Teutonic Mythology (Jacob Grimm (trans. James Steven Stallybrass), 1880)
==================
Grimm's Deutsche Mythologie in Stallybrass's English (4 vols., 1880–1888) — the foundation text of Germanic myth and rune-lore; every later work cites it. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/teutonicmythol01grimuoft).



TEUTONIC  MYTHOLOGY.

BY

JACOB  GRIMM.


TRANSLATED   FROM  THE  FOURTH   EDITION

WITH

NOTES  AND  APPENDIX
BY

JAMES  STEVEN   STALLYBRASS.
VOL.  I.


LONDON:    GEORGE    BELL    AND    SONS,   YORK    STREET,
COVENT   GARDEN.

1882.


TKANSLATOK'S    PKEFACE.


"  I  THINK  Scandinavian  Paganism,  to  us  here,  is  more  interesting
than  any  other.  It  is,  for  one  thing,  the  latest ;  it  continued  in
these  regions  of  Europe  till  the  eleventh  century ;  800  years  ago
the  Norwegians  were  still  worshippers  of  Odin.  It  is  interesting
also  as  the  creed  of  our  fathers  ;  the  men  whose  blood  still  runs  in
our  veins,  whom  doubtless  we  still  resemble  in  so  many  ways.
.  .  .  There  is  another  point  of  interest  in  these  Scandinavian
mythologies,  that  they  have  been  preserved  so  well." — CARLYLE'S
"  HERO-WORSHIP  ".

What  Mr.  Carlyle  says  of  the  Scandinavian  will  of  course  apply
to  all  Teutonic  tradition,  so  far  as  it  can  be  recovered ;  and  it  was
the  task  of  Grimm  in  his  Deutsche  Mythologie  to  supplement  the
Scandinavian  mythology  (of  which,  thanks  to  the  Icelanders,  we
happen  to  know  most)  with  all  that  can  be  gleaned  from  other
sources,  High-Dutch  and  Low-Dutch,  and  build  it  up  into  a  whole.
And  indeed  to  prove  that  it  was  one  connected  whole ;  for,  strange
as  it  seems  to  us,  forty  years  ago  it  was  still  considered  necessary  to
prove  it.

Jacob  Grimm  was  perhaps  the  first  man  who  commanded  a  wide
enough  view  of  the  whole  field  of  Teutonic  languages  and  literature
to  be  able  to  bring  into  a  focus  the  scattered  facts  which  show  the
prevalence  of  one  system  of  thought  among  all  the  Teutonic  nations
from  Iceland  to  the  Danube.  In  this  he  was  materially  aided  by
his  mastery  of  the  true  principles  of  Philology,  which  he  was  the
first  to  establish  on  a  firm  scientific  basis,  and  which  enabled  him
to  trace  a  word  with  certitude  through  the  strangest  disguises.

The  Comparative  Mythology  of  all  nations  has  made  great
strides  since  Grimm  first  wrote  his  book  ;  but  as  a  storehouse  of  facts
within  his  special  province  of  Teutonic  Mythology,  and  as  a  clue  to
the  derivation  and  significance  of  the  Names  of  persons  and  things


vi  Translator's  Preface.

in  the  various  versions  of  a  myth,  it  has  never  been  superseded
and  perhaps  it  never  can  be.  Not  that  he  confines  himself  to  the
Teutonic  field ;  he  compares  it  at  every  point  with  the  classical
mythus  and  the  wide  circle  of  Slavic,  Lettic  and  occasionally  of
Ugric,  Celtic,  and  Oriental  tradition.  Still,  among  his  Deutsch
kindred  he  is  most  at  home ;  and  Etymology  is  his  forte.  But  then
etymology  in  his  hands  is  transfigured  from  random  guessing  into
scientific  fact.

There  is  no  one  to  whom  Folk-lore  is  more  indebted  than  to
Grimm.  Not  to  mention  the  loving  care  with  which  he  hunted  up
his  Kinder  und  Haus-marchen  from  all  over  Germany,  he  delights
to  detect  in  many  a  nursery-tale  and  popular  custom  of  to-day  the
beliefs  and  habits  of  our  forefathers  thousands  of  years  ago.  It  is
impossible  at  times  to  forbear  a  smile  at  the  patriotic  zeal  with
which  he  hunts  the  trail  of  his  German  gods  and  heroes  ;  the  glee
with  which  he  bags  a  new  goddess,  elf,  or  swan-maid ;  and  his
indignation  at  any  poaching  Celt  or  Slav  who  has  spirited  away  a
mythic  being  that  was  German  born  and  bred :  "  Ye  have  taken
away  my  gods,  and  what  have  I  more  ? "

The  present  translation  of  the  Deutsche  Mytlwlogie  will,  like  the
last  (fourth)  edition  of  the  original,  be  published  in  three  volumes  ;
the  first  two  of  which,  and  part  of  the  third,  will  contain  the  trans
lation  of  Grimm's  text,  and  the  remainder  of  the  third  volume  will
consist  of  his  own  Appendix  and  a  Supplement.

The  author's  second  and  third  editions  (1844  and  1854)  were
each  published  in  2  vols.,  accompanied  by  an  APPENDIX  consisting,
first,  of  a  short  treatise  on  the  Anglo-Saxon  Genealogies,  and  secondly,
of  a  large  collection  of  the  Superstitions  of  various  Teutonic  nations.
This  Appendix  will  form  a  part  of  our  Vol.  III.  After  Grimm's
death  his  heirs  entrusted  to  Prof.  E.  H.  Meyer,  of  Berlin,  the  task
of  bringing  out  a  fourth  edition,  and  including  in  it  such  additional
matter  as  the  author  had  collected  in  his  note-books  for  future  use.
If  Grimm  had  lived  to  finish  his  great  Dictionary,  which  engrossed
the  latter  years  of  his  life,1  he  would,  no  doubt,  have  incorporated

1  He  used  to  say,  lie  had  a  book  ready  to  run  out  of  each  of  his  ten  fingers,
but  he  was  no  longer  free.


Translator's  Preface.  vii

the  pith  of  these  later  jottings  in  the  text  of  his  book,  rejecting
much  that  was  irrelevant  or  pleonastic.  The  German  editor,  not
feeling  himself  at  liberty  to  select  and  reject,  threw  the  whole  of
this  posthumous  matter  into  his  third  volume  (where  it  occupies
370  pages),  merely  arranging  the  items  according  to  the  order  of
subjects  in  the  book,  and  numbering  each  by  the  page  which  it
illustrates.  This  is  the  SUPPLEMENT  so  frequently  referred  to  in
the  book,  under  the  form  ("  see  Suppl.").  I  have  already  introduced
a  few  extracts  from  it  in  the  Foot-notes,  especially  where  it  appeared  ;
to  contradict,  or  materially  to  confirm,  the  author's  opinion  ex-  \
pressed  in  the  text.  But  in  the  present  English  edition  it  is  intended
to  digest  this  Supplement,  selecting  the  most  valuable  parts,  and
adding  original  articles  by  the  editor  himself  and  by  other  gentlemen
who  have  devoted  special  attention  to  individual  branches  or  the
science  of  Folk-knowledge.  A  full  classified  Bibliography  and  an
accurate  and  detailed  Index  to  the  whole  work  will  accompany  the
book.  It  is  hoped  by  this  means  to  render  the  English  Edition  as
complete  and  serviceable  as  possible.

Grimm's  Preface  to  the  edition  of  1844,  giving  a  vigorous  re
sume"  of  the  book,  and  of  the  whole  subject,  will,  as  in  the  German
accompany  Vol.  II.  There  is  so  much  in  it,  which  implies  the
reader's  acquaintance  with  every  part  of  the  book,  that  I  have  felt
bound  to  keep  it  where  I  find  it  in  the  original.


The  only  additions  or  alterations  I  have  ventured  to  make  in
the  text  are  the  following  : —

1.  The  book  bristles  with  quotations  in  various  languages,  for
the  most  part  untranslated.  An  ordinary  German  reader  might
find  the  Old  and  the  Middle  High  German  about  as  intelligible  as
an  ordinary  Englishman  does  Anglo-Saxon  and  Chaucer  respec
tively.  But  when  it  comes  to  making  out  a  word  or  passage  in
Old  Norse,  Greek,  and  even  Slavic,  I  must  suppose  the  author  to
have  written  for  a  much  more  limited  and  learned  public  than  that
which,  I  hope,  will  find  this  English  edition  sufficiently  readable.
I  have  therefore  translated  a  great  many  words  and  sentences,


viii  Translator's  Preface.

where  the  interest,  and  even  the  argument,  of  the  paragraph  de
pended  on  the  reader's  understanding  the  quotations.  To  have
translated  all  that  is  not  English  would  have  swelled  the  size  of
the  book  too  much.  Apart  from  such  translation,  any  additions  of
my  own  are  always  placed  in  square  brackets  [  ],  except  a  few
notes  which  bear  the  signature  "  TRANS.".

2.  For  the  sake  of  clearness,  I  have  divided  some  of  the  chapters
(XII.  to  XVI.)  into  smaller  sections  with  headings  of  their  own.

3.  I  have  consulted  the  English  reader's  convenience  by  sub
stituting  the  w  and  #?,  which  he  is  accustomed  to  see  in  Anglo-
Saxon  words,  for  Grimm's  v  and  d,  as  '  wseg '  instead  of  '  viig ',     I
have  also  used  the  words  '  Dutch,  Mid.  Dutch '  in  a  wider  sense
comprehending  all  the  Teutonic  dialects  of  the  Netherlands,  instead
of  coining  the  awkward  adjective  '  Netherlandish '.

One  word  on  the  title  of  the  book.  Ought  not  "  Deutsche
Mythologie  "  to  be  translated  German,  rather  than  Teutonic  Myth
ology  ?  I  am  bound  to  admit  that  the  author  aimed  at  building
up  a  Deutsch  mythology,  as  distinct  from  the  Scandinavian,  and
that  he  expressly  disclaims  the  intention  of  giving  a  complete
account  of  the  latter,  because  its  fulness  would  have  thrown  the
more  meagre  remains  of  the  Deutsch  into  the  shade.  At  the  same
time  he  necessarily  draws  so  much  upon  the  richer  remains  of  the
Norse  mythology,  that  it  forms  quite  a  substantive  portion  of  his
book,  though  not  exhaustive  as  regards  the  Norse  system  itself.
But  what  does  Grimm  mean  by  Deutsch  ?  To  translate  it  by
German  would  be  at  least  as  misleading  in  the  other  direction.  It
would  not  amongst  us  be  generally  understood  to  include — what  he
expressly  intends  it  to  include — the  Netherlands  and  England  ;  for
the  English  are  simply  a  branch  of  the  Low  German  race  which
happened  to  cross  the  sea.  I  have  therefore  thought,  that  for  the
English  ear  the  more  comprehensive  title  was  truer  to  the  facts  on
the  whole  than  the  more  limited  one  would  have  been.


TO

Professor  MAX  MULLER,  M.A.,  &c.,  &e.,


IS


EESPECTFULLY   DEDICATED


BY    PERMISSION.


.    J<ING    AND     po.,    J^NTEf^S,


CONTENTS.


VOL.  I.


CHAPTER

I.  Introduction


.         .         .               *';,         .  1—12

II.  God     ...                  .                  .  13—28

III.  Worship       .                                    .         ,  29—65

IV.  Temples        ....                  .  66—87
V.  Priests          .         .         .         .         .         .         .    '  88—98

VI.  Gods    .  99—130

VII.  Wnotan,  Wodan  (OSinn)      .         .  131—165

VIII.  Donar,  Thnnar  (Thorr)         ....  166—192

IX.  Zio,  Tiw  (Tyr)      .         .  193—208

X.  Fro  (Freyr)— (NiorSr)          .         .         .  209—219

XI.  Balder,  Phol— Hadu— Heremod— Fosite   ~"  .  220—232

XII.  Other    gods  :    Heimdall  —  Brego  —  Uogi  —  For-

neote— (Loki)—  Ssetere          .         .         ...  233—249

XIII.  Goddesses  :  Erda — Isis — Holda,  Berhta — Hrede—

Eastre— Zisa— Fricka— Frua— Folia     .         ,  250—315

XIV.  Condition  of  gods           .         ;         .         .         .       ' .  316—339
XV.  Heroes       '   .  .      .                                                      .  340—395

XVI.  Wise-women  396—437


CHAPTER  T.
INTRODUCTION.1

From  the  westernmost  shore  of  Asia,  Christianity  had  turned  at
once  to  the  opposite  one  of  Europe.  The  wide  soil  of  the  continent
which  had  given  it  birth  could  not  supply  it  long  with  nourish
ment;  neither  did  it  strike  deep  root  in  the  north  of  Africa.
Europe  soon  became,  and  remained,  its  proper  dwelling-place  and
home.

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  direction  in  which  the  new  faith
worked  its  way>  from  South  to  North,  is  contrary  to  the  current  of
migration  which  was  then  driving  the  nations  from  the  East  and
North  to  the  West  and  South.  As  spiritual  light  penetrated  from
the  one  quarter,  life  itself  was  to  be  reinvigorated  from  the  other,

1  In  a  book  that  deals  so  much  with  Heathenism,  the  meaning  of  the  term
ought  not  to  be  passed  over.  The  Greeks  and  Romans  had  no  special  name  for
nations  of  another  faith  (for  eYepoSo£oi,  /3ap/3apoi  were  not  used  in  that  sense)  ;
but  with  the  Jews  and  Christians  of  the  N.T.  are  contrasted  edvos,  fdvea,
cQviKoi,  Lat.  gentes,  gentiles  ;  Ulphilas  uses  the  pi.  thiudos,  and  by  preference  in
the  gen.  after  a  pronoun,  thai  thiudo,  sumai  thiudo  (gramm.  4,  441,  457),  while
thiudiskus  translates  edviicws  Gal.  2,  14.  As  it  was  mainly  the  Greek  religion
that  stood  opposed  to  the  Judaso-Christian,  the  word  "EXXyv  also  assumed  the
meaning  edviKos,  and  we  meet  with  lX\r)vtK£)s  =  f6viKa)s,  which  the  Goth  would
still  have  rendered  thiudisJcds,  as  he  does  render  "EXXr/i/es1  thiudds,  John  7,  35.
^12,  20.  1  Cor.  1,  24.  12,  13  ;  only  in  1  Cor.  1,  22  he  prefers  Krekos.  This
"EXX7;y=gentilis  bears  also  the  meaning  of  giant,  which  has  developed  itself
out  of  more  than  one  national  name  (Hun,  Avar,  Tchudi)  ;  so  the  Hellenic
walls  came  to  be  heathenish,  gigantic  (see  ch.  XVIII).  In  Old  High  German,
Notker  still  uses  the  pi.  diete  for  gentiles  (Graff  5,  128).  In  the  meanwhile
pagus  had  expanded  its  narrow  meaning  of  Kvp-r)  into  the  wider  one  of  ager,
campus,  in  which  sense  it  still  lives  on  in  It.  paese,  Fr.  pays  ;  while  paganus
began  to  push  out  gentilis,  which  was  lapsing  into  the  sense  of  nobilis.  All  the
Romance  languages  have  their  pagano,  pay  en,  &c.,  nay,  it  has  penetrated  into
Boh  em.  pohan,  Pol.  poganin,  Lith.  pac/onas  [but  Russ.  pogan= unclean].  The
Gothic  hdithi  campus  early  developed  an  adj.  hdithns  agrestis,  campestris  —
paganus  (Ulph.  in  Mark  7,  26  renders  eXXr/i/t'y  by  hdithnd),  the  Old  H.G.  heida
an  adj.  heidan,  Mid.  H.G.  and  Dutch  heide  heiden,  A.S.  hseS  hwftin,  Engl.  heath
heathen,  Old  Norse  heiSi  heiftinn ;  Swed.  and  Dan.  use  hedning.  The  O.H.G
word  retains  its  adj.  nature,  and  forms  its  gen.  pi.  heidanero.  Our  present
heide,  gen.  heiden  (for  heiden,  gen.  heidens)  is  erroneous,  but  current  ever  since
Luther.  Full  confirmation  is  afforded  by  Mid.  Lat.  agrestis  =  paganus,  e.g.  in
the  passage  quoted  in  ch.  IV  from  Vita  S.  Agili  ;  and  the  '  wilde  heiden'  in
our  Heldenbuch  is  an  evident  pleonasm  (see  Supplement).


2  INTRODUCTION.

The  worn  out  empire  of  the  Romans  saw  both  its  interior  con
vulsed,  and  its  frontier  overstept.  Yet,  by  the  same  mighty
doctrine  which  had  just  overthrown  her  ancient  gods,  subjugated
Eome  was  able  to  subdue  her  conquerors  anew.  By  this  means  the
flood-tide  of  invasion  was  gradually  checked,  the  newly  converted
lands  began  to  gather  strength  and  to  turn  their  arms  against  the
heathen  left  in  their  rear.

Slowly,  step  by  step,  Heathendom  gave  way  to  Christendom.
Five  hundred  years  after  Christ,  but  few  nations  of  Europe  believed
in  him;  after  a  thousand  years  the  majority  did,  and  those  the
most  important,  yet  not  all  (see  Suppl.).

From  Greece  and  Italy  the  Christian  faith  passed  into  Gaul  first
of  all,  in  the  second  and  third  centuries.  About  the  year  300,  or
soon  after,  we  find  here  and  there  a  Christian  among  the  Germans
on  the  Rhine,  especially  the  Alamanni ;  and  about  the  same  time
or  a  little  earlier1  among  the  Goths.  The  Goths  were  the  first
Teutonic  people  amongst  whom  Christianity  gained  a  firm  footing ;
this  occurred  in  the  course  of  the  fourth  century,  the  West-goths
leading  the  way  and  the  East-goths  following ;  and  after  them  the
Vandals,  Gepidse  and  Rugii  were  converted.  All  these  races  held
by  the  Arian  doctrine.  The  Burgundians  in  Gaul  became  Catholic
at  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  then  Arian  under  their
Visigoth  rulers,  and  Catholic  again  at  the  commencement  of  the
sixth  century,  The  Suevi  in  Spain  wTere  at  first  Catholic,  then
Arian  (about  469),  until  in  the  sixth  century  they,  with  all  the
West-goths,  went  over  likewise  to  the  Catholic  church.  Not  till  the
end  of  the  fifth  or  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  did  Christianity  win
the  Franks,  soon  after  that  the  Alamanni,  and  after  them  the
Langobardi.  The  Bavarians  were  converted  in  the  seventh  and
eighth  centuries,  the  Frisians,  Hessians  and  Thuringians  in  the
eighth,  the  Saxons  about  the  ninth.

Christianity  had  early  found  entrance  into  Britain,  but  was
checked  by  the  irruption  of  the  heathen  Anglo-Saxons.  Towards
the  close  of  the  sixth  and  in  the  course  of  the  seventh  century,  they
also  went  over  to  the  new  faith.

The  Danes  became  Christians  in  the  tenth  century,  the  Norwe
gians  at  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh,  the  Swedes  not  completely

1  Waitz's  Ulfila,  p.  35.


INTRODUCTION.


till  the  second  half  of  the  same  century.  About  the  same  time
Christianity  made  its  way  to  Iceland.

Of  the  Slavic  nations  the  South  Slavs  were  the  first  to  adopt
the  Christian  faith:  the  Carentani,  and  under  Heraclius  (d.  640)
the  Croatians,  then,  150  years  after  the  former,  the  Moravians  in
the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries.  Among  the  North  Slavs,  the
Obotritse  in  the  ninth,  Bohemians 1  and  Poles  in  the  tenth,  Sorbs
in  the  eleventh,  and  Eussians  at  the  end  of  the  tenth.

Then  the  Hungarians  at  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh,  Li-
vonians  and  Lettons  in  the  twelfth,  Esthonians  and  Finns  in  the
twelfth  and  thirteenth,  Lithuanians  not  even  till  the  commencement
of  the  fifteenth.

All  these  data  are  only  to  be  taken  as  true  in  the  main ;  they
neither  exclude  some  earlier  conversions,  nor  a  longer  and  later
adherence  to  heathenism  in  limited  areas.  Eemoteness  and  inde
pendence  might  protect  the  time-honoured  religion  of  a  tribe.
Apostates  too  would  often  attempt  at  least  a  partial  reaction.
Christianity  would  sometimes  lead  captive  the  minds  of  the  rich
and  great,  by  whose  example  the  common  people  were  carried
away ;  sometimes  it  affected  first  the  poor  and  lowly.

When  Chlodowig  (Clovis)  received  baptism,  and  the  Salian
Franks  followed  his  lead,  individuals  out  of  all  the  Frankish  tribes
had  already  set  the  example.  Intercourse  with  Burgundians  and
West-goths  had  inclined  them  to  the  Arian  doctrine,  while  the
Catholic  found  adherents  in  other  parts  of  Gaul.  Here  the  two
came  into  collision.  One  sister  of  Chlodowig,  Lanthild,  had  become
an  Arian  Christian  before  his  conversion,  the  other,  Albofled,  had
remained  a  heathen ;  the  latter  was  now  baptized  with  him,  and
the  former  was  also  won  over  to  the  Catholic  communion.2  But
even  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries  heathenism  was  not  yet
uprooted  in  certain  districts  of  the  Frankish  kingdom.  Neustria

1  Fourteen   Bohemian   princes  baptized  845  ;   see  Palacky  1,  110.      The
Middle  North-slavs — Riaderi,  Tolenzi,  Kycini,  Circipani — still  heathen  in  the
latter  half    of  the   llth   century;   see    Helmold  1,  21.  23  (an.   1066).     The
Rugians  not  till  1168  ;  Helm.  2,  12.  13.

2  baptizata  est  Albofledis.     .     .     .     Lanthildis  chrismata  est,  Greg.  Tur.  2,
31.     So  among  the  Goths,  chrismation  is  administered  to  Sigibert's  wife  Brune-
child  (4,  27),  and  to  Ingund's  husband  Herminichild  (5,  38,  who  assumes  the
new  name  of  Joannes.     The  Arians  appear  to  have  re-baptized  converts  from
Catholicism  ;  Ingund  herself  was  compelled  by  her  grandmother-mother  in
law  Goisuintha   'ut  rebaptizaretur '.     Rebaptizare  katholicos,  Eugippii  vita
Severini,  cap.  8.


4  INTRODUCTION.

had  heathen  inhabitants  on  the  Loire  and  Seine,  Burgundy  in  the
Vosges,  Austrasia  in  the  Ardennes ;  and  heathens  seem  still  to
have  been  living  in  the  present  Flanders,  especially  northwards
towards  Friesland.1  Vestiges  of  heathenism  lingered  on  among  the
Frisians  into  the  ninth  century,  among  the  Saxons  into  the  tenth,
and  in  like  manner  among  the  Normans  and  Swedes  into  the
eleventh  and  twelfth.2  Here  and  there  among  the  northern  Slavs
idolatry  was  not  extinct  in  the  twelfth  century,  and  not  universally
so  among  the  Finns  and  Lithuanians  in  the  sixteenth  and  seven
teenth3  ;  nay,  the  remotest  Laplanders  cling  to  it  still.

Christianity  was  not  popular.  It  came  from  abroad,  it  aimed  at
supplanting  the  time-honoured  indigenous  gods  whom  the  country
revered  and  loved.  These  gods  and  their  worship  were  part  and
parcel  of  the  people's  traditions,  customs  and  constitution.  Their
names  had  their  roots  in  the  people's  language,  and  were  hallowed
by  antiquity ;  kings  and  princes  traced  their  lineage  back  to
individual  gods ;  forests,  mountains,  lakes  had  received  a  living
consecration  from  their  presence.  All  this  the  people  was  now  to
renounce  ;  and  what  is  elsewhere  commended  as  truth  and  loyalty
was  denounced  and  persecuted  by  the  heralds  of  the  new  faith  as  a
sin  and  a  crime.  The  source  and  seat  of  all  sacred  lore  was
shifted  away  to  far-off  regions  for  ever,  and  only  a  fainter  borrowed
glory  could  henceforth  be  shed  on  places  in  one's  native  land.

The  new  faith  came  in  escorted  by  a  foreign  language,  which
the  missionaries  imparted  to  their  disciples  and  thus  exalted  into  a
sacred  language,  which  excluded  the  slighted  mother-tongue  from
almost  all  share  in  public  worship.  This  does  not  apply  to  the
Greek-speaking  countries,  which  could  follow  the  original  text  of
the  Christian  revelation,  but  it  does  to  the  far  wider  area  over
which  the  Latin  church-language  was  spread,  even  among
Eomance  populations,  whose  ordinary  dialect  was  rapidly  emanci
pating  itself  from  the  rules  of  ancient  Latin.  Still  more  violent
was  the  contrast  in  the  remaining  kingdoms.

The  converters  of  the  heathen,  sternly  devout,  abstemious,
mortifying  the  flesh,  occasionally  peddling,  headstrong,  and  in

1  Authorities  given  in  Ch.  IV.— Conf.  lex  Frisionum,  ed.  Gaupp,  p.  xxiv,
19,  47.  Heathenism  lasted  the  longest  between  Lauhuch  and  the  Weser.

a  Fornmanna  sogur  4,  116.     7,  151.

3  Wedekind's  notes  2,  275,  276.  Rhesa  dainos,  p.  333.  The  Lithuanians
proper  converted  1387,  the  Samogits  1413.


INTRODUCTION.  5

slavish  subjection  to  distant  Eome,  could  not  fail  in  many  ways  to
offend  the  national  feeling.  Not  only  the  rude  bloody  sacrifices,
but  the  sensuous  pleasure-loving  side  of  heathenism  was  to  them
an  abomination  (see  Suppl.).  And  what  their  words  or  their
wonder-working  gifts  could  not  effect,  was  often  to  be  executed
against  obdurate  pagans  by  placing  fire  and  sword  in  the  hands  of
Christian  proselytes.

The  triumph  of  Christianity  was  that  of  a  mild,  simple,  spiritual
doctrine  over  sensuous,  cruel,  barbarizing  Paganism.  In  exchange
for  peace  of  spirit  and  the  promise  of  heaven,  a  man  gave  his
earthly  joys  and  the  memory  of  his  ancestors.  Many  followed  the
inner  prompting  of  their  spirit,  others  the  example  of  the  crowd,
and  not  a  few  the  pressure  of  irresistible  force.

Although  expiring  heathenism  is  studiously  thrown  into  the
shade  by  the  narrators,  there  breaks  out  at  times  a  touching
lament  over  the  loss  of  the  ancient  gods,  or  an  excusable  protest
against  innovations  imposed  from  without1  (see  Suppl.).

The  missionaries  did  not  disdain  to  work  upon  the  senses  of  the
heathen  by  anything  that  could  impart  a  higher  dignity  to  the
Christian  cultus  as  compared  with  the  pagan  :  by  white  robes  for
subjects  of  baptism,  by  curtains,  peals  of  bells  (see  Suppl.),  the
lighting  of  tapers  and  the  burning  of  incense.2  It  was  also  a  wise
or  politic  measure  to  preserve  many  heathen  sites  and  temples  by
simply  turning  them,  when  suitable,  into  Christian  ones,  and
assigning  to  them  another  and  equally  sacred  meaning.  The
heathen  gods  even,  though  represented  as  feeble  in  comparison  with
the  true  God,  were  not  always  pictured  as  powerless  in  themselves ;
they  were  perverted  into  hostile  malignant  powers,  into  demons,
sorcerers  and  giants,  who  had  to  be  put  down,  but  were  never
theless  credited  with  a  certain  mischievous  activity  and  influence.
Here  and  there  a  heathen  tradition  or  a  superstitious  custom  lived
on  by  merely  changing  the  names,  and  applying  to  Christ,  Mary
and  the  saints  what  had  formerly  been  related  and  believed  of  idols
(see  Suppl.).  On  the  other  hand,  the  piety  of  Christian  priests
suppressed  and  destroyed  a  multitude  of  heathen  monuments,
poems  and  beliefs,  whose  annihilation  history  can  hardly  cease  to

1  Fornmanna  sogur  1,  31-35.     Laxdoela,  p.  170.     Kralodworsky  rukopis,
72.74.

2  Greg.  Tur.  2,  31.     Fornm.  sog.  1,  260.     2,  2QO.


INTRODUCTION.

lament,  though  the  sentiment  which  deprived  us  of  them  is  not  to
be  blamed.  The  practice  of  a  pure  Christianity,  the  extinction  of
all  trace  of  heathenism  was  of  infinitely  more  concern  than  the
advantage  that  might  some  day  accrue  to  history  from  their  longer
preservation.  Boniface  and  Willibrord,  in  felling  the  sacred  oak,
in  polluting  the  sacred  spring,  and  the  image-breaking  Calvinists
long  after  them,  thought  only  of  the  idolatry  that  was  practised  by
such  means  (see  Suppl.).  As  those  pioneers  '  purged  their  floor '  a
first  time,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  Pieformation  eradicated
aftergrowths  of  heathenism,  and  loosing  the  burden  of  the  Romish
ban,  rendered  our  faith  at  once  freer,  more  inward  and  more
domestic.  God  is  near  us  everywhere,  and  consecrates  for  us  every
country,  from  which  the  fixing  of  our  gaze  beyond  the  Alps  would
alienate  us.

Probably  some  sects  and  parties,  non-conformity  here  and  there
among  the  heathen  themselves,  nay,  in  individual  minds  a  precoci
ous  elevation  of  sentiment  and  morals,  came  half-way  to  meet
the  introduction  of  Christianity,  as  afterwards  its  purification
(see  Suppl.).  It  is  remarkable  that  Old  Norse  legend  occasionally
mentions  certain  men  who,  turning  away  in  utter  disgust  and  doubt
from  the  heathen  faith,  placed  their  reliance  on  their  own  strength
and  virtue.  Thus  in  the  Solar  Iio5  17  we  read  of  Vebogi  and
Eadey  '  a  sik  ]?au  truftu,'  in  themselves  they  trusted ;  of  king  Hakon
(Fornm.  sog.  1,  35)  '  konungr  gerir  sem  allir  aftrir,  ]?eir  sem  trua  a
matt  sinn  ok  megin,'  the  king  does  like  all  others  who  trust  in  their
own  might  and  main ;  of  BarSr  (ibid.  2, 151) '  ek  trui  ekki  a  skurSgoS
eSr  fiandr,  hefi  ek  )?vi  lengi  truat  a  matt  minn  ok  megin,'  I  trust  not
in  idols  and  fiends,  I  have  this  long  while,  &c. ;  of  Hiorleifr  *  vildi
aldri  biota,'  would  never  sacrifice  (Landn.  1,  5.7) ;  of  Hallr  and
Thorir  goolaus^s  '  vildu  eigi  biota,  ok  truSu  a  matt  sinn '  (Landn.  1,
11) ;.  of  king  Hrolfr  (Fornm.  sog.  1,  98)  '  ekki  er  J^ess  getit  at  Hrolfr
konungr  ok  kappar  hans  hafi  nokkurn  tima  blotat  go5,  heldr  truftu
&  matt  sinn  ok  megin,'  it  is  not  thought  that  king  H.  and  his  cham
pions  have  at  any  time,  &c.;  of  Orvaroddr  (Fornald.  sog.  2,  165 ;  cf.
505)  '  ekki  vandist  blotum,  J?vi  hann  trufti  a  matt  sinn  ok  megin ';
of  Finnbogi  (p.  272)  '  ek  trui  a  sialfan  mik.'  This  is  the  mood  that
still  finds  utterance  in  a  Danish  folk-song  (D.V.  4,  27),  though
without  a  reference  to  religion :


INTRODUCTION.  7

Forst  troer  jeg  mit  gode  svard.
Og  saa  min  gode  hest,
Dernast  troer  jeg  mine  dannesvenne,
Jeg  troer  mig  self  allerbedst ;

and  it  is  Christian  sentiment  besides,  which  strives  to  elevate  and
consecrate  the  inner  man  (see  Suppl.).

We  may  assume,  that,  even  if  Paganism  could  have  lived  and
luxuriated  a  while  longer,  and  brought  out  in  sharper  relief  and
more  spontaneously  some  characteristics  of  the  nations  that  obeyed
it,  yet  it  bore  within  itself  a  germ  of  disorganisation  and  disrup
tion,  which,  even  without  the  intervention  of  Christian  teaching,
would  have  shattered  and  dissolved  it.1  I  liken  heathenism  to  a
strange  plant  whose  brilliant  fragrant  blossom  we  regard  with
wonder ;  Christianity  to  the  crop  of  nourishing  grain  that  covers
wide  expanses.  To  the  heathen  too  was  germinating  the  true  God,
who  to  the  Christians  had  matured  into  fruit.

At  the  time  when  Christianity  began  to  press  forward,  many  of
the  heathen  seem  to  have  entertained  the  notion,  which  the  mis
sionaries  did  all  in  their  power  to  resist,  of  combining  the  new
doctrine  with  their  ancient  faith,  and  even  of  fusing  them  into  one.
Of  Norsemen  as  well  as  of  Anglo-Saxons  we  are  told,  that  some
believed  at  the  same  time  in  Christ  and  in  heathen  gods,  or  at  least
continued  to  invoke  the  latter  in  particular  cases  in  which  they

1  Old  Norse  sagas  and  songs  have  remarkable  passages  in  which  the  gods
are  coarsely  derided.  A  good  deal  in  Lokasenna  and  Harbard's  song  may
pass  for  rough  joking,  which  still  leaves  the  holiest  things  unshaken  (see
Suppl.).  But  faith  has  certainly  grown  fainter,  when  a  daring  poet  can  com
pare  Ooinn  and  Freyja  to  dogs  (Fornm.  sog.  2,  207.  Islend.  sog.  1,  11.  ed.  nov.
372.  Nialss.  160)  ;  when  another  calls  the  gods  rangeyg  (squint-eyed,  unfair)
and  rokindusta  (Fornm.  sog.  2,  154).  When  we  come  to  Freyr,  I  shall  quote  a
story  manifestly  tending  to  lessen  the  reverence  for  him  ;  but  here  is  a  pas
sage  from  Oswald  2913  :  *  din  got  der  ist  ein  junger  tor  (fool),  ich  wil  glouben
an  den  alten.'— If  we  had  a  list  of  old  and  favourite  dogs'-names,  I  believe  we
should  find  that  the  designations  of  several  deities  were  bestowed  upon  the
brute  by  way  of  degradation.  Vilk.  saga,  cap.  230.  235,  has  handed  down
Thor  (but  cf.  ed.  nov.,  cap.  263)  and  Paron,  one  being  the  0.1ST.,  the  other  the
Slav  name  in  the  Slovak  form  Parom  =  Perun  ch.  VIII.  With  the  Saxon
herdsmen  or  hunters  Thunar  was  doubtless  in  use  for  dogs,  as  perhaps  Donner
is  to  this  day.  One  sort  of  dog  is  called  by  the  Poles  Grzmilas  (Linde  1,  7<i9a.
2,  798),  by  the  Bohemians  Hrmiles  (Jimgm.  1,  759)  =  Thunder,  Forest-thunder.
In  Helbling  4,  441  seq.  I  find  a  dog  WunscHi  (not  Wiinsch).  Similar  to  this  is
the  transference  of  national  names  to  dogs  :  the  Bohemian  BodroJc  is  a  dog's
name,  but  signifies  an  Obotrite  (Jungm.  1,  150)  ;  Sclmr  in  the  Nialssaga  seems
to  mean  a  Same,  Sabme  =  Lapp  ;  Helbling  4,  458  has  a  Frank  (see  Suppl.).


8  INTRODUCTION.

had  formerly  proved  helpful  to  them.  So  even  by  Christians  much
later,  the  old  deities  seem  to  have  been  named  and  their  aid
invoked  in  enchantments  and  spells.  Landnfimabok  3,  12  says  of
Helgi :  '  hann  truSi  a  Krist,  en  Ipo  het  hann  a  Thor  til  scefara  ok
harSrsefta  ok  alls  J?ess,  er  honum  Ipotti  mestu  varoY ;  he  believed  in
Christ,  and  yet  he  called  upon  Thor  in  voyages  and  difficulties,
&c.  Hence  the  poets  too  transferred  heathen  epithets  to  Christ.
Beda  1,  15  relates  of  Redwald,  an  East- Anglian  king  in  the  begin-
ing  of  the  7th  century  :  '  rediens  domum  ab  uxore  sua,  a  quibusdam
perversis  doctoribus  seductus  est,  atque  a  sinceritate  fidei  depravatus,
habuit  posteriora  pejora  prioribus,  ita  ut  in  morem  antiquorum
Samaritanorum,  et  Christo  servire  videretur  et  diis  quibus  antea
serviebat,  atque  in  eodem  fano  et  altare  habebat  in  sacrificium
Christi  et  arulam  ad  victimas  daemoniorum'  (see  Suppl.).  This
helps  to  explain  the  relapses  into  paganism.

The  history  of  heathen  doctrines  and  ideas  is  easier  to  write,
according  as  particular  races  remained  longer  outside  the  pale  of
baptism.  Our  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Greek  and
Roman  religion  rests  upon  writings  which  existed  before  the  rise  of
Christianity;  we  are  oftener  at  fault  for  information  as  to  the
altered  shape  which  that  religion  had  assumed  among  the  common
people  in  Greece  and  Italy  during  the  first  centuries  of  our  era.
Eesearch  has  yet  to  penetrate,  even  deeper  than  it  has  done,  into
the  old  Celtic  faith ;  we  must  not  shrink  from  recognizing  and  ex
amining  Celtic  monuments  and  customs  on  ground  now  occupied
by  Germans.  Leo's  important  discovery  on  the  real  bearings  of  the
Malberg  glossary  may  lead  to  much.  The  religion  of  the  Slavs  and
Lithuanians  would  be  far  more  accurately  known  to  us,  if .  these
nations,  in  the  centuries  immediately  following  their  conversion,
had  more  carefully  preserved  the  memory  of  their  antiquities;  as  it
is,  much  scattered  detail  only  wants  collecting,  and  traditions  still
alive  in  many  districts  afford  rich  material.  On  the  Finnish
mythology  we  possess  somewhat  fuller  information.

Germany  holds  a  middle  place,  peculiar  to  herself  and  not  un
favourable.  While  the  conversion  of  Gaul  and  that  of  Slavland
were  each  as  a  whole  decided  and  finished  in  the  course  of  a  very
few  centuries,  the  Teutonic  races  forsook  the  faith  of  their  fathers
very  gradually  and  slowly,  from  the  4th  to  the  llth  century.
Eemains  of  their  language  too  have  been  preserved  more  fully  and


INTRODUCTION'.  9

from  the  successive  periods.  Besides  which  we  possess  in  the
works  of  Eoman  writers,  and  especially  Tacitus,  accounts  of  the
earlier  undisturbed  time  of  Teutonic  heathenism,  which,  though
scanty  and  from  a  foreign  source,  are  yet  exceedingly  important,
nay  invaluable.

The  religion  of  the  East  and  South  German  races,  which  were
converted  first,  is  more  obscure  to  us  than  that  of  the  Saxons ;
about  the  Saxons  again  we  know  incomparably  less  than  about  the
Scandinavians.  What  a  far  different  insight  we  should  get  into  the
character  and  contents  of  the  suppressed  doctrine,  how  vastly  the
picture  we  are  able  to  form  of  it  would  gain  in  clearness,  if  some
clerk  at  Fulda,  Eegensburg,  Eeichenau  or  St.  Gall,  or  one  at
Bremen,  Corvei  or  Magdeburg,  had  in  the  eighth,  ninth  or  tenth
century,  hit  upon  the  plan  of  collecting  and  setting  before  us,  after
the  manner  of  Saxo  Grammaticus,  the  still  extant  traditions  of  his
tribe  on  the  beliefs  and  superstitions  of  their  forefathers  !  Let  no
one  tell  me,  that  by  that  time  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  had  ;
here  and  there  a  footmark  plainly  shows  that  such  recollections
could  not  really  have  died  out.1  And  who  will  show  me  in  Sweden,
which  clung  to  heathenism  longer  and  more  tenaciously,  such  a
composition  as  actually  appeared  in  Denmark  during  the  twelfth
century  ?  But  for  this  fact,  would  not  the  doubters  declare  such  a
thing  impossible  in  Sweden  ?  In  truth,  the  first  eight  books  of
Saxo  are  to  me  the  most  welcome  monument  of  the  Norse  mytho
logy,  not  only  for  their  intrinsic  worth,  but  because  they  show  in
what  an  altered  light  the  ancient  faith  of  the  people  had  to  be
placed  before  the  recent  converts.  I  especially  remark,  that  Saxo
suppresses  all  mention  of  some  prominent  gods  ;  what  right  have
we  then  to  infer  from  the  non-mention  of  many  deities  in  the  far
scantier  records  of  inland  Germany,  that  they  had  never  been  heard
of  there  ?

Then,  apart  from  Saxo,  we  find  a  purer  authority  for  the  Norse
religion  preserved  for  us  in  the  remotest  -corner  of  the  North,
whither  it  had  fled  as  it  were  for  more  perfect  safety, — namely,  in
Iceland.  It  is  preserved  not  only  in  the  two  Eddas,  but  in  a
multitude  of  Sagas  of  various  shape,  which,  but  for  that  emigration

1  As  late  as  the  tenth  century  the  heroic  tale  of  Walther  and  Hildegund  was
poetized  in  Latin  at  St.  Gall,  and  a  relic  of  heathen  poetry  was  written  down  in
German  [deutlich,  a  misprint  for  deutsch  ?],  probably  at  Merseburg.


10  INTRODUCTION.

coming  to  the  rescue,  would  probably  have  perished  in  Norway,
Sweden  and  Denmark.

To  assail  the  genuineness  of  the  Norse  mythology  is  as  much  as
to  cast  doubt  on  the  genuineness  and  independence  of  the  Norse
language.  That  it  has  been  handed  down  to  us  both  in  a  clearer
and  an  obscurer  shape,  through  older  and  more  modern  authorities,
makes  it  all  the  easier  to  study  it  from  many  sides  and  more
historically.

Just  as  little  can  we  fail  to  perceive  the  kinship  and  close  con
nexion  of  the  Norse  mythology  with  the  rest  of  Teutonic  mythology.
I  have  undertaken  to  collect  and  set  forth  all  that  ca.n  now  be
known  of  German  heathenism,  and  that  exclusively  of  the  complete
system  of  Norse  mythology.  By  such  limitation  I  hope  to  gain
clearness  and  space,  and  to  sharpen  our  vision  for  a  criticism  of
the  Old  German  faith,  so  far  as  it  stands  opposed  to  the  Norse,  or
aloof  from  it ;  so  that  we  need  only  concern  ourselves  with  the
latter,  where  in  substance  or  tendency  it  coincides  with  that  of
inland  Germany.

The  antiquity,  originality  and  affinity  of  the  German  and  Norse
mythologies  rest  on  the  following  grounds  :

1.  The  undisputed  and  very  close  affinity  of  speech  between  the
two  races,  and  the  now  irrefutably  demonstrated  identity  of  form
in  their  oldest  poetry.  It  is  impossible  that  nations  speaking
languages  which  had  sprung  from  the  same  stock,  whose  songs  all
wore  the  badge  of  an  alliteration  either  unknown  or  quite  differently
applied  by  their  neighbours,  should  have  differed  materially  in  their
religious  belief.  Alliteration  seems  to  give  place  to  Christian
rhyme,  first  in  Upper  Germany,  and  then  in  Saxony,  precisely
because  it  had  been  the  characteristic  of  heathen  songs  then  still
existing.  Without  prejudice  to  their  original  affinity,  it  is  quite
true  that  the  German  and  the  Norse  dialects  and  poetries  have
their  peculiarities  of  form  and  finish  ;  but  it  would  seem  incredible
that  the  one  race  should  have  had  gods  and  the  other  none,  or  that
the  chief  divinities  of  the  two  should  have  been  really  different
from  one  another.  There  were  marked  differences  no  doubt,  but
not  otherwise  than  in  their  language ;  and  as  the  Gothic,  Anglo-
Saxon  and  Old  High  German  dialects  have  their  several  points  of
superiority  over  the  Old  Norse,  so  may  the  faith  of  inland  Germany
have  in  many  points  its  claims  to  distinction  and  individuality.


INTRODUCTION.  11

2.  The  joint  possession,  by  all  Teutonic  tongues,  of  many  terms
relating  to  religious  worship.     If  we  are  able  to  produce  a  word
used  by  the  Goths  in  the  4th  century,  by  the  Alamanni  in  the
8th,  in  exactly  the  same  form  and  sense  as  it  continues  to  bear  in
the  Norse  authorities  of  the  12th  or  13th  century,  the  affinity  of
the  German  faith  with  the  Norse,  and  the  antiquity  of  the  latter,
are  thereby  vindicated.

3.  The  identity  of   mythic  notions   and   nomenclature,   which
ever  and  anon  breaks  out :    thus  the  agreement  of  the    O.H.G.
muspilli,  0.  Sax.  mudspelli,  with  the  Eddie  muspell,  of  the  O.H.G.
itis,  A.  Sax.  ides,  with  the  Eddie  dis,  or  of  the  A.  Sax.  brosinga  mene
with  the  Eddie  brisinga  men,  affords  perfectly  conclusive  evidence.

4.  The  precisely  similar  way  in  which  both  there  and  here  the
religious  mythus  tacks   itself  on   to   the  heroic  legend.      As  the
Gothic,  Frankish  and  Norse  genealogies  all  run  into  one  another,
we  can  scarcely  deny  the  connexion  of  the  veiled  myths  also  which
stand  in  the  background.

5.  The  mingling  of  the  mythic  element  with  names  of  plants
and  constellations.     This  is  an  uneffaced  vestige  of  the  primeval
intimate  union  between  religious  worship  and  nature.

6.  The  gradual  transformation  of  the  gods  into  devils,  of  the
wise  women  into  witches,  of  the  worship  into  superstitious  customs.
The  names  of  the  gods  have  found  a  last  lurking-place  in  disguised
ejaculations,  oaths,  curses,  protestations.1     There  is  some  analogy
between  this  and  the  transfer  of  heathen  myths  from  goddesses
and  gods  to  Mary  and  the  saints,  from  elves  to  angels.     Heathen
festivals  and  customs  were  transformed  into  Christian,  spots  which
heathenism  had  "already  consecrated  were  sometimes  retained  for
churches  and  courts  of  justice.     The  popular  religion  of  the  Catho
lics,  particularly  in  the  adoration  of  saints,  includes  a  good  many
and  often  graceful  and  pleasing  relics  of  paganism  (see  Suppl.).

7.  The  evident  deposit  from  god-myths,  which  is  found  to  this
day  in  various  folk-tales,  nursery-tales,  games,  saws,   curses,  ill-
understood  names  of  days  and  months,  and  idiomatic  phrases.

8.  The   undeniable  intermixture  of   the  old  religious  doctrine
with  the  system  of  law ;  for  the  latter,  even  after  the  adoption  of


1  Conf.  our  '  dormer  !  hammer  ! '  the   Serv.  '  lele  !  lado  ! '  the   Lat.  '  pol  !
aedepol  !  me  hercle  !  nie  castor  !  mediustidius,'  &c.


12  INTRODUCTION.

the  new  faith,  would  not  part  with  certain  old  forms  and  usages
(see  JSuppl.).

In  unravelling  these  complex  relations,  it  appears  indispensable
not  to  overlook  the  mythologies  of  neighbouring  nations,  especially
of  the  Celts,  Slavs,  Lithuanians  and  Finns,  wherever  they  afford
confirmation  or  elucidation.  This  extension  of  our  scope  would
find  ample  reason  and  justification  in  the  mere  contact  (so  fruitful
in  many  ways)  of  the  languages  of  those  nationalities  with  Teu
tonic  ones,  particularly  of  the  Celtic  with  Old  Frankish,  of  the
Finnish  and  Lithuanian  with  Gothic,  and  of  the  Slavic  with  High
German.  But  also  the  myths  and  superstitions  of  these  very
nations  are  peculiarly  adapted  to  throw  light  on  the  course  taken
by  our  domestic  heathenism  in  its  duration  and  decadence.

Against  the  error  which  has  so  frequently  done  damage  to  the
study  of  the  Norse  and  Greek  mythologies,  I  mean  the  mania  of
foisting  metaphysical  or  astronomical  solutions  on  but  half-dis
covered  historical  data,  I  am  sufficiently  guarded  by  the  incomplete
ness  and  loose  connexion  of  all  that  has  been  preserved.  My  object
is,  faithfully  and  simply  to  collect  what  the  distortions  early
introduced  by  the  nations  themselves,  and  afterwards  the  scorn  and
aversion  of  Christians  have  left  remaining  of  heathenism ;  and  to
enlist  fellow-labourers  in  the  slow  task  of  securing  a  more  solid
store  of  facts,  without  which  a  general  view  of  the  substance  and
worth  of  our  mythology  is  not  to  be  attained  (see  Suppl.).


CHAPTER  II.
GOD.

In  all  Teutonic  tongues  the  Supreme  Being  has  always  with
one  consent  been  called  by  the  general  name  God.  The  dialectic
varieties  are :  Goth,  guff,  A.S.,  O.S.,  0.  Fris.  god,  O.H.G.  cot,  0.
Norse  goff ;  Swed.  Dan.  gud,  M.H.G.  got,  M.L.G.  god ;  and  here
there  is  a  grammatical  remark  to  make.  Though  all  the  dialects,
even  the  Norse,  use  the  word  as  masculine  (hence  in  O.H.G.  the  ace.
sing,  cotan  ;  I  do  not  know  of  a  M.H.G.  goten),  yet  in  Gothic  and
0.  Norse  it  lacks  the  nom.  sing,  termination  (-s,  -r)  of  a  masc.  noun,
and  the  Gothic  gen.  sing,  is  formed  guffs  without  the  connecting-
vowel  i,  agreeing  therein  with  the  three  irreg.  genitives  mans,
fadrs,  broSrs.  Now,  as  O.H.G.  has  the  same  three  genitives  irreg.,
man,  fatar,  pruodar,  we  should  have  expected  the  gen.  cot  to  bear
them  company,  and  I  do  not  doubt  its  having  existed,  though  I
have  nowhere  met  with  it,  only  with  the  reg.  cotes,  as  indeed
mannes  and  fateres  also  occur.  It  is  more  likely  that  the  sanctity
of  the  name  had  preserved  the  oldest  form  inviolate,  than  that  fre
quent  use  had  worn  it  down.1  The  same  reason  preserved  the
O.H.G.  spelling  cot  (Gramm.  1,  180),  the  M.  Dut.  god  (1,  486),  and
perhaps  the  Lat.  vocative  deus  (1,  1071).2  Moreover,  God  and
other  names  of  divine  beings  reject  every  article  (4,  383.  394.  404.
424.  432) ;  they  are  too  firmly  established  as  proper  nouns  to
need  any  such  distinction.  The  der  got  in  MS.  2,  260a.  is  said  of  a
heathen  deity.

On  the  radical  meaning  of  the  word  God  we  have  not  yet
arrived  at  certainty  ;3  it  is  not  immediately  connected  with  the  adj.

1  The  drift  of  these  remarks  seems  to  be  this  :  The  word,  though  used  as  a
masc.,  has  a  neut.  form  ;  is  this  an  archaism,  pointing  to  a  time  when  the
word  was  really  neuter ;  or  a  mere  irregularity  due  to  abtrition,  the  word
having  always  been  masc.  ? — TRANS.

2  Saxo  does  not  inflect  Thor  ;  Uhland  p.  198.

3  The  Slav,  bogh  is  connected   with  the  Sanskr.  bhaga  felicitas,  bhakta
devotus,  and  bhaj  colere  ;  perhaps  also  with  the  obscure  bahts  in  the  Goth,
andbahts  minister,  cultor  ;  conf.  p.  20,  note  on  boghat,  dives.     Of  6e6s,  deus
we  shall  have  to  speak  in  ch.  IX.


14  GOD.

good,  Goth,  gods,  O.N,  go'or,  A.S.  god,  O.H.G.  cuot,  M.H.G.,  guot,  as
the  difference  of  vowel  shows  ;  we  should  first  have  to  show  an
intermediacy  of  the  gradations  gida  gad,  and  gada  god,  whicli
does  take  place  in  some  other  cases ;  and  certainly  God  is  called  the
Good.1  It  is  still  farther  removed  from  the  national  name  of  the
Goths,  who  called  themselves  Gutans  (O.H.G.  Kuzun,  O.N.  Gotar),
and  who  must  be  distinguished  from  0.~N".  Gautar  (A.  S.  Geatas,
O.H.G.  Koza  ;  Goth.  Gautos  ?).

The  word  God  has  long  been  compared  with  the  Pers.  Klwdd
(Bopp,  comp.  gram.,  p.  35).  If  the  latter  be,  as  has  been  supposed,
a  violent  contraction  of  the  Zend  qvadata  (a  se  datus,  increatus,
Sanskr.  svadata,  conf.  Devadatta  ©eoSoro?,  Mitradatta  r.EDu<$SoT09,
Sridatta),  then  our  Teutonic  word  must  have  been  originally  a  com
pound,  and  one  with  a  very  apt  meaning,  as  the  Servians  also
address  God  as  samozazdani  bozhe  !  self-created  God  ;  Vuk  741.

The  O.H.G.  cot  forms  the  first  half  of  many  proper  names,  as
Cotadio,  Cotascalh,  Cotafrit,  Cotahram,  Cotakisal,  Cotaperaht,
Cotalint,  but  not  so  that  we  can  infer  anything  as  to  its  meaning  .
they  are  formed  like  Irmandio,  Hiltiscalh,  Sikufrit,  and  may  just  as
well  carry  the  general  notion  of  the  Divine  Being  as  a  more  definite
one.  When  cot  forms  the  last  syllable,  the  compound  can  only
stand  for  a  god,  not  a  man,  as  in  Irmincot,  Hellicot.

In  derivatives  Ulphilas  exchanges  the  TH  for  a  D,  which  ex
plains  the  tenuis  in  O.H.G.  ;  thus  guda-faurhts  (god-fearing)  Luke
2,  25,  gagudei  (godliness)  Tit.  1,  1  ;  though  the  dat.  sing,  is  invari
ably  guSa.2  Likewise  in  speaking  of  many  gods,  which  to  Christians
would  mean  idols,  he  spells  guda,  using  it  as  a  neuter,  John  10,
34-5.  The  A.S.  god  has  a  neut.  pi.  godu,  when  idols  are  meant
(cod.  exon.  250,2.  254,9.  278,16.).  In  like  manner  the  O.H.G.  and
M.H.G.  compound  apcot,  aptcot  (false  god)  is  commonly  neuter,  and
forms  its  pi.  apcotir ;  whether  the  M.H.G.  '  dcr  aptgot '  in  Geo.
3254.  3302  can  be  correct,  is  questionable ;  we  have  taken  to


1  ovdels  dyatibs  fl  M  efj  6  6(6s,  Mark  10,  18,  Luke  18,  19,  which  in  Gothic
is  rendered  'ni  hvashun  ]mu5eigs  alja  ains  GuS',  but  in  A.S,  '  nis  nan  man
god  buton  God  ana'.     God  is  the  giver  of  all  good,  and  himself  the  highest
good,  summum  bonum.     Thus  Plato  names  him  TO  dyadov.

2  In  Gothic  the  rule  is  to  change  TH  into  D  before  a  vowel  in  inflection,
as,   faSs,   fadis,  fada,    faG  ;    haubio,  -dis,  -da,  -5.     The  peculiarity  of  gut)  is
that  it  retains  TH  throughout  the  sing.,  giu5,  guSs,  guSa,  guG  ;  though  in  pi.
and  in  derivatives  it  falls  under  rule  again. — TEANS.


GOD.  15

using  algott  as  a  masc.  throughout,  yet  our  pi.  goiter  itself
can  only  be  explained  as  originally  neuter,  since  the  true  God  is
one,  and  can  have  no  plural ;  and  the  O.H.G.  cota,  M.H.G.  gote
contain  so  far  a  contradiction.  In  Ulph.  afguds  is  only  an  adj.,  and
denotes  impius  Sk.  44,  22  ;  afgudei  impietas,  Rom.  11,  26  ;  et%w\a
he  translates  by  galiuga  (figmenta),  1  Cor.  5,  10.  10,  20.  28,  or  by
galiugaguda,  1  Cor.  10,  20  ;  and  ei§v\eiov  by  galiug£  sta^s,  1  Cor.
8,  10.  Another  KH.G.  expression  gotze  I  have  discussed,  Gramm.
3,  694 ;  Luther  has  in  Deut.  12,  3  '  die  gotzen  ihrer  goiter,  making
gotze =idolum.  In  Er.  Alberus  fab.  23,  the  gotz  is  a  demigod1  (see
Suppl.).  The  O.K  language  distinguished  the  neut.  goff  idolum
from  the  masc.  guff  deus.  Snorri  119  says  of  Sif  '  it  harfagra  goo1,'
the  fail-haired  god  ;  I  do  not  know  if  a  heathen  would  have  said  it.

In  curses  and  exclamations,  our  people,  from  fear  of  desecrating
the  name  of  God,  resort  to  some  alteration  of  it?potz  wetter!
potz  tausend  !  or,  kotz  tausend  !  kotz  wunder !  instead  of  Gottes  ;
but  I  cannot  trace  the  custom  back  to  our  ancient  speech.  The
similar  change  of  the  Fr.  dieu  into  lieu,  lieu,  guieu*  seems  to  be
older  (see  Suppl.).

Some  remarkable  uses  of  the  word  God  in  our  older  speech  and
•  that  of  the  common  people  jnay  also  have  a  connexion  with
heathen  notions.

Thus  it  is  thrown  in,  as  it  were,  to  intensify  a  personal  pronoun
(see  Suppl.).  Poems  in  M.H.G.  have,  by  way  of  giving  a  hearty
welcome  :  gote  unde  mir  willekomen  ;  Trist.  504.  Frib.  Trist.  497.

1  Writers  of  the  16- 17th  centuries  use  olgotze  for  statue  (Stieler  says,  from
an  allegorical  representation  of  the  apostles  asleep  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,
61  =  oil).     Hans  Sachs  frequently  has  '  den  olgotzen  tragen '  for  doing  house
drudgery,  I.  5,  418d  528d.     III.  3,  24a  49d.     IV.  3,  37b  99a.     The  O.H.G.  coz,
simpuvium  Nuniae  (Juvenal  6,  343),  which  Graff  4,  154  would  identify  with
gotze,  was  a  vessel,  and  belongs  to  giozan=fundere.

2  Such  a  fear  may  arise  from  two  causes  :  a  holy  name  must  not  be  abused,
or  an  unholy  dreaded  name,  e.g.,  that  of  the  devil,  has  to  be  softened  down  by
modifying  its  form  ;  see  Chap.  XXXIII,  how  the  people  call  formidable  animals
by  another  name,  and  for  Doimer  prefer  to  say  donnerwetter  (Dan.  tordenveir
for  Thursday),  donnerwettstein  (wetterstein  or  wetzstein  ?),  donnerkeil,  donner-
wasche,  dummer.     In  Fornm.  sog.  10,  283  we  have  Oddiner  for  OSinn  ;  per
haps  Wuotansheer  (Woden's  host)   was   purposely  changed  into  Mutesheer  ;
whether  Phol  into  Falant,  is  worth  considering.

3  Sangbieu  (sang  de  Dieu),  corbieu  (corps  de  D.)  vertubleu  (vertu  de  D.),
morbleu  (mort  de  D.),  parbleu  (par   D.),  vertuguieu,  vertugoi  (vertu  de  D.),
morguoi  (mort  de  D.),  &c.     As  early  as  Renart  18177,  por  la  char  bieu.     So
the  Engl.  cock's  bones,  'od's  bones,  'od's  wounds,  'zounds,  &c.     Conf.  Weber
metr.  rom.  3,  284.


16  GOD.

gote  suit  ir  willekomen  sin,  iurem  lande  uncle  mir  (ye  sliall  be
welcome  to  God,  your  country,  and  me) ;  Trist.  5186.  got  alrest,
dar  ntich  mir,  west  willekomen  ;  Parz.  305,  27.  wis  willekomen
mir  und  got ;  Frauend.  128,  13.  sit  mir  gote  wilkomen1 ;  Eilh.
Trist.  248.  rente  got  wilkomen  mir ;  Dietr.  5200.  Nu  sit  ouch
mir  got  wilkomen ;  Dietr.  5803.  sit  willekomen  got  und  oueli  mir ;
Dietr.  4619.  nu  wis  mir  got  wilkomen;  Oswalt  208.  406.  1163.
1268.  1393.  2189.  du  solt  groz  willekomen  sin  dem  riclien  got
unde  mir ;  Lanz.  1082.  wis  mir  unde  ouch  got  wilkomen;  Ls.  1,
514.  Occasionally  gote  stands  alone  :  diu  naht  si  gote  willekomen  ;
Iw.  7400,  explained  in  the  note,  p.  413,  as  'devoted  to  God,'  though
it  only  means  '  to-night  be  (thou)  welcome '.  Upper  Germany  has
to  this  day  retained  the  greeting  '  gottwilche,  gottwillkein,  gotti-
kum,  skolkuom'  (Staid.  1,  467.  Schm.  2,  84).  I  do  not  find  it  in
Romance  poems ;  but  the  Saxon-Latin  song  of  the  10th  century
on  Otto  I.  and  his  brother  Heinrich  has  :  sid  wilicomo  bethiu  goda
ende  mi.  The  Supreme  Being  is  conceived  as  omnipresent,  and  is
expected,  as  much  as  the  host  himself,  to  take  the  new-comer  under
his  protection ;  so  the  Sloveny  say  to  the  arriving  guest  '  bSgh  te
vsprimi,  God  receive  you ! ' 2  and  we  to  the  parting  guest  '  God
guide,  keep,  bless  you ! '  We  call  it  commending  or  committing
one  to  God,  M.H.G.  gote  ergeben,  Er.  3598.  I  compare  with  these
the  Hail  !  called  out  to  one  who  arrives  or  departs  (heill  ver  J?u !
Seem.  67a  86b),  with  which  are  also  associated  the  names  of  helpful
gods  :  heill  J?u  farir,  heill  J?u  dsyniom  ser  !  fare  thou  well,  be  thou
well  by  (the  aid  of)  the  Asynior;  Ssem.  31a.  heill  scaltu  Agnarr,
allz  J?ic  heilan  biftr  vera  t$r  vera  !  Ssem.  40.

In  the  same  way  the  name  of  the  omniscient  God  emphasizes
an  assurance  of  knowledge  or  ignorance :  daz  weiz  got  unde  ick ;
Trist.  4151.  den  schatz  weiz  nu  nieman  wan  (except)  got  unde
min;  Nib.  2308,  3.3  This  comfortable  combination  of  /with  God
has  for  its  counterpart  the  opprobrious  one  of  a  thou  with  devil,  ch.
XXXIII.  Here  too  the  got  alone  is  enough :  ingen  vet  min  sorg
utan  gud;  Svenska  visor  2,  7.  That  we  are  fully  justified  in

aThe  omission  of  and  between  the  two  datives  is  archaic,  conf.  Zeitschr.
f.  d.  a.  2,  190.

2  Buge  waz  primi,  gralva  Venus!     Frauend.  192,  20  ;  conf.  177,  14.

3  hie  hcert  uns  anders   nieman  dan  got  unde  diu  waltvogellin ;   Ecke  96.
niemen  bevinde  daz  wan  er  und  ich  und  ein  kleinez  vogellin,  das  mac  wol
getriuwe  sin  ;  Walth.  40,  15.     Birds  play  the  spy  on  men's  privacy.


GOD.  17

referring  these  modes  of  speech  so  far  back  as  to  the  heathen  time,
is  shown  by  a  remarkable  passage  in  Fornald.  sog.  1,  380 :  ek  hugSa
engan  kunna  nema  mik  ok  O&inn.  By  secrets  which  none  can
know  save  OSinn  and  to  whomsoever  he  has  whispered  them,  his
divinity  is  at  once  revealed,  Stem.  38a>  b,  95b,  Fornald.  sog.  1, 487.  Not
quite  parallel  are  phrases  such  as :  daz  geloube  gote  unde  mir ;
Amis  989.  in  unde  gote  von  himile  klage  ich  unser  leit ;  Nib.
1889,  3.  ik  klage  gode  unde  m;  Eichtsteig  landr.  11.  16.  37.  sane
die  messe  beide  got  u.  in  ;  Parz.  378,  25.  Wh.  289,  5.  neic  si  im
unde  gote ;  Iw.  6013.  Also  in  O.Fr.,  jel  te  pardoins  de  diu  et  de
mi ;  Mones  untersuch.  245.  Sometimes  the  Evil  One  is  named  by
the  side  of  the  Deity  :  got  noch  den  tiuvel  loben ;  Iw.  1273.  in
beschirmet  der  tiuvel  noch  got ;  Iw.  4635,  i.e.  no  one  protects  him.

Poems  of  the  Middle  Ages  attribute  human  passions  to  God ;
especially  is  He  often  pictured  in  a  state  of  complacency  and  joy
(see  Suppl.),  and  again  in  the  contrary  state  of  wrath  and  vengeance.
The  former  is  favourable  to  the  creation  of  eminent  and  happily
endowed  men :  got  was  an  einer  suezen  zukt,  do'r  Parzivalen
worhte  (in  amiable  trim — form,  training — when  he  made  Perci-
val) ;  Parz.  148,  26.  got  der  was  vil  senftes  muotes.  do  er
geschuof  so  reine  ein  wip  ;  MS.  1,  17b.  got  der  was  in  frdiden,  do
er  dich  als  ebene  maz  (so  evenly  meted) ;  MS.  1,  22b.  got  in  grossen
freuden  was,  do  er  dich  schuof  (i.e.,  created  wine) ;  Altd.  bl.  1,  413.
got  der  was  in  Jwhem  werde, l  do  er  geschuof  die  reinen  fruht,  wan
ime  was  gar  wol  ze  muote ;  MS.  1,  24b.  got  si  zer  werlde  brahte,  do
ze  freuden  stuont  sin  muot ;  Wigal.  9282.  got  der  was  vil.woJ
gemuot,  do  er  schuof  so  reinem  wibe  tugent,  wiinne,  schcene  an  libe ;
MS.  1,  201a.  got  was  gezierde  milte,  der  si  beide  schuof  nach  lobe;
Troj.  19922.  got  selb  in  richen  freuden  was,  do  er  ir  lip  als  ebene
maz;  Misc.  2,  186.  ich  weiz  daz  got  in  frdiden  was,  do  er  niht,
frouwe,  an  dir  vergaz  waz  man  ze  lobe  sol  schouwen.  Ls.  1,  35.
So  a  troubadour  sings  :  belha  domna,  de  cor  y  entendia  Dieus,  quan
formet  vostre  cors  amoros;  Eayn.  1,  117.2  It  is  an  equally  heathen

1  The  Gothic  gavairthi  =  peace.

2  To  the  creative  God  rejoicing  in  his  work,  the  M.H.G.  poets  especially
attribute  diligence  and  zeal  :  an  den  henden  lac  der  gotes  'fliz  ;  Parz.  88,  15.
jach,  er  triiege  den  gotes  fliz  ;  Parz.  140,  5.     got  het  sinen  fliz  gar  ze  wunsche
wol  an  si  geleit ;  Wigal.  4130.     ich  ween  got  selbe  worhte  dich  mit  siner  got-
licher  hant ;  Wigal.  9723.     zware  got  der  hat  geleit  sine  kunst  mid  sine  kraft,
sinen  fliz  und  sine  meisterschaft  an  disen  loblichen  lip;    Iw.   1685.     So  in

2


18  GOD.

sentiment,  that  imputes  to  God  a  propensity  to  gaze  at  human
beauty,  or  to  do  whatever  men  do :  got  mohte  selbe  gerne  seken  die
selben  juncfrouwen ;  Fragm.  22*.  gott  moht  in  (him,  i.e.  the
musician)  gerne  hwren  in  sinen  himelkoeren;  Trist.  7649.  den  slac
scolte  got  selbe  haben  gesehen  (should  have  seen  that  stroke) ;  Eol.
198,  18.  Karl  72  .  got  selbe  moht  ez  gerne  sehen  ;  Trist.  6869.  ein
puneiz  (diadem),  daz  in  got  selber  mohte  sehen ;  Frauend.  84,  16.
gestriten  dazz  d'engel  mohten  hoeren  in  den  niun  kceren ;  Willeh.
230,  27.  si  mohte  nach  betwingen  mite  (might  nigh  compel
withal)  eines  engels  gedanc,  daz  er  vil  lihte  einen  wane  durch  si
von  himcle  tcete  (fail  from  heaven  for  her) ;  Iw.  6500  (imitated  by
Ottocar  166a).  ich  weiz  daz  wol,  daz  sin  got  nicht  verdruzze  ;  MS.
2,  127a.  ir  har  gelich  dem  golde,  als  ez  got  wunschen  solde;  MS.  2
62b.  sin  swert  dat  geinc  (ging,  went)  an  siner  hant,  dat  got  selve
vrdchde  mere  (would  ask  to  know),  we  der  ritter  were  ?  dey  engele
muosten  lachen,  dat  hey  is  sus  kunde  machen  ;  Haupts  zeitschr.  3,
24.  This  hilarity  of  the  attendant  guardian-angels  (ch.  XXVIII)
or  valklirs  must  be  thought  of  in  connexion  with  the  laughing  of
ghosts  (ch.  XXXI).  In  Hartmann's  Erec,  when  Enite's  white  hands
groomed  (begiengen)  a  horse,  it  says  355  :  und  waere,  daz  got  Men
erde  rite,  ich  wa3n,  in  genuocte  da  mite,  ob  er  solhen  marstaller  liode.
This  view  of  a  sympathizing,  blithe  and  gracious  god,  is  particularly
expressed  in  the  subst.  Jmldi,  O.N.  liylli :  Oolns  hylli ;  Seem.  47a.
Ullar  hylli  ok  allra  goSa  ;  Seem.  45b.

On  the  other  hand,  of  the  primitive  sensuous  representation  of
an  angry  avenging  deity  (see  Suppl.),  the  most  striking  example
will  be  treated  of  presently  in  ch.  VIII,  under  Donar,  thunder.1
The  idea  recurs  several  times  in  the  Edda  and  elsewhere :  reiffr  er
J?er  OSinn,  reiffr  er  j?er  Asabragr ;  Seem.  85b.  OSinn  ofreid~r\  Siem.
228b.  reiff  varS  ]?a  Freyja  oc  fnasaSi ;  Stum.  71b. — she  was  wroth,

Chrestien:  jaia  fist  Dex  de  sa  main  nue,  por  nature  fere  muser,  tout  le  mont  i
porroit  user,  s'ele  la  voloit  contret'ere,  que  ja  nen  porroit  a  chief  trere ;  no  Dex,
s'il  sen  voloit  pener,  mi  porroit,  ce  cuit,  assener,  que  ja  line  telle  feist,  por  peine
que  il  i  meist  (see  Suppl.).

1  Piacula  ires  dcum,  Liv.  €2,  9.  deos  iratos  habeam  !  dii  immortelles  liomin-
il)iis  irasci  et  succensere  consueverunt,  Cic.  pro  Rose.  16.  And  Tacitus  on  this
very  subject  of  the  Germans  :  propitiine  an  irati  dii,  Genii.  5.  ira  dei,  Hist.  \
26.  infensi  Batavis  dii,  Hist.  5,  25.  And  in  the  Mid.  Ages  :  tu  odium  Dei
nniniumque  sanctorum  habeas  !  Vita  Meinwerci,  cap.  13  §  95.  crebrescen-
tibus  juui  jainque  cottidie  Dei  justo  judicio  in  populo  diversis  calamitatibus  et
flagellis  ....  quid  esset  in  quo  Deus  offensus  esset,  vel  quibus
posset  operibus  ;  Pertz  2,  547.


GOD.  19

and  snorted  or  panted,  as  the  angry  wolf  in  Eeinli.  XLII  spirtles  out
his  beard.  guSin  reift  ordin ;  Fornm.  sog.  2,  29.  231.  gofta  gremi
(deorum  ira)  is  announced ;  Egilss.  352.  at  gremia  go5  (offendere
deos);  Fornald.  sog.  2,  69.  was  imo  god  dbolgan ;  Hel.  157,  19.
than  wirdid  iu  waldand  gram,  mahtig  modag;  Hel.  41, 16  (elsewhere  :
diu  Sselde,  or  the  world,  earth,  is  gram),  ein  zornec  got  in  daz  gebot
(bade  them),  daz  uns  hie  suohten  mit  ir  her ;  Parz.  43,  28.  hie  ist
geschehen  gotes  rdche  ;  Reinh.  975.  got  wil  verviieren  sinen  zorn ;
Os w.  717  ich  wsene  daz  got  rosche  da  selbe  sinen  anden  (wreak  his
vengeance) ;  Gudr.  845,  4.  daz  riuwe  got !  (God  rue  it) ;  Trist.
12131.  daz  ez  got  immer  riuwe !  Trist.  11704.  The  Lex  Bajuv.
6,  2,  in  forbidding  Sunday  labour,  says :  quia  talis  causa  vitanda
est,  quae  Deum  ad  iracundiam  provocat,  et  exinde  flagellamur  in
frugibus  et  penuriam  patimur.  How  coarse  were  the  expressions
still  used  in  the  17th  century  '  "  An  abuse  that  putteth  God  on
his  mettle,  and  maketh  him  to  hold  strict  and  pitiless  inquisition,
that  verily  he  shall,  for  saving  of  his  honour,  smite  thereinto  with
his  fists  "  ;  and  again :  "  to  run  upon  the  spears  of  an  offended
jealous  God  ".l  A  wicked'  man  was  in  the  Mid.  Ages  called  gote  hide,
loathed  by  God.  One  form  of  imprecation  was  to  consign  a  man
to  God's  hatred :  uz  in  gotes  haz  !  Trist.  5449.  uz  strichet  (sheer
off)  balde  in  gotes  haz  !  Trist.  14579.  nu  vart  den  gotes  haz  alsam
ein  boeswiht  von  mir  hin  !  Frauend.  109,  12.  mich  hat  der  gotes
haz  bestanden  ;  Kl.  518.  iuch  hat  rehte  gotes  haz  (al.  foul  weather,
the  devil,  &c.)  daher  gesendet  beide  ;  Iw.  6104.  so  miieze  ich
haben  gotes  haz  ;  Altd.  w.  3,  212.  varet  hen  an  godcs  haz  !  Wiggert
2,  47.  nu  mueze  er  gewinnen  gotes  haz;  Roth  611.  In  like  manner
the  MLG.  godsat  hebbe  !  Huyd.  op  St.  2,  350.  Reinaert  3196.2
But,  what  deserves  particular  notice,  this  formula  '  in  gotes  haz,'  or
in  ace.  without  prepos.  '  gotes  haz  varn,  strichen '  has  a  perfect
parallel  in  another  which  substitutes  for  God  the  sun,  and  so  heigh
tens  the  heathenish  colouring  ;  ir  suit  farn  der  sunnen  haz  !  Parz.
247,  26.  var  der  sunnen  haz  !  Unprinted  poems  of  Riiediger  46.
hebe  dich  der  sunnen  haz  !  Er.  93.  nu  ziuhe  in  von  mir  der  sunnen
haz  !  Helmbr.  1799.  si  hiezen  in  strichen  in  der  sunnen  haz;  Eracl.
1100.  hiez  in  der  sunnen  haz  hin  varn;  Frauend.  375,  26.  A  man
so  cursed  does  not  deserve  to  have  the  sun  shine  on  him  kindly.


1  Hartmann  on  benedictions,  Niirnb.  1680,  p.  158,  180.

2  Serious  illness  or  distress  is  habitually  called  *  der  gotes  slacj  stroke.


20  GOD.

The  Vandal  Gizerich  steps  into  his  ship,  and  leaves  it  to  the  winds
where  they  shall  drive  it  to,  or  among  what  people  he  shall  fall
that  God  is  angry  with,  e<£'  ofc  6  0eo?  a>pyi.iTai.  Procop.  de  bello
Vand.  1,  5.

Such  hostile  attitude  breeds  now  and  then  a  rebellious  spirit  in
men,  which  breaks  out  in  promethean  defiance  and  threats,  or  even
takes  a  violent  practical  turn  (see  SuppL).  Herodotus  4,  94  says  of
the  Thracians  :  ovrot,  ol  avrol  Sprj'iiees  KOI  Trpo?  Ppovrrjv  re  /cat
acrrpaTrrjv  To^eijovTes  avw  Trpo?  rov  ovpavov,  a-TretXeOcrt  ra)  dew.  If
the  god  denied  the  assistance  prayed  for,  his  statue  was  flung  into
the  river  by  the  people,  immersed  in  water,  or  beaten.  In  the
Carolingian  romances  we  repeatedly  come  upon  the  incident  of
Charles  threatening  the  Deity,  that  if  he  deny  his  aid,  he  will  throw
down  his  altars,  and  make  the  churches  with  all  their  priests  to
cease  from  the  land  of  the  Franks  ;  e.g.  Ferabr.  1211,  1428,  &c.
So  dame  Breide  too  threatens  to  uncover  the  altar  and  break  the
holy  relics  ;  Orendel  2395  ;  and  Marsilies  actually,  after  losing  the
battle,  has  the  houses  of  his  gods  pulled  down  ;  Eol.  246,  30.  If
the  vintage  failed,  the  statue  of  Urban  was  thrown  into  a  bath  or
the  river.1  The  Arcadians  would  scourge  their  Pan  with  squills
(ovaXAat?),  when  they  returned  bootless  from  the  chase  (Theocr.  7,
106).  The  Greeks  imputed  to  their  gods  not  only  anger  and  hate,
but  envy,  love  of  mischief,


EPITHETS  OF  GOD  (see  SuppL).  In  our  modern  speech  :  der  Hebe,
liebste,  gnadige?  grosse,  gute,  allmdchtige.  In  our  older  tongue  :  herre
got  der  guote  ;  Keinh.  1296.  Gute  frau,  276.  herro  the  godo  ;  Hel.
78,  3.  90,  6.  fro  min  the  godo  ;  143,  7.  ynwdcger  trehtin;  Eeinh.
1309.—  Freq.  the  rich  God:  thie  rikeo  Christ;  Hel.  1,  2.  riki
god;  Hel.  195,9.  riki  drohtin  ;  Hel.  114,22.  der  riche  got  von
himele;  Eoth.  4971.  got  der  riche;  Nib.  1793,  3.  Trist.  2492.
(lurch  den  richen  got  von  himel  ,  Morolt  3526.  der  riche  got  mich
ie  gesach  ;  V.d.  wibe  list  114.3  —  Cot  almahtico,  cot  heilac;  Wesso-

1  When  lightning  strikes,  our  people  say  :  If  God  can  burn,  we  can  Imild
again  ;  Ettners  hebamme,  p.  16.

2  Where  God   is,  there  is  grace  and  peace  ;  of  a  solemn  spot  it  is  said  :
Here  dwells  der  liebe  Gott  !     And,  to  drive  den  lieben  Gott  from  a  person's
room  (Lessing  1,  243),  means,  to  disturb  a  solitary  in  his  sanctum.

3  OHG.  rihhi  dives,  potens,  also  beatus  ;  and  dives  is  near  akin  to  Divus,
as  Bis,  Ditis  springs  out  of  divit.     From  the  Slav,  btighis  derived  boghdt  (dives),
Lith.  bagotas  ;  compare    ops,  in-ops  (Euss.  u-boghiy),  opulentus  with  Ops,  the
liona  Dea.     Conf.  Dieienb.  celt.  1,  196.


GOD.  21

brunn.  Gebet.     mahtig  drohtin  ;  Hel.  2,2.     frea  cdmildig ;  Csedm.
1,9.  10,1.      SQ  celmihtiga  wealdend;  Thorpe's  anal.  83.      manno
mtitisto  (largissimus) ;  Wessobr.  Geb.  vil  milter  Christ ;  Cod.  pal.
350,  56.— The  AS.  has  freq. :   ece  dryhten,  aeternus  ;   Caidm.  246,
I  11.     Beow.  3382.  3555.  4655.     Also :  witig  god,  sapiens ;  Beow.
1364,2105.     Csedm.  182,  24.     witig  dryhten;  Beow.  3101.  3679.
I  Cnedin.  179,  8.  witig  wuldorcyning ;  Csedm.  242,  30. —  Waltant  got ;
iHild.      waldindinger  got;    Eoth.   213.   523.    1009.   2332.    4031.
waltant  Krist :  0V.  25,  91.     Gudr.  2243.     (AS.)  luealdend  ;  Credm.
9,  25.     wuldres  wealdend;  Beow.  4.      heofnes  wealdend;  Csedm.
17,  15.      J?eoda   wealdend.      feeder  alwealda-,    Beow.    630.      (OS.)
waldand ;  Hel.  4,  5.   6,  6.      waldand  god  3,  17.     waldand  drohtin
1,19.     alowaldo^S.  5,20.  8,2.  69,23.     This  epithet  is  not  found
in  the  Edda.     The  notion  of  '  wielding ',  dominari,  regere,  is  further
applied  to  the  Supreme  Being  in  the  phrase  es  walten,  Parz.  568,  1.
En.  7299.    10165.    13225.    So  our  gottwalt's  !    M.  But.  godwouds  !
Huyd.  op  St.  2,  548.     Our  ace.  in  '  das  wait  Gott ! '  is  a  blunder ;
Agricola  596.     Praet.  weltb.  2,  50. — God  is  occasionally  called  the
Old  :  der  alte  Gott  lebt  noch,  i.e.  the  same  as  ever.     A.S.  eald  metod.
MHG.  hat  got  sin  alt  gemiiete ;  Wh.  66,  20.  der  aide  got ;  Eoth.
4401.     popul.  'der  alte  Vater'.      In  a  Servian  song  (Vuk  2,  244.
Montenegro   101),   bogh  is  named  '  stari  krvnik',  the  old  blood-
shedder,    killer;  and  in  Erauenlob   MS.  2,  214b   der  alte  friedel
(sweetheart).     The   13th   century  poets   sometimes   use   the  Lat.
epithet  altissimus,  Wh.  216,  5.  434,  23.     Geo.  90,  401 ;  with  which
may  be  compared  the  MHG.  diu  hohste  hant,  Parz.  484,  6.  487,  20.
568,  8.     Wh.  134,  7.  150,  14.  and  the  OHG.  zi  waltanteru  henti,
0V.  25,  91. — The  '  all- wielding '  God  is  at  the  same  time  the  all-
seeing,  all-knowing,  all-remembering ;  hence  it  is  said  of  fortunate
men,  that  God  mw  them,  and  of  unfortunate,  that  God  forgot  them :
(OHG.)  kesah  tih  kot !  =  0  te  felicem  !     N.  Boeth.  145.  (MHG.)
gesach  in  got! Chappy  he!     Altd.  bl.  1,  347.     so  mir  got  ergaz ;
Troj.  kr.  14072.     so  hat  got  min  vergezzen ;  Mb.  2256,  3.  wie  gar
iuwer  got  vergaz  (how  utterly  God  forgot  you) ;  Iw.  6254.  got  min
vergaz ;  Ecke  209.  got  haete  siri  vergezzen ;  Trist.  9243.     gensede-
licher  trehtin,  wie  vergaeze  du  ie  min  so  ?     Trist.  12483.     For  other
examples,  see  Gramm.  4,  175. — God,  by  regarding,  guards :  daz  si
got  iemer  schouwe  !     Iw.  794.     0.  Engl.  God  you  see  !     God  keep
you  in  his  sight !


22  GOD.

Among  substantive  epithets  are  several  which  God  has  in  com
mon  with  earthly  rulers  (see  Suppl.) : — Gothic  frduja  OS.  frd/w,
frd,  AS.  frcd ;  which  name  I  shall  treat  of  more  fully  by  and  by.
— OIIG.  truktin,  MHG.  trehtin,  OS.  drohtin,  AS.  dryhten,  ON".
drdttinn. — OHG.  heriro,  MHG.  herre,  which  however,  when  used
of  God,  is  never  contracted  into  her,  any  more  than  Dominus  into
the  Romance  domnus,  don. — Conspicuous  above  all  is  the  name
Father  (see  Suppl.).  In  the  Edda,  alfo&r.  (Seem.  46b  88a  154b.  Sn.
3.  11.  17),  herfacfir,  herja  fa&ir,  valfaffir  are  applied  to  OSinn  as
the  father  of  all  gods,  men  and  created  things.  Such  compounds
are  not  found  in  the  other  dialects,  they  may  have  sounded  heathen
ish  ;  though  the  AS.  could  use  feeder  alwealda,  Beow.  630,  and  the
idea  of  God  as  Father  became  more  familiar  to  the  Christians  than
to  heathens.  The  OHG.  altfatar  =  grandfather,  0.  i.  3,  6.  AS.
ealdfaider,  Beow.  743.  1883,  I  have  nowhere  seen  applied  to  God.
As  the  Greeks  coupled  together  Zevs  jrarrjp,  esp.  in  the  voc.  ZeO
Trdrep,  and  the  Eomans  Jupiter,  Diespiter,  Dispiter,  Mars  pater,1
as  well  as  Ajj^r^p,  Aa/mdrrjp,  Terra  mater,  so  the  Lettons  bestow
on  almost  every  goddess  the  epithet  mahte,  mahmina= mater,
matercula  (Biittner  244.  Bergmann  142),  on  which  we  shall  have
more  to  say  hereafter.  To  all  appearance,  father  Goth,  fadr  is
connected  with  fa];s  lord,  as  pater  Tran'^p  is  with  ITOTL^,  TroVt?,  Lith.
pats. — The  AS.  meotod,  metod,  Credm.  223,  14.  eald  metod,  Beow.
1883.  s65  metod,  Beow.  3222.  OS.  metod,  Hel.  4,  13.  15,  17.  66,  19,
an  expression  which  likewise  appears  in  the  Edda,  miotu&r  Sa3m.
226b  241,b  seems  to  signify  Creator,  as  verbally  it  bears  the  sense  of
mensor,  moderator,  finitor.  The  full  meaning  of  metod  will  not  be
disclosed,  till  we  have  a  more  exact  knowledge  of  the  relation
between  the  Goth,  mitan  (to  mete)  and  maitan  (to  cut),  the  OHG.
mezan  and  meizan;  in  the  Lat.  metiri  and  metere,  besides  there
being  no  shifting  of  consonant  (d  for  t),  the  quantity  is  inverted.
The  ON",  miotuffr  appears  to  be  also  sector,  messor ;  in  Snorri  104.
105,  the  wolfs  head  with  which  Heimdall  was  killed  is  called
1  miotuSr  HeimSallar,'  and  the  sword  is  '  mans  miotuSr ' ;  so  in
Eornald.  sog.  p.  441,  '  manna  miotuSr '  (see  Suppl.).  In  MHG.
too,  the  poets  use  mezzan  of  exquisite  symmetry  in  creating  :  do
sin  (Wunsch's)  gewalt  ir  bilde  maz ;  Troj.  19626.  got  selb  in

1  Jane  pater  !     Cato  134  :  but  what  can  Dissunapiter  mean  in  the  remark
able  conjuring-spell,  Cato  1GO  ?


COD.  23

riclien  frouden  was,  do  er  ir  lip  als  ebcne  maz ;  Misc.  2,  186.  er  sol
ze  relite  lange  wwzzen,  tier  an  si  so  efofte  wa2,  daz  er  an  si  zer  weiite
uie  mich  vollem  wunsche  weder  des  nocli  des  vergaz  ;  MS.  1,  154b.
got  der  was  in  iroiden,  do  er  dich  als  ebene  maz;  MS.  1,  22b
wer  kunde  in  so  gemezzen,  Tit.  130.  1.  anders  denne  got  uns
maz,  do  er  ze  werke  liber  mich  gesaz,  Parz.  518,  21.  '  em  bilde
inezzen '  is  therefore  the  same  thing  as  '  ein  bilde  sckaffen '
to  create  (Troj.  19805),  or  giezen  to  cast,  mould  (Walth.  45,
25.  MS.  1,  195b.  2,  22Gb)  ;  and  in  Suchenwirt  24,  154  it  says  :
*  got  het  gcgozzen  uf  ir  vel,  ir  miindel  rot  und  wiz  ir  kel ' ;  which
throws  a  significant  light  on  the  Gothic  tribal  name  Gduts,  A.S.
Gedt  OHG.  K6z  (see  SuppL). — AS.  scippend,  creator,  OHG-.  scefo,
scephio,  MHG.  scliepfcere,  Wh.  1,  3.  NHG.  sclwpfer. — Some  of
these  names  can  be  strung  together,  or  they  can  be  intensified  by
composition :  drolitin  god,  Hel.  2.  13.  waldand  fro  min,  Hel.  148,
14.  153,  8.  fred  dryhten,  Beow.  62.  186.  lif-fred,  Ceedm.  2,  9.  108,
18.  1.95,  3.  240,  33.  Beow.  4.  The  earthly  cuning  with  a  prefix  can
be  used  of  God  :  loiddorcyning,  king  of  glory,  Caedm.  10,  32.  hevan-
cuning,  Hel.  3,  12,  18.  4,  14.  5,  11.  and  synonymously  with  these,
rodora  weard,  Csedm.  11,  2.  or  the  epic  amplification,  irmin-got
obana  abhevane,~RM.  got  von  kimele,  Nib.  2090,4.  2114, 1.  2132, 1.
2136,  1.

Of  such  epic  formulas  (see  SuppL),  beautiful  specimens,  all  of
one  tenour,  can  be  cited  from  the  poets,  especially  the  Komance  :
they  are  mostly  borrowed  from  God's  dwelling-place,  his  creative
power,  his  omnipotence,  omniscience  and  truth  : — Dios  aquel,  que
esta  en  alto,  Cid  800.  2352.  2465.  qui  la  amont  el  seint  eel
inaint  (abides),  Een.  26018.  qui  maint  el  firmament,  Berte
129.  149.  der  hoho  sizet  unde  nideriu  sihet,  1ST.  ps.  112,  5.  qui
haut  siet  et  de  loing  mire,  Een.  11687.  qui  haut  siet  et  loins
voit,  Berte  44,  181.  Guitecl.  2,  139.  der  liber  der  blauen  decke
sitzt,  Melander  Jocoseria  1,  439.  cot  almahtico,  du  himil  inti
erda  gaworahtos  (wroughtest  heaven  and  earth),  Wessobr.  Geb.  eel
senhor,  qui  lo  mon  a  creat,  Ferabr.  775.  qui  tot  le  mont  forma,
Berte  143.  que  fezit  nueyt  e  dia,  Ferabr.  3997.  per  aycel  senhor  que
fetz  eel  e  rozada  (sky  and  dew),  Ferabr.  2994.  4412.  qui  fist  ciel  et
rousee,  Berte  28.  66.  111.  139.  171.  188.  Aimon  876.  qui  feis  mer
salee,  Berte  67.  qui  fist  et  mer  et  onde,  Meon  3,  460.  des  hant
daz  mer  gesalzen  hat,  Parz.  514,  15.  qui  fait  courre  la  nue,  Berte


24  GOD.

136.  183  (v€<f>e\7jyep€Ta  Zevtf.  par  celui  qui  fait  toner,  Ren.
10658.  17780.  par  qui  li  soleus  raie,  Berte  13.  81.  der  himel  und
erde  gebot  und  die  mergriezen  zelt  (counts  the  sea-sands,  or  pebbles),
Mar.  18.  der  der  sterne  zal  weiz,  Wh.  466,  30.  der  die  sterne  hat
gezalt,  Parz.  629,  20.  der  uns  gap  des  manen  (moon's)  schin,  Wh.
476,  1.  qui  fait  croitre  et  les  vins  et  les  blez,  Ferabr.  163a.  der
mir  ze  lebene  geriet  (planned),  Nib.  2091,  4.  Kl.  484.  der  mir  ze
lebene  gebot  (bade),  Roth.  215.  517.  4552.  der  uns  daz  leben
gebot,  Mar.  24.  (M.  Dut.)  bi  den  here  die  mi  ghebot  (Gramm.
4,  134),  die  mi  ghewrochte,  Elegast  345.  451.  996.  qui  tot
a  a  baillier  (oversee),  Berte  35.  qui  tot  a  a  garder,  Berte  7.
que  totz  nos  a  jutgier,  Ferabr.  308.  694.  1727.  the  man-
cunnies  forwardot,  Hel.  152,  5.  qui  sor  tos  homes  puet  et  vaut,
Meon  4,  5.  dominus  qui  omnia  potest,  Docum.  of  1264  in  Wenk  3,
no.  151.  wider  den  nieman  vermac,  A.  Heinr.  1355.  der  aller
wunder  hat  gewalt,  Parz.  43,  9.  der  git  tmde  nimt  (gives  and
takes),  Parz.  7  9.  der  weinen  und  lachen  geschuof,  Wh.  258,  19.
der  beidiu  krump  unde  sleht  gescuof  (both  crooked  and  plain),
Parz.  264,  25.  der  ane  sihet  alle  getougen  (secrets),  Diut.  3,  52.
der  durch  elliu  herzen  siht,  Frid.  355.  der  in  diu  herze  siht,  Wh.
30,  29.  der  ie  daz  guote  geriet  (aye  the  good  devised),  Greg.  2993.
ther  suntiloso  man  (sinless),  0.  iii.  21,  4.  dem  nie  voller  genaden
zeran  (tear,  waste),  Er.  2490.  qui  onques  ne  menti  (nunquam
mentitus),  Berte  82.  96.  120.  146.  Me'on  3,  8.  icil  dieu  qui  ne
ment,  et  qui  fist  tot  quanque  mer  serre,  Ren.  19338.  er  mik  skop
ok  ollu  ra35r,  Fornm.  sog.  1,  3.  sa  er  6'llu  neftr,  ibid.  8,  107.  er
solina  hefol  skapat,  ibid.  1,  242.  het  a  ]?ann  sem  solina  skapaSi,
Landn.  p.  139.

If,  in  some  of  the  preceding  names,  epithets  and  phrases  descrip
tive  of  God,  unmistakable  traces  of  Heathenism  predominate,  while
others  have  barely  an  inkling  of  it,  the  following  expressions  are
still  more  indisputably  connected  with  the  heathen  way  of
thinking.

In  the  Norse  mythology,  the  notion  of  a  Deus,  Divus,  if  not  of
the  uppermost  and  eldest,  yet  of  a  secondary  rank,  which  succeeded
to  power  later,  is  expressed  by  the  word  as,  pi.  cesir  (see  Suppl.).
Landds  (Egilss.  pp.  365-6)  is  patrium  numen,  and  by  it  Thor,  the
chief  god  of  the  North,  is  designated,  though  d-s  and  allmdttki  as  is
given  to  OSinn  (Landn.  4,  7).  dsmeg-in  is  divine  power :  tha  vex


GOD.  25

honum  asmegin  halfu,  Sn.  26.  fceraz  i  asmegin,  Sn.  65.  But  the
name  must  at  one  time  have  been  universal,  extending  over  Upper
Germany  and  Saxony,  under  such  forms  as :  Goth.  OHG.  ans,  pi.
anseis,  ensi,  AS.  6s,  pi.  es  (conf.  our  gans,  with  ON.  gas,  pi.
gaess,  AS.  gos,  pi.  ges ;  and  hose  —  hansa).  It  continued  to  form
a  part  of  proper  names :  Goth.  Ansila,  OHG.  Anso ;  the  OHG.
Anshelm,  Anshilt,  Anspald,  Ansnot  coriespondin  sense  to  Cotahelm,
Cotahilt,  &c. ;  AS.  Osweald,  Oslaf,  Osdaag,  Osred ;  ON.  Asbiorn,1
Asdis,  Asgautr,  Aslaug,  Asmundr,  &c. — Now  in  Ulphilas  Lu.  2,
41-2,  ans  denotes  a  beam,  So/eo?,  which  is  also  one  meaning  of  the
OK  as,  whether  because  the  mighty  gods  were  thought  of  as  joist,
rafter  and  ceiling  of  the  sky,  or  that  the  notions  of  jugum  and
mountain-ridge  were  associated  with  them,  for  as  is  especially  used
of  jugum  terrae,  mountain-ridge,  Pan.  bierg-aas  (dettias  =  sliding
beam,  portcullis,  Landn.  3,  17).  But  here  we  have  some  other
striking  passages  and  proofs  to  weigh.  An  AS.  poem  couples
together  '  esa  gescot '  and  '  ylfa  gescot/  the  shots  of  anses  and  of
elves,  jaculum  divorum  et  geniorum,  just  as  the  Edda  does  sesir  and
aifar,  Ssem.  8b  71*  82a  83b.  Jornandes  says,  cap.  13  :  Turn  Gothi,
magna  potiti  per  loca  victoria,  jam  proceres  suos  quasi  qui  fortuna
vincebant,  non  puros  homines,  sed  semideos,  id  est  anses  (which
would  be  anseis)  vocavere.  What  can  be  plainer  ?  The  Norse  sesir
in  like  manner  merge  into  the  race  of  heroes,  and  at  much  the
same  distance  from  an  elder  dynasty  of  gods  whom  they  have
dethroned.  And  here  the  well-known  statement  of  Suetonius  and
Hesychius,2  that  the  Etruscans  called  the  gods  cesares  or  cesi,  may
fairly  be  called  to  mind,  without  actually  maintaining  the  affinity
of  the  Etruscan  or  Tyrrhenian  race  with  the  ancient  German,
striking  as  is  the  likeness  between  Tvpprjvos,  Tupa-r^vos  and  the  ON.
Jmrs,  OHG.  durs.3

I  The  significance  of  this  analogy,  however,  is  heightened,  when
1  Ursus  divinus,  Asbirna  (ursa  divina),  for  which  the  Waltharius  has  the
brid  Ospirn,  prop.  Anspirn  ;  conf.  Reinh.  fuchs  p.  ccxcv.     For  Asketill,
Oscytel,  see  end  of  ch.  III.

2  Suet.  Octavian.  cap.  97.      futuriimqiie,   nt  inter  deos  referretur,  quod
cesar,   id  est  reliqua  pars  e  Csesaris  nomine,  Etrusca  lingua  deus  vocaretur.
Hesych.  s.v.  alvoi.     @€ol  VTTO  r&v  Tvpfavuv.     Conf.  Lanzi  2,  483-4  ;  also  Dio
Cass.  56,  29.

3  Unfortunately  ]?urs  means  a  giant,  and  durs  a  demon,  which,  if  they
have  anything  to  do  with  the  Tvpa-rjvoi,  would  rather  imply  that  these  were  a
hostile  and  dreaded  people.—  TRANS,


26  GOD.

we  observe  that  the  Etruscan  religion,  and  perhaps  also  the  Roman'
and  the  Greek,  supposed  a  circle  of  twelve  superior  beings  closely
bound  together  and  known  by  the  name  of  dii  consentes  or  complices
(see  SuppL),  exactly  as  the  Edda  uses  the  expressions  hdpt  and  bond,
literally  meaning  vincula,  for  those  high  numina  (Seem.  24a  89b.
Sn.  176.  204),  and  also  the  sing,  hapt  and  land  for  an  individual  god
(Soem.  93b).  Though  haptbandun  in  the  Merseburg  poem  cannot
with  certainty  be  taken  to  mean  the  same  thing  (the  compound
seems  here  to  denote  mere  bodily  chains),  it  is  possible  that  deus
and  Sto?  are  referable  to  Sew  I  bind ;  that  same  f  ans '  a  yoke,  is  the
same  thing  as  the  '  brace  and  band  '  of  all  things  ;  neither  can  we
disregard  the  fact  that  twelve  is  likewise  the  number  of  the  Norse
sesir ;  conf.  Ssem.  3b :  '  sesir  or  Jm  liSi '  of  the  set,  kindred.

Some  other  appellations  may  be  added  in  support.  In  the
earliest  period  of  our  language,  the  neut.  ragin  meant  consilium.
Xow  the  plural  of  this,  as  used  in  the  Edda,  denotes  in  a  special
manner  the  plurality  of  the  gods  (see  SuppL).  Regin  are  the
powers  that  consult  together,  and  direct  the  world  ;  and  the  expres
sions  blift  regin,1  holl  regin  (kind,  merciful  gods),  uppregin,  ginregin
(su perse  potestates)  have  entirely  this  technical  meaning.  Ragna-
rdkr  (Goth,  ragine  riqvis  ?  dimness,  darkness  of  gods)  signifies  the
end  of  the  world,  the  setting  of  the  divine  luminaries.  Saem.
89b  has  "rognir  ok  regin"  coupled  together,  rognir  (cf.  196a)  being
used  to  distinguish  the  individual  ragincis  (raguneis  ? ),  masc.
These  ON.  regin  would  be  Goth,  ragina,  as  the  hopt  and  bond  are
Gothic  hafta  and  banda,  all  neut. — The  same  heathen  conception
peeps  out  in  the  OS.  re#<mgiscapu,  m/cmogiscapu,  Hel.  79,  13.  103,
3,  equivalent  to  fatum,  destiny,  the  decree  and  counsel  of  the  gods,
and  synonymous  with  wwdgiscapu,  Hel.  103,  7,  from  wurd,  fatum.
And  again  in  mctodogiscapu,  Hel.  66,  19.  147,  11.  We  have  seen
that  metod  likewise  is  a  name  for  the  Supreme  Being,  which  the
Christian  poet  of  the  Heliand  has  ventured  to  retain  from  the


1  The  blithe,  happy  gods  ;  when  people  stepped  along  in  stately  gorgeous
attire,  men  thought  that  gods  had  appeared  :  menn  hugiSu  at  ccsir  vseri  ]mr
konmir,'  Landn.  3,  10.  The  Vpls.  saga  c.  26  says  of  SigurS  :  '  ]?at  hygg  ec  at
her /art  einn  afgofrunum,'  I  think  that  here  rides  one  of  the  gods.  So  in  Parz.
36,  18  :  '  alda  wip  und  man  verjach,  si  ne  gesachen  nie  holt  so  wiinneclich,  ir
gote  im  solten  sin  gctich'  (declared,  they  saw  never  a  hero  so  winsome,  their  gods
must  be  like  him).  The  more  reason  is  there  for  my  note  on  Siegfried  (ch.
XV),  of  whom  the  Nib.  84,  4  says  :  der  dort  s6  herUchen  gdt '  (see  SuppL).


GOD.  27

heathen  poetry.  But  these  gen.  plurals  regano,  metodo  again  point
to  the  plurality  of  the  binding  gods.

The  collection  of  Augustine's  letters  contains  (cap.  178),  in  the
altercatio  with  Pascentius,  a  Gothic  or  perhaps  a  Vandal  formula
sihora  armen,  the  meaning  of  which  is  simply  tcvpie  eXerjcrov.1  Even
if  it  be  an  interpolation,  and  written  in  the  fifth  or  sixth  century,
instead  of  at  the  end  of  the  fourth,  it  is  nevertheless  remarkable
that  sihora  should  be  employed  in  it  for  God  and  Lord.  Ulphilas
would  have  said :  frauja  armai.  The  inf.  armen,  if  not  a  mistake
for  arme,  might  do  duty  as  an  imperative ;  at  the  same  time  there
is  a  Finn,  and  Esth.  word  armo  signifying  gratia,  misericordia.  But
sihora,  it  seems,  can  only  be  explained  as  Teutonic,  and  must  have
been  already  in  heathen  times  an  epithet  of  God  derived  from  his
victorious  might  (see  SuppL).  Goth,  sigis,  ON.  sigr,  OHG.  siguy
AS.  sige  victoria,  triumphus.  OcSinn  is  styled  sigr  go  ft,  sigtfjr,
sigfoftur ;  and  the  Christian  poets  transfer  to  God  sigidrohtin ,  Hel.
47,  13.  114,  19.  125,6.  sigidryhten,  Ceedm.  33,  21.  48,  20.
sigmetod,  Beow.  3544.  vigsigor,  Beow.  3108. 2  elsewhere  sigoradryhten,
sigorafred,  sigorawealdend,  sigoragod,  sigoracyning.  It  is  even  pos
sible  that  from  that  ancient  sihora  sprang  the  title  sira,  sire  still
current  in  Teutonic  and  Ptomance  languages.3

The  gods  being  represented  as  superi  and  uppffyin,  as  dwelling
on  high,  in  the  sky,  uphimin,  up  on  the  mountain  height  (as,  ans),
it  was  natural  that  individual  gods  should  have  certain  particular
mountains  and  abodes  assigned  them.

Thus,  from  a  mere  consideration  of  the  general  names  for  God
and  gods,  we  have  obtained  results  which  compel  us  to  accept  an
intimate  connexion  between  expressions  in  our  language  and  con
ceptions  proper  to  our  heathenism.  The  '  me  and  God,'  the  graci
ous  and  the  angry  God,  the  froho  (lord)  and  the  father,  the  behold
ing,  creating,  measuring,  casting,  the  images  of  ans,  fastening,  band,

1  The  Tcheremisses  also  pray  'juma  sirlaga,'  and  the  Tchuvashes  ctora
sirlag,'  i.e.,  God  have  mercy  ;  G.  J.  Miillers  saml.  russ.  gesch.  ?,  359.     The
Morduins  say  when  it  thunders  '  pashangui  Porgiiini  pas,'  have  mercy,  god
Porguini  ;  Georgi  description  1,  64.

2  den  sig  hat  got  in  siner  hant,  MS.  2,16a.

3  Gott.  anz.  1833,  pp.  471-2.     Diez  however  raises  doubts,  Roman,  gram.
1,41.


28  GOD.

and  ragin,  all  lead  both  individually,  and  with  all  the  more  weight
collectively,  into  the  path  to  be  trod.  I  shall  take  up  all  the  threads
again,  but  I  wish  first  to  determine  the  nature  and  bearings  of  the
cultus.


CHAPTEK  III.
WOKSHIP.

The  simplest  actions  by  which  man  expressed  his  reverence1  for
the  gods  (see  Suppl.),  and  kept  up  a  permanent  connexion  with
them,  were  Prayer  and  Sacrifice.  Sacrifice  is  a  prayer  offered  up
with  gifts.  And  wherever  there  was  occasion  for  prayer,  there  was
also  for  sacrifice  (see  Suppl. ).

PRAYER. — When  we  consider  the  word  employed  by  Ulphilas
to  express  adoration,  we  at  once  come  upon  a  correspondence  with
the  Norse  phraseology  again.  For  Trpoo-fcvvea)  the  Goth,  equivalent
is  inveita,  invait,  invitum,  Matt.  8,  2.  9,  18.  Mk.  5,  6.  15,  19.
Lu.  4,  7-8.  John  9,  38.  12,  20.  1  Cor.  14,  25 ;  and  once  for
aaird^ofjiai,  Mk.  9,  15  (see  Suppl.).  Whether  in  using  this  word
the  exact  sense  of  Trpoa/cvvrjo-w  was  caught,  may  be  doubted,  if  only
because  it  is  invariably  followed  by  an  ace.,  instead  of  the  Greek
dat.  In  Mod.  Greek  popular  songs,  Trpocr/cvvelv  is  used  of  a  van
quished  enemy's  act  of  falling  to  the  ground  in  token  of  surrender.
We  do  not  know  by  what  gesture  inveitan  was  accompanied,
whether  a  bowing  of  the  head,  a  motion  of  the  hand,  or  a  bending
of  the  knee.  As  we  read,  1  Cor.  14,  25 :  driusands  ana  anda-
vleizn  (=antlitz),  inveitiS  gu5;  a  suppliant  prostration  like  irpoa-
Kvv7)<Ti,<$  is  not  at  variance  with  the  sense  of  the  word.  An  OS.
giwitan,  AS.  gewitan,  means  abire ;  could  inveitan  also  have  signi
fied  merely  going  up  to,  approaching  ?  Paul.  Diac.  1,  8  twice  uses
accedere.  Fraveitan  is  vindicare.  Now  let  us  compare  the  ON.  vita
inclinare,2  which  Biorn  quotes  under  veit,  and  spells,  erroneously,  I

1  Verehrung,  O.H.G.  £ra,  Goth.  prob.  aiza.    The  O.H.G.  er6n  is  not  merely
our  ehren,  to  honour,  but  also  verehren,  revereri  (as  reverentia  is  adoration,
cultus)  ;  A.S.  weorftian,  O.S.  giwerthon.     All  that  comes  from  the  gods  or  con
cerns  them  is  holy,  for  which  the  oldest  Teutonic  word  is  Goth,  veihs,  O.H.G.
wih  ;  but  only  a  few  of  the  O.H.G.  documents  use  this  word,  the  rest  preferring
heilac,  O.S.  lias  only  helag,  A.S.  hdlig,  O.N.  Jieilagr.     On  the  connexion  of  wih
with   the  subst.   wih,   more  hereafter.     Fr6n  denotes  holy  in  the  sense  of
dominicus.

2  Cleasby- Vigfusson  gives  no  meaning  like  inclinare,  either  under  vita  '  to
fine,'  or  under  vita  *  to  wit.' — TRANS.


30  WORSHIP.

think,  vita.  From  it  is  derived  veita  (Goth,  vaitjan  ?) ;  veita  heifir,
honorem  peragere ;  veita  tiolr,  sacra  peragere ;  veitsla,  epulum,
Goth,  vaitislo  ? l

The  Goth.  Hda  preces,  lidjan  precari,  rogare,  orare,  are  used
both  in  a  secular  and  a  spiritual  sense.  The  same  with  OHG.
peta  sm&pittan;  but  from  peta  is  derived  a  petdn  adorare,  construed
with  ace.  of  the  person  whom:  O.i.  17,  62.  ii.  14,  63.  nidar-
fallan  joh  mill  beton,  0.  ii.  4,86-9.  97.  iii.  11,25.  T.  46,  2.  60,
1.  petota  inan,  Diut.  1,  513b.  But  beton  can  also  express  a  spiri
tual  orare,  T.  34,  1,  2,  3.  Mo-man  cultores,  0.  II.  14,  68.  In
MHG.  I  find  beten  always  followed  by  the  prep,  an  (see  Suppl.) :
beten  an  diu  abgot,  Barl.  72,  4.  an  ein  bilde  beten,  ibid.  98,  15.
so  muoz  si  iemer  me  nach  gote  sin  min  anebet,  she  must  after  God
be  my  (object  of)  adoration,  Ben.  146.  Our  'bitten  ask,  beten  pray,
anbeten  adore,  are  distinct  from  one  another,  as  bitte  request  is  from
gebet  prayer.  The  OS.  beddn  is  not  followed  by  ace.,  but  by  prep.
te :  bedon  te  miimn  barma,  Hel.  33,  7.  8  ;  and  this  of  itself  would
suggest  what  I  conjectured  in  my  Gramm.  2,  25,  that  bidjan  origin
ally  contained  the  physical  notion  of  jacere,  prosterni,  which  again
is  the  only  explanation  of  Goth,  badi  K\W&IOV  a  bed,  and  also  of
the  old  badu,  AS.  beado  rr  canles,  strages.2 — The  AS.  New  Test,
translates  adorare  by  ge-edft-medan,  i.e.,  to  humble  oneself.  The
MHG.  flehen,  when  it  signifies  supplicare,  governs  the  dat. :  gote
flehen,  Aegid.  30.  den  goten  vlehen,  Parz.  21,  6.  Wh.  126,  30.
Tiirl.  Wh.  71a ;  but  in  the  sense  of  demulcere,  solari,  the  ace.,  Parz.
119,  23.  421,  25.  Nib.  499,  8  (see  Suppl.).3  It  is  the  Goth  frldihan,
fovere,  con  solari.  An  OHG.  flehon  vovere  I  only  know  from  N.
cap.  8,  Bth.  178,  and  he  spells  it  flehon:  ten  (ace.  quern)  wir  fle-
hoton.  We  say  '  zu  gott  flehen  j  but  '  gott  anflehen '. — The  Goth.
aihtron  irpocrev-^eadai,  Trpoo-aireiv  expresses  begging  rather  than
asking  or  praying.  The  OHG.  diccan,  OS.,  thiggian,  is  both
precari  and  impetrare,  while  AS.  fricgan,  ON.,  Mggja,  is  invariably


1  Bopp,  Comp.  grain,  p.  128,  identifies  inveita  with  the  Zend  nivaedhayemi
invoco.

2  What  was  the  physical  meaning  of  the  Slav,  moliti  rogare,  molitise  orare,
Boh.  modliti  se,  Pol.  modlid  si^  ]     The  Sloven,  moliti  still  means  porrigcTc,
conf.  Lith.  meldziu  rogo,  inf.   melsti,  and  malda  oratio.     Pruss.  madia,  conf.
Goth.  ma]?ljan  loqui,  ma]?leins  loquela,  which  is  next  door  to  oratio.

3  Iw.  3315  vlegete  got ;  but  in  the  oldest  MS.  vlehete  gote.


PRAYER.  31

impetrare,  accipere,  so  that  asking  has  passed  over  into  effectual
asking,  getting  (see  Suppl.).

Another  expression  for  prayer  is  peculiar  to  the  Norse  and  AS.
dialects,  and  foreign  to  all  the  rest :  OK  Ion  or  been,  Swed.  Dan.
Ion,  AS.  len,  gen.  bene  f.,  Csedm.  152,  26,  in  Chaucer  bone,  Engl.
boon ;  from  it,  bena  supplex,  bensian  supplicare.  Lastly  the  Icel.
Swed.  dyrka,  Dan.  dyrke,  which  like  the  Lat.  colere  is  used  alike  of
worship  and  of  tillage,  seems  to  be  a  recent  upstart,  unknown  to
the  OIsT.  language.

On  the  form  and  manner  of  heathen  prayer  we  lack  informa
tion  ;  I  merely  conjecture  that  it  was  accompanied  by  a  looking  lip
to  heaven,  lending  of  the  body  (of  which  bidjan  gave  a  hint),  folding
of  hands,  bowing  of  knees,  uncovering  of  the  head.  These  gestures
grow  out  of  a  crude  childlike  noti  ;n  of  antiquity,  that  the  human
suppliant  presents  and  submits  himself  to  the  mighty  god,  his
conqueror,  as  a  defenceless  victim  (see  Suppl.).  Precari  deos  ccelum-
que  suspicere  is  attested  by  Tacitus  himself,  Germ.  10.  Genuflec-
tere  is  in  Gothic  knussjan,  the  supplicare  of  the  Eomans  was  flexo
corpore  adorare.  Falling  down  and  bowing  were  customs  of  the
Christians  too ;  thus  in  Hel.  47,  6.  48,  16.  144,  24  we  have :  te
bedu  hnigan.  58,  12  :  te  drohtine  hnigan.  176,  8  :  te  bedu  fallan.
145,  3 :  gihneg  an  kniobeda.  In  the  SolarlioS  is  the  remarkable
expression :  henni  ec  laut,  to  her  (the  sun)  I  bowed,  Ssem.  126tt ;
from  luta  inclinare.  falla  a  kne  ok  luta,  Vilk.  saga  cap.  6.  nu
strauk  kongsdottir  sinn  legg,  ok  mselti,  ok  ser  i  loptiff  upp,  (stroked
her  leg,  and  spoke,  and  looks  up  to  the  sky),  Vilk.  saga  cap.  61.
So  the  saga  of  St.  Olaf  tells  how  the  men  bowed  before  the  statue

O

of  Thor,  lutu  Ipvi  skrimsli,  Fornm.  sog.  4,  247.  fell  til  iardar  fyrir
likneski  (fell  to  earth  before  the  likeness).  Fornm.  sog.  2,  108.
The  Langobards  are  stated  in  the  Dial.  Gregorii  M.  3,  28  to  have
adored  submissis  cervicibus  a  divinely  honoured  goat's  head.  In  the
Middle  Ages  people  continued  to  bow  to  lifeless  objects,  by  way  of
blessing  them,  such  as  a  loved  country,  the  road  they  had  traversed,
or  the  day.1  Latin  writers  of  the  time,  as  Lambert,  express  urgent
entreaty  by  pedibus  provolvi ;  the  attitude  was  used  not  only  to

1  Dem  stige  nigen,  Iw.  5837,  dem  wege  nigen,  Parz.  375,  26.  clem  lande
nigen,  Trist.  11532.  nigen  in  daz  lant,  Wigal.  4018.  nigen  in  elliu  lant,  Iw.
7755.  in  die  werlt  nigen,  Frauend.  163,  10.  den  stigen  und  wegen  segeu
tuon,  Iw.  357  (see  Suppl.).


32  WORSHIP.


God,  but  to  all  whom  one  wished  to  honour  :  neig  im  uf  den  fuoz,
Morolt  41b.  hie  viel  sie  uf  sinen  vuoz,  Iw.  8130.  ouch  nige  ich  ir
unz  uf  den  fuoz,  MS.  1,  155a.  valle  fiir  si  (fall  before  her),  und  nige
uf  ir  fuoz,  MS.  1,  54a.  buten  sich  (bowed)  weinende  uf  sinen  vuoz,
Greg.  355.  neig  im  nider  uf  die  hant,  Dietr.  55b.  These  passages  show
that  people  fell  before  the  feet,  and  at  the  feet,  of  him  who  was  to
be  reverenced  :  wilt  fallan  te  minun  fotun,  bedos  te  minun  barma,
Hel.  33,  7.  sich  bot  ze  tal  (bowed  to  the  ground)  gein  sinen  fu'ezen
nieder,  Wh.  463,  2.1  An  0.  Boh.  song  has  :  '  sie  klanieti  bohu,'  to
bow  before  God,  Koniginh.  hs.  72 ;  but  the  same  has  also  the  un-
Teutonic  '  se  Uti  w  celo  prede  bohy,'  to  beat  one's  brow  before  God.2
Uncovering  the  head  (see  Suppl.)  certainly  was  from  of  old  a  token
of  respect  with  our  ancestors,  which,  like  bowing,  was  shown  to
deity  as  well  as  to  kings  and  chiefs.  Perhaps  the  priests,  at  least
those  of  the  Goths,  formed  an  exception  to  this,  as  their  name  pile-
ati  is  thus  accounted  for  by  Jornandes,  qui&.opertis  capitibus  tiaris
litabant,  while  the  rest  of  the  people  stood  uncovered.  In  a
survival  of  heathenish  harvest-customs  we  shall  find  this  uncover
ing  further  established,  ch.  VII.  In  Nicolai  Magni  de  Gow
registrum  superstitionum  (of  1415)  it  is  said :  Insuper  hodie
inveniuntur  homines,  qui  cum  novilunium  priino  viderint  flexis
gcnibus  adorant  vel  deposito  caputio  vel  pileo,  inclinato  capite
honorant  alloquendo  et  suscipiendo.3  An  AS.  legend  of  Cuftberht
relates  how  that  saint  was  wont  to  go  down  to  the  sea  at

1  Fial  in  sine  fuazi,  0.  III.  10,  27.    an  sine  fiieze,  Karl  14b.     The  Chris
tians  in  the  Mid.  Ages  called  it  venie  fallen,  Parz.  460,  10.     Karl  104*.     Berth.
173.     Ksrchr.  2958.  3055.     Kneeling  and  kissing  the  ground,  to  obtain  abso
lution  :  da  er  uf  siner  venie  lac  (lay),  Barl.  366,  21.  den  anger  maz  mit  der  langen
venie,  Frib.     Trist.  2095.     venien  suoclien,  MS.    1, 23b.     Morolt.  28a.     Troj.
9300.    terrae  osculationibus,  quas  venias  appellant,  Fez.  bibl.  ascet.  8,  440.   gie
ze  kirchen  und  banekte  (prostrated  ?)  ze  gote  siniu  glider  mit  venien  und  gebet,
Cod.  kolocz.  180.

2  The  tchelo-bitnaya,  beating  of  the  forehead  in  presenting  a  petition,  was
prohibited  in  Russia  by  Catherine  II.     Conf.  pronis  vultibus  adorare,  Helm  old
1,  38.

3  What  else  I  have  collected  about  this  practice,  may  be  inserted  here  :
elevato  a  capite  pileo  alloquitur  seniorem,  Dietm.  Merseb.  p.  824  (an.   1012).
sublata  cydare  surgens   inclinat  honeste,   Ruodlieb   2,  93.      Odofredus  in   I.
secundo  loco  digest,  de  postulando  :  Or  signori,  hie  colligimus  argumentum,
quod  aliquis  quando  veniet  coram  magistratu  debet  ei  revereri,  quod  est  contra
Ferrarienses,  qui,  si  essent  coram  Deo,  non  extraherent  sibi  capellum  vel  birretum
de  capite,  nee  flexis  genibus  postularent.    Pilleus  in  capite  est,  Isengrimus  1139.
oster  la  chape  (in  saluting),  Meon  4,  261.     gelupfet  den  huot,  Ms  H.  3,330.
sinen  huot  er  abenam,  hiemit  eret  er  in  also,  Wigal.  1436.     er  z6di  durch  sin
hubscheit  den  huot  gezogenlichen  abe,  Troj.  1775.     do  stuont  er  uf  geswinde


PRAYER.  33

night,  and  standing  up  to  his  neck  in  the  briny  breakers,  to  sing  his
prayers,  and  afterwards  to  kneel  down  on  the  shingles,  with  palms
stretched  out  to  the  firmament.1  Lifting  up  and  folding  of  the
hands  (sne  Suppl.)  was  also  practised  to  a  master,  particularly  to  a
feudal  lord.  In  Ls.  3,  78  we  have  ' bat  mit  zertdnen  armen'  prayed
with  outspread  arms.  The  Old  Bavarian  stapfsaken  (denial  of
indebtedness)  was  accompanied  by  elevation  of  the  hands,  EA.  927
(see  Suppl.).  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  Christian  converts
retained  some  heathen  customs  in  praying.  In  a  manuscript,  pro
bably  of  the  12th  century,  the  prayers  are  to  be  accompanied  by
some  curious  actions:  so  miz  (measure)  den  ubir  dinherza  in  modum
crucis,  unde  von  dem  brustleffile  zuo  demo  nabile,  unde  miz  denne  von
eime  rippe  unz  an  daz  andire,  unde  sprich  alsus.  Again :  so  miz
denne  die  rehtun  hant  von  deme  lengistin  vingire  unz  an  daz  resti
(wrist),  unde  miz  denne  von  deme  dumin  zuo  deme  minnisten  vin
gire.  One  prayer  was  called  '  der  vane  (flag)  des  almehtigin  gotis';
nine  women  are  to  read  it  nine  Sundays,  '  so  ez  morginet' ;  the
ninth  has  to  read  the  psalm  Domini  est  terra,  in  such  a  posture
' daz  ir  lib  niet  ruore  die  erde,  wan  die  ellebogin  unde  diit,  chnie'
that  her  body  touch  not  the  ground,  except  at  the  elbows  and  knees;
the  others  are  all  to  stand  till  the  lighted  candle  has  burnt  out ;
Diut.  2,  292-3.

We  cannot  now  attach  any  definite  meaning  to  the  Gothic
aviliudon  ev^apiaTelv ;  it  is  formed  from  aviliud  %«££?,  which
resembles  an  O.  Sax.  alat,  olat  gratiae ;  does  it  contain  liuS  cantus,
and  was  there  moreover  something  heathenish  about  it?  (See
Suppl.).  The  old  forms  of  prayer  deserve  more  careful  collecting;
the  Norse,  which  invoke  the  help  of  the  gods,  mostly  contain  the


gnuoc,  ein  schapel  daz  er  uf  truoc  von  gimmen  und  von  golde  fin,  daz  nam  er  ab
dem  houpte  sin,  Troj.  18635.  er  zucket  im  sin  feopoft,  l^8*  3,  35.  er  was  gereit,
daz  er  von  dem  houbt  den  liuot  liez  vliegen  imd  sprach,  Kolocz.  101.  Festus
explains  :  lucem  facere  dicuntur  Saturno  sacrificantes,  id  est  capita  detegere;
again  :  Saturno  fit  sacrificium  capite  aperto ;  conf.  Macrob.  Sat.  1,  8.  Serv.  in
Virg.  3,  407.

1  Waes  gewunod  Ipset  he  wolde  gan  on  niht  to  sae,  and  standan  on  ]?am
sealtum  brimme,  0(5  his  swuran,  singende  his  gebedn,  and  siSSan  his  cneowu
on  ]?am.ceosle  gebygde,  astrehtum  handbredum  to  heofenlicum  rodere;  Thorpe's
analecta,  pp.  76-7.  homil.  2.  138.  [I  have  thought  it  but  fair  to  rescue  the
saint  from  a  perilous  position  in  which  the  German  had  inadvertently  placed
him  by  making  him  "  wade  into  the  sea  up  to  his  neck,  and  kneel  down  to
sing  his  prayers  ". — TRANS.] — In  the  O.Fr.  jeu  de  saint  Nicolas,  Tervagant
has  to  be  approached  on  bare  elbows  and  knees ;  Legrand  fabl.  1,  343.

3


34  WOKSHIP.

verb  dug  a  with  the  sense  propitium  esse:  biS  ec  Ottari  oil  goS  duga,
(I  Ot.  pray  all,  &c.),  Seem.  120b.  bio>  J?a  disir  duga,  S^ern.  195a.
Duga  means  to  belp,  conf.  Gramm.  4,  687.  There  is  beauty  in  the
ON.  prayer:  biSjom  herjafoSr  i  hugom  sitja  (rogemus  deum  in
animis  sedere  nostris),  Ssem.  113',  just  as  Christians  pray  the  Holy
Ghost  to  descend :  in  herzen  unsen  sdzi,  0.  iv.  5,  30  (see  Suppl.).

Christians  at  prayer  or  confession  looked  toward  the  East,  and
lifted  up  their  arms  (Bingham  lib.  xi.  cap.  7,  ed.  hal.  3,  273) ;  and
so  we  read  in  the  Kristinbalkr  of  the  old  Gulathing  law:  '  ver  skulum
Itita  austr,  oc  biSja  til  ens  helga  Krists  ars  ok  friSar/  we  must  bow
east,  and  pray  the  holy  Christ  for  plenty  and  peace  (conf.  Syntagma
do  baptismo  p.  65) ;  in  the  Waltharius  1159 :  contra  orientalem
prostratus  corpore  partem  precatur ;  in  AS.  formulas :  edstweard
ic  stande ;  and  in  Troj.  9298.  9642 :  keret  iuch  gen  orient.  The
heathens,  on  the  contrary,  in  praying  and  sacrificing,  looked  North
wards  :  horfa  (turn)  i  norftr,  Fornm.  sog.  11,  134.  leit  (looked)  i
norftr,  Ssem.  94a.  beten  gegen  mitternacht,  Keisersperg  omeiss  49b.
And  the  North  was  looked  upon  by  the  Christians  as  the  unblessed
heathen  quarter,  on  which  I  have  given  details  in  EA.  808  ;  it  was
unlucky  to  make  a  throw  toward  the  north,  EA.  57  ;  in  the  Lombard
boundary-treaties  the  northern  tract  is  styled  '  nulla  ora/  E A.  544.
These  opposite  views  must  serve  to  explain  a  passage  in  the  Eoman
de  Eenart,  where  the  fox  prays  christianly,  and  the  wolf  heatlitnly,
Eeinh.  fuchs  p.  xli.1

As  the  expressions  for  asking  and  for  obtaining,  pp.  30,  31,  are
identical,  a  prayer  was  thought  to  be  the  more  effectual,  the  more
people  it  was  uttered  by :

got  enwolde  so  manegem  munde
sin  genade  niht  versagen.     Wigal.  4458.

die  juncvrouwen  baten  alle  got,
nu  ist  er  so  gneedec  unt  so  guot
unt  so  reine  gemuot,
daz  er  niemer  kunde
so  manegem  siiezen  munde
betelichiu  dine  versagen.     Iw.  5351.

1  At  the  abrenuntiatio  one  had  to  face  the  sunset,  with  wrinkled  brow  (fronte
caperata),  expressing  anger  and  hatred  ;  but  at  the  confession  of  faith,  to  face
the  sunrise,  with  eyes  and  hands  raised  to  heaven  ;  Bingham  lib.  xi.  cap.  7.  §
13.14.  Conf.  Joh.  Olavii  synt.  de  baptismo,  pp.  64-5.


SACRIFICE.  35

in  (to  the  nuns)  waren  de  munde  so  royt,
so  wes  si  god  baden,
of  syt  mit  vlize  daden,
he  id  in  nummer  inkunde
dem  rosenroten  munde
bedelicher  dinge  versagen.

Ged.  von  der  vrouwen  sperwere,  Cod.  berol.   184,   54d.     Hence :
Mfen  singen,  MS.  1,  57a.  2,  42b.     Conf.  cento  novelle  61.1

SACRIFICE. — The  word  opfer,  a  sacrifice,  was  introduced  into
German  by  Christianity,  being  derived  from  the  Lat.  offero.  offe/rre?
The  AS.  very  properly  has  only  the  verb  offrian  and  its  derivative
offrung  (oblatio).  In  OHG.,  from  opfaron,  opforon  there  proceeded
also  a  subst.  opfar,  MHG.  ophern  and  opher  • 3  and  from  Germany
the  expression  seems  to  have  spread  to  neighbouring  nations,  ON".
offrt  Swed.  Dan.  offer t  Lith.  appiera,  Lett,  uppuris,  Esth.  ohwer,  Fin.
uhri,  Boh.  of  era,  Pol.  qfiara,  Sloven,  ofer.  Everywhere  the  original
heathen  terms  disappeared  (see  Suppl.).

The  oldest  term,  and  one  universally  spread,  for  the  notion  '  to
worship  (God)  by  sacrifice,'  was  llotan  (we  do  not  know  if  the
Goth.  pret.  was  baiblot  or  blotaida) ;  I  incline  to  attach  to  it  the
full  sense  of  the  Gk.  Oveirf  (see  Suppl.).  Ulphilas  saw  as  yet  no
objection  to  translating  by  it  cre/Bea-Oat,  and  \arpevew,  Mk.  7,  7.


1  Mock-piety,  hypocrisy,  was  branded  in  the  Mid.  Ages  likewise,  by  strong
phraseology  :  er  wil  gote  die  fueze  abezzen  (eat  the  feet  off),  Ls.  3,  421.  Fragm.
28*.     Mones  anz.  3,  22.  unserm  Herrgott  die  fuess  abbeissen  wollen  (bite  off),
Schmeller  2,  231.  den  heiligen  die  fuss  abbeten  wollen  (pray  the  saints'  feet  off
them),  Simplic.  1.  4,  17.  herrgottbeisser,  Hofer  2,  48.  herrgottfisler  (fiiszler),
Schmid  1,  93.  heiligenfresserin,  10  ehen,  p.  62.     So  the  Ital.  mangiaparadiso,
Fr.  mangeur  de  crucefix,  Boh.  Pol.  liciobrazek   (licker  of  saints).     A  sham
saint  is  indifferently  termed  kapeltrete,  tempeltrete,  tempelrinne,  Hones  schausp.
p.  123.  137  (see  Suppl.).

2  Not  from  operari,  which  in  that  sense  was  unknown  to  the  church,  the
.Romance  languages  likewise  using   It.   offerire,  Sp.   ofrecer,  Fr.  offrir,   never
operare,  obrar,  ouvrer  ;  the  same  technical  sense  adheres  to  offerta,  ofrenda,
o/rande.     From  oblata  come  the  Sp.  oblea,  Fr.  oublie,  and  perhaps  the  MHG.
oblei,  unless  it  is  from  eulogia,  oblagia.     From  offre  and  offerta  are  formed  the
Wei.    offryd,   Ir.    oifrion,  aifrion,    offrail.     Lastly,  the  derivation  from  ferre,
offerre,  is  confirmed  by  the  German  phrase  '  ein  opfer  bringen,  darbringen.'

3  Ophar,  opfer  could  hardly  be  the  Goth,  aibr  dwpov,  in  which  neither  the
vowel  nor  the  consonant  agrees.     The  Wei.  abert,  Gael,  iobairt,  Ir.  iodbairt,
(sacrificium)  probably  belong  also  to  offerta.

4^When  Sozomen  hist.  eccl.  6,  37  in  a  narrative  of  Athanaric  uses  Trpocncvi/eii/
/cat  6v€iv,  the  Gothic  would  be  inveitan  jah  blotan.


36  WORSHIP.

Lu.  2,  37;  he  construes  it  with  an  ace.  of  the  person:  blotan
fraujan  is  to  him  simply  Deum  colere,  with  apparently  no  thought
of  a  bloody  sacrifice.  For  \arpeia  Eom.  12,  1,  he  puts  Uotinassus,
and  for  0eocre/3r)<;  John  9,  31  gpKUdstrtis.  The  latter  presupposes  a
subst.  Uostr  (cultus,  oblatio),  of  which  the  S  is  explained  in
Gramm.  2,  208.  Usbloteins  (TrapaxXTjcris)  2  Cor.  8,  4  implies  a  verb
usbldtjan  to  implore.  Coedmon  uses  the  AS.  Uotan  pret.  bleot,
onllotan  pret.  onbleot,  of  the  Jewish  sacrifice,  and  follows  them  up
with  ace.  of  thing  and  dat.  of  person  :  blotan  sunu  (filium  sacri-
ficare)  173,  5.  onbleot  J?set  lac  Gode  (obtulit  hostiam  Deo)  177,  21.
In  Alfred's  Orosius  we  have  the  same  Udtan  pret.  blotte.  I  derive
from  it  lletsian,  later  blessian,  to  bless.  The  OHG.  pluozan,  pret.
pliez  and  pluozta,  appears  only  in  glosses,  and  renders  libare,  litare,
victimare,  immolare,  Gl.  Hrab.  959a  960a  966b  968b.  Diut.  1,  245,
258a.  No  case-construction  is  found,  but  an  ace.  of  the  thing  may
be  inferred  from  partic.  kaplozaniu  immolata.  A  subst.  pluostar
sacrificium,  Ihwstar,  Is.  382.  GL  emm.  411.  Gl.  jun.  209.  T.  56,  4.
95,  102  *;  pluostarhtis  idolium,  Gl.  emm.  402.  ploazlius  fanum,
pluostrari  sacrificator,  ibid.  405.  It  is  plain  that  here  the  word  has
more  of  a  heathen  look,  and  was  not  at  that  time  used  of  Christian
worship  ;  with  the  thing,  the  w^ords  for  it  soon  die  out.  But  its
universal  use  in  Norse  heathendom  leaves  no  doubt  remaining,  that
it  was  equally  in  vogue  among  Goths,  Alamanni,  Saxons,  before
their  conversion  to  Christianity.  The  ON.  verb  llota,  pret.  blet  and
blota<5i,  takes,  like  the  Gothic,  an  ace.  of  the  object  worshipped  ;
thus,  Gragas  2,  170,  in  the  formula  of  the  trygdamal:  sva  vi5a  sem
(as  widely  as)  kristnir  menu  kirkior  scekia,  heiSnir  menn  hof  llota
(fana  colunt);  and  in  the  Edda:  Thor  llota,  mik  llota,  llotafti  05in.
Sa3m.  llla,  113b,  141a,  165a2:  always  the  meaning  is  sacrificio  vene-
rari.  So  that  in  Goth,  and  ON.  the  verb  brings  out  more  the  idea
of  the  person,  in  OHG.  and  AS.  more  that  of  the  thing.  But
even  the  O.Dan,  version  of  the  OT.  uses  llothe  immolare,


1  The  Gl.  Hrab.  954a  :  bao,ha,  plostar,  is  incomplete  ;  in  Gl.  Ker.  45.  Dint.
1,  166a  it  stands  :  bacha  sacriticat,  ploastar  ploazit,  or  zepar  pWzit;  so  that  it  is
meant  to  translate  only  the  Lat.  verb,  not  the  subst.  bacha  (/Su^r?).     Or  per
haps  a  better  reading  is  'bachat'  for  bacchatur,  and   the  meaning   is    'non
Kicrificat  '.

2  Landn.   1,2:  blotaOi  hrat'na  ]?ria,  worshipped  three  ravens,  \vho  were
going  to  show  him  the  road  ;  so,  in  Soem.  141a,  a  bird  demands  that  cows  lie
sacrificed  to  him  ;  the  victim  itself  is  ON.  bltit,  and  we  are  told  occasionally  :
feck  at  bloti,  ak  bloti  miklu,  oti'ered  a  sacrifice,  a  great  sacrifice,  Landn.  2,  29.


SACRIFICE.  37

libamina,  Uotelsa  holocaustum,  Molbech's  ed.  pp.  171.  182.  215.  249.
Also  the  O.Swed.  Uplandslag,  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  church-
balkr  has :  sengin  skal  affguSum  Uotce,  with  dat.  of  person,  implying
an  ace.  of  the  thing. — The  true  derivation  of  the  word  I  do  not  know.1
At  all  events  it  is  not  to  be  looked  for  in  bloS  sanguis,  as  the  dis
agreeing  consonants  of  the  two  Gothic  words  plainly  show;  equally
divergent  are  the  OHG.  pluozan  and  pluot  from  one  another;
besides,  the  worship  so  designated  was  not  necessarily  bloody.  A
remarkable  passage  in  the  Livonian  rhyming  chronicle  4683  tells  of
the  Sameits  (Schamaits,  Samogits) :

ir  Uuotekirl  der  warf  zuo  hant
sin  loz  nach  ir  alden  site,
zuo  hant  er  Uuotete  alles  mite
ein  quek.

Here,  no  doubt,  an  animal  is  sacrificed.  I  fancy  the  poet  retained
a  term  which  had  penetrated  from  Scandinavia  to  Lithuania  with
out  understanding  it  himself ;  for  bluotkirl  is  merely  the  O.Swed.
blotkarl,  heathen  priest ;  the  term  is  foreign  to  the  Lithuanian
language.2

A  few  more  of  these  general  terms  for  sacrifice  must  be  added
(see  Suppl.).— OHG.  antheiz  (hostia,  victima),  Diut.  1,  240a.  246,
258.  278b ;  and  as  verbs,  both  antheizon  and  inheizan  (immolare),
Diut.  1,  246.  258.— OHG.  insaken  (litare),  Gl.  Hrab.  968b,  insaJcet  pirn
(delibor),  ibid.  959a  960a,  to  which  add  the  Bavarian  stapfsaken,
EA.  927 ;  just  so  the  AS.  onsecgan,  Cod.  exon.  171,  32.  257,  23.
onsecgan  .to  tibre  (devote  .as  sacrifice),  Csedm.  172,  30.  tiber
onscegde,  90,  29.  108,  17.  tifer  onsecge,  Ps.  65,  12.  lac  onsecge
Cod.  exon.  254,  19.  257,  29  ;  lac  onscegde,  Csedm.  107,  21.  113,
15.  Cod.  exon.  168,  28.  gild  onscegde,  fedrn.  172,  11.  and
onscegdnes  (oblatio).  —  As  inheizan  and  onsecgan  are  formed
with  the  prefix  and-,  so  is  apparently  the  OHG.  ineihan  pirn
(delibor),  Hrab.  960a,  which  would  yield  a  Goth,  anddikan ;  it  is

1  Letter  for  letter  it  agrees  with  <£Aot§deo  I  light  up,  burn,  which  is  also  ex
pressed  in  0u<0  and  the  Lat.  suffio  ;   but,  if  the  idea  of  burnt-offering  was
originally  contained  in  blotan,  it  must  have  got  obscured  very  early.

2  Even  in  MHG.  the   word   seems  to   have  already  become   extinct  ;  it
may  survive  still  in  terms  referring  to  place,  as  Wofegraben,  frfofegarten  in
Hessen,  conf.  the  phrase  '  Uotzen  mussen,'  to  have  to  fork  out  (sacrifice)  money.
An  old  knife  or  sword  also  is  called  blotz  (see  Suppl.).


38  WORSHIP.

from  this  OHG.  ineihhan,  which  I  think  Graff  1,  128  has  misread
ireihan,  that  a  later  neihhan  immolare,  libare  Graff  (2,  1015)  seems
to  have  risen  by  apha3resis  (Gramm.  2,  810),  as  neben  from  ineben ;
conf.  eichon  (dicare,  vindicare),  Graff  1,  127.  To  this  place  also
belongs  the  OHG.  pifelahan  (libare,  immolare),  Diut.  1,  245.  248.
— All  this  strictly  denotes  only  the  '  on-saying,'  dedication,  conse
cration  of  the  offering ;  and  it  follows  from  the  terminology  at  least
that  particular  objects  were  selected  beforehand  for  sacrifice.1
Thus  antheiz  is  elsewhere  simply  a  vow,  votum,  solemn  promise,
intheizan  vovere ;  hence  also  the  AS.  onsecgan  has  determinative
substantives  added  to  it.

In  the  same  sense  biudan  (offerre)  seems  to  have  been  in  use
very  early,  AS.  lac  bebeodan,  C;edm.  173,  9.  ON.  lodn  (oblatio).
From  this  biudan  I  derive  liuds  (mensa),  ON.  bioftr  (discus),  AS.
Icod  (mensa,  lanx),  OHG.  piot,  from  its  having  originally  signified
the  holy  table  of  offerings,  the  altar.

The  Goth,  fullafahjan  (with  dat.  of  pers.)  prop,  to  please,  give
satisfaction,  is  used  for  \arpeveiv,  Lu.  4,  8  (see  Suppl.). — In  Mk.  1,
44.  Lu.  5,  14  afbairan  adferre,  Trpocrfapeiv,  is  used  of  sacrifice ;  and
in  AS.  the  subst.  "bring  by  itself  means  oblatio ;  so  Wolfram  in
Parz.  45,  1  says :  si  Irahten  opfer  vil  ir  goten,  and  Fundgr.  II.  25  :
ein  lam  zopphere  brdhte. — It  is  remarkable  that  the  Goth,  saljan,
which  elsewhere  is  intransitive  and  means  divertere,  manere  [put
up,  lodge,  John  1,  39.  40]  is  in  Lu.  1,  9.  Mk.  14,  12.  1  Cor.  10,
20.  28  used  transitively  for  Bvpiav  and  6veiv,  and  hunsla  saljan,
John  16,  2  stands  for  \arpeiav  Trpocrtyepew,  which  brings  it  up  to
the  meaning  of  OHG.  and  AS.  sellan,  ON.  selja,  tradere,  to  hand
over,  possibly  because  the  solemn  presentation  included  a  personal
approach.  The  OHG.  pigangan  (obire)  is  occasionally  applied  to
worship  :  piganc  (ritus),  Diut.  1,  272a.  afgoda  legangan,  Lacomblet
1,  11. — Gildan,  Jceltan,  among  its  many  meanings,  has  also  to  do
with  worship  and  sacrifice  ;  it  was  from  the  old  sacrificial  banquets
that  our  guilds  took  their  name.  OS.  waldandes  (God's)  geld,  Hel.
3,  11.  6,  1.  that  geld  lestian,  Hel.  16,  5.  AS.  bryne^Wd,  holo-
caustum,  Csedm.  175,  6,  177,  18.  gild  onsecgan,  172,  11.  Abel's
offering  is  a  gield,  60,  5.  deofotytWd,  idololatria,  Beda  3,  30.  Cod.


1  So  the  O.Boh.  obiecati  obiet  (Koniginh.  hs.  72)  is  strictly  opfer  verheisscn,
to  promise  or  devote  an  offering.


SACRIFICE.  39


exon.  245,  29.  251,  24.  h^Qugield,  Cod.  exon.  243,  23.  OHG.
heidan&e/£  sacrilegium  :  gote  ir  gelt  bringent,  Warn.  2906.  offer-
micghelstar,  sacrificium,  Is.  395.  dhiu  blostar  iro  ghelstro,  Is.  382.
—  Peculiar  to  the  AS.  dialect  is  the  general  term  Idc,  neut.,  often
rendered  more  definite  by  verbs  containing  the  notion  of  sacrifice  :
onbldot  J?£et  Idc  gode,  Csedm.  177,,  26.  dryhtne  Idc  brohton,  60,  2.
Idc  bebeodanv  173,  9.  Idc  onssegde,  107,  21.  113,  15.  ongan  Idc,
90,  19  (see  SuppL).  The  word  seems  to  be  of  the  same  root  as  the
Goth.  masc.  laiks  (saltatio),  OHG.  leih  (Indus,  modus),  ON",  leikr,
and  to  have  signified  at  first  the  dance  and  play  that  accompanied  a
sacrifice,  then  gradually  the  gift  itself.1  That  there  was  playing
and  singing  at  sacrifices  is  shown  by  the  passages  quoted  further
on,  from  Gregory's  dialogues  and  Adam  of  Bremen.

The  following  expressions  I  regard  as  more  definite  (see  SuppL).
Ulph.  in  Eom.  11,  16  renders  airap-)^,  the  offering  of  firstfruits  at
a  sacrifice,  delibatio,  by  ufarskafts,  which  I  derive  not  from  skapan,
but  from  skaban  (shave)  radere,  since  airapyai  were  the  first
clippings  of  hair  off  the  victim's  forehead,  Odyss.  14,  422.  3,  446.
If  we  explain  it  from  skapan,  this  word  must  have  passed  from  its
meaning  of  creare  into  that  of  facere,  immolare.  —  The  Goth,  vitod
is  lex,  the  OHG.  ivizot  (Graff  1,  1112.  Fundgr.  1,  398b)  both  lex
and  eucharistia,  the  Fris.  vitat  invariably  the  latter  alone  ;  just  as
zakon  in  Serv.  has  both  meanings  [but  in  Euss.  only  that  of  lex].
-Ulph.  translates  Ovaia  by  Goth,  hunsl,  Matt.  9,  13.  Mk.  9,  49.
Lu.  2,  24  ;  then  again  \arpe(av  Trpocrtyepeiv  in  John  16,  2  by  Jmnsla
saljan,  where  the  reference  is  expressly  to  killing.  And  Qvo-iao-rrjpiov
is  called  hunslastafis,  Matt.  5,  23-4.  Lu.  1,  11.  But  the  corre
sponding  AS.  Msel,  Engl.  housel,  allows  of  being  applied  to  a
Christian  sacrament,  and  denotes  the  eucharist,  huselgong  the
partaking  of  it,  kdselfat  the  sacred  vessel  of  sacrifice  ;  conf.  Csedm.
260,  5  hdselMu  halegu  for  the  sacred  vessels  of  Jerusalem.  Like-
.wise  the  OK  Ms/  in  the  Norw.  and  Swed.  laws  is  used  in  a
Christian,  never  in  a  heathen  sense.  No  Jiunsal  is  found  in  OHG.;
neither  can  I  guess  the  root  of  the  word.  —  Twice,  however,  Ulph.

1  Serv.  prilog  offering,  what  is  laid  before,  prilozhiti  to  offer  ;  Sloven,  dar,
darina,  daritva  =  dwpov.  [Buss.  clarii  sviatiiye  =  dupa  iepa  means  ^  the
eucharist.]  The  Sloven  aldov,  bloodless  offering,  seems  not  to  be  Slavic,  it
resembles  Hung,  aldozat.  Qvaia  is  rendered  in  0.  Slav,  by  zhrtva  (Kopitar's
Glagol.  72C),  in  Russ.  by  zhertva  [fr.  zhariti  to  roast,  burn  ?  or  zhrati  devour,
zhe'ra  glutton  ?].


40  WORSHIP.

renders  Ovcrla  by  sduffs,  pi.  saudeis,  Mk.  12,  33.  Eom.  12, 1.  I  sup-
suppose  he  thought  of  the  sacrifice  as  that  of  an  animal  slaughtered
and  boiled ;  the  root  seems  to  be  siuSan  to  seethe,  and  the  OK  has
sauffr  a  ram,  probably  because  its  flesh  is  boiled.1  In  Eph.  5,  2  we
have  '  hunsl  jah  sdu& '  side  by  side,  for  trpocrfopav  real  dvaiav,  and
in  Skeir.  37,  8  gasaljands  sik  hunsl  jah  sauft — The  OHG.  zepar  is
also  a  sacrifice  in  the  sense  of  hostia,  victima,  Hymn.  10,  2. 12,  2.  21,
5.  Gl.  Hrab.  965b,  Diut.  240a  272*  (see  SuppL).  We  could  match
it  with  a  Goth,  tibr,  if  we  might  venture  on  such  an  emendation  of
the  unique  dilr  Swpov,  Matt.  5,  23  (conf.  Gramm.  1,  63).  My  con
jecture  that  our  German  nngeziefer  (vermin),  formerly  migeziber?
and  the  O.Fr.  atoivre  also  belong  to  this  root,  has  good  reasons  in
its  favour.  To  this  day  in  Franconia  and  Thuringia,  zicfer,  gcziefer
(insects)  not  only  designate  poultry,  but  sometimes  include  even
goats  and  swine  (Reinwald  henneb.  id.  1,  49.  2,  52,  conf.  Schm.  4,
228).  What  seems  to  make  against  my  view  is,  that  the  A.S.  tiler
cannot  even  be  restricted  to  animals  at  all,  Csedm.  90,  29.  108,  5.
172,  31.  175,  3.  204,  6.  301,  1.  sigefi&er,  203,  12.  sigorfo/er,  Cod.
exon.  257,  30 ;  on  the  contrary,  in  60,  9  it  is  Cain's  offering  of
grain  that  is  called  tiler t  in  distinction  from  Abel's  gield ;  and  in
^Elfr.  gl.  62b  we  find  vtmtifer,  libatio.  But  this  might  be  a  later
confusion ;  or  our  twigeziefer  may  have  extended  to  weeds,  and  con
sequently  zepar  itself  would  include  anything  fit  for  sacrifice  in
plants  and  trees.3  Meanwhile  there  is  also  to  be  considered  the
ON.  tafn,  victima  and  esca  ferarum. — Lastly,  I  will  mention  a
term  peculiar  to  the  ON.  language,  and  certainly  heathen :  forn,
fern,  victima,  hostia,  fdrna,  immolare,  or  instead  of  it  fornfara,
conf.  Fornm.  sog.  1,  97  2,  76.  this  forna  at  the  same  time,  according
to  Biorn,  meaning  elevare,  tollere.  AS.  forn  porcus,  porcaster  (?).

1  Rom.  12,   1.  'present  your  bodies  a  living  sauS '  was  scarcely  a  happy
combination,  if  sauSs  conveyed  the  notion  of  something  boiled  !     Can  nothing
l>e  made  of  s6(5jan  satiare  soothe  (Milton's  '  the  soothest  shepherd  '  =  sweetest,
Goth,  sutista)  ?     Grimm's  law  of  change  in  mutes  has  many  exceptions  :  pater
father  fajder  vater  (4  stages  instead  of  3,  so  mater)  ;  sessel  a  settle,  and  sattel
a  saddle,  both  from  sit  sat  ;  treu  true,  but  trinken  drink,  &c. — TRANS.

2  Titur.  5198,  ungezibere  stands  for  monster  ;  but  what  can  ungezibele  mean
in  Lanz.  5028  vor  grozem  ungezibele  ?  nibele  ?

3  Caedm.  9,  2  :  ]?a  seo  tid  gewat  ofer  tiber  sceacan  middangeardes.     This
passage,  whose  meaning  Thorpe  himself  did  not  rightly  seize,  I  understand
thus :  As  time  passed  on  over  (God's)  gift  of  this  earth.    The  inf.  sceacan  (elabi)
depends  on  gewat  ;  so  in  Judith  anal.  140,  5  :  gewiton  on  fleam  sceacan,  began
to  flee  ;  and  still  more  freq.  gewiton  gangan.


SACRIFICE.  41

If  the  6  did  not  hinder,  we  could  identify  it  with  the  adj.  forn
vetus,  forn  sorcerer,  fornceskia  sorcery,  and  the  OHG-.  furnic
antiquus,  prisons,  canus  (Graff  3,  628) ;  and  in  particular,  use  the
same  glosses  for  the  illustration  of  baccha  pluostar.  Forn  would
then  be  the  term  applied  by  the  Christians  to  heathen  sacrifices  of
the  farmer  olden  time,  and  that  would  easily  glide  into  sorcery,  nay,
there  would  be  an  actual  kinship  conceivable  between  zepar  and
zoupar  (zauber,  magic),  and  so  an  additional  link  between  the
notions  of  sacrifice  and  sorcery,  knowing  as  we  do  that  the  verbs
garawan,  wihan  and  perhaps  zouwan  [AS.  gearwian  to  prepare,
Goth,  veihan  to  consecrate,  and  taujan  to  bring  about]  are  appli
cable  to  both,  though  our  OHG.  karo,  karawi  victima,  Graff  4,  241
(Germ,  gar,  AS.  gearw,  yare)  expresses  no  more  than  what  is  made
ready,  made  holy,  consecrated.1  We  shall  besides  have  to  separate
more  exactly  the  ideas  vow  and  sacrifice,  Mid.  Lat.  votum  and  census,
closely  as  they  border  on  one  another :  the  vow  is,  as  it  were,  a
private  sacrifice.

Here  then  our  ancient  language  had  a  variety  of  words  at  its
command,  and  it  may  be  supposed  that  they  stood  for  different
things ;  but  the  difficulty  is,  to  unravel  what  the  differences  in  the
matter  were.

Sacrifice  rested  on  the  supposition  that  human  food  is  agreeable
to  the  gods,  that  intercourse  takes  place  between  gods  and  men,
The  god  is  invited  to  eat  his  share  of  the  sacrifice,  and  he  really
enjoys  it.  Not  till  later  is  a  separate  divine  food  placed  before  him
(see  Suppl.).  The  motive  of  sacrifices  was  everywhere  the  same :
either  to  render  thanks  to  the  gods  for  their  kindnesses,  or  to
appease  their  anger ;  the  gods  were  to  be  kept  gracious,  or  to  be
made  gracious  again.  Hence  the  two  main  kinds  of  sacrifice  :
tf/wwi&-offerings  and  sw-offerings.2  When  a  meal  was  eaten,  a  head  of

1  The  Skr.  kratu  sacrifice,  or  accord,  to  Benfey  2,  307  process,  comes  from
kri  facere  ,  and  in  Latin,  facere  (agnis,  vitula,  Virg.  eel.  3,  77)  and  operari  were
used  of  the  sacred  act  of  sacrifice  ;  so  in  Grk,  pegeiv  =  cpfaw,  Boeot.  pe88ew  of
offering  the  hecatomb,  and  epSeti/  is  epyeii/,  our  wirken,  work ,  einppsfciv  Od.  17,
211.  Qvtiv,  pffriv,  Spqv,  Athenseus  5,  403,  as  dpa*  for  dveiv,  so  dpao-is  —  dvaia.
The  Catholic  priest  also  uses  co7ifi,cere,  perjicere  for  consecrare  (Csesar.  heisterbac.
9,  27)  ;  compare  the  '  aliquid  plus  novi  facere  '  in  Burcard  of  Worms  10,  16
and  p.  193C.  The  Lat.  agere  signified  the  slaughtering  of  the  victim.

a  Sw/m-opfer,  strictly,  conciliatory  offerings  ;  but  as  these  were  generally
identical  with  Swid-opfer,  sin-offerings,  I  have  used  the  latter  expression,  as
short  and  familiar. — THANS.


42  WORSHIP.

game  killed,  the  enemy  conquered  (see  Suppl.),  a  firstling  of  the  cattle
born,  or  grain  harvested,  the  gift-bestowing  god  had  a  first  right  to
a  part  of  the  food,  drink,  produce,  the  spoils  of  war  or  of  the  chase
(the  same  idea  on  which  tithes  to-  the  church  were  afterwards
grounded).  If  on  the  contrary  a  famine,  a  failure  of  crops,  a
pestilence  had  set  hi  among  a  people,  they  hastened  to-  present
propitiatory  gifts  (see  Suppl.) .  These  sin-offerings  have  by  their
nature  an  occasional  and  fitful  character,  while  those  performed  to
the  propitious  deity  readily  pass  into  periodically  recurring  festivals.
There  is  a  third  species  of  sacrifice,  by  which  one  seeks  to  know
the  issue  of  an  enterprise,  and  to -secure  the  aid  of  the  god  to  whom
it  is  presented  (see  Suppl.).  Divination  however  could  also  be
practised  without  sacrifices.  Besides  these  three,  there  were  special
sacrifices  for  particular  occasions,  such  as  coronations,  births,
weddings  and  funerals,  which*  were  also  for  the  most  part  coupled
with  solemn  banquets.

As  the  gods  show  favour  more  than  anger,  and  as  men-  are
oftener  cheerful  than  oppressed  by  their  sins  and  errors,  thank-
offerings  were  the  earliest  and  commonest,  sin-offerings  the  more
rare  and  impressive.  Whatever  in  the  world  of  plants  can  be  laid
before  the  gods  is  gay,  innocent,  but  also  less  imposing  and  effective
than  an  animal  sacrifice.  The  streaming  blood,  the-  life  spilt  out
seems  to  have  a  stronger  binding  and  atoning  power.  Animal
sacrifices  are  natural  to  the  warrior,  the  hunter,  the  herdsman,
while  the  husbandman  will  offer  up  grain  and  flowers.

The  great  anniversaries  of  the  heathen  coincide  with  po
pular  assemblies  and  assizes.1'  In  the  Ynglinga  saga  cap.  8  they
are  specified  thus  :  ]?a  skyldi  biota  i  moti  vetri  (towards  winter)  til
ars,  enn  at  miSjum  vetri  biota  til  groSrar,  it  Jmoja  at  sumri,  j?at
var  sigrblot  (for  victory).  In  the  Olafs  helga  saga  cap.  104  (Fornm.
sog.  4,  237) .  en  J?at  er  siSr  J?eirra  (it  is  their  custom)  at  hafa  blot
a  haustum  (autumn)  ok  fagna  J?a  vetri,  annat  blot  hafa  )>eir  at
miojum  vetri,  en  hit  Jmftja  at  sumri,  J?a  fagna  ]?eir  sumari ;  eonf.  ed.
holm.  cap.  115  (see  Suppl.).  The  Autumn  sacrifice  was  offered  to
welcome  the  winter,  and  til  ars  (pro  annonae  ubertate)  ;  t)he  Mid
winter  sacrifice  tfl  grooYar  (pro  feracitate) ;  the  Summer  one  to
welcome  the  summer,  and  til  sigrs  (pro  victoria).  Halfdan  the  Old

1  KA.  245.  745.  821-5.


SACRIFICE.  43

held  a  great  midwinter  sacrifice  for  the  long  duration  of  his  life  and
kingdom,  Sn.  190.  But  the  great  general  blot  held  at  Upsal  every
winter  included  sacrifices  ( til  ars  ok  friSar  ok  sigrs,'  Fornm.  sog.  4,
154.  The  formula  sometimes  runs  '  til  arbotar '  (year's  increase),
or  '  til  friftar  ok  vetrarfars  gofts  (good  wintertime).  In  a  striking
passage  of  the  Gutalagh,  p.  108,  the  great  national  sacrifices  are
distinguished  from  the  smaller  offerings  of  cattle,  food  and  drink  :
'firi  J?ann  tima  oc  lengi  eptir  si]?an  troj^u  menn  a  hult  oc  a
hauga,  vi  ok  staf-garjm,  oc  a  hai]?in  gu]?  blotajm  J?air  synum  oc
dydrum  sinum,  oc  filepi  mi]?  mati  oc  mundgati,  J?at  gier]?u  J?air
eptir  vantro  sinni.  Land  alt  hafj?i  sir  hoystu  Uotan  inij?  fulki,
ellar  hatyi  huer  ]?rij?iungr  sir.  En  smeri  J?ing  hatyu  mindri
Uotan  med,  filepi  mati  oc  mungati,  sum  haita  supnautar :  j?i  et
J?air  supu  allir  saman.'

Easter-fires,  Mayday-fires,  Midsummer-fires,  with  their  numerous
ceremonies,  carry  us  back  to  heathen  sacrifices ;  especially  such
customs  as  rubbing  the  sacred  flame,  running  through  the  glowing
embers,  throwing  flowers  into  the  fire,  baking  and  distributing  large
loaves  or  cakes,  and  the  circular  dance.  Dances  passed  into  plays
and  dramatic  representations  (see  ch.  XIII,  drawing  the  ship,  ch.
XXIII,  and  the  witch-dances,  ch.  XXXIV),  Afzelius  1,  3
describes  a  sacrificial  play  still  performed  in  parts  of  Gothland,
acted  by  young  fellows  in  disguise,  who  blacken  and  rouge  their
faces  (see  ch.  XVII,  sub  fine).  One,  wrapt  in  fur,  sits  in  a  chair  as
the  victim,  holding  in  his  mouth  a  bunch  of  straw-stalks  cut  fine,
which  reach  as  far  as  his  ears  and  have  the  appearance  of  sow-
bristles  :  by  this  is  meant  the  boar  sacrificed  at  Yule,  which  in
England  is  decked  with  laurel  and  rosemary  (ch.  X),  just  as  the
devil's  offering  is  with  rue,  rosemary  and  orange  (ch,  XXXIII).—
The  great  sacrificial  feast  of  the  ancient  Saxons  was  on  Oct.  1,  and
is  traced  to  a  victory  gained  over  the  Thuringians  in  534  (see  ch.
VI) ;  in  documents  of  the  Mid.  Ages  this  high  festival  stills  bears
the  name  of  the  gemeinwoche  or  common  week  (see  ch.  XIII,  Zisa),
Wiirdtwein  dip!  magunt.  1  praef.  III-V.  Sclieffers  Haltaus  p.  142^
conf.  Hofers  ostr.  wb.  1,  306.  Another  chronicle  places  it  on  Sept.
25  (Ecc.  fr.  or.  1,  59)  ;  Zisa's  day  was  celebrated  on  Sept.  29,  St.
Michael's  on  the  28th;  so  that  the  holding  of  a  harvest-offering  must
be  intended  all  through. — In  addition  to  the  great  festivals,  they
also  sacrificed  on  special  occasions,  particularly  when  famine  or


44  WORSHIP.

disease  was  rife  ;  sometimes  for  long  life :  ( biota  til  langlifi,'  Landn.
3,  4 ;  or  for  favour  (thockasaeld)  with  the  people :  '  Grimr,  er
blotinn  var  daucSr  (sacrificed  when  dead)  fiir  thokkasaeld,  ok  kallaftr
kamban',  Landn.  1,  14.  3,  16.  This  epithet  kamban  must  refer  to
the  sacrifice  of  the  dead  man's  body ;  I  connect  it  with  the  OHG.
pichimpida  funus,  Mid.  Dut.  kwiban  comere,  Diut.  2,  207a.  conf.
note  to  Andr.  4.

Human  Sacrifices  are  from  their  nature  and  origin  expiative ;
some  great  disaster,  some  heinous  crime  can  only  be  purged  and
blotted  out  by  human  blood.  With  all  nations  of  antiquity  they
were  an  old-established  custom l ;  the  following  evidences  place  it
beyond  a  doubt  for  Germany  (see  Suppl.).  Tac.  Germ.  9  :  Deorum
maxime  Mercurium  colunt,  cui  certis  diebus  humanis  quoque  hostiis
litare  fas  habent.  Germ.  39 :  stato  tempore  in  silvam  coeunt,
caesoque  publice  (in  the  people's  name)  homine  celebrant  barbari
ritus  horrenda  primordia.  Tac.  Ann.  1,  61 :  lucis  propinquis  bar-
barae  arae,  apud  quas  tribunes  ac  primonim  ordinum  centuriones
mactaverant.  Tac.  Ann.  13,  57  :  sed  bellum  Hermunduris  pros-
perum,  Cattis  exitiosius  fuit,  quia  victores  diversam  aciem  Marti  ac
Mercuric  sacravere,  quo  voto  equi,  viri,  cuncta  victa  occidioni
dantur.  Isidori  chron.  Goth.,  aera  446  :  quorum  (regum  Gothi-
corurn)  unus  Eadagaisus  .  .  .  Italiam  belli  feritate  aggreditur,
promittens  sanguinem  Christianorum  diis  suis  litare,  si  vinceret.
Jornandes  cap.  5 :  quern  Martem  Gothi  semper  asperrima  placavere
cultura,  nam  victimae  ejus  mortes  fuere  captorum,  opinantes  bellor-
um  praesulem  aptius  humani  sanguinis  effusione  placandum.2
Orosius  7,  37  of  Eadagaisus,  whom  he  calls  a  Scythian,  but
makes  him  lead  Goths  to  Italy :  qui  (ut  mos  est  barbaris
hujusmodi  generis)  sanguinem  diis  suis  propinare  devoverat?

1  Lasaulx   die  siihnopfer  der  Grieclien   u.  Romer,  Wiirzburg   1841.   pp.
8—13.

2  Conf.  COBS,  de  B.  Gall.  6,  17  on  the  worship  of  Mars  among  the  Gauls  ;
and  Procop.  de  B.  Goth.  3,  14  on  the  Slavens  and  Antes  :  6ebv  p.ev  -yap  eva  TOV
TTJS  dfTTpaTrrjs  8r]p,iovp-yov  arrdvrutv  Kvpiov  p.6vov  avrov  vopi^ovcriv  eivai,  KOI  dvnvcriv
avTM  /3da?  re   Kal   tepeia    avraj/ra.      .      .      .      czXX'   eVfiSai/  avrols  ev  Ttocr\v  fjtir)  6
Odvaros  e'ir],   fj  j/o'cro)   a.Xovo't  fj  es  TroXeynoj/  Kadi(TTap.fvois,  eVayye'XXoi/rai  /ueV,   fjv
$ia<pvyaxn,    Qwiav    ra>    $ea>     avri    rr/s    "^v^fjs    ai/ritca    Troirjcrfiv,    8ta(pvy6vT€s    fie
flvovaiv   oTrcp   v7Tf(r^ovTO,   KOI  o'lovrai  TTJV  aa)TT]pia.v  ravTTjs  dr)  rfjs  dvaias  avrols
f(i)vfj(Tdai.

3  Of  him  Augustine  says,  in  sermo  105,  cap.  10 :  Rhadagaysus  rex  Goth-
orum     .     .     .     Romae     .     .     .     Jovi    sacrificabat    quotidie,    nimtiabaturque
ubique,  quod  a  sacrifices  non  desisteret.


SACRIFICE.  45

Procopius  de  bello  Goth.  2,  15  of  the  Thulites,  i.e.  Scandinavians :
Ovovcrt,  $6  6vSe\e%e(7TaTa  lepeia  irdvra  Kal  evayi&vcri,.  ra>v  £e
lepeiwv  G$'I<JI  rb  Ka\\icrTov  av6  pa)7T  6  ?  eaTLV,  ovirep  cuv  Sopid-

\COTOV      TrOiriO~aLVTO      7T  p  CO  T  O  V.          TOVTOV    jap     TO)     "Ap6L     OvOVCTlV,

eVel  6ebv  CLVTOV  von'itpvai  peyio-rov  elvcu.  Ibid.  2,  14,  of  the
Heruli  :  TTO\VV  TIVCL  vofJbl^ovTes  6ewv  opCkov,  oD?  Srj  KOI
dv0  PCDTTWV  Qvaiais  'Ckdcnteo-Qai  ocriov  aural?  eSo/cet  elvat.  Ibid.
2,  25,  of  the  already  converted  Franks  at  their  passage  of  the  Po  :
eTTika^o/jievoi  8e  r?}?  <ye(f>vpas  ol  <f>pdry<yoi,  iralSas  re  KOI  y  vv ac
ted  $  T&V  ToTdc&v,  ovsTrep  evTCLvOd  evpov  I  e  p  e  v  o  v  T€  Kal  avrcov
TO,  aco/jLara  €9  rbv  irora/jibv  d/c  pod  iv  la  r  ov  TT  o\e  pov  eppiir-
TOVV.  ol  fidpftapo!,  jap  OVTOL,  Xpio-riavol  76701/0x6?,  ra  7ro\\a  TT}?
TraXata?  £0^77?  $v\do-o-ovcri,,  Qvcriais  re  ^wfievoi
Kal  a\\a  oi>%  ocria  iepevovres,  ravrrj  re  ra?  pavreias
Sidonius  Apollinaris  8,  6  of  the  Saxons:  mos  est  remeaturis
decimnm  quemque  captorum  per  aequales  et  cruciarias  poenas,
plus  ob  hoc  tristi  quod  superstitioso  ritu  necare.  Capitul.  de  partib.
Saxon.  9 :  si  quis  hominem  diabolo  sacrificaverit  et  in  hostiam,  more
paganorum,  daemonibus  obtulerit.  Lex  Frisionum,  additio  sap.  tit.
42  :  qui  fanum  effregerit  .  .  .  immolatur  diis,  quorum  templa
violavit ;  the  law  affected  only  the  Frisians  '  trans  Laubachi/  who
remained  heathens  longer.  What  Strabo  relates  of  the  Cimbri,  and
Dietmar  of  the  Northmen,  will  be  cited  later.  Epist.  Bonif.  25  (ed.
Wiirdtw.)  :  hoc  quoque  inter  alia  crimina  agi  in  partibus  illis
dixisti,  quod  quidam  ex  fidelibus  ad  immolandum  paganis  sua
venundent  mancipia ;  masters  were  allowed  to  sell  slaves,  and
Christians  sold  them  to  heathens  for  sacrifice.  The  captive  prince
Graecus  Avar  de  (a)  Suevis  pecudis  more  litatus  (ch.  XIII,  the
goddess  Zisa).1  For  evidences  of  human  sacrifice  among  the  Norse,
see  Mliller's  sagabibl.  2,  560.  3,  93.  As  a  rule,  the  victims  were
captive  enemies,  purchased  slaves  or  great  criminals ;  the  sacrifice
of  women  and  children  by  the  Franks  on  crossing  a  river  reminds
of  the  Greek  $ia{3arrjpia ; 2  the  first  fruits  of  war,  the  first  prisoner

1  Adam  of  Bremen  de  situ  Daniae  cap.  24,  of  the  Lithuanians  :  draconcs
adorant  cum  volucribus,  quibus  etiam  vivos  litant  homines,  quos  a  mercatoribus
emunt,  diligenter  omnino  probates,  ne  maculam  in  corpore  habeant.

2  Hence  in  our  own  folk-tales,  the  first  to  cross  the  bridge,  the  first  to
enter  the  new  building  or  the  country,  pays  with  his  life,  which  meant,  falls  a
sacrifice.     Jornandes  cap.  25,  of  the  Huns  :  ad  Scythiam  properant,  et  quantos-
cunque  prius  in  ingressu  Scytharum  habuere,  litavere  Vidoriae.


46  WORSHIP.

taken,  was  supposed  to  bring  luck.  In  folk-tales  we  find  traces  of
the  immolation  of  children  ;  they  are  killed  as  a  cure  for  leprosy,
they  are  walled  up  in  basements  (ch.  XXXV.  XXXVI,  end) ;  and
a  feature  that  particularly  points  to  a  primitive  sacrificial  rite  is,
that  toys  and  victuals  are  handed  in  to  the  child,  while  the  roofing-in
is  completed.  Among  the  Greeks  and  Eomans  likewise  the  victims
fell  amid  noise  and  flute-playing,  that  their  cries  might  be  drowned,
and  the  tears  of  children  are  stilled  with  caresses,  '  ne  flebilis  hostia
immoletur '.  Extraordinary  events  might  demand  the  death  of
kings'  sons  and  daughters,  nay,  of  kings  themselves.  Thoro  offers
up  his  son  to  the  gods  ;  Worm  mon.  dan.  285.  King  Oen  the  Old
sacrificed  nine  sons  one  after  the  other  to  Oo'in  for  his  long  life ;
Yngl.  saga  cap.  29.  And  the  Swedes  in  a  grievous  famine,  when
other  great  sacrifices  proved  unavailing,  offered  up  their  own  king
Domaldi;  ibid.  cap.  18.

Animal  sacrifices  were  mainly  thank-offerings,  but  sometimes
also  expiatory,  and  as  such  they  not  seldom,  by  way  of  mitigation,
took  the  place  of  a  previous  human  sacrifice.  I  will  now  quote  the
evidences  (see  Suppl.).  Herculem  et  Martem  concessis  aniwalibus
placant,  Tac.  Germ.  9 ;  i.e.,  with  animals  suitable  for  the  purpose
(Hist.  5,  4),  '  concessurn '  meaning  sacrum  as  against  profanum ;
and  only  those  animals  were  suitable,  whose  flesh  could  be  eaten
by  men.  It  would  have  been  unbecoming  to  offer  food  to  the  god,
which  the  sacrificer  himself  would  have  disdained.  At  the  same
time  these  sacrifices  appear  to  be  also  banquets  ;  an  appointed
portion  of  the  slaughtered  beast  is  placed  before  the  god,  the  rest  is
cut  up,  distributed  and  consumed  in  the  assembly.  The  people
thus  became  partakers  in  the  holy  offering,  and  the  god  is  regarded
as  feasting  with  them  at  their  meal  (see  Suppl.).  At  great  sacri
fices  the  kings  were  expected  to  taste  each  kind  of  food,  and  down
to  late  times  the  house-spirits  and  dwarfs  had  their  portion  set
aside  for  them  by  the  superstitious  people. — Quadraginta  rustici  a
Langobardis  capti  carnes  immolatitias  comedere  compellebantur,
Greg.  M.  dial.  3,  27  ;  which  means  no  more  than  that  the  heathen
Langobards  permitted  or  expected  the  captive  Christians  to  share
their  sacrificial  feast1  These  'immolatitiae  carnes'  and  'hostiae  im-

1  I  do  not  know  how  cvmpellere  can  be  softened  down  to  *  permitting  or
expecting '. — TRANS.


SACRIFICE.  47

molatitiae,  quas  stulti  homines  juxta  ecclesias  ritu  pagano  faciunt '
are  also  mentioned  in  Bonifacii  epist.  25  and  55,  ed.  Wiirdtw.

In  the  earliest  period,  the  Horse  seems  to  have  been  the
favourite  animal  for  sacrifice ;  there  is  no  doubt  that  before  the
introduction  of  Christianity  its  flesh  was  universally  eaten.  There
was  nothing  in  the  ways  of  the  heathen  so  offensive  to  the  new
converts,  as  their  not  giving  up  the  slaughter  of  horses  (hrossa-sldtr)
and  the  eating  of  horseflesh ;  conf.  Malss.  cap.  106.  The  Christian
Northmen  reviled  the  Swedes  as  hross-ceturnar ;  Fornm.  sog.  2,
309.  Fagrsk.  p.  63.  King  Hakon,  whom  his  subjects  suspected  of
Christianity,  was  called  upon  '  at  hann  skyldi  eta  hrossasldtr ;'  Saga
Hak  goSa  cap.  18.  From  Tac.  ann.  13,  57  we  learn  that  the  Her-
munduri  sacrificed  the  horses  of  the  defeated  Catti.  As  late  as  the
time  of  Boniface  (Epist.  ed.  Wiirdtw.  25.  87  Serr.  121.  142),1
the  Thuringians  are  strictly  enjoined  to  abstain  from  horseflesh.
Agathias  bears  witness  to  the  practice  of  the  Alamanni :  LTTTTOVS
re  KOL  /3o<z?,  KOI  a\\a  aTTa  fj,vpia  /ca par  o /JLOVVT e  <?  (beheading),
e7ri0eid&va-i,  ed.  bonn.  28,  5. — Here  we  must  not  overlook  the
cutting  off  of  the  head,  which  was  not  consumed  with  the  rest,  but
consecrated  by  way  of  eminence  to  the  god.  When  Csecina,  on
approaching  the  scene  of  Varus's  overthrow,  saw  horses'  heads
fastened  to  the  stems  of  trees  (equorum  artus,  simul  truncis  arborum
antefixa  ora,  Tac.  ann.  1,  61),  these  were  no  other  than  the  Roman
horses,  which  the  Germans  had  seized  in  the  battle  and  offered  up
to  their  gods2  (see  Suppl.).  A  similar  '  immolati  diis  equi  abscissum
caput '  meets  us  in  Saxo  gram.  p.  75  ;  in  the  North  they  fixed  it  on
the  neidstange  (niftstong,  stake  of  envy)  which  gave  the  power  to
bewitch  an  enemy,  Egilss.  p.  389.  In  a  Hessian  kmdermarchen
(no.  89)  we  have  surviving,  but  no  longer  understood,  a  reminiscence

1  Inter  cetera  agrestem  caballum  aliquantos  comedere  adjunxisti,  plerosque
et  domesticum.  hoc  nequaquam  fieri  deinceps  sinas.   And  ,  iiiprimis  de  volatili-
bus,  id  est  graculis  et  corniculis  atque  ciconiis,  quae  omnino  cavendae  sunt  ab
esu   christianorum.  etiam  et  fibri  et  lepores  et  equi  silvatici  multo  amplius
vitandi.     Again,  Hieronymus  adv.  Jov.  lib.  2  (ed.  basil.   1553.  2,  75)  •    Sar-
matae,  Quadi,  Vandali  et  inmimerabiles  aliae  gentes  equorum  et  vulpimn  carnibus
delectantur.     Otto  frising.  6,  10  .  audiat,  quod  Pecenati  (the  wild  Peschensere,
Nib.  1280,  2)  et  hi  qui  Falones  vocantur  (the  Valwen,  Nib.  1279,  2.     Tit.
4097),  crudis  et  irnmimdis  carnibus,  utpote   equinis  et  catinis  usque  hodie
vescuntur.     Rol.  98,  20  of  the  heathen :  sie  essaent  diu  ros.     Witches  also  are
charged  with  eating  horseflesh  (see  Suppl.).

2  Also  in  that  passage  of  Jornandes  about  Mars  :  huic  truncis  suspende-
bantur  exuviae.


48  WORSHIP.

of  the  mysterious  meaning  of  a  suspended  horse's  head.1 — But  on
horse-sacrifices  among  the  heathen  Norse  we  have  further  informa
tion  of  peculiar  value.  The  St.  Olaf's  saga,  cap.  113  (ed.  holm.  2,
181),  says :  J?at  fylgSi  ok  ]?eirri  sogn,  at  ]?ar  vasri  drepit  naut  ok
hross  til  arbotar  (followed  the  saying  that  there  were  slain  neat  and
horse  for  harvest-boot).  A  tail-piece  at  the  very  end  of  the
Hervararsaga  mentions  a  similar  sacrifice  offered  by  the  apostate
Swedes  at  the  election  of  king  Svein  (second  half  of  llth  century):
var  ]?a  framleidt  hross  eitt  a  ]?ingit,  ok  hoggvit  i  sundr,  ok  skipt  til
dts,  en  rio)?uSu  bloolnu  llottrd;  kostucSu  ]?a  allir  Sviar  kristni  ok
hofust  blot ;  then  was  led  forward  a  horse  into  the  Thing,  and  hewed
in  sunder,  and  divided  for  eating,  and  they  reddened  with  the  blood
the  blot- tree,  &c.  Fornald.  sog.  1,  512.  Dietmar  of  Merseburg's
description  of  the  great  Norse  (strictly  Danish)  sacrificial  rite,
which  however  was  extinct  a  hundred  years  before  his  time,
evidently  contains  circumstances  exaggerated  legendwise  and  dis
torted  ;  he  says  1,  9  :  Sed  quia  ego  de  hostiis  (Northmannorum)
mira  audivi,  haec  indiscussa  praeterire  nolo.  est  unus  in  his
partibus  locus,  caput  istius  regni,  Lederun  nomine,  in  pago  qui
Selon2  dicitur,  ubi  post  novcm  annos  mense  Januario,  post  hoc
tempus  quo  nos  theophaniam  domini  celebramus,  omnes  con-
venerunt,  et  ibi  diis  suismet  Ixxxx.  et  ix.  homines,  et  totidem  equos,
cum  canibus  et  gallis  pro  accipitribus  oblatis,  immolant,  pro  certo,
ut  praedixi,  putantes  hos  eisdem  erga  inferos  servituros,  et  commissa
crimina  apud  eosdem  placaturos.  quam  bene  rex  noster  (Heinrich  1.
an.  931)  fecit,  qui  eos  a  tarn  execrando  ritu  prohibuit ! — A  grand
festive  sacrifice,  coming  once  in  nine  years,  and  costing  a  consider
able  number  of  animals — in  this  there  is  nothing  incredible.  Just
as  the  name  hecatomb  lived  on,  when  there  was  nothing  like  that
number  sacrificed,  so  here  the  legend  was  likely  to  keep  to  a  high-
sounding  number;  the  horror  of  the  human  victims  perhaps  it
threw  in  bodily.  But  the  reason  alleged  for  the  animal  sacrifice
is  evidently  wide  of  the  mark ;  it  mixes  up  what  was  done


1  Gregory  the   Great  fepist.   7,  5)   admonishes   Brunichild  to  take  pre
cautions  with  her  Franks,  '  ut  de  animalium  capitibus  sacrificia  sacrilega  non
exhibeant.'

2  Selon  for  Seloncl,  ON.  Stelundr,  afterwards  Sioland,  Seeland,  i.e.,  Zea
land.     Lederun,  the  Sax.  dat.  of  Ledera,  ON.  HleiSra,  afterwards  Lethra,
Leire  ;  conf.  Goth.  hlei]?ra  tabernaculum.


-SACRIFICE.  49

at  funerals l  with  what  was  done  for  expiation.  It  was  only
the  bodies  of  nobles  and  rich  men  that  were  followed  in  death
by  bondsmen  and  by  domestic  and  hunting  animals,  so  that
they  might  have  their  services  in  the  other  world.  Suppose  99
men,  we  will  say  prisoners  of  war,  to  have  been  sacrificed
to  the  gods,  the  animals  specified  cannot  have  been  intended  to
escort  those  enemies,  nor  yet  for  the  use  of  the  gods,  to  whom
no  one  ever  set  apart  and  slaughtered  horses  or  any  beasts  of  the
chase  with  a  view  to  their  making  use  of  them.  So  whether  the
ambiguous  eisdem  refers  to  homines  or  diis  (as  eosdem  just  after
stands  for  the  latter),  either  way  there  is  something  inadmissible
asserted.  At  the  new  year's  festival  I  believe  that  of  all  the  victims
named  the  horses  alone  were  sacrificed ;  men,  hounds  and  cocks
the  legend  has  added  on.2  How  Dietmar's  story  looks  by  the  side
of  Adam  of  Bremen's  on  the  Upsal  sacrifice,  shall  be  considered  on
p.  53.

Among  all  animal  sacrifices,  that  of  the  horse  was  preeminent
and  most  solemn.  Our  ancestors  have  this  in  common  with  several
Slavic  and  Finnish  nations,  with  Persians  and  Indians  :  with  all  of
them  the  horse  passed  for  a  specially  sacred  animal.3

Sacrifice  of  Oxen  (see  SuppL).  The  passage  from  Agathias
(tWou?  re  real  /3  6  a  5)  proves  the  Alamannic  custom,  and  that  from
the  Olafssaga  (naut  ok  hross)  the  Norse.  A  letter  to  Saint  Boniface
(Epist.  82,  Wlirdtw.)  speaks  of  ungodly  priests  '  qui  tauros  et  hircos
diis  paganorum  immolabant.'  And  one  from  Gregory  the  Great
ad  Mellitum  (Epist.  10,  76  and  in  Beda's  hist.  eccl.  1,  30)  affirms
of  the  Angles  :  loves  solent  in  sacrificio  daemonum  multos  occidere.

1  With  Sigurftr  servants  and  hawks  are  burnt,  Saem.  225b  ;  elsewhere  horses
and  dogs  as  well,  conf.  RA.  344.  Asvitus,  morbo  consumptus,  cum  cane  et  equo
terreno  mandatur  antro  ;  Saxo  gram.  p.  91,  who  misinterprets,  as  though  the
dead  man  fed  upon  them  :  nee  contentus  equi  vel  canis  esu,  p.  92.

;  '  Pro  accipitribus '  means,  that  in  default  of  hawks,  cocks  were  used.
Some  have  taken  it,  as  though  dogs  and  cocks  were  sacrificed  to  deified  birds  of
prey.  But  the  '  pro '  is  unmistakable.

3  Conf.  Bopp's  Nalas  and  Damajanti,  p.  42,  268.  The  Hyperboreans  sacri
ficed  asses  to  Apollo  ;  Pindar  Pyth.  10.  Callimach.  fr.  187.  Anton.  Liberal,
metam.  20.  The  same  was  done  at  Delphi ;  Bockh  corp.  inscr.  I,  807.  809.
In  a  Mod.  Greek  poem  Taddpov,  \VKOV  KCU  aXanrovs  StTjy^crts-  vv.  429-434,  a
similar  offering  seems  to  be  spoken  of;  and  Hagek's  bohm.  chron.  p.  62  gives
an  instance  among  the  Slavs.  That,  I  suppose,  is  why  the  Silesians  are
called  ass-eaters  (Zeitvertreiber  1668,  p.  153) ;  and  if  the  Gottingers  receive  the
same  nickname,  these  popular  jokes  must  be  very  old  in  Germany  itself  (see
Suppl.).

4


50  WORSHIP.

The  Hack  ox  and  Hack  cow,  which  are  not  to  be  killed  for  the  house
hold  (Superst.  887), — were  they  sacred  sacrificial  beasts  ?  Yal.
Suplit,  a  free  peasant  on  the  Samland  coast  (Samogitia  or  Semi-
galia),  sacrificed  a  black  bull  with  strange  ceremonies.1  I  will  add
a  few  examples  from  the  Norse.  During  a  famine  in  Sweden  under
king  Domaldi :  }?a  eflSo  (instituted)  Sviar  blot  stor  at  Uppsolum,  it
fyrsta  haust  (autumn)  blotuSu  )?eir  yxnum  ;  and  the  oxen  proving
insufficient,  they  gradually  went  up  to  higher  and  higher  kinds ;
Yngl.  saga,  c.  18.  J?a  gekk  hann  til  hofs  (temple)  Freyss,  ok
leiddi  ]?agat  uxan  gamlan  (an  old  ox),  ok  mselti  sva :  '  Freyr,  nu
gef  ek  ]?er  uxa  J?enna ' ;  en  uxanum  bra  sva  viS,  at  hann  qva£>  vi5,
ok  fell  niSr  dauSr  (dealt  the  ox  such  a  blow,  that  he  gave  a  groan
and  fell  down  dead) ;  Islend.  sog.  2,  348.  conf.  Vigaglumssaga,  cap.
9.  At  a  formal  duel  the  victor  slew  a  bull  with  the  same  weapons
that  had  vanquished  his  foe:  ]?a  var  leiddr  fram  grdffAngr  mildll  ok
gamall,  var  J?at  kallat  blotnaut,  ]?at  skyldi  sa  hoggva  er  sigr  hefol
(then  was  led  forth  a  bull  mickle  and  old,  it  was  called  blot-neat,
that  should  he  hew  who  victory  had),  Egilss.  p.  506.  conf.  Kormaks-
saga  p.  214-8. — Sacrifice  of  Cows,  Ssem.  141.  Fornm.  sog.  2,  138.
— The  Greek  e/caro^r)  (as  the  name  shows,  100  oxen)  consisted  at
first  of  a  large  number  of  neat,  but  very  soon  of  other  beasts  also.
The  Indians  too  had  sacrifices  of  a  hundred ;  Holzmann  3,  193.2

Boars,  Pigs  (see  Suppl.).  In  the  Salic  Law,  tit.  2,  a  higher
composition  is  set  on  the  majalis  sacrivus  or  votivus  than  on  any
other.  This  seems  a  relic  of  the  ancient  sacrifices  of  the  heathen
Franks ;  else  why  the  term  sacrivw  ?  True,  there  is  no  vast  differ
ence  between  700  and  600  den.  (17  and  15  sol.);  but  of  animals
so  set  apart  for  holy  use  there  must  have  been  a  great  number  in
heathen  times,  so  that  the  price  per  head  did  not  need  to  be  high.
Probably  they  were  selected  immediately  after  birth,  and  marked,
and  then  reared  with  the  rest  till  the  time  of  sacrificing. — In
Frankish  and  Alamannic  documents  there  often  occurs  the  word
friscing,  usually  for  porcellus,  but  sometimes  for  agnus,  occasionally
in  the  more  limited  sense  of  porcinus  and  agninus;  the  word  may  by

1  Berlin,  monatschr.  1802.  8,  225.  conf.  Lucas  David  1,  118-122.

2  In  many  districts  of  Germany  and  France,  the  butchers  at  a  set  time  of
the  year  lead  through  the  streets  a  fatted  ox  decked  with  flowers  and  ribbons,
accompanied  by  drum  and  fife,  and  collect  drink-money.     In  Holland  they  call
the  ox  bclder,  and  hang  gilded  apples  on  his  horns,  while  a  butcher  walks  in
front  with  the  axe  (beil).     All  this  seems  a  relic  of  some  old  sacrificial  rite.


SACRIFICE.  51

its  origin  express  recens  natus,  new-born,1  but  it  now  lives  only  in
the  sense  of  porcellus  (frischling).  How  are  we  to  explain  then,
that  this  OHG-.  friscing  in  several  writers  translates  precisely  the
Lat.  hostia,  victima,  holocaustum  (Notker  cap.  8,  ps.  15,  4.  26,  6.
33,  1.  39,  8.  41,  10.  43,  12.  22.  50,  21.  115,  17.  osterfriscing,  ps.  20,
3.  lamp  unkawemmit  kakepan  erdu  friscing,  i.e.  lamb  unblemished
given  to  earth  a  sacrifice,  Hymn  7,  10),  except  as  a  reminiscence  of
heathenism  ?  The  Jewish  paschal  lamb  would  not  suggest  it,  for  in
friscing  the  idea  of  porcellus  was  predominant. — In  the  North,  the
expiatory  boar,  sonargoltr,  offered  to  Freyr,  was  a  periodical  sacri
fice;  and  Sweden  has  continued  down  to  modern  times  the  practice
of  baking  loaves  and  cakes  on  Yule-eve  in  the  shape  of  a  boar.
This  golden-bristled  boar  has  left  his  track  in  inland  Germany  too.
According  to  popular  belief  in  Thuringia,2  whoever  on  Christmas
eve  abstains  from  all  food  till  suppertime,  will  get  sight  of  a  young
golden  pig,  i.e.  in  olden  times  it  was  brought  up  last  at  the  even
ing  banquet.  A  Lauterbach  ordinance  (weisthum)  of  1589  decreed
(3,  369),  that  unto  a  court  holden  the  day  of  the  Three-kings,
therefore  in  Yule  time,  the  holders  of  farm-steads  (hlibner)
should  furnish  a  clean  goldferch  (gold-hog)  gelded  while  yet  under
milk ;  it  was  led  round  the  benches,  and  no  doubt  slaughtered
afterwards.3  So  among  the  Welsh,  the  swine  offered  to  the  gods


*  Ducange  sub  v.    Eccard  Fr.  or.  2,  677.    Dorows  denkm.  I.  2,  55.    Lacom-
blet  1,  327.     Graff  3,  833.     Schmeller  wtb.  1,  619.

2  Gutgesells  beitr.  zur  gesch.  des  deutsclien  alterthums,  Meiningen  1834,
p.  138.

3  This  passage  from  the  Lauterb.  ordin.  I  can  now  match  by  another  from
those  of  Vinkbuch  in  the  Alamann  country.     It  says  1,  436  :  the  provost  shall
pick  out  in  the  convent  a  swine  worth  7  schilling  pfennig,  and  as  soon  as  harvest
begins,  let  it  into  the  convent  crewyard,  where  it  must  be  allowed  generous
fare  and  free  access  to  the  corn  ;  there  it  is  left  till  the  Thursday  after  St.  Adolf  s
day,  when  it  is  slaughtered  and  divided,  half  to  the  farm-bailiff,  half  to  the
parish  ;  on  the  same  day  there  is  also  a  distribution  of  bread  and  cheese  to
the  parish. — The  price  of  seven  shillings  tallies  with  the  seven  and  a  half
fixed  by  the  Lauterb.  ordin.,  and  is  a  high  one,  far  exceeding  the  ordinary
value  (conf.  Gott.  anz.  1827,  pp.  336-7) ;  it  was  an  arrangement  long  continued
and  often  employed  in  these  ordinances,  and  one  well  suited  to  a  beast  selected
for  sacrifice.     The  Lauterbach  goldferch,  like  that  of  Vinkbuch,  is  doled  out
and  consumed  at  a  festive  meal  ;  the  assize  itself  is  named  after  it  (3,  370)  ;
at  Vinkbuch  the  heathenish  name  only   has   been   forgotten   or   suppressed.
Assuredly  such  assize-feasts  were  held  in  other  parts  of   Germany  too.     St.
Adolf  was  a  bishop  of  Straszburg,  his  day  falls  on  August  29  or  30  (Conr.  v.
Dankr.  namenb.  p.  117),  and  the  assize  therefore  in  the  beginning  of  September.
Swine  are  slaughtered  for  the  household  when  winter  sets  in,  in  Nov.  or  Dec.  ;
and  as  both  of  these  by  turns  are  called  schlachtmon&t,  there  might  linger  in


52  WORSHIP.

became  one  destined  for  the  King's  table.  It  is  the  'swin  ealgyldcn,
eofor  irenheard '  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  and  of  its  exact  relation  to
the  worship  of  Froho  (Freyr)  we  have  to  treat  more  in  detail  by
and  by.  The  Greeks  sacrificed  swine  to  Demeter  (Ceres),  who  as
Nerthus  stands  very  near  to  NiorSr,  Freyr  and  Freyja.

Earns,  Goats  (see  Suppl.). — As  friscing  came  to  mean  victima,  so
conversely  a  name  for  animal  sacrifice,  Goth.  saufts,  seems  to  have
given  rise  to  the  ON.  name  for  the  animal  itself,  sauffr= wether.
This  species  of  sacrifice  was  therefore  not  rare,  though  it  is  seldom
expressly  mentioned,  probably  as  being  of  small  value.  Only  the
saga  Hakonar  goSa  cap.  16  informs  us  :  ];ar  var  oc  drepinn  (killed)
allskonar  smali,  ok  sva  hross.  Smali  (/jiijXa)  denotes  principally
sheep,  also  more  generally  the  small  beasts  of  the  flock  as  opposed
to  oxen  and  horses,  and  as  '  alls  konar  (omnis  generis)  '  is  here
added,  it  seems  to  include  goats.  The  sacrifice  of  he-goats  (hircos)
is  spoken  of  in  the  above-quoted  Epist.  Bonif.  82.  In  the  Swedish
superstition,  the  water-sprite,  before  it  will  teach  any  one  to  play
the  harp,  requires  the  sacrifice  of  a  Uack  lamb  ;  Svenska  folkv.  2,
128.  Gregory  the  Great  speaks  once  of  she-goats  being  sacrificed;
he  says  the  Langobards  offer  to  the  devil,  i.e.,to  one  of  their  gods,
caput  caprae,  hoc  ei,  per  circuitum  currentes,  carmine  nefando
dedicantes  ;  Dial.  3,  28.  This  head  of  a  she-goat  (or  he-goat  ?)  was
reared  aloft,  and  the  people  bowed  before  it.  The  hallowing  of  a
he-goat  among  the  ancient  Prussians  is  well  known  (Luc.  David  1,
87,  98).  The  Slavonian  god  Triglav  is  represented  with  three
goats'  heads  (Hanka's  zbjrka  23).  .  If  that  Langobardic  '  carmen
nefandum  '  had  been  preserved,  we  could  judge  more  exactly  of  the
rite  than  from  the  report  of  the  holy  father,  who  viewed  it  with
hostile  eyes.

About  other  sacrificial  beasts  we  cannot  be  certain,  for  of  Diet-
mar's  dogs  and  hawks  and  cocks,  hardly  any  but  the  last  are  to  be
depended  on  (see  Suppl.).  But  even  then,  what  of  domestic  poultry,
fowls,  geese,  pigeons  ?  The  dove  was  a  Jewish  and  Christian

this  also  a  reference  to  heathen  sacrifices  ;  an  AS.  name  for  Nov.  is  expressly
6W£monec5.  The  common  man  at  his  yearly  slaughtering  gets  up  a  feast,  and
sends  meat  and  sausages  to  his  neighbours  (conf.  mauchli,  Stalder  2,  525),
which  may  be  a  survival  of  the  common  sacrifice  and  distribution  of  ili-sh.
It  is  remarkable  that  in  Servia  too,  at  the  solemn  burning  of  the  badnyak,
which  is  exactly  like  the  yule-log  (ch.  XX,  Fires),  a  whole  swine  is  roasted,  and
often  a  sucking  pig  along  with  it ;  Vuk's  Montenegro,  pp.  103-4.


SACRIFICE.  53

sacrifice,  the  Greeks  offered  cocks  to  Asldepios,  and  in  Touraine  a
white  cock  used  to  be  sacrificed  to  St.  Christopher  for  the  cure  of  a
bad  finger  (Henri  Estienne  cap.  38,  6).  Of  game,  doubtless  only
those  fit  to  eat  were  fit  to  sacrifice,  stags,  roes,  wild  boars,  but  never
bears,  wolves  or  foxes,  who  themselves  possess  a  ghostly  being,  and
receive  a  kind  of  worship.  Yet  one  might  suppose  that  for  expiation
uneatable  beasts,  equally  with  men,  might  be  offered,  just  as  slaves
and  also  hounds  and  falcons  followed  the  burnt  body  of  their
master.  Here  we  must  first  of  all  place  Adam  of  Bremen's  descrip
tion  (4,  27)  of  the  great  sacrifice  at  Upsala  by  the  side  of  Dietmar's
account  of  that  at  Hlethra  (see  p.  48) : — Solet  quoque  post  novem
annos  communis  omnium  Sveoniae  provinciarum  solennitas
celebrari,  ad  quam  nulli  praestatur  immunitas ;  reges  et  populi,
omnes  et  singuli  sua  dona  ad  Ubsolam  transmittunt,  et,  quod  omni
poena  crudelius  est,  illi  qui  jam  induerunt  christianitatem  ab  illis
ceremoniis  se  redimunt.  Sacrificium  itaque  tale  est :  ex  omni
animante  quod  masculinum  est,  novem  capita  offeruntur  ;  quorum
sanguine  deos  tales  placari  mos  est.  Corpora  autem  suspenduntur
in  lucum  qui  proximus  est  templo.  Is  enim  lucus  tarn  sacer  est
gentilibus,  ut  singulae  arbores  ejus  ex  morte  vel  tabo  immolatorum
divinae  credantur.  Ibi  etiam  canes,  qui  pendent  cum  Jwminibus,
quorum  corpora  mixtim  suspensa  narravit  mihi  quidam  christian-
orum  se  septuaginta  duo  vidisse.  Ceterum  naeniae,  quae  in
ejusmodi  ritibus  libatoriis  fieri  solent,  multiplices  sunt  et  inhonestae,
ideoque  melius  reticendae. — The  number  nine  is  prominent  in  this
Swedish  sacrificial  feast,  exactly  as  in  the  Danish  ;  but  here  also  all
is  conceived  in  the  spirit  of  legend.  First,  the  heads  of  victims
seem  the  essential  thing  again,  as  among  the  Franks  and  Langobards ;
then  the  dogs  come  in  support  of  those  Hlethra  '  hounds  and  hawks/
but  at  the  same  time  remind  us  of  the  old  judicial  custom  of  hanging
up  wolves  or  dogs  by  the  side  of  criminals  (EA.  685-6).  That  only
the  male  sex  of  every  living  creature  is  here  to  be  sacrificed,  is  in
striking  accord  with  an  episode  in  the  Eeinardus,  which  was
composed  less  than  a  century  after  Adam,  and  in  its  groundwork
might  well  be  contemporary  with  him.  At  the  wedding  of  a  king,
the  males  of  all  quadrupeds  and  birds  were  to  have  been  slaughtered,
but  the  cock  and  gander  had  made  their  escape.  It  looks  to  me
like  a  legend  of  the  olden  time,  which  still  circulated  in  the  ll-12th
centuries,  and  which  even  a  nursery-tale  (No.  27,  the  Town-


54  AVOESHIP.

musicians)  knows  something  of.1  Anyhow,  in  heathen  times  vide
animals  seem  to  be  in  special  demand  for  sacrifice.2  As  for  killing
one  of  every  species  (and  even  Agathias's  KOI  d\\a  drra  nvpia  does
not  come  up  to  that),  it  would  be  such  a  stupendous  affair,  that  its
actual  execution  could  never  have  been  conceivable ;  it  can  only
have  existed  in  popular  tradition.  It  is  something  like  the  old
Mirror  of  Saxony  and  that  of  Swabia  assuring  us  that  every  living
creature  present  at  a  deed  of  rapine,  whether  oxen,  horses,  cats,
dogs,  fowls,  geese,  swine  or  men,  had  to  be  beheaded,  as  well  as  the
actual  delinquent  (in  real  fact,  only  when  they  were  his  property)  ;3
or  like  the  Edda  relating  how  oaths  were  exacted  of  all  animals
and  plants,  and  all  beings  were  required  to  weep.  The  creatures
belonging  to  a  man,  his  domestic  animals,  have  to  suffer  with  him
in  case  of  cremation,  sacrifice  or  punishment.

Next  to  the  kind,  stress  was  undoubtedly  laid  on  the  colour  of
the  animal,  white  being  considered  the  most  favourable.  White
horses  are  often  spoken  of  (Tac.  Germ.  10.  Weisth.  3,  301.  311.
831),  even  so  far  back  as  the  Persians  (Herod.  1, 189).  The  friscing
of  sacrifice  was  probably  of  a  spotless  white ;  and  in  later  law-
records  snow-ivhite  pigs  are  pronounced  inviolable.4  The  Votiaks
sacrificed  a  red  stallion,  the  Tcheremisses  a  white.  When  under
the  old  German  law  dun  or  pied  cattle  were  often  required  in  pay
ment  of  fines  and  tithes,  this  might  have  some  connexion  with
sacrifices5;  for  witchcraft  also,  animals  of  a  particular  hue  were
requisite.  The  water-sprite  demanded  a  black  lamb,  and  the  huldres
have  a  black  lamb  and  Hack  cat  offered  up  to  them  (Asb.  1.  159).
Saxo  Gram.  p.  1 6  says ;  rem  divinam  facere  furvis  hostiis ;  does
that  mean  black  beasts  ? — We  may  suppose  that  cattle  were


1  Or  will  any  one  trace  this  incident  in  the  Reynard  to  the  words  of  the
Vulgate  in  Matt.  22,  4  :    tauri  mei  et  altilia  occisa  sunt,  venite  ad  nuptios  ;
which   merely  describe  the  preparations  for  the  wedding-feast  1     Any  hint
about  males  is  just  what  the  passage  lacks.

2  The  Greeks  offered  male  animals  to  gods,/em«Ze  to  goddesses,  II.  3,  103  :
a  white  male  lamb   to  Helios    (sun),  a  black  ewe  lamb  to  Ge    (earth).     The
Lithuanians  sacrificed  to  their  earthgod  Zemiennik  utriusque  sexus  domestica
animalia  ;  Haupt's  zeitschr.  1, 141.

3  Reyscher  and  Wilda  zeitschr.  fur  deutsches  recht  5,  17,  18.

4  RA.  261.  594.     Weisth.  3,  41.  46.  69.  conf.  Virg.  Aen.  8,  82  :  Candida
cum  foetu  concolor  albo  sus  ;  and  the  Umbrian  :  trif  apruf  rufru  ute  peiu  (tres
apros  rubros  aut  piceos),  Aufrecht  und  Kirchh.  umbr.  sprachd.  2,  278-9.

8  RA.  587.  667.     Weisth.  1,  498.  3,  430.     White  animals  hateful  to   the
gods  ;  Tettau  and  Temme  preuss.  sag.  42.


SACRIFICE.  55

garlanded  and  adorned  for  sacrifice.  A  passage  in  the  Edda
requires  gold-horned  cows,  Seem.  14  la  ;  and  in  the  village  of  Fienstadt
in  Mansfeld  a  coal-black  ox  with  a  white  star  and  white  feet,  and
a  he-goat  with  gilded  horns  were  imposed  as  dues.1  There  are  indi
cations  that  the  animals,  before  being  slaughtered,  were  led  round
within  the  circle  of  the  assembly  —  that  is  how  I  explain  the
leading  round  the  benches,  and  per  circuitum  currere,  pp.  51,  52  —
perhaps,  as  among  the  Greeks  and  Komans,  to  give  them  the
appearance  of  going  voluntarily  to  death2  (see  Suppl.).  Probably
care  had  to  be  taken  also  that  the  victim  should  not  have  been  used
in  the  service  of  man,  e.g.,  that  the  ox  had  never  drawn  plough  or
waggon.  For  such  colts  and  bullocks  are  required  in  our  ancient
law-records  at  a  formal  transfer  of  land,  or  the  ploughing  to  death
of  removers  of  landmarks.

On  the  actual  procedure  in  a  sacrifice,  we  have  scarcely  any
information  except  from  Norse  authorities.  While  the  animal
laid  down  its  life  on  the  sacrificial  stone,  all  the  streaming  blood
(OK  hlauf)  was  caught  either  in  a  hollow  dug  for  the  purpose,  or
in  vessels.  With  this  gore  they  smeared  the  sacred  vessels  and
utensils,  and  sprinkled  the  participants.3  Apparently  divination
was  performed  by  means  of  the  blood,  perhaps  a  part  of  it  was
mixed  with  ale  or  mead,  and  drunk.  In  the  North  the  blood-
bowls  (hl&utbollar,  \Aotbollar)  do  not  seem  to  have  been  large;
some  nations  had  big  cauldrons  made  for  the  purpose  (see  Suppl.).
The  Swedes  were  taunted  by  Olafr  Tryggvason  with  sitting  at  home
and  licking  their  sacrificial  pots,  '  at  sitja  heima  ok  sleikja  Uot-
lolla  sina,'  Fornm.  sog.  2,  309.  A  cauldron  of  the  Cimbri  is  noticed
in  Strabo  7,  2  :  e#o?  Be  n  TMV  Ki/jL(3p(0v  Snyyovvrai,  TOIOVTOV,  on
rat?  <yvvai£iv  CLVTWV  o-varparevovcra^  7rapr)Ko\ov0ovv
lepeiat,  TToX/.oTp^e?,  Xef^ei/ioi'e?,  Kapiracrlvas


1  Neue  mitth.  des  thiir.  sachs.  vereins  V.  2,  131,  conf.  II.  10,  292.     Od.
3,  382  ;

<roi  8'  av  eyob  pe'£o>  /3ovi/  rjviv,  evpv/ierwTroj/,
a.§p.r)Tr)vt  fjv  OVTTO)  VTTO  £vybv  fjyayev  avrjp  •
rf)v  TOI  eyo)  pe'£o>,  xpuo-oi/  Kepaaiv  Trepixevas.

2  Oc  eingu  skyldi  tortyna  hvarki  fe  ne  monnum,  nema  sialft  gengi  i  burt.
Eyrb.  saga,  p.  10.     And  none  should  they  kill  (tortima?)  neither  beast  nor
man,  unless  of  itself  it  ran  a-tilt.

3  Saga  Hakonar  goSa,  cap.  16.     Eyrb.  saga  p.  10.     rauS  horgin,  reddened
the  (stone)  altar,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  413.     stalla  lata  rioSa  bloSi,  1,  454.  527.
Sasm.  114b  rio&u&u  bloSinu  Udttre,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  512.  the  Grk    alpa    TK>

.  conf.  Exod.  24,  8.


56  WORSHIP.


.8'

aurov?  ?yyoz>  eVt  K  p  ar  rj  p  a  %a\Kovv,  baov  d/uifopewv  e^tcocn  •  el^ou
8e  dvaftdOpav,  fy  dva/3aora  (77  /Ltai^rt?)  vTrepTrerrjs  TOV  \  e  /3  77  r  o  9
€\cuijLOTOfj,ei  eKaarov  fjierecopLadevra'  IK,  £e  TOU  TTpo^eofjuevov  ai/^aro?
6t9  TW  Kparrjpa,  /jLavreiav  TIVOL  eVotoiWo.1  Another  cauldron  of
the  Suevi,  in  the  Life  of  St.  Columban  :  Sunt  etenim  inibi  vicinre
nationes  Suevorum  ;  quo  cum  moraretur,  et  inter  habitatores  illius
leci  progrederetur,  reperit  eos  sacrificium  profanum  litare  velle,
vasque  magnum,  quod  vulgo  cupam  vocant,  quod  viginti  et  sex
•modios  amplius  minusve  capiebat,  cerevisia  plenum  in  medio  habe-
bant  positum.  Ad  quod  vir  Dei  accessit  et  sciscitatur,  quid  de  illo
fieri  vellent  1  Illi  aiunt  :  deo  suo  Wodano,  quern  Mercurium
vocant  alii,  se  velle  litare.  Jonas  Bobbiensis,  vita  Columb.  (from
the  first  half  of  the  7th  cent.  Mabillon  ann.  Bened.  2,  26).  Here
we  are  expressly  told  that  the  cauldron  was  filled  with  ale,  and  not
that  the  blood  of  a  victim  was  mixed  with  it  ;  unless  the  narrative
is  incomplete,  it  may  have  meant  only  a  drink-offering.

Usually  the  cauldron  served  to  cook,  i.e.  boil,  the  victim's  flesh  ;
it  never  was  roasted.  Thus  Herodotus  4,  61  describes  a  boiling
(tyew)  of  the  sacrifice  in  the  great  cauldron  of  the  Scythians.
From  this  seething,  according  to  my  conjecture,  the  ram  was  called
saufis,  and  those  who  took  part  in  the  sacrifice  su&nautar  (partakers
of  the  sodden),  Gutalag  p.  108  ;  the  boilings,  the  cauldrons  and  pots
of  witches  in  later  times  may  be  connected  with  this.2  The  distri
bution  of  the  pieces  among  the  people  was  probably  undertaken  by
a  priest  ;  on  great  holidays  the  feast3  was  held  there  and  then  in
the  assembly,  on  other  occasions  each  person  might  doubtless  take


1  '  They  say  the  Cimbri  had  this  custom,  that  their  women  marching  with
them  were  accompanied  by  priestess-prophetesses,  gray-haired,   white-robed,
with  a  linen  scarf  buckled  over  the  shoulder,  wearing  a  brazen  girdle,  and
bare-footed  ;  these  met  the  prisoners  in  the  camp,  sword  in  hand,  and  having
crowned  them,  led  them  to  a  brass  basin  as  large  as  30  amphora?  (180  gals)  ;
and  they  had  a  ladder,  which  the  priestess  mounted,  and  standing  over  the
basin,  cut  the  throat  of  each  as  he  was  handed  up.     With  the  blood  that  gushed
into  the  basin,  they  made  a  prophecy.'

2  The  trolds  too,  a  kind  of  elves,  have  a  copper  kettle  in  the  Norw.  saga,
Faye   11  ;  the  Christians  Ion"  believed  in  a  Saturni  dolium,  and  in  a  large
cauldron  in  hell  (chaudiere,  Meon  3,  284-5).

3  They  also  ate  the  strong  broth  and  the  fat  swimming  at  the  top.     The
heathen  offer  their  king  Hakon,  on  his  refusing  the  flesh,  drecka  so3~i£-and  eta
jlotit ;  Saga  Hakonar  goSa  cap.  18.     conf.  Foinm.  sog.  10,  381.


SACRIFICE.  57

his  share  home  with  him.  That  priests  and  people  really  ate  the
food,  appears  from  a  number  of  passages  (conf.  above,  p.  46).  The
Capitularies  7,  405  adopt  the  statement  in  Epist.  Bonif.  cap.  25
(an.  732)  of  a  Christian  '  presbyter  Jovi  mactans,  et  immolatitias
carnes  vescens,'  only  altering  it  to  '  diis  mactanti,  et  immolatitiis
carnibus  vescenti'.  We  may  suppose  that  private  persons  were
allowed  to  offer  small  gifts  to  the  gods  on  particular  occasions,  and
consume  a  part  of  them  ;  this  the  Christians  called  '  more  gentilium
offerre,  et  ad  honorem  daemonum  eomedere/  Capit.  de  part.  Sax.  20.
It  is  likely  also,  that  certain  nobler  parts  of  the  animal  were
assigned  to  the  gods,  the  head,  liver,  heart,  tongue}-  The  head  and
skin  of  slaughtered  game  were  suspended  on  trees  in  honour  of
them  (see  Suppl.).

Whole  ~burnt  offerings,  where  the  animal  was  converted  into
ashes  on  the  pile  of  wood,  do  not  seem  to  have  been  in  use.  The
Goth,  allbrunsts  Mk  12.,  33  is  made  merely  to  translate  the  Gk.
o\oKavrwfJia,  so  the  OHG.  albrandopher,  N.  ps.  64,  2  ;  and  the  AS.
Irynegield  onhredft  rommes  bloSe,  Caedni.  175,  6.  177,  18  is  meant
to  express  purely  a  burntoffering  in  the  Jewish  sense.2

Neither  were  incense-offerings  used  ;  the  sweet  incense  of  the
Christians  was  a  new  thing  to  the  heathen.  Ulphilas  retains  the
Gk.  thymiama  Lu.  1,  10.  11  ;  and  our  weih-rauch  (holy-reek),  O.
Sax.  wiroc  Hel.  3,  22,  and  the  OK  reykelsi,  Dan.  rogelse  are
formed  according  to  Christian  notions  (see  SuppL).

While  the  sacrifice  of  a  slain  animal  is  more  sociable,  more
universal,  and  is  usually  offered  by  the  collective  nation  or
community  ;  fruit  or  flowers,  milk  or  honey  is  what  any  household,
or  even  an  individual  may  give.  These  Fruit-offerings  are  therefore
more  solitary  and  paltry  ;  history  scarcely  mentions  them,  but  they
have  lingered  the  longer  and  more  steadfastly  in  popular  customs
(see  Suppl.).

When  the  husbandman  cuts  his  corn,  he  leaves  a  clump  of  ears
standing  for  the  god  who  blessed  the  harvest,  and  he  adorns  it  with


KOL  xotXia  (tongue  and  entrails)  iepciov  SmTreTrpayjue'i/ov,  Plutarch,
Phoc.  1.  yXcoo-o-ay  Tapvfiv  and  eV  TTV/H  .  fiuXXeiv,  Od.  3,  332.  341.  conf.  De
lingua  usu  in  sacrifices,  Nitzsch  ad  Horn.  Od.  1,  207.  In  the  folk-tales,  who
ever  has  to  kill  a  man  or  beast,  is  told  to  bring  in  proof  the  tongue  or  heart,
apparently  as  being  eminent  portions.

2  Sl&v.pdliti  obiet,  to  kindle  an.  offering,  Koniginh.  hs.  98.


58  WORSHIP.


ribbons.  To  this  day,  at  a  fruit-gathering  in  Holstein,  five  or  six
apples  are  left  hanging  on  each  tree,  and  then  the  next  crop  will  thrive.
More  striking  examples  of  this  custom  will  be  given  later,  in  treat
ing  of  individual  gods.  But,  just  as  tame  and  eatable  animals
were  especially  available  for  sacrifice,  so  are  fruit-trees  (frugiferae
arbores,  Tac.  Germ.  10),  and  grains;  and  at  a  formal  transfer  of
land,  boughs  covered  with  leaves,  apples  or  nuts  are  used  as  earnest
of  the  bargain.  The  MHG.  poet  (Fundgr.  II,  25)  describes  Cain's
sacrifice  in  the  words  :  *  eine  garb  er  nam,  er  wolte  sie  oppheren  mil
eheren  joch  mit  agenen'  a  sheaf  he  took,  he  would  offer  it  with  ears
and  eke  with  spikes  :  a  formula  expressing  at  once  the  upper  part
or  beard  (arista),  and  the  whole  ear  and  stalk  (spica)  as  well.
Under  this  head  we  also  put  the  crowning  of  the  divine  image,  of  a
sacred  tree  or  a  sacrificed  animal  with  foliage  or  flowers  ;  not  the
faintest  trace  of  this  appears  in  the  Norse  sagas,  and  as  little  in  our
oldest  documents.  From  later  times  and  surviving  folk-tales  I  can
bring  forward  a  few  things.  On  Ascension  day  the  girls  in  more
than  one  part  of  Germany  twine  garlands  of  white  and  red  flowers,
and  hang  them  up  in  the  dwellingroom  or  over  the  cattle  in  the
stable,  where  they  remain  till  replaced  by  fresh  ones  the  next  year.1
At  the  village  of  Questenberg  in  the  Ilarz,  on  the  third  day  in
Whitsuntide,  the  lads  carry  an  oak  up  the  castle-hill  which
overlooks  the  whole  district,  and,  when  they  have  set  it  upright,
fasten  to  it  a  large  garland  of  branches  of  trees  plaited  together,
and  as  big  as  a  cartwheel.  They  all  shout  *  the  queste  (i.e.  garland)
hangs,'  and  then  they  dance  round  the  tree  on  the  hill  top ;  both
tree  and  garland  are  renewed  every  year.2  Not  far  from  the
Meisner  mountain  in  Hesse  stands  a  high  precipice  with  a  cavern
opening  under  it,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  the  Hollow  Stone.
Into  this  cavern  every  Easter  Monday  the  youths  and  maidens  of
the  neighbouring  villages  carry  nosegays,  and  then  draw  some
cooling  water.  No  one  will  venture  down,  unless  he  has  flowers
with  him.3  The  lands  in  some  Hessian  townships  have  to  pay  a
~bunch  of  mayflowers  (lilies  of  the  valley)  every  year  for  rent.4  In
all  these  examples,  which  can  easily  be  multiplied,  a  heathen

1  Bragur  VI.  1,  126.

2  Otmars  volkssagen,  pp.  128-9.     What  is  told  of  the  origin  of  the  custom
seems  to  be  fiction.

3  Wigands  archiv  6,  317.

4  Wigands  archiv  C,  318.     Casselsches  wochenbl.  1815,  p.  928b.


MINNE-DRINKING.  59

practice  seems  to  have  been  transferred  to  Christian  festivals  and
offerings.1

As  it  was  a  primitive  and  widespread  custom  at  a  banquet  to
set  aside  a  part  of  the  food  for  the  household  gods,  and  particularly
to  place  a  dish  of  broth  before  Berhta  and  Hulda,  the  gods  were
also  invited  to  share  the  festive  drink.  The  drinker,  before  taking
any  himself,  would  pour  some  out  of  his  vessel  for  the  god  or  house-
sprite,  as  the  Lithuanians,  when  they  drank  beer,  spilt  some  of  it
on  the  ground  for  their  earth-goddess  Zemynele.2  Compare  with
this  the  Norwegian  sagas  of  Thor,  who  appears  at  weddings  when
invited,  and  takes  up  and  empties  huge  casks  of  ale. — I  will  now
turn  once  more  to  that  account  ol  the  Suevic  ale-titb  (cupa)  in  Jonas
.(see  p.  56),  and  use  it  to  explain  the  heathen  practice  of  minne-
drinking,  which  is  far  from  being  extinct  under  Christianity.  Here
also  both  name  and  custom  appear  common  to  all  the  Teutonic
races.

The  Gothic  man  (pi.  munum,  pret.  munda)  signified  I  think ;
gaman  (pi.  gamunum,  pret.  gamunda)  I  bethink  me,  I  remember.
From  the  same  verb  is  derived  the  OHG.  minna  =  minia  amor,
minnon  ==  minion  amare,  to  remember  a  loved  one.  In  the  ON.
language  we  have  the  same  man,  munum,  and  also  minni  memoria,
minna  recordari,  but  the  secondary  meaning  of  amor  was  never
developed.

It  was  customary  to  honour  an  absent  or  deceased  one  by
making  mention  of  him  at  the  assembly  or  the  banquet,  and
draining  a  goblet  to  his  memory:  this  goblet,  this  draught  was
called  in  ON.  erfi  drychja,  or  again  minni  (erfi  =  funeral  feast).

At  grand  sacrifices  and  banquets  the  god  or  the  gods  were
remembered,  and  their  minni  drunk:  minnis-ol  (ale),  Saem.  119b
(opposed  to  ominnis  61),  minnis-hom,  minnis-full  (cupful),  foro
minni  morg,  ok  skyldi  horn  dreckia  1  minni  hvert  (they  gave  many
a  m.,  and  each  had  to  drink  a  horn  to  the  m.).  um  golf  ganga  at
minnom  ollum,  Egilss.  206.  253.  minniol  signoff  asom,  Olafs  helga.

1  Beside  cattle  and  grain,  other  valuables  were  offered  to  particular  gods
and  in  special  cases,  as  even  in  Christian  times  voyagers  at  sea  e.g.t  would  vow
a  silver  ship  to  their  church  as  a  votive  gift  ;  in  Swedish  folk-songs,  offra  en
yryta  af  malm  (vessel  of  metal),  Arvidss.  2,  116  ;  en  gryta  af  blankaste  malm  (of
silver)  Ahlqvists  Oland  II.  1,  214  ;  also  articles  of  clothing,  e.g.  red  shoes.

2  In  the  Teut.  languages  I  know  of  no  technical  term  like  the  Gk.
Xe//3co,  Lat.  libo,  for  drink-offerings  (see  Suppl.).  ,


60  WORSHIP.

saga  (ed.  holm.)  113.  signa  is  the  German  segnen  to  bless,  conse
crate.  '  signa  full  OSni,  Thor.  051ns  full,  NiarSar  full,  Treys  full
drecka,  Saga  Hakonar  goSa  cap.  16.18.  In  the  Herraufts-saga  cap.
11,  Thor's,  OSin's  and  Freya's  minne  is  drunk.  At  the  burial  of  a
king  there  was  brought  up  a  goblet  called  Bragafull  (funeral  toast
cup),  before  which  every  one  stood  up,  took  a  solemn  vow,  and
emptied  it,  Yngl.  saga  cap.  40;  other  passages  have  Iragarfull,
Soem.  146a.  Fornald.  sog.  1,  345.  417.  515.  The  goblet  was  also
called  minnisveig  (swig,  draught),  Ssem.  193b.  After  conversion
they  did  not  give  up  the  custom,  but  drank  the  minne  of  Christ,
Mary,  and  the  saints :  Krists  minni,  Michaels  minni,  Fornm.  sog.
1,  162.  7, 148.  In  the  Fornm.  sog.  10,  1781,  St.  Martin  demands  of
Olaf  that  his  minni  be  proposed  instead  of  those  of  Thor,  05in,  and
the  other  ases.

The  other  races  were  just  as  little  weaned  from  the  practice ;
only  where  the  term  minne  had  changed  its  meaning,  it  is  trans
lated  by  the  Lat.  amor  instead  of  memoria  j1  notably  as  early  as  in
Liutprand,  hist.  6,  7  (Muratori  II.  1,  473),  and  Liutpr.  hist.  Ott.  12:
didboli  in  amorem  vinum  bibere.  Liutpr.  antapod.  2,  70  :  amoris
salutisque  mei  causa  bibito.  Liutpr.  leg.  65 :  potas  in  amore  beati
Johannis  prsecursoris.  Here  the  Baptist  is  meant,  not  the  Evan
gelist;  but  in  the  Fel.  Faber  evagat.  1,  148  it  is  distinctly  the
latter.  In  Eckehard  casus  S.  Galli,  Pertz  2,  84:  amoreque,  ut
nioris  est,  osculato  et  epoto,  laetabundi  discedunt.  In  the  Rudlieb
2,162:

post  poscit  vinum  Gerdrudis  amore,  quod  haustum
participat  nos  tres,  postremo  basia  fingens,
quando  vale  dixit  post  nos  gemit  et  benedixit.
In  the  so-called  Liber  occultus,  according  to  the  Miinchen  MS.,  at
the  description  of  a  scuffle  :

hujus  ad  edictum  nullus  plus  percutit  ictum,
sed  per  clamorem  poscunt  Gertrudis  amorem.
In  the  Peregrinus,  a  13th  cent.  Latin  poem,.v.  335  (Leyser  2114) :
et  rogat  ut  potent  sanctae  Gertrudis  amore,
ut  possent  onini  prosperitate  frui.

1  The  12th  cent,  poem  Von  dem  gelouben  1001  says  of  the  institution  of
the  Lord's  Supper,  whose  cup  is  also  a  drink  of  remembrance  to  Christians  :
den  cof  nam  er  mit  dem  wine,  uncle  secjente  darinne  ein  vil  guote  minne.  Conf.
loving  cup,  Thorn's  Ai.ecd.  82.


MIXNE-DEINKING.  01

At  Erek's  departure :  der  wirt  neig  im  an  den  fuoz,  ze  hand  truog
er  irn  do  ze  lieiles  gewinne  sant  Gertrude  minne,  Er.  4015.  The
armed  champion  'tranc  sant  Johannes  segcn,'  Er.  8651.  Hagene,
while  killing  Etzel's  child,  says,  Nib.  1897,  3  :

mi  trinken  wir  die  minne  unde  gelten  skiineges  win,

iz  mac  anders  niht  gesin

wan  trinkt  und  geltet  Ezeln  win;  Helbl.  6,  160.     14.  86.

Here  the  very  word  gelten  recalls  the  meaning  it  had  acquired  in
connexion  with  sacrificing  ;  conf.  Schm.  2, 40.  si  do  zucten  di  suert
unde  scancten  eine  minne  (drew  their  swords  and  poured  out  a  m.);
Herz.  Ernst  in  Hoffm.  fundgr.  1,  230,  35.  minne  schenken,
Berthold  276-7.  sant  Jftliannis  minne  geben,  Oswald  611.  1127.
1225  (see  Suppl.).  No  doubt  the  same  thing  that  was  afterwards
called  '  einen  ehrenwein  schenken ' ;  for  even  in  our  older  speech
era,  ere  denoted  verehrung,  reverence  shown  to  higher  and  loved
beings.

In  the  Mid.  Ages  then,  it  was  two  saints  in  particular  that  had
minne  drunk  in  honour  of  them,  John  the  evangelist  and  Gertrude.
John  is  said  to  have  drunk  poisoned  wine  without  hurt,  hence
a  drink  consecrated  to  him  prevented  all  danger  of  poisoning.
Gertrude  revered  John  above  all  saints,  and  therefore  her  memory
seems  to  have  been  linked  with  his.  But  she  was  also  esteemed  as
a  peacemaker,  and  in  the  Latinarius  metricus  of  a  certain  Andreas
rector  scholarum  she  is  invoked  :

0  pia  Gerdrudis,  quae  pacis  commoda  cudis
bellaque  concludis,  nos  caeli  mergito  ludis !

A  clerk  prayed  her  daily,  '  dass  sie  ihm  schueffe  herberg  guot,'  to
find  him  lodging  good;  and  in  a  MS.  of  the  15th  cent,  we  are
informed :  aliqui  dicunt,  quod  quando  anima  egressa  est,  tune  prima
nocte  pernoctabit  cum  beata  Gerdrude,  secunda  nocte  cum  arcli-
angelis,  sed  tertia  nocte  vadit  sicut  diffinitum  est  de  ea.  This
remarkable  statement  will  be  found  further  on  to  apply  to  Freya,
of  whom,  as  well  as  of  Hulda  and  Berhta,  Gertrude  reminds  us  the
more,  as  she  was  represented  spinning.  Both  John's  and  Ger
trude's  minne  used  especially  to  be  drunk  by  parting  friends,
travellers  and  lovers  of  peace,  as  the  passages  quoted  have  shown.
I  know  of  no  older  testimony  to  Gertrude's  minne  (which  presup
poses  John's)  than  that  in  Paidlieb ;  in  later  centuries  we  find


62  WORSHIP.

plenty  of  them :  der  brahte ,  mir  sant  Jolians  segen,  Ls.  3,  336.
sant  Johans  segen  trinken,  Ls.  2,  262.  ich  daht  an  sant  Jolians
minne,  Ls;  2,  264.  varn  (to  fare)  mit  sant  Gertrude  minne,
Amgb.  33b.  setz  sant  Johans  ze  biirgen  inir,  daz  du  komest
gesunt  lierwider  schier,  Hiitzl.  191b.  sant  Johannes  namen
trinken,  Altd.  bl.  413.  sant  Gfertrdde  minne,  Cod.  kolocz.  72.
trinken  sant  Johannes  segen  und  scheiden  von  dem  lande,  Morolt.
3103.  diz  ist  sancte  Johans  minne,  Cod.  pal.  364,  158.  S.  Johans
segen  trinken,  Anshelm  3,  416.  Johans  segen,  Fischart  gesch.  kl.
99b.  Simpliciss.  2,  262.1

Those  Suevi  then,  whom  Columban  was  approaching,  were  pro
bably  drinking  Wuotan's  minne  ;  Jonas  relates  how  the  saint  blew
the  whole  vessel  to  pieces  and  spoilt  their  pleasure :  manifesto
datur  intelligi,  dicibolum  in  eo  vase  fuisse  occultatum,  qui  per  pro-
famim  litatorem  caperet  animas  sacrificantium.  So  by  Liutprand's
devil,  whose  minne  is  drunk,  we  may  suppose  a  heathen  god  to
have  been  meant,  gefa  priggja  sdlda  ol  Oftni  (give  three  tuns  of
ale  to  Oolnn),  Fornm.  sog.  2,  16.  gefa  Thor  ok  Oftni  61,  ok  signa
full  asum,  ibid.  1,  280.  drecka  minni  Thors  ok  Oftins,  ibid.  3,  191.
As  the  North  made  the  sign  of  Thor's  hammer,  Christians  used  the
cross  for  the  blessing  (segnung)  of  the  cup ;  conf.  poculum  signare,
Walthar.  225,  precisely  the  Norse  signa  full.

Minne-drinking,  even  as  a  religious  rite,  apparently  exists  to
this  day  in  some  parts  of  Germany.  At  Otbergen,  a  village  of
Hildesheim,  on  Dec.  27  every  year  a  chalice  of  wine  is  hallowed  by
the  priest,  and  handed  to  the  congregation  in  the  church  to  drink
as  JoJiannis  segen  (blessing) ;  it  is  not  done  in  any  of  the  neigh
bouring  places.  In  Sweden  and  Norway  we  find  at  Candlemas  a
dricka  ddborgs  skal,  drinking  a  toast  (see  Superst.  &,  Swed.  122).

1  Thomasius  de  poculo  S.  Johannis  vtilgo  Johannistrunk,  Lips.  1675.
Scheffers  Haltaus  p.  165.  Oberlin  s.  vb.  Johannis  miim  und  trunk.  Schmeller
2,593.  Hannov.  mag.  1830,  171-6.  Ledeburs  archiv  2,  189.  On  Gertrude
espec.,  Huyd.  op  St.  2,  343-5.  Clignett's  l>idr.  392-411.  Hoffm.  horae  belg.
2,  41-8.  Antiqvariske  annaler  1,  313.  Hanka's  Boh  em.  glosses  79b  132a
render  Johannis  amor  by  swatd  mina  (holy  m.).  And  in  that  Slovenic  docu
ment,  the  Freysinger  MS.  (Kopitar's  Glagolita  xxxvii,  conf.  xliii)  is  tlie
combination  :  da  klanyamse,  i  modlimse,  im  i  tchesti  ich  piyem,  i  obieti  nashe
im  nesem  (ut  genutiectanms  et  precemur  eis  et  honores  eorum  bibamus  et  obli-
gationes  nostras  illis  feramus);  tchest  is  honor,  TI/ZT),  cultus,  our  old  era  ;  but
I  also  find  slava  (fame,  glory)  used  in  the  sense  of  minne,  and  in  a  Servian
song  (Vuk,  1  no.  94)  wine  is  drunk  '  za  slave  bozhye '  to  the  glory  of  God.  In
the  Finnish  mythology  is  mentioned  an  Ukkon  malja,  bowl  of  Ukko  ;  inalja  =
Swed.  skal,  strictly  scutella,  potatio  in  inemoriam  vel  sanitatem.


MINNE-DRINKING.  63

Now  that  Suevic  cupa  filled  witli  beer  (p.  75)  was  a  hallowed
sacrificial  cauldron,  like  that  which  the  Cimbri  sent  to  the  emperor
Augustus.1  Of  the  Scythian  cauldron  we  have  already  spoken,
p.  75 ;  and  we  know  what  part  the  cauldron  plays  in  the  Hymis-
qviSa  and  at  the  god's  judgment  on  the  seizure  of  the  cauldron  (by
Thor  from  giant  Hymir).  Nor  ought  we  to  overlook  the  ON.
proper  names  Asketill,  Thorketill  (abbrev.  Thorkel)  AS.  Oscytel
(Kemble  2,  302) ;  they  point  to  kettles  consecrated  to  the  as  and
to  Thor.

Our  knowledge  of  heathen  antiquities  will  gain  both  by  the
study  of  these  drinking  usages  which  have  lasted  into  later  times,
and  also  of  the  shapes  given  to  baked  meats,  which  either  retained
the  actual  forms  of  ancient  idols,  or  were  accompanied  by  sacrificial
observances.  A  history  of  German  cakes  and  bread-rolls  might
contain  some  unexpected  disclosures.  Thus  the  Indicul.  superstit.
26  names  simulacra  de  consparsa  farina.  Baked  figures  of  animals
seem  to  have  represented  animals  that  were  reverenced,  or  the
attributes  of  a  god.2  From  a  striking  passage  in  the  Fridthiofssaga
(fornald.  sog.  2,  86)  it  appears  that  the  heathen  at  a  disa  blot  baked
images  of  gods  and  smeared  them  with  oil :  '  satu  konur  viS  eldinn
ok  bokuSu  go<5in,  en  sumar  srnurSu  ok  J?erc5u  me5  dukum,'  women
sat  by  the  fire  and  baked  the  gods,  while  some  anointed  them  with
cloths.  By  FriSJriof '  s  fault  a  baked  Baldr  falls  into  the  fire,  the  fat
blazes  up,  and  the  house  is  burnt  down.  According  to  Yoetius  de
superstit.  3,  122  on  the  day  of  Paul's  conversion  they  placed  a
figure  of  straw  before  the  hearth  on  which  they  were  baking,  and
if  it  brought  a  fine  bright  day,  they  anointed  it  with  butter ;  other
wise  they  kicked  it  from  the  hearth,  smeared  it  with  dirt,  and
threw  it  in  the  water.

Much  therefore  that  is  not  easy  to  explain  in  popular  offerings
and  rites,  as  the  colour  of  animals  (p.  54),  leading  the  boar  round
(p.  51),  flowers  (p.  58),  minne-drinking  (p.  59),  even  the  shape
of  cakes,  is  a  reminiscence  of  the  sacrifices  of  heathenism  (see
SuppL).


TOO   2e/3ao-r<3  Saipoi/  TOV  iepa>raroi/  Trap1  auroi?  Xe£i}ra,  the  most
sacred  cauldron  tWy  had,  ktrabo  VII.  2.

2  Baking  in  the  shape  of  a  boar  must  have  been  much  more  widely  spread
than  in  the  North  alone,  see  below,  Fro's  boar  ;  even  in  France  they  baked
cochelins  for  New  Year's  day,  Mem.  de  1'ac.  celt.  4,  429.


64  WORSHIP.

Beside  prayers  and  sacrifices,  one  essential  feature  of  the
heathen  cultus  remains  to  be  brought  out :  the  solemn  carrying
about  of  divine  images.  The  divinity  was  not  to  remain  rooted  to
one  spot,  but  at  various  times  to  bestow  its  presence  on  the  entire
compass  of  the  land  (see  ch.  XIV).  So  Nerthus  rode  in  state  (in-
vehebatur  populis),  and  Berecyrithia  (ch.  XIII),  so  Fro  travelled  out
in  spring,  so  the  sacred  ship,  the  sacred  plough  was  carried  round
(ch.  XIII  Isis).  The  figure  of  the  unknown  Gothic  god  rode  in  its
waggon  (ch.  VI).  Fetching-in  the  Summer  or  May,  carrying-out
Winter  and  Death,  are  founded  on  a  similar  view.  Holda,  Berhta
and  the  like  beings  all  make  their  circuit  at  stated  seasons,  to  the
heathen's  joy  and  the  Christian's  terror ;  even  the  march  of
Wuotan's  host  may  be  so  interpreted  (conf.  ch.  XXXI.  Frau
Gauden).  When  Fro  had  ceased  to  appear,  Dietrich  with  the  ber
.(boar)  and  Dietrich  Bern  still  showed  themselves  (ch.  X.  XXXI),
or  the  sonargoltr  (atonement-boar)  was  conveyed  to  the  heroes'
banquet  (ch.  X),  and  the  boar  led  round  the  benches  (p.  51).
Among  public  legal  observances,  the  progress  of  a  newly  elected
king  along  the  highways,  the  solemn  lustration  of  roads,  the  beating
of  bounds,  at  which  in  olden  times  gods'  images  and  priests  can
hardly  have  been  wanting,  are  all  the  same  kind  of  thing.  After
the  conversion,  the  church  permanently  sanctioned  such  processions,
except  that  the  Madonna  and  saints'  images  were  carried,  particu
larly  when  drought,  bad  crops,  pestilence  or  war  had  set  in,  so  as  to
bring  back  rain  (ch.  XX),  fertility  of  soil,  healing  and  victory  ;  sacred
images  were  even  carried  to  help  in  putting  out  a  fire.  The  Indicul.
paganiar.  XXVIII  tells  '  de  simulacra  quod  per  campos  portant,'  on
which  Eccard  1,  437  gives  an  important  passage  from  the  manuscript
Vita  Marcsvidis  (not  Maresvidis) :  statuimus  ut  annuatim  secunda
feria  pentecostes  patronum  ecclesiae  in  parochiis  vestris  longo
cwibitu  circumferentes  et  domos  vestras  lustrantes,  et  pro  gentilitio
amlarvali  in  lacrymis  et  varia  devotione  vos  ipsos  mactetis  et  ad
refectionem  pauperum  eleemosynam  comportetis,  et  in  hac  curti
pernoctantes  super  reliquias  vigiliis  et  cantibus  solennisetis,  ut
praedicto  mane  determinaturn  a  vobis  anibitum  pia  lustratione  com-
plentes  ad  monasterium  cum  honore  debito  reportetis.  Confido
autem  de  patroni  hujus  misericordia,  quod  sic  db  ca  gyrade  tcrrae
scmina  ulcrius  provcniant,  et  variae  aeris  inclementiae  cessent.  The
Roman  ambarvalia  were  purifications  of  fields,  and  sacrifices  were


PROCESSIONS.


65


offered  at  the  terminus  publicus  ;  the  May  procession  and  the  riding
of  bounds  and  roads  during  the  period  of  German  heathenism  must
have  been  very  similar  to  them.  On  the  Gabel-heath  in  Mecklen
burg  the  Wends  as  late  as  the  15th  century  walked  round  the
budding  corn  with  loud  cries  ;  Giesebrecht  1,  87-


CHAPTEE  IV.
TEMPLES.


In  our  inquiries  on  the  sacred  dwelling-places  of  the  gods,  it
will  be  safest  to  begin,  as  before,  with  expressions  which  preceded  the
Christian  terms  temple  and  church,  and  were  supplanted  by  them.

The  Gothic  allis  fern,  translates  the  Jewish-  Christian  notions  of
vabs  (Matt.  27,  5.  51.  Mk.  14,  58.  15,  29.  Lu.  1,  9.  21.  2  Cor.  6,
16)  and  Upov  (Mk.  11,  11.  16.  27.  12,  35.  14,  49.  Lu.  2,  27.  46.  4,  9.
18,  10.  19,  45.  John  7,  14.  28.  8,  20.  59.  10,  23).  To  the  Goth
it  would  be  a  time-hallowed  word,  for  it  shares  the  anomaly  of
several  such  nouns,  forming  its  gen.  alhs,  dat.  alii,  instead  of  alhais,
alhai.  Once  only,  John  18,  20,  gudhus  stands  for  iepov  ;  the  simple
hus  never  has  the  sense  of  domus,  which  is  rendered  razn.  Why
should  Ulphilas  disdain  to  apply  the  heathen  name  to  the  Christian
thing,  when  the  equally  heathen  templum  and  i/ao?  were  found
quite  inoffensive  for  Christian  use  ?

Possibly  the  same  word  appears  even  earlier  ;  namely  in  Tacitus,
Germ.  43  :  apud  Naharvaloe  antiquae  religionis  lucus  ostenditur  ;
praesidet  sacerdos  muliebri  ornatu,  sed  deos  interpretatione  romana
Castorem  Pollucemque  memorant.  Ea  vis  numini,  nomen  Aids  ;
nulla  simulacra,  nullum  peregrinae  superstitionis  vestigium.  Ut
fratres  tamen,  ut  juvenes  venerantur.  —  This  alcis  is  either  itself  the
nom.,  or  a  gen.  of  alx  (as  f  alcis  of  falx),  which  perfectly  corresponds
to  the  Gothic  alhs.  A  pair  of  heroic  brothers  was  worshipped,
without  any  statues,  in  a  sacred  grove  ;  the  name  can  hardly  be
ascribed  to  them,1  it  is  the  abode  of  the  divinity  that  is  called  alx.
Numen  is  here  the  sacred  wood,  or  even  some  notable  tree  in  it.2


1  Unless  it  were  dat.  pi.  of  alcus  [or  alca  aX^].     A  Wendicholz,  Bohem.
holec,  which  has  been  adduced,  is  not  to  the  point,  for  it  means  strictly  a  bald
naked  wretch,  a  beggar  boy,  Pol.  golec,  Russ.  gholiak.     Besides,  the  Naharvali
and  the  other  Lygian  nations  can  scarcely  have  been  Slavs.

2  1  am  not  convinced  that  numen  can  refer  to  the  place.     The  plain  sense
seems  to  be  :  '  the  divinity  has  that  virtue  (which  the  Gemini  have),  and  the
name  Alcis,'  or  'of  Alx,'  or  if  dat.  pi.,  'the  Alcae,  Alci  '.    May  not  Alcis  be  conn.
with  a\Kr)  strength,  safeguard,  and  the  dat.  aA/a  pointing  to  a  nom.  aX£  ;  *  aXxa)
I  defend  ;  or  even  Caesar's  alces  and  Pausanias's  aX/cat  elks  ?  —  TRANS.


TEMPLES.  67

Four  or  five  centuries  after  Ulphilas,  to  the  tribes  of  Upper
Germany  their  word  alali  must  have  had  an  old-fashioned  heathen
ish  sound,  but  we  know  it  was  still  there,  preserved  in  composition
with  proper  names  of  places  and  persons  (see  Suppl.)  :  Alaholf,
Alahtac,  Alahhilt,  Alahgund,  Alahtrut ;  Alahstat  in  pago  Hassorum
(A.D.  834),  Schannat  trad.  fuld.  no.  404.  Alahdorp  in  Mulahgowe
(A.D.  856),  ibid.  no.  476.  The  names  Alahstat,  Alahdorf  may  have
been  borne  by  many  places  where  a  heathen  temple,  a  hallowed  place
of  justice,  or  a  house  of  the  king  stood.  For,  not  only  the  fanum,  but
the  folk-mote,  and  the  royal  residence  were  regarded  as  consecrated,
or,  in  the  language  of  the  Mid.  Ages,  as  frdno  (set  apart  to  the
fro,  lord).  Alstidi,  a  king's  pfalz  (palatium)  in  Thuringia  often
mentioned  in  Dietmar  of  Merseburg,  was  in  OHG.  alahsteti,  nom.
alahstat.  Among  the  Saxons,  who  were  converted  later,  the  word
kept  itself  alive  longer.  The  poet  of  the  Heliand  uses  alah  masc.
exactly  as  Ulphilas  does  alhs  (3,  20.  22.  6,2.  14,9.  32,14.  115,9.
15.  129,  22.  130,  19.  157,  16),  seldomer  godes  Ms  155,  8.  130,
18,  or,  that  helaga  Jills  3,  19.  Ceedm.  202,  22  alhn  (1.  alii  haligne
—holy  temple) ;  258,  11  ealhstede  (palatium,  aedes  regia).  In
Andr.  1642  I  would  read '  ealde  ealhstedas '  (delubra)  for '  eolhstedas',
conf.  the  proper  names  Eallistdn  in  Kemble  1,  288.  296  and  Ealli-
heard  1,  292  quasi  stone-hard,  rock-hard,  which  possibly  leads  us  to
the  primary  meaning  of  the  word.1  The  word  is  wanting  in  ON.
documents,  else  it  must  have  had  the  form  air,  gen.  als.

Of  another  primitive  word  the  Gothic  fragments  furnish  no
example,  the  OHG.  wih  (nemus),  Dint.  1,  492a ;  0.  Sax.  wih  masc.
(templum),  Hel.  3,  15.  17.  19.  14,  8.  115,  4.  119,  17.  127,  10.
129,  23.  130,  17.  154,  22.  169,  1 ;  friduwih,  Hel.  15,  19  ;  AS.
wih  wiges,  or  weoh  weos,  also  masc. :  wiges  (idoli),  Csedm.  228,  12.
J?isne  wig  wurSigean  (hoc  idolum  colere),  Casdm.  228,  24.  conf.
wigweorSing  (cultus  idolorum),  Beow.  350.  weohweorSing  Cod.
exon.  253, 14.  wihgild  (cultus  idol),  Csedm.  227,5.  weobedd  (ara),
for  weohbedd,  wihbedd,  Cgedm.  127,  8.  weos  (idola),  for  weohas,
Cod.  exon.  341,  28.— The  alternation  of  i  and  eo  in  the  AS.  indicates
a  short  vowel ;  and  in  spite  of  the  reasons  I  have  urged  in  Gramin.  1,
462,  the  same  seems  to  be  true  of  the  ON.  ve,  which  in  the  sing.,  as

1  There  is  however  a  noun  Hard,  the  name  of  many  landing-places  in  the
south  of  England,  as  Cracknor  Hard,  &c.— TRANS.


68


TEMPLES.


Ve,  denotes  one  particular  god ;  but  lias  a  double  pi,  namely,  a  masc.
vear  dii,  idola,  and  a  neut.  ve  loca  sacra.  Gutalag  6,  108.  Ill:
haita  a  Imlt  e>a  hauga,  a  m  e>a  stafgarjra  (invocare  lucos  aut  tumulos,
idola  aut  loca  palis  circumsepta) ;  trua  a  hult,  a  liauga,  m  oc  staf-
garj?a ;  han  standr  i  m  (stat  in  loco  sacro).  In  that  case  we  have
here,  as  in  alah,  a  term  alternating  between  nemus,  templum,  fanum,
idolum,  numen,  its  root  being  doubtless  the  Gothic  veilia  (I  hallow)^
vaih,  vaihum,  OHG.  wihu,  weih,  wihum,  from  which  also  comes
the  adj.  veins  sacer,  OHG.  wih  ;  and  we  saw  on  p.  41  that  wihan
was  applied  to  sacrifices  and  worship.  In  Lappish,  vi  is  said  to
mean  silva.

Still  more  decisive  is  a  third  heathen  word,  which  becomes
specially  important  to  our  course  of  inquiry.  The  OHG.  liaruc
masc.,  pi.  haruga,  stands  in  the  glosses  both  for  fanum,  Hrab.  963b.
for  delubrum,  Hrab.  959a.  for  lucus,  Hrab.  9G9a,  Jun.  212.
Dint.  1,  495b,  and  for  nemus,  Diut.  1,  492a.  The  last  gloss,
in  full,  runs  thus:  'nemus  plantavit=/0rs£  flanzota,  edo  (or)
hanw,  edo  wih!  So  that  liaruc,  like  wih,  includes  on  the  one
hand  the  notion  of  templum,  fanum,  and  on  the  other  that  of  wood,
grove,  lucus.1  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Lex  Eipuar.  has  preserved,
evidently  from  heathen  times,  harahus  to  designate  a  place  of
judgment,  which  was  originally  a  wood  (EA.  794.  903).  AS.  hearg
masc.,  pi.  heargas  (fanum),  Beda  2,  13.  3,  30.  Orosius  3,  9,  p.  109.
kean/tittf  (fani  tabulatum),  Beow.  349.  set  hcarge,  Kemble,  1,  282.
OX.  horgr  masc,  pi.  horgar  (delubrum,  at  times  idolum,  simulacrum)
Saern.  3Ga  42a  91a  114b  141a;  especially  worth  notice  is  Srcm.  114b  !
horgr  hlaSinn  steinom,  griot  at  gleri  orSit,  roSit  i  nyio  nauta  blool
(h.paven  with  stones,  grit  made  smooth,  reddened  anew  with  neat's
blood).  Sometimes  horgr  is  coupled  with  hof  (fanum,  tectum),  3Ga
141a,  in  which  case  the  former  is  the  holy  place  amidst  woods 'and
rocks,  the  built  temple,  aula  ;  conf.  '  hamarr  ok  horgr ;  Fornm.  sog.
5,  239.  To  both  expressions  belongs  the  notion  of  the  place  as  well

1  And  in  one  place  haraga  =  nrae.  Elsewhere  the  heathen  term  for  altar,
Ok  /3&>/idy,  was  Goth,  binds,  OHG.  piot,  AS.  beod.  strictly  a  table  (p.  38) ;
likewise  the  Goth,  badi,  OHG.  petti,  AS.  bed,  bedd  (lectus,  p.  30)  gets  to  mean
ara,  areola,  fanum,  conf.  AS.  wSKbed.  weohbcd,  vxobed,  afterwards  distorted  into
weofed  (ara,  altare),  OHG.  kotapetti  (gods'-bed,  lectus,  pulvinar  templi),  Graff
3,  51  ;  with  which  compare  Brunhild's  bed  and  the  like,  also  the  Lat.  lectister-
nium.  'Ad  altare  S.  Kiliani,  quod  vulgo  lectus  dicitur,'  Lang  res.  1.  239.  255
(A.D.  1160-5)  ;  (see  Suppl.).


GROVES.  69

as  that  of  the  numen  and  the  image  itself  (see  Suppl.).  Haruc  seems
unconnected  with  the  0.  Lat.  haruga,  aruga,  bull  of  sacrifice,  whence
haruspex,  aruspex.  The  Gk  re/ze^o?  however  also  means  the  sacred
grove,  II.  8,  48.  23,  148.  re/Aei/os  -rdpov,  II.  20,  184.

Lastly,  synonymous  with  haruc  is  the  OHG.  paro,  gen.  parawes,
AS.  bearo,  gen.  bearwes,  which  betoken  lucus1  and  arbor,  a  sacred
grove  or  a  tree ;  aet  bearwe,  Kemble.  1,  255.  ON.  barr  (arbor),
Seem.  109a;  barri  (nemus)  86b  87a.  qui  ad  aras  sacrificat=:de  za
demo  parawe  (al.  za  themo  we)  ploazit,  Diut.  1,  150  ;  ara,  or  rather
the  pi.  arae,  here  stands  for  templum  (see  Suppl).

Temple  then  means  also  wood.  What  we  figure  to  ourselves  as
a  built  and  walled  house,  resolves  itself,  the  farther  back  we  go,
into  a  holy  place  untouched  by  human  hand,  embowered  and
shut  in  by  self -grown  trees.  There  dwells  the  deity,  veiling  his
form  in  rustling  foliage  of  the  boughs ;  there  is  the  spot  where
the  hunter  has  to  present  to  him  the  game  he  has  killed,  and  the
herdsmen  his  horses  and  oxen  and  rams.

What  a  writer  of  the  second  century  says  on  the  cnltus  of  the
Celts,  will  hold  good  of  the  Teutonic  and  all  the  kindred  nations :
KeXrot  crepovai  fj,ev  Ala,  a<ya\/j,a  Se  ALOS  KekTLKov  vtyrjXr)  £/}£?,
Maximus  Tyrius  (diss.  8,  ed.  Eeiske  1,  142).  Compare  Lasicz.  46  :
deos  nemora  incolere  persuasum  habent  (Samogitae).  Habitarunt
di  quoque  sylvas  (Haupts  zeitschr.  1,  138).

I  am  not  maintaining  that  this  forest- worship  exhausts  all  the
conceptions  our  ancestors  had  formed  of  deity  and  its  dwelling-
place  ;  it  was  only  the  principal  one.  Here  and  there  a  god  may
haunt  a  mountain-top,  a  cave  of  the  rock,  a  river ;  but  the  grand
general  worship  of  the  people  has  its  seat  in  the  grove..  And  no
where  could  it  have  found  a  worthier  (see  Suppl.).

At  a  time  when  rude  beginnings  were  all  that  there  was  of  the
builder's  art,  the  human  mind  must  have  been  roused  to  a  higher
devotion  by  the  sight  of  lofty  trees  under  an  open  sky,  than  it  could
feel  inside  the  stunted  structures  reared  by  unskilful  hands.  When
long  afterwards  the  architecture  peculiar  to  the  Teutons  reached  its


1  To  the  Lat.  lucus  would  correspond  a  Goth,  lauhs,  and  this  is  confirmed
by  the  OHG.  I6h,  AS.  leak.  The  Engl.  lea,  ley  has  acquired  the  meaning
of  meadow,  field  ;  also  the  Slav,  lug,  Boh.  lutz,  is  at  once  grove,  glade,  and
meadow.  Not  only  the  wood,  but  wooded  meadows  were  sacred  to  gods  (see
Suppl.).


70  TEMPLES.

perfection,  did  it  not  in  its  boldest  creations  still  aim  at  reproducing
the  soaring  trees  of  the  forest  ?  Would  not  the  abortion  of
miserably  carved  or  chiselled  images  lag  far  behind  the  form  of  the
god  which  the  youthful  imagination  of  antiquity  pictured  to  itself,
throned  on  the  bowery  summit  of  a  sacred  tree  ?  In  the  sweep
and  under  the  shade1  of  primeval  forests,  the  soul  of  man  found
itself  filled  with  the  nearness  of  sovran  deities.  The  mighty
influence  that  a  forest  life  had  from  the  first  on  the  whole  being
of  our  nation,  is  attested  by  the  '  march-fellowships ; '  marka,  the
word  from  which  they  took  their  name,  denoted  first  a  forest,  and
afterwards  a  boundary.

The  earliest  testimonies  to  the  forest-cultus  of  the  Germans  are
furnished  by  Tacitus.  Germ.  9 :  ceterum  nee  cohibere  parietibus
deos,  neque  in  ullam  human!  oris  speciem  adsimulare  ex  magni-
tudine  coelestium  arbitrantur.  Lucos  ac  nemora  consecrant,  deorum-
que  nominibus  adpellant  secretum  illud  quod  sola  revereritia  vident.2
Germ.  39,  of  the  Semnones ;  Stato  tempore  in  silvam  auguriis
patrum  et  prism  formidine  sacram3  omnes  ejusdem  sanguinis
populi  legationibus  coeunt.  est  et  alia  luco  rcverentia.  nemo  nisi
vinculo  ligatus  ingreditur,  ut  minor  et  potestatem  numinis  prae  se
ferens.  si  forte  prolapsus  est,  attolli  et  insurgere  baud  licitum  :
per  humum  evolvuntur.4  cap.  40  :  est  in  insula  oceani  castum

1  Waldes  hleo,  Tilea  (umbra,  umbra cnlum) ,  Hel.  33,  22.  73,  23.     AS.  hleo,
ON.  hlie,  OHG.  liwa,  Graff  2,  296,  MHG.  lie,  liewe.

2  Ruodolf  of  Fuld  (f  863j  has  incorporated  the  whole  passage,  with  a  few
alterations,  in  his  treatise  De  translatione  Alexandri  (Pertz  2,  675),  perhaps
from  some  intermediate  source.     Tacitus's  words  must  be  taken  as  they  stand.
In  his  day  Germany  possessed  no  masters  who  could  build  temples  or  chisel
statues  ;  so  the  grove  was  the  dwelling  of  the  gods,  and  a  sacred  symbol  did
instead  of  a  statue.     Mb'ser  §  30  takes  the  passage  to  mean,  that  the  divinity
common  to  the  whole  nation  was  worshipped  unseen,  so  as  not  to  give  one  dis
trict  the  advantage  of  possessing  the  temple  ;  but  that  separate  gods  did  have
their  images  made.     This  view  is  too  political,  and  also  ill-suited  to  the  isolation
of  tribes  in  those  times.     No  doubt,  a  region  which  included  a  god's  hill  would
acquire  the  more  renown  and  sacredness,  as  spots  like  Rhetra  and  Loreto  did
from  containing  the  Slavic  sanctuary  or  a  Madonna  :  that  did  not  prevent  the
same   worship   from  obtaining  seats  elsewhere.     With   the  words  of  Tacitus
compare  what  he  says  in  Hist.  2,  78  :  est  Judaeam  inter  Syriamque  Carmelus,
ita  vocant  montem  deumque,  nee  simulacrum  deo  aut  templum,  sic  tradidere
majores,  ara  tantum  et  reverentia  ;  and  in  Dial,  de  Orat.  12  :  nemora  vero  et
luci  et  secretum  ipsum.    In  Tacitus  secretum  =  secessus,  seclusion,  not  arcanum.

3  This  hexameter  is  not  a  quotation,  it  is  the  author's  own.

4  Whoever  is  engaged  in  a  holy  office,  and  stands  in  the  presence  and  pre
cincts  of  ^the  god,  must  not  stumble,  and  if  he  falls  to  the  ground,  he  forfeits
his  privilege.     So  he  who  in  holy  combat  sinks  to  the  earth,  may  not  set


GROVES.  71

nemus,  dicatumque  in  eo  vehiculum  veste  contectum.  cap.  43 :
apud  Naharvalos  antiquae  religionis  lucus  ostenditur  .  ,  .
numini  nomen  Aids,  nulla  simulacra,  cap  7  :  effigies  et  signa  (i.e.
effigiata  signa)  quaedam  detractae  lucis  in  proelium  ferunt ;  with
which  connect  a  passage  in  Hist.  4,  22 :  inde  depromptse  silvis
lucisqiie  ferarum  imagines,  ut  cuique  genti  inire  proelium  mos  est.
Ann.  2,  12  :  Caesar  transgressus  Visurgim  indicio  perfugae
cognoscit  delectum  ab  Arminio  locum  pugnae,  convenisse  et
alias  nationes  in  silvam  Herculi  sacram.  Ann.  4,  73 :  mox
conpertum  a  transfugis,  nongentos  Komanorum  apud  lucum,
quern  Baduhennae  vocant,  pugna  in  posterum  extracta  con-
fectos ;  though  it  does  not  appear  that  this  grove  was  a  con
secrated  one.1  Ann.  1,  61  :  lucis  propinquis  barbarae  arae,  apud
quas  tribunes  mactaverant ;  conf.  2,  25  :  propinquo  luco  defossam
Varianae  legionis  aquilam  modico  praesidio  servari.  Hist.  4,  14 :
Civilis  primores  gentis  .  .  .  sacrum  in  nemus  vocatos.  These
expressions  can  be  matched  by  others  from  Claudian  three
centuries  later,  Cons.  Stilich.  1,  288  :

Ut  procul  Hercyniae  per  vasta  silentia  silvae
venari  tuto  liceat,  lucosquQ  vetusta
religione  truces,  et  robora  numinis  instar
larlarici  nostrae  feriant  impune  bipennes.
De  bello  Get.  545  :

liortantes  his  adde  dcos.     Non  somnia  nobis,
nee  volucres,  sed  clam  palam  vox  edita  luco  est :
'  rumpe  omnes,  Alarice,  moras  ! '

It  is  not  pure  nature- worship  that  we  are  told  of  here  ;  but  Tacitus
could  have  had  no  eye  for  the  '  mores  Germanorum/  if  their  most
essential  feature  had  escaped  him.  Gods  dwell  in  these  groves ;  no
images  (simulacra,  in  human  form)  are  mentioned  by  name  as  being
set  up,  no  temple  walls  are  reared.2  But  sacred  vessels  and  altars

himself  on  his  legs,  but  must  finish  the  fight  on  his  knees,  Danske  viser  1,  115 ;
so  in  certain  places  a  stranger's  carriage,  if  overturned,  must  not  be  set  upright
again,  RA.  554.  What  is  fabled  of  an  idol  called  Sompar  at  Gorlitz  (neue
lausitz.  monatsschr.  1805,  p.  1-18)  has  evidently  been  spun  out  of  this  passage
in  Tac.  ;  the  Semnones  are  placed  in  the  Lausitz  country,  as  they  had  been
previously  by  Aventin  (Fraiikf.  1580,  p.  27b),  who  only  puts  a  king  Schwab  in
the  place  of  Sompar.

1  Baduhenna,  perhaps  the  name  of  a  place,  like  Arduenna.     Miillenhoff
adds  Badvinna,  Patunna  (Haupts  zeitschr.  9,  241).

2  Brissonius  de  regno  Pers.  2,  28  ;  '  Persae  diis  suis  nulla  templa  vel  altaria
constituunt,  nulla  simulacra' ;  after  Herodot.  1,  131.


/ 1  TEMPLES.

stand  in  the  forest,  heads  of  animals  (ferarum  imagines)  hang  on
the  boughs  of  trees.  There  divine  worship  is  performed  and
sacrifice  offered,  there  is  the  folk-mote  and  the  assize,  everywhere  a
sacred  awe  and  reminiscence  of  antiquity.  Have  not  we  here
alak,  wih,  paro,  haruc  faithfully  portrayed  ?  How  could  such
technical  terms,  unless  they  described  an  organized  national
worship  presided  over  by  priests,  have  sprung  up  in  the  language,
and  lived  ?

During  many  centuries,  down  to  the  introduction  of  Christianity,
this  custom  endured,  of  venerating  deity  in  sacred  woods  and  trees.

I  will  here  insert  the  detailed  narrative  given  by  Wilibald
(t  786)  in  the  Vita  Bonifacii  (Canisius  II.  1,  242.  Pertz  2,  343)  of
the  holy  oak  of  Geismar  (on  the  Edder,  near  Fritzlar  in  Hesse).1
The  event  falls  between  the  years  725  and  731.  Is  autem  (Boni-
facius)  ...  ad  obsessas  ante  ea  Hessorum  metas  cum  consensu
Carli  ducis  (i.e.  of  Charles  Martel)  rediit.  turn  vero  Hessorum  jam
multi  catholica  fide  subditi  ac  septiformis  spiritus  gratia  confirmati
maims  impositionem  acceperunt,  et  alii  quidem,  nondum  animo
confortati,  intemeratae  fidei  documenta  integre  percipere  renuerunt,
alii  etiain  linguis  et  faucibus  clanculo,  alii  vero  aperte  sacrificdbant,
alii  vero  auspicia  et  divinationes,  praestigia  atque  incantationes
occulte,  alii  quidem  manifesto  exercebant,  alii  quippe  auspicia  et
auguria  intendebant,  diversosque  sacrificandi  ritus  incoluerunt,  alii
etiam,  quibus  mens  sanior  inerat,  omni  abjecta  gentilitatis  pro-
phanatione  nihil  horum  commiserunt.  quorum  consultu  atque
consilio  arborem  quandam  mirae  maynitudinis,  qu&Q  prisco  Pagan-
orum  vocdbulo  appellatur  robur  Jovis,  in  loco,  qui  dicitur  Gaesmere,
servis  Dei  secum  astantibus,  succidere  tentavit.  cumque  mentis
constantia  confortatus  arborem  succidisset,  magna  quippe  aderat
copia  Paganorum,  qui  et  inimicum  deorum  suorum  intra  se  diligen-
tissime  devotabant,  sed  ad  modicum  quidem  arbore  praecisa
confestim  immensa  roboris  moles,  divino  desuper  flatu  exagitata,
palmitum  confracto  culmine,  corruit,  et  quasi  super!  nutus  solatio
in  quatuor  etiam  partes  disrupta  est,  et  quatuor  ingentis  magnitu-
dinis  aequali  longitudine  trunci,  absque  fratrum  labore  astantium
apparuerunt.  quo  viso  prius  devotantes  Pagani  etiam  versa  vice
benedictionem  Domino,  pristina  abjecta  nialedictione,  credentes

1  A  shorter  account  of  the  same  in  the  annalist  Saxo,  p.  133.


GROVES.  73

reddiderunt.  Tune  autem  summae  sanctitatis  antistes  consilio  inito
cum  fratribus  ex  supradictae  arboris  materia *)  oratorium  construxit,
illudque  in  honore  S.  Petri  apostoli  dedicavit.  From  that  time
Christianity  had  in  this  place  a  seat  in  Hesse ;  hard  by  was  the
ancient  capital  of  the  nation,  '  Mattium  (Marburg),  id  genti  caput,'
Tac.  Ann.  1,  56  ;  which  continued  in  the  Mid.  Ages  to  be  the  chief
seat  of  government.  According  to  Landau,  the  oak  and  the  church
built  out  of  it  stood  on  the  site  of  St.  Peter's  church  at  Fritzlar.
The  whole  region  is  well  wooded  (see  Suppl.).

Not  unsimilar  are  some  passages  contained  in  the  Vita  S.
Amandi  (f  674),  on  the  wood  and  tree  worship  of  the  northern
Franks:  Acta  Bened.  sec.  2.  p.  714,  715,  718)  :  Amandus  audivit
pagum  esse,  cui  vocabulum  Gandavum,  cujus  loci  habitatores  ini-
quitas  diaboli  eo  circumquaque  laqueis  vehementer  irretivit,  ut
incolae  terrae  illius,  relicto  deo,  arbores  et  ligna  pro  deo  colerent,
atque  fana  vel  idola  adorarent. — Ubi  fana  destruebantur,  statim
monasteria  aut  ecclesias  construebat. — Amandus  in  pago  belvacense
verbum  domini  dum  praedicaret,  pervenit  ad  quendam  locum,  cui
vocabulum  est  Rossonto  juxta  Aronnam  fluvium  .  .  .  respondit
ilia,  quod  non  ob  aliam  causam  ei  ipsa  coecitas  evenisset,  nisi  quod
auguria  vel  idola  semper  coluerat.  insuper  ostendit  ei  locum,  in
quo  praedictum  idolum  adorare  consueverat,  scilicet  arborem,  quae
erat  daemoni  dedicate/,  .  .  f  nunc  igitur  accipe  securim  et  hanc
nefandam  arborem  quantocius  succidere  festina'.

Among  the  Saxons  and  Frisians  the  veneration  of  groves  lasted
much  longer.  At  the  beginning  of  the  llth  century,  bishop  Unwan
of  Bremen  (conf.  Adam.  Brem.  2,  33)  had  all  such  woods  cut  down
among  the  remoter  inhabitants  of  his  diocese  :  lucos  in  episcopatu
suo,  in  quibus  paludicolae  regionis  illius  errore  veteri  cum  profes-
sione  falsa  christianitatis  immolabant,  succidit;  Vita  Meinwerci,
cap-  22.  Of  the  holy  tree  in  the  Old  Saxon  Irminsijul  I  will  treat
in  ch.  VI.  Several  districts  of  Lower  Saxony  and  Westphalia
have  until  quite  recent  times  preserved  vestiges  of  holy  oaks,  to
which  the  people  paid  a  half  heathen  half  Christian  homage.  Thus,
in  the  principality  of  Minden,  on  Easter  Sunday,  the  young  people
of  both  sexes  used  with  loud  cries  of  joy  to  dance  a  reigen  (rig,

1  Other  MS.  have  '  mole  '  or  ( metallo  '.  A  brazen  image  on  the  oak  is  not
to  be  thought  of,  as  such  a  thing  would  have  been  alluded  to  in  what  precedes
or  follows.


74  TEMPLES.

circular  dance)  round  an  old  oak.1  In  a  thicket  near  the  village  of
Wormeln,  Paderborn,  stands  a  holy  oak,  to  which  the  inhabitants
of  Wormeln  and  Calenberg  still  make  a  solemn  procession  every
year.2

I  am  inclined  to  trace  back  to  heathenism  the  proper  name  of
Holy  Wood  so  common  in  nearly  all  parts  of  Germany.  It  is  not
likely  that  from  a  Christian  church  situated  in  a  wood,  the  wood
itself  would  be  named  holy ;  and  in  such  forests,  as  a  rule,  there  is
not  a  church  to  be  found.  Still  less  can  the  name  be  explained  by
the  royal  ban-forests  of  the  Mid.  Ages;  on  the  contrary,  these
forests  themselves  appear  to  have  sprung  out  of  heathen  groves,
and  the  king's  right  seems  to  have  taken  the  place  of  the  cultus
which  first  withdrew  the  holy  wood  from  the  common  use  of  the
people.  In  such  forests  too  there  used  to  be  sanctuaries  for  crimi
nals,  EA.  886-9.

An  old  account  of  a  battle  between  Franks  and  Saxons  at
Notteln  in  the  year  779  (Pertz  2,  377)  informs  us,  that  a  badly
wounded  Saxon  had  himself  secretly  conveyed  from  his  castle  into  a
holy  wood  :  Hie  vero  (Luibertus)  magno  curn  merore  se  in  castrum
recepit.  Ex  quo  post  aliquot  dies  mulier  egrotum  humeris  clam  in
sylvam  Sytheri,  quae  fuit  tliegathon  sacra,  nocte  portavit.  Vulnera
ibidem  lavans,  exterrita  clamore  effugit.  Ubi  multa  lamentatione
animam  expiravit.  The  strange  expression  thegathon  is  explained
by  T'  ayaOov  (the  good),  a  name  for  the  highest  divinity  (summus
et  princeps  omnium  deorum),  which  the  chronicler  borrowed  from
Macrobius's  somn.  Scip.  1,  2,  and  may  have  chosen  purposely,  to
avoid  naming  a  well-known  heathen  god  (see  Suppl.).  Sytheri,
the  name  of  the  wood,  seems  to  be  the  same  as  Sunderi  (southern),
a  name  given  to  forests  in  more  than  one  district,  e.g.  a  Sundernhart
in  Franconia  (Hofers  urk.  p.  308).  Did  this  heathen  hope  for  heal
ing  on  the  sacred  soil  ?  or  did  he  wish  to  die  there  ?

The  forest  called  Dat  hillige  holt  is  mentioned  by  a  document
in  Kindlinger's  Miinst.  beitr.  3,  638.  In  the  county  of  Hoya  there
stood  a  Hdligen-loh  (Pertz  2,  362).  A  long  list  of  Alsatian
documents  in  Schopflin  allude  to  the  holy  forest  near  Hagenau ;  no.
218  (A..D.  1065)  :  cum  foresto  heiligenforst  nominato  in  comitatu
Gerhardi  comitis  in  pago  Nortcowe.  no.  238  (1106) :  in  sylva

1  Weddigen's  westphal.  mag.  3,  712,

2  Spilckers  beitrage  2,  121.


GROVES.  75

heiligeforst.  no.  273  (1143)  :  praedium  Loubach  in  sacro  nemore
situm.  no.  297  (1158)  :  utantur  pascuis  in  sacra  silva.  no.  317
(1175) :  in  silva  sacra,  no.  402  (1215) :  in  sacra  silva.  no.  800  (1292):
conventum  in  konigesbriicken  in  Jieiligenforst.  no.  829  (1304)  :
nemus  nostrum  et  imperil  dictum  heiligvorst.  no.  851  (1310) :
pecora  in  foresta  nostra,  quae  dicitur  der  lieilige  forst,  pascere  et
tenere.  no.  1076  (1356)  :  porcos  tempore  glandium  nutriendos  in
silva  sacra.  The  alternating  words  '  forst,  silva,  nemus,'  are  enough
to  show  the  significance  of  the  term.  The  name  of  the  well-known
Dreieich  (Drieichahi)  is  probably  to  be  explained  by  the  heathen
worship  of  three  oaks  ;  a  royal  ban-forest  existed  there  a  long  time,
and  its  charter  (I,  498)  is  one  of  the  most  primitive.

The  express  allusion  to  Thuringia  and  Saxony  is  remarkable  in
the  following  lines  of  a  poem  that  seems  to  have  been  composed
soon  after  the  year  1200,  Eeinh.  F.  302  ;  the  wolf  sees  a  goat  on  a
tree,  and  exclaims  :

ich  sine  ein  obez  hangen,  I  see  a  fruit  hanging,

ez  habe  har  ode  borst ;  That  it  has  hair  or  bristles ;

in  einem  heiligen  vorste  In  any  holy  forest

ze  Diiringen  noch  ze  Sachseu        Of  Thuringia  nor  of  Saxony
enkimde  niht  gewahsen  There  could  not  grow

bezzer  obez  uf  rise.  Better  fruit  on  bough.

The  allusion  is  surely  to  sacrificed  animals,  or  firstfruits  of  the
chase,  hung  up  on  the  trees  of  a  sacred  wood  ?  Either  the  story  is
based  on  a  more  ancient  original,  or  may  not  the  poet  have  heard
tell  from  somewhere  of  heathenish  doings  going  on  in  his  own  day
among  Saxons  and  Thuringians  ?  (see  SuppL).

And  in  other  poems  of  the  Mid.  Ages  the  sacredness  of  the
ancient  forests  still  exerts  an  after-influence.  In  Alex.  5193  we
read  '  der  edele  wait  frone ' ;  and  we  have  inklings  now  and  again,
if  not  of  sacrifices  offered  to  sacred  trees,  yet  of  a  lasting  indestruc
tible  awe,  and  the  fancy  that  ghostly  beings  haunt  particular  trees.
Thus,  in  Ls.  2,  575,  misfortune,  like  a  demon,  sat  on  a  tree ;  and  in
Altd.  w.  3,  161  it  is  said  of  a  hollow  tree:

da  sint  heiligen  inne,  There  are  saints  in  there,

die  hcerent  aller  liute  bet.1         That   hear    all    people's  prayers

(see  SuppL).

1  From  the  notion  of  a  forest  temple  the  transition  is  easy  to  paying  divine
honours  to  a  single  tree.  Festus  has  :  delubrum  fustis  delibratus  (staff  with


76  TEMPLES.

Still  more  unmistakably  does  this  forest  cultus  prevail  in  the
North,  protected  by  the  longer  duration  of  heathenism.  The  great
sacrifice  at  Ledera  described  by  Dietmar  (see  p.  48)  was  performed
in  the  island  which,  from  its  even  now  magnificent  beech- woods,
bore  the  name  of  Scelundr,  sea-grove,  and  was  the  finest  grove  in  all
Scandinavia.  The  Swedes  in  like  manner  solemnized  their  festival
of  sacrifice  in  a  grove  near  Upsala ;  Adam  of  Bremen  says  of  the
animals  sacrificed:  Corpora  suspenduntur  in  lucum  qui  proximus
est  templo ;  is  enim  lucus  tarn  sacer  est  gentibus,  ut  singulae
arbor es  ejus  ex  morte  vel  tabo  immolatorum  divinae  credantur.  Of
HlotJr  HeiSreksson  we  are  told  in  the  Hervararsaga  cap.  16
(fornald.  sog.  1,  491),  that  he  was  born  with  arms  and  horse  in  the
Iwly  wood  (a  mork  hinni  helgu).  In  the  grove  Glasislundr  a  bird
sits  on  the  boughs  and  demands  sacrifices,  a  temple  and  gold-horned
cows,  Saem.  140-1.  The  sacred  trees  of  the  Edda,  Yggdrasil  and
Mimamei&r,  Ssem.  109a,  hardly  need  reminding  of.

Lastly,  the  agreement  of  the  Slav,  Prussian,  Finnish  and  Celtic
paganisms  throws  light  upon  our  own,  and  tends  to  confirm  it.
Dietmar  of  Merseburg  (Pertz  5,  812)  affirms  of  the  heathen  temple
at  Eiedegost :  quam  undique  sylva  ab  incolis  intacta  et  venerabilis
circumdat  magna ;  (ibid.  816)  he  relates  how  his  ancestor  Wibert
about  the  year  1008  rooted  up  a  grove  of  the  Slavs  :  lucum  Zuti-
bure  dictum,  ab  accolis  ut  deum  in  omnibus  honoratum,  et  ab  aevo
antiquo  nunquam  violatum,  radicitus  eruens,  sancto  martyri
Eomano  in  eo  ecclesiam  construxit.  Zutibure  is  for  Sveti  bor  —
holy  forest,  from  bor  (fir),  pine-barren ;  a  Merseburg  document  of
1012  already  mentions  an  '  ecclesia  in  Scutibure,'  Zeitschr.  f.
archivkunde,  1,  162,  An  ON.  saga  (Fornm.  sog.  11,  382)  names  a
Uotlundr  (sacrificial  grove)  at  Strsela,  called  Boku,  Helmold  1,  1
says  of  the  Slavs :  usque  hodie  profecto  inter  illos,  cum  cetera

bark  peeled  off)  quern  venerabantur  pro  deo.  Names  given  to  particular  trees
are  at  the  same  time  names  of  goddesses,  e.g.  ON.  Hlin,  Gna.  it  is  worthy  of
notice,  that  the  heathen  idea  of  divine  figures  on  trees  has  crept  into  Christian
legends,  so  deeply  rooted  was  tree  worship  among  the  people.  I  refer  doubters
to  the  story  of  the  Tyrolese  image  of  grace,  which  grew  up  in  a  forest  tree
(Deutsche  sagen,  no.  348).  In  Carinthia  you  find  Madonna  figures  fixed  on  the
trees  in  gloomy  groves  (Sartoris  reise  2,  165).  Of  like  import  seem  to  be  the
descriptions  of  wonderful  maidens  sitting  inside  hollow  trees,  or  perched  on  the
boughs  (Marienkind,  hausmarchen  no.  3.  Romance  de  la  infantina,  see  ch.
XVI.).  Madonna  in  the  wood,  Mar.  legend.  177.  Many  oaks  with  Madonnas
in  Normandy,  Bosquet  196-7.


GROVES.  77

onmia  communia  sint  cum  nostris,  solus  prohibetur  accessus  lucorum
ac  fontium,  quos  autumant  pollui  christianorum  access  11.  A  song
in  the  Koniginhof  MS.  p.  72  speaks  of  the  grove  (hain,  Boh.  hai,
hag,  Pol.  gay,  Sloven,  gaj ;  conf.  gaius,  gahajus,  Lex  Eoth.  324,
kaheius,  Lex  Bajuv.  21,  6)  from  which  the  Christians  scared  away
the  holy  sparrow.1  The  Esth.  sallo,  Finn,  salo  means  a  holy  wood,
especially  a  meadow  with  thick  underwood ;  the  national  god  Thara-
pila  is  described  by  Henry  the  Letton  (ad.  ann.  1219) :  in  confmio
Wironiae  erat  mons  et  silva  pulcherrima,  in  quo  dicebant  indigenae
magnum  deum  Osiliensium  natum  qui  Tharapila2  vocatur,  et  de
loco  illo  in  Osiliam  volasse, — in  the  form  of  a  bird  ?  (see  Suppl.).
To  the  Old  Prussians,  Romove  was  the  most  sacred  spot  in  the  land,
and  a  seat  of  the  gods  ;  there  stood  their  images  on  a  holy  oak  hung
with  cloths.  No  unconsecrated  person  was  allowed  to  set  foot  in
the  forest,  no  tree  to  be  felled,  not  a  bough  to  be  injured,  not  a
beast  to  be  slain.  There  were  many  such  sacred  groves  in  other
parts  of  Prussia  and  Lithuania.3

The  Vita  S.  Germani  Autisiodorensis  (b.  3  78,  d.  448)  written
by  Constantius  as  early  as  473  contains  a  striking  narrative  of  a
peartree  which  stood  in  the  middle  of  Auxerre  and  was  honoured
by  the  heathen.4  As  the  Burgundians  did  not  enter  Gaul  till  the
beginning  of  the  5th  century,  there  is  not  likely  to  be  a  mixture  in
it  of  German  tradition.  But  even  if  the  story  is  purely  Celtic,  it
deserves  a  place  here,  because  it  shows  how  widely  the  custom
prevailed  of  hanging  the  heads  of  sacrificial  beasts  on  trees.5  Eo
tempore  (before  400)  territorium  Autisiodorensis  urbis  visitatione
propria  gubernabat  Germanus.  Cui  mos  erat  tirunculorum  potius
industriis  indulgere,  quam  christianae  religioni  operam  dare,  is
ergo  assidue  venatui  invigilans  ferarum  copiam  insidiis  atque  artis
strenuitate  frequentissime  capiebat.  Erat  autem  arbor  pirus  in


1  Brzetislav  burnt  down  the  heathen  groves  and  trees  of  the  Bohemians  in
1093,  Pelzel  1,  76.     The  Poles  called  a  sacred  grove  rok  and  uroczysko,  conf.
Russ.  roshtcha,   grove  [root  rek  rok  =  fari,  fatum  ;  roshtcha  is  from  rosti,  rasti
=  grow].     On  threat  of  hostile  invasion,  they  cut  rods  (wicie)  from  the  grove,
and  sent  them  round  to  summon  their  neighbours.     Mickiewicz  1,  56.

2  Conf.  Turupid  in  Fornm.  sog.  11,  385;  but  on  Slav  nations  conf.  Schief-
ner  on  Castren  329.

3  Joh.  Voigts  gesch.  Preussens  1,  595 — 597.

4  Acta  sanctor.  Bolland.  July  31,  p.  202  ;  conf.  Legenda  aurea,  cap.  102.

5  Huic  (Marti)  praedae  primordia  vovebantur,  huic  truncis  susptndebantur
exuviae,  Jornandes  cap.  5.


78  TEMPLES.

urbe  media,  amcenitate  gratissima  :  ad  cujus  ramusculos  ferarum  ab
eo  deprehensarum  capita  pro  admiratione  venationis  nimiae  depen-
debant.  Quern  Celebris  ejusdem  civitatis  Amator  episcopus  his
frequens  compellebat  eloquiis :  '  desine,  quaeso,  vir  honoratorum
splendidissime,  haec  jocularia,  quae  Christianis  offensa,  Paganis  vero
imitanda  sunt,  exercere.  hoc  opus  idololatriae  cultura  est,  non  chris-
tianse  elegantissimae  disciplinae/  Et  licet  hoc  indesinenter  vir  deo
dignus  perageret,  ille  tamen  nullo  modo  admonenti  se  adquiescere
voluit  aut  obedire.  vir  autem  domini  iterum  atque  iteruni  eum  horta-
batur,  ut  non  solum  a  consuetudine  male  arrepta  discederet,  verum
etiam  et  ipsam  arlorem,  ne  Christianis  offendiculum  esset,  radici-
tus  exstirparet.  sed  ille  nullatenus  aurem  placidam  applicare  voluit
admonenti.  In  hujus  ergo  persuasionis  tempore  quodam  die  Ger-
manus  ex  urbe  in  praedia  sui  juris  discessit.  tune  beatus  Amator
opportunitatem  opperiens  sacrilcc/am  arborem  cum  caudicibus  ab-
scidit,  et  ne  aliqua  ejus  incredulis  esset  memoria  igni  concreman-
dam  illico  deputavit.  oscilla1}  vero,  quae  tanquam  tropliaea  cujus-
dam  certaminis  umbram  dependentia  ostentabant,  longius  a  civitatis
terminis  projici  praecipit.  Protinus  vero  fama  gressus  suos  ad
aures  German!  retorquens,  dictis  animum  incendit,  atque  iram  suis
suasionibus  exaggerans  ferocem  effecit,  ita  ut  oblitus  sanctae
religionis,  cujus  jam  fuerat  ritu  atque  munere  insignitus,  mortem
beatissimo  viro  minitaret.

A  poem  of  Herricus  composed  about  876  gives  a  fuller  descrip
tion  of  the  idolatrous  peartree  :

altoque  et  lato  stabat  gratissima  quondam
urbe  pirus  media,  populo  spectabilis  omni ;
non  quia  pendentum  flavebat  honore  pirorum,
nee  quia  perpetuae  vernabat  munere  frondis :

1  Virg.  Georg.  2,  388  :  tibique  (Bacche)  oscilla  ex  alta  suspendunt  mollia
pinu.  In  the  story,  however,  it  is  not  masks  that  are  hung  up,  but  real  heads
of  beasts;  are  the  ferarum  imagines  in  Tac.  Hist.  4,  22  necessarily  images  ?
Does  oscilla  mean  capita  oscillantia  ?  It  appears  that  when  they  hung  up  the
heads,  they  propped  open  the  mouth  with  a  stick,  conf.  Isengr.  (345.  Reinardus
3,  293  (see  Suppi).  Nailing  birds  of  prey  to  the  gate  of  a  burg  or  barn  is  well
known,  and  is  practised  to  this  day.  Hanging  up  horses'  heads  was  mentioned
on  p.  47.  The  Grimnismal  10  tells  us,  in  Corn's  mansion  there  hung  a  wolf
outside  the  door,  and  over  that  an  eagle ;  were  these  mere  simulacra  and  insignia  ?
Witechind  says,  the  Saxons,  when  sacrificing,  set  up  an  eagle  over  the  gate:  Ad
orientalem  pertain  ponuntaquilam,  aramque  Victoriae  construentes  ;  this  eagle
seems  to  have  been  her  emblem.  A  dog  hung  up  over  the  threshold  is  also
mentioned,  Lex.  Alain.  102.


BUILDINGS.  79

sed  deprensarum  passim  capita  alta  ferarum
arboris  obscoenae  patulis  Jiaerentia  ramis
praebebant  vano  plausum  spectacula  vulgo.
horrebant  illic  trepidi  ramalia  cervi
et  dirum  frendentis  apri,  fera  spicula,  dentes,
acribus  exitium  meditantes  forte  molossis.
tune  quoque  sic  variis  arbos  induta  tropaeis
fundebat  rudibus  lascivi  semina  risus.

It  was  not  the  laughter  of  the  multitude  that  offended  the  Christian
priests ;  they  saw  in  the  practice  a  performance,  however  degene
rate  and  dimmed,  of  heathen  sacrifices.1

Thus  far  we  have  dwelt  on  the  evidences  which  go  to  prove
that  the  oldest  worship  of  our  ancestors  was  connected  with  sacred
forests  and  trees.

At  the  same  time  it  cannot  be  doubted,  that  even  in  the  earliest
times  there  were  temples  built  for  single  deities,  and  perhaps  rude
images  set  up  inside  them.  In  the  lapse  of  centuries  the  old  forest
worship  may  have  declined  and  been  superseded  by  the  structure
of  temples,  more  with  some  populations  and  less  with  others.  In
fact,  we  come  across  a  good  many  statements  so  indefinite  or  incom
plete,  that  it  is  impossible  to  gather  from  them  with  any  certainty
whether  the  expressions  used  betoken  the  ancient  cultus  or  one
departing  from  it.

The  most  weighty  and  significant  passages  relating  to  this  part
of  the  subject  seem  to  be  the  following  (see  SuppL) :

Tac.  Germ.  40  describes  the  sacred  grove  and  the  worship  of
Mother  Earth ;  when  the  priest  in  festival  time  has  carried  the
goddess  round  among  the  people,  he  restores  her  to  her  sanctuary :
satiatam  conversatione  mortalium  deam  templo  reddit.

Tac.  ann.  1,  51  :  Csesar  avidas  legiones,  quo  latior  populatio
foret,  quatuor  in  cuneos  dispertit,  quinquaginta  millium  spatium
ferro  flammisque  pervastat ;  non  sexus,  non  aetas  miserationem


1  St.  Benedict  found  at  Montecassino  vetustissimum  fanum,  in  quo  ex
antique  more  gentilium  a  stulto  rusticano  populo  Apollo  colebatur,  circumquaque
enim  in  cultum  daemoniorum  hid  succreverant,  in  quibus  adhuc  eodem  tempore
infidelium  insana  multitude  sacrificiis  sacrilegis  insudabat.  Greg.  Mag.  dialogi
2,  8.  These  were  not  German  heathens,  but  it  proves  the  custom  to  have  been
the  more  universal.


80  TEMPLES.

attulit:  profana  simul  et  sacra}  et  celeberrimum  illis  gentibus
templum,  quod  Tanfanae1  vocabant,  solo  aequantur.  The  nation  to
which  this  temple  belonged  were  the  Marsi  and  perhaps  some
neighbouring  ones  (see  Suppl.).

Vita  S.  Eugendi  abbatis  Jurensis  (f  circ.  510),  auctore  monacho
Condatescensi  ipsius  discipulo  (in  Actis  sanctor.  Bolland.  Jan.  1,  p.
50,  and  in  Mabillon,  acta  Ben.  sec.  1,  p.  570) :  Sanctus  igitur
famulus  Christi  Eugendus,  sicut  beatorum  patrum  Bomani  et
Lupicini  in  religione  discipulus,  ita  etiam  natalibus  ac  provincia
extitit  indigena  atque  concivis.  ortus  nempe  est  haud  longe  a  vico
cui  vetusta  paganitas  ob  celebritatem  clausuramque  fortissimam
superstitiosissimi  templi  Gallica  lingua  Isarnodori,  id  est,  ferrei  ostii
indidit  nomen.  :  quo  mine  quoque  in  loco,  ddubris  ex  parte  jam
dirutis,  sacratissime  micant  coelestis  regni  culmina  dicata  Christi-
colis;  atque  inibi  pater  sanctissimae  prolis  judicio  pontifical!
plebisque  testimonio  extitit  in  presbyterii  dignitate  sacerdos.  If
Eugendus  was  born  about  the  middle  of  the  5th  century,  and  his
father  already  was  a  priest  of  the  Christian  church  which  had  been
erected  on  the  site  of  the  heathen  temple,  heathenism  can  at  the
latest  have  lingered  there  only  in  the  earlier  half  of  that  century,
at  whose  commencement  the  West  Goths  passed  through  Italy  into
Gaul.  Gallica  lingua  here  seems  to  be  the  German  spoken  by  the
invading  nations,  in  contradistinction  to  the  Eomana ;  the  name  of
the  place  is  almost  pure  Gothic,  eisarnadaiiri,  still  more  exactly  it
might  be  Burgundian,  isarnodori.2  Had  either  West  Goths  or
Burgundians,  or  perhaps  even  some  Alamanns  that  had  penetrated
so  far,  founded  the  temple  in  the  fastnesses  and  defiles  of  the  Jura?3
The  name  is  well  suited  to  the  strength  of  the  position  and  of  the
building,  which  the  Christians  in  part  retained  (see  Suppl.).

A  Constitutio  Childeberti  I  of  about  554  (Pertz  3,  1)  contains
the  following :  Praecipientes,  ut  quicunque  admoniti  de  agro  suo,
ubicumque  fuerint  simulacra  constructa  vel  idola  daemoni  dedicata

1  An  inscription  found  in  Neapolitan  territory,  but  supposed  by  Orelli
2053  to  have  been  made  by  Ligorius,  has  '  Tamfanae  sacrum  *  (Gudii  inscript.
untiq.  p.  Iv.  11,  de  Wai  p.  188)  ;  the  word  is  certainly  German,  and  formed  like
Hludana,  Sigann  CSeqiwiia),  Liutana  (Lngdtmum),  Rabana  (Ravenna),  &c.

2  Yet  the  Celtic  forms  also  are  not  far  removed,  Ir.  iaran,  Wei.  haiarn,
Armor,  uarn  (ferrum)  ;  Ir.  doras,  Wei.  dor  (porta)  :  haearndor  =  iron  gate,
quoted  in  Davies's  Brit,  Mythol.  pp.  120,  560.

3  Frontier  mountains  held   sacred  and  made  places  of  sacrifice  by  some
nations  ;  Hitters  erdkunde  1,  aufl.  2,  79.  vol.  2,  p.  903.


BUILDINGS.  81

ab  hominibus,  factum  non  statim  abjecerint  vel  sacerdotibus  haec
destruentibus  prohibuerint,  datis  fidejussoribus  non  aliter  discedant
nisi  in  nostris  obtutibus  praesententur.

Vita  S.  Eadegundis  (•(•  587)  the  wife  of  Clotaire,  composed  by  a
contemporary  nun  Baudonivia  (acta  Bened.  sec.  1,  p.  327) :  Dum
iter  ageret  (Eadegundis)  secular!  pompa  se  comitante,  interjecta
longinquitate  terrae  ac  spatio,  fanum  quod  a  Francis  colebatur  in
itinere  beatae  reginae  quantum  miliario  uno  proximum  erat.  hoc
ilia  audiens  jussit  famulis  fanum  igne  comburi,  iniquum  judicans
Deum  coeli  contemn!  et  diabolica  machinamenta  venerari.  Hoc
audientes  Franc!  uni versa  multitudo  cum  gladiis  et  fustibus  vel
omni  fremitu  conabantur  defender©,  sancta  vero  regina  immobilis
perseverans  et  Christum  in  pectore  gestans,  equum  quern  sedebat
in  antea  (i.e.  ulterius)  non  movit  antequam  et  fanum  perureretur
et  ipsa  orante  inter  se  populi  pacem  firmarent.  The  situation  of
the  temple  she  destroyed  I  do  not  venture  to  determine;  Eadegund
was  journeying  from  Thuringia  to  France,  and  somewhere  on  that
line,  not  far  from  the  Ehine,  the  fanum  may  be  looked  for.

Greg.  Tur.  vitae  patrum  6  :  Eunte  rege  (Theoderico)  in  Agrip-
pinam  urbem,  et  ipse  (S.  Gallus)  simul  abiit.  erat  autem  ibi  fanum
quoddam  diversis  ornamentis  refertum;  in  quo  barbaris  (1.  Barbaras)
opima  libamina  exhibens  usque  ad  vomitum  cibo  potuque  repleba-
tur.  ibi  et  simulacra  ut  deum  adorans,  membra,  secundum  quod
unumquemque  dolor  attigisset,  sculpebat  in  ligno.  quod  ubi  S.
Gallus  audivit,  statim  illuc  cum  uno  tantum  clerico  properat,  ac-
censoque  igne,  cum  nullus  ex  stultis  Paganis  adesset,  ad  fanum
applicat  et  succendit.  at  illi  videntes  fumum  delubri  ad  coelum
usque  conscendere,  auctorem  incendii  quaerunt,  inventumque  eva-
ginatis  gladiis  prosequuntur ;  ille  vero  in  fugam  versus  aulae  se
regiae  condidit.  verum  postqnam  rex  quae  acta  fuerant  Paganis
minantibus  recognovit,  blandis  eos  sermonibus  lenivit.  This  Gallus
is  distinct  from  the  one  who  appears  in  Alamannia  half  a  century
later ;  he  died  about  553,  and  by  the  king  is  meant  Theoderic  I  of
Austrasia.

Vita  S.  Lupi  Senonensis  (Duchesne  1,  562.  Bouquet  3,  491) :
Rex  Chlotarius  virum  Dei  Lupum  episcopum  retrusit  in  pago  quodam
Jeustriae  nuncupante  Vinemaco  (le  Vimeu),  traditum  duci  pagano
(i.e.  duci  terrae),  nomine  Boson!  Landegisilo  (no  doubt  a  Frank)
quern  ille  direxit  in  villa  quae  dicitur  Andesagina  super  fluvium


82  TEMPLES.

Auciam,  ubi  erant  templet  fanatica  a  decurionibus  culta.  (A.D.
614.)  Andesagina  is  Ansenrie,  Aucia  was  afterwards  called  la
Bresle,  Briselle.

Beda,  hist.  eccl.  2,  13,  relates  how  the  Northumbrian  king
Eadwine,  baptized  627,  slain  633,  resolved  after  mature  consultation
with  men  of  understanding  to  adopt  Christianity,  and  was  especially
made  to  waver  in  his  ancient  faith  by  Coin  (Ccefi)  his  chief  heathen
priest  himself:  Cumque  a  praefato  pontifice  sacrorum  suorum
quaereret,  quis  aras  et  fana  idolorum  cum  septis  quibus  erant  cir-
cumdata  primus  profanare  deberet  ?  respondit :  ego.  quis  enim  ea,
quae  per  stultitiam  colui,  nunc  ad  exemplum  omnium  aptius  quam
ipse  per  sapientiam  mihi  a  Deo  vero  donatam  destruam  ?  .  .  .
Accinctus  ergo  gladio  accepit  lanceam  in  maim  et  ascendens
emissarium  regis  (all  three  unlawful  and  improper  things  for  a
heathen  priest),  pergebat  ad  idola.  quod  aspiciens  vulgus  aesti-
mabat  eum  insanire.  nee  distulit  ille.  mox  ut  appropinquabat  ad
fanum,  profanare  illud,  injecta  in  eo  lancea  quam  tenebat,  multum-
que  gavisus  de  agnitione  veri  Dei  cultus,  jussit  sociis  destruere  ac
succendere  fanum  cum  omnibus  septis  suis.  ostenditur  autem  locus
ille  quondam  idolorum  non  longe  ab  Eboraco  ad  orientem  ultra
amnem  Dorowentionem  et  vocatur  hodie  Godmundinga  ham,  ubi
pontifex  ipse,  inspirante  Deo  vero,  polluit  ac  destruxit  eas,  quas
ipse  sacraverat,  aras.1

Vita  S.  Bertuffi  Bobbiensis  (f  640)  in  Acta  Bened.  sec.  2,  p.
164 :  Ad  quandam  villam  Iriae  fluvio  adjacentem  accessit,  ubi
fanum  quoddam  arboribus  consitum  videns  allatum  ignem  ei  admovit,
congestis  in  modum  pirae  lignis.  Id  vero  cernentes  fani  cultores
Meroveum  apprehensum  diuque  fustibus  caesum  et  ictibus  con-
tusum  in  fluvium  illud  demergere  conantur. — The  Iria  runs  into
the  Po  ;  the  event  occurs  among  Lombards.

Walafridi  Strabonis  vita  S.  Galli  (f  640)  in  actis  Bened.  sec.  2
p.  219,  220 :  Venerunt  (S.  Columbanus  et  Gallus)  infra  partes
Alemanniae  ad  fluvium,  qui  Lindimacus  vocatur,  juxta  quern  ad
superiora  tendentes  pervenerunt  Turicinum.  cumque  per  littus
ambulantes  venissent  ad  caput  lacus  ipsius,  in  locum  qui  Tucconia
dicitur,  placuit  illis  loci  qualitas  ad  inhabitandum.  porro  homines


1  The  A.S.  translation  renders  arae  by  wigbed  (see  p.  67),  fana  by  heargas,
idola  by  deofolgild,  septa  once  by  hegas  (hedges),  and  the  other  time  by  getymbro.
The  spear  hurled  at  the  hearg  gave  the  signal  for  its  demolition.


BUILDINGS.  83

ibidem  commanentes  crudeles  erant  et  impii,  simulacra  colentcs,
idola  sacrificiis  venerantes,  observantes  auguria  et  divinationes  et
multa  quae  contraria  sunt  cultui  divino  superstitiosa  sectantes.
Sancti  igitur  homines  cum  coepissent  inter  illos  habitare,  docebant
eos  adorare  Patrem  et  Filium  et  Spiritum  sanctum,  et  custodire
fidei  veritatem.  Beatus  quoque  Gallus  sancti  viri  discipulus  zelo
pietatis  armatus  fana,  in  quibus  daemoniis  sacrificdbant,  igni  suc-
cendit  et  quaecumque  invenit  oblata  demersit  in  lacum. — Here
follows  an  important  passage  which  will  be  quoted  further  on ;  it
says  expressly  :  cumque  ejusdem  templi  solemnitas  ageretur.

Jonae  Bobbiensis  vita  S.  Columbani  (•[•  615)  cap.  17.  in  act.
Bened.  2,  12.  13  :  Cumque  jam  multorum  monachorum  societate
densaretur,  coepit  cogitare,  ut  potiorem  locum  in  eadem  ereino
(i.e.  Vosago  saltu)  quaereret,  quo  monasterium  construeret.  in-
venitque  castrum  firmissimo  munimine  olim  fuisse  outturn,  a  supra
dicto  loco  distans  plus  minus  octo  millibus,  quern  prisca  tempora
Luxovium  nuncupabant,  ibique  aquae  calidae  cultu  eximio  constru-
ctae  habebantur.  ibi  imaginum  lapidearum  densitas  vicina  saltus
densabat,1  quas  cultu-  miserdbili  rituque  profano  vetusta  Payanorum
tempora  honorabant. — This  Burgundian  place  then  (Luxeuil  in
Tranche  Comte,  near  Vesoul)  contained  old  Eoman  thermae
adorned  with  statues.  Had  the  Burgundian  settlers  connected
their  own  worship  with  these  ?  The  same  castrum  is  spoken  of
in  the

Vita  S.  Agili  Eesbacensis  (f  650),  in  Acta  Ben.  sec.  2,  p.  317  :
Castrum  narnque  intra  vasta  eremi  septa,  quae  Vosagus  dicitur,
fuerat  fanaticorum  cultui  olim  dedicatum,  sed  tune  ad  solum  usque
dirutum,  quod  hujus  saltus  incolae,  quamquam  ignoto  praesagio,
Luxovium  [qu.  lux  ovium?]  nominavere.  A  church  is  then  built
on  the  heathen  site :  ut,  ubi  olim  prophano  ritu  veteres  coluerunt
fana,  ibi  Christ!  figerentur  arae  et  erigerentur  vexilla,  habitaculum
Deo  militantium,  quo  adversus  aerias  potestates  dimicarent  superni
Regis  tirones.  p.  319  :  Ingressique  (Agilus  cum  Eustasio)  hujus
itineris  viam,  juvante  Christo,  Warascos  praedicatori  accelerant,
qui  agrestium  fanis  decepti,  quos  vulgi  faunos  vocant,  gentilium

1  The  multitude  of  statues  made  the  adjoining  wood  thicker  ?  Must  we  not
supply  an  ace.  copiam  or  speciem  after  imag.  lapid.  1  [vicina  saltus  densabat
evidently  means  'crowded  the  adjoining  part  of  the  wood  .  So  in  Ovid:  densae
foliis  "buxi. — TRANS.]


84  TEMPLES,

quoque  errore  seducti,  in  perfidiam  devenerant,  Fotini  sen  Bonosi
virus  infecti,  quos,  errore  depulso,  matri  ecclesiae  reconciliatos  veros
Christi  fecere  servos.

Vita  S.  Willibrordi  (f  789),  in  Acta  Bened.  sec.  3,  p.  609 :
Pervenit  in  confinio  Fresonum  et  Danorum  ad  quandam  insulam,
quae  a  quodam  deo  suo  Fosite  ab  accolis  terrae  Fositesland  appel-
latur,  quia  in  ea  ejusdem  dei  fana  fuere  constructa.  Qui  locus  a
paganis  tanta  veneratione  habebatur,  ut  nil  in  eo  vel  animalium
ibi  pascentium  vel  aliarum  quarumlibet  rerum  gentilium  quisquam
tangere  audebat,  nee  etiam  a  fonte  qui  ibi  ebulliebat  aquam  haurire
nisi  tacens  praesumebat.

Vita  S.  Willehadi  (f  793),  in  Pertz  2,  381 :  Unde  contigit,  ut
quidam  discipulorum  ejus,  divino  compuncti  ardore, /&7ia  in  morem
gentilium  circumquaque  erecta  coepissent  evertere  et  ad  nihilum,
prout  poterant,  redigere ;  quo  facto  barbari,  qui  adhuc  forte
perstiterant,  furore  nimio  succensi,  irruerunt  super  eos  repente  cum
impetu,  volentes  eos  funditus  interimere,  ibique  Dei  famulum
fustibus  caesum  multis  admodum  plagis  affecere. — This  happened
in  the  Frisian  pagus  Thrianta  (Drente)  before  779.

Vita  Ludgeri  (beginning  of  the  9th  cent.)  1,8 :  (In  Frisia)  Paganos
asperrimos  .  .  .  mitigavit,  ut  sua  ilium  delubra  destruere  corarn
oculis  paterentur.  Inventum  in  fanis  aurum  et  argentum  plurimum
Albricus  in  aerarium  regis  intulit,  accipiens  et  ipse  praecipiente
Carolo  portionem  ex  illo.— Conf.  the  passage  cited  p.  45  from  the
Lex  Frisionum.

Folcuini  gesta  abb.  Lobiensium  (circ.  980),  in  Pertz  6,  55  :  Est
locus  intra  terminos  pagi,  quern  veteres,  a  loco  ubi  superstitiosa
(jentilitas  fanum  Marti  sacraverat,  Fanum  Martinse  dixeruut. — This
is  Farnars  in  Hainault,  not  far  from  Valenciennes.

In  all  probability  the  sanctuary  of  Tanfana  which  Germanicus
demolished  in  A.D.  14  was  not  a  mere  grove,  but  a  real  building,
otherwise  Tacitus  would  hardly  have  called  the  destruction  of  it  a
'  levelling  to  the  ground '.  During  the  next  three  or  four  centuries
we  are  without  any  notices  of  heathen  temples  in  Germany.  In
the  5th,  6th,  7th,  and  8th  centuries,  as  I  have  shown,  we  come
upon  castra,  tcmpla,  fana  among  Burgundians,  Franks,  Lombards,
Alamanns,  Anglo-Saxons,  and  Frisians.  By  fanum  (whence  fana-
ticus)  seems  often  to  have  been  understood  a  building  of  smaller


BUILDINGS.  85

extent,  and  by  templum  one  of  larger ;  the  Indiculus  superstit.  xxxi.
4  has :  '  de  casulis  (huts),  i.e.  fanis '  (see  Suppl.).  I  admit  that
some  of  the  authorities  cited  leave  it  doubtful  whether  German
heathen  temples-  be  intended,  they  might  be  Eoman  ones  which
had  been  left  standing ;  in  which  case  there  is  room  for  a  twofold
hypothesis  :  that  the  dominant  German  nation  had  allowed  certain
communities  in  their  midst  to  keep  up  the  Eoman-Gallic  cultus,  or
that  they  themselves  had  taken  possession  of  Eoman  buildings  for
the  exercise  of  their  own  religion1  (see  Suppl.).  No  thorough
investigation  has  yet  been  made  of  the  state  of  religion  among  the
Gauls  immediately  before  and  after  the  irruption  of  the  Germans  ;
side  by  side  with  the  converts  there  were  still,  no  doubt,  some
heathen  Gauls;  it  is  difficult  therefore  to  pronounce  for  either
lypothesis,  cases  of  both  kinds  may  have  co-existed.  So  much  for
ihe  doubtful  authorities  ;  but  it  is  not  all  of  them  that  leave  us  in
any  doubt.  If  the  Tanfana  temple  could  be  built  by  Germans,  we
can  suppose  the  same  of  the  Alamann,  the  Saxon  and  the  Frisian
mples;  and  what  was  done  in  the  first  century,  is  still  more  likely
to  have  been  done  in  the  2nd,  3rd,  and  4th.

Built  Temples  must  in  early  times  have  been  named  in  a  variety
of  ways  (see  Suppl.) :  OHG.  AS.  OS.  ON".  Jwf,  aula,  atrium  ;2—
OHG.  holla,  templum  (Hymn.  24,  8),  AS.  heal,  ON.  holl  (conf.  hallr,
lapis,  Goth,  hallus); — OHG.  sal,  ON.  salr,  AS.  sele,  OS.seli,  aula;—
AS.  reced,  domus,  basilica  (Ca^dm.  145,  11.  150,  16.  219,  23),  OS.
•aloud  (Hel.  114,  17.  130,  20.  144,  4.  155,  20),  an  obscure  word  not
found  in  the  other  dialects ; — OHG.  petaptir,  delubrum  (Drat.  1,


1  As  the  vulgar  took  Roman  fortifications  for  devil's  dikes,  it  was  natural
to  associate  with  Roman  castella  the  notion  of  idolatry.     Rupertus  Tuitiensis
't  1135)  in  his  account  of  the  fire  of  1128  that  levelled  such  a  castellum  at
Deuz,  which  had  been  adapted  to  Christian  worship,  informs  us  that  some
thought  it  was  built  by  Julius  Caesar,  others  by  Constantius  and  Constantine.
In  the  emperor  Otto's  time.  St.  Mary  appears  by  night  to  archbishop  Heribert:
*  surge,  et  Tuitiense  castrum  petens,  locum  in  eodem  mundari  praecipe,  ibique
monasterium   Deo   mihique  et  omnibus  sanctis  constitue,  nt,  ubi  quondam
habitavit   peccatum   et   cultus    daemonum,   ibi    justitia    regnet    et    memoria
sanctorum/  with  more  of  the  like,  in  the  Vita  Heriberti  cap.  15.     Conf.  the
fanum  at  Cologne  above,  p.  81.

2  The  asylum  that  atrium  and  temple  offered  within  their  precincts  is  in
ON.  gri&asta&r,  OHG.  frtthof,   OS.    vrtthob,   Hel.    151,  2,  9.     MHG.  vrone
vrithof,  Nib.  1795,  2  ;  not  at  all  our  friedhof  [but  conn,  with  frei,  free],  conf.
Goth,  freidjan,    OS.    fridon   (parcere).      That    the   constitution   of    the    Old
German  sanctuaries  was  still  tor  tl^e  most  part  heathenish,  is  discussed  in  RA.


86  TEMPLES.

195*)1; — to  which  were  afterwards  added  petahds,  minores  ecclesiae
(Gl.  sletst.  21,  32)  and  chirihhd,  AS.  cyrice.  The  MHG.  poets  like
to  use  betehus  of  a  heathen  temple  as  opposed  to  a  Christian  church
(En.  2695.  Earl.  339,  11.28.  342,6.  Athis  D  93.  Herb.  952.  Wigal.
8308.  Pass.  356,  73.  Tit.  3329),  so  in  M.  Nethl.  ledeMs  (Maerl.
1,  326.  3,  125),  much  as  the  Catholics  in  their  own  countries  do  not
allow  to  Protestants  a  church,  but  only  a  bethaus,  praying-house
(see  Suppl.).  0.  iv.  33,  33  has  the  periphrase  gotes  hus,  and  ii.  4,
52  druhtines  Jills.  Notker  cap.  17  makes  no  scruple  of  translating
the  Lat.  fanis  by  chilcchon,  just  as  bishop  does  duty  for  heathen
priest  as  well.  In  the  earliest  times  temple  was  retained,  Is.  382.
395.  T.  15,4.  193,2.  209,1.  Diut.  1,  195.a

The  hut  which  we  are  to  picture  to  ourselves  under  the  term
fanum  or  pur  (A.S.  bur,  bower)  was  most  likely  constructed  of  logs
and  twigs  round  the  sacred  tree  ;  a  wooden  temple  of  the  goddess
Zisa  will  find  a  place  in  ch.  XIII.  With  halla  and  some  other
names  we  are  compelled  to  think  rather  of  a  stone  building.

We  see  all  the  Christian  teachers  eager  to  lay  the  axe  to  the
sacred  trees  of  the  heathen,  and  fire  under  their  temples.  It  would
.almost  seem  that  the  poor  people's  consent  was  never  asked,  and
the  rising  smoke  was  the  first  thing  that  announced  to  them  the
broken  power  of  their  gods.  But  on  a  closer  study  of  the  details  in
the  less  high-flown  narratives,  it  comes  out  that  the  heathen  were
not  so  tame  and  simple,  nor  the  Christians  so  reckless.  Boniface
resolved  on  hewing  down  the  Thunder-oak  after  taking  counsel  with
the  already  converted  Hessians,  and  in  their  presence.  So  too  the
Thuringian  princess  might  not  have  dared  to  sit  so  immovable  on
her  palfrey  and  give  the  order  to  fire  the  Prankish  temple,  had  not
her  escort  been  numerous  enough  to  make  head  against  the  heathen.
That  these  did  make  an  armed  resistance,  appears  from  Radegund's
request,  after  the  fane  was  burnt  down,  ut  inter  se  populi  pacem
firmarent.

In  most  of  the  cases  it  is  expressly  stated  that  a  church  was
erected  on  the  site  of  the  heathen  tree  or  temple.2  In  this  way  the

1  Actum  in  illo  bctaptire   (the  church  at  Fulda)  publice,  Trad.  Fuld.  ed.
Schannat  no.  193.    in  bedebur,  Lacombl.  no.  412  (A.D.  1162).    in  bedebure,  Erhard
p.  148  (A.D.  1121).     betbur,  Meyer  Ziirch.  ortsn.  917.

2  Sulp.    Severus   (ed.   Amst.   1665),  p.    458  :    Nam  ubi   fana  destruxerat
(Martinus),  statim  ibi  aut  ecclesias  ant  monasteria  construcbat.  Dietmar  of  Merseb.
7,   52,  p.  859    (speaking  of  Bishop  Reinbern  on  Slav,  territory,  A.D.   1015)  :


TEMPLES.  87

people's  habits  of  thinking  were  consulted,  and  they  could  believe
that  the  old  sacredness  had  not  departed  from  the  place,  but  hence
forth  flowed  from  the  presence  of  the  true  God  (see  Suppl.).

At  the  same  time  we  here  perceive  the  reason  of  the  almost
entire  absence  of  heathen  monuments  or  their  remains,  not  only
in  Germany  proper,  but  in  the  North,  where  certainly  such
temples  existed,  and  more  plentifully  ;  conf.  in  chaps.  VI.  X.'  XVI.
the  temple  at  Sigtun,  baer  i  Baldrshaga,  and  the  Nornas'  temple.
Either  these  were  levelled  with  the  ground  to  make  room  for  a
Christian  church,  or  their  walls  and  halls  were  worked  into  the  new
building.  We  may  be  slow  to  form  any  high  opinion  of  the  build
ing  art  among  the  heathen  Germans,  yet  they  must  have  understood
how  to  arrange  considerable  masses  of  stone,  and  bind  them  firmly
together.  We  have  evidence  of  this  in  the  grave-mounds  and  places
of  sacrifice  still  preserved  in  Scandinavia,  partly  also  in  Friesland
and  Saxony,  from  which  some  important  inferences  might  be  drawn
with  regard  to  the  old  heathen  services,  but  these  I  exclude  from
my  present  investigation.

The  results  are  these  :  the  earliest  seat  of  heathen  worship  was
in  groves,  whether  on  mountain  or  in  pleasant  mead ;  there  the  first
temples  were  afterwards  built,  and  there  also  were  the  tribunals  of
the  nation.


Fana  idolorum  destruens  incendit,  et  mare  daemonibus  cultum,  immissis  quatuor
lapidibus  sacro  chrismate  pemnctis,  et  aqua  purgans  benedicta,  novam  Domino
.     .     .     plantationem  eduxit. — On  the  conversion  of  the  Pantheon  into  a
church,  see  Massmann's  Eradius  476.


CHAPTEE  V.
PEIESTS.

The  most  general  term  for  one  who  is  called  to  the  immediate
service  of  deity  (minister  deoram,  Tac.  Germ.  10)  is  one  derived
from  the  name  of  deity  itself.  From  the  Goth.  gu8  (deus)  is  formed
the  adj.  gaguds  (godly,  pius,  evo-e{3r)<;),  \hen.  gagudei  (pietas,  euo-e/3eta).
In  OHG.  and  MHG.,  I  find  pius  translated  erhaft,  strictly  reverens,
but  also  used  for  venerandus  ;  our  fromm  has  only  lately  acquired
this  meaning,  the  MHG.  vrum  being  simply  able,  excellent.  The
God-serving,  pious  man  is  in  Goth,  gudja  (tepeu?,  Matt.  8,  4,  27, 1.
63.  Mk.  10,  34.  11,  27.  14,  61.  Lu.  1,  5.  20,  1.  Jo.  18,  19.
22.  19,  6.  ufargudja  (ap^iepeu?)  Mk  10,  33.  gudjindn  (lepareveiv),
Lu.  1,  8.  gudjinassus  (lepareia)  Lu.  1,  9.  (see  Suppl.).

That  these  were  heathen  expressions  follows  from  the  accordance
of  the  ON.  gofti  (pontifex),  Jwfs  goffi  (fani  antistes),  Egilss.  754.
Freys  goffi,  Nialss.  cap.  96.  117.  Fornm.  sog.  2,  206.  godbrd
(sacerdotium).  An  additional  argument  is  found  in  the  disappear
ance  of  the  word  from  the  other  dialects,  just  as  our  alah  dis
appeared,  though  the  Goths  had  found  alhs  unobjectionable.  Only
a  faint  vestige  appears  in  the  OHG.  cotinc  by  which  tribunus  is
glossed,  Diut.  1, 187  (Goth,  gudiggs  ?).— Now  as  Ulphilas1  associates
gudja  and  sinista  (Trpeo-fivrepos,  elder,  man  of  standing,  priest),  a
remarkable  sentence  in  Amm.  MarcelL  28,  5  informs  us,  that  the
high  priest  of  the  Burgundians  was  called  sinisto:  Nam  sacerdos
omnium  maximus  apud  Burgundies  vocatur  sinistus,  et  est  perpetu-
us,2  obnoxius  discriminibus  nullis  ut  reges.  The  connexion  of
priests  with  the  nobility  I  have  discussed  in  EA.  267-8  (see  Suppl.).

More  decidedly  heathen  are  the  OHG.  names  for  a  priest
liarugari,  Diut.  1,  514b,3  andparaivari,  Diut.  1,  150a,  (being  derived
from  haruc  and  paro,  the  words  for  temple  given  on  p.  68-9,  and


*  Strictly  the  Evangelist  ;  the> translator  had  no  choice.— TRANS.

For  the  sense  of  perpetuity  attaching  to  sin-  in  composition,  see  Gramm.
_54-5.

3  If  haruc  meant  wood  or  rock,  and  harugari  priest,  they  are  very  like  the
•.  and  Gael,  earn,  cairn,  and  cairneac  priest.  O'Brien  77a.


2,  554-5.


PRIESTS.  89

confirming  what  I  have  maintained,  that  these  two  terms  were
synonymous).  They  can  hardly  have  been  coined  by  the  glossist
to  interpret  the  Lat.  aruspex,  they  must  have  existed  in  our  ancient
speech. — A  priest  who  sacrificed  was  named  pluostrari  (see  p.  36).

The  fact  that  cotinc  could  bear  the  sense  of  tribunus  shows  the
close  connexion  between  the  offices  of  priest  and  judge,  which
comes  out  still  more  clearly  in  a  term  peculiar  to  the  High  Germ,
dialect :  ewa,  ea  signified  not  only  the  secular,  but  the  divine  law,
these  being  closely  connected  in  the  olden  times,  and  equally
sacred  ;  hence  eowart,  dwart  law- ward,  administrator  of  law,  Z/O/UATO?,
AS.  se-gleaw,  ge-lareow,  Goth,  vitodafasteis,  one  learned  in  the  law,
K.  55a  56%b.  Gl.  Hrab.  974a.  N.  ps.  50,  9.  ewarto  of  the  weak  decl.
in  O.I.  4,  2.  18.  72.  gotes  ewarto  I.  4,  23.  and  as  late  as  the  12th
century  ewarte,  Mar.  21.  and,  without  the  least  reference  to  the
Jewish  office,  but  quite  synonymous  with  priest  :  der  heilige
dwarte,  Eeinh.  1705.  der  baruc  und  die  ewarten  sin,  Parz.  13,  25.
Wh.  217,  23  of  Saracen  priests  (see  SuppL).  The  very  similar
eosago,  esago  stood  for  judex,  legislator,  EA.  781.

The  poet  of  the  Heliand  uses  the  expression  wihes  ward  (templi
custos)  150,  24;  to  avoid  the  heathen  as  well  as  a  foreign  term,  he
adopts  periphrases:  the  gierddo  man  (geehrte,  honoured),  3,  19.
the  frodo  man  (frot,  fruot,  prudens)  3,  21.  7,  7.  frodgumo  (gumo,
homo)  5,  23.  6,  2.  godcund  gumo  6,  12,  which  sounds  like  gudja
above,  but  may  convey  the  peculiar  sense  in  which  Wolfram  uses
'  der  guote  man'.1  In  the  Eomance  expressions  prudens  homo,  bonus
homo  (prudhomme,  bonhomme)  there  lurks  a  reference  to  the
ancient  jurisprudence. — Once  Ulphilas  renders  dpxiepevs  by  auhu-
mists  veiha,  John  18,  13,  but  never  iepevs  by  veiha.

With  Christianity  there  came  in  foreign  words  (see  SuppL).
The  Anglo-Saxons  adopted  the  Lat.  sacerdos  in  abbreviated  form  :
sacerd,  pi.  sacerdas ;  and  ^Elfred  translates  Beda's  pontifex  and
summus  pontificum  (both  of  them  heathen),  2,  13  by  biscop  and
ealdorbiscop.  T.  and  0.  use  in  the  same  sense  bisgof,  biscof  (from

1  Parz.  457, 2.  458, 25.  460, 19.  476,  23.  487,  23.  The  godo  gumo,  Hel.  4,  16
is  said  of  John  ;  ther  guato  man,  0.  ii.  12, 21.  49  of  Nicodemus  ;  in  Ulrich's  Lan-
zelot,  an  abbot  is  styled  der  guote  man,  4613.  4639.  conf.  3857,  4620  ewarte,  4626
priester.  But  with  this  is  connected  diu  guote.frouwe  (v.  infra),  i.e.  originally
bona  socia,  so  that  in  the  good  man  also  there  peeps  out  something  heathenish,
heretical.  In  the  great  Apologue,  the  cricket  is  a  clergyman,  and  is  called
(Ren.  8125)  preudoms  and  Frobert  =  Fruotbert  (see  SuppL  j.


90  PRIESTS.

episcopus),  0.  I.  4,  4.  27.  47 ;  and  the  Hel.  150,  24  Uscop.  Later
on,  priester  (from  presbyter,  following  the  idea  of  elder  and  superior),
audpfajfe  (papa)  came  to  be  the  names  most  generally  used ;  AS.
preost,  Engl.  priest,  Fr.  prestre,  pretre ;  in  Veldek,  prester  rhymes
with  mester,  En.  9002.

When  Caesar,  bell.  Gall.  6,  21,  says  of  the  Germans:  Neque
druides  habent  qui  rebus  divinis  praesint,  neque  sacrificiis  student,
— the  statement  need  not  be  set  down  as  a  mistake,  or  as  contra
dicting  what  Tacitus  tells  us  of  the  German  priests  and  sacrifices.
Csesar  is  all  along  drawing  a  contrast  between  them  and  the  Gauls.
He  had  described  the  latter  6,  16  as  excessively  addicted  to
sacrifices  ;  and  his  '  non  studere  sacrificiis  '  must  in  the  connexion
mean  no  more  than  to  make  a  sparing  use  of  sacrifices.  As  little
did  there  prevail  among  the  Germans  the  elaborately  finished
Druid-system  of  the  Gauls ;  but  they  did  not  want  for  priests  or
sacrifices  of  their  own.

The  German  priests,  as  we  have  already  gathered  from  a  cursory
review  of  their  titles,  were  employed  in  the  worship  of  the  gods
and  in  judging  the  people.  In  campaigns,  discipline  is  entrusted
to  them  alone,  not  to  the  generals,  the  whole  war  being  carried  on
as  it  were  in  the  presence  of  the  deity :  Ceterum  neque  animad-
vertere  neque  vincire  nee  verberare  quidem  nisi  sacerdotibus  per-
missum,  non  quasi  in  poenam,  nee  ducis  jussu,  sed  velut  deo
imperante,  quern  adesse  bellantibus  credunt,  Germ.  7  (see  Suppl).
The  succeeding  words  must  also  refer  to  the  priests,  it  is  they  that
take  the  '  effigies  et  signa '  from  the  sacred  grove  and  carry  them
into  battle.  We  learn  from  cap.  10,  that  the  sacerdos  civitatis
superintends  the  divination  by  rods,  whenever  it  is  done  for  the
nation.  If  the  occasion  be  not  a  public  one,  the  paterfamilias
himself  can  direct  the  matter,  and  the  priest  need  not  be  called  in : —
a  remarkable  limitation  of  the  priestly  power,  and  a  sign  how  far  the
rights  of  the  freeman  extended  in  strictly  private  life  ;  on  the  same
principle,  I  suppose,  that  in  very  early  times  covenant  transac
tions  could  be  settled  between  the  parties,  without  the  interven
tion  of  the  judge  (EA.  201).  Again,  when  the  divination  was  by
the  neighing  of  the  white  steeds  maintained  by  the  state,  priests
accompanied  the  sacred  car,  and  accredited  the  transaction.  Tlie  priest
alone  may  touch  the  car  of  Nerthus,  by  him  her  approaching
presence  is  perceived,  he  attends  her  full  of  reverence,  and  leads


PRIESTS.  91

her  back  at  last  to  her  sanctuary,  cap.  40.  Segimund,  the  son  of
Segestes,  whom  Tac.  Ann.  1,  57  calls  sacerdos,  had  been  not  a
German  but  a  Roman  priest  (apud  aram  Ubiorum),  and  after  tearing
up  the  alien  chaplet  (vittas  ruperat),  had  fled  to  his  home.

These  few  incidental  notices  of  priests  give  us  anything  but  a
complete  view  of  their  functions  (see  SuppL).  On  them  doubtless
devolved  also  the  performance  of  public  prayers,  the  slaying  of
victims,  the  consecration  of  the  kings  and  of  corpses,  perhaps  of
marriages  too,  the  administering  of  oaths,  and  many  other  duties.
Of  their  attire,  their  insignia  and  gradations,  we  hear  nothing  at
all ;  once  Tacitus  cap.  43  speaks  of  a  sacerdos  muliebri  ornatu,  but
gives  no  details.  No  doubt  the  priests  formed  a  separate,  possibly
a  hereditary  order,  though  not  so  powerful  and  influential  as  in
Gaul.  Probably,  beside  that  sacerdos  civitatis,  there  were  higher
and  low^er  ones.  Only  one  is  cited  by  name,  the  Cattian,  i.e.
Hessian,  Libes  in  Strabo  (Ai/Bys  rwv  Xdrrwv  lepevsi),  who  with
other  German  prisoners  was  dragged  to  Rome  in  the  pompa  of
Germanicus.  Of  him  Tacitus  (so  far  as  we  still  have  him)  is
silent.1  Jornandes's  statement  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  Gothic
priests  were  termed  pileati  in  distinction  from  the  rest  of  the  people,
the  capillati,  and  that  during  sacrifice  they  had  the  head  covered
with  a  hat ;  conf.  RA.  271  (see  SuppL).  05inn  is  called  SiShottr,
broadhat.

The  succeeding  period,  down  to  the  introduction  of  Christi
anity,  scarcely  yields  any  information  on  the  condition  of  the
priesthood  in  continental  Germany ;  their  existence  we  infer  from
that  of  temples  and  sacrifices.  A  fact  of  some  importance  has  been
preserved  by  Beda,  Hist.  eccl.  2,  13  :  a  heathen  priest  of  the  Anglo-
Saxons  was  forbidden  to  carry  arms  or  to  ride  a  male  horse :  Non
enim  licuerat,  pontificem  sacrorum  vel  arma  ferre,  vel  praeterquam
in  equa  equitare.  Can  this  have  any  connexion  with  the  regulation
which,  it  is  true,  can  be  equally  explained  from  the  Bible,  that
Christian  clergymen,  when  riding  about  the  country,  should  be
mounted  on  asses  and  colts,  not  horses  (RA.  86-88)  ?  Festus  also
remarks :  Equo  vehi  flamini  diali  non  licebat,  ne,  si  longius  digre-
deretur,  sacra  neglegerentur  (see  SuppL).  The  transmission  of
such  customs,  which  have  impressed  themselves  on  the  habits  of

1  Libes  might  be  Leip,  Leb,  O.N.  Leifr,  Goth.  Laibs  ?    A  var.  lect.  has  A#W.


92  PEIESTS.

life,  would  seem  to  have  been  quite  admissible.  I  shall  try  else
where  to  show  in  detail,  how  a  good  deal  in  the  gestures  and  atti
tudes  prescribed  for  certain  legal  transactions  savours  of  priestly
ceremony  at  sacrifice  and  prayer  (see  Suppl.).  It  is  not  unlikely,
as  heathen  sacred  places  were  turned  into  Christian  ones,  that  it
was  also  thought  desirable  amongst  a  newly  converted  people  to
attract  their  former  priests  to  the  service  of  the  new  religion.
They  were  the  most  cultivated  portion  of  the  people,  the  most
capable  of  comprehending  the  Christian  doctrine  and  recommending
it  to  their  countrymen.  Prom  the  ranks  of  the  heathen  priesthood
would  therefore  proceed  both  the  bitterest  foes  and  the  warmest
partizans  of  innovation.1  The  collection  of  the  Letters  of  Boniface
has  a  passage  lamenting  the  confusion  of  Christian  and  heathen
rites,  into  which  foolish  or  reckless  and  guilty  priests  had  suffered
themselves  to  fall.2  This  might  have  been  done  in  blameless  ignor
ance  or  from  deliberate  purpose,  but  scarcely  by  any  men  except
such  as  were  previously  familiar  with  heathenism.

Even  the  Norse  priesthood  is  but  very  imperfectly  delineated  in
the  Eddas  and  sagas.  A  noteworthy  passage  in  the  Ynglingasaga
cap.  2  which  regards  the  Ases  altogether  as  colonists  from  Asia,
and  their  residence  Asgard  as  a  great  place  of  sacrifice,  makes  the
twelve  principal  Ases  sacrificial  priests  (hofgoSar) :  skyldu  J?eir  rafta
fyrir  blotum  ok  domum  manna  i  milli  (they  had  to  advise  about
sacrifices  and  dooms) ;  and  it  adds,  that  they  had  been  named  diar
(divi)  and  drottnar  (domini).  This  representation,  though  it  be  but
a  conjecture  of  Snorri's,  shows  the  high  estimation  in  which  the
priestly  order  stood,  so  that  gods  themselves  were  placed  at  the
head  of  sacrifices  and  judgments.  But  we  need  not  therefore  con
found  diar  and  drottnar  with  real  human  priests.

1  Just  as  the  Catholic  clergy  furnished  as  well  the  props  as  the  opponents  of
the  Reformation.     The  notable  example  of  a  heathen  priest  abjuring  his  ancient
faith,  and  even  putting  forth  his  hand  to  destroy  the  temple  he  had  once  held
sacred,  has  been  quoted  from  Beda  on  p.  82.     This  priest  was  an  English,  not
a  British  one,  though  Beda,  evidently  for  the  mere  purpose  of  more  exactly
marking  his  station,  designates  him  by  a  Gaefic  word  Coin  (choibi,  choibhidh,
cuimhi,  see  Jamieson,  supplement  sub.  v.  coivie,  archdruid).     Coifi  is  not  a
proper  name,  even  in  Gaelic  ;  and  it  is  incredible  that  Eadwine  king  of  Nor-
thumbria  should  have  adopted  the  British  religion,  and  maintained  a  British
priest.

2  Ed.  Wiirdtw.  82.  Serr.  140  :  Pro  sacrilegis  itaque  presbyteris,  ut  scripsisti,
qui  tauros  et  hircos  diis  paganorum  immolabant,  manducantes  sacrificia  mor-
tuorum.     .     .     .     modo  vero  incognitum  esse,  utruni  baptizantes  trinitatem
dixissent  an  non,  &c. — Connect  with  this  the  presbyter  Jovi  mactans,  Ep.  25.


PKIESTS-.  93

I  must  draw  attention  to  the  fact,  that  certain  men  who  stood
nearer  to  the  gods  by  services  and  veneration,  and  priests  first  of
all,  are  entitled  friends  of  the  gods1  (see  SuppL).  Hence  such  names
as  Freysvinr,  AS.  Fredwine,  Bregowine  for  heroes  and  kings  (see  ch.
X,  Fro  win).  According  to  Eyrbygg.  pp.  6,  8,  16,  26,  Kolfr  was  a
Thdrs  vinr  ;  he  had  a  hof  of  that  god  on  a  meadow,  and  was  there
fore  named  Thorrolfr,  he  dedicated  to  him  his  son  Steinn  and  named
him  Thorsteinn,  who  again  dedicated  his  son  Grimr  to  the  god  and
named  him  Thorgrimr  ;  by  this  dedicating  (gefa),  was  meant  the
appointing  to  the  office  of  goc5i  or  priest.  And  (according  to  Landn.
2,  23)  Hallstein  gave  his  son  as  gool  to  Thorr.  Here  we  see  the
priestly  office  running  on  through  several  generations  (see  SuppL).
However,  Odysseus  is  also  called  ALL  <£t'Xo?,  II.  10,  527.  Also
ALO\O<;  </>t'Xo?  dOavdroLcn  Oeolvi,  Od.  10,  2  ;  but  then  in  Od.  10,  21
he  is  TttjcuV  ave/jiwv,  director  of  winds,  therefore  a  priest.


How  deeply  the  priestly  office  in  the  North  encroached  on  the
administration  of  justice,  need  not  be  insisted  on  here  ;  in  their
judicial  character  the  priests  seem  to  have  exercised  a  good  deal  of
control  over  the  people,  whereas  little  is  said  of  their  political
influence  at  the  courts  of  kings  ;  on  this  point  it  is  enough  to  read
the  ISTialssaga.  In  Iceland,  even  under  Christianity,  the  judges
retained  the  name  and  several  of  the  functions  of  heathen  goffar,
Gragas  1,  109-113.  130.  165.  Convents,  and  at  the  same  time
state-farmers,  especially  occupiers  of  old  sanctuaries  (see  p.  85,  note)
apparently  continue  in  the  Mid.  Ages  to  have  peculiar  privileges,
on  which  I  shall  enlarge  in  treating  of  weisthiimer.  They  have  the
keeping  of  the  county  cauldron,  or  weights  and  measures,  and  above
all,  the  brood-animals,  to  which  great  favour  is  shown  everywhere
(see  SuppL).  '

The  go<5i  is  also  called  a  Uotma&r  (sacrificulus),  Uiotr  (Egilssaga
p.  209),  but  all  blotmenn  need  not  be  priests  ;  the  word  denoted
rather  any  participant  in  sacrifices,  and  afterwards,  among  Christians,
the  heathen  in  general.  It  tallies  with  the  passage  in  Tacitus
about  the  paterfamilias,  that  any  iarl  or  hersir  (baron)  might  per
form  sacrifice,  though  he  was  not  a  priest.  Saxo  Gramm.  p.  176

1  The  MHG.  poets  still  bestow  on  hermits  and  monks  the  epithets  gotes
friunt,  gotes  degen  (]?egn,  warrior).  In  the  Renner  24587,  St.  Jost  is  called
heiliger  gotes  Jcneht  (cniht,  servant).  [See  however  '  servus  dei,  famulus  dei  '
passim  in  the  lives  of  saints],


94  PRIESTS.

relates  of  Harald  after  his  baptism :  Delubra  diruit,  wctimarios
proscripsit,  flaminium  abrogavit.  By  victimarii  he  must  mean
blotmenn,  by  flamens  the  priests.  He  tells  us  on  p.  104,  that  at
the  great  Upsala  sacrifices  there  were  enacted  effoeminati  corporum
motus,  scenicique  mimorum  plausus,  ac  mollia  nolarum  crepitacula;
Greek  antiquity  has  also  something  to  tell  of  choruses  and  dances
of  priests.

On  the  clothing  of  the  Norse  priests,  I  have  not  come  across
any  information.  Was  there  a  connexion  between  them  and  the
poets  ?  Bragi  the  god  of  song  has  nothing  to  do  with  sacrifices  ;
yet  the  poetic  art  was  thought  a  sacred  hallowed  thing :  OSinn
spoke  in  verse,  he  and  his  hofgo&ar  are  styled  lioffasmidir  (song-
smiths),  Yngl.  saga  cap.  6.  Can  skald  (poeta,  but  neut.)  be  the
same  as  the  rare  OHG.  sgalto  (sacer)  ?  Diut.  1,  183.  Gl.  ker.  69,
scaldo.  Even  of  Christian  minstrels  soon  after  the  conversion  one
thing  and  another  is  told,  that  has  also  come  down  to  us  about
heathen  skalds.

Poetry  borders  so  closely  on  divination,  the  Roman  vates  is
alike  songster  and  soothsayer,  and  soothsaying  was  certainly  a
priestly  function.  Amm.  Marcell.  14,  9  mentions  Alamannian
auspices,  and  Agathias  2,  6  /za^ret?  or  ^^a^dKoyoi  "*  A\an,avviKoL

Ulphilas  avoids  using  a  Gothic  word  for  the  frequently  occur
ring  Trpofajrrjs,  he  invariably  puts  praiifetus,  and  for  the  fern.
7rpo</>r?™5  praufeteis,  Lu.  2,  36  ;  why  not  veitaga  and  veitago  ?  The
OHG.  and  AS.  versions  are  bolder  for  once,  and  give  wizayo,  witeya.1
Was  the  priest,  when  conducting  auguries  and  auspices,  a  veitaga  ?
conf.  inveitan,  p.  29.  The  ON.  term  is  spdmadr  (spae-man),  and  for
prophetess  spdkona  (spae-woman,  A.S.  witegestre).  Such  diviners
were  Mhnir  and  Gripir.  In  old  French  poems  they  are  devin
(divini,  divinatores),  which  occasionally  comes  to  mean  poets  :
uns  devins,  qui  de  voir  dire  est  esprovez,  Meon  4,  145.  ce  dient  li
devin,  Een.  7383  ;  so  Tristr.  1229  :  li  contor  dient  (see  SuppL).

We  have  now  to  speak  of  the  prophetesses  and  priestesses  of
antiquity. — The  mundium  (wardship)  in  which  a  daughter,  a  sister,
a  wife  stood,  appears  in  the  old  heathen  time  not  to  have  excluded

1  The  J.  is  become  ei  in  our  weissager,  MHG.  wissage  for  wizege ;  equally
erroneous  is  our  verb  weissagen,  MHG.  wissagen,  Iw.  3097  (OHG.  \vizagou,  AS.
witegian).


PEIESTESSES.  95

them  from  holy  offices,  such  as  sacrificing  (see  Suppl.),  or  from  a
good  deal  of  influence  over  the  people.  Tacitus,  after  telling  us
how  mightily  the  German  women  wrought  upon  the  valour  of  their
warriors,  and  that  the  Eomans  for  greater  security  demanded  noble
maidens  from  particular  nations,  adds  :  Inesse  quin  etiam  sanctum
et  providum  (feminis)  putant1,  nee  aut  consilia  earum  aspernantur,
aut  responsa  negligunt.  And  before  that,  Caesar  1.  50  :  Quod  apud
Germanos  ea  consuetude  esset,  ut  matres  fam.  eorum  sortibus  et
vaticinationibus  declararent,  utrum  proelium  comnritti  ex  usu  esset,
necne ;  eas  ita  dicere :  non  esse  fas  Germanos  superare,,  si  ante
no  vain  lunam  proelio  contendissent  (see  Suppl.).

While  history  has  not  preserved  the  name  of  one  German  vates,
it  has  those  of  several  prophetesses.  Tac.  Germ.  8 :  Vidimus  sub
divo  Vespasiano  Veledam  (as  a  prisoner  in  his  triumph)  diu  apud
plerosque  numinis  loco  habitant.  Hist.  4,  61 :  Ea  mrgo  nationis
Bructerae,  late  imperitabat,  vetere  apud  Germanos  more,  quo
plerasque  feminarum/afoVfoms,  et  augescente  superstitione  arbitrantur
deas.  Tuncque  Veledae  auctoritas  adolevit ;  nam  '  prosperas
Germanis  res  et  excidium  legionum '  praedixerat.  In  4,  65,  when
the  people  of  Cologne  were  making  an  alliance  with  the  Tencteri
they  made  the  offer  :  Arbitrum  habebimus  Civilem  et  Veledam
apud  quos  pacta  sancientur.  Sic  lenitis  Tencteris,  legati  ad  Civilem
et  Veledam  missi  cum  donis,  cuncta  ex  voluntate  Agrippinensium
perpetravere.  Sed  coram  adire,  alloquique  Veledam  negatum.
Arcebantur  aspectu,  quo  venerationis  plus  inesset.  Ipsa  edita  in
turre ;  delectus  e  propinquis  consulta  responsaqiie  ut  intermmtius
numinis  portabat.  5,  22  :  Praetoriam  triremem  flumine  Luppia
donum  Veledae  traxere.  5,  25 ;  Veledam  propinquosque  monebat.
Her  captivity  was  probably  related  in  the  lost  chapters  of  the  fifth
book.2  This  Veleda  had  been  preceded  by  others :  Sed  et  olim
Auriniam  (hardly  a  translation  of  any  Teutonic  name,  such  as  the
ON.  Gullveig,  gold-cup ;  some  have  guessed  Aliruna,  Olrun,
Albruna)  et  complures  alias  venerati  sunt,  non  adulatione  nee
tamquam  facerent  deas,  Germ.  8.  A  later  one,  named  Ganna,  is

1  A  wild  force  of  phantasy,  and  the  state  called  clairvoyance,  have  shown
themselves  preeminently  in  women.

2  Statius  silv.  I.  4,  90  :  Captivaeque  pieces    Veledae  ;  he  scans  the  first
two  syllables  as  short,  which  seems  more  correct  than  Dio's  BeX^da.     Zeuss  436
thinks  BeXeSa,  BeXt'Sa  =  Vilida.  Graff  has  a  n.  prop.  Wallodu  1,  800.     I  would
suggest  the  Gothic  fern,  name  Valadamarca,  in  Jornancles  cap.  48,  and  the  Thur-
ingian  name  of  a  place  Walada  ia  Pertz  I.  308.


96


PRIESTS.


cited  by  Dio  Cassius,  67,  5  j1  and  in  the  year  577  Gunthcramnus
consulted  a  woman  '  habentem  spiritum  phitonis,  ut  ei  quae  erant
eventura  narraret/  Greg.  Tur.  5,  14  (in  Aimoin  3,  22  she  is  mulier
phytonissa,  i.e.  7rv0<*)vi,o-o-a).  One  much  later  still,  Thiota,  who  had
come  to  Mentz  out  of  Alamannia,  is  noticed  in  the  Annals  of  Fulcla,
anno  847  (Pertz  1,  365).2  As  Cassandra  foretold  the  fall  of  Troy,
our  prophetesses  predict  the  end  of  the  world  (v.  infra)  ;  and
Tacitus  Ann.  14,  32  speaks  of  British  druidesses  in  these  words  :
Feminae  in  furore  turbatae  adesse  exitium  canebant  ;  conf.  14,  30.
But  we  have  the  sublimest  example  before  us  in  the  Voluspa  (see
Suppl.).

Those  grayhaired,  barefooted  Cimbrian  priestesses  in  Strabo  (v.
supra,  p.  55)  in  white  robe  and  linen  doublet,  begirt  with  brazen
clasps,  slaughtering  the  prisoners  of  war  and  prophesying  from


1  Tdvva   (al.    Tavva)   TrapOevos   /xera   rfjv   BeXrjSai/   eV   rrj    KC\TIKTJ

conf.  the  masc.  name  Gannascusin  Ann.  11,  18.  19  ;  the  fern.  Gonna,  dat.  Gan-
nane,  in  a  Lothr.  urk.,  as  late  as  709,  Don  Calmet,  ed.  1728,  torn.  1.  preuves  p.
265.

2  Traditions,  which  Hubertus  Thomas  of  Liittich,  private  secretary  to  the
Elector  Palatine,  according  to  his  book  De  Tungris  et  Eburonibus  1541,  pro
fesses  to  have  received  from  an  antiquary  Joan.  Berger  out  of  an  old   book
(libello  vetustissimis  characteribus  descripto),  and  which  he  gives  in  his  treatise
De  Heidelbergae  antiquitatibus,  relate  as  follows  :  Quo  tempore  Velleda  virgo
in  Bruchteria  imperitabat,  vetula  quaedam,  cui  nomen  Jettha,  eum  collem,
ubi  mine   est  arx    Heidelbergensis    et    Jetthae    collis    etiam    nunc     nomen
habet,  inhabitabat,  vetustissimumque  phanum  incolebat,  cujusfragmenta  adhuc
nuper  vidimus,  dum  comes  palatinus  Fridericus  factus  elector  egregiam  domum
construxit,  quam  novam  aulam  appellant.  Haec  mulier  vaticiniis  inclyta,  et
quo  venerabilior  foret,  raro  in  conspectum  hominum  prodiens,  volentibus  con-
silium  ab  ea  petere,  defenestra,  non  prodeunte  vultu,  respondebat.     Et  inter  cetera
praedixit,  ut  inconditis  versibus  canebat,  suo  colli  a  fatis  esse  datum,  ut  futuris
temporibus  regiis  viris,  quos  nominatim  recensebat,  inhabitaretur  et  templis
celeberrimis  ornaretur.     Sed  ut  tandem  fabulosae  antiquitati  valedicamus,  lubet
adscribere  quae  is  liber  de  infelici  morte  ipsius  Jetmat  continebat.     Egressa
quondam  amoenissimo  tempore  phanum,  ut  deambulatione  recrearetur,  progre-
diebatur  juxta  montes,  donee  pervenit  in  locum,  quo  montes  intra  convallem
declinant  et  multis  locis  scaturiebant  pulcherrimi  fontes,  quibus  vehementer
ilia  coepit  delectari,  et  assidens  ex  illis  bibebat,  cum  ecce  lupa  famelica  cum
catulis  e  silva  prorupit,  quae  conspectam  mulierem  nequicquam  divos  invocan-
tem  dilaniat  et  frustatim  discerpsit,  quae  casu  suo  fonti  nomen  dedit,  vocaturque

?uippe  in  hodiernum  diem  fons  luporum  ob  amoenitatem  loci  omnibus  notus.
t  is  scarcely  worth  while  trying  to  settle  how  much  in  this  may  be  genuine
tradition,  and  how  much  the  erudition  of  the  16th  century  foisted  in,  to  the
glorification  of  the  new  palace  at  Heidelberg  (  =  Heidberg)  ;  the  very  window
on  the  hill  would  seem  to  have  been  copied  from  Veleda's  tower,  though
Brynhild  too  resides  upon  her  rock,  and  has  a  high  tower  (Vols.  saga,  cap.  20,
24,  25  ;  conf.  MengloS,  OHG.  Maniklata  ?)  on  the  rock,  with  nine  virgins  at
her  knees  (Sasm.  110.  111).  If  the  enchantress's  name  were  Heida  instead  of
Jettha,  it  would  suit  the  localitv  better,  and  perhaps  be  an  echo  of  the  ON.
Heifir.


PRIESTESSES.  97

their  blood  in  the  sacrificial  cauldron,  appear  as  frightful  witches  by
the  side  of  the  Bructerian  Maid ;  together  with  divination  they
exercise  the  priestly  office.  Their  minutely  described  apparel,  we
may  suppose,  resembled  that  of  the  priests.

While  in  Tac.  Germ.  40  it  is  a  priest  that  attends  the  goddess,
and  guides  the  team  of  kine  in  her  car ;  in  the  North  conversely,
we  have  handmaids  waiting  upon  gods.  From  a  remarkable  story
in  the  01  af  Tryggv.  saga  (Fornm.  sog.  2,  73  seq.),  which  the
Christian  composer  evidently  presents  in  an  odious  light,  we  at  all
events  gather  that  in  Sweden  a  virgin  attended  the  car  of  Freyr  on
its  travels  among  the  people :  Frey  var  fengin  til  j?ionosto  Jcona
ung  ok  MS  (into  Frey's  service  was  taken  a  woman  young  and
fair),  and  she  is  called  kona  Freys.  Otherwise  a  priestess  is
called  gyffja,  Jiofgy&ja,  corresponding  to  goSi,  hofgoSi ; l  see  TuriSr
'hofgyoja,  Islend.  sog.  1,  205.  ]?orlaug  gyftja,  Landn.  1,  21.
Steinvor  and  FridgerSr,  Sagabibl.  1,  99.  3,  268.

But  the  Norse  authorities  likewise  dwell  less  on  the  priestly
functions  of  women,  than  on  their  higher  gift,  as  it  seems,  of
divination:  Perita  augurii  femina,  Saxo  Gram.  121.  Valdamarr
konungr  atti  moftur  miok  gamla  ok  orvasa,  sva  at  hun  la  1  rekkju,
en  J?o  var  hun  framsyn  af  Fitons  anda,  sem  margir  heiftnir  menn
(King  V.  had  a  mother  very  old  and  feeble,  so  that  she  lay  in  bed,
and  there  was  she  seized  by  a  spirit  of  Python,  like  many  heathen
folk),  Fornm.  sog.  1,  76. — Of  like  import  seems  to  be  a  term  which
borders  on  the  notion  of  a  higher  and  supernatural  being,  as  in  the
case  of  Veleda  ;  and  that  is  dis  (nympha,  numen).  It  may  be  not
accidental,  that  the  spakona  in  several  instances  bears  the  proper
name  Thordis  (Vatnsd.  p.  186  seq.  Fornm.  sog.  1,  255.  Islend.  sog.
1,  140.  Kormakkss.  p.  204  seq.)  ;  dis  however,  a  very  early  word,
which  I  at  one  time  connected  with  the  Gothic  filudeisei  (astutia,
dolus),  appears  to  be  no  other  than  our  OHG.  itis,  OS.  idis,  AS.
ides  (femina,  nympha). — As  famous  and  as  widely  spread  was  the
term  volvo,2  which  first  denotes  any  magic-wielding  soothsayeress
(Vatnsd.  p.  44.  Fornm.  sog.  3,  214.  Fornald.  sog.  2,  165-6.  506),
and  is  afterwards  attached  to  a  particular  mythic  Volva,  of  whom
one  of  the  oldest  Eddie  songs,  the  Voluspd,  treats.  Either  volu

1  Can  our  gotte,  gothe,  goth  for  godmother  (taufpathin,  susceptrix  e  sacro
fonte)  be  the  survival  of  an  old  heathen  term  1  Morolt  3184  has  gode  of  the
baptized  virgin.

a  The  Slavic  volkhv  magus. — TRANS.

7


98  PRIESTS.

stands  here  for  volvu,  or  the  claim  of  the  older  form  Vala  may  he
asserted ;  to  each  of  them  would  correspond  an  OHG.  Walawa  or
Wala,  which  suggests  the  Walada  above,  being  only  derived  in  a
different  way.  In  the  saga  Eiriks  raufta  we  come  upon  ThorUorg,
the  little  Vala  (Edda  Sseni.  Hafn.  3,  ty.—HeicFr  is  the  name  not
only  of  the  volva  in  the  Edda  (Sa3m.  4b,  conf.  118b)  but  also  of  the
one  in  the  Orvarodssaga  (conf.  Sagabibl.  3, 155). — Hyndla  (canicula)
is  a  prophetess  that  rides  on  wolves,  and  dwells  in  a  cave. — I  guess
also  that  the  virgins  Thorger&r  and  Irpa  (Fornm.  sog.  2, 108.  3, 100.
11,  134-7.  142.  172),  to  whom  all  but  divine  honours  were  paid,
and  the  title  of  horgabruSr  (nympha  lucorum)  and  even  the  name
of  guS  (numen)  was  accorded,  Nialss.  cap.  89,  are  not  to  be  excluded
from  this  circle.  So  in  the  valkyrs,  beside  their  godhood,  there
resides  somewhat  of  the  priestly,  e.g.  their  virginity  (see  ch.  XVI
and  SuppL).

We  shall  return  to  these  '  gleg '  and  '  wise '  women  (and  they
have  other  names  besides),  who,  in  accordance  with  a  deeply
marked  feature  of  our  mythology,  trespass  on  the  superhuman.
Here  we  had  to  set  forth  their  connexion  with  sacrifice,  divination
and  the  priesthood.


CHAPTEE  VL
GODS.

Now,  I  think,  we  are  fully  prepared  for  the  inquiry,  whether
real  gods  can  be  claimed  for  Germany  in  the  oldest  time.  All  the
branches  of  our  language  have  the  same  general  name  for  deity,
and  have  retained  it  to  the  present  day ;  all,  or  at  any  rate  most  of
them,  so  far  as  the  deficiency  of  documents  allows  the  chain  of
evidence  to  be  completed,  show  the  same  or  but  slightly  varying
terms  for  the  heathen  notions  of  worship,  sacrifice,  temples  and
priesthood.  Above  all  there  shines  forth  an  unmistakable  analogy
between  the  Old  Norse  terminology  and  the  remains,  many  cen
turies  older,  of  the  other  dialects :  the  Norse  sesir,  biota,  horgr,
gool  were  known  long  before,  and  with  the  same  meanings,  to  the
Goths,  Alamanns,  Franks  and  Saxons.  And  this  identity  or
similarity  extends  beyond  the  words  to  the  customs  themselves :
in  sacred  groves  the  earliest  human  and  animal  victims  were
offered,  priests  conducted  sacrifices  and  divinations,  '  wise  women  '
enjoyed  all  but  divine  authority.

The  proof  furnished  by  the  sameness  of  language  is  of  itself
sufficient  and  decisive.  When  the  several  divisions  of  a  nation
speak  one  and  the  same  language,  then,  so  long  as  they  are  left  to
their  own  nature  and  are  not  exposed  to  violent  influences  from
without,  they  always  have  the  same  kind  of  belief  and  worship.

The  Teutonic  race  lies  midway  between  Celts,  Slavs,  Lithu
anians,  Finns,  all  of  them  populations  that  acknowledge  gods,
and  practise  a  settled  worship.  The  Slav  nations,  spread  over
widely  distant  regions,  have  their  principal  gods  in  common  ;  how
should  it  be  otherwise  in  Teutondom  ?

As  for  demanding  proofs  of  the  genuineness  of  Norse  mythology,
we  have  really  got  past  that  now.  All  criticism  cripples  and  anni
hilates  itself,  that  sets  out  with  denying  or  doubting  what  is  trea
sured  up  in  song  and  story  born  alive  arid  propagated  amongst  an
entire  people,  and  which  lies  before  our  eyes.  Criticism  can  but
collect  and  arrange  it,  and  unfold  the  materials  in  their  historical
sequence.


100  GODS.

Then  the  only  question  that  can  fairly  be  raised,  is :  Whether
the  gods  of  the  North,  no  longer  disputable,  hold  good  for  the  rest
of  Teutondom  ?  To  say  yea  to  the  question  as  a  whole,  seems,
from  the  foregoing  results  of  our  inquiry,  altogether  reasonable
and  almost  necessary.

A  negative  answer,  if  it  knew  what  it  was  about,  would  try  to
maintain,  that  the  circle  of  Norse  gods,  in  substance,  were  formerly
common  to  all  Germany,  but  by  the  earlier  conversion  were  extin
guished  and  annihilated  here.  But  a  multitude  of  exceptions  and
surviving  vestiges  would  greatly  limit  the  assertion,  and  materially
alter  what  might  be  made  out  of  the  remainder.

In  the  meanwhile  a  denial  has  been  attempted  of  quite  another
kind,  and  the  opinion  upheld,  that  those  divinities  have  never
existed  at  all  in  Germany  proper,  and  that  its  earliest  inhabitants
knew  nothing  better  than  a  gross  worship  of  nature  without  gods.

This  view,  drawing  a  fundamental  distinction  between  German
and  Scandinavian  heathenism,  and  misapprehending  all  the  clues
which  discover  themselves  to  unprejudiced  inquiry  as  infallible
evidence  of  the  unity  of  two  branches  of  a  nation,  lays  special  stress
upon  a  few  statements  on  the  nature  of  the  heathen  faith,  dating
from  about  the  sixth  century  and  onwards.  These  for  the  most
part  proceed  from  the  lips  of  zealous  Christians,  who  did  not  at  all
concern  themselves  to  understand  or  faithfully  portray  the  paganism
they  were  assailing,  whose  purpose  was  rather  to  set  up  a  warning
against  the  grosser  manifestations  of  its  cultus  as  a  detestable  abo
mination.  It  will  be  desirable  to  glance  over  the  principal  passages
in  their  uniformity  and  one-sidedness.

Agathias  (•["  before  582),  himself  a  newly  converted  Greek,  who
could  only  know  from  christianly  coloured  reports  what  he  had
heard  about  the  distant  Alamanns,  thus  exhibits  the  Alamannic
worship  as  opposed  to  the  Frankish :  SevSpa  re  yap  nva  iXdaKovrai
KOI  peWpa  Trora/jiMV  KOI  \6(f)ov$  KOI  (£>dpayyas,  KOL  TOVTOLS  axnrep
oVta  Spares  28,  4.  Then  follow  the  words  quoted  on  p.  47  about
their  equine  sacrifices.

But  his  contrast  to  the  Franks  breaks  down  at  once,  when
we  hear  almost  exactly  the  same  account  of  them  from  the  lips  of
their  first  historian  Gregory :  Sed  haec  generatio  fanaticis  semper
cultibus  visa  est  obsequiurn  praebuisse,  nee  prorsus  agnovere  Deuin,
sibique  silvarum  atque  aquarum,  avium  bestiarumque  et  aliorum


GODS.  101

quoque  elementorum  finxere  formas,  ipsasque  ut  deum  colere  eisque
sacrificia  delibare  consueti.  Greg.  Tur.  2,  10. — Similarly,  Einhard
(jEginhartJ)  in  Vita  Caroli  cap.  7,  about  the  Saxons :  Sicut  omnes
fere  Gerrnaniam  incolentes  nationes  et  natura  feroces  et  cultui
daemonum  dediti,  nostraeque  religioni  contrarii. — Euodolf  of  Euld,
after  quoting  Tacitus  and  Einhard,  adds  (Pertz  2,  676) :  Nam  et
frondosis  arboribus  fontibusque  venerationem  exhibebant  j1  and  then
mentions  the  Irminsul,  which  I  shall  deal  with  hereafter  (see
Suppl). — Lastly,  Helmold  1,  47  affirms  of  the  Holsteiners :  Nihil
de  religione  nisi  nomen  tantum  christianitatis  habentes ;  nam
lucorum  et  fontium  ceterarumque  superstitionum  multiplex  error
apud  eos  habetur  .  .  .  Yicelinus  .  .  .  lucos  et  omnes
ritus  sacrileges  destruens,  &c.'

Conceived  in  exactly  the  same  spirit  are  the  prohibitions  of
heathenish  and  idolatrous  rites  in  decrees  of  councils  and  in  laws.
Concil.  Autissiod.  anno  586,  can.  3 :  Non  licet  inter  sentes  aut  ad
arbores  sacrivos  vel  ad  fontes  vota  exsolvere ;  conf.  Concil.  Turoii.
II.  anno  566,  can.  22. — Leges  Liutpr.  6,  30 :  Simili  modo  et  qui  ad
arborem,  quam  rustici  sanguinum  (al.  sanctivam,  sacrivam)  vocant,
atque  ad  fontanas  adoraverit. — Capit.  de  partibus  Sax.  20 :  Si  quis
ad  fontes  aut  arbores  vel  lucos  votum  fecerit,  aut  aliquid  more
gentilium  obtulerit  et  ad  honorem  daemonum  comederit.  And  the
converters,  the  Christian  clergy,  had  for  centuries  to  pour  out  their
wrath  against  the  almost  ineradicable  folly. — It  is  sufficient  merely
to  allude  to  the  sermons  of  Caesarius  episcopus  Arelatensis  (*f*  542)
'  Contra  sacrileges  et  aruspices,  contra  kalendarum  quoque  pagan-
issimos  ritus,  contraque  augures  lignicolas,  fonticolas,'  Acta  Bened.
sec.  1,  p.  668.

All  these  passages  contain,  not  an  untruth,  yet  not  the  whole
truth.  That  German  heathenism  was  destitute  of  gods,  they  can
not  possibly  prove;  for  one  thing,  because  they  all  date  from
periods  when  heathenism  no  longer  had  free  and  undisturbed  sway,
but  had  been  hotly  assailed  by  the  new  doctrine,  and  was  well-
nigh  overmastered.  The  general  exercise  of  it  had  ceased,  isolated
partizans  cherished  it  timidly  in  usages  kept  up  by  stealth ;  at  the
same  time  there  were  Christians  who  in  simplicity  or  error  con
tinued  to  practise  superstitious  ceremonies  by  the  side  of  Christian
ones.  Such  doings,  not  yet  extinct  here  and  there  among  the

1  Adam  of  Bremen  again  copies  Ruodolf,  Pertz  9,  286.


102  GODS.

common  people,  but  withdrawn  from  all  regulating  guidance  by
heathen  priests,  could  not  fail  soon  to  become  vulgarized,  and  to
appear  as  the  mere  dregs  of  an  older  faith,  which  faith  we  have  no
right  to  measure  by  them.  As  we  do  not  fail  to  recognise  in  the
devils  and  witches  of  more  modern  times  the  higher  purer  fancies  of
antiquity  disguised,  just  as  little  ought  we  to  feel  any  scruple  about
tracing  back  the  pagan  practices  in  question  to  the  untroubled  foun-
tainhead  of  the  olden  time.  Prohibitions  and  preachings  kept  strictly
to  the  practical  side  of  the  matter,  and  their  very  purpose  was  to  put
down  these  last  hateful  remnants  of  the  false  religion.  A  sentence
in  Cnut's  AS.  laws  (Schmid  1,  50)  shows,  that  fountain  and  tree
worship  does  not  exclude  adoration  of  the  gods  themselves :
Hasftenscipe  bi(5,  J?a3t  man  deofolgild  weorSige,  }?iut  is,  )?a3t  man
weorSige  hseftene  godas,  and  sunnan  oo15e  monan,  fyre  oftfte  fl65\va3-
ter,  wyllas  o<55e  stanas  oftSe  ffiniges  cynnes  wudutreowa;  conf.
Hornil.  1,  366.  Just  so  it  is  said  of  Olaf  the  Saint,  Fornm.  sog.  5,
239,  that  he  abolished  the  heathen  sacrifices  and  gods :  Ok  morg
onnur  (many  other)  blotskapar  skrimsl,  b?e5i  hamra  ok  horga,
skoga,  vb'tn  ok  tre  ok  611  onnur  blot,  biefti  meiri  ok  ininni.

But  we  can  conceive  of  another  reason  too,  why  on  such  occa
sions  the  heathen  gods,  perhaps  still  unforgotten,  are  passed  over  in
silence :  Christian  priests  avoided  uttering  their  names  or  describing
their  worship  minutely.  It  was  thought  advisable  to  include  them
all  under  the  general  title  of  demons  or  devils,  and  utterly  uproot
their  influence  by  laying  an  interdict  on  whatever  yet  remained
of  their  worship.  The  Merseburg  poems  show  how,  by  way  of
exception,  the  names  of  certain  gods  were  still  able  to  transmit
themselves  in  formulas  of  conjuring.

Pictures  of  heathenism  in  its  debasement  and  decay  have  no
right  to  be  placed  on  a  level  with  the  report  of  it  given  by  Tacitus
from  five  to  eight  centuries  before,  when  it  was  yet  in  the  fulness
of  its  strength.  If  the  adoration  of  trees  and  rivers  still  lingering
in  the  habits  of  the  people  no  longer  bears  witness  to  the  existence
of  gods,  is  it  not  loudly  enough  proclaimed  in  those  imperfect  and
defective  sketches  by  a  Roman  stranger  ?  When  he  expressly  tells
us  of  a  deus  terra  editus,  of  heroes  and  descendants  of  the  god
(plures  deo  ortos),  of  the  god  who  rules  in  war  (velut  deo  imperante),
of  the  names  of  gods  (deorum  nominibus)  which  the  people  trans
ferred  to  sacred  groves,  of  the  priest  who  cannot  begin  a  divination


GODS.

without  invoking  the  gods  (precatus  deos)  and  who  regards  himself
as  a  servant  of  the  gods  (ministros  deorum),  of  a  regnator  omnium
deus,  of  the  gods  of  Germany  (Germaniae  deos  in  aspectu,  Hist.  5,
IT),  of  the  diis  patriis  to  whom  the  captured  signa  Eomana  were
hung  up  (Ann.  1,  59);  when  he  distinguishes  between  penetrate
Germaniae  deos  or  dii  penates  (Ann.  2,  10.  11,  16),  communes  dii
(Hist.  4,  64),  and  conjugates  dii  (Germ.  18) ;  when  he  even  distin
guishes  individual  gods,  and  tries  to  suit  them  with  Eoman  names,
and  actually  names  (interpretatione  Eomana)  a  Mars,  Mercurius,
Hercules,  Castor  and  Pollux,  Isis,  nay,  has  preserved  the  German
appellations  of  the  deus  terra  editus  and  of  his  son,  and  of  a  goddess,
the  terra  mater ;  how  is  it  possible  to  deny  that  at  that  time  the
Germans  worshipped  veritable  gods  ?  How  is  it  possible,  when  we
take  into  account  all  the  rest  that  we  know  of  the  language,  the
liberty,  the  manners,  and  virtues  of  the  German!,  to  maintain  the
notion  that,  sunk  in  a  stolid  fetishism,  they  cast  themselves  down
before  logs  and  puddles,  and  paid  to  them  their  simple  adoration  ?

The  opinion  of  Caasar,1  who  knew  the  Germans  more  super
ficially  than  Tacitus  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  later,  cannot  be
allowed  to  derogate  from  the  truth.  He  wants  to  contrast  our
ancestors  with  the  Gauls,  with  whom  he  had  had  more  familiar
converse ;  but  the  personifications  of  the  sun,  fire,  and  the  moon,
to  which  he  limits  the  sum  total  of  their  gods,  will  hardly  bear  even
a  forced  '  interpretatio  Eomana'.  If  in  the  place  of  sun  and  moon
we  put  Apollo  and  Diana,  they  at  once  contradict  that  deeply  rooted
peculiarity  of  the  Teutonic  way  of  thinking,  which  conceives  of  the
sun  as  a  female,  and  of  the  moon  as  a  male  being,  which  could  not
have  escaped  the  observation  of  the  Eoman,  if  it  had  penetrated
deeper.  And  Vulcan,  similar  to  the  Norse  Loki,  but  one  of  those
divinities  of  whom  there  is  least  trace  to  be  found  in  the  rest  of
Teutondom,  had  certainly  less  foundation  than  the  equally  visible
and  helpful  deities  of  the  nourishing  earth,  and  of  the  quickening,
fish-teeming,  ship-sustaining  water.  I  can  only  look  upon  Caesar's
statements  as  a  half-true  and  roughcast  opinion,  which,  in  the  face
of  the  more  detailed  testimony  of  Tacitus,  hardly  avails  to  cast  a

1  Deorum  numero  eos  solos  ducunt,  quos  cernunt,  et  quorum  opibus  aperte
juvantur,  Solem  et  Vulcanum  et  Lunam;  reliquos  ne  fama  quidem  acceperunt.
B.G.  6,  21.  Compare  with  this  E.G.  4,  7  where  the  Usipetes  and  Tenchtheri
say  to  Csesar  :  Sese  unis  Suevis  concedere,  quibus  ne  dii  quidem  immortelles
pares  esse  possint.


10-4  GODS.

doubt  on  other  gods,  much  less  to  prove  a  bare  worship  of  elements
among  the  German!.

All  the  accounts  that  vouch  for  the  early  existence  of  individual
gods,  necessarily  testify  at  the  same  time  to  their  great  number  and
their  mutual  relationship.  When  Procopius  ascribes  a  TroXu?  Oewv
o/u\o9  to  the  Heruli,  this  '  great  host '  must  also  be  good  for  the
Goths,  just  those  of  whom  we  know  the  fewest  particulars,  and  for
all  the  Germans  together.  Jornandes  would  have  us  believe  that
Diceneus  was  the  first  to  make  the  Goths  acquainted  with  gods,
cap.  11 :  Elegit  ex  eis  tune  nobilissimos  prudentiores  viros,  quos
theologiam  instruens  numina  quaedam  et  sacella  venerari  suasit ;
here  evidently  we  see  the  ruler  who  promoted  the  service  of
particular  gods.  But  that  Jornandes  himself  credited  his  Goths
with  unmistakably  native  gods,  is  plain  from  cap.  10:  Unde  et
sacerdotes  Gothorum  aliqui,  illi  qui  pii  vocabantur,  subito  patefactis
portis  cum  citharis  et  vestibus  candidis  obviam  sunt  egressi  paternis
diis,  ut  sibi  propitii  Macedones  repellerent  voce  supplici  modulantes.
The  fact  here  mentioned  may  even  have  been  totally  alien  to  the
real  Goths,  but  anyhow  we  gather  from  it  the  opinion  of  Jornandes.
And  if  we  also  want  evidence  about  a  race  lying  quite  at  the
opposite  extremity  of  Germany,  one  that  clung  with  great  fidelity
to  their  old-established  faith,  we  have  it  in  the  Lex  Frisionum,
addit.  tit.  13,  where  the  subject  is  the  penalty  on  temple-breakers  :
Immolatur  diis  quorum  templa  violavit.

We  have  now  arrived  at  the  following  result.  In  the  first
century  of  our  era  the  religion  of  the  Germans  rested  mainly  upon
gods ;  a  thousand  or  twelve  hundred  years  later,  among  the  northern
section  of  the  race,  which  was  the  last  to  exchange  the  faith  of  its
fathers  for  a  new  one,  the  old  system  of  gods  is  preserved  the  most
perfectly.  Linked  by  language  and  unbroken  tradition  to  either
extremity  of  heathenism,  both  its  first  appearance  in  history  and  its
fall,  stands  central  Germany  from  the  fifth  to  the  ninth  century.
During  this  period  the  figures  of  the  heathen  gods,  in  the  feeble
and  hostile  light  thrown  upon  them  by  the  reports  of  recent  con
verts,  come  before  us  faded  and  indistinct,  but  still  always  as  gods.

I  must  here  repeat,  that  Tacitus  knows  no  simulacrum  of
German  gods,  no  image  l  moulded  in  human  shape ;  what  he  had

1  Grk.  ayaXpa,  signum,  statue  ;  Goth,  manleika,  OHG.  manalthho,  ON.
Uknesld  (see  Suppl.) ;  can  the  Sloven,  malik,  idol,  have  sprung  from  manleika?


IMAGES.  105

stated  generally  in  cap.  9,  he  asserts  of  a  particular  case  in  cap.  43,
and  we  have  no  ground  for  disbelieving  his  assertion.  The  exist
ence  of  real  statues  at  that  time  in  Germany,  at  least  in  the  parts
best  known  to  them,  would  hardly  have  escaped  the  researches  of
the  Romans.  He  knows  of  nothing  but  signa  and  formas,  appar
ently  carved  and  coloured,  which  were  used  in  worship  as  symbols,
and  on  certain  occasions  carried  about ;  probably  they  contained
some  reference  to  the  nature  and  attributes  of  the  several  deities.
The  model  of  a  boat,  sigmmi  in  modum  liburnae  figuratum  (cap.  9),
betokened  the  god  of  sailing,  the  formae  aprorum  (cap.  45)  the  god
to  whom  the  boar  was  consecrated ;  and  in  the  like  sense  are  to  be
taken  the  ferarum  imagines  on  trees  and  at  certain  sacrifices  (see
Suppl.).  The  vehiculum  veste  contectum  of  the  goddess  Earth
will  be  discussed  further  on.

The  absence  of  statues  and  temples,  considering  the  impotence
of  all  artistic  skill  at  the  period,  is  a  favourable  feature  of  the
German  cultus,  and  pleasing  to  contemplate.  But  it  by  no  means
follows  that  in  the  people's  fancy  the  gods  were  destitute  of  a  form
like  the  human ;  without  this,  gods  invested  with  all  human
attributes,  and  brought  into  daily  contact  with  man,  would  be
simply  inconceivable.  If  there  was  any  German  poetry  then  in
existence,  which  I  would  sooner  assert  than  deny,  how  should  the
poets  have  depicted  their  god  but  with  a  human  aspect  ?

Attempts  to  fashion  images  of  gods,  and  if  not  to  carve  them
out  of  wood  or  stone,  at  least  to  draw  and  paint  them,  or  quite
roughly  to  bake  them  of  dough  (p.  63),  might  nevertheless  be  made
at  any  period,  even  the  earliest ;  it  is  possible  too,  that  the  interior
parts  of  Germany,  less  accessible  to  the  Romans,  concealed  here
and  there  temples,  statues  and  pictures.  In  the  succeeding  cen
turies,  however,  when  temples  were  multiplied,  images  also,  to  fill
their  spaces,  may  with  the  greatest  probability  be  assumed.

The  terminology,  except  where  the  words  simulacra,  imagines,
which  leave  no  room  for  doubt,  are  employed,  makes  use  of  several


Bohem.  malik,  the  little  finger,  also  Thumbkin,  Toin  Thumb?  which  may
have  to  do  with  idol.  [In  the  Slavic  languages,  mal  =  little,  s-mall].  Other
OHG.  terms  are  avard ;  piladi,  pilidi  (bild)  effigies  or  imago  in  general ;  in  the
Mid.  Ages  they  said,  for  making  or  forming  (p.  23),  ein  bilde  giezcn,  eine
scheme  juncfrouwen  ergiezen,  Cod.  Vindob.  428,  num.  211,  without  any  refer
ence  to  metal-casting  ;  ein  bilde  mezzen,  Troj.  19626,  mezzen,  Misc.  2,  186.  On
the  Lith.  balwonas,  idolum,  statua,  conf.  Pott  de  ling.  Litth.  2,  51,  Russ.
bolvdn,  Hung,  bah  any ;  Russ.  kumtr,  idol,  both  lit.  and  lig.  (object  of  affection).


10G  GODS.

terms  whose  meaning  varies,  passing  from  that  of  temple  to  that  of
image,  just  as  we  saw  the  meaning  of  grove  mixed  up  with  that  of
numen.  If,  as  is  possible,  that  word  alah  originally  meant  rock  or
stone  (p.  67),  it  might  easily,  like  haruc  and  wilt,  melt  into  the
sense  of  altar  and  statue,  of  ara,  fanum,  idolum.  In  this  way  the
OIIG.  about,  abcuti  (Abgott,  false  god)  does  signify  both  fana  and
idola  or  statuae,  Diut.  1,  497b  513a  515a  533b,  just  as  our  gotze  is  at
once  the  false  god  and  his  image  and  his  temple  (see  above,  p.  15.
Gramm.  3,  694).  Idolum  must  have  had  a  similar  ambiguity,
where  it  is  not  expressly  distinguished  from  delubrum,  fanum  and
templum.  In  general  phrases  sucli  as  idola  colere,  idola  adorare,
idola  destruere,  we  cannot  be  sure  that  images  are  meant,  for  just
as  often  and  with  the  same  meaning  we  have  adorare  fana,  des
truere  fana.  Look  at  the  following  phrases  taken  from  OHG.
glosses  :  abcuti  wihero  stetio,  fana  excelsorum,  Diut.  1,  515a.  eibcut
in  lieilagem  stetim,  fana  in  excelsis,  Diut.  1,  213a.  steininu  zeihan
inti  abcuti,  titulos  et  statuas,  Diut.  1,  49  7b.  altara  inti  manalikun
inti  haruga,  aras  et  statuas  et  lucos,  Diut.  1,  513b.  afgoda  began-
gana,  Lacombl.  arch.  1,  11. — Saxo  Gram,  often  uses  simulacra  for
idols,  pp.  249,  320-1-5-7,  The  statement  in  Aribonis  vita  S.
Emmerammi  (Acta  sanct.  Sept.  6,  483) :  '  tradidera  te  genti
Saxonum,  quae  tot  idolorum  cultor  existit'  is  undeniable  evidence
that  the  heathen  Saxons  in  the  8th  century  served  many  false  gods
(Aribo,  bishop  of  Freisingen  in  the  years  764-783).  The  vita
Lebuini,  written  by  Hucbald  between  918-976,  says  of  the  ancient
Saxons  (Pertz  2,  361-2):  Inservire  idolorum  cultibus  .  .  .
numinibus  suis  vota  solvens  ac  sacrificia  .  .  .  simulacra  quae
deos  esse  putatis,  quosque  venerando  colitis.  Here,  no  doubt,
statues  must  be  meant  (see  Suppl.).

In  a  few  instances  we  find  the  nobler  designation  deus  still
employed,  as  it  had  been  by  Tacitus  :  Cumque  idem  rex  (Eadwine
in  625)  gratias  ageret  diis  suis  pro  nata  sibi  filia,  Beda  2,  9.

The  following  passages  testify  to  visible  representations  of  gods ;
they  do  not  condescend  to  describe  them,  and  we  are  content  to
pick  up  hints  by  the  way.

The  very  earliest  evidence  takes  us  already  into  the  latter  half
of  the  4th  century,  but  it  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable.  Sozomen,
Hist.  eccl.  6,  37,  mentions  the  manifold  dangers  that  beset  Ulphilas
among  the  heathen  Goths :  While  the  barbarians  were  yet  heathens


IMAGES.  107


(ert  TWV  fBapjBdptov  e\\rjviK(o$  6pr)a-tcev6vTa)v) — e\\vjviic&s  here
means  in  heathen  fashion,  and  Opya/ceveiv  (to  worship)  is  presently
described  more  minutely,  when  the  persecution  of  the  Christians
by  Athanaric  is  related — Athanaric,  having  set  the  statue  (evidently
of  the  Gothic  deity)  on  a  waggon  (%oavov  l(f>  apjuLa/jLafys  eoTw?),
ordered  it  to  be  carried  round  to  the  dwellings  of  those  suspected
of  Christianity  ;  if  they  refused  to  fall  down  and  sacrifice  (Trpocncv-
velv  teal  6i>6iv\  their  houses  were  to  be  fired  over  their  heads.  By
dpfidfia^a  is  understood  a  covered  carriage  ;  is  not  this  exactly  the
vehiculum,  veste  contectum,  in  which  the  goddess,  herself  unseen,  was
carried  about  (Tac.  Germ.  40)  ?  Is  it  not  the  vagn  in  which  Freyr
and  his  priestess  sat,  when  in  holy  days  he  journeyed  round  among
the  Swedish  people  (Fornm.  sog.  2,  74-5)  ?  The  people  used  to
carry  about  covered  images  of  gods  over  the  fields,  by  which  fertility
was  bestowed  upon  them.1  Even  the  Jcarrdschen  in  our  poems  of
the  Mid.  Ages,  with  Saracen  gods  in  them,  and  the  carroccio  of  the
Lombard  cities  (RA.  263-5)  seem  to  be  nothing  but  a  late  reminis
cence  of  these  primitive  gods' -waggons  of  heathenism.  The  Roman,
Greek  and  Indian  gods  too  were  not  without  such  carriages.

What  Gregory  of  Tours  tells  us  (2,  29-31)  of  the  baptism  of
Chlodovich  (Clovis)  and  the  events  that  preceded  it,  is  evidently
touched  up,  and  the  speeches  of  the  queen  especially  I  take  to  be
fictitious ;  yet  he  would  hardly  have  put  them  in  her  mouth,  if  it
were  generally  known  that  the  Franks  had  no  gods  or  statues  at  all.
Chrothild  (Clotilda)  speaks  thus  to  her  husband,  whom  she  is  try
ing  to  prepossess  in  favour  of  baptism :  Nihil  sunt  dii  quos  colitis,
qui  neque  sibi  neque  aliis  poterunt  subvenire ;  sunt  enim  aut  ex
lapide  aut  ex  ligno  aut  ex  metallo  aliquo  sculpti,  nomina  vero,  quae
eis  indidistis,  homines  fuere,  non  dii.  Here  she  brings  up  Saturnus
and  Jupiter,  with  arguments  drawn  from  classical  mythology;
and  then :  Quid  Mars  Ifercttruaque  potuere  ?  qui  potius  sunt
magicis  artibus  praediti  quam  divini  numinis  potentiam  habuere.
Sed  ille  magis  coli  debet  qui  coelum  et  terrain,  mare  et  omnia  quae
in  eis  sunt,  verbo  ex  non  extantibus  procreavit,  &c.  Sed  cum  haec
regina  diceret,  nullatenus  ad  credendum  regis  animus  movebatur,
sed  dicebat :  Deorum  nostrorum  jussione  cuncta  creantur  ac  pro-

1  De  simulacra  quod  per  campos  portant  (Indie,  superstit.  cap.  28)  ;  one  vita
S.  Martini  cap.  9  (Surras  6,  252)  :  Quia  esset  haec  Gallorum  rusticis  consue
tude,  simulacra  daemonum,  candido  tecta  velamine,  misera  per  agros  suos  cir-
cumlerre  dementia.


108  GODS.

deunt ;  deus  vero  vester  nihil  posse  manifestatur,  et  quod  magis  est,
nee  de  deorum  genere  esse probatur  (that  sounds  German  enough!).
When  their  little  boy  dies  soon  after  receiving  Christian  baptism,
Chlodovich  remarks :   Si  in  nomine  deorum  meorum  puer  fuisset
dicatus,  vixisset  utique ;  nunc  autem,  quia  in  nomine  dei  vestri
baptizatus  est,  vivere  omnino  non  potuit. — So  detailed  a  report  of
Chlodovich's  heathenism,  scarcely  a  hundred  years  after  the  event,
and  from  the  mouth  of  a  well  instructed  priest,  would  be  absurd,  if
there  were  no  truth  at  the  bottom  of  it.     When  once  Gregory  had
put  his  Latin  names  of  gods  in  the  place  of  the  Frankish  (in  which
he  simply  followed  the  views  and  fashion  of  his  time),  he  would  as
a  matter  of  course  go  on  to  surround  those  names  with  the  appro
priate  Latin  myths ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked,  that  the  four
deities  named  are  all  gods  of  the  days  of  the  week,  the  very  kind
which  it  was  quite  customary  to  identify  with   native  gods.     I
think  myself  entitled  therefore,  to  quote  the  passage  as  proving  at
least  the  existence  of  images  of  gods  among  the  Franks  (see  Suppl.).
The  narrative  of  an  incident  from  the  early  part  of  the  7th
century  concerns   Alamannia.     Columban  and  St.  Gallus  in  612
came  upon  a  seat  of  idolatry  at  Bregenz  on  the  Lake  of  Constance  :
Tres    ergo    imagines    aereas  et  deauratas    superstitiosa    gentilitas
ibi   colcbat,   quibus   magis   quam  Creatori  mundi  vota   reddenda
credebat.     So  says  the  Vita  S.  Galli  (Pertz  2,  7)  written  in  the
course  of  the  next  (8th)  century.     A  more  detailed  account  is  given
by  Walafrid  Strabo  in  his  Vita  S.  Galli  (acta  Bened.  sec.  2.  p.  233) :
Egressi  de  navicula  oratorium  in  honore  S.  Aureliae  constructum
adierunt.     .    .    .     Post  orationem,  cum  per  gymm  oculis  cuncta
lustrassent,  placuit  illis  qualitas  et  situs  locorum,  deinde  oratione
praemissa  circa  oratorium  mansiunculas  sibi  fecerunt.     Repererunt
autem  in  templo  ires  imagines  aereas  deauratas  parieti  qffixas,1  quas
populus,  dimisso  altaris  sacri  cultu,  adorabat,  et  oblatis  sacrificiis
clicere  consuevit :  isti  sunt  dii  veteres  et  antiqui  hujus  loci  tutores,
quorum  solatio  et  nos  et  nostra  perdurant  usque  in  praesens.    .    .    .
Cumque  ejusdem  templi  solemnitas  ageretur,  venit  multitude  non
minima  promiscui  sexus  et  aetatis,  non  tantum  propter  festivitatis
honorem,  verum  etiam  ad  videndos  peregrinos,  quos  cognoverant

1  So  then,  in  a  church  really  Christian,  these  old  heathen  gods1  images  had
^een  let  into  the  ivall,  probably  to  conciliate  the  people,  who  were  still  attached
to  them  ?  There  are  several  later  instances  of  this  practice,  conf.  Ledebur's
archiv.  14,  363.  378.  Thiir.  mitth.  VI.  2,  13  (see


IMAGES.  109

advenisse.  .  .  .  Jussu  venerandi  abbatis  (Columbani)  Gallus
coepit  viam  veritatis  ostendere  populo.  .  .  .  et  in  conspectu
omnium  arripiens  simulacra,  et  lapidibus  in  frusta  comminuens  pro-
jecit  in  locum.  His  visis  nonnulli  conversi  sunt  ad  dominum. — Here
is  a  strange  jumble  of  heathen  and  Christian  worship.  In  an
oratory  built  in  honour  of  St.  Aurelia,  three  heathen  statues  still
stand  against  the  wall,  to  which  the  people  continue  to  sacrifice,
without  going  near  the  Christian  altar:  to  them,  these  are  still  their
old  tutelary  deities.  After  the  evangelist  has  knocked  the  images
to  pieces  and  thrown  them  into  Lake  Constance,  a  part  of  these
heathen  turn  to  Christianity.  Probably  in  more  places  than  one
the  earliest  Christian  communities  degenerated  in  like  manner,
owing  to  the  preponderance  of  the  heathen  multitude  and  the
supineness  of  the  clergy.  A  doubt  may  be  raised,  however,  as  to
whether  by  these  heathen  gods  are  to  be  understood  Alamannish,  or
possibly  Roman  gods  ?  Roman  paganism  in  a  district  of  the  old
Helvetia  is  quite  conceivable,  and  dii  tutores  loci  sounds  almost  like
the  very  thing.  On  the  other  hand  it  must  be  remembered,  that
Alamanns  had  been  settled  here  for  three  centuries,  and  any  other
worship  than  theirs  could  hardly  be  at  that  time  the  popular  one.  That
sacrifice  to  Woden  on  the  neighbouring  Lake  of  Zurich1  (supra,  p.  56)
mentioned  by  Jonas  in  his  older  biography  of  the  two  saints,
was  altogether  German.  Lastly,  the  association  of  three  di
vinities  to  be  jointly  worshipped  stands  out  a  prominent  feature  in
our  domestic  heathenism ;  when  the  Romans  dedicated  a  temple  to
several  deities,  their  images  were  not  placed  side  by  side,  but  in
separate  cellae  (chapels). — Ratpert  (Casus  S.  Galli,  .Pertz  2,  61)
seems  to  have  confounded  the  two  events,  that  on  L.  Zurich,  and
the  subsequent  one  at  Bregenz:  Tucconiam  (to  Tuggen)  advenerunt,
quae  est  ad  caput  lacus  Turicini,  ubi  cum  consistere  vellent,  popu-
lumque  ab  errore  demonum  revocare  (nam  adhuc  idolis  immoldbant\
Gallo  idola  vana  confringente  et  in  lacum  mcinum  demergente,  populus
in  iram  conversus.  .  .  .  sanctos  exinde  pepulerunt.  Inde  iter
agentes  pervenerunt  ad  castrum  quod  Arbona  nuncupatur,  juxta

1  Curiously,  Mone  (Gesch.  des  heid.  1,  171-5)  tries  to  put  this  Woden-
worship  cat  Tuggen  upon  the  Heruli,  who  had  never  been  heard  of  there,  instead
of  the  Alamanns,  because  Jonas  says  :  Sunt  inibi  wcinae  nationes  Suevorum.
But  this  means  simply  those  settled  thereabouts ;  there  was  no  occasion  to  speak
ol  distant  ones.  Columban  was  staying  in  a  place  not  agreeable  to  himself,  in
order  to  convert  the  heathen  inhabitants  ;  and  by  Walafrid's  description  too,
the  district  lies  infra  partes  Alamanniae,  where  intra  would  do  just  as  well.


110  GODS.

lacum  potamicum,  ibique  a  Willimaro  presbytero  honorifice  suscepti,
septem  dies  cum  gaudio  permanserunt.  Qui  a  sarictis  interrogatus,
si  sciret  locum  in  solitudine  illorum  proposito  congruum,  ostendit
eis  locum  jocundissimum  ad  inhabitandum  nomine  Brigantium.
Ibique  reperientes  templum  olim  christianae  religioni  dedicatum,
nunc  autem  demonum  imaginibus  pollutum,  mundando  et  conse-
crando  in  pristinum  restituerunt  statum,  atque  pro  statuis  quas
ejecerunt,  sanctae  Aureliae  reliquias  ibidem  collocaverunt. — By  this
account  also  the  temple  is  first  of  all  Christian,  and  afterwards
occupied  by  the  heathen  (Alamanns),  therefore  not  an  old  Eoman
one.  That  Woden  s  statue  was  one  of  those  idola  vana  that  were
broken  to  pieces,  may  almost  be  inferred  from  Jonas's  account  of
the  beer-sacrifice  offered  to  him.  Eatpert's  cantilena  S.  Galli  has
only  the  vague  words :

Castra  de  Turegum  adnavigant  Tucconium,
Decent  fidem  gentem,  Jovem  linquunt  ardentem.
This  Jupiter  on  fire,  from  whom  the  people  apostatized,  may  very
well  be  Donar  (Thunar,  Thor),  but  his  statue  is  not  alluded  to.
According  to  Arx  (on  Pertz  2,  61),  Eckehardus  IV.  quotes  '  Jovis
et  Neptuni  idola,'  but  I  cannot  find  the  passage  ;  conf.  p.  122
Ermoldus  Nigellus  on  Neptune.  It  is  plain  that  the  three  statues
have  to  do  with  the  idolatry  on  L.  Constance,  not  with  that  on  L.
Zurich ;  and  if  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Neptune  stood  there  together,
the  first  two  at  all  events  may  be  easily  applied  to  German  deities.
In  ch.  VII,  I  will  impart  my  conjecture  about  Neptune.  But  I  think
we  may  conclude  from  all  this,  that  our  ires  imagines  have  a  better
claim  to  a  German  origin,  than  those  imagines  lapideae  of  the
Luxovian  forest,  cited  on  p.  831.

1  Two  narratives  by  Gregory  of  Tours  on  statues  of  Diana  in  the  Treves
country,  and  of  Mercury  and  Mars  in  the  south  of  Gaul,  though  they  exclude
all  thought  of  German  deities,  yet  offer  striking  comparisons.  Hist.  8,  15  :
Deinde  territorium  Trevericae  urbis  expetii,  et  in  quo  nunc  estis  monte
habitaculum,  quod  cernitis,  proprio  labore  construxi ;  reperi  tainen  hie  Dianae
simulacrum,  quod  populus  hie  incredulus  quasi  dcum  adorabat.  columnam  etiam
statui,  in  qua  cum  grand!  cruciatu  sine  ullo  peduni  stabam  tegmine.  .  .  .
Verum  ubi  ad  me  multitude  vicinarum  civitatum  coniluere  coepit,  praedicabam
jugiter,  nihil  esse  Dianam,  nihil  simulacra,  nihilque  quae  cis  videbatur  exerceri
cult ura  :  indigna  etiam  esse  ipsa,  quae  inter  pocula  luxuriasque  profluas  cantica
proferebant,  sed  potius  deo  omnipotent!,  qui  coelum  fecit  ac  terram,  digimm
sit  Bacrificium  laudis  impendere.  orabam  etiam  saepius,  ut  simulacra  dominus
diruto  dignaretur  populuni  ab  hoc  errore  discutere.  Flexit  clomini  nnVcri-
cordia  meiitcm  rusticam,  ut  inclinaret  aurem  suam  in  verba  oris  mei,  ut  scilicet
relictis  iilolis  dominum  sequeretur,  (et)  tune  convocatis  quibusdam  ex  cis
simulacrum  hoc  immensum,  quod  elidere  propria  virtute  non  poteram,  cum


IMAGES.  Ill

The  chief  authority  for  images  of  gods  among  the  Saxons  is  the
famous  passage  in  Widekind  of  Corvei  (1,  12),  where  he  relates
their  victory  over  the  Thuringians  on  the  E.  Unstrut  (circ.  530),
'  ut  majorum  memoria  prodit '  :  Mane  autem  facto,  ad  orientalem
portam  (of  castle  Schidungen)  ponunt  aquilam,  aramque  victoriae
construentes,  secundum  errorem  paternum,  sacra  sua  propria  vener-
atione  venerati  sunt,  nomine  Martem,  effigie  columnarum  imitantes
fferculem,  loco  Solem  quern  Graeci  appellant  Apollinem. — This
important  witness  will  have  to  be  called  up  again  in  more  than  one
connexion.

To  the  Corvei  annals,  at  year  1145,  where  the  Eresburg  is
spoken  of,  the  following  is  added  by  a  12th  century  hand  (Pertz
5,  8  note) :  Hec  eadem  Eresburg  est  corrupto  vocabulo  dicta,  quam
et  Julius  Cesar  Romano  imperio  subegit,  quando  et  Arispolis
nomen  habuit  ab  eo  qui  Aris  Greca  designatione  ac  Mars  ipse
dictus  est  Latino  famine.  Duobus  siquidem  idolis  hec  dedita  fait,
id  est  Aris,  qui  urbis  mcniis  insertus,  quasi  dominator  dominantium,
et  Ermis,  qui  et  Mercurius  mercimoniis  insistentibus  colebatur  in
forensibus. — According  to  this,  a  statue  of  Mars  seems  to  have  stood
on  the  town-wall.

That  the  Frisian  temples  contained  images  of  gods,  there  seems
to  be  sufficient  evidence.  It  is  true,  the  passage  about  Fosite  (p.
84)  mentions  only  fana  dei ;  we  are  told  that  Wilibrord  laid  violent
hands  on  the  sacred  fountain,  not  that  he  demolished  any  image.

eorum  adjutorio  possem  eruere  ;  jam  enim  reliqua  sigillorum  (the  smaller
figures)  quae  faciliora  erant,  ipse  confregeram.  Convenientibus  autem  multis
ad  hanc  Dianae  statuam,  missis  funibus  trahere  coeperunt,  sed  nihil  labor  eorum
proficere  poterat.  Then  came  prayers ;  egressusque  post  orationem  ad  operarios
veni,  adprehensumque  funem  ut  primo  ictu  trahere  coepimus,  protinus  simula
crum  ruit  in  terram,  confractumque  cum  malleis  ferreis  in  pulverem  redegi.  So
images  went  to  the  ground,  whose  contemplation  we  should  think  very  in
structive  now.  This  Diana  was  probably  a  mixture  of  Roman  and  Gallic
worship  ;  there  are  inscriptions  of  a  Diana  arduinna  (Bouquet  2,  319). — The
second  passage  stands  in  Mirac.  2,  5  :  Erat  autem  haud  procul  a  cellula,
quam  sepulchrum,  martyris  (Juliani  Arvernensis)  haec  matrona  construxerat
(in  vico  Brivatensi),  grande  delubrwn,  ubi  in  columna  altissima  siinulachrum
Martis  Mercuriique  colebatur.  Cumque  delubri  illius  festa  a  gentilibus  agerentur
ac  mortui  mortuis  thura  deferrent,  medio  e  vulgo  commoventur  pueri  duo  in
scanclalum,  nudatoque  unus  gladio  alterum  appetit  trucidandum.  The  boy
runs  to  the  saint's  cell,  and  is  saved.  Quarta  autem  die,  cum  gentilitas  vellet
iterum  diis  exhibere  libamina,  the  Christian  priests  offer  a  fervent  prayer  to  the
martyr,  a  violent  thunderstorm  arises,  the  heathens  are  terrified  :  Recedente
autem  tempestate,  gentiles  baptizati,  statuas  quas  coluerant  confringentes,  in
lacum  vico  amnique  proximum  projecerunt. — Soon  after  this,  the  Burgundians
settled  in  the  district.  The  statues  broken  down,  crushed  to  powder,  and  flung
into  the  lake,  every  bit  the  same  as  in  that  story  of  Ratpert's.


112  GODS.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Vita  Bonifacii  (Pertz  2,  339),  in  describing
the  heathen  reaction  under  King  Bedbod  (circ.  716),  uses  this
language :  Jam  pars  ecclesiarum  Christi,  quae  Francorum  prius
subjecta  erat  imperio,  vastata  erat  ac  destructa,  idolorum  quoque
cultura  exstructis  delubrorum  fanis  lugubriter  renovata.  And  if  it
should  be  thought  that  idolorum  here  is  equivalent  to  deorum,  the
Vita  Willehadi  (Pertz  2,  380)  says  more  definitely :  Insanum  esse
et  vanuin  a  lapidibus  auxilium  petere  et  a  simulacris  mutis  et  surdis
subsidii  sperare  solatium.  Quo  audito,  gens  fera  et  idololatriis
nimium  dedita  stridebant  dentibus  in  eum,  dicentes,  non  debere
profanurn  longius  vivere,  imo  reum  esse  mortis,  qui  tarn  sacrilegia
contra  deos  suos  invictissimos  proferre  praesumsisset  eloquia. — The
event  belongs  to  the  middle  of  the  8th  century,  and  the  narrator
Anskar  (|  865)  comes  a  hundred  years  later :  still  we  are  not
warranted  in  looking  upon  his  words  as  mere  flourishes.  And  I
am  not  sure  that  we  have  a  right  to  take  for  empty  phrases,  what  is
said  in  a  Vita  S.  Goari  (•(•  049),  which  was  not  written  till  839  :
Coepit  gentilibus  per  circuitum  (i.e.  in  Eipuaria),  simulacrorum
cultui  deditis  et  vana  idolorum  superstitionis  deceptis,  verbum
salutis  annuntiare  (Acta  Bened.  sec.  2,  p.  282).  Such  biographies
are  usually  based  on  older  memorials.

The  Frisians  are  in  every  sense  the  point  of  transition  to  the
Scandinavians  ;  considering  the  multifarious  intercourse  between
these  two  adjoining  nations,  nothing  can  be  more  natural  than  to
suppose  that  the  Frisians  also  had  in  common  with  their  neighbours
the  habit  of  temple  and  image  worship.  Even  Fosete's  temple  in
Heligoland  I  can  hardly  imagine  destitute  of  images.

Some  facility  in  carving  figures  out  of  wood  or  chiselling  them
out  of  stone  is  no  more  than  we  should  have  expected  from  those
signa  and  effigies  in  Tacitus,  and  the  art  might  go  on  improving  up
to  a  certain  stage.  Stone  weapons  and  other  implements  that  we
find  in  barrows  testify  to  a  not  unskilful  handling  of  difficult
materials.  That  not  a  single  image  of  a  Teutonic  god  has  escaped
the  destructive  hand  of  time  and  the  zeal  of  the  Christians,  need
surprise  us  less  than  the  total  disappearance  of  the  heathen  temples.
Why,  even  in  the  North,  where  the  number  of  images  was  greater,
and  their  destruction  occurred  much  later,  there  is  not  one  preserved ;
all  the  Lethrian,  all  the  Upsalian  idols  are  clean  gone.  The  technical
term  in  the  Xorse  was  dcurdgod"  (Fomm.  sog.  2,  73-5),  from  skera


IMAGES.  113

(sculpere),  skurd  (sculptura) ;  in  the  two  passages  referred  to,  it  is
likneski  af  Freyr.  Biorn  gives  sfctirgoft,  idolum,  sculptile,  from
skur,  subgrundium  (penthouse),  because  it  had  to  be  placed  under
cover,  in  sheds  as  it  were  ;  with  which  the  OHG.  skurguta  (Graff
6,  536)  seems  to  agree.  But  there  is  no  distinct  proof  of  an  ON.
skurgoft

Dietmar's  account  is  silent  about  the  gods'  images  at  Lethra  T ;
in  Adam  of  Bremen's  description  of  those  at  Upsal  (cap.  233),  the
most  remarkable  thing  is,  that  three  statues  are  specified,  as  they
were  in  that  temple  of  the  Alamanns :  Nunc  de  superstitione
Sveonum  pauca  dicemus.  Nobilissimum  ilia  gens  templum  habet,
quod  Ubsola  dicitur,  non  longe  positum  a  Sictona  civitate  (Sigtun)
vel  Birka.  In  hoc  templo,  quod  totum  ex  auro  paratum  est,  statuas
trium  deornm  veneratur  populus,  ita  ut  potentissimus  eorum  Thor
in  medio  solium  habeat  triclinio.  Hinc  et  inde  locum  possident
Wodan  et  Fricco.  The  further  description  we  have  nothing  to  do
with  here,  but  there  occurs  in  it  also  the  term  sculpere ;  as  the
whole  temple  was  ex  auro  paratum,  i.e.t  decorated  with  gold,  he
might  doubtless  have  described  the  figures  of  the  gods  above  all  as
gilded,  just  as  those  in  Alamannia  were  aereae  et  deauratae. — Saxo
p.  13  tells  of  a  golden  statue  of  Othin ;  Cujus  numen  Septentrionis
reges  propensiore  cultu  prosequi  cupientes,  effigiem  ipsius  aureo
complexi  simulacro,  statuam  suae  dignationis  indicem  maxima  cum
religionis  simulatione  Byzantium  transmiserunt,  cujus  etiam
brachiorum  lineamenta  confertissimo  armillarum  pondere  per-
stringebant.  The  whole  passage,  with  its  continuation,  is  not  only
unhistorical,  but  contrary  to  the  genuine  myths ;  we  can  only  see
in  it  the  view  of  the  gods  taken  by  Saxo  and  his  period,  and
inasmuch  as  golden  and  bedizened  images  of  gods  were  consonant
with  such  view,  we  may  infer  that  there  still  lived  in  his  time  a
recollection  of  such  figures  (see  Suppl.).  Ermoldus  Nigellus,  in
describing  Herold's  (Harald's)  interview  with  King  .  Charles,
mentions  4,  444  seq.  (Pertz  2,  509-10)  the  gods  images  (sculpta)  of
the  heathen,  and  that  he  was  said  to  have  had  ploughshares,
kettles  and  water-buckets  forged  of  that  metal.  According  to  the
Nialssaga  cap.  89,  in  a  Norwegian  temple  (goSahus)  there  were  to
be  seen  three  figures  again,  those  of  Thor  and  the  two  half -goddesses
ThorgerSr  and  Irpa,  of  human  size,  and  adorned  with  armlets ;

1  On  recently  discovered  figures  of  '  Odin,'  v.  infra.  "Wodan
8


114  GODS.

probably  Thor  sat  in  the  middle  on  his  car.  Altogether  the
portraitures  of  Thor  seem  to  have  been  those  most  in  vogue,  at  least
in  Norway.1  One  temple  in  which  many  skurdgoS  were  wor
shipped,  but  Thor  most  of  all,  is  described  in  Fornm.  sog.  2, 153  and
159,  and  his  statue  1,  295.  302-6;  in  2,  44  we  read:  Thorr  sat  i
miffju  ok  var  mest  tignaSr,  hann  var  mikill  ok  allr  gulli  Itiinn  ok
silfri  (ex  auro  et  argento  confectus)  ;  conf.  Olafs  helga  saga,  ed.
Holm.  cap.  118-9,  where  a  large  standing  figure  of  Thor  is  described ;
and  Fornm.  sog.  4,  245,  ed.  Christ,  p.  26.  Freyr  giorr  of  silfri,  Isl.
sog.  1,  134.  Landn.  3,  2.  One  man  carried  a  statuette  of  Thor
carved  in  whalebone  (likneski  Thors  af  tonn  gert)  in  his  pocket,  so
as  to  worship  him  secretly,  when  living  among  Christians,  Fornm.
sog.  2,  57.  Thor's  figure,  was  carved  on  the  ondvegis-pillars,
Eyrbygg.  p.  8.  Landnamab.  2,  12  ;  and  on  the  prows  of  ships,
Fornm.  sog.  2,  324.  A  figure  of  ThorgerSr  holgabruSr,  with  rings
of  gold  round  the  arm,  to  which  people  kneel,  Fornm.  sog.  2,  108.2

1  Finn  Magnusen,  bidrag  til  nordisk  archaeologie,  pp.  113-159.

2  There  is  another  thing  to  notice  in  this  passage.     The  figure  of  Thorgerftr
bent  its  hand  up,  when  some  one  tried  to  snatch  a  ring  off  its  arm,  and  the
goddess  was  not  disposed  to  let  him  have  it.     The  same  man  then  brought  a
lot  of  money,  laid  it  at  the  figure's  feet,  fell  on  his  knees  and  shed  tears,  then
rose  up  and  once  more  grasped  at  the  ring,  which  now  the  figure  let  go.     The
same  is  told  in  the  Foereyingasaga,  cap.  23,  p.  103.     I  regard  it  as  a  genuine
trait  of  heathen  antiquity,  like  others  which  afterwards  passed  into  Christian
folk-tales  of  the  Mid.  Ages  (see  SuppL).     Of  more  than  one  image  of  grace  we
are  told  that  it  dropt  a  ring  off  its  finger  or  a  shoe  off  its  foot  as  a  gift  to  those
who  prayed  before  it.     A  figure  of  Christ  gave  its  shoes  to  a  poor  man  (Nicolai
abbatis  peregrinutio,  ed.  Weiiauff  p.  20),  and  a  saint's  image  its  gold  slippers
(Mones  anz.  7,  584.     Archiv.  des  Henneb.  vereins,  pp.  70,  71).     A  figure  of
Mary  accepts  a  ring  that  is  presented  to  it,  and  bends  her  finger  as  a  sign  that
she  will  keep  it  (Meon  nouv.  recueil  2,  296-7.     Maerl.  2,  214).     The  two
Virgin-stories  in  Meon  and  Maerlant,  though  one  at  bottom,  have  very  differ
ent  turns  given  them.     In  the  latter,  a  young  man  at  a  game  of  ball  pulls  the
ring  off  his  finger,  and  puts  it  on  the  hand  of  a  Madonna  ;  in  the  former,  the
youth  is  boxing  in  the  Colosseum  at  Rome,  and  puts  his  ring  on  the  finger  of  a
heathen  statue,  which  bends  the  finger.     Both  figures  now  hold  the  man  to  his
engagement.     But  the  0.  French  poem  makes  the  afflicted  youth  bring  an
image  of  Mary  to  bear  on  the  heathen  one,  the  Mary  takes  the  ring  ofi'  the
other  figure,  and  restores  it  to  the  youth.     Conf.  Kaiserchr.     13142.     13265.
13323.     Forduni  Scoti  chroiiicon  1,  407  (W.  Scott's  minstr.  2,  136),  relates
this  fable  as  an  event  of  the  llth  century :  a  nobleman  playing  at  ball  slips  his


slip  for  wrdeutsch].  Even  in  a  painting  of  Mary,  the  infant  in  her  lap  hands  her
a  casket  to  give  to  a  suppliant,  Cod.  pal.  341  fol.  63).  Similarly,  statues  turn
the  face  away,  stretch  out  the  arm  to  protect,  they  speak,  laugh,  weep,  eat  and  walk ;
thus  a  figure  of  Christ  turns  itself  away  (Ls.  3,  78.  262),  another  begins  to  eat
and  grow  bigger  (Kinderm.  legenden  no.  9),  to  weep,  to  beckon,  to  run  away


IMAGES.  115

Frey's  statue  of  silver,  (Freyr  markaftr  af  silfri),  Vatnsd.  p.  44.  50  •
carried  about  in  a  waggon  in  Sweden,  Fornm.  sog.  2,  73-7.  The
Jomsvikingasaga  tells  of  a  temple  on  Gautland  (I.  of  Gothland),  in
which  were  a  hundred  gods,  Fornm.  sog.  11,  40  ;  truly  a  '  densitas
imaginum/  as  Jonas  has  it  (see  p.  83).  Saxo  Gram.  327  mentions
a  simulacrum  quercu  factum,  carved  in  oak  ?  or  an  oaktree
worshipped  as  divine  ?  (see  Suppl.).

Not  only  three,  but  occasionally  two  figures  side  by  side  are
mentioned,  particularly  those  of  Wuotan  and  Donar  or  of  Mars  and
Mereurius,  as  we  see  from  the  passages  cited.  Figures  of  Freyr
and  Thor  together,  and  of  Frigg  and  Freyja,  occur  in  Miiller's
sagabibl.  1,  92.  Names  of  places  also  often  indicate  such  joint
worship  of  two  divinities,  e.g.  in  Hesse  the  Donnerseiche  (Thor's
oak)  stood  close  by  the  Wodansberg ;  and  explorers  would  do  well
to  attend  to  the  point.

But  neither  the  alleged  number  of  the  statues,  nor  their  descrip
tions  in  the  sagas  can  pass  for  historical ;  what  they  do  prove  is,
that  statues  there  were.  They  appear  mostly  to  have  been  hewn
out  of  wood,  some  perhaps  were  painted,  clothed,  and  overlaid  with
silver  or  gold ;  but  no  doubt  stone  images  were  also  to  be  met  with,
and  smaller  ones  of  copper  or  ivory.1

I  have  put  off  until  now  the  mention  of  a  peculiar  term  for
statue,  with  which  some  striking  accounts  of  heathen  idols  connect
themselves.

OHG.  glosses  have  the  word  irman&Alt,  pyramides,  Mons.  360.
avar^n,  irmansdtt,  pyramides,  Doc.  203b.  irmansij.l,  colossus,
altissima  columna,  Florent.  987a,  Bias.  86.  eolossus  est  irminsdl,
Gl.  Schletst.  18,  1.  28,  1.  The  literal  meaning  seems  to  be  statue,
to  judge  by  the  synonym  avard,  which  in  Gl.  Jun.  226  is  used  for

(Deutsche  sagen,  no.  347.  Tettaus,  preuss.  sagen,  pp.  21 1-5-8).  In  Reinbot's
Georg  the  idol  Apollo  is  flogged  with  rods  by  a  child,  and  forced  to  walk  away
(3258-69),  which,  reminds  one  of  the  god  Perun,  whom,  according  to  monk
Nestor,  Vladimir  the  Apostolic  caused  to  be  scourged  with  rods.  In  an  Indian
story  I  find  a  statue  that  eats  the  food  set  before  it,  Polier  2,  302-3.  Antiquity
then  did  not  regard  these  images  altogether  as  lumps  of  dead  matter,  but  as
penetrated  by  the  life  of  the  divinity.  The  Greeks  too  have  stories  of  statues
that  move,  shake  the  lance,  fall  on  their  kness,  close  their  eyes  (Kara/iuo-eij),
bleed  and  sweat,  which  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  attitudes  of  ancient
images  ;  but  of  a  statue  making  a  movement  of  the  hand,  bending  a  finger,  I
have  nowhere  read,  significant  as  the  position  of  the  arms  in  images  of  gods
was  held  to  be.  That  the  gods  themselves  xelpa  inrep^xova-iv  over  those  whom
they  wish  to  protect,  occurs  as  early  as  in  Homer.
1  Finn  Magnusen  ibid.  132-7.


116  GODS.

statua  and  imago.  It  was  not  yet  extinct  in  the  12th  century,  as
appears  from  two  places  in  the  Kaiserchronik,  near  the  beginning
of  the  poem,  and  very  likely  there  are  more  of  them  ;  it  is  said  of
Mercury  (Massmann  129) : —

uf  einir  yrmensule  Upon  an  yrmensul

stuont  ein  abgot  ungehiure,          Stood  an  idol  huge,
den  hiezen  sie  ir  koufnian.  Him  they  called  their

merchant.
Again  of  Julius  Caesar  (Massm.  624) : —

Eomere  in  ungetruweliche  Eomans  him  untruly  slew,

sluogen,  On  an  yrm.  they  buried  him.

{if  einir  yrmensul  sie  in  begruoben.
And  of  Simon  Magus  24C  (Massm.  4432)  :—

uf  eine  yrmensul  er  steic,  On  an  yrmensul  he  climbed,

daz  lantvolc  im  allesamt  neic.  The  land-folk  to  him  all  bowed.
That  is,  worshipped  him  as  a  god.  Nay,  in  Wolfram's  Titurel,  last
chapter,  where  the  great  pillars  of  the  (christian)  temple  of  the
Grail  are  described,  instead  of  '  inneren  seul '  of  the  printed
text  (Halm  6151),  the  Hanover  MS.  more  correctly  reads  irmensul.
Further,  in  the  Frankish  annals  ad  aim.  772  it  is  repeatedly
stated,  that  Charles  the  Great  in  his  conquest  of  the  Saxons
destroyed  a  chief  seat  of  their  heathen  superstition,  not  far  from
Heresburg1  in  Westphalia,  and  that  it  was  called  Irminsul.  Arm.
Petav. :  Domnus  rex  Karolus  perrexit  in  Saxoniam  et  conquisivit
Erisburgo,  et  pervenit  ad  locum  qui  dicitur  Ermensul,  et  succendit
ea  loca  (Pertz  1,  16).  Ann.  Lauresh. :  Fuit  rex  Carlus  hostiliter
in  Saxonia,  et  destruxit/anwm  eorum  quod  vocatur  Irminsul  (Pertz
1,  30).  The  same  in  the  Chron.  Moissiac.,  except  the  spelling  Hir-
minsul  (Pertz  1,  295),  and  in  Ann.  Quedlinb.,  &c.  (Pertz  5,  37).
Ann.  Juvavenses :  Karolus  idolum  Saxonorum  combussit,  quod
dicebant  Irminsul  (Pertz  1,  88).  Einhardi  Fuld.  annales :  Karolus
Saxoniam  bello  a.ggressus,  Eresburgum  castrum  cepit,  et  idolum  Sax-
onum  quod  vocabatur  Irminsul  destruit  (Pertz  1,  348).  Ann.  Ratis-
bon. :  Carolus  in  Saxonia  conquesivit  Eresburc  et  Irminsul  (Pertz  1,
92).  Ann.  Lauriss.:  Karlus  in  Saxonia  castrum  Aeresburg  expugnat,
fanum  et  lucum  eorum  famosum  Irminsul  subvertit  (Pertz  1,  117).

1  Now  Stadtbergen,  conf.  the  extract  from  Dietmar ;  but  strong  reasons
incline  us  to  push  the  pillar  (seule)  some  15  miles  deeper  into  the  Osning
forest ;  Clostermeier  Eggesterstein,  pp.  26-7  :  Eresburg,  Horohus  in  pago  Hessi
Saxonico  Saracho  735.  350.  Conf.  Massmann's  Eggesterst.  p.  34.


GODS.  1  17

Ann.  Lauriss. :  Et  inde  pen-exit  partibus  Saxoniae  prima  vice,
Aeresburgum  castrum  cepit,  ad  Ermensul  usque  pervenit,  et  ipsum
fanum  destruxit,  et  aurum  et  argentum  quod  ibi  repperit  abstulit.
Et  fuit  siccitas  magna,  ita  ut  aqua  deficeret  in  supradicto  loco  ubi
Ermensid  stabat,  &c.  (Pertz  1, 150).  Einhardi  Ann. :  Ferro  et  igni
cuncta  depopulatus,  Aeresburgum  castrum  cepit,  idolum  quod  Irmin-
sul  a  Saxonibus  vocabatur  evertit  (Pertz  1,  151) ;  repeated  in  Ann.
Tilian.,  and  Chron.  Eegin.,with  spelling  Ormensul  (Pertz  1, 220,  557).1
And  Dietmar  of  Merseburg  (Pertz  5,  744)  further  tells  us,  in  connex
ion  with  later  events:  Sed  exercitus  capta  urbe  (Eresburch)  ingressus,
juvenem  praefatum  usque  in  ecclesiam  S.  Petri,  ubi  prius  ab  antiquis
Irminsul  colebatur,  bello  defatigatum  depulit. — Taking  all  these
passages  together,  Irminsul  passes  through  the  very  same  grada
tions  of  meaning  we  unfolded  in  ch.  IV,  and  signifies  now  fanum,
now  lucus,  now  idolum  itself.  It  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  that  vast
woodlands  extended  over  that  region :  what  if  Osning  ?  the  name  of
the  mountain-forest  in  which  the  pillar  stood,  betokened  a  holy-
wood  ?  The  gold  and  silver  hoard,  which  Charles  was  supposed  to
have  seized  there,  may  well  be  legendary  embellishment.3  Kuodolf
of  Fuld  goes  more  into  detail  about  the  Irminsul ;  after  his  general
statement  on  the  heathen  Saxons,  that '  frondosis  arboribus  fonti-
busque  venerationem  exhibebant'  (p.  101),  he  goes  on:  Truncum
quoque  ligni  non  parvae  magnitudinis  in  altum  erectum  sub  divo
colebant,  patria  eum  lingua  Irminsid  appellantes,  quod  Latine
dicitur  universalis  columna,  quasi  sustinens  omnia  (Pertz  2,  676),

1  Poeta  Saxo  1,  65  (Bouquet  5,  137) :

Gens  eadem  coluit  simulacrum  quod  vocitabant
Irminstil,  cujus  factura  simulque  columna
Non  operis  parvi  fuerat,  pariterque  decoris.

2  6s  is  the  Sax.  form  for  ans  (p.  25),  which  denoted  a  god,  and  also  a  moun
tain  ;    in  High  G.  the  name  would  be  Ansninc,  Ensninc.     But,  beside  this
mons  Osnengi  near  Theotmelli,  i.e.   Detmold  (Pertz  2,  447),  there  stood  also  a
silva  Osning  not  far  from  Osnabriick  (Moser  urk.  no  2),  and  a  third  in  Ripuaria
on  the  Lower  Rhine  (Lacomblet  no  310.  343.  354),  which  seems  to  have  ex
tended  towards  the  Ardennes  as  far  as  Aachen  (Aix  la  Chap.),  mentioned  in
Vilkinasaga  cap.  40  ;   and  according  to  Barsch  on  Schannat's  Eiflia,  illustr.   1,
110,  and  HattemerS,  602%  the  Ardennes  itself  was  called  Ominka,  Oseninch.
By  the  Osnabriick  charter  above,  the  forest  there  appears  even  to  have  been
modelled  on  the  Osning  of  Aachen  (ad  similitudinem   foresti  Aquisgranum  per-
tinentis).     That  Osning  is  met  with  in  several  places,  speaks  for  a  more  general
meaning  [than  that  of  a  mere  proper  name]  ;  like  as,  ans,  and  fairguni,  it  is
the  sacred  mountain  and  forest.     Ledebur  takes  the  Teutoburgiensis  saltus  to
be  Osning.  ^    Os?iabrtick,  Asnebruggi  (bridge  of  the  ases)  seems  nearly  related.

3  Is  this  Ermen-pillar  hoard  an  allusion  to  the  legend  of  Ermenrich's  hoard?
(Saxo  Gram.  156.     Reinh.  fuchs  CLII.)


118  GODS.

(see  Suppl.).  Here  was  a  great  wooden  pillar  erected,  and  wor
shipped  under  the  open  sky,  its  name  signifies  universal  all-sustain
ing  pillar.  This  interpretation  appears  faultless,  when  we  take
with  it  other  words  in  which  the  meaning  is  intensified  by
composition  with  irmin.  In  the  Hildebrands  lied,  irmingot  is  the
supreme  god,  the  god  of  all,  not  a  peculiar  one,  agreeing  in  sense
with  thiodgod,  the  (whole)  people's  god,  formed  by  another  streng
thening  prefix,  Hel.  33,  18.  52,  12.  99,  6.  irminman,  an  elevated
expression  for  man,  Hel.  38,  24.  107,  13.  152,  11.  irminthiod,
the  human  race,  Hel.  87,  13  and  in  Hildebr.1  In  the  same  way  I
explain  proper  names  compounded  with  irman,  irmin  (Gramm.  2,
448).  And  irmansul,  irminsdl  is  the  great,  high,  divinely  honoured
statue ;  that  it  was  dedicated  to  any  one  god,  is  not  to  be  found  in
the  term  itself. — In  like  manner  the  AS.  has  eormencyn  (genus
humanum),  Beow.  309.  Cod.  Exon.  333,  3.  eormengrund  (terra),
Beow.  1711.  (and  singularly  in  an  adj.  form:  ofer  ealne  yrmenne
grund,  Cod.  Exon.  243,  13).  eormenstrfind  (progenies). — ON.
iormungrund  (terra),  iormungandr  (anguis  maximus),  iormunreJcr
(taurus  maximus).  Erom  all  this  may  be  gathered  the  high  mythic
antiquity  of  these  appellations,  and  their  diffusion  among  all
branches  of  the  Teutonic  race ;  for  neither  to  the  Goths  can  they
have  been  strange,  as  their  famous  king's  name  Ermanaricus
(Airmanareiks,  ON.  Ib'rmunrekr)  shows ;  and  beyond  a  doubt  the
Hvrmunduri  are  properly  Ermunduri  (Gramm.  2, 175),  the  H  being
often  prefixed  to  all  such  forms.

Now  whatever  may  be  the  probable  meaning  of  the  word  irman,
iormun,  eormen,  to  which  I  shall  return  in  due  time,  one  thing  is
evident,  that  the  Irman-pillar  had  some  connexion,  which  continued
to  be  felt  down  to  a  late  period  (p.H6),with  Mercury  or  Hermes,  to
whom  Greek  antiquity  raised  similar  posts  and  pillars,  which  were
themselves  called  Hermae,  a  name  which  suggests  our  Teutonic  one.

The  Saxons  may  have  known  more  about  this ;  the  Eranks,  in
Upper  Germany,  from  the  8th  to  the  13th  century,  connected  with
irmanstil,  irminsul  the  general  notion  of  a  heathen  image  set  up  on
a  pillar.  Probably  Euodolf  associated  with  his  truncus  ligni  the

1  The  Slav,  ramo,  Bohem.  ramenso,  is  with  transposition  the  Lat.  armus,
OHG.  aram,  and  means  both  arm  and  shoulder  ;  in  the  Sloven,  compound
ramen-velik,  valde  magnus,  it  intensifies  exactly  like  irman  ;  does  this  point  to
an  affinity  between  irman  and  arm  ?  Arminius  too  is  worth  considering  ;  conf.
Schailarik  1,  427.


IMAGES.  119

thought  of  a  choice  and  hallowed  tree-stem  (with,  or  without,  a
god's  image  ?),  rather  than  of  a  pillar  hewn  into  shape  by  the  hand
of  man ;  this  fits  in  too  with  the  worshipping  sub  divo,  with  the
word  lucus  used  by  some  of  the  chroniclers,  and  with  the  simplicity
of  the  earliest  forest-worship.  As  the  image  melts  into  the  notion
of  tree,  so  does  the  tree  pass  into  that  of  image ;  and  our  West-
phalian  Irmen-pillar  most  naturally  suggests  the  idea  of  that
Thor's-oak  in  Hesse ;  the  evangelists  converted  both  of  them  into
churches  of  St.  Peter.  I  suspect  an  intimate  connexion  between
the  Irman-pillars  and  the  Roland-pillars  erected  in  the  later  Mid.
Ages,  especially  in  North  Germany ;  there  were  in  Sweden  Thor's-
pillars,  and  among  the  Anglo-Saxons  ^Ethelstdn-pillars  (Lappenberg
1,  376).  There  yet  remains  to  be  given  an  account  of  a  sacred  post
in  Neustria,  as  contained  in  the  Vita  Walarici  abbatis  Leuconensis
(f622),  said  to  have  been  composed  in  the  8th  century :  Et  juxta
ripam  ipsius  fluminis  slips  erat  magnus,  diversis  imaginibus  figuratus,
atque  ibi  in  terrain  magna  virtute  immissus,  qui  nimio  cultu  morem
gentilium  a  rusticis  colebatur.  Walaricus  causes  the  log  to  be
thrown  down :  et  his  quidem  rusticis  habitantibus  in  locis  non
parvum  tarn  moerorem  quam  et  stuporem  omnibus  praebuit.  Sed
undique  illis  certatim  concurrentibus  cum  armis  et  fustibus,  indigne
hoc  ferentes  invicem,  ut  injuriam  dei  sui  vindicarent  (Acta  Bened.
sec.  2,  pp.  84-5).  The  place  was  called  Augusta  (bourg  d'  Angst,
near  the  town  of  Eu),  and  a  church  was  built  on  the  spot.


I  think  I  have  now  shown,  that  in  ancient  Germany  there  were
gods  and  statues.  It  will  further  be  needful  to  consider,  how
antiquity  went  to  work  in  identifying  foreign  names  of  gods  with
German,  and  conversely  German  with  foreign.

The  Eomans  in  their  descriptions  cared  a  great  deal  more  to
make  themselves  partially  understood  by  a  free  translation,  than,
by  preserving  barbarous  vocables,  to  do  a  service  to  posterity.  At
the  same  time  they  did  not  go  arbitrarily  to  work,  but  evidently
with  care.

Caesar's  Sol,  Luna  and  Vulcan  are  perhaps  what  satisfies  us
least ;  but  Tacitus  seems  never  to  use  the  names  of  Eoman  deities,
except  advisedly  and  with  reflection.  Of  the  gods,  he  names  only
Mercury  and  Mars  (Germ.  9.  Ann.  13,  57.  Hist,  4,  64) ;  of  deified
heroes,  Hercules,  Castor  and  Pollux  (Germ.  9,  43) ;  of  goddesses,


120  GODS.

his  (Germ.  9),  the  terra  mater  by  her  German  name  (Germ.  40),
and  the  mater  deum  (Germ.  45).  Incompatible  deities,  such  as
Apollo  or  Bacchus,  are  never  compared.  What  strikes  us  most,  is
the  absence  of  Jupiter,  and  the  distinction  given  to  Mercury,  who
was  but  a  deity  of  the  second  rank  with  the  Eomans,  a  mere  god
of  merchants,  but  here  stands  out  the  foremost  of  all:  Deorum
maxime  Mercurium  colunt :  to  him  alone  do  human  sacrifices  fall,
while  Mars  and  Hercules  content  themselves  with  beasts.  This
prominence  of  Mercury  is  probably  to  be  explained  by  the  fact,
that  this  god  was  worshipped  by  the  Gauls  likewise  as  their  chief
divinity,  and  was  the  most  frequently  portrayed  (deum  maxime
Mercurium  colunt,  hujus  sunt  plurima  simulacra,  Caes.  B.  Gall.  6,
17)  ;x  and  that  the  looks  of  the  Eomans,  when  directed  towards
Germany,  still  saw  Gaul  in  the  foreground ;  besides,  it  may  have
been  Gallic  informants  that  set  the  German  divinity  before  them  in
this  light.  Observe  too  the  Gaulish  juxtaposition  of  Mars  and
Mercurius  in  statues  (p.l  11), precisely  as  Tacitus  names  the  German
ones  together  (Ann.  13,  57).  The  omission  of  Jupiter  is  obviously
accounted  for,  by  his  worship  yielding  the  precedence  to  that  of
Mercury  in  those  nations  which  Tacitus  knew  best :  we  shall  see,  as
we  go  on,  that  the  northern  and  remoter  branches  on  the  contrary
reserved  their  highest  veneration  for  the  thunder-god.  On  his  and
Hercules  I  shall  express  my  views  further  on.  Whom  we  are  to
understand  by  the  Dioscuri,  is  hard  to  guess ;  most  likely  two  sons
of  Woden,  and  if  we  go  by  the  statements  of  the  Edda,  the  brothers
Baldr  and  Hermoftr  would  be  the  most  fitting.

This  adaptation  of  classical  names  to  German  gods  became
universally  spread,  and  is  preserved  with  strict  unanimity  by  the
Latin  writers  of  the  succeeding  centuries ;  once  set  in  circulation,
it  remained  current  and  intelligible  for  long  ages.

The  Gothic  historian  names  but  one  god  after  the  Roman  fashion,
and  that  is  Mars :  Quein  Gothi  semper  asperrima  placavere  cultura
(Jornandes  cap.  5),  with  which  the  Scythian  Ares,  so  early  as  in
Herodotus  4,  62-3,  may  be  compared.

Paulus  Diaconus  winds  up  his  account  of  Wodan  with  the
express  announcement  (1,  9):  Wodan  sane,  quern  adjecta  litera
Gwodan  dixerunt,  ipse  est  qui  apud  Eomanos  Mercurius  dicitur,  et

1  Schopflin,  Als.  ill.  1,  435-60  ;  esp.  on  a  fanum  of  Mercury  at  Ebermiinster
1 ,  58.  Conf.  Hummel,  bibl.  deutsch.  alterth.  p.  229.  Creuzer,  altrom.  cultur  am.
Oberrhein,  pp.  48,  98.


GODS.  121

ab  universis  Germaniae  gentibus  ut  deus  adoratur.  Just  so  his
older  countryman  Jonas  of  Bobbio,  in  that  account  of  the  sacrificing
Alamanns,  declares  :  Illi  aiunt,  deo  suo  Vodano,  quern  Mercurium
vocant  alii,  se  velle  litare ;  upon  which,  a  gloss  inserted  by  another  •
hand  says  less  correctly :  Qui  apud  eos  Yuotant  vocatur,  Latini
autem  Martem  ilium  appellant ;  though  otherwise  Woden  greatly
resembles  Mars  (v.  infra).

Gregory  of  Tours  (supra,  p.107)  makes  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  and
again  Mars  MercuriusquQ  the  gods  whom  the  heathen  Chlodovich
adored.  In  1,  34  he  expresses  himself  in  more  general  terms:  Pri-
vatus,  Gabalitanae  urbis  episcopus.  .  .  .  daemoniis  immolare  com-
pellitur  a  Chroco  Alamannorum  rege  (in  the  third  cent.).  Wide-
kind  of  Corvei  names  Mars  and  Hercules  as  gods  of  the  Saxons  (see
p.  Ill);  and  that  little  addition  to  the  Corvei  Annals  (see  p.lll)
couples  together  the  Greek  and  Latin  denominations  Aris  and  Mars,
Ermis  and  Mercurius.

The  Indiculus  paganiarum  reckons  up,  under  8:  De  sacris
Mercurii  vel  Jovis1 ;  under  20  :  De  feriis  quae  faciunt  Jovi  vel
Mercurio.  So  that  the  thunder-god,  of  whom  Tacitus  is  silent,  is
in  other  quarters  unforgotten ;  and  now  we  can  understand  Wili-
bald's  narrative  of  the  robur  Jovis  (see  p.  72),  and  in  Bonifac.
epist.  25  (A.D.  723)  the  presbyter  Jovi  mactans  (see  Suppl.).

In  the  Additamenta  operum  Matthaei  Paris,  ed.  W.  Watts,
Paris  1644,  pp.  25-6,  there  is  an  old  account  of  some  books  which
are  said  to  have  been  discovered  in  laying  the  foundation  of  a  church
at  Verlamacestre  (St  Albans)  in  the  tenth  century,  and  to  have  been
burnt.  One  of  them  contained  '  invocationes  et  ritus  idololatrarurn
civium  Varlamacestrensium,  in  quibus  comperit,  quod  specialiter
Phoebum  deum  solis  invocarunt  et  coluerunt,  secundario  vero  Mer
curium,  Voden  anglice  appellatum,  deum  videlicet  mercatorum,
quia  cives  et  compatriotae  .  .  .  fere  omnes  negotiatores
et  institores  fuerunt.'  Evidently  the  narrator  has  added  somewhat
out  of  his  own  erudition;  the  invocations  and  rites  themselves
would  have  given  us  far  more  welcome  information.

Passages  which  appear  to  speak  of  a  German  goddess  by  the
name  of  Diana,  will  be  given  later.  Neptune  is  mentioned  a  few
times  (supra,  p.  110).

1  Had  these  been  Roman  gods,  Jupiter  would  certainly  have  been  named
first,  and  Mercury  after.


122  GODS.

Saxo  Grammaticus,  though  he  writes  in  Latin,  avoids  applying
the  Eoman  names  of  gods,  he  uses  Othinus  or  Othin,  never
Mercurius  instead ;  yet  once,  instead  of  his  usual  Thor  (pp.  41,
103),  he  has  Jupiter,  p.  236,  and  malleus  Jovialis ;  Mars  on  p.  36
seems  to  stand  for  Othin,  not  for  Tyr,  who  is  never  alluded  to  in
Saxo.  Ermoldus  Nigellus,  citing  the  idols  of  the  Normanni,  says  4,  9
(Pertz  2,  501),  that  for  God  (the  Father)  they  worshipped  Neptune,
and  for  Christ  Jupiter ;  I  suppose  Neptune  must  here  mean  OSin,
and  Jupiter  Thor  ;  the  same  names  recur  4,  69.  100.  453-5.

Melis-Stoke,  as  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  14th  century,  still
remembers  that  the  heathen  Frisians  worshipped  Mercury  (1,  16.
17) ;  I  cannot  indicate  the  Latin  authority  from  which  no  doubt  he
drew  this.1

If  the  supposition  be  allowed,  and  it  seems  both  a  justifiable
and  almost  a  necessary  one,  that,  from  the  first  century  and  during
the  six  or  eight  succeeding  ones,  there  went  on  an  uninterrupted
transfer  of  the  above-mentioned  and  a  few  similar  Latin  names  of
gods  to  domestic  deities  of  Gaul  and  Germany,  and  was  familiar
to  all  the  educated  ;  we  obtain  by  this  alone  the  solution  of  a
remarkable  phenomenon  that  has  never  yet  been  satisfactorily
explained :  the  early  diffusion  over  half  Europe  of  the  heathen
nomenclature  of  the  days  of  the  week.

These  names  are  a  piece  of  evidence  favourable  to  German
heathenism,  and  not  to  be  disregarded.

The  matter  seems  to  me  to  stand  thus.2 — From  Egypt,  through
the  Alexandrians,  the  week  of  seven  days  (e/SSo/^a?),  which  in
Western  Asia  was  very  ancient,  came  into  vogue  among  the  Eomans,
but  the  planetary  nomenclature  of  the  days  of  the  week  apparently
not  till  later.  Under  Julius  Caesar  occurs  the  earliest  mention
of  'dies  Saturni'  in  connection  with  the  Jewish  sabbath,  Tibull.  1,
3,  18.  Then  fjKiov  ^epa  in  Justin  Mart,  apolog.  1,  67.  rEp/*ov
and  A^poSLT?)?  rjfjiepa  in  Clem.  Alex,  strom.  7,  12.  The  institution
fully  carried  out,  not  long  before  Dio  Cassius  37,.  18,  about  the  close

1  Our  MHG.  poets  impart  no  such  information  ;  they  only  trouble  their
heads  about  Saracen  gods,  among  whom  it  is  true  Jupiter  and  Apollo  make
their  appearance  too.     In  Rol.  97,  7  are  named  Mars,  Jovinus,  Saturnus.

2  I  can  here  use  only  the  beginning,  not  the  conclusion,  which  would  be
more  useful  for  my  investigation,  of  a  learned  paper  by  Julius  Hare  on  the
names  of  the  days  of  the  week  (Philolog.  Mus.,  Nov.  1831).     Conf.  Idelers
handb.  der  chronol.  2,  177-180,  and  Letronne,  observations  sur  les  repre'senta-
tions  zodiacales,  p.  99.


GODS   OF  THE   WEEK.  123

of  the  2nd  century.1  The  Eomans  had  previously  had  a  week  of
nine  days,  nundmae=novendinae.  Christianity  had  adopted  from
the  Jews  the  hebdomas,  and  now  it  could  not  easily  guard  the
church  against  the  idolatrous  names  of  days  either  (see  SuppL).

But  these  names,  together  with  the  institution  of  the  week,  had
passed  on  from  Eome  to  Gaul  and  Germany,  sooner  than  the
Christian  religion  did.  In  all  the  Eomance  countries  the  planetary
names  have  lasted  to  this  day  (mostly  in  a  very  abridged  form),
except  for  the  first  day  and  the  seventh  :  instead  of  dies  solis  they
chose  dies  dominica  (Lord's  day),  It.  domenica,  Sp.  domingo,  Fr.
dimanche  ;  and  for  dies  Saturni  they  kept  the  Jewish  sabbatum,  It.
sabbato,  Sp.  sabado,  Fr.  samedi  (=sabdedi,  sabbati  dies).  But  the
heathen  names  of  even  these  two  days  continued  in  popular  use
long  after :  Ecce  enim  dies  solis  adest,  sic  enim  barbaries  vocitare
diem  dominicum  consueta  est,  Greg.  Tur.  3,  15.

Unhappily  a  knowledge  of  the  Gothic  names  of  days  is  denied
us.  The  sabbatd  dags,  salbato  dags,  which  alone  occurs  in  Ulphilas,
proves  nothing,  as  we  have  just  seen,  against  a  planetary  designation
of  the  remaining  six  or  five  days.  A  sunnons  dags,  a  menins
dags  may  be  guessed  ;  the  other  four,  for  us  the  most  important,  I
do  not  venture  to  suggest.  Their  preservation  would  have  been  of
the  very  highest  value  to  our  inquiry.

OLD  HIGH  GERM.— I.  sunndn  dag,  0.  v.  5,  22.  Gl.  bias.  I76a.
Lacombl.  arch.  1,  6. — II.  mdnin  tac  (without  authority,  for
manitag,  manotag  in  Graff  2,795.  5,  358  have  no  reference ;  manetag
in  Notker,  ps.  47,  1). — III.  dies  Martis,  prob.  Ziuwes  tac  among
Alamanns;  in  the  llth  cent.  Cies  dac,  Gl.  bias.  76a;2  prob.  different
among  Bavarians  and  Lombards. — IV.  dies  Mercurii,  perhaps  still
Wuotanes  tac  ?  our  abstract  term,  diu  mittawecha  already  in  N".  ps.
93,  and  mittwocha,  Gl.  bias.  76b. — V.  dies  Jovis,  Donares  tac,  Toniris
tac,  N.  ps.  80, 1.  domestic,  Gl.  bias.  76a.  Burcard  von  Worms  195b:
quintam  feriam  in  honorem  Jovis  honorati. — VI.  dies  Veneris,  Fria
dag,  0.  v.  4,  6.  Frije  tag,  T.  211,  1.— VII.  at  last,  like  the  Eomance
and  Gothic,  avoiding  the  heathenish  dies  Saturni,  sambaziag,  T.  68,
1.  K  91,  I.3  samiztag,  K  88,  40.  sunntin  aland,  our  sonnabend,

1  An  old  hexameter  at  the   end  of  the  editions  of  Ausonius  :   Ungues
Mercurio,  barbam  Jove,  Cy pride  crines  (nails  on  Wednesday,  beard  on  Thursday
hair  on  Friday).

2  Cies  for  Zies,  as  the  same  glossist  86a  writes  gicimbere  and  cinnurn.

3  Sambazolus  n.  prop,  in  Karajan.


124


GODS.


already  in  0.  v.  4,  9,  prob.  abbreviation  of  sunnundages  aband,  feria
ante  dominicam,  for  vespera  solis  cannot  have  been  meant  [conf.
Engl.  Whitsun-eve] ;  and  occasionally,  corresponding  to  the  Kom-
ance  dies  dominica,  frontag,  N.  ps.  23.

MID.  HIGH  GERM.— Would  any  one  believe,  that  the  names  of
the  days  of  the  week  are  not  easily  to  be  picked  out  of  the  abun
dant  remains  of  our  MHG.  literature  ?  It  is  true,  sunnen  tac
(suntac  in  Berth.  118)  and  maniac  (Parz.  452,  16.  mcentac  498,  22.
Amis  1648)1  admit  of  no  doubt.  Neither  do  Donrestac  (Donerstag,
Uolrich  73a.  Dunrestac,  Berth.  128),  spelt  Duristag  in  a  Semi-
Low  Germ.  urk.  of  1300  in  Hofer  p.  57),  and  Dornstag  in  one  of
1495,  Useners  femgerichten  p.  131 ;  nor  Fritac  (Parz.  448,  7.  470,
1.  Walth.  36,  31.  Berth.  134),  Vriegtag,  Uolrich  73a;  nor  yet
samztac  (Parz.  439,  2.  Berth.  138),  sunnen  abent  (Trist.  3880). —
But  uncertainty  hangs  about  the  third  and  fourth  days.  The
former,  by  a  remarkable  variation,  was  in  Bavaria  named  Eritac,
Erdac  (the  true  form  not  quite  certain,  eritag  in  Adelung's  vat.
hss.  2,  189.  ergetag  in  Berth.  122  ;  see  examples  collected  from
urkunden,  Schm.  1,  96-7),  in  Swabia  on  the  contrary  Ziestac,  for
Ziewestac.  Both  of  these  forms,  which  have  nothing  to  do  with
each  other,  live  to  this  day  in  the  speech  of  the  common  people :
Bav.  ierte,  Austr.  iarla,  irita,  Vicentino-Germ.  eortd,  ortd,  Alem.
ziestag,  zinstag,  ziestig,  zistiff,  zienstig,  zeinstig,  zinstag.  The  insertion  of
the  liquid  has  corrupted  the  word,  and  brought  in  quite  irrelevant
notions.  In  central  Germany  the  form  diestag,  tiestag  seems  to
predominate  (diestik  in  the  Pthon),  whence  our  dienstag  (less  cor
rectly  dinstag,  there  is  good  reason  for  the  ie) ;  the  spelling  ding-
stag,  as  if  from  ding,  thing,  juclicium,  is  false ;  dinstag  occurs  in
Gaupps  magdeb.  recht  p.  272. — The  fourth  day  I  have  never  seen
named  after  the  god,  either  in  MHG.  or  in  our  modern  dialects,
unless  indeed  the  gwontig  cited  in  the  note  can  be  justified  as
standing  for  Gwuotenstag,  Wuotenstag;  everywhere  that  abstrac
tion  '  midweek '  has  carried  all  before  it,  but  it  has  itself  become

1  Zuemtig  for  Monday,  Staid.  2,  470  ought  perhaps  to  be  zue  mentig,  ze
mantage ;  yet  1,  490  he  has  guenti,  giienti,  Tobler  248b  has  gwontig,
guentig,  and  Zellwegers  urk.  lb,  19  guonti,  for  which  Urk.  no.  146
has  'an  gutem  tag,'  which  seems  to  be  supported  by  Haltaus
jahrzeitb.  Or  is  only  this  particular  Monday  after  Lent  called  sol  In
the  Cod.  pal.  372,  103  (ann.  1382)  we  have  'giiotem  tag.'  The  resemblance
of  this  good  day  to  the  Westphalian  Gudensdag  (Woden's  day)  is  purely
accidental.


GODS    OF   THE   WEEK.  125

almost  unintelligible  by  being  changed  into  a  masculine  mitlwoch,
mittich,  Berth.  24,  maktig,  Staid.  2,  194,  conf.  the  Gothl.  majkadag,
Almqv.  442a),  '  an  der  mitkun*  fern.,  is  found  in  the  Cod.  zaringobad.
no.  140  (A.D.  1261).  So  even  for  the  fifth  day,  the  numeric  name
phinztac  (Berth.  128.  Ottoc.  144a.  Gratzer  urk.  of  1338.  Schwa-
benspiegel,  p.  196.  Schm.  1,  322),  or  phingstag,  has  made  its
way  into  some  districts  of  Upper  Germany  through  Greco-Slavic
influences,  Tre^Trr??,  petek,  piatek,  patek,  though  by  these  the  Slavs
mean  Friday  (see  Suppl.).

NEW    HIGH   GERM. — I.    sonntag.    II.  montag.     III.  Dienstag.

IV.  mittwoch.      V.    Donnerstag.      VI.     Freitag.      VII.    samstag,
sonnabend.

OLD  SAXON. — The  OS.  names  are  wanting,  but  must  have
differed  in  some  essential  points  from  the  OIIG.,  as  the  derived
dialects  prove.  We  may  pretty  safely  assume  Wddanes  dag  for
the  fourth  day  of  the  week,  for  in  Westphalia  it  is  still  called
Godenstag,  Gonstag,  Gaunstag,  Gunstag,  at  Aix  Gguesdag,  in  Lower
Rhen.  urkunden  Gudestag,  Giinther,  3,  585.  611  (A.D.  1380-7),
Gudenstag,  Kindlinger  horigk.  p.  577-8  (A.D.  1448). — The  third  day
was  probably  Tiwesdag,  the  fifth  Thunaresdag,  the  sixth  Friundag.
The  most  unlike  would  doubtless  be  the  seventh,  was  it  formed
after  dies  Saturni,  Sdteresdag  ?  conf.  the  Westph.  Saterstag,  Saiter-
staig,  Giinter  3,  502  (A.D.  1365).  In  Sachsensp.  2,  66  one  MS.  reads
for  sunavend  Satersdach  (see  Suppl.).

MID.  DUTCH. — I.  sondach,  Maerl.  2,  159.  II.  manendach,  Huyd.
op  St.  3,  389.  maendadi,  Maerl.  2,  139.  III.  Disendach,  Maerl.
2,  140.  al.  Dicendach,  Dissendach,  Cannaert  strafrecht,  pp.  124,  481
apparently  corrupted  from  Tisdach.  IV.  Wocnsdach,  Maerl.  2,  143.

V.  Donresdach,  Maerl.  2,  144.     VI.  Vridach,  Maerl.  2,  159.     gen.
Vrindagh&t,   Maerl.  2,   143.   157.     VII.  Saterdach,  Maerl.  2,  114.
120-3.  157-9.  276.  3,  197.  343.    also  sonnacht,  Maerl.  2,  164.  3,  240.
(see  Suppl.).

NEW  DUTCH. — I.  zondag.  II.  mdndag.  III.  dingsdag,  for
merly  dinsdag,  Dissendag.  IV.  Woensdag,  Belg.  Goensdag.  V.
Donderdag.  VI.  Vridag.  VII.  Zaterdag.

OLD  FRISIAN. — I.  sonnadei.  II.  monadci.  III.  Tysdei.  IV.
Wernsdei.  V.  Tkunresdei,  Tornsdei.  VI.  Frigendei,  Fredei.  VII.
Saterdei  (references  for  all  these  forms  in  Richthofen).

NEW  FRISIAN. — I.  sneyn,  abbrev.  from  sinnedey,  sendei,  senned


126  GODS.

(conf.  Frud) ;  the  final  n  in  sneyn,  no  doubt,  as  in  OFris.  Frigendei,
a  relic  of  the  old  gen.  sing,  in  the  weak  decl.  II.  moandey.  III.
Tyesdcy.  IV.  Wdnsdey.  V.  Tongersdey.  VI.  Fred,  abbrev.  from
Fredey.  VII.  sniuwn,  snioun,  abbrev.  from  sinnejuwn  =  Sun(day)-
even.  Conf.  tegenwoordige  staat  van  Friesland  1,  121.  Was-
senbergh's  bidraghen  2,  56.  Halbertsma  naoogst  p.  281-2  (see
Suppl.).

NORTH  FEISIAN. — I.  sennendei.  II.  monnendei.  III.  Tirsdei.
IV.  Winsdei.  V.  Tursdei.  VI.  Fridei.  VII.  sennin  (in = even).

ANGLO-SAXON. — I.  sonnan  dseg.  II.  monan  daeg.  III.  2Y?0es
dseg.  IV.  Wodenes  or  Forces  daeg.  V.  Thunores  dceg.  VI.
-Fr^e  daag.  VII.  Scetres  or  Sceternes  daeg.

OLD  NORSE. — I.  sunnudagr.1  II  mdnadagr.  III.  Tyrsdagr,
Tysdagr.  IV.  O&insdagr.  V.  Thorsdagr.  VI.  Friadagr,  Frey-
judagr.  VII.  laugardagr.

SWEDISH. — I.  sondag.  II.  mandag.  III.  Tisdag,  whence
even  Finn,  tystai.  IV.  Onsdag.  V.  Tliorsdag.  VI.  Fredag
VII.  lordag.

DANISH. — I  sondag.  II.  mandag.  III.  Tirsdag.  IV.  Ows-
c%.  V.  Torsdag.  VI.  Fredag.  VII.  loverdag  (see  Suppl.).

We  see,  it  is  only  in  the  seventh  day  that  the  Scandinavian
names  depart  from  the  Saxon,  Frisian  and  Dutch :  laugardagr
means  bath-day  because  people  bathed  at  the  end  of  the  week.
Yet  even  here  there  may  be  some  connexion  ;  a  Latin  poem  of  the
9th  century  on  the  battle  of  Fontenay  (Bouquet  7,  304)  has  the
singular  verse :  Sabbatum  non  illud  fuit,  sed  Saturni  dolium ;  a
devil's  bath  ?  conf.  ch.  XII,  Saturn.  [The  Germ,  for  carnage  is
blutbad,  blood-bath.]

Even  if  the  Germans  from  the  earliest  times  knew  the  week  of
seven  days  from  the  four  phases  of  the  lunar  change,2  yet  the

1  This  ON.  sunnudagr  is  noticeable,  as  in  other  cases  sol  is  used  rather  than
sunna  ;  sunnudagr  seems  to  have  been  formed  by  the  Christian  teachers  in  imita
tion  of  the  other  Teutonic  languages.     The  Swed.  and  Dan.  sondag  (instead  of
Boldag)  must  have  been  taken  bodily  from  a  Plattdeutsch  form.

2  To  the  Lat.  word  vix,  gen.  vicis  (change,  turn)  corresponds,  without  the
usual  consonant-change,  the  Gothic  vikti,  OHG.  wecha  and  wehsal,  both  refer
able  to  the  verb  veika,  vaik,  OHG.  wiclm  (I  give  way),  because  change  is  a
giving  way  [in  German,  '  der  wechsel  ist  ein  weichen '].     Ulph.  has  viko  only
once,  Lu.  1,  8,  where  ey  777  ragci  TTJS  f^^epias  is  translated  *  in  vikon  kunjis ' ;  it
is  evidently  something  more  than  rd^ts  here,  it  expresses  at  the  same  time  a  part
of  the  gen.  e^/ufptay,  therefore  lit.  '  in  vice  generis  ',  which  the  Vulg.  renders


GODS   OF   THE   WEEK.  127

naming  of  the  days  and  the  order  in  which  they  stand  is  manifestly
an  importation  from  abroad.  On  the  contrary  supposition,  there
would  have  been  variation  in  details ;  and  Saturn,  for  whom  no
Teutonic  god  seems  prepared  to  stand  sponsor,  would  have  been  left
out  in  the  cold.

But  it  would  be  no  less  absurd  to  attribute  the  introduction  of
the  week  and  the  names  of  the  days  to  the  Christians.  As  they
came  into  vogue  among  the  heathen  Romans,  they  could  just
as  well  among  heathen  Gauls  and  Germans ;  nay,  considering
the  lively  intercourse  between  the  three  nations,  a  rapid
diffusion  is  altogether  natural.1  Christianity  had  the  Jewish  week,
and  it  tolerated  names  which  were  a  frequent  offence  to  it,  but  were
already  too  deeply  rooted,  and  could  only  be  partially  dislodged.
Those  words  of  Gregory  reveal  the  utter  aversion  of  the  clergy,
which  comes  .out  still  more  plainly  in  the  language  (publ.  in  Syn
tagma  de  baptismo,  p.  190)  of  an  Icelandic  bishop  in  1107,  who
actually  did  away  with  them  in  Iceland,  and  replaced  them  by
mere  numeric  names.  How  should  the  Christian  teachers  ever  have
suffered  hateful  names  of  idols  to  be  handed  over  to  their  recent
converts  for  daily  use,  unless  they  had  already  been  long  established
among  the  people  ?  And  in  Germany,  how  should  the  Latin  gods
have  been  allowed  to  get  translated  into  German  ones,  as  if  on  pur
pose  to  put  them  within  easy  reach  of  the  people,  had  they  not
already  been  familiar  with  them  for  centuries  ?

Again,  the  high  antiquity  of  these  translations  is  fully  establish
ed  by  their  exact  accordance  with  the  terminology  used  in  the  first
centuries,  as  soon  as  people  came  to  turn  German  gods  into  Roman.
In  my  opinion,  the  introduction  of  the  seven  days'  names

by  '  in  ordine  vicis  '.  Now  whether  viko  expressed  to  the  Goths  the  alterna
tion  of  the  moon's  quarters,  we  do  not  know  for  certain  ;  I  incline  to  believe
it,  as  the  OHG.  weha,  woclia,  AS.  wice,  wuce,  ON.  vika,  Swed.  vecka,  Dan.
uge,  are  all  limited  to  the  one  meaning  of  septimana.  The  very  absence  of  con
sonant-change  points  to  a  high  antiquity  in  the  word.  It  is  remarkable  that
the  Javanese  vuku  means  a  section  of  time,  the  year  falling  into  30  vukus
(Humb.  Kawispr.  1,  196).  The  Finn,  wijkko  is  more  likely  to  have  been
borrowed  from  the  Norse  than  from  so  far  back  as  the  Gothic.  I  remark
further,  that  an  observance  by  the  Germani  of  sections  of  time  must  be  inferred
from  the  mere  fact  that  certi  dies  were  fixed  for  the  sacrifices  to  Mercury,  Tac.
Germ.  9.

1  Jos.  Fuchs,  gesch.  yon  Mainz  2,  27  seq.  (Kupfert  4,  no  7)  describes  a
Roman  round  altar,  prob.  of  the  3rd  or  4th  century,  on  which  are  carved  the
seven  gods  of  the  week  (1  Saturn,  2  Apollo,  3  Diana,  4  Mars,  5  Mercury,  6
Jupiter,  7  Venus),  and  in  an  8th  place  a  genius.


128  GODS.

amongst  us  must  be  placed  at  latest  in  the  fourth  or  fifth  century  ;
it  may  not  have  taken  place  simultaneously  in  all  parts  of  Teuton-
dom.

Our  forefathers,  caught  in  a  natural  delusion,  began  early  to
ascribe  the  origin  of  the  seven  days'  names  to  the  native  gods  of
their  fatherland. — William  of  Malmesbury,  relating  the  arrival  of
the  Saxons  in  Britain,  says  of  Hengist  and  Horsa,  that  they  were
sprung  from  the  noblest  ancestry:  Erant  enim  abnepotes  illius
antiquissimi  Voden,  de  quo  omnium  pene  barbararum  gentium
regium  genus  lineam  trahit,  quemque  gentes  Anglorum  deum  esse
delirantes,  ei  quartum  diem  septimanae,  et  sextum  uxori  ejus  Freae
perpetuo  ad  hoc  tempus  consecraverunt  sacrilegio  (Savile  1601.  p.
9). — More  circumstantially,  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  (lib.  6.  ed.  1587,
p.  43)  makes  Hengist  say  to  Yortigern :  Ingressi  sumus  maria,
regnum  tuum  duce  Mercurio  petivimus.  Ad  nomen  itaque  Mer-
curii  erecto  vultu  rex  inquirit  cujusmodi  religionem  haberent?  cui
Hengistus  :  deos  patrios  Saturnum,  atque  ceteros,  qui  munclum
gubernant,  colimus,  maxime  Mer  curium  (as  in  Tac.  9.),  quern  Woden
lingua  nostra  appellamus.  Huic  veteres  nostri  dicaverunt  quartam
septimanae  feriam,  quae  usque  in  hodiernum  diem  nomen  Wodenes-
dai  de  nomine  ipsius  sortita  est.  Post  ilium  colimus  dcam  inter
ceteras  potentissimam,  cui  et  dicaverunt  sextam  feriam,  quam  de
nomine  ejus  Fredai  vocamus. — As  Matthew  of  Westminster  (Flores,
ed.  1601,  p.  82)  varies  in  some  details,  his  words  may  also  be
inserted  here :  Cumque  tandem  in  praesentia  regis  (Vortigerni)
essent  constituti,  quaesivit  ab  eis,  quam  fidem,  quam  religionem
patres  eorum  coluissent  ?  cui  Hengistus :  dcos  patrios,  scilicet
Saturnum,  Jovem  atque  ceteros,  qui  mundum  gubernant,  colimus,
maxime  autcm  Mercurium,  quern  lingua  nostra  Voden  appellamus.
Huic  patres  nostri  veteres  dedicaverunt  quartam  feriam  septimanae,
quae  in  hunc  hodiernum  diem  Vodenesday  appellatur.  Post  ilium
colimus  deam  inter  ceteras  potentissimam,  vocabulo  Frcam,  cujus
vocabulo  Friday  appellamus.  Frea  ut  volunt  quidam  idem  est
quod  Venus,  et  dicitur  Frea,  quasi  Froa  a  frodos  [A-frod-ite  =  from
froth  ?]  quod  est  spuma  maris,  de  qua  nata  est  Venus  secimdiini
fabulas,  unde  idem  dies  appellatur  dies  Veneris. — Anglo-Saxon
legend  then,  unconcerned  at  the  jumbling  of  foreign  and  homespun
fable,  has  no  doubt  at  all  about  the  high  antiquity  of  the  names
among  its  people.


GODS.  129

Saxo  Grammaticus,  more  critical,  expresses  his  opinion  (p.  103)
of  the  Norse  nomenclature,  that  it  is  derived  from  the  native  gods,
but  that  these  are  not  the  same  as  the  Latin.  This  he  proves  by
Othin  and  Thor,  after  whom  the  fourth  and  fifth  days  of  the  week
are  named,  as  in  Latin  after  Mercury  and  Jupiter.  For  Thor,
being  Othin's  son,  cannot  possibly  be  identified  with  Jupiter,  who
is  Mercury's  father;  consequently,  neither  can  the  Norse  Othin,
Thor's  father,  with  the  Eoman  Mercury,  who  is  Jupiter's  son.  The
discrepancy  is  certainly  strong,  but  all  that  it  can  prove  is,  that  at
the  time  when  Othin  and  Mercury  began  to  be  placed  on  the  same
pedestal,  Mercury  was  thought  of  as  a  Celtic  divinity,  probably
with  attributes  differing  widely  from  his  classical  namesake.  Saxo
is  quite  right  in  what  he  means,  and  his  remark  confirms  the  early
heathen  origin  of  these  names  of  days  ; l  yet  upon  occasion,  as  we
saw  on  p.  122,  he  lets  himself  be  carried  away  after  all  by  the  over
powering  identity  of  Thor  and  Jupiter  (see  SuppL).

The  variations  too  in  the  names  of  the  seven  days  among  the
various  Teutonic  races  deserve  all  attention ;  we  perceive  that  they
were  not  adopted  altogether  cut-and-dry,  nor  so  retained,  but  that
national  ideas  still  exercised  some  control  over  them.  The  later
heathenism  of  Friesland  and  Saxony  caused  the-  old  names  of
Wednesday  and  Saturday  to  live  on,  while  in  Upper  Germany  they
soon  sank  into  oblivion.  But  what  is  especially  significant  to  us,
is  the  deviation  of  the  Alamanns  and  Bavarians  when  we  come  to
the  third  day ;  how  could  it  have  arisen  at  a  later  (Christian)  time,
when  the  idea  of  the  heathen  god  that  does  duty  for  Mars  had
already  become  indistinct  ?  how  came  the  Christian  clergy,  supposing
that  from  them  the  naming  had  proceeded,  ever  to  sanction  such  a
divergence  ?

The  nations  that  lie  behind  us,  the  Slavs,  the  Lithuanians,  do
not  know  the  planetary  names  of  days,  they  simply  count  like  the
Greeks,2  not  because  they  were  converted  later,  but  because  they
became  acquainted  with  Latin  culture  later.  The  Finns  and  Lapps


1  Conf.  Pet.  Er.  Muller  om  Saxo,  p.  79.

2  The  Indian  nations  also  name  their  days  of  the  week  after  planets  ;  and
it  seems  worth  remarking  here,  that  Wednesday  is  in  Sanskrit  Budhuvaras,
Tamil  Budhunkiiramei,  because  some  have  identified  Buddha  with  Woden.    In
reality  Budhas,  the  ruler  of  Mercury  and  son  of  the  moon,  is  quite  distinct  from
the  prophet  Buddhas  (Schlegel's  ind.  bibl.  2.  177).

9


130  GODS.

do  not  count,  while  the  Esthonians  again  mostly  do  (see  SuppL).
Even  the  christianizing  influence  of  Byzantium  decided  nothing  on
this  point;  Byzantium  had  no  influence  over  Lithuanians  and  Finns,
and  had  it  over  a  part  only  of  the  Slavs.  These  in  their  counting
begin  with  Monday,  as  the  first  day  after  rest,  consequently  Tues
day  is  their  second,  and  Thursday  their  fourth,1  altogether  deviating
from  the  Latin  and  Icelandic  reckoning,  which  makes  Monday  second
and  Thursday  fifth.  Hence  the  Slavic  piatek  (fifth)  means  Friday,
and  that  Up.  Germ,  pfinztag  (fifth)  Thursday.  Wednesday  they
call  middle,  sreda,  sereda,  srida  (whence  Lith.  serrada),  which  may
have  acted  upon  our  High  German  nomenclature ;  the  Finns  too
have  keskivrijcko  (half -week,  from  keski  medium).  It  would  be  well
worth  finding  out,  when  and  for  what  reason  the  High  German  and
the  Slav  first  introduced  the  abstract  names  mittewoche  and  sreda
(Boh.  stfeda),  while  the  Low  German  and  the  Eomance  have  kept
to  Woden  and  Mercury.  Alone  of  Slavs,  the  Wends  in  Liineburg
show  a  trace  of  naming  after  a  god;  dies  Jovis  was  with  them
Perendan,  from  Peren,  Perun,  thunder-god:  apparently  a  mere
imitation  of  the  German,  as  in  all  the  other  days  they  agree  with
the  rest  of  the  Slavs.2

The  nett  result  of  these  considerations  is,  that,  in  Latin  records
dealing  with  Germany  and  her  gods,  we  are  warranted  in  interpret
ing,  with  the  greatest  probability,  Mercurius  as  Wuotan,  Jupiter  as
Donar,  and  Mars  as  Ziu.  The  gods  of  the  days  of  the  week
translated  into  German  are  an  experiment  on  Tacitus's  '  interpretatio
Komana'.

1  E.g.  in  Russian :  1,  voskresenie,  resurrection  (but   O.S1.  ne-delia,  no
ticing).     2,    po-nedel'nik,    day    after-no-work.     3,  vtornik,   second  day.     4,
sereda,  middle.     5,  chetverg,  fourth  day.     6,  piatnitsa,  fifth,  day.     7,  subbota,
sabbath. — TRANS.

2  It  is  striking,  that  in  0.  Bohem.  glossaries  (Hanka  54.  165)  Mercury,
Venus  and  Saturn  are  quoted  in  the  order  of  their  days  of  the  week  ;  and  that
any  Slav  deities  that  have  been  identified  with  Latin  ones  are  almost  sure  to
be  of  the  number  of  those  that  preside  over  the  week.     And  whilst  of  the  Slav
gods,  Svatovit  answers  to  Mars  (Ziu),  Radigast  to  Mercury  (Wuotan),  Perun  to
Jupiter  (Donar),  Lada  (golden  dame,  zolotababa,  in  Hanusch  241,  35b)  to  Venus
(Fria),  and  perhaps  Sitivrat  to  Saturn  ;  the  names  of  the  planets  are  construed
quite  otherwise,  Mars  by  Smrto-nos  (letifer),  Mercury  by  Dobro-pan  (good  lord,
or  rather  bonorum  dator),  Jupiter  by  Krale-moc  (rex  potens),  Venus  by  Ctitel
(cupitor  ]    venerandus  ?),  Saturn  by  Hlado-let  (famelicus,  or  annonae  caritatem
afterens).     Respecting  Sitivrat  I  give  details  at  the  end  of  ch.  XII.


CHAPTEE  VII.
WUOTAN,  WODAN  (ODINN).

THE  highest,  the  supreme  divinity,  universally  honoured,  as  we
have  a  right  to  assume,  among  all  Teutonic  races,  would  in  the
Gothic  dialect  have  been  called  Vddans ;  he  was  called  in  OHG.
Wuotan,  a  word  which  also  appears,  though  rarely,  as  the  name  of  a
man :  Wuotan,  Trad.  Fuld.  1, 149.  2, 101-5-8. 128. 158. 161.  Woatan
2,  146,  152.  The  Longobards  spelt  it  Wddan  or  Guddan,  the  Old
Saxons  Wuodan,  Wodan,  but  in  Westphalia  again  with  the  g  prefixed,
Guddan,  Gudan,  the  Anglo-Saxons  Woden,  the  Frisians  Weda  from
the  propensity  of  their  dialect  to  drop  a  final  n,  and  to  modify  6
even  when  not  followed  by  an  i.1  The  Norse  form  is  O&inn,  in
Saxo  Othinus,  in  the  Faroe  isles  Ouvin,  gen.  Ouvans,  ace.  Ouvan.
Up  in  the  Grisons  country — and  from  this  we  may  infer  the  extent
to  which  the  name  was  diffused  in  Upper  Germany — the  Romance
dialect  has  caught  the  term  Vut  from  Alamanns  or  Burgundians  of
a  very  early  time,  and  retained  it  to  this  day  in  the  sense  of  idol,
false  god,  1  Cor.  8,  4.2  (see  Suppl.).

It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the  word  is  immediately  derived
from  the  verb  OHG.  watan  wuot,  ON",  va&a,  6&,  signifying  meare,
transmeare,  cum  impetu  ferri,  but  not  identical  with  Lat.  vadere,  as
the  latter  has  the  a  long,  and  is  more  likely  connected  with  OS.
gavitan,  AS.  gewitan.  From  watan  comes  the  subst.  wuot  (our
wuth,  fury),  as  /ue'i/o?  and  animus  properly  mean  mens,  ingenium,
and  then  also  impetuosity,  wildness  ;  the  ON.-  58r  has  kept  to  the


1  A  Frisian  god  Warns  has  simply  been  invented  from  the  gen.  in  the
compound    Warnsclei,    Wernsdei    (Richth.    p.    1142),    where  Werns  plainly
stands  for  Wedens,;  Wodens,  an  r  being  put  for  d  to  avoid  collision  with
the  succeeding  sd  ;  it  will  be  hard  to  find  anywhere  a  nom.  Wern.     And  the
present  West  Frisians  say  Wansdey,  the  North  Frisians  Winsdei,  without
such  r.

2  Conradis  worterb.  263.     CHristmann,  pp.  30—32.


132  WODAN.

one  meaning  of  mens  or  sensus.1  According  to  this,  Wuotan,
Offinn  would  be  the  all-powerful,  all-penetrating  being,  qui  omnia
permeat ;  as  Lucan  says  of  Jupiter :  Est  quodcunque  vides,  quo-
cunque  moveris,  the  spirit-god2 ;  conf.  Virg.  Georg.  4,  221  :  Deum
ire  per  omnes  terras,  and  Eel.  3,  60 :  Jo  vis  omnia  plena.  In  the
popular  language  of  Bavaria,  wuetdn  is  to  bestir  oneself,  to  swarm,
grow  luxuriantly,  thrive,  Schm.  4,  203  (see  Suppl.).

How  early  this  original  meaning  may  have  got  obscured  or
extinguished,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  Together  with  the  meaning
of  wise  and  mighty  god,  that  of  the  wild,  restless,  vehement,  must
also  have  prevailed,  even  in  the  heathen  time.  The  Christians  were
the  better  pleased,  that  they  could  bring  the  bad  sense  into  promin
ence  out  of  the  name  itself.  In  the  oldest  glosses,  wotan  is  put  for
tyrannus,  hems  malus,  Diut.  1,  276b.  gl.  Ker.  270 ;  so  wucterich,
wuterich  (Gramm.  2,  516)  is  used  later  on,  and  down  to  the  present
day,  conf.  ein  ungestiiemer  wiieterich,  Ben.  431 ;  as  in  Mar.  217.
Herod's  messengers  of  murder  are  wiieteriche,  O.i.  19, 18  names  the
king  himself  yotewuoto.  The  form  ivuotunc  seems  not  to  differ  in
sense ;  an  unprinted  poem  of  the  13th  century  says  '  Wlietunges
her'  apparently  for  the  'wiitende  heer,'3  the  host  led  as  it  were  by
Wuotan ;  and  Wuotunc  is  likewise  a  man's  name  in  OIIG.,  Wodunc,
Trad,  patav.  no.  19.  The  former  divinity  was  degraded  into  an  evil,
fiendish,  bloodthirsty  being,  and  appears  to  live  yet  as  a  form  of
protestation  or  cursing  in  exclamations  of  the  Low  German  people,
as  in  Westphalia :  0  Woudan,  Woudan !  Eirmenich  1,  257,  260  ;
and  in  Mecklenburg :  Wod,  Wod  !  (see  Suppl.).

Proofs  of  the  general  extension  of  Woden's  worship  present
themselves,  for  one  thing,  in  the  passages  collected  in  the  preceding
chapter  on  Mercurius,  and  again  in  the  testimonies  of  Jonas  of
Bobbio  (pp.  56  and  121)  and  Paulus  Diaconus,  and  in  the  Abre-
nuntiatio,  which  deserves  to  be  studied  more  closely,  and  lastly  in  the
concurrence  of  a  number  of  isolated  facts,  which  I  believe  have
hitherto  been  overlooked.

If  we  are  to  sum  up  in  brief  the  attributes  of  this  god,  he  is  the

1  A  word  that  has  never  been  fully  explained,  Goth.  v6j>is  dulcis,  2  Cor.  2,
15,  OHG.  wuodi,  Diut.  2,  304%  OS.  wuothi,  Hel.  36,  3.  140,  7,  AS.  u-efo,  must
either  be  regarded  as  wholly  unconnected,  or  its  meaning  be  harmonized.

2  Finn  Magnusen  comes  to  the  same  conclusion,  Lex.  myth.  621.  636.

3  The  belief,  so  common  in  the  Mid.  Ages,  in  a  'furious  host'  or  'wild
hunt,'  is  described  in  ch.  XXXI.— TRANS.


WODAN.  133

all-pervading  creative  and  formative  power,  who  bestows  shape  and
beauty  on  men  and  all  things,  from  whom  proceeds  the  gift  of  song
and  the  management  of  war  and  victory,  on  whom  at  the  same
time  depends  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  nay  wishing,  and  all  highest
gifts  and  blessings,  Seem.  113a>b.

To  the  heathen  fancy  Wuotan  is  not  only  the  world-ruling,  wise,
ingenious  god,  he  is  above  all  the  arranger  of  wars  and  battles.1
Adam  of  Bremen  cap.  233,  ed.  1595  says  of  the  Norse  god  :  Wodan,
id  est  fortior,  bella  gerit,  hominique  ministrat  virtutem  contra
inimicos  .  .  .  Wodanem  sculpunt  (Sveones)  armatum,  sicut  nostri
Martem  sculpere  solent.  To  the  fortior,  fortis,  would  answer  his
OK  name  of  Svidr,  i.e.  the  strong,  masterful,  swift  (OS.  suith) :  but
fortior  is,  no  doubt,  a  false  reading,  all  the  MSS.  (conf.  Pertz  3,  379)
read  'Wodan,  id  est  furor,'  which  agrees  with  the  conclusion  arrived
at  above.  To  him,  says  the  Edda,  belong  all  the  nobles  who  fall  in
battle  (Ssem.  77b).  and  to  Thor  the  common  folk,  but  this  seems
added  merely  to  depreciate  the  latter ;  in  another  passage  (Ssem.
42a),  Freya  shares  the  fallen  with  OSinn ;  he  is  named  vcdfa&ir  and
herfa&ir  (val,  choice  ;  her,  host).  Odinn  vildi  )?iggja  mann  at  hlut-
falli  at  hanga  or  herinom,  Fornald.  sog.  3,  31.  Eidem  prostratorum
manes  muneris  loco  dedicaturum  se  pollicetur  (Haraldus),  Saxo  p.
146.  Othinus  armipotens,  p.  37,  auctor  aciei  corniculatae,  ordinandi
agminis  disciplinae  traditor  et  repertor,  pp.  138-9,  146.  When  old,
he  teaches  arraying  of  battle,  p.  17,  the  hamalt  at  fylkja,  svinfylkja,
Fornald.  sog.  1,  380  ;  he  teaches  how  to  bring  down  with  pebbles
those  whom  sword  will  not  wound,  ibid.  p.  157  (see  SuppL).

We  need  not  be  surprised  then  to  find  him  confounded  with
Ziu  or  Tyr,  the  special  god  of  war,  or  Mercnrius  coupled  with  Mars
(pp.  107,  111),  or  a  gloss  on  Jonas  of  Bobbio,  who  had  rightly
identified  him  with  Mercury  (p.  121),  correcting  him  thus  :  Qui
apud  eos  (Alamannos)  Vuotant  (part.  pres.  of  wuotan)  vocatur,
Latini  autem  Martem  ilium  appellant.  Are  Adam's  words  also,
'  sicut  nostri  Martem  sculpere  solent/  to  be  so  taken  that  nostri


1  Got  waldes  an  der  sige  Mr  !  Wh.  425,  24.  sigehafte  hende  fiiege  in  got  !
Dietr.  84a.  OSinn,  when  he  sent  the  people  forth  to  war,  laid  his  hands  on  their
heads  and  blessed,  ace.  to  Yngl.  cap.  2,  gaf  ]?eim  bianac ;  Ir.  beannact,  bean-
nugad,  beandacht,  Gael,  beannachd,  Wei.  bianoch  (Villemarque,  essai  LIX)  =
benedictio,  prob.  all  from  the  Lat.  word  ?  conf.  Fr.  benir,  Ir.  beannaigim.


134  WODAN.

should  mean  Saxones  ?  He,  it  is  true,  may  have  meant  those
acquainted  with  Roman  mythology.

Especially  does  the  remarkable  legend  preserved  by  Paulus
Diaconus  1,  8  show  that  it  is  Wodan  who  dispenses  victory,  to  whom
therefore,  above  all  other  gods,  that  antique  name  sihora  (p.  27)
rightfully  belongs,  as  well  as  in  the  Eddas  the  epithets  Sigttjr  (god
of  victory),  Ssem.  248a,  Sn.  94,  Sigfoffr  (father  of  victory),  Saem.  68a  ;
AS.  vigsigor  (victor  in  battle),  Beow.  3107,  sigmetod  (creator  of
victory),  Beow.  3554  (see  Suppl.) : — Refert  hoc  loco  antiquitas  ridi-
culam  fabulam,  quod  accedentes  Wandali  ad  Wodan,  mctoriam  de
Winilis  postulaverint,  illeque  respondent,  se  illis  mctoriam  daturum,
quos  primum  oriente  sole  conspexisset.  Tune  accessisse  Gambaram
ad  Fream,  uxorem  Wodan,  et  Winilis  mctoriam  postulasse,  Fream-
que  consilium  dedisse,  Winilorum  mulieres  solutos  crines  erga
faciem  ad  barbae  similitudinem  componerent  wtmeque  primo  cum
viris  adessent,  seseque  a  Wodan  videndas  pariter  e  regione,  qua
ille  per  fenestram  orientem  versus  erat  solitus  adspicere,  colloca-
rent ;  atque  ita  factum  fuisse.  Quas  cum  Wodan  conspiceret  oriente
sole,  dixisse :  qui  sunt  isti  Langobardi  ?  tune  Fream  subjunxisse,
ut  quibus  nomen  tribuerat,  mctoriam  condonaret,  sicque  Winilis
Wodan  victoriam  concessisse.  Here  deacon  Paul,  as  a  good  Chris
tian,  drops  the  remark :  Haec  risu  digna  sunt,  et  pro  nihilo  habenda :
victoria  enim  non  potestati  est  adtributa  hominum,  sed  e  coelo
potius  ministratur ;  and  then  adds  a  more  exact  interpretation  of
the  name  Longobard :  Certum  tamen  est  Longobardos  ab  intactae
ferro  barbae  longitudine,  cum  primitus  Winili  dicti  fuerint,  ita
postmodum  appellatos.  Nam  juxta  illorum  linguam  lang  longam,
bart  barbam  significat.  Wodan  sane,  quern  adjecta  litera  Givodan
dixerunt,  et  ab  universis  Germaniae  gentibus  ut  deus  adoratur,  qui
non  circa  haec  tempora,  sed  longe  anterius,  nee  in  Germania,  sed  in
Graecia  fuisse  perhibetur.1

The  whole  fable  bears  the  stamp  of  high  antiquity ;  it  has  even
been  related  by  others  before  Paul,  and  with  variations,  as  in  the
Hist.  Francor.  epitomata,  which  has  for  its  author,  though  not  Fre-
degar,  yet  some  writer  of  the  seventh  century.  Here  Chuni

1  Godfrey  of  Viterbo  (in  Pistorius,  ed.  Struve  2,  305)  has  the  legend  out  of
Paul  Diac.  with  the  names  corrupted,  Godam  for  Wodan,  Feria  for  Frea.
Godam  or  Votam  sets  him  thinking  of  the  Germ,  word  got  (deus).  The
unheard-of  (  Toclacus  historiographus 3  has  evidently  sprung  out  of  *  hoc  loco '
in  Paul.


WODAN.  135

(Huns)  are  named  instead  of  Vandals : — Cum  a  Chunis  (Lango-
bardi)  Danubium  transeuntes  fuissent  comperti,  eis  bellum  conati
sunt  inferre.  Interrogati  a  Chunis,  quare  gens  eorum  terminos
introire  praesumeret  ?  At  illi  mulieribus  suis  praecipiunt,  comam
capitis  ad  maxillas  et  mentum  ligare,  quo  potius  virorum  habitum
simulantes  plurimam  inultitudinem  hostium  ostenderent,  eo  quod
erant  mulierum  comae  circa  maxillas  et  mentum  ad  instar  barbae
valde  longae  :  fertur  desuper  utraeque  phalangae  vox  dixisse  :  '  hi
sunt  Langobardi ! '  quod  ab  his  gentibus  fertur  eorum  deum  fuisse
locutum,  quern  fanatici  nominant  Wodanum  (al.  Wisodano,  a  mere
copyist's  or  reader's  error  for  Wuodanp).  Tune  Langobardi  cum  cla-
massent,  qui  instituerat  nomen,  concederet  victoriam,  in  hoc  praelio
Chunos  superant.  (Bouquet  2, 406  ;  according  to  Pertz,  all  the  MSS.
read  Wodano.)  In  this  account,  Frea  and  her  advice  are  nowhere  ;
the  voice  of  the  god,  giving  the  name,  is  heard  up  in  the  air.

It  was  the  custom  for  any  one  who  bestowed  a  name,  to  follow
it  up  with  a  gift.1  Wodan  felt  himself  bound  to  confer  the  victory
on  those  for  whom  he  had  found  a  new  national  name.  In  this
consisted  the  favour  of  fortune,  for  the  people,  in  dressing  up  their
wives  as  men,  had  thought  of  nothing  but  swelling  the  apparent
numbers  of  their  warriors.  I  need  scarcely  remind  the  reader,  that
this  mythical  interpretation  of  the  Lombard  name  is  a  false  one,
for  all  the  credit  it  found  in  the  Mid.  Ages.2

There  is  one  more  feature  in  the  legend  that  must  not  escape
>ur  notice.  Wodan  from  his  heavenly  dwelling  looks  down  on  the
irth  through  a  window,  which  exactly  agrees  with  ON.  descrip
tions.  Oolnn  has  a  throne  named  fflidskialf,  sitting  on  which  he
can  survey  the  whole  world,  and  hear  all  that  goes  on  among
men :  j?ar  er  einn  staSr  er  HliSscialf  heitir,  oc  J?aer  Oolnn  settiz
]?ar  i  hasseti,  oc  ]?a  sd  hann  of  alia  heima,  oc  vissi  alia  luti,
J?a  er  hann  sa  (there  is  a  stead  that  H.  hight,  and  when  O.
sat  there  on  high-seat,  then  saw  he  over  all  countries,  and
wist,  &c.),  Sn.  10.  oc  J?a  er  Allfb'Sr  sitr  i  J?vi  sseti,  J?a  ser  hann  of
allan  heim,  Sn.  21.  Uusiar  (listens)  OSinn  HliSscialfo  i,  Sa3m.  89b.


1  Lata  fylgja  nafni,  Saem.  142a.  150a.     Fornm.  sog.  3,  182.  203.     gefa  at
nafnfesti  (name-feast),  Sn.  151.     Fornm.  sog.  2,  51.  3,  133.  203.     Mend.  sog.
2,  143.    194.     Vocabuli  largitionem  muneris  additione  commendare,   Saxo
Gram.  71.

2  Longobardi  a  longis  barbis  vocitati,  Otto  fris.  de  gest.  Frid.  2,  13.     But
Oolnn  himself  was  named  Ldngbar&r.


136  WODAN.

When  Loki  wanted  to  hide,  it  was  from  this  seat  that  OSinn  espied
his  whereabouts,  Sn.  69.  Sometimes  also  Frigg,  his  consort,  is
imagined  sitting  by  his  side,  and  then  she  enjoys  the  same  prospect :
Oolnn  ok  Frigg  sdto  i  HliSscialfo,  ok  sd  urn  heima  alia,  Seem.  39.
The  proem  to  the  Grimnismal  bears  a  strong  resemblance  to  the
legend  in  Paul ;  for,  just  as  Frea  pulls  her  favourites  the  Winili
through,  in  opposition  to  Wodan's  own  resolve,  so  Frigg  brings  to
grief  GeirroSr,  whom  Oolnn  favoured. — Sensuous  paganism,  how
ever,  makes  the  god-like  attribute  of  overseeing  all  things  depend
on  the  position  or  structure  of  a  particular  chair,  and  as  the
gift  forsakes  the  god  when  he  does  not  occupy  the  seat,  others  can
enjoy  the  privilege  by  taking  his  place.  This  was  the  case  when
Freyr  spied  the  beautiful  GerSr  away  down  in  lotunheim  ;  Freyr
hafdi  setsc  i  HliSskialf,  oc  sd  urn,  heima  alia,  Ssem.  81.  Sn.  39.  The
word  hliffscialf  seems  to  mean  literally  door-bench,  from  liliS
(ostium,  conf.  Engl.  lid),  and  skialf  (scamnum),  AS.  scylfe,  Csedm.
79,  4.  Engl.  shelf  (see  Suppl).  Mark  the  language  in  which  the
OS.  poet  describes  the  Ascension  of  Christ :  sohta  imo  thena  helagon
stdl,  sitit  imo  thar  an  thea  suidron  (right)  half  Godes,  endi  tlianan
all  gisihit  (seeth)  waldandeo  Crist,  so  huat  so  (whatso)  thius  werold
behabet,  Hel.  176,  4—7,  conf.  C;edm.  265,  16.

This  idea  of  a  seat  in  the  sky,  from  which  God  looks  on  the
earth,  is  not  yet  extinct  among  our  people.  The  sitting  on  the
right  hand  is  in  the  Bible,  but  not  the  looking  down.  The
formulas  'qui  haut  siet  et  de  loing  mire,  qui  haut  siet  et
loins  voit '  (supra,  p.  23)  are  not  cases  in  point,  for  men
everywhere  have  thought  of  the  Deity  as  throned  on  high  and
seeing  far  around.  Zeus  also  sits  on  Ida,  and  looks  on  at  mortal
men ;  he  rules  from  Ida's  top,  "ISrjOev  ytteSeW,  even  as  Helios,  the
eye  of  the  sun,  surveys  and  discerns  all  things,  II.  3,  277.  But  a
widely-circulated  marchen  tells  us  of  a  mortal  man,  whom  St.  Peter
admitted  into  heaven,  and  who,  led  on  by  curiosity,  ended  by
climbing  into  the  chair  of  the  Lord,  from  which  one  can  look  down
and  see  nil  that  is  done  on  the  whole  earth.  He  sees  a  washerwoman
steal  two  lady's  veils,  and  in  his  anger  seizes  the  footstool  of  the
Lord,  which  stands  before  the  chair  (al.  a  chairs  leg),  and  hurls  it
down  at  the  thief.1  To  such  lengths  has  the  ancient  fable  travelled.

1  Kindcrmarchen  no.  35.  First  in  Bebel,  ed.  1,  Tub.  1506,  p.  6.  Frey's
gartengesellschaft  cap.  109,  ed.  1556  p.  106,  ed.  1590  p.  85.  Rollwagenbuchlein
1590,  pp.  98-9  (here  a  golden  settle).  Mosew  vermischte  schriften  1,  332.  2,


WODAN.  137

Can  it  be  alluded  to  in  the  MHG.  poem,  Amgb.  3a  ?

Der  nu  den  himel  hat  erkorn,

der  geiselt  uns  bi  imser  habe ;

ich  viirhte  sere,  tint  wirt  im  zorn,

den  slegel  wirft  er  uns  her  abe.1

Tn  a  Servian  song  (Vuk  4,  9)  the  angels  descend  to  earth  out  of
God's  window  (od  Bozhieg  prozora  ;  pro-zor  (out-look,  hence  window)
reminds  one  of  zora  (dawn),  prozorie  (morning  twilight),  and  of
Wodan  at  early  morn  looking  toward  the  sunrise.  The  dawn  is,  so
to  speak,  the  opening  in  heaven,  through  which  God  looks  into  the
world.

Also,  what  Paulus  Diac.  1,  20  tells  of  the  anger  of  the  Lord
(supra,  p..  18),  whereby  the  Herulian  warriors  were  smitten  before
their  enemies,  I  am  inclined  to  trace  up  to  Wuotan  :  Tanta  super  eos
coelitus  ira  respexit ;  and  again.:  Vae  tibi,  misera  Herulia,  quae
coelestis  Domini  flecteris  ira!  Conf.  Egilssaga  p.  365  :  rei&r  se
rogn  ok  Oolnn  !  wrathful  see  the  gods  and  0. ;  and  Fornald.  sog.  1,
501 :  gramr  er  ySr  OSinn,  angry  is  0.  with  you.

Victory  was  in  the  eyes  of  our  forefathers  the  first  and  highest
of  gifts,  but  they  regarded  Wuotan  not  merely  as  dispenser  of
victory ;  I  have  to  show  next,  that  in  the  widest  sense  he  repre
sented  to  them  the  god  to  whose  bounty  man  has  to  look  for  every
other  distinction,  who  has  the  giving  of  all  superior  blessings  ;  and
in  this  sense  also  Hermes  (Mercury)  was  to  the  Greeks  pre
eminently  Swrcop  edcov,  giver  of  good  things,  and  I  have  ventured
to  guess  that  the  name  Gibika,  Kipicho  originally  signified  the
same  to  us2.

235.  ed.  1842,  4,  5,  39.  H.  Sachs  (1563)  v.  381.  According  to  Greek  and  O.
Norse  notions,  the  gods  have  a  throne  or  chair  :  tha  gengengo  regin  oil  a  rokstola
ginheilog  got),  Syem.  lb.  Compare  in  the  Bible  :  heaven  is  God's  throne,  the
earth  his  footstool,  Matt.  5,  34-5  ;  and  Hel.  45,  11.  12  (see  Suppl.).

1  Also  MS.  2,  254b:  ze  hus  wirf  ich  den  slegel  dir..  MS.  2,  6b  :  mit
einem  slegel  er  zuo  dem  kinde  warf.  This  cudgel-throwing  resembles,
what  meant  so  much  to  our  ancestors,  the  hammer's  throw,  and  the
OHG.  slaga  is  malleus,  sZec?(/e-hammer  (Graff  6,  773).  The  cudgel  thrown
from  heaven  can  hardly  be  other  than  a  thunderbolt  ;  and  the  obscure
proverb,  *  swer  irre  rite  daz  der  den  slegel  fiinde,'  whoso  astray  should  ride,  that
he  the  s.  might  find,  Parz.  180,  10,  may  refer  to  a  thunder-stone  (see  ch.  VIII,
Donar)  which  points  to  hidden  treasure  and  brings  deliverance,  and  which  only
those  can  light  upon,  who  have  accidentally  lost  their  way  in  a  wood  ;  for
which  reason  Wolfram  calls  trunks  of  trees,  from  under  which  peeps  out  the
stone  of  luck,  '  slegels  urkiinde  und  zil,'  slegel's  document  and  mark  (aim).

<J  Haupts  zeitschr.  1,  573.     Lasicz.  47  names  a  Datanus  donator  bonoruin.


138  WODAN.

The  sum  total  of  well-being  and  blessedness,  the  fulness  of  all
graces,  seems  in  our  ancient  language  to  have  been  expressed  by  a
single  word,  whose  meaning  has  since  been  narrowed  down  ;  it  was
named  wunsck  (wish).  This  word  is  probably  derived  from  wunja,
wunnja,  our  wonne,  bliss ;  wunisc,  wunsc,  perfection  in  whatever
kind,  what  we  should  call  the  Ideal.  Thus,  Er.  1699  '  der  wunsch
was  an  ir  garwe,'  wish  was  in  her  complete  ;  Iw.  3991  '  daz  mir  des
wunsches  niht  gebrast,'  nought  of  wish  was  wanting;  Iw.  6468
'  der  rat,  des  der  wunsch  an  wibe  gert/  such  store  as  wish  can
crave  in  wife ;  Gerh.  1754  '  an  der  got  wunsches  niht  vergaz/  in
whom  God  nought  of  wish  forgot  (left  out) ;  Parz.  742,  15  '  der
wunsch  wirt  in  beiden  ' ;  Trist.  3710  '  dir  ist  der  wunsch  gegeben';
Frauend.  87  '  der  wunsch  von  edlem  obze,'  the  pick  of  noble  fruit ;
Parz.  250,  25  '  erden  wunsches  riche,'  rich  in  all  gifts  of  the  earth  ;
235,  24,  '  erden  wunsches  iiberwal ';  Trist.  4696.  4746  '  der  wunsch
von  worten,  von  bluomen ' ;  Trist.  1374  'in  dem  wunsche  sweben,'
i.e.,in  perfect  satisfaction.  And  the  magic  wand,  by  whose  impact
treasures  are  acquired,  was  a  wunschiligerta,  wishing-rod ;  conf.
Parz.  235,  22  '  wurzel  unde  ris  des  wunsches/  root  and  spray  of
wish.  The  (secondary)  meaning  of  '  desiring  and  longing  for '
these  perfections  would  seem  to  have  but  accidentally  attached
itself  to  the  wunsc,  OK  osk  (see  Suppl.).

Among  other  Eddie  names  of  OSinn,  appears  Osci,  Ssem.  46b.
Sn.  3,  24,  i.e.  he  who  makes  men  partakers  of  wunsch,  of  the
highest  gift.  Osk,  gen.  Oskar,  a  woman's  name,  Fornm.  sog.  1,  246.
Eyrbyggja  saga  cap.  7.  Laxd.  p.  12.

Another  thing  seems  to  me  to  be  connected  with  this,  and  there
fore  to  be  a  relic  of  the  heathen  religion :  the  fact  that  our  poets  of
the  13th  century  personify  wunsch,  and  represent  it  as  a  mighty
creative  being.  Instances  in  proof  of  this  are  found  chiefly  in
Hartmann,  Rudolf  and  Conrad :

Got  erloubte  dem  Wunsche  iiber  About  him,  God  gave  to  Wish

in,  full  leave,

daz  er  lib  unde  sin  that  he  body  and  mind

meistert  nach  sim  werde.  fashioned  according  to  his  worth,

swa  von  ouch  uf  der  erde  Of  whatsoever  upon  earth,

deheinem  man  ze  loben  geschiht,  to  any  man,  praiseworthy  falls,

desn  gebrast  im  niht ;  thereof  lacked  him  nought ;

der  Wunsch  liet  in  gemeistert  so  Wish  had  him  fashioned  so,


WODAN.


139


daz  er  sin  was  ze  kinde  vrd,
wande  er  nihts  an  im  vergaz  :
er  hetn  yeschaffet,  kunder,  baz.


Greg.  1091-1100.


man  sagt  daz  nie  kint  gewan
ein  lip  so  gar  dem  W unsche  glich.
Ex.  330.

also  was  ez  (daz  phert)  gestalt,
und  ob  er  (der  werltwise  man)

danne  den  gewalt
von  dem  Wunsche  hcete,
daz  ez  belibe  staete

swes  er  darzuo  gedaehte,

und  swenne  erz  volbrsehte,

daz  erz  fur  sich  stalte

und  er  wn  sinem  gwalte

dar  abe  nseme

swaz  daran  im  missezaeme,

also  was  ez  volkomen

daz  er  dar  abe  niht  hete  geno-

men
alse  groz  als  umb  ein  har.

Er.  7375-87.


that  he  was  glad  of  him  for  child,
for  he  nought  in  him  forgot :
he  had  him  shapen,  if  he  could,
better.

They  say  that  never  a  child  won
a  body  so  wholly  equal  to  Wish
(or,  exactly  like  Wish).

So  was  it  wrought  (the  horse),
that  if  he  (the  wright)  had  had

the  command  from  Wish,

that   (his  work)   should  be  left

unaltered,

whatever  he  attempted  thereon,
and  when  he  had  completed  it,
that  he  should  set  it  before  Him,
and  He  at  his  discretion
therefrom  should  take  away
whatever  therein  inisliked  him, —
so  perfect  was  it
that  he  therefrom  nought  would

have  taken
so  great  as  a  hair.


als  ez  der  Wunsch  gebdt  (bade).     Er.  8213.

was  ein  wunschkint  (was  a  child  of  wish).     Ex.  8277,

Enite  was  des  Wunsches  kint,

der  an  ir  nihtes  vergaz.     Er.  8934.

da  was  ir  har  und  ir  lich  (lyke,  lych,  body)

so  gar  dem  Wunsche  gelich  (like).     Iw.  1333.

diz  was  an  ir  (zuht,  schcene,  jugent)  und  gar  der  rat  (all  the  store)

des  der  Wunsch  (or  wunsch  ?)  an  wibe  gert  (desires.)     Iw.  6468.

wande  sie  nie  gesahen  (for  they  never  had  seen)

zwene  riter  gestalt  (two  knights  fashioned)

so  gar  in  Wunsches  gewalt

an  dem  llbe  und  an  den  siten  (manners).     Iw.  6913.

der  Wunsch  vluochet  (curses)  im  so.     Iw.  7066.


140  WODAN.

mir  hat  der  Wunsch  gevluochet.     Hartm.  biichl.  2,  113.

er  was  schoene  und  wol  gevar  (for  gefarwet,  coloured),

rehte,  als  in  der  Wunsch  erkos  (chose).     Gerh.  771.

min  herze  in  (ihnen,  to  them)  des  begunde  jehen  (acknowledge),

in  wsere  des  Wunsches  fliz  (zeal,  care)  bereit.     Gerh.  1599.

an  der  der  Wunsch  mit  kiusche  bar

sine  sileze  lebende  fruht.     Gerh.  1660.

daz  ich  ir  schcene  kroene

ob  alien  frouwen  schone

mit  des  Wunsches  krone.     Gerh.  1668.

ein  regen  uz  dem  wolken  vloz

der  uf  des  Wunsches  ouwe  goz

so  heizen  regen  (?).     Gerh.  2307.

an  lobe  (praise)  des  Wunsches  krone.     Gerh.  2526.

swes  ich  begunde  daz  geschach  (was  accomplished),

der  Wunsch  ie  minen  werken  jach  (ever  to  my  works  said  yea)

des  wunsches  als  ich  wolte

und  als  ich  wiinschen  solte.     Gerh.  2945.

nach  des  Wunsches  lere.  (lore).     Gerh.  4500.

der  Wunsch  mit  siner  hende

vor  wandel  (change,  fault)  hete  si  getwagen  (cleansed).     Troj.  1212.

der  Wunsch  hat  ane  lougen  (without  lying,  undeniably)

erzeiget  an  ir  sine  kraft,

und  siner  kunste  rneisterschaft

mit  vlize  an  ir  bewert  (carefully  evinced  in  her).     Troj.  7569.

der  Wunsch  hat  in  gemachet  wandels  vri  (free  of  fault).     Troj.  3154.

der  Wunsch  der  hete  an  si  geleit  (gelegt,  laid  out,  spent)

me  flizes  denne  uf  elliu  wip  (more  pains  than  on  any  woman).

Troj.  19620.

so  daz  er  niemer  wibes  leben
fur  sie  gescJiepfen  wolde  baz  (better) ;
do  sin  gewalt  ir  bilde  maz  (measured),
do  leit  (legte)  er  an  sie  manec  model.     Troj.  19627
und  hsete  sin  der  Wunsch  gesworn,
er  wolde  bilden  ein  schcener  wip,
und  schepfcn  also  klaren  lip
als  Helena  min  frouwe  treit  (tragt,  bears)
er  miieste  brechen  sinen  eit  (eid,  oath)
wan  er  kunde  niemer  (for  he  could  never),


WODAN.  141

und  solte  lilden  iemer  (were  he  to  shape  for  ever),

gcschepfen  wunneclicher  fruht.     Troj.  19526-32.

ez  hat  ze  sinem  teile  der  Wunsch  vergezzen  niender.     Engelh.  579.

daz  haete  an  si  der  Wunsch  geleit.     Engelh.  4703.

der  Wunsch  der  hete  niht  gespart

an  ir  die  sine  meisterschaft,

er  hete  sine  beste  kraft

mit  ganzem  fliz  an  sie  geleit.     Der  werlde  Ion.  84.

Other  poets  personify  too  (not,  however,  Wolfram  nor  Gotfried):
der  zweier  kurtesie
sich  ze  dem  Wunscke  het  geweten,
si  ware  niender  uz  getreten.     Wigal.  9246.
an  ir  schcene  was  wol  schin,
daz  ir  der  Wunsch  gedahte.     Wigal.  9281.
der  Wunsch  het  sich  geneiget  in  ir  gewalt.     ibid.  904.
in  was  der  Wunsch  bereit.     ib.  10592.
des  Wunsches  amie.     ib.  7906.  8735.
wen  mohte  da  erlangen,
da  der  Wunsch  inne  was.    ib.  10612.
der  Wunsch  het  si  gemachet  so,
und  ist  ir  ze  kinde  mo.     Amur  1338.  (Pf.  1343).
des  Wunsches  ougenweide  (food  for  the  eye)
sit  ir  und  miner  saelden  spil  (are  ye,  and  the  play  of  my  delight).

Wigal.  8760.  Amur  1068.  (Pf.  1072).

si  schepfet  uz  des  Wunsches  heilawdge  (holy  water).     Martina,  259.
(diu  hant)  ist  im  groz,  lane  unde  wiz,
zuo  der  het  sich  der  Wunsch  gesellet.     Turl.  Wh.  38a.
hie  stuont  (here  stood)  der  Wunsch.     ib.  137b.
dar  an  lit  (therein  lieth)  wol  des  Wunsches  vliz.     Tyrol  E,  3.
si  ist  des  Wunsches  hostez  zil  (highest  mark  or  aim).     Ms.  1,  84a.
sie  ist  der  Wunsch  uf  erde.     Ms.  2,  100b.

sie  ist  des  Wunsches  ingesinde  (one  of  W.'s  household).     Ms.  1,  6a.
von  ir  scheitel  uf  ir  zehen  (from  her  crown  to  her  toes)
so  ist  niht  an  minneclichen  widen  wan  (save,  but)  des  Wunsches

We.    MsH.  3,  493a.

des  Wunsches  Uuete  sint  entsprungen  in  mine  herzen.     Eragm.  45b.
si  trage  des  Wunsches  Hide.     Ms.  1,  191a.
des  Wunsches  krone  tragen.     Docen  misc.  2,  186.


142  WODAN.

sie  hat  des  Wunsches  pewalt.     Amgb.  31b
er  was  so  gar  des  Wunsches  kint,

daz  alle  man  gein  (against,  before)  siner  schoene  waren  blint,
und  doch  menlich  gestalt  bi  clarem  velle  (complexion) ;
der  Wunsch  im  niht  gebrechen  liez  (let  nought  be  lacking)
da  von  man  's   Wunsches  hint  den  stolzen  hiez   (should  call  the
stately  one).     Lohengr.  ed.  Eiickert  str.  625.

The  following  is  outside  the  bounds  of  MHG. :
an  yr  yst  Wensches  vlyt  geleit.     Haupts  zeitschr.  3,  221.
Mid.  Dutch  poems  have  no  personification  Wensch  ;  nor  is  there  a
Wunsch  in  the  Nibelungen  or  Gudrun ;  but  in  Wolfdietrich  970  :
des    Wunsches  ein  amie !     There  must  be  many  more  instances ;
but  the  earliest  one  I  know  of  is  found  in  the  Entekrist  from  the
12th  century  (Hoffm.  fundgr.  2,  107) :

mit  Wunschis  gewalta  With  Wish's  might

segniti  sie  der  alte.  The  old  man  blessed  her.

We  see  Wish  provided  with  hands,  power,  looks,  diligence,  art,
blossom,  fruit ;  he  creates,  shapes,  produces  master-pieces,  thinks,
bows,  swears,  curses,  is  glad  and  angry,  adopts  as  child,  handmaid,
friend :  all  such  pretty- well  stock  phrases  would  scarcely  have
sprung  up  and  lived  in  a  poetry,  in  a  language,  if  they  did  not
unconsciously  relate  to  a  higher  being,  of  whom  earlier  times  had  a
livelier  image;  on  such  a  basis  indeed  nearly  all  the  personifications
made  use  of  by  MHG.  poets  seem  to  me  to  rest.  In  the  majority
of  our  examples  we  might  fairly  put  the  name  of  God  in  the  place
of  Wish,  or  that  of  Wish  in  the  phrases  quoted  on  pp.  17-8,  which
describe  the  joyous  or  the  angry  God :  freudenvoll  hat  sie  Got
gegozzen,  MS.  1,  226b;  der  Wunsch  maz  ir  bilde,  as  mezzen  is  said
of  God,  p.  23;  and  gebieten,  to  command,  is  just  as  technically
applied  to  the  one  as  to  the  other,  p.  24.  The  'gramr  er  y5r  OSinn/
p.  137,  might  be  rendered  in  MHG.  'der  Wunsch  ziirnet  iu,  fluochet
iu/  meaning,  the  world  is  sick  of  you.  At  times  the  poet  seems  to
be  in  doubt,  whether  to  say  God  or  Wish:  in  the  first  passage  from
Gregor,  Wish  is  subordinated,  as  a  being  of  the  second  rank,  so  to
speak,  as  a  servant  or  messenger,  to  the  superior  god;  the  latter  has
to  give  him  leave  to  assume  his  creative  function,  which  in  other
cases  he  does  of  his  own  might.  Again,  when  body,  figure,  hair  are
said  to  be  'like  Wish/  it  exactly  reminds  us  of  Homer's


WODAN.  143

Xapireara-Lv  opolai,,  II.  17,  51;  and  Xdpires,  tlie  Gratiae,  creatresses
of  grace  and  beauty,  play  precisely  the  part  of  our  Wish,  even
down  to  the  circumstance,  that  in  addition  to  the  personal  meaning,
there  is  an  abstract  %apt?,  gratia,  as  there  is  a  wish.1  Piiterich  of
Eeicherzhausen  (Haupts  zeitschr.  6,  48)  speaks  of  '  die  wuntsches
fiiesse  '  of  a  princess  ;  the  older  phrase  would  have  been  *  ir  fiieze
waren  dem  Wunsche  gelich\  It  is  a  genuine  bit  of  German
heathenism  to  make  this  creative  faculty  reside  in  a  god,  and  not,
after  the  Greek  fashion,  in  a  female  personage.  And  there  are  other
features  too,  that  point  back  to  our  native  heathen  eld.  Wish's
(me  and  heilwac  can  be  matched  by  Phol's  ouwa  and  brunno,  or  the
meads  and  holywells  of  other  gods  ;  Wish's  crown  by  that  worn  by
gods  and  kings.  And,  most  remarkable  of  all,  Wish  rejoices  in  his
creature  as  in  a  child  ;  here  Woden's  self  comes  upon  the  scene  as
patriarch  or  paterfamilias,  before  whom  created  men  make  their
appearance  like  children,  friends,  domestics ;  and  '  wunschkint '  is
also  used  in  the  sense  of  an  adopted,  i.e.  wished  for,  child.2  Her-
bort  13330  makes  Hecuba  exclaim :  ich  han  einen  sun  verlorn,  er
gezsenie  gote  ze  kinde  (would  suit  God  as  a  child) ;  which  does  not
mean  in  a  Christian  sense, '  God  has  doubtless  been  pleased  to  take
him  to  Himself,'  but  in  a  heathen  sense,  '  he  was  so  lovely,  he
might  be  called  Wish's  child '.  For  the  Norse  Oolnn  too  has  these
marvellous  children  and  wish-maidens  in  his  train  (see  Suppl.)3

To  the  ON,  Oski  ought  by  rights  to  correspond  an  OHG.  Wunsco,
Wunscjo,  (weak  decl),  which  I  am  not  able  to  produce  even  as  a
man's  name  (see  Suppl.).4  A  MHG,  Wunsche  cannot  be  proved

1  In  many  places  it  is  doubtful,  whether  the  poet  meant  wish  or  Wish.     In
Wolfram  and  Gotfried,  who  abstain  from  distinct  personification,  I  always
prefer  the  abstract  interpretation,  while  Hartmann  admits  of  both  by  turns.
When  we  read  in  Parz.  102,  30  :  si  was  gar  ob  dem  wunsches  zil  (over  wish's
goal,  beyond  all  that  one  could  wish),  the  phrase  borders  close  upon  the  above-
quoted,  « si  ist  des  Wunsches  hostez  zil  (the  highest  that  Wish  ever  created) ' ;
and  it  is  but  a  step  from  *  mines  wunsches  paradis,'  MS.  2,    126%  to  *  des
Wunsches  paradis '  or  '  ouwe '.     So, '  da  ist  wunsch,  und  niender  breste  (here  is
one's  wish,  and  nothing  wanting),'  MS.  1,  88a  =  '  der  Wunsch  liez  im  nilit
gebrechen,'  W.  left  him  nothing  lacking  (see  Suppl.).

2  The  Germ,  an-wiinschen  verbally  translates  the  Lat.  ad-opto. — TRANS.

3  That  Wish  was  personified,  and  very  boldly,  by  the  Christian  poets,  is
abundantly  proved.     That  he  was  ever  believed  in  as  a  person,  even  in  heathen
times,  is,  to  my  thinking,  far  from  clear.     I  believe  some  German  scholars
regard  the  notion  as  little  better  than  a  mare's  nest. — TRANS.

4  The  name  does  occur  later  :  Johannes  dictus  de  (  =  der)   Wunsch,  Ch.
ann.  1324  (Neue  mitth.  des  thiir.  vereins  I.  4,65),     In  the  Oberhess.  wochen-
blatt,  Marburg  1830,  p.  420,  I  read  of  a  Joh.  Wunsch  who  is  probably  alive  at
this  moment.


144  WODAN.

from  Troj.  3154.  7569.  19620.  19726  (Straszb.  MS.),  both  the  metre
and  the  strong  gen.  in  -es  forbidding.  But  the  whole  idea  may  in
the  earliest  times  have  taken  far  stronger  root  in  South  Germany
than  in  Scandinavia,  since  the  Edda  tells  next  to  nothing  of  Oski,
while  our  poetry  as  late  as  the  1 5th  century  has  so  much  to  say  of
Wunsch.  That  it  was  not  foreign  to  the  North  either,  is  plainly
proved  by  the  Oskmeyjar  =  Wunschdfrauen,  wish-women;  by  the
Oskasteinn,  a  philosopher's  stone  connected  with  our  WunscJielrute,
wishing-rod,  and  Mercury's  staff;  by  Oskabyrr,  MHG.  Wunschwint,
fair  wind ;  by  Oskabiom,  wish-bear,  a  sea-monster ;  all  of  which
will  be  discussed  more  fully  by  and  by.  A  fern,  proper  name  Osk
occurs  in  a  few  places  ;  what  if  the  unaccountable  Oskopnir,  Sa3m.
188a,  were  really  to  be  explained  as  Osk-opnir  ?  Opnir,  Ofnir,  we
know,  are  epithets  of  OSinn.  Both  word  and  meaning  seem  to  grow
in  relevancy  to  our  mythology ,  it  is  a  stumbling-block  indeed,  that
the  AS.  remains  furnish  no  contribution,  even  the  simple  wu.sc
(optio,  votum)  seeming  to  be  rare,  and  only  wyscan  (optare)  in
common  use  ;  yet  among  the  mythic  heroes  of  Deira  we  meet  with
a  Wfocfred,  lord  of  Wish  as  it  were ;  and  to  the  Anglo-Saxons  too
this  being  may  have  merely  become  extinct,  though  previously  well
known  (see  Suppl.).

But  to  make  up  for  it,  their  oldest  poetry  is  still  dimly  conscious
of  another  name  of  Wuotan,  which  again  the  Edda  only  mentions
cursorily,  though  in  Ssem.  46b  it  speaks  of  Oski  and  Omi  in  a
breath,  and  in  91b  uses  Omi  once  more  for  0(5inn.  Now  this  Omi
stands  related  to  omr,  sonus,  fragor,  as  the  AS.  woma  to  worn,
clamor,  sonitus  ;  I  have  quoted  instances  in  Andr.  and  El.  pp.  xxx,
xxxi,  to  which  may  now  be  added  from  the  Cod.  exon. :  heofonwoma
52,  18.  62,  10;  daegredw&ma  179,  24;  hildewoma  250,  32.  282,  15;
wiges  woma  277,  5 ;  wintres  woma  292,  22  :  in  this  last,  the  mean
ing  of  hiemis  impetus,  fragor,  furor,  is  self-evident,  and  we  see
ourselves  led  -up  to  the  thought  which  antiquity  connected  with
Wuotan  himself :  out  of  this  living  god  were  evolved  the  abstrac
tions  wuot  (furor),  wunsch  (ideal),  woma  (impetus,  fragor).  The
gracious  and  grace- bestowing  god  was  at  other  times  called  the
stormful,  the  terror-striking,  who  sends  a  thrill  through  nature;
even  so  the  ON.  has  both  an  Yggr  standing  for  OSinn,  and  an  yggr
for  terror.  The  AS.  woma  is  no  longer  found  as  'Woma ;  in  OHG.
wuomo  and  Wuomo  are  alike  unknown.  Thorpe  renders  the


WODAN.  145

'  heofonwoman '  above  in  a  local  sense  by  'heaven's  corners,'  I  doubt
if  correctly ;  in  both  the  passages  coeli  fragores  are  meant.  We
may  however  imagine  Omi,  Woma  as  an  air-god,  like  the  Hindu
Indras,  whose  rush  is  heard  in  the  sky  at  break  of  day,  in  the  din
of  battle,  and  the  tramp  of  the  '  furious  host '  (see  Suppl.).

Precisely  as  the  souls  of  slain  warriors  arrive  at  Indra's  heaven,1
the  victory-dispensing  god  of  our  ancestors  takes  up  the  heroes
that  fall  in  fight,  into  his  fellowship,  into  his  army,  into  his
heavenly  dwelling.  Probably  it  has  been  the  belief  of  all  good
men,  that  after  death  they  would  be  admitted  to  a  closer  com
munion  with  deity.  Dying  is  therefore,  even  according  to  the
Christian  view,  called  going  to  God,  turning  home  to  God  :  in  AS.
metodsceaft  seon,  Beow.  2360.  Csedm.  104,31.  Or  seeking,  visiting
God:  OS.  god  suokian,  Hel.  174,26 ;  fadar  suokion,  Hel.  143,  23;
upodashem,  lioht  odar,  sinlif,  godes  riki  suokian,  Hel.  85,  21.  17,  17.
63,  14.  137,  16.  176,  5.  In  a  like  sense  the  Thracians,  ace.  to
Herodotus  4,  94,  said  Uvai  irapa  ZaXpofyv  (TefteXeltyv)  Sai/jiova,
which  Zalmoxis  or  Zamolxes  is  held  by  Jornandes  to  be  a  deified
king  of  the  Goths  (Getae).  In  the  North,  faring  to  Offinn,  being
guest  ivith  Offinn,  visiting  O&inn,  meant  simply  to  die,  Fornald.
sog.  1,  118.  422-3.  2,  366.  and  was  synonymous  with  faring  to
Valholl,  being  guest  at  Valholl,  ib.  1,  106.  Among  the  Christians,
these  were  turned  into  curses  :  far  pd  til  O&ins !  Offins  eigi  pik  !
may  Ooln's  have  thee  (see  Suppl.).  Here  is.  shown  the  inversion
of  the  kindly  being,  with  whom  one  fain  would  dwell,  into  an
evil  one,2  whose  abode  inspires  fear  and  dread.  Further  on,  we  shall
exhibit  more  in  detail  the  way  in  which  Wuotan  was  pictured
driving  through  the  air  at  the  head  of  the  '  furious  (wiitende)  host '
named  after  him.  Valholl  (aula  optionis)  and  Valkyrja  obviously
express  the  notion  of  wish  and  choice  (Germ,  wahl,  Scotch  wale).

Of  the  peculiarities  of  figure  and  outward  appearance  of  this
god,  which  are  brought  out  in  such  bold  relief  in  the  northern

1  Bopp's  Nalas,  p.  264.

2  So  Wuotan's  name  of  itself  degenerates  into  the  sense  of  fury  (wut)  and
anger  ;  the  Edda  has  instances  of  it.     In  revenge  he  pricked  Brynhild  with
the  sleeping-thorn,  Seem.   Z94a,  and  she  says  :  OSinn  ]?vi  veldr,  er  ek  eigi
mattak  bregSa  blunnstofom.     He  breeds  enmity  and  strife  :  einn  veldr  OSinn
6'llu  bolvi,  pviat  meS  sifjungom  sakrunar  bar,  Ssem.  165b.     inimicitias  Othinus
sent,  Saxo  gram.  p.  142,  as  Christians  say  of  the  devil,  that  he  sows  the  seeds
of  discord,     gremi  OSins,  Saem.  151a  (see  Suppl.).

10


146  WODAN.

myths,  I  have  found  but  few  traces  left  among  us  in  Germany.
The  Norse  Oolnn  is  one-eyed,  he  wears  a  broad  hat  and  wide  mantle'.
Grimnir  i  feldi  Udm,  blue  cloak,  Stem.  40.  i  heklu  grcenni  ok
Udm  Irokum,  green  cloak  and  blue  breeks,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  324.
Jieklumaffr,  cloaked  man,  1,  325.  When  he  desired  to  drink  of
Mind's  fountain,  he  was  obliged  to  leave  one  of  his  eyes  in  pawn,
Seem.  4a,  Sn.  15.1  In  Saxo,p.  12,  he  appears  as  grandaevus,  altero
vrbus  oculo  ;  p.  37,  armipotens,  uno  semper  contentus  ocello ;  p.  138,
senex  orbus  ocidis,  hispido  amictu.  So  in  the  Sagas  :  kom  ]?ar  maSr
gamall,  miok  orSspakr,  einsynn  ok  augdapr,  ok  haf5i  hatt  siffan  ;
there  came  an  old  man,  very  word-wise,  one-eyed  and  sad-eyed,
and  had  a  wide  hat,  Fornm.  sog.  2,  138.  hann  hafir  heJdu  flekkotta
yfir  ser,  sa  maftr  var  berfcettr  ok  hafSi  knytt  linbrokum  at  beini,  hann
var  har  miok  (very  high),  ok  eldiligr  ok  einsynn,  Fornald.  sog.  1, 120.
]?a  kom  maftr  i  bardagann  meS  si&an  hatt  ok  heklu  bid,2  hann  hafol
eitt  auga,  ok  geir  (spear)  i  hendi,  ib.  1,  145.  ]?etta  mun  Od 'inn
gamli  verit  hafa,  ok  at  visu  var  maSrinn  einsQnn,  ib.  1,  95.  sa
hann  mann  mikinn  me5  siffun  hetti,  ib.  5, 250.  meS  hetti  Hangatyss
ganga,  cum  cidari  Odiniana  incedere,  Vigagl.  saga,  p.  168.  Othinus,
os  pileo,  ne  cultu  proderetur,  obnulens,  Saxo  Gram.  44.  An  Eddie
song  already  names  him  QtQkBttr,  broad-hatted,  Seem.  46b,  and  one
saga  merely  Hottr,  hatted,  Fornald.  sog.  2,  25-6;  conf.  Miillers
sagabibl.  3,  142.  Were  it  not  for  the  name  given  him  in  the
Grimnismal,  I  should  have  supposed  it  was  the  intention  of  the
Christians  to  degrade  the  old  god  by  mean  clothing,  or  else  that,
wrapt  in  his  mantle,  he  was  trying  to  conceal  himself  from
Christians.  Have  we  a  right  here  to  bring  in  the  pileati  of
Jornandes  ?  A  saga  in  Saxo, p.  12,  tells  prettily,  how  the  blind  old\
god  takes  up  a  prote^  in  his  cloak,  and  carries  him  through  the  air,
but  Hading,  peeping  through  a  hole  in  the  garment,  observes  that]
the  horse  is  stepping  over  the  sea-waves.  As  for  that  heklumaftr
of  the  hat  with  its  rim  turned  up,  he  is  our  Hakolberend  at  thel
head  of  the  wild  host,  who  can  at  once  be  turned  into  a  Gothic


1  Conf.  Tritas  in  the  fountain,   Kuhn  in  Hofer  1,  290.     Ace.  to  the
popular  religion,  you  must  not  look  into  running  water,  because  you  look  int
God's  eye,  Tobler's  Appenzel  p.  3G9b  ;  neither  must  you  point  at  the  stars  wit!
your  fingers,  for  fear  of  sticking  them  into  the  angels'  eyes.

2  There  is  a  Swed.  marchen  of  Greymantle  (grakappan),  Molbech  14,  wh(
like  Mary  in  German  tales,  takes  one  up  to  heaven  and  forbids  the  opening  of
lock,  Kinderm.  3,  407.


WODAN.  147

HaJculabairands,  now  that  hakuls  for  </>6Xoz/?7?  is  found  in  2  Tim.
iv.  13. — Swedish  folk-tales  picture  Odin  as  bald-headed,  Iduna  10,
231.  In  the  ancient  poetry  he  is  Harbardr,  Siffgrani,  Sfc&skeggr,
all  in  allusion  to  his  thick  growth  of  hair  and  beard.  The  name
Eedbeard  I  have  elsewhere  understood  of  Thor,  but  in  Fornald.
sog.  2,  239 — 257  the  Grani  and  Raudgrani  are  expressly  Oolnn  (see
Suppl).

The  Norse  myth  arms  Oftinn  with  a  wonderful  spear  (geir),
Gungnir  by  name,  Ssem.  196.  Sn.  72  ;  which  I  put  on  a  par  with
the  lance  or  sword  of  Mars,  not  the  staff  of  Mercury.  Sigmund's
sword  breaks,  when  he  hacks  at  0 Sinn's  spear,  Vols.  saga  cap.  11.
He  lends  this  spear  to  heroes  to  win  victories  with,  Ssem.  165.  A
remarkable  passage  in  the  Fornm.  sog.  5,  250  says :  seldi  honum
reyrspiota  (gave  him  the  reeden  spear)  1  hond,  ok  baft  hann  skiota
honum  yfir  lift  Styrbiarnar,  ok  J?at  skyldi  hann  msela :  05in  a  yc5r
alia !  All  the  enemies  over  whom  the  spear  he  shoots  shall  fly,  are
doomed  to  death,  and  the  shooter  obtains  the  victory.  So  too  the
Eyrbyggja  saga  p.  228  :  J?a  skaut  Stein]?6rr  spioti  at  fornom  sift  til
heilla  ser  yfir  flock  Snorra ;  where,  it  is  true,  nothing  is  said  of  the
spear  launched  over  the  enemy  being  the  god's.  Ssem.  5a,  of  OSinn
himself :  fleigbl  ok  i  folk  urn  skaut  (see  Suppl.).

To  the  god  of  victory  are  attached  two  wolves  and  two  ravens,
which,  as  combative  courageous  animals,  follow  the  fight,  and
pounce  upon  the  fallen  corpses,  Andr.  and  El.  xxvi.  xxvii.  The
wolves  are  named  Geri  and  Freki,  Sn.  42 ;  and  so  late  as  in  Hans
Sachs  (i.  5, 499),  we  read  in  a  schwank,  that  the  Lord  God  has  chosen
wolves  for  his  hounds,  that  they  are  his  cattle.  The  two  ravens  are
Huginn  and  Muninn,  from  hugr  (animus,  cogitatio)  and  munr
(mens) ;  they  are  not  only  brave,  but  cunning  and  wise,  they  sit  on
the  shoulders  of  OSinn,  and  whisper  in  his  ear  whatever  they  see
and  hear,  Seem.  42b  88a.  Sn.  42.  56.  322.  To  the  Greek  Apollo  too
the  wolf  and  raven  were  sacred  ;x  his  messenger  the  raven  informed
him  when  Koronis  was  unfaithful,  and  Aristeas  accompanied  him
as  a  raven,  Herod.  4,  15  ;  a  raven  is  perched  aloft  on  the  mantle  of
Mithras  the  sun-god.  The  Gospels  represent  the  Holy  Ghost  as  a


1  In  Marc.  Cap.  1,  11,  the  words:  'augurales  vero  alites  ante  curriim
3elio  constiterunt/  are  transl.  by  Notker  37 :  to  waren  garo  ze  Apollinis  reito
;ine  wizegfogela,  rabena  unde  albisze.  To  Oolnn  hawks  are  sometimes  given
nstead  of  ravens  :  Oftins  haukar  Sasm.  167b.


148  WODAN.

dove  descending  upon  Christ  at  his  baptism,  Lu.  3,  22,  and  resting
upon  him,  epewev  €TT  avrov,  mansit  super  eum,  John  1,  32 :  'in
Krist  er  sih  gisidalta/  says  O.  i.  25,  24 ;  but  Hel.  30,  1  of  the
dove :  sat  im  uppan  uses  drohtines  ahslu  (our  Lord's  shoulder).  Is
this  an  echo  of  heathen  thoughts  ?  None  of  the  Fathers  have  this
circumstance,  but  in  the  Mid.  Ages  there  is  talk  enough  about
doves  resting  on  shoulders  j1  and  the  dove,  though  frequently
contrasted  with  the  raven  (which,  like  the  wolf,  the  Christians
applied  to  the  Evil  one),  may  nevertheless  be  put  in  the  place  of
it.  Oswald's  raven  flies  to  his  shoulder  and  arm,  749.  942.
Oswald  talks  to  it,  95-6,  and  kneels  before  it,  854.  Conf.  Zingerle,
Oswalt  p.  67  (see  Suppl.).2

Now  under  that  figure  of  the  bearded  old  man,  Wuotan  is
apparently  to  be  regarded  as  a  water-sprite  or  water-god,  answering
well  to  the  Latin  name  of  Neptunus  which  some  of  the  earlier
writers  put  upon  him  (p.  122).  In  ON.  he  is  Hnikar,  Hniku&r
Nikarr,  Nikuz,  and  the  hesitation  between  the  two  forms  which  in
Sn.  3  are  expressly  made  optional — '  Nikarr  effa  (or)  Nikuz ' — may
arise  from  the  diversity  of  old  dialects.  Nikarr  corresponds  to  the
AS.  Nicor,  and  Nikuz  to  OHG.  Nichus ,  the  initial  Hn  seems  to
be  ON.  alone.  On  these  I  shall  have  more  to  say,  when  treating
of  water-sprites  (see  Suppl.) — Another  epithet  of  OSinn  is  equally

1  Gregor.  Nyssen.  encom.  Ephraemi  relates,  that  when  Basil  the  Great  was
preaching,  Ephraem  saw  on  his  right  shoulder  a  white  dove,  which  put  words  o:
wisdom  in  his  mouth.     Of  Gregory  the  Great  we  read  in  Paul.  Diac.,  vita  p,
14,  that  when  he  was  expounding  the  last  vision  of  Ezekiel,  a  white  dove  sal
upon  his  head,  and  now  and  then  put  its  beak  in  his  mouth,  at  which  times  he,
the  writer,  got  nothing  for  his  stylus  to  put  down  ;  conf.  the  narrative  of  {
poet  of  the  12th  cent.,  Hoffm.  fundgr.  2,  229  ;  also  Myst.  1.  p.  226-7.     Angus
tine  and  Thomas   Aquinas  are  portrayed   with  a  white  dove  perched  on  theii
shoulders  or  hovering  over  their  heads.     A  nursery-tale  (Kindenn.  no.  33)  makes
two  doves  settle  on  the  pope's  shoulder,  and  tell  him  in  his  ear  all  that  he  has  tc
do.     A  white  dove  descends  singing  on  the  head  of  St.  Devy,  and  instructs  him
Buhez  santez  Nonn.  Paris  1837,  p.  117.     And  on  other  occasions  the  dove  flies
down  to  make  known  the  will  of  heaven.     No  one  will  trace  the  story  oi
Wuotan's  ravens  to  these  doves,  still  the  coincidence  is  striking  (see  Suppl.  V

2  There  are  said  to  have  been  found   lately,  in  Denmark   and   Sweden,
representations  of  Odin,  which,  if  some  rather  strange  reports  are  well-founded
ought  to  be  made  known  without  delay.     A  ploughman  at  Boeslund  in  Zeulanc
turned  up  two  golden  urns  filled  with  ashes  ;   on  the  lids  is  carved  Odin
standing  up,  with  two  ravens  on  his  shoulders,  and  the  two  wolves  at  his  feet
Kunstbl.  1843,  no.  19,  p.  80b.     Gold   coins   also  were   discovered   near  th<
village  of  Gomminga  in  Oeland,  one  of  which  represents  Odin  with  the  raven
on  his  shoulder  ;  the  reverse  has  runes  ;  Kunstbl.  1844,  no.  13,  p.  52a.


WODAN.  149

noticeable  for  its  double  form :  Bifli&i  efta  Biflindi,  Sn.  3 ;  Seem.
46b  has  Biblindi.  As  bif  (Germ,  beben)  signifies  motus,  aer,  aqua,
the  quaking  element,  and  the  AS.  liSe  is  lenis,  OHG.  lindi,  ON.
inr  (for  linnr)  ;  an  AS.  BifliSe,  BeofliSe,  OHG-.  Pepalindi,  might  be
suggested  by  the  soft  movement  of  the  air,  a  very  apt  name  for  the
all-penetrating  god ;  but  these  forms,  if-  they  gave  rise  to  the  Norse
term,  are  no  longer  found  in  AS.  or  OHG.  Wuotan's  dominion
>oth  over  the  air  and  over  the  water  explains,  how  it  is  that  he
walks  on  the  waves,  and  comes  rushing  on  the  gale. — It  is  OSinn
that  sends  wind  to  the  ships,  Fornm.  sog.  2,  16,  hence  a  good  sail-
ng  wind  is  called  osJcabijrr,  Seem.  165b,  i.e.,  Oskabyrr  ;  byrr  is  from
)yrja,  OHG.  purran,  to  rise,  be  lifted  up.  It  is  in  striking  accord
with  this,  that  the  MHG.  poets  use  wunschwint  in  the  same  sense ;
EEartinann  says,  Greg.  615  :

Do  sande  in  (to  them)  der  slieze  Krist
den  vil  rehten  wunschwint  (see  Suppl.)

But  other  attributes  of  Wuotan  point  more  to  Hermes  and
Apollo.  He  resembles  the  latter,  in  as  much  as  from  him  proceed
contagious  diseases  and  their  cure  ;  any  severe  illness  is  the  stroke
of  God,  and  Apollo's  arrows  scatter  pestilence.  The  Gauls  also
imagined  that  Apollo  drove  away  diseases  (Apollinem  morbos
depellere,  Caes.  B.  G.  6,  17) ;  and  Wodan's  magic  alone  can  cure
Balder's  lamed  horse.  The  raven  on  the  god's  shoulder  exactly  fits
Apollo,  and  still  more  plainly  the  circumstance  that  OSinn  invented
the  poetic  art,  and  Saga  is  his  divine  daughter,  just  as  the  Greek
Muses,  though  daughters  of  Zeus,  are  under  Apollo's  protection,
and  in  his  train. — On  the  other  hand,  writing  and  the  alphabet
were  not  invented  by  Apollo,  but  by  Hermes.  The  Egyptian  priests
placed  Hermes  at  the  head  of  all  inventions  (lamblich.  de  myst.
Aegypt.  8,  1),  and  Theutli  or  ThotJi  is  said  to  have  first  discovered
letters  (Plato's  Phaedr.  1,  96,  Bekker) ,  while,  ace.  to  Hygin.  fab.
143,  Hermes  learnt  them  by  watching  the  flight  of  cranes.  In  the
AS.  dialogue  between  Saturn  and  Solomon,  we  read  (Thorpe's  anal,
p.  100) :  '  saga  me,  hwa  serost  bocstafas  sette  ? '  '  ic  the  secge,
Mercurius  se  gygand\  Another  dialogue,  entitled  Adrian  and
Epictus  (MS.  Brit.  mus.  Arund.  no.  351.  fol.  39)  asks :  '  quis  primus
fecit  literas  ? '  and  answers  '  Seith,'  which  is  either  a  corruption  of
Theuth,  or  the  Seth  of  the  Bible.  Just  so  the  Eddie  Eunatals  J^ttr
seems  to  ascribe  the  first  teaching  of  runes  to  Oolnn,  if  we  may  so


150  WODAN.

interpret  the  words  :  nam  ec  upp  runar,  Ssem.  28a.  J?oer  ofreS,  J?ser
ofreist,  J?ser  ofhugol  Hroptr,  i.e.,  them  OSinn  read  out,  cut  out,
thought  out,  Seem.  195b.  Also  Snorri,  Yngl.  cap.  7  :  allar  J?essar
idrottir  kendi  hann  meS  rdnum  ok  lid&um.  Hincmar  of  Eheims
attributes  to  Mercury  the  invention  of  dice-playing  :  sicut  isti  qui
de  denariis  quasi  jocari  dicuntur,  quod  omnino  diabolicum  est,  et,
sicut  legimus,  primum  diabolus  hoc  per  Mercurium  prodidit,  unde
et  Mercurius  inventor  illius  dicitur,  1,  656.  Conf.  Schol.  to  Odyss.
23,  198,  and  MS.  2,  124b :  der  tiuvel  schuof  das  wiirfelspil.  Our
folk-tales  know  something  about  this,  they  always  make  the  devil
play  at  cards,  and  entice  others  to  play  (see  Suppl.).1  When  to  this
we  add,  that  the  wishing-rod,  i.e.,  Wish's  staff,  recals  Mercury's
caducous,  and  the  wish- wives,  le.,oskmeyjar,  valkyrior,  the  occupa
tion  of  the  Psychopompos ;  we  may  fairly  recognise  an  echo  of  the
Gallic2  or  Germanic  Mercury  in  the  epithet  Trismegistos  (Lactantius
i.  6,  3.  vi.  25,  10.  ter  maximus  Hermes  in  Ausonius),  which  later
poets,  Romance  and  German,  in  the  12th  and  13th  centuries3
transferred  to  a  Saracen  deity  Termagant  Tervagan,  Tcrvigant,
Terviant.  Moreover,  when  Hermes  and  Mercury  are  described  as
dator  bonorum,  and  the  Slavs  again  call  the  same  god  Dobro-pan
(p.  130,  note),  as  if  mercis  dominus ;  it  is  worth  noticing,  that  the
Misnere  Amgb.  42a,  in  enumerating  all  the  planets,  singles  out
Mercury  to  invoke  in  the  words  :  ISTu  hilf  mir,  daz  mir  saelde
wache!  schin  er  mir  ze  geliicke,  noch  so  kum  ich  wider  uf  der
sselden  phat  (pfad).  Just  so  I  find  Odin  invoked  in  Swedish  popu
lar  songs :  Hielp  nu,  Oden  Asagrim !  Svenska  fornsangor  1,  11.
hielp  mig  Othin !  1,  69.  To  this  god  first  and  foremost  the  people
turned  when  in  distress ;  I  suppose  he  is  called  Asagrim,  because
among  the  Ases  he  bore  the  name  of  Grimnir  ?


1  Reusch,  sagen  des  preuss.  Samlands,  no.  11.  29.

2  In  the  Old  British  mythology  there  appears  a  Gwydion  ab  Don,  G.  son  of
Don,  whom  Davies  (Celtic  researches  pp.  168,  174.  Brit.  myth.  p.  118,  204,  263-4,
353,  429,  504,  541)  identifies  with  Hermes  ;  he  invented  writing,  practised
magic,  and  built  the  rainbow  ;  the  milky  way  was  named  caer  Gwydion,  G.'s
castle  (Owen,  sub  v.).      The  British  antiquaries  say  nothing  of  Woden,  yet
Gwydion  seems  near  of  kin  to  the  above  Gwodan  =  Wodan.      So  the  Irish
name  for  dies  Mercurii,  dia  Geden,  whether  modelled  on  the  Engl.  Wednesday
or  not,  leads  us  to  the  form  Goden,  Gwoden  (see  Suppl.).

3  Even  nursery-tales  of  the  present  time  speak  of  a  groszmachtige  Mercurius,
Kinderm.  no.  99.  2,  86.

4  This  Termagan,  Termagant  occurs  especially  in  0.  Engl.  poems,  and  may
have  to  do  with  the  Irish  torinac  augmentum,  tormacaim  augere.


WODAN.  151

It  is  therefore  not  without  significance,  that  also  the  wanderings
of  the  Herald  of  gods  among  men,  in  whose  hovels  he  now  and
then  takes  up  his  lodging,  are  parallelled  especially  by  those  of
OSinn  and  Hcenir,  or,  in  Christian  guise,  of  God  and  St.  Peter,

Our  olden  times  tell  of  Wuotan's  wanderings,  his  waggon,  his
way,  his  retinue  (duce  Mercuric,  p.  128). — We  know  that  in  the
very  earliest  ages  the  seven  stars  forming  the  Bear  in  the  northern
sky  were  thought  of  as  a  four-wheeled  waggon,  its  pole  being  formed
by  the  three  stars  that  hang. downwards :

"ApKTOV  0\  TfV  KCLL    afJUa^CLV    67Ti/C\r)(rLV  Ka\€OV(Tt,V.       II.   18,  487.

Od.  5,  273.  So  in  OHG-.  glosses  :  ursa  wagen,  Jun.  304  ;  in  MHG.
Jiimelwagen,  Walth.  54,  3.1  lierwagen  Wackern.  Ib.  1.  772,  26.
The  clearest  explanation  is  given  by  Notker  cap.  64  :  Selbiu  ursa
1st  pi  demo  norde  mannelichemo  zeichenhaftiu  fone  dien  siben
glaten  sternon,  die  aller  der  liut  wagen  heizet,  unde  nan  einemo
gloccun  joche2  gescaffen  sint,  unde  ebenmichel  sint,  ane  (except)
des  mittelosten.  The  Anglo-Saxons  called  the  constellation  wcenes
pisl  (waggon's  thill,  pole),  or  simply  fiisl,  but  carles  ween  also  is
quoted  in  Lye,  the  Engl.  charles  wain,  Dan.  karlsvogn,  Swed.
Jearlwagn.  Is  carl  here  equivalent  to  lord,  as  we  have  herrenwagen
in  the  same  sense  ?  or  is  it  a  transference  to  the  famous  king  of
Christian  legend  ?  But,  what  concerns  us  here,  the  constellation
appears  to  have  borne  in  heathen  times  the  full  name  of  Wuotanes
wagan,  after  the  highest  god  of  heaven.  The  Dutch  language  has
evidence  of  this  in  a  MS.  of  as  late  as  1470  :  ende  de  poeten  in
heure  fablen  heetend  (the  constell.)  ourse,  dat  is  te  segghene
Woenswaghen.  And  elsewhere :  dar  dit  teekin  Arcturus,  dat  wy
heeten  Woonswaglien,  up  staet ;  het  sevenstarre  ofde  Woenswaghen  •
conf.  Huydec.  proeven  1,  24.  I  have  nowhere  met  with  plaustrum
Mercurii,  nor  with  an  ON.  05ins  vagn  ;  only  vagn  d  himnum.

It  is  a  question,  whether  the  great  open  highway  in  heaven — to
which  people  long  attached  a  peculiar  sense  of  sacredness,  and
perhaps  allowed  this  to  eclipse  the  older  fancy  of,  a  '  milky  way '
(caer  Gwydion,  p.  150) — was  not  in  some  districts  called  Wuotanes
wee  or  strdza  (way  or  street).  Wodenesweg,  as  the  name  of  a  place,
stood  its  ground  in  Lower  Saxony,  in  the  case  of  a  village  near
Magdeburg,  Ch.  ad  ann.  973  in  Zeitschr.  fur  archivk.  2,  349  ;  an

1  Septentrion,  qne  nos  char  el  del  apelon  ;  Roman  de  Ron.

2  Crossbeam,  such  as  bells  (glocken)  are  suspended  on;  conf.  ans,  as,  p.  125.


152  WODAN.

older  doc.  of  937  is  said  to  have  Watanesweg  (conf.  Wiggert  in  the
Neu.  mitth.  des  thiir.  vereins  VI.  2,  22).  praedium  in  Wodeneswege,
Dietm.  Merseb.  2, 14  p.  750.  Annal.  Saxo  272.  Johannes  de  Wden-
swege,  Heinricus  de  Wodensweghe  (Lenz.)  Brandenb.  urk.  p.  74
(anno  1273),  161  (anno  1301).  later,  Wutenswege,  Godenschwege,
Gutenswegen,  conf.  Ledebur  n.  arch.  2,  165,  170.  Gero  ex  familia
Wodenswegiorum,  Ann.  Magdeb.  in  chron.  Marienthal.  Meibom  3,
263.  I  would  mention  here  the  lustration  der  koninges  strate,  EA.
69 ;  in  the  Uplandslag  vidherb.  balkr  23,  7  the  highway  is  called
karlsveg,  like  the  heavenly  wain  above.  But  we  shall  have  to  raise
a  doubt  by  and  by,  whether  the  notion  of  way,  via,  is  contained  at
all  in  Wodensweg.

Plainer,  and  more  to  the  purpose,  appear  the  names  of  certain
mountains,  which  in  heathen  times  were  sacred  to  the  service  of
the  god.  At  Sigttys  lergi,  Sa3m.  248a.  Othensberg,  now  Onsberg,
on  the  Danish  I.  of  Samsoe ,  Odensberg  in  Schonen.  Godesberg
near  Bonn,  in  docs,  of  Mid.  Ages  Gudeneslerg,  Giinther  1,  211  (anno
1131),  1,  274  (anno  1143),  2,  345  (anno  1265);  and  before  that,
Wodenesbcrg,  Lacomblet  97.  117,  annis  947,  974  So  early  as  in
Caesarius  heisterb.  8,  46  the  two  forms  are  put  together:  Gudins-
lerg  vel,  Tit  alii  dicunt,  Wudinsberg.  Near  the  holy  oak  in  Hesse,
which  Boniface  brought  down,  there  stood  a  Wuodenesberg,  still  so
named  in  a  doc.  of  1154  (Schminke  beschr.  von  Cassel,  p.  30,  conf.
Wenk  3,  79),  later  Vdenesberg,  Gudensberg ;  this  hill  is  not  to  be
confounded  with  Gudensberg  by  Erkshausen,  district  Eotenburg
(Niederhess.  wochenbl.  1830,  p.  1296),  nor  with  a  Gudenberg  by
Oberelsungen  and  Zierenberg  (ib.  p.  1219.  Eommel  2,  64.  Guden-
lurg  by  Landau,  p.  212);  so  that  three  mountains  of  this  name
occur  in  Lower  Hesse  alone  ;  conf.  '  montem  Vodinberg,  cum  silva
eidem  monti  attinente,'  doc.  of  1265  in  Wenk  II,  no.  174.  In  a
different  neighbourhood,  a  Henricus  comes  de  Wodenesberg  is  named
in  a  doc.  of  1130,  Wedekind's  notes  1,  367  ;  acurtis  Wodenesberg  in
a  doc.  of  973,  Falke  tradit.  corb.  534.  Gotansberg  (anno  1275),
Langs  reg.  3,  471  :  vineas  duas  gotansbcrge  vocatas.  Mabillon's
acta  Bened.  sec.  5,  p.  208  contain  the  following  :  c in  loco  ubi  mons
quern  dicunt  Wonesberth  (1.  Wdneslerch  =  Wodanesberg)  a  radicibus
astra  petit,'  said  to  be  situate  in  pagus  Gandavensis,  but  more  cor
rectly  Mt.  Ardenghen  between  Boulogne  and  St.  Omer.  Comes
Wadanimontis,  aft.  Yaudemont  in  Lorraine  (Don  Calmet,  tome  2,


WODAN.  153

preuves  XLVIII.  L.),  seems  to  be  the  same,  and  to  mean  Wodani-
mons.1  A  Wddnes  leorg  in  the  Sax.  Chron.  (Ingram  pp.  27.  62),
later  Wodnesborough,  Wansborough  in  Wiltshire ;  the  corruption
already  in  Ethelwerd  p.  835  :  '  facta  ruina  magna  ex  utraque  parte
in  loco  qui  dicitur  Wodnesbyrg '  for  Wodnesberg  ;  but  Florence,  ed.
1592,  p.  225,  has  '  Wodnesbeorh,  id  est  mons  Wodeni  '.2  A  Wddnes-
leorg  in  Lappenberg's  map  near  the  Bearucwudu,  conf.  Wodnesbury,
Wodnesdyke,  Wodanesfeld  in  Lappenb.  engl.  gesch.  1, 131.  258.  354.
To  this  we  must  add,  that  about  the  Hessian  Gudensberg  the  story
goes  that  King  Charles  lies  prisoned  in  it,  that  he  there  won  a  victory
over  the  Saxons,  and  opened  a  well  in  the  wood  for  his  thirsting
army,  but  he  will  yet  come  forth  of  the  mountain,  he  and  his  host,
at  the  appointed  -time.  The  my  thus  of  a  victorious  army  pining  for
water  is  already  applied  to  King  Carl  by  the  Prankish  annalists
(Pertz  1,  150.  348),  at  the  very  moment  when  they  bring  out  the
destruction  of  the  Irminsul ;  but  beyond  a  doubt  it  is  older  and
heathen :  Saxo  Gram.  42  has  it  of  the  victorious  Balder.  The  agree
ment  of  such  legends  with  fixed  points  in  the  ancient  cultus  can
not  but  heighten  and  confirm  their  significance.  A  people  whose
faith  is  falling  to  pieces,  will  save  here  and  there  a  fragment  of
it,  by  fixing  it  on  a  new  and  unpersecuted  object  of  veneration.
After  such  numerous  instances  of  ancient  Woden-hills,  one  need
not  be  afraid  to  claim  a  mons  Mercurii  when  mentioned  in  Latin
annalists,  such  as  Fredegar.

Other  names  occur,  besides  those  of  mountains.  The  brevi-
arium  Lulli,  in  Wenk  II.  no.  12,  names  a  place  in  Thuringia :
'in  Wudaneshusun,'  and  again  Woteneshusun  (conf.  Schannat  no.
84.  105) ;  in  Oldenburg  .there  is  a  Wodemlwlt,  now  Godensholt,
cited  in  a  land-book  of  1428,  Ehrentraut  Fries,  arch.  1,  445  :  '  to
Wodensholte  Tideke  Tammen  gut  x  schillinge  ' ;  Wothenower  (W6-
denover  ?),  seat  of  a  Brandenburg  family,  Hofers  urk.  p.  270,  anno
1334 ;  not  far  from  Bergen  op  Zoom  and  the  Scheldt,  towards  Ant
werp,  stands  to  this  day  a  Woensdrecht,  as  if  Wodani  trajectum.
Woensel  =  Wodenssele,  Wodani  aula,  lies  near  Eindhoven  on  the


t  x  We  know  of  Graisivaudan,  a  valley  near  Grenoble  in  Dauphine,  for
which  the  Titurel  has  Graswaldane ;  but  there  is  no  ground  for  connecting  it
with  the  god.

2  Our  present  -borough,  -bury,  stands  both  correctly  for  burh,  byrig,  castle,
town  (Germ,  burg),  and  incorrectly  for  the  lost  beorg,  beorh,  mountain  (Germ,
berg). — TRANS.


154  WODAX.

Dommel  in  N.  Brabant ;  a  remarkable  passage  on  it  in  Gramaye's
Taxandria,  p.  23,  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  J.  W.  Wolf:  Imo
amplius  supersunt  aperte  Cymbricorum  deorum  pagis  aliquot,  ubi
forte  culti  erant,  indita  nomina,  nominatim  Mercurii  in  Woensel,
honoris  in  Eersel,  Martis  in  Roysel.  Uti  enim  Woen  Mercurium
eis  dictum  alias  docui,  et  eer  honorem  esse  omnes  sciunt,  ita  Eoy
Martem  a  colore  sanguineo  cognominatum  ostendunt  illi  qui  tertiam
hebdomadis  feriam  Koydach  indigitant.  In  due  time  I  shall
speak  of  Eersel  and  Roysel,  which  lie  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Woensel,  and  all  of  them  in  the  N..  Brabant  district  of  Oirschot.
This  Woensel  is  like  the  OSinssalr,  Othansale,  Onsala  named  on
p.  158.  Wunstorp,  Wunsdorf,  a  convent  and  small  town  in  Lower
Saxony,  stands  unmutilated  as  Wodenstorp  in  a  doc.  of  1179,  Falke
tradit.  corb,  770.  Near  Windbergen  in  the  Ditmar  country,  an
open  space  in  a  wood  bears  the  name  of  Wodcnslay,  Wonslag.  Near
Hadersleben  in  Schleswig  are  the-  villages  of  Wonsbeke,  Wonslei,
Woyens  formerly  Wodensyen.  An  AS.  doc.  of  862  (Kemble  2,  73)
contains  in  a  boundary-settlement  the  name  Wonstoc  =  Wodenesstoc,
Wodani  stipes,  and  at  the  same  time  betrays  the  influence  of  the*
god  on  ancient  delimitation.  Wuotan,  Hermes,  Mercury,  all  seem
to  be  divinities  of  measurement  and  demarcation ;  conf.  Woedens-
spanne,  Woenslet,  p.  160  (see  SuppI).

As  these  names,  denoting  the  waggon  and  the  mountain  of  the
old  god,  have  survived  chiefly  in  Lower  Germany,  where  heathenism
maintained  itself  longest ;  a  remarkable  custom  of  the  people  in
Lower  Saxony  at  harvest-time  points  the  same  way.  It  is  usual,  to
leave  a  clump  of  standing  corn  in  afield  to  Woden  for  his  hwse.
0<5inn  in  the  Edda  rides  the  eight-footed  steed  Skipnir,  the  best  of
all  horses,  Seem.  46a  93b.  Sn.  18.  45.  65.  Sleipnis  ver&r  (food;  is  a
poetic  name  for  hay,  Yngl.  saga  cap.  21 :  other  sagas  speak  of  a
tall  white  horse,  by  which  the  god  of  victory  might  be  recognised  in
battles  (see  Suppl.).  Christianity  has  not  entirely  rooted  out  the
harmless  practice  for  the  Norse  any  more  than  for  the  Saxon
peasant.  In  Schonen  and  Blekingen  it  continued  for  a  long  time
to  be  the  custom  for  reapers  to  leave  on  the  field  a  gift  for  Oden's
horses.1  The  usage  in  Mecklenburg  is  thus  described  by  Gryse :

i  Geyers  schwecl.  gesch.  1,  110.  orig.  1,  123.  In  the  Hognimssoclcen,
Oeland,  are  some  large  stones  named  Odins  flisor,  Odini  lamellae,  of  which  the


WODAN.  155

Ja,  im  heidendom  hebben  tor  tid  der  arne  (at  harvest-tide)  de
meiers  (mowers)  dem  afgade  Woden  umme  god  korn  angeropen
(invoked  for  good  corn),  denn  wenn  de  roggenarne  geendet,  heft
men  up  den  lesten  platz  eins  idem  (each)  veldes  einen  kleinen  ord
unde  humpel  korns  unafgemeiet  stan  laten,  datsiilve  baven  (b'  oben,
a-b'ove)  an  den  aren  drevoldigen  to  samende  geschortet,  unde
besprenget  (ears  festooned  together  three  times,  and  sprinkled).
Alle  meiers  sin  darumme  her  getreden,  ere  Jiode  (their  hats)  vam
Jcoppe  genamen  (v.  supra,  p.  32),  unde  ere  seisen  (scythes)  na  der
slilven  wode  [mode  ?]  unde  geschrenke  (encircling)  dem  kornbusche
upgerichet,  und  hebben  den  Wodenduvel  dremal  semplik  lud  averall
also  angeropen  unde  gebeden :

W ode,  hale  (fetch)  dinem  rosse  nu  voder,

nu  distil  unde  dorn,

torn  andern  jar  beter  korn !

welker  afgodischer  gebruk  im  Pawestom  gebleven.  Daher  denn  ok
noch  an  dissen  orden  dar  heiden  gewanet,  bi  etliken  ackerliiden
(-leuten,  men)  solker  avergelovischer  gebruk  in  anropinge  des
Woden  tor  tid  der  arne  gesporet  werd,  und  ok  oft  desiilve  helsche
jeger  (the  same  hellish  hunter),  sonderliken  im  winter,  des  nachtes
up  dem  velde  mit  sinen  jagethunden  sik  horen  let.1

David  Franck  (Meklenb.  1,  56-7),  who  has  heard  the  same  from
old  people,  quotes  the  rhyme  thus  ;

story  is  told,  that  Odin,  in  turning  his  horse  out  to  graze,  took  the  bit  off  him
and  laid  it  on  a  huge  block  of  stone  ;  the  weight  of  the  bit  split  the  stone  into
two  pieces,  which  were  set  upright  as  a  memorial.  Another  story  is,  that  Oden
was  about  to  fight  an  adversary,  and  knew  not  where  to  tie  his  horse  up.  In
the  hurry  he  ran  to  the  stone,  pierced  it  with  his  sword,  and  tied  his  horse  fast
through  the  hole.  But  the  horse  broke  loose,  the  stone  burst  in  pieces  and
rolled  away,  and  from  this  arose  the  deep  bog  named  Hogrumstrask  ;  people
have  tied  poles  together,  but  never  could  reach  the  bottom.  Abrah.  Ahlquist,
Oelands  historia,  Calrnar  1822.  1,  37,  2,  212.  There  is  a  picture  of  the  stones
in  Liliengren  och  Brunius,  no.  xviii.  In  the  Hogbysocken  of  Oeland  is  also  a
smooth  block  of  granite  named  Odinssten,  on  which,  ace.  to  the  folk-tale,  the
warriors  of  old,  when  marching  to  battle,  used  to  whet  their  swords  ;  Ahl
quist  2,  79.  These  legends  confirm  the  special  importance  of  Odin's  horse  in
his  mythus.  Verelii  notae  on  the  Gautrekssaga  p.  40  quote  from  the  Clavis
computi  runici  :  '  Odin  beter  hesta  sina  i  belg  bunden,'  which  I  do  not  quite
understand.  In  the  Fornm.  sog.  9,  55-6  OSinn  has  his  horse  shod  at  a  black
smith's,  and  rides  away  by  enormous  leaps  to  Sweden,  where  a  war  breaks  out
(see  Suppl.).

T  Spegel  des  antichristischen  pawestdoms  (popery),  dorch  Nicolaum  Grysen,
predigern  in  Rostock,  Eost.  1593.  4,  sheet  E  iiiib.  With  the  verses  cited  by
him,  conf.  the  formula  in  weisthiimer  :  Let  it  lie  fallow  one  year,  and  bear
thistle  and  thorn  the  next.


156  WODAN.

Wode,  Wode,

lial  dinen  rosse  nu  voder,

nu  distel  un  dorn,

achter  jar  beter  korn  !

He  adds,  that  at  the  squires'  mansions,  when  the  rye  is  all  cut,
there  is  Wodel-beer  served  out  to  the  mowers ;  no  one  weeds  flax
on  a  Wodenstag,  lest  Woden's  horse  should  trample  the  seeds  ;  from
Christmas  to  Twelfth-day  they  will  not  spin,  nor  leave  any  flax  on
the  distaff,  and  to  the  question  why  ?  they  answer,  Wode  is  galloping
across.  We  are  expressly  told,  this  wild  hunter  Wode  rides  a  white
horse.1  Near  Satuna  in  Vestergotland  are  some  fine  meadows
called  Onsdngarne  (Odens  angar,  ings),  in  which  the  god's  horses
are  said  to  have  grazed,  Afzelius  1,  4.  In  S.  Germany  they  tell  of
the  lord  of  the  castle's  grazing  gray  (or  white),  Mone  anz.  3,  259  ;  v.
infra,  the  '  wutende  heer'.  I  have  been  told,  that  in  the  neigh
bourhood  of  Kloppenburg  in  Oldenburg,  the  harvesters  leave  a
bunch  of  corn-stalks  uncut  on  the  field,  and  dance  round  it.  There
may  be  a  rhyme  sung  over  it  still,  no  doubt  there  was  formerly.

A  custom  in  Schaumburg  I  find  thus  described  :2  the  people  go
out  to  mow  in  parties  of  twelve,  sixteen  or  twenty  scythes,  but  it  is
so  managed,  that  on  the  last  day  of  harvest  they  all  finish  at  the
same  time,  or  some  leave  a  strip  standing  which  they  can  cut  down
at  a  stroke  the  last  thing,  or  they  merely  pass  their  scythes  over
the  stubble,  pretending  there  is  still  some  left  to  mow.  At  the  last
stroke  of  the  scythe  they  raise  their  implements  aloft,  pknt  them
upright,  and  beat  the  blades  three  times  with  the  strop.  Each
spills  on  the  field  a  little  of  the  drink  he  has,  whether  beer,  brandy,
or  milk,  then  drinks  himself,  while  they  wave  their  hats,  beat  their
scythes  three  times,  and  cry  aloud  Wold,  Wold,  Wold!  and  the
women  knock  all  the  crumbs  out  of  their  baskets  on  the  stubble.
They  march  home  shouting  and  singing.  Fifty  years  ago  a  song
was  in  use,  which  has  now  died  out,  but  whose  first  strophe  ran
thus :

Wold,  Wold,  Wold!
havenhune  weit  wat  schiit,
jiimm  hei  dal  van  haven  slit.

1  Mussaus  meklenb.  volkssagen  no.  5  ;  in  Liscli  meklenb.  jahrb.  2,  133  it
is  spelt  Waud,  and  a  note  is  made,  that  on  the  Elbe  they  say  fruh  Wod,  i.e.
froho,  lord  ;  conf.  infra,  fru  Gaue  and  fm  Gauden  in  the  '  wutende  heer ',

2  By  Munchhausen  in  Bragur  VI.  1,  21—34.


WODAN.  157

Vulle  kruken  un  sangen  hat  hei,
upen  holte  wasst  (grows)  manigerlei :
hei  is  nig  barn  un  wert  nig  old.
Wold,  Wold,  Wold!

If  the  ceremony  be  omitted,  the  next  year  will  bring  bad  crops  of
hay  and  corn.

Probably,  beside  the  libation,  there  was  corn  left  standing  for  the
venerated  being,  as  the  fourth  line  gives  us  to  understand  :  '  full
crocks  and  shocks  hath  he';  and  the  second  strophe  may  have
brought  in  his  horse.  '  Heaven's  giant  knows  what  happens,  ever
he  down  from  heaven  sees/  accords  with  the  old  belief  in
Wuotan's  chair  (p,  135) ;  the  sixth  line  touches  off  the  god  that
'  ne'er  is  born  and  ne'er  grows  old '  almost  too  theosophically.
Wold,  though  excused  by  the  rhyme,  seems  a  corruption  of  Wod,
Wode,1  rather  than  a  contraction  from  waldand  (v.  supra,  p.  21).
A  Schaumburg  man  pronounced  the  name  to  me  as  Wauden,  and
related  as  follows :  On  the  lake  of  Steinhude,  the  lads  from  the
village  of  Steinhude  go  every  autumn  after  harvest,  to  a  hill  named
Heidenhiigel,  light  a  fire  on  it,  and  when  it  blazes  high,  wave  their
hats  and  cry  Wauden,  Wauden  !  (see  Suppl.).

Such  customs  reveal  to  us  the  generosity  of  the  olden  time,
Man  has  no  wish  to  keep  all  his  increase  to  himself ;  he  gratefully
leaves  a  portion  to  the  gods,  who  will  in  future  also  protect  his
crops.  Avarice  increased  when  sacrificing  ceased.  Ears  of  corn
are  set  apart  and  offered  here  to  Wuotan,  as  elsewhere  to  kind
spirits  and  elves,  e.g.,  to  the  brownies  of  Scotland  (see  Suppl.  to
Elves,  pixy-hoarding).

It  was  not  Wuotan  exclusively  that  bestowed  fertility  on  the
fields ;  Donar,  and  his  mother  the  Earth,  stood  in  still  closer  con
nexion  with  agriculture.  We  shall  see  that  goddess  put  in  the  place
of  Wuotan  in  exactly  similar  harvest-ceremonies.

In  what  countries  the  worship  of  the  god  endured  the  longest,
may  be  learnt  from  the  names  of  places  which  are  compounded
with  his  name,  because  the  site  was  sacred  to  him.  It  is  very
unlikely  that  they  should  be  due  to  men  bearing  the  same  name  as
the  god,  instead  of  to  the  god  himself  ;  Wuotan,  Oolnn,  as  a  man's


1  Conf.  Dutch  oud,  goud  for  old,  gold  ;  so  Woude,  which  approximates
the  form  Wode.  Have  we  the  latter  in  '  Theodericus  de  Wodestede  ? 3  Scheldt's
mantissa  p.  433,  anno  1205.


158  WODAN.

name,  does  occur,  but  not  often ;  and  the  meaning  of  the  second
half  of  the  compounds,  and  their  reappearance  in  various  regions,
are  altogether  in  favour  of  their  being  attributable  to  the  god.
From  Lower  Germany  and  Hesse,  I  have  cited  (p.  151)  Wddenmueg,
Wodenesberg,  WodenesJwU,  Wddenesh'Asun,  and  on  the  Jutish  border
Wonsild ;  from  the  Netherlands  Woensdreclit ;  in  Upper  Germany
such  names  hardly  show  themselves  at  all.1  In  England  we  find :
Woodnesbortf  in  Kent,  near  Sandwich :  Wednesbury  and  Wednes-
field  in  Staffordshire  ;  Wednesham  in  Cheshire,  called  Wodncsfield
in  Ethelwerd  p.  84S.2  But  their  number  is  more  considerable  in
Scandinavia,  where  heathenism  was  preserved  longer :  and  if  in
Denmark  and  the  Gothland  portion  of  Sweden  they  occur  more
frequently  than  in  Norway  and  Sweden  proper,  I  infer  from  this  a
preponderance  of  Odin-worship  in  South  Scandinavia.  The  chief
town  in  the  I.  of  Funen  (Fion)  was  named  Odinsve  (Fornm.  sog.  11,
266.  281)  from  ve,  a  sanctuary ;  sometimes  also  O&imey  (ib.  230.
352)  from  eyt  island,  meadow ;  and  later  again  Odense,  and  in
Waldemar's  Liber  censualis3  530.  542  Othdnso.  In  Lower  Norway,
close  to  Frederikstad,  a  second  O&insey  (Heimskr.  ed.  Havn.  4,  348.
398),  aft.  called  Onso.  In  Jutland,  Othdnshylla  (-huld,  grace,
Wald.  lib.  cens.  519),  aft.  Onsild.  Othdnslef  (Othini  reliquiae,
leavings,  ib.  526),  now  Onskv.  In  Halland,  Othdnsdle  (-saal,  hall,
ib.  533),  now  Onsala  (Tuneld's  geogr.  2,  492.  504) ;  as  well  as  in
Old  Norway  an  Odhinssalr  (conf.  Woensel  in  Brabant,  Woenssele  ?).
In  Schonen,  Othdnshdret  (Wald.  lib.  cens.  528) ;  Othenshdrat  (Bring
2,  62.  138.  142),4  now  Onsjo  (Tuneld  2,  397) ;  Onslunda  (-grove,
Tuneld  2,  449)  ;  Otliensvara  (Bring  2,  46-7,  Othenvara  39)  ;
Othenstroo  (Bring  2,  48),  from  vara,  foedus,  and  tro,  fides  ?  In
Smaland,  Odensvalahult  (Tuneld  2,  146)  and  Odensjo  (2,  109.  147.
Sjoborg  lorsok  p.  61).  In  Ostergotland,  Odenfors  (Tuneld  2,  72).
In  Vestergotland,  Odenskulla  (2,  284)  and  Odenskdlla  (2,  264),  a
medicinal  spring  ;  Odensaker,  Onsaker  (-acre,  field,  2,  204.  253).  In

1  An  Odensberg  in  the  Mark  of  Bibelnheim  (now  Biebesheim  below  Gerns-
heim  in  Darmstadt)  is  named  in  a  doc.  of  1403.  Chmels  reg.  Ruperti  p.  204  ;
the  form  Wodensberg  would  look  more  trustworthy.

2  If  numbers  be  an  object,  I  fancy  the  English  contribution  might  be
swelled  by  looking  up  in  a  gazetteer  the  names  beginning  with  Wans-,  Wens-,
Wadden-,  Weddin-,  Wad-,  Wed-,  Wood-,  Warn-,  Wem-,  Worn-.— TRANS.

3  Langebek  script,  torn.  7.

4  Sven  Bring,  inonumenta  Scanensia,  vol  2,  Lond.  goth.  1748.


WODAN.  159

Westmanland,  Odensvi  (I,  266.  conf.  Gran,  p.  427),1  like  the
Odinsve  of  Fiinen  ;  and  our  Lower  Saxon  Woden  eswege  may  have
to  do  with  this  ve  (not  with  weg,  via),  and  be  explained  by  the  old
wig,  will,  templum  (see  p.  67).  This  becomes  the  more  credible,
as  there  occurs  in  the  Cod.  exon.  341,  28  the  remarkable  sentence :

Woden  worhte  weos,  wuldor  alwealda
rume  roderas ;

i.e.,  Woden  construxit,  creavit  fana  (idola),  Deus  omnipotens  amplos
coelos ;  the  Christian  writer  had  in  his  recollection  the  heathen
sanctuaries  assigned  to  Woden,  and  contrasts  with  them  the  greater
creations  of  God.  The  plur.  weos  is  easily  justified,  as  wih  is
resolved  into  weoh,  and  weohas  contracted  into  weos  :  so  that  an
AS.  Wodenesweoh  would  exactly  fit  the  OS.  Wodanesweg  =  W6-
daneswih,  and  the  ON.  Oolnsve.  Also  in  Westmanland,  an  Odensjo
(Grau  p.  502).  In  Upland,  Odensala  (Tuneld  1,  56);  Odensfors
(1,  144) ;  Onsike  (1,  144).  In  Nerike,  Odensbaclce  (1,  240),  (see
SuppL).

It  seemed  needful  here  to  group  the  most  important  of  these
names  together,  and  no  doubt  there  are  many  others  which  have
escaped  me  ;2  in  their  very  multitude,  as  well  as  the  similarity  or
identity  of  their  structure,  lies  the  full  proof  of  their  significance.
Few,  or  isolated,  they  might  have  been  suspected,  and  explained
otherwise ;  taken  together,  they  are  incontestable  evidence  of  the
wide  diffusion  of  Odin's  worship.

Herbs  and  plants  do  not  seem  to  have  been  named  after  this
god.  In  Brun's  beitr.,p.  54,  wodesterne  is  given  as  the  name  of  a
plant,  but  we  ought  first  to  see  it  in  a  distincter  form.  The  Ice
landers  and  Danes  however  call  a  small  waterfowl  (tringa  minima,
inquieta,  lacustris  et  natans)  Odinskani,  OdensJiane,  Odens  fugl,
which  fits  in  with  the  belief,  brought  out  on  p.  147,  in  birds  conse
crated  to  him.  An  OHG.  gloss  (Haupts  altd.  bl.  2,  212)  supplies
a  doubtful-looking  vtinswaluwe,  fulica  (see  SuppL).

Even  a  part  of  the  human  body  was  named  after  the  god :  the

1  Olof  Grau,  beskrifning  ofver  Wastmanland.  Wasteras  1754  conf.  Dybeck
runa  I.  3,  41.

2  There  are  some  in  Finn  Magnusen's  lex.  myth.  648  ;  but  I  do  not  agree
with  him  in  including  the  H.  Germ,  names  Odenwald,  Odenheim,  which  lack
the  HG.  form  Wuotan  and  the  -s  of  the  genitive  ;  nor  the  Finn.  Odenpa,  which
means  rather  bear's  head.


160  WODAN.

space  between  the  thumb  and  the  forefinger  when  stretched  out,
which  the  Greeks  name  Xt^a?,  was  called  in  the  Netherlands
Woedensspanne,  Woedenspanne,  Woenslet.  The  thumb  was  sacred,
and  even  worshipped  as  thumbkin  and  Pollux  =  pollex ;  Wodan
was  the  god  of  play,  and  lucky  men  were  said  to  have  the  game
running  on  their  thumb.  We  must  await  further  disclosures  about
the  name,  its  purport,  and  the  superstition  lying  at  the  bottom  of
it  (see  Suppl.).

I  started  with  assuming  that  the  worship  of  this  divinity  was
common  to  all  the  Teutonic  races,  and  foreign  to  none  Just  because
we  must  recognise  him  as  the  most  universal  and  the  supreme  one.
Wuotan — so  far  as  we  have  succeeded  in  gleaning  from  the  relics
of  the  old  religion  an  idea  of  his  being — Wuotan  is  the  most
intellectual  god  of  our  antiquity,  he  shines  out  above  all  the  other
gods ;  and  therefore  the  Latin  writers,  when  they  speak  of  the
German  cultus,  are  always  prompted  to  make  mention  first  of
Mercury.

We  know  that  not  only  the  Norsemen,  but  the  Saxons,  Thurin-
gians,  Alamanns  and  Langobards  worshipped  this  deity ;  why  should
Franks,  Goths,  and  the  rest  be  excluded  from  his  service  ?

At  the  same  time  there  are  plain  indications  that  his  worship
was  not  always  and  everywhere  the  dominant  one.  In  the  South
of  Germany,  although  the  personification  of  Wish  maintained  its
ground,  Wuotan  became  extinct  sooner  than  in  the  North  ;  neither
names  of  places,  nor  that  of  the  fourth  day  of  the  week,  have  pre
served  him  there.  Among  the  Scandinavians,  the  Swedes  and
Norwegians  seem  to  have  been  less  devoted  to  him  than  the  Got-
landers  and  Danes.  The  ON.  sagas  several  times  mention  images
of  Thor,  never  one  of  OSinn ;  only  Saxo  Gram,  does  so  in  an
altogether  mythical  way  (p.  113) ;  Adam  of  Bremen,  though  he
names  Wodan  among  the  Upsala  gods,  assigns  but  the  second  place
to  him,  and  the  first  to  Thor.  Later  still,  the  worship  of  Freyr
seems  to  have  predominated  in  Sweden.

An  addition  to  the  St.  Olaf  saga,  though  made  at  a  later  time,
furnishes  a  striking  statement  about  the  heathen  gods  whom  the
introduction  of  Christianity  overthrew.  I  will  quote  it  here,
intending  to  return  to  it  from  time  to  time:  '  Olafr  konungr
kristnaol  J?etta  riki  allt,  oil  blot  braut  hann  niSr  ok  oil  goS,  sein


WODAN.  161

Thor  Engilsmanna  gob",  ok  Odin  Saxa  go5,  ok  Skiold  Skanunga  goS,
ok  Frey  Svia  goS,  ok  Goftorm  Dana  goS ' ;  i.e.  king  0.  christened
all  this  kingdom,  broke  down  all  sacrifices  and  all  gods,  as  Thor  the
Englishmen's  god,  05in  the  Saxons'  god,  &c.,  Fornm.  sog.  5,  239. —
This  need  not  be  taken  too  strictly,  but  it  seems  to  rne  to  express
the  still  abiding  recollections  of  the  old  national  gods :  as  the
Swedes  preferred  Freyr,  so  probably  did  the  Saxons  Woden,  to  all
other  deities.  Why,  I  wonder,  did  the  writer,  doubtless  a  Norwe
gian,  omit  the  favourite  god  of  his  own  countrymen  ?  To  them  he
ought  to  have  given  Thor,  instead  of  to  the  English,  who,  like  other
Saxons,  were  votaries  of  Woden.  •

Meanwhile  it  must  not  be  overlooked,  that  in  the  Abrenuntiatio,

an  8th  century  document,  not  purely  Saxon,  yet  Low  German,  0.

Prankish  and  perhaps  Ripuarian,  Thunar  is  named  before  Vuodan,

nd  Saxnot  occupies  the  third  place.     From  this  it  follows  at  all

jvents,  that  the  worship  of  Thunar  also  prevailed  in  those  regions;

may  we  still  vindicate  Wuodan's  claims  to  the  highest  place  by

upposing  that  the  three  gods  are  here  named  in  the  order  in  which

heir  statues  were  placed  side  by  side?  that  Wuodan,  as  the  greatest

f  them,  stood  in  the  middle  ?  as,  according  to  Adam  of  Bremen,

nhor  did  at  Upsala,  with  Wodan  and  Fricco  on  each  side  of  him.

In  the  ON.  sagas,  when  two  of  these  gods  are  named  together,

'horr  usually  precedes  OSinn.     The  Laxdselasaga,  p.  174,  says  of

Ciartan :   At  hann   Jjykist  eiga  meira   traust   undir   afli  sinu  ok

4-pnum  (put  more  trust  in  his  strength  and  weapons,  conf.  pp.  6,

')  heldr  enn  J?ar  sem  er  Thorr  ok  O&inn.     The  same  passage  is

'epeated  in  Fornm.  sog.  2,  34.     Again,  Eyvindr  relates   how  his

)arents  made  a  vow  before  his  birth:   At  sa  maftr  skal  alt  til

dauSadags  ]?iona  Thor  ok  Offni  (this  man   shall   until  death-day

serve,  &c.),  Fornm.  sog.  2,  16 1.1     But  it  does  not  follow  from  this,

hat  Thorr  was  thought  the  greatest,  for  Eyvindr  was  actually

dedicated  to  OSinn.     In  Fornm.  sog.  5,  249,  Styrbiorn  sacrifices  to

Thorr,  and  Eirekr  to  Oftinn,  but  the  former  is  beaten.     Thdrr  tok


1  So  in  an  AS.  homily  De  temporibus  Antichrist!,  in  Wheloc's  Bedap.  495,
ire  enumerated  '  Thor  and  Eoftwen,  ]?e  hseSene  men  heriat)  8\viSe' ;  and  before
hat,  '  Erculus  se  ent  (Hercules  gigas)  and  Apollinis  (Apollo),  }?e  hi  ma3rne  god
eton '.  The  preacher  was  thinking  of  the  Greek  and  the  Norse  deities,  not  of
.he  Saxon,  or  he  would  have  said  Thunor  and  Woden.  And  in  other  cases,
•vhere  distinctly  Norse  gods  are  meant,  AS.  writers  use  the  Norse  form  of  name.
?.  Magnusens  lex.  p.  919.

11


1C2  WODAN.

jolaveizlu  fra  Haraldi,  cnn  O&inn  tok  fra  Halfdani,  Fornm.  sog.
10,  178.  In  the  popular  assembly  at  Thrandheim,  the  first
cup  is  drunk  to  Off  inn,  the  second  to  Thdrr,  ibid.  1,  35.  In  the
famous  Bravalla  fight,  Othin  under  the  name  of  Bruno  acts  as
charioteer  to  the  Danish  king  Harald,  and  to  the  latter's  destruction;
on  the  Swedish  side  there  fight  descendants  of  Frcyr,  Saxo  Gram.
144-7.  Yet  the  Eddie  HarbarzlioS  seems  to  place  OSinn  above  Thorr.
A  contrast  between  OSinn  and  Thorr  is  brought  out  strongly  in  the
Gautrekssaga  quoted  below,  ch.  XXVIII.  But,  since  Thorr  is  repre
sented  as  0(5in's  son,  as  a  rejuvenescence  of  him,  the  two  must
often  resolve  into  one  another.1

If  the  three  mightiest  gods  are  named,  I  find  Oolnn  foremost :
O&inn,  Thdr,  Freyr,  Sn.  edda  131.  According  to  Fornm.  sog.  1, 16,
voyagers  vow  money  and  three  casks  of  ale  to  Freyr,  if  a  fair  wind
shall  carry  them  to  Sweden,  but  to  Thdrr  or  O&inn,  if  it  bring  them
home  to  Iceland  (see  Suppl.).

It  is  a  different  thing,  when  OSinn  in  ON.  documents  is  styled
Thridi,  the  third  ;2  in  that  case  he  appears  not  by  the  side  of  Thorr
and  Freyr,  but  by  the  side  of  Hdr  and  lafnhdr  (the  high  and  the
even-high  or  co-equal,  OHG.  epan  hoh)  as  the  Third  High*  (see
Suppl.),  Sn.  7.  Yngl.  saga  52.  Seem.  46a.  As  we  might  imagine,
the  grade  varies  :  at  other  times  he  is  Tveggi  (duplex  or  secundus).
Again,  in  a  different  relation  he  appears  with  his  brothers  Vili  and
Ve,  Sn.  7;  with  Hcenir  and  LoSr,  Seem.  3b,  or  with  Hoenir  and  Loki
Ssem.  180.  Sn.  135;  all  this  rests  upon  older  myths,  which,  as
peculiar  to  the  North,  we  leave  on  one  side.  Yet,  with  respect  to
the  trilogy  Offinn,  Vili,  Ve,  we  must  not  omit  to  mention  here,
that  the  OHG-.  willo  expresses  not  only  voluntas,  but  votum,
impetus  and  spiritus,4  and  the  Gothic  viljan,  velle,  is  closely  con
nected  with  valjan,  eligere;  whence  it  is  easy  to  conceive  and

1  When  OGinn  is  called  Thundr  in  the  songs  of  the  Edda,  Ssem.  28b  47b,
this  may  be  derived  from  a  lost  bvnja  =  AS.  Jmnian,  tonare,  and  so  be  equivalent
to  Donar  ;  it  is  true,  they  explain  }mndr  as  loricatus,  from  Jnind  lorica.     But
Wuotan,  as  Voma,  is  the  noise  of  the  rushing  air,  and  we  saw  him  hurl  the
cudgel,  as  Thorr  does  the  hammer.

2  As  Zeus  also  is  rpiror,  from  which  TptroycVeia  is  more  easily  explained
than  by  her  birth  from  his  head  (see  Suppl.).

3  JElfric's  glosses   56a,  Altanus :    Woden.     Altanus,  like  Summanus,   an
epithet  of  Jove,  the  Altissimus  ;  else  Altanus,  as  the  name  of  a  wind,  might
also  have  to  do  with  the  storm  of  the  '  wiitende  heer '.

4  The  Greek  p.{ vos  would  be  well  adapted  to  unite  the  meanings  of  courage,
fury  (mut,  wut),  wish,  will,  thought.


WODAN.  163

believe,  how  Wuotan,  Wish  and  Will  should  touch  one  another  (see
SuppL).  With  the  largitor  opum  may  also  be  connected  the  AS.
wela,  OS.  welo,  OHG-.  wolo,  welo  =  opes,  felicitas  [weal,  wealth],
and  Wela  comes  up  several  times  almost  as  a  personification  (conf.
Gramm.  4,  752),  like  the  Lat.  goddess  Ops  (conf.  infra  Sselde,  note) ;
there  is  also  a  Vali  among  the  Norse  gods.  In  the  case  of  Ve,  gen.
vea,  the  sense  may  waver  between  wiho,  sanctus  (Goth.  Ahma  sa
veiha,  Holy  Ghost),  and  wih,  idolum.  In  Ssem.  63,  Loki  casts  in
the  teeth  of  Frigg  her  intrigues  with  Ye  and  Vili ;  this  refers  to
the  story  in  Yngl.  saga  cap.  3,  from  which  we  clearly  gather  the
identity  of  the  three  brothers,  so  that  Frigg  could  be  considered  the
wife  of  any  one  of  them.1

Lastly,  a  principal  proof  of  the  deeply-rooted  worship  of  this
divinity  is  furnished  by  Wodan's  being  interwoven  with  the  old
Saxon  genealogies,  which  I  shall  examine  minutely  in  the  Appendix.2

Here  we  see  Wodan  invariably  in  the  centre.  To  him  are
traced  up  all  the  races  of  heroes  and  kings ;  among  his  sons  and
his  ancestors,  several  have  divine  honours  paid  them.  In  parti-

1  According  to  this  story,  OSinn  was  abroad  a  long  time,  during  which  his
brothers  act  for  him  ;  it  is  worthy  of  note,  that  Saxo  also  makes  Othin  travel
to  foreign  lands,  and  Mithothin  fill  his  place,  p.  13  ;  this  Mithothin's  position
throws  light  on  that  of  Vili  and  Ve.    But  Saxo,  p.  45,  represents  Othin  as  once
more  an  exile,  and  puts  Oiler  in  his  place  (see  SuppL).     The  distant  journeys
of  the  god  are  implied  in  the  Norse  by-names  Gm\gra<5r,  Gdngleri,  Vegtamr,
and  Vi&forull,  and  in  Saxo  45  viator  indefessus.     It  is  not  to  be  overlooked,
that  even  Paulus  Diac.  1,  9  knows  of  Wodan's  residence  in  Greece  (qui  non
circa  haec  tempora — of  the  war  between  Langobards  and  Vandals — sed  longe
anterius,  nee  in  Germania,  sed  in  Graecia  fuisse  perhibetur ;  while  Saxo  removes
him  to  Byzantium,  and  Snorri  to  Tyrkland}.     In  the  passage  in  Paul.  Diac.  :
'Wodan  sane,  quern  adjecta  litera  Gwodan  dixerunt,  ipse.est  qui  apud  Romanos
Mercurius  dicitur,  et  ab  universis  Germaniae  gentibus  ut  deus  adoratur,  qui
non  circa  haec  tempora,  sed  longe  anterius,  nee  in  Germania,  sed  in  Graecia
fuisse  perhibetur ' — it  has  been  proposed  to  refer  the  second  '  qui 3  to  Mercurius
instead  of  Wodan  (Ad.  Schmidt  zeitschr.  1,  264),  and  then  the  harmony  of
this  account  with  Snorri  and  Saxo  would  disappear.     But  Paul  is  dealing  with
the  absurdity  of  the  Langobardic  legend  related  in  1,  8,  whose  unhistoric  basis
he  lays  bare,  by  pointing  out  that  Wodan  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  between
the  Wandali  and  Winili,  had  not  ruled  in  Germany,  but  in  Greece  ;  which
is  the  main  point  here.     The  notion  that  Mercury  should  be  confined  to  Greece,
has  wider  bearings,  and  would  shock  the  heathen  faith  not  only  of  the  Germans
but  of  the  Romans.     The  heathen  gods  were  supposed  to  be  omnipresent,  as
may  be  seen  by  the  mere  fact  that  Woden-hills  were  admitted  to  exist  in
various  spots  all  over  the  country  ;  so  that  the  community  of  this  god  to
Germans,  Greeks  and  Romans  raised  no  difficulty.

2  This  Appendix  forms  part  of  the  third  volume.     In  the  meanwhile,
readers  may  be  glad  to  see  for  themselves  the  substance  of  these  pedigrees,
which  I  have  extracted  from  the  Appendix,  and  placed  at  the  end  of  this
chapter. — TRANS.


WODAN.

cular,  there  appear  as  sons,  Balder  and  that  Saxntit  who  in  the  8th
rent  my  was  not  yet  rooted  out  of  N.W.  Germany  ;  and  in  the  line
<>l  his  progenitors,  Heremtid  and  Gedt,  the  latter  expressly  pro
nounced  a  god,  or  the  son  of  a  god,  in  these  legends,  while  Wodan
himself  is  regarded  more  as  the  head  of  all  noble  races.  But  we
easily  come  to  see,  that  from  a  higher  point  of  view  both  Geat  and
"Wodun  merge  into  one  being,  as  in  fact  Oftinn  is  called  'alda  Gautrl
Ssern.  93b  95b ;  conf.  infra  Goz,  Koz.

In  these  genealogies,  which  in  more  than  one  direction  are
visibly  interwoven  with  the  oldest  epic  poetry  of  our  nation,  the
gods,  heroes  and  kings  are  mixed  up  together.  As  heroes  become
deified,  so  can  gods  also  come  up  again  as  heroes  ;  amid  such  reap-
•peanuices,  the  order  of  succession  of  the  individual  links  varies  [in
different  tables].

Each  pedigree  ends  with  real  historical  kings:  but  to  reckon
back  from  these,  and  by  the  number  of  human  generations  to  get
;it  the  date  of  mythical  heroes  and  gods,  is  preposterous.  The
earliest  Anglo-Saxon  kings  that  are  historically  certain  full  into  the
lil'i  h,  sixth  or  seventh  century  ;  count  four,  eight  or  twelve  genera
tions  up  to  Woden,  you  cannot  push  him  back  farther  than  the
third  or  fourth  century.  Such  calculations  can  do  nothing  to  shake
our  assumption  of  his  far  earlier  existence.  The  adoration  of
AVodon  must  reach  up  to  immemorial  times,  a  long  way  beyond
the  first  notices  given  us  by  the  Komans  of  Mercury's  worship  in
Germania.

There  is  one  more  reflection  to  which  the  high  place  assigned
by  the  Germans  to  their  Wuotan  may  fairly  lead  us.  Monotheism
is  a  thing  so  necessary,  so  natural,  that  almost  all  heathens,  amidst
their  motley  throng  of  deities,  have  consciously  or  unconsciously
ended  by  acknowledging  a  supreme  god,  who  has  already  in  him
th<-  attributes  of  all  the  rest,  so  that  these  are  only  to  be  regarded
as  emanations  from  him,  renovations,  rejuvenescences  of  him.
This  explains  how  certain  characteristics  come,  to  he  assigned,  now
to  this,  now  to  that  particular  god,  and  why  one  or  another  of  them,
according  to  the  difference  of  nation,  comes  to  be  invested  with
supreme,  power.  Thus  our  Wuotan  resembles  Hermes  and  Mercury,
but  he  stands  higher  than  these  two;  contrariwise,  the  German
Donar  (Thunor,  Thorr)  is  a  weaker  Zeus  or  Jupiter;  what  was
added  to  the  one,  had  to  be  subtracted  from  the  other ;  as  for  Ziu


WODAN.


165


(Tiw,  Tyr),  he  hardly  does  more  than  administer  one  of  Wuotan's
offices,  yet  is  identical  in  name  with  the  first  and  highest  god  of  the
Greeks  and  Eomans :  and  so  all  these  god-phenomena  keep  meet
ing  and  crossing  one  another.  The  Hellenic  Hermes  is  pictured  as
a  youth,  the  Teutonic  Wuotan  as  a  patriarch :  OSinn  hinn  gamli
(the  old).  Yngl.  saga  cap.  15,  like  '  the  old  god '  on  p.  21.  Ziu  and
Froho  are  mere  emanations  of  Wuotan  (see  Suppl.).


GENEALOGIES  OF  ANGLO-SAXON  KINGS.
Descending  Series.


KENT.

EASTANGLIA.

ESSEX.

MERCIA.

Woden

Woden

Woden

Woden

Wecta
Witta
Wihtgils
Hengest  (d.  489)
Eoric  (Oesc)
Dcta

Casere
Titmon
Trigel
Hrothmund
Hrippa
Quichelm

Saxneat
Gesecg
Andsecg
Sweppa
Sigel'ugel
Bedeca

Wihtheg
Wsermund
Offa
Angeltheow
Eoma3r
Icel

Eormenric

Uffa

Offa

PnpVi^a

^Ethelbeorht  (567)

Tidel
Raedwald  (d.  617)

^Escwine  (527)
Sledda

vyllcUUrt

Cynewald
Creoda

Eorpwald  (632)

Ssebeorht  (604)

Wibba

Penda  (d.  656)

DEIRA.

BERNICIA.

WESSEX.

LlNDESFARAN.

Woden

Woden

Woden

Woden

WaegdcEg
Sigegar

Bseldeeg
Brand

Baeldseg
Brand

Winta
Cretta

Bwaefdaeg

Sigegeat
Sa3bald
Ssefugel
Westerfalcna

Wilgisl

Uw  +

Beonoc
Aloe
Angenwit
Ingwi
Esa
Eoppa

Fridhogar
Freawine
Wig
Gewis
Esla
Elesa

Queldgils
Ceadbed
Bubba
Bedeca
Biscop
Eanferth

scfrea
Vffa

Ida  (d.  560)

Cerdic  (d.  534)

Eatta

ine
-Elle  (d.  588)

Cynric
Ceawlin

Ealdfrith

According  to  this,  Woden  had  seven  sons  (B*lda>g  being  common  to  two

!      }^e,MWhere  he  £?,  °nl^  three>  e'9-  Wil-  Malm.  p.    17  :  tres  filii
egius,  Withlegms    et    Beldegius,   from   whom   the   Kentish  kinos     the

1'  ^  SaXOn  ^  Northumb™*  kings  respectively  were

Ascending  Series.


the  line  was  connected  with  Noah,  and  so  with     dam  !


CHAPTEE  VIII.
DONAE,  THUNAE,  (THOEE).

The  god  who  rules  over  clouds  and  rain,  who  makes  himself
known  in  the  lightning's  flash  and  the  rolling  thunder,  whose  bolt
cleaves  the  sky  and  alights  on  the  earth  with  deadly  aim,  was
designated  in  our  ancient  speech  by  the  word  Donar  itself,  OS.
Thunar,  AS.  Thunor,  ON.  Thorr.1  The  natural  phenomenon  is
called  in  ON.  >ruma,  or  duna,  both  fern,  like  the  Gothic  J?eihvo,
which  was  perhaps  adopted  from  a  Finnic  language.  To  the  god
the  Goths  would,  I  suppose,  give  the  name  Thunrs.  The  Swed.
tordon,  Dan.  torden  (tonitru),  which  in  Harpestreng  still  keeps  the
form  thordyn,  thordun,  is  compounded  of  the  god's  name  and  that
same  duna,  ON.  Thordunaf  (see  Suppl).  In  exactly  the  same
way  the  Swed.  term  aska  (tonitru,  fulmen),  in  the  Westgothl.  Laws
asikkia,2  has  arisen  out  of  asaka,  the  god's  waggon  or  driving,  from
as,  deus,  divus,  and  aka,  vehere,  vehi,  Swed.  aka.  In  Gothland  they
say  for  thunder  Thorsakan,  Thor's  driving  ;  and  the  ON.  reiff
signifies  not  only  vehiculum,  but  tonitru,  and  reiSarslag,  rei(5ar-
J?ruma,  are  thunderclap  and  lightning.  For,  a  waggon  rumbling
over  a  vaulted  space  cpmes  as  near  as  possible  to  the  rattling  and
crashing  of  thunder.  The  comparison  is  so  natural,  that  we  find
it  spread  among  many  nations :  8o/cet  OX^/ACL  rov  Jto?  rj  fipovrrj
elvai,  Hesychius  sub.  v.  ^aci^povra.  In  Carniola  the  rolling  of
thunder  is  to  this  day  gotten  fahren.  [To  the  Eussian  peasant  it  is
the  prophet  Ilia  driving  his  chariot,  or  else  grinding  his  corn.]
Thorr  in  the  Eclda,  beside  his  appellation  of  Asa]?6rr,  is  more
minutely  described  by  Oku>6rr,  i.e.  Waggon-thorr  (Sn.  25) ;  his
waggon  is  drawn  by  two  he-goats  (Sn.  26).  Other  gods  have  their

i  So  even  in  High  German  dialects,  durstag  for  donrstag,  Engl.  Thursday,
and  Bav.  doren,  daren  for  donnern  (Schm.  1,  390).  In  TMrr  it  is  not  RR,  but
only  the  first  R  (the  second  being  flectional),  that  is  an  abbrev.  of  NH,  j  i.e.
N  suffers  syncope  before  R,  much  as  in  the  M.  Dut.  ere,  mire,  for  enre  minre.

a  Conf.  Onsike  (Odin's  drive  ?)  supra,  p.  159.


THUNAR.  167

waggons  too,  especially  OSinn  and  Freyr  (see  pp.  107, 151),  but  Then-
is  distinctively  thought  of  as  the  god  who  drives  ;  he  never  appears
riding,  like  Oftinn,  nor  is  he  supposed  to  own  a  horse :  either  he
drives,  or  he  walks  on  foot.  We  are  expressly  told  :  '  Thorr  gengr
til  domsins,  ok  vec5r  ar,'  walks  to  judgment,  and  wades  the  rivers
(Sn.  IS).1  The  people  in  Sweden  still  say,  when  it  thunders  :
godgulrien  aker,  the  good  old  (fellow)  is  taking  a  drive,  Ihre  G96.
740.  926.  gofar  akar,  go  far  kor,  the  gaffer,  good  father,  drives  (see
SuppL).  They  no  longer  liked  to  utter  the  god's  real  name,  or  they
wished  to  extol  his  fatherly  goodness  (v.  supra,  p.  21,  the  old  god,
Dan.  vor  gamle  fader).  The  Norwegian  calls  the  lightning  Thors-
varme,  -warmth,  Faye  p.  6.

Thunder,  lightning  and  rain,  above  all  other  natural  phenomena,
proceed  directly  from  God,  are  looked  upon  as  his  doing,  his
business  (see  SuppL).2  When  a  great  noise  and  racket  is  kept  up,
a  common  expression  is  :  you  could  not  hear  the  Lord  thunder  for
the  uproar ;  in  France  :  le  bruit  est  si  fort,  qu'on  n'entend  pas  Dieu
tonner.  As  early  as  the  Eoman  de  Eenart  11893  :

Font  une  noise  si  grant
quen  ni  oist  pas  Dieu  tonant.

29143 :  Et  commen^a  un  duel  si  grant,
que  len  ni  oist  Dieu  tonant.

Ogier  10915  :  Lor  poins  deterdent,  lor  paumes  vont  batant,
ni  oissiez  nis  ame  Dieu  tonant.

Garin  2,  38  :  Nes  Dieu  tonnant  ni  possiez  oir.

And  in  the  Eoman  de  Maugis  (Lyon  1599,  p.  64) :  De  la  noyse
quils  faisoyent  neust  Ion  pas  ouy  Dieu  tonner.

But  thunder  is  especially  ascribed  to  an  angry  and  avenging
god ;  and  in  this  attribute  of  anger  and  punishment  again  Donar
resembles  Wuotan  (pp.  18, 142).  In  a  thunderstorm  the  people  say
to  their  children  :  the  gracious  God  is  angry ;  in  Westphalia  :  use
her  got  kift  (chides,  Strodtm.  osnabr.  104)  ;  in  Franconia  :  God  is  out


1  Scarcely  contradicted  by  his  surname  Hldrrifti ;  this  riSi  probably  points
to  reiS,  a  waggon  ;  HlorriSi  seems  to  me  to  come  by  assimilation  from  hloSriSi,
conf.  ch.  XIII,  the  goddess  HloSyn.

2  A  peasant,  being  requested  to  kneel  at  a  procession  of  the  Host,  said  :  I
don't  believe  the  Lord  can  be  there,  'twas  only  yesterday  I  heard  him  thunder
up  in  heaven  ;  Weidners  apophthegmata,  Amst.  1643,  p.  277.


168  THUNAR.

there  scolding  ;  in  Bavaria  :  der  himmeltatl  (-daddy)  greint  (Schm.
1,  462).  In  Eckstrom's  poem  in  honour  of  the  county  of  Honstein
1592,  ciib,  it  is  said:

Gott  der  herr  muss  warlich  from  sein  (must  be  really  kind),

dass  er  nicht  mit  donner  schlegt  drein.1

The  same  sentiment  appears  among  the  Letton  and  Finn  nations.
Lettic  :  wezzajs  kahjas,  wezzajs  tehws  barrahs  (the  old  father  has
started  to  his  feet,  he  chides),  Stender  lett.  gramm.  150.  With
dievas  (god)  and  dievaitis  (godkin,  dear  god)  the  Lithuanians
associate  chiefly  the  idea  of  the  thunderer:  dievaitis  grauja  !
dievaitis  ji  numusse.  Esthonian  :  wanna  issa  hiiab,  wanna  essa
waljan,  murrisep  (the  old  father  growls),  Eosenplanters  beitr.  8,
116.  'The  Lord  scolds,'  'heaven  wages  war,'  Joh.  Christ.  Petris
Ehstland  2,  108  (see  Suppl.).

Now  with  this  Donar  of  the  Germani  fits  in  significantly  the
Gallic  Taranis  whose  name  is  handed  down  to  us  in  Lucan  1,  440  ;
all  the  Celtic  tongues  retain  the  word  taran  for  thunder,  Irish  toran,
with  which  one  may  directly  connect  the  ON.  form  Thorr,  if  one
thinks  an  assimilation  from  rn  the  more  likely  But  an  old
inscription  gives  us  also  Tanarus  (Forcellini  sub  v.)  =  Taranis.
The  Irish  name  for  Thursday,  dia  Tordain  (dia  ordain,  diardaoin)
was  perhaps  borrowed  from  a  Teutonic  one  (see  Suppl.).

So  in  the  Latin  Jupiter  (literally,  God  father,  Diespiter)  there
predominates  the  idea  of  the  thunderer  ;  in  the  poets  Tonans  is
equivalent  to  Jupiter  (e.g.,  Martial  vi.  10,  9.  13,  7.  Ovid  Heroid.
9,  7.  Fasti  2,  69.  Metam.  1,  170.  Claudian's  Stilicho  2,  439)  ;
and  Latin  poets  of  the  Mid.  Ages  are  not  at  all  unwilling  to  apply
the  name  to  the  Christian  God  (e.#.,Dracontius  de  deo  1,  1.  satisfact.
149.  Yen.  Fortunat.  p.  212-9.  258).  And  expressions  in  the
lingua  vulgaris  coincide  with  this:  celui  qui  fait  toner,  qui  fait
courre  la  nue  (p.  23-4).  An  inscription,  Jovi  tonanti,  in  Gruter  21,
6.  The  Greek  Zeus  who  sends  thunder  and  lightning  (/cepatwo?)  is
styled  Ktpavveios.  Zevs  eVri/Tre,  II.  8,  75.  170.  17,  595.  J*o?
,  II.  15,  379.2  And  because  he  sends  them  down  from  the


1  In  a  poem  made  up  of  the  first  lines  of  hymns  and  songs  :  Acli  gott  vom
liimmel  sieh  darein,  und  werfe  einen  donnerstein,  es  1st  gewislich  an  der  zeit,
dass  scliwelgerei  und  iippigkeit  zerschmettert  werden  mausetodt  !  sonst  schrein
\vir  bald  aus  tiefer  noth.

2  One  might  be  tempted  to  connect  the  Etruscan  Tina  =  Jupiter  with
Tonans  and  Donar  ;  it  belongs  more  immediately  to  Z^i/  (v.  infra,  Zio).


THUNAR.  169

height  of  heaven,  he  also  bears  the  name  a'/epto?,  and  is  pictured
dwelling  on  the  mountain-top  (atcpt,*:).  Zeus  is  enthroned  on
Olympus,  on  Athos,  Lycaeus,  Casius,  and  other  mountains  of  Greece
and  Asia  Minor.

And  here  I  must  lay  stress  on  the  fact,  that  the  thundering
god  is  conceived  as  emphatically  a  fatherly  one,  as  Jupiter  and
Diespiter,  as  far  and  tatl.  For  it  is  in  close  connexion  with  this,
that  the  mountains  sacred  to  him  also  received  in  many  parts  such
names  as  Etzel,  Altvater,  Grossvater.1  Thorr  himself  was  likewise
called  Atli,  i.e.  grandfather.

A  high  mountain,  along  which,  from  the  earliest  times,  the
main  road  to  Italy  has  lain,  in  the  chain  between  the  Graian  and
Pennine  Alps,  what  we  now  call  the  St.  Bernard,  was  in  the  early
Mid.  Ages  named  mons  Jovis.  This  name  occurs  frequently  in  the
Frankish  annals  (Pertz  1,  150.  295.  453.  498.  512.  570.  606.  2,  82),
in  Otto  fris.  de  gest.  Frid.  2,  24,  in  Eadevicus  1,  25,  who  designates
it  via  Julii  Caesaris,  modo  mons  Jovis ;  in  AS.  writers  munt  Jofes
(Lye  sub.  v.),  in  ^Elfr.  Boet.  p.  150  muntgiow ;  in  our  Kaiserchro-
nik  88d  monte  job. — The  name  and  the  worship  carry  us  back  to
the  time  of  the  Eomans  ;  the  inhabitants  of  the  Alps  worshipped
a  Peninus  deus,  or  a  Penina  dea :  Neque  montibus  his  ab  transitu
Poenorum  ullo  Veragri,  incolae  jugi  ejus  norunt  nomen  inditum,
sed  ab  eo  (al.  deo)  quern  in  summo  sacratum  vertice  peninum
montani  adpellant ;  Livy  31,  38.  Quamvis  legatur  a  poenina  dea
quae  ibi  colitur  Alpes  ipsas  vocari ;  Servius  on  Virg.  Aen.  10,  13.
An  inscription  found  on  the  St  Bernard  (Jac.  Spon  miscellanea
antiq.  Lugd.  1685,  p.  85)  says  expressly :  Lucius  Lucilius  deo
Penino  opt.  max.  donum  dedit ;  from  which  it  follows,  that  this  god
was  understood  to  be  no  other  than  Jupiter.  Conf.  Jupiter  apenni-
nus,  Micali  storia  131-5.  Zevs  Kapaios  occurs  in  Hesych.  [icdpa
means  head,  and  so  does  the  Celtic  pen,  len\.  The  classic  writers
never  use  mons  Jovis,  and  the  tabula  Antonini  names  only  the
summus  Penninus  and  the  Penni  lucus ;  but  between  the  4th  and
7th  centuries  Jovis  mons  seems  to  have  taken  the  place  of  these,

1  Zeitschr.  des  hess.  vereins  2,  139-142.  Altd.  blatt.  1,  288.  Haupts
zeitschr.  1,26.  Finnish:  isainen  panee  (Eenval.  118a),  the  father  thunders.
To  the  Finns  uliko  signifies  proavus,  senex,  and  is  a  surname  of  the  gods
Wainasnomen  and  Ilmarinen.  But  also  Ukko  of  itself  denotes  the  thunder-
god  (v.  infra).  Among  the  Swedish  Lapps  aija  is  both  avus  and  tonitrus  (see
Suppl.).


170  THUNAR.

perhaps  with  reference  [not  so  much  to  the  old  Roman,  as]  to  the
Gallic  or  even  German  sense  which  had  then  come  to  be  attached
to  the  god's  name.  Remember  that  German  isarnodori  on  the  Jura
mountains  not  far  off  (p.  80).1

Such  names  of  mountains  in  Germany  itself  we  may  with
perfect  safety  ascribe  to  the  worship  of  the  native  deity.  Every
one  knows  the  Donnersberg  (mont  Tonnerre)  in  the  Rhine  palatinate
on  the  borders  of  the  old  county  of  Falkenstein,  between  Worms,
Kaiserslautern  and  Kreuznach ;  it  stands  as  Thoneresberg  in  a  doc.
of  869,  Schannat  hist,  wormat.  probat.  p.  9.  Another  Thuneresbery
situate  on  the  Diemel,  in  Westphalia,  not  far  from  Warburg,  and
surrounded  by  the  villages  of  Wormeln,  Germete  and  Welda,  is
first  mentioned  in  a  doc.  of  1100,  Schaten  mon.  paderb.  1,  649 ;
in  the  Mid.  Ages  it  was  still  the  seat  of  a  great  popular  assize,
originally  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  sacredness  of  the  spot :  '  comes  ad
ThuneresberJic  '  (anno  1123),  Wigands  feme  222.  comitia  de  Dunris-
berg  (1105),  Wigands  arch.  I.  1,  56.  a  judicio  nostro  Thonresberch
(1239),  ib.  58.  Precisely  in  the  vicinity  of  this  mountain  stands  the
holy  oak  mentioned  on  p.  72-4,  just  as  the  robur  Jovis  by  Geismar
in  Hesse  is  near  a  Wuotansberg,  p.  152.  To  all  appearance  the  two
deities  could  be  worshipped  close  to  one  another.  The  Kniillge-
birge  in  Hesse  includes  a  Donnerkaute.  In  the  Bernerland  is  a
DonnerluM  (doc.  of  1303,  Joh.  Miiller  1,  619),  called  Tonrbul  in
Justingers  Berner  chron.  p.  50.  Probably  more  Donnersbergs  are
to  be  found  in  other  parts  of  Germany.  One  in  the  Regensburg
country  is  given  in  a  doc.  of  882  under  the  name  of  Tuniesberg,
Ried,  cod.  dipl.  num.  60.  A  Sifridus  marschalcus  de  Donnersperch
is  named  in  a  doc.  of  1300,  MB.  33,  pars  1,  p.  289 ;  an  Otto  de
Donersperg,  MB.  4,  94  (in  1194),  but  Duonesberc,  4,  528  (in  1153),
and  Tunniesberg  11,  432.  In  the  Thuringer  wald,  -between  Stein-

1  This  mons  Jovis  must  be  distinguished  from  mons  gaudii,  "by  which  the
Mid.  Ages  meant  a  height  near  Rome  :  Otto  frising  1.  c.  2,  22  ;  the  Kaiserchr.
88d  translates  it  verbally  mendelberc.  In  Romance  poems  of  the  12- 13th
centuries,  monjoie  is  the  French  battle-cry,  generally  with  the  addition  of  St
Denis,  e.g.  monjoya,  monjoya  sant  Denis  !  Ferabras  365.  monjoie  enseigne  S.
Denis  !  Garin  108.  Ducange  in  his  llth  dissertation  on  Joinville  declares
monjoie  inadmissible  as  a  mere  diminutive  of  mont,  since  in  other  passages
(Roquefort  2,  207)  it  denotes  any  place  of  joy  and  bliss,  a  paradise,  so  that  we
can  fairly  keep  to  the  literal  sense  ;  and  there  must  have  been  mountains  of
this  name  in  more  than  one  region.  It  is  quite  possible  that  monjoie  itself
came  from  an  earlier  monjove  (mons  Jovis),  that  with  the  god's  hill  there
associated  itself  the  idea  of  a  mansion  of  bliss  (see  Suppl.).


THUNAR.  171

bach  and  Oberhof,  at  the  '  rennsteig  '  is  a  Donershauk  (see  Suppl.).
—  A  Donares  eih,  a  robur  Jovis,  was  a  tree  specially  sacred  to  the
god  of  lightning,  and  of  these  there  grew  an  endless  abundance  in
the  German  forests.

Neither  does  Scandinavia  lack  mountains  and  rocks  bearing  the
name  of  Thorr  :  Thors  Hint  in  East  Gothland  (conf.  Wildegren's
Ostergotland  1,  17);  Thorsborg  in  Gothland,  Molbech  tidskr.  4,  189.
From  Norway,  where  this  god  was  pre-eminently  honoured,  I  have
nevertheless  heard  of  none.  The  peasant  in  Vermland  calls  the
south-west  corner  of  the  sky,  whence  the  summer  tempests  mostly
rise,  Thorskala  (-hole,  cave,  Geijer's  Svearikes  hafder  1,  268).

And  the  Thunder-mountains  of  the  Slavs  are  not  to  be  over
looked.  Near  Milleschau  in  Bohemia  stands  a  Hromolan,  from
hrom,  thunder,  in  other  dialects  grom.  One  of  the  steepest  moun
tains  in  the  Styrian  Alps  (see  Suppl.)  is  Grimming,  i.e.,  SI.  germnik,
OS1.  gr"mnik,  thunder-hill  (Sloven,  gr'mi,  it  thunders,  Serv.  grmi,
Russ.  grom  gremit,  quasi  /Spo/xo?  /fye^et)  ;  and  not  far  from  it  is  a
rivulet  named  Donnerslach.1  The  Slavs  then  have  two  different
words  to  express  the  phenomenon  and  the  god:  the  latter  -is  in  OS1.
Perdu,  Pol.  Piorun,  Boh.  Peraun  ;2  among  the  Southern  Slavs  it
seems  to  have  died  out  at  an  earlier  time,  though  it  is  still  found  in
derivatives  and  names  of  places.  Dobrowsky  (inst.  289)  traces  the
word  to  the  verb  peru,  ferio,  quatio  [general  meaning  rather  pello,
to  push],  and  this  tolerably  apt  signification  may  have  contributed
to  twist  the  word  out  of  its  genuine  form.3  I  think  it  has  dropt  a
k  :  the  Lithuanian,  Lettish  and  OPrussian  thundergod  is  Perkunas,
PehrJcons,  Perkunos,  and  a  great  many  names  of  places  are  com
pounded  with  it.  Lith.,  Perkunas  grauja  (P.  thunders),  Perkunas
musza  (P.  strikes,  ferit)  ;  Lett.,  Pehrkons  sperr  (the  lightning
strikes,  see  Suppl.).  The  Slav,  perun  is  now  seldom  applied
personally,  it  is  used  chiefly  of  the  lightning's  flash.  Procopius  (de
Bello  Goth.  3,  14)  says  of  the  Sclaveni  and  Antes  :  6eov  pev  yap
€va  TOP  r^9  da  T  p  mrf]  <>  Srjfjiiovpjov  cLTrdvrwv  icvpiov  [lovov  ainov


1  Kindermann,  abriss  von  Steiermark  pp.  66,  67,  70,  81.

3  The  Slovaks  say  Parom,  and  paromova  strela  (P.'s  bolt)  for  perunova  ;
phrases  about  Parom,  from  Kollar,  in  Hanusch  259,  260.

3  Might  perun  be  connected  with  Kfpawos  =  nepawos  1  Still  nearer  to
Perun  would  seem  to  be  the  Sansk.  Parjanyas,  a  name  borne  by  Indra  as
Jupiter  pluvius,  literally,  fertilizing  rain,  thunder-cloud,  thunder.  A  hymn  to
this  rain-god  in  Rosen's  Vedae  specimen  p.  23.  Conf.  Hitzig  Philist.  296,  and
Holtzmannl,  112,  118.


172  THUNAR.


elvai,  KOI  Ouovcnv  avrw  /8oa?  re  KOL  lepeia  airavra,
Again,  the  oak  was  consecrated  to  Perun,  and  old  documents  define
boundaries  by  it  (do  perunova  duba,  as  far  as  P.'s  oak)  ;  and  the
Romans  called  the  the  acorn  juglans,  i.e.joviglans,  Jovis  glans,  the
fruit  of  the  fatherly  god.  Lightning  is  supposed  to  strike  oaks  by
preference  (see  Suppl.).

Now  Perkun  suggests  that  thundergod  of  the  Morduins,  Porguini
(p.  27),  and,  what  is  more  worthy  of  note,  a  Gothic  word  also,
which  (I  grant),  as  used  by  Ulphilas,  was  already  stript  of  all  per
sonification.  The  neut.  noun  fairguni  (Gramm.  2,  175.  453)
means  0/009,  mountain.1  What  if  it  were  once  especially  the
Thunder-mountain,  and  a  lost  Fairguns  the  name  of  the  god  (see
Suppl.)  \  Or,  starting  with  fairguni  with  its  simple  meaning  of
mons  unaltered,  may  we  not  put  into  that  masc.  Fafrguns  or  Fair-
guneis,  and  consequently  into  Perkunas,  the  sense  of  the  above-
mentioned  aKpios,  he  of  the  mountain  top  \  a  fitting  surname  for
the  thundergod.  Fergunna,  ending  like  Patunna,  p.  71,  signifies
in  the  Chron.  moissiac.  anno  805  (Pertz  1,  308)  not  any  particular
spot,  but  the  metal-mountains  (erzgebirge)  ;  and  Virgunnia  (Vir-
gundia,  Virgunda,  conf.  Zeuss  p.  10)  the  tract  of  wooded  mountains
between  Ansbach  and  Ellwangen.  Wolfram,  Wh.  390,  2,  says  of
his  walt-swenden  (wood-  wasting  T)  :  der  Swarzwalt  und  Virgunt
miiesen  da  von  cede  ligen,  Black  Forest  and  V.  must  lie  waste
thereby.  In  the  compounds,  without  which  it  would  have  perished
altogether,  the  OHG.  virgun,  AS.  firgen  may  either  bear  the  simple
sense  of  mountainous,  woody,  or  conceal  the  name  of  a  god.  —  Be  that
as  it  may,  we  find  fairguni,  virgun,  firgen  connected  with  divinely-
honoured  beings,  as  appears  plainly  from  the  ON.  Fiorgyn,  gen.
Fiorgynjar,  which  in  the  Edda  means  Thor's  mother,  the  goddess
Earth  :  Thorr  Jar&ar  burr,  Ssern.  70a  68a.  Offins  son,  Ss&m.  73a  74b.
And  beside  her,  a  male  Fiorgynn,  gen.  Fiorgyns,  Fiorgvins,  appears
as  the  father  of  OSin's  wife  Frigg,  Sn.  10,  118.  Seem.  63a.  In  all
these  words  we  must  take  fairg,  firg,  fiorg  as  the  root,  and  not  divide
them  as  fair-guni,  fir-gun,  fior-gyn.  Now  it  is  true  that  all  the  Anzeis,
all  the  Aesir  are  enthroned  on  mountains  (p.  25),  and  Firgun  might
have  been  used  of  more  than  one  of  them;  but  that  we  have  a  right
to  claim  it  specially  for  Donar  and  his  molfier,  is  shewn  by  Perun,

i  Matt.  8,  1.  Mk  5,  5.  11.  9,  2.  11,  1.      Lu.  3,  5.  4,  29.  9,  37.  19,  29.  37.
1  Cor.  13,  2.     Bairgahei  (f)  opeii/i?)  in  Lu.  1,  39,  65  ;  never  the  simple  bairgs.


THUNAR.  173

Perkun,  and  will  be  confirmed  presently  by  the  meaning  of  mount  and
rock  which  lies  in  the  word  hamar.  As  Zeus  is  called  eVa/cpto?,  so  is
his  daughter  Pallas  atcpia,  and  his  mother  opearepa  Td,  /ndrep  avrov
AIDS  (Sophocl.  Philoct.  389) ;  the  myth  transfers  from  him  to  his
mother  and  daughter.  Of  Donar's  mother  our  very  marchen  have
things  to  tell  (Pentam.  5,  4) ;  and  beyond  a  doubt,  the  stories  of
the  devil  and  his  bath  and  his  grandmother  are  but  a  vulgarization
of  heathen  notions  about  the  thundergod.  Lasicz  47  tells  us  :  Per-
cuna  tete  mater  est  fulminis  atque  tonitrui  quae  solem  fessum
ac  pulverolentum  balneo  excipit,  deinde  lotum  et  nitidum  postera
die  emittit.  It  is  just  matertera,  and  not  mater,  that  is  meant  by
teta  elsewhere.

Christian  mythology  among  the  Slav  and  certain  Asiatic  nations
has  handed  over  the  thunderer's  business  to  the  prophet  Elijah.,
who  drives  to  heaven  in  the  tempest,  whom  a  chariot  and  horses  of
fire  receive,  2  Kings  2,  11.  In  the  Servian  songs  2,  1.  2,  2  he  is
expressly  called  gromovnik  Iliya}  lightning  and  thunder  (munya  and
grom)  are  given  into  his  hand,  and  to  sinful  men  he  shuts  up  the
clouds  of  heaven,  so  that  they  let  no  rain  fall  on  the  earth  (see
SuppL).  This  last  agrees  with  the  O.T.  too,  1  Kings  17, 1.  18,  41-5,
conf.  Lu.  4,  25,  Jam.  5,  17 ;  and  the  same  view  is  taken  in  the
OHG.  poem,  0.  iii.  12,  13  :

Quedent  sum  giwaro,  Helias  sis  ther  mdro,
ther  thiz  lant  so  tharta,  then  himil  so  bisparta,
ther  iu  ni  liaz  in  notin  regonon  then  liutin,
thuangta  si  giwaro  harto  filu  suaro.2

But  what  we  have  to  note  especially  is,  that  in  the  story  of  Anti
christ's  appearance  a  little  before  the  end  of  the  world,  which  was
current  throughout  the  Mid.  Ages  (and  whose  striking  points  of
agreement  with  the  ON.  mythus  of  Surtr  and  Muspellsheim  I  shall
speak  of  later),  Helias  again  occupies  the  place  of  the  northern
thundergod.  Thorr  overcomes  the  great  serpent,  but  he  has
scarcely  moved  nine  paces  from  it,  when  he  is  touched  by  its
venomous  breath,  and  sinks  to  the  ground  dead,  Sn.  73.  In  the

1  Udri  gromom,  gromovit  Iliya !  smite  with  thunder,  thunderer  Elias,
1,77.

2  Greg,  tur.,  pref.  to  bk  2  :  Meminerit  (lector)  sub  Heliae  tempore,  qui
pluvias  cum  voluit  abstulit,  et  cum  libuit  arentibus  terris  infudit,  &c.


174  TIIUNAR.

OHG.  poem  of  Muspilli  48 — 54,  Antichrist  and  the  devil  do  indeed
fall,  but  Elias  also  is  grievously  wounded  in  the  fight :

Doh  wanit  des  vilu  gotmanno1

daz  Elias  in  demo  wige  arwartit :

sar  so  daz  Eliascs  pluot

in  erda  kitriufit,

so  inpriunant  die  perga ;

his  blood  dripping  on  the  earth  sets  the  mountains  on  fire,  and  the
Judgment-day  is  heralded  by  other  signs  as  well.  Without
knowing  in  their  completeness  the  notions  of  the  devil,  Antichrist,
Elias  and  Enoch,  which  were  current  about  the  7th  or  8th
century,2  we  cannot  fully  appreciate  this  analogy  between  Elias
and  the  Donar  of  the  heathens.  There  was  nothing  in  Christian
tradition  to  warrant  the  supposition  of  Elias  receiving  a  wound,
and  that  a  deadly  one.  The  comparison  becomes  still  more  sug
gestive  by  the  fact  that  even  half-christian  races  in  the  Caucasus
worship  Elias  as  a  god  of  thunder.  The  Ossetes  think  a  man  lucky
who  is  struck  ~by  lightning,  they  believe  Ilia  has  taken  him  to
himself ;  survivors  raise  a  cry  of  joy,  and  sing  and  dance  around
the  body,  the  people  flock  together,  form  a  ring  for  dancing,  and
sing :  0  Ellai,  Ellai,  eldaer  tchoppei !  (0  Elias,  Elias,  lord  of  the
rocky  summits).  By  the  cairn  over  the  grave  they  set  up  a  long  pole
supporting  the  skin  of  a  black  he-goat,  which  is  their  usual  manner
of  sacrificing  to  Elias  (see  Suppl.).  They  implore  Elias  to  make
their  fields  fruitful,  and  keep  the  hail  away  from  them.3  Olearius
already  had  put  it  upon  record,  that  the  Circassians  on  the  Caspian
sacrificed  a  goat  on  Elias  s  day,  and  stretched  the  skin  on  a  pole
with  prayers.4  Even  the  Muhammadans,  in  praying  that  a  thunder
storm  may  be  averted,  name  the  name  of  Ilya?

Now,  the  Servian  songs  put  by  the  side  of  Elias  the  Virgin
Mary  ;  and  it  was  she  especially  that  in  the  Mid.  Ages  was. invoked
for  rain.  The  chroniclers  mention  a  rain-procession  in  the  Liege


1  Gotman,  a  divine,  a  priest  ?    Conf.  supra,  pp.  88-9.

2  The  Rabbinical  legend  likewise  assumes  that  Elias  will  return  and  slay
the  malignant  Sammael  ;  Eisenmenger  2,  696.  851.

3  Klaproth's  travels  in  the  Caucasus  2,  606.  601.

4  Erman'a  archiv  fur  Russland  1841,  429.

5  Ad.  Olearius  reiseschr.  1647,  pp.  522-3.


THUNAE.  175

country  about  the  year  1240  or  1244  j1  three  times  did  priests  and
people  march  round  (nudis  pedibus  et  in  laneis),  but  all  in  vain,
because  in  calling  upon  all  the  saints  they  had  forgotten  the  Mother
of  God ;  so,  when  the  saintly  choir  laid  the  petition  before  God,
Mary  opposed.  In  a  new  procession  a  solemn  '  salve  regina  '  was
sung  :  Et  cum  serenum  tempus  ante  f  uisset,  tanta  inundatio  pluviae
facta  est,  ut  fere  omnes  qui  in  processione  aderant,  hac  illacque
dispergerentur.  With  the  Lithuanians,  the  holy  goddess  (dievaite
sventa)  is  a  rain-goddess.  Heathendom  probably  addressed  the
petition  for  rain  to  the  thundergod,  instead  of  to  Elias  and  Mary.2
Yet  I  cannot  call  to  mind  a  single  passage,  even  in  ON.  legend,
where  Thorr  is  said  to  have  bestowed  rain  when  it  was  asked  for ;
we  are  only  told  that  he  sends  stormy  weather  when  he  is  angry,
Olafs  Tryggv.  saga  1,  302-6  (see  SuppL).  But  we  may  fairly  take
into  account  his  general  resemblance  to  Zeus  and  Jupiter  (who  are
expressly  veno?,  pluvius,  II.  12,  25 :  ve  Zevs  cruz/e%e?),  and  the  pre
valence  of  votis  imlrem  wcare  among  all  the  neighbouring  nations
(see  SuppL).

A  description  by  Petronius  cap.  44,  of  a  Eoman  procession  for
rain,  agrees  closely  with  that  given  above  from  the  Mid.  Ages :
Antea  stolatae  ibant  nudis  pedibus  in  clivum,  passis  capillis,  menti-
bus  puris,  et  Jovem  aquam  exoralant ;  itaque  statim  urceatim  (in
bucketfuls)  pluebat,  aut  tune  aut  nunquam,  et  omnes  ridebant,  uvidi
tanquam  mures.  M.  Antoninus  (eZs  eavrov  5,  7)  has  preserved  the
beautifully  simple  prayer  of  the  Athenians  for  rain  :
'AOrjvaiwv,  vcrov,  vcrov,  w  <£t\e  Zev,  Kara  TT}?  dpovpas  r?}?
teal  TWV  7re$lo)v  (see  SuppL).  According  to  Lasicz,  the  Lithuanian
prayer  ran  thus :  Percune  devaite  niemuski  und  mana  dirvu  (so  I
emend  dievu),  melsu  tavi,  palti  miessu.  Cohibe  te,  Percune,  neve
in  meum  agrum  calamitatem  immittas  (more  simply,  strike  not),
ego  vero  tibi  hanc  succidiam  dabo.  The  Old  Prussian  formula  is
said  to  have  been  :  Dievas  Perkunos,  absolo  mus !  spare  us,  =  Lith.
apsaugok  mus  !  To  all  this  I  will  add  a  more  extended  petition  in
Esthonian,  as  Gutslaff3  heard  an  old  peasant  say  it  as  late  as  the

1  Aegidius  aureae  vallis  cap.  135  (Chapeauville  2,  267-8). ,  Chron.  belg.
magn.  ad  ann.  1244  (Pistorius  3,  263).

2  Other  saints  also  grant  rain  in  answer  to  prayer,  as  St  Mansuetus  in
Pertz  6,  512b.  513b  ;  the  body  of  St  Lupus  carried  about  at  Sens  in  1097,
Pertz  1,  106-7.     Conf.  infra,  Rain-making.

3  Joh.  Gutslaff,  kurzer  bericht  und  unterricht  von  der  falsch  heilig  ge-


176  THUNAR.

17th  century  :  '  Dear  Thunder  (woda  Picker),  we  offer  to  thee  an
ox  that  hath  two  horns  and  four  cloven  hoofs,  we  would  pray  thee
for  our  ploughing  and  sowing,  that  our  straw  be  copper-red,  our
grain  be  golden -yellow.  Push  elsewhither  all  the  thick  black  clouds,
over  great  fens,  high  forests,  and  wildernesses.  But  unto  us
ploughers  and  sowers  give  a  fruitful  season  and  sweet  rain.  Holy
Thunder  (poha  Picken),  guard  our  seedfield,  that  it  bear  good  straw
below,  good  ears  above,  and  good  grain  within/  Picker  or  Picken
would  in  modern  Esthonian  be  called  Pitkne,  which  comes  near
the  Finnic  pitkdinen  =  thunder,  perhaps  even  Thunder ;  Hiipel's
Esth.  Diet,  however  gives  both  pikkenne  and  pikne  simply  as
thunder  (impersonal).  The  Finns  usually  give  their  thundergod
the  name  Ukko  only,  the  Esthonians  that  of  Turris  as  well,
evidently  from  the  Norse  Thorr  (see  Suppl.).1

As  the  fertility  of  the  land  depends  on  thunderstorms  and
rains,  Pitkdinen  and  Zeus  appear  as  the  oldest  divinity  of  agri
cultural  nations,  to  whose  bounty  they  look  for  the  thriving  of
their  cornfields  and  fruits  (see  Suppl.) .  Adam  of  Bremen  too  attri
butes  thunder  and  lightning  to  Thor  expressly  in  connexion  with
dominion  over  weather  and  fruits  :  Thor,  inquiunt,  praesidet  in  aere,
qui  tonitrua  et  fulmina,  ventos  imbresque,  serena  et  fruges  giibcrnat.
Here  then  the  worship  of  Thor  coincides  with  that  of  Wuotan,  to
whom  likewise  the  reapers  paid  homage  (pp.  154 — 7),  as  on  the  other
hand  Thor  as  well  as  Oftinn  guides  the  events  of  war,  and  receives
his  share  of  the  spoils  (p.  133).  To  the  Norse  mind  indeed,  Thor's
victories  and  his  battles  with  the  giants  have  thrown  his  peaceful
office  quite  into  the  shade.  Nevertheless  to  Wuotan's  mightiest
son,  whose  mother  is  Earth  herself,  and  who  is  also  named  Per-
kunos,  we  must,  if  only  for  his  lineage  sake,  allow  a  direct  relation
to  Agriculture.2  He  clears  up  the  atmosphere,  he  sends  fertilizing


nandten  bache  in  Liefland  Wohhanda.  Dorpt.  1644,  pp.  362-4.  Even  in  his
time  the  language  of  the  prayer  was  hard  to  understand  ;  it  is  given,  corrected,
in  Peterson's  Finn,  mythol.  p.  17,  and  Rosenplanter's  beitr.,  heft  5,  p.  157.

1  Ukko  is,  next  to   Yumala  (whom  I  connect  with  Wuotan },  the  highest
Finnish  god.     Pitkainen  literally  means  the  long,  tall,  high  one.

2  Uhland  in  his  essay  on  Thorr,  has  penetrated  to  the  heart  of  the  ON.
myths,  and  ingeniously  worked  out  the  thought,  that  the  very  conflict  of  the
summer-god  with  the  winter-giants,  itself  signifies  the  business  of  bringing  land
under  cultivation,  that  the  crushing  rock-splitting  force  of  the  thunderbolt
prepares  the  hard  stony  soil.     This  is  most  happily  expounded  of  the  Hrungnir
and  Orvandill  sagas  ;  in  some  of  the  others  it  seems  not  to  answer  so  well.


THUNAR.  177

showers,  and  his  sacred  tree  supplies  the  nutritious  acorn.     Thor's
minni  was  drunk  to  the  prosperity  of  cornfields.

The  German  thundergod  was  no  doubt  represented,  like  Zeus
and  Jupiter,  with  a  long  beard.  A  Danish  rhyme  still  calls  him
1  Thor  med  sit  lange  -skidg '  (F.  Magnusen's  lex.  957).  But  the  ON.
sagas  everywhere  define  him  more  narrowly  as  red-bearded,  of
course  in  allusion  to  the  fiery  phenomenon  of  lightning  :  when  the
god  is  angry,  he  blows  in  his  red  beard,  and  thunder  peals  through
the  clouds.  In  the  Fornm.  sog.  2,  182  and  10,  329  he  is  a  tall,
handsome,  red-bearded  youth  :  Mikill  vexti  (in  growth),  ok  ungligr,
friSr  synum  (fair  to  see),  ok  rau&skeggja&r ;  in  5,  249  maSr  rauft-
skegyja&r.  Men  in  distress  invoked  his  red  beard :  Landsmenn
toko  ]?at  ra5  (adopted  the  plan)  at  heita  )?etta  hit  rauffa  skegg,  2,
183.  When  in  wrath,  he  shakes  his  beard :  EeiSr  var  J?a,  scegg
nam  at  hrista,  scor  nam  at  dyja  (wroth  was  he  then,  beard  he  took
to  bristling,  hair  to  tossing),  Seem.  70a.  More  general  is  the
phrase  :  let  siga  brynnar  ofan  fyrir  augun  (let  sink  the  brows  over
his  eyes),  Sn.  50.  His  divine  rage  (asmoftr)  is  often  mentioned :
Thorr  var5  reiftr,  Sn.  52.  Especially  interesting  is  the  story  of
Thor's  meeting  with  King  Olaf  1,  303  ;  his  power  seems  half  broken
by  this  time,  giving  way  to  the  new  doctrine  ;  when  the  Christians
approach,  a  follower  of  Thorr  exhorts  him  to  a  brave  resistance  :
]>eyt  J?u  i  mot  J?eim  skeggrodd  J?ina  (raise  thou  against  them  thy
beard's  voice).  ]?a  gengu  j?eir  ut,  ok  lies  Thorr  fast  i  kampana,  ok
freytti  skeggraustina  (then  went  they  out,  and  Th.  blew  hard  into
his  beard,  and  raised  his  beard's  voice),  kom  ]?a  J?egar  andviSil  moti
konungi  sva  styrkt,  at  ekki  matti  vi5  halda  (immediately  there  came
ill- weather  against  the  king  so  strong,  that  he  might  not  hold  out,
i.e., at  sea). — This  red  beard  of  the  thunderer  is  still  remembered  in
curses,  and  that  among  the  Frisian  folk,  without  any  visible  connex
ion  with  Norse  ideas:  'diis  ruadhiiret  donner  regiir!'  (let  red-haired
thunder  see  to  that)  is  to  this  day  an  exclamation  of  the  North  Fris
ians.1  And  when  the  Icelanders  call  a  fox  holtafiorr,  Thorr  of  the
holt,2  it  is  probably  in  allusion  to  his  red  fur  (see  Suppl.).

The  ancient  languages  distinguish   three  acts  in  the  natural


1  Der  geizhalz  auf  Silt,  Flensbiirg  1809,  p.  123  ;  2nd  ed.  Sonderburg  1833,
p.  113.

2  Nucleus  lat.  in  usum  scholae  schalholtinae.     Hafniae  1738,  p.  2088.

12


178  THUNAR.

phenomenon :  the  flash,  fulgur,  aa-rpaTnj,  the  sound,  tonitrus,  ftpovrij,
and  the  stroke,  fulmen,  /cepawos  (see  SuppL).

The  lightning's  flash,  which  we  name  Uitz,  was  expressed  in  our
older  speech  both  by  the  simple  plih,  Graff  3,  244,  MHG.  blic,  Iw.
649.  Wigal.  7284,  and  by  plecliazunga  (coruscatio),  derived  from
plechazan,1  a  frequentative  of  plechen  (fulgere),  Diut.  1,  222-4 ;
they  also  used  plechunga,  Diut.  1,  222.  Pleccateshem,  Pertz  2,  383,
the  name  of  a  place,  now  Blexen ;  the  MHG.  has  Uikze  (fulgur) :
die  blikzen  und  die  donerslege  sint  mit  gewalte  in  siner  pflege,  MS.
2,  166b. — Again  lohazan  (micare,  coruscare),  Goth,  lauhatjan,  pre
supposes  a  lohen,  Goth,  lauhan.  From  the  same  root  the  Goth
forms  his  Iduhmuni  (aarpaTrrj),  while  the  Saxon  from  blic  made  a
Uicsmo  (fulgur).  AS.  leoma  (jubar,  fulgur),  ON.  liorni,  Swed.
ljungeld,  Dan.  lyn. — A  Prussian  folk-tale  has  an  expressive  phrase
for  the  lightning  :  '  He  with  the  Uue  whip  chases  the  devil/  i.e.  the
giants ;  for  a  Hue  flame  was  held  specially  sacred,  and  people
swear  by  it,  North  Fris.  '  donners  blosJcen  (blue  sheen)  help  ! '  in
Hansens  geizhals  p  123 ;  and  Schartlin's  curse  was  blau  feuer  !
(see  SuppL).

.Beside  donar,  the  OHG.  would  have  at  its  command  capreh
(fragor)  from  prehhan  (frangere),  Gl.  hrab.  963b,  for  which  the
MHG.  often  has  klac,  Troj.  12231.  14693,  and  krach  from  kracheii,
(crepare) :  mit  krache  gap  der  doner  duz,  Parz.  104,  5 ;  and  as
krachen  is  synonymous  with  rizen  (strictly  to  burst  with  a  crash),
we  also  find  wolkenriz  fern,  for  thunder,  Parz.  378,  11.  Wh.  389,
18  ;  gegenrfe,  Wartb.  kr.  jen..  57 ;  rent  als  der  wilde  dunrslac  von
himel  kam  gerizzen,  Ecke  105.  der  chlafondo  doner,  N".  Cap.  114;
der  chlafleih  heizet  toner ;  der  doner  stet  gespannen,  Apollon.  879.
I  connect  the  Gothic  peihvo  fern,  with  the  Finnic  teuhaan  (strepo),
teuhaus  (strepitus,  tumultus),  so  that  it  would  mean  the  noisy,
uproarious.  Some  L.  Germ,  dialects  call  thunder  grummet,  Strodtm.
Osnabr.  77,  agreeing  with  the  Slav,  grom,  hrom  (see  SuppL).

For  the  notion  of  fulmen  we  possess  only  compounds,  except

1  While  writing  plechazan,  I  remember  pleckan,  plahta  (patere,  nuclari  ;
bleak),  MHG.  blecken,  blacte,  Wigal.  4890  ;  which,  when  used  of  the  sky,
means  :  the  clouds  open,  heaven  opens,  as  we  still  say  of  forked  and  sheet
lightning  ;  conf.  Lohengr.  p.  125  :  relit  alsam  des  himmels  bliz  von  doner  sich
erhlccket.  If  this  plechan  is  akin  to  plih  (fulgur),  we  must  suppose  two  verbs
plihhan  pleih,  and  plehhan  plah,  the  second  derived  from  the  first.  Slav,  blesk,
blisk,  but  Boh.  bozhi  posel,  god's  messenger,  lightning-flash.  Russ.  molniya,
Serv.  munya,  fern,  (see


THUNAR.  179

when  the  simple  donner  is  used  in  that  sense  :  sluoc  alse  ein  doner,
Eoth.  1747.  hiure  hat  der  scliur  (shower,  storm)  erslagen,  MS.  3,
223a ;  commonly  donnerschlag,  blitzschlay.  OHG.  blig-scuz  (-shot,
fulgurum  jactus),  N.  cap.  13;  MHG.  blickeschoz,  Barl.  2,  26.  253,  27,
and  blicschoz,  Martina  205a ;  fiurin  donerstrdle,  Parz.  104,  1;  don-
rcslac,  Iw.  651;  ter  scuz  tero  fiurentun  donerstrdlo  (ardentis  fulminis),
erscozen  mit  tien  donerstrdlon,  N.  Bth.  18.  175;  MHG.  wetterstrahl,
blitzstrahl,  donnerstrahl.  MHG.  wilder  donerslac,  Geo.  751,  as
lightning  is  called  wild  fire,  Eab.  412,  Schm.  1,  553,  and  so  in  ON.
villi-eldr,  Sn.  60  (see  SuppL).

So  then,  as  the  god  who  lightens  has  red  hair  ascribed  to  him,
and  he  who  thunders  a  waggon,  he  who  smites  has  some  weapon
that  he  shoots.  But  here  I  judge  that  the  notion  of  arrows  being
shot  (wilder  pfil  der  uz  dem  donre  snellet,  Troj.  7673.  doners  pfile,
Turnei  von  Nantheiz  35.  150)  was  merely  imitated  from  the  icrj\a
to?,  tela  Jovis ;  the  true  Teutonic  Donar  throws  wedge-shaped
stones  from  the  sky :  '  ez  wart  nie  stein  geworfen  dar  er  enkseme  von
der  schdre,'  there  was  never  stone  thrown  there  (into  the  castle
high),  unless  it  came  from  the  storm,  Ecke  203.  ein  vlins  (flint)
von  donrestralen,  Wolfram  9,  32.  ein  herze  daz  von  vlinse  ime  donre
gewahsen  wsere  (a  heart  made  of  the  flint  in  thunder),  Wh.  12,  16.
scMrestein,  Bit.  10332.  schawerstcin,  Suchenw.  33,  83.  so  slahe
mich  ein  donerstein  !  Ms.  H.  3,  202a.  We  now  call  it  donnerM,
Swed.  isk-vigg  (-wedge) ;  and  in  popular  belief,  there  darts  out  of
the  cloud  together  with  the  flash  a  black  wedge,  which  buries  itself
in  the  earth  as  deep  as  the  highest  church-tower  is  high.1  But  every
time  it  thunders  again,  it  begins  to  rise  nearer  to  the  surface,  and
after  seven  years  you  may  find  it  above  ground.  Any  house  in
which  it  is  preserved,  is  proof  against  damage  by  lightning  ;  when
a  thunder-storm  is  coming  on,  it  begins  to  sweat.2  Such  stones  are
also  called  donnerdxte  (-axes)  donnersteine,  donnerhammer,  albschosse
(elfshots),  strahlsteine,  teufelsfinger,  Engl.  thunder-bolts,  Swed.  Thors
vigge,  Dan.  tordenldle,  tordenstraale  (v.  infra,  ch.  XXXVII),3  and  stone
hammers  and  knives  found  in  ancient  tombs  bear  the  same  name.
Saxo  Gram.  p.  236  :  Inusitati  ponderis  malleos,  quos  Joviales  voca-

1  This  depth  is  variously  expressed  in  curses,  &c.  e.g.  May  the  thunder  strike,
you  into  the  earth  as  far  as  a  hare  can  run  in  a  hundred  years  !

2  Weddigens  westfal.  mag.  3,  713.     Wigands  archiv  2,  320,  has  nine  years
instead  of  seven.

3  The  Grk  name  for  the  stone  is  /3eXe/mY?;y  a  missile.


180  THUNAR.

bant,  .  .  .  prisca  virorum  religione  cultos ;  .  .  .  cupiens
enim  antiquitas  tonitruorum  causas  usitata  rerum  similitudine  com-
prehendere,  malleos,  quibus  coeli  fragores  cieri  credebat,  ingenti  aere
complexa  fuerat  (see  Suppl.).  To  Jupiter  too  the  silex  (flins)  was
sacred,  and  it  was  held  by  those  taking  an  oath.  From  the  mention
of  '  elf-shots '  above,  I  would  infer  a  connexion  of  the  elf-sprites
with  the  thundergod,  in  whose  service  they  seem  to  be  employed.

The  Norse  mythology  provides  Thorr  with  a  wonderful  hammer
named  Miolnir  (mauler,  tudes,  contundens),  which  he  hurls  at  the
giants,  Ssem.   57b   67b  68b ;   it  is   also   called  firu&hamar,  strong
hammer,  Seem.  67b  68b,  and  has  the  property  of  returning  into  the
god's  hand  of  itself,  after  being  thrown,  Sn.  132.     As  this  hammer
flies  through  the  air  (er  harm  kemr  a  lopt,  Sn.  16),  the  giants  know
it,  lightning  and  thunder  precede  the  throwing  of  it :  J?vi  nsest  sa
harm  (next  saw  he,  giant  HrungnirJ  eldingar  oc  heyrol  frrumur
storar,  sa  hann  J?a  Thor  i  asmoSi,  for  hann  akaflega,  oc  reiddi  hamarin
oc  kastaffi,  Sn.  109.    This  is  obviously  the  crushing  thunderbolt,
which  descends  after  lightning  and  thunder,  which  was  nevertheless
regarded   as   the   god's   permanent  weapon ;   hence  perhaps   that
rising  of  the  bolt  out  of  the  earth.     Saxo,  p.  41,  represents  it  as  a
club  (clava)  without  a  handle,  but  informs  us  that  Hother  in  a  battle
with  Thor  had  knocked  off  the  manubium  clavae ;  this  agrees  with
the  Eddie  narrative  of  the  manufacture  of  the  hammer,  when  it
was  accounted  a  fault  in  it  that  the  handle  was  too   short   (at
forskeptit  var  heldr  skamt),  Sn.  131.     It  was  forged  by  cunning
dwarfs,1  and  in  spite  of  that  defect,  it  was  their  masterpiece.     In
Saxo  p.  163,  Thor  is  armed  with  a  torrida  chalybs?     It  is  noticeable,
how  Frauenlob  MS.  2, 214b  expresses  himself  about  God  the  Father:
der  smit  tiz  Oberlande  warf  sinen  hamer  in  mine  schoz.     The  ham
mer,  as  a  divine  tool,  was  considered  sacred,  brides  and  the  bodies
of  the  dead  were  consecrated  with  it,  Sasm.  74b.  Sn.  49.  66  ;  men
blessed  with  the  sign  of  the  hammer?  as  Christians  did  with  the  sign
of  the  cross,  and  a  stroke  of  lightning  was  long  regarded  in  the

1  As  Zeus's  lightning  was  by  the  Curetes  or  Cyclopes.

2  That  in  ancient  statues  of  the  thundergod  the  hammer  had  not  been  for
gotten,  seems  to  be  proved  by  pretty  late  evidence,  e.g.  the  statue  of  a  dorper
mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  giants  (ch.  XVIII,  quotation  from^Fergut).
And  in  the  AS.  Solomon  and  Saturn,  Thunor  wields  &  fiery  axe  (ch.  XXV,  Mus-

pilli).

3  In  the  Old  Germ,  law,  the  throwing  of  a  hammer  ratifies  the  acquisition

of  property.


THUNAK.  181

Mid.  Ages  as  a  happy  initiatory  omen  to  any  undertaking.  Thorr
with  his  hammer  hallows  dead  bones,  and  makes  them  alive  again,
Sn.  49  (see  Suppl.). — But  most  important  of  all,  as  vouching  for
the  wide  extension  of  one  and  the  same  heathen  faith,  appears  to
me  that  beautiful  poem  in  the  Edda,  the  Hamars  heimt  (hammer's
homing,  mallei  recuperatio),1  whose  action  is  motived  by  Thor's
hammer  being  stolen  by  a  giant,  and  buried  eight  miles  underground:
'ek  hefi  HlorriSa  hamar  umfolginn  atta  rostom  for  iorS  nedan,'
Seem.  71a.  This  unmistakably  hangs  together  with  the  popular
belief  I  have  quoted,  that  the  thunderbolt  dives  into  the  earth  and
takes  seven  or  nine  years  to  get  up  to  the  surface  again,  mounting
as  it  were  a  mile  every  year.  At  bottom  Thrymr,  J?ursa  drottinn,
lord  of  the  durses  or  giants,  who  has  only  got  his  own  hammer
back  again,  seems  identical  with  Thorr,  being  an  older  nature-god,
in  whose  keeping  the  thunder  had  been  before  the  coming  of  the
ases;  this  is  shown  by  his  name,  which  must  be  derived  from
Jmima,  tonitru.  The  compound  J?rumketill  (which  Biorn  explains
as  aes  tinniens)  is  in  the  same  case  as  the  better-known  ]?6rketill
(see  Suppl.).

Another  proof  that  this  myth  of  the  thundergod  is  a  joint  pos
session  of  Scandinavia  and  the  rest  of  Teutondom,  is  supplied  by
the  word  hammer  itself.  Hamar  means  in  the  first  place  a  hard
stone  or  rock,2  and  secondly  the  tool  fashioned  out  of  it ;  the  ON.
hamarr  still  keeps  both  meanings,  rupes  and  malleus  (and  saks,  seax
again  is  a  stone  knife,  the  Lat.  saxum).  Such  a  name  is  particularly
well-suited  for  an  instrument  with  which  the  mountain-god  Donar,
our  Tairguneis,'  achieves  all  his  deeds.  Now  as  the  god's  hammer
strikes  dead,  and  the  curses  'thunder  strike  you'  and  'hammer  strike
you'  meant  the  same  thing,  there  sprang  up  in  some  parts,  especially
of  Lower  Gemany,  after  the  fall  of  the  god  Donar,  a  personification
of  the  word  Hamar  in  the  sense  of  Death  or  Devil :  '  dat  die  de
Hamer  !  i  vor  den  Hamer  !  de  Hamer  sla  ! '  are  phrases  still

1  No  other  lay  of  the  Edda  shows  itself  so  intergrown  with  the  people's
poetry  of  the  North ;  its  plot  survives  in  Swedish,  Danish  and  Norwegian  songs,
which  bear  the  same  relation  to  that  in  the  Edda  as  our  folk-song  of  Hilde-
brand  and  Alebrand  does  to  our  ancient  poesy.     Thor  no  longer  appears  as  a
god,  but  as  Thorkar  (Thorkarl)  or  Thord  af  Hafsgaard,  who  is  robbed  of  his
golden  hammer,  conf.  Iduna  8,  122.     Nyerups  udvalg  2,  188.     Arvidsson  1,  3.
Schade's  beskrivelse  over  oen  Mors,  Aalborg  1811,  p.  93.     Also  the  remarkable
legend  of  Thor  me&  tungum  liamri  in  Faye's  norske  sagn.  Arendal  1833,  p.  0,
where  also  he  loses  and  seeks  his  hammer.

2  Slav,  kamen  gen.  kanmia,  stone  ;  Lith.  akmu  gen.  akmens  ;  fcam  =  Tiam.


182  THUNAR.

current  among  the  people,  in  which  you  can  exchange  Ilamer  for
Diivel,  but  which,  one  and  all,  can  only  be  traced  back  to  the  god
that  strikes  with  the  hammer.  In  the  same  way  :  '  dat  is  en
Hamer,  en  hamersken  kerl,'  a  rascally  impudent  cheat.1  de  Hamer
kennt  se  all !  the  devil  may  know  them  all,  Schiitze  2,  96.  Hem-
merlein,  mcister  Hdmmerlcin,  signified  the  evil  spirit.  Consider  also
the  curses  which  couple  the  two  names ;  donner  und  teufel !  both
of  which  stood  for  the  ancient  god.  By  gammel  Thor,  old  Thor,  the
common  people  in  Denmark  mean  the  devil ;  in  Sweden  they  long
protested  by  Thoregud.  The  Lithuanians  worshipped  an  enormous
hammer,  Seb.  Frankes  weltbuch  55b  (see  Suppl.).

It  must  have  been  at  an  earlier  stage  that  certain  attributes
and  titles  of  the  Saviour,  and  some  Judeo-christian  legends,  were
transferred  to  the  heathen  god,  and  particularly  the  myth  of  Leviathan
to  lormungandr.  As  Christ  by  his  death  overmastered  the  monster
serpent  (Bar!  78,  39  to  79,  14),  so  Thorr  overcomes  the  miSgarSs-
orm  (-worm,  snake  that  encircles  the  world),  and  similar  epithets
are  given  to  both.2  Taking  into  account  the  resemblance  between
the  sign  of  the  cross  and  that  of  the  hammer,  it  need  not  seem
surprising  that  the  newly  converted  Germans  should  under  the
name  of  Christ  still  have  the  lord  of  thunder  and  the  giver  of  rain
present  to  their  minds  ;  and  so  a  connexion  with  Mary  the  Mother
of  God  (p.  174)  could  be  the  more  easily  established.  The  earliest
troubadour  (Diez  p.  15.  Eaynouard  4,  83)  actually  names  Christ
still  as  the  lord  of  thunder,  Jhesus  del  tro.

A  Neapolitan  fairy-tale  in  the  Pentamerone  5,  4  personifies
thunder  and  lightning  (truone  e  lampe}  as  a  beautiful  youth,  brother
of  seven  spinning  virgins,  and  son  of  a  wicked  old  mother  who
knows  no  higher  oath  than  '  pe  truone  e  lampe '.  Without  assert
ing  any  external  connexion  between  this  tradition  and  the  German

1  Brem.  wtb.  2,  575.    dat  di  de  hamer  sla !  Strodtm.  p.  80,  conf.  Schm.  2,  192.
the  hammer,  or  a  great  hammer  strike  you  !  Abeles  kunstl.  unordn.  4,  3.     Ge-
richtsh.  1,  673.  2,  79.  299.  382.    verhamert  diir,  kolt,  Schiitze  2, 96=verdonnert,
verteufelt,  blasted,  cursed,  &c.     How  deeply  the  worship  of  the  god  had  taken
root  among  the  people,  is  proved  by  these  almost  ineradicable  curses,  once
solemn  protestations  :  donner !  donnerwetter  !  heiliges  gewitter  (holy  thunder
storm)  !     And,  adding    the    Christian    symbol  :    kreuz  donnerwetter !     Then,
euphemistically  disguised  :    bim  (by  the)  dummer,  potz  dummer  !   duminer
auch  !  Slutz  1,  123.  2,  161-2.    3,  56.    bim  dummer  hammer  3,  51.    bim  dumstig.
dunnstig  !  as  in  Hesse  :  donnerstag  !  bim  hamer !     In  Flanders  :  bi  Vids  morkel
hamer!  Willem's  vloeken,  p.  12.

2  Finn  Magnusen  lex.  48  i-5.


THUNAR.  183

one,1  we  discover  in  it  the  same  idea  of  a  kind  and  beneficent,  not
a  hostile  and  fiendish  god  of  thunder.

The  large  beetle,  which  we  call  stag-beetle  or  fire-beetle,  lucanus
cervus,  taurus  (ch.  XXI,  beetles),  is  in  some  districts  of  South  Ger
many  named  donnergueg,  donnerguye,  donnerpuppe  (gueg,  guegi,
beetle),  perhaps  because  he  likes  to  live  in  oak-trees,  the  tree  sacred
to  thunder.  For  he  also  bears  the  name  eichochs,  Swed.  ekoxe  (oak-
ox)  ;  but  then  again  feuerschroter,  fiirboter  (fire-beeter,  i.e.  kindler),2
borner  or  haus-brenner  (-burner),  which  indicates  his  relation  to
thunder  and  lightning.  It  is  a  saying,  that  on  his  horns  he  carries
redhot  coals  into  a  roof,  and  sets  it  alight ;  more  definite  is  the
belief  mentioned  in  Aberglaube,  p.  xcvi,  that  lightning  will  strike  a
house  into  which  this  beetle  is  carried.  In  Swed.  a  beetle  is  still
named  horntroll  (see  SuppL).

Among  herbs  and  plants,  the  following  are  to  be  specially  noted :
the  donnerbart,  stonecrop  or  houseleek,  semper vivum  tectorum,
which,  planted  on  the  roof,  protects  from  the  lightning's  stroke3 :
barba  Jovis  vulgari  more  vocatur  (Macer  Floridus  741),  Fr.  Jbubarbe
(conf.  Append,  p.  Iviii) ; — the  donnerbesen  (-besom),  a  shaggy  tangled
nest-like  growth  on  boughs,  of  which  superstition  ascribes  the  gen
eration  to  lightning  ;  otherwise  called  alpruthe  ; — the  donnerkraut,
sedum; — the  donnerflug,  fumaria  bulbosa; — the  donnerdistel,  eryng-
ium  campestre; — the  Dan.  tordenskreppe,  burdock. — The  South  Slavs
call  the  iris  perunik,  Perun's  flower,  while  the  Lettons  call  our

1  How  comes  the  Ital.  to  have  a  trono  (Neap,  truono,  Span,  trueno)  by  the
side  of  tuono  ?  and  the  Provencal  a  irons  with  the  same  meaning  ?     Has  the  R
sliptin  from  our  donar,  or  still  better  from  the  Goth,  drunjus,  sonus,  Rom.  10,
18  (conf.  dronen,  'cymbal's  droning  sound'  of  Dryden)?  or  did  the  Lat.  thronus
pass  into  the  sense  of  sky  and  thunder  ?  '  iorcnst  nicht,  wanns  tonnert,  ein
iron  werd  vom  himmel  fallen  ? '  Garg.  181b.     The  troubadour's  '  Jhesus  del  tro  '
might  then  simply  mean  lord  of  the  firmament.

2  *  I  wol  don  sacrifice,  and  lyres  beete,}  Chaucer.     Hence  beetle  itself  ?  AS.
bytel. — TRANS.

3  A  Provencal  troubadour,  quoted  by  Raynouard  sub  v.  barbajol,  says :  e  da-
quel  erba  tenon  pro  li  vilan  sobra  lur  maiso.     Beside  this  hauswurz  (hauswurzel,
Superst.  60),  the  hawthorn,  albaspina,  is  a  safeguard  against  lightning  (Mem.
del' acad.  celt.  2,  212),  as  the  laurel  was  among  the  ancient  Romans,  or  the
white  vine  planted  round  a  house;  conf.  brennessel  (Superst.  336) ;  'palm  branches
laid  upon  coals,  lighted  candles,  a  fire  made  on  the  hearth,  are  good  for  a
thunderstorm,'  Braunschw.  anz.  1760,  p.  1392.     The  crossbill  too  is  a  protector
(Superst.  335)  ;  because  his  beak  forms  the  sign  of  the  cross  or  hammer  ?  but
the  nest-making  redbreast  or  redstart  appears  to  attract  lightning  (ch.  XXI,
redbreast  ;  Superst.  629.  704) ;  was  he,  because  of  his  red  plumage,  sacred  to
the  redbearded  god  1  (see  Suppl.).


184  THUNAR.

hederich  (ground-ivy?  hedge-mustard?)  pehrkoncs;  Perunika  is  also,
like  Iris,  a  woman's  name.  The  oak  above  all  trees  was  dedicated
to  the  Thunderer  (pp.  67,  72):  quercus  Jovi  placuit,  Phaedr.  3,  17  ;
magna  Jovis  antique  robore  quercus,  Virg.  Georg.  3,  332.  At
Dodona  stood  the  Sp{5?  v^tKOfjLos  Aw,  Od.  14,  327.  19,  297,  but  at
Troy  the  leech  often  named  in  the  Iliad:  $77709  v^rj\r)  Jto?  aiyioxpio,
5,  693.  7,  60.  A  particular  kind  of  oak  is  in  Servian  grm,  and
(jrmik  is  quercetum,  no  doubt  in  close  connexion  with  grom
(tonitrus),  grmiti  or  grmlieti  (tonare).  The  acorn  is  spoken  of
above,  p.  177.

Apparently  some  names  of  the  snipe  (scolopax  gallinago)  have
to  do  with  this  subject  :  donncrziege  (-goat),  donnerstagspferd
(Thursday  horse),  liimmelsziege  (capella  coelestis) ;  because  he  seems
to  bleat  or  whinny  in  the  sky  ?  But  he  is  also  the  weatherbird,
stormbird,  rainbird,  and  his  flight  betokens  an  approaching  thunder
storm.  Dan.  myrehest,  Swed.  horsgjok,  Icel.  hrossagaukr,  horsegowk
or  cuckoo,  from  his  neighing;  the  first  time  he  is  heard  in  the  year,
he  prognosticates  to  men  their  fate  (Biorn  sub  v.) ;  evidently
superstitious  fancies  cling  to  the  bird.  His  Lettish  name  pelirkona
Jeasa,  pehrkona  ahsis  (thunder's  she-goat  and  he-goat)  agrees  exactly
with  the  German.  In  Lithuanian  too,  Mielcke  1,  294.  2,  271
gives  Perkuno  ozhys  as  heaven's  goat,  for  which  another  name  is
tikkutis. — Kannes.  pantheum  p.  439,  thinks  the  name  donners-
tagspferd  belongs  to  the  goat  itself,  not  to  the  bird  ;  this  would  be
welcome,  if  it  can  be  made  good.  Some  confirmation  is  found  in
the  AS.  firgenycet  (ibex,  rupicapra,  chamois),  and  firginbucca  (capri-
cornus),  to  which  would  correspond  an  OHG.  virgungeiz,  virgun-
pocch ;  so  that  in  these  the  analogy  of  fairguni  to  Donar  holds
good.  The  wild  creature  that  leaps  over  rocks  would  better  become
the  god  of  rocks  than  the  tame  goat.  In  the  Edda,  Thorr  has
he-goats  yoked  to  his  thunder-car  :  between  these,  and  the  weather-
fowl  described  by  turns  as  goat  and  horse  (always  a  car-drawing
beast),  there  might  exist  some  half-obscured  link  of  connexion  (see
Suppl.).  It  is  significant  also,  that  the  devil,  the  modern  repre
sentative  of  the  thunder  god,  has  the  credit  of  having  created  goats,
both  he  and  she  ;  and  as  Thorr  puts  away  the  bones  of  his  goats
after  they  have  been  picked,  that  he  may  bring  them  to  life  again
(Sn.  49.  50),1  so  the  Swiss  shepherds  believe  that  the  goat  has

i  The  myth  of  the  slaughtered  goats  brought  to  life  again  by  hammer-couse-


THUNAK.  185

something  of  the  devil  in  her,  she  was  made  by  him,  and  her  feet
especially  smack  of  their  origin,  and  are  not  eaten,  Tobler  214a.
Did  the  German  thundergod  in  particular  have  he-goats  and  she-
goats  sacrificed  to  him  (supra,  p.  52)  ?  The  Old  Roman  or  Etruscan
tridental  (from  bidens,  lamb)  signifies  the  place  where  lightning  had
struck  and  killed  a  man :  there  a  lamb  had  to  be  sacrificed  to
Jupiter,  and  the  man's  body  was  not  burned,  but  buried  (Plin.  2,
54).  If  the  Ossetes  and  Circassians  in  exactly  the  same  way  offer
a  goat  over  the  body  killed  by  lightning,  and  elevate  the  hide  on  a
pole  (supra,  p.  174),  it  becomes  the  more  likely  by  a  great  deal  that
the  goat-offering  of  the  Langobards  was  intended  for  no  other  than
Donar.  For  hanging  up  hides  was  a  Langobardish  rite,  and  was
practised  on  other  occasions  also,  as  will  presently  be  shown.  In
Carinthia,  cattle  struck  by  lightning  are  considered  sacred  to  God ;
no  one,  not  even  the  poorest,  dares  to  eat  of  them  (Sartoris  reise  2,
158).

Other  names  of  places  compounded  with  that  of  the  thundergod,
besides  the  numerous  Donnersbergs  already  cited,  are  forthcoming
in  Germany.  Near  Oldenburg  lies  a  village  named  Donnerschwee,


cration,  and  of  the  boar  Ssehrimnir  (Sn.  42)  being  boiled  and  eaten  every  day
and  coming  whole  again  every  evening,  seems  to  re-appear  in  more  than  one
shape.  In  Wolfs  Wodana,  p.  xxviii,  the  following  passage  on  witches  in
Ferrara  is  quoted  from  Barthol.  de  Spina  (f  1546),  quaestio  de  strigibus  :
Dicunt  etiam,  quod  postquam  comederunt  aliquem  pinguem  bovem  vel  aliquam
vegetem,  vino  vel  arcam  sen  cophinum  panibus  evacuarunt  et  consumpserunt
ea  vorantes,  domina  ilia  percutit  aurea  virga  quam  maim  gestat  ea  vasa  vel  loca,
et  statim  ut  prius  plena  sunt  vini  vel  panis  ac  si  nihil  inde  fuisset  assumptum.
Similiter  congerijubet  ossa  mortui  bovis  super  cor  turn  ejus  extensum,  ipsumque  per
quatuor  partes  super  ossa  revolvens  virgaque  percutiens,  vivum  bovem  reddit  ut
prius,  ac  reducendum  jubet  ad  locum  suum.  The  diabolical  witches'  meal
very  well  matches  that  of  the  thundergod.  But  we  are  also  told  in  legends,
that  the  saint,  after  eating  up  a  cock,  reanimated  it  out  of  the  bones  ;  and  so
early  as  parson  Amis,  we  find  the  belief  made  use  of  in  playing-off  a  deception
(1.  969  seq.).  Folk-tales  relate  how  a  magician,  after  a  fish  had  been  eaten,  threw
the  bones  into  water,  and  the  fish  came  alive  a^ain.  As  with  these  eatable
creatures,  so  in  other  tales  there  occurs  the  reanimation  of  persons  who  have
been  cut  to  pieces  :  in  the  marchen  vom  Machandelbom  (juniper-tree)  ;  in  the
myth  of  Zeus  and  Tantalus,  where  the  shoulder  of  Pelops  being  devoured  by
Demeter  (Ovid  6,  406)  reminds  us  of  the  he-goat's  leg-bone  being  split  for  the
marrow,  and  remaining  lame  after  he  came  to  life  again  ;  in  the  myth  of  Osiris
and  St  Adalbert  (Temine  p.  33)  ;  conf.  DS.  no.  62,  and  Ezekiel  37.  Then  in
the  eighth  Finnish  rune,  Lemminkaimen's  mother  gathers  all  the  limbs  of  his
dismembered  body,  and  makes  them  live  again.  The  fastening  of  heads  that
have  been  chopped  off  to  their  trunks,  in  Waltharius  1157  (conf.  p.  93)  seems
to  imply  a  belief  in  their  reanimation,  and  agrees  with  a  circumstance  in
ftorske  eventyr  pp.  199,  201.


186  THUNAR.

formerly  Donerswe,1  Donnerswehe,  Donnerswede  (Kohli  handb.  von
Oldenb.  2,  55),  which  reminds  us  of  Oolnsve,  Wodeneswege  (p.  151),
and  leaves  us  equally  in  doubt  whether  to  understand  wih  a
temple,  or  weg  a  way.  The  Norwegian  folk-tale  tells  us  of  an
actual  Thors  vej  (way,  Faye  p.  5).  A  village  Donnersreut  is  to  be
found  in  Franconia  towards  Bohemia,  a  Donnersted  in  Theding-
hauseu  bailiwick,  Brunswick,  a  Thunrcsfeld  [Thurfield]  in  AS.
documents,  Kemble  2,  115.  195.  272,  &c.  &c. — Many  in  Scan
dinavia,  e.g.,  in  Denmark,  Torslunde  (Thors  lundr,  grove),  Tosingo
(Thors  engi,  ing)  ;2  several  in  Sweden,  Tors  mase  (gurges)  in  a
boundary-deed  of  Ostergbtland,  Broocman  1,  15,  Tkorslorgm  Goth
land,  Gutalag  p.  107.  260.  Thorsbiorg  (mountain)  and  Thorshofn
(haven)  in  Norway,  Fornm.  sb'g.  4,  12.  343;  Thorsmork  (wood,  a
holy  one  ? ),  Nialss.  cap.  149.  150.3  Thors  nes  (nose,  cape),  Saem.
155a  and  Eyrb.  saga  cap.  4  (see  Suppl.).  Thors  bro  (Thors  brii,
bridge)  in  Schonen,  like  the  Norwegian  Thor's-way,  leads  us  to
that  prevalent  belief  in  devil's  bridges  and  other  buildings,  which
is  the  popular  way  of  accounting  for  peculiarly  shaped  rocks,
precipices  and  steep  mountain  paths :  only  God  or  the  devil  could
have  burst  them  so.

As  a  man's  name,  Donar  in  its  simple  form  is  rarely  found  ;  one
noble  family  on  the  Ehine  was  named  Donner  von  Lorheim,  Sieb-
mach.  5,  144.  Its  derivatives  and  compounds  are  not  common  in
any  High  Germ,  dialect ;  a  Carolingian  doc.  in  the  Cod.  lauresh.
no.  464  has  Donarad,  which  I  take  to  be  the  ON.  Thorffr  ;  and  the
Trad.  fuld.  2,  23  Albthonar,  which  is  the  ON.  Thdrdlfr  inverted.
Such  name-formations  are  far  more  frequent  in  the  North,  where
the  service  of  the  god  prevailed  so  long :  Thorarr  (OHG.
Donarari  ? ),  Thorir,  Ttidrffr,  Thdrhallr,  Tkdrdlfr  (OS.  Thunerulf  in
Calend.  merseb.  Septemb.),  Tlwroddr,  and  the  feminines  Thorn,
Thorun,  Thorarna  (formed  like  diorna,  Gramm.  2,  336),  Th6rkatlat
Thdrhildr,  Thordis,  &c.  I  cannot  see  why  the  editors  of  the  Forn-
manna  sogur  deprive  such  proper  names  as  Thorgeirr,  Thorliorn,

1  '  to  Donerswe,  dar  heft  de  herscup  den  tegenden  (teind,  tithe),'  Land-
register  of  1428.

2  Others  specified  in  Suhin,  krit.  hist.  2,  651.

3  The  settlers  in  Iceland,  when  they  consecrated  a  district  to  Thorr,  named
it  Thorsmork,  Landn.  5,   2.  ed.  nova  p.   343.     From  Donnersmark  (Zschb'tor
tokely)  in  the  Hungarian  county  of  Zips,  comes  the  Silesian  family  of  Henkel
von  Donnersmark.     Walach.  manura  :  die  Donnersmurkt.


THUNAK.  187

Thdrsleinn,  Thorketill,  TMrvaldr,  Thorfinnr,  TMrger&r,  &c.  of  their
long  vowel ;  it  is  not  the  abstract  ]?or,  audacia,  that  they  are  com
pounded  with,  and  the  Nialssaga,  e.g.  cap.  65,  spells  IVtdrgeirr,
TAorkatla.— The  frequent  name  Thorketill,  abbrev.  Thorkell,  Dan.
Torkild,  AS.  Turketulus,  Thurkytel  (Kemble  2,  286,  349.  v.  supra,
p.  63),  if  it  signifies  a  kettle,  a  vessel,  of  the  thundergod,  resembles
Wuotan's  sacrificial  cauldron  (p.  56).  The  Hymisqvifta  sings  of
Thorr  fetching  a  huge  cauldron  for  the  ases  to  brew  ale  with,  and
wearing  it  on  his  head,  Ssem.  57 ;  which  is  very  like  the  strong
man  Hans  (ans,  as  ? )  in  the  nursery-tale  clapping  the  church  bell
on  his  head  for  a  cap. — The  coupling  of  Alp  (elf)  with  Donar  in
Albthonar  and  Thoralfr  is  worthy  of  notice,  for  alpgeschoss  (elf-shot)
is  a  synonym  for  the  thunderbolt,  and  Alpruthe  (elf-rod)  for  the
donnerkraut  [donnerbesen  ?  see  p.  183].  An  intimate  relation  must
subsist  between  the  gods  and  the  elves  (p.  180),  though  on  the  part
of  the  latter  a  subordinate  one  (see  Suppl.).1

It  is  observable  that  in  different  lays  of  the  Edda  Thorr  goes
by  different  names.  In  Lokaglepsa  and  HarbardslioS  he  is  4  Thorr,
Asa}?6rr,'but  in  Hamarsheimt '  Ving]?6rr,  HlorrioY  (yet  Thorr  as  well),
in  Alvismal  always  '  VingJ?6rr,'  in  HymisqviSa  'Veorr,  Hlorriol,'  not
to  mention  the  periphrases  vagna  verr  (curruum  dominus),  Sifjar  verr,
OSins  sonr.  Hlorriffi  was  touched  upon  in  p.  167,  note.  Vingthdrr
they  derive  from  vsengr,  ala ;  as  if  Wing-thunder,  the  winged  one,
aera  quatiens  ?  This  appears  to  be  far  from  certain,  as  he  is  else
where  called  fostri  Vingnis,  Sn.  101,  and  in  the  genealogies  this
Vingnir  appears  by  the  side  of  him.  Especially  important  is
Veorr,  which  outside  of  Hymisqvifta  is  only  found  once,  Sa3m.  9a,
and  never  except  in  the  nom.  sing. ;  it  belongs  doubtless  to  ve,
wih,  and  so  betokens  a  holy  consecrated  being,  distinct  from  the
Ve,  gen.  Yea  on  p.  163 ;  the  OHG.  form  must  have  been  Wihor,
Wihar  ?  (see  Suppl.).

As  OSinn  was  represented  journeying  abroad,  to  the  Eastern  land
(p.  163),  so  is  Thorr  engaged  in  eastward  travels:  Thorr  var  i
austrvegi,  Ssem.  59,  a  austrvega  68a ;  for  or  austrvegi,  75  ;  ec  var
austr,  78a>b ;  austrforom  J?inom  scaltu  aldregi  segja  seggjom  fra,  68a.
In  these  journeys  he  fought  with  and  slew  the  giants :  var  hann

1  To  the  Boriat  Mongols  beyond  L.  Baikal,  fairy-rings  in  grass  are  "  where
the  sons  of  the  lightning  have  danced." — TRANS.


188  THUNAR.

far  inn  i  austervcg  at  berja  troll,  Sn.  46.  And  this  again  points  to
the  ancient  and  at  that  time  still  imforgotten  connexion  of  the
Teutonic  nations  with  Asia ;  this  '  faring  east-ways  '  is  told  of
other  heroes  too,  Sn.  190.  363  ;  e.g.,  the  race  of  the  Skilfingar  is
expressly  placed  in  that  eastern  region  (su  kynsloS  er  i  austrve-
gum),  Sn.  193  ;  and  lotunheim,  the  world  of  the  giants,  was  there
situated.

Thorr  was  considered,  next  to  OSinn,  the  mightiest  and  strongest
of  all  the  gods  ;  the  Edda  makes  him  OSin's  son,  therein  differing
entirely  from  the  Roman  view,  which  takes  Jupiter  to  be  Mercury's
father ;  in  pedigrees,  it  is  true,  Thorr  does  appear  as  an  ancestor  of
Oftinn.  Thorr  is  usually  named  immediately  after  Oftiim,  some
times  before  him,  possibly  he  was  feared  more  than  Oolnn  (see
Suppl.).  In  Saxo  Gramm.,  Eegner  confesses  :  Se,  Thor  deo  excepto,
nullam  monstrigenae  virtutis  potentiam  expavere,  cujus  (sc.  Thor)
virium  magnitudini  nihil  humanarum  divinarumque  rerum  digna
possit  aequalitate  conferri.  He  is  the  true  national  god  of  the
Norwegians,  landds  (patrium  numen),  Egilss.  p.  365-6,  and  when
dss  stands  alone,  it  means  especially  him,  e.g.,  Seem.  V0a,  as  indeed
the  very  meaning  of  ans  (jugum  mentis)  agrees  with  that  of  Fai'r-
guneis.  His  temples  and  statues  were  the  most  numerous  in
Norway  and  Sweden,  and  dsmegin,  divine  strength,  is  understood
chiefly  of  him.  Hence  the  heathen  religion  in  general  is  so
frequently  expressed  by  the  simple  Thdr  biota,  Seem.  113b,  het
(called)  d  Thor,  Landn.  1,  12,  trAffi  (believed)  d  Thor,  Landn.  2, 12.
He  assigns  to  emigrants  their  new  place  of  abode :  Thorr  visaffi
honum  (shewed  him),  Landn.  3,  7  3,  12.  From  the  Landnamabok
we  could  quote  many  things  about  the  worship  of  Thorr :  J?ar
stendr  enn  Thors  steinn,  2,  12.  ganga  til  fretta  vi<5  Thor,  3,  12.
Thorr  is  worshipped  most,  and  Freyr  next,  which  agrees  with  the
names  Thorviffr  and  Freyvidr  occurring  in  one  family  line  2,  6  ;
vi5r  is  wood,  does  it  here  mean  tree,  and  imply  a  priestly  function?
OSinviSr  does  not  occur,  but  Tyviftr  is  the  name  of  a  plant,  ch.
XXXVII.  It  is  Thor's  hammer  that  hallows  a  mark,  a  marriage,
and  the  runes,  as  we  find  plainly  stated  on  the  stones.  I  show  in
ch.  XXXIII  how  Thorr  under  various  aspects  passed  into  the
devil  of  the  Christians,  and  it  is  not  surprising  if  he  acquired
some  of  the  clumsy  boorish  nature  of  the  giant  in  the  process,  for
the  giants  likewise  were  turned  into  fiends.  The  foe  and  pursuer


THUNAR.  189

of  all  giants  in  the  time  of  the  Ases,  he  himself  appeared  a  lubber
to  the  Christians ;  he  throws  stones  for  a  wager  with  giants  (conf.
ch.  XVIII).  But  even  in  the  Eddie  Thrymsqvifta,  he  eats  and
drinks  immoderately  like  a  giant,  and  the  Norwegian  folk-tale
makes  him  take  up  cask  after  cask  of  ale  at  the  wedding,  Faye  p.  4;
conf.  the  proverb :  mundi  enginn  Asathor  afdrecka  (outdrink).
Conversely,  the  good-natured  old  giant  Thrymr  is  by  his  very  name
a  Donar  (conf.  ch.  XVIII).  The  delightful  story  of  the  hobergs-
gubbe  (old  man  of  the  mountain,  giant)  was  known  far  and  wide  in
the  North  :  a  poor  man  invites  him  to  stand  godfather  to  his  child,
but  he  refuses  to  come  on  hearing  that  Thor  or  Tordenveir  is  also  a
bidden  guest  (conf.  ch.  XVIII) ;  he  sends  however  a  handsome
present  (conf.  Afzelius  2,  158.  Molbech's  eventyr  no.  62,  F.  Magn.
p.  935).  In  spite  of  all  divergences,  there  appears  in  the  structure
of  this  fable  a  certain  similarity  to  that  of  Gossip  Death,  ch.  XXVII,
for  death  also  is  a  devil,  and  consequently  a  giant ;  conf.  Miillen-
hoff,  schl.  hoist,  p.  289.  That  is  why  some  of  the  old  tales  which
still  stood  their  ground  in  the  Christian  times  try  to  saddle  him
with  all  that  is  odious,  and  to  make  him  out  a  diabolic  being  of  a
worse  kind  than  OSinn ;  conf.  Gautrekssaga  p.  13.  Finnr  drags
the  statue  of  Thorr  to  King  Olafr,  splits  and  burns  it  up,  then
mixes  the  ashes  in  furmety  and  gives  it  to  dogs  to  devour :  '  'tis
meet  that  hounds  eat  Thorr,  who  his  own  sons  did  eat,'  Fornm.  sog.
2,  163.  This  is  a  calumny,  the  Edda  knows  of  no  such  thing,  it
relates  on  the  contrary  that  M651  and  Magni  outlived  their  father
(see  Suppl.).  Several  revived  sagas,  like  that  of  the  creation  of
wolves  and  goats,  transform  Wuotan  into  the  good  God,  and  Donar
into  the  devil.

From  the  time  they  became  acquainted  with  the  Roman
theogony,  the  writers  identify  the  German  thundergod  with
Jupiter.  Not  only  is  dies  Jovis  called  in  AS.  Thunresdseg,  but
Latona  Jovis  mater  is  Thunres  modur ,  and  capitolium  is  trans
lated  TVidrshof  by  the  Icelanders.  Conversely,  Saxo  Gram.  p.  236
means  by  his  '  Jupiter  '  the  Teutonic  Thor,  the  Jupiter  ardens  above
(p.  110) ;  did  that  mean  Donar?  As  for  that  Thorr  devouring  his
children,  it  seems  [a  mere  importation,  aggravated  by]  a  down
right  confusion  of  Jupiter  with  his  father  Saturn,  just  as  the  Norse
genealogy  made  Thorr  an  ancestor  of  Oolnn.  The  '  presbyter  Jovi


190  THUNAR.

mactans/  and  the  '  sacra '  and  (  feriae  Jovis  '  (in  Indicul.  pagan.)
have  been  dealt  with  above,  p.  121.

Letzner  (hist.  Caroli  magni,  Hildesh.  1603,  cap.  18  end)  relates:
The  Saturday  after  Laetare,  year  by  year,  cometh  to  the  little
cathedral-close  of  Hildesheim  a  farmer  thereunto  specially  ap
pointed,  and  bringeth  two  logs  of  a  fathom  long,  and  therewith  two
lesser  logs  pointed  in  the  manner  of  skittles.  The  two  greater  he
planteth  in  the  ground  one  against  the  other,  and  a-top  of  them
the  skittles.  Soon  there  come  hastily  together  all  manner  of  lads
and  youth  of  the  meaner  sort,  and  with  stones  or  staves  do  pelt  the
skittles  down  from  the  logs ;  other  do  set  the  same  up  again,  and
the  pelting  beginneth  a-new..  By  these  skittles  are  to  be  under
stood  the  devilish  gods  of  the  heathen,  that  were  thrown  down  by
the  Saxon-folk  when  they  became  Christian.

Here  the  names  of  the  gods  are  suppressed,1  but  one  of  them
must  have  been  Jupiter  then,  as  we  find  it  was  afterwards.2  Among
the  farmer's  dues  at  Hildesheim  there  occurs  down  to  our  own
times  a  Jupitergeld.  Under  this  name  the  village  of  Grossen-
Algermissen  had  to  pay  12  g.  grosch.  4  pfen.  yearly  to  the  sexton
of  the  cathedral  •,  an  Algermissen  farmer  had  every  year  to  bring  to
the  cathedral  close  an  eight-cornered  log,  a  foot  thick  and  four
feet  long,  hidden  in  a  sack.  The  schoolboys  dressed  it  in  a  cloak
and  crown,  and  attacked  the  Jupiter  as  they  then  called  it,  by
throwing  stones  first  from  one  side,  then  from  the  other,  and  at
last  they  burnt  it.  This  popular  festivity  was  often  attended  with
disorder,  and  was  more  than  once  interdicted,  pickets  were  set  to
carry  the  prohibition  into  effect;  at  length  the  royal  treasury
remitted  the  Jupiter's  geld.  Possibly  the  village  of  Algermissen
had  incurred  the  penalty  of  the  due  at  the  introduction  of  Christi
anity,  by  its  attachment  to  the  old  religion.3  Was  the  pelting  of

1  In  the  Corbei  chron.,  Hamb.  1590,  cap.  18,  Letzner  thinks  it  was  the  god
of  the  Irrnensul.     He  refers  to  MS.  accounts  by  Con.  Fontanus,  a  Helmers-
haus  Benedictine  of  the  13th  century.

2  A  Hildesheim  register  drawn  up  at  the  end  of  the  14th  century  or
beginn.  of  the  loth  cent,  says  :  *  De  abyotter  (idols),  so  sunnabends  vor  laetare
(Letzn.  '  sonnab.  wcich  laet.')  von  einem  hausmann  von  Algermissen  gesetzet,
davor  (for  which)  ihm  eine  hofe  (hufe,  hide)  landes  gehort  zur.  sankmeisterie
(chantry  ?),  und  wie  seiches  von  dem  hausmann  nicht  gesetzt  worden,  gehort
Cantori  de  hove  landes.'     Hannoversche  landesblatter  1833,  p.  30.

3  Liintzel  on  farmers'  burdens  in  Hildesheim  1830,  p.  205.     Hannov.  mag.
1833,  p.  693.     Protocols  of  1742-3  in  an  article  '  On  the  Stoning  of  Jupiter,'
Hannov.  landesbl.,  ubi  supra.


THUNAR.  191

the  logs  to  express  contempt  ?  In  Switzerland  the  well-known
throwing  of  stones  on  the  water  is  called  Heiden  werfen,  heathen-
pelting  ;  otherwise :  '  den  Herrgott  losen,  vater  und  mutter  losen,'
releasing,  ransoming  ?  Tobler  174a  (see  Suppl).

I  do  not  pretend  to  think  it  at  all  established,  that  this  Jupiter
can  be  traced  back  to  the  Thunar  of  the  Old  Saxons.  The  custom  is
only  vouched  for  by  protocols  of  the  last  century,  and  clear  evidence
of  it  before  that  time  is  not  forthcoming;  but  even  Letzner's  account,
differing  as  it  does,  suggests  a  very  primitive  practice  of  the  people,
which  is  worth  noting,  even  if  Jupiter  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.
The  definite  date  '  laetare  '  reminds  one  of  the  custom  universal  in
Germany  of  '  driving  out  Death/  of  which  I  shall  treat  hereafter,
and  in  which  Death  is  likewise  set  up  to  be  pelted.  Did  the
skittle  represent  the  sacred  hammer  ?

An  unmistakable  relic  of  the  worship  paid  to  the  thunder-god
is  the  special  observance  of  Thursday,  which  was  not  extinct
among  the  people  till  quite  recent  times.  It  is  spoken  of  in  quite
early  documents  of  the  Mid.  Ages  :  '  nullus  diem  Jovis  in  otio
observet/  Aberglaube  p.  xxx.  'de  feriis  quae  faciunt  Jovi  vel
Mercurio,'  p.  xxxii.  quintam  feriam  in  honorem  Jovis  honorasti,
p.  xxxvii.  On  Thursday  evening  one  must  neither  spin  nor  hew  ;
Superst.,  Swed.  55.  110.  and  Germ.  517.  703.  The  Esthonians
think  Thursday  holier  than  Sunday.1  What  punishment  overtook
the  transgressor,  may  be  gathered  from  another  superstition,  which,
it  is  true,  substituted  the  hallowed  day  of  Christ  for  that  of  Donar :
He  that  shall  work  on  Trinity  Sunday  (the  next  after  Pentecost),
or  shall  wear  anything  sewed  or  knitted  (on  that  day),  shall  be
stricken  by  thunder ;  Scheffer's  Haltaus,  p.  225  (see  Suppl.).

If  Jupiter  had  these  honours  paid  him  in  the  8th  century,  if
the  Capitulare  of  743  thought  it  needful  expressly  to  enjoin  an  '  ec
forsacho  Thunare'  and  much  that  related  to  his  service  remained
urieradicated  a  long  time  after  ;  it  cannot  well  be  doubted,  that  at
a  still  earlier  time  he  was  held  by  our  forefathers  to  be  a  real  god,
and  one  of  their  greatest.

If  we  compare  him  with  Wuotan,  though  the  latter  is  more
intellectual  and  elevated,  Donar  has  the  advantage  of  a  sturdy
material  strength,  which  was  the  very  thing  to  recommend  him  to

1  Etwas  iiber  die  Ehsten,  pp.  13-4.


192  THUNAIl.

the  peculiar  veneration  of  certain  races;  prayers,  oaths,  curses
retained  his  memory  oftener  and  longer  than  that  of  any  other
god.  But  only  a  part  of  the  Greek  Zeus  is  included  in  him.


CHAPTER  IX.


ZIO,   (TIW,  TYR).

The  ON.  name  for  dies  Martis,  Tysdagr,  has  the  name  of  the
Eddie  god  Tyr  (gen.  Tys,  ace.  T$)  to  account  for  it.  The  AS.
Tiwesdseg  and  OHG.  Ziestac  scarcely  have  the  simple  name  of  the
god  left  to  keep  them  company,  but  it  may  be  safely  inferred  from
them  :  it  must  have  been  in  AS.  Tiw}  in  OHG.  Zio.  The  runic
letter  Ti,  Ziu,  will  be  discussed  further  on.  The  Gothic  name  for  the
day  of  the  week  is  nowhere  to  be  found  ;  according  to  all  analogy
it  would  be  Tivisdags,  and  then  the  god  himself  can  only  have  been
called  Tins.  These  forms,  Tiu-s,  Tiw,  Ty-r,  Zio  make  a  series  like
the  similar  J?iu-s,  J^eow  (}>iw),  ]?y-r,  dio  =  puer,  servus.

If  the  idea  of  our  thundergod  had  somewhat  narrow  limits,  that
of  Zio  lands  us  in  a  measureless  expanse.  The  non-Teutonic
cognate  [Aryan]  languages  confront  us  with  a  multitude  of  terms
belonging  to  the  root  div,  which,  while  enabling  us  to  make  up
a  fuller  formula  div,  tiv,  zio,  yield  the  meanings  '  brightness,  sky,
day,  god '.  Of  Sanskrit  words,  clyaus  (coelum)  stands  the  closest
to  the  Greek  and  German  gods'  names  Zeu?,  Tins.


SANSKRIT.

Nom.

Voc.

dyaus
dyaus

Ace.

divam

Gen.

divas

Dat.

dive

GREEK.


Zev

A  I  Fa,  A  [a


AiFL  Ait


GOTHIC,

Tius

Tiu

Tiu

Tivis

Tiva


To  the  digammated  arid  older  form  of  the  Greek  oblique  cases
lere  corresponds  also  the  Latin  Jovem,  Jovis,  Jovi,  for  which  we

1  It  might  have  been  Teow,  from  the  analogy  of  ]?eow  to  Kr.  Lye  quotes
without  references  :  Tiig,  Mars,  Tiiges-  vel  Tiis-daeg,  dies  Martis.  The  Epinal
glosses  brought  to  light  by  Mone  actually  furnish,  no.  520  (Anzeiger  1838,  p.
14o),  2  ^^g,  Mars  ;  also  Oehler  p.  35 1 .  The  change  of  letters  is  like  that  of  briiff,
.jusciilum,  for  briw  ;  and  we  may  at  least  infer  from  it,  that  the  vowel  is  long,

13


194  zio.

must  assume  a  nom.  Ju,  Jus,  though  it  has  survived  only  in  the
compound  Jupiter  —  Jus  pater,  Zeu?  irarrjp.  For,  the  initial  in
Jus,  Jovis  [pronounce  j  as  y]  seems  to  be  a  mere  softening  of  the
fuller  dj  in  Djus,  Djovis,  which  has  preserved  itself  in  Dijovis,  just
as  Zevs  presupposes  an  older  Aevs  which  was  actually  preserved  in
the  ^Eolic  dialect.  These  Greek  and  Latin  words  likewise  contain
the  idea  of  the  heavenly  god,  i.e.,  a  personification  of  the  sky.
Dium,  divum  is  the  vault  of  heaven,  and  Zeus  is  the  son  of  heaven,
Ovpavov  mo?,  ovpdvios,  Zevs  aiOepi  vaiwv  (see  SuppL).

But  apart  from  'dyaus,  Zeus  and  Jupiter,'  the  three  common  nouns
devas  (Sansk.),  6eos  and  deus  express  the  general  notion  of  a
divinity  ;  they  are  related  to  the  first  three,  yet  distinct  from  them.
The  Lat.  deus  might  seem  to  come  nearest  to  our  Tius,  Zio ;  but
its  u,  like  the  o  in  0eo?,  belongs  to  the  flexion,  not  to  the  root,  and
therefore  answers  to  the  a  in  devas.1  Nevertheless  deus  too  must
have  sprung  from  devus,  and  0eo?  from  0efo?,  because  the  very  6
instead  of  8  in  the  Greek  word  is  accounted  for  by  the  reaction  of
the  digamma  on  the  initial.  In  the  shortness  of  their  e  they  both
differ  from  devas,  whose  e  (— ai)  grew  by  guna  out  of  i,  so  that  the
Lith.  dievas  comes  nearer  to  it.2  But  the  adjectives  Sto?  (not  from
Sao?,  but  rather  for  &'fo<?)  and  divus  correspond  to  devas  as  dives
divitis  (p.  20)  to  devatas  (deus).  This  approximation  between  divus
and  deus  serves  to  confirm  the  origin  of  deus  out  of  devus  or  divus
with  short  i  (see  Suppl.)3,  Still  more  helpful  to  us  is  the  fact  that
the  Edda  has  a  plur.  tivar  meaning  gods  or  heroes,  Stem.  30a  41a ;
rikir  tivar  (conf.  rich  god,  p.  20),  Stem.  72a  93a ;  valtivar,  52a ;
sigtivar,  189a  248a  ;  the  sing,  is  not  in  use.  This  tivar,  though  not
immediately  related  to  Tyr,  yet  seems  related  to  it  as  8409,  #609,
0eZo9  are  to  Zeu? ;  its  i  is  established  by  the  fact  that  the  ON.
dialect  contracts  a  short  iv  into  y  ;  thus  we  obtain  by  the  side  of
tiv  a  tiv,  in  Sanskrit  by  the  side  of  div  a  dev,  and  in  Latin  by  the
side  of  deus  a  divus,  these  being  strengthened  or  guna  forms  of  the


1  Kuhn,  in  Zeitschr.  f.  d.  alt.  2,  231,  has  rightly  pointed  out,  that  Zio  can
be  immediately  related  only  to  dyaus  and  Zevs-,  not  to  deus  and  fcos  ;  but  he
ought  to  have  admitted  that  mediately  it  must  be  related  to  these  last  also.
That  div  was  the  root  of  Zeus,  had  already  been  shown  by  O.  Miiiler  in  Gott.
aiiz.  1834,  pp.  795-6.

2  Conf.  piemu  irot^v,  and  kiemas  Kw^rj  haims.

3  If,  as  hinted  on  p.  26,  dlos  deus  were  conn,  with  Se'co,  the  notion  of  bind
ing  must  have  arisen  first  out  of  the  divine  band,  which  is  hardly  conceivable.


zio.  195

root  div,  tiv  (splendere).1  If  the  earthborn  Tuisco,  the  ancestral
god  of  our  nation,  stands  (as  Zeuss  p.  72  has  acutely  suggested)  for
Tivisco,  Tiiisco,  it  shews  on  its  very  face  the  meaning  of  a  divine
heavenly  being,  leaving  it  an  open  question  whether  we  will  choose
to  understand  it  of  "VVuotan  or  any  other  god,  barring  always  Tius
himself,  from  whom  it  is  derived  (see  Suppl.).

The  light  of  day  is  a  notion  that  borders  on  that  of  heaven,  and
it  was  likewise  honoured  with  personification  as  a  god :  Lucetium
Jovem  appellabant,  quod  eum  lucis  esse  causam  credebant ;  Festus
sub  v.  To  begin  with,  dies  (conf.  interdiu,  dio)  is  itself  connected
with  deus  and  divus ;  Jupiter  was  called  Diespiter,  ie.,diei  pater,
•or  the  old  gen.  was  dies.  Then  the  word  in  the  sing,  fluctuates
Between  the  masc.  and  fern,  genders;  and  as  the  masc.  Ju,  Dju  with
the  suffix  n,  is  shaped  into  the  fern,  forms  Juno  for  Jovino,  Djovino,
and  Diana,  just  so  the  Lith.  name  for  day,  diena,  is  fern.,  while  the
Slav,  den,  dzien,  dan,  is  masc.  The  Teutonic  tongues  have  no  word
:or  sky  or  day  taken  from  this  root,  but  we  can  point  to  one  in
Greek  :  Cretenses  Aia  rrfv  rjfjuepav  vocant  (call  the  day  Zeus),  ipsi
quoque  Romani  Diespitrem  appellant,  ut  diei  patrem  ;  Mac-rob.
Sat.  1,  15.  The  poetic  and  Doric  forms  Zrjva,  Zrjvos,  Zijvt,  and
Zdva,  Zavos,  Zavi,  for  Aia,  Aios,  Ait,  correspond  to  the  above
•filiations  ;2  and  the  Etruscans  called  Jupiter  Tina,  i.e.  Dina ;  0.
Miiller  2,  43  (see  Suppl.).

A  derivative  from  the  same  root  with  another  suffix  seems  to
)resent  itself  in  the  OK  tivor  (deus  ?  ),3  Stem.  6b,  AS.  tir,  gen.  tires
tiir,  Cod.  exon.  331, 18  gloria,  splendor),  and  OS.  tir,  gen.  tiras,  tireas;
with  which  I  connect  the  OHG.  ziori,  ziari,  zieri  (splendidus),  and
;he  Lat.  decus,  decor,  decorus.  The  AS.  poets  use  the  word  tir  only
to  intensify  other  words:  tirmetod  (deus  gloriae,  summus  deus),
Caedm.  143,  7  ;  a3sctir  wera  (hasta  gloriosa  virorum),  124,  27  ;  a3sca
tir,  127,  10  ;  tirwine,  Boeth.  metr.  25,  41 ;  tirfruma,  Cod.  exon.  13,
21  ;  tirmeahtig  (potentissimus),  72,  1  ;  tireadig  (felicissimus),
Csedm.  189,  13.  192,  16;  tirisest  (firmissimus),  64,  2.  189,  19;


1  Sometimes,  though  rarely,  we  find  another  ON.  dtar,  Saem.  91a.  Sn.  176.
Xngl.  saga  cap.  2  ;  it  agrees  with  6f6s  more  than  with  bios.

2  We  know  to  what  shifts  Socrates  is  driven  in  trying  to  explain  the  forms
a  and  Am  (Plato's  Cratylus  p.   29,  Bekker)  ;  6c6s  he  derives  from  6elv,

mrrere  (p.  32).

3  Or  must  we  read  it  tivor,  and  connect  it  with  the  AS.  tifer,  tiber,  OHG.
:epar  1


196  zio.

much  in  the  same  way  as  the  AS.  eormen,  OHG.  irman  is  prefixed.
Now  when  a  similar  prefix  t^  meets  us  in  the  OK  writings,  e.g.
tyhraustr  (fortissimus),  tyspakr  (sapientissimus),  Sn.  29,  it  confirms
the  affinity  between  tir  and  Ty-r.

These  intricate  etymologies  were  not  to  be  avoided  :  they
entitle  us  to  claim  a  sphere  for  the  Teutonic  god  Zio,  Tiw,  Tyr,
which  places  him  on  a  level  with  the  loftiest  deities  of  antiquity.
Represented  in  the  Edda  as  Coin's  son,  he  may  seem  inferior  to
him  in  power  and  moment ;  but  the  two  really  fall  into  one,  inas
much  as  both  are  directors  of  war  and  battle,  and  the  fame  of
victory  proceeds  from  each  of  them  alike.  For  the  olden  time
resolved  all  glory  into  military  glory,  and  not  content  with  Wuotan
and  Zio,  it  felt  the  need  of  a  third  war-god  Hadu  ;  the  finer  distinc
tions  in  their  cultus  are  hidden  from  us  now. — It  is  not  to  be  over
looked,  that  OSinn  is  often  named  Sigt^r,  Hroptatyr,  Gautatyr,
hangatyr,  farmatyr  (Ssem.  30.  47.  248a.  Sn.  94-6),  bodvartyr,  quasi
pugnae  deus,  geirtyr  (Forum,  sog.  9,  515-8) ;  and  that  even  Thorr,
to  whom  Jupiter's  lightning  has  been  handed  over,  appears  as
Beifrartyr,  Eeidityr  (Sn.  94),  i.e.  god  of  the  waggon.1  In  all  these
poetical  terms,  we  see  that  tyr  bears  that  more  general  sense  which
makes  it  suitable  for  all  divinities,  especially  the  higher  ones.  Tyr
has  a  perfect  right  to  a  name  identical  with  Zeus.  Add  moreover,
that  the  epithet  of  father  w*as  in  a  special  degree  accorded,  not
only  to  Jupiter,  Diespiter,  but  to  victory's  patron  Marspiter*

Further,  this  lofty  position  is  claimed  for  Zio  by  the  oldest
accounts  that  have  reached  us.  Mars  is  singled  out  as  a  chief  god

1  I  do  not  reckon  Angantflr  among  this  set  of  words.     It  occurs  frequently,
both  in  the  Hervararsaga  and  in  Sa3in.  114a  119b  9a ;  this  last  passage  calls
O'o'inn  '  Friggjar  angantjr '.     The  true  form  is  doubtless  Anganfiyr,  as  appears
from  the  OHG.  Angandeo  (Trad.  fuld.  1,  67),  and  the  AS.  Ongenpcoiv,  Ongenfrio
(Beow.  4770.  4945-67.  5843-97.  5917-67);  -tyr  would  have  been  in  AS.  Tteow,  in
OHG.  -zio.     Graff  gives  an  Agandeo  1,  132.  5,  87,  which  seems  to  be  a  mis
spelling,  though  the  Trad,  wizenb.  no.  20  have  a  woman's  name  Agathiu  (for
Anganthiu),  to  which  add  the  ace.  Agathien,  Agacien  (Walthar.  029).     The
meaning  of  angan,  ongen,  is  doubtful;  *  angan  illrar  brudhar'  is  said  to  be
'delieiae  malae  mulieris,'  but  Biorn  interprets  it  pedisequa,  and  OSinn  might
iitly  be  called  Friggae  pedisequus.     That  some  proper  names  in  the  Edda  are
corrupt,  is  plain  from  Hamdir,  which  ought  everywhere  to  be  Ham]?yr,  OHG.
]Jamadio,  Hamideo  (Schannat  no.  576.  Cod.  lauresh.  2529),  MHG.   llamdie
(MsH  3,  213h).     This  much  I  am  sure  of,  that  neither  AnganHi  nor  Ham>J|
can  contain  a  tyr,  which  is  almost  always  compounded  with  genitives  in  a
figurative  sense.

2  Gellius  5,  12.


zio.  1G7

of  all  the  Germanic  nations,  and  mentioned  side  by  side  with  Mer
cury.  The  evidence  is  collected  on  p.  44.1  Tacitus,  in  Hist.  4,  64,
makes  the  Tencteri  say  right  out :  Communibus  deis,  et  prae-
cipuo  deorum  Marti  grates  agimus ;  we  have  no  occasion  to  apply
the  passage  to  Wuotan,  to  whom  the  highest  place  usually  belong?,
as  particular  races  may  have  assigned  that  to  Zio.  The  still  clearer
testimony  of  Procopius  12,  15  to  the  worship  of  Ares  among  the
dwellers  in  the  North,2  which  says  expressly :  eVel  Oeov  avrov
fjLi&va-i,  fjieyLo-Tov  elvdi,  ought  to  be  compared  with  the  statements
of  Jornandes  on  the  Gothic  Mars ;  in  both  places  human  sacrifices
are  the  subject,  and  therefore  Zeuss,  p.  22,  is  for  understanding  it
of  Wuotan  again,  because  to  him  Tacitus  says  that  men  were
sacrificed ;  but  he  does  not  say  to  him  alone, — on  the  contrary,
anent  the  Hermundurian  offering,  Ann.  13,  57,  where  '  viri '  were
also  slain,  Mars  stands  mentioned  before  Mercury.  And  Jornandes,
who  identifies  the  '  Gradivus  pater '  of  the  Getae  in  Virg.  Aen.  3,
35  with  the  Mars  of  the  Goths,  must  have  been  thinking  of  the
special  god  of  war,  not  of  a  higher  and  more  general  one,  intimately
as  they  interpenetrate  one  another  in  name  and  nature.  All  in
favour  of  this  view  are  the  Scythian  and  Alanic  legends  of  the
war-sword,  which  will  be  examined  by  and  by :  if  the  Getic,
Scythian  and  Gothic  traditions  meet  anywhere,  it  is  on  this  of
Jl/ars-worship.  Neither  can  we  disregard  Widukind's  representa
tion  at  a  later  time  (Pertz  5,  423)  of  the  Saxon  Mars  set  up  on
high.  Donar  and  Wuotan,  with  whom  at  other  times  he  is  combined
in  a  significant  trilogy,  appear,  like  Jupiter  and  Mercury,  to  retire
before  him.  But  it  is  quite  conceivable  how  the  glossist  quoted  on
p.  133  could  render  Wuotan  by  Mars,  and  Widukind  glide  easily
from  Mars  to  Hermes,  i.e.,  Wodan,  particularly  if  he  had  in  his
mind  the  analogy  of  those  prefixes  irman-  (of  which  he  is  speaking)
and  tir-.  The  ON.  writers,  while  they  recognise  Coin's  influence
Ion  war  and  victory,  speak  no  less  distinctly  of  Tyr,  who  is  em-


1  A  passage  in  Florus  2,  4 :  'mox  Ariovisto  duce  vovere  de  nostrorum  mili-
tum  praeda  Marti  suo  torquem  :  intercepit  Jupiter  votum,  nam  de  torquilms
jeoruin  aureum  tropaeum  Jovi  Flaminius  erexit,'  speaks  of  the  Insubrian  Gauls,

who  were  beaten  in  the  consulship  of  Flaminius  B.C.  225.  But  these  Galli
are  both  in  other  respects  very  like  Germani,  and  the  name  of  their  leader  is
that  of  the  Suevic  (Swabian)  king  in  Caesar.

2  GovXmu  (men  of  Thule)  is  their  generic  name,  but  he  expressly  includes
j  among  them  the  Tavrot,  whom  he  rightly  regards  as  a  different  people  from  the
ToYtfoi,  conf.  Gott.  anz.  1828,  p.  553.


198  zio.

phatically  their  VigaguS  (deus  proeliorum),  Sn.  105,  and  again :
hann  er  diarfastr  ok  best  hugaftr,  ok  liann  rceffr  mioc  sigri  i  orostom,
Sn.  29  (see  Suppl.).

No  doubt  there  were  mountains  hallowed  to  Zio,  as  well  as  to
Wuotan  and  Donar ;  the  only  difficulty  is,  to  know  which  god,
Wuotan  or  Zio,  was  meant  by  a  particular  name.  May  we  place
to  his  credit  the  name  of  the  abbey  of  Siegburg  in  the  Lower
Ehine,  which  was  founded  in  1064  on  a  mountain  where  the
ancient  assize  of  the  people  was  held?  From  that  time  the  moun
tain  was  to  have  been  called  Mons  sancti  Michaelis  after  the
Christian  conqueror,  but  the  heathen  Sigcbcrg  could  not  be  dislodged,
it  was  only  distorted  into  Siegburg  j1  or  are  we  to  explain  the  name
by  the  river  Sieg,  which  flows  through  the  district  ?  The  ON.
Sfgtysberg  (OS.  Sigu-tiwis-berag?),  Ssein.  348a  might  belong  to  Oolnn
or  to  Tyr.  The  Weimar  map  has  in  section  38  a  Tisdorf,  and  in.
section  48  a  Ziesberg,  both  in  Lower  Saxon  districts  on  the  Elbe.
A  place  in  Zealand,  about  which  there  are  folk-tales,  is  TyUerg
(Thiele  2,  20) ;  also  in  Zealand  are  Tisvelde  (Ti's  well),  Tysting  ;  in
Jutland,  Tystatlie,  Tiislunde.  In  Sweden:  Tistad,  Tisby,  Tisjo,
Tyved.  Zierlerg  in  Bavaria  (Cirberg,  Zirberc,  MB.  11,  71-3-5-6)
and  Zierenberg  in  Lower  Hesse  may  be  derived  from  the  collateral
form  (see  Suppl.).  The  mons  Mart  is  at  Paris  (Montmartre),  of
which  even  Abbo  de  bell.  Par.  2,  196  makes  mention,  has  to  do
with  the  Gallic  Mars,  whom  some  take  to  be  Belus,  others  Hesus.
With  far  better  right  than  the  Parisian  mons  Martis  (yet  conf.  Waitz's
Salic  law,  p.  52),  we  may  assign  to  Zio  the  fanum  Martis,  now
Famars  in  Hainault  (p.  84),  according  to  Herm.  Miiller  the  Old
Frankish  '  Disbargum  (or  Disbargus)  in  termino  Toringorum'  of
Greg.  tur.  2,  9,  Chlodio's  castellum.  Dis-  would  be  a  Latinized  form
of  Tis  =  Tives,  perhaps  recalling  Dispiter,  Diespiter ;  there  is  no
Gallic  word  like  it  looking  towards  Mars,  and  the  district  is  thor
oughly  Frankish,  with  Liphtinae  close  by,  where  we  have  Saxnot
named  by  the  side  of  Thunar  and  Wodan.  As  for  Eresberg  and
Mersberg  (3  or  4  pp.  on),  I  have  compared  the  oldest  documents  in
Seibertz:  no.  11  (anno  962)  gives  us  Eresburg;  no.  25  (1030)  already
Mersburg  ;  1,  98  (1043)  mons  Eresburg ;  no.  51  (1150)  mons  Eres
berg ;  no.  70  (1176)  mons  Eresberch ;  no.  85  (1184)  Heresburg;

i  Docum.  in  Lacomblet,  no.  203-4.


zio.  199

no.  115  (1201)  mons  Martis;  no.  153  (1219  Mersberch;  no.  167
(1222)  Eresberch ;  no.  179  (1228)  mons  Martis ;  no.  186  (1229)
mons  Heresberg ;  no.  189  (1230)  mons  Martis  and  Mersberg.
Mons  Martis  was  the  learned  name,  Mersberg  the  popular,  and
Eresberg  the  oldest.  As  mons  and  castellum  are  used  by  turns,
berg  and  burg  are  equally  right.  Widukind  2, 11  and  Dietmar  2, 1
spell  Heresbwrg  and  Eresburch,  when  they  describe  the  taking  of
the  place  in  938.  According  to  the  Ann.  Corb.  (Pertz  5,  8),  they
are  sacred  to  both  Ares  and  Hermes  (Mars  and  Mercury).

The  names  of  plants  also  confess  the  god  :  ON.  Tysfiola,  I  dare
say  after  the  Lat.  viola  Martis,  march- violet;  Tyrhialm  (aconitum),
otherwise  Thorhialm,  Thorhat  (helmet,  hat),  conf.  Germ,  sturmhut,
eisenhut,  Dan.  troldhat,  a  herb  endowed  with  magic  power,  whose
helmet-like  shape  might  suggest  either  of  those  warlike  gods  Tyr  and
Thorr;  Tym&r9T!y&  wood,  Dan.  Tyved,  Tysved  (daphne  mezereum),
in  the  Helsing.  dial,  tis,  tisfbast,  the  mezereon,  a  beautiful  poison-
flower  (see  Suppl.).

While  these  names  of  places  and  plants  sufficiently  vouch  for
the  wide-spread  worship  of  the  god,  we  must  lay  particular  stress
on  one  thing,  that  the  name  for  the  third  day  of  the  week,  which
is  what  we  started  with,  bears  living  witness  to  him  at  this  moment,
not  only  in  Scandinavia  and  England  (ON.  Tysdagr,  Swed.  Tisdag,
Dan.  Tirsdag,  AS.  Tiwesdseg),  but  among  the  common  people  in
Swabia  and  Switzerland  (Ziestag,  Tiestag,  diestik,  beside  our  uni
versal  Dienstag);  Schm.  4,  214  brings  all  the  forms  together.  And
there  is  yet  one  more  testimony  to  the  high  antiquity  of  Zio-worship
in  Swabia,  which  we  may  gather  from  an  old  Wessobrunn  gloss
'Cyuvari  =  Suapa,'  MB.  7,  375  and  Diut.  2,  370;  which  I  take  to
be  not  Teutonoari,  as  Zeuss  does,  pp.  146-9,  but  Ziowari  Martern
colentes,  warian  expressing,  like  Lat.  colere,  both  habitare  and
OepcLTrevew,  so  that  the  Suevi  are  OepaTrovTes  "Aprjos.

But  that  is  not  all  :  further  and  weighty  disclosures  on  the
name  and  nature  of  the  war-god  await  us  at  the  hands  of  the  Eunic
alphabet.

It  is  known  that  each  separate  rune  has  a  name  to  itself,  and
these  names  vary  more  or  less  according  to  the  nations  that  use  them,
but  they  are  mostly  very  ancient  words.  The  OHG.  runes  having
to  bestow  the  name  dorn  on  D,  and  tac  on  T,  require  for  their
aspirate  Z  which  closes  the  alphabet  the  name  of  Zio.  In  the  ON.


200  zio.

and  AS.  alphabets,  dag  stood  for  D,  Tfjr  and  Tiw  for  T,  J?orn  for  ]>,
being  the  same  three  words,  only  in  different  places ;  occasionally
the  Anglo-Saxons  wrote  Tir  or  Tis.  Whenever  a  list  of  runes
keeps  thorn  for  Th,  and  dag  for  D,  it  is  sure  to  have  Ti  for  T  (as
the  Cod.  Tsidori  paris.  and  bruxell.) ;  so  it  is  in  the  St  Gall  cod.
260  and  the  Brussels  9565,  except  that  dorn  is  improperly  put  for
thorn,  and  tag  for  dag,  but  Ti  stands  correctly  opposite  T.  The
Paris  cod.  5239  has  dhron  (dhorn),  tac,  Ziu,  that  of  Salzburg  dhorn,
Ti,  daeg :  everywhere  the  form  Ziu  shows  the  High  Germ,  accepta
tion,  and  the  form  Ti  (once,  in  Cod.  vatic.  Christinae  338,  spelt  Tu,
perh.  Tii)  the  Low  Germ.,  the  Saxon.  The  u  in  Ziu  seems  to  be
more  archaic  than  the  o  of  Zio,  which  has  kept  pace  with  the
regular  progress  of  the  OHG.  dialect,  and  follows  the  analogy  of
dio,  servus ;  this  relation  between  u  and  o  may  perhaps  be  seen
still  more  in  its  true  light,  as  we  go  on.  But  what  is  very  remark
able,  is  that  in  the  Vienna  cod.  140  the  name  Tyz  is  given  to  T  in
an  alphabet  which  uses  the  Gothic  letters,  for  Tyz  comes  very  near
to  our  conjectural  Goth.  Tius.  As  well  the  retention  as  the  unavoid
able  alterations  of  this  divine  name  in  the  runes  of  the  various  races,
may  be  taken  as  proofs  of  the  antiquity  and  extent  of  Zio- worship.
How  comes  it  that  no  rune  has  taken  its  name  from  \Vuotan  or
OSinn,  the  inventor  of  writing  itself  ?  '  K  =  reiS,  rad,'  i.e.,  waggon,
may  indirectly  at  least  be  referred  to  the  god  of  the  Thunder-car ;
and  F  according  to  one  interpretation  signifies  Freyr.  Anyhow,
'TrzTyr'  appears  to  have  been  a  supremely  honoured  symbol,  and
the  name  of  this  god  to  have  been  specially  sacred  :  in  scratching
the  runes  of  victory  on  the  sword,  the  name  of  Tyr  had  to  be  twice
inserted,  Seem.  194b.  The  shape  of  the  rune  ^  has  an  obvious
resemblance  to  the  old-established  symbol  of  the  planet  Mars  when
set  upright  -£,  and  an  AS.  poem  on  the  runes  expressly  says :  tir
bi5  tdcna  sum  (tir  is  one  of  the  tokens,  is  a  certain  sign) ;  where
again  the  derivative  form  tir  is  employed  to  explain  the  the  simple
Tiw  or  Ti.  Occasionally  the  poets  speak  of  '  tire  tacnian,'  to  mark
with  tir  (El.  753.  Jud.  137,  18),  and 'tires  to  tacne,'  as  mark  of  tir
(Beow.  3306) ;  we  may  expound  it  as  '  gloria,  decore  insignire,  in
gloriae  signum/  and  still  think  of  the  heathen  symbol  of  the  god,
pretty  much  as  we  saw  it  done  at  the  solemn  blessing  of  the  ale-
cups  (see  Suppl.).1

1  Conf.  note  to  Elene  155-6.


EOR.  201

Thus  far  we  have  dealt  with  the  runic  name  Tfr,  Tiw,  Zio,  and
no  other.  But  here  the  same  alphabets  come  out  with  a  sharp  dis
tinction  between  two  names  of  the  selfsame  god.  First,  in  the  AS.
lists,  in  addition  to  ^  Tir,  we  come  upon  a  similar  arrow  with  two
barbs  added  ^  and  the  name  Ear  attached  to  it.1  Then  the  OHG.
alphabets,  after  using  ^  for  tac,  find  a  use  for  that  very  symbol  ^
to  which  some  of  them  give  the  name  Zio,  others  again  Eo,  EOT,
Aer.  And  there  are  AS.  alphabets  that  actually  set  down  by  ^
the  two  names  Tir  and  Ear,  though  Tir  had  already  been  given  to  ^ .
It  is  evident  then,  that  Tir  and  Ear — Zio  and  Eo,  EOT — were  two
names  for  one  god,  and  both  must  have  been  current  among  the
several  races,  both  Low  German  and  High.

Evidence  as  regards  Low  Germany  is  found  both  in  the  rune
Ear  occurring  in  Anglo-Saxon,  and  in  the  remarkable  name  of
mresburg,  Aeresburg  being  given  to  a  notable  seat  of  pagan  worship
in  a  district  of  Westphalia,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the
Irmansul  (v.  supra,  p.  116).  That  it  was  strictly  Eres&er^  (as  Sieg-
burg  was  originally  Sigberg,  p.  198),  follows  both  from  the  Latin
rendering  mons  Martis,  and  from  its  later  name  Mersberg*  whose
initial  M  could  be  explained  by  the  contraction  of  the  words  '  in
dem  Eresberge,  Aresberge,'3  or  it  may  be  an  imitation  of  the  Latin
name.  There  was  a  downright  Marsberg  in  another  district  of  West
phalia.4  This  Eresberc  then  is  a  Ziesberc,  a  Sig-tiwes-berg,  and  yet
more  closely  an  Areopagus,  Mars'  hill,  ApeioTrayos,  irerpa  Trdyos  T*
*Apeios  (Aeschyl.  Eum.  690).

Still  more  plainly  are  High  German  races,  especially  the
Bavarian  (Marcomannic)  pointed  to  by  that  singular  name  for  the
third  day  of  the  week,  Ertag,  lertag,  Irtag,  Eritag,  Erclitag,  Erichtag,
which  answers  to  the  rune  Eor,  and  up  to  this  moment  lives  to  part
off  the  Bavarians,  Austrians  and  Tyrolese  from  the  Swabians  and
Swiss  (who,  as  former  Ziowari,  stick  to  Ziestag) ;  along  the  boundary-
line  of  these  races  must  also  have  run  formerly  the  frontier  between
Eor-worship  and  Zio-worship.  True,  the  compound  Ertac  lacks


1  In  one  poem,  Cod.  exon.  481,  18,  the  rune  contains  simply  the  vowel
sound  ea.

2  This  Eresburg  or  Mersberg  stands  in  the  pagus  Hessi  saxonicus  (registr.
Sarachonis  p.  42,  735)  ;  conf.  Wigands  archiv  I.  1,  36-7.  II.  143.  268.

3  So  :  Motgers  =  in  dem  Otgers  hove  [and,  the  nonce  =  then  once,  &c.].

4  In  the  pagus   Marstem,   Marshem,  Marsem   (close  to  the  Weser,  near
Marklo),  reg.  Sarachonis  42,  727.


202  zio.

the  genitive  ending  -s  which  is  preserved  in  Ziestac,  and  I  have  not
been  so  fortunate  as  to  hunt  up  an  Erestac1  in  the  older  records  of
the  13-14th  centuries ;  nevertheless  the  coincidence  of  the  double
names  for  the  day  and  for  the  rune  should  be  conclusive  here,  and
we  must  suppose  an  OHG.  Erestac,  to  match  the  Eresberg.  One
might  be  led  to  imagine  that  in  Ertag  the  Earth  (Erde  according
to  the  forms  given  at  the  beginning  of  ch.  XIII)  was  meant.  But
the  ancient  way  of  thinking  placed  the  earth  in  the  centre  of  the
world,  not  among  the  planets ;  she  cannot  therefore  have  given
name  to  a  day  of  the  week,  and  there  is  no  such  day  found  in  any
nation,  unless  we  turn  Venus  and  Ereyja  into  the  earth. — To  bear
this  Ertag  company,  there  is  that  name  of  a  place  Eersel,  quoted
p.  154  from  Gramaye,  in  which  neither  era  honor,  nor  its  personifi
cation  Era  (ch.  XVI,  XXIX)  is  to  be  thought  of,  but  solely  a  god
of  the  wreek.  It  is  worth  noticing,  that  Ertac  and  Erdag  occur  as
men's  names ;  also,  that  the  Taxandrian  Eersel  was  but  a  little  way
off  the  Tisberg  or  Eanmars  in  Hainault  (see  Suppl.). — Now  comes
something  far  more  important.  As  Zio  is  identical  with  Zeus  as
director  of  wars,  we  see  at  a  glance  that  Eor,  Er,  Ear,  is  one  with
"Apr]?  the  son  of  Zeus  ;  and  as  the  Germans  had  given  the  rank  of
Zeus  to  their  Wuotan,  Tyr  and  consequently  Eor  appears  as  the  son
of  the  highest  god.  Have  we  any  means  now  left  of  getting  at  the
sense  of  this  obscure  root  Eor  ?

The  description  of  the  rune  in  the  AS.  poem  gives  only  a  slight
hint,  it  runs  thus  :

Ear  bi(5  egle  eorla  gehwilcum,

J?onne  faBstlice  flsesc  onginneS

hra?-w  colian,  hrusan  ceosan

blac  to  gebeddan.     blaeda  gedreosaS,

wynna  gewitaS,  wera  geswicaS  ;

i.e.,  Ear  fit  importunus  hominum  cuicumque,  quum  caro  incipit
refrigescere,  pallidumque  corpus  terram  eligere  conjugem.  tune
enim  gloriae  dilabuntur,  gaudia  evanescunt,  foedera  cessant.  The
description  is  of  death  coming  on,  and  earthly  joys  dropping  off;
but  who  can  that  be,  that  at  such  a  time  is  burdensome  (egle,  ail-some)
to  men  ?  The  ordinary  meaning  of  ear,  spica,  arista,  can  be  of  no  use
here ;  I  suppose  that  approaching  dissolution,  a  personified  death

1  In  a  passage  from  Keisersberg  quoted  by  Schm.  1,  97,  it  is  spelt  Eristag,
apparently  to  favour  the  derivation  from  '  dies  aeris.'


EOR,   SAXNOT,  CHERU.  203

is  to  be  understood,  from  which  a  transition  to  the  destructive  god
of  battles,  the  ftpoToXoiyos,  fjuaifyovos  "ApTjs  is  easy  to  conceive.1
"Aprjs  itself  is  used  abstractly  by  the  Greeks  for  destruction,  murder,
pestilence,  just  as  our  Wuotan  is  for  furor  and  belli  impetus,2  and
the  Latin  Mars  for  bellum,  exitus  pugnae,  furor  bellicus,  conf.  'Mars
=cafeht,'  gefecht,  fight,  in  Gl.  Hrab.  969a ;  as  conversely  the  OHG.
wig  pugna,  bellum  (Graff  1,  740)  seems  occasionally  to  denote  the
personal  god  of  war.  'Wicgcli  quoque  Mars  est'  says  Ermoldus
JSTigellus  (Pertz  2,  468),  and  he  is  said  to  farneman,  AS.  forniman,
carry  off,  as  Hild  (Bellona)  does  elsewhere :  dat  inan  wic  fornam,
Hildebr.  lied ;  in  AS.  :  wig  ealle  fornam,  Beow.  2155  ;  wig  fornom,
Cod.  exon.  291,  11.  Do  we  not  still  say,  war  or  battle  snatched
them  all  away  ?  A  remarkable  gloss  in  the  old  Cod.  sangall.  913,
p.  193,  has  'turbines  =  ziu '  (we  have  no  business  to  write  zui),  which
may  mean  the  storm  of  war,  the  Mars  trux,  saevus,  or  possibly  the
literal  whirlwind,  on  which  mythical  names  are  sometimes  bestowed;
so  it  is  either  Zio  himself,  or  a  synonymous  female  personification
Ziu,  bearing  the  same  relation  to  Zio  as  diu  (ancilla)  to  dio
(servus).

Here  comes  in  another  string  of  explanations,  overbold  as  some
of  them  may  seem.  As  Eresburg  is  just  as  often  spelt  Heresburg
by  the  Frankish  annalists,  we  may  fairly  bring  in  the  Goth,  hair  us,
AS.  heor,  OS.  heru,  ON.  hiorr,  en  sis,  cardo,  although  the  names  of
the  rune  and  the  day  of  the  week  always  appear  without  the
aspirate.  For  in  Greek  we  already  have  the  two  unaspirated  words
"Apris  and  aop,  sword,  weapon,  to  compare  with  one  another,  and
these  point  to  a  god  of  the  sword.  Then  again  the  famous  Abre-
nuntiatio  names  three  heathen  gods,  Thunar,  Woden,  Saxndt,  of
whom  the  third  can  have  been  but  little  inferior  to  the  other  two
in  power  and  holiness.  Salisnot  is  word  for  word  gladii  censors,
ensifer  [Germ,  genoss,  sharer] ;  who  else  but  Zio  or  EOT  and  the
Greek  Ares  ?3  The  AS.  genealogies  preserve  the  name  of  Sascnedt

1  Or,  without  the  need  of  any  transition,  Ear  might  at  once  be  Ares  :  '  war
is  burdensome  in  old  age'. — TRANSL.

2  The  notions  of  raving  (wiiten)  and  insanire  are  suitable  to  the  blustering
ptormful  god  of  war.     Homer  calls   Ares   dovpos  the  wild,   and  a(ppa)v  the
insensate,    os  ovnva  of&e  0e>to-ra,  II.  5,  761.     But  /natVrai  is  said  of  other  gods
too,  particularly  Zeus  (8,  360)  and  Dionysos  or  Bacchus  (6,  132).

3  One  miglit  think  of  Fro,  Freyr  (ch.  X),  but  of  course  glittering  swords
were  attributed  to  more  than  one  god ;  thus  Poseidon  (Neptune)  wields  a  deivbv
aop,  II.  14,  385,  and  Apollo  is  called  xpvo-dopoS)  5,  509.  lo,  256.


204  zio.

as  the  son  of  Woden,  and  it  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  it,  that
Tyr  was  the  son  of  Oftinn,  and  Ares  the  son  of  Zeus  (see  Suppl.).
But  further,  as  the  Saxons  were  so  called,  either  because  they
wielded  the  sword  of  stone  (saxum),  or  placed  this  god  at  the  head
of  their  race,  so  I  think  the  Cheruscans  of  Tacitus,  a  people
synonymous,  nay  identical  with  them,  were  named  after  CJieru,
Heru  —  Eor,  from  whom  their  name  can  be  derived.1  After  this
weighty  consonance  of  facts,  which  opens  to  us  the  meaning  of  the
old  national  name,  and  at  the  same  time  teaches  that  '  heru  '  was
first  of  all  pronounced  '  cheru,'  and  last  of  all  '  eru,  er,'  I  think  we
may  also  bring  in  the  Gallic  war-god  Hesus  or  Esus  (Lucan  1,  440),
and  state,  that  the  metal  iron  is  indicated  by  the  planetary  sign  of
Mars,  the  AS.  '  tires  tacen,'  and  consequently  that  the  rune  of  Zio
and  Eor  may  be  the  picture  of  a  sword  with  its  handle,  or  of  a
spear.2  The  Scythian  and  Alanic  legends  dwell  still  more  emphati
cally  on  the  god's  sword,  and  their  agreement  with  Teutonic  ways
of  thinking  may  safely  be  assumed,  as  Mars  was  equally  prominent
in  the  faith  of  the  Scythians  and  that  of  the  Goths.

The  impressive  personification  of  the  sword  matches  well  with
that  of  the  hammer,  and  to  my  thinking  each  confirms  the  other.
Both  idea  and  name  of  two  of  the  greatest  gods  pass  over  into  the
instrument  by  which  they  display  their  might.

Herodotus  4,  62  informs  us,  that  the  Scythians  worshipped
Ares  under  the  semblance  or  symbol  of  an  ancient  iron  sword
(d/civaKT)^),  which  was  elevated  on  an  enormous  stack  of  brushwood
['  three  furlongs  in  length  and  breadth,  but  less  in  height '] :  eVl
rovrov  Crj  rov  oy/cov  a  K  t,  v  a  K  rj  9  <r  iBtf  peos  t'Spimu  ap^cuo^
eKaaTOKTi'  /cal  TOUT'  ecm  rov"Aprjos  ro  ayaXfia.  Amrnianus
Marcellinus  31,  2  says  of  the  Alani :  Nee  templum  apud  eos  visitur
aut  delubrum,  ne  tugurium  quidein  culmo  tectum  cerni  nsquam
potest,  sed  gladius  barbarico  ritu  humi  figitur  nudus,  eumque  ut
Alartem,  regionum  quas  circumcircant  praesulem,  verecundius
colunt.  And  he  had  previously  asserted  of  the  Quadi  also,  a
decidedly  German  people,  17, 12  (A.D.  358):  Eductis  mucronibus,  qiios
pro  numinibus  colunt,  juravere  se  permansuros  in  fide.  Perhaps  all

1  The  suffix  -sk  would  hardly  fit  with  the  material  sense  of  heru,  far  better
with  a  personal  Heru.

2  Does  the  author  overlook,  or  deliberately  reject,  the  ON.  or,  gen.  orrar,
AS.  arwe,  arrow  ?     Among  the  forms  for  Tuesday  occur  Erigt&g,  Erget&g  ;  erge
is  to  arwe,  as  sorge  to  sorwe,  morgen  to  morwen,  &c. — TRANS.


zio.  205

the  Teutonic  nations  swore  by  their  weapons,  with  a  touching  of
the  weapon,1  just  as  the  Scythians  and  Eomans  did  per  Martis
frameam,  Juvenal  13,  79.  So  Arnobius  6,  11 :  Eidetis  temporibus
priscis  coluisse  acinacem  Scythiae  nationes,  .  .  .  pro  Marte
Eomanos  hastam,  ut  Varronis  indicant  Musae ;  this  framea  and
hasta  of  the  Eomans  is  altogether  like  the  Scythian  sword.2
Jornandes,  following  Priscus  201,  17,  tells  of  the  Scythian  sword,
how  it  came  into  the  hands  of  Attila,  cap.  35  :  Qui  (Attila),
quamvis  hujus  esset  naturae  ut  semper  conficleret,  addebat  ei  tamen
confidential!!  gladius  Martis  inventus,  apud  Scytharum  reges  semper
habitus.  Quem  Priscus  historicus  tali  refert  occasione  detectum,
quum  pastor,  inquiens,  quidam  gregis  unam  buculam  conspiceret
claudicantem  (noticed  one  heifer  walking  lame),  nee  causam  tanti
vulneris  inveniret,  sollicitus  vestigia  cruoris  insequitur,  tandemque
venit  ad  gladium,  quem  depascens  herbas  bucula  incaute  calcaverat,
effossumque  protinus  ad  Attilam  defert.  Quo  ille  munere  gratu-
latus,  ut  erat  magnanimus,  arbitratur  se  totius  mundi  principem
constitutum,  et  per  Martis  gladium  potestatem  sibi  concessam  esse
bellorum. — But  the  sword  degenerated  into  an  unlucky  one,  like
some  far-famed  northern  swords.  Lambert  relates,  that  a  queen,
Solomon  of  Hungary's  mother,  made  a  present  of  it  to  Otto,  duke
of  Bavaria,  that  from  this  Otto's  hands  it  came  by  way  of  loan  to
the  younger  Dedi,  margrave  Dedi's  son,  then  to  Henry  IV.,  and  lastly
to  Lupold  of  Mersburg,  who,  being  thrown  by  his  horse,  and  by
the  same  sword  transpierced,  was  buried  at  Mertenefeld.  It  is  a
question  whether  these  local  names  Mersburg  and  Mertenefeld  can
have  any  reference  to  the  sword  of  Mars.  A  great  while  after,  the
duke  of  Alba  is  said  to  have  dug  it  out  of  the  earth  again  after  the
battle  of  Miihlberg  (Deutsche  heldensage  p.  311).  We  see  through
what  lengthened  periods  popular  tradition  could  go  on  nourishing
itself  on  this  world-old  worship  (see  Suppl.).

With  the  word  "Aprjs  the  Lat.  Mars  appears  to  have  nothing  to
do,  being  a  contraction  of  Mavors,  and  the  indispensable  initial
being  even  reduplicated  in  Mamers ;  so  the  fancied  connexion
between  Eresburg  and  Marsberg  will  not  hold.

In  the  Old  Eoman  worship  of  Mars  a  prominent  place  is  given

1  Conf.  RA.  896  ;  and  so  late  as  Wigal.  6517 :  « Swert,  uf  dinem  knopfe  ich
des  swer,'  Sword,  on  thy  pommel  I  swear  it.

2  Juro  per  Dianam  et  Martem,  Plaut.  Mil.  glor.  5,  21.


206  zio.

to  the  legend  of  Picus,  a  son  of  Saturn,  a  wood-spirit  who  helped
to  nurse  the  babes  Eemus  and  Romulus ;  certain  features  in  our
antiquities  seem  to  recall  him,  as  will  be  shown  later.  Romulus
consecrated  the  third  month  of  the  year  to  Mars,  his  progenitor ;
our  ancestors  also  named  it  after  a  deity  who  may  perhaps  be
identified  with  Mars.  That  is  to  say,  the  Anglo-Saxons  called
March  Hredemdnad',  which  Beda  without  hesitation  traces  to  a
goddess  Hreffe;  possibly  other  races  might  explain  it  by  a  god
Jfreda  ?  These  names  would  come  from  hr65  gloria,  fama,  OX.
hroc5r,  OHG.  hruod,  OFrank.  chrod,  which  helped  to  form  many
ancient  words,  e.g.  OHG.  Hruodgang,  Hruodhilt,  OFrank.  Chrodo-
gang,  Chrodhild  ;  did  Hruodo,  Chrodo  express  to  certain  races  the
shining  god  of  fame  ?x  The  Edda  knows  of  no  such  epithet  for  Tyr
as  Hr65r  or  Hroeol  (see  Suppl.).

To  these  discoveries  or  conjectures  we  have  been  guided  simply
by  the  several  surviving  names  of  one  of  the  greatest  gods  of  our
olden  time,  to  whose  attributes  and  surroundings  we  have  scarcely
any  other  clue  left.  But  now  we  may  fairly  apply  to  him  in  the
main,  what  the  poetry  of  other  nations  supplies.  Zio  is  sure  to
have  been  valiant  and  fond  of  war,  like  Ares,  lavish  of  glory,  but
stern  and  bloodthirsty  (al'/^aros  aaai  "Apya,  II.  5,  289.  20,  78.  22,
267) ;  he  raves  and  rages  like  Zeus  and  Wuotan,  he  is  that  '  old
blood-shedder '  of  the  Servian  song,  he  gladdens  the  hearts  of
ravens  and  wolves,  who  follow  him  to  fields  of  battle,  although
these  creatures  again  must  be  assigned  more  to  Wuotan  (p.  147) ;  the
Greek  phrase  makes  them  olwvoi  and  /cvves  (birds  and  dogs),  and

1  In  this  connexion  one  might  try  to  rescue  the  suspicious  and  discredited
legend  of  a  Saxon  divinity  Krodo ;  there  is  authority  for  it  in  the  loth  century,
none  whatever  in  the  earlier  Mid.  Ages.  Bothe's  Sassenchronik  (Leibn.  3,  286)
relates  under  the  year  780,  that  King  Charles,  during  his  conquest  of  the  East
Saxons,  overthrew  on  the  Hartesburg  an  idol  similar  to  Saturn,  which  the


people  called  Krodo.  If  such  an  event  had  really  happened,  it  would  most
likely  have  been  mentioned  by  the  annalists,  like  the  overthrow  of  the
Irmansul.  For  all  that,  the  tradition  need  not  be  groundless,  if  other  things
would  only  correspond.  Unfortunately  the  form  Crodo  for  Chrodo,  Hrodo,
Rodo  [like  Catti,  aiterw.  Chatti,  Hatti,  Hessen]  is  rather  too  ancient,  and  I  can
find  no  support  for  it  in  the  Saxon  speech.  A  doc.  of  1284  (Langs  reg.  4,  247)

nOQ    n    "YVo  1 1  li  tivno    /liofno       &*'/*•  r\rJ  ^      oi-»/l    r\      or\t-tf~f    1 1-»      "\Ti  f  1^  r\  vf  *a    TVToTT      *i       Ol^Qb    a      Jf.vnir\lf


Irmansul.     For  all  that,  the  tradition  need  not  be  groundless,  if  other  things
would  only  correspond.     Unfortunately  the  form  Crodo  for  Chrodo,  Hrodo,
Rodo  ~
find

has  a  Waltherus  dictus  Krode,  and  a' song  in  Nithart's  MsII.  3,  2()8b  a  Krotolf,
which  however  has  no  business  to  remind  us  of  Hruodolf,  Ruodolf,  being  not
a  proper  name,  but  a  nickname,  and  so  to  be  derived  from  krote,  a  toad,  to
which  must  be  referred  many  names  of  places,  Krotenpful,  &c.,  which  have
been  mistakenly  jiscribed  to  the  idol.  The  true  form  for  Upper  Germany
would  not  tolerate  a  Kr,  but  only  Hr  or  II  (see  Suppl.).


zio.  207

the  fields  of  the  slain,  where  the  hounds  hold  revel,  are  called  KVVWV
fj,e\in}0pa,  II.  13,  233.  17,  255.  18,  179.  Battle-songs  were  also
sure  to  be  tuned  to  the  praises  of  Zio,  and  perhaps  war-dances
executed  (pekTrevOai  *Apr)l,  II.  7,  241),  from  which  I  derive  the
persistent  and  widely  prevalent  custom  of  the  solemn  sword-dance,
exactly  the  thing  for  the  god  of  the  sword.  The  Edda  nowhere
lays  particular  stress  on  the  sword  of  war,  it  knows  nothing  of
Sahsnot,  indeed  its  sverSas  is  another  god,  IleirnSallr  ;x  but  it  sets
Tyr  before  us  as  one-handed,  because  the  wolf,  within  whose  jaws
he  laid  his  right  hand  as  a  pledge,  bit  it  off  at  the  joint,  whence
the  wrist  was  called  ulfliSr,  wolf-lith,  Seem.  65a.  Sn.  35-6.  This
incident  must  have  been  well-known  and  characteristic  of  him,  for
the  OK  exposition  of  runes  likewise  says,  under  letter  T  :  Tyr  er
einhendr  Asa ;  conf.  Sn.  105,  The  rest  of  Teutonic  legend  has  no
trace  of  it,2  unless  we  are  to  look  for  it  in  Walther's  onehandedness,
and  find  in  his  name  the  mighty  '  wielder  of  hosts '.  I  prefer  to
adopt  the  happy  explanation,3  that  the  reason  why  Tyr  appears
one-handed  is,  because  he  can  only  give  victory  to  one  part  of  the
combatants,  as  Hadu,  another  god  who  dispenses  the  fortune  of
war,  and  Plutos  and  Fortuna  among  the  Greeks  and  Eomans,  are
painted  blind,  because  they  deal  out  their  gifts  at  random  (see
Suppl.).  Now,  as  victory  was  esteemed  the  highest  of  all  fortune,
the  god  of  victory  shares  to  the  full  the  prominent  characteristics
of  luck  in  general,  partiality  arid  fickleness.  And  a  remoter  period
of  our  nation  may  have  used  names  which  bore  upon  this.4

Amongst  the  train  of  Ares  and  Mars  there  appear  certain
mythic  beings  who  personify  the  notions  of  fear  and  horror.  Aelnos
and  $o/3o5  (11.  4,  440.  11,  317.  15,  119)  answer  to  the  Latin  Pallor

1  Conf.  Apollo  xpvo-dopos  above,  p.  203,  note.

2  Cod.  pal.  361,  65a  tells  of  Julian,  that  he  was  forced  to  put  his  hand
into  the  mouth  of  Mercury's   statue  :    Die  hant  stiez  er  im   in  den   munt
dar,  darinne  uobte  sich  der  valant  (devil),  er   clemmete  im  die  hant,  mid
gehabete  sie  im  so  vaste,  daz  er  sich  niht  irlosen  mohte  (could  not  get  loose).
Besides,  the  wolfs  limb  has  a  likeness  to  the  Wuotan's  limb,  Woens-let,  p.  160.

3  Wackernagel's,  in  the  Schweiz.  mus.  1,  107.

4  The  Greek  epos  expresses  the  changefulness  of  victory  (VLKTJ  eVepaXK^y,  II.
8,    171.    16,   362  ;    VIK.J]   eVa/Liei/Serai  ai/Spay,    6,    339)   by  an   epithet   of   Ares,


'AAXoTrpoo-aXXoy  5,  831.  889.  A  certain  many-shaped  and  all- transforming,
being,  with  a  name  almost  exactly  the  same,  Vilanders  (Ls.  1,  369-92),  Bald-
anderst,  Baldander  (H.  Sachs  1,  537.  Simpliciss.  bk  6,  c.  9),  has  indeed  no  visible
connexion  with  the  god  of  war,  but  it  may  have  been  the  name  of  a  god.  The
similaritv  of  this  Vilanders  to  the  name  of  a  place  in  the  Tyrol,  Villanders
is,  Vulunuturusa,  ace.  to  Steub.  p.  79.  178)  is  merely


near  Brixen  (Velunutris
accidental.


208  zio.

and  Pavor ;  it  is  the  two  former  that  harness  the  steeds  of  Ares,
$6/3os  is  called  his  son  (13,  299),  and  in  Aeschylus  he  is  provided
with  a  dwelling  (pekaOpov  tectum),  out  of  which  he  suddenly  leaps.
So  in  the  old  Bohemian  songs,  Tras  (tremor)  and  Strdkh  (terror)
burst  out  of  forest  shades  on  the  enemy's  bands,  chase  them,  press
on  their  necks  and  squeeze  out  of  their  throats  a  loud  cry  (Koniginh.
hs.  84.  104)  ;  they  are  ghostly  and  spectral.  This  borders  upon
Voma,  Omi  and  Yggr  (pp.  119,  120),  terms  which  designate  the
god  himself,  not  his  companions,  sons  or  servants,  yet  they  again
bear  witness  to  the  community  there  was  between  Wuotan  and
Zio.  Thorr  was  called  6tti  iotna,  terror  gigantum.  When  in  our
modern  phraseology  fear  'surprises,  seizes,  shakes,  deprives  of  sense,'
personification  is  not  far  off;  in  the  Iliad  also  17,  67  j(Kwpov  Seo?
(neut.)  alpei,  pale  fear  seizes  ;  but  masculine  embodiments  like
Bel/mo?,  (/>o/3o9,  pallor,  pavor,  tras,  strakh,  bring  it  more  vividly  before
us,  and  pavor  was  weakened  by  passing  into  the  fern,  paura,  peur
of  the  Eomance.  AS.  J?a  hine  se  broga  ongeat  (terror  eum  invasit),
Beow.  2583.  OHG.  forhta  chain  mih  ana,  N.  ps.  54,  5 ,  forhta
anafiel  ubar  inan,  T.  2,  4 ;  conf.  MHG.  diu  sorge  im  was  so  verre
entriten,  sie  mohte  erreichen  niht  ein  sper,  fear  was  fled  so  far  from
him,  a  spear  could  not  reach  it,  Wh.  280,  10  (see  SuppL).  But
further  on,  we  shall  get  acquainted  with  a  female  Hilta,  comparable
to  the  Lat.  Bellona  and  the  Gr.  Enyo  and  Eris,  who  is  really  one
with  war  and  the  war-god.

Tyr  is  described  in  Sn.  105  as  a  son  of  Oolnn,  but  in  the
HymisqviSa  as  a  kinsman  of  the  giants.  His  mother,  whose  name
is  not  found,  but  whose  beauty  is  indicated  by  the  epithet  all-gullin,
all-golden,  Ssern.  53a,  must  have  been  a  giant's  daughter,  who  bore
to  Oolim  this  immortal  son  (see  SuppL).


CHAPTER  X.
FRO,   (FREYR).

The  god  that  stands  next  in  power  and  glory,  is  in  the  Norse
mythology  Freyr  (Landn.  4,  7)  ;  with  the  Swedes  he  seems  even  to
have  occupied  the  third  place.  His  name  of  itself  proclaims  how
widely  his  worship  prevailed  among  the  other  Teutonic  races,  a
name  sacred  enough  to  be  given  to  the  Supreme  Being  even  in  christ-
ian  times.  There  must  have  been  a  broad  pregnant  sense  underlying
the  word,  which  made  it  equally  fit  for  the  individuality  of  one
god,  and  for  the  comprehensive  notion  of  dominion,  whether  sacred
or  secular  :  to  some  nations  it  signified  the  particular  god,  to  others
the  soverain  deity  in  general,  pretty  much  as  we  found,  connected
with  the  proper  names  Zio,  Zeus,  the  more  general  term  deus,  0e6?.
While  the  names  of  other  heathen  gods  became  an  abomination  to
the  Christians,  and  a  Gothic  Vodans  or  Thunrs  would  have  grated
I  harshly  on  the  ear;  this  one  expression,  like  the  primitive  guj?  itself,
could  remain  yet  a  long  time  without  offence,  and  signify  by  turns
the  heavenly  lord  and  an  earthly  one.

It  is  true,  the  names  do  not  correspond  quite  exactly.  The  ON.
Freyr  gen.  Freys,  which  Saxo  gives  quite  correctly  in  its  Danish
form  as  Fro  gen.  Fros  (whence  Froso,  Fro's  island),  the  Swed.  like-
jwise  Fro,  ought  to  be  in  Gothic  Fraus  or  Fravis,1  instead  of  which,
|3very  page  of  Ulphilas  shows  frduja  gen.  fraujins,  translating  tcvpw,
pn  the  other  hand,  the  ON.  dialect  lacks  both  the  weak  form  (Freyi,
Freyja),  and  the  meaning  of  lord.  The  remaining  languages  all
Wd  with  the  Gothic.  In  OHG.  the  full  form  frouwo  was  already
Lost,  the  writers  preferring  truhtin;  it  is  only  in  the  form  of  address
UW  min!'  (0.  i.  5,  35.  ii.  14,  27.  v.  7,  35.  Ludw.  lied)  that  the

|k   l  Frey  =  Fravi,  as  hey  =  havi  (hay),  mey  =  mavi  (maid),  ey  =  avi  (isle),

14


1210  FRO.

word  for  a  divine  or  earthly  lord  was  preserved,  just  as  that  antique
sihora  and  sire  (p.  27)  lasted  longest  in  addresses.  In  the  Heliand
too,  when  the  word  is  used  in  addressing,  it  is  always  in  the  short
ened  form  fro  min  !  123,  13.  140,  23.  fro  min  the  godo  !  131,  6.
134,  15.  138,  1.  7.  waldand  fro  min  !  153,  8.  drohtin  fro  min  !
15,  3  ;  but  in  other  cases  we  do  find  the  complete  froJio  gen.  frohon
3,  24  ;  frdho  119,  14,  gen.  frahon  122,  9,  fraon  3,  24.  5,  23  ;  froio
93,  1.  107,  21.  Still  the  OS.  poet  uses  the  word  seldorner  than  the
synonyms  drohtin  and  herro,  and  he  always  puts  a  possessive  with
it,  never  an  adjective  (like  mari  drohtin,  riki  drohtin,  craftag  drohtin,
liob  herro),  still  less  does  he  make  compounds  with  it  (like  sigi-
drohtin) :  all  symptoms  that  the  word  was  freezing  up.  The  AS.
fred  gen.  frean  (for  freaan,  freawan)  has  a  wider  sweep,  it  not  only
admits  adjectives  (frea  relmihtig,  Csedm.  1,  9.  10,  1),  but  also  forms
compounds:  agendfrea,  Caedm.  135,  4.  aldorfrea  218,  29.  folcfrea
111,  7  :  and  even  combines  with  dryhten :  freadryhten,  Crcdm.  54,
29,  gen.  freahdrihtnes,  Beow.  1585,  dat.  freodryhtne  5150.— But
now  by  the  side  of  our  OHG.  fro  there  is  found  a  rigid  (indecl.)
frono,  which,  placed  before  or  after  substantives,  imparts  the  notion
of  lordly,  high  and  holy ;  out  of  this  was  gradually  developed  a
more  flexible  adj.  of  like  meaning  fron,  and  again  an  adj.  fronisc
(pulcher,  mundus,  inclytus,  arcanus),  OS.  fronisk,  frdnisk.  In
MHG.  and  even  modern  German  we  have  a  good  many  compounds
with  vron,  as  also  the  adj.  in  the  above  sense,  while  frohnen,frdlmen  is
to  do  service  to  one's  lord,  to  dedicate.  The  Frisian  dialect  contri
butes  &frdn,  dominions,  and/ran^,  minister  publicus.  The  added
-n  in  all  these  derivatives  can  be  explained  by  the  Gothic  frdujinon
dominari,  though  there  was  probably  no  Gothic  fraujinisks,  as
fronisc  seems  not  to  have  been  formed  till  after  the  contraction  fro
and  frono  had  set  in.

But  even  the  Gothic  frduja  does  not  present  to  us  the  simple  j
stem,  I  look  for  it  in  a  lost  adj.  fravis  (like  navis  veKpos,  Eom.  7,  2),i
the  same  as  the  OHG.  fro  gen.  frouwes,  OS.  fra  gen.  frahes,  MHG.  j
vrd,  and  our  froJi  [frohlich,  frolic,  &c.],  and  signifying  mitis,  laetus,
blandus ;  whence  the  same  dialects  derive  frouwi,  gaudium,  frouwan,
laetum  reddere,  frouwida,  laetitia,  &c.  (see  Suppl.).

I  do  not  mean  to  assert  that  a  god  Frauja,  Frouwo,  Fraho  was
as  distinctly  worshipped  by  the  Goths,  Alamanns,  Franks  and
Saxons  in  the  first  centuries  of  our  era,  as  Freyr  was  long  after  in


FRO.  211

Scandinavia;  it  is  even  possible  that  the  form  frauja  already
harboured  a  generalization  of  the  more  vividly  concrete  Fravis  =
Freyr,  and  therefore  seemed  less  offensive  to  the  Christians.  But
in  both  words,  the  reference  to  a  higher  being  is  unmistakable,  and
in  the  Mid.  ages  there  still  seems  to  hang  about  the  compounds
with  vrdn  something  weird,  unearthly,  a  sense  of  old  sacredness;  this
may  account  for  the  rare  occurrence  and  the  early  disappearance
of  the  OHG.  fro,  and  even  for  the  grammatical  immobility  of
frono ;  it  is  as  though  an  echo  of  heathenism  could  be  still  detected
in  them.

A  worship  of  Fro  may  be  inferred  even  from  the  use  of  certain
proper  names  and  poetic  epithets,  especially  by  the  Anglo-Saxons,
j  The  Goths  even  of  later  times  use  Frduja  as  a  man's  name,  to  which
i  we  can  hardly  attribute  the  sense  of  lord  simply :  an  envoy  from
j  king  Hadafus  to  Charles  the  Great  is  called  Froia  (Pertz  1,  184.
2,  223),  perhaps  Froila  (Fraujila) ;  an  OHG.  Frewilo  occurs  in  a
document  in    Neugart  no.    162.      The   AS.   genealogies    contain
i  Wtiscfred ;  the  name  is  often  found  elsewhere  (Beda  138,  19.  153,
5),  and  seems  suitable  to  Woden  the  god  or  lord  of  wishing  (p.  144).
.Equally  to  the  point  is  the   poetic  fredwine   (freawine  folca)  in
JBeow.  4708.  4853.  4871,  where  it  is  a  mere  epithet  of  divine  or  god-
loved  heroes  and  kings.     But  the  Wessex  pedigree  can  produce  its
Fredwine,  whom  Saxo  Gram,  calls  Frowinus    (better  Frowinus)  ;
3HG.  documents  likewise  have  the   proper  name  Frowin  (Trad,
iuvav.  p.  302,  Cod.  lauresh.  712,  but  Friowini  722),  and  in  several
:ioble  families,  e.g.,  the  distinguished  one  of  the  Yon  Huttens,  it  has
JDeen  kept  up  till  modern  times.     What  is  remarkable,  the  Edda
uses  of  a  hero  Freys  mnr  (Seem.  219b),  like  the  AS.  freawine,  only
jmcompounded:   Sigiiror  is  Frey's  friend  and  protege,  or  perhaps
liis  votary  and  servant,  in  the  way  shown  on  p.  93.    Here  again  frea,
;'ro,  freyr,  cannot  have  merely  the  general  meaning  of  lord,  any  lord,
rhe  Swedish  heroes  in  the  Bravalla  fight,  who  boast  their  descent
j  rorn  Fro,  are  in  Saxo,  p.  144,  called  Fro  dei  necessarii,  which  is
exactly  our  Freys  vinar.    In  the  same  way  the  AS.  and  ON.  poetries,
'.nd   consequently   the   myths,   have   in   common   the   expression
red  Ingwina  (gen.  pi.),  Beow.  2638,  Ingvinar  (gen.  sing.)  freyr,
Lngunnar/reyr,  Seem.  65b,  Ingi/m/r  (Thorlac.  obs.  bor.  spec.  6,  p.  43),
i>y  which  is  to  be  understood  a  hero  or  god,  not  'junior  dominus,'
.s  Thorlacius,  p.  68,  supposes.     Yngvi/m/r  is  called  Coin's  son,  Sn.


212  FRO.

211a.  I  shall  come  back  to  this  mysterious  combination  of  two
mythical  names,  when  I  come  to  speak  of  the  hero  Ingo.  The  ON.
skalds  append  this  freyr  to  other  names  and  to  common  nouns,  e.g.,
in  Kormakssaga,  pp.  104  122,  'fiornis  freyr,  myMfreyr'  mean  no
more  than  hero  or  man  in  the  heightened  general  sense  which  we
noticed  in  the  words  irmin,  tir  and  t^r.  In  the  same  way  the  fern.
freyja  means  frau,  woman,  lady,  Kormakss.  p.  317.

All  that  I  have  made  out  thus  far  on  the  name  and  idea  of  the
god,  will  receive  new  light  and  confirmation  when  we  come  to  ex
amine  his  divine  sister  Freyja.  The  brother  and  sister  are  made
alike  in  all  their  attributes,  and  each  can  stand  for  the  other.


Fro  does  not  appear  in  the  series  of  gods  of  the  week,  because
there  was  no  room  for  him  there ;  if  we  must  translate  him  by  a
Koman  name,  it  can  scarcely  be  any  other  than  that  of  Liber,  whose
association  with  Libera  is  extremely  like  that  of  Fro  with  Frowa
(Freyr  with  Freyja).  As  Liber  and  Libera  are  devoted  to  the
service  of  Ceres  or  Demeter,  Fro  and  Frowa  stand  in  close  union
with  Nerthus.  Fro's  godhead  seems  to  hold  a  middle  place  between
the  notion  of  the  supreme  lord  and  that  of  a  being  who  brings  about
love  and  fruitf ulness.  He  has  Wuotan's  creative  quality,  but
performs  no  deeds  of  war  ;  horse  and  sword  he  gives  away,  when
consumed  with  longing  for  the  fair  GerSr,  as  is  sung  in  one  of  the
most  glorious  lays  of  the  Edda.  Snorri  says,  rain  and  sunshine  are
in  the  gift  of  Freyr  (as  elsewhere  of  Wuotan  and  Donar,  pp.  157.
175) ;  he  is  invoked  for  fertility  of  the  soil  and  for  peace  (til  drs  oc
fri&ar,  Sn.  28  ;  conf.  Yngl.  saga  cap.  12).  The  Swedes  revered
him  as  one  of  their  chief  gods,  and  Adam  of  Bremen  says  that  at
Upsal  his  statue  stood  by  those  of  Thor  and  Wodan  (see  Suppl.).
Also  in  Saem.  85b  he  is  named  next  to  OSinn  and  Thorr  (asabragr)
as  the  third  god.  Adam  calls  him  Fricco,1  which  is  precisely  parallel
to  the  frequent  confusion  of  the  two  goddesses  Freyja  and  Frigg,
which  I  shall  deal  with  at  a  future  time.  But  he  paints  him  as  a
god  of  peace  and  love  :  Tertius  est  Fricco,  pacem  voluptatemque
laro-iens  mortalibus,  cujus  etiam  simulachrum  finguut  inycnti


1  Which  occurs  elsewhere  as  a  man's  iiame,  e.g.,  Friccheo  in  Scliannat,  Trad,
fuld.  386.


FRO.  213

priapo  ;l  si  nuptiae  celebrandae  sunt,  (sacrificia  offerunt)  Fricconi.
Then  there  is  the  story,  harmonizing  with  this,  though  related  from
the  Christian  point  of  view  and  to  the  heathen  god's  detriment,  of
Prey's  statue  being  carried  round  the  country  in  a  waggon,  and  of
his  beautiful  young  priestess,  Fornm.  sog.  2,  73-8.  This  progress
takes  place,  '  }?a  er  hann  skal  gera  monnum  drbot'  when  he  shall
make  for  men  year's  boot ;  the  people  flock  to  meet  the  car,  and
bring  their  offerings,  then  the  weather  clears  up  and  men  look
for  a  fruitful  year.  The  offerings  are  those  which  Saxo,  p.  15,  names
Frobldt;  live  animals  were  presented,  particularly  oxen  (Vigagl.
saga,  p.  56.  Islend.  sog.  2,  348),  which  seems  to  explain  why
Freyr  is  reckoned  among  the  poetic  names  for  an  ox,  Sn.  221a;  in
like  manner,  horses  were  consecrated  to  him,  such  a  one  was
called  Frcyfaxi  and  accounted  holy,  Vatnsd.  p.  140  ;  and  human
victims  fell  to  him  in  Sweden,  Saxo  Grain.  42.  Freyr  possessed
a  boar  named  Gullinbursti,  whose  'golden  bristles'  lighted  up
the  night  like  day,  who  ran  with  the  speed  of  a  horse  and  drew  the
deity's  car,  Sn  66.  132.  It  is  therefore  in  Frey's  worship  that  the
atonement-boar  is  sacrificed  (p.  51)  ;2  in  Sweden  cakes  in  the  shape
of  a  boar  are  baked  on  Yule-eve. — And  here  we  come  upon  a  good
many  relics  of  the  service  once  done  to  the  god,  even  outside  of
I  Scandinavia.  We  hear  of  the  clean  gold-hog  (-ferch,  whence  dimin.
farrow)  in  the  popular  customs  of  the  Wetterau  .and  Thuringia
(p.  51).  In  the  Mid.  Dutch  poem  of  Lantslot  ende  Sandrii),\
374,  a  knight  says  to  his  maiden :  <  ic  heb  u  liever  dan  en  everswin,
al  waert  van  finen  goude  gkewrackt,'  I  hold  you  dearer  than  a  boar-
swine,  all  were  it  of  fine  gold  y-wrought ;  were  they  still  in  the
habit  of  making  gold  jewels  in  the  shape  of  boars  ?  at  least  the
remembrance  of  such  a  thing  was  not  yet  lost.  Fro  and  his  boar
may  also  have  had  a  hand  in  a  superstition  of  Gelderland,  which
I  however  puts  a  famous  hero  in  the  place  of  the  god  :  Derk  met  den

1With  priapus  »rptWos   I  would  identify  the   ON.  friof   semen    friofr
foecundus ;  conf  Goth,  fraiv,  seed.     The  statement  of  Adainus  Bremensis  looks
better,  since  Wolf  in  his  Wodana  xxi.  xxii.  xxiii  brought  to  light  the  festivals
and  images  of  Priapus  or  Ters  at  a  late  period  in  the  Netherlands.     This  ters
Us  the  AS.  feora,  OHG.  zers,  and  Herbert  4054  is  shy  of  uttering  the  name
Aerses      Phallus-worship,  so  widely  spread  among  the  nations  of  antiquity
|  must  have  arisen  out  of  an  innocent  veneration  of  the  generative  principle
which  a  later  age,  conscious  of  its  sins,  prudishly  avoided.     After  all  is  said'
there  is  an  inkling  of  the  same  in  Phol  too  and  the  avoidance  of  his  name
'  2  XT    thou8h  *  do  not  venture  exactly  to  identify  him  with  0aXXo'r.
Not  only  Demeter,  but  Zeus  received  boar-offerings,  II.  19,  197.  251.


214  FRO.

leer  (Theoderic,  Derrick  with  the  boar)  goes  his  round  on  Christmas-
eve  night,  and  people  are  careful  to  get  all  implements  of  husbandry
within  doors,  else  the  boar  will  trample  them  about,  and  make
them  unfit  for  use.1     In  the  same  Christmas  season,  dame  Holda  or
Berhta   sallied   out,  and   looked   after   the   ploughs   and   spindles,
motherly  goddesses   instead  of  the  god,  Frouwa   instead  of  Fr6.
With  this  again  are  connected  the  formae  aprorum  worn  as  charms
by   the  remote   Aestyans,  who   yet  have   the   'ritus   habitusque
Suevorum'.    Tacitus  Germ.  45  says,  these   figures   represent   the
worship  of  the  'mater  deum/  of  a  female  Fro,  i.e., of  Freyja ;  and,
what  is  conclusive  on  this  point,  the  Edda  (Ssem.  114a)  assigns  the
Gulliribursti  to  Freyja,  though  elsewhere  he  belongs  to  Freyr  (see
Suppl.). — Anglo-Saxon  poetry,  above  all,  makes  mention  of  these
loar-badges,  these  gold  swine.     When  Constantine  sees  a  vision  in
his  sleep,  he  is  said  to  be  eoforcumble  be]?eaht  (apri  signo  tectus
El.  76  ;  it  must  have  been  fastened  as  an  auspicious  omen  over  th
head  of  the  bed.     Afterwards  again,  in  the  description  of  Elene'
stately  progress  to  the  east :  J?eer  waes  on  eorle  eSgesyne  grimheli
manig,  cenlic  eoforcumlul  (tune  in  duce  apparuit  horrida  cassis,  ex
cellens  apri  forma),  El.  260.     The  poet  is  describing  a  decoration  o
the  old  heathen  time,  cumbul  is  the  helmet's  crest,  and  the  king*
helmet  appears  to  be  adorned  with  the  image  of  a  boar.     Severa
passages  in  Beowulf  place  the  matter  beyond  a  doubt :   coforlfa
scionon  ofer  hleor  beran  gehroden  golde,  fan  and  f^rheard  ferhwearde
heold  (apri  formam  videbantur  supra  genas  gerere  auro  comptam
quae  varia  igneque  durata  vitam  tuebatur),  605 ;  het  Jm  inberaD
eofor  hedfodsegn,  heaSosteapne  helm  (jussit  afferri  aprum,  capitis
signum,  galeam  in  pugna  prominentem),  4300  ;   sivin  ofer  helm(
(sus  supra  galea),  2574 ;  swin  ealgylden,  eofor  irenheard  (sus  aureus
aper  instar  ferri  dums),  2216,  i.e.,  a  helmet  placed  on  the  funera
pile  as  a  costly  jewel ;  helm  befongen  Fredwrdsnum  (—  OHG.  Fro-
reisanum),  swa  hine  fyrndagum  worhte  waepna  smi5,  besette  swin-
licum,  j?eet  hine  siSJmn  no  brond  ne  beadoinecas  bitan  ne  meahtan
(galea  ornata  Frohonis  signis,  sicut  earn  olim  fabricaverat  armorum
faber,  circumdederat  earn  apri  formis,  ne  gladius  ensesve  laedere
earn  possent),  2905 ;  as  a  sacred  divine  symbol,  it  was  to  protect  in


1  Staring,  in  the  journal  Mnemosyne,  Leyden  1829.  1,  323  ;  quoted  thence
in  Westendorp's  Noordsche  mythologie,  Dordrecht  1830.  p.  495.


FRO.  215

battle  and  affright  the  foe.1  The  OHG.  proper  name  Epurhelm,
Eparhelm  (eber,  eofor,  aper),  placed  by  the  side  of  Frohelm  (both
occur  in  the  Trad,  patav.  no.  20;  MB.  28b,  18)  acquires  thus  a  special
and  appropriate  meaning.  Such  boar-crests  might  still  serve  as
ornaments  even  to  Christian  heroes,  after  the  memory  of  Fro  was
obliterated,  and  long  continue  to  be  wrought  simply  as  jewels  (see
Suppl.). — Some  other  traces  of  boar  consecration  have  lasted  still
later,  especially  in  England.  The  custom  of  the  boar-vow  I  have
explained  in  EA.  900-1.  As  even  at  the  present  day  on  festive
occasions  a  wild  boar's  head  is  seen  among  the  other  dishes  as  a
show-dish,  they  used  in  the  Mid.  Ages  to  serve  it  up  at  banquets,
garnished  with  laurel  and  rosemary,  to  carry  it  about  and  play  all
manner  of  pranks  with  it :  *  Where  stood  a  boars  head  garnished
With  bayes  and  rosemary e,'  says  one  ballad  about  Arthur's  Table  ;
when  three  strokes  have  been  given  with  a  rod  over  it,  it  is  only
the  knife  of  a  virtuous  man  that  can  carve  the  first  slice.  At  other
times,  even  a  live  boar  makes  its  appearance  in  the  hall,  and  a  bold
hero  chops  its  head  off.  At  Oxford  they  exhibit  a  boar's  head  on
Christmas  day,  carry  it  solemnly  round,  singing:  Caput  apri  defero,
Reddens  laudes  Domino  (see  Suppl.).  Those  Aestyans  may  prove
a  link  of  fellowship  between  the  Germanic  nations  and  the  Finnish
and  Asiatic ;  it  is  well  worth  noticing,  that  the  Tcherkass  (Circas
sians)  worship  a  god  of  woods  and  hunting,  Mesitch  by  name,  who
rides  a  wild  boar  vrith  golden  bristles?  To  most  of  the  other  gods
tame  animals  are  sacred,  to  Fro  the  daring  dauntless  boar,  as  well
befits  a  god  of  the  chase.  Perhaps  also  a  huge  boar  with  white
tusks,3  who  in  Slavic  legend  rises  foaming  out  of  a  lake,  is  that  of
a  kindred  deity.

The  Edda  attributes  to  Freyr  a  sword  of  surpassing  virtue,  which
could  put  itself  into  motion  against  the  brood  of  giants,  Seem.  82.
His  giving  it  away  when  in  straits,  proved  his  ruin  afterwards  ;  it
was  held  to  be  the  cause  of  his  death,  when  at  the  Eagnarokr  he
had  to  stand  single  combat  with  Surtr  (swart),  and  missed  his

1  On  this  point  again,  the  statement  of  Tacitus  about  the  Aestyans  agrees
so  exactly,  that  it  seems  worth  quoting  in  full  :  Aestyorum  gentes.     .     .     .
quibus   ritus   habitusque   Suevorum.      .      -,      .      Matrem  deum   venerantur :
insigne  superstitionis,  formas  aprorum  gestant ;  id  pro  armis  omniumque  tutela
securum  deae  cultorem  etiam  inter  hostes  praestat. — TRANS.

2  Erman's  archiv  fur  wissenschaftl,  kunde  Russlands  1842,  heft  1,  p.  118.

3  AevKov  oSoj/ra,  II.  11,  416.     aCs*  XevKai  oSo'm,  Od.  19.  465.


216  FRO.

trusty  blade.  Sn.  73.  There  appear  to  have  been  other  traditions
also  afloat  about  this  sword  j1  and  it  would  not  seem  far-fetched,  if
on  the  strength  of  it  we  placed  the  well-known  trilogy  of  '  Thunar,
Wodan,  Saxnot '  beside  Adam  of  Bremen's  '  Wodan,  Thor  and
Fricco  '  or  the  Eddie  '  OSinn,  Asabragr,  Freyr,'2  that  is  to  say,  if  we
took  Freyr,  Fricco  =  Fro  to  be  the  same  as  Sahsndt  the  sword-
possessor.  Add  to  this,  that  the  Edda  never  mentions  the  sword  of
Tyr.  Nevertheless  there  are  stronger  reasons  in  favour  of  Sahsnoz
being  Zio :  this  for  one,  that  he  was  a  son  of  Wuotan,  whereas
Freyr  comes  of  NiorSr,  though  some  genealogies  to  be  presently
mentioned  bring  him  into  connexion  with  Woden.

For  the  brilliant  Freyr,  the  beneficent  son  of  NiorSr,  the
dwarfs  had  constructed  a  wonderful  ship  SkiSblaSnir,  which  could
fold  up  like  a  cloth,  Ssem.  45b,  Sn.  48.  Yngl.  saga  cap.  7  (see
Suppl.).3

Besides  the  Swedes,  the  Thrsendir  in  Norway  were  devoted  to
Freyr  above  all  other  gods,  Fornm.  sog.  10,  312.  Occasionally
priests  of  his  are  named,  as  ThorSr  Freys  go&i  (of  the  10th  century),
Landn.  4,  10  and  Nialss.  cap.  96 ;  Flosi  appears  to  have  succeeded
his  father  in  the  office ;  other  Freysgy&lingar  are  cited  in  Landn.
4,  13.  The  Vigaglumssaga  cap.  19  mentions  Freys  kof  at  Upsala,
and  cap.  26  his  statue  at  Thvera  in  Iceland,  though  only  in  a  night-
vision  :  he  is  pictured  sitting  on  a  chair,  giving  short  and  surly
(stutt  ok  reiSuliga)  answers  to  his  supplicants,  so  that  Glumr,  who
in  cap.  9  had  sacrificed  an  old  ox  to  him,  now  on  awaking  from  his
dream  neglected  his  service.  In  the  Landn.  3,  2  and  Vatnsd.  pp.
44.  50  we  are  told  of  a  Freyr  giorr  of  silfri  (made  of  silver),  which
was  used  in  drawing  lots  ;  conf.  Verlauff  s  note,  p.  362.  In  the
Landn.  4,  7  is  preserved  the  usual  formula  for  an  oath :  Hialpi  mer
sva  Freyr  ok  Nior&r  ok  hinn  almdttki  as  (so  help  me  F.  and  N.  and
that  almighty  ds) !  by  which  last  is  to  be  understood  Thorr  rather


1  In  old  French  poetry  I  find  a  famous  sword  wrought  by  Galant  himself
(Wielant,  Wayland),  and  named  Froberge  or  Floberge  (Garin  ],  263.  2,  30-8)  ;
the  latter  reading  has  no  discoverable  sense,  though  our  later  Flamberge  seems
to  have  sprung  from  it.     Froberge  might  very  well  be  either  a  mere  fro-bergende
(lord-protecting)  weapon,  or  a  reminiscence  of  the  god  Fro's  sword  ;  conf.  the
word-formations  quoted  in  my  Gramm.  2,  486.     There  are  townships  called  in
OHG.  Helidberga,  Marahaberga  (horse-stable).      The  ON.  has  no  Freybiorg
that  I  know  of,  though  it  has  Thorbiorg  fern.,  and  Thorbergr  masc.

2  Also  in  Sn.  131,  OSinn,  Th6rr,  Freyr  are  speakers  of  doom.

3  Pliny  N.  H.  5,  9  mentions  Ethiopian  '  naves  plicatiles  humeris  translatas.'


NIKDU.  217

than  05inn,  for  in  the  Egilssaga  p.  365,  Freyr,  Nidrffr  and  the
landds  (Thorr)  are  likewise  mentioned  together.  In  the  same
Egilss.  p.  672,  Freyr  ok  Nidr&r  are  again  placed  side  by  side.  The
story  of  the  Brisinga-men  (-monile ;  append,  to  Sn.  354)  says,  Oftinn
had  appointed  both  Freyr  and  Niorffr  to  be  sacrificial  gods.  Hall-
freSr  sang  (Fornm.  sog.  2,  53,  conf.  12,  49) :

Mer  skyli  Freyr  oc  Freyja,  narft  laet  ek  ae)ul  Niarftar,
liknist  groin  vi5  Grimni  gramr  ok  Thorr  enn  rammi  !

That  Freyr  in  these  passages  should  be  brought  forward  with
Freyja  and  Nior'Sr,  is  easy  to  understand  (see  SuppL).

Of  Niorffr  our  German  mythology  would  have  nothing  to  tell,
any  more  than  Saxo  Gram,  ever  mentions  him  by  that  name,  had
not  Tacitus  put  in  for  us  that  happy  touch  of  a  goddess  Nertlius,
whose  identity  with  the  god  is  as  obvious  as  that  of  Fro  with
Frouwa.  The  Gothic  form  Natrjnis  would  do  for  either  or
even  for  both  sexes ;  possibly  Frauja  was  considered  the  son
of  the  goddess  Nairjms,  as  Freyr  is  of  the  god  NiorSr,  and  in
the  circuit  which  the  goddess  makes  in  her  car,  publishing  peace
and  fertility  to  mortals,  we  can  recognise  that  of  Freyr  or  of  his
father  NiorSr.  According  to  Yngl.  saga  cap.  11,  these  very  bless
ings  were  believed  to  proceed  from  NiorSr  also :  '  auftigr  sem
NiorSr '  (rich  as  N.)  was  a  proverbial  saying  for  a  wealthy  man,
Vatnsd.  p.  202.  Snorri,  in  Formali  10,  identifies  him  with  Saturn,
for  he  instructed  mankind  in  vine-dressing  and  husbandry ;  it
would  be  nearer  the  mark  to  think  of  him  and  Freyr  in  connexion
with  Dionysus  or  Liber,  or  even  with  Noah,  if  any  stress  is  to  be
laid  on  NiorS's  abode  being  in  Noatun,  As  '  freyr '  was  affixed
to  other  names  of  heroes  (p.  211-2),  I  find  geirnidrffr  used  for  a  hero
in  general,  Stem.  266b ;  conf.  geirmimir,  geirniflungr,  &c.  The
name  itself  is  hard  to  explain ;  is  it  akin  to  north,  AS.  norS,  OK
norSr,  Goth.  naur]?s  ?  In  Seem.  109b  there  is  niarSlas  for  sera
firma,  or  pensilis  ?  I  have  met  with  no  Nirdu,  Nerd,  Nird  among
OHG.  proper  names,  nor  with  a  NeorS  in  the  AS.  writings.
Irminon's  polyptych  22 2a  has  Narthildis  (see  SuppL).

Niordr  appears  to  have  been  greatly  honoured :  hofum  oc
hb'rgum  hann  rseSr  hundmorgum,  Ssem.  36a ;  especially,  no  doubt,
among  people  that  lived  on  the  sea  coast.  The  Edda  makes  him
rule  over  wind,  sea  and  fire,  he  loves  waters  and  lakes,  as  Nerthus
in  Tacitus  bathes  in  the  lake  (Sn.  27) ;  from  the  mountains  of  the


218  FRO.

midland  he  longs  to  be  away  where  the  swans  sing  on  the  cool
shore;  a  water-plant,  the  spongia  marina,  bears  the  name  of  Niarcfar
vottr,  Niorft's  glove,  which  elsewhere  was  very  likely  passed  on  to
his  daughter  Freyja,  and  so  to  Mary,  for  some  kinds  of  orchis
too,  from  their  hand-shaped  root,  are  called  Mary's  hand,  lady-hand,
god's  hand  (Dan.  gudshaand).

As  Dionysus  stands  outside  the  ring  of  the  twelve  Olympian
gods,  so  NiorSr,  Freyr  and  Freyja  seem  by  rights  not  to  have  been
reckoned  among  the  Ases,  though  they  are  marshalled  among
them  in  Sn.  27-8.  They  were  Vanir,  and  therefore,  according  to
the  view  of  the  elder  Edda,  different  from  Ases  ;  as  these  dwelt  in
Asgar5,  so  did  the  Vanir  in  Vanaheim,  the  Alfar  in  Alfheim,  the
lotnar  in  Ib'tunheim.  Freyr  is  called  Vaningi,  Seem.  86b.  The
Vanir  were  regarded  as  intelligent  and  wise,  Seem.  36a ;  and  they
entered  into  intimate  fellowship  with  the  Asen,  while  the
Alfs  and  lotuns  always  remained  opposed  to  them.  Some  have
fancied  that  the  Alfs  and  lotuns  stand  for  Celtic  races,  and  the
Vanir  for  Slav;  and  building  chiefly  on  an  attempt  in  the  Yngl.
saga  cap.  1  to  find  the  name  of  the  Tanais  in  Tanaqvisl  (or  Vana-
qvisl !),  they  have  drawn  by  inference  an  actual  boundary-line
between  Aesir  and  Vanir  =  German!  and  Slavi  in  the  regions
formerly  occupied  by  them  (see  Suppl.).  And  sure  enough  a
Eussian  is  to  this  day  called  in  Finnish  Wenaila'inen,  in  Esth.
Wennelane ;  even  the  name  of  the  Wends  might  be  dragged  in,
though  the  Vandili  of  Tacitus  point  the  other  way.  Granting  that
there  may  be  some  foundation  for  these  views,  still  to  my  mind
the  conceptions  of  Aesir,  Vanir,  Alfar  in  the  Edda  are  sketched  on
a  ground  altogether  too  mythical  for  any  historical  meaning  to  be
got  out  of  them  ;  as  regards  the  contrast  between  Ases  and  Vanir,
I  am  aware  of  no  essential  difference  in  the  cultus  of  the  several
gods  ;  and,  whatever  stress  it  may  be  right  to  lay  on  the  fact  that
Frouwa,  Freyja  answers  to  a  Slavic  goddess  Priye,  it  does  not  at
all  follow  that  Fro,  Frouwa  and  Nerthus  were  in  a  less  degree
Germanic  deities  than  the  rest.  Tacitus  is  silent  on  the  German
Liber,  as  he  is  on  our  Jupiter,  yet  we  are  entitled  to  assume  a
universal  veneration  of  Donar,  even  though  the  Gothic  fairguni  is
better  represented  in  Perkunas  or  Peruri ;  so  also,  to  judge  by  what
clues  we  have,  Frauja,  Fro,  Freyr  appears  so  firmly  established,
that,  considering  the  scanty  information  we  have  about  our


FRO.  219

antiquities,  no  German  race  can  be  denied  a  share  in  him,  though
some  nations  may  have  worshipped  him  more  than  others;  and
even  that  is  not  easy  to  ascertain,  except  in  Scandinavia.1

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  AS.  and  ON.  genealogies  bring
Fred  into  kinship  with  Woden,  making  Finn  the  father  of  a  Frealaf
(Frioleifr),  and  him  again  of  Woden ;  some  of  them  insert  two  more
links,  FriSuwulf  and  FriSuwald,  so  that  the  complete  pedigree
stands  thus  :  Finn,  Friftuwulf,  Fredldf,  FricTuwald,  Woden  (or,  in
the  place  of  Frealaf,  our  old  acquaintance  Fred  wine).  Here
evidently  FriSuwulf,  Frealaf,  FriSuwald  are  all  the  same  thing,  a
mere  expansion  of  the  simple  Fred.  This  follows  even  from  a  quite
different  ON.  genealogy,  Fornald.  sog.  2,  12,  which  makes  Burr
(=  Finn;  conf.  Eask,  afh.  1,  107-8)  the  immediate  progenitor  of
OSinn,  and  him  of  Freyr,  Nib'rftr  and  a  second  Freyr.  The  double
Freyr  corresponds  to  the  AS.  FriSuwulf  and  FriSuwald,  as  the
words  here  expressing  glad,  free  and  fair  are  near  of  kin  to  one
another.  Lastly,  when  the  same  AS.  genealogies  by  turns  call
Finn's  father  Godwidf  and  Folcwald,  this  last  name  is  supported  by
the  'Fin  Folcwalding'  (-ing  =  son)  of  Cod.  exon.  320,  10  and  of
Beow.  2172,  where  again  the  reference  must  be  to  Fred  and  his
race,  for  the  Edda  (Siem.  87a,  conf.  10a)  designates  Freyr  '  folcvaldi
(al.  folcvaldr)  gooY.  Now  this  folkvaldi  means  no  other  than
dominator,  princeps,  i.e.  the  same  as  fred,  fr8,  and  seems,  like  it,  to
pass  into  a  proper  name.  On  the  linking  of  Freyr  and  NiorSr  with
05inn,  there  will  be  more  to  say  in  ch.  XV  (see  Suppl.).  If
Snorri's  comparison  of  Niorftr  with  Kronos  (Saturn)  have  any
justification,  evidently  Poseidon  (Neptune)  the  son  of  Kronos  would
come  nearer  to  our  Teutonic  sea-god ;  and  UocretScwy  might  be
referred  to  Troops  (lord,  Lith.  pats,  Sansk.  patis,  Goth.  fa]?s),  which
means  the  same  as  Fro.  Only  then  both  Fro  and  Nirdu  would
again  belong  to  the  eldest  race  of  gods.

1  Wh.  Miiller,  Nibelungensage  pp.  136 — 148,  wishes  to  extend  the  Vanir
gods  only  to  the  Sueves  and  Goths,  not  to  the  western  Germans,  and  to  draw  a
distinction  between  the  worship  of  Freyr  and  that  of  "Wuotan,  which  to  me
looks  very  doubtful.  As  little  can  I  give  up  the  point,  that  NiorSr  and  Nerthus
were  brother  and  sister,  and  joint  parents  of  Freyr  and  Freyja  ;  this  is  grounded
not  only  on  a  later  representation  of  Snorri  in  the  Yngl.  saga  cap.  4,  where  yet
the  female  NiorS  is  nowhere  named,  as  Tacitus  conversely  knows  only  a  female
Nerthus  and  no  god  of  that  name  ;  but  also  on  JSaem.  65a  :  '  vi(5  systor  thinni
gaztu  slikan  mog,'  with  thy  sister  begattest  thou  such  brood,  though  here  again
the  sister  is  left  unnamed.


CHAPTER  XL
r ALTAR   (BALDER).

The  myth  of  Balder,  one  of  the  most  ingenious  and  beautiful  in
the  Edda,  has  happily  for  us  been  also  handed  down  in  a  later
form  with  variations  :  and  there  is  no  better  example  of  fluctuations
in  a  god-myth.  The  Edda  sets  forth,  how  the  pure  blameless  deity
is  struck  with  Mistiltein  by  the  blind  Ho5r,  and  must  go  down  to
the  nether  world,  bewailed  by  all ;  nothing  can  fetch  him  back,  and
Nanna  the  true  wTife  follows  him  in  death.  In  Saxo,  all  is  pitched
in  a  lower  key :  Balder  and  Hother  are  rival  suitors,  both  wooing
Nanna,  and  Hother  the  favoured  one  manages  to  procure  a  magic
sword,  by  which  alone  his  enemy  is  vulnerable ;  when  the  fortune
of  war  has  wavered  long  between  them,  Hother  is  at  last  victorious
and  slays  the  demigod,  to  whom  Hel,  glad  at  the  near  prospect  of
possessing  him,  shews  herself  beforehand.  But  here  the  grand
funeral  pile  is  prepared  for  Gelder,  a  companion  of  Balder,  of  whom
the  account  in  the  Edda  knows  nothing  whatever.  The  worship  of
the  god  is  attested  chiefly  by  the  Fri(5]?iofssaga,  v.  Fornald.  sb'g.  2,
63  seq.  (see  Suppl.).

Baldr,  gen.  Baldrs,  reappears  in  the  OHG.  proper  name  P altar
(in  Meichelbeck  no.  450.  460.  611)  51  and  in  the  AS.  bealdor,  baldor,
signifying  a  lord,  prince,  king,  and  seemingly  used  only  with  a  gen.
pi.  before  it :  gumena  baldor,  CsBdm.  163,  4.  wigena  baldor,  Jud.
132,  47.  sinca  bealdor,  Beow.  4852.  winia  bealdor  5130.  It  is
remarkable  that  in  the  Cod.  exon.  276,18  nuegSa  bealdor  (virginum
princeps)  is  said  even  of  a  maiden.  I  know  of  only  a  few  examples
in  the  OX. :  baldur  i  brynju,  Seem.  272b,  and  herbaldr  218b  are
used  for  a  hero  in  general ;  atgeirs  baldr  (lanceae  vir),  Fornm.  sog.
5,  307.  This  conversion  from  a  proper  name  to  a  noun  appellative

1  Graff  1,  432  thinks  this  name  stands  for  Paltaro,  and  is  a  compound  of
aro  (aar,  aquila),  but  this  is  unsupported  by  analogy  ;  in  the  ninth  and  tenth
centuries,  weak  forms  are  not  yet  curtailed,  and  we  always  find  Epuraro
(eberaar,  boar-eagle),  never  Epurar.


PALTAR.  221

exactly  reminds  us  of  frduja,  fro,  frea,  and  the  ON.  t$r.  As  bealdor
is  already  extinct  in  AS.  prose,  our  proper  name  Paltar  seems
likewise  to  have  died  out  early  ;  heathen  songs  in  OHG.  may  have
known  a  paltar  =  princeps.  Such  Gothic  forms  as  Baldrs,  gen.
Baldris,  and  baldrs  (princeps),  may  fairly  be  assumed.1

This  Baldrs  would  in  strictness  appear  to  have  no  connexion
with  the  Goth,  batys  (bold,  audax),  nor  Paltar  with  the  OHG.  paid,
nor  Baldr  with  the  ON.  ballr.  As  a  rule^  the  Gothic  Id  is  represented
by  OK  Id  and  OHG.  It :  the  Gothic  1>  by  OK  11  and  OHG.  Id.2
But  the  OS.  and  AS.  have  Id  in  both  cases, and  even  in  Gothic,  OK.  and
OHG.  a  root  will  sometimes  appear  in  both  forms  in  the  same  lan
guage;3  so  that  a  close  connexion  between  balj?s  and  Baldrs,4  paid  and
Paltar,  is  possible  after  all.  On  mythological  grounds  it  is  even
probable  :  Balder's  wife  Nanna  is  also  the  bold  one,  from  nenna  to
dare ;  in  Gothic  she  would  have  been  Nanjjo  from  nanjyan,  in
OHG.  Nandd  from  gi-nendan.  The  Baldr  of  the  Edda  may  not
distinguish  himself  by  bold  deeds,  but  in  Saxo  he  fights  most
valiantly  ;  and  neither  of  these  narratives  pretends  to  give  a
complete  account  of  his  life.  Perhaps  the  Gothic  Balthae  (Jor-
nandes  5,  29)  traced  their  origin  to  a  divine  Batys  or  Baldrs  (see
Suppl.).

Yet  even  this  meaning  of  the  '  bold '  god  or  hero  might  be  a
later  one :  the  Lith.  laltas  and  Lett,  baits  signify  the  white,  the
good;  and  by  the  doctrine  of  consonant-change,  baltas  exactly
answers  to  the  Goth.  bal}?s  and  OHG.  paid.  Add  to  this,  that  the
AS.  genealogies  call  Woden's  son  not  Bealdor,  Baldor,  but  Bceldceg,
Beldcg,  which  would  lead  us  to  expect  an  OHG.  Paltac,  a  form  that
I  confess  I  have  nowhere  read.  But  both  dialects  have  plenty  of
other  proper  names  compounded  with  dseg  and  tac  :  OHG.  Adaltac,

1  Baldrs,  Paltar,  must  be  kept  distinct  from  the  compound  Baldheri
(Schannat  no.  420.  448),  Paldheri  (Trad,  patav.  no.  35),  AS.  JBaldhere.  This
Paldheri  is  the  same  as  Paldackar  (Trad,  patav.  no.  18).

2  Goth.        kalds )          C  vil>eis          hutys  gtilk

ON.          kaldr  V-  but  1  villr  hollr  gull.

OHG.        chaltj          (wildi  hold  kold.

3  Conf.  Gothic  atyan  and  al]?s  aldis,  also  aldrs  ;  Goth,  fatyan  and  OHG.
faldan,  afterwards  faltan.     As  ]?  degenerates  into  d,  and  d  into  t,  any  d  put  for
]?,  or  t  for  d,  marks  a  later  form  :  the  Goth,  fadr  stands  for  fa]?r,  as  we  see  by
pater  [the  AS.  '  feeder,  modor,'  after  a  usurpation  of  1000  years,  must  have
given  place  to  the  truer  '  father,  mother '  again].     In  the  ON.  valda  pret.  olli,
we  must  regard  the  11  as  older  than  the  Id,  in  spite  of  the  Goth,  valdan  and
OHG.  waltan  [some  would  prefer  to  call  valda  an  archaism].

4  Baldr  may  be  related  to  bal}?,  as  tir  to  ty,  and  zior  to  zio.


222  PALTAR.

Alptac,  Ingatac,  Kertac,  Helmtac,  Hruodtac,  Regintac,  Sigitac ;
OS.  Alacdag,  Alfdag  (Albdag,  Pertz  1,  286),  Hildidag,  Liuddag,
Osdag,  Wulfdag ;  AS.  Wegdaeg,  Swefdseg ;  even  the  ON.  has  the
name  Svipdagr.  Now,  either  Baeldseg  simply  stands  for  Bealdor,
and  is  synonymous  with  it  (as  e.g.,  Eegintac  with  Reginari,  Sigitac
with  Sigar,  Sigheri)1 ;  or  else  we  must  recognise  in  the  word  docg,
dag,  tac  itself  a  personification,  such  as  we  found  another  root
undergoing  (p.  1 94-5)  in  the  words  div,  divan,  dina,  dies ;  and  both
alike  would  express  a  shining  one,  a  white  one,  a  god.  Prefixing  to
this  the  Slavic  biel,  bel,  we  have  no  need  to  take  Bteldseg  as  standing
for  Bealdor  or  anything  else,  Bod-dasg  itself  is  white-god,  light-god,
he  that  shines  as  sky  and  light  and  day,  the  kindly  Bielbogli,  Bel-
Wgh  of  the  Slav  system  (see  Suppl.).  It  is  in  perfect  accord  with
this  explanation  of  Bael-dseg,  that  the  AS.  tale  of  ancestry  assigns
to  him  a  son  Brand,  of  whom  the  Edda  is  silent,  brond,  brand,  ON.
brandr,  signifying  jubar,  fax,  titio.  Baelda3g  therefore,  as  regards
his  name,  would  agree  with  Berhta,  the  bright  goddess.

We  have  to  consider  a  few  more  circumstances  bearing  on  this
point.  Baldr's  beauty  is  thus  described  in  Sn.  26:  ' Hann  eisv&fagr
alitum  ok  liartr  svd  at  lysir  af  honum,  oc  eitt  gras  er  sva  hvitt,  at
iafnat  er  til  Baldrs  brdr,  ]?at  er  allra  grasa  hvitast  oc  ]mr  eptir  mattu
marka  hans  fegurS  bseol  a  hfiri  ok  liki ' ;  he  is  so  fair  of  countenance
and  bright  that  he  shines  of  himself,  there  is  a  grass  so  white  that  it
is  evened  with  Baldr's  brows,  it  is  of  all  grasses  whitest,  and  thereby
mayest  thou  mark  his  fairness  both  in  hair  and  body.  This
plant,  named  Baldrsbrd  after  the  god's  white  eyebrow,2  is  either  the
anthemis  cotula,  still  called  Barbro  in  Sweden,  Balsensbro,  Ballensbm
in  Schonen,  and  Barbrogr&s  in  Denmark,  or  the  matricaria  maritima
inodora,  whHi  retains  the  original  name  in  Iceland  (see  Suppl.).3
In  Skane  there  is  a  Baldursberg,  in  the  Ottingen  country  a
Baldern,  and  in  the  Vorarlberg,  east  of  Bregenz,  ^Balderscliwang ;
such  names  of  places  demand  caution,  as  they  may  be  taken  from
men,  Baldar  or  Baldheri,  I  therefore  withhold  the  mention  of
several  more.  But  the  heavenly  abode  of  the  god  was  called
Breiffablik,  nom.  pi.  (Ssem.  41b,  Sn.  21-7),  i.e.  broad  splendors,

1  The  cases  are  hardly  analogous  :  Bceld-osj  and  Regin-fac. — TRANS.

2  Homer  emphasizes   the  dark  brows  ot  Zeus  and  Hera,  6<j>pvs  Kvavta.
Conf.  \cvic6(f)pvs  and  Artemis  Xev/co^pvj/r/,  white-browed  Diana.

3  Germ,  names  of  the  camomile  :  kuhauge,  rindsauge,  ochsenauge  (ox-eye).
Dalecarl.  hvitet-o.ia  (white  eye),  in  Bahuslan  hvita-piga  (white  girl).


HADU.  223

which  may  have  reference  to  the  streaks  of  the  milky  way  ;  a  place
near  Lethra,  not  far  from  Eoeskild,  is  said  to  have  borne  the  name
of  Bredeblick.1  This  very  expression  re-appears  in  a  poem  of  the
twelfth  century,  though  not  in  reference  to  a  dwelling-place,  but  to
a  host  of  snow-white  steeds  and  heroes  advancing  over  the  battle
field  :  Do  brahte  Dietheriches  vane  zvencik  clusint  lossam  in
foeither  llickin  uber  lant,  Both.  2635.  In  Wh.  381,  16  :  '  daz
bluot  uber  die  Uicke  floz,  si  wurdn  almeistic  rotgevar,'  did  the
blood  flow  over  the  paths  of  the  field,  or  over  the  shining  silks  ?

If  Bceldcey  and  Brond  reveal  to  us  that  the  worship  of  Balder
had  a  definite  form  of  its  own  even  outside  of  Scandinavia,  we
may  conclude  from  the  general  diffusion  of  all  the  most  essential
proper  names  entering  into  the  main  plot  of  the  myth  there,  that
this  myth  as  a  whole  was  known  to  all  Teutons.  The  goddess  Hel,
as  will  be  more  fully  shown  in  ch.  XIII,  answers  to  the  Gothic  im
personal  noun  halja,  OHG.  hella.  Hoffr  (ace.  Ho5,  gen.  HaSar,  dat.
HeSi),  pictured  as  a  blind  god  of  tremendous  strength  (Sn.  31),
who  without  malice  discharges  the  fatal  arrow  at  Baldr,  is  called
Hotherus  in  Saxo,  and  implies  a  Goth.  Hapus,  AS.  Hea&o,  OHG.
Hadu,  0  Frank.  Chado,  of  which  we  have  still  undoubted  traces  in
proper  names  and  poetic  compounds.  OHG.  Hadupraht,  Hadufuns,
Hadupald,  Hadufrid,  Hadumar,  Hadupurc,  Hadulint,  Haduwic
(Hedwig),  &c.,  forms  which  abut  close  on  the  Catumerus  in  Tacitus
(Hadumar,  Hadamar).  In  AS.  poetry  are  still  found  the  terms
heaSorinc  (vir  egregius,  nobilis),  Csedm.  193,  4.  Beow.  "737.  4927  ;
heaSowelm  (belli  impetus,  fervor),  Coedm.  21,  14.  147,  8.  Beow.  164.
5633;  heaSoswat  (sudor  bellicus),  Beow.  2919. 3211.  3334;  heaftowsed
(vestis  bellica),  Beow.  78 ;  heaSubyrne  (lorica  bellica),  Cod.  exon.
297,  7 ;  heatJosigel  and  heaSogleam  (egregium  jubar),  Cod.  exon.
486,  17  and  438,  6;  heatfolac  (pugnae  ludus),  Beow.  1862.
3943 ;  heaSogrim  (atrocissimus),  Beow.  1090.  5378 ;  heaftosioc
(pugna  vulneratus),  Beow.  5504 ;  heaSosteap  (celsus),  Beow.  2490.
4301.  In  these  words,  except  where  the  meaning  is  merely  intensi
fied,  the  prevailing  idea  is  plainly  that  of  battle  and  strife,  and  the
god  or  hero  must  have  been  thought  of  and  honoured  as  a  warrior.
Therefore  Hafius,  Ho&r,  as  well  as  Wuotan  and  Zio,  expressed
phenomena  of  war ;  and  he  was  imagined  blind,  because  he  dealt
out  at  random  good  hap  and  ill  (p.  207). — Then,  beside  Hoftr,  we

8  Suhm.  crit.  hist.  2,  63.


224  PALTAR.

have  Hcrmo&r  interweaving  himself  in  the  thread  of  Haider's
history  ;  he  is  dispatched  to  Hel,  to  demand  his  beloved  brother
back  from  the  underworld.  In  Saxo  he  is  already  forgotten  ;  the
AS.  genealogy  places  its  HeremoS  among  Woden's  ancestors,  and
names  as  his  son  either  Sceldwa  or  the  Sceaf  renowned  in  story,
whereas  in  the  North  he  and  Balder  alike  are  the  offspring  of  OSinn  ;
in  the  same  way  we  saw  (p.  219)  Freyr  taken  for  the  father  as  well
as  the  son  of  NiorSr.  A  later  Heremod  appears  in  Beow.  1795.
3417,  but  still  in  kinship  with  the  old  races ;  he  is  perhaps  that
hero,  named  by  the  side  of  Sigmundr  in  Saem.  113a,  to  whom  OSinn
lends  helm  and  hauberk.  AS.  title-deeds  also  contain  the  name;
Kemb.  1,  232.  141  ;  and  in  OHG.  Herimuot,  Herimaot,  occurs  very
often  (Graff  2,  699  anno  782,  from  MB.  7,  373.  Neugart  no.
170.  214.  244.  260.  annis  8U9-22-30-34.  Eied.  no.  21  anno
821),  but  neither  song  nor  story  has  a  tale  to  tell  of  him  (see
Suppl.).

So  much  the  more  valuable  are  the  revelations  of  the  Merseburg
discovery  ;  not  only  are  we  fully  assured  now  of  a  divine  Balder  in
Germany,  but  there  emerges  again  a  long-forgotten  mytlius,  and
with  it  a  new  name  unknown  even  to  the  North.

When,  says  the  lay,  Phol  (Balder)  and  Wodan  were  one  day
riding  in  the  forest,  one  foot  of  Balder's  foal,  '  demo  Balderes  volon,'
was  wrenched  out  of  joint,  whereupon  the  heavenly  habitants
bestowed  their  best  pains  on  setting  it  right  again,  but  neither
Sinngund  and  Sunna,  nor  yet  Frua  and  Folia  could  do  any  good,
only  Wodan  the  wizard  himself  could  conjure  and  heal  the  limb
(see  Suppl.).

The  whole  incident  is  as  little  known  to  the  Edda  as  to  other
Norse  legends.  Yet  what  was  told  in  a  heathen  spell  in  Thuringia
before  the  tenth  century  is  still  in  its  substance  found  lurking
in  conjuring  formulas  known  to  the  country  folk  of  Scotland
and  Denmark  (conf.  ch.  XXXIII,  Dislocation),  except  that  they
apply  to  Jesus  what  the  heathen  believed  of  Balder  and  Wodan.
It  is  somewhat  odd,  that  Cato  (Dere  rust.  160)  should  give,  likewise
for  a  dislocated  limb,  an  Old  Roman  or  perhaps  Sabine  form  of
spell,  which  is  unintelligible  to  us,  but  in  which  a  god  is  evidently
invoked:  Luxum  si  quod  est,  hac  cantione  sanum  fiet.  Harundinem
prende  tibi  viridena  pedes  IV  aut  V  longam,  mediam  diffinde,  et
duo  homines  teneant  ad  coxendices.  Incipe  cantare  in  alio  S.F.


HERIMUOT.      PHOL.  225

motas  vaeta  daries  dardaries  astataries  Dissunapiter !  usque  durn
coeant.     What  follows  is  nothing  to  our  purpose.

The  horse  of  Balder,  lamed  and  checked  on  his  journey,  acquires
a  full  meaning  the  moment  we  think  of  him  as  the  god  of  light  or
day,  whose  stoppage  and  detention  must  give  rise  to  serious  mis
chief  on  the  earth.  Probably  the  story  in  its  context  could  have
informed  us  of  this  ;  it  was  foreign  to  the  purpose  of  the  conjuring-
spell.

The  names  of  the  four  goddesses  will  be  discussed  in  their
proper  place ;  what  concerns  us  here  is,  that  Balder  is  called  by  a
second  and  hitherto  unheard-of  name,  Phol.  The  eye  for  our
antiquities  often  merely  wants  opening:  a  noticing  of  the  unnoticed
has  resulted  in  clear  footprints  of  such  a  god  being  brought  to  oar
hand,  in  several  names  of  places.

In  Bavaria  there  was  a  Pholesauwa,  Pholesouwa,  ten  or  twelve
miles  from  Passau,  which  the  Traditiones  patavienses  first  mention
in  a  document  drawn  up  between  774  and  788  (MB.  vol.  28,  pars
2,  p.  21,  no.  23),  and  afterwards  many  later  ones  of  the  same  district:
it  is  the  present  village  of  Pfalsau.  Its  composition  with  aue  quite
fits  in  with  the  supposition  of  an  old  heathen  worship.  The  gods  were
worshipped  not  only  on  mountains,  but  on  '  eas '  inclosed  by  brooks
and  rivers,  where  fertile  meadows  yielded  pasture,  and  forests  shade.
Such  was  the  castum  nemus  of  Nerthus  in  an  insula  Oceani,  such
Fosetesland  with  its  willows  and  well-springs,  of  which  more
presently.  Baldrshagi  (Balderi  pascuum),  mentioned  in  the  Fri5-
•fofssaga,  was  an  enclosed  sanctuary  (griSastaoY),  which  none  might
damage.  I  find  also  that  convents,  for  which  time-hallowed  vener
able  sites  were  preferred,  were  often  situated  in  '  eas ' ;  and  of  one
nunnery  the  very  word  is  used  :  '  in  der  megde  ouwe,'  in  the  maids'
ea  (Diut.  1,  357).1  The  ON.  mythology  supplies  us  with  several  eas
named  after  the  loftiest  gods :  OSins<??/  (Odensee)  in  Fiinen,  another
Oolnsey  (Onsoe)  in  Norway,  Fornm.  sog.  12,  33,  and  Thorsey,  7,  234.
9,  17 ;  Hlesscy  (Lassoe)  in  the  Kattegat,  &c.,  &c.  We  do  not  know
any  OHG.  Wuotanesouwa,  Donaresouwa,  but  Pholesouwa  is  equally
to  the  point.

Very  similar  must  have  been  Pholespiunt  (MB.  9,  404  circ.  1138.

1  So  the  Old  Bavarian  convent  of  Chiemsee  was  called  ouwa  (MB.  2Sa,  103
an.  890),  and  afterwards  the  monastery  there  'der  herren  iverd,'  and  the  nunnery
'der  nunnen  werd'.  Stat  'zo  gottes  ouwe'  in  Lisch,  mekl.  jb.  7,  227,  from  a
fragment  belonging  to  Bertholds  Crane.  Demantin  242.

15


226  PALTAR.

Pfalspiunt,  5,  399  anno  1290),  now  Pfalzpoint  on  the  Altmiihl,
between  Eichstadt  and  Kipfenberg,  in  a  considerable  forest.  Piunt
means  an  enclosed  field  or  garden  ;*  and  if  an  ea  could  be  conse
crated  to  a  god,  so  could  a  field.  Graff  3,  342  has  a  place  called
Yiswunpiunt,  which,  to  judge  by  the  circumstances,  may  with  like
reason  be  assigned  to  the  goddess  Frouwa;  no  doubt  it  also  belongs
to  Bavaria  (see  SuppL).

In  the  Fulda  Traditions  (Schannat  p.  291,  no.  85)  occurs  this
remarkable  passage:  Widerolt  comes  tradidit  sancto  Bonifacio
quicquid  proprietatis  habuit  in  Pholesbrunnen  in  provincia  Thur-
ingiae.  To  this  Pholesbrunno,  the  village  of  Phulsborn  has  the  first
claim,  lying  not  far  from  the  Saale,  equidistant  from  the  towns
Apolda,  Dornburg  and  Suiza,  and  spelt  in  Mid.  Age  documents
Phulsborn  and  Pfolczborn  ;  there  is  however  another  village,  Fals-
brunn  or  Falsbronn,  on  the  Eauhe  Eberach  in  the  Franconian
Steigerwald.  Now  Pfolesbrunno  all  the  more  plainly  suggests  a
divinity  (and  that,  Balder),  as  there  are  also  Baldersbrunnen :  a
Baldebrunno  has  been  produced  from  the  Eifel  mts,  and  from  the
Rhine  Palatinate,2  and  it  has  been  shown  that  the  form  ought  to  be
corrected  into  Baldersbrunno  as  well  as  the  modern  Baldenhain  to
Baldershain  (Zeitschr.  f.  d.  alt.  2,  256) ;  and  Bellstadt  in  the  Klingen
district  of  Schwarzburg-Sondershausen  was  formerly  Baldersteti,
Schannat  dioec.  Fuld.  p.  244,  anno  977  (see  SuppL).  From  the
Norse  mythus  of  Balder,  as  given  by  Saxo,  we  learn  that  Balder  in
the  heat  of  battle  opened  a  fountain  for  his  languishing  army:
Victor  Balderus,  ut  afflictum  siti  militem  opportuni  liquoris  beneficio
recrearet,  novos  humi  latices  terram  altius  rimatus  aperuit,  quorum
erumpentes  scatebras  sitibundum  agmen  hianti  passim  ore  captabat.
Eorundem  vestigia  sempiterna  firmata  vocabulo,  quamquam  pristina
admodum  scaturigo  desierit,  nondum  prorsus  exolevisse  creduntur.
This  spot  is  the  present  Baldersbrond  near  Roeskild  (note  to  Miiller's
Saxo,  p.  120).  But  the  legend  may  be  the  same  as  old  German
legends,  which  at  a  later  time  placed  to  king  Charles's  account  (p.
117,  and  infra,  Furious  host)  that  which  heathendom  had  told  of

1  A  Salzburg  doc.  of  the  tenth  cent.,  in  Kleinmayrn  p.  196  :   Curtilem
locum  cum  duobus  pratis,  quod  piunti  dicimus.

2  Conf.  Schopflin's  Alsat.  dipl.  no.  748,  anno  1285  :  in  villa  Baldeburne.
A  Westphal.  doc.  of  1203  (Falke  trad.  corb.  p.  5G6)  names  a  place  Balderbroc,
which  might  mean  palus,  campus  Balderi.


PHOL.  227

Balder  ;  in  that  case  the  still  surviving  name  has  itself  proved  a
fountain,  whence  the  myth  of  Balder  emerges  anew.1

But  the  name  of  Phol  is  established  more  firmly  still.  A
Heinricus  de  Pholing  frequently  appears  in  the  Altach  records  of
the  13th  century,  MB.  part  11,  a  Eapoto  de  Pkolingen,  Phaling,  in
MB.  12,  56.  60  ;  this  place  is  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Danube  below
Straubingen,  between  the  two  convents  of  Altach.  I  doubt  if  the
Polling  in  other  records  (and  there  are  several  Pollings  in  the
Aminer  country)  can  be  the  same  word,  as  the  aspirate  is  wanting
and  the  liquid  doubled.  Pfullendorf  or  Follendorf  near  Gotha  is
in  docs,  of  the  14th  century  Phulsclorf.  A  Pholenlieim  in  Schannat,
Vinci,  lit.  coll.  1,  48.  53.  Not  far  from  Scharzfeld,  between  the
Harz  mts  and  Thuringia,  is  an  old  village  named  Polde,  called  in
early  records  and  writings  Polidi,  Palidi.  Palithi,  Pkolidi  (Gramm.
2,  248),  the  seat  of  a  well-known  convent,  which  again  may  have
been  founded  on  the  site  of  a  heathen  sanctuary.  If  a  connexion
with  the  god  can  be  established  in  this  case,  we  at  the  same  time
gather  from  it  the  true  value  of  the  varying  consonant  in  his  name.

Of  Phol  so  many  interpretations  crowd  upon  us,  that  we  should
be  puzzled  if  they  could  all  be  made  good.  The  Chaldaic  lei  or  lal
seems  to  have  been  a  mere  title  pertaining  to  several  gods  :  bel=
Uranus,  bel=  Jupiter,  bel=Mars.  The  Finnish  palo  means  fire,  the
OK  Ictt,  AS.  lael  rogus,  and  the  Slav,  pdliti  to  burn,  with  which
connect  Lat.  Pales  and  the  Palilia.  Of  phallm  we  have  already
spoken.  We  must  first  make  sure  of  the  sounds  in  our  native
names  for  a  divinity  of  whom  as  yet  we  know  nothing  but  the
bare  name  (see  Suppl.).  On  the  question  as  to  the  sense  of  the  word
itself,  I  set  aside  the  notion  one  might  stumble  on,  that  it  is  merely
a  fondling  form  of  Paltar,  Balder,  for  such  forms  invariably  preserve
the  initial  of  the  complete  name  ;  we  should  expect  Palzo,  Balzo,
but  not  Phol.2  Nor  does  the  OHG.  Ph  seem  here  to  be  equivalent


1  Greek  tradition  tells  of  Herakles  and  Zeus:  <pa<ri  TOV  'HpaxAe'a  8
^evra  zv^aardai  TO   Atl   rrarpi  eViSei^at  ai>r&>  fJUKpav  At/3a5a.      6  8e

CLVTOV  Kararpu^eo-^at,  pfyas  Kepavvbv  dvedooKe  piKpav  Ai/3u8a,  f)v  6ea(rdp.fvos  6
'Hpa.K\f)s  KOI  ovon/my  els  TO  7rAov<na>repoi>  eVoajcre  (pe'peo"$al  (Scholia  in  II.  20,  74).
This  spring  was  Scamander,  and  the  \ij3ds  'HpaK\f}os  may  be  set  by  the  side  of
Pfolesbrunno  as  well  as  Pfolesouwa,  Xifido'iov  being  both  mead  and  ea  ;  and
does  not  the  Grecian  demigod's  pyre  kindled  on  Oeta  suggest  that  of  Balder  ?

2  So  I  explain  the  proper  name  Foh  from  Folbreht,  Folrat,  Folmar,  and
the  like  ;  it  therefore  stands  apart  from  Phol.     [The  Suppl.  qualifies  the  sweep
ing  assertion  in  the  text  ;   it  also  takes  notice  of  several  other  solutions,  as
Apollo,  Pollux,  foal,  &c.]


228  PALTAR.

to  the  ordinary  F  which  corresponds  to  the  Saxon  F,  but  rather  to  .
be  an  aspirate  which,  answering  to  the  Saxon  tenuis  P,  represents
an  Old-Aryan  media  B.  But  we  know  that  a  Saxon  initial  P=OHG.
Ph  is  found  almost  exclusively  in  foreign  words1  (porta,  phorta ;
putti,  phuzi ;  peda,  pheit) ;  it  follows  that  for  Phol,  in  case  the  Sax.
form  Pol  is  really  made  out,  we  must  either  look  for  such  a  foreign
P,  or  as  a  rare  exception,  in  which  the  law  of  consonant-change
does  assert  itself,  an  Old- Aryan  B.  I  incline  to  this  last  hypothesis,
and  connect  Phol  and  Pol  (whose  o  may  very  well  have  sprung
from  a)  with  the  Celtic  Bcal,  Beul,  Bel,  Bdcmis,  a  divinity  of  light
or  fire,  the  Slav.  Bielboyh,  Belloyh  (white-god),  the  adj.  biel,  bel
(albus),  Lith.  baltas,  which  last  with  its  extension  T  makes  it  pro
bable  that  Basldaeg  and  Baldr  are  of  the  same  root,  but  have  not
undergone  consonant-change.  Phol  and  Paltar  therefore  are  in  their
beginning  one,  but  reveal  to  us  two  divergent  historical  develop
ments  of  the  same  word,  arid  a  not  unimportant  difference  in  the
mythology  of  the  several  Teutonic  races.2

So  far  as  we  can  see,  the  god  was  worshipped  under  the  name
of  Phol  chiefly  by  the  Thuringians  and  Bavarians,  i.e.  according  to
ancient  nomenclature  the  Hermunduri  and  Marcomanni,  yet  they
seem  to  have  also  known  his  other  name  Paltar  or  Balder,  while

1  That  is,  really  borrowed  words,  as  port,  paternal,  palace,  in  which  the  Low
Germ,  makes  no  change   (like  that  in  filth,  father),  and  therefore  the  High
Germ,  stands  only  one  stage  instead  of  two  in  advance  of  Latin  :  Pforte,  Pi'ul/,
<&c.     Such  words  stand  outside  the  rule  of  consonant-change. — TRANS.

2  I  have  thus  far  gone  on  the  assumption  that  Phol  and  Balder  in  the
Merseberg  spell  designate  one  and  the  same  divine  being,  which  is  strongly
supported  by  the  analogy  I  have  pointed  out  between  Pholesouwa  and  Baldrshagl,
Pholesbrunno  and  Baldrsbrunnr  ;  and  his  cultus  must  have  been  very  familiar
to  the  people,  for  the  poem  to  be  able  to  name  him  by  different  names  in  suc
cession,  without  fear  of  being  misunderstood.     Else  one  might  suppose  by  the
names,  that  Phol  and  Balder  were  two   different  gods,  and   there  would  be
plenty  of  room  left  for  the  question,  who  can  possibly  be  meant  by  Phol  ?     If
PH  could  here  represent  V  =  W,  which  is  contrary  -to  all  analogy,  and  is  almost
put  out  of  court  by  the  persistent  PH,  PF  in  all  those  names  of  places  ;  then
we  might  try  the  ON.  Ullr,  Ollerus  in  Saxo,  p.  45,  which  (like  nil,  OHG.  wolla,
wool)  would  be  in  OHG.  Wol,  so  that'Wol  endi  \\6dan  (Ullr  ok  OSinn)]
made  a  perfect  alliteration.     And  Ullr  was  connected  with  Baldr,  who  in  Stem.
93a  is  called  '  Ullar  sen,'  sib  to  U.,  Ulli  cognatus  (see  Suppl.).     But  the  gen.
would  have  to  be  Wolles,  and  that  is  contradicted  by  the  invariably  single  L
in  Pholes.     The  same  reason  is  conclusive  against  Wackernagel's  proposal  to
take  Fol  for  the  god  of  fulness  and  plenty,  by  the  side  of  the  goddess  Folia  ;  I
think  the  weak  form  Folio  would  be  demanded  for  it  by  an  OHG.  Pilnitis  ;  v.
Haupts  zeitschr.  2,  190.     Still  more  does  the  internal  consistency  of  the  song
itself  require  the  identity  of  Phol  and  Balder  ;  it  would  be  odd  for  Phol  to  be
named  at  the  beginning,  and  no  further  notice  to  be  taken  of  him.


FOSITE.  229

Baldag,  Bceldccg  prevailed  among  the  Saxons  and  Westphalians,
and  the  AS.  bealdor  had  passed  into  a  common  noun.  Now  as  the
Bavarian  Eor  stood  opposed  to  the  Alamannic  Zio,  we  ought  to  find
out  whether  Phol  was  in  like  manner  unknown  to  the  Alamanns
and  the  races  most  akin  to  them.1

Lastly,  from  eastern  Germany  we  are  transported  to  the  north
west  by  a  name  appertaining  closely  to  the  Balder  cultus,  and  again
linking  itself  with  the  Edda.  The  Edda  cites  among  the  Ases  a
son  of  Baldr  and  Nanna,  Forseti,  who  like  his  father  dwelt  in  a
shining  hall  Glitnir  (glit,  nitor,  splendor,  OHG.  kliz)  built  of  gold
and  silver,  and  who  (as  Baldr  himself  had  been  called  the  wisest,
most  eloquent  and  mildest  god,  whose  verdicts  are  final,  Sn.  27)
passed  among  gods  and  men  for  the  wisest  of  judges;  he  settled  all
disputed  matters  (Srem.  42a.  Sn.  31.  103),  and  we  are  told  no  more
about  him  (see  SuppL).

This  Forseti  is  well  entitled  to  be  compared  with  the  Frisian
god  Fositc,  concerning  whom  some  biographies  composed  in  the
ninth  century  gives  us  valuable  information.  The  vita  sancti
Wilibrordi  (•(•  739),  written  by  the  famous  Alcuin  (•[•  804),  relates
as  follows,  cap.  10  :  Cum  ergo  pius  verbi  Dei  praedicator  iter  agebat,
pervenit  in  confmio  Fresonum  et  Danorum  ad  quamdam  insulam,
quae  a  quodam  dco  SILO  Fosite  ab  accolis  terrae  Fositesland  appella-
tur,  quia  in  ea  ejusdem  dei  fana  fuere  constructs  qui  locus  a
paganis  in  tanta  veneratione  habebatur,  ut  nil  in  ea,  vel  animalium
ibi  pascentium,  vel  aliarum  quarumlibet  rerum,  gentilium  quisquam
tangere  audebat,  nee  etiani  a  fonte  qui  ibi  ebulliebat  aquam  haurire
nisi  tacens  praesuinebat.  Quo  cum  vir  Dei  tempestate  jactatus  est,
mansit  ibidem  aliquot  dies,  quousque  sepositis  tempestatibus
opportunum  navigandi  tempus  adveniret.  sed  parvipendens  stultam

1  The  inquiry,  how  far  these  names  reach  back  into  antiquity,  is  far  from
exhausted  yet.  1  have  called  attention  to  the  P/oZgraben  (-ditch),  the  Pfalhecke
(-hedge,  -fence),  for  which  devil's  dyke  is  elsewhere  used  ;  then  the  raising  of
the  whirlwind  is  ascribed  in  some  parts  to  the  devil,  in  others  to  Herodias
[meaning  H.'s  daughter  the  dancer],  in  others  again  to  Pfol.  Eastern  Hesse
on  the  Werra  has  a  '  very  queer'  name  for  the  whirlwind,  beginning  with  Bull-
or  Boil-  ;  and  in  the  neighbouring  Eichsfeld  Pulloineke  is  pronounced  with
shyness  and  reluctance  (Miinchner  gel.  anz.  1842,  p.  762).  A  Niddawitz
ordinance  of  the  same  district  (3,  327)  contains  the  family  name  UoT/foperg
(Polesberc  ]),  Pfoylsperg.  The  spelling  Bull,  Boil,  would  agree  with  the  con
jecture  hazarded  above,  but  I  do  not  connect  with  this  the  idol  Biel  in  the
Harz,  for  Bielstein  leads  back  to  bilstein,  i.e.  beilstein.  Schmid's  westerw.  id.
145  has  pollecker,  bollecker  for  spectre,  bugbear  (see  Suppl.).


230  P  ALTAR.

loci  illius  religionem,  vel  ferocissimurn  regis  animum,  qui  violatores
sacrorum  illius  atrocissima  morte  damnare  solebat ;  tres  homines
in  eo  fonte  cum  invocatione  sanctae  Trinitatis  baptizavit.  sed  et
animalia  in  ea  terra  pascentia  in  cibaria  suis  mactare  praecepit.
Quod  pagani  intuentes,  arbitrabantur  eos  vel  in  furorem  verti,  vel
etiam  veloci  morte  perire ;  quos  cum  nil  mali  cernebant  pati,
stupore  perterriti,  regi  tamen  Radbodo  quod  viderant  factum
retulerunt.  Qui  nimio  furore  succensus  in  sacerdotem  Dei  vivi
suorum  injurias  deorum  ulcisci  cogitabat,  et  per  tres  dies  semper
tribus  vicibus  sortes  suo  more  mittebat,  et  nunquam  damnatorum
sors,  Deo  vero  defendente  suos,  super  servum  Dei  aut  aliquem  ex
suis  cadere  potuit ;  nee  nisi  unus  tantum  ex  sociis  sorte  monstratus
martyrio  coronatus  est.—  Eadbod  feared  king  Pippin  the  Frank,
and  let  the  evangelist  go  unhurt.1  What  Wilibrord  had  left
unfinished,  was  accomplished  some  time  .after  by  another  priest,
as  the  vita  sancti  Liudgeri,  composed  by  Altfrid  (f  849),  tells  of
the  year  785 :  Ipse  vero  (Liudgerus)  ....  studuit  fana  destruere,
et  omnes  erroris  pristini  abluere  sordes.  curavit  quoque  ulterius
doctrinae  derivare  flumina,  et  consilio  ab  imperatore  accepto,  trans-
fretavit  in  confinio  Fresonum  atque  Danorum  ad  quandarn  insulam,
quae  a  nomine  del  sui  falsi  Fosete  Foseteslant  est  appellata  ....
Pervenientes  autem  ad  eandem  insulam,  destruxerunt  omnia  ejus-
dem  Fosetis  fana,  quae  illic  fuere  constructa,  et  pro  eis  Christi
fabricaverunt  ecclesias,  cumque  habitatores  terrae  illius  fide  Christi
imbueret,  baptizavit  eos  cum  invocatione  sanctae  Trinitatis  in  fonte,
qui  ibi  ebulliebat,  in  quo  sanctus  Willibrordus  prius  homines  tres
baptizaverat,  a  quo  etiam  fonte  nemo  prius  haurire  aquam  nisi
tacens  praesumebat  (Pertz  2,  410). — Altfrid  evidently  had  the  work
of  Alcuin  by  him.  From  that  time  the  island  took  the  name  of
helegland,  Helgoland,  which  it  bears  to  this  day ;  here  also  the
evangelists  were  careful  to  conserve,  in  the  interest  of  Christianity,
the  sense  of  sacredness  already  attaching  to  the  site.  Adam  oi
Bremen,  in  his  treatise  De  situ  Daniae  (Pertz  9,  369),  describe;
the  island  thus  :  Ordinavit  (archiepiscopus  episcopum)  in  Finm
(Fiihnen)  Eilbertum,  quern  tradunt  conversum  (1.  captum)  a  piratis
Farriam  insulam,  quae  in  ostio  fluminis  Albiae  longo  secessu  latet
in  oceano,  primum  reperisse  constructoque  monasterio  in  ea  fecisse
habitabilem.  haec  insula  contra  Hadeloam  sita  est.  cujus  longi-

1  Acta  sanctor.  Bcned.,  sec.  3.  pars  1,  p.  GOO.


FOSITE.  231

tudo  vix  VIII  milliaria  panditur,  latitude  quatuor;  homines  stramine
fragmentisque  navium  pro  igne  utuntur.  Sermo  est  piratas,  si
quando  praedam  inde  vel  minimam  tulerint,  aut  mox  perisse  nau-
fragio,  aut  occisos  ab  aliquo,  nullum  redisse  indempnem  •  quapropter
solent  heremitis  Hi  viventibus  decimas  praedarum  offerre  cum  magna
devotione.  est  enim  feracissima  frugum,  ditissima  volucrum  et
pecudum  nutrix,  collem  habet  unicum,  arborem  nullam,  scopulis
includitur  asperrimis,  nullo  aditu  nisi  uno,  ubi  et  aqua  dulcis  (the
spring  whence  they  drew  water  in  silence),  locus  venerdbilis  omnibus
nautis,  praecipue  vero  piratis,  unde  nomen  accepit  ut  Heiligeland
dicatur.  hanc  in  vita  sancti  Willebrordi  Fosetisland  appellari
dicimus,  quae  sita  est  in  confinio  Danorum  et  Fresonum.  sunt  et
aliae  insulae  contra  Fresiam  et  Daniam,  sed  nulla  earum  tarn  memo-
rabilis. — The  name  Farria,  appearing  here  for  the  first  time,  either
arose  from  confounding  the  isle  of  Fohr  with  Helgoland,  or  we  must
emend  the  passage,  and  read  '  a  piratis  Farrianis.'  By  the  customs
of  these  mariners  and  vikings  even  of  Christian  times,  we  may
assure  ourselves  how  holy  the  place  was  accounted  in  the  heathen
time  (see  SuppL).

In  an  island  lying  between  Denmark,  Friesland  and  Saxony,  we
might  expect  to  find  a  heathen  god  who  was  common  to  all  three.
It  would  be  strange  if  the  Frisian  Fosite  were  unknown  to  the
Norsemen ;  and  stranger  still  if  the  Eddie  Forseti  were  a  totally
different  god.  It  is  true,  one  would  have  expected  a  mention  of  this
deity  in  particular  from  Saxo  Gram.,  who  is  quite  silent  about  it ;
but  then  he  omits  many  others,  and  in  his  day  Fosite's  name  may
have  died  out  amongst  the  Frisians.

There  is  some  discrepancy  between  the  two  names,  as  was
natural  in  the  case  of  two  nations  :  ON.  Forseti  gen.  Forseta,  Fris.
Fosite  gen.  Fosites.  The  simplest  supposition  is,  that  from  Forsite
arose  by  assimilation  Fossite,  Fosite,  or  that  the  E,  dropt  out,  as  in
OHG.  mosar  for  morsar,  Low  Germ,  mosar;  so  in  the  Frisian
Angeln,  according  to  Hagerup  p.  20,  fost,  foste  ==  forste,  primus.
Besides,  there  is  hardly  any  other  -way  of  explaining  Fosite.  In
ON.  forseti  is  praeses,  princeps,  apparently  translatable  into  OHG.
forasizo,  a  fitting  name  for  the  god  who  presides  over  judgment,  and
arranges  all  disputes.  The  Gothic  fatiragaggja  bears  almost  the
same  sense,  which  I  also  find,  even  in  much  later  writings,  attached
to  our  word  vorganger  (now  =  predecessor).  More  complete  AS.


232  PALTAR.

genealogies  would  perhaps  name  a  Forseta  or  Forsete  as  Bseldseg's


son.1

Forseti,  Fosite  are  a  proof  of  the  extent  of  Balder's  worship.  If
we  may  infer  from  Pholesouwa  and  Baldrshagi  that  the  god  loved
isles  and  '  eas,'  Helgoland  is  a  case  in  point,  where  the  flocks  of  his
son  grazed ;  and  so  is  perhaps  the  worship  of  the  Hercules-pillars,
which,  following  Tacitus,  we  might  fix  on  some  other  island  near  it.2

1  Later  writers  have  turned  Fosete  into  a  goddess  Foseta,  Phoseta,  Fosta,  to
approximate  her  to  the  Roman  Vesta  ;  maps  of  Helgoland,  in  which  are  found
marked  a  '  templum  Fostae  vel  Phosetae '  of  the  year  768,  and  a  'tempi  um
Vestae'  of  692,  were  made  up  in  Major's  Cimbrien  (Plon,  1692),  conf.  WiebeFs
programm  iiber  Helgoland,  Hamb.  1842.     The  god  Foste  and  Fosteland  could
easily  find  their  way  into  the  spurious  Vita  Suiberti  cap.  7.

2  Another  thought  has  struck  my  mind  about  Fosete.     In  the  appendix  to
the  Heldenbuch,  Ecke,   Vasat,  Abentrot  are  styled  brothers.     The  form  Fasat
instead  of  the  usual  Fasolt  need  not  be  a  mistake  ;  there  are  several  QHG.
men's  names  in  -at,  and  OS.  in  -ad,  -id,  so  that  Fasat  and  Fasolt  can  hold  their
ground  side  by  side.     Now  Fasolt  (conf.  ch.  XX.  Storm)  and  Ecke  were  known
as  god-giants  of  wind  and  water,  Abentrot  as  a  daemon  of  light.     As  Ecke-Oegir
was  worshipped  on  the  Eider  and  in  Lassoe,  so  might  Fosite  be  in  Helgoland.
The  connexion  with  Forseti  must  not  be  let  go,  but  its  meaning  as  For-seti,
Fora-sizo  becomes  dubious,  and  I  feel  inclined  to  explain  it  as  For?-eti  from
fors  [a  whirling  stream,  '  force  '  in  Cumbld],  Dan.  fos,  and  to  assume  a  daemon  of
the  whirlpool,  a  Fossegrimm  (conf.  ch.   XVII.  Nichus),  with  which  Fositfs
sacred  spring  would  tally.     Again,  the  Heldenbuch  gives  those  three  brothers
a  father  Nentiger  (for  so  we  must  read  for  Mentiger)  =  OHG.  Nandcjer  •  and
does  not  he  suggest  Forseti's  mother  Nanna  =  Nandd  ?


CHAPTER  XII.
OTHER     GODS.

In  addition  to  the  gods  treated  of  thus  far,  who  could  with
perfect  distinctness  be  pointed  out  in  all  or  most  of  the  Teutonic
races,  the  Norse  mythology  enumerates  a  series  of  others,  whose
track  will  be  harder  to  pursue,  if  it  does  not  die  out  altogether.  To
a  great  extent  they  are  those  of  whom  the  North  itself  has  little  or
nothing  to  tell  in  later  times.

1.  (HEIMDALL.)

Heimffallr,  or  in  the  later  spelling  Heimdallr,  though  no  longer
mentioned  in  Saxo,  is,  like  Baldr,  a  bright  and  gracious  god :
hvitastr  asa  (whitest  of  ases,  Saam.  72a),1  sverSas  hvita,  Ssem.  90a,
hviti  as,  Sn.  104 ;  he  guards  the  heavenly  bridge  (the  rainbow),  and
dwells  in  Himinbiorg  (the  heavenly  hills).  The  heim  in  the  first
part  of  his  name  agrees  in  sound  with  himinn  ;  ]?allr  seems  akin  to
J?611,  gen.  J?allar  (pinus),  Swed.  tall,  Swiss  dale,  Engl.  deal  (Staid.  1,
259,  conf.  Schm.  2,  603-4  on  mantala),  but  J?611  also  means  a  river,
Sn.  43,  and  Freyja  bears  the  by-name  of  Mardoll,  gen.  Mardallar,
Sn.  37. 154.  All  this  remains  dark  to  us.  No  proper  name  in  the
other  Teutonic  tongues  answers  to  HeimSallr;  but  with  Himin-
liorg  (Sasm.  41b  92b)  or  the  common  noun  himinfioll  (Saem.  148a
Yngl.  saga  cap.  39),  we  can  connect  the  names  of  other  hills :  a
Himilinbcrg  (mons  coelius)  haunted  by  spirits,  in  the  vita  S.  Galli,
Pertz  2,  10  ;  Himelberc  in  Lichtenstein's  frauend.  199,  10  ;  a  Himi-
lesberg  in  the  Fulda  country,  Schannat  Buchon.  vet.  336  ;  several  in

1  When  this  passage  says  further,  *  vissi  hann  vel  fram,  sem  Vanir  a&rir,'
liter.  '  he  foreknew  well,  like  other  Vanir,'  his  wisdom  is  merely  likened  to
that  of  the  Vanir  (Gramm.  4,  456  on  ander],  it  is  not  meant  that  he  was  one  of
them,  a  thing  never  asserted  anywhere  [so  in  Homer,  '  Greeks  and  other  Trojans'
means  '  and  Trojans  as  weW].  The  Fornald.  sog.  1,  373  calls  him,  I  know  not
why,  '  heimskastr  allra  asa,'  heimskr  usually  signifying  ignorant,  a  greenhorn,
what  the  MH.G.  poets  mean  by  tump.


234  OTHER  GODS.

Hesse  (Kuchenb.  anal.  11, 137)  near  Iba  and  Waldkappel  (Niederh.
wochenbl.  1834  pp.  106,  2183);  a  Himmelsberg  in  Vestgotland,  and
one,  alleged  to  be  Heimdall's,  in  Halland.  At  the  same  time,
Himinvdngar,  Srem.  150a,  the  OS.  hebanwang,  hebeneswang,  a
paradise  (v.  ch.  XXV),  the  AS.  Heofenfeld  coelestis  campus,  Beda
p.  158,  and  the  like  names,  some  individual,  some  general,  deserve
to  be  studied,  but  yield  as  yet  no  safe  conclusion  about  the  god.

Other  points  about  him  savour  almost  of  the  fairy-tale :  he  is
made  out  to  be  the  son  of  nine  mothers,  giantesses,  Saam.  118a'b.
Sn.  106.  Laxd.  p.  392 ;  he  wants  less  sleep  than  a  bird,  sees  a
hundred  miles  off  by  night  or  day,  and  hears  the  grass  grow  on  the
ground  and  the  wool  on  the  sheep's  back  (Sn.  30).1  His  horse  is
Gulltoppr,  gold-tuft,  and  he  himself  has  golden  teeth,2  hence  the
by-names  Gullintanni  and  HallinsM&i,  '  tennur  HallinskiSa/
Fornm.  sog.  1,  52.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  Hallinskiol  and
Heimdali  are  quoted  among  the  names  for  the  ram,  Sn.  221.

As  watchman  and  warder  of  the  gods  (vorftr  go5a,  Ssem.  41),
Heimdali  winds  a  powerful  horn,  Giallarhorn,  which  is  kept  under
a  sacred  tree,  Sxm.  5b  8a.  Sn.  72-3.  What  the  Voluspa  imparts,
must  be  of  a  high  antiquity  (see  Suppl.).

Now  at  the  very  outset  of  that  poem,  all  created  beings  great
and  small  are  called  megir  Hcimd'allar,  sons  or  children  of  the  god ;
he  appears  therefore  to  have  had  a  hand  in  the  creation  of  the
world,  and  of  men,  and  to  have  played  a  more  exalted  part  than  is
assigned  to  him  afterwards.  As,  in  addition  to  Wuotan,  Zio  pre
sided  over  war,  and  Fro  over  fruitfulness,  so  the  creative  faculty
seems  to  have  been  divided  between  OSinn  and  Heimftallr.

A  song  of  suggestive  design  in  the  Edda  makes  the  first
arrangement  of  mankind  in  classes  proceed  from  the  same  Heim-
ffallr,  who  traverses  the  world  under  the  name  of  Rigr  (see  Suppl.).
There  is  a  much  later  German  tradition,  very  prevalent  in  the  last
few  centuries,  which  I  have  ventured  to  trace  to  this  heathen  one,
its  origin  being  difficult  to  explain  otherwise.3  As  for  the  name  Mgr,
it  seems  to  me  to  have  sprung,  like  dis  from  idis,  by  aphaBresis
from  an  older  form,  which  I  cannot  precisely  determine,  but  would
connect  with  the  MHG.  Irinc,  as  in  ON.  an  n  before  g  or  k  often

1  Conf.  KM.  3,  125.

2  Li  diente  d'  oro,  Pentam.  3,  1.     Of  a  certain  Haraldr  :  tennr  voru  miklor
ok  gulls  litr  d,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  366.

3  Zeitschrift  f.  d.  alt.  2,  257—267.     Conf.  ch.  XIX.


HEIMDAIL.      BRAGI.  235

drops  out  (conf.  stinga  stack,  ]?acka  Jmnki),  and,  as  will  be  shown
later,  Iringes  straza,  Iringes  wee  answers  to  a  Swedish  Eriksgata.1
The  shining  galaxy  would  suit  extremely  well  the  god  who  descends
from  heaven  to  earth,  and  whose  habitation  borders  on  Bifrost.

Norwegian  names  of  places  bear  witness  to  his  cultus :  Heim-
dallarvattn,  a  lake  in  Guldbrandsdalen  (GuSbrandsdalr),  and
Heimdallshoug,  a  hill  in  Nummedalen  (Naumudalr) ;  neither  is
mentioned  in  the  ON.  sagas.

2.  (BRAGI,  BREGO.)

Above  any  other  god,  one  would  like  to  see  a  more  general
veneration  of  the  ON.  Bragi  revived,  in  whom  was  vested  the  gift
of  poetry  and  eloquence.  He  is  called  the  best  of  all  skalds,  Saem.
46a.  Sn.  45,  frumsmiSr  bragar  (auctor  poeseos),  and  poetry  itself  is
bragr.2  In  honour  of  him  the  Bragai\\\\.  or  bragarfall  was  given
(p.  60) ;  the  form  appears  to  waver  between  bragi  gen.  braga,  and
bragr  gen.  bragar,  at  all  events  the  latter  stands  in  the  phrase
*  bragr  karla  '  =  vir  facundus,  praestans,  in  '  asa  bragr '  deorum
princeps  =  Thorr  (Sasm.  85b.  Sn.  21  la,  but  Bragi  211b),  and  even
'  bragr  qvenna  '  femina  praestantissima  (Seem.  218a).3

Then  a  poet  and  king  of  old  renown,  distinct  from  the  god,
himself  bore  the  name  of  Bragi  limn  gamli,  and  his  descendants
were  styled  Bragningar.  A  minstrel  was  pictured  to  the  mind  as
old  and  long-bearded,  si5skeggi  and  skeggbragi,  Sn.  105,  which
recalls  Oolnn  with  his  long  beard,  the  inventor  of  poetry  (p.
146)  j  and  Bragi  is  even  said  to  be  Oftin's  son,  Sn.  105  (see  Suppl.).

In  the  AS.  poems  there  occurs,  always  in  the  nom.  sing.,  the
term  brcgo  or  breogo,  in  the  sense  of  rex  or  princeps :  bregostol  in
Beow.  4387  and  Andr.  209  is  thronus  regius;  bregoweard  in  Csedm.
140,  26.  166,  13  is  princeps.4  Now,  as  gen.  plurals  are  attached  to

1  Der  gammel  Erik,  gaminel  Erke  (old  E.),  has  now  come  to  mean  old  Nick
in  Swedish  ;  conf.  supra  p.  124,  on  Erchtag.

2  Ssem.  113b,  of  OSinn  :  gefr  hann  brag  skaldom  (dat  carmen  poetis).

3  Does  not  the  Engl.  brag,  Germ,  prahlen  (gloriari)  explain   everything  ?
Showy  high-flown   speech  would   apply  equally  to  boasting  and   to   poetry.
Then,  for  the  other  meaning,  '  the  boast,  glory,  master-piece  (of  men,  gods,
women,  angels,  bears),'  we  can  either  go  back  to   the  more  primitive  sense
(gloria)  in  prangen,  prunk,  pracht,  bright,  or  still  keep  to  brag.      '  Beauty  is
nature's  brag,  and  must  be  shewn/  says  Conius. — TRANS.

4  In  Beda  4,  23  (Stevens,  p.  304)  a  woman's  name  Bregosuid,  BregoswiO  ;
in  Kemble  5,  48  (anno  749)  Bregeswi&estdn,  and  1, 133-4  (anno  762),  5,  46  (anno
747),  5,  59  (anno  798)  a  man's  name  Bregowine.     In  Beow.  3847  bregorof  is
clarissimus.


236  OTHER   GODS,

it :  brcgo  engla,  Caxlm.  12,  7.  60,  4.  62,  3  ;  brego  Dena,  Beow.
8i8  ;  hseleSa  brego,  Beow.  3905  ;  gumena  brego,  Andr.  61 ;  beorna
brego,  Andr.  305  (conf.  brego  moncynnes,  Cod.  exon.  457,  3)  ;  there
grows  up  an  instructive  analogy  to  the  above-mentioned  '  bragr
karla,'  and  to  the  genitives  similarly  connected  with  the  divine
names  Tyr,  Fred  and  Bealdor  (pp.  196,  211,  220).  The  AS.  brego
equally  seems  to  point  to  a  veiled  divinity,  though  the  forms  and
vowel-relations  do  not  exactly  harmonize.1

Their  disagreement  rather  provokes  one  to  hunt  up  the  root
under  which  they  could  be  reconciled :  a  verb  briga  brag  would
suit  the  purpose.  The  Saxon  and  Frisian  languages,  but  not  the
Scandinavian  or  High  German,  possess  an  unexplained  term  for
cerebrum :  AS.  briigen  (like  regen  pluvia,  therefore  better  written
so  than  braegen),  Engl.  brain,  Fris.  brein,  Low  Sax.  bregen  ;  I  think
it  answers  to  the  notions  '  understanding,  cleverness,  eloquence,
imitation,'  and  is  connected  with  (frprjv,  $pevos,  -cfrpcov,  -$>povo<$.  Now
the  ON.  bragr,  beside  poesis,  means  also  mos,  gestus,  and  '  braga
eftir  einum '  referre  aliquem  gestu,  imitari.  OHG.  has  nothing  like
it,  nor  any  such  proper  name  as  Prako,  Brago,  Brego.

But,  as  we  detected  among  the  Saxons  a  faint  trace  of  the  god
or  god's  son,  we  may  lay  some  stress  on  the  fact  that  in  an  OS.
document  of  1006  Burnacker  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  place,  v.
Llinzel's  Hildesheim,  p.  124,  conf.  pref.  v.  (see  Suppl.).  Now  Bragi
and  his  wife  I5unn  dwelt  in  Brunnakr,  Sn.  121a,  and  she  is  called
'  Brunnakrs  beckjar  ger5r,'  Brunnakerinae  sedis  ornatrix,  as  Sk.
Thorlacius  interprets  it  (Spec.  6,  pp.  65-6).  A  well  or  spring,
for  more  than  one  reason,  suits  a  god  of  poetry  ;  at  the  same  time  a
name  like  '  Springfield  '  is  so  natural  that  it  might  arise  without  any
reference  to  gods.

Bragi  appears  to  have  stood  in  some  pretty  close  relation  to
Oegir,  and  if  an  analogy  between  them  could  be  established,  which
however  is  unsupported  hitherto  on  other  grounds,  then  by  the
side  of  '  briga  brag  '  the  root  '  braga  brog '  would  present  itself,  and
the  AS.  broga  (terror),  OHG.  pruoko,  bruogo,  be  akin  to  it.  The
connexion  of  Bragi  with  Oegir  may  be  seen  by  Bragi  appearing
prominently  in  the  poem  Oegisdrecka,  and  by  his  sitting  next  to
Oegir  in  Sn.  80,  so  that  in  intimate  converse  with  him  he  brings
out  stories  of  the  gods,  which  are  thence  called  Bmgarocdur,

1  The  Irish  breitheam,  brethemb  (judcx)  is  said  to  be  pronounced  almost
as  '  brehon,'  Trans,  of  Irish  acad.  14,  167.


AKI,   UOKI,   OEGIR.  237

speeches  of  Bragi.  It  is  with  great  propriety,  no  doubt,  that  these
narratives,  during  which  Oegir  often  interrupts  him  with  questions
(Sn.  93),  as  Gangleri  does  Har  when  holding  forth  in  the  first  part
of  the  Edda,  were  put  in  the  mouth  of  the  patron  of  poetry.

3.  AKI,  UOKI  (OEGIR,  HLER).  FIFEL,  GEOFON.

This  Oegir,  an  older  god  of  the  giant  kind,  not  ranked  among
the  Ases,  but  holding  peaceable  intercourse  with  them,  bears  the
name  of  the  terrible,  the  awful.  The  root  '  aga  6g '  had  given  birth
to  plenty  of  derivatives  in  our  ancient  speech:  Goth,  agis  <£o/3o?,  6g
^o/Beo/juaL,  OHG.  akiso,  egiso,  AS.  egesa  horror,  OHG.  aki,  eki,  AS.
ege  (ege  1  awe)  terror,  ON.  cegja  terrori  esse,  which  can  only  be
spelt  with  ce,  not  3d.  To  the  proper  name  Oegir  would  correspond
a  Goth.  Ogeis,  AS.  fige,  OHG.  Uogi,  instead  of  which  I  can  only
lay  my  hand  on  the  weak  form  Uogo,  Oago.  But  cegir  also  signifies
the  sea  itself :  sol  gengr  i  ceginn,  the  sun  goes  into  the  sea,  sets ;
cegi-sior  pelagus  is  like  the  Goth,  mari-saivs ;  the  AS,  eagor  and
egor  (mare)  is  related  to  ege,  as  sigor  to  sige.  I  attach  weight  to
the  agreement  of  the  Greek  coiceavds,  'fliceavos  and  'fiyijv,  whence
the  Lat.  oceanus,  Oceanus  was  borrowed,  but  aequor  (rnare  placi-
dum)  seems  not  cognate,  being  related  to  aequus,  not  to  aqua  and
Goth,  ahva  (see  Suppl.).1

The  boisterous  element  awakened  awe,  and  the  sense  of  a  god's
immediate  presence.  As  Woden  was  also  called  Woina  (p.  144),
and  OSinn  Omi  and  Yggr,  so  the  AS.  poets  use  the  terms  woma,
sweg,  broga  and  egesa  almost  synonymously  for  ghostly  and  divine
phenomena  (Andr.  and  El.  pp.  xxx — xxxii).  Oegir  was  therefore  a
highly  appropriate  name,  and  is  in  keeping  with  the  notions  of  fear
and  horror  developed  on  p.  207-8.

This  interpretation  is  strikingly  confirmed  by  other  mythical
conceptions.  The  Edda  tells  us  of  a  fear-inspiring  helmet,  whose
name  is  Oegishialmr :  er  oil  qvikvendi  brceSast  at  sia,  Sn.  137  ;
such  a  one  did  Hreitmiar  wear,  and  then  Fafnir  when  he  lay  on  the
gold  and  seemed  the  more  terrible  to  all  that  looked  upon  him,
Ssem.  188a ;  vera  (to  be)  undir  Oegiskialmi,  bera  Oegishialm  yfir

1  Oegir  is  also  called  Gymir,  Saem.  59.  Gdmir,  Sn.  125.  183  possibly
epulator  ?  but  I  know  no  other  meaning  of  the  ON.  gaumr  than  cura,  attentio,
though  the  OHG.  gomna,  OS.  goma  means  both  cura  and  epulae,  the  AS.
gyming  both  cura  and  nuptiae.


238  OTHER  GODS.

einum,  means  to  inspire  with  fear  or  reverence,  Laxd.  saga,  p.  130.
Islend.  sog.  2,  155  ;  ek  bar  Oegishialm  yfir  alia  folki,  Fornald.  sog.
1,  162  ;  hafa  Oegishialm  t  augum,  ibid.  1,  406,  denotes  that  terrible
piercing  look  of  the  eyes,  which  others  cannot  stand,  and  the
famous  basilisk-glance,  ormr  i  auga,  was  something  similar.1  Now
I  find  a  clear  trace  of  this  Norse  helmet  in  the  OHG.  man's  name
Egihelm  (Trad.  fuld.  1,  97  ;  in  Schannat  no.  126,  p.  286  Eggihelm),
i.e.  Agihelm,  identical  with  the  strengthened- vowel  form  Uogihelm,
which  I  am  unable  to  produce.  But  in  the  Eckenlied  itself  Ecke's
costly  magic  helmet,  and  elsewhere  even  Ortnit's  and  Dietrich's,
are  called  Hildegrim,  Hildegrin ;  and  the  ON.  grima  mask  or
helmet  (in  Ssem.  51a  a  name  for  night)  has  now  turned  up  in  a
Eulda  gloss,  Dronke  p.  15  :  '  scenici  =  crimfan '  presupposes  a  sing.
krimd  larva,  persona,  galea ;  so  we  can  now  understand  Krimliilt
(Gramm.  1,  188)  the  name  of  a  Walkurie  armed  with  the  helmet  of
terror,  and  also  why  '  daemon '  in  another  gloss  is  rendered  by
egisgrimolt.  The  AS.  egesgrime  is  equally  a  mask,  and  in  El.  260
the  helmet  that  frightens  by  its  figure  of  a  boar  is  called  a  grim-
helm.  1  venture  to  guess,  that  the  wolf  in  our  ancient  apologue
was  imagined  wearing  such  a  helmet  of  dread,  and  hence  his  name
of  Isangrim,  iron-mask,  Eeinh.  ccxlii  (see  Suppl.).  NOT  have  we
yet  come  to  the  end  of  fancies  variously  playing  into  one  another :
as  the  god's  or  hero's  helmet  awakened  terror,  so  must  his  shield
and  sword  ;  and  it  looks  significant,  that  a  terrific  sword  fashioned
by  dwarfs  should  likewise  be  named  in  the  two  forms,  viz.  in  the
Vilkinasaga  Eckisax,  in  Veldek's  Eneit  Uokesahs  (not  a  letter  may
we  alter),  in  the  Eckenlied  Ecken  sahs,  as  Hildegrin  was  Ecken
helm,  Eckes  helm.  In  the  Greek  alyk  I  do  not  look  for  any  verbal
affinity,  but  this  shield  of  Zew  aiyioxo*  (H.  15,  310.  17,  593),
wielded  at  times  by  Athena  (2,  447.  5,  738)  and  Apollo  (15,  229.
318.  361.  24,  20),  spreads  dismay  around,  like  Oegishialmr,
Hildegrim  and  Eckisahs ;  Pluto's  helmet  too,  which  rendered
invisible,  may  be  called  to  mind. — That  ancient  god  of  sea,  Oceanus
and  Oegir  (see  Suppl.),  whose  hall  glittered  with  gold,  Saem.  59,2

1  Fornm.  sog.  9,  513  :  gekk  alvaldr  und  tfgishialmi.     The  spelling  with  f
goes  to  confirm  our  02,  and  refute  se,  as  an  y  can  only  stand  for  the  former,  not
for  the  latter  ;  conf.  mor  and  the  deriv.  inyri  =  mceri,  Gramm.  1,  473.

2  In  the  great  feast  which  he  gave  to  the  gods,  the  ale  came  up  of  itself  (sialft
barsc  ]?ar  ol,  »Su>m.  59),  as  Hephsestus's  tripods  ran  avTopdrot  in  and  out  of  the
Qdov  aywi/a,  II.  18,  376.     Even  so  Freyr  had  a  sword  er  sialft  vegiz  (that  swings
itself),  Seem.  82a,  and  Thor's  Miolnir  comes  back  of  itself  everytime  it  is  thrown.


AKI,  UOKI,   OEGIR,  FIFEL,   GEOFON,  HLER.  239

would  of  all  others  wear  the  glittering  helmet  which  takes  its
name  from  him.  From  all  we  can  find,  his  name  in  OHG.  must
have  been  Aki  or  Uoki ;  and  it  requires  no  great  boldness  to
suppose  that  in  the  Ecke  of  our  heroic  legend,  a  giant  all  over,  we
see  a  precipitate  of  the  heathen  god.  Ecke's  mythical  nature  is
confirmed  by  that  of  his  brothers  Fasolt  and  Abentrot,  of  whom
more  hereafter.  As  the  Greek  Okeanos  has  rivers  given  him  for
sons  and  daughters,  the  Norse  Oegir  has  by  Ban  nine  daughters,
whose  names  the  Edda  applies  to  waters  and  waves.  We  might
expect  to  find  that  similar  relations  to  the  seagod  were  of  old
ascribed  to  our  own  rivers  also,  most  of  which  were  conceived  of  as
female  [and  still  bear  feminine  names].

And  there  is  one  such  local  name  in  which  he  may  be  clearly
recognised.  The  Eider,  a  river  which  divides  the  Saxons  from  the
Northmen,  is  called  by  the  Frankish  annalists  in  the  eighth  and
ninth  centuries  Egidora,  Agadora,  Aegidora  (Pertz  1.  355-70-86.
2,  620-31) ;  Helmold  1,  12.  50  spells  Egdora.  The  ON.  writers
more  plainly  write  Oegisdyr  (Fornm.  sog.  11,  28.  31,  conf.  Geogr.  of
a  Northman,  ed.  by  Werlauff  p.  15),  i.e.,  ocean's  door,  sea-outlet,
ostium,  perhaps  even  here  with  a  collateral  sense  of  the  awful.
Again,  a  place  called  Oegisdyr  is  mentioned  in  Iceland,  Landn.  5,
2,  where  we  also  find  3,  1  an  Oegissifta,  latus  oceani.  Further,  it
comes  out  that  by  the  AS.  name  Fifeldor  in  Cod.  exon.  321,  8  and
by  the  Wieglesdor  in  Dietmar  of  Merseb.  ad  ann.  975,  p.  760  is
meant  the  Eider  again,  still  the  aforesaid  Oegisdyr ;  while  a  various
reading  in  Dietmar  agrees  with  the  annalist  Saxo  ad  ann.  975  in
giving  Heggedor  =  Eggedor,  Egidor.  Now,  seeing  that  elsewhere
the  AS.  poems  use  Fifelstream,  Fifelwseg  (Boeth.  26,  51.  El.  237)
for  the  ocean,  and  Fifelcynnes  eard  (Beow.  208)  for  the  land  of  the
ocean-sprites,  we  may  suppose  Fifel  and  its  corruption  Wiegel  to  be
another  and  an  obsolete  name  of  Oegir.

The  same  may  hold  good  of  the  AS.  Geofon,  OS.  Geban,  a  being
whose  godhead  is  sufficiently  manifest  from  the  ON.  Gefjun,  who  is
reckoned  among  the  Asynior,  though  she  bore  sons  to  a  giant.
The  Saxon  Geban  however  was  a  god  ;•  the  Heliand  shows  only  the
compound  Gebenesstrom  90,  7.  131,  22,  but  the  AS.  poets,  in
addition  to  Geofenes  begang,  Beow.  721,  Geofenes  staft,  Caedm.  215,
8,  and  the  less  personal  geofonhus  (navis),  Csedm.  79,  34,  geofonflod,
Cod.  exon.  193,  21,  have  also  a  Geofon  standing  independently  in


240  OTHER   GODS.

the  nom.,  Cacdm.  206,  6,  and  gifen  geotende,  Beow.  3378.  An
OIIG.  Kepan  is  nowhere  found,  even  in  proper  names,  though
Stahlin  1,  598  gives  a  Gebeneswtlare.  I  know  not  whether  to  take
for  the  root  the  verb  giban  to  give,  in  which  case  G-ibika  (p.  137)
and  Wuotan's  relation  to  Neptune  (pp.  122,  148)  would  come  in
here  ;  or  to  look  away  to  the  Greek  yi<*v  fern.  \XL^V>  hib-ernus  ?]
and  the  notion  of  snow  and  ice  giants.

And  the  North  itself  furnishes  some  names  which  are  synony
mous  with  Oegir.  In  the  Fundinn  Noregr  (Sn.  369.  Fornald.  sog.
2,  17)  we  read  :  Forniotr  atti  3  syni,  hett  einn  Hler,  er  vcr  kollum
Ocgi  (one  hight  Hler,  whom  we  call  Oegir),  annarr  Logi,  Jmdji  Kari
(Rask,  afh.  1,  95  :  Kari).  Hler,  gen.  Hies,  appears  from  this  to  have
been  the  older  name,  in  use  among  the  giants,  by  which  Oegir  is
spoken  of  in  Sn.  79,  and  after  which  his  dwelling-place  was  named
Hles-cy  (Stum.  78b  159b  243b),  now  Lassoe  in  the  Cattegat.

4.  (FORNIOTR).

Of  this  HUr  I  have  nothing  more  to  tell  (see  SuppL),  but  his
father  Forniotr  has  left  a  notable  trace  of  himself  behind ;  he
belongs  even  less  than  Oegir  to  the  circle  of  Ases,  being  one  of  the
older  demonic  giants,  and  proving  that  even  these  demigods  or
personified  powers  of  nature  must  also  have  borne  sway  among  the
Teutonic  races  outside  of  Scandinavia.  Forniotr  is  to  be  explained,
not  as  for-niotr  primus  occupans,  but  rather  as  forn-iotr,  the  ancient'
lotr  (Rask,  afhand.  .1,  78),  a  particularly  apt  expression  for  those
giants,  and  closely  connected  with  iotunn  itself,  AS.  eoton,  as  will
be  shown  further  on.  Now  in  the  AS.  Liber  medicinalis,  from
which  Wanley,  pp.  176 — 80  gives  insufficient  extracts,  there  is
according  to  Lye's  dictionary  a  plant  of  healing  virtue  spoken  of
(twice  apparently,  from  the  various  spelling)  by  the  name  of
Fomcotes  folme,  Fornetcs  folme  (i.e.  Forneoti  manus).  As  none  of
the  ON",  writings  allude  to  this  herb,  its  name  must  be  a  remnant
of  the  Saxon  people's  own  mythology.  In  OHG.  the  giant  may
have  been  called  Firnez,  and  the  plant  Firnezes  folma.  We
remember  how,  in  Beow.  1662,  Grendel  has  torn  off  the  hand  of  a
water-sprite,  and  presents  it  as  tacen  of  his  victory,  just  as  Tristan
chops  off  the  giant  Urgan's  hand,  and  takes  it  with  him  to  certify
the  deed,  16055-65-85.  The  amputation  of  the  huge  giant-hand
seems  therefore  part  of  an  ancient  myth,  and  to  have  been  iitly


LOKI,  GRENDEL,  SATURN.  241

retained  in  the  name  of  a  broad-leaved  vegetable  ;  there  is  also  a  j
plant  called  devil' s-hand,  and  in  more  than  one  legend  the  Evil  one  {
leaves  the  print  of  his  hand  on  rocks  and  walls.

If  these  last  allusions  have  led  us  away  from  the  beneficent
deities  rather  to  hurtful  demons  and  malignant  spirits,  we  have  here
an  easy  transit  to  the  only  god  whom  the  teaching  of  the  Edda  repre
sents  as  wicked  and  malevolent,  though  it  still  reckons  him  among
the  Ases.

5.  (LOKI,  GRENDEL),  SATURN.

Logi,  as  we  have  seen,  was  a  second  son  of  Forniotr,  and  the
three  brothers  Hler,  Logi,  Kari  on  the  whole  seem  to  represent
water,  fire  and  air  as  elements.  Now  a  striking  narrative  (Sn.  54.
60)  places  Logi  by  the  side  of  Loki,  a  being  from  the  giant  province
beside  a  kinsman  and  companion  of  the  gods.  This  is  no  mere  play
upon  words,  the  two  really  signify  the  same  thing  from  different
points  of  view ,  Logi  the  natural  force  of  fire,  and  Loki,  with  a
shifting  of  the  sound,  a  shifting  of  the  sense :  of  the  burly  giant
has  been  made  a  sly  seducing  villain.  The  two  may  be  compared
to  the  Prometheus  and  the  Hephaestus  (Vulcan)  of  the  Greeks  ;
Okeanos  was  a  friend  and  kinsman  of  the  former.  But  the  two  get
mixed  up.  In  Loki,  sa  er  flestu  illu  raetfr  (Sn.  46),  who  devises  the
most  of  ill,  we  see  also  the  giant  demon  who,  like  Hephaestus,  sets
the  gods  a-laughing  ;  his  limping  reminds  us  of  Hephaestus  and  the
lame  fire  (N.  Cap.  76),  his  chaining  of  Prometheus's,  for  Loki  is  put
in  chains  like  his  son  Fenrir.  As  Hephsestus  forges  the  net  for
Ares  and  Aphrodite,  Loki  too  prepares  a  net  (Sn.  69),  in  which  he
is  caught  himself.  Most  salient  of  all  is  the  analogy  between
Hephaestus  being  hurled  down  from  Olympus  by  Zeus  (II.  1,  591-3)
and  the  devil  being  cast  out  of  heaven  into  hell  by  God  (ch.  XXXIII,
Devil),  though  the  Edda  neither  relates  such  a  fall  of  Loki,  nor  sets
him  forth  as  a  cunning  smith  and  master  of  dwarfs  ,  probably  the
stories  of  Loki  and  Logi  were  much  fuller  once.  Loki's  former
fellowship  with  OSinn  is  clearly  seen,  both  from  Ssem.  61b,  and
from  the  juxtaposition  of  three  creative  deities  on  their  travels,
Offinn,  Hcenir,  Lo&r,  Saem.  3a,  instead  of  which  we  have  also  O&inn,
Hcenir,  Loki,  Saem.  180,  or  in  a  different  order  O&inn,  Loki,  Hcenir,
Sn.  80.  135  (conf.  supra,  p.  162).  This  trilogy  I  do  not  venture  to
identify  with  that  of  Hler,  Logi,  Kari  above,  strikingly  as  OSinn
corresponds  to  the  t?  CLVC/JLOIO  ;  and  though  from  the  creating  OSinn

16


242  OTHER  GODS.

proceed  breath  and  spirit  (ond),  as  from  Lo&r  (blaze,  glow)  come
blood  and  colour  (la  ok  litr),  the  connexion  of  Hcenir,  who  imparts
sense  (65),  with  water  is  not  so  clear :  this  Hcenir  is  one  of  the
most  unmanageable  phenomena  of  the  Norse  mythology,  and  with
us  in  Germany  he  has  vanished  without  leaving  a  trace.  But  the
fire-god  too,  who  according  to  that  gradation  of  sounds  ought
either  to  be  in  Goth.  Laiiha  and  OHG.  Loho,  or  in  Goth.  Luka  and
OHG.  Locho,  seems  with  the  loss  of  his  name  to  have  come  up
again  purely  in  the  character  of  the  later  devil.  He  lasted  longer
in  Scandinavia,  and  myths  everywhere  show  how  nearly  Loki  the
as  approaches  Logi  the  giant.  Thorlacius  (spec.  7,  43)  has  proved
that  in  the  phrase  '  Loki  fer  yfir  akra  '  (passes  over  the  fields),  and
in  the  Danish  '  Locke  dricker  vand '  (drinks  water),  fire  and  the
burning  sun  are  meant,  just  as  we  say  the  sun  is  drawing  water,
when  he  shines  through  in  bright  streaks  between  two  clouds.
Loka  daun  (Lokii  odor)  is  Icelandic  for  the  ignis  fatuus  exhaling
brimstone  (ibid.  44) ;  Lokabrenna  (Lokii  incendium)  for  Sirius ;
Loka  sposnir  are  chips  for  firing.  In  the  north  of  Jutland,  a  weed
very  noxious  to  cattle  (polytrichum  comm.)  is  called  Lokkens  havre,
and  there  is  a  proverb  '  Nu  saaer  Lokken  sin  havre,'  now  Locke
sows  his  oats,  i.e.,  the  devil  his  tares  ;  the  Danish  lexicon  translates
Lokeshavre  avena  fatua,  others  make  it  the  rhinanthus  crista  galli.
When  the  fire  crackles,  they  say  '  Lokje  smacks  his  children/  Faye
p.  6.  Molbech's  Dial.  lex.  p.  330  says,  the  Jutland  phrase  '  Lokke
saaer  havre  idag  (to-day),'  or  what  is  equivalent  '  Lokke  driver  idag
med  sine  geder  (drives  out  his  goats),'  is  spoken  of  vapours  that
hang  about  the  ground  in  the  heat  of  the  sun.  When  birds  drop
their  feathers  in  moulting  time,  people  say  they  '  gaae  i  Lokkis  arri
(pass  under  L.'s  harrow  ?) ' ;  'at  hore  paa  Lockens  eventyr
(adventures) '  means  to  listen  to  lies  or  idle  tales  (P.  Syv's  gamle
danske  ordsprog  2,  72),  According  to  Sjoborg's  Nomenklatur,  there
is  in  Vestergotland  a  giant's  grave  named  Lokehall.  All  of  them
conceptions  well  deserving  notice,  which  linger  to  this  day  among
the  common  people,  and  in  which  Loki  is  by  turns  taken  for  a  bene
ficent  and  for  a  hurtful  being,  for  sun,  fire,  giant  or  devil.  Exactly
the  same  sort  of  harm  is  in  Germany  ascribed  to  the  devil,  and  the
kindly  god  of  light  is  thought  of  as  a  devastating  flame  (see  Suppl.).

On  this  identity  between  Logi  and  Loki  rests  another  vestige


LOKI,   GKENDEL,   SATUEN.  243

of  the  Norse  daemon,  which  is  found  among  the  other  Teutonic
races.  If  Logi  comes  from  liuhan  (lucere),  Lold  will  apparently
fall  to  the  root  lukan  (claudere,  conf.  claudus  lame) ;  the  ON.  lok
means  finis,  consummatio,  and  loka  repagulum,  because  a  bolt  or
bar  closes.  In  Beowulf  we  come  upon  an  odious  devilish  spirit,  a
thyrs  (Beow.  846)  named  Grendel  t  and  his  mother,  Grendeles  modor
(4232-74),  a  veritable  devil's  mother  arid  giant's  mother.  An  AS.
document  of  931  in  Kemble  2,  172  mentions  a  place  called
Grendles  mere  (Grendeli  palus).  Now  the  AS.  grindel,  OHG.
krintil,  MHG.  grintcl  is  precisely  repagulum,  pessulus  ;  so  the  name
Grendel  seems  related  to  grindel  (obex)  in  the  same  way  as  Loki  to
loka ;  the  ON.  grind  is  a  grating,  which  shuts  one  in  like  bolt  and
bar.  Gervase  of  Tilbury  (in  Leibn.  1,  980)  tells  of  an  English  fire-
demon  named  Grant.  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  we  Germans  have
still  in  use  a  third  synonymous  expression  for  a  diabolic  being,  its
meaning  heightened  no  doubt  by  composition  with '  hell';  hollriegel
vectis  infernalis,  hell-bar,  a  hell-brand,  devil  or  the  devil's  own ;  a
shrewish  old  hag  is  styled  hollriegel  or  the  devil's  grandmother ;
and  Hugo  von  Langenstein  (Martina  4b)  already  used  this  Jiellerigcl
as  a  term  of  abuse.  Now  hell  was  imagined  as  being  tightly  bolted
and  barred  ;  when  Christ,  says  Fundgr.  1,  178,  went  down  to  Hades
in  the  strength  of  a  lion,  he  made  '  die  grintel  brechen'.  Lastly,
we  may  even  connect  the  OHG.  dremil  (pessulus,  Graff  5, 531)  with
the  ON.  trami  or  tremill,  which  mean  both  cacodaernon  and  also,  it
seems,  clathri,  cancelli :  '  tramar  gneypa  J?ik  skulo  ! '  Stem.  85a  ;
and  in  the  Swedish  song  of  Torkar,  trolltram  is  an  epithet  of  the
devil  who  stole  the  hammer.  As  this  is  the  Thrymr  of  the  Edda,
one  might  guess  that  trami  stands  for  J?rami,  with  which  our  dremil
would  more  exactly  accord.  Thus  from  several  sides  we  see  the
mythical  notions  that  prevailed  on  this  subject  joining  hands,  and
the  merging  of  Logi  into  Loki  must  be  of  high  antiquity.  Foersom
(on  Jutl.  superstit.  p.  32)  alleges,  that  the  devil  is  conceived  of  in
the  form  of  a  lassetra,  i.e.,  the  pole  with  which  a  load  is  tied  down.
Beside  Loki  the  as,  Snorri  sets  another  before  us  in  the  Edda,
Utyar&aloki,  as  a  king  whose  arts  and  power  deceive  even  godlike
Thorr ;  it  was  one  of  his  household  that  outdid  the  other
Loki  himself,  Sn.  54  seq.1  Saxo,  who  in  the  whole  of  his  work

1  '  Thorlacius's  theory,  of  an  older  nature- worship  supplanted  by  the  Ases,
rests  mainly  on  the  antithesis  of  an  Oku]?6rr  to  Asaf>6rr,  of  Logi  to  Loki,  and
probably  of  Hler  to  Oegir,  each  pair  respectively  standing  for  thunder,  fire,


244  OTHER  GODS.

never  once  names  the  Eddie  Loki,  tells  wonderful  things  of  this
'  Ugarthilocus,'  pp.  163-6  :  he  paints  him  as  a  gigantic  semi-divine
monster,  who  dwells  in  a  distant  land,  is  invoked  in  a  storm  like
other  gods,  and  grants  his  aid.  A  valiant  hero,  named  Thorkill,
brooks  the  adventurous  journey  to  Ugarthilocus :  all  this  is  but
legendary  variation  of  the  visit  which,  in  Snorri,  Thorr  pays  to
UtgarSaloki.  Still  it  is  worth  noticing,  that  Thorkill  plucks  out  one
of  Ugarthilocus's  huge  spear-like  hairs,  and  takes  it  home  with  him
(Saxo  165-6).  The  utgar&ar  were  the  uttermost  borders  of  the
habitable  world,  where  antiquity  fixed  the  abode  of  giants  and
monsters,  i.e.,  hell;  and  here  also  may  have  been  present  that
notion  of  the  bar,  closing  up  as  it  were  the  entrance  to  that
inaccessible  region  of  ghosts  and  demons.

Whether  in  very  early  times  there  was  also  a  Saxon  LoJco  and
an  Alamannic  Lcihlw,  or  only  a  Grendil  and  Krentil ;  what  is  of
capital  importance  is  the  agreement  in  the  myths  themselves.  To
what  was  cited  above,  I  will  here  add  something  more.  Our
nursery -tales  have  made  us  familiar  with  the  incident  of  the  hah
plucked  off  the  devil  as  he  lay  asleep  in  his  grandmother's  lap
(Kinderm.  29).  The  corresponding  Norwegian  tale  makes  three
feathers  be  pulled  out  of  the  dragon's  tail,  not  while  he  sleeps,  but
after  he  is  dead.

Loki,  in  punishment  of  his  misdeeds,  is  put  in  chains,  like
Prometheus  who  brought  fire  to  men;  but  he  is  to  be  released
again  at  the  end  of  the  world.  One  of  his  children,  Fenrir,1  i.e.,
himself  in  a  second  birth,  pursues  the  moon  in  the  shape  of  a  wolf,
and  threatens  to  swallow  her.  According  to  Sn.  12.  13,  an  old
giantess  in  the  forest  gave  birth  to  these  giants  in  wolfskin  girdles,
the  mightiest  of  them  being  Mdnagarmr  (lunae  canis)  who  is  to
devour  the  moon  ;  but  in  another  place,  while  Skoll  chases  the  sun,
Hati,  Hroffvitnis  sonr  (Soem.  45a)  dogs  the  moon.  Probably  there
were  fuller  legends  about  them  all,  which  were  never  written
down  ;  an  old  Scotch  story  is  still  remembered  about  '  the  tayl  of

water.  To  the  elder  series  must  be  added  Sif=  earth,  and  the  miSgarSsormr
(world-snake).  But  what  nature-god  can  OSinn  have  taken  the  place  of?
None  ?  And  was  his  being  not  one  of  the  primeval  ones  1  '  &c.  [Quoted  from
SuppL,  vol.  iii.]

1  Goth.  Fanareis  ?  OHG.  Fanari,  Feniri  ?  can  it  be  our  fahnentrager,
pannifer  1  But  the  early  Norse  does  not  seem  to  have  the  word  answering  to
the  Goth,  fana,  OHG.  fano  (flag).  [Has  the  fox  holding  up  his  tail  as  a
standard,  in  the  unrighteous  war  of  beasts  against  birds,  anything  to  do  with
this  ?]


LOKI,  GRENDEL,  SATURN.  245

tlie  wolfe  and  the  warldis  end'  (see  Stippl.).  But  the  popular
belief  seems  to  have  extended  generally,  and  that  from  the  earliest
times,  all  over  Germany,  and  beyond  it.  We  still  say,  when
baneful  and  perilous  disturbances  arise, '  the  devil  is  broke  loose/  as
in  the  North  they  used  to  say '  Lola  er  or  bondum  '  (ch.  XXIII).  In
the  Life  of  Goz  von  Berlichingen,  p.  201  :  '  the  devil  was  every
where  at  large ' ;  in  Detmar's  chronik  1,  298 :  '  do  was  de  duvel  los
geworden/  i.e.,  disorder  and  violence  prevailed.  Of  any  one  who
threatened  from  a  safe  distance,  the  folk  in  Burgundy  used  the
ironical  phrase :  '  Dieu  garde  la  lune  des  loups  ! ?1  meaning,  such
threats  would  not  be  fulfilled  till  the  end  of  the  world ;  in  the  same
way  the  French  popular  song  on  Henry  IV.  expresses  the  far  end
of  the  future  as  the  time  when  the  wolf's  teeth  shall  get  at  the
moon :  jusqu'  a  ce  que  Ton  prenne  la  lune  avec  Us  dents?  Fischart
in  several  places  speaks  of  this  '  wolf  des  mons?  and  most  fully  in
his  Aller  practik  grossmutter  :  '  derhalben  dorft  ihr  nicht  mehr  fur
ihn  betten,  dass  ihn  Gott  vor  den  ivolfen  wolle  leliuten,  denn  sie
werden  ihn  diss  jahr  nicht  erhaschen '  (need  not  pray  for  the  moon,
they  won't  get  her  this  year). 3  In  several  places  there  circulate
among  the  people  rhymes  about  the  twelve  hours,  the  last  two
being  thus  distinguished :  '  um  elfe  kommen  die  wolfe,  um  zwolfe
bricht  das  gewolbej  at  11  come  the  wolves,  at  12  bursts  the  vault,
i.e.,  death  out  of  the  vault.  Can  there  be  an  echo  in  this  of  the  old
belief  in  the  appearing  of  the  wolf  or  wolves  at  the  destruction  of
the  world  and  the  bursting  of  heaven's  vault  ?  In  a  lighted  candle,
if  a  piece  of  the  wick  gets  half  detached  and  makes  it  burn  away
too  fast,  they  say  '  a  wolf  (as  well  as  thief)  is  in  the  candle  ; '  this
:oo  is  like  the  wolf  devouring  the  sun  or  moon.  Eclipses  of  sun  or
noon  have  been  a  terror  to  many  heathen  nations ;  the  incipient
md  increasing  obscuration  of  the  luminous  orb  marks  for  them  the
inoment  when  the  gaping  jaws  of  the  wolf  threaten  to  devour  it,
md  they  think  by  loud  cries  to  bring  it  succour  (ch.  XXII,  Eclipses).
The  breaking  loose  of  the  wolf  and  the  ultimate  enlargement  o(
Loki  from  his  chains,  who  at  the  time  of  the  Eagnarokr  will  war
tgainst  and  overcome  the  gods,  is  in  striking  accord  with  the  release
)f  the  chained  Prometheus,  by  whom  Zeus  is  then  to  be  overthrown.

1  Lamonnaye,  glossaire  to  the  noei  bourguignon,  Dijon  1776,  p.  242.

2  Conf.  Ps.  72,  7  :  donee  auferetur  luna.

3  May  we  in  this  connexion  think  of  the  fable  of  the  wolf  who  goes  down
'lie  well  to  eat  up  the  moon,  which  he  takes  for  a  cheese  ?


246  OTHER  GODS.

The  formula, '  unz  Loki  verSr  lauss  '  (=unz  riufaz  regin,  till  the  gods
be  destroyed),  answers  exactly  to  the  Greek  Trplv  av  etc  Secr/iwi/
Xa\da0r)  npowdevs  (Aesch.  Prom.  176.  770.  991) ;  the  writhings  of
the  fettered  Loki  make  the  earth  to  quake  (Ssem.  69.  Sn.  70),  just
as  %0a)v  <reo-d\evTcu  in  the  case  of  Prometheus  (Aesch.  1081).
Only  the  Greek  Titan  excites  our  noblest  sympathy,  while  the
Edda  presents  Loki  as  a  hateful  monster.

Loki  was  fair  in  form,  evil  in  disposition ;  his  father,  a  giant,
was  named  Farbauti  (boatman  ?),  his  mother  Laufey  (leaf-ea)  and
Ndl  (needle ;  thin  and  insinuating,  mio  ok  auttyreiflig,  355),  all  of
them  words  easy  to  translate  into  OHG.  as  Farpozo  (remex),
Loupouwa,  Nadala,  though  such  names  are  nowhere  found.  He  is
never  called  Farbauta  sonr,  but  always  after  his  mother,  Loki
Laufeyjar  sonr  (Seem.  67a  72b  73a),  which  had  its  origin  in
alliteration,  but  held  its  ground  even  in  prose  (Sn.  64)  and  in  the
Locke  Loje,  Loke  Lovmand,  Loke  Lejemand  of  the  later  folk-songs.
This  Laufey  (Swed.  Lofo)  is  first  of  all  the  name  of  a  place,  which
was  personified,  and  here  again  there  is  doubtless  reference  to  an
element.  By  his  wife  Sigyn  Loki  had  a  son  Nari  or  Narvi,  and  by
a  giantess  Angrlofta  three  children,  the  aforesaid  Fenrir,  the  serpent
Idrmungandr  and  a  daughter  Hel.  It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  he
himself  is  also  called  Loptr  (aerius),  and  one  of  his  brothers  Hel-
Uindi,  which  is  likewise  a  name  of  OSinn.  I  just  throw  out  these
names,  mostly  foreign  to  our  German  mythology,  in  the  hope  of
enlisting  for  them  future  inquiry.

Once  again  we  must  turn  our  attention  to  a  name  already
brought  forward  among  the  gods  of  the  week  (pp.  125-6),  for  which
a  rare  concurrence  of  isolated  facts  seems  almost  to  secure  a  place
in  our  native  antiquities.  The  High  German  week  leaves  two  days, ,
one  in  the  middle  and  one  at  the  end,  not  named  after  gods.  But
sambaztag  for  Saturday,  as  well  as  mittwoch  for  Wuotanstag,  was  a
sheer  innovation,  which  the  church  had  achieved  or  gladly  accepted »
for  those  two  days  at  all  events.  The  first  six  days  were  called  after!
the  sun,  the  moon,  Zio,  Wuotan,  Donar  and  Fria ;  what  god  was  I
entitled  to  have  the  naming  of  the  seventh  day  ?  Four  German j
deities  were  available  for  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus,  but  how|
was  Saturn  to  be  put  into  German  ?  The  Mid.  Ages  went  on
explaining  the  seventh  day  by  the  Roman  god  :  our  KaiserchronikJ


LOKI,  GRENDEL,  SATURN.  247

which  even  for  the  third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  days  names  no
German  gods,  but  only  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus,  expresses
itself  thus  clumsily :

An  dem  sameztage  sa  Then  on  the  Saturday

einez  heizet  rotunda",  Is  a  thing  named  rotunda

daz  was  ein  herez  betehus,  That  was  a  lofty  temple,

der  got  hiez  Saturnds,  The  god  was  named  Saturnus,

darnach  was  iz  aller  tiuvel  6re.        Thereafter  was  it  to  all  devils'

honour.

Here  the  worship  of  Saturn  is  connected  with  the  pantheon  built
in  honour  of  all  the  gods  or  devils,  which  Boniface  converted  into
a  church  of  St.  Mary.  The  Anglo-Saxons,  English,  Frisians,  Dutch
and  Low  Saxons  have  left  to  the  '  dies  Saturni '  the  god's  very
name :  Sceteresd&y  or  Sceternesdzeg,  Saturd&y,  SaterdQi,  Saterd&ch,
Satersdag,  and  even  the  Irish  have  adopted  dia  Satuirn  or  Satarn  ;
whereas  the  French  samedi,  Span,  sabado,  Ital.  sabato,  agrees  with
our  High  Germ,  samstag.  Here  is  identity,  not  only  of  idea,  as  in
the  case  of  the  other  gods,  but  of  name,  and  the  absence  of  conson
ant-change  seems  to  betray  downright  borrowing :  or  may  the
resemblance  have  been  accidental,  and  a  genuine  German  name
have  been  modified  in  imitation  of  the  foreign  one  ?  In  OHG
neither  a  Satarnes-  nor  a  Sazarnestac  can  be  found ;  but  in  AS.
scetere  means  insidiator  (OHG.  sazari,  conf.  saza,  MHG.  saze  insidiae,
a  sitting  in  wait,  as  laga,  lage  is  lying  in  wait) ;  and  what  is  still
more  remarkable,  a  document  of  Edward  the  Confessor  (chart,
antiq.  rot.  M.  no.  1.  Kemble  4,  157)  supplies  us  with  the  name  of
a  place  Setter esby rig,  quite  on  a  par  with  Wodnesbyrig ;  further,  the
plant  gallicrus,  our  hahnenfuss,  Engl.  crowfoot,  was  in  AS.  sdtorld&e
Saturni  taedium  as  it  were  (-loathing,  ON.  leiol,  OHG.  leidi).1  I
call  to  mind,  that  even  the  ancient  Franks  spoke  of  Saturnus  (p.  88)
as  a  heathen  god,  and  of  Saturni  dolium,  though  that  may  have
referred  to  the  mere  planetary  god  (see  SuppL).

The  last  name  for  the  '  sabbath '  brings  us  to  the  OK  laugar-

1  In  the  AS.  are  preserved  various  dialogues  between  Saturn  and  Solomon,
similar  to  those  between  Solomon  and  Marculf  in  continental  Germany,  but
more  antique  and,  apart  from  their  Christian  setting  or  dressing  up,  not  unlike
the  questions  and  discourses  carried  on  in  the  Edda  between  OSinn  and  VatyruS-
nir,  between  Ving]?6rr  and  Alviss,  between  Har  and  Gangleri.  Here  also  the
name  Saturn  seems  to  make  for  my  point,  and  to  designate  a  god  of  Teutonic
paganism.


248  OTHER  GODS.

dagr,  Swed.  logerdag,  Dan.  loverdag,  by  which  in  later  times  no
doubt  washing  or  bathing  day  was  meant,  as  the  equivalent
)?vottdagr  shows ;  but  originally  Zo^adagr,  Zo^adagr  may  have
been  in  use,1  and  Logi,  Loki  might  answer  to  the  Latin  Saturnus,2  as
the  idea  of  devil  which  lay  in  Loki  was  popularly  transferred  to  the
Jewish  Satan  and  [what  seemed  to  be  the  same  thing]  the  heathen
Saturn,  and  Locki  in  ON.  is  likewise  seducer,  tempter,  trapper.
We  might  even  take  into  consideration  a  by-name  of  OSinn  in
Saem.  46a,  Saftr  or  perhaps  Sa5r,  though  I  prefer  to  take  the  first
form  as  equivalent  to  Sannr  (true)  and  Sanngetall.

But  that  AS.  Sceteresbyrig  from  the  middle  of  the  llth  century
irresistibly  recalls  the  '  burg '  on  the  Harz  mts,  built  (according  to
our  hitherto  despised  accounts  of  the  15th  century  in  Bothe's
Sachsenchroriik)  to  the  idol  Saturn,  which  Saturn,  it  is  added,  the
common  people  called  Krodo ;  to  this  we  may  add  the  name
touched  upon  in  p.  206  (HreSe,  HreSemonaS),  for  which  an
older  Hruodo,  Chrodo  was  conjectured.3  We  are  told  of  an  image
of  this  Saturn  or  Krodo,  which  represented  the  idol  as  a  man
standing  on  a  great  fish,  holding  a  pot  of  flowers  in  his  right  hand,
and  a  wheel  erect  in  his  left ;  the  Roman  Saturn  was  furnished
with  the  sickle,  not  a  wheel  (see  Suppl.).4

Here  some  Slav  conceptions  appear  to  overlap.  Widukind
(Pertz  5,  463)  mentions  a  brazen  simulacrum  Batumi  among  the
Slavs  of  the  tenth  century,  without  at  all  describing  it ;  but  Old
Bohemian  glosses  in  Hanka  14a  and  17a  carry  us  farther.  In  the
first,  Mercurius  is  called  '  Radihost  vnuk  Kirtov '  (Radigast  grand
son  of  Kirt),  in  the  second,  Picus  Saturni  films  is  glossed  '  ztracec

1  Conf.  Finn  Magnusen,  lex.  pp.  1041-2,  dagens  tider  p.  7.

2  I  suppose  the  author  had  in  his  mind  Homer's  constant  epithet,  Kpovos
dyKv\op.r)TT)s  wily,  crooked-counselled  Kronos. — TRANS.

3  To  Hrodo  might  now  be   referred  those   names  Roysel  (later  spelling
Reusel)  and  Roydach  in  Gramaye,  who  understands  them  of  Mars  ;   ancient
documents  must  first  place  it  beyond  doubt,  which  day  of  the  week  is  meant.
There  is  an  actual  Hruodtac,  a  man's  name  in  OHG.  (Graff  5,  362),  and  an  OS.
HrGddag  is  found  in  Trad.  corb.  §  424,  ed.  Wigand  ;  these  may  be  related  to
Hruodo,  Hrodo  as  Baldag  to  Balder,  and  the  contraction  Roydag,  Rodag  would
be  like  Roswith  for  Hrodsuith.     If  Roydag  should  turn  out  to  be  the  seventh
day  of  the  week,  it  would  be  a  strong  testimony  to  the  worship  of  Chrodo  ;  if
it  remain  the  third,  we  have  to  add,  that  the  third  month  also  was  sacred  to
Mars,  and  was  called  ffrefremonaS  by  the  Anglo-Saxons.

4  '  The  Kaiserchr.  3750  says,  to  Saturn  we  offer  quicksilver  ;  whereas  now
Saturn's  symbol  signifies  lead.     In  Megenber;;,  Saturn  is  called  Satjdr.     The
Saxon  Saturn  is  supported  by  Hengest's  reference  to  that  god '.     (Extracted
from  Suppl.,  vol.  iii.)


LOKI,  GRENDEL,  SATURN.  249

Sitivratov  zin'  (woodpecker,  Sitivrat's  son);  and  in  a  third  20a,  Saturn
is  again  called  Sitivrat.  Who  does  not  see  that  Sitivrat  is  the
Slavic  name  for  Saturn,  which  leads  us  at  the  first  glance  to  sit  =
satur  ?  Eadigast= Mercury  (p.  13 On.)  is  the  son  of  Stracec= Picus  ;
and  in  fact  Greek  myths  treat  Picus  (ZTt/to?)  as  Zeus,  making  him
give  up  the  kingdom  to  his  son  Hermes.  Picus  is  Jupiter,  son  of
Saturn ;  but  beside  Sitivrat  we  have  learnt  another  name  for
Saturn,  namely  Kirt,  which  certainly  seems  to  be  our  Krodo  and
Hruodo.  Sitivrat  and  Kirt  confirm  Saturn  and  Krodo ;  I  do  not
know  whether  the  Slavic  word  is  to  be  connected  with  the  Boh.
krt,  Pol.  kret,  Euss.  krot,  i.e.,  the  mole.1  I  should  prefer  to  put
into  the  other  name  Sitivrat  the  subordinate  meaning  of  sito-vrat,
sieve-turner,  so  that  it  would  be  almost  the  same  as  kolo-vrat,
wheel-turner,  and  afford  a  solution  of  that  wheel  in  Krodo's  hand ;
both  wheel  (kolo)  and  sieve  (sito)  move  round,  and  an  ancient  spell
rested  on  sieve-turning.  Slav  mythologists  have  identified  Sitivrat
with  the  Hindu  Satydvrata,  who  in  a  great  deluge  is  saved  by
Vishnu  in  the  form  of  a  fish.  Krodo  stands  on  a  fish  ;  and  Vishnu
is  represented  wearing  wreaths  of  flowers  about  his  neck,  and  hold
ing  a  wheel  (chakra)  in  his  fourth  hand.2  All  these  coincidences
are  still  meagre  and  insecure;  but  they  suffice  to  establish  the
high  antiquity  of  a  Slavo-Teutonic  myth,  which  starts  up  thus
from  more  than  one  quarter.

1  Hardly  with  Crete,  where  Kronos  ruled  and  Zeus  was  born.

2  Edw.  Moore's  Hindu  Pantheon,  Lond.  1810,  tab.  13  and  23.—'  Sitivrat,
who  corresponds  to  Saturn,  is  the  Indian  Satyavrata,  i.e.,  according  to  Kuhn,
he  that  hath  veracious  (fulfilled)  vows;  so  Dhritavrata,  he  that  hath  kept-vows
=  Varunas,  Ouranos.'     (Quoted  from  Suppl.,  vol.  iii.)


CHAPTEE  XIII.
GODDESSES.

In  treating  of  gods,  the  course  of  our  inquiry  could  aim  at
separating  the  several  personalities ;  the  goddesses l  it  seems
advisable  to  take  by  themselves  and  all  at  one  view,  because  there
is  a  common  idea  underlying  them,  which  will  come  out  more
clearly  by  that  method.  They  are  thought  of  chiefly  as  divine
mothers  who  travel  round  and  visit  houses,  from  whom  the  human
race  learns  the  occupations  and  arts  of  housekeeping  and  husbandry:
spinning,  weaving,  tending  the  hearth,  solving  and  reaping.  These
labours  bring  with  them  peace  and  quiet  in  the  land,  and .  the
memory  of  them  abides  in  charming  traditions  even  more  lastingly
than  that  of  wars  and  battles,  from  which  most  goddesses  as  well
as  women  hold  themselves  aloof.

But  as  some  goddesses  also  take  kindly  to  war,  so  do  gods  on  the
other  hand  favour  peace  and  agriculture  ;  and  there  arises  an  inter
change  of  names  or  offices  between  the  sexes.

1.  ERDA,  NIRDU,  GATJE,  FIRGUNIA,  HLUODANA.
In  almost  all  languages  the  Earth  is  regarded  as  female,  and
(in  contrast  to  the  father  sky  encirling  her)  as  the  breeding,  teem
ing  fruit-bearing  mother:  Goth,  airpa,  OHG.  erada,  erda,  AS.  eorffe,
ON.  iorff,  Gr.  epa  (inferred  from  epa^e)  ;  Lat.  terra,  tellus,  humus
=  Slav,  zeme',  ziemia,  zemlia,  Lith.  zieme,  Gr.  xaM  (?  whence
%a/iafe),  ala,  yala,  yfj :  the  '  mother '  subjoined  in  A^^rrjp,  Zema
mate,  indicates  the  goddess.  The  form  air)?a,  erda  (also  herda)  is
itself  a  derivative  ;  the  simpler  OHG.  ero  (in  the  Wessobr.  prayer :
ero  noh  ufhimil,  earth  nor  heaven)  and  hero  (in  a  gloss,  for  solurn,

1  OHG.  in  Notker  has  only  the  strong  form  gutin  gen.  gutinno,  MHG.
gotinne,  Trist.  4807.  15812.  Barl.  246-7.  seldomer  gutinne,  MS.  2,  65b  ;  AS.
gyden  pi.  gydena,  but  also  weak  gydene  pi.  gydenan,  Mones  gl.  4185  Proserpi-
iiam  =  to  giclenan  (1.  togydenan,  additional  goddess)  ;  ON.  gytya  (which  might
be  dea  or  sacerdos  fern.),  better  dsynja  (see  Suppl.).


EEDA,  NIRDU,  GAUE,  FIRGUNIA,   HLUODANA.  251

Graff  4,  999)  might  be  masc.  (like  herd  =  solum,  Graff  4,  1026)  or
fern,  still.1  The  Goth,  mulda,  OHG.  molta,  AS.  molde,  ON.  mold,
contain  only  the  material  sense  of  soil,  dust ;  equally  impersonal  is
the  OS.  folda,  AS.  folde,  ON",  fold,  conf.  feld,  field,  Finn,  peldo
(campus),  Hung,  fold  (terra).  But  the  ON.  lord'  appears  in  the
flesh,  at  once  wife  and  daughter  of  Oftinn,  and  mother  of  Thorr
(Sn.  11.  39.  123),  who  is  often  called  larSar  burr.  Distinct  from
her  was  Rindr,  another  wife  of  OSinn,  and  mother  of  Vali  (Saem.
91a  95a  97b),  called  Einda  in  Saxo,  and  more  coarsely  painted ;  her
name  is  the  OHG.  rinta,  AS.  rind  =  cortex,  hence  crusta  soli  vel
terrae,  and  to  crusta  the  AS.  hruse  (terra)  is  closely  related.  As
this  literal  sense  is  not  found  in  the  North,  neither  is  the  mythical
meaning  in  Germany  (see  Suppl.).

But  neither  in  Ior5  nor  in  Eindr  has  the  Edda  brought  out  in
clear  relief  her  specially  maternal  character  ;  nowhere  is  this  more
purely  and  simply  expressed  than  in  the  very  oldest  account  we
possess  of  the  goddess.  It  is  not  to  all  the  Germani  that  Tacitus
imputes  the  worship  of  Nerthus,  only  to  the  Langobardi  (?),  Eeudigni,
Aviones,  Angli,  Varini,  Eudoses,  Suardones  and  Vuithones  (Germ.
40):  Nee  quicquam  notabile  in  singulis,  nisi  quod  in  commune
Nerthum*  id  est  Terram  matrem  colunt,  eamque  intervenire  rebus
hominum,  invehi  populis,  arbitrantur.  Est  in  insula  oceani  castum
nemus,  dicatumque  in  eo  vehiculum,  veste  contectum,  attingere  uni
sacerdoti  concessum.  Is  adesse  penetrali  deam  intelligit,  vectamque
lubus  feminis  multa  cum  veneratione  prosequitur.  Laeti  tune  dies,
festa  loca,  quaecunque  adventu  hospitioque  dignatur.  Non  bella
ineunt,  non  arma  sumunt ;  clausum  omne  ferrum :  pax  et  quies
tune  tantum  nota,  tune  tantum  amata :  donee  idem  sacerdos  satia-
tam  conversatione  mortalium  deam  templo  reddat.  Mox  vehiculum
et  vestes,  et,  si  credere  velis,  numen  ipsum  secreto  lacu  alluitur.
Servi  ministrant,  quos  statim  idem  lacus  haurit.3  Arcanus  hinc

1  The  two  forms  ero  and  hero  remind  one  of  the  name  Eor,  Cheru,  attri
buted  to  Mars  (supra,  pp.  203-4).

2  The  MSS.  collated  have  this  reading,  one  has  nehertum  (Massmann  in
Aufsess  and  Mones  anzeiger,  1834,  p.  216);  I  should  prefer  Nertus  to  Nerthus,
because   no   other   German   words   in  Tacitus  have  TH,  except  Gothini  and
Vuithones.      As  for  the   conjectural   Herthus,  though  the   aspirate ^in  herda
might  seem  to  plead  for  it,  the  termination  -us  is  against  it,  the  Gothic  having
air>a,  not  airbus.     Besides,  Aventin  already  (Frankf.  1580,  p.  19a)  spells  Nerth.

3  The  lake  swallows  the  slaves  who  had   assisted   at  the  secret  bathing.
More  than  once  this  incident  turns  up,  of  putting  to  death  the  servants  em
ployed  in  any  secret  work  ;   as  those  who  dug  the  river  out  of  its  bed  for


252  GODDESSES.

terror  sanctaque  ignorantia,  quid  sit  illud,  quod   tantum   perituri
vident  (see  Suppl.).1

This  beautiful  description  agrees  with  what  we  find  in  other
notices  of  the  worship  of  a  godhead  to  whom  peace  and  fruitfulness
were  attributed.  In  Sweden  it  was  Freyr,  son  of  Niordr,  whose
curtained  car  went  round  the  country  in  spring,  with  the  people
all  praying  and  holding  feasts  (p.  213);  but  Freyr  is  altogether
like  his  father,  and  he  again  like  his  namesake  the  goddess  Nerthus.
The  spring- truces,  harvest-truces,  plough-truces,  fixed  for  certain
seasons  and  implements  of  husbandry,  have  struck  deep  roots  in
our  German  law  and  land-usages.  Wuotan  and  Doiiar  also  make
their  appearance  in  their  wains,  and  are  invoked  for  increase  to  the
crops  and  kindly  rain ;  on  p.  107,  anent  the  car  of  a  Gothic  god
whose  name  Sozomen  withholds,  I  have  hinted  at  Nerthus.

The  interchange  of  male  and  female  deities  is,  luckily  for  us
here,  set  in  a  clear  light,  by  the  prayers  and  rhymes  to  Wuotan  as  god
of  harvest,  which  we  have  quoted  above  (p.  155  seq.),  being  in  other
Low  German  districts  handed  over  straight  to  a  goddess.  When
the  cottagers,  we  are  told,  are  mowing  rye,  they  let  some  of  the
stalks  stand,  tie  flowers  among  them,  and  when  they  have  finished
work,  assemble  round  the  clump  left  standing,  take  hold  of  the  ears
of  rye,  and  shout  three  times  over :

Fru  Gaue,  haltet  ju  fauer,        Lady  Gaue,  keep  you  some  fodder,
diit  jar  up  den  wagen,  This  year  on  the  waggon,

dat  ander  jar  up  der  kare  ! 2  Next  year  on  the  wheelbarrow.
Whereas  Wode  had  better  fodder  promised  him  for  the  next  year,
Dame  Gaue  seems  to  receive  notice  of  a  falling  off  in  the  quantity
of  the  gift  presented.  In  both  cases  I  see  the  shyness  of  the
Christians  at  retaining  a  heathen  sacrifice :  as  far  as  words  go,  the
old  gods  are  to  think  no  great  things  of  themselves  in  future.

In  the  district  about  Hameln,  it  was  the  custom,  when  a  reaper
in  binding  sheaves  passed  one  over,  or  left  anything  standing  in  the

Alaric's  funeral  (Jornand.  cap.  29),  or  those  who  have  hidden  a  treasure,  Landn.
5,  12  (see  Suppl.).

1  Speaking  of  Nerthus,  we  ought  to  notice  Ptolemy's  Nertereans,  though  he
places  them  in  a  very  different  locality  from  that  occupied  by  the  races  who
revere  Nerthus  in  Tacitus.

2  Braunschw.  anz.  1751,  p.  900.     Hannov.  gel.  anz.  1751,  p.  662  [is  not
'  haltet '  a  mistake  for  '  hal '  and  something  else  ?]     In  the  Altenburg  country
they  call  this  harvest-custom  building  a  barn.     Arch,  des  henneb.  vereins  2,  91.


ERDA,  NIRDU,   GAUE,  FIRGUNIA,  HLUODANA.  253

field,  to  jeer  at  him  by  calling  out :  '  scholl  diit  dei  gaue  frue  (or,
defru  Gauen]  hebben  (is  that  for  dame  G.)  ?  'l

In  the  Prignitz  they  say  fru  Gode,  and  call  the  bunch  of  ears
left  standing  in  each  field  vergodendeelsstrtiss,  i.e.,  dame  G  ode's
portion  bunch.2  Ver  is  a  common  contraction  for  frau  [as  in
jungfer] ;  but  a  dialect  which  says  fauer  instead  of  foer,  foder,  will
equally  have  Gaue  for  Gode,  Guode.  This  Guode  can  be  no  other
than  Gwode,  Wode ;  and,  explaining  fru  by  the  older  fro,  fro  Woden
or  fro  Gaue  (conf.  Gaunsdag  for  Wonsdag,  p.  125)  will  denote  a  lord
and  god,  not  a  goddess,  so  that  the  form  of  prayer  completely
coincides  with  those  addressed  to  Wuotan,  and  the  fruh  Wod  sub
joined  in  the  note  on  p.  156  (see  SuppL).  If  one  prefer  the  notion
of  a  female  divinity,  which,  later  at  all  events,  was  undoubtedly
attached  to  the  term  fru,  we  might  perhaps  bring  in  the  ON".  Goi
(Sn.  358.  Fornald.  sog.  2,  17),  a  mythic  maiden,  after  whom
February  was  named.  The  Greek  Tala  or  Fi)  is,  I  consider,  out  of
the  question  here.

In  an  AS.  formulary  for  restoring  fertility  to  fields  that  have
been  bewitched,  there  occur  two  remarkable  addresses  ;  the  first  is
'  crce,  erce,  erce,  eorfian  modor  I '  by  which  not  the  earth  herself,  but
her  mother  seems  to  be  meant;  however, the  expression  is  still
enigmatical.  Can  there  lie  disguised  in  erce  a  proper  name  Erce  gen,
Ercan,  connected  with  the  OHG.  adj.  erchan,  simplex,  genuinus,
germanus  ?  it  would  surely  be  more  correct  to  write  Eorce 1  ought
it  to  suggest  the  lady  Erche,  Hcrkja,  Herche,  Helclie  renowned  in
our  heroic  legend  ?  The  distinct  traces  in  Low  Saxon  districts  of  a
divine  dame,  Herke  or  Harke  by  name,  are  significant.  In  Jessen,
a  little  town  on  the  Elster,  not  far  from  Wittenberg,  they  relate  of
frau  Herke  what  in  other  places,  as  will  be  shown,  holds  good  of
Freke,  Berhta  and  Holda.  In  the  Mark  she  is  called  frau  Harke,
and  is  said  to  fly  through  the  country  between  Christmas  and
Twelfth-day,  dispensing  earthly  goods  in  abundance ;  by  Epiphany
the  maids  have  to  finish  spinning  their  flax,  else  frau  Harke  gives


1  Hannov.  gel.  anz.  1751,  p.  726.     More  pleasing  to  the  ear  is  the  short
prayer  of  the  heathen  Lithuanians,  to  their  earth-goddess,  when  in  drinking
they  spilt  some  of  the  ale  on  the  ground  :  Zemenyle  ziedekle,  pakylek  musii
ranku  darbus  !  blooming  Earth,  bless  the  work  of  our  hands.

2  Adalb.  Kuhns  markische  sagen,  pp.  337.  372,  pref.  p.  vii.     Conf.  in  ch.
II  the  cry  of  the  dwarfs  :  '  de  gaue  fru  is  im  dot  (dead) '.


254  GODDESSES.

them  a  good  scratching  or  soils  their  distaff  (see  Suppl.).1  In
earlier  times  a  simpler  form  of  the  name  was  current ;  we  find  in
Gobelinus  Persona  (Meibom  1,  235)  the  following  account,  which
therefore  reaches  back  beyond  1418  :  Quodautem  Hera  colebatur  a
Saxonibus,  videtur  ex  eo  quod  quidam  vulgares  recitant  se  audivisse
ab  antiquis,  prout  et  ego  audivi,  quod  inter  festum  nativitatis  Christ!
ad  festum  epiphaniae  Domini  domina  Hera  volat  per  aera,  quoniam
apud  gentiles  Junoni  aer  deputabatur.  Et  quod  Juno  quandoque
Hera  appellabatur  et  depingebatur  cum  tintinnabulis  et  alis,
dicebant  vulgares  praedicto  tempore :  vrovje  Hera  sen  corrupto
nomine  vro  Here  de  vlughet,  et  credebant  illam  sibi  conferre  rerum
temporalium  abundantiam.  Have  we  here  still  extant  the  old  Ero,
"Epa,  Hero  meaning  earth  ?  and  does  "Hpa  belong  to  it  ?  If  the
AS.  Erce  also  contains  the  same,  then  even  the  diminutive  form
Herke  must  be  of  high  antiquity.

The  second  address  in  the  same  AS.  ritual  is  a  call  to  the  earth :
'  Ml  wes  thu  folde,  fira  modor ! '  hale  (whole)  be  thou  earth,  mother
of  men ;  which  agrees  with  the  expression  terra  mater  in  Tacitus.

The  widely  extended  worship  of  the  teeming  nourishing  earth
would  no  doubt  give  rise  to  a  variety  of  names  among  our  fore
fathers,  just  as  the  service  of  Gaia  and  her  daughter  Rhea  mixed
itself  up  with  that  of  Ops  mater,  Ceres  and  Cybele.2  To  me  the
resemblance  between  the  cultus  of  ISTerthus  and  that  of  the  Phrygian
mother  of  gods  appears  well  worthy  of  notice.  Lucretius  2,  597 —
641  describes  the  peregrination  of  the  magna  deum  mater  in  her
lion-drawn  car  through  the  lands  of  the  earth  :

Quo  mine  insigni  per  magnas  praedita  terras
horrifice  fertur  divinae  matris  imago     .     .     .
Ergo  quom  primum  magnas  invecta  per  urbeis
munificat  tacita  mortaleis  inuta  salute,
aere  atque  argento  sternunt  iter  omne  viarum,
largifica  stipe  ditantes,  ninguntque  rosarum
floribus,  umbrantes  matrem  comitumque  cater vam.
The  Romans  called  the  VI.  kal.  Apr.  lavatio  matris  detim,  and  kept
it  as  a  feast,  Ovid.  fast.  4,  337  :

1  Adalb.  Kuhn  in  the  Markische  forschungen  1,  123-4,  and  Mark,  sagen
pp.  371-2  ;  conf.  Singularia  magdeburg.  1740.  12,  768.

~  Ops  mater  =  terra  mater  ;  Ceres  =  Geres,  quod  gerit  fmges,  antiquis  enim
C  quod  mine  G  ;  Varro  de  ling,  lat,  ed.  0.  Mtiller  p.  25.  Her  Greek  appella
tion  Ar]ij.t]TT)p  seems  also  to  lead  to  yrj  ^rr]p  (see  Suppl.).


EK.DA,   N1RDU,   GAUE,  FIRGUNIA,   HLUODANA.  255

Est  locus,  in  Tiberin  qua  lubricus  influit  Almo,
et  nomen  magno  perdit  ab  amne  minor ;

illic  purpurea  canus  cum  veste  sacerdos

Almonis  dominam  sacraque  lavit  aquis.

Ammian.  Marcell.  23,  3  (Paris  1681,  p.  355) :  Ad  Callinicum,— ubi
ante  diem  sextum  kal.  quo  Eomae  matri  deorum  pompae  celebrantur
annales,  et  carpentum  quo  vehitur  simulacrum  Almonis  undis  ablui
perhibetur.  Conf.  Prudentius,  hymn.  10,  154 :

Nudare  plantas  ante  carpentum  scio

proceres  togatos  matris  Idaeae  sacris.

Lapis  nigellus  evehendus  essedo

muliebris  oris  clausus  argento  sedet,

quern  dum  ad  lavacrum  praeeundo  ducitis

pedes  remotis  atterentes  calceis

Almonis  usque  pervenitis  rivulum.

Exactly  in  the  same  way  Nerthus,  after  she  has  travelled  round  the
country,  is  bathed  in  the  sacred  lake  in  her  waggon  ;  and  I  find  it
noted,  that  the  Indian  JBhavani,  wife  of  Shiva,  is  likewise  driven
round  on  her  feast-day,  and  bathed  in  a  secret  lake  by  the  Brahmans
(see  Suppl.).1

Nerthus's  '  island  in  the  ocean '  has  been  supposed  to  mean
Eiigen,  in  the  middle  of  which  there  is  actually  a  lake,  called  the
Schwarze  see,  or  Burgsee.  What  is  told  as  a  legend,  that  there  in
ancient  times  the  devil  was  adored,  that  a  maiden  was  maintained
in  his  service,  and  that  when  he  was  weary  of  her,  she  was  drowned

1  Gregor.  Turon.  de  glor.  conf.  cap.  77  compares  or  confounds  with  the
Phrygian  Cybele  some  Gallic  goddess,  whose  worship  he  describes  as  follows  : —
'Ferunt  etiam  in  hac  urbe  (Augustoduno)  simulachrum  fuisse  Berecynthiae,  sicut
sancti  martyris  Symphoriani  passionis  declarat  historia.  Hanc  cum  in
carpento,  pro  salvatione  agrorum  et  vinearum  suarum,  misero  gentilitatis  more
deferrent,  adfuit  supradictus  Simplicius  episcopus,  hand  procul  adspiciens
cantantes  atque  psallentes  ante  hoc  simulachrum,  gemitumque  pro  stnltitia  plebis
ad  Deum  emittens  ait :  illuinina  quaeso,  Domine,  oculos  hujus  populi,  ut
cognoscat,  quia  simnlachrum  Berecynthiae  nihil  est  !  et  facto  signo  crncis  contra
protinus  simulachrum  in  terram  ruit.  Ac  defixa  solo  animalia,  quae  plaustrum
hoc  quo  vehebatur  trahebant,  moveri  non  poterant.  Stupet  vulgus  innumerum,
et  deam  laesam  omnis  caterva  conclainat ;  immolantur  victimae,  animalia
verberantur,  sed  moveri  non  possunt.  Tune  quadringenti  de  ilia  stulta
multitudine  viri  conjuncti  simul  ajunt  ad  invicem  :  si  virtus  est  ulla  deitatis,
erigatur  sponte,  jubeatque  boves,  qui  telluri  sunt  stabiliti,  procedere  ;  certe  si
moveri  nequit,  nihil  est  deitatis  in  ea.  Tune  accedentes,  et  immolantes  unum
de  pecoribus,  cum  viderent  deam  suam  nullatenus  posse  moveri,  relicto
gentilitatis  errore,  inquisitoque  antistite  loci,  conversi  ad  unitatem  ecclesiae,
cognoscentes  veri  Dei  magnitudinem.  sancto  sunt  baptismate  consecrati.'
Compare  the  Legenda  aurea  cap.  117,  where  a  festum  Veneris  is  mentioned.


256  GODDESSES.

in  the  black  lake,1  must  have  arisen,  gross  as  the  perversion  may
be,  out  of  the  account  in  Tacitus,  who  makes  the  goddess,  when
satiated  with  the  converse  of  men,  disappear  in  the  lake  with  her
attendants.  But  there  are  no  other  local  features  to  turn  the  scale
in  its  favour  ;2  and  the  Danish  islands  in  the  Baltic  have  at  least
as  good  a  claim  to  have  been  erewhile  the  sacred  seat  of  the
goddess.

We  have  yet  more  names  for  the  earth-goddess,  that  demand
investigation :  partly  Old  Norse,  partly  to  be  gathered  from  the
Romans.  In  the  Skaldskaparmal,  p.  178,  she  is  named  both
Fidrgyn  and  Hloftyn.

Of  Fidrgyn  I  have  treated  already,  p.  172  ;  if  by  the  side
of  this  goddess  there  could  stand  a  god  Fiorgynn  and  a  neuter
common  noun  fairguni,  if  the  idea  of  Thor's  mother  at  the  same
time  passes  into  that  of  the  thundergod,  it  exactly  parallels  and
confirms  a  female  Nertlms  (Goth.  Nafrjms,  gen.  Nair]?aus)  by  the
side  of  the  masculine  Nior&r  (Nerthus),  just  as  Freyja  goes  with
Freyr.  If  it  was  not  wrong  to  infer  from  Perkunas  a  mountain-
god  Fairguneis,  Lithuanian  mythology  has  equally  a  goddess
Perkunatele.

Hloftyn  is  derived  in  the  same  way  as  Fiorgyn,  so  that  we  may
safely  infer  a  Goth.  Hlofrunja  and  OHG.  Hluodunia.  In  Yoluspa
56  Thorr  is  called  '  mogr  HldSynjarj  which  is  son  of  earth  again  ;
and  Fornald.  sog.  1,  469  says :  i  Hlddynjar  skaut.  In  the  OK
language  hldff  is  a  hearth,3  the  goddess's  name  therefore  means
protectress  of  the  fireplace;  and  our  OHG.  herd  (p.  251),  beside  solum
or  terra,  also  denotes  precisely  focus,  arula,  fornacula,  the  hearth
being  to  us  the  very  basis  of  a  human  habitation,  a  paternal  Lar,  so
to  speak,  corresponding  to  the  mother  earth.  The  Eomans  also
worshipped  a  goddess  of  earth  and  of  fire  under  the  common  name
of  Fornax,  dea  fornacalis*  But  what  is  still  more  important  to  us,
there  was  discovered  on  Low  Rhenish  ground  a  stone,  first  kept  at
Cleve  and  afterwards  at  Xanten,  with  the  remarkable  inscription :

1  Deutsclie  sagen,  num.  132.

2  Of  Hertha  a  proverb  is  said  to  be  current  in  Pomerania  :  '  cle  Hertha  gift
grns,  und  fiillt  schiin  und  fass  (barn  and  vessel),' Hall.  allg.  lit.  z.  1823,  p.  375).
But  the  un-Saxon  rhyme  of  gras  with  fass  (for  fat)  sufficiently  betrays  the
workmanship.     It  is  clumsily  made  up  after  the  well-known  rule  of  the  farmer  :
'  Mai  kiihl  und  nass  fiillt  scheunen  und  fass '  (see  Suppl.).

s  Liter,  strues,  n.ra,  from  hlaSan  lilOS,  struere,  Gramm.  2,  10,  num.  83.
*  Ovid.  fast.  2,  513.


isis.  257

DEAE  HLUDANAE  SACEVM  C.  TIBERIVS  VERVS.  Hludana
is  neither  a  Roman  nor  a  Celtic  goddess,  but  her  name  answers
perfectly  to  that  of  the  Norse  divinity,  and  Sk.  Thorlacius  has  the
merit  of  having  recognised  and  learnedly  proved  the  identity  of  the
two.1  In  this  inscription  I  see  striking  evidence  of  the  oneness  of
Norse  and  German  mythology.  Thorlacius,  not  without  reason,
compares  the  name  with  ATJTCI)  and  Latona.  Might  not  Hldrriffi,
an  epithet  of  Thorr  the  son  of  Hloftyn,  be  explained  as  Hloftrid'i  ?

2.  TANFANA.    NEHALENNIA.

Another  goddess  stands  wrapt  in  thicker  darkness,  whom
Tacitus  calls  Tanfana,  and  a  stone  inscription  Tamfana  (TAM-
FANAE  SACRUM,  p.  80).  We  are  sure  of  her  name,  and  the
'termination  -ana  is  the  same  as  in  Hludana  and  other  fern,  proper
names,  Bertana,  Rapana,  Madana.  The  sense  of  the  word,  and
with  it  any  sure  insight  into  the  significance  of  her  being,  are
locked  up  from  us,

We  must  also  allude  briefly  to  the  Belgian  or  Frisian  dea
NeJialennia,  about  whose  name  several  inscriptions  of  like  import2
remove  all  doubt ;  but  the  word  has  also  given  rise  to  forced  and
unsatisfying  interpretations.  In  other  inscriptions  found  on  the
lower  part  of  the  Rhine  there  .occur  compounds,  whose  termination
(-nekis,  -nehabus,  dat.  plurals  fern.)  seems  to  contain  the  same  word
that  forms  the  first  half  of  Nehalennia ;  their  plural  number
appears  to  indicate  nymphs  rather  than  a  goddess,  yet  there  also
hangs  about  them  the  notion  of  a  mother  (^see  ch.  XVI,  the
Walachuriun).

3.  (Isis).

The  account  in  Tacitus  of  the  goddess  Isis  carries  us  much
farther,  because  it  can  be  linked  with  living  traditions  of  a  cultus
that  still  lingered  in  the  Mid.  Ages.  Immediately  after  mentioning
the  worship  of  Mercurius,  Hercules,  and  Mars,  he  adds  (cap.  9) :
Pars  Suevorum  et  Isidi  sacrificat  Unde  causa  et  origo  peregrine

1  Antiq.  bor.  spec.  3,  Hafn.  1782.     Conf.  Fiedler,  gesch.  tindalt.  cles  imtern
Germaniens,  1,  *22(i.  Steiner's  cod.  inscr.  Rheni  no.  632.    Gotfr.  b'chiitze,  in  his
essay  De  dea  Hludana,  Lips.  1748,  perceived  the  value  of  the  stone,  but  could
not  discern  the  bearings  of  the  matter.

2  Montfaucon  ant.  expl.  2,  443.     Vredii  hist.  Flandr.  1,  xliv.     Mem.  de
1'acad.  celt.  1,  199—245.     Mone,  heidenth.  2,  346.

17


258  GODDESSES.

sacro,  parum  comperi,  nisi  quod  signum  ipsum,  in  modum  liburnae
figuratum,  docet  advectam  religionem.  The  importation  from
abroad  can  hardly  consist  in  the  name  Isis,  seeing  that  Mercury,
Mars,  Hercules,  names  that  must  have  sounded  equally  un-
German,  raised  no  difficulty ;  what  looked  foreign  was  the  symbol,
the  figure  of  a  ship,  reminding  the  writer  of  the  Eoman  navigium
Isidis.

When  spring  had  set  in,  and  the  sea,  untraversed  during  winter,
was  once  more  navigable,  the  Greeks  and  Eomans  used  to  hold  a
solemn  procession,  and  present  a  ship  to  Isis.     This  was  done  on
the  fifth  of  March  (III  non.  Mart.),  and  the  day  is  marked  in  the  j
kalendarium  rusticum  as  Isidis  navigium.1     The  principal  evidence  {
is  found  in  Apuleius  and  Lactantius,2  two  writers  who  are  later
than  Tacitus,  but  the  custom  must  have  reached  back  to  a  much
older  date.     On  Alexandrian  coins  Isis  appears  walking  by  the  side
of  Pharus,  unfurling  a  sail.

Say  that  from  Egypt  the  worship  of  Isis  had  penetrated  to
Greece,  to  Rome,  how  are  we  to  imagine,  that  in  the  first  century,  or
before,  it  had  got  itself  conveyed  to  one  particular  race  inhabiting
the  heart  of  Germany  ?  It  must  have  been  a  similar  cultus,  not
the  same,  and  perhaps  long  established  amongst  other  Germans  as
well.

I  will  here  draw  attention  to  a  strange  custom  of  a  much  later
time,  which  appears  to  me  to  be  connected  with  this.  About  the
year  1133,  in  a  forest  near  Inda  (in  Eipuaria),  a  ship  was  built,  set
upon  wheels,  and  drawn  about  the  country  by  men  who  were  yoked
to  it,  first  to  Aachen  (Aix),  then  to  Maestricht,  where  mast  and  sail
were  added,  and  up  the  river  to  Tongres,  Looz  and  so  on,  every
where  with  crowds  of  people  assembling  and  escorting  it.  Where-
ever  it  halted,  there  were  joyful  shouts,  songs  of  triumph  and  dancing

1  Gesner,  script,  rei  rust.,  ed.  Lips.   1773.  1,  886  ;  so  also  in  the  Calend.
vallense,  and  in  the  Cal.  lambec.  (Graevii  thes.  8,  98).

2  Apuleii  met.  lib.  11  (Ruhnken  p.  764-5)  :  Diem,  qui  dies  ex  ista  nocte
nascetur,  aeterna  mini  nuncupavit  religio  ;  quo  sedatis  hibernis  tempestatibus ,
et  lenitis  maris  procellosis  nuctibus,  navigabili  jam  pelago  rudem  dedicantesl
carinam  primitias  commeatus  libant  mei  sacerdotes.     Id  sacrum  sollicita  nee  |
profana  mente  debebis  operiri ;  nam  meo  monitu  sacerdos  in  ipso  procmctu
pompae  roseam  manu  dextra  sistro    (Egyptian  timbrel)  cohaerentem  gestabit
coronam.     Incontanter  ergo  dimotis  turbulis  alacer  continuare  pompam  in  earn,  i
volentia  fretus  ;  et  de  proximo  dementer  velut  manum  sacerdotis  deosculabun-
dus  rosis  decerptis,  pessimae  mihique  detestabilis  diulum  belluae  istius  corio  te
protinus  exue.     Lactantius,  instit.    1,  27  :   Certus  dies  habetur  in  fastis,  quo
Isid-is  navifjium  celebratur,  quae  res  docet  illain  non  tranasse,  sed  navigasse.


isis.  259

round  the  ship  kept  up  till  far  into  the  night.  The  approach  of  the
ship  was  notified  to  the  towns,  which  opened  their  gates  and  went
out  to  meet  it.

We  have  a  detailed,  yet  not  complete,  report  of  it  in  Rodulfi
chronicon  abbatiae  S.  Trudonis,  lib.  xi.,  which  on  account  of  its
importance  I  will  here  insert,  from  Pertz  12,  309  seq.:

Est  genus  mercenariorum,  quorum  officium  est  ex  lino  et  lana
texere  telas,  hoc  procax  et  superbum  super  alios  mercenaries  vulgo
reputatur,  ad  quorum  procacitatem  et  superbiam  humiliandam  et
propriam  injuriam  de  eis  ulciscendam  pauper  quidam  rusticus  ex
villa  nomine  Inda1  hanc  diabolicam  excogitavit  technam.     Accepta
a  judicibus  fiducia  et  a  levibus  hominibus  auxilio,  qui  gaudent  jocis
et  novitatibus,  in  proximo,   silva   navem   composuit,   et   earn  rotis
suppositis  affigcns  vehibilem  super  terram  efecit,  obtinuit  quoque  a
potestatibus,  ut  injectis  funibus  textorum  humeris  ex  Inda  Aquis-
granum  traheretur.2      Aquis  suscepta  cum  utriusque  sexus  grandi
hominum  processione :  nihilominus  a  textoribus  Trajectum  [Maes-
tricht]  est  provecta,  ibi  emendata,  malo  veloque  insignita  Tungris
[Tongres]  est   inducts,  de  Tungris   Los   [Looz].      Audiens   abbas
(sancti  Trudonis)3    Eodulfus  navim  illam  infausto  omine  compactam
malaque  solutam   alite    cum   hujusmodi  gentilitatis  studio   nostro
oppido  adventare,  praesago  spiritu  hominibus  praedicabat,  ut  ejus
susceptione  abstinerent,  quia  maligni  spiritus  sub  hac  ludificatione
in  ea  traherentur,  in  proximoque  seditio  per  earn  moveretur,  undo
caedes,  incendia  rapinaeque   fierent,  et  humanus   sanguis  multus
funderetur.      Quern    ista   declamantem    omnibus   diebus,   quibus
malignorum  spirituum  illud  simulacrum  loci  morabatur,  oppidani
nostri  audire  noluerunt,  sed  eo  studio  et  gaudio  excipientes,  quo
perituri  Trojani  fatalem  equum  in   medio   fori   sui  dedicaverunt,
statimque  proscriptionis  sententiam  accipiunt  villae  textores,  qui  ad
prof  anas  hujiis  simulacri  excubias  venirent  tardiores.     Pape  !  Quia
vidit   unquam   tantam    (ut    ita   liceat   latinisare)   in   rationalibus
animalibus  brutitatem  ?     quis  tantam  in  renatis  in  Christo  gentili-

1  Inden  in  the  Jiilich  country,  afterwards  Corneliniiinster,  not  far  from
Aix  ;  conf.  Pertz  1,  394.  488.  514.  592.    2,  299.  489.

2  This  of  ships  being  built  in  a  wood  and  carried  on  men's  shoidders  reminds
one  of  Saxp  Gram.  p.  93,  and  of  the  « Argo  humeris  travecta  Alpes '  (Pliny  N.H.
3,  18  ;  their  being  set  on  wheels,  of  Nestor's  story  about  Oleg  ;  conf.  the  ship
of  Fro  above.     [An  inadvertence  on  the  author's  part  :  the  ship  is  not '  carried/
but  '  drawn  by  ropes  thrown  over  the  weavers'  shoulders '.]

3  St.  Tron  between  Liege  and  Louvain.


260  GODDESSES.

tatem  ?  Cogebant  sententia  proscriptionis  textores,  nocte  et  die
navim  stipare  omni  armaturae  genere,  solicitasque  ei  excubias  nocte
et  die  continuare.  Mimmque  fuit,  quod  non  cogebant  eos  ante
navim  Ncptuno  hostias  immolare,  de  cujus  naves  esse  solent  regione,
sed  Neptunus  eas  Marti  reservabat,  quod  postea  multipliciter  fac-
tum  est.

Textores  interim  occulto  sed  praecordiali  gemitu  Denm  justum
jndicem  super  eos  vindicem  invocabant,  qui  ad  hanc  ignominiam
eos  detrudebant,  cum  juxta  rectam  vitam  antiquorum  Christianorum
et  apostolicorum  virorum  manuum  suarum  laboribus  viverent,  nocte
et  die  operantes,  unde  alerentur  et  vestirentur,  liberisque  suis
idipsum  providerent.  Quaerebant  et  conquerebantur  ad  invicem
lacrymabiliter,  unde  illis  magis  quam  aliis  mercenariis  haec
ignominia  et  vis  contumeliosa,  cum  inter  Christianos  alia  plura
essent  officia  suo  multum  aspernabiliora,  cum  tamen  nullum
dicerent  aspernabile,  de  quo  Christianus  posset  se  sine  peccato
conducere,  illudque  solum  esset  vitabile  et  ignobile  quod  immun-
ditiam  peccati  coritraheret  animae,  meliorque  sit  rusticus  textor  et
pauper,  quam  exactor  orphanorum  et  spoliator  viduarum  urbanus
et  nobilis  judex.  Cumque  haec  et  eorum  similia  secum,  ut  dixi,
lacrymabiliter  conquererentur,  concrepabant  ante  illud,  nescio  cujus
potius  dicam,  Bacclii  an  Veneris,  Neptuni  sive  Martis,  sed  ut  verius
dicam  ante  omnium  malignorum  spirituum  execrabile  domicilium
genera  diversorum  musicorum,  turpia  cantica  et  religioni  Christianae
indigna  condnentium.  Sancitum  quoque  erat  a  judicibus,  ut  praeter
textores,  quicumque  ad  tactum  navi  appropinquarent,  pignus  de  collo
eorum  ercptum  iextoribus  relinquerent,  nisi  se  ad  libitum  redimerent.
Sed  quid  faciam  ?  loquarne  an  sileam  ?  utinam  spiritus  mendacii
stillaret  de  labiis  meis  :  sub  fugitiva  adhuc  luce  diei  imminente
luna  matronarum  catervae  abjecto  femineo  pudore  audientes  strepi-
tum  livjus  vanitatis,  passis  capillis  de  stratis  suis  exiliebant,  aliae
seminudae,  aliae  simplice  tcntum  clamide  circumdatae,  chorosque  du-
centibus  circa  navim  impudenter  irrumpendo  se  admiscebant.  Videres
ibi  aliquando  mille  hominum  animas  sexus  utriusque  prodigiosum
et  infaustum  cekusma  usque  ad  noctis  medium  celebrare.  Quando
vero  execrabilis  ilia  chorea  rumpebatur,  emisso  ingenti  clamore  vo-
cum  inconditarum  sexus  uterque  hac  illacque  bacchando  ferebatur ;
quae  tune  videres  agere,  nostrum  est  tacere  et  deflere,  quibus  modo
contingit  graviter  luere.  Istis  tarn  nefandis  factis  plus  quam  duo-


isis.  261

dedm  diebus  supradicto  ritu  celebratis,  conferebant  simul  oppidani
quid  agerent  amodo  de  deducenda  a  se  navi.

Qui  sanioris  erant  consilii,  et  qui  earn  susceptam  fuisse  do-
lebant,  timentes  Deum  pro  his  quae  facta  viderant  et  audierant,
et  sibi  pro  his  futura  conjiciebant,  hortabantur  ut  comburatur
(combureretur)  aut  isto  vel  illo  modo  de  medio  tolleretur ;  sed
stulta  quorundam  coecitas  huic  salubri  consilio  contumeliose  re-
nitebatur.  Nam  maligni  spiritus,  qui  in  ilia  ferebantur,  disse-
minaverant  in  populo,  quod  locus  ille  et  inhabitantes  prdbroso
nomine  amplius  notarentur,  apud  quos  remansisse  inveniretur.  Dedu-
cendam  igitur  earn  ad  villam,  quae  juxta  nos  est,  Leugues  decre-
verunt.  Interea  Lovaniensis  dominus  audiens  de  daemonioso  navis
illius  ridiculo,  instruetusque  a  religiosis  viris  terrae  suae  de  illo
vitando  et  terrae  suae  arcendo  monstro,  gratiam  suam  et  amicitiam
mandat  oppidanis  nostris,  commonefaciens  eos  humiliter,  ut  pacem
illam  quae  inter  illos  et  se  erat  reformata  et  sacramentis  confir-
mata  non  infringerent,  et  inde  praecipue  illud  diaboli  ludibrium
viciniae  suae  inferrent ;  quod  si  ludum  esse  dicerent,  quaererent
alium  cum  quo  inde  luderent.  Quod  si  ultra  hoc  mandatum
committerent,  pacem  praedictam  in  eum  infringerent  et  ipse  vin-
dictam  in  eos  ferro  et  igne  exsequeretur.  Id  ipsum  mandaverat
Durachiensibus  dominis,  qui  et  homines  ejus  fuerant  manuatim,  et
interpositis  sacramentis  et  obsidibus  datis  sibi  confoederati.  Hoc
cum  jam  tertio  fecisset,  spretus  est  tarn  ab  oppidanis  nostris  quam
Durachiensibus  dominis.  Xam  propter  peccata  inhabitantium  vo-
lebat  Dominus  mittere  super  locum  nostrum  ignem  et  arma  Lo-
vaniensium.  Ad  hanc  igituTplebeiamfatuitatem  adjunxit  se  dominus
Gislebertus  (advocatus  abbatiae  S.  Tmdonis)  contra  generis  sui
nobilitatem,  trahendamque  decrevit  navem  illam  terream  usque
Leugues  ultra  Durachiensem  villam,  quod  et  fecit  malo  nostro
omine  cum  omni  oppidanorum  nostrorum  multitudine  et  ingenti
mebaechantium  vociferations.  Leuguenses,  oppidanis  nostris  pru-
dentiores  et  Lovaniensis  domini  mandatis  obsequentes,  portas
suas  clauserunt  et  infausti  ominis  monstrnm  intrare  non  per-
miserunt.

Lovaniensis  autem  dominus  precum  suarum  et  mandatorum
contemptum  nolens  esse  inultum,  diem  constituit  comitibus  tanquam
suis  hominibus,  qui  neque  ad  primum,  neque  ad  secundum,  sed
nee  ad  tertium  venire  voluerunt  Eduxit  ergo  contra  eos  et  contra


262  GODDESSES.

nos  multorum  multitudinis  exercitum  armatorum  tarn  peditum
quam  militum.  Nostro  igitur  oppido  seposito,  tanquam  firmius
munito  et  bellicosorum  hominum  pleno,  primum  impetum  in  Dura-
cliienses  fecit,  quibus  viriliter  resistentibus  castellum,  nescio  quare,
cum  posset  non  obsedit,  sed  inter  Leugues  et  Durachium  pernocta-
vit.  Cumque  sequenti  die  exercitum  applicare  disponeret  et  ex
quatuor  partibus  assultum  faceret,  habebat  enim  ingentem  multi-
tudinem,  supervenit  Adelbero  Metensium  primicerius  filiorum  Lo-
vaniensis  domini  avunculus,  cujus  interventu,  quia  comitissa  Dura-
chiensis  erat  soror  ejus,  et  Durachiense  erat  castellum  sancti
Lamberti,  Lovaniensis  dominus  ab  impugnatione  cessavit  et  ab
obsidione  se  amovit,  promisso  ei  quod  Durachienses  paulo  post  ei
ad  justitiam  suam  educerentur.  Et  cum  ista  et  alia  de  dominis
et  inter  dominos  tractarentur,  pedites  et  milites  per  omnia  nostra
circumjacentia  se  diffuderunt,  villas  nostras,  ecclesias,  molendina
et  quaecumque  occurrebant  combustioni  et  perditioni  tradentes,
recedentes  vero  quae  longe  a  nobis  fuerant  prout  cuique  adjacebant
inter  se  diviserunt.

Obviously,  throughout  the  narrative  everything  is  put  in  an
odious  light ;  but  the  proceeding  derives  its  full  significance  from
this  very  fact,  that  it  was  so  utterly  repugnant  to  the  clergy,  and
that  they  tried  in  every  way  to  suppress  it  as  a  sinful  and
heathenish  piece  of  work.  On  the  other  hand,  the  secular  power
had  authorized  the  procession,  and  was  protecting  it ;  it  rested  with
the  several  townships,  whether  to  grant  admission  to  the  approach
ing  ship,  and  the  popular  feeling  seems  to  have  ruled  that  it  would
be  shabby  not  to  forward  it  on  its  way.

Mere  dancing  and  singing,  common  as  they  must  have  been  on
all  sorts  of  occasions  with  the  people  of  that  time,  could  not  have
so  exasperated  the  clergy.  They  call  the  ship  'malignorum
spirituum  simulacrum  '  and  '  diaboli  ludibrium,'  take  for  granted  it
Avas  knocked  together  '  infausto  omine '  and  f  gentilitatis  studio,'
that  '  maligni  spiritus '  travel  inside  it,  nay,  that  it  may  well  be
called  a  ship  of  Neptune  or  Mars,  of  Bacchus  or  Venus  ;  they  must
burn  it,  or  make  away  with  it  somehow.

Probably  among  the  common  people  of  that  region  there  still
survived  some  recollections  of  an  ancient  heathen  worship,  which,
though  checked  and  circumscribed  for  centuries,  had  never  yet  been
entirely  uprooted.  I  consider  this  ship,  travelling  about  the


isis.  263

country,  welcomed  by  streaming  multitudes,  and  honoured  with
festive  song  and  dance,  to  be  the  car  of  the  god,  or  rather  of  that
goddess  whom  Tacitus  identifies  with  Isis,  and  who  (like  Nerthus)
brought  peace  and  fertility  to  mortals.  As  the  car  was  covered  up,
so  entrance  to  the  interior  of  the  ship  seems  to  have  been  denied
to  men ;  there  need  not  have  been  an  image  of  the  divinity  inside.
Her  name  the  people  had  long  ago  forgotten,  it  was  only  the
learned  monks  that  still  fancied  something  about  Neptune  or  Mars,
Bacchus  or  Venus :  but  to  the  externals  of  the  old  festivity  the
people's  appetite  kept  returning  from  time  to  time.  How  should
that  '  pauper  rusticus '  in  the  wood  at  Inden  have  lighted  on  the
thought  of  building  a  ship,  had  there  not  been  floating  in  his  mind
recollections  of  former  processions,  perhaps  of  some  in  neighbour
ing  districts  ?

It  is  worthy  of  note,  that  the  weavers,  a  numerous  and  arrogant
craft  in  the  Netherlands,  but  hateful  to  the  common  herd,  were
compelled  to  draw  the  ship  by  ropes  tied  to  their  shoulders,  and  to
guard  it ;  in  return,  they  could  keep  the  rest  of  the  people  from
coming  too  near  it,  and  fine  or  take  pledges  from  those  who  did  so.1

Eodulf  does  not  say  what  became  at  last  of  the  '  terrea  navis,'
after  it  had  made  that  circuit ;  it  is  enough  for  him  to  relate,  how,
on  a  reception  being  demanded  for  it  and  refused,  heats  and  quarrels
arose,  which  could  only  be  cooled  in  open  war.  This  proves  the
warm  interest  taken  by  contemporaries,  fanned  as  it  was  to  a  flame
for  or  against  the  festival  by  the  secular  and  the  clerical  party.

There  are  traces  to  be  found  of  similar  ship -processions  at  the
beginning  of  spring  in  other  parts  of  Germany,  especially  in  Swabia,
which  had  then  become  the  seat  of  those  very  Suevi  of  Tacitus  (see
Suppl.).  A  minute  of  the  town-council  of  Ulrn,  dated  St.  Nicholas'
eve,  1530,  contains  this  prohibition:  '  Item,  there  shall  none,  by  day
nor  night,  trick  or  disguise  him,  nor  put  on  any  carnival  raiment,
moreover  shall  keep  him  from  the  going  about  of  the  plough  and
with  ships  on  pain  of  1  gulden  '.2  The  custom  of  drawing  the
plough  about  seems  to  have  been  the  more  widely  spread,  having

1  Doe3  the  author  imply  that  the  favour  of  the  peasantry,  as  opposed  to
artizans,   makes   it  likely   that   this   was   a  relic  of  the  worship  of  Earth  ?
Supposing  even  that  the  procession  was  that  of  the  German  Isis  ;    Tacitus
nowhere  tells  us  what  the  functions  of  this  Isis  were,  or  that  she  '  brought
peace  and  fertility'. — TRANS.

2  Carl  Ja'ger,  Schwab,  stadtewesen  des  MA.  (Mid.  Ages),  1,  525.


264  GODDESSES.

originally  no  doubt  been  performed  in  honour  of  the  divinity  from
whom   a   fruitful  year  and  the  thriving  of  crops  was  looked  for.
Like  the  ship-procession,  it  was  accompanied  by  dances  and  bon
fires.     Sebast.   Frank,  p.   ola  of  his  Weltbuch  :    '  On  the  Rhine,
Franconia  and  divers  other  places,  the  young  men  do  gather  all  the   I
dance-maidens  and  put  them  in  a  plough,  and  draw  their  piper,  who
sitteth  on  the  plough  piping,  into  the  water ;  in  other  parts  they
draw  a /m/  plough  kindled  with  a  fire  very  artificial  made  thereon,
until  it  fall  to  wrack.'     Enoch  Wiedemanri's  chronik  von  Hof  tells
how  '  On  Shrove-Tuesday  evil-minded  lads  drove  a  plough  about,
yoking  to  it  such  damsels  as  did  not  pay  ransom ;   others  went
behind   them   sprinkling   chopped   straw   and   sawdust.'      (Sa'chs.
provinz.  bl.  8,  347.)     Pfeiffer,  chron.  lips.  lib.  2,  §  53  :  '  Mos  erat
antiquitus  Lipsiae,  ut  liberalibus  (feast  of  Liber  or  Bacchus,  i.e.,
carnival)    personati  juvenes    per   vicos    ^ppidi    aratrum    circum
duccrent,  puellas  obvias  per  lasciviam  ad   illius  juguni   accedere
etiam  repugnantes  cogerent,  hoc  veluti  ludicro  poenam  expetentes
ab  iis  quae  innuptae  ad  eum  usque  diem  mansissent  \l     On  these
and  similar  processions,  more  details  will  be  given  hereafter;  I  only
wish  at  present  to  shew  that  the  driving  of  the  plough  and  that  of
the  ship  over   the  country  seem  both  to  rest  on  the  same   old-
heathen  idea,  which  after  the  dislodgement  of  the  gods  by  Chris
tianity  could  only  maintain  itself  in  unintelligible  customs  of  the
people,  and  so  by  degrees  evaporate  :  namely,  on  the  visible  mani
festation  of  a  beneficent  benign  divinity  among  men,  who  every
where  approached  it  with  demonstrations  of  joy,  when  in  springtime
the  soil  was  loose  again  and  the  rivers  released  from  ice,  so  that
agriculture  and  navigation  could  begin  anew.2     In  this  way  the

1  Scheffer's  Haltaus,  202.      Hans  Sachs  also  relates  I.  5,  508a,  how  the
maids  who  had  not  taken  men,  were  forced  into  the  plough  (see  Suppl.).

2  To  this  day,  in  the  churches  of  some  villages  of  Holstein,  largely  inha
bited  by  seamen,  there  hang  little  ships,  which  in  springtime,  when  navigation
re-operis,  are  decorated  with  ribbons  and  flowers  :  quite  the  Roman  custom  in
the  case  of  Isis  (p.  258).    We  also  find  at  times  silver  sliips  hung  up  in  churches,
which  voyagers  in  stress  of  weather  have  vowed  in  case  of  a  safe  arrival  home  ;
an  old  instance  of  this  I  will  borrow  from  the  Vita  Godehardi  Hildesiensis  :
Fuit  tune  temporis  in  Trajectensi  episcopatu  vir  quidam  arti  mercatoriae  dedi-
tus,  qui  frequenter  mare  transiret ;  hie  quodam  tern  pore  maxima  tempestate  in
medio  mari  deprehenditur,  ab  omnibus  conclamatur,  et  nil  nisi  ultimus  vitae
terminus  timetur.     Tandem  finite  aliquanto  tempore  auxilium  beati  Godehardi
implorabant,  et  argenteam  navim  delaturos,  si  evaderent,  devoverunt.     Hos  in
ecclesia  nostra  navim  argenteam  deferentes  postea  vidimus  (in  King  Lothair's
time).     In  a  storm  at  sea,  sailors  take  vows  :  E  chi  dice,  una  nave  vo  far  fare,  e
poi  portarla  in  Vienna  al  gran  barone  ;  Buovo  d'Antona  5,  32.     The  Lapps  at


HOLD  A,  HOLLE.  265

Sueves  of  Tacitus's  time  must  have  done  honour  to  their  goddess
by  carrying  her  ship  about.  The  forcing  of  unmarried  young
women  to  take  part  in  the  festival  is  like  the  constraint  put  upon
the  weavers  in  Kipuaria,  and  seems  to  indicate  that  the  divine
mother  in  her  progress  at  once  looked  kindly  on  the  bond  of  love
and  wedlock,  and  punished  the  backward  ;  in  this  sense  she  might
fairly  stand  for  Dame  Venus,  Hold  a  and  Frecke.

The  Greeks  dedicated  a  ship  not  only  to  Isis,  but  to  Athene.
At  the  Panathensea  her  sacred  peplos  was  conveyed  by  ship  to  the
Acropolis  :  the  ship,  to  whose  mast  it  was  suspended  as  a  sail,  was
built  on  the  Kerameikos,  and  moved  on  dry  land  by  an  under
ground  mechanism,  first  to  the  temple  of  Demeter  and  all  round  it,
past  the  Pelasgian  to  the  Pythian,  and  lastly  to  the  citadel.  The
people  followed  in  solemnly  ordered  procession.1

We  must  not  omit  to  mention,  that  Aventin,  after  transforming
the  Tacitean  Isis  into  a  frau  Eisen,  and  making  iron  (eisen)  take
its  name  from  her,  expands  the  account  of  her  worship,  and  in
addition  to  the  little  ship,  states  further,  that  on  the  death  of  her
father  (Hercules)  she  travelled  through  all  countries,  came  to  the
German  king  Schwab,  and  staid  for  a  time  with  him ;  that  she
taught  him  the  forging  of  iron,  the  sowing  of  seed,  reaping,  grinding,
kneading  and  baking,  the  cultivation  of  flax  and  hemp,  spinning,
weaving  and  needle  work,  and  that  the  people  esteemed  her  a  holy
woman.2  We  shall  in  due  time  investigate  a  goddess  Zisa,  and  her
claims  to  a  connexion  with  Isis.

4.  HOLDA,  HOLLE.
Can  the  name  under  which  the  Suevi  worshipped  that  goddess

yule-tide  offer  to  their  jauloherra  small  ships  smeared  with  reindeer's  Itlood,  and
hang  them  on  trees  ;  Hogstrom,  efterretninger  om  Lapland,  p.  511.  These
votive  gifts  to  saints  fill  the  place  of  older  ones  of  the  heathen  time  to  gods,
as  the  voyagers  to  Helgoland  continued  long  to  respect  Fosete's  sanctuary
(p.  231).  Now,  as  silver  ploughs  too  were  placed  in  churches,  and  later  in  the
Mid.  Ages  were  even  demanded  as  dues,  these  ships  and  ploughs  together  lend
a  welcome  support  to  the  ancient  worship  of  a  maternal  deity  (see  SuppL).

1  Philostr.  de  vitis  sophist,  lib.  2  cap.  1,  ed.  Paris.  1608,  p.  549.

2  So  Jean  le  Maire  de  Beiges  in  his  Illustrations  de  Gaulle,  Paris,  1548,  bk.
3  p.  xxviii  :  '  Au  temps  duquel  (Hercules  Allemannus)  la  deesse  Isis,  royne
d'Egypte,  veint  en  Allemaigne  et  montra  au  rude  peuple  1'usaige  de  mouldre  la
farine  et  faire  du  pain.3      J.  le  Maire  finished  his  work  in  1512,  Aventin  not
till  1522  ;  did  they  both  borrow  from  the  spurious  Berosus  that  came  out  in
the  15th  century  ?     Hunibald  makes  a  queen  Cambra,  who  may  be  compared
with  the  Langobardic  Gambara,  introduce  the  arts  of  building,  sowing  and
weaving  (see  Suppl.).


266  GODDESSES.

whom  the  Romans  identified  with  Isis — may  not  at  least  one  of  her
secondary  names — have  been  Holda  ?  The  name  has  a  purely
Teutonic  meaning,  and  is  firmly  grounded  in  the  living  traditions
of  our  people  to  this  day.

Holdd  is  the  kind,  benignant,  merciful  goddess  or  lady,  from
hold  (propitius),  Goth.  hul)?s  (Luke  18,  13 ;  root,  hityan  halj?
liutyun,  to  bend,  bow),  ON.  hollr ;  the  Gothic  form  of  it  would  be
Hulpo.  For  the  opposite  notion  of  a  malignant  diabolic  being,
Ulphilas  employs  both  the  fern,  unhulpd  and  the  masc.  unhulfra,
from  which  I  infer  a  liulfra  by  the  side  of  hulpo  :  one  more  confir
mation  of  the  double  sex  running  through  the  idea  of  these
divinities.  It  is  true,  such  a  by-name  could  be  shared  by  several
gods  or  spirits.  Notker  in  the  Capella  81  renders  verus  genius  by
'  min  ware  Tioldo  '.  And  in  MHG.  parlance,  holde  (fern,  and  masc.)
must  have  been  known  and  commonly  used  for  ghostly  beings.
Albrecht  of  Halberstadt,  in  translating  Ovid's  Metamorphoses,
uses  wazzerholde  (gen.  -en)  for  nymph  ;  rhyme  has  protected  the
exact  words  from  corruption  in  Wikram's  poetic  paraphrase.1  In
the  largely  expanded  Low  German  version  of  the  Ship  of  Fools
(Narragonia,  Rostock  1519  ;  96a)  we  find  the  following  passage
which  is  wanting  in  the  HG.  text :  '  Mannich  narre  lovet  (be-
lieveth)  an  vogelgeschrei,  und  der  guden  hollen  (bonorum  geniorum)
gunst '.  Of  more  frequent  occurrence  is  the  MHG.  unholde  (fern.),
our  modern  unkold  (masc.),  in  the  sense  of  a  dark,  malign,  yet
mighty  being.

The  earliest  example  of  the  more  restricted  use  of  the  name
Holda  is  furnished  by  Burchard,  bp.  of  Worms,  p.  194a : 2  Credidisti

1  Frankf.  1631  ;  4,  171a  von  einer  wazzerh olden,  rh.  solden  ;  176a  wazzer
holde,  rh.  solde.

2  If,  in  the  inscription  *  deae  Hludanae '  quoted  p.  257,  we  might  by  a
slight  transposition  substitute  Huldanae,  this  would  be  even  more  welcome
than  the  analogy  to  ON.  Hloftyn,  it  would  be  the  most  ancient  evidence  for
Hulda,  supported  as  she  already  is  by  the  Goth,  unhulpd  and  the  OHG.  female
name  Holda,  a  rare  one,  yet  forthcoming  in  Schannat,  trad.  fuld.  no.  445  ;  also
Holdasind  in  Graff  4,  915.     Schiitze's  treatise  De  dea  Hludana  first  appeared
Lips.  1741  ;  and  when  Wolf  (in  Wodana,  p.  50)  mentions  a  Dutch  one  De  dea
Huldea,  Trajecti  1746,  if  that  be  really  the  title,  this  can  be  no  other  than  a  very
tempting  conjecture  by  Cannegieter  founded  on  our  *  Hulda '  which  occurs  in
Eccard.     A  Latin  dative  Huldanae  would  mean  our  weak  form,  OHG.  Holdun,
AS.  Holdan,  just  as  Berta,  Hildegarda  are  in  Latin  docs,  inflected  Bertanae,
Hildegardanae  ;   though    there   may  also  have  sprung  up  a    nom.   Bertana,
Huldana.     So  the  dat.  Tanfanae  too  would  lead  us  to  at  all  events  a  German
nom.  Tanfa,  and  cut  short  all  the  attempts  to  make  out  of  -fana  a  Celtic  word
or  the  Latin  fanum.     Tanfa  suggests  an  ON.  man's  name  Danpr,  or  the  OHG.


HOLD  A,  HOLLE.  207

ut  aliqua  femina  sit,  quae  hoc  facere  possit,  quod  qnaedam  a  diabolo
deceptae  se  affirmant  necessario  et  ex  praecepto  facere  debere,  id
est  cum  daemonum  turba  in  similitudinem  mulierum  transformata,
quam  vulgaris  stultitia  Holdam  (al.  unholdam)  vocat,  certis
noctibus  equitare  debere  super  quasdam  bestias,  et  in  eorum  se
consortio  annumeratam  esse.  The  remarkable  varia  lectio
'  unJwlda '  is  taken  from  the  Cod.  vindob.  univ.  633.  Burchard  has
here  put  the  German  word  in  the  place  of  the  more  usual  '  Diana
paganorum  dea,'  who  in  other  passages  is  named  in  a  like  sense  and
in  the  same  connexion.  [A  still  earlier  notice  of  Holda  is  found
in  Walafrid  Strabo,  see  Suppl.]

In  popular  legends  and  nursery-tales,  frau  Holda  (Hulda,
Holle,1  Hulle,  frau  Holl)  appears  as  a  superior  being,  who  manifests  a
kind  and  helpful  disposition  towards  men,  and  is  never  cross
except  when  she  notices  disorder  in  household  affairs.  None  of
the  German  races  appear  to  have  cherished  these  oral  traditions  so
extensively  as  the  Hessians  and  Thuringians  (that  Worms  bishop
was  a  native  of  Hesse).  At  the  same  time,  dame  Holle  is  found  as
far  as  the  Voigtland,2  past  the  Ehon  mts  in  northern  Franconia,3  in
the  Wetterau  up  to  the  Westerwald,4  and  from  Thuringia  she
crosses  the  frontier  of  Lower  Saxony.  Swabia,  Switzerland,
Bavaria,  Austria,  North  Saxony  and  Friesland  do  not  know  her  by
that  name.

From  what  tradition  has  still  preserved  for  us,5  we  gather  the
following  characteristics.  Frau  Holle  is  represented  as  a  being  of
the  sky,  begirdling  the  earth  :  when  it  snows,  she  is  making  her

root  damph  ;  granted  a  change  of  F  into  CH  or  TH  [/  has  become  ch  in  sachte,
nichte,  achter,  ruchtbar  or  ruchbar,  &c.],  there  would  arise  yet  further  possi
bilities,  e.g.  a  female  name  Tancha  (grata)  would  correspond  to  the  OHG.  masc.
Dancho  (gratus)  Graff  5,  169  ;  conf.  Dankrat  =  Gibicho,  Haupt's  zeitschr.  1,
573. — I  am  not  convinced  of  Huldana,  and  confess  that  Hludana  may  also
maintain  itself,  and  be  explained  as  Hluda  (clara,  praeclara)  ;  the  weight  of
other  arguments  must  turn  the  scale.  Among  these  however,  the  use  of  gute
holden  and  hollar  vaettir  (Ssem.  240b)  for  spirits,  and  of  holl  regin  (Sa3m.  60*)
for  gods,  is  especially  worthy  of  notice.  In  ON.  the  adj.  hollr  had  undergone
assimilation  (Goth.  hul]?s,  OHG.  hold),  while  the  proper  name  Huldr  retained
the  old  form  ;  for  to  me  the  explanation  huldr  =  occultus,  celatus,  looks  very
dubious.

1  Holle  from  Hulda,  as  Folle  from  Fulda.

2  Jul.  Schmidt's  Eeichenfels  p.  152.

3  Reinwald,  Henneb.  id.  1,  68.     2,  62.     Schmeller  2,  174.

4  Schmidt's  Westerwald.  idiot.  73.  341.

5  Kinderm.   no.    24.      Deutsche  sagen,  nos.  4 — 8.      Falkenstein's  Thur.
chronica  1,  165-6  (see  Suppl.).


268  GODDESSES.

bed,  and  the  feathers  of  it  fly.1  She  stirs  up  snow,  as  Donar  does
rain :  the  Greeks  ascribed  the  production  of  snow  and  rain  to  their
Zeus :  Jto?  o/x/3/>o?,  II.  5,  91.  11,  493  as  well  as  vnpaSes  Ai6s,  II.  19,
357 ;  so  that  Holda  conies  before  us  as  a  goddess  of  no  mean  rank.2
The  comparison  of  snowflakes  to  feathers  is  very  old ;  the  Scythians
pronounced  the  regions  north  of  them  inaccessible,  because  they
were  filled  with  feathers  (Herod.  4,  7.  conf.  31).  Holda  then  must
be  able  to  move  through  the  air,  like  dame  Herke.

She  loves  to  haunt  the  lake  and  fountain ;  at  the  hour  of  noon
she  may  be  seen,  a  fair  white  lady,  bathing  in  the  flood  and
disappearing;  a  trait  in  which  she  resembles  Kerthus.  Mortals,
to  reach  her  dwelling,  pass  through  the  well ;  conf.  the  name
wazzerlwlde?

Another  point  of  resemblance  is,  that  she  drives  about  in  a
waggon.  She  had  a  linchpin  put  in  it  by  a  peasant  whom  she
met ;  when  he  picked  up  the  chips,  they  were  gold.4  Her  annual
progress,  which,  like  those  of  Herke  and  Berhta,  is  made  to  fall
between  Christmas  and  Twelfth-day,  when  the  supernatural  has
sway,5  and  wild  beasts  like  the  wolf  are  not  mentioned  by  their
names,  brings  fertility  to  the  land.  Not  otherwise  does  '  Derk  with
the  boar,'  that  Freyrof  the  Netherlands  (p.  214),  appear  to  go  his
rounds  and  look  after  the  ploughs.  At  the  same  time  Holda,  like
Wuotan,  can  also  ride  on  the  winds,  clothed  in  terror,  and  she,  like
the  god,  belongs  to  the  '  wiitende  heer'.  From  this  arose  the
fancy,  that  witches  ride  in  Holla's  company  (ch.  XXXIV,  snow-

1  Dame  Holle  shakes  her  bed,  Modejourn.  1816,  p.   283.     They  say  in
Scotland,  when  the  first  flakes  fall :    The  men  o'  the  East  are  pyking  their
geese,  and  sending  their  feathers  here  awa'  there  awa'.     In  Prussian  Samland,
when  it  snows  :  The  angels  shake  their  little  bed  ;  the  flakes  are  the  down-
feathers,  but  many  drop  past,  and  get  down  to  our  earth.

2  As  other  attributes  of  Holda  have  passed  to  Mary,  we  may  here  also
bring  into  comparison  the  Maria  ad  nives,  notre  dame  aux  neiges,  whose  feast  was
held  on  Aug.  5  ;  on  that  day  the  lace-makers  of  Brussels  pray  to  her,  that  their
work  may  keep  as  white  as  snow.     In  a  folk-song  of  Bretagne  :  Notre  dame
Marie,  sur  votre  trone  de  neige  !     (Barzas  breiz  1,  27).     May  not  the  otherwise
unintelligible  Hildesheim  legend  of  Hillesnee  (DS.  no.  456)  have  arisen  out  of
a  Holde  sue  ?

3  If  the  name  brunnenhold  in  the  Marchenbuch  of  Alb.  Ludw.  Grimm  1,
221  is  a  genuine  piece   of  tradition,  it  signifies  a  fountain-sprite.      [Newborn
babes  are  fetched  by  the  nurse  out  of  dame  Hollas  pond ;  Suppl.]

4  A  similar  legend  in  Jul.  Schmidt's  Reichenfels  p.  152.

5  This  must  be  a  purely  heathen  view.     I  suppose  the  Christian  sentiment
was  that  expressed  by  Marcel! us  in  Hamlet  i.  1  :  'no  spirit  dares  stir  abroad,
the  nights  are  wholesome,  &c. '. — TRANS.


HOLD  A,  HOLLE.  269

wives) ;  it  was  already  known  to  Burchard,  and  now  in  Upper
Hesse  and  the  Westerwald,  Holle-riding,  to  ride  with  Holle,  is
equivalent  to  a  witches'  ride.1  Into  the  same  'furious  host,'
according  to  a  wide-spread  popular  belief,  were  adopted  the  souls
of  infants  dying  uribaptized ;  not  having  been  christian'd,  they
remained  heathen,  and  fell  to  heathen  gods,  to  "VVuotan  or  to
Hulda.

The  next  step  is,  that  Hulda,  instead  of  her  divine  shape,
assumes  the  appearance  of  an  ugly  old  woman,  long-nosed,  big-
toothed,  with  bristling  and  thick-matted  hair.  •  He's  had  a  jaunt
with  Holle/  they  say  of  a  man  whose  hair  sticks  up  in  tangled
disorder ;  so  children  are  frightened  with  her  or  her  equally  hideous
train  :2  '  hush,  there's  Hulle-letz  (-bruin),  Hulle-popel  (-bogie)
coming/  Holle-peter,  as  well  as  Hersche,  Harsche,  Hescheklas,
Euprecht,  Eupper  (ch.  XVII,  house-sprites^,  is  among  the  names
given  to  the  muffled  servitor  who  goes  about  in  Holle's  train  at  the
time  of  the  winter  solstice.  In  a  nursery-tale  (Marchen  no.  24)
she  is  depicted  as  an  old  witch  with  long  teeth ;  according  to  the
difference  of  story,  her  kind  and  gracious  aspect  is  exchanged  for  a
dark  and  dreadful  one.

Again,  Holla  is  set  before  us  as  a  spinning-wife ;  the  cultivation
of  flax  is  assigned  to  her.  Industrious  maids  she  presents  with
spindles,  and  spins  their  reels  full  for  them  over  night ;  a  slothful
spinner's  distaff  she  sets  on  fire,  or  soils  it.3  The  girl  whose  spindle
dropt  into  her  fountain,  she  rewarded  bountifully.  When  she

1  Ester's  oberh.  idiot.,  sub  v.

2  Erasm.  Alberus,  fable  16  :  '  Es  kamen  auch  zu  cliesem  heer  Viel  weiber
die  sich  forchten  sehr  (were  sore  afraid),  Und  trugen  sicheln  in  der  hand,  Fraw
Hulda  hat  sie  ausgesandt.'     Luther's  Expos,  of  the  Epistles,  Basel  1522  fol.
69a  :  '  Here  cometh  up  dame  Hulde  with  the  snout  (potznase,  botch-nose),  to
wit,  nature,  and  goeth  about  to  gainsay  her  God  and  give  him  the  lie,  hangetli
her  old  ragfair  about  her,  the  straw-harness  (stroharnss) ;  then  falls  to  work,
and  scrapes  it  featly  on  her  fiddle.'      He  compares  nature  rebelling  against  God
to  the  heathenish  Hulda  with  the  frightful  nose  (Oberlin,  sub  v.  potzmann-
chen),  as  she  enters,  muffled  up  in  straw  and  frippery,  to  the  fiddle's  playing.

3  Bruckner,  Contrib.  to  the  Henneberg  idioticon,  p.  9,  mentions  a  popular
belief  in  that  part  of  Franconia  :    '  On  the   high   day  comes  the  Hollefrau
(Hollefra,  Hullefra),  and  throws  in  reels ;  whoever  does  not  spin  them  full,  she
breaks  their  necks,'  (conf.  infra  Berhta  and  Berhtolt  and  the  Devil).     '  On  the
high    day   she    is    burnt,'  which  reminds  one  of   'Carrying   Death  out'   in
Teutonic  and  Slav  countries,  and    'Sawing   the   old   woman'   in  Italy   and
Spain.      By  the  addition  of  -frau  after  the  name  (conf.   gaue  fru,  p.  253)
we  perceive  its   originally  adjective   character.     Cod.    pal.    355b  :    'ich  wen,
kain  sckusel  in  kaim  rocken  wart  nie  als  hesslich  als  du  bist,'  I  ween  no  scare
crow  on  a  distaff  was  ever  as  ugly  as  thou.


270  GODDESSES.

enters  the  land  at  Christmas,  all  the  distaffs  are  well  stocked,  and
left  standing  for  her ;  by  Carnival,  when  she  turns  homeward,  all
spinning  must  be  finished  off,  and  the  staffs  are  now  kept  out  of
her  sight  (Superst.  683)  ;  if  she  finds  everything  as  it  should  be,
she  pronounces  her  blessing,  and  contrariwise  her  curse ;  the
formulas  '  so  many  hairs,  so  many  good  years ! '  and  '  so  many
hairs,  so  many  bad  years  ! '  have  an  oldworld  sound.  Apparently
two  things  have  been  run  into  one,  when  we  are  also  told,  that
during  the  '  twelve-nights '  no  flax  must  be  left  in  the  diesse,  or
dame  Holla  will  come.1  The  concealment  of  the  implements
shows  at  the  same  time  the  sacredness  of  her  holiday,  which  ought
to  be  a  time  of  rest.2  In  the  Ehon  mts,  they  do  no  farm- work  on
Hulla's  Saturday,  neither  hoe,  nor  manure,  nor  '  drive  the  team  a-
field  '.  In  the  North  too,  from  Yule-day  to  New-year's  day,  neither
wheel  nor  windlass  must  go  round  (see  Superst.,  Danish,  134;  SuppL).
This  superintendence  of  agriculture  and  of  strict  order  in  the
household  marks  exactly  the  office  of  a  motherly  deity,  such  as  we
got  acquainted  with  in  Nerthus  and  Isis.  Then  her  special  care  of
flax  and  spinning  (the  main  business  of  German  housewives,  who
are  named  after  spindle  and  distaff,3  as  men  are  after  sword  and
spear),  leads  us  directly  to  the  ON.  Frigg,  Coin's  wife,  whose  being
melts  into  the  notion  of  an  earth-goddess,  and  after  whom  a
constellation  in  the  sky,  Orion's  belt,  is  called  Friggjar  rockr,
Friggae  coins.  Though  Icelandic  writings  do  not  contain  this
name,  it  has  remained  in  use  among  the  Swedish  country-folk
(Hire,  sub  v.  Friggerock).  The  constellation  is  however  called
Maridrock,  Dan.  Marirock  (Magnusen,  gloss.  361.  376),  the
Christians  having  passed  the  same  old  idea  on  to  Mary  the
heavenly  mother.  The  Greeks  put  spindle  arid  distaff  in  the  hands
of  several  goddesses,  especially  Artemis  (xpva-rjXd/caTos,  II.  20,  70)
and  her  mother  Leto,  but  also  Athene,  Amphitrite  and  the  Nereids.
All  this  fits  in  with  Holda,  who  is  a  goddess  of  the  chase  (the  wild
host),  and  of  water-springs.

1  Braunschw.  anz.  1760,  no.  86  ;  the  diesse  is  the  bundle  of  flax  on  the
dis-staff.

2  This   makes   one    think  of    Gertrude.      The   peasants'   almanacks     in
Carniola  represent  that  saint  by  two  little  mice  nibbling  at  the  thread  on  a
spindle  (vreteno),  as  a  sign  that  there  ou^ht  to  be  no  spinning  on  her  day.    The
same  holds  good  of  the  Russian  piatnitsa,  Friday  (Kopitars  rec.  von  Strahls
gel.  Russlam  1).

3  RA.  163-8.  470.     Women  are  called  in  AS.  Mc5owebban,  peace- weavers.


HOLDA,  HOLLE.  271

One  might  be  tempted  to  derive  dame  Holda  from  a  character
in  the  Old  Testament.  In  2  Kings  22,  14  and  2  Chron.  34,  22  we
read  of  a  prophetess  ?TT7il  Huleddah,  Huldah,  for  which  Luther
puts  Hulda ;  the  Septuagint  has  'O\8a,  the  Vulgate  Olda,  but  the
Lat.  Bible  Viteb.  1529  (and  probably  others  since)  Hulda,
following  Luther,  who,  with  the  German  Holda  in  his  mind,  thus
domesticated  the  Jewish  prophetess  among  his  countrymen.
Several  times  in  his  writings  he  brings  up  the  old  heathen  life  •  we
had  an  instance  a  page  or  two  back.1  I  do  not  know  if  any  one
before  him  had  put  the  two  names  together;  but  certainly  the
whole  conception  of  a  dame  Holda  was  not  first  drawn  from  the
'  Olda '  of  the  Vulgate,  which  stands  there  without  any  special
significance;  this  is  proved  by  the  deep-rootedness  of  the  name
in  our  language,  by  its  general  application  [as  adj.  and  com.
noun]  to  several  kinds  of  spirits,  and  by  the  very  ancient  negative
unholda.

Were  it  only  for  the  kinship  of  the  Norse  traditions  with  our
own,  we  should  bid  adieu  to  such  a  notion  as  that.  True,  the
Eddie  mythology  has  not  a  Holla  answering  to  our  Holda ;  but
Snorri  (Yngl.  saga  c.  16.  17)  speaks  of  a  wise  woman  (volva,
seiSkona)  named  Suldr,  and  a  later  Icelandic  saga  composed  in
the  14th  century  gives  a  circumstantial  account  of  the  enchantress
Hulda,  beloved  of  OSinu,  and  mother  of  the  well-known  halt-
goddesses  ThorgerSr  and  Irpa.2  Of  still  more  weight  perhaps
are  some  Norwegian  and  Danish  folk-tales  about  a  wood  or
mountain  wife  Sulla,  Huldra,  Huldre,  whom  they  set  forth,  now
as  young  and  lovely,  then  again  as  old  and  gloomy.  In  a  blue  garment
and  white  veil  she  visits  the  pasture-grounds  of  herdsmen,  and
mingles  in  the  dances  of  men ;  but  her  shape  is  disfigured  by  a  tail,
which  she  takes  great  pains  to  conceal.  Some  accounts  make  her
beautiful  in  front  and  ugly  behind.  She  loves  music  and  song,  her
lay  has  a  doleful  melody  and  is  called  huldreslaat.  In  the  forests
you  see  Huldra  as  an  old  woman  clothed  in  gray,  marching  at  the
head  of  her  flock,  milkpail  in  hand.  She  is  said  to  carry  off
people's  unchristened  infants  from  them.  Often  she  appears,  not
alone,  but  as  mistress  or  queen  of  the  mountain-sprites,  who  are

1  I  believe  Luther  followed  the  Hebrew,  merely  dropping  the  final  ht  as
he  does  in  Jehova,  Juda,  &c. — TRANS.

2  Muller's  sagabibl.  1,  363—6.


272  GODDESSES.

called  huldrefolk.1  In  Iceland  too  they  know  of  this  Huldufolk,  of
the  Haldumenn ;  and  here  we  find  another  point  of  agreement
with  the  popular  faith  of  Germany,  namely,  that  by  the  side  of  our
dame  Holde  there  are  also  holdcn,  i.e.,  friendly  spirits,  a  silent
subterranean  people,  of  whom  dame  Holde,  so  to  speak,  is  the
princess  (see  Suppl.).  For  this  reason,  if  no  other,  it  must  be  more
correct  to  explain  the  Norse  name  Hulla,  Huldra  from  the  ON.
hollr  (fidus,  fidelis,  propitlus)  which  is  huld  in  Dan.  and  Swed.,  and
not  from  the  ON.  hulda  (obscuritas)  as  referring  to  the  subterranean
abode  of  the  mountain-sprites.  In  Swedish  folk-songs  I  find
'  huldmoder,  hulda  rnoder '  said  of  one's  real  mother  in  the  same
sense  as  kiira  (dear)  moder  (Sv.  vis.  1,  2,  9) ;  so  that  huld  must
have  quite  the  meaning  of  our  German  word.  It  is  likely  that  the
term  huldufolk  was  imported  into  the  Icelandic  tongue  from  the
Danish  or  Norwegian.  It  is  harder  to  explain  the  K  inserted  in
the  forms  Huldra,  Huldre ;  did  it  spring  out  of  the  plural  form
hulder  (boni  genii,  hollar  vaettir)  ?  or  result  from  composition  ?

The  German  Holda  presides  over  spinning  and  agriculture,  the
Norse  Hulle  over  cattle-grazing  and  milking.

5.  PERAHTA,  BERCHTK

A  being  similar  to  Holda,  or  the  same  under  another  name,
makes  her  appearance  precisely  in  those  Upper  German  regions
where  Holda  leaves  off,  in  Swabia,  in  Alsace,  in  Switzerland,  in
Bavaria  and  Austria.2  She  is  called  frau  Berchte,  i.e.,  in  OHG.
Perahta,  the  bright,3  luminous,  glorious  (as  Holda  produces  the
glittering  snow) :  by  the  very  meaning  of  the  word  a  benign  and
gladdening  influence,  yet  she  is  now  rarely  represented  as  such  ;  as
a  rule,  the  awe-inspiring  side  is  brought  into  prominence,  and  she

1  Details  to  be  found  in  Miiller's  sagab.  1 ,  367-8.     Hallager  p.  48.     Faye
pp.  39-43  and  10.  15.  25.  20.  36.     Frigge,  nytaarsgave  for  1813,  p.  85.     Strom's
Sondmor   1,   538-59.     Vilses    Spydeberg    2,    419.      Villes   Sillejord.   p.    230.
Asbiornsen,  passim.

2  A  portion  of  Franconia  and  Thuringia  knows  both  Berchta  and  Holda,
there  at  all  events  is  the  boundary   between   the  two.     Matthesiits,  in   his
Exposition   of  the  gospels   for  feastdays,  p.    22,  names  dame  Hulda  and  old
Uerchte  side  by  side.

3  Among  "the   celebrated   maidens    of    MengloS    is   a  Biort  (Ssem.  llla),
MengloG    herself  is  called   'su   in   solbiarta'   (lllb),  and  the   father   of  her
betrothed  Svipdagr  Solbiartr  (sun-bright,  112a).     A  Menglot)  in  a  later  story
appears  to  some  one  in  a  dream   (Fornin.  sog.   3,  222-3),  and  leaves  him  a
marvellous  pair  of  gloves.


PERAHTA,  BERCHTE.  273

appears  as  a  grim  bugbear  to  frighten  children  with.  In  the
stories  of  dame  Berchta  the  bad  meaning  predominates,  as  the  good
one  does  in  those  of  dame  Holda;  that  is  to  say,  the  popular
Christian  view  had  degraded  Berchta  lower  than  Holda.  But  she
too  is  evidently  one  with  Herke,  Freke  and  some  others  (see
SuppL).

Where  their  identity  comes  out  most  plainly  is  in  the  fact  that
they  all  go  their  rounds  at  the  same  time,  in  the  so-called  '  twelfths'
between  Christmas  and  New-year.  Berchta  however  has  a
particular  day  assigned  her  at  the  end  of  that  period,  which  I  never
find  named  after  Holda.  And  no  less  similar  are  their  functions.

Berchta,  like  Holda,  has  the  oversight  of  spinners;  whatever
spinning  she  finds  unfinished  the  last  day  of  the  year,  she  spoils
(Superst.  512).  Her  festival  has  to  be  kept  with  a  certain  tradi
tional  food,  gruel  and  fish.  Thorr  says  he  has  had  sildr  ok  hafra
(herrings  and  oats)  for  supper,  Sgem.  75a ;  our  white  lady  has  pre
scribed  the  country  folk  a  dish  of  fish  and  oat-grits  for  evermore,
and  is  angry  whenever  it  is  omitted  (Deutsche  sagen,  no.  267).
The  Thuringians  in  the  Saalfeld  country  wind  up  the  last  day  of
the  year  with  dumplings  and  herrings.  Fish  and  farinaceous  food
were  considered  by  Christians  the  proper  thing  for  a  fast.1

The  revenge  taken  by  the  wrathful  Berchta,  when  she  misses  the
fish  and  dumplings,  has  a  quaint  and  primitive  sound :  whoever  has
partaken  of  other  food  on  her  day,  she  cuts  his  belly  open,  fills  it
with  chopped  straw,  and  sews  up  the  gash  with  a  ploughshare  for
a  needle  and  an  iron  chain  by  way-  of  thread  (Superst.  525).2

1  The  Braunschw.  anz.  1760,  p.  1392,  says  no  leguminous  plants  are  to  be
i  eaten  when   dame  Holla  is  going  round   in   the  '  twelve-nights '.      Either  a
j  mistake,  or  to  be  understood  of  particular  kinds  of  pulse.

2  Almost  the  same  is  told  in  the  Voigtland  of  the  Werre  or  dame  Holle.
The   Werre,  on  the  holy  eve  of  the  high  New-year,  holds  a  strict  inquiry

I  whether  all  the  distaffs  are  spun  off ;  if  they  are  not,  she  defiles  the  flax.  And
on  that  evening  you  must  eat  poise,  a  thick  pap  of  flour  and  water  prepared  in
a  peculiar  way  ;  if  any  one  omits  it,  she  rips  his  body  open,  Jul.  Schmidt,
Reichenfels,  p.  152.  The  name  Werra  (from  her  'gewirrt,'  tangled  shaggy
hair?)  is  found  in  Thorn.  Reinesius,  Lect.  var.,  Altenbg  1640,  p.  579  (in  the
(critical  notes  on  Rhyakinus's,  i.e.  Andr.  Rivinus  or  Bachmann's  Liber  Kirani-
ium  Kirani,  Lips.  1638)  :  Nostrates  hodieque  petulantioribus  et  refractariis
manducum  aliquem  cum  ore  hiante  frendentem  dentibus,  aut  furibundam
silvesceute  coma,  facie  lurida,  et  cetero  habitu  terribilem  cum  cornitatu  maena-
jdum  Werram  interminantur.  Reinesius  (1587-1667)  came  from  Gotha,  but
(lived  at  Hof  in  the  Voigtland.  A  werre  is  also  a  noisome  chirping  insect  of
le  cricket  kind  (Popowitsch  620).  In  MHG.  :  '  ssejet  diu  Werre,  (Discordia)
samen  dar,'  BOWS  her  seed,  Ms.  2,  25  lb,  conf.  Troj.  385  (see  Suppl.)  ;  and  in

18


274  GODDESSES.

And   the   same   threat   is   held   out  in   other  districts   also    (see

Suppl.)-

Borner's  Folk-tales  of  the  Orlagau  (between  the  Saale  and  the
Orle)  furnish  abundant  details.  At  p.  153:  The  night  before
Twelfthday,  PercUha  always  examines  the  spinning-rooms  of  the
whole  neighbourhood,  she  brings  the  spinners  empty  reels,  with
directions  to  spin  them  full  within  a  very  brief  time,  and  if  all  she
demands  cannot  be  delivered,  she  punishes  them  by  tangling  and
befouling  the  flax.  On  the  same  occasion  she  cuts  open  any  one's
body,  that  has  not  eaten  zemmcde  l  that  day,  takes  out  any  other
food  he  has  had,  and  fills  the  empty  space  with  hay  or  straw  wisps
and  bricks,  and  at  last  sews  his  body  up  again,  using  a  ploughshare
for  a  needle,  and  for  thread  a  rohm  chain.— P.  159 :  At  Oppurg,  the
same  night  of  the  year,  PercUha  found  the  spinning-room  full  of
merrymaking  guests,  and  in  a  towering  rage  she  handed  in  through  the
window  tivelve  empty  reels,  which  were  to  be  spun  full  to  the  rim  within
an  hour,  when  she  would  come  back  ;  one  quarter  of  an  hour  had
passed  after  another  in  fearful  expectation,  when  a  saucy  girl  ran
up  to  the  garret,  reached  down  a  roll  of  tow,  and  wrapped  it  round
the  empty  reels,  then  they  spun  two  or  three  thicknesses  of  thread
over  the  tow,  so  that  the  reels  looked  full.  Perchtha  came,  they
handed  over  to  her  their  finished  work,  and  she  walked  off  with  it,
shaking  her  head.  (Conf.  the  similar  story  of  the  white  manikin  in
Bader,  p.  369).— P.  167:  At  Langendembach  lived  an  old  spinning-
wife  who  swiftly  wound  the  thread  all  the  winter  through,  and  did
not  'so  much  as  leave  off  on  Twelfth  day-eve,  though  son  and
daughter-in-law  warned  her :  '  If  Perchtha  comes,  it  will  go  hard
with  you  '.  '  Heyday  ! '  was  her  answer, '  Perchtha  brings  me  no
Shirts,  I  must  spin  them  myself/  After  a  while  the  window  is
pushed  open,  Perchtha  looks  into  the  room,  and  throws  some  empty

Selphirtes  re«el  (Wackernagel's  Ib.  903),  there  is  exhibited  together  with
brSr  Zornli  and  hruoder  Ergerli,  a  bruoder  Werra  «  dor  sin  herze  mi  t  wett-
lichen  din^en  also  beworren  hat  (has  so  entangled  his  heart  with  worldly  things),
dazda  n?htme  in  mag'.  And  that  notion  ^  tangled  thrcud  ^dhcar,^ucl
prevails  about  Bertha  and  Holda,  may  after  al  be  akin  to  this  0 n^  Zuncfc
She  is  called  de  Chlunqere,  because  she  puts  chlungel  (knots  lumps)  in  tne

n's  ed  yarn  of  slothful  n.aidens,  Alb.  Schott,  Deutsclie colomen  in  P^™nt,
p  282      In  Bavaria  and  German  Bohemia,  Berhta  is  often  represented  by  S
Wk  thou-h  her  day  comes  on  Dec.  13.     Fran  Lutz  cuts  the  belly  open,
Schmeller  2,  532.    JosT  Rank,  Bohmerwald,  P.  137.    Conf.  the  Lusse  in  Sweden,
Wiesejlgren.  386^  ^  ^  ^  ^^  ^  ^^  .n  &  ^  .   fasting   fore>

evidently.


PERAHTA,  BERCHTE.  275

spools  to  her,  which  she  must  have  back,  spun  full,  in  an  hour's
time.     The  spinner  took  heart  of  grace,  spun  a  few  rounds  on  each
spool  for  dear  life,  and  threw  them,  one  and  all,  into  the  brook  that
ran  past  the  house  (and  by  that,  Perchtha  seems  to  have  been
appeased). — P.  173 :   As  a  miner  was   returning   from  Bucha   to
Konitz  on  Perchtha's  night,  she  came  up  to  him  at  the  cross-roads,
and  demanded  with  threats,  that  he  should  put  a   wedge  in  her
waggon.     He  took  his  knife,  cut  the  wedge  as  well  as  he  could,  and
fitted  it  into  Perchtha's  waggon,  who  made  him  a  present  of  the
fallen  chips.     He  picked  them  up,  and  at  home  he  drew  gold  out  of
every  pocket  in  which  he  had  put  Perchtha's  gifts. — P.  182  :  Two
peasants  of  Jiidewein,  after  stopping  at  the  alehouse  in  Kostriz  till
late  on  Perchtha's  eve,  had  gone  but  a  little  way,  when  Perchtha
came  driving  in  a  waggon,  and  called  to  them  to  put  a  peg  in  the
pole  of  her  waggon.     One  of  the  men  had  a  knife,  and  Perchtha
supplied  him  with  wood,  the  peg  was  let  in,  and  the  handy  man
carried  home  several  pieces  of  money  in  his  shoe  as  a  reward. —
P.  113  :  Between  Bucha  and  Wilhelmsdorf  in  the  fruitful  vale  of
the  Saale,  Perchtha  queen  of  the  heimchen  had  her  dwelling  of  old ;
at  her  command  the   heimchen  had  to  water  the  fields  of  men,
while   she  worked   underground  with  her  plough.     At  last   the
people  fell  out  with  her,  and  she  determined  to  quit  the  country  ;
on  Perchtha's  eve  the  ferryman  at  Altar  village  received  notice  to
be  ready  late  in  the  night,  and  when  he  came  to  the  Saale  bank,
his  eyes  beheld  a  tall  stately  dame  surrounded  by  weeping  children,
and  demanding  to  be  ferried  over.     She  stept  into  the  craft,  the
little  ones  dragged  a  plough  and  a  number  of  other  tools  in,  loudly
lamenting  that  they  had  to  leave  that  lovely  region.     Arrived  at
the  other  side,  Perchtha  bade  the  boatman  cross  once  more  and
fetch  the  heimchen  that  had  been  left  behind,  which  under  compul
sion  he  did.     She  in  the  meantime  had  been  mending  the  plough,
she  pointed  to  the  chips,  and  said  to  the  ferryman,  '  There,  take
that  to  reward  thy  trouble  '.     Grumbling,  he  pocketed  three  of  the
chips,  and  at  home  flung  them  on  the  window-shelf,  and  himself,
ill  at  ease,  into  bed.     In  the  morning,  three  gold -pieces  lay  where
he  had  thrown  the  chips.     The  memory  of  Perchtha's  passage  is  also
preserved  at  Kaulsdorf  on  the  Saale,  and  at  Kostriz  on  the  Elster,
not  far  from  Gera. — P.  126  :   Late  one  night,  the  master  wheel
wright  at  Colba  was  coming  home  from  Oppurg,  where  he  had


276  GODDESSES.

been  to  work  ;  it  was  the  eve  of  the  Three-kings  (Twelfthday),  and
on  the  bank  of  the  rivulet  Orla  he  came  upon  Perchtha,  her  broken
plough  surrounded  by  weeping  heimchen.  (  Hast  thou  a  hatchet
with  thee,  so  help  me  mend ! '  she  cried  to  the  terrified  traveller.
He  gave  what  help  he  could,  but  the  fallen  chips  offered  him  for
wages  he  would  not  touch :  '  I  have  plenty  of  them  at  home,'  says  he.
When  he  got  home,  he  told  what  had  happened  to  him,  and  while
his  people  shook  their  heads  incredulously,  he  pulled  off  one  of  his
shoes,  which  something  had  got  into,  that  hurt  his  foot,  and  out
rolled  a  bright  new  gold-piece.  A  twelvemonth  passed,  and  one  of
his  men,  who  had  heard  him  tell  the  tale,  set  out  on  Perchtha's
night,  and  waited  by  the  Orla,  just  where  his  master  had  met
Perchtha;  in  a  little  while,  on  she  came  with  her  infant  train:
'  What  seekest  thou  here  at  this  hour  ? '  she  cried  in  anger,  and
when  he  stammered  out  an  answer,  she  continued :  '  I  am  better
provided  with  tools  this  time,  so  take  thou  thy  due  ! '  and  with
those  words  she  dug  her  hatchet  into  the  fellow's  shoulder.  The
same  story  is  repeated  near  Kaulsdorf  at  a  part  of  the  brook  which
is  called  the  water  over  the  way,  at  Presswitz  near  the  Saal-house,
and  on  the  sandhill  between  Possneck  and  the  forester's  lodge  of
Reichenbach.  Below  the  Gleitsch,  a  curiously  shaped  rock  near
Tischdorf,  the  story  varies  in  so  far,  that  there  Perchtha  along  with
the  heimchen  was  driving  a  waggon,  and  had  just  broken  the  axle,
when  she  fell  in  with  a  countryman,  who  helped  her  out  with  a
makeshift  axle,  and  was  paid  in  chips,  which  however  he  disdained,
and  only  carried  a  piece  home  in  his  shoe. — P.  133  :  A  spinning-
girl  walked  over  from  the  JSTeidenberg  during  that  night,  she  had
done  every  bit  of  her  spinning,  and  was  in  high  spirits,  when
Perchtha  came  marching  up  the  hill  towards  her,  with  a  great  troop
of  the  heimchen-folk,  all  children  of  one  sort  and  size,  one  set  of
them  toiling  to  push  a  heavy  plough,  another  party  loaded  with
farming-tools  ;  they  loudly  complained  that  they  had  no  longer  a
home.  At  this  singular  procession  the  spinner  began  to  laugh  out
loud,  Perchtha  enraged  stept  up  to  the  giddy  thing,  Uew  upon  her,
and  struck  her  blind  on  the  spot.  The  poor  girl  had  a  trouble  to
find  her  way  into  the  village,  she  led  a  wretched  life,  could  no
longer  work,  but  sat  mournful  by  the  wayside  begging.  When  the
year  was  past  and  Perchtha  visited  Altar  again,  the  blind  one,  not
knowing  one  from  another,  asked  an  alms  of  the  high  dame  as  she


PERAHTA,  BERCHTE.  2/7

swept  by ;  Perchtha  spoke  graciously :  '  Here  last  year  I  blew  a
pair  of  lights  out,  this  year  I  will  blow  them  in  again'.  With  these
words  she  blew  into  the  maid's  eyes,  which  immediately  began  to
see  again.  The  same  legend  is  found  in  the  so-called  Sorge,  near
Neustadt  on  the  Oiia.  Touching  stories  of  the  weeping  children,
who  tramp  along  in  Perchtha's  great  troop,  will  be  given  when  we
come  to  treat  minutely  of  the  '  wlitende  heer '.  (See  Suppl.).

To  these  significant  traditions  of  Thuringia,  others  can  be  added
from  Bavaria  and  Austria.  In  the  mountain  district  about  Trauen-
stein  (Up.  Bavaria,  opposite  Salzburg)  they  tell  the  children  on  the
eve  of  Epiphany,  that  if  they  are  naughty,  Berclie  will  come  and  cut
their  bellies  open.  Greasy  cakes  are  baked  that  day,  and  the
workmen  say  you  must  grease  your  stomach  well  with  them,  so
that  dame  Berclie 's  knife  may  glance  off  (Schm.  1, 194).  Is  that  the
reason  why  she  is  called  wild  Bertha,  iron  Bertha  ?  Crusius,  Ann.
Suev.  p.  2,  lib.  8,  cap.  7,  p.  266,  relates,  as  his  explanation  of  the
origin  of  the  name,  that  Henry  IV.  bestowed  privileges  on  the  city
of  Padua :  Inde,  in  signa  libertatis,  armato  carrocio  uti  coeperunt  in
bello,  Bertha  nominato.  Hinc  dictum  ortum  puto,  quo  terreritur
inquieti  pueri,  '  Schweig,  oder  die  eiserne  Bertha  kommt ! '  *  In
other  places,  Franconian  and  Swabian,  she  is  named  Hilddberta
(apparently  a  combination  of  the  two  names  Holda  and  Berta),  and
Bildaberta ;  with  hair  all  shaggy  she  walks  round  the  houses  at
night,  and  tears  the  bad  boys  to  pieces  (see  Suppl.).2

Dame  Precht  with  the  long  nose  is  what  Vintler  calls  her :  and
even  a  MUG.  poem,  which  in  one  MS.  is  entitled  '  daz  rnaere  von
der  Stempen,'  has  in  another  the  heading  '  von  Berchten  mit  der
langen  nasj  (Haupt's  Altd.  bl.  1,  105).  It  is  only  from  the  former
(with  corrected  spelling)  that  I  am  able  to  extract  what  has  a
bearing  on  our  subject :

nu  merket  rehfe-waz  (ich)  iu  sage  :  Now  mark  aright  what  I  you  tell :

nachwihennaht  amzwelften  tage,  after  Christmas  the  twelfth  day,

nach  dem  heilgen  ebenwihe  3  after  the  holy  New-year's  day

(gotgeb,  daz  er  uns  gedihe),  (God  grant  we  prosper  in  it),

do  man  ezzen  solt  ze  nahte,  when  they  should  eat  supper

a  Conf.  Crusius  p.  1,  lib.  12,  cap.  6,  p.  329,  where  Bertha  the  mother  of
Charles  is  meant.  The  Lombards  called  a  carrocium  Berta  arid  Berteciola
(Duciinge  sub  v.),  perhaps  the  carriage  of  the  travelling  goddess  or  queen  ?

2  Joach.  Camerarius,  chronol.  Nicephori,  p.  129.
Even-holy,  equally-holy  day,  Schefler's  Haltaus,  p.  68.


278  GODDESSES.

und  man  ze  tische  brahte  and  had  to  table  brought

allez  daz  man  ezzen  solde,  all  that  they  should  eat,

swaz  der  wirt  geben  wolde          •     whatso  the  master  would  give,
do  sprach  er  zem  gesinde  then  spake  he  to  his  men

und  zuo  sin  selbes  kinde  :  and  to  his  own  child :

'  ezzet  Mnte  fast  durch  min  bete,      '  eat  fast  (hard)  to  night,  I  pray,
daz  inch  die  Stempe  niht  entrete.'      that  the  Stenipe  tread  you  not.'
daz  kintlin  do  von  forhten  az,         The  child  then  ate  from  fear,
er  sprach:  'veterlin,  waz  ist  daz,     he  said  :  '  father,  what  is  this
daz  du  die  Stempen  nennest  ?  that  thou  the  Stempe  callest  ?

sag  mir,  ob  dus  erkennest.'  tell  me,  if  thou  it  knowest/

der  vater  sprach :  'daz  sag  ich  dir,     The  father  said :  '  this  tell  I  thee,
du  solt  ez  wol  gelouben  mir,  thou  mayest  well  believe  me,

ez  ist  so  griuwelich  getan,  there  is  a  thing  so  gruesome  done,

daz  ich  dirz  niht  gesagen  kan  :        that  I  cannot  tell  it  thee :
wan  swer  des  vergizzet,  for  whoso  forgets  this,

daz  er  nicht  fast  izzet,  so  that  he  eats  not  fast,

df  den  Jcumt  ez  und  trit  in?  on  him  it  comes,  and  treads  him.'

Here  also  children  and  servants  are  warned  by  the  master  of  the
house  to  eat  up  clean  all  that  is  brought  on  the  table,  and  are  !
threatened  with  a  trampling  from  Stempe.  This  cognomen  of
Berchte  must  have  come  from  stamping  (step,  tap,  thump,  &c.),  and
perhaps  it  ought  to  be  spelt  Stempfe  (German  stampfen,  to  stamp) ;
but  in  Bavaria  there  is  a  proper  name  Stempo  (MB.  2,  280,  anno
11.30),  not  Stempho,  and  both  stampen  and  stampfen  seem  to  be
correct  for  trampling  and  squeezing,  Ital.  stampare :  she  is  the
night  hag,  similar  to  alp  and  schrat  [old  scratch  ?].  Add  to  this,
that  in  the  Nordgau  of  Franconia,  dame  Holda  is  called  the  Trempe
(Doderlein,  Antiq.  nordg.  41),  i.e.,  the  trampling  racketing  one;
Stalder  defines  trampeln  as  walking  with  short,  measured  steps
(tripping),  and  the  Drut  (night-goblin)  approaches  with  soft  foot
fall  ;  at  the  same  time,  trampel,  trampelthier,  is  a  heavy  clumsy
woman.  Now,  as  S  is  occasionally  added  before  an  initial  T,  it  is
surely  not  going  too  far,  to  connect  Stempe  with  the  more  ancient
Tamfana,  Tanfana,  p.  257  (see  SuppL).

Martin  of  Amberg  l  calls  her  Percht  mit  der  eisnen  nascn  (with

•

1  His  Gewissensspiegel  (mid.  of  14th  cent.)  is  in  two  MSS.  at  Vienna
(HofiFm.  pp.  335-6)  ;  conf.  Schm.  4,  188.  216,  and  the  Jalirb.  der  Berliner
gesellsch.  iur  deutscne  spr.  2,  63 — 65.


PERAHTA,  BERCHTE.  279

iron  nose),  and  says  that  people  leave  meat  and  drink  standing  for
her;  which  means  a  downright  sacrifice.

In  the  mountains  of  Salzburg  there  is  kept  up  to  this  day,  in
honour  of  the  terrible  Perchtel,  a  so  called  Perchta-running,  Perclita-
leaping  at  the  time  of  the  rauchnachte  [incense -nights  ?]x  In  the
Pinzgau,  from  100  to  300  young  fellows  (styled  the  Berchten)  will
roam  about  in  broad  daylight  in  the  oddest  disguises,  carrying  cows'
bells,  and  cracking  whips.2  In  the  Gastein  valley  the  procession,
headed  by  from  50  or  100  to  300  stout  fellows,  goes  hopping  and
skipping  from  village  to  village,  from  house  to  house,  all  through
the  valley  (Muchar,  Gastein  pp.  145-7).  In  the  north  of  Switzer
land,  where  in  addition  to  Berchtli  the  softened  form  Bechtli  or
Bechteli  is  in  use,  Bechteli's  day  is  the  2nd  (or,  if  New-year's  day
falls  on  a  Saturday,  the  3rd)  of  January,  and  is  honoured  by  the
young  people  in  general  with  social  merrymakings  ;  they  call  the
practice  berchleln,  bechteln.  In  the  16th  century  it  was  still  the
custom  at  Zurich,  for  men  to  intercept  and  press  one  another  to
take  wine  ;  this  was  called  '  conducting  to  Berchtold '  (Staid.  1,  150-
6).  There  was  thus  a  masculine  Bercht  or  BerclMt,  related  to
Wuotan,  as  Berhta  was  to  Freke  ;  and  from  this  again  there  arose
in  Swabia  a  new  feminine,  Breclitolterin,  Prechtolterin  (Schmid,
Schwab,  wtb.  93).  In  Alsace  the  beckten  was  performed  by  pren
tices  and  journeymen  running  from  one  house  or  room  to  another,
and  keeping  up  a  racket  (see  passages  in  Oberlin,  sub.  v.  Bechten).
Cunrat  of  Dankrozheim  says  in  his  Namenbuch,  composed  1435  : 3
darnauch  so  komet  die  milde  Behte,
die  noch  hat  ein  gar  gross  geslehte  (great  kindred).
He  describes  her  as  the  mild,  gracious  to  men,  not  as  the  terrible.
Berchtolt  however  is  in  Swabian  legend  the  white  mannikin,  who
brings  spools  to  be  filled  with  spinning  (Hone's  anz.  8,  179),
exactly  like  Berchta,  p.  274  (see  Suppl).

And  as  a  kind  benevolent  being  she  appears  in  many  other
descriptions,  which  undoubtedly  reach  far  back  into  the  Mid.  Ages.
The  white  lady,  by  her  very  name,  has  altogether  the  same  meaning,

1  This  Perchtenspringen  is  like  the  hexentusch  in  the  Bb'hmerwald,  which,
Jos.  Rank  p.  76-7  says,  is  performed  at  Whitsuntide,  when  young  men  and
boys  provide  themselves  with  loud  cracking  whips,  and  chase  all  the  witches
out  of  houses,  stables  and  barns.

2  Journey  through  Upper  Germany,  p.  243.     Schm.  1,  195.

3  Ad.  Walt.  Strobel's  beitr.,  Strasb.  1827,  p.  123.


280  GODDESSES.

for  peraht,  berht  or  brecht,  signifies  bright,  light,  white.  This
white  lady  usually  attaches  herself  to  particular  families,  but  even
then  she  keeps  the  name  of  Bert  a,  e.g.,  Berta  of  Rosenberg.  In
snow-white  garments  she  shows  herself  by  night  in  princely  houses,
she  rocks  or  dandles  the  babies,  while  their  nurses  sleep :  she  acts
the  old  grandmother  or  ancestress  of  the  family  (see  Suppl.).

There  is  a  good  deal  in  the  fact,  that  several  women  of  that
name,  who  are  famed  in  our  national  traditions,  stand  connected
with  the  ghostly  Berhta ;  they  have  been  adopted  out  of  the  divine
legend  into  the  heroic  legend.  In  Italy  and  France,  a  far  distant
past  is  expressed  by  the  phrase  :  'nel  tempo  ove  Berta  filava?  when
B.  span  (Pentamerone.  Liebrecht  2,  259),  '  au  terns  que  la  reine
Berthe  fila.it : '  the  same  idea  still,  of  the  spinning  matron.1  Berta,
the  daughter  of  king  Flower  and  of  Whiteflower,  afterwards  the
wife  of  king  Pippin  and  mother  of  the  great  hero  Charles,
she  who  in  the  MLG.  poem  of  Flos  is  called  both  Vredcling  and
Brehte  (1555.  7825),  does  not  belie  her  mythic  origin.2  She  is
called  Berhte  mit  demfuoze  (foot),  Flore  309;  in  French,  Berthe  au
grand  pied;  and  ace.  to  the  Eeali  di  Franza  6,1:  '  Berta  del  gran
pie,  perche  ella  aveva  un  pie  un  poco  maggior  dell  altro,  e  quello
era  il  pie  destro,'  had  the  right  foot  larger.  The  French  poet  Adenez
tries  apparently  to  extenuate  the  deformity  by  making  both  her
feet  large,  he  calls  her  'Berte  as  grans  pies'  (Paris  ed.  LI  I.  78. 104);
so  the  Mid.  Dutch,  '  Baerte  met  ten  breden  voeten,'  Floris  3966.
But  the  one  big  foot  is  more  genuine,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  far

*  I  can  produce  another  spinning  Bertha.  The  Vita  S.  Berthae  Avenna-
censis  in  dicccesi  Remensi  (conf.  Flodoardus  4,  47)  says  (Acta  Sanctor.,  Maii  p.
114b)  :  Quae  dum  lustraret  situs  loci  illius,  pervenit  ad  quendam  hortum,  in
quo  erat  fons  inirae  pulcritudinis.  Quern  ut  vidit  Deo  devota  femina,  minime
concupivit,  sed  possessoribus  ipsius  praedii  sic  locula  est  :  0  fratres,  hunc
fontem  praedii  vestri  vendite  mihi,  et  accepta  digna  pecunia  cedite  usibus
nostris.  Cui  sic  aiunt  :  En  praesto  sumus,  si  tamen  detur  pretium  a  nobis
taxatum.  Sancta  autem,  videntibus  qui  aderant,  libram  unam  denariorum
posuit  super  lapidem  qui  erat  super  os  ejusdem  fontis,  domini  vero  ac  vendi-
tores  receperunt  aes.  Tune  sancta  mater,  Deo  plena,  colo  quain  manu  tenebat
coepit  terram  fodere,  et  in  modum  sulci  rigam  facere,  orans  ac  dicens  :  Ostende
nobis,  Domine,  misericord iam  tuam,  et  salutare  tuum  da  nobis  !  Revertens
namque  monasterium,  colum  eadem  post  se  trahebat,  tantaque  abundantia
aquae  earn  sequebatur,  ut  ad  usus  omnes  hominibus  pertinentes  sufficeret,  sicut
usque  hodie  apparet.  Nomen  quoque  sancta  mater  iluviolo  ipsi  composuit,
dicens  :  Libra  vocaberis,  quia  una  libra  pro  emptione  tua  data  est.

2  How  firmly  she  is  rooted,  may  be  seen  by  her  being  the  link  that  joins
the  Carolingian  legend  to  the  Langobardic  :  she  is  mother  of  Carl,  wife  of
Pippin  the  son  of  Rother  (4789),  and  daughter  of  Flore  and  Blancheilor,  whose
name  again  contains  the  notion  of  whiteness.


PERAHTA,  BEKCHTE.  281

more  ancient  tradition  of  a  '  reine  Pedauque,  regina  pede  aucae'
whose  figure  stands  carved  in  stone  on  old  churches.1  It  is  appar
ently  a  swan-maiden's  foot,  which  as  a  mark  of  her  higher  nature
she  cannot  lay  aside  (any  more  than  Huldra  her  tail,  or  the  devil
his  horse  hoof) ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  spinning- woman's  splay
foot  that  worked  the  treadle,  and  that  of  the  trampling  dame
Stempe  or  Trempe.  If  we  had  older  and  minuter  descriptions  of
'  frau  Berhta '  in  Germany,  perhaps  this  foot  would  also  be
mentioned  in  them  (see  SuppL).

It  still  remains  for  us  to  explain  her  precise  connexion  with  a
particular  day  of  the  year.  It  is  either  on  Dec.  25  (dies  natalis),  or
twelve  days  after  Christmas,  on  Jan.  6,  when  the  star  appeared  to
the  Three  Kings  (magi),  that  the  Christian  church  celebrates  the
feast  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  under  the  name  of  epipkania
(v.  Ducange,  sub  v.),  lethphania  or  theophania  (0.  Fr.  tiephaine,
tiphagne).  In  an  OHG.  gloss  (Emm.  39-4),  theophania  is  rendered
giperahta  naht,  the  bright  night  of  the  heavenly  vision  that
appeared  to  the  shepherds  in  the  field.2  Documents  of  the  Mid.
Ages  give  dates  in  the  dative  case:  ' perchtentag,  perhtennaht'
(for  OHG.  zi  demo  perahtin  taga,  zi  deru  Perahtun  naht)  ;  again,
'  an  der  berechtnaht,'  M.  Beham  (Mone,  anz.  4,  451) ;  *  ze  perh-
nahten,'  MB.  8,  540  (an.  1302);  'imze  an  den  ahtodin  tac  nah  der
Perhtage,'  till  the  eighth  day  after  the  Perht's  (fern.)  day,  Fundgr.
110,  22  ;  '  von  dem  nehsten  Berhtag,'  MB.  9,  138  (an.  1317) ;  '  an
dem  Prehentag,'  MB.  7,  256  (an.  1349); — these  and  other  contracted
forms  are  cited  with  references  in  Scheffer's  Ilaltaus  p.  75,  and
Schm.  1,  194.3  Now  from  this  there  might  very  easily  grow  up  a
personification,  Perchtentzc,  Perchtennaht,  the  bright  day  becoming
Bright's,  i.e,,  dame  Bright's,  day.  (Conrad  of  Dankrotsheim,  p.  123,
puts  his  milde  Belite  down  a  week  earlier,  on  Dec.  30.)  4

Two  hypotheses  present  themselves.  Either  the  entire  fabulous
existence  of  a  Perhta  first  arose  accidentally  and  by  misunderstand
ing,  out  of  such  personification  ;  or  the  analogy  of  the  '  bright '  day
was  tacked  on  to  a  previously  existing  Perhta.  Now  it  is  true  we

1  AM.  w.  3,  47-8  ;  Paris  too  connects  this  Pedauque  with  Berte,  iii.  iv.
198  ;  reine  Pedauque,  Michelet  hist,  de  France  1,  496-8.     2,  152.
a  Luke  2,  0.     0.  i.  12,  3.  4.     Hel.  12,  8.     Maria  182.

3  The  OHG.  'j»fcrmtae»paza8cev6  (Graff  5,  360)  is  Good  Friday,  and
distinct  from  Prehentag,  Perchtentag.

4  Dec.  28  is  Innocents',  29  St.  Thomas's,  31  St.  Silvester's.


282  GODDESSES.

cannot  point  out  a  dame  Perhta  before  the  15th  or  14th  century,
or  at  earliest  the  13th ;  but  the  first  supposition  need  not  break
down,  even  if  we  did  manage  to  hunt  up  her  personal  name  in
older  authorities  :  even  in  the  9th  century  the  expression  '  perahtun
naht '  might  have  developed  into  '  Perahtun  naht '.  Still  the  char
acteristics  we  have  specified  of  a  mythical  Berta,  and  above  all,  her
identity  with  Holda,  seem  to  me  to  decide  the  matter  the  other
way.  If,  independently  of  the  Christian  calendar,  there  was  a
Holda,  then  neither  can  Perahta  be  purely  a  product  of  it ;  on  the
contrary,  both  of  these  adjective  names  lead  up  to  a  heathen  deity,
who  made  her  peregrination  at  that  very  season  of  yule,  and  whom
therefore  the  Christians  readily  connected  with  the  sacredness  of
Christmas  and  New-year.

I  will  here  group  together  the  features  which  unmistakably
make  Holda  and  Bertha  appear  in  this  light.  They  drive  about  in
waggons,  like  mother  Earth,  and  promote  agriculture  and  navigation
among  men  ;  a  plough,  from  which  there  fall  chips  of  gold,  is  their
sacred  implement.  This  too  is  like  the  gods,  that  they  appear
suddenly,  and  Berhta  especially  hands  her  gifts  in  at  the  window.
Both  have  spinning  and  weaving  at  heart,  they  insist  on  diligence
and  the  keeping  of  festivals  holy,  on  the  transgressor  grim  penalties
are  executed.  The  souls  of  infant  children  are  found  in  their  host,
as  they  likewise  rule  over  elves  and  dwarfs,  but  night-hags  and
enchantresses  also  follow  in  their  train : —  all  this  savours  of
heathenism.

It  is  very  remarkable,  that  the  Italians  too  have  a  mis-shapen
fairy  Befana,  a  terror  to  children,  who  has  sprung  out  of  epiphania
(befania)  :  on  that  day  the  women  and  children  set  a  doll  made  of
old  rags  in  the  window  ;  she  is  black  and  ugly,  and  brings  presents.
Some  say,  she  is  Herod's  daughter ;  Eanke's  hist,  zeitschr.  1,  717.
1  La  Befania  '  (Pulci's  Morg.  5,  42).  Berni  says  :  '  il  di  di  Befania
vo  porla  per  Befana  alia  fenestra,  perche  qualcun  le  dia  d'  una
ballestra  '.l  It  would  be  astonishing,  if  twice  over,  in  two  different
nations,  a  name  in  the  calendar  had  caused  the  invention  of  a
supernatural  being;  it  is  more  likely  that,  both  in  Italy,  and  among
us,  older  traditions  of  the  people  have  sought  to  blend  themselves
with  the  Christian  name  of  the  day.

1  Franc.  Berni,  rime  105.     Crusca  sub  v.  befana.


HERODIAS,  DIANA,  ABUNDIA.  283

6.  (HERODIAS.    DIANA.    ABUNDIA).

Herodias,  of  whom  we  have  just  been  reminded  by  Befana,  will
illustrate  this  even  better.  The  story  of  Herod's  daughter,  whose
dancing  brought  about  the  beheading  of  John  the  Baptist,  must
have  produced  a  peculiarly  deep  impression  in  the  early  part  of  the
Mid.  Ages,  and  in  more  than  one  way  got  mixed  up  with  fables.
Keligious  poets  treat  the  subject  in  full,  and  with  relish  (Hel.  83-5) ;
Otfried  seems  to  leave  it  out  designedly.  It  was  imagined,  that  on
account  of  her  thoughtless  rather  than  malicious  act  (for  the
proposal  came  from  her  revengeful  mother),  Herodias  (the  daughter)
was  condemned  to  roam  about  in  company  with  evil  and  devilish
spirits.  She  is  placed  at  the  head  of  the  '  furious  host '  or  of
witches'  nightly  expeditions,  together  with  Diana,  with  Holda  and
Perahta,  or  in  their  stead.  In  Burcard  of  Worms  10,  1  we  read :
Illud  etiam  non  omittendum,  quod  quaedam  sceleratae  mulieres
retro  post  Satanam  conversae,  daemonum  illusionibus  et  phantas-
matibus  seductae,  credunt  se  et  profitentur  nocturnis  horis  cum
Diana  paganorum  dea  vel  cum  Herodiade  et  innumera  multitudine
mulierum  equitare  super  quasdam  bestias,  et  multa  terrarum  spatia
intempestae  noctis  silentio  pertransire,  ej  usque  jussionibus  velut
dominae  obedire,  et  certis  noctibus  ad  ejus  servitium  evocari. —
Joh.  Salisberiensis  (f  1182)  in  Polycr.  2,  17  :  Quale  est,  quod  noc-
tilucam  quandam,  vel  Herodiadem  vel  praesidem  noctis  dominam,
concilia  et  conventus  de  nocte  asserunt  convocare,  varia  celebrari
convivia,  &c. — Angerius,  episcopus  Conseranus  (an.  1280)  :  Nulla
mulier  de  nocturnis  equitare  cum  Diana  dea  paganorum  vel  cum
Herodiade  seu  Bensozia l  et  innumera  mulierum  multitudine  pro-
fiteatur. — Similar  statements  have  passed  into  later  writings,  such
as  those  of  Martin  von  Amberg,  and  Vintler.  It  is  worth  noticing,
that  to  the  worship  of  this  Herodias,  one  third  of  the  whole  world  is
ceded,  and  so  a  most  respectable  diffusion  allowed.  Eatherius
(bishop  of  Verona,  but  a  Frank,  b.  at  Lobi  near  Cambray,  d.  974)  in
his  Praeloquia  (Martene  and  Durand  9,  798.  opp.  edit.  Ballerini
pp.  20.  21) :  Quis  enim  eorum,  qui  hodie  in  talibus  usque  ad  per-
ditionem  animae  in  tantum  decipiuntur,  ut  etiam  eis,  quas  (Ball.

1  Ducange  sub  v.  Diana  spells  Benzoria,  but  has  the  true  meaning  under
Bensozia  itself  ;  it  seems  to  mean  bona  socia,  friendly  propitious  being.  Bona
dea,  Dio  Cass.  37,  35.  45.  Conf.  ch.  XXVIII,  dobra  sretia,  bona  Fortuna  j  ch.
XVI,  good  wife,  under  Wood-women.


284  GODDESSES.

de  quibus)  ait  Gen.1,  Ilerocliam  illam  baptistae  Christ!  interfectri-
cem,  quasi  reginam  imo  deam  proponant ;  asserentes,  tertiam  totim
mundi  partem  illi  traditam  :  quasi  haec  merces  fuerit  prophetae
occisi,  cum  potius  sint  daemones,  talibus  praestigiis  infelices  mulier-
culas,  hisque  multum  vituperabiliores  viros,  quia  perditissimos,
decipientes. — A  full  and  remarkable  account  of  the  medieval
tradition,  that  was  tacked  on  to  Herodias,  is  contained  in  the  Eei-
nardus  1,  1139— 11G4  :

Praecipue  sidus  celebrant,  ope  cujus,  ubi  omnes

defuerant  testes,  est  data  Eoma  Petro,
traditaque  injusto  Pharaildis  virgo  labori ;

sed  sanctifaciunt  qualiacunque  volunt.
Hac  famosus  erat  felixque  fuisset  Her  odes

prole,  sed  infelix  hanc  quoque  laesit  amor  i
haec  virgo,  thalamos  Baptistae  solius  ardens,

voverat  hoc  demto  nullius  esse  viri.
Offensus  genitor,  comperto  prolis  amore,

insoritern  sanctum  decapitavit  atrox.
Postulat  afferri  virgo  sibi  tristis,  et  affert

regius  in  disco  tempora  trunca  cliens.
Mollibus  allatum  stringens  caput  ilia  lacertis

perfundit  lacrimis,  osculaque  addere  avet ;
oscula  captantem  caput  aufugit  atque  resufflat,

ilia  per  impluvium  turbine  flantis  abit.
Ex  illo  nimium  memor  ira  Johannis  eandem

per  vacuum  coeli  flabilis  urget  iter  :
mortuus  infestat  miseram,  nee  vivus  amarat,

non  tamen  hanc  penitus  fata  perisse  sinunt.
Lenit  honor  luctum,  minuit  reverentia  poenam,

pars  hominum  moestae  tertia  servit  herae.
Querculms  et  corylis  a  noctis  parte  secunda

usque  nigri  ad  galli  carmina  prima  sedet.
Nunc  ea  nomen  habet  Pharaildis,  Herodias  ante

saltria,  nee  subiens  nee  subeunda  pari.

Conf.  Aelfrici  homiliae  1,  486.  Here  we  have  Herodias  described
as  inoesta  her  a  cui  pars  tertia  hominum  servit,  the  reverential
homage  she  receives  assuages  her  bitter  lot ;  only  from  midnight

1  Ballerini  cannot  understand  this  Gen.  ;  is  it  Gennadius  (Massiliensis),  a
writer  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  ?


HERODIAS,  DIANA,  ABUNDIA,  285

till  first  cockcrow  she  sits  on  oaks  and  hazel-trees,  the  rest  of  her
time  she  floats  through  the  empty  air.  She  was  inflamed  by  love
for  John,  which  he  did  not  return  ;  when  his  head  is  brought  in  on
a  charger,  she  would  fain  have  covered  it  with  tears  and  kisses,  but
it  draws  back,  and  begins  to  blow  hard  at  her ;  the  hapless  maid  is
whirled  into  empty  space,  and  there  she  hangs  for  ever.1  Why  she
was  afterwards  (in  the  twelfth  century)  called  Pharaildis,  is  not
explained  by  the  life  of  a  saint  of  that  name  in  Flanders  (Acta
sanct.  4  Jan.) ;  nor  does  anything  that  the  church  tells  of  John  the
Baptist  and  Herodias  (Acta  sanct.  24  Jun.)  at  all  resemble  the
contents  of  the  above  story  :  Herodias  is  Herod's  wife,  and  the
daughter  is  named  Salome.  Pharaildis  on  the  contrary,  M.  Dutch
Verelde,2  leads  us  to  ver  Elde  =  frau  Hilde  or  frau  Hulde,  as  in  a
doc.  of  1213  (Bodmanns  Bheing.  alterth.  p.  94)  there  occurs  a
'  miles  dictus  Verhildebwrgj  and  in  a  Frisian  doc,  of  the  14th
century  a  Ferliildema,  evidently  referring  to  the  mythic  Hildburg.
Still  more  remarkable  seems  a  M.  Dutch  name  for  the  milky  way,
Vroneldenstraet  =  frauen  Hilde  or  Hulde  strasse  (street,  highway),
So  that  the  poet  of  the  Eeinardus  is  entirely  in  the  right,  when
Herodias  sets  him  thinking  of  Pharaildis,  and  she  again  of  the
milky  way,  the  sidus  in  his  first  line.

There  is  no  doubt  whatever,  that  quite  early  in  the  Mid.  Ages
the  Christian  mythus  of  Herodias  got  mixed  up  with  our  native
heathen  fables  :  those  notions  about  dame  Holda  and  the  '  furious
host '  and  the  nightly  jaunts  of  sorceresses  were  grafted  on  it,  the
Jewish  king's  daughter  had  the  part  of  a  heathen  goddess  assigned
her  (Ratherius  says  expressly :  imo  dea),  and  her  worship  found
numerous  adherents.  In  the  same  circle  moves  Diana,  the  lunar
deity  of  night,  the  wild  huntress ;  Diana,  Herodias  and  Holda

1  This  reference  to  the  turbo  (the  whirlwind  of  his  blast),  looks  mythical
and  of  high  antiquity.     Not  only  did  Ziu  or  Zio,  once  a  deity,  become  with  the
Christians  a  name  for  the  whirlwind,  p.  203  (and  Pulloineken  too  may  have  to
do  with  Pkol,  p.  229)  ;  but  to  this  day  such  a  wind  is  accounted  for  in  Lower
Saxony  (about  Celle)  by  the  dancing  Herodias  whirling  about  in  the  air.     Else
where  the  raising  of  it  is  ascribed  to  the  devil,  and  offensive   epithets  are
hurled  at  him,  as  in  the  Saalfeld  country  :  '  Schweinezahl  fahret,'  there  goes
swine-tail  (Praetorius,  Riibezahl  3,  120),  and  on  the  Rhon  ints.  :  *  Sauzagel,'
sow- tail  (Schm.  4,  110),  to  shew  contempt  for  the  demon,  and  abate  his  fury
(see  Suppl.).     I  shall  bring  in  some  other  stories,  when  treating  of  the  wind-
sprites.

2  Canneart,  strafrecht  153-5.      Balg.  mus.  6,  319.     Conf.  Vergode  for  frau
Gaude.


286  GODDESSES.

stand  for  one  another,  or  side  by  side.  Diana  is  denounced  by
Eligius  (Superst.  A) ;  the  passage  in  the  decrees  of  councils
(Superst.  C)  has  found  its  way  into  many  later  writings  (Superst.
D,  G) :  like  Herodias,  she  appears  as  domina  and  hem.  The  life  of
St.  Caesarius  Arelatensis  mentions  a  '  daemonium,  quod  rustic!
Dianam  vocant,'  so  that  the  name  was  familiar  to  the  common
people ;  that  statue  of  Diana  in  Greg.  Tur.  8,  15  I  have  spoken  of
on  p.  110.  But  the  strongest  testimony  to  the  wide  diffusion  of
Diana's  cultus  seems  to  be  a  passage  in  the  life  of  St.  Kilian,  the
apostle  of  the  East  Franks  (*f-  689) :  Gozbertusdux  Franciae  .  .  .
volens  crebra  apud  se  tractare  inquisitione,  utrum  Ejus  quern
(Kilianus)  praedicabat,  vel  Dianae  potius  cultus  praeferendus  esset.
Diana  namque  apud  ilium  in  summa  veneratione  habebatur
(Surius  4,  133  ;  Acta  sanct.  Bolland.  8  Jul.  (p.  616).  As  it  is
principally  in  Thuringia,  Franconia  and  Hesse  that  frau  Holda
survives,  it  is  not  incredible  that  by  Diana  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Wiirzburg,  so  far  back  as  the  7th  century,  was  meant  no  other
than  she.

Lastly,  the  retrospective  connexion  of  this  Herodias  or  Diana
with  personages  in  the  native  paganism,  whether  of  Celtic  or
Teutonic  nations,  receives  a  welcome  confirmation  from  the  legend
of  a  domina  Abundia  or  dame  Habonde,  supplied  by  French
authorities  of  the  Mid.  Ages.  A  bishop  of  Paris,  Guilielmus
Alvernus  (Guillaume  d'  Auvergne),  who  died  1248,  speaks  thus  of
nymphs  and  lamiae  (opera,  Par.  1 674,  fol.  1. 1036) :  'Sic  et  daemon,
qui  praetextu  mulieris,  cum  aliis  de  nocte  domos  et  cellaria  dicitur
frequentare,  et  vocant  earn  Satiam  a  satietate,  et  dominam
Abundiam  pro  abundantia,1  quam  earn  praestare  dicunt  domibus,
quas  frequentaverit :  htijusmodi  etiam  daemones,  quas  dominas
vocant  vetulae,  penes  quas  error  iste  remansit,  et  a  quibus  solis
creditur  et  somniatur.  Dicunt  has  dominas  edere  et  bibere  de  escis
et  potibus,  quos  in  domibus  inveniunt,  nee  tamen  consumptionem
aut  imminutionem  eas  facere  escarum  et  potuum,  maxime  si  vasa
escarum  sint  discooperta  et  vasa  poculorum  non  obstructa
eis  in  nocte  relinquantur.  Si  vero  operta  vel  clausa  inveniunt
seu  obstructa,  inde  nee  comedunt  nee  bibunt,  propter  quod
infaustas  et  infortunatas  relinquunt,  nee  satietatem  nee  almn-

1  The  Romans  also  personified  Abundantia  as  a  superior  being,  but  she
only  appears  on  coins,  she  had  neither  temples  nor  altars.


HERODIAS,   DIANA,   ABUNDlA.


287


dantiam  eis  praestantes.'  The  like  is  repeated  on  p.  1068,  but
on  p.  1066  we  read :  '  Sunt  et  aliae  ludificationes  malignorum
spirituum,  quas  faciunt  interdum  in  nemoribus  et  locis  amoenis
et  frondosis  arboribus,  ubi  apparent  in  similitudine  pudlarum  aut
matronarum  ornatu  muliebri  et  candido,  interdum  etiam  in  stabulis,
cum  luminaribus  cereis,  ex  quibus  apparent  distillationes  in  comis
et  collis  equorum,  et  comae  ipsorum  diligenter  tricatae,  et  audies
eos,  qui  talia  se  vidisse  fatentur,  dicentes  veram  ceram  esse,  quae
de  luminaribus  hujusmodi  stillaverat.1  De  illis  vero  substantiis,
quae  apparent  in  domibus,  quas  dominas  nocturnas,  et  principem
earum  vocant  dominam  Abundiam,  pro  eo  quod  domibus,  quas
frequentant,  abundantiam  bonorum  temporalium  praestare  putan-
tur,  non  aliter  tibi  sentiendum  est,  neque  aliter  quam  quemadmo-
dum  de  illis  audivisti.  Quapropter  eo  usque  invaluit  stultitia  ho-
minum  et  insania  vetularum,  ut  vasa  vini  et  receptacula  ciborum
discocperta  relinquant,  et  omnino  nee  obstruant  neque  claudant  eis
noctibus,  quibus  ad  domos  suas  eas  credunt  adventuras,  ea  de
causa  videlicet,  ut  cibos  et  potus  quasi  paratos  inveniant  et  eos
absque  difficultate  apparitionis  pro  beneplacito  sumant.
The  Koman  de  la  rose  (Meon  18622  seq.)  informs  us :

qui  les  cine  sens  ainsinc  deceit
par  les  fantosmes,  quil  rec^oit,
dont  maintes  gens  par  lor  folie
cuident  estre  par  nuit  estries
errans  auecques  dame  Halondc,
et  dient,  que  par  tout  le  monde
li  tiers  enfant  de  nacion
sunt  de  ceste  condition.
qu'il  vont  trois  fois  en  la  semaine,
si  cum  destinee  les  maine,
et  par  tous  ces  ostex  se  boutent,
ne  cles  ne  barres  ne  redoutent,
ains  sen  entrent  par  les  fendaces,
par  chatieres  et  par  crevaces,
et  se  partent  des  cors  les  ames
et  vont  avec  les  bonnes  dames
par  leus  forains  et  par  maisons,
et  le  pruevent  par  tiex  raisons  :

1  Conf.  Deutsche  sagen,  no.  122.


288


GODDESSES.


que  les  diversitds  veues
ne  sunt  pas  en  lor  liz  venues,
ains  sunt  lor  ames  qui  laborent
et  par  le  monde  ainsinc  sen  corent,  &c.
18686.  Dautre  part,  que  li  tiers  du  monde
aille  ainsinc  avec  dame  Habonde,
si  cum  voles  vielles  le  pruevent
par  les  visions  que  truevent,
dont  convient  il  sans  nule  faille
que'  trestous  li  mondes  i  aille.

As  Ratheriua  and  the  Eeinardus  represent  a  third  part  of  the  world
as  given  up  to  the  service  of  Herodias,  the  same  statement  is  here
applied  to  dame  Habonde ;  Herodias  and  Abundia  are  therefore
one.  A  connexion  between  Abundia  and  our  native  Folia,  Fulla
(fulness)  will  presently  be  made  apparent.  The  term  enfans  may
refer  either  to  the  unchristened  lobes  above,  or  to  the  great
multitude  of  heathen,  who  remained  shut  out  of  the  Christian
community.  It  had  long  been  the  custom  to  divide  the  known
world  into  three  parts.1  The  domina  clothed  in  white  reminds  one
of  Perahta  the  bright,  the  bona  domina  or  bona  soda2  of  Holda  the
gracious,  and  Herodias  haunting  the  oaks  by  night  of  the  Old
German  tree-worship.  They  are  originally  benignant  beings  all,
whose  presence  brings  prosperity  and  plenty  to  mankind ;  hence  to
them,  as  to  friendly  spirits  or  gods,  meat  and  drink  are  set  for  a
sacrifice  in  the  night  season.  Holda,  Berhta  and  Werra  seem  to
love  a  particular  kind  of  food,  and  look  for  it  on  their  feast-day.

7.  HRUODA  (HREDE).    OSTARA  (EASTEE).

Thus  far  we  have  got  acquainted  with  the  names  and  worship
of  several  goddesses,  who  were  honoured  under  different  names  by
particular  tribes  of  Teutondom  (Nerdu,  Hludana,  Tanfana,  Holda,
Berhta),  and  others  resembling  them  have  only  become  known  to
us  under  foreign  appellations  (I sis,  Diana,  Herodias,  Abundia) :  of
all  these  (so  long  as  I  consider  still  doubtful  the  connexion  of

»  Agitnr  pars  tertia  mimcli.  Ovid.  met.  5,  372  ;  tertia  pars  muntli  fumans
perit  Africa  ilammis,  Coripp.  1,  47  :  tertia  pars  orLis  Europa  vocutur,  Wal-
thar.  1.

2  Is  the  name  soda  connected  with  the  Satia  in  Guilieliuus  Alvernus  ?


HKUODA,    OSTARA.  289

'  Erce '  with  our  Herke)  not  one  is  to  be  found  among  the  Anglo-
Saxons,

On  the  other  hand,  the  Anglo-Saxon  historian  tells  us  the
names  of  two  beings,  whom  he  expressly  calls  ancient  goddesses  of
his  people,  but  of  whose  existence  not  a  trace  is  left  amongst  other
Germans.  A  clear  proof,  that  here  as  well  as  there,  heathenism
was  crowded  with  divinities  of  various  shape  and  varying  name,
but  who  in  their  characteristics  and  cultus  corresponded  to  one
another.  Why  this  multiplicity  of  form  should  prevail  more  in  the
case  of  the  female  deities  than  of  the  male,  can  be  fairly  explained,
I  think,  by  the  greater  respect  paid  to  the  chief  masculine
divinities:  they  were  too  famous  and  too  highly  thought  of,  for
their  principal  names  not  to  have  penetrated  all  branches  of  the
nation.

The  two  goddesses,  whom  Beda  (De  temporum  ratione  cap.  1 3)
cites  very  briefly,  without  any  description,  merely  to  explain  the
months  named  after  them,  are  ffrede  and  Edstre,  March  taking  its
Saxon  name  from  the  first,  and  April  from  the  second :  '  Rhedmo-
nath  a  dea  illorum  Rheda,  cui  in  illo  sacrificabant,  nominatur.'—
'Antiqui  Anglorum  populi,  gens  mea  .  .  .  apud  eos  Aprilis
Esturmonaih,  qui  mine  paschalis  mensis  interpretatur,  quondam  a
dm  illorum,  quae  Eostra  vocabatur  et  cui  in  illo  festa  celebrantur
(?),  nomen  habuit ;  a  cujus  nomine  nunc  paschale  tempus  cogno-
minant,  consueto  antiquae  observations  vocabulo  gaudia  novae
solennitatis  vocantes.' x

It  would  be  uncritical  to  saddle  this  father  of  the  church,  who
everywhere  keeps  heathenism  at  a  distance,  and  tells  us  less  of  it
than  he  knows,  with  the  invention  of  these  goddesses.  There  is
nothing  improbable  in  them,  nay  the  first  of  them  is  justified  by
clear  traces  in  the  vocabularies  of  other  German  tribes.  March  is
in  OHG.  lenzinmanot,  named  after  the  season  lenzo,  lengizo
[lengthening  of  days]  ;2  but  it  may  have  borne  other  names  as  well.
Oberlin  quotes,  from  Chorion's  Ehrenkranz  der  teutschen  sprach,
Strassb.  1644,  p.  91,  Eetmonat  for  March;  and  a  doc.  of  1404

1  One  MS.  (Kolmesen  opusc.  p.  287  ;  this  ref.  given  in  Rathlef  s  Hoya  and
Diepholz  3,  16)  reads  :  Yeteres  Anglican!  populi  vocant  Estormonath  paschalem
mensem,  idque  a  dea  quadam  cui    Teutonici  populi   in  paganismo   sacrificia
fecerunt  tempore  mensis  Aprilis,  quae  Eostra  est  appellata.

2  Gramin.  2,  510.     Langez.  Dint.  3,  88.

19


290  GODDESSES.

(Weisth.   1,  175)  has  Redtmonet,  it  is  not  clear  for  what  month.
When  we  find  in  the  Appenzeller  reimchronik  p.  174  :

In  dem  Redimonet

die  puren  kamen  donet,

do  der  merzenrnonat  gieng  herzu

an  ainem  morgen  fru

do  zundentz  Eorschach  an  ;

here  Redimonet  seems,  by  the  displacement  so  common  in  the
names  of  months,  to  he  the  month  before  March,  as  Chorion  uses
his  Retmonat  for  February  as  well.  Von  Arx  explains  the  word
quite  differently,  and  I  think  untenably,  by  a  mountain.  Apart
from  the  Swiss  term  altogether,  I  believe  the  AS.  name  was
really  ffreff  or  Hreffe  —  OHG.  Hruod  or  Hruodd,  and  derived,
as  I  said  on  p.  206,  from  hruod  gloria,  fama ;  so  that  we  get  the
meaning  of  a  shining  and  renownful  goddess.  The  Trad.  fuld.  2,
196,  furnish  a  female  name  Hruada,  gen.  Hruadun,  and  in  1,  42.  2,
26,  another  nom.  Hruadun,  this  last  apparently  formed  like  ON.
Fiorgyn  and  Hlodyn.  The  AS.  adj.  hreS  or  hreSe  means  crudelis
(Caedm.  136,  21.  198,  2),  perhaps  victoriosus  ?  I  am  in  doubt
about  hret),  sigehreS,  gufthreft,  Beow.  5146.  974.  1631 ;  they  waver
between  an  adj.  and  a  subst.  sense,  and  in  the  last  passage,
'  Beowulfe  wearS  guc5hre<5  gifefte/  victoria  is  evidently  meant.
When  the  AS.  Menologue,  line  70,  translates  Martius  by  reSe,  this
may  stand  for  hreSe.

We  Germans  to  this  day  call  April  ostermonat,  and  dstarmdnoth
is  found  as  early  as  Eginhart  (temp.  Car.  Mag.).  The  great
Christian  festival,  which  usually  falls  in  April  or  the  end  of  March,
bears  in  the  oldest  of  OHG.  remains  the  name  ostard  gen.  -un  j1  it
is  mostly  found  in  the  plural,  because  two  days  (ostartaga,
aostortaga,  Diut.  1,  266a)  were  kept  at  Easter.  This  Ostard,  like
the  AS.  Edstre,  must  in  the  heathen  religion  have  denoted  a  higher
being,  whose  worship  was  so  firmly  rooted,  that  the  Christian
teachers  tolerated  the  name,  and  applied  it  to  one  of  their  own
grandest  anniversaries.2  All  the  nations  bordering  on  us  have
retained  the  Biblical  'pascha';  even  Ulphilas  writes  paska,  nofc

1  T.  157,  1.  3.  5.     0.  i.  22,  8.    iii.  6,  16.    iv.  9,  8.    Hymn.  21,  4.  Fragm.
tlieol.  xiv.  17.

2  Couf.  Meier's  chronologic  1,  516.


ZISA.  291

austro,  though  he  must  have  known  the  word ; x  the  Norse  tongue
also  has  imported  its  paskir,  Swed.  pask,  Dan.  paaske.  The  OHG.
adv.  dstar  expresses  movement  toward  the  rising  sun  (Gramm.  3,
205),  likewise  the  ON",  austr,  and  probably  an  AS.  eastor  and  Goth,
austr.  In  Latin  the  identical  auster  has  been  pushed  round  to  the
noonday  quarter,  the  South.  In  the  Edda  a  male  being,  a  spirit  of
light,  bears  the  name  of  Austri,  so  a  female  one  might  have  been
called  Austra ;  the  High  German  and  Saxon  tribes  seem  on  the
contrary  to  have  formed  only  an  Ostara,  Edstre  (fern.),  not  Ostaro,
Eastra  (masc).2  And  that  may  be  the  reason  why  the  Norsemen
said  paskir  and  not  austrur :  they  had  never  worshipped  a  goddess
Austra,  or  her  cultus  was  already  extinct.

Ostara,  Edstre  seems  therefore  to  have  been  the  divinity  of  the
radiant  dawn,  of  upspringing  light,  a  spectacle  that  brings  joy  and
blessing,3  whose  meaning  could  be  easily  adapted  to  the  resurrec
tion-day  of  the  Christian's  God.  Bonfires  were  lighted  at  Easter,
and  according  to  a  popular  belief  of  long  standing,  the  moment  the
sun  rises  on  Easter  Sunday  morning,  he  gives  three  joyful  leaps,  he
dances  for  joy  (Superst.  813).  Water  drawn  on  the  Easter
morning  is,  like  that  at  Christmas,  holy  and  healing  (Superst.  775.
804) ;  here  also  heathen  notions  seems  to  have  grafted  themselves
on  great  Christian  festivals.  Maidens  clothed  in  white,  who  at
Easter,  at  the  season  of  returning  spring,  show  themselves  in  clefts
of  the  rock  and  on  mountains,  are  suggestive  of  the  ancient  goddess
(see  SuppL).

8.  ZISA.

Beda's  account  of  Hrede  and  Eastre4  shall  be  followed  now  by
a  statement  reaching  back  to  the  llth  century,  and  deserving
attention  if  only  for  its  great  age,  concerning  a  goddess  Zisa,
worshipped  at  Augsburg  in  the  heathen  time.

1  For  oriens  he  chooses  urruns,  for  occidens  sagqs,  i.e.,  rising  and  sinking  of
the  sun,  not  that  he  did  not  know  vistr  (versus  occidentem),  root  vis  (repose,
stillness,  evening).

2  Composite   proper  names  :    Ostroberht,  Austroberta,  Austregisil,  Ostro-
gotha  (like  Visigotha,  Vistrimund,  Westeralap,  Sundarolt,  Nordberaht,  &c.  &c.)

3  In  the  Basque  language  ostara  means  May.  the  budding  leafing  time,
from  ostoa,  leaf,  foliage  :  a  mere  accidental  resa  nblance.

4  I  might  introduce  into  the  text  an  AS.  JB'cew-,  if  I  knew  any  more  about
her  than  what  Lye's  glossary  quotes  from  Cod.  Cot.  65,  87  :  Iticenne  Diana.    It
is  formed  like  ]?inen  (ancilla),  wylpen  (bellona),  &c.


292  GODDESSES.

The. Cod.  Monach.  Lat.  2  (of  1135),  and  the  Cod.  Emmeran.  F.
IX.  fol.  4a  (of  12-13th  cent.)  contain  identic  '  Excerpta  ex  Gallica
liistoria  '*

'  Bum  liec  circa  renum  geruntur,  in  noricorum  (interlined
bawariorum,  Cod.  Vind.  GIL  pauwariorum)  finibus  grave  vulnus
romanus  populus  accepit.  quippe  germanorum  gentes  (interlined
suevi),  que  retias  occupaverant,  non  longe  ab  alpibus  tractu  pari
patentibus  campis,  ubi  duo  rapidissimi  amnes  [interlined  licus  et
werthaJia  (CII  vuerdaha)]  inter  se  confluunt,  in  ipsis  noricis  finibus
(interlined  terminis  bawariorum  et  suevorum)  civitatem  non  quidem
inuro  sed  vallo  fossaque  cinxerant,  quam  appellabant  zizarim  (CII.
cizarim)  ex  nomine  dee  cize?  quam  religiosissime  colebant.  cujus
templuin  quoque  ex  lignis  barbarico  ritu  constrictum,  postquam  eo3
colonia  romana  deducta  est,  inviolatum  permansit,  ac  vetustate
collapsum  no  men4  colli  servavit.  hanc  urbem  tiiw  annius  pretor
ad  arcendas  barbarorum  excursiones  kal.  sextilibus  (interlined
exacta  jam  estate)  exercitu  circumvenit.  ad  meridianam  oppidi
partem,  que  sola  a  continent!  (interlined  littoribus)  erat,  pretor  ipse
cum  lef/ione  martia  castra  operosissime  cornmunivit.  ad  occiden-
te'm  vero,  qua  barbarorum  adventus  erat,  dvar,  bdgudis  rcgis  films,
cum  equitatu  omni  et  auxiliaribus  mactdonum  copiis  inter  flumen  ct
vallum  loco  castris  parum  amplo  infelici  temeritate  extra  Hum  en
(interlined  werthalia)  consedit.  pulchra  indoles,  non  minus  romanis
quam  greds  disciplinis  instructa.  igitur  quinquagesimo  nono  die,
qua  eo  ventum  est,  cum  is  dies  dee  cize  (CII.  dee^  ciz^)  apud  barbaros
celeberrimus,  ludum  et  lasciviam  magis  quam  formidinem  ostentaret,
immanis  barbarorum  (interlined  suevomm,  CII.  svivorum)  multitudo,
ex  proximis  silvis  repente  erumpens  ex  improviso  castra.  irrupifc,
equitatum  omnem,  et  quod  miserius  erat,  auxilia  sociorum  delevit.
avar,5  cum  in  hostium  potestatem  regio  habitu  vivus  venisset,  [sed

1  I  owe  their  cominrmicatien-  to  Schmeller's  kindness.     The  same  piece  is
found  at  Vienna  in  two  forms*:  in  the  Cod.  Lat.  CII  (olim  hist.  prof.  Go2)  see.
xi.  ineuntis  fol.  79.  80  ;  and  in  the  Cod.  CCXXVI  (olim  univ.  237)   sec.  xii.
In   both  it  stands  between  Jorn.  De  reb.  get.  and  De  regn.  suce.     CII  lias
interlinear  glosses  and  marginal  notes  (exactly  like  the  Munich  MSS.)  by  a
scarcely  later  hand,  which  also  writes  the  heading   '  Excerptum  ox  (Jallira
historia '.     CCXXVI  adopts  the  interlinears  into  the  text,  but  otherwise  agrees.

2  On  margin:   'Quern  male  polluerat  cultura  nei'aria  dud  11111

gallus  monticulum  hunc  tibi  ciza  tulit '.

3  On  margin  :  'post  conditam  urbem  auyustam  a  rotnanis'.

4  Marg.  note  :  '  ut  usque  hodie  ab  incolis  cizunberc  nominetur'.

5  Marg.   note:    'ex   cujus   vocalmlo,  quia  ibi  mactatus  et  tumulatus  est
ckrikc  saver  on  (CII  chrek{usa\rer)  iioinen  accepit.  (jrecus  enim  erat '.


ZISA.  293

que  apud  ~barl>aros  reverentia  ?]  more  pecudis  ibidem  mactatur.1
oppidani  vero  lion  minori  fortuna  sed  maiori  virtu te  pretorem  in
auxilium  sociis  properantem  adoriuntur.  romani  baud  segniter
resistant,  duo  principes  oppidanorum  habino21  et  caccus5  in  primis
pugnantes  cadunt.  et  inclinata  jam  res  oppidanorum  esset,  ni
maturassent  auxilium  ferre  socii  in  altera  ripa  jam  victoria  potiti.
denique  coadunatis  viribus  castra  irrumpunt,  pretorem,  qui  paulo
altiorem  tumulum  (interlined  perleih)  frustra  ceperat,  romana  vi
resistentem  obtruncant.  legionern4  divinam  (interlined  martiam),
ut  ne  nuncius  cladis  superesset,  funditus  delent.  Verres  solus
tribunus  militum  amne  transmisso  in  proximis  paludibus  se
occultans5  honestam  mortem  subterfugit.  nee  multo  post  sicilie
proconsul  immani  avaricia  turpem  mortem  promeruit.  nam  cum  se
rnagistratu  abdicaret,  judicio  civium  damnatus  est.'

The  same  fragment,  only  without  the  interlined  words  and
without  marginal  additions,  stands  in  Goldast's  Eerum  suev.  script,
aliquot  veteres,  Ulm  1727  ibl.  p.  3  under  the  rubric  :  '  Velleii  Gall  I
fragmeritum  de  victoria  Suevorum  contra  Eomanos '  (conf.  Haupts
zeitschr.  10,291).  It  has  the  readings  '  dea  Cisa'  suid'Cisam'
and  for  Caccus  '  Cacus,'  but  agrees  in  the  other  names.  Further,
for  loco  parum  amplo,  I  find  the  better  reading  apto.  The  paren
thesis  '  sed — reverentia '  is  wanting,  so  is  the  concluding  sentence
*  nam — damnatus  est '.  I  should  believe  that  Goldast  had  borrowed
it  all  from  Wolfg.  Lazius's  Eeip.  Eom.  libri  xii.  Francof.  1591  p.
52,  if  this  copy  had  not  some  variations  too ;  the  heading  runs :
'  Velleii  excerpta  ex  Gallica  historia  ' ;  it  has  Cisara,  but  Ciz$,  also
'  Habbino,  Caccus,  amplo/  and  concludes  with  promeruit.  Lazius

1  On  margin  :

'  Hoc  nomen  terris  bogudis  dat  regia  proles

grecavar  (CII  grecus  auar),  pecudis  de  suevis  more  litatus.'

2  On  margin  :

'  Prefectus  habeno  se  victum  hicque  sepultum

perpetuo  montis  nomine  notificat.

qui  juxta  montem  occisus  et  sepultus  nomen  monti  habenonberch  dedit,  quern
rustici  havenenbercli  (CII  havenonperch)  dicunt.'

3  CII  :  '  a  cujus  nomine  putamus  iekingen  nominari.'

4  On  margin  :    '  de    hac  ibi  perdita   legione  adhuc  perleich   nominatur.'
.Then  in  smaller  but  contemporaneous  writing  :

*  Iridicat  hie  collis  romanam  nomine  cladem

martia  quo  legio  tota  simul  periit.
subdidit  hunc  rome  prepes  victoria  petro,

hoc  sibimet  templum  qui  modo  constituit.3

5  On  margin  :  *  hie  quia  in  paludibus  adjacentibus  latuit,  lacui  uerisse  hue
usque  nomen  dedit '.


294  GODDESSES.

says :  '  quam  nos  historiam  in  pervetusto  codice  membran.  literis
antiquissimis  script-am  reperimus ' ;  that  would  be  the  sixth  MS.
known  hitherto,  and  copies  must  have  been  pretty  numerous  in  the
11-1 2th  centuries.  The  one  that  Goldast  had  before  him  may
probably  have  been  the  oldest.

Either  one  or  the  other  of  them,  both  Otto  von  Freisingen  and
the  author  (or  continuator)  of  the  Auersberg  chronicle  seem  to  have
had  before  them.  The  former  tries  to  connect  the  story  with
Quintilius  Varus  (instead  of  Verres),  and  after  relating  his  over
throw,  adds  (chron.  3,  4) :  '  Tradunt  Augustenses  hanc  caedem  ibi
factam,  ostenduntque  in  argumentum  collem  ex  ossibus  mortuorum
compactum,  quern  in  vulgari  pcrleicli  (Mone,  anz.  1,  256),  eo  quod
legio  ibi  perierit,  usque  hodie  vocant,  vicumque  ex  nomine  Vari  ap-
pellatum  monstrant '.  The  Auersberg  chronicler's  account,  though
he  almost  verbally  adopts  the  older  fragment,  I  hold  it  needful  to
insert  here,  because  the  marginal  glosses  are  curiously  interwoven
with  the  text,  and  referred  to  '  discovered  inscriptions  on  stone  \l

De  Augusta  Vindelicorum  vel  Ehetiae.  sicut  ex  scriptis  veterum
colligitur  haec  civitas  tria  nomina  accepit.  German  orum  quippe
gentes  primum  considentes  in  partibus  Ehetiae,  quae  nunc  est  pars
Sueviae,  noil  longe  ab  alpibus  in  planitie,  loco  tamen  munito  propter
concursum  duorum  rapidorum  fluminum,  hanc  urbern  construxerunt,
et  non  muris  sed  fossatis  earn  firmaverunt,  et  ex  nomine  deae  Zizae,
quam  religiosissime  colebant,  Zizerim  earn  nominabant.  hujus
quoque  deae  templum  ex  lignis  barbarico  ritu  constructum,  etiam
postquam  Eomani  earn  incolere  coeperunt,  inviolatum  permansit.
at  vetustate  collapsum  nomen  colli  servavit,  in  quo  postmodum  in
lapide  exsculpti  hi  versus  sunt  reperti :

quern  male  polluerat  cultura  nefaria  dudum

gallus  monticulum  hunc  tibi  Ziza  tulit.

unde  usque  in  praesens  ab  incolis  idem  monticulus  Zizcriberg  no-
minatur.  apud  hanc  urbem  Eomani  deleti  sunt  magna  caede.
nam  Titus  Annius  praetor  ad  arcendas  barbarorum  excursiones
cum  exercitu  in  kal.  Augusti  earn  circundedit,  ipseque  ad  meri-
dianam  oppidi  partem,  quae  sola  patebat,  castra  sua  cum  legione
Martia  operosissime  communivit.  ad  occidentem  vero  ultra
fluvium,  ubi  Suevis  aut  barbaris  aditus  patebat,  Avar  Eogudis  regis

i  Chron.  Conradi  ursperg.  Argent.  1532,  p.  308.  eel.  1609,  p.  225.


ZISA.  295

filius  cum  omni  equitatu  et  auxilio  macedonico  consedit.  igitur
quinquagesimo  nono  die,  quam  eo  ventum  est,  cum  is  dies  deae  Ziz^
apud  barbaros  celeberrimus  esset,  ludum  et  lasciviam  magis  quam
formidinem  cives  osteutarunt.  tune  etiam  immanis  barbarorum
multitudo,  quae  de  partibus  Sueviae  illuc  convenerat,  de  proximis
silvis  repente  erumpens  ex  improviso  castra  irrupit  et  Avaris
exercitum  delevit.  ipsum  quoque  Avar  regio  habitu  indutum
vivum  comprehendentes  crudeliter  in  modum  pecoris  mactaverunt.
a  quo  in  loco,  ubi  mactatus  est,  vicus  usque  hodie  appellatus  est
Criechesaveron,  in  quo  hi  versus  reperti  sunt :

his  nomen  terris  Bogudis  dat  regia  proles
Graecus  Avar,  pecudis  de  Suevis  more  litatus.
oppidani  vero  non  minor!  fortuna  sed  majori  virtute  praetorem
in  auxilium  sociis  properantem  invadunt,  quibus  Komani  haud
segniter  resistunt.  in  quo  conflictu  duo  principes  oppidanorum
Habino  et  Caccus  in  primis  pugnantes  cadunt,  et  inclinata  jam  res
esset  oppidanorum,  ni  maturassent  auxilium  ferre  Smvi  in  altera
ripa  victoria  jam  potiti.  de  nominibus  autem  illorum  principum
interfectorum  exstant  adhuc  loca  denominata,  nam  rustic!  de  Ha-
binone  vocant  monticulum  Habinoberg,  in  quo  hi  versus  reperti
sunt:

praefectus  Habino  se  victum  atque  sepultum

perpetuo  montis  nomine  notificat.

a  Cacco  vero  dicunt  Gegginen  denominari.  denique  coadunatis
Suevis  et  oppidanis  castra  irrumpunt,  et  praetorem,  qui  paulo  al-
tiorem  tumulum  frustra  ceperat,  romana  vi  resis ten  tern  obtruncant,
legionemque  divinam,  ut  nee  nuncius  cladis  superesset,  funditiis
delent.  de  hac  perdita  legione  adhuc  perlaich,  quasi  perdita  legio,
nominatur,  ubi  postmodum  hi  versus  sunt  reperti :

indicat  hie  collis  romanam  nomine  cladem,

martia  quo  legio  tota  simul  periit.

solus  Verrcs  tribunus  militum  amne  transmisso  in  proximis  palu-
dibus  se  occultans  honestam  mortem  subterfugit,  lacui  Vernse
hucusque  nomen  dedit.  versus  :

das  nomen  lacui  Verres  quo  tu  latuisti.

hie  tamen  non  multo  post  Siciliae  proconsul  effectus  turpem  mor
tem  promeruit.  nam  cum  se  magistrate  abdicaret  judicio  civiuni
damnatus  est.  propter  hunc  Ve-rrem  tradunt  Augustenses  hanc
caedem  fuisse  eandem,  quam  sub  Augusto  factam  quidani  descri-


296  GODDESSES.

bunt,  sed  Varum  ilium  nominant  his  verbis  :  ea  tempestate  Varus,
romano  more,  superbe  et  avare  erga  subditos  se  gerens  a  Germanis
deletus  est.

Some  later  writers  also  mention  the  tradition.  About  1373 —
91,  an  ecclesiastic,  Klichlin,  composed  in  rhyme  a  history  of
Augsburg  l  for  the  burgomaster  Peter  Egen  the  Young,  who  wished
to  have  his  house  painted  with  illustrations  from  it.  Cap.  2,  fol.
99  says  of  the  Swabians  :

Sie  bawten  einen  tempel  gross  darein
zu  eren  (in  honour  of)  Zise  der  abgottin,
die  sie  nach  heidnischen  sitten  (after  heathen  ways)
anbetten  zu  denselben  zeiten  (adored  in  those  days).
Die  stat  ward  genennt  (city  got  named)  auch  Zisaris
nach  der  abgottin  (after  the  goddess),  das  was  der  pris.
Der  tempel  als  lang  stund  unversert  (stood  uninjured),
bis  im  von  alter  was  der  val  beschert  (its  fall  decreed),
und  da  er  von  alter  abgieng  (as  from  age  it  passed  away),
der  berg  namen  von  im  empfieng  (the  hill  took  name),
daruf  gestanden  was  (whereon  had  stood)  das  werck,
und  haist  noch  hut  (hight  still  to-day)  der  Ziscriberck.
Oonf.  Keller's  Fastn.  sp.,  p.  1361.     Sigism.  Meisterlin,  in  his  Augs
burg  chronicle  2  (which  is  in  print  from  the  8th  chap,  of  bk  1),
treats  of  this  Cisa  in  chaps.  5-6  of  bk  2.     In  the  imprinted  chap.  4
of  bk  1,  he  unmistakably  refers  to  Klichlin,  and  again  at  the  end  of
chap.  7  :  'das  er  auch  melt  (tells)  von  der  gottin  Cisa,  die  auch
genent  wird  Cizais,  das  sy  geert  habend  (they  honoured  her)  die
doch  aus  Asia  warend ;   dawider  seind   die  andern,  die  von  Cysa
schreibent,    die    sprechent,   das    sy   die   Vindelici    habend    nach
schwebischen  sitten  angebettet.     von  der  gottin  wirst  du  hernach
mer  haben,  ob  got  wil  (buch  3.  cap.  5.  6).'      (See  Suppl.)

Hopeless  contradictions  lie  on  the  face  of  that  fragment.
Bogud,  a  Punic  ship's-captain,  who  lived  in  the  year  494  of  Eome,
or  260  B.C.,3  is  here  turned  into  a  Macedonian  king ;  and  his  son
Avar  is  made  contemporary  with  the  Ciceronian  Verres  of  200
years  after,  or  even  of  the  still  later  Varus.  Yet  Bogudes  and
Varus  do  occur  as  contemporaries  of  Pompey  in  Dio  Cassius  41, 42.

1  Cod.  Monach.  Lat.  61  ;  likewise  sent  me  by  Sehmeller.

"  Augsb.  1522  fol.     Meisterlin  wrote  it  in  1456.  and  died  about  1484.

3  Niebuhr's  Rom.  Hist.  3,  677.


ZISA.  297

What  Titus  Annius  was  meant  by  the  '  praetor,'  I  cannot  guess  ;
there  is  a  consul  of  that  name  A.U.C.  601  and  626,  or  B.C.  153, 128.
Velleius  Paterculus  can  never  have  written  this  sort  of  thing.1

But  all  the  rubbish  it  contains  does  not  destroy  the  value  of
the  remarkable  story  to  us.  The  comparatively  pure  Latinity  is
enough  to  show  that  it  was  not  composed  so  late  as  the  twelfth
century  ;  Lazius  and  Velser  2  are  inclined  to  place  it  in  the  Caro-
lingian  period,  and  it  looks  like  the  work  of  a  foreigner,  to  whom
the  Germans  are  heathens  and  barbarians.  The  glosses  confirm  the
local  connexion  of  the  whole  tradition  with  Augsburg  and  its
neighbourhood ;  ,and  not  .only  the  Latin  verses,  but  the  German
forms  werthaha  (R.  Wertach),  cizunberc,  habino,  habinonberc,  look
too  old  for  the  12th  century.  Habino  (Hepino),  Habinolf,  is  an
authentic  OHG.  man's  name:  Cacus  is  unknown  to  me,  Cacan,
Cagan  would  seem  more  vernacular,  and  the  derived  local  name
Geginen  leads  up  to  it.  Some  of  the  names  quoted  are  preserved
to  this  day:  the  eminence  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  next  the  senate-
house,  is  still  called  Perlach,  on  which  the  monastery  and  churcli
of  St.  Peter  were  founded  in  1064 ;  so  the  verse  '  subdidit  hunc
(collem)  Eomae  praepes  victoria  Petro  '  was  composed  after  that  ?
The  name  perleih,  which  the  legend  derives  from  periens  or  perdita
legio,  suggests  the  OHG.  eikileihi,  aigilaihi  (phalanx),  Gl.  ker.  124.
Diut.  1,  223  ;  and  in  other  compounds  we  find  leih  in  a  variety  of
senses.3  Zisenberg  and  Havenenberg  are  names  no  longer  heard,
while  Pfersen  (Veris-se)  MB.  33b,  108  an.  1343,  and  Kriegshaber
are  well  known  villages.  Whatever  may  be  the  explanation  of  the
older  and  correcter  form  Criechesaveron,  it  is  very  plain  that  the
name  of  die  place  Criahhes  (graeci)  avard  (imago,  -conf.  pp.  86,  95,
yet  also  avaro  proles)  first  suggested  '  Graecus  Avar,'  as  well  as
HaUnonlerc  the  hero  -<  Habino  '.  The  Auersberg  chronicler's  state
ment,  that  the  Latin  verses  were  found  carved  in  all  those  places,
must  be  rejected.

We  find  then,  that  tradition,  true  to  her  wont,  has  mixed  up

1  CL  3&.  Vossius,  De%ist.  Lat.  1,  24.

2  Marct  yelseri  rer.  Augustanar.  libri  8.  1594  fol.  p.  45.

3  Henisch  p.  293   explains  '  berlach '  at  Augsburg  '  ab   ursis   in   publica
cavea  ibi  altia,   a  tiring  which  was  done  in  other  towns,  e.g.  Bern.     On  the
Perlach  tower  there  was  fixed  a  figure  of  St.  Michael,  which  came  into  view
every  time  the  clock  struck  on  Michaelmas-day  ;  in  earlier  times  a  wooden
temple  of  Isis  (p.  294,  ex  lignis)  is  said  to  have  stood  on  the  spot ;  Fischart's
geschichtkl.  30b  :  '  der  amazonischen  Augspurger  japetisch  fraw  Eysen '.


293  GODDESSES.

fact  and  fiction  ;  the  great  point  is,  that  she  brings  us  tidings  of  a
Sue  vie  goddess.  Cisa  seems  the  older  and  better  spelling,  and  Ciza
would  be  harder  to  explain.  Now  from  this  name  of  the  goddess
we  can  hardly  derive  that  of  the  town  Cisara,  supposing  it  to  be  a
purely  German  derivative ;  names  of  places  are  never  formed  with
such  a  termination  from  male  or  female  proper  names.  It  seems
more  likely  that  Cisara  —  Cisae  ara,  from  the  altar  and  temple  of
the  goddess  :  and  later  writers  might  corrupt  Cisaram  into  Zizarim,
Zizerim.  We  read  that  she  was  most  devoutly  (religiosissime)
honoured  by  the  Suevi,  her  anniversary  is  a  grand  festival  devoted
to  games  and  merrymaking,  the  day  is  precisely  defined  as  the
fifty-ninth  after  Aug.  1,  it  fell  therefore  on  Sept.  28.  At  such  a
season  might  be  held  a  feast  of  the  divinity  who  had  prospered  the
harvest  just  gathered  in.  On  Sept.  29  the  Christians  kept  one  of
their  grandest  days,  that  of  St.  Michael,  who  often  had  to  replace  a
heathen  god  of  war  and  victory.  It  seems  worthy  of  notice,  that
the  Saxons  had  their  great  feast  of  victory  about  the  same  time,
viz.,  the  beginning  of  October ;  Widukind  pp.  423-4.  With  the
first  Sunday  after  Michaelmas  the  holy  common-week  was  considered
in  the  Mid.  Ages  to  begin;,  Scheffer's  Haltaus,  pp.  141-2.  na  der
hillifjen  meinweken,  Weisth.  %  240.  In  the  handing  down  of  a
precise  and  doubtless  genuine  date,  I  feel  the  credibility  of  the  story
confirmed.

Now  who  is  Cisa  ?'  One  naturally  thinks  first  of  that  Sftevic
Isis  (p.  257)  in  Tacitus,  whose  name  even  is  not  unlike  Cisa,  Zisa,
if  we  make  allowance  for  the  mere  dropping  of  the  initial,  an
omission  which  the  Eornan  might  be  prompted  to  make  by  the
similarity  of  the  Isis  that  he  knew..  But  even  if  Zisa  be  totally
different  from  Isis,  she  can  with  all  the  better  right  be  placed  by
the  side  of  our  Zio,  in  whom  also  was  displayed  a  thoroughly
Swabian  deity  (p.  199) ;  nay,  together  with  our  supposed  feminine
Ziu  (p.  203)  there  may  have  been  a  collateral  form  Zisd,  so  that  her
Zisuiiberg  would  exactly  correspond  to  the  god's  Ziewesberg,  Zisberg
(see  Suppl.).  Shall  I  bring  forward  a  reason  for  this  guess,  which
shall  be  anything  but  far-fetched  ?  The  Mid.  Dutch  name  for  the
third  day  of  the  week  had  the  curious  form  Disendach  (p.  125),  which
being  of  course  a  corruption  of  Tisendach  brings  us  at  once  to  Tise
=  Zisa.  It  is  a  matter  for  further  researches  to  demonstrate,1  but

1  Down  in  the  Kiese  between  the  rivers  Lech  and  Wertach,  in  the  midst  of
Sueves,  at  a  time  supposed  to  be  before  even  the  Romans  settled  in.  the  region^


FKIKKA.    FROTJWA.  299

that  tliree  divinities,  Zio,  Zisa  and  Isis,  are  assigned  to  the  Suevi,  is
already  abundantly  clear.

8.  FPJKKA  (FRIGG).    FHOUWA  (FREYJA).

Our  inquiry  turns  at  length  to  the  goddesses  of  the  Norse
religious  system,  of  whom  unequivocal  traces  are  forthcoming  in
the  rest  of  Teutondom.

Foremost  of  these  are  Frigg  the  wife  of  OSinn,  and  Freyja  the
sister  of  Freyr,  a  pair  easy  to  confound  and  often  confounded
because  of  their  similar  names.  I  mean  to  try  if  a  stricter  etymo
logy  can  part  them  and  keep  them  asunder.

The  name  of  Freyja  seems  the  easier :  it  is  motived  no  doubt
by  the  masculine  Freyr  (Gramm.  3,  335).  Now  as  we  recognised
Freyr  in  the  Gothic  frauja  (p.  209),  Freyja  leads  us  to  expect  a
Gothic  fraujo,  gen.  fraujons,  both  in  the  general  sense  of  clomina
mistress,  and  in  the  special  one  of  a  proper  name  Fraujo.  The
notion  of  mistress,  lady,  never  occurs  in  Ulphilas.  To  make  up
for  it,  our  OHG.  remains  express  it  very  frequently,  by  fruwd,
frdivd;  the  MUGr.  frouwe,  frou  and  our  modern  frau  have  preserved
themselves  purely  as  common  nouns,  while  the  masc.  fro  has
vanished  altogether.  In  meaning,  frouwe  and  frau  correspond
exactly  to  herre,  herr,  and  are  used  like  it  both  in  addressing  and
otherwise.1  Our  minnesangers  are  divided  as  to  the  respective
superiority  of  frouwe  (domina)  and  wip  (femina),2  wip  expressing
more  the  sex,  .and  frouwe  the  dignity ;  to  this  day  we  feel  frau  to
be  nobler  than  weib,  though  the  French  femme  includes  a  good  deal
of  what  is  in  our  frau.  It  seems  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  poets

no  Slav  gods  need  be  looked  for  ;  neither  does  the  Slav  mythology  know  any
thing  at  all  certain  about  a  Ziza,  alleged  to  be  Ceres  mamiuosa  (Boh.  cic,  cec,
Pol.  eye,  Russ.  titi,  mamma),  in  support  of  whom  forsooth  our  Cisa  must  be
wronged  ;  see  Hanusch  278.  It  were  better  to  think  of  the  MHG.  name  for
the  zeisig  (zeis-chen,  siskin)  din  ztse,  ein  kleiniti  zise,  Ms.  1,  191b.  "Wh.  275,
30  ;  which  can  scarcely  have  arisen  from  cicindela  (glow-worm,  Graff  5,  711)  ;
however,  no  connexion  has  come  to  light  between  the  goddess  and  the  form  of
a  bird,  though  some  little  birds,  the  woodpecker,  the  titmouse,  were  held
sacred.

1  Like  our  fr6,  the   0  Fr.  dame  (dominus)  is  now  lost  ;   dame  (domina)
remains,  like  our  frau.     The  Span,  keeps  both  don  and  dona,  the  Ital.  only
donna.     The  Romance  tongues  express  the  masc.  notion  by  two  other  words,
sire,  sieur  (p.  27)  and  seigneur,  signore,  seiior,  i.e.,  senior,  out  of  which  an  Ital.
signora,  a  bpan.  senora  have  sprouted,  but  no  Fr.  feminine.

2  Walth.  48-9.  57.     Amgb.  45b  4fia.     Ms.  2,  182b  21Ga.      Docen  misc.  2,
278-9.     frouwe  uiide  wip,  Parz.  302,  7  (see  Suppl.).


300  GODDESSES.

harp  on  the  connexion  of  fmu  with  froli  glad  (fro-lic)  and  freude
joy  ;  conf.  Fridank  106,  5—8.     Tit.  15,  35.

The  AS.  and  OS.  languages  have  done  the  very  reverse:  while
their  masc.  frea,  fraho  is  used  far  more  freely  than  the  OHG.
frouwo,  they  have  developed  no  fern,  by  its  side.  The  M.  Dutch
dialect  has  vramoe,  vrouwe  in  addressing  and  as  title  (Huyd.  op  St.
1,  52.  356.  Rein.  297.  731.  803.  1365.  1655.  2129.  2288.  2510-
32-57-64,  &c.),  seldomer  in  other  positions,  Eein.  2291 ;  the  modern
vrouw  has  extended  its  meaning  even  beyond  the  limits  of  our
frau.

All  the  above  languages  appear  to  lack  the  fern,  proper  name,
in  contrast  to  the  OX.  which  possesses  Freyja  almost  solely  as  the
goddess's  name,  and  no  freyja  =  hera.  Yet  we  find  husfreyja  house
wife,  Stem.  212b,  and  Snorri  is  still  able  to  say  that  freyja  is  a
tignarnafn  (name  of  honour)  derived  from  the  goddess,1  that  grand
ladies,  rikiskonur,  are  freyjur,  Sn.  29.  Yngl.  saga  c.  13.  The
readings  frur,  fruvor  here  are  corrupt,  for  the  Icel.  form  frd  has
evidently  slipped  in  from  the  Dan.  frue,  Swed.  fru,  and  these  from
Germany.  The  goddess  should  be  in  Swed.  Froa,  Dan.  Froe,  which
I  have  never  met  with;  the  Swed.  folk-song  of  Thor's  hammer
calls  Freyja  Froijenlorg  (the  Dan.  Fridlefsborg),  a  Danish  one  has
already  the  foreign  Fru.  Saxo  is  silent  about  this  goddess  and
her  father  altogether;  he  would  no  doubt  have  named  her  Froa.
Our  Merseburg  poem  has  now  at  last  presented  us  with  Frud  =
Frowa,  as  the  proper  name  of  the  goddess.2

Frigg  gen.  Friggjar,  daughter  of  Fiorgynn  and  wife  of  OSinn,  is
kept  strictly  apart  from  Freyja,  gen.  Freyju :  in  the  Vafyrudnismal
and  the  beginning  of  the  Grimnismal,  Offinn  and  Frigg  are  plainly
presented  as  husband  and  wife ;  and  as  Hroptr  and  Svafnir  are
also  names  of  OSinn,  '  Hroptr  ok  Frigg,  Svafnir  ok  Frigg '  in  Saem.

1  As  fraivjo  from  Fraujo,  and  freyja  from  Freyja,  a  song  of  Frauenlob's,
Ettm.  p.  112  makes  wip  come  from  a  Prankish  king  IVippeo.     Is  this  an  echo
of  a  mythical  Wippo,  Wibba  (geneal.  of  Mercia,  end  of  ch.  VII)  ?     The  expla
nation  is  as  false  as  when  the  Edda  derives  vif  from  vela,  for  all  a  woman's
being  practically  a  weaver  and  a  peace-weaver  ;  we  should  have  to  assume  two
roots,  viban  and  veiban,  side  by  side.     The  ON.  proper  name  Vefreyja  is  also
worthy  of  note,  Fornald.  sog.  2,  459.     3,  250.  594.

2  The  reasons  why  we  may  not  take  /rdd  here  for  a  mere  title  (and  so  a
noun  com.)  are  set  forth  in  the  Zeitschr.  f.  d.  a.  2,  189.     As  for  the  u  in  the
MS.,  it  looks  to  me  quite  plain,  else  Wackernagel's  proposal  to  read  Friia  =
Frija%Friga,  Fria,  would  be  acceptable  (friiu  does  occur  in  T.  93,  3).     Frua
aiid  Fria  are  alike  welcome  and  suitable  for  my  explanation.


FRIKKA.     FROUWA.  301

91-b  93a  express  the  same  relation.  Saxo  Gram.,  p.  13,  has  correctly
'  Frigga  Othini  conjux  '.  In  prayers  the  two  goddesses  even  stand
side  by  side :  '  sva  hialpi  ther  hollar  vsettir,  Frigg  ok  Freyja,  ok
fleiri  go$  (more  gods),  sem  jm  feldir  mer  far  af  hondom  ! '  Ssem.
240b.  So  they  do  at  the  burning  of  Baldr's  body,  Sn.  66,  conf.  37.
And  that  Danish  folk-song  has  likewise  '  Frigge,  Fru  og  Thor '.

The  ON.  usually  has  gg  where  the  AS.  has  eg  and  OHG.  cc  or
kk,  namely,  where  a  suffix  i  had  stood  after  g  or  k:  thus,  ON.
egg  (acies),  AS.  ecg,  OHG.  ekki ;  ON.  bryggja  (ponsj,  AS.  brycge,
OHG.  prukka;  ON.  hryggr  (dorsum),  AS.  hrycg,  OHG.  hrukki.
In  the  same  way  we  get  an  AS.  Fricg,  OHG.  Frikka,  Frikkia,  even
farther  away  from  Frouwd  than  Frigg  from  Freyja.

It  is  the  confounding  of  these  two  beings  that  will  explain  how
Adam  of  Bremen  came  to  put  Fricco  instead  of  Fro  for  Freyr  (supra,
p.  212)  ;  he  would  equally  have  said  Fricca  for  Freyja.  Fricco,
Friccho,  Friccolf  were  in  use  as  proper  names  in  OHG.

And  now  it  seems  possible  to  explain,  what  is  otherwise
unaccountable,  why  the  sixth  day  of  the  week,  dies  Veneris,  should
be  called  in  ON.  both  Freyju&a,gr  and  also  Friadagr,  in  OHG,
never  Frouwuntac,  but  Friatac,  Frigefac,  now  Freitag,  in  AS.
(for  Fricgedseg  ?),  v.  supra,  pp.  123-6,  and  in  Faroese
(Lyngbye  532).

Among  these  forms  the  AS.  presents  no  difficulty  :  in  the  OHG.
and  ON.  names  we  are  puzzled  by  the  absence  of  the  guttural  I
believe  a  solution  is  offered  by  that  most  important  passage  in
Paulus  Diac.  1,  8  where  Wodan's  consort  is  named  Frea,  which  can
only  mean  Frigg,  not  Freyja,  as  Saxo  Gram,  too,  while  expressly
grounding  on  Paulus,  makes  use  of  the  form  Frig :  '  Paulo  teste
auctore  Frig  dea  '.l

This  Langob.  Frea  accords  with  the  OHG.  Frfa,  I  take  it  to  be
not  only  identical  with  Frigg,  but  the  original  form  of  the  name ;
it  has  less  to  do  with  Freyja  and  the  AS.  masc.  frea.  As  an  ON.
bru  (pons)  stands  related  to  bryggia,  so  will  fri  to  frigg.  The
Langob.  Frea  is  =  Frea,  Fria,  Frija,  Frea.  Its  root  is  suggested  by

1  The  AS  chroniclers  (p.  128)  borrow  Frea  from  Paulus.  With  Frea  we
must  above  all  connect  the  frea  of  the  Laws  of  Liutprand  6,  40  and  67  and
tins  means  uxor,  clomma,  not  libera,  ingenua.  Paulus  therefore,  in  assmnim

r<   TPH       TC\         WnrlOTl       OCt         l-nn      t-wrl  P,-.          1  , J.      1  j  1  T  /•        .  1  -*.  -*-  -r-.     .  ^ *-


f\\'  •        i  ^  /*  OO      ^AAt*^     '^J

Jonin,  as  is  done  in  the  Grimnismal  (see  Suppl.).


302  GODDESSES.

such  words  as :  Goth,  freis,  frijis  (liber),  OHG.  fri ;  Goth,  frijon
(amare),  OHG.  frion  ;  especially  may  we  take  into  account  the  OS.
neut.  M  (mulier),  Hel.  9,  21.  13,  16.  171,  21.  172,  1,  the  AS.
freo  (mulier),  Cicdm.  29,  28.  freolic  cwen  (pulcra  femina),  Beow.
1275.  freolicu  meowle,  Cod.  exon.  479,  2.  freolic  wif,  Beow.  1222.
freolic  foemne,  Coedm.  12,  12.  54,  28.1  Now,  as  fri  (liber)  and  our
frech,  ON.  frekr  (protervus,  impudens),  fri  (mulier  formosa)  and
ON".  frier  (forinosus),  fritJr  (pax)  seem  to  be  all  related,  even  the
adjectival  forms  betray  the  shifting  sense  of  the  substantival.2

We  gather  from  all  this,  that  the  forms  and  even  the  meanings
of  the  two  names  border  closely  on  one  another.  Freyja  means  the
gladsome,  gladdening,  sweet,  gracious  goddess,  Frigg  the  free,
beautiful,  loveable ;  to  the  former  attaches  the  general  notion  of
frau  (mistress),  to  the  latter  that  of  fri  (woman).  Holda,  from  hold
(sweet,  kind),  and  Berhta  from  berht  (bright,  beautiful)  resemble
them  both.  The  Swedish  folk-song,  in  naming  Froijenborg,  calls
her  '  den  viina  solen,'  the  beautiful  sun.

Hence  the  mingling  of  their  myths  becomes  the  more  con
ceivable.  Saxo,  p.  13,  relates  how  Friyga,  to  obtain  gold  for  her
ornaments,  violated  conjugal  fidelity;  more  minutely  told,  and
differing  much  in  the  details,  the  tale  about  Freyja  in  Sn.  356
appears  to  be  the  same  adventure.  On  quite  another  ground
however  the  like  offence  is  imputed  to  Frigg  too  (S^em.  63.  Yngl.
saga  cap.  3).  In  Sn.  81  the  valshamr  of  Freyja  is  spoken  of,  but  in
113-9  that  of  Frigg ;  the  former  is  supported  by  Severn.  70.

Hence  the  variations  in  the  name  for  the  day  of  the  week.  The
OHG.  Friatac  ought  clearly  to  be  Friggjardagr  in  ON.,  and  the
ON.  Freyjuda.gr  should  be  Frouwuntac  in  OHG.  Hence  too  the
uncertainty  in  the  naming  of  a  constellation  and  of  several  plants.
Orion's  belt,  elsewhere  named  Jacob's  staff  and  also  spindle  (coins
r]\afcdrrj),  is  called  by  the  Swedish  people  F rigger ock  (colus  Friggae,
Hire,  p.  663)  or  Frejcrock  (Finn  Magnusen  361a),  as  we  noticed
before,  or  Frojas  rock  (Wieselgren.  383).  The  orchis  odoratissima,
satyrium  albidum,  a  plant  from  which  love-potions  are  brewed,  Icel.
Friggjargras,  otherwise  hionagras  (herba  conjugalis) ;  the  later

1  Conf.  the  MHG.  wiplich  wip,  Parz.  10,  17.      MS.  1,  50*  202*.  2,  42b
182b  258a.      wibin  wip,  MsH.   1,  359b  ;    similarly  6rj\vrfpai  yvvalnes,  Od.  11,
386.  434.     15,  422.     Hesiod  scut.  4.

2  We  might  connect  Venus  with  the  Goth,    qino,  qens,  as  venire   with
qjman  ;    the    Wei.   gwen  would  answer   to   Gvenus   for  Venus  ;    the   Ir.  dia
beine,  Friday,  from  bean,  len  (lady)  =  Venus  =  AS.  cwen.


FPJKKA.     FKOUWA.  303

Christian  way  of  thinking  has  substituted  Mary  for  the  heathen
goddess.  And  the  labouring  man  in  Zealand  speaks  of  the  above
constellation  also  by  the  name  of  Maridrok,  Marirok.  Several
kinds  of  fern,  adiantum,  polypodium,  asplenium,  are  named  lady's
hair,  maidenhair,  Mariengras,  capillus  Vcneris,  Icel.  Freyjuhdr,  Dan.
Fruehaar,  Venusstraa,  Venusgrds,  Norweg.  Marigras,  &c.  Even  if
the  Norse  names  here  have  sprung  out  of  Latin  ones,  they  show
how  Venus  was  translated  both  by  Frigg  and  Freyja  and  Mary.
As  for  Mary,  not  only  was  the  highest  conception  of  beauty  carried
over  to  her,  (frto  sconiosta,  idiso  sconiost,  Hel.  61,  13.  62,  1),  but
she  was  pre-eminently  our  lady,  fmu,  domina,  donna.  Conf.  infra
frauachiiQli,  ladycow,  Marienkalblein.  In  the  nursery-tales  she  sets
the  girls  sewing  and  spinning  like  Holda  and  Berhta,  and  Holda's
snow  appears  to  mean  the  same  as  Mary's  snow  (p.  268).

Before  so  close  a  contact  of  the  two  names  I  pause,  doubting  with
which  of  them  to  connect  the  strong  and  incontestable  similarity  of
certain  divine  names  in  the  non-Teutonic  [Aryan]  languages.
First  of  all,  an  OBoh.  gloss  gives  Priye  for  Aphrodite ;  taking  into
account  the  Goth,  frijon,  the  OHG.  friudil  (lover),  MHG.  vriedel,
and  the  Slav,  priyatel  (friend),  Boh.  prjtel,  Pol.  przyiaciel,  it  must
have  meant  either  Freyja  the  goddess  of  love  and  fruitfulness,  or
Frigg  the  divine  mother  and  patroness  of  marriage.  In  Sanskrit
also  pri  is  to  love,  priyas  a  friend,  Ramapriya  dear-to-Lakshmi  =
lotus,  Yamapriya  pleasing-to-Yama  =  ficus  indica,  priya  in  names
of  gods  =  husband  or  wife,  Pott's  forsch.  2,  424-7.  Then  prithivi
is  the  earth,  and  matd  Prithvi  Terra  mater,  from  whom  comes  fruit
and  increase  (conf.  Wei.  pridd  terra,  Bopp's  gloss.  223b) ;  and  the
word,  though  next  of  kin  to  prithus  (TrXaru?  latus),  the  earth  being
named  the  broad  and  wide,  seems  nevertheless  connected  with
Fria,  Frigg  and  fridu.

Frigg  the  daughter  of  Fiorgynn  (p.  172),  as  consort  of  the  highest
god,1  takes  rank  above  all  other  goddesses  :  she  knows  the  fates  of
men  (Stem.  63b.  Sn.  23.  64),  is  consulted  by  OSinn  (Stem.  31a),
administers  oaths,  handmaids  fulfil  her  host,  she  presides  over

1  Some  of  the  AS.  genealogies  have  '  Woden  et  Frealaf  ejus  uxor,'  so  that
Frigg  =  Frealaf  (OHG.  Froleip  1)  which  fits  iu  with  that  Fridlefsborg  in  the
Danish  song,  p.  300  ;  others  make  Frealaf  Woden's  father.  But  in  lieu  of  hint
we  have  also  ffriftulkt  and  Fri&uwiilf,  a  fresh  confirmation  of  the  connexion
between  fri5  and  the  goddess's  name.


30  i  GODDESSES.

marriages,  and  her  aid  is  implored  by  the  childless  (Fornald.  suj.  1,
117);  hence  hionagras  is  also  Fricjgjargras.  We  may  remember
those  maidens  yet  unmarried  (p.  264)  being  yoked  to  the  plough  of
the  goddess  whose  commands  they  had  too  long  defied.  In  some
parts  of  northern  England,  in  Yorkshire,  especially  Hallamshire,
popular  customs  show  remnants  of  the  worship  of  Fricg.  In  the
neighbourhood  of  Dent,  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year,  especially
autumn,  the  country  folk  hold  a  procession  and  perform  old  dances,
one  called  the  giant's  dance :  the  leading  giant  they  name  Woden,
and  his  wife  Frigga,  the  principal  action  of  the  play  consisting  in
two  swords  being  swung  and  clashed  together  about  the  neck  of  a
boy  without  hurting  him.1  Still  more  remarkable  is  the  clear
vestige  of  the  goddess  in  Lower  Saxony,  where  to  the  common
people  she  is  fru  Frekc?  and  plays  the  very  parts  which  we  saw
assigned  tofrau  Nolle  (pp.  267-8):  a  strong  argument,  by  the  way,  for
the  divine  nature  of  this  latter.  Then  in  Westphalia,  legend  may
derive  the  name  of  the  old  convent  Freckcnhorst,  Frickenhorst,  from
a  shepherd  Frickio,  to  whom  a  light  appeared  in  the  night  (like  the
fall  of  snow  by  night  at  Hildesheim,  p.  268)  on  the  spot  where  the
church  was  to  be  built ;  the  name  really  points  to  a  sacred  hurst  or
grove  of  Frecka  fern.,  or  of  Friclco  masc.,  whose  site  Christianity  was
perhaps  eager  to  appropriate ;  conf.  Frcecinghyrst,  Kemble  1,  248.
2,  265.  There  is  a  VrcMeve,  Frickslcbcn,  not  far  from  Magdeburg
(see  SuppL).

Freya  is  the  goddess  most  honoured  after  or  along  with  Frigg ;
her  worship  seems  to  have  been  even  the  more  prevalent  and
important  of  the  two,  she  is  styled  '  agoetuz  af  Asynjum,'  Sn.  28,
and  '  blotgyoja,'  Yngl.  saga  cap.  4,  to  whom  frequent  sacrifices  were
offered.  HeiSrekr  sacrificed  a  boar  to  her,  as  elsewhere  to  Freyr,
and  honoured  her  above  all  other  gods.3  She  was  wedded  to  a

1  Communicated  by  J.  M.  Kemble,  from  the  mouth  of  an  '  old  Yorksliire-
inan '.  I  account  for  the  sword  by  the  ancient  use  of  that  weapon  at  weddings ;
coiif.  EA.  426-7.  431  ;  esp.  the  old  Frisian  custom  pp.  167-8,  conf.  Heimreich's
Nordfries.  chron.  1,  53-4.  In  Swabia,  as  late  as  the  18th  century,  the  brides
men  carried  large  swords  with  fluttering  ribbons  before  the  bride  ;  and  there
is  a  striking  similarity  in  the  Esthonian  custom  (Superst.  M.  13).

*Eccard  de  orig.  Germ,  p.  398:  Celebratur  in  plebe  Saxon ica  fru  Frelce,
cui  eadem  munia  tribuuntur,  quae  superiores  Saxones  Holdae  suae  adscribunt.
Fru  Frcke  has  just  been  unearthed  again  by  Ad.  Kuhn,  namely  in  the  Uker-
mark,  where  she  is  called  Fruike,  and  answers  to  fru  Harke  in  the  Mittclmark
and  fru  Gode  in  the  Prignitz.

3  Hervavarsapi,  ed.  Vend.  p.  138,  ed.  1785  p.  124.  By  the  editors  of  the
Fornald.  sog.  1,  463  the  passage  is  banished  into  the  notes  as  an  unsupported
reading.


FltfKKA.     FROUWA.


305


man  (not  a  god,  at  least  not  an  As),  named  Offr,  but  he  forsook  her,
and  she  sought  him  all  over  the  world,  among  strange  peoples,
shedding  tears.  Her  name  Syr  (Sn.  37)  would  perhaps  be  Saurs  in
Gothic  :  Wilh.  Miiller  has  detected  the  very  same  in  the  Syritha  of
Saxo  Gram.  p.  125,  who  likewise  goes  in  search  of  Othar.  Freyja's
tears  were  golden,  gold  is  named  after  them,  and  she  herself  is
'gratfagr,'  fair  in  greeting  (weeping),  Sn.  37.  119.  133;  in  our
nursery-tales  pearls  and  flowers  are  wept  or  laughed  out,  and  dame
Holla  bestows  the  gift  of  weeping  such  tears.  But  the  oldest
authorities  make  her  warlike  also  ;  in  a  waggon  drawn  by  two  cats
(as  Tliorr  drives  two  goats)1  she  rides  to  the  battlefield,  '  riSr  til
vtgs,'  and  goes  shares  with  05inn  in  the  slain  (supra  p.  133,  conf.
Ssem.  42a.  Sn.  28.  57).  She  is.  called  '  eigandi  valfalls '  (quae
sortitur  caesos  in  pugna),  Sn.  119 ;  valfreyja,  mistress  of  the  chosen,
Nialss.  p.  118,  and  of  the  valkyrs  in  general;  this  seems  to  be
in  striking  accord  with  Holda  or  Berhta  (as  well  as  Wuotan)
adopting  the  lobes  that  die  uncJiristened  into  their  host,  heathen
goddesses  the  heathen  souls.  Freyja's  dwelling  is  named  Folk-
vdngr  or  Folkvdngar,  the  plains  on  which  the  (dead  ?)  folk  troop
together ;  this  imparts  new  credibility  to  the  connexion  of  St.
Gertrude,  whose  minne  is  drunk,  with  Frowa,  for  the  souls  of  the
departed  were  supposed  to  lodge  with  Gertrude  the  first  night  (p.  61).
Freyja's  hall  is  Sessrymnir,  the  seat-roomy,  capacious  of  much/o/A:;
dying  women  expect  to  find  themselves  in  her  company  after  death.
Thorgerftr  in  the  Egilss.,  p.  103,  refuses  earthly  nourishment,  she
thinks  to  feast  with  Freyja  soon :  '  ok  engan  (nattverS)  mun  ek
fyrr  enn  at  Freyju '.  Yet  love-songs  please  her  too,  and  lovers  do
well  to  call  upon  her :  ' henni  likaSi  vel  mansongr,  a  hana  er  gott
at  heita  til  asta,'  Sn.  29.  That  the  cat  was  sacred  to  her,  as  the
wolf  to  Wuotan,  will  perhaps  explain  why  this  creature  is  given  to
night-hags  and  witches,  and  is  called  donneraas,  wetter aas  (-carrion).
When  a  bride  goes  to  the  wedding  in  fine  weather,  they  say  '  she
has  fed  the  cat  well,'  not  offended  the  favourite  of  the  love-goddess.
The  meaning  of  a  phrase  in  Walther  82,  17  is  dark  to  me:  '  weder
ritest  gerner  eine  guldin  katze,  aid  einen  wunderlichen  Gerhart
Atzen  ? '  In  Westphalia,  however,  the  weasel  was  named  froie,


1  Freyja  has  a  waggon  like  Nertlms  (mother  of  Freyr?},  like  Holda  and
e  .  Freyr  himself,  Wuotan  and  Donar  (pp.  105-7,  251-2-4, 275)  ;  the  kingly  waggon
.  is  proper  only  to  great  exalted  deities.     •

20


30G  GODDESSES.

Reinh.  clxxii,  which  I  suppose  means  frau,  fraulein  (froiken),  as
that  -ghostly  creature  was  elsewhere  called  muhmlein  (aunty),
fraulein,  donna,  donnola,  titles  sure  to  be  connected  with  myths,
and  these  would  doubtless  point  in  the  first  place  to  our  goddess
and  her  worship.  The  Greeks  said  Galinthias  was  turned  into  a
weasel  or  cat  (ya\eif),  Ovid,  metam.  9,  306  (see  Suppl.).

In  so  far  as  such  comparisons  are  allowable,  Frigg  would  stand
on  a  line  with  Here  or  Juno,  especially  the  pronuba,  Jupiter's
spouse  ;  and  Freyja  with  Venus,1  but  also  with  Isis  who  seeks
Osiris.  Freyr  and  his  sister  Freyja  are  suggestive  of  Liber  and
Libera  (Dionysus  and  Proserpina,  or  even  her  mother  Demeter  ;  of
sun  and  moon).  Mary  could  replace  the  divine  mother  and  the
goddess  of  beauty ;  verbally  Frigg  agrees  better  with  Libera,  and
Adam  of  Bremen's  Fricco,  if  he  was  god  of  love,  answers  in  name  to
Liber,  in  character  to  Freyr.

The  passage  quoted  from  Paul  Diac.  is  one  of  the  clearest  and
most  convincing  testimonies  to  the  harmony  between  the  German
and  Norse  mythologies.  An  author  of  Charles  the  Great's  time
tells  us  that  the  Langobards  named  Wodan's  wife  Frea,  and  she  is
called  Frigg  in  the  Edda.  He  cannot  have  drawn  this  from  Norse
tradition,  much  less  can  his  narrative  through  Saxo's  intermediacy
have  become  the  source  of  the  northern  faith.

But  in  favour  of  Freyja  too  we  possess  a  weighty  piece  of
external  evidence.  The  Edda  makes  her  the  owner  of  a  costly
necklace  named  Brisinga  men  (Brisingorum  monile)  ;  she  is  called
'  eigandi  Brisingamens,'  Sn.  37.  119.  How  she  acquired  this
jewel  from  the  dwarfs,  how  it  was  cunningly  stolen  from  her  by
Loki,  is  fully  narrated  in  a  tale  by  itself,  Sn.  354—357.  In  the
poets  therefore  Loki  is  Brisings  J?iofr  (Thorl.  obs.  6,  41.  63) ;  a  lost
lay  of  the  Edda  related  how  Heimdallr  fought  with  Loki  for  this
ornament,  Sn.  105.  When  Freyja  pants  with  rage,  the  necklace
starts  from  her  breast  (stauk  J?at  it  micla  men  Brisinga),  S?em.  71b.
When  Thorr,  to  get  his  hammer  back,  dresses  up  in  Freyja's  gar
ments,  he  does  not  forget  to  put  her  famous  necklace  on :  '  hafi

1  In  the  Tanhauser,  as  sung  in  Switzerland  (Aufsess.  anz.  1832,  240-2  ;
Uhland's  volksl.  p.  771),  instead  of  the  usual  dame*  Venus  we  find  precisely
frau  Frene,  and  ace.  to  Staid.  1,  395  frein  is  there  a  collateral  form  olfrei  free.
A  woman's  name  Vreneli  is  known  from  Hebel.  Vrene  may  be  Verena  the
martyr,  or  Veronica,  v.  Vreiie,  Ben.  328.


FRIKKA.     FKOUWA.  307

hann  (have  lie)  it  mikla  men  Brisinga  ! '  Ssem.  72. — Now  this  very
trinket  is  evidently  known  to  the  AS.  poet  of  Beowulf  2399,  he
names  it  Brosinga  mene,  without  any  allusion  to  the  goddess ;  I
would  read  '  Brisinga  mene,'  and  derive  the  word  in  general  from  a
verb  which  is  in  MHG-.  brisen,  breis  (nodare,  nodis  constringere,
Gr.  icevrelv  to  pierce),  namely,  it  was  a  chain  strung  together  of
bored  links.  Yet  conf.  ch.  XX,  Irising  St.  John's  fire :  perhaps
the  dwarfs  that  forged  it  were  called  Brisingar  ?  The  jewel  is  so
closely  interwoven  with  the  myth  of  Freyja,  that  from  its  mention
in  AS.  poetry  we  may  safely  infer  the  familiarity  of  the  Saxon  race
with  the  story  itself ;  and  if  the  Goths  worshipped  a  goddess
Fraujo,  they  too  would  doubtless  know  of  a  Breisigge  mani.1
Conf.  ch.  XX,  larffar  men,  Earth's  necklace,  i.e.,  turf  in  the  ON.
legal  language.

We  cannot  but  feel  it  significant,  that  where  the  gospel  simply
speaks  of  TO  ayiov  sacrum  (Matt.  7,  6),  the  OS.  poet  makes  it  a
helag  halsmeni  (holy  necklace),  Hel.  52,  7  ;  an  old  heathen  remin
iscence  came  over  him,  as  once  before  about  doves  perching  on
shoulders  (p.  148).  At  the  same  time,  as  he  names  only  the  swine,
not  the  dogs,  it  is  possible  that  he  meant  halsmeni  to  be  a  mere
amplification  of  '  merigrioton,'  pearls.

But  this  legend  of  the  goddess's  necklace  gains  yet  more  in  im
portance,  when  we  place  it  by  the  side  of  Greek  myths.  Brisinga
men  is  no  other  than  Aphrodite's  o/oyoto?  (Hymn  to  Venus  88),  and
the  chain  is  her  girdle,  the  /ceo-ro?  //xa?  Tnu/aXo?  which  she  wears
on  her  bosom,  and  whose  witchery  subdues  all  gods  and  mortals.
How  she  loosens  it  off  her  neck  (OLTTO  o-TrjOeacfuv)  and  lends  it  to
Here  to  charm  her  Zeus  with,  is  told  in  a  lay  that  teems  with
world-old  myths,  II.  14,  214-8.  As  the  ifids  is  worn  in  turn  by
Here  and  by  Aphrodite,  the  Norse  fable  gives  the  jewel  now  to
Frigg  and  now  to  Freyja,  for  that  '  gold  of  Frigg '  in  Saxo  is  the
same  as  Brisinga  men.  Then  there  is  another  similarity  :  the  same
narrative  makes  Freyja  possess  a  beautiful  chamber,  so  strong  that,
when  the  door  is  locked,  no  one  can  enter  against  her  will :  '  hun

1  Just  as  from  Freyja  proceeded  the  general  notion  of  a  freyja  frouwa,  so
necklace-wearing  serves  to  describe  a  beautiful  wife  or  maiden.  In  Seem.  97:i
mengloft  (monili  laeta,  rejoicing  in  a  necklace)  means  simply  femina,  but  in
108a  llla  Mengloft  is  a  proper  name  (see  p.  272  note);  in  222a  menskogul  is
used  of  Brynhildr.  Women  are  commonly  named  from  their  ornaments  of
gold  or  precious  stones,  Sn.  128  (see  Suppl.).


308  GODDESSES.

atti  ser  eina  skemmu,  er  var  baefti  fogr  ok  sterk,  sva  at  j?at  segja
menu,  ef  huroln  var  laest,  at  eingi  matti  komast  i  skemmuna  an
(without)  vilja  Freyju,'  Sn.  354.  We  are  told  the  trick  by  which
Loki  after  all  got  in,  and  robbed  her  of  the  necklace  ; 1  Homer  says
nothing  about  that,  but  (II.  14,  165-8)  he  knows  of  Here's  0aA.a/io?,

TOV  ol  <j)l\os  mo?  er€vj;ev
rvKwas  Se  dvpas  crraO^olcnv  £jri]p<T6
KpvTrrf),  TTJV  S'  ov  #6o?  a\\o?  avcpyev.
What  can   be  more  exactly  in   accordance  with  that  inaccessible
apartment  of  Freyja,  especially  as  the  Ipds  is  spoken  of  directly
after?     Hephaistos  (Vulcan),  who  built  his  mother  the  curiously
contrived  bedchamber,  answers  to  the  dwarfs  who  forged  the  neck
lace  for  Freyja.     The  identity  of  Frigg  and  Freyja  with  Here  and
Aphrodite  must  after  this  mythus  be  as  plain  as  day.

10.   FOLLA.      SlNDGUND.

Another  thing  that  betrays  the  confusion  of  Frigg  with  Freyja
is,  that  the  goddess  Folld,  now  proved  by  the  Merseburg  poem  to
belong  to  our  German  mythology,  is  according  to  it  a  sister  of  Frua,
while  the  OX.  Falla  again  is  handmaid  to  Frigg,  though  she  takes
rank  and  order  among  the  Asynjor  themselves  (Sn.  36-7).2  Her
office  and  duties  are  sufficiently  expressed  in  her  name  ;  she  justi
fies  our  reception  of  the  above-mentioned  Abundia  or  dame  Habonde
into  German  mythology,  and  corresponds  to  the  masculine  god  of
plenty  P-ilnitis,  Pilnitus,  whom  the  Lettons  and  Prussians  adored.
Like  dame  Herke  on  p.  253,  she  bestowed  prosperity  and  abundance
'  on  mortals,  to  her  keeping  was  intrusted  the  divine  mother's  chest
(eski),  out  of  which  gifts  were  showered  upon  them.

It  may  be,  that  Fulla  or  Folia  was  at  the  same  time  thought
of  as  the  full-moon  (Goth.  fullij?s,  Lith.  Pilnatis,  masc.),  as  another
heavenly  body,  Orion,  was  referred  to  Frigg  or  Freyja  :  in  the  Mer
seburg  MS.  she  is  immediately  followed  by  Sunnd  with  a  sister
Sindpund,  whose  name  again  suggests  the  path  of  a  constellation.
The  Eddie  S61  ranks  with  the  Asynjor,  but  Sindgund  (OK  Sinn-

1  He  bored  a  hole  and  crept  through  as  a  fly,  then  as  a  flea  he  stung  the
sleeping  goddess  till  she  shook  off  the  ornament :  an  incident  still  retained  in
nursery-tales.     Conf.  the  stinging  fly  at  the  forging,  Sn.  131.

2  If  we  read  Fria  for  Frua,  then  Folia  would  stand  nearer  to  her  as  in  the
Norse,  whether  as  attendant  goddess  or  as  sister.     Yet,  considering  the  insta
bility  of  those  goddesses'  names,  she  may  keep  her  place  by  Frouwa  too.


GAKT.   SIPPIA.   SUNIA.   WAR  A.   SAGA.  NAN  DA.  309

gunnr  ?)  is  unknown  to  the  Edda.     In  ch.  XXII.  on  the  constella
tions  I  shall  come  back  to  these  divinities  (see  Suppl.).

11.  GART.    SIPPIA.    SUNIA.    WARA.    SAGA.    NANDA.

From  surviving  proper  names  or  even  impersonal  terms,  more
rarely  from  extant  myths,  we  may  gather  that  several  more
goddesses  of  the  North  were  in  earlier  times  common  to  the  rest  of
Teutondom.

Frey's  beloved,  afterwards  his  wife,  was  named  Gerffr,  she
came  of  the  giant  breed,  yet  in  Sn.  79  she  is  reckoned  among  the
Asynjor.  The  Edda  paints  her  beauty  by  a  charming  trait :  when
Freyr  looked  from  heaven,  he  saw  her  go  into  a  house  and  close  the
door,  and  then  air  and  water  shone  with  the  brightness  of  her  arms
(Saem.  81.  Sn.  39).  His  wooing  was  much  thwarted,  and  was
only  brought  to  a  happy  issue  by  the  dexterity  of  his  faithful
servant  Skirnir.  The  form  of  her  name  Ger&r,  gen.  GerSar,  ace.
GerSi  (Saem.  117b),  points  to  a  Goth.  Gardi  or  Gardja,  gen.  Gardjos,
ace.  Gardja,  and  an  OHG.  Gart  or  Garta,  which  often  occurs  in  the
compounds  Hildigart,  Irmingart,  Liutkart,  &c.,  but  no  longer  alone.
The  Latin  forms  Hildegardis,  Liudgardis  have  better  preserved  the
terminal  i,  which  must  have  worked  the  vowel-change  in  GerSr,
ThorgerSr,  ValgerSr,  HrimgerSr.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  cingens,
inuniens  [Gurth  ?],  Lat.  Cinxia  as  a  name  of  Juno  (see  Suppl.).

The  Goth,  sibfa,  OHG.  sippia,  sippa,  AS.  sib  gen.  sibbe,  denote
peace,  friendship,  kindred;  from  these  I  infer  a  divinity  Sibfa,  Sippia,
Sib,  corresponding  to  the  OK  Sif  gen.  Sifjar,  the  wife  of  Thorr,  for
the  ON,  too  has  a  pi.  sifjar  meaning  cognatio,  sifi  amicus  (OHG.
sippio,  sippo),  sift  genus,  cognatio.  By  this  sense  of  the  word,  Sif
would  appear  to  be,  like  Frigg  and  Freyja,  a  goddess  of  loveliness
and  love  ;  as  attributes  of  05inn  and  Thor  agree,  their  wives  Frigg
and  Sif  have  also  a  common  signification.  Sif  in  the  Edda  is  called
the  fair-haired,  '  it  harfagra  gooY  and  gold  is  Sifjar  haddr  (Sifae
peplum),  because,  when  Loki  cut  off  her  hair,  a  new  and  finer  crop
was  afterwards  forged  of  gold  (Sn.  119.  130).  Also  a  herb,  poly-
trichum  aureum,  bears  the  name  haddr  Sifjar.  Expositors  see  in
this  the  golden  fruits  of  the  Earth  burnt  up  by  fire  and  growing  up
again,  they  liken  Sif  to  Ceres,  the  ^avOrj  A^rfrnp  (II.  5,  500) ;  and
with  it  agrees  the  fact  that  the  0  Slav.  Siva  is  a  gloss  on  'Ceres  dea


310  GODDESSES.

f rumen ti '  (Hanka's  glosses  5a  6a,b) ;  only  the  S  in  the  word  seems
to  be  the  Slav,  zhivete  =  Zh,  and  V  does  not  answer  to  the  Teut.
F,  B,  P.  The  earth  was  Thor's  mother,  not  his  wife,  yet  in  Sn.
220  we  do  find  the  simple  Sif  standing  for  earth.  To  decide,  we
ought  to  have  fuller  details  about  Sif,  and  these  are  wholly  want
ing  in  our  mythology.  Nowhere  amongst  us  is  the  mystic  relation
of  seed-corn  to  Demeter,  whose  poignant  grief  for  her  daughter
threatens  to  bring  famine  on  mankind  (Hymn  to  Cer.  305 — 315),  nor
anything  like  it,  recorded.

The  Gothic  language  draws  a  subtle  distinction  between  sunja
(veritas)  and  sunjd  (defensio,  probatio  veritatis) ;  in  OHG.  law,
sunna,  sunnis  means  excusatio  and  impedimentum.  The  ON.  law
likewise  has  this  syn  gen.  synjar,  for  excusatio,  defensio,  negatio,
impedimentum,  but  the  Edda  at  the  same  time  exhibits  a  personi
fied  Synt  who  was  to  the  heathen  a  goddess  of  truth  and  justice,
and  protected  the  accused  (Sn.  38).  To  the  same  class  belongs  Tor
gen.  Varar,  goddess  of  plighted  faith  and  covenants,  a  dea  foederis
(Sn.  37-8),  just  as  the  Romans  deified  Tutela.  The  phrase  '  vigja
saman  Varar  hendi,'  consecrare  Tutelae  manu  (Seem.  74b),  is  like
the  passages  about  Wish's  hands,  p.  140.  As  in  addition  to  the
abstract  wish  we  saw  a  Wish  endowed  with  life,  so  by  the  side  of
the  OHG.  wara  foedus  there  may  have  been  a  goddess  Wara,  and
beside  sunia  a  Sunid  (see  SuppL),

In  the  same  way  or  sage  (saw,  tale)  is  intensified  into  a  heathen
goddess  Saga,  daughter  of  Wuotan ;  like  Zeus's  daughter  the  Muse,
she  instructs  mankind  in  that  divine  art  which  Wuotan  himself
invented.  I  have  argued  in  a  separate  treatise  (Kleine  schr.  1,  83 —
112),  that  the  frou  Aventiure  of  the  Mid.  Ages  is  a  relic  of  the
same.

Nanna  the  wife  of  Baldr  would  be  in  Goth.  Nanjio,  OHG.
Nandd,  AS.  Ndde,  the  bold,  courageous  (p.  221),  but,  except  in  ON,
the  simple  female  name  is  lost ;  Procopius  1, 8  has  Gothic  0euSe-
vavQa,  ON.  Thioftnanna  (see  SuppL).

Inferences  like  these,  from  dying  words  to  dead  divinities,
could  be  multiplied ;  to  attempt  them  is  not  unprofitable,  for  they
sharpen  the  eye  to  look  in  fresh  quarters  [for  confirmation  or  con-


KAHANA.     HELLIA.  311

futation].     The  discovery  from  legend  or  elsewhere  of  a  harmony
between  myths  may  raise  our  guesses  into  demonstrations.1

12.  EAHANA  (RAN).    HELLIA  (HEL).

My  survey  of  the  gods  closed  with  Oegir  and  Loki ;  and  the
goddesses  akin  to  these  shall  be  the  last  mentioned  here.  -

To  correspond  to  the  OK  Gefjon  the  Old  Saxons  had,  as  far  as
we  know,  not  a  female  but  a  male  being,  Gelan,  Geofon  (sea,  p.  239).
With  four  giant  oxen,  according  to  Sn.  1,  Gefjon  ploughs  Zealand
out  of  the  Swedish  soil,  and  a  lake  arises,  whose  inward  bend  exactly
fits  the  projecting  coast  of  Zealand.  She  is  described  as  a  virgin,
and  all  maidens  who  die  virgins  wait  upon  her,  Sn.  36.  Her  name
is  called  upon  when  oaths  are  taken  :  sver  ek  viS  Gefjon,  F.  Magn.
lex.  386  (see  SuppL).  Gefn,  a  name  of  Freyja  (Sn.  37  and  Viga-
glumss.  cap.  27)  reminds  one  of  Gefjon.

Ran  was  the  wife  of  the  seagod  Oegir,  they  had  nine  daughters
who  are  cited  by  name  in  the  Edda,  and  called  Ednar  (or  Oegis)
dcetr.2  Men  who  are  drowned  fall  to  the  share  of  Ran,  which  of
itself  attests  her  divinity  :  fara  til  Rdnar  is  to  get  drowned  at  sea,
Fornald.  sog.  2,  78  ;  and  sitja  at  Rdnar  to  be  drowned,  Fornm.  sog.
6,  376.  Those  who  were  drowned  she  drew  to  her  in  a  net,  and

1  It  seems  almost  as  if  the  MHG.  poets  recognised  a  female  personage  fr6
Fuoge  or  Gefuoge  (fitness),  similar  in  plastic  power  to  the  masc.  Wish,  a  per
sonified  compages  or  dp/xoi/ta.     Lachmann  directs  me  to  instances  in  point.  Er.
7534-40  (conf.  Iwein,  p.  400)  :

So  hete  des  meisters  sin  So  had  the  master's  thought

gepriievet  clitz  gereite  turned  out  this  riding-gear

mit  grozer  wisheite  ;  with  great  wisdom  ;

er  gap  dem  helfenbeine  he  gave  the  ivory

und  da  bi  dem  gesteine  and  withal  the  jewelry

sin  gevellige  stat,  each  its  proper  place,

als  in  diu  Gevuoge  bat.  as  him  dame  Fitness  bade.

(Conf.  Er.  1246  :  als  in  min  ware  sclmlde  bat).— Parz.  121,  11  :

Wer  in  den  zwein  landen  wirt,          Whoso  in  the  two  lands  thrives,
Gefuoge  ein  wunder  an  im  birt ;         Fitness  a  wonder  in  him  bears  ;

he  is  a  miraculous  birth  of  Fitness,  her  child,  her  darling. — Conversely,  Wal-

ther  64,  38  :

Fro  Unfuoge,  ir  habt  gesiget.  Dame  Unfitness,  thou  hast  triumphed.

And  65,  25  :

Swer  Ungefuoge  swigen  hieze  Whoso  bade  Indecorum  hush,

und  sie  abe  den  biirgen  stieze  !          and  hurled  her  from  her  strongholds.

It  is  true,  the  prefixes  ge-,  un-,  argue  a  later  and  colder  allegory.     And  the

weak  fern,  form  (ace.  in  -en)  would  be  preferable,  OHG.  Fuoga,  gen.  Fuogun,

as  in  N.  cap.  135  hifuogun,  sotigenam  (see  SuppL).

2  Sami.  79b  144a  153b  180.     Sn.  124-9.  185.     Eyrbygg.  saga  p.  274,  and  in
dex  sub  v.  Ran.     Egilssaga  p.  616.


312  GODDESSES.

carried  them  off,  whence  the  explanation  of  her  name :  ran  neut.  is
rapina,  raena  rapere,  spoliare  (see  SuppL).

On  the  discovery  of  the  rare  word  rahanen  (spoliare)  in  the
Hildebr.  lied  57,  I  build  the  supposition  that  other  Teutonic  lands
had  also  a  subst.  rahan  (rapina,  spolium)  and  a  goddess  Eahana
(conf.  Tanfana,  Hluodana),  as  well  as  an  Uogi  =  Oegir.1

As  we  passed  from  Oegir  (through  Forniot  and  Logi)  to  Loki,
so  we  may  from  Kan  to  Hd,  who  is  no  other  than  Loki's  daughter,
and  like  him  a  dreadful  divinity.  Kan  receives  the  souls  that  die
by  water,  Hel  those  on  land,  and  Freyja  those  that  fall  in  battle.

The  ON.  Hel  gen.  Heljar  shows  itself  in  the  other  Teutonic
tongues  even  less  doubtfully  than  Frigg  and  Freyja  or  any  of  the
above-mentioned  goddesses  :  Goth.  Hcdja  gen.  Haljos,  OHG.  Hellia,
Hella  gen.  Hellia,  Hella,  AS.  Hell  gen.  Helle ;  only,  the  personal
notion  has  dropt  away,  and  reduced  itself  to  the  local  one  of  halja,
hellia,  hell,  the  nether  world  and  place  of  punishment.  Originally
Hellia  is  not  death  nor  any  evil  being,  she  neither  kills  nor
torments ;  she  takes  the  souls  of  the  departed  and  holds  them  with
inexorable  grip.  The  idea  of  a  place  evolved  itself,  as  that  of  cegir
oceanus  out  of  Oegir,  and  that  of  ge'ban  mare  from  Ge'ban  ;  the
converted  heathen  without  any  ado  applied  it  to  the  Christian
underworld,  the  abode  of  the  damned  ;  all  Teutonic  nations  have
done  this,  from  the  first  baptized  Goths  down  to  the  Northmen,
because  that  local  notion  already  existed  under  heathenism,
perhaps  also  because  the  church  was  not  sorry  to  associate  lost
spirits  with  a  heathen  and  fiendish  divinity.2  Thus  hellia  can  be
explained  from  Hellia  even  more  readily  than  ostara  from  Ostara.

In  the  Edda,  Hel  is  Loki's  daughter  by  a  giantess,  she  is  sister
to  the  wolf  Fenrir  and  to  a  monstrous  snake.  She  is  half  Hack  and
half  of  human  colour  (bid  half,  en  half  me5  horundar  lit),  Sn.  33,
after  the  manner  of  the  pied  people  of  the  Mid.  Ages ;  in  other

1  The  Trad,   patav.  pp.  60-2  assure  us  of  a  man's  name  Raan,  Rhaan
(Rahan  ?).     An  OHG.  Rahana  rests  on  a  very  slender  foundation.

2  Hel  has  no  affinity  at  all  with  ON.  hella  petra,  hellir  antrum,  as  the
Goth,  hallus  petra  shows  (from  hillan  sonare,  because  a   rock  resounds) :   a
likelier  connexion  is  that  with  our  hole  antrum,  OHG.  holi,  more  frequent  in
neut.  hoi,  for  which  we  should  expect  a  Gothic  hul,  as  in  fact  a  fern,  hulundi
is  caverna,  for  a  cave  covers,  and  so  does  the  nether  world  (both  therefore  from
hilan  celare).     Only,  the  vowels  in  hole  (=  huli)  and  holle  (=  halja)  do  not
agree.


BAHANA.      HELLIA.  313

passages  her  blackness  alone  is  made  a  subject  of  comparison  :  lldr
sem  Hel,  Nialss.  117.  Fornm.  sog.  3,  188  ;  conf.  Heljar skinn  for
complexion  of  deathly  hue,  Landnamab.  2,  19.  Nialss.  cap.  96.
Fornald.  sog.  2,  59.  60  ;x  death  is  black  and  gloomy.  Her  dwelling
is  deep  down  in  the  darkness  of  the  ground,  under  a  root  of  the
tree  Yggdrasill,  in  Niflheim,  the  innermost  part  of  which  is  there
fore  called  Niflhel,  there  is  her  court  (rann),  there  her  halls,  Ssem.
6b  44a  94a.  Sn.  4.  Her  platter  is  named  liungr,  her  knife  sultr,
synonymous  terms  to  denote  her  insatiable  greed.  The  dead  go
down  to  her,  fara  til  Heljar,  strictly  those  only  that  have  died  of
sickness  or  old  age,  not  those  fallen  in  fight,  who  people  Valhalla.
Her  personality  has  pretty  well  disappeared  in  such  phrases  as  i
hel  sla,  drepa,  berja  i  hel,  to  smite  into  hell,  send  to  Hades  ;  %  helju
vera,  be  in  Hades,  be  dead,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  233.  Out  of  this  has
arisen  in  the  modern  dialects  an  altogether  impersonal  and  distorted
term,  Swed.  ihjdl,  Dan.  ihiel,  to  death.2  These  languages  now
express  the  notion  of  the  nether  world  only  by  a  compound,  Swed.
helvete,  Dan.  helvede,  i.e.,  the  ON.  Mviti  (supplicium  infernale),
OHG.  hellawizi,  MHG.  hellewize.  One  who  is  drawing  his  last
breath  is  said  in  ON.  liggja  milli  heims  oc  heljar  (to  lie  betwixt
home  and  hell),  to  be  on  his  way  from  this  world  to  the  other.
The  unpitying  nature  of  the  Eddie  Hel  is  expressly  emphasized  ;
what  she  once  has,  she  never  gives  back  :  haldi  Hel  tyvi  er  hefir,  Sn.
68  ;  hefir  nu  Hel,  Ssem.  257a,  like  the  wolf  in  the  apologue  (Eein-
hart  xxxvi),  for  she  is  of  wolfish  nature  and  extraction ;  to  the
wolf  on  the  other  hand  a  hellish  throat  is  attributed  (see  SuppL).
Two  lays  in  the  Edda  describe  the  way  to  the  lower  world,  the

1  The  ancients  also  painted  Demeter,  as  the  wrathful  earth-goddess,  black
(Pans.  8,  42.  O.  Miiller's  Eumenides  168,  conf.  Archfeol.  p.  509  the  black
Demeter  at  Phigalia),  and  sometimes  even  her  daughter  Persephone,  the  fair
maid  doomed  to  the  underworld  :  lfurva  Proserpina,'  Hor.  Od.  2,  13  (Censorin.
De  die  nat.  c.  17).  Black  Aphrodite  (Melanis)  is  spoken  of  by  Pausanias  2,  2.
8,  6.  9,  27  and  by  Athenseus  bk.  13  ;  we  know  the  black  Diana  of  Ephesus,
and  that  in  the  Mid.  Ages  black  Madonnas  were  both  painted  and  carved,  the
Holy  Virgin  appearing  then  as  a  sorrowing  goddess  of  earth  or  night  ;  such  at


Furia  dwelling  in  Tartarus  is  also  represented  bo°th  as  black  and  as  half  white
half  black.

2  0  Swed.  has  more,  correctly  ihael,  i.e.,  ihal  (Fred,  af  Normandie  1299.
1356.  1400.  1414).  In  Ostgotalagen  p.  8,  one  reading  has  already  ihieell  for
ihsel  ;  they  no  longer  grasped  the  meaning  of  the  term.


3 14  GODDESSES.

HelreiS  Brynhildar  and  the  VegtamsqviSa ;   in  the  latter,  Gain's
ride  on  Sleipnir  for  Baldr's  sake  seems  to  prefigure   that   which
HermoSr  afterwards  undertakes  on  the  same  steed  in  Sn.    65-7.
But  the  incidents  in  the  poem  are  more  thrilling,  and  the  dialogue
between  Vegtamr1  and  the  vala,  who  says  of  herself :
var  ek  snifin  sniofi  (by  snow),  ok  slegin  regni,
ok  drifin  doggo  (by  dew),  dauS  (dead)  var  ek  leingi,
is  among  the  sublimest  things  the  Edda  has  to  shew.     This  vala
must  stand  in  close  relationship  to  Hel  herself.

Saxo  Gram.  p.  43  very  aptly  uses  for  Hel  the  Latin  Proserpina,
he  makes  her  give  notice  of  Balder's  death.  In  the  Danish  popular
belief  Hel  is  a  three-legged  horse,  that  goes  round  the  country,
a  harbinger  of  plague  and  pestilence ;  of  this  I  shall  treat  further
on.  Griginally  it  was  no  other  than  the  steed  on  which  the  goddess
posted  over  land,  picking  up  the  dead  that  were  her  due ;  there  is
also  a  waggon  ascribed  to  her,  in  which  she  made  her  journeys.

A  passage  in  Beowulf  shows  h)w  the  Anglo-Saxons  retained
perfectly  the  old  meaning  of  the  word.  It  says  of  the  expiring
Grendel  1098 :  '  feorh  filegde,  hreftene  sawle  (vitam  deposuit,
animam  gentilem),  J?aer  hine  Hel  onfeng,'  the  old-heathen  goddess
took  possession  of  him.

In  Germany  too  the  Mid.  Ages  still  cherished  the  conception  of
a  voracious,  hungry,  insatiable  Hell,  an  Orcus  esuriens,  i.e.,  the  man-
devouring  ogre  :  '  diu  Helle  ferslindet  al  daz  ter  lebet,  si  ne  wirdet
niomer  sat!  N.  Cap.  72.  '  diu  Helle  und  der  arge  wan  werdent
niemer  sat,'  Welsch.  gast.  It  sounds  still  more  personal,  when  she
lias  gaping  yawning  jaws  ascribed  to  her,  like  the  wolf  ;  pictures  in
the  MS.  of  Csedmon  represent  her  simply  by  a  wide  open  mouth.
Der  tobende  wuoterich  The  raging  tyrant

der  was  der  Hellen  gelich,  he  was  like  the  Hell

diu  daz  abgrunde  who  the  chasm  (steep  descent)

begcnit  mit  ir  munde  be-yawneth  with  her  mouth

unde  den  himel  zuo  der  erden.      from  heaven  down2  to  earth,
unde  ir  doch  niht  ne  mac  werden,And  yet  to  her  it  cannot  hap

1  OSinn  calls  himself  Vegtamr  (way-tame,  broken-in  to  the  road,  gnams
viae),  son  of  Valtamr  (assuetus  caedibus),  as  in  other  places  gangtamr  (itineri
assuetus)  is  used  of  the  horse,  Sasm.  26ob,  but  OSinn  himself  is  GangraGr  or
(langleri.  Vegtamr  reminds  one  of  the  holy  priest  and  minstrel  Wechtam  in
Hunibald.

2  I  have  supposed  that  *  unde  den '  is  a  slip  for  '  abe  dem '. — TRANS.


KAHANA.      HELLIA.  315

daz  si  imer  werde  vol ;  that  she  ever  become  full ;

si  ist  daz  ungesatliche  hoi,  she  is  the  insatiable  cavern,

daz  weder  nu  noch  nie  ne  sprah :  that  neither  now  nor  ever  said
'  diz  ist  des  ih  niht  ne  mac.'          '  this  is  what  I  cannot  (manage)/
Lampr.  Alex.  6671-80.     Old  poems  have  frequent  allusions  to  the
abgrund  (chasm,  abyss)  and  the  doors  of  hell :  helligruoba,  hella-
grunt,  helliporta,  &c.  Grarnm.  2,  458  ;  der  abgrunde  tune,  der  tiefen
helle  tune  (the  deep  hell's  dinge,  darkness),  Mart.  8Sb  99C.

Of  course  there  are  Bible  texts  that  would  in  the  first  instance
suggest  much  of  this,  e.g.,  about  the  insatiableness  of  hell,  Prov.  27,
20.  30,  16  (conf.  Freidank  Ixxiv),  her  being  uncovered,  Job  26,
6,  her  opening  her  mouth,  Isaiah  5,  14.  But  we  are  to  bear  in
mind,  that  all  these  have  the  masc.  aSrjs  or  infernus,  with  which
the  idea  of  the  Latin  Orcus  also  agrees,  and  to  observe  how  the
German  language,  true  to  its  idiosyncrasy,  was  obliged  to  make  use
of  a  feminine  word.  The  images  of  a  door,  abyss,  wide  gaping
throat,  strength  and  invincibility  (fortis  tanquam  orcus,  Petron.
cap.  62),  appear  so  natural  and  necessary  to  the  notion  of  a  nether
world,  that  they  will  keep  recurring  in  a  similar  way  among
different  nations  (see  Suppl.).

The  essential  thing  is,  the  image  of  a  greedy,  unrestoring,  female
deity.1

But  the  higher  we  are  allowed  to  penetrate  into  our  antiquities,
the  less  hellish  and  the  more  godlike  may  Haifa  appear.  Of  this
we  have  a  particularly  strong  guarantee  in  her  affinity  to  the  Indian
Bhavani,  who  travels  about  and  bathes  like  Nerthus  and  Holda
(p.  268),  but  is  likewise  called  Kali  or  MaliaMU,  the  great  Hack
goddess.  In  the  underworld  she  is  supposed  to  sit  in  judgment  on
souls.  This  office,  the  similar  name  and  the  black  hue  (kala  niger,
conf.  caligo  and  Ke\cuv6<i)  make  her  exceedingly  like  Halja.  And
Halja  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  commonest  conceptions  of  our
heathenism.

1  In  the  south  of  Holland,  where  the  Meuse  falls  into  the  sea,  is  a  place
named  Helvoetsluis.  I  do  not  know  if  any  forms  in  old  documents  confirm  the
idea  contained  in  the  name, 'of  Hell-foot,  foot  of  Hell.  The  Romans  have
a  Helium  here  :  Inter  Helium  ac  Flevum,  ita  appellantur  ostia,  in  quae  effusus
Rhenus,  ab  septentrione  in  lacus,  ab  occidente  in  amnem  Mosam  se  spargit,
medio  inter  haec  ore  modicum  nomine  suo  custodiens  alveum,  Plin.  4,  29.
Tac.  also  says  2,  6  :  immense  ore.  Conf.  supra  p.  198  on  Oegisdyr  (see  Suppl.).


CHAPTER  XIV.
CONDITION  OF  GODS.

Now  that  we  have  collected  all  that  could  be  found  concerning
the  several  divinities  of  our  distant  past,  I  will  endeavour  to  survey
their  nature  as  a  whole ;  in  doing  which  however,  we  must  be
allowed  to  take  more  frequent  notice  of  foreign  and  especially
Greek  mythology,  than  we  have  done  in  other  sections  of  this
work :  it  is  the  only  way  we  can  find  connecting  points  for  many  a
thread  that  otherwise  hangs  loose.

All  nations  have  clothed  their  gods  in  human  shape,  and  only
by  way  of  exception  in  those  of  animals  ;  on  this  fact  are  founded
both  their  appearances  to  men,  or  incarnation,  their  twofold  sex,
their  intermarrying  with  mankind,  and  also  the  deification  of
certain  men,  i.e.,  their  adoption  into  the  circle  of  the  gods.  It
follows  moreover,  that  gods  are  begotten  and  born,  experience  pain
and  sorrow,  are  subject  to  sleep,  sickness  and  even  death,  that  like
men  they  speak  a  language,  feel  passions,  transact  affairs,  are
clothed  and  armed,  possess  dwellings  and  utensils.  The  only
difference  is,  that  to  these  attributes  and  states  there  is  attached  a
higher  scale  than  the  human,  that  all  the  advantages  of  the  gods
are  more  perfect  and  abiding,  all  their  ills  more  slight  or  transient.

This  appears  to  me  a  fundamental  feature  in  the  faith  of  the
heathen,  that  they  allowed  to  their  gods  not  an  unlimited  and
unconditional  duration,  but  only  a  term  of  life  far  exceeding  that
of  men.  All  that  is  born  must  also  die,  and  as  the  omnipotence  of
gods  is  checked  by  a  fate  standing  higher  than  even  they,  so  their
eternal  dominion  is  liable  at  last  to  termination.  And  this  reveals
itself  not  only  by  single  incidents  in  the  lives  of  gods,  but  in  the
general  notion  of  a  coming  and  inevitable  ruin,  which  the  Edda
expresses  quite  distinctly,  and  which  the  Greek  system  has
in  the  background :  the  day  will  come  when  Zeus's  rei^n  shall  end.


CONDITION  OF  GODS.  317

But  this  opinion,  firmly  held  even  by  the  Stoics,1  finds  utterance
only  now  and  then,  particularly  in  the  story  of  Prometheus,  which
I  have  compared  to  the  Norse  ragnarokr,  p.  245-6.

In  the  common  way  of  thinking,  the  gods  are  supposed  to  be
immortal  and  eternal.  They  are  called  Oeol  alev  eoWe?,  II.  1,  290.
494,  aievyeverai  2,  400,  dddvaroi,  2,  814,  dOdvaro^  Zevs  14,  434 ;
and  therefore  pd/capes  1,  339.  599  in  contrast  to  mortal  man.  They
have  a  special  right  to  the  name  ajA/Sporot,  immortales,  while  men
are  pporol  mortales ;  afipporo?  is  explained  by  the  Sansk.  amrita
immortalis,  the  negative  of  mrita  mortalis  (conf.  Pers.  merd,  homo
mortalis) ;  in  fact  both  amrita  and  apPpocrios,  next  neighbour  to
foPporos,  contain  a  reference  to  the  food,  by  partaking  of  which
the  gods  keep  up  their  immortality,  They  taste  not  the  fruits  of
the  earth,  whereby  the  ffporol  live,  ot  apovprjs  Kapirov  eSovcriv,  II.  6,
142.  With  /3poro5  again  is  connected  pporo?  thick  mortal  blood,
whereas  in  the  veins  of  the  gods  flows  l^cop  (II.  5,  340.  416),  a  light
thin  liquid,  in  virtue  of  which  they  seem  to  be  called  affpoToi,  =.

d/JL/BpOTOi.

Indian  legend  gives  a  full  account  of  the  way  amrita,  the  elixir
of  immortality,  was  brewed  out  of  water  clear  of  milk,  the  juice  of
herbs,  liquid  gold  and  dissolved  precious-stones  ;2  no  Greek  poem
tells  us  the  ingredients  of  ambrosia,  but  it  was  an  d^pocnr)  rpofoj
(food),  and  there  was  a  divine  drink  besides,  <y\v/cv  ve/crap,  II.  1,
598,  of  a  red  colour  19,  38,  its  name  being  derived  either  from  vr)
and  KTaaOai,  or  better  from  vetc-rap  necem  avertens.  Where  men
take  bread  and  wine,  the  gods  take  ambrosia  and  nectar,  Od.  5,
195,  and  hence  comes  the

a/jipporov  al/jia  Oeoio,

iX(*)p,  0*09  7T€p  re  peet,  /jiaKapeo-cn  Qzolaiv  •
ov  jdp  alrov  eSova,  ou  TTivoixr  aWojra  olvov  •
rovveK?  dvaifJLovis  elcn  KOL  dQavarot,  KaXeovrai.

-II.  5,  339.

Theirs  is  no  thick  glutinous  al^a  (conf.  our  seim,  ON.  seimr,  slime),
nor  according  to  the  Indians  do  they  sweat ;  and  this  avai^^v
(bloodless)  agrees  with  the  above  explanation  of  affporos.  The

1  Atque  omnes  pariter  deos  perdet  mors  aliqua  et  chaos.     Seneca  in  Here.

2  Cleopatra  had  costly  pearls  melted  in  her  wine,  and  it  is  said  to  be  still  a
custom  with  Indian  princes  ;  conf.  Sueton.  Calig.  37.


318  CONDITION   OF   GODS.

adjectives  a/3poro<?,  a^poro?,  afjbjBpbcrios,  veKrdpeos  are  passed  on
from  the  food  to  other  divine  things1  (see  Suppl.).  Plainly  then
the  gods  were  not  immortal  by  their  nature,  they  only  acquired  and
secured  this  quality  by  abstaining  from  the  food  and  drink  of  men,
and  feasting  on  heavenly  fare.  And  hence  the  idea  of  death  is  not
always  nor  as  a  matter  of  course  kept  at  a  distance  from  them  ;
Kronos  used  to  kill  his  new  born  children,  no  doubt  before  nectar
and  ambrosia  had  been  given  them,2  and  Zeus  alone  could  be  saved
from  him  by  being  brought  up  secretly.  Another  way  in  which
the  mortality  of  certain  gods  is  expressed  is,  that  they  fall  a  prey
to  Hades,  whose  meaning  borders  on  that  of  death,  e.g.,  Perse
phone.

If  a  belief  in  the  eternity  of  the  gods  is  the  dominant  one
among  the  Greeks,  and  only  scattered  hints  are  introduced  of  their
final  overthrow  ;  with  our  ancestors  on  the  contrary,  the  thought  of
the  gods  being  immortal  seems  to  retire  into  the  background.
The  Edda  never  calls  them  eylifir  or  odauoligir,  and  their  death  is
spoken  of  without  disguise :  )?a  er  regin  deyja,  Saem.  37a,  or  more
frequently :  regin  riu/az  (solvuntur),  36b  40a  108b.  One  of  the
finest  and  oldest  myths  describes  the  death  of  Balder,  the  burning
of  his  body,  and  his  entrance  into  the  lower  world,  like  that  of
Proserpine ;  05in's  destined  fall  is  mentioned  in  the  Voluspa  9a,
05ms  lani  (bane),  Sn.  73,  where  also  Thorr  falls  dead  on  the
ground ;  Hrungnir,  a  giant,  threatens  to  slay  all  the  gods  (drepa
guS  oil),  Sn.  107.  Yet  at  the  same  time  we  can  point  to  clear
traces  of  that  prolongation  of  life  by  particular  kinds  of  food  and
drink.  While  the  einherjar  admitted  into  Valholl  feast  on  the
boiled  flesh  of  a  boar,  we  are  nowhere  told  of  the  Ases  sharing  in
such  diet  (Sa3m.  36.  42.  Sn.  42) ;  it  is  even  said  expressly,  that
OSinn  needs  no  food  (onga  vist  ]?arf  hann),  and  only  drinks  wine
(vin  er  honum  bseol  dryckr  ok  matr,  both  meat  and  drink)  ;
with  the  viands  set  before  him  he  feeds  his  two  wolves  Geri  and
Freki.  VitS  vin  eitt  vapngofugr  05inn  03  lifir  (vino  solo  armipotens
semper  vivit),  Saem.  42b  ;  a3  lifir  can  be  rendered  '  semper  vescitur,

1  Both  nectar  and  ambrosia,  like  the  holy  grail  of  the  Mid.  Ages,  have
miraculous  powers  :  poured  into  the  nose  of  a  corpse,  they  prevent  decay,  II.
19,  38  ;  they  ward  off  hunger,  II.  19,  347.  353.

2  As  human  infants  may  only  Le  exposed  before  milk  and  honey  have
moistened  their  lips,  conf.  KA.  pp.  458-9.  When  Zeus  first  receives  in  the
assembly  of  the  gods  the  son  whom  Leto  bore  him,  he  hands  him  nectar  in  a
golden  bowl  :  by  this  act  he  recognised  him  for  his  child.


IMMOETALITY.  319

nutritur,'  or  '  immortalitatem  nanciscitur,'  and  tlien  the  cause  of  his
immortality  would  be  found  in  his  partaking  of  the  wine.  Evi
dently  this  wine  of  the  Norse  gods  is  to  the  beer  and  ale  (olr)  of
men,  what  the  nectar  of  the  Greek  gods  was  to  the  wine  of  mortals.
Other  passages  are  not  so  particular  about  their  language  ;  1  in
Snem.  59  the  gods  at  Oegir's  hall  have  ale  set  before  them,  conf.  ol
giora,  68b  ;  Heimdall  gladly  drinks  the  good  mead,  41  b  ;  verSar
nema  oc  sumbl  (cibum  capere  et  symposium)  52,  leaves  the  exact
nature  of  the  food  undefined,  but  earthly  fare  is  often  ascribed  to
the  gods  in  so  many  words.2  But  may  not  the  costly  Odhro&ris
dreckr,  compounded  of  the  divine  Qvasir's  blood  and  honey,  be
likened  to  amrita  and  ambrosia  ?  3  Dwarfs  and  giants  get  hold  of
it  first,  as  amrita  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  giants  ;  at  last  the
gods  take  possession  of  both.  OShrceris  dreckr  confers  the  gift  of
poesy,  and  by  that  very  fact  immortality  :  OSinn  and  Saga,  goddess
of  poetic  art,  have  surely  drunk  it  out  of  golden  goblets,  gladly  and
evermore  (um  alia  daga,  Ssem.  41a).  We  must  also  take  into
account  the  creation  of  the  wise  Qvasir  (conf.  Slav,  kvas,  convivium,
potus)  ;  that  at  the  making  of  a  covenant  between  the  Aesir  and
Vanir,  he  was  formed  out  of  their  spittle  (hraki)  ;  the  refining  of
his  blood  into  a  drink  for  gods  seems  a  very  ancient  and  far-
reaching  myth.  But  beside  this  drink,  we  have  also  notices  of  a
special  food  for  gods  :  Iftunn  has  in  her  keeping  certain  apples,  by
eating  of  which  the  aging  gods  make  themselves  young  again  (er
gooln  skulo  abita,  J?a  er  ]?au  eldaz,  oc  verSa  j?a  allir  ungir,  Sn.  30a).
This  reminds  one  of  the  apples  of  Paradise  and  the  Hesperides,  of  the
guarded  golden  apples  in  the  Kindennarchen  no.  57,  of  the  apples
in  the  stories  of  Fortunatus  and  of  Merlin,  on  the  eating  or  biting
of  which  depend  life,  death  and  metamorphosis,  as  elsewhere  on  a
draught  of  holy  water.  According  to  the  Eddie  view,  the  gods  have
a  means,  it  is  true,  of  preserving  perpetual  freshness  and  youth,


1  As  Homer  too  makes  Ganymede  ofooxocvcti/,  II.  20,  234,  and  of  Hebe  it  is
even  said,  vfKrap  eWo^oei  4,  3.

2  Zeus  goes  to  banquet  (KCITO.  dalra)  with  the  Ethiopians,  II.  1,  423  ;  orav
Trpos  baiTa  KOI  eVt  Ooivrjv  toxri,  Plato's  Pheedr.  247,  as  Thorr  does  with  the  Nor
wegians  ;  even  when  disguised  as  a  bride,  he  does  not  refuse  the  giants'  dishes,
Ssem.  73b  ;  and  the  Ases  boiled  an  ox  on  their  journey,  Sn.  80.

8  In  Sanskrit,  sudha  nectar  is  distinguished  from  amrita  ambrosia.  Every
where  there  is  an  eagle  in  the  business  :  Garuda  is  called  sudhahara,  or  amrita-
harana,  nectar-thief  or  ambrosia-thief  (Pott,  forsch.  2,451)  ;  it  is  in  the  shape  of
an  eagle  that  O'Sinn  carries  off  OShrttrir,  and  Zeus  his  cupbearer  Ganymede
(see  ch.  XXXV  and  XXX,  Path-crossing  and  Poetry).


320  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

but,  for  all  that,  they  are  regarded  as  subject  to  the  encroach
ments  of  age,  so  that  there  are  always  some  young  and  some  old
gods  ;  in  particular,  Odinn  or  Wuotan  is  pictured  everywhere  as  an
old  greybeard  (conf.  the  old  god,  p.  21),  Thorr  as  in  the  full
strength  of  manhood,  Balder  as  a  blooming  youth.  The  gods  grow
hdrir  ok  gamlir  (hoar  and  old),  Sn.  81.  Freyr  has  'at  tannfe  '
(tooth-fee)  presented  him  at  his  teething,  he  is  therefore  imagined
as  growing  up.  In  like  manner  Uranos  and  Kronos  appear  as  old,
Zeus  (like  our  Donar)  and  Poseidon  as  middle  aged,  Apollo,  Her
mes  and  Ares  as  in  the  bloom  of  youth.  Growth  and  age,  the
increase  and  decline  of  a  power,  exclude  the  notion  of  a  strictly
eternal,  immutable,  immortal  being  ;  and  mortality,  the  termination,
however  long  delayed,  of  gods  with  such  attributes,  is  a  necessity
(see  Suppl.).

Epithets  expressing  the  power,  the  omnipotence,  of  the  reigning
gods  have  been  specified,  pp.  21-2.  A  term  peculiar  to  ON.  poetry
is  #mregin,  Seem.  2Sa  50a  51a  52b,  #mheilog  go£  la ;  it  is  of
the  same  root  as  gina,  OHG.  kinan,  hiare,  and  denotes  minima
ampla,  late  dominantia,  conf.  AS.  ginne  grund,  Beow.  3101.  Jud.
131,  2.  ginne  rice,  Caxlm.  15,  8.  ginfaest,  firmissimus  176,  29.
ginfresten  god,  terrae  dominus  211,  10.  garsecges  gin,  oceani
amplitude  205,  3.

The  Homeric  peia  (=  paSuo*;,  Goth.  raj?izo)  beautifully  ex
presses  the  power  of  the  gods  ;  whatever  they  do  or  undertake
conies  easy  to  them,  their  life  glides  along  free  from  toil,  while
mortal  men  labour  and  are  heavy  laden  :  6eol  peia  Jeooi/re?,  II.  6,
138.  Od.  4,  805.  5,  122.  When  Aphrodite  wishes  to  remove  her
favourite  Alexander  from  the  perils  of  battle,  TOV  8'  e^pjra^
'A<f>poSin)  peia  pd\\  wo- re  0  eos,  II.  3,  381  ;  the  same  words  are
applied  to  Apollo,  when  he  snatches  Hector  away  from  Achilles  20,
443.  The  wall  so  laboriously  built  by  the  Greeks  he  overturns  peia
fid\a,  as  a  boy  at  play  would  a  sand-heap  15,  362.  With  a  mere
breath  (irvotfj\  blowing  a  little  (rjica  /ua'Aa  ijrvj-aa-d),  Athene  turns
away  from  Achilles  the  spear  that  Hector  had  thrown  20,  440  (see
Suppl.).  Berhta  also  blows  (p.  276),  and  the  elves  breathe  (ch.
XVII),  on  people.

The  sons  of  men  grow  up  slowly  and  gradually,  gods  attain
their  full  size  and  strength  directly  after  birth.  No  sooner  had


STRENGTH.      PRECOCITY.      SIZE.  321

Themis  presented  nectar  and  ambrosia  (a{i/3poair)v  epareivrjv)  to
the  newborn  Apollo,  than  he  leapt,  /care/3p<w?  a/jL/3porov,  out  of  his
swathings,  sat  down  among  the  goddesses,  began  to  speak,  and,
unshorn  as  he  was,  to  roam  through  the  country  (Hymn,  in  Ap.
Del.  123—133).  Not  unlike  Vali,  whom  Eindr  bore  to  Oolrm  ;
when  only  one  night  old  (einnsettr),  unwashen  and  unkempt,  he
sallies  forth  to  avenge  Baldr's  death  on  Hoftr,  Ssem.  6b  95b.  Here
the  coincidence  of  cucepa-exo^  with  the  Edda's  '  ne  hofu5  kembr '
is  not  to  be  disregarded.  Hermes,  born  at  early  morn,  plays  the
lute  at  mid-day,  and  at  eve  drives  oxen  away  (Hymn,  in  Merc.  17
seq_.).  And  Zeus,  who  is  often  exhibited  as  a  child  among  the
Kuretes,  grew  up  rapidly  (fcapTraXlfjLa)?  /iez/o?  KOI  fya&ipa  yvla
r)i>t;6To  roto  ava/cros'),  and  in  his  first  years  had  strength  enough  to
enter  the  lists  with  Kronos  (Hes.  theog.  492).  The  Norse  mytho
logy  offers  another  example  in  Magni,  Thor's  son  by  the  giantess
larnsaxa :  when  three  nights  old  ()?rinsettr),  he  flung  the  giant
Hrungni's  enormous  foot,  under  whose  weight  Thorr  lay  on  the
ground,  off  his  father,  and  said  he  would  have  beaten  the  said  giant
dead  with  his  fist,  Sn.  110  (see  Suppl.).

The  shape  of  the  gods  is  like  the  human  (p.  105),  only  vaster,
often  exceeding  even  the  gigantic.  When  Ares  is  felled  to  the
ground  by  the  stone  which  Athene  flings,  his  body  covers  seven
roods  of  land  (eirrd  S'  eVe^e  7re\e0pa  Treacbv,  II.  21,  407),  a  size
that  with  a  slight  addition  the  Od.  11,  577  puts  upon  the  titan
Tityos.  When  Here  takes  a  solemn  oath,  she  grasps  the  earth
with  one  hand  and  the  sea  with  the  other  (II.  14,  272).  A  cry
that  breaks  from  Poseidon's  breast  sounds  like  that  of  nine  or  even
ten  thousand  warriors  in  battle  (14,  147),  and  the  same  is  said  of
Ares  when  he  roars  (5,  859) ;  Here  contents  herself  with  the  voice  of
Stentor,  which  only  equals  those  of  fifty  men  (5,  786).  By  the  side
of  this  we  may  put  some  features  in  the  Edda,  which  have  to  do
with  Thorr  especially :  he  devours  at  a  wedding  one  ox  and  eight
salmon,  and  drinks  three  casks  of  mead,  Ssem.  73b ;  another  time,
through  a  horn,  the  end  of  which  reaches  to  the  sea,  he  drinks  a
good  portion  of  this,  he  lifts  the  snake  that  encircles  the  whole
world  off  one  of  its  feet,  and  with  his  hammer  he  strikes  three  deep
valleys  in  the  rocky  mountain,  Sn.  59,  60.  Again,  Teutonic
mythology  agrees  with  the  Greek  in  never  imputing  to  its  gods  the
deformity  of  many  heads,  arms  or  legs ;  they  are  only  bestowed

21


322  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

on  a  few  heroes  and  animals,  as  some  of  the  Greek  giants  are
€Kar6y^eipe<;.  Such  forms  are  quite  common  in  the  Hindu  and
Slav  systems :  Vishnu  is  represented  with  four  arms,  Brahma  with
four  heads,  Svantovit  the  same,  while  Porevit  has  five  heads  and
Kugevit  seven  faces.  Yet  Hecate  too  is  said  to  have  been  three-
headed,  as  the  Eoman  Janus  was  two-faced,  and  a  Lacedaemonian
Apollo  four-armed.1  Khuvera,  the  Indian  god  of  wealth,  is  a
hideous  figure  with  three  legs  and  eight  teeth.  Some  of  the  Norse
gods,  on  the  contrary,  have  not  a  superfluity,  but  a  deficiency  of
members :  OSinn  is  one-eyed,  T£r  one-handed,  HoSr  blind,  and
Logi  or  Loki  was  perhaps  portrayed  as  lame  or  limping,  like
Hephasstus  and  the  devil.  Hel  alone  has  a  dreadful  shape,  black
and  white  ;  the  rest  of  the  gods  and  goddesses,  not  excepting  Loki,
are  to  be  imagined  as  of  beautiful  and  noble  figure  (see  Suppl.).

In  the  Homeric  epos  this  ideally  perfect  human  shape,  to  which
Greek  art  also  keeps  true,  is  described  in  standing  epithets  for  gods
and  especially  goddesses,  with  which  our  ruder  poetry  has  only  a
few  to  set  in  comparison,  and  yet  the  similarity  of  these  is  signi
ficant.     Some   epithets   have  to  serve  two  or  three  divinities  by
turns,  but  most  are  confined  to  individuals,  as   characteristic
them.     Thus  Here  is  Xeu/ewXei/o?  or  /^OWTT/,?  (the  former  used  als
of  Helen,  II.  3, 121,2  the  latter  of  a  Nereid  18,  40),  Athene  ry\av/cc*
Trt?  or  rivKojjbos  (which  again  does  for  Here),  Thetis  apyvpojr
Iris  aeXXoTro?,  7roS??Ve//,o?,  xpva-oTrrepos,  Eos  poSoSa/criAo?,  Demete
(Ceres)  gavOtf  5,  500,  and  /caXXtTrXo/ca^o?  14,  326,  just  as  Sif  i
harfogr  (p.  309),  in  allusion  to  the  yellow  colour  of  the  waving
corn.     As  the  sea  rolls  its  dark  waves,  Poseidon  bears  the  nam
Kvavoxafrv:,  II.  14,  390.  15,  174.     20,  144.     Zeus  could  either  be
called  the  same,  or  icvavofypvs  (a  contrast  to  Baldr  brahvitr,  brow
white  p.  222),  because  to  him  belong  apfipocricu  yai-Tai  II.  1,  528,  th(
hair  and  locks  of  Wish  (p.  142),  and  because  with  his  dark  brow
he   makes   signs.     This   confirmatory   lowering   of  the   brows   01
nodding  with  the  head  (vevew,  Karave^eiv  fcvaverjaiv  eV  6(f>puo-t  I]
1,  527.     17,  209)  is  the  regular  expression  of  Zeus's  will :  Ke$
KaTavevcrofJiat,,  a0avdroi(7L  ^ejiarov  re/cjjLwp,  II.  1,  524.     In  refusing
he  draws  the  head  back  (avavevef).  '  Thor's  indignant  rage  is  shown
by  sinking  the  eyebrows  over  the  eyes  (siga  brynuar  ofan  fyrir

1  0.  Muller's  archaeol.  p.  515.

2  And  Aphrodite  throws  her  Tr^ee  XeuKo>  round  ^Eneas. — TRANS.


SHAPE.      ANGER.  323

augun,  Sn.  50),  displaying  gloomy  brows  and  shaking  the  beard.
Obviously  the  two  gods,  Zeus  and  Donar,  have  identical  gestures
ascribed  to  them  for  expressing  favour  or  anger.  They  are  the
glowering  deities,  who  have  the  avenging  thunder  at  their  command;
this  was  shown  of  Donar,  p.  177,  and  to  Zeus  is  given  the  grim
louring  look  (Seiva  8'  vjroSpa  ISav,  II.  15,  13),  he  above  all  is  the
fiey  6x6>jo-a<;  (1,  517.  4,  30),  and  next  to  him  Poseidon  of  the
dingy  locks  (8,  208.  15,  184).  Zeus  again  is  distinguished  by
beaming  eyes  (rpeirev  oacre  (fraewco  13,  3.  7.  14,  236.  16,  645),
which  belong  to  none  else  save  his  own  great-hearted  daughter  21,
415 ;  Aphrodite  has  ofifiara  ^ap^aipovra,  3,  397,  twinkling,
shimmering  eyes  (see  SuppL).

Figures  of  Greek  divinities  show  a  circle  of  rays  and  a  nimbus
round  the  head  ;x  on  Indo-Grecian  coins  Mithras  has  commonly  a
circular  nimbus  with  pointed  rays,2  in  other  representations  the
rays  are  wanting.  Mao  (deus  Lunus)  has  a  halfmoon  behind  his
shoulders  ;  Aesculapius  too  had  rays  about  his  head.  In  what  century
was  the  halo,  the  aureole,  first  put  round  the  heads  of  Christian
saints  ?  And  we  have  also  to  take  into  account  the  crowns  and
diadems  of  kings.  Ammian.  Marc.  16, 12  mentions  Chnodomarius,
cujus  vertici  flammeus  torulus  aptabatur.  N.  Cap.  63  translates
the  honorati  capitis  radios  of  the  Sol  auratus  by  houbetsHmo  (head-
sheen),  and  to  portray  the  sun's  head  surrounded  with  flames  is
extremely  natural.  In  ON.  I  find  the  term  ro&a  for  caput  radiatum
sancti,  which  I  suppose  to  be  the  OHG.  ruota  rod,  since  virga  also
goes  off  into  the  sense  of  flagellum,  radius,  ON.  geisli.  A  likening
of  the  gods  to  radiant  luminaries  of  heaven  would  at  once  suggest
such  a  nimbus,  and  blond  locks  do  shine  like  rays.  It  is  in  con-
inexion  with  the  setting  sun  that  Tac.  Germ.  45  brings  in  formas
deorum  and  radios  capitis.  Around  Thor's  head  was  put,  latterly  at
all  events,  a  ring  of  stars  (Stephanii  not.  ad  Saxon.  Gram.  p.  139).
According  to  a  story  told  in  the  Galien  restore",  a  beam  came  out  of
Oharles  the  Great's  mouth  and  illumined  his  head.3  What  seems
nore  to  the  purpose,  among  the  Prilwitz  figures,  certain  Slavic
dols,  especially  Perun,  Podaga  and  Nemis,  have  rays  about  their


1  0.  Muller's  archaeol.  p.  481.

2  Getting,  anz.  1838,  229.

3  This  beam  from  Charles's  mouth  is  like  the  one  that  shines  into   his
beloved's  mouth  and  lights  up  the  gold  inside  (see  ch.  XVI.,  Menni).


324  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

heads  ;  and  a  head  in  Hagenow,  fig.  6,  12  is  encircled  with  rays,  so
is  even  the  rune  E  when  it  stands  for  Eadegast.  Did  rays  originally
express  the  highest  conception  of  divine  and  lustrous  beauty  ?
There  is  nothing  in  the  Homeric  epos  at  all  pointing  that  way  (see
SuppL).

It  is  a  part  of  that  insouciance  and  light  blood  of  the  gods,  that
they   are   merry,  and   laugh.      Hence   they   are  called  blift  regin
(p.  26),  as  we  find  *  froh  '  in  the  sense  of  gracious  applied  to  gods
and  kings,1  and  the  spark  of  joy  is  conveyed  from  gods  to  men.
Frauja,  lord,  is  next  of  kin  to  froh  glad  (p.  210).     It  is  said  of  the
Ases,  teitir  varo,  Seem.  2a  ;  and  of  Heimdall,  dreckr  gla&r  hinn  g65a
mioS  41b.     And  '  in  svdso  guS  '  33a  contains  a  similar  notion.     In
this  light  the  passages  quoted  (pp.  17-8)  on  the  blithe  and  cheerful
God  gather  a  new  importance  :   it  is  the  old  heathen  notion  still
lurking  in  poetry.     When  Zeus  in  divine  repose  sits  on  Olympus
and  looks  down  on  men,  he  is  nioved  to  mirth  (opowv  fypeva  rep-vjro-
pai,  II.  20,  23),  then  laughs  the  blessed  heart  of  him  (eyeXacrae  Be
ol  <f)i\ov  r)Top,  21,  389)  ;   which  is  exactly  the  Eddie  '  hlo  honum
hugr  i  briosti,  hlo  HlorriSa  hugr  i  briosti/  laughed  the  mind  in  hi
breast  :  a  fresh  confirmation  of  the  essential  oneness  of  Zeus  am
Thorr.     But  it  is  also  said  of  heroes  :  '  hlo  J?a  Atla  hugr  i  briosti
Ssem.  238b.     '  hlo  J?a  Brynhildr  af  ollum  hug/  with  all  her  hear
220a.     OS.   '  hugi  ward   fromod,'  Hel.  109,  7.     AS.  '  mod   ahloh
Andr.  454.     Later,  in  the  Eudlieb  2,  174.  203.     3,  17  the  king  ii
his  speech  is  said  subridere  ;    in  the  Nibel.  423,  2  ol  Brunhild
'  mit  smielinden  munde  si  iiber  ahsel  sah,'  looked  over  her  shoulder
Often  in  the  song  of  the  Cid:  '  sonrisose  de  la  boca,'  and  '  alegre  era'.
@v/j,o<;  IdvOrj,  II.  23,  600  ;  conf.  dvpov  laivov,  Hymn,  in  Cer.  435
Half  in  displeasure   Here  laughs  with  her  lips,  not   her  brows
eyeXacrae  xeiXeviv,  ov&e  fiercoTrov  eV   o<j)pv(Ti  Kvaveyaw  lavdrj,  I.
15,  102  ;   but  Zeus  feels  joy  in  sending  out  his  lightnings,  he  i
called  repiTLKepavvos  2,    781.     8,  2.  773.     20,    144.     So   Artemi
(Diana)  is  lo%eaipa,  rejoicing  in  arrows,  6,  428.     21,  480.     Od.  11
198.     At  the  limping  of  Hephaestus,  the  assembly  of  gods  burst
into  a<7/3eo-To?  76X0)?,  uncontrolled  laughter,  II.  1,  599  ;  but  a  gentl
smile   (jjiei&av)   is    peculiar   to   Zeus,   Here   and   Aphrodite.      A


1  Andreas  and  Elene  p.  xxxvii.

2  Helbl.  7,  518  :  diu  warheit  des  erlachet,  truth  laughs  at  that.


MIRTH.      GAIT.      PACE.  325


Aphrodite's  beauty  is  expressed  by  ^tXo^etS^?,  smile-loving  (II.  4,

10.  5,  375),  so  is  Freyja's  on  the  contrary  by  '  gratfogr/  fair  in
weeping  (see  Suppl.).

We  have  to  consider  next  the  manner  in  which  the  gods  put
themselves  in  motion  and  become  visible  to  the  eyes  of  mortals.
We  find  they  have  a  gait  and  step  like  the  human,  only  far  mightier
and  swifter.  The  usual  expressions  are  ftij,  {3fj  L/juev,  @fj  Ikvai,  II.
1,  44.  2,  14.  14,  188.  24,  347,  faffjicei,  1,  221,  tfa  14,  224,  j3dr7]v
5,  778,  Prjrrji'  14,  281,  iroal  7rpo/3i/3d<?  13,  18,  TrpovefifaeTo  2,  48.
14,  292,  tcarepjo-eTo  13,  17,  aTrepfaero  2,  35;  and  in  the  Edda
gengr,  Saam.  9a,  gek  100a,  gengo  70a  71b,  gengengo  la  5a,  or  else  for
31a  31b  53a  75a,  this  fara  meaning  no  more  than  ire,  proficisci,  and
OSinn  was  even  called  Gangleri,  Ssem.  32.  Sn.  24,  i.e.,  the  walker,
traveller  ;  the  AS.  poets  use  gewdt  (evasit,  abiit)  or  siffdde  of  God
returning  to  heaven,  Andr.  118.  225.  977.  El.  94-5.  But  how
enormously  the  walk  of  the  gods  differs  from  the  common,  we  see
in  the  instance  of  Poseidon,  who  goes  an  immense  distance  in  three
steps,  II.  13,  20,  or  that  of  the  Indian  Vishnu,  who  in  three  paces
traverses  earth,  air  and  sky.  From  such  swiftness  there  follows
next  the  sudden  appearance  and  disappearance  of  the  gods;  for
which  our  older  speech  seems  to  have  used  Goth,  hvairban,  OHG.
huerban,  AS.  hweorfan  (verti,  ferri,  rotari)  :  '  hwearf  him  to
heofenum  halig  dryhten  '  says  Csedm.  16,  8  ;  and  '  Oomn  hvarf  J?a,'
vanished,  Saem.  47.  Homer  employs,  to  express  the  same  thing,
either  the  .verb  ataaco  (impetu  feror),  or  the  adverbs  icapiraXifuos
(as  if  dp7ra\^a>9  raptim)  and  Kparnvw  raptim.  Thus  Athene
or  Here  comes  at%aaa,  Od.  1,  102.  II.  2,  167.  4,  74.  19,  114.
22,  187  ;  Thetis,  the  dream,  Athene,  Here,  all  appear  icafyiraXi^^

11.  1,  359.     2,  17.  168.     5,  868.     19,  115.     Od.  2,  406;  Poseidon
and  Here  tcpanrvd,  Kpaiirvfa,  II.  13,  18.     14.  292  ;  even  Zeus,  when
he  rises  from  his  throne  to  look  on  the   earth,  o-rfj  avat&s  15,  6.
So  Holda  and  Berhta  suddenly  stand  at  the  window  (p.  274).     Much
in  the  same  way  I  understand  the  expression  used  in  Saem.  53a  of
Thorr  and  Tyr  :  foro  driugom  (ibant  tractim,  raptim,  e\/cr)S6v\  for
driugr  is  from  driuga,  Goth,  driugan   trahere,  whence  also  Goth.
draiihts,  OHG.  truht  turba,  agmen,  ON.  draugr  larva,  phantasma,
OHG.   gitroc    fallacia,  because   a   spectre   appears    and  vanishes
quickly  in  the  air.     At  the  same  time  it  means  the  rush  and  din


326  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

that  betoken  the  god's  approach,  the  worn  a  and  onii  above,  from
which  O'Sinn  took  a  name  (p.  144-5).  The  rapid  movement  of
descending  gods  is  sometimes  likened  to  a  shooting  star,  or  the
flight  of  birds,  II.  4,  75.  15,  93.  237  ;  hence  they  often  take  even
the  form  of  some  bird,  as  Tharapila  the  Osilian  god  flew  (p.  77).
Athene  flies  away  in  the  shape  of  a  apirrj  (falcon  ?),  II.  19,  350,  an
opvw  bird,  Od.  1,  320,  or  a  (prjvij  osprey,  3,  372  ;  as  a  swallow  she
perches  (efer'  avat^aaa)  on  the  house's  peXaOpov  22,  239.  The
exchange  of  the  human  form  for  that  of  a  bird,  when  the  gods  are
departing  and  no  longer  need  to  conceal  their  wondrous  being,
tallies  exactly  with  Gain's  taking  his  flight  as  a  falcon,  after  he
had  in  the  shape  of  Gestr  conversed  and  quarrelled  with  HeiSreckr:
viSbrast  i  veils  liki,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  487;  but  it  is  also  retained  in
many  stories  of  the  devil,  who  assumes  at  departure  the  body  of  a
raven  or  a  fly  (exit  tanquam  corvus,  egressus  est  in  muscae
similitudine).  At  other  times,  and  this  is  the  prettier  touch  of  the
two,  the  gods  allow  the  man  to  whom  they  have  appeared  as  his
equals,  suddenly  as  they  are  going,  to  become  aware  of  their  divine
proportions  :  heel,  calf,  neck  or  shoulder  betrays  the  god.  "When
Poseidon  leaves  the  two  Ajaxes,  one  of  them  says,  II.  13,  71  :
i%via  <yap  fjieTOTTicrde  TTO^WV  r)$e  KVIHJLCKDV
pel'  €<yvo)v  air  lovros'  aplyvcoroi  Se  Oeol  ire  p.
So,  when  Venus  leaves  Aeneas,  Virg.  1,  402  :

Dixit,  et  avertens  rosea  cervice  refulsit
et  vera  incessu  patuit  dea.     I  lie  ubi  matrem
agnovit,  tali  fugientem  est  voce  secutus.
So,  II.  3,  396,  Alexander  recognises  the


d  #'  l/juepoevra  KOL  o/Jifjuara
And  in  ON.  legend,  Hallbiorn  on  awaking  sees  the  shoulder  of  a
figure  in  his  dream  before  it  vanishes  :  }?ykist  sia  a  herSar  honuin,
Fornald.  sog.  3,  103  ;  as  is  likewise  said  in  Olaf  the  saint's  saga
cap.  199.  ed.  Holm.,  while  the  Fornm.  sog.  5,  38  has  it  :  sia  svip
mannsins  er  a  brutt  gekk  ;  conf.  os  humerosque  deo  similis,  Aen.  1,
589.  This  also  lingers  in  our  devil-stories:  at  the  Evil  one's
departure  his  cloven  hoof  suddenly  becomes  visible,  the  lyyia  of
the  ancient  god.

As  the  incessus  of  Venus  declared  the  goddess,  the  motion  (f#/xa)
of  Here  and  Athene  is  likened  to  that  of  timorous  doves,  II.  5,  778.


FLIGHT.      VEHICLES.      HORSES.  327

But  the  gliding  of  the  gods  over  such  immense  distances  must  have
seemed  from  first  to  last  like  flying,  especially  as  their  departure
was  expressly  prepared  for  by  the  assumption  of  a  bird's  form.  It
is  therefore  easy  to  comprehend  why  two  several  deities,  Hermes
and  Athene,  are  provided  with  peculiar  sandals  (TreSiXa),  whose
motive  power  conveys  them  over  sea  and  land  with  the  speed  of
wind,  II.  24,  341.  Od.  1,  97.  5,  45 ;  we  are  expressly  told  that
Hermes  flew  with  them  (Trereto,  II.  24,  345.  Od.  5,  49);
plastic  art  represents  them  as  winged  shoes,  and  at  a  later  time  adds
a  pair  of  wings  to  the  head  of  Hermes.1  These  winged  sandals
then  have  a  perfect  right  to  be  placed  side  by  side  with  the  feather-
shift  (fiaSrhamr)  which  Freyja  possessed,  and  which  at  Thor's
request  she  lent  to  Loki  for  his  flight  to  lotunheim,  Saem.  70a>b ;
but  as  Freyja  is  more  than  once  confounded  with  Frigg  (p.  302),
other  legends  tell  us  that  Loki  flew  off  in  the  '  valsham  Friggjar,'
Sn.  113.  I  shall  come  back  to  these  falcon  or  swan  coats  in
another  connexion,  but  their  resemblance  to  the  Greek  pedlla
is  unmistakable;  as  Loki  is  here  sent  as  a  messenger  from  the
gods  to  the  giants,  he  is  so  far  one  with  Hermes,  and  Freyja's
feather-shift  suggests  the  sandals  of  Athene.  Sn.  132-7:  'Loki
atti  skda,  er  hann  rann  d  lopt  ok  log!  had  shoes  in  which  he  ran
through  air  and  fire.  It  was  an  easy  matter,  in  a  myth,  for  the
investiture  with  winged  hamr  or  sandals  to  glide  insensibly  into
an  actual  assumption  of  a  bird's  form  :  GeirroSr  catches  the  flying
Loki  as  a  veritable  bird,  Sn.  113,  and  when  Athene  starts  to  fly,
she  is  a  swallow  (see  Suppl.).

The  mighty  gods  would  doubtless  have  moved  whithersoever  it
pleased  them,  without  wings  or  sandals,  but  simple  antiquity  was
not  content  with  even  these :  the  human  race  used  carriages  and
horses,  and  the  gods  cannot  do  without  them  either.  On  this  point
a  sensible  difference  is  to  be  found  between  the  Greek  and  German
mythologies.

All  the  higher  divinities  of  the  Greeks  have  a  chariot  and  pair
ascribed  to  them,  as  their  kings  and  heroes  in  battle  also  fight  in
chariots.  An  o^rjfia  for  the  god  of  thunder  would  at  once  be
suggested  by  the  natural  phenomenon  itself ;  and  the  conception  of
the  sun-chariot  driven  by  Helios  must  also  be  very  ancient.  The

1  0.  Miiller's  archseol.  559.


328  CONDITION   OF   GODS.

car  of  Here,  and  how  she  harnesses  her  steeds  to  it,  mounts  it  in
company  with  Athene,  and  guides  it,  is  gorgeously  depicted  in  II.
5,  720-76  ;  so  likewise  Demeter  and  Kora  appear  seated  in  a
carriage.  Hermes  is  drawn  by  rams,1  as  the  Norse  Thorr  [by  he-
goats].  The  Okeanides  too  have  their  vehicle,  Aesch.  Prom.  135.
But  never  are  Zeus,  Apollo,  Hermes  or  any  of  the  most  ancient
gods  imagined  riding  on  horseback ;  it  is  Dionysos,  belonging  to  a
different  order  of  deities,  that  first  rides  a  panther,  as  Silenus  does
the  ass,  and  godlike  heroes  such  as  Perseus,  Theseus,  and  above  all,
the  Dioscuri  are  mounted  on  horses.  Okeanos  bestrides  a  winged
steed,  Prom.  395.  It  seems  worth  remarking,  that  modern  Greek
legend  represents  even  Charon  as  mounted.

In  Teutonic  mythology  the  riding  of  gods  is  a  far  commoner
thing.  In  the  Merseburg  poem  both  Wuotan  and  Phol  ride  in  the
forest,  which  is  not  at  all  inconsistent  with  the  word  used,  '  faran  ' ;
for  it  is  neither  conceivable  that  Wuotan  drove  while  Balder  rode,
nor  that  Balder  drove  a  one-horse  carriage.  Even  Hartmann  von
Aue  still  imagines  God  riding  a  horse,  and  contented  with  Enit  for
his  groom  (p.  18).  Among  those  that  ride  in  the  Edda  are  Oftinn
(who  saddles  his  Sleipnir  for  himself,  Ssem.  93a),  Baldr  and
HermoSr ;  in  Sse-m.  44a  and  Sn.  18  are  given  the  names  of  ten  other
horses  as  well,  on  which  the  Ases  daily  ride  to  council,  one  of  them
being  HeimdalTs  Gulltoppr,  Sn.  30.  66 ;  the  owners  of  the  rest  are
not  specified,  but,  as  there  were  twelve  Ases  and  only  eleven  horses
are  named,  it  follows  that  each  of  those  gods  had  his  mount,  except
Thorr,  who  is  invariably  introduced  either  driving  or  walking  (p.
167),  and  when  he  gets  Gullfaxi  as  spoil  from  Hrungnir,  gives  him
away  to  his  son  Magni,  Sn.  110.  OSin's  horse  leaps  a  hedge  seven
ells  high,  Fornni.  sog.  10,  56.  175.  Even  the  women  of  the  gods
are  mounted :  the  valkyrs,  like  OSinn,  ride  through  air  and  water,
Sn.  107,  Ereyja  and  Hyndla  on  a  boar  and  a  wolf,  as  enchantresses
and  witches  are  imagined  riding  a  wolf,  a  he-goat  or  a  cat.  Night
(fern.)  had  a  steed  Hrimfaxi,  rimy-mane,  as  Day  (masc.)  had
Skinfaxi,  shiny-mane.

At  the  same  time  carriages  are  mentioned  too,  especially  for
goddesses  (p.  107).  The  sacred  car  of  Nerthus  was  drawn  by  cows,
that  of  Freyja  by  cats,  Holda  and  Berhta  are  commonly  found
driving  waggons  which  they  get  mended,  the  fairies  in  our  nursery  -

1  0.  Muller's  archccol.  5G3.


VEHICLES.      HOUSES.  329

tales  travel  through  the  air  in  coaches,  and  Brynhildr  drives  in  her
waggon  to  the  nether  world,  Ssem.  227.  The  image  of  a  Gothic
deity  in  a  waggon  was  alluded  to  on  p.  107 ;  among  the  gods,
Freyr  is  expressly  described  as  mounted  on  his  car,  while  Thorr
has  a  waggon  drawn  by  he-goats :  on  Woden's  waggon,  conf.  p.
151  (see  SuppL).

When  we  consider,  that  waggons  were  proper  to  the  oldest
kings  also,  especially  the  Frankish  kings,  and  that  their  riding  on
horseback  is  nowhere  mentioned ;  it  seems  probable  that  originally
a  similar  equipage  was  alone  deemed  suitable  to  the  gods,  and  their
riding  crept  in  only  gradually  in  the  coarser  representations  of  later
times.  From  heroes  it  was  transferred  to  gods,  though  this  must
have  been  done  pretty  early  too,  as  we  may  venture  to  allow  a
considerable  antiquity  to  the  story  of  Sleipnir  and  that  of  Balder's
horse  or  foal.  The  Slavs  also  generally  furnished  their  god
Svantovit  with  a  horse  to  ride  on.

Some  few  divinities  made  use  of  a  ship,  as  may  be  seen  by  the
stories  of  Athene's  ship  and  that  of  Isis,  and  Frey's  Ski5bla5nir,
the  best  of  all  ships,  Ssem.  45b.

But  whichever  way  the  gods  might  move,  on  earth,  through  air
or  in  water,  their  walk  and  tread,  their  riding  and  driving  is
represented  as  so  vehement,  that  it  produces  a  loud  noise,  and  the
din  of  the  elements  is  explained  by  it.  The  driving  of  Zeus  or
Thorr  awakens  thunder  in  the  clouds ;  mountains  and  forests
tremble  beneath  Poseidon's  tread,  II.  13,  18  ;  when  Apollo  lets
himself  down  from  the  heights  of  Olympus,  arrows  and  bow  clatter
(efc\ay%av)  on  his  shoulder  1,  44,  Sewi)  Se  /c\a<yyrj  lyeyer'  apyvpeoio
f$iolo,  dreadful  was  the  twang  of  his  silver  bow  1,  49.  In  the  lays
of  the  Edda  this  stirring  up  of  nature  is  described  in  exactly  the
same  way,  while  the  AS.  and  OHG.  writings,  owing  to  the  earlier
extinction  of  heathen  notions,  have  preserved  no  traces  of  it :
'  framm  reiS  OSinn,  foldvegr  dundi/  forth  rode  0.,  earth's  way
thundered,  Seem.  94a ;  '  biorg  brotnoSo,  brann  iorft  loga,  6k  Oblns
sonr  i  lotunheima,'  mountains  crumbled,  earth  blazed,  when  rode,
&c.  73a ;  '  no  Loki,  fiaSrhamr  dundi,'  the  wing-coat  whirred,  70a
71a  ;  '  ior5  bifaz  (quaked),  enn  allir  for  scialfa  garSar  Gymis  '  when
Skirnir  came  riding  83a.  The  rage  and  writhing  of  gods  who  were
bound  produced  equally  tremendous  effects  (p.  246).


330  CONDITION  OF  GODS.

On  the  other  hand,  delightful  and  salutary  products  of  nature
are  also  traced  to  the  immediate  influence  of  the  gods.  Flowers
spring  up  where  their  feet  have  strayed ;  on  the  spot  where  Zeus
clasped  Here  in  his  arms,  shot  up  a  thick  growth  of  sweet  herbs
and  flowers,  and  glittering  dewdrops  trickled  down,  II.  14,  346 — 51.
So,  when  the  valkyrs  rode  through  the  air,  their  horses'  manes
shook  fruitful  dew  on  the  deep  vales  below,  Saem.  145b ;  or  it  falls
nightly  from  the  bit  of  Hrimfaxi's  bridle  32b  (see  Suppl.).

Of  one  thing  there  is  scarcely  a  trace  in  our  mythology,  though
it  occurs  so  often  in  the  Greek :  that  the  gods,  to  screen  themselves
from  sight,  shed  a  mist  round  themselves  or  their  favourites  who
are  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  enemy's  eye,  II.  3,  381.  5,  776.  18,
205.  21,  549.  597.  It  is  called  rjepi  KaXvirreiv,  yepa  ^elv,  afavv  or
vefos  a-Tefaiv,  and  the  contrary  d^Kvv  ovce8a£etz>  to  scatter,  chase
away,  the  mist.  We  might  indeed  take  this  into  account,  that  the
same  valkyrs  who,  like  the  Servian  vily,  favour  and  shield  their
beloved  heroes  in  battle,  were  able  to  produce  clouds  and  hail  in
the  air ;  or  throw  into  the  reckoning  our  tarnkappes  and  helidhelms,
whose  effect  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  mist.  And  the  Norse
gods  do  take  part  with  or  against  certain  heroes,  as  much  as  the
Greek  gods  before  Ilion.  In  the  battle  of  Bravik,  OSinn  mingled
with  the  combatants,  and  assumed  the  figure  of  a  charioteer  Bruni ;
Saxo  Gram.,  p.  146.  Fornald.  sog.  1,  380.  The  Grimnismal  makes
Geirroftr  the  protege  (fostri)  of  OSinn,  Agnarr  that  of  Frigg,  and
the  two  deities  take  counsel  together  concerning  them,  Ssem.  39 ;  in
the  Vols.  saga  cap.  42,  OSinn  suggests  the  plan  for  slaying  the  sons
of  lonakr.  The  Greek  gods  also,  when  they  drew  nigh  to  counsel
or  defend,  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  human  warrior,  a  herald,  an
old  man,  or  they  made  themselves  known  to  their  hero  himself,
but  not  to  others.  In  such  a  case  they  stand  before,  beside  or
behind  him  (irapd,  II.  2,  279.  tyyvOi,  Od.  1,  120.  o^oO,  II.  2,  172.
3,  129.  4,  92.  5, 123.  Trp6v6ev  4,  129.  fai6ev  1, 197) ;  Athene  leads
by  the  hand  through  the  battle,  and  wards  the  arrows  off  4,  52 ;
she  throws  the  dreadful  aegis  round  Achilles  18,  204;  Aphrodite
shields  Aeneas  by  holding  her  veil  before  him  5,  315;  and  other
heroes  are  removed  from  the  midst  of  the  fray  by  protecting
deities  (p.  320).  Venus  makes  herself  visible  to  Hippomenes  alone,
Ovid  Met.  10,  650.  Now  they  appear  in  friendly  guise,  Od.  7,  201


SLEEP.      SICKNESS.      LAUGHTER.  331

seq.  ;  now  clothed  in  terror  :   %a\e7rol  Be  Oeol  <f>atveaOcu  evapyels,
II.  20,  131  (see  Suppl.).

The  Iliad,  14,  286  seq.,  relates  how"T7n/o<?  (sleep),  sitting  in  the
shape  of  a  song-bird  on  the  boughs  of  a  fir-tree  on  Mt.  Ida,  over
powers  the  highest  of  all  the  gods  ;  other  passages  show  that  the
gods  went  to  their  beds  every  night,  and  partook  like  men  of  the
benefit  of  sleep,  II.  1,  609.  2,  2.  24,  677.  Still'  less  can  it  be
doubted  of  the  Norse  gods,  that  they  too  slept  at  night  :  Thorr  on
his  journeys  looks  out  for  night-lodging,  Sn.  50  ;  of  Heimdall  alone
is  it  said,  that  he  needs  less  sleep  than  a  bird,  Sn.  30.  And  from
this  sway  of  sleep  over  the  gods  follows  again,  what  was  maintained
above,  that  of  death  :  Death  is  the  brother  of  Sleep.  Besides,  the
gods  fell  a  prey  to  diseases.  Freyr  was  sick  with  love,  and  his
great  hugsott  (mind-sickness)  awakened  the  pity  of  all  the  gods.
Oolnn,  Niorcr  and  Freyr,  according  to  the  Yngl.  saga  10.  11.  12,  all
sink  under  sicknesses  (sottdauolr).  Aphrodite  and  Ares  receive
wounds,  II.  5,  330.  858  ;  these  are  quickly  healed  [yet  not  without
medical  aid].  A  curious  story  tells  how  the  Lord  God,  having
fallen  sick,  descends  from  heaven  to  earth  to  get  cured,  and  comes
to  Arras  ;  there  minstrels  and  merryandrews  receive  commands  to
amuse  him,  and  one  manages  so  cleverly,  that  the  Lord  bursts  out
laughing  and  finds  himself  rid  of  his  distemper.1  This  may  be  very
ancient  ;  for  in  the  same  way,  sick  daughters  of  kings  in  nursery-
tales  are  made  to  laugh  by  beggars  and  fiddlers,  and  so  is  the
goddess  Skaol  in  the  Edda  by  Loki's  juggling  tricks,  when  mourning
the  death  of  her  father,  Sn.  82.  lambe  cheered  the  sorrowing
Demeter,  and  caused  her,  TTO\\CL  Trapao-KcoTrrovcra,  yLtet8r}crat  ye\dcrat,
re,  Kal  fi\aov  a-^elv  Ovpov,  Hymn,  in  Cer.  203  (see  Suppl.).

Important  above  all  are  the  similar  accounts,  given  by  Greek
antiquity  and  by  our  own,  of  the  language  of  the  gods.  Thus,
passages  in  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey  distinguish  between  the
divine  and  human  names  for  the  same  object  :

ov  Bpidpeajv  KoXiovari  Oeol,  avbpes  Be  re  Trdvres

Afyauov.     II.  1,  403.

rrjv  r}Toi  avbpes  Barieiav


1  De  la  venue  de  Dieu  a  Arras,  in  Jubinal's  Nouveau  recueil  de  contes  2,
377-8.


332  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

uOdvaroi  Se  re  crf;//,a  irokvaKapOfJioio  Mvphnfi.     2,  813.

%a\KiBa  KiK\.rj(TKOvo'i,  Oeoi,  av&pes  8e  K.UJJLIV&IV.     14,  291.

bv  ttdvOov  Ka\eovcTi  6eoi,  civSpes  Se  2 fcdfjiavSpov.     20,  74.1

/jiw\v  £e  /LUV  Kokeovcri  6eoL     Od.  10,  305.

A  whole  song  in  the  Edda  is  taken  up  with  comparing  the  languages,
not  only  of  gods  and  men,  but  of  Vanir,  elves,  dwarfs,  giants  and
subterraneans,  and  that  not  in  a  few  proper  names  and  rare  words,
but  in  a  whole  string  of  names  for  the  commonest  objects.     At  the
very  outset  it  surprises  us,  that  while  goS  and  sesir  are  treated  as
synonymous,  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  goS  and  ginregin.     In
13  strophes  are  given  78  terms  in  all:  on  examining  these,  it  soon
appears  that  the  variety  of  names  (six)  for  each  thing  simply  comes
of   the  richness  of  the  Teutonic   tongue,  and  cannot  possibly  be
ascribed  to   old   remnants   or   later  borrowings  from   any  Finnic,
Celtic  or  Slavic  languages.     They  are  synonyms  or  poetic  names,
which  are  distributed  among  six  or  eight  orders  of  beings  endowed
with  speech,  according  to  the  exigencies  of  alliteration,  not  from
their  belonging  to  the  same  class,  such  as  poetical  or  prose.     I  will
illustrate  this  by  quoting  the  strophe  on  the  names  for  a  cloud :
sc$  heitir  meS  mb'nnom,  en  scdrvdn  meS  goSom,
kalla  vindflot  Vanir,
drvdn  iotnar,  alfar  veffrmegin,
kalla  i  heljo  liidlm  huliz.

Everything  here  is  Teutonic,  and  still  the  resources  of  our  language
are  not  exhausted  by  a  long  way,  to  say  nothing  of  what  it  may
have  borrowed  from  others.  The  only  simple  word  is  sky,  still
used  in  the  Scandinavian  dialects,  and  connected  with  skuggi  umbra,
AS.  scuwa,  scua,  OHG.  scuwo.  The  rest  are  all  appropriate  and
intelligible  periphrases.  Scurvan  [shower-weening]  pluviae  expec-
tatio,  from  skur  imber,  Germ,  schauer ;  urvan  just  the  same,  from
ur  pluvia,  with  which  compare  the  literal  meaning  of  Sanskr.
abhra  nubes,  viz.  aquam  gerens.2  Vindflot  is  apparently  navigium
venti,  because  the  winds  sail  through  the  air  on  clouds.  Veftrmegin
transposed  is  exactly  the  OHG.  maganwetar  turbo ;  and  hialmr

1  Perhaps  we  ought  also  to  reckon  aierdy  and  Trepwos  24,  316,  which  is  no
mere  eVkAijo-is  as  in  7,  138.  18,  487  (Od.  5,  273).  22,  29.  506,  though  'A0ru6<0{
in  this  last  passage  happens  to  have  2/ca/iai/dptos  (6,  402)  answering  to  it,  as
Sdvdos  has  2/ca/iai/8pO£.

8  Bopp,  gloss,  saiiskr.  16&  209a.


LANGUAGE.  333

huliz  appears  elsewhere  as  hulizhialmr,  OS.  lielith-helm,  a  tarn-
helmet,  grima,  mask,  which  wraps  one  in  like  a  mist  or  cloud.  Of
course  the  Teutonic  tongue  could  offer  several  other  words  to  stand
for  cloud,  beside  those  six ;  e.g.,  nifl,  OHG.  nebal,  Lat.  nebula,  Gr.
ve^eX-rj ;  Goth,  milhma,  Swed.  moln,  Dan.  mulm ;  Sansk.  megha,
Gr.  o/u^X?7,  o/AixXij,  Slav,  megla  ;  OHG.  wolchan,  AS.  wolcen,  which
is  to  Slav,  oblako  as  miluk,  milk,  to  Slav,  mleko ;  ON.  J?oka  nebula,
Dan.  taage ;  M.Dut.  swerk  nubes,  OS.  gisuerc,  caligo,  nimbus ;  AS.
hoSma  nubes,  Beow.  4911.  And  so  it  is  with  the  other  twelve
objects  whose  names  are  discussed  in  the  Alvismal.  Where  simple
words,  like  sol  and  sunna,  mani  and  skin,  or  iord  and  fold,  are
named  together,  one  might  attempt  to  refer  them  to  different
dialects :  the  periphrases  in  themselves  show  no  reason  (unless
mythology  found  one  for  them),  why  they  should  be  assigned  in
particular  to  gods  or  men,  giants  or  dwarfs.  The  whole  poem
brings  before  us  an  acceptable  list  of  pretty  synonyms,  but  throws
no  light  on  the  primitive  affinities  of  our  language.

Plato  in  the  Cratylus  tries  hard  to  understand  that  division  of
Greek  words  into  divine  and  human.  A  duality  of  proper  names,
like  Briareos  and  Aigaion,  reminds  us  of  the  double  forms  Hler  and
Oegir  (p.  240),  Ymir  and  Oergelmir,  which  last  Sn.  6  attributes  to  the
Hrimjwrses ;  ISunn  would  seem  by  Saem.  89ar  to  be  an  Elvish
word,  but  we  do  not  hear  of  any  other  name  for  the  goddess.  In
the  same  way  Xanthus  and  Skamander,  Batieia  and  Myrina  might
be  the  different  names  of  a  thing  in  different  dialects.  More
interesting  are  the  double  names  for  two  birds,  the  %a\/a9  or
Kv/uLivSw  (corif.  Plin.  10,  10),  and  the  atero?  and  Trepicvos.  Xa\/ci<;
is  supposed  to  signify  some  bird  of  prey,  a  hawk  or  owl,  which  does
not  answer  to  the  description  opins  \<,<yvpd  (piping),  and  the  myth
requires  a  bird  that  in  sweet  and  silvery  tones  sings  one  to  sleep,
like  the  nightingale.  Ilepicvos  means  dark-coloured,  which  suits
the  eagle ;  to  imagine  it  the  bird  of  the  thundergod  Perkun,  would
be  too  daring.  Poetic  periphrases  there  are  none  among  these
Greek  words.

The  principal  point  seems  to  be,  that  the  popular  beliefs  of
Greeks  and  Teutons  agree  in  tracing  obscure  words  and  those
departing  from  common  usage  to  a  distinction  between  divine  and
human  speech.  The  Greek  scholiasts  suppose  that  the  poet,
holding  converse  with  the  Muses,  is  initiated  into  the  language  of


334  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

gods,1  and  where  he  finds  a  twofold  nomenclature,  he  ascribes  the
older,  nobler,  more  euphonious  (TO  Kpel-rrov,  evfywvov,  Trpoyevecr-
repov  ovofjio)  to  the  gods,  the  later  and  meaner  (TO  e\arrov,  f^era-
yevea-Tepov)  to  men.  But  the  four  or  five  instances  in  Homer  are
even  less  instructive  than  the  more  numerous  ones  of  the  Norse
lay.  Evidently  the  opinion  was  firmly  held,  that  the  gods,  though
of  one  and  the  same  race  with  mortals,  so  far  surpassed  living  men
in  age  and  dignity,  that  they  still  made  use  of  words  which  had
latterly  died  out  or  suffered  change.  As  the  line  of  a  king's
ancestors  was  traced  up  to  a  divine  stock,  so  the  language  of  gods
was  held  to  be  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  men,  but  right  feeling
would  assign  to  the  former  such  words  as  had  gradually  disappeared
among  men.  The  Alvismal,  as  we  have  seen,  goes  farther,  and
reserves  particular  words  for  yet  other  beings  beside  the  gods ;
what  I  maintained  on  p.  218  about  the  impossibility  of  denying  the
Vanir  a  Teutonic  origin,  is  confirmed  by  our  present  inquiry. — That
any  other  nation,  beside  Greeks  and  Teutons,  believed  in  a  separate
language  of  gods,  is  unknown  to  me,  and  the  agreement  of  these
two  is  the  more  significant.  When  Ovid  in  Met.  11,  640  says  :
Hunc  Icelon  superi,  mortale  Phobetora  vulgus  nominat,  this  is
imitated  from  the  Greeks,  as  the  very  names  show  (see  Suppl.).
The  Indians  trace  nothing  but  their  alphabet  (devanagari,  deva-
writing),  as  our  forefathers  did  the  mystery  of  runes  (p.  149),  to  a
divine  origin,  and  the  use  of  the  symbol  may  be  connected  with
that  of  the  sound  itself ;  with  the  earliest  signs,  why  should  not
the  purest  and  oldest  expressions  too  be  attributed  to  gods  ?
Homer's  eirea  Trrepoevra  (winged  words)  belong  to  heroes  and  other
men  as  well  as  to  gods,  else  we  might  interpret  them  strictly  of  the
ease  and  nimbleness  with  which  the  gods  wield  the  gift  of  speech.

Beside  language,  the  gods  have  customs  in  common  with  men.
They  love  song  and  play,  take  delight  in  hunting,  war  and  banquets,
and  the  goddesses  in  ploughing,  weaving,  spinning ;  both  of  them
keep  servants  and  messengers.  Zeus  causes  all  the  other  gods  to  be
summoned  to  the  assembly  (dyop;,  II.  8,  2.  20,  4),  just  as  the  Ases


1  iy  p.ov(TOTpa(pr)s  <al  ray  Trapa  deols  tViorarat  Ae'£eiy,  oiSe  TTJV  TWV  6e£)v
8id\€KTOv,  olSe  TO.  TU>V  6ewv  (ov6p,aTa),  as  VTTO  p.ovcrwv  Karanvfap-fvos.  6i\cov  6
irotrjTrjs  6eZ£at  on  fJiovaoXrjTrTOS  eVrtv,  ov  p.6vov  TO,  TU>V  dvdpwTT&v  ovo^ara  liray-
ye'XXerai  etSeVat,  dXX*  Sxnrfp  KOI  ol  6eoi  Xtyovtrt,


GKADES.      OFFICES.  335

attend  at  the  }?ing  (Soem.  93a),  on  the  rokstola,  and  by  the  Yggdra-
sill  (Stem.  lb  2a  44a),  to  counsel  and  to  judge.  Hebe,  youth,  is
cupbearer  of  the  gods  and  handmaid  to  Here  (II.  5,  722),  as  Fulla
is  to  Frigg  (Sn.  36) ;  the  youth  Ganymede  is  cupbearer  too,  and  so
is  Beyla  at  the  feast  of  the  Ases  (Ssem.  67a);  Skirnir  is  Frey's
shoemaker  (81)  and  messenger,  Beyggvir  and  Beyla  are  also  called
his  servants  (59).  These  services  do  no  detriment  to  their  own
divine  nature.  Beside  Hermes,  the  goddess  Iris  goes,  on  errands
for  the  Greek  gods  (see  Suppl).

Among  the  gods  themselves  there  is  a  difference  of  rank.  Three
sons  of  Kronos  have  the  world  divided  among  them,  the  sky  is
allotted  to  Zeus,  the  sea  to  Poseidon,  hell  to  Hades,  and  the  earth
they  are  supposed  to  share  between  them  (II.  15,  193).  These
three  tower  above  all  the  rest,  like  Har,  lafnhar  and  Thrift!  in  the
Norse  religion,  the  triad  spoken  of  on  p.  162.  This  is  not  the  same
thing  as  '  Wuotan,  Donar,  Ziu/  if  only  because  the  last  two  are  not
brothers  but  sons  of  Wuotan,  although  these  pass  for  the  three
mightiest  gods.  Then,  together  with  this  triad,  we  become  aware
of  a  circle  of  twelve  (p.  26),  a  close  circle  from  which  some  of  the
gods  are  excluded.  Another  division,  that  into  old  and  new  gods,
does  not  by  any  means  coincide  with  this :  not  only  OSinn  and  his
Ases,  but  also  Zeus  and  his  colleagues,  appear  as  upstarts1  to  have
supplanted  older  gods  of  nature  (see  Suppl.).

All  the  divinities,  Greek  and  Norse,  have  offices  and  functions
assigned  them,  which  define  their  dominion,  and  have  had  a  marked
influence  on  their  pictorial  representation.  In  Sn.  27 — 29  these
offices  are  specified,  each  with  the  words :  '  hann  rseftr  fyrir  (he
looks  after)/  or '  a  hann  skal  heita  til,  er  gott  at  heita  til  (to  him
you  shall  pray  for,  it  is  good  to  pray  for) '.  Now,  as  any  remnants
of  Greek  or  Teutonic  paganism  in  the  Mid.  Ages  were  sure  to
connect  themselves  with  some  Christian  '  saints,  to  whom  the
protection  of  certain  classes  or  the  healing  of  certain  diseases  was
carried  over,  'it  is  evident  that  a  careful  classification  of  these
guardian  saints  according  to  the  offices  assigned  them,  on  the
strength  of  which  they  are  good  to  pray  to,2  would  be  of  advan
tage  to  our  antiquities.  And  the  animals  dedicated  to  each

1  Aesch.  Prom.  439  deolai  rols  veois,  955  veov  veoi  Kparetre,  960  TOVS  veovs
6eovs.     Eumen.  156.  748.  799  ol  i/ewrepot  deoi.     Conf.  Otfr.  Miiller,  p.  181.

2  Conf.  Haupt's  zeitschr.  fur  d.  alt.  1,  143-4.


336  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

deified  saint  (as  once  they  were  to  gods)  would  have  to  be  specified
too.

The  favourite  residence  of  each  god  is  particularly  pointed  out
in  the  Grimnismal ;  mountains  especially  were  consecrated  to  the
Teutonic,  as  to  the  Greek  deities:  Sigt^sberg,  Himinbib'rg,  &c.
Olympus  was  peculiarly  the  house  of  Zeus  (Jto?  SCO/JLO),  to  which
the  other  gods  assembled  (II.  1,  494)  ;  on  the  highest  peak  of  the
range  he  would  sit  apart  (arep  a\\wv  1,  498.  5,  753),  loving  to  take
counsel  alone  (d-TrdvevOe  Oe&v  8,  10).  He  had  another  seat  on  Ida
(11, 183.  336),  whence  he  looked  down  to  survey  the  doings  of  men,
as  05inn  did  from  HliSscialf.  Poseidon  sat  on  a  height  in  the
wooded  range  of  Samos  (13,  12).  Valholl  and  Bilskirnir,  the
dwellings  of  OSinn  and  Thorr,  are  renowned  for  their  enormous
size ;  the  one  is  said  to  have  540  doors,  through  any  one  of  which
800  einheriar  can  go  out  at  once,  and  Bilskirnir  has  likewise  540
'  golfe '  [OK  golfr,  floor]  (see  SuppL).

If  now  we  take  in  one  view  the  relations  of  gods  and  men,  we
find  they  meet  and  touch  at  all  points.  As  the  created  being  is
filled  with  a  childlike  sense  of  its  dependence  on  the  creator,  and
prayers  and  offerings  implore  his  favour,  so  deity  too  delights  in  its
creations,  and  takes  in  them  a  fatherly  interest.  Man's  longing
goes  forth  towards  heaven  ;  the  gods  fix  their  gaze  on  the  earth,  to
watch  and  direct  the  doings  of  mortals.  The  blessed  gods  do
commune  with  each  other  in  their  heavenly  abodes,  where  feasts
and  revels  go  on  as  in  earthly  fashion ;  but  they  are  more  drawn  to
men,  whose  destinies  enlist  their  liveliest  sympathy.  It  is  not  true,
what  Mart.  Cap.  says  2,  9  :  ipsi  dicuntur  dii,  et  caelites  alias
perhibentur  .  .  .  nee  admodum  eos  mortalium  curarum  vota
sollicitant,  a7ra0eZ?que  perhibentur.  Not  content  with  making
their  will  known  by  signs  and  messengers,  they  resolve  to  come
down  themselves  and  appear  to  men.  Such  appearance  is  in  the
Hindu  mythology  marked  by  a  special  name:  avatura,  i.e.,  de-
scensus.1

Under  this  head  come  first  the  solemn  car-processions  of  deities
heralding  peace  and  fruitfulness  or  war  and  mischief,  which  for  the
most  part  recur  at  stated  seasons,  and  are  associated  with  popular
festivals ;  on  the  fall  of  heathenism,  only  motherly  wise-women

1  Bopp's  gloss,  sansk.  21a.


DWELLINGS.      INCARNATION.


337


still  go  their  rounds,  and  heroes  ride  through  field  or  air.  More
rarely,  and  not  at  regular  intervals,  there  take  place  journeys  of
gods  through  the  world,  singly  or  in  twos  or  threes,  to  inspect  the
race  of  man,  and  punish  the  crimes  they  have  noticed.  Thus
Mercury  and  OSinn  appeared  on  earth,  or  Heimdall  to  found  the
three  orders,  and  Thorr  visited  at  weddings  ;  Oolnn,  Hoenir  and
Loki  travelled  in  company;  medieval  legend  makes  God  the
Father  seek  a  lodging,  or  the  Saviour  and  St.  Peter,  or  merely
three  angels  (as  the  Servian  song  does,  Vuk  4,  no.  3).  Most
frequent  however  are  the  solitary  appearances  of  gods,  who,  invoked
or  uninvoked,  suddenly  bring  succour  to  their  favoured  ones  in
every  time  of  need  ;  the  Greek  epos  is  quite  full  of  this.  Athene,
Poseidon,  Ares,  Aphrodite  mingle  with  the  warriors,  warning,
advising,  covering  ;  and  just  as  often  do  Mary  and  saints  from
heaven  appear  in  Christian  legends.  The  Lithuanian  Perkunos  also
walks  on  earth  (see  SuppL).

But  when  they  descend,  they  are  not  always  visible  ;  you  may
hear  the  car  of  the  god  rush  by,  and  not  get  sight  of  him  bodily  ;
like  ghosts  the  blessed  gods  flit  past  the  human  eye  unnoticed,  till
the  obstructive  mist  be  removed  from  it.  Athene  seizes  Achilles
by  the  hair,  only  by  him  and  no  other  is  she  seen,  II.  1,  197  ;  to
make  the  succouring  deities  visible  to  Diomed,  she  has  '  taken  the
mist  from  his  eyes,  that  was  on  them  before  '  5,  127  :

8'  av  TOI  air   o(£#aX//,coz/  e\ov,  r)  irplv  eirrjev,
too-Kys  r)fj,ev  Oeov  ?)8e  KOI  avSpa.

Just  so  Biarco,  in  Saxo  Gram.,  p.  37,  is  unable  to  spy  Othin  riding
a  white  steed  and  aiding  the  Swedes,  till  he  peeps  through  the  ring
formed  by  the  arm  of  a  spirit-seeing  woman:  a  medium  that
elsewhere  makes  the  elfin  race  visible  to  the  bleared  eyes  of  man.
In  another  way  the  gods,  even  when  they  showed  themselves
bodily,  concealed  their  divine  nature,  by  assuming  the  form  of  a
human  acquaintance,  or  of  an  animal.  Poseidon  "stept  into  the
host,  disguised  as  Kalchas,  II.  13,  45,  Hermes  escorted  Priam  as  a
Myrmidon  warrior  24,  397,  and  Athene  the  young  Telemachus  as
Mentor.  In  the  same  way  Othin  appeared  as  the  chariot-driver
Bruno  (p.  330),  or  as  a  one-eyed  old  man.  Metamorphoses  of  gods
into  animals  in  Teutonic  mythology  take  place  only  for  a  definite
momentary  purpose,  to  which  the  character  of  the  animal  supplies
the  key  ;  e.g.,  Oftinn  takes  the  shape  of  a  snake,  to  slip  through  a

22


6V


338  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

hole  lie  lias  bored  (Sn.  86),  and  of  an  eagle,  to  fly  away  in  haste
(86),  Loki  that  of  a  fly,  in  order  to  sting  (131),  or  to  creep  through
a  keyhole  (356) ;  no  larger  designs  are  ever  compassed  by  such
means.  So,  when  Athene  flies  away  as  a  bird,  it  expresses  the
divinity  of  her  nature  and  the  suddenness  of  her  departure.  But
the  swan  or  bull,  into  which  Zeus  transformed  himself,  can  only  be
explained  on  the  supposition  that  Leda  too,  and  lo  and  Europa,
whom  he  was  wooing,  were  thought  of  as  swan-maidens  or  kine.
The  form  of  animal  would  then  be  determined  by  the  mythus,  and
the  egg-birth  of  the  Dioscuri  can  be  best  understood  in  this  way
(see  SuppL).

In  the  Asiatic  legends,  it  seems  to  me,  the  manifestations  of
deity  are  conceived  deeply  and  purely  in  comparison,  and  nowhere
more  profoundly  than  in  those  of  India.  The  god  comes  down  and
abides  in  the  flesh  for  a  season,  for  the  salvation  of  mankind.
Wherever  the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis  prevailed,  the  bodies  of
animals  even  were  eligible  for  the  avatara;  and  of  Vishnu's  ten
successive  incarnations,  the  earlier  ones  are  animal,  it  was  in  the
later  ones  that  he  truly  '  became  man '  (see  SuppL).  The  Greek
and  Teutonic  mythologies  steer  clear  of  all  such  notions ;  in  both
of  them  the  story  of  the  gods  was  too  sensuously  conceived  to  have
invested  their  transformations  with  the  seriousness  and  duration  of
an  avatara,  although  a  belief  in  such  incarnation  is  in  itself  so
nearly  akin  to  that  of  the  heroes  being  bodily  descended  from  the
gods.

I  think  that  on  all  these  lines  of  research,  which  could  be
extended  to  many  other  points  as  well,  I  have  brought  forward  a
series  of  undeniable  resemblances  between  the  Teutonic  mythology
and  the  Greek.  Here,  as  in  the  relation  between  the  Greek  and
Teutonic  languages,  there  is  no  question  of  borrowing  or  choice,
nothing  but  unconscious  affinity,  allowing  room  (and  that  inevit
ably)  for  considerable  divergences.  But  who  can  fail  to  recognise,
or  who  invalidate,  the  surprising  similarity  of  opinions  on  the!
immortality  of  gods,  their  divine  food,  their  growing  up  overnight,
their  journey  ings  and  transformations,  their  epithets,  their  anger
and  their  mirth,  their  suddenness  in  appearing  and  recognition  ati
parting,  their  use  of  carriages  and  horses,  their  performance  of  allj
natural  functions,  their  illnesses,  their  language,  their  servants  and)


CONDITION   OF   GODS,  339

messengers,  offices  and  dwellings  ?  To  conclude,  I  think  I  see  a
further  analogy  in  the  circumstance,  that  out  of  the  names  of  livino-
gods,  as  Tyr,  Freyr,  Baldr,  Bragi,  Zeus,  grew  up  the  common  nouns
tyr,  frauja,  baldor,  bragi,  deus,  or  they  bordered  close  upon
them  (see  SuppL).


CHAPTER  XV.
HEROES.

Between  God  and  man  there  is  a  step  on  which  the  one  leads
into  the  other,  where  we  see  the  Divine  Being  brought  nearer  to
things  of  earth,  and  human  strength  glorified.  The  older  the  epos,
the  more  does  it  require  gods  visible  in  the  flesh  ;  even  the  younger
cannot  do  without  heroes,  in  whom  a  divine  spark  still  burns,  or
who  come  to  be  partakers  of  it.

Heroism  must  not  be  made  to  consist  in  anything  but  battle
and  victory  :  a  hero  is  a  man  that  in  fighting  against  evil  achieves
immortal  deeds,  and  attains  divine  honours.  As  in  the  gradation
of  ranks  the  noble  stands  between  the  king  and  the  freeman,  so
does  the  hero  between  God  and  man.  From  nobles  come  forth
kings,  from  heroes  gods.  rjpa)?  eo-rlv  ef  avOpMirov  TI  KOL  Beov
c-vvBerov,  o  fJLTJrt-  avOpwTTQS  earl,  fjLrjre  6ebs,  KCLI  o-vva/uL^orepop  ecrrl
(Lucian  in  Dial,  mortuor.  3),  yet  so  that  the  human  predominates :
'  ita  tamen  ut  plus  ab  homine  habeat,'  says  Servius  on  Aen.  1,  200.
The  hero  succumbs  to  pains,  wounds,  death,  from  which  even  the
gods,  according  to  the  view  of  antiquity,  were  not  exempt  (p.  318).
In  the  hero,  man  attains  the  half  of  deity,  becomes  a  demigod,
semideus  :  rj  /z  1 0  eco  v  yepos  avbpwv,  II.  12,  23  ;  apftpwp  rjpwwv  Oelov
7^09,  01  Ka\eop7cu  rj /A  i  0  6  o  i,  Hes.  epy.  159.  Jornandes  applies
semidei  to  the  anses  (supra  p.  25),  as  Saxo  Gram,  pronounces
Balder  a  semidcum,  arcano  superum  semine  procreatum.  Otherwise
in  ON.  writings  we  meet  with  neither  halfgoft  nor  halfas  ?  but  N.
Cap.  141  renders  hemithei  heroesque  by  '  halbkota  unde  crdkota
(earthgods) '.

Heroes  are  distinct  from  daemonic  beings,  such  as  angels,  elves,
giants,  who  fill  indeed  the  gap  between  God  and  man,  but  have  not
a  human  origin.  Under  paganism,  messengers  of  the  gods  were

'Halftroll,  halfrisi  are  similar,  and  the  OHG.  halpdurinc,  halpwalahy
halpteni  (ON.  lialfdan)  as  opposed  to  altdurinc,  altwalah.


HEROES.  341

gods  themselves  j1  the  Judeo-christian  angel  is  a  daemon.  Eather
may  the  hero  be  compared  to  the  Christian  saint,  who  through
spiritual  strife  and  sorrow  earns  a  place  in  heaven  (see  SuppL).

This  human  nature  of  heroes  is  implied  in  nearly  all  the  titles
given  to  them.  For  the  definite  notion  of  a  divine  glorified  hero,
the  Latin  language  has  borrowed  heros  from  the  Greek,  though  its
own  vir  (=Goth.  vair  ON.  ver,2  AS.  OHG.  wer,  Lett,  wihrs,  Lith.
wyras)  in  the  sense  of  vir  fortis  (Tac.  Germ.  3)  so  nearly  comes  up
to  the  Sanskr.  vim  heros.  Heros,  r/pa>?,  which  originally  means  a
mere  fighter,  has  been  identified  with  rather  too  many  things:  hems,
''Hpij,  (HpaK\r)s,  even  "ApTjs  and  aperr)  =  virtus,  so  that  the  Goth,
aims,  ON.  ar,  a~ri=nuntius,  minister,  might  come  in  too,  or  the
supposed  digamma  make  a  connexion  with  the  aforesaid  vira  look
plausible.  More  undeniably,  our  held  is  a  prolongation3  of  the
simple  ON.  hair,  AS.  hsele  vir :  the  name  Halidegastes  (like
Leudogastes)  is  found  so  early  as  in  Vopiscus  ;  and  a  Goth,  halips,
OHG.  halid,  helid  may  be  safely  inferred  from  the  proper  names
Helidperaht,  Helidcrim,  Helidgund,  Helidniu,  Helidberga,4  though
it  is  only  from  the  12th  century  that  our  memorials  furnish  an
actual  Jielit  pi.  helide ;  the  MHG.  helet,  helt,  pi.  helde,  occurs  often
enough.  Of  the  AS.  heeled'  I  remark  that  it  makes  its  pi.  both
hseleSas  and  hseleS  (e.g.,  Beow.  103),  the  latter  archaic  like  the
Goth.  meno]?s,  whence  we  may  infer  that  the  Gothic  also  had  a  pi.
hali]?s,  and  OHG.  a  pi.  helid  as  well  as  helida,  and  this  is  confirmed
by  a  MHG.  pi.  held,  Wh.  44,  20.  In  OS.  I  find  only  the  pi.
helidos,  helithos ;  in  the  Heliand,  helithcunni,  helithocunni  mean
simply  genus  humanum.  M.Dut.  has  helet  pi.  helde.  The  ON.
holdr  pi.  holdar  (Ssem.  114b  115a.  Sn.  171)  implies  an  older
holuftr  (like  manuSr  =  Goth.  meno]?s) ;  it  appears  to  mean  nothing
but  miles,  vir,  and  holdborit  (hold-born)  in  the  first  passage  to  be
something  lower  than  hersborit,  the  holdar  being  free  peasants,
buendr.  The  Dan.  helt,  Swed.  hjelte  (OSwed.  halad)  show  an
anomalous  t  instead  of  d,  and  are  perhaps  to  be  traced  to  the

1  At  most,  we  might  feel  some  doubt  about  Skirnirt  Frey's  messenger  and
servant  ;  but  he  seems  more  a  bright  angel  than  a  hero.

2  With  this  we  should  have  to  identify  even  the  veorr  used  of  Thorr  (p.
187)  in  so  far  as  it  stood  for  viorr.

3  Fortbildung  :    thus  staff,  stack,  stall,  stem,  stare,  &c.   may  be    called
prolongations  of  the  root  sta. — TRANS.

4  In  early  docs,  the  town  of  Heldburg  in  Thuringia  is  already  called
Selidiberga,  MB.  28a  33.


342  HEROES.

German  rather  than  the  ON.  form.  If  we  prefer  to  see  both  in
hair  and  in  halij^s  the  verb  haljan  occulere,  defendere,  tueri,  the
transition  from  tutor  to  vir  and  miles  is  easily  made ;  even  the
Lat.  celer  is  not  far  from  celo  to  conceal.

Beside  this  principal  term,  the  defining  of  which  was  not  to  be
avoided  here,  there  are  several  others  to  be  considered.  Notker,
who  singularly  avoids  heleda,  supplies  us  in  Cap.  141  with :  '  heroes,
taz  chit,  Jiertinga  aide  chueniga '.  This  lurtinga  suggests  the  AS.
heardingas,  Elene  25.  130,  whether  it  be  a  particular  line,  or  heroes
in  general  that  are  meant  by  it ;  and  we  might  put  up  with  the
derivation  from  herti,  heard  (hard),  viri  duri,  fortes,  exercitati,  as
hartunga  in  N.  ps.  9,  1  means  exercitatio.  But  as  we  actually  find
a  Gothic  line  of  heroes  Azdingi,  Astingi,  and  also  an  ON.  of
Haddingjar,  and  as  the  Goth,  zd,  ON.  dd,  AS.  rdt  OHG.  rt  corres
pond  to  one  another,  there  is  more  to  be  said  for  the  Gothic  word
having  dropt  an  h  in  the  course  of  transmission,  and  the  forms
hazdiggs,  haddingr,  hearding,  hartinc  being  all  one  word.1  Now,  if
the  ON.  haddr  means  a  lock  of  hair  (conf.  p.  309),  we  may  find  in
haddingr,  hazdiggs,  &c.  a  meaning  suitable  enough  for  a  freeman
and  hero,  that  of  crinitus,  capillatus,  cincinnatus  ;  and  it  would  be
remarkable  that  the  meaning  heros  should  be  still  surviving  in  the
tenth  century.  No  less  valuable  to  us  is  the  other  term  chucnig,
which  can  hardly  be  connected  with  chuning  rex,  as  N.  always
spells  it ;  it  seems  rather  to  be  =  chuonig,  derived  either  from
chuoni  audax,  fortis  (as  fizusig  from  fizus  callidus),  or  from  its  still
unexplained  root.2  Other  terms  with  a  meaning  immediately
bordering  on  that  of  hero  are:  OHG.  degan  (miles,  minister);
wigant  (pugil) ;  chamfio,  chempho  (pugil),  AS.  cempa,  ON.  kappi ;
the  ON.  hetja  (bellator),  perhaps  conn,  with  hatr  odium,  bellum ;
and  skati,  better  skaffi,  AS.  sceaSa,  scaSa,  properly  nocivus,  then
predator,  latro,  and  passing  from  this  meaning,  honourable  in
ancient  times,  into  that  of  heros  ;  even  in  the  Mid.  Ages,  Landscado,
scather  of  the  land,  was  a  name  borne  by  noble  families.  That
heri  (exercitus),  Goth,  liarjis,  also  meant  miles,  is  shown  by  OHG.


1  The  polypt.  Irminon   I70b  has  a  proper  name  Ardingus  standing  for

2  Graff *4   447  places  chuoni,  as  well  as  chuninc  and  chunni,  under  the  all-
devouring  root  chan  ;   but  as  kruoni,  AS.  grene  viridis,  comes  from  kruoan,
AS.  growan,  so  may  chuoni,  AS.  cene,  from  a  lost  chuoan,  AS.  cowan  pol


vigere


HEROES.  343

glosses,  Graff  4,  983,  and  by  names  of  individual  men  compounded
with  lieri ;  conf.  ch.  XXV,  einheri.  The  OHG.  u-recchio,  hrecchio,
reecho,  had  also  in  a  peculiar  way  grown  out  of  the  sense  of  exsul,
profugus,  advena,  which  predominates  in  the  AS.  wrecca,  OS.
wrekio,  into  that  of  a  hero  fighting  far  from  home,  and  the  MHG.
recke,  ON.  reckr  is  simply  a  hero  in  general.1  Similar  develop
ments  of  meaning  can  doubtless  be  shown  in  many  other  words ;
what  we  have  to  keep  a  firm  hold  of  is,  that  the  very  simplest
words  for  man  (vir)  and  even  for  man  (homo)  adapted  themselves
to  the  notion  of  hero ;  as  our  mann  does  now,  so  the  ON.  hair,  the
OHG.  gomo  (homo),  ON.  gumi  served  to  express  the  idea  of  heros.
In  Diut.  2,  314b,  heros  is  glossed  by  gomo,  and  gumnar  in  the  Edda
has  the  same  force  as  skatnar  (see  Suppl.).

Now,  what  is  the  reason  of  this  exaltation  of  human  nature  ?
Always  in  the  first  instance,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  a  relation  of  bodily
kinship  between  a  god  and  the  race  of  man.  The  heroes  are
epigoni  of  the  gods,  their  line  is  descended  from  the  gods :  settir
guma  er  fra  go<5om  komo,  Seem.  114a.

Greek  mythology  affords  an  abundance  of  proofs ;  it  is  by
virtue  of  all  heroes  being  directly  or  indirectly  produced  by  gods
and  goddesses  in  conjunction  with  man,  that  the  oldest  kingly
families  connect  themselves  with  heaven.  But  evidently  most  of
these  mixed  births  proceed  from  Zeus,  who  places  himself  at  the
head  of  gods  and  men,  and  to  whom  all  the  glories  of  ancestors  are
traced.  Thus,  by  Leda  he  had  Castor  and  Pollux,  who  were  called
after  him  Dios-curi,  Hercules  by  Alcmena,  Perseus  by  Danae,
Epaplms  by  lo,  Pelasgus  by  Niobe,  Minos  and  Sarpedon  by  Europa;
other  heroes  touch  him  only  through  their  forefathers  :  Agamemnon
was  the  son  of  Atreus,  he  of  Pelops,  he  of  Tantalus,  and  he  of  Zeus;
Ajax  was  sprung  from  Telamon,  he  from  Aeacus,  he  from  Zeus  and
Aegina.  Next  to  Zeus,  the  most  heroes  seem  to  proceed  from  Ares,
Hermes  and  Poseidon  :  Meleager,  Diomedes  and  Cycnus  were  sons
of  Ares,  Autolycus  and  Cephalus  of  Hermes,  while  Theseus  was  a
son  of  Aegeus,  and  Nestor  of  Neleus,  but  both  Aegeus  and  Neleus

1  Some  Slavic  expressions  for  hero  are  worthy  of  notice  :  Etiss.  vttiaz,
Serv.  vitez;  Russ.  boghatyr,  Pol.  bohater,  Boh.  bohatyr,  not  conn,  either  with
bogh  deus,  or  boghat  dives,  but  the  same  as  the  Pers.  behddir,  Turk,  bahadyr,
Mongol,  baghdtor,  Hung,  bdtor,  Manju  bdtura,  and  derivable  from  Vadm  lively,
merry ;  Schott  in  Erman's  zeitschr.  4,  531  [Mongol,  baghd  is  force,  £ia,  and
-tor,  -tur  an  adj.  suffix].


344  HEROES.

were  Poseidon's  children  by  Aethra  and  Tyro.  Achilles  was  the
son  of  Peleus  and  Thetis,  Aeneas  of  Anchises  and  Venus.1  These
examples  serve  as  a  standard  for  the  conditions  of  our  own  heroic
legend  (see  Suppl.).

Tacitus,  following  ancient  lays,  places  at  the  head  of  our  race  as
its  prime  progenitor  Tuisco,  who  is  not  a  hero,  but  himself  a  god,  as
the  author  expressly  names  him  '  deum  terra  eclitum '.  Now,  as
Gaia  of  herself  gave  birth  to  Uranos  and  Pontos,  that  is  to  say,  sky
and  sea  sprang  from  the  lap  of  earth,  so  Tuisco  seems  derivable
from  the  word  tiv,  in  which  we  found  (pp.  193-4)  the  primary
meaning  to  be  sky;  and  Tuisco,  i.e.,  Tvisco,  could  easily  spring
out  of  the  fuller  form  Tivisco  [as  Tuesday  from  Tiwesdseg].  Tvisco
may  either  mean  coelestis,  or  the  actual  offspring  of  another  divine
being  Tiv,  whom  we  afterwards  find  appearing  among  the  gods :
Tiv  and  Tivisco  to  a  certain  degree  are  and  signify  one  thing.
Tvisco  then  is  in  sense  and  station  Uranos,  but  in  name  Zeus,
whom  the  Greek  myth  makes  proceed  from  Uranos  not  directly,
but  through  Kronos,  pretty  much  as  our  Tiv  or  Zio  is  made  a  son
of  Wuotan,  while  another  son  Donar  takes  upon  him  the  best  part
of  the  office  that  the  Greeks  assigned  to  Zeus.  Donar  too  was  son
of  Earth  as  well  as  of  Wuotan,  even  as  Gaia  brought  forth  the  great
mountain-ranges  (ovpea  pa/cpa,  Hes.  theog.  129  =  Goth,  fairgunja
mikila),  and  Donar  himself  was  called  mountain  and  fairguneis  (pp.
169.  172),  so  that  ovpavo?  sky  stands  connected  with  ovpos  0/305
mountain,  the  idea  of  deus  with  that  of  ans  (pp.  25.  188).  Gaia,
Tellus,  Terra  come  round  again  in  our  goddesses  Fiorgyn,  lorS  and
Eindr  (p.  251)  ;  so  the  names  of  gods  and  goddesses  here  cross  one
another,  but  in  a  similar  direction.

This  earth-born  Tvisco's  son  was  Mannus,  and  no  name  could
sound  more  Teutonic,  though  Norse  mythology  has  as  little  to  say
of  him  as  of  Tvisco  (ON.  Tyski  ?).  No  doubt  a  deeper  meaning
once  resided  in  the  word ;  by  the  addition  of  the  suffix  -isk,  as  in
Tiv  Tivisco,  there  arose  out  of  maim  a  mannisko  =  homo,  the

]  In  the  Koman  legend,  Romulus  and  Remus  were  connected  through
Silvia  with  Mars,  and  through  Amulius  with  Venus  ;  and  Romulus  was  taken
up  to  heaven.  The  later  apotheosis  of  the  emperors  differs  from  the  genuine
heroic,  almost  as  canonization  does  from  primitive  sainthood ;  yet  even
Augustus,  being  deified,  passed  in  legend  for  a  son  of  Apollo,  whom  the  god  in
the  shape  of  a  dragon  had  by  Atia ;  Sueton.  Octav.  94.


INGUIO.  345

thinking  self-conscious  being  (see  p.  59) ;  both  forms,  the  simple
and  the  derived,  have  .(like  tiv  and  tivisko)  the  same  import,  and
may  be  set  by  the  side  of  the  Sanskr.  Manus  and  manushya.
Mannus  however  is  the  first  hero,  son  of  the  god,  and  father  of  all
men.  Traditions  of  this  forefather  of  the  whole  Teutonic  race
seem  to  have  filtered  down  even  to  the  latter  end  of  the  Mid.  Ages :
in  a  poem  of  meister  Frauenlob  (Ettm.  p.  112),  the  same  in  which
the  mythical  king  Wippo  is  spoken  of  (see  p.  300),  we  read  :

Mennor  der  erste  was  genant,     Mennor  the  first  man  was  named
dem  diutische  rede  got  tet          to  whom   Dutch  language   God

bekant  made  known.

This  is  not  taken  from  Tacitus  direct,  as  the  proper  name,  though
similar,  is  not  the  same  (see  Suppl.).

As  all  Teutons  come  of  Tvisco  and  Mannus,  so  from  the  three
(or  by  some  accounts  five)  sons  of  Mannus  are  descended  the  three,
five  or  seven  main  branches  of  the  race.  From  the  names  of
nations  furnished  by  the  Eomaris  may  be  inferred  those  of  their
patriarchal  progenitors.

1.  INGUIO.  Iscio.  IRMINO.

The  threefold  division  of  all  the  German!  into  Ingaevones,
Iscaevones  and  Herminones1  is  based  on  the  names  of  three  heroes,
Ingo,  Isco,  Hermino,  each  of  whom  admits  of  being  fixed  on  yet
surer  authority.

Ing,  or  Ingo,  Inguio  has  k:ept  his  place  longest  in  the  memory
of  the  Saxon  .and  Scandinavian  tribes.  Eunic  alphabets  in  OHG.
spell  Inc,  in  AS.  Ing,  and  an  echo  of  his  legend  seems  still  to  ring
in  the  Lay  of  Runes  :

Ing  wses  serest  mid  Eastdenum

gesewen  secgum,  o5  he  siS5an  east

ofer  wseg  gewat.     wsen  aefter  ran.

]>us  Heardingas  Jpone  hasle  nemdon.

Ing  first  dwelt  with  the  East  Danes  (conf.  Beow.  779.  1225.  1650),
then  he  went  eastward  over  the  sea,2  his  wain  ran  after.  The  wain

1  Proximi  oceano  Ingaevones,  medii  Berminones,  ceteri  Istaevones  vocan-
tur,  Tac.  Germ.  2.

2  Csedm.  88,  8  says  of  the  raven  let  out  of  Noah's  ark  :  gewat  ofer  wonne
wseg  sigan.


340  HEROES.

is  a  distinctive  mark  of  ancient  gods,  but  also  of  heroes  and  kings  ;
its  being  specially  put  forward  here  in  connexion  with  a  sea-
voyage,  appears  to  indicate  some  feature  of  the  legend  that  is
unknown  to  us  (see  Suppl,).  Ing's  residence  in  the  east  is
strikingly  in  harmony  with  a  pedigree  of  the  Ynglings  given  in  the
Islendingabok  (Isl.  sog.  1,  19).  Here  at  the  head  of  all  stands
'  Yngvi  Tyrkja  konungr/  immediately  succeeded  by  divine  beings,
NiorSr,  Freyr,  Fiolnir  (a  byname  of  OSinn),  Svegdir,  &c.  In  the
same  way  OSinn  was  called  Tyrkja  konungr  (Sn.  068)  from  his
residing  at  Byzantium  (p.  163  note).1  The  Ynglinga  saga  on  the
other  hand  begins  the  line  with  NiorSr,  after  whom  come  Freyr,
Fiolnir  and  the  rest ;  but  of  Freyr,  whom  the  wain  would  have
suited  exactly,  it  is  stated  that  he  had  another  name  Yngvi  or
Yngvifreyr  (p.  211-2),  and  the  whole  race  of  Ynglingar  were  named
after  him.2  Ingingar  or  Ingvingar  would  be  more  exact,  as  is
shown  by  the  OHG.  and  AS.  spelling,  and  confirmed  by  a  host  of
very  ancient  names  compounded  with  Ing  or  Ingo :  Inguiomerus
(Ingimarus,  Ingumar,  or  with  asp.  Hincmarus),  Inguram,  Ingimund,.
Ingiburc,  Inginolt,  &c.  Even  Saxo  Gram,  writes  Ingo,  Ingimarus.
As  for  Ynglingar,  standing  for  Inglingar,  it  may  be-  formed  from
the  prolongation  Ingil  in  Ingelwin,  Ingelram,  Ingelberga  and  the
Norse  Ingellus,  unless  it  is  a  mere  confusion  of  the  word  with
ynglingr  juvenis,  OHG.  jungilinc,  AS.  geongling,  from  the  root
ung,  June,  geong,  which  has  no  business  here  at  all  (?).< — The  main
point  is,  that  the  first  genealogy  puts  Ingvi  before  Nior<5r,  so  that
he  would  be  Frey's  grandfather,  while  the  other  version  makes  him
be  born  again  as  it  were  in  Freyr,  and  even  fuses  his  name  with
Frey's,  of  which  there  lurks  a  trace  likewise  in  the  AS.  '  frea
Ingwina'  (p.  211).  This  Ingwina  appears  to  be  the  gen.  pi.  of
Ingwine,  OHG.  Inguwini,  and  'dominus  Ingwiriorum '  need  not
necessarily  refer  to  the  god,  any  hero  might  be  so  called.  But  with
perfect  right  may  an  Ingvi,  Inguio  be  the  patriarch  of  a  race  that

1  Snorri  sends  him  to  Turkland,  Saxo  only  as  far  as  Byzantium. — TRANS.

2  As  the  ON.  genealogies    have   Yngvi,  NiorSr,  Freyr,  the  Old   Swedish
tables   in   Geijer  (hafder    118.  121.  475)  give  Inge,  Neorch,  Fro-,   some  have
Neoroch  for   Neorch,  both   being   corruptions  of    Neorth.     Now,    was   it  by
running  Ingvi  and  Freyr  into  one,  that  the  combination  Ingvifreyr  (transposed
into  AS.  frea  Ingwina)  arose,  or  was  he  cut  in  two  to  make  an   additional
link  1     The  Skaldskaparmal  in  Sn.  211a  calls  Yngvifreyr  OSin's  son,  and  from
the  enumeration  of  the  twelve  or  thirteen  Ases  in  Sn.  21  lbit  cannot  be  doubted
that  Yngvifreyr  was  regarded  as  equivalent  to  the  simple  Freyr.


INGUIO.      HARTUNG.  347

bears  the  name  of  Ingvingar  —  Ynglingar.  And  then,  what  the
Norse  genealogy  is  unable  to  carry  farther  up  than  to  Ingvi,  Tacitus
kindly  completes  for  us,  by  informing  us  that  Inguio  is  the  son  of
Mannus,  and  he  of  Tvisco;  and  his  Ingaevones  are  one  of  two
things,  either  the  OHG.  pi.  Inguion  (from  sing.  Inguio),  or  Ingwini
after  the  AS.  Ingwine.-

Thus  pieced  out,  the  line  of  gods  and  heroes  would  run:
Tvisco,  Mannus,  Ingvia,  Nerthus,  Fravio  (or  whatever  shape  the
Gothic  Frauja  would  have  taken  in  the  mouth  of  a  Eoman).  The
earth-born  Tvisco's  mother  repeats  herself  after  three  intermediate
links  in  Nerthus  the  god  or  hero,  as  a  Norse  Ingui  stands  now
before  NiorSr,  now  after;  and  those  Vanir,  who  have  been  moved
away  to  the  east,  and  to  whom  Nib'rftr  and  his  son  Freyr  were  held
mainly  to  belong  (pp.  218-9),  would  have  a  claim  to  count  as  one
and  the  same  race  with  the  Ingaevones,  although  this  associa
tion  with  Mannus  and  Tvisco  appears  to  vindicate  their  Teutonic
character.

But  these  bonds  draw  themselves  yet  tighter.  The  AS.  lay
informed  us,  that  Ing  bore  that  name  among  the  Heardings,  had
received  it  from  them.  This  Heardingas  must  either  mean  heroes
and  men  generally,  as  we  saw  on  p.  342,  or  a  particular  people.
Hartung  is  still  remembered  in  our  Heldenbuch  as  king  of  the
Eeussen  (Eus,  Russians),  the  same  probably  as  '  Hartnit '  or
'  Hertnit  von  Eeussen ' ;  in  the  Alphart  he  is  one  of  the  Wolfing
heroes.1  Hartunc  and  his  father  Immune  (Eudlieb  17,  8)  remain
dark  to  us.  The  Heardingas  appear  to  be  a  nation  situated  east  of
the  Danes  and  Swedes,  among  whom  Ing  is  said  to  have  lived  for
a  time ;  and  this  his  sojourn  is  helped  out  both  by  the  Turkish
king  Yngui  and  the  Eussian  Hartung.  It  has  been  shown  that  to
Hartunc,  Hearding,  would  correspond  the  ON.  form  Haddingr.
Now,  whereas  the  Danish  line  of  heroes  beginning  with  OSinn
arrives  at  Fr65i  in  no  more  than  three  generations,  OSinn  being
followed  by  Skioldr,  Frioleifr,  FroSi ;  the  series  given  in  Saxo
Gram,  stands  thus :  Humbl,  Dan,  Lother,  Skiold,  Gram,  Hading,
Frotho.  But  Hading  stands  for  E adding,  as  is  clear  from  the
spelling  of  '  duo  Haddingi '  in  Saxo  p.  93,  who  are  the  Haddingjar
often  mentioned  in  the  Edda ;  it  is  said  of  him,  p.  12  :  '  orientalium

1  Hernit  =  Harding  in  the  Swedish  tale  of  Dietrich  (Iduna  10,  253-4.
284).


348  HEROES,

robore  debellato,  Suetiam  reversus,'  which  orientals  again  are
Rutheni ;  but  what  is  most  remarkable  is,  that  Saxo  p.  17-8  puts
in  the  mouth  of  this  Danish  king  and  his  wife  Regnilda  a  song
which  in  the  Edda  is  sung  by  Niorffr  and  Ska&i  (Sn.  27-8).1  We
may  accordingly  take  Hadding  to  be  identical  with  Nib'rSr,  i.e.,  a
second  birth  of  that  god,  which  is  further  confirmed  by  Frioleifr
( —  Frealfif,  whom  we  have  already  identified  with  the  simple  Fred,
p.  219)  appearing  in  the  same  line,  exactly  as  Freyr  is  a  son  of
Nib'rftr,  and  Saxo  says  expressly,  p.  16,  that  Hadding  offered  a
Froblot,  a  sacrifice  in  honour  of  Freyr.  Whether  in  Frdffi  (OHG.
Fruoto,  MHG.  Fruote),  the  hero  of  the  Danish  story,  who  makes
himself  into  three,  and  whose  rule  is  praised  as  peaceful  and  bliss
ful,  we  are  to  look  for  Freyr  over  again,  is  another  question.

In  the  god-hero  of  Tacitus  then  there  lingers,  still  recognisable,
a  Norse  god ;  and  the  links  I  have  produced  must,  if  I  mistake
not,  set  the  final  seal  on  the  reading  '  Nerthus '.  If  we  will  not
admit  the  goddess  into  the  ranks  of  a  race  which  already  has  a
Terra  mater  standing  at  its  very  head,  it  is  at  all  events  no  great
stretch  to  suppose  that  certain  nations  transferred  her  name  to  the
god  or  hero  who  formed  one  of  the  succeeding  links  in  the  race.

There  are  more  of  these  Norse  myths  which  probably  have  to
do  with  this  subject,  lights  that  skim  the  deep  darkness  of  our
olden  time,  but  cannot  light  it  up,  and  often  die  away  in  a  dubious
flicker.  The  Formali  of  the  Edda,  p.  15,  calls  OSinn  father  of
Yngvi,  and  puts  him  at  the  head  of  the  Ynglingar :  once  again  we
see  ourselves  entitled  to  identify  Oolnn  with  Mannus  or  Tvisco.
Nay,  with  all  this  interlacing  and  interchange  of  members,  we
could  almost  bear  to  see  0<5inn  made  the  same  as  Nib'rftr,  which  is
clone  in  one  manuscript.  But  the  narrative  '  fra  Fornioti  ok  hans
ffittmb'nnum'  in  Fornald.  sog.  2,  12  carries  us  farther:  at  the  top
stands  Bum,  like  the  king  of  Tyrkland,  followed  by  Burr,  Offinn,
Freyr,  Nidrftr,  Freyr,  Fiolnir;  here  then  is  a  double  Freyr,  the
first  one  taking  Yngvi's  place,  i.e.,  the  Yngvifreyr  we  had  before ;
but  also  a  manifold  O&inn,  Fiolnir  being  one  of  his  names  (Saem.
10a  46b  184a.  Sn.  3).  Burri  and  Burr,  names  closely  related  to


SkaoTs


1  So  Wh.  Miiller  (Haupt's  zeitschr.  3,  48-9)  has  justly  pointed  out,  that
Si's  choice  of  the  muffled  bridegroom,  whose  feet  alone  were  visible  (Sn.
82),  agrees  with  Saxo's  '  eligendi  mariti  libertas  curiosiore  corporum  attrecta-
tione,'  but  here  to  find  a  ring  that  the  flesh  has  healed  over.  SkaSi  and
Eagnhild  necessarily  fall  into  one.


INGUIO.      PORO.      ISCIO.  349

each  other  like  Folkvaldi  and  Folkvaldr,  and  given  in  another  list
as  Burri  and  Bors,  seem  clearly  to  be  the  Buri  and  Borr  cited  by
Sn.  7.  8  as  forefathers  of  the  three  brothers  Oolnn,  Yili,  Ye  (see  p.
162).  Now,  Buri  is  that  first  man  or  human  being,  who  was
licked  out  of  the  rocks  by  the  cow,  hence  the  eristporo  (erst-born),
an  OHG.  Poro,  Goth.  Batira ;  Borr  might  be  OHG.  Pant,  Goth.
Barus  or  whatever  form  we  choose  to  adopt,  anyhow  it  comes  from
bairan,  a  root  evidently  well  chosen  in  a  genealogical  tale,  to  denote
the  first-born,  first-created  men.1  Yet  we  may  think  of  Byr  too,
the  wish- wind  (see  Oskabyrr,  p.  144).  Must  not  Buri,  Borr,  Odinn
be  parallel,  though  under  other  names,  to  Tvisco,  Mannus,  Inguio  1
Inguio  has  two  brothers  at  his  side,  Iscio  and  Hermino,  as  OSinn
has  Yili  and  Ye ;  we  should  then  see  the  reason  why  the  names
T^ski  and  Maftr2  are  absent  from  the  Edda,  because  Buri  and  Bon-
are  their  substitutes ;  and  several  other  things  would  become
intelligible.  Tvisco  is  '  terra  editus,'  and  Buri  is  produced  out  of
stone ;  when  we  see  OSinn  heading  the  Ynglingar  as  well  as
Inguio  the  Ingaevones,  we  may  find  in  that  a  confirmation  of  the
hypothesis  that  Saxons  and  Cheruscans,  preeminently  worshippers
of  Wodan,  formed  the  flower  of  the  Ingaevones.  These  gods  and
demigods  may  appear  to  be  all  running  into  one  another,  but  always
there  emerges  from  among  them  the  real  supreme  divinity,
"Wuotan.

I  go  on  expounding  Tacitus.  Everything  confirms  me  in  the
conjecture  that  Inguio's  or  Ingo's  brother  must  have  been  named
Iscio,  I sco,  and  not  Istio,  Isto.  There  is  not  so  much  weight  to  be
laid  on  the  fact  that  sundry  MSS.  even  of  Tacitus  actually  read
Iscaevones  :  we  ought  to  examine  more  narrowly,  whether  the  st
in  Pliny's  Istaevones  be  everywhere  a  matter  of  certainty ;  and
even  that  -need  not  compel  us  to  give  up  our  sc ;  Iscaevo  was
perhaps  liable  to  be  corrupted  by  the  Komans  themselves  into  Istaevo,
as  Yistula  crept  in  by  the  side  of  the  truer  Yiscula  (Weichsel).  But
what  seem  irrefragable  proofs  are  the  Escio  and  Hisicion3  of

1  So  in  the  Pagsmal  105%  Burr  is  called  the  first,  Barn  the  second,  and  JocT
(conf.  AS.  eaden)  the  third  child  of  FaSir  and  MoSir.

2  ON.   for  man :  sing.   maSr,  mannis,  manni,  mann  ;  pi.   menn,  manna,
monnum,  menn.

3  In  Nennius  §  17,  Stevenson  and  Sanmarte  (pp.  39.  40)  have  adopted  the
very  worst  reading  Hisitio.


350  HEROES.

Nennius,  in  a  tradition  of  the  Mid.  Ages  not  adopted  from  Tacitus,
and  the  Isiocon1  in  a  Gaelic  poem  of  the  llth  century  (see  Suppl.).
If  this  will  not  serve,  let  internal  evidence  speak :  in  Tuisco  and
Mannisco  we  have  been  giving  the  suffix  -isc  its  due,  and  Tuisto,  a
spelling  which  likewise  occurs,  is  proof  against  all  attempt  at
explanation.  Now  Isco,  as  the  third  name  in  the  same  genealogy,
would  agree  with  these  two.  For  Tvisco  and  Mannus  the  Norse
legend  substitutes  two  other  names,  but  Inguio  it  has  preserved  in
Ingvi ;  ought  not  his  brother  Iscio  to  be  discoverable  too  ?  I  fancy
I  am  on  his  track  in  the  Eddie  Askr,  a  name  that  is  given  to  the
first-created  man  again  (Sa3m.  3.  Sn.  10),  and  means  an  ash- tree.
It  seems  strange  enough,  that  we  also  come  across  this  ask  (let
interpretation  understand  it  of  the  tree  or  not)  among  the  Eunic
names,  side  by  side  with  '  inc,  ziu,  er,'  all  heroes  and  gods ;  and
among  the  OK  names  for  the  earth  is  Eskja,  Sn.  220b.  And  even
the  vowel-change  in  the  two  forms  of  name,  Iscio  and  Askr,  holds
equally  good  of  the  suffix  -isk,  -ask.

Here  let  me  give  vent  to  a  daring  fancy.  In  our  language  the
relation  of  lineal  descent  is  mainly  expressed  by  two  suffixes,
ING  and  ISK.  Manning  means  a  son  the  offspring  of  man,  and
mannisko  almost  the  same.  I  do  not  say  that  the  two  divine
ancestors  were  borrowed  from  the  grammatical  form,  still  less  that
the  grammatical  form  originated  in  the  heroes'  names.  I  leave  the
vital  connexion  of  the  two  things  unexplained,  I  simply  indicate  it.
But  if  the  Ingaevones  living  '  proximi  oceano '  were  Saxon  races,
which  to  this  day  are  addicted  to  deriving  with  -ing,  it  may  be
remarked  that  Asciburg,  a  sacred  seat  of  the  Iscaevones  who  dwelt
'  proximi  Eheno,'  stood  on  the  Ehine.2  Of  Askr,  and  the  relation
of  the  name  to  the  tree,  I  shall  treat  in  ch.  XIX ;  of  the  Iscae
vones  it  remains  to  be  added,  that  the  Anglo-Saxons  also  knew  a
hero  Oesc,  and  consequently  Oescingas.

Zeuss,  p.  73,  gives  the  preference  to  the  reading  Istaevones,
connecting  them  with  the  Astingi,  Azdingi,  whom  I  (p.  342)  took  for
Hazdingi,  and  identified  with  the  OK  Haddingjar,  AS.  Heardingas,
OHG.  Hertinga.  The  hypothesis  of  Istaevones  =  Izdaevones  would
require  that  the  Goth,  zd  =  AS.  rd,  OHG.  rt,  should  in  the  time  of

1  Pointed  out  by  Leo  in  the  zeitschr.  f.  d.  alt.  2,  534.

2  Conf.  Askitun  (Ascha  near  Amberg),  Askiprunno  (Eschborn  near  Frank
fort),  Askipah  (Eschbach,  Eschenbach)  in  various  parts  ;  Ascarih,  a  man's
name  (see  feuppl.).


ISCIO.      IRMINO.  351

Tacitus  have  prevailed  even  among  the  Ehine  Germans ;  I  have  never
yet  heard  of  an  OHG.  Artinga,  Ertinga,  nor  of  an  ON.  Addingar,
Eddingar.  According  to  this  conjecture,  ingenious  anyhow  and
worth  examining  further,  the  ancestral  hero  would  be  called  Istio  —
Izdio,  Izdvio,  OHGL  Erto,  ON.  Eddi,  with  which  the  celebrated
term  edda  proavia  would  agree,  its  Gothic  form  being  izdd,  OHG.
ertil  Izdo,  Izdio  proavus  would  seem  in  itself  an  apt  name  for  the
founder  of  a  race.  The  fluctuation  between  i  and  a  would  be  common
to  both  interpretations,  'Iscaevones  =  Askinga  '  .and  '  Istaevones=
Artinga '.

The  third  son  of  Mannus  will  occupy  us  even  longer  than  his
brothers.  Ermino's  posterity  completes  the  cycle  of  the  three  main
races  of  Germany :  Ingaevones,  Iscaevones,  Herminones.  The  order
in  which  they  stand  seems  immaterial,  in  Tacitus  it  merely  follows
their  geographical  position ;  the  initial  vowel  common  to  them
leads  us  to  suppose  an  alliterative  juxtaposition  of  the  ancestral
heroes  in  German  songs.  The  aspirate  given  by  the  Eomans  to
Herminones,  as  to  Hermunduri,  is  strictly  no  part  of  the  German
word,  but  is  also  very  commonly  retained  by  Latin  writers  of  the
Mid.  Ages  in  proper  names  compounded  with  Irmin.  In  the  name
of  the  historical  Arminius  Tacitus  leaves  it  out.

As  with  Inguio  and  Iscio,  we  must  assign  to  the  hero's  name
the  otherwise  demonstrable  weak  form  Irmino}  Ermino,  Goth.
Airmana :  it  is  supported  by  the  derivative  Herminones,  and  even
by  the  corruptions  '  Hisicion,  Armenon,  Negno '  in  Nennius  (see
Suppl.).  Possibly  the  strong-formed  Irman,  Irmin,  Armin  may
even  be  a  separate  root.  But  what  occurs  far  more  frequently  than
the  simple  word,  is  a  host  of  compounds  with  irman-,  irmin-,  not
only  proper  names,  but  other  expressions  concrete  and  abstract :
Goth.  Ermanaricus  (Airmanareiks),  OHG.  Irmanrih,  AS.  Eormenric,
ON.  lormunrekr,  where  the  u  agrees  with  that  in  the  national
name  Hermundurus  ;  OHG.  Irmandegan,  Irmandeo,  Irmanperaht,
Irmanfrit,  Irminolt,  Irmandrut,  Irmaiigart,  Irmansuint,  &c.  Atten
tion  is  claimed  by  the  names  of  certain  animals  and  plants :  the
ON.  lormungandr  is  a  snake,  and  lormunrekr  a  bull,  the  AS.
Eormenwyrt  and  Eormenleaf  is  said  to  be  a  mallow,  which  I  also

1  Pertz  1,  200.  300.  2,  290.  463.  481  ;  the  abbas  Irmino  of  Claries  the
Great's  time  is  known  well  enough  now  ;  and  a  female  name  larmin  is  met
with  in  deeds.


352  HEROES.

find  written  geormenwyrt,  geormenleaf.  Authorities  for  irmangot,
irmandiot,  OS.  irminthiod,  irminman,  irmansul,  &c.,  &c.,  have  been
given  above,  p.  118.  A  villa  Irmenld,  i.e.,  a  wood  (in  ilia  silva
scaras  sexaginta)  is  named  in  a  deed  of  855,  Bondam's  charterbook,
p.  32.  silva  Irminlo,  Lacombl.  1,  31.

In  these  compounds,  especially  those  last  named,  irman  seems
to  have  but  a  general  intensifying  power,  without  any  distinct
reference  to  a  god  or  hero  (conf.  Woeste,  mittheiL  p.  44) ;  it  is
like  some  other  words,  especially  got  and  diot,  regin  and  megin,
which  we  find  used  in  exactly  the  same  way.  If  it  did  contain
such  reference,  Eormenleaf  would  be  Eormenes  leaf,  like  Forneotes
folme,  Wuotanes  wee.  Irman  deo  then  is  much  the  same  as
Gotadeo,  Irmanrih  as  Diotrih ;  and  as  irmangot  means  the  great
god,  irmandiot  the  great  people,  iormungrund  the  great  wide  earth,
so  irmansul  cannot  mean  more  than  the  great  pillar,  the  very  sense
caught  by  Rudolf  in  his  translation  universalis  columna  (p.  117),

This  is  all  very  true,  but  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  Irmino  or
Irmin  having  had  a  personal  reference  in  previous  centuries  :  have
we  not  seen,  side  by  side  with  Zeus  and  Tyr,  the  common  noun
deus  and  the  prefix  ty-,  tir-  (p.  195-6)  ?  conf.  p.  339.  If  Sseteresda3g
has  got  rubbed  down  to  Saturday,  Saterdach  (p.  125),  so  may  Eritac
point  to  a  former  Erestac  (p.  202),  Eormenleaf  to  Eormenes  leaf,
Irmansul  to  Irmanessftl ;  we  also  met  with  Donnerbiihel  for
Donnersbiihel  (p.  170),  Woenlet  for  Woenslet,  and  we  say
Frankfurt  for  Frankenfurt  [Oxford  for  Oxenaford,  &c.].  The  more
the  sense  of  the  name  faded  out,  the  more  readily  did  the  genitive
form  drop  away ;  the  OHG.  godes  lifts  is  more  literal,  the  Goth.
gu]?lifts  more  abstract,  yet  both  are  used,  as  the  OS.  regano  giscapu
and  regangiscapu,  metodo  giscapu  and  metodgiscapu  held  their
ground  simultaneously.  As  for  geormen  =:  eormen,  it  suggests
Germanus  (Gramm.  1,  11).

It  is  true,  Tacitus  keeps  the  Hermino  that  lies  latent  in  his
Herminones  apart  from  Arminius  with  whom  the  Romans  waged
war  ;  yet  his  famous  '  canitur  adhuc  barbaras  apud  gentes/  applied
to  the  destroyer  of  Varus,  might  easily  arise  through  simply
misinterpreting  such  accounts  as  reached  the  Roman  ear  of
German  songs  about  the  mythical  hero.  Granted  that  irmansul
expressed  word  for  word  no  more  than  '  huge  pillar/  yet  to  the  people
that  worshipped  it  it  must  have  been  a  divine  image,  standing  for


IRMINO,   IRMIN.  353

a  particular  god.  To  discover  who  this  was,  we  can  only  choose
one  of  two  ways :  either  he  was  one  of  the  three  great  divinities,
Wodan,  Thonar,  Tin,  or  some  being  distinct  from  them.

But  here  we  must,  above  all  things,  ponder  the  passage  partly
quoted  on  p.  Ill  from  Widukind,  himself  a  Saxon;  it  says,  a
heathen  god  was  worshipped,  whose  name  suggested  Mars,  his
pillar-statue  Hercules,  and  the  place  where  he  was  set  up  the  sun
or  Apollo.  After  that,  he  continues  :  '  Ex  hoc  apparet,  aestima-
tionem  illorum  utcumque  probabilem,  qui  Saxones  originem  duxisse
putant  de  Graecis,  quia  Hirmin  vel  Hermes  graece  Mars  dicitur,
quo  vocabulo  ad  laudem  vel  ad  vituperationem  usque  hodie  etiam
ignorantes  utimur '.  From  this  it  follows,  that  the  god  to  whom
the  Saxons  sacrificed  after  their  victory  over  the  Thuringians  was
called  Hirmin,  Irmin,  and  in  the  10th  century  the  name  was  still
affixed  in  praise  or  blame  to  very  eminent  or  very  desperate
characters.1  Apollo  is  brought-  in  by  the  monk,  because  the  altar
was  built  ad  orientalem  portam,  and  Hercules,  because  his  pillar
called  up  that  of  the  native  god;  no  other  idol  can  have  been
meant,  than  precisely  the  irmin&til  (pp.  115 — 118),  and  the  true  form
of  this  name  must  have  been  Irmines,  Irmanes  or  Hirmines  sul.
The  Saxons  had  set  up  a  pillar  to  their  Irmin  on  the  banks  of  the
Unstrut,  as  they  did  in  their  own  home.

The  way  Hirmin,  Hermes  and  Mars  are  put  together  seems  a
perfect  muddle,  though  Widukind  sees  in  it  a  confirmation  of  the
story  about  the  Saxons  being  sprung  from  Alexander's  army
(Widuk.  1,  2.  Sachsensp.  3,  45).  We  ought  to  remember,  first,
that  Wodan  was  occasionally  translated  Mars  instead  of  Mercurius
(pp.  121.  133),  and  had  all  the  appearance  of  the  Eoman  Mars
given  him  (p.  133);  then  further,  how  easily  Irmin  or  Hirmin  in
this  case  would  lead  to  Hermes,  and  Ares  to  Mars,  for  the  Irminsul
itself  is  connected  with  Eres-burg  (p.  11G).  What  the  Corvei
annalist  kept  distinct  (p.  Ill),  the  two  images  of  Ares  and  of
Hermes,  are  confounded  by  Widukind.  But  now,  which  has  the
better  claim  to  be  Irmin,  Mars  or  Mercury1}  On  p.  197  I  have
pronounced  rather  in  favour  of  Mars,  as  Miillenhoff  too  (Haupt  7,
384)  identifies  Irmin  with  Ziu ;  one  might  even  be  inclined  to  see

1  Much  as  we  say  now  :  he  is  a  regular  devil,  or  in  Lower  Saxony  hamer
(p.  182).  The  prefix  irmin-  likewise  intensifies  in  a  good  or  bad  sense  ;  like
*  irmingod,  irminthiod,'  there  may  have  been  an  irminthiob  =  '  meginthiob,
reginthiob '.

23


354  HEROES.

in  it  the  name  of  the  war-god  brought  out  on  p.  202,  '  Eru,  Hern/
and  to  dissect  Irman,  Erman  into  Ir-man,  Er-man,  though,  to  judge
by  the  forms  Irmin,  Eormen,  Ermun,  lormun,  this  is  far  from
probable,  the  word  being  derivative  indeed,  yet  simple,  not  com
pound  ;  we  never  find,  in  place  of  Ertag,  dies  Martis,  any  such
form  as  Ermintac,  Irminestac.  On  behalf  of  Mercury  there  would
speak  the  accidental,1  yet  striking  similarity  of  the  name  Irmansul
or  Hirmensul  to  'Epprjs  and  ep^a  =  prop,  stake,  pole,  pillar  (p.
118),  and  that  it  was  precisely  Hermes's  image  or  head  that  used
to  be  set  up  on  such  ep/juara,  and  further,  that  the  Mid.  Ages
referred  the  irmen-pillars  to  Mercury  (p.  116).  In  Hirmin  the
Saxons  appear  to  have  worshipped  a  Wodan  imaged  as  a  warrior.

If  this  view  be  well  grounded,  we  have  Wodan  wedging  himself
into  the  ancient  line  of  heroes  ;  but  the  question  is,  whether  Irmin
is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  second  birth  or  son  of  the  god,  whethejj
even  an  ancestral  hero  Irmino  is  not  to  be  distinguished  from  this
god  Irmin,  as  Hermino  in  Tacitus  is  from  Arminius  ?  So  from  thiod,
regin,  were  formed  the  names  Thiodo,  Ilegino.  It  would  be  harder
to  show  any  such  relation  between  Ing  and  Ingo,  Isc  and  Isco;  but  I
think  I  can  suggest  another  principle  which  will  decide  this  point  :
when  races  name  themselves  after  a  famous  ancestor,  this  may  be  a
deified  man,  a  demigod,  but  never  a  purely  divine  being.  There  are
Ingaevones,  Iscaevones,  Herminones,  Oescingas,  Scilfingas,  Ynglin-
gar  (for  Ingingar),  Vb'lsungar,  Skioldungar,  Mfitmgar,2  as  there  were
Heracleidae  and  Pelopidae,  but  no  Wodeningas  or  Thunoringas,
though  a  Wodening  and  a  Kronides.  The  Anglo-Saxons,  with
Woden  always  appearing  at  their  head,  would  surely  have  borne
the  name  of  Wodeningas,  had  it  been  customary  to  take  name
from  the  god  himself.  Nations  do  descend  from  the  god,  but
through  the  medium  of  a  demigod,  and  after  him  they  name  tli  em-
selves.  A  national  name  taken  from  the  highest  god  would  have
been  impious  arrogance,  and  alien  to  human  feeling.

As  Lower  Saxony,  especially  Westphalia,  was  a  chief  seat  of
the  Irmin-worship,  we  may  put  by  the  side  of  Widukind's  account
of  Hirmin  a  few  other  traces  of  his  name,  which  is  not  even  yet

1  To  the   Greek  aspirate  corresponds  a  Teutonic  S,  not  H  :  6,  17  sa,  so  ;
sibun  ;  SXs  salt.     [There  are  exceptions  :  6,  17,  ot  he,  her,  hig  ;  oXoy  whole,


hela  ;  cXoi  haul,  holen].

2  A  patronymic  suffix  is  not  necessary  :  the  Gautos,  Gevissi,  Suapa  take
name  from  Gauts,  Gevis,  Suap,  divine  heroes.


IEMIN.  355

entirely  extinct  in  that  part  of  Germany.  Strodtmann  has  noted
down  the  following  phrases  in  Osnabriick :  '  he  ment,  use  herre
gott  heet  Herm  (he  thinks  our  Lord  is  called  H.,  i.e.  is  never  angry) ;
use  herre  gott  heet  nicli  Herm,  he  heet  leve  herre,  un  weet  wal  to-
te-gripen  (knows  how  to  fall  on) '.  Here  there  seems  unconcealed
a  slight  longing  for  the  mild  rule  of  the  old  heathen  god,  in
contrast  to  the  strictly  judging  and  punishing  Christian  God.  In
Saxon  Hesse  (on  the  Diemel),  in  the  districts  of  Paderborn,  Ravens-
berg  and  Minister,  in  the  bishopric  of  Minden  and  the  duchy  of
Westphalia,1  the  people  have  kept  alive  the  rhyme :

Hermen,  sla  dermen,

sla  pipen,  sla  trummen,

de  kaiser  wil  kummen

met  hamer  un  stangen,2

wil  Hermen  uphangen.
Hermen  is  challenged,  as  it  were,  to  strike  up  his  war-music,  to
sound  the  catgut,  pipe  and  drum ;  but  the  foe  draws  nigh  with
maces  and  staves,  and  will  hang  up  Hermen  (see  Suppl).  It  is  not
impossible  that  in  these  rude  words,  which  have  travelled  down  the
long  tradition  of  centuries,  are  preserved  the  fragments  of  a  lay
that  was  first  heard  when  Charles  destroyed  the  Irmensul.  They
cannot  so  well  be  interpreted  of  the  elder  Arminius  and  the  Romans.3
The  striking  and  the  staves  suggest  the  ceremony  of  carrying  out
the  Summer.

In  a  part  of  Hesse  that  lies  on  the  Werra,  is  a  village  named
Ermschwerd,  which  in  early  documents  is  called  Ermeswerder,
Armeswerd,4  Ermeneswerde  (Dronke's  trad.  fuld.  p.  123),  JErmenes-
werethe  (Vita  Meinwerci  an.  1022.  Leibn.  1,  551),  =  Irmineswerid,
insula  Irmini,  as  other  gods  have  their  isles  or  eas.  This  interpre
tation  seems  placed  beyond  a  doubt  by  other  such  names  of  places.
Leibn.  scr.  1,  9  and  Eccard,  Er.  or.  1,  883,  De  orig.  Germ.  397

1  Rommel's  Hessen  1.  p.  66   note.     Westphalia  (Minden  1830)   i.  4,  52.
The  time  is  given  in  Schumann's  Musical,  zeitung  for  1836.

2  Variants  :   mit  stangen  und  prangen  (which  also   means   staves)  ;   mit
hamer  un  tangen  (tongs).

3  This  explanation  has  of  course  been  tried  :  some  have  put  Hermann  for
Hermen,  others  add  a  narrative  verse,  which  I  do  not  suppose  is  found  in  the
people's  mouth  :  '  mi  Hermen  slang  dermen,  slaug  pipen,  slaug  trummen,  de
fiirsten  sind  kummen  met  all  eren  mannen,  hebt  Varus  uphangen '.

4  The  same  vowel-change  is  seen  in  Ermensulen  (deed  of  1298  in  Baring's
Clavis  dipl.  p.  493  no.  15),  a  Westphalian  village,  now  called  Armenscul.


356  HEROES.

give  Irmineswagen  for  the  constellation  arctus,  plaustrum  coeleste,
I  do  not  know  on  what  authority :  this  wain  would  stand  beside
Wuotanswagen,  Donnerswagen,  and  even  Ingswagen.

Some  of  the  later  AS.  and  several  0.  Engl.  authorities,  in
specifying  four  great  highways  that  traverse  England,  name
amongst  them  Ermingestrcte,  running  from  south  to  north  of  the
island.2  But  we  may  safely  assume  the  pure  AS.  form  to  have
been  Eormenstrcet  or  Eormenes-straet,  as  another  of  the  four  ways,
Wcetlingastrcet,  occurs  in  the  Saxon  Chron.  (Ingr.  190.  Thorpe's
anal.  p.  38),  and  in  the  Treaty  of  Alfred  and  Guthrun  (Thorpe,  p.
66),  and  '  andlang  Wactlinga  straet '  in  Kemble  2,  250  (an.  944).
Lye  has  Irmingstrcet  together  with  Irmingsul,  both  without  refer
ences.  The  conjectural  Eormenstrset  would  lead  to  an  OHG.
Irmanstraza,  and  Eormenesstrset  to  Irmanesstraza,  with  the  mean
ings  via  publica  and  via  Irmani.

Now  it  is  not  unimportant  to  the  course  of  our  inquiry,  that
one  of  the  four  highways,  Wsetlingastrset,  is  at  the  same  time
translated  to  the  sky,  and  gets  to  look  quite  mythical.  A  plain
enough  road,  extending  from  Dover  to  Cardigan,  is  the  milky  way
in  the  heavens,  i.e.,  it  is  travelled  by  the  car  of  some  heathen  god.

Chaucer  (House  of  Fame  2,  427),  describing  that  part  of  the
sky,  says :

Lo  there,  quod  he,  cast  up  thine  eye,

se  yondir,  lo,  the  galaxie,

the  whiche  men  clepe  the  milky  way

for  it  is  white,  and  some  parfay

ycallin  it  han  W ailing estrete,

that  onis  was  brente  with  the  hete,

whan  that  the  sunnis  sonne  the  rede,

which  hite  Phaeton,  wolde  lede

algate  his  fathirs  carte  and  gie.

In  the  Complaint  of  Scotland,  p.  (JO,  it  is  said  of  the  comet :  '  it
aperis  oft  in  the  quhyt  circle  callit  circulus  lacteus,  the  quhilk  the
marynalis  callis  Vatlanstreit '.  In  Douglas's  Virgil,  p.  85  :

2  IIII  cheminii  Watlingestrete,  Fosse,  Hickenildestrete,  Ermingcstrete
(Thorpe's  Anc.  laws,  p.  192)  ;  conf.  Henry  of  Hunt.  (Erningestreet),  Hob.  of
Glouc.,  Oxf.  1742,  p.  299  (also  Erning.*  after  the  preceding).  Ranulph
Highden's  Polychr.,  ed.  Oxon.  p.  196.  Leland's  Itinerary,  Oxf.  1744.  6,  108—
140.  Gibson  in  App.  chron.  Fax.  p.  47.  Camden's  Britannia,  ed.  Gibson,
map  to  Lappenberg's  Hist,  of  Engl.,  the  direction


of  the  four  roads  is  indicated.


IRMIN.  357

Of  every  sterne  the  twynkling  notis  he
that  in  the  still  hevin  move  cours  we  se,
Arthurys  house,  and  Hyades  betaikning  rane,
Watlingestrete,  the  Home  and  the  Charlewane,
the  feirs  Orion  with  his  goldin  glave.

Wsetlinga  is  plainly  a  gen.  pi. ;  who  the  Wsetlings  were,  and  how
they  came  to  give  their  name  to  an  earthly  and  a  heavenly  street,
we  do  not  know.  Chaucer  perhaps  could  still  have  told  us,  but  he
prefers  to  harp  at  the  Greek  mythus.  Phaethon,  also  the  son  of  a
god,  when  he  presumed  to  guide  his  father's  sun-chariot,  burnt  a
broad  streak  in  the  sky,  and  that  is  the  track  we  call  the  milky
way.  The  more  common  view  was,  that  Here,  indignant  at  the
bantling  Hermes  or  Herakles  being  put  to  her  breast,  spilt  her
milk  along  the  sky,  and  hence  the  bright  phenomenon.  No  doubt,
among  other  nations  also,  fancy  and  fable  have  let  the  names  of
earthly  and  heavenly  roads  run  into  one  another.1

A  remarkable  instance  of  this  is  found  in  one  of  our  national
traditions  ;  and  that  will  bring  us  round  to  Irmin  again,  whom  we
almost  seem  to  have  lost  sight  of.

1  I  limit  myself  to  briefly  quoting  some  other  names  for  the  milky  way.
In  Arabic  it  is  tarik  al  thibn  (via  straminis)  ;  Syriac  schevil  tevno  (via  paleae)  ;
Mod.  Hebrew  netibat  theben  (semita  paleae)  ;  Pers.  rah  kah  keslian  (via  stramen
trahentis)  ;  Copt,  pimoit  ende  pitoh  (via  straminis)  ;  Ethiop.  hasare  zamanegade
(stipula  viae)  ;  Arab,  again  derb  ettubenin  (path  of  the  chopped-straw  carriers)  ;
Turk,  saman  ughrisi  (paleam  rapiens,  paleae  fur)  ;  Armen.  hartacol  or  hartacogh
(paleae  fur)  ;  all  these  names  run  upon  scattered  chaff,  which  a  thief  dropt  in
his  flight.  More  simple  is  the  Arabic  majerra  (tractus),  nahr  al  majcrra
(flumen  tractus),  and  the  Koman  conception  of  path  of  the  gods  .or  to  the  gods  ;
also  Iroq.  path  of  souls,  Turk,  hadjiler  j uli  (pilgrims'  path),  hadji  is  a  pilgrim  to
Mecca  and  Medina.  Very  similar  is  the  Christian  term  used  in  the  Mid.  Ages,
*  galaxias  via  sancti  Jacobi '  already  in  John  of  Genoa's  Catholicon  (13th  cent.)  ;
camino  di  Santiago,  chemin  de  saint  Jaques,  Jacobsstrasse,  Slov.  zesta  v'  Rim
(road  to  Rome),  from  the  pilgrimages  to  Galicia  or  Rome,  which  led  to  heaven
[was  there  no  thought  of  Jacob's  ladder  ?]  This  James's  road  too,  or  pilgrim's
road,  was  at  once  on  earth  and  in  heaven  ;  in  Lacomblet,  docs.  184  and  185
|  (an.  1051)  name  a  Jacobsivech  together  with  the  via  regia.  ON.  vetrarbraut
(winterway).  Welsh  caer  Gwydion  (p.  150),  and  Arianrod  (silver  street?  which
comes  near  Argentoratum).  Finn,  linnunrata  (birdway),  Lith.  paukszcsrid
kieles,  perhaps  because  souls  and  spirits  flit  in  the  shape  of  birds ;  Hung.  Hada-
kuttya  (via  belli),  because  the  Hungarians  in  migrating  from  Asia  followed
this  constellation  (see  SuppL).  Vroneldenstraet  (p.  285)  and  Pharaildis  fit
intelligibly  enough  with  frau  Holda  and  Herodias,  whose  airy  voyages  easily
account  for  their  giving  a  name  to  the  milky  way,  the  more  so,  as  Wuotaii,
who  joins  Holda  in  the  nightly  hunt,  shows  himself  here  also  in  the  Welsh
appellation  caer  Gwydion.  Even  the  fact  of  Diana  being  mixed  up  with  that
j  chase,  and  Juno  with  the  milky  way,  is  in  keeping  ;  and  gods  or  spirits  sweep
I  along  the  heavenly  road  as  well  as  in  the  heavenly  hunt.


358  HEROES.


Widukind  of  Corvci  is  the  first  who  gives  us  out  of  old  songs
the  beautiful  and  truly  epic  story  of  the  Saxons'  victory  over  the
Thuringians,1  which  Kuodolf  before  him  (Pertz  2,  674)  had  barely
touched.  Irmenfried,  king  of  the  Thuringians,  being  oppressed  by
Dieterich,  king  of  the  Franks,  called  the  Saxons  to  his  aid  :  they
appeared,  and  fought  valiantly.  But  he  began  to  waver  in  his
mind,  he  secretly  negotiated  a  treaty  with  the  Franks,  and  the  two
nations  were  about  to  unite  against  the  formidable  Saxon  host.
But  the  Saxons,  becoming  aware  of  the  treachery,  were  beforehand ;
led  by  the  aged  Hathugat,  they  burst  into  the  castle  of  the  Thurin
gians,  and  slew  them  all ;  the  Franks  stood  still,  and  applauded  the;
warlike  renown  of  the  Saxons.  Irmenfried  fled,  but,  enticed  by  a
stratagem,  returned  to  Dieterich's  camp.  In  this  camp  was
staying  Irmenfried's  counsellor  Iring,  whose  prudent  plans  had
previously  rendered  him  great  services.  When  Irmenfried  knelt
before  Dieterich,  Iring  stood  by,  and  having  been  won  by  Dieterich,
slew  his  own  lord.  After  this  deed  of  horror,  the  Frankish  king
banished  him  from  his  sight,  but  Iring  said,  '  Before  I  go,  I  will
avenge  my  master,'  drew  his  sword,  stabbed  Dieterich  dead,  laid  his
lord's  body  over  that  of  the  Frank,  so  that  the  vanquished  in  life
might  be  the  victor  in  death,  opened  a  way  for  himself  with  the
sword  (viam  ferro  faciens),  and  escaped.  '  Mirari  tamen  non
possumus'  adds  Widukind,  'in  tantum  famam  praevaluisse,  ut
Iringi  nomine,  quern  ita  vocitant,  lacteus  coeli  circulus  usque  in
praesens  sit  notatus.'  Or,  with  the  Auersberg  chronicler  :  *  famam
in  tantum  praevaluisse,  ut  lacteus  coeli  circulus  Iringis  nomine
fringesstrdza  usque  in  praesens  sit  vocatus '  (sit  notatus  in  Pertz
8,  178).

In  confirmation,  AS.  glosses  collected  by  Junius  (Symb.  372)
give  '  via  secta  :  fringes  mice,'  from  which  Somner  and  Lye  borrow
their  '  fringes  weg,  via  secta  '.  Conf.  via  sexta  iringesuucc,  Haupts
zeitschr.  5,  195.  Unpubl.  glosses  of  the  Amplonian  libr.  at  Erfurt
(10-1 1th  cent.  bl.  14a)  have  'via  secta:  luuaringes  uucy ' ;  which
In  waring  agrees  very  remarkably  with  the  later  form  Euring  in
Euringsstrass,  Aventin  102b  103a.

1  Conf.  the  differing  but  likewise  old  version,  from  a  H.  German  district,
in  Goldast's  Script,  rer.  Suev.  pp.  1—3,  where  Swabians  take  the  place  ot  the
Saxons.  The  Auersberg  chron.  (ed.  Argent.  1609,  pp.  146-8)  copies  Widu
kind.  Eckehard,  in  Pertz  8,  176-8.


IRMIN.      IRING.  259

In  the  Nibelungenlied  1285.  1965—2009,  these  heroes  appeal-
again,  they  are  the  same,  but  differently  conceived,  and  more  akin
to  the  H.  German  version  in  Goldast : l  Irnvrit  of  Duringen  and
Irinc  of  Tenemarke,  one  a  landgraf,  the  other  a  markgraf,  both
vassals  of  Etzel  (Attila).  The  Lied  von  der  klage  (threnody)  adds,
that  they  had  fallen  under  the  ban  of  the  empire,  and  fled  to
Hunland  ;  here  we  see  a  trace  of  the  banishment  that  Dieterich
pronounced  on  Iring.  In  the  poems  of  the  13th  century,  however,
Iring  is  not  a  counsellor,  still  less  a  traitor  and  a  murderer  of
Irmenfried  :  the  two  are  sworn  friends,  and  both  fall  before  the
irresistible  Hagene  and  Volker.

Add  to  all  this,  that  the  Vilk.  saga  cap.  360,  though  silent  on
Irnfried,  tells  of  Irung's  last  combat  with  Hogni,  and  makes  him
sink  against  a  stone  wall,  which  is  still  called  Irungs  veygr  in
memory  of  the  hero.  The  Norse  redactor  confounded  vegr  (via)
with  veggr  (murus)  ;  his  German  source  must  have  had  Iringes  vec,
in  allusion  to  the  *  cutting  his  way  ;  in  Widukind.

So  now  the  road  is  paved  to  the  conclusions  we  desire  to  draw  :
German  legend  knew  of  an  Iringes  wee  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  so
did  AS.  legend  of  a  double  Wsetlinga-strset,  and  so  was  the  road
to  Rome  and  St.  James  set  in  the  firmament  as  well.  These
fancies  about  ways  and  wains,  we  know,  are  pagan,  and  indicate
god-myths.  The  Thuringian  Irnvrit,  originally  Irmanfrit,  it  is
reasonable  to  suppose,  is  the  same  as  Irman,  Irmin  (conf.  Sigfrit,
Sigmunt,  Sigi),  and  the  Hermunduri  =  Irman-duri  are  plainly  con
nected  with  the  During s  (Thuringians) :  so  that  Irman  assumes  a
peculiar  significance  in  Thuringian  tradition.  If  this  would  but
tell  us  of  an  Irmines  wee,  all  would  come  right.

It  does  tell,  however,  in  three  or  four  places,  of  an  Iringes  wee.
The  names  Irinc  and  Irmin,  apart  from  the  alliteration  which
doubtless  operated  in  the  ancient  lay,  have  nothing  in  common;  the
first  has  a  long  i,2  and  of  themselves  they  cannot  have  represented

1  As  already  quoted,  Deutsch.  heldens.  p.  117.

2  Or  IM,  as  some  roots  shift  from  the  fourth  to  the  fifth  vowel-series  (like
htrat  and  hiurat,  now  both  heirat  and  heurat ;  or  tir  and  tyr,  p.  196),  so  lurinc
(expanded  into  luwarinc,  as  the  OHG.  poss.  pron.  iur  into  iuwar)  ;   so  in  the
16- 17th  cent.  Eiring  alternates  with  Euring.     A  few  MSS.  read   Hiring  for
Iring,  like  Hirmin  for  Irmin,  but  I  have  never  seen  a  Heuring  for  Euring,  or
it  might  have  suggested  a  Saxon  hevenring,  as  the  rainbow  is  called  the  ring  of
heaven.     An  old  AS.  name  for  Orion,  Ebur&rung,  Ebir&ring,  seems  somehow
connected,  especially  with  the  luwaring  above.


360


HEROES.


one  another.  Now,  either  the  legend  has  made  the  two  friends
change  places,  and  transferred  Irmin's  way  to  Iring,  or  Iring  (not
uncommon  as  a  man's  name  too,  <r#.,Trad.  Euld.  1,  79)  is  of  him
self  a  demigod  grown  dim,  who  had  a  way  and  wain  of  his  own,  as
well  as  Irmin.  Only,  Irmin's  worship  seems  to  have  had  the
deeper  foundations,  as  the  image  of  the  Irman&Al  sufficiently
shows.  As  the  name  of  a  place  I  find  fringes  pure  (burg),  MB.  7,
47.  157.  138.  231.  Iringisperc  (berg)  29,  58.

Up  to  this  point  I  have  refrained  from  mentioning  some  Norse
traditions,  which  have  a  manifest  reference  to  the  earthly  hero-
path.  It  had  been  the  custom  from  of  old,  for  a  new  king,  on  as
suming  the  government,  to  travel  the  great  highway  across  the
country,  confirming  the  people  in  their  privileges  (EA.  237-8).
This  is  called  in  the  0.  Swed.  laws  '  Eriksgatu  ridha/  riding  Eric's
road.1  Sweden  numbers  a  host  of  kings  named  Erik  (ON.  Eirikr),
but  they  are  all  quite  historical,  and  to  none  of  them  can  be  traced
this  custom  of  the  Eriksgata.  With  the  royal  name  of  Erik  the
Swedes  must  from  very  early  times  have  associated  the  idea  of  a
god  or  deified  king ;  the  vita  Anskarii  written  by  his  pupil  Eim-
bert,  has  a  remarkable  passage  on  it  (Pertz  2,  711).  When  the
adoption  of  Christianity  was  proposed  to  king  Olef  about  860,  a
man  of  heathen  sentiments  alleged,  '  Se  in  conventu  deorum,  qui
ipsam  terram  possidere  credebantur,  et  ab  eis  missum,  ut  haec  regi
et  populis  nunciaret :  Vos,  inquam,2  nos  vobis  propitios  diu  habuis-
tis,  et  terram  incolatus  vestri  cum  multa  abundantia  nostro
adjutorio  in  pace  et  prosperitate  longo  tempore  tenuistis,  vos  quo-
que  nobis  sacrificia  et  vota  debita  persolvistis,  grataque  nobis  vestra
fuerunt  obsequia.  At  mine  et  sacrificia  solita  subtrahitis,  et  vota
spontanea  segnius  offertis,3  et,  quod  magis  nobis  displicet,  alienum
deum  super  nos  intro  ducitis.  Si  itaque  nos  vobis  propitios  habere
vultis,  sacrificia  omissa  augete  et  vota  majora  persolvite,  alterius
quoque  dei  culturam,  qui  contraria  nobis  docet,  ne  apud  vos  reci-
piatis  et  ejus  servitio  ne  intendatis.  Porro,  si  etiam  plures  deos

1  The  venerable  custom  still  prevailed  in  the  15-16th  cent.  :  'statute  pro-
vincialium  generose  confirmavit  et  sigillavit  in  equitatu  qui  dicitur  Eriksgata,'
Diarium   Vazstenense   ad   an.    1441    (ed.    Benzel,    Ups.    1721)   p.  86.      'Rex
Christoferus  Sueciae  et  Daciae  equitatum  fecit  qui  dicitur  Eriksgata  secundum
leges  pcitriae,'  ibid,  ad  an.  1442.     Even  Gustavus  Vasa  rode  his  Eriksgata.

2  For  inquimus,  as  elsewhere  inquit  for  inquiunt.

3  Votuin,  what  ah  individual  oilers,  as  opposed  to  the  sacrificium  presented
publicly  and  jointly  ;  coiif.  supra,  p.  57.


IKMIN.      IKING.  361

habere  desideratis,  et  nos  vobis  non  sufficimus,  Ericum,  quondam
regem  vestrum,  nos  unanirnes  in  collegium  nostrum  asciscimus,1  ut
sit  units  de  numero  deorum.' — I  have  transcribed  the  whole  passage,
because  it  aptly  expresses  the  attitude  of  the  pagan  party,  and  the
lukewarmness  already  prevailing  towards  their  religion :  the
heathen  priests  thought  of  adding  a  fresh  hero  to  their  throng  of
gods.2  This  seems  to  exclude  all  later  Erics  from  any  claim  to  the
Eriksgata ;  probably  there  were  mixed  up  even  then,  at  least  in
Kimbert's  mind,  traditions  of  a  divine  Erik.

It  can  no  longer  remain  doubtful  now,  what  god  or  divine  hero
lies  hidden  in  this  Erik.  I  had  at  one  time  thought  of  Er  (Mars),
because  the  form  Erctag  is  met  with  a  few  times  for  Ertag  (p.  124),
but  the  short  vowel  in  Er,  and  the  long  one  in  Irinc,  Eirikr,  are
enough  to  warn  us  off'.  Instead  of  Eriksgata  we  also  meet  with
Riksgata,  and  this  points  decidedly  to  Rigr,  the  earthly  name  of
the  god  Heimdallr,  who  in  the  Edda  walks  the  green  roads  (groenar
brautir)  of  earth,  to  beget  the  three  races  of  men.  In  the  green
earthly  roads  are  mirrored  the  white  and  shining  paths  of  heaven.3
Then  the  problem  started  on  p.  234,  whether  the  ON.  form  Rigr
arose  out  of  Iringr  by  aphaeresis  and  syncope,  now  finds  a  solution
approaching  to  certainty.  Heimdallr  dwells  in  Himinbiorg  on  the
quaking  roost  (Bifrost),  the  rainbow,  which  is  the  bridge  or  path  by
'which  the  gods  descend  from  heaven  to  earth.  The  rainbow  is  the
celestial  ring,  as  the  galaxy  is  the  celestial  road,  and  Heimdallr
keeper  of  that  road,  Heimdallr  is  Elgr  =  Iring,  walking  the  earth
and  translated  to  the  skies ;  now  we  comprehend,  why  there  lived
among  the  nations  many  a  various  tale  of  Eriksgata,  Iringesivec,
Iring  esstrdza,  and  was  shifted  now  to  one  and  now  to  the  other
celestial  phenomenon.  Iring,  through  luwaring,  borders  on  Ebur-
drung  the  old  name  of  Orion  (see  SuppL).  And  if  our  heroic
legend  associates  Irmenfrit,  i.e.,  Irmin  with  Iring,  and  Irinin-street
alternates  with  Iring-street,  then  in  the  god-myth  also,  there  must
have  existed  points  of  contact  between  Irmin  =  OSinn  and  Iring  =
Heimdallr:  well,  Heimdallr  was  a  son  of  Oolnn,  and  the  Welsh  milky
way  was  actually  named  after  Gwydion,  i.e.,  Woden.  From  the
Irminsul  four  roads  branched  out  across  the  country,  Eriksgata

1  So  king  Hakon  is  admitted  into  the  society  of  gods,  HermotSr  and  Bragi
go  to  meet  him  :  «  siti  Hakon  meS  heio'in  goS '  (Hakoiiarmal).
a  Dahlmann  guesses  it  may  be  the  Upsal  Erik  (d.  804).
3  Altd.  blatter  1,  372-3.


3G2  HEROES.

extended  in  four  directions,  four  such  highways  are  likewise  known
to  English  tradition,  though  it  gives  the  name  of  Ermingestret  to
only  one,  and  bestows  other  mythic  titles  on  the  rest.  Of  Irmin
and  of  Iring,  both  the  divine  personality  and  the  lapse  into  hero-
nature  seem  to  be  made  out.


2.  MA  ESQ.    GAMBARO.    SUAPO.

Now  that  I  have  expounded  the  primeval  triad  of  Germanic
races,  I  have  to  offer  some  conjectures  on  the  sevenfold  division.
Pliny's  quintuple  arrangement  seems  not  so  true  to  fact,  his  Vindili
are  Tacitus's  Vandilii,  his  Peucini  not  referable  to  any  founder  of  a
race.  But  Tacitus  to  his  first  three  adds  four  other  leading  races,
the  Marsi,  Gambrivii,  Suevi  and  Vandilii,  in  whose  names  there
exists  neither  alliteration  nor  the  weak  form  as  a  mark  of  deriva
tion.

The  Marsi  between  Rhine  and  Weser,  an  early  race  which  soon
disappears,  in  whose  country  the  Tanfana  sanctuary  stood,  lead  up
to  a  hero  Marso,  whom  we  must  not  mix  up  with  the  Pioman  Mars
gen.  Martis,  nor  with  Marsus  the  son  of  Circe  (who  in  like  manner
gives  name  to  an  Italian  people,  Gellius  16,  11.  Pliny  7,  2.
Augustine  in  Ps.  57).  The  Marsigni  =  Marsingi,  a  Suevic  people,
acknowledged  the  same  name  and  origin.  The  proper  name  Marso
occurs  in  Mabillon  no.  18,  in  a  deed  of  692,  also  in  the  polypt.
Irminonis  p.  158a  163b,  but  seldom  elsewhere.  Jl/em'burg  and
Marseburg,  Pertz  8,  537.  540,  seem  to  belong  here,  while  some
other  names  given  above,  p.  201,  are  open  to  doubt;  I  do  not
know  if  a  MHG.  phrase,  obscure  in  itself,  is  at  all  relevant :  '  zuo
alien  marsen  varn,'  MS.  1,  25a,  which  may  signify,  to  go  to  all  the
devils,  expose  oneself  to  every  danger ;  conf.  '  einen  marsen  man/
Crane  2865.  The  Gothic  marzjan  (irnpedire,  offendere)  might  seem
allied  to  the  root,  but  that  would  have  been  merrian,  merran
in  OHG.

The  name  of  the  Gambrivii  I  assign  to  the  root  gambar,
kambar  strenuus,  from  which  also  is  derived  the  name  of  Gambara,
ancestress  of  the  Langobards.  There  may  have  been  likewise  a
hero  Gambaro.  And  the  forest  of  Gambreta  (instead  of  Gabreta).
is  worth  considering.  Gambara's  two  sons  are  called  Ibor  =  OHG.
Epur,  AS.  Eofor,  ON.  lofur,  i.e.  aper,  boar,  and  Ajo :  all  the  three
names  appear  to  be  corrupt  in  Saxo  Gram.


MARSO.      SUAPO.  363

Ought  we  to  assume  for  the  Suevi,  OHG.  Suapa,  an  eponymous
hero  Suevo,  Suapo,  and  perhaps  connect  with  him  an  old  legend  of
a  mountain  ?  Pliny  4,  13  places  in  the  land  of  the  '  gens  Ingae-
vonum,  quae  est  prima  Germaniae,'  a  certain  'Sevo  mons  immensus'
reaching  to  the  Sinus  Codanus  ;  and  Solinus,  following  him,  says
22,  1 :  f  Mons  Sevo  ipse  ingens  .  .  .  initium  Germaniae  facit,
Imnc  Inguaeones  tenent ; '  but  Isidor  (Orig.  10,  2)  makes  out  of  it :
'  dicti  autem  Suevi  putantur  a  monte  Suevo,  qui  ab  ortu  initium
Germaniae  facit '.  From  this  evidently  is  taken  the  account  of  the
immigrating  Swaben  in  the  Lay  of  Anno  284 :  '  si  sluogen  iri
gecelte  (pitched  their  tents)  ane  dem  berge  Sucbo  (so  several  read
for  Suedo),  dannin  wurdin  si  geheizin  Suabo  '.l  In  the  Low
German  psalms  57,  17  mons  coagulatus  is  rendered  '  berg  sueuot'
which  is  perhaps  to  be  explained  by  the  legend  of  the  lebirmer
[liver-sea,  Tacitus's  mare  pigrum  ?  Germ.  45.  Agr.  10].  It  seems
more  to  the  point,  that  in  Saem.  164-8  the  Sefa  fioll  (fells,  moun
tains,  of  the  Sevs)  are  mentioned  in  those  very  Helga-songs,  one  of
which  sings  of  Svafaland,  king  Svafnir  and  the  valkyr  Svava.  A
v  after  s  is  frequently  dropped,  and  the  readings  Sevo,  Suevo  can
thus  be  reconciled.  Suapo  then  would  be  a  counterpart  to  Etzel
and  Fairguns  (pp.  169,  172)  ?  The  AS.  Sweppa,  or  rather  Swsef-
daeg,  can  hardly  be  brought  in  here.

Tacitus's  Vandilii  and  Pliny's  Vindili  stand  in  the  same  relation
to  each  other  as  Arminius  and  Irmin,  Angrivarii  and  Inguiones ;
both  forms  come  from  winding  and  wending,  out  of  which  so  many
mythic  meanings  flow.  Wuotan  is  described  under  several  names
as  the  wender,  wanderer  [Germ,  wandeln  ambulare,  mutare].

On  the  slight  foundation  of  these  national  names,  Marsi,
Gambrivii,  Suevi  and  Vandilii,  it  is  unsafe  as  yet  to  build.  Tacitus
connects  these  with  Mannus,  but  the  heroes  themselves  he  does  not
even  name,  let  alone  giving  any  particulars  of  them.

3.  (HERCULES).    (ULYSSES).    ALOIS.

Clear  and  definite  on  the  other  hand  are  the  historian's  notices
of  another  famous  hero :  Fuisse  apud  eos  et  Herculem  memorant,
primumque  omnium  virorum  fortium  ituri  in  proelia  canunt,  Germ.

1  Kaiserchr.  285  :  sin  gecelt  hiez  er  slahen  do  uf  einin  here  der  heizit
Swero,  von  dem  berge  Swero  sint  sie  alle  gelieizen  Swabo.  For  Swero  read
Swevo  (see  Suppl.).


364  HEROES.

3.  Speaking  of  sacrifices  in  cap.  9,  after  mentioning  Mercurius
first,  he  immediately  adds  :  Herculem  ac  Martern  concessis  animali-
bus  placant,  the  demigod  being  purposely  put  before  even  Mars.
Chapter  34  tells  us  of  the  ocean  on  the  coast  of  the  Frisians,  then
says :  Et  superesse  adhuc  Herculis  columnas  fama  vulgavit,  sive
adiit  Hercules,  sen  quidquid  ubique  magnificuin  est,  in  claritatem
ejus  referre  consensimus.  Nee  defuit  audentia  Druso  Germanico,
sed  obstitit  oceanus  in  se  simul  atque  in  Herculem  inquiri.  Mox
nemo  tentavit,  sanctiusque  ac  reverentius  visum  de  actis  deorum
credere  quam  scire.  The  Annals  2,  12  name  a  '  silva  Herculi
sacra/  between  the  Weser  and  Elbe  in  the  land  of  the  Chernscans ;
while  the  Peutinger  Table  puts  a  *  castra  Herculis '  near  Novio-
magus  (Nimwegen).  All  this  means  something,  it  all  points  to
some  demigod  who  is  identified,  not  unadvisedly,  with  that  of  the
Romans.  Hercules,  whose  deeds  were  accomplished  in  countries
widely  remote,  is  thought  to  have  visited  Germany  also,  and  the
Gaditanian  pillars  at  one  end  of  Europe  have  a  counterpart  in  the
Frisian  ocean  on  another  side  of  it.  In  the  German  battle-song
the  praise  of  Hercules  is  sounded  first,  victims  are  slain  to  him  as
to  the  highest  gods,  to  him  a  wood  is  consecrated.  Of  pillars,
even  Widukind  still  knows  something,  by  his  speaking  of  Hirmin's
effigies  columnarum  (pi.),  not  columuae.  Was  the  plural  irman-
siili  (p.  115)  more  exact  than  irmansul,  and  had  the  image  several
pillars  ?  Did  the  Eoman  in  his  Hermin  and  Herminones  think  of
Herakles  and  Hercules,  whose  name  bore  plainly  on  its  face  the
root  r/Hpa,  Hera  ?  was  that  why  he  retained  the  aspirate  in  Her-
minones  and  Hermunduri,  and  not  in  Arminius  ?  An  approxima
tion  of  sound  in  the  names  of  the  two  heroes,  Roman  and  German,
may  surely  be  presupposed.  The  position  of  Herculis  silva  and
columnae  does  not  indeed  agree  with  that  of  the  Herminones,  but
the  worship  of  such  a  hero  was  sure  to  spread  far  and  not  to  be
confined  to  the  particular  race  to  which  he  gave  his  name.  In
the  German  Irman,  Irmin,  it  seems  correct  for  the  aspirate  to
be  wanting,  as  in  Arminius ;  in  Cherusci  it  is  indispensable,  and
therefore  the  Romans  never  wrote  Herusci.

If  in  this  '  Hercules '  we  wish  to  see  one  of  the  great  gods
themselves,  we  must  apparently  exclude  Mercury  and  Mars,  from
whom  he  is  distinguished  in  cap.  9,  i.e.,  Wuotan  and  Zio.  And  for
supposing  him  to  mean  Donar,  i.e.,  Jupiter  (as  Zeuss  does,  p.  25),  I


HERCULES.      ULYSSES.  365

see  no  other  ground  than  that  the  Norse  Thorr,  like  Hercules,
performs  innumerable  heroic  deeds,  but  these  may  equally  be
placed  to  the  credit  of  Irmin,  and  Innin  and  the  thundergod  have
nothing  else  in  common.  Yet,  in  favour  of  'Hercules'  being  Donar,
we  ought  perhaps  to  weigh  the  AS.  sentences  quoted  on  p.  161,
note  ;  also,  that  Herakles  was  a  son  of  Zeus,  and  a  foe  to  giants.

I  had  thought  at  one  time  that  Hercules  might  stand  for
Sahsnot,  Seaxneat,  whom  the  formula  of  renunciation  exalts  by  the
side  of  Thunar  and  Wodan ;  I  thought  so  on  the  strength  of
'  Hercules  Saxanus,'  whese  surname  might  be  explained  by  saxum
=  sahs.  But  the  inscriptions  in  which  we  meet  with  this
Hercules  Saxanus  extend  beyond  the  bounds  of  Germany,  and
belong  rather  to  the  Roman  religion.  Our  Sahsndt  has  with  more
justice  been  assigned  to  Zio  (p.  203),  with  whom  Hercules  cannot
be  connected.  I  now  think  the  claims  of  Irmin  are  better  founded:
as  Hercules  was  Jupiter's  son,  Irmin  seems  to  have  been  Wodan's  ;
and  he  must  have  been  the  subject  of  the  battle-songs  (ituri  in
proelia  canunt),  even  of  those  which  Tacitus  understood  of  Ar-
minius  (canitur  adhuc) ;  though  they  would  have  suited  Mars  too,
p.  207  (see  Suppl.).

It  is  a  harder  matter  to  form  an  opinion  about  the  '  Ulysses  ' :
Ceterum  et  Ulixem  quidam  opinantur  longo  illo  et  fabuloso  errore
in  hunc  oceanum  delatum  adisse  Germaniae  terras,  Asciburgium-
que,  quod  in  ripa  Rheni  situm  hodieque  incolitur,  ab  illo  consti-
tutum  nominatumque ;  aram  quin  etiam  Ulixi  consecratam,  adjecto
Laertae  patris  nomine,  eodem  loco  olim  repertam ;  Tac.  Germ.  3.
In  Odysseus  people  have  seen  OSinn,  in  Asciburg  Asburg ;  but  if
Woden  stood  for  the  god  Mercury,  it  cannot  here  mean  the  hero,
still  less  can  Askiburg  be  traced  to  the  ases,  a  purely  Norse  form,
which  in  these  regions  would  have  been  anses.  When  Tacitus
makes  Ulixes  the  founder  of  Asciburg,  nothing  is  simpler  than  to
suppose  him  to  have  been  Isco,  Escio,  Asko  (p.  350) ;  and  if  it  was
Isco  that  set  the  Romans  thinking  of  Ul-ixes,  how  it  helps  to  esta
blish  the  sc  in  Iscaevones  !  Mannus  the  father  of  Isco  may  have
suggested  Laertes,  inasmuch  as  Xao?  people,  and  Xao?  stone,  are
mixed  up  in  the  creation  of  the  first  man  (the  origo  geutis)  out  of
stone  or  rock  (see  ch.  XIX)  ;  in  the  same  way  Asco  grew  up  out  of
the  tree  (ash),  and  fy?D?  and  Trerpij  stand  together  in  the  mythus,


366  HEROES.

not  without  meaning.      As  liut  from   liotan,  Xao?  seems  to  come
from  the  same  root  as  Xao?,


The  interpretatio  Eomana  went  more  upon  analogies  of  sense
than  of  sound  ;  so,  in  dealing  with  Castor  and  Pollux,  I  will  not
take  them  for  the  brothers  Hadu  and  Phol  =  Baldr  (see  Suppl.).
These  Gemini,  however,  are  the  very  hardest  to  interpret  ;  the
passage  about  them  was  given  on  p.  6G,  and  an  attempt  was  made
to  show  that  alx  referred  to  the  place  where  the  godlike  twins  were
worshipped  :  I  confess  it  does  not  satisfy  .me.  Our  antiquity  has
plenty  of  hero  brothers  to  show,  but  no  twins  with  a  name  like
Alci,  if  this  plural  of  Alcus  is  the  true  form.  It  occurs  to  me,  that
one  of  OSin's  names  is  Idlkr  (Ssem.  46b  47b),  and  jolk  in  the
Vermland  dialect  means  a  boy.2  This  comes  more  home  to  us  than
the  Samogitic  Algir  (angelus  est  summorum  deorum,  Lasicz,  p.  47),
towards  which  the  dictionaries  offer  nothing  but  alga,  reward.
Utterly  untrustworthy  is  any  comparison  with  the  Slav  deities
Lei  and  Polel,  themselves  as  yet  unsupported  by  authority  (see
Suppl.).3

4.  BEOWULF,  SIGFRIT,  AMALO,  ERMENPJCII,  DIETERICH,  &c.

From  the  above  specimens  in  Tacitus  we  may  conclude  that  all
the  Teutonic  races  had  a  pretty  fully  developed  Heroology  ;  and  if
our  ancient  stores  of  native  literature  had  been  still  accessible  to  us,
we  might  have  gained  a  much  closer  insight  into  its  nature  and  its
connexion  as  a  whole.  As  it  is,  we  are  thrown  upon  dry  genealogies,
dating  from  many  centuries  after,  and  touching  only  certain  races,
namely  the  Goths,  Langobards,  Burgundians,  but  above  all,  the
Anglo-Saxons  and  Scandinavians.  We  may  learn  from  them  the
connexion  of  the  later  kings  with  the  ancient  gods  and  heroes,  but
not  the  living  details  of  their  myths.  Yet  we  could  be  content,  if
even  such  pedigrees  had  also  been  preserved  of  the  Franks  and
other  nations  of  continental  Germany.

The  Anglo-Saxon  genealogies  seem  the  most  important,  and  the

1  "  Ulixes  =  Loki,  Sn.  78.     For  Laertes,  whose  name  Pott  1,  222  explains
as  protector  of  the  people,  c'onf.  Ptolemy's  Aa/a/3ov/ryioi/."      Extr.  from  Suppl.,
vol.  iii.

2  Almqvist,  Svensk  sprSklara,  Stockh.  1810,  p.  385\

8  In  Lith.  lele  is  pupa,  nkies  lele  pupilla,  leilas  butterfly.


GOZ.      FKOGER.  367

Appendix  gives  them  in  full  [but  see  above,  p.  165].  All  the
families  branch  out  from  Woden,  as  most  of  the  Greek  do  from
Zeus ;  it  was  a  proud  feeling  to  have  one's  root  in  the  highest  of
all  gods.  Prominent  among  his  sons  are  Saxnedt  and  Bceldceg,  who
were  themselves  accounted  divine;  but  several  other  names  can
claim  a  place  among  the  earliest  heroes,  e.g.,  Sigegedt  and  Wodcl-
gedt1  (both  akin  to  the  Gothic  Gduts),  Fredivine,  Wuscfred,  Sccfugd,
Westcrfalcna ;  and  many  are  fallen  dim  to  us.  Cdsere,  which  in
other  AS.  writings  is  used  for  cyning,2  seems  to  be  a  mere
appellative,  and  to  have  acquired  the  character  of  a  proper  name
after  the  analogy  of  the  Eoman  caesar  (?).  All  these  genealogies
give  us  barely  the  names  of  the  god's  sons  and  grandsons,  never
those  of  their  mothers  or  grandmothers;  and  the  legend,  which
ought  like  the  Greek  ones  to  give  life  to  the  relationship,  is  the
very  thing  we  miss.

Some  of  the  Norse  traditions  gain  in  value,  by  being  taken  with
the  genealogies.  The  Volsungasaga  sets  out  with  OSin's  being  the
father  of  Sigi,  but  all  particulars  of  the  relationship  are  withheld ;
Eerir  the  son  of  Sigi  is  in  the  immediate  keeping  of  the  highest
gods,  and  so  on.  Another  time,  on  the  contrary,  we  are  informed,
Sn.  84—86,  how  OSinn  under  the  name  of  Bolverkr  (OHG.  Palo-
wurcho  ?)  became  servant  to  the  giant  Baugi,  in  order  to  get  at  the
divine  drink,  which  the  giant's  brother  Suttungr  kept,  guarded  by
his  daughter  Gunnloff;  between  her  and  the  god  took  place  sundry
passages  of  love,  dimly  hinted  at  by  Ssemund  also  12b  23a'b  24a,
but  we  are  nowhere  told  what  heroes  were  begotten  in  the  three
nights  that  05inn  passed  with  the  giant's  daughter.  Gunnloff
belongs  to  the  race  of  giants,  not  of  men,  which  is  also  the  case
with  Gerdr  whom  Freyr  wooed,  and  perhaps  with  others,  who  are
not  reckoned  among  the  asynjor.  The  Greeks  also  held  that  from
the  union  of  gods  with  titans'  daughters  might  spring  a  hero,  or
even  a  god  (like  Tyr,  p.  208).— Only  Saxo,  p.  66,  and  no  other
authority,  tells  us  of  a  Norwegian  king  and  hero  '  Frogerus,  ut
quiclam  ferunt,  Othino  patre  natus/  to  whom  the  gods  gave  to  be
invincible  in  fight,  unless  his  adversary  could  grasp  the  dust  from

1  OHG.  Wuotilgoz  (Zeitschr.  f.  d.  alt.  1,  577),  conf.  wueteln  above,  p.  132,
and  Wodel-beer,  p.  156  (see  Suppl.).

2  In  Boeth.  38,  1  Agamemnon  is  styled  casere,  and  Ulysses  cyning  [in  the
Pref.,  Ecedgot,  Ealleiic,  Theodric  are  cyningas,  the  emperor  always  casere]  ;  in
a  doc.  in  Kemble  2,  304  Eadred  is  '  cvning  and  casere  '.


3G8  HEROES.

under  his  feet,1  which  the  Danish  king  Frotho  by  fraud  contrived  to
do.  Can  this  Froyer  be  the  AS.  FreoSegar,  FreSegar  in  the  Wessex
genealogy,  who  had  Brond  for  father,  Bseldaeg  for  grandfather,
Woden  for  great-grandfather  ?  The  ON.  table  of  lineage  seems  to
mix  up  FrioGegar  with  FroSi,  his  adversary.2  According  to  the
Formal!  of  the  Edda,  p.  1 5,  and  the  Yngl.  saga  c.  9,  Norway  traced
her  eldest  line  of  kings  to  Sccmingr,  the  son  of  OSinn  by  SkaSi,
previously  the  wife  of  NiorSr ;  some  write  Semingr,  which  means
pacificator,  and  would  lead  to  FriSgeir  again.  SkaSi  was  daughter
to  the  iotunn  Thiassi,  and  the  SigurSardrapa  (-killing)  calls
SigurSr  LaSaiarl  '  afspringr  Thiassa,'  (Th.  progenies). — The  Her-
rauSssaga  cap.  1  makes  Hringr  spring  from  Gauti,  and  him  from
O(5inn  :  this  Gautr  or  Gauti  (conf.  Ing  and  Ingo,  Irmin  and  Irmino),.
Goth.  Gauts,  OHG.  Koz,  AS.  Geat,  whether  surname,  son  or
ancestor  of  OSinn,  cannot  belie  his  divinity  (conf.  p.  367) ;  and  his
son  Godwulf  too,  confounded  by  some  with  Folcwalda  (p.  165,  last
table),  looks  mythical.  It  is  from  Gduts  that  the  Gautos  (Koza,  Tav-
TOI)  professed  to  be  descended,  these  being  other  than  the  Cubans
(Tac.  Gothones,  Fordoi),  but  related  to  them  nevertheless,  for  the
Gothic  genealogy  starts  with  the  same  Gauts  at  the  head  of  it. —
Again,  Sigrlami  is  called  OSin's  son,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  413.  But  who
can  '  Bous  (gen.  Boi),  Othini  ex  Einda  films '  be  in  Saxo  Gram.  46  ?
Possibly  Biar,  Biaf,  Beav  =  Beowulf,  to  whom  we  are  coming  (see
Suppl.)'.3

Another  OSinsson,  Skioldr,  is  the  famed  ancestral  hero  of  the
Danes,  from  whom  are  derived  all  the  Skioldungar  (Sn.  146) ;  he
may  have  been  most  nearly  related  to  the  people  of  Schonen,  as  in
the  Fornm.  sog.  5,  239  he  is  expressly  called  Skanunga  goS  (see  p.
161),  and  was  probably  worshipped  as  a  god.  In  Saxo  Gram,  he
does  not  take  the  lead,  but  follows  after  Humblus,  Dan4  and
Lother ;  Skiold  himself  has  a  son  Gram,5  from  whom  come  Hadding


1  A  token   of  victory  1  as  the  vanquished  had  to  present  such  dust  (RA.
111-2).

2  The  AS.  name  Frodheri  stands  yet  farther  away  (Beda  2,  9  §  113).

3  Saxo  122  mentions  one  hero  begotten  by  Thorr  :  Halda/nut  Biarggrammut
a  pud  Sueones  magni  Thor  jilius  existimatur.     And  I  know  of  no  other  but  this
one.

4  Dan,  in  Saxo's  view  the  true  ancestor  of  the  Danes,  is  called  in  the
Rigsmal  tianr,  and  placed  together  with  Danpr,  Srem.  106b.

8  Elsewhere  Gramr  is  the  proper  name  of  a  particular  sword,  while  the
appellative  gramr  denotes  kii'.g.


GEAT.      JSCILD.      BEOWULF.


369


and  then  Frotho ;  but  the  AS.  genealogy  places  its  Scild  after
Scedf,  and  singularly  makes  them  both  ancestors  of  OSinn.  From
Scedf  descends  Sceldwa,  from  him  consecutively  Beaw,  Tcetiva,  Gedt,
and  after  several  more  generations  comes  Woden  last.  The  ON.
version  of  the  lineage  is  in  harmony  with  this ;  and  even  in  the
Gothic  pedigree,  which  only  begins  with  Gduts,  we  may  suppose  a
Skaufs,  Skildva,  Taitva  to  have  preceded,  to  whom  the  OHG.  names
Scoup,  Scilto,  Zeizo  would  correspond. — None  however  is  so
interesting  as  Sceldwa's  son,  the  Anglo-Saxon  Beaw,  called  by  the
Scandinavians  Biar,  Biaf,  but  in  the  living  AS.  epos  Beewulf.  It
is  true,  the  remarkable  poem  of  that  name  is  about  a  second  and
younger  Beowulf,  in  whom  his  forefather's  name  repeats  itself ;  but
fortunately  the  opening  lines  allude  to  the  elder  Beowulf,  and  call
his  father  Scild  (Goth.  Skildus,  agreeing  with  Skioldr)  a  Scefing,  i.e.,
son  of  Scedf.  Beaw  is  a  corruption  of  Beow,  and  Beow  an  abbrevia-^
tion  of  Beowulf-,  it  is  the  complete  name  that  first  opens  to  us  a
wider  horizon.  Beowulf  signifies  bee-wolf  (OHG.  Piawolf?),  and  i
that  is  a  name  for  the  woodpecker,  a  bird  of  gay  plumage  that  hunts
after  bees,  of  whom  antiquity  has  many  a  tale  to  tell.1  Strange  to
say,  the  classical  mythus  (above,  pp.  206,  249)  makes  this  Picus  a
son  of  Saturn,  inasmuch  as  it  either  identifies  him  with  Zeus  who
is  succeeded  by  a  Hermes,  or  makes  him  nourisher  of  Mars's  sons
and  father  of  Faunus.  We  see  Picus  (Picumnus)  interwoven  into
the  race  of  Kronos,  Zeus,  Hermes  and  Ares,  the  old  Bohemian
Stracec  =  picus  into  that  of  Sitivrat,  Kirt  and  Eadigost,  as  Beowulf
is  into  that  of  Gedt  and  Woden.  If  the  groups  differ  in  the  details
of  their  combination,  their  agreement  as  wholes  is  the  more
trustworthy  and  less  open  to  suspicion.  And  just  as  the  footprints
of  Saturn  were  traceable  from  the  Slavs  to  the  Saxons  and  to
England,  but  were  less  known  to  the  Northmen,  so  those  of  the
divine  bird  in  Stracec  and  Beowulf  seem  to  take  the  same  course,
and  never  properly  to  reach  Scandinavia.  The  central  Germans
stood  nearer  to  Eoman  legend,  although  no  actual  borrowing  need
have  taken  place.

What  a  deep  hold  this  group  of  heroes  had  taken,  is  evidenced
by  another  legend.  Scedf  (i.e.,  manipulus  frumenti)  takes  his  name,

1  Can  the  name  in  Upper  Germany  for  the  turdus  or  oriolus  galbula,
Birolf,  Pirolf,  brother  Pirolf  (Frisch  1,  161),  possibly  stand  for  Biewolf  (or
Biterolf)  ?  The  Serbs  call  it  Urosh,  and  curiously  this  again  is  a  hero's  name.
Conf.  the  Finn,  uros  [with  heros  ?  ],  p.  341.

24


370  HEROES.

from  the  circumstance,  that  when  a  boy  he  was  conveyed  to  the
country  he  was  destined  to  succour,  while  asleep1  on  a  sheaf  of  corn
in  the  boat.  The  poetry  of  the  Lower  Ehine  and  Netherlands  in
the  Mid.  Ages  is  full  of  a  similar  story  of  the  sleeping  youth  whom
a  swan  conducts  in  his  ship  to  the  afflicted  land ;  and  this  swan-
knight  is  pictured  approaching  out  of  paradise,  from  the  grave,  as
Helms,  whose  divine  origin  is  beyond  question.  Helias,  Gerhart  or
Loherangrin  of  the  thirteenth  century  is  identical  then  with  a  Scdf
or  Scoup  of  the  seventh  and  eighth,  different  as  the  surroundings
may  have  been,  for  the  song  of  Beowulf  appears  to  have  transferred
to  Scild  what  belonged  of  right  to  his  father  Scedf.  The  beautiful
story  of  the  swan  is  founded  on  the  miraculous  origin  of  the  swan-
brothers,  which  I  connect  with  that  of  the  Welfs ;  both  however
seem  to  be  antique  lineage-legends  of  the  Franks  and  Swabians,  to
which  the  proper  names  are  mostly  wanting.  Had  they  been
preserved,  many  another  tie  between  the  heroes  and  the  gods  would
come  to  light.2 — Further,  to  Sceldwa  or  Skioldr  belongs  obviously
the  name  Schiltunc  in  the  Tirol  and  Parzival,3  as  the  name  Schil-
lunc,  Mb.  88,  3,  points  to  a  race  of  Sciljmngd,  corresponding  to  the
AS.  Scilfingas,  OK  Scilfingar,  of  whom  Skelfir,  Scilfe,  Scilpi  is  to
be  regarded  as  the  ancestor.  This  Skelfir  the  Fornald.  sog.  2,  9
makes  the  father  of  Skioldr,  so  that  the  Skilfinga  and  Skioldinga
sett  fall  into  one.  Either  ifcelLis^JiexfL-gQnfounded  with  Scef.  or
Scef  must  be  altered  to  ScelLJbnL  the  frequent  occurrence_of_the
Jofm~Scear7and  its  interpretation  (from  sheaf),  seem  alike  to  forbid
jbhis  (see  Suppl.).

As  the  Skioldungar  descend  from  Skioldr,  so  do  the  Giukungar
from  Giuki  =  Gibika,  Kipicho,  with  whom  the  Burgundian  line
begins  :  if  not  a  god  himself  (p.  137),  he  is  a  divine  hero  that  carries
us  back  very  near  to  Wuotan.  The  Gibichensteine  (-stones)  more
over  bear  witness  to  him,  and  it  is  to  the  two  most  eminent  women
of  this  race  that  Grimhildensteine,  Brunhildensteine  are  allotted.4


1  Umborwesende  ?     Beow.  92.

2  The  ship  that  brought  Sceaf  and  the  swan-knight  carries  them  away
again  at  last,  but  the  reason  is  disclosed  only  in  later  legend  :  it  was  forbidden
to  inquire  into  their  origin,  Parz.  825,  19.     Conr.,  Schwanritter  1144-73.

3  Zeitschr.  fur  deut.  alterth.  1 ,  7.

4  Brunehildesteiii,   lectulus    Brunihilde,   Kriemhiltenstein,    Oiemildespili
(Heldensage  p.  155)  ;  Krimhilte  graben  (Weisth.  1,  48)  ;  in  loco  Grimhiltaperg
nominate  (Juvavia  p.  137)  ;  de  Crimhilteperc,  MB.  7.  498.


SCEAF.      GIBIKA.      WELIS.      SIGOFRID.  371

Frau  Ubte  however  appears  as  ancestress  of  the  stock.1  It  has  not
been  so  much  noticed  as  it  ought,  that  in  the  Lex  Burg.  Gislahari
precedes  Gundahari  by  a  whole  generation,  whilst  our  epic
(Nibelungen)  makes  Giselhere  Gunthere's  younger  brother,  and  the
Edda  never  names  him  at  all.  The  Law  makes  no  mention  of  any
brothers,  and  Giselher  the  young  has  merely  the  name  of  his  elder
kinsman.  Gernot  (from  ger  =  gais)  and  Giselher  seem  to  be
identical  (conf.  Gramm.  2,  46).  But  the  Norse  Guttormr  can
hardly  be  a  distortion  of  Godomar,  for  we  meet  with  him  outside  of
the  legend,  e.g.,  in  Landn.  1,  18.  20,  where  the  spelling  Guftormr
(Guntwurm)  would  lead  us  to  identify  him  with  Gunthere,  and  in
Saxo  Gram,  are  found  several  Guthormi  (see  Suppl.).  Then  Hagano
the  one-eyed,  named  from  hagan  (spinosus,  Waltharius  1421),  is
'  more  than  heroic  '.2

Even  deeper  reaching  roots  must  be  allowed  to  the  Welisungs  ;
their  name  brings  us  to  a  divine  Valis  who  has  disappeared  (conf.
the  ON.  Vali,  p.  163),  but  the  mere  continuance  of  an  OHG.
Welisunc  is  a  proof  of  the  immemorial  diffusion  of  the  Volsunga-
saga  itself  (see  Suppl.).  How,  beginning  with  Wuotan,  it  goes  on
to  Sigi,  Sigimunt,  Sigifrit,  Sintarfizilo,  has  been  alluded  to  on  p.
367,  and  has  already  been  treated  of  elsewhere.3  With  Sigfrit
stands  connected  Helfrich,  Chilpericus,  ON.  Hialprekr.  It  is
worthy  of  note,  that  the  AS.  Beowulf  calls  Sigfrit  Sigemund,  and
Sigmundr  is  a  surname  of  OSinn  besides.4  Such  a  flood  of
splendour  falls  on  Siegfried  in  the  poems,  that  we  need  not  stick  at
trifles ;  his  whole  nature  has  evident  traces  of  the  superhuman :
brought  up  by  an  elf  Eegino,  beloved  by  a  valkyr  Brunhild,
instructed  in  his  destiny  by  the  wise  man  Gripir,  he  wears  the
helmet  of  invisibility,  is  vulnerable  only  on  one  spot  in  his  body,
as  Achilles  was  in  the  heel,  and  he  achieves  the  rich  hoard  of  the
Mbelungs.  His  slaying  of  the  dragon  Fafnir  reminds  us  of  IlvOcav6

1  Haupts  zeitschr.  1,  21.

2  Lachmann's  examination  of  the  whole  Nibelung  legend,  p.  22.

3  Haupts  zeitschr.  1,  2 — 6.

4  In  the   Copenh.  ed.  of  the  Edda,  Saem.  2,  889  Sigemon,  and  in  Finn
Magn.  lex.  643  Segemon,   is   said  to  have  been  a  name  of  the  Celtic  Mars  ;
I  suppose  on  the  ground  of  the  inscriptt.  in  Gruter  Iviii.  5  :  Marti  Segomoni
sacrum     ...     in  civitate  Sequanorum  ;   and  ii.  2  :    Diis   deabus  omnibus
Veturius  L.L.  Securius  (al.  Segomanics)  pro  se  quisque  (see  Suppl.).

5  Almost  the  same,  granting  a  change  of  th  into  /(as  in  tirjp,  <pr)p)  ;  of  our
a  standing  for  Greek  J  there  are  more  examples  :  fnasu,  blasu  =  7n/evo>,  0Xvca.


372  HEROES.

whom  Apollo  overcame,  and  as  Python  guarded  the  Delphic  oracle,
the  dying  Faf nir  prophesies.1  We  must  take  into  account  Lofffdfnir
Seem.  24,  30.  Sinfiotli,  who,  when  a  boy,  kneads  snakes  into  the
dough,  is  comparable  to  the  infant  Hercules  tested  by  serpents.

Through  Siegfried  the  Frankish  Welisungs  get  linked  to  the
Burgundian  Gibichungs,  and  then  both  are  called  Nibelungs.

Among  Gothic  heroes  we  are  attracted  by  the  Ovida  and
Cnivida  in  Jornandes  cap.  22,  perhaps  the  same  as  Offa  and
Cnebba  in  the  Mercian  line.  But  of  far  more  consequence  is  the
great  Gothic  family  of  Amals  or  Amalungs,  many  of  whose  names
in  the  Jornandean  genealogy  seem  corrupt.  The  head  of  them  all
was  Gapt,  which  I  emend  to  Gaut  (Gauts),  and  so  obtain  an  allusion
to  the  divine  office  of  casting  [giessen,  ein-guss,  in-got]  and  meting
(pp.  22.  142)  ;  he  was  a  god,  or  son  of  a  god  (p.  164),  and  is  even
imported  into  the  Saxon  lines  as  Gedt,  Wodelgeat,  Sigegeat  (p.  367).
In  this  Gothic  genealogy  the  weak  forms  Amala,  Isarna,  Ostro-
gotha,  Ansila,  confirm  what  we  have  observed  in  Tuisco,  Inguio,
Iscio,  Irmino ;  but  those  best  worth  noting  are  Amala,  after
whom  the  most  powerful  branch  of  the  nation  is  named,  Ermana-
ricus  and  Thcodericus.  Ermanaricus  must  be  linked  with  Irmino
and  the  Herminones,  as  there  is  altogether  a  closer  tie  between
Goths  and  Saxons  (Iiigaevones  and  Herminones)  as  opposed  to  the
Franks  (Iscaevones),  and  this  shows  itself  even  in  the  later  epics. —
Amongst  the  Amalungs  occur  many  names  compounded  with
vidf,  which  reminds  us  of  their  side-branch,  the  Wulfings ;  if  it  be
not  too  bold,  I  would  even  connect  Isarna  (Goth.  Eisarna)  with
Isangrim.  To  me  the  four  sons  of  Achiulf  seem  worthy  of
particular  notice :  Ansila,  Ediulf,  Vuldulf,  and  Hermenrich.  Of
the  last  we  have  just  spoken,  and  Ansila  means  the  divine ;  our
present  concern  is  with  Ediulf  and  Vuldulf.  I  find  that  Jornandes,
cap.  54,  ascribes  to  the  Scyrians  also  two  heroes  Edica  and  Vulf;
the  Eugian  Odoacer  has  a  father  Eiicho  and  a  brother  Aonulf;  and

1  The  epithet  sveinn  (Sw.  sven,  Dan.  svend)  given  to  the  Norse  Sigurfrr
appears  already  in  Fafnir's  address  '  sveinn  ok  sveinn  /'  and  in  the  headings  to
ch.  142-4  of  the  Vilk.  saga.  The  same  hero  then  is  meant  by  the  tiiiard
snaresvtnd  (fortis  puer)  of  the  Danish  folk-song,  who,  liding  on  (Irani,
accompanies  to  Askereia  (see  ch.  XXXI),  and  by  Svend  Felding  or  Falling  of
the  Danish  folk-tale  (Thiele  2,  64-7.  Muller's  sagabibl.  2,  417-9).  He  drank
out  of  a  horn  handed  to  him  by  elvish  beings,  and  thereby  acquired  the  strength
of  twelve  men.  Swedish  songs  call  him  Sven  Furling  or  Foiling ;  Arvulsson


IRMANRIH.      ETICHO.      DIETRICH.  373

the  legend  on  the  origin  of  the  Welfs  has  the  proper  names
j  Isenlart,  Irmentrud,  Wdf  and  Etico  constantly  recurring.  Now,
welf  is  strictly  catulus  (huelf,  whelp,  OK  hvelpr),  and  distinct  from
wolf ;  natural  history  tells  us  of  several  strong  courageous  animals
that  are  brought  into  the  world  blind ;  the  Langobardic  and
Swabian  genealogies  play  upon  dogs  and  wolves  being  exposed ;  and
as  Odoacer,  Otaclier  (a  thing  that  has  never  till  now  been  accounted
for)  is  in  some  versions  called  Sipicho,  ON".  Bicki,  and  this  means
dog  (bitch),  I  suspect  a  similar  meaning  in  Edica,  Eticho,  Ediulf,
Odacar,  which  probably  affords  a  solution  of  the  fable  about  the
'  blind  Schwaben  and  Hessen  ' :  their  lineage  goes  back  to  the  blind
Welfs.  In  the  genealogy  Ediulf  is  described  as  brother  to  Ermen-
rich,  in  later  sagas  Bicki  is  counsellor  to  lormunrekr ;  the  Hilde-
brandslied  has  but  too  little  to  say  of  Otacher.  Then  Vuldulf  also
(perhaps  Vuldr-ulf)  will  signify  a  glorious  beaming  wolf  (see
Suppl.). — As  Siegfried  eclipsed  all  other  Welisungs,  so  did  Dieterich
all  the  Amalungs  ;  and  where  the  epos  sets  them  one  against  the
other,  each  stands  in  his  might,  unconquered,  unapproachable.
Dieterich's  divine  herohood  comes  out  in  more  than  one  feature,  e.g.,
his  fiery  breath,  and  his  taking  the  place  of  Wuotan  or  Ero  (p.
213-4)  at  the  head  of  the  wild  host,  as  Dietrichbern  or  Bemhard.
The  fiery  breath  brings  him  nearer  to  Donar,  with  whom  he  can  be
compared  in  another  point  also  :  Dieterich  is  wounded  in  the
forehead  by  an  arrow,  and  a  piece  of  it  is  left  inside  him,  for  which
reason  he  is  called  the  deathless  j1  not  otherwise  did  the  half  of
Hrungnir's  hein  (stone  wedge)  remain  in  Thor's  head,  and  as
Groa's  magic  could  not  loosen  it,  it  sticks  there  still,  and  none  shall
aim  with  the  like  stones,  for  it  makes  the  piece  in  the  god's  forehead
stir  (Sn.  109 — 111).2  This  horn-like  stone  was  very  likely  shown
in  images,  and  enhanced  their  godlike  appearance.

The  renowned  race  of  the  Billings  or  Billungs,  whose  mythic
roots  and  relations  are  no  longer  discoverable,  was  still  flourishing
in  North  Germany  in  the  10-1 1th  centuries.  The  first  historically
certain  Billing  died  in  967,  and  another,  above  a  hundred  years
older,  is  mentioned.3  The  Cod.  Exon.  320,  7  says  :  '  Billing  weold

1  Simon  Keza,   chron.    Hungaror.    1,   11.    12.     Heinr.   von  Miiglein   (in
Kovachich  p.  8)  ;  conf.  Deutsche  heldensage  p.  164.

2  Hence  the  proverb  :  seint  losnar  hein  i  hofSi  Thors.

3  Wedekind's  Hermann  duke  of  Saxony,  Liineb.  1817,  p.  60.     Conf.  the
miles  Billinc,  comes  Billingus  in  docs,  of  961-8  in  Hofers  zeitschr.  2,  239.  344,
and  the  OHG.  form  Billungus  in  Zeuss,  Trad,  wizenb.  pp.  274.  287.  305.


374:  HEROES.

Wernum/  he  belongs  therefore  to  the  stock  of  Werina,  who  were
near  of  kin  to  the  Angles.  There  was  a  Billinga  haeft  (heath)  near
Whalley,  and  London  has  to  this  day  a  Billingsgate.  In  OHG.  we
find  a  man's  name  Billunc  (Eied  nos.  14.  21-3,  A.D.  808.  821-2).  If
we  take  into  account,  that  a  dwarf  Billingr  occurs  in  the  Edda,  Saem.
2a  23a,  a  hero  Pillunc  in  Eol.  175, 1,  and  Billunc  and  Nidunc  coupled
together  in  the  Kenner  14126-647,  the  name  acquires  a  respectable
degree  of  importance  (see  Suppl.).  The  derivative  Billinc  implies
a  simple  bil  or  bili  (lenitas,  placiditas),  from  which  directly  [and
not  from  our  adj.  billig,  fair]  are  formed  the  OHG.  names  Pilidrut,
Pilihilt,  Pilikart,  Pilihelm ;  to  which  add  the  almost  personified
Billich  (equity)  in  Trist,  9374.  10062.  17887.  18027,  and  the  ON.
goddess  Bil,  Sn.  39  ;  the  II  in  Billung  could  be  explained  through
Biliung.  Just  as  Oolnn  in  Ssem.  46b  is  called  both  Bileygr  (mild-
eyed)  and  Baleygr  (of  baleful  eye),  so  in  Saxo  Gram.  130  a  Bilvisus
(aequus)  stands  opposed  to  Bolvisus  (iniquus).

5.  OEENTIL.  WIELANT.  MIMI.  TELL,  &c.

In  addition  to  the  heroes  ascertained  thus  far,  who  form  part  of
the  main  pedigree  of  whole  nations,  and  thence  derive  weight  and
durability,  there  is  another  class  of  more  isolated  heroes  ;  I  can  only
put  forward  a  few  of  them  here.

We  have  still  remaining  a  somewhat  rude  poem,  certainly
founded  on  very  ancient  epic  material,  about  a  king  Orendel  or
Erentel,  whom  the  appendix  to  the  Heldenbuch  pronounces  the
first  of  all  heroes  that  were  ever  born.  He  suffers  shipwreck  on  a
voyage,  takes  shelter  with  a  master  fisherman  Eisen,1  earns  the
seamless  coat  of  his  master,  and  afterwards  wins  frau  Hreide,  the
fairest  of  women :  king  Eigel  of  Trier  was  his  father's  name.  The
whole  tissue  of  the  fable  puts  one  in  mind  of  the  Odyssey :  the  ship
wrecked  man  clings  to  the  plank,  digs  himself  a  hole,  holds  a  bough
before  him ;  even  the  seamless  coat  may  be  compared  to  Ino's  veil,
and  the  fisher  to  the  swineherd,  dame  Breide's  templars  would  be
Penelope's  suitors,  and  angels  are  sent  often,  like  Zeus's  messengers.
Yet  many  things  take  a  different  turn,  more  in  German  fashion,
and  incidents  are  added,  such  as  the  laying  of  a  naked  sword
between  the  newly  married  couple,  which  the  Greek  story  knows
nothing  of.  The  hero's  name  is  found  even  in  OHG.  documents :

1  Who  is  also  found  apparently  in  a  version  of  the  Lay  of  king  Oswald.


BILLUNG.      ORENTIL.  375

Orendil,  Meiclielb.  61;  Orenttt,  Trad,  fuld.  2,  24  2,  109  (Schannat
308) ;  Orendil  a  Bavarian  count  (an.  843  in  Eccard's  Fr.  or.  2,  367);
a  village  Orendelsal,  now  Orendensall,  in  Hohenlohe,  v.  Haupts
zeitschr.  7,  558. — But  the  Edda  has  another  myth,  which  was
alluded  to  in  speaking  of  the  stone  in  Thor's  head.  Groa  is  busy
conning  her  magic  spell,  when  Thorr,  to  requite  her  for  the
approaching  cure,  imparts  the  welcome  news,  that  in  coming  from
lotunheim  in  the  North  he  has  carried  her  husband  the  bold
Orvandill  in  a  basket  on  his  back,  and  he  is  sure  to  be  home  soon ;
he  adds  by  way  of  token,  that  as  OrvandiTs  toe  had  stuck  out  of  the
basket  and  got  frozen,  he  broke  it  off  and  flung  it  at  the  sky,  and
made  a  star  of  it,  which  is  called  Orvandils-td.  But  Groa  in  her
joy  at  the  tidings  forgot  her  spell,  so  the  stone  in  the  god's  head
never  got  loose,  Sn.  110-1.  Groa,  the  growing,  the  grass-green,  is
equivalent  to  Breide,  i.e.,  Berhta  (p.  272)  the  bright,  it  is  only
another  part  of  his  history  that  is  related  here :  Orvandill  must
have  set  out  on  his  travels  again,  and  on  this  second  adventure
forfeited  the  toe  which  Thorr  set  in  the  sky,  though  what  he  had
to  do  with  the  god  we  are  not  clearly  told.  Beyond  a  doubt,  the
name  of  the  glittering  star-group  is  referred  to,  when  AS.  glosses
render  '  jubar '  by  earendel,  and  a  hymn  to  the  virgin  Mary  in  Cod.
Exon.  7,  20  presents  the  following  passage :

Eala  Earendel,  engla  beorhtast,

ofer  middangeard  monnum  sended,

and  soSfsesta  sunnan  leoma

torht  ofer  tunglas,  J?u  tida  gehwane

of  sylfurn  Ipe  symle  inlihtes  !

i.e.,  0  jubar,  angelorum  splendidissime,  super  orbem  terrarum
hominibus  misse,  radie  vere  solis,  supra  stellas  lucide,  qui  omni
tempore  ex  te  ipso  luces  !  Mary  or  Christ  is  here  addressed  under
the  heathen  name  of  the  constellation;  I  am  only  in  doubt  as  to
the  right  spelling  and  interpretation  of  the  word  ;  an  OHG.  drentil
implies  AS.  earendel,  and  the  two  would  demand  ON.  aurvendill,
eyrvendill ;  but  if  we  start  with  ON,,  orvendill,  then  AS.  earendel,
OHG.  erentil  would  seem  preferable;  The  latter  part  of  the
compound  certainly  contains  entil-  =-  wentil.1  The  first  part  should

1  Whence  did  Matthesius  (in  Frisch  2,  439a)  get  his  "  Pan  is  the  heathens'
Wendel  and  head  bagpiper  "  1  Can  the  word  refer  to  the  metamorphoses  of  the
flute-playing  demigod  1  In  trials  of  witches,  "Wendel  is  a  name  for  the  devil,
Mones  anz.  8,  124.


376  HEROES.

be  either  ora,  earo  (auris),  or  else  ON",  or,  gen.  b'rvar  (sagitta).
Now,  as  there  occurs  in  a  tale  in  Saxo  Gram.,  p.  48,  a  Horvendilus
films  Gervendili,  and  in  OHG.  a  name  Kerwentil  (Schm.  2,  334)
and  Gerentil  (Trad.  fuld.  2,  106),  and  as  geir  (hasta)  agrees  better
with  or  than  with  eyra  (auris),  the  second  interpretation  may  com
mand  our  assent  j1  a  sight  of  the  complete  legend  would  explain  the
reason  of  the  name.  I  think  Orentil's  father  deserves  attention
too :  Eigil  is  another  old  and  obscure  name,  borne  for  instance  by
an  abbot  of  Fulda  who  died  in  822  (Pertz  1,  95.  356.  2,  366.
Trad.  fuld.  1,  77-8.  122).  In  the  Ehine-Moselle  country  are  the
singular  Eigelsteine,  Weisth.  2,  744  (see  Suppl.).2  In  AS.  we  find
the  names  Aegles  burg  (Aylesbury),  Acgles  ford  (Aylesford),  Aegles
J)orp ;  but  I  shall  come  back  to  Eigil  presently.  Possibly  Orentil
was  the  thundergod's  companion  in  expeditions  against  giants.
Can  the  story  of  Orentil's  wanderings  possibly  be  so  old  amongst
us,  that  in  Orentil  and  Eigil  of  Trier  we  are  to  look  for  that  Ulysses
and  Laertes  whom  Tacitus  places  on  our  PJiine  (p.  365)  ?  The
names  shew  nothing  in  common.3

Far-famed  heroes  were  Wieland  and  Witticli*  whose  rich
legend  is  second  to  none  in  age  or  celebrity.  Vidigoia  (Vidugauja)
of  whom  the  Goths  already  sang,  OHG.  Witugouwo  as  well  as
Witicko,  MHG.  Witcgouwe  and  Witege,  AS.  Wudga,  in  either  form
silvicola,  from  the  Goth,  vidus,  OHG.  witu,  AS.  wudu  (lignum,
silva),  leads  us  to  suppose  a  being  passing  the  bounds  of  human
nature,  a  forest-god.  Frau  Wachilt,  a  mermaid,  is  his  ancestress,
with  whom  he  takes  refuge  in  her  lake.  At  the  head  of  the  whole
race  is  placed  king  Vilkinus,  named  after  Vulcanus  as  the  Latin
termination  shews,  a  god  or  demigod,  who  must  have  had  another
and  German  name,  and  who  begets  with  the  merwoman  a  gigantic
son  Vadi,  AS.  Wada  (Cod.  Exon.  323,  1),  OHG.  Wato,  so  named  I
suppose  because,  like  another  Christopher,  he  ivaded  with  his  child
on  his  shoulder  through  the  Grcenasund  where  it  is  nine  yards

1  And  so  Uhland  (On  Thor,  p.  47  seq.)  expounds  it :  in  Groa  Tie  sees  the
growth  of  the  crop,  in  Orvandill  the  sprouting  of  the  blade.     Even  the  tale  in
Saxo  he  brings  in.

2  The  false  spelling  Eichelstein  (acorn-stone)  has  given  rise  to  spurious
legends,  Mones  anz.  7,  368.

3  I  have  hardly  the  face  to  mention,  that  some  make  the  right  shifty  Ulysses
father  to  Pan,  our  Wendel  above.

4  The  still  unprinted  M.Dutch  poem,  De  kinderen  van  Limburg,  likewise
mentions  Wilant,  Wedcge  and  Mimminc,


EIGIL.     WITICHO.     WATE.     WIELANT.  377

deep  (between  Zealand,  Falster  and  Moen)  ;  the  Danish  hero  Wate
in  Gudrun  is  identical  with  him ;  the  AS.  Wada  is  placed  toward
Helsingen.  Old  English  poetry  had  much  to  tell  of  him,  that  is
now  lost :  Chaucer  names  *  Wades  boot  Guingelot,'  and  a  place  in
Northumberland  is  called  Wade's  gap ;  Wsetlingestret  could  only
be  brought  into  connexion  with  him,  if  such  a  spelling  as
Wsedling  could  be  made  good. — Now,  that  son,  whom  Vadi  carried
through  the  sea  to  apprentice  him  to  those  cunning  smiths  the
dwarfs,  was  Wielant,  AS.  Weland,  Welond,  ON.  Volundr,  but  in
the  Vilk.  saga  Velint,  master  of  all  smiths,  and  wedded  to  a  swan-
maiden  Hervor  -alvitr.  The  rightful  owner  of  the  boat,  which
English  tradition  ascribes  to  Wada,  seems  to  have  been  Wieland  ;
the  Vilk.  saga  tells  how  he  timbered  a  boat  out  of  the  trunk  of  a
tree,  and  sailed  over  seas.  Lamed  in  the  sinews  of  his  foot,  he
forged  for  himself  a  winged  garment,  and  took  his  flight  through
the  air.  His  skill  is  praised  on  all  occasions,  and  his  name  coupled
with  every  costly  jewel,  Vilk.  saga  cap.  24.  Witeche,  the  son  he
had  by  Baduhilt,  bore  a  hammer  and  tongs  in  his  scutcheon  in
honour  of  his  father ;  during  the  Mid.  Ages  his  memory  lasted
among  smiths,  whose  workshops  were  styled  Wieland 's  houses,1  and
perhaps  his  likeness  was  set  up  or  painted  outside  them;  the
ON.  'Volundar  hus  '  translates  the  Latin  labyrinth;  a  host  of
similar  associations  must  in  olden  times  have  been  generally
diffused,  as  we  learn  from  the  names  of  places :  Welantes  gruoba
(pit),  MB.  13,  59 ;  Widantes  heim,  MB.  28a,  93  (an.  889)  ;  Wielan-
tis  dorf,  MB.  29,  54  (an.  1246) ;  Widantes  tanna  (firs),  MB.  28b,
188.  471  (an.  1280)  ;  Wielandes  brunne,  MB.  31,  41  (an.  817).
The  multiplication  of  such  names  during  long  centuries  does  not
admit  of  their  being  derived  from  human  inhabitants.  The  Dan.
Velandsuit  (-wort),  Icel.  Velantsurt,  is  the  valerian,  and  according  to
Staid.  2,  450  Wielandbeett  the  daphne  cneorum.  Tradition  would
doubtless  extend  Wieland's  dexterity  to  Wittich  and  to  Wate,  who
also  gets  the  credit  of  the  boat,  and  in  the  Gudrun-lay  of  the
healing  art.  In  Sasm.  270a,  ' bcekur  ofnar  volundom '  are  stragula
artificiose  contexta,  and  any  artist  might  be  called  a  volundr  or
wielant.  A  gorgeous  coat  of  mail  (hrsegel,  OHG.  hregil)  is  in  Beow.
904  Welandes  geweorc.  JElfred  in  Boe'th.  2,  ;7  translates  fidelis

1  Juxta  donrnm  Welandi  fabri,  Ch.  ad  arm.  1262  in  Lang's  reg.  3,  181  :
conf.  Haupts  zeitschr.  2,  248.    I  find  also  Witigo  faber,  MB.  7,  122.


378  HEROES.

ossa  Fabricii  f]?aes  wisan  goldsmiSes  ban  Welondes*  (metrically:
Wdandes  b£m) ;  evidently  the  idea  of  faber  which  lay  in  Fabricius
brought  to  his  mind  the  similar  meaning  of  the  Teutonic  name,
Weland  being  a  cunning  smith  in  general.  For  the  name  itself
appears  to  contain  the  OK  vel  =  viel  (ars,  re^i/i/,  OHG.  list),
Gramm.  1,  462,  and  smiSvelar  meant  artes  fabriles ;  the  AS.  form
is  wll,  or  better  wil,  Engl.  wile,  Fr.  guile;  the  OHG.  wiol,  wiel  (with
broken  vowel)  is  no  longer  to  be  found.  But  further,  we  must  pre
suppose  a  verb  wielan,  AS.  welan  (fabrefacere),  whose  pres.  part,  wie-
lant,  weland,  exactly  forms  our  proper  name,  on  a  par  with  wigant,
werdant,  druoant,  &c. ;  Graff  2,  234  commits  the  error  of  citing
Wielant  under  the  root  lant,  with  which  it  has  no  more  to  do  than
heilant  (healer,  saviour).  The  OFr.  Galans  (Heldens.  42)  seems
to  favour  the  ON",  form  Volundr  [root  val]  since  Veland  would
rather  have  led  to  a  Fr.  Guilans ;  possibly  even  the  ON.  vala
(nympha)  is  a  kindred  word  ?  An  OHG.  name  Wieldrud  seems
the  very  thing  for  a  wise-woman. — This  development  of  an  intrinsic
significance  in  the  hero's  name  finds  an  unexpected  confirmation
in  the  striking  similarity  of  the  Greek  fables  of  Hephaestus,
Erichthonius  and  Daedalus.  As  Weland  offers  violence  to
Beadohild  (Volundr  to  BooVildr),  so  Hephaestus  lays  a  snare -for
Athene,  when  she  comes  to  order  weapons  of  him ;  both  Hephaestus
and  Volundr  are  punished  with  lameness,  Erichthonius  too  is  lame,
and  therefore  invents  the  four-horse  chariot,  as  Volundr  does  the
boat  and  wings.  One  with  Erichthonius  are  the  later  Erechtheus
and  his  descendant  Daedalus,  who  invented  various  arts,  a  ring-
dance,  building,  &c.,  and  on  whose  wings  his  son  Icarus  was  soaring
when  he  fell  from  the  clouds.  But  Aa&dkos l  is  SalSaXos,  ScttSaX-
eo9,  cunningly  wrought,  Sat'SaX/ia  (like  dydX/jio)  a  work  of  art,  and
Sai&aXXew  the  same  as  our  lost  wielan.  As  our  list  [like  the  Engl.
cunning  and  craft]  has  degenerated  from  its  original  sense  of  scientia
to  that  of  calliditas  and  fraus,  and  vel  has  both  meanings,  it  is  not
surprising  that  from  the  skill-endowed  god  and  hero  has  proceeded
a  deformed  deceitful  devil  (p.  241).  The  whole  group  of  Wate,
Wielant,  Wittich  are  heroes,  but  also  ghostly  beings  and  demigods
(see  SuppL).

The  Vilkinasaga  brings  before  us  yet  another  smith,  Mimir,  by

1  A  reduplication  like  TratVaXof,  TrauraXods  tortus,  arduus,  irainaXXeiv  tor-
quere  ;  conf.  XcuXa^-,  //.al/za£,  &c.


WELAND.      MIMI.  379

whom  not  only  is  Velint  instructed  in  his  art,  but  Sigfrit  is  brought
up — another  smith's-apprentice.  He  is  occasionally  mentioned  in
the  later  poem  of  Biterolf,  as  Mime  the  old  (Heldensage,  pp.  146-8) ;
an  OHG.  Mimi  must  have  grown  even  more  deeply  into  our
language  as  well  as  legend :  it  has  formed  a  diminutive  Mimilo
(MB.  28,  87-9,  annis  983-5),  and  Mimd^Mimidrtit,  Mimihilt  are
women's  names  (Trad.  fuld.  489.  Cod.  lauresh.  211) ;  the  old  name
of  Mlinster  in  Westphalia  was  J/^migardiford,  J/^migerneford
(Indices  to  Pertz  1.  2),  conf.  Jf£?7ugerdeford  in  Kichthofen  335 ;  the
Westphalian  Minden  was  originally  Mimidxrn.  (Pertz  1,  368),  and
Memleben  on  the  Unstrut  Mimilobat  The  great  number  of  these
proper  names  indicates  a  mythic  being,  to  which  Memerolt  (Morolt
111)  may  also  be  related! — The  elder  Norse  tradition  names  him
just  as  often,  and  in  several  different  connexions.  In  one  place,
Saxo,  p.  40,1  interweaves  a  Mimingus,  a  '  silvarum  satyrus '  and
possessor  of  a  sword  and  jewels,  into  the  myth  of  Balder  and
Hother,  and  this,  to  my  thinking,  throws  fresh  light  an  the
vidugauja  (wood-god)  above.  The  Edda  however  gives  a  higher
position  to  its  Mimir:  he  has  a  fountain,  in  which  wisdom  and
understanding  lie  hidden ;  drinking  of  it  every  morning,  he  is  the
wisest,  most  intelligent  of  men,  and  this  again  reminds  us  of
'  Wielandes  brunne  '.  To  Mimisbimmr  came  Oolnn  and  desired  a
drink,  but  did  not  receive  it  till  he  had  given  one  of  his  eyes  in
pledge,  and  hidden  it  in  the  fountain  (Ssem.  4a.  Sn,  17) ;  this
accounts  for  Oolnn  being  one-eyed  (p.  146).  In  the  Yngl.  saga
cap.  4,  the  Ases  send  Mimir,  their  wisest  man,  to  the  Vanir,  who
cut  his  head  off  and  send  it  back  to  the  Ases.  But  OSinn  spake
his  spells  over  the  head,  that  it  decayed  not,  nor  ceased  to  utter
speech ;  and  Oolnn-  holds  conversation  with  it,  whenever  he  needs
advice,  conf.  Yngl.  saga  cap.  7,  and  Srem.  8a  195b.  I  do  not  exactly
know  whom  the  Voluspa  means  by  Mimis  syni-r  (sons),  Ssem.  8a ;
Mmameidr  109a  implies  a  nom.  Mimi  gen.  Mima,  and  may  be
distinct  from  Mimir  (conf.  Bragr  and  Bragi,  p.  235). — Mimir  is  no
As,  but  an  exalted  being  with  whom  the  Ases  hold  converse,  of
whom  they  make  use,  the  sum-total  of  wisdom,  possibly  an  older
nature-god  ;  later  fables  degraded  him  into  a  wood-sprite  or  clever
smith.  His  oneness  with  heroes  tends  to  throw  a  divine  splendour

1  P.  E.  Mullet's  ed.,  p.  114,  following  which  I  have  set  aside  the  reading
Mimringus,  in  spite  of  the  Danish  song  of  Mimering  tand.


380  HEHOES.

on  them.  Swedish  folk-song  has  not  yet  forgotten  Mimes  a
(Arvidsson  2,  316-7),  and  in  Konga  harad  and  Tingas  socken  in
Smaland  there  lies  a  Mimes  sjo,  inhabited  according  to  the  legend
by  neckar  (nixies),  ibid.  p.  319.  Perhaps  some  of  the  forms  quoted
have  by  rights  a  short  i,  as  have  indisputably  the  AS.  mimor,
meomor,  gemimor  (memoriter  notus),  mimerian  (memoria  tenere),
our  Low  German  mimeren  (day-dreaming),  Brem.  wtb.  3,  161,  and
the  Memerolt,  Memleben  above ;  so  that  we  might  assume  a  verb
meima,  maim,  minium.  Then  the  analogy  of  the  Latin  memor  and
Or.  fjbifjieofjLai  allows  us  to  bring  in  the  giant  and  centaur  Mi^as,
i.e.,  the  wood-sprite  again  (see  Suppl.).

According  to  the  Edda  (Sxm.  133),  Volundr  had  two  brothers
SlagfiSr  and  Egill,  all  three  '  synir  Finnakonungs/  sons  of  a  Finnish
king,  whereas  the  saga  transplanted  to  the  North  from  Germany
makes  its  Vilkinus  a  king  of  Vilkinaland.  Or  can  Finna  be  taken
as  the  gen.  of  Finni,  and  identified  with  that  Finn  Folcwaldansunu
on  p.  219  ?  SlagfiSr  might  seem  =  Slagfinnr,  but  is  better
explained  as  Slagfio'Sr  (flap- wing,  see  ch.  XVI,  Walachuriun).  All
three  brothers  married  valkyrs,  and  Egill,  the  one  that  chiefly
concerns  us  here,  took  Olrun  (Alioruna).  The  Vilk.  saga,  cap.  27,
likewise  calls  Velint's  younger  brother  Eigill :  '  ok  ]?enna  kalla
menn  OlrAnar  Eigil,'1  but  the  bride  is  not  otherwise  alluded  to ;
this  form  Eigill  agrees  with  the  OHG,  Eigil  on  p.  376,  not  with  the
ON".  Egill,  dat.  Agli,  for  the  dat.  of  Eigill  would  have  been  Eigli.
Well,  this  Eigill  was  a  famous  archer ;  at  Nidung'a  command  he
shot  an  apple  off  the  head  of  his  own  little  son,  and  when  the  king
asked  him  what  the  other  two  arrows  were  for,  replied  that  they
were  intended  for  him,  in  case  the  first  had  hit  the  child.  The  tale
of  this  daring  shot  must  have  been  extremely  rife  in  our  remotest
antiquity,  it  turns  up  in  so  many  places,  and  always  with  features
of  its  own.  As  the  Vilkinasaga  was  imported  into  Scandinavia  in
the  13th  century,  the  story  of  Eigill  was  certainly  diffused  in
Lower  Germany  before  that  date.  But  Saxo  Grammaticus  in
Denmark  knew  it  in  the  12th  century,  as  told  of  Toko  and  king
llarald  Gorrnsson,  with  the  addition,  wanting  in  Eigill,  that  Toko

1  Peringskiold  translates  *  Egillus  Sagittarius,'  and  Eafn  '  Egil  den  traf-
fende,'  but  this  was  merely  guessed  from  the  incidents  of  .the  story.  Arrow  is
not  61,  but  or  ;  Orentil  on  the  contrary,  Eigil's  son,  does  seem  to  have  been
named  from  the  arrow.


EIGIL,      TOKI.      HEMING.      TELL.  381

after  the  sliot  behaved  like  a  hero  in  the  sea-storm.  The  Icelanders
too,  particularly  the  lomsvikinga  saga,  relate  the  deeds  of  this
Pdlnatold,  but  not  the  shot  from  the  bow,  though  they  agree  with
Saxo  in  making  Harald  fall  at  last  by  Tola's  shaft.  The  king's
death  by  the  marksman's  hand  is  historical  (A.D.  992),  the  shot  at
the  apple  mythical,  having  gathered  round  the  narrative  out  of  an
older  tradition,  which  we  must  presume  to  have  been  in  existence
in  the  10-llth  centuries.  To  the  Norwegian  saga  of  Olaf  the
Saint  (-|-1030),  it  has  attached  itself  another  way :  Olaf  wishing  to
convert  a  heathen  man,  EindriSi,  essayed  his  skill  against  him  in
athletic  arts,  first  swimming,  then  shooting ;  after  a  few  successful
shots,  the  king  required  that  EindrioYs  boy  should  be  placed  at  the
butts,  and  a  writing-tablet  be  shot  off  his  head  without  hurting  the
child.  EindriSi  declared  himself  willing,  but  also  ready  to  avenge
any  injury.  Olaf  sped  the  first  shaft,  and  narrowly  missed  the
tablet,  when  Eindrifti,  at  his  mother's  and  sister's  prayer,  declined
the  shot  (Fornm.  sog.  2,  272).  Just  so  king  Haraldr  SigurSarson
(HarSraSa,  -f  1066)  measured  himself  against  an  archer  Hemingr,
and  bade  him  shoot  a  hazelnut  off  his  Biorn's  head,  and  Hemingr
accomplished  the  feat  (Mliller's  sagabibl.  3,  359,  Thattr  af
Hemingi  cap.  6,  ed.  Eeykjavik  p.  55),  Long  afterwards,  the  legend
was  transferred  to  a  Hemming  Wolf,  or  von  Wulfen,  of  Wewelsflet
in  the  Wilstermarsch  of  Holstein,  where  the  Elbe  empties  itself
into  the  sea,  Hemming  Wolf  had  sided  with  count  Gerhard  in
1472,  and  was  banished  by  king  Christian.  The  folk-tale  makes-
the  king  do  the  same  as  Harald,  and  Hemming  as  Toko ;  an  old
painting  of  Wewelsflet  church  represents  the  archer  on  a  meadow
with  bow  unbent,  in  the  distance  a  boy  with  the  apple  on  his  head,
the  arrow  passes  through  the  middle  of  the  apple,  but  the  archer
has  a  second  between  his  teeth,  and  betwixt  him  and  the  boy
stands  a  wolf,  perhaps  to  express  that  Hemming  after  his  bold
answer  was  declared  a  wolf's  head.1  Most  appropriately  did  the
mythus  rear  its  head  on  the  emancipated  soil  of  Switzerland :  In
1307,  it  is  said,  Wilhelm  Tell,  compelled  by  Gessler,  achieved  the
same  old  master- shot,  and  made  the  courageous  speech ;  but  the
evidence  of  chroniclers  does  not  begin  till  toward  the  16th  century,2

1  Schleswigholst.   prov.  berichte   1798,  vol.  2,  p.   39  scq.      Milllenhof,
Schleswigholst.  sagen  no.  66.

2  I  suspect  the  genuineness  of  the  verses,  alleged  to  be  by  Heinrich  von


382  HEROES.

shortly  before  the  first  printed  edition  of  Saxo,  1514.  Of  the
unhistorical  character  of  the  event  there  cannot  be  the  slightest
doubt.  The  mythic  substratum  of  the  Tell  fable  shews  itself  in  an
Upper  Ehine  legend  of  the  15th  century  (in  Malleus  malef.  pars  2
cap.  16,  de  sagittariis  maleficis)  which  immediately  preceded  the
first  written  record  of  that  of  Tell :  Fertur  de  ipso  (PuncheroJ,  quod
quidam  de  optimatibus,  cum  artis  sue  experientiam  capere  voluis-
set,  eidem  proprium  filium  parvulum  ad  metam  posuit,  et  pro  signo
super  birretum  pueri  denarium,  sibique  mandavit,  ut  denarium  sine
birreto  per  sagittam  amoveret.  Cum  autem  maleficus  id  se  facturum
sed  cum  difficultate  assereret,  libentius  abstinere,  ne  per  diabolum
seduceretur  in  sui  interitum;  verbis  tamen  principis  inductus,
sagittam  unam  collari  suo  circa  collum  immisit,  et  alteram  balistae
supponens  denarium  a  birreto  pueri  sine  omni  nocumento  excussit.
Quo  viso,  dum  ille  maleficum  interrogasset,  '  cur  sagittam  collari
imposuisset  ? '  respondit,  '  si  deceptus  per  diabolum  pueruin
occidissem,  cum  me  mori  necesse  fuisset,  subito  cum  sagitta  altera
ws  transfixissem,  ut  vel  sic  mortem  meam  vindicassem '.  This  shot
must  have  taken  place  somewhere  about  1420,  and  the  story  have
got  about  in  the  middle  part  of  the  15th  century. — Beside  the
above-mentioned  narratives,  Norse  and  German,  we  have  also  an
Old  English  one  to  shew  in  the  Northumbrian  ballad  of  the  three
merry  men,  Adam  Bell,  Clym  of  the  Clough,  and  William  of
Cloudesle  ;  this  last,  whose  Christian  name,  like  the  surname  of  the
first,  reminds  one  of  Tell,  offers  in  the  king's  presence  to  set  an
apple  on  the  head  of  his  son,  seven  years  old,  and  shoot  it  off  at
120  paces*-  The  arrow  sped  from  the  bow,  and  cleft  the  apple.
I  suppose  that  Aegel's  skill  in  archery  would  be  known  to  the
Anglo-Saxons  ;  and  if  we  may  push  Wada,  Weland  and  Wudga  far
up  into  our  heathen  time,  Aegel  seems  to  have  an  equal  claim.
The  whole  myth  shows  signs  of  having  deep  and  widely  extended

Hiinenbergof  1315,  which  Carl  Zay  has  made  known  in  his  book  on  Goldau,
Zurich  18(77,  p.  41 :

Dum  pater  in  puerum  telum  crudele  coruscat
Tellius  ex  jussu,  saeve  tyranne,  tuo,

poinum,  non  natum,  figit  fatalis  arundo  :

altera  mox  ultrix  te,  periture,  petet.

H.  von  Hiinenberg  is  the  same  who,  before  the  battle  of  Morgarten,  shot  a
warning  billet  over  to  the  Swiss  on  his  arrow  (Joh.  Miiller  2,  37),  he  was
therefore  a  bowman  himself.  Justinger  and  Johann  von  Winterthur  are  silent
about  Tell  ;  Melchior  Russ  (t  1499)  and  Petermann  Etterlin  (completed  1507)
were  the  first  who  committed  the  story  to  writing.


TELL.      EIGIL.  383

roots.  It  partly  agrees  even  with  what  Eustathius  on  II.  12,  292
tells  us,  that  Sarpedon,  a  hero  of  the  blood  of  Zeus,  was  made
when  a  child  to  stand  up  and  have  a  ring  shot  off  his  breast
without  injury  to  him,  an  action  which  entailed  the  acquisition  of
the  Lycian  kingdom  (see  Suppl.).1

With  these  specimens  of  particular  heroes— crumbs  from  the
richly  furnished  table  of  our  antiquities — I  will  content  myself,  as
there  are  still  some  reflections  of  a  more  general  kind  to  be  made.

I  started  with  saying,  that  in  the  heroic  is  contained  an  exalting
and  refining  of  human  nature  into  divine,  originally  however
founded  on  the  affinity  of  some  god  with  the  human  race.  Now
as  procreation  is  a  repetition,  and  the  son  is  a  copy  of  the  father
(for  which  reason  our  language  with  a  profound  meaning  has  avara
for  image  and  avaro  for  child) ;  so  in  every  hero  we  may  assume
to  a  certain  extent  an  incarnation  of  the  god,  and  a  revival  of  at
least  some  of  the  qualities  that  distinguish  the  god.  In  this  sense
the  hero  appears  as  a  sublimate  of  man  in  general,  who,  created
after  the  image  of  God,  cannot  but  be  like  him.  But  since  the
gods,  even  amongst  one  another,  reproduce  themselves,  i.e.,  their
plurality  has  radiated  out  of  the  primary  force  of  a  single
One  (p.  164),  it  follows,  that  the  origin  of  heroes  must  be  very
similar  to  that  of  polytheism  altogether,  and  it  must  be  a  difficult
matter  in  any  particular  case  to  distinguish  between  the  full-bred
divinity  and  the  half-blood.  If  heroes,  viewed  on  one  side,  are
deified  men,  they  may  on  the  other  hand  be  also  regarded  as
humanized  gods ;  and  it  comes  to  the  same  thing,  whether  we  say
that  the  son  or  grandson  begotten  by  the  god  has  attained  a  semi-
divine  nature,  or  that  the  god  born  again  in  him  retains  but  a  part
of  his  pristine  power.  We  are  entitled  to  see  in  individual  heroes
a  precipitate  of  former  gods,  and  a  mere  continued  extension,  in  a
wider  circle,  of  the  same  divine  essence  which  had  already  branched
out  into  a  number  of  gods  (see  Suppl.).

This  proposition  can  the  more  readily  be  demonstrated  from  the
popular  faiths  of  Greece  and  Germany,  which  commit  themselves
to  no  systematic  doctrine  of  emanation  and  avatara,  as  in  these

1  Similar  legends  seem  to  live  in  the  East.  In  a  MS.  of  the  Cassel  library
containing  a  journey  in  Turkey,  I  saw  the  representation  of  an  archer  taking
aim  at  a  child  with  an  apple  on  its  head.


384  HEROES.

religions  the  full-blooded  animalism  of  heroliood  developed  itself
the  more  richly  for  that  very  reason.  While  the  Indian  heroes  are
in  the  end  reabsorbed  into  the  god,  e.g.,  Krishna  becomes  Vishnu,
there  remains  in  Greek  and  German  heroes  an  irreducible  dross  of
humanism,  which  brings  them  more  into  harmony  with  the
historical  ingredients  of  their  story.  Our  hero-legend  has  this  long
while  had  no  consciousness  remaining  of  such  a  thing  as  incarna
tion,  but  has  very  largely  that  of  an  apotheosis  of  human  though
god-descended  virtue.

Herakles  can  never  become  one  with  Zeus,  yet  his  deeds  remind
us  of  those  of  his  divine  sire.  Some  traits  in  Theseus  allow  of  his
being  compared  to  Herakles,  others  to  Apollo.  Hermes  was  the
son  of  Zeus  by  Maia,  Amphion  by  Antiope,  and  the  two  brothers,,
the  full  and  the  half-bred,  have  something  in  common.

In  Teutonic  hero-legend,  I  think,  echoes  of  the  divine  nature
can  be  distinguished  still  more  frequently ;  the  Greek  gods  stood
unshaken  to  the  last,  and  heroes  could  be  developed  by  the  side  of
them.  But  when  once  the  Teutonic  deities  encountered  Christianity,
there  remained  only  one  of  two  ways  open  to  the  fading  figures
of  the  heathen  faith,  either  to  pass  into  evil  diabolic  beings,  or
dwindle  into  good  ones  conceived  as  human.  The  Greek  heroes
all  belong  to  the  flowering  time  of  paganism;  of  the  Teutonic  a
part  at  least  might  well  seem  a  poverty-stricken  attenuation  and
fainter  reproduction  of  the  former  gods,  such  as  could  still  dare  to
shew  its  face  after  the  downfall  of  the  heathen  system.  Christian
opinion  in  the  Mid.  Ages  guided  matters  into  this  channel ;  unable
to  credit  the  gods  any  longer  with  godhood,  where  it  did  not
transform  them  into  devils,  it  did  into  demigods.  In  the  Edda  the
aesir  are  still  veritable  gods  ;  Jornandes  too,  when  he  says,  cap.  6 :
'  mortuum  (Taunasem  regem)  Gothi  inter  numina  populi  sui
coluerunt ' — be  this  Taunasis  Gothic  or  Getic — assumes  that  there
were  Gothic  gods,  but  the  anses  he  regards  as  only  victorious
heroes  exalted  into  demigods ;  and  in  Saxo,  following  the  same  line
of  thought,  we  find  that  Balder  (who  exhibits  some  Heraklean
features,  v.  supra  p.  22G-7),  and  Hother,  and  Othin  himself,  have
sunk  into  mere  heroes.1  This  capitis  deminutio  of  the  gods  brought

1  In  the  AS.  Ethel wcrd  p.  833  we  read  :  '  Hengest  et  Horsa,  hi  nepotes
fuere  Woddan  regis  barbarorum,  quern  post  infanda  dignitate  ut  deum  honorantes,
sacrificium  obtulerunt  pagani  victoriae  causa  sive  virtutis,  ut  humanitas  sarpc
credit  hoc  quod  videt'.  Win.  of  Malmesbury's  similar  words  were  quoted


HEROES.  385

them  nearer  to  heroes,  while  the  heroes  were  cut  off  from  absolute
deification ;  how  much  the  two  must  have  got  mixed  up  in  the
mist  of  legend  !  Yet  in  every  case  where  bodily  descent  from  the
gods  is  alleged  of  a  hero,  his  herohood  is  the  more  ancient,  and
really  of  heathen  origin.

Among  the  heroes  themselves  there  occur  second  births,  of
which  a  fuller  account  will  be  given  further  on,  and  which  shew  a
certain  resemblance  to  the  incarnations  of  gods.  As  a  god  renews
himself  in  a  hero,  so  does  an  elder  hero  in  a  younger.

Beings  of  the  giant  brood,  uniting  themselves  now  to  gods  and
now  to  heroes,  bring  about  various  approximations  between  these
two.

We  have  seen  how  in  the  genealogy  of  Inguio,  first  OSinn,  then
NiorSr  and  Freyr  interweave  themselves :  NiorSr  and  Hadding
seem  identical,  as  do  Heimdall  and  Eigr,  but  in  NiorSr  and  Heim-
dall  the  god  is  made  prominent,  in  Hadding  and  Eigr  the  hero.
Irmin  appears  connected  with  Wuotan  and  Zio,  just  as  Ares  and
Herakles  approach  each  other,  and  Odysseus  resembles  Hermes.
Baldr  is  conceived  of  as  divine,  Basldseg  as  heroic.  In  Siegfried  is

above,  p.  128  ;  he  also  says  '  denm  esse  delirantes\  Albericus  tr.  font.  1,  23
(after  A.D.  274)  expresses  himself  thus  :  '  In  hac  generatione  decima  ab  incar-
nutione  Domini  regnasse  invenitur  quidam  Mercurius  in  Gottlandia  insula,  quae
est  inter  Daciam  et  Russiam  extra  Romanum  imperium,  a  quo  Mercuric,  qui
Woden  dictus  est,  descendit  genealogia  Anglorum  et  rnultoruin  aliorum '.  Much
in  the  same  way  Snorri  in  the  Yngl.  saga  and  Form.  13.  14  represents  0<5inn
as  a  liofftinc/i  and  herma&r  come  from  Asia,  who  by  policy  secured  the
worship  of  the  nations  ;  and  Saxo  p.  12  professes  a  like  opinion  :  '  ea  tempes-
tate  cum  Othinus  quidam,  Europa  tota,  falso  divinitatis  titulo  censeretur,'  &c.
conf.  what  he  says  p.  45.  What  other  idea  could  orthodox  Christians  at  that
time  form  of  the  false  god  of  their  forefathers  ?  To  idolatry  they  could  not  but
impute  wilful  deceit  or  presumption,  being  unable  to  comprehend  that  some
thing  very  different  from  falsified  history  lies  at  the  bottom  of  heathenism.
As  little  did  there  ever  exist  a  real  man  and  king  OSinii  (let  alone  two  or
three),  as  a  real  Jupiter  or  Mercury. — But  the  affinity  of  the  hero  nature
with  the  divine  is  clearly  distinct  from  a  deification  arising  out  of  human
pride  and  deceit.  Those  heathen,  who  trusted  mainly  their  inner  strength  (p.
6),  like  the  Homeric  heroes  TrenoidoTes  &ij)<l>i  (II.  12,  256),  were  yet  far  from
setting  themselves  up  for  gods.  Similar  to  the  stories  of  Nebucadnezar  (er  wolte
selbe  sin  ein  got,  would  himself  be  god,  Parz.  102,  7.  Barl.  60,  35),  of  Kosroes
(Massmann  on  Eracl.  p.  502),  of  the  Greek  Salmoneu-s  (conf.  N.  Cap.  146),  and
the  Byzantine  Eraclius,  was  our  Mid.  Age  story  of  Imelot  aus  wiiester  Babilonie,
'  cler  wolde  selve  wesen  got '  (Bother  2568)  =  Nibelot  ze  Barise  *  der  machet
himele  guldin,  selber  wolt  ergot  sin'  (Bit.  299),  just  as  Salmoneus  imitated
the  lightning  and  thunder  of  Zeus.  Imelot  and  Nibelot  here  seem  to  mean
the  same  thing,  as  do  elsewhere  Imelunge  and  Nibelunge  (Heldens.  162)  ;  I
do  not  know  what  allusion  there  might  be  in  it  to  a  Nibelunc  or  Amelunc  (see
Suppl.).

25


386  HEROES.

an  echo  of  Baldr  and  Freyr,  perhaps  of  OSinn,  in  Dietrich  of  Thorr
and  Freyr.  Ecke  oscillates  between  the  giant  and  the  hero.
Even  Charles  and  Eoland  are  in  some  of  their  features  to  be
regarded  as  new-births  of  Wuotan  and  Donar,  or  of  Siegfried  and
Dietrich.  As  for  Geat,  Sceaf,  Sceldwa,  for  lack  of  their  legends,  it
is  difficult  to  separate  their  divine  nature  from  their  heroic.

One  badge  of  distinction  I  find  in  this,  that  the  names  of  gods
are  in  themselves  descriptive,  i.e.,  indicating  from  the  first  their
inmost  nature ; l  to  the  names  of  half-gods  and  heroes  this  signi
ficance  will  often  be  wanting,  even  when  the  human  original  has
carried  his  name  over  with  him.  Then,  as  a  rule,  the  names  of
gods  are  simple,  those  of  heroes  often  compound  or  visibly  derived.
Donar  therefore  is  a  god  from  the  first,  not  a  deified  man  :  his
appellation  expresses  also  his  character.  The  same  reason  is
decisive  against  that  notion  of  Wuotan  having  made  his  way  out  of
the  ranks  of  men  into  those  of  the  gods.

Demigods  have  the  advantage  of  a  certain  familiarness  to  the
people :  bred  in  the  midst  of  us,  admitted  to  our  fellowship,  it  is
they  to  whom  reverence,  prayers  and  oaths  prefer  to  address  them
selves  :  they  procure  and  facilitate  intercourse  with  the  higher-
standing  god.  As  it  came  natural  to  a  Koman  to  swear  '  mehercle  I
mecastor  !  ecastor  !  edepol ! '  the  Christians  even  in  the  Mid.  Ages
swore  more  habitually  by  particular  saints  than  by  God  himself.

We  are  badly  off  for  information  as  to  the  points  in  which  the
Hero-worship  of  our  forefathers  shaped  itself  differently  from  divine
worship  proper ;  even  the  Norse  authorities  have  nothing  on  the
subject.  The  Grecian  sacrifices  to  heroes  differed  from  those
offered  to  gods :  a  god  had  only  the  viscera  and  fat  of  the  beast
presented  to  him,  and  was  content  with  the  mounting  odour;  a
deified  hero  must  have  the  very  flesh  and  blood  to  consume.
Thus  the  einherjar  admitted  into  Valholl  feast  on  the  boiled  flesh
of  the  boar  Ssehrimnir,  and  drink  with  the  Ases  ;  it  is  never  said
that  the  Ases  shared  in  the  food,  Srcm.  36.  42.  Sn.  42  ;  conf.
supra,  p.  317.  Are  we  to  infer  from  this  a  difference  in  the  sacri
fices  offered  to  gods  and  to  demigods  ?

Else,  in  the  other  conditions  of  their  existence,  we  can  perceive
many  resemblances  to  that  of  the  gods.

Thus,  their  stature  is  enormous.     As  Ares  covered  seven  roods,

1  Something  like  the  names  of  the  characters  in  the  Beast-apologue.


FIGURE.  387

Herakles  has  also  a  body  of  gigantic  mould.  When  the  godlike
SigurSr  strode  through  the  full-grown  field  of  corn,  the  dew-shoe  l
of  his  seven-span  sword  was  even  with  the  upright  ears  (Veils,  saga
cap.  22.  Vilk.  saga  cap.  166) ;  a  hair  out  of  his  horse's  tail  was
seven  yards  long  (ISTornag.  saga  cap.  8). — One  thing  hardly  to  ba
found  in  Teutonic  gods,  many-handedness,  does  occur  in  an  ancient
hero.  Wudga  and  Kama,  Witege  and  Heime,  are  always  named
together.  This  Heimo  is  said  to  have  been  by  rights  called  Studas,
like  his  father  (whom  some  traditions  however  name  Adelger,
Madelger) ;  not  till  he  had  slain  the  worm  Heima,2  did  he  adopt  its
name  (Vilk.  saga  cap.  17).  To  him  are  expressly  attributed  three
hands  and  four  elbows,  or  else  two  hands  with  three  elbows  (Heldens.
257.  Eoseng.  p.  xx,  conf.  Ixxiv)  ;  the  extra  limbs  are  no  exaggera
tion  (Heldens.  391),  rather  their  omission  is  a  toning  down,  of  the
original  story.  And  Asprian  comes  out  with  four  hands  (Eoseng.
p.  xii).  StarkaSr,  a  famous  godlike  hero  of  the  North,  has  three
pairs  of  arms,  and  Thor  cuts  four  of  his  hands  off  (Saxo  Gram.,  p.
103) ;  the  Hervararsaga  (Eafn  p.  412,  513)  bestows  eight  hands  on
him,  and  the  ability  to  fight  with  four  swords  at  once  :  dtta  handa,
Fornald.  sog.  1,  412.  3,  37.  In  the  Swedish  folk-song  of  Alf,  ori
ginally  heathen,  there  is  a  hero  Torgnejer  (roaring  like  thunder  ?),
*  han  hade  otta  hander  (Arvidss.  1,  12).3  Such  cumulation  of  limbs
is  also  a  mark  of  the  giant  race,  and  some  of  the  heroes  mentioned
do  overlap  these ;  in  the  Servian  songs  I  find  a  three  headed  hero
Balatchko  (Vuk  2,  no.  6,  line  608) ;  Pegam  too  in  the  Carniolan
lay  has  three  heads  (tri  glave). — Deficiency  of  members  is  to  be
found  in  heroes  as  well  as  gods :  Oftinn  is  one-eyed,  T^r  one-
handed,  Loki  (=Heph?estus?)  lame,  HotSr  blind,  and  Vi5ar  dumb-4

1  Doggskor,  Sw.  doppsko,  the  heel  of  the  sword's  sheath,  which  usually
brushes  the  dew  :  so  the  Alamanns  called  a  lame  foot,  that  dragged  through
the  dewy  grass,  toudregil.     This  ride  through  the  corn  has  something  in  "it
highly  mythic  and  suggestive  of  a  god.

2  Heimo  appears  to  mean  worm  originally,  though  used  elsewhere  of  the
cricket  or  cicada  (Reinh.  cxxv),  for  which  our  present  heimchen  (little  worm)
is  better  suited.     A  renowned  Kaiiing  hero  was  also  named  Heimo  (Reinh.
cciv).     We  find  again,  that  Madelger  is  in  Morolt  3921  a  dwarf,  son  of  a  mer
maid,  and  in  Rol.  58,  17  a  smith.

3  In  the  prophecies  of  the  North  Frisian  Hertje  (A.D.  1400)  the  tradition  of
such  monstrosities  is  applied  to  the  future:    '  Wehe   den  minschen,  de  den
leven,  wen  de  liide  4  arme  kriegen  und  2  par  scho  over  de  vote  dragen  und  2
hode  up  den  kop  hebben  ! '     Heimreichs  chron.,  Tondern  1819  ;  2,  341.     It
may  however  refer  merely  to  costume.

4  Goth,  haihs,  hanfs,  halts,  blinds,  dumbs.


388  HEROES.

so  is  Hagano  one-eyed,  Walthari  one-handed,  Gunthari  and  Wie-
lant  lame,  of  blind  and  dumb  heroes  there  are  plenty.

One  thing  seems  peculiar  to  heroes,  that  their  early  years
should  be  clouded  by  some  defect,  and  that  out  of  this  darkness
the  bright  revelation,  the  reserved  force  as  it  were,  should  suddenly
break  forth.  Under  this  head  we  may  even  place  the  blind  birth
of  the  Welfs,  and  the  vulgar  belief  about  Hessians  and  Swabians
(p.  373).  In  Saxo  Gram.,  p.  63,  Ujffb  is  dumb,  and  his  father
Vermund  blind  ;  to  him  corresponds  the  double  Offa  in  the  line  of
Mercia,  and  both  of  these  Offas  are  lame  and  dumb  and  blind.
According  to  the  '  vita  Offae  prirni,  Varmundi  filii,'  he  was  of  hand
some  figure,  but  continued  blind  till  his  seventh  year,  and  dumb
till  his  thirtieth  ;  when  the  aged  Varmund  was  threatened  with
war,  all  at  once  in  the  assembly  Offa  began  to  speak.  The  '  vita
Offae  secundi'  says,1  the  hero  was  at  first  called  Vinered  (so  we  must
emend  Pineredus),  and  was  blind,  lame  and  deaf,  but  when  he
came  into  possession  of  all  his  senses,  he  was  named  Offa  secundus.
Exactly  so,  in  Soem.  14.2a.  HiorvarSr  and  Sigurlinn  have  a  tall  hand
some  son,  but '  hann  var  jjogull,  ecki  nafn  festiz  vi5  liann  '.  Only
after  a  valkyrja  has  greeted  him  by  the  name  of  Helgi,  does  he
begin  to  speak,  and  is  content  to  answer  to  that  name.  StarkaSr
too  was  ];ogull  in  his  youth  (Fornald.  sb'g.  3,  3G),  and  Halfdan  was
reckoned  stupid  (Saxo,  p.  134) ;  just  as  slow  was  the  heroism  of
Dietleib  in  unfolding  itself  (Vilk.  saga  cap.  91),  and  that  of  Iliya  in
the  Kussian  tales.  Our  nursery-tales  take  up  the  character  as
dscherling,  aschenbrodcl,  askcfis  (cinderel) :  the  hero-youth  lives
inactive  and  despised  by  the  kitchen-hearth  or  in  the  cattle-stall,
out  of  whose  squalor  he  emerges  when  the  right  time  comes.  I
do  not  recollect  any  instance  in  Greek  mythology  of  this  exceed
ingly  favourite  feature  of  our  folk-lore.

Unborn  children,  namely  those  that  have  been  cut  out  of  the
womb,  usually  grow  up  heroes.  Such  was  the  famous  Persian
Ptustem  in  Ferdusi,  as  well  as  Tristan  according  to  the  old  story  in
Eilhart,  or  the  Russian  hero  Dobruna  Nikititch,  and  the  Scotch
Macduff.  But  Volsungr  concerns  us  more,  who  spoke  and  made
vows  while  yet  unborn,  who,  after  being  cut  out,  had  time  to  kiss
his  mother  before  she  died  (Volsungas.  cap.  2.  5).  An  obscure

1  These  remarkable  vitae  Offae  prirni  ct  sccuncli  are  printed  after  Watts's
Matth.  Paris,  pp.  8,  9.


AFFLICTED.      UNBORN.  389

passage  in  Fafnismal  (Saem.  187a)  seems  to  designate  SigurSr  also
an  6borinn;  and  in  one  as  difficult  (Beow.  92),  may  not  the  'umbor-
wesende '  which  I  took  in  a  different  sense  on  p.  370,  stand  for
unbor-wesQude,  to  intimate  that  Sceaf  passed  for  an  unborn  ?  The
Landnamabok  4,  4  has  an  Uni  hinn  oborni  (m.),  and  1,  10  an
Ulfrun  in  oborna  (f.) ;  for  wise-women,  prophetesses,  also  come  into
the  world  the  same  way.1  Our  Mid.  Ages  tell  of  an  unborn  hero
Hoyer  (Benecke's  Wigalois,  p.  452) ;  in  Hesse,  Reinhart  of  Dalwig
was  known  as  the  unborn,  being,  after  the  caesarian  operation,
brought  to  maturity  in  the  stomachs  of  newly  slaughtered  swine.2
As  early  as  the  tenth  century,  Eckhart  of  St.  Gall  informs  us  :
Infans  excisus  et  arvinae  porci  recens  erutae,  ubi  incutesceret,
involutus,  bonae  indoiis  cum  in  brevi  apparuisset,  baptizatur  et
Purchardus  nominatur  (Pertz  2,  120) ;  this  is  the  Burchardus
ingenitus,  afterwards  abbot  of  St  Gall.  One  Gebehardus,  ex  de-
functae  matris  Dietpurgae  utero  excisus,  is  mentioned  in  the  Chron.
Petershus.  p.  302,  with  the  remark  :  De  talibus  excisis  literae
testantur  quod,  si  vita  comes  fuerit,  felices  in  mundo  habeantur.
To  such  the  common  standard  cannot  be  applied,  their  extra
ordinary  manner  of  coming  into  the  world  gives  presage  of  a  higher
and  mysterious  destiny.  Not  unlike  is  the  Greek  myth  of  Metis
and  Tritogeneia :  the  virgin  goddess  springs  out  of  the  forehead  of
Zeus.  The  phrase  about  '  HloSr  being  born  with  helmet,  sword  and
horse '  (above,  p.  76),  is  explained  by  the  Hervararsaga,  p.  490,  to
mean,  that  the  arms  and  animals  which  accompany  the  hero  were
forged  and  born  at  the  time  of  his  birth.  Schroter's  Finnish  Eunes
speak  of  a  child  that  was  born  armed:  this  reminds  us  of  the
superstition  about  lucky  children  being  born  with  hood  and  helmet
(see  ch.  XXVIII).

It  was  noticed  about  the  gods  (p.  321),  that  Balder's  brother,
when  scarcely  born,  when  but  one  night  old,  rushed  to  vengeance,
unwashed  and  uncombed.  This  is  like  the  children  born  of  liten
Kerstin  after  long  gestation  :  the  newborn  son  gets  up  directly  and
combs  his  hair,  the  new  born  daughter  knows  at  once  how  to  sew
silk.  Another  version  makes  her  give  birth  to  two  sons,  one  of
whom  combs  his  yellow  locks,  the  other  draws  his  sword,  both
equipped  for  swift  revenge  (Svenska  fornsanger  2,  254-6).  Here

1  Heimreich's  Nordfries.  chr.  2,  341.

2  Zeitschrift  t'iir  Hess,  gesch.  1,  97.


390  HEROES.

combing  and  not  combing  seem  to  be  the  same  characteristic.     A
new  born  child  speaks  ;  Norske  eventyr  1,  139.

As  the  birth  of  beloved  kings  is  announced  to  their  people  by
joyful  phenomena,  and  their  death  by  terrible,  the  same  holds  good
of  heroes.  Their  generosity  founds  peace  and  prosperity  in  the
land.  Froffis  reign  in  Denmark  was  a  period  of  bliss ;  in  the  year
of  Hakon's  election  the  birds  bred  twice,  and  trees  bore  twice,
about  which  beautiful  songs  may  be  gleaned  out  of  his  saga,  cap.  24.
On  the  night  that  Helgi  was  born,  eagles  cried,  and  holy  waters
streamed  from  the  mountains,  Sa3m.  149a.

Sigurd's  walk  and  manner  of  appearing  was  impetuous,  like
that  of  a  god  ;  when  he  first  approached  the  burg  of  Brynhildr,
'iorft  diisaol  ok  opphimin,'  earth  shook  and  heaven,  Sffim.  241b ;
and  of  Brynhild's  laughing,  as  of  that  of  the  gods  (p.  324),  we  are
told :  '  hlo,  beer  allr  dundi,'  she  laughed  and  all  the  castle  dinned,
Ssem.  208*.  A  divine  strength  reveals  itself  in  many  deeds  and
movements  of  heroes.  Dietrich's  fiery  breath  may  be  suggestive  of
Donar,  or  perhaps  only  of  a  dragon :  '  ob  sin  atem  goebe  fiur  als
eines  wilden  trachen,'  (Parz.  137,  18).

A  widely  prevalent  mark  of  the  hero  race  is  their  being  suckled
"by  leasts,  or  fed  ly  birds.  A  hind  offers  her  milk  to  SigurSr  when
exposed,  Vilk.  saga  142 ;  a  she-wolf  gives  suck  to  the  infant
Dieterich  (like  Romulus  and  Remus)  together  with  her  four  blind
whelps,  hence  his  name  of  Wolfdieterich.  The  same  fellowship
with  whelps  seems  imputed  to  the  beginnings  of  the  Goths  and
Swabians,  as  to  those  of  the  Romans  (p.  373) ;  but  the  woodpecker
also,  that  Bee-wolf,  brought  food  to  the  sons  of  Mars,  and  we  have
come  to  know  the  Swabians  as  special  devotees  of  Zio  (p.  199).
The  Servian  hero  Milosh  Kobilitch  was  suckled  by  a  mare  (kobila),
Vuk  2,  101 ;  does  that  throw  light  on  the  OHG.  term  of  abuse
merihunsun,  zfigiinsun  (RA.  643)  ?  A  like  offensive  meaning
lurked  in  the  Latin  lupa.1  But  it  is  not  only  to  sucklings  that
the  god-sent  animals  appear ;  in  distress  and  danger  also,  swans,
ravens,  wolves,  stags,  bears,  lions  will  join  the  heroes,  to  render
them  assistance  ;  and  that  is  how  animal  figures  in  the  scutcheons
and  helmet-insignia  of  heroes  are  in  many  cases  to  be  accounted  for,
though  they  may  arise  from  other  causes  too,  e.g.,  the  ability  of
certain  heroes  to  transform  themselves  at  will  into  wolf  or  swan.

1  Fils  de  truie  ;  Garin  2,  229.


NURSED   BY   ANIMALS.  391

The  sivan's  wing,  the  swan's  coat,  betokens  another  supernatural
quality  which  heroes  share  with  the  gods  (p.  326),  the  power  of
flying.  As  Wieland  ties  on  his  swan-wings,  the  Greek  Perseus  has
•winged  shoes,  talaria,  Ov.  met.  4,  667.  729,  and  the  Servian  Eelia  is
called  kriliit  (winged),  being  in  possession  of  krilo  and  okrilie
(wing  and  wing-cover),  Vuk  2,  88.  90.  100.  A  piece  of  the  wing
remaining,  or  in  women  a  swan's  foot,  will  at  times  betray  the
higher  nature.

The  superhuman  quality  of  heroes  shines  out  of  their  eyes
(luminum  vibratus,  oculorum  micatus,  Saxo  Gram.  23)  :  ormr  i
auga.  The  golden  teeth  of  gods  and  heroes  have  been  spoken  of,  p.
234.  In  the  marchen  sons  are  born  with  a  star  on  the  forehead,
Kinderm.  96.  Straparola  4,  3 ;  or  a  golden  star  falls  on  the  fore
head,  Pentam.  3,  10.  The  Dioscuri  had  a  star  or  flame  shining  on
their  heads  and  helmets :  this  may  have  reference  to  the  rays
encircling  the  head  (p.  323),  or  to  constellations  being  set  in  the
sky.  In  some  cases  the  heroic  form  is  disfigured  by  animal
peculiarities,  as  Siegfried's  by  his  horny  skin,  and  others  by  a
scaly  ;  the  marchen  have  heroes  with  hedgehog  spikes.  The  legend
of  the  Merovings,  imperfectly  handed  down  to  us,  must  be  founded
on  something  of  the  kind.  When  Clodio  the  son  of  Faramund
with  his  queen  went  down  to  the  shore,  to  cool  themselves  from
the  sultry  summer  heat,  there  came  up  a  monster  (sea-hog  ?)  out  of
the  waves,  which  seized  and  overpowered  the  bathing  queen.  She
then  bore  a  son  of  singular  appearance,  who  was  therefore  named
Merovig,  and  his  descendants,  who  inherited  the  peculiarity,
Merovings.1  Theophanes  expressly  declares,  that  the  Merovings
were  called  KpicrrdraL  and  rpf^opa^draL,  because  all  the  kings  of
that  house  had  bristles  down  the  backbone  (pd^s),  like  swine.
We  still  find  in  Eol.  273,  29,  where  it  is  true  they  are  enumerated
among  heathens,

di  helde  von  Meres ;

vil  gewis  sit  ir  des,

daz  niht  kuoners  mac  sin  :

an  dem  rucke  tr agent  si  borsten  sam  swin.

The  derivation  of  the  name  is  altogether  unknown.    Can  it  possibly
have  some  connexion  with  the  boar-worship  of  Fro,  which  may

1  Fredegar's  epitome  (Bouquet  2,  396),  and  Conradus  Ursperg.,  Arg.  1609,
.p.  92.     Per  contra,  Mullenhoff  in  Haupt's  zeitschr.  6,  432.


392  HEROES.

have  been  especially  prevalent  among  the  Franks  ?  Lampr.  Alex.
5368  also  has  :  sin  hut  was  ime  bevangen  al  mit  swtnes  bursten  (see
Suppl.).

One  principal  mark  to  know  heroes  by,  is  their  possessing
intelligent  horses,  and  conversing  with  them.  A  succeeding  chapter
will  shew  more  fully,  how  heathendom  saw  something  sacred  and
divine  in  horses,  and  often  endowed  them  with  consciousness  and
sympathy  with  the  destiny  of  men.  But  to  heroes  they  were  indis
pensable  for  riding  or  driving,  and  a  necessary  intimacy  sprang  up
between  the  two,  as  appears  by  the  mere  fact  of  the  horses  having
proper  names  given  them.  The  touching  conversation  of  Achilles
with  his  Xanthos  and  Balios  (II.  19,  400—421)  finds  a  complete
parallel  in  the  beautiful  Karling  legend  of  Bayard ;  compare  also
Wilhelm's  dialogue  with  Puzzdt  (58,  21—59,  8),  in  the  French
original  with  Baucent  (Garin  2,  230-1),  and  Begon's  with  the  same
Baucent  (p.  230).  In  the  Edda  we  have  Skirnir  talking  with  his
horse  (Sasm.  >82b) ;  and  GoSrun,  after  SigurS's  murder,  with  Grani
(231b) :

hnipnaCi  Grani  )m,  drap  i  gras  hofcSi.

Well  might  Grani  mourn,  for  the  hero  had  bestridden  him  ever
since  he  led  him  out  of  Hialprek's  stable  (180),  had  ridden  him
through  the  flames  (202a),  and  carried  off  the  great  treasure.
Swedish  and  Danish  folk-songs  bring  in  a  sagacious  steed  Black,
with  whom  conversation  is  carried  on  (Sv.  vis.  2,  194.  Sv,  forns.
2,  257.  Danske  vis.  1,  323).  In  the  poems  on  Artus  the  horses
are  less  attractively  painted  ;  but  how  naively  in  the  Servian,
when  Mila  shoes  the  steed  (Vuk  1,  5),  or  Marko  before  his  death
talks  with  his  faithful  Sharats  (2,  243  seq.  Danitza  1,  109).  In
Mod.  Greek  songs  there  is  a  dialogue  of  Liakos  with  his  horse
(Fauriel  1,  138),  and  similar  ones  in  the  Lithuanian  dainos  (Khesa
p.  224).  The  Persian  Eastern's  fairy  steed  is  well-known  (see
Suppl.).1

If  many  heroes  are  carried  off  in  the  bloom  of  life,  like  Achilles
or  Siegfried,  others  attain  a  great  age,  beyond  the  limit  of  the
human.  Our  native  legend  allows  Hildebrand  the  years  of  Nestor


L  Mongolian  warriors  dying  song  has  :
My  poor  cream-coloured  trotter,  you  will  get  home  alive.
Then  tell  my  mother,  pray  :  « full  rii'teen  wounds  had  he '.
And  tell  my  father,  pray  :  'shot  through  the  back  was  he,'  &c.— '


HOUSES.    AGE.  393.

with  undiminished  strength,  and  to  the  Scandinavian  StarkaSr  is
measured  out  a  life  that  runs  through  several  generations ;  the
divinely  honoured  Goftmundr  is  said  to  have  numbered  near  five
hundred  years,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  411.  442.  In  the  genealogies  that
have  come  down  to  us,  great  length  of  life  is  given  to  the  first
ancestors,  as  it  is  in  the  Bible  also.  Snacrr  hinn  gamli,  sprung
from  Kari  and  Jokull,  is  said  to  have  attained  300  years,  and
Hdlfdan  gamli  as  many,  Fornald.  sog.  2,  8.  The  MHG.  poem  of
Dietrich's  ancestors  (1869 — 2506)  gives  Dietwart  and  Sigeher  400
years  of  life  each,  Wolfdieterich  503,  Hugdieterich  450,  and  Dietmar
340 ;  Dietrich  of  Bern  is  the  first  that  reaches  only  the  ordinary
limit,  Otnit  the  son  of  Sigeher  was  killed  when  young.1  The
Servian  Marko  was  three  hundred  years  old,  almost  like  the  giants
of  old.  On  the  other  hand,  the  life  of  heroes  is  enfeebled  by  union
with  goddesses  and  superhuman  females.  Examples  will  be  given,
when  the  valkyrs  are  discussed ;  the  belief  of  the  Greeks  is
expressed  in  ,a  remarkable  passage  of  the  Hymn  to  Venus  190,
where  Anchises,  after  he  has  embraced  Aphrodite,  fears  that  he
shall  lead  a  stricken  life  (a^e^o?)  among  men  :

eVel  ov  /3to#aX/uo5  a
ryfyverai,  ocrre  Oeals  evvd^erai  d
The  goddess  does  not  conceal,  that  age  will  come  on  him  apace,  and
that  Zeus's  thunderbolt  will  maim  him  if  he  boast  of  her  favours.
The  story  of  Staufenberger  and  the  sea-fairy  is  founded  on  similar
notions.

Another  thing  in  which  the  condition  of  heroes  resembles  that
of  gods  is,  that  particular  local  haunts  and  dwellings  are  assigned
them.  Such  abodes  seem  by  preference  to  bear  the  name  of  stone,
as  Gibichenstein,  Brunhildenstein,  Kriemhildenstein,  Eigclstein,
Waskenstein ;  which  points  to  sacred  rocks  uninhabited  by  men,

1  These  are  undoubtedly  genuine  myths,  that  lose  themselves  in  the
deeps  of  time,  however  distorted  and  misplaced  they  may  be.  Sigeher  (OHG.
Siguhari)  is  plainly  the  ON.  Sigarr,  from  whom  the  Siglingar  or  Siklingar
take  their  najne  ;  Sigeher's  daughter  is  called  Siyelint,  Sigar's  daughter  Signy,
but  the  two  are  identical.  Hugdieterich,  who  in  woman's  clothing  woos  Hilde-
burg,  is  one  with  HagbarSr  (Sw.  Habor,  Dan.  Hafbur),  who  likewise  succeeds
in  his  suit  for  Signy  (.Sw.  Signil,  Dan.  Signild),  though  here  the  story  has  a
tragic  end,  and  the  names  disagree  ;  but  hug  and  hag,  both  from  one  root,
support  each  other.  Sigeminne  too,  the  wife  of  Wolfdieterich,  who  in  the  Hel-
denbuch  is  the  son  of  Hugdieterich,  comes  near  to  Signy.  The  part  about
Hugdieterich  in  the  Heldenbuch  is  throughout  uncommonly  sweet,  and  cer
tainly  very  ancient.


394  HEROES.

and  a  primeval,  firmly  rooted  worship.  More  rarely  we  find  castle
or  hall  connected  with  a  hero  (Iringes  burc,  Orendelsal),  a  few  times
ea  and  burn,  oftener  way  or  street ;  now,  as  the  notion  of  a  highway
lies  close  to  that  of  a  conspicuous  column  to  which  the  roads  led  up,
we  may  well  connect  the  '  Herculis  columnae/  the  Irmansuli,  with
the  Roland-pillars,  which  we  come  upon  just  in  those  northern
parts  of  Germany  where  heathenism  prevailed  latest.  As  king
Charles  occupies  Wuotan's  place  in  certain  legends,  especially  that
of  the  '  furious  host,'  Eoland,  the  noblest  hero  of  his  court,  who  is
to  him  almost  exactly  what  Donar  is  to  Wuotan,  seems  to  replace
the  divine  vanquisher  of  giants.  JEthelstdn-pillars  have  been
mentioned,  p.  119.  It  is  worthy  of  note,  that,  while  Scandinavia
offers  nothing  else  that  can  be  likened  to  the  Irmen-pillars,  yet  at
Skeningen,  a  town  of  Ostergotland,  there  stood  erected  in  the
marketplace,  just  where  Roland-pillars  do  stand,  the  figure  of  a
giant  or  hero,  which  the  people  called  Thore  lang  (Thuro  longus),
and  at  which  idolatry  was  practised  in  former  times.1  This  figure
appears  far  more  likely  to  belong  to  the  heathen  god  than  to  any
hero  or  king;  and  probably  the  column  in  the  market  place  of
Bavais  in  Hainault,  from  which  seven  roads  branched  off,  and
which  is  said  to  have  been  reared  in  honour  of  a  king  Bavo,  had  a
similar  meaning  (see  Suppl.).

According  to  a  widely  accepted  popular  belief,  examined  more
minutely  in  ch.  XXXII  on  Spiriting  away,  certain  heroes  have
sunk  from  the  rocks  and  fortresses  they  once  inhabited,  into  clefts
and  caverns  of  the  mountains,  or  into  subterranean  springs,  and  are
there  held  wrapt  in  a  seldom  interrupted  slumber,  from  which  they
issue  in  times  of  need,  and  bring  deliverance  to  the  land.  That
here  again,  not  only  Wuotan,  Arminius,  Dieterich  and  Siegfried,
but  such  modern  heroes  as  Charles,  Frederick  Barbarossa  and  even
Tell  are  named,  may  assure  us  of  the  mystic  light  of  myth  which
has  settled  on  them.  It  was  a  Norse  custom,  for  aged  heroes,  dead
to  the  world  and  dissatisfied  with  the  new  order  of  things,  to  shut
themselves  up  in  a  hill:  thus  Herlaugr  with  twelve  others  goes
into  the  haugr  (Egilss.  p.  7),  and  in  like  manner  Eticho  the  Welf,
accompanied  by  twelve  nobles,  retires  into  a  mountain  in  the
Scherenzerwald,  where  no  one  could  find  him  again  (Deutsche

i  Olaus  Magnus  J4,  15.  Stjernhook,  De  jure  Sveon.  vet.,  p.  326.  Brooc-
mans  beskrifn.  6'fver  Ostergotland,  Norrkoping  1760.  1,  190.


ABODES.


395


sagen,   no.   518).      Siegfried,   Charles    and    Frederick,   like   King
Arthur  of  the  Britons,  abide  in  mountains  with  their  host.

Be  it  be  remarked  lastly,  that  the  heroic  legend,  like  the  divine,
is  fond  of  running  into  triads.  Hence,  as  OSin,  Vili,  Ve,  or  Har,
lafnhar  and  Thriol  stand  together,  there  appear  times  without
number  three  heroic  brothers  together,  and  then  also  it  commonly
happens,  that  to  the  third  one  is  ascribed  the  greatest  faculty  of
success.  So  in  the  Scythian  story  of  the  three  brothers  Leipoxais,
Arpoxais  and  Kolaxais  (Herod.  4,  5) :  a  golden  plough,  yoke  and
sword  having  fallen  from  heaven,  when  the  eldest  son  and  the
second  tried  to  seize  them,  the  gold  burned,  but  the  third  carried
them  off.  The  same  thing  occurs  in  many  inarchen.


CIIAFTEB  XVI.
WISE     WOMEN.

The  relation  of  women  to  the  gods  is  very  different  from  that  of
men,  because  men  alone  can  found  famous  houses,  while  a  woman's
family  dies  with  her.  The  tale  of  ancestry  contains  the  names  of
heroes  only ;  king's  daughters  are  either  not  named  in  it  at  all,  or
disappear  again  as  soon  as  they  have  been  introduced  as  brides.
For  the  same  reason  we  hear  of  deified  sons,  but  not  of  deified
daughters  ;  nay,  the  marriage  of  mortals  with  immortals  issues
almost  always  in  the  birth  of  sons.  There  are  therefore  no  women
to  be  placed  by  the  side  of  the  heroes,  whom  in  the  preceding
chapter  we  have  regarded  as  a  mixture  of  the  heavenly  and  earthly
natures  :  the  distaff  establishes  no  claim  to  immortality,  like  the
sword.  To  the  woman  and  the  bondman,  idle  in  battle,  busy  in  the
house,  the  Anglo-Saxons  very  expressively  assigned  the  occupation
of  weaving  peace  :  heroic  labours  suited  men.

But  that  which  women  forfeit  here,  is  amply  made  up  to  them
in  another  sphere.  In  lieu  of  that  distinct  individuality  of  parts
given  to  heroes,  which  often  falls  without  effect  in  the  story ,_thfiy
have  general  duties  assigned  them  of  momentous  and  lasting  influ
ence.  A  long  range  of  charming  or  awful  half-goddesses  mediates
between  men  and  deity  :  their  authority  is  manifestly  greater,  their
worship  more  impressive,  than  any  reverence  paid  to  heroes.  There
are  not,  strictly  speaking,  any  heroines,  but  whatever  among  women
•answers  to  heroes  appears  more  elevated  and  spiritual.  Brunhild
towers  above  Siegfried,  and  the  swan-maid  above  the  hero  to  whom
she  unites  herself  (see  Suppl.).

In  other  mythologies  also  it  is  observable,  that  in  the  second
rank  of  deities  female  beings  predominate,  while  the  first  is  reserved
almost  exclusively  for  the  male,  but  the  divine  heroes  we  have
spoken  of  come  only  in  the  third  rank.  I  have  on  p.  250  partly
accounted  for  the  longer  duration  of  the  tradition  of  several  goddesses


WISE  WOMEN,  ^97

by  its  having  left  more  abiding,  because  more  endearing,  impressions
on  the  mind  of  the  people.

There  is  no  harder  problem  in  these  investigations,  than  to,  dis
tinguish  between  goddesses  and  half-goddesses.  Every  god's  wife
must  ipso  facto  pass  for  a  real  goddess ;  but  then  there  are  unmarried
goddesses  ;  e.g.,  Hel.  One  who  cannot  be  shown  to  be  either  wife
or  daughter  of  a  god,  and  who  stands  in  a  dependent  relation  to
higher  divinities,  is  a  half-goddess.  Yet  such  a  test  will  not
always  serve,  where  a  mythology  has  been  imperfectly  preserved  ;
for  the  very  reason  that  half-goddesses  stand  higher  than  half-gods,
the  boundary-line  between  them  and  the  class  of  great  gods  is
harder  to  hit.  The  line  may  be  disturbed,  by  particular  races
promoting  divine  beings  of  lower  rank,  whose  worship  got  the
upper  hand  among  them,  to  a  higher;  it  is  true  the  same  thing
seems  to  occur  in  hero-worship,  but  not  so  often.

The  mission  and  functions  of  half-goddesses  then  may  be
roughly  denned  thus:  to  the  upper  gods  they  are  handmaids,  to
men  revealers.

It  is  a  significant  feature  in  our  heathenism,  that  women,  not
men,  are  selected  for  this  office.  Here  the  Jewish  and  Christian
view  presents  a  contrast :  prophets  foretell,  angels  or  saints  from
heaven  announce  and  execute  the  commands  of  God ;  but  Greek
and  Teutonic  gods  employ  both  male  and  female  messengers.  To
the  German  way  of  thinking,  the  decrees  of  destiny  assume  a
greater  sacredness  in  the  mouth  of  woman,  soothsaying  and  sorcery
in  a  good  as  well  as  bad  sense  is  peculiarly  a  women's  gift,  and  it
may  even  be  a  part  of  the  same  thing,  that  our  language  personifies
virtues  and  vices  as  females.  If  human  nature  in  general  shews  a
tendency  to  pay  a  higher  respect  and  deference  to  the  female  sex,
this  has  always  been  specially  characteristic  of  Teutonic  nations.
Men  earn  deification  by  their  deeds,  women  by  their  wisdom  :
'  Fatidicae,  augescente  superstitione  deae,'  p.  95  (see  Suppl.).

This  Germanic  reverence  for  woman,  already  emphasized  by
Tacitus,  is  markedly  expressed  in  our  old  systems  of  law,  especially
the  Alamannian  and  Bavarian,  by  doubling  the  composition  for
injury  -VEA.  404) :  the  defenceless  one  thereby  receives  protection
and  consecration,  nay,  she  is  to  forfeit  the  privilege  the  moment
she  takes  up  man's  weapons.  And  not  only  does  a  worship  of
woman  shew  itself  in  the  minne-songs  of  our  Mid.  Ages,  but  in  a


393  WISE   WOMEN.

remarkable  formula  of  chivalry  occurring  both  in  folk-songs  and  in
court-poems :  '  durch  alter  frouwen  ere!  by  all  women's  honour,
Wotfdiet.  104.  Morolt  855.  888.  2834.  Morolf  1542.  Ecke  105.
117.  174.  Eoseng.  2037.  MsH.  3,  200a;  'durch  reiner  (pure)
frouwen  ere/  Ecke  112 ;  'durch  ivillen  (for  the  sake)  aller  frouwen -,'
thus  one  hero  cries  to  another  '  nu  beite  (stay),  durch  willen  oiler
meide  !'  Eab.  922-4  ;  'durch  willen  schcener  wibe,'  Ecke  61  ;  'durch
ander  maget  (other  maids')  ere'  Gudr.  4863  ;  'durch  elliu  wip!  in
the  name  of  all  women,  Parz.  13,  16;  '  ere  an  mir  elliu  wip!  respect
in  me  all  women,  Erec  957  ;'  eret  an  mir  elliu  wip  ! '  says  a  woman
in  Parz.  88,  27,  to  ensure  attention  to  her  prayer ;  '  alien  meiden
tuot  ez  ze  ercn  (do  it  in  honour  of),'  Gudr.  1214,  3;  'ere  und  minne
elliu  wip  ! '  is  the  injunction  on  giving  a  sword,  Trist.  5032  ;  '  tuon
allez  daz  frouwen  iville  si,'  do  all  that  may  be  woman's  will,  Bit.
7132  ;  'als  liep  iu  alle  frouwen  sin,'  as  all  women  are  dear  to  you,
Laurin  984.  Their  worship  was  placed  on  a  par  with  that  of
God :  '  eret  Got  und  diu  wip,1  Iw.  6054 ;  '  durch  Got  und  durch  der
wibe  Ion  (guerdon)'  Wh.  381,  21 ;  'wart  so  mit  riterschaft  getan,  des
Got  sol  danken  und  diu  wip!  niav  God  and  the  ladies  requite  it,
Wh.  370,  5;  'dienen  Got  und  alle  frouwen  eren!  Ms.  2,99b;  of
Parzival  it  is  even  said  :  '  er  getruwete  wilen  baz  (better)  dan  Gote,'
Parz.  370,  18.  These  modes  of  speech,  this  faith,  can  be  traced  up
to  a  much  earlier  age,  as  in  0.  i.  5,  13 :  '  do  sprah  er  erlicho  ubaral,
so  man  zi  frowiin  skal' ;  and  v.  8,  58:  '  ni  sit  irbolgaii  wile'  ye
shall  not  bully  a  woman,  Etzels  hofhalt.  92-3 ;  '  sprich,  wiben  libel
mit  nihte '  says  the  po.iin  of  the  Stete  ampten  286.  The  very  word
frau  is  the  name  of  a  goddess,  conf.  p.  299  on  the  meanings  of
frau  and  weib  (see  Suppl.).

But  more  than  that,  when  the  hero  in  stress  of  battle  looked  upon
his  love  (OHG.  trutin.trutinna,  MHG.  triutinne),  thought  0/her,  named
her  name,  he  increased  thereby  his  strength,  and  was  sure  of  the
victory.  We  might  even  bring  under  this  head  the  declaration  of
Tacitus  :  memoriae  proditur,  quasdam  acies  inclinatas  jam  et  labantes
a  feminis  restitutas  constantia  precum  et  objectu  pectorum.  From  the
poems  of  the  13th  century  I  will  quote  the  principal  passages  only  :

und  als  er  dar  zuo  an  sach  (on-saw,  looked  at)

die  schcenen  frowen  Eniten,

daz  half  (holp)  im  vaste  striten  (fight  hard).     Er.  933.

swenne  rnich  der  muot  iwer  ermant  (the  thought  of  you  mans),


WISE  WOMEN.  399

so  1st  sigesaelic  (victorious)  min  hant :

wand  (for)  iwer  guote  minne

die  sterkent  mine  sinne  (nerve  my  senses),

daz  mir  den  vil  langen  tac  (all  the  long  day)

niht  wider  gewesen  mac  (nought  can  vex).     Er.  88G7.

diu  da  gegenwurtic  saz  (who  there  present  sat),

diu  gehalf  ir  manne  baz  (she  holp  her  man  better).

ob  im  dehein  zwivel  (if  ever  a  doubt)  geschach,

swenn  (whenever)  er  si  danne  wider  (again)  an  sack,

ir  schoene  gap  im  niwe  kraft  (strength),

so  daz  er  unzagehaft  (undismayed)

sine  sterke  wider  gewan  (his  strength  regained)

und  vaht  (fought)  als  ein  geruowet  (rested)  man.     Er.  9171.

der  gedanc  (thinking)  an  sin  schcene  wip

der  kreftigete  im  den  lip  (life,  body).     Er.  9229.

swenne  im  diu  muoze  (opportunity)  geschach

daz  er  die  maget  (maid)  reht  ersach,

daz  gap  ir  gesellen  (to  her  fellow,  lover)

Gawane  manlich  ellen  (elan).     Parz.  409,  13.     410,  5.

nu  sack  er  daz  si  urnb  in  was  in  sorgen  (in  fear  for  him),

alrest  er  niuwe  kraft  enpfant  (felt).     Lohengr.  p.  54-5.

den  Heiden  minne  nie  verdroz  (never  wearied),

des  (therefore)  was  sin  herze  in  strite  groz.     Parz.  740,  7.

ern  welle  (if  he  do  not)  an  minne  denleen,

sone  mag  er  niht  entwenken  (cannot  escape).     Parz.  740,  15.

wes  sumest  (wherefore  delayest)  du  dich,  Parzival,

daz  du  an  die  kiuschen  liehtgemal  (pure-one  so  bright)

niht  denlcest,  ich  mem  din  wip,

wiltu  behalten  (save)  hie  den  lip  ?     Parz.  742,  27.

der  getoufte  nam  (the  Christian  gained)  an  kreften  zuo,

er  ddht   (thought),  des  was  ini  niht  ze  fruo  (none  too  soon),

an  sin  wip  die  kiiniginne

unt  an  ir  werden  (worthy)  minne.     Parz.  743,  23.

swa  ich  sider  (after)  kom  in  not  (difficulty),

ze  hant  so  ich  (the  moment  I)  an  si  ddhte,

ir  minne  helfe  brahte.     Parz.  768,  27.

miiede  was  ir  beder  lip  (weary  were  both  their  bodies),

niuwan  daz  sie  (had  they  not)  ddhten  an  diu  wip

sie  waeren  bedesamt  gelegen  (both  together  fallen).  Alt. bl.  1,340.


400  V/ISE  WOMEN.

In  the  Carmen  de  Fliyllide  et  Flora  it  is  said  31,  4  :  '  Ille  me  com-
memorat  inter  ipsas  caedes/  my  beloved  in  the  battle  breathes  my
name,  to  issue  therefrom  victorious.1  This  sounds  altogether
heathen,  for  the  gods  too  were  at  your  side  the  moment  you  uttered
their  names.  Snorri,  in  Yngl.  saga  cap.  2,  says  of  OSinn :  '  sva  var
oc  um  hans  menn,  hvar  sem  J?eir  urftu  i  nauSum  staddir,  a  sia  efta
&  landi,  );a  Jcolludu  ];eir  d  nafn  hans,  oc  J?6ttiz  iafnan  fa  af  J?vi  fro/
so  was  it  also  with  his  men,  wherever  they  were  in  trouble,  on  sea
or  on  land,  then  called  they  on  his  name,  and  immediately  were
gladdened  by  it.  When  Hrungnir  became  intolerable  to  the  Ases,
'  J>a  nefna  J?eir  Tlior,  J?vi  nasst  kom  Thorr  i  hollina,'  Sn.  108.  Kraka,
a  semi-divine  being,  admonished  Erich:  si  suprema  necessitatis
violentia  postularet,  nominis  sui  nuncupations  remedium  celerius
esse  quaerendum,  affirmans  se  divina  partim  virtute  subnixam  et
quasi  consortem  coelitus  insitam  numinis  gestare  potentiam,  Saxo
Gram.,  p.  72.  So  the  valkyrja  comes  to  the  rescue  of  her  chosen
hero,  when  he  calls  out  her  name  ;  she  is  become  his  guardian,  as  if
sent  by  the  gods  to  bring  him  aid  (see  Suppl.).

The  mission  of  such  women  then  is  to  announce  and  prepare
good  or  ill,  victory  or  death  to  mortal  men  ;  and  we  have  seen  that
the  popular  faith  retained  longest  its  connexion  with  fighting  and
victory.  Their  own  being  itself,  like  that  of  the  heroes,  rests  on
human  nature,  they  seem  for  the  most  part  to  have  sprung  from
kingly  and  heroic  families,  and  probably  an  admixture  of  divine
ancestors  is  to  be  presumed  in  their  case  too.  But  to  perform  their
office,  they  must  have  wisdom  and  supernatural  powers  at  their
command :  their  wisdom  spies  out,  nay,  guides  and  arranges  com
plications  in  our  destiny,  warns  of  danger,  advises  in  difficulty.  At
the  birth  of  man  they  shew  themselves  predicting  arid  endowing,
in  perils  of  war  giving  help  and  granting  victory.  Therefore  they
are  called  wise  ivomen,  ON.  spdkonor  (conf.  spakr,  OHG.  spahi,
prudens),  Scot,  spae  wife,  MHG.  wisiu  ivip,  Nib.  1473.  3.  1483,  4
(see  Suppl.).

1.  ITIS,  IDES  (Dis).
But  I  will  first  take  an  older  word,  which  appears  to  me  to  yield

1  Philander  of  Sittewalcl  2,727,  Soldatenl.  p.  241,  still  mentions  the  practice
in  time  of  danger  'of  commending  oneself  to  the  loved  one's  grace  and
favour '.


ITIS.  401

exactly  the  meaning  we  have  just  unravelled,  and  in  its  generalness
to  comprehend  all  the  particular  beings  to  be  studied  more  minutely
by  and  by.  The  OHG.  itis  pi.  itisi,  OS.  ides,  pi.  idisi,  AS.  ides,  pi.
idesa,  denotes  femina  in  general,  and  can  be  used  of  maids  or  matrons,
rich  or  poor.1  Yet,  like  the  Greek  vvfufrrj,  it  seems  even  in  the
earliest  times  to  have  been  specially  applied  to  superhuman  beings,
who,  being  considered  lower  than  goddesses  and  higher  than  earthly
women,  occupy  precisely  that  middle  rank  which  is  here  in
question.  Tacitus  informs  us,  that  a  famous  battle-field  on  the
Weser  was  called  by  the  Cheruscans  Idisiaviso  (so  I  emend  Idis-
taviso),  i.e.,  nympharum  pratum,  women's  meadow ;  it  matters  not
whether  the  spot  bore  that  name  before  the  fight  with  the  Eomans,
or  only  acquired  it  afterwards  (v.  Haupt's  zeitschr.  9,  248).  There
at  one  time  or  another  a  victory  was  won  under  the  lead  of  these
exalted  dames.  The  Merseburg  poem  sets  the  idisi  before  us  in
fall  action :

suma  hapt  heptidun,  suma  heri  lezidun,
suma  clubodun  umbi  cuniowidi ;

Some  put  a  check  (on  the  fighting),  as  we  read  in  Eenner  20132  :
dez  muoz  (therefore  must)  ich  he/ten  einen  haft
an  dirre  materie  an  minen  danc  (against  my  will),
wan  ich  fiirhte  (for  I  fear)  sie  werde  ze  lane.
Others  letted  the  host  (hinder,  make  late,  Goth,  hari  latidedun)  ;
others  again  grasped  (clawed)  at  chains  or  wreaths,  i.e.,  withs  and
twigs  with  which  to  twist  shackles,  or  to  twine  garlands  for  the
victor.     Here  then  their  business  was  to  bind  and  check,  which  is
also  demanded  by  the  very  object  of  the  conjuring-spell ;  in  striking
harmony  with  this  are  the  names  of  two  Norse  valkyrs,  mentioned
together   in    Soem.  45a,  Hlock  —  OHG.  Hlancha,  i.e.,  catena,  and
merftotr  =  OHG.  Herifezzara,  exercitum   vinciens.     But  it  must
have  been  as  much  in  their  power  to  set  free  and  help  on,  as  to"
shackle  and  hamper.     Compounded  with  itis  we  have  the  female
names  Itispuruc  (Meichelb.  no.  162),  Itisburg  (Trad.  fuld.  Schannat
181),  Idisburg  (Lacombl.  no.  87),  and  Itislant  (Graff  1,  159);  which,
like  Hiltipurc,  Sigipurc,  Sigilant  (MB.  14,  362),  are  proper  to  such
women  of  our  olden  time  (see  Suppl.).2

1  Freolicu  meowle  =  ides,  Cod.  exon.  479,2.     '  Weras  and  idesa,'  or  'eorlas
and  idesa '  are  contrasted,  ibid.  176,  5.     432,  2.

2  Here  the  local  meaning  coincides  with  the  personal ;  we  may  therefore

26


402  WISE  WOMEN.

But  we  obtain  much  fuller  information  as  to  their  nature  from
the  Norse  authorities.  It  has  been  overlooked  hitherto,  that  the
OHG.  itis,  AS.  ides,  is  the  same  as  the  ON.  dis  pi.  disir ;  similar
instances  of  aphteresis  are  the  Pdgr  for  Iring  on  p.  234,  and  Sangrim,
Singrim  for  Isangrim,  Isingrim  (Keinh.  ccviii).  Any  remaining
doubt  disappears  on  comparing  the  Eddie  '  dis  Skioldunga,'  Sam.
169a  209a  with  the  AS.  'ides  Scildinga,'  Beow.  2337.  The  Norse
disir  likewise  are  sometimes  kind  protecting  beings,  sometimes
hostile  and  hindering,  Saem.  185a  195a  254b  273a.  An  instance  of
the  latter  sort  is  found  in  the  story  of  ThiSrandi,  whom  disir
destroyed,  '  thann  er  sagt  at  disir  vaegi,'  quern  deas  interfecisse
dicunt  (Nialss.  cap.  97),  though  the  full  narrative.  (Fornm.  sog.  2,
195)  calls  them  simply  konur,  women;  so  Spddisir,  nymphae
vaticinantes,  Vols.  saga  cap.  19,  means  just  the  same  as  spdkonur ;
and  the  phrase  '  ecki  eru  allar  disir  dauSar  enn '  in  Alfs  saga  cap.
15,  means  in  the  most  general  sense,  all  good  spirits  are  not  dead'
yet ;  '  y5r  munu  clauSar  disir  allar,'  to  you  all  spirits  are  dead,
Fornald.  sog.  2,  47.  But  the  Norse  people  worshipped  them,  and
offered  them  sacrifice :  the  mention  of  disciblot  is  very  frequent,
Egilss.  cap.  44  p.  205 ;  Vigagl.  saga  cap.  6  p.  30 ;  '  biota  kumla
disir'  deabus  tumulatis  sacrificare,  Egilss.  p.  207.  This  passage
implies  a  connexion  between  disir  and  ghosts,  departed  spirits,
whose  reappearance  portends  something  :  '  honor  hugftak  dau&ar
koma  i  nott,'  dead  women,  i.e.,  disir,  come  at  night,  Soem.  254*.
Herjans  dis  (Saem.  213b)  is  nympha  Odini,  a  maiden  dwelling  at
Valholl  in  the  service  of  Oomn;  dis  Skioldunga  (Saem.  169a  209a),
divine  maid  sprung  from  the  Skioldung  stock,  is  an  epithet  both  of;
Sigriin  and  of  Brynhild,  conf.  AS.  ides  Scyldinga,  ides  Helminga,
Beow.  1234.  But  Freyja  herself  is  called  Vanadis,  nympha
Yanorum,  Sn.  37;  and  another  goddess,  SkaSi  ondurdis  (walking
in  wooden  shoes),  Sn.  28,  which  is  equivalent  to  onduigwcf.  Several  j
proper  names  of  women  are  compounded  with  dis:  Thord™
Hiordis,  Asdis,  Vigdis,  Halldis,  Freydis  (to  which  might  have
corresponded  an  OHG.  Donaritis,  &c.) :  they  prove  the  pretty  high  j
antiquity  of  the  monosyllabic  form  dis,  which  even  in  the  Edda
invariably  alliterates  with  D.  With  the  orginal  form  id  is  the

compare  Magadaburg  with  Idisaburg,  Idisoburg,  and  Islant  with  Itislunt,
Itisolant.  The  Prankish  Dispargum  on  the  contrary  seems  not  to  be  Idisberg, ;
but  Tiesberg,  fanum  Martis  (Herm.  Miiller,  Salic  law,  p.  33-4).


ITIS.      VELEDA.      GANNA.  403

name   of    the   goddess    Idunn   may   possibly  be   connected    (see
SuppL).

2.  VELEDA.    GANNA.    ALARUN.

If,  as  I  suppose,  the  generic  term  idis  was  already  current  in
the  time  of  Tacitus,  he  gives  us  other  more  specific  appellations  as
mere  proper  names,  though  still  a  certain  general  meaning  seems
to  belong  to  them  too.  His  statements  about  Veleda,  Ganna,  and
Aurinia  I  have  already  quoted  in  ch.  V,  where  the  connexion
between  prophetesses  and  the  priestly  office  was  pointed  out.
Veleda  appears  to  be  almost  an  appellative,  and  akin  to  the  Norse
Vala,  Volva  (p.  97-8),  or  even  to  the  masc.  Volundr  (p.  378),  per
haps  also  to  the  name  valkyrja.1  She  lives  on  a  tower,  like  Jetha
(p.  96)  and  Brynhildr  (Vb'ls.  saga  cap.  24).  Treaties  were  ratified  in
her  presence ;  she  not  only  prophesied,  but  had  to  settle  disputes
among  the  people,  and  carry  out  plans.  In  Ssem.  4b  5a  the  Vala,
after  whom  the  famous  lay  Yoluspa  is  named,  is  also  called  Heiftr
and  Gullveig ;  and  as  our  female  names  Adalheid,  Alpheid,  &c.,  are
formed  with  -held,  Finn  Magnusen  p.  41 6b  would  derive  Veleda
from  a  supposed  Valaheid,  which  however  is  nowhere  found  (see
SuppL).  The  description  given  of  her  is  an  attractive  one  :  where-
ever  in  the  land  this  vala  velspa  (fatidica)  came,  she  worked
witchery,  she  was  believed  to  travel  about  aud  make  visitations  to
houses.  This  '  til  husa  koma  '  reminds  us  of  the  '  drepa  d  vett  sem
volur,'  pulsare  aedes  sicut  fatidicae,  Ssem.  63a,  as  in  other  cases  also
prophesying,  inspiring  and  boon-bestowing  women  were  always
supposed  to  pass  through  the  country,  knocking  at  the  houses  of
those  whom  they  would  bless.

Ganna  (p.  95-6)  could  be  explained  with  more  certainty,  if  the
I  real  meaning  of  its  root  ginnan  were  disclosed  to  us  :  a  MHG.
Iginnen  is  secare,  the  ON.  ginna  allicere,  seducere;  and  in  Ssem.  21a
|  we  are  warned  not  to  trust  the  wheedling  words  of  valas,  'volo
jvilmaali  trui  engi  maSr ' ;  we  shall  see  presently,  how  the  AS.  poets
use  similar  expressions  about  Wyrd.

When  Drusus  had  crossed  the  Weser  and  was  nearing  the  Elbe,

1  I  find  Waladericiis  in  Trad.  corb.  p.  364,  §  213  ;  a  wild  woman  is  called
Jin  Wolfdieterich  514  'die  wilde  waldin,' and.  735  '  diu  libel  ivalledein' ;  but  this
'  seems  a  corruption  of  valandinne,  she-devil.


404  WISE  WOMEN.

there  met  him  in  the  land  of  the  Cheruscans  a  superhuman  female,
ryvvrj  T£<?  /jLet&v  7j  Kara  avdpwTrov  (frvcriv,  who  forbade  his  farther
advance,  and  foretold  his  approaching  end  (Dio  Cass.  55, 1).  Species
larlarae  mulieris,  humana  amplior,  victorem  tendere  ultra,  sermone
Latino,  prohibuit  (Sueton.  in  Claudio  I).1  There  may  have  been
German  folk-tales  about  this,  which  became  known  to  the  Eomans.
Wise-women  of  the  fatherland,  as  well  as  heroes,  rose  up  in  their
country's  need,  and  by  their  appearance  terrified  the  foe.

Aurinia  is  said  (p.  95)  to  have  been  famous  in  Germany  before
Yeleda ;  copyists  may  easily  have  corrupted  all  into  '  au,'  and  runa
into  'rinia':  we  should  then  have  Aliruna,  though  it  would  be
still  more  handy  if  Tacitus  had  written  A  lioruna.  But  anyhow  we
cannot  fail  to  recognise  the  agreement  (which  many  have  noted)
with  Jornandes  cap.  24,  who,  in  accounting  for  the  origin  of  the
Huns,  relates  of  the  Gothic  king  Filimer :  4  Kepperit  in  populo  suo
quasdam  magas  midieres,  quas  patrio  sermone  aliorumnas  (al.
alyrumnas,  aliorunas,  aliuruncas)  is  ipse  cognomiiiat,  easque  habens
suspectas  de  medio  sui  proturbat,  longeque  ab  exercitu  suo  fugatas
in  solitudine  coegit  errare.  Quas  silvestres  homines,  quos  faunos
ficarios  vocant,  per  eremum  vagantes  dum  vidissent,  et  earum  se
cornplexibus  in  coitu  miscuissent,  genus  hoc  ferocissimum  ediderel
Many  names  of  women  are  formed  with  -run,  -runa  (Gramm.  2,
517),  and  OHG.  documents  even  offer,  though  sparingly,  Alarun
Aleruna,  MB.  3,416  (an.  1140);  'Gosprecht  der  Alraunyn  sun/
MB.  27,  80  (an.  1309).  I  have  never  seen  Elirun,  the  form  we
should  expect  from  ali-.2  But  it  is  significant,  that  the  OK  name
OlrAn,  Ssem.  133-4,  belongs  precisely  to  a  wise-woman ;  and  alruna
(Graff  2,  523),  now  alraun,  from  its  old  sense  of  a  prophetic  and
diabolic  spirit,  has  at  length  passed  into  that  of  the  root  (mandragora,

1  A  similar  tale  about  Alexander  Severus  :  Mulier  Druias  eunti  exclamavit
Gallico  sermone,  *  vadas,  nee  victoriam  speres,  nee  te  militi  tuo  credas  ! '  Ael.
Lampridius  in  Alex.  Sev.  cap.  60.     And  Attila  at  the  passage  of  the  Lech  is
said  to  have  "been  scared  away  by  a  rune-maiden  calling  out  three  times  '  back,
Attila  ! '     Paul  of  Stetten's  Erl.  aus  der  gesch.  Augsburgs,  p.  25.     Of  still  more
weight  is  the  agreement  of  an  ON.  tradition  in  Saxo  Gram.  p.  15  :  'Hadingum
(our  mythic  Harding,  Hartung)  obvia  femina  h'ac  voce  compellat :

Seu  pede  rura  teras,  sen  ponto  carbasa  tendas,
infestos  patiere  deos,  totumque  per  orbem
propositis  inimica  tuis  elementa  videbis.

2  It  throws  some  light  on  the  meaning  of  -run,  that  in  AS.  also  lurgrilna,
or  burgr&nan  stands  for  parcae  and  furiae  (Lye  sub  v.,  and  Gl.  epinal.  617).


ALARUN.      NORNI.  405

mandrake)  out  of  which  he  is  cut.  We  now  turn  to  some  other
names,  about  which  the  fountain  of  tradition  flows  more  freely  (see
SuppL).

3.  NORNI  (FATAE).

The  three  Fates  are  the  subject  of  an  independent  and  profound
myth  in  the  Edda.  Collectively  they  are  called  the  nornir,  and
singly,  Urffr,  Verffandi,  Skidd,  Ssem.  4a.  Sn.  18.  The  term  norn
(parca)  has  not  been  discovered  hitherto  in  any  other  dialect,1
though  undoubtedly  it  belongs  to  a  genuine  Teutonic  root,  and  is
formed  like  thorn,  corn,  horn,  &c.,  and  would  have  been  in  OHG.
norn,  pi.  norni ;  but  even  Swedish  and  Danish  know  it  no  longer
(see  SuppL).  In  the  three  proper  names  it  is  impossible  to  mistake
the  forms  of  verbal  nouns  or  adjectives  :  Urffr  is  taken  from  the
pret.  pi.  of  verSa  (varS,  urSum),  to  become,  Ver&andi  is  the  pres.
part,  of  the  same  word,  and  Skidd  the  past  part,  of  skula,  shall,  the
auxiliary  by  which  the  future  tense  is  formed.  Hence  we  have
what  was,  what  is,  and  what  shall  be,  or  the  past,  present  and
future,  very  aptly  designated,  and  a  Fate  presiding  over  each.2  At
the  same  time  the  very  names  prove  that  the  doctrine  of  norns  was
originally  not  foreign  to  any  of  the  Teutonic  nations.  A  Gothic
Vaur]?s,  VairSandei,  Skulds,  an  OHG.  Wurt,  Werdandi,  Scult,  and
so  on,  must  have  been  known  once  as  personal  beings  ;  in  the  OS.

1  Nlirnberg  (mons  Noricus)  has  nothing  to  do  with  it,  it  is  no  very  old
town  either  (in  Bohmers  regest.  first  in  1050,  no.  1607  ;  conf.  MB.  29,  102).
In  the  fields  at  Dauernheim   near  Nidda  is  a  well  called  Nornborn,  Nornborn,
and  its  spring  is  said  to  flow  only  when  there  is  war.     But  I  should  like  to  see
the  name  authenticated  by  an  old  document.     The  AS.  gen.  pi.  neorxena,  which
only  occurs,  in  '  neorxena  wong '  =  paradisus,  has  been  proposed,  but  the  ab
breviation  would  be  something  unheard  of,  and  even  the  nom.  sing,  neorxe  or
neorxu  at  variance  with  norn  ;  besides,  the  Parcae  are  nowhere  found  connected
with  paradise.    May  we  trace  norn  to  niosan  (sternutare),  whose  past  part,  is  in
OHG.  noran,  MHG.  norn,  because  of  the  prophetic  virtue  there  is  in  sneezing
(ch.  XXXV)  ?     But  the  special  meaning  in  this  verb  [conn,  with  nose]  seems
older  than  any  such  general  meaning,  and  its  ON.  form  hniosa  stands  opposed.

2  *  Fatum  dicunt  esse  quicquid  dii  effantur.     Fatum  igitur  dictum  a  fando,
i.e.,  loquendo.     Tria  autem  fata  finguntur  in  colo,  in  fuso,  digitisque  fila  ex
lana   torquentibus,    propter   trina   tempora  :    praeteritum,   quod   in  fuso  jam
netum  atque  involutum  est,  praesens,  quod  inter  digitos  nentis  trahitur,  futur-
um  in  lana  quae  colo  implicata  est,  et  quod  adhuc  per  digitos  nentis  ad  fusum
tanquam  praesens  ad  praeteritum  trajiciendum  est/  Isidori  etym.  8,  11  §  92,  a
passage  pretty  extensively  circulated  in  the  Mid.  Ages  (v.  Gl.  Jun.  398),  yet
no  proof  of  the  Teutonic  notion  being  borrowed  from  the  classical.     In  §  93
Isidore   adds  :  'quas  (parcas)  tres  esse  voluerunt,  imam  quae  vitam  hominis
ordiatur,  alteram  quae  contexat,  tertiam  quae  rumpat '.


406  WISE  WOMEN.

and  AS.  poetry  we  are  able  to  lay  our  finger  on  the  personality  of  j
the  first  norn  :  '  thiu  Wurdh  is  at  handun '  says  the  Heliand  146, !
2,  just  as  '  dod  is  at  hendi,'  92,  2  :  the  Fate,  or  death,  stands  so  i
near,  that  she  can  grasp  with  her  hand 1  the  man  who  is  fallen  due  i
to  her ;  we  should  say  just  as  concretely  '  is  at  hand,  is  at  the  I
door '.  Again  :  '  thiu  Wurth  nahida  thuo,'  drew  nigh  then,  HeL
103,  16.  '  Wurtli  ina  benam,'  the  death -goddess  took  him  away
66,  18.  Ill,  4  Not  so  living  is  the  term  as  used  in  the  Hildebr.  j
lied  48,  '  wewurt  skihit,'  or  perhaps  separately  '  we  !  wurt  skihit/  j
because  '  geschehen  '  to  happen  is  used  more  of  abstract  inanimate
things.  An  OHG.  gloss  also  has  wurt  for  fatum  (Graff  1,  992).
Far  more  vivid  are  the  AS.  phrases :  '  me  J??ct  Wyrd 2  gewfif,'  i
parca  hoc  mihi  texuit,  Cod.  exon.  355  ;  '  Wyrd  oft  nereS  unfegne
eorl,  ]?onne  his  ellen  deah/  parca  saepe  servat  virum,  donee  virtus
ejus  viget  (ellan  taoc,  Hildeb.),  Beow.  1139  ;  'him  waes  Wyrd  un-l
gemete  neah,  se  ]?one  gomelan  gretan  sceolde,  secean  sawlehord,
sundur  gedselan  lif  wiS  lice,'  4836  (so,  '  deaS  ungemete  neah '  5453) ;
'  swa  him  Wyrd  ne  gescraf/  ita  ei  fatum  non  ordinavit,  decrevit,
Beow.  5145.  EL  1047.  conf.  Boeth.  ed.  Bawl.  p.  151;  '  ealle
Wyrd  forsweop,'3  swept  all  away,  Beow.  5624;  'hie  seo  Wyrd\
beswac,  forleolc  and  forlserde,'  eos  parca  decepit,  allexit,  seduxit,
Andr.  613;  'us  seo  Wyrd  sce8e(5,'  nos  fatum  laedit,  Andr.  1561.
The  instances  in  Casdmon  are  less  concrete,  yet  in  61,  12  the  Wyrd\
is  called  'walgrim,'  bloodthirsty.— Of  the  Wyrd  then  are  predicated:
gretan  (excitare,  OHG.  cruczan),  scrifan  (ordinare,  OHG.  scripan)*
wefan  (texere,  OHG.  wepan),  beswican  (decipere,  OHG.  pisuichan),!
forlsecan  (fallere,  OHG.  farleichan),  forlseran  (seducere,  male
informare),  sceSan  (nocere).  She  is  painted  powerful,  but  often
cruel  and  warlike  (see  Suppl.).  We  cannot  in  the  same  .way  point
out  a  personal  application  of  the  other  two  names,  though  the

1  MHG.  'er  hat  den  tot  an  der  hant,'  Reinh.  1480.  1806.     Nib.  1480,  4.
Morolt.  29b.     Dietr.  29a.     Pf.  Chuonrat  3860.     Karl  52a.

2  With  D,  not  Th,  because  the  pret.  of  weorSan  is  wearS,  pi.  wurdon,
which  supports  the  derivation  I  proposed ;  so  the  OHG.  Wurt,  because  werd*
has  pret.  pi.  wurtum.

3  So  I  read  for  the  'forsweof  of  the  editions,  conf.  forswapen,  Caedm.  25,  9.

4  Conf.  note  to  Elene  p.  161,  on  a  similar  use  of  the  MHG.  schrtben,  and;
Klausen  in  Zeitschr.  fur  alterth.  1840  p.  226  on  the  Roman  notion    of  the
Parcae  keeping  a  written  record.     N.  Cap.  50.  55  renders  parca  by  brievara,  the)
recorder.     Tertullian,  De  aiiima  cap.  39,  informs  us  that  on  the  last  day  of  the!
first  week  of  a  child's  life  they  used  to  pray  to  the  fata  Scribunda.     FlemiM
479  calls  the  three  Fates  '  des  verhangnis  schreiberinnen  '.


NORNI.      WYRD.  407

third,  Skidd,  OHG.  Scult,  AS.  Scyld,  continued  in  constant  use  as
an  abstract  fern,  skuld,  scult,  scyld,  in  the  sense  of  debitum,  delic-
tum.1  When  Christianity  had  banished  the  heathen  notions,  one
name  alone  was  found  sufficient,  and  soon  even  that  died  out,
giving  place  to  new  fangled  terms  such  as  schicksal,  verhangnis
(destiny)  and  the  like,  far  more  cumbrous  and  unwieldy  than  the
old  simple  words.  The  English  and  especially  the  Scotch  dialect
seems  to  have  harboured  the  old  word  longest :  we  all  know  the
weird-sisters  in  Macbeth,  which  Shakspeare  took  from  Hollinshed ;
they  are  also  in  Douglas's  Virgil  80,  48,  and  the  Complaynt  of
Scotland  (written  1548)  mentions,  among  other  fabulous  stories,
that  '  of  the  thre  wewdsystirs,'  (Leyden's  ed.  Edinb.  1801,  p.  99) ;
in  Warner's  Albions  England  (first  printed  1616)  we  have  '  the
weirdelves'  probably  meaning  the  Parcae  of  the  ancients.  More
native  apparently  is  '  the  weird  lady  of  the  woods!  who,  when
asked  for  advice,  prophesies  out  of  her  cave,  Percy's  Keliques  3,
220-2.2

Even  in  the  North,  Urdr  must  have  been  of  more  consequence
than  the  other  two,  for  the  fountain  by  the  sacred  ash  is  named
after  her,  U'r&arbrunnr?  and  beside  it  stands  the  hall  from  which
the  three  norns  issue ;  it  is  also  '  Urftar  orS,'  word  (Seem.  112a)
that  is  chiefly  spoken  of,  and  once  '  grimmar  urdir '  dira  fata,  is
used  impersonally,  Saem.  216b. — These  three  virgins  allot  to  every
man  his  term  of  life,  '  skapa  monnum  aldr ;  skdp  i  ardaga  (year-
days),'  Sn.  18.  Ssem.  181a.  I  have  elsewhere  (EA,  750)  shown
the  technical  pertinence  of  the  term  skapa  to  the  judicial  office  of
the  norns,4  to  whom  for  the  same  reason  are  ascribed  domr  and


1  Fornald.  sog.  1,  32  Skuld,  daughter  of  an  alfkona  ;  also  in  Saxo  Gram.  p.
31,  Sculda,  n.  prop.

2  Conf.  Jamieson  sub  v.  weird  (weerd,  weard).     Chaucer  already  substitutes
fatal  sustrin  for  weirdsysters  (Troil.  3,  733.     Leg.  of  gd  worn.  2619).     In  Engl,
dictionaries  we  find  wayward  sisters  explained  by  parcae  and  furiae  ;  wardsisters
would  create  no  difficulty,  but  wayward  means  capricious,  and  was  once  way-
warden^  in  which  the  warden  suggests  the  Dan.  vorren,  vorn  (Gramm.  2,  675).
What  AS.  form  can  there  be  at  the  bottom  of  it?  [wa  =  woe  is  the  usual  etym.]

3  This  brunnr  deserves  attention,  for  the  wayfaring  wives  and  fays  of  the
Mid.   Ages  also  appear  habitually  at  fountains,  as  the  muses  and  goddesses
of  song  haunted  the  same,  and  particular  goddesses,  esp.  Holda,  loved  wells  and
springs  (p.  268).      Altogether  it  is   hard   often  to   tell  which   dame  Holda
resembles  more,  an  ancient  goddess  or  a  wise- woman.

4  Conf.  AS.  wyrda  gesceaft,  Casdm.  224,  6.     wyrda  gesceapu,  Cod.  exon.  420,
25.   ^OS.  wurdhgiscapu  (decreta  fati),  Hel.  113,  7  ;  and  the  OHG.  term  scep-
hentd,  MHG.  schepfe  (Ottoc.  119b)  and  schepfer ;  the  poet,  also  a  vates,  was  in


408  WISE  WOMEN.

qvi&r,  Saem.  273b  ;  '  liotar  nornir  skopo  oss  langa  }?ra,'  dirae  parcae
creaverunt  nobis  longum  moerorem  217a ;  '  nornir  heita  )?o3r  er
nauS  skapa,  Skaldskaparmal  p.  212.a  In  the  same  sense  '  nornir
visa,'  Ssem.  88b,  they  give  us  to  wit  judgment,  and  are  wise.  Hence  to
them,  as  to  judges,  a  seat  is  given  :  '  a  norna  stoli  sat  ek  niu  daga  '
127a.  They  approach  every  new  born  child,  and  utter  his  doom ;
at  Helgi's  birth,  it  is  said  in  Saem.  149  :

nott  var  i  boe,  nornir  qvamo,
)?cer  er  6'olingi  aldr  um  skopo  :
}?ann  baSo  fylki  froegstan  verSa,
>ok  BuSlunga  beztan  ]?yckja.
snero  J?cer  af  afli  drlogpdtto,
7J>a  er  borgir  braut  i  Bralundi :
J?cer  um  greiddo  gidlinsimo,
ok  und  manasal  miojan/esfo.
]?oer  austr  ok  vestr  enda  falo,
J?ar  atti  loffiungr  land  a  milli :
bra  nipt  Nera  a  norftrvega
eiumfesti.     ey  ba5  hon  halda.

This  important  passage  tells  us,  that  norns  entering  the  castle  at
night  spun  for  the  hero  the  threads  of  his  fate,  and  stretched  the
golden  cord  (fidttr  =  daht,  docht,  =  simi)  in  the  midst  of  heaven ;
one  norn  hid  an  end  of  the  thread  eastward,  another  westward,  a
third  fastened  it  northward;  this  third  one  is  called  'sister  of  Neri'.1
Their  number,  though  not  expressly  stated,  is  to  T)e  gathered  from
the  threefold  action.  All  the  region  between  the  eastern  and
western  ends  of  the  line  was  to  fall  to  the  young  hero's  lot ;  did
the  third  norn  diminish  this  gift,  when  she  flung  a  band  northward,
and  bade  it  hold  for  aye  ?  (see  Suppl.).

It  seems  the  regular  thing  in  tales  of  norns  and  fays,  for  the
advantages  promised  in  preceding  benefactions  to  be  partly  neutral
ized  by  a  succeeding  one.

The  Nornagestssaga  cap.  11  says :  There  travelled  about  in  the

OHG.  scuof,  OS.  sctip,  from  the  same  root.  The  AS.  word  metten  I  connect
with  metod  (creator,  see  p.  22).  In  Boeth.  p.  101  (Rawlinson)  a  varia  lectio
lias  '  )?a  gramaii  mettena,3  the  unkind  fates  ;  the  *  metodo  giscapu '  in  Hel.  66,
19.  67,  11  answer  to  those  '  wyrda  gesceapu,'  and  the  gen.  plurals  'metodo,
wyrda '  imply  that  not  one  creator,  but  several  are  spoken  of.  Vintler  calls
them  '  diernen,  die  dem  menschen  erteilen,'  maids  that  dole  out  to  man.
1  Conf.  nipt  Nara,  Egilssaga  p.  440.


KORNI.  409

land  '  volvur*  who  are  called  '  spdkonur'  who  foretold  to  men  their
fate,  '  spaSu  monnum  aldr  '  or  '  orlog '.  People  invited  them  to
their  houses,  gave  them  good  cheer  and  gifts.  One  day  they  came
to  Nornagest's  father,  the  babe  lay  in  the  cradle,  and  two  tapers  were
burning  over  him.  When  the  first  two  women  had  gifted  him,  and
assured  him  of  happiness  beyond  all  others  of  his  race,  the  third
or  youngest  norn,  '  hin  yngsta  nornin'  who  in  the  crowd  had  been
pushed  off  her  seat  and  fallen  to  the  ground,  rose  up  in  anger,  and
cried  'I  cause  that  the  child  shall  only  live  till  the  lighted  taper  beside
him  has  burnt  out '.  The  eldest  volva  quickly  seized  the  taper,  put
it  out,  and  gave  it  to  the  mother  with  the  warning  not  to  kindle  it
again  till  the  last  day  of  her  son's  life,  who  received  from  this  the
name  of  Norns-guest.  Here  volva,  spdkona  and  norn  are  perfectly
synonymous ;  as  we  saw  before  (p.  403)  that  the  vohir  passed
through  the  land  and  knocked  at  the  houses?-  the  nornir  do  the  very
same.  A  kind  disposition  is  attributed  to  the  first  two  norns,  an
evil  one  to  the  third.  This  third,  consequently  jflculd,  is  called
'the  youngest,'  they  were  of  different  ages  therefore,  Urffr  being  con
sidered  the  oldest.  Such  tales  of  travelling  gifting  sorceresses
were  much  in  vogue  all  through  the  Mid.  Ages  (see  Suppl.).2

1  I  have  -elsewhere  shown  in  detail,  that  the  journeying  house-visiting  Muse
dame  Aventiure  is  an  inspiring  and  prophetic  norn,  and  agrees  to  a  feature
with  the  ancient  conception  ;  see  my  Kleine  schriften  1,  102.

2  Nigellus  Wirekere,  in  his  Speculum  stultorum  (comp.  about  1200),  relates
a  fable  (exemplum)  :

.Ibant  tres  hominum  curas  relevare  sorores,

quas  nos  fatales  dicimus  esse  deas.

They  travel  through  the  land,  to  remedy  the  oversights  of  nature.  Two  of  the
sisters,  soft-hearted  and  impulsive,  want  to  rush  in  and  help  at  the  first  ap
pearance  of  distress,  but  are  restrained  by  the  third  and  more  intelligent  one.
whom  they  address  as  domina,  and  revere  as  a  higher  power.  First  they  fall
in  .with  a  beautiful  noble  maiden,  who  has  all  good  things  at  her  command,  and
yet  complains  ;  she  is  not  helped,  for  she  can  help  herself.  Then  they  find  in
the  forest  a  modest  maid  laid  up  in  bed,  because  sore  feet  and  hips  hinder  her
from  walking  ;  she  too  obtains  no  help  from  the  goddesses  ;  excellently
endowed  in  mind  and  body,  she  must  ,bear  .her  misfortune  patiently.  At  last
in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  town  the  sisters ,  come  upon  a  poor  rough  peasant

Exiit  in  bivium  ventrem  purgare  puella

rustica,  nil  reverens  inverecunda  deaf-,

vestibus  elatis  retro  nimiumque  rejectis,

poplite  dejiexo  ci;ure  resedit  humi,
una  manus  foenum,  panis  tenet  altera  frustum  ;

this  one,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  third  sister,  when  the  first  two  have  turned
away,  is  heaped  with  the  gifts  .of  fortune  by  the  goddesses  :

Haec  mea  multotiens  genitrix  narrare  solebat,
cujus.me  certe  non  meminisse  pudet.


410  WISE   WOMEN.

The  Edda  expressly  teaches  that  there  are  good  and  lad  norns
(goftar  ok  illar,  grimmar,  liotar),  and  though  it  names  only  three,
that  there  are  more  of  them  :  some  are  descended  from  gods,  others
from  elves,  others  from  dwarfs,  Sn.  18.  19.  Seem.  187-8.  Why
should  the  norns  be  furnished  with  dogs  ?  grey  norna,  Seem.  273a.

We  see,  throughout  this  Eddie  description,  things  and  persons
are  kept  clearly  apart.  Destiny  itself  is  called  orlog,  or  else  nau&r
(necessitas),  aldr  (aevum) ;  the  norns  have  to  manage  it,  espy  it,
decree  it,  pronounce  it  (see  Suppl.).  And  the  other  dialects  too  had
possessed  the  same  term :  OHG.  urlac,  AS.  orlceg,  MHG.  urlouc
(Gramm.  2,  7.  87.  789.  790),  OS.  orlag,  orlcgi,  aldarlagu  (Hel.  103,
8.  113,  11.  125,  15)  j1  it  was  only  when  the  heathen  goddesses
had  been  cast  off,  that  the  meanings  of  the  words  came  to  be  con
founded,  and  the  old  flesh-and-blood  wurt,  ivurff,  wyrd  to  pale  into
a  mere  impersonal  urlac.

In  the  same  relation  as  norn  to  orlog,  stands  parca  to  fatum
(from  fari,  like^qviftr  from  qveSa  qvaft,  quoth),  and  also  alaa,  fjiolpa
to  avdyfCTj  (nauSr)  or  etfiapfievrj.  But  when  once  the  parcae  had
vanished  from  the  people's  imagination,  the  Eomance  language  (by
a  process  the  reverse  of  that  just  noticed  amongst  us)  formed  out
of  the  abstract  noun  a  new  and  personal  one,  out  si  fatum  an  Ital.
fata,  Span,  hada,  Prov.  fada  (Eayn.  sub  v.),  Fr.  fee.2  I  do  not  know
if  this  was  prompted  by  a  faint  remembrance  of  some  female  beings
in  the  Celtic  faith,  or  the  influence  of  the  Germanic  norns.  But
these  fays,  so  called  at  first  from  their  announcing  destiny,  soon
came  to  be  ghostly  wives  in  general,  altogether  the  same  as  our
idisi  and  volur.3  How  very  early  the  name  was  current  in  Italy,
is  proved  by  Ausonius,  who  in  his  Gryphus  ternarii  numeri  brings
forward  the  '  tres  Charites,  trio-  Fata,'  and  by  Procopius,  who

1  From  legan  (to  lay  down,  constituere),  like  the  AS.  lage,  ON.  log  (lex) ;
therefore  urlac,  fundamental  law.     The  forms  urlouc,  urliuge  have  significantly
been  twisted  round  to  the  root  liugan,  louc  (celare).

2  Conf.  nata,  nee  ;  amata,  aimee  ;  lata,  lee.     Some  MHG.  poets  say  few
(Hartm.  Woli'r.),  smefeie,  Haupt's  zeitschr.  2,  182-3,  others /ane  (Gotfr.  Conr.).

3  OFr.  poems  call  them,  in  addition  to  fees,  divesses  (Marie  de  Fr.  2,  385),
duesses  (Meon  4,  158.  165),  duesse  and  fee  (Wolf,  lais  51)  ;  puceles  bien  curves
(Meon  3,  418),  /ranches  puceles  senees  (3,  419)  ;   sapaudes  (wise-women,  from
sapere  ?),  Marie  de  Fr.  2,  385.     Enchanting  beauty  is  ascribed  to  them  all  :
'  plus  bela  que  fada,'  Ferabras  2767  ;  cont'.  16434.     A  book  of  H.  Schreiber
(Die  leen  in  Europa,  Freib.  1842)  throws  much  light  on  the  antiquities  of  fay-
worship.     Houses,  castles  and  hills  of  the  fays  remind  us  of  the  wise-women's
towers,  of  the  Venus-hill  and  Holla-hill,  and  of  giant's  houses.      In   Irish,
siubrog,  siyhbrog,  is  first  a  fays'  house,  then  the  fay  community.


NOKNI.      FATAE.  411

mentions  (De  bello  Goth.  1,  25,  ed.  Bonn.  2,  122)  a  building  in  the
Roman  Forum  called  ra  rpia  fyara  (supra  p.  405,  note)  with  the
remark :  ovrco  yap  'Pco/xaioi,  r«9  polpas  vevojjbiKacn  /caXet^.1  At
that  time  therefore  still  neuter;  but  everywhere  the  number  three,
in  norns,  moirai,  parcae  and  fays  (see  Suppl.).2

About  the  Eomance  fays  there  is  a  multitude  of  stories,  and
they  coincide  with  the  popular  beliefs  of  Germany.  Folquet  de
Romans  sings :

Aissim  fadero  tres  serors

en  aquella  ora  qu'ieu  sui  natz,

que  totz  temps  fos  enamoratz.
Guilhdei.  Poitou:

Assi  fuy  de  nueitz  fadatz  sobr'nn  puegau.

(so  was  I  gifted  by  night  on  a  mount).
Marcabrus :

Gentil  fada

vos  adastret,  quan  fas  nada

d'una  beutat  esmerada.

Trefate  go  past,  laughing,  and  give  good  gifts,  Pentam.  1,  10.  4,  4;
the  first  fate  bestow  blessings,  the  last  one  curses  2,  8 ;  Pervonto
builds  a  bower  for  three  sleeping  fate,  and  is  then  gifted  1,  3 ;  tre
fate  live  down  in  a  rocky  hollow,  and  dower  the  children  who
descend  2,  3.  3,  10 ;  fate  appear  at  the  birth  of  children,  and  lay
them  on  their  breast  5,  5 ;  Cervantes  names  '  los  siete  castillos  de
las  siete  fadas!  Don  Quix.  4,  50  ;  '  siete  fadas  mefadaron  en  brazos
de  una  ama  mia/  Rom.  de  la  infantina ;  there  are  seven  fays  in  the
land,  they  are  asked  to  stand  godmothers,  and  seats  of  honour  are
prepared  at  the  table :  six  take  their  places,  but  the  seventh  was
forgotten,  she  now  appears,  and  while  the  others  endow  with  good
things,  she  murmurs  her  malison  (La  belle  au  bois  dormant) ;  in
the  German  kindermarchen  (Dornroschen)  it  is  twelve  wise  women,
the  thirteenth  had  been  overlooked.  So  in  the  famed  forest  of

1  Accordingly  I  do  not  derive  fata  from  (frans  (speech),  or  faros  spoken,
though  the  Latin  verb  is  of  course  the  same  word  as  <pr)pi.     Conf.  Ducange  sub
v.  Fadus,  and  Lobeck's  Aglaoph.  816.     Fatuus  and  fatua  are  also  connected.

2  Lersch  in  the  Bonner  jb.  1843.  2,129 — 131    separates  the  three  parcae
from  the  three  fata,  because  in  sculptures  they  have  different  adjuncts  :  the
Roman  parcae  are  represented  writing  (p.  406),  the  Grecian  moirai  weaving,  the
tria  fata  simply  as  women  with  horns  of  plenty.     But  almost  everything  in  the
doctrine  of  fays  points  to  a  common  nature  with  our  idises  and  norns,  and
works  of  art  fall  into  the  background  before  the  fulness  of  literature.


412  WISE  WOMEN.

Brezeliande,  by  the  fontaine  de  Barendon,  dames  fae'es  in  white
apparel  shew  themselves,  and  begift  a  child,  but  one  is  spiteful
and  bestows  calamity  (San  Marte,  Leg.  of  Arthur  p.  157-8.  160).
At  Olger's  birth  six  wise  women  appear,  and  endow ;  the  last  is
named  Morgue.  In  the  Children  of  Limburg  (Mones  anzeiger
1835,  169),  when  Ectrites  falls  asleep  in  a  meadow  beside  a  fountain
and  a  lime-tree,  three  wayfaring  wives  approach,  and  foretell  the
future.  The  OFr.  romance  of  Guillaume  au  court  nez  describes
how  Eenoart  falls  asleep  in  a  boat,  and  three  fays  come  and  carry
him  off.  In  Burchard  of  Worms  they  are  still  spoken  of  as  three
sisters  or  parcae,  for  whom  the  people  of  the  house  spread  the
table  with  three  plates  and  three  knives  ;  conf .  the  '  praeparare
mensas  cum  lapidibus  vel  epulis  in  domo '.  In  the  watches  of
the  night  the  fatuae  come  to  children,  wash  them  and  lay  them
down  by  the  fire  (see  SuppL).  In  most  of  the  tales  there  appear
three  fays,  as  well  as  three  norns  and  three  parcae;  occasionally
seven  and  thirteen  ;  but  they  also  come  singly,  like  that  '  weirdlady
of  the  wood/  and  with  proper  names  of  their  own.1  French

1  La  fata  in  Guerino  meschino  p.  m.  223.  234—8  ;  Morganda  fatata,fata
Morgana,  Morghe  la  fee  (Nouv.  Eenart  4810);  <diu  frouwe  de  la  rosche  Mse
(black  rock),  die  gesach  nieman,  er  schiede  dan  vro,  riche  unde  wise,'  whom
none  saw  but  he  went  away  glad,  rich  and  wise,  Ben.  144.  MsH.  1,  118a.
Monnier's  Culte  des  esprits  dans  la  Sequanie  tells  of  a  fee  Arie  in  Franche-
comte,  who  appears  at  country  (esp.  harvest)  feasts,  and  rewards  diligent
spinners  ;  she  makes  the  fruit  fall  off  the  trees  for  good  children,  and
distributes  nuts  and  cakes  to  them  at  Christmas,  just  like  Holda  and  Berhta.
I  believe  her  to  be  identical  with  the  Welsh  Arianrod,  daughter  of  Don  and
sister  of  Gwydion  (Woden),  in  Croker  3,  195  ;  her  name  contains  arian
(argentum),  so  that  she  is  a  shining  one,  and  it  is  also  used  of  the  milky  way.
A  jeu  composed  in  the  latter  half  of  the  13th  century  by  Adam  de  la  Halle  of
Arras  (publ.  in  Theatre  franc,  au  moyen  age,  Paris  1839,  p.  55  seq.)  gives  a
pretty  full  account  of  dame  Morgue  et  sa  compaignie.  They  are  beautiful
women  (beles  dames  parees),  who  at  a  fixed  time  of  the  year  seek  a  night's
lodging  at  a  house,  where  dishes  are  set  on  the  table  for  them  ;  men  that  look
on  must  not  speak  a  word.  Beside  Morgue  la  sage  there  appear  (p.  76-7)  two
other  fays,  Arsile  and  Maglore.,  and  (the  last,  on  sitting  down,  notices  that  no
knife  has  been  laid  for  her,  while  the  others  praise  the  beauty  of  theirs.
Maglore  cries  out  in  anger  :  *  Suije  li  pire  ?  peu  me  prisa  qui  estavli,  ni  avisa
que  toute  seule  a  coutel  faille '.  Arsile  tries  to  pacify  her,  and  says,  it  is  fitting
that  we  give  a  present  to  those  who  have  arranged  this  place  so  prettily.
Morgue  endows  one  with  riches,  Arsile  with  the  poetic  art,  but  Maglore  says :

De  mi  certes  naront  il  nient :

bien  doivent  falir  a  don  bel,

puisque  jai  fall  a  coutel

honni  soit  qui  riens  leur  donra  !

Morgue  however  insisting  on  a  gift,  Maglore  bestows  on  one  fellow  a  bald
head,  and  on  the  other  a  calamitous  journey  :


NORNI.      FATAE.  413

tradition  brings  to  light  a  close  connexion  between  fays  and  our
giant-maidens :  the  fays  carry  enormous  blocks  of  stone  on  their
heads  or  in  their  aprons,  while  the  free  hand  plies  the  spindle  ;
when  the  fay  who  was  doing  the  building  part  had  finished  her
task,  she  called  out  to  her  sisters  not  to  bring  any  more,  and  these,
though  two  miles  off,  heard  the  cry  and  dropped  their  stones,  which
buried  themselves  deep  in  the  ground ;  when  the  fays  were  not
spinning,  they  carried  four  stones  at  once.  They  were  good-
natured,  and  took  special  care  of  the  children  whose  fates  they
foretold.  They  went  in  and  out  of  the  neighbours'  houses  by  the
chimney,  so  that  one  day  the  most  careless  one  among  them  burnt
herself,  and  uttered  a  loud  wail,  at  which  all  the  fays  of  the
neighbourhood  came  running  up.  You  never  could  deceive  them  :
once,  when  a  man  put  his  wife's  clothes  on  and  nursed  the  baby,
the  fay  walked  in  and  said  directly :  '  non,  tti  n'es  point  la  belle
d'hier  au  soir,  tu  ne  files,  ni  ne  vogues,  ni  ton  fuseau  n'enveloppes ',
To  punish  him,  she  contented  herself  with  making  the  apples  that
were  baking  on  the  hearth  shrink  into  peas.

Of  such  stories  there  are  plenty ;  but  nowhere  in  Eomance  or
German  folk-tales  do  we  meet,  as  far  as  I  know,  with  the  Norse
conception  of  twining  and  fastening  the  cord,  or  the  Greek  one  of
spinning  and  cutting  the  thread  of  life.  Only  one  poet  of  the  Mid.
Ages,  Marner,  has  it  2,  173b :

zwd  schepfer  fldliten  mir  ein  seil,

da  bi  diu  dritte  saz  (the  third  sat  by) ;

diu  zerbrachz  (broke  it) :  daz  was  min  unheil.

But  this  seems  borrowed  from  the  Roman  view  of  breaking  off  the
thread  (rumpat,  p.  406,  note),  Ottokar  makes  the  schepfen

ains  comperront  drier  le  coutel

qu'il  ouvlierent  clii  a  metre.

Then  before  daybreak  the  fays  depart  to  a  meadow,  their  place  of  meeting,  for
they  shun  to  meet  the  eyes  of  men  by  day.  Here  we  see  plainly  enough  the
close  resemblance  of  these  three  fays  to  the  three  norns.  The  French  editor
wrongly  understands  coutel  of  a  cloth  spread  for  the  fay  ;  the  passage  in
Burchard  of  Worms  removes  all  doubt.  If  Maglore  be  a  corruption  of
Mandaglore,  Mandagloire,  as  the  mandragora  is  elsewhere  called,  a  close
connexion  may  be  established  with  Alrune,  Olrun.  Morgue  is  shortened  from
Morgan,  which  is  the  Breton  for  merwoman  (from  mor,  the  sea,  and  gwen,
splendens  femina).  One  might  be  tempted  to  connect  Morgan  with  that
inexplicable  '  norn,'  as  the  ON.  morni  stands  for  morgrii ;  but  the  norn  has
nothing  to  do  with  the  morning  or  the  sea  (see  Suppl.).

i  H.  Schreiber,  Feen  in  Europa  pp.  11.  12.  16.  17.     Michelet  2,  17.


414  WISE  WOMEN.

(creating)  impart  all  success  in  good  or  evil.  The  '  banun  festan  '
in  Hild.  lied  is  hardly  to  be  explained  by  the  fastening  of  a  thread
of  death.

If  we  compare  the  Norse  my  thus  with  the  Greek,  each  has
taken  shape  in  its  own  independent  way.  In  Homer  it  is  the
personified  Alaa1  that  spins  the  thread  for  the  newborn  :

dcro-a  ol  Ala  a

yetvofievep  eirewja-e  \lvw,  ore  piv  rerce  fi^rrjp.      II.  20,  127 ;
'  what  things  Aisa  span  for  him  at  birth  with  her  thread '.     But  in
Od.  7,  197  other  spinners  (two)  are  associated  with  her :
da-era  ol  Alaa  KaraK\&6es  re

ryeivofjievto  vrjcravro  XtW,  ore  uiv  reice
'  what  Aisa  and  the  Kataklothes  unkind  span '.  Hesiod  (am.  258)
makes  three  goddesses  stand  beside  the  combatants,  KXwtfw,
Ad^ea-is,  "ArpoTros,  the  last  small  of  stature,  but  eldest  and  most
exalted  of  all.  But  in  Theog.  218  he  names  them  as

K\w6o)  re  Ad%ecriv  re  KOI  "Arporrov,  atre  ftporolcriv

<yeivo[jL€voicn  &I&OIKTIV  e^etv  dyaOov  re  KCLKOV  re  •
'  who  give  to  mortals  at  birth  to  have  both  good  and  ill ; '  and  in
almost  the  same  words  at  905.  The  most  detailed  description  is
given  by  Plato  (De  republ.  617  Steph.  508  Bekk.) :  The  three
polpai  are  daughters  of  'AvdjKrj  (necessity),  on  whose  knees  the
spindle  (drpa/cros)  turns  ;  they  sit  clothed  in  white  and  garlanded,
singing  the  destiny,  Lachesis  rd  yeyovora,  Klotho  rd  ovra,  Atropos
rd  i*,e\\ovra  :  just  the  same  relation  to  past,  present  and  future  as
the  norns  have,  though  the  Greek  proper  names  do  not  themselves
express  it.  K\w0co  (formed  like  Av%a)}  Oa\\co,  Arjrw,  Mop/ia,
spins  (from  /cXw&o  spin,  twine),  Lachesis  allots  (from
,  "ArpoTros,  the  unturnable,  cuts  the  thread.  It  must  not  be
overlooked,  that  Hesiod  sets  up  the  last,  Atropos,  as  the  mightiest,
while  with  us  Wurt  the  eldest  produces  the  most  powerful  impres
sion.  Latin  writers  distribute  the  offices  of  the  parcae  somewhat
differently,  as  Apuleius  (De  mundo  p.  280) :  Clotho  praesentis
temporis  habet  curam,  quia  quod  torquetur  in  digitis,  moment!

1^I  think  aio-a  is  the  OHG.  era,  our  elire,  for  which  we  should  expect  a
Gothic  a"iza,  aisa  (as  aistan  is  aestimare)  :  era  =  honor,  decus,  dignitas,  what
is  fair  and  fitting,  what  is  any  one's  due  ;  nar  alo-av,  ex  dignitate,  to  each  his
meed.  If  this  etymology  holds,  we  understand  why  frau  Ere  was  personified
(see  Suppl.).


NORNI.  415

praesentis  indicat  spatia ;  Atropos  praeteriti  fatum  est,  quia  quod
in  fuso  perfectum  est,  praeteriti  temporis  habet  speciem ;  Lacliesis
futuri,  quod  etiam  illis  quae  futura  sunt  finem  suum  deus  dederit
(see  SuppL).  Isidore's  opinion  was  quoted  on  p.  405.1  The  Nor-
nagestssaga  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  that  of  Meleager,  at
whose  birth  three  moirai  tell  his  fortune :  Atropos  destines  him  to
live  only  till  the  billet  then  burning  on  the  hearth  be  burnt  out ;
his  mother  Althaea  plucks  it  out  of  the  fire.2  Our  modern  tales
here  exchange  the  norns  or  fates  for  death,  Kinderm.  no.  44.
Another  tale,  that  of  the  three  spinners  (no.  14),  depicts  them  as
ugly  old  women,  who  come  to  help,  but  no  longer  to  predict ;  they
desire  to  be  bidden  to  the  marriage  and  to  be  called  cousins.
Elsewhere  three  old  women  foretell,  but  do  not  spin.3  A  folk-tale
(Deutsche  sagen  no.  9)  introduces  two  maidens  spinning  in  a  cave
of  the  mountain,  and  under  their  table  is  the  Evil  one  (I  suppose
the  third  norn)  chained  up  ;  again  we  are  told  of  the  roof-beam  on
which  a  spinning  wife  sits  at  midnight.4  We  must  not  forget  the
AS.  term  which  describes  a  norn  as  weaving,  '  Wyrd  geivdf'
(p.  406) ;  and  when  it  is  said  in  Beow.  1386  :  '  ac  him  Dryhten
forgeaf  wigspeda  gewiofu'  (ei  Dominus  largitus  est  successuum
bellicorum  texturas),  this  is  quite  heathen  phraseology,  only
putting  God  in  the  place  of  Wyrd.  Gottfried  (Trist.  4698),  in
describing  Blicker  of  Steinach's  purity  of  mind,  expresses  himself
thus :

ich  wsene,  daz  infeinen

ze  wunder  haben  gespunnen

und  haben  in  in  ir  brunnen

geliutert  und  gereinet ;

'  I  ween  that  fays  spun  him  as  a  wonder,  and  cleansed  him  in  their
fountain '.

Saxo  Gram.  p.  102  uses  the  Latin  words  parca,  nympha,  but
unmistakably  he  is   describing  norns  :   '  Mos  erat  antiquis,  super

1  The  Hymn  to  Mercury  550-561  names  individually  some  other  /zolpat,
still  three  in  number,  winged   maidens  dwelling   on  Parnassus,  their  heads
besprinkled  with  white  meal,  who  prophesy  when  they  have  eaten  fresh  divine
food  (f)8dav  c8a>8rjv)  of  honey.     Otherwise  they  are  called  Opiai

2  Apollodorus  i.  8,  2.

3  Altd.  wb.  1,  107-8-9-10.     Norske  eventyr  no.    13.     Eob.  Chambers  p.
54-5.     MiillenhofFs  Schleswigh.  s.  p.  410.     Pentamer.  4,  4.

4  Jul.  Schmidt,  Reichenfels  p.  140.


416  WISE  WOMEN.

futuris  liberorum  eventibus  parcarum  oracula  consultare.  Quo
ritu  Fridlevus  Olavi  filii  fortunam  exploraturus,  nuncupatis
solenniter  votis,  deorum  aedes  precabundus  accedit,  ubi  introspecto
sacello1  ternas  sedes  totidem  nymphis  occupari  cognoscit.  Quarum
prima  indulgentioris  animi  liberalem  puero  formam,  uberemque
human!  favoris  copiam  erogabat.  Eidem  secunda  beneficii  loco
liberalitatis  excellentiam  condonavit.  Tertia  vero,  protervioris
ingenii  invidentiorisque  studii  femina,  sororum  indulgentiorem
aspernata  consensum,  ideoque  eamm  donis  officere  cupiens,  futuris
pueri  moribus  parsimoniae  crimen  affixit.'  Here  they  are  called
sisters,  which  I  have  found  nowhere  else  in  ON.  authorities ;  and
the  third  nymph  is  again  the  illnatured  one,  who  lessens  the  boons
of  the  first  two.  The  only  difference  is,  that  the  norns  do  not
come  to  the  infant,  but  the  father  seeks  out  their  dwelling,  their
temple  (see  Suppl.).2

The  weaving  of  the  norns  and  the  spindle  of  the  fays  give  us
to  recognise  domestic  motherly  divinities ;  and  we  have  already
remarked,  that  their  appearing  suddenly,  their  haunting  of  wells
and  springs  accord  w'ith  the  notions  of  antiquity  about  frau  Holda,
Berhta  and  the  like  goddesses,  who  devote  themselves  to  spinning,
and  bestow  boons  on  babes  and  children.3  Among  Celts  especially,

1  They  had  a  temple  then,  in  which  their  oracle  was  consulted.

2  The  Lettish  Laima,  at  the  birth  of  a  child,  lays  the  sheet  under  it,  and
determines  its  fortune.     And  on  other  occasions  in  life  they  say,  '  taip  Laima
leme,'  so  Fate  ordained  it  ;   no  doubt  Laima  is  closely  connected   with  lemti
(ordiiiare,   disponere).     She  runs   barefooted   over  the   hills    (see   ch.  XVII,
Watersprites).     There  is  also  mentioned  a  Delilda  (nursing-mother,  from  debt
to  suckle).     A  trinity  of  parcae,  and  their  spinning  a  thread,  are  unknown  to
the   Lettons  ;   conf.  Stender's  Gramm.  p.  264.     Rhesas  dainos  pp.   272.  309.
310.— The  Lithuanians  do  know  a  Werpeya  (spinner).     The  Ausland  for  1839,
no.   278  has  a  pretty  Lithuanian  legend  :    The  dieves  valditoyes  were   seven
goddesses,  the  first  one  spun  the  lives  of  men  out  of  a  distaff  given  her  by  the
highest  god,  the  second  set  up  the  warp,  the  third  wove  in  the  woof,  the  fourth
told  tales  to  tempt  the  workers  to  leave  off,  for  a  cessation  of  labour  spoilt  the
web,  the  fifth  exhorted  them  to  industry,  and  added  length  to  the  life,  the  sixth
cut  the  threads,  the  seventh  washed  the  garment  and  gave  it  to  the  most  high
god,  and  it  became  the  man's  winding-sheet.     Of  the  seven,  only  three  spin  or
weave.

3  Not  a  few  times  have  Holda  and  Berhta  passed  into  Mary  ;  and  in  the
three  Marys  of  a  Swiss  nursery-rhyme  I  think  I  can  recognise  the  heathen  norna
or  idisl  :

rite,  rite  rosli,  ride,  ride  a-cock  horse,

ze  Bade  stot  e  schlossli,  at  Baden  stands  a  little  castle,

ze  Bade  stot  e  guldi  hus,  at  Baden  stands  a  golden  house,

es  liieged  drei  Mareie  drus.  there  look  three  Marys  out  of  it  :

die  eint  spinnt  side,  the  one  spins  silk,


NORNI.      WALACHURIUN.  417

the  fatae  seem  apt  to  run  into  that  sense  of  matres  and  matronae,1
which  among  Teutons  we  find  attaching  more  to  divine  than  to
semi-divine  beings.  In  this  respect  the  fays  have  something
higher  in  them  than  our  idises  and  norns,  who  in  lieu  of  it  stand
out  more  warlike.

4.  WALACHUEIUN  (VALKYRJOR).

Yet,  as  the  fatae  are  closely  bound  up  with  fatum — the  pro
nouncing  of  destiny,  vaticination — the  kinship  of  the  fays  to  the
norns  asserts  itself  all  the  same.  Now  there  was  no  sort  of  destiny
that  stirred  the  spirit  of  antiquity  more  strongly  than  the  issue  of
battles  and  wars:  it  is  significant,  that  the  same  urlac,  urlouc
expresses  both  fatum  and  bellum  also  (Graff  2,  96.  Gramm.  2,  790),
and  the  idisi  forward  or  hinder  the  fight.  This  their  office  we  have
to  look  into  more  narrowly.

From  Caesar  (De  B.  Gall.  1,  50)  we  already  learn  the  practice
of  the  Germani,  'ut  matresfamilias  eorum  soriibus  et  vaticinationibus
declararent,  utruin  proelium  committi  ex  usu  esset,  necne '.  Mis
tresses  of  families  practised  augury,  perhaps  women  selected  for  the
purpose,  of  superior  and  godlike  repute  like  Veleda.

Let  us  bear  in  mind,  which  gods  chiefly  concerned  themselves
with  the  event  of  a  battle :  O&inn  and  Freyja  draw  to  themselves
all  those  who  fall  in  fight,  and  Oolnn  admits  them  to  his  heavenly
abode  (pp.  133,  305).  This  hope,  of  becoming  after  death  members
of  the  divine  community,  pervades  the  religion  of  the  heathen.
Now  the  ON.  valr,  AS.  wcel,  OHG.  walt  denotes  the  carnage  of  the
battle-field,  the  sum  of  the  slain :  to  take  possession  of  this  val,
to  gather  it  in,  was  denominated  kiosa,  kiesen,  to  choose  ;  this  verb
seems  a  general  technical  term  for  the  acceptance  of  any  sacrifice
made  to  a  higher  being.2  But  OSinn,  who  has  the  siges  kilr  (choosing

die  ander  schnatzelt  chride,  the  other  cards  .  .  .  .  ?

die  drit  schnit  haberstrau.  the  third  cuts  oaten  straw.

bhiiet  mer  Gott  mis  chindli  an  !  God  keep  my  childie  too  !

Schnatzeln  is,  I  suppose,  to  wind  ?  [snast  =  wick  ?  snood  ?  In  the  marchen
of  the  Goosemaid,  schnatzen  is  apparently  to  comb].  The  seventh  line  sometimes
runs  :  di  dritte  schneidt  den  fade*  (cuts  the  thread).  Conf.  Vonbun  p.  66.
jFirmenich  2,  665b.  Mannhardt  pp.  388.  392.  The  nursery-song  in  the
Wunderhorn  p.  70-1  has  three  spinning  tocken,  i.e.  nymphs,  fays.

1  Lersch  in  the  Bonn  Annual  1843,  pp.  124 — 7.

2  Chief  passage,  Ssem.  141a.     Conf.  Gramm.  4,  608,  and  AS.  wig  cwrot?,
Caedm.  193,  9;  MHG.  sige  kiesen,  Iw.  7069,  sig  erkiesen,  Wh.  355,  15.     So,

|den  tot  kiesen.

27


418  WISE  WOMEN.

of  victory,  p.  133,  note),  is  served  in  Valholl  by  maidens,  and  them
he  sends  out  into  every  battle,  to  choose  the  slain,  Sn.  39;  *  kiosa  er
KSnir  ero/  Stem.  164b;  vildi  )?ik  kiosa,  Seem.  254a.

Hence  such  a  maiden,  half  divine,  is  called  valkyrja ;  and
it  is  another  most  welcome  coincidence,  that  the  AS.  language
has  retained  the  very  same  term  wcelcyrie  (waelcyrge,  wselcyrre)  to
English  such  Latin  words  as  bellona,  erinnys,  Alecto,  Tisiphone.
and  employs  it  even  for  parca  and  venefica.  The  Cott.  MS.  Vitell.
A.  15  has  a  gloss  '  wselcyrigean  eagan,  gorgoneus':  this  is  translating
the  Greek  idea  into  an  AS.  one ;  did  the  eyes  of  the  waelcyrigean
instil  horror  like  the  Gorgons'  heads?  I  am  quite  safe  in  assuming
an  OHG.  walachurid  (walachurra) ;  valakusjd  would  be  the  Gothic
form.  At  the  end  of  the  Langobardian  genealogy  we  find  a  man's
name  Wo.lcausus)-

Another  name  of  the  valkyrjur  is  ON.  valmeyjar  (battle-maids),
perhaps  also  the  present  N"orw.  valdoger,  which  Hallager  140b  says
is  guardian-spirit.    Again,  they  are  called  skialdmeyjar,  hialmmeyjar,
because  they  go  forth  armed,  under  shield  and  helmet  (vera  und
hialmi,  Saem.  15  la  192b)  ;  nonnor  Herjans,  nuns  of  Oftinn  4b.     The
Edda  bestows  on  the  valkyrja  the  epithets:  livit  168b,7m£  und  hial
mi  (alba  sub  galea)  145b,  Uort  174b,  sdlbiort,  sunbright  167b,  Hart-
lituff  142%  hialmmtr  157a,  gullvariff  167b,  margullin  maer  145a,
alvitr  164a,  all  descriptive  of  beauty  or  helmet-ornaments.     Helm
and  shield  distinguish  these  helm  and  shield  women  as  much  as
heroes,  they  ride  on  shield-service,  under  shield-roof,  Seem.  250b
and  are  called  skialdmeyjar  aldrstamar,  or  young  shield-maidens  o
Atli's  court.     The  legend  of  the  Amazons  (Herod.  4,  110 — 117
Jorn.  cap.  6.7.8.     Paul.  Diac.  1,  15)  seems  to  rest  on  similar  ye
different  notions.   A  valkyr  in  Ssem.  167b  is  named  su&rcen  (australis]
apparently  in  the  sense  of  biort,  solbiort  ?     Again  at  151b,  disi
suSroenar  (see  Suppl.).2

1  Of  valr,  wal  itself  we  might  seek  the  root  in  velja,  valjan  (eligere),  so
that  it  should  from  the  first  have  contained  the  notion  of  choosing,  but  beinj
applied  to  strages,  and  its  sense  getting  blurred,  it  had  to  be  helped  out  by  a
second  verb  of  the  same  meaning.    Our  Tit.  105,  4  has  a  striking  juxtaposition

'  Sigun  diu  sigehaft  uf  dem  wal,  da  man  welt  magede  kiusche  und  ir  siieze '.  I
is  only  in  Dietr.  91b  and  Rab.  536.  635.  811.  850.  923  that  welrecke  occurs  ;  can
it  have  any  relationship  to  walkiire  ?

2  OSinn  has  Frigg,  the  valkyr -jur  and  the  ravens  in  the  waggon  with  him
Sn.  66.     For  valkyrja  I  also  find  the  name  skorAngr,  derivable  either  from  skai
stiperbia,  or  skari  agmen.     Brynhildr  is  called  in  Vols.  saga  cap.  24  'mest
akor&ngr'  (see  Suppl. j.


VALKYRJA,  W.ELCYRIE.  419

One  name  is  particularly  attractive  :  dskmeyjar,  wish-maidens
.  212.  Vols.  saga  cap.  2),  given  them,  I  think,  because  they  are
in  OSin's  service,  and  OSinn  is  called  Oski,  Wunsc.  But  there  is
something  more :  I  find  a  confirmation  of  my  opinion  that  Wuotan
bore  the  name  of  Wunsc  in  his  identity  with  Mercury,  for  Mercury
carries  the  magic  wand  (caduceus),  which  is  like  our  wishing-rod,
OHG-.  wunsciligerta  (-yerde,  yard).  The  likeness  will  come  out
more  distinctly  from  a  closer  inspection  of  the  two  rods,  which  is  yet
to  come ;  but  if  Wuotan  and  Wunsc,  OSinu  and  Oski  are  one,  we
may  suppose  that  the  thorn,  the  sleeping-thorn,  which  Oolnn  put
into  the  dress  of  the  valkyrja  Brynhildr  (Seem.  192a),  was  likewise
a  wishing-thorn.  It  throws  light  on  the  nature  of  Brunhild  and
Chrimhild,  that  rocks  are  named  after  them,  one  called  spilstein,
Chriemhildesp7  (p.  370),  which  does  not  find  a  meaning  so  well
from  spil  (ludus)  as  from  spille  (spindle,  fusus).  For  other  stones
have  the  name  kunkel  (distaff),  and  in  French  fairy-tales  quenouille
a  la  bonne  dame ; x  Dornroschen  (thorn-rosekin)  pricked  her  finger
with  the  spindle  and  fell  into  a  dead  sleep,  as  Brunhild  did  with
the  wishing-thorn.  Spindles  are  an  essential  characteristic  of  all  the
wise-women  of  antiquity  among  Teutons,  Celts  and  Greeks.2  The
walklire  is  a  wtmsch-kint,  Wunsches  kint,  pp.  139, 142  (see  Suppl.).

The  name  wunschelweib,  which  lasted  down  to  a  late  time,  shall
be  produced  hereafter;  here  I  call  up  from  the  poem  of  the
Staufenberger  a  being  by  whom  the  connexion  of  valkyrs  with  fays
is  placed  beyond  doubt.  To  the  knight  there  shews  herself  a  maiden
in  white  apparel  (the  hvit  and  biort  above),  sitting  on  a  stone  (line
224) ;  she  has  watched  over  him  in  danger  and  war  from  his  youth
up,  she  was  about  him  unseen  (332 — 364);  now  she  becomes  his
love,  and  is  with  him  whenever  he  wishes  for  her  (swenne  du  einest
wiinschest  nach  mir,  so  bin  ich  endelichen  bi  dir  474).  By  super
human  power  she  moves  swiftly  whither  she  lists  (war  ich  wil,  da
bin  ich,  den  wunsch  hat  mir  Got  gegeben  497).  Staufenberger,  after
being  united  to  her  in  love,  may  do  anything  except  take  a  wedded
wife,  else  he  will  die  in  three  days.

'  er  wunschte  nach  der  frouwen  sin,
bi  im  so  war  diu  schcene  fin.'


i  H.  Schreiber  pp.  20.  21.

2 1  like  also  Schreiber's  derivation,  pp.  65 — 67,  of   the  name  Nehaecij
Nehalennia  (supra  p.  257)  from  the  root  nere,  neza  to  spin.


420  WISE  WOMEN.

When  he  notwithstanding  resolves  on  another  marriage,  she  drives
her  foot  through  the  floor,  and  he  has  to  die  (1016.  1066).  Accord
ing  to  this  remarkable  story,  wunschweib  or  wunschelweib  is  one
whose  presence  her  lover  can  procure,  by  wishing  it,  whenever  he
longs  for  her,  '  names  her  name'  as  it  were  (p.  398) :  this  is,  though
not  a  false,  yet  a  later  meaning  substituted  for  the  original  one,
which  had  reference  to  the  god  of  wishing,  the  divine  Wish.  Old
Norse  legend  will  unfold  to  us  more  precisely  the  nature  of  these
women.

In  Valholl  the  occupation  of  the  oskmeyjar  or  valkyrjur  was  to
hand  the  drinking-horn  to  the  gods  and  einherjar,  and  to  furnish
the  table.  Here  comes  out  their  peculiar  relation  to  Freyja,  who
'  chooses  val '  like  them,  is  called  Valfreyja  (p.  305),1  and  pours  out
at  the  banquet  of  the  Ases  (at  gildi  Asa),  Sn.  108.  Exactly  in  the
same  way  did  Gondul,  sitting  on  a  stol  i  rioSrinu  (in  the  niuriute,
clearing),  offer  the  comers  drink  out  of  a  horn  (Fornald.  sog.  1,  398.
400);  and  with  this  agree  the  deep  draughts  of  the  modern  folk-tale :
a  beautifully  dressed  and  garlanded  maiden  from  the  Osenberg  offers
the  count  of  Oldenburg  a  draught  in  a  silver  horn,  while  uttering  pre
dictions  (Deutsche  sagen,  no.  541).  Svend  Falling  drank  out  of  the
horn  handed  him  by  elf-women,  and  in  doing  so,  spilt  some  on  his
horse,  as  in  the  preceding  story  (Thiele  2,  67) ;  I  have  touched
(p.  372)  on  the  identity  of  Svend  Falling  with  Siegfried,  whose
relation  to  the  valkyr  Brunhild  comes  out  clearly  in  the  Danish
story.  In  a  Swedish  folk-song  in  Arvidsson  2,  301,  three  mountain-
maids  hold  out  silver  tankards  in  their  white  hands.  Quite  in
harmony  are  some  Norwegian  traditions  in  Faye  p.  26-8-9.  30;
and  additional  Danish  ones  in  Thiele  1,  49.55.  3,44  (see  Suppl.).

Still  more  to  the  purpose  is  the  office  of  the  valkyrs  in  war.
Not  only  '  kiosa  val,  kiosa  feigS/2  but  '  ratJa  vigum '  or  '  sigri/
therefore  the  deciding  of  battle  and  victory,  is  placed  in  their  hands,
Sn.  39.  They  are  said  to  be  '  gorvar  (alert)  at  ri5a  grand/  '  gorvar

1  So,  in  a  Faroese  song,  Valvfrygv  (Finn  Magn.  lex.  p.  805).

2  The  taking  possession  of  souls  at  the  moment  of  death  by  OSinn   and
Freyja,  or  by  their  messengers  the  valkyrs,  appears  to  me  so  deep-rooted  a
feature  of  our  heathenism,  that  we  may  well  find  it  lingering  even  in  Christian
traditions.     Of  this  sort  is  the  scramble  of  angels  and  devils  for  the  soul,  des
cribed  in  the  poem  Muspilli,  which  Schmeller  has  hunted  up,  Georg  1 235-44.
6082—86,  and  Meon  1,  239.     4,  114-5  ;  and  a  striking  passage  in  the  Morolt  I
shall  quote  in  ch.  XVII.    Will  any  one  think  of  tracing  this  idea  to  the  Epistle
of  Jude  9,  or  the  apocryphal  Book  of  Enoch  ?


WALACHURIUN,      SKULD.  421

at  ricSa  til  go5J?io5ar/  Ssem.  4b.  Eooted  in  their  being  is  an  irresis
tible  longing  for  this  warlike  occupation ;  hence  the  Edda  expresses
their  most  characteristic  passion  by  the  verb  'j?ra'  (desiderant),
Ssem.  88b,  'J?raoV  (desiderabant)  or  'fystoz'  (cupiebant),  134a :  it
is  their  own  longing,  striving  and  wishing  that  has  swung  itself
round  into  that  wishing  for  them.  Usually  nine  valkyrjur  ride  out
together,  Saem.  142,  162;  their  lances,  helmets  and  shields  glitter
151a.  This  nineness  is  also  found  in  the  story  of  ThiSrandi  (see
p.  402),  to  whom  nine  disir  appear  first  in  white  raiment,  then  nine
others  in  black.  Ssem.  44-5,  and  after  him  Sn.  39,  enumerate
thirteen  of  them :  Hrist,  Mist,  Skeggold,  Skogul,  Hildr,  Thrll&r,
Hlock,  Herfwtr,  Goll,  GeirahoS  (aL  Geirolul),  RandgmS,  RddgriS,
Reginleif ;  but  Saem.  4b  only  six:  Skidd,  Skogul,  Gunnr,  Hildr ,
Gondul,  GeirsJcoguL1  The  prose  of  Sn.  39  distinguishes  three  as
strictly  val-choosers  and  mistresses  of  victory:  Gu&r,  Rota  and
Skuld  fnorn  en  yngzta'.  The  celebrated  battle-weaving  song  of
the  Nialssaga  names  the  following :  Hildr,  Hiorprimul,  Sangri&r  (1.
RangriSr),  Svipul,  Gunnr,  Gondul]  the  Hakonarmal:  Gondol,  Skogol,
Geirskogol;  the  Krakumal  (ed.  Eafn,  p.  121)  only  Hlock  and  Hildr.
Several  of  these  names  are  of  extraordinary  and  immediate  value
to  our  investigation,  and  not  one  of  the  remainder  ought  to  be  left
out  of  sight  in  future  study  (see  Suppl.).

Skuld,  for  instance  :  we  gather  from  it  the  affinity  of  norns  and
valkyrs,  and  at  the  same  time  the  distinction  between  them.  A
dis  can  be  both  norn  and  valkyr,  but  the  functions  are  separate,
and  usually  the  persons.  The  norns  have  to  pronounce  the  fatum,
they  sit  on  their  chairs,  or  they  roam  through  the  country  among
mortals,  fastening  their  threads.  Nowhere  is  it  said  that  they  ride.
The  valkyrs  ride  to  war,  decide  the  issue  of  the  fighting,  and
conduct  the  fallen  to  heaven ;  their  riding  is  like  that  of  heroes
and  gods  (pp,  327.  392),  mention  is  made  of  their  horses  :  skalf
Mistar  marr  (tremuit  Mistae  equus),  Sa3m.  156* ;  m<z?*gullin  maer
(aureo  equo  vecta  virgo),  145a;  when  the  steeds  of  the  valkyrs
shake  themselves,  dew  drips  from  their  manes  into  the  valleys,  and
fertilizing  hail  falls  on  trees  14oa>b,  with  which  compare  the  l  des-
tillationes  in  comis  et  collis  equorum '  of  the  wise-women  (p.  287) ;
the  name  Mist,  which  elsewhere  means  mist,  may  have  indicated

1  Unpublished  passages  in  the  skalds  supply  29  or  30  names  (Finn  Magn.
lex.  p.  803).


422  WISE   WOMEN.

a  like  phenomenon.  Of  the  norns,  none  but  Skuld  the  youngest
(p.  405)  can  be  a  valkyrja  too  :  were  UrSr  and  VerSandi  imagined
as  too  aged  or  too  dignified  for  the  work  of  war  ?  did  the  cutting,
breaking,  of  the  thread  (if  such  an  idea  can  be  detected  in  the
North)  better  become  the  maiden  practised  in  arms  ?

Two  other  valkyrs,  Rlock  and  Herfiotr,  have  been  claimed
above  (p.  401)  as  idisl,  and  interpreted  as  restrainers  of  the  fight.
In  the  Kormakssaga  there  also  occurs  Hlokk  gen.  Hlakkar,  for
bellona.

Hildr,  Gunnr,  Thruffr  deserve  to  be  studied  the  more  closely,
because  their  personality  turns  up  in  other  Teutonic  tongues  as
well,  and  the  presence  there  of  some  walachuriun  argues  that  of
the  whole  sisterhood.  Even  in  ONorse,  Hildr  and  Gunnr  (mGuSr)
got  generalized  into  hildr  and  gunnr  (pugna,  proelium) ;  of  bellona
was  made  bellum :  '  hildr  hefir  ]m  oss  verit,'  bellona  nobis  fuisti,
Seem.  164b.  Conversely,  beside  the  AS.  hild  and  guff  we  still
find  a  personal  Hild  and  Guff:  gif  mec  Hild  nime  (if  H.  take  me),
Beow.  899.  2962  j  Guff  nimeB  5069  ;  Guff  fornam  (carried  off)
2240  ;  as  elsewhere  we  have  '  gif  mec  dea$  nimeoY  Beow.  889,  wig
ealle  fornam  2154,  guSdeaS  fornam  4494,  Wyrd  fornam  2411  (conf.
OS.  Wurd  farnimid,  Hel,  111,  11),  swylt  fornam  2872,  Wyrd  for-
sweop  (supra  p,  406) ;  conf.  '  Hilde  grap '  5009.  And  as  other
beings  that  do  us  good  or  harm  are  by  turns  aroused  and  quieted,
it  is  said  picturesquely:  Hildi  vekja  (bellonam  excitare),  Ssem.  160*
246a;  elsewhere  merely  vig  vekja  (bellum  excitare)  105a.  The
valkyrs,  like  OSinn  (p.  147),  are  accompanied  by  eagles  and  ravens,
who  alight  on  the  battlefield,1  and  the  waging  of  war  is  poetically
expressed  as  ala  gogl  yunna  systra  (aves  alere  sororum  belli),  Ssem.
160a.  The  forms  in  OHG.  were  Hiltia  and  Gundia  (Gudea),  both
found  in  the  Hild.  lied  6,  60,  though  already  as  mere  common
nouns  ;  composite  proper  names  have  -hilt,  -gunt.2  The  legend  of
Hildr,  who  goes  to  the  val  at  night,  and  by  her  magic  wakes  the
fallen  warriors  into  life  again,  is  preserved  both  in  the  Edda  (Sin.
164-5)  and  also  in  the  OHG.  poem  of  Gudrun,  where  she  is  called
Hilde? — Lastly,  Thruffr,  which  likewise  sinks  into  a  mere  appella-

1  Anclr.  and  El.  p.  xxvi.  xxvii.     Conf.  Luke  17,  37  :  onov  TO  o-co/^a,  ««
(Twa\6r](TOVTai  KCU  ol  aeroi.

2  The  Trad,  fuld.,  in   Schannat  no.  443,  have  preserved  the  name,  well
suited  to  a  valkyr,  of  Themarhilt  (from  de'mar,  crepusculum).

3  Deutsche  "heldensage  p.  327  seq.  Conf.  supra  p.  285,  on  Hilde  and  Hild-.
burg.


HILD.      GUND.      DRUD.  423

tive  firtiffr  virgo,  and  in  OHG.  occurs  in  a  great  many  female
names  (e.g.  Alpdrud  [^ElfyryS,  Elfrida],  Wolchandrud,  Himildrud,
Pliddrut,  Plihdrut  ==  Plectrud,  Kerdrud  =  Gertrude,  Mimidrud,
Sigidrud,  which  naturally  suggest  ghostly  beings),  has  assumed
the  general  meaning  of  witch,  sorceress,  hobgoblin.1  Hans  Sachs
several  times  uses  '  alte  trute '  for  old  witch,  and  noisy  children  are
quieted  with  the  words  :  '  hush,  the  drut  will  come  ! ' 2  so  that  here
she  exactly  fills  the  place  of  frau  Holla  or  Berhta,  and  can
the  more  appropriately  be  the  ancient  valkyr.  An  AS.  wood-
maiden,  named  Dhryft,  comes  up  in  the  Vita  Offae  secundi  (supra,
p.  388)  :  she  is  from  France,  where  she  had  been  sentenced  to
death  for  her  crimes,  exposed  in  a  ship,  and  cast  on  the  shore  of
Mercia.  Here  Offa  saw  the  maiden  passing  fair,  and  married  her,
but  she  soon  committed  new  transgressions.  She  is  called  9a  Drida,
9b  Petronilla,  15b  Qvendrida  (!e.,cwen  ThryS  ;  conf.  Kemble's  pre
face  to  Beow.  pp.  xxxv.  xxxvi,  and  Backstrb'm  1,  220  (see  SuppL).

Beside  the  valkyrs  named,  there  must  have  been  many  others,
and  the  second  section  of  the  Ssemundaredda  names  several  as
lovers  or  wives  of  heroes.  Such  are  Svava,  Sigrlinn,  Kara,  jSigrtin,
Sigrdrifa,  who  are  expressly  called  valkyrjur,  Ssem.  142b  145b  157,
169.  194.  It  also  comes  out,  that  they  were  of  human  origin,
being  daughters  of  kings,  Svava  of  Eylimi,  Sigrlinn  of  Svafnir,
Sigrun  of  Hogni,  Kara  of  Halfdan,  Sigrdrifa  of  Buoli ;  Svava  was
the  lover  of  Helgi  HiorvarSsson,  Sigrlinn  of  HiorvarSr,  Sigrun  of
Helgi  Hundingsbani,  Kara  of  Helgi  HaddingskaSi,  and  Sigrdrifa,
who  is  no  other  than  Brynhildr,  of  Sigurftr.  Grimhildr  (helmet-
maiden,  p.  238),  and  above  all  Brynhildr,  Prunhilt,  whose  very
name  betokens  the  mail-clad  Hildr,  is  superhuman:  her  inaccessible
hall  stands  on  a  mountain,  like  those  of  Yeleda  and  Jetha  (pp.  95-
6) ;  it  was  a  schildburg  (skialdborg),  where  she  herself,  bound  by
the  spell,  slept  under  her  shield,  till  SigurSr  released  her.  Then
she  prophesied  to  him,  Ssem.  194b,  and  before  her  death  she
prophesies  again,  224.  226b.  Her  hall  was  encircled  vritib.  flickering
flame,  '  oc  var  um  sal  hennar  vafrlogi,'  Sn.  139  (see  SuppL),  as  was
also  that  of  Mengloft  (OHG.  Maniklata,  i.e.,  monili  laetabunda),
another  valkyr:  salr  er  slunginn  er visom vafiioga  (Ssem.  110a,  conf.

1  Some  people  think  Gerdrut,  Gerdraut,  an  unchristian  name.     Fran  Trude
(Kinderm.  43).

2  Flogel,  gesch.  des  groteskekom.  p.  23.


424  WISE  WOMEN.

107a'b).  Before  this  MengloS,  nine  virgins  kneel,  sit,  and  sing;
sacrifice  is  offered  to  them  all  (llla) ;  conf.  ch.  XXXVI.  Then
Vebiorg  skialdmcer  appears  in  Fornald.  sog.  1,  384.  And  vrd
Babehilt,  whom  Dietrich  finds  at  a  fountain,  asleep  (as  Sigurd  found
Brynhild),  and  who  gives  him  healing  salves,  and  foretells  his  fate
(Ecke  151 — 160),  must  also  be  reckoned  among  norns  or  valkyrs.
The  valkyrs  bestowed  on  their  favourites,  as  Staufenberger's  lover
did  on  him  (p.  419),  victory  and  protection  in  battle  (Sigrun  hlifSi
honom  opt  siSan  i  orrostom,  Ssem.  142b) ;  this  relation  is  technically
expressed  by  verja  (tueri  134a);  they  hide  their  heroes'  ships  (Svava
145a'b,  Sigrun  153b).  The  above-mentioned  Hildr  too,  the  daughter
of  king  Hogni  (Hagene),  was  Heoln's  betrothed.  The  memory  of
these  shield-maidens  has  filtered  down  even  into  modern  folk
songs  :  in  Arvidsson  1,  189,  Kerstin  skoldmo  with  her  8000  maids
redeems  her  betrothed  from  captivity  ;  at  other  times  it  is  a  sister
that  rescues  her  brother,  by  which  is  not  meant  a  sister  by  birth,
but  a  valkyr  again,  for  these  higher  beings  are  everywhere  called
sisters,  and  fraternize  with  their  proteges  (Arvidsson  2,  120-1-2.
Nyerup  4,  38-9).  Now  those  women  in  our  medieval  poetry,  the
sight  of  whom  nerves  to  victory,  whose  name  need  only  be  uttered
to  bring  them  to  one's  side  as  quickly  as  a  wish  can  be  formed  and
accomplished,  are  evidently  shield-women  of  this  kind  (see  Suppl.).
OSinn  then  admitted  into  his  band  of  valkyrs  mortal  maidens
of  kingly  race,  deified  women  standing  by  the  side  of  the  deified
heroes.;  yet  I  do  not  suppose  that  all  valkyrs  were  of  such  lineage,
but  that  the  oldest  and  most  famous  were,  like  the  norns,  descended
from  gods  or  elves.  It  is  also  worth  noting,  that  Kara  and  her
Helgi  were  looked  upon  as  a  second  birth  of  Svava  and  the  elder
Helgi,  Ssem.  148b  169.  In  the  VolundarqviSa  three  other  valkyrs
make  their  appearance  together:  ffladguffr  svanhvit,  Hervor  alvitr,
and  Olrun,  the  first  two  being  daughters  of  king  LoSver,  the  third
of  Kiar.;  they  unite  themselves  to  Slagfiftr,  Volundr  and  Egill,  live
with  them  seven  years,  ,and  then  escape,  '  at  vitja  viga/  to  pursue
their  old  trade  of  war  again.  On  the  whole,  it  seems  the  union  of
these  half-goddesses  with  heroes  turned  out  detrimentally  to  both
parties  :  the  heroes  came  to  an  early  death  or  other  harm,  as
Staufenberger's  example  teaches  ;  and  c  Sigrun  varS  skammlif,'  she
grew  scant  of  life,  Ssem.  169a.  Perhaps  we  should  be  right  iu
assuming  that  promotion  to  the  valkyr's  office  took  place  under  an


WALACHURIUN.  425

obligation  of  virginity,1  which  again  reminds  one  of  the  Amazons.
At  all  events,  when  OSinn  was  angry  with  Sigrdrifa  for  letting  his
favourite  fall  in  battle,2  he  decreed  that  now  she  should  be  given  in
marriage, '  qva5  hana  giptaz  scyldo/  Seem.  194a.  Hla5gu5r,  Hervor
and  Olrun  had  been  carried  off  by  the  men  forcibly  and  against
their  will  (see  Suppl.).3  All  these  female  names  are  descriptive.
Qlr&n  was  discussed  on  p.  404.  Hladguftr  is  literally  bellona
stragis ;  Hervor,  like  the  kindred  Gunnvor,  alludes  to  hosts  and
battles,  the  adj.  alvitr  to  the  gift  of  prophecy,  and  svanlivit  to  the
swan-shape.  Saxo  Gram.  22-3  names  another  Svanhvita,  who  has
likewise  much  of  the  valkyr,  is  a  seer  of  spirits,  and  presents  a
sword  to  Regner  to  seal  their  covenant.  As  for  Slagfi&r  (see  p.  380),
I  prefer  to  explain  it  not  as  Slagfinnr,  though  he  is  called  a  son  of
the  Finnakonungr,  but  as  Slagfio&r  =  alatus,  pennatus,  which  goes
better  with  Svanhvit  his  lover,  and  is  supported  by  the  OHG.
word  slagifedara,  penna.

How  little  we  are  entitled  to  separate  the  norns  and  valkyrs
totally  from  one  another,  is  taught  by  the  tale  of  these  three
maidens  also.  Not  to  mention  the  prevalence  among  valkyrs  as
well  as  norns  of  the  number  three  and  sisterly  companionship,  nor
Hervor's  having  the  epithet  alvitr  (omniscia),  which  better  fits  a
norn  than  a  valkyr ;  it  is  said  of  all  three,  that  they  sat  on  the
sea-beach  spinning  costly  flax,  nay,  of  the  same  ' all- witting  '  one
(who  is  repeatedly  called  dnga,  as  Skuld  is  in  other  places),  that
she  was  about  to  '  orlog  drygja,'  to  dree  a  weird,  Saem.  133a  134a.

1  Pompon.    Mela    3,   8  :    '  Oraculi    numinis    Gallic!    antistites,  perpetua
virginitate  sanctae,  numero  novem  esse  traduntur.     Gallicenas  vocant,  putantque
ingeniis  singularibus  praeditas  maria  ac  ventos  concitare,  seque  in  quae  velint
animalia  vertere,  sanare   quae  apud   alios  insanabilia   sunt,  scire  ventura  et
praedicare,  sed  non  nisi  deditas  navigantibus,  et  in  id  tantum  ut  se  consulerent
profectas  [1.  profectis  ?]  '.     The  similarity  of  these  nine  sooth-telling  gallicenae
is  unmistakable.     Some  read  Galli  Cenas,  others  Barrigenas,  conf.  Tzsehucke,
Not.  crit.  pp.  159—163.

2  N.B.  against  OSin's  will,  who  could  therefore  be  outwitted :  destiny  stood
above  the  god.

3  On  p.  406  we  saw  wise-women  represented  as  acquainted  with  writing,
and  as  actually  writing  ;  it  will  be  for  similar  reasons  that  valkyrs  embroider
and  paint.     The  Vols.  saga  cap.  24  says  of  Brynhild  :  *  him  sat  i  einni  skemmu
vi<5  meyjar  sinar,  hun  kunni  rneira  hagleik  enn  aSrar  konur,  hun  lagSi  sinn
borSa  meS  gulli,  ok  saumaSi  a  ]?au  stormerki,  er  SigiirSr  hafSi  giort '.     And  in
this  chamber  SigurS  .comes  tojier.     I  place  beside  this  the  opening  lines  of  a
Swedish  song  :

Sven  Farling  han  rider  till  jungfruns  gard,
som  stickade  pa  silket  det  hvita.
And  this  hero  is  identical  with  Sigurd".


42 G  WISE  WOMEN.

The  award  of  battle  is  one  part  of  destiny ;  not  only  norns,  but
valkyrs  also  were  imagined  spinning  and  weaving.  This  is  placed
in  the  clearest  light-  by  the  fearfully  exciting  poem  in  cap.  158  of
the  Nialssaga.  Through  a  crevice  in  the  rock  DorruSr  sees  women
sit  singing  over  a  web,  at  which  human  heads  serve  them  for
weights,  entrails  for  warp  and  weft,  swords  for  spools,  and  arrows
for  a  comb :  in  their  weird  song  they  describe  themselves  as
valkyrjur,  and  their  web  as  intended  for  the  spectator  DorruSr.1
At  length  they  tear  up  their  work,  mount  their  steeds,  and  six  of
them  ride  to  the  south,  six  to  the  north.  Compare  with  this  the
weaving  Wyrd  of  the  AS.  poet  (p.  415).  The  parting  of  the
maidens  into  two  bands  that  ride  in  opposite  directions,  is  like
those  nine  in  white  and  nine  in  black,  who  came  riding  up  in  suc
cession  (p.  421).

I  have  set  norns  and  fiolpai  side  by  side ;  with  equal  aptness  a
comparison  can  be  drawn  between  valkyrs  and  /crjpes  (without  any
verbal  affinity,  for  no  doubt  the  likeness  is  only  an  apparent  one)  :
the  KTJP  too  might  be  seen  on  the  battlefield  in  bloody  garments,
tending  the  wounded,  dragging  away  the  dead.  A  tcijp  is  allotted
to  the  child  as  soon  as  it  is  born ;  Achilles  had  two  /cfjpes  between
whom  he  might  choose,  and  Zeus  put  two  in  the  balance,  to  decide
the  death  of  Hector  or  Achilles.2  Hesiod  (scut.  249—254)  makes
the  dingy  white-toothed  icfjpes  contend  over  the  fallen  warriors,
each  throws  her  talons  round  the  wounded  man,  eager  to  drink  his
blood,  just  as  he  ascribes  talons  and  a  thirst  for  blood  to  the  moirai
(p.  414) :  a  fresh  confirmation  of  the  identity  of  norns  and  valkyrs.
The  claws  of  the  moirai  and  keres,  the  wings  of  the  thriai,  point  to
their  possession  of  a  bird's  shape.  The  later  view  [Hesiod's]  brings
into  prominence  the  sinister  side  of  the  keres.

5.  SWAN-MAIDENS.

But  we  have  now  to  make  out  a  new  aspect  of  the  valkyrs.
We  are  told  that  they  travel  through  air  and  water,  '  ri5a  lopt  ok
log/  Saem.  142b  15  9b;  theirs  is  the  power  to  fly  and  to  swim,  in
other  words,  they  can  assume  the  body  of  a  swan,  they  love  to

1  So  at  least  we  may  understand  ( vindum,  vindum  vef  Dammar,3  even  if
the  name  and  the  whole  story  first  arose  out  of  a  *  vef  darraSar,'  web  of  the
dart,  conf.  AS.  deoreS  (jaculum).  We  know  that  the  Sturlungasaga  contains  a
very  similar  narrative.

2 II.  8,  70.  9,  411.  18,  535—540.  22,  210.  23,  79.  24,  82.


SWAN-MAIDENS.  427

linger  on  the  sea-shore;  and  the  swan  was  considered  a  bird  of
augury}-  The  VolundarqviSa  relates:  Three  women  sat  on  the
shore,  spinning  flax,  and  had  their  dlptarliamir  (swan-shifts)  by
them,  so  that  any  moment  they  could  fly  away  again  as  swans  :
'  meyjar  flugo!  and  '  settuz  at  hvilaz  a  ssevarstrond  ' ;  one  of  them
has  even  the  surname  of  svanhvit  (swan white),  and  wears  swan's
feathers  (svanfiaSrar  dro).  In  the  Hromundarsaga  (Fornald.  sog.
2,  375-6),  the  same  Kara,  who  the  Edda  says  was  a  second  birth
of  Svava,  appears  as  an  enchantress  in  swan-shift,  (fiolkyngiskona
i  alftarham),  and  hovers  above  the  hero,  singing.2  By  her  assist
ance  Helgi  had  always  conquered,  but  it  happened  in  one  fight,
that  he  swung  his  sword  too  high  in  the  air,  and  hewed  off  his
lover's  foot,  she  fell  to  the  ground,  aud  his  luck  was  spent.  In
Saxo  Gram.,  p.  100,  Fridlevus  hears  up  in  the  air  at  night  'sonum
trium  olorum  superne  clangentium,'  who  prophesy  to  him,  and  drop
a  girdle  with  runes  on  it.  Brynhildr  is  '  like  the  swan  on  the
wave'  (Fornald.  sog.  1,  186) :  the  simile  betrays  at  the  same  time,
that  she  had  really  the  power  of  changing  into  the  bird.  Many
tales  of  swan-wives  still  live  among  the  Norse  people.  A  young
man  saw  three  swans  alight  on  the  shore,  lay  their  white  bird-shifts
in  the  grass,  turn  into  beautiful  maidens,  and  bathe  in  the  water,
then  take  their  shifts  again,  and  fly  away  in  the  shape  of  swans.
He  lay  in  wait  for  them  another  time,  and  abstracted  the  garment
of  the  youngest ;  she  fell  on  her  knees  before  him,  and  begged  for
it,  but  he  took  her  home  with  him,  and  married  her.  When  seven
years  were  gone  by,  he  shewed  her  the  shift  he  had  kept  concealed ;
she  no  sooner  had  it  in  her  hand,  than  she  flew  out  as  a  swan
through  the  open  window,  and  the  sorrowing  husband  died  soon
after.  Afzelius  2,  143-5.  On  the  other  hand,  the  swan-hero
forsakes  his  wife  the  moment  she  asks  the  forbidden  question.  A
peasant  had  a  field,  in  which  whatever  he  set  was  trampled  down
every  year  on  St.  John's  night.  Two  years  in  succession  he  set  his
two  eldest  sons  to  watch  in  the  field ;  at  midnight  they  heard  a
hurtling  in  the  air,  which  sent  them  into  a  deep  sleep.  The  next
year  the  third  son  watched,  and  he  saw  three  maidens  come  flying,

1  Es  schwant  mir,  it  swans  me  =  I  have  a  boding.     The  reference  to  the
bird  seems  undeniable,  for  we  also  say  In  the  same  sense  :  es  wachsen  (there
grow)  mir  schwansfedern'  (so  already  in  Zesen's  Simson).     Conf.   the  Eddie
'  svanfiaSrar  dro  (wore) '.

2  Kafn  has  chosen  the  reading  Lara.


428  WISE  WOMEN.

who  laid  their  wings  aside,  and  then  danced  up  and  down  the
field.  He  jumped  up,  fetched  the  wings  away,  and  laid  them  under
the  stone  on  which  he  sat.  When  the  maidens  had  danced  till
they  were  tired,  they  came  to  him,  and  asked  for  their  wings  ;  he
declared,  if  one  of  them  would  stay  and  be  his  wife,  the  other  two
should  have  their  wings  back.  From  this  point  the  story  takes  a
turn,  which  is  less  within  the  province  of  the  swan-wife  myth ;  but
it  is  worth  noting,  that  one  of  the  maidens  offers  her  lover  a  drink
of  water  out  of  a  golden  pitcher,  exactly  as  elfins  and  wish-wives  do
elsewhere  (pp.  420,  326).  Molbech  no.  49.

These  lovely  swan-maidens  must  have  been  long  known  to
German  tradition.  When  they  bathe  in  the  cooling  flood,  they  lay
down  on  the  bank  the  swan-ring,  the  swan-shift ;  who  takes  it  from
them,  has  them  in  his  power.1  Though  we  are  not  expressly  told
so,  yet  the  three  prophetic  merwomen  whose  garments  Hagene  took
away,  are  precisely  such ;  it  is  said  (Nib.  1476,  1)  by  way  of  simile
again :

sie  swebten  sam  die  vogele  uf  der  fluot.

It  is  true,  our  epic  names  only  two  of  them  (the  Danish  story  only
one),  the  wisiu  wip,  Hadburc  and  Sigelint?  but  one  of  them  begins
to  prophesy,  and  their  garments  are  described  as  '  wunderlich,'
1478,  3.  The  myth  of  Volundr  we  meet  with  again  in  an  OHG.
poem,  which  puts  doves  in  the  place  of  swans  :  three  doves  fly  to  a
fountain,  but  when  they  touch  the  ground  they  turn  into  maidens,
Wielant  removes  their  clothes,  and  will  not  give  them  up  till  one
of  them  consents  to  take  him  for  her  husband.  In  other  tales  as
widely  diffused,  young  men  throw  the  shift,  ring  or  chain  over
them,  which  turns  them  into  swans?  When  the  resumption  of
human  shape  cannot  be  effected  completely,  the  hero  retains  a
swan-wing ;  evidence  of  the  high  antiquity  of  this  detail  lies  in  its
connexion  with  the  heroic  legend  of  Scoup  or  Sceaf  (p.  370) ;  and
it  has  found  its  way  into  modern  pedigrees.4  Especially  impor-

1  Musaeus,  Volksmarchen  vol.  3  :  The  stolen  veil.

2  There  is  a  plant  named,  I  suppose,  from  this  Sigelint ;  Sumerl.  22,  28
(conf.  23,  19)  has  cigelinta  fel  draconis,  and  53,  48  cigelinde;  Graff  6,  145  has
sigeline ;  see  Sigel/Siglander  in  Schm.  3,  214.

3  Kinderm.  no.  49.     Deutsche  sagen  2,  292-5.     Adalb.  Kuhn  p.  164,  the
swan-chain.

4  Conf.  Deutsche  sagen  no.  540  :  '  the  Schicanrings  of  Plesse/  who  carry  a
swarfs  wing  and  ring  on  their  scutcheon.     A  doc.  of  1441  (Wolfs  Norten  no.
48)    names    a  Johannes    Swanefliigel,   decretorum   doctor,   decanus    ecclesiae
majoris  Hildesemensis.     In  a  pamphlet  of  1617  occurs  the  phrase  :  *  to  tear
the  ring  and  mask  off  this  pseudonym '.


SWAN-MAIDENS.  429

tant,  as  placing  in  a  clear  light  the  exact  relation  of  these  swan-
wives  to  the  walkuren,  is  a  statement  about  them  in  Altd.  bl.  1
128 :  A  nobleman  hunting  in  a  wild  forest  saw  a  maiden  bathing
in  the  river,  he  crept  up  and  took  away  the  gold  chain  on  her
hand,  then  she  could  not  escape.  There  was  peculiar  virtue  in  this
chain :  '  dor  iimme  (on  account  of  it)  werden  siilche  frowen
wunschelwylere  genant'.  He  married  her,  and  she  had  seven
children  at  a  birth,  they  all  had  gold  rings  about  their  necks,  i.e.,
like  their  mother,  the  power  of  assuming  a  swan-shape.  Swan-
children  then  are  wish-children.  In  Gudrun,  the  prophetic  angel
comes  over  the  sea-wave  in  the  shape  of  a  wild  bird  singing,  i.e.,  of
a  swan,  and  in  Lohengrin  a  talking  swan  escorts  the  hero  in  his
ship;  in  AS.  poetry  swanrdd  (-road)  passed  current  for  the  sea
itself,  and  alpiz,  selfet,  alpt  (cygnus)  is  akin  to  the  name  of  the
ghostly  alp,  self  (see  SuppL).

We  hear  tell  of  a  swan  that  swims  on  the  lake  in  a  hollow
mountain,  holding  a  ring  in  his  bill :  if  he  lets  it  fall,  the  earth
comes  to  an  end.1  On  the  UrSarbrunnr  itself  two  swans  are
maintained  (Sn.  20) ;  another  story  of  a  soothsaying  swan  is-
communicated  by  Kuhn,  p.  67,  from  the  Mittelmark.  A  young
man  metamorphosed  into  a  swan  is  implied  in  the  familiar  West-
phalian  nursery -rhyme :

swane,  swane,  pek  up  de  nesen,
wannehr  bistu  krieger  wesen  (wast  a  warrior)  ?
Another,  of  Achen,  says  :

krune  krane,  wisse  schwane,
we  wel  met  noh  Engeland  fahre  ?

And  the  name  Ssefugel  in  the  AS.  genealogies  seems  to  indicate  a
swan -hero.

The  spinner  Berhta,  the  goose- footed*  queen,  may  fairly  suggest
swan-maidens  (p.  280).3  If  those  prophetic  'gallicenae  '  were  able

1  Gottschalk's  Sagen,  Halle  1814,  p.  227.

2  The  pentagram  was  a  Pythagorean  symbol,  but  also  a  Druidic  ;  as  it  goes
by  the  name  of  elf s  foot,  elf's  cross,  goblin-foot,  and  resembles  a  pair  of  goose-
feet  or  swan-feet,  semi -divine  and  elvish  beings  are  again  brought  together  in
this  emblem  ;  the  valkyr  ThruS  is  next  door  to  a  swan-maiden,  and  Staufen-
berger's  lover  likewise  had  such  a  foot.

3  The  beautiful  story  of  the  Good  Woman,  publ.  in  Haupt's  zeitschr.  2,
350,  is  very  acceptable  as  shewing  yet  another  way  in  which  this  fairy  being
got  linked  with  the  hero-legend  of  the  Karlings.     The  two  children  born  on
one  day  at  paske  flourie,  and  brought  up  in  mutual  love  (77 — 87),  are  clearly
identical  with  Flore  and  Blanche/bur,  for  these  also  are  not  real  names,  but


430  WISE  WOMEN.

to  assume  what  animal  shapes  they  pleased,  why,  then  the  Celts
too  seem  to  have  known  about  swan-metamorphosis  in  very  early
times,  so  that  in  French  fay-legends  we  may  supply  the  omissions ;
e.g.,  in  Meon  3,  412  :

en  la  fontaine  se  baignoient

trois  puceles  preuz  et  senees,

qui  de  biaute  sembloient  fees  :

lor  robes  a  tout  lor  chemises

orent  desoz  une  arbre  mises

du  bout  de  la  fontaine  en  haut.

puceles  senees  3,  419.  bien  eure"es  418.  la  plus  mestre  413-5.
The  shifts  were  stolen,  and  the  maidens  detained.  In  the  Lai  du
Desire  the  knight  espies  in  the  forest  a  swan-maiden  without  her
wimple  (sans  guimple).  The  wimple  of  the  white-robed  fay
answers  to  the  swan-shift.

6.  WOOD-WIVES.

We  have  seen  that  the  wish-wives  appear  on  pools  and  lakes
in  the  depth  of  the  forest :  it  is  because  they  are  likewise  wood-wives,
and  under  this  character  they  suggest  further  reflections.  The  old
sacred  forest  seems  their  favourite  abode :  as  the  gods  sat  throned
in  the  groves,  on  the  trees,  the  wise-women  of  their  train  and
escort  would  seek  the  same  haunts.  Did  not  the  Gothic  aliorunas
dwell  in  the  woodland  among  wood-sprites  ?  Was  not  Veleda's
tower  placed  on  a  rock,  that  is,  in  the  woods  ?  The  Volundarqvifta
opens  with  the. words  :

meyjar  flugo  sunnan  Myrkvift  igognom,

invented  in  fairy-tale  fashion,  to  suit  the  name  of  their  daughter  Berhta,  the
bright,  white.  Berhta  marries  Pepin,  and  gives  birth  to  Charlemagne ;  in  the
Garin  le  Loherain,  Pepiri's  wife  is  said  to  be  Blanchefieur  of  Moriane,  but  in  the
story  now  in  question  she  is  the  unnamed  daughter  of  count  Ruprecht  of
Barria  (Robert  of  Berry),  spoken  of  simply  as  diu  gmtefrouwe  (162.  1130),  diu
guote  (1575),  la  bone  dame  (3022),  conf.  bonadea,  bonasocia,  p.  283  ;  her
husband,  who  steps  into  the  place  of  the  childless  last  king  (Merovingian),  is
Karelman  (3020),  and  the  only  name  that  can  suit  herself  is  Berte,  already
contained  in  that  of  her  father  Euodbert.  The  children  of  this  pair  are
Pippin  der  kleine  (little) '  and  <  Karle  der  merre  (greater) '.  The  events  in  the
middle  part  of  the  story  are  quite  other  (more  fully  unfolded,  if  not  more
pleasing)  than  those  told  of  Flore  and  Blanchefleur  ;  but  we  plainly  perceive
how  on  the  new  Karling  race  in  the  freshness  of  its  bloom  were  grafted  older
heathen  myths  of  the  swan-wife,  of  the  good  wife  (p.  253),  of  the  mild  woman
(p.  280),  of  the  bona  socia  (p.  283),  and  of  the  bonne  dame  (p.  287) ;  Conf.
Sommer's  pref.  to  Flore  xxvi.  xxvii.  xxxii.


WOOD-WIVES.  431

maids  flew  from  south  through  murky  wood  to  the  seashore,  there
they  tarried  seven  years,  till  they  grew  homesick  :

meyjar  fystoz  a  myrkvan  wcT,

they  could  resist  no  longer,  and  returned  to  the  sombre  wood.
Almost  all  swan-maidens  are  met  with  in  the  forest.  The  seven
years  agree  with  those  of  the  Swedish  story  on  p.  42  7.1

As  Sigrun,  Sigrdrifa,  Sigrlinn  are  names  of  valkyrs,  and  our
epic  still  calls  one  of  the  wise-women  Sigelint,  I  believe  that  the
OHG.  siguwip,  AS.  sigewif,  ON.  sigrvif,  was  a  general  designation
of  all  wise-women,  for  which  I  can  produce  an  AS.  spell  com
municated  to  me  by  Kemble  :

sitte  ge  sigewif,  sigac5  to  eorSan !

nsefre  ge  wilde  (1.  wille)  td  icuda  fleogan  !

beo  ge  swa  gemyndige  mines  godes,

swa  bi5  manna-gehwylc  metes  and  eSeles.2
Like  norns,  they  are  invited  to  the  house  with  promise  of  gifts.

On  this  point  we  will  consider  a  passage  in  Saxo,  where  he  is
unmistakably  speaking  of  valkyrs,  though,  as  his  manner  is,  he
avoids  the  vernacular  term.  In  his  account  of  Hother  and  Balder,
which  altogether  differs  so  much  from  that  of  the  Edda,  he  says,
p.  39  :  Hotherus  inter  venandum  errore  nebulae  perductus  in
quoddam  silvestrium  virginum  conclave  incidit,  a  quibus  proprio
nomine  salutatus, '  quaenam  essent '  perquirit.  Illae  suis  ductibus
auspiciisque  maxime  bellorum  fortunam  gubernari  testantur :  saepe
enim  se  nemini  conspicuas  proeliis  interesse,  clandestinisque  subsidiis
optatos  amicis  praebere  successus:  quippe  conciliare  prospera,  adversa
infligere  posse  pro  libitu  memorabant.  After  bestowing  their  advice
on  him,  the  maidens  with  their  house  (aedes,  conclave)  vanish
before  Mother's  eyes  (see  SuppL).  Further  on,  p.  42  :  At  Hotherus
extrema  locorum  devia  pervagatus,  insuetumque  mortalibus  nemus
emensus,  ignotis  forte  mrginibus  habitat-urn  reperit  specum :  easdem
esse  constabat,  quae  eum  insecabili  veste  quondam  donaverant.
They  now  give  him  more  counsel,  and  are  called  nymphae?

1  In  the  Wallachian  marchen  201,  three  wood-wives  bathing  have  their
crowns  taken  from  them.

2  Sedete  bellonae,  descendite  ad  terrain,  nolite  in  silvam  volare  !   Tarn
meniores  estote  fortimae  meae,  quam  est  hominnm  quilibet  cibi  atque  patriae.

3  Three  other  nymphs  appear  directly  after,  and  prepare  enchanted  food  for
Balder  with  the  spittle  of  snakes,  p.  43.     A  ifemina  silvestris  et  imniaiiis '  is
also  mentioned  by  Saxo  p.  125.


432  WISE  WOMEN.

This  seems  no  modern  distorted  view,  to  imagine  the  maids  of
war,  that  dwelt  in  Oftin's  heavenly  company,  that  traversed  air  and
flood,  as  likewise  haunting  the  woodland  cave ;  therefore  feaxo  was
right  to  call  them  silvestres,  and  to  place  their  chamber,  their  cave,
in  the  forest.

The  older  stages  of  our  language  supply  some  similar  expressions,
in  which  I  recognise  the  idea  of  wise  wood-wives,  not  of  mere  elvish
wood-sprites.     They   are  called  wildiu  wip,  and  the  Trad,  fuld.,
p.  544,  speak  of  a  place  '  ad  domum  wildero  wibo '.     Burcard  of
Worms,  p.  198d,  mentions  '  agrestes  feminas  quas  silvaticas  vocant,  et
quando  voluerint  ostendunt  se  suis  amatoribus,  et  cum  eis  dicunt
se  oblectasse,  et  item  quando  voluerint  abscondunt  se  et  evanescunt'.
This  '  quando  voluerint '  seems  to  express  the  notion  of  wish-life.
Meister   Alexander,  a  poet  of   the  13th  century,  sings  (str.  139,
p.  143b) :   '  nu  gent  si  viir  in  (go  they  before  him)  uber  gras  in
wilder  wibe  wsete  (weeds) '.     So  :  '  von  einem  wilden  wile  ist  Wate
arzet,'  is  (i.e.  has  learnt  to  be)  physician,  Gudr.  2117;  'das  wilde
frouwelin;  Ecke  189.     In  the  Gl.  monst.  335,  wildaz  wip  stands
for  lamia,  and  333  wildiu  wip  for  ululae,  funereal  birds,  death-
boding  wives,  still  called  in  later  times  klagefrauen,  klagemutter,  and
resembling  the  prophetic  Berhta  (p.  280).     In  groves,  on  trees,  there
appeared  dominae,  matronae,  puellae  clothed  in  white  (pp.  287-8),
distinguishable  from  the  more  elvish  tree-wife  or  dryad,  whose  life
is  bound  up  with  that  of  the  tree.    The  Vicentina  Germans  worship
a   wood-wife,   chiefly    between    Christmas   and   Twelfthday :    the
women  spin  flax  from  the  distaff,  and  throw  it  in  the  fire  to  pro
pitiate  her : *  she  is  every  bit  like  Holda  and  Berhta.     As  three
bunches  of  corn  are  left  standing  at  harvest-time  for  Wuotan  and
frau  Gaue,  so  to  this  day  in  the  Frankenwald  they  leave  three
handfuls  of  flax  lying  on  the  field  for  the  holzweibel  (wood-wives,
Jul.  Schmidt's  Eeichenfels,  p.  147),  a  remnant  of  older  higher  wor
ship.    Between  Leidhecken  and  Dauernheim  in  the  Wetterau  stands
the  high  mountain,  and  on  it  a  stone,  der  welle  fra  gestoil  (the  wild
woman's  chairs) ;   there  is  an  impression   on  the  rock,  as  of   the
limbs  of  human  sitters.     The  people  say  the  wild  folk  lived  there
'  wei  di  schtan  noch  mell  warn,'  while  the  stones  were  still  soft ;
afterwards,  being  persecuted,  the  man  ran  away,  the  wife  and  child
remained  in  custody  at  Dauernheim  until  they  died.     Folk-songs
1  Deutsche  sagen  no  150.


WOOD- WIVES.      MENNI.  433

make  the  huntsman  in  the  wood  start  a  dark-brown  rnaid,  and  hail
her:  'whither  away,  wild  beast?'  (Wunderhorn  2,  154),  but  his
mother  did  not  take  to  the  bride,  just  as  in  the  tale  of  the  swan-
children.  We  find  a  more  pleasing  description  in  the  Spanish
ballad  De  la  infantina  (Silva  p.  259) :  a  huntsman  stands  under  a
lofty  oak :

En  una  rama  mas  alta  viera  estar  una  infantina,
cabellos  de  su  cabeza  todo  aquel  roble  cobrian  :
1 siete  facias  (7  fays)  me  fadaron  en  brazos  de  una  ama  mia,
que  andasse  los  siete  anos  sola  en  esta  montina '.
But  the  knight  wants  first  to  take  his  mother's  opinion,  and  she
refuses  her  consent.      When   Wolfdieterich  sits  by  a  fire  in  the
forest  at  night,  rauhe  Els  comes  up,  the  shaggy  woman,  and  carries
off  the  hero  to  her  own  country,1  where  she  is  a  queen  and  lives  on
a  high  rock  :  at  length,  bathing  in  the  jungbrunnen,  she  lays  aside
her  hairy  covering,  and  is  named  Sigeminne,  '  the  fairest  above  all
lands  '.2 — Synonymous  with  'wildaz  wip'  the  glosses  have  liolzmuoja
(lamia  and  ulula),  she  who  wails  or  moos  in  the  wood ;  holzfrowe
(lamia)  Altd.  bl.  2,   195;   holzruna  (Gl.  mons.  335.     Doc.  219b)
meaning  the  same,  but  suggestive  of  that  Gothic  aliorumna,  AS.
burgrune,  and  the  ON.  Sigrun  (see  Suppl.).3

7.  MENNI,  MERIMANNI.

One  general  name  for  such  beings  must  from  very  early  times
have  been  menni,  minni ;  it  is  connected  with  man  (homo),  and
with  the  ON.  man  (virgo),  but  it  occurs  only  in  compounds  :  meri-
manni  (neut.),  pi.  merimanniu,  translates  sirena  or  scylla  (Eeda  umbe
diu  tier,  in  Hoffm.  fundgr.  19,  18),  meriminni,  Gl.  Doc.  22 5a  mons.
333.  In  the  13th  century  poets,  merminne  is  equivalent  to
merwip,  merfrouwe,  yet  also  to  wildez  wip  :  ' diu  wise  merminne'
Diut.  1,  38.  '  *  gottinne  oder  merminne,  die  sterben  niht  enmohten
(could  not  die),'  Eneit.  8860.  In  the  Wigamur  112.  200.  227  seq.,

1  Called  Troje,  conf.   Ecke  81  ;  and  Elsentroje,  Deutsche  heldensage  198.
211  (see  Suppl.).

2  In  the  Wolfdietr.  (Dresd.  MS.  290—7),  twelve  goddesses  go  to  a  mountain,
fetch  the  hero  to  them,  and  tend  him  ;  the  loveliest  wants  him  for  a  husband.
These  beings  are  more  wise-women  than  elfins.

3  As  the  XdpiTfs  (Graces)  and  fays  spin  and  weave,  so  do  the  wild  women
also  :  « mit  wilder  wibe  henden  geworht,'  Ulr.  Lanz.  4826  ;  nf TT\OS  b

Kapov  aural,  II.  5,  338  (see  Suppl.).

28


434  WISE   WOMEN.

there  appears  a  wildez  wip,  who  dwells  in  a  hollow  rock  of  the  sea,
and  is  indifferently  termed  merwip  168.  338,  merfrouwe  134,  and  |
merminne  350.     AS.  merewif,  Beow.  3037.     M.  Dutch  maerminne.  I
Those  three  wisiu  wip  of  the  Nibelungen  are  also  called  merwip  I
1475,  1.     1470,  1 ;  they  foretell  and  forewarn ;  their  having  indi-  j
vidual  names  would  of  itself  put  them  on  a  par  with  the  Norse !
valkyrs:  Hadburc,  Sigelint.     The  third,  whose  name  the  poem  omits !
(p.  428),  is  addressed  by  Hagne  as  'aller  wiseste  wip!'  1483,  4.1
Wittich's  ancestress  (p.  376)  is  named  frouwe  Wdchilt,  as  if  Wave-
Hilde,  she  is  a  merminne,  and  says  sooth  to  the  hero,  Rab.  964 — 974.
Morolt  also  has  an  aunt  a  merminne  who  lives  in  mount  Elsabe  and
rules  over  dwarfs ;  her  name  is  not  given,  but  that  of  her  son  is
Madelger,  and  she  likewise  gives  wise  advice  to  Morolt;  Mor.  40b  41*.
The  merminne  in  Ulrich's  Lanzelet  (lines  196  seq.)  is  said  to  be  wis\
(5751.  6182),  she  has  under  her  10,000  unmarried  women  (dern
keiniu  bekande  man  noch  mannes  gezoc),  they  dwell  on  a  mountain
by  the  sea,  in  an  ever-blooming  land.     In  the  Apollonius,  a  bene
volent  merminne  is  queen  of  the  sea  (lines  5160.  5294)  ;  here  the
poet  had  in  his  mind  a  siren  in  the  classical  sense,  but  the  Germans
must  have  had  a  merminne  before  they  ever  heard  of  sirens.     The
Danish  name  is  maremind  (Danske  viser  1, 118. 125).    Norse  legend
has  preserved  for  us  a  precisely  corresponding  male  being,  the  taciturn
prophetic  marmennill  (al.  marmendill,  marbendill),  who  is  fished
up  out  of  the  sea,  and  requires  to  be  let  go  into  it  again ;  Halfssaga
c.  7  (Fornald.  sog.  2,  31—33),  and  Isl.  sog.  1,  03  (Landn.  2,  5).1
Prom  him  coral  is  named  marmennils  smifti,  he  cunningly  wrought
it  in  the  sea.    At  a  later  time  the  word  merfei  was  used  in  Germany:
that  lover  of  Staufenberger,  whom  he  found  in  the  forest,  and  the!
'Fair   Melusina   (possibly   even  a  tradition  of   ancient   Gaul),  are
precisely  the  fairy  being  that  had  previously  been  called  merimennm
— But,  similar  to  the  merminne,  there  was  also  a  waltminne,  which!
word   equally   stands   for  lamia    in   old  glosses    (Diut.   3,   276).
Sigeminne,  whether  the  baptized  Kauch-els,  Wolfdieterich's  lover!
(p.  433),  or  the  wife  of  Hugdieterich,3  may  with  perfect  right  be|

1  Marmennill  is  extremely  like  the  Greek  Proteus,  who  is  also  reluctant  at
first  to  prophesy,  Od.  4,  385  seq.  There  may  have  been  Proteus-like  stories
current  of  our  Buldander  and  Vilander,  p.  172  (see  Suppl.).

2  Yet  merfeine  occurs  already  in  l)iut.  1,  38;  wazzerfeine  (Oberl.  sub  v.),
and  even  merfein,  MS.  2,  63a.

3  Deutsche  heldensage  pp.  185.  200-1.


MENNI.      MERIMANNI.  435

regarded  as  a  waltminne  or  merminne.1  In  the  Vilk.  saga  cap.  17
I  find  scekona  used  of  the  woman  whom  Vilkinus  found  in  the  wood,
and  who  bore  him  Vadi.  Saxo  Gram.,  p.  15,  speaks  of  a  tugurium
silvestris  immanisque  feminae  (see  SuppL).

By  this  array  of  authorities  it  is  proved  to  satisfaction,  that  the
wildaz  wip  or  menni,  minni  was  thought  of  as  a  higher,  superhuman
being,  such  as  can  be  placed  at  the  side  of  the  Scandinavian  norn
and  valkyr.  But  in  the  scanty  remains  of  our  tradition  the  names
stand  wofully  bare,  finer  distinctions  are  inevitably  lost,  and  in
more  than  one  place  the  boundary-lines  between  gods,  demigods,
elves  and  giants  cross  one  another.  Equally  with  norns  and  valkyrs
(pp.  413-9.  425),  we  have  goddesses  spinning  and  weaving,  as
Holda,  Berhta,  Freyja,  and  even  giantesses,  as  we  shall  see  by  and

by-

Among  the  figures  in  the  Greek  and  Teutonic  mythologies,  we
have  placed  side  by  side  the  vv^ai  and  idisi,  the  fiolpat,  and  nornir,
the  /cfjpes  and  valkyrior.  But  several  isolated  names  might  be
compared  in  the  same  way,  as  for  instance,  Niter)  or  Victoria  with
some  Sigrun  or  Sigrdrifa,  "Et'pw  and  'Evva)  or  Bellona  with  a  Hildr
and  Gunnr.  Eris,  like  Iris,  is  sent  forth  on  an  errand  by  Zeus
(II.  11,  3),  as  Skogul  or  Gondul  by  Oomn.  I  often  find  these
Grecian  figures  in  attendance  on  individual  gods :  in  II.  5,  333
7rTo\i7rop0o$  'Evva>  goes  with  Athene ;  in  5,  592  TTOTVI  'Evvco  with

1  A  Leyden  parchm.  MS.  of  the  13th  century  contains  the  following  legend
of  Charles  the  Great  :  Aquisgrani  dicitur  Ays  (Aix),  et  dicitur  eo  quod  Karolus
tenebat  ibi  quandam  mulierem  fatatam,  sive  quandam  fatam,  que  alio  nomine
nimpha  vel  dea  vel  adriades  (1.  dryas)  appellatur,  et  ad  hanc  consuetudinem
habebat  et  earn  cognoscebat,  et  ita  erat,  quod  ipso  accedente  ad  earn  vivebat
ipsa,  ipso  Karolo  recedente  moriebatur.  Contigit,  dum  quadam  vice  ad  ipsara
accessisset  et  cum  ea  delectaretur,  radius  soils  intravit  os  ejus,  et  tune  Karolus
vidit  granum  auri  linguae  ejus  affixum,  quod  fecit  abscindi,  et  contingenti  (1.  in
continent!)  mortua  est,  nee  postea  revixit.  The  grain  of  gold,  on  which  the  spell
hung,  is  evidently  to  explain  the  name  of  the  city  :  later  tradition  (Petrarcha
epist.  fam.  1,  3.  Aretin's  legend  of  Charlem.  p.  89)  has  instead  of  it  a  ring,
which  archbishop  Turpin  removes  from  the  mouth  of  the  corpse,  and  throws
into  a  lake  near  Aachen  ;  this  lake  then  attracts  the  king,  and  that  is  why  he
made  the  town  his  favourite  residence.  There  is  no  further  mention  of  the.
maiden's  fairy  existence.  It  was  a  popular  belief  (applied  to  the  Frankish
king  and  gradually  distorted)  about  the  union  of  a  wild-woman  or  mermaid
with  a  Christian  hero.  Not  very  differently  was  Charles's  ancestress  Berhta,  as
we  saw  above  (p.  430),  made  into  a  '  good  woman,'  i.e.  a  fay.  [The  similarity
of  names  in  the  heroic  line :  Pepin  of  Herstal,  Charles  Martel,  Pepin  the  Little,
Charles  the  Great,  seems  to  have  made  it  doubtful  whether  Berhta  was  Charle
magne's  mother  or  his  great-grandmother.]


436  WISE  WOMEN.

Ares ;  in  4,  440  and  5,  518  "Ept?  apo-rov  iiepavla  with  Ares,  who  is
also  followed  by  Aelfios  and  $o/3o?  (p.  207-8).  And  lastly,  the
Charites  are  nearly  allied  ;  and  there  was  supposed  to  be  a  special
Charis  of  victory.  Still  nearer  to  our  wood-wives  stand  particular
classes  of  nymphs,  especially  those  whom  Theocritus  5,  17  names
ra9  \ifjLvd5a?  vvp<l>a<;,  or  those  called  vv^ai  CLKOL^TOL,  Sew/at  deal
fypoubran  13,  44.  The  graceful  myth  of  swan-wives  appears
indeed  to  be  unknown  to  the  Greeks  and  Komans,  while  we  Teutons
have  it  in  common  with  the  Celts  ;  yet  a  trace  of  it  remains  in  the
story  of  Zeus  and  Leda  (p.  338),  and  in  the  swan's  prophetic  song,
as  in  the  Indian  Nalus  too  the  gold-bedizened  swan  (hansa  =  anser,
goose)  finds  human  speech  (Bopp's  ed.  pp.  6.  7).

The  Slavs  have  not  developed  any  idea  of  goddesses  of  fate.1  .
The  beautiful  fiction  of  the  vila  is  peculiar  to  Servian  mythology :
she  is  a  being  half  fay,  half  elf,  whose  name  even  resembles  that
of  the  vala.  The  relation  of  valkyrs  to  Christian  heroes  is  suggested
by  the  fraternal  bond  between  the  vila  and  Marko  (Vuk  2,  98.  232.
Danitza  for  1826,  p.  108),  as  also  by  the  vilas  appearing  singly,
having  proper  names,  and  prophesying.  In  some  things  they  come
nearer  the  German  elfins  of  our  next  chapter :  they  live  on  hills,
love  the  song  and  the  round  dance  (Ir.  elfenm.  Ixxxii),  they  mount
up  in  the  air  and  discharge  fatal  arrows  at  men :  '  ustrielila  ga  vila,'
the  vila  has  shot  him  with  her  shaft.  Their  cry  in  the  wood  is
like  the  sound  of  the  woodpecker  hacking,  and  is  expressed  by  the
word  'kliktati'.  The  vila  has  a  right  to  the  child  whom  his  mother
in  heedless  language  (diavo  ye  odniyo !)  has  consigned  to  the  devii
(Vuk  no.  394),  as  in  similar  cases  the  wolf  or  bear  fetches  him  away.
Vile  te  odnele!  (vilae  te  auferant)  is  a  curse  (Vuks  sprichw.  p.  36);
<kad  dot'u  vile  k  otchiin'  (quando  vilae  ante  oculos  veniunt)  signifies
the  moment  of  extreme  distress  and  danger  (ibid.  117).  The  vila
rides  a  seven-year  old  stag,  and  bridles  him  with  snakes,  like  the
Norse  enchantresses  (see  Suppl.).2

1  The  Bohem.  sudice  translates  parca,  but  it  simply  means  judge  (fern.) :
the    Russians   even   adopt   the   word  parka.     We   must   at  least   notice  the
lichoplezi  in  Hanka's  Glosses  21a,  who  are  said  to  be  three,  like  the  sirens  an<
mermaids.  .          .,

2  The  Bulgarian   samodlva  or  samorila  corresponds  to  the  Servian  vila.
When  the  wounded  Pomak  cries  to  his    'sister'   samodiva,  she  conies  and
cures  him.     The  samodivy  carry  off  children  ;    and  mischief  wrought  by  •


WISE  WOMEN.  437


elements,  by  storms,  &c.,  is  ascribed  to  them.  Like  the  Fates,  they  begift  the
newborn  :  three  samodivy  visit  the  infant  Jesus,  one  sews  him  a  shirt,  another
knits  him  a  band,  and  the  third  trims  a  cap  for  him.  Some  stories  about
them  closely  resemble  those  of  the  swan-maids.  Stoyan  finds  three  samodivy
bathing,  removes  their  clothes,  restores  those  of  the  two  eldest,  but  takes  the
youngest  (Mariyka)  home,  and  marries  her.  St.  John  christens  her  first
child,  and  asks  her  to  dance  as  do  the  samodivy.  But  she  cannot  without  her
'samodivski  drekhi,'  Stoyan  produces  them,  she  flies  away,  bathes  in  the
mominski  fountain,  and  recovers  her  mominstvo  (virginity). — TRASS.


END  OF  VOL.  1.


A.    KING  AND   CO.,   ABERDEEN.


CLASSIFIED   CATALOGUE

OF

EDUCATIONAL  WORKS

PUBLISHED  BY

GEORGE   BELL   ©>   SONS


LONDON :    YORK  STREET,   COVENT   GARDEN

NEW  YORK:  66,  FIFTH  AVENUE;  AND  BOMBAY

CAMBRIDGE  :   DEIGHTON,  BELL  &  CO

DECEMBER,  1894


CONTENTS.

PAGB

GREEK   AND   LATIN   CLASSICS  :—

ANNOTATED  AND  CRITICAL  EDITIONS    ....  3

TEXTS 9

TRANSLATIONS         ........  10

GRAMMAR  AND  COMPOSITION          .        .        .        .        .  15

HISTORY,  GEOGRAPHY,  AND  REFERENCE  BOOKS,  ETC.  .  18

MATHEMATICS  :—

ARITHMETIC  AND  ALGEBRA 19

BOOKKEEPING  .........  20

GEOMETRY  AND  EUCLID          ......  21

ANALYTICAL  GEOMETRY,  ETC 21

TRIGONOMETRY 22

MECHANICS  AND  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY        ...  22

MODERN   LANGUAGES  :—

ENGLISH  ..........  24

FRENCH  CLASS  BOOKS     .......  29

FRENCH  ANNOTATED  EDITIONS 31

GERMAN  CLASS  BOOKS 31

GERMAN  ANNOTATED  EDITIONS 32

ITALIAN    ..........  34

BELL'S  MODERN  TRANSLATIONS      .....  34

SCIENCE,   TECHNOLOGY   AND   ART:—

CHEMISTRY      .........  34

BOTANY 35

GEOLOGY 35

MEDICINE 36

BELL'S  AGRICULTURAL  SERIES 36

TECHNOLOGICAL  HANDBOOKS 37

Music       ..........  37

ART 38

MENTAL,  MORAL  AND   SOCIAL   SCIENCES:—

PSYCHOLOGY  AND  ETHICS 39

HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY 40

LAW  AND  POLITICAL  ECONOMY 40

HISTORY 41

DIVINITY,  ETC 42

SUMMARY  OF  SERIES 45


GREEK   AND   LATIN    CLASSICS.

ANNOTATED   AND    CRITICAL    EDITIONS.

AESCHYLUS.     Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY.  M.A.,  LL.D.,  late  Classical  Exa
miner  to  the  University  of  London.     $th  edition,  revised.     8vo,  8s.

[Bib.  Class.
—  Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  6  vols.  fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.


Agamemnon.

Choephoroe.

Eumenides.


Persae.

Prometheus  Vinctus.

Septem  contra  Thebas.


ARISTOPHANIS  Comoediae  quae  supersunt  cum  perditarum  fragmentis
tertiis  curis,  recognovit  additis  adnotatione  critica,  summariis,  descriptione
metrica,  onomastico  lexico  HUBERTUS  A.  HOLDEN,  LL.D.  [late  Fellow  of
Trinity  College,  Cambridge].  Demy  8vo.

Vol.  I.,  containing  the  Text  expurgated,  with  Summaries  and  Critical
Notes,  iSs.

The  Plays  sold  separately  :


Acharnenses,  2s.
Equites,  is.  6d.
Nubes,  2s.
Vespae,  2s.
Pax,  2s.


Aves,  2s.

Lysistrata,   et   Thesmophoriazu-

sae,  4*.
Ranae,  2s.
Plutus,  2s.


Vol.  II.     Onomasticon  Aristophaneum  continens  indicem  geographi-
cum  et  historicum      5.$-.  6d.

-  The   Peace.     A  revised  Text  with  English  Notes  and  a  Preface.      By

F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A..  LL.D.     Post  8vo,  $s.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

-  The  Acharnians.     A  revised  Text  with  English  Notes  and  a  Preface.

By  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Post  8vo,  ^s.  6J.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  The  Frogs.    A-:revised  Text  with  English  Notes  and  a  Preface.     By,  F.  A.

PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Post  8vo,  4-f.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

CAESAR  De  Bello  Gallico.    Edited  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.  A.    New  edition.
Fcap.  8vo,  4-r.

Or  in  parts,  Books  I. -III.,  is.  6d.  ;  Books  IV.  and  V.,  is.  6d.  •  Books
VI.  and  VII.,  is.  6d.  \Gram.  Sch.  Class.

—  De  Bello  Gallico.      Book  I.      Edited  by  GEORGE  LONG,   M.A.      With

Vocabulary  by  w.  F.  R.  SHILLETO,  M.A.      is.  6d.  [Lower  Form  Ser.

—  De  Bello  Gallico.      Book  II.     Edited  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.      With

Vocabulary  by  w.  F.  R.  SHILLETO,  M.A.    Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

[Lower  Form  Ser.

—  De  Bello  Gallico.     Book  III.     Edited  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.     With

Vocabulary  by  w.  F.  R.  SHILLETO,  M.A.      Fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d.

[Lower  Form  Ser.

—  Seventh  Campaign  in  Gaul.     B.C.  52.     De  Bello  Gallico,  Lib.  VII.

Edited  with  Notes,  Excursus,  and  Table  of  Idioms,  by  REV.  w.  COOK-
WORTHY  COMPTON,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Dover  College.  With
Illustrations  from  Sketches  by  E.  T.  COMPTON,  Maps  and  Plans.  2nd
edition.  Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.  net.

"  A  really  admirable  class  book." — Spectator.

"  One  of  the  most  original  and  interesting  books  which  have  been
published  in  late  years  as  aids  to  the  study  of  classical  literature.  I  think


George  Bell  &  Sons


CAESAR  De  Bello  Gallico— continued.

it  gives  the  student  a  new  idea  of  the  way  in  which  a  classical  book  may
be  made  a  living  reality."— Rev.  J.  E.  C.  IVelldon,  Harrow.

Easy  Selections  from  the  Helvetian  War.     Edited  by  A.  M.  M.  STED-

MAN,  M.A.     With  Introduction,  Notes  and  Vocabulary.      i8mo.      is.

[ Pt  imary  Classics.

CALPURNIUS  SICULUS  and  M.  AURELIUS  OLYMPIUS
NEMESIANUS.  The  Eclogues,  with  Introduction,  Commentary,
and  Appendix.  By  c.  H.  KEENE,  M.A.  Crown  8vo,  6s.
CATULLUS,  TIBULLUS,  and  PROPERTIUS.  Selected  Poems.
Edited  by  the  REV.  A.  H.  WRATISLAW,  late  Head  Master  of  Bury  St.
Edmunds  School,  and  F.  N.  SUTTON,  B.A.  With  Biographical  Notices  of
the  Poets.  Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.  [Gram.  Sch.  Class.

CICERO'S  Orations.     Edited  by  G.  LONG,  M.A.     8vo.  [Bib.  Class*

Vol.  I.— In  Verrem.     Ss.

Vol.  II. Pro  P.  Quintio — Pro  Sex.  Roscio— Pro.  Q.  Roscio — Pro  M.

Tullio— Pro  M.   Fonteio— Pro  A.   Caecina— De  Imperio  Cn.  Pompeii —
Pro  A.  Cluentio — De  Lege  Agraria— Pro  C.  Rabirio.     Ss.
Vols.  III.  and  IV.      Out  of  print.

De  Senectute,  De  Amicitia,  and  Select  Epistles.    Edited  by  GEORGE

LONG,  M.A.     New  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  35-.  [Gram.  Sch.   Class.

—  De  Amicitia.     Edited  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.

—  De  Senectute.     Edited  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.

—  Epistolae  Selectae.     Edited  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.    Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.

The   Letters  to   Atticus.      Book  I.     With  Notes,  and  an  Essay  on  the

Character  of  the  Writer.  By  A.  PRETOR,  M.A.,  late  of  Trinity  College,
Fellow  of  St.  Catherine's  College,  Cambridge,  yd  edition.  Post  8vo,
4*.  6d.  [p"b-  Sc/i-  Ser-

CORNELIUS  NEPOS.      Edited  by  the  late  REV.  j.  F.   MACMICHAEL,
Head  Master  of  the  Grammar  School,  Ripon.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.

[Gram.  Sch.  Class.

DEMOSTHENES.    Edited  by  R.  WHISTON,  M.A.,  late  Head  Master  of

Rochester  Grammar  School.     2  vols.  8vo,  8s.  each.  [Bib.  Class.

Vol.    I.— Olynthiacs— Philippics— De   Pace— Halonnesus— Chersonese

Letter  of  Philip— Duties  of  the  State— Symmoriae— Rhodians— Mega-

lopolitans — Treaty  with  Alexander— Crown.

Vol.  II. — Embassy  —  Leptines — Meidias  —  Androtion — Aristocrates —
Timocrates — Aristogeiton.

—  De  Falsa  Legatione.     By  the  late  R.  SHILLETO,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St.
Peter's  College,  Cambridge.     yth  edition.     Post  8vo,  6.r.    [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

The    Oration   against  the   Law  of  Leptines.     With   English  Notes.

By  the  late  B.  w.  BEATSON,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Pembroke  College,     yd

edition.     Post  8vo,  3*.  6d.  {.Pub-  Sch.  Ser.

EURIPIDES.     By  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.    3  vols.    2nd  edition,  revised.

8vo,  Ss.  each.      Vol.  I.      Out  of  print.  [Bib.  Class.

Vol.     II. Preface — Ion — Helena — Andromache — Electra — Bacchae —

Hecuba.     2  Indexes.

Vol.    III. — Preface — Hercules    Furens— Phoenissae— Orestes— Iphi-
genia  in  Tauris — Iphigenia  in  Aulide — Cyclops.     2  Indexes.


Educational  Catalogue.


EURIPIDES.     Electra.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  c.  H.

KEENE,  M.A.,  Dublin,  Ex-Scholar  and  Gold  Medallist  in  Classics.    Demy

8vo,  IQJ-.  6d.
—  Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     13  vols.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.  each.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.


Alcestis.

Medea.

Hippolytus.

Hecuba.

Bacchae.

Ion  (2J.).


Phoenissae.
Troades.

Hercules  Furens.
Andromache.
Iphigenia  in  Tauris.
Supplices.


Orestes.

HERODOTUS.    Edited  by  REV.  j.  w.  BLAKESLEY,  B.D.    2  vols.  8vo,  12*.

[Bib.  Class.

—  Easy  Selections  from  the  Persian  Wars.     Edited  by  A.  G.  LIDDELL,

M.A.     With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Vocabulary.     i8mo,  is.  6d.

[Primary  Classics.

HESIOD.    Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.    2nd  edition,  revised.    8vo,  5*.

[Bib.  Class.

HOMER.      Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.      2  vols.      2nd  edition,
revised.     I^s.     Vol.  II.  (Books  13-24)  may  be  had  separately,  6s.

[Bib.  Class.

—  Iliad.     Books  I. -XII.     Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Fcap.  8vo,

45-.  6d.

Also  in  2  Parts.     Books  I. -VI.     2s.  6d.     Books  VII.-XII.     2s.6d,

[Gram.  Sch.  Class.

—  Iliad.     Book  I.     Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.

[Camb.  Text  with  Notes.

HORACE.     Edited  by  REV.  A.  j.  MACLEANE,  M.A.     $th  edition,  revised  by
GEORGE  LONG.     8vo,  Ss.  [Bib.  Class.

—  Edited  by  A.  j.  MACLEANE,  M.A.     With  a  short  Life.     Fcap.  8vo,  31.  6d.

Or,  Part  I.,  Odes,  Carmen  Seculare,  and  Epodes,  2s. ;  Part  II.,  Satires,
Epistles,  and  Art  of  Poetry,  2s.  [  Gram.  Sch.  Class.

—  Odes.     Book  I.     Edited  by  A.  j.  MACLEANE,  M.A.     With  a  Vocabulary

by  A.  H.  DENNIS,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.  [Lower  Form  Ser.

JUVENAL:    Sixteen  Satires  (expurgated).     By  HERMAN  PRIOR,  M.A.,

late  Scholar  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford.     Fcap.  8vo,  3^.  6d.

[Gram.  Sch.  Class.
LIVY.     The  first  five  Books,  with  English  Notes.      By  j.  PRENDEVILLE.

A  new  edition  revised  throughout,  and  the  notes  in  great  part  re- written,

by  J.   H.  FREESE,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Books  I.   II.  III.  IV.  V.     With  Maps  and  Introductions.     Fcap.   8vo.

is.  6d.  each.

—  Book  VI.     Edited  by  E.  s.  WEYMOUTH,  M.A.,  Lond.,  and  G.  F.  HAMILTON,

B.A.       With  Historical  Introduction,   Life  of  Livy,   Notes,  Examination
Questions,  Dictionary  of  Proper  Names,  and  Map.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

—  Book  XXI.      By  the  REV.  L.  D.  DOWDALL,  M.A.,  late  Scholar  and  Uni

versity  Student  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  B.D.,  Ch.  Ch.  Oxon.     Post
8vo,  3-r.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Book  XXII.     Edited  by  the  REV.  L.  D.  DOWDALL,  M.A.,  B.D.     Post  8vo,

3j.  6d.  [Pub.  Sck.  Ser.


George  Bell  &  Sons


LIVY.  Easy  Selections  from  the  Kings  of  Rome.  Edited  by  A.  M.  M.
STEDMAN,  M.A.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Vocabulary.  i8mo,
\s.  6d.  [Primary  Class.

LUCAN.  The  Pharsalia.  By  c.  E.  HASKINS,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's
College,  Cambridge,  with  an  Introduction  by  w.  E.  HEITLAND,  M.A.,
Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  8vo,  14^.

LUCRETIUS.  Titi  Lucreti  Cari  De  Rerum  Natura  Libri  Sex.  By
the  late  H.  A.  J.  MUNRO,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
^th  edition,  finally  revised.  3  vols,  demy  8vo.  Vols.  I.,  II. ,  Introduc
tion,  Text,  and  Notes,  18^.  Vol.  III.,  Translation,  6s.

MARTIAL:  Select  Epigrams.  Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.,
and  the  late  w.  H.  STONE,  Scholar  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  With
a  Life  of  the  Poet.  Fcap.  8vo,  qs.  6d.  [Gram.  Sch.  Class.

OVID:    Fasti.      Edited  by  F.   A.   PALEY,   M.A.,   LL. D.      Second  edition.

Fcap.  8vo,  3-r.  6d.  [Gram.  Sch.  Class.

Or  in  3  vols,  is.  6d.  each  [Grammar  School  Classics],  or  2s.  each  [Camb.

Texts  with   Notes'],  Books  I.  and  II.,  Books  III.  and  IV.,  Books  V.

and  VI.

—  Selections  from  the   Amores,  Tristia,   Heroides,  and    Metamor

phoses.     By  A.  j.  MACLEANE,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.

—  Ars  Amatoria  et  Amores.     A  School  Edition.     Carefully  Revised  and

Edited,  with  some  Literary  Notes,  by  j.    HERBERT   WILLIAMS,   M.A.,
late  Demy  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.     Fcap.  8vo,  3^.  6d.

—  Heroides  XIV.     Edited,  with  Introductory  Preface  and  English  Notes,

by  ARTHUR  PALMER,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Latin  at  Trinity  College,  Dublin.
Demy  8vo,  6j-.

—  Metamorphoses,  Book  XIII.      A  School  Edition.      With  Introduction

and  Notes,  by  CHARLES  HAINES  KEENE,  M.A.,  Dublin,  Ex-Scholar  and
Gold  Medallist  in  Classics,     yd  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

—  Epistolarum  ex  Ponto  Liber  Primus.     With  Introduction  and  Notes,

by  CHARLES    HAINES    KEENE,  M.A.       Crown  8vo,  3*.

PLATO.  The  Apology  of  Socrates  and  Crito.  With  Notes,  critical
and  exegetical,  by  WILHELM  WAGNER,  PH.D.  12th  edition.  Post  8vo,
3.5-.  6d.  A  CHEAP  EDITION.  Limp  Cloth.  2s.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Phaedo.      With    Notes,    critical    and    exegetical,    and    an    Analysis,    by

WILHELM  WAGNER,  PH.D.    tyh  edition.    Post  8vo,  $s.  6d.    [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Protagoras.      The   Greek  Text  revised,  with  an  A  nalysis   and  English

Notes,  by  w.  WAYTE,  M.A.,  Classical  Examiner  at  University  College,
London.     *]th  edition.     Post  8vo,  4_r.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Euthyphro.       With    Notes  and    Introduction  by  G.    H.   WELLS,  M.A.,

Scholar  of  St.  John's  College,   Oxford  ;  Assistant  Master  at   Merchant
Taylors' School,     yd  edition.     Post  8vo,  3^.  [Pul>.  Sch.  Ser.

—  The   Republic.      Books  I.  and  II.      With  Notes  and  Introduction  by

G.  H.  WELLS,  M.A.     qth  edition,  with  the  Introduction  re-written.     Post
8vo,  5-r.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Euthydemus.     With   Notes   and  Introduction    by  G.    H.  WELLS,    M.A.

Post  8vo,  4J.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Phaedrus.     By  the  late  w.  H.  THOMPSON,  D.D.,  Master  of  Trinity  College,

Cambridge.     8vo,  $s.  [Bib.  Class.

—  Gorgias.     By  the  late  w.  H.  THOMPSON,  D.D.,  Master  of  Trinity  College,

Cambridge.     New  edition.     6s.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.


Educational  Catalogue.


PLAUTUS.  Aulularia.  With  Notes,  critical  and  exegetical,  by  w.
WAGNER,  PH.D.  yh  edition.  Post  8vo,  4^.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Trinummus.       With    Notes,    critical    and    exegetical,    by    WILHELM

WAGNER,  PH.D.     $th  edition.     Post  8vo,  4*.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Menaechmei.       With     Notes,    critical    and   exegetical,    by    WILHELM

WAGNER,  PH.D.     2nd  edition.     Post  8vo,  4$-.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Mostellaria.      By  E.  A.  SONNENSCHEIN,   M.A.,  Professor  of  Classics  at

Mason  College,  Birmingham.     Post  8vo,  5-r.  [Pttb.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Captivi.     Abridged  and  Edited  for   the   Use   of  Schools.     With   Intro

duction  and  Notes  by  j.  H.  FREESE,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  St.  John's
College,  Cambridge.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

PROPERTIUS.  Sex.  Aurelii  Propertii  Carmina.  The  Elegies  of
Propertius,  with  English  Notes.  By  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.  2nd
edition.  8vo,  55-.

SALLUST  :  Catilina  and  Jugurtha.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  the  late
GEORGE  LONG.  New  edition,  revised,  wiih  the  addition  of  the  Chief
Fragments  of  the  Histories,  by  j.  G.  FRAZER,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity
College,  Cambridge.  Fcap.  8vo,  $s.  6d,  or  separately,  zs.  each.

[Gram.  Sch.  Class.

SOPHOCLES.     Edited  by  REV.   F.  H.  BLAYDES,  M.A.     Vol.  I,  Oedipus

Tyrannus — Oedipus  Coloneus — Antigone.     8vo,  8s.  [Bib.  Class.

Vol.    II.   Philoctetes — Electra — Trachiniae — Ajax.      By  F.  A.   PALEY,

M.A.,  LL.D.     8vo,  6s.,  or  the  four  Plays  separately  in  limp  cloth,  2s.  6d.

each.

—  Trachiniae.     With  Notes  and  Prolegomena.     By  ALFRED  PRETOR,  M.A.,
Fellow  of  St.  Catherine's  College,  Cambridge.     Post  8vo,  $s.  6d.

[Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  The  Oedipus  Tyrannus  of  Sophocles.      By  B.   H.  KENNEDY,  D.D.,

Regius  Professor  of  Greek  and  Hon.  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cam
bridge.     With  a  Commentary  containing  a  large  number  of  Notes  selected
from  the  MS.  of  the  late  T.  H.  STEEL,  M.A.     Crown  8vo,  Ss.
—  A  SCHOOL  EDITION,  post  8vo,  5.?.  [Pzib.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Edited  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     5  vols.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.  each.

\Cantb.  Texts  with  Notes.


Oedipus  Tyrannus.
Oedipus  Coloneus.


Electra.
Ajax.


Antigone.

TACITUS  :  Germania  and  Agricola.     Edited  by  the  late  REV.  p.  FROST,
late  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

[Gram.  Sch.  Class.

—  The  Germania.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  R.  F.  DAVIS,

M.A.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

TERENCE.     With  Notes,  critical  and  explanatory,  by  WILHELM  WAGNER,
PH.D.     ^rd  edition.     Post  8vo,  "js.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  Edited  by  WILHELM  WAGNER,  PH.D.     4  vols.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.    6J.  each.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.

Andria.  Hautontimorumenos.

Adelphi.  Phormio.

THEOCRITUS.      With  short,  critical  and  explanatory  Latin   Notes,  by
F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     2nd  edition,  revised.     Post  8vo,  qs.  6d.

[Pub.  Sch.  Ser.


8  George  Bell  &  Sons

THUCYDIDES,  Book  VI.  By  T.  w.  DOUGAN,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's
College,  Cambridge ;  Professor  of  Latin  in  Queen's  College,  Belfast.
Edited  with  English  notes.  Post  8vo,  3-y.  6d.  [Pub.  Sch.  Ser.

—  The  History  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.    With  Notes  and  a  careful

Collation  of  the  two  Cambridge  Manuscripts,  and  of  the  Aldine  and
Juntine  Editions.  By  the  late  RICHARD  SHILLETO,  M.A.,  Fellow  of
St.  Peter's  College,  Cambridge.  8vo.  Book  I.  6s.  6d.  Book  II.  5*.  6d.
VIRGIL.  By  the  late  PROFESSOR  CONINGTON,  M.A.  Revised  by  the  late
PROFESSOR  NETTLESHIP,  Corpus  Professor  of  Latin  at  Oxford.  8vo.

[Bib.  Class.

Vol.  I.  The  Bucolics  and  Georgics,  with  new  Memoir  and  three  Essays
on  Virgil's  Commentators;  Text,  and  Critics.     $th  edition,      los.  6d.
Vol.  II.   The  Aeneid,  Books  I. -VI.     tfh  edition.     IOT.  6d.
Vol.  III.  The  Aeneid,  Books  VII. -XII.     yd  edition,     icw.  6d.

—  Abridged  from  PROFESSOR  CONINGTON'S  Edition,  by  the   REV.  j.  G.  SHEP-

PARD,  D.C.L.,  H.  NETTLESHIP,  late  Corpus  Professor  of  Latin  at  the
University  of  Oxford,  and  w.  WAGNER,  PH.D.  2  vols.  fcap.  8vo,
4s.  6d.  each.  ,  [Gram.  Sch.  Class.

Vol.  I.  Bu  colics,  Georgics,  and  Aeneid,  Books  I. -IV.
Vol.  II.   Aeneid,  Books  V. -XII.
Also  the  Bucolics  and  Georgics,  in  one  vol.  3^.

Or  in  9  separate  volumes  [Grammar  School  Classics,  with  Notes  at  foot  of  page],
price  is.  6d.  each.


Bucolics.

Georgics,  I.  and  II.
Georgics,  III.  and  IV.


Aeneid,  V.  and  VI.
Aeneid,  VII.  and  VIII.
Aeneid,  IX.  and  X.


Aeneid,  I.  and  II.  Aeneid,  XI.  and  XII.

Aeneid,  III.  and  IV.

Or  in  12  separate  vohtmes  [Cambridge  Texts  -with  Notes  at  end],  price
is.  6d.  each.


Bucolics.

Georgics,  I.  and  II.
Georgics,  III.  and  IV.
Aeneid,  I.  and  II.
Aeneid,  III.  and  IV.
Aeneid,  V.  and  VI.  (price  2s.)


Aeneid,  VII.
Aeneid,  VIII.
Aeneid,  IX.
Aeneid,  X.
Aeneid,  XI.
Aeneid,  XII.


—  Aeneid,    Book  I.      CONINGTON'S  Edition  abridged.     With  Vocabulary

by  w.  F.  R.  SHILLETO,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.  [Lower  Form  Ser.

XENOPHON  :    Anabasis.      With  Life,  Itinerary,  Index,  and  three  Maps.

Edited  by  the  late   j.  F.  MACMICHAEL.     Revised  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,

3.5-.  6d.  [Gram.  Sch.  Class.

Or  in  4  separate  volumes,  price  is.  6d.  each.

Book  I.   (with  Life,   Introduction,  Itinerary,  and  three  Maps) — Books
II.  and  III.— Books  IV.  and  V.— Books  VI.  and  VII.

—  Anabasis.     MACMICHAEL'S  Edition,  revised  by  j.   E.  MELHUISH,  M.A.,

Assistant  Master  of  St.    Paul's  School.     In  6  volumes,  fcap.  8vo.      With
Life,  Itinerary,  and  Map  to  each  volume,   is.  6d.  each.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.

Book   I.— Books   II.   and   III.— Book   IV.— Book  V.— Book    VI.—
Book  VII.


Educational  Catalogue.


XENOPHON.  Cyropaedia.  Edited  by  G.  M.  GORHAM,  M  A.,  late  Fellow
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  New  edition,  Fcap.  8vo,  3^.  6d.

[Gram.  Sch.  Class.
Also  Books  I.  and  II.,  is.  6d.  ;    Books  V.  and  VI.,  is.  6d.

—  Memorabilia.      Edited    by  PERCIVAL  FROST,   M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  St.

John's  College,  Cambridge.     Fcap.  8vo,  $s.  [Gram.  Sch.  Class.

—  Hellenica.     Book  I.     Edited  by  L.  D.  DOVVDALL,  M.A.,  B.D.     Fcap   8vo,

2s.  [Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.

—  Hellenica.    Book  II.     By  L.  D.  DOWDALL,  M.A.,  B.D.     Fcap.  8vo,  zs.

[Camb.  Texts  with  Notes.

TEXTS.

AESCHYLUS.  Ex  novissima  recensione  F.  A.  PALEY,  A.M.,  LL.D.  Fcap.
Svo,  2s.  [Camb.  Texts.

CAESAR  De  Bello  Gallico.  Recognovit  G.  LONG,  A.M.  Fcap.  8vo,
is.6d.  \Camb.  Texts.

CATULLUS.  A  New  Text,  with  Critical  Notes  and  an  Introduction,  by
J.  P.  POSTGATE,  M.A.,  LITT.D.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,
Professor  of  Comparative  Philology  at  the  University  of  London.  Wide
fcap.  Svo,  35.

CICERO  De  Senectute  et  de  Amicitia,  et  Epistolae  Selectae.  Recen-
suit  G.  LONG,  A.M.  Fcap.  Svo,  is.  6d.  [Camb.  Texts.

CICERONIS  Orationes  in  Verrem.  Ex  recensione  G.  LONG,  A.M.
Fcap.  Svo,  2s.  6d.  [Camb.  Texts.

CORPUS  POETARUM  LATINORUM,  a  se  aliisque  denuo  recogni-
torum  et  brevi  lectionum  varietate  instructorum,  edidit  JOHANNES  PERCI
VAL  POSTGATE.  Tom.  I. — Ennius,  Lucretius,  Catullus,  Horatius,  Vergilius,
Tibullus,  Propertius,  Ovidius.  Large  post  4to,  2is.  net.  Also  in  2  Parts,
sewed,  qs.  each,  net.

*%  To  be  completed  in  4  parts,  making  2  volumes.

CORPUS  POETARUM  LATINORUM.  Edited  by  WALKER.  Con
taining  : — Catullus,  Lucretius,  Virgilius,  Tibullus,  Propertius,  Ovidius,
Horatius,  Phaedrus,  Lucanus,  Persius,  Juvenalis,  Martialis,  Sulpicia,
Statius,  Silius  Italicus,  Valerius  Flaccus,  Calpurnius  Siculus,  Ausonius,
and  Claudianus.  I  vol.  Svo,  cloth,  i8.r.

EURIPIDES.  Ex  recensione  F.  A.  PALEY,  A.M.,  LL.D.  3  vols.  Fcap.
Svo,  2s.  each.  [Camb.  Texts.

Vol.   I. — Rhesus — Medea  —  Hippolytus — Alcestis  — Heraclidae — Sup-
plices — Troades.

Vol.  II. — Ion — Helena — Andromache — Electra — Bacchae — Hecuba.
Vol.  III. — Hercules  Furens — Phoenissae — Orestes — Iphigeniain  Tauris
— Iphigeniain  Aulide — Cyclops.

HERODOTUS.  Recensuit  j.  G.  BLAKESLEY,  S.T.B.  2  vols.  Fcap.  Svo,
2s.  6d.  each.  [Camb.  Texts.

HOMERI  I  LI  AS  I. -XII.  Ex  novissima  recensione  F.  A.  PALEY,  A.M.,
LL.D.  Fcap.  Svo,  u.  6d.  [Camb.  Texts.

HORATIUS.     Ex  recensione  A.  j.  MACLEANE.  A.M.     Fcap.  Svo,  is.  6d.

[Camb.  Texts.

JUVENAL  ET  PERSIUS.  Ex  recensione  A.  J.  MACLEANE,  A.M.
Fcap.  Svo,  is.  6d.  [Camb.' Texts.


io  George  Bell  &  Sons

LUCRETIUS.     Recognovit  ii.  A.  j.  MUNRO,  A.M.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.

[Camb.  Texts.
PROPERTIUS.       Sex.    Propertii    Elegiarum    Libri    IV.    recensuit    A.

PALMER,    collegii  sacrosanctae  et  individuae  Trinitatis  juxta  Dublinum

Socius.     Fcap.  8vo,  3.$-.  6d.
SALLUSTI    CRISPI    CATILINA    ET   JUGURTHA,    Recognovit

G.  LONG,  A.M.      Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.  [Camb.   Texts.

SOPHOCLES.    Ex  recensione  F.  A.  PALEY,  A.M.,  LL.D.    Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

\Camb.   Texts.
TERENTI  COMOEDIAE.     GUL.  WAGNER  relegit  et  emendavit.    Fcap.

8vo,  2s.  [Camb.  Texts.

THUCYDIDES.      Recensuit  j.    G.    DONALDSON,    S.T.P.     2   vols.     Fcap.

8vo,  2s.  each.  [Camb.  7exts.

VERGILIUS.     Ex  recensione  J.  CONINGTON,  A.M.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.

[Camb.  Texts.
XENOPHONTIS  EXPEDITIO  CYRI.    Recensuit  j.  F.  MACMICHAEL.

A.B.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.  [Camb.  Texts.


TRANSLATIONS.

AESCHYLUS,  The  Tragedies  of.     Translated  into  English  Prose.     By
F.  A.   PALEY,  M.A.,    LL.D.,    Editor   of   the   Greek    Text.       2nd  edition
revised^  8vo,  Js.  6d.
—  The  Tragedies  of.     Translated  into  English  verse  by  ANNA  SWANWICK.

Ajh  edition  revised.     Small  post  8vo,  55-.
-  The  Tragedies  of.    Literally  translated  into  Prose,  by  T.  A.  BUCKLEY,  B.  A.

Small  post  8vo,  3^.  6d.

-The  Tragedies  of.  Translated  by  WALTER  HEADLAM,  M.A.,  Fellow  of
King's  College,  Cambridge.  [Preparing.

ANTONINUS  (M.  Aurelius),  The  Thoughts  of.  Translated  by
GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.  Revised  edition.  Small  post  8vo,  3$.  6d.

Fine  paper  edition  on  handmade  paper.     Pott  8vo,  6s.
APOLLONIUS  RHODIUS.      The  Argonautica.     Translated  by  E.  P.

COLERIDGE.     Small  post  8vo,  5-r.

AMMIANUS  MARCELLINUS.  History  of  Rome  during  the
Reigns  of  Constantius,  Julian,  Jovianus,  Valentinian,  and  Valens.  Trans
lated  by  PROF.  c.  D.  YONGE,  M.A.  With  a  complete  Index.  Small  post
8vo,  js.  6d.

ARISTOPHANES,  The  Comedies  of.      Literally  translated   by  w.  j.
HICKIE.      With  Portrait.     2  vols.  small  post  8vo,  \s.  each.
Vol.  I. — Acharnians,  Knights,  Clouds,  Wasps,  Peace,    and  Birds.
Vol.   II. — Lysistrata,    Thesmophoriazusae,  Frogs,    Ecclesiazusae,    and
Plutus.

—  The  Acharnians.    Translated  by  w.  H.  COVINGTON,  B.A.     With  Memoir

and  Introduction.     Crown  8vo,  sewed,  is.

ARISTOTLE  on  the  Athenian  Constitution.  Translated,  with  Notes
an'j  Introduction,  by  F.  G.  KEN  YON,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College,
Oxford.  Pott  8vo,  printed  on  handmade  paper.  2nd  edition.  4^.  6d.

—  History  of  Animals.     Translated  by  RICHARD  CRESSWELL,  M.A.     Small

post  8vo,  $s.


Educational  Catalogue.  1 1

ARISTOTLE.  Organon  :  or,  Logical  Treatises,  and  the  Introduction  of
Porphyry.  With  Notes,  Analysis,  Introduction,  and  Index,  by  the  REV.
O.  F.  OWEN,  M.A.  2  vols.  small  post  8vo,  3-r.  6d.  each.

-  Rhetoric  and  Poetics.      Literally  Translated,  with   Hobbes'  Analysis,

&c.,  by  T.  BUCKLEY,  B.A.      Small  post  8vo,  $s.

-  Nicomachean  Ethics.     Literally  Translated,  with  Notes,  an  Analytical

Introduction,  &c.,  by  the  Venerable  ARCHDEACON  BROWNE,  late  Classical
Professor  of  King's  College.     Small  post  8vo,  5-r.

—  Politics    and    Economics.      Translated,    with   Notes,    Analyses,    and

Index,  by  E.  WALFORD,  M.A.,  and  an  Introductory  Essay  and  a  Life  by
DR.  GILLIES.     Small  post  8vo,  5-y.

—  Metaphysics.      Literally  Translated,  with  Notes,   Analysis,   &c.,    by  the

REV.  JOHN  H.  M'MAHON,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  5.5-.

ARRIAN.  Anabasis  of  Alexander,  together  with  the  Indica.  Trans
lated  by  E.  j.  CHINNOCK,  M.A.,  LL.D.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  Maps,
and  Plans.  Small  post  8vo,  5^.

CAESAR.  Commentaries  on  the  Gallic  and  Civil  Wars,  with  the  Supple
mentary  Books  attributed  to  Hirtius,  including  the  complete  Alexandrian,
African,  and  Spanish  Wars.  Translated  by  w.  A.  M'DEVITTE,  B.A.
Small  post  8vo,  $s.

—  Gallic  War.    Translated  by  w.  A.  M'DEVITTE,  B.A.     2  vols.,  with  Memoir

and   Map.      Crown  8vo,  sewed.     Books  I.   to  IV.,  Books  V.  to  VII.,

is.  each.
CALPURNIUS   SICULUS,  The  Eclogues  of.     The  Latin  Text,  with

English  Translation  by  E.  J.  L.  SCO  IT,  M.A.     Crown  8vo,  3^.  6d.
CATULLUS,  TIBULLUS,  and  the  Vigil  of  Venus.   Prose  Translation.

Small  post  8vo,  5-r.
CICERO,    The  Orations  of.     Translated  by  PROF.   c.   D.   YONGE,   M.A.

With  Index.     4  vols.  small  post  8vo,  $s.  each.

—  On  Oratory  and  Orators.     With  Letters  to  Quintus  and  Brutus.     Trans

lated  by  the  REV.  j.  s.  WATSON,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  5*.

—  On   the    Nature  of  the   Gods.     Divination,    Fate,   Laws,  a  Republic,

Consulship.     Translated   by   PROF.   c.    D    YONGE,   M.A.,  and   FRANCIS
BARHAM.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.

—  Academics,    De   Finibus,    and    Tusculan    Questions.     By   PROF.    c.    D.

YONGE,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  5-r.

—  Offices ;  or,  Moral  Duties.     Cato  Major,  an  Essay  on  Old  Age ;  Laelius,

an  Essay  on  Friendship  ;  Scipio's  Dream  ;  Paradoxes  ;  Letter  to  Quintus
on  Magistrates.     Translated  by  C.  R.  EDMONDS.      With  Portrait,  $s.  bd

—  Old  Age    and    Friendship.     Translated,   with  Memoir  and  Notes,   by

G.  H.  WELLS,  M.A.     Crown  8vo,  sewed,  is.

DEMOSTHENES,  The  Orations  of.  Translated,  with  Notes,  Arguments,
a  Chronological  Abstract,  Appendices,  and  Index,  by  C.  RANN  KENNEDY.
5  vols.  small  post  8vo.

Vol.  L— The  Olynthiacs,  Philippics.     3*.  6d.

Vol.  II. — On  the  Crown  and  on  the  Embassy.     $s.

Vol.  III. — Against  Leptines,  Midias,  Androtion,  and  Aristocrates.     5-r.

Vols.  IV.  and  V. — Private  and  Miscellaneous  Orations.     $s.  each.

—  On   the    Crown.     Translated  by  c.   RANN  KENNEDY.     Small  post  8vo,

sewed,  is.,  cloth,  is  6d.

DIOGENES  LAERTIUS.  Translated  by  PROF.  c.  D.  YONGE,  M.A.
Small  post  8vo,  5.5-.


1 2  George  Bell  &  Sons


EPICTETUS,    The    Discourses    of.       With    the    Encheiridion    and
Fragments.     Translated  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  55.

Fine  Paper  Edition,  2  vols.  Pott  8vo,  los.  6d.
EURIPIDES.      A    Prose    Translation,    from    the   Text    of    Paley.       By

E.  P.  COLERIDGE,  B.A.       2  vols.,   $S.   each.

Vol.  L— Rhesus,  Medea,  Hippolytus,  Alcestis,  Heraclidoe,  Supplices,
Troades,  Ion,  Helena.

Vol.  II. — Andromache,  Electra,  Bacchae,  Hecuba,  Hercules  Furens,
Phoenissae,  Orestes,  Iphigenia  in  Tauris,  Iphigenia  in  Aulis,  Cyclops.

***  The  plays  separately  (except  Rhesus,  Helena,  Electra,  Iphigenia  in
Aulis,  and  Cyclops).  Crown  8vo,  sewed,  is.  each.

—  Translated  from  the  Text  ofDindorf.     By  T.  A.   BUCKLEY,   B.A.     2  vols.

small  post  8vo,  5^.  each.
GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.     Translated  by  GEORGE  BURGES,  M.A.     Small

post  8vo,  55-.
HERODOTUS.     Translated  by  the  REV.  HENRY  CARY,  M.A.     Small  post

8vo,  3J-.  6d.

—  Analysis  and  Summary  of.     By  j.  T.  WHEELER.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.
HESIOD,  CALLIMACHUS,    and   THEOGNIS.     Translated   by  the

REV.  j.  BANKS,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  5-y.
HOMER.     The  Iliad.     Translated  by  T.  A.  BUCKLEY,  B.A.     Small  post

8vo,  5j.

-  The    Odyssey,    Hymns,   Epigrams,    and    Battle  of  the  Frogs  and
Mice.     Translated  by  T.  A.  BUCKLEY,  B.A.     Small  post  8vo,  5.5-.

—  The    Iliad.      Books   I. -IV.     Translated  into  English  Hexameter   Verse,

by  HENRY  SMITH  WRIGHT,  B.A.,  late  Scholar  of  Trinity  College,  Cam
bridge.     Medium  8vo,  5*.

HORACE.     Translated  by  Smart.     Revised  edition.     By  T.  A.   BUCKLEY,
B.A.     Small  post  8vo,  3-r.  6d.

—  The  Odes  and  Carmen  Saeculare.     Translated  into  English  Verse  by

the  late  JOHN   CONINGTON,    M.A.,   Corpus  Professor  of   Latin   in   the
University  of  Oxford.     \\th  edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     3$.  6d.

—  The    Satires    and   Epistles.     Translated  into  English  Verse  by  PROF.

JOHN  CONINGTON,  M.A.     8M  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  $s.  (xi.

—  Odes   and   Epodes.     Translated  by  SIR  STEPHEN  E.  DE  VERB,  BART.

yd  edition,  enlarged.     Imperial  161110.     7s.  6d.  net.
ISOCRATES,  The  Orations  of.     Translated  by  j.  H.  FREESE,  M.A.,  late

Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  with  Introductions  and  Notes.

Vol.  I.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.
JUSTIN,   CORNELIUS   NEPOS,    and   EUTROPIUS.     Translated

by  the  REV.  j.  s.  WATSON,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.
JUVENAL,  PERSIUS,  SULPICIA,  and   LUCILIUS.      Translated

by  L.  EVANS,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  5*.
LIVY.    The  History  of  Rome.    Translated  by  DR.  SPILLAN,  c.  EDMONDS,

and  others.     4  vols.  small  post  8vo,  $s.  each.

—  Books!.,  II.,  III.,  IV.     A  Revised  Translation  by  j.  H.  FREESE,  M.A.,

late  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.     With  Memoir,  and  Maps.
4  vols.,  crown  8vo,  sewed,  is.  each.

—  Book  V.     A  Revised  Translation  by  E.  s.  WEYMOUTH,  M.A.,  Lond.     With

Memoir,  and  Maps.     Crown  8vo,  sewed,  I.T.

—  Book  IX.     Translated  by  FRANCIS  STORR,   B.A.     With  Memoir.     Crown

8vo,  sewed,  is.


Educational  Catalogue.  13

LUC  AN.  The  Pharsalia.  Translated  into  Prose  by  H.  T.  RILEY.  Small
post  8vo,  $s.

—  The    Pharsalia.     Book  I.     Translated   by   FREDERICK   CONWAY,    M.  A.

With  Memoir  and  Introduction.      Crown  8vo,  sewed,  is.
LUCIAN'S    Dialogues  of  the  Gods,   of  the  Sea-Gods,  and  of  the

Dead.     Translated  by  HOWARD  WILLIAMS,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.
LUCRETIUS.     Translated  by  the  REV.  j.  s.  WATSON,  M.A.     Small  post

8vo,  5j.

—  Literally  translated  by  the  late  H.  A.  j.  MUNRO,  M.A.     qth  edition.     Demy

8vo,  6s.

MARTIAL'S  Epigrams,  complete.  Literally  translated  into  Prose,  with
the  addition  of  Verse  Translations  selected  from  the  Works  of  English
Poets,  and  other  sources.  Small  post  8vo,  Js.  6d.

OVID,  The  Works  of.     Translated.     3  vols.,  small  post  8vo,  5^.  each.
Vol.  I. — Fasti,  Tristia,  Pontic  Epistles,  Ibis,  and  Halieuticon.
Vol.  II. — Metamorphoses.      With  Frontispiece.

Vol.  III. — Heroides,  Amours,  Art  of  Love,  Remedy  of  Love,  and
Minor  Pieces.  With  Frontispiece.

PINDAR.     Translated  by  DAWSON  w.  TURNER.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.
PLATO.     Gorgias.     Translated   by   the   late  E.    M.    COPE,   M.A.,   Fellow
of  Trinity  College.      -2nd  edition.     8vo,  'js.

—  Philebus.     Translated  by  F.'A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Small  8vo,  4*.

—  Theaetetus.     Translated  by  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Small  8vo,  4^.

—  The  Works  of.     Translated,  with  Introduction  and  Notes.     6  vols.  small

post  8vo,  5-r.  each.

Vol.  I. — The  Apology  of  Socrates — Crito — Phaedo — Gorgias — Prota
goras — Phaedrus — Theaetetus — Eutyphron — Lysis.  Translated  by  the

REV.  H.  GARY.

Vol.  II. — The  Republic — Timaeus — Critias.  Translated  by  HENRY
DAVIS.

Vol.  III. — Meno— Euthydemus— The  Sophist — Statesman— Cratylus
— Parmenides— The  Banquet.  Translated  by  G.  BURGES.

Vol.  IV.  — Philebus — Charmides — Laches — Menexenus — Hippias — Ion
— The  Two  Alcibiades — Theages — Rivals — Hipparchus — Minos — Cli-
topho — Epistles.  Translated  by  G.  BURGES.

Vol.  V. — The  Laws.     Translated  by  G.  BURGES.

Vol.  VI.— The  Doubtful  Works.  Edited  by  G.  BURGES.  With  General
Index  to  the  six  volumes.

—  Apology,  Crito,  Phaedo,  and  Protagoras.     Translated  by  the  REV.  H.

GARY.     Small  post  8vo,  sewed,  is.,  cloth,  is.  6d.

—  Dialogues.     A  Summary  and  Analysis  of.     With  Analytical  Index,  giving

references  to  the  Greek  text  of  modern  editions  and  to  the  above  transla
tions.     By  A.  DAY,  LL.D.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.

PLAUTUS,  The  Comedies  of.  Translated  by  H.  T.  RILEY,  B.A.  2  vols.
small  post  8vo,  5_y.  each.

Vol.  1. — Trinummus — Miles  Gloriosus — Bacchides — Stichus — Pseudolus
— Menaechmei — Aulularia — Captivi — Asinaria — Curculio.

Vol.  II. — Amphitryon — Rudens — Mercator — Cistellaria — Truculentus
— Persa — Casina— Poenulus — Epidicus — Mostellaria — Fragments.

—  Trinummus,   Menaechmei,    Aulularia,  and  Captivi.     Translated  by

H.  T.  RILEY,  B.A.     Small  post  8vo,  sewed,  is.,  cloth,  u.  6d.


14  George  Bell  &  Sons

PLINY.  The  Letters  of  Pliny  the  Younger.  Melmoth's  Translation,
revised,  by  the  REV.  F.  c.  T.  BOSANQUET,  M.A.  Small  post  8vo,  5*.

PLUTARCH.  Lives.  Translated  by  A.  STEWART,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of
Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.  4  vols.  small  post
8vo,  3^.  6d.  each.

-  Moials.     Theosophical  Essays.     Translated  by  c.   w.  KING,  M.A.,  late

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Small  post  8vo,  5*.

—  Morals.     Ethical  Essays.     Translated  by  the  REV.  A.  R.  SHILLETO,  M.A.

Small  post  8vo,    s.

PROPERTIUS.  Translated  by  REV.  p.  j.  F.  GANTILLON,  M.A.,  and
accompanied  by  Poetical  Versions,  from  various  sources.  Small  post  8vo,
S.T.  6d.

PRUDENTIUS,  Translations  from.  A  Selection  from  his  Works,  with
a  Translation  into  English  Verse,  and  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by
FRANCIS  ST.  JOHN  THACKERAY,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Vicar  of  Mapledurham,
formerly  Fellow  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford,  and  Assistant-Master  at
Eton.  Wide  post  8vo,  7s.  6d.

QUINTILIAN  :  Institutes  of  Oratory,  or,  Education  of  an  Orator.
Translated  by  the  REV.  j.  s.  WATSON,  M.A.  2  vols.  small  post  8vo,
5-r.  each.

SALLUST,  FLORUS,  and  VELLEIUS  PATERCULUS.  Trans
lated  by  j.  s.  WATSON,  M.A.  Small  post  8vo,  5^.

SENECA:  On  Benefits.  Translated  by  A.  STEWART,  M.A.,  late  Fellow
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Small  post  8vo,  3*.  6d.

—  Minor  Essays  and  On  Clemency.     Translated  by  A.  STEWART,  M.A.

Small  post  8vo,  $s.

SOPHOCLES.  Translated,  with  Memoir,  Notes,  etc.,  by  E.  p.  COLERIDGE,
B.A.  Small  post  8vo,  $s.

Or  the  plays  separately,  crown  8vo,  sewed,  is.  each.

-  The   Tragedies  of.     The  Oxford  Translation,  with  Notes,  Arguments,

and  Introduction.      Small  post  8vo,  5.5-.

-  The  Dramas  of.     Rendered  in  English  Verse,  Dramatic  and  Lyric,  by

SIR  GEORGE  YOUNG,  BART.,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,
Cambridge.     8vo,  I2s.  6d.

—  The  CEdipus  Tyrannus.     Translated  into  English  Prose.     By  PROF.  B.

H.  KENNEDY.     Crown  8vo,  in  paper  wrapper,  is.
SUETONIUS.      Lives   of  the    Twelve   Caesars  and   Lives   of  the

Grammarians.    Thomson's  revised  Translation,  by  T.  FORESTER.     Small

post  8vo,  5c.
TACITUS,  The  Works  of.     Translated,  with  Notes  and  Index.     2  vols.

Small  post  8vo,  55.  each.
Vol.  I.— The  Annals.

Vol.  II.—  The  History,  Germania,  Agricola,  Oratory,  and  Index.
TERENCE  and  PHAEDRUS.     Translated  by  H.  T.  RILEY,  B.A.     Small

post  8vo,  5-r.
THEOCRITUS,  BION,  MOSCHUS,  and  TYRTAEUS.     Translated

by  the  REV.  j.  BANKS,  M.A.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.
THEOCRITUS.     Translated   into  English   Verse  by  c.   s.    CALVERLEY,

M.A. ,   late  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.     New  edition,  revised.

Crown  8vo,  Js.  6d.


Educational  Catalogue.  15

THUCYDIDES.     The  Peloponnesian  War.     Translated  by  the  REV.  H.

DALE.      With  Portrait.     2  vols. ,  ^s.  6d.  each.

—  Analysis  and  Summary  of.     By  j.  T.  WHEELER.     Small  post  8vo,  5*.
VIRGIL.     Translated  by  A.  HAMILTON  BRYCE,  LL.D.     With  Memoir  and

Introduction.     Small  post  8vo,  2s-  6d.

Also  in  6  vols.,  crown  8vo,  sewed,  is.  each.


Georgics.
Bucolics.
^Eneid  l.-III.


IV. -VI.
VII. -IX.
X.-XII.


XENOPHON.     The  Works  of.     In  3  vols.     Small  post  8vo,  5*.  each.

Vol.  I. — The  Anabasis,  and  Memorabilia.  Translated  by  the  REV.  j.  s.
WATSON,  M.A.  With  a  Geographical  Commentary,  by  w.  F.  AINSWORTH,
F.S.A.,  F.R.G.S.,  etc.

Vol.  II. — Cyropaedia  and  Hellenics.  Translated  by  the  REV.  J.  s.
WATSON,  M.A.,  and  the  REV.  H.  DALE.

Vol.  III. — The  Minor  Works.  Translated  by  the  REV  _,  s.
WATSON,  M.A.

SABRINAE  COROLLA  In  Hortulis  Regiae  Scholae  Salopiensis  con-
texuerunt  tres  viri  floribus  legendis.  qth  edition,  revised  and  re-arranged.
By  the  late  BENJAMIN  HALL  KENNEDY,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek
at  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Large  post  8vo,  los.  6d.

SERTUM  CARTHUSIANUM  Floribus  trium  Seculorum  Contextum.
Cura  GULIELMI  HAIG  BROWN,  Scholae  Carthusianae  Archididascali.
Demy  8vo,  $s.

TRANSLATIONS  into  English  and  Latin.  By  c.  s.  CALVERLEY,  M.A.,
late  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge,  yd  edition.  Crown  8vo,
js.  6d.

TRANSLATIONS  from  and  into  the  Latin,  Greek  and  English.  By
R.  C.  JEBB,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University  of  Cam
bridge,  H.  JACKSON,  M.A.,  LITT.  D.,  Fellows  of  Trinity  College,  Cam
bridge,  and  w.  E.  CURREY,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,
Cambridge.  Crown  8vo.  2nd  edition,  revised.  8s.


GRAMMAR   AND   COMPOSITION.

BADDELEY.  Auxilia  Latina.  A  Series  of  Progressive  Latin  Exercises.
By  M.  j.  B.  BADDELEY,  M.A.  Fcap.  8vo.  Part  I.,  Accidence.  $th
edition.  2s.  Part  II.  $th  edition.  2s.  Key  to  Part  II.  2s.  6d.

BAIRD.  Greek  Verbs.  A  Catalogue  of  Verbs,  Irregular  and  Defective  ;
their  leading  formations,  tenses  in  use,  and  dialectic  inflexions,  with  a
copious  Appendix,  containing  Paradigms  for  conjugation,  Rules  for
formation  of  tenses,  &c.,  &c.  By  j.  s.  BAIRD,  T.C.D.  New  edition,  re
vised.  2s.  6d.

—  Homeric  Dialect.  Its  Leading  Forms  and  Peculiarities.  By  j.  s.  BAIRD,
T.C.D.  New  edition,  revised.  By  the  REV.  w.  GUNION  RUTHERFORD,
M.A.,  LL.D.,  Head  Master  at  Westminster  School,  is.

BAKER.  Latin  Prose  for  London  Students.  By  ARTHUR  BAKER,
M.A.,  Classical  Master,  Independent  College,  Taunton.  Fcap.  8vo,  2s.


1 6  George  Bell  &  Sons


BARRY.      Notes  on  Greek  Accents.     By  the  RIGHT  REV.  A.  BARRY,

D.D.     New  edition^  re-written,     is.
CHURCH.     Latin  Prose  Lessons.     By  A.  j.  CHURCH,  M.A.,  Professor  of

Latin  at  University  College,  London.     gth  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.
CLAPIN.      Latin  Primer.      By  the  REV.  A.  c.  CLAPIN,   M.A.,   Assistant

Master  at  Sherborne  School,     yd  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.
COLLINS.     Latin  Exercises  and  Grammar  Papers.     By  T.  COLLINS,

M.A.,  Head  Master  of  the  Latin  School,  Newport,  Salop.     7th  edition.

Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

—  Unseen  Papers  in  Latin  Prose  and  Verse.    With  Examination  Questions.

6th  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

—  Unseen   Papers  in  Greek  Prose  and  Verse.      With  Examination  Ques

tions,     yd  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  y.

--  Easy  Translations  from  Nepos,  Caesar,  Cicero,  Livy,  £c.,  for  Retrans-
lation  into  Latin.  With  Notes.  2s.

COMPTON.  Rudiments  of  Attic  Construction  and  Idiom.  An  Intro
duction  to  Greek  Syntax  for  Beginners  who  have  acquired  some  knowledge
of  Latin.  By  the  REV.  w.  COOKWORTHY  COMPTON,  M.A.,  Head  Master
of  Dover  College.  Crown  8vo,  y.

FROST.  Eclogae  Latinae  ;  or,  First  Latin  Reading  Book.  With  Notes
and  Vocabulary  by  the  late  REV.  p.  FROST,  M.A.  Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  Analecta  Graeca  Minora.     With  Notes  and  Dictionary.     New  edition.

Fcap.  8vo,  2s.

- —  Materials  for  Latin  Prose  Composition.  By  the  late  REV.  p.  FROST,
M.A.  New  edition.  Fcap.  8vo.  2s.  Key.  4^.  net.

—  A  Latin  Verse  Book.     New  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.     Key.     5-r.  net.

—  Materials  for  Greek  Prose  Composition.     New  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,

2s.  6d.     Key.      $s.  net.

—  Greek  Accidence.     New  edition,     is.

—  Latin  Accidence,      is.

HARKNESS.  A  Latin  Grammar.  By  ALBERT  HARKNESS.  Post  8vo,
6s.

KEY.  A  Latin  Grammar.  By  the  late  T.  H.  KEY,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  6th  thou
sand.  Post  8vo,  8s.

—  A  Short  Latin  Grammar  for  Schools.      i6th  edition.     Post  8vo,  3^.  6d.
HOLDEN.       Foliorum   Silvula.      Part  I.     Passages  for  Translation  into

Latin  Elegiac  and  Heroic  Verse.     By  H.  A.  HOLDEN,  LL.D.     nth  edition.
Post  8vo,  JS.  6d.

—  Foliorum  Silvula.     Part  II.     Select  Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin

Lyric  and  Comic  Iambic  Verse,     yd  edition.     Post  8vo,  5-r.

—  Foliorum  Cemuuae.      Select  Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin  and

Greek  Prose.      loth  edition.     Post  8vo,  8s.

JEBB,  JACKSON,  and  CURREY.  Extracts  for  Translation  in
Greek,  Latin,  and  English.  By  R.  c.  JEBB,  LITT.D.,  LL.D.,  Regius  Pro
fessor  of  Greek  in  the  University  of  Cambridge  ;  H.  JACKSON,  LITT.D.,
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge;  and  \V.  E.  CURREY,  M.A.,  late
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  4^.  6d.

Latin  Syntax,  Principles  of.     is.

Latin  Versification,     is.

MASON.  Analytical  Latin  Exercises  By  c.  P.  MASON,  B.A.  $th
edition.  Part  I.,  is.  6d.  Part  II.,  2s.  6d.

—  The  Analysis  of  Sentences  Applied  to  Latin.     Post  8vo,  is.  6d.


Educational  Catalogue.  1 7

NETTLESHIP.  Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin  Prose.  Pre
ceded  by  Essays  on  : — I.  Political  and  Social  Ideas  IF.  Range  of  Meta
phorical  Expression.  III.  Historical  Development  of  Latin  Prose  Style
in  Antiquity.  IV.  Cautions  as  to  Orthography.  By  H.  NETTLKSHIP,
M.A.,  late  Corpus  Professor  of  Latin  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Crown
8vo,  3-r.  A  Key,  4^.  6d.  net.

Notabilia  Quaedam ;  or  the  Principal  Tenses  of  most  of  the  Irregular
Greek  Verbs,  and  Elementary  Greek,  Latin,  and  French  Constructions.
New  edition,  is.

PA  LEY.  Greek  Particles  and  their  Combinations  according  to  Attic
Usage.  A  Short  Treatise.  By  F.  A.  PALEY,  M.A.,  LL.D.  2s.  6d.

PENROSE.  Latin  Elegiac  Verse,  Easy  Exercises  in.  By  the  REV.  j.
PENROSE.  New  edition.  2s.  (Key,  3^.  6c/.  net.)

PRESTON.  Greek  Verse  Composition.  By  G.  PRESTON,  M.A.  $th
edition.  Crown  8vo,  4*.  6d.

PRUEN.  Latin  Examination  Papers.  Comprising  Lower,  Middle,  and
Upper  School  Papers,  and  a  .number  of  the  Woolwich  and  Sandhurst
Standards.  By  G.  G.  PRUEN,  M.A.  ,  Senior  Classical  Master  in  the  Modern
Department,  Cheltenham  College.  Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

SEAGER.  Faciliora.  An  Elementary  Latin  Book  on  a  New  Principle.
By  the  REV.  j.  L.  SEAGER,  M.A.  2s.  6d.

STEDMAN  (A.  M.  ML).  Fits-t  Latin  Lessons.  By  A.  M.  M.  STEDMAN,
M.A.,  Wad  ham  College,  Oxford.  2nd  edition,  enlarged.  Crown  8vo,  2s.

—  Initia  Latin  a.     Easy  Lessons  on  Elementary  Accidence.      2nd  edition.

Fcap.  8vo,  is.

—  First  Latin  Reader.     With  Notes  adapted  to  the  Shorter  Latin  Primer

and  Vocabulary.     Crown  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  Easy   Latin    Passages    for   Unseen    Translation.      2nd  and  enlarged

edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  Exempla  Latina.     First  Exercises  in  Latin  Accidence.     With  Vocabu

lary.     Crown  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  The  Latin  Compound  Sentence  ;  Rules  and  Exercises.    Crown  8vo,

is.  6d.     With  Vocabulary,  2s.

—  Easy  Latin  Exercises  on  the  Syntax  of  the  Shorter  and  Revised  Latin

Primers.     With  Vocabulary.     T>rd  edition.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

—  Latin   Examination   Papers  in   Miscellaneous   Grammar  and  Idioms.

yd  edition.     2s.  6d.     Key  (for  Tutors  only),  6s.  net.

-    Notanda  Quaedam.      Miscellaneous  Latin   Exercises.       On  Common
Rules  and  Idioms.     2nd  edition.     Fcap.  8vo    is.  6d.    With  Vocabulary,  2s.

—  Latin  Vocabularies  for  Repetition.     Arranged  according  to  Subjects.

yd  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  First  Greek  Lessons.  [In preparation.

—  Easy  Greek  Passages  for  Unseen  Translation.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  Easy  Greek  Exercises  on  Elementary  Syntax.  [In preparation.

—  Greek  Vocabularies  for  Repetition.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  Greek  Testament   Selections  for  the  Use  of  Schools.      2nd  edition.

With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Vocabulary.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

—  Greek   Examination  Papers  in   Miscellaneous  Grammar  and   Idioms.

2nd  edition.     2s.  6d.     Key  (for  Tutors  only),  6s.  net.

THACKERAY.  Anthologia  Graeca.  A  Selection  of  Greek  Poetry,
with  Notes.  By  F.  ST.  JOHN  THACKERAY.  $th  edition.  i6mo,  4^.  6d.

B


1 8  George  Bell  &  Sons

THACKERAY.  Anthologia  Latina.  A  Selection  of  Latin  Poetry,  from
Naevius  to  Boethius,  with  Notes.  By  REV.  F.  ST.  JOHN  THACKERAY.
6th  edition.  1 6mo,  4^.  6d.

—  Hints  and  Cautions  on  Attic  Greek  Prose  Composition.     Crown

8vo,  3-r.  6d.

—  Exercises  on  the  Irregular  and  Defective  Greek  Verbs,      is.  6d.
WELLS.       Tales   for   Latin   Prose    Composition.       With   Notes   and

Vocabulary.     By   G.    H.    WELLS,    M.A.  ,   Assistant   Master    at   Merchant
Taylor's  School.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.


HISTORY,    GEOGRAPHY,   AND    REFERENCE    BOOKS,

ETC.

TEUFFEL'S  History  of  Roman  Literature.  $th  edition,  revised  by
DR.  SCHWABE,  translated  by  PROFESSOR  G.  c.  \v.  WARR,  M.A,  King's
College,  London  Medium  8vo.  2  vols.  30.?.  Vol.  I.  (The  Republican
Period),  15.?.  Vol.  II  (The  Imperial  Period),  15*.

KEIGHTLEY'S  Mythology  of  Ancient  Greece  and  Italy,  qth  edition,
revised  by  the  late  LEONHARD  SCHMITZ,  PH.D.,  LL. D.,  Classical  Examiner
to  the  University  of  London  With  12  Plates.  Small  post  8vo,  5-r.

DONALDSON'S  Theatre  of  the  Greeks,     loth  edition.     Small  post  8vo,

DICTIONARY  OF  LATIN  AND  GREEK  QUOTATIONS;  in
cluding  Proverbs,  Maxims,  Mottoes,  Law  Terms  and  Phrases.  With  all
the  Quantities  marked,  and  English  Translations.  With  Index  Verborum.
Small  post  8vo,  5*.

A  GUIDE  TO  THE  CHOICE  OF  CLASSICAL  BOOKS.  By  j.  B.
MAYOR,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  at  King's  College,  late
Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  yd  edition,  with
Supplementary  List.  Crown  Svo,  $s.  bd.  Supplement  separate,  is.  6d.

PAUSANIAS'  Description  of  Greece.  Newly  translated,  with  Notes
and  Index,  by  A.  R.  SHILLETO,  M.A.  2  vols.  Small  post  Svo,  5-r.  each.

STRABO'S  Geography.  Translated  by  w.  FALCONER,  M.A.,  and  11.  c.
HAMILTON.  3  vols.  Small  post  Svo,  5-r.  each.

AN  ATLAS  OF  CLASSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  By  w.  HUGHES  and
G.  LONG,  M.A.  Containing  Ten  selected  Maps.  Imp.  Svo,  3^.

AN  ATLAS  OF  CLASSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  Twenty-four  Maps
by  w.  HUGHES  and  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.  With  coloured  outlines.
Imperial  Svo,  6s.

ATLAS  OF  CLASSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  22  large  Coloured  Maps.
With  a  complete  Index.  Imp.  Svo,  chiefly  engraved  by  the  Mess??,
Walker,  -js.  6d.


Ediicational  Catalogue.


MATHEMATICS.


ARITHMETIC   AND   ALGEBRA.

BARRACLOUGH  (T.).  The  Eclipse  Mental  Arithmetic.  By  TITUS
BARRACLOUGH,  Board  School,  Halifax.  Standards  I.,  II.,  and  III.,
sewed,  6d.  ;  Standards  II.,  III.,  and  IV.,  sewed,  6d.  net ;  Book  III.,
Part  A,  sewed,  4^.  ;  Book  III.,  Part  B,  cloth,  is.  6d.

BEARD  (W.  S.).  Graduated  Exercises  in  Addition  (Simple  and  Com
pound).  For  Candidates  for  Commercial  Certificates  and  Civil  Service
appointments.  By  w.  s.  BEARD,  F.R.G.S.,  Head  Master  of  the  Modem
School,  Fareham.  2nd  edition.  Fcap.  410,  is.

—  See  PENDLEBURY.

ELSEE  (C.).  Arithmetic.  By  the  REV.  c.  ELSEE,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of
St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  Senior  Mathematical  Master  at  Rugby
School.  \^th  edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  3-r.  6d.

\_Camb.  School  and  College  Texts.

—  Algebra.     By  the  REV.  c.  ELSEE,  M.A.     t>th  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  4*.

\Camb.  S.  and  C.  Texts.

FILIPOWSKI  (H.  E.).  Anti-Logarithms,  A  Table  of.  By  H.  E.
FILIPOWSKI.  yd  edition.  Svo,  15^.

GOUDIE  (W.  P.).     See  Watson.

HATHORNTHWAITE  (J.  T.).  Elementary  Algebra  for  Indian
Schools.  By  j.  T.  HATHORNTHWAITE,  M.A.,  Principal  and  Professor
of  Mathematics  at  Elphinstone  College,  Bombay.  Crown  Svo,  2s.

HUNTER  (J.).  Supplementary  Arithmetic,  with  Answers.  By  REV.
j.  HUNTER,  M.A.  Fcap.  8vo,  3-T.

MACMICHAEL  (W.  F.)  and  PROWDE  SMITH  (R.).  Algebra.
A  Progressive  Coarse  of  Examples.  By  the  REV.  w.  F.  MACMICHAEL,
and  R.  PROWDE  SMITH,  M.A.  ^tk  edition.  Fcap.  Svo,  3^-.  6d.  With
answers,  4-y.  6d.  \Ccunb.  S.  and  C.  Texts.

[ATHEWS  (G.  B.).  Theory  of  Numbers.  An  account  of  the  Theories
of  Congruencies  and  of  Arithmetical  Forms.  By  G.  B.  MATHEWS,  M.A.,
Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  University  College  of  North  Wales.
Part  I.  Demy  Svo,  I2s.

(PENDLEBURY  (C.).  Arithmetic.  With  Examination  Papers  and
8,000  Examples.  By  CHARLES  PENDLEBURY,  M.A.,  F.R.A.S.,  Senior
Mathematical  Master  of  St.  Paul's,  Author  of  "  Lenses  and  Systems  of
Lenses,  treated  after  the  manner  of  Gauss."  "]th  edition.  Crown  Svo.
Complete,  with  or  without  Answers,  4.?.  6d.  In  Two  Parts,  with  or
without  Answers,  2s.  6d.  each.

Key  to  Part  II.     *]s.  6d.  net.  \Camb.  Math.  Ser.

Examples  in  Arithmetic.  Extracted  from  Pendlebury's  Arithmetic.
With  or  without  Answers,  ^th  edition.  Crown  Svo,  3^.,  or  in  Two  Parts,
is.  6d.  and  2s.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

\—  Examination  Papers  in  Arithmetic.  Consisting  of  140  papers,  each
containing  7  questions;  and  a  collection  of  357  .more  difficult  problems.
2nd  edition.  Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d.  Key,  for  Tutors  only,  5-r.  net.


2O  George  Bell  &  Sons

PENDLEBURY  (C.)  and  TAIT  (T.  S.).  Arithmetic  for  Indian
Schools.  By  c.  PENDLEBURY,  M.A.  and  T.  s.  TAIT,  M.A.,  B.SC.,
Principal  of  Baroda  College.  Crown  8vo,  y.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

PENDLEBURY  (C.)  and  BEARD  (W.  S.).  Arithmetic  for  the
Standards.  By  c.  PENDLEBURY,  M.A.,  F.R.A.S.,  and  w.  s.  BEARD,
F.R.G.S.  Standards  I.,  II.,  III.,  zd.  each  ;  IV.,  V.,  VI.,  3^.  each.  VII.,
in  the  Press.

—  Elementary  Arithmetic,     yd  edition.     Crown  8vo,  is.  6d.

POPE  (L.  J.).     Lessons  in  Elementary  Algebra.     By  L.  j.  POPE,  B.A,  j
(Lond.),   Assistant  Master  at  the  Oratory  School,   Birmingham.       First
Sene--,  up  to  and  including  Simple  Equations  and  Problems.     Crown  8vot
is  6d.

PROWDE  SMITH  (R.).     See  Macmichael.

SHAW  (S.  J.  D.).  Arithmetic  Papers.  Set  in  the  Cambridge  Higher
Local  Examination,  from  June,  1869,  to  June,  1887,  inclusive,  reprinted
by  permission  of  the  Syndicate.  By  S.  J  D.  SHAW,  Mathematical
Lecturer  of  Newnham  College.  Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.  •  Key,  4^.  6d.  net.  j

TAIT  (T.  S.).     See  Pendlebury.

WATSON  (J  )  and  GOUDIE  (W.  P.).  Arithmetic.  A  Progressive"
Course  of  Examples  With  Answers.  By  j.  WATSON,  M.A.,  Corpus
Christi  College,  Cambridge,  formerly  Senior  Mathematical  Master  of  the
Ordnance  School,  Carshalton.  *jth  edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  By  w.
P.  GOUDIE,  B.A.  Lond.  Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.  [Camb.  S.  and  C.  Texts.

WHITWORTH  (W.  A.).  Algebra.  Choice  and  Chance.  An  Ele
mentary  Treatise  on  Permutations,  Combinations,  and  Probability,  with
640  Exercises  and  Answers.  By  W.  A.  WHITWORTH,  M.A..  Fellow  of
St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  $th  edition,  revised  and  enlarged.
Crown  8vo,  6^.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

WRIGLEY  (A.)  Arithmetic.  By  A.  WRIGLEY,  M.A  ,  St.  John's  College.
Fcap.  8vo,  y.  6d.  [Camb.  S.  and  C.  Texts.


BOOK-KEEPING.

CRELLIN  (P.).  A  New  Manual  of  Book-keeping,  combining  the
Theory  and  Practice,  with  Specimens  of  a  set  of  Books.  By  PHILLIP
CRELLIN,  Chartered  Accountant.  Crown  8vo,  3*.  6d.

—  Book-keeping  lor  Teachers  and  Pupils.  Crown  8vo,  is.  6d.  Key,
2s.  net.

FOSTER  (B.  W.).  Double  Entry  Elucidated.  By  B.  w.  FOSTKR.
iq.th  edition.  Fcap.  4to,  35.  6d.

MEDHURST  (J.  T.).  Examination  Papers  in  Book-keeping.  Com
piled  by  JOHN  T.  MEDHURST,  A.K.C.,  F.s.s.,  Fellow  of  the  Society  of
Accountants  and  Auditors,  and  Lecturer  at  the  City  of  London  College.
y<i  edition.  Crown  8vo,  y.

THOMSON  (A.  W.).  A  Text-Book  of  the  Principles  and  Practice
of  Book-keeping.  By  PROFESSOR  A.  w.  THOMSON,  B.SC.,  Royal
Agricultural  College,  Cirencester.  Crown  8vo,  5^.


Educational  Catalogue.  2 1


GEOMETRY   AND   EUCLID.

BESANT  (W.  H.).  Geometrical  Conic  Sections.  By  w.  H.  BESANT,
SC  D.,  F.R.S.,  P'ellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  8//fc  edition.
Fcap.  8vo,  4$-.  6d.  Enunciations,  separately,  sewed,  is.

[Camb.  S.  and  C.  Texts.

BRASSE  (J.).  The  Enunciations  and  Figures  of  Euclid,  prepared  for
Students  in  Geometry  By  the  REV.  j.  BRASSE,  D.D.  New  edition.
Fcap.  8vo,  is.  Without  the  Figures,  6d.

DEIGHTON  (H.).  Euclid.  Books  I.-VL,  and  part  of  Book  XL,  newly
translated  from  the  Greek  Text,  with  Supplementary  Propositions,
Chapters  on  Modern  Geometry,  and  numerous  Exercises.  By  HORACE
DEIGHTON,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Harrison  College,  Barbados,  yd
edition.  $s.  6d.  Key,  for  tutors  only,  $s.  net.  [Camb.  Math.  Set:

Also  issued  in  parts  : — Book  I.,  is.  ;   Books  I.  and  II.,  is.  6<J.  ;  Books
I.-III.,  2s.  6d.  ;    Books  III.  and  IV.,  is.  6d.

DIXON  (E.  T.).  The  Foundations  of  Geometry.  By  EDWARD  T.
DIXON,  late  Royal  Artillery.  Demy  8vo,  6s.

MASON  (C.  P.).  Euclid.  The  First  Two  Books  Explained  to  Beginners.
By  C.  p.  MASON,  B.A.  2nd  edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

McDOWELL  (J.)  Exercises  on  Euclid  and  in  Modern  Geometry,  con
taining  Applications  of  the  Principles  and  Processes  of  Modern  Pure
Geometry.  By  the  late  j.  MCDOWELL,  M.A.,  F.R.A.S.,  Pembroke  College,
Cambridge,  and  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  <\th  edition.  6s.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.

TAYLOR  (C.).  An  Introduction  to  the  Ancient  and  Modern  Geo
metry  of  Conies,  with  Historical  Notes  and  Prolegomena.  15^.

—  The  Elementary  Geometry  of  Conies.  By  c.  TAYLOR,  D.D.,  Master
of  St.  John's  College.  *jth  edition,  revised.  With  a  Chapter  on  the  Line
Infinity,  and  a  new  treatment  of  the  Hyperbola.  Crown  8vo,  4.?.  6d.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.

WEBB  (R.).  The  Definitions  of  Euclid.  With  Explanations  and
Exercises,  and  an  Appendix  of  Exercises  on  the  First  Book  by  R.  WEBB
M.A.  Crown  8vo,  is.  6d.

WILLIS  (H.  G.).  Geometrical  Conic  Sections.  An  Elementary
Treatise.  By  H.  G.  WILLIS,  M.A.,  Clare  College,  Cambridge,  Assistant
Master  of  Manchester  Grammar  School.  Crown  8vo,  5-y.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.

ANALYTICAL  GEOMETRY,    ETC.

ALDIS  (W.  S.).  Solid  Geometry,  An  Elementary  Treatise  on.  By  w.
S.  ALDIS,  M.A.,  late  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  University  College,
Auckland,  New  Zealand,  ^th  edition,  revised.  Crown  8vo,  6s.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.

BESANT  (W.  H.).  Notes  on  Roulettes  and  Glissettes.  By  w.  H.
BESANT,  SC.D.,  F.R.s.  2nd  edition,  enlarged.  Crown  8vo,  $s.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.


2  2  George  Bell  &  Sons

CAYLEY  (A.).  Elliptic  Functions,  An  Elementary  Treatise  on.  By
ARTHUR  CAYLEY,  Sadlerian  Professor  of  Pure  Mathematics  in  the  Univer
sity  of  Cambridge.  Demy  8vo.  New  edition  in  the  Press.

TURNBULL  (W.  P.).  Analytical  Plane  Geometry.  An  Introduction
to.  By  w.  P.  TURNBULL,  M.A.,  sometime  Fellow  of  Trinity  College.

8vO,    I2S.

VYVYAN  (T.  G.).  Analytical  Geometry  for  Schools.  By  REV.  T.
VYVYAN,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  and  Mathematical
Master  of  Charterhouse.  6th  edition.  8vo,  4^.  6d.

[Camb.  S.  and  C.   Texts.

—  Analytical  Geometry  for  Beginners.  Part  I.  The  Straight  Line  and
Circle.  Crown  8vo,  zs.  6d.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

WHITWORTH  (W.  A.).  Trilinear  Co-ordinates,  and  other  methods
of  Modern  Analytical  Geometry  of  Two  Dimensions.  By  w.  A.  WHIT-
WORTH,  M.A.,  late  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  Queen's  College,  Liver
pool,  and  Scholar  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  8vo,  i6s.


TRIGONOMETRY.

DYER  (J.  M.)  and  WHITCOMBE  (R.  H.).  Elementary  Trigono
metry.  By  j.  M.  DYER,  M.A.  (Senior  Mathematical  Scholar  at  Oxford),
and  REV.  R.  H.  WHITCOMHE,  Assistant  Masters  at  Eton  College.  2nd
edition.  Crown  8vo,  4^.  6d.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

VYVYAN  (T.  G.).  Introduction  to  Plane  Trigonometry.  By  the
REV.  T.  G.  VYVYAN,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,
Senior  Mathematical  Master  of  Charterhouse.  yd  edition,  revised  and
augmented.  Crown  8vo,  3.?.  6d.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

WARD  (G.  H.).  Examination  Papers  in  Trigonometry.  By  G.  H.
WARD,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  St.  Paul's  School.  Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.
Key,  5-y.  net.

MECHANICS   AND    NATURAL   PHILOSOPHY.

ALDIS  (W.  S.).  Geometrical  Optics,  An  Elementary  Treatise  on.  By
w.  S.  ALDIS,  M.A.  4/ 'h  edition.  Crown  8vo,  4$.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

—  An  Introductory  Treatise  on  Rigid  Dynamics.     Crown  8vo,  4^.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.

—  Fresnel's   Theory  of  Double  Refraction,  A  Chapter  on.     2nd  edition,

revised.     8vo,  2s.

BASSET  (A.  B.).  A  Treatise  on  Hydrodynamics,  with  numerous
Examples.  By  A.  B.  BASSET,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Demy  8vo.  Vol.  I.,  price  lew.  6d.  ;  Vol.  II.,  I2s.  6d.

—  An  Elementary  Treatise  on  Hydrodynamics  and  Sound.      Demy

8vo,  y.y.  6d.

—  A  Treatise  on  Physical  Optics.     Demy  8vo,  i6s.

BESANT  (W.  H.).  Elementary  Hydrostatics.  By  w.  H.  BESANT,
SC.D.,  F.R.S.  \6th  edition.  Crown  8vo,  45.  6d.  Solutions,  5*.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.

-   Hydromechanics,   A  Treatise  on.     Part  I.    Hydrostatics.     $th  edition,
revised,  and  enlarged.     Crown  8vo,  $s.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.


Educational  Catalogue.  2  3

BESANT  (W.  H.).  A  Treatise  on  Dynamics.  2nd  edition.  Crown
8vo,  io.y.  6d.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

CHALLIS  (PROF.).  Pure  and  Applied  Calculation.  By  the  late
REV.  j.  CHALLIS,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  Demy  8vo,  15-y.

-  Physics,  The  Mathematical  Principle  of.     Demy  8vo,  $s.

—  Lectures  on  Practical  Astronomy.     Demy  8vo,  los.

EVANS  (J.  H.)  and  MAIN  (P.  T.).  Newton's  Principia,  The  First
Three  Sections  of,  with  an  Appendix ;  and  the  Ninth  and  Eleventh
Sections.  By  J.  H.  EVANS,  M.A.,  St.  John's  College.  The  $th  edition,
edited  by  p.  T.  MAIN,  M.A.,  Lecturer  and  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College.
Fcap.  8vo,  4J.  [Camb.  S.  and  C.  Texts.

GALLATLY  (W.).  Elementary  Physics,  Examples  and  Examination
Papers  in.  Statics,  Dynamics,  Hydrostatics,  Heat,  Light,  Chemistry,
Electricity,  London  Matriculation,  Cambridge  B.  A.,  Edinburgh,  Glasgow,
South  Kensington,  Cambridge  Junior  and  Senior  Papers,  and  Answers.
By  w.  GALLATLY,  M.A.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge,  Assistant
Examiner,  London  University.  Crown  8vo,  4^.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

GARNETT  (W.).  Elementary  Dynamics  for  the  use  of  Colleges  and
Schools.  By  WILLIAM  GARNETT,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's
College,  late  Principal  of  the  Durham  College  of  Science,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne.  $th  edition,  revised.  Crown  8vo,  6s.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

—  Heat,   An  Elementary  Treatise   on.     6th  edition,   revised.      Crown  8vo,

4s.  6d.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

GOODWIN  (H.).  Statics.  By  H.  GOODWIN,  D.D.,  late  Bishop  of

Carlisle.  2nd  edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  3^.  [Camb.  S.  and  C.  Texts.

HOROBIN  (J.  C.).  Elementary  Mechanics.  Stage  I.  II.  and  III.,

is.   6d.  each.     By  j.   c.  HOROBIN,    M.A.,   Principal  of  Homerton  New

College,  Cambridge.

—  Theoretical   Mechanics.     Division  I.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

%*  This  book  covers  the  ground  of  the  Elementary  Stage  of  Division  I.
of  Subject  VI.  of  the  "  Science  Directory,"  and  is  intended  for  the
examination  of  the  Science  and  Art  Department.

JESSOP  (C.  M.).  The  Elements  of  Applied  Mathematics.  In
cluding  Kinetics,  Statics  and  Hydrostatics.  By  c.  M.  JESSOP,  M.A.,  late
Fellow  of  Clare  College,  Cambridge,  Lecturer  in  Mathematics  in  the
Durham  College  of  Science,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.  Crown  8vo,  6s.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.

MAIN  (P.  T.).  Plane  Astronomy,  An  Introduction  to.  By  P.  T.  MAIN,
M.A.,  Lecturer  and  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College.  6th  edition,  revised.
Fcap.  8vo,  4j.  [Camb.  S.  and  C.  Texts.

PARKINSON  (R.  M.).  Structural  Mechanics.  By  R.  M.  PARKINSON,
ASSOC.  M.I.C.E.  Crown  8vo,  4^.  6d.

PENDLEBURY  (C.).  Lenses  and  Systems  of  Lenses,  Treated  after
the  Manner  of  Gauss.  By  CHARLES  PENHLEBURY,  M.A.,  F.R.A.S.,  Senior
Mathematical  Master  of  St.  Paul's  School,  late  Scholar  of  St.  John's
College,  Cambridge.  Demy  8vo,  $s.

STEELE  (R.  E.).  Natural  Science  Examination  Papers.  By
R.  E.  STEELE,  M.A.,  F.c.s.,  Chief  Natural  Science  Master,  Bradford
Grammar  School.  Crown  8vo.  Part  I.,  Inorganic  Chemistry,  2s.  6d.
Part  II.,  Physics  (Sound,  Light,  Heat,  Magnetism,  Electricity),  2s.  6d.

[School  Exam.  Series.


24  George  Bell  &  Sons

WALTON  (W.).  Theoretical  Mechanics,  Problems  in.  By  w.  WAL
TON,  M.A  ,  Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  Trinity  Hall,  Mathematical
Lecturer  at  Magdalene  College,  yd  edition,  revised.  Demy  8vo,  i6s.

—  Elementary  Mechanics,  Problems  in.     2nd  edition.     Crown  8vo,  6s.

[Camb.  Math.  Ser.

DAVIS  (J.  P.).  Army  Mathematical  Papers.  Being  Ten  Years'
Woolwich  and  Sandhurst  Preliminary  Papers.  Edited,  with  Answers,  by
J.  F.  DAVIS,  D.LIT.,  M.A.  Lond.  Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

DYER  (J.  M.)  and  PROWDE  SMITH  (R.).  Mathematical  Ex
amples.  A  Collection  of  Examples  in  Arithmetic,  Algebra,  Trigono
metry,  Mensuration,  Theory  of  Equations,  Analytical  Geometry,  Statics,
Dynamics,  with  Answers,  &c.  For  Army  and  Indian  Civil  Service
Candidates.  By  J.  M.  DYER,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master,  Eton  College
(Senior  Mathematical  Scholar  at  Oxford),  and  R.  PROWDE  SMITH,  M.A.
Crown  8vo,  6s.  [Camb.  Math.  Ser.

GOODWIN  (H.).  Problems  and  Examples,  adapted  to  "Goodwin's
Elementary  Course  of  Mathematics."  By  T.  G.  VYVYAN,  M.A.  yd
edition.  8vo,  $s.  ;  Solutions,  yd  edition,  8vo,  gs.

SMALLEY  (G.  R.).  A  Compendium  of  Facts  and  Formulae  in
Pure  Mathematics  and  Natural  Philosophy.  By  G.  R.  SMALLEY,
F. R.A.S.  New  edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  By  J.  MCDOWELL,  M.A.,
F.R.A.S.  Fcap.  8vo,  2s.

WRIGLEY  (A.).  Collection  of  Examples  and  Problems  in  Arith
metic,  Algebra,  Geometry,  Logarithms,  Trigonometry,  Conic  Sections,
Mechanics,  &c.,  with  Answers  and  Occasional  Hints.  By  the  REV.  A.
WRIGLEY.  loth  edition,  2Oth  thoiisand.  Demy  8vo,  Ss.  6d.

A  Key.    By  j.  c.  PLATTS,  M.A.  and  the  REV.  A.  WRIGLEY.    2nd  edition.
Demy  8vo,  los.  6d.


MODERN   LANGUAGES.

ENGLISH.

ADAMS  (E.).     The  Elements  of  the  English  Language.     By  ERNEST
ADAMS,    PH.D.     26th  edition.     Revised  by  j.   F.  DAVIS,  D.LIT.,   M.A.,
(LOND.).     Post  8vo,  45-.  6d.
-  The  Rudiments  of  English  Grammar  and  Analysis.     By  ERNEST

ADAMS,  PH.D.      ityh  thousand.     Fcap.  8vo,  u.

ALFORD  (DEAN).     The  Queen's  English:   A  Manual  of  Idiom  and
Usage.     By  the  late  HENRY  ALFORD,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury.     6th
edition.     Small  post  8vo.     Sewed,  is.,  cloth,  is.  6d.
ASCHAM'S  Scholemaster.     Edited  by  PROFESSOR  j.  E.  B.  MAYOR.     Small

post  8vo,  sewed,  is.

BELL'S  ENGLISH  CLASSICS.     A  New  Series,    Edited    for   use  in
Schools,  wi)h  Introduction  and  Notes.     Crown  8vo.
JOHNSON'S  Life  of  Addison.    Edited  by  K.  RYLANO,  Author  of  "The  Students'

Handbook  of  Psychology,"  etc.     2$.  6d.
—  Life  of  Swift.     Edited  by  F.  RYLAND,  M.A.     zs.


Educational  Catalogue.


BELL'S    ENGLISH    CLASSICS— continued.

JOHNSON'S  Life  of  Pope.     Edited  by  F.  RYLAND,  M.A.     zs.  6d.

—  Life  of  Milton.     Edited  by  F.  RYLAND,  M.A.     zs.  6d.

—  Life  of  Dryden.     Edited  by  F.  RVLAND,  M.A.  {Preparing.
LAMB'S  Essays.     Selected  and  Edited  by  K.  DEIGHTON.     3*.  ;  sewed,  zs.
BYRON'S  Childe  Harold.     Edited  by  H.  G.  KEENH,  M.A.,  c.i  E.,  Author  of  "A

Manual  of  French  Literature,"  etc.     3$.  6d.     Also  Cantos  I.  and  II.  separately  ;
sewed,  is.  gd.

—  Siege  of  Corinth.     Edited  by  p.  HORDERN,  late  Director  of  Public  Instruction  in

Burma,     is.  6d  ;  sewed,  is.
MACAU  LAY'S  Lays   of  Ancient  Rome.     Edited   by  p.  HORDERN.     zs.  6d.  ;

sewed,  is.  gd.
MASSINGEK'S  A  New  Way  to  Pay  Old  Debts.     Edited  by  K.  DEIGHTON.

3s.  ;  sewed,  25-.
BURKE'S  Letters  on  a  Regicide  Peace.     I.  and  II.     Edited  by  H.  G.  KEENE,

M.A.,  C.I.E.     3-r.  ;  sewed,  zs.
MILTON'S   Paradise  Regained.     Edited  by  K.  DEIGHTON.     zs.   6d.  ;    sewed,

is.  gd.
SELECTIONS   FROM  POPE.     Containing  Essay  on  Criticism,  Rape  of  the

Lock,    Temple   of  Fame,  Windsor  Forest.     Edited   by  K.   DEIGHTON.     zs.  6d.  ;

sewed,  is.  gd.
GOLDSMITH'S  Good-Natured  Man  and  She  Stoops  to  Conquer.     Edited

by  K.  DEIGHTON.     Each,  zs.  cloth  ;   is.  6d.  sewed.
DE    QUINCEY,    Selections   from.      The    English    Mail-Coach   and    The

Revolt   of  the   Tartars.      Edited  by  CECIL   M.   BARROW,  M.A.,  Principal  of

Victoria  College,  Palghat.  {In  the  press.

MILTON'S  Paradise  Lost.     Books  I.  and  II.     Edited  by  R.  G.  OXENHAM,  M.A.,

Principal  of  Elphinstone  College,  Bombay.  {Preparing.

—  Books  III.  and  IV.     Edited  by  R.  G.  OXENHAM.  {Preparing.
SELECTIONS    FROM    CHAUCER.      Edited   by   j.    B.    BILPERBECK,    B.A.,

Professor  of  English  Literature,  Presidency  College,  Madras.  {Preparing.

MACAULAY'S  Essay  on  Clive.     Edited  by  CECIL  BARROW.  M.A.       {Preparing.
BROWNING'S    Strafford.     Edited  by   E.    H.   HICKEY.     With    Introduction   by

S.   R.  GARDINFR,   I.L.D.       ZS.  6d.

SHAKESPEARE'S  Julius  Caesar.     Edited  by  T.  DUFF  BARNETT,  B.A.  (Lond.).
zs.

—  Merchant  of  Venice.     Edited  by  T.  DUFF  BARNETT,  B.A.  (Lond.).     zs.

—  Tempest.     Edited  by  T.  DUFF  BARNETT,  B.A.  (Lond.).     zs.

Others  to  follow.


BELL'S    READING    BOOKS.

Infants.

Infant's  Primer.     3^.
Tot  and  the  Cat.     6J.
The  Old  Boathouse.     6d.
The  Cat  and  the  Hen.     ()d.

Standard  I.
School  Primer.     6d.
The  Two  Parrots.     6d.
The  Three  Monkeys.     6d.
The  New-born  Lamb.     6d.
The  Blind  Boy.     6d.

Standard  II.
The  Lost  Pigs.     6d.
Story  of  a  Cat.     td.
Queen  Bee  and  Busy  Bee.     6d.


Post  8vo,  cloth,  illustrated.
Gull's  Crag.     6d.
Great  Deeds  in  English  History.
is.

Standard  III.

Adventures  of  a  Donkey,     is.
Grimm's  Tales,     is.
Great  Englishmen,     u.
Andersen's  Tales,      is.
Life  of  Columbus,     is.

Standard  IV.
Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,     is.
Great  Englishwomen,     is.
Great  Scotsmen,     is.
Edgeworth's  Tales,      u.
Gatty's  Parables  from  Nature,   is.
Scott's  Talisman,     is.


26


George  Bell  &  Sons'


BELL'S    READING    BOOKS— continued.


Standard  V.

Hickens'  Oliver  Twist,      u.
Dickens'  Little  Nell.     is.
Masterman  Ready,     is.
Marryat's  Poor  Jack.     is.
Arabian  Nights,      is.
Gulliver's  Travels,      is.
Lyrical  Poetry  for  Boys  and  Girls.

is.
Vicar  of  Wakefield.     is.


Standards  VI.  and  VII.
Lamb's  Tales  from  Shakespeare.

is.

Robinson  Crusoe,     is.
Tales  of  the  Coast,     is.
Settlers  in  Canada,     is.
Southey's  Life  of  Nelson,      is.
Sir  Roger  de  Coverley.     i*.


BELL'S  GEOGRAPHICAL  READERS.

WARD,   MA.  (Worcester  College,  Oxford).


By    M.    J.     HARRINGTON •


The  Child's  Geography.  Illus
trated  Stiff  paper  cover,  6d.

The  Map  and  the  Compass.
(Standard  I  )  Illustrated.  Cloth,


The  Round  World.    (Standard  II.)

Illustrated.      Cloth,   lod.
About    England.     (Standard  III.}

With    Illustrations    and    Coloured
Map.     Cloth,  is.  4//.

EDWARDS  (F.).     Examples  for  Analysis    in   Verse  and   Prose  from
well-known  sources,  selected  and  arranged  by  F.  EDWARDS.    New  edition.
Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  is.
GOLDSMITH.     The  Deserted  Village.     Edited,  with  Notes  and  Life,

by  C.  P.  MASON,  B.A.,  F.c.P.     ^fh  edition.     Crown  8vo,  is.
HANDBOOKS  OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE.     Edited  by  j.    w.
HALES,  M.A.,  formerly   Clark  Lecturer  in  English  Literature  at  Trinity
College,  Cambridge,   Professor  of  English  Literature  at  King's  College,
London.     Crown  8vo,  3^.  6d.  each.

The  Age  of  Pope.     By  JOHN  DENNIS.  [Ready.

In  preparation.

The  Age  of  Chaucer.     By  PROFESSOR  HALES.
The  Age  of  Shakespeare.     By  PROFESSOR  HALES.
The  Age  of  Milton.     By  j.  BASS  MULLINGER,  M.A.
The  Age  of  Dryden.     By  w.  GARNETT,  LL.D.
The  Age  of  Wordsworth.     By  PROFESSOR  c.  H.  HERFORD,  LTTT.D

Other  volumes  to  follow.

HAZLITT  ( W.).    Lectures  on  the  Literature  of  the  Age  of  Elizabeth.
Small  post  8vo,  sewed,  is.

-  Lectures  on  the  English  Poets.     Small  post  8vo,  sewed,  is.

—  Lectures  on  the  English  Comic  Writers.     Small  post  8vo,  sewed,  is.
LAMB    (C.).     Specimens  of  English  Dramatic  Poets  of  the  Time  of

Elizabeth.     With  Notes,   together  with  the  Extracts  from  the  Garrick

Plays.
MASON    (C.    P.).     Grammars  by    c.    P.    MASON,   B.A.,    F.C.P.,   Fellow  of

University  College,  London.

-  First    Notions    of  Grammar   for   Young    Learners.     Fcap.    8vo.     85^

thousand.     Cloth,  i.r.

First  Steps  in  English  Grammar,  for  Junior  Classes.     Demy  i8mo.     54^
thousand,      is.


Ediicational  Catalogue.  27


MASON  (C.  P.).  Outlines  of  English  Grammar,  for  the  Use  of  Junior
Classes.  17/7*  edition,  yjth  thousand.  Crown  8vo,  2s.

--English  Grammar;  including  the  principles  of  Grammatical  Analysis.
j$th  edition,  revised,  iq&th  thousand.  Cro\vn  8vo,  green  cloth,  3^.  6d.

—  A   Shorter    English  Grammar,   with    copious   and  carefully  graduated

Exercises,  based  upon  the  author's  English  Grammar,     gth  edition,     qqtk
thousand.     Crown  8vo,  brown  cloth,  3.?.  6d.

—  Practice  and  Help  in  the  Analysis  of  Sentences.     Price  is.     Cloth.

—  English  Grammar  Practice,   consisting  of  the  Exercises  of  the  Shorter

English  Grammar  published  in  a  separate  form,     yd  edition.     Crown  8vo,
is.

—  Remarks  on  the  Subjunctive  and  the  so-called  Potential  Mood.

6d.,  sewn.

—  Blank  Sheets  Ruled  and  headed  for  A  nalysis.     is.  per  dozen.
MILTON  :  Paradise  Lost.     Books  I.,  IT.,  and  III.     Edited,  with  Notes

on  the  Analysis  and  Parsing,  and  Explanatory  Remarks,  by  C.  P.  MASON,
B.A.,  F.C.P.     Crown  8vo.

Book  I.     With  Life.     $th  edition,     is.

Book  II.     With  Life,     yd  edition,      is.

Book  III.     With  Life.     2nd  edition,      is.

—  Paradise  Lost.     Books  V  -VIII.     With  Notes  for  the  Use  of  Schools.

By  c.  M.  LUMBY.     2s.  6d..

PRICE  (A.  C.X  Elements  of  Comparative  Grammar  and  Philology.
For  Use  in  Schools.  By  A.  c.  PRICE,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Leeds
Grammar  School ;  late  Scholar  of  Pembroke  College,  Oxford.  Crown
8vo,  2s.  6d.

SHAKESPEARE.  Notes  on  Shakespeare's  Plays.  With  Introduction*
Summary,  Notes  (Etymological  and  Explanatory),  Prosody,  Grammatical
Peculiarities,  etc.  By  T.  DUFF  BARNETT,  B.A.  Lond.,  late  Second
Master  in  the  Brighton  Grammar  School.  Specially  adapted  for  the  Local
and  Preliminary  Examinations.  Crown  8vo,  is.  each.

Midsummer  Night's  Dream.— Julius  Caesar. — The  Tempest.—
Macbeth. — Henry  V. —  Hamlet.— Merchant  of  Venice. — King
Richard  II. — King  John. — King  Lear. — Coriolanus.

"The  Notes  are  comprehensive  and  concise." — Educational  Times.

"Comprehensive,  practical,  and  reliable." — Schoolmaster.
-  Hints  for  Shakespeare-Study.     Exemplified  in  an  Analytical  Study  of
Julius    Ccesar.     By  MARY  GRAFTON  MOBERLY.     2nd  edition.     Crown  8vo,
sewed,  is.

—  Coleridge's  Lectures  and  Notes  on  Shakespeare  and  other  English

Poets.     Edited  by  T.   ASHE,   B.A.     Small  post  8vo,  3^.  6d.

—  Shakespeare's   Dramatic  Art.     The  History  and  Character  of  Shake

speare's  Plays.     By  DR.    HERMANN   ULRICI.     Translated  by   L.    DORA
SCHMITZ.     2  vols.  small  post  8vo,  3^-.  6d.  each.

-  William  Shakespeare.  A  Literary  Biography.  By  KARL  ELZE,  PH.D.,
LL.D.  Translated  by  L.  DORA  SCHMITZ.  Small  post  8vo,  $s.

—  Hazlitt's  Lectures  on  the  Characters  of  Shakespeare's  Plays.    Small

post  8vo,  is.
SHELL'S   ENGLISH    CLASSICS.


28  George  Bell  &  Sons'


SKEAT  (W.  W.).  Questions  for  Examinations  in  English  Litera
ture.  With  a  Preface  containing  hrief  hints  on  the  study  of  English.
Arranged  by  the  REV.  w.  w.  SKEAT,  LITT.  D.,  Elrington  and  Bosworth
Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  yd  edition.
Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

SMITH  (C.  J.)  Synonyms  and  Antonyms  of  the  English  Language.
Collected  and  Contrasted  by  the  YEN.  c.  J.  SMITH,  M.A.  -2nd  edition,
revised.  Small  post  8vo,  $s.

—  Synonyms  Discriminated.     A  Dictionary  of  Synonymous  Words  in  the

English  Language.  Illustrated  with  Quotations  from  Standard  Writers.
By  the  late  YEN.  c.  J.  SMITH,  M.A.  With  the  Author's  latest  Corrections
and  Additions,  edited  by  the  REV.  H.  PERCY  SMITH,  M.A.,  of  Balliol
College,  Oxford,  Vicar  of  Great  Barton,  Suffolk,  ^th  edition.  Demy
8vo,  1 4v.

TEN  BRINK'S  History  of  English  Literature.  Vol.  I.  Early  English
Literature  (to  Wiclif).  Translated  into  English  by  HORACE  M.  KENNEDY,
Professor  of  German  Literature  in  the  Brooklyn  Collegiate  Institute.
Small  post  8vo,  3^.  6d.

—  Vol.   II.   (Wiclif,   Chaucer,   Earliest  Drama,  Renaissance).     Translated  by

W.  CLARKE  ROBINSON,   PH.D.       Small  post  8vo,  3-T.  6d.

THOMSON:  Spring.  Edited  by  c.  P.  MASON,  B.A.,  F.C.P.  With  Life.
2nd  edition.  Crown  8vo,  is.

—  Winter.     Edited  by  c.  p.  MASON, B. A.,  F.C.P.    With  Life.    Crown  Svo,  is.

WEBSTER'S  INTERNATIONAL  DICTIONARY  of  the  English
Language.  Including  Scientific,  Technical,  and  Biblical  Words  and
Terms,  with  their  Significations,  Pronunciations,  Alternative  Spellings,
Derivations,  Synonyms,  and  numerous  illustrative  Quotations,  with  various
valuable  literary  Appendices,  with  83  extra  pages  of  Illustrations  grouped
and  classified,  rendering  the  work  a  COMPLETE  LITERARY  AND  SCIENTIFIC
REFERENCE- BOOK.  New  edition  (1890).  Thoroughly  revised  and  en
larged  under  the  supervision  of  NOAH  PORTER,  D.D.,  LL.D.  i  vol.  (2,118
Pages,  3,500  woodcuts),  410,  cloth,  31*.  6d.  ;  half  calf,  £2  2s.  ;  half  russia,
£2  $s.  ;  calf,  £2  Ss.  ;  or  in  2  vols.  cloth,  £i  14^.

Prospectuses,  with  specimen  pages,  sent  post  free  on  application.

WEBSTERS    BRIEF    INTERNATIONAL    DICTIONARY.     A

Pronouncing  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language,  abridged  from  Webster's
International  Dictionary.  With  a  Treatise  on  Pronunciation,  List  of
Prefixes  and  Suffixes,  Rules  for  Spelling,  a  Pronouncing  Vocabulary  of
Proper  Names  in  History,  Geography,  and  Mythology,  and  Tables  of
English  and  Indian  Money,  Weights,  and  Measures.  With  564  pages
and  8cc  Illustrations.  Demy  Svo,  35.

WRIGHT  (T.).  Dictionary  of  Obsolete  and  Provincial  English.
Containing  Words  from  the  English  Writers  previous  to  the  igth  century,
which  are  no  longer  in  use,  or  are  not  used  in  the  same  sense,  and  Words
which  are  now  used  only  in  the  Provincial  Dialects.  Compiled  by  THOMAS

WRIGHT,   M.A.,   F.S.A.,  etc.       2  vols.   5-T.   each.


Educational  Catalogue.  29


FRENCH    CLASS   BOOKS.

BOWER  (A.  M.).  The  Public  Examination  French  Reader.  With
a  Vocabulary  to  every  extract,  suitable  for  all  Students  who  are  preparing
for  a  French  Examination.  By  A.  M.  BOVVER,  F.R.G.S.,  late  Master  in
University  College  School,  etc.  Cloth,  3^.  6d.

BARBIER  (PAUL).  A  Graduated  French  Examination  Course.
By  PAUL  BARBIER,  Lecturer  in  the  South  Wales  University  College,  etc.
Crown  8vo,  3^.

BARRERE  (A.)  Junior  Graduated  French  Course.  Affording  Mate
rials  for  Translation,  Grammar,  and  Conversation.  By  A.  BARRERE,
Professor  R.M.A.,  Woolwich,  is.  6d.

—  Elements  of  French  Grammar  and  First  Steps  in  Idioms.     With

numerous  Exercises  and  a  Vocabulary.      Being  an  Introduction  to  the
Precis  of  Comparative  French  Grammar.     Crown  8vo,  2s.

—  Precis  of  Comparative  French  Grammar  and  Idioms  and  Guide  to

Examinations.     $th  edition,     ^s.  6d.
—  Recits  Militaires.     From   Valmy    (1792)   to  the   Siege  of  Paris  (1870).

With  English   Notes  and   Biographical   Notices.     2nd  edition.     Crown

8vo,  3-y.
CLAPIN    (A.    C.).     French    Grammar   for    Public    Schools.     By   the

REV.  A.  C.  CLAPIN,  M.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  and  Bachelier-

es-lettres  of  the  University  of  France.     Fcap.  8vo.     i^th  edition.     2s.  6d.

Key  to  the  Exen  i^es.     3^.  6d.  net.
-  French  Piimer.     Elementary  French  Grammar  and  Exercises  for  Junior

Forms  in  Public  and  Preparatory  Schools.     Fcap.  8vo.     lofh  edition,     is.

—  Primer    of   French    Philology.     With    Exercises    for    Public    Schools.

6th  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.

—  English  Passages  for  Translation  into  French.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

Key  (for  Tutors  only),  4.5.  net.
DAVIS  (J.  F.)      Army  Examination  Papers  in  French.     Questions  set

at  the  Preliminary  Examinations  for  Sandhurst  and  Woolwich,  from  Nov.,

1876,  to  June,   1890,  with  Vocabulary.     By  j.  F.  DAVIS,  D.LIT.,  M.A.,

Lond.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.
DAVIS    (J.    F.)    and    THOMAS    (F.).       An     Elementary    French

Reader.     Compiled,  with  a  Vocabulary,  by  j.   F.   DAVIS,  M.A.,  D.LIT.,

and   FERDINAND    THOMAS,    Assistant   Examiners   in   the   University   of

London.     Crown  8vo,  2s.
DELILLE'S   GRADUATED    FRENCH   COURSE.


The  Beginner's  own  French  Book.
2s.  Key,  2s.

Easy  French  Poetry  for  Be
ginners.  2S.

French  Grammar.     $s.     Key,  3-r.


Repertoire  des  Prosateurs.  35-.  6d.
Modeles  de  Poe^ie.     3.5-.  6d.
Manuel  Etymologique.     2<-.  6d.
Synopti  al     Table      of     French
Verbs.     6d.


GASC  (F.  E.  A.).  First  French  Book;  being  a  New,  Practical,  and
Easy  Method  of  Learning  the  Elements  of  the  French  Language.  Reset
and  thoroughly  revised.  n6M  thousand.  Crown  8vo,  is.

—  Second  French  Book ;  being  a  Grammar  and  h-xercise  Book,  on  a  new
and  practical  plan,  and  intended  as  a  sequel  to  the  "  First  French  Book."
$2nd  thousand.  Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.


30  George  Bell  &  Sons

GASC  (F.  E.  A.).  Key  to  First  and  Second  French  Books.  $th  edition,
Fcap.  8vo,  3_y.  6d.  net.

—  French  Fables,  for  Beginners,  in  Prose,  with  an  Index  of  all  the  Words

at  the  end  of  the  work.      \6th  thousand.      I2mo,  is.  6d.

—  Select  Fables  of  La  Fontaine,      iqt/i  thousand.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  Histoires   Amusantes    et    Instructives  ;    or,   Selections  of  Complete

Stories  from  the  best  French  modern  authors,  who  have  written  for  the
young.  With  English  notes,  ijth  thousand.  Fcap.  8vo,  2s.

—  Practical    Guide    to    Modern    French    Conversation,    containing:  —

I.  The  most  current  and  useful  Phrases  in  Everyday  Talk.  II.  Every
body's  necessary  Questions  and  Answers  in  Travel-Talk.  igM  edition.
Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  French  Poetry  for  the  Young.     With  Notes,  and  preceded   by  a  few

plain  Rules  of  French  Prosody,     tyh  edition,  revised.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

—  French  Prose  Composition,  Materials  for.     With  copious  footnotes,  and

hints  for  idiomatic  renderings.     2ist  thousand.      Fcap.   8vo,   y.
Key.     2nd  edition.     6s.  net.

—  Prosateurs  Contemporains  ;   or,   Selections  in  Prose  chiefly  from  con

temporary  French  literature.     With  notes,      nth  edition.      I2mo,  3^.  bd.

—  Le  Petit  Compagnon  ;  a  French  Talk-Book  for  Little  Children.      \^th

edition.      i6mo,  is.  6d.

—  French  and  English  Dictionary,  with  upwards  of  Fifteen  Thousand

new  words,  senses,  &c.,  hitherto  unpublished.  $th  edition,  with  numerous
additions  and  corrections.  In  one  vol.  8vo,  cloth,  IOJ.  6d.  In  use  at
Harrow,  Rugby,  Shrewsbury,  &c.

—  Pocket  Dictionary  of  the  French  and  English  Languages  ;  for  the  every

day  purposes  of  Travellers  and  Students.  Containing  more  than  Five
Thousand  modern  and  current  words,  senses,  and  idiomatic  phrases
and  renderings,  not  found  in  any  other  dictionary  of  the  two  languages.
New  edition.  §\st  thousand,  ibmo,  cloth,  2s.  6d.

GOSSET  (A.).  Manual  of  French  Prosody  for  the  use  of  English
Students.  By  ARTHUR  GOSSET,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  New  College,  Oxford.
Crown  8vo,  3^.

"This  is  the  very  book  we  have  been  looking  for.     We  hailed  the  title
with  delight,  and  were  not  disappointed  by  the  perusal.      The  reader  who
has  mastered   the  contents  will  know,  what  not  one  in  a  thousand  of
Englishmen    who  read  French  knows,    the    rules  of  French  poetry."—
Journal  of  Education.

LE  NOUVEAU  TRESOR;  designed  to  facilitate  the  Translation  of
English  into  French  at  Sight.  By  M.  E.  s.  i8///  edition.  Fcap.  8vo,
is.  6d.

STEDMAN  (A.  M.  M.).  French  Examination  Papers  in  Miscel
laneous  Grammar  and  Idioms.  Compiled  by  A.  M.  M.  STEDMAN,  MA.
5//i  edition.  Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

A  Key.    By  G.  A.  SCHRUMPF.    For  Tutors  only.     6s.  net.
Easy  French  Passages  for  Unseen  Translation.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.
-  Easy  French  Exercises  on  Elementary  Syntax.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.
First  French  Lessons.     Crown  8vo,  is.

—  French  Vocabularies  for  Repetition.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.
Steps  to  French.     I2mo,  Sd.


Educational  Catalogue.  3 1


FRENCH   ANNOTATED    EDITIONS.

BALZAC.  Ursula  Mirouet.  By  HONORE  DE  BALZAC.  Edited,  with
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  JAMES  BOIELLE,  B.-es-L.,  Senior  French
Master,  Dulwich  College.  3^.

CLARETIE.  Pierrille.  By  JULES  CLARETIE.  With  27  Illustrations.
Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  JAMES  BOIELLE,  B.-es-L.  2s.  6d.

DAUDET.  La  Belle  Nivernaise.  Histoire  d'un  vieux  bateau  et  de  son
equipage.  By  ALPHONSE  DAUDET.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and
Notes,  by  JAMES  BOIELLE,  B.  -es-L.  With  Six  Illustrations.  2s.

FENELON.     Aventures  de  Telemaque.     Edited   by  c.   j.   DELILLE.

Afth  edition.      Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.
GOMBERT'S  FRENCH  DRAMA.     Re-edited,  with  Notes,  by  F.  E.  A.

GASC.     Sewed,  6d.  each.

MOLIERE.

Le  Misanthrope.  Les  Fourberies  de  Scapin.

L'Avare.  Les  Precieuses  Ridicules.

Le  Bourgeois  Gentilhomme.  L'Ecole  des  Femmes.

Le  Tartuffe.  L'Ecole  des  Maris.

Le  Malade  Imaginaire.  Le  M£decin  Malgre  Lui.

Les  Femmes  Savantes.

RACINE.

La  Thebaide,  ou  Les  Freres   ,  Britannicus.


Ennemis.
Andromaque.
Les  Plaideurs.


Phedre.
Esther.
Athalie.


Iphigenie.

CORNEILLE.

Le  Cid.  Cinna.

Horace.  Polyeucte.

VOLTAIRE.— Zaire.
GREVILLE.      Le  Moulin  Frappier.      By  HENRY  GREVILLE.     Edited,

with  Introduction  and  Notes  by  JAMES  BOIELLE,  JB. -es-L.      3.5-.
HUGO.      Bug  Jargal.      Edited,   with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  JAMES

BOIELLE,   B.-eS-L.       3-T.

LA    FONTAINE.     Select    Fables.     Edited    by    F.    E.    A.    GASC.      igfA

thousand.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.
LAMARTINE.    *Le  Tailleur  de  Pierres  de  Saint-Point.     Edited  with

Notes  by  JAMES  BOIELLE,  B.-CS-L.      btk  thousand.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.
SAIN  TINE.      Picciola.      Edited  by  DR.  DUBUC.      ibth  thousand.     Fcap.

8vo,  is.  6d.
VOLTAIRE.     Charles  XII.     Edited  by  L.  DIREY.     jtA  edition.     Fcap.

8vo,  is.  6d.

GERMAN   CLASS    BOOKS.

BUCHHEIM    (DR.    C.    A.).     German  Prose  Composition.     Consist
ing  of  Selections  from  Modern  English  Writers.     With  grammatical  notes,
;       idiomatic  renderings,  and  general  introduction.    By  c.  A.  BUCHHEIM, PH.D.,
Professor  of  the  German  Language  and  Literature  in  King's  College,  and


32  George  Bell  &  Sons'

Examiner  in  German  to  the  London  University.  \^.th  edition,  enlarged  and
revised.  With  a  list  of  subjects  for  original  composition.  Fcap.  8vo,  4^.  6d.
A  KEY  to  the  1st  and  2nd  parts,  yd  edition.  3.5-.  net.  To  the  3rd  and
4th  parts.  4^.  net.

BUCHHEIM    (DR.    C.    A.).      First  Book  of  German  Prose.     Being

Parts  I.  and  II  of  the  above.     With  Vocabulary  by  H.  R.    Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

CLAPIN    (A.    C.).     A  German  Grammar  for  Public  Schools.     By  the

REV.  A.  C.  CLAPIN,  and  F.  HOLL-MULLER,  Assistant  Master  at  the  Bruton

Grammar  School.     6th  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

—  A  German  Primer.     With  Exercises.     2nd  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.
German.       The    Candidate's     Vade    Mecum.       Five     Hundred     Easy
Sentences  and    Idioms.     By    an   Army   Tutor.      Cloth,    is.     For  Army
Prelim.  Exam.

LANGE  (F.).  A  Complete  German  Course  for  Use  in  Public  Schools.
By  F.  LANGE,  PH.D.,  Professor  K.M.A.  Woolwich,  Examiner  in  German
to  the  College  of  Preceptors,  London  ;  Examiner  in  German  at  the  Victoria
University,  Manchester.  Crown  8vo.

Concise  German  Grammar.  Writh  special  reference  to  Phonology,
Comparative  Philology,  English  and  German  Equivalents  and  Idioms.
Comprising  Materials  for  Translation,  Grammar,  and  Conversation.
Elementary,  2s.  ;  Intermediate,  2s.  ;  Advanced,  3-r.  6d.
Progressive  German  Examination  Course.  Comprising  the  Elements
of  German  Grammar,  an  Historic  Sketch  of  the  Teutonic  Languages,
English  and  German  Equivalent,  Materials  for  Translation,  Dictation,
Extempore  Conversation,  and  Complete  Vocabularies.  I.  Elementary
Course,  2s.  II.  Intermediate  Course,  2s.  III.  Advanced  Course.
Second  revised  edition,  is.  6d.

Elementary  German  Reader.  A  Graduated  Collection  of  Readings  in
Prose  and  Poetry.  With  English  Notes  and  a  Vocabulary.  ^th
edition,  is.  6d.

Advanced  German  Reader.  A  Graduated  Collection  of  Readings  in
Prose  and  Poetry.  With  English  Notes  by  F.  LANGE,  PH.D.,  and
j.  F.  DAVIS,  I).  LIT.  2nd  edition.  $s.

MOR1CH    (R.   J  ).      German    Examination    Papers    in    Miscellaneous

Grammar  and  Idioms.     By  R.  J.  MORICH,  Manchester  Grammar  School.

2nd  edition.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.     A  Key,  for  Tutors  only.      $s.  net.  <.,--•

STOCK    (DR.).      Wortfolge,  or  Rules  and  Exercises  on  the  order  of  Words

in  German   Sentences.      With   a  Vocabulary.     By   the   late   FREDERICK

STOCK,  D.LIT.,  M.A.      Fcap.  8vo,    Is.  6d.

KLUGE'S  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  German  Language.
Translated  by  j.  F.  DAVIS,  D.LIT.  (Lond.).  Crown  410,  i8s.

GERMAN   ANNOTATED    EDITIONS.

AUERBACH    (B.).     Auf  Wache.     Novelle  von  BFRTHOLD  AUERBACH.

Der  Gefrorene  Kuss.     Novelle  von  OTTO  ROQUETTE.     Edited  by  A.  A.

MACDONELL,  M.A.,  PH.D.      2nd  edition.     Crown  8vo,  2s.
BENEDIX    (J.    R.).      Doktor  Wespe.     Lustspiel  in  fiinf  Aufziigen  von

JULIUS    RODERICK    BENEDIX.       Edited    by    PROFESSOR    F.    LANGE,    PH.D.

Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.


Educational  Catalogue.  33

EBERS  (G.).  EineFrage.  Idyll  von  GEORG  EBERS.  Edited  by  F.  STORR,
B.A.,  Chief  Master  of  Modern  Subjects  in  Merchant  Taylors'  School.
Crown  8vo,  2s.

FREYTAG  (G.).  Die  Journalisten.  Lustspiel  von  GUSTAV  FREYTAG.
Edited  by  PROFESSOR  F.  LANGE,  PH.D.  Ajhrevised  edition.  Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

—  SOLL    UND    HABEN.     Roman  von  GUSTAV  FREYTAG.     Edited  by

w.  HANBY  CRUMP,  M.A.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

GERMAN  BALLADS  from  Uhland,  Goethe,  and  Schiller.  With  Intro
ductions,  Copious  and  Biographical  Notices.  Edited  by  c.  L.  BIELEFELD.
/\th  edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

GERMAN  EPIC  TALES  IN  PROSE.  I.  Die  Nibelungen,  von
A.  F.  c.  VILMAR.  II.  Walther  und  Hildegund,  von  ALBERT  RICHTER.
Edited  by  KARL  NEUHAUS,  PH.D.,  the  International  College,  Isleworth.
Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.

GOETHE.  Hermann  und  Dorothea.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Argu
ments.  By  E.  BELL,  M.A.,  and  E.  WOLFEL.  2nd  edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  is.  6d.

GOETHE.  FAUST.  Part  I.  German  Text  with  Hay  ward's  Prose
Translation  and  Notes.  Revised,  With  Introduction  by  c.  A.  BUCHHEIM,
PH.D.,  Professor  of  German  Language  and  Literature  at  King's  College,
London.  Small  post  Svo,  $s.

GUTZKOW  (K.).  Zopf  und  Schwert.  Lustspiel  von  KARL  GUTZKOW.
Edited  by  PROFESSOR  F.  LANGE,  PH.D.  Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d.

KEY'S  FABELN  FUR  KINDER.  Illustrated  by  o.  SPECKTER.
Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  Grammatical  Summary,  Words,  and  a  com
plete  Vocabulary,  by  PROFESSOR  F.  LANGE,  PH.D.  Crown  Svo,  is.  6d.

—  The  same.  With  a  Phonetic  Introduction,  and  Phonetic  Transcription  of
the  Text.  By  PROFESSOR  F.  LANGE,  PH.D.  Crown  Svo,  zs.

HEYSE  (P.).  Hans  Lange.  Schauspiel  von  PAUL  HEYSE.  Edited  by
A.  A.  MACDONELL,  M.A.,  PH.D.,  Taylorian  Teacher,  Oxford  University.
Crown  Svo,  zs.

HOFFMANN  (E.  T.  A.).  Meister  Martin,  der  Kiifner.  Erzahlung
von  E.  T.  A.  HOFFMANN.  Edited  by  F.  LANGE,  PH.D.  2nd  edition.
Crown  Svo,  is.  6d.

MOSER  (G.  VON).  Der  Bibliothekar.  Lustspiel  von  G.  VON  MOSER.
Edited  by  F.  LANGE,  PH.D.  ^th  edition.  Crown  Svo,  2s.

ROQUETTE    (O.).     See  Auerbach.

SCHEFFEL  (V.  VON).  Ekkehard.  Erzahlung  des  zehnten  Jahr-
hunderts,  von  VICTOR  VON  SCHEFFEL.  Abridged  edition,  with  Intro
duction  and  Notes  by  HERMAN  HAGER,  PH.D.,  Lecturer  in  the  German
Language  and  Literature  in  The  Owens  College,  Victoria  University,
Manchester.  Crown  Svo,  3-f.

SCHILLER'S  Wallenstein.  Complete  Text,  comprising  the  Weimar
Prologue,  Lager,  Piccolomini,  and  Wallenstein's  Tod.  Edited  by  DR.
BUCHHEIM,  Professor  of  German  in  King's  College,  London.  6/h  edition.
Fcap.  Svo,  5^.  Or  the  Lager  and  Piccolomini,  2s.  6d.  Wallenstein's
Tod,  zs.  6d.

—  Maid  of  Orleans.     With  English  Notes  by  DR.  WILHELM  WAGNER.    -$rd

edition.     Fcap.  Svo,  is.  6d.

—  Maria  Stuart.     Edited  by  v.   KASTNER,  B.-es-L.,   Lecturer  on  French

Language  and  Literature  at  Victoria  University,  Manchester,     ^rd  edition.
Fcap.  Svo,  is.  6d.


34  George  Bell  &  Sons

ITALIAN.

CLAPIN    (A.    C.).     Italian  Primer.     With  Exercises.     By  the  REV.  A.  c.

CLAPIN,  M.A.,  B.-es-L.     yd  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  is.
DANTE.     The  Inferno.     A  Literal  Prose  Translation,  with  the  Text  of  the

Original  collated  with  the  best  editions,  printed  on  the  same  page,  and

Explanatory  Notes.     By  JOHN  A.  CARLYLE,  M.D.     With  Portrait.     2nd

eaition.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.

—  The  Purgatorio.     A  Literal  Prose  Translation,  with  the  Text  of  Bianchi

printed  on  the  same  page,  and  Explanatory  Notes.     By  w.  s.   DUGUALE.
Small  post  8vo,  $s.

BELL'S    MODERN   TRANSLATIONS.

A  Series  of  Translations  from  Modern  Languages,  with  Memoirs,

Introductions,  etc.      Crown  Sv0,  is.  each.
GOETHE.     Egmont.     Translated  by  ANNA  SWANWICK.     With  Memoir.

—  Iphigenia  in  Tauris.     Translated  by  ANNA  SWANWICK.     With  Memoir.
HAUFF.     The  Caravan.     Translated  by  s.  MENDEL.     With  Memoir.

—  The  Inn  in  the  Spessart.     Translated  by  s.   MENDEL.     With  Memoir,
LESSING.     Laokoon.     Translated  by  E.  c.  BEASLEY.     With  Memoir.

—  Nathan  the  Wise.     Translated  by  R.  DILLON  BOYLAN.     With  Memoir.

—  Minna   von    Barnhelm.      Translated  by   ERNEST   BELL,    M.A.      With

Memoir.

MOLIERE.  The  Misanthrope.  Translated  by  c.  HERON  WALL.  With
Memoir.

The  Doctor  in  Spite  of  Himself.  (Le  Medecin  malgre  lui).  Trans
lated  by  C.  HERON  WALL.  With  Memoir.

—  Tartuffe;  or,  The  Impostor.     Translated  by  c.  HERON  WALL.     With

Memoir.

-  The  Miser.     (L'Avare).     Translated  by  c.  HERON  WALL.    With  Memoir.
The   Shopkeeper  turned   Gentleman.      (Le  Bourgeois  Gentilhomme).

Translated  by  C.  HERON  WALL.     With  Memoir.
RACINE.      Athalie.     Translated   by   R.    BRUCE   BOSWELL,    M.A.      With

Memoir.

—  Esther.     Translated  by  R.  BRUCE  BOSWELL,  M.A.     With  Memoir.
SCHILLER.     William    Tell.     Translated  by  SIR   THEODORE   MARTIN,

K.C.B.,  LL.D.     New  edition,  entirely  revised.     With  Memoir.

—  The  Maid  of  Orleans.    Translated  by  ANNA  SWANWICK.    With  Memoir.
Mary  Stuart.     Translated  by  J.  MELLISH.     With  Memoir.

,,.%  For   other  Translations  of   Modern   Languages,   see  the  Catalogue   of
Bohn's  Libraries,  which  will  be  forwarded  on  application.

SCIENCE,    TECHNOLOGY,    AND    ART.

CHEMISTRY.

STOCKHARDT  (J.  A.).  Experimental  Chemistry.  Founded  on  the
work  of  J.  A.  STOCKHARDT.  A  Handbook  for  the  Study  of  Science  by
Simple  Experiments.  By  c.  w.  H EATON,  F.I.C.,  F.c.s.,  Lecturer  in
Chemistry  in  the  Medical  School  of  Charing  Cross  Hospital,  Examiner  in
Chemistry  to  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  etc.  Revised  edition.  55.


Educational  Catalogue.  35

WILLIAMS  (W.  M.).  The  Framework  of  Chemistry.  Part  I.  Typical
Facts  and  Elementary  Theory.  By  w.  M.  WILLIAMS,  M.A.,  St.  John's
College,  Oxford  ;  Science  Master,  King  Henry  VIII. 's  School,  Coventry.
Crown  8vo,  paper  boards,  <)d.  net.


BOTANY.

EGERTON-WARBURTON  (G.).  Names  and  Synonyms  of  British
Plants.  By  the  REV.  G.  EGERTON-WARBURTON.  Fcap.  8vo,  3-r.  6d.
(Uniform  with  Havivard* s  Botanisfs  Pocket  Book.)

HAYWARD  (W.  R.).  The  Botanist's  Pocket-Book.  Containing  in
a  tabulated  form,  the  chief  characteristics  of  British  Plants,  with  the
botanical  names,  soil,  or  situation,  colour,  growth,  and  time  of  flowering
of  every  plant,  arranged  under  its  own  order  ;  with  a  copious  Index.
By  w.  R.  HAYWARD.  6th  edition,  revised.  Fcap.  8vo,  cloth  limp,  4J-.  6d.

MASSEE  (G.).  British  Fungus-Flora.  A  Classified  Text-Book  of
Mycology.  By  GEORGE  MASSES,  Author  of  "  The  Plant  World."  With
numerous  Illustrations.  3  vols.  post  8vo.  Vols.  I.,  II.,  and  III.  ready,
7*.  6d.  each.  Vol.  IV.  in  the  Press.

SOWERBY'S  English  Botany.  Containing  a  Description  and  Life-size
Drawing  of  every  British  Plant.  Edited  and  brought  up  to  the  present
standard  of  scientific  knowledge,  by  T.  BOSWELL  (late  SYME),  LL.D.,
F.L.S.,  etc.  yd  edition,  entirely  revised.  With  Descriptions  of  all  the
Species  by  the  Editor,  assisted  by  N.  E.  BROWN.  12  vols.,  with  1,937
coloiired  plates,  £24.  $s.  in  cloth,  £26  us.  in  half-morocco,  and  ^30  9.5-.
in  whole  morocco.  Also  in  89  parts,  $s.,  except  Part  89,  containing
an  Index  to  the  whole  work,  7.5-.  6d.

*%  A  Supplement,  to  be  completed  in  8  or  9  parts,  is  now  publishing.
Parts  I.,  II.,  and  III.  ready,  $s.  each,  or  bound  together,  making
Vol.  XIII.  of  the  complete  work,  ijs.

TURNBULL  (R.).  Index  of  British  Plants,  according  to  the  London
Catalogue  (Eighth  Edition),  including  the  Synonyms  used  by  the  principal
authors,  an  Alphabetical  List  of  English  Names,  etc.  By  ROBERT
TURNBULL.  Paper  cover,  2s.  6d.,  cloth,  3^.


GEOLOGY.

UKES-BROWNE  (A.  J.).  Student's  Handbook  of  Physical  Geo
logy.  By  A.  j.  JUKES-BROWNE,  B.A.,  F.G.s.,  of  the  Geological  Survey  of
England  and  Wales.  With  numerous  Diagrams  and  Illustrations.  2nd
edition,  much  enlarged,  Js.  6d.

Student's  Handbook  of  Historical  Geology.    With  numerous  Diagrams
and  Illustrations.     6s.

"An  admirably  planned  and  well  executed  '  Handbook  of  Historical
Geology.'  " — -Journal  of  Education.
—  The  Building  of  the  British  Isles.    A  Study  in  Geographical  Evolution.
With  Maps.     2nd  edition  revised,     "js.  6d.


36  George  Bell  &  Sons


MEDICINE.

CARRINGTON  (R.  E.),  and  LANE  (W.  A.).  A  Manual  of  Dissec
tions  of  the  Human  Body.  By  the  late  R.  E.  CARRINGTON,  M.I>.
(Lond.),  F.R.C.P.,  Senior  Assistant  Physician,  Guy's  Hospital.  2nd
edition.  Revised  and  enlarged  by  w.  ARBUTHNOT  LANE,  M.S.,  F.R.C.S.,
Assistant  Surgeon  to  Guy's  Hospital,  etc.  Crown  8vo,  gs.

"  As  solid  a  piece  of  work  as  ever  was  put  into  a  book  ;  accurate  from
beginning  to  end,  and  unique  of  its  kind." — British  Medical  Jotirnal.

HILTON'S  Rest  and  Pain.  Lectures  on  the  Influence  of  Mechanical  and
Physiological  Rest  in  the  Treatment  of  Accidents  and  Surgical  Diseases,
and  the  Diagnostic  Value  of  Pain.  By  the  late  JOHN  HILTON,  F.R.S.,
F.R.C.S.,  etc.  Edited  by  w.  H.  A.  JACOBSON,  M.A.,  M.CH.  (Oxon.),
F.R.C.S.  yh  edition,  gs.

HOBLYN'S  Dictionary  of  Terms  used  in  Medicine  and  the  Collateral
Sciences.      12th  edition.     Revised  and  enlarged  by  j.  A.  P.  PRICE,  B.
M.D.  (Oxon.).     los.  6d.

LANE  (W.  A.).  Manual  of  Operative  Surgery.  For  Practitioners  am
Students.  By  w.  ARBUTHNOT  LANE,  M.B.,  M.S.,  F.R.C.S.,  Assistan
Surgeon  to  Guy's  Hospital.  Crown  8vo,  8s.  6d.

SHARP  (W.)  Therapeutics  founded  on  Antipraxy.  By  WILLIAM
SHARP,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  Demy  8vo,  6s.

BELL'S  AGRICULTURAL  SERIES.

In  crown  %vo,  Illustrated,  160  pages,  cloth,  2s.  6d.  each.

CHEAL  (J.).  Fruit  Culture.  A  Treatise  on  Planting,  Growing,  Storage
of  Hardy  Fruits  for  Market  and  Private  Growers.  By  J.  CHEAL,  F.R.H.S.
Member  of  Fruit  Committee,  Royal  Hort.  Society,  etc.

FREAM  (DR.).  Soils  and  their  Properties.  By  DR.  WILLIAM  FREAM
B.sc.  (Lond.).,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  F.S.S.,  Associate  of  the  Surveyor's  Institu
tion,  Consulting  Botanist  to  the  British  Dairy  Farmers'  Association  am
the  Royal  Counties  Agricultural  Society  ;  Prof,  of  Nat.  Hist,  in  Downton
College,  and  formerly  in  the  Royal  Agric.  Coll.,  Cirencester.

GRIFFITHS  (DR.).    Manures  and  their  Uses.    By  DR.  A.  B.  GRIFFITHS
F.R.S.E.,  F.C.S.,  late  Principal  of  the  School  of  Science,  Lincoln  ;  Membre
de  la  Societe  Chimique  de  Paris  ;  Author  of  "  A  Treatise  on  Manures,
etc. ,  etc.     In  use  at  Downton  College.

—  The  Diseases  of  Crops  and  their  Remedies.

MALDEN  (W.  J.).  Tillage  and  Implements.  By  w.  j.  MAI.DKN
Prof,  of  Agriculture  in  the  College,  Downton.

SHELDON    (PROF.).     The    Farm   and   the   Dairy.     By   PROFESSO
j.   p.  SHELDON,  formerly  of  the  Royal  Agricultural  College,  and  of  th
Downton    College   of    Agriculture,    late   Special    Commissioner   of    the
Canadian  Government .     In  use  at  Downton  College.

Specially  adapted  for  Agricultural  Classes.     Crown  8vo.     Illustrated.     I*,  each.
Practical  Dairy  Farming.     By  PROFESSOR  SHELDON.     Reprinted  from  th<

Author's  larger  work  entitled  "The  Farm  and  the  Dairy."
Practical  Fruit  Growing.      By  j.   CHEAL,  F.R.H.S.      Reprinted  from  th(

author's  larger  work,  entitled  "  Fruit  Culture."


Educational  Catalogue.  37


TECHNOLOGICAL   HANDBOOKS.

Edited  by  Sir  H.  Tntetnan  Wood.
Specially  adapted  for  candidates  in  the  examinations  of  the  City  Guilds

Institute.     Illustrated  and  uniformly  printed  in  small  post  8vo.
BEAUMONT  (R.).     Woollen  and  Worsted  Cloth  Manufacture.     By
ROBERTS  BEAUMONT,  Professor  of  Textile  Industry,  Yorkshire  College,
Leeds  ;    Examiner  in  Cloth  Weaving  to  the  City  and  Guilds  of  London
Institute.     2nd  edition.     Js.  6d.

BENEDIKT  (R),  and  KNECHT  (E.).  Coal-tar  Colours,  The
Chemistry  of.  With  special  reference  to  their  application  to  Dyeing,  etc.
By  DR.  R.  BENEDIKT,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Vienna.
Translated  by  E.  KNECHT,  PH.D.  of  the  Technical  College,  Bradford.
2nd  and  enlarged  edition,  6s.  6d.
CROOKES(W.).  Dyeing  and  Tissue-Printing.  By  WILLIAM  CROOKES,

F.R.S.,  V.P.C.S.       5-T.

GADD  (VV.  L.).     Soap  Mauufacture.     By  w.  LAWRENCE  GADD,  F.I.C.,

F.c.S.,  Registered  Lecturer  on  Soap-Making  and  the  Technology  of  Oils

and  Fats,  also  on  Bleaching,  Dyeing,  and  Calico  Printing,  to  the  City  and

Guilds  of  London  Institute.     5^.
HELLYER    (S.    S.).     Plumbing:    Its  Principles  and    Practice.     By

S.  STEVENS  HELLYER.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     5-r.
HORNBY   (J.).      Gas    Manufacture.      By  j.   HORNBY,    F.I.C.,  Lecturer

under  the  City  and  Guilds  of  London  Institute.  [Preparing.

HURST  (G.H.).     Silk-Dyeing  and  Finishing.     By  G.  H.  HURST,  F.C.S. ,

Lecturer  at  the  Manchester  Technical  School,  Silver  Medallist,  City  and

Guilds  of  London  Institute.     With  Illustrations  and  numerous  Coloured

Patterns,     js.  6d.
JACOBI   (C.   T.).     Printing.     A  Practical  Treatise.      By  c.    T.   JACOBI,

Manager  of  the  Chiswick  Press,  Examiner  in  Typography  to  the  City  and

Guilds  of  London  Institute.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     $s.
MARSDEN  (R.).     Cotton  Spinning:   Its  Development,    Principles,

and  Practice,  with  Appendix  on  Steam  Boilers  and  Engines.     By  R.

MARSDEN,  Editor  of  the  "Textile  Manufacturer."     qth  edition.     6s.  6d.
—  Cotton  Weaving     With  numerous  Illustrations.  [/«  the  press.

POWELL    (H.),    CHANCE    (H.),    and    HARRIS    (H.    G.).       Glass

Manufacture.     Introductory  Essay,  by  H.  POWELL,  B.A.  (Whitefriars

Glass   Works) ;    Sheet  Glass,  by  HENRY  CHANCE,  M.A.  (Chance  Bros.,

Birmingham)  :    Plate    Glass,    by  H.    G.   HARRIS,   Assoc.   Memb.    Inst.

C.E.     3j.  6d.
ZAEHNSDORF   (J.    W.)      Bookbinding.      By    j.    w.    ZAEHNSDORF,

Examiner  in  Bookbinding  to  the  City  and  Guilds  of  London  Institute.

With  8  Coloured  Plates  and  numerous  Diagrams.     2nd  edition ,  revised

and  enlarged,     $s.

%*  Complete  List  of  Technical  Books  on  Application.

MUSIC.

BANISTER  (H.    C.).     A  Text  Book  of  Music  :     By  H.  c.  BANISTER,
Professor  of  Harmony  and  Composition  at  the  R.  A.  of  Music,  at  the  Guild-


38  George  Bell  &  Sons

BANISTER    (H.    C.)— continued.

hall  School  of  Music,  and  at  the  Royal  Normal  Coll.  and  Acad.  of  Music
for  the  Blind.      i$th  edition.      Fcap.  8vo.     $s.

This  Manual  contains  chapters  on  Notation,  Harmony,  and  Counterpoint ;
Modulation,  Rhythm,  Canon,  Fugue,  Voices,  and  Instruments  ;  together
with  exercises  on  Harmony,  an  Appendix  of  Examination  Papers,  and  a
copious  Index  and  Glossary  of  Musical  Terms.

—  Lectures  on  Musical  Analysis.  Embracing  Sonata  Form,  Fugue,
etc.,  Illustrated  by  the  Works  of  the  Classical  Masters.  2nd  edition,
revised.  Crown  8vo,  7*.  6d.

—  Musical  Art  and  Study  :    Papers  for  Musicians.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.

CHATER  (THOMAS).  Scientific  Voice,  Artistic  Singing,  and
Effective  Speaking.  A  Treatise  on  the  Organs  of  the  Voice,  their
Natural  Functions,  Scientific  Development,  Proper  Training,  and  Artistic
Use.  By  THOMAS  CHATER.  With  Diagrams.  Wide  fcap.  2s.  6d.

HUNT  (H.  G.  BONAVIA).  A  Concise  History  of  Music,  from  the
Commencement  of  the  Christian  era  to  the  present  time.  For  the  use  ot
Students.  By  REV.  H.  G.  BONAVIA  HUNT,  Mus.  Doc.  Dublin  ;  Warden
of  Trinity  College,  London  ;  and  Lecturer  on  Musical  History  in  the  same
College.  12th  edition,  revised  to  date  (1893).  Fcap.  8vo,  y.  6d.

ART.

BARTER  (S.)  Manual  Instruction— Woodwork.  By  s.  BARTER
Organizer  and  Instructor  for  the  London  School  Board,  and  to  the  Joint
Committee  on  Manual  Training  of  the  School  Board  for  London,  the  City
and  Guilds  of  London  Institute,  and  the  Worshipful  Company  of  Drapers.
With  over  300  Illustrations.  Fcap.  410,  cloth.  'js.  6d.

BELL  (SIR  CHARLES).  The  Anatomy  and  Philosophy  of  Expres
sion,  as  connected  with  the  Fine  Arts.  By  SIR  CHARLES  BELL,  K.H.
7///  edition,  revised.  $s.

BRYAN'S  Biographical  and  Critical  Dictionary  of  Painters  and
Engravers.  With  a  List  of  Ciphers,  Monograms,  and  Marks.  A  new
Edition,  thoroughly  Revised  and  Enlarged.  By  R.  E.  GRAVES  and
WALTER  ARMSTRONG.  2  volumes.  Imp.  8vo,  .buckram,  3/.  35.
CHEVREUL  on  Colour.  Containing  the  Principles  of  Harmony  and  Con
trast  of  Colours,  and  their  Application  to  the  Arts,  yd  edition,  with
Introduction.  Index  and  several  Plates.  $s. — With  an  additional  series
of  1 6  Plates  in  Colours,  Js.  6d.

DELAMOTTE   (P.    H.).     The  Art  of  Sketching  from  Nature.    By  P.
H.  DELAMOTTE,  Professor  of  Drawing  at  King's  College,  London.     Illus
trated  by  Twenty-four  Woodcuts  and  Twenty  Coloured  Plates,  arranged
progressively,  from  Water-colour  Drawings  by  PROUT,  E.  w.  COOKE,  R.A.,
GIRTIN,  VARLEY,  DE  WINT,  and  the  Author.    New  edition.    Imp.  4to,  2\s.
FLAXMAN'S   CLASSICAL   COMPOSITIONS,  reprinted  in  a  cheap
form  for  the  use  of  Art  Students.     Oblong  paper  covers,  2s.  dd.  each.
The  Iliad  of  Homer.     39  Designs.
The  Odyssey  of  Homer.     34  Designs.
The  Tragedies  of  ^Eschylus.     36  Designs.
The    "Works    and    Days"    and    "  Theogony "  of  Hesiod.      37

Designs.
Select  Compositions  from  Dante's  Divine  Drama.     37  Designs.


Educational  Catalogue.  39

FLAXMAN'S  Lectures  on  Sculpture,  as  delivered  before  the  President
and  Members  of  the  Royal  Academy.  With  Portrait  and  53  plates.  6s.

HEATON  (MRS.).  A  Concise  History  of  Painting.  By  the  late  MRS.
CHARLES  HEATON.  New  edition.  Revised  by  COSMO  MONKHOUSE.  5-y.

LELAND  (C,  G.).  Drawing  and  Designing.  In  a  series  of  Lessons
for  School  use  and  Self  Instruction.  By  CHARLES  G.  LELAND,  M.A.,
F.  R.L.S.  Paper  cover,  is.;  or  in  cloth,  is.6d.

—  Leather  Work :  Stamped,  Moulded,  and  Cut,  Cuir-Bouille,  Sewn,  etc.
With  numerous  Illustrations.  Fcap.  4to,  5^.

-  Manual  of  Wood  Carving.  By  CHARLES  G.  LELAND,  M.A.,  F.R.L.S.
Revised  by  j.  j.  HOLTZAPFFEL,  A.M.  INST.C.E.  With  numerous  Illustra
tions.  Fcap.  410,  5-$".

—  Me:al  Work      With  numerous  Illustrations.     Fcap.  4to,  $s.
LEONARDO    DA    VINCI'S  Treatise  on  Painting.     Translated  from

the    Italian  by  j.    F.    RIGAUD,   R.A.       With  a  Life  of  Leonardo  and  an
Account  of  his  Works,  by  j.  w.  BROWN.     With  numerous  Plates.     $s.

MOODY  (  F.  W.).  Lectures  and  Lessons  on  Art.  By  the  late  F.  w.
MOODY,  Instructor  in  Decorative  Art  at  South  Kensington  Museum.  With
Diagrams  to  illustrate  Composition  and  other  matters.  A  new  and  cheaper
edition.  Demy  8vo,  sewed,  q.s.  6d.

WHITE  (GLEESON).  Practical  Designing:  A  Handbook  on  the
Preparation  of  Working  Drawings,  showing  the  Technical  Methods  em
ployed  in  preparing  them  for  the  Manufacturer  and  the  Limits  imposed  on
the  Design  by  the  Mechanism  of  Reproduction  and  the  Materials  employed.
Edited  by  GLEESON  WHITE.  Freely  Illustrated.  2nd  edition.  Crown
8vo,  6s.  net.

Content^  .-—Bookbinding,  by  H.  ORRINSMITH — Carpets,  by  ALEXANDER
MILLAR — Drawing  for  Reproduction,  by  the  Editor — Pottery,  by  w.  p.
RIX — Metal  Work,  by  R.  LL.  RATHBONE — Stained  Glass,  by  SELWYN
IMAGE — Tiles,  by  OWEN  CARTER — Woven  Fabrics,  Printed  Fabrics,  and
Floorcloths,  by  ARTHUR  SILVER— Wall  Papers,  by  G.  c.  HAITE.

MENTAL,    MORAL,   AND    SOCIAL
SCIENCES.

PSYCHOLOGY   AND    ETHICS.

ANTONINUS  (M.  Aurelius).  The  Thoughts  of.  Translated  literally,
with  N'otes,  Biographical  Sketch,  Introductory  Essay  on  the  Philosophy,
and  Index,  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.  Revised  edition.  Small  post  8vo,
3.5-.  6d.,  or  new  edition  on  Handmade  paper,  buckram,  6s.

BACON'S  Novum  Organum  and  Advancement  of  Learning.  Edited,
with  Notes,  by  j.  DEVEY,  M.A.  Small  post  8vo,  $s.

EPICTETUS.  The  Discourses  of.  With  the  Encheiridion  and  Frag
ments.  Translated  with  Notes,  a  Life  of  Epictetus,  a  View  of  his  Philo
sophy,  and  Index,  by  GEORGE  LONG,  M.A.  Small  post  8vo,  $s.,  or  new
edition  on  Handmade  paper,  2  vols.,  buckram,  los.  6d.

KANT'S  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  Translated  by  j.  M.  D.  MEIKLEJOHN,
Professor  of  Education  at  St.  Andrew's  University.  Small  post  8vo,  $s.

—  Prolegomena  and    Metaphysical  Foundations    of   Science.      With

Life.     Translated  by  E.  BELFORT  BAX.     Small  post  8vo,  5-r.


4O  George  Bell  &  Sons

LOCKE'S  Philosophical  Works.  Edited  by  j.  A.  ST.  JOHN.  2  vols.
Small  post  8vo,  3^.  6d.  each.

RYLAND  (F .).  The  Student's  Manual  of  Psychology  and  Ethics,
designed  chiefly  for  the  London  B.A.  and  B.Sc.  By  F.  RYLAND,  M.A.,
late  Scholar  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  Cloth,  red  edges.  5///
edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  With  lists  of  books  for  Students,  and
Examination  Papers  set  at  London  University.  Crown  8vo,  $s.  6d.

—  Ethics  :    An  Introductory   Manual  for  the  use  of  University   Students.

With  an  Appendix  containing  List  of  Books  recommended,  and  Exami
nation  Questions.  Crown  8vo,  35-.  6d.

SCHOPENHAUER  on  the  Fourfold  Root  of  the  Principle  of  Suffi
cient  Reason,  and  On  the  Will  in  Nature.  Translated  by  MADAME

HILLEBRAND.       Small  post  8vO,  5-T.

—  Es&ays.     Selected  and  Translated.     With  a    Biographical  Introduction

and  Sketch  of  his  Philosophy,  by  E.  BELFORT  BAX.     Small"  post  8vo,  $s.
SMITH  (Adam).     Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments.     With  Memoir  of  the

Author  by  DUGALD  STEWART.      Small  post  8vo,  35.  6d.

SPINOZA'S  Chief  Works.  Translated  with  Introduction,  by  R.  H.  M.
ELWES.  2  vols.  Small  post  8yo,  $s.  each.

Vol.  I. — Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus — Political  Treatise.
II. — Improvement  of  the  Understanding — Ethics — Letters.

HISTORY   OF   PHILOSOPHY.

BAX  (E.  B.).  Handbook  of  the  History  of  Philosophy.  By  E.  BEL-
FORT  BAX.  2nd  edition,  revised.  Small  post  8vo,  5-r.

DRAPER  (J.  W  ).  A  History  of  the  Intellectual  Development  of
Europe.  By  JOHN  WILLIAM  DRAPER,  M.D.,  LL.D.  With  Index.  2
vols.  Small  post  8vo,  $s  each.

HEGEL'S  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  History.  Translated  by
j.  SIBREE,  M.A.  vSmall  post  8vo,  5.?.

LAW   AND    POLITICAL   ECONOMY.

KENT'S  Commentary  on  International  Law.  Edited  by  j.  T.  ABDY,
LL.D.,  Judge  of  County  Courts  and  Law  Professor  at  Gresham  College,
late  Regius  Professor  of  Laws  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  2nd
ed-tion*  revised  and  brought  down  to  a  recent  date.  Crown  8vo,  lo.r.  6d.

LAWRENCE  (T.  J.).  "Essays  on  some  Disputed  Questions  in
Modern  International  Law.  By  T.  j.  LAWRENCE,  M.A.,  LL.M.  2nd
edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  Crown  8vo,  6s.

—  Handbook  of  Public  International  Law.     2nd  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  3^.
MONTESQUIEU'S    Spirit    of   Laws.      A   New    Edition,    revised   and

corrected,  with  D'Alembert's  Analysis,  Additional  Notes,  and  a  Memoir,
by  J.  v.  TRITCHARD,  A.M.  2  vols.  Small  post  8vo,  3-y.  6d.  each.

RICARDO  on  the  Principles  of  Political  Economy  and  Taxation.
Edited  by  E.  C.  K.  CONNER,  M.A.,  Lecturer  in  University  College,
Liverpool.  Small  post  8vo,  $s.

SMITH  (Adam).  Tne  Wealth  of  Nations.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature
and  Causes  of.  Reprinted  from  the  Sixth  Edition,  with  an  Introduction
by  ERNEST  BELFORT  BAX.  2  vols.  Small  post  8vo,  3-r.  6d.  each.


Educational  Catalogue.  41


HISTORY.

BOWES  (A.).      A   Practical    Synopsis   of  English  History;    or,    A

General  Summary  of  Dates  and  Events.      By  ARTHUR    BOWES.       IO/A

edition.     Revised  and  brought  down  to  the  present  time.      Demy  8vo,  is.
COXE    (W.).      History    of  the    House    of    Austria,    1218-1792.      By

ARCHDN.  COXE,   M.A.,  F.R.s.     Together  with  a  Continuation  from  the

Accession  of  Francis  I.  to  the  Revolution  of  1848.     4  vols.     Small  post

8vo.     3-r.  6d.  each.
DENTON   (W.).     England  in  the    Fifteenth   Century.     By  the  late

REV.  w.  DENTON,  M.A.,  Worcester  College,  Oxford.     Demy  8vo,  I2s.
DYER  (Dr.  T.  H.).     History  of  Modern  Europe,  from  the  Taking  of

Constantinople  to  the  Establishment  of  the  German  Empire,  A.D.   1453-

1871.     By  DR.  T.  H.  DYER.     A  new  edition.      In  5  vols.     £2  I2f.  6d.
GIBBON'S- Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.     Complete  and

Unabridged,  with  Variorum  Notes.     Edited  by  an  English  Churchman.

With  2  Maps.     7  vols.     Small  post  8vo,  3^.  6d.  each.
GUIZOT'S  History  of  the  English  Revolution  of  1640.     Translated  by

WILLIAM  HAZLITT.     Small  post  8vo,  3-T.  6</.
—  History  of  Civilization,  from  the  "Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire   to  the

French  Revolution.     Translated  by  WILLIAM  HAZLITT.     3  vols.     Small

post  8vo,  3.?.  6d.  each.
HENDERSON  (E.  F.).     Select  Historical  Documents  of  the  Middle

Ages.     Including   the  most  famous    Charters   relating  to  England,  the

Empire,  the  Church,  etc.,  from    the  sixth   to   the    fourteenth   centuries.

Translated  and  edited,  with  Introductions,  by  ERNEST  F.   HENDERSON,

A.B.,  A.M.,  PH.D.     Small  post  8vo,  5.5-.

—  A  History  of  Germany  in  the  Middle  Ages.     Post  8vo,  7*.  6d.  net.
HOOPER  (George).     The  Campaign  of  Sedan:    The  Downfall  of  the

Second  Empire,  August-September,  1870.     By  GEORGE  HOOPER.     With
General  Map  and  MX  Plans  of  Battle.     Demv  8vo,  14^.

-  Waterloo  :    The  Downfall  of  the  First  Napoleon :  a  History  of  the

Campaign  of  1815.     With  Maps  and  Plans.     Small  post  8vo,  3*.  6d.
LAMARTINE'S  History  of  the  Girondists.     Translated  by  H.  T.  RYDE.
3  vols.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.  6d.  each.

—  History  of  the  Restoration  of  Monarchy  in  France  (a  Sequel  to  his

History  of  the  Girondists).     4  vols.      Small  post  8vo,  y.  6d.  each.

—  History  of  the  French  Revolution  ot   184*.     Small  post  Svo,  3-r.  6d.
LAPPENBERG'S    History    of  England    under    the    Anglo-Saxon

Kings.     Translated  by  the  late  B.  THORPE,  F.S.A.     New  edition,  revised

by  E.  C.  OTTE.     2  vols.     Small  post  Svo,  3^.  6d.  each.
LONG    (G.).       The    Decline   of  the    Roman    Republic  :      From    the

Destruction  of  Carthage  to  the  Death  of  Caesar.     By  the  late  GEORGE

LONG,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.     In  5  vols.     $s.  each.
MACHIAVELLI'S    History    of  Florence,  and  of  the  Affairs  of  Italy

from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Death  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent  :  together

with  the  Prince,  Savonarola,  various  Historical  Tracts,  and  a  Memoir  of

Machiavelli.     Small  post  Svo,  $s.  6d.
MARTINEAU  (H.).     History  of  England  from  1800-15.     By  HARRIET

MARTIN EAU.     Small  post  8vo,  3-r.  6d.

-  History  of  the  Thirty  Years'  Peace,    1815-46.     4  vols.     Small  post

Svo,  3-r.  6d.  each.


42  George  Bell  &  Sons

MAURICE  (C.  E.).  The  Revolutionary  Movement  of  1848-9  in
Italy,  Austria,  Hungary,  and  Germany.  With  some  Examination
of  the  previous  Thirty-three  Years.  By  c.  EDMUND  MAURICE.  With  an
engraved  Frontispiece  and  other  Illustrations.  Demy  8vo,  i6s.

MENZEL'S  History  of  Germany,  from  the  Earliest  Period  to  1842.
3  vols.  Small  post  8vo,  3.?.  6d.  each.

MICHELET'S  History  of  the  French  Revolution  from  its  earliest
indications  to  the  flight  of  the  King  in  1791.  Small  post  8vo,  T,s.  6it.

MIGNET'S  History  of  the  French  Revolution,  from  1789  to  1814.
Small  post  8vo,  3^.  6d.

PARNELL  (A.).  The  War  of  the  Succession  in  Spain  during  the
Reign  of  Queen  Anne,  1702-1711.  Based  on  Original  Manuscripts
and  Contemporary  Records.  By  COL.  THE  HON.  ARTHUR  PARNELL,
R.E.  Demy  8vo,  14^.  With  Map,  etc.

RANKE  (L.).     History  of  the  Latin  and   Teutonic   Nations,  1494-

1514.     Translated  by  p.  A.  ASHWORTH.     Small  post  8vo,  3.5-.  6d.
—  History  of  the  Popes,  their  Church  and  State,  and  especially  of  their
conflicts  with  Protestantism  in  the  i6th  and    I7th  centuries.     Translated
by  E.  FOSTER.     3  vols.     Small  post  8vo,  3^.  6d.  each.

-  History  of  Servia  and  the  Servian  Revolution.     Translated  by  MRS.

KERR.     Small  post  8vo,  -$s.  6d.
SIX   OLD   ENGLISH   CHRONICLES:    viz.,  Asser's  Life  of  Alfred

and  the  Chronicles  of  Ethehverd,  Gildas,  Nennius,  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,

and   Richard  of  Cirencester.     Edited,  with  Notes  and   Index,  by  J.   A.

GILES,  D.c.L.     Small  post  8vo,  $s.
STRICKLAND  (Agnes).     The   Lives  of  the  Queens  of    England;

from  the  Norman  Conquest  to  the  Reign  of  Queen  Anne.     By  AGNES

STRICKLAND.     6  vols.     $s.  each.
—  The   Lives    of  the    Queens   of    England.     Abridged  edition  for  the

use  of  Schools  and  Families,  Post  Svo,  6^.  6d.
THIERRY'S  History  of  the  Conquest  of  England  by  the  Normans ;

its  Causes,  and  its  Consequences  in  England,    Scotland,  Ireland,  and  the

Continent.     Translated  from  the  7th  Paris  edition  by  WILLIAM  HAZLITT.

2  vols.     Small  post  Svo,  3.?.  6d.  each.
WRIGHT  (H.  F.).    The  Intermediate  History  of  England,  with  Notes,

Supplements,  Glossary,  and  a  Mnemonic  System.     For  Army  and  Civil

Service  Candidates.     By  H.  F.  WRIGHT,  M.A.,  LL.M.     Crown  Svo,  6s.

For  other  Works  of  value  to  Students  of  History,  see  Catalogue  of

Bonn's  Libraries,  sent  post-free  on  application.

DIVINITY,    ETC.

ALFORD  (DEAN).  Greek  Testament.  With  a  Critically  revised  Text,
a  digest  of  Various  Readings,  Marginal  References  to  verbal  and  idio
matic  usage,  Prolegomena,  and  a  Critical  and  Exegetical  Commentary.
For  the  use  of  theological  students  and  ministers.  By  the  late  HENRY
ALFOKD,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury.  4  vols.  Svo.  £$  2s.  Sold  separately.

-  The  New  Testament  for  English  Readers.    Containing  the  Authorized

Version,  with  additional  Corrections  of  Readings  and  Renderings,  Marginal
References,  and  a  Critical  and  Explanatory  Commentary.  In  2  vols.
£,2  145.  6d.  Also  sold  in  4  parts  separately.


Educational  Catalogue.  43

AUGUSTINE  de  Civitate  Dei.  Books  XL  and  XII.  By  the  REV.
HENRY  D.  GEE,  B.D.,  F.s.A.  I.  Text  onl-y.  2s.  II.  Introduction  and
Translation.  3^.

BARRETT  (A.  C.).  Companion  to  the  Greek  Testament.  By  the  late
A.  C.  BARRETT,  M. A.,  Caius College,  Cambridge,  ^th  edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  5-r.

BARRY  (BP.).  Notes  on  the  Catechism.  For  the  use  of  Schools.  By
the  RT.  REV.  BISHOP  BARRY,  D.  D.  io//z  edition.  Fcap.  2s.

BLEEK.  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament.  By  FRIEDRICHBLEEK.
Edited  by  JOHANN  BLEEK  and  ADOLF  KAMPHAUSEN.  Translated  from
the  second  edition  of  the  German  by  G.  H.  VENABLES,  under  the  super
vision  of  the  REV.  E.  VENABLES,  Residentiary  Canon  of  Lincoln.  2nd
edition,  with  Corrections.  With  Index.  2  vols.  small  post  8vo,  5-y.  each.

BUTLER  (BP.).  Analogy  of  Religion.  With  Analytical  Introduction
and  copious  Index,  by  the  late  RT.  REV.  DR.  STEERE.  Fcap.  3^.  6d.

EUSEBIUS.  Ecclesiastical  History  of  EusebiusPamphilus,  Bishop
of  Caesarea.  Translated  from  the  Greek  by  REV.  c.  F.  CRUSE,  M.A.
With  Notes,  a  Life  of  Eusebius,  and  Chronological  Table.  Sm.  post  8vo,  $s.

GREGORY  (DR.).  Letters  on  the  Evidences,  Doctrines,  and  Duties
of  the  Christian  Religion.  By  DR.  OLINTHUS  GREGORY,  F.R.A.S.
Small  post  8vo,  $s.  6d.

HUMPHRY   (W.    G.).     Book  of  Common  Prayer.     An  Historical  and
Explanatory  Treatise  on  the.      By  w.   G.   HUMPHRY,  B.D.,  late  Fellow  of
Trinity  College,   Cambridge,  Prebendary  of  St.   Paul's,  and  Vicar  of  St.
Martin's -in-the-Fields,  Westminster.     6th  edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.
Cheap  Edition,  for  Sunday  School  Teachers,      is.

JOSEPHUS  (FLAVIUS).  The  Works  of.  WHISTON'S  Translation.
Revised  by  REV.  A.  R.  SHILLETO,  M.A.  With  Topographical  and  Geo
graphical  Notes  by  COLONEL  SIR  c.  w.  WILSON,  K.C.B.  5  vols.  y.  6d.  each.

LUMBY  (DR.).  The  History  of  the  Creeds.  I.  Ante-Nicene.  II.
Nicene  and  Constantinopolitan.  III.  The  Apostolic  Creed.  IV.  The
Quicunque,  commonly  called  the  Creed  of  St.  Athanasius.  By  J.  RAW  SON
LUMBY,  D.D.,  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity,  Fellow  of  St.  Catherine's
College,  and  late  Fellow  of  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.  ydcditiun,
revised.  Crown  8vo,  Js.  6d.

—  Compendium  of  English  Church  History,  from  1688-1830.     With  a

Preface  by  j.  RAWSON  LUMBY,  D.D.     Crown  8vo,  6s.

MACMICHAEL  (J.  F.).  The  New  Testament  in  Greek.  With
English  Notes  and  Preface,  Synopsis,  and  Chronological  Tables.  By  the
late  REV.  j.  F.  MACMICHAEL.  Fcap.  8vo  (730  pp.),  45.  6d.

Also  the  Four  Gospels,  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  separately.
In  paper  wrappers,  6d.  each.

MILLER  (E  ).  Guide  to  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  New  Testa
ment.  By  REV.  E  MILLER,  M.  A.  ,  Oxon,  Rector  of  Bucknell,  Bicester.
Crown  8vo,  4^.

NEANDER  (DR.  A.).  History  of  the  Christian  Religion  and
Church.  Translated  by  J.  TORREY.  10  vols.  small  post  8vo,  3$.  6d.  each.

—  Life  of  Jesus  Christ.    Translated  by  j.  MCCLINTOCKand  c.  BLUMENTHAL.

Small  post  8vo,  $s.  6d.

—  History  of  the  Planting  and  Training  of  the  Christian  Church  by

the  Apostles.     Translated  by  j.  E.   RYLAND.     2  vols.     3^.  6d.  each.

—  Lectures   on    the    History   of  Christian    Dogmas.     Edited   by   DR.

JACOBI.     Translated  by  J.  E.  RYLAND.    2  vols.  small  post  8vo,  y.  6d.  each.


44  George  Bell  &  Sons


NEANDER  (DR.  A.).  Memorials  of  Christian  Life  in  the  Early  and
Middle  Ages.  Translated  by  J.  E.  RYLAND.  Small  post  8vo,  3-r.  6d.

PEARSON  (BP.).  On  the  Creed.  Carefully  printed  from  an  Early
Edition.  Edited  by  E.  WALFORD,  M.A.  Post  8vo,  5^.

PEROWNE  (BP.).  The  Book  of  Psalms.  A  New  Translation,  with
Introductions  and  Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory.  By  the  RIGHT  REV.
J.  j.  STEWART  PEROWNE,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Worcester.  8vo.  Vol.  I.
8///  edition,  revised.  i8s.  Vol.  II.  'jtk  edition,  revised.  i6s.
-  The  Book  of  Psalms.  Abridged  Edition  for  Schools.  Crown  8vo.
7th  edition.  los.  6d.

SADLER  (M.  F.).  The  Church  Teacher's  Manual  of  Christian  Instruc
tion.  Being  the  Church  Catechism,  Expanded  and  Explained  in  Question
and  Answer.  For  the  use  of  the  Clergyman,  Parent,  and  Teacher.  By  the
REV.  M.  F.  SADLER,  Prebendary  of  Wells,  and  Rector  of  Honiton.  43^
thousand.  2s.  6d.

»%  A  Complete  List  of  Prebendary  Sadler's  Works  will  be  sent  on
application.

SCRIVENER  (DR.).  A  Plain  Introduction  to  the  Criticism  of  the  New
Testament.  With  Forty-four  Facsimiles  from  Ancient  Manuscripts.  For
the  use  of  Biblical  Students.  By  the  late  F.  H.  SCRIVENER,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,
LL.D.,  Prebendary  of  Exeter,  ^th  edition,  thoroughly  revised,  by  the  REV.
E.  MILLER,  formerly  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  New  College,  Oxford.  2  vols.
demy  8vo,  32^.

—  Novum    Testamentum    Grsece,   Textus    Stephanici,    1550.     Accedunt

variae  lectiones  editionum  Bezae,  Elzeviri,  Lachmanni,  Tischendorfii,
Tregellesii,  curante  F.  H.  A.  SCRIVENER,  A.M.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.  Revised
edition,  4*.  6d.

—  Novum    Testamentum    Graece    [Editio    Major]    textus    Stephanici,

A.D.  1556-  Cum  variis  lectionibus  editionum  Bezae,  Elzeviri,  Lachmanni,
Tischendorfii,  Tregellesii,  Westcott-Hortii,  versionis  Anglicance  emendato-
rum  curante  F.  H.  A.  SCRIVENER,  A.M.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  accedunt  parallela
s.  scripture  loca.  Small  post  8vo.  2nd  edition,  "js.  6d.

An  Edition  on  writing-paper,  with  margin  for  notes.   4to,  halfbound,  12s.

WHEATLEY.  A  Rational  Illustration  of  the  Book  of  Common
Prayer.  Being  the  Substance  of  everything  Liturgical  in  Bishop  Sparrow,
Mr.  L'Estrange,  Dr.  Comber,  Dr.  Nicholls,  and  all  former  Ritualist
Commentators  upon  the  same  subject.  Small  post  8vo,  T>S.  6d.

WHITAKER  (C.).  Rufinus  and  His  Times.  With  the  Text  of  his
Commentary  on  the  Apostles'  Creed  and  a  Translation.  To  which
is  added  a  Condensed  History  of  the  Creeds  and  Councils.  By  the  REV.
CHARLES  WHiTAKi'R,  B.A.,  Vicar  of  Natland,  Kendal.  Demy  8vo,  $s.

Or  in  separate  Parts. — I.  Latin  Text,  with  Various  Readings,  2s.  6d.
2.  Summary  of  the  History  of  the  Creeds,  is.  6d.  3.  Charts  of  the
Heresies  of  the  Times  preceding  Rufinus,  and  the  First  Four  General
Councils,  6d.  each.

—  St.  Augustine  :  De  Fide  et  Symbolo— Sermo  ad  Catechumenos.     St.  Leo

ad  Flavianum  Epistola — Latin  Text,  with  Literal  Translation,  Notes,  and
History  of  Creedsand  Councils.  $s.  Also  separately,  Literal  Translation.   2s.
—  Student's  Help  to  the  Prayer-Book.     3*.


Educational  Catalogue.  45


SUMMARY    OF    SERIES.

PAGE

BlBLIOTHECA  CLASSICA 45

PUBLIC  SCHOOL  SERIES 45

CAMBRIDGE  GREEK  AND  LATIN  TEXTS 46

CAMBRIDGE  TEXTS  WITH  NOTES 46

GRAMMAR  SCHOOL  CLASSICS 46

PRIMARY  CLASSICS 47

BELL'S  CLASSICAL  TRANSLATIONS 47

CAMBRIDGE  MATHEMATICAL  SERIES 47

CAMBRIDGE  SCHOOL  AND  COLLEGE  TEXT  BOOKS   . 49

FOREIGN  CLASSICS 49

MODERN  FRENCH  AUTHORS 49

MODERN  GERMAN  AUTHORS 49

GOMBERT'S  FRENCH  DRAMA 50

BELL'S  MODERN  TRANSLATIONS 50

BELL'S  ENGLISH  CLASSICS 50

HANDBOOKS  OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE 50

TECHNOLOGICAL  HANDBOOKS [::.     .     .     .  50

BELL'S  AGRICULTURAL  SERIES 50

BELL'S  READING  BOOKS  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL  READERS  .  [ .     .     .     .  50

BlBLIOTHECA    CLASSICA.

AESCHYLUS.     By  DR.  PALEY.     85.

CICERO.     Bye.  LONG.     Vols.  I.  and  II.     Zs.  each.

DEMOSTHENES.     By  R.  WHISTON.     2  Vols.     8s.  each.

EURIPIDES.     By  DR.  PALEY.     Vols.  II.  and  III.     8s.  each.

HERODOTUS.     By  DR.  BLAKESLEY.     2  Vols.     125.

HESIOD.     By  DR.  PALEY.     5$.

HOMER.     By  DR.  PALEY.     2  Vols.     14^.

HORACE.     By  A.  G.  MACLEANE.     %s.

PLATO.     Phaedrus.     By  DR.  THOMPSON.     55.

SOPHOCLES.     Vol.  I.     By  F.  H.  BLAYDES.     5*.

—  Vol.  II.     By  DR.  PALEY.     6s.

VIRGIL.     By  CONINGTON  AND  NETTLESHIP.     3  Vols.     ios.[6d.  each.

PUBLIC    SCHOOL    SERIES.

ARISTOPHANES.     Peace.     By  DR.  PALEY.     4s.  6d.

—  Acharnians.     By  DR.  PALEY.     45.  6d.

—  Frogs.     By  DR.  PALEY.     4$.  6d.

CICERO.     Letters  to  Atticus.     Book  I.     By  A.  PRETOR.     4*.  6d.
DEMOSTHENES.     De  Falsa  Legatione.     By  R.  SHILLETO.     6s.

—  Adv.  Leptinem.     By  B.  w.  BEATSON.     3$.  6d.

LIVY.     Books  XXI.  and  XXII.     By  L.  D.  DOWDALL.     -$s.  6d.  each.
PLATO.     Apology  of  Socrates  and  Crito.     By  DR.  w.  WAGNER.     35.  6d.  and
2s.  6d.

—  Phaedo.     By  DR.  w.  WAGNER.     5$.  6d.

—  Protagoras.     By  w.  WAYTE.     4*.  6d.

—  Gorgias.     By  DR.  THOMPSON.     6s.

—  Euthyphro.     By  G.  H.  WELLS.     3$.

—  Euthydemus.     By  G.  H.  WELLS.     45.

—  Republic.     By  G.  H.  WELLS.     55.

PLAUTUS.     Aulularia.     By  DR.  w.  WAGNER.     45.  6d.

—  Trinummus.     By  DR.  w.  WAGNER.     4$.  6d.

—  Menaechmei.     By  DR.  w.  WAGNER.     4$.  6d.

—  Mostellaria.     By  E.  A.  SONNENSCHEIN.    55.


46  George  Bell  &  Sons

PUBLIC    SCHOOL    SERIES— continued.

SOPHOCL-ES.     Trachiniae.     By  A.  PRKTOR.     45.  6d.

—  Oedipus  Tyrannus.     By  13.  H.  KENNEDY.     55.
TERENCE.     By  DR.  w.  WAGNER.     7*.  6d.
THEOCRITUS.     By  DR.  HALEY.     AS.  6d.
THUCYDIDES.     Book  VI.     By  T.  w.  DOUGAN.     3*.  6J.

CAMBRIDGE    GREEK   AND    LATIN    TEXTS.

AESCHYLUS.     By  DR.  PALEY.     2s.
CAESAR.     Bye.  LONG.     is.  6d.

CICERO.     De  Senectute,  de  Amicitia,  et  Epistolae  Selectae.     By  c.  LONG.
is.  6d.

—  Orationes  in  Verrem.     By  G.  LONG.     25.  6d.
EURIPIDES.     By  DR.  PALEY.     3  Vols.     zs.  each.
HERODOTUS.     By  DR.  BLAKESLEY.     2  Vols.     2s.  6d.  each.
HOMER'S  Iliad.     By  DR.  PAI.EY.     is.  6d.

HORACE.     By  A.  j.  MACLEANE.     is.  6d.

JUVENAL   AND    PERSIUS.     By  A.  j.  MACLEANE.     is.  (>d.

LUCRETIUS.     By  H.  A.  j.  MUNRO.     2s.

SOPHOCLES.     By  DR.  PALEY.     25.  6<t.

TERENCE.     By  DK.  w.  WAGNER.     2s.

THUCYDIDES.     By  DR.  DONALDSON.     2  Vols.     2^.  each.

VIRGIL.       By  PROF.  CONINGTON.       2S.

XENOPHON.     By  j.  F.  MACMICHAEL.     is.  6d.

NOVUM  TESTAMENTUM   GRAECE.     By  DR.  SCRIVENER.     4*.  6d.

CAMBRIDGE  TEXTS  WITH  NOTES.

AESCHYLUS.     By  DR.  PALEY.     6  Vols.     is.  6d.  each.

EURIPIDES.     By  DR.  PALEY.     13  Vols.    (Ion,  2^.)     is.  6d.  each.

HOMER'S  Iliad.     By  DR.  PALEY.     is.

SOPHOCLES.     By  DR.  PALEY.     5  Vols.     is.  6d.  each.

XENOPHON.    Hellenica.    By  REV.  L.  D.  DOWDALL.    Books  Land  II.    25.  each.

—  Anabasis.     By  j.  F.  MACMICHAEL.     6  Vols.     is.  6d.  each.

CICERO.    De  Senectute,  de  Amicitia,  et  Epistolae  Selectae.    By  G.  LONG.

3  Vols.     is.  6d.  each.
OVlD.    Selections.     By  A.  j.  MACLEANE.     is.6d.

—  Fasti.     By  DR.  PALEY.     3  Vols.     2s.  each.
TERENCE.     By  DR.  w.  WAGNER.     4  Vols.     is.  6d.  each.
VIRGIL.     By  PROF.  CONINGTON.     12  Vols.     is.  6d.  each.

GRAMMAR    SCHOOL   CLASSICS.

CAESAR,  De  Bello  Gallico.     By  G.  LONG.     4$. ,  or  in  3  parts,  is.  6d.  each.
CATULLUS,  TIBULLUS,   and  PROPERTIUS.     By  A.  H  .  WRATISLAW,

and  F.  N.  SUTTON.     zs.  6d.

CORNELIUS    NEPOS.     By  j.  F.  MACMICHAEL.     2s.

CICERO.    De  Senectute,  De  Amicitia,  and  Select  Epistles.    By  G.  LONG.   3*.
HOMER.    Iliad.     By  DR.  PALEY.     Books  I. -XII.     4s.  6rf.,or  in  2  Parts,  2S.  6d.

each.

HORACE.     By  A.  j.  MACLEANE.     $s.  6d.,  or  in  2  Parts,  2s.  each.
JUVENAL.     By  HERMAN  PRIOR.     35.  6d.
MARTIAL.     By  DR.  PALEY  and  w.  H.  STONE.     4$.  6d.
OVID.     Fasti.     By  DR.  PALEY.     js.  6d.,  or  in  3  Parts,  is.  6d.  each.
SALLUST.    Catilina  and  Jugurtha.     By  G.  LONG  and  j.  G.  FRAZER.     35.  6d.,

or  in  2  Parts,  2s. each.

TACITUS.    Germania  and  Agricola.     By  p.  FROST.     2s.  6d.
VIRGIL.    CONINGTON'S  edition  abridged.     2  Vols.     4$.  6d.  each,  or  in  9  Parts,

is.  6d.  each.

—  Bucolics  and  Georgics.     CONINGTON'S  edition  abridged.    3$.
XENOPHON.     By  j.  F.  MACMICHAEL.     is.  6d.,  or  in  4  Parts,  is.  6d.  each.

—  Cyropaedia.     By  G.  M.  GORHAM.     3^.  6d.,  or  in  2  Parts,  is.  6d.  each.

—  Memorabilia.     By  PERCIVAL  FROST.     3*.

PRIMARY   CLASSICS.

EASY   SELECTIONS  FROM    CAESAR.     By  A.  M.  M.  STEDMAN.     is.

EASY    SELECTIONS  FROM    LIVY.     By  A.  M.  M.  STEDMAN.     is.  6</.

EASY   SELECTIONS  FROM    HERODOTUS.     By  A.  G.  LIDDELL.    is.  6d.


Educational  Catalogue.  47


BELL'S   CLASSICAL   TRANSLATIONS.

AESCHYLUS.     By  WALTER  HEADLAM.     6  Vols.  [/«  tJte press.

ARISTOPHANES.     Acharnians.     By  w.  H.  COVINGTON.     is.
CAESAR'S  Gallic  War.     By  w.  A.  MCDEVITTE.     2  Vols.     is.  each.
CICERO.    Friendship  and  Old  Age.     By  G.  H.  WELLS,     is.
DEMOSTHENES.     On  the  Crown.     By  c.  KANN  KENNEDY,     is.
EURIPIDES.     14  Vols.     By  E.  p.  COLERIDGE,     is.  each.
LIVY.     Books  I. -IV.     By  j.  H.  FREESE.     w.  each.

—  Book  V.     By  E.  s.  WEYMOUTH.     is.

—  Book  IX.     By  F.  STORR.     is.

LUC  AN  :  The  Pharsalia.     Book  I.     By  F.  CONWAY.     is.
SOPHOCLES.     7  Vols.     By  E.  p.  COLERIDGE,     is.  each.
VIRGIL.     6  Vols.     By  A.  HAMILTON  BRYCE.     is.  each.

CAMBRIDGE    MATHEMATICAL    SERIES.

ARITHMETIC.     By  c.  PENDLEBURY.     4-v.  6J.,  or  in  2  Parts,  2s.  6d.  each.

Key  to  Part  II.     js.  6d.  net.
EXAMPLES    IN   ARITHMETIC.    By  c.  PENDLEBURY.    35.,  or  in  2  Parts,

is.  6d.  and  2s.

ARITHMETIC  FOR  INDIAN  SCHOOLS.    By  PENDLEBURY  and  TAIT.   3*.
ELEMENTARY   ALGEBRA.     By  j.  T.  HATHORNTHWAITE.     zs.
CHOICE    AND   CHANCE.     By  w.  A.  WHITWORTH.     6s.
EUCLID.     By  H.  DEIGHTON.     +s.  6d.,  or  Book  I.,  is.  ;  Books  I.  and  II.,  is.  6d  •

Books  I.-IIL,  25.  6d. ;  Books  III.  and  IV.,  is.  6d.

—  KEY.     55.  net.

EXERCISES    ON    EUCLID,  &c.     By  j.  MCDOWELL.     6s.
ELEMENTARY   TRIGONOMETRY.     By  DYER  and  WHITCOMBE.     4s.  6<t.
PLANE    TRIGONOMETRY.     By  T.  G.  VYVYAN.     y.  6d.
ANALYTICAL    GEOMETRY    FOR    BEGINNERS       Parti.      By  T.  G.

ELEMENTARY   GEOMETRY   OF   CONICS.     By  DR.  TAYLOR.     4s.  6d
GEOMETRICAL  CONIC  SECTIONS.     By  H.  G.  WILLIS,     y.
SOLID   GEOMETRY.     By  w.  s.  ALOIS.     6.9.
GEOMETRICAL    OPTICS.     By  w.  s.  ALDIS.     4*.
ROULETTES    AND   GLISSETTES.     By  DR.  w.  H.  BESANT.     y
ELEMENTARY   HYDROSTATICS.     By  DR.  w.  H.  BESANT.     4*.  6d.

Solutions.     5-y.

HYDROMECHANICS.     Parti.     Hydrostatics.     By  DR.  w.  H.  UKSANT.     y.
DYNAMICS.     By  DR.  w.  H.  BESANT.     los.  6d.
RIGID    DYNAMICS.     By  w.  s.  ALDIS.     4*.
ELEMENTARY    DYNAMICS.     By  DR.  w.  GARNETT.     6s
ELEMENTARY   TREATISE   ON'  HEAT.     By  DR.  w.  GARNETT.     AS.  6d
ELEMENTS    OF    APPLIED    MATHEMATICS.     Bye    M   JFSSOP      6s
PROBLEMS    IN    ELEMENTARY   MECHANICS.     By  w.  WALTON      6s
EXAMPLES    IN    ELEMENTARY   PHYSICS.     By  w  GALI  ATLY      4*
MATHEMATICAL   EXAMPLES.     By  DYER  and  PROWDE  SMITH.     6s.

CAMBRIDGE    SCHOOL  AND    COLLEGE    TEXT    BOOKS.

ARITHMETIC.     By  c.  ELSEE.     3s.  6d.

By  A.  WRIGLEY.     y.  6d.

EXAMPLES    IN    ARITHMETIC.     By  WATSON  and  GOUDIF.     2s.  6d
ALGEBRA       By  c.  ELSEE.     45-.
EXAMPLES    IN    ALGEBRA.     By  MACMICHAEL  and  PROWDE  SMITH.    y.  6d.

and  4*.  6d.

PLANE    ASTRONOMY.     By  P.  T.  MAIN.     4*.

GEOMETRICAL   CONIC    SECTIONS.     By  DR.  w.  H.  BESANT      4s  6d
STATICS.     By  BISHOP  GOODWIN.     3*.
NEWTON'S    Prmcipia.     By  EVANS  and  MAIN.     4*.
ANALYTICAL  GEOMETRY.     By  T.  G.  VYVYAN.     4*.  6d
COMPANION    TO  THE  GREEK  TESTAMENT.    By  A  c.  BARRETT,    y
TREATISE   ON    THE    BOOK    OF    COMMON    PRAYER.       By  w    G'

HUMPHRY.       ZS.  6d.

TEXT    BOOK   OF   MUSIC.     By  H.  c.  BANISTER.     5s.

CONCISE    HISTORY   OF    MUSIC.     By  DR.  H.  G.  BONAVIA  HUNT.     3s.  6d.


48     George  Bell  &  Sons  Educational  Catalogue.


FOREIGN    CLASSICS.

FENELON'S  Telemaque.     By  c.  j.  DELILLE.     zs.  f>d.

LA    FONTAINE'S    S-lect  Fables.     By  F.  E.  A.  GASC.     is.  6tt.

LAMARTINE'S    Le  Tailleur  de  Pierres  de  Saint-Point.     By  j.  BOIKLLE.

i.».  6</.

SAINTINE'S  Picciola.     By  DR.  DL-BEC.     u.  6<t.
VOLTAIRE'S    Charles  XII      By  L.  DIRY.     i*.  f>d.
GERMAN  BALLADS.     Bye.  L.  BIELEFELD,     is.  f>d.

GOETHE'S  Hermann  und  Dorothea.    By  E   BELL  and  E.  WOLFEL.     is.  6d.
SCH  ILLER'S  Wallenstein.    By  DR.  BUCHHEIM.    55.,  or  in  2  Parts,  zs.  6d.  each.

—  Maid  of  Orleans.     By  DR.  w.  WAGNER,     is.  6d.

—  Maria  Stuart.     By  v.  KASTNEK.     is.  6d.

MODERN  FRENCH  AUTHORS.

BALZAC'S  Ursule  Mirouet.     By  j.  BOIELLE.     3*.
CLARETIE'S   Pierrille.     By  j   BUIELLE.     as.  6d.
DAUUET'S  La   Belle  Nivernaise.     By  j.  BOIELLE      2s.
GREVILLE'S  Le  Moulin  Frappier.     By  j.  BOIELLE.     35.
HUGO'S   Bug  Jargal.     By  j.  BOIELLE.     3^.

MODERN  GERMAN  AUTHORS.

HEY'S  Fabeln  fur  Kinder.     By  PROF.  LANGE.     is.  6d.

—  —  with  Phonetic  Transcription  of  Text,  £c.     zs.

FREYTAG'S  Soil    und  Haben.     By  w.  H.  CRUMP.     2s.  6d.

BENEDi  A'S   Doktor  Wespe      By  PROF.  LANGE.     2s.  6d.

HOFFMANN'S   Meister  Martin.     By  PROF.  LANGE.     is.  6d.

HEYaE'S   Hans  Lange.     By  A.  A.  MA<-DONELL.     25.

AUERBACH'S  Auf  Wache,  and  Roquette's   Der   Gefrorene    Kuss.      By

A.    A.    MACDONELL        ZS.

MOSER'S   Der  Bibliothekar.     By  PR<IF.  LANGE.     2$.
EBERS'  Eine  Frag  .     By  F.  STOKR.     2^
FKEY  TAG'S  Die  Journalisten.     By  PROF.  LANGE.     2^.6^.
GUTZKOW'S  Zopf  und  Schwert.     By  PROF.  LANGE.     2*.  6d.
GERMAN   EPIC  TALES.     By  DR.  KARL  NEUHAUS.     zs.  6J.
SCHEFFEL'S  Ekkehard.     By  DR.  H.  HAGER.     35.

The  following  Series  are  given  in  full  in  the  body  of  the  Catalogue.

GOMBERT'S  French  Drama.     See  page  31.
BELL'S    Modern  Translations.


BELL'S  English  Classics.     See  pp.  24,  25.

HANDBOOKS    OF    EN   -LISH    LITERATURE.     See  tage  zf3.

TECHNOLOGICAL    HANDBOOKS      Sec  page  yj.

BELL'S   Agricultural  Series.     Seepage^.

BELL'S  Reading  Books  and  Geographical  Readers.     Sec  pp.  25,  26.


CHISWICK  PRESS:— c.  WHITTINGHAM  AND  co.,   TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY  LANE.


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  PQCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


RVATION
SERVICES


===== [next volume/part: Vol. II] =====


=====


Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


k SS«^#^.'«.*i!l■i:■


! lmit4:3MA


'^fMiri'mi


mmttk>i'-


t^. .«'u^is.'sir^t


•^i**!^ ??*'**•«


t- »


I i£^?#i^^^M


'%fip|3i^ir4&


■•%.'% ^


*•^'''!V/ J^VA*^* '


JiXr.'fi^-'Äi'^-^.


^ \ Li

« 1 ■


• »'*i>r> - *. V


.•>:'»


-.. .« »i 1 p, y . .. 1 A i£ B . .-k.


TEUTONIC MYTHOLOGY.


JACOB GRIMM.


♦


/^


TEUTONIC MYTHOLOGY

BT

JACOB GRIMM.

TBANBLATED FBOH THE fOUBTH EDITION.
NOTES AND APPENDIX


JAMES STEVEN STALLTBRÄSS.


VOL. II.


LONDON : GEORGE BELL & SONS, YORK STREET,
COVENT OABDEN.


k * •

k k

«> V k b V


Builtr ä Tatmtr,
rk0 BtU0Ood PHnHisf Work$,
Ptvma, and London,


b k k
k k k


w w t>


102 5 9 1


k k k

k k


k k
« k


» • k
« •


k k k k I
- k'


w % ^ % ^

« k k k k
k k k k k


•-* ^ *


k > b
• k^

kkkkk bwkSk

k k
• k k •» V


• k • k k

• ft

• • •


k k » k V


• k k k

k k k k


•./•.


CHAPTER XVII.
WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Apart from deified and semi-divine natares there stands a
whole order of other beings distinguished mainly by the fact
tliat^ whild those have issued from men or seek human fellowship^
these form a separate community^ one might say a kingdom of
tlieir own^ and are only induced by accident or stress of circum-
stances to have dealings with men. They have in them some
admixture of the superhuman^ which approximates them to gods ;
they have power to hurt man and to help him^ at the same time
they stand in awe of him^ being no match for him in bodily
strength. Their figurQ is much below the stature of man^ or else
mis-shapen« They almost all have the faculty of making them-
selves invisible.^ And here again the females are of a broader
and nobler cast^ with attributed resembling those of goddesses
and wise- women ; the male spirits are more distinctly marked o£E^
both from gods and from heroes.^

The two most general designations for them form the title of
this chapter; they are what we should call apirits nowadays.
Bat the word spirit (geist^ ghost),^ like the Greek Bal/io^v, is
too comprehensive; it would include^ for instance, the half-
goddesses discussed in the preceding chapter. The Lat. geniiM
would more nearly hit the mark (see Suppl.).

The term wiht seems remarkable in more than one respect, for
its variable gender and for the abstract meanings developed from

* But so have the gods (p. 825), goddesses (p. 268) and wise-women (p. 419).

' Celtic tradition, which rons particularly rich on this snhject, I draw from
the following works : Fairy Legends and ^aditions of the South of Ireland,
by Crofton Oroker, Lond. 1825 ; 2nd ed., parts 1, 2, 3, Lond. 1828. The Fairy
Uythology, by Th. Eeightley, vols. 1, 2, Lond. 1828. Barzas-Breiz, chants popu-
lairee de la Bretagne, par Th. de la Yillemarqn6, 2e 6d., 2 vol., Paris 1840.

* OHG. keitt, AS. gast, OS. gest (see root in Gramm. 2, 46) ; Goth, ahma,
OHG. atum for ahadom, conn, with Goth, aha (mens), ahjan (meminisse, oogitare),
u man (homo), mannUha^ and mannif minni belong to munan, minnen (pp. 59.
844. 438).

VOL. U. «« B


440 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

it. The Gothic vaihts, gen. vaihtdis, is feminine, and ülpliilas
hardly ever uses it in a concrete sense ; in Lake 1, 1 he tmnslates
by it irpajfia, and much oftener, when combined with a negative,

ovSiv (Gramm. 8, 8. 734). This, however, does not exclude the
possibility of vaihts having at other times denoted to the Goths
a spirit regarded as female; and in 1 Thess. 5, 22 the sentence
airo iravTo^ etSov^ irovrfpov airiyeaOe is rendered: af allamma
vaihts ubil&izd afhab&i]; izvis, where the Ynlg. has : ab omni
specie mala abstinete vos ; the use of the pi. ' vaihteis ubilds ^ of
itself suggests the notion of spirits. The other Teutonic tongues
equally use the word to intensify and make a substantive of the
negative, and even let it swallow up at last the proper particle
of negation ; ^ but in all of them it retains its personal meaning
too. The OHG. writers waver between the neut. and masc. ; the
Gothic fem. is unknown to them. Otfried has a neut. wiht, with
the collective pi. wihtir^ and likewise a neut. pi. wihii, which
implies a sing, wihti ] thus, armu wihtir, iv. 6, 23 ; armu wihti,
ii. 16, 117; krumbu wihti, iii. 9, 5; meaning 'poor, crooked
creatures,' so that wiht (derivable from wthan facere, creare)
seems altogether synonymous with being, creature, person, and
can be used of men or spirits : * in demo mere sint wunderltchiu
vnhtir, diu heizent sirenae,' Hoffm. Pundgr. 19, 17. In MHG.
sometimes neut. : unreinez %mktf Diut. 1, 13 ; Athis H. 28 ;
triigehafbez wUit, Bari. 367, 11 ; vil tumbez wiht, 11, 21; some-
times masc. : boeser wiht, Bari. 220, 15; unrehter bcasewiht, MS.
2, 147*, Geo. 3508; kleiner wiht, Altd. bl. 1, 254; der wikt,
Geo. 3513-36; der tumbe vnht, Fragm. 42*; and often of in-
determinable gender: boese wiht, Trist. 8417; helle wiht, Geo.
3531 ; but either way as much applicable to men as to spirits«
Ghostly wights are the ' minuti dii ' of the Romans (Plaut.
Gasina, ii. 5, 24). In Mod. Germ, we make wicht masc,
and use it slightingly of a pitiful hapless being, fellow, often
wifch a qualifying epithet: 'elender wicht, bösewicht (villain)/
If the diminutive form be added, which intensifies the notion of
littleness, it can only be used of spirits : wichtlein, wichtdmann ; '

^ kughi * i-wiht, any wight or whit ; naught » n*i-wiht, no wight, no whit. —
Xkaks.

9 So : thin dinfilir, iii 14, 68, hy the side of ther dinlal, iH. 14, lOS.

* In Hesse wicHtelmänner is the expression in vogae, except on the Diemel in
Bason Hesse, where they say *gate holden.'


WIGHTS. 441

MHG. din wihtel^ MS. 1^ 157* ; bcesez wihtel, Elfenm. cxviii. ;
kleinez wihtelin, Ls. 1, 378, 880, Wolfdiefcr. 788, 799; OHG.
mhtelin penates ; wihtelen vel lielbe {i,e, elbe), lemures, dsQmones^
Gl. Florian. The demea toihti, occalti genii, in Hel. 31, 20. 92, 2
are deceitful demonic beings, as 'thie demo' 161, 19 means
the devil himself; letha wihti, 76, 15; wreda vnhti 76, 1. In
Lower Saxony wicht is said^ quite in a good sense, of little
children : in the Münster country ' dat wicht ' holds especially
of girls, about Osnabrück the sing, wicht only of girls, the pi.
toicht^ of girls and boys ; ' innocent wichte ' are spoken of in
Sastrow, 1, 351. The Mid. Nethl. has a neut. widht like the
H. German : qnade wicht, clone wicht (child). Hnyd. op St. 3, 6.
370; arena wiht, Beinh. 1027; so the Mod. Dutch wicht, pi.
tnchteren : arm wicht, aardig wicht, in a kindly sense. The AS.
language agrees with the Gothic as to the fem. gender : vnht,
gen. wihte, nom. pi. wihta; later wuht, wuhte, wuhta; seo wiht,
Cod. Exon. 418, 8. 419, 3. 5. 420, 4. 10. The meaning can be
either concrete: yfel wiht (phantasma), leas wiht (diabolus),
Csodm. 310, 16 ; scewiht (animal marinum), Beda, 1, 1 ; or
entirely abstract = thing, aflRair. The Engl. wigM has the sense
of our wicht. The ON. vcett and voettr, which are likewise fem.,
have preserved in its integrity the notion of a demonic spiritual
being (Saam. 145*) : allar vcettir, genii quicunque, Saam. 93^ ;
hollar vccttir, genii benigni, Sasm. 240^ ; ragvcettir or meinvoBttir,
genii noxii,' landvcettir, genii tutelares, Fornm. sog. 3, 105.
IsL sog. 1, 198, etc. In the Faroes they say: 'fe&r tft tSar
til mainvittia (go to the devil) ! ' Lyngbye, p. 548. The Danish
tüte is a female spirit, a wood-nymph, meinvette an evil spirit.


^ Swer weiz and doch niht wizzen wil, Whoso knows, yet will not know,
der slfBt sich mit stn selbes hant ; Smites himself with his own hand ;

des wtsheit aht ich zeime apil, His wisdom lvalue no more than a plaj

daz man diu wiktel h&t genannt : That they call * the little wights ' : "

er lit ons sohonwen wunders yU, He lets us witness mach of wonder,

der ir d& waltet. Who governs them.

The passage shows that in the 18th cent, there was a kind of puppet-show in which
fi^tly beings were set before the eyes of spectators. *Der ir waltet,' he that
Yields them, means the showman who pats the figores in motion. A fall confir-
mation in Uie Wachtelmäre, line 40 : ' rihtet za mit den tnüeren (strings) die
tatermanne ! ' Another passage on the toiktel-spil in Haapt's Zeitschr. 2, 60 :.
'^t mit dem ynhtelin üf dem tisch mnb gaoten win.*

' Biöm sappoflee a maso. (fem. ?) meifwattr and a neat, meinvatti ; no doabt
min is noza, malum ; neyerthelesB I call attention to the Zendic mainyut, dismooi
•od agmmai&ynB, demon malus.


442 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Thiele 8^ 98. The Swedish tongue^ in addition to vätt (genius)
and a synonymous neut. vättr, has a loikt formed after the German,
Ihre^ p. 1075. Neither is the abstract sense wanting in any of
these dialects.

This transition of the meaning of wight into that of thing on
the one hand, and of devil on the other, agrees with some other
phenomena of language. We also address little children as
' thing/ and the child in the marchen (No. 105) cries to the
lizard : ' ding, eat the crumbs too ! ' Wicht, ding, wint, teufel,
valant (Gramm. 8, 731. 786) all help to clinch a denial. 0. French
males choaes, mali genii, Ren. 80085. Mid. Latin bonce res = honi
genii, Vine. Bellov. iii. 8, 27 (see Suppl.).

We at once perceive a more decided colouring in the OHG.
and MHG. alp (genius), AS. celf, ON. alfr ; a Goth, albs may
safely be conjectured. Together with this masc, the OHG.
may also have had a neut. alp, pi. elpir, as we know the MHG.
had a pi. elber ; and from the MHG. dat. fem. elbe (MS. 1, 50^)
we must certainly infer a nom. diu elbe, OHG. alpia, elpia, Goth.
albi, gen. albjSs, for otherwise such a derivative could not occur.
Formed by a still commoner suffix, there was no doubt an OHG.
elpinna, MHG. elbinne, the form selected by Albrecht of Halber-
stadt, and still appearing in his poem as remodelled by Wikram;^
AS. elfen, gen. elfenne. Of the nom. pi. masc. I can only feel
sure in the ON., where it is alfar, and would imply a Groth.
albos, OHG. alp&, MHG. albe, AS. aslfas ; on the other hand an
OHG. elpi (Goth, albeis) is suggested by the MHG. pi. elbe
(Amgb. 2^, unless this comes from the fern, elbe above) and by
the AS. pi. ylfe, gen. pi. ylfa (Beow. 223).* The Engl, forms

^ Wikram 1, 9. 6, 9 (ed. 1681, p. 11» 199b). The first passage, in all the editions
I have compared (ed. 1545, p. 8*), has a faulty reading : * anoh viel ewinnen and
freyeUf^ rhyming with * zweyen.* Albrecht sorely wrote ' yil elbitiTien and feien.^
1 can maku nothing of ' freien * bat at best a veiy daring allnsion to Frigg and
Frea (p. 801) ; and * froie * * fraalein, as the weasel is called in Beinh. clzxii., can
have nothing to say here.

' Taking AS. y [as a modified a, a, «a,] as in yldra, ylfet, yrfe, OHG. eldiro,
elpiz, erpi. At the same time, as y can also be a modified o (orf, yrfe » pecas), or
a modified u (wnlf , wylfen), I will not pass oyer a MHG. uZ/, pi. iUve, which seems
to mean much the same as alp, and may be akin to an AS. ylf: * von den Hlven
entbunden werden,* MS. 1, 81» ; * ülfheit ein saht ob allen sühten,' MS. 2, 185» ;
* der sich ülfet ux der jugent,* Helbl. 2, 426 ; and oonf. the ölp quoted from H.
Sachs. Shakspeare occasionally couples elyes and goblins with smular beings called
ouphea (Nares sub t.). It -speaks for the identity of the two forms, that one
Svredish folk-song (Arwidsson 2, 278) has Ul/ver where another (2, 276) has Elfvtf»


ELVES. 443

tlfy elves, the Swed« elf, pi. masc. elfvar (fern, elfvor), the Dan.
elv, pi. elve, are quite in rale ; the Dan. compounds ellefolkj eile-
koner, elleskudt, eüevild have undergone assimilation. With us
the word alp still survives in the sense of night-hag, night-mare,
in addition to which our writers of the last century introduced
the Engl, elf, a form untrue to our dialect ; before that, we find
everywhere the correct pi. elbe or elben.^ H. Sachs uses ölp :
' du ölp ! du dölp ! ' (i. 5, 525^), and ölperisch (iv. 3, 95*^) ; conf.
ölpem and ölpetrütsch, alberdriitsch, drelpetrütsch (Schm. 1, 48) ;
elpefUrötech and tölpentrötsch, trilpentrisch (Schmidts Swab. diet.
162) ; and in Hersfeld, hilpentrisch. The words mean an awkward
pilly fellow, one whom the elves have been at, and the same thing
is expressed by the simple elbisch, Fundgr. 365. In Gloss. Jun.
340 we read eloesce wehte, elvish wights.

On the nature of Elves I resort for advice to the ON. authori-
ties, before all others. It has been remarked already (p. 25),
that the Elder Edda several times couples OBsir and difar together,
as though they were a compendium of all higher beings, and
that the AS. es and ylfe stand together in exactly the same way.
This apparently concedes more of divinity to elves than to men.
Sometimes there come in, as a third member, the va7iir (Saem.
83^), a race distinct from the e&sir, but admitted to certain
relations with them by marriage and by covenants. The Hrafna-
galdr opens with the words : AlföSr orkar (works), dlfar skiija,
vanir vita,'' S»m. 88* ; Allfather, i,e, the Äs, has power, älfar
have skill (understanding), and vanir knowledge. The Alvismäl
enumerates the dissimilar names given to heavenly bodies,
elements and plants by various languages (supra, p. 332) ; in
doing 80, it mentions cesir, dlfar, vanir, and in addition also
go^, menn, ginregin, votnar, dvergar and denizens of hel (hades).
Here the most remarkable point for us is, that dlfar and dvergar
(dwarfs) are two different things. The same distinction is made
between dlfar and dvergar, Sasm. 8^; between dvergar and
doekdlfar, Saem. 92^; between three kinds of norns, the fts-kungar,
älf-kungar and doatr Dvalins, Sasm. 188% namely, those descended
from &ses, from elves and from dwarfs ; and our MHG. poets,
as we see by Wikram's Albrecht, 6, 9, continued to separate elbe

^ Besold. Bub v. t'lbe ; Eitncr's Hebamme, p. 910, alpen or elben.


444 WIGHT3 AND ELVES.

from getwerc} Some kinship however seems to exist between
them^ if only becaase among proper names of dwarfs we find an
Alfr and a Vindalftf Ssem. 2. 3. Loki^ elsewhere called an fts^
and reckoned among ftses^ bat really of iötan origin^ is neverthe-
less addressed as aJfVj Ssem. 110* ; nay, Völundr, a godlike hero,
is called ^ alfa licSi/ alfornm socins, and 'vtsi aXfa,^ alforam
princeps, Saem. 135** **• I explain this not historically (by a
Finnish descent), but mythically : German legend h'kewise makes
Wielant king Elberich's companion and fellow smith in Mount
Gloggensachsen (otherwise Göugelsahs, Caucasus ?). Thus we
see the word alfr shrink and stretch by turns.

Now what is the true meaning of the word aXba, alp = genius ?
One is tempted indeed to compare the Lat. albus, which according
to Festus the Sabines called alpus ; ä\4>6^ (vitiligo,' leprosy)
agrees still better with the law of consonant-change. Probably
then alhs meant first of all a light-coloured, white, good spirit,'
so that, when alfar and dvergar are contrasted, the one signifies
the white spirits, the other the black. This exactly agrees with
the great beauty and brightness of &lfar. But the two classes
of creatures getting, as we shall see, a good deal mixed up
and confounded, recourse was had to composition, and the elves
proper were named liosalfar?

The above-named döckälfar (genii obscuri) require a counter-
part, which is not found in the Eddie songs, but it is in Snorri^s
prose. He says, p. 21 : ^In Alf heim dwells the nation of the
liosdlfar (light elves), down in the earth dwell the döckälfar
(dark elves), the two unlike one another in their look and their
powers, liosalfar brighter than the sun, döckälfar blacker than
pitch.* The liosalfar occupy the third space of heaven, Sn. 22.
Another name which never occurs in the lays, and which at
first sight seems synonymous with döckälfar, is svartdlfar (black

^ In Norway popTiIar belief keeps alfer and dverge apart, Faye p. 49.

^ The word appears in the name of the snowolad mountains {alpes, see Snppl.),
and that of the clear river {Albis, Elbe), while the ON. elf elfa, Swed. elf, Dan.
elv » flnvins, is still merely appellative ; the ghostly elvish swan (OHQ-. alpiz,
MHG. elbez, AS. seifet, ON. alpt, p. 429) can be explained both by its colour and its
watery abode ; likewise the Slav, labnd, lebed, from Labe.

3 Vanir also may contain the notion of white, bright ; consider the ON. V€Bnn
(puloher), the Ir. ban (albus), ben, bean (femina), Lat. Venue, Goth. qinS, AS. cwen.
To this add, that the Ir. banshi, ban-nghe denotes an elvish being usually regarded
as female, a fay. The same is expressed by tia, tighe alone, whidi is said to mean
properly the twilight, the hour of spirits (see Suppl.).


ELVES. 445

elyes) ; ^ and these Snorri evidently takes to be the same as
dvergar, for his dvergar dwell in Svartälfaheim^ (Sn. 34. 180.
136). This 18^ for one things at variance with the separation
of alfar and dvergar in the lays^ and more particnlarly with
the difference implied between döckälfar and dvergar in Saem.
92^ 188*. That language of poetry^ which everywhere else im-
parts snch precise information aboat the old faith^ I am not
inclined to set aside here as vagae and general. Nor^ in con-
nexion with this^ ought we to overlook the ndir, the deadly pale
or dead ghosts named by the side of the dvergar, SaBm. 92^
though again among the dvergar themselves occur the proper
names Nftr and N&inn.

Some have seen, in this antithesis of lighb and black elves, the
same Dualism that other mythologies set up between spirits good
and bad, friendly and hostile, heavenly and hellish, between angels
of light and of darkness. But ought we not rather to assume
three kinds of Itorse genii, liosal/ar, döchcUfar, svartalfar ? No
doubt I am thereby pronouncing Snorri^s statement £EJlacious :
* dock&lfar ern svartari en bik (pitch)/ Döchr ^ seems to me not so
much downright black, as dim, dingy ; not niger, but obscurus,
foscus, aquilus. In ON. the adj. iarpr, AS. eorp, fuscus, seems to
be used of dwarfs, Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 152 ; and the female name
Irpa (p. 98) is akin to it. In that case the identity of dwarfs
and black elves would hold good, and at the same time the Old
Eddie distinction between dwarfs and dark elves be justified«

Such a Trilogy still wants decisive proof ,* but some facts can
be brought in support of it. Pomeranian legend, to begin with,
seems positively to divide subterraneans into white, brown, and
black ; ^ elsewhere popular belief contents itself with picturing
dwarfs in gray clothing, in gray or brown cap-of-darkness ;
Scotch tradition in particular has its brownies, spirits of brown
hue, i.e. döck&lfar rather than svartftlfar (see Suppl.). But here
I have yet another name to bring in, which, as applied to such
spirits, is not in extensive use. I have not met with it outside

' Tfaorlao. speo. 7, p. 160, giTea the lios&lfar another name holt&lfar (white
elTee) ; I ha^e not foand the word in the old writings.

* Conf. OHG. tnnohal, MHG. ttmkel (our dunkel), Nethl. donker.

' E. M. Amdt*B Märchen and Jogenderinnemngen, Berl. 1818, p. 159. In Phil.
Ton Steinan't Volkssagen, Zeitz 1888, pp. 291-3, the same traditions are giyeo,
bot only white and black (not brown) dwarfs are distingnished.


446 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

of the Vogtland and a part of East Tharingia. There the small
elvish beings that travel especially in the train of Berchta^ are
called the heimchsn (supra^ p. 276) ; and the name is considered
finer and nobler than qaerx or erdmännchen (Börner p. 52). It
is hardly to be explained by any resemblance to chirping crickets^
which are also called heimchen^ OHG. heimili (Graff 4, 953) ;
still less by heim (domns)^ for these wights are not home-sprites
(domestici) ; besides^ the correct spelling seems to be lieinehen
(Variscia 2, 101), so that one may connect it with 'Friend
Hein/ the name for death, and the Low Sax. Aetn^nkleed
(winding-sheet, Strodtmann p. 84).^ This notion of departed
spirits, who appear in the ' furious host ' in the retinue of former
gods, and continue to lead a life of their own, may go to support
those nair of the Bdda; the pale hue may belong to them,
and the gray, brown, black to the coarser but otherwise similar
dwarfs. Such is my conjecture. In a hero-lay founded on
thoroughly German legend, that of Morolt, there appear precisely
three troops of spirits, who take charge of the fallen in battle
and of their souls : a white, a pale, and a bla^Jc troop (p. 28*),
which is explained to mean ' angels, kinsmen of the combatants
coming up from hades, and devils.^ No such warlike part is ever
played by the Norse dlfar, not they, but the valkyrs have to do
with battles ; but the traditions may long have become tangled
together, and the offices confounded.* The liosalfar and svartalfar
are in themselves sufficiently like the christian angels and devils ;
the pale troop ' uz dei* helle ' are the döckalfwi* that dwell ' niSri
i iörffu,^ nay, the very same that in the Alvism&l are not expressly
named, but designated by the words H heljo/ Or I can put it in
this way : lios&lfar live in heaven, döck&lfar (and näir ?) in hel,
the heathen hades, svartalfar in Svartalfaheim, which is never
nsed in the same sense as hel (see Suppl.). The dusky elves
are souls of dead men, as the younger poet supposed, or are we
to separate döckälfar and näir ? Both have their abode in the
realms of hades, as the light ones have in those of heaven. Of
no other elves has the Edda so much to tell as of the black.


^ *i7ein«n]de€d is not oonn. with Friend Hein, bnt means a Afinenkleed
(ch. XVin.) ; conf. also the hünnerskes, and perhaps the hannken, or aonken in
the Westph. sgönannken.' — Extr. from Suppl.

3 The different races of elyes contending for a corpse (Ir. Elfenm. 68).


ELVES, DWABFS, 447

who have more dealizigB with mankind ; svart&lfar are named in
abundance, lios&lfar and döck&lfar bat fitfully.

One thing we must not let go : the identity of svartdlfar and
dcergar.

Dvergr, Goth, dvairgs ? AS. dweorgy OHG. tvsrc, MHG. tverc,
oor Twerg^ answer to the Lat. nanus, Gr. vayyo<i (dwarf, puppet),
Ital. nano. Span, enano, Portug. anao, Proy. nan, nant, Fr. nain.
Mid. Nethl. also naen, Ferg. 2243-46-53-82. 3146-50, and nane,
3086-97 ', or Gr. wyfidlo^. Beside the masc. forms just given,
OHG. and MHG. frequently use the neut. form gituerc, getwerc.
Nib. 98, 1. 335, 3. MS. 2, 15\ Wigal. 6080. 6591. Trist.
14242. 14515. daz wOde getwere, Ecke 81. 82. Wh. 57, 25.
Oeiwerc is used as a masc. in Eilhart 2881-7. Altd. bl. 1, 253-6-8 ;
der twerk in Hoffm. fundgr. 237. Can deovfyyo^ (performing
miraculous deeds, what the MHG. would call wundersare) have
anything to do with it ? As to meaning, the dwarfs resemble
the Idsean Dactyls of the ancients, the Cabeiri and vdratKoi : all
or most of the d vergär in the Edda are cunning smiths (Sn. 34.
48. 130. 354). This seems the simplest explanation of their
hlaek sooty appearance, like that of the Cyclopes. Their forges
are placed in caves and mountains : Svartalfahdmr must there-
fore lie in a mountainous region, not in the abyss of hell. And
our Grerman folk-tales everywhere speak of the dwarfs as forging
in the mountains : ' von golde wirkent si diu spcehen were ' says
the Wartburg War of the getwerc Sinnels in Palakers, whereas
elves and elfins have rather the business of weaving attributed to
them. Thus, while dwarfs border on the smith-heroes and smith-
gods (Wielant, Vulcan), the functions of elves approach those of
fays and good-wives (see Suppl.).^

If there be any truth in this view of the matter, one can easily
conceive how it might get altered and confused in the popular
belief of a later time, when the new christian notions of angel
and devil had been introduced. At bottom all elves, even the
light ones, have some devil-like qualities, e.g, their loving to

' In LaositB and E. Thnringia querx^ in Thüringerwald querliek, Jac. von
Kdnigthofen, p. 89, has qvereh. In. Lower Saxony Bometimes tirdrm, for twarg.

* In Bretagne the korr, pi. horred answers to onr elf, the korrigan to our elfin ;
ind she too is desorihed like a fay : she sits by the fountain, combing her hair, and
whoever eatehes her doing so, must marry her at once, or die in three days (Ville-
marqa^ 1. 17). Hie Welsh cawr means a giant.


448 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

teaze men ; bat they are not therefore devils, not even the black
ones, but often good-natnred beings. It appears even that to these
black elves in particular, i.e. moantain spirits, who in various
ways came into contact with man, a distinct reverence was paid,
a species of worship, traces of which lasted down to recent
times. The clearest evidence of this is found in the Kormaks-
saga pp. 216-8. The hill of the elves, like the altar of a god,
is to be reddened with the blood of a slaughtered bull, and of
the animal's flesh a feast prepared for the elves : ' H611 einn er
he'San skamt t brott, er älfar bua i (cave that elves dwell in) ;
gräMng ]?ann, er Kormakr drap (bull that K. slew), skaltA f&, ok
rifiiSa bl6% grä^Angsins & holinn ütan, en gera alfum veizlu (make
the elves a feast) af sl4trinu, ok mun )^er batna.' An actual
alfablot. With this I connect the superstitious custom of cooking
food for angels, and setting it for them (Superst. no. 896). So
there is a table covered and a pot of food placed for home-smiths
and kobolds (Deut. sagen, no. 37. 88. 71) ; meat and drink for
domina Abundia (supra, p. 286) ; money or bread deposited in
the caves of subterraneans, in going past (Neocorus 1, 262. 560).^
There are plants named after elves as well as after gods : alpranke,
alpfranke, alfsranke, alpkraut (lonicera periclymen., Solanum dul-
cam.), otherwise called geissblatt, in Denmark troldbar, in Sweden
trullbär; dweorges dwosle, pulegium (Lye), Mone's authorities
spell dwostle, 322* ; dvergeriis, ace. to Molbech's Dial. Lex. p. 86,
the spartium scoparium. A latrina was called alfreh, lit. genios
fugans, Eyrb. saga, cap. 4 (see Suppl.).

Whereas man grows but slowly, not attaining his full stature
till after his fifteenth year, and then living seventy years, and a
giant can be as old as the hills ; the dwarf is already grown up
in the third year of his life, and a greybeard in the seventh ; ^
the Elf-king is commonly described as old and white-bearded.

^ The Old Pmss. and Lith. parttuk (thombkin) also has food placed for him,
conf. Lasicz 54. The Lett, hehrttuhki is said to mean a child's doll, Bergm. 145.

2 Emp. Ludwig the Bavarian (1S47) writes oontemptnonsly to Markgraf Carl of
Moravia : ' Beoollige, qnia nondnm venit hora, nt pigmei de Judea (1. India) statora
cubica evolantes fortitndine gnauica (1. gnanioa, x,e. nanica) terras gygantium de-
trahere debeant in minas, et at pigmei, id est homines bioubitales, qui in anno
tercio orescont ad perfectam quantitatem et in septimo anno senesount et moriun-
tur, imperent gygantibus.* PelzePs Carl IV. 1 nrk. p. 40. Gonf. BÖhmer's Font.
1, 227. 2, 570. Yet this description does not look to me quite German ; the more
the dwarfs are regarded as elves, there is accorded to them, and especially to elfins
(as to the Greek oreads), a higher and semi-divine age ; conf. the stories of change«
lings quoted further on. Laurin, ace. to the poems, was more than 400 years old.


ELVES, DWABPS. 449

Accounts of tbe creation of dwarfs will be presented in cbap.
XIX. ; but they only seem to refer to tbe earthly form of the
black elves, not of the light.

The leading features of ' elvish nature seem to be the follow-
ing :—

Man's body holds a medium between those of the giant and
the elf ; an elf comes as much short of human size as a giant
towers above it. All elves are imagined as small and tiny, but
the light ones as well-formed and symmetrica], the bl<ich as ugly
and misshapen. The former are radiant with exquisite beauty,
and wear shining garments : the AS. celfsciene, C»dm. 109, 23.
165, 11, sheen as an elf, bright as angels, the ON. 'friS sem
alfkfma* fair as elfin, express the height of female loveliness.
In Budlieb xvii. 27 a dwarf, on being caught, calls his wife out
of the cave, she immediately appears, 'parva, nimis pulchra,
sed et auro vesteque compta.' Fomald. sog. 1, 887 has : ' )^t er
knnnigt t öUum fornum f räsögnum um ]?at f61k, er äl/ar hdtu,
at yskt var miklu frtSara enn önnur mankind.' The Engl, elves
are slender and puny : Palstaff (1 Henry IV. i. 4) calls Prince
Henry ' you starveling, you elfskin I ' ^ The dwarf adds to his
repulsive hue an ill-shaped body, a humped back, and coarse
clothing; when elves and dwarfs came to be mixed up together,
the graceful figure of the one was transferred to the other,
yet sometimes the dwarfs expressly retain the black or grey
complexion : ' svart i synen,' p. 457 ; ' a little black mannikin,'
Kinderm. no. 92 ; ^grey mannikin,' Büsching's Wöch. nachr. 1,
98. Their very height is occasionally specified : now they attain
the stature of a four years' child,^ now they appear a great deal
smaller, to be measured by the span or thumb: 'k&me drier
spannen lane, gar eislich getan* Elfenm. cxvi. ; two spans high,
Dent. sag. no. 42 ; a little wight, ' reht als ein dumelle lane,' a
thumb long, Altd. bl. 2, 151; 'ein kleinez weglin (1. wihtZtn)

> In Denmark popalar belief piotores tbe eUekone as young and captivating
to look at in front, bat hoUow at die back like a kneading-trough (Thiele 1, 118) ;
which leminda one of Dame Werlt in MHG. poems.

s Whether the OHG. pmilin is said of a dwarf as Graff supposes (8, 852 ; oonf.
Swed. py8$ling)t or merely of a child, like the Lat. pnsns, pusio, is a qnestion. The
Mid. Age gave to its angeli these smaU dimensions of elves and dwarfs : * Ein
iegelioh eriifel schtnet also gestalter als ein kint in jdren vieren (years 4) in der
jagende,* Tit. 5895 (Hahn) ; * joncltohe gemalet als ein kint daz d& vünf jär (5
year) alt ist,' Berth. 184. Lanrtn is taken for the angel Michael ; Elberich (Otnit,
Ettm. 24) and Antiloia (Ubr. Alex.) are compared to a diild of four.


450 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

dumeln lano/ Ls. 1^ 378. In one Danish lay, the smallest trold
is no bigger than an ant, D.Y. 1, 176. Hence in fairy tales
däumling (thnmbling^ petit poucet) indicates a dwarfish figure;
the BaKTvXo^ ^BaZo^ is to be derived from SaKrvXo^ (finger);
TTvyfialo^ pigmsaus from irvyiirf (fist) ; the 0. Pruss. parstude,
perstuck, a dwarf, from Lith. pirsztas, Slav, perst, prst (finger) ;
and a Bohem. name for a dwarf, pj'c{tmt/i;/:«span-mannikin, from
pjd' (span).^ In Sansk. balakhilya -geniomm genns, pollicis
magnitndinem aeqoans, sixty thousand of them sprang out of
Brahma's hair, Bopp's Gloss. Skr. p. 122» (ed. 2, p. 238*) ; b&la,
b&laka=puer, parvulns, the 'ilya' I do not understand. There
are curious stories told about the deformity of dwarfs' feet^ which
are said to be like those of geese or ducks; ^ conf. queen Berhta,


1 When we read in a passage qnoted by Jungmann 4, 652 : * mezi pjdimxizj]^
kralnge trpasljk* (among thumbllngs a dwarf is king), it is plain that a trpasljk is
more than a pidimuzjk. Can this trp- (Slovak, krpec, krpateo) be conn, with our
kniips, knips, klips, gribs (▼. infra), which means one of small statnre, not quite a
dwarf? Fum. peukalot a thnmhUng, Ealew. IS, 67 ; mUi peni^ pikku mie$, little

man three fingers high 13, 6d-8. 24, 144. For dwarf the MHG. has also * der

kurze man,* Wigal. 6593. 6685. 6710 ; * der wenige man,' Er. 7442. Uk. Alex, (in
Wackem.'s Bas. Ms., p. 29^), in contrast with the ' michel man ' or giant. One
old name for a dwarf was ehurziboU, Pertz 2, 104, which otherwise means a short
coat. Hoff. GL 36, 13. Both. 4576. Conf. urkinde (nanns), Qramm. 2, 789.

' Deutsche Sagen, no. 149 ; I here give a more faithful version, for which I am

indebted to Hr. Hieron. Hagebuch of Aarau. Vo de kärdmändUne vd der Bams>

flue. Hinder der Ärlisbaoher egg, zwüschenem dörfle Hard und dem alte Lorenze-
kapällele, stoht im ene thale so ganz eleigge e grusle verträite flue, se sägere
dRamsflue. uf der hindere site isch se hohl, und dhöle het numme e chline igang.
Do sind denn emol, me weiss nid äzaot i wele johrgänge, so rarige mändle gsi, die
sind i die höhle us und i gange, hand ganz e so es eiges labe gefüehrt, und en
apartige hushaltig, und sind ganz bsunderig derhär cho, so wSrkliäi gestaltet, und
mit eim wort, es isch halt kei mönsch usene cho, wer se denn au seige, wohär se
cho seige, und was se tribe, ämel gekochet band se nüt, und wurzle und beeri
ggässe. unde a der flue lauft es bäohle, und i dem bächle händ die mändle im sum-
mer badet, wie tiible, aber eis vonene het immer wacht gha, und het pfiffe, wenn
öpper derhär cho isch, uf dem fuesswäg : denn sind se ame gsprunge, was gisoh
was hesch, der barg uf, dass ene kei haas noh cho wer, und wie der sohwick in
ehre höhle gschloffe. demäbe hand se kem mönsch nüt zleid tho, im gägetheü,
gfäUigkäite, wenn se händ ohönne. Einisoh het der Hardpur es ffiederle riswalle
glade, und wil er elei gsi isch, het ers au fast nid möge. £ sones mändle gsehts vo
der flue obenabe, und chunt der durah zhöpperle über driese, und hilft dem pur,
was es het möge, wo se do der bindbaum wand ufe thue, so isch das mändle uSfem
wage gsi, und het griohtet, und der pur het überunde azoge a de bindchneble. do
het das mandU sseü nid rächt ume gliret,und wo der pur azieht, sohneilt der bäum
los und trif t smandle ane finger und hets wärst blessiert ; do foht der pur a jom-
mere und seit ' o heie, o heie, wenns nomenau mer begegnet wer 1 ' do seit das
mändle ' abba, das macht nüt, salben tho, salben gha.'* mit dene worte springts
vom wage nabe, het es chrütle abbroche, hets verschaflet und ul das bluetig fln-

* Swab. * seil thaun, seil haun,' Sohmid p. 628. More neatly in MHG., * selb«
tffite, selbe habe,' MS. 1, 10^. 89«.


ELVES, BWABFS. 461

p. 280^ and the swan-maidens, p. 429. One is also reminded
of the blateviieze, Bother 1871. Ernst 8828; conf. Hauptes
Zeitschr. 7, 239.

The Mid. Nethl. poem of Brandaen^ bat no other version of the
same legend^ contains a very remarkable feature.^ Brandan met
a man on the sea^ who was a thumb long, and floated on a leaf,
holding a little bowl in his right hand and a pointer in his left :
the pointer he kept dipping into the sea and letting water drip
from it into the bowl ; when the bowl was fnll^ he emptied it out,
and began filling again : it was his doom to be measuring the
sea until the Jadgment-day (see Sappl.). This lilipatian floating
on the leaf reminds ns of ancient^ especially Indian myths.'

The &lfar are a people, as the Edda expressly says (Sn. 21), and

gerle gleit, und daa het alles ewäg pnzi. do spxingts wider ufe wage, nnd het zum
pnr gseit, er soll sseil nmne wider tune ge. MangiBch, wenn rachtsohafne lüt dam
tag gfaeaet oderbimde hand und se sind nit fertig worde bis zobe, und shet öppe
wdle eho ragne, so sind die Härdmändle cho, and hand geschaffet and gewamet
drof ine, bis alles im scharme gsi isch. oder wenns dort dnaoht isoh eho wättere,
hind se shea and sohom, wo dasse gläge isoh, de Ittte zom tenn aae trait, and am
moige het halt alles gross aage gmacht, and se hand nid gwüsst, wers tho het. den
hind erst no die mändle kei dank begehrt, nomenaa dass me se gem hat. Amenim
winter, wenn alles stei and bei gfrore gsi isch, sind die mändie is oberst has cho
zArlispach : se hand shalt gar gaet chönnen mit dene lute, wo dert gwohnt hand,
and sind ame dart dnadit afem ofe gläge, and am merge Yortag hand se se wieder
dras gmacht. was aber gar gspassig gsi isch, si hand ehre filettle rue vilre glo^ hand
e$ charlaehrothi mäntele träit, vom hala bi$ ufe bode nahe, jetzt hets im dorf so
gwonderige meitle and bnebe gha, die sind einisoh znacht vor das has go gen äsche
streae, dass se gsäche, was die härdmändle für füessle hebe, nnd was handse
gfande ? sisch frile wanderle : ante und geissfüess sind in der asche abdrückt gsi.
Aber to sälber stand a is<^ keis mandU meh cho, und se sind au nümme nf der
Bamsflne bliebe, i dkrüohe hand se se verschlnffe, tief id geissflae hindere, and händ
keis zeiche me von ene ge, and chömme nümme, so lang dlüt eso boshaft sind

JBee Snppl.). [Substance of the above. Earth-mannikin* on the Bamsflue :
iTed in a cave with a narrow entrance ; cooked nothing, ate roots and berries ;
bathed in a brook like dovet^ set one to watch, and if he whistled, were up the hills
faster than hares, and slipt into their cave. Nerer hart men, often helped : the
farmer at Hard was alone loading, a dwarf came down, helped to finish, got on the
waggon, did not properly run the rope over the bind-pole, it slipped off, the pole
flew np and hart him badly. Farmer : * I wish it had happened to me. ' Dwarf :
* Not so ; self do, self have.* Got down, picked a herb, and cured the wound in-
stantly. Often, when honest folk out hay or tied com, dwarfs helped them to
finish and get it under shelter ; or in the night, if rain came on, they brought in
what was lying eat, and didn't the people stare in the morning 1 One severe winter
they came every night to a house at ArUsbach, slept on the oven, departed before
dawn ; wore »carlet cloak» reaching to the ground^ $o that their feet were never teen ;
but some prying people sprinkled ashes before the house, on which were seen the
next morning marks of duck's and goose's feet. They never showed themselves
again, and never will, while men are so spiteful.]

* Blommaert's Oudvlaemsche gedichten 1, 118^ 2, 26*.

s BrahnuK sitting on a lotus, floats musing across the abysses of the sea. Yishnu,
when after Brahma's death the waters have covered all the worlds, sits in the shape
of a tiny infant on a leaf of the pipala (fig-tree), and floats on the sea of milk,
socking the toe of his ri^t foot. (Asiat. Bes. 1, 846.)


462 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

as the Alvtsm&l implies by patting ftlfar^ dvergar^ and helbÄar (if
I may use the word)^ by the side of men, giants, gods, &8es and
vanir, each as a separate class of beings, with a language of its
own. Hence too the expressions 'das stille volk; the good
people (p. 456) ; hnlda-/dZ& ; ' in Lausitz Indki, little folk (Wend,
volksl. 2, 268), from lud, liud (nation), OHG. liut. Boh. lid; and
in Welsh y teiihi (the family), y tylwyth teg (the fair family, the
pretty little folk, conf. Owen sub y. tylwyth, and DiefenbacVs
Geltica ii. 102. Whether we are to understand by this a histo-
rical realm situate in a particular region, I leave undecided here.
Dvergmdl (sermo nanorum) is the ON. term for the echo : a very
expressive one, as their calls and cries resound in the hills, and
when man speaks loud, the dwarf replies, as it were, from the
mountain. Herrau^saga, cap. 11, p. 50: 'SigurtSr stilti svft
h&tt hörpuna, at dvergmaX qva'S t höUunni,' he played so loud
on the harp, that dwarf^s voice spoke in the hall. When heroes
dealt loud blows, ^ dvorgamal sang nj qvörjun hamri,' echo
sang ia every rock (Lyngbye, p. 464, 470) ; when hard they
hewed, 'dvörgamäl sang uj fiödlun,' echo sang in the mountains
(ibid. 468). ON. ^ qyeSr viffi klettunum,* reboant rapes. Can
graeti alfa (ploratus nanorum) in the obscure Introduction to
the Hamdism&l (SsBm. 269^^) mean something similar ? Even our
German heroic poetry seems to have retained the same image :

Dem fehten allez n&ch erhal. To the fighting everything

resounded,
do beide berg und ouch diu tal then both hill and also dale
gaben ir siegen stimme. gave voice to their blows.

(Ecke^ ed. Hagen, 161.)

Daz d& beide berg und tal

vor ir siegen wilde wider einander allez hal. (ibid. 171.)

The hills not only rang again with the sword-strokes of the
heroes, but uttered voice and answer, Le. the dwarfs residing in
them did.^

This nation of elves or dwarfs has over it a hhig. In Norse
legend, it is true, I remember no instance of it among &lfar
or d vergär; yet Huldra is queen of the huldrefölk (p. 272), as


^ The Irish for echo is Bimilar, though 1«m toaatifal: muc oUo, twine of the rock..


ELVES, DWARFS. 453

Berchta is of the heinclien (p. 276), and English tradition tells
of an elf-queen, Chaucer's C. T. 6442 (the fairy queen^ Percy
3, 207 seq.) ; I suppose^ because Gallic tradition likewise made
female fairies (f6es) the more prominent. The OFr. fable of
Haon of Bordeaox knows of a roi Oberon^ Le. Auberon for
Alberon^ an alb by his very name : the kingdom of the fays
(royaome de la f 6erie) is his. Our poem of Orendel cites a dwarf
AJban by name. In Otnit a leading part is played by Jcilnec
Alberieh, Elberich, to whom are subject " manec berg und tal ; "
the Nib. lied makes him not a king, but a vassal of the kings
Schilbung and Nibelung ; a nameless king of dwarfs appears in
the poem of Ecke 80 ; and elsewhere king Ooldeina/r (Deut. held-
ensage p. 174. Haupt's Zeitschr. 6^ 522-8), hing Sinneis and
Lauria (MS. 2, 15»); 'der getwerge hünec Bild/ Er. 2086.
The Grerman folk-tales also give the dwarf nation a king (no.
152); hing of erdmännchen (Kinderm. 3, 167). Oubich (Gibika,
p. 137) is in the Harz legends a dwarf-king. Heiliiig is prince of
the dwarfs (no. 151).^ These are all kings of black elves, except
Oberen^ whom I take to be a light alb. It appears that human
heroes^ by subduing the sovereign of the elves, at once obtain
dominion over the spirits ; it may be in this sense that Völundr
is called msi alfa (p. 444)^ and Siegfried after conquering Elbe-
rich would have the like pretensions (see Suppl.).

The ON. writings have preserved plenty of dwarfs* names
which are of importance to the study of mythology (loc. princ.
S»m. 2^* 3*). I pick out the rhyming forms Vitr and Litr, Fili
and Kiliy Fiala/rr and Oalarr, SMrvir and Virvir, Anar and Onar,
Finnr and Qinnr, as well as the absonant Bivor and Bavor.
Ndr and Nainn are manifestly synonymous (mortuus), and so
are Thrdr and Thrainn (contumax, or rancidus?). With Nainn
agrees Dainn (mortuas again) ; with Oinn (timidus) Moinn ;
Ihalinn, Durinn, Thorinn, Fundinn, shew at least the same

^ A eaxionB cry of grief keeps reonning in Beveral dwarf -stories : * the king is
dMd 1 Urban is dead 1 old mother Pumpe is dead 1 * (Büsching^s Wöch. naohr. 1,
99. 101) ; the old Mchumpe is dead ! (Legend of Bonikaa), MHG. sohompfe, Fragm.
96«; eonf. Bange's Thür. ohron. 49*, where again they say ^king Enoblanch
(girlie) is dead 1 * Taking into aooonnt the saying in Saxony, * de gaue fru ist nu
aldot! ' with evident allasion to the motherly goddess (p. 253), and the similar
phnse in Seandinayia, * na em daniSar aUar diiir I * (p. 402) ; iJl these exclama-
tions seem to give vent to a grief, dating from the oldest times, for the death of
Mme superior being (see SuppL).


454 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

participial ending. Alfr, QandaXfr, and Vindalfr place the con-
nexion of elves and dwarfs beyond donbt. Ai occurs twice,
and seems to mean avas^ as in Saam. 100^; Firmr and Billingr
are like the heroes' names discussed on pp. 373, 380. Nyr, and
Nidiy Nyr and Nyra^r have reference to phases of the moon's
light ; a few other names will be touched upon later. In Seem.
45*^ and Sn. 48. 130 all dwarfs are said to be ' loalda synir/
sons of IvalcU, and he seems identical with the elvish Ivaldr,
father of I'Sann, S»m. 89^, just as Folkvaldr and Folkvaldi (AS.
Folcwealda), Domyaldr and Domvaldi« Domaldi, are used in-
differently. Ivaldr answers to the Dan. Evald and our Ewald,
a rare name in the older documents : we know the two 8L
Ewalds (niger et albus) who were martyred in the elder Pipings
time (695) and buried at Cologne, but were of English origin.
Beda 5, 10 spells it Hewald, and the AS. transl. Hedwold (see
Suppl.) .

Of the dwellings of light elves in heaven the folk -tales have
no longer anything to tell; the more frequently do they de-
scribe those of dwarfs in the rifts and caves of the mountains.
Hence the AS. names hergcelfen, duncelfen, muntcelfen. ON. ' b^
ec for %ör9 neSan, & ec undr steint siaiS/ I dwell underneath
the earth, I have under stone my stead, Sasm. 48*. 'dvergr sat
undir steininum,* Yngl. saga, cap. 15. 'dvergar bAa i iörffu oc
i steinum/ Sn. 15. Hlbenstein, JElphinstone, are names of noble
families, see JElwenstein, Weisth. 1, 4. In the Netherlands
the hills containing sepulchral urns are vulgarly denominated ^
alfenbergen (Belg. mus. 5, 64). Treasures lie hidden in graves
as they do in the abodes of elves, and the dead are subterraneans
as these are. And that is why dwarfs are called erdmännlein,
erdmanneken, in Switzerland hourdmandle, sometimes even unter"
irdische, Dan. underjordiske} They scamper over moss and fell,
and are not exhausted by climbing steep precipices : 'den wilden

^ I cannot yet make ont the name arweggers^ by which the earth-men are called
np in Einderm. 2, 168-4. [erd-wihte? v. ar- for erd-, p. 467» L 8 ; and ir^plin, p. 449] .
The ON. 6rvakr is hardly the same (see Snppl.). In Pmss. Samogitia * de undet'
hördschkei*; the tales abont them oarefnlly collected by Bensch, no. 48-59. The
Wends of Lüneburg called subterranean spirits görzoni (hill-mannikins, fr. gora,
hill), and the hills they haunted are still shown. When they wished to borrow
baking utensils of men, they gave a sign without being seen, and people placed
them outside the door for them. In the evening they brought them back, knocking
at the window and adding a loaf by way of thanks (Jugler*8 Worterb.). The £s-
thonian mythology also has its subterraneans (ma dUtued, under ground).


ELVES^ DWABFS. 455

getwergen wsere ze BtSgen dft gennoc/ enongh climbing for wild
dwarf Sy says Wh. 57, 25, speaking of a rooky region,^ The popu-
lar beliefs in Denmark about the biergToand, biergfolk, biergtrold,
are collected in Molbech's Dial. lex. p. 35-6. The biergmand's
wife is a biergehone. These traditions about earth-men and
mountain-sprites all agree together. Slipping ^ into cracks and
crevices of the hills^ they seem to vanish suddenly^ 'like the
schwick/ as the Swiss tale has it^ and as suddenly they come up
from the ground ; in aU the places they haunt, there are shown
such dwarfs holes, qtterlich's holes. So the ludhi in Lausitz make
their appearance out of underground passages like mouseholes ;
a Breton folk-song speaks of the korred^s grotto (Yillemarqud
1, 36). In such caves they pursue their occupations^ collecting
treasures^ forging weapons curiously wrought ; their kings fashion
for themselves magnificent chambers underground^ Elberich,
Laurin dwell in these wonderful mountains^ men and heroes at
times are tempted down^ loaded with gifts, and let go, or held
fast (see SuppL). Dietrich von Bern at the close of his life is
fetched away by a dwarf, Dent, heldens. p. 800 ; of Etzel, says
the Nibelungs' Lament 2167, one knows not 'ob er sich ver-
düffe in löcher der steinwende/ whether he have slipped away
into holes of the rocks': meaning probably, that, like Tanu-
haoser and faithful Eckart, he has got into the mount wherein
Dame Venus dwells. Of this Dame Yenus's mount we have no
accounts before the 15-1 6th centuries j one would like to know
what earlier notions lie at the bottom of it : has Dame Venus
been put in the place of a subterranean elf -queen, or of a goddess,
such as Dame Holda or Frikka? Heinrich von Morunge sings
of his beloved, MS. 1, 55* :

und dunket mich, wie si ge zuo mir dur ganze mHi/ren,
ir tr6st und ir helfe Iftzent mich niht trAren;
swenne si wil, so vueret sie mich hinrian
mit ir wtzen hant hohe über die zinnen^
ich wsBne sie ist ein Venus h^re.

1 Oiher instanoes are oollecied in Ir. Elfemn. Izxvi. * den here büten wildiu
getwere,* wild dwarfs inhabited the hill, Sigenot 118.

' SUefen is said of them as of the fox in Bdnh. zzzi. ; our aabsi sohlacht
stands for sluft (besohwiohtigen, lacht, kraoht, for swiften, loft, kraft), hence a hole
to slip into.

' Conf . Dentsohe sagen, no. 383, on Theoderic's boqI, how it is conyeyod into
Volean^B abj-sa.

VOL. U.


456 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

(Methinks she comes to me throagh solid walls^ Her help, her
comfort lets me nothing fear ; And when she will she wafteth me
from here With her white hand high o'er the pinnacles. I ween
she is a Venas high.) He compares her then to a Yenns or
Holda, with the elvish power to penetrate throagh walls and
carry you away over roof and tower (see chap. XXXI.^ Tann-
häuser; and Snppl.). Accordingly, when a Hessian nursery-
tale (do. 13) makes three hanle-männerchen appear, these are
henchmen of Holle, elves in her retinue, and what seems espe-
cially worthy of notice is their being three^ and endowing with
gifts : it is a rare thing to see male beings occupy the place of
the fortune-telling wives. Elsewhere it is rather the little earth-
wives that appear; in Hebel (ed. 5, p. 268) Eveli says to the
wood- wife : ' Grod bless you, and if you're the eaHh-mannikin's
wife, I won't be afraid of you.' ^

There is another point of connexion with Holda: the ex-
pressions 'die guten holden* (p. 266), ^ guedeholden* penates
(Teutonista), or holMchen, holdeken, holderchen seem perfectly
synonymous with 'the good elves;' holdo is literally a kind,
favourably disposed being, and in Iceland liuflingar (darlings)
and huldufolk, huldumenn (p. 272) are used for älfar. The form
of the Dan. hyldemänd is misleading, it suggests the extraneous
notion of hyld (sambucus, elder- tree), and makes Dame Holda
come out as a hyld&moer or hyldeqvind, viz., a dryad incorporated
with that tree (Thiele 1, 132) ; but its real connexion with the
huldre is none the less evident. Thus far, then, the elves are
good-natured helpful beings ; they are called, as quoted on p.
452, the stille volk (Dent, sagen. No. 30-1), the good people, good
neighbows, peaceful folk (Gael, daoine shi, Jr. daoine maith, Wei.
dynion mad). When left undisturbed in their quiet goings on,
they maintain peace with men, and do them services when they
can, in the way of smith-work, weaving and baking. Many a
time have they given to people of their new-baked bread or cakes
(Mone's Anz. 7, 475). They too in their turn require man's
advice and assistance in certain predicaments, among which are

1 One winter Hadding was eating his supper, when suddenly an earth-wife
pushed her head tip through the floor by the fireside, and offered him green vege-
tables. 8axo, p. 16, calls her cicutarum gerula, and makes her take Hadding into
the subterranean land, where are meadows covered with grass, as in our nursery-
tUes which describe Dame Holla's underground realm. This grass- wife resembles
a little earth-wife.


ELVES, DWABFS. 457

to be reckoned three cases in particular. In the first place^ they
fetch goodwiyes, midwives, to assist she-dwarfs in labour ; ^ nezt^
men of understanding to divide a treasure^ to settle a dispute ; '
thirdly^ they borrow a hall to hold their weddings in ; ^ but they
requite eyery f ayour by bestowing jewels which bring luck to the
man's house and to his descendants. They themselves^ however^
haye much knowledge of occult healing virtues in plants and
stones.^ In Bndlieb xvii. 18^ the captured dwarf retorts the
taunt of treachery in the following speech :


1 Banzan, Alvenaleben, Hahn. (Dent. sag. no. 41, 68-9) ; Müllenh. Bohleew.
hoist, sag. no. 443-4. Asbiöm Norw. s. 1, 18. Irish legends and fairy tales 1,
245-250. Mone's Anz. 7, 475; oonf. Thiele 1, 36. — Hölpher's Sämlingen om

Jämtland (Westeras 1775, p. 210) has the following Swedish story: *&r 1660, da

jag tillika med min hostru var gangen til f aboderne, som ligga | mil if ran Bagonda
prastegärd, och der sent om qv&Uen sattit och talt en stand, kom en Uten man
ingiende genom ddren, och bad min hostm, det Tille hon hjelpa bans AiMtru, som
di Ug oeh qvaldee med ham, karlen yar eljest Uten til Yäxten, wart i eynen, och
med ganüa gA Uäder försedd. Jag och min hostrn sutto en stund och nndrade
pi denne mannen, emedan vi onderstodo, at ban var et troll, och hört berättas, det
sidane, af bondfolk vettar kallade, sig altid i fäbodame uppehÄlla, sedan folket om
hosten sig derifrän begifyit. Men som han 4 ä 5 ganger sin begäran päyrkade, och
man derhos betankte, hvad skada bondfolket berätta sig ibland af vettame lidit,
di de antingen svorit p& dem, eller eljest vist dem med yränga ord til helvetet ;
ty fattade jag di til det ridet, at jag laste öfver min hostra nigre böner, yälsignade
henne, och bad henne i Guds namn följamed honom. Hon tog si i hastighet nigre
gamla linkläder med sig, och folgde honom it, men jag blef qvar sittande. Sedan
iiar hon mig ^id iterkomsten berättat, at di hon gitt med mannen ntom porten,
tykte hon sig liksom föras udi vädret en stund, och kom si uti en stuga, hvarest
l^edevid var en Uten mörk kammare, das hans hustru lig och yindades med bam
i en sang, min hustru har si stigit til henne, och efter en Uten stund hjelpt henne,
di hon födde bamet, och det in&i lika itbörder, som andra menniskor pläga hafva.
Karlen har sedan tilbndit henne mat, men som hon dertil nekade, ty tackade han
henne odi folgde henne it, hyarefter hon iter likasom farit i vädret, och kom efter
en stund til porten igen yid passklockan 10. Emedlertid Yoro en hoper gamla
rilfvenkedar lagde pi en hylla i stugan, och fann min hustru dem, di hon andra
dagen stökade i vriame : kunnandes försti, at de af vettret voro dit lagde. At si
i Banning är skedt, -vitnar jag med mitt namns undersättande. Bagunda, d. 12

april, 1671. Pet. Bahm.' [Substance of the foregoing: 1, the undersigned, and

my wife were accosted by a little man with black facti and old gray clothes, who
b<^ed my wife to come and aid his wife then in labour. Seeing he was a trolly
such as the peasantzy caU vettar (wights), I prayed over my wife, blessed her, and
bade her go. She seemed for a time to be borne along by the wind, found his wife
in a Uttle dark room, and helped, etc. Befused food, was carried home in the
same way ; found next day a heap of old silver vessels brought by the vettr,}

In Finland the vulgar opinion holds, that under the altars of churches there Uve
small mis-shapen beings called kirkonwäki (church-folk) ; that when their women
have difficult labour, they can be reUeved by a Christian woman visiting them and
laying her hand on them. Such service they reward UberaUy with gold and sil/er.
Mnemosyne, Abo 1821, p. 313.

s Pref. p. xzx. Neocorus 1, 542. Einderm. 2, 43. 3, 172. 225. Nib. 92, 3.
Bit 7819. Conf. Deutsche heldensagen, p. 78.

' Hoia (Deut. sagen, no. 35). Bonikau (EUsabeth von Orleans, Strassb. 1789,
p. 133; Leipzig 1820, p. 450-1). Busching's Wochentl. nachr. 1, 98 ; conf. 101.

« The wounded härdmäncUe, p. 450-1. Here are two Swedish stories ^iven in
odman's Bahuslan pp. 191, 224 : Biöm Mirtensson, accompanied by an archer,


458 WIGHTS AND BLVB8.

Absit at inter nos unquam regnaverit haec fraas I
non tarn longaevi tunc esBemas neqae sanu
Inter yos nemo loqiiitnr nisi corde doloso^
hinc neqne ad aetatem maturam pervenietis :
pro cajasque fide snnt ejas tempera yitae.
Non aliter loquimur nisi sicut corde tenemua,
neque cibos varios edimus morbos generantes,
longius incolv/mes hinc nos durahimus ac vos.

Thus already in the 10th century the dwarf complains of the
faithlessness of mankind^ and partly accounts thereby for the
shortness of human life^ while dwarfs, because they are honest
and feed on simple viands, have long and healthy lives. More
intimately acquainted with the secret powers of nature, they can
with greater certainty avoid unwholesome food. This remark-
able passage justifies the opinion of the longevity of dwarfs ; and
their avoidance of human food, which hastens death, agrees
with the distinction drawn out on p. 818 between men and gods
(see Suppl.).

went hunting in the high woods of ömekalla ; there thej found a bergsmed
(mountain-smith) asleep, and the huntsman ordered the archer to seize him, but
he declined : * Pray God shield you 1 the bergsmith will fling yon down the hilL*
But the huntsman was so daring, he went up and laid hands on the sleeper ; the
bergsmith cried out, and begged they would let him go, he had a wife and seven
little ones, and he would forge them auything they liked, they had only to put the
iron and steel on the cliff, and they'd presently find the work lying finished in the
same place. Biöm asked him, whom he worked for 7 *For my feUows,' he
replied. As Biöm would not release him, he said : ' Had I my cap-of-darkness
(uddehatt p. 463), you should not carry me away ; but if you don't let me go, none
of your posterity will attain the greatness you enjoy, but will go from bad to worse.'
Which afterwards came true. Biöm secured the bergsmith, and had him put in
prison at Bohus, but on the third day he had disappeared.

At Mykleby lived Swen, who went out hunting one Simday morning, and on the
hill near Tyfweholan he spied a fine buck with a ring about his neck ; at the same
instant a cry came out of the hill : ' Look, the man is shooting our ring-buck 1 *
* Nay,' cried another voice, * he had better not, he has not washed this morning'
(i.e., been sprinkled with holy water in church). When Swen heard that, he

immediately , washed himself in haste, and shot the ring-buck. Then

arose a great screaming and noise in the hül, and one said : ' See, the man has
taken his belt-flask and washed himself, but I will pay him out.' Another
answered : ' Tou had better let it be, the white buck will stand by him.' A tre-
mendous uproar followed, and a host of trolls filled the wood all round. Swen
threw himself on the ground, and crept und^ a mass of roots ; then came into his
mind what the troll had said, that the white buck, as he contemptuously caUed the
church, would stand by him. So he made a vow, that if Gk)d would help him out
of the danger, he would hand over the buck's ring to Mykleby church, the horns to
Torp, and the hide to Langeland. Having got home uninjured, he performed all
this : the ring, down to the year 1732, has been the Imocker on Mykleby church
loor, and is of some unknown metal, like iron ore ; the buck's horn was pre&erved
in Torp church, and the skin in Langeland church.


ELVES, DWABFS. 459

Whilst ia tliifl and other ways the dwarfs do at times have
dealings with mankind^ yet on the whole they seem to shrink
from man ; they give the impression of a downtrodden afflicted
race, which is on the point of abandoning its ancient home
to new and more 'powerful invaders. There is stamped on
their character something shy and something heathenishy which
estranges them from intercourse with christians. They chafe
at human faithlessness, which no doubt would primarily mean
the apostacy from heathenism. In the poems of the Mid. Ages,
Laurtn is expressly set before us as a Jieathen. It goes sorely
against the dwarfs to see churches built, bell-ringing (supra,
p. 5) disturbs their ancient privacy ; they also hate the clearing
of forests, agriculture, new fangled pounding-machinery for ore.^


1 More fully treated of in Ir. Elfenm. xciy. zot. ; oonf. Thiele 1, 42. 2, 2. Fa je
p. 17, is. Heinehen driyen away by grazing herds and tinkling sheephellst Varisoia
2, 101. Hesaian tales of wichtelmänherehen, Einderm. no. 89, to which I add the
following one ; On the Schwalm near XJttershansen stands the Dosenberg ; close
to the riyer'a bank are two apertures, once the exit and entrance holes of the
wichulmänner. The grandfather of farmer Tobi of Singlis often had a little
wichtelmann come to him in a friendly manner in his field. One day, when the
farmer was cntting com, the wiehtel asked him if he would undertake a carting job
across the river that night for a handsome price in gold. The farmer said yes, and
in the erening the unehtel brought a sack of wheat to the farmhouse as earnest ; so
four horses were harnessed, and the farmer drove to the foot of the Bosenberg.
Oat of the holes the mehtel brought heavy invisible loads to the waggon, which the
farmer took through the water to the other side. So he went backwards and
forwards from ten in the evening till four in the morning, and his horses at last
got tired. Then said the wiehtel : ' That wiU do, now you shall see what you have
been carrying.' He bid the farmer look over his right shoulder, who then saw the
whole vide ßeld full of little wichtelmen. Said the wiehtel : * For a thousand years
we haye dwelt in the Dosenberg, our time is up now, we must away to another
country ; but there is money enough left in the mountain to content the whole
neighbourhood.' He then loaded Tobi*s waggoa full of money, and went his way.
The farmer with much trouble got his treasure home, and was now a ridi man ;
his descendants are still well-to-do people, but the wichtelmen have vanished from
the land for ever. On the top of the Dosenberg is a bare place where nothing will
grow, it was bewitched by the wiehtel holding their trysts upon it. Every seven
years, generally on a Friday, you may see a high blue flame over it, covering a
larger space of ground than a big caldron. People call it the geldfeuer, they have
bnuhed it away witii their feet (for it holds no heat), in hopes of finding treasure,
but in vain : the devil had always some new hoouspocus to make some Uttle word
pop out of their mouths.

Then, lastly, a Low Saxon story of the Aller country : Tau Offensen bin

Kloster Wienhusen was en groten buem, Hövermann nenne he sick, die harre ok en
Bchip up der Aller. Eins dages komt 2 lue tau jüm un segget, he schölle se over dat
water schippen. Tweimal f änert hei over de Aller, jedesmal na den groten rume,
den se Allerd Kelten dauet, dat is ne grote unminschliche wische lang un breit, dat
inan se kums afkiken kann. Ans de buer taun tweitenmale over efauert is, sogt
ein von den twarmen to öme : * Wut du nu ne sunune geldes hebben, oder wut du
nakoptalbetalt sin? ' *Iekwill leiver ne summe gold nemen' sK de buer. Do
tmX de dne von den lütjen Kien sinen haut af , un settet den dem schipper^i^^ :
*I>a herrst dik dooh beteör estan, wenn du na koptal efodert herrst * segt de twarm;


460 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Breton legend informs as : A man had dug a treasure out of a
dwarf's hole^ and then cautionsly covered his floor with ashes and
glowing embers ; so when the dwarfs came at midnight to get
their property back^ they burnt their feet so badly, that they set
up a loud wail (supra, p. 41 3) and fled in haste, but they smashed
all his crockery. Villemarquö 1, 42 (see Suppl.).

From this dependence of the elves on man in some things^
and their mental superiority in others, there naturally follows
a hostile relation between the two. Men disregard elves, elves
do mischief to men and teaze them. It was a very old belief^
that dangerous arrows were shot down from the air by elves ;
this evidently means light elves, it is never mentioned in stories
of dwarfs, and the AS. formula couples together ' 6sagescot and
ylfagescot/ these elves being apparently armed with weapons
like those of the gods themselves ; ^ the divine thunderbot is even
called an albschoss (pp. 179, 187), and in Scotland the elf -arrow,
elf-flint, elf-bolt is a hard pointed wedge believed to have been
discharged by spirits ; the turf cut out of the ground by light-
ning is supposed to be thrown up by them.' On p. 187 I have
already inferred, that there must have been some closer con-
nexion, now lost to us, between elves and the Thundergod : if it
be that his bolts vrere forged for him by elves, that points rather
to the black elves.

Their touch, their hreath may bring sickness or death on man
and beast ; ' one whom their stroke has fallen on, is lost or in-
capable (Danske viser 1, 328) : lamed cattle, bewitched by them,

nn de buer, de vorher niehts nich seien harre, on den et ao lichte in sohipp vorko-
men was, ans of he nichts inne herre, süt de ganze AUerd von luter UUjen nUrucken
krimmein un wimmeln, Dat sind de twarme west, dei wier trökken sind. Von der
tit heft Hövermanns noch immer Tall geld ehat, dat senich kennen d6en, aTerst nn
sind se sau ein nan annern nt estorven, nn de hof is verkoft. ' Wann ist denn das
gewesen ? ' Vor ölen tien, ans de twarme noch sau in der weit wesen sind, nu
gift et er wol keine mehr, Tor drüttig, virzig jaren. [Substance of the foregoing :

Hövermann, a large farmer at Offensen, had also a ship on the B. AUer. Two

little men asked him to ferry them oyer. He did so twice, each time to a large
open space called Allerö. Dwarf : * Will yon have a lump sum, or be paid so madi
a head T ' Farmer : * A lump sum.* Dwarf : ' Yoa*d better have asked so much
a head.* He pnt his own hat on the farmer's head, who then saw the whole Aller 6
swarming with little men, who had been ferried across. The Hövermanns grew rich,
have now all died out, farm sold. * When did that happen 7 ' Ages ago, in the
olden time, when dwarfs were in the world, 80 or 40 years ago.]

^ Arrows of the Servian vila, p. 436. The Norw. äU^kudty elf-shotten, is said
of sick cattle, Sommerfelt Saltdalens prästegield, p. 119. Scot, elfshot,

3 Irish Elf-stories zIt. xlvi. cii.

3 Ibid. ciii.


ELVES, DWAKFS. 461

are said in Norway to be dverg-tlagen (Hallager p. 20) ; the term
elbentrötsch for silly halfwitted men, whom their avenging hand
has touched, was mentioned on p. 443. One who is seduced by
elyes is called in Danish eUemld, and this ellevildelse in reference
to women is thus described: 'at elven legede med dem/
Bbwing pnffiug beings language itself shews them to be from
of old : as spirihia comes from spirare, so does geiat, ghost from
the old verb gisan (flari, cum impetu ferri); the ON. gustr,
Engl, gust, is flatus, and there is a dwarf named Gustr (Ssem.
18P) ; ^ other dwarfs, Auatri, Vestri, Norffri, Suffri (SsBm. 2^. Sn.
9. 15. 16) betoken the four winds, while Vinddlfir, still a dwarfs
name, explains itself.^ Beside the breathing, the mere look of
an elf has mag^c power: this our ancient idiom denominates
intfehan (torve intueri, Gramm. 2,810), MHG. enUehen : 'ich
hin in gesegent (blessed), er was enUehen/ Eracl. 3239 ; ' von
der dbe wirt enUehen vil maneger man,' MS. 1, 50^ (see Suppl.).
The knot-holes in wood are popularly ascribed to elves. In
Smaland a tale is told about the ancestress of a family whose
name is given, that she was an elf maid, that she came into the
house through a knot-hole in the wall with the sunbeams ; she was
married to the son, bore him four children, then vanished the
same way as she had come. Afzelius 2, 145. Thiele 2, 18.
And not only is it believed that they themselves can creep
through, but that whoever looks through can see things other-
wise hidden from him ; the same thing happens if you look
through the hole made in the skin of a beast by an elf s arrow,
la Scotland a knot-hole is called elf bore, says Jamieson : ' a hole
in a piece of wood, out of which a knot has dropped or been
driven : viewed as the operation of the fairies.' They also say
auwisbore, Jutish ausbor (Molbech's Dial. lex. p. 22. 94). If on
the hill inhabited by elves the following rhyme be uttered 15
times:

allkuon, allkuon, est du her inn,
saa ska du herud paa 15 iegepinn 1

(elf- woman, art thou in here, so shalt thou come out through 15

* Norweg. alvguat, an illness oaased by having been breathed upon by elves,
Hallager 4i>.

3 Old French legend has an elf called Zephyr ; there is a German home-sprite
Bluerle, Hone's Anzeiger 1834, p. 260.


4B2 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

oak knot-holes^ egepind), the elfin is bound to make her appear-
ance, Molb. Dial. 99 (see Snppl.).

In name, and still more in idea, the elf is connected with the
ghostlike batterfly, the product of repeated changes of form.
An OHG. gloss (Gbraff 1, 243) says : bmcus, locusta quae nondam
Tolavit, quam vulgo albam vocant. The alp is supposed often
to assume the shape of a butterfly, and in the witch-trials the
name of elb is given by turns to the caterpillar, to the chrysalis,
and to the insect that issues from it. And these share even the
names of guf^ holden and böse dinger (evil things) with the spirits
themselves«

These light airy sprites have an advantage over slow unwieldy
man in their godlike power (p. 825) of vanishing or making
themselves invisible^ No sooner do tbey appear, than they are
snatched away from our eyes. Only he that wears the ring can
get a sight of Elberich, Ortn. 2, 68. 70. 86. 8, 27. With the
light elves it is a matter of course, but neither have the black
ones forfeited the privilege. The invisibility of dwarfs is usually
lodged in a particular part of their dress, a liat or a cloak, and
when that is accidentally dropt or cast aside, they suddenly
become visible. The dwarf-tales tell of nebelkappen (Deut. sag.
nos. 152-8-5), of gray coats and red caps (Thiele 1, 122. 135),
of scarlet cloaks (supra, p. 451n.).^ Earlier centuries used the
words helkappe, helkeplein, helkleit (Altd. bl. 1, 256), nebelkappe
(MS. 2, 156*. 258*»; Morolt 2922. 3932) and tamkappe. ByAlbe-
rfch^s and afterwards SigfriVs tamkappe (Nib. 98, 3. 836, 1.
442, 2. 1060, 2) or simply kappe (835, 1) we must understand
not a mere covering for the head, but an entire cloak; for
in 337, 1 we have also tamhiit, the protecting skin, and the

^ * Hnjas tempore prineipis (Heinrioi dacis Earinthiae) in montanitf Boae
ditionis gen$ gnana in caverDis montium habitavit, cum hominibuB veeoebantiir»
Indebant, bibebant, choreas ducebant, eed iiwisibiliter. Literas soribebant, rem-
pnblicam inter se gerebant, legem habentes et prinoipem, fidem oatholicam pro-
fitentes, domicilia hominnm latenter intrantes, bominibas consedentes et arridentee.
. . . Principe snbdnoto, nihil de eis amplius est anditum. Didtur quod
gemmat gettant, quae eoa reddunt invisibHeSt quia dtfarmitatem et parvitatem oor-
pomm erabesonnt.' Anon. Leobiens. ad ann. 1385 (Pez 1, 940*).

' 01. Wormin8*8 pref . to Glanssön's Dan. transl. of Snorre, Gopenh. 1633 : * der-
lor sigis de (dverger) at hafve hätte paa, huormid knnde giöre sig nsynlig.' Other
proofs are collected in Jr. Elfenm. IzziT. Izxy. A schretel wears a rStez keppel on
him (not on his head), ibid. cxyi. BoUenhagen's * bergmannlein * wear little white
shirts and pointed caps, Frosdhmenseler zx. y". Mangis, the Oarolingian sorcerer,
is called * lerres (latro) o le noir chaperon.*


ELVES, DWARFS. 463

schretel's 'rotez Jceppel* becomes in H. Sachs 1, 280^ a ^mantel
Scharlach rot des Zwergleins/ Beside invisibility^ this cloak
imparts superior strength, and likewise control over the dwarf
nation and their hoard. In other instances the cap alone is
meant: a Norwegian folk-tale in Faye p. 30 calls it uddehat
(pointed hat f), and a home-sprite at Hildesheim bears the name
of Hodeken from the felt hat he wore. Probably the OHG. helot-
helm (latibulnm). Gl. Hrab. 969*, the OS. helith-helmy Hel. 164,
29, AS. heoiahelm, Cod. Ezon. 862, 81, hcBlffhelm, Csedm. 29, 2,
ON. hialmr huliz (an Eddie word for cloud). Seem. 50V and the
AS. gnmhelm, Csedm. 188, 27. 198, 20. Beow. 666, all have a
similar meaning, though the simple helm and grime (p. 238)
already contain the notion of a covering and a mask ; for helm
is from helan (celare) as huot, hood, or hat, from huotan (tegere).
No doubt other superior beiugs, beside elves and dwarfs, wore
the invisible-making garment ; I need only mention OSin's hat
with tumed-up brim (p. 146), Mercury's petasvs, Wish's hat,
which our fairy-tales still call vnshing-hat,^ and Pluto's or Orcus's
helmet (ÄZS09 Kvvirj, II. 5, 845. Hesiod, Scut. 227). The dwarfs
may have stood in some peculiar, though now obscured, relation
to OSinn, as the hat-wearing pataeci, cabiri and Dioscuri did to
Jupiter (see Suppl.).

From such ability to conceal their form, and from their teazing
character in general, there will arise all manner of deception and
disappointment (conf. Suppl. to p. 331), to which man is exposed
in dealing with elves and dwarfs. We read: der alp trivget
(cheats), Fundgr. 327, 18 ; den triuget, weiz Got, nicht der alp,
not even the elf can trick him, Diut. 2, 34; Silvester 5199; die
mag triegen wol der alp, Suchen wirt xzxi. 12; ein getroc daz
mich in dem sl&fe triugety Ben. 429 ; dich triegen die elhin (1. elbe,
rhyme selbe), Altd. bl. 1, 261 ; elbe triegent, Amgb. 2^; diu elber
triegerUy Herbort 5^ ; in bedühte daz in trüge ein alp, Ir. elfenm.
Ivii.; alfs ghedroch, Elegast 51, 775. Reinh. 5367, conf. Horae
Belg. 6, 218*9 ; alfsche droch, Beinaert (prose Ixxii.^). In our


> Fomm. Bog. 2, 141 says of Eyvindr the soroerer : * giöi^i )>ei]n hulidshialm,*
mide for them a mist, darkness. hiUinhialmrj Fomald. sog. 3, 219 ; kuflgfattr 1,
9. 2, 20. See Bafn's Index sub v. dulgerfi.

' A weighty addition to the arguments for the identity of Wnotan and Mercary ;
ooqL p. 419 on the wishing-rod.


464 WIGHTS AND BLVBS.

elder speech gitroc, getroe, agetroe, abegetroe, denotes trickery
especially diabolic^ proceeding from evil spirits (Gramm. 2, 709.
740-1).^ To the same effect are some other disparaging epithets
applied to elves : elbischez getwas^elbischez as, eliischez ungehiure,
as the devil himself is called a getwfts (fantasma) and a monster.
So^ of the morbid oppression felt in sleep and dreaming^ it is
said quite indifferently, either : ' the devil has shaken thee, ridden
thee/ 'hinaht ritert dich satanas (Satan shakes thee to-nig1it)/
Fundgr. 1, 170; or else the elf, the nightmare^ : * dich hat geriten
der mar,^ 'ein alp zotimet dich (bridles thee)/ And as Dame
Holle entangles one's spinning or hair (p. 269), as she herself has
tangled hair/ and as stubbly hair is called HoUevaopf; ^ so the
nightelf, the nightmare, rolls up the hair of men or the manes and
tails of horses, in knots, or chews them through : alpzopf, dritten^
zopf, michtelzopf, weichselzopf (of which more hereafter), in Lower
Saxony mahrenlocke, elfklatte (Brem. wörtb. 1, 302), Dan. mare-
lok, Engl, elflocka (Nares sub v.), elvish knots, and in Shakspeare
to elf means to mat: 'elf all my hair in knots,' K. Lear ii. 3.
Here will come in those ^ comae equorum diligenter tricaiae/
when the white women make their midnight rounds (supra^ p.
287). The Lithuanian elf named aitwaras likewise mats the
hair : aitwars yo plaukus suzindo, suwele (has dravni his hair to-
gether). Lasicz 51 has : aitwaros, incubus qui post sepes habitat
(from twora sepes, and ais pone). Some parts of Lower Saxony
give to the wichtelzopf (plica polonica) the name of selkensteert,
selkin's tail (Brem. worth. 4, 749), sellentost (Hufeland's Journal
11. 43), which I take to mean tnfb of the goodfellow, homesprite


^ Daz analatie des sili pergenten trugetieveles, N. Bth. 44; (^dro^ phantaema,
0. iii. 8, 24; gedrog, Bel. 89, 22 ; tievels getroCy Earl 62* ; * ne dragn io 6nic dmgi
thing/ Hel. 8, 10. The dwarf Elberioh (Ortn. 3, 27. 6, 105) is called * ein trüge-
wiz ' ; conf. infra, bilvtz.

3 Our naehtmar I eannot produce either in OHG. or MHG. Lye gives AS.
* mare fieoce* incabus, ephialtes, bat I do not anderstand fiecce. Nearly akin is
the Pol. moraj Boh. mära, elf and evening butterfly, sphinx. In the Mark they say
both alb and mähren Adalb. Euhn, p. 874. Fr^oh eauchemaret cochemar, also
chauchevilUt ehauchi vieiUi (M6m. des Antiq. 4. 899 ; J. J. ChampoUion Figeac
patois, p. 12^ ; ItaL pesaruole, Span, petadilla^ O.Fr. appesari; these from caueher
(calcare), and pesar (to weigh down).

s In Einderm. 8, 44, Holle gets her terrible hair combed out, which had not
been combed for a year. A girl, whom she has gifted, combs pearls and precious
stones out of her own hair.

< Hess. Hollezaul (for -zagel, tail), HoUezopp, Schmidt's Westerw. idiot. 341.
Adelung has : * Jwllemopf, plica polonica, Pol. koltun. Boh. koltaun.'


ELVES, DWAKFS. 465

(geaellchezi).^ In Tharingia gaelloekoj Praatorlus^s Welfcbeschr. 1^
40. 293 (see Suppl.).

The Edda nowhere represents either &lfar or dvergar as mounted^
whilst oar poems of the Mid. Ages make both Hlberich and Lanrin
come riding. Heinrich von Oflterdingen bestows on them a steed
'als ein geiz (goat)/ and Ulrich's Alexander gives the dwarf
king Antilois a pony the nze of a roe,^ while Altd. bl. 2, 151
withoat more ado mounts the wihtel on a white roe. Antilois is
richly dressed, bells tinkle on his bridle-reins ; he is angry with
Alexander for spoiling his flower-garden, as Z/aurin is with Diet-
rich and Wittich. The Welsh stories also in Crofton Croker 3,
806 say : ^ they were very diminutive persons riding four abreast,
and moanted on small white horses no bigger than dogs ' (see
SuppL).

All dwarfs and elves are thiemsh. Among Eddie names of
dwarfs is an Älßiofr, Sadm. 2^; Alpris, more correctly Alfrikr
dvergr, in Yilk. saga cap. 16, 40. is called 'hinn mikli stelari^ ;
and in the Titurel 27, 288 (Hahn 4105), a notorious thief, who
can steal the eggs from under birds, is Elbegast (corrupted into
Elegast, Algast). In our Low German legends they lay their
plana especially against the pea^fields^^ Other thefts of dwarfs

I Ogonezyk Zakrzew6ki,.m his Hist of plica polonioa (Vienna» 1830), observes,
that its core also is aceompUshed with superstitions ceremonies. In Podlachia the
elftoft is solemnly eat off at Easter time and buried. In the Skawina district aboat
Crsoow, it is paxtially cropped with redhot shears, a piece of copper money tied
np in it, and thrown into the rains of an old castle in which evil spirits lodge ;
bat whoever does this mast not look round, but hasten home as fast as he can.
Saperatitioiu formulas for the core of plica are giyen by Zakrzewski, p. 20, out of
an Old Boh. MS. of 1825.

' Wackemagel*s Basel MSS. p. 28.

* Dent, sagen, nos 162, 155 ; to which I will here add two communicated by Hr.

Sehambaeh. The first is from Jtihade, near Göttingen : ^Yor nich langer tid gal

et to June noch twarge. Düse plegten np et feld to gan, un den läen de arften
bleuten die erbsen) weg to stelen, wat se tim sau lichter können, da se unsichtbar
voran dor (durch) ene kappe, dei se uppen koppe harren (hatten). Sau wören nu
ok de twarge enen manne ümmer up sin grat arftenstücke egan, un richteden öne
▼elen schilt damp an. Düt düerde sau lange, bet hei up den infal kam, de twarge
to fengen. Hei tog alsaa an hellen middage en sei (seil) rings um dat feld. As nu
de twarge nnner den sei dorkmpen wollen, feilen önen de kappen af , se Seiten nu
alle in blaten köppen, an wören sichtbar. De twarge, dei sau efongen wören,
geiwen öne vele gaue wore, dat he dat sei wegnömen mögde, un versproken ene
mette (miethe) geld dayor to gewen, hei solle mant vor aunrunupgange weer (wieder)
an diise stde komen. £n ander man segde öne awer, hei mögde nioh gegen sun-
nenupgang, sondern schon um twölwe hengan, denn da wore de dag ok schon
toegan. Düt d6 he, und richtig wören de twarge da met ener mette geld. Davon
heiten de Ifie, dei dei mette geld ekregen harren, Mettens. [Epitome : — ^Dwarfs at
Jühnde preyed on the pea-fields ; wore caps which made them invisible. One man
at high noon stretched a cord round his field. Dwarfs, creeping under it, brushed


466 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

are collecfced in Elfenm. xcii. xciii.^ and their longing for children
and blooming maids is treated of, p. civ. cv. Dwarf-kings rur^
away with maidens to their ^lonntains : Lanrtn with the lair
Similt (Sindhilt ?), Groldemar or Volmar with a king's daughter
(Dent, heldensag. 1 74, Hauptes Zeitschr. 6, 522-3) ; the Swed.
folk-lay ' Den bergtagna ' (-taken) tells of a vii^n, who spends
eight years with a mountaiu'ldng, and brings him seven sons and
a daughter, before she sees her home again.^ The following

their caps o£f, became visible and were caught ; promised him money, if he oame
there again before sunrise. A friend advised him to go as early as 12, for even
then the day (of the dwarfs?) was begnn. He did so, and got his meed.]

The second story is from Dorste in Osterode bailiwick : En buere harre arften

baten stan, dei wören one ümmer utefreten. Da word den bneren esegt, hei soUe
hengan an slaen met wdenraaen (weidenraten) drupe rtim, san sleogde gewis einen
de kappe af . Da geng he ok hen met sinnen ganzen lüen, an fank ok enen twarg,
dei sie (sagte) tan One, wenn he one wier las Ian (wieder los lassen) wolle, sau wolle
öne enn wagen val geld gewen, hei moste awer vor sunnenupgange komen. Da leit
ne de bnere las, an de twarg ste öne, wo sine hüle wore. Do ging de baere henn
nn frang enn, wannir dat denn die sunne apginge ? Dei sie tau öne, dei ginge
glooke twölwe ap. Da spanne ok sinen wagen an, un tug hen. Asse (as he) vor
de hülen kam, do jachen se drinne an sangen :

Dat ist gaat, dat de büerken dat nich weit,
dat de sonne um twölwe np geit 1

Asse Sek awer melle, wesden se öne en afgeflllet perd, dat solle mde (mit) nömen,
wier (weiter) können se Öne nits gewen. Da was de baere ärgerlich, awer hei wolle
doch fleisch vor sine hanne m6e nömen, da haade en grat stücke af, an land et
upen wagen. Asser m§e na has kam, da was alles schire gold.^ Da wollet andere
noch nae langen, awer da was hüle an perd verswannen. [Epitome : — A farmer,
finding his peas eaten, was advised to beat all roand with willow twigs, sore to
knock a dwarfs cap off. Ganght a dwarf, who promised a waggon full of money if
he'd come to his cave before sunrise. Asked a man when sanrise was f * At
twelve.' Went to the cave, heard shouting and singing : * ' Tis well the poor
peasant but little knows Üiat twelve is the time when the sun up goes t ' Is shown
a sltinned horse, he may take that 1 G«ts angry, yet cuts a great piece off for his
dogs. When he got home, it was all sheer gold. Went for the rest ; cave and
horse were gone.]

The remarkable trysting-time before sunrise seems to be explained by the dwarf-
kind's shyness of daylight, which appears even in the Edda, Siem. 61i> : they avoid
the suuy tiiey have in their eaves a different light and different time from those of
men. In Norse legends re-appears the trick of engaging a trold in conversation till
the sun is risen : when he looks round and sees the sun, he splits in two ; Asbiömsen
and Moe, p. 186. [The mSrohen of Rumpelstilzchen includes the dwarfs' song,
* 'Tis well,' etc., the splitting in two, and the kidnapping presently to be men-
tioned.]

^ But she-dwarfs also marry men ; Ödman (Bahuslän, p. 78-9, oonf . Aizelius 2,

157) relates quite seriously, and specifying the people's names : Beors förüldrar i

Hogen i Lurssockn, some bodde i Fuglekärr i Svarteborgssockn ; hvars farfar var
en skött, ok bodde vid et berg, ther flok hau se mitt pa dagen sitjande en viieker
piga ph en sten^ ther med at fänga henne, kastade han stal emellan berget ok kenne,
hvarpä hennes far gasmade eller log in i berget, ok öpnade bergets dörr, tilfrftgandes
honom, om han viU ha bans dotter? Hvilket han med ja besvarade, ok efter fum
var helt naken^ tog han sina kläder ok hölgde ofver henne, ok lat christna henne.
Tid afträdet sade hennes far til honom : * när tu skalt ha bröllup, skalt tu laga til
12 tunnor öl ok baka en hop bröd ok kiött efter 4 stutar, ok kiöra iUjordhögen eller
berget, ther jag hAller til, ok när brudskänken skall utdelas, skall jag tU ge min ' ;


BLVBS, DWABFS. 467

legend from Dorste near Osterode, it will be seen, transfers to
dwarf 8 what the Kindermärchen No. 46 relates of a sorcerer : —
£^!«?a8 enmal en maken int holt nan arberen egan, da keimen de
iuHwge on neiment m6e. Da se na örer hülen keimen, da yerleifde
Sek de eine twarg in se, nn da solle se öne ok frien, awer iest
(erst) wollen de twarge de andern twarge taar hochtit bidden,
nnderdes solle dat maken in hose alles reine maken un tanr hochtit
anreien. Awer dat mäken, dat wolle den twwrg nich frien, da
wollet weglopen, awer dat se't nich glik merken, tag et sin teug
at nn tag dat ne strawisch an, un da sach et ne tunne vul hanig,
da knip et rinder (hinein), un da sach et ok ne tunne vul feddem,
nn da krap et ok rinder, nn da et wedder rater kam, was et gans
Tal feddem, un da leip et weg un steig upn hoagen boam. Da
keimen de twarge derbunder (darunter) vorbi, un da se't seichen,
meinen se, et wore en vugel, da reipen se't an un sden :

* Wohen, woher du schöäne feddervugel ? '
' Ek kome ut der twarges hüle/

' Wat maket de schöäne junge brüt ? '

* Dei steit metn bessen un keret dat hus/
'Juchhei I sau wil wie ok hen/

und da se hen keimen, sden se taur brut 'gAen morgen,' un
g^en noch mehr dertan ; awer da se nich antwure, sleuchten se'r
hinder de aren, un da feil se hen^ (see Snppl.).

hvillLet ok akedde, Ty när de andre gäfvo, lyfte han up ta4;ket ok koitade en tä ttor
petmingepotte ther igenom^ at bänken 8ä när g&dt af , ok sade thervid : * ther &r min
skiuik I ' ok sade ytterligare : * när tu skal ha tin hemmagifta, skaltn kiöra med 4t
hastar hit til berget ok lä tin andeL' TA han sedeimera efter hans begäran kom
tit, fik hau kopparkättlart then ene större an then andre, tÜB then yttersta storste
kättftlen blef npiyld med andra mindre; item brandcreatur, Bom voro hiehneta, af
hTÜken färg ok creatnrslag, aom äro stora ok frodiga, the an ha qvar p& rik, i
Tannrns gäU beläget. Thenne mannen Beors far i Foglekärsten benämd, aflade en
hop bam med thenna sin sAledes frftn berget afhämtade hostni, bland hyilka var
nimnemannen Beor p& Hogen ; so har 01a Stenson i stora Bijk yarit Beors syster-
son, hyilken i förledit &r med döden afgik. [Epitome : — Beor's fathers dwelt, etc.
One, an archer, Uyed near a hill, saw one day at noon a fine girl titling on a stone ;
to get her, he threw steel hetween her and the hill. Her father opened Üie door of
the hUl, asked him if he wanted his daughter. He answered yes, and as she was
mtked, threw some of his clothes over her ; had her christened. Father : * At thy
wedding bring ale, bread and horseflesh to my hillf and I will give thee a wedding
g^* This being done, he lifted their roof and threw in a great sum of money.
*Kow for honae-famitare, come here with four horses.* The man did so, and re-
edved copper kettles of all sizes, one inside the other, etc., eto. By this wife, thos
fetched from the hill, he had many children ; one was Beor, whose nephew 0. S.
died only last year.]

^ Translation : — Onoe a girl had gone into the wood after strawberries, when the


468 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

They abstract well-shaped children from the cradle^ and sab-
stitnte fcheir own ugly ones^ or even themselves. These sop«
posititions creatares are called changelings^ cambiones (App.^
Snperst. E.) ; OHG. wihselinga (N. Ps. 17, 46. Cant. Deuteron.
5), our wechselbalge; Swed. bytingar, Dan. bittinger; also onr
kielkröpfe, dickköpfe from their thick necks and heads. (Stories
about them in Thiele 1, 47. 8, 1. Faye p. 20. Ir. Elfenm.
xli.-xlv. cv. Dent. sag. nos. 81-2, 87-90.)^ So early as in the
poem 'Zeno^ (Bruns p. 27 seq.) it is the devil that fills the
place of a stolen child. The motive of the exchange seems to be,
that elves are anxious to improve their breed by means of the
human child, which they design to keep among them, and for
which they give up one of their own. A safeguard against such
substitution is, to place a key, or one of the fathe^^s clothes, or


dwarfs came and carried her off. When they got to their oave, one dwarf fell in
love with her, and ehe was to marry him ; but first the dwarfs were going to bid the
other dwarfs to the wedding, in the meantime the girl was to make the house dean
and prepare it for the wedding. But the girl, she did not want to many the dwarf,
so she would run away ; but &at they might not notice it at once, she pulled her
dress off and put it round a bundle of straw ; then she saw a tub full of honey and
crept into it, and then she saw a tub full of feathers and crept into that also, and
when she came out again, she was all over feathers ; then she ran away, and climbed
up a high tree. Then the dwarfs came past under it, and when they saw her, they
thought she was a bird, and called to her and said : * Whither and whence, thou

pretty feathered bird?' 'I come out of the dwarfs hole ' 'What does the

pretty young bride T * * She stands with a besom and sweeps the house.*

* Hurra ! then we'll go there too.' And when they got there, they said to the

bride * good morning,' and said other things too ; but as she never answered, they
boxed her ears, and down she fell.

Assuredly the dwarfs in this story are genuine and of old date. Besides, it can
be supplemented from Einderm. 8, 75, where the returning dwarfs are preceded by
foxes and bears, who also go past and question the 'Pitcher's fowl.' There the
tub of honey in the dwarf's house is a cask of bloody but both together agree wonder-
fully with the vessels which the dwarfs Fialar and Galar keep filled with Kv&si's
precious blood and with honey. Sn. 83. 84.

^ Dresd. saml. no. 16, of the * mttllers sun.' A foolish miller begs a girl to teach
bitn the sweetness of love. She makes him lick honey all night, he empties a big
jar, gets a stomach-ache, and fancies himself about to become a parent. She sends
for a number of old women to assist him : * da fragt er, war sein kind wer komen
(what's come of the baby) T sie sprachen : hastu nit vernommen 7 ez was ain rehter
wUlonbalk (regiüar cha^eling), und tett als ein guoter schalk: da er erst von
deinem leib kam (as soon as bom), da fuer ez paid hin und entran hin uff zno dem
fürst empor. Der müller sprach : paid hin uff daz spor 1 vachent ez (catch him) I

pringent ez mir herab ! ' They bring him a swallow in a covered pot. Again a

Hessian folk-tale : A woman was cutting com on the Dosenberg, and her infant lay
beside her. A wichtel-wife crept up, took the human child, and put her own in its
place. When the woman looked for her darling babe, there was a frightful thick-
head staring in her face. She screamed, and raised such a hue and cry, that at last
the thief came back with the child ; but she would not give it up till the woman
had put the wichulhalg to her breast, and nourished it for once with the generous
milk of human kind.


ELVES, BWABFS. 469

Bteel and needles ia the cradle (App.^ Saperst. Germ. 484. 744.
Swed. 118) .1

One of the most striking instances of agreement that I know
of anywhere occurs in connection with prescriptions for getting
rid of your changeling.

In Hesse, when the wichtelmann sees water boiled over the
fire in eggshells, he cries oat : ' Well, I am as old as the Wester-
vfoldf bnt I never saw anything boiled in eggshells ; ' Km. no.
39. In Denmark a pig staffed with skin and hair is set before
the changeling : ' Now, I have seen the wood in Tisö young three
times over, bat never the like of this ' : Thiele 1, 48. Before
an Irish changeling they also boil eggshells, till he says : ' Fve
been in the world 1500 years, and never seen that ^ ; Elfenm. p.
38. Before a Scotch one the mother puts twenty-four eggshells
on the hearth, and listens for what he will say ; he says : ' I was
isven before I came to my nurse, I have lived four years since,
and never did I see so many milkpans;^ Scott's Mintrelsy 2,
174. In the Breton folksong (Yillemarqa6 1, 29) he sees the
mother cooking for ten servantmen in one eggshell, and breaks
out into the words : ' I have seen the egg before [it became] the
white hen, and the acorn before the oak, seen it acorn and sapling
and oak in Brezal wood, but never aught like this.' This story
about the changeling is also applied to Dame Gauden's little dog,
chap. XXXI. YillemarqaS 1, 82, quotes in addition a Welsh
legend and a passage from Geoffrey of Monmouth, in which the
Breton and Welsh formula for great age is already put into
the mouth of Merlin the wild ; in each case an ancient forest is
named. In all these stories the point was, by some out-of-the-
way proceeding, to get the changeling himself to confess his age,
and consequently the exchange. Such traditions must have
been widely spread in Europe from the earliest times ; and it was
evidently assumed, that elves and korred had a very different
term of life assigned them from that of the human race (see
Snppl.).

All elves have an irresistible fondness for music and dancing.
By night you see them tread their round on the moonlit meadows,

> The FinnB eall a ohaDgeliiig luoti : monBtnim nee non infans matre dormiente
a migis Buppositas, qoales patant esse infantem rachitide laborantem (Benvall). A
Breton etory of ihb korrigan ohanging a ehild is in Yillemarqad 1, 25.


470 WIGHTS AND BLYBS.

and at dawn perceive their track in the dew : Dan. aUedands,
Swed. älfdands, Engl, fairy rings, fairy green* The sight of
mountain-spirits dancing on the meadows betokens to men a
fruitfal year (Deut. sag. no. 298). An Austrian folk-song in
Schottky, p. 102^ has : ' und duärt drobn afm beargl, da dansn
zwoa zweargl, de dftnzn so rar.' In Laurin'a mountain, in
Yenus's mountain^ there murmurs a gay seductive musici dances
are trod in them (Laurin, 24) ; in the Ortnit (Ettm. 2, 17) there
is 'ein smdlez pfat getreten mit kleinen fiiezen/ a small path
trod by little feet. Songs of elßns allure young men up the
mountain, and all is over with them (Svenska fomsanger 2, 305.
Danske viser 1, 285-240).^ This performance is called elffrus hk,
elfvelek. The ordinary fomyrSalag ' bears among Icelandic poets
the name liufiingalag (carmen genii), Olafsen p. 56 ; in Norway
that kind of sweet music is called hvMreslat (supra, p. 271).
One unprinted poem in MHG. (Cod. pal. 341. 357*) contains
the remarkable passage : ' there sat fiddlers, and all fiddled the
albleidi (elf-lay) ' ; and another (Altd. bl. 2, 93) speaks of
' Seiten spil und dee wihtels schal ' : it must have been a sweet
enchanting strain, whose invention was ascribed to the elves.'
Finn Magnusen derives the name of the dwarf Haugspori (Saom.
2^) from the footmarks printed on grass by an elf roaming over
the hills at night. And a song in Yillemarqu6 1, 39 makes the
dwarfs dance themselves out of breath (see SuppL).

This fondness of elves for melody and dance links them with
higher beings, notably with half-goddesses and goddesses. In
the ship (of Isis) songs of joy resound in the night, and a dancing
multitude circles round it (p. 258). In Dame Holda's dwelling,
in Dame Yenus's mountain, are the song and the dance. Celtic
traditions picture the fays as dancing (M6m. de Pacad. celt. 5,
108) ; these fays stand midway between elfins and wise women.^
The Hymn to Aphrodite 260 says of the mountain-nymphs :

Sffpov fihf ^(oov(n K€U afißpoTov elBap eSovai,
seal r€ fier adavaroiai, koKov 'xppov ippaxravro.

^ Folk-tale of the Hanebierg in the Antiqyariake Annaler 1, 331-2.

' Fom-yr5a-Iag, ancient word-lay, the alliteratiTe metre of narratlTe verse, in
which the poems of the Elder Edda are written. — Tbanb.

* Conf . Lr. Elfenm. lzzzi.-lzzxiii., and the wihtel-ahow aboYe, p. 441 note ; Ihre
sub T. älfdans ; Amdt's Joom^ to Sweden 3, 16.

^ Like the bervian vUy, who hold theii douce on moontaiu and mead, p. 136.


ELVES, DWABFS. 471

(On deathless food they feed, and live fall long. And whirl with
gods through gracefal dance and song.) No wonder onr sage
elves and dwarfs are equally credited with having the gift of
diuinaiion. As sach the dwarf Andvari appears in the Edda
(Sffim. 18P), and still more Alvts (all- wise) ; dwarf Engel (L.
Germ, ögel) prophesies to Siegfried (Hum. Sifr. 46, 4. 162, 1),
BO does Gripir in the Edda, whose father^s name is Eylimi ; in
the OFr. Tristran, the nains (nanus) Frocin is a devins (divinator),
he interprets the stars at the birth of children (11. 318-326. 632).
When, in legends and fairy tales, dwarfs appear singly among
men, they are sage caunaellors and helpful, but also apt to fire up
and take offence. Such is the character of Elberich and Oberen ;
in a Swiss nursery- tale (no. 165), ' e chlis isigs mandle' (a little
ioe-grey mannikin), 'e Mia mutziga mandle' (stumpy m.), ap-
pears in an 'isige chlaidle' ig^^Y coat), and guides the course
of events ; elves forewarn men of impending calamity or death
(Ir. Elfenm. Ixxxvi.). And in this point of view it is not without
significance, that elves and dwarfs ply the spinning and weaving
BO mnch patronized by Dame Holda and Frikka. The flying gos-
samer in autumn is in vulgar opinion the thread spun by elves and
dwarfs; the Christians named it Marienfaden (-thread), Marien-
sommer, because Mary too was imagined spinning and weaving.
The Swed. dverg signifies araneus as well as nanus, and dvergs^nät
a cobweb.^ The ON. saga of Samson hinn fagri mentions in cap.
17 a marvellous ' skickja, sem alfkonumar höf'Su ofit/ mantle that
elfins had woven. On a hill inhabited by spirits you hear at
night the elfin (which 'troldkone' here must mean) spinning,
and her wheel humming, says Thiele 3, 25. Melusina the fay is
called alvinne in a Mid.Nethl. poem (Moneys Niederl. Yolkslit.

p. 75). On the other hand, the male dwarfs forge jewels and

arms (supra, p.444-7,and in fuller detail in Ir. Elfenm. Ixszviii.).'

^ So the Breton karr is both dwarf and spider.

' Here is one more legend from Ödman's Bahnslän, p. 79 :— Thessntan har
man iteldllige berattelser ok sagor om smedar^ sA 1 hogar som barg, s&som bar i
Fossamstorp hdgar, hTareet man hördt, at the smidt likgom i en annan smi^ja om
tftonen efter aoUnet nedergdngt ok eljest mitt pa höga middagen. For 80 ftr sedan
gik Olas fadar i Sartnng, benämd Ola Simonsson, här i f orsamlingen fr&n SUngevald
hafrandes med eig en hand, hvilken t& ban blef varse mitt pA dagen bargtmajmen^
■om t& tmidde pd en star tten^ skiälde ban p& honom, hvar p& hörgsmeden^ som bade
en lintgrd rdk ok bldtmlen halt, begynte at snarka At bnnden, som tillika med bna-
boaden fonno rideligast, at lemna honom i fred. Thet gifvas ok anna ibland
gBinene man mnl eradfixer al metall, som gemenligen halles fore yara i fordna

VOL. n. D


472


WIGHTS AND ELVES.


To bring pig-iron to dwarfs, and find it the next morning outside
the cave, ready worked for a slight remuneration, is a feature of
very ancient date; the scholiast on Apollon. Ehod. (Argon. 4,
761) illustrates the a/cfiove^ *H<f>al<rToio (anvils of H.) by a story
of the volcanic isles about Sicily taken from Pytheas's Travels :
TO 0€ iraXaiov iKiyero rby ßovXofievov apybv aßripov äiro^epeiv
fcal iirl rtfv avpiov ikOovra Xafißdveiv fi ^Uf>o^ ff el rt, aXXo ^dcXe
tcaTactcevda-ai, KaraßaKovra fiiadov (see SuppL).

What I have thus put together on the nature and attributes of
elves in general, will be confirmed by an examination of particular
elvish beings, who come forward under names of their own.

Among these I will allot the first place to a genius, who is
nowhere to be found in the Norse myths, and yet seems to be
of ancient date. He is mentioned in several MHO. poems :

Sie weiten daz kein pilvnz

si di schüzze durch diu knie. Wh. 324, 8.

Er solde sin ein guoter

und ein pilewis geheizen,

davon ist daz in reizen

die Übeln ungehiure. Büediger von zwein gesellen (Cod,

regiment.) 15^,
D& kom ich an bulwechsperg gangen,
d& schöz mich der bulwechs,
da schöz mich die bulweclisin,

-da schöz mich als ir ingesind. Cod. vindob. 2817. 71*.
Von schrabaz pilmhten. Titur. 27, 299 (Hahn 41 16).
Sein part het manchen pilbißzoten. Casp. von der Ron.

heldenb. 156^.

Out of all these it is hard to pick out the true name. Wolfram

tider smidde i Mrg, hvilka the ofdratandiire broka at hänga pä boekap, Bom hastigt
fädt ondt Ute pä marken, eller som säges blifyit vödenlaffne, hvarigenom tro them
bli helbregda. Af sädana bärgsniiden har jag ok nyligen kommit öf^er ett, som
. ännu är i förrar, ok pä ofvannämde satt gik i Un at beta siukdommar. [Epitome :
^—Maoj stories of smithi in the mountains, who worked as at any other smithy^
after tunset or else at high noon. Eighty years ago Ola Simnnsson was coming,
eto. ; had with him a dog, which, on seeing a hill-man forging on a great eume^
barked at him ; but the hiU-emith^ who wore a light-grey coat and blue wooUen cap,
snarled at the dog, eto. There are small metal crucifixes held to hare been forged
in the hilU in former times, which simple folk still hang on cattle hurt in the field
or weather-ttrieken, whereby they trow them to get healed. Of such hiU-wrought
things I have lately met with one, that used to be lent out to caie sicknesses.]


piLWiz, BiLwrr. 473

makes pflwiz (var. pilbiz, bilwiz^ bilwitz) rhyme with biz (morsns)^
where the short vowel in the last syllable seems to point to
pilwiht; the same with bilbis in another poem^ which would have
spelt it bilbeis if it had been long ; so that we oannot connect it
with the OS. balowts^ nor immediately with the bilwts and balwis
oontrasted on p. 874. The varying form is a sign that in the
13-14th century the word was no longer understood; and later
on^ it gets farther distorted^ till bulwechs makes us think of a
totally unconnected word balwahs (hebes).^ A confession-book
of the first half of the 15th century (Hoffmann's Monatschr. 753)
lias peleu^ysen synonymous with witches, and Colerus^s Hausbuch
(Mainz 1656), p. 403, uses bihlweisen in the same sense;, several
authorities for the fonn pübü are given in Schm. 4, 188. We
welcome the present Westph. Nethl. belevoitten in the Teutonista,
where Schnüren considers it equivalent to guede holden and tüüte
vrcuwen (penates). Eilian has belemtte (lamia) ; and here comes
m fitly a passage from 6isb. Yoetius de miraculis (Disput., torn.
2,1018): 'De illis quos nostrates appellant beeldwit et blinde
bellen, a quibus nocturna visa videri atque ex iis arcana revelari
patant.' Belwii then is penas, a kindly disposed' home-sprite,
a guoU holds (supra, p. 266), what Hüediger calls 'ein guUer
nnd ein püewizJ Peculiar to AS. is an adj« bilwit, bilewit,
Codm. 53, 4. 279, 28, which is rendered mansuetus, simplex^ but
might more exactly mean aequus, Justus.. God is called ^bilewit
fadder ' (Andr. 1996)^ Booth, metr. 20, 510. 538 ; and is also
addressed as such in Cod. exon. 259, 6 ; again, ' bilvritra breoste '
(bonorum, aequorum pectus), Cod. exon. 843, 23. The spelling.
bäehunt (Beda 5, 2, 13, where it translates simplex) wouldJead
to hwlt (albus), but then what can bil mean f I prefer the better
authorized bilewit, taking ' wit ' to mean scius, and bilwit, OHG.
pilawiz, pilwiz ? to mean aequum' scions,. aeq^us, bonus, although

1 Fandgr. 1, 848, where palwaeee rhymes with yahse, as MHG. often has * wahs
for seotna, when it should he * was,' OHG. hnas, AS. hwes, ONr hvass ; thus the
OHG. palohaas->hadl7 sharp, i.e, blunt, ON. böihvass? just as palotili»balefiil
deed. A later form bülwächs in Sohm. 4, 15.

* The simple bü seems of itself to be aeqnitas, jus, and mythio enough (p. 876).
MHG. bUiieh (aeqnns), Dial 8, 8S. Fnndgr. ü. 56, 27. 61, 88. 66, 19. Beinh.
854. Iw. 1680. 5244. 5780. 6842. Ls. 2, 829. biUiehen (jore), Nib. 450, 2. der
hiUick (aeqnitas). Trist. 6429. 9874. 10062. 18772. 18027. An OHG. IdUih 1 only
know from W. Ixr. 27, where the L^den MS. has büithlieh. As the notions
* aeqnns, aeqnalis, similis ' lie next door to each other, jpiladi, bilidi (our bild) is
nsUy aeqnalitas, similitndo, the ON. likneski (imago). The Oeltic hü also means
good, mfld ; and Leo (Malb. GL 88) tries to explain büwiz from hUbhelth, bUbhith.


474 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

an adj. ' vit, wiz ' occurs nowhere else that I know of, the ON.
vitr (gen. vitrs) being provided with a suffix -r. If this etymology
is tenable, büynz is a good genius, but of elvish nature ; he hannts
mountains, his shot is dreaded like that of the elf (p. 460), hair
is tangled and matted by him as by the alp (p. 464). One
passage cited by Schm. 4, 1 88, deserves particular notice : ' so
man ain kind oder ain gewand opfert zu aim pilbispawm/ if one
sacrifice a child or garment to a pilbis-tree, ue. a tree supposed
to be inhabited by the pilwiz, as trees do contain wood-sprites
and elves. Bömer's Legends of the Orlagau, p. 59. 62, name a
witch Bilbze. The change of bilwiz, bilwis into bUwiht was a step
easily taken, as in other words also s and h, or s and hi inter*
change (lies, lioht, Gramm. 1, 138), also st and ht (forest, foreht,
Gramm. 4, 416) ; and the more, as the compound bUtoiht gave
a not unsuitable meaning, ' good wight.' The Gl. blas. 87* offer
a wihsilstein (penas), nay, the varying form of our present names
for the plica (p. 464), weichselzopf, wichselzopf, wichtelzopf {bich^
telzopf) makes the similar shading off of bilweichs, bilwechs, hiU
wicht probable : I have no doubt there is even a bilweichszopf,
biltvizzopf to be found.^

Popular belief in the last few centuries, having lost the old and
higher meaning of this spiritual being, has retained, as in the case
of the alb, of Holla and Berhta, only the hateful side of its natare :
a tormenting terrifying spectre, tangling your hair and beard,
cutting up your com, it appears mostly in a female form, as a
sorceress and witch. Martin von Amberg's Mirror of Confession
already interprets pilbis by devil, as Kilian does beUtoitie by
lamia, strix. The tradition lingers chiefly in Eastern Germany,


1 Another Polish name for plica, beside koltnn, is trietzezyee (Linde 6, 227), and
▼nlgar opinion ascribes it to the magic of a wietzczka wise woman, witch. This
wieszczyce agrees with our tcHehtel-zo^ptf and also with the -wiz, -toeu in bilwiz.
If we could point to a eomponnd bialowieszczka (white witoh, white fay ; but I
nowhere find it, not even among other Slavs), there wonld arise a strong snspicdon
of the Slavic origin of our hilwiz ; for the present its German character seems to
me assnred both by the absence of such Slavic compomid, and by the AS. bilwit
and Nethl. belwitte : besides, oar wiz comes from wizan, and the Pol. vfiezzez from
wiedzie^ [O.Sl. v6deti, to wit] , and the kinship of the two words can be explained
without any thought of borrowing. Of different origin seem to me the Sloven,
paglawitz, dwarf, and the Lith. Pilvitus (Lasicz 64) or Pilwite (Karbutt 1, 62), god
or goddess of wealth. [The Buss, v^hch (shch pron. as in parish-church) has the
same sound as wie$zezy but means thing, Goth, vaiht-s ; for kt, ht becomes shoh,
as in noshch, night. I am not sure therefore that even wieszczka may not be
UtÜe wiht."»TaAH8.]


ti


PILWIZ, BILWIT. 475

iD Bavaria, Franconia, Vogtland and Silesia. H. Sachs uses
hilbitzen of matfcing the hair in knots, pilmitz of tangled locks :
'ir har verbilbiizt, zapfet und stroblet, als ob sie hab der rab
gezoblet,' i. 5, 809*^, ii. 2, 100*^ ; 'pilmitzen, zoten und fasen/ iii.
3, 12*. In the Ackermann von Böhmen, cap. 6, pilwis means
the same as witch; ^pielweiser, magician, soothsayer/ Böhmens
Beitr. zum schles. recht 6, 69. 'an. 1529 (at Schweidnitz), a
pielweiss buried alive/ Hoffmann's Monatschr. p. 247. ' 1582
(at Sagan), two women of honest carriage rated for pilweissen

and / ibid. 702. ^ du. pileweissin ! ' A, Gryphius, p. 828.

' Las de deine bilhezzodn auskampln ' says the angry mother to
her child, 'i den hilmezschedl get nix nei,' get your b. clots
combed out, you don't come in in that shaggy scalp, Schm. 1,
168. pUmeskindj a curse like devil's child, Delling's Bair. idiot,
1, 78. On the Saale in Thuringia, bulmuz is said of unwashed
or uncombed children ; while bilbezschnitt, bilwezschnitt^ bilfez»
schnitt, pilmcuschnid (Jos. Bank. Böhmerwald, p. 274) denotes a
catting through a field of corn, which is regarded as the work
of a spirit, a witch, or the devil.

This last-mentioned belief is also one of long standing.
Thus the Lex Bajuvar. 12 (18), 8: 'si quis messes alterius
initiaverit maleficis artibus, et inventus f uerit, cum duodecim
solidis componat, quod arw»iscarti^ dicunt.' I dare say such a
delinquent was then called a piliwiz, pilavnz ? On this passage
Mederer remarks, p. 202-3 : An honest countryman told me
about the so-called hUmerschnitt, bilberschnitt, as follows : ' The
spitefal creature, that wants to do his neighbour a rascally mis-
chief, goes at midnight, stark naked, with a sickle tied to his foot,
and repeating magic spells, through the middle of a field of corn
jost ripe. From that part of the field that he has passed his
sickle through, all the grains fly into his bam, into his bin.'
Here everything is attributed to a charm practised by man.^

^ Goth. a$atu (messis), OHG. aran, am.

* Can thifl magio be alluded to so early as in the Kaiserohronik (2180-87) f


dia mnoter helzit Bacheli
din hAt in gel6ret :
swenne sie in hiez snfden gAn,
«in harU incom nie dar aut


sin siohil sneit schiere

m^r dan andere viere ;

wil er doroh einin here yam,

der stdt immer mdr ingegen im üf getftn.


(His mother B. taught him : when she bade him go cut, he never put his hand to
it, his sickle soon cut more than any other four ; if he will drive through a hlU, it
opens before him^


476 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Julius Schmidt too (Beichenfels, p, 119) reports from the Vogt-
land : The belief in hUsen- or bilver-schnitter (-reapers) ^ is toler-
ably extensive, nay, there seem to be certain persons who believe
themselves to he sudh : in that case ihey go into the field before
sunrise on St. John's day^ sometimes on Walpurgis-day (May 1)^
and cut the stalks with small sickles tied to their great toes, step-
ping slantwise across the field. Such persons must haye small
three-cornered hats on (bilsenschnitter-hütchen) ; if during their
walk they are saluted by any one, they must die that year.
These 'bilsenschnitter belieye they get half the produce of the
field where they have reaped, and small sickle-shaped instru-
ments have been found in some people's houses, after their death.
If the owner of the field can pick up any stubble of the stalks
so cut, and hangs it in the smoke, the hilsenscknitter will gra-
dually waste away (see SuppL).

According to a communication from Thuringta, there are two
ways of baffling the bilms' or binsen-schneider {-cutter),^ which-
ever he is called. One is, on Trinity Sunday or St. John's day,
when the sun is highest in the sky, to go and sit on an elderbush
with a looking-glass on your breast, and look round in every
quarter, then no doubt you can detect the binsenschneider, but
not without great risk, for if he spies you before you see him,
you must die and the binsenschneider remain alive, unless he
happen to catch sight of himself in the mirror on your breast,
in which case he also loses his life that year. Another way is,
to carry some ears that the binsenschneider has cut to a newly
opened grave in silence, and not grasping the ears in your bare
hand ; if the least word be spoken, or a drop of sweat from your
hand get into the grave with the ears, then, as soon as the ears
rot, he that threw them in is sure to die.

What is here imputed to human sorcerers, is elsewhere laid
to the devil (Superst. no. 523), or to elvish goblins, who may at
once be known by their small hats. Sometimes they are known
as bilgenschneider, as pilver^ or hilperts'-schnitter, sometimes by
altogether different names. Alberus puts sickles in the hands of
women travelling in Hulda's host (supra, p. 269 note). In some
places, ace. to Schm. 1, 151, they say bocJeschnitt, because the

' Bihe is henbanei and Inrue a ni8h,whioh plants haye no business here. They
are merely an adaptation of bilwiz, when this had become nnintelUgible. — Tbahb.


BOGGBN-MUHMB, COBN-MAMMT. 477

goblin is supposed to ride through the cornfield on a he-goat^
which may well remind us of Dietrich with the boar (p. 214). The
people about Osnabrück believe the tremsemutter walks about in
the com : she is dreaded by the children. In Brunswick she is
called hormoif: when children are looking for cornflowers^ they
will not venture too far into the green field, they tell each other
of the comwife that kidnaps little ones. In the Altmark and
Mark Brandenburg they call her roggenmöhme (aunt in the rye),
and hush crying children with the words : ' hold your tongue,
or roggenmöhme with the long black teats will come and drag
you away ! ' ^ Others say ' with her long iron teats/ which
recals iron Berhta: others again name her rockentnör, because
like Holla and Berhta, she plays all manner of tricks on idle
maids who have not spun their distaffs clear during the Twelves.
Babes whom she puts to her black breast are likely to die. Is
not the Bavarian preinscheuhe the same kind of corn-spectre 7
In the Schrackengast, Ingolst. 1598, there are coupled together
on p. 73, ^ preinseheuhen und meerwunder/ and p. 89 'wilde
larvenscbopper und preinscheuhen.' This prein, brein, properly
pap (puis), means also grain-bearing plants like oats, millet,
panicum^ plantago (Schm. 1, 256-7) ; and br&inacheuhe (-scare)
may be the spirit that is the bugbear of oat and millet fields 7

In all this array of &cts, there is no mistaking the affinity
of these bilwisses with divine and elvish beings of our heathenism.
They mat the hair like dame Holla, dame Berhta, and the alb,
they wear the small hat and wield the shot of the elves, they
have at last, like Holla and Berhta, sunk into a children's
bugbear. Originally ' gute holden,' sociable and kindly beings,
they have twisted round by degrees into uncanny fiendish goblins,
wizards and witches. And more, at the back of these elvish
beings there may lurk stiU higher divine beings. The Bomans
worshipped a Bobigo, who could hinder blight in com, and per-
haps, if displeased, bring it on. The walking of the bUwiss^ of
the Roggenmxdime in the grain had at first a benevolent motive :
as the names mutter, muhnie, m'&r teach us, she is a motherly


1 Conf. Bent, sagen, no. 89. Kuhn, p. 878. Temme's Sagen, p. 80. 82, of the
Altmark. The Baden legend makes of it a rockert-weibeU and an enchanted
countess of Ebontein, who walks about in a wood named Bookert (Mone's Anzeiger,
8, 145).


478 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

•

gnardian goddess of spindle and seedfield. Fro upon his boar
mast have ridden through the plains^ and made them productive,
nay, even the picture of Siegfried riding through the corn I
incline to refer to the circuit made by a god ; and now for the
first time I think I understand why the Wetterau peasant to this
day, when the corn-ears wave in the wind, says the boar walks in
the com. It is said of the god who causes the crops to thrive.
Thus, by our study of elves, with whom the people have kept up
acquaintance longer, we are led up to gods that once were. The
connexion of elves with Holla and Berhta is further remarkable,
because all these beings, unknown to the religion of the Edda,
reveal an independent development or application of the heathen
faith in continental Germany (see Suppl.).^

What comes nearest the hairy shaggy elves, or bilwisses, is a
spirit named scrat or scrato in OHG. documents, and pilosus in
contemporary Latin ones. The 61. mons. 333 have scratun
(pilosi) ; the Gl. herrad. 200^ waltschrate (satyrus) ; the Sumerlat.
10, 66 srate (lares mali); so in MHG. scrdz; Beinh. 597 (of the
old fragment), 'ein wilder waltschrat;* Bari. 251, 11. Aw. 3,
226. Ulr. Lanz. 437 has 'von dem «c/ira2;6'"= dwarf; 'sie ist
villihte ein sehr at, ein geist von helle;* Albr. Titur. 1, 190
(Hahn 180). That a small elvish spirit was meant, is plain
from the dimin. schretel, used synonymously with wihtel in that
pretty fable, from which our Irish elf-tales gave an extract, but
which has since been printed entire in Moneys treatise on heroic
legend, and is now capped by the original Norwegian story in
Asbiömsen and Moe, No. 26 (one of the most striking examples

1 The Slays too have a field-spirit who paces through the eorn. Bozhom's Besp.
Mosooy., pars 1, p. ... : '* Daemonem qaoqne meridianom Moscoyitae metnant et
ooltmt. Ille enim, dum jam matarae resecantur fmges, habitn viduae lugenti$ mri
obambulatf operariisque uni yel plaribns, nisi protinas yiso spectro in terram proni
conddanty brachia jbrangit et cmra. Neque tarnen contra hanc plagam remedio
destituontnr. Habent enim in yioina silya arbores religione patrum coltas : harum
cortice ynhieri superimposito, ilium non tantmn sanant, sed et dolorem loripedi
ezimmit.*' Among the Wends this corn-wife is named pshipolnitza [prop, prepoln.,
from polno, full, i,e, full noon] , at the honr of noon she creeps about as a veiled
woman. If a Wend, conyersing with her by the honr on flax and flax-dressing, can
manage to contradict eyerything she says, or keep saying the Lord's prayer back-
wards without stumbling, he is safe (Lausitz, monatsschr. 1797, p. 744). The Bohe-
mians call her hdba (old woman), or poledniee^ poludnice (meridiana), the Poles
dziewanna, dzietoiee (maiden), of whom we shaU haye to speak more than once, conf.
chap. XXXYI. Here also there are plainly gods mixed up with the spirits and
goblins.


SCRAT. 479

of the tough persistence of such materials in popular tradition) ;
both the schretel and the word wazzerbern answer perfectly to
the trold and the hvidbiöm. V^intler thinks of the schrättlin as a
spirit light as wind^ and of the size of a child. The Vocab. of
1482 has schretUn (penates) ; Dasypodius naektschrettele (ephi-
altes) ; later ones spell it schrättele, schrättel, schretieley schrötle,
conf. Staid. 2, 850. Schmid's Schwab, worth. 478. In the Sette
comm. schraia or sehretele is a butterfly^ Schm. 3^ 519. A
Thidericas Scratman is named in a voucher of 1244 ; Spilcker 2,
84. A district in Lower Hesse is called the Schratweg, Wochenbl.
1833, 952. 984. 1023. And other Teutonic dialects seem to
know the word : AS. scritta, Eng. scrat (hermaphroditus),^ ON.
skratti (malus genius, gigB'S) ; a rock on the sea is called
skrattasker (geniorum scopulus), Fomm. sog. 2, 142. Compar-
ing these forms with the OHG. ones above, we miss the usual
consonant-change : the truth is, other OHG. forms do shew a
t in place of the t : scraa, 61. fuld. 14 ; screza (larvae, lares mali).
Gl. lindenbr. 996^; ' srezze vel strate' (not: screzzol scraito),
Snmerlat. 10, 66; 'unreiner schräz/ Altd. w. 3, 170 (rhymes
vriz).* And Upper Germ, dictionaries of the 16th cent, couple
sehretzel with alp; Höfer 3, 114, has Mer schretz/ and Schm.
3, 552, 'der sehretzel, das schretzleinJ According to Mich.
Beham 8. 9 (Moneys Anz. 4, 450-1), every house has its schrez^
lein ; if fostered, he brings you goods and honour, he rides or
drives the cattle, prepares his table on Brecht-night, etc.^

The agreement of Slavic words is of weight. O. Boh. scret
(daemon)^ Hanka's Zbirka 6^; screti, scretti (penates intimi et
Becretales), ibid. 16^ ; Boh. skfet, skfjtek (penas, idolum) ; Pol.
»knot, skrzUek ; Sloven, zhhrdt, zhkrdtiz, zhkrdielj (hill-mannikin).
To the Serv. and Buss, dialects the word seems unknown.

I can find no satisfactory root for the German form.^ In Slavic

> Already in Saehsensp. 1, 4 altvile and dverge side by aide ; conf. BA. 410.

* A oontraotion of schraioaz f Qadr. 448, ichrawaz uud merwunder ; Albr. Titur.
27, 299 has sekrahctz together with pilwiht ; achrawaUen und merwonder, Gasp, yon
der Bön*s Wolfdieterich 195. Wolfd. und Sahen 496. [* Probably of different
origin,* says Snppl.]

s Muohar, EömiBches Noriemn 2, 87, and Gaatein 147, mentions a capricious
mountain-spirit, schranel,

^ The ON. skratti is said to mean terror also. The Swed. skratta, Dan. skratte,
is to laugh loud. Does the AS. form soritta allow us to compare the Gr. CKlprot,
a hopping, leaping goblin or satyr (from ffKiprdw^ I bound) T Lobeck's Aglaoph.,
1311.


480 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

skr^fci (celare^ occulere) is worth considering. [A compound of
kr^ti, to cover, root kr^, krov, KpvTrrm. If Slav, skr^, why not
AS. scrftd^ shroud ?] .

Going by the sense, aehrat appears to be a wild, rough, shaggy
wood-sprite, very like the Lat. faun and the Gr. satyr, also the
Roman sUvanwa (Livy 2, 7) ; its dimin. schrcUlein, synonymous
with wichtel and alp, a home-sprite, a hfll-mannikin. But the
male sex alone is mentioned, never the female ; like the fauns,
therefore, they lack the beauty of contrast which is presented by
the elfins and bilwissins. We may indeed, on the strength of
some similarity, take as a set-off to these schrats those wild women
and wood-minnes treated of at the end of chanter XVI. The
Greek fiction included tiMuntain-nymphs {pv/kjuu opeax^oi) and
dryads {SpvdSe^, Englished vmduoelfenne in AS. glosses), whose
life was closely bound up with that of a tree (loc. princ. Hymn
to Aphrodite 257-272 ; and see Suppl.).

Another thing in which the schrats differ from elves is, that
they appear one at a time, and do not form a people.

The Fichtelberg is haunted by a wood-sprite named the Katzen-'
veity with whom they frighten children ; ' Hush, the Katzenveit
will come ! ' Similar beings, full of dwarf and goblin-like
humours, we may recognise in the Oübich of the Harz, in the
RUbezal of Biesengebirge. This last, however, seems to be of
Slav origin, Boh. Bybecal, Byhrcol} In Moravia runs the story
of the seehirt, sea-herd, a mischief-loving sprite, who, in the shape
of a herdsman, whip in hand, entices travellers into a bog (see
Suppl.) .^

The gloss in Hanka 7^. 11* h&a ^ vUcodlae faunas, vilcodla-d
faunificarii, incubi, dusii ' ; in New Boh. it would be wlkodldk^
wolf-haired; the Serv. vuJcodXac\A vampire (Vuk sub v.). It is
not surprising, and it offers a new point of contact between elves,
bilwisses, and schrats, that in Poland the same matting of hair is
ascribed to the skrzot, and is called by his name, as the skfjteh is
in Bohemia;' in some parts of Germany schrötleinzopf.

1 In Slav, ryba is fish, bat oal, or ool CL think) has no meaning. The oldest
Gtenn. does, have Babe-zagil, -zagel, »zagi (-tail) ; Bnbe may be short for the
ghostly * knecht Bapreoht/ or Bobert. Is Babezagel oar bobtail, of which I have
seen no decent etymology? — Tbams.

■ Sagen aas der vorzeit Mährens (Briian, 1817), pp. 136-171.

* The plica is also called koltun, and again koUki are Polish and BnssiAn home-
sprites.


SCBAT (PILOSUS). 481

People in Earope began yeiy early to think of daBmonic beings
as pilosi. The Ynlgate has * et pilosi saltabnnt ibi/ Isaiah 13^
21, where the LXX. had Baifiovia ixH opx^<^ovraL^ conf.
34^ 14.^ Isidore's Etym. 8, cap, alt. ^and from it 61. Jon.
399) : ^pUosi qni g^ece panitae, latine incubi nominantar, —
ho8 daemones Otalli dusios nnncupant.' Qaem an tern vulgo
incuhonem yocant, hnnc Bomani faanam dicant.' Burcard of
Worms (App. Superst. C) is speaking of the saperstitious custom
of patting playthings, shoes, bows and arrows, in cellar or
bam for the home-sprites,^ and these genii again are called
'satyri TolpiUmJ The monk of St. Gall, in the Life of Charles
the Great (Pertz 2,741), tells ol Sb pUostus who visited the house
of a smith, amused himself at night with hammer and anvil,
and filled the empty bottle out of a rich man's cellar (conf. Ir.
elfenm. cxi. cxii.). Evidently a frolicking, dancing, whimsical
homesprite, rough and hairy to look at, ' eislich get&n,' as the
Heidelberg fable says, and rigged out in the red little cap of a
dwarf, loving to follow his bent in kitchens and cellars. A figure
quite in the foreground in God. palat. 324 seems to be his very
portrait.

Ouly I conceive that in earlier times a statelier, . larger figure
was allowed to the schrai, or wood-schrat, then afterwards the
merrier, smaller one to the achrettel. This seems to follow from
the ON. meaning of skratti gigas, giant. These woodsprites must
have been, as late as the 6-7th cent., objects of a special worship :
there were trees and temples dedicated to them. Quotations in
proof have already been given, pp. 58. 68 : ' arbores daemoni
dedicatae,' and among the Warasken, a race akin to the Bavarian,
'agrestinm fana, quos vulgus /auna« vocat.'

Some remarkable statements are found in Eckehart's Walt-
harius. Eckevrid of Saxony accosts him with the bitter taunt
(761) :

* Imtber tncnslatea feldteufel ; the Heb. iagnir denotee a shaggy, goat-like
Ung. Bade^ictts friaing. 2, 18, imitates the whole passage in the prophet : ' alulae,
npapae, bubones toto anno in ectis fonebria personantes lugnbri voce aores om-
mnm repleTerant. Piloti qnos iatyrot vocant in domibns plemnque anditi.' Again
S, M: * in aedibns tnia Ingabri voce respondeant nlnlae, iaUerU piloai.*

s * Daemones qnos du$eio$ Galli nunonpant.* Angustine, Civ. Dei, c. 28. The
nime dux still lives in Bretagne, dimin. duxik (Villemarqa6 1, 42).

* In the same may the jMel (I suppose gtietel, the same as gaote hold») baa
toys placed lor him, Superst. I, no. 62 ; oonf . in&a, the homespiites.


482 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

DiCj ait, an corpus yegetet tractabile temet,
sive per aerias fallas, maledicte, figaras ?
saltibus assuetas f annus mihi quippe yideris.

Walthari replies in mockery (765) :

Celtica lingua probat te ex ilia gente creatum^
cui natura dedit reliqaas ludendo praeire ;
at si te propius venientem dextera nostra
attingat, post Saxonibus memorare valebis,
te nunc in Vosago fauni fantasma videre.

If you come within reach of my arm, I give you leave then
to tell your Saxon countrymen of the ' schrat ' you now see in
the Wasgau (Vosges). When Eckevrid has hurled his spear at
him in vain, Walthari cries :

Haec tibi ttilvaniis transponit munera f annua.

Herewith the ' wood-schrat ' returns you the favour.^

Here the faun is called fantasma^ phantom ; OHG. giscin, T.
81 (Matt. xiv. 26), otherwise scinleih (monstrum). Gl. hrab. 969^.
Jun. 214; AS. scinldc (portentum) ; or' gitroc, p. 464. Pkan-'
taama vagahundumi(^i\A Lebuini, Pertz 2, 361) ; ^fantasma vult
nos pessundare ' (Hroswitha in Dulcicius) ; ^fantasia quod in
libris gentilium/attntt« solet appellari,' Mabillon, Analect. 3,352.
A ' municipium,' or ' oppidum mona fanni^ in Ivonis Carnot.
epist. 172, and conf. the doc. quoted in the note thereon, in
which it is i[}\onBfaunu'm. Similarly in OFr. poems : ^fantosme
nous va fannoiant' M6on 4, 138; fantoame qui me desvoie,
demaine,' ibid. 4, 140. 4. 402. A passage from Girart de
Bossillon given in Moneys Archiv 1835. 210 says of a moun-
tain : ' en ce mont ha moult de grans secrez, trop y a de faniomea'
Such are the fauni ficarii and ailveatrea homines, with whom
Jemandes makes his Gothic aliomnea keep company (p. 404).
Yet they also dip into the province of demigod heroes. Miming
silvarum satynis, and Witugouwo (silvicola) seem to be at once
cunning smith-schrats and heroes (pp. 376-379). A valkyr unites
herself with satyr-like Yölundr, as the aliorunes did with fauns.
The wild women, wood-minne (pp. 432-4), and the wüde man

1 The dialogne is obscure, and in the printed edition, p. S6, 1 have endeayoured
to justify the above interpretation.


SCBAT (FAUNUS). WOOD-FOLK. 483

(Wigamnr 203) oome together. Wigal. 6286 hhswildez wip, and
6602 it is said of the dwarf Karrioz :

Sin mnoter was ein wildez wip His mother was a wild woman,

da von was sin kurzer lip therefrom was his short body

aller rudi nnde stark, all over hairy and strong,

sin gebein was &ne mark his bones without marrow

(solid)

nach dem gesiebte der muoter sin, after his mother^s stock,

deste sterker muoser sin. the stronger must he be.

In the Wolfdietrich a wild man like this is called waltluoder, and
in Laurfn 173. 183 waltmann. The ON. mythology knows of
wild wood-wives by the names iviffjur, Srem. 88*. 119**, andiar/i-
vidjur, Sn. 13. About the ividja we find at the beginning of the
Hrafnagaldr the obscure statement ' elr iviiSja,' alit, auget, parit,
gignit dryas ; Ivi'Sja is derived from a wood or grove iviffr, of
which the Völuspft 1* makes mention : ' nio man ek heima, nio
iviffi' ; BO iamvidja from iamvidr, iron wood (see Suppl.).^

I cannot properly explain these ON. iviiSjur and iamvi^jur.
The popular belief of t<f-day in South-eastern Germany presents
in a more intelligible shape the legend of the wild-folk, forest-folk,
wood-folk, moss-folk, who are regarded as a people of the dwar
kind residing together, though they come up singly too, and in
that case the females especially approximate those higher beings
spoken of on p. 432. They are small of stature, but somewhat
larger than elves, grey and oldish-looking, hairy and clothed in
moss: 'ouch wftreii ime diu oren als eime walttoren vermieset,^
Us ears like a forest-fooPs bemossed (?), Iw. 440. Often holz-
tBeikel alone are mentioned, seldomer the males, who are supposed
to be not so good-natured and to live deeper in the woods, wear-
ing green garments faced with red, and black three-cornered hats.
H. Sachs 1, 407* brings up holzmänner and holzfrauen, and gives
1, 348^ the lament of the vrild woodfolk over the faithless world.
Schmidt^s Beichenfels, pp. 140-8 tells us the Yoigtland tradition,
and Bömer, pp. 188-242 that of the Orlagau; from them I borrow
what is characteristic. The little wood-wives come up to wood-
cutters, and beg for something to eat, or take it themselves out

' Afzelins 2, 145-7, mentions Swed. löfjertkoTt leaf-maids, forest-maids, and
eomparea them with Laufey (p. 246), bat the people haye little to say aboat them.


484 WIOHTS AND ELVES.

of their pots ; but whatever they have taken or borrowed they
make good in some other way, not seldom by good advice. At
times they help people in their kitchen work and at washing;
but always express a great fear o£ the wild huntsman that pursues
them. On the Saale they tell you of a bush-grandmother and her
moss-maidens ; this sounds like a queen of elves, if not like the
'weird lady of the woods' (p. 407). The little wood-wives are
glad to come when people are bakings and ask them, while they
are about it, to bake them a loaf too, as big as half a millstone,
and it must be left for them at a specified place ; they pay it back
afterwards, or perhaps bring some of their own baking, and lay
it in the furrow for the ploughmen, or on the plough, being
mightily ofifended if you refuse it. At other times the wood-wife
makes her appearance with a broken little wheelbarrow, and begs
you to mend the wheel ; then, like Berhta she pays you with the
fallen chips, which turn into gold ; or if you are knitting, she
gives you a ball of thread which yon will never have done un-
winding. Every time a man twists (driebt, throws) the stem of
a young tree till the bark flies off, a wood-wife has to die. When
a peasant woman, out of pity, gave the Hreast to a crjdng wood-
child, the mother came np and made her a present of the bark in
which the child was cradled ; the woman broke a splinter off and
threw it in to her load of wood, but when she got home she found
it was of gold (see Suppl.).

Wood-wives, like dwarfs, are by no means satisfied with the
ways of the modern world ; but to the reasons given on p. 459
they add special ones of their own. There's never been a good
time since people took to counting the dumplings they put in the
pot, the loaves they put in the oven, to * pipping ' their bread
and putting caraway-seeds in it. Hence their maxim :

Schäl keinen bäum. No tree ever shell,

erzähl keinen träum, no dream ever tell,

back keinen kümmei ins brot, bake in thy bread no cummin-
seed,
so hilft dir Gott ans aller noth. and God will help in all tfay

need.

The third line may be 'pip kein brod,' don't pip a loaf. A


WOOD-POLK. 486

wood-wife^ after tasting some newly-baked bread, ran off to the
forest, screaming loud :

Sie haben mir gebacken kümmelbrot,
das bringt diesem hause grosse noth !

(They^ve baked me caraway-bread, it will bring that honse great
tronble). And the farmer's prosperity soon declined, till he was
utterly impoverished. To ' pip ' a loaf is to push the tip of your
finger into it, a common practice in most places. Probably the
wood-wives could not carry off a pricked loaf, and therefore
disliked the mark ; for a like reason they objected to counting.
Whether the seasoning with cummin disgusted them as an inno-
vation merely, or in some other connection, I do not know. The
rhyme rans thus : ' kümmelbrot, unser tod ! ' the death of us ;

or — 'kummelbrot macht angst und noth.' Some wood-manni-

kins, who had long done good service at a mill, were scared away
by the miller's men leaving out clothes and shoes for them, Jul.
Schmidt, p. 146 (see Suppl.).^ It is as though, by accepting

> This agree« wonderfully with what Beasoh, pp. 68-5, reports from Pmssian

Semlaad : ^A householder at Lapöhnen, to whom the subterraneans had done

nisoy servieee, was grieTed at their haying such poor elothes, and asked his wife to
pat some new little coats where they would find them. Well, they took their new
outfit, hut their leave at the same time, crying, * paid up, paid up 1 * Another time
they had been helping a poor smith, had come every night and turned out a set of
little pots, pans, plates and kettles as bright as could be ; the mistress would set a
didi ä mUk for tliem, which they fell upon like wolves, and cleared to the last drop,
mahed up the plates and then set to work. The smith having soon become a rich
mau, his wife sewed them each a pretty little red coat and cap, and left them lying.
* Paid up, paid up 1 * eried the undergrounders, then quickly slipt into their new
finny, and were off, without touching the iron left for them to work at, or ever

eoming back. Another story of the Seewen-weiher (-pond), near Bippoldsau, in

the Bkek Forest (Hone's Anz. 6, 175) : — A lake-mannikin liked coming to the
folks at Seewen farm, would do jobs there all day, and not return into his lake tUl
evening; they used to serve him up breakfast and dinner by himself. If in giving
oat tasks they omitted the phrase * none too much and none too little,' he turned
cross, and threw all into confusion. Though his clothes were old and shabby, he
nerer would let the Seewen farmer get him new ones ; but when this after all was
done, and the new coat handed to the lake-mannikin, one evening, he said, ' When
one is paid off one must go ; beginning from to-morrow, I come to you no more ;'
tnd in spite cfi all the farmer's apologies he was never seen again. — »Jos. Bank's
Böhmerwald, p. 217, tells a pretty stpry of a wasehweiberl (wee washerwife), for whom
the people of the house wanted to have shoes made, but she would not hold out her
little foot to be measured. They sprinkled the floor with flour, and took the
measure by her footprints. When the shoes were made and placed on the bench
for her, she fell a-sobbing, turned her little smock-sleeves down again, unlooped
the skirt of her frock, then burst away, lamenting loudlv, and was seen no more.*
That is to say, the wee wife, on coming into the house, had turned up the sleeves
of her smock, and looped up her frock, that she might the more easily do any khid
of work. Similar tales are told of the brownie, B. Chambers, p. 88. And the same
idea lies at the bottom of the first story about wichtelm&nnorchen in Einderm. 89.


486 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

clothes^ the spirifcs were afraid of snddeDly breaking off the
relation that subsisted between themselves and mankind. We
shall see presently that the home-sprites proper acted on different
principles^ and even bargained for clothes.

The more these wood-folk live a good many together, the more
do they resemble elves, wichtels, and dwarfs ; the more they
appear singly, the nearer do the females stand to wise women and
even goddesses, the males to gigantic fanns and wood- monsters,
as we saw in Katzen veit, Gnbich and Biibezahl (p. 480). The
salvage man with uprooted fir-tree in his hand, such as supports
the arms of several princes in Lower Germany, represents this
kind of faun j it would be worth finding out at what date he is
first mentioned. Grinkenschmied in the mountain (Deut. sag. 1,
232) is also called ' der wilde man/

In the Romance fairy-tales an old Roman god has assumed
altogether the nature of a wood-sprite ; out of Orcus ^ has been
made an Ital. orco, Neapel, huorco, Pr. ogre (supra, p. 314) : he
is pictured black, hairy, bristly, but of great stature rather than
small, almost gigfantic; children losing their way in the wood
come upon his dwelUng, and he sometimes shews himself good-
natured and bestows gifts, oftener his wife (orca, ogresse) pro-
tects and saves.' German fairy-tales hand over his part to the
devil, who springs even more directly from the ancient god of
the lower world. Of the invisible-making helmet the orco has
nothing left him, on the other hand a dasmonic acuteness of
scent is made a characteristic feature, he can tell like a sea-
monster the approach of human flesh : 'je sens la chair fraiche/
'ich rieche, rieche mensohenfleisch,' 'ich wittere, wittere
menschenfieisch,' 'i schmöke ne Crist,' 'I smell the blood,'
'jeglugter det paa min höire haand (right hand),' 'her lugter
Baa kristen mands been,' ^ exactly as the meerminne already in

It is a common ebaracteristio, that holds good of wichtels, of subterraneans, of lake-
sprites and of wood-folk, but chiefly of male ones who do service to mankind.
[Might the objection to shewing their feet arise from their being web-footed, like
the Swiss h&rdmändle, especially in the case of water-sprites ?]

^ See App., Snperst. A, * Orcum invooare* together with Neptune and Diana ;
Snperst. G, extr. from Vintler, 1. 88 : * er hab den orken gesechen.' Beow. 224 has
orcneas^ pi. of orcne.

3 Pentamerone, for the oroo 1, 1. 1, 5. 2, 3. 8, 10. 4, 8. For the orca 2, 1.
2, 7. 4, 6. 6, 4.

s Perranlt*s Petit ponoet ; Einderm. 1, 152. 179. 2, 850. 8, 410; MnssQS 1,
21 ; Danske yiser 1, 220 ; Norske folkeeventyr, p. 35.


ßCTJOHISAL. 487

Morolt 3924 says : ' ich smacke diutsclie tserngewant^' ooats
of mail (see SappL). The Ital. however has also an uom foresto,
Pulci's Morgante 5, 88.

The Gothic neat, skohsl, by which ülphilas renders Saifioviov,
Matth. 8^ 31. Ln. 8, 27 (only in margin; text reads nnha])>6).
1 Cor. 10^ 20. 21^ I am disposed to explain by supposing a skohs,
gen. sk&his^ or rather skogs (the h being merely the g softened
before slj. It would answer to the ON. slcogr (sQva) ; in all our
Gothic fragments the word for forest never occurs^ so that in
addition to a vidus (p. 376) we may very well conjecture a sk6gs.
In Sweden the provincialisms skogsnerte, skogsivufva^ are still
used; snerte appears to contain snert gracilis, and snufva to
mean anhelans.^ Now if skohsl is wood-sprite/ there may have
been associated with it, as with Sat/Movi^v, the idea of a higher
being, semi-divine or even divine. When we call to mind the
sacred, inviolable trees inhabited by spirits (chap. XXI, and
Snperst. Swed. no. 110, Dan. no. 162), and the forest- worship of
the Germani in general (pp. 54-58. 97-8) ; we can understand
why wood-gprites in particular should be invested with a human
or divine rather than elvish nature.

Water-sprites exhibit the same double aspect. Wise-women,
Valkyrs, appear on the wave as swans, they merge into prophetic
merwomen and merminnes (p. 434). Even Nerthus and dame
Holla bathe in lake or pool, and the way to Holla's abode is
through the well, Kinderm. 24. 79.

Hence to the general term holde or guoter holde (genius, bonus
genius) is added a waazerholde (p. 266), a brunnenholde (p. 268) ;
to the more general minni a meriminni and ma/rmennill (p. 433).
Other names, which explain themselves, are: MHG. wildiu

1 Liniuens's Gothlandske resa, p. 312. Faye, p. 42.

' In 1298 Torkel Enntson founded on the Neva a stronghold against the Bussians,
ealled Landskrona. An old folk-tale says, there was heard in the forest near the
river a continnal knocking, as of a stone-entter. At last a peasant took courage and
penetrated into the forest ; there he found a wood-sprite hewing at a stone, who, on
being asked what that should mean, answered : * this stone shall he the hoimdary
between the lands of the Swedes and Moskovites.* Forsell*B Statistik von Schwe-
den, p. 1.

* To make np anOHG. sknoh and sknohisal is donbtless yet more of a venture.
Our tcheuMal (monstrum), if it comes from scheuen (sciuhan), to shy at, has quite
soother f ondamental vowel ; it may however be a corruption. The only very old
form I know is the $chuiel given in the foot-note on p. 269. But the Vooah. of 1482
has seheube (larva).

VOL. II. B


488 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

merhint, wildiu merwunder, Gudmn 1 09, 4. 112,3. wildez mervnp,
Osw. 653. 673; Mod. HG, meervmnder, Wassermann (Slav.
vodnik), seejungfer, meerweib ; ON. haf-fru, ceS'hona, hafgygr, mar"
gygr; Dan. Juwma/nd, bröndmand (man of the born or spring),
Molb. Dial. p. 58; Swed. hafsman, hafsfru, and more particnlarly
Strömkarl (river sprite or man). Wendish vodny muz, water man.
The notion of a wa;ter-lcing shews itself in waJterconinhy Melis
Stoke 2, 96. Certain elves or dwarfs are represented as water-
sprites : Andva/riy son of Otn, in the shape of a pike inhabited
a fors, Ssdm. 180-1 ; and Alfrikr, ace. to Yilk. saga, cap. 34,
haunted a river (see SuppL).

The pecnliar name of such a watersprite in OHG. was nihhus,
nichtis, gen. niohnses, and by this term the glossists render crooo-
dilus. Gl. mons. 832, 412. Jun. 270. Wirceb. 978^; the Physio-
logus makes it neater : daz nikkus, Dint. 8, 25. Hoffm. Fandgr.
23. Later it becomes niches, Gl. Jun. 270. In AS. I find, with
change of s into r, a masc. nicor, pi. niceras, Beow. 838. 1144.
2854, by which are meant monstrous spirits living in the sea,
conf. nicorMs, Beow. 2822. This AS. form agrees with the M.
Nethl. nicker, pi. nickers, (Horae Belg. p. 119) ; Beinaert prose
MIIIIP has ' wicfc«"« ende wichteren'; necker (Neptunus), Dint.
2, 224^. ' hdft mi die necker bracht .hier f ' (has the devil brought
me here ?), Moneys Ndrl. volkslit. p. 140. The Mod. Nethl.
nikker means evil spirit, devil, ' alle nikkers uit de hel; ' so the
Engl. ' old Nick»' We have retained the form with s, and the
original sense of a watersprite, a male nix and a female nixe, i.e.,
niks and nikse, though we also hear of a nickel and nickelmann.
In MHG. Conrad uses wassemixe in the sense of siren : ' heiz ans
leiten üz dem bade der vertanen (accursed) Wassernixen, daz uns
ir gedoene (din) iht schade ' (MS. 2, 200^).i

The ON. nikr (gen. niks?) is now thought to mean hippo-
potamus only ; the Swed. näk, nek, and the Dan. nok, nok, nocke,
a^nycke (Molb. Dial. p. 4) express exactly our watersprite, but
always a male one. The Danish form comes nearest to a Mid.
Lat. nocca, spectrum marinum in stagnis et fluviis ; the Finn.

^ Gryphius (mihi 743) has a Thyme: * die wa$ierlüt8 auf erden mag nicht
80 schöne werden,' apparently meaning a water-wife or nize. In Ziska's östr.
Yolksm. 64 a kind w€UiemiXt like dame Holla, bestows wishing-gifts on the
children.


• NICHTJS, NIX. 489

näkH, Esth. nek (watersprite) seem borrowed from the Swedish.
Some have brought into this connexion the mach older neha
iiehalennia (pp. 257, 419), I think without good reason: the
Latin organ had no. occasion to put h for c, and where it does
have an h in German words (as Vahalis, Naharvali), we have no
business to suppose a tenuis ; besides, the images of Nehalennia
hardly indicate a river-goddess.

I think we have better reason for recognising the water-sprite
in a name of 08inn, who was occasionally conceived of as Nep^
hine (p. 148), and often appears as a sailor and ferryman in his
bark. The AS. Andreas describes in detail, how Ood Himself, in
the shape of a divine shipman escorts one over the sea ; in the
Legenda Aurea it is only an angel. OSinn, occording to Sn. 3, is
called Nikarr or Hnika/rr, and Nikuz or Hnikudr. In Ssem. 46*» ^
we read Hnikarr, Hnikudr, and in 91* 184*» ^ Hnikarr again.
Nikarr would correspond to AS. Nicor, and Nikuz to OHG.
Nichus. Snorri's optional forms are remarkable, he must have
drawn them from sources which knew of both; the prefixing
of an aspirate may have been merely to humour the metre. Finn
Magnusen, p. 488, acutely remarks, that wherever OSinn is called
Hnikarr, he does appear as a sea-sprite and calms the waves.
For the rest, no nickar (like älfar and dvergar) are spoken of in
either Edda. Of the metamorphoses of the nickur (hippop.) the
ON. uses the expression '^nykrat e^a finug&lkat,'' Sn. 317 (see
Sappl.).

Plants and stones are named after the nix, as well as after
gods. The nymphaea {vvfiff>ala from yvfufyq) we still call mV-
hlume as well as seeblume, seelilie, Swed. näckblad, Dan. nöJc-
iebUymsier, nokkerose; the conferva rupestris, Dan. nökkeakä^
(nix-beard) ; the haliotis, a shellfish, Swed. näcköra (nix-ear) ;
the crumby tufa-stone, tophns, Swed. näekebröd, the water-
sprite's bread. Finn, näkinkenka (mya margaritifera) nakin
waltikka (typha angnstifolia) ; the Lausitz Wends call the blos-
soms or seedpods of certain reeds 'vodneho mvzha porsty,
potaczky [piorsty, perczatky f], lohszy,' water-man's fingers or
gloves. We ourselves call the water-lily wassermännlein, but
also mummel, mummelchen as müemel, aunty, water-aunt, as the
merminne in the old lay is expressly addressed as Morolt's
'liebe muome,' and in Westphalia to this day watermöme is a


490 WIGHTS Ain> ELYBS.

ghostly being ; in Nib. 1479^ 8 Siglint the one merwoman says
of Hadbaro the other :

Durch der wsete liebe h&t min mu-ome dir gelogen^

'tis through love of raiment (weeds) mine aant hath lied to thee;
these merwomen belongs as swan-maidens, to one sisterhood and
kindred (p. 428), and in Oswald 673-9 'ein ander merwlp' is
coupled with the first. Several lakes inhabited by nixes are
called mTjmmelsee (Dent. sag. nos. 59. 331. Moneys Anz. 8, 92),
otherwise meumke^loch, e.g., in the Paschenburg of Schaumbarg«
This explains the name of a little river Mümling in the Oden-
wald, though old docs, spell it Mimling. Mersprites are made to
favour particular pools and streams, e.g., the Saale, the Danube,
the Elbe,^ as the Bomans believed in the bearded river-gods
of individual rivers; it may be that the name of the Neckar
(Nicarus) is immediately connected with our nicor, neehar (see
Suppl.).

Biöm gives nennir as another ON« name for hippopotamus,
it seems related to the name of the goddess Nanna (p. 310).'
This nennir or nihir presents himself on the sea-shore as a hand-
some dapple-grey horse, and is to be recognised by his hoofs
looking the wrong way ; if any one mounts him, he plunges with
his prey into the deep. There is a way however to catch and
bridle him, and break him in for a time to work.^ A clever man
at Morland in Bahus fastened an artfully contrived bridle on him,
40 that he could not get away, and ploughed all his land with
aim; but the bridle somehow coming loose, the ^neck* darted
;ike fire into the lake, and drew the harrow in after him> In
he same way German legends tell of a great hulking hlack horse,
.that had risen out of the sea, being put to the plough, and going
ahead at a mighty pace, till he dragged both plough and plough-
man over the cliff.^ Out of a marsh called the ^ taufe,' near

' The Elbjiuigfer and Saalweiblein, Dent. sag. no. 60 ; the river-sprite in the
Oder, ibid. no. 62.

^ Mnchar, in Norikum 2, 87, and in Q-astein p. 145, mentions an Alpine
sprite Donanadel; does nadel here stand for nandelf A misprint for madel (girl)
is scarcely conceivable.

> Landn&mabök, 2, 10 (Islend. sog. 1, 74). Olafsen's Beise igiennem Island,
1, 65. Sv. vis. 3, 128.

4 P. Eahn's Westgöta ooh Bahnslandska resa, 1742, p. 200.

<^ Letzner*s Dasselsche obxonik 5, 18.


NICHUS, NIX. 491

Scheaen in Lower Saxony^ a wild bull comes up at certain times,
and goes with the cows of the herd (Harry's Sagen, p. 79),
When a thunderstorm is brewing, a great horse with enormous
hoofe will appear on the water (Paye, p. 55). It is the vulgar
belief in Norway, that whenever people at sea go down, a
soedrouen (sea sprite) shews himself in the shape of a headless
old man (Sommerfelt, Saltdalens prästegjeld, Trondhjem 1827, p.
119). In the Highlands of Scotland a water-sprite in the shape
of a horse is known by the name of water-kelpie (see Suppl.).

Water-sprites have many things in common with mountain-
sprites, but also some peculiar to themselves. The males, like
those of the schrat kind, come up singly rathejr than in companies.
The water man is commonly represented as oldish and with a
hng beard, like the Boman demigod out of whose urn the river
spouts; often he is many-Jieaded (conf. p. 387), Faye p. 51. In
a Danish folk-song the nökke lifts his beard aloft (conf. Svenska
visor 3, 127. 133), he wears a green hat, and when he grins you
see his green teeth (Deut. sag. no. 52). He has at times the
figure of a ivild boy with shaggy hair, or else with yellow curls
and a red cap on his head.^ The näkki of the Finns is said to
have iron teeth,^ The nixe (fem.), like the Bomance fay and our
own wise- women, is to be seen sitting in the sun, comhing her
long hair (Svenska vis. 3, 148), or emerging from the waves with
the upper half of her body, which is exceedingly beautiful. The
lower part^ as with sirens, is said to consist of a fish-like tail ;
bot this feature is not essential, and most likely not truly
Teutonic, for we never hear of a tailed nix,^ and even the nixe,
when she comes on shore among men, is shaped and attired like
the daughters of men, being recognised only by the wet skirt of

^ The small size is implied in the popular rhyme : ' Nix in der grübe (pit), da
Inst ein bdeer hübe (bad boy) ; wasch dir deine beinohen (little legs) mit rothen
uegelsteinehen (red brick).*

' On the grass by the shore a girl is seized by a pretty boy wearing a handsome
peasant^s belt, and is forced to scratch his head for him. Whue she is doing so, he
tlipi a girdle round her unperceived, and chains her to himself ; the continued
friction, however, sends him to sleep. In the meantime a woman comes up, and
aiks the girl what she is about. She tells her, and, while talking, releases herself
from the girdle. The boy was more sound asleep than ever, and his lips stood
pretty wide apart ; then the woman, coming up closer, cried out : ' why, that's a
neeik, look at his fis}C$ teeth \* In a moment the neck was gone (Etwas über die
Ehsten, p. 51).

' But we do of nixes shaped like men above and like hortee below ; one water-
iprite takes his name from his $lit ear». Peat. sag. no. 63.


492 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

her dress> the wet tips of her apron.^ Here is another point of
contact with swan-maidens^ whose swan-foot betrays them : and
as they have their veils and clothes taken from them, the nixe
too is embarrassed by the removal and detention of her gloves
in dancing (Deut. sag. nos. 58. 60). Among the Wends the
water-man appears in a linen smockfrock with the bottom of its
sUH wet ; if in buying up grain he pays more than the market
price, a dearth follows, and if he buys cheaper than others, prices
fall (Lausitz, monatschr. 1797, p. 750). The Russians name
their water-nymphs rusdlki: fair maidens with green or gar-
landed hair, combiug themselves on the meadow by the waterside,
and bathing in lake or river. They are seen chiefly on Whit-
sunday and in Whitsnn-week, when the people with dance and
song plait garlands in their honour and throw them into the
water. The custom is connected with the Grerman river-worship
on St. John's day. Whitsun-week itself was called by the
Russians rusaldnaya, in Boh. msadla, and even in Wallachian
rusalie.^

Dancing, song and mueic are the delight of all water-sprites, as
they are of elves {p. 470). Like the sirens, the nixe by her
song draws listening youth to herself, and then into the deep.
So Hylas was drawn into the water by the nymphs (Apollod.
i« 9> 19. ApoUon. rhod. 1, 131). At evening up come the da/rfi-
selsfrom the lake, to take part in the human dance, and to visit
their lovers.^ In Sweden they tell of the strömkarVs alluring
enchanting strain : the strömkarls-lag (-lay) is said to have
eleven variations, but to only ten of them may you dance,
the eleventh belongs to the night-spirit and his band; begin

^ In Olaf the Saint's saga (Fomm. Bog. 4, 56. 5, 162) Amarg^griB pictured as a
beantifal woman, from the girole downward ending in a fish, InJimg men to sleep
with her sweet song ; evidently modelled on the Boman siren. Pretty stories of
nixes are told in Jiü. Schmidt's Beichenfels, p. 150 (where the word docken ^doUst
pappets) and 161. Water-wives when in labour send for human assistance, like
she-dwarfs (p. 457). * They spake at Dr. M. L.'s table of spectra and of changelings,
then did Mistress Luther, his goodwife, tell an histoiy, how a midwife at a place
was fetched away by the devil to one in childbed, with whom the devil had to do,
and that lived in a hole in the water in the Mulda^ and the water hurt her not at
all, but in the hole she sat as in a fair chamber.' Table-talk 1571. 440b.

' Schafarik in the Öasopis desk. mus. 7, 259 his furnished a full dissertation on
the rusalky [from rusy, blond ; but there is also ruslo, river's bed, deepest part] .

' Hebel doubtless founds on popular tradition when (p. 281) he makes the
' jungfere wem see ' roam through the fields at midnight, probably like the roggen-
muhme to make them fruitful. Other stories of the meerweibUin in Mone's Anz. 8,
178, and Bechstein's Thtir. sagen 8, 236.


NICHUS, NIX. 493

to play that^ and tables and benches^ cap and can^ gray-beards
and grandmothers, blind and lame, even babes in the cradle
would begin to dance.^ This melodious strömkarl loves to linger
by mills and waterfalls (conf. Andvari, p. 488). Henoe his
Norwegian name fossegrim (fos, Swed. and ON. fors, waterfall).
On p. 52 it was cited as a remnant of heathen sacrifices, that to
this dsomonic being people offered a black lamb, and were taught
music by him in return. The fossegrim too on calm dark
evenings entices men by his music, and instructs in the fiddle
or other stringed instrument any one who will on a Thursday
evening, with his head turned away, offer him a little white he-gocU
and throw it into a ' forse ' that falls northwards (supra, p. 34) .
If the victim is lean, the pupil gets no farther than the tuning of
the fiddle ; if fat, the fossegrim clutches hold of the player's right
hand, and guides it up and down till the blood starts out of all
his finger-tips, then the pupil is perfect in his art, and can play
so that the trees shall dance and torrents in their fall stand still
(see Suppl.).*

Although Christianity forbids such offerings, and pronounces
the old water-sprites diabolic beings, yet the common people
retain a certain awe and reverence, and have not quite given up
all faith in their power and influence : accursed beings they
are, bat they may some day become partakers of salvation. This
is the driffc of the touching account, how the strömkarl or neck
wants yon not only to sacrifice to him in return for musical
instruction, but to promise him resurrection and redemption.^
Two boys were playing by the riverside, the neck sat there
touching his harp, and the children cried to him : ^ What do you
sit and play here for, neck ? you know you will never be saved.'
The neck began to weep bitterly, threw his harp away, and sank
to the bottom. When the boys got home, they told their father

1 Arndt*« Beue nach Schweden 4, 241 ; Bimilar danoee spoken of in Herrande-
saga, eap. 11. pp. 49—53.

' Faje p. 67. Conf. Thiele 1, 185 on the kirk^grim,

s Odman's Bahuslan, p. 80 : Cm spelemän i högar ok foraar har man ok
itakiUiga aagor ; for 15 Ir tilbaoka har man här ati hdgen under Gären i Tannms
gall belagit hdrt apela som the baste musioanter. Then som har viol ok Till lara
■pela, blur i ögnableket lard, allenast han lofvar upntdndeUe \ en som e] lofte thet,
fiek höra hum the i bögen »logo sonder »ina violer ok greto hitUrUga, ^He that has
a fiddle and wiU learn to play, becomes in a moment learned, only ne promises
reemreetion ; one who promised not that, did hear how they in the hill beat
asonder their fiddlea and wept bitterly.)


494 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

what had happened. The father^ who was a priest^ said 'yon
have sinned against the neck^ go back^ comfort him and tell him
he may he sa/ved/ When they retomed to the river^ the neck
sat on the bank weeping and wailing. The children said : ' Do
not cry so^ poor neck, father says that your Bedeemer liveth too.'
Then the neck joyfully took his harp, and played charmingly till
long after sunset.^ I do not know that anywhere in oar legends
it is so pointedly expressed, how badly the heathen stand in need
of the Christian religion, and how mildly it ought to meet
them. .But the harsh and the compassionate epithets bestowed
on the nixes seem to turn chiefly upon their ur^lessedness, their
damnation.'

But beside the jreewill offering for instruction in his art, the
nix also exacted -cruel and comgpuUory sacrifices, of which the
memory is preserved in nearly all popular tradition. To this day,
when people are drowned in a river, it is common to say : ' the
river-sprite demands his yearly victim/ which is usually 'an
innocent child/ ^ This points to actual human sacrifices offered
to the nichus in far-off heathen times. To the nix of the Diemel
they throw bread and fruit once a year (see SuppL).

On the whole there runs through the stories of water-sprites a
vein of cruelty and bhodthirstiness, which is not easily found among
daemons of mountains, woods and homes. The nix not only kills
human beings who fall into his clutches, but wreaks a bloody
vengeance on his own folk who have come on shore, mingled
with men, and then gone back. A girl had passed fifteen years
in the sea- wife's house (i haf-fruns gärd), and never seen the sun
all that time. At last her brother ventures down, and brings
his beloved sister safely back to the upper world. The hafsfru
waited her return seven years, then seized her staff, and lashing
the water till it splashed up high, she cried :

^ Sv. visor 3, 128. Ir. Elfenm. p. 24; similar Irish, Sootoh, and Danish tra-
ditions, pp. 200-2. Gonf. Thiele 4, 14. Holberg's Julestue so. 12 : * Nisser og
underjorske folk, drive store fester bort med klagen og hylen, eftersom de ingen d^
bar derudi ' (because they have no part therein).

' * Vertane wassemize,' fordone, done for (p. 488) ; * den fula ttygga neoken/
Sv. vis. 8, 147 ; * den tule havfrne, tule maremind,' ' den arme mareviv/ * du fuU
og lede spaaqvindel' Danske visor 1, 110. 119. 125. Holberg's Melampus 8, 7
cites a Danish superstition : * naai en fisker ligger hos sin fiskerinde paa söen,
saa föder hun en havfrue.*

3 Deut. sag., nos. 61. 62. Faye, p. 51. The Biver Saale yearly demands her
victim on Walburgis or St. John's day, and on those days people avoid the river.


NICHüSi NIX. 495

Hade jag trott att du yarit sä falsk^
Sä skalle jag knackt dig din tiafvehals !

(had I trowed thou wert so false^ I'd have nicked thy thievish
neck)^ Arvidsson 2, 820-3. If the sea-maidens have stayed too
long at the dance^ if the captive Christian have born a child to
the nix^ if the water-man's child is slow in obeying his call^ one
Bees a, jet of blood shoot up from the water's bed in sign of the
vengefal deed.^ As a mle^ there was likewise a favourable sign

^ Dent, sag., nos. 49. 58-9. 60. 804-6. 818» i. Here I give another Westphalian

Iflgend, written down for me by Hr Seitz, of Osnabrück : Dönken von den $mett

«pjm Damusen. Dichte bei Braumske Uggt en lütken see, de Darmssen ; do stönd
vörr aalen tien (olden tide) en klanater ane. de miönke &ber in den klaoster liabeden
nig ni Qoddes willen ; dramme gönk et anner. Nig lange nA hiar hörden de boren
in der nanberskap, in Epe, olle nachte en kloppen an liarmen bi den Darmssen, osse
wenn me apn ambold sldt, and wecke Itie aeigen wott (some folk saw somewhat)
midden ap den Darmssen. 8e sgeppeden drup to ; d& was et n smett, de bet ant lif
(bis an*s leib) inn water eeit, mitn nftmer in de fust, dftmit weis he jümmer ap den
smbold, on bedadde (bedeatete) de boren, dat se em wot to smfen bringen sollen.
Sit der tit brochten em de lue ot der burskop jümmer isen to smien (iron to forge),
on ninminairft haddc SO goe plogiscn (good ploaghshares) osse de £per. Ens wol
Knatman to Epe rdt (reed) at den Darmssen h&len, do feind he n lUtk kind annen
Swer, dat was ruw upn ganssen 2tto«.* Do sgreggede de smett : * nimm mi meinen
tunnen nig weg ! * &ber Eoatman neim dat kind inn back fall, on lop dermit n&
knae. Sit der üt was de emett nig mehr to sehn or to hören. Koatman f&rde
(folterte) den ruwwen np, on de word sin beste on flitigste knecht. Osse he aber
twintig jftr aolt wör, sia he to sinen baren : * bur, ik mot von jo gaon, min vdr het
M ropen,^ * Dat spit mi je,' sia de bur, * gift et denn gar nin middel, dat do bi mi
bliven kannst ? ' 'Dl will es (mal) sehn,' sia dat waterkind, * g&t erst es (mal) no
Braomske an hAlt mi en niggen djangen (degn) ; mer ji mjöt do förr giebn wot de
kaopmann hebben will, an jao niki af hannein,* De bür gönk no Braumske an
Mdß en djangn, hanneide &ber doch wot af. Na gongen se to haope no'n Darmssen,
do sia de ruwwe : * Na passt opp, wenn ik int water elfte ua et kümmt blötf dann
mot ik weg, kOmmt mjalke, dann darf ik bi ja bliwwen.' He slög int water, di
kwamm kene mjalke on aok k6n blöd, gans largerlik sprak de rurcwe : * ji hebt mi
vot wis maket, an wot afhannelt, dorümme kömmt k6n blöd an kene mjalke. spot
jo, SD kaopet in Braomske en ftnnem djangn.' De bür gong weg an kweim wir ;
ftber erst dat drüdde mal brftohte he en djangen, w& he niks an awwehannelt hadde.
Osse de ruwwe d& mit int water slög, do wai et so raut oue bl&d, de ruvnve störtede

■ik in den Darmssen, an ninminske hef en wier sehn. [Epitome : — The smith in

Dürmuen lake. Once a monastery there ; bad monks, pot down. Peasants at Epe
beard a hammering every night, rowed to middle of lake, foond a smith sitting
lip to Mm waiMt in water; he made them signs to l»ing him work, they did eo
eoDstantly, and the Epe plooghshares were the best in the coontry. Once farmer
Eoatoian foond a child on the bank, all over hairy. Smith cried, ' don't take my
ton ' ; bat K. did, and reared him. Smith never seen again. The Shaggy one, when
med 20, said, *I mast go, father has called me,* — ' Can't yoo stay anyhow?' —
' Well, I'll see ; go bay me a new sword, give the price asked, don't beat down.* E.
boo^t one, bat cheapened« They go to the Darmssen ; says Shag, * Watch, when
I strike the water ; if blood comes^ I most go, if milk^ I may stay.' Bat neither came :
' Yoa've cheapened 1 go boy another sword.' E. cheapened again, bot the third time
he did not. Shag strock the water, it was red as bloody and he plunged into the.
Darmssen.] The same sign, of milk or blood coming up, occurs in another folk-
tale, which makes the water-nymphs into white-veiled none, Mone's Anz. 8, 98.

* So in Casp. von der Bön, pp. 224-5 the meerwonder is called * der rauhe, der
rauche: Cent aopra, pp. 481. 491.


496 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

agreed upon (a jet of milk, a plate with an apple), but withheld
in such a case as this.

And here is the place to take up Orendd again, whom we
likened (p. 243) to the malicious god Loki, though Loki, even
apart from that, seemed related to Oegir. Grendel is cruel and
bloodthirsty : when he climbs out of his marsh at night, and
reaches the hall of the sleeping heroes, he clutches one and drinks
the blood out of another (Beow. 1478). His mother is called a
merewif (3037), brimwylf (she-wolf of the breakers, 3197), and
grundwyrgen (3036) which means the same thing (from wearg,
lupus, comes wyrgen, lupa). This pair, Grendel and mother, have
a water-house, which is described (3027 seq.) almost exactly as
we should imagine the Norse Oegir's dwelling, where the gods
were feasted : indoors the water is excluded by walls, and there
burns a pale light (3033).^ Thus more than one feature leads on
to higher beings, transcending mere watersprites (see Suppl.).

The notion of the nix drawing to him those who are drowning
has its milder aspect too, and that still a heathen one. We saw
on p. 311 that drowned men go to the goddess Ran ; the popular
belief of later times is that they are received into the abode of the
nix or nixe. It is not the river-sprite kills those who sink in the
element of water ; kindly and compassionately he bears them to
his dwelling, and harbours their souls.' The word ran seems to
have had a more comprehensive meaning at first : ' masla ran ok
regin * was to invoke all that is bad, all evil spirits, upon one. It
has occurred to me, whether the unexplained Swed. rä in the
compounds «Jörd (nix), skogsrä (schrat), tomträ (homesprite), which
some believe to be rä angulus, or a contraction of rädande, may
not have sprung from this ran, as the Soandinavian tongue is so
fond of dropping a final n. Dame Wdehilt too (p. 434) is a
succouring harbouring water- wife. The water man, Uke Hel and
Ban, keeps with him the souls of them that have perished in the
water, ' in pots turned upside down,' to use the naive language of
one story (no. 52) ; but a peasant visiting him tilts them up, and
in a moment the souls all mount up through the water. Of the

\ Conf. the dolphin^s hoase in Masane's mar<di0n of the Three Sisters.

^ Probably there were stories also of helpful succouring liver-gods» saoh as the
Greeks and Bomans told of Thetis, of Ino-Leucothea (Od. 5, 883-353)» Albanea,
Matata.


NIX. WATEE-SPRIT^. 497

drowned they say 'the nix has drawn them to him/ or 'has sucked
them/ because bodies found in the water have the nose red.^
'Juxta pontem Mosellae quidam paerulus naviculam excidens
snbmersas est. quod videns quidam juvenis vestibus abjectis aquae
insilivit^ et inventum extrahere volens^ maligno spiritu ref/rahente,
quem Neptunum vocant, semel et secundo perdidit ; tertio cum
nomen apostoli invooasset^ mortuum recepit/ Miracula S. Mat-
thiae, cap. 4S. Fez, Thes. anecd. 2, S, pag. 26. Bollenhagen in
the Froschmenseler (Nn 11^) :

'das er
elend im wasser wer gestorben,
da die seel mit dem leib verdorben,
oder beim geist blieb, der immer frech
den ersofnen die heU abbreche*

(that he had died miserably in the water, and his soul had per-
ished with the body^ or abode with the spirit that ever without
ado breaketh the necks of the drowned). The Swedish supersti-
tion supposes that drovmed men whose bodies are not found have
been drawn into the dwelling of the hafsfru (Sv. vis. 3, 148).
In some German fairy-tales (no. 79) children who fall into the
well come under the power of the water-nixe ; like dame HoUa^
she gives them tangled flax to spin.

Faye^ p. 51, quotes a Norwegian charm, to be repeated on the
water against the nix :

nyh, nyh, naal i vatn I

jomfru Maria kästet staal i vatn :

du säk, äk flyt.'

(oick^ nick^ needle in water ! Virgin casteth steel in water.
Thou sink, and I flee). A similar one for bathers is given in
Superst. Swed. no. 71 [with the addition: 'thy father was a
steel-thief, thy mother was a needle-thief/ etc.] . Steel stops a
spirit's power to act upon yon (supra, p. 466-7 n.).

A sepulchral cry of the nix, similar to death groans, is said to
portend drowning (Faye, p. 51). Some very old writings ascribe

1 Dma. *iidkken har taget ham,' * nökken har snet dem,' TnUin^a Skrifter 2, 13.
' So Brynhildr eaUe out at last to the giantess : * seykttu, g^gjar kyn ! ' Sem.
229*.


498 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

to watersprites in general wailing voices and doleful speeches, that
resoand from lakes and pools : they tell each other of their
baffled schemes^ or how they have to vacate the land before the
christians. Gregory of Tonrs, in De glor. confess, cap. 31, re-
members an incident of his yonng days ' apad Arvemos gestnm.'
A man setting out early to the forest has his morning tneal
blessed before he takes it : Camque ad amnem adhac ante-
lucanum venisset, imposito plaostro cnm bobos in ponte qai
super navem locatus erat, alterum transmeare coepit in littns.
Verum ubi in medium amrUs devenit, andivit vocem dicentis
' merge, merge, ne m^oreris /' Cui respondens vox alia ait : ' sine
tua etiam admonitione quae proclamas fecissem, si res sacra meis
conatibus non obstaret ; nam scias enm enlogiis sacerdotis esse
munitum, ideo ei nocere non possum' (see Suppl.) — In the
Vita Godehardi Hildesiensis (first quarter of 11th cent.}, cap. 4
(Leibn. 1, 492), we read : Erat etiam in orientali parte civitatis
nostrae (Hildenes-hem) palus horrifica et circnmmanentibus
omnino plurali formidine invisa, eo quod ibi, nt opinabantur, tarn
meridiano quam et nocturno tempore illusiones quasdam horH-
biles yel audirent vel yiderent, quae (sc. palus) a fonte salsuginis
quae ibidem in medio bulliebat Snha dicitur. Qua ille (Gode-
hardus) spectata, et illusione etiam phantastica, qua brnta plebs
terrebatur, audita, eandem paludem secundo sui adventas anno
cum cruce et reliquiis sanctorum invasit, et habitationem suam
ibidem aptavit, et in medio periculo oratorium in honorem S.
Bartholomaei apostoli fundavit, quo sequenti anno consummate et
dedicate, omne daemonum phantasma (conf. p. 482) exinde fundi-
tus extirpavit, et eundem locum omnibus commorantibus vel
advenientibus gratum et sine qualibet tentatione habitabilem
reddidit. — My third quotation is a continuation of that given
on p. 108 from the Vita S. GaUi (Perfcz 2, 7) : Volvente deinceps
cursu temporis electus Dei Gallus retia lymphae laxabat in silentio
noctis, sed inter ea audivit demonem de culmine moniis pari suo
clamantem, qui erat in abditis vncms. Quo respondente ' adsnm,'
montanus econtra: 'Surge' inquit 'in adjutorium mihi. Ecce
peregrini venerunt, qui me de templo ejecerunt (nam deos con-
terebant quos incolae isti colebant, insuper et eos ad se oonver-
tebant) ; veni, veni, adjuva nos expellere eos de terris/ Marinus
demon respondit :


WAT^B-SPBITE. HOME-SPRITE. 499

' En nnns eornm est in pelago,
cni nnnqaam nocere potero^
Tolni enim retia sna ledere,
sed me victum proba lagere :
signo orationis est semper clausas^
nee umqaam somno oppressus/

Eleeins vero Gallas haeo audiens mnnivit se undiqne signacnlo
Christi^ dixitqae ad eos :

' In nomine Jesu Christi praecipio vobis^
ut de locis istis recedatis^
nee aliquem hie ledere presumatis ! *

et cam festinatione ad littas rediit^ atqne abbati sno quae aadierat
recitavit.^ Qaod vir Dei Colnmbanas audiens^ convocavit fratres
in ecclesiam^ solUum signum tangens. mira dementia diaboli !
Yoces seryornm Dei praeripnit vox fantasmatica, cam hejulatus
atqne ululatua dircB vocis andiebatar per culmina. — Bead farther
on (2, 9) the story of two lake-women who stand naked on the
shore and throw stones. Everywhere we see the preachers con-
front the pagan daamons with cross and holy spell^ as something
real; the moomfal bowl of the spirits yields to the ringing of
bells. Gods and spirits are not distingaished : the god cast oat
of the temple^ whose image Has been broken^ is the elf or nix
meditating revenge. It is remarkable, too, that mountain and
vfoter sprites are set before as as fellows (pares) ; in folk-tales of
a later time their affinity to each other seems abundantly estab-
lished.

We have now considered genii of monntains, of woods and of
rivers; it remains to review the large and varionsly named gronp
of the friendly familiar Home-Sprites.

They of all sprites stand nearest to man, becanse they come
and seek his fellowship, they take ap their abode under his very
roof or on his premises.

Again, it is a feature to be marked in home-sprites, that they
are purely male, never female ; there appears a certain absence
of sex in their very idea, and if any female beings approach this

> Oonf. the oonvenations of trolls OYorhdard by two of St. Olafs men, Fomm.
log. 1, 18&-188.


600 WIGHTS ADO) ELVES.

goblin kind, it is former goddesses who have come down in the
world. ^

What the Bomans called Iwty^ lar familiaris (see the prologae
to Plantus's Aulnlaria) and penas, is named in our older speech
hufsing or stetigot (genius loci) ; conf. ' hAsinga (penates) ' in Not-
ker's Capella 31. In Cap. 142 N. renders lares by ^ingoumen
(hiusero aide burgo)'; the literal meaning of ingoumo would be
guard of the interior. In Cap. 50 he uses ingeside for penates, ue.
our ingesinde, inmates, domestics ; the form continued to be used
in MH6. : daz liebe heilige ingeside, Hol. 115, 1. 226, 18. Simi-
larly the Span, diiende, duendecillo (goblin) seems derivable from
domus, dueno is house-owner (dominus, distinct from. don, p. 299
note), and daendo domestic, retired. The ON. toft, Swed. tomt,
means area, domus vacua, and the home-sprite's name is in Swed.
tomtekarly tomtegubbe (old fellow on the premises), torrUrä, tarnte'
bias, som styr i kallrars rike (Hallman, p. 73) : Norw. torihteväite,
toftvcbtte. Another ON. name is 8lcürgo&, p. 112. We can trace
in them a peculiar connexion with the hearth of the house ; they
often come out from under it (p. 456 n.), it seems to be the door, as
it were, to their subterranean dwelling : they are strictly hearth-
gods. Here and there in Germany we also meet with the name
gesell, fellow (supra, p. 464, seile, selke), gutgesell, nachbar, lieber
nachba/r, in the Netherlands goede kind (Horae Belg. 119), in
England goodfeUow, in Denmark god dreng, good boy, hiare
granjie, dear neighbour, (conf. bona soda, p. 283-8, and gvote
holde, p. 266). The Eng. jmch we may indeed connect with the
Ir. phuka, Wei. pwcca,^ but with more justice perhaps with the
Dan. pog (lad), which is simply the Swed. pojke, ON. puki (puer),
and comes from Finn, poica (filius) ; in Lower G-ermany too they
say pook for a puny stunted man (Brem. wb. 8, 349). Heim-
reich^s Nordfries, chron. 2, 348 has hxiopuke (see Suppl.).

From the 13th century (and possibly earlier, if only we had
authorities) ^ down to the present time the name heboid has been

1 HoUat Berhtuf Werra, Stempe, Female are the Gr. MopfM& and Ac^uia, the
Bom. Lamia, Mania, Maniola. ' The Poles too have a fern. Omaenica : * Anioolae
vetant pueros edere in tenebris. ne spectmm hoc devorent, quod eos insatiabileB
reddat/ Linde sub ▼. * omacaö/ to burden. OHG. dgenggun lamlae,iGTaff 1, 132.

2 Larva (spectre, dfemon) is conn, with lar, as arvum, arvos with arare. The
Monachus Sangall. calls the pilosus (p. 481) larva,

8 Croker's Fairy legends 8, 230-2. 262.

4 * Ace. to Falke, a Koboltesdorp (ann. 946), Trad. corv. ; Adalpertus choboU,
Jcobolt (ann. 1185), MB. 27, 86. 42.' £xtr. from Supfl.


HOME-SPBITB. KOBOLD. 601

in ose. A doc. of 1250 in Böhmer's Cod. francof. 1^ 83 has a
'Heinricos dictus Coboldvs.' Even before that date coholdus
occars (Zeitschr. des Hess. Vereins 3, 64). Conrad of Wiirzburg^
MS. 2y 206% has : ' mir ist ein löser hoveschalk als ein Itobolt
Ton bahse/ no better than a k. of boxwood ; and the Misneere
(Amgb. 48*) : ' w6 den Icobolden, die alsus erstummen (are so
Btrack dumb)! mir ist ein holztn (wooden) bischof vil lieber
dan ein stummer herre.' The notions of kobold, dwarf, thumb"
kin, puppetj idol largely run into one another (conf . supra^ malik^
p. 104 note). It seemsj they used to carve little home-sprites
of boxwood and set them np in the room for fan, as even now
wooden nutcrackers and other mere playthings are cut in the
shape of a dwarf or idol ; yet the practice may have had to do
with an old heathen worship of small lares, to whom a place was
assigned in the innermost part of the dwelling ; in time the
earnest would turn into sport, and even christian sentiment tole-
rate the retention of an old custom.^ They must also have tied
rags and shreds into dolls, and set them up. The dumb wooden
kobold is kept in countenance by the 'wooden bishop' mentioned
immediately after by the Misnaere.' In the oft-quoted poem of
Baediger we find (17^ of the Königsb. MS.) 'in koboldes spräche,'
[i.6., speaking low] . In Altd. w. 2, 55 ' einen kobold von wahse
machen,' one of wax. Hoffmann's Fundgruben give us in the
Glossary 386, from a Yocab. of the 14th century, opold for
kopold. Hugo von Trimberg has several allusions to kobolds :
line 5064, ' und Idm einander goukelspil, unter des mantel er
hoboUe mache, der (whereat) manic man tougen (secretly) mit im
lache ' ; 5576, ' der male ein andern hoboU dar, der ungessen bt
im sitze ' ; 10277, ' einer siht den andern an, als kobolt hern tater*
man*; 10843, 'ir abgot (the heathens' gods), als ich gelesen
h&n^ daz waren kobolt und taterman* ; 11527, 'Got möhte wol
lachen, solte ez sin, wan sine tatermennelin (same in Roth's
Fragment, p. 65) sd wunderlich üf erden leben,' God might
laugh to see his little mannikins behave so strangely. Jugglers

^ One ought to aeftrch out the age and design of the variooB gear that is set oat
(aa mere ornament this long while) on shelves and tables ; from this and from
long-establisbed moulds for pastiy, we may arrive at some conclusions about the
heiShen cnetom of carving or * doughing ' idols (conf. pp. 15. 105. 112. 114) : teig
(dough) including any soft substance, clay, wax or flour-paste.
^On ' papa salignus ' conf. Beinh. p. xciv.


602 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

bring kobolds out from nnder their cloak, kobolds are painted
on the wall, the heathen gods were nothing bat kobolds and

tatermen, to stare at each other like kobold and taterman,

all throngh, the kobold appears as the tiny tricky home-sprite.
In writers of the 17th centnry I find the remarkable phrase 'to
laugh like a heboid/ Ettner's XTnwürd. doct. p. 340, and App. p.
53 ; ' yon langh as though you'd empty yourself, like a kobolt/
Beimdich p. 149. This must either mean, to laugh with mouth
agape, like a carved kobold, who may hare been so represented,
or simply to laugh loud and heartily.^ Again, ' to laugh like a
hampelmann/ Deutschfranzos p. 274; 'ho, ho, ho I the loud
laugh of Robin Goodfellow,' Anecd. and Trad., ed. by W. J.
Thoms, Lend. 1839, p. 115. In the poem of Zeno 867. 1027
this daamonic laughter is expressed by skraken (Brem. wb. 4,
686 schrachtern). Schweinichen 1, 260 tells of an unquiet spirit
laughing loud and shrill; it may be a laugh of mirth or mockery.

In the Netherlands too we find at an early time the form
kouhout (pi. coubouten, Horae Belg. 1, 119) ; now kabout, and in
Belgium kabot, kabote^manneken} The Scandinavian languages
have not the word.

It is a foreign word, sprung no doubt from the Gr. fcSßaXo^
(rogue), Lat. cobalus,* with a t added, as our language is partial
to forms in 'OU for monstrous and ghostly beings. From cobalas,
in Mid. Lat. already gobelinua, the Fr. has formed its gobelin^
whence the Engl, goblin, strengthened into hobgoblin. Hanka's
O. Boh. glosses render 79^ gitulins (getulius, gaetulius) by kobolt,
and directly after, aplinus (1. alpinns, i,e. alphinus, the ^fool'
or queen in chess) by tatrman : here are kobolt and tatrman
together, just as we saw them staring at each other in the
Senner; hence also the Cod. pal. 341, 126^ speaks of 'einen
taterman m&len,' painting a t., and the WahtelmsBre 140 of
guiding him with strings, ' rihtet zuo mit den snüeren die toter'

1 * Hlahtar kiacuHtaz,* laughed till he shook, E. 24«. Notk. Gap. 88 has : « tas
lahter seutta sia ; Petronias, cap. 24, * risn disBolyehat ilia sua ' ; Beinardas 3,
1929, ' cachinnns yisoera fissnms ' ; or, as we say, to split with laughing, laa^
yourself double, short and small, to pieces, to a hMzlin (Gryphius p. m. 877), brown,
out of your senses ; * einen schübei voll lachen ' ; perish, die with laughing, MH6.
* man swindet under lachen,* Ben. 330. A Breton song in Yillemarqud 1, 39 speaks
of the loud laugh of the korred (see BuppL).

' Schayes sur les usages et traditions des Beiges. Lonvain 1884, p. 230.

• Lobeck'B Aglaoph. 1308-1328.


GOBLIN. TATEBMAN. 503

tnanne' (suprs, p. 410 g.). To explain this taterman by the
£jigl. tatter has some plausibility^ but then oar HG. ought
to have had zaterman (conf. OHG. zata^ zatar^ Graff 5^ 632-3^
with AS. tsBttera, panniculus). The glossist above may have
meant by gaetnlins an African savage^ by alpinus a Tartar (MHG.
tater, tateler)^ or still better^ a fool;^ the word taterman occurs
in other O. Boh. documents besides^ and signifies doll and idol
(Jungmann 3^ 554^) ; foreign to all other Slavic dialects^ it seems
borrowed from German.^ Ifcs proper meaning can only be re-
vealed by a fuller insight into the history of puppet-shows. Per*
. haps the Hang, tatos (juggler) has a claim to consideration.'

Several MSS. however and the first printed edition of the
Benner have not taterman at all^ but katerman (Cod. francof.
164^ reads verse 10843 kobülde unde katirman), which is not
altogether to be rejected^ and at lowest offers a correct secondary
sense. Katerman, derived from kater (tom-cat)^ may be com-
^red with heinzelman, hinzelman, hinzemännchen, the name of
a home-sprite/ with Hlme the cat in Beineke^ and the wood-
sprite Katzenveit (p. 480) . The piMs-in-boots of the fairy-tale plays
exactly the part of a good-natured helpful kobold ; another one
is called stiefel (boot^ Dent. sag. no. 77)/ because he wears a
large boot: by the boot, I suppose, are indicated the gefeite
ickuhe (fairy shoes) of older legend, with which one could travel
faster on the ground, and perhaps through the air ; such are the
league-boots of fairy-tales and the winged shoes of Hermes. The
name of Heinze is borne by a mountain-sprite in the Frosch-
meuseler. Heinze is a dimin. of Heinrich, just as in Lower
(lennany another noisy ghost is called Chimke, dimin. of Joachim
(conf. 'dat gimken/ Brem. wb. 5, 379) : the story of Chimmeken

^ There is in the kobold's charaoter an nnmistakahle similarity to the witty
oonrt-fool ; hence I feel it significant, that one described in Sohweiniohen 1, 260-2
•xpressly eairies a bawble. The EngL hobgoblin means the same as eloumgoblin
(Nares sab t. hob).

' Hannsch (Slav. myth. 299) takes the taterman (he says, hastennan also occurs)
for a water-sprite.

* * In lyrol to^nnan » soareorow, coward« kobold, from tattem, zittern, to qoake,
skedaddle ; Frommann 2, 327. Leoprechting p. 177 says, tattem to frighten ; at
Gntz in Styiia, the night before solstice, tattermann^ a bngbear, is carried round
and set on fire in memory of extirpated heathenism.' — ^Extr. from Suppl.

* Dent. sag. no. 76 ; the story is 100 years later than the composition of the
Beineke. Hinzelmann leayes a dint in the bed, as if a cat had lain in it. Luther^s
Table-talk (ed. 1571, p. 441*) had previously related the like concerning a spirit
Heintlin,

YOL. II. V


504 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

(of about 1827) is to be foand in Kantzow's Pomerania 1, 333.
The similar and equally Low-Oerman name Wolterken aeems
to Have a wider circulation. Samuel Meiger in bis Pannrgia
lamiarum (Hamb. 1587. 4)^ bok 8 cap. 2,, treats 'van den laribns
domesticis edder husknechtkens^ de men ok WoUerken unde
ChimJcen an etliken örden nömet.' These Wolterkens are also
mentioned by Amkiel (Cimbr. heidenth. 1, 49) ; in the Nether-
lands they are called Wouters, Wouterken, and Tuinman 2, 201
has a proverb ' 't is een wilde Wauter/ though incorrectly he
refers it to wout (silva). Wouter, Wolter is nothing but the
human proper name Walter bestowed on a home-sprite. It is
quite of a piece with the familiar intercourse between these spirits
and mankind^ that^ beside the usual appellatives^ certain proper
names should be given them^ the diminutives of Henry^ Joachim^
Walter. Not otherwise do I understand the Robin and Nissen in
the wonted names for the English and Danish goblins Robin
goodfellow and Nissen god dreng. Bobin is a French-Englisb
form of the name Robert^ 0H6. Hruodperaht^ MHG. Rnotperht^
our Ruprecht^ Rupert^ Ruppert; and Robin fellow iq the same
home-sprite whom we in Germany call Tcnecht Ruprecht, and
exhibit to children at^Christmas^ but who in the comedies of the
16-1 7th centuries becomes a mere Rüpel or Ruppel, i,e, a merry
fool in general.^ In England^ Robin Groodfellow seems to get
mixed up with Robin Hood the archer^ as Hood himself reminds
us of Hödeken (p. 463) ; and I think this derivation from a
being of the goblin kind^ and universally known to the people^
is preferable to the attempted historical ones from Rubertua
a Saxon mass-priest^ or the English Robertus knight, one
of the slayers of Thomas Becket. Nisse, Nissen, current in
Denmark and Norway, must be explained from Niels, Nielsen,


^ Ayrer'B Fastnaehtspiele 78<^ oonfirms the fact of Rupel being a dimin. of
Bnprecht. Some dialeots nse Rüpeln Riepel as a name for Üie tom-cat again ; in
vitch-triala a little young devil is named Rubel. Ace. to the Leipzig ATantniier 1,

22-3, knecht Ruprecht appears in shaggy clothes, sack on back and rod in hand.

[If Hob in hobgoblin stands for Bobert, it is another instance of the friendly or at
least conciliatoiy feeling that prompted the giving of such names. In Mids. N.
Dream ii. 1, the same spirit tiiat has just been called Robin Goodfellow, is Üius
addressed :

Those that Hb(-goblin call you, and sweet Puck,
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.

Of course Hob as a man's name is Bobert, as Hodge is Boger.— Tbins.]


HOME-SPRITE. 505

t.«. Nico]aas^ Niclas/ not from our HG. common noun ' nix '
the watersprite^ whioh is in Danish nök^ nok (p. 488) ^ and has
no connexion with Nisse ; and the Swed. form is also Nilson. I
find a confirmation of this in our habit of assigning to Ntclavs,
Glaus or Globes the selfsame part that in some districts is played
by Ruprecht. To this latter I am inclined to refer even the
words of so early a writer as Ofterdingen, MS. 2, 2^ : ' Rupreht
min ineeht muoz iuwer bar gelich den tören schem/ B. my man
ntast shear your hair like that of fools. A home-sprite Rudy (for
Badolf) in Moneys Anz. 3^ 365.

Another set of names is taken from the noises which these
spirits keep up in houses : you hear them jumping softly^ knock-
ing at walls^ racketing and tumbling on stairs and in lofts.
Span, trasgo (goblin) ^ and trasguear (to racket); Fr. soterai,
sotret (jumper)^ M6m. de Facad. celt. 4, 91 ; ekerken (eichhörn-
chen, squirrel)^ Dent. sag. no. 78 ; poltergeist, rumpelgeist, rurri'
pelstih in the Kindermärchen no. 55^ rumpelstilt in Fischart ;^
one particalar goblin is called hlopfer, knocker (Deut. sag. no.
76)^ and it may be in this connexion that hämmerlein, hemerlein
(sapra^ p. 182) has come to be applied to home-sprites of diabolic
nature. Nethl. hullman, bullerman, bullerhater, from bullen^
ballern, to be boisterous. Flem. boldergeest, and hence 'bi
lu)Ider te bolder/ our ' bolter die polter/ helter-skelter. A pop-
hart, identical with rumpelstilt in Fischart, is to be derived
from popeln, popem, to keep bobbing or thumping soflly and
rapidly;' a house-goblin in Swabia was called the poppele; in
other parts popel, pöpel, popelmann, popanz, usually with the side-
meaning of a muffled ghost that frightens children, and seldom
nsed of playful good-humoured goblins. At the same time pöpel
is that which muffles (puppt) itself: about Henneberg, says
Beinwald 2, 78, a dark cloud is so called ; it contains the notion

' Kot only Nielsen, bat Nissen is a family name in Denmark, and can only
mean the same, by no means nix or goblin. [I suppose Niels is rather Nigellas,
Nigel, which bieaks down the connexion with Nicolas or Clans ; still the two can
ituid independently. — Tbanb.]

' Is stiUt sUlz the old stalt in compounds? Gramm. 2, 627. What the fairy-
tale says of Bumpelstili, and how his name has to be guessed, other stories tell of
EüenhüUl or HopferiMUel (who wear an iron hat or one wreathed with hop-leaves),
Ektke's Alman. t. yolksm. 67 ; or of the dwarf HoUrührlein, Bonneßhrlein, Harrys
1, is [of Knirßker, GehhaH, Tepentiren, MüUenh. 306-8, of Titteli Türe, Sy. folkr.
1, 171. — SuppXi.] ; and we shall meet with the like in giant-stories.

* Staid. 1, 204. Schm. 1, 298. 828.


506 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

of mask and tarnkappe (p. 333). In connexion with Holda^ a
Hollepöpel, Hollepeter is spoken of.

The same shifting of form appears in the words mumhart
(already in Cassarias heisterb. 7^ 46 : ' mummart momordit me ^),
mummel, mummelmann, mummanz^ which express the very same
notion^ ' mummen^ mnmmehi ' signifying to mumble^ to ntter a
muffled soand. Or can we connect it with mumel, muomel, the
name of the watersprite (p. 490) ? In that case^ vermammen
(to disguise) j mnmmerei (mamming^ larra) would seem to mean
acting like the spectre^ instead of the spectre having taken his
name from mumming (see Suppl.).

The word butze as far back as the 12th-13th century had the
same meaning as mummart and poppart : a place called Puzi-
prunnun, PiLcipininnen, MB. 6, 60. 62. 9, 420 (12th century),
unless puzi=:puteus be meant, might take its name from a well,
haunted by such a home-sprite. 'Ein nngehinrer (uncanny)
butze/ Martina 116° 224*; ' si sehent mich nicht mdr an in butzen
wis,' they look at me no more in butze wise, Walth. 28, 37 ; 'in
butzen wise gehn,' Oberlin sub v. ; ' den butzen vorht er kleine,
als man dd seit von kinden,' he little fears the b., as we say of
children, Albr. Tit. x. 144 (Hahn 1275) ; butzengriul, -horror,
Walth. 140, 2. MsH. 3, 451»; 'geloub ich daz, s6 biz mich
butze/ b. bite me if I believe it, Hatzlerin 287% which agrees with
'mummart momordit me' above; 'ein hiuderbutze/ Ls. 1, 617;
' forht ich solchen bützel/ Ls. 1, 880, where a wihtel is spoken
of. So, to frighten with the butze, to tear off the butze (mask) ;
butzen antliit (face) and butzen kleider (clothes) =larva in
Kaisersperg (Oberlin 209) ; winterbutz in Brant's Narrenschiff
129 (winterbutte in the Plattdeutsch translation 140^). I do
not understand the butzenhänsel in Weisth. 1, 691. All over
Germany almost, we hear to this day : 'der butz kommt,' * or 'der
butzemann, butzelmann/ and in Elsass butzmummel, the same as
butz or mummel alone, buz, Jäger's Ulm, p. 522. butzenmann,
Fischart's Bienkorb 194*. butz, Oarg. 231*. butzemann, Simpl.
2, 248. In Bavaria, fasnachtbutz, Shrovetide b., buzmann, buzi-
bercht, b. coupled with the Bercht or Berchta of our pp. 272-9;

^ For mum hans (muffle- jack), as popanz ib for pop-hans (bob-jack), and as
there were likewise blindhans, grobfaans, karsthans, soharrhans, etc.
* In Normandy : * hush, the gobelin will eat you up.*


HOME-SPBITE. 507

butzwinkel, larking-placOi butzlfinster, pitch-dark^ w^^n the ap-
parition is most to be dreaded ; ^ the putz would take ns over
hill and dale/ Schm. 1^ 229. 230; the butz who leads travellers
astray (Machar's Gastein^ p. 145). In Swabia butzenmaukler
(from mancheln^ to be slj)^ butzenbrecht, butzenraule, butzenrolle,
rollputz, bidzenbell (because his rattle rolls and his bell tinkles)^
Schmid 111. About Hanau I have heard the interjection^ katza-
btdza-rol^ ! the 'katze-butze' bringing up the connexion between
cat and goblin (p. 503) in a new form. In Switzerland bootzi, bozi,
St. 1^ 204. Here several meanings branch out of one another :
first we have a monstrous butz that drags children away^ then a
tiny butzel, and thence both butzel and butz^igel (-urchin) used
contemptuously of little deformed creatures. In like manner but
in Low Germ, stands for a squat podgy child ; button^ verhütten
is to get stunted or deformed^ while the bugbear is called butte^
biUke, buddsy buddeke : ' dat di de butke nig bit/ (that thee the
bogie bite not I) is said satirically to children who are afraid of
Ae dark^ Brem. wb. 1, 173-5; and here certainly is the place
for the watersprite butt or bv^tjs in the Kindermärchen no. 19^
the name having merely been transferred to a blunt-headed fish^
the rhombus or passer marinus.^ There is also probably a butte^
mann, buttmann, but more commonly in the contracted form
bu-man (Br. wb. 1^ 153). Nethl. bytebauw, for bnttebauw, which
I identify with Low Germ, bu-ba (Br. wb. 1, 152). The Dan.
buMiemand, bussegroll, bussetrold (Molbech^ p. 60) seems to be
formed on the German (see SuppL). — The origin of this butze,
butte is hard to ascertain: I would assume a lost Goth, biuta
(tandoj pulso)^ b4ut, butum, OHG. piazu^ pöz, puzum^ whence
OHG. anapöz, our amboss^ anvil^ MHG. b6zen (pulsare)^ and
gebiuze^ thumping^ clatter [Engl, to butt 7]^ conf. Lachmann
on Nib. 1823, 2. Fragm. 40, 186; butze would be a thumping
rapping sprite^ perfectly agreeing with mumhart and pophart,^
and we may yet hear of a bözhart or bnzhart. But^ like

1 Homesprite and water-sprite meet in this soothsaying wish-granting fish.
The stoiy of the butt has a parallel in the OFr. tale of an elvish spirit and en-
chanter Merlin, who keeps fulfilling the growing desires of the oharooal homer, till
they pABB all bounds, then plunges him back into his original poTerty (M6on, nouv.
no. 2, 342-252. Jnbinal 1, 128-185.

* As the monstrous includes the repulsive and unclean, it is not surprising that
both butxe and popel signify mucus, filth (Oberlin 210. Schm. 1, 291). The same
with Swiss böög, St. 1, 208.


508 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

butzenhänsel^ there is also a hanselmcmn nsed for spiritus
familiaris (Phil. y. Sittew. 5^ 828^ ed. Lugd.)^ and the similar
hampelmann for goblin^ pappet and mannequin ( = männeke^
mannikin). Bavar. hämpel, haimpel, both devil and simpleton
(Schm. 2, 197), Austr. henparl (Höfer 2, 46).

The Fr. fallet, It. foletto, is a diminuitive of fol, fon ; which,
like follis (bellows), seems to be derived from an obsolete follere
(to move hither and thither)^ and brings ns to a fresh contact
of the home- sprite with the fool.^ Then lutin, also luton, perhaps
from the Lat. luctus : a sprite who wails and forebodes sorrow ?
Lithuan. bilduhkas, bildunas, bildziuJcs (noisy sprite)^ fix>m
bildenti (to racket, rattle) ; grozdunas from grödzia (there is a
racket made). Sloven, ztrazhnik, Serv. strashilo, Boh. straSidlo,
Pol. straszydlo, from strasiti (terrere); Boh. bubdk (noisy sprite).
Somewhat stronger is the Pol. dziedqjad, child-eater, like the
Lat. manducns. Irish home-sprites are called Gluricauns (Elfenm.
p. 85-114), Leprechaun, Logheriman (Keightley 2, 179 ; and see
Suppl.). ••

But enough of these names : no doubt many more could be
added. It is time to consider the nature and functions of these
Home-sprites.

In stature, appearance and apparel they come very near to
elves and dwarfs; legend loves to give them red hair or a
red beard, and the pointed red hat is rarely missing. Hütehen
(Hodeke, Hoidike), the Hildesheim goblin, and Hopfenhüteh
Eisenhütel take their names from it. A broad-topped mushroom
is in Dan. called niasehat. The Norwegian Nissen is imagined
small like a child, but strong, clothed in grey, with a red peaky
cap, and carrying a blue light at night.^ So they can make
themselves visible or invisible to men, as they please. Their fairy
shoes or boots have been noticed, p. 503 ; with these they can get
over the most difficult roads with the greatest speed : it was just
over mountains and forests that Hütchen^s rennpfad extended
(Deut. sag. 1, 100), and the sclvratweg (p. 479) means much the

1 BatheriuB, ed. Ballerini, p. 814 : * merito etgofoUU latiali rastioitate yoearis,
qnoniam yeritate yaoans.* Wüholm. metenB. ep. 8: *foUem me rostioo yerbo
appellaeti.'

> J. N. Wilse's Beskriyelae oyer Spydeberg, Christiana 1779, p. 41S. Conl the
blue light of the black mannikin, Einderm. no. 116.


f


HOME-SPBITE. 509

sanie.^ With this walking apparatus and this swiftness there is
associated now and then some animaVsform and name : Heinze^
Heinzelmann^ polterkater^ katermann^ boot-cat, squirrel; their
shuffling and bustling about the house is paralleled by the nightly
turbulence of obstreperous cats.^ They like to live in the stable,
bam or cellar of the person whose society they have chosen,
sometimes even in a tree that stands near the house (Swed. bo-trä,
dwelling- tree). You must not break a bough o£E such a tree, or
the offended goblin will make his escape, and all the luck of the
house go with him ; moreover, he cannot abide any chopping in
the yard or spinning on a Thursday evening (Superst. Swed. no.
110).^ In household occupations they shew themselves friendly
and fnrthersome, particularly in the kitchen and stable. The
dwarf-king Ooldemar (pp. 453. 466) is said to have lived on in-
timate terms with Neveling of Hardenberg at the Hardenstein,
and often shared his bed. He played charmingly on the harp,
and got rid of much money at dice ; he called Neveling brother-
in-law, and often admonished him, he spoke to everybody, and
made the clergy blush by discovering their secret sins. His
hands were lean like those of a frog, cold and soft to the grasp ;
he would allow himself to be felt, but never to be seen. After a
stay of three years he made off without injuring any one. Other
accounts call him king Vollmar, and they say the room he lived
in is called Vollmar^s Jeammer to this day : a place at table had
to be kept for him, and one in the stable for his horse ; meats,
oats and hay were consumed, but of horse or man you saw nothing
but tlie shadow. Once an inquisitive man having sprinkled ashes
and peas to make him fall and to get sight of his footprints, he
sprang upon him as he was lighting the fire, and chopped him up
into pieces, which he stuck on a spit and roasted, but the head
and legs he thought proper to boil. The dishes, when ready,
were carried to YoUmar's chamber, and one could hear them
being consumed with cries of joy. After this, no more was heard

1 So a chemin de fie$ is spoken of in M6m. oelt. 4, 240, and a tr^UoMkeid
(enzrienlmn gigantnm) in Laxd. saga 66.

' Witches and fays often assome the ilupe of a eat, and the oat is a oreatore
peenliarly open to suspicions of witchcraft.

> Wilse, nbi supra, entirely agrees : * tomtegnbben skal have sin til hold nnde
gamU träer Ted stoehnset {boeträer), og derfor har man e| toidet fälde disss gand-
ske.* To this oozmezion of home-sprites with tree-worship we shall have to return
farther on.


510 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

of king VoUmar ; but over his chamber-door it was foand written,
that from that time the honse would be as anlacky as it had been
prosperous till then^ and the scattered estates woald never come
together again till there were three Hardenbergs of '•Hardenstein
living at once. Both spit and gridiron were long preserved, till
in 1651 they disappeared daring the Lorrain war^ but the pot is
still there, let into the kitchen wall.^ The home-sprite^s parting
prophecy sounds particularly ancient, and the grim savagery of
his wrath is heathen all over. Sam. Meiger says of the woUer^
kens : ' Se vinden sik gemeinichlich in den hüseren, dar ein god
vörrad (store) van allen dingen is. Dar schölen se sik bedenst-
haftigen (obsequious) anstellen^ waschen in der koken up, böten
vür (beet the fire), schüren de vate, schrapen de perde im stalle,
voderen dat quik, dat it vet und glat herin geit, theen (draw)
water und dragent dem vehe (cattle) vor. Men kan se des
nacktes hören de ledderen edder treppen (or stairs) up und dal
stigen, lachen, wen se den megeden efte knechte de decken
aftheen (pull off), se richten to, houwen in, jegen (against) dat
geste kamen schölen,^ smiten de ware in dem huse umme^ de den
morgen gemeinliken darna verkoft wert.' The gobiin then is an
obliging hardworking sprite, who takes a pleasure in waiting on
the men and maids at their housework, and secretly dispatching
some of it himself. He curries the horses, combs out their
manes,' lays fodder before the cattle,* draws water fiH)m the well
and brings it them, and cleans out the stable. For the maids he
makes up fire, rinses out the dishes, cleaves and carries wood,
sweeps and scrubs. His presence brings prosperity to the house,
his departure removes it. He is like the helpful earth-mannikins
who lend a hand in field labour (p. 451 n.). At the same time he
oversees the management of the house, that everything be done
orderly; lazy and careless workers get into trouble with him (as
with Holla and Berhta, pp. 269. 273), he pulls the coverlets off

* Von Steinen^s Westph. gesoh. pp. 777-9.

^ When the cat trims her whiskerB, they say it is a sign of gaests.

3 Like the white lady (Berhta), whose nightly visits are indicated the next
morning by the wax that has dropt from her taper on the manes (Dent. sag. no. 122).
In Wales the people believe that goats have their beards combed out every Friday
night hy the dves (Oroker 3, 204).

4 Hence the name futtermänncJient (oonfonnded at times with Petermärmehen) ;
but often he has one favourite horse that he pays special attention to^ taking hay
out of ihe others* cribs to bring to him. Faye p. 44.


HOME-SPRITB. 511

the beds of sluggards^ blows their light out, turns the best cow's
neck awry, kicks the dawdling milkmaid's pail over, and mocks
her with insulting laughter ; his good-nature turns into worrying
and love of mischief, he becomes a ' tormenting spirit.' Agemund
in the Beinardns 4, 859-920 seems to me no other than a house-
dasmon, distorted and exaggerated by the poet, disturbing the
maid in her sleep, her milking and churning (see Suppl.).^

Servants, to keep on good terms with him, save a little potful
of their food on purpose for him, which is surely a vestige of little
sacrifices that were offered him of old (p. 448). That is probably
why one Swiss goblin bears the name NapfhanSf Potjack. But
in many cases it is only done on holidays, or once a week. The
sprite is easily satisfied, he puts up with a saucerful of porridge,
a piece of cake and a glass of beer, which are left out for him
accordingly ; on those evenings he does not like any noisy work
to be going on, either in or out of doors. This they call in
Norway ' at holde qvelvart (qvellsvart),' to hold evening rest.
Those who desire his goodwill, give him good words : ' kiäre
ffranne, giör det 1 ' dear neighbour, do this ; and he replies con-
formably. He is said at times to carry his preference for the
goodman so far as to pilfer hay and straw from other farmers'
bams or stables, and bring it to him (see Suppl.).

The Nissen loves the moonlight, and in wintertime you see
hiip merrily skipping across the farmyard, or skating. He is a
good hand at dancing and music, and much the same is told of
him as of the Swedish stromkarl (p. 493), that /or a grey sheep
he teaches people to play the fiddle.'

The home-sprite is contented with a trifling wage : a new hat, a
red cap, a parti-coloured coat with tinkling bells he will make
shift with. The hat and cap he has in common with dwarfs
(p. 463), and therefore also the power to make himself invisible.
Petronins (Satir. cap. 88) shows it was already a Roman super-
stition : ' sed qnomodo dicunt, ego nihil scivi, sed audivi, quo-
modo ineuboni pileam rapuisset, et thesaurum invenit.' Home-

* Hid description of his figure (a horse's mane, hawk's bill, cat's tail, goat's
beard, ox*8 horns and oook's feet) can hardly have been all invented there and then.

' Unless Wilae (Beskriy. oyer Spyd. 419) has confounded Nissen with nöoken ;
yet the German goblui Goldemar was likewise mnsioal (Ir. Elfenm. Ixxziii.). Wilse,
and Faye, pp. 4S-46, give the best account of the Norwegian Nissen, and Thiele i.
134^ of the Danish.


512 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

sprites goard treasures^ and in Nib. 399 Si^fried becomes
master of the hoard as soon as he has taken Alberich's tarnkappe
from him. In Galderon^s Dama dnende the little goblin wears a
large hat : ' era nnfrayle tamanito, y tenia un eiicurucho tamano/
The Swedish ' tomte i garden ' looks like a year-old child^ bnt
has an old knowing face ander his red cap. He shews himself at
midday (see chap. XXXVL, daemon meridianus) in summer and
autumn^ slow and panting he drags a single straw or an ear
(p. 459) ; when the farmer laughed and asked^ ' What's the
odds whether yon bring me that or nothing f ' he quitted the
farm in dudgeon, and went to the next. From that time pros-
perity forsook the man who had despised him, and went over to
his neighbour. The farmer who respected the busy tomte and
cared for the tiniest straw, became rich, and cleanliness and
order reigned in his household. Many Christians still believe in
such home-sprites, and present them an offering every year, ' pay
them their wage ' as they call it. This is done on the mom of
Yule, and consists of grey cloth, tobacco and a shovelful of earth,
Afzelius 2, 169. A puck served the monks of a Mecklenburg
monastery for thirty years, in kitchen, stall and elsewhere ; he
was thoroughly good-natured, and only bargained for ' tunicam
de diversis coloribus, et tintinnabulis plenani,'^ In Scotland there
lived a goblin Shellycoat, and we saw (p. 465) that the dwarfs
of the Mid. Ages also loved helU [schellen ; and Schellenkappe is
Germ, for cap and beUs] . The bells on the dress of a fool still
attest his affinity to the shrewd and merry goblin (fol, follet) ;
see Suppl.

He loves to play merry pranks, and when he has accomplished
one, he is fain to laugh himself double for delight : hence that
goblin laughter (p. 502) and chuckling* But also when he sulks,
and means mischief to those who have brought him into trouble
and difficulty, he utters a scornful laugh at the top of his voice.^

As hendima/n true, he abides by the master he once takes up
with, come weal come woe. But his attachment is often found
irksome, and one cannot be rid of him again. A farmer set fire

^ The Btory (aa written down in 1559) is given in Em. Joaoh. Westphal's Speci-
men dooomentomm ineditomm, Rostook 1726, pp. 156-166.

s Sooit'8 Minstrelqr I. dy. mentions a North English Brag or Bargue$t: *he
nsoally ended his misohieYoas frolios with a horselaughs* Conf. Hone's TaUebook
2, 656.


HOME-SPRITE. 513

to his bam^ to bam the goblin that haunted it ; when it is all
ablaze^ there sits the sprite at the back of the cart in which they
were removing the contents (Dent. sag. no. 72).* In Moneys
Anzeiger 1835^ 312 we read of a little black man that was
bought with a chesty and when this was opened^ he hopped ont
and slipped behind the oven, whence all efforts to roat him out
were fruitless ; but he lived on excellent terms with the house-
hold, and occasionally shewed himself to them, though never to
strangers. This black figure reminds one both of the Scandi-
navian dwarfs, and of the devil. Some thoroughly good goblin-
stories are in Adalb. Kuhn's collection, pp. 42. 55. 84. 107. 159.
191-3. 372.«

There are also goblins who, like nix and watersprite, are
eugaged in no man's service, but live independently ; when such
a one is caught, he will offer you gifts or tell your fortune, to be
set at liberty again. Of this sort is the hutt in the nursery-tale


> Very similar stories in Enhn, no. 108, Thiele 1, 136, and the Irish tale of the
ehuieann (pp. 92. 218 of the transl.). Also a capital Poliish story about Iskrzyoki,
in W6yeidii*B Kleohdy 1, 198 : An unknown person, who oalled himself Iskrzyoki
[flinty, from iskra— spark, says Grimm ; there is also a SlaT. iskri—near, iskrenny
■ neighbonr, friendly] eame and offered his services to a man of noble family.
The accreement was drawn up, and even signed, when the master observed that Isk-
rzydd had horse's feet, and gave him notice of withdrawal. But the servant stood
on his rights, and declared his intention of serving his master whether he would
or no. He lived invisible by the fireplace, did all the tasks assigned him, and by
degrees they got used to him ; but at last the lady pressed her husband to move,
and he arranged to take another estate. The family all set out from the mansion,
and had got through the better part of the way, when, the log-road being out of
repair, the carriage threatens to upset, and the lady cries out in alarm. Suddenly
a voice from the back of the carriage calls out : Never fear, my masters! Iskrzyoki
IB with yon (nie b6j si^, pani ; Iskrzycki z wami). The * masters ' then perceiving
that ihey oonld not shake him off, turned back to their old house, and lived at
peace with tiie servant until his term expired. [English readers will remember

Tennyson's * Yes, we*re flitting, says the ghost.'] The alraun or gallows-man-

nikin in Deatsche sagen nos. b8. 84 is not properly a kobold, but a semi-diabolic
being carved out of a root, and so diminutive that he can be kept in a glass ; like
an idol, he has to be bathed and nursed. In one thing however he resembles the
home-sprite, that he will not leave his owner, and even when thrown away he
always comes back again, unless indeed he be sold [orig. ' bought '] for less than
be cost. The last purchaser has to keep him. SimpHciss. 2, 184. 208. Conf.
Schm. 8, 96-7. [Home-sprites can be bought and sold, but the third buyer must
keep him, MüUenhoff p. 822. With ref. to the * idol (götze) ' : As the figure of the
child Jesus has its shirt washed (Sommer, pp. 88. 178), so the heckmännehen must
be dressed np anew at a certain time every year, 10 Ehen, p. 285. — Extr. from

BUFPL.]

* To ueape the futtermSnnchen, a farmer built a new house, but the day before
he moved, he spied the f . dipping his grey coat in the brook : *• My little coat here
I swiU and souse. To-morrow we move to a fine new house.' fiömer's Orlagau,
p. 246L Whoever has the kobold must not wash or eotnb himself (Sommer p. 171.
MfiUenh. 209) ; so in the case of the devil, ch. XXXIU.— Extr. from Suppl.


514 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

(p. 507), likewise the folet in Marie de Fr. 2, 140, who grants
three wishes (oremens). And the captive marmennill (p. 434),
or the sea-wife, does the same.

The unfriendly, racketing and tormenting spirits who take pos-
session of a house, are distinguished from the friendly and good-
natured by their commonly forming a whole gang, who disturb
the householder's rest with their riot omd clatter y and throw stones
from the roof at passers by. A French comedy of the 16th
century, ' Les Esprits,' ^ represents goblins racketing in a house,
singing and playing at night, and aiming tiles at passers by in
the daytime ; they are fond of fire, but make a violent uproar
every time the master spits.* In Gervase of Tilbury, cap. 18,
the foUeti also pelt with stones, and this of stone-throwing is
what we shall meet with in quite early stories of devils; al-
together the racketing sprites have in this respect more of the
devil or spectre in them than of the elf : it is a darkening and
distortion of their original nature in accordance with Christian
sentiment«

So it becomes clear, at last, how the once familiar and faith-
ful friend of the family under heathenism has gradually sunk
into a bugbear or a taunt to children : a lot which he shares with
goddesses and gods of old. As with Holle and Berhte, so people
are threatened with the Lamia, the Omacmica, the manducus and
goblin (pp. 500. 507) : ' le gobelin vous mangera, le gobelin
vous attrapera ! ' Little bützel no more, but a frightful butze-
mann or katzenveit, in mask (strawbeard) or with sooty visage
he scares (like the roggenmuhme, p. 477). And it is worth
remarking how, in some districts at least, kneeht Ruprecht, knedU
Nicolas, appear at Christmas-time not by themselves, but in


1 Comedies faoeoienfles de Pierre de rArivey, ohampenois, Lyon 1597. Bonen,
1611, p. 242 seq.

* Legenda anrea, cap. 177 : Hnjus Lado^ioi tempore, anno Domini 856, nt in
qoadam chronica habetur, in paroohia Magontina maUgwu ipiritm parietes domo-
rum ^ua$i malieU puUando et manifeste loqaendo et disoordias seminando adeo horn*
inis mfestabat, at qaocomqae intrasset, statim ilia domus exvrereUr, Presbyteris
antem letanias agentibas et aqaam benedictam spargentibos inimiouB lapideg jact-
dbat et moitos cmentabat. Tandem aliqaando conqoiescens confessus est se, qnando
aqua spargebatnr, sub eapa talis saeerdotis quasi familiaris sui latnisse, aooosans
enm qnod com filia procnratoris in peooatom lapsns fuerit. [This incident, said to
have occurred at Gapmanti (Kembden) near Bingen, is derived from Budolfi Fnl-
densis Annal. ann. 858, in Pertz 1, 872, where further details are given. — Eztr.
from SüPPL.


HOME-SPRITE. 515

attendance on the real gift-giver^ the infant Christ or dame
Berhta : while these dole oat their favonrs, those come on with
rod and sack, threatening to thrash disobedient children^ to
throw them into the water, to puff their eyes ont (Rockenphilos.
6, 353). Their pranks, their roughness, act as foil to the gracious
higher being from whom the gifts proceed; they are almost as
essential to the festival as Jackpudding to our old comedy. 1
can well imagine that even in heathen times the divinity, whose
appearing heralded a happy time, had at his side some merry elf
or dwarf as his attendant embodying to the vulgar eye the bless-
ings that he brought.^ Strongly in favour of this view are the
North Franconian names Hullepöpel (Popowitsch 522), Hollepeter
(Schm. 2, 174), the Bavarian Semper, of whom they say he cuts
naaghty children's bodies open and stufis them with pebbles
(Schm. 3, 12. 250), exactly after the manner of Holla and Berhta
(p. 273)^; and consider faithful Eckart, who escorts Holla.
In Christian times they would at first choose some saint to
accompany the infant Christ or the mother of God in their dis-
tribotion of boons, bat the saint would imperceptibly degenerate
into the old goblin again, but now a coarser one. The Christmas
plays sometimes present the Saviour with His usual attendant
Peter, or else with Niclas, at other times however Mary with
Gabriel, or with her i^ed Joseph, who, disguised as a peasant,
acts the part of knecht Buprecht. Nicolaus again has converted
himself into a ' man Globes ' or Rupert ; as a rule, it is true,
there is still a Niclas, a saintly bishop and benevolent being,
distinct from the ' man ' who scares children ; but the characters
get mixed, and Globes by himself acts the 'man' (Tobler 105^,
106»); the Austrian Grampus (Höfer 1, 313. Schm. 2, 110),
Krämpus, Krambas, is possibly for Hieronymus, but how to ex-
plain the Swiss Schmutzli (Staid. 2, 337) I do not rightly know,
perhaps simply from his smutty sooty aspect f Instead of Grampus
there is also in Styria a Bärthel (pointing to Berhta, or Bartho-
lomew 7) Schmutzbartel ^ and Klaubauf, who rattles, rackets, and

' Heinrich and Rujprtohi were once oonunon names for serving-men, as Hans
iDd Claos are now.

' Zember aboat Eger in Qerman Bohemia (Popowitsch 623) ; at the same time
the Lausitz idol Sompar (snpra, p. 71 note) is worth considering.

* The phrase * he knows where Barthel gets his must,* notwithstanding other
explanations, may refer to a home-sprite well-known in the cellar.


516 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

throws nuts (Denis, Lesefr. 1, 131 ; see Sappl.). Farther, on this
point I attach weight to the Swedish juUekar, Dan. jtdeleger,
ynle-lays, undoubtedly of heathen origin, which at Christmas-
time present Christ and certain saints, but replace our man
Buprecht by a julbock, julebuk, t.e. a mansenrant disguised as
a goat.^ This interweaving of. jackpudding, fool, Klobes and
Rüpel, of the yule-buck and at last of the devil himself, into the
rude popular drama of our Mid. Ages, shows what an essential
part of it the wihtels and tatermans formerly were, how ineradi-
cable the elvish figures and characters of heathenism. The
Greeks enlivened the seriousness of their tragedy by satyric
plays, in which e,g. Proteus, similar to our sea-sprite (p. 484),
played a leading part.^

There is yet another way in which a former connexion between
gods, wise- women a|id these genii now and then comes to light.
The elf who showers his darts is servant or assista/ni to the high
god of thunder, the cunning dwarf has forged his thunderbolts
for him ; like gods, they wear divine helmets of invisibility, and
the home-sprite has his feet miraculously shod as well ; water-
sprites can assume the shape of fishes and sea-horses, and home-
sprites those of cats. The weeping nix, the laughing goblin are
alike initiated in the mystery of magic tones, and vrill even un-
veil it to men that sacrifice. An ancient worship of genii and
daemons is proved by sacrifices offered to spirits of the inountain,
the wood, the lake, the house. Goblins, we may presume, ac-
companied the manifestation of certain deities among men, as
Wuotan and Holda, and both of these deities are also connected
with watersprites and swan-maids. Foreknowledge of the future,
the gift of prophecy, was proper to most genii ; their inexhaust-
ible cheerfulness stands between the sublime serenity of gods


^ Bead Holberg's Jnlestae, and look up JuZvcUten in Finn Magn. lexicon, p. 326
note.

' They frightened children with Booty Cyclops, and aoo. to CallimachnB (Hymn
to Diana 66-71), Hermes, like our Buprecht bladLened with soot, straok terror
into disobedient daughters CTen of gods :

oXX' ore Kovpdvp tis dxeiBia ßffripi ret^oc,
fJof/TTip fiijv Ki^K\(OTas iS irl TaiSl KoKiffrpet
"Apyrfp 1j JiTtpbfwuiv * o hk du^iarot ix fwxßroio
ipX'Prax *EpfulriSt airoBif KtxpVf^^ o^^V»
airrUca rfyf Koöfnpf fiop/i.^<r<r€Tai ' ^ di reKOÖertft


SPBITES. GENH. 517

and ihe solemn fates of mortals. They feel themselves drawn to
men^ and repelled by them. The downfall of heathenism mast
have wronght great changes in the old-established relationship :
the spirits acquired a new and terrible aspect as ministers and
messengers of Satan.^ Some put on a more savage look that
savonrs of the giant^ especially the woodsprites. Grendel's
nature borders on those of giants and gods. Not so with the
females however : the wild women and female nixes drop into
the class of fortune-telling swan-maids who are of human kind^
while the elfins that present the drinking-horn melt into the
circle of valkyrs ; and here again we recognise a general beauty
pervading all the female spirits^ and raising them above the
males^ whose characteristics come out more individually. In
wichtels^ dwarfs and goblins^ especially in that children's bugbear
the man Ruprecht^ there shews itself a comic faculty derived
from the oldest times.

Through the whole existence of elves^ nixes, and goblins there
runs a low under-current of the unsatisfied, disconsolate : they
do not rightly know how to turn their glorious gifts to account,
they always require to lean upon men. Not only do they seek
to renovate their race by intermarriage with mankind, they also
need the counsel and assistance of men in their afiairs. Though
acquainted in a higher degree than men with the hidden virtues
of stones and herbs, they yet invoke human aid for their sick
and their women in labour (pp. 457. 492), they borrow men's
vessels for baking and brewing (p. 454 n.), they even celebrate
their weddings and hightides in the halls of men. Hence too
their doubting whether they can be partakers of salvation, and
their unconcealed grief when a negative answer is given.

' Bruder Batueh [friar Bnsh) a veritable goblin, is without hesitation [described
M being] despatdied nrom hell among the monks ; his name is to be derived from
rnu-ifaiigo (as kohlraosoh was formerly spelt kolross).


CHAPTER XVIII.

GIANTS-

The relation in which giants stand to dwarfs and men has
been touched upon in p. 449. By so much of bodily size and
strength as man surpasses the elf or dwarf, he falls short of the
giant ; on the other hand, the race of elves and dwarfs has a
livelier intellect and subtler sense than that of men, and in these
points again the giants fall far below mankind. The rude coarse-
grained giant nature is defiant in its sense of material power and
might, the sly shy dwarf is conscious of his mental superiority.
To man has been allotted a happy mean, which raises him above
the giant^s intractableness and the dwarf^s cunning, and betwixt
the two he stands victorious. The giant both does and suffers
wrong, because in his stupidity he undervalues everybody, and
even falls foul of the gods ; ^ the outcast dwarf, who does discern
good and evil, lacks the right courage for free and independent
action. In order of creation, the giant as the sensuous element
came first, next followed the spiritual element of elvish nature,
and lastly the human race restored the equilibrium. The abrupt-
ness of these gradations is a good deal softened down by the
giants or dwarfs forming frequent alliances with men, affording
clear evidence that ancient fiction does hot favour steep contrasts :
the very earliest giants have sense and judgment ascribed to
them (see Suppl.).

On one side we see giants forming a close tie of brotherhood
or servile dependence with human heroes, on the other side
shading off into the type of schrats and woodsprites.

There is a number of ancient terms corresponding in sense to
our present word riese (giant).*

^ Not a trace of the finer features of gods is to be seen in the Titans. 0. Muller's
Prolog. 373.

* Some are mere oircamlocations (a eonnterpart to those quoted on p. 450) : der
grdze man, £r. 5380. der michel man, Er. 5475. der michel ümoöe, Iw. 5056.

618


EZAN, BOTEN. 519

The oldest and most comprehensive term in Norse is iotunn,
pi. iotnar (not jötunn^ jötnar) ; it is backed up by an AS. eoten,
pi. eotenas^ Beow. 223 (eotena cyn^ 836. eotonisc^ 5953) , or
eten, Lye snb v.; OE. etin, ettin, Nb;v9B sab v.; Scot, ettyn,
eyttyriy Jamieson sab v. ; an OS. etan, eten can be inferred with
certainty from the name of a place in old docs.^ Etanasfeldj
Etenesfeld (campns gigantis), Wigand's Archiv i. 4^ 85. Moser
noa. 2. 13. 18. 19. And what is more, the word mast have lived
on in later timesj down to the latest^ for I find the fem. eteninne
(giantess) preserved at least in nnrsery-tales. Laarenberg (ed.
Lappenberg^ p. 26) ^ has ^ de olde eteninns,* and another Rostock
book of the beginning of the 18th century ^ ^ die alte eteninne * ;
I shonld like to know whence Adelang sab v. mummel gets the
fact, that in Westphalia a certain terrible female with whom they
frighten children is called etheninne ? I have no donbt it is
corre<}t. The Saxon etan warrants us in conjectnring an OHG.
ezan, ezzan, a Groth. Uans, having for root the ON. eta, AS. etan,
0H6. ezzan, Goth, itan (edere), and for meaning edo (gen.
edonis), mandncns, iroXv^dryo^, devoarer. An AS. poem in Cod.
exon. 425, 26 says: ^ic mesan mseg meahtelicor and efn etan
ealdam ^yrre/ I can chew and eat more mightily than an old
giant Now the qaestion arises, whether another word, which
wants the suffix -n, has any business here, namely the ON. iotr,^
AS. eot, now only to be found in the compound Fomiotr, Forneot
(p. 240) and the national name lotar, the Jutes? One thing
that makes for it is the same omission of -n in the Swed. jätte
(gigas)^ Dan. jetto, pi. jetter; then, taking iotnar as«iotar
(Goth. itands»itds), we should be justified in explaining the
names Jotar, Jotland by an earlier (gigantic ?) race whom the
advancing Teutons crowded out of the peninsula.^ In that
case we might expect an OS. et, etes, an OHG. ez, ezes, with the


1 Johann Lanrenberg, a Boetock man, b. 1590, d. 1658. The first ed. of his poem
appeared 1652.

' Em. Joaeh. Westphal, De eonsnetudine ex saoco et libro, Bost. 1726. 8. pp.
224-5 ; the catalogue there given of old stories of women is copied in Joh. Pet.
Schmidt's Fastelabendssamlmigen, Bostock (1742) 4. resp. 1752, p. 22, but here
incorrectly * yon der Arden Inn * instead of Westphal's * von der alten Eten Inne.*

' For iötr, as miolk for miölk, see Gramm. 1, 451. 482.

* Beda 1, 15 has Jnti, which the AS. version mistakenly renders Geätas (the ON.
Ototar), ^oDgh at 4, 16 it more correctly gives Eotaland for Jntoixim terra, and
the Sax. Gloon. (Ingr. p. 14) has lotxun for lutis, Intnacynn for Intorom gens.

VOL. II, Q


620 GIANTS.

meaniDg of giant. ^ Possibly there was beside iötunn, also an
ON. iötull, OHG. ezal (edax) ; * that would explain the present
Norwegian term for giant : jötul, jutul, Hallager 52. Faye 7
(see Suppl.).*

Our second term is likewise one that suggests the name of
a nation. The ON. ßurs seems not essentially different from
iötunn ; in Sn. 6 Ymir is called ancestor of all the hrtmj^nrses^ in
SaBm. 118^ all the iötnar are traced up to him. In particular
songs or connexions the preference is given to one or the other
appellative : thus in the enumeration of dialects in the Alvtsmäl
the giants are always iötnar^ never )?ursar^ and there is no
Thursaheimr in use for lötunheirar, lötnaheimr; but Thrymr,
though dwelling in lötnaheimr^ is nevertheless called )?ursa
drdttinn (Saem. 70. 71) and not iötna dröttinn, but he summons
the iötnar (73*), and is a iötunn himself (74*). In Sasm. 85^
both iötnar and hrimj^ursar are summoned one after the other,
so there must be some nice distinction between the two, which
here I would look for in the prefix hrim: only hrim)>ursar, no
hrimiötnar, are ever met with ; of this hrim)?urs an explanation
will be attempted further on. Instead of )>urs there often occurs,
especially at a later stage of the language, the assimilated form
Jmss, particularly in the pi. )?ussar, hrim)?ussar ; a dasmonic being
in the later sagas is called Thusselin (Müller's Sagab. 1^ 367-8),
nay, the Danish tongue has retained the assimilation in its tosse,
clumsy giant, dolt (a folk-song has tosfsegrefve) ^ and a Norwegian
daBmon bears the name tussel. The ON. )?urs, like several names
of gods, is likewise the title of a rune-letter, the same that the
Anglo-Saxons called }?orn (conf. '}?urs rlsta,' Sasm. 86*): a
notable deviation, as the AS. tongue by no means lacks the
word ; in Beow. 846 we find Jryrs, and also in the menology in


^ Can the witch Jettha of the Palatinate (p. 96 note) be a eorrnption of Eta, Eza?
Anyhow the Jettenbühel (Jetthas ooIHr) reminds ns of the Bavarian »letUttherg
(Mon. boica 2, 219, ann. 1317), and Mount Jetten in Beinbote's Georg 1717, where
it is misprinted Setten. Near Willingshaasen in Hesse is another Jettenberg^ see
W. Grimm On the rones, p. 271.

* The rained Weissenstein, by Werda near Marburg, was ace. to popular legend
the abode of a giant named Etsel (ezzal?), and the meadow where at the fall of his
castle he sank its golden door in the B. Lahn, is still called Fstelswerd.

' Isidore's glosses render the Gallic name of a people ambro by devorator, which
agrees with the OHG. transl. manezOf man-eater (Graff 1, 528), the weU-known
MJEiG. manezze.

* Rn the Dan. fos, fossen, for the ON. fors.


DUBS, THURS. 521

Hickes (Gramm. AS. p. 207) : ^ }>yr8 sceal on fenne gewunian/
and elsewhere ]>yr8y pi. )?yraas^ renders the Lat. cyclops, orcus.
The passage already given from the Cod. exon. 425^ 28 has pyrre
with the 8 assimilated^ as in irre for irse. And we find an
Engl, thurst sarviving in Jiobthurst (woodsprite), conf. hobgoblin
p. 502 [hob o' t' hurst ?] The OHG. form ought to be dur8, pi.
dars&, or duris, gen. durises^ which last does occur in a gloss for
the Lat. Dis^ Ditis (Schm. 1^ 458)^ and another gloss more Low
Germ, gives thuris for orcus (Pr. ogre); yet Notker ps. 17, 32
spells it tur8 (daemonium), pi. tursa, and MHG. has turse, gen.
torsen (Aw. 3, 179), perhaps türse, tiirsen (as in Massm. denkm.
109 tür8en rhymes kiirsen), and even türste, gen. tiirsten (MS. 2,
205*) ; on the other hand, Albr. Tit. 24, 47 has ' spil von einem
dür8en^ (Hahn 3254 tursen) ==play of a d., from which passage we
gather that türse-shows as well as wihtel-shows (p. 441 n.) were
exhibited for pastime : Ls. 3, 564 says, alluding to a well-known
fable, ' des kunt der dür^ch, und sprichet schuo I ' the d. knows
that, etc., where the notion of satyr and wild man (p. 482)
predominates. The Latin poem of Wilten monastery in Tyrol,
which relates the story of the giant Haimo, names another giant
Thyr8i8, making a proper name of the word :

Forte habitabat in his alius truculentior oris

Cyclops, qui dictus nomine Thyr8i8 erat,
Thyr8i8 erat dictus, Seveldia rura colebat.^

The name of a place Tursinriut, Tursenriut (Doc. of 1218-9 in
Lang's Reg. 2, 88. 94) ^ contains our word unmistakably, and so
to my thinking does the earlier Tuzzinwanc near Neugart, stand-
ing for Titssinwcmc, Tursinwanc (campus gigantis), the present
Dussnang, Nor does it seem much more hazardous to explain
Strabo's BovavikBa (7, 1. Tzsch. 2, 328) by Thurshilda, Thuss-
hilda, Thorsinhilda,' though I cannot produce an ON. Thurshildr.
In Switzerland to this day dilrst is the Wild Hunter (St. 1, 329),
on the Salzburg Alp du8el is a night-spirit (Muchar's Gastein,
p. 145), and in Lower Germany dro8 or drosi is devil, dolt, giant.*

' Mone'B Untennehiing, pp. 288-9.

' Now Tinoheiireit, Tirsonengereith. Schmeller's birthplace in the Up. Pala-
tinate, Sehm. 1, 458. So TOnohenwald, thyrsentritt, Türstwinkel, et .—Suppl.
* Conf. PharaUdis, Vereide, p. 284-5 ; Grimild for Orimhild.
^ Brem. wb. 1, 257. Biohey sab ▼. draos, Schütze sub ▼. drost, Strodtmann sub


522 GIANTS.

Whether ThorshoU, ThoshoU, the name of a place in Oldenburg,
is connected with )>ars, I cannot tell. — In Gothic the word
would have to be ßaürs, pi. )>aiir6Ös (or )>atirsis, pi. jTadrsjösT
)>atirsus^ ]7atlrsjus ? J^adraja, J^atirsjans ?) ; and of these forms the
derivation is not far to seek. The Goth. ]7atirsus means dry,
]>atirsjan to thirst, )>atirstei thirst ; J^atirsus, )?aiirsis becomes in
OHG. durri for dursi (as airzis becomes irri for irsi), while the
noun durst (thirst) retains the s, and so does our durs (giant)
and the ON. )>urs by the side of the adjective purr (dry). So that
ßaürs, ßurs, durs signify either fond of wine, thirsty, or drunken,
a meaning which makes a perfect pair with that we fished out of
i'tans, iötunn. The two words for giant express an inordinate
desire for eating and drinking, precisely what exhibits itself in
the Homeric cyclop. Herakles too is described as edax and
bibax, e.g. in Euripides's Alcestis ; and the ON. giant SuttAngr
(Seem. 23. Sn. 84) apparently stands for Suptungr (Finn Magn.
p. 738), where we must presuppose a noun supt = sopi, a sup
or draught.

Now, as the Jutes, a Teutonic race, retained the name of the
former inhabitants whom they had expelled,^ these latter being
the real lötnar or Itanös ; so may the )?ursar, dursdi, in their mythic
aspect [as giants] be connected with a distant race which at a
very early date had migrated into Italy, I have already hinted
(p. 25) at a possible connexion of the }>aiirs6s with the Tvparfvoi,
TvppTfvoif Tusci, Etrusci: the consonant-changes are the very
thing to be expected, and even the assimilations and the
transposition of the r are all found reproduced. Niebuhr makes
Tyrrhenians distinct from Etruscans, but in my opinion wrongly ;
as for the Ovptro^ carried in the Bacchic procession, it has no claim
to be brought in at all (see Suppl.).

There is even a third mode of designating giants in which we
likewise detect a national name. Lower Germany, Westphalia
above all, uses hüne in the sense of giant ; the word prevails in
all the popular traditions of the Weser region, and extends as far
as the Groningen country and B. Drenthe ; giants' hills, giants'

y. droost : * dat di de drooit sla ! * may the d. smite thee ; in the Altmark : * det di
de druse hal (fetch) ! * and elsewhere * de drSa m de helle.* At the same time the
HG. dmos, traos (plague, blain) is worth considering.

' A case that often occurs ; thus the Bavarians, a Teutonic people, take their
name from the Celtic Boii. [And the present Bulgarians, a Slav race, etc.]


HUN. 523

tombs are called hünehedde, hunebedden, bed being commonly
used for grave, the resting-place of the dead. ' Grot as enjiune '
expresses gigantic stature. Schiiren's Teatonista couples ' rose *
with huyne. Even H.Germ. writers of the 16th-l7th centuries,
though seldomer, use heune; Mathesius: 'Goliath der grosse
heune;' the Yocab. of 1482 spells heimie. Hans Sachs 1, 453*
uses heunisch (like entisch) for fierce, malignant. But the word
goes back to MHG. too; Herbert 1381 : *gr6z alsam ein hujie/
rhym. ' mit starkem gelftne ; ' Trist. 4034 : * an geliden und an
gelione gewahsen als ein hiune/^ In OHG. writings I do not find
the word in this sense at all. But MHG. has also a Hiune (gen.
Hinnen) signifying, without any reference to bodily size, a Hun-
garian, in the Nibelunge a subject of Etzel or Attila (1110, 4.
1123,4. 1271,3. 1824,3. 1829,1. 1831,1. 1832, 1), which
in Lat. writings of the Mid. Ages is called Hunnus, more exactly
Haniu, Ckunus. To this Hiune would correspond an OHG.
H&nio; I have only met with the strong form Hun, pi. Hunt,
gen. Hiinio, Hftneo,' with which many names of places are com-
pounded, e.g. Hftniofeld, a little town in Fulda bishopric, now
Hünfeld; also names of men, Hftnolt, Hftnperht (Humprecht), Hün-
lit, Althftn, Folchün, etc. The AS. Euna cyning (Beda 1, 13)
requires a sing. H&n; but to the ON. nom. pi. Huna/r there is said
to belong a weak sing. Hftni (Gl. Edd. havn. 2, 881). It is plain
those Hftni have a sense that shifts about pretty much with time
and place, now standing for Pannonians, then for Avars^ then
again for Yandals and Slavs, always for a nation brought into
frequent contact with Germany by proximity and wars. The
Uiunenlantot the 13th century (Nib. 1106, 3. 1122, 3) cannot
possibly be the Hünaland which the Eddie lays regard as SigurS's
home (Deutsche heldens. 6. 9). At the time when proper names
like Hünrät, HAnperht first arose, there could hardly as yet be
any thought of an actual neighbouring nation like Pannonians
or Wends ; but even in the earliest times there might circulate
talk and tale of a primitive mythic race supposed to inhabit some
ancertain region, much the same as lötnar and Thursar. I incline


' Wolfdietr. 661 has, for giant, heme rhym. Bohoene, bat only in the place of the
ancient CAsuia, bo that the older reading was most likely /»tun«.

* In Hildeb. lied * Hüneo trohtin (lord of Huns), and ' alt§r Hun ; * Dint. 2, 1S2
Hünl (Pannonii) ; 2, 858^ Hüni for Hun (Hanns) ; 2, 870 Hünl (YandaU).


524 GIANTS.

therefore to guess, that the sense of ' giant/ which we cannot
detect, in Hun till the 13th century, must nevertheless have lain
in it long before : it is by such double meaning that Hadubrant's
exclamation ' altÄr Hün ! ' first acquires significance. When
Gotfried used hiune for giant, he must have known that Hiune
at that time also meant a Hungarian ; and as little does the
distinctness of the nationality rendered Hftni in 0H6. glosses
exclude the simultaneous existence of a mythic meaning of the
word. It may have been vivider or fainter in this place or that:
thus, the ON. hünar is never convertible with iötnar and )>ursar.
I will not touch upon the root here (conf. p. 529 note), but only
remark that one Eddie name for the bear is hunn, Sn. 179. 222%
and ace. toBiörn hün and hünbiöm = oe^tolxis ursinus (see Suppl.).
One AS. term for giant is ent, pi. entas : -Alfred in his Orosius
p. 48 renders Hercules gigas by ' Ercol se ent/ The poets like
to use the word, where ancient buildings and works are spoken
of: ' enta geweorc, enta öBrgeweorc (early work of giants), eald
cn/a geweoro,* Beow. 3356. 5431. 5554. Cod. exon. 291, 24.
476, 2. So the adj. : ' entiseholm/ Beow, 5955; Lipsius's glosses
also give eintisc avitus, what dates from the giants' days of yore.
Our 0H6. eniisc antiquus does not agree with this in consonant-
gradation [t should be z] ; it may have been suggested by the
Latin word, perhaps also by the notion of enti (end) ; another
form is antrisc antiquus (GraflF 1, 387), and I would rather asso-
ciate it with the Eddie ' inn aldni iotunn* (grandaBVus gigas) , Ssem.
23* 46** 84^ 1 89**. The Bavarian patois has an intensive prefix
enzy enzio (Schmeller , 188), but this may have grown out of the
gen. of end, ent (Schm. 1, 77) ; or may we take this ent- itself in
the sense of monstrous, gigantic, and as an exception to the law
of consonant-change? They say both enterisch (Schm. 1, 77) and
enzerißch for monstrous, extraordinary. And was the Enzenherc,
MS. 2, 10^ a giant's hill ? ^ and is the same root contained in
the proper names Änzo, Enzo, Enzinchint (Pez, thes. iii. 8, 689^),
Enzawip (Meichelb. 1233. 1305), Enzeman (Ben. 325) ? If
Hunt alluded to Wends and Slavs, we may be allowed to identify
entas with the ancient Antes ; as for the Indians, whom Mone

1 The present Inselherg near SohmalkaJden ; old docs., however, spell it Emise-
here, named apparently from Üie brook Emise, Emse, which rises on it. Later
forms are Enzelberg, Einzelberg, Einselberg.


BNT. GIGANT. BISO. 525

(Anz, 1836, 1. 2) would bring in, they may stay outside, for in
OHO. itself antisc, entisc (antiquns) is distinct from indisc (In-
diens), Graff 1, 885-6 ; and see Suppl.

The AS. poets use also the Greek, Latin,^ and Bomance appel-
latiye gigani, pi. gigantas, Beow. 225. giganta cyn 3379. giganU
msBCg, Caedm. 76, 36 ; conf. Ital. Span, gigante, Prov. jayan
(Ferab. 4232), O.Pr. gaiant (Ogier 8092. 8101), Fr. geant, Eng.
giant; also OHG. gigcmt (0. iv. 12, 61), MHG. gigante die
mwren (Dint. 3, 60),^ M. Nethl. gigant. The ON. word which is
usually compared with this, but which wants the nt, and is only
used of giantesses, seems to me unconnected : fem. gygr, gen.
g^gjar, Sasm. 39, Sn. 66. 68 ; a Swed. folk-song still has ' den
leda gijger/ Arvidsson, 2, 302. It is wanting in the other Tent,
dialects, bat if translated into Gothic it would be giugi or giugja;
I trace it to the root giugan, and connect it with the words quoted
in my Gramm. 2, 50 no. 536 (see Suppl.) .

Our riese is the OHG. mi (O. iv. 12, 61) or riso (N. ps. 32, 16),
MHG. rise, MLG. rese (En. 7096), ON. risi (the elder Edda has
it only in Grdttas. 12), Swed. rese, Dan. rise, M. Nethl. rese, rose
(Hnyd. op St. 3, 33. 306), now reus. To these would correspond
a Gothic vrisa, as may be gathered from the OS. form wriso which
I confidently infer from the adj. wrisilic giganteus, Hel. 42, 5.
The Anglo-Saxons seem to have had no analogous wrisa, as they
confine themselves to }^yrs, gigant [and ent] . The root of vrisa
is unknown to me ; it cannot belong to reisan surgere, therefore
the OHG. riso does not mean elatus, superbus, excelsus.^

Again, lubbe, liibbe seems in parts of Lower Saxony to mean

^ Strange that the Latin langnage has no word of its own for giant, hut must
borrow the Greek gigas, titan, oyclops ; yet Italy has indigenoas folk-tales of Cam-
poman giants.

2 ^e Biblical view adopted in the Mid. Ages traced the giants to Catn, or at least
to miztoxe with his family : * gigantes, quales propter iracundiam Dei per filios Seth
deßliabus Cain narrat scriptnra procreatos,* Pertz 2, 755. For in Genesis 6, 4 it
is said : ' gigantes antem erant snper terram in diebus illis ; postquam enim ingressi
sunt filii Dei ad filias hominum, iUieqae gennemnt, isti sunt potentes a seculo viri
famosi.' The same view appears in Cfedm. 76. 77 ; in Beow. 213 GrendePs descent
is derired from Caities eynne^ on whom God avenged the murder of Abel : thence
sprang all the uniydrat (neg. of tndor proles, therefore misbirths, evil brood), eotencu,
yife, oTcneoM and gigantas that war against God. This partly fits in with some
heathen notions of cosmogony.

' Mone in Anz. 8, 133, takes wrise torfriset and makes Frisians and Persians out
of it. [What of * writhe, wris-t, wrest, wrestle,' (as wit, wis-t becomes wise) ? Or
Slav. TTOd-fti, to hnrt, AS. wre'Se ? A Buss, word for gi^t is verzflo, supposed to
be from yexg-Ati, to throw.]


526 GIANTS.

unwieldy giant^ lubben-stones are shown on the Comeliusberg
near Helmstadt^ and lubbe ace. to the Brem. wb. 3^ 92 means a
slow clumsy fellow; it is the Engl, lubber, lobber, and Michel
Beham's Itipel (Mone's Anz. 1835, 450^), conf. ON. lubbi (hir-
sutus). To this add a remarkable docament by Bp. Grebhard of
Halberstadt, bewailing as late as 1462 the heathenish worship of
a being whom men named den guden lubben, to whom they offered
bones of animals on a hill by Schochwitz in the county of Mans-
feld. Not only have such ancient bone-heaps been discovered on
the Lupberg there (conf. the Augsburg perleich, p. 294), but in
the church of the neighbouring Müllersdorf an idol image let into
the wall, which tradition says was brought there from the Lup-
berg (see Suppl.).^

The ON. has several words for giantess, beside the gygr men-
tioned above: shass, neut., Sasm. 144^ 154^, and skessa, fern.;
gHdr f., viella f. ; gifr f., Ssem. 143^ Norweg. jyvri (Hallag, 53)
or gyvriy gurri, djurre (Faye 7. 9. 10. 12). This gifr seems to
mean saucy, defiant, greedy.

Troll neut., gen. trolls (Ssem. 6*), Swed. troll, Dan, trold,
though often used of giants, is yet a more comprehensive term,
including other spirits and beings possessed of magic power, and
equivalent to our monster, spectre, unearthly being. By trold
the Danish folk-tales habitually understand beings of the elf kind.
The form suggests a Gothic trallu ; does our getralle in Benner
1365, 'der gebüre ein getralle,' rhym. 'alle,' mean the same
thing ? (see Suppl.),

Giant is in Lith. miliinas, milzinu, Lett, milsis, milsenis ; but
it would be overbold to connect with it German names of places,
Milize (Trad. fuld. 2, 40), Milsenburg, Melsungen. The Slovak
obor, Boh. obr, 0. Pol- obrzym,^ Pol. olbrzym, is unknown to the
South Slavs, and seems to be simply Avarus, Abarus. Nestor
calls the Avars Obri (ed. Schlözer 2, 112-7). The ' Grsecus
Avar ' again in the legend of Zisa (p. 292-5) is a giant. Now,

1 Nene mltth. des thür. säohs. vereinB 8, 180-^. 5, 2. 110-182. 6» 87-8. The
pictnre, however, contains nothing giant-like, but rather a goddess standing on a
wolf. Yet I remark, that a giant's tomb on Mt. Blano is called * la tombe da bon
kommet de la bonne femme,* an ezptession associated with the idea of a sacred vene-
rated man (supra, p. 89). Conf. also godgubbe used of Thörr, p. 167, and godmor,
p. 430.

> Psalter of queen Mafgareta, Vienna 1834, p.l7^ : o&rxim, the -im as in oyozim,
pie?grzym.


GIANTS. 527

as the Avari in the Mid. Ages are = Chuni^ the words hdn and
obor alike spring oat of the national names Hun and Avar.^ To
the Slavs^ Tchud signifies both Finn and giantj and the Buss.
ispolin (giant) might originally refer to the ' gens Spalorum * of
Jomandes; conf. Schafarik 1, 286. 310. So closely do the
names .for giant agree with those of ancient nations : popular
belief magnified hostile warlike neighbours into giants^ as it
diminished the weak and oppressed into dwarfs. The Sanskrit
rakshasas can have nothing to do with our riese, nor with the
0H6. recchio^ MHG. recke^ a designation of human heroes (see
Sappl.).

We find plenty of proper names both of giants and giantesses
preserved in ON., some apparently significant; thus Hrungnir
suggests the Gothic hrugga (virga, rod, pole) and our runge
(Brem. wb. 3, 558) ; Herbort 1385 : ^grdz alsam ein runge.' Our
MHG. poems like giant's names to end in »olty as Witolt, FasoU^
Memerolt, etc.

A g^eat stature, towering far above any human size, is ascribed
to all giants : stiff, unwieldy, they stand like hills, like tall trees.
According to the Mod. Greeks, they were as tall as poplars, and
if once they fell, they could not get up again [like Humpty
Dumpty]. The one eye of the Greek cyclops I nowhere find
imputed to our giants ; but like them ^ and the ancient gods,
(p. 322), they are often provided with many hands and heads.
When this attribute is given to heroes, gigantic ones are meant,
as Heimo^ StarkalSr, Asperian (p. 387). But Ssam. 85^ expressly
calk a Jmrs ßrihöfffudr, exactly as the MHG. Wahtelmsare names
a drihcmptigen tursen (Massm. denkm. 109) : a remarkable in-
stance of agreement. In Sssm. 35* appears a giant's son with
fix heads^ in 56* the many-headed band of giants is spoken of,
and in 53 a giantess with 900 heads» Brana's father has three
(invisible) heads, Fomald. sog. 3, 574, where also it is said : ' ]7a

> Schafarik explains obor by the Geltio anibro aboTo (p. 620n.) ; but in that ease
the Polish would have been %br.

* Briarens or Mgaon hias a hundred armi (^/car^TxciDos, IL 1, 402) and fifty
headi, Oeryon three headt and six hands ; in Hesiod's Theog. 150, Eottus, Gyges
snd BiiareoB have one hundred arms and fifty heads. The giant in the Hebrew
•toiy has only an additional finger or toe given to each hand and foot : vir fuit
excelsQs, qui senoe in manibus pedibnsqne habebat digitos, i.e. viginti qnatuor
(instead of the homan twenty), 2 Sam. 21, 20. Bertheaa's Israel, p. 143. 0. Fr.
poems giye the Saraoen giant /our anns, two noses, two chins, Ogier 9817.


528 GIANTS.

fell margr (many a) tvihöfSaSr iötuan/ Trolds with 12 heads,
then with 5^ 10^ 15 occur in Norske event, nos. 3 tftid 24. In
Scotland too the story ' of the reyde eyttyn with the thre heydis '
was known (Oomplaynt, p. 98), and Lindsay's Dreme (ed. 1592,
p. 225) mentions the 'history of reid etin,* The fairy-tale of
Red etin wV three heads may now be read complete in Chambers,^
pp. 56-58; but it does not explain whether the red colonr in his
name refers to skin, hair or dress. A black complexion is not
attributed to giants, as it is to dwarfs (p. 444) and the devil,
though the half-black Hel (p. 312) was of giant kin. Hr&ngnir,
a giant in the Edda, has a liead of stone (SsBm. 76^, Sn. 109),
another in the Fornald. sog. 3, 573 is called lamhatLS, iron skull.
But giants as a rule appear well-shaped and symmetrical ; their
daughters are capable of the highest beauty, e.g. 6ei-8r, whose
gleaming arms, as she shuts the house-door, make air and water
shine again, SsBm. 82*, Sn. 39 (see Suppl.).

In the giants as a whole, an untamed natural force has full
swing, entailing their excessive bodily size, their overbearing in-
solence, that is to say, abuse of corporal and mental power, and
finally sinking under its own weight. Hence the iötunn in the
Edda is called shrautgiam (fastosus), Ssem. 117^; sa inn dmdttki
(prsepotens) 4P 82**; storuSgi (magnanimus) 76*'; prungmoSgi
(superbus) 77*; hardrdSr (ssbvus) 54*; our derivation of the
words iötunn and J^urs finds itself confirmed in poetic epithet and
graphic touch : Tcostmoffr iötunn (cibo gravatus), SaBm. 56** ; ' ölr
(ebrius) ertu Geirrö^r, hefir )7Ü ofdruccit (overdrunk)' 47* (see
Suppl.).

From this it is an easy step, to impute to the giants a stupidity
contrasting with man's common sense and the shrewdness of the
dwarf. The ON. has ' ginna alia sem ßussa * (decipere omnes
sicut thursos), Nialssaga p. 263. Damm in our old speech was
mutus as well as hebes, and dumbr in ON. actually stands for
gigas ; to which dumbi (dat.) the adj. ßumbi (liebes, inconcinnus)
seems nearly related. A remarkable spell of the 11th cent, runs
thus : ' tumbo saz in berke mit tumbemo kinde in arme, tumb hiez
der berc, tumb hiez daz kint, der heilego tumbo versegene tisa
wunda I ' i.e. dummy sat on hill with d. child in arm, d. was

1 Popular rhymes, fireside stories, and amusements of Scotland, Edinb. 1842.


GIANTS. '529

called the hill and d. the child^ the holy d. bless this wound away
[the posture is that of Humpty Dumpty] . This seems pointed
at a sluggish mountain-giant^ and we shall see how folk-tales of
a later period name the giants dumme dutten ; the term lubbe,
luhhe likewise indicates their clumsy lubberly nature^ and when
we nowadays call the devil dumm (stupid)^ a quondam giant is
really meant (see Suppl.).^

Yet the Norse lays contain one feature favourable to the giants.
They stand as specimens of a fallen or falling race^ which
with the strength combines also the innocence and wisdom of
the old worlds an intelligence more objective and imparted at
creation than self -acquired. This half- regretful view of giants
prevails particularly in one of the finest poems of the Edda^
the H^misqvi^a. H^mir ^ is called forn iötunn (the old) 54% as
UoXi^afjLos in Theocr. 11,9 is apx^'^o^t aiid another giant, from
whom gods are descended, has actually the proper name Forniotr,
Forneot (p. 240), agreeing with the ' aldinn iötunn ' quoted on
p. 524; then we have the epithet hundoias (multiscius) applied
52**, as elsewhere to Lo^inn (Ssem. 145*), to Geirrö^r (Sn. 113),
and to Starka«r (Fornald. sog. 3, 15. 32).« Oegir is called
fiolkunnigr (much-knowing), S»m. 79, and barnteitr (happy as a
child) 52*; while Thrymr sits fastening golden collars on his
hounds, and stroking his horses' manes, Sasm. 70^. And also the
faithfulness of giants is renowned, like that of the men of old :
trölltryggr (fidus instar gigantis), Egilss. p. 610, and in the Faroe
dialect ^trur sum trodlir/ true as giants (Lyngbye, p. 496).*
Another lay is founded on the conversation that OSinn himself
is anxious to hold with a giant of great sense on matters of
antiquity (4 fomom st<)f um) : Vaf)?rü5nir again is called ' inn
aUvinni iötunn,' 30* 35^; örgelmir and Bergelmir 'ea inn froffi

1 The familiar (able of tbe devil being taken in by a peasant in halving the crop
between them, is in the Danish myth related of a trold (Thiele 4, 122), see Chap.

AAA III.

^ ON. hum is crepuscolnm, hüma vesperascere, h^ma dormiturire ; is Ht^mir the
sloggish, sleepy ? OHG. HiunU t How if the MHü. hiune came from an OHG.
hiuni? An m is often attenuated into n, as OHG. slimni, sniumi (celer), MHG.
>liime, slinnic, onr schleunig. That would explain why there is no trace of the
word hiune in ON. ; it would also be fatal to any real connexion with the national
name Hun.

' Hand (centum) intensifies the meaning : hundmargr (permultus), hundgamall
(old as the hill8).

* We find the same faithfulness in the giant of Christian legend, St. ChrUtopher^
sod in that of Carolingian legend, Ferabras,


530 GIANTS.

iötann/ SaBm. 85*»**; Penja and Menja are framvisar (Gr6ttas. 1,
13). When the verb J^reya, usually meaning exspectare, deai-
derare, is employed as characteristic of giants (Saem. 88*), it
seems to imply a dreamy brooding, a half -drunken complacency
and immobility (see Suppl.).

Such a being, when at rest, is good-humoured and unhandy,^
but when provoked, gets wild, spiteful and violent. Norse legend
names this rage of giants iötunmoÖr, which pits itself in defiance
against ÄsmöSr, the rage of the gods : ' vera i iötunmöSi,' Sn.
150^. When their wrath is kindled, the giants hurl rocks, rub
stones till they catch fire (Roth. 1048), squeeze water out of
stones (Kinderm. no. 20. Asbiörnsen's Möe, no. 6), root up
trees (Kinderm. no. 90), twist fir-trees together like willows (no.
166), and stamp on the ground till their leg is buried up to the
knee (Roth. 943. Vilk. saga, cap. 60) : in this plight they are
chained up by the heroes in whose service they are to be, and
only let loose against the enemy in war, e.g, Witolt or Witolf
(Roth. 760. Vilk. saga, cap. 50). One Norse giant, whose story
we know but imperfectly, was named Beli (the bellower) ; him
Freyr struck dead with his fist for want of his sword, and thence
bore the name of ' bani Belja,* Sn. 41. 74.

Their relation to gods and men is by turns friendly and hostile.
lötunheimr lies far from Asaheimr, yet visits are paid on both
sides. It is in this connexion that they sometimes leave on us
the impression of older nature-gods, who had to give way to a
younger and superior ra^ce ; it is only natural therefore, that in
certain giants, like Ecke and Fasolt, we should recognise a pre-
cipitate of deity. At other times a rebellious spirit breaks forth,
they make war upon the gods, like the heaven-scaling Titans,
and the gods hurl them down like devils into hell. Yet there
are some gods married to giantesses : NiörSr to SkalSi the
daughter of Thiassi, Thorr to larnsaxa, Freyr to the beautiful
GerSr, daughter of G^mir. Gunnlö? a giantess is OSin's be-
loved. The &sin Gefiun bears sons to a giant; Borr weds the
giant Böl]>orn's daughter Bestla. Loki, who lives among the
äses, is son to a giant Farbauti, and a giantess AngrboiSa is his

' Unformed, inooncinnas ; MHG. ungeviUge^ applied to giants, Nib. 45G, 1.
Iw. 444. £051. 6717. der uugeTüege knabe, Er. 5552 ; ' knabe,' as in * der uiichel
kuabe/ p. 518n.


GIANTS. 531

wife. The gods associate with Oegir the iötunn, and by him
are bidden to a banquet. Giants again sue for &sins, as Thrymr
for Freyja, while Thiassi carries off Kunn. HrAngnir asks for
Freyja or Sif, Sn. 107. Starka^Sr is henchman to Norse kings;
in Bother's army fight the giants Asperiän (Asbiöm^ Osbem) and
Witolt. Among the ftses tlie great foe of giants is Thorr, who
like Jupiter inflicts on them his thunder- wonnds ; ^ his hammer
has crushed the heads of many : were it not for Thörr^ says a
Scandinavian proverb^ the giants would get the upper hand ; ' he
vanquished HrAngnir, H^mir, Thrymr, GeirröSr, and it is not all
the legends by any means that are set down in the Edda (see
Sappl.). St. Olaf too keeps up a hot pursuit of the giant race ;
in this business heathen and Christian heroes are at one. In our
heroic legend Sigen6t, Ecke, Fasolt succumb to Dietrich's human
strength, yet other giants are companions of Dietrich, notably
Wittich and Heime, as Asperi&n was Bother's. The kings
Niblunc and Schilbunc had twelve strong giants for friends
(Nib. 95), i.e. for vassals, as the Norse kings often had twelve
berserks. But, like the primal woods and monstrous beasts of
the olden time, the giants do get gradually extirpated off the
face of the earth, and with all heroes giant-fighting alternates
with dragon- fighting.'

King FröSi had two captive giant-maidens Fenja and Menja as
mill-maids ; the grist they had to grind him out of the quern
Grotti was gold and peace, and he allowed them no longer time
for sleep or rest than while the gowk (cuckoo) held his peace or
they sang a song. We have a startling proof of the former pre-
valence of this myth in Germany also, and I find it in the bare
proper names. Managold, Manigold frequently occurs as a man's
name, and is to be explained from mani, ON. men = moniIe;
more rarely we find Fanigold, Fenegold, from fani, ON. fen =
palus, meaning the gold that lies hidden in the fen. One Trad,
patav. of the first half of the twelfth cent. (MB. 28^ pp. 90-1)

1 The skeleton of a giantess struck by lightning, hung np in a sacristy, see Wide-
gren's Ostergotland 4, 527.

' Swed. 'Tore ej thordön (Thor-din, thunder) till, lade troll Terlden öde.'
' In British legend too (seldomer in Carolingian) the heroes are indefatigable
giant-qnellers. If the nursery-tale of Jack the giantkiller did not appear to be of
Welsh origin, that hero's deeds might remind us of Thdr's ; he is equipped with
a cap of darkness, shoes of swiftness, and a sword that cuts through anything, as
the god is with the resistless hammer.


532 ' GIANTS.

furnishes both names ManegoU and Feiiegolt oat of the same
neighbourhood. We may conclude that once the Ba7arians well
knew how it stood with the fanigold and manigold ground out by
Fania and Mania (see SuppL).

Tmir, or in giant's language örgelmir, was the first-created^
and out of his body^s enormous bulk were afterwards engendered
earthy water^ mountain and wood. Ymir himself originated in
melted hoarfrost or rime (hrim)^ hence all the giants are called
hrimßursar, rime-giants, Sn. 6. Sasm. 85****; hrimkaldr, rime-
cold, is an epithet of )?urs and iötunn, Ssem. 33^ 90% they still
drip with thawing rime, their beards (kinnskögr, chin-forest) are
frozen, SaDm. 53^; Hrimnir, HHmgrimr, Hnmgerffr are proper
names of giants, Ssdm. 85* 86*^ 114. 145. As hrim also means
grime, fuligo, Ymir may perhaps be connected with the obscure
MHG. om, ome (rubigo), see Gramm. 3, 733. At the same time
the derivation from ymja, um^i (stridere) lies invitingly near, so
that Ymir would be the blustering, noisy, and one explanation of
örgelmir would agree with this ; conf, chap. XIX. (see SuppL).

Herbs and heavenly bodies are named after giants as well
as after gods : ßursaskegg, i.e. giant's beard (fucus filiformis) ;
Norw. tussegras (paris quadrifolia) ; Brönugras (satyrium, the
same as Friggjargras, p. 302), because a giantess Brana gave it
as a charm to her client Hälfdän (Fornald. sog. 3, 576) ; Fomeotes
folme, p. 240 ; OSinn threw ThiassVa eyes, and Thörr örvandiVs
toe, into the sky, to be shining constellations, Sn. 82-3. 111.

Giants, like dwarfs, shew themselves thievish. Two lays of the
Edda turn upon the recovery of a hammer and a cauldron which
they had stolen.

The giants form a separate people, which no doubt split into
branches again, conf. Rask's Afhand. I, 88. Thrymr is called
pursa drottinn, Seem. 70-74; dk Jmrsa }>io9 {pAiiov) is spoken of,
107*, but iötunheimr is described as their usual residence. Even
our poem of Rother 767 speaks of a riesenlant. On the borders
of the giant province were situate the griottuna garffar, Sn. 108-9.
We have already noticed how most of the words for giant coin-
cide with the names of ancient nations.

Giants were imagined dwelling on roclcs and mountains, and
their nature is all of a piece with the mineral kingdom : they are
either animated masses of stone, or creatures once alive petrified.


GIANTS. 533

HrAngnir had a three-cornered stone heart, his head and shield
were of stone, Sn. 109. Another giant was named Vagnhöf9l
(waggon-head), Sn. 211», in Saxo Gram. 9. 10. Dame Hutt is a
petrified queen of giants, Deut. sag. no. 233.

Oat of this connexion with monntains arises another set of
names: bergrisi, Sn. 18, 26. 30. 45-7. 66. Gröttas. 10. 24.
Egilss. 22;^ bergbuiy Fomald. sog. 1, 412; hraunbüi (saxicola),
Saöm. 57** 145» ; hraunhvalr (-whale) 57*^; pussin af biargi, Fornald.
sog. 2, 29; feergfdarwV (gigantes), Ssem. 54**; bergrisabrudr {bride),
mcer bergrisa, Gröttas. 10. 24, conf. the Gr. opetd^i on this side
the notion of giantess can easily pass into that of elfin. Thrym-
heimr lies up in the mountains, Sn. 27. It is not to be over-
looked, that in our own Heldenbuch Dietrich reviles the giants
as mountain-cattle and forest-boors, conf. bercrinder, Laurin 2625,
and waltgeburen 534. 2624. Sigendt 97. walthunde, Sigendt 13.
114. waldes diebe (thieves), 120. waldes tdre (fool), waldes
affe (ape), Wolfd. 467. 991 (see p. 481-2 and Suppl.).

Proper names of giants point to stones and metals, as larnsaxa
(ironstony), Tarnhaus (ironskuU) ; possibly our still surviving
compound steinMltj old as stone (Gramm. 2, 555), is to be ex-
plaiQed by the great age of giants, approaching that of rocks and
hills ; gtfur rata (gigantes pedes illidunt saxis) is what they say
m the North.

Stones and rocks are weapons of the giant race ; they use only
stone clubs and stone shields, no swords. Hrüngni's weapon is
called hein (hone) ; when it was flung in mid air and came in
collision with Thdr's hammer, it broke, and a part fell on the
ground ; hence come all the ' heinberg,' whinstone rocks, Sn.
108-9. Later legends add to their armament stahelstangen (steel
bars) 24 yards long. Roth. 687. 1602. Hum. Sifr. 62, 2. 68, 2.
Sigenöt (Lassb.) 14, (Hag.) 69. 75. Iwein 5022 {-ruote, rod
5058. .fco»c,club 6682. 6726). Trist. 15980. 16146 ; isenstange,
Nib, 460, 1. Veldek invests his Pandurus and Bitias (taken from
Aen. 9, 672) with giant's nature and iseme kolven, En. 7089 ;
king Gorhand's giant host carry Icolben stähelin, Wh. 35, 21.
395, 24. 396, 13; and giant Langben a staalstang (Danske
viaer 1, 29). We are expressly told in Er. 5384, 'wftfens w&ren

' In the case of mixed descent : half bergrisi, hdlfrin, h&lf troll, Egilss. p. 22.
, NialsB. p. 164 ; see Gramm. 2, 633.


534 GIANTS.

si bl6z/ i.e. bare of knightly weapon^ for they carried ' Jcolben
Bwsere, gröze nnde lange.' ^ Tet the ' eald sweord eotonisc ' pro-
bably meant one of stone^ though the same expression is used
in Beow. 5953 of a metal sword mounted with gold ; even the
' entisc helm/ Beow. 5955 may well be a stone helmet. It may
be a part of the same things that no iron sword will cut into
giants ; only with the pommel of the sword can they be killed
(Ecke 178), or with the fist, p. 530 (see Suppl.).

Ancient buildings of singular structure^ which have outlasted
many centuries, and such as the men of to-day no longer take in
hand^ are vulgarly ascribed to giants or to the devil (conf. p. 85,
note on devil's dikes) : * burg an berge, h6 holmklibu, wrisUic
giwerc' is said in Hel. 42, 5 of a castle on a rock (risönburg^
N. Bth. 173) ; a Wrisberg, from which a Low Saxon family takes
its name, stood near the village of Petze. These are the enta
geweorc of AS. poetry (p. 524): 'efne sw& wide swA wegas to
lägen enta cergeweorc innan burguni, strcete stdnfdge/ Andr. 2466.
' stapulas storme bedrifene, eald enta geweorc, 2986. Our Anno-
lied 151 of Semiramis : 'die alten Babildnie stiphti si van cigelin
den alten, die die gigandi brauten/ of bricks' that giants burnt.
And Karlmeinet 35 : 'we dise burg stichte ? ein rise in den alien
zidenj In 0. French poems it is either gaiant or paian (pagans)
that build walls and towers, e.g, in Grerars de Viane 1745 :

Les /or« tors, ke sent dantiquitey,
ke paian firent par lor grant poestey.

Conf. Moneys Unters. 242-4-7. 250. Whatever was put together
of enormous blocks the Hellenes named cyclopean walls, while the
modem Greeks regard the Hellenes themselves as giants of the
old world, and give them the credit of those massive structures^'
Then, as ancient military roads were constructed of great blocks
of stone (strata felison gifuogid, Hel. 164, 27), they also were
laid to the account of giants : iötna vegar (viae gigantum), Ssdm.
23^ ; ' usque ad giganteam viam : entisken wee/ MB. 4, 22 (about
1130). The common people in Bavaria and Salzburg call such
a road, which to them is world-old and uncanny, enterisch (Schm.

1 Goliath too, 1 Sam. 17, 7, and 2 Sam. 21, 19 is credited with a hastile (spear-
staflf) qnasi liciatoriam texentiam (like a weaver's beam).

3 Conf. Niebuhr's Bom. Hist. i. 192-8. An ancient wall is in Mod. Greek rb
iKKrfvuc6, Ukich's Beise 1, 182.


GIANTS. 535r

4, 44) ; the tröUasJceid was mentioned p. 508-9^ and trolldhlaS is
septum gigantnm. Some passages in Fergüt are worthy o£
notice; at 1576 :

Die roke was swert ende eiselike,
want wtlen dr 6n gigant,
hie hien hare ane en en cant
dn padelMn tote in den top^
da.er en mach ghSn paert op^
dn man mochter opgaen te voet.

And at 1628 seq. is described the brazen statue of' a dorper,^
standing outside the porch of a door :

het dede maken dn gigant,

die daer wilen woende int lant (see SuppL).

Gicmt's-mountains, gianfs-hills, hünen-beds may be so named
because popular legend places a giant's grave there, or sees in
the rock a resemblance to the giant's shape, or supposes the
giant to have brought the mountain or hill to where it stands.

We have just had ha instance of the last kind : the Edda
accounts for all the hein-rocks by portions of a giant's club having
dropt to the ground, which club was made of smooth whinstone.
There is a pleasing variety about these folk-tales, which to my
thinking is worth closer study, for it brings the living conception
of giant existence clearly before us. One story current in the
I. of Hven makes Grimild and Hvenild two giant sisters living
in Zealand. Hvenild wants to carry some slices of Zealand to
Schonen on the Swedish side; she gets over safely with a few
ibat she has taken in her apron, but the next time she carries oS
too large a piece, her apron-string breaks in the middle of the
sea, she drops the whole of her load, and that is how the Isle of
Hven came to be (Sjöborg's Nomenkl. p. 84). Almost the same
story is told in Jutland of the origin of the little isle of
Worsoekalv (Thiele 3, 66). Pomeranian traditions present dif-
ferences in detail : a giant in the Isle of Rügen grudges having
to wade through the sea every time to Pomerania ; he will build
a causeway across to the mainland, so, tying an apron round him,
he fills it with earth. When he has got past Bodenkirchen with

' This darper grot again we are tempted to take for the old thimdergod, for it
BajB : * hi hilt van stale (of steel) enen hamer in sine hant.'

VOL. II. H


536 GIANTS.

his load^ his apron springs a leak, and the earth that drops out
becomes the nine hills near Bambin. He darns the hole, and
goes further. Arrived at Gustow, he bursts another hole, and
spills thirteen little hills ; he reaches the sea with the earth that
is left, and shoots it in, making Prosnitz Hook and the peninsula
of Drigge. But there still remains a narrow space between
Bügen and Pomerafiia, which so exasperates the giant that he
is struck with apoplexy and dies, and his dam has never been
completed (B. M. Amdt's Märchen 1, 156). Just the other way,
a giant girl of Pomerania wants to make a bridge to Bügen, ' so
that I can step across the bit of water without wetting my bits
of slippers.' She hurries down to the shore with an apronful of
sand ; but the apron had a hole in it, a part of her freight ran
out 'tother side of Sagard, forming a little hill named Dubber-
worth. ' Dear me ! mother will scold,' said the hüne maiden, but
kept her hand under, and ran all she could. Her mother looked
over the wood : ' Naughty child, what are you after ? come, and
you shall have the stick.' The daughter was so frightened she let
the apron slip out of her hands, the sand ^as all spilt about, and
formed the barren hills by Litzow.^ Near VI in Kallasocken lies
a huge stone named Zechiel's stone after a giantess or merwoman.
She lived at Edha castle in Högbysocken, and her sister near the
Skäggenäs (shag-ness) in Smäland. They both wished to build
a bridge over the Sound; the Smaland giantess had brought
Skäggenäs above a mile into the sea, and Zechiel had gathered
stones in her apron, when a man shot at her with his shafts, so
that she had to sit down exhausted on a rock, which still bears
the impress of her form. But she got up again, and went as far
as Pesnässocken, when Thor began to thunder (da haf ver gogvhhen
begynt at äka) ; she was in such a fright that she fell dead,
scattering the load of stones out of her apron higgledy-piggledy
on the ground ; hence come the big masses of rock there of two
or three men's height. Her kindred had her buried by the side
of these rocks (Ahlqvist's Öland, 2, 98-9). These giants' dread
of Thor is so great, that when they hear it thunder, they hide
in clefts of rocks and under trees : a högbergsgubbe in Gothland,

» Lothar'8 Volkssagen, Leipz. 1825, p. 66. Temme's Pomm. sagen, nos. 190-1 ;
see Barthold's Pommern 1, 660, who spells Dobberwort, and explains it by the PoL
wor (sack).


GIANTS. 537

whom a peasant^ to keep him friendly, had invited to a christen-
ing, refosed^ mach as he woold have liked to share in the feast,
because he learnt from the messenger that not only Christ, Peter
and Mary, bat Thor also woald be there ; he woald not face him
(Nyerap's Morskabsläsning, p. 243). A giant in Fladsöe was on
bad terms with one that lived at Nestved. He took his wallet to
the beach and filled it with sand, intending to bary all Nestved.
On the way the sand ran oat throngh a hole m the sack, giving
rise to the string of sandbanks between Fladsöe and Nestved.
Not till he came to the spot where Hasvald then stood, did the
giant notice that the greater part was spilt ; in a rage he flang
the remainder toward Nestved, where yon may still see one sand-
bank by itself (Thiele 1, 79). At Sonnerap lived another giant,
Lars Krands by name, whom a farmer of that place had offended.
He went to the shore, filled his glove with sand, took it to the
farmer^s and emptied it, so that the farmhoase and yard were
completely covered ; what had run through the five finger holes of
the glove made fivo hills (Thiele 1, 33). In the Netherlands the
hill of Hillegersberg is produced by the sand which a giantess
lets fall through een sch&i'tekleed (Westendorp's Mythol. p. 187).
— And these tales are not only spread through the Teutonic
race, bat are in vogue with Finns and Celts and Greeks. Near
Fajände in Hattulasocken of Tawastoland there stand some rocks
which are said to have been carried by giant's daughters in their
aprons and then tossed up (Ganander's Finn. myth. pp. 29. 30).
French traditions put the holy Virgin or fays (p. 413) in the place
of giantesses. Notre dame de Clery, being ill at ease in the
church of Mezidres, determined to change the seat of her adora-
tion, took earth in her apro^i and carried it to a neighbouring
height, pursued by Judas : then, to elude the enemy, she took
Q part of the earth up again, which she deposited at another place
not far off: oratories were reared on both sites (M6m. de I'acad.
celt. 2, 218). In the Charente country, arrond. Cognac, comm.
Saintfront, a huge stone lies by the Ney rivulet ; this the holy
Virgin is said to have carried on her head, beside four other
pillars in her apron ; but as she was crossing the Ney, she let one
pillar fall into Saintfront marsh (M6m. des antiquaires 7, 31).
According to a Greek legend, Athena was fetching a mountain
from Pallene to fortify the Acropolis, but, startled at the ill newB


638 GIANTS.

brought by a crow^ slie dropt it on the way, and there it remains
as Moant Lykabettos.^ As the Lord God passed over the
earth scattering stones^ his bags barst over Montenegro, and the
whole stock came down (Yak. 5).

Like the goddess, like the giants, the devil takes such burdens
upon him. In Upper Hesse I was told as follows : between
Gossfelden and Wetter there was once a village that has now
disappeared, Elbringhausen ; the farmers in it lived so loxuriously
that the devil got power over them, and resolved to shift them
from their good soil to a sandy flat which is flooded every year
by the overflowing Lahn. So he took the village up in bis
basket, and carried it through the air to where Sarenau stands :
he began picking out the houses one by one, and setting them
up side by side; by some accident the basket tipped over, and the
whole lot tumbled pellmell on the ground ; so it came about, that
the first six houses at Sarenau stand in a straight row, and all
the others anyhow. Near Saalfeld in Thuringia lies a village.
Langenschade, numbering but 54 houses, and yet a couple of
miles long^ because they stand scattered and in single file. The
devil flew through the air, carrying houses in an apron, but a
hole in it let the houses drop out one by one. On looking back^
he noticed it and cried ^there's a pity (schade) ! ' (see Suppl.).

The pretty fable of the giant's daughter picking up the plough-
ing husbandman and taking him home to her father in her apron
is widely known, but is best told in the Alsace legend of Nideck
castle :

Im waldBohloss dort am Wasserfall In f orest-oasüe by waterfall

sinn d'ritter rise gsixm (gewesen) ; the barons there were giants ;

ä mol (einmal) kmnmt's fränle hrab ins onoe the maiden oomes down into the

thai, dale,

aim geht apaziere drinn. and goes a-waUdng therein,

sie that bis schier noch Hadaoh gehn, She doth as far as Haslaoh go ;

vorm wald im ackerf eld outside the wood, in the cornfield

do blibt sie voll yerwandrang stehn she stands still, fall of wonder,

ann sieht, wie's feld word bestellt. and sees how the field gets tilled,

sie lüegt dem ding ä wil so za ; She looks at the thing a while,

der pfiui, die tm, die Wit the plough, the hortet, the men

isdher ebs (ist ihr etwas) neas ; sie geht are new to her ; she goes thereto

derzn

» Antigoni Oaiystii hist, mirab. cap. 12, Lips. 1791 p. M : rf W 'iLBiivf, ^po6c^

riot
Koxay-


GIANTS.


539


mm denkt ' die nimm i mit.*

D*mo hunit sie an de bode hin

um 9prHt ihr fürti ust,

fangt alles mit der hand, thut*B *nün,

onn lauft gar froh noch hus.

sie springt de felswei *naf ganz frisch,

dort wo der berg jetzt isoh so gäh

nnn me (man) so krattle mns in d'höh,

macht sie nur eine schritt.

Der ritter sitzt jast noch am tisch :

* min kind, was bringste mit f

d* frend lüegt der za de ange 'noss ;
se krom nur geschwind din fürti uss ;
was hest so zaweliohs drin 7 '

* o yatter, spieldings gar ze nett,

i ha noch nie ebs schöns so g*hett,*
onn stelltem (ihm) alles hin.
Unn of de tisch stellt sie den pfluU
d* bure mm ihri ros,
lauft drum heram nnn lacht derzn,
ihr frend isch gar ze gross.

* Ja, kind, diss isch ken spieldingt nitt,
do hest ebs schöns gemacht '

saht der herr ritter glich und lacht,

* geh nimm*s nnr widder mit I
die bnre sorje uns für brot,
snnsch sterbe mir de hungertod ;
trah alles widder fürt ! *

's fräule krint, der yatter schilt :

* a bur mir nitt als spieldings gilt,

i lud (ich leide) net dass me murrt.
pack alles sachte widder ün
onn trah*s ans namli plätzel hin,
wo des (dn*s) genumme hest.
baut nit der bur sin aekerfeld,
se fehlt's bi uns an brot unn geld
in onserm f elsennest.*


and thinks * TU take them with me.*
Then plumps down on the ground
and spreads her apron out,
grasps all in her hand, pops it in,
and runs right joyful home ;
leaps up the rock-path brisk,
where the hill is now so steep
and men must scramble up,
she makes but one stride.
The baron sits just then at table :

* my child, what bringst with thee ?
joy looks out at thine eyes ;

undo thine apron, quick,

what hast so wonderful therein ? *

* father, playthings quite too neat,
I ne*er had aught so pretty,*

and sets it all before him.
On the table she sets the plough^
the farmers and their horses^
runs round them and laughs,
her joy is all too great.

* Ah child, this is no plaything,
a pretty thing thou hast done ! *
saith the baron quick, and laughs,

* go take it back !

the farmers provide us with bread,
else we die the hunger-death;
cany it all away again.*
The maiden cries, the father scolds :

* a farmer shall be no toy to me.
I will have no grumbling ;
pack it all up softly again

and cany it to the same place
where thou tookst it from.
Tills not the farmer his field,
we are short of bread and money
in our nest on the rock.*


Similar anecdotes from the Harz and the Odenwald are given
in Dent. sag. nos. 319. 824. In Hesse the giant's daughter
is placed on the Hippersberg (betw. Kölbe, Wehrda and Gross-
felden) : her father rates her soandly^ and sets the ploughman
at liberty again with commendations. The same story is told at
Dittersdorf near Blankenbarg (betw. Badolstadt and Saalfeld).
Again^ a hünin with her daughter dwelt on Hünenkoppe at the
entrance of the Black Forest. The daughter found a peasant
ploaghing on the common^ and put him in her aproUy oxen, plough
and olU then went and showed her mother Hhe little fellow


540 - GIANTS.

and his pussy-cats.^ The mother angrily bade her cariy man,
beast and plough directly back to where she found them : ' they
belong to a people that may do the hünes much mischief/ And
they both left the neighbourhood soon after.^ Yet again : when
the Grüngrund and the country round about were still inhabited
by giants, two of them fell in with an ordinary man : ' what sort
of groundworm is this ? ' asked one, and the other answered,
' these grounckoorms will make a finish of us yet ! ' (Moneys Anz.
8, 64). Now sentiments like these savour more of antiquity than
the fair reasons of the Alsatian giant, and they harmonize with
a Finnish folk-tale. Giants dwelt in Kemisocken, and twenty
years ago' there lived at Rouwwanjemi an old woman named
Caisa, who told this tale : A giant maiden (kalewan tyttären)
took up horse and ploughman and plough (bewosen ja kyntäjän
ja auran) on Iter lup, carried them to her mother and asked,
' what kind of beetle (sontiainen) can this be, mother, that I found
rooting up the ground there ? ' The mother said, ' put them
away, child j we have to leave this country, and they are to live
here instead.' The old giant race have to give way to agri-
cultural man^ agriculture is an eye-sore to them, as it is to dwarfs
(p. 459). The honest coarse grain of gianthood, which looks
upon man as a tiny little beast, a beetle burrowing in the mud,
but yet is secretly afraid of him, could not be hit off more
happily than in these few touches. I believe this tradition is
domiciled in many other parts as well (see Suppl.).

Not less popular or naive is the story of the giant on a journey
being troubled with a little stone in his shoe : when at last he
shakes it out, there is a rock or hill left on the ground. The
Brunswick Anzeigen for 1759 inform us on p. 1636 : 'A peasant
said to me once, as I travelled in his company past a hill on the
B. Elm : Sir, the folk say that here a hüne cleared out his shoe,
and that's how this hill arose.* The book ' Die kluge trodelfrau '
by E. J. 0. P. N. 1682, p. 14, mentions a large stone in the
forest, and says: 'Once a great giant came this way with a
pebble in his shoe that hurt him, and when he untied the shoe,
this stone fell out.' The story is still told of a smooth rock near
Goslar, how the great Christopher carried it in his shoe, till he

^ L. A. Walther'B Einl. in die thür. sohwarzb, gesoh., Budolst. 1788, p. 52.
2 In Ganander's time (Finn. myth. p. 80).


GIANTS. 541

felt Bometlung gall liis foot ; he pulled off the shoe and turned it

down, when the stone fell where it now lies» Sach stones are

also called crumb-stones. On the Soiling near üslar lie some

large boandary-stones^ 16 to 20 feet long^ and 6 to 8 thick : time

out of mind two giants were jaanting across country ; says the

one to the other^ ' this shoe hurts me, some bits of gravel I think

it must be/ with that he pulled off the shoe and shook these stones

out. In the valley above Ilfeld, close to the Bahr, stands a huge

mass of rock, which a giant once shook out of his slwe, because

the grain of sand galled him. I am confident this myth also has

a wide circulation, it has even come to be related of a mere set

of men : ' The men of Sanerland in Westphalia are fine sturdy

fellows ; they say one o£ them walked to Cologne once^ and on

arriving at the gate, asked his fellow-traveller to wait a moment,

while he looked in his shoe to see what had been teazing him so

all the while. '' Nay " said the other, '' hold out now till we get

to the inn." The Sauerlander said very well, and they trudged

up and down the long streets. But at the market»place he could

stand it no longer, he took the shoe off and threw out a great lump

of stone, and there it has lain this long while to prove my words.'

A Norwegian folk-tale is given by Hammerich (om Bagnaröks-

mythen, p. 93) : a jutel had got something into his eye, that

pricked him ; he tried to ferret it out with his finger, but that

was too bulky, so he took a sheaf of com, and with that he

managed the business. It was a fir-cone, which the giant felt

between his fingers, and said : ' who'd have thought a little thing

like that would hurt you so 7 ' (see Suppl.).

The Edda tells wonderful things of giant Skr^mir/ in the
thumb of whose glove the god Thdrr found a night's lodging.
Skr^mir goes to sleep under an oak, and snores; when Th6rr
with his hammer strikes him on the head, he wakes up and asks
if a leaf has fallen on him. The giant lies down under another
oak, and snores so that the forest roars ; Th6rr hits him a harder
blow than before, and the giant awaking cries, ' did an acorn fall
on my face ? ' He falls asleep a third time, and Thdrr repeats
his blow, making a yet deeper dint, but the giant merely strokes
his cheek, and remarks, ' there must be birds roosting in those

^ In the Faroe dialect Skrujmsli (Lyngbye, p. 480). ON., skravmr blatero,
babbler.


■542 OIANTS.

>boaghs; I fancied^ when I woke, they dropt something on my
head/ Sn. 51-53. These are touches of genuine gianthood,
and are to be met with in qaite different regions as well. A
Bohemian story makes the giant Scharmak sleep under a tower,
which his enemies undermine, so that it tumbles about his ears ;
he shakes himself up and cries : ^ this is a bad place to rest in,
the birds drop things on your head.* After that, three men drag
a large bell up the oaktree under which Scharmak is asleep,
snoring so hard that the leaves shake ; the bell is cut down, and
comes crashing on the giant, but he does not even wake. A
Grerman nursery-tale (1, 307) has something very similar; in
another one, millstones are dropt on a giant in the well, and he
calls out, ^ drive those hens aw&j, they scratch the sand up there,
and make the grains come in my eyes ^ (2, 29).^

A giantess (g^gr) named Hyrrokin (igne fumata) is mentioned
in the Edda, Sn. 66 on occasion of Baldr's funeral : nothing
could set the ship Hringhorn, in which the body lay, in motion ;
they sent to the giants, and Hyrrokin came riding on a wolf,
with a snake for bridle and rein ; she no sooner stept up to the
vessel and touched it with her foot, than fire darted out of the
beams, and the firm land quaked. I also find in a Norwegian
folk-tale (Faye, p. 14), that a giantess (djurre) by merely kicking
the shore with her foot threw a ship into the most violent agita-
tion.

Babelais ' and Fischart have glorified the fable of Ghirgantua.
It was, to begin with, an old, perhaps even a Celtic, giant-story,
whose genuine simple form may even yet be recoverable from
unexpired popular traditions.^ Grargantua, an enormous eater
and drinker, who as a babe had, like St. Christopher, taxed
the resources of ten wetnurses, stands with each foot on a high
mountain, and stooping dovm drinks up the river that runs between

^ Conf. the story of the giant Andaoh in Hammer's Bosenöl 1, 114.

* Babelais took his sahjeot-matter from an older book, printed abready in the
15th century, and pablished more than once in the 16th : Les ohroniqnes admirables
du puissant roi Gargantua s. 1. et a. (gothique) 8 ; Lyon 1582. 4 ; La plaisante et
joyeuse histoire du grand Gargantua. Valence 1547. 8; at last as a chap-book:
La Tie dn fameux Gargantua, le plus terrible g6ant qui ait amais paru sur la terre.
Conf. Notice sur les chroniques de Garg., par I'auteur des nouv. reoh. bibl. Paris
1834.

* A beginning has been made in Traditions de Tanoien duch6 de Betz, sur Gaxg.
(M6m. de I'acad. celt. 5, 892-5), and in Yolkssagen aus dem Greyersland (Alpen-
rosen 1824, pp. 57-8). From the latter I borrow what stands in the text.


GIANTS. 643

(see Snppl.}. A Westphalian legend of the Weser has mucli the
same tale to tell : On the R. Soilings near Mt. Eberstein^ stands
the Hünenbrinkj a detached conical hill [brink = grassy knoll].
When the hüne who dwelt there of old wanted to wash his face
of a mornings he wonld plant one foot on his own hill^ and with
the other stride over to the Eichholz a mile and a half away^ and
draw from the brook thai flows through the valley. If his neck
ached with stooping and was like to break, he stretched one arm
oyer the Burgberg and laid hold of Lobach^ Negenbom and
Holenberg to support himself.

We are often told of two giant comrades or neighbours, living
on adjacent heights, or on two sides of a river, and holding con-
verse. In Ostergotland, near Tumbo in Tdre-härad, there was a
jatte named Tumme ; when he wished to speak to his chum Oden
at Hersmala two or three miles off, he went up a neighbouring
hill Hogatoft, from which you can see all over Ydre (Widegren's
Ostergotland 2, 897). The first of the two names is apparently
the ON. )7umbi (stultus, inconcinnus, conf. p. 528), but the other
is that of the highest god, and was, I suppose, introduced in
later legend by way of disparagement. German folktales make
such giants throw stone hammers and axes to each other (Deut.
sag. no. 20), which reminds one of the thundergod's hammer.
Two hünes living, one on the Eberstein, the other on Homburg,
had bnt one aze between them to split their wood with. When
the Eberstein hüne was going to work, he shouted across to
Homburg four miles off, and his friend immediately threw the ojxe
over ; and the contrary, when the axe happened to be on the
Eberstein. The same thing is told in a tradition, likewise West-
phalian, of the hünes on the Hünenkeller and the Porta thromng
their one hatchet} The hünes of the Brunsberg and Wiltberg,
between Godelheim and Amelunxen, played at howls together
across the Weser (Deut. sag. no. 16). Gbod neighbours too were
the giants on Weissenstein and Bemberg in Upper Hesse ; they
had a baking'Oven in common, that stood midway in the field, and
when one was kneading his dough, he threw a stone over as a
sign that wood was to be fetched from bis neighbour's fort to
heat the oven. Once they both happened to be throwing at the

' Bedeker*8 Westfälische sagen, no. 86.


644 GIANTS.

same timei the atones met in the air} and fell where they now
lie in the middle of the field above Michelbach^ each with the
marks of a big giant hand stamped on it. Another waj of
signalling was for the giant to scratch his body, which was done
so loud that the other heard it distinctly. The three very ancient
chapels by Sachsenheim^ Oberwittighausen and Grünfeldhansen
were built by giants^ who fetched the great heavy stones in their
aprons. When the first little church was finished^ the giant
flung his hammer through the air : wherever it alighted^ the next
building was to begin. It came to the ground five miles oS, and
there was erected the second church, on completing which the
giant flung the hammer once more, and where it fell, at the same
distance of five miles, he built the third chapel. In the one at
Bachsenheim a huge rib of the builder is preserved (Mone's Anz.
8,63). The following legends come from Westphalia: Above
Nettelstädt-on-the-hill stands the Hünenbrink, where hiines lived
of old, and kept on friendly terms with their fellows on the Stell
(2i miles farther). When the one set were baking, and the
other wanted a loaf done at the same time, they just pitched it
over (see Snppl.). A hüne living at Hilverdingsen on the south
side of the Schwarze lake, and another living at Hille on the
north side, used to haTce their bread together. One morning the
one at Hilverdingsen thought he heard his neighbour emptying
his kneading-trough, all ready for baking ; he sprang from his
lair, snatched up his dough, and leapt over the lake. But it was
no such thing, the noise he had heard was only his neighbour
scratching his leg. At AltehüSen there lived hünen, who had but
one knife at their service ; this they kept stuck in the trunk of a
tree that stood in the middle of the village, and whoever wanted
it fetched it thence, and then put it back in its place. The spot
is still shown where the tree stood. These hunes, who were also
called dutteSy were a people exceedingly scant of wit, and to them
is due the proverb * Altehiiffen dumme dutten.* As the surround-
ing country came more and more under cultivation, the hünen
felt no longer at ease among the new settlers, and they retired.
It was then that the duttes of Altehüfien also made up their minds
to emigrate; but what they wanted was to go and find the

1 Like Hrüngni'B hein and TbOr's hammer, p. 538.


GIANTS. 545

entrance into heaven. How they fared on the way was never
known^ but the joke is made upon them^ that after a long march
they came to a great calm^ clear sheet of water, in which the
bright sky was reflected ; here they thought they could plunge
into heaven, so they jumped in and were drowned.^ From so
remarkable a consensus ' we cannot but draw the conclusion, that
the giants held together as a people, and were settled in the
mountains of a country, but that they gradually gave way to
the human race, which may be regarded as a nation of invaders.
Legend converts their stone weapons into the woodman's axe or
the knife, their martial profession into the peaceable pursuit of
baking bread. It was an ancient custom to stick swords or
knives into a tree standing in the middle of the yard (Fomald.
sog. 1, 120-1); a man's strength was proved by the depth to
which he drove the hatchet into a stem, RA. 97. The jumping
into the blue lake savours of the fairy-tale, and comes before us
in some other narratives (Kinderm. 1, 343. 3, 112).

But, what deserves some attention, Swedish folktales make the
divine foe of giants, him that hurls thunderbolts and throws
hammers, himself play with stones as with balls. Once, as Thor
was going past Linneryd in Smäland with his henchman (the
Thi&lfi of the Edda), he came upon a giant to whom he was not
known, and opened a conversation : ' Whither goes thy way ? '
'I go to heaven to fight Thor, who has set my stable on fire.'
'Thou presumest too much; why, thou hast not even the strength
to lift this little stone and set it on the great one.' The giant
clutched the stone with all his might, but could not lift it off the
ground, so much weight had Thor imparted to it. Thor's servant
tried it next, and lifted it lightly as he would a glove. Then
the giant knew it was the god, and fell upon him so lustily that
he sank on his knees, but Thor swung his hammer and laid
the enemy prostrate.

All over Grermany there are so many of these stories about
stones and hammers being hurled, and giant's fingers imprinted

^ The last foar tales from Bedeker, nos. 37 to 40. Dutten means stnlti, and is
further intensified by the adj. In the Teutonist dod* gawk, oonf. Biohthofen sub
▼. dud, and supra, p. 528 on tombo. Similar tales on the Bhön mts., only with
eTeryl^ing giant-like effaced, abont the tolUn dittisser (Beohstein pp. 81-91).

' I do not know that any tract in Germany is richer in giant-stories than West-
phalia and Hesse. Conf. also £uhn*s Märkische sagen, nos. 22. 47. 107. 182. 141.
149. 158. 202. Temme*B Pommersohe sagen, nos. 175-184. 187.


546 GLLNTS.

on hard rock^ that I can only select one here and there as samples
of the style and spirit of the rest. Bains of a castle near Hom-
berg in Lower Hesse mark the abode of a giantess ; five miles
to one side of it, by the village of Grombet, lies a stone which
she hurled all the way from Homberg at one throw, and you see
the fingers of her hand imprinted on it. The Scharfenstein by
Gadensberg was thrown there by a giant in his rage. On the
Tyrifjordensstrand near Burn in Norway is a large stone, which
one jatul fighting with another is said to have flung obliquely
across the bay, and plain marks of his fingers remain on the stone
(Faye, p. 15). Two or three miles from Dieren in the Meissen
country there lie a block of quartz and one of granite ; the former
was thrown by the giant of Wantewitz at the giant of Zadel, the
latter by the Zadeler at the Wantewitzer ; but they both missed,
the stones having fallen wide of the mark.^ So two combatants
at Befnäs and Asnäs threw enormous stones at each other, one
called sortensteen, the other blak, and the latter still shews the
fingers of the thrower (Thiele 1, 47). A kind of slaty stone in
Norway, says Hallager 53*, is called jyvrikling, because the jyvri
(giantess) is said to have smeared it over with butter, and you
may see the dint of her fingers on it. Two giants at Nestved
tried their hands at hurling stones ; the one aimed his at Biislov
church, but did not reach it, the other threw with such force that
the stone flew right over the Steinwald, and may still be seen
on the high road from Nestved to Bingsted (Thiele 1, 80 ; conf.
176). In the wood near Palsgaard lies a huge stone, which a
jette flung there because the lady of the manor at Palsgaard,
whom he was courting, declined his proposals ; others maintain
that a jette maiden slung it over from Fünen with her garter
(Thiele 3, 65-6 ; conf. 42).

When giants fight, and one pursues another, they will in their
haste leap over a village, and slit tJieir great toe against the
church-spire, so that the blood spirts out in jets and forms a
pool (Deut. sag. no. 325); which strikingly resembles Wäinä-
möinen, rune 3. In leaping off a steep cliff, their foot or their
horse's hoof leaves tracks in the stone (ibid. nos. 318-9). Also,
•when a giant sits down to rest on a stone, or leans against a rock,

^ Preusker in Erasers Deatsoh. alterth. iii. 3, 87.


GIANTS. 547

bis fignre prints itself on the hard surface/ e.g. Starcather's in
Saxo Gram. 111.

It is not as smitJiSy like the cyclops, that giants are described
in German legend^ and the forging of arms is reserved for dwarfs.
Once in onr hero-legend the giant Aspri&n forges shoes (Both.
2029) ; also the giant Yade makes his son Yelint learn smith'
work, first with Mlmir, then with dwarfs.

As for smid'r in the ON. language^ it does not mean faber^ but
artificer in general, and particularly builder ; and to be accom-
plished builders is a main characteristic of giants, the authors of
those colossal structures of antiquity (p. 534). On the nine giant-
pillars near Miltenberg the common folk still see the handmarks
of the giants who intended therewith to huild a bridge over the
Main (Dent. sag. no. 19).

The most notable instance occurs in the Edda itself. A iötunn
had come to the &ses, professing to be a smiSr, and had pledged
himself to build them a strong castle within a year and a half, if
they would let him have Freyja with the sun and moon into the
bargain. The gods took counsel, and decided to accept his offer,
if he would undertake to finish the building by himself without
the aid of man, in one winter ; if on the first day of summer
anything in the castle was left undone, he should forfeit all his
claims. How the ' smith,' with no help but that of his strong
horse Svaffilfari, had nearly accomplished the task, but was
hindered by Loki and slain by Thörr, is related in Sn. 46-7.

Well, this myth, obeying that wondrous law of fluctuation so
often observed in genuine popular traditions, lives on, under new
forms, in other times and places. A German fairy tale puts the
dedl in the place of the giant (as, in a vast number of tales, it is
the devil now that executes buildings, hurls rocks, and so on,
precisely as the giant did before him) : the devil is to build a
house for a peasant, and get his soul in exchange ; but he must
have done before the cock crows, else the peasant is free, and the
deril has lost his pains. The work is very near completion, one
tile alone is wanting to the roof, when the peasant imitates the

' Herod. 4, 82 : txpos ^MpeucKiof ^ahovai iw vh-fro hthw^ rb otice fUvß'^fMTi dp9p6t,
^m Ü t6 ftiiyaSot Strrfxv, iraph, rh» Ti/fnjp rorafliv, in Scythia. (Footprint of
Herakles in stone, like a man's, bnt two cubits long.)


648 GIANTS.

crowing of a cock^ and immediately all the cocks in the neigh-
bourhood begin to crow^ and the enemy of man loses his wager.
There is more of the antique in a Norrland saga : ^ King Olaf of
Norway walked 'twixt hill and dale, buried in thought ; he had
it in his heart to build a church, the like of which was nowhere
to be seen, but the cost of it would grievously impoverish his
kingdom. In this perplexity he met a man of strange appearance,
who asked him why he was so pensive. Olaf declared to him
his purpose, and the giant (troll) offered to complete the building
by his single self within a certain time ; for wa^es he demanded
the sun and moon, or 8t, Olaf himself. To this the king agreed,
but projected such a plan for the church, as he thought impossible
of execution: it was to be so large, that seven priests could
preach in it at once without disturbing each other ; pillar and
ornament, within and without, must be wrought of hard flint,
and so on. Erelong such a structure stood completed, all but
the roof and spire. Perplexed anew at the stipulated terms,
Olaf wandered over hill and dale ; suddenly inside a mountain he
heard a child cry, and a giant-woman (jätteqvinna) hush it with
these words : ' tyst, tyst (hush) ! ^ to-morrow comes thy father
Wind-and-Weather home, bringing both sun and moon, or saintly
Olafs self.' Overjoyed at this discovery,* for to name an evil
spirit brings his power to nought, Olaf turned home : all was
finished, the spire was just fixed on, when Olaf cried : ' Vind och
Veder I du har satt spiran sneder (hast set the spire askew).'
Instantly the giant, with a fearful crash, fell off the ridge of
the church's roof, and burst into a thousand pieces, which were
nothing but fiintstones. According to different accounts, the
jätte was named Blaster, and Olaf cried: 'Blaster, satt spiran
vaster (set the spire west-er) ! ' or he was called Slätt, and the
rhyme ran : ' Slätt, satt spiran rätt (straight) I ' They have the
same story in Norway itself, but the giant's name is Skalle, and
he reared the magnificent church at Nidarös. In Schonen the
giant is Finn, who buUt the church at Lund, and was turned into

^ Extracted, from Zetterstrom's oollection, in the third no. of the Iduna, 2 ed.
Stockh. 1816, pp. 60-1. Now incladed, with others like it, in Afzelins^a Sago-
hafder 8, 83-86.

' Conf. the interj. * zias, ziss I ' in H. Sachs iv. 3, 3^.

s Ahnost in the same way, and with similar result, the name of Bompelstilz is
discoyered in ^Inderm. 55 ; conf. 8, 98, and supra p. 505 n.


GIANTS. 549

stone by Sfc. Lawrence (Finn Magnusen's Lex. myth. 851-2 ; and
see Sappl.) .

It is on another side that the following tale from Courland
touches the story in the Edda. In Kintegesinde of the Dzervens
are some old wall-stones extending a considerable length and
breadth, and the people say : Before the plagne (i.e. time out of
mind) there lived in the district of Hasenpot a strong man (giant)
of the name of Kinte. He could hew out and polish huge masses
of stone, and carted even the largest blocks together with his
one white mare. His dwelling-house he built on rocks, his fields
he fenced with stone ramparts. Once he had a quarrel with a
merchant of Libau; to punish him, he put his white mare to
draw a stone equal to twelve cartloads all the way to Libau,
intending to drop it at the merchant's door. When he reached
the town, they would not let him cross the bridge, fearing it
woald break under the load, and insisted on his removing the
stone outside the liberties. The strong man, deeply mortified,
did so, and dropt the stone on the road that goes to Grobin by
Battenhof. There it lies to this day, and the Lettons, as they
pass, point to it in astonishment.^ Kinte's white mare may stand
for the Scandinavian smith's SvaiSilfari ; the defeat of the giant's
building designs is efiected in a different way.

King Olaf brooked many other adventures with giants and
giantesses. As he sailed past the high hills on the Homs-herred
coast, in which a giantess lived, she called out to him :

S. Olaf med dit rode skiag,

dn seilar for när ved min kjelderväg !

(St. Olaf with thy red beard, thou sailest too near my cellar wall) .
Olaf was angry, and instead of steering his vessel between the
cliffs, he turned her head on to the hill, and answered :

hör du kjerling med rok og med teen,
her skal du sidde og blive en steen I

(hear, thou carlin with distaff and spool, here shalt thou sit and
become a stone). He had scarce finished speaking, when the hill
split open, the giantess was changed into a stone, and you still
see her sitting with spindle and distaff on the eastern cliff; a

^ Commonio. by Watson in JahresTerhandl. der knrl. geeellsoh. 2, 311-2.


550 GIANTS.

sacred spring issued from the opposite cliff.^ According to a
Swedish account^ Olaf wished to sail through Värmeland and by
L. Yaner to Nerike^ when the troll shouted to him :

kong Olaf med dit pipnga skägg (peaky beard),

du seglar for när min badstuguvägg (bathroom wall] I

Olaf replied :

du troll med din rak och ten

skal bli i sten

och aldrig mer gora skeppare men !

(shalt turn to stone, and never more make skipper moan). The
giantess turned into stove, and the king erected a cross at Dalky
church in Elfdals herred.' The Danish rhyme is also quoted as
follows :

hör du Oluf rodeskjäg,

hvi seiler du igjennem vor stueväg (through our chamber wall) T

And :

stat du der og bliv til steen,

og (gjör) ingen dannemand (no Dane) mere til meen I *

In Norway itself the legend runs thus i The Hornelen Mountains
in Bremanger were once connected with Maröe, but are now
divided from it by a sound. St. Olaf sailed up to them, and
commanded the cliffs to part and let him pass through. They
did so, but instantly a giantess leapt out of the mountain and
cried :

sig (see), du mand med det hvide skäg (white beard),
hvi splitter du saa min klippeväg ?

Olaf:

stat (stand) trold nu evig der i steen,

saa gjör du ei nogen mand (not any man) meer meen.

His word came to pass, and the stone figure stands yet on the
clifiF (Faye 124). OlaPs red heard (like those of our hero-kings
Otto and Friedrich) reminds us of Thörr the foe of giants (p. 177) ;
' pipuga skägg' is apparently the same as the pipshägg, wedge-

^ Danske viser 2, 12-8. Thiele 1, 32 ; conf. Faye, 118-9.

2 Femow'8 Värmeland, p. 228.

> Nyerap's Earakteristik af Christian 4, p. 17.


tHANTS. 551

like or peaked beard, quoted by Ihre ; but the Norwegian rhyme
has white beard (the barbe fleurie of Charlemagne). Such
divergences, and the changes rung on ' cellar wall, bathroom
wall, cliff wall,' vouch for the popular character of the tradition
(see SuppL). It will surprise no one, if I produce a still older
type of the whole story from the Edda itself. When Biynhildr
in her decorated car was faring the 'hel-veg,' she went past
the dwelling of a gygr ; the giantess accosts her with the words
(Sffim. 228'') :

skaltu t gognom gänga eigi

gridti studda gcurSa mtna !

(shalt not go through my stone-built house). This brings on a
dialogue, which is closed by Brynhildr with the exclamation:
*seykstu g^gjarkynl' (conf. p. 497u.). The giantess's house is
of stones skilfully put together, and the later rhymes speak of
cellar and bathroom : she herself is qaite the housewife with
distaff and spindle. The sacred rights of domesticity are in-
fringed, when strangers burst their way througL There are
other instances in which the giantess, like the elfin, is described
with spindle and distaff: 'tolv troldqvinder (12 trold-women) de
Btode for hannem med role og ten ' (Danske viser 1, 94) .^

Close to the Bomsdalshom in Norway is a mountain called
Troldtinder, whose jutting crags are due to giants whom Olaf
converted into stones, because they tried to prevent his preaching
Christianity in Bomsdal.'

It would appear, from Sa3m. 145**, that giants, like dwarfs,
have reason to dread the daylight, and if surprised by the break
of day, they turn into stone : ' dagr er nü,' cries Atli to HrimgerSr,
'hafnar mark J;yckir hlcegeligt vera, J>a/rs pu i steins Uki stendr.^

Grotesque humanlike shapes assumed by stalactite, flint and
fiakestone on the small scale, and by basalt and granite rocks on
the greats have largely engendered and fed these fancies about


^ The Geltie lay earrids huge stones on her spindle, and spins on as she walks»
Keifl^y 2, 286. Gonl. supra, p. 418.

' Faye 124, who foUows Schöning's Beise 2, 128. Sanot Olafs saga p& svenske
rim, ed. Hadoiph. p. 87 : ' ell troll, som draap X man, han giordit i stena, ooh
Stander Kn ; flere troll han ooh bortdref, sidan folokit i frijd blef.' Certain round
pot-shaped holes found in the mountains, the Norwegian people believe to be the
work of giants. They call them JätUgrytert troldgryter, yet also S. Olea gryter
(Hallager 58^).

TOL. U. I


552 GIANTS.

petrified giants. Then the myth about stone-circles accounts for
their form by dances of giants ; ^ many rocks have stories attached
to them of wedding*folk and dancing guests being turned into
stone (see Suppl.). The old and truly popular terminology of
mountains everywhere uses the names of diflTerent parts of the
body ; to mountains are given a head, brow, neck, back, shoulder,
knee, foot, etc. (RA. 541).

And here we come across numerous approximations and over-
lappings between the giant-legend and those of dwarfs, schrats
and watersprites, as the comprehensive name troll in Scandinavian
tradition would of itself indicate. Dwarfs of the mountains are,
like giants, liable to transformation into stone, as indeed they
have Bprung out of stone (p. 532-3). Rosmer havmand (merman)
springs or flies, as the graphic phrase is, into sione.^

Then on the other side, the notion of the giant gets a good deal
mixed up with that of the hero, usually his opposite. Strong
Jack in our nursery- tales assumes quite the character of a giant ;
and even Siegfried, pure hero as he is in the Mid. Age poems,
yet partakes of giant nature when acting as a smith, like Wielant,
who is of giant extraction. Moreover, both Siegfried slightly,
and Strong Jack more distinctly, acquire a tinge of that Eulen-
Spiegel or Rübezahl humour (p. 486) which is so amusing in the
Finnish stories of Kalewa, Eisi, and especially Soini (conf.
Kalewala, rune 19). This Soini or KuUervo bears the nickname
of Kalki (schalk, rogue) ; when an infant three days old, he tore
up his baby-linen ; sold to a Garelian smith, and set to mind the
baby, he dug its eyes out, killed it, and burnt the cradle. Then,
when his master ordered him to fence the fields in, he took whole
fir-trees and pines, and wattled them with snakes ; after that, he

^ Stonehenge, AS. StÄnhenge (-hangiDg), near Salisbury, in Welsh Choirganr,
T at. chorea gigantum ; aco. to Giraldus Cambr. cap. 18, a oaim broaght by plants
from Africa to Spain (Palgrave's Hist, of AS., p. 60) ; conf. Diefenbaoh's Celtica
ii. 101. In Trist. 6887, Gurmun is said to be • bom of Africa.»

3 Danske viser 1, 223 : ' ban sprang saa yildt i bjerget om, og bley iilßintesten
Sorte.' 1, 228 : * ban bley til en kampesteen graa.' 1, 233 : * saa ßy ban bort i
roden flinty og bley saa borte med alle.' 1, 186 of a crael stepmother : * han gprang
hort ißinUBteen: But H. Sachs too has, iii. 3, 31». 426, * vor zom zu einem stein
springen ; ' ib. 63^ * yor sorg zu eim stein springen ; ' iv. 3, 97**, * vor leid wol tu eim
stein möcht springen,* Overpowering emotions make the life stand still, and curdle
it into cold stone. Cont Chap. XXXT.T. on the heroes entrapped in mountains, and
Suppl.


GIANTS. 553

hkä to pastare the flock^ but the goodwife having baked a stone
in his breads Soini was in such a rage that he called bears and
wolves to aid him, who tore the woman's legs and worried the
flock. The Esthonians also tell of a giant's son (Kallewepoeg),
who furrowed up grassy lands with a wooden plough, and not a
blade has grown on them since (see SuppL). This trickiness of
the Finnish giants is a contrast to the rough but honest ways
of the Grerman and Scandinavian.

Above aD, there is no clear line to be drawn between giants
and the wild hairy woodsprites dealt with in pp. 478-486. In the
woods of the Bingenheim Mark are seen the stone seats of the
mid folk (conf. p. 432) who once lived there, and the print of
their hands on the stones (Dent. sag. no. 166). In the vale of
Gastein, says Muchar, p. 137, wild men have lived within the
memory of man, but the breed has died out since ; one of them
declared he had seen the forest of Sallesen near Mt. Stubner-
kogel get ' mair ' (die out and revive again) nine times : he could
mind when the Bocksteinkogl was no bigger than a kranawetvogl
(crossbill ?), or the mighty Schareck than a twopenny roll. Their
strength was gigantic : to hurl a ploughshare the whole breadth
of the valley was an easy throw for them. One of these ^ men '
leant his staff against the head farmer's house, and the whole
house shook. Their dwelling was an inaccessible cavern on the
left bank of the Ache, at the entrance to the Klamm ; outside
the cave stood some appletrees, and with the apples they would
fell the passers-by in fun ; remains of their household stuff are
still to be seen. To the inhabitants of the valley they were
rather friendly than otherwise, and often put a quantity of butter
and milk before their house-doors. This last feature is more of a
piece with the habits of dwarfs and elves than of giants.

Just as the elves found the spread of agriculture and the clear-
ing of their forests an abomination, which compelled them to
move out ; so the giants regard the woods as their own property,
m which they are by no means disposed to let men do as they
please. A peasant's son had no sooner begun to cut down a
bushy pinetree, than a great stout trold made his appearance
with the threat : ' dare to cut in my wood, and I'll strike thee
dead ' (Asbiömsen's Möe, no. 6) ; the Danish folk-song of Eline
af Villenakov is founded on this, D,V. 1, 175. And no less do


554 GIANTS.

giants (like dwarfs^ p. 459) hate the ringiDg of bells^ as in the
Swedish tale of the old giant in the tnonntain (Afzelins 3^ 88) ;
therefore they sling rocks at the belfries. Oargantua also carries
off bells from churches.

In many of the tales that have come before ns, giant and devil
are convertible terms, especially where the former has laid aside
his clumsiness. The same with a number of other resemblances
between the two. The devil is described as many-headed like
the giant, also, it is true, like the dragon and the hellhound.
Wherever the deviFs hand clutches or his foot treads, indelible
traces imprint themselves even on the hardest stone. The titans
chased from Olympus resemble the angels thrust out of heaven
and changed into devils. The abode of the giants, like that of
heathens and devils in general (p. 84), is supposed to be in the
north : when Freyr looks from heaven toward lötunheim (Ssem.
81) and spies the fair giantess, this is expressed in Snorri 39 by
' Freyr leit i norffrcettJ In the Danish folk-song of the stolen
hammer, Th6rr appears as Tord (thunder) af Hafsgaard (sea-
burgh), while the giant from whom Loke is to get the hammer
back dwells in Nordenßeld ; the Swedish folk-song says more
vaguely ^ trolltrams gärd.' ^

But what runs into gianthood altogether is the nature of the
man-eatvng huorco or ogre (p. 486). Like him the stone-hurling
Cyclops in the Odyssey hanker after human flesh ; and again a
Tartar giant Depeghöz (eye on top of head) ^ stands midway be-
tween Polyphemus, who combs with a harrow and shaves with a
scythe (Ov. Metam. 13, 764), and Oargantua, As an infant he
sucks all the nurses dry, that offer him the breast ; when grown
up, the Oghuzes have to supply him daily with 2 men and 600
sheep. Bissat, the hero, bums out his eye with a red-hot knife ;
the blinded giant sits outside the door, and feels with his hands
each goat as it passes out. An arrow aimed at his breast would
not penetrate, he cried ' what's this fly here teazing me ? ' The
Laplanders tell of a giant 8talo, who was one-eyed, and went
about in a garment of iron. He was feared as a man-eater, and


> To wish a man «nordan HÜ ßSlW (Arvidflson 2, 163) is to wish him in a
disagreeable qnarter (Germ. * in pepperland/ at Jericho).

' Diez : The newly disoovered Oghnzian evdop compared with the Homeric.
HaUe A Berlin 1816. j r tr^


GIANTS. 555

received the by-name of yityatya (Nilsson 4, 32). The Indian
Mahäbh&rata also represents Hidinibas the räkshasa (giant) ^ as
a man-eater^ misshapen and red-bearded : man's flesh he smells
from afar,* and orders Hidimba his sister to fetch it him ; bat
she, like the monster's wife or daughter in the nursery-tales^
pities and befriends the slumbering hero (see Suppl.) .

Our own giant-stories know nothing of this grim thirst for
bloody even the Norse iötunn is nowhere depicted as a cannibal,
like the Greek and Oriental giants ; our giants are a great deal
more genial, and come nearer to man's constitution in their
shape and their way of thinking: their savagery spends itself
mainly in hurling huge stones, removing mountains and rearing
colossal buildings.

Saxo Gram. pp. 10. 11 invests the giantess Harthgrepa with
the power to make herself small or large at pleasure. This is a
gift which fairy-tales bestow on the ogre or the devil, and folk-
tales on the haulematter (Harrys 2, 10 ; and Suppl.).

It is in living legend (folktale) that the peculiar properties of
oar native giants have been most faithfully preserved ; the poets
make their giants far less interesting, they paint them, espe-
cially in subjects borrowed from Bomance poetry, with only
the features common to all giants. Harpin, a giant in the
Iwein, demands a knight's daughter, hangs his sons, and lays
waste the land (4464. 4500) :^ when slain, he falls to the ground
like a tree (5074).* Still more vapid are the two giants intro-
duced at 6588 seq. Even in the Tristan, the description of giant
ürgän (15923) is not much more vivid : he levies blackmail on
oxen and sheep, and when his hand is hewn oS, he wants to heal

1 Tevetat*a Becond birth (Beinhart oolxxzi.) is a r&kshas!, giantess, not a
beast.

' * Mightily works man's smell, and amazingly qnickens my nostrils/ Axjana's
Jooiney, by Bopp, p. 18. The same in oar fairy-tales (supra, p. 486). Epithets
of these Indian daemons indicate that they w<Uk about by night (Bopp's gloss.
•1. 97).

> One giant is * hagel al der lande,' hail-storm to all lands. Bit. 6482.

* N.B., his bones are treasured up outside the castle-gate (5881), as in Fischart's
Oarg. 41*: ' they teU of riesen and haunen, shew their bones in churches, under
town halls.* So there hangs in a church the skeleton of the giantess struck by
lightning (p. 581 n.), the heathen maiden's dripping rib (Deut. sag. 140), and her yellow
loch (ibid. 317) ; in the castle is kept the gianVs bone (ibid. 324). At Alpirsbaoh
in the Black Forest a giant's skeleton hangs outside the gate, and in Our Lady's
church at Arustadt the * riesenribbe,' Bechst. 3, 129 ; oonf . Jerichow and Werben
in Ad. Kuhn, no. 56. The horns of a giant ox naüed up in the porch of a temple
(Kiebuhr'B Bom. Hist. 1, 407).


556 GIANTS.

it on again (16114).^ The giants shew more colour as we come
to poems in the cycle of our hero-legend. Kuperän in the Hum.
SJfrit (Cüpri&n of the Heldens. 171) rules over 1000 giants, and
holds in durance the captive daughter of a king. The Botber
brings before us, all alive, the giants Aspri&n, Grimme, Widolt,
the last straining like a lion at his leash, till he is let loose for
the fight (744. 2744. 4079) ; in the steel bar that two men could
not lift he buries his teeth till fire starts out of it (650. 4653-74),
and he smites with it like a thunderbolt (2734) ; the noise of his
moving makes the earth to quake (5051), his hauberk rings
when he leaps over bushes (4201) ; he pitches one man over the
heads of four, so that his feet do not touch the ground (1718),
smashes a lion against the wall (1144-53), rubs fire out of mill-
stones (1040), wades in mould (646. 678) up to the knee (935),
a feature preserved in Vilk. saga, cap. 60, and also Oriental
(Hammer's Rosenöl 1, 36). Aspriän sets his foot on the mouth
of the wounded (4275). And some good giant traits come out in
Sigenöt: when he breathes in his sleep, the boughs bend (60),*
he plucks up trees in the fir-wood (73-4), prepares lint-plugs
(schübel) of a pound weight to stuff into his wounds (113), takes
the hero under his a/rmpit and carries him off (110. 158. Hag. 9,
Lassb.). A giantess in the Wolfdiet. picks up horse and hero,
and, bounding like a squirrel, takes them 350 miles over the
mountains to her giant cell; another in the folk-song (Aw. 1,
161) carries man and horse up a mountain five miles high, where
are two ready boiled and one on the spit (a vestige of androphagi
after all) ; she offers her daughter to the hero, and when he
escapes, she beats her with a club, so that all the flowers and
leaves in the wood quiver. Giant Welle's sister Riitze in the
Heldenbuch takes for her staff a whole tree, root and branch,
that two waggons could not have carried; another woman 'of
wild kin' walks over all the trees, and requires two bullocks'
hides for a pair of shoes, Wolfd. 1513. Giant Langbein (Danske
viser 1, 26) is asleep in the wood, when the heroes wake him up
(see SuppL).

A good many giant-stories not yet discovered and collected

« _i ^® Bomanoe giants are often porters and bridge-keepers, eonf . the dorper in
*^m^^P"' P- ^^^^ » y®* ^^ ^ ^^^' '*^7, 4. 468, 1 : « rise porUnare.*

' The same token of gianthood is in Vilk. saga, cap. 176. and in a Servian lay.


GIANTS. 557

mnst still be living in the popular traditions of Norway and
Sweden^^ and even we in Germany may gather something from
oral narration^ though not much from books. The monk of St.
Gall (Pertz 2, 756) has an Eishere {i.e, Egisheri, terribilis) of
Thurgau^ but he is a giant-like hero^ not a giant.^

Of sacrifices offered to giants (as well as to friendly elves and
home-sprites)^ of a worship of giants^ there is hardly a trace.
Yet in Kormakssaga 242 I find blotrisiy giant to whom one
sacrifices; and the buttered stone (p. 546) may have been smeared
for the giantess^ not by her^ for it was the custom of antiquity to
anoint sacred stones and images with oil or fat, conf. p. 63. As
to the ' gude lubbe ' whose worship is recorded by Bp. Gebhard
(p. 526), his gianthood is not yet satisfactorily made out. Fasolt,
the giant of storm, was invoked in exorcisms ; but here we may
regard him as a demigod, like ThorgerSr and Irpa, who were
adored in Scandinavia (see Suppl.).

The connexion pointed out between several of the words for
giant and the names of ancient nations is similar to the agree-
ment of certain heroic names with historic characters. Mythic
traits get mysteriously intergrown with historic, and as Dietrich
and Charles do duty for a former god or hero, Hungarians and
Avars are made to stand for the old notion of giants. Only we
must not carry this too far, but give its due weight to the
fact that iötunn and Jours' have in themselves an intelligible
meaning.

* Holj^ers 8, 47 speaks of * löjlige berättelse om fordna jättar,'' withont going
into them.

' It is quite another thing, when in the debased folktale Siegfried the hero
degenerates into a giant (Whs. heldensage, pp. 801-16), as divine Oden himself
(p. 165) and Thörr are degraded into düyels and dolts. A still later yiew (Altd. bl.
1, 123) regards riese and reoke (hero) as all one.

* Schafarik (Slov. star. 1, 258) sees nothing in them but Geta and Thyrsns ;
at that rate the national name Thnssaget» mast inolude both.


CHAPTER XIX.
CREATION.

Now that we have treated of gods^ heroes^ elves^ and giants,
we are at length prepared to go into the views of ancient times
on cosmogony. And here I am thp more entitled to take the
Norse ideas for a groundwork, as indications are not wanting of
their having equally prevailed among the other Teutonic races.

Before the creation of heaven and earth, there was an immense
chasm called gap (hiatus, gaping), or by way of emphasis gap
ginnunga (chasm of chasms), corresponding in sense to the Greek
;^ao9.^ For, as %ao9 means both abyss and darkness, so gin»
nunga-gap seems also to denote the world of mist, out of whose
bosom all things rose. How the covering and concealing ' hel '
was likewise conceived of as ^nifl-hel' with yawning gaping jaws,
has been shewn above, pp. 312-314.

Yet this void of space had two extremities opposed to one
another, muspell (fire) the southern, and nifl (fog) the northern ;
from Muspellsheim proceed light and warmth, from NiSheim
darkness and deadly cold. In the middle was a fountain Hvergel-
mir, out of which flowed twelve rivers named elivagar. When

they got so far from their source, that the drop of fire contained

•

^ Xdoij from xa/n«=»OHG. gtnan, ON. gtnaaLat. hiare; oonf. OHG. ginimga,
hiatus. But we need not therefore read * gap ginünga,' for the ON. ginna, which
has now only the sense of allioere, must formerly have had that of findere, seoare,
which is still found in OHG. inginnan, MHG. enginnen (see aboye, p. 403, Ganna} :
Otfried iii. 7, 27 says of the barleycorn, * thoh findu ih melo th&r inne, inthin ih
es higinne (if I split it open) ; inkinnan (aperire), Graff 4, 209 ; ingunnen (seotus),
N. At. 95. So in MHG., * stn herze wart ime engunnen ' (fissum), Fondgr. 2,
268 ; enginnen (seoare), En. 2792. 5722 ; engunnen (secuerunt). En. 1178. Nearly
related is ingeinan (fissiculare), N. Gap. 186. From a literal ' splitting open ' must
have arisen the more abstract sense of * beginning,' Goth, duginnan, AS. onginnan,
OHG. inkinnan, pikinnan. Then gtna hiare, gin hiatus, further suggest gin
(amplus), and ginregin (p. 320). Singularly Festus, in discussing inehoare, comes
upon chaos, just as * b^in * has led us to gtnan. CohtUf from which some derive
incohareainchoare, is no other than chaos. Fest, sub v. oohum. [Nearly all
the above meanings appear in derivatives of the Mongol, root khag, khog to crack,
etc., including khoghSson empty, chaos]. ' Beside gtnan, the OHG. has a chinan
hiscere (Graff 4, 450), Gk>th. keinan, AS. <Ane (rima, chine, chink). The AS. has
also a separate word dwolma for hiatus, chaos. — Eztr. from Suppl.

653


CREATION. 559

in them hardened, like the sparks that fly out of fiame, they
tamed into rigid ice. Toached by the mild air (of the south),
the ice began to thaw and trickle : by the power of him who
sent the heat, the drops quickened into life, and a man grew out
of them, Ymir, called Örgelmir by the HrimJ^urses, a giant and
evil of nature.

Ymir went to sleep, and fell into a sweat, then under his left
hand grew man and wife, and one of his feet engendered with
the other a six-headed son; hence are sprung the families of
giants.

But the ice dripped on, and a cow arose, AuSumbla, from
whose udder flowed four streams of milk, conveying nourishment
to Ymir. Then the cow licked the salty ice-rocks, and on the
evening of the first day a man's hand came forth, the second
day the man's head, the third day the whole man ; he was beau-
tiful, large, strong, his name was Buri, and his son's name Börr
(p. 849).^ Börr took to him Bestla, the giant Bölßom's daughter,
and begat three sons, 09inn, Vili, Ve (p. 162), and by them was
the giant Ymir slain. As he sank to the ground, such a quantity
of blood ran out of his wounds, that all the giants were drowned
in it, save one, Bergelmir^ who with his wife escaped in a WSv
(Saem. 85**, Sn. 8), and from them is descended the (younger)
race of giants (see Suppl.).-'*

The sons of Börr dragged the dead Ymir's body into the mid-
dle of ginnünga-gap, and created out of his hlood the sea and
water, of his flesh the earth, of his hones the mountains, of his
ieeih and broken bones the rocks and crags. Then they took his
ikull and made of it the sky, and the sparks from Muspellsheim
that floated about free they fixed in the sky, so as to give light
to all. The earth was round, and encircled by deep sea,^ on


' In the Zend system, the firs man proceeds from the haunch of the primeval
hvU Kajomer.

* Ymir, t^. , Örgelmir, begot ThrCtffgelmir^ and he Bergelmir,

* The meaning of lüdr has not been ascertained ; elsewhere it stands for
eolens, tuba, here it is supposed to be a mill-chest. The OHG. ludara f. means
a eradle (Qmff 2, 201) as weU as pannus, inyolucrum (swaddling-band), and this
would fit remarkably weU, as some accounts of the Deluge do make the rescued
ehild float in its cradle. True, Snorri speaks not of a child, but of a grown-up
giant, who sits in the lutSr with his wife ; this may be a later version. [Slav. ISt
is shallow basket, trough, tray.]

* Snorri at aU events conceived the earth to be round, he says p. 9 : * hon er
bloglött ntan, ok >ar utan am liggr hinn diupi siAr.' So in the Luddarius : * dL^e


560 CREATION.

whose shore the giants were to dwell ; but to gaard the inland
parts of the earth against them, there was bnilt of Ymir's hrows
a castle, Mi9gar9. The giant's brain was thrown into the air,
and formed the clonds, Sn. 8, 9.

SeBmund's acconnt 45** (conf . 33*) differs in some points :

or Tmirs holdi var iör5 um scöpnt,

enn or sveita seer,

biörg or heinom-, baBmr or Aan,

enn or hau^i himinn,

enn or hans hram gerBo bliS regin

miiSgarS manna sonom,

enn or hans heila voro ]?au in harSmdSgo

sk^ oil nm scöpat.

Here the teeth are not made use of, but we have instead the
formation of trees out of the giant's hair.

When all this was done, the sons of Börr went to the seashore,
aud found two trees^ out of which they created two human beings,
Äskr and Embla. To these 08inn gave soul and life, Vili wit
and feeling (sense of touch). Ye countenance (colour?), speech,
hearing and sight, Sn. 10. More exactly in S89m. 3* :

unz J^rir komo or ^vi li&

öflgir ok ästgir sesir at süsi (uproar).

f undo ä. landi litt megandi

Ask ok Emblo örlöglausa :

önd (spirit) )^au ne ätto, ö% (mind) ]?au ne hofSo,

M (blood) ne lasti, ne lito (colours) go'Sa.

önd gaf OSinn, 6i gaf Hoenir,

la gaf Lo'Sr ok litu g6%a.

In this account the three &ses are named OSinn, Hoenir, LoSr
(p. 241) instead of 0«inn, Vili, Ve (p. 162) ; they come to the
roaring (of the sea, ad aestum, irapa 6lva 'jro\v<f>Xolaßoio Bo-
Xdaarj^), and find Askr and Embla powerless and inert. Then

welt ist Binwel (spherical), nnd umbeflozzen mit dem wendelmer, darin ffnrebt di«
erde als daz tutt^r in dem wizen de$ eiiet ist/ oonf. Berthold p. 287, and Waokem.
Basel MSS. p. 20. The creation of heaven and earth out of the parts of an egg is
poetically painted in Ealewala, rone 1 (see Suppl.). — ' Indian legend has likewise
a creation ont of the egg, heaven and earth being eggshells, Somadeva 1, 10. Conf.
the birth of Helen and the Diosoori out of an egg.' — ^Eztr. from Suppl.


CREATION. 561

OSinD endowed them with spirit, Hoeair with reason, LoiSr with
blood and complexion (see Suppl.)*

The creation of dwa/rfs is related in two passages which do not
altogether agree. Sn. 15 tells ns, when the gods sat in their
chairs jadging, they remembered that in the dost and the earth
dwarfs had come alive, as maggots do in meat (see SuppL).
They were created and received life first of all in Tmir's flesh.
By the decree of the gods these maggots now obtained nnder-
standing and haman shape, bat continued to live in the earth
and in stones. Ssdm. 2 says on the contrary, that the holy gods
in their chairs consulted, who should make the nation of dwarfs
ont of Brimir^s flssh and his black bones ; then sprang up
Motsognir, prince of all dwarfs, and after him Durinn, and they
two formed a multitude of manlike dwarfs out of the earth.

Taking all these accounts together, it is obvious in the first
place, that only the men and dwarfs are regarded as being
really created, while the giants and gods come, as it were, of
themselves out of chaos. To the production of men and dwarfs
there went a formative agency on the part of gods ; giants and
gods, without any such agency, made their appearance under the
mere action of natural heat and the licking of a cow. Giants
and gods spring out of a combination of fire with water, yet
80 that the element converted into ice must recover its fiuidity
before it becomes capable of production. The giant and the cow
drip out of the frost, Buri slowly extricates himself in three days
from t)ie thawing mass of ice. This d/ripping origin reminds us
of some other features in antiquity ; thus, OSinn had a gold ring
Draupnir (the dripper), from which every ninth night there
dripped eight other rings of equal weight (SsBm. 84\ Sn. 66).
Saem. 195^ speaks, not very lucidly, of a hausi Hei^draupnis
(cranio stillantis) ; Styrian legend commemorates a giant's rib
from which a drop falls once a year (D.S. no. 140).^ And Eve
may be said to drip out of Adam's rib. With the giant's birth
oat of ice and rime we may connect the story of the snow-child
(in the Modus Liebinc), and the influence, so common in our
fairy-tales, of snow and blood on the birth of a long wished for
child. All this seems allied to heathen notions of creation, conf.

' No doubt the familiar name Bibbentrop is founded on some such tradition.


562 CBBATION.

Chap. XXX. Also I must call attention to the terms eitrdropi
S89m. 35% eitrqvikja Sn. 5, qvikudropi Sn. 6 : it is the vivifying
fiery drop, and we do bestow on fire the epithet ' living.' Eitr
is oar eiter^ OHG. eitar^ AS. &tor, coming from OHQ. eit, AS.
ftd ignis ; and its derivative sense of venennm (poison, f^Mxpficucov)
seems inapplicable to the above compounds.

It tallies with the views expressed at p. 816 on the gods having
a beginning and an end, that in this system of creation too they
are not described as existing from the first : the god appears in
gfinnüngagap after a giant has preceded him. It is true, Snorri
6 makes use of a remarkable phrase : ' svä at qviknaSi meS
krapti J^ess er til sendi hitann,' the quickening is referred to the
might of him that sent the heat, as if that were an older eternal
God who already ruled in the chaos. The statement would have
more weight, were it forthcoming in the Yöluspft or any of the
Eddie songs themselves ; as it is, it looks to me a mere shift of
Snorri's own, to account for the presence and action of the heat,
and so on a par with the formulas quoted in pp. 22-3-4.^ Bari,
who is thawed into existence out of ice, to set limits to the rude
evil nature of the giant that was there before him, shews himself
altogether an ancestor and prototype of the heroes, whose mission
it was to exteinninate the brood of giants. From him are de-
scended all the äses, O^inn himself being only a grandson.

Again, there is no mistaking the distinct methods by which
giants, gods and men propagate their kind. Only one giant had
sprung out of ice, he has to beget children of himself, an office
performed by his hands and feet together, as in other ways also
the hand and foot are regarded as akin and allied to one another.-
Ymir's being asleep during the time is like Adam's sleep while
Eve was fashioned out of his rib ; Eve therefore takes her rise
in Adam himself, after which they continue their race jointly.
How Buri begat Börr we are not informed, but Börr united him-
self to a giant's daughter, who bore him three sons, and from
them sprang the rest of the &ses. It was otherwise with men.


^ We might indeed imagine that regin and ginregin mied before the arrival
of the &ses, and that this force of heat proceeded from them. Bat the Edda must
first have distinctly said so.

* Conf. Hauptes Zeitschr. 3, 156-7. Brahma too makes a man oat of his own
arm, Poller 1, 168.


CREATION. 563

who were not created singly^ like the giant or the god, but two
at once^ man and wife, and then jointly propagate their species.

While the hnge mass of the giant's body sapplied the gods
with materials, so that they conld frame the whole world out of
his different parts, and the dwarfs swarmed in the same giant's
flesh as worms ; mankind are descended from two trees on the
seashore, which the gods endowed with breath and perfect life.
They ha\re therefore no immediate connexion with giants.

In the OSes we see a superior and successful second product,
in contrast with the first half-bungled giant affair. On the giants
an undue proportion of inert matter had been expended ; in the
ftses body and soul attained a perfect equilibrium, and together
with infinite strength and beauty was evolved an informing
and creative mind. To men belongs a less full, yet a fair,
measure of both qualities, while dwarfs, as the end of creation,
form the antithesis to giants, for mind in them outweighs the
puny body. Our Heldenbuch on the contrary makes the dwarfs
come into being first, the giants next, and men last of all.

As the giants originated in the ice of streams that poured out
of the fountain Hvergelmir, we may fairly assume some connexion
between it and the names Örgelmir, Thruffgelmir, Bergelmir. I
derive gelmir from gialla (stridere), and connect it with the
OHG. galm (stridor, sonitus). Hvergelmir will therefore mean a
roaring cauldron ; and the same notion of uproar and din is
likely to be present in the giants' names, which would support
the derivation of Ymir from ymja, p. 532. The reading örgemlir
would indeed accord with the notion of great age associated with
the giant nature (p. 524), but would sever the link between
giants and the cauldron of chaos.

Thus far the Scandinavian theory : now to prove its general
diffusion.

Though the word ginnfingagap has no exact parallel in 0H6.
or AS., it may for all that be the thing described in the follow-
ing verses of the Wessobrunn Prayer :

Dat gafregin ih mit firahim firiwizzo meista (wisest men),
dat ero ni was noh fifhimil (earth was not, nor sky),
noh paum (tree) nohheinig noh pereg (mountain) ni was,
noh Bunnft ni scein [noh stemo ni cleiz (glistened)],


564 CREATION.

no mäno (moon) ni liahta nob der mareosSo (sea).

do dar niwiht ni was enteo ni wenteo^

enti do was der eino almahtico Cot (Almighty God alone).
The last line may sound completely christian^ and the preceding
ones may have nothing directly opposed to christian doctrine ;
yet the juxtaposition of earth and heaven, tree and mountain,
sun [and star], moon and sea, also the archaic forms ero (terra),
üfhimil (coelum), mareosSo (mare, Gk)th. marisÄivs), which must
be thrown into the scale, — all have a ring of the Edda :

Vara sandr ne seer, ne svalar unnir,
iörS fanz 88va ne upphiminn,
gap var ginnünga, enn gras hvergi.
sol ]7at ne vissi hvar hon sali fttti,
stiörnor ]7at ne visso hvar ]789r sta*Si atto,
mäni ]7at ne vissi hvat hann megins ätti.

The words ' ni wiht ni was enteo ni wenteo ' give in roundabout
phrase exactly the notion of ginnftngagap.^

These hints of heathenism have gained additional force, now
that OHG. and OS. songs are found to retain the technical term
muspilli = ON. muspell ; the close connexion between nifl, NyU
heim, and the Nibelungen so intergrown with our epos (p. 372) does
not in any case admit of doubt. Now if these two poles of the
Scandinavian chaos entered into the belief of all Teutonic nations,
the notion of creation as a whole. must have been as widely
spread. It has been shewn that the Old-German opinion about
giants, gods, men and dwarfs closely agreed with the Norse ; I
am now able further to produce, though in inverted order, the
same strange connexion described in the Edda between a giant's
body and the world's creation.

Four documents, lying far apart in respect of time and place
(and these may some day be reinforced by others) transmit to us
a notable account of the creation of the first man. But, while
the Edda uses up the giant's gutted and dismembered frame to
make a heaven and earth, here on the contrary the whole world
is made use of to create man's body.

1 Conf. also Otlr. ii. 1, 3 : *%r se ioh himil wurti, ioh erda ouh sd herti/ and
the desoription of chaos in O»dmon 7. 8, particularly the term heoUtersceado 7,
11 ; thongh there is little or nothing opposed to Bible doctrine. Conf. Aiistoph.
Ayes 693-4.


CBBATION.


565


The oldest version is to be found in the Rituale eoclesiae
Dunelmensis (Lend. 1839)^ in which a scribe of the 10th century
has interpolated the following passage^ an AS. translation being
mterlined with the Latin :


Odo pondera, de quibus factus
est Adam, pondus limi^ inde
factus (sic) est caro; pondus
ignis^ inde rubens est sanguis
et calidus; pondus salis^ inde
simt salsae lacrimae; pondus
roris, nnde factus est sudor;
pondas floris, inde est varietas
oeulorum ; pondus nubis^ inde
est instabilitas mentium; pon-
das venti^ inde est anhela fri"
gida ; pondus ^ gratiae^ inde est
sensus hominis.


^hte pundo, of J^eem dworden
is Adam, pund lämes^ of ]7on
äworden is flcesc; pund fires,
of ]7on read is blöd and hat;
pund saltes, of ]^on sindon salto
tehero ; pund J?edwes, of ]7on
ftworden is swat; pund bl6st-
mes, of ]7on is fägung egena;
pund wolcnes, of ]7on is onstyd-
fuUnisse ßohta; pund windes,
of ]7on is m'oS cold; pund ^ gefe,
of ]7on is ßoht monnes.


A similar addition is made to a MS. of the Code of Emsig (Rieht-
hofen^ p. 21 1): — 'God scop thene 6resta meneska^ thet was Adam,
fon achta wendeni, thet benete fon tha stdne^ thet flask fon there
erthe, thet blöd fon tha wetere, tha herta fon tha winde, thene
thochta fon tha wölken, thene s^cet fon tha dawe, tha loTcTcar fon
tha gerse^ tha dgene fon there sunna, and tha blSrem on (blew
into him) thene helga 6m (breath), and tha scop he Eva fon
sine ribbe, Adames liana.' The handwriting of this document
is ouly of the 15th cent., but it may have been copied from an
older MS. of the Emsig Code^ the Code itself being of the 14th
cent.

1 This * poTuid of giace* oomes in bo oddly, that I venttire to gaess an omission
between the words, of perhaps a line, which described the 8th material. The two
aceounts that follow next, after naming eight material ingredients, bring in the holy
breath or spirit as something additional, to which this gift of * grace ' would fairly
eonespond. Another AS. version, given in Süppl. , from the Saturn and Solomon
(Thorpe*s Anal. p. 95, ed. Eemble p. 180), is worth comparing: here *foldan
pond * becomes *ßa$e, fyres pond hlody windes p. csSung, wolcnes p. itioi^et un-
sta^lfflBStnes, gyfe p. faX and geßang^ bl6stmena p. edgena missenltcnist, deawes
p. twatj sealtes p. teara«.* — Here * £^e ' is right in tiie middle of the sentence : can
it be, that both * gefe * and * gyfe ' are a corruption of Geofon the sea god, gifen the
>ea (supra, p. 239), which in christian times had become inadmissible, perhaps
oninteUigible ? It would be strange if water, except as dew, were made no use of ;
•nd the * sea supplying thought ' would agree with the French account, which
•sctibeB wisdom to lum that has an extra stock of sea in him. — Tbamb.


666 CREATION.

The third passage is contained in a poem of the 12th cent,
on the four Gospels (Diemer 820, 6-20 ; conf . the notes to 95,
18. 27, and 320, 6) :

Got mit stner gewalt

der wrchet zeichen vil manecvalt,

der worhte den mennischen einen

üzzen von aht teilen :

von dem leime gab er ime daz fleisch,

der tow becßchenit den aweihc (sweat),

von dem steine gab er im daz pein (bone),

des nist zwivil nehein (is no doubt),

von den wrcen (worts) gab er ime di ädren (veins),

von dem grase gab er ime daz h&r,

von dem mere gab er ime äa,zplüt (blood),

von den welchen (clouds) daz müt (mood, mind),

du habet er ime begunnen

der ougen (eyes) von der sunnen.

Er verlöh ime sinen &tem (his own breath),

daz wir ime den behüten (keep it for him)

unte sinen gestn (and be his)

daz wir ime imer wuocherente sin (ever bear fruit).

Lastly, I take a passage from Godfrey of Viterbo^s Pantheon,
which was finished in 1187 (Pistorii Scriptor. 2, 53) : — 'Cum
legimus Adam de limo terrae formatum, intelligendum est ex
quatuor elementis. mundus enim iste major ex quatuor elementis
constat, igne,aere, aqua et terra, humanum quoque corpus dicitnr
microcosmus, id est minor mundus. habet namque ex terra
ca/mem, ex aqua humores, ex aere flatum, ex igne calorem. caput
autem ejus est rotundum sicut coelum, in quo duo sunt ocuUy tan-
quam duo luminaria in coelo micant. venter ejus tanquam mare
continet omnes liquores. pectus et pulmo emittit voces, et
quasi coelestes resonat harmonias. pedes tanquam terra sustinent
corpus Universum, ex igni coelesti habet visum, e superiore aere
habet auditum, ex inferiori habet olfactum, ex aqua gustnm, ex
terra habet tactum. in duritie participat cum lapidibus, in
ossibus vigorem habet cum arboribus, in capillia et tmguibus
decorem habet cum graminibus et floribus. setisus habet cum
brutis animalibus. ecce talis est hominis substantia corporea.' —


CREATION. 567

Oodfrey^ edacated afc Bamberg^ and chaplain to German kings^
must have heard in Germany the doctrine of the eight parts ; he
brings forward only a portion of it^ such as he conld reconcile
with his other system of the four elements ; he rather compares
particular parts of the body with natural objects^ than affirms
that those were created out of these.

Not one of the four compositions has any direct connexion
with another^ as their peculiarities prove ; but that they all rest
on a common foundation follows at once from the ' octo pondera^
achta wendem^ aht teilen,' among which the alleged correspond-
ences are distributed. They shew important discrepancies in
the details« and a different order is followed in each. Only three
items go right through the first three accounts, namely, that lime
(loam, earth) was taken for the flesh, dew for the sweat, clouds
for the mind. But then the MEG. and Frisian texts travel much
forther together ; both of them make bone spring out of stone,
bair (locks) from grass, eyes from the sun, blood from the sea
(water), none of which appear in the AS. Peculiar to the MHG.
poem is the derivation of the veins from herbs (würzen), and to
the AS. writer that of the blood from fire, of tears from salt, of
the various colours in the eye from flowers,^ of cold breath from
wind« and of sense from grace; which last, though placed
beyond doubt by the annexed translation, seems an error not-
withstanding, for it was purely out of material objects that
creation took place ; or can the meaning be, that man's will is
first conditioned by the g^race of God ? Fitly enough, tears are
likened to salt (salsae lacrimae) ; somewhat oddly the colours of
the eye to flowers, though it is not uncommon to speak of an
opening flower as an eye. The creation of hearts out of wind
is found in the Frisian account alone, which is also the only one
that adds, that into this mixture of eight materials God blew his
holy breath, and out of Adam's rib created his companion Eve
[the MHG. has : ' imparted his breath '] .*

^ Variegated eyes are the oottli varii^ Prov. vain hnelhs (Rayn. sab v. Tar),
O.Fr. vain iex (Boqaef. sub v.). We find in OHG. hluomfeht and ' gevehet n&h
tien bluomon/ Graff 8, 426 ; the AS. fägung above.

' WeU, here is ahready ojxx fifth version, from a Paris M3. of the 15 th oentary
(Panlin Paris, MSS. fran^ais de la bibl. dn roi 4, 207) : * Adam fa form6 oa ohamp
damacien, et fa fait si oomme noas troavons de huit parties de choses : da Umon de
la terre, de la mevt da soleilj des nuetf da vent^ des pierreif da saint esprit, et de la
cfarti du monde. De la terre fu la char, de la mer fa le sang, da soleil f orent les

TOL. II. K


568 CREATION.

If now we compare all the statements with those taken from
the Edda^ their similarity or sameness is beyond all question :
blood with sea or water^ flesh with earthy bone with stone^ hair
with trees or grass^ are coupled together in the same way here.
What weighs more than anything with me is the accordance of
^ brain and clouds ' with ' thoughts and clouds/ The brain is the
seat of thought^ and as clouds pass over the sky, so we to
this day have them flit across the mind ; ^ clouded brow ' we say
of a reflective pensive brooding one, and the Grimnismftl 45^
applies to the clouds the epithet harSmoiSagr, hard of mood. It
was quite in the spirit of the Edda to make the skull do for
the sky, and the eyebrows for a castle ; but how could sky or
castle have furnished materials for the human frame ? That the
striking correspondence of the sun to the eye should be wanting
in the Edda, is the more surprising, as the sun, moon and stars
are so commonly spoken of as eyes (Superst. 614), and antiquity
appears even to have seen tongvss in them, both of which points
fall to be discussed in Chap. XXII. ; meanwhile, if these enu-
merations are found incomplete, it may be that there were plenty
more of such correspondences passing current. If Thörr flung
a toe into the sky as a constellation, there may also have been
tongues that represented stars.

The main diSerence between the Scandinavian view and all
the others is, as I said before, that the one uses the microcosm as
material for the macrocosm, and the other inversely makes the
universe contribute to the formation of man. There the whole
of nature is but the first man gone to pieces, here man is put
together out of the elements of nature. The first way of think-
ing seems more congenial to the childhood of the world, it is all

yeulxj des nties fnrent les pensiesj da Tent forent les aVaineSf des pierres forent les
oz, du saint esprit fa la vie,l& clart6 da monde signifie Crist et sa creance. Saichez
que se il y a en Tomme plus de limon de la terre, il sera paresceux en toutes man-
i^res ; et se il y a plus de la mer, il sera sage ; et se il y a plus de soleü, 11 sera
beaa ; et se il y a plus de naes, il sera pensis ; et se il y a plas du vent, ü sera
ireax ; et se il y a plas de pierre, il sera dar, avar et larron ; et se il y a plas de
saint esprit, il sera gradeax ; et se il y a plus de la clart6 da monde, 11 sera beaax

et amez.' These eight items are again somewhat different from the preceding,

though six are the same : earth, sea, cloud, wind, stone and sun ; the Holy Ghost
and the light of the world are pecaliar, while veins, hair, tears, and motley eyes
are wanting. The * champ damacien ' is *■ ager plasmationis Adas, qui didtur ager
damascenus,* oonf . Fel. Fabrl Evagator, 2, 341. [Is * du monde ' the mistranslation
of a Germ. * des mondes,* the moon's ? Like the sun, it bestows ' beauty,* and
that has nothing to do with Christ, who is however * the light of the world.'— Ta.J


CBBATION. 569

in keeping to explain the sun as a giant's eye^ the mountains as
his bones^ the bushes as his hair ; there are plenty of legends
still that account for particular lakes and marshes by the
gashing blood of a giant^ for oddly-shaped rocks by his ribs
and marrow-bones ; and in a similar strain the waving corn was
Ukened to the hair of Sif or Ceres. It is at once felt to be more
artificial for sun and mountain and tree to be pat into requisition
to produce the human eye and bones and hair. Yet we do speak
of eyes being sunny^ and of our flesh as akin to dust^ and why
may not even the heathens have felt prompted to turn that cos-
mogonic view upside down ? Still more would this commend
itself to Christians^ as the Bible expressly states that man was
made of earth or loam/ without enlarging on the formation of
the several constituent parts of the body. None of the Fathers
seem to be acquainted with the theory of the eight constituents
of the first man; I will not venture to decide whether it was
already familiar to heathen times^ and maintained itself by the
side of the Eddie doctrine^ or first arose out of the collision of
this with christian teachings and is to be regarded as a fuller
development of the Adamic dogma. If Adam was interpreted
to mean clay^ it was but taking a step farther to explain^ more
precisely, that the flesh only was borrowed from earth, but
the bones from stones, and the hair from grass. It is almost
unscriptural, the way in which the MHGr. poetizer of Genesis
(Fandgr. 2, 15) launches out into such minutiae: — ^Duo Got
zeinitzen stucchen den man zesamene wolte rucchen, duo nam er,
sdsich wftne, einen leim zähe (glutinous lime), da er wolte daz
daz lit zesamene solte (wished the limbs to come together),
streich des unterzaisken (smeared it between), daz si zesamene
mohten haften (stick), denselben leiten (clay) tet er ze ftdaren
(made into veins), über ieglich lit er zöch denselben leim zäch,
daz si vasto chlebeten, zesamene sich habeten. üz hertem leime
(hard lime) tet er daz gebeine, uz proder erde (crumbly earth)
hiez er daz fleisk werden, üz leiten deme zälien machet er die
ädare. duo er in allen zesamene gevuocte, duo bestreich er in
mit einer slote (bedaubed him with a slime), diu selbe slote wart
ze dere hüte (became the skin) . duo er daz pilede (figure) drlich

^ * Die IHn^nen,' the loamen folk, Geo. 8409, is said of men, as we say * e Into,
ex meliozi lato fioti.'


570 CEEATION.

gelegete fare sich, duo stuont er ime werde obe der selben erde.
sJnen geist er in in blies, michelen sin er ime firliez, die &dare
alle wurden pluotes folle, ze fleiske wart diu erde, ze peine der
leim harte, die ftdare pugen sich sw& zesamene gie daz lit (blew
his spirit in, imparted mickle sense, the veins filled with blood,

the earth became flesh, the hard lime bone, etc.).' ^These

distinctions between lime, clay, earth and slime have a tang of
heathenism ; the poet durst not entirely depart from the creation
as set forth by the church, but that compounding of man out of
several materials appears to be still known to him. And traces
of it are met with in the folk-poetry.^

It is significant how Greek and, above all, Asiatic myths of

the creation coincide with the Norse (and what I believe to have

been once the universal Teutonic) view of the world's origin out

of component parts of the human body : it must therefore bo

of remote antiquity. The story lasts in India to this day, that

BrahmA was slain by the other gods, and the sky made out of his

skull : there is some analogy to this in the Greek notion of Atlas

supporting on his head the vault of heaven. According to one

of the Orphic poets, the body of Zeus is understood to be the

earth, his bones the mountains, and his eyes the sun and moon.*

Cochin-Chinese traditions tell, how Buddha made the world out

of the giant Banio's body, of his skull the sky, of his eyes the

sun and moon, of his flesh the earth, of his bones rocks and hills,

and of his hair trees and plants. Similar macrocosms are met

with in Japan and Ceylon; Kalmuk poems describe how the

earth arose from the metamorphosis of a mountain-giantess, the

sea from her blood (Finn Magn. Lex., 877-8, and Suppl.).

But Indian doctrine itself inverts this 'macrocosm, making the
sun enter into the eye, plants into the hair, stones into the bones,
and water into the blood of created man, so that in him the

1 The giantB moxüd a man out of clay (leir), Sn. 109. The Finpiah godD-
marinen hammers himself a wife out of gold, Bune 20. Pintosmauto is baked of
sngar, spice and scented water, his hair is made of gold thread, his teeth of pearls,
his eyes of sapphires, and his lips of rubies, Pentam. 6, 3. In a Servian song
(Vuk no. 110), two sisters spin themselves a brother of red and white silk, they
make him a body of boxwood, eyes of precious stones, eyebrows of sea-urchins,
and teeth of pearls, tiien stuff sugar and honey into his mouth : * Now eat that,
and talk to us (to nam yödi, pa nam probesddi) I ' And the myth of Pygmalion is
founded on bringing a stone figure to life (see SupplJ.

2 'OfAfMTa 5' -tfiXios T€ Kol iirrUfwra ffcXi^. Euseb. TipoTapaaK. eöoyy. 3, 9.
Lobeck, De microo. et macroc. p. 4.


CBBATION. 571

whole world is mirrored back. According to a Chaldean cos-
mogony^ when Belus had cat the darkness in twain^ and divided
heaven from earthy he commanded his own head to be struck o£E^
and the blood to be let ran into the ground; out of this arose
man gifted with reason. Hesiod^s representation is^ that Pandora
was formed by Hephssstus out of earth mingled with water^ and
then Hermes endowed her with speech^ "EpY« 61-79. The
number of ingredients is first reduced to earth and blood (or
water) ^ then in the 0. T. to earth alone.

And there are yet other points of agreement claiming our
attention. As Ymir engendered man and wife out of his hand^
and a giant son out of his f oot^ we are told by the Indian Manus^
that Brahma produced four families of men^ namely from his
mouth the first brahman (priest)^ from his arm the first kshatriya
(warrior), from his thigh the first vizh (trader and husbandman),^
from his foot the first sMra (servant and artizan). And so, no
doubt, would the Eddie tradition, were it more fully preserved,
make a difference of rank exist between the offspring of Ymir's
hand and those of his foot ; a birth from the foot must mean a
lower one. There is even a Caribbean myth in which Luguo,
the sky, descends to the earth, and the first parents of mankind
come forth from his navel and thigh, in which he had made an
incision.^ Beading of these miraculous births, who can help
thinking of Athena coming out of Zeus^s head {rpLToyeveui) , and
Dionysus out of his thigh {firjpoppaifyi]^) ? As the latter was
called hifiTfTtop (two-mothered), so the unexplained fable of the
nine mothers of Heimdallr (p. 234) seems to rest on some
Bimilar ground (see SuppL).

From these earlier creations of gods and giants the Edda and,
as the sequel will shew, the Indian religion distinguish the crea-
tion of ÜiQ first human pair. As with Adam and Eve in Scrip-
ture, so in the Edda there is presupposed some material to be
quickened by God, but a simple, not a composite one. Tr6
means both tree and wood, askr the ash-tree (fraxinus) ; the
relation of Askr to the Isco of heroic legend has already been
discussed, p. 350. If by the side of Aslcr^ the man, there stood


1 E femoribns natas^üraTja, üruja, Bopp*8 Gloss. 54*.
> Majer*B Mythol. taschenbuoh 2, 4.


572 CREATION.

an Eshja, the woman, the balance would be held more evenly ;
they would be related as Meshia and Meshiane in the Persian
myth, man and woman, who likewise grew out of plants. But
the Edda calls them Ashr and Embla : embla, emla, signifies a
busy woman, OHG. emila, as in fiur-emila (focaria), a Cinderella
(Graff 1, 252), from amr, ambr, ami, ambl (labor assiduns),
whence also the heroes name Amala (p. 370). As regards Ashr
however, it seems worthy of notice, that legend makes the first
king of the Saxons, Aschanes (Askanius), grow up out of the
Harz rocks, by a fountain-head in the midst of the forest. See-
ing that the Saxons themselves take their name fi*om sahs (saxum,
stone), that a divine hero bears the name of Sahsn6t (p. 203)^
that other traditions derive the word Germani from germinare,
because the Germans are said to have grown on trees ; ^ we have
here the possibility of a complex chain of relationships. The
Geogr. of Savenna says, the Saxons removed from their ancient
seats to Britain ' cum principe suo, nomine Anchis/ This may
be Heugist, or still better his son Oesc, whom I have identified
with Askr.*

Plainly there existed primitive legends, which made the first
men, or the founders of certain branches of the Teutonic nation,
grow out of trees and rocks, that is to say, which endeavoured
to trace the lineage of living beings to the half-alive kingdom of
plants and stones. Even our lent (populus), OHG. liut, has for
its root liotan (crescere, puUulare), OS. liud, liodan ; ' and the
sacredness of woods and mountains in our olden time is height-
ened by this connexion. And similar notions of the Greeks fit
in with this. One who can reckon up his ancestors is appealed
to with the argument (Od. 19, 163) :

oi yap airb Spv6<: iaai *jra\ac<f>dTOV ovS' arrb irirprf^ •

for not of fabled oah art thou, nor rock;* and there must have

^ D. S. no. 408. Aventin 18^ ; conf. the popular joke, prob, ancient, on the
origin of Swabians, Franks and BaTarians, Schm. 8, 524.

' In the Jewish language, both learned and Tnlgar, Ashkenaz denotes Ger-
many or a German. The name occurs in Gen. 10, 3 and Jer. 51, 27 ; how early
its mistaken use began, is unknown even to J. D. Michaelis (Spicil. geogr. Hebr.
1, 59) ; it must have been by the 15th century, if not sooner, and the rabbis may
very likely have been led to it by hearing talk of a derivation of the Germans from
an ancestor AskanitUt or else the Trojan one.

3 PSpulus however is unconn. witii populus a poplar.

* Such an * e queren aut sazo natus/ who cannot name his own father, is vul-


CREATION. 573

been fairy tales about it^ whicli children told eacli other in con-
fidential chat {6api^€ßi€vaL otto hpvo^ 97S* airb irerpri^y II. 22^ 126.^
oKKÄ rlri fioi ravra irepl hpvv fj irepX irirprjv; Hes- Theog. 35).
In marked unison with the myth of Askr is the statement of
Hesiod, that Zeus formed the third or brazen race out of ash-
trees {ix fieXMv, Op. 147) ; and if the allusion be to the stout
ashen shafts of the heroes^ why^ Isco or Askr may have bran-
dished them too. One remembers too those wood- wives and fays^
who^ like the Greek meliads and dryads^ had their sole power of
living bound up with some particular oak or ash^ and, unlike the
tree-bom man, had never got wholly detached from the material
of their origin. Then, a creation out of stones is recorded in
the story of Deucalion, whom after the deluge Hermes bade
throw stones behind his back : those that he threw, all turned
into men, and those that his wife Pyrrha threw, into women. As
in the Edda, after the great flood comes a new creation ; only in
this case the rescued people are themselves the actors.^ Even
the Jews appear to have known of a mythical creation out of
stones, for we read in Matth. 3, 9 : on Svvarai 6 Oeo^ ix tS)v
XiOav TovrtDV iyeipai rifcva t& Aßpadfi (see Suppl.).

The creation of dwarfs is described ambiguously in the Edda :
according to one story they bred as worms in the proto-giant's
flesh, and were then endowed by the gods with understanding
and homan shape ; but by the older account they were created
out of the flesh and bones of another giant Brimir. All this has
to do with the black elves alone, and must not be extended to
the light ones, about whose origin we are left in the dark. And
other mythologies are equally silent.

It is important and interesting to get a clear view of the grada-
tion and sequence of the several creations. That in the Edda
giants come first, gods next, and then, after an intervening deluge.


gvly spoken of as one * whose father got drowned on the apple (or nnt) tree.* Also,
* not to haTe sprang from an oak-stem/ Etner's Unw. doct. 585. ' Min gof ist an
nod abbem nossbom aba ehoh/ * and my dad didn't come off the nnt-tree/ Tobler
337^, who wrongly refers it to the Christmas-tree.

1 Homer*8 phrase is : * ohat from oak or rock, as yonth and maiden do.' —
Taixg.

- As Deucalion and Pyrrha create the race of men, so (aco. to a myth in the
B^htrtssage, whose source I never could discover) do Adam and Eve create that
of beasts by smiting the sea with rods. Only, Adam makes the good beasts, Eve
the bad ; 10 in Pazsee legend Ormnzd and AViiHmii.Ti hold a creating match.


574 CREATION.

men and dwarfs are created^ appears in sarprising harmony with
a theological opinion largely adopted throughout the Mid. Ages^
according to which^ though the O. T. begins with the work of
the six days^ yet the existence and consequently the creation of
angels and the apostasy of devils had gone before^ and then were
produced heaven and earthy man and all other creatures.^ After-
wards^ it is true^ there comes also a destructive floods but does
not need to be followed by a new creation^ for a pious remnant
of mankind is saved^ which peoples the earth anew. The Muham-
medan eblis (by aphsBresis from dieblis^ diabolus) is an apostate
spirit indeed^ but created after Adam^ and expelled from Para-
dise. Our Teutonic giants resemble at once the rebel angels
(devils) and the sinful men swept away by the flood ; here deli-
verance was in store for a patriarchy there for a giant^ who after
it continues his race by the side of men. A narrative preserved
in the appendix to our Heldenbuch offers some fragments of
cosmogony : three creations follow one another, that of dwarfs
leading the way, after whom come giants, and lastly men ; Gk»d
has called into being the skilful dwarfs to cultivate waste lands
and mountain regions, the giants to fight wild beasts, and the
heroes to assist the dwarfs against disloyal giauts ; this connexion
and mutual dependence of the races is worthy of note, though on
the manner of creating there is not a word. Lastly, the threefold
arrangement of classes instituted by Heimdallr * may, I think, be
regarded as a later act in the drama of creation, of which perhaps
a trace is yet to be seen even in modem traditions (p. 234) .'

Another thing I lay stress on is, that in the Edda man and
woman (Askr and Embla) come into existence together, but the

^ Conf. the poetical representations in Csßdmon and Fundgr. 2, 11. 12; of
conrse they rest on opinions approved or tolerated bj the ehnrch. Scripture, in its
aocotint of the creation, looks only to the human race, leaving angels and giants
out of sight altogether, though, as the narrative goes on, they are found existing.

^ The Mid. Ages trace the origin of freemen to Shem, that of knights and serfs
to Japhet and Ham; Wackem. Bas. MSS. 2, 20.

' I have since lighted on a Muhammedan legend in Wolfg. Menzel's Mythol.
forschungen 1, 40 : Eve had so many children, Üiat she was ashamed, and onoe,
when surprised by God, she hid some of them away. God then called the children
to him, and divided all the goods and honours of the earth among them. Those
that were hidden got none, and from them are descended beggars and fakirs.
Unfortunately no authority is given, but the agreement with the Gherman drama of
the 16th cent, is undeniable, and makes me doubt the supposed connexion of the
latter with the ON. fable. That the concealed children are not called up, is at
variance with all German accounts.


CREATION. 575

Bible makes two separate actions^ Adam's creation coming firsts
and Eve's being performed afterwards and in a different manner.^
So^ by Hesiod's account^ tbere already existed men descended
from the gods themselves^ when the first woman Pandora, the all-
gifted^ fair and false^ was formed ont of earth and flood (p. 571).
It is difficult to arrive at the exact point of view in the Hesiodic
poems. In the Theogony, theire ascend ont of chaos first Graia
(earth) the giantess^ then Erebus (corresp. to Niflheim) and
Night ; but Graia by herself brought forth Uranus (sky) and seas
and mountains^ then other children by Uranus^ the last of them
Kronus the father of Zeus and ancestor of all the gods. As
the Edda has a Burl and Börr before O^inn, so do Uranus and
Eronus here come before Zeus ; with Zeus and OSinn begins the
race of gods proper, and Poseidon and Hades complete the fra-
ternal trio, like Yili and Ye. The enmity of gods and titans is
therefore that of &ses and giants ; at the same time, there is just
as much resemblance in the expulsion of the titans from heaven
(Theog. 813) to the fall of the rebel angels into the bottomless
pit ; so that to the giant element in the titans we may add a
dffimonic. When the ' Works and Days ^ makes the well-known
five races fill five successive ages, the act of creation must needs
bave been repeated several times ; on which point neither the
poem itself nor Plato (Cratyl. 897-8, Steph.) gives sufiicient
information. First came the golden race of blissful daimones,
next the silver one of weaker divine beings, thirdly, the brazen
one of warriors sprung from ash-trees, fourthly, the race of
heroes, fifthly, the iron one of men now living. The omission
of a metal designation for the fourth race is of itself enough to
make the statement look imperfect. Dimmest of all is the second
race, which also Plato passes over, discussing only daemons, heroes
and men : will the diminutive stature of these shorter-lived genii
warrant a comparison with the wights and elves of our own
mythology 7 In the third race giants seem to be portrayed, or
fighters of the giant sort, confronting as they do the rightful

^ The rabbinic myth supposes a first woman, Lilith, made out of the ground
like Adam. [The Bible, we know, has two different accounts of man*s creation :
the first (ElohjBtic) in Gen. 1, 27, * male and female created he them ; ' the second
(JehoTiBtie) in Gen. 2, 7, * formed man of the dust,' and in w. 21. 22, * took one of
his ribs, . . . and the rib . . . made he a looman.' The first account seems to
imply nmidtaiieouB oreationB.— Tbaks.]


676 CEBATION.

heroes of the fourth. The latter we might in Mosaic language
call sons of Elohim^ and the former sons of men ; at the same
time^ their origin from the ash would admit of their being placed
beside the first-created men of the Edda. The agreement of the
myths would be more striking if we might bestow the name of
stone race on the third, and shift that of brazen, together with
the creation from the ash, to the fpurth ; stones being the natural
arms of giants. ApoUodorus however informs us it was the
brazen race that Zeus intended to destroy in the great flood from
which Deucalion and Pyrrha were saved, and this fits in with the
Scandinavian overthrow of giants. The creation of Askr and
Embla has its parallel in the stone-throwing of the Greek myth,
and the race of heroes might also be called stone-created (see
Suppl.).

It will be proper, before concluding, to cast a glance at the
Story of the Dehige : its difi'usion among the most diverse nations
of the earth gives a valuable insight into the nature of these
myths.^

From the sons of God having mingled with the daughters of
men sprang robbers and wrongdoers ; and it repented Jehovah
that he had made man, and he said he would destroy everything
on earth. But Noah found favour in his eyes, and he bade him
build a great ark, and enter therein with his household. Then
it began to rain, until the waters rose fifteen cubits above the
highest mountains, and all that had flesh and breath perished,
but the ark floated on the flood. Then Jehovah stayed the rain,
the waters returned from off the earth, and the ark rested on the
mountains of Ararat. But Noah let out first a raven, then a
dove, which found no rest for her foot and returned into the ark ,*
and after seven days he again sent forth a dove, which came back
with an olive leaf in her mouth ; and after yet other seven days
he sent forth a dove, which returned not any more.* Then Noah
came out on the dry earth, and offered a clean burntofiering, and


^ Ulpb. renders KaTaxXwrfiSt by midjasveipdirut sreipan meaning no doubt tbe
same as /cXi^^o', to flush, rinse, conf. AS. swfipan yerrere. Diluvium is in OHG.
unniezßuot or iinßuot (like sinw&ki gurges, MHG. sinwiege) ; not so good is the
OHG. and MHG. sintvluot, and our sündflnth (»tn-flood) is a blunder.

^ Sailors let birds fly, Pliny 6, 22. Three ravens fly as guides, LandnAmabök 1, 2.


DBLUGH, SINFLUT. 577

Jehovah made a covenant with man^ and set his bow in the cloud
for a token of the covenant.

After this beaatifnl compact picture in the 0. T.^ the Eddie
narrative looks crude and unpolished. Not from heaven does the
flood rain down^ it swells up from the blood of the slain giant^
whose carcase furnishes material for creating all things, and the
hnman race itself. The insolence and violence of the annihilated
giants resemble those of the sons of Elohim who had mingled
with the children of men ; and Noah's box {x^ßcoTo^) is like
Bergelmi's lA^r. But the epic touches, such as the landing on
the mountain, the outflying dove, the sacrifice and rainbow, would
sorely not have been left out, had there been any borrowing here.

In the Assyrian tradition,^ Kronos warns Sisuthros of the
coming downpour, who thereupon builds a ship, and embarks
with men and beasts. Three days after the rain has ceased, birds
are sent out, twice they come flying back, the second time with
alime on their feet, and the third time they staid away. Sisuthros
got out first with his wife and daughter and pilot, they prayed,
sacrificed, and suddenly disappeared. When the rest came to
land, a voice sounded in the air, saying the devout Sisuthros had
been taken up to the gods ; but they were left to propagate the
human race. Their vessel down to recent times lay on the
moontains of Armenia.^ Coins of Apamea, a city in Phrygia,
show an ark floating on the water, with a man and woman in it ;
on it sits a bird, another comes flying with a twig in its claws.
Close by stand the same human pair on firm land, holding up
their right hands. Beside the ark appear the letters Nfl (Noah),
and this Apamea is distinguished by the by-name of Ki^ßcDTo^?

According to Greek legend, Zeus had determined to destroy
mankind; at the prompting of Prometheus, Dat^caZton built an
ark, which received him and Pyrrha his wife. Zeus then sent a
mighty rain, so that Hellas was flooded, and the people perished.
Nine days and nights Deucalion floated on the waters, then landed
on Tartias8U8, and oSered sacrifice to Zeus ; we have seen how
this couple created a new generation by casting stones. Plutarch
adds, that when Deucalion let a dove out of the ark, he could tell

' Buttmaim On the myth of the Deluge, p. 21.

' Conf . the Annolied 308 f9eq., which brings the Bavarians from Armenia.

* AU this in Bnttmami, pp. 24-27.


578 CREATION.

the approach of storm by her flying back^ and of &ir weather by
her keeping away. Lacian (De dea Syria^ cap. 12. 13) calls him
AevKoXloDva rov SfcvOea (the Scythian) ; if that sprang oat of
^uridea} it may have long had this altered form in the legend
itself. Some branches of the Greek race had their own stories
of an ancient floods of which they called the heroes Ogyges and
Ogygos ;^ bat all these accounts are wanting in epic details.^

A rich store of these opens for as in the Indian Mahäbh&rata>
King Manus stood on a river's bank^ doing penance^ when he
heard the voice of a little fish imploring him to save it. He
caught it in his hand and laid it in a vessel^ bat the fish began to
grow^ and demanded wider quarters. Manas threw it into a large
lake^ but the fish grew on^ and wished to be taken to Gtkngä the
bride of the sea. Before long he had not room to stir even there,
and Manas was obliged to carry him to the sea^ but when
launched in the sea^ he foretold the coming of a fearful flood,
Manus was to build a ship and go on board it with the seven
sages, and preserve the seeds of all things, then he would shew
himself to them homed. Manus did as he was commanded, and
sailed in the ship ; the monster fish appeared, had the ship
fastened to his horn by a rope, and towed it through the sea for
many years, till they reached the summit of the Himavan, there
he bade them moor the ship, and the spot to which it was tied
still bears the name of Naubandhanam (ship-binding). Then
spake the fish : I am Brahma, lord of created things, a higher
than I there is not, in the shape of a fish have I delivered you ;

1 GETOEA from CICTGEA is Battmann's acnte saggestion ; but he goes
farther, taking this Sisythes or Sisathros to be Sesothris, Sothis, Seth ; and Noah
to be Dionysos, and a symbol of water.

' Bnttm. p. 45 seq., who connects it with Okeanos and Ogenos.

' It is remarkable, that in a beautiful simile, therefore without names or places.
Homer depicts a kind of Deluge, 11. 16, 384 :

dn S* (nrb XoUXairi iraaa «cXeui^ ßdßptOe x^<^
IjfiaT diTbjpiytpt ore Xaßporarop x^^* Ö8w/»
ZciJj, ore JiJ ß* AySpeffffi Koreaffdfievoi x<*^^*"^'Th
ot ßi^j cIp ayopi (r/roXids KplvuMri $ifiurraSf
ix 5i diKTfv (IXaawriy BeQy 6Tiy oix dX^otn-es,
fwHOei B4 T€ ipy dvdpunrtap.

Even as crouches the darkening land, overcrowed by the tempest, All on a summer's
day, when Jove doth the down-rushing water Suddenly pour, and wreak his wrath
on the proud men, Men of might, who sit dealing a crooked doom in the folkmote.
Forcing justice aside, unheeding of gods and their vengeance ; (rivers swell, etc.)
and the works of man are all wasted.
* Bopp's Die sOndflut, Berl. 1829.


DELUGE. 579

now shall Manns make all creatures^ gods^ asnris and men^ and
all the worlds^ things movable and immovable. And as he had
spoken^ so it was done.

In the Bhftgavatam^ Satyavratas (snpra^ p. 249) takes the place
of Manns^ Yishnns that of Brahm&^ and the facts are embellished
with philosophy.

The Indian myth then^ like the Teatonic^ makes the Delage
precede the real creation^ whereas in the Mosaic account Adam
lives long before Noah^ and the flood is not followed by a new
creation. The seven rishis in the ship^ as Bopp remarks^ are
of divine rather than human nature^ sons of Brahma^ and of an
older birth than the inferior gods created by Manns or their
enemies the asnris (elsewhere daityas and d&navas = titans^
giants). Bat it is a great point gained for us^ that Mantis (after
whom mannshyas^ homo^ is named) comes in as a creator; so
that in onr German Mannus (whence manna and manniskja,
homo) we recognise precisely Börr and his creator sons (p. 349).
Askr and Embla are simply a reproduction of the same idea of
creation^ and on a par with Deucalion and Pyrrha^ or Adam and
Eve.

I must not pass over the fact^ that the first part of the Indian
poem^ where Brahm& as a fish is caught by Manus^ and then
reveals to him the future^ lingers to this day in our nursery tale
of the small all-powerful turbot or pike^ who gradually elevates
a fisherman from the meanest condition to the highest rank'; and
only plunges him back into his pristine poverty^ when^ urged by
the counsels of a too ambitious wife^ he desires at last to be
equal with God. The bestowal of the successive dignities is in
a measure a creation of the different orders.^

One more story of the Deluge^ which relates the origin of the
Lithuanians^ deserves to be introduced.' When Pramzimas the
most high god looked out of a window of his heavenly house
(like Wuotan, p. 135) over the world, and perceived nothing but
war and wrong among men, he sent two giants Wandu and
Weyas (water and wind) upon the sinful earth, who laid all
things waste for twenty nights and days. Looking down once

^ Conf. the capture of the Boothsaying marmennil, p. 434.
s Dzieie staroiytne oarodu Litewskiego, przez Th. Narbatta. Wüno 1835.
1,2.


680 CBEATION.

more^ when he happened to be eating celestial nuts, PramSimas
dropt a nutshell^ and it lighted on the top of the highest moun-
tain, to which beasts and several hnman pairs had fled for refiige.
They all climbed into the shelly and it drifted on the flood which
now covered all things. Bat God bent his countenance yet a
third time upon the earthy and he laid the storm^ and made the
waters to abate. The men that were saved dispersed themselves,
only one pair remained in that country^ and from them the
Lithuanians are descended. But they were now old, and they
grieved, whereupon God sent them for a comforter (linxmine)
the rainbow, who counselled them to leap over the earth^s bones :
nine times they leapt, and nine couples sprang up, founders of
the nine tribes of Lithuania. This incident reminds us of the
origin of men from the stones cast by Deucalion and Pyrrha ; and
the rainbow, of the Bible account, except that here it is intro-
duced as a person, instructing the couple what to do, as Hermes
(the divine messenger) did Deucalion. It were overbold perhaps
to connect the nutshell with that nut-tree (p. 572-3), by whicli
one vaguely expresses an unknown extraction.

Not all, even of the stories quoted, describe a universal deluge
desolating the whole earth : that in which Deucalion was rescued
affected Greece alone, and of such accounts of partial floods
there are plenty. Philemon and Baucis in Phrygia (where Noah's
ark rested, p. 577), had given shelter to the wayfaring gods, and
being warned by them, fled up the mountain, and saw themselves
saved when the flood rose over the land (Ovid. Met. 8, 620) ;
they were changed into trees, as Askr and Embla were trees.
A Welsh folktale says, that in Brecknockshire, where a large
lake now lies, there once stood a great city. The king sent his
messenger to the sinful inhabitants, to prove them ; they heeded
not his words, and refused him a lodging. He stept into a
miserable hut, in which there only lay a child crying in its cradle
(conf. Iddara, p. 559 n.) ; there he passed the night, and in going
away, dropt one of his gloves in the cradle. He had not left the
city long, when he heard a noise and lamentation ; he thought of
turning back to look for his glove, but the town was no longer to
be seen, the waters covered the whole plain, but lo, in the midst
of the waves a cradle came floating, in which there lay both child
and glove. This child he took to the king, who had it reared as


DELÜGE. 581

the sole survivor of the sunken city.^ Conf. the story of Dold at
the end of Ch. XXXII. Another and older narrative^ found even
in the British Triads^ comes much nearer to those given above :
When the lake of Llion overflowed and submerged all Britain,
the people were all drowned save Dwyvan and Dwyvach, who
escaped in a naked (sailless) ship^ and afterwards repeopled the
land. This ship is also named that of Nevydd näv neivion^ and
had on board a male and female of every creature ; again it is
told^ that the oxen of Hu Gadarn dragged the avanc (beaver)
ashore out of the Llion lake, and it has never broken out since.^

Of still narrower limits are our German tales, as that of the
dwarf seeking a lodging at Balligen on L. Thun (no. 45), which
is very like the Philemon-myth; of Arendsee (no. Ill), where
again only a husband and wife are saved; of Seeburg (no. 131) ;
and Frauensee (no. 239). A Danish folktale is given by Thiele
1, 227. Fresh and graceful touches abound in the Servian lay of
the three angels sent by God to the sinful world, and the origin
of the Plattensee or Balatino yezero, Yuk 4, 8-13 (2nd ed. 1,
no. 207).8

There is above all a dash of German heathenism about the
lakes and pools said to have been formed by the streaming blood
of giants (Dent. sag. no. 325), as the destructive Deluge arose
from Ymir's blood.

It appears to me impossible to refer the whole mass of these
tales about the great Flood and the Creation of the human species
to the Mosaic record, as if they were mere perversions and dis-
tortions of it j the additions, omissions and discrepancies peculiar
to almost every one of them are sufficient to forbid that. And
I have not by a long way exhausted this cycle of legends (see
Snppl.) : in islands of the Eastern Archipelago, in Tonga and
New Zealand, among Mexicans and Caribs there start up ac-
counts, astonishingly similar and yet different, of creation and
the first human pair, of a flood and deliverance, and the murder
of a brother.*

J Edw. Davies's Brit. Mythol. 146-7.

' Ibid. 95. 129. Yillemarqnd, Gontes bretons 2, 294. Mablnogion 2, 841. 381.

' Sole example of a Deluge- story among Slavs, by whom cosmogonio ideas in
geoeral seem not to have been handed down at all.

^ W. von Humboldt's Eawispraohe 1, 240. 8, 449. Majer*s Mythol. taschenb.
2, 5. 131.


CHAPTER XX.
ELEMENTS.

Prom gods^ half-gods and heroes^ from the whole array of
friendly or hostile beings that^ superior to man in mind or
body^ fill up a middle space betwixt him and deity, we tarn our
glance to simple phenomena of nature, which at all times in their
silent greatness wield an immediate power over the human
mind. These all-penetrating, all-absorbing primitive substances,
which precede the creation of all other things and meet us again
everywhere, must be sacred in themselves, even without being
brought into closer relation to divine beings. Such relation is
not absent in any mythology, but it need not stand in the way
of the elements receiving a homage to some extent independent
of it and peculiar to themselves.

On the other hand, it is not the religion, properly speaking, of
a nation, that ever springs from the soil of this elemental worship ;
the faith itself originates in a mysterious store of supersensual
ideas, that has nothing in common with those substances, but
subjugates them to itself. Yet faith will tolerate in its train
a veneration of elements, and mix it up with itself; and it may
even chance; that when faith has perished or is corrupted, this
veneration shall keep its hold of the people longer. The multi-
tude will give up its great divinities, yet persist for a time in the
more private worship of household gods; even these it will
renounce, and retain its reverence for elements. The history of
the heathen and christian religions shews, that long after the one
was fallen and the other established, there lived on, nay there
live still, a number of superstitious customs connected with the
worship of elements. It is the last, the all but indestructible
remnant of heathenism ; when gods collapse, these naked sub-
stances come to the front again, with which the being of those
had mysteriously linked itself (see Suppl.).

To this eflfect I have already expressed myself (pp. 82-84) in


WATER. 583

speaking of a worship of nature by our ancestors^ which is indeed
supported by early testimonies^ but these are often perverted
into an argument against the heathen having had any gods.
The gods stood and fell from other causes.

Water the limpid^ flowing, welling up or running dry; Fire
the iUaminating, kindled or quenched ; Air unseen by the eye,
bat sensible to ear and touch ; Earth the nourishing, out of
which everything grows, and into which all that has grown dis-
solves; — ^these, to mankind from the earliest time, have appeared
sacred and venerable; ceremonies, transactions and events in
life first receive their solemn consecration from them. Working
as they do with never-resting activity and force on the whole of
nature, the childlike man bestows on them his veneration, without
any particular god necessarily intervening, though he too will
commonly appear in combination with it. Even to-day the
majesty and might of these eldest bom of things awakes our
admiration ; how could antiquity have forborne its astonishment
and adoration 7 Such a worship is simpler, freer and more dig-
nified than a senseless crouching before pictures and idols.

All the elements are cleansing, healing, atoning, and the proof
by ordeal rests mainly upon them ; but man had to secure them
m their purest form and at the most seasonable times.

We will consider them one by one.

1. Watee.*

Passages proving that the Alamanns and Franks worshipped
rivers and fountains are cited at pp. 100-1 and in the Appendix.*

^ Goth, vatdj ON. patn^ OHG. toaiar, OS. toatar, AS. w(EUrt Dan. vand, Slav.
9odd, Lith. toandüj Lett, uhdentf Gr. üöwp ; then, oorresp. in form to Lat. aqua^ bat
meaning flnvins, Goth, akua, OHG. aha, AS. ed, ON. d; the Goth, vegt, OHG.
wie wAgesi-flnctiXB, flow.

' When here and elsewhere I ase Bp. Bnrchard^s Coll. of Decrees as authority
for Oerman superstitions, I do not forget that in most cases (not all) it is drawn
from oouneilfl not held in Germany, but in Gaul, Italy or Spain. Yet, if we con-
sider that German nations had been spreading themselves aU over those countries
down to the 8-9th cent., that the AS. and Lombard Laws, to say nothing of
Capitularies, declaim equally with those Decrees of Council against water, tree and
stone worship, that Agathias and Gregory of Tours expressly charge the Alamanns
and Franks with such worship ; these superstitions are seen to be something com-
mon to the Italian, Gallic and German nationalities, of which none of them can be
icquitted. Some have tried to make out from Agathias, that our forefathers had
a mere nature-worship, and no gods. It would be about as uncritical to do what
is to some extent the reverse, and suspect Agathias and Gregory of having adopted
their aaaertions out of ohurch-pzohibitions that were never meant for Germany at

VOL. II. L


584 ELEMENTS. .

The people prayed on the river's bank j at the fountain's brink
they lighted candles and laid down sacrificial gifts. It is called
'fontibus yenerationem exhibere^ ad fontanas adorare (conf. Legg.
Liutpr. 6, 30)^ ad fontes yotam facere, roddere^ exsolvere^ orare
ad fontes^ offerre ad fontes, munus deferre^ ad fontes laminaria
facere^ candelam deferred This last no doubt was done only or
chiefly at nighty when the flame reflected from the wave would
excite a religious awe.^ The Saxons alsp were fonticolae ; wyllas
and fiStwceter are named in the AS. laws as objects of rever-
ence. Beside the passage from Cnut (p. 102)^ the Poenitentiale
Ecgberti says 2^ 22 : ' gif hwilc man his sdlmessan geMte o^ie
bringe to hwilcon wylle*; 4, 19 : ^ gif hw& his W89ccan set aenigum
wylle hsdbbe (vigilias suas ad aliquem foutem habeat) ' ; the
Canones Edgari § 16 forbid wilweorÖ'unga (well- worship). I am
not sure that a formal worship of water in Scandinavia is implied
in«the saga quoted above (p. 102), where vötn is mentioned;
but that water was held sacred is a thing not to be doubted.
A lay in the Edda has near the beginning the remarkable words :
' hnigo heilög vötn af himinfiöllom^' fell holy waters from heaven's
hills. The Sclaveni as eariy as Procopius (B. Goth. 3^ 14)
aißovat worafiov^ (worship rivers) ; and as late as Helmold
(1^ 47) it is said of the Slavs at Faldera : lucorum et fontium
ceterarumque superstitionum multiplex error apud eos habetur
(see Suppl.).

Above all was the place honoured^ where the wondrous element
leaps up from the lap of earth ; a spring is in our older speech
urspriuc (-ges), and also prunno.^

Often enough the first appearing of a spring is ascribed to
divine agency or a miracle : Wuotan, Balder, Charles the Great,
each made the reviving fountain flow out of earth for Ids fainting
host (p. 226). Other springs are charmed out of the rock when
struck by a staff or a Iwrse's hoof ; ^ a saint plants a bough in

all. Into seonlar codes snoh prohibitions seem to have found their way fizst
through the Gapitolaries ; the older codes had no penidties for idolatry, oxüy the
AS. ddmas of Wihtrfed cap. 13 impose them on deofolgild m generaL
^ At Christmas people look into their toelU with candles.

* From prinnan (ardere), as tdt, another word for well, comes from siodaa
(fervere), toelle (flactas) from wallan (fenrere), nuil (sabfrigidos) from sueUm (ardere),
conf. Gramm. 2, 29. 34 ; sprudeln to bubble up is from sprühen to fly off as sparks
d'3. In such words fire and water get wedded together.

* The Heliconian horse-fount (trrox/)!^) was stmok open by Pegasus : * novt


WATEB. HEUiAWAC. 685

the ground^ and water bubbles np. But there are two theories
even more generally received : that the water of sacred brooks
and rivers is in the first instance poured by gods and superior
beings out of bowls or urns; and that springs and wells are
goarded by snakes or dragons lying near them (see Suppl.).

Water drawn at a holy season^ at midnight^ before sunrise^
and in solemn silence^ bore till a recent time the name of heilawäc,
heilwäc, heilwcege. The first fbrm^ retaining the connecting
vowel after a long syllable^ proves the antiquity of the word^
whose sacred meaning secured it against change. MS. 2^ 149^ :
'man seit (saith) von heilawage uns vil^ wie heil, wie guot ez st^
wie gar voUekomen der dren spil^ wie gar sin krafb verheilet swaz
wandes an dem man versdret ist/ how good for healing wounds^
etc. Martina 116 : 'Got^ du fröude flüzzic Jieüawac/ and in a
like sense 248. 288. Applied to Christ and his cross^ Mar. 224 :
'der boum ist gemeizzen^ d& daz heilwcege von bechumet^ daz aller
werlte gefrumet/ the tree whence cometh h. And more gener-
ally, 'ein heilwdge/ Diut. 1, 352; much later^ in Anshelm's
Chron. of Bern 1, 808, ' heilwag ' among other charms and magic
appliances. Lastly, in Phil, von Sittewald (Strasb. 1677) 1,
483 : ' running spring-water, gathered on holy Christmas night,
while the clock strikes twelve, and named heilwag, is good for
pain of the navel,' Superst. 804. In this heilaw&c we discover
a very early mingling of heathen customs with christian. The
common people believe to this very day, that at 12, or between
11 and 12, on Christmas or Easter night, spiring -water changes
into wine (Superst. 54. 792),^ Wieselgren p. 412 ; and this belief
rests on the supposition that the first manifestation of the
Saviour's divinity took place at the marriage in Cana, where he
turned water into wine. Now at Christmas they celebrated both
his birth (epiphany, theophany, p. 281) and his baptism, and
combined with these the memory of that miracle, to which was


/oRtif Dora meduBiei qaem prspetis nngüla rapit/ Ov. Met. 6, 257 seq. Bo the
vein of gold in a hül is laid open by a blow from a hoof. Bhea opens a spring in
with her staff:

iprajr^ffeura Bth. /Uyixp h^^i *^vy

iK V tx^ef /jjya x^vfia. Gallimach. hy. Jov. 28.
1 Zehn ehen eines weibes (her ten marriages), Leipz. 1735, p. 235.


%


586 ELEMENTS.

given a special name^ bethphania.^ As far back as 387, Chry-
sostom preaching an Epipbany sermon at Antioch says that
people at that festival drew running water at midnight, and kept
it a whole yea/r, and often two or three (no doubt for tbanmaturgic
uses), and it remained fresh and nncormpted.' Superstitious
Christians then believed two things, a hallowing of the water at
midnight of the day of baptism, and a turning of it into wine
at the time of the bethphania : such water the Germans called
heilawa^y^ and ascribed to it a wonderful power of healing diseases
and wounds, and of never spoiling (see SuppL).

Possibly even in Syria an old pagan drawing of water became
veiled under new christian meanings. In Germany other cir-
cumstances point undisguisedly to a heathen consecration of
water : it was not to be drawn at midnight, but in the morn-
ing before minrise, down stream and silently (Superst. 89. 775),
usually on Easter Sunday (775-6) to which the above explana-
tions do not so well apply ; this water does not spoil, it restores
youth, heals eruptions, and makes the young cattle strong.*
Magic water, serving for unchristian divination, is to be collected
before sunrise on a Sunday in one glass from three flowing springs;
and a taper is lighted before the glass, as before a divine being
(Superst. H. c. 55-57).^ Here I bring in once again the Hessian

X The first manifestation of Christ was his birth, the second his baptism
(Candlemas), the third the marriage in Cana : * Tertia apparitio fait postea similiter
eodem die anno revolnto, cum esset 30 annorom et 18 diernm, sive qnando
manifestavit se esse Demn per mutatiotifm aquae in vinum, quod fnit primnm
miraculum apertum, quod Dominus fecit in Cana Galilaeae, Tel simpUciter primam
quod fecit. Et haeo apparitio dicitnr bethphania a fii/jrw^ qnod est domns, et ^dbw,
quod est apparitio, quia ista apparitio facta fuit in domo in nuptiis. De his tribua
apparitionibus fit solemnitas in hac die/ Durantis Bation. div. offio. 6, 16. The
church consolidated the three mamfestations into one festival.

^ Tom. 2 (ed. Montfauc, Paris 1718), p. 869 : 6id rot rovro xat fjxvwvKritf Kara
T^y iofrr^v ra&niv Avavres vSpcvadficpoi oficade tA pdfiara iTorldevTat, Kcd ets inavr^
6\6k\t^PW <f>v\drrown. Are Hf iHifupop &yiaa$4vTia¥ rwr (fSdrwy' teal t6 arifuio^ t^ccu
ivapy^St oi diatpSeipofJkivTis rijs rOnr ifSdrtay iK€iy<av <f>ijc€ias rf fii^K€t toO xP^^'^i ^^
els ivtavrby 6\6k\7ipov Kcd ivta Kcd rpla irji rod <r^fUpov dyT\'ri$4rTos djcepaiw teal
peapov fUiKJtrros, Kcd furd roaovrw XP^^^ ''o* J dprn ruw wriyQif i^/nraffSeurtw ÜBarv
äfuXKbffiipov.

* And also heilattin f Frauenlob MS. 2, 218^ on the * garden that bears
heilvAn: Altd. bL 2, 294.

* Jul. Schmidt's Beichenf. p. 121. At Cassel I have heard bathing in the
' drusel * water commended as wholesome, but you must draw with the current, not
against. Probably the right time for it is Walborgis or Midsummer.

* The rite, like others cited by Hartlieb (who wrote in 1455), may be of dasdo
origin. In yaarpofuurreia^ i.e. divining by a bellied jar (ydarprf) filled witii water,
there also occurs the torch and the innocent boy (Hartl/s « ain rain kind '). Potter's
Antiq., 1, 764. Fabricii Bibliogr. antiq., ed. 8, p. 600.


WATER. HEILAWAC. 587

custom mentioned at p. 58 : on Easter Monday youths and
maidens walk to the Hollow Bock in the mountains^ draw water
from the cool spring in jugs to carry hoine, and throw flowers in
as an offering. Apparently this water- worship was Celtic like-
wise; the water of the rock-spring Karnant makes a broken
sword whols again, but

da mnost des nrspringes hän

underm velse^ e in beschin der tac (ere day beshine it).

Parz. 254^ 6. Tit. 5456. 5732.^ Curious customs shew us in
what manner young girls in the Pyrenees country tell their own
fortunes in spring water on May-day morning.

We need not suppose that the peculiar properties of medicinal
springs are the point here ; no^ it is the normal efficacy of the
refreshing, strengthening, re-animating element.» Many places
in Germany are called Heilbrunn, Heilborn, Heiligenbrunn, from
the renewing effect of their springs, or the wonderful cures that
have taken place at them. Heilbronn on the Neckar is called
Heilacprunno in the oldest documents.' But certain springs and
wells may have stood in especial repute. Of high renown are
the ON. Mimisbrunnr and Urffarhrunnr (p. 407), which Sn. 17
calls ' brunnr miöc heilagr/ A Danish folksong (1, 318) tells of a
Maribokilde^ by whose clear waters a body hewn in pieces is put to»
gether again. Swedish lays celebrate Ingemos Icdlla (Vis. 1, 244-5).
We remember that old Frisian fount of Forseti, 'whence none
drew water save in silence/ pp. 229, 230 (see Suppl.). Sacrifices
were offered at such springs. Of the salutary effect of hot and
chalybeate springs people must have been aware from immemorial
time^ witness the Aquae Mattiacae in the Boman time and those


> The hardening and repairing of swords in water (sver^ hefSa, SflBm. 136^)
VBs certainly believed in by the Germans too. The Yilkinasaga, cap. 40 p. 100,
says: when dwarf Alberioh had fashioned Nailring, he searched nine kingdoms
before he found the water in which the sword conld be tempered ; at last he arrived
at the water Treya^ and there it was tempered. Onr Eckenlied, str. 81, agrees with
this, bat is still more precise : * dannoch was ez niht vollebrlht, do fnorten'z zwei
▼fldin getwerc wol durch nian künecrtche, biz daz si k&men zno der Dr&l^ din dfi
ze Troige rinnet, daz swert daz was so liehtgem&l: si harten* z in der Dr&U^ des
wait ez also fin ' (dwarfs bring it to the Dräl, that runs by Troige, etc.). Who can
doubt any longer of real German lays forming the groundwork of the Yilk. saga ?

' A man bitten l>y an adder will not die, if he can leap over the nearest water
before the adder does so. Lenz's Sohlangenkunde, p. 208.

> Böhmer*s Reg. Karolor. nr. 740 (an. 841) ; Eoc. Fr. orient. 2, 893 ; • der
Necker vliuzet für Heilicbrunnen (flows past Holy- well),' MS. 2, 68^.


588 ELEMENTS.

«

'aquae calidae' near Lnxeuil (p. 83). Wlien the Wetteran
people beji^n a new jag of chalybeate^ they always spill the first
drop or two on the ground^ they say ' to clear the dast away/
for the jugs stand open, but it may have been once a libation to
the fountain-sprite.^ Not only medicinal^ but salt springs were
esteemed holy : ancient accounts of these wül be presented in a
later chapter. The Mid. Ages cherished the notion of a Jung-
brunnen:^ whoever bathes in it is both cured of diseases and
guarded from them ; in it Sauchels shed her shaggy skin, and
became the beauteous Sigeminne (p. 488-4) ; such a spring has
sometimes the power even to change the bather^s sex' (see
Suppl.).»

In a spring near Nogent men and women bathed on St.
John's eve (Superst. L. 83); Holberg's comedy of Kilde-reisen
is founded on the Copenhagen people's practice of pilgriming to
a neighbouring spring on 8. Hans aften, to heal and invigorate
themselves in its waters. On Midsummer eve the people of
Östergötland journeyed according to ancient custom to Lagman's
bergekälla near Skeninge, and drank of the well (Broocman I,
187. 2y 676). In many parts of Germany some clear fountain is

1 Where the Heathens aBcribed the miracxiloTU power of a epring to their wood
or water sprites, the Christians afterwards transferred it to their saints. I take an
instance from the Miracula S. Agili, written in the 12th century: MarreUons cores
were wrought at the brook of St. Agilut. Sed interim qnomndam Tesaniae occnr-
rere übet, qui in digito Dei neqnaqnam haeo fieri aestimantes, daemoniacae, pro
nefas, attribnnnt potestati. Cumqne miracula diffiteri neqneunt, id solnm in
causam calnmniae adsmnunt, qnod in agresti finnt locOf nbi nnllus Dei cultus, ubi
niiUae sanotomm memoriae. pmdentiam I yerentnr homines snblimi ingenio,
ne ad Indibrinm mortalium a faunu, nymphis vel tatyrUt ceterisve ruris numinibtu,
res geratnr ejnsmodi. Nam ut de fabuhs taceam, apnd qnos historiographomm
veterom sen modemomm legitnr daemones Tisom coecis, mentem amentibns,
manns debilibns, gressnm olaudicantibns restanrasse? (Acta Bened. sec. 2, p. 333.)
The Swedish people ascribe the healing power of some springs to white snakes. In
1809 there flocked thousands from H^land and Yestergötland to the wonder-work-
ing Helsjö, a small lake near Bampegärde ; they said, some children tending cattle
on the shore had often daring the year seen a beautiful maiden sit on the bank»
holding a snake in her hand and shewing it to them. It is only every hundredth
year that this water-maiden with the snake appears (Bexell's Halland 2, 320 ; 3,
303). Multitudes from Norway and Halland yisited a spring named S. Olafskiäüa^
dropt money-offerings in, and carried on other superstition (Ödman^s Bahuslan p.
169). In christian times healing fountains are believed to spring up near the
tombs of holy men, Bex. Hall. 3, 69 ; or from under a saint's body, Flodoard. re-
mens. 2, 3. I think it is with the hot baths at Aix that we must connect the water-
maiden with whose myth Charles the Great is mixed up, p. 435.

* Synonymously the OHG. quecprunru), MHG. quecprunne^ Parz. 613, 9.
Fragm. 18, 267.

> Conf. the passages quoted in Mns. für altd. lit. 1, 260-3 from MonteviQa,
from the Titurel and from H. Sachs.


WATER. HEILAWAC. 589

visited at Whitsuntide, and the water drunk in jugs of a peculiar
shape. Still more important is Petrarch's description of the
annual bathing of the women of Cologne in the Bhine : it de-
serves to be quoted in full/ because it plainly proves that the
cult prevailed not merely at here and there a spring, but in
Germany's greatest river. From the Italian's unacquaintance
with the rite, one might infer that it was foreign to the country
whence all church ceremonies proceeded, and therefore altogether
michristian and heathenish. Bat Petrarch may not have had
a minute knowledge of all the customs of his country ; after his
time at all events we find even there a lastration on St. John's
day [described as an ancient custom then dying out] . Benedict
de Falco's Descrizione de luoghi antiqui di Napoli (Nap. 1580)
has the statement: ^in una parte populosa dell a citta giace la
chiesa consegrata a S. Giovan battista, chiamata S. Giovan a
mare. Era una antica usanza, hoggi non al tutto lasciata, che
la vigilia di 8. Oiovane, verso la sera e '1 secure del di, tutti
huomini e donne andare al mare, e nudi lavarsi; persuasi pur-
garsi de lore peccati, alia focchia degli antichi, che peccando
andavano al Tevere lavarsi.' And long before Petrarch, in
Augustine's time, the rite was practised in Libya, and is de-

1 Franc. Petrarehae De rebtu familiar. epiBtolae, lib. i. ep. 4: Aqnis digressam,
eed prins, nnde ortnm oppidi nomen patant, aquis bajano more tepentibus ablntum,
exoepit Agrippina Golonia, quae ad sinistrom Rheni latns sita est, locas et sitn et
flnmine dams et popolo. Mirmn in terra barbarica quanta oirilitas, qaae orbis
Gpeeies, quae Tirorum graTitas, quae mnnditiae matronanun. Forte Johannit
baptistae vigilia erat dum iliac appUcoi, et jam ad oocidentem sol vergebat : con-
festim amicomm monita (nam et ibi amioos prins mihi fama pepererat qnam
meritnm) ab hospitio traducor ad flnvium insigne spectaculum visurus. Nee
fallebar; omnii enim ripa praeclaro et ingenti rruilierum tigmine tegebatur. Ob-
•tapni, dii boni, quae forma, quae facies, quia habitus 1 amare potuisset quisquis
eo non praeoccupatum animum attulisset. In loco pauUum altiore constiteram,
nnde in ea quae gerebantur intenderem. Incredibilis sine offensione ooncursus
erat, Tioiseimque alacree, pars ?terbit odoriferis incincttiej redtictisque post cubitttm
manieitt Candidas in gurgite manu» ac brachia Uwabant, nescio quid blandum pere-
grino murmure eoÜoquenU». [A few lines omitted.] Unum igitur ex eo [amicorum]
numero admirans et ignarus rerum percunctatus vergiliano illo versiculo : ' Quid
▼nit coneursas ad amnem, quidve petunt animae ? * responsum accepi : pervetustum
geniis rittim este^ Tulgo persuasum, praesertim femineo, omnem totiu$ anni ealamita-
tem imminenUm fluviali iUiut diei abbitione purgari, et deinoeps laetiora snccedere;
itaqne UutraXionem esse arniuam^ inexhaustoque semper studio oultam colendamque.
Ad haee ego subridens : * nimium felioes ' inquam * Rheni aocolae, quoniam Hie
miserias pnrgat, nostras quidem neo PoSau unquam purgare y^uit nee Tiberi». Vos
Teetra mala Britannia Bheno Tectore transmittitis ; nos nostra Ubenter Afris atque
lUynis mitteremna, sed nobis (ut intelligi datur) pigriora sunt flumina.' Gommoto
risot sero tandem inde discessimus. [A few lines omitted.] The letter is of 1880.
and addressed to Card. Colonna. We find it quoted so early as by Eaisersberg
(Omeisa 35«}.


590 ELEMENTS. •

nonnced by that Father as a relic of paganism : ^ natali Johannis,
de solemnitate superstitiosa pagana^ Ghristiani ad mare veiiiehant,
et se baptizabant ' (Opp^ Paris 1683^ torn. 5^ p. 903); and again:
* ne nllos in festivitate S. Johannis in fontihus aut paludibus ant
in fluminibus, noctnmis aut matntinis horis se lavare praesnmat,
quia haec infelix consuetndo adhuc de Paganomm observatione
remansit' (Append, to torn. 5 p. 462). Generally sanctioned by
the church it certainly was not^ yet it might be allowed here and
there^ as a not unapt reminder of the Baptizer in the Jordan,
and now interpreted of him, though once it had been heathen.
It might easily come into extensive favour, and that not as a
christian feast alone : to our heathen forefathers St. John's day
would mean the festive middle of the year, when the sun turns,
and there might be many customs connected with it. I confess,
if Petrarch had witnessed the bathing in the river at some small
town, I would the sooner take it for a native rite of the ancient
Germani ; at Cologne, the holy city so renowned for its relics, I
rather suspect it to be a custom first introduced by christian
tradition (see Suppl.).^

There are lakes and springs whose waters periodically rise and
fall : from either phenomenon mischief is prognosticated, a death,
war, approaching dearth. When the reigning prince is about to
die, the river is supposed to stop in its course, as if to indicate its
grief (Deut. sag. no. 110) ; if the well runs dry, the head of the
family will die soon after (no. 103). A spring that either runs
over or dries up, foreboding dearth, is called himgerquelle, hunger^
hrunnen (Staid. 2, 63). Wössingen near Durlach has a hunger-
brunnen, which is said to flow abundantly when the year is going
to be unfruitful, and then also the fish it produces are small.^

1 In Poland and Silesia, and perhaps in a park of Russia, giris who have OTer*
slept matin-time on Easter Monday are toused anth water by the lads, and flogged
'wiüi birch twigs ; they are often palled oat of bed at night, and dragged to a river
or cistern^ or a trough filled with water, and are dadced. The Silesians call this
sehmagostem (even Estor^s Oberhess, idiot, has $chmakuttem—^ying the rod at
Easter); perh. from Pol. smi6. Boh. smyti, so that ^igast woi^d be rinsing
[SuppL. says, * better from smaga6 to flog 'J . The Poles say both smid and dyngo-
wa6, dyngns, of the splashing each other with water (conf. Hannsch, p. 197), and
the time of year seems to be St. John's day as well as Easter. In the Bnsaian gov.
of Archangel, the people bathe in the river on Jane 28, and sprinkle kap^Unitsa
(rannnoulas acris), Earamzin 1, 78-4 [the same is also a somame of St. Agripplna,
on whose day, June 24, river-bathing (kupälnia) oommenoes]. Everywhere a
beli3f in the sacredness of the Easter-bath and St. John's>bath.

^ Mone's Anz. 8, 221. 840, who gives a forced and misleading explanation of the


HUNGER-SPRING. WATER-GAUGING. 591

Sach a hunger-spring there was by Halle on the Saale ; when
the peasants came up to town, they looked at it, and if it ran
over, they said : ' this year, things '11 be dear.' The like is told
of fountains near Rosia in the Siennese, and near Chateandun
in the Orleanese. As Hunger was personified, it was easy to
make him meddle with springs. A similar Nombom was noticed,
p. 405. I insert Dietmar of Merseburg's report (1, 3) of lake
Glomazi in the Slav parts of the Elbe valley : ' Glomazi ^ est fons
non plus ab Albi quam duo milliaria positus, qui unam de se
paludem generans, mira, ut incolae pro vero asserunt oculisque
approbatum est a multis, saepe operatur. Gum bona pax indigenis
profutura suumque haec terra non mentitur fructum, tritico et
avena ac glandine refertus, laetos vicinorum ad se crebro con-
fluentium efficit animos. Qaando autem saeva belli tempestas
ingruerit, smiguine et cinere certum futuri exitus indicium prae-
monstrat. Huno omnis incola plus quam ecclesias, spe quamvis
dubia, veneratur et timet.* ^ But apart from particular fountains,
by a mere gauging of water a season of dearth or plenty, an
increase or decrease of wealth may be divined, according as the
water poured into a vessel rises or falls (Superst. F, 43 ; and no.
958 in Praetor's Saturnalien p. 407). This looks to me like a
custom of high antiquity. Saxo Gram. p. 820 says, the image of
the god Svantovit in Bügen held in its right hand a horn : ' quod
sacerdos sacrorum ejus peritus annuatim mero perfundere con-
saeverat, ex ipso liquoris habitu sequentis anni copious prospecturus,
. . . Postero die, populo prae foribns excubante, detractum
simulacro poculum curiosius speculatus, si quid ex inditi liquoris
mensura substractum fuisset, ad sequentis anni inopiam pertinere
putabat. Si nihil ex consuetae foecunditatis habitu diminutum
vidisset, Ventura agroiTLm ubertatis tempera praedicabat.' The
wine was emptied out, and water poured into the horn (see Soppl.) .


word. Another name is tehändlebach (beck that brings shame, oonfasion) : snch a
one was pointed out to me on the plain near Gassel, and Simplioiss. 6, 14 mentions
the »chändlihach by Obemeheim, which only runs when misfortmie befalls the land.
rSr PPL. adds the MHG. ichantbach, Weisth. 1, 760, and * der tehanden bechelin,*
Frauenlob p. 186]. So, when the Lutterbom by Herbershansen (Helperhusen)
near Oöttingen runs, it is a dear season ; but when the spider builds in Helperhouse
mill, and the swallow in the millwheel, the times are good.

* Al. ' Glomazi, Zlumici ' ; now the Lommatsch district.

' Capital, an. 794 (Pertz 8, 74) : * experimento didicimns, in anno quo ilia
Talida famis irrepsit, ehullire vacaas annonas (empty ears), adaemonibue deyoratas.'


692 ELEMENTS.

Whirlpools and waterfalls were doubtless held in special vene-
ration j they were thought to be put in motion by a superior
beings a river-sprite. The Danube whirlpool and others still
have separate legends of their own. Plutarch (in his Csesar,
cap. 19) and Clement of Alex. (Stromat. 1^ 805) assure us that
the German prophetesses watched the eddies of rivers, and by
their whirl and noise explored the future. The Norse name for
such a vortex is fors, Dan./o«, and the Isl. sog. 1, 226 expressly
say, *blöta"8i forsin (worshipped the f.).' The legend of the
river-sprite fossegrim was touched upon^ p. 493 ; and in such a
fors dwelt the dwarf Andvari (Ssom. 180. Fornald. sog. 1^ 152).
But animal sacrifices seem to have been specially due to the
whirlpool (SZi/09), as the black lamb (or goat) to the fossegrim;
and the pckssages quoted from Agathias on pp. 47, 100, about the
Alamanns offering horses to the rivers and ravines, are to the
same purpose. The lUad 21, 131 says of the Skamander :

^ B^ BffOä TToXeZ? l€p€V€T€ Tavpov^t

^a)0V9 8' iv Bivrjat xaOiere fidmrxa^ ittttov^*

(Lo, to the river this long time many a bull have ye hallowed,
Many a whole-hoofed horse have ye dropped alive in his eddies) ;
and Fausan. viii. 7, 2 : to Be apyaiov KaOUaav i^ rtfv Aeivt^v
(a water in Argolis, conn, with BHvosi) t^J IIoaetB&vt ?7nrov9 oi
Apyelov KeKoafiivov^ 'x^aXivoi^. Horace, Od. 3, 13: O fons
Bandusiae, non sine floribus eras donaberis haedo (see Suppl.).

It is pretty well known, that even before the introduction of
Christianity or christian baptism, the heathen Norsemen had a
hallowing of new-born infants by means of water ; they called
this vatni ausa, sprinkling with water. Very likely the same
ceremony was practised by all other Teutons, and they may have
ascribed a peculiar virtue to the water used in it, as Christians do
to baptismal water (Superst. Swed. 116). After a christening,
the Esthonians will bribe the clerk to let them have the water,
and then spUish it up against the walls, to secure honours and
dignities for the child (Superst. M, 47).

It was a practice widely prevalent to turn to strange supersti-
tious uses the water of the millwheel caught as it glanced off the
paddles. Old Hartlieb mentions it (Superst. H, c. 60), and vulgar
opinion approves it still (Sap. I, 471. 766). The Servians call


MILL-WHEEL WATBB. BAIN-MAEING. 693

such water omaya, rebound, from omannti^ omakhonti, to rebound.
Vuk, under the word, observes that women go early on St.
George's day (Apr. 28), to catch it, especially off a small brook-
mill (kashitchara), and bathe in it. Some carry it home the
evening before, and sprinkle it with all manner of broken greens :
they think all evil and harm will then glwnce off their bodies like
tlie water off the millwheel (Vuk sub v. Jurjev dan). Similar,
though exactly the reverse, is the warning not to flirt the water
off your hands after washing in the morning, else you flirt away
your luck for the day (Sup. I, 21).

Not only brooks and rivers (p. 585), but rain^ also was in the
childlike faith of antiquity supposed to be let fall out of bowls by
gods of the sky; and riding witches are still believed to carry
pitchers, out of which they pour storm and hau upon the plains,
instead of the rain or dew that trickled down before. ^

When the heavens were shut, and the fields languished in
droDght, the granting of rain depended in the first instance on a
deity, on Donar, or Mary and Elias, who were supplicated accord-
ingly (pp. 173-6).* But in addition to that, a special charm
was resorted to, which infallibly procured ' rainwater,' and in a
measure compelled the gods to grant it. A little girl, completely
undressed and led outside the town, had to dig up henbane (bilsen-
kraut, 0H6. pilisa, hyoscyamus) with the little finger of her
right hand, and tie it to the little toe of her right foot ; she was
then solemnly conducted by the other maidens to the nearest
river, and splashed with water. This ceremony, reported by
Bnrchard of Worms (Sup. 0, 201^*) and therefore perhaps still in
use on the Ehine or in Hesse in the 11th cent., comes to us with
the more weight, as, with characteristic differences which put all
direct borrowing out of the question, it is still in force among
Servians and Mod. Greeks. Vuk, under the word 'dodole,*
describes the Servian custom. A girl, called the dodola, is stript
naked, but so wrapt up in grass, herbs and flx>wers, that nothing of

* The PeravianB believe in a rain-goddess, who Bits in the clouds with a pitcher
of water, ready to poor it out at the right time ; if she delays, her brother with
thnnder and Ughtmng smites the pitcher in pieces. Garcilaso de la Vega's Histt.
Incarnm pemanorum 11, 27 ; oonf. Talvj's Characteiistik der Volkslieder, p. 126.

* I will here add, from Anton's GoU. on the Slavs, the substance of a Walla-
ehian song, which the children sing when the com is endangered by drought :
* Papaluga (father Luga), climb into heaven, open its doors, and send down rain
from iü>0Te, that well the rye may grow I '


594 ELEMENTS.

her person is to be seen, not even the face.^ Escorted by other
maidens^ dodola passes from house to house^ before each house
they form a ring^ she standing in the middle and dancing alone.
The goodwife comes out and empties a buchet of water over the
girl, who keeps dancing and whirling all the while ; her com-
panions sing songs, repeating after every line the burden ' oy
dodo, oy dodo le I* The second of these rain-hymns (piesme
dodolske) in Vuk's Coll. nos. 86-88 (184-8 of ed. 2) runs
thus:

To God doth our doda call, oy dodo oy dodo le !

That dewy rain may fall, oy dodo oy dodo le !

And drench the diggers all, oy dodo oy dodo le !

The workers great and small, oy dodo oy dodo le !

Even those in house and stall, oy dodo oy dodo le !

And they are sure that rain will come at once. In Greece, when
it has not rained for a fortnight or three weeks, the inhabitants
of villages and small towns do as follows. The children choose
one of themselves who is from eight to ten years old, usually a
poor orphan, whom they strip naked and deck from head to foot
with field herbs and fixywers : this child is called irvpirqpovva. The
others lead her round the village, singing a hymn, and every
housewife has to throw a pailful of water aver the pyrperuna's
heady and hand the children a para {{ of a farthing). The Mod.
Greek hymn is in Theod. Kind's rpay&Bca rfj^ via^ ^EXKdBo^,
Leipz. 1833, p. 13. Passow, nos. 311-3, p. 627. Neither Greek
nor Slavic will explain why the rain-girl should be called dodola
(caressingly doda) and irvpirqpovva* * Burchard very likely could
have given us a German designation equally inscrutable. But the
meaning of the performance is clear : as the water from the
bucket on the dodola, so is rain out of heaven to stream down on
the earth ; it is the inystic and genuinely symbolic association of
means with end. Just so the rebound off the mill wheel was to
send evil flying, and the lustration in the stream to wash away all

^ Is this covering merely to protect the maiden's modesty, or has it some
fmiher reason ? We shall see that personations of spring and summer were in like
manner enveloped in foliage.

^ Kind, pp. 86-7, gives some variant forms, but all the explanations appear to
me farfetched. Both the Greek and the Servian names have the reduplication so
characteristic of folk-words. [Slav, dozhd is rain, and zhd represents either gd or
dd ; if this be the root, dodo-la may be a dimin.]


RAIN-MAKING. DUCKING. 595

fatnre illnesses. Celtic tradition, without bringing in girl or
child, makes the pouring out of water in seasons of great drought
evoke the wished-for rain. The huntsmen go to the fountain of
Barenton in the forest of Breziliande, scoop up the water in their
horns, and spill it on the stones ; immediately the rain-clouds rise
and refresh the land. ^ The custom, with an addition of church
ceremonial, is kept up to this day. Led by the clergy, amid
chanting and pealing of bells, with five great banners borne in
front, the parish walks in procession to the spring, and the head
of the commune dips his foot crosswise in the fountain of Bar-
enton ; they are then sure of its raining before the procession
arrives home again.' The mayor's foot alone is wetted instead of
the child, or a little water only is poured out as a beginning of
that which is to fall in masses from the sky. The scanty offering
brings the great bounty to our door. In Spain, when hot weather
lasts long, an image of the Virgin arrayed in mourning (imagen
cubierta de luto) is solemnly escorted through the villages, to
obtain the blessing of rain,* as in the Liege procession (pp. 174- 5),
with which again that described by Petronius agrees (p. 175) ;
only here the symbolic libation is left out. But of those herbs
that were tied round the child, some most likely were of magic
power j such a use of henbane is otherwise unknown to me.
Lastly, the Bavarian waterbi/rd seems identical with dodola and
pyrperuna. The man who is the last to drive out on Whitmonday *
is led by the other workmen into the nearest wood, and tied
round and round with leaves and twigs or rushes; then they ride in
triumph through the village, and* everybody that has young legs
follows the procession to the pond or brook, where the waterbird
is solemnly tumbled off his horse into the water (Schm. 1, 320).
In Austria too the village lads elect a Whitsun king, dress him
up in green houghs, blacken his face and pitch him into the brook
(Denis, Lesefr. 1, 130). In these two cases the 'votis vocare

1 Boman de Bon, v. 11514 (the passage extracted in the notes to Iwein, pp.
262.3).

' Bevne de Paris, tome 41, pp. 47-58. Villemar adds, that children throw
pins into the fountain, while they call out : * ris done, fontaine de Berendon, et ie
te donnerai une 6pingle 1 * and the fay of the fountain is supposed to be made
friendly by the gift. Gonf. * libamina lacni exhibere', p. 596.

s Don Qnixote 1, 52 (Ideler 2, 435). And in other places it was the custom 1».
time of drought, to carry the bodies of saints about, Flodoard. rem. 4, 41.

* As the girl who oversleeps herself on Easter morning is ducked (p. 590).


S96 ELEICENTS.

imbrem ' lias dropt oat altogether^ and been replaced by a mere
Whitsun drollery at the cost of the laziest man ; ^ but I have
little donbt that the same purpose lies at the bottom of the
custom (see SappL).

Of goddesses^ no doubt the bath-loving Nerthiia and Holda
are the most nearly connected with water- worship (Holda lives in
wells^ pp. 268^ 487) ; and to them must be added swan-maidens,
merminnes (p. 433), water-holdes, spring-holdes (p. 268), water-
mahmes and nixies. To all of them particular rivers, brooks,
pools and springs can be consecrated and assigned as their
abode; Oegir (p. 237) and Ban (pp. 311, 497) ruled in the sea,
and the waves are called their daughters : all this gives a new
stamp to the veneration of the element. Of this very natural,
but not essential, combination of simple rude water-worship with
a faith in higher beings, I will give a few more specimens.

As those who cross a river by ferry or by bridge have to dread
the power of the daemon that dwells in it (p. 497), so vulgar
opinion in Sweden (Sup. K, 40) holds it advisable, in crossing
any water in the dark, to spit three times, as a safeguard against
evil influences.' Precautions are also taken in drawing water from
a well : before drawing any, the Greeks at Mykono salute three
times in honour of Teloni (fountain-sprite).' For a thief to throw
in the water a little of what he has stolen (Sup. I, 836), means
sacrificing to the water-sprite. The Vita S. Sulpicii Bitnrig.
(died 644) relates (Acta Bened. sec. 2, p. 172): 'gurges quidam
erat in Yirisionensium situs agello (Yierzon, in Biturigibus)
aquarum mole copiosas, utpote daemonibus consecratiis ; et si
aliquis cansa qualibet ingrederetur eundem, repente ßinäms
daemoniacis circumplexus amittebat crudeliter vitam.' A more
decisive testimony to the worship of water itself is what Gregory
of Tours tells of a lake on Mt. Helanus (De gloria confess.,
cap. 2) : ' Mons erat in Gabalitano territorio (Gevaudan) cogno-
mento Helanus, lacum habens magnum. Ad quern certo tem-
pore multitude rusticorum, qiuufi libamina lacui iUi exhibens,

' 8np. I, 842 : the lazy maid, on carrying home her first grass, is docked or
splashed, to prevent her going to sleep over grass-catting.

' The spirits cannot abide tpittttig {f, 614).

* Villoison in Maltebnm, Annales de voy. 2, 180« Artemidoras's Oneirocrit.
2. 27 (Beiff 1, 189) admits weU-nymphs : rtf/A^ re ydp ttffiM h rf ippiaru Faoriel :
t6 ffrocxei^ rod wcra^ioO*


HOLY WATEBS. LAKES. 697

linteamina projiciebat ao pannos qui ad üsnm vestimenti virilis
praebentnr: nonnulli lanae vellera, plarimi etiam formas casei^
ac cerae vel panis^ diyersasque species unnsquisqae juxta yires
suas, quae dinnmerare perlongam puto. Yeniebant autem cum
plaustria potuxn cibümque deferentes^ madanies animalia et per
triduum epulantes. Quarta autem die cum discedere deberent,
anticipabat eos tempestas cam tonitruo et coruscatioue valida ; et
in tautum imber ingens cum lapidum violentia descendebat^ ut
vix se quisquam eorum putaret eyadere. Sic fiebat per eingulos
annos, et involvebatur insipiens populus in errore/— No god or
spirit shews his face here^ the yearly Sacrifice is offered to the
lake itself^ and the feast winds up with the coming tempest,
Geryase of Tilbury (in Leibnitz 1^ 982) tells of a lake on Mt.
Cayagum in Catalonia: 'in cujus summitate locus est aquam
continens subnigram et in fundo imperscrutabilem. lUic mansio
fertur esse daetnonum ad modum palatii dilatata et janua clausa ;
facies tarnen ipsins mansionis sicut ipsoram daemonum yul-
garibns est incognita ac inyisibilis. In lacum si quis aliqaam
lapideam aut aliam solidam projecerit materiam^ statim tcmquam
offtmns dctemonihtis tempestas erumpit,'^ Then comes the story
of a girl who is carried off by the watersprites^ and kept in the
lake seyen years.

Lakes cannot endure to haye their depth gauged. On the
Mummelsee, when the sounders had let down all the cord out of
nine nets with a plummet without finding a bottom^ suddenly the
raft they were on began to sink^ and they had to seek safety in a
rapid flight to land (Simplic. 5^ 10). A man went in a boat to
the middle of the Titisee, and payed out no end of line after the
plummet^ when there came out of the wayes a terrible cry:
' Measure me^ and I'll eat you up ! ' In a great fright the man
desisted from his enterprise^ and since then no one has dared

> Fomuiges, whence fromages.

t ThiB raising of a storm by throwing iUmei into a luke or wellhead is a Ten-
tonio, a Celtic and a Finnish superstition, as the examples quoted shew. The
vaterapriie avenges the desecration of his holy stream. Under this head come the
Btories of the Mummelsee (Deut sag. no. 59. Simplic. 5, 9), of the Pilatussee
(Lothar's Yolkssag. 232. Dobenek 2, 118. Gutslafl p. 288. Mone*s Anz. 4, 423),
of L. Gamarina in Bicily (Camarinam movere), and above all, of Berenton weU in
Breziliande forest, Iwein 553-672, where however it is the well-water poured on the
well-rock that stirs up the storm : conf . supra, p. 594, and the place in Pontus men-
tioned by Beoeke, p. 269. The lapis manalis tiso oonjuied up rain, 0. Müller's £tr.
2,97.


598 ELEMENTS.

to sound the depth of the lake (Moneys Anz. 8, 536). There is
a similar storj in Thiele 3^ 73^ about Huntsöe^ that some people
tried to fathom its depth with a ploughshare tied to the line,
and from below came the sound of a spirit- voice : ' i maale vore
vägge, vi skal maale jeres lagge ! ' Full of terror they hauled
up the line, but instead of the share found an old horse's skull
fastened to it.^

It is the custom in Esthonia for a newly married wife to drop a
present into the well of the house ; it is a nationality that seems
particularly given to worshipping water. There is a detailed
account of the holy WöMicmda, a rivulet of Livonia. It rises
near Ilmegerve, a village of Odenpä district in Esthonia, and
after its junction with the Medda, falls into L. Peipus. The
source is in a sacred grove, within whose bounds no one dares to
cut a tree or break a twig : whoever does it is sure to die that
year. Both brook and fountain are kept clean, and are put to
rights once a year; if anything is thrown into the spring or
the little lake through which it flows, the weather turns to storm
(see Suppl.).

Now in 1641 Hans Ohm of Sommerpahl, a large landowner
who had come into the country in the wake of the Swedes, built
a mill on the brook, and when bad harvests followed for several
years, the Ehsts laid it all to the desecration of the holy stream,
who allowed no obstructions in his path ; they fell upon the mill,
burnt it down, and destroyed the piles in the water. Ohm went
to law, and obtained a verdict against the peasants ; but to
rid himself of new and grievous persecutions, he induced pastor
Gutslaff, another German, to write a treatise^ specially com-
bating this superstition. Doubtless we learn from it only the
odious features of the heathenish cult. To the question, how
good or bad weather could depend on springs, brooks and lakes,
the Ehsts replied : ' it is our ancient faith, the men of old have
so taught us (p. 25, 258); mills have been burnt down on this

* The people about L. Baikal believe it has no bottom. A priest, who could
dive to any depth, tried it, but was so frightened by the 16s (dragons, sea-monsters),
that, if I remember rightly, he died raving mad.— Tbans.

' A short account of the holy brook (falsely so called) Wöhhanda in Liefland,

whereby the ungodly burning of Sommerpahl miU came to pass. Given from

Christian zeal against unchristian and heathenish superstition, by Joh. GuUlaff

Pomer. pastor at Urbs in Liefland. Dorpt 1644 (8vo, 407 pp. without the DedicJ

and Pref.). An extract in Eellgren (Suomi 9, 72-92).


HOLT LAKES AND STREAMS. 699

brook before now (p. 278), he will stand no crowding/ The Esth.
Dame is ' pöha yögge/ the Lettic ' shv^ti ubbe/ i.e. holy brook.
By means of it they conld regalate the weather, and when they
wanted rain, they had only to throw something in (p. 25). Once,
when three oxen were drowned in the lake, there followed snow
and frost (p. 26). At times there came np out of the brook a carl
wiih blue and yellow stockings : evidently the spirit of the brook.
Another Esthonian story is about L. Mm changing his bed.
On his banks lived wild and wicked men, who never mowed the
meadows that he watered, nor sowed the fields he fertilized, but
robbed and murdered, so that his bright wave was befouled with
the blood of the slain. And the lake mourned ; and one evening
he called his fish together, and mounted with them into the
air. The brigands hearing a din cried : ^ the Eim has left his
bed, let us collect his fish and hidden treasure.*^ But the fish
were gone, and nothing was found at the bottom but snakes,
toads and salamanders, which came creeping out and lodged with
the ruffian brood. But the Eim rose higher and higher, and
swept like a white cloud through the air ; said the hunters in the
woods : 'what is this murky weather passing over us ? ' and the
herdsmen : 'what white swan is fiying in the sky f ' All night
he hung among the stars, at mom the reapers spied him, how
that he was sinking, and the white swan became as a white ship,
and the ship as a dark drifting cloud. And out of the waters
came a voice: 'get thee hence with thy harvest, I come to dwell
with thee.* Then they bade him welcome, if he would bedew their
fields and meadows, and he sank down and stretched himself in
his new conch. They set his bed in order, built dikes, and planted
young trees around to cool his face. Their fields he made fertile,
their meadows green ; and they danced around him, so that old
men grew young for joy.*

1 Fr. Thiersch in Taschenbaoh für liebe and frenndiBohaft 1809, p. 179. Mast
not Eim be the same as Enibaeh (mother-beck, fr. emma mother, conf . dim mother-
in-law) near Dorpat, whose origin is reported as follows ? When God had created
heaven and earth, he wished to bestow on the beasts a king, to keep them in
order, and commanded them to dig for his reception a deep broad beck, on
whose banks he might walk ; the earth dng ont of it was to make a hill for the
king to live on. All the beasts set to work, the haze measnred the land, the fox's
bmsh trailing after him marked the coarse of the stream ; when they had finished
hollowing oat the bed, €k>d poared water into it oat of his golden bowl (Yerhandl.
der ecthn. geselischaft, Dorpat 18i0. 1, 40-42). The two stories differ as to the
manner of preparing the new bed.

VOL. II. M


600 ELEMENTS.

The Greeks and Bomans personified their rivers into male
beings ; a bearded old man pours the flowing spring out of his
nm (pp. 585. 593). Homer finely pictures the elemental strife
between water and fire in the battle of the Skamiander with
HephsBstus : the river is a god^ and is called ava^, Od. 5^ 445.
451. The Indian Ganges too is an august deity. Smaller
streams and fountains had nymphs set over them.' In oar
language^ most of the rivers' names are feminine (Gramm. 3^
384-6), there mast therefore have been female watersprites.
Twelve or eighteen streams are specified by name in Ssem. 43^.
Sn. 4, I single out Leiptr, by whose clear water, as by Styx or
Acheron, oaths were sworn. Ssem. 165*: 'at eno liosa Leiptrar
vatni.^ A daemon of the Bhine is nowhere named in our native
traditions, bat the Edda calls the Bin (fem.) svinn, äskanna
(prudens, a diis oriunda, Ssem. 248*). And in the bosom of the
Ehine lie treasure and gold. The Goths buried their beloved
king Alane in the bed of a river near Consentia (Cosenza), which
they first dag out of its course, and then led back over the
corpse (Jemandes, cap. 30) ; the Franks, when crossing a river,
ofiered sacrifice to it (p. 45).

Bat where the sacred water of a river sweeps round a piece
of meadow land, and forms an ea (aue), such a spot is specially
marked out for tiie residence of gods ; witness Wunsches ouwe
(p. 140), Pholes ouwa {p. 225).* Equally venerable were islands
washed by th^ pure sea wave, Fosetesland (p. 230), and the island
ofNerthus (p. 251).

In the sea itself dwelt Oegir (p. 237) and R&n (p. 311), and the
waves are their daughters : the Edda speaks of nifie waves, and
gives their names (Sn. 124, conf. the riddles in the Hervararsaga,
pp. 478-9) ; this reminds me of the nona unda in the Waltharius
1343, and the 'flactus decamanus^ [every tenth wave being the
biggest, Festas, and Ov. Trist, i. 2, 50] . There must also have
been another god of the sea, Geban (p. 239, conf. p. 311), Then,

^ The Bomans appear to have much elaborated their coitus of rivers and
brooks, as may be seen by the great number of monuments erected to river-gods. I
will here add the testimony of Tacitus, him, 1, 79 : * sacra et lucos et aras jMitriw
amnilnu dicare.*

^ Gallus Ohem's Chronik von Reichenau (end of 15th cent.) quoted in Schön-
huth's Beichenau, Freib. 1836, p. v. : * the isle is to this day esteemed honaurabU
And holy ; unohristened babes are not buried in it, but carried out and laid beside a
small house with a saint's image in it, called the ohindli-bild.


EA, ISLAND. SEA. FIRE. 601

according to the Edda^ there lies in the deep sea an enormous
'worm,' mi'SgarSs-ormr, biting his own tail and begirding the
whole earth. The immensity of ocean (Goth, marisdivs) is ex-
pressed in the OHG. names endilmeri and wendilmeri (GrafiE 2,
829) ; conf. enteo and wenteo (p. 564), entil and wentil (p. 375).
An AS. term garsecg I have tried to explain in Zeitschr. für d. a.
1, 578. As the running stream will suffer no evil-doer in it, so
is 'daz mer so reine, daz ez keine bösheit mac geliden,' so clean
that it no wickedness can bear, Wiener merfart 392 (see Snppl.).


2. FiBE.

Fire,^ like water, is regarded as a limng being : corresponding
to quecprunno (p. 588 n.) we have a quecfiur, daz quecke fiwer,
Parz. 71, 13 ; Serv. vatra zhiva, ogan zhivi (vivus, Vuk 1, xlvi.
and 3, 8. 20) ; to nrvp 07)piov ifiy^vxov of the Egyptians, Herod. 3,
16; ignis animal, Cic. de N. D. 3, 14, i.e. a devouring hungry
insatiable beast, vorax flamma; frekr (avidus), Ssdxn. 50^; bitar
fiur, Hel. 78, 22 ; bitar logna 79, 20; gr&dag logna (greedy lowe),
130, 23; grim endi gradag 133, 11; eld unfuodi (insatiabilis) 78,
23 ; it licks with its tongue, eats all round it, pastures, vi/Merai,
11. 23, 177; the land gets eaten clean by it,7rvpl 'xßoDv vifierai,
2, 780; 'leztu eld eta iöfra bygdir, Srom. 142*; it is restless,
axdfjMTov nrvp, II. 23, 52. To be spoken to is a mark of living
things: 'heitr ertu hripu^Sr!' (hot art thou. Fire), Sssm. 40*.
The ancient Persians made a god of it, and the Indian Agni
(ignis) is looked upon as a god. The Edda makes fire a brotlier
of the wind and sea, therefore himself alive and a god, Sn. 126.
Our people compare the element to a cock flying from house to
house : ' I'll set the red cock on your roof is a threat of the incen-
diary ; ' ein roten hau aufs stadel setzen,' H. Sachs iv. 3, 86** ;
roter schin, Gudr. 786, 2.

An antique heathen designation of the great World-fire, ON.
muspell, OHG. OS. muspilli, mudspelli, mutspelU, has already
been noticed, p. 558. The mythic allusions here involved can
3nly be unfolded in the sequel ; the meaning of the word seems
to be ligni perditor, as fire in general is also called hani viffar,

' Names for it, Gramm. 8, 852 ; Eddie names, Seem. 50^, Sn. 187-8.


602 ELEMENTS.

grand vi&a/r (bane, crusher, of wood), Sn. 126, her alls vi9ar,
Sasm. 228^. Another difficult expression is eihin fur, Saem. 83^.
Of vafrlogi (quivering flame), suggesting the MH6. ' daz bibende
fiwer^ (Tund. 54, 58), I likewise forbear to speak; conf. Chap.
XXXI., Will o* the wisp (see Suppl.).

A regular worship of fire seems to have had a more limited
range than the veneration of water ; it is only in that passage of
the AS. prohibitions quoted p. 102, and in no other, that I find
mention of fire. A part of the reverence accorded to it is no
doubt included in that of the light- giving and warming tnin, as
Julius Caesar (p. 103 above) names Sol and Vulcanus together;
and the Edda fire and sun, praising them, both as supreme :
' eldr er beztr med ^ta sonum, ok solar s^,* fire is best for men^
Saem. 18^ (as Pindar says water is). In Superst. B, 17, I under-
stand ' observatio pagana in foco * of the flame on the hearth or in
the oven : where a hearth-fire bums, no lightning strikes (Sup. I,
126) ; when it crackles, there will be strife (322. 534). Compare
with this the Norwegian exposition (p. 242) ; so long as a child
is unbaptized, you must not let tlie fire out (Sup. Swed. 22), conf.
Icasta eld, tagi i elden (24-5. 54. 68. 107). — The Esthonians
throw gifts into fire, as well as into water (Sup. M, 11) ; to
pacify the flame, they sacrifice a fowl to it (82).

A distinction seems to have been made between friendly and
malignant fires ; among the former the Greeks reckoned brimstone
fire, as they call sulphur Oeiov, divine smoke (H. 8, 135. Od. 22,
481. 493). In 0. Fr. poems I often find such forms of cursing
as : mal feu arde ! Tristr. 3791 ; mav^ feus et male flamhe
m'arde ! Meon 3, 227. 297. Ren. 19998. This evil fire is what
the Norse Loki represents ; and as Loki or the devil breaks loose,
we say, when a fire begins, that it breaks loose, breaks out, gets out,
as if from chains and prison : ' worde vür los,' Doc. in Sartorius's
Hanse p. 27 ; in Lower Germany an alarm of fire was given in the
words ' für los 1 ' ON. ' einn neisti (spark) warS laus.'

Forms of exorcism treat fire as a hostile higher being, whom
one must encounter with might and main. Tacitus (Ann. 13, 57)
tells us how the Ubii suppressed a fire that broke out of the ground :
Besidentibus flammis propius suggressi, ictu fustium aliisque
verberibus ut feras (see p. 601) absterrebant, postremo tegmina
corpore direpta injiciunt, quanto magis profana et usu polluta,


FIRE-WORSHIP. 603

tanto magis oppressara ignes. So^ on valuables that have canght
fire, people throw some article of clothing that has been worn
next the skin, or else earth which has first been stamped on with
the foot, Bapertns Tuitiensis, De incendio oppidi Taitii (i.e. Deatz,
ia 1128), relates that a white altar-cloth (corporale) was thrust
into the middle of the fire, to stifle it, but the flame hurled bach
the cloth. The cloth remained uuinjured, but had a red streak
running through it. Similar to this was the casting of clothes
into the lake (p. 596-7). Fire breaking out of the earth (iarJS-
eldr) is mentioned several times in Icelandic sagas : in the even-
ing you see a great horrible man rowing to land in an iron boat,
and digging under the stable door ; in the night earth-fire breaks
out there, and consumes every dwelling, Landn. 2, 5 ; ' iarSeldr
rann ofan,' 4, 12 (see Suppl.).

Nekdfire. — Flame which had been kept some time among
men and been propagated from one fire to another, was thought
anserviceable for sacred uses ; as holy water had to be drawn
fresh from the spring, so it made all the difference, if instead of
the profaned and as it were worn out flame, a new one were used.
This was called wild fire, as opposed to the tame and domesti-
cated. So heroes when they fought, 'des fiurs ftz den ringen
(harness) hiuwen si genuoc,' Nib. 2215, 1 ; Az ir helmen daz
wUde fiwer von den siegen vuor entwer,' Alt. bl. 1, 339; 'daz
fiur wilde wadlende drAze vluoc,' Lanz. 5306 ; ' si sluogen üf ein-
ander, daz toilde fiur erschien,' Etzels hofh. 168 (see Suppl.).
Fire struck or scraped out of stone might indeed have every
claim to be called a fresh one, but either that method seemed
too common (flammam concussis ex more lapidibus elicere. Vita
Severini cap. 14), or its generation out of wood was regarded as
more primitive and hallowed. If by accident such wild fire have
arisen under the carpenter's hand in driving a nail into the mor-
tised timbers of a new house, it is ominous of danger (Superst. I,
411. 500. 707). But for the most part there was a formal kindling
of flame by the rubbing of wood, for which the name known from
the oldest times was notfeuer (need fire), and its ritual can with
scarce a doubt be traced back to heathen sacrifices.

So far back as in the Indiculus supers tit. 15, we have mention
' de ignefiicato de ligno, id est nodfyr*; the Capitulare Carlomani


604 ELEMENTS.

of 742 § 5 (Pertz 3^ 17) forbids ' illos sacrilegos ignes qnos nied-
fyr vocant.^

The preparation of needfire . is variously described : I think
it worth the while to bring all such accounts together in this
place. Lindenbrog in the Glossary to the Capitularies says :
' Busticani homines in multis Germaniae locis, et festo quidem
S. Johannis Baptistae die^ palum sepi extrahunt, extracto funenn
circumligant, illumque hue illuc diwunt, donee ignem concipiai :
quern stipula lignisque aridioribus aggestis curate fovent, ac
cineres coUectos supra olera spargunt^ hoc medio erucas abigi
posse inani superstitione credentes. Earn ergo ignem nodfeur et
nodfyr, quasi necessarium ignem, vocant/ — Joh. Beiskius,* in Un-
tersuchung des notfeuers^ Frankf. and Leipz. 1696^ 8. p. 51 :
^If at any time a grievous murrain have broke out among
cattle great or small^ and they have suffered much harm
thereby ; the husbandmen with one consent make a nothfur
or nothfeuer. On a day appointed there must in no house he
ani/ j^a9n6 left on the hearth. From every house shall be some
straw and water and bushwood brought ; then is a stout oaken
stake driven fast into the ground, and a hole bored through the
same^ to the which a wooden roller well smeared with pitch and
tar is let in, and so winded about, until by reason of the great
heat and stress (nothzwang) it give out fire. This is straightway
catched on shavings, and by straw, heath and bushwood enlarged,
till it grow to a full nothfeuer, yet must it stretch a little way
along betwixt two walls or hedges, and the cattle and thereto the
horses be with sticks and whips driven through it three times or
two. Others in other parts set up two such stakes^ and stuff into
the holes a windle or roller and therewith old rags smeared with
grease. Others use a hairen or common light- spun rope, collect
wood of nine kinds, and keep up a violent motion till such time as
fire do drop therefrom. There may be in use yet other ways for
the generating or kindling of this fire, nevertheless they all have
respect unto the healing of cattle alone. After thrice or twice
passing through, the cattle are driven to stall or field, and the


1 Tgnorant scribes made it metfratres, the Capitnlaria spiiria Benedicti 1, 3
(Pertz iv. 2, 46) have nedfratres.

' Rector of Wolfenbtittel school, v. Gericke's Sdhottelins illnstratns, Ldpz.
1718, p. 66. Eccard's Fr. or. 1, 425.


NBBD-FIRB. 606

collected pile of wood is again palled asunder^ yet in Bach wise in
sundry places^ that every householder shall take a brand with him^,
quench it in the wash or swill tab^ and pat the same by for a
time in the crib wherein the cattle are fed. The stakes driven in
for the extorting of this fire, and the wood used for a roller, are
sometimes carried away for fijel, sometimes laid by in safety, when
the threefold chasing of the cattle through the flame hath been
accomplished/ — In the Marburg Records of Inquiry, for 1605, it
is ordered, that a new cartwlieel with an unused axle be taken
and worked round until it give fire, and with this a fire be
lighted between the gates, and all the oxen driven through it f but
before the fire bo kindled, every citizen shall put his own fire clean
out, and afterward fetch him fire again from the other.^ Kühnes
Märkische sagen p. 369 informs us, that in many parts of the
Mark the custom prevails of making a n^thfeuer on certain occa-
sions, and particularly when there is disease among swine. Before
sunrise two stakes of dry wood are dug into the ground amid solemn
silence, and hempen ropes that go round them are pulled back
and forwards till the wood catches fire ; the fire is fed with leaves
and twigs, and the sick animals are driven through. In some
places the fire is produced by the friction of an old cartwJieeL. —
The following description, the latest of all, is communicated from
Hohenhameln, bailiw. Baldenberg, Hildesheim : In many villages
of Lower Saxony, especially in the mountains, it is common, as a
precaution against cattle plague, to get up the so-called wild fire,
through which first the pigs, then the cows, lastly the geese are
driven.^ The established procedure in the matter is this. The
farmers and all the parish assemble, each inhabitant receives
notice to extinguish every bit of fire in his house, so that not a
spark is left alight in the whole village. Then old and young
walk to a hollow way, usually towards evening, the women carry-
ing linen, the men wood and tow. Two oaken stakes are driven
into the ground a foot and a half apart, each having a hole on the
inner side, into which fits a cross-bar as thick as an arm. The
holes are stuffed with Ihien, then the cross-bar is forced in as
tight as possible, the heads of the stakes being held together with

^ Zeitichr. des hess. yereins 2, 281.

' Not a word about $heep : supposing eoeks and hen» were likewise hunted over
the coals, it would explain a hitherto unexplained proverb (Beinhart xciv.).


606 ELEMENTS.

cords. Abont the smootli round cross-bar is coiled a ropß, whose
long ends^ left hanging on both sides^ are seized by a number of
men ; these make the cross-bar revolve rapidly this way and that,
till the friction sets the linen in the holes on fire. The sparks are
caught on tow or oakum^ and whirled round in the air till they
burst into a clear blaze^ which is then communicated to straw^ and
from the straw to a bed of brashwood arranged in cross lasers in
the hollow way. When this wood has well burnt and nearly done
blazing^ the people hurry off to the herds waiting behind^ and
drive them perforce^ one after the other, through the glowing
embers. As soon as all the cattle are through, the young folks
throw themselves pellmell upon the ashes and coals, sprinkling'
and blackening one another ; those who are most blackened and
besmudged march into the village behind the cattle as conquerors,
and will not wash for a long time after.^ If after long rubbing*
the linen will not catch, they feel sure there is still fire somewhere
in the village, and that the element refuses to reveal itself through
friction : then follows a strict searching of houses, any fire they
may light upon is extinguished, and the master of the house
rebuked or chastised. But that the wildfire should be evoked by
friction is indispensable, it cannot be struck out of flint and steeL
Some localities perform the ceremony, not yearly as a preventive
of murrain, but only upon its actually breaking out.

Accurate as these accounts are, a few minor details have
escaped them, whose observance is seen to in some districts at
least. Thus, in the Halberstadt country the ropes of the wooden
roller are pulled by two chaste boys.^ Need fires have remained in
use longer and more commonly in North Germany,' yet are not
quite unknown in the South. SchmeUer and Stalder are silent,
but in Appenzell the country children still have a game of rub-
bing a rope against a stick till it catches fire : this they call ' de
tiifel hale/ unmanning the devil, despoiling him of his strength.^

* Is there not also a brand or some light canied home for a redistribution of
fire in the village ?

2 Biisching's Wöchentliche nachr. 4, 64; so a chaste youth has to strike the
light for curing St. Anthony^s fire, Superst. I, 710.

' Conf. Connng's Epist. ad Baluz. xiii. Geiicke's Schottel. p. 70. Dähnert
sub v. noodftir.

* Zellweger's Gesch. von Appenzell, Trogen 1880. 1, 63 ; who observes, that
with the ashes of the fire so engendered they strew the fields, as a protection
against vermin.


NEBD-FIRB. 607

Bat Tobler 252^ says^ what boys call de tüfel häla is spinning a
pointed sticky with a string coiled round it, rapidly in a wooden
socket, till it takes fire. The name may be one of those innu-
merable allusions to Loki, the devil and fire-god (p. 242). Nie.
Gryse, in a passage to be quoted later, speaks o{ sawing ßre out
of wood, as we read elsewhere of symbolically sawing the old
woman in two. The Practica of Berthol. Carrichter, phys. in
ord. to Maximilian II., gives a description (which I borrow from
Wolfg. Hildebrand on Sorcery, Leipz. 1681. p. 226) of a magic
bath, which is not to be heated with common flint-and-steel fire :
' 6o to an appletree which the lightning hath stricken, let a saw
be made thee of his wood, therewith shalt thou saw upon a
wooden threshold that much people passeth over, till it be kindled.
Then make firewood of birch-fungus, and kindle it at this fire,
with which thou shalt heat the bath, and on thy life see it go not
out' {see Suppl.).

Notfiur can be derived from n6t (need, necessitas), whether
because the fire is forced to shew itself or the cattle to tread the
hot coal, or because the operation takes place in a time of need,
of pestilence. Nevertheless I will attempt another explanation :
notfiur, nodfiur may stand for an older hnotfiur, hnodfiur, from
the root hniudan, OHG. hniotan, ON. hnioSa (quassare, terere,
tandere) j ^ and would mean a fire elicited by thumping, rubbing,
shaking.

And in Sweden it is actually called both vrideld and gnideld :
the one from vrida (torquere, circumagere), AS. wri*8an, OHG.
ridan, MHG. riden ; the other from gnida (fricare), OHG.knitan,
AS. cntdan (conterere, fricare, depsere).

It was produced in Sweden as with us, by violently rubbing
two pieces of wood together, in some districts even near the
end of last century ; sometimes they used boughs of nine sorts
ofwood.^ The smoke rising from gnideld was deemed salutary,

^ OHG. pihniutit (excatit),Gl. ker.251. hnoidt (qaassat) 229. hnutten (vibrare)
282 ; N. has fnotdn (quassare), Ps. 109, 6. Bth. 280 ; oonf. nieten, to bump. ON.
still has hnio1$a in lino's (tades, malleas), hnot$a (depsere), hnu'Sla (subigere). It
might be spelt hndtfiur or hnotfior (hnutfiur), ace. as the sing, or pi. vowel-form
^ used. Perhaps we need not even insist on a lost h^ bat torn to the OHG.
niawan, ON. nüa ^terere, fricare), from which a sahst, not might be derived by
loffix. Nay, we might go the length of supposing that not, n&a)>B, nautSr, need,
eontained from the first the notion of stress and pressure (oonf. Graff 2, 1032. 4,
1125).

^ Ihre's De superstit. p. 98, and Glossaiy sub. v. wredeld. Finn. Magn.,


608 ELEMENTS.

frait-trees or nets fumigated with it became the more prodactive
of fruit or fish. On this fumigation with vriden eld, and on
driving the cattle out over such sTooke, conf. Superst. Swed. 89.
108. We can see that the purposes to which needfire was
applied must have been far more numerous in heathen times : in
Germany we find but a fragment of it in use for diseased cattle,
but the superstitious practice of girls kindling nine sorts of wood
on Christmas eve (Sup. I, 955) may assure us of a wider meaning
having once belonged to needfire (see Suppl.).

In the North of England it is believed that an angel strikes a
tree, and then needfire can be got from it ; did they rub it only
out of windfall wood ? or does striking here not mean felling ?

Of more significance are the Scotch and Irish procedures,
which I am glad to give in the words of the original communica-
tions. The following I owe to the kindness of Miss Austin; it
refers to the I. of Mull (oflF the W. coast of Scotland), and to
the year 1767. 'In consequence of a disease among the black
cattle the people agreed to perform an incantation, though they
esteemed it a wicked thing. They carried to the top of Cam-
moor a wheel and iiine spindles of oak wood. They extinguished
every fire in every house within sight of the hill ; the wlieel was
then turned from east to west over the nine spindles long enough
to produce fire by friction. If the fire were not produced before
noon, the incantation lost its effect. They failed for several days
running. They attributed this failure to the obstinacy of one
householder, who would not let his fires be put out for what he
considered so wrong a purpose. However by bribing his ser-
vants they contrived to have them extinguished, and on that
morning raised their fire. They then sa^yrific-ed a heifer, cutting
in pieces and burning, while yet alive, the diseased part. Then
they lighted their own hearths from the pile, and ended by feast-
ing on the remains. Words of incantation were repeated by an
old man from Morven, who came over as master of the cere-
monies, and who continued speaking all the time the fire was
being raised. This man was living a beggar at Bellochroy.
Asked to repeat the spell, he said the sin of repeating it once had


Tidskr. for nord. oldk. 2, 294, following Westerdahl. Conf. bjaraan, a magic
ntensü, Chap. XXXIV.


NBBD-FIBE. 609

brought him to beggary^ and that he dared not say those words
again. The whole country believed him accursed' (see SuppL).

In the Highlands^ and especially in Caithness^ they now use
needfire chiefly as a remedy for preternatural diseases of cattle
broQght on by witchcraft.^ 'To defeat the sorceries, certain
persons who have the power to do so are sent for to raise the
needfire. Upon any small river, lake, or island, a circular booth
of stone or turf is erected, on which a couple or rafter of a birch--
tree is placed, and the roof covered over. In the centre is set a
perpendicular post, fixed by a wooden pin to the couple, the lower
end being placed in an oblong groove on the floor ; and another
pole is placed luyrizontally between the upright post and the legs
of the couple, into both of which the ends, being tapered, are
inserted. This horizontal timber is called the auger, being pro-
vided with four short arms or spokes by which it can be turned
ronnd. As many men as can be collected are then set to work,
having first divested themselves of all kinds of metal, and two at
a time continue to turn the pole by means of the levers, while
others keep driving wedges under the upright post so as to press
it against the auger, which by the friction soon becomes ignited.
From this the needfire is instantly procured, and all other fires
being immediately quenched, those that are rekindled both in
dwelling house and offices are accounted sacred, and the cattle
are successively made to smell them.' Let me also make room
for Martin's description,^ which has features of its own : ' The
inhabitants here did also make use of a fire called tinegin, i.e, a
forced fire, or fire of necessity,* which they used as an antidote
against the plague or murrain in cattle ; and it was performed
thus: all the fires in the parish were extinguished, and then
eighty-one (9 x 9) mamed men, being thought the necessary
number for efiecting this design, took two great planks of wood,
and nine of 'em were employed by turns, who by their repeated
efforts rubbed one of tlie planks against the other until the heat

^ I borrow the description of the process from James Logan*s * The Scottish
Otel, or Celtic manners as preserved among the Highlanders,* Lond. 1831. 2, 64;
though here he copies almost verbally from Jamieson's Supplem. to the Scot. Diet,
sob V. neidfjrre.

' Descr. of the Western Islands, p. 118. *

' From tin, Jr. teine (fire), and egin, Ir. eigin, eigean (vis, vielen tia) ; which
wemt to favour the old ethology of nothfener, unless it be simply a translation of
the Engl. needftTe [which itself may stand for kneadtie] .


610 ELEMENTS

thereof prodaced fire; and from this forced fire each family ü
supplied with new fire, which is no sooner kindled than a pot full
of water is quickly set on it, and afterwards sprinkled upon ^ the
people infected with the plague, or upon the cattle that have the
murrain. And this they all say they find successful by ex-
perience : it was practised on the mainland opposite to the soath
of Skye, within these thirty years/ As in this case there is water
boiled on the frictile fire, and sprinkled with the same effect, so
Eccard (Pr. or. 1, 425) tells us, that one Whitsun morning he saw
some stablemen rub fire out of wood, and boil their cabbage over
it, under the belief that by eating it they would be proof against
fever all that year. A remarkable story from Northamptonshire,
and of the present century, confirms that sacrifice of the young
cow in Mull, and shows that even in England superstitious
people would kill a calf to protect the herd from pestilence : Miss

and her cousin walking saw a fire in a field, and a crowd

round it. They said, 'what is the matter?' ^Killing a calf*
'What for?' 'To stop the murrain.' They went away as
quickly as possible. On speaking to the clergyman, he made
inquiries. The people did not like to talk of the affair, but it
appeared that when there is a disease among the cows, or the
calves are born sickly, they sacrifi/ye (i.e. kill and burn) or^s for
good luck.' [A similar story from Cornwall in Hone's Daybook
1, 153.]

Unquestionably needfire was a sacred thing to other nations
beside the Teutonic and Celtic. The Creeks in N. America hold
an annual harvest festival, commencing with a strict fast of
three days, during which the^re« are put out in all houses. On
the fourth morning the chief priest by rubbing two dry sticks
together lights a new clean fire, which is distributed among all
the dwellings ; not till then do the women carry home the new
com and fruits from the harvest field.^ The Arabs have for fire-
friction two pieces of wood called March and Aphar, the one
male, the other female. The Chinese say the emperor Sui was
the first who rubbed wood against wood; the inconvenient
method is retained as a holy one. Indians and Persians turn
a piece of cane round* in dry wood, Kanne's Urk. 454-5 (see
Suppl.).

1 Fr. Majer's Mythol. tasohenb. 1811, p. 110.


NBBD-FIRB. 611

It is still more interesting to observe how nearly the old
Roman and Greek cnstoms correspond. Excerpts from Festus
(0. Müller 106^ 2) say: 'ignis Vestae si qaando interstinctus
esset, virgines verberibus afficiebantur a pontifice, quibus mos
erat, tabulam felicis materiae tarn diu terebrare, qaousqae exceptam
ignem cribro aeneo virgo in aedem ferret/ The sacred fire of
the goddess, once extinguished, was not to be rekindled, save by
generating the pnre element anew. A plank »of the choice
timber of sacred trees was bored, i,e. a pin turned round in it,
till it gave out sparks. The act of catching the fire in a
sieve, and so conveying it into the temple, is suggestive of a
similar carrying of water in a sieve, of which there is some
account to be given further on. Plutarch (in Numa 9) makes
out that new fire was obtained not by friction, but by in-
tercepting the snn^s rays in clay vessels destiued for the pur-
pose. The Greeks worshipped Hestia as the pure hearth-flame
itself.^ But Lemnos, the island on which Zeus had flung down
the celestial fire-god HephsBstus,^ harboured a fire-worship of
its own. Once a year every fire was extinguished for nine days,
till a ship brought some fresh from Delos off the sacred hearth of
Apollo : for some days it drifts on the sea without being able to
land, but as soon as it runs in, there is fire served out to every
one for domestic use, and a new life begins. The old fire was no
longer holy enough ; by doing without it altogether for a time,
men would learn to set the true value on the element (see
Suppl.).* Like Vesta, St. Bridget of Ireland (d. 518 or 521)
had a perpetual fire maintained in honour of her near Kildare ; a
wattled fence went round it, which none but women durst ap-
proach ; it was only permissible to blow it with bellows, not with
the mouth. ^ The mode of generating it is not recorded.

The wonderful amount of harmony in these accounts, and the
usages of needfire themselves, point back to a high antiquity.
The wheel seems to be an emblem of the sun, whence light and
fire proceed; I think it likely that it was provided with nine

^ Nee tn aliud Vestam quam vivam intellige ^mmam, Ov. Fast. 6, 295.

' Ace. to the Finnish myth, the fire created by the gods fails on the sea in
bills, it is swallowed by a salmon, and men afterwards find it inside the fish when
eanght. Bane8_pp. 6-22.

' Philostr. Heroic, pp. 740. Weloker's Trilogie, pp. 247-S.

* Acta sanotor., calend. Febr. p. 112^.


612 ELEMENTS.

spokes: 'thet niagenspetze fiaP survives in the Frisian laws, those
nine oaken spindles whose friction against the nave produced fire
signify the nine spokes standing oat of the nave^ and the same
sacred number turns up again in the nine kinds of wood, in the
nine and eighty-one men that rub. We can hardly doubt that
the wheel when set on fire formed the nucleus and centre of a
holy and purifying sacrificial flame. Our weisthiimer (2, 615-6.
693-7) have aifbther remarkable custom to tell of. At the great
yearly assize a cartwheel, that had lain six weeks and three days
soaking in water (or a cesspool)^ was placed in a fire kindled
before the judges^ and the banquet lasts till the nave, which must
on no account be turned or poked, be consumed to ashes. This
I take to be a last relic of the pagan sacrificial feast, and the
wheel to have been the means of generating the fire, of which it
is true there is nothing said. In any case we have here the use
of a cartwheel to feed a festal flame.

If the majority of the accounts quoted limit the use of need-
fire to an outbreak of murrain, yet some of them expressly inform
us that it was resorted to at stated times of the year, especially
Midsummer, and that the cattle were driven through the flames to
guard them beforehand against future sicknesses. Nicolaus Gryse
(Rostock 1593, liii*) mentions as a regular practice on St. John's
day : * Toward nightfall they wanned them by St. John's blaze
and needfire (nodfur) that they sawed out of wood, kindling
the same not in Grod's name but St John's; leapt and ran
and drave the cattle therethro^ and were fulfilled of thousand
joys whenas they had passed the night in great sins, shames
and harms.'

Of this yearly recurrence we are assured both by the Lemnian
worship, and more especially by the Celtic.^ It was in the great
gatherings at annual feasts that needfire was lighted. These the
Celtic nations kept at the beginning of May and of November.
The grand hightide was the Mayday ; I find it falling mostly on
the 1st of May, yet sometimes on the 2nd or 3rd. This day is
called in Irish and Gaelic la healtine or beiltine, otherwise spelt
beltein, and corrupted into belton, beltim, beltam. La means day,

1 Hyde remarks of the Gaebers also, that they lighted a fire eveiy year.


NEED-FIEE. BEALTINE. 613

teine or tine fire^ and beal, beil^ is understood to be the name of
8 god^ not directly connected with the Asiatic Belus^^ but a deity
of light peculiar to the Celts. This Irish Beal, Beil, G-aelic
Bealf appears in the Welsh dialect as Beli, and his 0. Celtic
name of Belenus, Belimis is preserved in Ausonius^ Tertullian and
namerous inscriptions (Forcellini sub v.) . The present custom
is thus described by Armstrong sub v. bealtainn : ' In some parts
of the Highlands the young folks of a hamlet meet in the moors
on the first of May. They cut a table in the green sod^ of a
roand figure, by cutting a trench in the ground of such circum-
ference as to hold the whole company. They then kindle a fire^
and dress a repast of eggs and milk in the consistence of a
castard. They knead a cake of oatmeal^ which is toasted at the
embers against a stone. After the custard is eaten up, they
divide the cake in so many portions, as similar as possible to one
another in size and shape, as there are persons in the company.
They daub one of these portions with charcoal until it is perfectly
black. They then put all the bits of the cake into a bonnet, and
every one, blindfold, draws out a portion. The bonnet-holder is
entitled to the last bit. Whoever draws the black bit is the
devoted person who is to be sacrificed to Baal, whose favour they
mean to implore in rendering the year productive. The devoted
person is compelled to leap three times over the flames,* Here the
reference to the worship of a deity is too plain to be mistaken :
we see by the leaping over the flame, that the main point was, to
select a human being to propitiate the god and make him merci-
ful, that afterwards an animal sacrifice was substituted for him,
and finally, nothing remained of the bodily immolation but a leap
through the fire for man and beast. The holy rite of friction is
not mentioned here, but as it was necessary for the needfire that
purged pestilence, it must originally have been much more in
requisition at the great yearly festival.

The earliest mention of the beiltine is found in Cormac, arch-
bishop of Cashel (d. 908). Two fires were lighted side by side,
and to pass unhurt between them was wholesome for men and
cattle. Hence the phrase, to express a great danger : ^ itir dha
theinne beil,' i.e. between two fires.^ That the sacrifice was

I Bet, Balj Iridor. Etjin. 8, 23.

> 0*Flaherty in Transact. of Irish Acad., vol. 14, pp. 100. 122-8.


614 ELEMENTS.

strictly superintended by priests, we are expressely assured by
usher (Trias thaamat. p. 125), who founds on Evinus: Lege
etiam severissima cavebatar, ut omnes ignes per universas re-
giones ista nocte exstingaerentur, et nuUi liceat ignem reacoen-
dere nisi prius Temoriae (Tighmora, whom we know from Ossian)
a magis rogus sacrificiorum exstrueretwr, et quicnnque banc legem
in aliqno transgrederetur non alia mulcta quam capitis sapplicio
commissi delicti poenam luebat.^

Leo (Malb. gl. i, 35) has ingeniously put forward an antithesis
between a god of war Beal or Baely and a god of peace Sighe or
Sithich ; nay, by this distinction he explains the brothers Bel-
loyesus and Sigovesus in Livy 5, 34 as servants (yesus= Gaelic
uis, uais, minister) of Beal and Sighe, connecting Sighe with
that silent peaceful folk the elves, who are called sighe (supra,
p. 444n.) : to Beal were offered the May fires, healtine, to Sighe
the November fires, samhtheine (peace-fire). In Wales too they
lighted fires on May 1 and Nov. 1, both being called coelcerth
(see Suppl.).

I still hesitate to accept all the inferences, but undoubtedly
Beal must be taken for a divine being, whose worship is likely to
have extended beyond the Celtic nations. At p. 228 I identified
him with the German Phol ; and it is of extraordinary value to
our research, that in the Rhine districts we come upon a Pfultag,
Pulletag (P.'s day), which fell precisely on the 2nd of May
(Weisth. 2, 8. 3, 748). We know that our forefctthers very
generally kept the beginning of May as a great festival, and it is
still regarded as the trysting-time of witches, t.e. once of wise-
women and faysj who can doubt that heathen sacrifices blazed
that day? Pholtag then answers to Bealteine^ and moreover
Baldag is the Saxon form for Paltar (p. 229).

Were the German May-fires, after the conversion, shifted to
Easter and Midsumm&r, to adapt them to Christian worship ? Or,
as the summer solstice was itself deeply rooted in heathenism, is
it Eastertide alone that represents the ancient May-fires 7 For,
as to the Celtic November, the German Yule or Midwinter might
easily stand for that, even in heathen times.

> Gonf. the aocotmts in Moneys (beschichte des heidenth. 2, 485.
' All over England on the Ist of May they set up a May pole, which may be
from pole, palas, AS. pol ; yet Pol, Pho.l may deserve to be taken into account too.


BEALTINB. PHOL'S DAY. 615

Whichever way we settle that, our very next investigations
will shew, that beside both needfire and bealtine, other fires are
to be found almost all over Europe.

It is not unimportant to observe, that in the north of Germany
they take place at Easter, in the south at Midsummer. There
they betoken the entrance of spring, here the longest day ; as
before, it all turns upon whether the people are Saxon or Prank.
All Lower Saxony, Westphalia, and Lower Hesse, Gelders,
Holland, Friesland, Jutland, and Zealand have Easter fires ; up
the Shine, in Franconia, Thuringia, Swabia, Bavaria, Austria,
and Silesia, Midsummer fires carry the day. Some countries,
hoiireyer, seem to do homage to both, as Denmark and Carinthia.

Eastbr Fires. — At all the cities, towns and villages of a country,
towards evening on the first (or third) day of Easter, there is
lighted every year on mountain and hill a great fire of straw, turf,
and wood, amidst a concourse and jubilation, not only of the
young, but of many grown-up people. On the Weser, especially
in Schaumburg, they tie up a tar- barrel on a fir-tree wrapt round
with straw, and set it on fire at night. Men and maids, and all
who come, dance exulting and singing, hats are waved, handker-
chiefs thrown into the fire. The mountains all round are lighted
up, and it is an elevating spectacle, scarcely paralleled by any-
thing else, to survey the country for many miles round from one
of the higher points, and in every direction at once to see a vast
number of these bonfires, brighter or fainter, blazing up to heaven.
In some places they marched up the hill in stately procession,
carrying white rods; by turns they sang Easter hymns, grasping
each other's hands, and at the Hallelujah clashed their rods to-
gether. They liked to carry some of the fire home with them.^

No doubt we still lack many details as to the manner of keep-
ing Easter fires in various localities. It is worth noting, that at
Bräunrode in the Harz the fires are lighted at evening twilight

^ Joh. Timens On the Easter fire, Hamb. 1590 ; a reprint of it follows Reiske's
Notfener. Letzner's Historia S. Bonif., Hildesh. 1602. 4, cap. 12. Lenkfeld's
AnÜq. gandersh. pp. 4-5. Eberh. Baring's Beschr. der (Lanensteiner) Saala,
1744. 2, 96. Hamb. mag. 26, 802 (1762). Hannöv. mag. 1766, p. 216. Bath-
lef 's Diepholz, Brem. 1767. 3, 86-42. (Pratje's) Bremen and Verden 1, 165.
Bragar ri, 1, 85. Geldersche volksalmanak voor 1835, p. 19. Easter fire is in
I^azuflh paagke-blui or -hltut ; whether Sweden has the custom I do not know, bat
Olans Magnus 15, 5 affirms that Scandinavia has Midsummer fires. Still more
Borprising that England has no trace of an Easter fire ; we hare a report of such
from Carinthia in Sartori*8 Beise 2, 850.

VOL. ir. N


616 ELEMENTS.

of the first Easter day, but before that, old and young sally out
of that village and Griefenhagen into the nearest woodlands to
hunt up the squirrels. These they chase by throwing stones and
cudgels, till at last the animals drop exhausted into their hands,
dead or alive. This is said to be an old-established custom.^

For these ignes paschales there is no authority reaching beyond
the 16th century; but they must be a great deal older, if only for
the contrast with Midsummer fires, which never could penetrate
into North Grermany, because the people there held fast by their
Easter fires. Now, seeing that the fires of St. John, as we shall
presently shew, are more immediately connected with the Christian
church than those of Easter, it is not unreasonable to trace these
all the way back to the worship of the goddess Ostara or Edstre
(p. 291), who seems to have been more a Saxon and Anglian
divinity than one revered all over Germany. Her name and her
fires, which are likely to have come at the beginning of May,
would after the conversion of the Saxons be shifted back to the
Christian feast.* Those mountain fires of the people are scarcely
derivable from the taper lighted in the church the same day : it
is true that Boniface, ep. 87 (Würdtw.), calls it ignis paschalis,^
and such Easter lights are still mentioned in the 16 th century.
Even now in the Hildesheim country they light the lamp on
Maundy Thursday, and that on Easterday, at an Easter fire which
has been struck with a steel. The people flock to this fire, carry-
ing oaken crosses or simply crossed sticks, which they set on fire
and then preserve for a whole year. But the common folk dis-
tinguish between this fire and the wild fire elicited by rubbing
wood. Jäger (Ulm, p. 521) speaks of a consecration of fire and
of logs.

^ BoBenkranz, Nene zeitsohr. f. gesoh. der germ. völk. i. 2, 7.

2 Letzner says (ubi Bupra), that betwixt Brunetein and "Wibbrechtshanaen,
where Boniface had overthrown the heathen idol Beto (who may remind us of Beda s
Bheda), on the same Betberg the people *did after Bunset on Easter day, ev^
within the memory of man, hold the Easter fire, which the men of old named
bocks-thorn.' On the margin stands his old authority again, the lost Conradus
Fontamis (supra p. 190). How the fire itself should come by the name of buck's or
goat's thorn, is hard to see ; it is the name of a shrub, the tragaoanth. Was bocks-
thorn thrown into the Easter flames, as certain herbs were into the Midsummer
fire ? . ,

» N.B., some maintain that the Easter candle waa ignited by buming-glasseß
or crystals (Serrarius ad Epist. Bonif. p. S43).

* Franz Wessel's Beschreibung des päbstlichen gottesdienBteß, Stralsund ed. by
Zober, 1837, p. 10.


EASTEB FIRES. 617

Almost everywhere during the last hundred years the feeble-
ness of governments has deprived the people of their Easter fires
(see Suppl.).!

MiosüMMBB Fires.* — In our older speech^ the most festive
season of the year^ when the sun has reached his greatest height
and must thence decline again, is named sunewende = sunnewende
(sun's wending, solstice), commonly in the plural, because this
Ugh position of the sun lasts several days : ' ze einen sunewenden,'
Nib. 32, 4 ; 'zen nsehsten sunewenden,' Nib. 1424, 4. Wigal. 1717;
'vor disen sunewenden,' Nib. 678, 3. 604, 3 ; ' ze sunewenden,'
Trist. 5987 (the true reading comes out in Groot's variants) ; 'an
sunewenden &bent,' Nib. 1754, 1 ; ' nÄcb sune wenden,' Iw. 2941.^
Now, as Midsummer or St. John's day (June 24), ' sant Johans
snnewenden tao,' Ls. 2, 708, coincides with this, the fires in
question are called in Up. German documents of the 14- 15th
century »unwentfeuer, sunhentfewr,^ and even now among the
Austrian and Bavarian peasantry sunäwetsfoir, sunwenisfeuer,
H. Sachs 1, 423** : ' auch schüm die bubn (lads poke) mnwenU
feuer* At this season were held great gatherings of the people :
' die nativitatis S. Johannis baptistae in conventu populi maximo '
(Pertz 2, 386) ; this was in 860. In 801 Charles the Great kept
this festival at Bporedia, now Ivrea (Pertz 1, 190. 223) ; and
Lewis the Pious held assemblies of the Empire on the same day
in 824 and 831. Descriptions of Midsummer fires agree with
those of Easter fires, with of course some divergences.. At
Gemsheim in the Mentz country, the fire when lighted is blessed
by the priest, and there is singing and prayer so long as it burns ;
when the flame goes out, the children jump over the glimmering
eoaU; formerly grown-up people did the same. In Superst. I,


1 * Jndio. inquiry reap, the Easter fire burned, contr. to prohib., on the Eogeln-
berg near Yolkmarsen, Apr. 9* 1833/ see Niederhess, wochenbl 1834, p. 2229*.
The older prohibitions allege the unchristian character, later ones the waste of
timber. Even bonfires for a victory were very near being suppressed.

' The best treatise is: Franc. Const, de Ehautz de ritu ignis in natali S.
Johannis bapt. accensi, Yindob. 1769, 8vo.

' AU the good MSS. have, not sunnewende, but sunewende, which can only
stand for sunwende, formed like suntao. We also find ' zu ningihten,* Schefifer's
Haltans, pp. 109, 110 ; giht here oorreep» to Goth, gahts (gressus), and allows us to
guess an OHG. sunnagaht.

* Hahn'8 Monum. 2, 693. Sutner's Berichtigungen, Munch. 1797, p. 107 (an.
1401).


'618 ELEMENTS.

848 we are told how a garland is plaited of nine sorts of flowers.
Reiske (ut supra^ p. 77) says : ' the fire is made under the open
sky^ the youth and the meaner folk leap over it, and all manner
of herbs are cast into it : like these^ may all their troubles go off
in fire and smoke 1 In some places they light lanterns outside
their chambers at nighty and dress them with red poppies or
anemones^ so as to make a bright glitter/ At Niii-nberg the
lads go about begging billets of wood^ cart them to the Bleacher's
pond by the Spital-gate^ make a fire of them, and jump over it ;
this keeps them in health the whole year (conf. Sup. I, 918).
l^hey invite passers by to have a leap, who pay a few kreuzers
■for the privilege. In the Ful^a country also the boys beg for
wood to bum at night, and other presents, while they sing a
rhyme : ^ Da kommen wir her gegangen Mit spiessen und mit
«tangen, Und wollen die eier (eggs) langen. Peuerrothe blüme-
lein. An der erde springt der wein, Gebt ihr uns der eier ein
Zum JoKannisfeuer, Der haber is gar theuer (oats are so dear).
Haberje, haberju! frifrefrid ! Gebt uns doch ein schiet (scheit,
billet)!' (J. V. u. f. Deutschi. 1790. 1, 318.) Similar rhymes
from Franconia and Bavaria, in Schm. 3, 262. In the Austrian
Donaulandchen on St. John's eve they light fires on the hill, lads
and lasses jump over the flames amid the joyful cries and songs
of the spectators (Reil, p. 41). 'Everywhere on St. John's eve
there was merry leaping over the sonnenwendefeuer, and mead was
drunk over it,' is Denis's recollection of his youthful days (Lesefr.
1, 130). At Ehingen in Swabia they boiled pease over the fire,
which were laid by and esteemed wholesome for bruises and
wounds (Schmid's Schwab, id. 167); conf. the boiling over ueed-
fires (p. 610). Greg. Strigenitius (b. 1548, d. 1603), in a sermon
preached on St. John's day and quoted in Ecc. Fr. or. i. 425,
observes, that the people (in Meissen or Thuringia) dance and
sing round the Midsummer fires ; that one man threw a horses
head into the flume, meaning thei'eby to force the witches to fetch
some of the fire for themselves. Seb. Frank in his Weltbuch
5P : ' On St. John's day they make a simetfire [corrupt, of sun-
went], and moreover wear upon them, I know not from what
superstition, quaint wreaths of mugwort and monks-hood; nigh
every one hath a blue plant named larkspur in hand, and wlvosv
looheth into the fire thro* the same, hath never a sore eye all that


MIDSUMMER FIRES. 619

year ; he that would depart home unto his house, castefh this his
plant into the ßre, saying, So depart all mine ill-fortune and be
burnt up with this herb 1 * ^ So, on the same day, were the waves
of water to wash away with them all misfortune (p. 589). But
in earlier times the polite world, even princes and kings, took
part in these bonfires. Peter Herp's Ann. francof. teU us, ad an.
1489 (Senkenb. Sei. 2, 22) : ^In vigilia S. Joh. bapt. rogus ingens
fiiit factus ante domum consulum inforo (francofnrtensi)^ fuerunt-
que mnlta vexilla depicta posita in struem lignorum, et vexillum
regis in supremo positum, et circa ligna rami virerUes positi,
faitque magna chorea dominorum, rege inspiciente.' At Augsburg
in 1497, in the Emp. Maximilian's presence, the fair Susanna
Neithard kindled the Midsummer fire with a torch y and with
Philip the Handsome led the first ring-dance round the fire}
A Munich voucher of 1401 renders account : ' umb gras und
knechten, die dy pänk ab dem haws auf dem, margt trugen
(carried benches to the market-place) an der sunbentnacht, da
herzog Stephan und sein gemachel (consort) und das frawel auf
dem margt tanzten mit den purgerinen bei dem sunbenifwr/ (Sut-
ner's Berichtig, p. 107). On St. John's eve 1578, the Duke of
Liegnitz had a bonfire made on the Oredisberg, as herr Gotsch
did on the Kynast, at which the Duke himself was present with
his court (Schweinichen 2, 347).

We have a fuller description of a Midsummer fire made in
1823 at Konz, a Lorrainian but still German village on the
Moselle, near Sierk and Thionville. Every house delivers a truss
of straw on the top of the Stromberg, where men and youths
assemble towards evening; women and girls are stationed by the
Barbach spring. Then a huge wheel is wrapt round wUh straw,

1 On Jane 20, 1S5S, the Nürnberg town-ootinoil issned the following order :
Whereas experience heretofore hath shewn, that after the old heathenish use, on
Jolm*8 day in every year, in the country, as weU in towns as yillages, money and
wood hath been gathered by young folk, and thereupon the so-called tonnenwendt or
tirnwut fire kindled, and tnereat winebibbing, dancing about the taid fire, leaping
over the same, with burning of sundry herbs and flowers, and setting of brands from
the said fire in the fields, and in many other ways all manner of saperstitioos work
earned on — Therefore the Hon. Cooncil of Nürnberg town neither can nor ought
to forbear to do away with all such unbecoming superstition, paganism, and peril
of fire on this coming day of St. John (Neuer lit. anz. 1807, p. 818). [Sonwend
fires forbidden in Austria in 1850, in spite of Goethe's * Fires of John we'll cherish,
Wbv should gladness perish t ' — Scppl.]

' Gasseri Ann. august., ad an. 1497, Sohm. 8, 261 ; oonf. Banke's Boman. u.
German, völk. 1, 102.


620 ELEMENTS.

BO that none of the wood is left in eighty a strong pole is passed
through the middle^ which sticks out a yard on each side^ and is
grasped by the guiders of the wheel ; the remainder of the straw
is tied ap into a number of small torches. At a signal given
by the Maire of Sierk (who, according to ancient custom^ earns
a basket of cherries by the service), the wheel is lighted with a
torch, and set rapidly in motion, a shout of joy is raised^ ail wave
tlieir torches on high, part of the men stay on the hill, part follow
the rolling glohe of fire as it is guided doivnhill to the Moselle. It
often goes out first; but if alight when it touches the river,
it prognosticates an abundant vintage, and the Konz people have
a right to levy a tun of white wine from the adjacent vineyards.
Whilst the wheel is rushing past the women and girls, they
break out into cries of joy, answered by the men on the hill ; and
inhabitants of neighbouring villages, who have flocked to the
river side, mingle their voices in the universal rejoicing.^

In the same way the butchers of Treves are said to have yearly
sent down a wheel of fire into the Moselle from the top of the
Paulsberg (see Suppl.).*

The custom of Midsummer fires and wheels in France is
attested even by writers of the 12th and 18th centuries, John
Beleth, a Parisian divine, who wrote about 1162 a Summa de
divinis officiis, and William Durantis, b. near Beziers in Langue-
doc, about 1237, d. 1296, the well-known author of the Bationale
divinor. oflSc. (written 1286; conf. viii. 2, 3 de epacta). In the
Summa (printed at Dillingen, 1572) cap. 137, fol. 256, and thence
extracted in the Bationale vii. 14, we find: 'Peruntur quoque
(in festo Joh. bapt.) hrandae sen faces ardentes et fiunt ignes,
qui significant S. Johannem, qui fuit lumen et lucema ardens,
praecedens et praecursor verae lucis . . . ; rota in quibusdam
locis volvitur, ad significandum, quod sicut sol ad altiora sui
circuli pervenit, nee altius potest progredi, sed tunc sol descendit
in circulo, sic et fama Johannis, qui putabatur Christus, descendit

* M6m. des antiquaires de Fr. 5, 383-6.

' * In memoiy of the hermit Paulas, who in the mid. of the 7th cent, hnrled
the idol Apollo from Mt. Gehenna, near Treyes, into the Moselle,' thinks the writer
of the article on Konz, pp. 387-8. If Trithem^s De yiris illnstr. ord. S. Bened. 4,
201, is to Tonoh for this, I at least can only find at p. 142 of 0pp. pia et spirit.
Mogunt. 1605, that Paulas lived opposite Treves, on Gevenna, named Mons Pauli
after him ; hut of Apollo and the firewheel not a word [and other authorities are
equally silent] .


MIDSUMMEB FIBES. 621

secandum quod ipse testimoniam perhibet^ dicens : me oportet
minni^ illam aatem crescere/ Much older^ but somewhat vague^
is the testimony of Eligias : ' NuUas in f estivitate S. Johannis
vel quibaslibet sanctonim solemnitatibus solstitia (?) aut valla-
tiones vel saltationes aut casaulas aut cantica diabolica ezerceat/^
In great cities^ Paris^ Metz^ and many more^ as late as the
15-16-1 7th centuries, the pile of wood was reared in the public
square before the town hall, decorated with flowers and foliage,
and set on fire by the Maire himself.^ Many districts in the
south have retained the custom to this day. At Aix, at
Marseille, all the streets and squares are cleaned up on St. John's
Day, early in the morning the country folk bring flowers into the
town, and everybody buys some, every house is decked with
greenery, to which a healing virtue is ascribed if plucked before
sunrise : ' aco soun dherbas de san Jean.' Some of the plants
are thrown into the flame, the young people jump over it, jokes are
played on passers-by with powder trains and hidden fireworks,
or they are squirted at and soused with water from the windows.
In the villages they ride on mules and donkeys, carrying lighted
branches of fir in their hands.'

In many places they drag some of the charred brands and
charcoal to their homes: salutary and even magical effects are
supposed to flow from these (Superst. French 27. 30. 34).

In Poiton, they jump three times round thefi/re with a branch of
walnut in their hands (M^m. des antiq. 8, 451). Fathers of
ÜBknulies whisk a bunch of white mullein (bouillon blanc) and a
leafy spray of walnut through the flame, and both are afterwards
nailed up over the cowhouse door; while the youth dance and
sing, old men put some of the coal in their wooden shoes as
a safeguard against innumerable woes (ibid. 4, 110).

In the department of Hautes Pyr^n^es, on the 1st of May,

^ The Eaiserohronik (God. pal. 861, 1^) on the celebration of the Sunday :

Swenne in kom der sonnintao,

86 yllzete sioh Börne al din etat (all B. bestirred itself),

wie si den got mohten geSren (to honour the god),

die allirwtsisten hdrren ^wisest lords)

vuorten einiz al ombe die stat (carried a thing ronnd the city)

daz was geichaffen $ame ein rat (shapen like a wheel)

mit brinnenden lichten (with burning lights) ;

6 wie gröze sie den got zierten (greatly glorified the god) 1

- M6m. de Taoad. celt. 2, 77-8. 3, 447.

' Millin'B Voyage dans le midi 8, 28. 841-5.


622 ELEMENTS.

every commune looks onfc the tallest and slenderest tree, a pine or
fir on the hills^ a poplar in the plains ; when they have lopped
all the boughs off, they drive into it a number of wedges a foot
long, and keep it till the 23rd of June. Meanwhile it splits
diamond-shape where the wedges were inserted, and is now rolled
and dragged up a mountain or hill. There the priest gives it his
blessing, they plant it upright in the ground, and set it on fire
(ibid. 5, 387).

Strutt ^ speaks of Midsummer fires in England : they were
lighted on Midsummer Eve, and kept up till midnight, often till
cock-crow ; the youth danced round the flame, in garlands of
motherwort and vervain, with violets in their hands. In Denmark
they are called Sanct Hans aftens blus, but also gadeild (street-
fire), because they are lighted in public streets or squares, and on
hills. [Is not gade conn, with sunna-gaht, p. 617 ?] Imagining
that all poisonous plants came up out of the ground that night,
people avoided lingering on the grass ; but wholesome plants
(chamaemelum and bardanum) they hung up in their houses.
Some however shift these street-fires to May-day eve.* Nor-
way also knows the custom: ^S. Hans aften brändes der baal
ved alle griner (hedged country-lanes), hvilket skal fordrive ondt
(harm) fra creaturerne,' Sommerfeldt's Saltdalen, p. 121. But
some words quoted by Hallager p. 13 are worth noting, viz.
brandshat for the wood burnt in the fields, and brising for the
kindled fire ; the latter reminds us of the gleaming necklace of
Freyja (p. 306-7), and may have been transferred from the flame
to the jewel, as well as from the jewel to the fiame«

There is no doubt that some parts of Italy had Midsummer
fires : at Orvieto they were exempted from the restrictions laid
on other fires.^ Italian sailors lighted them on board ship out
at sea, Fel. Fabri Evagat. 1, 170. And Spain is perhaps to
be included on the strength of a passage in the Romance de
Guarinos (Silva, p. 113) :

^ Sports and PastÜDes of the People of England, by Jos. Strati. New ed. by
WHone, Lond. 1830, p. 359.

> Molbech*8 Dialect. Lex. 150. Lyngbye's Nord, tidskr. for oldk. 2, 352-9. Finn
Magn. Lex. myth. 1091-4. Arndt's Beise durch Schweden 3, 72-3.

> Statuta urbevetana, an. 1491. 3, 51 : Quicunque sine licentia officialis fecerit
ignem in aliqua festivitate de nocte in ciyitate, in xl sol. denarior. puniatur,
excepta festivitate S. Johannis bapt. de mense Junii, et qui in iJla nocte furatus
fuerit Tel abstulerit ligna vel tabulas alterius in lib. x den. puniatur.


MIDSÜMMEB FIRES. 623

Vanse dias, vienen dias, venido era el de Sant Juan,
donde Christianos 7 Moros hazen gran solenidad :
los Ckristianos echan juncia, y los Moros arrayhan,
los Judios echan eneas, por la fiesta mas honrar.

Here nothing is said of fire/ but we are told that the Christians
strew rushes, the Moors myrtle, the Jews reeds ; and the throw-
ing of flowers and herbs into the flame seems an essential part
of the celebration, e.g. mugwort, monks-hood, larkspur (p. 618),
mullein and walnut leaves (p. 621), Hence the collecting of
all such John's-herbs in Germany (Superst. I, 157. 189. 190), and
of S. Hans urter (wprts) in Denmark (K, 126), and the like in
Prance (L, 4). According to Casp. Zeumer's De igne in festo
S. Joh. accendi solito, Jenae 1699, the herb aXiSfia (?) was
diligently sought on that day and hung up over doors.

In Greece the women make a fire on Midsummer Eve, and
jump over it, crying, * I leave my sins.' In Servia they think the
feast is so venerable, that the sun halts three times in reverence.^
On the day before it, the herdsmen tie birchbark into torches,
and having lighted them, they first march round the sheepfolds
and cattle-pens, then go up the hills and let them bum out (Yuk
sub V.Ivan dan). Other Slav countries have similar observances.
In Sartori's Journey through Carinthia 3, 849-50, we find the
roUing of St. John's fiery wheel fully described. Midsummer-
day or the solstice itself is called by the Slov&ns kres, by the
Croats hresz, i.e. striking of light, from kresati (ignem elicere),
Pol. krzesac ; and as May is in Irish mi-na-bealtine (fire- month),
80 Ju^e in Slovenic is kresnik. At the kres there were leaps of
joy performed at night ; of lighting by friction I find no mention.*
Poles and Bohemians called the Midsummer fire sobotka, i.e. little
Saturday, as compared with the great sob6ta (Easter Eve) ; the

Mt is spoken of more definitely by Maiünns de Aries, canonieos of Pampelnna
(eir. 1510), in his treatise De saperstitionibus (Tract, tractatanm, ed. Lugd. 1544.
^t 133): Gam in die S. Johannis propter jucnnditatem mnlta pie aguntur a
fidelibuB, pnta polsatio campanarum et ignea jucunditatU^ similiter summo mane
exeont ad colligendas herbas odoriferas et optimas et medioinales ex sua natura et
ex plenitndinevirtutnm propter tempus. . . quidam t^n^s accefidunt in compitis
^iarom, in agris, ne inde sortilegae et maleficae ilia noote transitnm faoiant, ut
ego propriis ocolis vidi. Alii herbas coUeetas in die S. Johannis incendente$ contra
folgnra, tonitma et tempestates orednnt suis fomigationibns arcere daemones et
tempestates.

' As he is supposed to leap three times at Easter (p. 291).


624 ELEMENTS.

Bobemians used to lead their cows over it to protect tbem from
witchcraft. The Bassian name was kupdlo, which some explain
by a god of harvest^ Kwpalo : youths and maidens^ garlanded with
flowers and girt with holy herbs, assembled on the 24th Jane,
lighted a fire, leapt and led their fiocks over it, singing hymns the
while in praise of the god. They thought thereby to shield
their cattle from the Idshis or woodsprites. At times a white eoek
is said to have been burnt in the fire amid dance and song. Even
now the female saint, whose feast the Greek ritual keeps on this
day [Agrippina], has the by-name kupdlnitsa; a burning pile of
wood is called the same, and so, according to Karamzin, is the
flower that is strewn on St. John's Day [ranunculus, crowfoot] }
This fire seems to have extended to the Lithuanians too : I fiud
that with them kwpoles is the name of a St. John's herb. Tettau
and Temme p. 277 report, that in Prussia and Lithuania, on
Midsummer £ve fires blaze on all the heights, as far as the eye
can reach. The next morning they drive their cattle to pasture
over the remains of these fires, as a specific against murrain,
magic and milk-drought, yet also against hailstroke and lightning.
The lads who lighted the fires go from house to house collecting
milk. On the same Midsummer Eve they fasten large burs and
mugwort (that is to say, kup^les) over the gate or gap through
which the cattle always pass.

Now at a bird's-eye view we perceive that these fires cover
nearly all Europe, and have done from time immemorial. About
them it might seem a great deal more doubtful than about water-
lustration (pp. 585. 590), whether they are of heathen or of Chris-
tian origin. The church had appropriated them so very early to
herself, and as Beleth and Durantis shew, had made them point
to John ; the clergy took some part in their celebration, though
it never passed entirely into their hands, but was mainly con-
ducted by the secular authorities and the people itself (see Suppl.).

Paciaudi* labours to prove that the fires of St. John have
nothing to do with the far older heathenish fires, but have sprung
out of the spirit of Christian worship.

' Karamzin 1. 78. 81. 284, Götze'a Rnaa. volkal. p. 280-2. Dobrovsky dflnies
a god Knpalo, and derives the feast from küpa (hayoock) ; Hanusoh p. 201 from
kupel, kaupel, kupadlo (bath, pond), because aco. to Slav notions the snn rises out
of his bath, or because pouring of water may have been practised at the festivaL
De cultu S. Johaunis baptistae, Bomae 1765, dissert. 8, oap. 1. 2.


(PALILIA). 625

In Dent. 18^ 10 and 2 Chron. 28^ 8 is mentioned the heathen
CQstom of making sons and daughters pass through afire. In
reference to this^ Theodoret bp. of Cyras (d. 458)^ makes a note
OQ 2 Elings 16, 3 : elSov yap ev run, iroKeccv aira^ rov erov^ iv
Tai? 7rXar6tat9 awTOfjueva^ iruph^ xal ravTa^ Tiva^ inrepaWofievox;^;
Kal iTTfB&VTa^ ov fiovov irdiSa^; aXXa /cal avSpa^, ra 84 ye ßpiifyrf
vaph T&v fiTfrepoDV irapa^epofieva Sia rrj^ <f>\oy6^. iSoxet Sk
rovTo awoTpoiruurfib^ elvai, Ka\ Kadapai,^. (In some towns I saw
fyres lighted once a yea/r in the streets^ and not only children
bat men lea/ping over them, and the infants passed through the
flame by their mothers. This was deemed a protective expiation).^
He says ' once a year/ bat does not specify the day^ which would
have shewn ns whether the custom was imported into Syria
from Rome. On April 21^ the day of her foundings Borne kept
the paliliay an ancient feast of herdsmen^ in honour of Pales^ a
motherly divinity reminding us of Ceres and Vesta.' This date
does not coincide with the solstice^ but it does with the time of
the Easter fire ; the ritual itself^ the leaping over the flame, the
driving of cattle through the glowing embers^ is quite the same
as at the Midsummer fire and needfire. A few lines from Ovid's
description in the 4th book of the Fasti shall suffice :

727. certe ego transilui positas ter in ordine flammas.
781. moxque per ardentes stipulae crepitantis acervos

trajicias celeri strenua membra pede.
795. pars quoque, quum saxis pastores saxa feribant^

scintillam subito prosiluisse ferunt ;
prima quidem periit ; stipulis excepta secunda est,

hoc argumentum ^ammajpaZiZi« habet.
805. per fiummas saluisse pecus, saluisse colonos ;

quod fib natali nunc quoque, Roma, tuo (see Suppl.).

The shepherds had struck the fire out of stone, and caught it on
straw ; the leaping through it was to atone and cleanse, and to
Becare their flock against all harm. That children were placed in
the fire by their mothers, we are not told here ; we know how
the infant Demophoon or Triptolemus was put in the fire by

* 0pp., ed. Sirmond, Paris, 1642. 1, 852.

' The masc. PaUs, which also oooors, may remind us of the Slav god of
Bhepherds, Boss. Volott Boh. Wele$.


626 ELEMENTS.

Ceres, as Achilles was by Thetis, to insare his immortality.^ This
fire-worship seems equally at home in Canaan, Syria, Greece and
Rome, so that we are not justified in pronouncing it a borrowed
and imported thing in any one of them. It is therefore hard to
determine from what source the Christians afterwards drew, when
they came to use it in their Easter and Midsummer festivals, or on
other occasions. Canon 65 of the Council of A.D. 680 already
contains a prohibition of these superstitious fires at new moon :
TO? €v Tafc vovfiffvlai^ iwo riv&v wpb r&v olxeifop ipyaoTrfpitav fj
oXkwv avaiTTOfieva^ Trvp/catct^^ &9 xal inrepdWeo'Oai nve^, Kara
TO edo^ ap'Xjcuov, hri')(€ipova'i,Vt airo irapovro^ Karapyrjdrjvai
TrpoardTTOfiev (The fires kindled before workshops and houses at
new moon, which some aUo leap over after the ancient custom,
we command henceforth to be abolished). The same thing was
then forbidden, which afterwards, on St. John's day at least, was
tolerated, and to some extent connected with church ordinances.

Now, even supposing that the Midsummer fire almost universal
throughout Europe had, like the Midsummer bath, proceeded more
immediately from the church, and that she had picked it up in
Italy directly from the Roman palilia ; it does not follow yet, that
our Easter fires in northern Germany are a mere modification of
those at Midsummer. We are at liberty to derive them straight
from fires of our native heathenism : in favour of this view is the
difference of day, perhaps also their ruder form ; to the last there
was more earnestness about them, and more general participation ;
Midsummer fires were more elegant and tasteful, but latterly con-
fined to children and common people alone, though princes and
nobles had attended them before. Mountain and hill are essential
to Easter fires, the Solstitial fire was frequently made in streets
and marketplaces. Of jumping through the fire, of flowers and
wreaths, I find scarcely a word in connexion with the former;
friction of fire is only mentioned a few times at the Midsummer
fire, never at the Easter, and yet this friction is the surest mark
of heathenism, and — as with needfire in North Germany, so with
Easter fires there — may safely be assumed. Only of these last
we have no accounts whatever. The Celtic bel-firea, and if my
conjecture be right, our Phol-days, stand nearly midway betwixt

* Conf. the snperstitioas * filinm in fomacem ponere pro sanitate febriuin,'
and * ponere infantem juarta ignem,' Superat. B, 10. 14, and p. 200».


OTHEB FIBES. 627

Easter and Midsummer, but nearer to Easter when that falls late.
A feature common to all three, and perhaps to all public fires
of antiquity, is the wheel, as friction is to all the ancient Easter
fires.

I must not omit to mention, that fires were also lighted at
the season opposite to summer, at Ch-istmas, and in Lent. To
the Yule-fire answers the Gaelic samhtheine (p. 614) of the 1st
November. In France they have still in vogue the sotiche de
Noel (from dies natalis, Prov. natal) or the trefiw (log that bums
three days, Superst.K,!. 28), conf. the <rö/bir in Brandos Pop.antiq.
1, 468. At Marseille they burnt the calendeau or ealigneau, a
large oaken log, sprinkling it with wine and oil ; it devolved on
the master of the house to set light to it (Millin 8, 336). In
Dauphin6 they called it chalendal, it was lighted on Christmas
eve and sprinkled with wine, they considered it holy, and had
to let it bum out in peace (Champol.-Figeac, p. 124). Christmas-
tide was called chalendes, Prov. calendas (Baynouard I, 292),
because New-year commenced on Dec. 25. In Germany I find
the same custom as far back as the 1 2th cent. A document of
1184 (Kindl.'s Münst. beitr. ii. urk. 34) says of the parish priest
of Ahlen in Münsterland : ' et arborem in nativitate Domini ad
festivum ignem suum adducendam esse dicebat.^ The hewing of
the ChrUtmas block is mentioned in the Weisthümer 2, 264. 302.
On the Engl, yule-clog see Sup. I, 1109, and the Scandinav.
julblok is well known ; the Lettons call Christmas eve hlukku
wdkkars, block evening, from the carrying about and burning of
the log (blukkis).^ Seb. Prank (Weltbuch 51*) reports the fol-
lowing Shrovetide customs from Franconia : ' In other places they
draw a fiery pUmgh kindled by a fire cunningly made thereon, till
it fall in pieces (supra, p. 264). Item, they wrap a waggon^wheel
all round in straw, drag it up an high steep mountain, and hold
thereon a merrymaking all the day, so they may for the cold,
with many sorts of pastime, as singing, leaping, dancing, odd or
even, and other pranks. About the time of vespers they set the
wheel afire, and let it run into the vale at full speed, which to look
upon is like as the sun were running from the sky.' Such a

' * So the Lith. kalledos m Christmas, from kalada, a log.' — Suppl.


628 ELEMENTS.

^ hoop'trundling ^ on Shrove Tuesday is mentioned by Schm. 1,
544 ; the day is called funkentag (spunk.)^ in the ßheingau halV-
fev^r, in Prance * la f8te des brandons.' ^ It is likely that similar
fires take place here and there in connexion with the vintage.
In the Voigtland on Mayday eve, which would exactly agree with
the bealteine, you may see fires on most of the hills, and children
with blazing brooms (Jul. Schmidt^s Beichenf. 118). Lastly, the
Servians at Christmas time light a log of oak newly cut, badniak,
and pour wine upon it. The cake they bake at such a fire and
hand round (Vuk^s Montenegro, 105) recalls the Gaelic practice
(p. 613). The Slavs called the winter solstice koleda, Pol.
koleda. Buss, koliadi, answering to the Lat. calendae and the
chalendes above ; ' they had games and dances, but the burning
of fires is not mentioned. In Lower Germany too kaland had
become an expression for feast and revelry (we hear of kalaud-
gilden, kalandbrüder), without limitation to Christmas time, or
any question of fires accompanying it (see SnppL).

If in the Mid. Ages a confusion was made of the two Johns,
the Baptist and the Evangelist, I should incline to connect with
St. John's fire the custom of St. John's rmnne (p. 61), which by
rights only concerns the beloved disciple. It is true, no fire
is spoken of in connexion with it, but fires were an essential
part of the old Norse minne-drinking, and I should think the
Sueves with their barrel of ale (p. 56) burnt fires too. In the
Saga Häkonar gö^a, cap. 16, we are told: ' eldar scyldo vera &
midjo gölfi i hofino, oc )>ar katlar yfir, oc scyloU fvil of^ eld bera/
should bear the cups round the fire. Very striking to my mind
is the ' dricka eldborgs sk&l ' still practised in a part of Sweden
and Norway (Sup. K, 122-3). At Candlemas two tall candles
are set, each member of the household in turn sits down between
them, takes a drink out of a wooden beaker, then throws the
vessel backwards over his head. If it fall bottom upwards, the
thrower will die; if upright, he remains aUve.^ Early in the
morning the goodwife ha.8 been up making her fire and baking ;
she now assembles her servants in a half-circle before the oven

^ Sap. E, 16. M6m. des antiqnaires 1, 236. 4, 371.

' Other deriyations have been attempted, Hanusoh 192-3. [See note, p. 627,
on Lith. kalledosJ]

* A similar throwing backwards of an emptied glass on other occasions, Sup. J
6U. 707.


OVEN. BONFERE. 629

door^ they all bend the knee, take one bite of cake^ and drink
eldborgsskdl (the fire^s health) ; what is left of cake or drink is
cast into the flame. An unmistakeable vestige of heathen fire-
worship^ shifted to the christian feast of candle-consecration as
the one that furnished the nearest parallel to it.

Our ofen, MHG. oven, 0H6. ovan, ON. on represents the Goth.
avJins, O. Swed. omn, ofn, ogn, Swed. iLgn, Dan. on ; they all
mean fomaz^ i.e. the receptacle in which fire is inclosed (conf.
focus, fuoco, feu), but originally it was the name of the fire itself.
Slay, ogan, ogen, ogn, Boh. ohen, Lith. ugnis, Lett, ugguns, Lat.
ignis, Sanskr. Agni the god of fire. Just as the Swedish servants
Icneel down before the ugns-hol, our German märchen and sagen
have retained the feature of kneeling before the oven and praying
to it; the unfortunate, the persecuted, resort to the oven, and
hewail their woe, they reveal to it some secret which they dare not
confide to the world.^ What would otherwise appear childish is
explained : they are forms and formulas left from the primitive
fire-worship, and no Ignger understood. In the same way people
complain and confess to mother earth, to a stone, a plant, an oak,
or to the reed (Morolt 1488). This personification of the oven
hangs together with Mid. Age notions about orcus and hell as
places of fire. Conf. Erebi fomaz (Walthar. 867), and what was
said above, p. 256, on Fomaa.

The luminous element permitted a feast to be prolonged into
the night, and fires have always been a vehicle for testifying
joy. When the worship had passed over into mere joy-fires, ignis
joeunditatis, feux de joie, Engl, bon-fires, these could, without
any reference to the service of a deity, be employed on other
occasions, «specially the entry of a king or conqueror. Thus
they made a torch-waggon follow the king, which was afterwards
set on fire, like the plough and wheels at the feast of St. John


* Hans nnd kinderm. 2, 20. 8, 221. Deutsche sagen no. 513. A children's
game has the rhyme : * Dear good oven, I pray to thee, As thoa hast a wife, send a
husband to me ! ' In the comedy * Life and death of honest Madam Slut (Schlam-
pampe),' Leipz. 1696 and 1750, act 8, sc. 8 : ' Come, let ns go and kneel to the oven,
maybe the gods will hear our prayer.' In 1558 one who had been robbed, but had
sworn secrecT, told his stoxy to the Dutch-tile oven at the inn. Bommell's Hess,
gesch. 4, note p. 420. Joh. Mailer's Hist. Switz. 2, 92 (a.D. 1838). ' Nota est in
eligiis Tibulli Januae personificatio, cui amantes dolores suos narrant, quam orant,
quam inciepant ; erat enim daemoniaca quaedam Tis januartmi ez opinione yeterum,'
Biasen's Tib. 1, clxzix. Conf. Hartung's BeL der Böm. 2, 218 seq.


630 ELEMENTS.

(BA. 265). ' FacuKs et faustis acclamationibaa^ at prioribus
regibus assaeverant^ obviam ei (non) procedebant/ Lamb, schafn.
ad an. 1077. Of what we now call illumination, the lighting up
of streets and avenues^ there are probably older instances than
those I am able to quote : ^ von kleinen kerzen maneo schoup
geleit üf ölboume loup/ of little tapers many a cluster ranged in
olive bower, Parz. 82, 25. Detmar (ed. GrautoflF 1, 301) on the
Emp. Charles IV,'s entry into Lübeck : ' des nachtes weren die
Inchten bernde ut alien husen, unde was so licht in der nacht als
in dem dage.' The church also escorted with torchlight pro-
cessions : ' cui (abbati) intranti per noctis tenebras adhibent faces
et lampadas,' Chapeaville 2, 532 (12th cent.). ' Hirimannus dox
susceptus est ab archiepiscopo manuqae deducitur ad ecclesiam
accensis luminaribus, cunctisque sonantibus campanis,^ Dietm.
merseb. 2, 18. ' Taceo coronas tarn luminoso fulgore a luminaribas
pendentes,' Vita Joh. gorziens. (bef. 984) in Mabillon's Acta
Ben., sec, 5, p. 395 (see SuppL).

3. Air.

The notions ' avr, wind, weather/ touch one another, and their
names often do the same.^ Like water, like fire, they are all
regarded as a being that moves and lives : we saw how the words
animus, spiritus, geist (pp. 439. 461) come to be used of genii,
and the Slav, dukh is alike breath, breathing, and spirit.
Wuotan himself we found to be the all-pervading (p. 133) ; like
Yishnu, he is the fine aether that fills the universe. But lesser
spirits belong to this element too: Oustr, Zephyr, Blaser (p. 461),
Blaster, Wind-amd-weather (p. 548), proper names of dwarfs,
elves, giants. In the Lithuanian legend the two giants Wanda
(water) and Weyas (wind) act together (p. 579). To the OHG.
wetar, OS. weda/r, AS. weder (tempestasj corresponds the Slav.
veter, vietar (ventus, aer) : and to Goth, vinds, OHG. wint, the
Lat. ventus. The various names given to wind in the AlvisniM
(Saem. 50*) are easily explained by its properties of blowing,
blustering and so forth : oepir (weeper) ejulans, the wailing,
conf. OS. wop (whoop), OHG. wuof ejulatus ; gneggio9r (neigher)
strepens, quasi hinniens; dynfari cum sonitu iens.

> Our luft I inolnde nnder the root Unban, no. 630, whose primary meaning
is stiU obsoure ; oonf . kliuban kloft, skinban skuft.


AIR. THE WINDS. 631

Thus personification already peeps oat in mere appellatives;
in the mythic embodiments themselves it is displayed in the most
various ways.

Woodcuts and plates (in the Sachsenspiegel) usually represent
the winds, half symbolically, as hlowmg faces, or heads, probably
a fancy of very early date, and reminding us of the hlowmg John's-
head that whirls Herodias about in the void expanse of heaven
(p. 285). The winds of the four cardinal points are imagined as
four dwarfs : ' undir hvert horn (each corner) settu )?eir dverg',
Sn. 9 (p. 461) ^ j but by the Greeks as giants and brethren :
Zephyrus, Hesperus, Boreas, Notus (Hes. Theog. 871), and
Boreas's sons Zetes and Kalals are also winged winds (ApoUon.
Argon. 1, 219). Aeolus (aw\o9 nimble, changeful, many-hued),
at first a hero and king, was promoted to be governor and guider
of winds {rafiirj^ dv€/jL€ov, p. 93). In Russia popular tradition
makes the four winds sons of one mother,^ the 0. Buss, lay of Ig6r
addresses the wind as ' lord,' and the winds are called StribogVs
grandsons,^ his divine nature being indicated by the ^ bogh' in
his name. So in fairy-tales, and by Eastern poets, the toind is
introdaced talking and acting : * the wind, the heavenly child /' *

In the ON. genealogy, Porniotr, the divine progenitor of giants
(p. 240), is made father of Edri (stridens) ^who rules over the
toinds ;' Käri begets lökul (glacies), and lökul Sneer (nix), the
king whose children are a son Thorri and three daughters Fönn,
Drifa, Miöll, all personified names for particular phenomena of
snow and ice (Sn. 358. Fomald. sog. 2, 3. 17). Käri however is
brother to Hlßr (p. 241) and Logi (p. 240), to water and fire, by
which is expressed the close affinity between air and the other
two elements. The old Scandinavian cry * bl&s kdri ! ' is echoed
in that of the Swedish sailors ^ bias kajsa !' a goddess instead of
the god (Afzelius 1, 30). Both wind and fire ^ blow' and ^ emit
spray,' nay, fire is called the red wind : ' von ir zweier swerte gie
ierfiur-rote wint,' Nib. 2212, 4. In the same line of thought a
higher divinity, NiörSr, has the sovereignty given him alike over


^^ And therefore dttr&ni^ wettr6ntt sundrdni, nordrSni are masc. nouns ; the
Gofbi^ forms would be dtutr&neis^ etc.

' Kuss. Tolksmärchen, Leipz. 1831. p. 119.

' ' Vdtre ydtrilo gospodine,' Hanka's ed. pp. 12. 36.

* E.g. in Nalus, p. 180 (Bopp's 2 ed.). Kinderm. nos. 16. 88.

VOL. II. O


632 ELEMENTS.

water, wind and fire (p. 217) ; and Loptr (aereus) is another name
for Loki (p. 246). A phrase in Csedm. 181, 13 seems worthy of
notice : ' lyfUhelme hepoabt/ galea aerea tectus (see Suppl.).

When in our language we still call one kind of tempest (OHG.
vAwint, Graff 1, 624), the Windsbraut (wind's bride), and it was
called the same in our older speech, OHG. wintes brut^ 0. v. 19,
27. windis prut, Gl. Hrab. 975^ Jun. 230. Diut. 2, 182. Gl.
florent. 982*-3M*'j MHG. windea brut (Gramm. 2, 606), Tit. 3733.
s winder (swifter) danne windes brut, Ms. 2, 131*. lief spilnde
als ein w.b. durch daz gras, Fragm. 19'. alsam in r6re diu w. b.,
Reinfried 159^. varn mit hurt als ein w. prut, Frauend. 92, 13 ;—
it is only the proper names that seem to be lost.^ The corrupt
forms wintsprout, -praut (Suchenw. 41, 804), windbrauss (in later
writers, as Matthesius), windsprauch (Schm. 4, 110), have arisen
out of the endeavour to substitute some new meaning for the
no longer intelligible mythic notion. They say it is a woman
snatching up a napkin from the bleaching ground and falling
down with it. Moneys Anz. 8, 278. So in the Netherlands the
whirlwind is called barende frauw. Wolf nos. 518-620 (see Suppl.).

This wind^s-bride is a whirlwind, at which our mythology
brings the highest gods into play. Even Wuotan's ' furious host,'
what is it but an explanation of the storm wind howling through
the air ? The OHG. ziu, turbines, we have traced to Zio, pp. 203.
285 ; and the storm-cloud was called rruiganwetar (p. 332 last 1.)*
But the whirlwind appears to be associated with Phol also (pp<
229. 285), and with an opprobrious name for the devil (schweine-
zagel, säuzagel, süstert, sow^s tail), to whom the raising of the
whirl was ascribed (Superst. I, 522) * as well as to witches (ibid.
554). It was quite natural therefore to look upon some female
personages also as prime movers of the whirlwind, the gyrating
dancing Herodias, and /rau Hilde, frau Holde (p. 285). In Kilian
693 it is A fahrendes weib ; in Celtic legend it is stirred up hjfays,

^ Orifhyia oarried off by Boreas (Ov. Met. 6, 710)' could with perfect justice
be named vnndesbrüt by Albrecht.

' Two Pol. tales in Woyoicki 1, 81 and 89 : When the whirlwind (vikher) sweeps
up the loose sand, it is the evil spirit dancing ; throw a tharp new knife into the
middle of it, and you wound him. A magician plunged such a knife into his
threshold, and condemned his man, with whom he was angry, for seyen years to ride
round the world on the swift stormwind. Then the whirlwind lifted the man, who
was making haycocks in a meadow, and bore him away into the air. This knife-
throwing is also known to Germ, superstition everywhere (I, 554=).


wind's BRIDE. 633

and the Iridh name for it is sigh ffooite (O'Brien), aighgaoithe
(Croker III, xzi) ; in a whirlwind elvish sprites can steal (Stewart
p. 122). It ia a popular belief in Sweden, that the skogsrii
(wood-wife) makes her presence known by a violent whirlwind
which shakes the trees even to breaking. The Slav, poledniee
(snpra, p. 478n.) is a female daemon, who flies up in the dust ot
the whirlwind (Jungmann sub v.). According to a legend of the
Hark (Kuhn no. 167) the whirlwind was a noble damsel who
loved the chase above everything, and made havock of the hus-
bandman's crops, for which she is doomed to ride along with
the storm to all eternity ; this again reminds us of Diana and
the huntress Holda (see Suppl.).

In addition to these widely spread fancies, there is a peculiar
one about the origin of wind, which appears to extend through
nearly all Europe. According to the Edda, HrcesvelgriQ the name
of a giant, who in the shape of cm eagle ^ sits at the end of heaven :
from his wings cometh all wind upon men, Ssem. 35^. Snorri
defines it more minutely : He sits at the north side of heaven,
and when he flaps his wings, the winds rise from under them (Sn.
22.) And in the formula of the trygdamdJ (Grägäs 2, 170), it
is said : ' svft vtSa sem valr fl^gr v&rlUngan dag, oc standi byrr
iindir bdda vasngi/ far as falcon flies a summerlong day, when
stands fair wind under both his wings. Light clouds threatening
storm are called in Iceland klo-sigi (Biöm spells kl6segi), claw-
sinking ; ace. to Ounnar Pauli, because the eagle causes storm by
letting down one of his claws (Finn Magn. pv 452) .^ It is also
an Indian belief that tempest comes from Oaruda's vjings,
Somadeva 2, 102 : the motion of his flight stirs up the wind.

Then again people in the Shetland isles are said to conjure the
storm-wind in the shape of a great eaglet Further we are told
that Charles the Great had a brazen eagle fixed on the top of
his palace at Achen (Aix), and there was some connexion
between it and the wind ; Richerus 3, 71 (Pertz 5, 622) relates
the inroad of the Welsh (Gtauls) in 978 : * Aeneam aquilam, quae
in vertice palatii a Karolo magno acsi volans fixa erat,* in vul-

^ The giants often pnt on the amar ham (erne's ooat) : Thiazi in Sn. 80. 82,
Sattüngr in Sn. 86.

' Bay also was imaged as a bird, wlio dng his claws into the donds.

' Soott's Pirate, Edinb., 1822.

* It ought not to be overlooked here, that at tlie west door of OSin's hall there


634 ELElfENTS.

iurnum converterunt. Nam Germani earn in favonium (Up.
^erm. fohn) converterant^ subfciliter significantes Gallos suo
equitatu quandoque posse devinci/ The meaning seems to be,
that the French turned the eagle's head to the south-east, the
Oermans to the west, to signify that like the storm they could
make a raid (ride, that is what equitatus comes to) upon the
country toward which the bird's head was directed. Dietmar of
Merseburg's account 3, 6 (Pertz 5, 761) is as follows : ' Post haec
autem imperator ordinavit expeditionem suam adversas Lotharium
regem KArelingorum, qui in Aquisgrani palatium et sedem regiam
nostrum semper respicientem dominium valido ezercitu praesump-
sit invadere, sibique versa aquila designare. Haec stat in
orientali parte domus, morisque fuit omnium hunc locum possi-
dentium ad sua earn vertere regna,' This statement appears less
accurate than that of Richerus, for each would turn the eagle's
head not toward his own kingdom, but the foreign or depen-
dent one; conf. Jahrb. d. Eheinlande v. vi. 78. But even in
the 12th cent, the wind's connexion with the eagle was still
known in Germany, for Veldek sings, MS. 1, 21*: 'j&rlanc ist
reht daz der ar winke dem vil süezen winde/ all this year the
eagle must beckon to (i.e. bring) a mild wind. How many
fancies familiar to the Mid. Ages must be lost to us now, when
of all the poets that mention air and wind and storm no end of
times, only one happens to allude to this myth ! But not only
do aquila and aquilo/ vultur and vultumus point to each other ;
avefJLo^ (wind) and a€T09 (eagle) are likewise from one root
ao), arjfiL? According to Horapollo 2, 15 a sparrowhawk with
outspread wings represents the wind. Eagle, falcon, vulture,
sparrowhawk, are here convertible birds of prey. The Indian
garuda, king of birds, is at the same time the wind. The O.T.
also thinks of the winds as winged creatures, without specifying
the bird, 2 Sam. 22, 11: 'rode on the wings of the winds';
Pa. 18,11. 104,3: 'volavit super pennas ventorum/ which


also hung a wolf, and over it an eagU (drüpir örn yfir, Sasm. 41**), and that the
yictorious Saxons fixed an eagle over the city's gate, snpra, p. 111.

^ Festus : * aquilo ventus a Yehementissimo volatu ad instar aqoilae appel-
latur ' ; conf. Hesjchius, dxipos 6 ßoß^ai,

^ Wackemagel on Ablaut (vowel-change) p. 80. Eustathius on the II. 87. la
Bom.


WIND. STORM. 635

Notker translates 'überfloag die vettacha dero windo'; and
Martina 7*^ has, in allusion to the biblical phrase^ ' der üf der
mnde vedem saz.' The expression used by Herbert 17091, 'der
wint liez ouch dare gän/ shews that the poet imagined it either
flying or riding (see Suppl.).

The Finns call the eagle kokko (kotka) ; but a poem descriptive
of the northstorm begins : ' Came the eagle on from Turja, down
from Lappmark sinks a bird/ and ends : ' Neath his wing a
hundred men, thousands on his tail's tip, ten in every quill there
be.' ^ And in a Mod. Greek folk-song the spa/rrowhawk (as in
HorapoUo) calls upon the winds to hush : airo rii TpUop<f>a ßouvh
lepdtct eavpe XaXid • Tra-^er,' aipe^, ira'^ere airo'^^ k oKKt^v fiiäv
ßpaSid.^ The winds are under the bird's command^ and obey
him. In another song the mother sets three to watch her son
while he sleeps, in the mountains the sun, in the plain the eagle
(a€T09), on the sea the brisk lord Boreas : the sun sets, the eagle
goes to sleep, and Boreas goes home to his mother ; ^ from the
whole context here we must understand by the eagle the sweet
soft wind, and by Boreas the cool northwind.

Hrcesvelgr (OHG. Hrfiosnolah?) means swallower of corpses,
flesh-eater, Sansk. krayiyäda, and is used of birds of prey that
feed on carrion, but may also be applied to winds and storms
which purify the air : they destroy the eflSuvia from bodies that
he unburied.

Is that the foundation of the fancy, that when a man Jiangs
himself, a tempest springs up, and the roar of the wind pro-
claims the suicide ? ^ Is it the greedy carrion-fowl that comes
on in haste to seize the dead, his lawful prey, who swings un-
buried on the tree ? Or does the air resent the self-murderer's
polluting presence in it? A New-year's storm is thought to
announce pestilence (Sup. I, 330. 910), spreading an odour of
death in anticipation.

Tempest (like fire) the common people picture to themselves as
a voracums hungry being (of course a giant, according to the root


1 Finniflh ranes, ups. 1819, pp. 58-60.
< Fauriel 2, 236. Wh. MüUer 2, 100.
> Fanriel 2, 482. Wh. MiUler 2, 120.

* Bap. I, 843. 1013. Kirchhofer*B Sohweiz. spr. 327. CI. Brentano's Libussa
p. 432. Sartori's Beise in Kärnten 2, 164. Leoprecbting 102.


636 ELEMENTS.

idea of iötunn, p. 519), and they try to pacify him by pouring out
flour in the air.^ I take this to be an ancient superstition, and
light is thrown upon it now by a Norwegian tale in Asbjomsen
no. 7, of the narthivind carrying off a poor fellow^s meal three
times, but compensating him afterwards by costly presents. This
northwind behaves exactly as a rough good-natured giant. (See
Suppl.).

The raising of the whirlwind was, as we have seen (p. 632),
ascribed to divine, semi-divine and diabolic beings. In Norway
they say of whirlwinds and foul weather, ' the giant stirs his pots,'
Faye p. 7.

In two weather-spells (Append., Exorcism v.) Mermeut and
Fasolt are called upon as evil spirits and authors of stonns.
Fasolt is the well-known giant of our hero-legend, brother of
Ecke, who was himself god of tides and waves (p. 239). The
two brothers have kindred occupations, being rulers of the dread
sea and of the weather. What we gather from the second spell
about Fasolt seems to me of importance, and another conclu-
sive proof of the identity of Ecke with Oegir : as H16r and
Käri.are brothers and giants, so are also Ecke and Fasolt; as
H16r commands the sea and K&ri the winds, so does Ecke rule
the waters and Fasolt the storm. To the Norse poets the ttnnd
is ' Fomiots sonr ' and ' Oegis brö^ir.'* Now, as H16r was called
by another nation Oegir, i.e. IJogi, Ecke, so Kftri may have been
called Fasolt. Fasolt must be an old word, if only because it is
hard to explain ; does it come under the OHG. fasa, fiasön (Graff
3, 705) ? In ON., ' fas ' is snperbia, arrogantia ; the name seems
to express the overbearing nature of a giant. Mermeut, which
occurs nowhere else, perhaps means the sea-mutterer f Schm. 2,
552. 653 has maudem, mutem, murmurare. — These demi-gods
and giants stand related to Donar the supreme director of clouds
and weather, as ^olus or Boreas to Zeus.

And from Zeus it was that the favourable wished-for wind
proceeded: J 409 oipo^, Od« 5, 176. Wiiotan (the all-pervading,

1 Sup. I, 282. Praetorins's Weltbesohr. 1, 429 : At Bamberg, when a violtnt
wind was raging, an old woman snatched ap her mealsaok, and emptied it oat of
window into the air, with the words : ' Dear wind, don't be so wild ; take that home
to your child ! ' She meant to appease the hnnger of the wind, as of a greedy
Üon or fierce wolf.

> * Fomiots sef ar ' = sea and wind, S»m. 90^


WIND. STORM. 637

p. 630) makes the wish-wind, dska-byrr, p. 144. What notion
lies at the bottom of Wolfram's making Juno give the ' segels
laft/ sail-wind (Para. 753, 7) ? Again in Para. 750, 7 and 766,
4 : ' Juno faocte (fitted) daz weUr* and ' segelweter* The fruit-
ful breeze that whispers in the com was due to Fro and his boar,
pp. 213-4. An ON. name of QSinn was FidWr, the weatherer:
' at )?eir sögSu han veiSrum rifBa,' he governs weathers (Pornm.
sog. 10, 171). Such a god was Pogoda to the Slavs, and the Pol.
pogoda. Boh. pohoda, still signifies good growing or ripening
weather [Buss, god = time, year; pogoda = weather, good or bad].
Typhon in Egyptian legend meant the south wind, Hes. Theog.
301. 862.

The Lettons believed in a god of winds and storms Ohkupeemis,
and thought that from his forehead they came down the sky to
the earth. ^

In an ON. saga (Fomald. sog. 3, 122) appears giant Grtmnir,
whose father and brother are named Grtmdlfr and Grimarr, a sort
of Polyphemus, who can excite storm or good wind : here again
it is OSinn we must think of (p. 144). Two semi-divine beings,
honoured with temples of their own and bloody sacrifices, were
the giant^s daughters Thorgerffr and Irpa (p. 98) . In the Skäld-
skaparmäl 164 Thorger8r is called Hölgabruffr or king Hölgi's
daughter, elsewhere hörgabrüdr and hörgatröll (Fomald. sog. 2,
131), sponsa divum, immanissima gigas, which reminds us of our
vnnd'S'bride. Both the sisters sent foul weather, storm and hail,
when implored to do so, Pornm. sog. 11, 134-7. And ON.
legend mentions other dames besides, who make /cmZ weather and
fog, as Hei'Si and Hamglöm, Fomald. sog. 2, 72, Ingibiörg, ibid.
3, 442 (see Suppl.).«

What was at first imputed to gods, demigods and giants, the
sending of wind, storm and hail (vis daemonum concitans pro-
cellas, Beda's Hist. eccl. 1, 1 7), was in later times attributed to
human sorcerers.

First we find the Lex Visigoth, vi. 2, 3 provides against the

' malefici et immissores tempestatum, qui quibusdam incanta-

' iioDibus grandinem in vineas messesque mittere perhibentur.'

Then Charles the Great in his Capit. of 789 cap. 64 (Pertz 3, 64) ;

^ Okka, or anlca, storm ; peere forehead. Stender's Gramm. 266.
> Conf . p. 888, 468 hnlizhialmr.


638 ELEMENTS.

' ut nec cauculatores et incantatores^ nee tempestarii vel obliga-
tores non fiant^ et nbicanqae sunt^ emendentar vel damnentar/
Soon after that king's death, about the beginning of Lewis the
Pious's reign, bp. Agobard (d. 840) wrote * Contra insolsam vnlgi
opinionem de grandine et tonitniis/ From this treatise, following
Baluz's edit, of the works of Agobard, I take a few passages.

1, 145 : In his regionibos pene omnes homines, nobiles et
ignobiles, nrbani et rnstici, senes et juvenes, putant grandines et
tonitrua hominum libitu posse fieri. Dicunt enim, mox at aadie-
rint tonitroa et viderint falgura : ' aura levaiitia est.' Inter-
rogati yero, quid sit aura levatitia ? alii cum yerecundia, parum
remordente conscientia, alii aatem confidenter, ut imperitoruoi
moris esse solet, confirmant incantationibus hominum qui dicun-
tur tempestarii, esse levatam, et ideo dici levatitiam auram.

1, 146 : Plerosque antem vidimus et audivimus tanta dementia
obrutos, tanta stultitia alienates, at credant et dicant, quandam
esse regionem quae dicatur Magonia, ex qua naves veniant in
nubibus, in quibus fruges quae grandinihus decidunt et tempesta-
tibus pereunt, vehantur in eandem regionein, ipsis videlicet nautis
aereis dantibus pretia tempestariis, et accipientibus framenta vel
ceteras fruges. Ez his item tarn profunda stultitia excoecatis, at
hoc posse fieri credant, vidimus plures in quodam conventu homi-
num exhibere vinctos quatuor homines, tres viros et unam femi-
nam, quasi qui de ipsis navibus cedderint: quos scilicet, per
aliquot dies in vinculis detentos, tandem coUecto conventu homi-
num exhibuerunt,ut dixi, in nostra praesentia, tanquam lapidandos.
Sed tamen vincente veritate post multam ratiocinationem, ipsi qui
eos exhibuerant secundum propheticum illud confusi sunt, sicut
confunditur fur quando deprehenditur.

1, 153 : Nam et hoc quidam dicunt, nosse se tales tempestarios,
qui dispersam grandinem et late per regionem decidentem feu^iant
unum in locum fluminis aut silvae infructuosae, aut super unam,
ut ajunt, cupam, sub qua ipse lateat, defluere. Frequenter certe
audivimus a multis dici quod talia nossent in certis locis facta, sed
necdum audivimus, ut aliquis se haec vidisse testaretur.

1, 158 : Qui, mox ut audiunt tonitrua vel cum leviflatu venti,
dicunt ' levatitia aura est,' et maledicunt dicentes : ' maledicta
lingua ilia et arefiat et jam praecisa esse debebat, quae hos &cit ! '

1, 159 : Nostris quoque temporibus videmus aliquando, coUectis


WIND. STORM. 639

messibns et yindemiis^ propter siccitatem agricolas seminare non
posse. Quare non obtinetis apnd tempestarios vestros^ ut mittant
auras levatitias, qnibns terra inrigetar^ et postea seminare possitis?

1^ 161 : Isti antem^ contra qaos sermo est^ ostendant nobis
komnncnlos^ a sanctitate^ jnstitia et sapientia alienos^ a fide et
veritate nudos^ odibiles etiam prozimis^ a quibus dicunt vehement
timmos imbres, sonantia aquae tonitma et levatitiaa auras posse
fieri.

1, 162 : In tantnm malum istud jam adolevit^ ut in plerisque
locis sint homines miserrimi^ qui dicant^ se non equidem nosse
immittere tempestates^ sed nosse tamen defendere a tempestate
liabitatores loci. His habent statntum, quantum de frugibus suis
donent, et appellant hoc canonicum. Many are backward in tithes
and alms^ canonicum autem^ quern dicunt^ suis defensoribus (a
qaibus se defendi credunt a tempestate) nullo praedicante^ nullo
admonente vel ezhortante^ sponte p&rsolvunt, diabolo ioliciente.
Denique in talibus ex parte magnam spem habent vitae suae^
quasi per illos vivant (see Suppl.).

It was natural for driving hail- clouds to be likened to a ship
sailing across the sky ; we know our gods were provided with
cars and ships^ and we saw at p. 882 that the very Edda bestows
on a cloud the name of vindflot. But when the tempest-men
by their spells call the air-ship to them or draw it on^ they are
servants and assistants rather than originators of the storm.
The real lord of the weather takes the corn lodged by the hail
into the ship with him^ and remunerates the conjurors^ who
might be called his priests. The Christian people said : ' these
conjurors sell the grain to the aeronaut^ and he carries it away.'
Bat what mythic country can Magonia mean ? It is not known
whether Agobard was bom in Germany or Gaul^ though his name
is enough to shew his Frankish or Burgundian extraction ; just
as little can we tell whether he composed the treatise at Lyons^
or previously at some other place. The name Magonia itself
seems to take us to some region where Latin was spoken^ if we
may rely on its referring to magus and a magic land.

In later times I find no mention of this cloud-ship, except in
H. Sachs^ who in his schwank of the Lappenhäuser ii. 4^ 89° re-
lates how they made a ship of feathers and straw^ and carried it
up the hill^ with the view of launching out in it when the viiet


640 ELEMENTS.

should fall, Fisclier in Garg. 96* introdaces quite anconnectedlj
the nebelschiffs segel of Philozenus (the gaestfriend or Zens ?) in
a passage that has nothing in Babelais answering to it.

In the latter part of the Mid. Ages there went a story of the
wind-selling inhabitants of Yinland^ which I give from a work
composed towards 1360 by Glanvil or Bartholomaens Anglictts^
^Deproprietatibus rerum' 15, 172 : 'Oens (Yinlandiae) estbarbara,
agrestis et saeva> magicis artibas occnpata. Undo et naviganti-
bas per eornm litora, vel apad eos propter venti defectnm moram
contrahentibus, ventum venalem offemnt atqae vendnnt. Globnm
enim de file facinnt, et diversos nodos in eo connecten^tes, usque ad
ires nodos vel plnres de globo exirahi praecipinnt^ secnndnm qnod
volnerint ventum habere fortiorem.^ Qnibns propter eornm in-
credalitatem illudentes, daemones aerem condtant et ventum
majorem vel minorem excitant, secundum quod plures niödos de
filo extrahunt vel pauciores, et quandoqne in tantnm oommovent
ventum, quod miseri talibus fidem adhibentes justo judicio sub-
raerguntur/ — This selling of wind in Wilandia (as he calls it) is
likewise mentioned in Seb. Frankes Weltbuch 60*, without any
description of the method. By Yinland is to be understood s
part of the Greenland coast which had been early visited by
Norwegians and Icelanders, and in ON. tales is by turns called
Yinland and Yindland ; ^ the latter form might have suggested
the whole story of raising the wind, on which the ON. writings
as well as Adam of Bremen are silent. Others however tell
the same story of the Finns (01. Magnus 3, 15) : it seems to me
a tradition spread all over the North ^ (see Suppl.).

The Norse legends name wind produced by magic göminga^veSr.
Ogautan (like Aeolus) had a veffr-belgr (-bellows, or leathern
bag) ; when he shook it, storm and wind broke out (Fomald.
sog. 2, 412); the same with MönduU (3, 338). The Swedish

^ This globus resembles the Lat. turbo, a top or teetotum used in magic : * oitoxn
retro solve, solve tnrbinem,' Hor. Epod. 17, 7.

> Fornm. sog. 2, 246. Isl. sog. 1, 9. 100. 151. Gonl. Torfiaeas's Hist. Viulandiae
antiquae, Hafn. 1705.

s The Esthonians believed that wind could be generated and altered. In the
direction whence ^ou wish it to blow, hang up a snake or set an axe upright, and
whistle to make it come. A olerg^yman happened to see some peasants makiug a
great fuss round three itonet, eating, drinking and dancing to the sound of rostie
instruments. Questioned as to the object of the feast, they replied that by means
of those stones they could produce wet weather or dry ; dry, if they set them
upright, wet if they laid them along (lieber die Ehsten, p. 48) ; supra pp. 598-7.


STORM. 641

king Einkr^ son of Bagnar Lodbrok, bore the samame of
veffrhcUtr (ventosi pilei) : whichever way he ttumed his hat, from
there the wished for wirhd would blow (Saxo Oram. 175. 01.
Magnus 3^ 13. Gejer's Häfder 582). One of our nursery-tales
even^ no. 71^ tells of a man who can direct the weather by
sating his hat straight or askew. There is an expression in
the Edda^ vindhidlmr (Ssem. 168^)^ which reminds me of the
OHG. name Wiridhelm, Trad. fuld. 2, 167 (see Suppl.).

That is a beautiful fancy in the Edda^ of seven-and-twenty
▼alkyrs riding through the air^ and when their horses shake,
themselves^ the dew dropping out of their manes on the deep
▼alleys, and hail on the lofty trees : a sign of a fruitful year. Seem.
145. So morning-dew falls on the earth each day from the foam-
ing bit of the steed Hrimfazi (dew-mane), Sn. 11. The ON.
meldropi, AS.' melede&w, OHG. militou (Gl. Jun. 224), MHG.
miltou (Ms. 2, 124*), all take us back to mel (Inpatum equi) ;
conf. note on Elene p. 164, where mel is derived from midl,
mittul, and supra p. 421. Antiquity referred all the phenomena
of nature to higher powers. The people in Bavaria call a dark
rain-cloud * anel mit der laugen,' granny with her ley (Schm. 1,
63) ; in Bohemia light clouds are habhy, grannies. When moun-
tain mist is rising, the Esthonians say ^ the Old one is putting his
fire out ' ; our people ascribe it to animals at least : ' the hare is
boiling [his supper], the fox is bathing, brewing,' Beinh. ccxcvi.
When shapes keep rising in the mists on the seashore, the
Italians call it fata morgana^ p. 412 (see Suppl.).

The Scythians explained drifting snow as flying feathers (Herod.
4, 31), and our people see in the flakes the feathers out of the
goddess's bed, or goose (p. 268). Those snow-women Fönn,
DHfa, MiöU (p. 631) appear also to touch one side of Holda. The
Lettish riddles, ' putns skreen, spahrni pill,' and ' putns skreen,
spalwas putt '^ mean a rain-cloud and a snow-cloud. In Switzer-
land vulgar opinion looks upon avalanches as ravening beasts, on
whom (as on fire) you can put a check (see Suppl.).

4. Eabth.

Of the goddess, and her various names, we have spoken already :
Ncrthus p. 251, Erda p. 250, Fairguni p. 172. 256, Erce p. 253,

^ Bird flies, viDgB drip. Bird flies, feathers drop. Stender's Gramm. 260.


642 ELEMENTS.

Hladana p. 256, and others ; in which the ideas of the ancients
about Terra, Gaia> Ops, Bhea, Cybele, Ceres repeat themselves.
On p. 303 the Indian Prithivi was compared with Freyja, and the
closest kinship exists between Freyr and NiörSr (the male Ner-
thus) . But also the bare element itself, the molte (mould, pulvis)
p. 251, was accounted holy : it is the ;^Öö)i; iroXvßoreipa, out of
its teeming lap rise fruits and trees, into it the dead are laid, and
decay or fire restores them to dust and ashes.^ To die was ' to
sink to the earth,' ' til iarSar (til moldar) hniga,' ' to kiss the
earth,' still more prettily in ON. ' i modurcett falla ' (Nialss. cap.
45), in matemum genus cadere, to fall back into the womb of
terra mater} They also said ' iarffar niegin kiosa ' (vim tellnris
eligere, ue. invocare), Sssm. 27^; and as the Greeks made the
falling giant acquire new strength the moment he touched the
ground, the Edda has ' aukinn iarÖar msgni^ (auctus vi telluris),
1 18^, 119*.^ One who had been long away from home kissed the
earth on treading it once more ; in O.Fr. poems ' baiser la terre '
is a sign of humility, Berte pp^ 35. 43. 58. Renart 14835. As
the pure stream rejects the malefactor, so neither will the earth
endure him: 'uns solt diu erde nicht tragen,' Troj. 491 [conf. 'art
cursed from the earth,' Gen. 4. 10--12]. Secrets were entrusted
to the earth, as well as to fire and oven, p. 629 (see Suppl.).

It is more especially earth grown over with grass, the green-
award, that has a sacred power ; such grass the Sanskrit calls
hhttsa, and in particular durva, to which correspond the AS. turf,
ON. torf, OHG. zurba : ' holy earth and haulms of durva,' Sak-
untala (Hirzel pp. 51. 127). I have also accounted for the famous
chrene crud of the Salic law by our ' reines kraut,' clean herb ;
and explained ' chreneschruda (dat.) jactare' by the Boman

^ Irstantent (they rise again) fon themo fülen legare, üz fon theru <uguy fon
thero falaunsgu, fon themo irditgen herde, O. t. 20, 25--8.

^ Ancient tombs have been discovered, in which the bodies neither lie nor sit,
bnt crouch with the head, arms and legs pressed together, in receptacles nearly
square. M. Fr6d. Troyon of French Switz., who has carefully explored and ob-
served many old graves, expressed to me his opinion, that by this singular treat-
ment of dead bodies it was prob, intended to replace man in the same posture that
he maintained in the womb before birth. Thus the return into mother earth would
be at the same time an intimation of the coming new birth and resurrection of the
embryo.

* The Servians, by way of protesting, say * tako mit zemlie ! * so (help) me
earth. A Gaelic saw (Armstrong sub v. coibhi, priest, supra p. 92 note) declares :
* ged is fagus claoh do 'n lir, is faigse na sin cobhair choibhi,' near as a stone is to
the ground, the coibhi*s help is nearer still, which seems to imply theearth^s prompt
assistance as well as the priest's.


EARTH. 643

^puram herbam tollere/ as the Hel. 73, 7 has hrencumi, an OHG.
gloss reincumes ={Tumenti, MHG. 'daz reine gras/ Iw. 6446, and
grass and 'der melm,^ dust, are coupled together, Wh. 24, 28.
The purport of the law is, that earth or dust must be taken up
from the four corners of the field, and thrown with the hand over
the nearest kinsman. It was a solemn legal ceremony of heathen
times, which the christian Capitulars abolished. Against my
interpretation, however, Leo has now set up a Celtic one (cruin-
neach collectus, criadh terra) ,^ and I cannot deny the weight
of his arguments, though the German etymology evidently
has a stronger claim to a term incorporated in the text itself
than in the case of glosses [because the Latin text must be
based on a Frankish original] . The mythic use made of the
earth remains the same, whichever way we take the words.

The ON. language of law offers another and no less significant
name: the piece of turf [under which an oath was taken] is
called iardmen, iarffa/r men ; now ' men ' is literally monile, OHG.
mani, meni, AS. mene, as we saw- in the case of Freyja^s neck-
kee 'Brisinga men.' But 'iarSar men' must once have been
laröar men, Erda's necklace, the greensward being very poetically
taken for the goddess's jewelry. The solemn ' g^nga undir
Iar9ar men* (RA. 118-9) acquires its true meaning by this. In
other nations too, as Hungarians (BA. 120), and Slavs (Böhme's
Beitr. 5, 141), the administration of oaths took place by the per-
son who swore placing earth or turf on his head (see Suppl.).

The custom of conquered nations presenting earth and water
in token of submission reaches back to remote antiquity : when
the Persians declared war, they sent heralds to demand the two
elements of those whose country they meant to invade,^ which
again reminds us of the Soman ^pura.' Our landsknechts as
late as the 16th century, on going into battle, threw a clod of
earth (like him that threw chrenechruda) in token of utter re-
nnnciation of life.^ Among the Greeks too, grasping the sod

* Zeitscbr. f. d. alterth. 2, 168 seq. Malb. gl. 2, 149. 150.

' BriBsonios De regno Pers. 8, 66 — 71. Herod. 4, 127. 5, 18. Curtiusiii. 10,
106. Aristotle Bhet. u. 22, 87. Also Judith 2, 7 : iroifid^eip yrjv xal üöup (God.
ftlez. ed. Aogusti).

* Barthold's Fmndsberg p. 58-9. In the Mid. Ages, when a nun was conse-
crated, her kinsmen, as a sign that she renounced all earthly possessions, threw
earth over the maiden's arm; oonf. Svenska visor 1, 176 :

det voro s& nULnga grefvar b&ld,


644 ELEMENTS.

signified taking possession of land, especially in the case of
emigrants. As Eaphamos sits on the prow of the Argo^ Triton
appears in human form and presents him with a clod of earth as a
gift of hospitality. Eaphamos takes the symbolic earth {ßdikaxa
iaifji^vUiv)y and gives it to his men to keep, but they drop it
in the sea, and it melts away. Had it been preserved and
deposited at Tainaros, the descendants of Eaphamos would have
won the promised . land (Gyrene) in the fourth generation. As
it was, they only got it in the 17th (see Suppl.).^

In an AS. spell which is elsewhere given, four pieces of turf
are cut out, oil, honey, yeast and the milk of all cattle are dropt
on them, and thereto is added some of every kind of tree that
grows on the land, except hard trees,^ and of every herb except
burs ; and then at length the charm is repeated over it. With
their seedcom people mix earth from three sorts of fields (Superst.
I, 477) ; on the coffin, when lowered, three clods are dropt (699) ;
by cutting out the sod on which footprints [of a thief or enemy]
are left, you can work magic (524. 556; and see Suppl.).

Of holy mountains and hills there were plenty \ yet there seems
to have been no elemental worship of them : they were honoured
for the sake of the deity enthroned upon them, witness the
Wodan^s and Thunar^s hills. When Agathias, without any such
connexion, speaks of \oil>oi and ifxipayye^ (hills and gullies) as
objects of worship (p. 100) ; possibly his knowledge of the facts
was imperfect, and there was a fire or water worship connected
with the hill. It is among the Goths, to "whom fairguni meant
mountain (p. 172), that one would first look for a pure mountain-
worship, if the kinship I have supposed between that word and
the god^s name be a matter of fact. Dietmar of Merseburg
(Pertz 5, 855) gives an instance of mountain-worship among the
Slavs : ' Posita autem est haec (civitas, viz. Nemtsi, Nimptch)
in pago silensi, vocabulo hoc a quodam monte, nimis excelso et
grandi, olim sibi indito : et hie ob quaUtatem suam et quantitatem,
cam execranda gentilitas ibi veneraretur, ab incolis omnibus nimis

som hade deraf stor harm (great sorrow),

der de na kantadf, den snarta mull (black mould)

allt öfver skön Valborg's arm.

^ Pindar's Pyth. 4, 21-44. O. Mailer's Orohom. S52, and proleg. 142 seq. ;
his Dorier 1, 85. 2, 5B5.

3 * Only of soft wood, not hard,' BA. 506.


MOUNTAINS. STONES. 645

honorahdiur/ The commentators say it is the Zobtenberg in
Silesia (see Suppl.).

Here and there single stones and rpcks, or several in a gronp^
sometimes arranged in circles^ were held in veneration (Append.
' vota ad lapides/ especially ' lapides in ruinosis et silvestribus
locis venerari -/ AS. stanweorSung, ' bringan t6 stane,' Thorpe pp.
380. 396). This worship of stones is a distinguishing character-
istic of Celtic religion/ less of Teutonic, though amongst our-
selves also we meet with the superstition of slipping through
KoUow stones as well as hollow trees. Chap. XXXVI. Cavities
not made artificially by human hand were held sacred. In Eng-
land they hang such holy-stones or holed-stones at the horses^
heads in a stable, or on the bed-tester and the house-door against
witchcraft. Some are believed to have been hollowed by the
sting of an adder (adderstones) . In Germany, holy stones were
either mahlsteine of tribunals or sacrificial stones : oaths were
taken ' at ursvölum urma/r st&ini/ ' at enom hvita kelga steini/
8®m. 165». 237\ heilögfiöll 189^ Helgafell, Landn. 2, 12 ; conf.
espec. Eyrbygg. saga c. 4. Four holy stones are sunk to cleanse
a profaned sea (supra p. 87 note). A great number of stones
which the giant or devil has dropt, on which he has left the print
of his hand or foot, are pointed out by popular legend, without
any holy meaning being thereby imparted to them (see Suppl.).

As giants and men get petrified (p. 551), and still retain, so
to speak, an afler-sense of their former state, so to rocks and
stones compassion is attributed, and interest in men's condition.
Snorri 68 remarks, that stones begin to sweat when brought out
of the frost into warmth, and so he explains how rocks and stones
wept for Baldr. It is still common to say of bitter anguish : ' a
stone by the wayside would feel pity,' ' it would move a heart
of stone.' * Notice the MHG. phrase : ' to squeeze a stone with


^ Conf. ArmBtrong snb y. cam and olachbratb ; O'Brien sub v. earn ; H.
Sohreiber's Feen, p. 17 on tbe menhir and pierree fites, p. 21 on the pierres
Innlantes. Of spindle-stones I have spoken, p. 419.

' This mode of expression is doubtless very old; here are specimens from
MHG. : ez erbarmet einem iUine, Hart. erst, büohl. 1752. wasr sin herze steinen,
Bwer (whoso) si weinen sähe, ze weinen im gescluehe. Herb. 68^ ; ir klage mohte
erbarmen einen «e^n 89^ erbarmen ein »teinhertez herze, Flore 1498. ir j&mer
daz moht einen veU erbarmen, Lohengr. p. 16. ez moht ein stein beweinet h&n
diae barmmige, Dietr. 48*. Mark, Üie stones did not weep of themselves, but were
moved to sympathy by the weeping and wailing of the hapless men, which as it


646 ELEMENTS.

straps^ till its veins drop blood/ MsH. 2, 235^^ saggested no
doubt by the veins wbich ran throagh some stones (see Suppl.).
In closing this chapter^ I will group together the higher gods
who more immediately govern the four elements. Water^ springs^
rain and sea are under Wuotan (Nichus) , Donar, Uogi, Holda.
Fire, lightning under Donar, Loki. Air, wind under Wuotan,
Fro. Earth under Nerthas and many others, mentioned ou
p. 641-2.


were penetrated their ears. So in Holberg (EUefte juni 4, 2) : hörte jeg en sakken
og hylen, som en steen maatte grade ved. And Ovid (Met. 9, 303) : moturaque
duras Verba qneror iilices. Lake 19, 40 : ol \L0oi MKpd^ovTui [Habak. 2, 11 : the
stones shall cry oat of the wall] .


CHAPTER XXI.
TREES AND ANIMALSv

As all nature was thought of hj the heathen mind as living; ^
as language and the understanding of human speech was allowed
to beasts^ and sensation to plants (see Suppl.) ; and as every kind
of transition and exchange of forms was supposed to take place
amongst all creatures : it follows at once^ that to some a higher
worth may have been assigned^ and this heightened even up to
divine veneration. Gods and men transformed themselves into
trees^ plants or beasts^ spirits and elements assumed animal
forms ; why should the worship they had hitherto- enjoyed be
withheld from the altered type of their manifestatioa f Brought
under this point of view^ there is nothing to startle us in the
veneration of trees or animals. It has become a gross thing
only when to the consciousness of men the higher being has-
vanished from behind the form he assumed^ and the form alone
bas then to stand for him.

We must however distinguish from divinely honoured plant»
and animals those that were esteemed high and holy because
they stood in close relationship to gods or spirits. Of this kind
are beasts and vegetables used for sacrifice, trees under which

* The way it ib ezpreesed in the Eddie myth of Baldr is more to the point than
anything else: To wud off every danger that. might threaten that beloved god,
^gg exacted oaths from water, fire, earth, stones, plants, beasts, birds and worms,
xiay from plagues personified, that they would not harm him ; one single shrub she
let oil from £e oath, because he was too young, Sn. 64. Afterwards all creatures
weep the dead Baldr, men, animals, plants and stones, Sn. 68. The OS. poet of the
HeUand ealls dumb nature the unquethandi^ and says 168, 82 : * that thar Wid-
dsndes död (the Lord's death)« unquethandes so filo antkennian scolda, that is
endagon ertha bivöda, hzisidun thia hdhun bergo$, harda sthios olubun, feliso» after
them felde.* It is true these phenomena are from the Bible (Matth. 27, 51-2), yet
possibly a heathen picture hoTered in the author's mind (as we saw on pp. 148.
807), in this case the mourning for Baldr, so like that for the Saviour. Herbert
makes all things bewail Hector : if (says he, 68») stones, metals, chalk and sand«
Ittd wit and sense, they would have sorrowed too. As deeply sooted in man's
nature is the impulse, when unfortunate, to bewail his woes to the rocks and trees
uid woods ; this is b«iutifuUy expressed in the song Ms. 1, 3^, and all the objects-
there appealed to, offer their help.

VOL, II. ^ P


£48 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

higher beings dwells animals that wait upon them. The two
classes can hardly be separated^ for incorrect or incomplete
accounts will not allow us to determine which is meant.

1. Tb£es.

The high estimation in which Woods and Trees were held by
the heathen Germans has already been shown in Chap. lY. To
certain deities^ perhaps to all, there were groves dedicated, and
probably particular trees in the grove as well. Such a grove
was not to be trodden by profane feet, such a tree was not to be
stript of its boughs or foliage, and on no account to be hewn
down.^ Trees are also consecrated to individual dsdmons, elves^
wood and home sprites, p. 509.

Minute descriptions^ had any such come down to us, would tell
us many things worth knowing about the enclosure and main-
tenance of holy woods, about the feasts and sacrifices held in
them. In the Indiculus paganiarum we read ^ de sacris silvaram,
quae nimidas vocant.' This German word seems to me uncor-
rupted, but none the easier to understand : it is a plur. masc.
from the sing, nimid,^ but to hit the exact sense of the word, we
should have to know all the meanings that the simple verb
neman was once susceptible of. If the German nimu be, as ic
has every appearance of being, the same as vifuo, then nimid
also may answer to Gr. vifio^, Lat. nemus, a woodland pastnre,
a grove, a sacrum silvae (p. 69).* Documents of 1086 and 1150

^ Sacrum netmu, nenua eattum in TaoitoB. Ovid, Amor. iii. 1, 1 :

Stat yetuB et mtiltos incaedua nlva per annoB,

oredibile eBt üli nmnen inesse loco :
fons sacer in medio, spelunoaqae pumice pendens,

et latere ex om£i dcUce qaerontor aves.

Lnean, Phars. 3, 899 : LnouB erat longo nunquam violattu ab aeyo. So the Sem-
nonian wood, the nemuB of Nerthus, the Slav luons Zatibm«, the Pmssian grove
Bomowe. Among the Esthonians it Ib held infamons to pluck even a single leaf
in the sacred grove : far as its shade extends (ut umbra pertingit, BA. 57. 105), thej
will not take so much as a strawberry ; some people secretly bury their dead there
(Petri Ehstland 2, 120). They call such woods /»to, and the I. of Dag6 is in
Esth. Hiomahf because there is a consecrated wood near the farmhouse of Hioho/
(Thom. Hiäm.).

' Like hebd (heros), gimeinid (communio), frumid, pi. frumidas (AS. frymiSas,
primitiae), barid (clamor, inferred from Tacitus's baritus).

* Can nimid nave been a heathen term for sacrifice f Ahnemen in the 13th cent.
meant maotare, to slaughter (used of cattle). Berthold p. 46, as we still Bay abthun,
abschneiden, Ulph. uf»neij>an ; Schmid's Schwab, wtb. 405 abnehmen to kill ponltry.
Thifl meaning can hardly Ue in the prefix, it must be a part of the word itself:


TREES. 649

name a place Nimodon, Nimeden (Möser's Osnabr. gesch.^ nrk. 31.
56. 8, 57. 84) ; the resemblance may lead to something farther
(see Sappl.).

There can be no donbt that for some time after the conversion
the people continned to light candles and offer small sacrifices
under particular holy trees^ as even to this day they hang wreaths
npon them^ and lead the ring-dance under them (p. 58). In the
church-prohibitions it is variously called : ^ vota ad a/rbores f aoere
ant ibi candelam sen quodlibdt munus deferre ; arborem colore ;
Totum ad arborem persolvere; arbores daemonihus consecratas
colere^ et in tanta veneratione habere^ ut vulgus nee ramum nee
sureulum atideat amputare/ It is the AS. treow-weorffung (cultus
arborum)^ the ON. biota lundinn (grove)^ Landn. 3^ 17. The
Acta Bened. sec. 2 p. 841 informs us : ' Adest qnoqae ibi (at
Latosas^ now Leuze) non ignoti miraculi fagvs (beech) ^ subier
}uam luminaria saepe cum accensa absque hominum aocessu
videmus^ divini aliquid fore suspicamur.' So the church turned
the superstition to account for her own miracles : a convent was
founded on the site of the tree. About Esthonians of the present
day we are told in Bosenplänter's Beitr. 9^ 12^ that only a few
years ago« in the parish of Harjel^ on St. George's^ St. John's
and St. Michael's night, they used to sacrifice under certain trees,
i.e. to kill, a black fowl} Of the Thunder-god's holy oak an
account has been given, pp. 72-3-4. 171. 184; and in Gramm.
2, 997 the OHG. scaldeih (ilex) is compared with the AS. names
of plants Bcaldhyfel, scald}^yfel and the scaldo quoted above^p. 94.
All this is as yet uncertain, and needs further elucidation.

Among the Langobards we find a worship of the so-called
blood-tree or Jioly tree (p. 109). The Yita S. Barbati in the Acta
sanctor. under Febr. 19, p. 139. The saint (b. cir. 602, d. cir.
683) lived at Benevento, under kings Grimoald and Bomuald ;


niman, neman wonld therefore be to ent, kiU, divide, and nimidoi the viotims slain
in the holy grove, under trees f Conf . what is said in the text of the Langobardic
tree of sacrifloe. Celtic etymologies seem rather out of place for this plainly Saxon
Indicnlns. Adelang already in Mithrid. 2, 65. 77 had brought into the field Nemetes
and nemet (templnm) ; Ir. naomh is sanctus, neamh (gen. nimhe) ooelom, niem-
hndh land consecrated, belonging to the church.

^ The superstition of the Lausitz Wends holds that there are woods which
yearly demand a human victim (like the rivers, p. 494) ; some person must lose his
Ute in them : * hohla dyrbi kojzde Ijeto jeneho ozloweka mjecz,' Lausitz mon. sehr.
1797. p. 748.


650 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

the Lombard nation was baptized, but still clung to superstitions
practices : ' Quin etiam non longe a Beneventi moenibus devotis-
sime sacrilegam colebant arborem, in qua suspenso cario cuncti qui
aderant terga vertentes arbori celerius equitabant, calcaribus
oruentantes equos, ut unus alterum posset praeire, atque in eodem
cursu retroversis manibus in eorium jaculabantur. Sicque parti-
culam modicam ex eo comedendam superstitiose accipiebant. Et
quia stulta illic persolvebant vota, ab actione ilia nomen loco illi^
sicut hactenus dicitur, votum imposuerunt/ In vain Barbatas
preaches against it : ' illi ferina coecati dementia nil aliud nisi
sessorum meditantes usus, optimum esse fatebantur cuUum legis
majorum suorum, quos nominatim bellicosissimos asserebant.'
When Komuald was gone to Naples, 'repente beatissimus Barbatus
securim accipiens et ad votum pergens, suis manibus fiefandam
arborem, in qua per tot temporis spatia Langobardi exitiale sacri-
legium perficiebant, defossa humo a radicibus incidit, ac desuper
terrae congeriem fecit, ut nee indicium ex ea quis postea valuerit
reperire/ ^ This part about felling the tree has an air of swagger
and improbability ; but the description of the heathen ceremony
may be true to the life. I have pointed out, p. 174, that the
Ossetes and Circassians hung up the hides of animals on poles
in honour of divine beings, that the Groths of Jemandes truncis
suspendebant exuviae to Mars (p. 77 note), that as a general thing
animals were hung on sacrificial trees (pp. 75-9) ; most likely
this tree also was sacred to some god through sacrifices, i.e. votive
offerings of individuals,^ hence the whole place was named ' ad
votum.' What was the meaning of hurling javelins through the
suspended skin, is by no means clear ; in the North it was the
custom to shoot through a hanging raw oxhide (Fomm. sog. 3, 18.
4, 61), as a proof of strength and skill. Doing it backwards

^ Another Vita Barbati (ibid. p. 112) relates as foUows : * Nam quid deqoioa-
bilius credendum est, quam ex mortuis animalibus non camem sed oorimn acoipere
ad asnm oomestionis, nt prayo errori sabjecti Langobardi fecenmt f qui saarum
festa solennitatnm equis praeonrrentibns unus altero praeoedente, sicnt mos erat
gentiliunit arhoH Indificae prooul non satis Beneyento vota sua iolvebant, Saspensa
itaqoe putredo oorii in hano arborem dtvam, equorum sessores yersis post tergam
braohiia ignominiam oorii oertabant lanoeolis yibrare. Cumque lanoeolis esse
yibrata pellis mortua oemeretnr, yeluti pro remedio animae ex hao illosione oorii
partis mediae faotam recisionem gnstabant. Eooe quali ridienlo vanae mentis
homines errori sabjaoebant pestifero ! *

* Snpra p. 860 note ; yotmn is not only yow, but the oblatio rei yotiyae :
• yotare puerum ' in Pertz 2, 93 is equiy. to ofiferre.


TBEES. 651

increased the difficulty^ and savours of antiquity.^ Why the
particle of skin that was knocked out should be eaten^ it is hard
to say ; was it to indicate that they were allowed to participate
in the sacrifice 7 (p. 46 ; see Suppl.).

And not only were those trees held sacred^ under which men
sacrificed^ and on which they hung the head or hide of the
slaughtered beast^ but saplings that grew up on the top of solctu
ficed animals. A willow slip set over a dead foal or calf is not
to be damaged (Sup. I^ 838) ; are not these exactly Adam of
Bremen's ' arbores ex morte vel tabo immolatorum divvnae ^ ? (p-
76).«

Of hallowed trees (which are commonly addressed as frau,
i&me, in the later Mid. Ages) the oak stands at the head (pp.
72-77) : an oak or beech is the arbor frugifera in casting lots
(Tac. Germ. 10). Next to the oak, the ash was holy, as we may
see by the myth of the creation of man ; the ashtree Yggdrasill
falls to be treated in Chap. XXV. The wolf, whose meeting of
you promises victory, stands under ashen boughs. ' The common
people believe that ^tis very dangerous to break a bough from
the asij to this very day,' Bk)b. Plot's Staffordshire p. 207. One
variety, the mountain-ash or rountree, rowan-tree, is held to have
magical power (Brockett p. 177),» (conf. Chap. XXVII., Bonn).
With dame Hazel too our folk-songs carry on conversations, and
hazels served of old to hedge in a court of justice, as they still do
cornfields, RA. 810. According to the östgöta-lag (bygdab. 30),
any one may in a common wood hew with impunity, all but oaks
and hazels, these have peace, i.e. immunity. In Superst. 1, 972 we
are told that oak and hazel dislike one another, and cannot agree,
any more than haw and sloe (white and black thorn ; see Suppl.).
Then the elder (sambucus), OHG. holanUvr, enjoyed a marked
degree of veneration ; holan of itself denotes a tree or shrub (AS.

cneowholen= ruscus). In Lower Saxony the sambucus nigra is

I

' So the best head had to be touched haekwardi^ BA. 896 ; bo men sacrifioed
with the head tamed away (p. 49S), and threw backwards over their heads (p. 628).

\ A schoUam on Ad. of Bremen's Hist. eocl. (Pertz, scr. 7, 879) is worth
quoting: * Prope illud templom (upsaliense) est arhor maxima^ late ramos extendens,
Mitate et hieme semper virens : onjos ilia generis sit, nemo seit. Ibi etiam est fons,
ubi gacriflcia Paganorom solent exeroeri, et homo vivus immergi, qui dnm im-
mergitor (al. inyenitor), ratmn erit votom populi.* To sink in water was a good
sign, as in the ordeal (BA. 924; oonf. Chap. XXXTV., Witch's bath).

' Escultis JoYi sacra, Pliny 16, 4 (5).


652 TREES AND ANIMALS.

called ellom, elUhom.^ ArnkieFs testimony 1, 179 is beyond
suspicion : ' Thus did our forefathers also hold the ellhorn holy, and
if they must needs clip the same^ they were wont first to say this
prayer : " Dame Ellhorn, give me somewhat of thy wood, then will
I also give thee of mine, if so be it grow in the forest/' And this
they were wont to do sometimes with bended knees, bare head and
folded hands, as I have ofttimes in my young days both heard
and seen/ Compare with this the very similar accounts of elder
rods (Sup. I, 866), of planting the elder before stables (169), of
pouring water under the elder (864), and of the elder^s mother
(Sup. K, Dan. 162).» The juniper, Wacholder, plays an impor-
tant part in the märchen of machandelbooxn. ; in the poem of the
MiiTor's adventure, fol: 38, occurs the mysterious statement :

Fraw WecJcolter, ich sich Dame Juniper, I see

daz du ir swester bist, that thou her ' sister art,

du kund ouch falsche list thou knewest false cunning too

d6 du daz kind verstalt. when thou stolest the child.

A man in Sudermania was on the point of cutting down a fine
shady juniper, when a voice cried out, ' hew not the juniper ! '
He disregarded the warning, and was about to begin again, when
it cried once more ' I tell thee, hew not down the tree 1 ' and he
ran away in a fright.* A similar notion lies at the bottom of
kindermarchen no. 128, only it has a ludicrous turn given it; a
voice out of the tree cries to the hewer, ' he that hews haspelholz
(windlass-wood), shall die.' Under such a tree, the Klinta iall
(deal-tree, pine) in Westmanland, dwelt a hafs-fru, in fact the
.pine tree's r& (p. 496) ; to this tree you might see snow-white
cattle driven up from the lake across the meadows, and no one
dared to touch its boughs. Trees of this kind are sacred to indi-
vidual elves, woodsprites, homesprites ; they are called in Swed.

^ AS. elUn, The Ganones editi sub Eadgaro rege, cap. 16 (Thoxpe, p. 896),
epeak of the sorcery praotieed * on ellenum and e&c on o'Srum mislicom treowam '
(in sambucis et in aliis Tariis arboribus).

' The god Pnshkait lives under the etder^ and the Lettons nsedto set bread and
beer for him beside the tree, Thorn. Hiäm, p. 48. [In Somersetshire they will not
bom elder wood, for fear of ill lack. — Tbans.]

' My faithless lover's.

^ I find this quoted from Locoenins*s Antiq. Sneog. 1,8; it is not in the ed. of
1647, it may be in a later. Afzelins 2, 147 has the story with this addition, that at
the second stroke blood flowed from the root, the hewer then went home, and soon
fell siok.


TBEBS. 653»

hö-trädfiD. Dan. hoe4rä (p. 509). Under the lime-tree in the
Hero-book dwarfs love to haunt^ and heroes fall into enchanted
sleep : the sweet breath of its blossoms causes stupefaction, D.
Heldenb. 1871, 8, 14-5. 135 (see Suppl.). But elves in particular
have not only single trees but whole orchards and groves assigned
them, which they take pleasure in cultivating, witness Laurin^s
Ro^garden enclosed by a silken thread. In Sweden they call
these gardens elfträd-gärdar.

The Greek dryads ^ and hamadryads have their life linked to a
tree, and as this withers and dies, they themselves fall away and
cease to be ; any injury to bough or twig is felt as a wound, and
a wholesale hewing down puts an end to them at once.^ A cry
of anguish escapes them when the cruel axe comes near. Ovid in
Met. 8, 742 seq., tells a beautiful story of Erisichthon^s impious
attack on the grove of Ceres :

nie etiam Cereale nemus violasse securi
dicitur, et lucos ferro temerasse vetustos.
Stabat in his ingens annoso robore quercus,
saepe sub hac dryades festas duxere choreas . . .
Contremuit, gemitumque dedit Deo'ia quercus,
et pariter irondes, pariter pallescere glandes
coepere, ac longi pallorem ducere rami.

When the alder (erle) is hewn, it bleeds, weeps, and begins to
speak (Meinert's Kuhlandch. 122). An Austrian marchen (Ziska
38-42) tells of the stately j/ir, in which there sits a fay waited on
by dwarfs, rewarding the innocent and plaguing the guilty ; and
a Servian song of the maiden in the pine (fichte) whose bark the
boy splits with a gold and silver horn. Magic spells banish the
ague into frau Fichte (see Suppl.).

This belief in spirit-haunted trees was no less indigenous among
Celts. Sulpicius Severus (beg. of 5th cent.) reports in his life of
St. Martin, ed. Amst. 1665, p. 457 : ' Dum in vice quodam tem-
plnm antiquissimum diruisset, et arbor em pinum, quae fano erat
proxima, esset aggressus excidere, tum vero antistes illius luci
ceteraque gentilium turba coepit obsistere ; et cum iidem Uli, dum
templum evertitur, imperante domino quievissent, succidi arborem

^ AS. glosa, ioudu-elfenne, wood-elfins, fern. pi.

> * Non sine hamadryadis faio cadit arborea trabs.* Ansonius.


• 654 TREES AND ANDCALS.

non patiebantur. lUe eos sedulo commonerej nihil esse religionis
in stipite ; Deom potins^ cui serviret ipse^ seqaerentar ; arborem
illam exscindi operiere^ quia esset daemoni dedicata ' (see Sappl.) .
A great deal might be written on the sacredness of particular
plants and flowers. They are either dedicated to certain gods
and named after them (as Donners bart^ p. 183. Baldrs brft,
p. 222. Fomeotes folme^ p. 240. Lokkes havre^ p. 242. Freyja
h&r^ Friggjar gras, p. 302-3) ; or they come of the transformation
of some afflicted or dying man. Nearly all sach plants have power
to heal or hart^ it is true they have to be plncked and gathered
first : the Chap, on magic will furnish examples. Like sacred
tutelary beasts^ they are blazoned on the coats-of-arms of
countries, towns^ and heroes. Thus to the Northwest Grermans^
especially Frisians and Zeelanders, the seeblatt (nymphaea^ nenu-
phar) was from the earliest times an object of veneration. The
Hollanders call it plompe, the Frisians pompe : strictly speakings
the broad leaves floating on the sea are pompebledden, and the
fragrant white flowers, golden yellow inside, swanneblommen
(flores cygnei) ; which recals the names given at p. 489, nix»
blume, ndckblad, muhme and muTn/mel {{.e. swan-maiden). The
Frisians put seven ' sea-blades ' (zeven plompenbladen) in their
escutcheon, and under that emblem looked for victory ;^ our
Grudrunlied (1373) knows all about it, and furnishes Herwic of
SSwen or Selanden with a sky-blue flag : ^ sebleter swebent (float)
dar inne.' This sea-flower is the sacred lotus of old Egypt, and
is also honoured in India ; the Tibetans and Nepalese bow down
to it, it is set up in temples, Brahma and Vishnu float on its leaf;
and ifc is no other than a M. Nethl. poem that stul remembers
Thumbkin floating on the leaf (p. 451).


^ J. H. Halbertsma's Het Baddhisme en zijn stichter, Deventer 1843, pp. 3. 10;
and he adds, that the people are to this day very careful in picking and carrying the
plompen : if you fall with the flower in your hand, you get the tailing uolmesa.
Plomben, our plumpfen, ON. pompa, means plumping or plunging down. Ace. to
W. Barnes, * butterpumps» ovary of the yellow waterlily ;* conl Lith. pumpa, Slav,
pupa, wen, pimple? Mart. Hamconii Frisia, Franekarae 1620, p. 7, says Friso intro-
duced the cognisance of the ieven iea-blades : ' insigne Frisonis, ut Cappidns refert,
Meptem fuerunt rubra nympheae herbae folia, in tribus argenteis oonstitntae trabibns
per tcutum caeruUum oblique ductis.* Cappidus is said to have been a priest at Sta-
vom at the beg. of the 10th century, but nothing more is known of him. Conf. Yan
d. Bergh*B Yolksoverlev. p. S3. 41. 110. Others connect the division of Friesland
into 7 sea-lands with the 7 leaves of the scutcheon ; it is not known for certain when
that division first began ; see De vrije Yries 4, 137.


AKIMAIiS. 655

2. Akiicals.

We shall have still more to say about sacred animals, which
enter into more intimate relations with man than dumb nature
can ; but their cultus will admit of being referred to two or three
principal causes. Either they stood connected with particular
gods, and to some extent in their service, as the boar belougs
to Fr6^ the wolf and raven to Wuotan; or there lies at the basis
the metamorphosis of a higher being into some animal shape^
on the strength of which the whole species comes to be invested
with a halo of honour. That is how we may in some instances
have to take a bear^ buU^ cow or snake^ presupposing an in-
carnation, though our mythology may have long ceased to reach
so far back as to give a full account of it. Then, bordering
close upon such a lowering of the god into the animal, comes
the penal degradation of man into a beast, the old doctrine
of transmigration, in which we discover a third reason for the
consecration of animals, though it does not warrant an actual
worship of them. Those myths, e.g. of the cuckoo, woodpecker,
nightingale, and so on, furnish a fund of beautiful tales, which
enter largely into the hero-worship (see SuppL).

QuADBüPEDS. — Foremost of animals I name the horse, the
noblest, wisest, trustiest of domestic animals, with whom the hero
holds friendly talk (p. 392), who sympathizes in his griefs and
rejoices in his victories. As some heroes are named after the
horse (Heugest, Hors), the horse too has proper names given him ;
Norse mythology assigns to nearly every god his separate horse,
endowed with miraculous powers. OSin's steed is named Sleipnir
(p. 154), and is, like some giants and heroes, an octopod.^ The
other horses of the ftses are enumerated by Ssem. 44* and Su. 18,
without specifying to which they belonged. Several names are
formed with 'faxi' (jubatus, comatus, OHG. vahso), as Skinfaxi
(Ssem. 32. Sn.U), Gullfaxi (Sn. 107-10), Hrimfaxi (S»m. 32.
91. Sn. 11), Freyfasn (Vatnsd. 140-1). Of these, Gullfaxi the
gold-maned belonged to giant Hrüngnir, Skinfaxi the shiny-

> Old riddle on O'Sinn und Sleipnir in the Hervararsaga : * Who are the two that
go to Thing (oonnoil) together, and have three eyes, ten legs and one tail between
them? * A mode of expression quite of a piece with our old habits of speeoh ; thus
in the Weisthümer it is said the officers of the court shall come to the assize with 6J
mouths, meaning three men on horseback and a dog.


656 TREES AND ANIMALS.

maned was the steed of Day, and Hrlmfaxi the rimy-maned
(p. 641) of Night. But even Faxt by itself is a name for horses,
e.g. Fomald. sog. 2, 168. 508. Arvakr (early- waker), AlsviSr
(all-wise) are horses of the sun-chariot, Saam. 45. Sn. 12 ; on
Arvakr's ear, on Alsvinn's -^ hoof, there were runes written ; also
runes 'fi. Sleipnis tönnom (teeth),' SsBm. 196% as well as on the
bear's paw and the wolPs claws.' Svadilfari was the horse that
helped the giant in building, Sn. 46. And our hero-legend has
handed down the names of many famous horses (p. 392). Bajart
is described as intelligent, like AlsviiSr ; he is said to be still alive
in Ardennes forest, where you may hear him neigh every year on
Midsummer day (Quatre fils Aimon 180°). The track of Schim-
ming's shoe stands printed on the rock, Vilk. saga cap. 37 (see
Suppl.).

The Freyfaxi in Vatnsdaslasaga was owned by a man named
Brandr, who is said to have worshipped it (at hann hefiSi ätrünaiS
d Paxa), and was therefore called Faxabrandr. The unpublished
saga of Hrafnkell is known to me only from MüUer's Bibl. 1, 103,
but he too had a horse Freyfaxi (mispr. Preirfara), which he
had half given to Freyr, vowing at the same time to slay the
man who should mount it without his leave. I can give the
passage from Job. Brici de philippia apud priscos boreales. Lips.
1755, p. 122 : 'Hrafnkell ätti )7ann grip i eigo sinni, er h&nom
)76tti betri enn annar, }?at var heatr bleikalöttr at lit, er hann
kalla*5i Freyfaxa, hann gaf Frey vin sinom (supra, pp. 93. 211)
ßenna liest hdlfann, & J'essom hesti hafSi hann svft mikla elsko
(love), at hann strengdi }?ess heit (vow), at hann skyldi }?eim
manni at bana verSa, er )7eim hesti riiSi &n bans vilja.' Brand's
' ätrünaiS ' refers, no doubt, to the same circumstance of his horse
being hallowed and devoted to the god. A striking testimony
to this is found in Olafs Tryggvasonar saga : ^ Tidings came to
the king, that the Treandir (men of Drontheim) had turned back
to the worship of Freyr, whose statue still stood among them.
When the king commanded them to break the image, they re-
plied; 'ei munum ver bridta Ukneshi Freys, {rviat ver höfum leingi

^ SvilSr, gen. STinns, like matSr, mannB.

' Beminding of the Germ. Beast-apologue (Beinh. oolxiii.). In Fomald. sog.
1, 169 Bafn prefers, wrongly I think, the reading « höfSi,' head.

,«^ *v^^: ^^*^- ^^^®- ^^^- 2. 190 cap. 49 ; this cap. is left out in Formn. sog. 2.
189, but inserted at 10, 812. ^*


HOBSES. 657

honnm Jrionat ok hefr oss vol dAgat/ Olafr sammoned them
to an assembly^ resolving to destroy the idol himself^ and sailed
to the coast where the temple (hof ) stood. When he landed^ he
found the horses of the god grazing there (j^ä s&a hans menn st6%-
hross nokr viS vegin, er J?eir sögSu at hann Freyr aatti). The
king mounted the stallion^ and his courtiers the mares^ and so
they rode to the temple ; Olafr dismounted, walked in and threw
down the idols (golSin),^ but took Frey's image away with him.
When the Tr«9ndir found their gods dishonoured, and Prey's
image carried off, they were ware that the king had done it, and
they came to the place of meeting. The king had the image set
np in the Thing, and asked the people : ' know ye this man ? '
' It is Freyr our god ^ they answered. ' How has he shewn his
power to you ? ' ' He has often spoken to us, foretold the
future, granted plenty and peace (veitti oss &r oc friiS).' 'The
devil spake to you ' said the king ; then taking an axe, he cried
to the image : ' Now help thyself, and defend thee if thou canst.'
Freyr continuing silent, Olafr hewed off both his hands, and then
preached to the people how this idolatry had arisen. The whole
narrative bears the impress of a later age, yet it had sprung out
of Norse tradition, and assures us that horses were consecrated to
Freyr, and maintained in the hallowed precincts of his temple.
Had not the temples of other gods such horses too ? The animals
that Wilibrord found grazing in Fosete's sanctuary (p. 230) can
hardly have been horses, or he would not have had them slaugh-
tered for food ; but the practice of rearing cattle consecrated to
the gods is established by it none the less. And apart from this,
it seems that single beasts were maintained by private worship-
pers of the god.

Such breed of pure and dedicated horses was destined for holy
uses, especially sacrifice, divination, and the periodical tours of
deities in their cars. Their manes were carefully cultivated,
groomed and decorated, as the name Faxi indicates; probably
gold, silver and ribbons were twined or plaited into the locks
(Qullfaxi, Skinfaaei) ; mön gloar (juba splendet). Seem. 92% l^sir
men af mari (lucet juba ex equo) 32% as indeed the Lat. jubar
suggests juba, because a mane does radiate, and light sends out

^ So that there weie other statnes standing beside Frey*B.


658 TREES AND ANIMAI^S.

beams in the manner of hair.^ OulUoppr, SUfrintoppr are names
of horses whose tails were tied round with gold or silver^ Sn. 44.
The names Oyllir and Qler (golden, glittering, ibid.) may be
given them for the same reason, or because their hoofs were
shod with gold, or from the gilding of the bridle and saddle.
Of colours, white was esteemed the noblest ; a king would make
his entry, or bestow a fief, seated on a milk-white steed. The
Weisthiimer often mention the white horse (e.g. 3, 342. 857) ; if
an inheritance lie vacant, the governor is to mount a white foal,
and taking one man before him and the other behind, to set one
of them down on the property (3, 831; conf. 2, 541). A foal
was esteemed even purer and nobler than a horse (see Suppl.).'

Tacitus (Germ. 9, 10), after saying ' lucos ac nemora conse-
crant,' adds : ' Proprium gentis, equorum quoque praesagia ac
monitus ezperiri. Publice aluntv/r, iisdem nemoribus ac hicisy
candidi et nullo mortali opere contacti, quos presses sacro curm
sacerdos ac rex vel princeps civitatis comitantur, hinnitusqtte ac
fremitus observant. Nee ulli auspicio major fides, non solum
apud plebem, sed apud proceres, apud sacerdotes : se enim
ministros deorum, illos conscios putant ; ' these sacred beasts are
in the secrets of the gods, and can reveal their counsels. And iu
christian times the Indiculus pagan, cap. xiii. speaks ' de auffurüs
equorum/ without describing them further. A horse's neigh is
an omen of good (Sup. I, 239).* To warriors victory was fore-
tokened by their chargers' neighing (OHG. huei6n, MQGr. weien,
M. Neth. neien, ON. hneggja, Swed. gnägga), and defeat by
their withholding the cheerful spirit-stirring strain : see an in-
stance in the Flem. rhyming chron., ed. Elausler 7152. We


1 Single hairs out of the mane or tail of a sacred horse were treasured up.
Franz Wessel relates, p. 14, that when the Johannites preached in a town or viUage,
thej had a fine stallion ridden round, to which the people offered 'afgehowen
woppen (bunch of oat ears) * ; any one who could get a hair out of the horse's tail,
thought himself lucky, and sewed it into the middle of his milk-strainer, and the
milk was proof against witchcraft.

^ A foal's tooth, it seems, was hung about the person, and worn as a safeguard.
A MHG. poet says : * gevater unde fiili-zant an grözen noeten sint ze swadi,* god-
fathers and foal's teeth are too weak in great emergencies, MS. 2, 160^. To let
children ride on a black foal makes them out their teeth easily, Superst. I, 428.
From Eracl. 1320. 1485 fäl-zene appear to be the milk-teeth shed by a foal (see
Buppl.).

> What the breath of a swine has poUuted, is set right again by that of the
hone (Sup. I, 820. E, 92} ; the horse is a clean animal. It helps a woman in labour,'
for a hor$e to feed out of her apron (Sup. I, 337).


HOBSES. 659

know how the Persians chose a king by the neighing of his
horse^ Herod. 8^ 84. In the Norwegian tale Grimsborken (Asb.
and Moe^ no. 38) a foal is suckled bj twelve mares^ and gets to
talk sensibly (see Sappl.).

And as Mimics head retained its wisdom after it was cot off
(379)^ heathendom seems to have practised all sorts of magic by
catting off horse? 8 heads and sticking them up. In a nnrsery-tale
(no. 89) the trusty Falada's head is na/iled up over the gate, and
carries on converse with the king's daughter. This catting off
and setting np of horse? a heads has been mentioned at p. 47-8 as
an ancient German custom. Pliny 19, 10 (58) notices, as a remedy
for caterpillars : ^ si polo imponantvr in hortis ossa capitis ex
equina genere/ In Scandinavia they stuck a horse's head on a
pole, and turned the gaping jaws, propped open with a stick, in
tbe direction whence the man they had a spite against, and
wished to harm, was sure to come.^ This was called a neidstange
(spite-stake). Saxo Gram. p. 75: Immolati diis equi ahscissum
caput conto excipiens, subjectis stipitibus disientos faudum rictus
aperuity sperans se primes Erici conatus atrocis spectaculi for-
midine frustraturum. Arbitrabatur enim ineptas barbarorum
mentes oblatae cervicis terriculamento cessuras; et jam Ericas
obvium illis iter agebat. Qui prospecto eminus capite, obscoenita-
tis apparatum intelligens, silere socios cautiusque se gerere jubet,
nee quemquam teraere praocipitare sermonem, ne incauto effamine
nllum maleficiis instruerent locum, adjiciens, si sermone opus
incideret, verba se pro omnibus habiturum. Jamque medius illos
amnis secreverat, cum magi, ut Ericum pontis aditu deturbarent,
eontum quo equi caput refixerant fiuvio citimum locant. Ille
nihilominus pontem intrepide aggressus, 'in latorem' inquit
' gestaminis sui fortuna recidat, nos melior consequatur eventus.
Male maleficis cedat, infaustae molis gerulum onus obruat, nobis
potiora tribuant omina sospitateni ! ' Nee secus quam optabatur
evenit: continue namque excnssa cervice mens ferentem stipes
oppressit.— Egilssaga p. 389 : Egill t6k t hond ser heslis staung
(hazel rod), ok geek ä bergsnaus nockura, j^d. er vissi til lands
inn. \iL tök hann hrosS'höfu9 oh setti up ä staningina. silSan veitti


^ Wolves* head$ were in like manner held open with hotel rod» and hung up
laengr. 645-7-8. Beinardus 8, 293. 312. Beinhart, introd. p. bdz.


660 TREES AND ANIMALS.

hann form&la ok mseiti sva : ^ her set ek npp nilFstaung^ ok se^
ek ]7essn niiSi ft hönd Eiriki konüagi ok Ganiiliilda drottninga.'
hann sneri hross-höffinu inn d land. — At other times they caryed
a man^s head oat of wood^ and fastened it to a stake which was
inserted in the breast of a slaughtered horse} Yatnsd. saga^ p.
142 : lökall skar karls höfut ft s&la endann^ ok risti ft r&nar med
öllum j^eim formftla sem fjrr var sagdr^ stiSan drap lökoll mer
eina (killed a mare), ok opnuSa hana hia briostinu^ fcerffa a
suluna, ok 16tu horfa J^eim ft Borg (see SnppL). It is well worth
noticing, that to this very day the peasants' houses in a part
of Lower Saxony (Lüneburg, Holstein, Mecklenbarg) have horses'
lueads ca/rved on the gables : they look upon it merely as an orna-
ment to the woodwork of the roof^ but the custom may reach
far back, and have to do with the heathen belief in outward-
pointing heads keeping mischief away from houses.' The Jahrb.
of the Meckl. verein 2^ 118 says, these horses^ heads are nailed
transversely on each gable-end (kühlende) of the roof^ a remin-
iscence of the sacred horses of the ancients. Heinr. Schreiber
(Taschenb. f. 1840, p. 240 seq.) has likewise noticed these horses
rushing at each other on gables of the older houses in Romanic
BhsBtia (not Germ. Switz., but Tyrol; see Zingerle^s Sitten
p. 55) ; he is decidedly over hasty in pronouncing them a Celtic
symbol, for if we were to say that the custom in L. Saxony was
a legacy from the earlier Celtic inhabitants, criticism would lose
all firm footing. To me this custom, as well as horse- worship
altogether, seems to belong equally to Celts, Teutons and Slavs ;
what particular branches of these races were most addicted to
it, will by degrees unfold itself to future research (see SuppL).
Praetorius (Weltbeschr. 2, 162-3) relates, that the Non-German
people (Wends) used to keep off or extirpate cattle-plagues by
fixing round their stables the heads of mad Jiorses and cows on

I Conf. Sup. I, 838» planting the willow in the dead foaPs mouth.

* Pretty much as they turned the eagle's head on the house, and thought
thereby to shift the wind (p. 633-4). The heathen practice of fastening up animals'
heads explains many very old names of places in Germ, and France, as BerhaupUn,
Tierhaupten, Boshaupten, Schm. 2, 223. Ad locum qui nuncupatur caput caballi'
Ttum, Pertz 2, 278. Ad locum qui vocatur caput equi (Vita S. Magni, in Canisius's
Leot. ant. 1, 667), with the addition in Goldast (Scr. rer. Alem. i. 2, 198) : « et iddxco
vocatus est ille locus caput equi, quia omnes venatores reliquerant ibi sues caballos,
et pedestres ibant ad venandum.» Obviously a false later interpretation ; in fact

If 11-11 ? ?*; Magnus (Magnoald, Mangold) has a good many interpolations, ooni
Mabillon's Acta Bened. sec. 2, p. 505. ^ r t


HOUSES. 661

hedge-stakes ; also that if at night their horses were ridden
to exhaustion by the night-hag or leeton^ they put a horse^a Jtsad
among the fodder in the crib^ and this would curb the spirit^s
power orer the beast. Very likely the superstitious burying of
a dead hsad in the stable (I, 815) means that of a horse/ conf.
Chap. XXXYIII.^ Nightmare. In Holland they hang a horae^a
head over pigstyes (Westendorp p. 518), in Mecklenburg it is
placed under a sick man's pillow (Jahrb. 2, 128). We saw
the horse's head thrown into the Midsummer fire with a view to
magical effects (p. 618).'

Pr»torius's account is enough to shew that Slavs agreed with
Germans in the matter of horse- worship. But older and weightier
witnesses are not wanting. Dietmar of Merseburg (6, 17. p. 812)
reports of the Luitizers, i.e, Wilzes: ^Terram cum tremore
infodiunt, quo sortibus emissis [imm. ?] rerum certitudinem du-
biarum perquirant. Quibus finitis, cespite yiridi eas operientes,
equum, qui maximus inter alios habetur et ut sacer ah his vener-
aiur, super fixas in terram duorum cuspides hastilitum inter se
transmissorum supplici obsequio ducunt, et praemissis sortibus
qoibns id explicavere prius, per hunc qiuisi divinum denuo
augurantur; et si in duabus his rebus par omen apparet, factis
completur ; sin autem, a tristibus populis hoc prorsus omittitur.'
—The Vita beati Ottonis episcopi bambergensis, composed by an
unknown contemporary (Canisius iii. 2, 70), relates more fully of
the Pomeranians, whom Otto converted a.I). 1124: 'Habebant
caballtMn miras magnitvdiniSf et pinguem, nigri coloris, et acrem
valde. Iste toto anni tempore vacabat, tantaeque fuit samctitatis
ut nullum dignaretur sessorem; habuitque unum de quatuor
sacerdotibus templorum custodem diligentissimum. Quando ergo
itinere terrestri contra hostes aut praedatum ire cogitabant,
eventum rei hoc modo solebant praediscere. Hastae novem dis-
ponebantur humo, spatio unius cubiti ab invicem separatae.
Strato ergo caballo atque frenato, sacerdos, ad quem pertinebat
custodia illius, tentum freno per jacentes hastas transversum
ducebai ter, atque reducebat. Quod si pedibus inoffensis hastisque

' Conf. Fornftld. sdg. 2, 168. 800, what is said of Faxi*8 hross-kaus,

' Why should the monks in the abbey have a caput eaballinum t BemharJns

3, 2032. 2158. Does the expression spun out of a dead hone's head * in Boroard,

WaldiB 4, 2, mean enchanted ?


662 TBEES AND AIHMALS.

indistarbatis equus transibat, Bignam babuere prosperitatis, et
secari pergebant ; sin autem^ qaiescebant.' — Here the holj steed
is led across nine spears lying a cubit apart from one another^ in
Dietmar's older narrative over the points of two crossed spears ;
of course the Luitizers may have had a different method from the
Pomeranians. Saxo Gram. p. 821 gives yet a third account of
the matter respecting the Slavs of Bügen : ' Praeterea peculiarem
albi coloris equum titulo possidebat (numen), cujus jubae aut ca/udas
pilos convellere nefarinm dacebatur. Hunc soli sacerdoti pascendi
insidendique jus erat^ ne divini animalis usus quo frequentier hoc
vilior haberetur. In hoc equo^ opinione Bugiae^ Svantoviius (id
simulacro vocabulum erat) adversus sacrorum suorum hostes bella
gerere credebatur. Cujus rei praecipuum argumentum ezstabat,
quod is nocturne tempore stabulo insistens adeo plernmque mane
sudore ac luto respersus videbatur/ tanquam ab ezercitatione
veniendo magnorum itinerum spacia percurrisset. Auspieia
quoque per eundem equum hujusmodi sumebantnr. Cum bellum
adversum aliquam provinciam suscipi placnisset^ ante fanum trü
plex hasiamm ordo ministrorum opera disponi solebat, in quorum
quolibet binae e traverso junctae conversis in terram cuspidibns
figebantur^ aequali spaciorum magnitudine ordines disparante«
Ad quos equus ductandae expeditionis tempore^ solenni precatione
praemissa^ a sacerdote e vestibule cum loramentis productuSj si
propositos ordines ante dextro quam laevo pede transcenderet,
faustam gerendi belli omen accipiebatur. Sin laevum vel semel
dextro praetulisset, petendae provinciae propositum mutabatur.' —
This description is still more exact : the sacred horse, here attri-
buted to the deity himself who bestrides him by night, is led
three times over two spears planted crosswise, that is, o^>er six
spears, and must, for the omen to be favourable, pass each row
with his right foot foremost; if at even one row he has lifted
the left before the right, misfortune is threatened. The colour
ascribed to the steed is white as in Tacitus, not black as in the
biographer of Otto.

The Chronica Augustensis ad. an. 1068 (in Freher 1, 349)
says, that Bp. Burcard of Halberstadt (the Buko still known in

next^t^^t ?^"® "Joä®" }y *^« »i«ht.Bpirit is covered with dart and sweat the
next monung (see p. 287 and SuppL).


i


HOBSES. 668

oar chQdren^s game) took away their sacred horse from the
liutizers, and rode home to Saxony on it himself: 'Burcardus
Halberstatensis episcopns Luiticiomm provinciam ingressas in-
cendit^ vastavit^ avectoque equo quern pro deo in Bheda ^ colebant,
super earn sedens in Saxoniam rediit/

May we then adopt the hypothesis^ that Dietmar and the
Angsbnrg chronicler mean the sacred horse of Badigast at
Rhetra, and Saxo and the author of the Yita Ottonis that of
Sviatovit at Arkona 7 Each of these gods ' had horses hallowed
to him^ and others may have had the same. And so in Germany
too, horses may have been dedicated to several deities, and
divination performed with them ander similar forms ; especially
to the gods Frouwo (p. 656) and Waotan (p. 154-5-6).

Some acconnts of the reverence paid to sacred horses in Dit-
marsen have a doabtfal look. The Bieswold or Biesumwold on
the confines of N. and S. Ditmarsen is said to have been a holy
wood, in which human sacrifices were offered, and white horsea
cansecrcUed to gods were maintained.' This is simply an unauthor-
ized appropriation of the statement in Tacitus to a particular
locality. There is more of local colour in what Bolten 1, 262 re-
peats after the suspicious Carsten, that at Windbergen there
stood a grove set apart to Hesus (I), which is still called Hese
or Heseholt.^ In the grove two white horses, a young and an
old, were fed for the god, no one was allowed to mount them, and
good or bad auguries were gathered from their neighing and
leaping. Some talk of ten or even twenty horses. A priest of
the god stuck staves in the ground, led the bridled steed along,
and by certain processes made it leap slowly over the ataves.
Joh. Aldolfi, i.e. Neocorus, who is cited in support, says nothing
at all about it. The immunity from mounting is another point of
agreement with those Slav horses.


^ Not 'in rheda' (Wedekind's Notes 1, 173). Rhetra, a chief place of Slav
heathenimi, placed by Adam of Bremen in the land of the Betharii, where stands
the temple of Bedigost ; Dietmar gives the Lntiz town in the * gran Biedera ' itself
the name of Biedegost.

' Smatovii or Syanteyit has been confounded with St. Vitas, sanetn» Yitns
(ooni. Acta sanctor. 16 Jon. p. 1018); but we cannot possibly make the god
Svantevit originate in Yitos.

* Falk's Collection of treatises, 5, lOS. Tondem, 1828.

* This Hete-wood may however remind as of the * sUva HeUi^ Hese * on the
Bohr io Westph. (Laoombl. no. 6. 17. 64. 260) and the * ailva eaetia' of Tacitas.

VOL. II. Q


664 TBEES AKD AKIMALS.

But in the case of the heathen Livonians the Slav custoof
admits of proof. The Chronicon livonicam vetns relates ad
an. 1192 (in Gruber p. 7): 'Colligitur populus^ voluntas deoruin
de immolatione (fratris Theoderici cisterciensis) sorte inquiritar.
Ponitur lancea, calcat equiis; pedem vitas d&putaiumi (the right
foot) nutu dei praeponit. Orat frater ore^ manu benedicit.
Ariolns denm Christianorum equi dorso insidere et pedem eqai
ad praeponendum movere asserit, et ob hoc equi dorsum tergen-
dum^ quo deus elabatur. Quo facto^ dum equus vitas pedem
praeponit ut prius^ frater Theodoricus vitae reservatur/ Here a
heathen and a christian miracle met.

This worship was also an Old Prussian one : ' Prussorum aliqui
equos 7iigros, quidam albi coloris, propter decs suos non aade-
bant aliqaaliter equitare.' Dusburg 3^ 5 (see Suppl.).^

The sacrificing of horses, and the eating of horseflesh inseparable
from it, have been noticed (pp. 47-49). Strabo reports, that the
Veneti offered a white horse to Diomed (v. 1, 9. Siebenk. 2, 111.
Casaub. 215. Kramer 1, 839). The Indians get up grand horse-
sacrifices with imposing ceremonies. What is told of the Kal-
muks appears worthy of notice. Among them you see numbers
of scaffolds erected, bearing horses^ hides and heads, the remains
of former sacrifices. By the direction of the horse's head to east
or west, you can tell if the sacrifice was offered to a good or
evil spirit.^ On the one hand it suggests that sacrificial fixing
of horses' heads in a particular direction *in Grermany, which
under Christianity was treated as wicked sorcery; and on the
other hand the * pira equinis sellis constructa ' in Jemandes, and
the arjfia of the Scythian kings in Herodotus (see RA. 676, and
Suppl.).»

Of honours paid to oxen I have not so mach to tell, though
they are not at all a matter of doubt, if only because bullocks
were sacrificed, and bulls drew the car of the Frankish kings, RA.
262. War-chariots continued to have oxen till late in the Mid.
Ages : ' capto ducis (Lovaniensis) vexillo, dicto gallice standart,

^ Sup. M, 35 shews that Esthonians ascribe prophetic powers to the horse.

' Ledebour*B Beise nach dem Altai, Berl. 1830. 2, 54-5.

> A Sansk. name for the horse is Sribhrdtri, brother of Sri (Lakshmi), because,
like her (and Aphrodite) it rose out of the sea-waves, Pott 2, 407. Still more
natural is the identification of horse and ship.


OXEN. 665

opere plamario a regina Angliae ei misflo, qaod fastu superbiae
quadriga bourn ferebat/ Chapeaville 2, 69 (an. 1129). A chariot
drawn hy four white oxen in Lorraine occurs in Scheffer's HaltauSj
p. 251. In Platarcb's Marias cap. 23 is the well-known story of
the Cimbrians swearing over a brazen bull, by which the Mecklen-
bargers account for the bolFs head in their arms (Masco v 1, 13).
At HvitabsBr the people worshipped an ox (Fornald. sog. 1, 2b3),
at Upsal a coio {I, 254. 260-6. 270-2; see Sappl.).

Whilst among horses the stallion is more honoured than the
mare, among neat the cow seems to take the lead. Kine were
yoked to the car of Nerthus [and two milch- kine to the ark of
Jehovah] . The Edda speaks of a cow named Äu9umbla, which
plays a great part in the origin of men and gods (p. 559)^ and was
no doubt regarded as a sacred beast. By the side of that faith
in horses (p. 656) we find an ' ätr&na^r & kt.' King Eysteinn of
Sweden put faith in a cow called Sibilja : 'hun var svfi. miök
blotin (so much worshipped)^ at menu mattu eigi standast lät
hennar^ ; they used to lead her into battle^ Fornald. sog. 1^ 254.
260. King ögvaldr carried a sacred cow with him everywhere,
by sea and by land^ and constantly drank of her milk (Fomm.
sog. 2, 138. 10, 802). 1

The horns of cows, like the manes of horses, were adorned
with gold : ^ guUhyrndar kfr/ Seam. 73*. 141*; and the herdsman
of the Alps still decks the horns of his cattle with ribbons and
flowers. Oxen for sacrifice are sure not to have lacked this
decoration.

The Sanskrit gave (bos and vacca), root go, ace. g&m, Pers.
ghan, gho, corresponds to Lett, gohw, OHQ-. chuo, AS. cu, ON.
hyr. What is more important, 'g6' likewise means terra and
plaga (Bopp's Gram. § 123. Gloss, p. 108**), so that it touches
the Gr. yä, yrj. Taking with this the presence of Aud'uvibla in
the Norse history of creation, we can perhaps connect ririta (the
earth) and Rindr (p. 251) with our rind armentum ; it is true
this 'rind' originally began with hr (Grafi'4, 1171), and is the

* What can the black cow mean in the foUowing phrases ? * the h. c. crashes
lmn*(Hüper8 Livländ. idiot. 131); * the 5. c. has trodden him' (Etner's Apoth.
514). The Hor. Belg. 6, 97. 101 (conf. 228) speaks * van onser goeden hlaren coe, van
miere blaren coe ' ; and Ir. elfenm. cxz. of the blue cow. It is dangerous to kill
the black cow, Sup. I, 887. A Slovdnic name for the rainbow is mavra >■ black cow.
[£ng. * the 6. c. has trodden on his foot,* of sorrow, esp. bereavement.]


666 TREES AND ANIMALS.

AS. hry«er, hro«er, but who can tell whether ' rinde ' cortex was
not once aspirated too ? Evpwirq, the name of one quarter of
the earth, must surely also mean earth [evpeta the broad), and on
p. 838 I made a guess that Europa, whom Zeus courted in the
shape of a bull, must herself have been thought of as a cow, like
lo ; it was not the earth took name from her, but she from the
earth. On the worship of cows and oxen by the Indians, Egypt-
ians and Romans, I refer to A. W. Schlegel's learned treatise.^
The Israelites also made a burnt-oflfering of ' a red heifer (Goth,
kalbö) upon which never came yoke,' Numb. 19, 2 (see Suppl.).

The hoar and the he-goat were holy sacrificial beasts (p. 50-1-2),
the boar* dedicated to Freyr (p. 213), he and she goats to Thorr
(p. 185), as goats are even yet considered devil's creatures.» To
that divine hoav^s account I think we are also entitled to set
down the old song out of which Notker has preserved a passage
(he whose foreign learning so seldom suffers him to put down
anything he knew of his own country) :

Imo sint fuoze f noderm&ze,
imo sint bürste ebenhfi forste,
undo zone sine zuelif -einige ;

his bristles are even-high with the forest, and his tusks twelve ells
long. A reason for the veneration of the boar has been found
in the fact that he roots up the ground, and men learnt from him
to plough. The Slavs also seem to have worshipped boars:
'Testatur idem antiquitas, errore delusa vario, si quando his
saeva longae rebellionis asperitas immineat, ut e man praedicto
(near Biedergost) ajper magnus et candido dente e spumis luces-
cente exeat, seque in volutabro delectatum terribili quassatione
multis ostendat,' Ditm. merseb. p. 812 (see Suppl.).

None but domestic animals were fit for sacrifice, and not all of
them, in particular not the dog, though he stands on much the
same footing with his master as the horse ; he is faithful and in-
telligent, yet there is something mean and unclean about him,

1 Ind. bibl. 2, 28S— 296.

* He enjoys a doable appellation : OHG. epur, AS. eof or ; and OHQ. per^ AS.
bftrfGoth. b&is?).

* While God (Wuotan) made the wolf (p. 147), the devil a>onar?) prodnoedthe
goat. In some places they will not eat goats* feet (Tobler p. 214).


r


BOAB. DOG. BEAB. 667

whicli makes his name a handle to the tongue of the scomer. It
seems worthy of notice^ that dogs can see spirits (Sup. I, 1111),
and recognise an approaching god while he is yet hidden from
the human eye. When Grimnir entered the house of GeirröSr,
there was ' eingi hundr sv& 61mr, at ft hann mundi hlaupa/ the
king bade seize the dark-cloaked giant, ^er eigi yildo hunda/r
ftrftiSa/ Sadm. 39. 40. So when Hel prowls about, the dogs per-
ceive her. The Greeks had exactly the same notion : at Athena's
approach, no one espies her, not even Telemachos, only Odysseus
and the dogs. Od. 16, 160 :

ovS^ apa TrfXifiaxo^ IBev avriov, ovS' ivorja-ev^
ov yap TTO) irdvrea-ai deol <f>aivovTat ivapyel^,
aW ^OBv(r€v<; t€ /cvve^ t€ ISov, xal p' ou^ vXdovro, ^
Kvv^0fi& erepfoa-e Sut araOfiolo ^oßtfOep,

(they did not bark, but fled whining through the tent). — The
howling of dogs is ominous (Sup. I, 493), and gives notice of fire.
08inn is provided with dogs, ^ Vieris grey/ Ssem. 151* ; so are
the noms (p. 410), 'noma grey,* 273*. But whence arose the
story in the early Mid. Ages, of St. Peter and his dog ? In the
AS. Saturn and Solomon (Kemble p. 186), one asks: 'saga me,
hwilc man firost weere wiÖ^ hintfid sprecende?* and the other
answers : 'ic }>e secge, sanctus Petrus.' The Nialss. cap. 158 p.
275 contains a spell to save from the power of the water sprite :
'runnit hefr hundr ßinn, Petr 'postoli, till Boms tysvar (twice), ok
mandi (would) renna it J^riiSja sinn, ef ^t leyfdir ' (see Suppl.).

Among wild beasts of the wood were some that men regarded
with awe, and treated with respect : above all, the bear, wolf and
foz, I have shewn that it was an ancient and widespread custom
in Europe to bestow names of honour on these three (Reinh. p.
Iv. ccvii. 446),* and that with our ancestors the bear passed for
the king of beasts (p. xlviii. seq. ccxcv.). A doc. of 1290 (Lang's
Beg. 4, 467) presents the surname ^Chuonrat der heiligbär*; with
this connect the name Halecbem (Trad. corb. Wig. § 268), the
ON. Hallbiöm, and the still older names, male and female, ON.

^ In a Dan. folksong 1, 207-9 they bark at a spectre. Barking and not bark-
ing are the same thing here.

> A striking confirmation appears in V. Hugo's Notre Dame de Paris 2, 272 : he
states, from a book or from oral tradition, that the Gipsies call the fox piedbUu,
eowewr du boU^ the wolf pUdgrU, pieddor€, and the bear vieux or grandphre.


668 TREES AND ANIMALS.

ÄsMörn, AS. Osbeom, OHG, Anspero, and ON. Asbima, OHG.
Anspirin (in Walth. Ospirn), Ospirinberg, MB. 28. 2, 123; ap-
parently the legend of the animal's sacredness was still in fall
swing among the people. Biom was a side-name of Thfirr, and
Welsh legend presents king Arthur as a bear and a god, which is
not to be accounted for by the mere resemblance of his name to
apfCTo^ : the bear in the sky plays a most dignified part. In the
Edda a by-name of the bear is VetrliSi, hiemem sustinens (Sn.
179. 222), because he sleeps through winter, and winter was
called biamar-nött ; the name was passed on to men, as ' VetrliSi
sk&ld' in Fomm. sog. 2, 202, and a Vetrlifi 3, 107 whose name
reproduces his father's name Asbiorn} The myth of the white
bear and the wee wight was alluded to, p. 479. It is not to
be overlooked, that certain beast-fables get converted into human
myths, and vice versa : e.g,, the parts of bear and fox are handed
over to a giant or the devil. Thus, the Esthonian tale of the
man who goes partners with the bear in raising turnips and oats
(Reinhart cclxxxviii.) is elsewhere told of a man and the devil.
Such overlapping of the beast-fable with other traditions is an
additional guarantee of the epic nature of the former. — Two
wolves, Oeri and Freki^ were sacred to OSinn : whatever food was
set before him, he gave to them to eat, Sn. 4 ; they were, so
to speak, the hounds of the god ( Vi"8ris grey) . I should like to
know where Hans Sachs picked up that striking notion of the
Lord God having chosen wolves to be His hunting dogs.' A
son of Loki, FenrisHlfr, makes his appearance in wolfs shape
among the gods ; no metamorphosis occurs more frequently in
our antiquities than that of men into were-wolves. — ^Both wolf
and bear are a favourite cognisance in coats of arms, and a great
many names of men are compounded with them : neither fact is
true of the fox. Hence the dearth of mythical conceptions linked
with the fox ; a few traces have been pointed out in Beinh. ccxcvi.,'

^ The name Weturlit is also found in the Neorolog. angiense (Mone 98^).

^ Ed. 1558. i, 499^ : * die wolf er im erwelen gond ('gan choose), and het sie bei
ihm für Jagdhund.'

' Elaproth finds in Japanese books, that the people in Japan worship the imri
(fox) as a tutelar god : little temples are dedicated to him in many houses, espee.
of the commoner folk. They ask his advice in difficulties, and set rice or beans for
him at night. If any of it is gone in the morning, they believe the fox has con-
sumed it, and draw good omens from it ; the contrary is an unlucky sign (Noav.
annales des voyages, Dec. 1833, p. 298). They take him to be a kami i.e. the soul
of a good man deceased (ibid.)


WOLF. POX. CAT. BIBDS. 669

and the kindermärchen no. 38 has furnished him with nine tailsy
as Sleipnir had eight legs^ and some heroes and gods four
arms.

Freyja's car was drawn by two cats (tveim köttum), p. 305.
Now, as fres in ON. means both he-cat and bear, it has lately
been contended, not without reason, that köttum may have been
substituted for fressum, and a brace of bears have been really
meant for the goddess, as Cybele's car was drawn by lions,
p. 254. For Puss-in-boots see pp. 503-9, and the Norweg. tale in
Folkeeventyr no. 29. Gats and weasels pass for knowing beasts
with magical powers, whom one has good reason to indulge. Sup»
I, 292 (see Suppl.).

Birds. — With birds the men of old lived on still more intimate
terms, and their greater nimbleness seemed to bespeak more of
the spiritual than was in quadrupeds. I will here quote some
instances of wild fowl being fed by man. Dietmar of Merseb.
relates of Mahtildis, Otto I.'s mother (Pertz 5, 740) : ' non solum
pauperibns, verum etiam ambus victum subministrabat ; ' and we
find the same in the Vita Mahtild. (Pertz. 6, 294) : ' nee etiam
oblita est volucrum aestivo tempore in arboribus resonantium,
praecipiens ministris sub arbores proicere micas panis.' In Nor-
way they nsed to put out bunches of corn for the sparrows on
Yule-eve: ' Jule-aften at sette trende kombaand paa stöer under
aaben himmel ved laden og föe-huset till spurrens föde, at de
Baste aar ikke skal giore skade (do no harm next year) paa
ageren,* Hiorthoi Gulbrands dalen, Kb. 1785. 1, 130; it was a
sacrifice offered to the birds, to keep them from ravaging the
crops. It reminds one of the legacy to birds on Walther von
der Vogelweide's tombstoüe, whose very name denotes ' pascua
avium.'

Gods and goddesses ofben change themselves into birds, but
giants possess the same power too. The Esthonian god Tarapila
flies from one place to another, p. 77; the Greek imagination
pictured winged gods, the Hebrew winged angels, the Old German
a maiden with swan's wings. The Norse gods and giants put on
An eagle's coat, amar-ham, p. 633n., the goddesses a falcon's coat,
vals-ham, p. 302. Wind is described as a giant and eagle, p.
633, and sacred eagles scream on the mountains : ' örn göl aria.


670 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

arar gallo/ Seam. 142* 149*. Wolfram thinks of the earth as a
bird, when he says, Wh. 808, 27 :

b6 din erde ir gevidere rÄrt

nnde si der meie Idrt

ir müze alsos volrecken (see Snppl.).

Domestic fowl available for sacrifice, notably the cock and the
goose, have but few mythic aspects that I know of. Fire is de-
cribed as a red cock (p. 601) : H. Sachs has the phrase ' to make
the red cock ride on one's rooftree,' and the Danes ' den rode
hane galer over taget,' the red cock crows on the thack (the
fire crackles). Bed cocks in preference had to be brought in
payment of ground rent (formerly perhaps in sacrifice), RA. 376.
The Yöluspä 54 sets before as 'Fialarr, fagur-rwuffr hani ' singing
in the forest; a golden-crested cock awakes the heroes, a dark
one crows in the nether world. In the Danish song 1, 212 there
is meaning in the crowing of a red and a blcuJc cock one after the
other; and another song 1, 208 adds a white cock as well. An-
other cock in the Edda, Yi^fnir, perches on MimameiSr, Ssem.
109*^; with him Finn Magnusen (Lex. myth. 824. 1090) would
connect the cock they stick on the Maypole. The Wends erected
cross-trees, but, secretly still heathen at heart, they contriyed to
fix at the yery top of the pole a weathercock.^ In one fairy-tale>
no. 108, Hansmeinigel's cock sits on a tree in the wood. I do not
know when the gilded cock on the church-steeple was introduced ;
it can hardly have been a mere weather-yane at first. Guibertos
in Yita sua, lib. 1 cap. 22, mentions a gallus super turri, so that
the custom preyailed in France at the beginning of the 12th
century; in S. Germany we know it existed two centuries earlier.
Eckehard tells of the great irruption of Hungarians : ' duo ex illis
accendunt campanarium, cujus cacuminis gallum aureum put-antes,
deumque loci sic vocatum^ non esse nisi carioris metalli materia
fusum, lancea dum unus, ut eum revellat, se yalidus protendit, in
atrium de alto cecidit et periit ' (Pertz 2, 105). The Hungarians
took this gilded cock (gallus) for the diyinity of the place, and
perhaps were confirmed in their error by the bird's name being
the same as that of St. Gallus; they eyen left the minster stand-

1 Aiinalen der Chnrbr. Hanndv. lande, 8 jahrg. p. 284. Some think the cock
referred to Peter's denial.


COCK. RAVEN. 671

ing for fear of him: ' monasterio^ eo quod Oalliis, dens ejus,
ignipotens sit, tandem omisHo' (ibid. 106).^ Tit. 407: ^liz golde
ein ar g^roetet^ gefiaret unde gefunkelt ufjeglich kriuze geloetet.'
True^ the cock is an emblem of vigilance, and the watchman, to
command a wide view, must be highly placed ; ' but it is quite
possible that the christian teachers, to humour a heathen custom
of tying cocks to the tops of holy trees, made room for them on
church-towers also, and merely put a more general meaning on
the symbol afterwards (see Snppl.).

At the head of wildfowl the eagle stands as king, and is the
messenger of Jove. In our beast«fables the raven seems to take
upon him the parts both of wolf and of fox, uniting the greed
of the one with the other's cunning. Two ravens, Huginn and
Muninn, are, like the two wolves, constant companions of OSinn
(p. 147) ; their names express power of thought and remembrance :
they bring him tidings of all that happens.' Compare the sage
sparrow (spörr) of the Norse king Dag (Yngl. saga 21), who
gathers news for him out of all countries, and whose death be
avenges by an invasion. Those scouts of OSinn seem to be
alluded to in several stories, e.g., Olaf Tryggv. cap. 28, where
screaming ravens testify that OSinn accepts the offering pre-
sented ; and in Nialss. 119 two ravens attend a traveller all day.
In like manner St. Gregory is escorted by three flying ravens,
Paul. Diac. 1, 26. In the beautiful myth of king Oswald, the
raven who gets his plumage bound with gold (conf. the falcon,
Ms. 1, 88^) acts an essential part : he has nothing of the fiendish
nature afterwards imputed to this bird. It shews the same
tendency, that where the Bible says of the raven sent out of the
ark by Noah, simply that he i^eKdiav ovk avearrpe'^e (Gren. 8, 7),


^ All very legendary; for the Hungarian attack on the monastery of Herzfeld
(Hiratfeld) on the Lippe U related much in the same way in the Vita S. Idae, viz.
that having scaled the nolarius, bat not succeeded in wrenching off the bells, they
suddenly fled, aliqnid ibi esse diralis numinis suspicati sunt (Pertz 2, 673). Here
the cock does not come into play, the bells do it aU.

' Monster's Sixmbilder der alten Christen, p. 65. As Gregory the Great explains
galltu by * praedicator ' (Opp., Paris 1706. i, 969. 961), and again speculator by the
tame * praedicator,* he may in the following passage hare had the cock in view,
without naming him: * speculator semper in altitudine stat, ut quidquid venturum
■it longe prospioiat,' ibid, i, 1883.

' In a Slovdnic fairy-tale somebody had a raven (yrdna) who was all-knowing
(vedezh)^ and used to tell him everything when he came home. Murko's Sloven,
deutsches wtb. Gratz 1833. p. 696.


672 TREES AND ANIMALS.

oar Teutonic poetizers must make him alight on carrion, Csedm.
87, 11. Diut. 3, 60. King Arthur, whom wo lately met as a
bear, is said to have been converted into a raven : ' que anda
hasta ahora convertido en cuervo, j le esperan en su reyno per
mementos,^ Don Quixote 1 , 49. In folksongs it is commonly a
bird that goes on errands, brings intelligence of what has passed,
and is sent out with messages : the Bohemians say ' to learn it
of the bird' (dowedeti se po pta6ku, see Suppl.).

In our legends, birds converse together on the destinies of
men, and foretell the future. Ravens reveal to the blind the
means of recovering their sight, KM. no. 107. Domestic fowls
discuss the impending ruin of the castle, Deut. sag. 1, 202. In
the HelgaqviSa, Seam. 140-1, a mse bird (fugl froShuga'Br) is
introduced talking and prophesying to men, but insists on a
temple and sacrifices before he will tell them more. In one
German story, men get to understand the language of birds by
eating of a white snake, KM. no. 17. SigurSr understands it too,
the moment the heart's blood of the dragon Fafnir has got from
his finger-tips to his tongue : and then swallows (igSor) give him
sound advice, Ssem. 190-1. To kill swallows brings misfortune :
ace. to Sup. I, 378 it occasions four weeks' rain ; and their nests
on the houses no one dares knock down. From Saxo's account
(p. 827) of the oaken statue of Bugivit, we may conclude that the
Slavs had let swallows build on it in peace (see Suppl.).

The mythical character of the swan is certified by the legend
of swan-wives (p. 426) and by the bird's own death-song (see
Suppl.). The storTe too was held inviolable, he is like swallows
a herald of spring ; his poetic name certainly reaches back to
heathen times, but hitherto has baffled all explanation. OHG.
glosses give odebero, GraflF 3, 155, udebero^ Sumerl. 12, 16,
otivaro, odebore, Fundgr. 1, 386, odeboro^ Gl. Tross; MHG.
adebar only in Diut. 3, 453 ; MLG. edebere, Brun's Beitr. 47,
adebar, "Reinke, 1777. 2207; M. Neth. odevare, hodevare. Rein.
2316. Clignett 191; New Neth. oyevar; New LG. eber, äbfir,
atjebar ; AS. and Norse have nothing similar. The ' bero, boro '
is bearer, but the first word, so long as the quantity of its vowel
remains doubtful, is hard to determine; the choice would lie
between luck-bringer (fr. 6t opes) and child-bringer, which last
fits in with the faith, still very prevalent, that the stork brings


SWALLOW. STORK. WOODPECKER. 673

babies. If, beside the OS. partic. ödan^ AS. e&den, ON. au-Sinn
(genitus), we could produce a subst. 6d, e&d (proles), all would be
straight. The prose word, OHQ. storah, AS. storc^ ON. storhr,
may be just as old. In Frisian superstition there occur meta-
morphoses of storks into men, and of men into storks. A lay
of Wolfram 5, 21 declares that storks never hurt the crops (see
Suppl.).

The woodpecker was held sacred by ancient peoples of Italy,
and ranked as the bird of Mars, "Apeo^ 6pvi^ : perched on a
wooden pillar (cttI ki>6vo^ ^vXivov) he prophesied to the Sabines
in the grove by Matiena (or Matiera, Dion. hal. 1, 14. Beiske
p. 40) ; he had once guiddd them on their way, apfirjirrat^ ol
IItK€vrlvoi, SpvoxoTiATTTov rriv oSov 'qyeara/jiivov, Strabo v, p. 240.
And he purveyed for Bomulus and Remus when the wolf's milk
did not suffice them, Ov. Fasti 8, 37. 54 ; conf . Niebuhr 1, 245.
Ace. to Virg. Aen. 7, 189 and Ov. Met. 14, 321 Picii8 was the
son of Saturn and father of Faunus,^ and was changed into the
bird. The apparent relationship of this Picus to our poem of
Beoundf (bee-hunter, i.e. woodpecker), was pointed out p. 869.
In Norway the red-hooded blackpecker is called Oertrude^s fowl,
and a story in Asbiomsen and Moe (no. 2) explains its origin :
When our Lord walked upon earth with Peter, they came to a
woman that sat baking, her name was Gertrude, and she wore a
red cap on her head. Faint and hungry from his long journey,
our Lord asked her for a little cake. She took a little dough
and set it on, but it rose so high that it filled the pan. She
thought it too large for an alms, took less dough and began
to bake it, but this grew just as big, and again she refused to
give it. The third time she took still less dough, and when the
cake still swelled to the same sizie, ' Ye must go without ' said
Gertrude, 'all that I bake becomes too big for you.' Then
was the Lord angry, and said: 'Since thou hast grudged to
give me aught, thy doom is that thou be a little bird, seek thy
scanty sustenance twizt wood and bark, and only drink as oft as
it shall rain.' No sooner were these words spoken, than the
woman was changed into Oertrude'a fowl, and flew up the kitchen

1 When the Swiss call the black-pecker merzaßtUi (Maroh-foal, Staid. 2, 199.
Tobler 316*), the Bimplest explan. is from pious martins ; yet füllimaybe for vögeli,
and so March-fowl or Martin's fowl ; see more in Chap. ^LXXV., Path-crossing.


674 TBEES AND ANIMAIiS.

chimney. And to tHia day we see her in her red cap, and the
rest of her body black, for the soot of the chimney blackened
her ; continually she hacks into the bark of trees for food, and
pipes before rain, becaase, being always thirsty^ she then hopes
to drink.^ The green-pecker has the alias gieasvogel, Austr.
gissvogel (Stelzhamer's Lieder pp. 19. 177), goiasvogel (Hofer 1,
306), Low G. gütvogel, gieivogel, gütfugd (Ehrentr. 1. 845), Engl.
rainbirdy rainfowl, becaase his cry of ' geass, giess, giet ' (pour !)
is said to augur a downpour of rain. About him there goes a
notable story : When the Lord God at the creation of the world
ordered the beasts to dig a great well (or pond), this bird
abstained from all work, for fear of s#iling his handsome plumage
(or yellow legs). Then God ordained that to all eternity he
should drink out of no well (pond) ; therefore we always see him
sip laboriously out of hollow stones or cart-ruts where rainwater
has collected. But when no rain has fallen and there is drought,
he is sore athirst, and we hear unceasingly his pain-stricken
' giet ! ' And the good Lord takes pity, and pours down rain
(Beusch in Preuss. provinz. bl. 26, 536; from Samland). Fahl-
mann in the Dorpater verhandl. 1, 42 gives an Esthonian myth :
God was haying the Em-bach (-beck, -brook, p. 599n.) dug^ and
set all the beasts to work ; but the Whitsun-f owl idly flew from
bough to bough, piping his song. Then the Lord asked him :
^hast thou nought to do but to spruce thyself f ' The bird
replied, ' the work is dirty, I can't afford to spoil my golden-
yellow coat and silvery hose.* 'Thou foolish fop,' the Lord
exclaimed, ' from henceforth thou shalt wear black hose, and
never slake thy thirst at the brook, but pick the raindrops off the
leaves, and only then strike up thy song when other creatures

creep away from the coming storm.' Now that Norwegian

Oertrude^s fowl, whose thirsty piping brings on rain, is evidently
identical, and very likely another story explains the rainbird as
the metamorphosis of a vain idle person. Sometimes it is not
the woodpecker at all that is meant by giessvogel, giesser, wasser*
vogel, pfingstvogel, regenpfeifer, but a snipe (Höfer 1, 306. 341),
whose cry likewise forebodes a storm (p. 184), or the curlew
(numenius arquata), Pr. pluvier (pluviarius). Boh. koliha, Pol.

^ Rytohkov'B Joum. thro' the Bass. Emp., trsl. by Hase, Biga 1774. p. 124.


WOODPECKBB. MAGPIE. 8PABR0WHAWK. CUCKOO. 675

kultg, kullik, LQ. regenwolp, water wolp (Brem. wtb. 5, 286). In
oar own beast-fables the woodpecker is left without any part
to play^ only in an altogether isolated episode he is introduced
conversing with the wolf (Reinh. 419). The Votiaks pay divine
honours to the tree-tapping woodpecker^ to induce him to spare
their woods.^ The cry of this woodpecker (zhunia) the Servians
call klikchi^ kliknuti^ kliktati^ as they do that of the vila [p. 436,
but there wrongly ascribed to the tapping noise]. Wood-
peckers by their tapping shew the way to the river (Lay of Ig6r
79) ; the old legend of the woodpecker and springwurzel will be

examined in Chap. XXXII (see Suppl.) . A near neighbour of

the pecker (picus) is ihe pie, magpie (pica). In ON. her name is
skaSi (masc, says Biöm), Swed. shata, Dan. shade, which may
be referred to the abstract notion of damnum, OHGr. scado ; at
the beginning of the Yölsnnga saga there occurs a man^s name
8kaM, which Finn Magn. (Lex. 699) declares to be the goddess
8haffi. In Flemish beast-legend the magpie was ' ver Ave/ frau
Ave. In Poitou there still lingers a trace of pie-worship ; viz.
a bunch of heath and laurel is tied to the top of a high tree in
honour of the magpie, because her chatter warns the people of the
wolfs approach : ' porter la cr6pe (pancake) ä la pie,' Mem. des
antiq. 8, 451.

In Old Bohemian songs the sparrowhawk (krahui, krahug) is a
sacred bird, and is harboured in a grove of the gods (Königinh.
MS. 72. 80. 160). On the boughs of an oak that springs out of
a murdered man's grave, holy sparrowhawks perch, and publish
the foul deed (see Suppl.).

There is no bird to which the gift of prophecy is more univer-
sally conceded than the cuckoo,^ whose clear and measured voice
rings in the young foliage of the grove. The Old German law
designates spring by the set phrase ' wann der gattch guket ' (BA.
86), as in Hesiod's rules of husbandry the cuckoo's song marks
the growing rains of spring. Two old poems describe the quarrel
of Spring and Winter about the cuckoo, and the shepherds'
lamentation for him: Spring praises the bird, 'tarda hiems'

^ Gamiol. jnna, Pol. Boh. zlnwa, Boh. also wlha, wolga.

* Qoth. ginks ? OHG. gooh (Ho£fm. 6, 6), AS. geio, ON. gankr ; MHG. goaoh,
MS. 2, 132^, also rednplioated (like eaoulas) gnogoaoh» MS. 1, 182*, goggouoh, MS.
1, 166^ ; our gokuk, kakak, Up.G. guggaachi gategoa(üi.


676 TREES AND AKIMALS.

chides him^ shepherds declare that he is drowned or kidnapped.
There is a remarkable line :

Tempas adest veris ; cucidus, modo rumpe soporem.^

His notes usher in the sweetest season of the year^ bat his telling
men their fortunes is not alluded to. The Cod. Ezon. 146^ 27
also makes him publish or ^ bid ' the year : ' gedcds gear budon/
cuculi annum nuntiavere. But the superstition is not yet extinct,
that the first time you hear the cuckoo in the spring, you can
learn of him how many years you have yet to live (Sup. I, 197.
K, Swed. 119. Dan. 128. 146). In Switzerland the children
call out : ' gugger^ wie lang leb i no ? ' and in Lower Saxony :

kukuk vam häven^

wo lange sail ik leven ?

then you must listen, and count how many times the bird repeats
his own name after your question, and that is the number of
years left you to live (Schütze's Holst, idiot. 2, 363). In some
districts ^ the rhyme runs :

JcuTcuTc beckenknecht^

sag mir rechte

wie viel jar ich leben soll ? ^

The story is, that the bird was a baker's (or miller^s) man, and
that is why he wears a dingy meal-sprinkled coat. In a dear
season he robbed the poor of their flour, and when Grod was
blessing the dough in the oven, he would take it out, and pull
lumps out of it, crying every time ' guk-guk/ look-look ; there-
fore the Lord punished him by changing him into a bird of prey.


^ Both eclogues in Domavii Amphith. 456-7, where they are attrib. to Beda ;
ditto in Leyser p. 207, who says they were first printed in the Frankf. ed. (1610) of
Ovid's Amatoria, p. 190. Meanwhile Oadin (De script, eocles. 2, 827-8, ed. Lips.
1722) gives the Oonfliotus veris et hiemis under the name of ' MUo, sancti Amandi
elnonensis monaohus * (first half of 9th century) ; and the second poem De morte
ouculi stands in Mabillon's Anal. 1, 869 as *Alctdni versus de cuculo.' Anyhow they
fall into the 8th or 9th century ; in shortening the penultima of * caculns * they
agree with Beinardus 3, 528. Hoffm, Horae belg. 6, 236 has also revived the
Gonfliotus.

2 Aegid. Albertini narrenhatz, Augsb. 1617. p. 95 : * Even as befel that old wife,
which asked a guguck how many year she had yet to live, and the guguck beginning
five times to sing, she supposed that she iiad five year more to live, etc.* From
' Schimpf und ernst ' c. 391.

' So in Mod. Greek : kovko ftoVj koDkAki /mv, ki ipyvpoKovKdua fiWf T6<rovs XP^''^"^
6k vh. ^ffta ;


CUCKOO. 677

which incessantly repeats that cry (conf. Praetorins's Weltbeschr.
Ij 666. 2, 491). No doubt the story, which seems very ancient,
and resembles that of the woodpecker (p. 673), was once told
very differently; conf. Chap. XXII., Pleiades. That 'dear
season ' may have to do with the belief that when the cuckoo's
call continues to be heard after Midsummer, it betokens dearth
(Sup. I, 228).

In Sweden he tells maidens how many years they will remain
Hnmarried :

g'ok, gök, sitt pa quist (on bough),

säg mig vist (tell me truej,

hur manga är (how many years)

jag o-gift gär (I shall un-given go) f

If he calls more than ten times, they declare he has got ' pa galen
quist' (on the silly bough, i.e. bewitched), and give no heed to
his prophecies. And then a good deal depends on the quarter
whence you hear your cuckoo first. Tou must pay strict atten-
tion in spring; if you hear him from the north (the unlucky
quarter), you will see sorrow that year, from east or west his
call betokens luck, and from the south he is the proclaimer of
butter : ' östergök är tröstegök, vestergök är bästagök, norrgök ör
sorggök, sörgök är smörgök.^

In Goethe's Oracle of Spring the prophetic bird informs a
loving pair of their approaching marriage and the number of
their children.

It is rather surprising that our song- writers of the 13th cen-
tury never bring in the cuckoo as a soothsayer; no doubt the
fact or fancy was Cetmiliar to all, for even in the Benner 11340 we

read:

daz weiz der goicch, der im fur war

hat gegutzet hundert jar.

Caesarius heisterbac. 5, 17: 'Narravit nobis anno praeterito
(? 1221) Theobaldus abbas eberbacensis, quod quidam couversus,
cum nescio quo tenderet, et avem, quae cuculus dicitur a voce
nomen habens, crebrius cantwntem audiret, vices interruptionis
numeravit, et viginti duas inveniens, easque quasi pro omiue

^ Aradt's Beise doroh Schw. 4, 6 — 7. The snipe Ib in Swed. hwsgjok, ON.
hro99agaukr (horBe-cuokoo)» and she too has the gift of divination, p. 184.


678 TEEES AJn) ANIMALS.

accipiens^ j9ro annis totidem vices easdem sihi compuiavit : 'eia'
inqnit^ ' certe viginti daobus annis adhnc viyam^ at qaid tanto
tempore mortificem me in ordine ? redibo ad seculum^ et aecolo
deditus viginti annis f mar deliciis ejus ; daobus annis qui super-
sunt poenitebo.' — In the Couronnemens Benart^ the fox hears the
bird^s voice^ and propounds to him the query :

A cost mot Benart le cucu

entent, si jeta un fans ris^

'jou te conjur' fait il, 'de oris,
215 cucus^ que me dies le voir (truth),

quans ans jai ä vivre ? savoir

le veil/ Cucu, en preu cucu,^

et deus cucu^ et trois cucu,

quatre cucu, et cine cucu,
220 et sis cucu, et set cucu,

et uit cucu, et nuef cucu,

et dis cucu, onze cucu,

duze cucu, treize cucu.

Atant se taist, que plus ne f u
225 li oisiaus illuec, ains s'envolle.

Renart carries the joyful news to his wife, that the bird has
promised him yet 'treize ans d'a6 ' (see Suppl.).

Is it the cuckoo that is meant by ' timebird ' in Ms. 1, 88* : ' diu
vröide vlogzet (joy flies) gellch dem zitvogel in dem neste'?
What makes me think so is a passage in Pliny, which anyhow is
pertinent here, exhorting the husbandman at the aequinoctium
vemum to fetch up all arrears of work : ' dum sciat inde natam
exprobrationem foedam putantium vites per imitationem cantas
alitis temporarii, quem cticulum vocant. Dedecus enim habetur
opprobriumque meritum, falcem ab ilia volucre deprehendi, ut ob
id petulantiae sales etiam cum prime vere ludantur.'

Delight at the first song of the cuckoo is thus expressed in &
Swiss couplet (Tobler 245**) :

wenn der gugger chond gegugga ond 's merzafoli lacht,
denn wött i gad goh lo, ^swit i koh möcht ;

^ A line Beema wanting here» to tell us that Cnokoo, like a sensible onokoo (en
pren cucu, fngl IrÖ^hngatSr), * began to sing, One caoa.*


CUCKOO. 679

they imagine that he never sings before the 3rd of Aprils and
never after Midsammer :

am dretta Abarella

moss der gugger grüena haber schnella ;

bat he cannot sing till he has eaten a bird^s egg. If yon have
money in your pouch when you hear him sing the first time, you
will be well oflf all that year, if not, you will be short the whole
year (Sup. I, 874) ; and if you were fosting, you will be hungry
all the year. When the cuckoo has eaten his fill of cherries three
times, he leaves off singing. As the cuckoo's song falls silent at
Midsammer, vulgar opinion holds that from that time he tv/rns
into a hawk. Reusch, N. pr. prov. bl. 5, 338-9.

The Poles call the bird zezula, the Bohemians 'ezhule (both
fem.). The 0. Pol. chronicle of Prokosz,^ p. 113 of the Lat. ed.,
has a remarkable account of the worship of a Slavic god Zy vie :
'divinitati Zywie fanum ezstructum erat in monte ab ejusdem
nomine Zywiec dicto, ubi primis diebus mensis Maji innumerus
populus pie conveniens precabatur ab ea, quae vitae ^ auctor habe-
batur, longam et prosperam valetudinem. Praecipue tamen ei
litabatur ab iis qui primum cantum cuculi audivissent, ominantes
superstitiose tot annos se victuros quoties vocem repetiisset. Opin-
abantnr enim sapremum huno universi moderatorem traiisfigurari
in euculum nt ipsis annuntiaret vitae tempera: undo crimini
dacebatur, capitalique poena a magistratibus afficiebatur, qui
cuculum occidisset.' Here the oracular bird is a god in meta-
morphosisj just as that Saxon rhyme called him 'kukuk vam
haven.'

To the Servian haiduks it betokens evil when the Jcuhavitsa
comes too soon, and cries out of the black (leafless) forest ; and
good luck when it sings from the green wood, Vuk sub v.

In the Eddie Grotta-song the quern-maids are only allowed to
rest and sleep while the cuckoo is silent (enn gaukrinn J'agSi) .

The cuckoo can prophesy both good and ill ; in dealing with
him (as with other birds of enchantment, owls, magpies) you

^ Eronika polska przez Prodosza, Warsz. 1825, and in Latin * Chronicon
SlaToearmaticom ProcoBÜ/ Varsay. 1827 ; professedly of the 10th cent. It is not
BO old as that, yet Dobrowsky (Wien, jahrb. 32, 77 — 60) goes too far in pronoancing
it a pore fabrication ; it is at any rate founded on old traditions.

' iywy, aliye ; 2ywi<S, to sustain life, nourish.

11. S


680 TREES AND ANIMALS.

have to weigh your words and questions, so as not to get en-
snared (Arndt's Sweden 8, 18). To kill him without cause is
dangerous, his followers might avenge it. He has power to teaze
men, to debide them, what Swedish superstition calls dära, and
Danish gante. A MHG. poem (Fragm. 38^) has : 'peterlin und
louch h&t begucket mit der gouch/ Often his appearing is of evil
omen. Paulus Diac. 6, 55 says of Hildeprand king of the Lom-
bards : ' cui dum cent um, sicut moris est, traderent, in ejus conti
summitate cuculus avis volitando veniens insedit. Tunc aliquibus
prudentibus hoc portento visum est significari, ejus principatum
inutilem fore ' (see Suppl.) .

As that all-nourishing life-divinity of the Slavs took the shape
of the cuckoo, so does the Grecian Zeus transform himself into
the bird, when he first approaches Hera. A seated figure of the
goddess shews a cuckoo on her staff, and a bas-relief representing
the wedding procession of Zeus and Hera has a cuckoo perched on
Zeus's sceptre (as on that of the Lombard king) ;^ so that this
bird has got mixed up with the most sacred of all weddings,
and we understand why he promises marriage and the fruit of
wedlock. Then, the mountain on which Zeus and Hera came
together, previously called Opova^ (from Opovo^, seat of the
Thunderer? supra p. 183) or Gopva^, received after that the
name of 8po<; KOKKvyiov (Pausanias ii. 36, 2). Well, and we have
gowk's-hills in Germany : a Oauchsberg near Kreuznach (Widder's
Pfalz 4, 36), others near Durlach and Weinsberg (Mone's Anz. 6,
350), a Guggisberg in Switzerland (Joh. Müller, 1, 347. 2, 82.
Tschachtlan p. 2), Oöckerliberg (KM. no. 95); the name might
be accounted for very naturally by the song of the bird being
heard from the hill, but that other traditions also are mixed up
with it. In Preidank 82, 8 (and almost the same in Bonerius 65,
55):

wisiu wort unt tumbiu were
diu habent die von Ooucliesberc,

Here the men of Gauchsberg are shown up as talking wisely aitd
acting foolishly ; Gauchsberg is equivalent to Narrenberg (foors

> Weloker on Schwenk 269. 270 ; nsnaUy an eagU aits there. The figureB of
^gie and cuckoo are not always easy to distinguish ; but to this day the BavariftM
by way of jest caU the Prussian eagle * gukezer/ Schm. 2, 27.


CUCKOO. 681

moant).^ As far back as the lOth cent. gouU has the side-mean-
ing of fool (N. ps. 48, 11. 93, 8. urheizfcowA, war-fool, N. Bth.
175); the same everywhere in the 13th (Walth. 22, 31. Trist.
8631. 18215), though commonly with a qualifying adj. or gen.
pi. : ich tumber gouch, MS. 1, 65*. tumber denn ein gouch, Troj.
8126. tumber gouch, Bari. 319, 25. gouch unwise 228, 32. sin-
neloser gouch, 319, 38. der treit gouches houbet (wears a gowk's
head), MsH. 3, 468». rehter witze ein gouch, MS. 2, 124^. der
msere ein göichelin (dim.), and gouchgouolt (augm.), Ben. 209.
The ON. gaukr is likewise arrogans morio. Hans Sachs occa-
sionally uses Oauchberg^ in the same sense, ii. 4, 110^ (Kempten
ii. 4, 220*), extr. from Göz 1, 52. Yet originally in Gauch^berg
the bird himself may very well have been meant in a mystic sense
which has fallen dark to us now (see Suppl.) .^

In other ways too the cuckoo stands in ill repute, he passes
for an adulterer, who lays his eggs in other people's nests ; hence
the Bomans used cuculos in the sense of moechus (Plauti Asinaria,
twice in last scene), and our gouch, göuchelin formerly meant
bastard (Nib. 810, 1. Aw. 1, 46), as the Swiss gugsch still
means an unbidden rival suitor. He even comes out as a fiendish
being, or the fiend himself, in phrases everywhere known from of
old : ' cuckoo knows, cuckoo take him, cuckoo sent him here '
and the like, in all of which the devil's name might be substi-
tuted without change of meaning. This seems to me to point
to old heathen traditions, to which the diabolic tinge was added
only by degrees ; and among these I reckon the Low Saxon
formula ' the cuckoo and his clerk (or sexton) ' I by which clerk is
meant the hoopoo (Brem. wtb. 2, 858), a bird that is likewise
thought to have received his form by metamorphosis. I cannot
trace the story of the cuckoo and hoopoo any further; does the

' Hence we find, as substitutes for it, Affenberc (Docen*B Miso. 2, 187) ; Afen-
here and Narrental, MsH. 8, 200i>; Affental^ ibid. 218«. Winsbeke 45,7. Benner
16469 ; Apenberg and Narrenberg in the Plattd. ' Narragonia ' 77^. 137^ ; Eselsberc,
Dint. 2, 77. Animals whose stupidity was proverbial of old, are the ox, ass, ape,
goat, goose, gowk and jay : vi'S ösvinna apa. Seem. 25^. ätrunnr apa 55*. Notk. ps.
67, 11 has rnoh (stultus), i.e. hruoh, AS. hr6c (graculus, Qramm. 3, 361).

' Much oftener Schalksberg (rogue's hill) in the phrase * in den schalksperg
hawen (hew) ' i. 5, 524». iü. 3, 28<i. 54^. iv. 8, 20<i. 81o. 40» ; the reason of which I
do not know. * Schalksberg wine grows in Franconia.' ' Henricns dictus de Scalkes-
beigh,' Spilker 2, 148 (an. 1268).

' Those who crave other explanations, will find plenty in Mone's Anz. 6, 850
seq. *GoachBberg is Caucasus, as Elberich is the spirit of Elburj, diabolus the
Persic div,' and so forth.


I 682 TREES AND ANIMALS.

one sing to the other? [his note 'ooboo' is like an echo of
^cuckoo']. Döbel i. 1, 68 calls the hoopoo the cuckoo's lackey,
because he comes with him in spring and goes with him in
autumn (see Suppl.) . The peewit has the same things said of
' him.

The froth on willows, caused by the cicada spumaria, we call
JcukuJcS'Speichel, Swiss gvggerapeu^ Engl, cuckoo-spit, -spittle, Dan.
giögespyt, but in some places witch's spittle, Norweg. trold-
kiäringspyfi :^ another proof of the bird's connexion with preter-
natural things, and reminding us of the bird-spittle (fugls hr&ki)
which in Sn. 34 goes to make up the band Gleipnir. Several
names of plants assure us of his mythic nature. Sorrel: OHG.
gouchesampferd, Swiss guggersauer, AS. gedcessure, Dan. giöge-
mad, giögesyre, it being supposed that he loved to eat it ; our
hukuksbrot, gauchlauch, Pr. pain de concou, panis cuculi. Cuckoo-
flower : hukukshlume, gauchhlume, flos cuculi. Pimpernel : gauch-
heil, etc., guckgauchdom, Fischart's Greschichtskl. 269*.

The Slavs all make this bird feminine, and see nothing bad,
nothing fiendish in it : zezhulice sits on the oak, and bewails the
passing away of spring, Koniginh. MS. 174. The Servian Tcuka-
vitsa was once a maiden, who wept her brother's death till she
was changed into the bird ; ' sinia (gray) kukavitsa,' Vuk 8, 66 ;
three women turned into kukavitsas, Vuk 1, no. 321. In songs
of Lit. Bussia still a moping melancholy bird ; and in Russian
folktales we have again a young girl changed into a cuckoo by an
enchantress (Gotze's Serb, lieder, p. 212).

Of small birds, the swallow has been mentioned, p. 672.
' Frau nachtigall * is often named by our minnesingers ; but the
myth, that her children are born dead and she sings them alive,
seems not of German origin. The lark and galander (crested
lark) must have been actors in the animal legend oftener than we
are now aware of; there are still beautiful stories of the zaunkonig
(hedgeking, wren), AS. wrenna. But I have yet to speak of two
little birds, which appear to have been peculiarly sacred in olden
times : redbreast and titmouse.

Robin redbreast is on no account to have his nest disturbed, or
ihe house will be struck with lightning : it is the redstart^s nest

' Summer-freokles in Bavar. gugker-schegken, cuckoo-spots, Bchm. 2. 27 : oonf.
Höfer 1,337. •


REDBREAST. TITMOUSE. 683

that draws down the flash. The latter the Swiss call husrötheli
(house-redling) ; if you tease him or take him out, your cows
will give red milk (Tobler 281). Were these birds sacred to
Donar the red-bearded ? And has that to do with the colour of
their throat and tail f They say the redbreast drops leaves and
flowers on the face of a murdered man [or ' babe ^] whom he
finds in the wood ; did he do this in the service of a god^ who
therefore would not suffer him to be molested ?

The tiny titrrumse,^ whom he called gossip, was able to outwit
even Reynard himself. The weisthumer tell us in what estima-
tion this little forest bird was held, by setting the severest penal-
ties on his capture : ' item, si quis sibilando vel alio modo volu-
crem ilium ceperit, qui vulgo meise nuncupatur, banni reus erit/
Jnra archiep. trever., in Lacombl. aich. 326. 'si quis auceps
banc silvam intraverit, pro nullo genere volucrum componet, nisi
capiat m&isam que dicitur banmeisa, et pro ilia componat 60 sol.
tanquam pro cervo,' ibid. 367. ' wer da fehet ein hermeiseny der
sal geben ein koppechte hennen und zwelf hunkeln, und sechzig
schilling pfenning und einen helbeling/ Dreieicher wildbann
(Weisth. 1, 499). 'wer eine kolmeise fienge mit limen ader mit
slagegam, der sal unserme herm geben eine falbe henne mit sie-
ben hünkeln/ Rheingauer w. l, 535. ' wer ein sterzmeise fahet,
der ist umb leib u. guet, und in unsers herrn ungnad/ Grenz-
nacher w. 2, 153. — The reason of these laws is hidden from us ;
plainly the bird was held sacred and inviolable. And it is per-
fectly in tune with this, that at the present moment the Lettons,
who call the bird sihle^ regard it as prophetic and auspicious,
and even call a soothsayer sihlneehs? Also the Spanish name for
the titmouse, cid (lord), or dd paxaro (lord sparrow), is worth
considering. Titmouse, wren and woodpecker (bee-wolf) are
confounded in popular belief; what is meant is the tiQiest
prettiest bird (see Suppl.).


1 Meiae, OHO. meisA, AS. milse, Nethl. mdze, Fr. mesange, O.Fr. moBenge.

' Lith. ^yle, iyl^e ; Pol. sikora, Bob. sykora, Buss, zfnika, sinitsa, SIot.
flenitaa, Seir. Bienitsa. The Lettio name may be deriTable from siimabt, tbe Lith.
from iynoti (scire), so that the faU form would be sinnele, ^ynle, the sage knowing
bird ? The jay also is in Lettio sihls. To the Swed. Lapps taitru signifies not
only wood-pecker, bat superstitious divination ; tayetet is to understand. In view
of Üiat, our ^eehi (woodpecker) seems to belong to a lost root spihan, spah, sp&hun,
whence also spehdn (explorare), and sp&hi (sapiens, prudens).

• Mag. der lett. lit. gesellsoh., Mitau 1S88. 0, 151.


684 TREES AND ANIMALS.

Reptiles. — Snakes^ by the beauty of their shape and the terror
of their bite, seem above all animals to command awe and rever-
ence. A great many stories tell of an exchange of form between
men and snakes : an almost infallible sign of their having been
worshipped. Beings that had passed out of human into animal
shapes, and were able to return into the former at need, these
heathenism was inclined to regard as sacred ; it worshipped kind
beneficent snakes, whilst in christian opinion the notion of snakes
being malignant and diabolic predominates.

The same Vita Barbati, which we had to thank for information
on the tree-cultus of the Lombards (p. 649), tells us likewise of
a worship of snakes : ' His vero diebus, quamvis sacra baptis-
matis unda Langobardi ablnerentur, tamen priscum gentilitatU
ritu/m tenentes, sive bestiali mente degebant, bestiae simulachro,
quae vulgo vipera nominatur, flectebant colla, quae debite suo de-
bebant flectere Creatori. . . . Praeterea Bomuald ejnsqne
sodales, prisco coecati errore, palam se solum Deum colere fate-
bantur, et in abditis viperae simulachrum ad suam perniciem
adorabantJ During the king^s absence, Barbatns beseeches his
consort Theodorada to procure for him that image of the snake.
' Illaque respondit : Si hoc perpetravero, pater, veraciter scio me
morituram.' He perseveres and at last persuades her ; as soon
as the image is in his hands, he melts it down, and delivers the
metal to goldsmiths to make out of it a plate and a chalice.^
Out of these golden vessels the christian sacrament is adminis-
tered to the king on his return, and then Barbatus confesses that
the holy utensils were made by melting down the idol. ' Bepente
unus ex circumstantibus ait : Si mea uxor talia perpetrasset, nuUo
interposito memento abscinderem caput ejus.' A passage in the
other Vita also is pertinent here : ' Quinetiam vip&raTa auri
metallo formatam summi pro magnitudine dei supplici devotione
venerari videbantur. Unde usque hodie, sicut pro voto arboris
Votum, ita et locus ille Census, devotiones * ubi viperae redde-
bantur dignoscitur appellari/ About ' votum ' I expressed my
mind, p. 6o0n. ; ' census ' signifies the Goth, gild, gilstr, OHG.
hell, kelstar (p. 38-9 and RA. 358) . The two words votum and

^ As the gold of the swan-rings was made into pots» and what remained otot
was the goldsmith's profit.

^ Printed text : loons ille census deyotionis, nhi Tiperae reddehantnr.


SNAKB. 685

census are no slight testimony to the genuineness and oldness of
the biography.— Here then we have a striking instance of an
idol made of gold^ and moreover of the christian teacher^s en-
deavour to preserve the sacred material, only converting it into a
christian form. What higher being the snake represented to the
Ix>mbards, we can scarcely say for certain ; not the all-encircling
world- snake, the miiSgarSs-ormr, iormungandr of Norse myth-
ology, for there is not a hint that even in the North, let alone
elsewhere, he was visibly represented and worshipped. Ofnir
and SvafniT are ON. names of snakes, and side-names of OSinn
(conf. p. 144) ; is it Wuotan that we are to understand by the
^ summus deus ' of the Lombards ? ^ But the special character-
istics of their snake- worship are entirely lost to us. If the term
vipera was deliberately chosen, as I have no doubt it was, it can
only mean one of the smaller kinds of snake (coluber berus),
OHG. natara, AS. ncedre, ON. naSra (also masc. na'Sr, like Groth.
nadrs), though the simulacrum, of whose gold a plate and chalice
could be made, bespeaks a considerable size.

Lombard legend has more to tell us of snakes, and those
expressly small ones. The Heldenbuch describes the combat of
a small fire-spitting beast on the Gartensee (L. di Garda) with
Wolfdietrich and a lion, to both of whom it gives enough to do :

Nan hörent durch ein wonder, wie das tierlein ist genant :
es heisst zn welsch ein zundeTt zu teutsoh ein »arihant^
in Sittenland nach esen ist es ein vipper genant ;

and it is added, that there are bat two such vipers alive at once,
for the young ones soon after birth eat up their parents. This
agrees closely with the statements in the Physiologus (Diut. 3,
29, 80. Hoffm. fundgr. 28). I cannot explain zunder from any
Italian dialect ; scuribant is the MHG. serpant, Trist. 8994. Sit-
tenland I take to be the canton Yalais, from its capital Sitten
(Sion) ; there the Bomance vipera might easily remain in use
(Grisons vipra, vivra). In the Jura a never-dying winged snake
with a diamond eye is called vouivre, M6m. des autiq. 6, 217. In
Switzerland this snake in called stollenwurm (Wyss^s Heise ins
Bemer Oberland, p. 422), and in Salzburg birgatutze, Schm. 1,
196 (seeSnppL).

I * Sommi pro magn. Dei * may possihlj mean * iiutead of (worshipping) the
majesty of the Most High.* — Tbams.


686 TBEES AND AKIMALS.

Plenty of old tales are still told of home-enakes and unkea}
On meadows and pastures^ and even in houses^. snakes come to
children when alone, sip milk with them out of their bowl, wear
golden crovms, which in drinking they take off from their heads
and set on the gronnd, and often forget and leave them ; they
watch infants in the cradle, and to bigger children they shew
treasures : to kill them is unlucky. Every village has its own
snakes to tell of. So goes the story in Swabia. Some Hessian
stories are collected under Kinderm. no. 105, and one from
Austria in Ziska's Volksmärchen (Vienna 1822, p. 51) ; nearly all
bring in the rmlk-drinking ^ and the golden crown. If the parents
surprise the snake with the child, and kill it, the child begins to
fall away, and dies before long (Temme's Fomm. sagen no. 257) .
Once, when a woman lay asleep, a snake crept into her open
mouth, and when she gave birth to a child, the snake lay tightly
coiled round its neck, and could only be got away by a milk-
bath ; but it never left the baby's side, it lay in bed with it, and
ate out of its bowl, without doing it any harm (Hone's Anz. 8,
530). Then other accounts speak of a multitude of snakes filling
house and yard, whose king was distinguished by a glittering
crown on his head. When he left the yard, all the rest would
accompany him ; in the stable where he lived, they swarmed so
plentifully, that the maids feeding the cattle would take them
out of the crib by armfnls. They were friendly to the cattle
and the people ; but a new farmer shot their king, and they all
departed, and with them vanished wealth and prosperity from
the estate (ibid. 6, 1 74).^ Here also comes in the queen of snakes
(Deut. sagen no. 220), and a remarkable story in the Gesta Bo-
manorum (Keller p. 152). To a dairymaid at Immeneich there
came a great snake into the cowshed every morning and evening
at milking-time, and wore a great crown on its head. The girl


1 MHG. unk, gen. nnkes, MS. 2, 209^ 206«: ' from copper one diyideih gold
with an nnke's ashes' ; hence an alohymist was called unken-hrenner (Felix
Malleolus de nobilitate et mstioitate, cap. SO). By vnke is properly meant the
rana portentosa (bull-frog?), but often snake or reptile in general. Like the
weasel, it is called caressingly * mumelein, mäemal^* aunty. Schm. 2, 576.

' Down to the recurring formula : * ding, iss auch brocken 1* (thing, eat cnunbs
too) ; * friss auch mocken, nicht lauter schlappes ! ' (not only slops) Mone'a Ana.
8, 580 ; * friss auch brocken, nicht lauter brühe ! ' ibid. 6, 175.

* A similar story of the king of snakes from Lübbenau in the Spieewald of
Lausitz (Bü8ching*8 Wöch. nachr. 3, 842) in Beosoh no. 74.


SNA£E. 687

everytime gave it warm ocyufs milk to sup. She suddenly left the
place in a tiff^ and when the new maid went for the first time to
milk^ there lay the golden crown on the milking-stool^ with the
inscription : ^ a token of gratitude.' She brought the crown to
her master^ who gave it to the girl it was intended for; but from
that time the snake was never seen again (Moneys Anz. 8^ 537).
The adder's crown (attemkranlein) makes any one that wears it
invisible (Schm. 2y 388) and immensely rich as well. In some
districts they say every house has two snakes, a male and a
female, but they never shew themselves till the master or mistress
of the house dies, and then they undergo the same fate. This
feature, and some others, such as the offering of milk, bring the
hame'^nakes near to the notion of good helpful home-sprites (see
Sappl.).

The snake then comes bef<»« us as a beneficent inviolable
creature, perfectly adapted for heathen worship. A serpent
tvrined round the staff of Asklepios, and serpents lay beside
healing fountains (p. 588n.).. The ancient Prussians maintained a
large snake for their Potrimpos, and the priests guarded it with
care ; it lay under ears of com, and was nourished with milk.^
The Lettons call snakes milk-mothers (peena mahtes) ; they were
under the protection of one of the higher goddesses named
Brehkina (crier), who cried oat to all that entered to leave her
' peena mahtes ' unmolested in the house (Mag. der lett. gesellsch.
6, 144). There is milk set for them in pots. The Lithuanians
also revered snakes, harboured them in their houses, and offered
them sacrifices.' Egyptian snake-worship was witnessed by
Herodotus 2, 74« 'Nullus locus sine genio, qui per anguem
plerumque ostenditur,' Serv. ad Aen. 5, 95«

Snakes were devised as a charm in sword's and on helmets
(Sssm. 142^) :

liggr meS eggjo ormr dreyftSr,
enn ft valbösto verpr n>adr hala.

The ormr or yrmllngr was supposed to run from the sword's hilt

> Yoigt'B Geschichte PraoBfleiiB 1, 584.

* 8eb. Frank's Weltbueh 65^ Mone's Heidenth. 1, 98. Adam. brem. de sita
Daniae, cap. 24, of the LithoaniaDB : * dracone» adorant cum vohurrihm^ quibus
etiam yiyoa Utant homines, qiios a meroatoribos emnnt, diligenter omnino piobatos
ne maftwiftw» in oozpore habeant.'


688 TBEES AKD ANIMALS.

(belz; hialt) to the point and back again (Kormakss. p. 82-4.
Vilk. 8. p. 101). Vitege had the epithet 'mit dem sla/ngen* be-
cause of his helmet's crest (Heldensage p. 148) . They imparted
strength to a helmet^ and force to the blade of a sword. It
seems much the same things when waggoners plait adder's-
tongues into their whips^ Sup. I^ 174 (see Suppl.).

The snake crawls or wriggles along the ground; when
provided with wings, it is called drache, a non-German word
coming from the Lat. draco, Grr. Bpaxoov, and introduced very
early, OHG. tracchoy AS. draca, ON. drehi. The Elder (or
Saemund^s) Edda has dreki only once, in the latish Sölarl. 127**;
elsewhere it is ormr, AS. wyrm, OHG. wurm, Goth, vaurms, which
in a wider sense includes the snake also. The one encountered
by Beowulf comes before us emphatically as a winged snake
(serpens alatus) ; ' nihtes fleoge^S ' 4541, by night he flies, and
hence is called uhtsceaffa 4536 (noctumus hostis, aggressor), and
lyßsceada (aereus hostis), Cod. exon. 829, 24. Also the dragon
that keeps Krimhild prisoner on the Drachenstein comes riding
through the air, or flying. But the one that young Siegfried had
previously killed, when sent out by the smith, lay beside a linde
(lime-tree), and did not fly: this is the Fafiiir of the Edda, a man
who had assumed the form of a snake; of him the Edda uses
skri'Sa (repere, to stride), Seam. 186. Sn. 138; and he is the
wyrm or draca slain by Sigemund and Fitela in Beow. 1765.
1779. In the Nib. 101, 2 and 842, 2 he is called linirache, litiU
drache, in the Siegfriedslied 8, 2 lintwurm : an expression found
also in Mar. 148, 28. En, 2947. Troj. 25199, and to be ex-
plained, not from linde (tüia) as misunderstood by later legend,
but from the OHG. lint. With ijhis lint (Goth. linj>s, AS. li«,
ON. linn?) many women's names are formed (Gramm. 2, 505),
^'9'i Sigilint, ON. Sigrlinn (supra p. 428), and it may have con-
tained the notion of brightness or beauty,^ suitable alike to snake
and woman; the derivative weak form Unni (masc.) in ON.
signifies again coluber, serpens. And Limburg= Ltn^fcur j, the
name of several towns, is more correctly derived from snake than
from lime-tree.

About dragons it is a favourite fancy of antiquity, that they

--iJw^°1? ?*^^ the Engl lithe, pKable, gWe ihe most soitable meamng, Germ.
gelind »oft, hndem to mitigate ?— Tbahb. *««««i«, vr»


DRAGON. 689

lie upon gold, and are illamined by it ; gold itself was poetically
named worm-bed, ON. ormbe*8r or ormbe'Ss-eldr (wormbed^s fire).
And with this was linked a further, notion^ that they guard
treasures^ and carry them through the air by night. That wyrm
slain by Sigemund is called ' hordes hyrde/ Beow. 1767 ; the one
that Beowulf fought with receives the epithet ' se hord beweo-
tode ' 4420. F&fnir, formerly a giant, lay ' in (the shape of) a
worm/ wearing the Oegis-hialm, over inherited gold (Sam.
188\ 189*) ; the expression is '1 l^ngvi ' (from l^ng, heath), and
the spot is named Gntta-hei'Si ; hence in other cases also the word
lyngvi, lyngormr (heath-worm) stands for dragon. The Vols.
saga c. 17 distinguishes lyngormr a small snake from dreki a large
one; so that our OHG. heimo, OS. hema, AS. hama, spoken of
on p. 387, may be identical with lyngvi; Vilk. saga c. 17, p. 31
expressly calls heima 'alka orma slcemntr' (omnium vermium
minimus), but as he is venomous, he cannot be the harmless
cicada (OHG. muhheimo). Popular belief still dreams of glitter-
ing treasures lying on lonesohie heaths and guarded by dragons ;
and hceffen gold in Beow. may mean either aurum tesquorum or
ethnicorum, for dragons, like giants, were thought of as old and
full of years, e.g., eald uhtsceaiSa, Beow. 4536^ wintrum froS (wise
with years) 4548 ; )^reo hund (300) wintra heold on hrusan (earth)
4550 ; at the same time they are covetous, envious, venomous,
spitting flame: niffdraoa, Beow. 4540; dttorsceaffa 5673, f;^re
befongen 4541, ongon gl6dum spiwan 4619, deorcum nihtum
ricsian 4417. It is said of F&fnir, «Sa&m. 186^ 'screi'S af gulli,
bids eitri, hristi sik ok barSi höfiSi ok sporSi,' stept off the gold,
blew poison, shook himself, and struck with head and tail ; it was
noticed on p. 562 that the two notions of eit (fire) and eiter
(poison) run into one. Connect with this the descriptions of MHG.
poets : the ' trache ' has his iiaunt in a valley, out of his throat
he darts flame, smoke and wind. Trist. 8944-74 ; he has plumage,
wings, he spits fire and venom, Troj^ 9764. 9817 (see Suppl.).

Now it was the heroes' province to extirpate not only the
giants, but (what was in a measure the same thing) the dragons ^
in the world : Tb6rr himself tackles the enormous miiSgarSs-orm,
Sigemund, Siegfried, Beowulf stand forth as the bravest of

^ The analogy is kept up in the cirotunstanoe of the conquered dragon (like the
giant's skeleton p. 555n.) being fastened over the town-gate, e.g. Pnlci 4, 76.


690 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

dragon-qnellers^ backed by a crowd of others, who spring out of
the ezhanstless fonnt of living legend, wherever time and place
requires them. Frotho, a second Siegfried, overpowers a yeno-
moas dragon that lay reposing on his treasure, Saxo Gram. p.
20. The beautiful Thora Borgarhiörtr had a small l^ngorm given
her, whom she placed in a casket, with gold under him : as he
grew, the gold grew also, till the box became too narrow, and the
worm laid himself in a ring all round it ; soon the chamber was
too small, and he lay round that, with his tail in his mouth, admit-
ting none into the room unless they brought him food, and he
required an oz at every meaL Then it was proclaimed, that
whoever slew him should get the maiden for his bride, and as
much gold as lay under the dragon, for her dowry. It was
Kagnar Lodbrok that subdued this dragon, Fomald. sog. 1,
237-8. The rapid growth of the worm has a startliug similariiy
to that of the fish, p. 578. But, beside the hoarded gold which
the heroes carry off as prize, the adventure brings them other
advantages : eating the dragon's heart gives one a knowledge of
beasts' language, and painting oneself with his blood hardens the
skin against all injury« Both features enter deeply into the
legend of Siegfried (see Suppl.) }

Nearly all of this has its counterpart in the beliefs of other
nations. As the Romans borrowed gigas from the Greeks, so
they did draco, for neither serpens nor vermis was adequate
(like our slango and wurm) to express the idea. Now Bpcucwp
comes from Sipicew to look, illumine, flash out, ^>do^ SiBopKe
expresses illuminating light, and this confirms me in my proposed
explanation of our lint and linni. A fox after long burrowing
struck upon the cave of a dragon watching hidden treasure, 'ad
draconis speluncam ultimam^ custodiebat qui thesaoros abditos,'
Phaedr. 4, 19. Then the story of the gold-guarding griflina must
be included, as they are winged monsters like the dragons.

In 0. Slavic zmif m., and zmiya f., signify -snake, the one more
a dragon, the other an adder« The Boh. zmek is the fiery dragon
guarding money, zmii/e the adder; Serv. zmay dragon, zmiya
adder. Mica, which the zmay shakes off him, is named otresine
zmayeve (dragon's offshake), Vuk p. 584. Once more, everything

conf.^^i1l87a dÄ^^ ^"^ ""'^'^ of a BimiUir tale of Bodolz,


DBAGON. BEETLE. 691

leads to glitter^ gold and fire. The Lith. amahas seems borrowed
from Slavic ; whether connected with AS. snaca, is a question.
Jungmann says^ zmeJc is not only a dragon, but a spirit who
appears in the shape of a wet bird,^ usually a chicken, and brings
people money ; Sup. I, 143 says you must not hurt earth-chicks
or hause^adders ; Schm. 1, 104 explains erdhimlein (earth -chicken)
as a bright round lustre, in the middle of which lies some-
thing dark ; conf. geuhuon, Helbl. 8, 858.

Kenvall thus describes the Finn, marmnelainen : ' femina ma-
ligna, matrix serpentis, divitiamm subterranearum custos.' Here
at last the hoard is assigned to a female snake ; in Teutonic and
also Slavic tales on the contrary it is characteristic of the fierce
fiendish dragon (m.) to guard treasure, and the adder or unke (f .)
plays more the part of a friendly homesprite : as the one is a man
transformed, so the other appears as a crowned maiden with a
serpent's tail (Deut. sag. no. 13), or as a fay. But she can no
more dispense with her golden crown than the dragon with his
guardianship of gold ; and the Boh. zmek is at once dragon and
adder. A story of the adder 'king is in Bechstein's Franken p.
290 (see SuppL) .

Amidst all these points of connexion, the being worshipped by
the Lombards must remain a matter of doubt ; we have only a
right to assume that they ascribed to it a benign and gracious
character.

Insects.-— Some traces of beetle-worship I am able to disclose.

We have two old and pretty general terms: OHG. eheüor,
cheviro, MHG. kever, kevere, NHG. käfer, N. Neth. kever, AS.
ceafor, Engl, chafer. We have no business to bring in the Lat.
caper (which is AS. heafer, ON. hafr) ; the root seems to be the
AS. ceaf, caf = alacer, for the chafer is a brisk lively creature,
and in Swabia they still say käfermässig for agilis, vivax (Gramm.
2, 571. 1013). The AS. has ceafortün, cafertün, for atrium, vesti-
bulum; ' scarabaeorum oppidum' as it were, because chafers
chirp in it ? ' The second term, OHG. wibil, webil, MHG. vdbel,

^ Zmoklj is drenchedi zmoknuti to wet ; * mokry gako zmok,' dripping like «n
earth-Bprite.

* Here again the female being has the adyantage oyer the male.

s Helbling, speaking of an ill-shaped garment, starts the query (1, 177), where


C92 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

NHG. webel, wiebel, AS. rvifel, wefel, Engl, weevil, agrees with
Lith. wabalas, wabalis, Lett. wabhoU, and I trace it to weben
(weave, wave) in the sense of our * leben und weben/ vigere,
moveri; we say, 'kriebeln und wiebeln' of the swarming of
beetles.*

To the Egyptians the beetle (scarabaeus, xdvOapo^, Kapaßosi)
was a sacred being, an emblem of inmost life and mysterious self-
generation. They believed that he proceeded out of matter
which he rolled into globules and buried in manure (see Suppl.].

ON. literature deals in no prose terms, but at once comes out
with the poetic name iotunoz, iötunozi (giant-ox) ; as that giant
maiden took the ploughman with his oxen and plough for crawl-
ing beetles (p. 540, Finn, sontiainen, sondiainen, dung-beetle
from sonda, fimus), so conversely the real beetle might awaken
the notion of a iötunox. To liken the small animal to the large
was natural.

Our biggest beetle, the stately antlered stag-beetle, the Romans
called lucanus, Nigid. in Pliny 11, 28 (34), with which I suppose
is connected the well-known luca bos, lucanus or lucana bos, a
name which got shifted from the horned beast to a tusked one,
the elephant (Varro 7, 39. 40. 0. Müll. p. 135). But we call
the beetle hirsch (stag, Fr. cerf volant), and even ox and goat,
all of them homed beasts, Pol. ielonek, 0. Slav, elenetz (both
stagling). Boh. rohac (corniger), Austr. homier, Swed. homtroll.
Again, a Lat. name for scarabaeus terrester was taurus, Plin. 30,
5 (12), which keeps my lucanus bos or cervus, in countenance.
To the female the Bohemians give the further name of babka
(granny).

On p. 183 we came across a more significant name, donner-
guegi, donnerpuppe, in obvious allusion to Donar, whose holy tree
the beetle loves to dwell in ; and with this, apparently, agrees a
general term for beetles which extends through Scandinavia^
viz. Westergötl. torbagge, Swed. tortyfvel, Norweg. tordivel, JuH
torr, torre. True, there is no Icelandic form, let alone ON., in
which Th6rr can be detected ; yet this ' tor ' may have the same

might be the back and belly of one that was hidden away in Buoh a eheverpeunt ?
He calls the ample cloak a chafer-pound or yard, in whose reoessee you catch beetles.
This keverpiunt answers to the AS. ceafortun.

^ Slavic names are, Boh. chranst, Pol. chr%szez ; Boh. braok, bmk, prob, from
bmchiiB, ßpovKot, [KasB. zhok ; the * gueg * of S. Oermany ?]


BEETLE. CHAFEB. 693

force it has in iorsdag (p. 126) and tordon (p. 166) ; 'bagge/
says Ihre p. 122^ denotes juvenis^ pner^ hence servant of the god,
which was afterwards exchanged for dyfvel=diefvul, devil.
Afzelias (Sagohäfder 1, 12. 18) assnres ns, that the torbagge was
sacred to Thor^ that in Norrland his larva is called mulloze (earth-
ox, oar Swiss donnerpnppe? conf. iötonoxi), and that he who
finds a dung-beetle lying on his back (ofvaltes) unable to help
himself^ and sets him on his legs again, is believed by the Norr-
landers to have atoned for seven sins thereby.

This sounds antique enough, and I do not hastily reject the
proposed interpretation of tordyfvel^ false as it looks. For the
AS. tordwifel is plainly made up of ' tord,' stercus (Engl, turd)
and the 'wifel' above, and answers to the Dan. skarnbasse,
skamtorre (dungbeetle) ; consequently tordyfvel, torbasse crave
the same solation^ even though a simple ' tord ' and ' vivel ' be
now wanting in all the Scandinavian dialects. The Icelandic
has turned tordivel about into torfdifill, as if turf-devil, from
torf, gleba. There is also the N. Neth. tor, torre beetle^ and
drektorre dungbeetle [or devil's coach-horse ; also Engl, durable-
dorr cockchafer], to be taken into account (see Suppl.).

Bat who ever saw even a beetle lie struggling on his back,
without compassionately turning him over ? The German people,
which places the stagbeetle in close connexion with thunder and
fire, may very likely have paid him peculiar honours once.

Like other sacred harbingers of spring (swallows, storks), the
first cockchafer (Maikäfer)^ used to be escorted in from the woods
with much ceremony; we have it on good authority^ that this

^ Maikäfer (like maiblmne) Bonnds too general, and not a people's word. And
there is no Lat. name preserved either. The Greek firiKoK^vdri designates onr mai-
kafer or our goldkäfer ; boys tied a string to it and played with it (Aristoph. Nub.
763), as our boys do. The It. icarafaggio is formed from scarafone (scarabaeos) ;
the Fr. harmeton a dim. of the obsolete hanne horse, which may have been the term
for the stagbeetle (still petz^aul, Brain's horse, in the Wetterau), Fr. cerf Tolant,
Dan. eeghiortf Swed. ekhjort, i.e. oak-hart. The Mecklenb. ektäwer, oak-chafer, as
well as the simple säver^ sever ^ sehher (Schütze's Holst, idiot. 4, 91) is applied to the
maikafer ; in other parts of L. Saxony they say maitävel, maüäbel. This $äver,
zäoer (Brem. wtb. 4, 592. 5, 310) is sorely no other than käfer with change of k
into 2, t; Chytrseus's Nomenol. saxon. has ^ zever^ and ^o/dzev^r» goldkäfer.' Or
does the HG. ziefer belong here, contraxy to the etymol. proposed on p. 40 ? In
the Westerwald pöwitZt köwiu is maikäfer, and in Bavensberg povömmel dongbeetle
(Kahn*s Westfal. sagen 2, 188), almost agreeing with Esthon. poua chafer, beetle.
Like the yarions names for the stagbeetle, maybeetle, dongbeetle, goldbeetle, the
traces of ancient beetle- worship seem also to meet, first in one, then in another of
them. A scarafone who brings suoconr oocnrs in Fentamer. 8, 5 (see Suppl.).


694 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

continued to be done by the spinning girls in parts of Schleswig
as late as the 1 7th century.^

Folk- tales of Up. Germany inform us : Some girls, not grown
up, went one Sunday to a deserted tower on a hill, found the
stairs strewn with sand, and came to a beautiful room they had
never seen before, in which there stood a bed with cartains.
When they drew these aside, the bed was swarming with gold-
beetles, and jumping up and down of itself. Filled with amaze-
ment, the girls looked on for a while, till suddenly a terror seized
them, and they fled out of the room and down the stairs, with an
unearthly howl and racket at their heels (Moneys Anz. 7, 477).
On the castle-hill by Wolfartsweiler a little girl saw a copper' pot
standing on three legs, quite new and swarming full of horsebeetlss
(roskafer). She told her parents, who saw at once that the beetles
were a treasure, and hastened with her to the hill, but found
neither pot nor beetles any more (ibid. 8, 305). Here beetles
appear as holy animals guarding gold, and themselves golden.

In Sweden they call the small goldbeetle (skalkrak) Virgin
Mary's key-maid (jungfru Marie nyckelpiga), Dybeck's Buna
1844, p. lOj in spring the girls let her creep about on their
hands, and say, ' hon märker mig brudhandskar,' she marks (fore-
shews) me bride's gloves ; if she flies away, they notice in which
direction, for thence will come the bridegroom. Thus the beetle
seems a messenger of the goddess of love ; but the number of
the black spots on his wings has to be considered too : if more
than seven, corn will be scarce that year, if less, you may look
for an abundant harvest, Afzel. 8, 112-3.

The little coccinella septempunctata has mythical names in
nearly all our dialects: NHG. gotteshiihlein (God's little cow),'
gotteskalb, herrgotteskalb, herrgotts-thierchem (-beastie), Iverr-
gotS'VÖglein (-birdie), Marien vÖglein, Marienkäfer, Marienkälblein;
Engl, lady cow, ladybird, lady fly ; Dan. Marihöne (-hen) ; Boh.
krawha, krawicha (little cow). In Up. Germany they call the
small goldbeetle (chrysomela vulg.) fraua^chüeli, ladycow (Tobler

^ An old desoription of the majgraye feast by ülr. Petersen (in Falok*8 New
staatsb. mag., toI. 1, Sohlesw. 1832|p. 655) speaks of it thus : ' A quaint procession
of the erewhile amazons of the spinning-wheel at Schleswig, for fetching in of a
cantkarU or maykäfer with green boughs, whereat the town-hall of this place was
decked out with greenery.* The feast was still held in 1630—40.

^ The Buss. * B6zhia koröyka, has exactly the same meaning. — Tbahs.


CHAPEB. BEE. 695

204*») and ' der liebe frovA henje/ our lady's hen (Alb. Scbott's
Deatache in Piemonfc 297), in contrast to herra-chüeU the
coccinella (Tobler 265*), thongh the name probably wavers be-
tween the two. By the same process which we observed in the
names of plants and stars, Mary seems to have stept into the
place of Freyja, and Marihöne was formerly Freyjuh(e)ia, which
we still have word for word in Prone henje, and the like in Fraaa-
chüeli. And of Romance tongues, it is only that of France (where
the community of views with Grermany was strongest) that has a
bete ä dieu, vache a dieu ; Span, and ItaL have nothing like it.
At all events our children's song :

MarienJcäfereherij flieg aus ! (fly away)

dein bauschen brennt, (bums)

dein mütterchen flennt, (weeps) "^

dein Väterchen sitzt auf der schwelle ; (sits on the threshold)

flieg in 'n kimmel aus der höUe ! (into heaven out of hell)

must be old, for in England also they sing : ' Ladybird, ladybird,
fly away home, your house is on fire, and your chUdren will bum
[all but little Bessie that sits in the «an].' With us too the chil-
dren put the Marienkäfer or sonnenkäfer on their finger, and ask
it, like the cuckoo : ' aunnenJcieken (sun's chicken), ik frage di,
wo lange schal ik leven 7 ' ' Een jaar, twee jaar,' etc., till the
chafer flies away, its home being in the sun or in heaven. In
Switzerland they hold the goldbeetle on their hand, and say :
' cheferli, cheferli, flüg us I i getter milech end brocka ond e
silberigs löS*eli dezue.' Here the chafer, like the snake, is offered
'milk and crumbs and a silver spoon thereto.' In olden times he
must have been regarded as the god's messenger and confidant
(see Suppl.).

Lastly the bee, the one insect that is tamable and will live
among men, and whose wise ways are such a lesson to them, may
be expected to have old mythic associations. The bee is believed
to have survived from the golden age, from the lost paradise
(Chap. XXX.) ; nowhere is her worth and purity more prettily
expressed than in the Servian lay of the rich Gavan, where God
selects three holy angels to prove mankind, and bids them
descend from heaven to earth, ' as the bee upon the flower,' kako
pchela po tsvetu (Yuk 1, 128 ed. 2). The clear sweet honey,

VOL. u. s


696 TREES AND ANIMALS.

which bees suck out of every blossom, is a chief ingredient of the
drink divine (p. 819), it is the ffSela c&üSi? of the gods, Hjmn. m
Merc. 560 ; and holy honey the first food that touches the lips
of a new-born chüd, RA. 457. Then, as the gift of poesy is
closely connected with OShroeris dreckr, it is bees that bnng it
to sleeping Pindar : ^Outrcrat avrS Kadevhovn. irpocreirirovro re
Kal hrXaaaov irph^ tÄ X^^V ^ov kvrov' ipxv A*^" U^vB^
TToietv aafiara iyevero rotavTf), Pausan. ix. 23, 2. And there-
fore they are called Musarum volucres (Varro de re rust. 3, 16).
A kindermarchen (no. 62) speaks of the queen-bee settling on
her favourite's mouth 5 ^ if she flies to any one in his sleep, he
is accounted a child of fortune.

It seems natural, in connexion with these bustling winged
creatures, to think of the silent race of elves and dwarfs, which
like them obeys a queen. It was in the decaying flesh of the first
giant that dwarfs bred as maggots ; in exactly the same way bees
are said to have sprung from the putrefaction of a bullock's body :
'apes nascuntur ex bubulo corpore putrefacto,' Varro, 2, 5;
' ^tmissas reparari ventribus bubulis recentibus cum fimo obratis,'
Plin. 11, 20 (23); conf. Virg. Georg. 4, 284-658. Or. Met. 15,
864. To this circumstance some have ascribed the resemblance
between apis bee and Apis bull, though the first has a short a,
and the last a long. What seems more important for us is the
celebrated discovery of a golden buUock's-head amongst many
hundred golden bees in the tomb of the Frankish king Childeric
at Doomik (repres. in Eccard's Fr. or. 1, 89. 40).

Natural history informs us that clouds of bees fall upon the
sweet juice of the ash-tree ; and from the life-tree Yggdrasil the
Edda makes a dew trickle, which is called a 'fall of honey,'
and nourishes bees (Sn. 20).^

The Yngl. saga cap. 14 says of Yngvifrey's son, king Fiolnir
(Siolm in the 0. Swed. chron.), that he fell into a barrel of mead
and was drowned; so in Saxo, king Hunding falls into sweet
mead, and the Greek myth lets Glaucus drown in a honey-jar, the
bright in the sweet. According to a legend of the Swiss Alps,

^ Sedenmt in ore infantis tnm etiam Platonis, soaTitatem iüam praednlets
eloqnii portendentes. Flin. 11, 17 (18).

3 Ceram ex floribns, melliginem e 1ft/»riTniff arborum quae glutinum parinnt,
saliclB, ulmi, arundinia saooo.


BEB. 697

in the golden age when the brooks and lakes were filled with
milk, a shepherd was npset in his boat and drowned ; his body,
long songht for, tnmed np at last in the foaming cream, when
they were chnming, and was bnried in a cavity which bees had
constrncted of honeycombs as large as town-gates (M^m. de
I'acad. celt. 5, 202). Bees weave a temple of wax and feathers
(Schwenk's Gr. myth. p. 129. Herm. Müller's Griechenth. 455),
and in onr Kinderm. no. 107, p. 130-1 a palace of wax and honey.
This reminds ns of the beautiful picture in Lohengrin p. 191 of
Henry 2.'s tomb in Bamberg cathedral :

Sus lit er d& in stner stift

di'er het erbouwen, als diu bin ir wift

ftz maneger bliiete würket, daz man honc-seim nennet.

(he lies in the minster he built, as the bee her web from many a
blossom works, that we name honey-juice). In the various
languages the working bee is represented as female, OHG. pta,
Lat. apis, Gr. fiiXiaa-a, Lith. bitte, in contrast with the masc.
fucus the drone, OHG. treno, Idth. tranas ; but then the head of
the bees is made a king, our weiser (pointer), MHG. wtsel, OHG.
wtso, dux, Pliny's ' rex apium,' Lith. bittinis, M. Lat. chosdrus
(Dncange sub v.), yet AS. beom6dor. Boh. matka. The Gr.
iatrqv is said to have meant originally the king-bee, and to have
acquired afterwards the sense of king or priest, as fiiXiaaa also
signified priestess, especially of Demeter and Artemis. Even
gods and goddesses themselves are represented by the sacred
animal, Zeus (Aristaeus) as a bee, Vishnu as a blue bee. A
Boman Meilona (Amob. 4, 131), or Mellonia (Aug. de civ. Dei
4, 24), was goddess of bees ; the Lith. Austheia was the same,
jointly with a bee-god Bybylus. Masculine too was the Lett,
ühsinsh, i,e,y the hosed one, in reference to bees' legs being
covered with wax ('waxen thighs,' Mids. Dream 3, 1). From all
these fancies, mostly foreign, we might fairly make guesses about
our own lost antiquities ; but we should have to get more exact
information as to the legend of the Bee-wolf (pp. 369, 673) and
the mythic relationship of the woodpecker (Lith. melleta) to the
bee (see Suppl.).'


CHAPTER XXn.
SKY AND STARS.

The visible heavens have in many ways left their mark on the
heathen faith. Not only do gods, and the spirits who stand
next them, have their dwelling in the sky, and get mixt up with
the stars, but earthly beings too, after their dissolution, are
transported thither, and distinguished heroes and giants shine
as constellations. From the sky the gods descend to earth,
along the sky they make their journeys, and through the sky
they survey unseen the doings of men. And as all plants turn
to the light of heaven, as all souls look up to heaven, so do the
smoke of sacrifice and the prayers of mankind mount upwards.

Heaven covers earth, and our word 'himmel' comes from
the root hima (tego, involve, vestio, Gramm. 2, 55; conf. Lith.
dangus coelam, from dengiu tego ; OHG. himilezi laquear). The
Goths and Old Norsemen agree in preferring the form himins,
himinn, and most other Teutons himil; even Swed. Norw. Dan.
have himmeh The Saxon race has moreover two terms peculiar
to itself: one is OS. hebhan, hevan, AS. heofon, Engl, heaven,
and still in Lower Saxony and Westphalia, heben, heven, haven,
häwen, I have endeavoured to make out the area over which
this name extends (Gramm. I, xiv.) . The Frisians did not use
ib, for the N. and W. Fris, patois of to-day owns to nothing but
'himmel.'^ Nor does the Netherl. dialect know it; but it is
found in Westphalia, in L. Saxony as far as Holstein, and beyond
the Elbe in Mecklenburg and Pomerania. The AS. and Engl,
are wholly destitute of the word' himel ; OS., like the present
LS. and Westph., employs both terms alike, yet apparently so
as to designate by hevan more the visible heaven, and by himu
the supersensual. Alb. of Halberstadt (ed. 1545, 145^) uses

^ Himel, Lapekoer fen Gabe scroar, Dimter 1834, p. 101. 103. hemnul, Hansens
Geizhalz, Sonderbg. 1883. p. 148. himel. Friesche wetten 348. himul. As. 274.

698


SKY. HEAVEN. 699

heben (rhym. neben) of the place. Beinolt von der Lippe couples
the two words : ' himel und heben von vreuden muz irkrachen/
burst with joy. People say : ' de heven steit nümmer to ' ; ' wenn
de heoeii fallt, ligg wi der all unner ; ' ' de sterren an dem haven ; '
in Westphalia hebenscheer means a sky overcast without rain, and
even heben alone can signify cloud.^ Id hävenhüne (p. 156), in
kukuk vam haven (p. 676), the physical sense preponderates,
whereas one would hardly speak otherwise than of 'going to
himel/ or himelrik. Yet this distinction seems to be compara-
tively recent : as the AS. heofon can be used in a purely spiritual
sense, so the poet of our Heliand alternates between himilriki
149, 8 and hebanriki 148, 24, himilfader 145, 12 and hebancuning
148, 20. And of course himil had originally, and has everywhere
in HGr., the physical meaning too ; hence uphimil in Hel. 88, 15,
just like upheofon in Ga^dm. 270, 24. The root of hebhan, hevan,
heofon, is probably a lost Gothic, ' hiba, haf,' cognate with Lat.
capio, so that it is the all-capacious, ON. vidfeffmir, wide-fathom-
ing or encompassing sky.^ ^

The other« Saxon term may be placed on a level with the Gr.
aiOijp (thin upper air), whilst himil and hevan answer to ovpavo^ ;
it is OS. radur, AS. rodar. In Gsddmon we find rodor 188, 19.
207, 8. uprodar 179, 10. 182, 15. 205. 2. rodortungol (star),
100, 21. rodorbeorht 239, 10. Its root had lies buried as yet
in obscurity ; it has disappeared from all modern dialects [except
as Bother in proper names ?] . I am inclined to connect with
it the ON. Tö9ull (sol), which has nothing to do with rau'Sr
(ruber). Prom the AS. poets using indifiFerently ^ wuHree gim'
and ' heofonee gim ' (Beow. 4142. Andr. 1269) ; heofonbeorht,
rodorbeorht, wuldorheorht ; heofontorht, ewegl^vht, wuXdortovht ;
we might almost infer that wuldor (glory) originally meant
coelum, which would throw light on the OHG. name Woldarhilt.
And the same with swegel (aether, coelum) : conf. sweglee begong,

1 S&nskr. nabas, Slav. mSbo (ooelnm), pi. nebesi, Gr. r^^of, Lat. nnbes, nebula ;
Ir. neamh, Wei. ndv, Axmor. nef, Lett, debbes (coelum), debbesB (nubes) ; oonf. Lith.
danguB above [and sky, welkin, with ON. bc^, Germ, wölke, cloud] .

* * Hills of heaven* are high ones, reaching into the clouds, often used as proper
names : himinfiöll, Saam. 148*. Tngl. saga cap. 89 ; Himinbidrgt Sssm. 41, 92^ is
an abode of gods ; spirits haunt the Himilinberg (mons coelius, Pertz 2, 10) ;
Himilesberg in Hesse (Kuohenbeoker's Anal. 11, 137. Amsb. urk. 118) ; a Him-
meltherg in Vestgötland, and one in HaUand (said to be HeimtSaU's) ; Himelben;,
Frauendienst 199, 10.


700 SKY AND STABS.

Beow. 1713; under swegle (sub coelo), Beow. 2149; sweglviA
(coeli currus), Cod. exon. 355, 47 ; OS. suigli.

I call attention to the AS. sceldbyrig, Csadm. 283, 23, which
has no business to be translated refngium or sheltering city ; it is
distinctly our schildburg (aula clypeis tecta), a bit of heathenism
the poet let fall inadvertently ; so the Edda speaks of Yalhöll
as ^sMöldum J^ökt, lagt gyÜum skiöldum, sv& sem sp&n]?ak,' Sn. 2,
thatched with golden shields as with shingle-roof (p. 702 and
SnppL).

Eddie names in Ssem. 49^. Sn. 177; all masculine, some
obviously founded on personification. Heaven is pictured as
a husband, embracing the female earth; he is not however
admitted into the circle of the gods, like Ovpavo^, whereas Earth
does stand among the goddesses. To us heaven sig^fies simply
a certain space, the residence of gods. Two poetic names for
it have reference to that enigmatical being Mimir (p. 379) :
hreggmimir, rain-shedder, from hregg imber ; and vetmimir,
moistener ? conf. vasta humor^

To express star, constellation (sidus), our older speech, in
addition to stairno, stemo, steorra, stiama (Gh*amm. 3, 392) and
OHG. himiheichan (Hymn. 4, 2), has a symbolical term, OHG.
himilzvngd, Dint. 1, 526^ and Gl. Doc. 249 ; OS. himiltungal, Hel.
18, 2; AS. heofontungol, rodortungol; ON. himintungL Even
the simple tungol has the same sense in AS.^ and a GK)thic gloss
on Gal. 4, 3, gives ' tuggl astrum,' whilst in ON. tiingl means the
moon. This neuter noun tungal, tungol, tungl, is no doubt from
tunga (lingua), which word itself appears in OHG. himilzungä
(Graff 5, 682) : the moon and some of the planets, when partially
illuminated, do present the appearance of a tongue or a sickle,
and very likely some cosmogonic belief^ was engrafted on that ;
I know of nothing like it in other languages.

All the heavenly bodies have particular spots, seats, chairs
assigned them, which they make their abode and resting-place ;
they have their lodges and stages (sterr6no girusti, 0. i. 17, 10).
This holds especially of the sun, who daily sinks into his seat


^ A translation of the tongae to heayen. Or was the twinkling of the stars
likened to a tingling [züngeln, a quivering flickering motion like that of the
tongne]? The moon's steady light does not bear that oat, nor the OHG. form
without the {.


SUN. MOON. 701

or settle (see Chap. XXIII) ; bat similar chairs (KM. 25)^ and
a seat-going (sedelgang) are attributed to all the stars. N. Bth.
210. 223 sajB^ Bootes Hrftgo ze sedele gange/ and Hin zeichen
ne gftnt nicht in sedelJ As chair and table are things closely
connected^ the stars may have had tables of their own^ or^ what
comes to the same things may have been regarded as tables of
the sky ; in saying which^ I am not thinking of the Egyptian
son-table^ but more immediately of the ' hioSum yppa/ sidera
extoUere^ of the VöluspÄ (Saam. 1^), the three creative 'Bors
synir ' having set up as it were the tables of the firmament :
bio'Sr is the Goth, binds, OHG. piot (pp. 38. 68). As the
stationary stars had chairs and tables, the planetary ones, like
other gods, had steeds and cars ascribed to them (see Suppl.).^

The two principal stars are the sun and moon, iwhose gender
and appellations I have discussed in Gramm. 3, 349. .350 : a MHG.
poet calls the sun 'daz merere lieht/ the greater* light, Fundgr.
2, 12. It IB worth mentioning that some of the Eddie names
for the moon are still preserved in patois dialects of Up. Germany.
As the dwarfs named the moon shin (jubar), the East Franks
call her schein (Beinwald's Henneb. id. 2, 159).^ In the under-
world the moon bore the name of hverfandi hvel, whirling wheel,
and in Styria (esp. the Brück distr.) she is ginoa-rat (Sartori's
Styria, p. 82), if I may translate that by rota communis, though
it may perhaps mean gemeiner rath (vorrath), a common pro-
vision at the service of all men. That the sun was likened to a
wheel of fire, and the element blazing out of him was represented
in the shape of a wheel, has been fully shewn, p. 620. Tit. 2983
speaks of the sun's wheel. The Edda expressly calls the sun
fagrahvel, fair wheel, Saem. 50» Sn. 177. 223. The Norse
rune for S is named sol sun, the AS. and OHG. sigil, sugil, for
which I have proposed (Andr. p. 96) the readings segil, sagil,
sahil, and may now bring in support the Goth, sauil and
Gr. fjXM^, But the Gothic letter Q (= HV) is the very symbol
of the sun, and plainly shews the shape of a wheel ; we must

^ Wagen waggon belongs to weg way, as oarpentmn does to earpere (viam) ; the
ear of heaven is also that of the hi^iest god. Otfr. i. 5, 5. says of the herald angel :
* floQg er sonnüm pod, sterr6no Uräza^ wega wolkSrw,* The Indians also call the
■ky wUh of eloudit Somadeva 1, 17. 2, 157.

' So in Mod. Gr. ^eyy^ brilliance, a name whose surprising identity with the
0^,fengari (Sn. 177) I have already noticed elsewhere.


702 SKT AND STABS.

therefore suppose it to have been the initial of a Goth.
hvil = AS. hioeol, ON. hveL From 'hvel' was developed the
Icel. hiol, Swed. Dan. hjul, 0. Swed. hitighi; and from 'hweol,
hweohl' the Engl, wheel, Nethl. wiel, andFris.j^Z (Bichth« 737).
In view of all these variations^ some have even ventured to
bring in the ON. jol, Swed. Dan. jid {yvle}, the name of the
winter solstice, and fasten upon it also the meaning of the wheel ;
on that hypothesis the two forms must have parted company
very early, sopposing the Gothic name of November jiuleis to
be cognate.^ The word wheel seems to be of the same root as
while, Goth, hveüa, OHG. hmla, i.e* revolving time ; conf . (roth.
hveila-hvairbs, OHG. hnil-hnerbSo, voldbilis.

Another symbolic epithet of the sun seems to be of great age :
the warlike sentiment of elden times saw in him a gleaming
circular shield, and we noticed above (p. 700) that the sky itself
formed a sceldbyrig. Notker cap. 71, finding in his text the
words 'sinistra clypeum coruscantem praeferebat (Apollo),^
translates : ' an dero winsterdn tmog er einen roten shiÜ/ then
adds a remark of his own; 'wanda selbin diu sunna einemo
sMlte gelih ist.^ In German law and German poetry we catch
the glimmer of these ' red shields.' Even Opita 2, 286 calls the
sun ' the beauteous shietd of hea»e)u'

The very oldest and most universal image connected with
the sun and other luminaries seems after all to be that of the
eye. Ancient cosmogonies represent them as created out of eyes.
To Persians the sun was the eye ol Ahur6miazd&o (Ormuzd), to
Egyptians the right eye of the Demiurge, to the Greeks the
eye of Zeus, to our forefathers that of Wuotan ; and a fable in
the Edda says OSinn had to leave one of his eyes in pledge
with Mimir, or hide it in his fountain, and therefore he is pic-
tured as one-eyed. In the one-eyed Cyclop's mouth Ovid puts
the words (Met. 13, 851) :

Unum est in media lumen mihi fronte, sed instar
ingentis clypei ; quid, non haec omnia magno
sol videt e coelo ? soli tames vnfiicus orbia.

^ The Norse initial H is oocasionallT dropt : in Icel. both hinla and jtda

stand for the babbling of infants. The dialeci of the Saterland Frisians has an

actual jule, jole (rota). It is worthy of notice» that in some parts of Schleswig they

nsed at Ghnstmas-time to roll a wheel into the village, and this was oalled * at triUe

juul i by,' trandling yule into town ; Outzen sab. v. jöl, p. 145.


SUN. MOON. 703

Like the giant^ the god (Waotan^ the sky) has bat one eye,
which is a wheel and a shield. In Beow. 1135 ' bedcen God es '
is the san, the great celestial sign.^ With this eye the divinity
snrveys the worid, and nothing can escape its peenng all-piercing
glance' ; all the stars look down upon men.^ But the ON. poets,
not content with treating sun, moon and stars as eyes of heaven,
invert the macrocosm, and call the haman eye the sun, moon^ or
star of the skull, forehead, brows and eyelashes > they even call
the eye the shield of the foreheads a confirmation of the similar
name for the sun« Another title they bestow on the son is
^gimsteinn himins' ^(gemma coeli.) ^ so in AS. 'heofones gim/
Beow. 4142 and ' wuldres jiim,* Andr. 1289 (see SuppL).

And not only is the sun represented as the god's eye looking
down, but as his fall face and countenance; and that is how we
draw his pictare still. Otfried says of the san being darkened
at the Saviour's death, iv. 33, 5 x

In ni liaz si nuzzi thaz scdnaz annuzzi,

m liaz in scinan tharah thaz ira gisiuni blidaz.

The Edda speaks of the sun and moon as brother and sister,
children of a mythic Mundilfori. Several nations beside the
Lithuanians and Arabs (Gramm. 3, 351) agree with us in ima-
gining the moon masculine and the sun feminine« The Mexican
Meztli (luna) is a man ; the Oreenlanders think of Anningat, the
moon, as pursuing his sister MallirMb, the sun. An Ital. story
(Pentam* 5, 5) makes Sols and Luna children of TaUa (in
Perranlt they are named Jour and Aurore). The Slavs make the
moon masc, a star fern., the sun neut. ; thus in a Servian lay
(Yuk 1, 134), God calls the sun.(sunt8e. Boss, solntse, -tse dim«
fluff.) his child (chedo), the moon (mesets) being its brother, and
the star (zvezda) its sister. To think of the stars as children or
young suns is nothing out of the way. Wolfram says in Wh. 254,
5 : ' jungiu sunneUn mehten wahsen«^

* The Servians call the deepest part of a lake oho (eye)^ Yak's Moatenegio 62.
' When the Iliad 14, a44 8a78:

o9r€ Kcd d^&rar» r Aerat 0dos el(ropdaa$ait

it resembles the lay of Wolfram 8, 28 :

Obe der sonnen drt mit blicke waren (if there were 3 suns looking),
sin möhten zwischen si gelinhten (they could not shine in between).

' TLpicßiorow (karpwf vvicrbs ^aK/i6t, Aeech. Sept. a Th. 890.


704 SKY AND STARS.

Down to recent times^ our people were fond of calling the
sun and moon frau sonne and Ifierr meniy Aventin 19^ : 'frauw
Sonne geht eu rast und gnaden/ In the country between the
Inn and Salzach they say ' der Mr Man* meaning no more than
simply moon, Schm. 2, 2S0. 582. Gesner in Mithrid., Tur. 1556,
p. 28 : ' audio veteres Germanos Lunum quoque deum coluisse et
appellasse hermon, id est dominum Lunum, quod forte pamm
animadvertentes aliqui ad Hermann, i.e. Mercuriom trans-
tulerunt; ' this last guess has missed the mark. Halderic. Eyben
de titulo nobilis, Helmst. 1677. 4, p. 136: 'qna etiam ratione
in yeteri idololatrico luna non domina, dominus appellatur :

bis gottwillkommen, neuer mon, holder herr,
mach mir meines geldes mehr t ^

Also in • Nicolaus Magni de Gawe (Superst. E, 10): 'vetulam
novi, quae credidit solem esse deanvy vocans earn sanctani domu
nam ; ' and earlier still in Eligius (Sup. A) : ' nuUus dominos
solem aut lunam vocet.' *

In these invocations lingers the last vestige of a heathen
worship ; perhaps also in the sonnenlehn, sun-fief (RA. 278) ? I
have spoken on bowing to the sun, p. äl, and cursing by him,
' der sunnen haz varn,' p. 19, where he is made equal to a deity .^
In the same way the knees were bent and the head bared to the
new moon (Sup. E, 11). In taking an oath the fingers were
extended toward the sun (Weisth. 3, 349) ; and even Tacitus in
Ann. 13, 55 relates of Bojocalus : ^ solem respiciens et cetera
sidera vocans, quasi coram interrogabat, vellentne intueri inane
solum ' (see SuppL).

That to our remote ancestry the heavenly bodies, especially
the sun and moon, were divine beings, will not admit of any
doubt. Not only do such symbolic expressions as 'lace, eye,
tongue, wheel, shield, table, car * bring us face to face with a
vivid personification ; we have also seen how significantly Caesar

1 Frau Sunne (Görres Meisterl. 184). Henoe in O.Fr. Solaru^ withont the
article, Bekker on Ferabras p. 163.

3 HIb authority is DynJcelspnhl tract. 1, praeo. 1, p» 59. Is this the Kicolaos
Dinkelspnel in Jöcher ?

* Conf. the wind addressed as lord, p. 631 ; and dobroparif p. 130 note.

^ Some would trace the name oi Salzwedel, Soltwedel in the Altmark to heathen
sun-worship, (Ledebur's Allg. arch. 14, 370. Temme's Altmark p. 29), thou^ the
first syll. plainly means salt ; * wedel * will be explained when we oome to the moon.


SUN. MOON. 705

oonples togetlier 8ol, Vulcanus and Luna, p. 108. conf. p. 602.
As 861 is reckoned among ftsins in the Edda (Sn. 39), and is
sister to Mäni (Sn. 12), this last has claims to an equal rank.
Yet SsBm. 1^ calls Sol ' sinni M&na,' companion of the moon,
sinni being the Goth. gasinJTJa, OHG. kasindeo, sindo ; and it is
remarkable that the Merseburg Lay gires the divine Sunna not
a companion brother, but a sister Sindgund (supra p. 808), whose
name however still expresses attendance, escort;^ may she have
been a morning or evening star ? We should have to know first,
what distinction a dim remote antiquity made between sduil and
ninno in respect of gender and mythical use ; if ' s&uil, sagil,' like
sol and ^\to9, was masc, then Sunn& and Sindgund might be
imagined as female moons like Luna and SeXi^vt), yet sol is always
fem. in ON., and our sonne so late as in MHG. strangely wavers
between the two sexes, Gramm. 3, 350 (see Suppl.).

Be that as it may, we have a right to add in support of the
son's divinity, that 'she ' is described like other gods (pp. 17. 26.
324), as hlithe, sweet and gradous, O. iv. 33, 6 speaks of her
' gisinni bUdaz, thes sih ioh worolt frewita/ whereof the world
had aye rejoiced ; and a 13th cent, poem (Zeitschr. f. d. alt. 1,
493-4) thus describes the greetings addressed to her :

Wol air frouwe Snnne ! 'Hail to thee. Lady Sun !

du bist al der werlt wunne ! Art all the world's delight.'

sfi ir die Sunnen vro sehet. When ye see the sun glad,

Bchoenes tages ir ir jehet. The fair day to her ye ascribe,

der firen ir der Sunnen jehet. To her ye give the honour,

swenn ir si in liehtem schine sehet. Whenever ye see, etc.

Other passages in point are reserved for next chapter.

The personality of the sun and moon shews itself moreover in
a fiction that has wellnigh gone the round c^ the world. These
two, in their unceasing unflagging career through the void of
heaven, appear to be in flighty avoiding some pursuer. A pair of
wolves are on their track, Slcoll dogging the steps of the sun,
^aii of the moon ; they come of a giant race, the mightiest of
whom, Managarmr (moon-dog), apparently but another name for
Hati, is sure some day to overtake (md swallow the moon. How

' Conl nmnagahu^ ningiht (soUb iter), p. 617 n., and Buman tUJffat (iter),
Codm. IS2, 25.


706 SKY AND STABS.

extensively this tradition prevailed^ has already been shewn
(pp. 244-5).^ A parhelion or mock-san (vädersol) is in Swed.
called aolvarg, selulfj sun-wolf^ Ihre's Dial. lex. 165.

One of the most terrific phenomena to heathens was an eclipse
of the sun or moon, whidi they associated with a destruction of
all things and the end of the world > they fancied the monster
had already got a part of the shining orb between his jaws, and
they tried to scare him away by loud cries. This is what Eligias
denonnces (Snperst. A):: 'naUus, si qnando luna obscuratur,
vociferare praesnmat ; ' it is the cry of ' vince luna I ' * that the
Indicul. paganiar. means in cap. 21 de defectione lunae, and
Burchard (Sup. C, 193^) by his ' claTnorihus aut auxilio splendorem
lunae deficientis restaurcure/ The Norse writings, while minutely
describing the threatened deglutition, make no allusion to the
shouting: it may haye been more customary with Celts and
Romans than with Teutons. A 5th cent, father, St. Maximus of
Turin, in a Homilia de defectu lunae, preaches thus : ' Cum ante
dies plerosque de vestrae avaritiae cnpiditate pulsaverim, ipsa die
circa vesperam tanta vociferatio populi exstitit, ut irreligiositas
ejus penetraret ad coelum. Quod quum requirerem, quid sibi
clamor hie velit, dixerunt mihi, quod laboranti lunae vestra vocife-
ratio subveniretj et defectum ejvs suis cla/moribus adjuva/ret.' * The
same ' laborans ^ (in distress) is used by Juvenal 6, 442 :

Jam nemo tubas, nemo aera fatiget ;
una laboranti poterit succwrrere lunae.^

I may safely assume that the same superstitious notions and
practices attend eclipses among nations ancient and modern.^
The Indian belief is, that a serpent eats up the sun and moon
when they are eclipsed "(Bopp's Gloss. 148*), or a demon (r&hus)
devours them (Bopp's Nalas, pp. 153. 272. Somadeva 2, 1 5. 187).

> I add from Fisohart's Gkurg. 130^ : * Bah den wolf d«8 mora.* Babelaü 1, 11
has : la lune det loups. In old calendars, eclipfles are represented by two dragons
holding the sun and moon in their moHths, Mone's Untersuch, p. 183.

> This would be in OHG. ' Earih mfino I ' in Goth. * jiak&i mdna I ' bat we
find nothing of the kind even later.

* Dacange 6, 1618 quotes the passage sub t. vinceluna ; but the reprint of the
Horn. Maximi taurin. * De defeotn lunae * (in MabiUon's Mus. Ital., torn. L pars 8,
pp. 19. 20) has it not.

^ Conr. Tac. Annal. 1, 28 and Boeth. de consol. 4 metr. 5 : * lassant erebris
pulsibus aSra.'

* It is only among Greeks and Slays that I have not come across them.


ECLIPSES. 707

To this day the Hindus consider that a giant lays hold of the
luminaries^ and tries to swallow them (Broughton's Pop. poetry
of Hind. p. 181). The Chinese call the solar eclipse zhishi (solis
deroratio)^ the lunar yueshi (lunae devoratio)^ and ascribe them
both to the machinations of a dragon. Nearly all the populations
of Northern Asia hold the same opinion : the Tchnvashes use
the phrase ' vubur siat/ daemon comedit (6uil. Schott de lingua
Tschuw^ p. 5) ; the Finns of Europe have a similar belief^ the
Esthonians say the sun or moon ' is being eaten^* and formerly
they sought to hinder it by conjuring spells (Thom. Hiäm^ Mitau
1794 p. 39). The Lithuanians think a demon (Tiknis or Tiklis)
attacks the chariot of the sun^ then darkness arises^ and all
creatures are in fear lest the dear sun be worsted ; it has been
staved off for a long time^ but it must come to that at the end
of the world (Narbutt 1^ 127. 142). In eclipses of the moon^ the
Greenlanders carry boxes and kettles to the roofs of their houses,
and beat on them as hard as they can (Cranz's Grönland 3^ 294) .
An English traveller says of the Moors in Africa : When the sun's
eclipse was at its height^ we saw the people running about as if
mad, and firing their rifles at the sun, to frighten the monster who
they supposed was wishing to devour the orb of day. The plains
and heights of Tripoli resounded with the death-dirge (the cry
' wnlliali wu I '), and the same all along the coast. The women
banged copper vessels together, making such a din that it was
heard leagues away (see Suppl.). ^

A Mongolian myth makes out that the gods determined to
punish Arakho for his misdeeds, but he hid so effectually, that
no one could find out his Inrkingplace. They therefore asked
the sun, who gave an unsatisfactory answer; but when they
asked the moon, she disclosed his whereabouts. So Arakho was
dragged forth and chastised ; in revenge of which, he pursues both
sun and moon, and whenever he comes to hand-grips with one of
them, an eclipse occurs. To help the lights of heaven in their
sad plight, a tremendous uproar is made with musical and other
instruments, till Arakho is scared away.^ Here a noticeable

> Morgenblatt 1817 p. 159»; conf. Niebnhr's Besohr. Arab. 119. 120.

' Benj. Bergmannes Nomad. Btreifereien 8, 41. Aoo. to Georgii Alphab. tibe-
tan. p. 189, it is monsters called Traoehn, with their npper parts shaped like men,
and the lower like snakes, that lie in wait for the snn and moon. [South of L.
Baikal it is the king of hell that tries to swallow the moon. — Tbahs.]


708 SKY AND STABS.

feature is the inquiry made of the sun and moon, wlio overlook
the world and know all secrets (Gastrin's Myth. 62). So in our
fairytales the seeker asks of the sun, moon and stars (Kinderm.
no. 25. 88 ; conf. 3, 218-9)^ some of whom are found helpful and
sympathizing^ others crnel and cannibal (Yak no. 10). In Ser-
vian songs the moon and the momingstar (danitsa) hold a colloqny
on the affairs of men (Yuk 3, 3). Daring an eclipse of the son
(I don't know whether of the moon also) our people cover the
wells np^ else their water would turn impure^ Superst. I^ 589.

Is there a trace of moon-worship to be found in the fact that
people had an image of the moon carved on rocks and stones that
marked a boundary? In It A. 542 an Alamannic doc. of 1155 is
given^ which traces the custom all the way up to king Dagobert.
In Westphalian docs, as late as the 17th cent. I find hcdfmonds^
schnad-stones^^ unless the word halfmoon here means something
else.

In Bavaria there is a Mondsee^ OHG. Maninseo (lunae lacus),
in Austria a Manha/rt (lunae silva^ 17 Aovva v\ff in Ptolemy);' we
may safely credit both with mythic associations.

As time is more easily reckoned by the changes of the moon^
which visibly mark off the week (p. 126-7)> than by the sun^ our
ancestors seem to have had, beside the solar year, a lunar one
for common use, whose thirteen months answered to the twelve
of the solar year. The recurring period of from 29 to 30 days
was therefore called "tnenoßs, mänod, from m6na, m&no. Hence
also it was natural to count by nights, not days : ^ nee dierum
numerum sed noctium computant, sic constituunt, sic condicunt,
nox ducere diem videtur,' Tac. Germ. c. 11. And much in the
same way, the year was named by its winter, which holds the
same relation to summer as night to day. A section of time was
measured by the number of se'ennights, fortnights, months or
winters it contained.

And that is also the reason why the phases of the moon had
such a commanding influence on important undertakings. They
are what Jemandes cap. 11 calls lunae commoda incommodaque.
It is true, the performance of any kind of work was governed by

^ Defence of Wnlften castle» Yienna 1766. snppl. p. 71-2. 162.
s Can Manhart have come from Maginhart ? Helbl. 18, 190 has MeinkisrU^
here.


PHASES OF THE MOON. 709

the day and solar time^ whether of warriors (RA. 297), or of
servants (353), or of tribunals especially (814-6). If, on the
other hand, some new and weighty matter was to be taken in
hand, they consulted the moon ; which does not mean that the
consultation was held or the action begun in the night, but on
those days whose nights had an auspicious phase of the moon :
' Goennt, nisi quid fortuitum et subitum incident, certis diebus,
quum ami inchoatur luna aut impletur ; nam agendis rebus hoc
auspicatissimum initium credunt,' Tac. Germ. 11. So in Tac.
Ann - 1^ 50 a nox illunis is chosen for a festival.

Now the moon presents two distinct appearances, one each
fortnight, which are indicated in the passage just quoted : either
she is beginning her course, or she has attained her fall orb of
light. From the one point she steadily increases, from the other
she declines. The shapes she assumes between are not so sharply
defined to the sense.

Her invisibility lasts only the one night between the disappear-
ance of her last quarter and the appearance of her first, at new-
moon (conjunction of sun and moon) ; in like manner, full-moon
lasts from the moment she attains perfect sphericity till she loses
it again. But in common parlance that ' noz illunis ' is included
iu the new-moon, and similarly the decline is made to begin
simultaneously with the full.

The Gothic for iravaiXrfvov WE^ßilUßs m., or fallij> n. (gen. pi.
fuUi]^), from which we may also infer a niujißs for vovfirfvla.
Curiously, this last is rendered fulli]^ in Col. 2, 16, which to my
mind is a mere oversight, and not to be explained by the supposi-
tion that the Goths looked upon full-moon as the grander festival.
The AS. too must have called full-moon fylleff, to judge by the
name of the month ' winterfylli'S,^ which, says Beda (de temp,
rat. 13), was so named ' ab hieme et plenilunio %* but the later
writers have only niwe mona and full mona. So there may have
been an OHG. niuwid and fullid, though we can only lay our
finger on the neuters niumani and folmani,^ to which Graff 2, 222
adds a niwilune; MHG. daz niumoene and volm€ene, the last in
Trist. 9464. 11086. 11513 (see Suppl.).

1 Also niuwer m4no» N. ps. 80, 4. foller mftzio, ps. 88, 88. In Gap. 107-8 he
TOM vol and wan (empty), and in Cap. 147 homahtt halbteaftig and fol; oonf. HeL
111, 8 wanod ohtho wahnd.


710 SKY AND STABS.

In ON. the two periods are named by the neuters ' ny ok ni9/
habitnally alliterating ; ny answers to novilaniam, it signifies the
new light, and niS the declining, dwindling, from the lost root
niiSa na'S, from which also come the adv. ntSr (deorsum) and the
noun n&iS (qnies, OHG. ginftda) . So that n^ lasts from the begin-
ning of the first quarter to the fall, and ni'S from the decrease of
the full to the extinction of light in the last quarter. The two
touch one another at the border-line between the faintest streaks
of waxing and of waning brightness« But ni'S meant especially
the absence of moonlight (interlunium), and niiSamyrlor total
darkness (luna silens). Kind gods created these for men of old
to tell the year by : ' ny ok ni9 sk&po nj^t regin öldum at &r-tali,'^
Seem. 34*. ' Mäni st^rirgöngu tAngls, oc raalJr nyjum oo niffum/
Sn. 12, Mäni steers the going of the moon, and rules new moons
and full. Probably even here personification comes into play,
for in Völuspd 11 (Saöm. 2*) Nyji and Niäi are dwarfs, i.e. spirits
of the sky, who are connected, we do not exactly know how, with
those lunar phases n^ ok ni'S.' Of changeful things it is said ' "pht
gengr eptir n;^um ok ni'Snm,' res altematur et subit lunae vices.
0. Swed. laws have the formula ^ny oc liidar,* for ' at all times,
under any phase,' Gutalagh p. 108. So 'iny ok niSa/ Sudh.
bygn. 32. Upl. vidh. 28, 1. Vestg, thiuv. 22, 1; but here the
second word seems to have given up its neut. form, and passed
into a personal and masc. Mod. Swed. has 'ny och nedan' ;
Dan. ' ny og nee/ ' def gaaer efter nye og n(Be/ ' hverken i nye aller
nee/ i.e. never, ' naar nyet tandes,' quando nova luna incenditnr ;
this n89 was in 0. Dan. ned, need. To the niiSamyrkr above
answers a Swed. nedmörk, pitchdark. The Norse terminology
diifers in so far from the H. Germ., that it expresses the total
obscuration by ni'S, while we designate it by neumond {i.e. nf) ;
with us new-moon is opposed to full-moon, with the Scandina^
vians ni'S to n^, each of them standing for one half of the moon's
course. Since a mention of the first and last quarters has come
into use, full-moon and new-moon signify simply the points of
fullness and vacancy that lie between ; and now the Swedes and
Danes have equally adopted a fullmane, fuldmaane, as counter-


> Aoo. to AlyismAl, the Alfar call the moon drtali (OHG. jfinalo ?), Sem. 49^.
» Comp, with • ni« ok n^ » the Gr. fwrj koI via.


PHASES OF THE MOON. 711

part to nytnäne, nymaane, whereby the old ' ned, nsB ' has become
superfluous^ and the meaning of ny ' somewhat modified.^

Though the OHG. remains do not ofiFer us a neuter niuwi,^ such
a form may have existed^ to match the Norse ny, seeing that the
Mülhausen statute of the 13th cent. (Grasshof p. 252)^ in granting
the stranger that would settle in the town a month^s time for the
attempt^ says ' ein nuwe und ein wedil^ daz sint vier wochin ; '
that Martin von Amberg's Beichtspiegel has ' das vol und das
neu/ Dasypodius still later ' das newe, interlunium/ and Tobler
331^ 'das neu, der wachsende mond.' For the waning moon,
Tobler 404** gives 'nid si gehender (going down)/ which reminds
one of niS; otherwise ' der schwined mo/ OHG. ' diu suinenta
m&nin/ N. ps. 88, 38, its opposite being ' diu folia ' (see Suppl.).

I have yet to bring forward another expression of wide range
and presumably old, which is used by turns for one and another
phase of the moon's light, oftenest for plenilunium, but some-
times also for interlunium : MHG. wedel : ' im was unkunt des
m&nen wedel/ Martina 18P; NHG. wadel,wädel, hut moTQAjnong
the common folk and in the chase than in written speech. Pic-
torius 480, Staid. 2, 456, Tobler 44P have wedel, wädel full-moon,
wädeln to become full-moon, when her horns meet, i.e., when she
completes her circle. Keisersperg's Postille 138^ : ' ietz so ist er
nüw, ietz fol, ietz alt, ietz die erst qvart, ietz die ander qvart,
ietz ist es wedel ' ; here fulUmoon and wedel are not so clearly
defined as in another passage of Keisersperg (Oberlin 1957)
on March : ' wan es ist sein wedel, sein volmon.' In Dasy-
podius : ' plenilunium, der volmon, wädeV * The Germans in
Bohemia commonly use wädel for full-moon, and Schm. 4, 22
produces other notable authorities. But the word is known in
Lower Germany too ; Böhmer's Kantzow p. 266 spells it wadel,"^

' Modem Icel. names are : hlAn^ (black new, interlaninm) ; prfm (nova Inna),
also n^qveikt tüngl ; hälfvaxid tiingl (first quarter) ; fuUt tungl (plenilnninm) ;
halfßrotid tungl (last quarter). Here too the old names have gone out of use,
*■ hiänf ' replaces ni$, and * prim * n^.

' Notker*s Capella 100 has ' mftnen niwi ' fem.

3 Tet under luna he has ' plenilunium yollmon oder bruch^* and the same under
bruch (»abbruch) a breaking off, falling off, defectus; which confirms my view,
that we reckon the wane from full-moon itself (Wtb. 2, 408). Ace. to Muchar's
Noricum 2, 86 the waxing and waning moon are called tiie gesunde and the kranke
man (well and ill).

* Following Tacitus, he says, tiie German! always chose either new or fulUmoon,
for after the wadel they thought it unlucky. Wadel then comprehends the two phases
of new and full moon, but seems to exclude those of the first and last quarter.

YOL. II. T


712 SKY AND STABS.

the Brem. wtb. 5^ 166 'wool, vollmond' (like aal for adel, a
Bwamp)^ and Kilian * waedel, Beniam lunae/ From the phrase-
ology of Superst. I^ 973 one would take wadel to be a general
name for the moon^ whether waxing or waning, for ^ the bad wadel '
[new-moon] sorely implies a good wadel &voarable to the oper-
ation. Now wadel, wedel means that which wags to and fro, and
is nsed of an animals tail, £abram, flabellum, cauda ; it must
either, like zang& and tüngl, refer to the tip or streak of light in the
crescent moon, or imply that the moon cruises about in the sky.^
The latter explanation fits a passage in the AS. poem on Finnes-
burg fight, line 14 : ' nü scineS j^es m&na wa9ol under wolonum,'
t.6., the moon walking [wading] among the clouds, wa^l being
taken for the adj. vagus, vagabundus. Probably even the OHG.
xvadal was applied to the moon, as an adj. vagus (Graff 1, 776),
or as a subst. flabellum (1, 662). But, as this subst. not only
signifies flabellum [whisk], but fasciculus [wisp], the name may
ultimately be connected with the bundle of brushwood that a
myth (to be presently noticed) puts in the spots of the full-moon
(see Suppl.).

Lith. jdunas men/& novilunium, pilnatis plenilunium, puspUis
first quarter, pusdylis last qu., delczia luna decrescens, lit. trunca,
worn away, twrpijos interlunium (from tarp, inter) ; puspilis
means half-full, pusdylis half-worn, from the same root as delczia
truncation, decrease. There is also a 'menu tusczias/ vacant
moon; and the sickle-shaped half-moon is called dalgahynos,
Lettic : jauns mehnes novilun., pilna mehnes plenilun., mehnes

punte luna accrescens, wezza mehnes ' luna senescens. Finnic :

uusikuu novU., täysikuu plenil., ylikuu luna accr., alaJcuu deer.,
formed with uusi novus, taysi plenus, yli superus, ala inferus,

which supports our explanation of the ON. ni*8. The Servians

divide thus : miyena novil., mladma luna accr., lit. young, puna
plenil., ushtap luna deer. Sloven mlay, mlad novil., polna plenil.,
ship plenil., but no doubt also luna deer., from shipati to nip,
impair. Pol« now and Boh. nowy novil., Pol. pelnia and Boh.

^ 1 The Engl. teaddU, which is the same word, would graphioally express the
osoillation of Öie (yisible) moon from side to side of her path ; and if toedel meant
that oscillation, it wonld apply equally to new and to full moon. — Tbanb.

' Wezza mehnes, the old moon. In a Scotch ballad : ' I saw the new moon late
yestreen wi' he auld moon in her ann.* Jamieson 1, 169, Percy 1, 78. Halliwell
pp. 167-8.


PHASES OP THE MOON. 713

•

auplnek plenil. Here we see another instance of the ruder races
having more yarious and picturesque names for natural pheno-
mena^ which among the more cultivated are replaced by abstract
and uniform ones. No doubt Teutonic speech in its yarious
branches once possessed other names beside ni9 and wadeL

Tacitus merely tells us that the Germani held their assemblies
at new moon or full moon^ not that the two periods were thought
equally favourable to all enterprises without distinction. We may
gaess that some matters were more suitable to new moon^ others
to full ; the one would inspire by its freshness^ the other by its
fulness.^

Caesar 1, 50 reports to uä the declaration of wise women in the
(»mp of Ariovistus: 'non esse fas G^rmanos superare, si ante
novam lunam proelio contendissent.' A happy issue to the battle
was expected^ at all events in this particular instance^ only if it
were fought at new moon.

As far as I can make out from later remnants of German
Buperstition^ with which that of Scotland should be compared
(Chambers 85**. 86*), Tww-moow, addressed by way of distinction
as ' gracious lord * p. 704^ is an auspicious time for commence-
ments properly speaking. Marriages are to be concluded in it,
houses to be built : ' novam lunam observasti pro domo facienda
aut conjugiis sociandis ' (Sup. G^ 198**), the latter just the same
in Esth. Sup. no. 1. Into a new house you must move at new
moon (Sap. I, 429), not at the wane (498) ; count money by the
new moon (228), she will increase your store (conf. p. 704) ; on
the other hand, she loves not to look into an empty purse (107).
All through, the notion is that money, married bUss and house
stores will thrive and grow with the growing light. So the hair
and nails are cut at new-moon (French Sup. 5. Schützers Holst.
id. 3, 68), to give them a good chance of growing; cattle are
weaned in the waxing light (I, 757), in the waning they would
get lean; Liih. Sup. 11 says, let girls be weaned at the wane,

^ Kew-moon was peonliarly holy to anoient peoples, thus io ihe Greeks the Hri
Ktd Wa, which was also expressed by hii alone »Sanskr. amA (new moon). The
letcun of Odysseus was expected at that season. Od. 14, 162 :

roO i*hf ^IwovTOi fjniySt, rod S" UrrofihoM,

BAmi's birth is fixed for the new-moon after yemal equinox (Schlegel on B&mAy.
i* 19, 2). Probably bealteine were lighted at this new-moon of spring.


714 SKY AND STARS. .

boys at the full, probably to give the one a sHm elegant fignre,
and the other a stout and strong. Healing herbs and pure dew-
are to be gathered at new-moon (ton an des manen niwi gelesen,
N. Cap. 100, conf. 25), for then they are fresh and unalloyed.
When it says in I, 764 that weddings should take place at full-
moon, and in 238 that a new dwelling should be entered with the
waxing or full moon, this full-moon seems to denote simply the
utmost of the growing light, without the accessory notion of
incipient decline. If our ancestors as a rule fought their battles
at new-moon, they must hare had in their eye the springing
up of victory to themselves, not the defeat and downfall of
the enemy .^

At fulUmoon (as opposed to new), i.e. by a waning light, you
were to perform operations involving severance or dissolution,
cutting down or levelling. Thus, if I understand it rightly, a
marriage would have to be annulled, a house pulled down, a
pestilence stamped out, when the moon is on the wane. Under
this head comes in the rule to cut wood in the forest when it is
wadel, apparently that the timber felled may dry. In a Calendar
printed by Hupfuff, Strasb. 1511 : 'with the moon's wedel 'tis
good to begin the hewing of wood.' The same precept is still
given in many modern forest-books, and full-moon is therefore
called holz'Wadel : ' in the bad wadel (crescent moon) fell no
timber,' Sup. I, 973. In Keisersperg's Menschl. baum, Strasb.
1521, 19 : ' Alway in wedel are trees to be hewn, and game to be
shot.' * Grass is not to be mown at new, but at full moon (Lith.
Sup. 7) ; that the hay may dry quickly ? and treasures must be
lifted at full-moon. If a bed be stuffed when the moon is grow-
ing, the feathers will not lie (I, 372. 914) ; this operation too
requires a waning light, as if to kill the new-plucked feathers
completely, and bring them to rest. If you open trenches by
a waxing moon, they will soon grow together again; if by a
waning, they keep on getting deeper and wider. To open a vein
with the moon declining, makes the blood press downwards and

1 The Esthonians say to the new-moon : * Hail, moon I may you grow old, and
I keep young I ' Thorn. Hiäme p. 40.

* In Demerara grows a tree like the mahogany, called walala ; if cut down at

new-moon, the wood is tough and hard to split, if at fuU, it is soft and splits easily.

Bamboo pUuiks cut at new-moon last ten years, those cut at full-moon rot within
the year.


PHASES OF THE MOON. 715

load the legs (Tobler 404*^) ; set about it therefore by the mount-
ing moonlight. Vuk sub v. miyena says, the Servian women will
wash never a shirt at new-moon, they declare all the linen would
get mooned (omiyeniti) in the water, i.e. bulge and pucker, and
soon tear; one might find another reason too for washing by
the waning moon, that stains and dirt should disappear with the
dwindling light (see Suppl.).

Behind superstitious practices I have tried to discover a
meaning, which may possibly come near their original signifi-
cation. Such symbolical coupling of means and end was at all
events not foreign to antiquity anywhere : the holy water floats
all misfortune away with it (p. 589), the spray from the mill wheel
scatters all sickness (p. 593). So the sufferer stands with his
face to the waning moon, and prays : ' as thou decreasest, let my
pains diminish' (I, 245) ; he can also go on the other tack, and
cry to the new moon : ' may what I see increase, and what I suffer
cease' (492). Turning the face toward the luminary I take to
be a relic of heathen moon-worship.^

Superstitions of this kind have long been banished to the
narrower limits of agriculture and cattle-breeding; we should
arrive at a clearer knowledge of them, had their bearing on
public life been described for us in early times. Observation of
the lunar changes must in many ways have influenced sacrifices,
the casting of lots and the conduct of war. Some things now
appear bewildering, because we cannot review all the circum-
stances, and some no doubt were different in different nations.
German superstition (I, 856) thinks it a calamity for the master
of the house to die during the moon's decline, for then the whole
family will fall away ; the Esthonian view (41) is, that a death at
new-moon is unlucky, perhaps because more will follow 7 Fruits
that grow above ground are to be sown at the waxing, those under
ground at the waning (Jul. Schmidt p. 122) ; not so Westendorp
p. 129: ^dat hoven den grond wast, by o/hemende maan, dat
onder den grond wast, by ^oenemende maan te zaaien.' Gutslaf
(Wöhhanda p. 49, conf. errata) remarks, that winter-crops are
not to be sown while the moon stands at the idle quarter (third,

^ Whoever at play tarns his back to the moon, has bad lack (I, 801). Bat the
seaman in his hammock takes care not to face the fall-moon, lest he be straok with
blindness.


716 SET ASD STABS.

kus 86 kah mäal). In the sermon of Eligios (Sup. A)^ the
sentenoe ' nee luna nova quisquam timeat aliqoid operis arripere '
is t^intelligible so long as we do not know what sort of operation
is meant.

The spots or shady depressions on the ßill-moon's disc hare
given rise to grotesque bat similar myths in several nations. To
the common people in India they look like a hare, i.e. Chandras
the god of the moon carries a hare (sasa)^ hence the moon is
called sasin or sas&nka, hare mark or spot.^ The Mongolian
doctrine also sees in these shadows the figure of a hare.^ Bogdo
Jagjamani or Shigemuni [the Buddha Saky&-muni]^ supreme
ruler of the sky^ once changed himself into a hwre, simply to
serve as food to a starving traveller ; in honour of which meri-
torious deed Khormusta^ whom the Mongols revere as chief of
the tenggri [genii] ^ placed the figure of a hare in the moon.
The people of Ceylon relate as follows : While Buddha the great
god sojourned upon earth as a hermit^ he one day lost his way
in a wood. He had wandered long, when a ha/re accosted him :
' Cannot I help thee 7 strike into the path on thy right, I will
guide thee out of the wilderness.' Buddha replied: 'Thank
thee^ but I am poor and hungry^ and unable to repay thy kind-
ness.' ' If thou art hungry^' said the hare, ' light a fire, and kill,
roast and eat me.' Buddha made a fire, and the hare immediately
jumped in. Then did Buddha manifest his divine power, he
snatched the beast out of the flames, and set him in the moon,
where he may be seen to this day.^ To the Greenlander's fancy
these spots are the marks of Matina's fingers, with which she
touched the fine reindeer pelisse of Anninga (Major's Myth.*
taschenb. 1811. p. 15).

An ON. fable tells us, that M4ni (the moon) took two children,
Bil and Hiuki, away from the earth, just as they were drawing
water from the well Byrgir, and carrying the pail Ssogr on the
pole Simul between their shoulders. These children w^k behind

^ Sohlegel*8 Ind. bibl. 1, 217. Aco. to Bopp*8 Qloss. 846% ft Sanskrit name for
the moon means lepore praediUu^ leporem gereru,

s Bergmannes Streifer. 8, 40. 204. Majer's Myth. vtb. 1, 640.

* Donee's niastr. of Shaksp. 1, 16 from the Ups of a Frenoh traTeller, whose
telescope the Cingalese had often borrowed, to have a good look at the hare in the
moon.


MAN IN THE MOON. 717

Mäni, as one may see from the earth (sv& sem si& mä af iörSa)^
Sn. 12. That not the moon^s phases bat her spots are here
meantj is plain enough from the figure itself. No change of «the
moon conld suggest the image of two children with a pail slung
on their slwulders. Moreover, to this day the Swedish people see
in the spots of the moon two persons carrying a big bucket on
a pole,^ Bil was probably a girl, and Hiuki a boy, the former
apparently the same as the &synja named together with Sol in
Sn. 39 ; there it is spelt Bil^ but without sufficient reason ; the
neuter 'bil' signifies momentum, interstitium, a meaning that
would suit any appearance of the moon (conf. p. 374 on OHG.
pil). What is most important for us, out of this heathen fancy
of a kidnapping man of the moon, which, apart from Scandinavia,
was doubtless in vogue all over Teutondom, if not farther, there
has evolved itself since a christian adaptation. They say the
man in the moon is a wood-stealer, who during church time on
the holy sabbath committed a trespass in the wood, and was then
transported to the moon as a punishment ; there he may be seen
with the axe on his bach and the bundle of brushwood (domwelle)
in his hand. Plainly enough the water-pole of the heathen story
has been transformed into the axe's shaft, and the carried pail
into the thombush ; the general idea of theft was retained, but
special stress laid on the keeping of the christian holiday ; the
man suffers punishment not so much for cutting firewood, as
because he did it on a Sunday.' The interpolation is founded on
Numb. 15, 32-6, where we are told of a man that gathered
sticks on the sabbath, and was stoned to death by the congrega-
tion of Israel, but no mention is made of the moon and her spots.
As to when this story first appeared in Germany I have no means
of telling, it is almost universally prevalent now ; ' in case the
full-moon's name of wadel. wedel in the sense of a bunch of twigs ^

^ Dalin 1, 158: men anna fins den meningen bland y&t almoge. Ling*8
Eddomas sinnebildslära 1, 78 : Snnn Hager allmftnheten i Södraswerge, att mänens
fläekar äro Wenne varelser, som bara en bryggsft (bridge-bnoket, slung pail).

' A Westphalian story says, the man dressed the church with thorns on
Sunday, and was therefore put, bundle and all, into the moon.

* Hebel has made a pretty song about it, pp. 86-9: 'me het em gsait der
DUterlet* on which Schm. 2, 688 asks : is this Dietrich of Bern, translated in
classic fashion to the sky ? We must first make sure that the poet found the name
already in the tradition.

* In the Henneberg dlstr. wadel means brushwood, twigs tied up in a bundle,
esp. fir-twigs, wadeln to tie up brushwood (Beinwald 2, 187) ; this may however
come from the practice of cutting wood at full-moon.


718 SKY AND STABS.

has itself arisen out of the story (p. 712)^ it mast be of pretty
high antiquity. In Tobler's Appenzell sprachsch. 20** we are
told : An arma ma (a poor man) het alawil am sonnti holz
nfg^Iesa (picked up wood). Do hed em der liebe Gott dVahl
g'loh (let him choose), ob er lieber wött i' der sonn verbrenna,
oder im mo' verfrüra (bum in sun, or freeze in moon. Yar. :
in'n kalta mo' ihi, oder i' d' höU abi). Do will' er lieber in'n mo'
ihi. Dromm sied ma' no' ietz an^ ma* im mo^ inna, wenn's wedel
ist. Er hed a,' püscheli uff 'em rogga (bush on his back). Kuhn's
Mark, sagen nos. 27. 104. 130 give us three different accounts :
in one a broom-maker has bound twigs (or a woman has spun) on
a Sunday, in another a man has spread manure, in the third he
has stolen cabbage-stumps; and the figure with the bunch of
twigs (or the spindle), with the dangfork, with the cabbage-stalk,
is supposed to form the spots in the moon. The earliest authority
I know of is Fischart's Garg. 1 30^ : ' sah im mon ein männlinf
das holz gestohlen hett ; * Praetorius says more definitely, Welt-
beschr. 1, 447 : the superstitious folk declared the dark spots on
the moon to be the man that gathered sticks on the sabbath and
was stoned therefor. The Dutch account makes the man steal
Tegetables, so he appears in the moon with the ' bundel moes ^ on
his shoulders (Westendorp p. 129). The English tradition seems
pretty old. Chaucer in his Testament of Greseide 260-4 de-
scribes the moon as lady Cynthia :

Her gite (gown) was gray and fol of spottis blake,

and on her brest a ckorl paintid f al even

bering a hv,sh of ihomU on hia hakey

which for his theft might clime no ner the heven.

In Ritson's Anc. songs (Lond. 1790), p. 35 is a 'song upon
the man in the moon,^ beginning thus :

Mon in the mone stond and strit (standeth and Btrideth),

on hia hotforhe is htarthen he hereth;

hit is mnche wonder that he na doan slyt (slideth),

for dontelesse he yalle, he shoddreth and shereth,

when the forst freseth mnch chele he byd (chill he bideth) ;

the thomes beth kene, is haitren to-tereth.

Shivering with cold, he lugs on his fork a load of thorns, which
tear his coat, he had cut them down and been impounded by the
forester; the difficult and often unintelligible song represents


MAN IN THE MOON. 719

him as a lazy old man^ who walks a bit and stands a bit^ and
is drank as well ; not a word about desecration of the sabbath.
Shakspeare allades more than once to the man in the moon;
Tempest ii. 2 : ' I was the man i' th' moon^ when time was ^ . . .
' I have seen thee in her^ and I do adore thee : my mistress shewed
me thee and thy dog and thy bush,' Mids. N. Dr. iii. 1 : ^ One
mast come in with a bush of thorns and a lanthorn^ and say he
comes to present the person of Moonshine.' In Gryphius too
the player who acts the moon ties a bush round his body (conf.
Ir. elfenm. no. 20).

Two more, and those conflicting, interpretations of the moon's
spots are likewise drawn from the Bible. Either it is Isaac bear-
ing a burthen of wood for the sacriBce of himself on Mount Moriah
(Praetor. Weltbeschr. 1, 447) ; or it is Cain carrying a bundle of
thorns on his shoulders, and offering to the Lord the cheapest gift
from his field.^ This we find as far back as Dante, Parad. 2, 50.

che sono i segni but
di questo corpOj che laggiuso in terra
fan di Cam favoleggiare altrui 7

And Inferno 20, 126 : Oaino e le spine. On this passage Landino
remarks : ' cioe la luna, nella quale i volgare vedendo una certa
ombra, credono che sia Caino, c' habbia in spalla una forcata di
pruni/ And another commentator : ' accommodandosi alia favola
del volgo, che sieno quelle macchie Caino, che inalzi una forcata
di spine/

Nearly all these explanations agree in one thing : they suppose
the spots to be a human figure carrying something on its shoulder,
whether a hare, a pole and bucket, an axe and thorns, or the load
of thorns alone.' A wood-stealer or fratricide accounts for the
spots of the moon, as a ohaff-stealer (p. 857) does for the streaks
ia the milky way.

There must have been yet more traditions. A Netherl. poet
of the 14th century speaks of the dark stripes that stand

^ The story of the first fratricide seems to have made a peculiarly deep im-
pression on the new converts from heathenism ; they fancy him a wicked giant,
oonf. Beow. 213 seq., and supra p. 525.

' Water, an essential part of the Norse myth, is wanting in the story of the
man with the thombush, but it re-appears in the Oamiolan stoiy (for kramerisoh
read krainerisch) cited in Brentano's Libussa p. 421 : the man in the moon is oidled
Kotar, he makes her grow by pouring water.


720 SKY AND STABS.

recht int midden van der mane^
dat men in dnitsche heet ludergheer ;

in another passage it is lendegker^ (for leudegher?); and Willems
in Messager de Gand^ 1^ 195, following a MS. of 1351, reads, ' dat
men in dietsch heet lodegeer ; ' but none of these forms is intel-
ligible to me. Perhaps the proper name Ludgfir, Leodegarins,
OHG. LintkSr, has to do with it, and some forgotten legend of
the Mid. Ages. A touching religious interpretation is handed
down by Berthold 145, surely not invented by himself, that the
moon is Mary Magdalene, and the spots her tears of repentance
(see SuppL).

The Sun has had a slighter influence than the moon on super-
stitious notions and observances. Magical herbs must be
gathered, if not by moonlight, at least before sunrise (p. 621),
and healing waters be drawn before sunrise (p. 586). The
mounting sun dispels all magic, and bids the spirits back to their
subterranean abode.

Twice in the year the sun changes his course, in summer to
sink, in winter to rise. These turning-points of the sun were
celebrated with great pomp in ancient times, and our St. John^s
or Midsummer fires are a relic of the summer festival (p. 617
seq.). The higher North, the stronger must have been the im-
pression produced by either solstice, for at the time of the sum-
mer one there reigns almost perpetual day, and at the winter one
perpetual night. Even Procopius (ed. Bonn. 2, 206) describes
how the men of Thule, after their 35 days' night, climb the
mountain-tops to catch sight of the nearing sun. Then they
celebrate their holiest feast (see Suppl.).

Tacitus tells us (cap. 45), that the sun afler setting shoots up
such a radiance over the Suiones, that it pales the stars till
morning. ' Sonum insuper audiri, forma» deorum et radios capUis
aspici, persuasio adjicit.' I would have turned this passage to
account in Chap. VI., as proving the existence of Germanic gods,

> Van Wyn'8 AYondstonden 1, 806. Bilderdijk^B Verklärende gestaohtlijst der
naamworden 2, 198 has ludegeer, Ittdegaar, and explains it, no doubt wrongly, as
loikenaar (leodiensis). However, he teUe the old story : * *t mannetjen in de maan,
dat gezegd werd een doombosch op zijn rag te heben, en om dat hy *t gestolen had,
niet hooger ten hemel te mögen opklimmen, maar daar ingebannen te zijn.* Exactly
as in Chancer.


SOLSTICE. SUNSET. 721

bad it not seemed credible that snch accoants may not hare
reached the Bomans from Germany itself^ bat been spread among
them by miscellaneoas travellers' tales. Strabo 3^ 1 (Tsch. 1^
868) quotes from Posidonius a very similar story of the noise
made by the setting sun in the sea between Spain and Africa :
fiei^ca Svveiy rbv fjXioy iv r^ TraptOKeavLriZv libera '^6<^ov irapwrrKr^^
<rlo^^y &aav€\ aifyvro^ rov nreXarfov^ Kara aßiaiv avTov Sia ro
ifiTriirreiv €t9 rov ßvßov. But the belief may even then have
prevailed among Germans too ; the radiant heads, like a saint's
glory^ were discussed at p. 323^ and I will speak of this mar-
vellous music of the rising and setting sun in the next chapter.
Meanwhile the explanation given of the red of morning and
evening, in the old AS. dialogue between Saturn and Solomon
(Thorpe's Anal. p. 100), is curious : ' Saga me, forhwan byS seo
Bunne redd on cefen ? ' ' Ic )7e secge, for)>on heo löcafi on helle.'
' Saga me, hwt scine^S heo swÄ redde on morgene ? ' ' Ic )>e secge,
for]?on hyre twyna'S hwas'Ser heo maeg oSe [orig. ]>e] ne maeg
]nsne middaneard eondisctnan sw& hyre beboden is.' The sun
is red at even, for that she looketh on hell ; and at morn, for
that she doubteth whether she may complete her course as she is
bidden.

Not only about the sun and moon, but about the other stars,
our heathen antiquity had plenty of lore and legend. It is a very
remarkable statement of Jemandes cap. 11, that in Sulla's time
the Goths under Dicenaeus, exclusive of planets and signs of the
zodiac, were acquainted with 344 stars that ran from east to west.
How many could we quote now by their Teutonic names 7

The vulgar opinion imagines the stars related to each individual
man as friend or foe .^ The constellation that shone upon his birth
takes him under its protection all his life through ; this is called
being bom under a good or lucky star. From this guidance, this
secret sympathy of dominant constellations, fate can be foretold.
Conversely, though hardly from native sources, it is said in the
Benner 10984 that every star has an angel who directs it to the
place whither it should go.


1 Swem die stemen weident gram,
dem wirt der man» llhte alMm. Frid. 108, 8.


722 SZY Am) STABS.

There is a pious custom of saluting tlie celestial luminaries
before going to bed at night (Sup. I^ 112)^ and among the Mod.
Greeks^ of offering a prayer when the evening star is on the rise.

According to the Edda^ all the stars were sparks of fire from
Muspells-heim^ that flew about the air at random^ till the gods
assigned them seats and orbits^ Sn. 9. Seem. 1.

Ignited vapours, which under a starry sky fall swiftly through
the air like fiery threads — ^Lat. trajectio stellae, Stella transvolans,
Ital. Stella cadente, Fr. 6toile filante. Span, estrella vaga, Swed.
stjernfall, Dan. stiemskud (star-shoot), what the Greeks call
Bidyeiv trajicere — are by our people ascribed to a trimming of
the stars^ light ; they are like the sparks we let fall in snuffing a
candle. We find this notion already in Wolfram's Wh. 322, 18 :

Dehein steme ist so lieht. No star so bright

em färbe sich etswenne.^ but trims itself somewhen.

Hence our phrase of 'the stars snuffing themselves,' and our
subst. stemputze, Sternschnuppe. These falling stars are ominous,^
and whoever sees them should say a prayer (Sup. I, 595) : to the
generous girl who has given away her all, they bring down with
them [or turn into] gold-pieces (Kinderm. 153) ; nay, whatever
wish you form while the snuff is falling, is fulfilled (Tobler 408^).
The Lithuanians beautifully weave shooting stars into the fate-
mythus : the verpeya (spinneress) begins to spin the thread of the
new-born on the sky, and each thread ends in a star; when a man
is dying, his thread snaps, and the star turns pale and drops
(Narbutt, 1, 71).

A comet is called taiUstar, hair-stur in Aventin 74^. 11 9^*,
peacock-tail (Schm. 1, 827) ; and its tail in Detmar 1, 242 schin-
schove, from schof a bundle of straw. Its appearing betokens
events fraught with peril, especially the death of a king (Greg,
tur. 4, 9) : ' man siht an der zit einen sterren, sam einen pfawen
zagel wit (wide as a peacock's tail), so miiezen siben sachen in
der werlt organ,' MsH. 3, 468** (see Suppl.).

Our old heathen fancies about the fixed stars have for the most
part faded away, their very names are almost all supplanted by

^ MS. n. reads ' sdbere eich.* Even OHG. has furban (mundare, ezpiare).
' So with the Greeks (Beinh. fuohs p. lixii.). In a poem of Bdranger: * mon
enfant, un mortel expire, son 6toUe tombe k I'instant.*


SHOOTING STAR. COMET. PLANET. 723

learned astronomic appellations; only a few have managed to
save themselves in ON. legend or among the common people.

Whether the planets were named after the great gods, we
cannot tell : there is no trace of it to be found even in the North.
Planet- names for days of the week seem to have been imported,
though very early, from abroad (p. 126 seq.) Other reasons
apart, it is hardly conceivable that the heathen, who honoured
certain fixed stars with names of their own, should not have
distinguished and named the travelling stars, whose appearances
and changes are so much more striking. The evening and
morning Venus is called eveningstar, momingstar, OHG. apanU
siernoy tagastemo, like the Lat. vesper and lucifer.^ The tunkeU
steme in Ms. 1, 38^ seems to be vesperugo, the eveningstar be-
ginning to blaze in the twilight, conf» Gramm. 2, 526. An OHG.
uhtostemo momingstar, N. Bth. 223, is from uhtä, Goth, uhtvd
crepusculnm. Gl. Trev. 22^ have stelbom hesperus ; can this be
stellbaum, the bird-catcher's pole? But in Bol. 240,27 'die
nrm&ren stalboume ^ stands for stars in general, and as every star
was provided with stool or stand (p. 700-1), we may connect stel-
boum, stalboum with this general meaning. There is perhaps
more of a mythic meaning in the name nahtfare for eveningstar
(Heumanni opusc. 453. 460), as the same word is used of the witch
or wise- woman out on her midnight jaunt. The Anglo-Saxons
called the eveningstar swana steorra (bubulcornm Stella), because
the swains drove their herd home when it appeared. Again, in
O. iv. 9, 24 Christ is compared to the sun, and the apostles to
the eleven daystars, ' dagasterron ' here meaning not so much
laciferi as the signs of the zodiac. There are no native names
for the polar star (see Suppl.) .

Twice the Edda relates the origin of particular stars, but no
one knows now what constellations are meant. The legend of
Orvandils'td and the AS. Earendel, OHG. Oreniil, has been cited,
p. 374; this bright luminary may have meant the momingstar.
Then the ftses, having slain the giant Thiassi, had to atone for it
to his daughter Ska^i. OSinn took Thiassi^s eyes and threw
them against the sky, where they formed two stars, Sn. 82-3.
These augu Thiassa are most likely two stars that stand near

1 In an old ohnrch-hymn Lucifer is proyided with a chariot: ourroB jam posoit
phoaphoms (reita gia f ergot tagastem), Hymn. 2, 8.


724 SKT AND STABS.

each other^ of equal size and brightness^ perhaps the Twins ?
This is another instance of the connexion we found between stars
and eyes ; and the toe translated to heaven is quite of a piece
with the ' tongues ' and the correspondence of the parts of the
body to the macrocosm^ p. 568 (see Suppl.).

The milky-way and its relation to Irmin I have dealt with^
pp. 356-8.

Amongst all the constellations in our sky, three stand pro-
minent to the popular eye : Ursa major^ Orion and the Pleiades.
And all of them are still known by native names ; to which I
shall add those in use among the Slavs^ Lithuanians and Finns^
who give them the same place of honour as we do.

The Ghreat Bear was doubtless known to our ancestors, even
before their conversion, as waggon, wain; which name, un-
borrowed, they had in common with kindred [Aryan] nations,
and therefore it is the conunon people's name for it to this
day : they say, at dead of night the heavenly wain turns round
with a great noise, oonf. p. 745. So the Swiss (Tobler 264*) :
when the herra-wa^a stands low, bread is cheap, when high, it is
dear. O. v. 17, 29 uses the pi. 'waga/no gistelli,' meaning at
once the greater waggon and the less ; which last (Ursa minor)
Berthold calls the wegeUn,^ So ' des wagenes gerihte,' Wackem.
lb. 772, 26. It comes of a lively way of looking at the group,
which circling round the polar star always presents the appear-
ance of four wheels and a long slanting pole, deiehsel (temo), on
the strength of which the AS. sometimes has Jnsl alone : wcenes
Jngla (thill), Booth. BawUns. 192^. References are given at
p. 151, also the reasons for my conjecture that the waggon meant
is that of Wuotan the highest god. True, an 0. Swed. chronicle
connects the Swed. name Jearlwagen with Thorr, who stepping
into his chariot holds the seven stars in his hand (Thor statt
naken som ett bam, sin stjemor i banden och Karle wag^), which
I will not absolutely deny; but it is Woden stories in particular
that are transferred to the Frankish Charles (p. 153). When
in Gl. Jun. 188 ' Arturus' is rendered wagan (though 61. Hrab.

1 Ich h&n den glänzen himelwttgen nnd daz gesiirne besehen, Troj. 19062.
There may for that matter be several himelwagens, as there were many gods with
oars. Cervantes too, in a song of the gitaniUa (p. m. 11), says: Si en el oielo hay
estreUas, que lueUntes carrot forman«


CHABLES'S WAIN. 725

951^ has 'arctas' the heAr = wagan in himile), that is explained
by the proximity of the star to the Great Bear's tail^ as the very
name apicrovpo^ shews.^ I hare to add^ that Netherland cities
(Ajitwerp^ Groningen) have the stars of the Great or the Lesser
Bear on their seals (Messager de Gand 3^ 339)^ and in England
the Charles- wain is painted on the signboards of taverns.

The Greeks have both names in nse^ ap#cT09 bear^ and afia^a
waggon^ the Romans both ursa and plaustrum, as well as a
septentrio or septentriones from trio, plongh-ox. Fr. cha^, charriot,
Ital. Span, carro. Pol. woz (plaastrum), woz niebieski (heavenly
wain), Boh. wos, and at the same time ogha (thill, sometimes og,
wog) for Bootes ; the Ulyrian Slavs hola, pi. of kolo wheel, there-
fore wheels, i.e. wain, but in their kola rodina and rodoJcola * I
cannot exphtin the adjuncts rodo, rodina. Lith. gryzulio rats,
gryzdo rats, from ratas (rota), while the first word, unexplained
by Mielcke, must contain the notion of waggon or heaven ; ' Lett.
raiti (rotae). Esth. wankri tahhed, waggon-stars, from wanker
(currus) ; Hung, göntzöl szekere, from szeker (currus), the first
word being explained in ' Hungaria in parabolis ' p. 48 by a
mythic Gx>ntzöl, their first waggoner. Prominent in the Finnish
epos are päiwä the sun^ kuu the moon, and otawa, which Gastrin
translates karla-vagnen, they are imagined as persons and divine,
and often named together ; the Pleiades are named seulainen.

Never, either in our OHG. remains, or among Slavs, Lithu-
anians and Finns, ^ do we find the name borrowed from the
animal (ursa), though these nations make so much of the bear
both in legend and perhaps in worship (p. 668).

The carro menor is called by Spanish shepherds boüna, bogle ;^
by Icelanders ^«a2;on2ir a lopti, milkmaids of the sky, Biöm sub
y. F. Magnusen's Dag. tid. 104-5 (see Sappl.).


1 [From o9/>of keeper, not o^pd tail] . ^A/Mrro^vXa^ [bear-ward, or as we might
say] Waggoner, is Bootes, of whom Greek fable has much to teU. Arctnrus stands
in Bootes, and sometimes for Bootes. An OHG. gloss. Dint. 1. 167', seems
onzionsly to render Bootes by $ti{fala, Graff 6, 662. Is this stnphila, stipnla^
ttabble ?

* Bosnian Bible, Ofen 1881. 8, 154. 228. In Yak roda is stork, whence the
adj. rodin, but what of that f This roda seems to be rota, rad, wheel oyer again.

' Lith. Bible, Königsb. 1816, has in Job 9, 9 gryzo wezimmai ; gryzdas,
griznias is thill, and wezimmas waggon.

* Can this be reconciled with the statement, p. 729, that Finn, otawa—bear ?
The Mongol, for bear is ütSgS. — ^Tbans.

» Don Quixote 1, 20 (ed. Ideler 1, 282 ; conf. 6, 261).


726 SKY AND STABS.

The small^ almost invisible star jast above the middle one in
the waggon's thill has a story to itself. It is called waggoner,
hind, in Lower Germany ddimeke, thambkin^ dwarf, Osnabr.
dümke, Meckl. duming, in Holstein ' Hans Diimken, Hans Dilmkl
sitt opm wagn.' They say that once a waggoner, having given
our Saviour a lift, was offered the kingdom of heaven for his
reward ; but he said he would sooner be driving from east to
west to all eternity (as the wild hunter wished for evermore to
hunt) . His desire was granted, there stands his waggon in the
sky, and the highest of the three thill-stars, the ' rider ' so-called,
is that waggoner. Another version in Miillenhoff's Schles. Hoist,
sagen no. 484. I daresay the heathen had a similar fiction about
Wödan's charioteer. Joh. Praetorius De suspecta poli declina-
tione. Lips. 1675, p. 35: 'qui hano stellam non praeteriissent,
etiamsi minor quam Alcor, das knechtgen, der dümeke, das renter-
lein, knechtfink fuisset; ' and again on the thiePs thumb, p. 140 :
' fabula de pollicari auriga, dümeke, fuhrman»' That the same
fancy of the waggoner to this constellation prevails in the East,
appears from Niebuhr's Arabia, and the Hungarian Oöntzöl seems
closely related to him ; in Greek legend likewise Zeus places the
waggon's driver {vvioxo^) or inventor Erickthonius among the
stars, though not in the Great Bear, but between Perseus and
the Twins in the galaxy. The Bohemian formdnek, wozatag
(auriga) or bowozny signify Arcturus, Bootes and Erichthonius
(Jungm. 1, 550. 3, 401), and palecky u wozu thumblings on
waggon. But in Slovenic, it seems, hervor (Murko 85. Jarnik
229^) and burovzh mean the waggoner and the Polar Star.

The cluster of brilliant stars in which the Greeks recognised
the figure of Orion ^ had various Teutonic names, the reasons of
which are not always clear to us now. First, the three stars in
a line that form Orion's belt are called in Scandinavia Friggjar-
rockr, Friggerok (pp. 270. 302-3), and also by transfer to Mary
Marlärok, Marirok (Peter Syv in the Danske digtek. middelald.
1, 102), Mariteen; here is plain connecting of a star-group with
the system of heathen gods. The same three stars are to this
day called by the common folk in Up. Germany the three mowers,
because they stand in a row like mowers in a meadow : a homely

1 Our MHG. poets adopt Oridn Tnthont translating it, MS. 1, 37^ The
Boxnans, ace. to Yarro and FestoSi oalled it Jugula, it is not known why.


WAGGONBR. OBION. 727

designation^ like that of waggon^ which arose in the childlike
fancy of a pastoral people. OHG. glosses name Orion jpfluoc
(aratrum)^ and in districts on the Bhine he is called the rake
(rastram) : he is a tool of the husbandman or the mower. The
Scotch pUuch, Engl, plough, is said of Charleses \^ain. Some
AS. (perhaps more OS.) glosses translate Orion by ehurSring,
eburdrung, ebirdring, ebirthiring (Gl. Jan. 369. 371), ^ which in
pure AS. would have been eofor8ryng, efor^ring ; it can mean
nothing but boar-throng, since )>ryng, as well as ]>rang, Mid.
Lat. drungas, is turba. How any one came to see a herd of wild
boars in the group, or which stars of Orion it included, I do not
know : the wild huntsman of the Greek legend may have nothing
to do with it, as neither that legend nor the group as seen by
Greek eyes includes any hunted animal ; the boars of the Teutonic
constellation have seemingly quite a different connexion, and
perhaps are founded on mere comparison. OHG. glosses give
us no epurdnme, but its relation to luwaring and Iring was
pointed out, p. 359 note. In the latter part of the Mid. Ages
our ' three mowers * or the Scandinavian ' Mary's distaff' is called
Jacobs'stah, Boh. JahubahM; the heathenish spindle, like the
heathenish Irmin-street (p. 857 note), is banded over to the
holy apostle, who now staff in hand, paces the same old heavenly
path ; in some parts Peter's staff is preferred. The Esthonians
call Orion warda tahhed, spear stars, from ' wardas ' spear, and
perhaps staff, like St. James's staff. The Lithuanians szenpjuwis,
hay-star? firom 'szen' foenum (Nesselmann 515), as August is
called szenpjutis ; because the constellation rises at hay-harvest 7
perhaps also with reference to the ' three-mowers ' 7 for in the
same way several Slav nations have the name kosi scythes, Boh.
kosy (Jungm. 2, 136), Pol. kosy (Linde 1092*), Sloven, koszi
(Murko 142) mowers. Other Slavic names of Orion are shtupka
(Bosn. Bible, 3, 154), for which we ought to read shtapka, in Vuk
shiaka crutch, crosier, from our Stäbchen, Carniol. pdlize staves,
in Stulli babini sctapi old wives' staves ; and kruzilice,^ wheelers,
rovers? from 'kruiiti' vagari (see SuppL).

^ The seoond passage has * ebnrdntmg/ an error, bat an evidence of the MS.'s
age, for in the 8-9th cent, the second stroke of r was made as long as that of n.

* Dobrowskj's Slavin p. 425 ; the Pol. kruilic is crocklet, mug. Hanka's
Altböhm. gloBsen have 66, 857 kmzlyk circnlea, 99, 164 kmsslyk lix, which I do
not understand. Can it be cratch f

VOL. n. U


728 SKY AND STABS.

Between the shoulders of the Bull is a space thickly sown with
stars^ but in which seven (really six) larger ones are recognis-
able; hence it is called sieben-gestim, OHG. thaz sibunstirri^
0. V. 17, 29. Diut. i. 520*. Gl. Jun. 188 (where it is confounded
with the Hyades not far off, in the BalPs head) . Beside this
purely arithmetical denomination, there are others more living :
Gr. JTXeiaSe?, Ion. IlXrfldSe^;, seven daughters of Atlas and
Pleione, whom Zeus raised to the sky, II. 18, 486. Od. 5, 272,
and who, like the Norse Thiassi and örvandill, are of giant kin ;
but some explain these Pleiads from TreXetd^ wild dove, which
is usually iriXeta} Lat. Vergiliae, of which Pestus gives a lame
explanation. A German poet writes virilie, Amgb. 42^.

The picture of the Pleiades that finds most favour among the
people in Germany and almost all over Europe is that of a hen
and seven chickens^ which at once reminds us of the Greek seven
doves } Mod. Gr. irovkia (Fauriel 2, 277). Our klucJce, kluckerin,
MuckJienne, brut-henne mit den künhin ; Dan. af ten-hone, even-
ing-hen {'hönne, Dansk. digtek. middelald. 1, 102); Engl, hen with
her chickens ; Fr. la poiissiniere, in Lorraine poucherosse, covrosse
(couveuse, brood-hen, qui conduit des pous^ins)^ ; Gris. duotscJias
or cluschas the cluck-hens ; Ital. gallinelle ; Boh. slepice s kufdtky
hen with chickens ; Hung, fiastik, fidstyuk from tik, tyuk gallina,
and fiazom pario. The sign of the clticJ^-hen seems to me inter-
grown with our antiquity. Nursery tales bring in a peculiar
feature, viz. that three nuts or eggs having been given as a pre-
sent, out of them come a golden dress, a silver dress, and a cbickle
with seven (or twelve) chickies, the three gifts representing sun,
moon and seven-stars. Kinderm. no. 88 (2, 13). So in the
Introd. to the Pentamerone, out of the miraculous nut comes a
voccola CO dudece polecine. Now the Hungarian tale in Gaal p. 381
has ' golden hen and six chickens/ meaning the Pleiades ; and the
maiden, seeking her lost lover, has to obtain access to him by tbe
valuables contained in three nuts ; these were three dresses, on
which severally were worked the sun, the moon, and the seven-
stars (conf. Wigal. 812), being gifts of Sun, Moon, and Seven-

* The Snppl. adds : * the Pleiades, like doves, cany ambrosia to Zeus, but one
olwayt gets lost in passing the Planctae rocks, and Zens fills up their number again,
Athen. 4, 826-6.'— Homer tells the story simply of doves, irAatai, Od. 12, 61.— Tbass.

' Conf. Pentam. 4, 8 * li sette palommielle/ seven children transformed.

8 M6m. des antiq. 4, 876. 6, 121-9.


PLEIADES. 729

ßtars^ bestowed upon her in her wanderings. The third dress
tradition at last converted into the cluckie herself. Treasure-
hunters dig for the costly cluckie with her chicks; conf. the
sunken hoards Chap. XXXII. A ' hen and twelve hiinkeln ^ was
also an earthly fine^ Weisth. 1, 465. 499. I am not sure that we
are entitled to connect the nut with ^ Iduns huot ^ ; but )what is
' sun^ moon and cluckie * with us^ is with the Finns far more
plainly ' päiwä, kuu^ otawa/ i.e. sun, moon, bear. The Span, name»
is ' las siete cdbrillas ^ seven kids,^ Pol. baby old wives. Boss.
baha old wife [and nasedka sitting hen], Linde 1, 38*; Serv.
vlashitsi (Vuk 78), vlashnitsi, (Bosn. Bible 3, 154, 223), Slovöo.
vlastovtse swallows? but Jarnik 229*^ explains it ^ ramatäbe,^ whieh
I do not understand. The 0. Boh. name too is obscure^^cs^^e^-
nycze pleiades (Hanka^s Glossen 58*^) = stetnice, bristly ones, from
stetina seta? Sloven, ffostoseotsi, goatozhirtsi the thick-sown?
The last name agrees with the Lith. and Finn. view,. viz.. the con-
stellajiion is a sieve having a great many holes, or lifting out a
heap of flour : Lith. setas Lett, setinshy Esth. sööl or söggel, Finn.
seula, seulainen. Why does Suchenwirt 4, 32& say, ^ daz her daz
tailt sich in daz lant gleich recht als ain sibenstim * ? because the
army is so thickly spread over the land ? . (see SuppL).

The origin of the Pleiades is thus related : Christ was passing
a baker's shop, when He smelt the new bread, and sent his dis-
ciples to ask for a loaf. The baker refused, but the baker's wife
and her six daughters were standing apart, and secretly gave it.
For this they were set in the sky as the Seven-stars, while the
baker became the cuckoo (p. 676 baker's man), and so long as
he sings in spring, from St. Tiburtius's day to St. John's, the
Seven-stars are visible in heaven. Compare with >this the Nor*
wegian tale of Gertrude's bird (p. 673).

There may be a few more sta.rs for which popular names still
exist.^ In Lith. the Kids are artojis su jdiiczeis plougher with
oxen^ and Capella neszqa walgio food-bearer (f.). Hanka's 0.
Boh. gl. 58^ gives hrusa for Aldebaran, przyczeJc for Arcturus,
We might also expect to find names for the Hyades and Cas-

1 Don Quixote 2, 41 (Idel. 4, 83 ; conf. 6, 242).

3 Cymric and Gaelic Bibles (Job 9, 9), retain tne Latin names from the Vulgate;
from which it does not follow tnat these languages lack native names for stars.
Armstrong cites Gael. crannaraiTif baker's peel, for the Pleiades, and draghlodt fixe-
tail, for the Lesser Bear.


730 SKY AND STARS.

siopeia. Bat many stars are habitually confounded, as tlie
Pleiades with the Hyades or Orion, and even with the Wain and
Arcturus ; * what is vouched for by glosses alone, is n t to be
relied on. Thus I do not consider it proved as yet that the names
plough and ehurdi-ung really belong to Orion. By ' plough ' the
Irish Fairy-tales 2, 123 mean the Wain rather than Orion, and
who knows but the ' throng of boars ' may really stand for the
'TaSe? (from v?)^ and the Lat. Suculae ? (see Suppl.).

Still more unsafe and slippery is the attempt to identify the
constellations of the East, founded as they are on such a different
way of looking at the heavens. Three are named in Job 9, 9 :
tt^ &sh, flD^Z) kimeh, ^7V2 ksilj' which the Septuagint renders
mXecdhe^y Sairepo^;, ap/crovpo^;, the Vulgate 'Arcturus, Orion,
Hyades,^ and Luther 'the Wain, Orion, the Glucke (hen).' In
Job 38, 31 ktmeh and ksU are given in the LXX as irXeidBe^,
^IlploDV, in Vulg. as 'Pleiades, Arcturus,' in Diut. 1, 520 as
' Siebenstimi, Wagan,' and in Luther as ' Siebenstern, Orion.*
For ksil in Isaiah 13, 10 the LXX has ^ilploav, Vulg. merely
'splendor,' Luther 'Orion.' In Amos 5, 8 ktmeh and ksil are
avoided in LXX, but rendered in Vulg. ' Arcturus, Orion,' and
by Luther 'the Glucke, Orion.' Michaelis drew up his 86
questions on the meaning of these stars, and Niebuhr received
the most conflicting answers from Arabian Jews ; ^ on the whole
it seemed likeliest, that (I) &sh was the Arabian constellation
om en ndsh, (2) kimeh or chima the Arab, toriye, (3) kstl the
Arab, sheil (sihhSi) ; the three corresponding to Ursa major.


^ Eeiseraperg's Postil 206 : * the sea-star or the Wain, or die kenn mit den hünlin
as ye call it.* Grobianns 1572 fol. 93^ : * wo der wagen steht, und wo die gluck mit
hiinkeln geht.* Several writers incorrectly describe the ' dümke, düming ' as ' Sie-
bengestirn ' ; even Tobler, when he says 370^ * three stars of the siebeng. are called
the hones, near which stands a tiny star, the waggoner ^^ is evidently thinking of the
Wain's thill [Germans often take the ' seven-stars* for Ursa instead of Pleiades] .

' It has long been tiiought a settled point, that Suculae (little sows) was a blun-
dering imitation of 'TdSes, as if that came from 0s a sow, whereas it means * the
rainers' from ßciv to rain (* ab imbribus,' Cicero; *pluvio nomine,' Pliny). Does
the author mean to reopen the question f Did the later Greeks and Bomans,
ashamed of having these * little sows ' in the sky, invent the * rainers ' theory ?
May not Suculae at all events be a genuine old Boman name, taken from some meri-
torious mythical pigs? — Tbans.

* In Hebr. the three words stand in the order * &sh, k'sil, kim&h ; and their
transposition here does 'some injustice to the Yulg. and Luther. As a fact, two out
of the four times that k'sil occurs, it is 'Qpiitnr in LXX, and the other two times it is
Orion in Vulgate. Luther and the Engl, version are consistent throughout. — Traks.

* Beschr. von Arabien p. 114 ; some more Arabian names of stars, pp. 112 — 6.


CONSTELLATIONS. 731

Pleiades and Sirias. If we look to the verbal meanings^ n&ish,
which some Arabs do change into ash, is feretram^ bier or
barrow,* a thing not very different from a ' wain ' } kimeh, hima
seems to signify a thick clnster of stars, much the same sense as
in that name of ' sieve ' : ksU, means foolish, ungodly, a lawless
giant, hence Orion.

Constellations can be divided into two kinds, according to
their origin. One kind requires several stars, to make np the
shape of some object, a man, beast, etc. ; the stars then serve as
gronnd or skeleton, round which is drawn the full figure as
imagination sees it. Thus, three stars in a row form St. James's
staff, distaff, a belt ; seven group themselves into the outline of a
bear, others into that of a giant Orion. The other kind is, to my
thinking, simpler, bolder, and older : a whole man is seen in a
single sta^, without regard to his particular shape, which would
disappear from sheer distance ; if the tiny speck drew nearer to
ns, it might develop itself again. So the same three stars as
before are three men mowing ; the seven Pleiads are a hen and
her chickens ; two stars, standing at the same distance on each
side of a faintly visible cluster, were to the ancient Greeks two
asses feeding at a crib. Here fancy is left comparatively free
and unfettered, while those outline-figures call for some effort of
abstraction ; yet let them also have the benefit of Buttmann's apt
remark,' that people did not begin with tracing the complete
figure in the sky, it was quite enough to have made out a portion
of it; the rest remained undefined, or was filled up afterwards
according to fancy. On this plan perhaps the Bear was first
found in the three stars of the tail, and then the other four
supplied the body. Oar Wain shews a combination of both
methods : the thill arose, like the Bear's tail, by outline, but the
four wheels consist each of a single star. One point of agree-
ment is important, that the Greek gods put men among the
stars, the same as Thörr and 08inn do (pp. 375. 723 ; see Suppl.).

The appearance of the rainbow in the sky has given rise to a
number of mythic notions. Of its rounded arch the Edda makes
a heavenly bridge over which the deities walk ; hence it is called

^ Bocbarii hierorz., ed. BosenmüUer 2, 680.

« Origin of the Grk constell. (in Abh. der Berl. acad. 1826, p. 19-63).


732 SKY AND STABS.

Asbru (Saein. 44*), more commonly Bif-roat (OHG-. would be pipa-
rasta) the quivering tract, for röst, Goth, and OHG. rasta, means
a definite distance, like mile or league. It is the best of all
bridges (Saem. 46*), strongly built out of three colours; yet the
day Cometh when it shall break down, at the end of the world,
when the sons of Muspell shall pass over it, Sn. 14. 72. The
tail of this bridge*^ extends to Himinbiörg, Heimdall's dwelling
(Sn. 21), and Heimdallr is the appointed keeper of the bridge ;
he guards it against hrtmthurses and mountain-giants,' lest they
make their way over the bridge into heaven, Sn. 18. 30. The
whole conception is in keeping with the cars in which the
gods journey through heaven, and the roads that stretch across
it (conf. p. 361). It was Christianity that first introduced the
0. Test, notion of the celestial hew being a sign of the covenant
which God made with men after the rain of the Deluge : OHG.
reganpogo, AS. saurboga, shower-bow, Ga&dm. 93, 5. Meanwhile
some ancient superstitions linger still. The simple folk imagine,
that on the spot where the rainbow springs out of the ground,
there is a golden dish, or a treasure lies buried ; that gold coins
or pennies drop out of the rainbow. When gold-pieces are picked
up, they are called regenbogen-sehüeselein (-dishes), patellae Iridis,
which the sun squanders in the rainbow. In Bavaria they call
the rainbow himmelring, sonnenring, and those coins himmelriu-g-
schusseln (Schm. 2, 196. 8, 109: conf. supra p. 359 note). The
Romans thoaght the bow in rising drank water out of the ground :
'bibit arcus, pluet hodie,^ Plaut. Curcul. 1, 2 ; 'purpureus pluvias
cur bibit arcus aquas ? ' Propert. iii. 5, 32. TibuU. i. 4, 44. Virg.
Georg. 1, 380. Ov. Met. 1, 271. One mustno^ poini with fingers
at the rainbow, any more than at stars, Braunschw. anz. 1754, p.
1063. Building on the rainbow means a bootless enterprise (note
on Freidank p. 319. 320, and Nib. Lament 1095. Spiegel,
161, 6) ; and setting on the rainbow (Bit. 2016) apparently


' Brdar-spordr (we still speak of a bridge's head^ tdte de pont), as if an animal
,liad laid itself across the river, with head and tail resting on either bank. Bat we
mnst not omit to notice the word spordr (prop, canda piscis) ; as röst, rasta denote
a certain stadium, so do the Goth. spaUrd» OHG. spurt a recurring interval, in tiie
sense of our '(so many) times': thus, in Fragm. theot. 15, 19, dhrim spurtim
(tribus vicibns), where rastöm would do as well. Do the * rünar A hruanpordi,*
biem. 196* mean the rainbow?

' Giants are often made bridge-keepers (p. 556 n.) : the maiden MötSgulSr guards
giallarbrü, Sn. 67.


RAINBOW. 733

exposing to greafc danger ? Is 'behüsen unebene ftf regenbogen'
(Tit. Hahn 4061) to be unequally seated ? In H. Sachs ii. 287 a
man gets pushed ofif the rainbow. The Finns have a song in
which a maiden sits on the rainbow, weaving a golden garment.
Might not our heathen ancestors think and saj the like of their
piparasta? There is a remarkable point of agreement on the
part of the Chinese : ' tunc et etiamnum viget saperstitio^ qua
iridem orientalem digito monatrare nefas esse credunt ; qui hanc
monstrayerit^ huic subito ulcus in manu futurum. Iridem habent
Sinae pro signo libidinis effrenatae quae regnat.' ^

The Slavic name for the rainbow is O. SI. iuga^ Serv. and
Buss, duga^ duga nebeskia, Boh. duha, prop, a stave (tabula, of a
cask)^ hence bow; the Servians say^ any male creature that
passes under the rainbow turns into a female^ and a female into
a male (Vuk sub v.).* Two Slovfenic names we find in Murko :
mdvray mduritsa, which usually means a blackish-brindled cow ;
and bozhyi stolets, god's stool^ just as the rainbow is a cliair of
the Welsh goddess Ceridwen (Dav. Brit. myth. 204) ; conf.
'God's chair,' supra p. 136. Lett, warramhksne, liter, the
mighty beech f Lith. Laumes yosta, Lauma's or Laima's girdle
(sup. p. 416) ; also dangaus yosta heaven's girdle, kilpinnia
dangavs heaven's bow, ürorykszte weather- rod ; more significant
is the legend from Polish Lithuania, noticed p. 580, which
introduces the rainbow as messenger after the flood, and as
counsellor. Finn, iaiviancaari, arcus coelestis. In some parts
of Lorraine courraie de 8, Lienard, eouronne de 8. Bernard, In
Saperst. Esth. no. 65 it is the thunder-god's sickle, an uncom-
monly striking conception.

To the Greeks the lpi<; was, as in the 0. Test., a token of the
gods, II. 11, 27; but at the same time a half-goddess Vp£9> who
is sent out as a messenger from heaven. The Indians assigned
the painted bow of heaven to their god Indras. In our own
popular belief the souls of the just are led by their guardian-
angels into heaven over the rainbow, Ziska's Oestr. volksm.
49. 110.

As for that doctrine of the Edda, that before the end of the


1 Chi-kixkg ez lat. P. Lacharme, interpr. Jal. Mohl, p. 242.

s Like the contrary effects ol the planet Venus on the two sexes in Saperst. X 1^67.


734 SKY AND stars:

world Bifröst will breaks I find it again in the German belief
during the Mid. Ages that for a number of years before the
Jndgment-daj the rainbow will no longer be seen : ' onch h6rt
ich sagen^ daz man stn (the regenpogen) nieht ensehe drizich jar
(30 years) vor dome snontage/ Diut. 3, 61. Hugo von Trim-
berg makes it 40 years (Benner 19837) :

So man den regenbogen siht^
so enzaget diu werlt niht
dan dam&ch über vierzec jar ;

so the rainbow appear^ the world hath no fear^ until thereafter 40
year. Among the signs the Church enumerates of the approach
of the Last Day^ this is not to be found (see Suppl.).


CHAPTER XXIII.
DAT AND NIGHT.

All the liveliest fancies of antiquity respecting day and night
are intertwined with those about the sun^ moon and stars : day
and night are holy godlike beings^ near akin to the gods/ The
Edda makes Day the child of NighL

Norvi^ a iötunn^ had a daughter named Nott, black and dingy
like the stock she came of (svört oc dock sem hon &tti aett til) ;^
seyeral husbands fell to her share^ first Naglfari, then Anar (Onar) '
a dwarf, by whom she had a daughter lorS, who afterwards
became OSin's wife and Thör's mother. Her last husband was
of the fair race of the &ses, he was called Delltngr, and to him
she bore a son Dagr, light and beautiful as his paternal ancestry.
Then All -father took Night and her son Day, set them in the sky,
and gave to each of them a horse and a car, wherewith to journey
round the earth in measured time. The steeds were named the
riroy-maned and the shiny-maned (p. 655-6).

The name Dellingr, the assimilated form of Deglingr, includes
that of the son Dagr, and as -ling if it mean anything means
descent, we must either suppose a progenitor Dagr before him,
or that the order of succession has been reversed, as it often is
in old genealogies.

For the word ' dags, dagr, dsög, tac ' I have tried to find a root
(Gramm. 2, 44), and must adhere to my rejection of Lat. ' dies'
as a congener, because there is no consonant-change, and the
Teutonic word develops a g, and resolves its a into o {no); yet
conf. my Kleinere Schriften 3, 117.' On the other hand, in ' dies'
and all that is like it in other languages, there plainly appeared

' Tliis paPBage was not taken into account, p. 628 ; that Night and Helle
fthoold be black, stands to reason, but no conclusion can be drawn from that about
giants as a bodj. Notice too the combination ' svört ok dock,' conf. p. 445. Here
giant and dwarf genealogies have evidently overlapped.

* Conf. Hanpt's Zeitschr. 8, 144.

' [Sanskr. dah urere, ardere ^Bopp*8 GI. 165) does seems the root both of dies
and Goth, dags, which has exceptionally kept prim, d unchanged. MHG. tao still
retained the sense of heat : * für der heizen snnnen t<iCt* MS. 2, 84*.— Süppl.]

736


736 DAY AND NIGHT.

an interlacing of the notions ' day, sky, god,' p. 193. As Day
and Donar are both descended from Night, so Dies and Dens
(Zens) fall nnder one root ; one is even tempted to identify Donar,
Thonor with the Etruscan Tina (dies), for the notion day, as we
shall see, carries along with it that of din : in that case Tina
need not stand for Dina, but would go with Lat. tonos and toni-
tms. Dens is our Tiw, Ziu, for the same name sometimes gets
attached to different gods ; and it is an additional proof how
little ' dies ' has to do with our ' d»g, tag ' ; likewise for
coelum itself we have none but unrelated w(»rds, p. 698-9. From
the root div the Ind. and Lat. tongues have obtained a number
of words expressing all three notions, g^s, day and sky ; the
Greek only for gods and sky, not for day, the Lith. for god and
day, not sky, the Slav, for day alone, neither god nor sky, and
lastly our own tongue for one god only, and neither sky nor day.
Here also we perceive a special affinity between Sanskrit and
Latin, whose wealth the remaining languages divided amount
them in as many different ways. The Greek iiftap, ^fiepa I do
regard as near of kin to the Tout, himins, himil ; there is also
'Hfiipa a goddess of day.

The languages compared are equally unanimous in their name
for night : Goth, nahts, GHG. naht, AS. niht, ON. nott (for n&tt),
Lat. nox noctis, Gr. vv^ iar/rro9^ Lith. nahtis, Lett, nakts, O. SI.
noshti, PoL and Boh. noc (pron. nets).. Sloven, nozh, Serv. notj,
Sanskr. nakta chiefly in compounds, the usual word being nii,
nisd (both fem..). Various etymologies have been proposed, but
none satisfactory.^ As day was named the shining, should not
the opposite meaning of ' dark ' lurk in the word night ? Yet it
is only night unillumined lo^j the moon that is lightless. There is
a very old anomalous verb ^ nahan ' proper to our language, from
whose pret. nahta^ the noun nahts seems to come, just as from
magan mahta, lisan lista come the nouns mahts, lists. Now

1 [Bopp 198^ and Pott 1, 160 explain nisA as ^ lying down ' from ei! to lie ; and
naktam as ' while lying.' Benfey assmnes two roots, nakta ' not-waking/ 2, 369
and nis conn, with Lat. niger 2, 57. — Süppl.]

s The plarals of Goth, ganah, binah are lost to as ; I first assumed ganahnm,
binahnm, but afterwards ganaühum, because binaüht » l^c^ri in 1 Cor. 10, 23, and
ganaüha airrdpKcia occurs several times. The u {fXi before an h) is the same as in
skal skulum, man monum, OHG. mac mugnm, m spite of whidi the noun is maht.
But the Goth, mag magum proves the superior claim of a, so that nahts (nox)
would presuppose an older nah nahum, nahta, even though Ulphilas had written
nah naühom, naühta.


DAY. NIGHT. 737

Gofcli. ganahan, OHG. kinahan^ means snfficere^ so that nahts
wonld be the sufficing^ pacifying^ restful^ quiet, at the same time
efRcient, strongs apKia, which seems to hit the sense exactly«
Add to this, that the 0H6. duruh-naht is not only pernox, totam
noctem darans, but more commonly perfectus, consummatus,
' f allsammed in power/ MHG. darnehte, dumehtec, where there
is no thought of night at all. Where did Stieler 1322 find his
^ durchnacht, nox illunis'f-=the Scand. niiS (p. 710), and meaning
the height of night ^(see Snppl.).

Both day and night are exalted beings. Day is called the
holy, like the Greek Upov fffMip-i 'sam mir der heilic tad'
Ls. 2, 311. '8& mir daz heilige lieht!* Both, ll^ 'die liehen
tage/ Ms. 1, 165*. 'der liehe iag^ Simplic. 1, 5. Hence both
are addressed with greetings : ' heill Bagr^ heilir Daga »ynir,
heil Nott ok niptl ereilSom augom ütit ockr )^innig, ok gefit
sitjondom sigurl' they are asked to look with gracious eyes
on men, and give victory, Sadm, 194*; and the adoration of day
occurs as late as in Mart, von Amberg's (Beichtspiegel. ' diu edele
naht, Ms. 2, 196^ 'diu heilige naht/ Gerh. 3541. 'sam mir diu
heilicnaht hint! ' ■ so j(help) me Holy Night to-night, Helbl. 2,
1384. 8, 606. 'frau Naht, Ms H. 3,428» (see SuppL).

Norse poetry, as we saw, provided both Night and Day with
cars, Jike other gods ; but then the sun also has his chariot, while
the moon, as far as I know, has none ascribed to her. Night
and Day are drawn by one horse each, the San has two ; con»
sequently day was thought of as a thing independent of the sun,
as the moon^lso has to light up the dark night. Probably the
car of Day was supposed to run before that of the Sun,^ and
the Moon to follow Night. The alternation of sexes seems not
without significance, the masculine Day being accompanied by
the ^feminine Sun, the. fern. Night by the masc. Moon« The
Greek myth gives chariots to Helios and Selene, none to the
deities of day and night; yet Aeschylus in Persae 386 speaks
of day as Xwkott^Xo^ "fifiipa, the white-horsed. The riddle in
Reinmar^on Zweter, Ms. 2, 136, lets the chariot of the year be
drawn by seven white and seven black steeds (the days and
eights of the week). Here also the old heathen notion of riding

1 t.«. day or morning is there before the mn, who backs them up, so to speak :
unz daz din sonne ir liehtez schlnen h^t dem morgen über berge, Nib. 1564, 2.


788 DAY AND NIGHT.

or driving deities peeps ont. Again^ a spell quoted in Mone's
Anz. 6, 459 begins with * God greet thee^ holy Sunday ! I see
thee there come riding.' This is no doabt the heathen god Tag
riding along on Scinfahso with his shiny mane (ON. Skin&ri,
Sn. 11) ; but if we took it for the white god Paltar on his foal
(p. 222-4)', we shonld not be altogether wrong. We shall have
more to say presently on the personification of Day; but tiiat
spell is well worthy of consideration (see Sappl.).

Nevertheless our poets express the break of day by the Bun*8
uprising, and more especially the fall of night by his setting ;
but neither the beginning nor end of night by the moon, whose
rising and setting are seldom simultaneous with them. I will
now give the oldest set phrases that express these phenomena.

The sun rises, climbs : Goth, sunna ur-rinniß, Mk. 4, 6. 16, 2.
OHG. ar-rinnit; daran&h tr-ran diu sunna, N. ps. 103, 22 ; MH6.
si was of er-rtinnen, Mar. 189. ON. }A rann dagr upp, 01. helg.
cap. 220. Rinnan is properly to run, to flow, and here we see
a strict analogy to the O. Rom. idiom, which in like manner uses
manure of the rising day : ' diei principinm mdne, quod turn
mänat dies ab Oriente,' Varro 6, 4 (0. Müller p. 74) ; ' manor
solem dicebant antiqui, cum solis orientis radii splendorem jacere
coepissent' (Festus sub v.). TTlphilas never applies ur-reisan
(surgere) to the sun. The Span, language attributes to. the
rising sun a pricking (apuntar) : ' yxie el sol, dios, que fermoso
apuntaba/ Cid 461 ; ' quando viniere la manana, que apuntare
el sol,' Cid 2190. After rising the sun is awake, 'with the sun
awake' means in broad daylight (Weisth. 2, 169. 173. 183),
' when sunshine is up* (2, 250) . AS. ' h&dor heof onleoma com
hlican^ Andr. 888 (see Suppl.).

The sun sinks, falls : Goth, sagq sunn6 (pron. sank), Lu. 4, 40.
gasagq sauil, Mk. 1, 32. dissigqdi (occi4at), Eph. 4, 26. OHG.
sunnk pifeal [rmt) , pislu,ac (occidit),^ Gl. Ker. 254. Diut. 1, 274*.
MHG. siget : diu sunne stget hin. Trist. 2402. diu sunne was ze
tal gesigen, Wh. 447, 8. nu begund diu sunne sigen. Aw. 1, 41.
ON. both s61ar/aZZ and BtHsetr, Engl. Qiinset ; so OHG. 'denne
sunnft kisaz/ cum sol occumberet, Diut. 1, 492*, implying that he
sits down, and that there is a seat or ckair for him to drop into

> Intrang.y as we still say niederschlagen, zn boden schlagen.


N*


8UNBI8B. SUNSET. 739

at the end of his joamej. His setting is called OHG. aedalkanc,
Hym. 18^ 1 ; sedal ira kät (goeth) 14, 2. AS. setelgong^ setlrdd,
Csedm. 181^ 19. o'S^iet sunne gewat to sets glidan, Andr. 1305.
o^Ssdt beorht gewat sunne swegeltorht to sete glidan 1248. OS.
sag sunne to sedle, Hel. 86, 12. sunne ward an sedle 89, 10.
geDg thar ftband tuo, sunna ti ttedle 105, 6. sordd wester dag,
sunne te sedle 137, 20. so thuo gisdgid warth sedle n&hor hedra
sunna mid hebantunglon 1 70, 1 . Dan. for vesten gaaer sol en til
sade, DV. 1, 90, in contrast to 's61 er i aiistri (east),' Vilk.
saga p. 58-9. The West (occasus) stands opposed to the East
(oriens), and as OHG. kibil means pole, and Nordkibel, Sunt-
kibel the north and south poles (N. Bth. 208), a set phrase ia
our Weisthiimer may claim a high antiquity: 'bis (until) die
sonne unter den Westergibel geht' (1, 836) ; 'bis die sonne an
den Wg. schint' (2, 195) ; 'so lange dat die sonne in den Wes'
iergevel seh int ' (2, 159). The first of these three passages
has the curions explanation added : ' till 12 o'clock.' ' Ovid's
' axe sub hesperio ' Met. 4, 214 is thus given by Albrecht :
in den liebten westemangen. The similar expression in ON.
seems to me important, Grägäs 1, 26 : ' fara til lögbergs, at sol
s£ ft gidhamri enum vestra/ gifthamarr being chasmatis rupes
OGcidentalis. I shall have more to say about that in another
connexion; conf. however Landjiftma b6k 215: sol t austri ok
vestri. MHG. din sunne gie ze sedele, Diut. 3, 57. als diu
sunne in ir gesedel solde gftn, Morolt 38*; but what place on
earth can that be, whose very name is told us in 14^, ' ze Oeilat,
dft din sunne ir gesedel hftt ' ? the capital of India ? (see p. 743
note.) I suppose kadam, MHG. gaden (cubicnlum), Mor. 15* is
equivalent to sedal, unless the true reading be ' ze gnftden.' The
Ban gets way-worn, and longs for rest : do hete diu müede sunne

^ ON. and AS. distingnish between two periods of the eyening, an earlier apian
«/msveapera, and a later qveld, cwild=Qonti(iiniam: * at qveldi,' Ssm. 20*. 73^
means at full evening, when night has fallen and its stillness has set in. I derive
ewildf qveld from cwellan, qvelja to quell or kill, as in many passages it means liter,
interitos, occisio, nex ; so we may explain it by the falling or felling of the day
(cadere, whence caedere), or still better by the deathlike hush of night ; oonf. Engl.
I dead of night, deadtime of n.\ the conticininm, AS. cwildtid. If ' chuiltiwerch '
in a doc. of 817 means cwildweoro, work in the late evening, which is not to be put
upon maidservants, then OHG. too had a c?iuilt corresp. to cwild and qveld, qvold.
In Casdm. 188, 111 propose to read : * cwildr6fa eodou on WSia l&st,' i,e, (belluae)
vesperi famosae ibant in vestigia malorum.

* In fixing boundaiy-lines Weiter gibel ia even used topographically, Weisth. 1,
464.5. 485. 498. 550-6.


740 DAT AND NIGHT.

ir liehten blio hinz ir gelesen^ Parz. 32^ 24. He goes to his
bed^ his bedchamber : Dan. ' solen ganger til senge/ DV. 1, 107.
'solen gik til hvile* 1, 170. MHG. diu sanne gerte l&zen sich
zao Teste J Ernst 1326. diu snnne dd ze reste gie^ Ecke (Hag.)
110. nu wolte diu sunne ze reste und ouch ze gemache nider g&n,
Dietr. 14^; so M. Opitz 2^ 286 : 'muss doch zu HLste gehen, so
oft es abend wird^ der schöne himmels-schild.' OE. the snn
was gon to rest, Iwan 3612. Our giiade (favour)^ MH6. gen&de,
OHG. kin&da, properly means inclining, drooping, repose
(p. 710), which accounts for the phrase 'diu sunne gienc ze
gnaden* (dat. pi.), Mor. 37». Wolfdietr. 1402. Even Agricola no
longer understood it quite, for he says in Sprichw. 737: 'it
lasted till the sun was about to go to gnaden, i.e. to set, and deny(!)
the world his gnade and light by going to rest.' Aventin (ed .
1580 p. 19^) would trace it back to our earliest heathenism and
a worship of the sun as queen of heaven : ' never might ye say
she set, but alway that she went to röst and gnaden, as the silly
simple folk doth even yet believe.* The last words alone are
worth noticing; the superstition may be of very old standing,
that it is more pious, in this as in other cases, to avoid straight-
forward speech, and use an old half-intelligible euphemism. On
this point Yuk 775 has something worthy of note : you must say
' smirilo se suntse * (the sun is gone to rest, conquievit), and not
zadye (is gone) nor syede (sits) ; if you say zadye, he answers
' zashao pa ne izishao ' (gone, not come out) ; ^ if you say syede,
he tells you ' syeo pa ne ustao ' (sat down, not risen) ; but to
' smiri se ' the answer is ' smiryö se i ti ' (rest thee also thou) .'
And with this I connect the Eddie saw on the peculiar sacredi^ess
of the setting sun : ' engi skal gumna } gögn vega st9slnnandi
systor Mana,' Seem. 184^, none shall fight in the face of the
late-shining sister of the Moon (see Suppl.)

Lye quotes an AS. phrase 'ear sun go to glade,' which he
translates ^ priusquam sol vergat ad occasum, lapsum.' The
noun formed from glidan (labi) would be gl&d, and gltdan is

1 Eopitar tells me, * zashao etc.* is rather an impreeation : mayst thou go in (per-
haps, lose thy way) and neyer get out I So ' syeo eto.\ mayst tnon sit down and
never get up !

s Mod. Greek songs say, 6 IjXtot ißacrCXcve, ißaffCKejpe (Faoriell, 56. 2, SOG. 432),
i.e, has reigned, reigns no more in the sky, is set ; and the same of the setting
moon (2, 176).


SÜNSBT. 741

ftctaally nsed of the sun's motion : heofones gim glad ofer
grandas, Beow. 4140 [and ' to sete glidan ' twice in Andreas] .
Bat 'gongan to glade' seems nonsense; perhaps we oaght to
suppose a noun glaede with the double meaning of splendor and
gaudium. Both the ON, glaiSr and 0H6. klat signify first
splendidus^ then hilaris^ two notions that run into one another
(as in our heiter = serenus and hilaris) ; hlat is said of stars, eyes,
rays (Graff 4, 288), and the sun, 0. ii. 1, 13 : 6r wurti sunna so
glat (ere he grew so bright). The MHG. poet quoted on p. 705
says (Warnung 2037) :

86 ir die sunnen vro sehet. When ye see the sun glad,

schcenes tages ir ir jehet. Ye own the fine day is hers,

des dankt ir ir, und Goto niht. Ye thank her, not God.

In Switzerland I find the remarkable proper name Sunnenfroh
(Anshelm 3, 89. 286). But now further, the notions of bliss,
repose, chamber, lie next door to each other, and of course
brightness and bliss. The setting sun beams forth in heightened
splendour, he is entering into his bliss : this is what ' gongan to
glffide ' may have meant. In ON. I have only once fallen in with
solargladan (occasus), Fornald. sog. 1, 518. We learn from
Ihre^s Dialectlex. p. 57^ 165% that in Yestgötland 'gladas' is said
of the sun when setting : solen gladas or glcMs (occidit), sole»
glanding, solglädjen (occasus), which may mean that the setting
sun is glad or glitters. That is how I explain the idiom quoted
by Staid. 1, 463. 2, 520: the sun goes gilded = sets, i.e. glitters
for joy. So in Kinderm. no. 165 : sunne z'gold gange; in a song
(Eschenbarg's Denkm. 240) : de sunne ging to golde ; and often
in the Weisthümer : so die sun för gold gat (1, 197j, als die
sonne in golt get (1, 501). Again, as the rising sun presents
a like appearance of splendour, we can now understand better
why the vulgar say he leaps for joy or dances on great festivals
(p. 291); he is called Hhe paschal piper,' Haupt's Zeitschr. 1,
547. Nor would I stop even there, I would also account for that
noise, that clang once ascribed to the rising and setting sun
(p. 720-1) by a deep affinity between the notiond of light and
sound, of colours and tones, Gramm. 2, 86-7. A strophe in
Albrecht's Titurel describes more minutely the music of sunrise :


742 DAY Am) NIGHT.

Darn&cli kand sich diu saune

wol an ir zirkel riden (writhe) :

der süeze ein überwunne,

ich wsen die süeze nieman möht erltden.

mit done dö diu zirkel morte ;

seitenklanc nnd vogelsano

ist alsam glich der golt gSn kapfer fuorte.

(Then in his orb the sun to whirling took, I ween such glut of
sweetness none might brook ; with dulcet din his orb he rolled,
that clang of strings or bird that sings were like as copper beside
gold.) Who can help thinking of the time-honoured tradition of
Memnov/s statiie, which at sunrise sent forth a sound like the
clang of a harpstring, some say a joyful tone at the rising and a
sad at the setting of the sun.^ Further on we shall be able to
trace some other fancies about the break of day and the fall of
night, to light and sound (see Suppl.).

But whither does the evening sun betake himself to rest, and
where is his chamber situated ? The oldest way of putting it is,
that he dives into the sea, to quench his glow in the cool wave.
The AS. Bth. (Bawl. 193*) : 'and J^edh monnum J^ynceiS pmi hio
on mere gauge, under see swife, )K)nne hio on setl gltdeS/ So
the ancients said Bvvai and mergere of the sun and stars, ' occasus,
interitus, vel solis in oceanum mersio ' (Pestus).^ Boeth. 4 (metr.
5) says of Bootes : cur mergat seras aequore flammas ; and metr. 6 :
nee, cetera cernens sidera mergi, oupit oceano tingere flammas;
which N. 223 translates : alliu zeichen sehende in sedel g&n,
niomer sih ne geröt hebadon (bathe) in demo merewazere» So,
' sol petit oceanum/ Rudlieb 4, 9. But the expression comes so
naturally to all who dwell on the seacoast, that it need not be a
borrowed one ; we find it in ON. ' s61 gengr i oegi^ Fomm, sog.
2, 302, and in MHG. ' der «e, d& diu sunne Af got ze resie,^ MS.
2, 66^. And, as other goddesses after making the round of the
country are bathed in the lake, it is an additional proof of the
Sun's divinity that ' she ' takes a hath, a notion universally preva-

1 Pansan. 1/42. PhiloBtr. Vita Apoll. 6, 4. Heroic. 4. Pliny 86, 11. Tao.
Ann. 2, 61. Juven. 15, 5.

' Setting in the lake is at the same time depositing the divine eye as a pledge
in the fomitain. I will add a neat phrase from Wolfram, Parz. 32, 24 : d6 hete dia
müede sonne ir liehten blic hinz ir gelesen.


DAYBREAK. 743

lent among the Slavs also : at eve she sinks into her bath to
cleanse herself, at mom she emerges clean with renewed grandeur.
The sea was thought to be the Sun's mother^ into whose arms
she sank at night.^

To inhabitants of the inland, the horizon was blocked by a
wood, hence the phrases : sdl gengr til vi9a/r (Biöm sub v. vidr) ;
Bolen g&r under vide (Ihre sub v.) ? But the AS. word in :
' h&dor S89gl wuldortorht gew&t under woiSa scriSan/ Andr. 1456,
seems to be a different thing, the OHG. weidi (p. 132 n.). We
say the sun goes behind the hills, to which corresponds the AS.
' sunne gew&t under niflan noRs/ sub terrae crepidinem, Andr.
1306 (conf. under neolum naesse, El. 831); a Dan. folksong:
solen gik til iorde, down to earth, DV. 1, 170 ; Ecke (Hagen) 129 :
diu sunne üz dem himel gie. Or, the sun is dovm, MHG. ' der
sunne (here masc.) hinder geg&t,' MS. 2, 192^ (see Suppl.).*

We will now examine other formulas, which express daybreak
and nightfall without any reference to the sun.

What is most remarkable is, that day was imagined in the
shape of an animal, which towards morning advances in the sky.
Wolfram begins a beautiful watchman's song with the words :
' sine Jclawen durch die wölken sint gestagen (his claws through the
clouds are struck), er sttget üf mit grözer kraft, ih sih ihn gr&wen,
den tac;' and in part third of Wh. (Cass. 317*) we read: 'daz
diu wölken w&ren grä, und der tac sine cid hete geslagen durch die
naht.^ Is it a bird or a beast that is meant f for our language
gives claws to both. In AS. there is a proper name Doeg-hrefn,
Beow. 4998, which in OHG. would be Taka-hraban ; and Beow.
3599 describes daybreak in the words: 'hrsafn bläca heofones
Wynne bll8-heort bodöde,' niger corvus coeli gaudium laeto corde
nuntiavit.^ That piercing with the claw to raise a storm (p. 633)
makes one think of an eagle, while an Oriental picture, surprisingly


^ Hannsoh, Slay. myth. p. 281, who oonnects with it the splashing with water
at the Enpalo feast, and deriyes that name from knpel, k%piel.

' Esth. pääw katsab metsa ladwa, the sun walks on Üie tips of the wood.

* Qndr. 116, 2 : * der sunne sohtn gelao verborgen hinter den wölken ze
GuMtrdte yerre ' I understand no better than Geiläte (p. 789) ; but both seem to
mean the same thing.

4 So in a Weisthum (3, 90) : ' de sunne uppe dem hogesten gewest clawendich,*

* Conf. volucrU dies, Hor. Od. ill. 28, 6. iv. 18, 16.

VOL. II. Z


744 DAY AND NIGHT.

similar, suggests rather tHe king of beasts^ who to ns is thebear.^
Ali Jelebi in bis Hamaynn-nameb (Diez p. 153) describes tbe
beginning of day in langnage bombastic it may be, yet doubtless
a faithful reflex of ancient imagery : ' When the falcon of the
nest of the firmament had scattered the nightbirds of the flicker-
ing stars from the meadow of heaven, and at sight of the daws
of the lion of day the roe of mnsk- scented night had fled from
the field of being into the desert of non-existence/ The night,
a timid roe, retires before the mighty beast of day : a beautiful
image, and fall of life. Wolfram again in another song makes
day press forward with resistless force (see Snppl.).

But the dawn is also pictured in human guise, that of a beautiful
youth, sent like Wuotan's raven as ha/rhinger of day : ' daeg by8
Dryhtnes sond^ says the Lay of Bunes. And in this connexion
we ought to consider the formation of such names as B^dldoeg,
Swipice^, etc., for gods and heroes. This messenger of the gods
stations himself on the mountain's top, and that on tiptoe, like the
beast on his claws, that he may the sooner get a glimpse of the
land : ' jocund day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops,'
Bom. and J. 8, 5 j a popular image, I have little doubt, and one
that Hebel also uses about Sunday morning : ' und lisli uf de
zeche goht und heiter uf de berge steht de sunntig.' He climbs
and pushes on swiftly, irrepressibly : der tac stigende wart. Trist.
8942. der tac begund herdringen, Wolfd. 124. In AS. ' ]A W89S
morgen leoht scofen and scynded* (praecipitatus et festinatus,
shoved and shindied), Beow. 1828. Hence our poets call him
der riehe, the mighty, as they do Grod (p. 20) : riche als6 der tac,
MS. 1, 163\ riche muotes alsam der tac^ Wigal. 5222. der tac
wil geriehen (prevail, prosper), MS. 1, 27^. 2, 28^; he is not to be
checked, he chases night away. Put impersonally : th6 iz zi dage
want (turned), Otfr. iii. 8, 21 ; but also : der tac wil niht erwinden
(turn aside, give it up), MS. 1, 147^. merge fruo^ als der tac
ersta/rJeet (gathers strength)^ Eracl. 587. d6 die naht der tac
vertreip, Prauend. 47. 58. He hurls her from her throne, and
occupies it himself : ez taget, diu naht muoz ah ir trone, den sie
ze Kriechen hielt mit ganzer vrdne^ der tac wil in besitzen, MS.
1, 2^; conf. ßatrCKeveiv said of the sun (see SappL).

^ The Arabs call the first glimmer of dawn the wolf$ toil, Büekert's Hariri 1,
215.


DAYBREAK. 745

Sometimes it appears as if tHe day, whether pictured as man
or as beast^ were tetliered, and delayed in dawning : li^ata,fune
ligcUa dies, Beinh. Ixiv ; he approaches slowly, hindered by the
bands : ein nacht doch nicht gepunden ist an einen stekchen, hoer
ich sagen, Sachenw. 22, 80. Has that in Fergftt 1534, 'quam
die dach ghestriet in die sale,' anything to do with this ? In a
Hangarian fairy-tale (Mailath 1, 137), midnight and dawn are so
tied up, that they cannot get forward, and do not arrive among
men. Stieres Yolksm. pp. 3. 5. One MHG. poem- represents day
as on sale and to be had for money, Zeitschr. f. d. a. 1, 27 ^ like
a slave bound by a cord ?

The Romance tongues (not the Teut.) often signify the break
of day by a word meaning to prick : Fr. poindre, Sp. ptimtar,
apuntar (said of the sun also, p. 738}, It. spuntare; thus, ^ la
pointe du jour, at daybreak. This may indeed be understood of
the day's first advance, as though it presented a sharp point, but
also it may refer to day as a rider who spurs his steed, or to the
tramping and trotting of a beast, which is also poindre^ Reinh.
p. xxzix (see Suppl.).

But more significant and impressive are the phrases that
connect with daybreak (as well as with sunrise) the idea of a
flutter and rustle, which might be referred to the pinions of the
harbinger of day, but which carries us right up to the highest
god^ whose sovereign sway it is that shakes the air. Wuotan,
when spoken of as Wuomo, W6ma^ is a thrill of nature (p. 144),
such as we actually experience at dawn, when a cool breeze
sweeps through the clouds. Expressions in point are the AS.
dceg-woma Csddm. 199, 26. Cod. exon. 175, 4. dxegred-woma,
Andr. 125, 8. Ood. exon. 179, 24. morgen-sweg, Beow. 257.
dyne on dsdgrSd, Cssdm. 289, 27. ser dsdgrMe ]?89t se dyne becom,
Csddm. 294, 4 ; conf. Introd. to Andr. and El. xxx. xxxi, and the
allusion to Donar^ p. 736. To this I would trace the 'clang'
sent forth by the light of sunrise and sunset. And I venture to
put the same sense on an O. Fr. formula^ which occurs only in
Carolingian poems: Grerard De Yiane 1241, Hon matin par «on
Vaube esclarcie.' Cod. reg. 7183, 3', ' un matin par son Vaube,
quant el fu aparue ' ; ibid. 5% ' un matin par son Vaube, quant
li jor esclaira ' ; ibid. 161% ' au matin par son Vaube, si con chante
li gaus (gallus)/ Cod. 7535^ 69% ' a matin par son Vaube* I


746 DAY AND NIGHT.

add a few instanoes from the Charlemagne^ ed. Michel 239^ ' al
matin sun la (f ) lalbe ' ; 248. 468. 727, ^ al matin par sun lalhe ' ;
564, 'le matin par sun lalbe/ Was it not originally per «onum
(sonitam) albae ? Later they seem to have taken it in a different
sense, viz. son=ssnmmum, summitas, Fr. sommet; Michel in
Oloss. to Charlem. 183 gives a passage which spells ' par «om
lanbe,' and elsewhere we find ' par son leve,' on the top of the
water, 'en snn eel pin,' up on this pine, Charlem. 594. 760, 'en
son,' on the top, Renart 2617. In Provencal, Perabras 182, 'lo
mati sus en lalba ' ; 8484, ' lo matinet svs lalba.' In It., Baovo
p. m. 84. 99. 155, nna mattina su V alba, i.e. sar I'aube, which
gives only a forced meaning, as though it meant to say ' when the
alba stood over the mountain top.'

The English use the expression ^peep of day' : 'the sun began
to peep ' says a Scotch song, Minstr. 2, 430 ; so the Danes have
pipefrem : ' hist piper solen ^r^m, giv Gud en lyksom dag ! ' says
Thom. Kingo, a 17th cent, poet (Nyerup's Danske digtek. mid-
delalder 1, 235). Both languages now make it a separate word
from 'to pipe,' Dan. 'pibe.' But, just as in the Pr. 'par son'
the sound became a coming in sight, so the old meaning of
' piping ' seems to have got obliterated, and |b new distinction to
have arisen between peep and pipe, Dan. pipe and pibe. Oar
Gryphius therefore is right in saying (p. m. 740), 'the moon
pipes up her light.' It is the simultaneous breaking forth of
light and noise in the natural phenomenon. We have the same
thing in * skreik of day' (Hunter's Hallamsh. gloss, p. 81), which
can mean nothing but ' shriek ' ; and in the Nethl. ' krieh, krieken
van den dag,' Plattd. 'de krik vam dage' for the morning
twilight, the chirking (so to speak) of day, as the chirping insect
is called cricket, kriek, krikel, krekel (cicada). A remarkable
instance of the two meanings meeting in one word is found in
the Goth, svigla {avX6<:), OHG. suekala (fistula), by the side of
the AS. swegel (lux, sether), OS. suigli (lux).

Our own word anbrechen (on-break) implies a crash and a
shaking, MHG. s4 do der ander tac M brach (Prauend. 53. 109) ;^

1 Conf. Bon. 48. 68 ; and I must quote Ls. 8, 259 : ' d6 brach der tao dA herfSr,
din naht yon dem tac wart klnent (became yawning, was split ? conf. sapra p. 558),
diu sonne wart wol echtnent.' The Gate Fran has twice (1539. 2451) : * dd der tac
durch daz tach (thatch) luhte nnde brach.^ We might pern, derive * üf brach * from
brehen, bat we now say anbrechen, anbrach.


DAYBREAK. TWILIGHT. i4i

EngL break (as well as f^h, blush) of day. Span, 'el alva
TompeJ O. Sp. 'apriessa cantan los gallos^ e qaieren quebrar
albores^' Cid 235. ' ya quiebran los albores^ e vinie la manana '
460. ' trocida es la noche^ ya quiebran los albores ' 3558. O. Fr.
' Faabe crieve,* Ren. 1 186. ' ja estoit Tanbe erevee ^ 1 1 75. ' tantost
con Pan be se ereva' 16057. Prov. 'can lalba fo crevada/ Perabr.
3977. This romper, qaebrar, crevar (Lat. crepare) is the quiver-
ing and qaaking of the air that precedes sanrise, accompanied
by a perceptible chill ; and crepusculum contains the same idea.
The Spaniard says also 'el alva se rie/ laughs j and the Arab
'the morning sneezes' (see Suppl.).^

But here the notion of Twilight, and the oldest words by which
it is expressed, have to be examined more minutely.

The very first glimmer of dawn, or strictly that which precedes
it, the latter end of night, is expressed by the Groth. uhtvo
{ewvxov), Mk. 1, 35, OHQ. vJitd, or as N. spells it uohta, OS.
uktay AS. uhte (most freq. ' on nhtan/ Caddm. 20, 26. 289, 31.
294, 2. God. exon. 443, 24. 459, 17. 460, 14. 'on uhtan mid
89rd89ge,' Beow. 251), ON. Sita (Biörn says, from 3 to 6 a.m.).
The root has never been explained ; probably the Swiss Uchtland
and Westphalian üchte may be named from uht&. Closely
bordering on it is the AS. cerdceg (primum tempus), Beow. 251.
2623. 5880 ; ON. drdagi (conf. &rdegis, mane) ; an OHQ. £rtac or
ertago is unknown to me. Next comes the notion of diluculum,
ON. da^sbruriy dagsbiwrmi, dagsbirta, from brün = ora, margo, as
if supercilium, and biarmi, birta=lux : but OHG. tagarod, tagarut
(Graff 2, 486-7) ; AS. d4ßgred, Cffldm. 289, 27. 294, 4; MLG.
dagerat, En. 1408 ; M. Nethl. dagheraet (Huyd. op. St. 2, 496) :
a compound whose last syllable is not distinctly traceable to rub
(ruber), but is perhaps allied to the rodur, röiSull (coelum) on
p. 699. The gender also wavers between masc. and fem.^ We
catch glimpses of a mythic personality behind, for N. in Cap.
102 translates Leucothea (the white bright goddess, a Perahta)
by ' der tagerod/ and carries out the personification : ' ube der


^ B&fikeri*8 Hariri 1, 375. In the Novelas of Maria do Zayaa 1, 8 is a Bong
oegizming : ' si se m el alva,* elsewhere she has ' qaando el alva maestra tu aUgre
Tita; ' oonf. p. 602 on laoghter that shakes one. The Ital. * fare ridert una botta '
is an expressiYO phrase for shaking a cask so that it rons over.

s Yet conf. OHO. morgan-röt, -röto, and -rötft (Graff 2, 486); MHG. ülgdnder
moigenröt (is it morgen r6t?), Walth. 4, 6 ; but daz morgenrdt, Trist. 8286. 9462.


74S DAY AND NIGHT.

tagerod sina facohelun inzundet habe * have kindled his torches.
And in Urkunden we meet with a man's name Dagharoi (Falke's
Trad. corb. p. 5), also a place named Wirin-tagaroth (Höfer's
Zeitschr. 2, 170). When OHG. glosses put tagar6d for crepus-
culum^ it comes of unacquaintance witji the Latin idiom ; it can
be nothing but diluculum^ aurora. In O.Fr. there is a woman's
name Brunmatin^dAwn, Ren. 15666. 15712. 16441 [conn, with
dagsbrAn, Suppl.] . The ON, has no dagsrod, but it has solarrod
aurora, Pomm. sog. 8, 846. [Sctppl. adds 'meS dagroedbm/
Ssam. 24^]. The M. Nethl. has a second term dachgrake,
dagherake (fern.), grdk&ii for the night's blackness brightening
into gray j so MH6. der gräwe tac, daz grawe licht, MS, 2, 49*,
der tac wil grawen, Wolfr. 4, 11; 'si k6s den alten jungen
grdwen grisen (tac)' ; ^junc unde grd der morgen üf g&t,' MsH. 3,
427^ (see Suppl.).

After aurora follows the full morning, Goth, maurgins, OHG.
morkan, OS. morgcm, ON. morgun, strictly avpiov. I suspect it
has a sense allied to the day's ' breaking or bursting,' for the
Goth, gamadrgjan means to cut and shorten, like ginnen, secare
(see Suppl.).

To names for the rising day stand opposed those for the sink-
ing. For oyp'i, o^la Ulphilas puts andanahti, the times towards
night, but also 8ei}}u (serum), as the Mod. Greeks call evening
the slow, late, to ßpdhv^ and morning the swift, early, to ra^Vf
therefore also the short (conf. gamadrgjan). The OHG. dpant,
OS. dband, AS. cefen, ON. aptan is of one root with aba, afbar,
aptr, wliich expresses a falling off, a retrograde movement. The
OHG. demar, our dämmentng, stands especially for crepusculum,
and is connected with AS. dim, Lith. tamsus, Slav, temni [dark,
from tma, tenebrss] . AS. cefenrim, CBfenglom crepusculum. What
has peculiar interest for us, the Tagaröd above is supported by
an undoubtedly personal Apantrod, a giant of our heroic legend :
Abentrot is the brother of Ecke and Fasolt, in both of whom we
recognised phenomena of the sea and air (pp. 239. 636). If day
was a godlike youth, morning and evening twilight may have
been conceived as the giants Tagarod and Apantrod (see
Suppl.).! '

> MHG. der dbentrM, Walth. 30, 15 ; but * do diu abentrot (f.) witen ir lieht der
erden b6t/ Uolrich 1488.


DAYBREAK. TWILIGHT. 743

To the Greeks and Bomans Tld)^, Aurora, was a goddess, and
she is painted in the liveliest coloars. She rises from the coitch
{ex Xej^iwv, as onr sun goes to bed, p. 740) of her husband
Tithonos, Od. 5, 1; she is the early-bom (iJptYeveta), the rosy-
fingered (poBoBd/cTvXo^, H. 1, 477) ; she digs her ruddy fingers
into the clouds as day does his claws, p. 743 ; she is also called
Xpvcodpovo^ golden-throned, like Hera and Artemis. The Slavs,
instead of a goddess of dawn, appear to have had a god, Tutri-
bogh (see Suppl.).

There is another belief of the Slavs and Hungarians, which,
having strayed over to us, must not be passed over in silence.
In Hungary dawn is called hajnal (Esth. haggo), and the watch-
men there cry to one another : ' hajnal vagyon szep piros, hajnal,
hajnal vagyon ! ' aurora est (erumpit) pulcra purpurea, aurora,
aurora est. The same word heynal, eynal is in use among the
Poles, who cry: ^heynal äwita!' aurora lucet (Linde 1, 623).
Now Dietmar of Merseburg tells us under the year 1017 (7, 50
p. 858) : ' Audivi de quodam baculo, in cujus summitate manus
erat, unum in se ferreum tenens circulum, quod cum pastore illius
villae Silivellun (Selben near Merseb.), in quo (1. qua) is fuerat,
per omnes domes has singulariter ductus, in prime introitu a
portitore sue sic salutaretur: vigila Hennil, vigila! sic enim
ruBtica vocabatur lingua, et epulantes ibi delicate de ejusdem se
tneri custodia stulti autumabant.' And, coming to our own
times, I quote from Ad. Kuhn's Mark, sagen p. 330 : ' An old
forester of Seeben by Salzwedel used to say, it was once the
custom in these parts, on a certain day of the year, to fetch a tree
out of the common- wood, and having set it up in the village, to
dance round it, crying : Hennil, Hennil wache ! * Can this have
come out of Dietmar ? and can this ' Hennil, wake 1 ' and
'Hennil vigila!' so far back as the 11th cent, have arisen
through misunderstanding the Hung, vagyon (which means ' est,'
not ' vigilat ') ? Anyhow, the village watchman or shepherd,
who went round to all the houses, probably on a certain day of
the year, carrying the staff on which was a hand holding an iron
ring, and who called out those words, seems to have meant by
them some divine being. A Slovak song in KoUar (Zpievanky
p. 247, conf. 447) runs thus :


760 DAY AND NIGHT.

Eainal svit^^ gi2 den biely, H. shines, now day is white^

stavayte velky i maly ! arise ye great and small 1

dosti sme gilt dloho spali. long enough have we now slept.

Bohemian writers try to identify this Hajnal, Heyndl, HennU
with a Servian or Bohemian god of herdsmen Honidlo;^ I know
not how it may be about this god, but honidlo is neuter in form,
and the name of a tool, it must have been gonidlo in Polish, and
totally unconnected with eynal, heynal (see Suppl.) .

We saw that the rising sun uttered a joy fid sound, p. 741-2
that the rustling dawn laughed^ p. 747; this agrees with the
oft-repeated sentiment, that the day brings bliss, the night sorrow.
We say, ' happy as the day,^ and Shaksp. 'jocund day ' ; Beinolt
von der Lippe 'er verbilde als der dag'; MS. 2, 192 of depart-
ing day, ' der tac sin wunne verlät/ Especially do birds express
their joy at the approach of day : ^ gsBst inne swsef o]?]?8Bt hreefn
bl&ca heofenes wynne bliff-heort boddde,' Beow. 8598 ; the heaven's
bliss that the raven blithe-hearted announces is the breaking day.
' I am as glad as the hawks that dewy-faced behold the dawn
(dögglitir dagshrun sid}/ SsBm. 167*; ' nu ver8r hann sv& feginn,
semfiigl degi/ Vilk. saga, cap. 39, p. 94; 'Horn was as &in o'
fight as is the foule of the light when it ginneth dawe,' Horn and
Bimen. 64, p. 307 ; ' ich warte der frouwen min, reht als des tages
diu kleinen vogelUn/ MS. 1, 51*^; 'fröit sich min gemüete, sam
diu kleinen vogellin, so si sehent den morgenschin/ MS. 2, 102*.
Hence the multitude of poetic set-phrases that typify the break
of day by the song of cocks (han-krät) or nightingales. Biarka-
mfil near the beginning : ' dag^ er upp kominn, dynja hana
fia'Srar,' cocks' feathers make a din. ' ä la manana, quando los
gallos cantaran,' Cid 317. 'li coo cantoient, pros fu del esclairier.'
' I'aube est percie, sesclere la jomee, cil oisellon chantent en la
ramee.' ' biz des morgens vruo, daz diu nahtigal rief,' En. 12545
(see Suppl.),

Night is represented as swift, overtaking, taking unawares,
dot) j/iif, n. 10, 394, for does not she drive a chariot ? She faMs
or sinks from heaven, 'la nuit tombs, nuit tombante, ^ la iowhee de
la nuit; ' she bricht ein (breaks or bursts in, down), whereas day
bricht an (on, forth) ; she gathers all at once, she surprises. In

> Jnngmaim 1, 670. 724. Hanosoh pp. 369-70.


NIGHTFALL. 751

Matth. 14^ 15, where the Yulg. has ' hora jam praeteriit/ Lather
G^rmani^es it into 'die nacht ^aZZ^ daher ^ (on, apace); and 0.
Germ, already used the yerbs ana gan,fallan in this sense : &band
ansih a/na geit, ther dag ist stnes sindes, O. v. 10, 8. in ane
gaenda naht, N. Bth. 81. der &bent begunde ane gän, Mar. 171.
schiere viel d6 diu naht an, Both. 2653. do din naht ane gie. Er.
3108. nnz daz der äbent ane gie, Flore 3468. Ls. 1, 314.
Wigal. 1927. 6693. als der Äbent ane get, Wigal. 4763. biz daz
der ftbent ane lac, Ls. 1, 243. din naht diu gat mich an, Wolfd.
1174. din naht get uns vaste zuo, Livl. chron. 5078. In the same
way 9igen (sink) : do der &bent zuo seic, Dint. 3, 68. also iz zuo
deme &bande seic 3, 70. iiu aeig ouch der &bent ziio, Frauend. 95,
20. diu naht begunde zuo sigen, Rab. 102. begunde dgen an,
367. do diu naht ztu> seic, Dietr. 62^. diu naht siget an. Ecke
106. der &bent seic ie nfther, Gudr. 878, 1. ze tal diu sunne was
genigen, und der äbent ziw gesigen, Diut. 351, diu .naht begunde
sigen am, Mor. 1620. 3963.^ diu tageweide diu wil hin (the day's
delight it will away), der Äbent siget vaste zuo, Amgb. 2*. der
tach is ouch an uns gewant, uns siget der &vent in die hant,
Ssp. pref. 193. in der sinkenden naht. Cornel, releg., Magd.
1605, F. 5*. in simMichter nacht, Schoch stud. D. 4'. And we
still say 'till sinking night.' ^ Much the same are: n& der
äbent, diu naht zuo gefloz (came flowing up), Troj. 13676. 10499.
AS. 'aefen com sigeltorht swungen,' Andr. 1246. — -But this set-
ting in, gathering, falling can also come softly, secretly, like
a thief: diu naht begunde slichen an (creep on), Dietr. 68^. n&
was din naht geslichen gar über daz gevilde (fields), Christoph.
413. do nü diu naht her sleich, und diu vinster in begreif (dark-
ness caught him) 376: s6 thiu naht bifeng, Hel. 129, 16. dd
begreif in die nacht, Flörsheim chron. in Miinch 3, 188. wie
mich die nacht begrif, Simplic. 1, 18. hett mich die nacht schon
begriffen, Götz v. Berl. p. m. 164. In MHG. we find predicated
of night 'ez benemen,' to carry off (the light? the victory?):
unz inz diu naht benam, Gudr. 879, 1. ne hete iz in diu naht
benomen, Diut. 3, 81 (conf. Gramm. 4, 334). Hroswitha says, in
Fides et spes : ' dies abut, nox incumbit/

^ Both times * segen ' in text ; if sigen an (yinoere) were meant, we ehotild ex-
pect the word day in the dative.

* Goethe says sweetly : For Evening now the earth was rocking, And on the
moontaina hung the Night.


752 DAY AND NIGHT.

Clearly in many of these expressions Night is regarded as a
hostile, evil power, in contrast to the kindly character of Day^ who
in tranquil ease climbs slowly np above the mountains ; hence
night is as leisurely about endings as she is quick in setting in :
' diu naht gemeehlich ende nam^' slowly the night took endings
Frauend. 206, 21, 'Night is no man's friend' says the proverb,
as though she were a demon (see SuppL).

Between Day and Night there is perennial strife. Night does
not rule till day has given up the contest : ' unz der tac Uez einen
strit/ Parz. 423, 15. 'der tac nam ein ende, diu naht den sige
gewan,' the victory won, Wolfd. 2025. ' do der tac verqiuim, und
diu naht daz lieht nam,' En. 7866. ' Nu begunde euch strucJien
der tac, daz stn schin vil nftch gelac, unt daz man durch diu
wölken sach, des man der naht ze boten jach, manegen stem der
balde gienc, wand er der naht herberge vienc. Nach der naht
baniere kom.sie selbe schiere/^ In this pleasing description
the stars of evening precede the Night herself, as pioneers and
standard-bearing heralds, just as the morning star was messenger
of Day.*

On p. 742 we had a sunrise taken from the Titurel ; a de-
scription of failing day, which immediately precedes, deserves to
stand here too :

Dd diu naht zuo slichen

durch nieman wolte l&zen,

und ir der tac entwichen

muoste, er fuor && wester hin die strazen,

alsd daz man die erd in sach verslinden,

unz er ir möht empfliehen,

do kund' er sich von orient ftf winden.*

Earth devours the departing day (see Suppl.).

I find the older poets dwelling more on the sense of gloominess :

1 The Da j 'gan founder then and fall, and mach was shent his wonted sheen,
till thro' the clouds might they be seen, whom oonriers of the Night we call, foil
many a star that fleetly fares, and harbourage for her prepares. Next her banners,
soon Night herself came on.

3 Lucifer interea praeco soandebat Olympo, Walthar. 1188. Lucifer ducebat
diem, Aen. 2, 801. Eyening is called in Banskr.rajaniifiuA^/ui, night*s mouth, which
reminds one of * Holla's mouth : ' so is morning ahamukha, day's mouth. Bopp's
gloss. 27*. 284^.

' Then Night came creeping on, for no man would she stay, and Day must
needs be gone, retreating down the western way ; the earth devouring him thou
see'st, until that he might from her flee, then could he hoist him up from east.


NIGHTFALL. NIGHT. 753

vv^ 6p<f>vaiff the duskj^ in Homer. ' thö warth &bancl caman^ naht
mid neflu/ HeL 170, 25. ^ die finstere ragende nacht/ gloomy low-
rii^g (j'^tting)* Schreckensgast, Ingoist. 1590, p. 114. 'die eitele
xuid finstere nacht,' Kommann's Mona Ven. 829. 'nipende niht,'
Beow. 1088. 1291, conf. genip (caligo). 'scaduhelm/ Beow. 1293.
^nihthelm geswearc deorc ofer dryhtguman* 3576. 'nihthehn to
glad,' Andr. 123. El. 78 : to her, as a goddess, is ascribed, quite
in the spirit of onr olden time, a terrible and fearful helmet, like a
cloak-of-darkness, ^niht helmade^ (put on her helmet) we are told
in Andr. 1306. Still finer perhaps is that ' eye of black night/
tcekaivrj^ wkto^ 6fi/ia in Aeschylus (Pers. 428) for thick dark-
ness as opposed to the bright eye of night, the moon, p. 702
(see Suppl.).^

The poetic images I have here collected remove all doubt as to
Day and Night having been in the remotest antiquity both alive
and divine. But the sentiment must very early have lost some
of its hold over the Teutons, from the time they laid aside that
name for day, which of itself bespoke his kinship with the gods.

Beckoning by nights instead of days does indeed rest on the
observance of lunar time (p. 708), but may have another reason
too, the same that prompted men to count winters and not sum-
mers. The heathens used to fix their holy festivals for, or prolong
them into, the night, especially those of the summer and winter
solstices, as we see by the Midsummer and Christmas fires ; the
fires of Easter and May also bear witness to festal nights. The
Anglo-Saxons kept a hcerfestniht (ON. haustnött, haustgrima),
the Scandinavians a höhunott (F. Magn. Lex. 1021). Beda in his
De temp. rat. cap. 13 has preserved a notable piece of informa-
tion, though its full meaning is beyond our ken : ^ Incipiebant
annum (antiqui Anglorum populi) ab octavo cal. Jan. die, ubi nunc
natale Domini celebramus ; et ipsam noctem, nunc nobis sacro-
sanctam, tunc gentili vocabulo modranecht (mödra niht),* i.e. ma-
trum noctem appellabant ob causam, ut suspicamur, ceremoniarum
quas in ea pervigiles agebant.^ Who were these mothers ?

1 Lnages now familiar to us, about qaenohing the lamps of day, I haye not met
with in the old poets ; but the night bums her tapers too. Shaksp. describes the
end of night by * night's candles are burnt/ Bom. & J. 8, 6.

' Afzelins 1, 4. 13 has no right to speak of a jnodematt, which is not founded
on Norse docs., but simply borrowed from Beda. [Can * mddre niht ' have meant
' muntere nacht,' wakeful night ? conf. * perrigiles.']


CHAPTER XXIV.
SUMMER AND WINTER.

The Seasons^ which, like day and night, depended on the near-
ness or distance of the san, have maintained their personality a
great deal more yigoronsly and distinctly. Their slow revolntion
goes on with a measured stateliness, while the freqaent change of
day and night soon effaced the recollection of their having once
been gods.

Day and night resemble sammer and winter in another point,
viz. that the break of day and the arrival of Summer ai« greeted
with joyfal songs by the birds, who mourn in silence daring night
and winter. Hence the Eddie kenningar of gUSifugla (laetitia
volacnim) for summer, and mt oh siriS' fugla (dolor et angor
avium) for winter. This sympathy of nature finds utterance no
end of times in the lays of our minnesingers (see SuppL).

The olden time seems at first to have recognised only two
seasons in the year, afterwards three, and lastly four. To this
the very names bear witness. Our jahr, Goth, jer, OHQ-. jar, M.
Nethl. jaer, OS. ger, AS. gear, Engl, year, ON. är, is plainly the
Pol. iar, iaro, Boh. gar, garo, which signify spring.^ In the
same way the Slavic leto, lieto, liato, strictly summer, and seem-
ingly akin to our lenz, OHG. lenzo, lengiz, MHG. lenze^ lengez,
AS. lenden, lengten (lent, spring) has come by degrees to cover
the whole year. Thus both j&r and Idto mean the warmer season
(spring or summer) ; and southern nations reckoned by them, as
the northern did by winters.

Ulphilas renders Sro^ by jer, and ivtaxno^ either by aßn, Gral.
4, 10, or aiapni, John 18, 13, a word that has died out of our
language everywhere else, but still lingers in the Gothic names
Athanagildus, Athanaricus (A]?nagilds, A}mareiks) ; it seems

^ The Pol. iar looks like Hfi, bat this is nnderstood to be for fiap^ ficap, Lai.
ver for Yerer, yeser, closely «onn. with Lith. wasara (aestas) and Sanskr. Taaanta,
Benfey 1, 309. Of the same root seems the Slav, vesna, wiosna (spring), but hardlj
the ON. Y&8a'6r, whioh means sharp winter.

754


SEASONS. 755

akin to ero^, perhaps to the Slavic g6ä, godfna, which in Buss,
and Serv. mean a year, while in O.Sl. they stood, as the Pol.
g6d, Boh. h6d, hodine still stand, for time in general. The
relation between Sto^ and iviavro^ remains uncertain, for in Od.
1, 16 (Ito9 IjfKde ireptirXo/iivoDv iviaxrr&v, a year went past with
circling seasons) iviavrol are sections of a year^ while other
accounts make an evLavro^ contain three en;. This comp.
iviavTo^ holds in it the simple evo^, Lat. annus ^ (see Suppl.).

The year was supposed to make a circle, a ring (orbis, circulus) :
järes umbi'hringj jär-hrmg, umbi-huurfl; MHG. j&res umbe-ganc,
-ring, -vart, -trit; and the completion and recommencement of
this ring was from a very early period the occasion of solemn
festivities. Eligius preaches: 'nuUus in kal. Jan. nefanda aut
ridicnlosa, vetnlos aut cervalos aut joticos faciat, neque mensas
super noctem componat, neque strenas aut bibitiones superfluas
exerceat/ This was apparently a Celtic and Boman custom,
'strenae ineunte anno' are mentioned by Suetonius (Cal.42. Aug.
57)^ and the holy mistletoe was plucked amid joyful cries of
' a-gui-lan-neuf 1 ' [Michelet 2, 17: guy-na-n^ maguillanneu,
gni-gne-leu. Suppl.]. Nothing of the kind seems to have been
known in Germany ; but it is worth while to notice the New-
year's hymns and wishes iu Clara Hätzlerin's book as late as the
14th cent. (57^. 77% espec. 196-— 201 in Haltaus's ed.) where the
year is pictured as a newborn babe, a newborn god, who will grant
the wishes of mortals. Immediately, no doubt, this referred to
Christmas and the Saviour's birth, in places where the new year
began with that day ; yet some heathen practices seem to have
got mixed up with it too^ and I cannot overlook the use in these
hymns of the bare adj. new, without the addition of 'year' or
'child' (just as in naming the new-moon, p. 710, n^, niuwi) :
[' des günn dir alles der newgebom l ' this the Newborn grant
thee all, Hatzl. 196b. So in other new-year's wishes : ' wünsch
ich dir ain vil gät jär zu disem new,^ Wolkenst. p. 167. 'gen
disem saeligen guoten newen,^ Ad. Keller's Altd. ged. p. 10. —
Suppl.] •

Otherwise I hardly find the yea/r as a whole (conf. the riddle,
p. 737) exalted into a person, except in adjurations, spells and

^ For amnns, says Bopp*8 Gloss. Skr. 16^ ; Benfey 1, SIO explains htavrlxi by
Skr. axn&yat, hvi being amft, new-moon.


756 SUMMER AND WINTER.

cnrses : ' sani mir daz heileejar / ' so (help) me holy year, Ls. 1,
287. Haupt's Zeitschr. 7, 104. The two following refer to the
year's commencement only : ' ein scelec jar gang dich an ! ' a
blessed year betide thee, Ls. 8, 111 ; and ^ daz dich ein veiges jar
müez ane komen ! ' a doomed (fey) year be thy dole, Ls. 1, 317.
In AS. ^0*8 ]?»t o'Ser com gear in geardas,' Beow. 2260 (see
SuppL).

But even in the earliest times the year had fallen into halvesj
to which AS. and ON. give the curious name of missere, misseri,
and the AS. poems seem to reckon chiefly by these. We find
'missera worn,' store of m., CsBdm. 71, 10; ' fela missera ' 180,
23. Beow. 306; 'hund missera,' Beow. 2996. 3586 = the 50
winters in 4413; 'misserum fröd, missarum frM,' Csddm. 104,
30. 141, 16 (wise with age, like 'gearum, dsegrime, fymdagam
fr6d,' Gramm. 1, 750). In the Edda I find only 212* ^ 'ein
missen^ (per unum annum), and 'sams misseris' (eodem anno) ;
but the Grr&g&s has also missen (semes trium). The etymology of
the word is not easy : one would expect to find in it the words
half (medius, dimidius) and year, but the short vowel of the
penult conflicts with the ON. 4r and AS. gear, and it appears
to be masc. besides (einn misseri, not eitt m.) ; the ON. misseri
(bad year, annonae Caritas, neut.) is quite another thing. Again,
why should the d of the AS. midde (Groth. midja, OHG. mitti)
have passed into ss ? It must be admitted however, that in
the relation of Lat. medius to Goth, midja we already observe a
disturbance in the law of change ; misseri may have come down
and continued from so remote an antiquity that, while in appear-
ance denying its kindred, it will have to own them after all, and
the ' miss ^ is in the same predicament as the Gr. fiiao^, fiiaa-o^
compared with Sanskr. madhyas, or ßvatro^ =ßv06^. No ^ mis-
seri, missiri ' meets us in the OHG. remains, but the lost hero-
lays may have known it, as even later usages retain the reckoning
by half-years ; when the Hildebr.-lied says ' ih wall6ta sumaro
enti ivintro sehstic nr lante,^ it means only 60 misseri (30 sum-
mers and 30 winters), which agrees with the ' 80 years ' of the
more modem folk-song; and we might even guess that the
'thirteen years' and 'seven years' in Nib. 1082 and 1327, 2,
which make Chriemhild somewhat old for a beauteous bride, were
at an older stage of the epos understood of half-years« In the


SEASONS. 757

North, where winter preponderates, so many winters stood for
so many years, and ^ttUfvetra gamall' means a twelve- year-old.
That in OHG. and even MH6. summer and winter represent the
essential division of the year, I infer even from the commonly
used adverbs snmerlanc, winterlanc, while we never hear of a
lengezlanc or herbestlanc; the ON. snmarlängr, vetrlängr, are
supplemented by a haustlängr (the whole autumn).

The Greek year has only three seasons. Sap, 0ipo^, x^ifuov,
autumn is left out. Our two great anniversaries, the summer
and winter solstices, marked off two seasons; the harvest-feast
at the end of Sept. and the fetching-in of summer are perhaps
sufficient proof of a third or fourth. The twofold division is
further supported by the AS. terms midsumor and midmnter,
ON. miffsumar, midvetr, which marked the same crises of solstice,
and had no midhearfest to compete with them ; an AS. midleneten
(Engl, midlent) does occur, and is about equivalent to our mit-
fasten. Now in what relation did the missere stand to midsumor
and midwinter ? The day (of 24 hours) likewise fell into two
halves of 12 hours each, the AS. dogor, ON. doegr ; and dogor
bears the same relation to dssg as missere to gear. Our ancient
remains have no tuogar attending upon tac, but a Gothic dogr by
the side of dags may be inferred from fidurdogs and ahtäudögs
in Ulphilas (see Suppl.).

Tacitus, after saying that the Germans cultivate grain only,
and neither enclose meadows nor plant orchards, adds : ' unde
annum quoque ipsum non in totidem digerunt species : hiems et
ver et fiestas intellectum ac vocabula habent ; auctumni perinde
nomen ac bona ignorantur.' Here auctumnus evidently refers to
garden-fruit and aftermath, while the reaping of corn is placed
in summer, and the sowing in spring. But when we consider,
that North Germany even now, with a milder climate, does not
get the grain in till August and September, when tBe sun is
lower down in the sky ; and that while August is strictly the
emte-month ^ and Sept. the herbst-month, yet sometimes Sept.
is called the augstin and October the herbst-month ; the Tacitean
view cannot have been universally true even in the earliest times.
Neither does the OHG. herpist, herbisty AS. hsarfest, seem at

^ OHG. aranmftndt, from aran (messis), Goth, (uana ; the 0. Saxons said
bevdd or fteo, HeL 78, 14. 79, 14 ; Ketnl. bouio, houwd.


758 SUMBCBB AND WINTER.

all yoanger than other very old words. More correct surely is
the statement we made before^ that as we go farther north in
Europe, there appear but two seasons in all, summer and winter ;
and as we go south, we can distinguish three, four, or even five.^
Then also for mythical purposes the two seasons are alone avail-
able, though sometimes they are called' spring and winter, or
spring and autumn > (see Snppl.).

With the Goth, vintrus (hiems) we have a right to assume a
masc. 8umru8 exactly like it, though ülph. in Mk 13, 28 (and
prob, in Matth. 24, 32 and Lu. 21, 30) rendered 6ipo^ by asans
(harvest-time). The declension follows from OHG. sumar^
sumaru (for a Goth, sumrs of 1 decl. would bring in its train
an OHG. somar) ; also from AS. sumor with dat. sumera, not
sumere. The ON. suma/r being neut. in the face of a masc. vetr,
OHG. wintar, AS. mnter, seems inorganic ; it must have been
masc. once. The root assumed in my Gramm. 2, 55 runs upon
sowing and reaping of crops.

The Edda takes us at once into the genealogy of these two
worthies. Sumar is the son of Sväauffr (Seem. 84^. Sn. 23. 127),
a name derived from sv&s (earns, proprius, domesticus), Goth.
8v6s, OHG. suäs, for he is one that blesses and is blest, and after
him is named all that is sweet and blithe (sv&slegt, blitt). But
the father of Vetr is named Vindloni or Vindsvalr (windbringer,
windcool), whose father again was Vasad^r (ibid.) the dank and
moist : a grim coldhearted kindred. But both sets, as we should
anticipate, come before us as giants, Sväsu'Sr and Sumar of a
good friendly sort, Vä.sa'Sr, Vindsvalr and Vetr of a malignant ;

1 Spaniards divide spring into primaverh and verano (great spring), see Don
Quiz. 2, 53 and Ideler 6, 805. After verano comes estio^ Fr. €t6, both maso., while
Ital. esta, estate remains fem, like aestas.

3 The Slavs too, as a race, hold with two principal seasons : summer and year
are both {d£«, i.e. the old year ends with winter, and with summer the new begins ;
Idto, like our jahr, is neut., and of course impersonal. Winter they call zimä
(fem.). When intermediate seasons have to be named, they say podUti (subaestas)
for spring, podzim (subhiems) for autumn. But other names have also come into
vogue, beside the garOj iaro above : Buss, and Boh. vesnä, PoL wiosna ; Slovdn.
vy-gred (e-grediens, in Germ. Garinthia auswärt), mlado Uto (young summer),
mladlhtie, po'tnland, «-pomZad, s-prot-tttie (fr. s-prot, against), all denoting spring;
the South Slavs espec. felt the need of parting spring from summer. Autumn is
in Serv. y^sen, Slovdn. y^zen or predzima (prae-hiems). Buss. Ösen. Zimk must be
very old, Lith. iiema, Gr. x^^f^^ ^^^- ^^^^fns. Skr. hemanta. Ova fiUhling, friO^ahr
(early year) is neither O. nor MHG., but formed during the last few cents, on the
model of printemps or primavera ; Spätling, spätjahr (late year) is aJso used for
autumn. On auswärts and einwärts conf. Schm. 1, 117. 4, 161.


SüMMEB. 759

80 that here again the twofold natare of giants (p. 528-9) is set
in a clear light. The Sh&Idskaparm&l puts them down among the
ancient iötnar : 209* 8omr (U. Sömir) ok SvasuSr, 210* Vindsvalr
ok Vi9arr (1. Vetr). Even now Summer and Winter are much
used as proper names, and we may suppose them to have been
such from the beginning, if only because [as names of seasons]
they do not agree with any in the Non-Teutonic tongues. An
Urkunde in Neugart no. 373 (as early as A.D. 958) introduces us
to two brothers named Wintar and Sumar. Graff 1, 631 has the
proper name Wintarolf in the augmentatiye form (see p. 762 n.)

Now I will produce plain marks of their personality, which
have long maintained themselves in popular phrases and poetic
turns of speech. We say every day : Summer, Winter is at the
door, comes in, sets in. H. Sachs iv. 3, 21* : ' till Summer step
this way.' ^ In MHG. the one is commonly called lieb (lief,
dear), the other leid (loathly, sad) : 'der liebe Sumer urloup
genam,' took leave, Ben. 344. 'urloup nam der Winder/ 362.
Both are provided with a retinue : ' Sumer, dine holden (retainers)
von den huoben sint gevam,' 304. ' Sumer, din gesiiide/ 406.
' mln sane siile des Winters wapen tragen,' my song should W.'s
livery wear, MS. 1, 1 78*. ' Winder ist mit slnen vriunden komen,'
Ben. 414. Evidently they have marched up with their men, each
with intent to war upon and chase away his foe: 'der leide
Winder h&t den Sumer hin verjaget,' 381. 'er (der Winter) ist dir
gehaz, er en-weiz niht umbe waz, selten er des ie vergaz, swenne
er dinen stuol besaz, er en-ructe in vür baz, sin gewalt wol tüsend
eilen vür den dlnen gät,' he hateth thee, he wot not why ; he
seldom forgat, when thy chair he besät, but he pushed it further ;
his power passeth thine, etc. MsH. 3, 258. Ben. 303. ' Winter^
hl^t ez hie gerftmet ' cleared out, Ben. 437. — Again, as summer
begins with May, we have that month acting as its representative,
and ^t as full of life and personality. (All three receive the
title of lord : ' mln herre Winter 1 ' MsH. 3, 267*. ' her Meie ! '
3, 443^. ' her Meige ! ' Walth. 46, 30). May makes his entry :
'so der Meige in gat,* Meist. Alex. 144*. 's6 der vil süeze
Meige in gat/ Trist. 537. ' Meige ist komen in diu lant,' Ms. 1,

' Alse die Scmer qnam int lant, Beinaert 2451. alse do Sommer qndme int
lant, Beineke 2311. do here de Summer trat, Wiggert 2, 48.

3 Without article, therefore not com. noon ; oonf . p. 704 note, Solans.

VOL. n. Y


760 SUMMER AND WINTER.

13^. Ben. 364. ' der Meie sin ingeainde Mt^' lias Ms retinae 1,
14^. ' des Meien iiir ist üf getan, MsH. 3, 296*. ' der Mei ist in
den landen hie^ 3^ 230*. ^s6 der Meie sinen krame schoawen
l&t (his store displays), unde in gat mit vil manigem liebten
m&Ie' 30, 30^. ^vil manager bände varwe (full many a bne)
b&t in sinem krame der Meige/ MS. 1, 59*, ^der Meie h&t
brieve für gesant^ daz sie künden in dia lant sine kanft den
YTUoten/ Ben. 433; like a king wbo after a long absence
returns victorious, be sends letters on before, to announce bis
coming. ' da ist der Meie und al sin kraf t, er und sin geselle-
scbaft diu (sic 1.) ringent manige swaare (ligbten many a
burden); Meie b&t im angesiget' overcome bim (winter), Ben.
449. ' icb lobe dicb, Meie, diner kraf t, du tuost Burner sigebaft^^
tbou makest S. victorious (botb prop, n.), MS. 2, 57*. ^ ob der
Meige ze velde lac/ Ls. 1, 199. ^ so der Meige alrdrst in ^d^.'
Frauend. 14. ^ der Mei b&t sin gezelt bestelt,' set up bis tents,
camp, MsH. 3, 303^. ' des Meien schilt/ 3, 307*. ' Sumer der
bat sin gezelt nu geribtet überal/ Ms. 2, 57*. 'des Meien
waldenasre kündet an die sumerzit^' May's forester announces
summertide, MsH. 3, 230^, 'die (waldes ougenweide, forest's
eye-feast) bat der Meie für gesant, daz si künden in diu lant sin
kunft ' 3, 227^. ' der Meie vüeret den wait an siner hende/ leads
tbe wood by tbe band, MS. 2, 81^; be is provided witb bands
(like Wisb, p. 142). Men worsbip bim witb tbanks and bowings
like a king or god making bis progress (p. 213, Freyr) ; like
tbem be bas bis strete (bigbway) : ' des Meigen strdze/ Ben. 42.
' ü£ des Meien strazen/ MS. 23*. ' Meie, icb wil dir nigen/ bow
to, Ben. 398. ' erent den Meien/ Ben. 184. MsH. 1, 147**^
' der Meie babe des danc ! ' tbanks tbereof,^ Ben. 434. May and
Summer put on tbeir verda/nt attire : ' der Meie ist t£ sin grüenez
zun gesezzen,' MS. 2, 75*. May bears complaints, be commands
bis flowers, 1,3^. ' des Meigen vriunt (attendant), der gtuene
wase (sward), der bet tz bluomen angeleit (laid on) s6 wüneclicbe
sumerkleit/ Trist. 562. ' der Sumer sneit sin kleit,' Ben. 159.
' der Meie sendet dem walde kleider' 436. 'der Sumer gab diu

1 In Ghramm. 4, 725 is a ooll. of the oft-reonrrmg phxases < des Meigen in
(honour), d. M. ffÜeUt des Somers güete (goodness)/ which seem to imply an ancient
worship (p. 29, §ra). I add a few more references : MsH. 1, 62\ 60*. 61^ 194».
305*. 848^. 8, 222i>. Notioe : * Got gebe daz der herhett stn ire Tolbringe ! * that
antnmn his worship fnlM, MS. 2, 180*.


WINTER. 761

selben kleit, Ahrelle maz, der Meie sneit/ April measured, May
cub out, MS. 2, 94^. ' diu (kleider) het gegeben in (to them)
der Meie z'einer niuwen w&t (weeds, clothing),' MsH. 3, 286*.
' Mei hat enprozzen berg und tal ' 3, 188*. ' Sumer h&t gesendet
6z sin wunne, der Meie spreit &f diu laut sin wät ' (2, 291).^ ' der
blüenden hmde voget (heath's controller) ist mit gewalt Af uns
gezoget (has rushed), hoert wi er mit winde broget (blusters) &f
wait und im gevilde,' MsH. 1, 193* (see SuppL).

But more especially does the antithesis demand attention. In
Winier^s train come Rime and Snow, still personifications, and
giants from of old (p. 532). They declare war against Summer :
' dir hat widerseit beidiu Rif and Sne/ Ben. 398. ' der Meie loste
bluomen üz Rifen bände* 437. 'manegen tac stark in sinen
banden lac diu heide (the heath lay fast in Winter's bonds) ; uns
was verirt der vmnne hWt von des argen Winter's nit,' long did
we miss our shepherd of bliss by wicked W.'s envy, MsH. 1,
192*. 'der W. und sine knechte (his men), daz ist der Rife und
der Wind/ Hartm. erst, büchl. 834. MsH. 3, 232*. What
Summer clothed. Winter strips bare: ^uber diu oren^ er dem
wold sin kleider brach,' tore the wood's clothes over his ears
(ibid.). ' äk daz niuwe loup (leafage) 6 was entsprungen, des
hästu nu gevüllet dinen sac ' 2, 386* ; like an enemy or robber,
he fills his sack with booty (saccage). 'bluomen undo loup was
des Rifen firster roup (first plunder), den er in die secJce schovp
(shoved into his sacks), er enspielt in noch enkloup,' Ben. 304.
Yet, ' sunder Rifen danc, allez grüenez in fröiden lit,' no thanks
to Jack Frost, all green things are in glee, MS. 1, 34*. ' unbe-
snngen ist der wait, daz ist allez von des Rifen ungen4den (ill-
will) komen,' Ben. 275, Wizlau in one song exclaims : ' Winder,
dich vorhote (take heed) 1 der Sumer komt ze mute,' to meet
thee, Amgb. 29*; and Walther 39, 9 : ' weizgot, er lat ouch dem
Meien den strit,' Winter gives up the battle ; conversely, ' der
Sutner sinen strit dem Winder Iftt,' Warnung 2386. And, what
is more than all^ one poem ^ has preserved even the mythic name

' So that * des Meigen w&t, kleit * MS. 2, 105-6-7 ifi a metaphor for foliage, and
* boten, (messengers) des Sumeres ' 1, 97^ for flowers.

s 'Walt h6t ören, velt hAt gesiht/ wood has ears, field has sight, MS. 2, 131» ;
' velt hAt 6ren, wait h6t ougen,' eyes, 135^.

* Nfthart's, Ben. 384. To this poet we owe the liveliest images of Summer
and Winter.

\


762 SUMMER AND WINTER.

of the Bime-giant : it is Äucholf, formed just with the suffix 'Olf,
whioh like -oU is characteristic of monstrous ghostly beings;^
the root &aka^ OHG. ouhhu^ means angeo^ so that Oacholf may
contain the notion of enormous^ gigantic ^ (see Suppl.).

Summer and Winter are at war with one another, exactly like
Day and Night (p. 752) ; Day and Summer gladden^ as Night
and Winter vex the world.'

Now the arrival of Summer, of May, or as we now say, of
Spring, was kept as a holiday from of old. In the Mid. Ages
this was called die zit empfdhen, welcoming the season, MS. 1,
200^. 2, 78^. Ben. 453; die zit mit sauge hegen (keep). Misc.
2, 198; den Sumer empfahen, MsH, 3, 207». 211*. 232». ' Sumer,
wis (be) empfangen von mir hundert tAsent stunt (times) ! ' Ben.
328. ^vrouwen und man empfiengen den Meien,' MsH. 3, 185^.
*d& wart der Mei empfangen wol' 3, 218^ 219*. 'den Meigen
enpfahen und tanzen ' 1, 47^, ' nü wolüf grüezen (greet) wir den
süezen ! ' 1, 60^. 'ich wil den Sumer grüezen ' 3, 446^. ' helfent
grüezen mir den Meien,' MS. 1, 202^. 'si (diu vogelltn, small
fowl) wellent alle grüezen nÄ den Meien ' 2, 84^. ' willehome her
Meige ! ' 1, 57^ ' slt willehome her Meie ! ' 1, 59*. ' so wol dir,
lieber Sumer, daz d& komen bist ! ' MsH. 2, 316^. A song in
Eschenburg's Denkm. 458 has the burden ' willkommen Maie ! '
(see Suppl.).

But the coming in of Summer did not happen on any fixed
day of the year, it was determined by accidental signs, the open-
ing of flowers, the arrival of birds. This was called finding
Summer : ' ich h&n den Sumer vunden/ MsH. 3, 202**.

Whoever had spied ' den erstefii viol ' * made it known ; the
whole village ran to the spot, the peasant» stuck the flower on a
pole, and danced around it. On this subject also Nithart has
some spirited songs, MsH. 3, 298-9 ; conf. 202* (den Ersten vtol

^ Qramm. 2, 884—40; conf. Nahtolf, Biterolf, Egisgrimolt (p. 238), Faaolt
(p. 529), Mimerolt (p. 379), Eobolt (p. 414).

> A MHG. poet paints the battle between May and Antmnn, in a pretty stozr
(Fragm. 29), but it does not come within the mythic province, conf. MS. 2, 105.
More to the point is H. Sachs's poem 1, 420-1. A M. Nethl. * spel van den winter
ende sommer ' is printed in Hoffm. hor. belg. 6, 125 — 146. Kotker in Gap. 27 calls
* herbest nnde lenzot zwdne gendza,* fellows twain.

* The Fris. Laws too conple night with winter : ' si ilia tenebrosa nebula et
frigidissima hiems in hortos et sepes descendit,' Riohth. 46 (huersft thin tfaiastera
nacht and thi nSdkalda winter nr tha tuner hleth).

* Flonim prima ver nuntiantium viola alba, Pliny 21, 11 (38).


HERALDS OP SUMMER. 763

schonwen). H. Sachs iv. 3, 49 seq. describes the same festival;
round the^r«^ summer flower they dance and sing. ^ den ersten
bltLomen vlehten/ MS. 1, 41** (see SuppL).

That the^r«^ cockchafer also was fetched in with ceremonies^
we saw on p. 693-4 ; to this day the passion for hunting these
chafers and playing with them is indestructibly rooted among
boys.

In like manner the first swallow , the first stork was hailed as
messenger of spring {äyy€\o<: €apo<;). The swallow's return was
celebrated even by the Greeks and Romans : Athenaeus 8^ 15 p.
360 gives a yeXi^iovKr^a^ chanted by children at Bhodes, who
carried a swallow about and collected eatables. The custom still
survives in Greece; the young people assemble on March 1, and
traverse all the streets^ singing a sweet spring-song ; the singers
carry a swallow carved out of wood, which stands on a cylinder^
and keeps turning round,* ' Hirundine prima/ says Horace
Epist. i, 7, 13. That in Germany also the ^8^ swallow was taken
notice of in the Mid. Ages, is shewn by the superstitious obser-
vance (Sup. G, and I, 217) of digging a coal out of the ground
on her appearance. In Sweden the country folk welcome her
with a thrice repeated shout of joy (Westerdahl p. 55). Both
swallow and stork are accounted sacred inviolable creatures. He
that first announced the return of the stork to the Greeks,
received messenger's pay. As late as last century the warders
of many German towns were required to blow-in the approaching
herald of spring,^ and a drink of honour was served out to them
from the town-cellar. An epigram by Joach. Olearius begius :

Ver laetum rediit, rediitque ciconia grata,
aspera dum pulso frigore cessat hiems.^

The cuckoo may also be regarded as the announcer of spring,
and an O.Engl, song appeals to him : ' sumer is icumen in, Ihude
nng cueu ! ' Hone's Daybook 1, 739 (see SuppL).

The proclaiming of summer by songs of the younger folk still


1 Sgen. opnso. philol. 1, 165. ZelPs Feriensohr. 1, 53. 88. Sohneidewin's
Delectus 2, 465-6.

' Faoriel 2, 256. Diso, prelim, xxviii. More fully in Theod. Kind p. 12.

* Alpenrosen (Bern 1817) p. 49 ; oonf. Hebel's song Der storch.

* Bostock 1610 ; oonf. Jon. Fraetorius's * Storchs und schwalben-winterquartier,*
Francf. 1676, p. 185.


764 • SUMMER AND WINTER.

prevails^ or did prevail in recent centaries^ almost everywliere ia
German and Slav conntries, and bespeaks a very ancient origin.
What the minnesingers^ with their elegant phrases about the old
' chair^ entry^ highway^ grace and glory of Summer ' as a king
or god, may have led us to guess, is supplemented and illus-
trated by abiding customs of the people, which in rude artless
fashion drive at the main point. The modes of celebration and
the songs vary greatly.^ Often there is only a wreath, a doll, an
animal carried about in a basket, and gifts demanded from house
to house.^ Here it is a cock, thene a crow or a fox^ that the
children take round, as in Poland at the time of coleda (new-
year) they go about with a stuffed wolf, collecting gifts (Lindc
sub V. koleda). These animals do not migrate, and I leave it
undetermined, what right they can have to represent the stork
or swallow, or whether they mean something altogether different.
The approach of Summer is only mentioned in a few words and
phrases, or not at all.

In many places however the collecting of gifts is only the
sequel to a previous performance full of meaning, in which youths
and maidens take part. Two disguised as Summer and Winter
make their appearance, the one clothed with ivy or singrün, the
other with straw or moss, and they fight one another till Summer
wins. Winter is thrown on the ground, his wrappages stripped
off and scattered, and a summer^s wreath or branch is carried
about. Here we have once more the ancient idea of a quarrel or
war between the two powers of the year, in which Summer comes
off victorious, and Winter is defeated ; the people supply, as it
were, the chorus of spectators, and break out into praises of the
conqueror.

^ The most diligent collector of them, though in a scattered disorderly way, is
Chr. Heinr. Schmid of Giessen, hoth in the * Journal Ton and für D.' for 1787. 1,
186-98. 480-5; for 1788. 1, 666-71. 2. 409-11 ; for 1790. 1, 310-4 ; for 1791. 1002 ;
and in the ' Deutsche monatsohrift * for 1798. 2, 58-67 ; he gives references to a
great many authors old and new. A still earlier artide in * Journal v. a. f. D.' for
1784. 1, 282 is worth consulting. Isolated facts in Ertinitz's Enoydop. 58, 681
seq., Gräter*s Idunna 1812 p. 41, BUsching's Wöch. nachr. 1, 183-6. 3, 166 and
other places to he cited as they are wanted. The two earliest treatises are hy Paul
Chr. Hilscher ' de ritu Dominicae Laetare, quem vulgo appellant den tod austreiben/
Lips. 1690 (in Qerm. 1710), and Joh. Gasp. Zeumer *de Dominica Laetare,* Jena
1706.

- Let the tummer-ehildren tell you a tummeft and your cows will give plenty
of milk, Sup. 1, 1097.

' Beinhart, Introd. p. ccxix. Athen, also, nbi supra, speaks of a crow being
carried about, instead of the swallow.


EXPULSION OP WINTBB. 765

The custom just described belongs chiefly to districts on the
middle Bhine^ beyond it in the Palatinate, this side of it in the
Odenwald betwixt Main and Neckar. Of the songs that are song
I give merely the passages in point :

Trarira I der Sommer der ist da ;
wir wollen hinans in garten
and wollen des Sommers warten (attend),
wir wollen hinter die hecken (behind the hedges)
und wollen den Sommer wecken (wake),
der Winter hats verloren (has lost),
der Winter liegt gefangen (lies a prisoner) ;
und wer nicht dazu kommt (who won't agree),
den schlagen wir mit stangen (we'll beat with staves)«
Elsewhere : Jajaja ! der Sommertag ^ ist da,

er kratzt dem Winter die äugen aus (scratch W.'s

eyes out),
und jagt die bauem zur stube hinaus (drive the

boors out of doors).
Or : Stab aus I * dem Winter gehn die augen aus (W.'s

eyes come out) ;
Veilchen, rosenhlumen (violets and roses),
holen wir den Sommer (we fetch),
schicken den Winter über 'n Rhein (send W. over

Bhine),
bringt uns guten kühlen wein.
Also : Violen und die blumen

bringen uns den Sommer,

der Sommer ist so keck (cheeky, bold),

und wirft den Winter in den dreck (flings W. in the

dirt).
Or : Stab aus, stab aus,

blas dem Winter die augen aus (blow W.'s eyes out) !

Songs like this must have come down through many centuries ;
and what I have quoted above from poets of the 13 th cent, pre-

> For Sommer ? conf. Bieldsg for Bealdor, p. 222-9, and Day, p. 738.

* Also * 8tam aiu ' or * 8ta maus^* and * heib aus, treib at», dem W. ist ein aug'
ans.' Stabaas may be for ataubam ■» up and away, S^m. 8, 602 ; oonf. Zingerle
2, 147.


766 SÜMMEB AIH) WIKTEB.

supposes their existence^ or that of songs substantially the same.
The conception and setting of the whole are qnite heathenish :
valiant Snmmer found, fetched, wakened from his sleep; van-
quished Winter rolled in the dust, thrown into chains, beaten
with staves, blinded, banished ; these are demigods or giants of
antiquity. Violets are mentioned with evident reference to the
welcoming of Summer. In some parts the children march out
with white peeled rods, either for the purpose of helping Summer
to belabour the foe, or perhaps to represent the retinue of Winter,
for it was the old custom for the conquered and captive to be let
go, carrying white staves (RA. 134). One of the band of boys,
marching at their head vrrapt in straw, stands for Winter, another
decked toith ivy for Summer. First the two fence with their poles,
presently they close and wrestle, till Winter is thrown and his
straw garment stript off him. During the duel, the rest keep
singing :

stab aus, stab aus,

stecht dem Winter die augen aus !

This is completely the * rauba birahanen, hrusti giwinnan, caesos
spoliare armis ' of the heroic age ; the barbarous punching out of
eyes goes back to a still remoter antiquity.^ The wakening of
Summer is like the wakening of Sadlde.

In some places, when the fight is over, and Winter put to flight,
they sing :

So treiben wir den Winter aus

durch unsre Stadt zum thor hinaus (out at the gate) ;

here and there the whole action is compressed into the shout :
' Sommer 'rein (come in), Winter 'nans (go out) I '

As we come back through the Odenwald toward inner Fran-
conia, the Spessart and the Rhön Mts, the words begin to change,
and run as follows :

Stab aus, stab aus,

stecht dem Tod (death) die augen aus !


> The MHG. soDga keep pace : ' der Meie h&t stnen 9chaft ül den Winter Ter>
Btoohen/ dug his shaft into, MsH. 3, 195^ 'Mai hat den W. enlagen\ slain,
HätzL 131, 68. * vehten wil der W. kalt gegen dem lieben Sumer,* MaH. 3, 423\


EXPULSION OF DEATH.


76r


Then : Wir haben den Tod hinausgetrieben (driven out),
den lieben Sommer bringen wir wieder (again),
den Sommer und den Meien
mit blümlein mancherleien (of many a sort).

So Beaih has stept into Winter's place ; we might say, because
in winter nature slumbers and seems dead ; but it may also be,
that at an early time some heathenish name for Winter had to
give place to the christian conception of Death.

When we get to the heart of Pranconia, e.g. Nürnberg, the
songs drop all mention of Summer, and dwell the more em-
phatically on the expulsion of Death} There country lasses of
seventeen or eighteen, arrayed in all their finery, parade the
streets of the whole town and suburbs; on or under their left
arm they carry a little open coffin, with a shroud hanging over
the sides, and a puppet lying under that. Poor children carry
nothing but an open box, in which lies a green bough of beech
with a stalk sticking up, on which an apple is fixed instead of
the head. Their monotone song begins : ' To-day is Midlent,
we hear Death into the water, and that is well/ Amongst other
things:

Wir tragen den Tod in^s wasser,

tragen ihn 'nein, und wieder Waue ' (in, and out again).


' Seb. Frank*6 Weltbnoh 51* thas desoribes the Shrovetide oastom in Fran-
coniA : * Four of them hold a sheet by his 4 comers, whereon is l&id a straw
pufptt in hose, jerkin and mask, like a dead man^ the which tibey tott up by the
4 comerBf and catch him again in the sheet. This they do the whole town through.
At Midlent they make in some places a straw man or imp, arrayed as a death. Mm
the assembled youth bear into the nigh lying villages. And by some they be well
received, eased and fed with dried pears, mük and peas ; by others, which hold it
a presage of coming death, evil entreated and driven from their homesteads with
foul words and oftentimes with buffets.'

' This seems to indicate, Üiat the deity of Death is not to be annihilated by
the ducking, but only made sensible of the people's dissatisfaction. Gruel Death
has during the year snatched many a victim, and men wish, as it were, to be
revenged on him. This is of a piece with the idea brought out on p. 20 : when
a god has not answered your expectations, you bully him, you plunge his image
into water. So by the Franconians, on a failure of the wine-crop, St. Urban's
image, who had neglected to procure tttem wine (Fischart's Garg. 11) was ^un^ into
the brook, or the mtuf (Seb. Frank 61^), or the water-trough, even in the mere antici-
pation of a poor vintage (Agricola's Sprichw. 498. Grater's Idunna 1812, p. 87).
So the Bavarians, during St. Leonhard's solemn procession, would occasionally
drop him in the river (Schm. 2, 478). We know how the Naples people to this day
go to work with their San Gennaro, how seamen in a storm ill-use St. James's
image, not to speak of other instances.


763 SUMMER AND WINTER.

tragen ihn vor des biedermanns haus (ap to the goodman's
hoase).

Wollt ihr ans kein schmalz nicht geben (won^t give us no
lard),

lassen wir euch den Tod nicht sehen (wonH let you see D.).

Der Tod der hat ein panzer an (wears a coat of mail).
Similar cusfcoms and songs prevailed all over Franconia, and in
Thuringia, Meissen, Vogtland, Lausitz and Silesia. The begin-»
ning of the song varies :

Nun treiben wir den Tod aus^ (drive D. out),

den alten weiter n in das haus (into the old women's house).
Or : hinter's alte hirtenhaus' (behind the old shepherd's house).
Further on :

hätten wir den Tod nicht ausgetrieben (not driven D. out)^

war er das jähr noch inne geblieben^ (he'd have staid all the
year).

Usually a puppet^ a figure of straw or wood, was carried about,
and thrown into water, into a hog, or else burnt ; if the figute
was female, it was carried by a boy, if male, by a girl. They
disputed as to where it should be made and tied together ; what-
ever house it was brought out of, there nobody died that year.
Those who had thrown Death away, fled in haste, lest he should
start up and give them chase ; if they met cattle on their way
home, they beat them with staves, believing that that would
make them fruitful. In Silesia they often dragged about a bare
fir-tree with chains of straw, as though it were a prisoner. Here
and there a strong man, in the midst q{ children, carried a may*


^ Lnther parodied this song in his DriTing of the Pope out, Joam. Ton a. far
D. 1787. 2, 192-3.

' * Dem alten Juden in seinen bauch, etc.*, into the old Jew's belly, on to the
young Jew's back, the worse for him ; over hül and dale, so he may never come
back ; over the heath, to spite the shepherds ; we went through the greenwood,
there sang birds young and old. Finn Magnusen (Edda 2, 135) would hiaye us take
the old * Juden ' for a iötunn,

> J. F. Herri, on certain antiquities found in the Erfurt country 1787, p. 28,
has the line : ' wir tragen den Krodo in's wasser,' but confesses afterwards (Joum.
V. u. f. D. 1787. 483-4) that he dragged the dubious name into the text on pure con-
jecture. The more suspicious becomes the following strophe in HeUbaoh*8 Suppl.
to the Archiv v. u. f. Sohwarzburg, Hildburgh. 1789. p. 52 : * wir tragen den alten
thor (fool) hinaus, hinter's alte hirtenhaus, wir haben nun den sommer gewonnen,
und Krodes macht ist weggekommen,' E'.s power is at an end. The expressions
in the last line smack of recent invention.


SUMMER FESTIVAL. 769

jpole.^ In the Altmark, the Wendish villages about Salzwedel,
especially Seeben (where we saw Hennil still in use, p. 749),
have preserved the following custom: at Whitsuntide men-
servants and maids tie fir-branches, straw and hay into a large
figure, giving it as much as possible a human shape. Profusely
garlanded with field-flowers, the image is fastened, sitting up-
right, on the brindled cow (of which more hereafter), and lastly
a pipe cut out of alder wood stuck in its mouth. So they conduct
it into the village, where all the houses are barred and bolted,
and every one chases the cow out of his yard, till the figure falls
oflF, or goes to pieces (Ad. Euhn's Mark, sagen, p. 316-7).

Prom Switzerland, Tobler 425-6 gives us a popular play in
rhymes, which betray a Swabian origin, and contain a song of
battle between Summer and Winter. Summer is acted by a man
in his bare shirt, holding in one hand a tree decorated with
ribbons and fruit,« in the other a cudgel with the end much split.
Winter is warmly clad, but has a similar cudgel ; they lay on to
one another's shoulders with loud thwacks, each renowniug him-
self and running down his neighbour. At length Winter falls
back, and owns himself beaten. Schm. 3, 248 tells of the like
combat in Bavaria : Winter is wrapt in fur. Summer carries a
green bough in his hand, and the strife ends with Summer
thrusting Winter out of doors. I do not find the custom reported
of Austria proper ; it seems to be known in Styria and the
adjoining mountains of Carinthia : the young fellows divide into
two bands, one equipt with winter clothes and snowballs, the
other with green summer hats, forks and scythes. After fighting
a while in front of the houses, they end with singing jointly the
praises of victorious Summer.' It takes place in March or at
St. Mary's Candlemas (see Suppl.).

Some of the districts named have within the last hundred years
discontinued this old festival of announcing Summer by the
defeat of Winter, others retain it to this day. Bygone centuries
may well have seen it in other German regions, where it has
not left even a historical trace; there may however be some

> At Leipzig in the 17th cent, the festival had become bo discredited, that they
had the straw puppet carried about and immersed by women of ill fame.

s Barton's Neueste Beise d. Oestr., Vienna 1811. 2, 848. The Styrian battle-
song is printed in Büsching's Wöch. nachr. 1, 226-8.


770 SUMMER AND WINTER.

accounts that have escaped my notice. In S. Germany, Swabia,
Switzerland, Bavaria, Austria, Styria, the ditties are longer and
more formal, but the ceremony itself not so artless and racy. In
Lower Hesse, Lower Saxony, Westphalia, Friesland, and the
Netherlands, that is to say, where Easter-fires remained in vogue,
I can hardly anywhere detect this annunciation of Summer;
in lieu of it we shall find in N. Germany a far more imposing
development of May-riding and the Maigraf feast. Whether the
announcing of Summer extended beyond the Palatinate into
Treves, Lorraine, and so into France, I cannot say for certain.^
Clearly it was not Protestant or Catholic religion that deter-
mined the longer duration or speedier extinction of the custom.
It is rather striking that it should be rifest just in Middle
Germany, and lean on Slav countries behind, which likewise do it
homage; but that is no reason for concluding that it is of Slay
origin, or that Slavs could have imported it up to and beyond the
Bihine. We must first consider more closely these Slav customs.
In Bohemia, children march, with a straw man representing
Death, to the end of the village, and there bum him while they
sing:

Giz nesem 8mrt ze wsy. Now bear we D. from the village,

nowe Leto do wsy ; new Summer to the village ;

witey Leto lib^zne, welcome Summer sweet,

obiljcko zelene 1 little grain so green*

> G. H. Sohmid has indeed drawn np (Jonm. y. n. f. D. 1790, 314-5) a list of
the lands and spots where Winter or Death is carried out, and it includes parts of
L. Saxony, Mecklenharg, even Friesland. But no authorities are given ; and other
customs, similar, but without any of the distinctive features of the subject in hand,
are mixed up with it. Aug. Pfeiffer (b. Lauenstein 1640, d. Lübeck *98) in Evang.
Erquiokungstunden, Leipz. 1698 mentions a * battle of Sum. and Win.\ bat names
no places, and he had lived long in Silesia and Ijeipzig. H. Labbert (preacher at
Bohlendorf by Lübeck, b. 1640, d. 1708) in his Fastnachtsteofel p. 6 describes a
March (not May) procession, but does not sufficiently bring out the essential fea-
tures. I extract the passage (from J. P. Schmidt's Fastelab. p. 182), because it
illustrates the far from ineffectual zeal of the clergy against popular amusements,
almost as strikingly as the diatribe, 560 years older, quoted on pp. 259 seq. : ' The
last year, on Dominica Quinquag. (4 weeks bef. Laetare), I again publicly prayed
every man to put away, once for all, these pagan doings. Alas, I was doomed to
see the wicked worldlings do it worse than befora Not alone did children carrying
long sticks torapt in green leaves go about within doors, and sing all manner of lewd
jests, but specially the men-servantSf one of them having a green petticoat tied ahovt
himi went in two parties through the village from house to house with a bag-pipe,
singing, swilling, rioting like madmen in the houses ; afterward they joined together,
drank, danced, and kept such pother several nights through, that one scarce ooold
sleep for it. At the said ungodly night-dances were even some lightminded maids,
that took part in the accursed business.*


EXPULSION OF DEATH. 771

Elsewhere :

Snvrt plyne po wode, D. floats down the water,

nowe Leio k n&m gede.^ new Sammer to us rides.

Or:

8mrt gsme wim zanesly, D. weVe from you taken,

nowe Leio prinesly. new Summer to you brought.

In Moravia :

Nesem, nesem Mafenu. We bear, we bear Marena.

Other Slavs :

Wyneseme, wyneseme Ma-

muriendu. Bemove we Mamurienda.

Or:

wynesli Bme'Murienu se wsi, weVe taken Muriena out, and

prinesli sme May nowy do wsi.^ brought new May to the town.

At Bielsk in Podlachia, on Dead Sunday they carry an idol of
plaited hemp or straw through the town, then drown it in a marsh
or pond outside, singing to a mournful strain :

Smierc wieie sie po plotu, D. blows through the wattle,
szukai^c klopotu. seeking the whirlpool.

They mn home as fast as they can : if any one falls down, he dies
within the year.^ The Sorbs in Upper Lausitz make the figure
of straw and rags; she who had the last corpse must supply the
shirt, and the latest bride the veil and all the rags ; ^ the scare-
crow is stuck on a long pole, and carried away by the biggest
strongest lass at the top of her speed, while the rest sing :

Lec7 here, lecz here ! Fly high, fly high,

jatabate woko, twist thyself round,

pan dele, pan dele I fall down, fall down.


' Celakowsky'B Slowansk6 narodni piflne, Prague 1822. p. 209. He quotes other
rhymes as well.

s J. EoUAr's Zpiewanky 1, 4. 400.

> Hannsch Slav. myth. 413. Jnngmann sub t. Marana, who pats the Poliah
rhyme into Bohem. thus : Smrt wige po plotn, sukagjo klopotn. Gonf. a Mora v.
song (Eolda in d'Elv 107-8-9).

* Indical. snperst. 27-8 : ' de nmulacris de pannis factis^ qnae per campos por-
tant.* The Esthonians on New yearns day mcüce an idol of straw in the shape of a
man, to which they concede the name of metziko and the power of protecting their
cattle from wild b^sts and defending their frontier. All the people of the Tillage
acoompany, and set him on the nearest tree, Thom. Hiam, p. 40.


772 SUMMBB AND WINTER.

They all throw sticks aad stones at it : whoever hits Death will
not die that year. So the figure is borne oat of the village to a
piece of water^ and drowned in it. Bat they often carry Death
to the boundary of the next village, and pitch him over it ; each
picks for himself a green twig, and carries it homeward in liigh
glee, bat on arriving at his village throws it away again. Some-
times the youth of the village within whose bounds they have
brought Death will run after them, and throw him back, for no
one likes to keep him; and they easily come to words and
blows about it.^ At other places in Lausitz women alone take
part in this Driving-out of Death, and suflfer no men to meddle.
They all go in black veils that day, and having tied up a puppet
of straw, put a white shirt on it, and give it a broom in one hand,
and a scythe in the other. This pappet they carry singing, and
pursued by boys throwing stones, to the border of the next town,
where they tear it up. Then they hew down a handsome tree in
the wood, hang the shirt upon it, and carry it home with songs.^
This tree is undoubtedly a symbol of Summer introduced in the
place of Death driven out. Such decorated trees are also carried
about the village by boys collecting gifts, after they have rid
themselves of Death. In other cases they demand the contribu-
tions while taking the puppet round. Here and there they make
the straw man peep into people's windows (as Berhta looks in at
the window, p. 274) : in that case Death will carry off some one
in the house that year, but by paying a money ransom in time, you
can avert the omen. At Königshain by Görlitz the whole village,
young and old, wended their way with torches of straw to a
neighbouring height called the Todtenstein, where formerly a
god's image is said to have stood ; they lit their torches on the
top, and turned home singing, with constant repetition of the
words : ' we have driven out Death, we bring back Summer.' *

So it is not everywhere that the banished idol represented
Winter or Death in the abstract ; in some cases it is still the
heathen divinity giving way to Christianity, whom the people
thrust out half in sorrow, and uttering songs of sadness.

* Lausitz. Mag. for 1770, p. 84-5, from a MS. of Abraham Fi«ncel.

' Chr. Arnold's Append, to Alex. Kossen's Unterschiedn. gottesdienst, Hddelb.
1674. p. 136.

* Anton*B first YersQch über die alten Slaveni p. 78-4.


EXPULSION OF GODS. 773

Dlagosz^^ and others after him^ report that by order of king
Miecislaus all the idols in the land were broken up and burnt j
in remembrance of which the people in some parts of Poland^ once
a year, singing mournful songs, conduct in solemn procession
images of Marzana and Ziewoniay fixed on poles or drawn on
drags, to a marsh or river, and there drown them ; ^ paying
them so to speak, their last homage. Dlagosz^s explanation of
Marzana as ^harvest-goddess' seems erroneous; Frencel's and
Schaffarik's ' death-goddess ' is more acceptable : I derive the
name from the Pol. marznacS, Boh. mrznauti. Buss, merznut', to
freeze, and in opposition to her as winter-goddess I set the sum-
mer-goddess Wiosna, Boh. Wesna, The Königenhof MS. p. 72
has a remarkable declaration : ' i iedinu dru^u n&m imiSt' po puti
z We9ny po Moranu,* one wife (only) may we have on our way
from Wesna to Morana, from spring to winter, i.e. ever. Yet
the throwing or dipping of the divine image in a stream need not
have been done by the Christians in mere contempt, it may have
formed a part of the pagan rite itself ; for an antithesis between
summer and winter, and an exalting of the former, necessarily
implied a lowering of the latter.^

The day for carrying Death out was the quarta dominica quad-
ragesimae, i.e. Laetare Sunday or Midlent, on which very day
it also falls in Poland (w nieziele ^rodopostna), Bohemia, Silesia
and Lausitz. The Bohemians call it smrtedbia, samrtnä nedele,
the Sorbs smerdnitsa, death Sunday ; coming three weeks before
Easter, it will almost always occur in March. Some have it a
week earlier, on Oculi Sunday, others (espec. in Bohemia) a
week later, on Judica Sunday ; one Boh. song even brings in
' Mag nowy,' new May. But in the Bhine and Main country, as


I Hist. Polon. lib. 2, ad a. 065. Matth. de Mechovia chron. Polon. ii. 1, 22.
Mart. Cromer lib. 8, ad a. 965. Mart. Hanke de Silesior. nominibus, p. 122-8.

^ So the BaBsian Vladimir, after his conversion, orders the image of Pemn to
be tied to a horse^s tail, beaten, and throum into the Dnieper. Afterwards, when
tiie Novgorod Pemn was in like manner thrown into the Volkhov, he set np, while
in the river, a loud lament over the people's ingratitude.

> The Indian E&U, on the 7th dav after the Mardi new-moon, was solemnly
earned about, and then thrown into tbe Ganges ; on May 18 the Koman vestals
hoie puppet» plaited ofnuhee to the Pons SnbUoins, and dropt them in the Tiber,
Ov. Fast. 5, 620:

Turn qnoqne priscorum virgo simulacra viromm
mittere roboreo seirpea ponte solet.


774 SUMMEB AND WINTER.

in most places^ Laetare is the festive daj, and is there called
Summerday.

There is no getting over this unanimitj as to the time of the
festival. To the ancient Slavs^ whose new year began in March^
it marked the commencement of the year, and likewise of the
summer half-year, i.e. of their Idto; to Germans the arrival of
sammer or spring, for in March their stork and swallow come
home, and the first violet blows. Bat then the impersonal ' Idto '
of the Slavs fights no battle with their Smrt : this departing
driven-out god has the play nearly all to himself. To our an-
cestors the contest between the two giants was the essential
thing in the festival ; vanquished Winter has indeed his parallel
in Smrt, but with victorious Summer there is no living personality
to compare. And, beside this considerable difference between
the Slav ceremony and our own, as performed on the Rhine or
Neckar, it is also difficult to conceive how a native Slav custom
should have pushed itself all the way to the Odenwald and the
Palatinate beyond Rhine, accountable as it might be on the upper
Main, in the Fulda country, Meissen or Thuringia. What is still
more decisive, we observe that the custom is known, not to all
the Slavs, but just to those in Silesia, Lausitz, Bohemia and,
with a marked difference, in Poland ; not to the South Slavs at
all, nor apparently to those settled in Pomerania, Mecklenburg
and Lüneburg. Like our Bavarians and Tyrolese, the Camiolans,
Styrians and Slovaks have it not ; neither have the Pomeranians
and Low Saxons.^ Only a central belt of territory has preserved
it, alike among Slavs and Germans, and doubtless from a like
cause. I do not deny that in very early times it may have been
common to all Slav and all Teutonic races> indeed for Germany
I consider it scarcely doubtful, because for one thing the old
songs of Nithart and others are sufficient proof for Austria, and
secondly because in Scandinavia, England, and here and there
in N. Germany, appears the custom of MoAf-riding, which is quite
the same thing as the Rhenish ' summer-day ^ in March.

Olaus Magnus 15, 4 says: 'The Swedes and Goths have a
custom, that on the first da/y of May the magistrates in every

1 The Holstein costom of going ronnd (omgaan) with the fox, p. 764, took
plaoe in snmmer (says Schütze 8, 165), therefore not on Laetare ; and the words
they sing have no explicit reference to sununer and winter.


MAY-BmiNG. 775

city make two troops of horse^ of tall youths and men^ to as-
semble^ as tho' they would go forth to a mighty battle. One
troop hath a captain^ that under the name of Winter is arrayed
in much fur and wadded garments, and is armed with a winter-
spear : he rideth arrogantly to and fro^ showering snowballs and
iceflakes^ as he would fain prolong the cold^ and much he vauntetli
him in speech. The other troop hath contrariwise a captain, that
is named the Blumengrave, he is clad in green houghs, leaves amd
flowers, and other summer raiment, and not right fencible ; he
rides into town the same time with the winter-captain, yelf each
in his several place and order, then hold a public tilting and
tourney, wherein Summer hath the mastery, bearing Winter to
the ground. Winter and his company scatter ashes and sparks
about them, the other fend them with birchen boughs and young
lime- twigs; finally, by the multitude around, the victory is
awarded to Summer.'

Here Death is not once alluded to ; in true Teutonic fashion,
the whole business is made to lie between 8ummsr and Winter;
only, the simple procession of our peasant-folk has turned more
into a chivalry pageant of opulent town-life. At the same time
this induction of May into the city ('hisset kommer Sivard
Snarensvend [p. 372n.], han forer os sammer/ or 'ooh hör oss
sommer i by/ DV. 1, 14. Sv. foms. 1, 44. ^bära ma/ i by/
Dybeok runa 2, 67 ; in Schonen ^före somma i by *) cuts a neater
stateUer figure than the miserable array of mendicant children,
and is in truth a highly poetic and impressive spectacle. These
Mayday sports are mentioned more than once in old Swedish
and Danish chronicles, town regulations and records. Lords
and kings not seldom took a part in them, they were a great
and general national entertainment. Crowned with flowers, the
m^ygrefve fared with a powerful escort over highway and thorp ;
banquet and round-dance followed. In Denmark the jaunting
began on Walburgis day (May 1), and was called ^at ride Som-
mer i bye/ riding S. into the land : the yonug men ride in front,
then the May-grave (floriger) with two garlands, one on each
shoulder, the rest with only one ; songs are sung in the town,
all the maidens make a ring round the may-gra^e, who picks out
one of them to be his majinde, by dropping a wreath on her
head. Winter and his conflict with May are no longer mentioned

VOL. II. z


776 SUMMER AND WINTER.

in the Schonish and Danish festival. Many towns had regularly
organized majgreve gilde} Bat as the May-fire in Denmark
was called ' gadeild^^ g^te (street) fire^ so was the leader of the
May-feast a gadehcuse (gate bear)^ and his maiden partner
gadelam (gate lamb) or gadinde; gadebasse and gadinde there-
fora mean the same as maigreve and maigrevinde.' There is a
remarkable description in Mnndelstrnp's Spec, gentilismi etiam-
nam superstitis^ Hafn. 1684 : ' Qui ex janioribns rosticis contnm
stipalis accensis flammatnm efficacins yersas sidera tollere
potuefit^ praeses (gadebasse) incondite omnium clamore de-
claratar^ nee non eodem tempore sua cuique ex rnsticis paellis^
quae tanc temporis yemacnla appellantur gadelam, distribaitar,
et quae praesidi adjicitur titulam hnnc gadinde merebitnr.'
Hinc ezcipinnt convivia per Universum illud temporis^ quod inter
arationem et foenisecium intercedit^ quavis die dominica celebrari
sueta^ gadelams-gilder dicta^ in quibus proceriorem circum ar-
borem in antecessum humo immissam variisque coroUis ac aignis
omatam^ corybantum more ad tympanorum stridentes sonitus
bene poti saliunt/

Now this May-riding, these May-graves, were an old tradition
of Lower Germany also ; and that apparently is the very reason
why the Mid-German custom of welcoming summer at Laetare
was not in vogue there. How could springs which does not
reappear in the North till the beginning of May, have been
celebrated there in March ? Besides, this May-festival may in
early times have been more general in Germany ; or does the
distinction reach back to the rivalry between March and May as
the month of the f olkmote ? ^ The maigreve at Greifswald, May
1, 1528, is incidentally mentioned by Sastrow in his Lebensbeachr.
1, 65-6; a license to the scholars at Pasewalk to hold a maigraf

1 Ihre mb y. majgrefre. Skrftordning for Enntsgillet i Lnnd an. 1586, f 128-7
in Bring's Monnm. BoftnenBia, p. 207-10 ; the same for Mahnö, p. 211. £r. Tegel's
Hist. GostaTi i. 1, 119. Nyemp's Danske digtek. 1, 246. 2, 186. 143. Thiele 1,
145-68 ; conf . 200. For the Zealand custom see Molbeoh's Hist, tidskiift 1840.
1, 208. The maigreyes in Bibe are mentioned by Teipager in Bipae oimbrieae,
p. 728 ; the Aalbnrg maigreve in Wilda*s Oildewesen p. 285, from a statute of
the 15th Century ; conf. Molb. dial. lex. p. 588.

' Molb. dial. lex. pp. 150-1-2, where doubt is thrown on the deriyation of
gade from ON. gata (gate, road). He has also a midtommen-lam, p. 859.

* The italics here are mine. Each man has a gadeUm, bat oiüy the leader
a gadinde, — Trans.

4 Oonf. BA. 821-6 on the time of assiaes.


MAT-RIDING. 777

jaunt, in a Chnrch- visitation ordinance of 1563 (Baltische Studien
6^ 137) ; and more precise information has lately been collected
on the snryival of May-riding at Hildesheim^ where the beautiful
costom only died out in the 18th century.^ Towards Whitsun-
tide the maigreve was elected, and the forest commoners in the
Use had to hew timber from seven villages to build the May-
waggon; all loppings mnst be loaded thereon, and only fonr
horses allowed to draw it in the forest. A grand expedition from
the town fetches away the waggon, the burgomaster and council
receive a May-wreath from the commoners, and hand it over
to the maigreve. The waggon holds 60 or 70 bundles of may
(birch), which are delivered to the maigreve to be further dis-
tributed. Monasteries and churches get large bundles, every
steeple is adorned with it^ and the floor of the church strown
with clippings of boxwood and field-flowers. The maigreve
entertains the commoners, and is strictly bound to serve up a
dish of crabs. But in all this we have only a fetching-in of
the May'Waggon from the wood under formal escort of the May-
grave ; not a word now about the battle he had to fight with
winter. Is it conceivable that earlier ages should have done
without this battle ? Assuredly they had it> and it was only by
degrees that custom left it out. By and by it became content with
even less. In some parishes of Holstein they keep the commence-
ment of May by crowning a young fellow and a girl with leaves
and flowers, conducting them with music to a tavern, and there
drinking and dancing ; the pair are called maigrev and maigrön, i.e.
maigräfin (Schutze 3, 72). The Schleswig maygrave-f east (festum
frondicomans) is described in Ulr. Petersen's treatise already
quoted (p. 694 n.).' In Swabia the children at sunrise go into the
wood, the boys carrying silk handkerchie& on staves, the g^rls
ribbons on boughs ; their leader, the May-Jeing, has a right to
choose his queen. In Gelders they used on Mayday-eve to set up
trees decorated and hung with tapers like a Christmas-tree ; then
came a song and ring-dance.' All over Germany, to this day,

I Koken and Lüntzel's Mittheilongen 2, 45-61.

* He says : * the memoiy of this ancient but nseless May-feast finally pasied
by inheritance to the toum-cattle, which, even since 1670, had eyeiy Mayday a gar-
luid of beech-leaves thrown about the neck, and so bedizened were driven home ;
for which service the cowherd could count upon his fee.'

> GeldersoheYolksalmanak voor 1835, pp. 10-28. The song is given in Hoffm.


778 SUMMER AND WINTER.

we have may 'hushes brought into our houses at Whitsuntide : we
do not fetch them in ourselves, nor go out to meet them.^

England too had May 'games or Mayings down to the 16-17th
century. On Mayday morning the lads and lasses set out soon
after midnight, with horns and other music, to a neighbouring
wood, broke boughs oflF the trees, and decked them out with
wreaths and posies ; then turned homeward, and at sunrise set
these May-bushes in the doors and windows of their houses.
Above all, they brought with them a tall birch tree which had
been cut down ; it was named maiepole^ m^ipoll, and was dratffn
hy 20 to 40 yoke of oxen, each with a nosegay betwixt his horns ;
this tree was set up in the village, and the people danced round
it. The whole festival was presided over by a lord pf the May
elected for the purpose, and with him was associated a lady of
the May} In England also a fight between Summer and Winter
was exhibited (Hone's Daybook 1, 359) ; the Maypole exactly
answers to the May- waggon of L. Saxony, and the lord of the
May to the May-grave.' And here and there a district in France
too has undoubtedly similar May-sports. ChampoUion (Rech,
sur les patois, p. 183) reports of the Isfere Dept. : ' mme, f6te que
les enfans c^ldbrent aux premiers jours du mois de mai, en
parant un d'entre eux et lui donnant le titre de roi.^ A lawsuit
on the ^ jus eundi prima die mensis maji ad majum colligendum in
nemora' is preserved in a record of 1262, Gu6rard cart, de N.D.
2, 117 (see Suppl.). In narrative poems of the Mid. Ages, both
French and German, the grand occasions on which kings hold
their court are Whitsuntide and the blooming Maytime, Rein. 41
seq. Iw. 33 seq., and Wolfram calls King Arthur ' der meienbcere
man,' Parz. 281, 16; conf. ' pfingestUcher (pentecostal) küniges
name," MS. 2, 128».

On the whole then, there are four different ways of welcoming

Horae belg. 2, 178-lSO. Conf. * io wil den mei gaen honwen voor mijxiB liefs vein'
sterkyn,' go hew before my love's window, Uhland's Volksl. 178.

^ Has the May-drink still made in the Lower Bhine and Westphalia, of wine
and certain (sacred?) herbs, any connexion with an old saorificiid xite? On no
account must woodroof (asperula) be omitted in preparing it.

» FnUer descript. in J. Strutt, ed. Lond. 1830, p. 861-6. Haupt'a Zeitachr. 6,
477.

• The AS. poems have no passage turning on the battle of 8. and W. In Beow.
2266 * J>Ä wees winter scacen ' only means winter was past, * el ibiemo es ezido.* CSd
1627.


RKCBPTION OF SUMMER. 779

Sammerj tliat we have learnt to know. In Sweden and Gothland
a battle of Winter and Summer, a triumphal entry of the latter.
In Schonen, Denmark, L. Saxony and England simply May-
riding, or fetching of the May- waggon. On the Bhine merely a
battle of Winter and Summer, without immersion,^ without the
pomp of an entry. In Franconia, Thuringia, Meissen, Silesia and
Bohemia only the carrying-out of wintry Death ; no battle, no
formal introduction of Summer.' Of these festivals the first and
second fall in May, the third and fourth in March. In the first
two, the whole population takes part with unabated enthusiasm ;
in the last two, only the lower poorer class. It is however
the first and third modes that have retained the full idea of the
performance, the struggle between the two powers of the year,
whilst in the second and fourth the antithesis is wanting. The
May- riding has no Winter in it, the farewell to Death no Sum-
mer ; one is all joy, the other all sadness. But in all the first
three modes, the higher being to whom honour is done is repre-
sented by living persons, in the fourth by a puppet, yet both the
one and the other are fantastically dressed up.

Now we can take a look in one or two other directions.

On the battle between Vetr and Sutmut ON. tradition is silent,'
as on much else, that nevertheless lived on among the people.
The oldest vestige known to me of a duel between the seasons
amongst us is that ' Conflictus hiemis et veris' over the cuckoo
(p. 675-6). The idea of a Summer-god marching in, bringing
blessings, putting new life into everything, is quite in the spirit
of our earliest ages : it is just how Nerthus comes into the land
(p. 251) ; also Freyr (p. 213), Isis (p. 258), Hulda (p. 268), Berhta

^ It was a different thing therefore when in olden times the Frankfort boys and
girls, every year at Candlemas (Febr. 2), threw a stuffed garment into the Main, and
sang : * Beoker Uder schlng sein mutter, schlug ihr arm and bein entzwei, dass sie
mordio sohrei,* Lersner's Chron. p. 492. I leave the song nnexplained.

' Yet Sommer as a contrast does occasionally come out plainly in songs or
customs of Bohemia and Lausitz.

* Finn Magnusen, always prone to see some natural phenomenon underlying a
myth, finds the contrast of summer and winter lurking in more than one place in the
Edda: in Fiöllsvinnsm&l and Harbardsliod (th. 2, 135. 8, 44 of his Edda), in Saxo's
OUer and Othin saga (th. 1, 196. Lex. 766), in that of Thiassi (Lex. 887), because
O^inn sets the eye of the slain giant in the sky (p. ), and Winter is also to

have his eyes punched out (p. 766) ; to me Uhland (Ueber Thor p. 117. 120) seems
more profound, in regarding Thmssi as the storm-eagle, and kidnapped I'Snnn m
the green of summer (ingrün, so to speak) ; but the nature of this goddess remains a
secret to us.


780 SUMMER AND WINTER.

(p. 273), Pricg (p. 804), and other deities besides, whose car op
ship an exulting people goes forth to meet, as they do the waggon
of May, who, over and above mere personification, has from of old
his ere and straze (p. 670 n.) : in heathen times he must have had
an actual worship of his own. All these gods and goddesses
appeared at their appointed times in the year, bestowing their
several boons ; deified Summer or May can fairly claim identity
with one of the highest divinities to whom the gift of fertility
belonged, with JPVo, Wuotcm, Nerthus. But if we admit goddesses,
then, in addition to Nerthus, Osta/ra has the strongest claim to
consideration. To what was said on p. 290 I can add some signi-
ficant facts. The heathen Easter had much in common with the
May-feast and the reception of spring, particularly in the matter
of bonfires. Then, through loi^ ages there seem to have lingered
among the people Haaier-games so-called, which the church itself
had to tolerate : I allude especially to the custom of Easter eggs,
and to the Eastei' tale which preachers told from the pulpit for
the people's amusement, connecting it with Christian reminis-
cences. In the MHG. poets, 'mines herzen osterspil, ostertac/
my heart's Easter play or day, is a complimentary phrase for lady
love, expressing the height of bliss (MS. 2, 52*^. ST'*. Iw. 8120.
Frib. Trist. 804) ; Conr. Troj. 19802 makes the ' österlichen tec
mit lebender wunne spiln ' out of the fair one's eye. Later still,
there were dramatic shows named osterspilej Wackeni. lb. 1014,
30. One of the strongest proofs is the summer and dance song
of lord Goeli, MS. 2, 57* (Haupt's Neidh. xxv) : at the season
when ea and eyot are grown green, Pridebolt and his companions
enter with long swords, and offer to play the osterspil, which
seems to have been a sword-dance for twelve performers, one
of whom apparently was leader, and represented Summer beating
Winter out of the land :

Fridebolt setze M den huot F., put on thy hat,

wolgefriunt, und gang ez vor, well backed, and go before,

bint daz ostersahs zer linken siten bind o. to thy left side,

bis dur Künzen hochgemuot, be for K.'s sake merry,

leite uns vür daz Tinkfiftor, lead us outside the T. gate,

la den tenz al Af den wasen rlten ! let dance on turf be rid.

This binding on of the ' Easter seax,' or sword-knife, leads us to


SAWING THE OLD WIFE. 781

infer that a sword of peculiar antique shape was retained; as
the Easter scones, osterstttopha (RA. 298) and moonshaped dster-
mane (Brem. wtb.) indicate pastry of heathenish form. The
sword may have been brandished in honour of Ostara, as it was
for Pricka (p. 804). Or is östersahs to be understood like
Beiersahs (Haupt's Neidh. xxv. 17, note) f

May we then identify Ostara with the Slav goddess of spring
Vesna, the Lith. v(i9a/ra (aestas), Lett, vassara, and with ver and
Sap in the forms ascribed to them on p. 754 ? True, there is no
counterpart, no goddess answering to Marzana; but with our
ancestors the notion of a conflict between two male antagonists,
the giants Summer and Winter ^ must have carried the day at a
very early time [to the exclusion of the goddesses] .

The subject was no stranger to the Greeks and Bomans : in
one of Aesop's fables (Cor. 422. Fur. 380) xeijioav and eap have
a quarrel.^ The Boman ver began on Feb. 7, the first swallow
came in about Feb. 26, though she does not reach us till near
the end of March, nor Sweden till the beginning of May (Tiede-
mann's Zool. 3, 624). The Florealia were kept from Apr. 28 till
May 1 : there were songs, dances and games, they wore flowers
and garlands on their heads, but the contrast. Winter, seems not
to have been represented. I am not informed what spring
customs have lasted to this day in Italy. Polydore Vergil, of
TJrbino in Umbria, tells us (de invent, rer. 5, 2) : ' Est consuetu-
dinis, ut Juventus promiscui sexus laetabunda Cal. Maji exeat in
agroSy et cantitans inde virides reportet arborum ramos, eosque
ante domorum fores ponat, et denique unusquisque eo die aliquid
viridis ramusculi vel herbae ferat ; quod non fecisse poena est,
praesertim apud Italos, ut madefiat.' Here then is a ducking
too; this May-feast cannot have meant there a fetching-in of
spring, for that comes earlier, in March (see Suppl.).

Much more remarkable is the Italian and Spanish custom of
tying together at Mid Lent, on that very Dominica Laatare, a
puppet to represent the oldest woman in the village, which is
carried out by the people, especially children, and sawn through
the middle. This is called segare la vecchia. At Barcelona the
boys on that day, in thirties and forties, run through all the

^ Greazer*8 Symb. 2, 429. 494, following Hermann's inteipret. of names, makes
of the giant Briareus ü fighting winter-demon^


782 SUMMER AND WINTBB.

streetfl, some with saws, some with billets of wood, and some
with napkins in which people deposit their gifts. They declare
in a song, that they are looking for the very oldest woman in the
Umn, to saw her through the body ; at last they pretend they
have found her, and begin sawing something, and afterwards
bum it.^ But the same custom is also found among the South
Slavs. In Lent time the Croats tell their children, that at the
hour of noon an old woman is sawn in pieces outside the gates ; ^
in Camiola it is at Mid Lent again that the old wife is led out of
the village and savm through the middle.^ The North Slavs call
it bdbu rezati, sawing old granny, i.e. keeping Mid Lent (Jongm.
1, 56). Now this sawing up and burning of the old wife (as of
the devil, p. 606) seems identical with the carrying out and
drowning of Death, and if this represented Winter, a giant, may
not the Romance and South Slav nations have pictured their
hiems, their zima, as a godd^s or old woman (SI. bäba) ? ^ Add
to this, that in villages even of Meissen and Silesia the straw
figure that is borne out is sometimes in the shape of an old woman
(p. 768), which may perhaps have meant Marzana (p. 773) ? I
should not be surprised if some districts of Bavaria, Tyrol und
Switzerland were yet to reveal a similar sawing of the old wife,*
The Scotch Highlanders throw the auld wife into the fire at
Christmas (Stewart^s Pop. superst p. 236 seq.).

But Lower Germany itself presents an approximation no less
worthy of attention. On p. 190 we mentioned that it was the
custom at Hildesheim, on the Saturday after Laetare, to set forth
the triumph of Christianity over the heathen gods by knocking
down logs of wood. The agreement in point of time would of
itself invite a comparison of this solemnity with that Old-Polish
one, and further with the carrying-out of Death ; one need not
even connect the expulsion of the old gods with the banishment

^ Alex. Laborde*B Itm6raire de TEspagne 1, 57-8; conf. DoUados bziep«
Hone^fi Dayb. 1, 869.

' Anton's Versuch über die Slaven 2, 66.

' Linhart's Geschichte von Erain 2, 274.

* The Ital. inyemo, Span.-mviemo, is however mase.

' In Swabia and Switz., frOnf ästen (Lord's fast «Ember days, Scheffer's
Haltans p. 53) has been comipted into a frau FatU^ as if it were the fast-time
personified (Staid. 1, 394. Hebel sub y.). Can onttixig Mid Lent in two have sig-
nified a break in the fast ? I think not. What means the phrase and the act of
' breaking the neck of the fast,' in an essay on Gath. superst. in the I6th cent. ? see
Forstemann's Records of Augsburg Diet, Halle 1833, d. 101 (see SuppL).


LOG-FELLING. GOSSAMEB. 783

of Winter at ^ all. In Geo. Torquatus's (unpublished) Annal.
Magdeb. et Halberst. part 8 lib. 1 cap. 9 we are told that at
Halberstadt (as at Hildesheim aboye) they used once a year to
set up a log in the marketplace, and throw at it till its head came
off. The log has not a name of its own, like Jupiter at Hildes-
heim; it is not unlikely that the same practice prevailed at other
places in the direction of these two cities. At Halberstadt it
lasted till markgraf Johan Albrecht^s time ; the oldest account
of it is by the so-called ' monk of Pima,' Joh. Lindner (Tilianus,
d. ab. 1530) in his Onomasticon: 'In the stead of the idoPs
temple pulled in pieces at Halberstadt, there was a dome-church
(cathedral) edified in honour of God and St. Stephen ; in memory
thereof the dome-lords (dean and chapter) young and old shall
on Letare Monday every year set up a wooden skittle in the idol's
stead, and throw thereat, every one ; moreover the dome-provost
shall in public procession and lordly state let lead a bear (barz, L
baren) beside him, else shall his [customary dues be denied him ;
likewise a boy beareth after him a sheathed sword under his arm.'
Leading a bear about and delivering a beards loafwaA a custom
prevalent in the Mid. Ages, e.g. at Mainz (Weisth. 1, 533) and
Strassburg (Schilter's Gloss. 102).

This Low Saxon rejection, and that Polish dismissal, of the
ancient gods has therefore no necessary connexion with a bring-
ing in of summer, however apt the comparison of the new religion
to summer's genial warmth. In the Polish custom at all events
I find no such connexion hinted at« At the same time, the
notion of bringing summer in was not unknown to the Poles.
A Cracow legend speaks of Lei and Po-lel (after-lel), two divine
beings of heathen times, chasing each other round the field, and
bringing Summer; they are the cause of 'flying summer,' i.e.
gossamer.^ Until we know the whole tradition more exactly,
we cannot assign it its right place. Lei and Polel are usually
likened to Castor and Pollux (Linde i. 2, 1250^), to whom they
bear at least this resemblance, that their names, even in old folk-
songs, make a simple interjection, * as the Romans used the twin

* HaU. allg. l£. 1807. no. 266, p. 807.

«Pol. lelum, polelum ; Serv. lele, leljo.lelja (Vnk snb v.) ; Walaoh. lerum (oonf.
ununlamm, verba eflfutitia). It seems to me hazardous to suppose them sons of
Lada as C. and P. were of Leda. Conf. supra p. 366.


784 SÜMMEB AND WINTEB.

demigods to swear by. Fliegender sonvmer, flugsojnmer, eommer"
fl^9> graswebe, are oar names for the white threads that cover the
fields at the beginning of springs and still more of aatnmn ; the
spring tissue is also called mmdensumTner, Mary's yam> Mary's
thread (p. 471)^ that of aatnmn aftersummer^ antamn yam^ old^
wives* summer ; but generally both kinds are covered by the one
name or the other. Nethl. slammetje (draggletail? Brem. wtb. 4,
799) j Engl, gossamer (Gk>d's train, trailing garment}^ also samar,
simoff' (train) ; Swed. dvärgsnät (dwarf's net), p. 471. Boh. wlacka
(harrow, becanse the threads rake the ground ?) ; Pol. UUo swieto
"tna/rcinskie, Mary's holy summer. Here again the Virgin's name
seems to have been chosen as a substitute or antidote for heathen
notions : the ancient Slavs might easily believe the gauzy web
to have been spread over the earth by one of their gods. But
the autumn gossamer has another Slavic name : Pol. babie Uito,
old wives' summer^ Boh. babske leto, or simply bdbj, which pats
us in mind once more of that antithesis between summer and
the old wife (p. 782). She rules in winter, and the god in sam-
mer (see Suppl.) . Can the words of the Wendish ditty, quoted
p. 771, be possibly interpreted of the film as it floats in the air ?

I hope I have proved the antiquity and significance of the
conceptions of Summer and Winter ; but there is one point I
wish to dwell upon more minutely. The dressing-up of the two
champions in foliage and flowers, in straw a/nd moss, the dialogue
that probably passed between them, the accompanying chorus
of spectators, all exhibit the first rude shifts of dramatic art,
and a history of the German stage ought to begin with such
performances. The wrappage of leaves represents the stage-dress
and masks of a later time. Once before (p. 594), in the solemn
procession for rain, we saw such leafy garb. Popular custom
exhibits a number of variations, having preserved one fragment
here, and another there, of the original whole. Near Willings-
hausen, county Ziegenhain, Lower Hesse, a boy is covered over
and over with leaves, green branches are fastened to his body :
other boys lead him by a rope, and make him dance as a bear,
for doing which a present is bestowed ; the girls carry a hoop
decked out with flowers and ribbons. Take note, that at the
knocking down of logs at Halberstadt (p. 783), there was also


DRESSING UP IN GREEN. 785

a bear and a boy with a sword (conf. supra p. 304 n.) in the pro-
cession j that Yildifer^ a hero disguised in a bea/rsJcin, is led about
by a musician^ and dances to the harp. ^ Doubtless a dramatic
performance of ancient date, which we could have judged better,
had the M. Nethl. poem of here Wialau* been preserved; but
the name Vildifer seems to be founded on an OS. Wild-efor,
which originated in a misapprehension of the OHG. Wildpero
Cpero' ursus being confounded with 'pÄr' aper), as only a
dancing bear can be meant here, not a boar. Now this bear
fits well with the gadebasse of the Danish May feast (p. 776).
Schmidts Schwab, wtb. 518^ mentions the Augsburg waterbird :
at Whitsuntide a lad larapt from head to foot in reeds is led
through the town by two others holding birch-boughs in their
hands : once more a festival in May, not March. The name of
this 'waterfowl' shews he is meant to be ducked in the brook or
river ; but whether Summer here is a mistake for Winter, whether
the boy in reeds represents Winter, while perhaps another boy
in leaves played Summer, or the mummery was a device to bring
on rain, I leave undetermined. Thuringian customs also point
to Whitsuntide : the villagers there on Whit-Tuesday choose their
green man or leituce-lcing ; a young peasant is escorted into the
woods, is there enveloped in green bushes and boughs, set on
a horse, and conducted home in triumph. In the village the
community stands assembled : the bailiff is allowed three guesses
to find who is hidden in the green disguise ; if he fails, he must
pay ransom in beer.^ In other places it is on Whit-Sanday
itself that the man who was the last to drive his cattle to pasture,
is wrapt in fir and birch boughs, and whipt through the village
amidst loud cries of ' Whitsun^sUeper ! ' At night comes beer-
drinking and dancing. In the Erzgebirge the shepherd who
drives out earliest on Whit-Sunday may crack his whip, the last
comer is laughed at and saluted Whitsun-looby : so with the
latest riser in every house. The sleeping away of sacred festive

^ yUk. saga, cap. 120-1 ; mark, that the minstrel gives him the name of VitrUo
(wise lion), which should of oonrse have been Vitrbiom ; for a bear has the sense of
12 men (Beinh. p. 445). The people's * king of beasts ' has been confounded with
that of scholars.

^ Horae belg. 1, 61. Mone's Niederl. volkslit. p. 36-6. Conf. Wenezlan, Altd
bl. 1, 333. Wislau is the Slav. Weslav, Waslay (Wenoeslaas).

sBeichsanz. 1796. no. 90, p. 947. The herdsman that drives earliest to the
ilpine pastures on May 1, earns a privilege for the whole year.


786 6UMMEB A19I) WINTEB.

hoars (conf. p. 590 n.), and the penalty attached to it, of acting
the butze and being ducked, I look upon as mere accessories,
kept alive long after the substance of the festival had perished
(see SnppL).

Kuhn (pp. 314-29) has lately famished as with accurate ac-
counts of Whitsun customs in the Marks. In the Mittelmark
the houses are decorated with ' mai/ in the Altmark the farm-
servants, horse-keepers and ox-boys go round the farms, and
carry May-crowns made of flowers and birch twigs to the farmers,
who used to hang them up on their houses, and leave them hang-
ing till the next year. On Whitsun morning the cows and horses
are driven for the first time to the &llow pasture, and it is a great
thing to be the first there. The animal that arrives first has a
bunch of ^ mai ' tied to its tail, which bunch is called dau-sleipe
(dew-sweep),^ while the last comer is dressed up in fir-twigs,
all sorts of green stuff and field fiowers, and called the moÜey
cow or motley horse, and the boy belonging to it the pingst^käam
or pingsUkääreL At Havelberg the cow that came home first
at night used to be adorned with the crown of fiowers, and the
last got the ihau-schleife ; now this latter practice is alone kept
up.' In some of the Altmark villages, the lad whose horse gets
to the pasture first is named thau^achlepper, and he who drives
the hindmost is made motley boy, viz. they clothe him from head
to foot in mid flowers, and at noon lead him from farm to farm,
the dew-sweeper pronouncing the rhymes. In other places a pole
decked with flowers and ribbons is carried round, and called the
bammel (dangle) or pings-kääm, though, as a rule, this last name
is reserved for the boy shrouded in leaves and flowers, who
accompanies. He is sometimes led by two others called hunde-
brösel. In some parts of the Mittelmark the muffled boy is called
the kavdemest. On the Drömling the boys go round with the
pingst-kääm, and the girls with the may-bride, collecting gifts.
Some villages south of the Drömling have a more elaborate


^ So named, because it has to tonch the dewy grass: which confixms my
interpretation of the Alamannic tau-dragil (B.A. 94, 630), snpra p. 887 note.

' In some places a winning horse has a stick cleft in three fixed on his head
and richly encircled with the finest flowers ; the boy who rides him, beside many
garlands, receives a cap tooven of nuheSf and must preserve a serious countenance
while the procession slowly advances : if he can be provoked to laughter, he loses,
Kuhn, p. 328.


DRESSING UP IN GREEN. 787

ceremonial. On ' White Sunday/ a fortnight before Easter, the
herdboys march to the pasture with white sticks (supra p. 766),
and with these they mark off a spot, to which no one may drive
his cattle till Whitsuntide.^ This being done, the smaller boys
name tlieir brides ^ to the bigger ones, and no one must reveal
the name till Whitsunday, when the railed-off pasture is thrown
open, and any one may tell the brides^ names. On Whitmonday
one of the boys is disguised by having two petticoats put on him,
and one of them pulled over his head and tied up; then they
sioathe him in may, hang flower-wreaths about his neck, and
set a flower-crown on his head. They call him the fästge mat
(well-appointed, armed), and lead him round to all the houses;
at the same time the girls go round with their may^bride, who is
completely covered with ribbons, her bridal band hanging to the
ground behind ; she wears a large nosegay on her head, and keeps
on singing her ditties tiU some gift is handed to her.

Other villages have horse-races on Whitmonday for a wreath
which is hung out. Whoever snatches it down both times is
crowned, and led in triumph to the village as May-king.

A work composed in the 13th cent, by Aegidius aureae vallis
religiosus reports the Netherland custom of electing a Whitsun
queen in the time of bp. Albero of Lüttich (d. 1155) : 'Saoer-
dotes ceteraeqne ecclesiasticae personae cum universe populo, in
solemnitatibus paschae et penteeostes^ aliquam ex sacerdotum
ooncubinis, purpuratam ac diademate renitentem in eminentiori
solio constitutam et cortinis velatam, reginam creabant, et coram
ea assistent^es in choreis tympanis et aliis musicalibus instrumentis
tota die psallebant, et quasi idolatrae effecti ipsam tanqiLam
idolum colebant* Chapeaville 2, 98. To this day poor women
in Holland at YHiitsuntide carry about a girl sitting in a little


^ "While this fallow pasture is being railed o£P, the new lads (those who are tend-
ing for the first time) have to procure bonn to cover the branches of a fir-tree which
ii erected. The tree is called the gibbet of bones, and its top adorned with a horses
skull (Kuhn 823-4): plainly a reHo of some heathen sacrificial rite, conf. the
delation of animals on trees, pp. 53, 75, esp. of horses* heads, p. 47; the good
Labbe*B hill of bones is also in point, p. 526.

' This naming of brides resembles the crying of fief s on Walbnrgis eve in
Hesse, on the L. Bhine, the Ahr and the Eifel, Zeitsohr. f. Hess, gesch. 2, 272-7.
Dieilenbaoh's Wetterau p. 234. Ernst Weyden's Ahrthal, Bonn 1839, p. 216.
And who can help remembering the ON. heit strengja at Yule-tide? when the
heroes likewise chose their loved ones, e,g. in Ssm. 146* : * HeSinn strengdi heit til
Syavo.'


788 Summer and winter.

carriage, and beg for money. This girl, decked with flowers and
ribbons^ and named pinxterbloem, reminds us of the ancient god-
dess on her travels. The same pinxterbloem is a name for the
iris psendacoras^ which blossoms at that very season ; and the
sword-lily is named after other deities beside Iris (peranika^ p.
183-4). On the Zaterdag before Pentecost^ the boys go ont early
in the mornings and with great shonting and din awake the lazy
sleepers, and tie a bundle of nettles at their door. Both the
day and the late sleeper are called luilap or luUak (slaggard).
Summer also had to be wakened, p. 765.

Everything goes to prove, that the approach of summer was
to our forefathers a holy tide, welcomed by sacrifice, feast and
dancev and largely governing and brightening the people^s life.
Of Easter fires, so closely connected with May fires, an accomit
has been given; the festive gatherings of May-day night will
be described more minutely in the Chap, on Witches. At this
season brides were chosen and proclaimed, servants changed,
and houses taken possession of by new tenants.

With this I conclude my treatment of Summerand Winter;
i.e. of the mythic meanings mixed up with the two halves of
the year. An examination of the twelve solar and thirteen lunar
m-onths^ is more than I can undertake here, for want of space;
I promise to make good the deficiency elsewhere. This much
I will say, that a fair proportion of our names of months also
is referable to heathen gods, as we now see by the identifi-
cation of May with summer, and have already seen in the case
of Erede (March) and Eastre (April), p. 289. Phol, who had
his Phol-day (p. 614), seems also to have ruled over a PhoUmanoi
(May and Sept.), conf. Diut. i. 409, 432, and Schefier's Haltaus
36. The days of our week may have been arranged and named
on the model of the Soman (p. 127) ; the names of the three
months aforesaid are independent of any Latin influence.' A
remarkable feature among Slavs and Grermans is the using of one
name for two successive months, as when the Anglo-Saxons


^ That there were harutr yean is indicated by the moon*8 being given ' at Aitali,'
for year's tale, p. 710.

' Martins rests on Mars, Aprilis mnst contain a spring-goddess answering to
Ostara, Majns belongs to Maja, a mother of gods, ^e same three conseoatiYe
months are linked in the Latin calendar, as in ours, with divinities.


MONTHS. 789

speak of an »rra and aaftera Geola^ sdrra and aaftera Lt^a^ and
we of a great and little Horn (Jan. and Feb.), nay^ Oagest is
followed up by an Oagstin^ the god by a goddess ; I even see
a mythical substratum in popular saws on certain months^ thus
of February they say : ' the Spörkelsin has seven smocks on^
of different lengths every one^ and them she shakes/ i.e. raises
wind with them. ' Sporkel/ we know^ is traced to the Roman
spnrcalia.


u


CHAPTER XXV.
TIME AND WORLD.

In the last chapter we examined myths having reference to the
alternation of seasons^ to phenomena of the year. Oar language
affords several instances of transition from the notion of time to
that of spaee.

Ulphilas translates j(p6yo^, tcaipo^, &pa alternately by melt
hveila, ßdhs, yet so that 'mdl' usually stands for j(p6vo^ or
Kaipo^i rarely for &pa, and ' hveila ' mostly for &pay seldomer for
'Xpovo^ and tcatpo^; the former expressing rather the longer
section of time^ and the latter the shorter. Mel, OHO. mal, AS.
mcel, ON. mal, lit. mark or measure^ is applied to measured
speech or writing as well as to a portion of time ; on the contrary^
hveila, OHO. huila, MHO, wile, AS. hwil (p. 702), denotes rest,
and is purely a notion of time^ whereas mM was transferred from
space to time. We come across ßeiha (neut. gen. J^eihsis) only
twice^ viz. Rom. 13^ 11 : 'vitandans ]7ata ]>eihs^ )?atei mel ist^'
€tSoT€9 TOP KULpov, oTt &pa, and 1 Thess. 5^ 1 : ' bi ]7Ö {^eihsa jah
mSIa/ irepl r&v ypovtov KaX r&v Katp&v. Each passage contains
both ]?eihs and mel^ but the choice of the former for xP^^o^ <^d
the latter for Katpo^ shews that {^eihs is even better adapted than
m^l for the larger fuller notion^ and the most complete arrange-
ment would be : )^eihs %pöi^09^ m^l Katp6<:, hveila &pa. I derive
ßeihs from )?eihan (cresoere, proficere, succedere)^ as veihs gen.
veihsis (propugnaculum) from veihan (pugnare) ; so that it ex-
presses profectus^ successus^ the forward movement of time^ and
is near of kin to OHG. dihsmo^ d6hsmo (profectus)^ probably also
to dihsila (temo), our deichsel^ AS. )?isl^ thill^ for which we may
assume a Goth. )?eihslo^ ]7eihsla^ the apparatus by which the
waggon is moved on. Schmeller 4, 294 cleverly connects tSroo
itself with tempus : the celestial waggon-thill (p. 724) marks the
movement of nocturnal time (Varro 7, 72-5), and ]?eihsla becomes
a measure like the more general J^eihs. Even if the connexion of
the two Latin words be as yet doubtful, that of the two Gothic

790


TIME. 791

01166 can hardly be so. Bat nov> as the Goth, ßeiht has no
representative in the other Teatonic tongues^ and in return the
OHG. zity AS. üd, ON. ^id* seems foreign to Gothic^ it is natoral^
considering the identity of meanings to suppose that the latter
form arose from mixing up ]^eihan (cresoere) with teihan (nan-
tiare), and therefore that the AS. tid stands for \ftd, and OHG.
ztt for dit; besides^ the OHG. zit is mostly neut.^ like ]>eihs^
whereas the fem. ztt^ tid would have demanded a Goth. J^eihaJ's.
Of course a Goth. )?eihs ought to have produced an OHG. dihs or
dih (as veihs did wih) ; but^ that derivation here branched in two
or three directions is plain from the ON. timi, AS. time (tempus,
hora), which I refer to the OHG. dihsmo^ above, and a Goth.
]?eihsma, with both of which the Lat. tempus (and t^mo ?) would
perfectly agree (see SuppL).

Like hveila, the OHG. etulla, and stunt, stunta, AS. ON. stund
(moment, hour), contain the notion of rest, and are conn, with
stilli (quietus), standan (stare), while conversely the Lat. mo*
mentam (movi-mentum) is borrowed from motion.' We express
the briefest interval of time by augenbliek, eye-glance; Ulph.
renders Luke 4, 5 iv ffri/yfiß j(p6vov ' in stiha mSlis,' in a prick
of time, in ictu temporis ; 1 Cor. 15, 52 ip pvirß 6<l>da\fiov, ' in
brahva &ugins,' brahv being glance, flash, micatus, AS. twincel,
and traceable to bralhvan (micare, lucere), OHG. prehan, MHG.
brehen;' AS. 'on beorhtm-hynU * from bearhtm ictus oculi, 'on
edgan beorhtm/ Beda 2, 18 ; ON. 't amgahragSi/ conf. Seam. 11^.
14*. 19**. OHG. 'in slago dero hrawo/ N. ps. 2, 12, in a movement
of the eyelid (conf. slegiprawa palpebra, Graff 3, 316); 'ante-


^ In dlhan, dfhsmo the d remained, in sft it degenerated. Just so the Goth.
Hahan first became regularly OHG. doahan, then irregolarly tnahan, now zwagen ;
the OS. thuingan first OHG. dningan, then toingan, now zwingen. Less anomal-
ous hy one degree are OHG. zi for 6k)th. da (to), and onr zweig for ON. dyergr
(dwarh, MHG. twero.

' Nomeral adverbs of repetition our langnage forms with stunt as well as mal,
but also by some words borrowed from space, Gramm. 8, 230.

< Beside the inf. brHhen (MS. 1, 47^ 185^ Gudr. 1856, 2) we are only sure of
the pros. part. : onge-brehender kid, MS. 1, 3^ brehender schtn 2, 231* ; for the

SBt. hrachf MS. 2, 52». Bon. 48. 68, conld be referred to brechen, conf. * break of
y,' p. 747, yet the two yerbs themselves may be congeners. In OHG. the perf.
put. appears in pr^^n-oogi (lippus), a compound formed like zoran-ougi, Gramm.
2» 693. The Gotb. Itrahv assures us of the princ. parts in full, braihva, brahv,
brihvum (like saihva, sahv, sdhvum). But instead of an adj. braihts (bright), even
the Gothio has only a transposed form bairhts, OHG. peraht, AS. beorht, ON.
biartr ; yet our Perahta is afterwards also called Prehta, Brehte (pp. 277-9), and other
proper names waver between the two forms, as Albreoht Albert, Buprecht Bobert. v

YOL. II. A A


792 TIMB AND WOBLD.

qnam snperciliam snperius inferiori jangi possit/ Caesar, heisterb.
12, 5. 'minre wllen (in less time) dan ein oncbr& zao der an-
dern muge geslalien/ Grieshaber p. 274. 'als ein oucbrft mac
üf nnd zno gegdn/ can open and shat, Berth. 239. ^ 6 ich die
hant nmbk^rte^ oder zno geslüege die (or better, din) br&/ Er.
51 72. ' also schier so (as fast as) ein brftwe den andern slahen
mac/ Pundgr. 1, 199 (see Snppl.).^

A great length of time is also expressed by several different
words: Gh)th. dive (m.), OHG. ewa (f.), Gr. aUiv, Lat. ctevum
shading off into the sense of seculnm, O. Fr. ae (p. 678) ; the
OS. 60 (m.) means only statntnm, lex, as the Gt)th. mM was
Rcriptnra as well as tempns. Then Goth, alßs (f.), by tnma aUir
(Eph. 2, 2. 1 Tim. 1, 17. 2 Tim. 4, 10), and ßio^ or yeved;
ON. old; OHG. with saffix aUar (aevnm, aetas), though the
simple word also survives in the compound weralt (aasimil.
worolt), MHG. werU, our welt, AS. w'erold, Engl, world, Pris.
wraldy ON. verald, verold, Swed. world, Dan. verd : constant use
accounts for the numerous distortions of the word.' Its Gothic
form, wanting in Ulph., would have been vair-alps or 'valrfi
al)?s,' virorum (hominnm) aetas, aetas (lifetime) passing into the
local sense of mundus (world), just as secnlum, sitele, has come
to mean mundus, monde. We saw on p. 575 that Greek myth-
ology supposes four ages of the world, golden, silver, brazen
and iron : a fancy that has travelled far,' and was apparently
no stranger in Scandinavia itself. Snorri 15 gives the name of

^ Can br4w6, OHG. pr&wa, ON. br&, be deriyed from brehenf Perhaps the
set phrases in the text reveal the reason for it. In that case the OHG. prftwa must
be for prfiha, and we might expect a Goth, br^yaf Then the Sanskr. bhrA, Or.
d^pust would be left without the yiyid meaning of the Tent. word.

' Its true meaning was so obscured, that other explanations were tried.
Maerlant at the beginn, of his Sp. Hist. : ' die de wereU 6rst toerreU hiet, hine was
al in dole niet. Adam die wereU al verwerrede,^ This deriv, from wetren (impediie,
intricare) was, if I mistake not, also hit upon by MHG. poets, e.g. Benner 2S98.
Equally wrong are those from wem to last, and werlen to whirl. It is quite possi-
ble, that werd alt (virorum aetas) was intended as an antithesis to a risdnd alt .
(gigantum aetas) wnioh preceded it.

' In our Mid. Ages the World was personified, like Death» and the yariona ages
were combined in a statue with a head of gold, arms of silver, a breast of brass and
iron, and feet of earth, MS. 2, 176t> ; another representation gave the hgare a
golden head, silver breast and arms, brazen belly, steel thighs, iron legs, earthen
feet, MS. 8, 225* ; a third, a golden head, silver arms, brazen breast, copper belly,
steel thighs, earthen feet, AmjB[b. 27^ This medley, though borrowed horn. Daniel
2, 81-48, reminds us of ancient idols formed out of various metals, and also of
Hrüngnir with the stone heart, and Möckrk^fi who was made of loam, and had a
mare*s heart put into him, Sn. 109. Hugo in his Benner 18764 speaks of a steel,
diamond, copper, wood, and straw world.


WOBLD. 793

guU-aldr to the period when the gods had all their utensils made
of gold, which was only cat short by the coming of giantesses
oat of lötanheim. Had he merely borrowed this golden age
from the classics, he woald have taken the trouble to discover
the other metals too in Norse legend.^ Bat in the Yöluspä
(SaBm. 8*) we see that other ages are spoken of, sJc^g-öld (see p.
421), sJealm-öld, vind-öld and va/rg-öld, which are to precede the
destraction of the world.

To translate /c6a-fjuf<:, ülph. takes by turns, and often one im-
mediately after the other, the two words favrhvus and momaseßs;
both must have been in common use among the Goths, Mcma»
sep8 ' means yirorum satns (seed of men), and is used at once for
Xao9 and for /c6a-fjk09, thus fully conciding with the above- developed
sense of weralt. Fairhvus I take to be near of kin to OHG.
(erah, AS. feorh, MHG. verch, so that it expressed lifetime again,
like aevum; it is also connected with 0H6. firahi (homines), and
woold mean first 'coetus hominam viventium,' then the space
in which they live. It has nothing to do with falrguni^ earth,
mountain (see Suppl.).

As /COO-/A09 properly means the ordered, symmetrical (world),
mundua the clean, well-trimmed, bright, and as the Frisian laws
126, 26 speak of ' thi shene wrald ' ; so the Slavic voiet^ svety swiat
is, first of all, light and brightness, then world, the open, public,^
all that the sun illumines, whatsoever is ^ under the sun.' ^ So
the Wallach, lume, the Hung, vildg, signify both light and world.
The Lith. swietds, O. Pruss. 8mtai, world, is borowed from Slavic.
Like mundus, the Slav, sviet passes into the time-sense of
seculum, viek (Dobrowsky's Inst. 149). The older Slavs called
the world mir and ves^nUr, Dobr. 24. 149 ; mir is also the word
for peace, quietness, and seems akin to mira or mera, measure
(order?). The Finnic for world is maa' ilma, the Esth. ma ilm
(from ilma, the expanse of air, and maa, earth), the Lapp, ilbms.

^ We may oonnect the golden age with Frö'Si, whose mill ground gold and
peace. The Finns say, in Ukko*s time gold was ground in the mills, honey trickled
from the oaks, and milk flowed in the rivers (conf. p. 697), Ganander 98.

' Always with single n, as in mana-maür|>rja, mana-riggys, manags (many),
man&uli, and as in OHG. mana-houpit, mana-luomi, manac, conf. MHG. sune-
wende, p. 617 n. The reason of this peculiarity grammar must determine.

• To bring to light, impart to the world, is in Serv. * na svidt izd&ti.'

* The Lett, word pasaule seems to have been modelled on this * sub sole * in
Eooles. 1, 3. 2, 22. 8o * unter disem wölken,' Hol. 9, 31.


794 TIME AND WOBLD.

The ON. heimr is mnndas^ domas^ and akin to himinn, himil
(p. 698)^ as mandns also is applied both to world and sky;
heimskringla, orbis terraram. ülphilas renders oiKovfieptf, Lake
2, 1. 4, 6. Rom. 10, 18, by midjunga/rds ; to this correspond tiie
AS. middangeard, Csödm. 9, 3. 177, 29. Beow. 150. 1496; the
OHG. 'mittingart, Is. 340. 385-6. 408. Pragm. theot. 17, 6.
mittigart, Pragm. th. 17, 3. 20, 20. 25, 9. mittUigart, Gl. Jan.
216. T. 16, 1. mittilgart, T. 155, 1. 178, 2. 179, 1; the OS.
middilgard; the ON. miffgardr, Seem. 1\ 45\ 77*». 90*. 114^ 11 5\
Sn. 9. 10. 13. 45. 61 ; and even a Swed. folksong 1, 140 has
retained medjegärd. 0. Engl, middilerd, medüooßrth, like the 6r.
/lea-oyaüi, Pischart's Garg. 66* has mittelkreias, mid-cirole. We
saw (p 560) that midgwrdr was, to the Norse way of thinking,
created oat of Ymir's eyebrows, and appointed to men for their
habitation. The whole oompoand, doabtless very ancient, is of
prime importance, because it is native to our oldest memorials,
and at the same time strictly Eddie. Nor is that all : in similar
harmony, fehe world is called in ON. Oegisheimr, SsBm. 124^. 125',
and in MHG. mergarte, Annolied 444. Bol. 106, 14. Kaiserchr.
501. 6633. Karl. 38*; i.e. the sea-girt world, oonf. Goth,
marisfiivs (ocean), and OHG. mertherti (aetherium),^ Diat. 1, 250.
Lastly, OHG. woroUring, 0. ii. 2, 13. iii. 26, 37. iv. 7, 11. v. 1,
33. 19, 1. erdriTig, 0. i. 11, 47. MHG, erdrine, Mar, 198-9, orbis
terraram, Graff 4, 1163.

According to the Edda, a hage serpent, the mi9gar98 ormr, lies
coiled roand the earth's circumference, 'umgiörtJ allra landa':
evidently the ocean. When Alexander in the legend was carried
up in the air by griffins, the sea appeared to him to twine like a
89iake round the earth. But that ' world«serpe(nt,' hateful to all
the gods (sü er goS fta, Sasm. 55*) was the child of Loki, and
brother to the Penris-Ülfr and Hel ; he was called lormungandr
(Sn. 32), the great, the godlike (conf. p. 351), and like Hel he
opens wide his jaws, Sn. 63 (see Suppl.).

Everything shews that the notions of time, age, world, globe,
earth, light, air and water ran very much into one another ; in
^ earth-ring,' ring indicates the globular shape of the earth and


' The Fizmio Uma f Featas says mundus meant ooeloxn as well as terra, mare,
aez:.


WOBLD. 795

its planetary revolniion. Mcmaseßsyfairhvus, and weralt point to
spaces and periods filled by men.^

So &r as ' world * contains the notion of secnlam and life^ it is
significantly called^ even by the OS. poet, a dream : liibdio drom,
Hel. 17, 17. 104, 7. 109, 20. numm drom 23, 7. 108, 4. AS.
gumdredm, Beow. 4933 ; * la vida es saeno.' Its perishableness
and painf olness have suggested yet other designations : ' diz
eilende wvoflal (weep-dale),' Tod. gehugde 983, as we say ' this
vale of tears, house of sorrow' (see SnppL).

From its enormous superficial extent is borrowed the phrase
'thins bride w&rM,' Hel. 60, 1. 131,21; MHG. 'diu breite
werlt/ Mar. 161 ; our weite breite welt. Also : ' thiz lant breUa'
O. ii. 2, 18. daz breiie gevilde. Mar. 34. Wigal. 2269. din breite
erde. Both. 4857. Wh. 60, 29. Geo. 4770, evpfla x^«v. This
reminds one of the name of Balder^s dwelling spoken of on
p. 222-3, breUfa blik, which seems to include the two notions
of breadth and brightness. An expression used by miners is
remarkable in this connexion: ^ blickgold, blicksilber' is said of
the clear molten metal gleaming on the fining-hearth, and ' der
breite blick ' when there is a plentiful yield of it.^ The beautiful
bright world is, as it were, a wide glance.

When ' world * or ' heimr ' is merely used in the general sense
of dwelling place, we can think of several worlds. The Yöluspft,
Saem. 1\ supposes nine worlds and nine firmaments (tviiSir), conf.
Saom. 36^ 49% just as Sn. 222^ speaks of nine lieavens (see
Suppl.).»

Of these worlds, not abodes of the living human race, those
that demand a close investigation are : the Flame-world, the
Dead- world, and Paradise; but all are connected more or less


> As we often lue ' world ' and * earth ' indifferently, bo did the MHG. poets.
The beginning of time is expressed at option either thus : * Ton anegenges zit, daz
sioh diu werlt erhnop (ap-hove), and mnoter ir kint getmoc (bore)/ Bol. 285, 12.
* stt (since) diu werlt drste wart,' Uk. Trist. S699 ; or thus : * sit ditiu erde geleget
wart,* Bol 187, 7. ' sit diu erde abrdrst begonde bem (to bear),' Earl 70^

* In Matthesins's Sermons 84* : * Now this Gyms hath a silTer kingdom,
wherein the word of God, as silver refined in the fire, is preached eu breitem
pUek,* 91^ : * He hath sent his apostles into all the world, that they may preach the
goq^ tu breitem plick, as ye mining folk say.' 101* : * Elsewhere lead ap-
peareih in bloeks, as at Gk>8lar, where the Bamelsberg is su breitem plick almost all
lead.'

' Nine choirs of angels, Fondgr. 1, 101. Pass. S89. 841. < niu fyUdngar engla,'
Fomald. sog. 8, 663 ; conf. the nine punishments of hell, Waokemagel's Basel
USS. 24** [Buddhist books describe 18 hells, some hot, some cold] .


796 TIME AND WOBLD.

with the upper world^ that inhabited by man^ and passages exist
from the one to the other.

The ON. system supposes a world-tree^ askr Tggdrasils, which
links heaven^ earth and hell together^ of all trees the greatest
and holiest. It is an ash (askr)^ whose branches shoot through
all the worlds and reach beyond heaven. Three roots spread out
in three directions^ one striking toward the &ses into heaven^
another to the hrim]^urses^ the third to the under world. From
under each root gushes a miraculous springs namely^ by the
heaven root Ur9curbrunnr (p. 407), by the giants' root Mimis-
brunri/r, by the heU root Hvergelmir, i.e. the roaring (or the old)
cauldron, olla stridens (p. 563). All these wellsprings are holy :
at the ürSar-well the &ses and noms hold their council, the
giants' well is watched by a wise man Mimir (p. 879), I know
not whether a sage old giant himself or a hero, anyhow a semi-
divine being, or nearly so. Every day the noms draw water
from their well, to water the boughs of the ash : so holy is this
water, that it imparts to anything that gets into the well the
colour of the white of an egg; from the tree there trickles a
bee-nourishing dew, named huna/ngsfaU (fall of honey). On
its boughs, at its roots, animals sit or dart about: an eagle,
a squirrel, four stags, and some snakes; and all have proper
names. Those of the stags are elsewhere names of dwarfs,
notably Bainn and Dvalinn. The snake Ni9höggr (male pun-
gens, caedens) lies below, by Hvergelmir, gnawing at the root.
The squirrel Batatöahr^ runs up and down, trying to sow discord
between the snake and the eagle who is perched aloft. The
eagle's name is not given, he is a bird of great knowledge and
sagacity ; betwixt his eyes sits a hawk Ve9ff6lnir.^

The whole conception bears a primitive stamp, but seems
very imperfectly unfolded to us. We get some inkling of a feud
between snake and eagle, which is kept alive by Batatöskr ; not
a word as to the purpose and functions of hawk or stags.
Attempts at explaining Yggdrasil I have nothing to do with; at

' The word contains rata (elabi, permeare), Goth. vratSn^ and perh. eagjta, pi.
töBknr, pera : peram penneanB ? Wolfram in Parz. 651, 13 has * wenken als ein
eichom^^ dodging like a sqnirrel. The squirrel is still an essential featnre in the
popnlar notion of a forest, oonf . BA. 497 and the catching of squirrels at Easter
(supra p. 616), perhaps for old heathen uses.

2 The eagle's friend, for haukr I homi (hawk in the comer) means a hidden
counsellor.


WOBLD-TREB. 797

present, before giving my own opinion, I mnst point out two

coincidences very unlike each other. This tree of the Edda has

s^gested to others before me the tree of the Cross, which in

the Mid. Ages gave birth to many speculations and legends. Well,

a song in the 'Wartburg War,' MsH. 8, 181 sets the following

riddle:

Ein edel bonm gewahsen ist

in eime garten, der ist gemacht mit höher list ;

ein Wurzel ka/n der helle grünt erlangen,

ein tolde (for ' zol der ') rüeret an den ir&n

d& der süeze Got bescheidet vriande lön,

sin eeie breit hdwt al die werU bevangen :

der boom an ganzer zierde stät and ist geloubet schoBne,

dar dfe sitzent vogelin

süezes sanges wtse nftoh ir stimme fin,

n4ch maniger kunst so haltents ir gedoene.

(A noble tree in a garden grows, and high the skill its making
shews ; its roots the floor of hell are grasping, its summit to
the throne extends where bounteous God requiteth friends,
its branches broa4 the wide world clasping: thereon sit birds
that know sweet song, etc.) This is very aptly interpreted of
the Cross and the descent into hell. Before this, 0. v. 1, 19 had
already written :

Thes krüzee horn thar obana zeigSt üfin himila,
thie armajoh thio henti thie zeigdnt worolt-entif
ther selbe mittilo bourn, ther scow6t thesan woroU-floum,

theiz innan erdu stentit,

mit thin ist thar bizeinit, theiz imo ist al gimeinit
in erdu joh im himile inti in ahgrunte ouh hiar nidare.

(The cross's top points to heaven, the arms and hands to the
world's ends, the stem looks to this earthly plain, . . . stands
in the ground, thereby is signified, that for it is designed all in
earth and heaven and the abyss beneath.) It matters little if
the parallel passage quoted by Schilter from cap. 18 de divinis
o£Eiciis comes not from Alcuin, but some later author : Otfried
may have picked up his notion from it all the same.^ It says :
' Nam ipsa crux magnum in se mysterium continet, cujus positio

^ I do not know if Lafontaine had Virgü^s yerses in his mind, or followed his
own prompting, when he Bays of an oak :

Celui, de qni la tdte an oiel 6tait voisine,

et dont les pieds tonchaient k Tempire des morts.


798 TIME AND WORLD.

talis eat, at superior pars coehs petat, inferior terrae inhaerBai,
fixa mfemcTwm ima contingat, latitado aatem ejus partem nuindi
appetat/ I can never beliere that the myth of Yggdrasil in its
complete and richer form sprang oat of this christian oonceptian
of the Gross ; it were a far likelier theory^ that floating heathen
traditions of the world-tree, soon after the conversion in Germany,
France or England, attached themselves to an object of christian
faith, just as heathen temples and holy places were converted
into christian ones. The theory would break down, if the same
exposition of the several pieces of the cross could be found in
any early Father, African or Oriental ; but this I doubt. As for
the birds with which the 13th cent, poem provides the tree, and
which correspond to the Norse eagle and squirrel, I will lay no
stress on them. Bat one thing is rather surprising : it is pre-
cisely to the ash that Virgil ascribes as high an elevation in the
air as its depth of root in the ground, Georg. 2, 291 :

Aesculus in primis, quae quantum vortice ad auras
aetheria^, tantum radice in taria/ra tendit ;

upon which Pliny 16, 81 (56) remarks: 'si Virgilio credimus,
esculus quantum corpore eminet tantum radice descendit.' ^ So
that the Norse fable is deeply grounded in nature ; conf. what
was said, p. 696, of the bees on this ash-tree.

Another and still more singular coincidence carries us to
Oriental traditions. In the Arabian ' Calila and Dimna ' the
human race is compared to a man who, chased by an elephant,
takes refuge in a deep well : with his hand he holds on .to the
branch of a shrub over his head, and his feet he plants on a
narrow piece of turf below. In this uneasy posture he sees two
mice, a black and a white one, gnawiug the root of the shrub ;
far beneath his feet a horrible dragon with its jaws wide open ;
the elephant still waiting on the brink above, and four worms'
heads projecting Irom the side of the well, undermining the turf
he stands on; at the same time there trickles liquid honey from a
branch of the bush, and this he eagerly catches in his mouth.'

^ Perhaps Hrabanus Manros's Oarmen in laadem sanotae oraois, which I hare
not at hand now, contains the same kind of thing.

> Calila et Dimna, ed. SUvestre de Sacy. M6m. hist p. 28-9, ed. Knatchbnll,
p. 80-1 ; conf. the somewhat different version in the Ezempeln der alten weisen,
p.m. 22.


WORLD-TREE. 799

Hereapon is founded a rebuke of man^s levity^ who in the ut-
most stress of danger cannot withstand the temptation of a small
enjoyment. Well^ this fable not only was early and extensively
circulated by Hebrew, Latin and Greek translations of the entire
book,^ ' but also found its way into other channels. John
Damascenns (circ. 740) inserted it in his BapKdafi Koi ^I<odca<f>*
which soon became universally known through a Latin repro-
duction.^ On the model of it our Budolf composed his Barlaam
and Josaphat, where the illustration is to be found, p. 116-7 ;
in a detached form, Strieker (Ls. 1, 253). No doubt a parable
so popular might also reach Scandinavia very early in the Mid.'
Ages, if only the similarity itself were stronger, so as to justify
the inference of an immediate connexion between the two myths.
To me the faint resemblance of the two seems just the main
point ; a dose one has never existed. The ON. fisbble is far more
significant and profound; that from the East is a fragment,
probably distorted, of a whole now lost to us. Even the main
idea of the world-tree is all but wanting to it ; the only startling
thing is the agreement in sundry accessories, the trickling honey
(conf. p. 793 n.), the gnawed root, the four species of animals.

But if there be any truth in these concords of the Eddie myth
with old Eastern tenets, as well as with the way the Christians
tried to add portions of their heathen faith to the doctrine of the
Cross; then I take a further step. It seems to me that the
notion, so deeply rooted in Teutonic antiquity, of the Irminsul,
that ' altissima, universalis columrui, quasi sustiuens omnia ' (p.
11 5- 7),' is likewise nearly allied to the world-tree Yggdrasil. As
this extended. its roots and boughs in three directions (standa &
]?ria vega), so did three or four great highways branch out from
the Irminsul (pp. 356. 361) ; and the farther we explore, the
richer in resalts will the connexion of these heathen ideas prove.
The pillars of Hercules (p. 364), of Bavo in Hainault, and the
Thor and Boland pillars (p. 394) may have had no other purpose
than to mark out from them as centre the celestial and terrestrial
direction of the regions of the world ; and the sacred Yggdrasil

^ AIbo in the East, conf. Jelaleddin'B Divan in Hammer's Pers. redek. p. 183.

* First pabl. in Boissonade's Aneod. Graeoa, torn. 4, Paris 1832, pp. 1 — 366.

> Hist, dnorum Christi militmn (Opera, Basil. 1576. pp. 816—902) ; also printed
sepcurately, Antv. s.a. (the illnsiration at p. 107) ; another version in Suiius 7, B58
seq., the parable at p. 889.


800 TIME ANJ) WOBLD.

sabserved a very similar parfcition of the world. The thing might
evea have to do with ancient land-siirve3ring^ and answer to the
Boman cardo^ intersected at right angles by the decamanns. To
the ashtree we mnst also concede some connexion with Ascibnrg
(p. 350) and the tribal progenitor Askr (p. 571-2). Another
legend of an ashtree is reserved for chap. XXXII (see SappL) .

NiflheirrWf where NtShoggr and other serpents (named in Ssem.
44^. Sn. 22) have their haant round the spring Hvergelmir^ is
the dread dwelling-place of the death-goddess Hel (p. 812)^ G-oth.
Ealja ('or heljo/ S»m. 94% 'i heljo' 49. 50. 51, is clearly
spoken of a place^ not a person), it is gloomy and black, like her;
hence a Nebelheim, cold land of shadows, abode of the departed,^
but not a place of torment or punishment as in the christian view,
and even that was only developed gradually (p. 318). When Ul-
philas uses halja, it is always for ^£179 (Matt. 11, 23. Luke 10, 15.
16, 23. 1 Gor. 15, 55), the mfemus of the Vulg. ; whenever the
text has yeeyva, Vulg. gehenna, it remains gaiainna in Gk>thic
(Matt. 5, 29. 30. 10, 28),it was an idea for which the Oothic had
no word. The OHG. translator T. renders ' infemus ' by hella
(Matt. 11, 23), 'gehenna'» by hellafiur (5, 29. 30) or hellamssi
(-torment 10, 28), and only 'filium gehennae' by hella sun (23,
15), where the older version recently discovered is more exact:
qiialu 8unu, son of torment. When the Creed says that Christ
'ni-Sar steig zi helliu' (descendit ad inferna), it never meant the
abode of souls in torment. In the Heliand 72, 4 a sick man is
said to be 'f&sid an helsid*, near dying, equipped for his journey
to Hades, without any by-thought of pain or punishment» That
AS. poetry still remembered the original (personal) conception of
Eel, was proved on p. 314, but I will add one more passage from
Beow. 357: 'Helle gemundon, MetoS ne cuiSon,' Helam venera-
bantur, Deum verum ignorabant (pagani). So then, from the
4th cent, to the 10th, halja, hella was simply Hades or the death-
kingdom, the notion of torment being expressed by another word
or at any rate a compound ; and with this agrees the probability

1 A dead man is called nifl-farinn^ Sffim. 249*. The progenitor of the Nibelnngs
was prob. Nehel (Fomald. sog. 2, 9. 11, Niefill for Kefill) : a race of heroes doomed
to Hades and early death. * Nibelange: spirits of the death-kingdom,* Lachmaon
on Nib. 342.

- From gehenna comes, we know, the Fr. gehene, gdne, i.e. sappHoe, though in
a very mitigated sense now.


HELL. NIFL-HBIM. 801

that as late as Widekind of Corvei (l^ 23) Saxon poets^ chanting
a victory gf Saxons over Franks^ nsed this very word heUa for
the dwelling-place of the dead : ' nt a mimis declamaretnr^ ubi
tantns ille infemtis esset^ qoi tantam multitudinem caesorum capere
posset ? ' ^ A Latin poem on Bp. Heriger of Mentz^ of perhaps
the 10th cent.^' describes how one that had been spirited away
to the underworld declared 'totnm esse infemum accinctam dentds

ndiqne silvis^' meaning evidently the abode of the dead^ not the
place of punishment. Even in a poem of the 12th cent. (Dint. 8^
104) Jacob says : ' so mnoz ich iemer cholen^ nnze ich so vara ze
der helie/ until I fare to hell^ i.e. die. The 13th cent, saw the
present meaning of helle already established^ the abode of the
damned ; e.g. in Iw. 1472 : ' God bar thee out of helle ! ' take
thee to heaven^ not guard thee from deaths for the words are
addressed to a dead man (see SuppL).

Hell is represented as a lodging, an inn, as Valhöll, where those
who die put up the same evening (p. 145) : ' ver skulum d Valhöll
gista % gyeld,^ Fomald. sog. 1, 106 ; ' viiJ munum i apian OSin
gUia ' 1, 428 ; singularly Abbo 1, 555 (Pertz 2, 789), ' plebs
inimica Deo pransura Plutonis in v/ma.* No doubt, people used
to say : ' we shall put up at Nobis-haus to-night 1 * The Saviour's
words, oTj^pov /ler ifLov iaji iv rä irapaZelatj^, Luke 23, 43 have
'this day,' but not ' to-nigh V (see Suppl.).

Here and there in country districts, among the common people,
helle has retained its old meaning. Li Westphalia there are
still plenty of common carriage-roads that go by the name of
hellweg, now meaning highway, but originally death-way, the
broad road travelled by the corpse. My oldest example I draw
from a Record of 890, Bitz 1, 19 : ' helvius sive strata publica.'
Later instances occur in Weisth. 3, 87. 106, in Tross's Bee. of
the feme p. 61, and in John of Soest (Fichard's Arch. 1, 89).^

^ Trad. Gorbeieng. pp. 465. 604 makes a regular hexameter of it : ' tantns ubi
infemiiB, caesos qui devoret omnes 7 * This overcrowding of Hades with the dead
reminds one of Calderon's fanatic fear, lest heaven stand empty, with all the world
running to the other house after Lather :

Que vive Dios, que ha de tener en oielo
pooos que aposentar, si considero
que estan ya aposentado con Lutero.

(Sitio de Breda, jom. primera).

^ Lat. gediohte des X. XI. jh. p. 835, conf. 844.

' Also in Lower Hesse : hellweg by Wettesingen and Oberlistingen (Woohenbl.
for 1838, 952. 984. 1028. 1138), mUweg by Calden (951. 982. 1022), höllepfad by
Nothfelden (923).


802 TIME AND WORLD.

In the plains of Up. Germany we aometimes find it called toJieTh^
weg (Moneys Anz. 1838. pp. 225. 316). The ON. poetry makes
the dead ride or drive to the underworld, *fara til heljar * or ' til
HeljcuTf to the death-goddess: Brynhildr, after she is burnt,
travels to Hel in an ornamental car, ' 6k meS rei^nni & helveg/
and the poem bears the title Helreif, Ssem. 227. In our Freidank
105, 9. 151, 12 it is the christian notion that is expressed by
' zer helle vam * and ' drt str&ze zer helle gftnt/ For the rest, a
hell weg would necessarily bring with it a hellwagen (p. 314), just
as we meet with a Wödan's way and waggon both (p. 151).
Nay,, the Great Bear is not only called himelwagen and herren-
wagen, but in the Netherlands hellewagen (Wolfs Wodana i. iii.
iv.) ; see a ' Wolframus dictus hellewagen/ MB. 25, 123 a.d. 1314
(see Sappl.).

The O. Saxons at first, while their own hellia still sounded too
heathenish, preferred to take from the Latin Bible infem, gen.
infemes, e.g. Hel. 44, 21, and even shortened it down to fern,
Hel. 27, 7. 103, 16. 104, 15. 164, 12; so that the poet cited by
Widekind may actually have said infem instead of hellia.^

The heathen hellia lay low down toward the North; when
Hermd'Sr was sent after Baldr, he rode for nine nights through
valleys dark and deep (dökva dala ok diupa), the regions peopled
by the dark elves (p. 445) ; he arrived at the river Oiöll (strepens),
over which goes a bridge covered with shining gold ; a maiden
named Md^guiSr guards the bridge, and she told him that five
fylki of dead men ' had come over it the day before, and that
from this bridge the ' hellway * ran ever lower and northwarder :
' niiSr ok nortSr liggr helvegr.^ This I understand of the proper
hall and residence of the goddess, where she is to be met with,
for all the country he had been crossing was part of her kingdom.
This palace is surrounded by lofty railings (hel-grindr), Sn. 33.
67. The hall is named Eliudhir (al. ElviSnir), the threshold
fallanda forad (al. the palisade is fallanda forad, the threshold
]7olmü'Snir), the curtain blilgandi böl, Sn. 33. It is probably a
door of this underworld (not of YalhöU, which has 540 huge


^ A place InfemUi (Erhard p. 140, a.D. 1118) ; Gael, iflinn, Ir. ifetamy WeL
jjf/pm, ufern,

3 A fylki oontainB 60 (BA. 207), bo that Baldr rode down with an escort of 250,
though one MS. doubles the number : * taiiS Baldr h^ melS 500 manna.*


NIFL-HEL. 803

gates) that is meant in SaBm. 226* and Fornald. sog. 1^ 204^
where Brynhildr wishes to follow SigurS in death, lest the door
fall npon his heel : a formnla often used on entering a closed
cavern.^ Bat Hel's kingdom bears the name of Niflhsimr or Nifl-
hel, mist-world, mist-hell,* it is the ninth world (as to position),
and was created many ages before the earth (p. 558) ; in the
middle of it is that fountain HvergeVmi/Ty out of which twelve
rivers flow, Qioll being the one that comes nearest the dwelling
of the goddess, Sn. 4. Prom this follows plainly what I have
said : if Hvergelmir forms the centre of Niflheimr, if GiöU and
the other streams pertain exclusively to hell, the goddess Hel's
dominion cannot begin at the ' hel-grindr,' but must extend to
those ' dank dales and deep,' the ' dense forests ' of the Latin
poem. Yet I have nothing to say against putting it in this way :
that the dark valleys, like the murky Erebos of the Greeks, are
an intermediate tract, which one must cross to reach the abode
of Aides, of Halja. Out of our Halja the goddess, as out of the
personal Hades, the Boman Orcus (orig. nragus, urgus, and in
the Mid. Ages still regarded as a monster and alive, pp. 814,
486) there was gradually evolved the local notion of a dwelling-
place of the dead. The departed were first imagined living with
her, and afterwards in her (it). In the approaches dwelt or
hovered the dark elves (see SuppL).

Nifllietmr then, the mist-world, was a cold underground region
covered with eternal night, traversed by twelve roaring waters,
and feebly lighted here and there by shining gold, i.e. fire. The
rivers, especially Qioll, remind us of Lethe, and of 8tyx, whose
holy water gods and men swore by. With Hvergelmir we may

1 The O. Fr. poem on the *qiiatre fils Aimon' (Cod. 7188 fol. 126 1») makes
Biehart, when abont to be hong, offer a prayer, in whieh we are told that the
Savionr brought back all the Boulis oat of nell except one woman, who wonld stop
at the door to give hell a pieoe of her mind, and is therefore doomed to stay there
till the Judgment-day : all were released,

Ne mes que une dame, qui dist une raison :
* hai enfer * dist ele, * oon vos remanez solz,
noirs, hisdoz et obscure, et laiz et tenebrox f '
a Ventrer de la parte, si oon lisant trovon.
jusquau terme i sera, que jugerois le mont.

The source of this strange legend is unknown to me. •

* * Diu itrre heUe, wo nehel und finster,* The Luoidarius gives ten names of
hell : stagnum ignis, terra tenebrosa, tezra oblivionis, ewartiu ginunge, etc. Mone's
Anz. for 1884, 818 ; conf. expressions in the OS. poet : hdt endi thiiutri, »uart
Hnnahti, Hel. 65, 12 ; an dalon thiuetron, an themo alloro ferrosten feme 65, 9 ;
unäeifemdalu 83, 16 ; diap dödes dalu 157, 22.


804 TIMB AND WORLD.

connect Hellebome in Brabant^ tlie source of HeUebehe ; several
places are named HeUeput (Wolf's Wodana 1, v. and 35). Ed-
voetsluis was cited^ p. 315 note ; the name Helle-voet (-foot) is,
we are told, still to be seen on signboards (aithangborden) in the
Netherlands (see Suppl.).

Gloomy and joyless as we mnst imagine Niflheimr,^ there is no
mention anywhere of its denizens being punished and tormented;
neither is it the wicked especially that are transported thither at
the end of their life, but all and sundry, even the noblest and
worthiest, as the examples of Brynhildr and Baldr may shew.-
The only exceptions seem to be the heroes that fall in battle,
whom OSinn takes to himself into ValhoU.

In contradiction with this view stands another and, I ihink,
a later one, that presented in Sn. 4 : All&ther the highest god
has given to all men an immortal soul, though their body rot in
the ground or bum to ashes; all good men (r£tt si'Sa'Sir) go to
him in Gimill or Yingölf, ali the wicked (vftudir) to Niflheimr or
hell (conf. Sn. 21 and 75, of which more hereafter). This is
already the christian idea, or one extremely like it.

For the old heathen hell, pale and dim, the Christian substi*
tuted a pool filled with flames and pitch, in which the souls of
the damned bum for ever, at once pitch-black and illumined
with a glow. Gehenna is interpreted heUa/mri, MHG. hellefiwer
Parz. 116. 18; the poet of the Heliand, when he wants to picture
vividly this black and burning hell, turns the old fern, form into
a masc. : ' an thene hetan hel ' 76, 22. ' an thene sTmrtan hel *
103, 9. Erebi /omoa?, Walther 867. Nay, 0. and other OHG.
writers make the simple heh (pix) stand for hell ' : ' in dem beehe/


^ Gffidmon stiU piotnres the wttehüs (house of torment) as * deop, dre4ma le&s,
Biimiht« beseald.' Striking images occur in a doo. of the 11th cent. (Zeitschx. f.
d. a. 8 445) : sweyilstank, geniheU^ t6dei seategruobe, wallente stredema, etc

' So all the Ghreek heroes sink into Hadei* houu under the earth. Bat it is
hard to distinguish from it Tartanu^ which lies lower down the abyss, and where
the subjugated giants sit imprisoned. This denoted therefore, at least in the later
times, a part of the underworld where the wicked dwelt /or their pwdikment^ which
answers to the christian Jbiell. But that the * roots of earth and sea from aboTs
grow down ' into Tartarus (Hes. Theog. 728) suggests our Norse ashtree, whose
root reaches down to Niflheim. Conf. also Ovid's description of the underworld
(Met. 4, 482 seq.), where * Styx nehuXa» exhcUat iners' fits in with the conception
of Kiflheim.

' Quotations in my ed. of the Hymns p. 51. Add Muspilli 5, on which Schm.
quotes a line from Wtüafrid : * At secum infelix pieeo spatiatur av«mo.' Eogenius
in Dracont. p. m. 80 : * Ut possim picei poenam vitare barathri.*


HELL. 805

Warnung 547 and Wemher v. Niederrh. 40, 10; 'die pechwelle/
Anegenge 28, 19. It is a fancy widely scattered over Europe ;
the Mod. Greeks still say irlaaa for hell, as in a proverb of Alex.
Negri : e)(€i irüraav koX wctpaBeiaoVf putting hell and heaven side
by side. This pitchy hell the Greeks seem to have borrowed
from the Slavs, the 0. SI. peklo meant both pitch and hell (Dobr.
instit. 294), so the Boh. peJclo, hell, Pol. pieklo, Serv. pakao,
Sloven. peJcel, some masc, some neuter; Lith. pehla (fem.), 0.
Pmss. piehillis (pickuUien in the Catechism p. 10 is Ace.), the
devil himself is in Lith. pyculas, 0. Pruss. piekuUy conf. Bausch
p. 484. The Hungarians took their pokoly hell, from the Slavic,
as our ancestors did 'galalnna' and 'infem' from Greek and
Latin. And the smela, hell, of the Lüneburg Wends seems
allied to the Boh. smola, smAla, resin or pitch. With the heat
of boiling pitch was also combined an intolerable stench ; Beineke
5918 : ' it stank dftr also dat heische pek/ Conf. generally En.
2845. 3130 (see Suppl.).

Since the conversion to Christianity therefore, there has clung
to the notion of hell the additional one of punishment and pain :
kvollheimr, mundus supplicii, in S61arl. 53 (Seem. 127*) is unmis-
takably the christian idea. The OHG. hellawizi, OS. helliwUi^
Hel. 44, 17, AS. hellewUe, expresses supplicium inferni, conf.
Graff 1, 1117 on wizi, MHG. wize, MsH. 2, 105^ upon it are
modelled the Icel. helvUi, Swed. helvete, Dan. helvede, which
mean simply our hell; from the Swedes the converted Finns
received their helwetti (orcus), the Lapps their helvete, and from
the Bavarians the Slovens in Camiola and Styria got their vize
(purgatorium), for the Church had distinguished between two
fires, the one punitive, the other purgative, and hanging midway
betwixt hell and heaven.^

But the christians did not alter the position of hell, it still was
down in the depths of the earth, with the human world spread out
above it. It is therefore called abyssus (Ducange sub v.), and
forms the counterpart to heaven: 'a coelo usque in abyssum.'
From abyssus, Span, abismo, Fr. abime, is to be explained the
MHG. abis (Altd. bl. 1, 295; in äbisses gründe, MsH. 3, 167),
later obis, nobis (en &bis, en obis, in abyssum). OS. helligrund,

1 Of one in purgatory the EsthoniaxiB say : ta on kahha ilma wahhel, he is be-
tween two vorldi.


806 TIME AND WORLD.

Hel. 44, 22; in af gründe gftn. Both. 2334; ir . verdienet daa of-
grunde^ 1970 ; ' varen ter helle in den donhren Icelre/ dark cellar^
Floris 1257.^ AS. se neowla grand (imus abyssas)^ Caddm. 267^ 1 •
270, 16; )>89t neowle genip (profunda caligo) 271, 7. 275^ 31.
This neowel, niwel (profundus) may explain an expression in the
Frisian Asega-bok (Bichth. 130, 10), 'thiu nitient hille/ where a
M. Nethl. text has ' de grundlose helle/ bottondess hell. Hell
sinking downwards is contrasted with heaven mounting upwards:
' der himel allez Af get, diu helle »iget aUez ze tal/ Warnung
3375-81 (see Suppl.).

It appears that men imagined, as lying at the bottom of our
earth, like a ceiling or grating of the underworld, a stone, called
in MHG. poems dille-stein (fr. dille, diele, deal »tabula, plirtens,
OHG. du, diu, ON. }ril, J>ili): 'gruebe ich Af den diUe^stein/ if
I dug down to the d., Schmiede (smithy, forge) 33 ; ' des hcdhe
viir der himele dach und durch der heUe hodem vert,' its height
passes over heaven's roof and through helPs floor, ibid. 1252 ;
' viir der himele dach dA blickest, u. durch der heUe diUestein [is
not thia floor rather than ceiUng?],' MS. 2, 199^; 'wan ez kumt
des tiuvels schrei, d& von wir stn erschrecket : der dülestein der
ist enzwei (in-two, burst), die töten sint üf gewecket,' Dietr.
drachenk. cod. pal. 226\ This makes me think of the oiiA4>äKo^
at Delphi, a conical stone wrapt in net (Gerhard's Metroon p. 29) ,
still more of the lapis mcmalis (Festus sub v.) which closed the
mouth of the Etruscan WAmdusy and was lifted off on three holy
days every year, so that the souls could mount into the upper
world (Festus sub v. mundus) Not only this pit in the earth,
but heaven also was called mundus,^ just as Niflheimr is still
a heimr, i.e. a world. And that hell-door (p. 802) is paralleled
by the ' descensus Avemi/ the ^fauces grave dentis Averni/ the
'atri janua Ditis' in Virgil's description, Aen. 6, 126. 201 (conf.
helle infart,' Veldeck's En. 2878. 2907); fairytales of the Slavs
too speak of an entrance to the lower world by a deep pit,
Hanusch p. 412 (see Suppl.).

The mouth or jaws of hell were spoken of, p. 314; Hel yawns

1 Does * eggmni ' stand for eok-gnmt ? * Das rawer adle komen tzor ^ggrwnde,'
Cod. pal. 349, 19<».

3 Conf. 0. Miiller'B Etrofiker 2, 96-7. The Fiim. manala is * locns sabterranenfi,
ubi yersantuT mortal/ aepnlcrmn, orons, bat derived frraoi maa (terra, inondaB),
and only accidentally resembling ' manalis.'


DILLE-STEIN. MUSPILLI. 807

like her brother Penrir, and every abyss gapes :^ 08 gehermae
in Beda 363^ 17 is the name of a fire-spouting well (puteus);'
in an AS. gloss (Mone 887) mulf (os) means orcus. The same
Coll. of glosses 742 pats down 8ed& (puteus^ barathrum) for hell^
and 2180 cwia for tartarus, 1284 cwis-husle, where undoubtedly
we must read cwia-susle. To cwü I can find no clue but the ON.
qvis calumnia [quiz^ tease 7 queror, questus 7] ; sfAsl is apparently
tormentum^ supplicium^ the dictionaries having no ground for
giving it the sense of sulphur (AS. swefel) ; ' susle ge-innod/
Casdm. 3^ 28, 1 take to be supplicio clausum. The notion of the
well agrees remarkably with the fable in the Beinhart, where
the hero having fallen into a well wheedles the wolf into the
bucket; he pretends he is sitting in parcuUs down there, only
there is no getting to it but by taking ' einen tuk (plunge) in die
helle.* The well easily leads to the notion of bathing : ' ze helle
baden/ MsH. 2, 254*; for you can bathe in fire and brimstone
too (see Suppl.).

Christian and heathen notions on the punishments of the lost
are found mixed in the S6Iarlio% of the Edda, Saom. 128-9.
Snakes, adders, dragons dwell in the christian hell (Caadm.
270-1), as at the Hvergelmir root (p. 796). It is striking how
the poem of Oswald (Haupt's Zeitschr. 2, 125) represents a
dead heathen woman as a she^wolf, with the devils pouring pitch
and brimstone down her throat. Dante in his Purgatorio and
Inferno misses up what he finds handed down by the Mid. Ages
and classical literature. Bead also the conclusion of Ceadmon
(Fundgr. 202); and in the Barlaam 310, Budolf's brief bat
poetic picture of hell ' (see SuppL).

That the heathen Mist-world lying far to the north was not
filled with fire, comes out most clearly from its opposite, a Flame-
world in the south (p. 558), which the Edda calls Muspell or
Muspells-heimr. This is bright and hot, glowing and burning,^

i Wallach, iad (hiatos), iadul hell.

> As evening is the 'mouth of night.*

' Here we may snm np what livüig men have reached Hades and come back: of
the Greeks, Orpheus in search of Eorydice; Odysseus; Aeneas. Of Norsemen, Her-
mölSr when dispatched after Baldr, and Hadding (Saxo Gram. p. 16). Medieval
legends of Brandanus and Tundalns ; that of Tanhauser and others like it shall
come in the next chap. Monkish dreams, visions of princes who see their ancestors
in hell, are coll. in D.S. nos. 461. 527. 680. 554 ; of the same kind is the vision of
the vacant chair in the Annolied 724, conf. Tundalus 66, 7.

^ Mnspellsheimr is not heaven, nor are the sons of Muspell the same as the
light elvei that live in heaven (p. 445) ; when Surtr has burnt up heaven and eartli,

VOL. II. B fi


808 TIME AND WORLD.

natives alone can exist in it^ hence human beings from onr world
never pass into it^ as into the cold one of the north. It is guarded
by a god (?) named Surtr, bearer of the blazing sword.

In the word Muspell we find another striking proof of the
prevalence of ON. conceptions all over Teutondom. Not only
has the Saxon Heliand a rmidspelK 79^ 24^ mutspelli 133, 4», but
a High German poem, probably composed in Bavaria, has at line
62 muspilli (dat. muspille). Besides, what a welcome support
to the age and real basis of the Edda, coming from Saxon and
Bavarian manuscripts of the 9th cent, and the 8th I Eyeiy-
where else the term is extinct : neither Icelanders nor other
Scandinavians understand it, in Anglo-Saxon writings it has
never shewn itself yet, and later specimens of German, High
and Low, have lost all knowledge of it. Assuredly a primitive,
a heathenish word.^

On its general meaning I have already pronounced, p. 601 :
it can scarcely be other than fire, flame. The Heliand passages
. tell us : ' mudspellea megin obar man ferid,' the force of fire
fareth over men ; ' mutspelli cumit an thiustrea naht, al so thiof
ferid damo mid is d&diun,^ fire cometh in dark night, as thief
fareth secret and sudden with his deeds (Matth. 24, 43. 2 Pet.
3, 10) ; and the 0H6. poet says : ' dar ni mac denne milk an-
dremo helfan vora demo rmtspille, denna daz preitä wasal (Graff
1,1063) allaz varprennit,^ enti viur enti lufb allaz arfurpit,^ then
no friend can help another for the fire, when the broad shower
of glowing embers (?) burns up all, and fire and air purge
(furbish) everything.

It must be a compound, whose latter half spilli, spelli, spell
we might connect with the ON. spiöll (corruptio), spilla (oorrmn-
pere), AS. spUlan (perdere), Engl, spill, OHG. spildan, OS.
spildian (perdere) ; ^ ON. mannspiöU is clades hominum, Isespioll
(Nialss. c. 158) perhaps bellum. But we are left to guess what

theie lies abore this heaTen a second, named Andl&ngrt and above that a third
named Vi&bldinnt and there it is that light elve» alone live now, says Snoiri 22.

^ In Nemnieh, among the many names given for the bittern (OHG. horotombil,
onocrotalns, ardea stellaris), there is also muspelt which probably has to do with
moss and moor, not with onr word.

" So I read (trans.) for ' varprinnit ' (intrans.), as * wasal * cannot otherwise be
explained.

» OHG. M= ON. II ; conf. * wüdi, kold » with * viUr, guU.* But then why is it
not muspildi in the OHG. and OS. poems 7


MUSPILLI. 809

mud, mu {md ?) can be, whether earth, land, or else wood, tree.
In the latter case, mudspelli is a descriptive epithet of fire, an
element aptly named the wood-destroying, tree- consuming, as
elsewhere in the Edda it is hani vifar (percussor, inimicus ligni),
grand viffar (perditio ligni), Sn. 126 ; the Lex Alam. 96, 1 has
medela, medula in the sense of lancwitu, lancwit (Grramm. 3, 455),
the Lex Bothar. 305 modula, apparently for qnercus, robur (Orafif
2, 707), and the ON. mei&r. (perh. for mey8r, as sei'Sr for seySr)
is arbor, Lith. medis [Mongol, modo] arbor, lignum. The other
supposition would make it land-destroying, world-wasting ; but
still less do I know of any Teutonic word for land or earth that
is anything like Ttiud or rrm. We may fairly regard it as a much
obscured and distorted form; Finn, maa is terra, solum (see
Suppl.).!

Surtr (gen. Surtar, dat. Surti, Seem. 9*) is the swart, swarthy,
browned by heat, conn, with svartr (niger), yet distinct from it ; '
it occurs elsewhere too as a proper name, Fomald. sog. 2, 114.
Islend. sog. 1, 66. 88. 106. 151.206; and curiously ' Surtr enn
hvtti,' ibid. 1, 212. But there must have been another form
Surti, gen. Surta, for in both Eddas we meet with the compound
Surtalogi, Seem. 37^*. Sn. 22. 76. 90. A certain resinous
charred earth is in the North still called Surtarbrandr (Surti
titio, Biörn sub v., F. Magn. lex. 730), a mode of naming indica-
tive of a superior being, as when plants are named after gods.
Volcanic rock-caves in Iceland are called Surtarhellir (F. Magn.
lex. 729) ; the Landnämab6k 3, 10 (Isl. sog. 1, 151) tells how
one Thdrvaldr brought to the cave of the iotunn Snrtr a song
composed about him : ' ]?& fdr hann upp til hellisins Surta, oc
foerSi }^ar dräpu ]?&, er hann haf'Si ort um iötuninn i hellinum ' ;
and Sn. 209^ 210^ includes Surtr and Svartr among the names
of giants. Nowhere in the two Eddas does Surtr appear as a

1 Bhonld any one reject these explanations, and take e.g. OS. mudspelli for

* math-spelli/ oris eloqoiam, or * mdt-sp./ mntationis nantias (as I proposed in
Gramm. 2, 525), he is at once met by the objection, ^t the Bay. poet writes
neither * mxmd-sp.' nor * müz-sp.,' any more than the ON. has monn-spiall ' or

* müt-sp.' ; and then how are these meanings to be reconciled with that of * heimr ' ?
let alone the fact that there is no later (christian) term for the world's end or the
judgment-day pointing at all that way.

^ Sortr might stand related to svartr, as the Goth, name Svartns to the adj.
svarts. Procopios de hello Goth. 2, 16. 4, 25 has a Herolian name 2ovo/n-ovaf,
Svartva ? The AS. geneal. of Deira has Swearta and Swerting, conf . Beow. 2406,
and * sweart racn ' below.


810 TIME AND WORLD.

god, but always, like other giants, as an enemy and assailant o!
the gods. In Völuspft 48 (Saem. 8*) fire is caUed ' Surta sefi,'
Surti amicus ,- and in 52 (Ssem. 8^) we read :

Surtr far sunnan me^ sviga leifi,
skin af sverSi s61 valttva,

i.e. Surtus tendit ab austro cum vimine gigas, splendet e gladio
(ejus) sol deornm : ' leifi ' is plainly another word for giant, Sn.
209»; 'valtlva' can only be a gen. pi. (conf. Saem. lO» 52») and
dependent on s61, not gen. sing, of valttvi (which never occurs,
p. 194) dep. on sverSi ; what can be the meaning here of ' svigi '
(usually twisted band, wisp ?) I cannot say, one would think it
also referred to the brandished sword. Surtr thqn is expressly
called a giant, not a god. Sn. 5 says : ' s& er Surtr nefndr, er
)?ar sitr & landzenda til landvamar, hann hefir loganda sverff ,
Surtus vocatur, qui sedet in fine regionis (i.e. Muspellsheims) ad
earn tuendam, ensemque gestat ardentem {iee Suppl.).

The authors of the Heliand and the OHÖ. poem, both christian,
but still somewhat versed in heathen poetry, alike introduce
muspUli at the end of the world, at the approach of the Judgment-
day, when the earth and all it contains will be consumed by fire.
And that is exactly how the Edda describes the same event :
Surtr arises with the sons pf muspell, makes war upon all the
gods and overcomes them, the whole world perishes by his fire,
Sn. 5. 73. When he with his blazing brand comes on from the
South, the rocks in the mountains reel, the giantesses flee, men
go the way of the dead, heaven cracks asunder, Saem. 8^ ; the
Ases do battle with Surtr and his host on a holm called
Oskopnir (supra p. 144), they are all slain, and the world comes
to an end (see SuppL).

It is only the Edda that brings in the name of Surtr ; but our
OHG. poetry seems to have interwoven features of him into the
church doctrine about Antichrist, OHG. Antichristo (p. 173-4),
which, originally founded on the 11th chap, of Revelation, was
afterwards worked out further on Jewish-christian lines of
thought. The name occurs in two epistles (1 John 2, 18. 4, 3.
2 John 7), not in the Apocalypse, where he is meant by the
many-headed beast. In his time two prophetic witnesses are to be
sent from heaven to earth, but to be conquered and slain by him.


MTJSPILLI. 811

Their names are not given either ; that they are Enoch and Elias
follows from the power given them to shut heaven that it rain
not^ and is expressly acknowledged by the Fathers.^ Their
bodies lie nnburied in the street : after this victory the power of
Antichrist attains its greatest height, nntil he gets npon the
Mount of Olives, to ascend into heaven ; then the angel Michael
appears, and cleaves his skull.^

With this narrative our 0. Bavarian poet had become acquainted
through learned men (weroltrehtwtsS), but still the old heathen
pictures of the world's destruction come floating before him as
' maspilli ^ draws nigh : he makes much of the flames, he sees
the mountains set on fire by the blood of the mortally wounded
Elias dropping on the earth ; no such circumstance is found in
any christian tradition. The sky swelters in a blaze (suilizöt
lougiA), the earth bums (prinnit mittilagart), and his already
quoted ' dar ni mac denne m&k andremo helfan vera demo mus^
ftUe% supported as it may be by Mark 13, 12. Luke 21, 16,
sounds very like the Eddie

brcB^r muno berjaz ok at bönom verSa,

muno systrftngar sifjum spilla,

man ecki malSr ölSrum }^yrma (Saem. 7^ 8*).

He has ' mano fallit,' as Saemund has 'sol tekr sortna, hverfa
af himni hei^ar stiömurj Again Sn. 71 : ' ]?& drepaz brcelSr fyrir
ägimi sakar, oc engi j^yrmir fölSr eSa syn t manndr&pum oc
sifjaslitL' ^ So even a MHO*, poet of the 12th cent. (Fundgr.
194) : ' so ist danneniht triuwe diu frowe der diuwe (maid), noch
der man dem wibe ; si lebent alle mit nide ; so hazzet der vater
den sun,' etc. One would like to know what heathen figure


1 Jnstin Martyr*8 Dial, cnm Tryph. ed. Sylb. p. 208 ; Tertoll. de anima cap. 60,
de resorr. eamis cap. 58 ; Hippolvtns in A67ot repl rijs ffwreXelas rod KÖa-fiov xcd repl
TOO drrtxpi^ou ; Dorothens Tyr. ae vita prophet, cap. 18 ; Ambrose on ApocaL cap.
11 ; Aug. de ciy. Dei 20, 29 ; Greg. Magn. in moral. 16, 18. And see authors
qnoted in Hofbn. Fondgr. 2, 102 seq. and Eansler's Anl. denkm. 1, 486. For later
times, oonf. N. ps. 68, 7. 73, 10 ; Boroard. Wormat. 20, 98-7 ; Otto Fiising. 8, 1-8;
Disoip. de tempore, serm. 10.

3 12-13th cent, accounts of Antichrist in the Hortus delici. of Herrat of Lands-
berg (Engelhard p. 48) ; in Cod. yind. 653, 121-2 ; Fnnd«^. 1, 195-6. 2, 10^—134 ;
Martina 191 seq. ; Wackemag. Basle MBS. 22»; and oonf. Introd. to Freidank
Izii. Izxii.

s No stronger argument do I know for the theory that VölnspA is an echo of
our Scriptnres, than the agreement of the Edda and the Bible in this particular ; if
only the rest would ooxrespond 1


812 TIME AND WOBLD.

Antichristo took tbe place of to Bavarians and Alamanns^ it most
have been one similar to the Norse 8urir. Antichristo plays the
fiendish hypocrite^ Surtr is painted as the adversary of the Ases,
as a giant^ and his fire consumes the world. The muspells-synir
are all drawn np in sqnadrons of lights they and Sartr by their
fighting bring aboat a higher order of things^ while Antichrist is
but transiently victorious^ and is finally overthrown by a mightier
power (see Suppl.).

What adds new weight to the whole comparison is the affinity
between Donar and Elias, which was made oat on p. 173-4 and
is clear on other grounds. To the 8th cent. Elias might well seem
something more than the Hebrew prophet^ viz. a divine hero^
a divinity. The Edda makes all the Ases^ Odinn, Thorr, Freyr,
and l}yrj unite their powers to do battle with the sons of fire
and their confederates^ yet they are beaten like Enoch and Elias :
Elias bears a marked resemblance to Th6rr (or Donar) ^ Michael
to the queller of Garmr or Fenris-Alfr ; I do not say that Enoch
is equally to be identified with any particular god, but he might.
Surtr with the flaming sword may remind us of the angel that
guards Paradise, but he also finds his counterpart in the story of
Enoch and Elias, for these two, at least in the legend of Brandan
(in Bruns p. 187), have an angel with a fiery sword standing by

their side.^ An AS. homily De temporibus Antichristi quoted

by Wheloc on Beda p. 495 (supra p. 161n.) contains remarkable
statements. Arrogant Antecrist, it says, not only strives against
God and his servants, but sets himself up above all heathen gods :
^ He &hefS hine silfhe ofer ealle ]?& ]7e hsd^ene men cwasdon J^aat
godas been sceoldon, on hsBj^ene wisan. Swylc swft W89s Ercidus
se ent, and Apollinis, ^e hi maeme god l^ton, Dhore&G and EowSen,
ye hsej^ene men heria^ swi^e. Ofer ealle ]783s he hine SBune up
ähefS, forSam he ladt ßcet he ana si strengra ßonne hi ealle J Why
does the preacher say all this ? Had Saxon songs also identified
the advent of Antichrist with heathen traditions, and recognised
his victory, like that of Surtr, over Woden and Thunor ? The
un-Saxon forms Eow8en and Dh6r indicate Norse or Danish

influence. But a decisive connexion is established by the

AS. Salomon and Saturn (Kemble p. 148) : in the great battle

* M. Nethl. poems in Blommaert 1, 105«. '^, 12* haye simply an * out man ' in
Enoch's place, but they mention the cherubtn med enen »werde vierin.


MUSPELLI. RAGNA-BÖK. 813

between God and Antichrist, we are told. Thunder was threshing
with his^ry axe, ' se Thunor hit )7rysce'8 mid ]fddve Jyrenan oeexe/
by which is unmistakably meant Thdr's Miölnir, the torrida
chalybs (p. 180), and the confluence of heathen beliefs with
those about Antichrist is placed beyond the reach of doubt. The
devil too is called malleus, hammer, chap. XXXIII.

Whoever is inclined to refer the characteristics of our antiquity
as a whole to Boman and christian tradition, could easily take
advantage of this harmony between the two pictures of the world's
destruction, to maintain that the Eddie doctrine itself sprang out
of those traditions of Antichrist. This I should consider a gross
perversion. The Norse narrative is simple, and of one piece with
all the rest of the Edda ; the myth of Antichrist is a jumble, nay
artificially pieced together. The two leading personages, Surtr
and Antichrist, have totally different characters. How should
the Scandinavians have foisted-in a number of significant acces-
sories, notably this of muspell, and again a H. German poet
nnconnected in time and place have tacked on the very same 7

What the Edda tells of Surtr and his combat with the Ases is
the winding-up of a fuller representation of the end of the world,^
whose advent is named aldar rök (Seem. 36*), aldar la</, aldar rof
(37^. 167»),» but more commonly ragna rök (7\ 38\ 96\ 166^) or
ragna rökr (65*. Sn. 30. 36. 70. 88. 165), i.e. twilight, darkening,
of time and the sovran gods (supra p. 26). Bök and rökr hoth
mean darkness, ro'/s rö&ra in Saam. 113* is an intensified expres-
sion for utter darkness ; Biöm renders röckur (neut.) crepus-
culum, röckva vesperascere. It is akin to the Ooth. riqis o-koto^,
riqizeins a-Koreivo^, riqizjan a-Kori^ea-dai, only that is increased
by a suffix -is, and has its radical vowel alien from the Norse ö,
which must be a modified a, so that rök stands for raku. This
is confirmed by the Jutish rag nebula, still more by the AS.
racu : ' ]7onne sweart racu stigan onginne^,' Gaedm. 81, 34 must
be rendered ' cum atra caligo surgere incipit.' Bökatolar (Saem.
P, conf. supra p. 136) are the chairs of mist whereon the gods sit
up in the clouds. To this rök, racu I refer the expression quoted


^ It is worth noting, that it is proclaimed by prophetesses, Vala, Hyndla ; and
later, Thiota (p. 96) announced congnmmationis seouli diem.

' Rof ruptura ; as they said * regin rtu/eu/ dii rompuntor, the world is going
to pieces.


814 TIME AND WORIiD.

on p. 753, ' die finstre ragende naclit/ which can hardly be ex-
plained from our ragen (rigere) stick ont.^ Bagnarok then is
the night of the gods^ which comes over all beings^ even the
highest^ p. 816 (see Sappl.)*

Then the evil beings^ long held in check and nnder spell^ break
loose and war against the gods : a wolf swallows the snn^ another
the moon (p. 705-6)^ the stars fall from heaven^ the earth qnakes^
the monstroas world-snake lörmongandr, seized with giant faiy
(iötunmo^r^ p. 530)^ rises out of the waters on to the land^
Fenris&lfr is set free (p. 244)^ and Naglfar afloat, a ship con-
structed out of dead men^s nails.^ Loki brings up the hrimthurses
and the retinue of Hel (Heljar sinnar)^ all the hellish^ wolfish kin-
dred have mustered together. But it is from the flame-world
that the gods have most danger to dread : Surtr and his glitter-
ing host come riding over Bifrost the rainbow (p. 732) in such
strength that they break it down. The single combatants are
disposed thus : O^inn fights with Fenris&lfr, Th6rr with lormun-
gandr^ Preyr with Surtr, T^ with Garmr/ Heimdall with Loki;
in every case the old gods go down, though Garmr and Loki fall
too, and Fenris&lfr is slain by Yi%kr> That Loki and all his kin
should come out as allies to the sons of flame, follows from his


> Pers. rache is said to mean vaponr ; may the Sanskr. rajani (nox) be also
brought in? The Slav, rok tempus, annna, terminus, fatnm, Lith. rakutf is worth
considering ; its abstract meaning may have sprang out of a material one, and fits
in perfectly with the notions of time and world developed on p. 790 [rok^ fate, is
from rekn, I speak] . Neither rok, rökr, nor riqis has anything to do with our
ranch, reek, ON. reykr. It is not correct for Danish writers to nse the form ragna-
rok; ON. rok must in their dialect be rag (as sök is sag) ; the OHQ. form of ragna-
rok would be regino-rahha, or -rah, -rahhu, according as it were fern, or neuter.
In Swed. and Dan. the term is extinct, but they both have a word for crepusculum,
Swed. tkysmörker^ Dan. tutmi^ke^ which may be from |>U8S, |>urs, implying an ON.
puTtmyrkr^ giant's murk, and that would tally with the giant nature of Surtr.

^ This is intended to express the enormous distance and tardy arriyal of the
world^B end : before such a yessel can be built of the tiny nail-parings of dead bodies
a longish time must elapse, which is still further protracted by the wholesome pre-
cept, always to pare the nails of the dead before burying or burning them ; conf. F.
Magnusen's Lex. 520. 820. Not unlike is the image of the mountain of eternity, to
which a bird adds one grain of sand every hundred years.

' Garmr, the hugest of all hound» (Sem. 46^), no doubt, like Kipßepot^ only
a metamorphosed giant, seems like him also to be a native of the under-world ;
when OSinn journeys to Niflhel, ' mcetti hann hvelpi >eim er or heljo kom,* met he
the whelp that came out of hell (94*) ; he barks long, he lies chained and barks *for
On^pafiellir ' (7*. 8*). The hell-nound of christian legend oomes nearer the None
wolf (see next note).

* VtSar's viotoiy over the wolf, in whose jaws he plants a foot mythicaUy shod
(Sn. 78), resembles the description in christian traditions of how the hell-hound was
Msailed ; conf. Fundgr. 1, 178-9.


END OF THE WORLD. 815

very nature^ he being a god of fire (p. 241). After tie world-
conflagration or Surtalogi, a new and happier earth rises out
of the sea^ with gods made young again^ but still called Aesir,
SsBm. 10 : a finale bearing an indisputable likeness to the Last
Judgment ^ and New Jerusalem of the christians. Strophe 65 of
the Völuspä, which expressly mentions the regindomr, has been
pronounced an interpolation^ because it is wanting in some MSS.;
but interpolation is not a thing to be gauged by the contents
alone, it must be incontrovertibly established by explicit proofs.
Even if it did take place, neither the heathen character of the
myth nor the age of the poem as a whole is thereby brought
under suspicion. For, as the heathen faith among early converted
races was not demolished at a blow,^ so here and there a chris-
tian dogma may also have penetrated even to nations that were
still heathen; conversely some heathen ways of thinking lingered
on among christians. Consider how the author of the Heliand
(131-2-3), while following the Gospels in describing the approach
of the Last Day, yet admits such rank heathenisms as ' Gebanes
strdm ^ and ' Mi^dspelli.^ In the very personifying of the Judg-
ment day i^verit stuatago in lant,' like ^muspelli humit') there is
a flavour of heathenism.

There seem to have existed some other traditions about the
world^s destruction, which have not come down to us in their
fulness. Among these 1 reckon the folk-tale mentioned on p. 429^
of the ring which the swan will drop from his mouth : it sounds
altogether antique, and possibly harks back to the notion of the
world-ring, p. 794.

To the destruction of the world hy fire, which heathens and
christians^ look forward to as future^ stands opposed that hy
watery which the histories of both represent as pa^t. The Burn-
ing, like the Deluge (pp. 576 — 81), is not to destroy for ever, but
to purify, and bring in its wake a new and better order of things
(see Suppl.).

1 OHG. antitago, tuonotac, iuanotago, tuomUtae, tuomtae^ stuatago (Goth.
8t4nadag8?) ; MHG. endetaCy tüenetac, tuomtac; OS. *the lazto dag,* ddmdag, ddmes-
dag, AS. d6mdag, Engl, doonu-day, ON. ddmtdagr,

' In Leyden'B Gomplaynt p. 98 is actually mentioned a story, * the tayl of the
wolfe and the warldifi end,* which was oarrent in Scotland and elsewhere (sapra
p. 245) as late as the 15th cent. Worth reading is an loel. free adaptation of the
Vatidniom Merlini, said to have been composed towards the end of the 12th oent.,
in which are mixed ON. ideas of the world's end, F. Magn. lex. 658-9.

> 2 Pet. 8, 12 ; oonf . Freidank 179, 4.


816 TIME AND WOBLD.

The ohurcli tradition of the Mid. Ages (based on Matth. 24,
Mark 13, Luke 21) accepts fifteen signs as premonitions of the
Jadgment-day ; ^ these do not include the unearthly winter, fim^
bulvetr, that wind-age (vindöld, p. 798, Haupt's Zeitschr. 7,
309), which according to both Eddas (Sasm. 36^. Sn. 71) pre-
cedes the ragnarökr, and is doubtless a truly Teutonic fancy ; *
but we have a darkening of the sun and moon described (p. 244),
and an earthquake, which equally precedes the twilight of the
gods : ' griotbiörg gnaia, himinn klofnar, gnyr allr lötunheimr,*
S83m. 8^; the ordinary term in ON. is land-skialfii, Sn. 50, or
'iörd shalfi' 'landit sk&lf, sem ft J>r8e«i 16ki,' Pornald. sog. 1,
424. 503.* For aeiafio^ TJiphilas gives the fem. reiro, he says
'airpskreirdida;' OS. 'ertha bivoda/ Hel. 168, 23; OHG. 'erda
bibinota/ 0. iv. 34, 1, and the subst. erdpipa, erdbibunga, erd-
giruomessi. Beinardus 1, 780 puts in juxtaposition: 'nee tremor
est terras, judidive dies;' and Servian songs: 'ili grmi, ü se
zemlia trese ? ' does it thunder, or does the earth shake ? (Vuk 2,
1. 105). But the earth^s quaking, like the Deluge, is oftener
represented as a past event, and is ascribed to various causes.
The Greek fable accounts for it by imprisoned cydops or titans
(Ov. Met. 12, 521) ; the Norse by the struggles of chained Loki
when drops of poison fall upon his face (SsBm. 69. Sn. 70), or by
F&fnir's journey to the water (Pornald. sog. 1, 159. 160). The
earth also quakes at the death of certain heroes, as Heimir (For-
nald. sog. 1, 232), and of the giant (Yilk. saga cap. 176). At
Roland's death there is lightning, thunder and earthquake, Bol.
240, 22. To the Indians the earth quakes every time one of the
eight elephants supporting the globe is tired of his burden, and
gives his head a shake.^ The Japanese say of an earthquake :
' there is another whale crept away from under our country ;* the


^ Thorn. Aquinas (d. 1274) in Libnim 4 sententiar. Petri Lomb. diet. 48. qa. 1.
art. 4 (Thomae opp. Venet. 13, 442). Asegabök (Biohth. 130-1). Haupt*B Zeitschr.
1, 117. 3, 523. Hoffm. Fondgr. 1, 196-7. 2, 127. Amgb. 39. Wackem^gers Basle
MSS. 22b. Massm. denkm. 6. Berceo (d. 1268) de los signos que aparoer&n ante
del Jnicio, in Sanohez coleocion 2, 273. Thomas, Asegabök and Beroeo aU refer to
Jerome, but no such enumeration of the 15 signs is to be found in his works. Bol.
289-90 and Earl 89* have similar signs at Boland's death (see Suppl.).

' Notice Saem. 119* : ' >a'San koma aniofar ok $narir vindar,* and the poetic de-
scriptions of winter in AS. writers: Andr. 1256-63. Beow. 2258.

» * Lönd oil skulfu,' Sn. 66 ; * fold for sHdlfandi' 148.

* Schlegel's Ind. bibl. no. 2.


BABTHQUAKBS. WALAHALLA. 817

Tahitians: 'God shakes the earth ;'^ the Lettons: 'Drebknls beats
the earthy and makes her tremble/ jast as the Greeks call their
Poseidon (Neptune) ^Ewoa-iyato^, ^Evvoa-lSa^ (see Sappl.)*

Oar forefathers thought of the sky not only as a roof to the
earth (p. 698), but as a heavenly kingdom, the dwelling-place of
gods and of blessed men whom they had taken np. The bridge
of the heavenly bow leads into it (p. 732), so does the milky way
(p. 366).

We mnst first suppose all that to have happened which was
told in chap. XIX about the creation of the world according to
ON. views. After the gods had set in order heaven and earth,
created Ask and Embla, and appointed Mi'SgarS to be the
habitation of man, they fitted up for themselves in the centre
of the world a dwelling-place named Asgarfr, in whose vast ex-
tent however a number of particular spots are specified.

None of these separate mansions is more celebrated than the
Odinic Valhöll (OHG. Walahalla?), whose name has an obvious
reference to the god's own appellation of Valföffr and to the
Valkyrs (p. 417).^ Into this abode, sometimes known as Otins
aalir (Seem. 148^), the war-maidens have conducted to him all
the heroes that from the beginning of the world have fallen in
valr, on the battle-field (the v&pn-bitnir, weapon-bitten, Yngl.
saga c. 10) ; these he adopts as children, they are oskasynir, sons
by wishing, ad-option,' and likewise sons of the god Wish (p.
143). Their usual name is einherja/r, egregii, divi, as QSinn him-
self is called Herjan and Herjafödr, and heri means the fighting
hero (p. 342-8). It must not be overlooked-, that Th6rr himself
is called an einheri, SsBm. 68% as if a partaker of Yalhöll. From
the existence of a proper name Einheri in OHG. (e.g. Meichelbeck
no. 241. 476. Schannat 137), I argue the former prevalence of
the mythical term amongst us also ; yet not with certainty, as it
may be a contracted form of Eginheri, Aganheri, like Einhart for
Eginhart, Beinhart for Beginhart. Valhöll is covered with shields^

1 Zimmerm. Tasofaenb. f. reisen, jahrg. 9 abth. 2. Adelang*s Mithrid. 1, 634.

* Prob, also to Valaskidlff the hall covered with silver, Stem. 41*. Sn. 21 ; oonf.
Hliffskialft p. 135. Skidlf expresses the quivering motion of the airy mansion,
like bif in Bifröst. Oar OHG. * walaekt des dwigen Itbes,' Is. 73, 4 seems not
merely possessio vitae SBternsB, bat an emphatic term purposely chosen.

' * Got setzet si in sine schdz,' in hid bosom, Ls. 3, 92.


818 TIMB AND WORLD.

(Sn. 2) and nambers 540 doors^ each affording passage to 800
einheries at once^ or 432,000 in all^ SsBni. 43*. In the midst of
it stands a mighty tree Ljemffr, Lceraffr, whose foliage is crept by
the she-goat Heiärün; the goat's udder yields (as Amalthea's
horn did nectar) a barrelful of mead a day, enough to nourish all
the einheries. The stag Eikßymir gnaws the branches of the
tree, and out of his horns water trickles down into H^ergelmir
continually, to feed the risers of the underworld (pp. 558. 561).

This mansion of bliss all valiant men aspired to, and attained
after death ; to the evildoer, the coward, it was closed ^ : ' mun
s& malSr braut rekinn ur Fo/AoUu, ok ^r aldrei koma,' Nialss.
cap. 89. To wage a life-and-death conflict with a hero was
called shewing him to Walhalla (visa til Valhallar), Fomald.
sog. 1, 424. Sagas and panegyric poems paint the reception of
departed heroes in Walhalla: when Helgi arrives, OSinn offers
to let him reign with him, Sssm. 166^; the moment Helgi has
acquired the joint sovereignty, he exercises it by imposing menial
service on Hundingr, whom he had slain. Thus the distinctions
of rank were supposed to be perpetuated in the future life. On
the approach of Eyrikr, OSinn has the benches arranged, the
goblets prepared, and wine brought up (Fragm. of song, Sn. 97) ;
Sigmund and Sinfiotli are sent to meet him (Midler's Sagabibl.
2, 375). The H&konarm&l is a celebrated poem on Häkon's wel-
come in Yalholl. But even the hall of a king on earth, where
heroes carouse as in the heavenly one, bears the same name
Valhöll (Sa&m. 244\ 24<>* anent AÜi). The abodes and pleasures
of the gods and those of men are necessarily mirrored in each
other ; conf. pp. 336. 393 (see Suppl.) .

Indian mythology has a heaven for heroes, and that of Ghreece
assigns them an elysium in the &r West, on the happy isles of
Okecmos; we may with perfect confidence assert, that a belief in
Walhalla was not confined to our North, but was common to all
Teutonic nations. A 'vita Idae' in Pertz 2, 571 uses the ex-
pression 'coelorum }xilatinae eedes/ implying that a court is
maintained like the king's palatium, where the departed dwell.
Still more to the point is the AS. poet's calling heaven ^ a shield'

^ A 13th cent. poem, to be pnmsaüj quoted, has whetiäj an immistakaUe zefer-
enee to oar tale of tne »pUlwMtm or tpielkmmsel (Jack player), who is turned oot of
heaven, beeaose he has led a bad life, and pofonned no deeds.


WALAHALLA. 819

bwrg, which, like ValhöU, was covered with golden shields (p. 700).
In the 'vita Wnlframi' there is shewn to the Frisian king Radbot
a house glittering ivith gold, prepared for him when he dies (D.S.
no. 447. V, d, BorgVs 07erlev,,93) ; like that described in MS.
2, 229b :

In himeliich ein hüs st&t,

ein galdin wee dartn gkt,

die siule die sint mermelin^

die zieret unser trehtin

mit edelem gesteine.

A poem of the 13th cent. (WamuDg 2706 — 98) declares that
the kingdom of heaven is to be won by heroes only, who have
fought and bear upon them scars from stress of war (n&ch ur-
linges n6t), not by a useless fiddler :

Die herren vermezzen

ze gemache sint gesezzen,

unt ruowent immer mdre

n&ch verendetem s^re.

Versperret ist ir burctor,

beliben miiezen d& vor

die den strit niht en-v&hten

unt der flühte ged&hten. —

SwU 86 helde suln beliben

ir herren ir müezet vehten,

welt ir mit guoten knehten

den selben gmach niezen (see Sappl.).

(There men high-mettled to repose are settled, they rest ever-
more from ended sore. Barred is their borough-gate ; and they
without must wait who the fight ne'er fought, but of flight took
thought, etc.)

But another thing must have been inseparable from the heathen
conception, viz. that in Walhalla the goblet goes round, and the
joyous carouse of heroes lasts for ever.^ Several expressions may

1 The Bame thought is strongly expressed in a well-known epitaph :

Wiek, düvel, wiek 1 wiek wit van mi (get away from me) I

ik soher mi nig (I oare not) en har nm di,

ik ben en meklenburgsoh edelman :

wat geit di düvel min süpen an (to do with my quaffing) ?


820 TIME AND WORLD.

be accepted as proofs of this. Olaffs-hsimr is tlie name of the
spot on which Yalhöll is reared^ Saom. 41*; in OlaSsheim stands
the high seat of Allfather^ Sn. 14« A house by the side of it,
built for goddesses, bears the name of Vin-golf, but it seems also
to be used synonymously with Yalhöll, as one poet sings : ' vildac
glalSr 1 Vingolf fylgja ok meiS einherjum öl drecka.' Vingolf is
literally amica aula, and it is by the almost identical words wiiv-
burg, winsele, as well as goldburg, goldsele, that AS« poets name
the place where a king and his heroes drink (Pref. to Andr. and
El. xxxvii.-yiii.). GlalSsheimr or gla'Sheimr may mean either
glad, or bright, home; even now it is common to call heaven a
hall of joy, vale of joy, in contrast to this vale of tears (p. 795),
I do not know if the aiicient term mona gaudii, mendelberc (p.
170 n.) had any reference to heaven ; but much later on, a joyful
blissful abode was entitled saBldenberc (Diut. 2, 85),wonnenberg,
freudenberg : ' to ride to the freudenberg at night ' says a Bee.
of 1445 (Amoldi^s Misc. 102); 'thou my heart's freudensal* is
addressed to one's lady love (Fundgr. 1, 335), like the more
usual ' thou my heaven * ; and in thieves' slang freudenberg and
wonnenberg = doxy. Frevden-thal, »berg, -garten often occur as
names of places (see Suppl,).^

Let us see how much of these heathen fancies has survived
among christian ones, or found its counterpart in them. The
name Yalhöll, Walahalla, seems to have «been avoided; winsele
may indeed have been said of heaven, but I can only find it used
of earthly dwelUngs, Caedm. 270, 21. Beow. 1383. 1536. 1907.
On the other hand our later and even religious poets continue
without scruple to use the i^vm. freudejisal for heaven, for heavenly

ik sup mit min herr Jesa Christ,
wenn dn, düvel, ewig dörsten must,
nn drink mit en fort koUe schalt
wenn dn sittst in de höllequal.

This is not mere railing, but the sober earnest of heroes who mean to drink and
hunt with Wuotan ; conf. Lisoh's Mekl. jahrb. 9, 447.

1 Such a land of bliss is part of Celtic legend too, the fav Morgan (p. 412 n.)
conducts to it ; I read in Parz. 56, 18 : den faort ein feie, hiez Morgan, in Ter de la
$choye (joie ; see Snppl.). Bemember also the Norse glerhiminn (ooelom yitreom),
a paradise to which old heroes ride (larlmagus saga p.m. 320-2) ; legends and lavs
have gUus-hergs and gUus-hurgs as abodes of heroes and wise women, e.g. Brynild's
smooth nnscalable glarhjerg (Dan. V. 1, 182), and the four ^Uusbergs in Wolfdiet.
(Cod. Dresd. 289), conf. the Lith. and Pol. glass-mountam of the nnderworld,
p. 836 n. A gUuS'hotue in the air (chAtean en Tair) occurs as early as Tzistan,
ed. Michel 2, 103, conf. 1, 222


PAEADISE. 821

joy is christian too. Also : ' stigen ze himel M der sodden here/
climb the mount of bliss^ Wackern. Basle MSS. p. 5. The
christian faith tells of two places of bliss^ a past and a fhtare.
One is where the departed dwell with God ; the other^ forfeited
by our first parents' sin^ is represented as a garden, Eden. Both
are translated irapahetao^ in the LXX, whence paradisus in the
Yulg.; this is said to be a Persian word^ originally denoting
garden or park, which is confirmed by the Armenian bardez
(hortns). The only passage we have the advantage of consulting
in XJlph., 2 Cor. 12, 4, has vaggs, the OHGr. wane (campus amoe-
nus, hortus) . Our OHG. translators either retain paradisi, Fragm.
theot. 41, 21, or use timnnigrar^o, 61. Jun. 189. 217. Hymn 21,
6. wunnogarto, N. ps. 37, 5; conf. Hhaz wunnisama {eld/ 0, ii.
6, 11. 'after paradises wunnen/ Diut. 3, 51. MHG. 'der wunns
garte/ Fuozesbr. 126, 27. ' der wollüste garte,' MsH. 3, 463\
OHG. zartgarto, N. ps. 95, 10, The name wunnigarto may be
substantially the same as vingolf, winsele, as wunna for wunia,
Goth, vinja, lies close to wini (amicus). A strange expression is
the AS. neorxena-wong, neorxnawong, Cssdm. 11, 6. 13, 26. 14,
12. 115, 23, of which I have treated in Gramm. 1, 268. 2, 267.
8, 726 ; it is apparently field of rest,^ and therefore of bliss, and
may be compared to Goth, vaggs, OS. heben-wang, Hel. 28, 21.
176, 1 ; the 'noms' are out of the question, especially as heaven
is never called norna-v&ngr in ON. poems. Beside hebenwang,
the OS. poet uses odas-hem 96, 20 and üp-ödas-hem 28, 20.
85, 21, domus beatitudinis, the ' hSm ' reminding us of heimr in
glalSsheimr, as the ' garto ' in wunnigarto does of &sgarSr. Up-
ödashfim is formed like üphimil, and equally heathen. All the
Slavs call paradise rai, Serv. raj, Pol. ray. Boh. rag, to which
add Lith. rojtts, sometimes called rojaus sodas (garden of par.),
or simply da/rzas (garden). Bai as a contraction of paradise
(Span, parayso) is almost too violent ; Anton (Essay on Slavs 1,
35) says the Arabic arai means paradise.'

Like YalhöU, the Greek Elysium too, ^Xvaiov weBuiv (Plutarch
4, 1156. Lucian de luctu 7) was not a general abode of all the


' The ^tarri ßwHi, Od. 4, 565.

> To me the connexion of rai (and perh. of r6d glad, billing) with {tBXt^ ^,
Mwt (^atdiof) easy, and ^eca easily, seems obvioas. Homer's gods are {tela ^i^orrcf
Hying in ease, — Trans.


822 TIME AND WORLD.

dead^ but of picked heroes: the Greeks too made the highest
blessedness wait upon the warrior's valour. Neither were all
heroes even admitted there^ Menelaos was as son-in-law of Zeus,
Od. 4, 569 ; others even more renowned were housed with
Aides, in Hades. Achilles paces the flowery mead, the aa'<l>oS€Kb^
Xeifitov of the underworld^ whither Hermes conducts the souls
of the slain suitors^ Od. 11^ 539. 24^ 13. Lncian de lucta 5.
philops. 24.

This ' ea' of the blest is no less known to our native song and
story. Children falling into wells pass through green meadows to
the house of friendly HoUa. Flore 24, 22 : ' swer im selber den
tdt tuet, den geriuwet diu vart, und ist im euch verspart diu toisef
dar du komen wilt^ an der Blancheflür spilt (plays), mit andern
genuogen (enow), die sich niht ersluogen;' who slays himself
will rue such journey, to him is eke denied that mead, etc. Floris
1107: 'int ghebloide velt (flowery field), ten paradise.' 1248:
' waenstu dan comen int ghebloide velt, daer int paradis ? ' 1205 :
' ic sal varen int ghebloide velt, daer Blancefloeren siele jeghen die
mine gadert, ende leset bloemekine.' The French Flores in the
corresponding passages has camp fl^ori (Altd. bl. 1, 373),^ in
Bekker's ed. of Flore 786. 931. 1026. But our older poets, pro-
bably even those of heathen times, imagined heaven, like the
earth, as a green plain : ' teglidid groni wang ' (the earth), Hel.
131, 1 ; 'himilriki, groni Qodes wang ' 94, 24. ^ groni wang para-
dise gelic' 96, 15. 'the groneo wang* 23, 4 is said of Egypt.
Caadm. 32, 29 : ' br&de sind on worulde grene geardasJ Häko-
narmäl 13 : ' ri'Sa ver nu sculom grcena heima go^a,' i.e. to heaven.
In many parts of Germany paradis and goldne aue are names of
places to this day. So viretum in Yirgil has the sense of para-
dise, Aen. 6, 638 :

Devenere locos laetos et amoena vireta
fortunatorum nemorum sedesque beatas.

Paradise then is twofold, a lost one, and a future one of the
earth emerging newly green out of the wave : to Iffavöllr, in
whose grass the gods pick up plates of gold (for play), SsBm. 9^
10^, corresponds that older Iffavöllr where the äses founded As-

^ The M. NethL poem Beatiis 1037 plaoea the Last Judgment * int $oete dal,
daer God die werelt doemen sal.'


ELYSIUM. . 823

garS, to the renovated realm of the fature a yaniahed golden age
that flowed with milk and honey (see Sappl.) .^

The younger heaven has in the Edda another name^ one pecn-
liar to itself, and occurring only in the dative ' & gimli/ Ssem.
10.* Sn. 4, 75 [but 21 gimli as nom. ?], for which I propose a
nom. gimill (not gimlir) standing for himill, a form otherwise
wanting in ON., and = OHGr. OS. himil by the same consonant-
change as G^mir for H^mir ; and this is confii*med by the juxta-
position ' & gimli, & himni,' Sn. 75. Now this Oimill is clearly
distinct from the Odinio YalhöU : it does not make its appearance
till ragnarökr has set in and the &ses have fallen in fight with the
sons of muspell. Then it is that a portion of the äses appear to
revive or become young again. Baldr and Hödr, who had gone
their way to the underworld long before the twilight of the gods,
Hoßnir who had been given as a hostage to the Vanir, are named
in Völuspä. (Saem. 10**), as gods emerging anew; they three were
not involved in the struggle with Surtr. Then again Sn. 76
gives us Viffar and Vali, who unhurt by Surtalogi revive the old
AsgarS on I^SavöUr, and with them are associated Modi and Magni,
beside Baldr and Hö$r from the underworld; Hcenir is here
passed over in silence. Vi^ar and Vali are the two avengers, one
having avenged OSin's death on Fenrisülf, the other Baldr^s death
on Hö^Sr (hefniÄss Baldrs dölgr Ha^Sar, Sn. 106) . They two, and
Baldr the pure blameless god of light, are sons of OSinn, while
Mö'Si and Magni appear as sons of Thörr by a g^gr, and from
that time they bear the emblem of his might, the all-crushing
Miolnir. Unquestionably this means, that OSinn and Thörr, the
arch-gods of old AsgarS, come into sight no more, but are only
renewed in their sons. Baldr signifies the beginning of a mild
spring time, p. 614 (see Suppl.).

' It is natural that this paradise, past or to oome, should have ^ven birth to
varioas tales of an earthly paradise, lying in regions ffu: away, wUoh has been
reached by here and there a traveller : thus Alexander in his Indian campaign is
said to have arrived at paradise. Not the Eddas themselves, but later Icel. sagas
tell of OdAint-akr (immortalitatis ager) ; a land where no one sickens or dies, oonf.
d£inn mortaas, morti obnozius (p. 453) ; the Hervararsaga (Fomald. sog. 1, 411.
513) places it in the kingdom of a deified king Oo^mundr (conf. Go'Sormr p. 161) ;
aoo. to the Saga Ereks vi-Sförla (Fomald. sog. S, 519. 661-6. 670) it lay in Üie east,
not far from India. Can this * Erekr hum vitSf örU * be the hero of the lost MHQ.
poem Erek der walkere (pilgrim)? The name Od&insakr may however be an
adaptation of an older and heathen OtSinsakraVaUhöll, oonl the Oden sfiker in
Sweden, p. 158, last line.

70L. II. CO


824 TIME AITB WORLD.

AgaiD^ as Valholl had only received men who died by weapons
(yäpn-dau'Sa vera)^ whilst other dead men were gathered in Folk-
v&ngr with Freyja (p. 804), and virgins with Gtefjon (Sn. 36) ;
from this time forward Gimill takes in without distinction all the
jast^ the good, and Hel all the bad, the criminal ; whereas the
former Hel, as a contrast to YalhöU, nsed to harbour all the resi-
dae of men who had not fallen in fight, withont its being implied
that they were sinners deserving punishment.

The most difficult point to determine is, how matters exactly
stand with regard to Surtr, to whom I must now return. That
he is represented, not as a god, but as a giant of the fire-world,
has been shown, p. 809 ; nor is he named among the renovated
gods ' & gimli ' in Saem. 10' or Sn. 76, which would have been
the place for it. In one MS. alone (Sn. 75, var. 3) is apparently
interpolated ' ä Gimli me9r 8v/rti ; ' and it is mainly on this that
Finn Magnusen rests his hypothesis, that Surtr is an exalted god
of light, under whose rule, as opposed to that of OSinn, the new
and universal empire stands. He takes him to be that mightier
one from whose power in the first creation days the warmth
proceeded (p. 562), the strong (öflugr) or rich one revealed by the
vala, who shall direct all things (sä er öUu resi^r, Sasm. 10^), like-
wise the mighty one foreseen by Hyndla, whose name she dare
not pronounce (j^k kemr annar enn mättkari, }?ö )?ori ec eigi )7ann
at nefna, Sasm. 119') ; conf. the strengra of the AS. homily (p.
812). But why should she have shrunk from naming Surtr, of
whom no secret is made in Ssdm. 8^-^. 9'. 33', the last passage
positively contrasting him with the mild merciful gods (in svftso
go's) ? The invasion of Surtr in company with the liberated Loki
must anyhow be understood as a hostile one (of giant's or devil's
kin) ; his very name of the swart one points that way.

The unuttered god may be likened to the ayvtoaro^ Oeo^ (Acts
17, 23), still more to the word that OSinn whispered in the ear
of his son Baldr's corpse, as it ascended the funeral pile r a secret
which is twice alluded to, in Seem. 38' and Hervarars. p. 487 ; so
an Etruscan nymph speaks tSe name of the highest god in the
ear of a buU.^ It has already been suggested (p. 815) that
presentiments of a mightier god to come may have floated before

' O. Mailer's Etr. 2, 83, with which mast be conn, the medieYal legend of
Silvester (Conrad's poem, pref. p. xx).


SUETR. 825

the heathen imagination^ like the promise of the Messiah to the
Jews.^

The world's destruction and its renewal succeed each other in
rotation ; and the interpenetration of the notions of time and
space^ world and creation^ with which I started^ has been proved.
Further^ as the time-phenomena of the day and the year were
conceived of as persons, so were the space-phenomena of the
world and its end (Hal ja. Hades, Snrtr).


1 Martin Hammerich om Bagnaroks-mythen, Gopenh. 1836, argues plausibly
that the tvnilight of the gods and the new kingdom of heaven are the expression of
a spiritual monotheism opposed, though as yet imperfectly, to the prevailing Odinic
paganism. But then there are renovated gods brought on the scene * ä gimli ' too,
though fewer than in AsgarS, and there is nothing to shew their subordination to
the mighty One. Still less do I think the author entitled to name this new god
ßmbtU^r, a term that in the whole of the Edda occurs bat once (SsBm. 9b),and then
seems to refer to O^inn. Others have ventured to identify the word fimbul- (which
like the prefix irman-, heightens the meaning of a word, as in fimbulfambi, fimbul-
|>ulr, fimbulvetr, fimbullio«, as well as fimbult^r) with the AS. fifel (p. 239) ; to
tnis also I cannot assent, as fifill itself occurs in ON., and is citod by Biom as
the name of a plant.


CHAFPER XXVI.
SOULS.

Langaages treat the living life-giving soul as a delicate feminine
essence : Goth. Baivala, akin to säivs the sea^ an nndnlating flaid
force, OHG. seola, sela, MHG. sele, NHG. seele, AS. sdwlj ON.
sal, Swed. Dan. sjcU, and hence Finn, sielu; Gr. ^v^Vi I^^t. Ital.
anima, Fr. ame, O. Fr. sometimes armey Span, cdma; Russ. Serv.
dusha, Slov. duzha, Boh. dw^e, Pol. dt^sia, Lith. duszxa^ Lett.
dwehsele. They all distinguish it from the maso. breath and
spirit, äv€fio<;, which goes in and out more palpably; often the
two names are next door to each other, as Lat. animtis and
anima, Slav, dukh and dusha}

And this intimate connexion may be recognised in the myths
too. The soul freed from the fetters of the body is made to re-
semble those airy spirit forms of chap. XVII (conf. pp. 489.
630) . It hovers with the same buoyancy, appears and vanishes,
often it assumes some definite shape in which it is condemned
to linger for a time (see Suppl.).

It is a graceful fancy which makes the departing soul either
break into blossom as a flower, or fly up as a bird. Both these
notions are connected with metamorphosis into plants and animals
in general, and are founded on the doctrine of metempsychosis
so prevalent in early antiquity. Immortality was admitted in this
sense, that the soul still existed, but had to put up with a new
body.

Its passing into a flower I can only infer. A child carries
home a bud, which the angel had given him in the wood ; when
the rose blooms, the child is dead (Kinder-leg. no. 3). In Ehesas
dainos p. 307, a rosebud is the soul of the dead youth. The Lay
of Bunzifal makes a hldckthom shoot up out of the bodies of slain
heathens, a white flower by the heads of fallen christians, Karl

' Where soul stands lor life, yitality, a neuter word is used, OHG. ferah, MHG.
verch, AS. feorh, ON. ßör ; bnt we saw (p. 793), how from vita and ßlos there arose
the snm total of all that lives, the world, Goth, fafrhvus.

8S6


THE SOUL A FLOWER. 827

118**. When the innocent are pat to death, white lilies grow out
of their graves^ three lilies on that of a maiden (TJhland's Volksl.
241), which no one but her lover may plack ; from the mounds
of buried lovers flowering shrubs spring up, whose branches
intertwine. In Swedish songs lilies and limes grow out of graves,
Sv. vis. 1, 101. 118. In the ballad of 'fair Margaret and sweet
William ' :

Out of her brest there sprang a rose,

And out of his a briar ;

They grew till they grew unto the church-top,

And there they tyed in a true lovers knot.^

In Tristan and Isote I believe it to be a later alteration, that the
rose and vine, which twine together over their graves, have first
to be planted. In a Servian folksong there grows out of the
youth's body a green fir (zelen bor, m.), out of the maiden's a red
rose (rumena ruzhitsa, f.), Yuk 1, no. 137, so that the sex is kept
up even in the plants : ^ the rose twines round the fir, as the silk
round the nosegay. All these examples treat the flower as a
mere symbol, or as an after-product of the dead man's intrinsic
character : the rose coming up resembles the ascending spirit of
the child ; the body must first lie buried, before the earth sends
up a new growth as out of a seed, conf. chap. XXX V IL But
originally there might lie at the bottom of this the idea of an
immediate instantaneous passage of the soul into the shape of a
flower, for out of mere drops of blood, containing but a small
part of the life, a flower is made to spring : the soul has her seat
in the blood, and as that ebbs away, she escapes with it. Greek
fables tell us how the bodies of the persecuted and slain, espe-
cially women, assumed forthwith the figure of a flower, a bush, a
tree (p. 653), without leaving any matter behind to decay or be
burnt ; nay, life and even speech may last while the transforma-
tion is taking place. Thus Daphne and Syrinx, when they
cannot elude the pursuit of Apollo or Pan, change themselves
into a laurel and a reed ; the nymph undergoing transformation
speaks on so long as the encrusting bark has not crept up to

^ Percy 8, 123 ; Taxiant in Bob. Jamieson 1, 33-4.

3 Therefore der rehe (vine) belongs to Tristan's grave, dm rose to Isote's, as in
Eilhart and the ohap-book ; Ulrich and Heinrich made the plants change places.


828 SOULS.

her mouth. Vintler tells us, the wege-xvarie (OHG. wegawartA,
wegapreitA), plantago, was once a woman, who by the wayside
waited (wartete) for her lover; he suggests no reason for the
transformation, conf. Kinderm. no. 160 (see Suppl.).

In the same way popular imagination, childlike, pictures the
soul as a bird, which comes flying out of the dying person's
mouth. That is why old tombstones often have doves carved on
them, and these the christian faith brings into still closer prox-
imity to spirit.^ A ship founders : the people on shore observe
the souls of those who have sunk ascending from the wave to-
ward heaven in the shape of white doves? The Romance legend
of the tortured Eulalia says: ^ in figure de colomh volat a ciel.' As
a bird the little brother, when killed, flies out of the juniper-tree
(machandelbom, Kinderm. 47). To the enigma of the green tree
and the dry, each with a little bird sitting on it, the interpretation
is added : ^ ir sele zen vogelen si gezalt ! ' their (the christians')
soul be numbered among birds, MS. 2, 248^. In the underworld
there fly scorched birds who were souls (svi^nir fuglar er s&lir
voro), like swarms of flies, SsBm. 127*. The heathen Bohemians
thought the soul came out of the dying lips as a bird, and hovered
among the trees, not knowing where to go till the body was
buried ; then it found rest. Finns and Lithuanians call the Milky-
way the path of birds (p. 357n.), i.e. of souls.

The Arabs till the time of Mahomet believed that the blood of
a murdered man turns into an accusing bird, that flits about the
grave till vengeance be taken for the dead.

According to a Polish folk-tale every member of the Herburt
family turns into an eagle as soon as he dies. The first-bom
daughters of the house of Pileck were changed into doves if they
died unmarried, but the married ones into owls, and to each
member of the family they foretold his death by their bite (Woy-
cicki's Kiechdy 1, 16). When the robber Madej was confessing
under an appletree, and getting quit of his sins, apple after apple
flew up into the air, converted into a white dove : they were the
souls of those he had murdered. One apple still remained, the

^ Servati Lnpi yita S. Wigberhti, cap. 11 : Yemin hora exitns ejus . . .
circnmstantibaB fratribns, yisa eat avis qnaedam specie pnlchenima snpra ejus cor-
pnsculum ter advoUuse^ nnsquamque postea comparuisse. Not so much the aoul
itself, as a spirit who escorts it.

' Maerlant 2, 217» from a Latin sonroe.


THB SOUIi A BIRD. MEADOW. 829

soul of his father^ whose murder he had suppressed; when at
length he owned that heinous crime^ the last apple changed into
a gray dove, and flew after the rest (ibid. 1, 180). This agrees
with the unresting birds of the Boh. legend. In a Podolian folk-
song, on the gra7e-mound there shoots up a little oak, and on it
sits a snow-white dove (ibid. 1, 209).i

Instances of transformation into birds were given above,
(pp. 673-6. 680), under woodpecker and cuckoo. Greek mythology
has plenty of others (see Suppl.).

The popular opinion of Greece also regarded the soul as a
winged being ("^v;^ irvevfjka Kal ^(ovif>iov irnjvov^ says Hesy-
chius), not bird, but butterfly, which is even more apt, for the
insect is developed out of the chrysalis, as the soul is out of the
body; hence ^vxv is also the word for butterfly. A Roman
epitaph found in Spain has the words : M. Porcius M. haeredibus
mando etiam cinere ut meo volitet ebrius papilio? In Basque,
'arima' is soul (conf. arme, alma, p. 826), and 'astoaren arima'
(ass's soul) butterfly. We shall come across these butterflies
again as will o' the wisps (ziebold, vezha), and in the Chap, on
Witches as elvish beings (see Suppl.).

When men are in a trance, or asleep, the soul runs out of them
in the shape of a 9Tuike,we(i8el or mouse (chap. XXXI Y and Suppl.) .

Of will o' the wisps a subsequent chapter will treat; synony-
mous with them I find wiesenhilpfer, wiesenhilpferin, meadow-
hopper, e.g. in the Mägdelob (printed 1688) p. 46; its explana-
tion, from their dancing on marshy meadows, is right enough,
but perhaps too limited. Hans Sachs is not thinking of ignes
fatui, when he more than once employs the set phrase : ' mit im
schirmen, dass die seel in dem gras umbhupfen,' fence with him
till their souls hop about in the grass iii. 3, 13^. iv. 3, 28*. 'und
Schmitz ihn in ein fiderling, dass sein seel muss im gras umbhupfen*
iv. 3, 5P; he simply means that the soul flies out of him, he
dies. Therefore the same superstition again, that the soul of
the dying flutters (as bird or butterfly) in the meadow, i.e. the

^ Na t^j mogile wyröst ci d%beczek,
na ni6j bieluchny siada got^beczek.

' ^vxf? S' iK ff(tiiMrot imft ßew oat of the body, Batrach. 207. fvx^ S^ /leXiup
i^hrrn 211. ix fieXiwp Bv/ibt vr&ro, II. 23, 880.

> Fint in Ambr. de Morales's Antigaidades de las dndades de Espafia, Aloala
1575, fol. 81^; thence in Gmteri and in Spon'B Miaoell. erad. antiq. p. 8.


830 SOULS.

meadow of the underworld spoken of in p. 822.^ Jost so ihe
Bohemians make the sool fly about in trees, Königinh. hs. p. 88.
106; hence both souls and elves dance to and fro in the
meadows at night. Strange^ that a minnesanger already makes
the soul of a drunken (as if entranced) man jum'p : ^ min sßle ftf
eime rippe st&t^ w&fen ! diu von dem wtne darüf gehüppet h&t '
(MS. 2, lOS**).* So the souls of the drowned keep jumping up
out of the jars^ p. 496 (see Suppl.). Shooting stars are supposed
to be the souls of dying men (p. 722) ; not only heroes and
other men, but separate limbs of their bodies were fixed in the
sky as stars, chap. XX II.

These are the simplest (if you will^ rudest) notions as to the
nature of the soul^ and to them I ascribe a high antiquity.

More polished^ more deeply rooted in ancient myths^ is the
opinion of the soul's passage into the domain of the underworld
across a water which divides the realm of living men from that of
the dead.

The Norse narrative of the death of Baldr has the remarkable
incident^ that the &ses placed his body on board a vessel, in which
they erected the funeral pile, set it on fire, and so committed it to
the sea at high water (Sn. 66).' In the same way the corpse of
the deified hero Scild (p. 869) is adorned and carried into a ship,
which drifts away on the sea, nobody knows whither, Beow. 55 —
105. Sigmnndr bears the body of his beloved son Sinfiötli to
the seashore, where a stranger waits with a skifiT, and offers


^ Those who are neither Bftved nor damned come into the grten meadow,
Heinse's Ardinghello 1, 96.

^ Conf. Hdbl. 1, S54 : * vrou SiUj tretet üf ein rippe. '' Benart in his bucket
at the bottom of the well (p. 807), to humbug Tsengrin, pretends he is living in
paradise there, and that eyeiy soul, on parting from the body, has to sit on the
bucket-pole tiU it is penitent, then it may climb down, and leave all its ilia behind,
Benart 68(H-13.

> What deep root this custom had taken in the North, may be gathered from
the fact that bodies were also buried in a boat [on land] , doubtless so that on their
journey to the underworld, when they came to a water, they might have their ferrt
at hand. * H&kon konüngr t6k ]>ar «ittp oil et &tt höfSo Eirtks synir, ok IH draga
ft land upp ; |>ar Idt Hftkon leggja Egil Ullserk i skip, oc meü hftnom alia )>& menn
er af >eirra lilSi höfVo fallit, let bera J>ar at %dr6 oe griot. H&kon konüngr Ut oc
ßeiri skip uppsetja, oc bera ft valinn,' Saga H. gd^a, cap. 27. * Unnr var WgS t
skip i hauginum,' Lazd. p. 16. * Asmundr var heygSr ok i skip lagifr, |»raBll hans
lag1$r i annan stafn skipsins,* Islend. sog. 1, 66. * Geirmundr heygifr ok lag&r i skip
>ar fttt sköginn fra ga^i,' ibid. 1, 97. Probably the bodies of the great were first
laid in a coffin, and this put in the boat, which was then buried in the hill. Gudrun
says: 'knör mun ek kaupa ok kisto steinlSa,* Siem. 264^ No boats have been
found, that I know of, in ancient barrows of Continental Germany.


CBOSSING THE WATER. 831

a passage ; Sigmandr lays tlie dead in the boat^ which has then
its full freight^ the unknown pushes off and sails away with the
corpse, Saem. 170-1. Fornald. sog. 1, 142. Frotho's Law p. 87
lays down distinctions of rank : ' Centurionis vel satrapae corpus
rogo propria nave constructo funerandum constituit ; dena autem
gubernatornm corpora uniua puppis igne consumi praecepit;
ducem quempiam aut regem interfectum proprio injectum na/vigio
concremari.' The dead larlm&gus is conveyed in a ship by his
widow to a holy land, larlm. saga cap. 45. A Swedish folk-tale
(Afzelius 1, 4) speaks of a golden ship lying sunk near the
Bchlüsselberg at Bunemad; in that ship Odin is said to have
carried the slain from Bravalla to Valhall, In the O. Fr. romance
of Lancelot du lac, ed. 1591, p. 147 the demoiselle d'Escalot
arranges what is to be done with her body : ' le pria, que son
corps fut mis en une nef richement equippöe, que Von laisseroit
aller au gre du vent sans conduiteJ ^ And in the romance of
Gawan a swan tows a boat in which lies a dead knight (Keller's
Bomvart 670). Was it believed that the corpse, abandoned to
the sacred sea and the winds, would of itself arrive at the land
of death that was not to be reached under human guidance ?

Here it is the corpse that is transported, in other legends
merely the soul when released from the body : it is over again
the distinction we noticed above, p. 827. In the Nialss. cap.
1 60, old Flosi, weary of life, is even said to have taken a battered
boat, and thrown himself on the mercy of the sea- waves : ^ bar &
skip ok ISt i haf, ok hefir til ]?ess skips aldri spurt stSan,' never
heard of since.

The Greeks believed that Charon ferried the souls in a narrow
two-oared boat over the Styx, Acheron or Cocytus to the kingdom
of Hades. For this he charged a fare^ rh TropOfiia, therefore
they placed an obolos (the danaka) in the mouth of the dead.^
This custom of putting a small coi7i in the mouth of a corpse
occurs among Germans too, Superst. I, 207 where a modern and


> Oento noyeUe antiche 81 : La damigeUa di Soalot ; the ' navicella sanza vela,
sanza remi e sanza neono Bopra sagliente * is carried down to Gamalot, to the court
of Be Artu.

> Diodor. 1, 90. Eorip. Ale. 253. 441. Aen. C, 298. At Hermione in Argolis,
supposed to be no great distance from the underworld, no money was given to tho
dead, Strabo 8, 378. These coins are often found in ancient tombs, £. Fr.
Hermann's Antiq. 198.


832 SOULS.

mistaken reason is alleged for it [lest they come back to visit
buried hoards] : originally the money could be no other than that
samenaulum.

One stormy night a monkisn figure wakes a boatman who lies
buried in eleep^ puts passage-mofiey in his hand, and demands to
be taken across the river. At first six monks step into the boat^
but no sooner is it fairly launched^ than suddenly it is filled by
a throng of friars black and white^ and the ferryman has scarcely
room left for himself. With difiiculty he rows across, the
passengers alight, and a hurricane hurls the ferryboat back to
the place of starting, where another set of travellers wait and
take possession of the boat, the foremost of whom with fingers
cold as ice presses the fare-penny into the boatman's hand. The
return voyage is made in the same violent way as before.^ The
like is told, but less completely, of monks crossing the Rhine at
Spire.' In neither story can we detect the purpose of the
voyagö; they seem to be early heathen reminiscences, which,
not to perish entirely, had changed their form (see SuppL).

Procopius de hello Goth. 4, 20 (ed. Bonn. 2, 567), speaking of
the island of Brittia, imparts a legend which he had often heard
from the lips of the inhabitants. They imagine that the souls
of the dead are transported to that island. On the coast of the
continent there dwell under Frankish sovereignty, but hitherto
exempt from all taxation, fishers and farmers, whose duty it is
to ferry the souls over.^ This duty they take in turn. Those to


^ Neue Tolksmärchen der Dentschen, Leipz. 1792. 8, 45>7.

^ D.S. no. 275 ; earliest auth. an account by Geo. Sabinus (b. 1608 d. 1560}.
Melander's Joe. no. 664.

' Td ßUp äXKa ^pdYftav KterfiKooi itneSy ^6pw fidwroi drayiayijir odSerunran
ra/KKTXÖ/icvoi, {f4>€i/jJvov airrcis ^k raXcuov rovBe rod d^^ovti inrwprflat rtpftf, 6^ 0a<rir,
(ycKou \4yov<rt ol ra&r'g Bj^ptavoi iK ircpa-porijt iTUcaa$<u rät rwv ^yxi^ Tapavo/ttrdt
ff^L On this passage and one in Tzetzes, consult Welcker in Bhein. mus. 1, 288
seq. Gonf. Plutarch de defectu oracul. cap. 18 (ed. Beiske 7, 652) : '0 5^ Aifft^rpios
^017 TUP vepl T^v Bperajvlatp yficiov eUai iroXXdt ifn^/iovs (nropdZas^ Jv Mas ioL/t^wp
Kcd ijptttup Ivopa^adaLy irXeC<rat ik airrbs Urroplas koI 64as Ifcko, vofirS rod ßoffiXitaSt ^'t
TijP iyyiara KCkpuhriv tup ify^/uop, ixowrop od iroXXo^ iroiKOVPTaSt Icpods Si koI dol/Xot«
troPTas irrb rwp Bperaypwp 6pTas. d^nKOfiipov S* airoO P€b9ffrl, ffdyx^r» /uy6Xi/p T€pL
TOP dipa Kcd Sioa^fielas iroXXdt ycpiaOcUy Kcd rpeJ^ßora Kara^JHtyrfpai Kod rtcup
rprjirr^pas. iirel 5* eX(6^<r6, \iy€tp roös prfffuirrast 8ti tQp Kpeuraöpup rtpbs (tcKei^s
yiy opcp. Cat yap X^fos dpairT6fiepot f^pai dccvdr aö9ip ^ei, aßcppi&ßepoi di voXX^f
\vinjp6s ioTiPj odrus al fieyaXat ^vx<d ras fUp dyaXcC/i^is cifiepeU koI d\&wovt <^oivcr,
al ii ffßiffeis a&rup koI 4p0opaL ToXXdictf ju^f, (hs pvpI^ mrevfiara koL ^tiXat rpiwcvai,
ToWaKis 8i XoifUKclis vaOcavp dipa ^pfidTrcwrtp, ixcT ßiirroi fda» e&eu r^or, ^ f rör
Kp6pop KaT€ipx^O'*> ^povpoöfupop Orb tov Bpidpcu iro^cvSorra. bcfffibp yap oArf rbp
ÖTPOP pxiATjfXjcu^Bai, ToXXo^f Si rcpi airbp cTvat ScU/MPas dTobo^ Kcd Oep&ropras, This


CROSSING THE WATER. 833

whom it falls on any night, go to bed at dusk ; at midnight they
hear a knocking at their door, and mnfläed voices calling. Im-
mediately they rise, go to the shore, and there see empty boats,
not their own bat strange ones, they go on board and seize the
oars. When the boat is under way, they perceive that she is laden
choJce-foill, with her gunwales hardly a finger's breadth above
water. Yet they see no one, and in an hour's time they touch
land, which one of their own craft would take a day and a night
to do. Arrived at Brittia, the boat speedily unloads, and be-
comes so light that she only dips her keel in the wave. Neither
on the voyage nor at landing do they see any one, but they hear
a voice loudly asking each one his name and country. Women
that have crossed give their husbands' names.

Procopius's Brittia lies no farther than 200 stadia (25 miles)
from the mainland, between Britannia and Thule, opposite the
Rhine mouth, and three nations live in it. Angles, Frisians and
Britons. By Britannia he means the NW. coast of Gaul, one
end of which is still called Bretagne, but in the 6th century
the name included the subsequent Norman and Flemish-Frisian
country up to the mouths of Scheldt and Bhine ; his Brittia is
Great Britain, his Thule Scandinavia.

Whereabouts the passage was made, iirhether along the whole
of the Gallic coast, I leave undetermined. Villemarqu^ (Barzas
breiz 1, 136) places it near Baz, at the farthest point of Armorica,
where we find a bay of souls (baie des ämes, bo6 ann anavo).
On the R. Treguier in Bretagne, commune Plouguel, it is said
to be the custom to this day, to convey the dead to the church-
yard in a boat, over a small arm of the sea called passage de
I'enfer, instead of taking the shorter way by land; besides, the
people all over Armorica believe that souls at the moment of
parting repair to the parson of Braspar, whose dog escorts them
to Britain : up in the air you hear the creaking wheels of a
waggon overloaded with souls , it is covered with a white pall,
and is called ca/rr an ancou, carrikel an ancou, soul's car (M6m.
de I'acad. celt. 8, 141). Purely adaptations to suit the views of
the people. As christians, they could no longer ferry their dead

Kronos aeleep on the holy island far away, with his retinae of servants, is like
a Wnotan enchanted in a mountain, conf. Humboldt in Herrn. Müller p. 440-1.
Welcker's El. sehr. 2, 177.


834 SOULS.

to the island : well^ they will take them to the churchyard by
water anyhow; and in their tradition they make the voyage
be performed no longer by ship^ bat through the air (as in the
case of the Furious Host)^ and by waggon. Closer investigation
must determine whether similar legends do not live in Normandy,
Flanders and Friesland. Here I am reminded once more of old
Helium and Hel-voet, pp. 315 n. 804.

Procopius's account is re-affirmed by Tzetzes (to Lycoph. 1204)
in the 12th century; but long before that, Glaudian at the be-
ginning of the 5th (in Bufinum 1, 123 — 133) had heard of those
Gallic shores as a trysting-place of flitting ghosts :

Est locus, extremum qua pandit Gallia littus,
oceani praetentus aquis, ubi fertur TJlixes
sanguine libato populum movisse silentem.
lUic umhrarum tenui Stridore volanium
flehilis auditur questvs : simulacra coloni
pallida, defunctasque vident migrare figuras ;

and not far from that region are Britain, the land of the Senones,
and the Bhine. This faint murmur of the fleeting shades is
much the same thing as the airy waggon of the Bretons. The
British bards make out that souls, to reach the underworld, must
sail over the pool of dread and of deud bones, across the vale of
death, into the sea on whose shore stands open the mouth of
hell's abyss^ (see Suppl.). A North English song, that used to
be sung at lykewakes, names 'the bridge of dread, no brader
than a thread,^ over which the soul has to pass in the under-
world (J. Thoms^ Anecd. and trad. pp. 89. 90). The same
bridge is mentioned in the legend of Tundalus (Hahn's ed. pp.
49. 50) : the soul must drive a stolen cow over it.*

The same meaning as in the voyage of souls over the gulf or

I Owen'8 Diet. 2, 214. Villemarqn6 1, 185.

^ The narrow bridge is between purgatoiy and paradise, even Owain the hero
had to cross it (Scott's Minstr. 2, 860-1). In striking harmony with it (as snpra
p. 574) is a Mahom. tradition given in Salens Koran (ed. 1801, introd. 120) : in
the middle of hell all souls must walk over a bridge tniuner than a hair, ehaiper
than the edge of a sword, and bordered on both sides by thorns and prickly shiubs.
The Jews also speak of the hell-bridge narrow as a thread, but only nnbeliereis
have to cross it (Eisenmenger 2, 258) ; conf. Thorns p. 91. Aoc. to Herbelot, the
Mahometans believe that before the judgment-day they shall pass over a redhot
iron rod, that spans a bottomless deep ; then the good works of each believer wiU
put themselves under his feet.


BRIDGE. HELL-SHOE. 835

river of the underworld appears to lie in their walking the bridge
tluU spans the river. The bridge-keeper's words to (the livinfjf)
HermöSr are remarkable : ' my bridge groans more beneath thy
single tread, than under the five troops of dead men who yesterday
rode over it/ Sn. 67. I see in this a very strong resemblance to
the soft patter of the dwarfs^ feet on the bridge when quitting the
country, as also their ferrying over by night (pp. 275. 459) ; and
the affinity of souls with elvish beings comes out very plainly.
When the dwarfs moved out of Voigtland, they were a whole
night crossing the Elster (Jul. Schmidt p. 143-8). At their de-
parture from the Harz, it was agreed that they should pass over
a narrow bridge at Neuhof, each dropping his toll-money in a
vessel fixed upon it, but none of the country folk were to be
present. Prying people hid under the bridge, and heard for
hours their pit-a-pat, as though a flock of sheep were going over
(Deut. sagen no. 152-3). The bridge-toll brings to mind the /erry-
money of souls. With all this compare the story of the elf making
his passage in a boat by night (D.S. no. 80). Then again 'the
bridge of dread no brader than a thread ' is a kindred notion,
which moreover connects itself with the iron sword-bridge
crossed by the soul that has crept out of a sleeping man (see
Suppl.) .

A minute examination of the various funeral ceremonies of
European nations, which is no part of my purpose here, would
throw some more light on the old heathen views as to the nature
of the soul and its destiny after death. Thus the dead, beside
Öie passage-money and the boat, had a particular shoe called
todtenschuh, ON. hel-sko, given them for setting out on their
journey, and tied on their feet. The Gisla Surssonarsaga says :
' \bX, er ttSska at binda monnum helskd, sem menn skulo & g&nga
til Valhallar, ok mun ek Vesteini )>at giöra' (conf. Müller's
Sagabibl. 1, 171). Sir W. Scott in Minstr. 2, 357 quotes a
Yorkshire superstition : ' They are of beliefe, that once in their
lives it is good to give a pair of new shoes to a poor man, foras-
much as after this life they are to pass barefoote through a great
launde full of thomes and furzen, except by the meryte of the
almes aforesaid they have redeemed the forfeyte ; for at the edge
of the launde an oulde man shall meet them with the same shoes
that were given by the partie when he was lyving, and after he


836 SOULS.

hath shodde them^ dismisseth them to go throagh thick and thin^
without scratch or scalle/ The land to be traversed by the soul
is also called whinny moor, i.e. furzy bog (Thorns 89). In Henne-
berg^ and perhaps other places^ the last honours paid to the dead
are still named todtenschuh (Reinwald 1, 165), though the practice
itself is discontinued; even the funeral feast is so denominated.
Utterly pagan in character, and suited to the warlike temper of
old times, is what Burkard of Worms reports p. 195^: Quod
quidam faciunt homini occiso, cum sepelitur : dant ei in manum
unguentum quoddam, quasi illo unguento post mortem vulnus
sanari possit, et sic cum unguento sepeliunt.^ For a similar
purpose, slaves, horses, dogs were burnt with a dead man, that he
might use them in the next world. King Ring had king Harald
buried in a great barrow, his horse killed that he had ridden in
Bravalla fight, and his saddle buried with him, so that he could
ride to Walhalla. It was thought that to convey the corpse by
any road but the traditional one (the hell weg, p. 801) was bad
for the soul of the deceased, Ledebur^s Archiv 5, 369 (see
Suppl.).

The poems of the Mid. Ages occasionally describe a conflici
of angels and devils round the parting soul, each trying to take
possession of it. At the head of the angels is an archangel,
usually Michael, who, as we shall see in chap. XX VIII, has also
the task of weighing souls ; sometimes he is called Oherubim :
' vor dem tievel nam der sole war der erzengel Kerubin,^ he saw
the soul first, Wh. 49, 10.

L&Z& l&za tengeln !

d& wart von den engeln

1 The LithnaniaiiB btizy or bom with the dead the elaws of a Ivnx or bear, in
the belief that the soul has to climb up a steep mountaiii, on which the divine judge
(Eriwe Eriweito) sits : the rich wiU find it harder to scale than the poor, who are
unburdened with property, unless their sins weigh them down. A wind wafts the
poor sinners up as lightly as a feather, the rich have their limbs mangled by a
dragon Wizunas, who dwells beneath the mountain, and are then carried up by
tempests (Woycicki's Elechdy 2, 1S4-5. Narbutt 1, 284). The steep hill is called
AnaßeUu by the Lithuanians, and szklanna gora (glass mountain) by the Poles, who
think the lost souls must climb it as a punishment, and when they have set foot on
the summit, they slide off and tumble down. This gUus mountain is still known to
our German songs and fairytales, but no longer distinctly as an abode of the
deceased, though the little maid who carries a huckle-bone to insert (like the bear*s
claw) into the glass mountain, and ends with cutting her little finger off that she
may scale or unlock it at last, may be looked upon as seeking her lost brothers in
the underworld (Einderm. no. 25).


SCRAMBLE FOR SOULS. 837

manec sSle empfangen

e der strit was zegangen.

Daz weinete manec amie :

von wölken wart nie snie

als6 dicke sunder zal

beidiu nf bergen und ze tal^

als engel unde tievel flugen^

die do ze widerstrite zugen

die s61e her und widere^

d' einen üf, die ander nidere. Geo. 1234.

Der engelfürste Michahel

empfienc des marcgr&ven s^l^

und manec engel liehtgevar

die kamen mit gesange dar

und fuorten in vrceliche

inz sclioene himelnche.

Geo. 6082, conf. Diut. 1, 470. In the Brandan (Bruns p. 192-3)
we read : ' de duvele streden umme de s^le mit sunte Michaile ' ;
conf. Pundgr. 1, 92.

Gebt mir eine g&be,
daz des küniges sSle
von sante Michahele
hiute gecondwieret st. Gate frau 2674 ;

Michael having taken upon him the office of Mercury or the
Walchure. A record of the 18th cent. (MB. 7, 371) calls him
' praepositus paradisi et princeps animarum.^ A still more im-
portant passage, already noticed at p. 446, occurs in Morolt 28*^ ^
where three troops are introduced, the black, white and pale :
' den strit mahtu gerne schouwen, dens umb die aele suln h&n.^
For similar descriptions in the elder French poets, conf. M^n 1,
239. 4, 114.5. 3, 284.

And even so early as the 8-9th cent, we find quite at the
beginning of the Muspilli fragment :

Wanta s&r s6 sih diu sela in den sind arhevit (rises)
enti si den lihhamun likkan l&zit (leaves the body lying),
so quimit ein hen (comes one host) fona himilzungalon,
daz andar fona pehhe (pitch, hell) ; dar pägant aiu umpi,
I have questioned (p. 420) whether this ' pac umpi dia sela '


838 SOULS.

(tussle for the soul) between the hosts of heaven and hell be
traceable to christian tradition. The Ep. of Jude v. 9 does tell
of archangel Michael and the devils striving for the body of
Moses^^ and the champion Michael at all events seems borrowed
thence. But jealousy and strife over the partition of souls may
be supposed an idea already present to the heathen mind^ as the
Norse OSinn, Thörr and Preyja appropriated their several por-
tions of the slain. At pp. 60 and 305 we identified Freyja with
Oertrude : ' some say the soul, on quitting the body, is the first
night with St. Oerdraut, the next with 8t. Michuely the third in
such place as it has earned/ Superst. 7, 24. Now as Antichrist
in the great world-fight is slain by Michael (p. 811), while Surtr
has for adversaries OBinn and Thörr : ' Gerdrflt and Michael '
may fairly be translated back into ' Fröwa and Wuotan (or
Donar) \ So at p. 198 a 'mons sancti Michaelis' was found
applicable to Wuotan or Zio (see Suppl.).

An Irish fairytale makes the spirits of the Silent Folk maintain
a violent contest for three nights at the cross-roads, as to which
churchyard a human corpse shall be buried in, Ir. elfenm. p. 68.
So that elves and dwarfs, as they steal live children and maidens,
(p. 386-8), would seem also to have a hankering for our bodies
and souls. The souls of the drowned the water-nix keeps in his
house (p. 496).

All this leads up to a more exact study of the notions about
Death.

1 The passage is supposed to be founded on a lost book named **Apdßaffts
Moyses', conf . Grotius ad S. Judae ep. 9, and Fabiicii Cod. pseudepigr. Y. T. p. 839.


CHAPTER XXVII.
DEATH.

To Üie olden time Death was not a being that killed^ bnt simply
one that fetched away and escorted to the underworld. Sword
or sickness killed; Death came in as messenger of a deity, to
whom he condncted the parting, soul. Dying is announced^ not
caused^ by his arrival. So to that child in the fairytale the angel
of death had given a £iower-bad : when it blossomed^ he would
come again.

And the Jewish notion^ which Christianity retained^ is in
harmony with this. The sonl of the b^gar is fetched away by
angels of Grod^ and carried into Abraham's bosom^ Luke 16^ 22 ;
or^ as the Heliand 103^ 5 expresses it : ' Codes engilös andfengon
is ferh^ endi leddon ine an Abrahämes barm' ; ^ and it completes
the picture of the rich man's fate by adding the counterpart
(I03j 9) : Mebha wihti bisenkidun is sdola an thene suarton hel/
loathly wights (devils) sank his soul into swart hell. A sermon
in Leyser 126 has: 'wane ir ne wizzit niht^ zu welicher zit der
bote (messenger) unsers herren Gotis zu ture clopfe (may knock
at the door). Welich ist der bote ? daz ist der Tot (death)' ; and
161: 'nu quam ouch der gemeine bote (general messenger)^ der
nieman Iodic l&t (lets alone) ^ wie lange im maniger vorgät^ daz ist
der gewisse tdt.' ' Dd der Tot im sin zuokunft enbot (an-
nounced)^ so daz er in geleite/ he might escort him^ Greg. 20.

There is no substantial difference between this and the older
heathen view. Halja, Hel, the death- goddess^ does not destroy^
she receives the dead man in her house, and will on no account
give him up. To kill a man is called sending him to her. Hel

^ It iB a beautifiil image, that the dyin^ return to God*8 bosom, children to that
of their father, whence they had isened at birth. But the name thing was known to
our heathenism, which caUed newborn and adopted children * boeom-children, wiah-
children,' BA. 455. 464, and interpreted dying as departing to Waotan, to Wish (p.
145). To heathens then, as weU as christians, to die was to fare to God, to enter
into Qod's rest and peace, * Metod seon,* Beow. 2360, * f6ran on Fre&n were,' the
Lord's peace 52. So, to be buried is to faU into the mother's bosom (p. 642) ; mother
and faäier take their children into their keeping again.

VOL. U. 889 jj jj


840 DEATH.

neither comes to fetch the souls fallen due to her/ nor sends
messengers after them. The dead are left alone to commence
the long and gloomy joomey ; shoes, ship and ferry-money, ser-
yants, horses, clothes, . they take w^th them from home for the
hell-way. Some ride, others sail, whole companies of sools troop
together : no condactor comes to meet them.

There were other gods besides, who took possession of souls.
The sea-goddess Ran draws to herself vrith a net all the bodies
drowned within her province (p. 311). Water-sprites in general
seem fond of detaining souls: dame Holle herself, at whose
dwelling arrive those who fall into the well (pp. 268. 822), has a
•certain resemblance to Hel (see Suppl.).

It is another matter with the souls destined for YalhöU. CHSinn
sends out the valkyrs to take up all heroes that have fallen in
fight, and conduct them to his heaven (p. 418) : wish-maidens
fetch his wish-sons, ' ^sdr kiosa feigS k menu,' Sn. 39. Their
attendance and the heroes' reception are splendidly set forth in
the Häkonarmäl. But these messengers also take charge of heroes
while alive, and protect them until death : they are guardian-
angels and death-angels. How beautiful, that the gracious god,
before he summons them, has provided his elect with an attendant
spirit to glorify their earthly path !

I can see a connexion between valkyrs and Hermes, who is
wielder of the wishing-rod (p. 419) and conductor of souls to
the underworld, ^jrv^aytoyo^, ^jruxoirofiTO^, vexpoTrofiiro^. These
maids are Opsin's messengers, as Hermes is herald of the gods,
nay Hetties is O&inn himself, to whom the souls belong. Thus
the god's relation to the dead is an additional proof of the iden-
tity between Wv>otan and Mercury, A distinction appears in the
fact that Hermes, like the Etruscan CJiarun (0. Müller 2, 100),
conducts to Hades, but not, as far as I know, to Elysium ; valkyrs,
on the contrary, to Valhöll, and not to HeL Further, the function
of guardian-spirit is wanting to Hermes.

This idea of a protecting spirit finds expression more in the
personified Thanatos (death) of the Greek people's faith. He is
pictured as a genius, with hand on cheek in deep thought, or

^ It is only in a dream-viBion that she appears : ' postera noote eidem Proier-
pina per quietem adstare aspect a postridie ejus complexa usaram denonoiat. neo
inane somnii praesagium fait.' Sazo Gram. p. 43.


THANATOS. MORS. DAUDUS. 841

setting his foot on the psyche (soul) as if taking possession of her ;
often his hands are crossed over the extinguished torch. At
times he appears black (like Hel^ p. 313) or black^winged (atris
alis) : TOP Se ireaovra el\e fie\a^ Oavaro^y '^XV ^' ^* ccofiaro^
enrrj (Batrach. 207)^, and aXevaro Krjpa fiiXaivav (ibid. 85).
But usually the departing dead is represented riding a horue,
which a genius leads : an open door betokens the departure^ as we
still throw open a door or window when any one dies (Superst. I^
664). As a symbol^ the door alone^ the horse^s head alone, may
express the removal of the soul.^ The Boman genius of death
seems to announce his approach or bhe hour of parting by knock-
ing at the door; ^ a knocking and poking at night is ghostly and
ominous of death (see SnppL).

Roman works of art never give Death the shape of a female
like Halja^ though we should have expected it from the gender
of mors, and originally the people can scarcely have conceived it
otherwise ; the Slavic smrt, smart (the same word) is invariably
fern., the Lith. smertis is of either gender^ the Lett, nahwe fem.
alone. And the Slav. Morena, Marana (Mofena^ Marzana)^ de-
scribed p. 771^ seems to border closely on smrt and mors.

These words find an echo in Teutonic ones. Schmerz, smart, we
now have only in the sense of pain^ originally it must have been
the pains of deaths as our qaal (torment) has to do with quellan^
AS. cwellan. Eng. kill:^ the OHG. MHG. and AS. have alone
retained the strong verb smerzan^ smerzen^ smeortan (dolere).
OHG. smerza is fem.^ MHG. smerze masc.^ but never personified.
Nahwe answers to the Goth. masc. ndus, pi. naveis^ funus (conf.
ON. nar, nainn p. 453), as ddvaro^ too can mean a corpse.^ Bat
this Grk. word has the same root as the Goth, ddußus, OHG. tod


^ One would suppose from this passage, that Death took only the corpse of the
fallen to himself, that the soul flew away to Hades, for it is said of her in y. 235

' 0. Müller's Arehäol., ed. 2, pp. 604. 696. For the horse's head, conf.
Boeckh's Corp. inscr. no. 800. Marm. Oxon. p. 2, no. 63-7. B. Boohette 8
Monum. InM. 1, 126. Pausan. yii. 25, 7. Gerhard's Antike bildw. p. 407.

' Hor. Od. i. 4, 13 : pallida tnon aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas regum-
que tnrres.

-* Constant use will soften down the meaning of the harshest terms ; we had
an instance in the Fr. gdne, p. 800n.

* Ooth. Uik (corpus, caro), our leiche, leichnam. Eng. lick (cadaver) ; the OHG.
hreo, AS. hraw, MHG. re (cadaver, funus), and Goth, hrdiv (whence hr^ira-dubö,
moomer-doTe) are the Lat. corpus.


842 DBATH.

(orig. tödu) maso.^ OS. dod, doff, AS. dedff, ON. dauffi, all masc.,
the M. Nethl. dot having alone preserved the fern, gender, which
is however compatible with the Gothic form. The verb in Gothic
is diva^ dan (morior)^ standing in the same relation to Oviia-icmp
edavov, Odvaro^ aer the Gothic Tiv to the Slavic dan (day, p. 195).
The ON. dauiSi I find nsed only of the condition, not of the
person, while the Groth. ddujma does express the latter in 1 Cor.
15, 55 (see Sappl.).

To this affinity of words corresponds a similarity of senti-
ments. The most prominent of these in our old poets seem to
be the following.

As all spirits appear suddenly,^ so does Death; no sooner
named or called, than he comes : ' hie naliet der Tot manigem
manne/ Roth. 277\ 'daz in naJtst der T6t,' Nib. 2106, 4. 'd6
nakte im der Tot ' 2002, 3. ' Mors praesens,^ Walthar. 191. ' der
Tot g^fc dir vaste zao,' E[arl 69^. He Inrks in the backgroand
as it were, waiting for call or beck (Freidank 177, 17. 'dem T6de
winken,^ beckon to D., Renn. 9540). Like fate, like Wnrt, he is
nigh and ai hand (p. 406). Like the haunting homesprite or will
o^ wisp, he rides on people's necks : ' der T6t mir sitzet üf dem
kragen,' Kolocz. 174. ^ stet vor der tür/ Diut. 2, 153. A story in
Reusch (no. 36) makes Death sit outside the door, waiting for it
to open ; he therefore catches the soul as it goes out.

Luckless life-weary men call him to their side, complain of his
delay : ' Tot, nu nim din teil an mir 1 ' now take thy share of me,
Wh. 61, 2. ' Tot, daz du mich nu kanst spam ! ' 61, 12. ' wa nu
Tot, du nim mich hin ! ' Ecke 145.' ' Mort, qar me pren, si me
delivre ! ' Ren. 9995. ' Mors, cur tam sera venis f ' Rudi. 7, 58.
'd wS Tot, dazt' ie so lange min verbasrel' shonldst forbear,
shun me, MsH. 1, 89*. ' por ce requier ä Dien la mort,^ M6on
nouv. rec. 2, 241. We know the Aesopic fable of the old man
and Thanatos. To wish for death is also called seeking Death,*
sending for Death, having him fetched : 'ja W88net des der degen.


^ Supra p. 825. Beinhart p. liii. em. ; like Night, Winter, and the Judgment-
day, Death * breaks in.'

' So beasts of prey are inyited. Er. 5882 : *tDdn& kungerigiu tier, bdde wolf
und her, iwer einez (one of you) kume her und ezze uns beide ! *

* Straparola 4, 5 tells of a young man who from curiosity started off to hont
up Death.


FETCHES THE SOUL. 843

ich habe gesani nach Tode (he fancies I have sent for D.) : ich
wil^s noch lenger pflegen/ Nib. 486, 5. Of a slothfnl servant it is
said he is a good one to send after Death, i.e. he goes so slow^ yon
may expect to live a good while longer. This saying mnst have
been widely diffused : ' en lui avon bon mesagier por querre la
Mort et cerchier, que il revendroit moult k tart/ Ren. 5885. ' du
worst ein bot gar gnot zuo schicken nach dem Todt, du kommst
nit bald/ H. Sachs 1, 478''. * werst gut nach dem Tod zu schicken'
iv. 8, 43*. Pischart geschichtkl. 84*. ' du är god att skicka
öfter Döden,' Hallman p. 94. ' bon i aller chercher la mort/
Pluquet contes p. 2. In Bob. : 'to dobr6 gest pro Smrt posjlati/
Jungmann 4, 193*. Can this lazy servant be connected with
Qdnglati and Oänglöt, the man and maid servant of the ancient
Hel ? Sn. 38.

Death takes the soul and carries it away : ' hina fuartanan
T6d/ 0. i. 21, 1. 'dd quam der T6t und nam in Hn* Lohengr.
186. 'er hegrifet,' Gregor. 413. Diut. 3,53. ergreif, gript,
Greg. 19, an expression used also of Sleep, the brother of Death,
when he falls upon and overpowers : ' der Sl&f in hegreif^ Pf.
Ghuonr. 7076. He presses men into his house, the door of which
stands open : ' gegen im het der Tot sines hüses tilt enÜochen
(unlocked),' Bit. 12053. ' der Tot weiz manige s&ze (trick), sw&
er wil dem menschen schaden und in heim ze hüs laden (entice),'
Tiirh. Wh. 2281. 'dö in der Tot heim nam in sin gezimmer
(building),' ' bräht heim in sin gemiure (walls),' Lohengr. 143.
150. These are deviations from the original idea, which did not
provide him with a dwelling of his own ; or is he here an equiva-
lent for Hel f

Probably, like all messengers (RA. 135), like Hermes the con-
ductor of souls, he carries a staff, the symbol of a journey, or
of delegated authority. With this wand, this rod (of wish), he
touches whatever has fallen due to him : ' la Mort de sa verge le
toucha,' M6on 4, 107.^

To Death is ascribed a highway, levelled smooth and kept in
repair, on w&ich the dead travel with him \ ' des Todes pfat wart
g'ebenet,' Turl. Wh. 22\ 23\ ' dk moht erbouwen der T6t sin
sträze,' Bit. 10654. ' nu seht, wie dei: Tot umbe sich mit kreften

^ In Banse Maoabre p. m. 65, troit verge» are wielded by Death.


844 DEATH.

h&t gebomoen/ Kl. 829. Like a sbifty active servant^ he greases
the hoots of tbe man he comes to fetch^ in preparation for the
great journey; in Burgundy his arrival is expressed in the
phrase: 'quan la Mor venr6 graisse no bote/ quand la Mort
viendra graisser nos bottes; Noei Borguignon p. 249 (see
SnppL).

A tboroughly heathen feature it is^ to my thinking, that he
appears mounted, like the valkyrs ; on horseback he fetches away,
he sets the dead on his own horse. In a folksong of wide cir«
culation the lover, dead and buried far away, comes at midnight
and rides off with his bride.^ Possibly that horse^s head at p.
841 stands more for Death's horse than for the dead man's. Both.
Hel and her messenger, like other gods, had doubtless a horse
at their service ; this is confirmed by certain phrases and fancies
that linger here and there among the people. One who has got
over a serious illness will say : ' jeg gav Böden en shidppe havre *
(Thiele 1, 138), he has appeased Death by sacrificing to him a
bushel of oats for his horse. So the heathen fed the horse of
Wuotan (p. 154), of dame Gaue (p. 252) ; the Slavs did the same
for their Svantevit and Badegast (p. 661). Of one who blunders
in noisily they say, in Denmark as above : ' han gaaer som en
helhest/ he goes like a hel-horse, Dansk ordb. 2, 545^. There
are more things told of this heUhest : he goes round the church-
yard on his three legs, he fetches Death. One folktale has it,
that in every churchyard, before it receives human bodies, a live
horse is buried, and this is what becomes the walking dead-horse
(Thiele 1, 137); originally it was no other than the Death-
goddess riding round. Amkiel quotes 1, 55 the Schleswig
superstition, that in time of plague 'die Hell^ ri^es about on a
three-legged horse, destroying men ' ; if at such a time the dogs
bark and howl in the night (for dogs are spirit- seers), they say
' Hell is at the dogs ' ; when the plague ceases, ' Hell is driven
away ' ; if a man on the brink of death recovers, ' he has come

» * The moon shineB bright, the dead ride fasW Burger's life p. 37. Wh. 2,
30. *t maantje schijnt zo hel, mijn paardtjes lope zo snel,' Eindeim. 3, 77.
• mftnan skiner, dödman rider,' Sv. vis. 1, liii. and even in the Edda : • rida menn
daudir,' SaBm. 166»». 167». Norw. ' manen skjine, dihnan grine, varte du ikkie lad?'
Gonf. the Mod. Grk. song in Wh. Müller 2, 64, and Vuk 1, no. 404.

Rewrites 'der Hell,' maso. ; but the Plattdeutsch, when they attempt H.
Oerm , often misuse the article, e.g. • der Pest ' for * die Pest.'


RIDES A HOBSE. 845

to terms with HelV Here^ as in other cases, the notion of Death
has run into one with the personified plagne. In our own
medieval poems we never read of Death riding about, but we do
of his loading his horse with souls. Thus, in describing a battle :
' seht, ob der Tot da iht sin soumer lüede (loaded his sumpter
at all) f ja er was unmüezec gar (high busy),^ Lohengr. 71. ' daz
ich des Todes vuoder mit in läed und vazzei I * Ottocar 448*.
The Mod. Greeks have converted old ferryman Xdpwy into a
death' s-messenger Xdpo^ ; you see him crossing the mountains
with his dusky throng, himself riding, the young men walking
before him, the old following behind, and the tender babes
ranged on his saddle.^ The Lübeck Dance of Death makes him
ride on a lion, and he is so represented in a picture also, Douce
p. 160. 'Mortis habenae/ Abbo de bellis Paris. 1, 187. 322 (see
Snppl.).

The dead march like captives in Death's bonds ; to the Indian
imagination likewise he leads them away bound.^ 'ei, waz nü
dem Tdde geschicket wart an sin seil (to his rope) ! ' Lohengr.
115. 'maneger quam an des T6des seiV 123. 'in Todes 8%l
stigen/ Ls. 3, 440. ' zuo dem Tode wart geseilet/ Greo. 2585. ' w6
dir Tot ! din sloz und din gebende bindet und besliuzet,' Wigal.
7793. ' der Tot hftt mich gevangen/ Karl 81^ Greg. 50.

As the old divinity of the lower world fell into the background,
and Death came forward acting for himself, there could not but
ensue a harsher reading of his character, or a confounding of
him with other gods. From the silent messenger who did no
more than punctually discharge his duty, he becomes a grasping
greedy foe, who will have his bond, who sets traps for mortals.
Already 0. v. 23, 260 imputes to him crafty besuichan (decipere),
and Conrad strik (meshes) and netzegam, Troj. 12178, which
reminds of the goddess Ban with her net (pp. 311. 840). We
think of him still under the familiar figure of a fowler or fisher,
spreading his toils or baiting his hook for man : ' do kam der
T6t als ein diep (thief), und stal dem reinen wibe daz leben ftz
ir libe (the life out of her body),' Wigal. 8033.» But he uses

^ Ta rpwptpä, ToiS^TovXa 'f rV <reXX* ißßaiicurfjJyat Fauriel 2, 228. Wh. Müller
2, 8 ; conf . Kind 1849, p. 14.

^ Bopp*B Sündflut, pp. 87. 60. In Bahez santez Nonn p. 205, Death says
' j'attire tout dans mea liens k mon gtte.*

' Lifestealert man-tlayer, names for Death.


846 DBATH.

open violence too^ be routs out, parsnes BXid plunders, Nib. 2161,
3. 2163, 1 ; he ' Mfalta sie/ feUed them, O. iü. 18, 34 ; ' mich
hat der Tot gevangen/ clntched, Greg. 50 ; he jaget, hunts. Both.
2750, bekrellet (claws T), Fnndgr. 196, 20; and the Bible has the
same thing : in Ps. 91, 3 — 6 he comes oat as a banter with sfiares
and arrows. His messenger-staff has tamed into a spectr which
he hnrls, an a/rrow which he discharges from the bow. Worth
noting are the Benn. 24508 : ' wirt dem des Todes sper gesandt ; '
and Freid. 177, 24 : ' der Tot gftt her, der widerseit ans an dem
sper,* defies ns at point of lance ; a reading which I prefer to the
accepted one '&ne sper,' withoat spear. OSinn has a spear
Gftngnir (p. 147) whose thrust or throw was fatal. The Lith.
Smertis comes as a warrior with sword and pike, riding in a
chariot, i.e. in the form of a god. All this carries with it the
idea of Death having a regular ^^A^ and wrestle with man, whom
he overpowers and brings to the groand : ' mit dem Tode vehten/
fence with D., MS. 2, 82**. ' der Tot wil mit mir ringei^ (wrestle)/
Stoufenb. 1126. 'dd ranc er mit dem T6de,' Nib. 939, 2. 'also
der Tdt hie mit ime rank/ Ecke 184 ; and we still speak of the
death agony, though withoat any thought of a personality. In
a Mod. Grk song a daring youth wrestles with Oharos on smooth
marble from mom till midday ; at the hour of eve Death flings
him down. In another case Charos takes the shape of a black
swallow, and shoois his arrow into a maiden's heart.^ A doabt-
ful passage in Beow. 3484 we ought perhaps to refer to Death,
who is there called a destroyer that shoots with arrow-bow of
fire : ' bona, se J>e of flanbogan jyrenum sceoteS ; ' conf. the Serv.
h^nik, bloodshedder p. 21. Brun von Schonebeke makes Death
wield a scourge of four strings; and our MHO. poets lend him an
arrow and battle-axe : ' des Todes strale het si gar versniten,*
cut them up, Tit. 3770. 'w4 snidet des Todes barte,* Wh. 8,
220 (Cod. cass.). The ' isemporte ' in a Meister-song of the
14th cent. (Hagen's Mus. 2, 188) means surely isernbarte?
Here Death promises a tliousand year^ grace, should his adversary
gain the victory (see Suppl.).*

i Wh. Müller 2, 4. 6 ; conf. Tommaseo^s Ganti popolari 3, 301 seq.

^ Our poets too are no strangers to the idea of Death pro$eeuting at law his
claim npon a man : * do begnnde der Tdt einen gr&ven beelagen and mit ffewaUe
twingen ze nötigen dingen/ aoouse a count and drive him to straits, Iw. 6625 seq.


HIS WEAPONS. EIS ABMY. 847

In snch a conflict^ however^ Death mast appear as the leader
of a large and eyer increasing army. There is a following^ a
retinae assigned him : ' der T6t saochte sfire dft sin gesinde was/
Nib. 2161, S. The Ghreeks set us the fisishion of calling the dead
oi 7rX€ov69 the majority, and «9 irkeovfov Itciadai, meant the same
as €9 ^'AiZov Ik., to reach the abode of the great mnltitnde, join
the great host, as we still say. In the ' Bohemian Ploughman,'
Death is styled captain of the mountain; because, as in the Ghreek
song (p. 845), the march of his army covers the mountains f 'In
des Todes sehanr vom/ fare to D.'s host, Wh. y. Orl. 2118. 'ist
an die vart/ gone his way (obiit), Walth. 108, 6. Though taking
no part in the fight, the dead seem to. bear a badge (flag or
lance), which, so to speak, he fastens on the dying, with which
he tenches them, enroUs them in his band.^ That is how I
understand 'des Todes zeichen tragen/ Nib. 928, 8. 2006, 1,
though it may include the collateral sense of haying receiyed a
death-wound, which now serves as his badge and cognisance.
Hence in Nib. 939, 3 : ' des Todes zeichen ie ze sdre sneit,' D.'s
token aye too sore he cut; where one MS. reads wafen (arms),
and elsewhere we find 'eines wafen tragen/ carry some one's
arms, Parz. 130, 4. Freidank 74, 18. Wigal. 7797, and even
' des tödes wäpen (coat of arms) tragen,' Wh. 1 7, 16. ' Tristandes
zeichen vüeren/ Heinr. Trist. 2972, is to be wounded like him.
So far back as i3Slfred's Booth, p. 16 (Bawl.) we have 'DediSes
tdcnung^ ; even Zio's or Tiwes tdcen p. 200, and OSin's spear
p. 147 are worth considering (see Suppl.).^

With the idea of messengership and that of the great company
were associated some others, which probably reach a long way

the ooont is called ' der verlorne, wand* er maose im ze enone (satisfaction) geben
beide sfn gesnnt nnd stn leben.* So Iw. 7161 speaks of haying to * gelten (pay) vür
des Todes tchelten * ; and the same perhaps is meant by * der T6fe hAt ül si getwom^
Nib. 2017, 6. In the * Ackermann ans Böhmen * on the contrary, Death is the
defendant, and a man whose wife he has carried off is prosecutor. Similar law-
soits are brought by the Devil, *Nu kume tu grimmeolicher Tot, und rihte
Gote Ton uns beiden I * MS. 1, 17. Obsenre too * mit des Tödes hantveste über-
Migelet* sealed with D.*8 sign manual, Wh. 391, 27. The Indian god of death,
Tama, is a lord of law.

^ Conf. * einem des Tödes muoder (mieder) snlden,* Titur. ; to cut D*s. coat on
(or for) a man.

' It is worthy of note, that in the Meister-song already quoted (Mus. 2, 187)
Death says : * be ready, when I send thee my messengers (the infirmities) to give
thee the iigm^* to mark thee for my own. Death, orig. a messenger himself, sends
out under-messengers. Conf. Einderm. no. 177. Even the 0. Fr. Chanson des
ßazons 2, 134 has : * la Morz le temont sovent et menu,* viz, by fainting-fits.


848 DEATH.

back. Messengers in ancient times were often fiddlers and pipers :
it was nothing ont of the way, to make Death and his meny
perform a reihen {rig, round dance) ; with fife and fiddle he seeks
to win recruits. Beally a pleasant fancy, tending to mitigate
the harshness of dying : the souls of the dead enter at onoe
upon dancing and revebry. To the ancient Romans there were
songs and dances in the Elysian fields ; ^ and it accords with the
resemblance of departed spirits to elves, who also love music and
dancing (p. 470) • Yet our poets of the 13th cent, never once
allude to the Dance of Death, which from the 15-16th became
such a favourite subject. The oft-recurring phrase ' er hat den
Tot an der hant/ by the hand (Nib. 1480, 4. 1920, 4. 1958, 4.
Wigal. 2453. 4700. Alph. 286. 345. 359) seems to mean, not
catching hold for the purpose of dancing, but of leading away
(like ' d6d is at Jiendi/ p. 406).

Holy Scripture having already likened our fleeting life to grass,
it was not difficult to see in Death a mower or reaper, who
cuts men down like flowers and corn-stalks. Knife, sickle, or
scythe is found him in this connexion : ' There^s a reaper they call
Death, Power from Gbd most high he hath. He whets his knife
to-day. Keener it cuts the hay ; Look to thyself, O flowret fair ! '
Pop. Hymn. The older poets never give him these implements,
but the figure of 'Death carried out' is sometimes furnished with
a scythe (p. 772). In later times the harp^ (sickle) of the Greek
Kronos (0. Miiller's Archäol. p. 599) may have had an influence
too, cont faiciienens in Badevicus 2, 11. To 'match men with
flowers, make them bite the grass,' Lohengr. 138, is said equally
of other conquerors beside Death. But he weeds out the plants :
'in lebens garten der Tot nu jat,' Turl. Wh. 23**. Conversely
Death, like the devil, is called a sower, who disseminates weeds
among men; 'do der T6t slnen samen under si gesaate,' Wh.
361, 16. 'er ier durch in des Todes furch/ he eared through him
D.'s furrow, Ulr. Trist. 3270, simply means : he planted in him
a mortal wound (see Suppl.).

Before explaining certain other conceptions, I have to enumer-
ate the names and epithets of Death in our old poetry.

^ Virg. Aen. 6, 644 : pars pedibas plaudant eJwreoi et carmina dicunt. TibuU.
. 3, 59 : hie ckoreae cantusque vigent.


HIS DANCE. A SKELETON. 849

Very commonly he is called ' der grimme/ furious. Both. 2750.
Nib. 1360, 4. 1553, 3. Mar. 218. Flore 1931. Troj. 2317-25.
10885. Ls. 3, 124 ,- ^—' der ferchgHmme/ Morolt 4059, a felicit-
ous compound, as Death has designs upon the life or soul (ferch) ;
— der grimmige/ Both. 517. Reinh. 360. 1248. Berthold 303;
— 'der bittere^ {iriKpo^ ddvaros;) and ^ am^ra Mors,' ^ Budl. 1,
110. Unibos 117, 4. Diut. 3, 89. Mar. 206. Alex. (Lampr.)
820. 1097. 3999. 4782. Gr. Buod. C^ 15. Wh. 253, 28. Wigal.
1113;— der bitterliche, Troj. 3521. 22637;— 'der sure/ sour,
Parz. 643, 24; — der scharfe' : ein scharpher bote, Freid. 21, 6; —
* der irre/ Amgb. 29* in Wizlau neighbhd. therefore prob, for
erre, ireful; — 'der gemeine/ common (qui omnes manet). En.
208L All, so far, epithets taken from his unavoidableness,
cruelty, bitterness ; not a hint about his personal presence. No-
where is he the black, the pale, after the Latin 'mors atra,
pallida.' Otto II was called ^pallida m^rs Saracenorum,' Cod.
lauresh. 1, 132; and in Benner 23978. 80 I find 'der gelwe
t6t,' yellow d. ; in both cases the aspect of the dead, not of
Death, is meant. So when Walth. 124, 38 says of the world,
that it is ' inn&n swarzer varwe, vinster sam der tot,' inwardly
black of hue, dark as death, he means the abode of the dead,
hell, not the figure of Death. In one song he is addressed as
' lieber Tot ! ' dear D. (Hagen's Mus. 2, 187), and H. Sachs i. 5,
528* speaks of him as ' der heilig Tod,' holy D.; 'h&r Tot ! ' Sir
D., again in voc. case only, Apollonius 295 and often in the
Ackermann aus Böhmen (see Suppl.).

It is more important to our inquiry, that in the Beinardus 3,
2162 a bone fiddle is said to be ' ossea ut domimis Blicero/ by
which nothing but Death can have been meant, whether the word
signify the pale (bleich), or the grinning (bleckend), or be, as I
rather think, the proper name Blidger, Blicket with a mere sug-
gestion of those meanings. A bony horse's head is here handed
in mockery to the wolf as a skilful player (joculandi gnarus) by
way of fiddle, ' bony as a skeleton.' And now that unexplained
caput caballinum at p. 661n. may be interpreted as in fact a sym-


^ Der grimme t6t, the name of a knife (Wolfd. 1313|, is remarkable, as Hers
knife was called sultr (p. 813) from ivelta esurire, which m the Goth, aviltan takes
the meaning of mori.

' Isidore even says, ' mors dicta quod sit amara.*


850 DEATH.

bol of Death (p. 844) and the dead-man^s steed (p. 841). As
the convent clergy set np haman death's-heads in their cells for
a memento mori^ may not they also have nailed up horse? s shuUs
inside their walls f did an older heathen custom^ here as in so
many instances^ have a christian thought breathed into it T If
this holds good^ we can see why the horse's head shonld have set
the Flemish poet thinking of Death ; it may even be^ that fanatic
scniptors nsed to fashion Death as playing on it instead of a
fiddle or fife.^

In any case dominus Blicero proves that in the middle of the
12th cent, it was the practice to represent Death as a skeleton.
I do not know of any earlier evidence^ bat think it very possible
that such may be hunted np. We know that to the ancient
Bomans fleshless shrivelled-up masks or skeletons served to
indicate Death.' On tombs of the Mid. Ages^ no donbt from an
early time, corpses were sculptured as whole or half skeletons (see
Suppl.). Poets of the 13th cent, paint the World (p. 792n.) as
a beautifully formed woman in front, whose back is covered with
snakes and adders : ' the notion itself may be of much higher
antiquity ; it is closely related to the story of three live and three
dead kings.^

This mode of representing Death, which soon became universal,
stands in sharp contrast with the ancient portraitures and the
old heathen conceptions of him. The engaging form of the
genius, akin to Sleep, the childlike Angel of death, is now
supplanted by a ghastly figure copied from the grim reality of
corruption in the grave. Yet even here poetry steps in with her
all-embracing, all-mellowing influence. The older conceptions
of Death as leading away, as a^ta^hing, as dancing, applied to tbis
new and hideous figure, have called forth a host of truly popular,
naive and humorous art-productions; nay, their wealth is not
nearly exliausted by the artists yet. Without this ba^ of bones

^ Todenp/eife is a place in Lower Hesse, Bommel 5, 875. Bemigins demonol.
Ii5 says, at witohes* gatherings they played on a dead hone^i head instead of a
cithern : a ooincidenoe idmost deoisive. Philand. yon Sittew. (p. m. 174) has also
a Death with his lyre.

3 0. MtUler's Archaol. 696-7. Lessing 8, 251-2.
* The poem was printed hefore the Wigalois.

4 Staphorst i. 4, 263. Bragor 1, 869. 0. Fr. < les trois mors et les trois ris.*
Boqnefort 2, 780. Catal. de la Valli^re p. 285-6 ; conf . Donee p. 81 seq. and Catal.
of MSS. in Brit. Mas. (1834) 1, 22 (God. Arond. no. 83 seo. ziv), also plate 7.


BIB BLICERO. FBIEKB HEIN. 851

aping the garb and gestures of the living^^ and his startling
incongrnity with the warm life around^ all the charm and qoaint-
ness of those compositions would be gone. Less enjoyable must
have been the processions and plays in which these spectacles
were exhibited in France daring the 15th cent, and perhaps
earlier; there and then originated that pecnliar name for the
Dance of Death : chorea Machabaeortum, Fr. la da/nse Macabre.^

Another name of Deaths much later seemingly than BUcker^
but now universally known, is Freund Hein or Hain ; I cannot
even trace it up to the middle of last century.' In itself it looks
old and fitting enough, and is susceptible of more than one
explanation. Considering that Death has so many points of
contact with grants and other spirits, the name Heine (p. 503)
might be borrowed from the homesprite for one, and the addition
of Friend would answer to the ' fellow, neighbour, goodfellow '
of those elvish beings whom we meet with under the name of
Heimchen, Heinchen (pp. 275. 459n.), and who border closely on
the idea of departed spirits. Add the L. Germ, term for a
winding-sheet, heinenhleed (p. 446). But it is also spelt Aiinan-
hleed, which brings us to ' heun, hüne,' giant (p. 528) ; and
Hein itself might be explained as Heimo (p. 387), or Ha^gano
(p. 371). A Voigtland story of the god Hain (Jul. Schmidt,
p. 150), or the Thuringian one about an ancient haingott, grove-
god (Bosencranz's Neue zeitschr. i. 8, 27), being themselves very
doubtful, I am not inclined to fasten on our still doubtful Friend
Hein. Still less attention is due to a name for mortuarium,
' hainrecht,' ^ coming as it probably does from heimrecht, i.e.
heimfaU, lapse of property.

^ As the beasta in a fable ape those of men.

' Latest writings on the Danoe of Death : Peignot, * Beoherohes snr les danses
des morts' (1826). F. Donee, ' The Danoe of Death ' (1833). The latter derives
Macabre from St. Macariui^ to whom three skeletons appeared in a vision. I do
not see how * chorea Maohabaeomm,' as the oldest authorities have it, oonld have
come from that ; oonf. Carpentier sab v. (a. 1424-68). It onflht to appear by the
old paintings, that the 7 heroes of the O.T. martyred in one day [2 liaocabees 7]
were incorporated as leading characters in the dance. Perhaps it is more oorrect
to explain ' macabre * from the Arabic magabir, ma^^baragh (dead-yud, oimeterimn).
On the French performances conf . Michelet*s Hist, de France 4, 409 — 412 (Paris
1840).

• It is used by Mnsäns (Yolksm. 1, 16), Claudius and Götter. J. R. Schellen-
berg in Pref. to Freund Heins erscheinungen (Winterthur 1785) thinks Claudius in
his Asmus (after 1776) invented the name, which I very much doubt ; he has given
it currency.

* Mittennaier*s Privatrecht § 77, no. 27.


852 DEATH.

Kaisersberg calls Death holz-meier, wood-mower. He wrote ä
bookj De arbore hamana (Strasb. 1521 fol.)^ 'wherein easily and
to the glory of God ye may learn to await blithely the woodciUter
Death/ Then, p. 118^: 'So is death called a vilktge-mower or
wood-mower, and justly hath he the name, for he hath in him the
properties of a wood-cutter, as, please God, ye shall hear. The
first property of the village-mower is commanitas, he being pos-
sessed in common by all snch as be in the village, and being to
serve them all alike. So is the wood-cutter* likewise common to
all the trees, he overlooketh no tree, but heweth them down all.*^
Here Death is regarded as a forester, a ranger, who has a right
to fell any of the forest-trees. It is said that in some places the
gravedigger is called holzm^eier.

In the Deutsche Schlemmer, a drama of the 16th cent..
Death is called the pale Strechefusa or Streckebein (leg-stretcher),
as Gryphius too (Kirchhofsged. 86) names him Streckfuss, because
he stretches out the limbs of the dying, loosens them (Xvo-^^eXi/?) ;
and before that, the twice quoted Meister-song of the 14th
cent, has : ' er hat kein ru, er hab gestrecket mir das fell (my
skin),' Hag. mus. 2, 188. In Chr. Weisels Drei erzn. 314 I find
Streckebein and Bleckezahn, bleak (i.e. bared) teeth; and else-
where Dürrbein, Klapperbein, names for a skeleton. The allusion
in kupferbickel (Ackerm. aus B. p. 34) remains obscure (see
Suppl.).

It remains for me to mention certain more fully developed
myths respecting Death, which have survived from assuredly a
remote antiquity.

H. Sachs (1, 102^), speaking of Death^s arrival, says he twitdies
or jerks tlte stool from under man, tips it over, so that he tumbles
to the ground. He takes from him his seat and standing among
the living : I suspect there was a fuller story at the back of this.
More commonly the same thing is expressed by 'Death has
blown the man's candle out ' (as Berhta blew out the lights of the
eyes, p. 277), for the notions of light, life and sojourn among the
living, run into one another.* The living principle was linked

^ The earlier editions in Latin (1614, 115^-«, and 1519, 105^^) have in paren-
theses * der dorfmeyger ' and * der holzmeyger.*

' Wh. 416, 14 : * bi liehter sonnen d& verlatch (went out) manegem Sarrazin
sin liehtJ Lohengr. 1S8 : * er sluoc in, daz im muose daz lieht erluchen,*


QUENCHES LIGHT. A GODFATHER. 853

to a lights a taper^ a brand: when these were wasted^ death
ensued (pp. 409. 415). Here then the idea of Death is intimately
connected with that of fate. The genius lowers hia torch, re-
verses it^ and the light of life is quenched. For the child as
soon as born^ the norn has kindled a light, to which his thread of
life is fastened; possibly even our lighting of tapers in con-
nexion with birthday gifts has reference to this.^ We have a
capitally contrived story of Gossip Death (gevatter Tod, Kinderm.
no. 44), the conclusion of which represents a subterranean
cavern, with thousands of lights burning in endless rows. These
are the lives of men, some still blazing as long tapers, others
burnt down to tiny candle-ends ; but even a tall taper may topple
or be tipt over. The preceding part relates, how Death has
stood gossip ^ to a poor man, and has endowed his godson with
the gift of beholding him bodily when he approaches the sick,
and of judging by his position whether the patient will recover
or not.^ The godson becomes a physician, and attains to wealth
and honours: if Death stands at the sick man^s head, it is all
over with him ; if at his feet, he will escape. Occasionally the
doctor turns the patient round, and circumvents Death ; but in
the end Death has his revenge, he catches his godson napping,
and knocks his candle over.^ Throughout this fable Death shews
himself friendly, good-natured and indulgent, only in case of
absolute need does he fulfil his function ; hence too his gossip*
hood^ with man, which evidently corresponds to that ancient
visit of the noms to the newborn child, and their bestowing
gifts on him (pp. 408 — 12), as in some nursery-tales the fays are
invited to stand godmothers.^ The extinguished light resembles
the taper and the brand, to which are linked the lives of Noma-
gestr and Meleager (pp. 409. 415). It is then a primitive myth


> In the child's game ' If the fox dies I get the skin * (Eindenn. 2, zviii.), a
pieoe of buminff wood is passed round, and its extinction decides.

' God'iib expresses the kinship of god-parents to each other or to the parents.
— Tbans.

' So the bird charadrins, by looking at or away from yoa, decides your life or
death, Freid. introd. Ixxxvi., where a couplet in Titurel 6154-5 and the O.Fr. Bes-
tiaire (Boquef . sub v. caladrio) are left unnoticed.

* May not that * stool ' also, when upset, haye knocked the candle oyer f

' Is Death likewise called the brother of man, as he is of Sleep? The
* bruoder tot * in Ben. 262 means /ratm mors.

< The semi-divine noms and fays protect and bestow gifts like ohxistian
sponsors.


864 DEATH.

of heathen Germany ; in telling which. Death was pictured, even
till recent times, not as a skeleton, bat in the shape of a living
man or god. We cannot wonder that the story is found with a
great many variations, which are collected, though still incom-
pletely, in Kinderm. 3, 72 : in some of them Death presents his
godson with a ring, by which he can judge of diseases.^ Old
Hugo yon Trimberg at the close of his work had told a tale
^ von dem Tode, wie er ein hint Kuop (took up),' but there is not
much in it (Bamb. ed. 23665 — 722) : Death promises to send his
gossip some messengers before he comes to fetch him (as in the
Meister-song p. 847n.) ; these are, ringing in the ears, running
at the eyes, toothache, wrinkled skin, and grizzled beard. The
gossiphood is the only guarantee of any connexion with the later
marchen.— — The resemblance of the OHG-. toto, godfather,
MHG. tote (Parz. 461, 10. Wh. 7, 21) to tot, death, is striking,
though strictly the quantity of the vowel keeps the two words
apart, and to harmonize them some derivative process must be
presupposed. The story never grew out of a play on the words
(see Suppl.).*

Equally celebrated, but gayer in tone, is the tale of Death and
Player Jack (Spielhansel, no. 82 ; conf. 3, 135 — 148), who by a
spell binds Death to a tree, so that nobody dies in the world
for seven years. Welcker (Append, to Schwenk p. 323-4) has
pointed out a parallel story in Pherekydes, how Death is set on
by Zeus to attack Sisyphos, who binds him in strong chains, and
then no one can die; Hades himself comes and sets Death free,
and delivers Sisyphos into his hands. Our German fable inter-
weaves the Devil into the plot. Once the Devil was put in
possession of hell, he had to take his place beside Death, as
the alliteration ' death and devil 1 ' couples them together. Bo
Welnas, Wels, originally the death-god of the Lithuanians and
Lettons, got converted into the Devil. According to the chris-
tian view, angels received the souls of the just, devils those of
the wicked (p. 836) ; therefore Death in coming for souls was
divided into a double power, according as he resembled the
angel or the devil. As angelic messenger, he comes nearest the
christicui Michael, whose office it was to receive souls (Morolt

1 Etiner*s ünwürd. doctor p. 290.

* Ck>nf. p. 14 on the affinity between gSd and g6de.


A GOD. 855

2660. 2715), conf. p. 836. Of very aged people, who still live
on, we say ' Death has forgotten to fetch them.' The Nib.
Lament 122 has : ^ der Tdt Tiet ir minne, die da sterben solden/
D. bore those in mind that there should die, or, as Lachmann in-
terprets it, desired them for his band (conf. p. 848).

These investigations will hardly have left it doubtful, that the
heathen ' Death ' is one of a secondary order of gods ; hence too
he coincides more especially with the semi-divine valkyrs and
noms, he is dependent on OSinn and Hel ; of the Grecian gods,
it is Hermes and Hades, Persephone and the ferryman Charon
that come nearest to him. But his nature is also not unrelated
to that of elves, homesprites and genii.

Chap. XXIV. has explained how he got mixed up with one of
the time-gods. Winter; no wonder therefore that he now and
then reminds us of Kronos.

In our Heldenbuch, Death figures as a false god, whom the
heathen Belligan serves above all other gods, and whose image is
demolished by Wolfdietrich. I do not know exactly how to
account for this : it must be a diabolic being that is meant.

Li the Finnish lays, Manala tknd Tuonela are often named
together, but as separate beings. One is the underworld, from
' maa,' earth ; the other the kingdom of the dead,, as Tuon {Odv-
arosi) is Death, Halja. In E^lewala, runes 6 — 9, Tuonela seems
to be a river of the underworld, with sacred swans swimming on
it (see Suppl.) .


VOL. :i. E B


CHAPTER XXVIII.
DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

This is the place to insert a more exact survey of ancient
opinions on fortune and destiny^ than it was possible to take in
chap. XVI, where the semi-divine directresses of human fate
were spoken of. Fate in the proper sense has so much to do
with men's notions about birth, and more especially those about
death, and these have only just been expounded. Thus, a man
over whom there impends a speedy and inevitable death is said
to be fey}

Our ancestors, like other heathens, appear to have made a
distinction between destiny and fortune. Their gods bestow
prosperity and bliss : above all, Wuotan is the giver of all good,
the maker and author of life and victory (pp. 133-7). But
neither he nor any other god was at the beginning of creation,
he has himself sprung out of it (p. 559), and can do nothing
against a higher constitution of the world, which exempts neither
him nor victory-lending Zeus ^ from a general destruction (pp.
316-8). Some things turn out contrary to his will : 05inn
and all the &ses cannot prevent the misfortune of Balder;
another instance of overruling destiny at p. 425. Bag^arök, the
world's destruction, far overtops the power of the gods.

This predetermined and necessary character of all that comes
into being and exists and perishes, was expressed by a plural

> ORO.feigi, MHG. veige; OS, fegi, Hel. 72, 4; AS. fage, Beow. S94S; ON.
feigr. The old meaning of the word has been preserved longest in Lower Saxony
[and Scotland] : * dar is en veege in'n hnse ' ; * en veegToinsdie, dat balde sterren
werd (will die soon) ' ; per contra, * he is nan nig veege (not fey yet) ' of a man
who comes in when you are talking of him. Also Nethl. ' een veeg man (with one
foot in the graye), een veege teken (sign of death)', hence also veeg ■» debilis, peri-
culis expositus. Our own feig has acquired the sense of fainthearted, cowardly,
pitiable, as the Lat. fatalis has, in the Fr. fatal, that of unlucky, disagreeable. So
the Lith. paikatf bad (see Suppl.).

^ IpiUan ßo^erai pUjip (II. 7, 21. 16, 121), as ßcutkii will, counsel, is usually
attributed to Zeus (^fuv ßoCXerai 17, 331) ; and sometimes v6oi (17, 176) or p6iißia,
purpose (17, 409). His great power is illustrated by the gold chain (o-ccpo, II. 8,
19—28), but passages presently to be cited shew that he had to leave destiny to be
decided by the balance.

866


DESTINY. 857

nonn, ON. scop, OS. giscapu, AS. gesceapu; I have not fonnd
an OHG. scaf, kiscaf in the same sense, though the sing, is forth-
coming, and, like the sing, skap in ON., signifies indoles, con-
siliam, Graff 6, 450. The later Icelandic uses a masc. shapnaffr,
and the Dan. skiebne (ON. skepna= forma, indoles). The OS.
intensifies its giscapn by prefixes: wurdigiscapUy Hel. 103, 7.
reganogiscapu (sapra p. 26), decreta fati, snperomm, where the
old heathen notions of wurd and regin plainly assert themselves.
In ON. the neat. pi. log (statuta) is never used of destiny, except
when joined to the particle or (for or), örlög, which in all the
other dialects becomes a sing., OHG. urlac (neut. ? Graff^s
quotations 2, 96-7 leave it doubtful, Notker uses urlag as masc,
pi. urlaga), OS. orlag, AS. orlceg, all denoting a ^fixing from
the first ; ' but as the most momentous issue of fate was to the
heathen that of war, it early deviated into the sense of bellum,
and in Hel. 132, 3 v/rlagi bellum seems distinct from orlag, orleg
fatum, but in reality both are one. So the OHG. urteil, urteili,
AS. ordcel, from being the award of a judge, came to mean that
of battle. The OS. compound aldarlagu (vitae decretum), Hel.
125, 15 retains the old plural form. Now aldr, aldar is strictly
aevum (p. 792), and hveila, OHG. huilu tempus, but also vitae
tempus; hence these words also run into the sense of fatum,
conf. AS. gesceap-hwil, mdeg-hwü, Beow. 52. 4849. 5817, OS.
orlag-huila, Hel. 103, 8, and OHG. huilsalida.^ Then there is
an ON. axidha, Swed. öde, destiny, and ^ au'Sinn ^ fato concessus :
' au9na ras^r hvors manns lifi,' rules every man's life, Fomald.
sog. 1, 95. Our modern words, not introduced till late, Schicksal
(fr. schicken aptare, conf. geschickt aptus), Verhängnis, fägung,
do not come up to the old ones in simplicity or strength.

To the nouns 'scapn, lagu,' correspond the verbs to shape, to
la\j, which are used in a special sense of the decrees of fate (pp.
407. 410): 'ist tha kinder skepen (is it shaped for the child)' says
the O. Fris. Law 49, 10. But we also meet with an ON. cetla
(destinare, to intend for some one), OHG. ahton and perhaps
ahtilön, MHG. ahten, and beslahten, as ahte and slahte are akin
to one another (see Suppl.).

» WUsdlda (fortuna), N. Cap. 20-8-5. 53. 77. MHO. wiUiBlde, Kaiserchr. 1757.
Massmann 3, 669. Geo. 61*. * dia tolle min nnd ich müez Got beyolhen atn,' must
be committed to God, Bit. 3^


858 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

Bestinj has principally to do with the beginning and the end
of human life. The Ward visits the newborn and the dying,
and it is for one or the other of these events that the above-
mentioned names of destiny are mostly used by the poets ; thus
Beow. 51 speaks of dying ' to gesceaphwile/ at the appointed
time: Hel. 103, 7: ^tho qaamnn wnrdegiscapu themn 6dagan
man, orlaghnlle, that he thit licht farl^t.' The hour of birth too
settles much as to the coarse and outcome of one's life : ' qaalem
Naacentia attulit, tsdis erit/ and ' Parcae, dum aliquis nascitur,
valent eum designare ad hoc quod volant/ Superst. A, and C
198'. The infant's whole course of life shall be conformable to
what the norns or fays in their visitation have bestowed, have
shaped, ^

It is a deviation from this oldest way of thinking, to put the
settlement of destiny into the hands of the gods; yet it is a
very old one. Undoubtedly the faith of many men began early
to place the Highest God at the vei-y head of the world's manage-
ment, leaving those weird-women merely to make known his
mandates. The future lies on the lap of the gods, Oe&v iv yovvaat
Kclrai, and with this agrees that ' laying on the lap,' that ^ taking
to the bosom,' which is performed by the paternal or maternal
deity (pp. 642. 839). If above the gods themselves there could
be conceived a still higher power, of the beginning and end of all
things, yet their authority and influence was regarded by men as
boundless and immeasurable, all human concerns were undoubtedly
under their control (see SuppL).

The Gautrekssaga tells us (Fornald. sog. 3, 32), that at mid-
night Hrosshdrsgrani ^ awoke his foster-son Starka'Sr, and carried
him in his boat to an island. There, in a wood, eleven men sat
in council ; the twelfth chair stood vacant, but Hrossh&rsgrani
took it, and all saluted him as OSinn. And CHSinn said, the
demsters should deem the doom of Starka'Sr (dömendr skyldi
dcema örlug St.). Then spake Thörr, who was wroth with the
mother of the lad : I shape for him, that he have neither son nor

* We still say : * bom in happy hour.* OHG. * mit heUu er giboran ward,' 0.
Sal. 44. Freq. in theO. Span. Cid : ' el que en buen ora nascio, el que en buen punUi
nasoio.* From this notion of a good hour of beginning {k la lK>nne heure) has
sprung the Fr. word bonheur (maso.) for good hap in general. Similarly, about
receiving knighthood, the 0. Span, has ' el que en buen ora cinxo espada.'

3 That is, Grani, SltSgrani, the bearded, a by-name of OiSinn (p. 147).


DESTINY. 859

daughter^ bat be the last of his race. OSinn said : I shape him^
that he live three men's lifetimes (conf. Saxo Gram. p. 103).
Thörr : in each lifetime he shall do a ' ntSings-verk.' OSinn :
I shape him^ that he have the best of weapons and raiment.
Thörr : he shall have neither land nor soil. OSinn : I give him^
that he have store of money and chattels. Thdrr : I lay nnto
him^ that he take in eveiy battle grievous wonnds. OSinn : I
give him the gift of poetry. Thdrr : what he composes he shall
not be able to remember. OSinn : this I shape him^ that he be
prized by the best and noblest men. Thörr : by the people he
shall be hated. Then the demsters awarded to StarkaSr all the
doom that was deemed^ the council broke up^ and Hrossh&rsgrani
and his pupil went to their boat.

Thörr plays here exactly the part of the ungracious fay (pp.
411-2)^ he tries to lessen each gift by a noxious ingredient.
And it is not for an infant^ but a well-grown boy^ and in his
presence^ that the destiny is shaped.

According to G-reek legend, Zeus did not always decide
directly, but made use of two scales, in which he weighed the
fates of men, e.g. of the Trojans and AchaDans, of Achilles and
Hector :

Kal Tore Brf j^vcreia Trarrfp iiriraive rdkavra*
iv 8' irlOet Bvo /cijpe ravrfXeyio^ Oavdrom,
Tpaxov 0* iinrohdfKav Kal ^A')(ai,S}v ')(aKico')(jLTWV(ov,
eXjce Bi fietrtra Xaßdir pewe S' alcnfiov ^fiap A'xai&v.

II. 8, 69. 22, 209; conf. 16, o58. 19, 223. The same of
Aeneas and Turnus, Aen. 12, 723 :

Jupiter ipse, duas aequato examine lances

sustinet, et fata imponit diversa duorum,

quern damnet labor, et quo vergat pondere letum.

I am the more particular in quoting these, as the christian legend
also provides the archangel Michael, the conductor of souls, with
scales, in which the good and evil deeds of them that die are
weighed against one another, and the destinies of souls determined
by the outcome^ (see Suppl.). The application of a balance to
actions, to sins, is very natural ; the (apocryphal) 2 Esdras 3, 34

1 Conf. Deat. S. no. 479; a coll. of authorities in Zappert's Vita Acotanti
(Vienna 1839), pp. 79, 88.


860 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

has: 'none ergo pondera in stcUera nostras iniquitates/ and 4,
36 : ' qaoniam in statera ponderavit secnlam/^ The Jomsvikinga*
saga cap. 42 (Fornm. sog. 11^ 128-9) describes the magical luck-
scales or wishing-scales of Hakon iarl : ' SHSan tekr iarl skaUr
g69ar ]wr er hann &tti, }wr roro gervar af brenda silfri ok gylldar
allar, en jiar fylgSo 2 met, annat af gnlli en annat af silfri ; ä
hv&rotveggja metino Tar gert sem vsBri likneskja^ ok hSto }^at
hlotar, en ]?at voro reyndar hlatir, sem mönnum var titt at hafa^
ok fylgSi )>es80 n&ttAra mikil, ok til ]^ss alls^ er iarli )>ötti skipta^
\k hafSi hann J^essa hlati. Iarl var )>Ti vanr at leggja hlati J^essa
i sk&lirnar, ok kvati & hvat hv&r skyldi merkja fyrir honum^ ok
&valt er vel g^ngo hlatir, ok 8& kom npp, er hann yildi^ ]>& var sa
dkyrr hlatrinn t sk&linni, er )^t merk'Si at hann vildi at yrSi, ok
breysti 8& hlatrinn nokkot sv& i sk&linniy at glam varS af .'

I do not find that in oar earlier heathen time the fates of men
were calcalated from the litara at their birth. This kind of
soothsaying (p. 721) seems not to have become known till the
latter part of the Mid. Ages. Radalphns Ardens (an Aquitanian
priest of the 11th cent.) says in his Homilies (Antverp. 1076^
p. 41^) : Cavete^ fratres^ ab eis qai mentiantur, qaod qaando
quisqae nascitur^ ztella sua stcum tuiseUur, qua fcUum ejvs caru-
stituituTj samentes in erroris sni argumentam, qaod hie in scrip-
tura sacra (on the star of the Magi) dicitar ' Stella ejus.' One
instance we find in Klinsor's star-gazing on the Wartburg;
another in the wishing-wife who looks into the stars, Altd. bl.
1, 129 (see Suppl.).

For individuals then, as well as for whole families and nations,
length of days and happiness were ordained beforehand.^ But
the decrees of norns and gods lay shrouded in an obscurity that
disclosed its secrets only to the glances of wise men and women
(p. 400).^ The people believed in a predetermining of fates, as
they did in the certainty of death.

> We need not go to 2 Esdnts to find plenty of aiinUar passages in the O. T.,
e.g. 1 Sam. S, S. Job 81» 6. Prov. 16, 2. Isa. 26, 7. Dan. 5^ 27.— Tbaks.

* Not onfreqaently depending on their possession of certain things : a hoard
drags the whole kindred of the Nibialnngs to rain ; the gift, the jewel, of the dwarfs
(p. 457) insures the prosperity of partionhur families.

* It is worthy of remark, that, aeo. to the ON. view, not aU the gods, hut only
the highest ones possessed a knowledge of de$tiny: so to the Greeks, none but Zeros
and those whom he made his confidants knew of it. Of Frigg it is said, Sem.
Gö^: *at öU örlög viti, |»6tt hon sialfgi segi,' all fates she knows, bnt tells not. And


FATALISM. 861

The Old Norse fatalism is proved by the following passages :
' lagt er alt for/ predestined is all ; and ^ era me^ löstom lögff
8dfi )>er/ Sffim. 1 75^. ^ siä mun gipt Uigiff & grams »G/ and
' munat sJcöpom vinna/ 1 79^. ' eino doegri mer var aldr nm
skapadr oc allt lif urn lagit/ 83*. ' var )?er )?ar skapat/ 164^. ' )wit
verSr hverr at vinna, er a^tlat er ' ; ' ];at man verSa fram atkoma,
sem cetlat er'; ^ecki man mer j^at stolSa, ef mer er dauffinn
cetladr^ ; 'koma man til min feigSin, hvar sem ek em staddr, ef
mer ver8r Jwss au9it\ Nialss. pp. 10. 23. 62. 103. So in Swed.
and Dan. folksongs: ^detta var mig spädt uti nun bamdom/
Aryidss. 2, 271. 'hver skal njde skiebnen sin/ Danske Y. 1,
193.

The same with our MHGr. poets : ' swaz sich sol fliegen, wer
mac daz underst^n (what is to happen, who can hinder) ?' Nib.
1618, 1. 'swaz gescliehen sol, daz flieget sich/ what shall be,
will be, Frauend. ' d& sterbent wan die veigen/ there die (none)
bnt the fey. Nib. 149, 2. ' ez sterbent niuwan die veigen, die
laBgen doch d& heime tot,' would lie dead though at home,
Wigal. 10201. 'di veigen fielen dar nider,' Lampr. 2031. 'hin-
nerstirbet niman wan di veigen/ Pf. Chuonr. 8403. ' then veigen
mac nieman behuoteu, thiu erthe ne mag m niht üf gehaven
(hold up), scol er tha werthen geslagen, er sturve (would die)
thoh thaheime,' Fr. belli 42^. ' swie ringe er ist, der veige man,
in mac ros noch enkan niht viirbaz getragen,' the fey man, how*
ever light, no horse can carry farther, ICarl 72^. Rol. 207, 24.
' die veigen muosen ligen tdt,' Livl. chron. 59^. ' der veigen mac
keiner genesen,' none recover, ib. 78*. ' ich ensterbe niht vor
minem tac (day),' Herb. 53**. 'nieman sterben sol wan zu sinem
gesatten zil (goal),' Ulr. Trist. 2308. ' daz aver (whatever) scol
werden, daz nemac nieman erwenden (avert),' Diut. 3, 71. 'ge-
mach er wenden niht enkan swaz dem man geschehen sol/ Troj.
58*^. 'daz miLose wesen (what had to be), daz geschach,' Orl.
11167. 'swaz geschehen sol, daz geschiht.' Freid. 182^ MS. 1,
66*. 71*^. ' daz solt eht sin, nu ist ez geschehen,' MS. 74». 80».
' ez geschiht niht wan daz sol geschehen,' Lanz. 6934. ' ez


O'Sinii says (62^), that Gef jon knows the world's destiny (aldar örlög) equally with
himself. Among men, piurticular heroes and priests spy ont the secrets of the
futare, preeminently Grlpir (p. 94) ; to women, to priestesses, belonged the gift of
divination.


862 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

erg&t doch niht, wan ale ez sol/ Trist. 6776. ' tot arenra qan-
qae doit avenir/ Ogier 7805. ^ bin ich genislich, sd genise ich,'
if I was made to lire thro' it^ I shall^ A. Heinr. 190. ' swaz ich
getuon (do)^ bin ich genislich, ich genise wol ; bin ich dem valle
ergeben (doomed to fall)^ so n' hilfet mich min woltaon nicht ein
hir/ MS. 2, 129\ 'ez muose sin, and ez' was mir beschaffen/ it
was to be, was shaped for me (134^). ' din maget was in beschaf-
fen/ that girl was cut out for you, Wigal. 1002. ' ez was im
beslaht (destined),' Eracl. 2394. 'swaz ist gescliaffen (shapen),
daz muoz geschehen,' MsH. 3, 434^. ' nu mir daz was in teile/
well, that was in mj lot (portion), En. 11231. ' ez was enteile uns
getan/ Herb. 18418. 'ez ist mich angehorn/ I was born to it.
Herb. 6*. — The words geschaffen, beschaffen and beslaht are identi-
cal with the ON. skapat and oetlat, and this sameness of the
words testifies to their original connexion with the heathen doc-
trine. Even at the present day the fatalist view prevails largely
among the common people (Jul. Schmidt pp. 91. 163). 'ez müste
mir sein gemacht gewesen,' must have been made for me. Sieben
ehen eines weibes, p. 211. 'fatum in yulgari dicitur "'tis allotted
unto me {bescheert, my share)"; ego antem addo "allotting and
deserving run alway side by side."' Sermones disc, de tempore,
sermo 21. 'was bescheert ist, entläuft nicht,' Schweinichon 3,
249 (see Suppl.) .^

Now, in themselves, the gifts of destiny would include every
earthly blessing. But gradually men began ascribing whatever
in human life seemed bane or blessing (excepting birth and
death) to a separate being : thus the Greeks and Romans, in
addition to ßiolpa and fatum, held by an independent Tu^n &i^cl
Fortuna,

Müllenhoff in the Nordalbingia p. 11 (conf. Schlesw. hoist,
sagen xliv) infers from the name of a place Welanao, occurring
in Ansgar (Pertz 2, 687-99), an OS. god Welo, AS. Wela, the
very thing I had had in my mind (p. 163) : an older god of weal
in the place of the later goddess S&lida, Saalde. But insfcead of
his interpretation Welanaha, I should prefer Welan-owa, which
is supported by the more modern Welnau, a place that stood on

7 1.*^ ^^® "*"*® ^^®* ^ ^^^ ^y *^ Lithuaniana and Lettona, fate they call likkimas
iaifTl* ."Jj'^* ^ i*y ^^"^^ arrange : « tai buwo jo likkims/ • tas jan bija win-
nam hktz,' that was destined for him. » j j


WEAL. S^LDE. 863

the right bank of the Elbe near Itzehoe^ the river Stör having
apparently formed the 'aue^ ea'; Welan-owa would then be
uniform with Wunschesouwa and Pholesouwa (p. 600). The
great thing ie^ first to establish from other sources the personality
of Welo, which the quotations from the Heliand fail to do^ for
welanowa taken simply as isle of luck (Atterbom^s lycksalighetens
Ö) is quite compatible with the old ways of thinking : Beichenau
(augia dives) has much the same meanings and in the vicinity of
Welnau has arisen Glückstadt. In the AS. * welan bewunden *
(Gramm. 4, 752), wela is used^ though mythically^ yet not of a
person but a thing : Grod himself sits ' welan bewunden/ Adam
and Eve stand 'mid welan bewunden/ wrapt in splendour^ in
bliss^ Cffidm. 42, 2* 27, 19. But the 'gold welan bewunden'
forms a contrast to the ' gold galdre bewunden/ a holy divine
power is imagined confronting that of sorcery; and this wela
does seem to lead up to Wela, as the kindred notion of wünsch
to Wunsch.

The ON. distinguishes its fem. heill (felicitas) from a nent. heil
(omen), so does the AS. its haelu f. (salus) from hadl n« (omen),
and the OHG. its heili f. (salus) from heil n. (omen). Both
meanings are combined in MHG. hail n. Personifications of
this I scarcely know, unless such be intended by a passage
obscure to me, Ottoc. 683^ which gives out as a common pro-
verb : ' chum hail hauenstain ! ' In MS. 2, 130^ : ' waz ob iuwer
lisil eime andern kumet an sin seil,' what if your hap prove
another's hanging? And so early as 0. ii. 18, 7 : 'thaz heil ni
gifs^hit iuwih,' luck comes not your way (see Suppl.).

On the other hand, it is the commonest thing with our 13th
cent, poets to treat scelde (fortuna) as a female person, and that
apparently not in imitation of the Romance writings : even the
OHG. sdlida occurs with the like import, and the compound
huiUalida (supra p. 857) was a stronger expression of the same
thing. 0. i. 26, 4 speaking of the baptism of Christ in the
water, uses a remarkable phrase, to which no church writer could
hare prompted him : ' sid wacheta all6n mannen thin Sälida in
th£n undon.' Waking presupposes life. The personification
comes out still more clearly in poets four centuries after him :
' unser Beeide wachet/ Parz. 550, 10. ' min sorge sl&fet, so din
Scelde wachet/ Tit. 31, 3. 'z'aller zit des S. wachet/ MS. 1, 16\


861 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

' nnser 8. dia wil wachen/ Trist. 9430. ' des noch stn 8. wachet/
Ernst. 5114. 'ir 8. wachet/ Amgb. 85\ 'daz mir 8. wache/
ib. 48*. * ich wsen sin 8, eldfe/ ib. 44*. ' sd ist im al diu 8.
ertaget (dawned)/ Trist. 9792. ' diu S. ist dir betaget/ Wartb.
kr. Jen. 21. ' diu S. was mit im betaget/ Dietr. 5'. 27'. 'inwer
8. wirt erwecket/ Lohengr. 19. Observe in these MHG. qaota-
tions the frequent poss. pron.^ or gen. case : the Ssalde dedicates
herself to certain men^ protects and prospers them^ wakes for
them while they sl^ep, as we say ' luck came to me in my sleep.^
A mode of speech so common need not always be felt to personify :
' daz im stn heil niht slief/ Troj. 9473. 'd& wachet schände^
und slsBft daz heil/ Zaaberbecher (magic bowl) 1113. 'Tristans
geliicke dft niht slief/ Heinr. Tr. 2396. It was even extended to
other notions of the same kind : ' wachet sin 6re nnd ouch an
lop/ honour, praise, Amgb. 47'. ' ir milte wachet/ ib. 12^. 'ir
gen&de (kindness) mir mnoz wachen/ MS. 1, 33'. 'ich waone an
ir ist genäde entsläfen (asleep), daz ich ir leider niht erwecken
kan,' MS. 1, 48'. ' du (minne) bist gegen mir hart entsl&fen/
MS. 1, 60'. 'min schade wachet/ Ben. 121. 'din kraft mit
eilen dö niht slief,' Parz. 85, 24. We still say, ' treason sleeps
not ' ; and some phrases of this sort can have a personal sense.
The heathen colouring of Ssalde's waking and being waked I infer
chiefly from the analogous ' vekja Hildi ' noticed on p. 422, who
not only was awaked, but herself awoke the heroes (Sn. 164).
And ' vilbiörg seal vaica/ Sadm. 46', may bear the same meaning :
we can translate it ' jucunda salus,' or suppose it a proper noun.
FröSi makes Fenja and Menja (p. 531) grind gold, peace and
happiness (gull, fri'S oc s»lu), allowing them but scanty rest at
night : they wake to grind prosperity for him, and afterwards
misfortune (salt) for M^stngr, Sn. 146-7 (see SuppL).

And this is far from being the only way personification is
applied to her. Ssalde is called ^ati, she appears, meets, bends
her face toward her favourites, hearkens to them (as a god hears
prayer), smiles on them, greets them, is kind and obliging, but
can be cross ; those whom she dislikes, she forgets, shuns, flees,
runs away from,^ turns her back upon ; she has a door and a

^ So : * des si min S. gein iu bote,* Parz. 416, 4. * des sol min S. pfant sin,' be
pledge thereof, Frauend. 23. * l&t dir'z din S. wol gezemen,' MS. 2, 252*.

- This etcaping is the same thing as the ON. hverfa (evanesoere) : heilUr


s^'iiDß. 865

road. Here again old Ofcfrid leads the way (ii. 7^ 20) : ' thiu
Sälida in thar gaganta' (eis occurrit). Walther sings 55^ 35 :
^fro Scelde teilet umbe sich (scatters gifts around)^ und leeret mir
dejh rägge zuo (turns her back)^ sie stöt ungeme gegen mir, si n'
rnochet (recks) mich niht an gesehen' ; and 43, 5: ' min frou S.,
wie si min vergaz ! * ^vro 8. h&t iu an sich genomen, wil dJn
pflegen (cherish)/ Ecke 10, 160. 'ob vrouvje 8, mines heiles
welle roochen/ Ben. 425. ' die wlle es min 8, mochte/ Parz.
689, 20. ' haete mir diu 8. ir ore baz geneiget/ inclined her ear,
MS. 2, 220^. ' dö was mir 8. entrunnen/ Parz. 689, 8. ' 8. was
stn geleite/ conductress, WigaL 8389. 'frou 8. ir was bereit/
ready to help, Er. 3459; and perhaps we ought to add what
follows: 'diu Gotes hövescheit ob mtner frowen swebte/ God^s
kindness over my lady hovered; for so hover the valkyrs over
the heroes they befriend. 'Got wise mich der 8a^lden wege/
guide me on Fortune's way, Parz. 8, 1 6. ' den vuoz (foot) setzen
in der 8. pfat/ Ben. 306. 'frowe 8. muoz in of ir straze wisen,'
Tit. 5218. ' der 8celden site/ path, Karl 19^ 'über fro S. stec
gdin/ Pragm. 46\ 'tuo mir M (open) der 8. türrUS, 1, 36\
' der 8. porte,' A. Heiur. 243, 33. ' der 8. tür besliezen,' shut,
MsH. 3, 336'. 'setzen zuo der 8. iilr/ Zauberb. 1150. 'den
begiuzet 8. vluot/ flood, MsH. 3, 205'. ' Scelde und ir gesinde
(household) wait ir,' MS. 1, 88**. ' diu Saide folget sinen vanen,'
follows his banners, Lampr. 2089. 'mir enwil diu 8. ninder
folgen einen fuoz/ Ben, 367. ' mir ist diu 8. gram/ unfriendly,
Gregor 2390. 'diu 8. was ime gram/ Diut. 1, 10. Athis D. 84.
' diu 8. vliuhet (flees) von mir/ Greg, 1526. ' diu 8. h&t mich
Verlan/ Karl 95'. ' diu 8, hat si besezzen/ possessed her, Wigal.
884. ' diu 8. het ir geswoi-n' 941. ' diu 8. het zuo im geswom
zeim staeten ingesinde,' to be his steadfast follower, Lanz. 1561.
* der Scelden spil/ game, Wigal. 8761. 9271. 9386. ' din gespil
der 8./ playmate 10532. ' swes diu 8. ze gesellen gert,' desires
as companion 945. ' im gab din 8. ir hantgift/ Silv. 534. ' diu
8. vl6z im in den munt' 1024, 'ez rise (drop) üf dich der 8.
tufl' 1389. 'so grüenet diner 8. ris/ spray, MsH. 2, 258'.
^frouwe 8. lachet mir,' laughs, Ernst 4334. ' daz dir /ro 8. lache,
und al din heil bewache/ Silv. 2565. ' Fortune wolt im d6 niht

horfnar (felioitateB evanitae), SsBin. 98*. * Bwi ime di S&lden volgen^ werdent si ime
verbolgen, si ne keren zoiiiliche widert^ onoe offended, tbey come not back, AI. 6189.


866 DESTINT AND WELL-BEING.

TDÖ geneödeclichen (graciously) lachen! Troj. 5754. ' ßö decket
uns der 8. httot/ hood^ hat, Winsbekin 45, 7 : a wishing-cap.
'daz iuch frouwe 8, müeze behüllen' (fovere), Lohengr. 101:
behüllen prob, in its literal sense, to wrap, to clothe, as Walther
43, 1 and 7 makes fro S»lde kleiden (clothe) people, and schroten
(cat out) for them ; she cuts out sorrow and high courage. And
8o„ no doubt, under many more aspects, which we can guess from
our present figures of speech: 'fortune &voars, visits, pursues
him,' etc. etc. And here again we find, even in old poets, the
more vague neuter : ' gelücke h&t den nuwen gegen mir gekdrt/
turned its back toward me, LS. 1,238; 'hat den nuwen noch
gegen mir endecket; enblecket gdn mir stnen zan (bared its
teeth, gnashed) ; het zer rechten hende griffen ' 3, 539. ' do
körte von im undo vldch gelücke,' Troj. 5750. We say 'my
fortune blooms, grows,' as though it were attached to a tree
or herb : ' mein glücke das blühete mir,' Schweinichen 1, 170.
'gelücke wahset mit genuht,' Troj. 5686. 'uns ist niht wol
erschozen gelücke' 12438. 'Got wil ans sadlde l&zen wahsen,'
Lohengr. 66. The proverb ' das glück kommt von ungefähr wol
über neunzig standen her,' Simplic. 2, 158, well expresses the
suddenness and surprise, the windfall nature of luck, to which
are owing the very names of tv^V (from rvj(€lvy rtryxdv€t,v) and
fortuna (from fors). Very likely some of the phrases quoted
above have come to us from the ancients, or they had them in
common with us (see Suppl.).

The tale of the Wunderer (wonder-worker, Ebzels hofh. 208),
makes /rau Scelde a king's daughter with three miraculous gifts>
(1) that of knowing a man's thoughts, (2) of blessing warriors
against wounds in battle, (3) of transporting herself whither she
will (24 — 26). Who can fail to detect in this the echo of an old
heathen valkyr ?

The now universally familiar image of Fortune riding on a
rolling wheel {KvkivSpo<$),^ which was attributed to Fors, Tyche
and Nemesis (0. MüUer's Archäol. 607), is, I consider, an im-
portation, ' Versatur celeri Fors levis orbe rotae/ Tibull. i. 5, 70.
\ starts in orbe dea* Ov. ep. ex Ponto ii. 3, 56. ' Fortunae rotam
pertimesQebat,' Oic. in Pison. 10. 'rota Fortunae/ Tac, de orat

^ A dififerent thing therefore from the wheel that Erodo and Vishnu earry i»
the hand (p. 248-9).


fortune's wheel. 867

23. * assnmptus in amplissimum Fortanae fastigiam, versahiles
ejus motus expertua est^ qui ladunt mortalitatem^ nunc evehentes
qaosdam in sidera^ nanc ad Cocyti profunda mergentes/ Amm.
Marc. 14, 11 : * Fortunae volucris rota adversa prosperis semper
altemans' 31, 1. ^ Ftyrtunas te regendum dedisti, dominae
moribus oportet obtemperes, tu vero volventis rotae impetum
retinere conaris ? Si manere incipit, Fors esse desistit/ Boeth. de
consol. ii. pr. 1. Notker cap. 25. ' rotam volubili orbe versamus
(says Fortuna of herself), infima summis, summa infimis mutare
gaudemus. ascende si placet, sed ea lege uti ne, cum ludicri mei
ratio poscet, descenders injuriam putes,' ib. ii. pr. 2. — There
seem to be two separate images here : one, that of the goddess
herself standing or sitting ^ on the revolving wheel,^ and so
whirling by in breathless haste ; the other, that she 'makes the
favoured ones ascend the wheel, and the unlucky ones descend,
those soar alofc, these hang below. Our poems of the Mid. Ages
often speak in general terms of the rat (wheel) or schibe (disc,
orb) of Fortune, of luck, of Saelde : ' orbita Fortunae ducit
ntroque rotam (a better reading: utramque viam)/ Beinh. 1,
1494. ' volubilis Fortunae rota/ Bodulfns chron. Trudonis, p.
881. ^rota Fortunae/ Badevicus 1, 40. 'swaz ie geschiht, daz
st&t an gliickes rade/ whatever happens rests on fortune's wheel,
Freid. 110, 17. 'daz im der soelekeit rat mit willen umbe lief,*
Troj. 9471 ; ' jft walzet ir gelUckes rat vil st89teclich M und nider,
her und hin, dan und wider loufet ez,* her (i.e. Ssölde's) wheel of
luck rolls right steadfastly,^ etc. 2349. ' im dienet daz gelückes
rat, daz im nach Sren umbe lief 7229^ * gelückes rat louft uns
die sumer und die winder,' Lohengr. 119. 'min schibe gät ze
wünsche,' Ben. 353 ; ' dem g6t sin schibe enzelt,' 360. ' wol gie
(or, gie für sich) ir schibe/ Lohengr. 146. 189. ' si vuoren (they
rode) üf gelückes rade/ Flore 844. ' Beeide diu ist sinewel (sphe-

^ Pentam. 6, has also a * veoohia seduta neoppa na rota * as Fortuna.

* The mere tunÜDg of a wheel (daz sueibönta rad, N. Boeth. 47) maj, quite
apart from the g9dde8B, snggest the mutability of fate. When Gyrus saw a captive
king attentively watch the rising and falling spokes of wheels, and inquired the
reason, the latter replied, that they put him in mind of the instability of life, tQs
rd Kdrta Ibm ytvovrai, koI rd Sjfu jcdro; (Gedrenns, ed. Paris, 142).

* This is contrary to James I. of Scotl.*s idea : ' the tvMen sweltering of that
ilk wheel .... so loiter whilom did she it to- wry (twist about).' But it seems the
preTailing one here, unless *■ sin schibe gdt en-zelt * (3 lines lower) mean * goes
tolter,* tolutans, ambling, as zelter is an ambler. Further on, * mich hin verdrücke,'
push me off, need not imply a waddling movement. — Tbans.


868 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

rical)^ Dnd walzet umb als ein rai^ Uebel wtp 241. ' der SceUen
»chiben trihen/ Amis 20b3. 'entschiben,' Ulr. Trist. 708. Yet
that ascending and descending is often mentioned too : ' sd stige
ich M, and ninder abe/ never down, Parz. 9^ 22. ' gelücke ist
rehte als ein bal, swer stiget der sol vürhten yal/ who climbs
must fear a fall^ Freid. 115^ 27. 'so hangen ich an dem raJes
teile (limb)^ dft maneger hanget &ne tröst (without hope)^' Ben.
88 ; ' 6 daz der Beeiden schibe mich hin yerdrücke gar zao der
verzalten schar' 91. 'si waren höhe gar gestigen (mounted
high) M des . . . gelückes rat, nft müezens leider von der stat aber
nider rücken (move down again)/ Flore 6148. ' swer hiute sitzet
nf dem rode, der siget morgen drnnder (sinks under it to-morrow)/
Troj. 18395. ' er ist komen uf gelilckes rat, daz muoz im immer
stille st&n/ Geo. 198. ^ gelückes rat, wenne sol ich mine stat&f
dir vinden ? ' Ben. 806. ' swebe oben an der Scelichkeit rade/
Zauberb. 1860. ' Got werfe in von (hurl him from) geluckes rat /*
Kolocz. 74. 'geluckes rait geit up ind neder, ein velt (one falls),
der ander stiget weder/ Hagen's Coin. chr. 1770. ' geluckes rat
nu ride in uf die hoehe/ turn (writhe) him up aloft^ Tit. 5218 ;
' gelücke f din rat nu ride ! ' 5275. 'Fortuna diu ist s6 getän^ ir
schibe l&zet si umbe gSi,u, umbo loufet ir rat, dicke vellet der da
vaste saz/ oft falleth he that sat there fast^ Lampr. Alex. 3066.^
This notion carried into detail shews us four (or twelve) men at
once standing on fortune's wheel in ceaseless revolution : ' ge-
Uickes rat treit vier man, der eine stiget tS, der ander stäget abe,
der dritte ist obe, der vierde der ist under/ MS. 2, 221*; and
Wigal. p. 41 teils us of one who had in his house such a wheel
cast of gold, and who was always happy (like Frode with his mill
of luck, which also went round) : ' ein rat enmitten Af dem sal,
daz gie ftf und ze tal (down) ; da wären bilde gegozzen an (molten
images thereon) , iegelichez geschaffen als ein man. hie sigen diu
(sank these) mit dem rade nider, so stigen (mounted) din ander
Af wider, daz was des geluckes rat J * In Benart ,le nouvel 7941
— 8011, Fortune lifts the fox on to her wheel, and promises not
to tarn it. Hence too the story of the twelve landsknechts or

1 Conf . the passage on la roe de la Fortune in the Jen d' Adan (Theatre fran-
^ais an moyen &ge p. 82).

3 From this wheel, which Wigalois wore on his helmet (1862—6), oame the
naire of Ritter mit dem rod (already in Gildas of Banchor ' miles qaacbigae '}, not
ircm the adventure be had to brook with a brazen wheel (pp. 252—^ of the poem).


CHILD OP LUCK. 869

Johanneses on fortune^s wheel, Deufc. sag. nos. 209. 337. Oar
Saalde is never painted blind or blindfolded ^ (see Sappl.) .

What seems to me to be far more significant than this wheels
which probably the Sälida of our heathen forefathers never had
(a whole carriage to herself would be more in their way)^ is the
circumstance of her adopting children^ owning her favourites for
her sons : ' ich bin ouch in frd Beeiden schoz geleit/ laid in her
lap. Fragm. 45**. To be a darling of fortune, a child of luck, to
sit in fortune^ B lap, implies previous adoption (Goth, frasti-sibja^
Rom. 9^ 4)^ conf. BA. 160. 463-4. A select being like this is
called ' der Sceld&n bam,' Bari. 37, 36. 191, 38. Engelh. 5070.
' Artus der S. hint; Zauberb. 1433. ' 8. Unt h&t S. stift ' 1038.
' Maria der 8, hint/ Wartb. kr. jen. 56. 'ir sit gezelt gelücke ze
ingesinde (as inmate), dem heile ze liebem hinde/ Warnung 2596.
* Si ist 8. Bundertriutel (fondling), in der würzegarten kan si
brechen ir rösen,' MS. 1, 88'. Now, as Wuotan can take the place
of the gifting nom (p. 858), so he can that of Sadlde; he is himself
the bestower of all bliss, he takes up children to his bosom.
Altogether identical therefore with Saelden bam must be 'des
Wwisches bam, an dem der Wunsch was volle varn,' on whom
Wish had perfectly succeeded, Orl. 3767. A child of luck has
' des Wunsches segen/ Lanz. 5504. For more references, see pp.
138 — 144.' Accordingly 8älida can be regarded as a mere
emanation of Wuotan (see Suppl.).

Such a child of luck was Fortunatus, to whom Fortuna (conf.
Felicia, MsH. 2, 10^ and infra ch. XXXII.) appears in a forest of
Bretagne, and gives a fairy purse : and who also wins the wishing^
cap (souhaitant chapeau), the tarn-cap, which one has only to
put on, to be in a twinkling at some distant place. Evidently
a hat of Wish or Wuotan (p. 463), a ireraao^; or winged cap of
Hermes the giver of all good, of all söelde. And ' SsBlde's hat'
is expressly mentioned : ' so decket uns der Salden huot, daz uns
dehein weter selwen mac,' no weather can befoul us, MsH. 8,
466*. The never empty purse I connect with the goddess's horn
of plenty : ' mundanam comucopiam Fortuna gestans,' Amm.


^ Nor is she called gUtln, like the Lai. Fortana vitrea ; Gotfrid of Strassbnrg
alone (MS. 2, 46^ ) has * daz gUtin glücke^ and we have now the proverb * luck and
crock are easy broke/

' I find also a proper name SeldenbotsS»lde*8 messenger, Weisth. 8, 277-8.


870 DESTINY AND WELL-BEINa.

Marc. 22, 9. 'formatam Fortunae habitam cum divite cornu,^
Prudent, lib. 1 contra Symm. ; also with Amalthea's horn or
SvantQvit^s (p. 591), nay with the fcipa^ a-eorrfpia^:, Luke 1, 69.
Of the wishing-rod we are reminded by the synonymous expres-
sions : ' alles heiles ein wünscheUris/ -twig, -wand, Troj. 2216,
and ' des Wunsches bluome,' Bari. 274, 25.

The belief in fairy things [wünscheldinge, lit. wishing-gear] is
deeply rooted in our mythology: let us examine it minutely.
There are things, belonging to gods, but also lent to men, which
can bestow a plenitude of bliss, the best that heart can icish ;
so that our old vernacular word seems quite appropriate. The
Sanskrit for wish is significant : mano^ratha, wheel of the mind ;
does this open to us a new aspect of the divine wish ? Wish
turns the wheel of our thoughts. In the Edda the wishing-gear
IS the cunning workmanship of dwarfs, and is distributed among
the gods. OSinn possessed the spear Oungnir, the hurling of
which brings victory, Thdrr the hammer Miölnir, which comes
crashing down as thunderbolt, which also consecrates, and of
itself comes back into his hand. Freyr had a sword of similar
nature, that swung itself (er siWft vegiz), Sssm. 82*. Sn. 40; its
name is unrecorded. The ' cudgel jump out o' your sack ! ' in
our fairy-tale is the same story vulgarized; in (Egi's hall the
pitchers or beakers of ale hrought themselves (siälft barsc ]7ar öl),
Sasm. 48 ; Wolfdieterich (Cod. dresd. 296-7) fell in with god-
desses, to whose table the wheaten loaf cams walking, and the
wine poured itself out : such gear the Greeks called avrofiaToy
(self-taught), II. 18, 876. (Egis-hialm/r must originally have
been (Egi's own (and CEgir is at times undistinguishable from
OSinn), as Aegis is wielded by the two highest deities Zeus and
Athena: afterwards the helmet came into the hand of heroes.
Out of the magic helm sprang helot-helm, grim^helm, tam-kappe,
wunsch-mantel (Kinderm. no. 122), wunsch-hut, which bestow
on dwarfs, heroes and fortune's favourites the power to walk
unseen, to sail swiftly through the sky. To the goddesses
Freyja and Frigg belonged Brisifiga men, which, like the t/Mif
of Venus and Juno, awakened longing {ifiepo^), and matches the
sword, spear and hammer of the gods (p. 885). On the veil or
hood of the goddess Sif grew golden hair, as com does on the
earth : its proper name is not given. 8k%9bla9nir is described,


WISHINa-GEAB. 871

now as a sliip, now as a hat^ both of wUch could either be folded
up or expanded, for sailing in or for raising a storm ; wishing^
ships occur in Norske eventyr 1, 18. 142 and 8v. folkv. 1, 142*S.
Not unlike this are our winged sandals and league hoots. Chdlin-
bursti, too, Frey's boar, carries him through air and water.
From OSin's ring Dra/upnir dropped other rings as heavy ; the
miraculous powdr of Fallals ring (Fullo fingrgull, Sn. 68) is not
specified, perhaps it made one invisible, like that of Aventiove
(p. 911). Draupnir suggests the broodpefmy (Dent. sag. no. 60)
or hatching dollar of later times : whoever ate the bird's heart>
would find a gold-piece under his pillow every morning. With
this are connected the mshing-pwrse^ and the wishing-rod, which
unlocks the hoard, but apparently feeds it as well (ch. XXXI) ;
also the Wunderblume and the springwurzel [root which springs
open the door of a treasure] ; a bird^$ nest makes invisible (Dent.
8. no. 85. Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 361. Mone's Anz. 8, 539).
Fr6%i's wishing^mill Gr6tti would grind anything the grinder
wished for aloud (Su. 146), gold, salt, etc. ; this we can match
with the wheel of fortune, an image that may be an importation
to us (p. 866), yet not have been strange to our remote ancestry ;
of manoratha I have spoken before. British legend too had
its own version of fortune's wheel (p. 869). Such a mill, such
a wheel ought above all to grind food for gods. The gods
possess the drink of immortality, which inspires man with song,
and keeps a god young. I^un's apples restore youth, as apples
in Yölsungasaga make pregnant, in Sneewitchen send sleep, and
in Fortunatus give horns and take them away. But the wishing-
cloak becomes a ivishing-cloth, which when spread brings up any
dish one may desire : in Danish and Swedish songs such a cloth
is woven of field wool {ageruld, D. vis. 1, 265. 300. äkeridl, Sv.
vis. 2, 199), a sort of grass with a woolly flower (eriophorum
polystachium) ; the same wishing-cloth occurs in Norske e v. 1,
44. 274, it is pulled out of a ma/re*s ear, p. 112. Other wishing-
cloths have to be spun in silence, or the hemp for them must be
picked, baked, braked, hatcheUed, spun and woven all in one
day. The Servians tell of a miraculous cow, out of whose ear
yam is spun, she is then killed and buried, and miracles are
wrought on her grave. A wishing-cow Kdmaduh or Kdmadhenu
is mentioned in Indian myth (Pott 2, 421. Somadeva 1, 198) ;

VOL. II. p F


872 dbstin:^ and well-being.

a tuuthing-goai, who procures money, in the Norw. tales 1,45;
an OM in Pentam. 1, 1. The machandelbom (janiper) in our
fairy-tale is a toiahing-tree, so is that from which Cinderella
shakes down all her splendid dresses ; the Indians call it Jcalpa
vrikßha (tree of wishes) or ManorcUhO'dayalca (wish-giving),
Somadeva 2, 84. Beside the dresses of sun and moon, the
gold-hen and seven chickens (p. 728) are contained in the nut.
Fortuna carries a horn of plenty (p. 870). The goat Amaltheia's
horn supplied the nymphs who had nursed Zeus with all ikej
wished for ; another legend makes the nymph Amaltheia possess
a bull's horn, which gave in abundance all manner of meat and
drink that one could wish. A Scottish tradition has it, that
if any one can approach a banquet of the fairies, take away their
drinking-bowl or horn, and carry it across a running stream
without spilling, it will be to him a cornucopia of good fortune;
if he break it, his good days are done (B. Chambers pp. 82-3).
We know that wise-women and elfins offer drinking-horns to men
(p. 420) ; that jewels of the elves (like those of the smith dwarfs)
ensure luck to human families, viz. their sword, ring and goblet
(p. 457) ; that the swan left in Loherangrin's family a stvord,
hoi'n and fingerling (ring, Parz. 826. 19). Oberon's hor7i., and
he is of elf kind, was a wishing-horn, and excited magic dancing.
Other wonders are wrought by the ha/rps of gods and heroes
(p. 907). The elves, beside the horn, have in their gift a bread
of grace that blesses. By the side of this may stand the beau-
tiful myths of the critse of oil that never runs dry, the savoury
pottage that brims over, the yam that has never done winding.
Jemshid's goblet too was a miraculous one, so was the far-famed
Orail (greal, Ducange sub v. gradaJus, graletus, grasala, grassale,
grassellus), that nourished and healed, which Romance legend took
up and interwined with christian, as indeed the spear of Longinus
and the bleeding lance are very like a heathen wishing-spear;
nails of the true cross are worked up into bridles that bring
victory (El. xxii), wood of the cross and a thousand relics are
applied to thaumatu»gic uses (eh. XXXVI), rings and precious
stones were held against a relic, that its virtue might pass into
them ; precious stones themselves are in a sense wishing-stones,
such to the Indians was Divyaratna (Pott 2, 421), which fulfilled
all the wishes of its owner. And the Grail cannot be more


WISHINQ-GBAR. 873

celebrated in the poems of the Round Table than Sampo is in
the epic of the Finns. It was fashioned by the god Ilmarinen
in Pohjola^ and a joy it was to live in the land that possessed it^
the fields were covered with standing com and hanging fruits.
But the gods tried to win it back (just like OShroerir^ p. 902)^
and Wäinämöinen and Ilmarinen succeeded in the theft; yet
Louhi the princess of Pohjola pursued them in eagles shape (as
Suttüug did OSinn)^ and overtook the fugitives on the open sea.
While Louhi makes a clutch at Sampo^ and Wäinämöinen strikes
at her fingers with the rudder^ Sampo falls into the sea and
breaks ; the lid alone (Eirjokannen 23^ 393^ conf. 11, 361) is left
in Louhi's hand, and with it she flies back to Pohjola : wretched-
ness and famine have reigned there ever since. Wäinämöinen
finds pieces of Sampo on the shore, and has them sown, out of
which grow up trees, one of them a lofty oak that darkens the
sun. The points of likeness between this Sampo and the Norse
drink of immortality are startling, and the pieces picked up on
the strand by the highest god, and giving birth to trees, may
be compared to Askr and Embla, whom the three &ses found on
the sea-shore (p. 560. Sasm. 3^). The name Sampo, doubtless
one of high antiquity and sacredness, caUs to mind a Mongolian
legend of a tree Asambu-bararkha, whose fruit dropping in the
water uttered the sound samhu (Major's Myth. wtb. 1, 565);
sangpa in Tibetian means purified, holy. We gather from all
these examples, still far from complete, how under the veil of
sensuous images — spear, hammer, hat, helmet, cloak, horn,
goblet, necklace, ring, ship, wheel, tree, rod, flower, cloth, meat
and drink — lay hidden the spiritual ones of victory, happiness,
peace, healing, fertility, riches, virtue and poetic art. But when
several single attributes met in one object, as in Sampo and
the Grail, they still further enhanced its meaning and sacredness
(see SuppL).

From the prologue to the Orimnismäl, Sssm. 39, we learn that
OSinn and Frigg, beside being the chief paternal and maternal
deities of antiquity, bestow their protection on special favourites :
under the form of an old man and woman, they bring up the
boys GeirröSr and Agnar respectively, the act being expressed
by the verb fostra. Frigg had even, according to Sn. 38, a


874 DBSTINT AND WBLL-BBINa.

special handmaid, heraelf a divine being, whom she ^pcnnied
for the defence (til gfletda) of such foeter-sons against aU dan-
gers ; this personified Tntela was named Elin (p. 884), as if the
couch, tcXlvfi, OHG. hUna (recubitus, GL Ker. 278) on which one
leans (root hleina hliin. Or. scXivm, Lat. clino) . We find * harmr
Hlinan'/ S®m. 9\ and there went a proverb ' sft er forSaz hlei-
nir/ he that is stniggUng leans for help. Him (Goth. meinsT)
shelters and shields, the Goth, hliins is a hill [Germ, bei^, a hill,
is from bergen, to hide], the OHG. hlinaperga, linaperga=
falcmm, reclinatorinm.

Those who are bom with a canl about their head are popularly
believed to be lucky children. Such a membrane is called glucks-
liaube, wehmutter-häfiblein, and is carefuUy treasured up, or sewed
into a band and put round the babe.* Fischart in Garg. 229*» calls
it kinderpel^lin (bälg, bag), whüe the Icelanders give it the name
of fylgja f., and imagine that in it resides the chad's guardian-
spirit or a part of its soul : midwives are careful not to injure it,
but bury it under the threshold over which the mother has to
pass. Whoever carelessly throws it away or burns it, deprives
the child of its guardian, Bdd. Seem. Hafniens. 2, 653. This
guardian-spirit is variously named fylgja (who follows man),
sometimes forynja (who goes before him, F. Magn. lex. 379),
oftener hamingja (felicitas) from hamr induviae, nay, this hamr
of itself seems to stand for the same thing : ' hamr Atla,' genius

1 Eindfinn. no. S9, oonf. 8, 89. Ettn«r'B Hebamme p. 684. Journal y. n. f . I>.
1788. 1, 674. Ital. 'nasoer vwttto'-awentnrato; Fr. n6 coiffS; Pol. w cufhi
urodzil, Haupt'B Zeitschr. 1, 187. The Servians name the caul ko$huliUa^ httto
flhirt , and a ohüd bom with it tndovit : he will go to the Vilaa and know more than
other men. In Holland they say * met den helm geboren zin ' (coi^. p. 889) : such
ohildren have the power of seeing spectres ; a ham (ovom) in which a fcMtl came
into the world is hnng up on a high tree, Westendoip p. 618. Of the glücks-hehn
we are told : ' ab eo tegmine obstetrioes et delirae anicnlae infantibus bona «c colore


passage

pueri piUo insignari naturaliy quod obstetrioes rapiunt et advocatis oreduÜs Ten-
dant, siquidem oausidioi hoc juvari dicuntur.* [AS. heafela^ hafela, HHG. Mete-
Zin, JxUtDät, kindbälgelt weeUrhi^e^ wetterhmt ; oonf. the westerwdt preserved in
churches, and the names Glüokshelm, Bamhelm. * Membranulae ad modom retis
disposltae, in quibus quandoque nascuntur pueii et Tocantur in vulgari (Bohemioo)
toodienic, de his membranis famant vetulae: si redpiantnr IX Tel ad minos Y et
haheantur cumßlo aureo et tericeo in eeeleeia per novem dies illo tempore quo horae
canonicae dicuntur per nonam, et ferantur per aliquem ad judicem yel ad judiciumi
ille obtinet causam suam.' Jungmann sub t. odenj. Lith. namai kudiÜo, child's

house. ON. HlötSr bom with helmet and sword. ^Extr. from Suffl., yoI iü-

Not a word about it as a charm agidnst drowning.]


child's caul, güabdian angel. 875

Atlii^ SeBm. 253\ According to Ihre (de Saperst. p. 24-5), the
Swed. hamn denotes a genius that follows each man.

What is essential to the notion of a guardian-imgel is his being
native to ns : this distinguishes him from the home-sprite (genins
familiaris), who devotes himself to an individual man, but not
from birth. Regula Bcnedicti cap. 7 : 'ab angelis nobis depubaiis
cotidie die noctnque Domino Factor! nostro opera nostra nun-
tiantur/ Berthold preaches (p. 209) : ' als daz kint lebende
wirt an siner muoter libe, so giuzet im der engel die sele in, der
almehtige Got giuset dem kinde die sele mit dem engel in ; ' and
St. Bernard (sermo 12 in ps. Qui habitat) : * quoties gravissima
cernitur urgere tentatio et tribulatio vehemens imminere, invoca
cnstodem tuum, doctorem tuuro, adjutorem tuum. in opportuni-
tatibus, in tribulatione, in quovis diversorio, in quovis angulo,
angelo tuo reverentiam habe, tu ne audeas illo praesente, quod
vidente me non anderes.' One more passage I -will transcribe,
from Notker's Capella 137 : ' alldn menniskdn wirdet sunderig
unde gemeine huotäre gesezzet. ten heizent si ouh fiihtare
(pflichter, care-taker), wanda er alles werches fliget. ten gemeinen
betönt (adore) tie liute sament, unde &ne daz iogelih ten stnen
(beside that, each his own), fone diu heizet er genius, wanda er
genitis s&r gegeben wirt ze flihte. tiser huot&re unde diser getriwo
bruoder behuotet iro s£l& unde iro sinna allere, wanda er ouch
tougene gedancha Qote chundet, pediu mag er ioh angelus
heizen.' ^ This doctrine, partially retained as we see by the
church, seems to have got mixed up with that grosser native
superstition of guardian and attendant spirits. Caesar heisterb.
8, 44 supposes every man to have a good and a bad angel, who
seeks to bring him weal or woe. The valkyrs. too were to a
certain extent guardian-spirits of the heroes (pp. 400. 419), and
remained bound to them for a time. It is said of slain heroes
(Lament 922) : ' ir engel vil wol wisten, war ir s6Ie selten komen,'
full well their angels wist whither their souls should go. Other

1 The Lai text mug: 'et generalis omnium praeeol, et specialis singnlis
moiialibos genius admoyetnr, quem eüam praettitenit quod praeBit gerundis
omnibns, yooayerunt. nam et populi genio, qunm generalis posdtnr, suppUoant, et
nnnsquisque gubematozi proprio dependit obsequium. ideoque genius dicitur,
quoniam qitum quia hominum genitus fuerit, max eidem eoptUcttur, hio tutelator
fidisämnsque germanus animos ommum mentesque eustodit. et quoniam oogi-
tationum arcana Superae annuntiat Potestati, etiam angelus poterit nuncupari.*
Conf. Porphyry's Tita Plotini p. 14. Plutarch's Vito Antonini p. 480.


876 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

passages speak of these angels : ' sie redeten^ daz ir engel maose
lachen/ they said her angel must laagh for joy, Wartb. kr. jen.
38 ; ' ein wiser (wizer, white ?) engel hi dir got, der dinen tiuvel
sd von dir gescheiden hat' 47: 'teile din pater noster mite
dinem engel ^ 23 ; ' ein engel, der din hat gepflegen (tended) ' 62.
' ich wil gelonben, daz den list din engel finde,* will find out a
way, Lohengr. p. 3. 'in was ir engel hi/ Geo. 343. 'daz der
engel din diner eren hiiete ! ' guard thy honour, MsH. 3, 230^.
' zuo im was geweten ein engel, daz im niht geschach,' Geo. 3205.
' als im sin engel gab die l^re,' Kolocz. 148 ; ' daz inch min enget
grüeze ! ' greet you 102; and elsewhere 'daz iuwer min engel
walte!' Graceful equivalents for 'I from my inmost soul/^
(see SappL).

In Nialssaga cap. 101 a heathen submits to baptism, but only
on the assurance that St. Michael (receiver of souls, p. 854-5)
shall thereby become his fylgju engilL And cap. 23 speaks of
the fylgja Gunnars.

One who is near death sees his angel first: 'J^A mant vera
feigr ma{$r, oc munt fft s6i$ hafa fylgju pina* sure thou art fey,
and hast seen thy f., Nialss. cap. 41. Quite logically, as the
man's death severs the bond between him and his fylgja. Then
the fylgja presents herself to another person, and ofiers him her
services : Helgi forecast his own death, because a witch riding
her wolf appeared to his brother at night, and offered her
attendance, 'bau-B fylg5 slna; fylgjo beiddi,' Sasm. 14'. 147'.
When a man sees his fylgja, she is giving him up, quitting him.
In Norway the vulgar opinion is, that the folgie likes to shew
herself in the shape of some animal that typifies the character
of the man she belongs to (Faye p. 77). Can this have indi-
cated a future transmigration ? conf. p. 823. There were fylgjor
that, like the dwarfs, stuck to certain families : hynfylgjor,
cettarfylgjcyr ; and this is important, as teaching the aflSnity of

^ Conf. H. Sachs's poem * die engels hat/ and < der lockige knabe,' in Hebel's
Karfunkel. [Not only men, but even some animals, haye an angel of their own,
Eeisersp. brosämL 19«. The Pass. 337, 46 agrees with Gaes. heist. : * zwdne engel,
einen guoten, einen leiden * ; yet * sin engel * 41 means only the good one, and so
It 18 generally. Conf. Menander's protest {abridged) : * a good daemon is given at
birth ; never dream that there are evil daemons, for God is good.' Angels are
always imagined as male ; thus, when two ladies appear : ' ob ez von himele weren
zwene engeU (maso.), des enweiz ich niht,' Frib. Trist. The guardian-angelB of two
friends are also friends, Eenn. 18902.— Extr. from Sdppl.]


GUAEDIAN ANGEL. 877

sach spirits to elves and dwarfs^ who (like the white lady, the
ancestress Berhta, p. 280) shew themselves when a death in the
family is imminent.

Hamvagjor, occurring as early as Saem. 37^. 93^ are very like
oar personified scelde: hamingja too at first denoted fortnna,
felicitas, and afterwards a being that bestowed these blessings,
holding a middle place between a fate, a guardian-spirit and a
goodnatured homesprite; conf. Laxd. saga p. 441. ^ Hamingjor
horfnar, heillir horfnar * in Sasm. 93 are those that have aban-
doned their man.

The ON. landvcett (p. 441) is, like the fylgja and hamingja, a
female being, not however the guardian-spirit of an individual
or a family, but of the whole country. In the code of Ulfliot
it is ordered that every ship shall have its figure-head taken
down before it come in sight of land (i landss^n), lest the gaping
jaws afiright the landvcetttr : ' sigla eigi at landi meS gapandi
höfSum ne ginandi tridnu, svft at landvoBttir faeldist viiS ' ^ (see
Suppl.).

With the Slavs the notions of luck, chance and destiny touch
one another, yet their mythology is destitute of beings equivalent
to the norns and parcae (p. 436). For luck the Servians have
sretia [from s-r6titi to meet], the Slovens srezha, and they
personify them too : dohra Sretia (bona Fortuna, Vuk 3, 444)
is their ärya0r) TuxVi their fro Saelde.* The Lettish Laima (p.
416) comes nearer the parca or moira : she is called mahmina^ i.e.
mother, goddess. Then again the fostermother Behkla (ibid.) by
the boon of her milk bestows luck and aptitude: 'kä Dehkla
noleek, t& noteek,^ as D« disposes, so it happens. ^ In Lith. also
Laima ^AatfM, Lat. Lamia (see Suppl.).

^ Fomm. 8ög. 8, 105. Isl. sog. 1, 198-9. This gaping yawning ship reminds
me of the Gepanta (navis tardius yeota) in Jemandes cap. 17. [Biarki's fylgja
appears as a bear^ ana fights while B. slumbers ; Gnnnar*s fylgja too is a biarndyr.
Olümr, having dreamt of a woman higher than the hiUs coming towards him,
concludes that Vigf As is dead, and this is his hamingja coming to look for a new
place. It follows, that fylsJO' and hamingja are one. Similar is the Engl, fetch
(Scot, fye) or double^ N. Biding waff, toiff, Scot, wraith, Cumbl. twarth (all in Hone's
Daybk). Ir. taise, etc. — ^Extr. from Suppl.]

^ The name has given rise to a sad blunder. Anton in Versuch 1, 50 having
paraded a Dalmatian goddess Dobra Frichia^ he was followed by Earamzin 1, 85,
by Jungmann 1, 342, and who knows how many more. It aU rests on a clerical
error in translating Forties Viaggio in Dalmazia (Venice 1774) ; ^e Ital. text, 1, 74
has quite correctly Dobra-sriehia, 1 would have any one beware of likening this
false Frichia to our fru Freeke (p. 304).

> Magaz. der lett. gesellsch., Mitan 1888. 6, 144.


878 DESTnnr and well-being.

As the goddees of destiny has both good and evil in ber
hand^ there needs no separate representation of misfortune. Oor
elder poets however do treat her more or less as a person, and
apply to her much the same phrases as to Ssdlde. ' Unsalde hat
Af mich geswom/ Gregor 2394 (so of T6t, p. 847n.). ' Unsoilde
h&t mich bed&ht/ Troj. 17105. 'der Unscalden kint/ Iw. 4449.
'dtn heil sin ungelucke begonde erwecken harte/ Qold. scbm.
1306. 'über in het geswom sines libes unheil/ Klage 1240.
' Vnscelde si mir Af getan 1 ' Bab. 896. ' wie in din UnscRlde
verriete/ Dietr. 38*^. ' der Unscelden vart varn/ go the way of,
Doc. misc. 2, 163. 'so wirt unheil von mir gejaget/ chased
away^ Herrn. Dam. 42. ' ungelucke, wnai ir mir leides taotl' what
hurt yon do me, Lampr. Alex. 3065. Other images are pecoliar
to misfortune : she is a dog bestriding one's path^ and barking
at one : ' unheil mir über den wee schreit gelich einem hunde/
Hartm. erstes büchl. 1671. ' wen nftch gelücke grdz unheil an
bellet (barks, bület f or vellet, yelt f )' Ls. 1, 239. A M. Netbl.
poet ascribes to her a net : ' al h6ft dat ongheval nu mi aldns

onder tnet ghevaen f ' Bein, 6180. Two separate stories

deserve quoting at greater lengrth : A poor knight sits in
the forest, consuming a scanty meal; he looks up and spies
in the tree overhead a monstrous being, who cries to him ' I am
thy ungelucke/ He invites ' his ill-luck ' to share his meal, bat
no sooner is it down, than he seiates it firmly and shuts it up in
an 'eicher' (hollow oak?). From that moment all goes well
with him, and he makes no secret of what has happened. One
who envies him, wishing to plunge him into misery again, goes
to the wood and releases UUlv^Jc ; but, instead of burdening the
knight any longer, it jumps on the traitor's back, just as a kobold
would (Ls. 2, 575). This fable was known to H. Sachs iii. 2, 72':
Misfortune shall be made fast with chains and ropes to an oaken
stake, so it may visit no houses more, unless some man be so

fond to let it loose again. The other story may as wjell be given

in Beinmar's own words, MS. 2, 134^ :

Ez was ein gar unsaelic man (a most unlucky man)

in einer stat gesezzen, dar inne er nie dehein heil gewan,

der d&hte, ich wil versuochen, wie min gelüke in fremden

landen si.
do im der reise ze muote wart (resolved to travel).


UNaELDB. 879

Unscelde warfc sin geverte, dia haob sich mifc im M die vart ;
er lief gegen einem walde^ er wände er wsBre ünsadlden wor-
den vrl (he weened be was free of U.)*
er sprach : ' Unicelds, na bin ich dir entrannen (escaped)/
' nein ' sprach Unsmlde, ' ich hän den sig (victory) gewannen ;
$waz du geliefe, daz selbe ich rande (I ran as fast as thou),
üfdinem halse (neck) was min gemach (I took my ease.)' ^
der man dft zno im selbe sprach (to himself spake) :
'$ö 'st niht so giLot, ich enkere wider ze lande ! * (best to tarn
back).

Exactly the story of the homesprite, who flits with yon, and
yea cannot shake him off (p. 513) : Misfortane personified is
here snbstitated for the more living kobold. UnssBlde occnrs
in the plaral too : ' ganc z^ alien anselden hin I ' in a Lower Rhine
poem by Wilhelm (F. A. Beuss p. 13). It reminds me of 'zuo
zallen marsen vam' (p. 362; see Suppl.).

1 PoBt eqnitexn sedet atra Cora. Hor. OcL 3, 1


CHAPTER XXIX.
PEESONIFIOATIONS.

This is a convenient place to treat more fully of Mythical
Personification.

All objects are either perceptible to onr senses^ or merely exist
in our thoughts. Of sensible objects a very general characteristic
is^ that they strike upon the eye {eh &7ra, Trpo^ Aira), for which
we once possessed the pretty word äugen, OHG. ougan^ Goth,
iugjan, to come in sight, appear (hence sich er-eignen. Gramm.
1, 226). The form and shape of this appearance was called
in Goth, siuns, ON. syn, OHG. gisiuni, which come from
saihva (I see), as species from specio, visus from video, eI8o9
from the lost etBto, and signify the seen^ the present;^ while
vaihts, which Ulphilas uses also for elSo^ (p. 440), is derived
from veiha (facio, p. 68). More commonly still we find combina-
tions : Goth, andaugiy andvairßi, OHG. antwerti, Goth, andavleizn,
AS. andwlite, OHG. anasiuni, andsiht, gisiht ; all of which,
formed like the Gr. irpoafoirov, have alike the sense of aspectos^
obtutus, and the narrower one of facies, vultus, frons (Goth, vlits
fr. vleita), because vision is directed mainly to the visage. The
Lat. persona, obscure as its origin ' may seem, agrees with the
above in its use, except that siuns and irpoawirov may refer to
any sight, vlits and persona more especially to the human form.

The freest personality is proper to gods and spirits^ who can
suddenly reveal or conceal their shape, appear and disappear
(chap. XXX). To man this faculty is wanting^ he can but slowly

^ MHG. 9cHn nsed in the same way : disen ritter oder atnen schtn. Pan. 18, 13.
Bante Martins gewer oder stn schin, Fragm. 28^. wip, man oder tieres schin. Dint.
2, 94. stn wesen and 8tn Bchin (schein), Er. 10047-9. der mensohlich sohln, Ls.
8, 263.

' Hardly from Tpbtrtaww, like Proserpina from Ile/Nre^i^, where the change of
Bonnd is exactly the other way. What if the old etymology from persönare
should prove defensible, and sonns be conn, with stuns T There are plenty of
analogies between sound and sight (e.g. that Romance * par son*, p. 745), and also
changes of short yowels into long (persona) ; irpoiranror itself happens to be an
example of both (5^ voice and eye, 0^tt visio, &^ eye, face, iSnHi look) ; the forma-
tion of persona would be as in Perenna, Pertunaa, Pervinoa.

880


PBBSONLPICATION. 881

come and go, and in his body he must bide, unless magic inter-
yene ; hence he is [not] in the strictest sense a person, his veriest
self being emphasized in oar older speech by the term Itp (life),
body (Gramm. 4, 296). Bat language and an open brow distin-
guish him from beasts, who have only voice and irporofirj, not a
real irpiacmrov or countenance. Still less of personality have
plants, silent as they are, and rooted to the soil. Never-
theless both animals and plants have in common with man a
difference of sex and the power of propagation ; to both of them
language assigns natural gender and, only where that is non-
apparent« a purely grammatical. It goes yet further, and con-
cedes it to lifeless tools and to things beyond the reach of sight
or sense.

Then poetry and fables set themselves to personify, i.e. to extend
personality, the prerogative of gods, spirits and men, to animals,
plants, things or states to which language has lent gender. All
these appear in ^sop endowed with human speech, and acting
by the side of gods and men ; and this not only in the case of
trees and shrubs (like the bean or corn stalk in the fairy-tale),
but of utensils like pot and file (x^'Tprj, pivrf) , of days and seasons
(koprri, varipTf, yj^Lfidav, ca/o), even of mere emotions, as love,
shame {epax:, alax^yv)' Our own simple-hearted eld loves to
emphasize this livingness by the formalities of address and rela-
tionship : horse, ship and sword are gravely apostrophized by the
hero (Gramm. 3, 331. 434. 441); such entities receive the title of
' herr ' or ' frau ' (3, 346) ; as animals are invested with gossip-
hood and brotherhood (Reinh. p. xxvii), the Edda makes air (the
awl) brother to knifr, Sn. 133. Under this head too I bring
the practice of coupling 'father* and 'mother' with lifeless
things (Gramm. 4, 723).

Things deeply intergrown with speech and story can at no
time have remained foreign to mythology, nay, they must have
sucked up peculiar nourishment from her soil, and that universal
life conceded in grammar and poetry may even have its source in
a mythical prosopopoeia. As all the individual gods and godlike
attributes really rest on the idea of an element, a luminary, a
phenomenon of nature, a force and virtue, an art and skill, a
blessing or calamity, which have obtained currency as objects of
worship ; so do notions related to these^ though in themselves


882 PERSONIFICATIONS.

impersonal and abstract^ acquire a claim to deification. A distinct
personality will attach to animals^ plants, stars, which stand con-
nected with particolar gods, or have spmng oat of metamor-
phosis. One might say, the heathen gods as a whole have arisen
oat of the varioos personifications that were most nataral to each
nation's way of thinking and state of caltnre ; bat that individnal
figures among them, by combining eeveral attributes and by
long continued tradition, were sure to attain a higher rank and
reputation.

In this process however we notice an important distinction
with regard to sex : strong, vehement forces and operations are
by preference made into gods, mild and gracious ones into gad-
deises, which of itself determines the superior power, as a rule, of
tbe male divinities. Yet this inferiority of the goddesqes, added
to their grace, tended, as I have more than once remarked, to
secure their status longer, while the stem sway of the gods was
being rooted out.

Everywhere the two sexes appear hand in hand, so that out of
their union, according to human notions, may issue new births
and new relationships. Wherever personification is not directly
intended, it is the habit of our language to use the crude unde*
veloped neuter.

Amongst elements, we find air and fire handed over more to
gods, earth and water more to goddesses. Wuoto/n appears as
an all-pervading atmosphere, as a murmur that sweeps through
heaven and earth ; this we made out under the words umot (p.
131) and wdma (p. 144; conf. p. 745), and perhaps we have a
right to connect even wehen (to blow) with waten (to wade)^
beben (to quake) with Biflindi (p. 149). The hurricane of the
'furious host' will then have real point and significance. Favour-
able wind (p. 636-7) was ii| the hands of Wuotan and Zeus, OSinn
' weathered,' stormed or thundered, and was called VidHr (ibid.) •
The shaking of the air by thunder is everywhere traced to the
highest god, whom our antiquity represents separately as Donor,
Thunar, the son of Wuotan, but in Zens and Jupiter it is tbe
father again ; Thrymr seems identical with Thdrr (p. 181). Lopir
(pp. 246. 632) is another emanation of QSinn. Zio, and perhaps
Pholf as whirlwinds (turbines), must be regarded in tbe same


AIB. FERE. WATEB. EABTH. 883

light (p. 632). ■ Of goddesses^ we have to reckon whoever may
stand for the * wind's bride ' and whirlwind, Holda who accom-
panies the 'farions host/ and Herodiaa (p. 632); and bear in
mind that to the same Holdcu and to Mary is given power over
snow and rain (pp. 267. 641. 174-5). It is in Wikram 251* that
a ' frau lufb ' first occurs, as H. Sachs makes aer, ignis, aqaa all
^ fräalein.' Whenever dwarfs, giants and giantesses raise wind,
weather and storm (pp. 631-6-7), they act as servants of the
highest god. Kari also represented air.

Loki and Logi (p. 241) are gods of fire, and so was probably
atihns, ovan, which to ns denotes the mere element itself (p.
629). The 'dea Hludana^ (p. 257) might stand beside him.
Donar, like the Slavic Peran, harls the lightning flash, yet the
Slavs ma]^e Orom, thunder, a youth, and Munya, lightning, a
maiden (p. 178 n.). Fire, the godlike, is spoken to, and called
' bani vi'Sar,' wood-killer. Balder, Phol, is perhaps to be under-
stood as a divinity of light (pp. 227. 612-4), and from another
point of view Ostara (p. 291). Mist was taken for a valkyr (p.
421).

Hier (p. 240) and Oegir (pp. 137. 311) are gods of the wave,
and Ran a goddess (p. 311) ; Oeban, Oejjon (pp. 239. Sil) is
divided between both sexes. The fem. ahva (p. 583 n.) and the
female names of our rivers (p. 600) lead us to expect water-
goddesses, with which agrees the preponderance of nixies and
mermaids (p. 487), also the softness of the element, though
OSinn too is found nnder the name of Hnikar (ibid.) Snow and
Hoarfrost are thought of as male (p. 761), but the Norse Brifa
(loose drifting snow) is a daughter of Snior (Yngl. saga 16).

The Earth, like Terra and Tellus, could not be imagined other
than female, so that the masc. Heaven might embrace her as
bride ; Rinda is a goddess too, and Nerthus (p. 251), though she
and the masc. NiörSr play into one another. Out of the Goth,
fairguni's neutrality nnfolded themselves both a male Fiorgynn
(p. 172) and a female Fiörgyn (p. 256) ; the former answers to
Perkunas (Fairguneis) and to other cases of gods being named
after mountains, conf. ans, &s (p. 25) and Etzel (p. 169). And
Hama/r the rock-stone (p. 181) is another instance of the same
thing. The forest-worship dwelt upon in ch. IV conld not fail
to introduce directly a deification of sacred trees, and most trees


884 PEBSONIFICATIONS.

are regarded as female; we saw (pp. 651-2-3) how Üie popu-
lar mind even in recent times treated ' fraa Hatel, fraa Elhom^
frau Wacholder, frau Fichte ' as living creatores. HUn and GnA,
handmaids of Frigg^ are named in Sn. 38 among ftsynjor, and
Block in Sn. 39 among valkjrjor : all three^ according to Biöm^
are likewise üames of trees, HUn apparently of oar leinbaom,
leinahom, lenne (acer, maple), in the teeth of our derivation
(p. 874) ; conf. AS. hlin. Again Sn. 128 tells ns more generally,
why all fem. names of trees are applicable to women, e.g. selja
is both Salix and procuratrix.

Zio, like Zeus, appears to mean, in the first instance, sky and
day (pp. 193. 736) ; yet our mythology takes no notice of his
relation to the earth (p. 700). Bat still it personifies Day m.
(p. 735), and makes him the son of Night f. At the same
time evening and morning, Apantrod and Tagarod (p. 748) are
mascnline.^ It is therefore the more surprising that the sun,
the great light of day (p. 701), shoold be pictared as female and
the moon as male, especially as the san shines fiercely and the
moon softly. Though this view is of high antiquity (p. 704), yet
the identity of the Goth, sduil, AS. segil, with sol and ^Xi09,
makes it appear likely that with as too the relation between sun
and moon was once the same as in the classical languages (p. 701 ),
and was only departed from by slow degrees. Even in MHG.
the gender of ' sunne ^ continued to vacillate, as the Latin con«
versely shews a Lunvs by the side of Luna. In the same way
the Goth, stairno, ON. stiama, is fem. like Stella, but the OHG.
sterno, OS. sterro, AS. steorra, masc. like aarrip ; and each has
its justification in the particular stars personified.

Our Summer and Winter are masculine (p. 758), the Lat.
aestas and hiems feminine, to which add the 6r. x^ifKov m., and
the Slav, zima f. Eztepting Hrede and Edstre, all our names
of months were masc, and Mai in particular often stands for
summer. On the contrary, the vagueness of the neuter ' year '
shews the absence of mythical prosopopoeia, (see Suppl.).

On mere tools and utensils its operation seems more stinted :
an exception must at once be made in favour of the sivord.
As this weapon received proper names and a living accusative

^ Lith. * Berlea dea vespertma, Breksta dea tenebranmi,' Lasiez 47. In oar
Tristan, Isot is beautiiolly oompared to the San, and her motlier to the Da^m, f.


HBATA. 885

(Gramm. 3^ 441), as it was often apostrophized (Klage 847.
Wi^al, 6514j, and like Norse heroes, or like fire, was called bani
(occisorj e.g. Hialmars bani, Fornald. sog. 1, 522), as its hilt and
point were the haunt of snake and adder (p. 687-8) ; agreeable to
all this is a deification of the aword of war (p. 203-4), and for this
would be found available not the lifeless neater ' swert,' but the
masc. ' hairus, hern, cheru,' p. 203, to which correspond the divine
names Eor, "Äpfj^ and Sahsnot : from this divine progenitor's name
prooeeded the national names of Gheruscans, Saxons, conf . Suar-

dones, with Sweordweras, in Cod. exon. 322, 13. In contrast

with the sword, which ennobles men, stands female decoratioD,
from which our language drew similar designations ; and it is a
significant thing that, ad one of the highest gods borrowed lustre
from the sword, so did the fairest of goddesses from her necklace,
she after whom all ladies are called freyja (pp. 299. 306). In
our oldest laws the sword ^ was an essential part of the 'her-
gewäte,' war-equipment, and the necklace of the ' frauen-gerade,'
woman's outfit (RA. 567 seq.) ; now, as we find in the Lex An^l.
et Worin. 7, 3 the expression ' omamenta muliebria quod rhedo
dicunt,' it becomes a question, whether a totally difierent ex-
planation of the AS. goddess Rheda from that attempted on
p. 289 be not the right one. Ostara, Eastre, was goddess of the
growing light of spring, and Hrede might be goddess of female
beauty, another name for Frouwa, Freyja, or a personification of
the necklace ; ^ the root might be the same as in the OHG. hrat,
A.S. hrasd, ON. hra^r (velox, celer), as the notions of swiftness
and sweetness often meet. We must not overlook another word
used for the above 'gerade:' radeleve (RA. 567), OHG. rado-


^ And with it a hone and ikip, the most preoions of movable goods in antiquity.
*Meara8 and m&iSmaB' are coupled together in AS. poems ; out of mil'Sm was
developed the notion of the Goth, mdi^ms, a costly gift, while the MHG. meiden
retained the literal meaning of horse ; the formula * sohifl nnd geschirr,' ship and
harness, which afterwards meant the land-ship (waggon) and its rigging, may
originally have signified the sea-ship, which ON. and A3, poets in varying phrase
denominate ' sea-horse/ Andr. and EL xzziv.-v. ; even in the French Simplic.
8, 46 I find * to put the wooden water-horse to his paces' = to sail. This borders
closely on the notion of demonic sea-horses (p. 490).

' The personifications Hamar and Heru as weapons of the highest gods, and
their counterpart the feminine spindle and necklace^ support each other (conf.
p. 204). The hammer was left to grow diabolic (ch. XXXIII) and superetitious
?XXXVII), but the men would not allow their sword to be dishonoured. The In-
dians personified and apostrophized the tacrificial knife (Götting. anz. 1831, p.
1762).


886 PEBSOKIFICATIOKS.

leiba (Graff 3, 855), more exactly hrataleipa, on comparing wbich
with the AS. sweorda l&fe^ homera l&fe (Beow. 5868. 5651), Le.
l&fe preceded by a genitive, we see that Hredan or Hredean l&fe
wonld originally mean jewellery the legacy (leavings) of the god"
dess, which afterwards all women divided among them. And this
explanation is supported by several other things. Not only do
the Norse skalds designate woman in general by the name of any
ornament that she wears; bat Freyja herself, whose bosom is
adorned with that costly Brtsinga men (Goth. BreisiggS m&ni ?
p. 806), as mother earth too wears her ' iarSar men' the green*
sward (p. 643), gave birth to a divine daughter identical with
herself, whose name also gets to mean ornament and jewelry.
Sn. 87 says, she was called Hnoss, and was so beantifal that
everything elegant and precious was named hnossir; 'hnossir
velja,' Ssem. 233^ means to select jewelry for a present. Hnoss
may either be derived from hnoSa, glomus, nodns (as hlass from
hlaiSa, sess from sitja), or be connected with an OHG. form hnnst,
nust, nusc (Graff 2, 1006-7) ; either way it so obviously agrees
with bris (compages, nodus), or with nusta (ansula), nuskil (fibula),
that it is wonderfully like the Bri^singa (or Brisinga) men of the
mother. But elsewhere we find Freyja provided with another
daughter Oeraimi (Sn. 212. Yngl. saga c. 13), whose name ex-
hibits the same notion over again, nay it has found its way, like
rhedo, into ancient legal phraseology. Gersemi (fem.) means costly
ornament, cimelium (Gloss, to Gr&g&s p. 26), also arrha, and mulcts
pactitia; the Ostgöta-lag giptab. 18 has garsimi, the Vestgota-lag
p. 140 görsimar, the Dan. laws giörsum, giorsum; even A.S.
records repeatedly use the phrase ' g^rsuman, gersuman niman,'
gersumam capere in the sense of thesaurum, cimelium (Spelm. p.
263*. Ducange 3, 513), but I have not come across it in the poets.
As the AS. -sum answers to OHG. -sam (Gramm. 2, 574), I con-
jecture an OHG. karosemi (from karo, gar, yare, parafcus) mean-
ing the same as wip-garawi, mundus muliebris (Graff 4^ 241) j
we should then have learnt three new equivalents for the gerade
of our German law : rhedo, hnoss, gersemi, all of them personified
and deified as Ereda, Hnosa, Oersemi. Again, it occurs to me
that in the story of Oswald, one that teems with mythical allusions
(think of Tragemund, and the raven all but Odinic), there appears
a maiden Spange (Z. f. d. a. 2, 96-7. 105, ver Spange 103, vor


HNOSS. GEBßIMI. SPANGE. HASHABT. 887

Spange 115^ like ver Hilde^ ver Gaue)^^ plainly a personified
Spange (armilla)^ a meaning highly appropriate to the beautiful
princess. Such goddesses of female adornment and of household
implements may also be supposed among the Lithuanian deities
named in Lasicz p. 48-9. Nadala the snuggling^ insinuating
(p. 246) occurs at least as an 0H6. proper name in Irmino IS?*^;
compare the personal relation attributed to air and kntfr (p. 881).
Hloch we have explained (p. 401^ oonf. 421-2) as hlancha^ catena
(see Snppl.).

Latin^ Romance and German poems of the Mid. Ages^ as early
as the 12th cent, it seems to me, introduce the player^s die as a
personal demonic being; the Cod. Monac. ol. benedictobur. 160^
fol. 94 contains the following passage : ' cum sero esset una gens
lusorum, venit Dedus in medio eorum, et dixit. Frans vobis I
nolite cessare ludere, pro dolore enim vestro missus sum ad vos ;'
and fol. 97^ speaks of the ' secta Decii/ i.e. of dicers. Other
auths. are given by Dncange sub v. Decius = talus, taxillus, with
a correct explanation of the word by the Fr. d^, 0. Fr. dez, Prov.
dat, datz. It. Sp. dado = Lat. datus,' because in playing ' dare '
was used for edere, jacere. The same Munich codex fol. 95^
furnishes another remarkable phrase : ' nil hie expavescimus preter
Eashardi minas,' the threatenings of the die; yet 'hasehart,'
which is known to MHG. poets also,* can only be traced to the Fr.
hasart, hasard, whose own orig^ is obscure, whose wider meaning
brings it sooner to the verge of personification. Add to all this,
that the Indian myth makes Dvapara, a demon, squeeze himself
into the dice, and that these come in the shape of birds, Bopp's
Nalus pp. 88-9. 50 (see Suppl.) .

Scarcely will a deification grow out of notions of place ; on the
other hand, the idea and name of a deity can be transferred to
space. Thus from the heathen Hali, Hel, arose the christian hell ;
the ON. Laufey (p. 246) is perhaps another instance, and the idea
of a god often mingles with that of wood and grove.

^ EttmtUler'8 text has an erroneotiB unmflaniiig Fange.

' Goni 16, lez. It. lato, Sp. lado, Lat. latus ; n6, nez, It. nato, Sp. nado, Lat.
natnB ; pr6, prez, Prov. mtz, It. prate, Sp. prado, Lat. pratnm.

^ Examples ooll. in Z. f. d. a. 1, 577 ; to which may be added : * spil geteilet
td bret aid an hasehart,' Gute fxan 1098. * den hasehart werfen,* Tanler's Sermons
in Cod. Argent. A, 89.

VOL. IL G Q


888 PBBSONIFICATIONS.

Abstract immaterial objects open a far wider field for personifi-
cations ; and here we see female ones decidedly predominate over
male.

Of the latter the most striking instances are^ I think, the
following. Donar is pictured at once as father and grandfaiher
(p. 167) ; Aija to the Lapps, Ukko to the Finns, are grandfather
as well as thunder. Wunsch, Oski, a name of Wnotan (p. 143)
signifies much the same as the female figures S&lida, Fruma,Xafw ;
and the Gr. ttoOo^ (wish, longing) occasionally occurs as H60o^.
If I am right in my interpretations of OUnJca (p. 137), Gdtds (pp.
23. 367—72), 8igi (pp. 27.371), we can easily find female beings
to match them also. All these names belonged to the highest
god, whose creative bounty blesses ; others to his near kinsnum
the majestic god of war : Wig (pugna, p. 203, conf. Graff 1, 740)
and Hadu (pp. 207. 223), to which many female names corre-
spend, Hilta, etc.^ With Yggr (p. 208) I have identified the
Pallor and Favor of the Romans ; Omi, W6ma is better explained
as elemental. What comes nearer to Wig and Hadu is Deaih,
Daujms (p. 842), which likewise fi*om a male becomes a female
person ; that death is immediately related to hunger is shewn
in our language, Goth, svults being mors, and ON. sultr fisimes
[Germ, sterben. Eng. starve], like \^ii6^ hunger, Xo^^*<k pesti-
lence ; and personifications start up on every side : hungr is
Hel's dish, 9ultr her knife (Sn. 33), Herbout (Benart 23362.
Roman de la rose 18097) is a visitation of ÜEunine, a name I derive
from the OHG. Heribalt, for Hunger stalks like a mighty warrior
through the world: 'ferid unmet gr&t Hunga/r hfitigrim obar
helido bam,' Hel. 132, 8. ' der Hunger gie liberal, breite sich
in die werlt wtte,' Diut. 3, 101. The Roman Fames is fem., her
personality comes out in Ov. Met. 8^ 800. Doubt still hangs over
the comparison attempted on p. 374 between a MHG. Billich and
the Eddie Bil or Bil, whose own being is as yet unexplained ;
but that the sexes do interchange is most satisfactorily proved
by the frequent appearance, side by side, of an identical g^d and
goddess^ who are parent and child, or brother and sister, as
NiörSr and Nerthus, Freyr and Freyja, Liber and Libera. So
Berhta became BerchtoU, p. 279 (see Snppl.).

1 Braoder ZomZt, Ergerli (p. 274). H. Saohs I 6, 538^ ezMbiU Hederlcin in a
l36ar*8 hide as brother of ZenkUin.


8N0TBA. WABA. SÜKIA. FBÜMA. 889

Of goddesses and godlike women that have sprang oat of
moral ideas^ the namber is far greater (p. 397). Under yarioas
forms a dimne mother stands beside the father or grandfather :
frau TToie^ ancestress of all the heroio families (Zeitschr. f. d. a. 1^
21), Holda the gracioas, Berhta the bright, Frouwa, Frey ja the
fair or happy, Sippia, 8if the kindly (p. 309). Folia, Fulla,
Abundia means falness of blessing rather than fall-moon ; the
Bomans hallowed Oopia with her horn of plenty ; ' aorea frages
Italiae pleno def andit Oopia cornn/ Hor. Ep. i. 12, 28. ' divesqae
meo bona Copia coma est,' Ov. Met. 9, 85. Snotra che wise,
well-behaved, Sn. 38 ; the word lived on as an adj., Groth. snatrs,
AS. snotor, ON. snotr, pradens, callidas, liter, emanctae naris,
0H6. snozar by rights, but snotar appears to be used also (Graff
6, 845) ; any discreet sensible woman can be called snotra.
Three &synjor, who are protectresses in the sense of the Boman
Tutela, are cited by Sn. 38 : Vor, OHG. prob. Wara, she who is
aware and wary, from whom nothing can be hidden ; 8yn, who
gaards the doorway, with which I connect the Ooth. sanja Veritas,
Banjdns defensio (sanjö p. 310 was an error), and the sannis
ezcasatio foand in oar oldest laws, so that the meaning seems to
be defence ; Elin, whom Frigg has set for the protection of all
men that are in peril, from hlina tueri, f overe.^ Even Ilaii, Halja
is a sheltering goddess, who hides us in the bosom of the under-
world, and originally a kind one.

From the oft-recurring phrases : ' was im thiu fruma gibidig,'
Hel. 110, 2. 130, 13 ; ' thiu fruma ist hiar irougit,' 0. i. 15, 32 ;
'thaz in thiu fruma queman was' 16, 17; 'so quimit thir fruma
in henti' 18, 42; 'nu uns thiu fruma irreimti,' 0. ii. 14, 120;
one would think this fruma (lucrum, ntilitas) had once had a
personal Fruma underlying it, especially as the OS. gibidig
gibidi, AS. gifeiSe (datus, ooncessus) is habitually used of superior
gifts of fortune : tir gifeSe (gloria ooncessa), Jud. 136, 5 ; e&d


1 Snorri, in proof of the three goddesseB, qnotee as mftny proverbs: *kona
ver^r v&r ^ess er hon yerSr vis,' a woman is wary of what she is aware of ; * ryn er
fyrir sett/ a defence is set up (when one denies his goUt, conf. Fomm. sog. 9, 6 :
hann setti>ar sjn fyri, ok ban's sklrslor) ; * s4 er forSaz ^tntr/he that is straggling
leans (on the tutelary goddess). From hlina to slant, icXireti', inolinare, Goth,
hleinan, comes the oansative meina to lean, Goth, hlianjan. Hliins in Gothic is
ooUis, [slanting or] sheltering hill ? I do not see how to reconcile with this the sense
attributed to hltn of a (sheltering 7) tree (p. 884).


'&90 PEBSONIFICATIONS.

gifeSe (opes concessae).^ like the above 'thin frama uns ir-
reimta' we have 'thfin thin s&lida gireim/ 0. i* 8, 17; giriman
again is a higher ' falling to one's lot/ and in 0. iii. 9, 11. 12 is
the combination : * fmma thana fnarta^ sl^ida inti heili.' And
sälida, like fruma, comes ' in henti/ to hand. The unquestionable
personifications of SaUda have been treated p. 864, etc.

The OHG. name Siguhepa would suit a victory-giving valkyr,
as the Norse Victoria or Nltcrf is in like manner named Sigrdrifa
(p. 435) ; drifa is one that drives, and the name Drifa was also
fitly given to a goddess of the snowstorm, for in the heat of battle
darts and arrows fly like snowflakes,' Holda sends out the flakes,
Wuotan the arrows. Our Bellona was both Hiliia and Kwidia
(p. 422).

Beside these divine or at least superhuman beings, from whom
proceeded splendour, light, shelter, deliverance and a heap of
blessings, especially victory, there were also others who were
imagined as personifications of single virtues : as deity branched
out bodily into separate powers, its spiritual attributes appeared
likewise as though distributed into rays, so as to shine before
mankind. But here again, honour, love, truth, gentleness, shame,
self-controland pity all assume the guise of goddesses, because
the people were accustomed from of old to hand over all that was
fair and gracious to the female sex (see Suppl.).

It was the accepted belief that, like the wise-women of
heathenism (pp. 400. 424), the virtues selected favourites with
whom to lodge and consort. Offended or wronged by evil-doing,
they took their leave, and returned to the heavenly dweUing, the
place of their birth. In this too they are like the swan-wives,
who after long sojourn among men suddenly take wing and seek
their better home (p. 427).

Such notions must reach a long way back, and be widely spread.
Hesiod in TEpya 198—200 tells how AlBo)^ and NifiecK» Shame
and Remorse, having wrapt them in white raiment (put the swaui»

1 Ei^ifu, OHO. Otikepa, » woman's name «opes largiens, might tranBlate the
Lat. goddess Ops.

' Ao velati Boreae sab tempore nix glomerata

spargitnr, hand aliter saeyas jeoere sagittas. Walth. 188.

Von beidenthalben flonoh daz sooz (flew the shots)

alsd dioke bo der snd (as thick as snow). Alex. 2886 (8285).

Daz geeohoz als din sme gie (went),

and die worfe ander daz her (and the darts among them). Wigal. 10978.


EBB. FBOMUOT. 891

shift on) 9 depart from men to the immortal gods. We still say^
Truth and Honour are gone out of the land ; a chronicler of the
14th cent. (Böhmer's Fontes 1^ 2) writes : ' tunc enim pax in
exUium migravitJ KI. 1575 : 'ja enwil min vrowe Ere beUben in
dem riche, std also jasmerltohe die £re tragende sint gelegen,
wer solt si denne widerwegen^ swenn ir geswtchet din kraf t ? des
hat gar die meisterschaf t min lieber »vater Büedeg^r. vrowe Ere
diu wirt nimmer m£r mit solchem wnnsche getragen, als er sie
tmoc bi sinen tagen/ (Honoor will not stay, now her bearers
are in such pitifhl case. Who is to steady her, when strength
fails her ? R. had the secret ; she^U never again be borne as he
bore her.) The hero to whom dame Honour* had attached herself,
knew how to maintain her equilibrium, to carry her upright.
Nithart 135 speaks of a female being Vrdmvx>t (merry-mind) in
a way that excludes a human person ; something mythical must
lie at the back of it. Hiltrftt and some other maidens are to
meet for dancing, and with them shall fare Fromuot, 'din ist ir
aller wisel,' queon*bee of them all. They brought their atten-
dants, she at springtime had entered the land, but afterwards she
is missing, she has fled out of Austria, probably because, she was
not held in honour there. The poet closes this (first) song with
the exclamation : ' could we but win her back, we should bear
her on our hands,' as the hero of the hour (a king, a bride) is
raised on high and carried about ; the passage on Rüdiger sug-
gests the same kind of ' chairing.' In the second song ' we are
told that Frdmuot fareth sorrowful from land to land in search of
cheerful men ; now who so certain of his happiness and luck,
that he dare send an embassy to her ? Why, none but prince
Friderich, his court by all means let her visit. It is mirth and
gaiety that have left the kingdom : frömüete, OHG. frawamuati,
OS. frdmöd (Hel. 35, 1) means jovial, but Frdmuot likewise
occurs as a woman's name (Graff 2, 699), it is that of Sigeminne's
handmaid in Wolfd. 673-5-6-7. 719, and the personification
may have its reason in ancient ways of thinking.^ In a poem of
the early part of the 15th cent. (Z. f. d. a. 1, 424), ^rau Oerechtig-
keit (righteousness) and her companions say : * now am I clean

1 The emendation proposed in Altd. bl. 1, 871, * Tioa Maot,* Ib actnally found
in MsH. 8, 318^ in ease the yar. lectt. 768** have had fall justice done them. Bat
I have never met with the simple Maot as a woman's name.


892 PEBSONIFICATIONS.

rejected and driven to another la/nd « . . we all have taken
flight and are chased out of the landJ So Helbl. 7^ 61 makes
Wa/rheit (veritas) and Triuwe (fides) quit the oonntry^ bat what
he further tells of Wlirheit is pecnliar, how she slipt into a
parson^ and nestled in his cheeky but left him at last when he
opened his lips, 7, 65— 102. In 7, 751 yioes are summoned to
creep (sUefen) into a judge. So that both virtues and vices, like
the daemon, take up their abode in men, and retire from them
again. But such fancies were not far to seek, and even the elder
poets make Minne especially visit the heart of man, possess it,
e.g. MS. 1, 26^ : ' ach süesse Minne, fn^e dich in ihr herae, und
gib ir minnen muot I ' Notice too the naive question the daughter
puts to her mother, MS. 2, 260* : ^ nn sage mir ob diu Minne lebe
und hie bi uns fif erde si, aid ob uns in den lüften swebe (or
hovers in the air above us) ? ^ She has heard of higher beings,
whom she imagines living in the air, as the heathen valkyrs
glided through it. The mother answers, speaking of Venus : ' si
vert unsihtic (travels viewless) als ein geist, si en h&t nibt ruowe
(no rest) naht noch tac ; ' oonf. p. 456.

In the Gute frau 576 : ' d6 kam vrou Scelde und Ere^ die warden
sine geverten (companions), die in bit dicke emerten von aller
slahte swsBre (oft saved him from harm) ; ' 61 1 : 'im enschatte
onch niht sore, daz vrou Scelde und vrou Ere sich sin nnterwunden
(took charge), do si'n ftf der str&ze vunden (found him on march).
vrou 8. löste im din plant (difficulties), dar n&ch versatate si ze
haut vrou K aber vürbaz.' Dietr. 49 : ' des hete din Ere zuo im
flnht (resorted), durch das (because) er ir so schöne pflac (treated);'
105 : ' daz er die Ere het ze h&s.' MS. 2, 174'' : 'wro Ere kamt
mit im gerant.' Wartb. kr. cod. jen. 112 : ^ ver Triuwe nam
(took) an sich die Seham, sam tete diu Zuht, diu Kiusche (so
did courtesy, chastity), Milte und Ere alsaro, si j&hen daz ir aller
vriedel wasre (they all declared their darling was) der vürste d&
ÜZ Düringe laut ; ' the preceding stanzas make it clear that dame
Faith commands and loads the other five (see Snppl.).

It was clumsy of Otfried, after making Karitas (iv. 29) spin
and weave the Saviour's tunic ^ in the manner of a heathen nom,

^ The ionioa ineotuutUu (gUMsaldta lU mit filn UeinAB fadmnon joh mgin&ten
rednon kleindro gurno), and aoo. to the Orendellied spim by ICaiy and wrought
by Helena. Whence arose thumythr Greg. Tru. muno. 1, 8 has already * tonics


MILDE. MINNE. MAZE. 893

to give Her for sisters two anfeminine ideas^ ' fridn ' and ' reht '
(▼• 28, 125) ; the Latin Oaritas, Poob, JusHtia wonld more fitly
have discharged the office of fateSj and a German Sippa and Rehtt
wonld have answered to them: Notker in Cap. 138 manages
better, when he translates Concordia, Fides, Padicitia by Qemsin»
muoti, Triwa, Ohituhi* I bring these examples to shew how
familiar snch personifications were even in the 9- 10th cent. ; they
need not have been iuyented or introduced first by the MHQ«
poets.

Minna, even in OHG« (p. 59), could signify not only Caritas,
but amor and cnpido ; and there is nothing offensive in Veldek's
Lavinia and Eneas addressing Venus as Minna (En. 10088.
10948) ; in Hartmann, Wolfram and Walther, frou Minne appears
bodily (Iw. 1587. 1688. Parz. 288, 4. 80. 291—5. Walth. 14,
10. 40, 26. 55, 16), and Hartmann, who is fond of interweaving
dialogue, has a talk with her, Iw. 2971 Beq., a thing imitated in
Gute frau 328-46-80. Afrowe Maxe (modus, meetness) occurs in
Walth. 46, 83; a frou Witze in Parz. 288, 14. 295, 8 ; examples
o{ frou Ere were given a page or two back, and o( frou Scelde
p. 865-6. These personifications are brought in more sparingly
by Gotfried and Conrad, yet in the Trist. 10929 diu M&ze cuts
out a garment, and JDSt before that comes the fine passage (10900)
on Isot's figure : ' als si diu Minne drsBte ir selber z'eime veder«
spil, dem Wunsche z'einem endezil, d& fur er niemer komen kan,'
as if Venas had made her for a toy to herself, and for utmost
bound to Wish, that he can never get beyond. Tristan 4807 has
' din gotinne Minne/ and Parz. 291, 17 once ^rou Liebe as well as
frou Minne. Frou Ere is freq. in Frauenlob : ' d& h&t vrou Ere
ir wünschelruot ' 41, 18; * vroun Eren diener* 184, 18; ^vroun
Eren bote ' 194, 8 ; she excludes ' unwip ' from her castle (vesten)
274, 18 ; ' vroun Eren str&ze ' 884-5 (see Suppl.).

In the 14- 15th cent, these fancies are carried to excess, and
degenerate into mere allegories : my ladies, the Virtues, instead
of coming in, one at a time, where they are wanted to deepen the
impressiveness of the story, intrude themselves into the plot of
the whole story, or at least of long formal introductions and
proems. And yet there is no denying, that in these preludes,

Chxisti non eoziBnta.* [The »athor forgets the * eoat without seam,' x""^ ^^«^i
John 19, 23.]


894 PERSONIFICATIONS.

nearly all of one traditional pattern^ which even Hans Sachs is
excessively fond of, there occur now and then shrewd and happy
thoughts, which must be allowed to possess a mythical signifi-
cance. By degrees all the devices of poetry were so used up,
the art was so denuded of her native resources, that no other
expedient was left her; our Mythology will have to remember
this, and in stray features here and there recognise [mangled but]
still palpitating figures even of the heathen time. When the
poet has missed his way in a wooded wild, and beside the mur-
muring spring comes upon a wailing wife, who imparts advice
and information, what is this but the apparition of a wiah-wife
or valkyr, who meets the hero at the forest fount, and makes
a covenant with him? And that dwarfs or giants often come
between, as servants of these wild women, and conduct to their
dwelling by a narrow path, this also seems no invention, but
founded on old tradition:

Out of many examples I will select a few. MS. 2, 186^ : Ich
kam geriten M ein velt viir einen grüenen wait, d& vant ich ein
vil schcen gezelt (tent), dar under saz diu Triuwe, si wand ir
hende, si bot ir leit, si schr6 vil l&te../ min schar ist worden al ze
kleine (my followers are grown far too few)/ Cod. BeroL 284
fol. 57-8 : By a steep cliff in the greenwood lives Virtue, and on
a high rock beside it her sister da/me Honowr, with whom are
Loyalty, Bounty y Meekness, Manhood, Truth and Oonstaney, be-
wailing the death of a count of Holland. Ls. 1, 375 (a charming
tale) : On a May morning the poet is roused from sleep by a
passionate cry, he starts up, goes into the forest, and climbs over
steep rocks, till high up he reaches a delectable flowery vale, and
in the dense thicket spies a little wight,* who rates him soundly
and wishes (like Laurin) to impound him for trampling his lady's
roses. When pacified at last, he tells him that here in a strong-
hold not to be scaled lives dame Honour with five maidens of
her household, named AdeUrut, Schamigunt, ZuhtUehe, TugenthUi
and Mazebure (the ancient Hiltia, Gundia, Dr&t, p. 422). Ls. 3
83 : A woman on a pilgrimage, having lost her way in the wooded
mountains, comes to a little blue house, in which there sits an
ancient dame clothed in blue, who receives her kindly. This
good dame calls herself the Old Minne, she stiU wears the colour
of truth, but now she is banished from the world. The pilgrim


PEBSONIFICATION. 895

jonmeys on to the tent of Toung Minne, who like her playmate
Wankelmut (fickle-mind^ a fem. formed like Fr6maot) wears
checkered garments^ and is bnsy entering men and women's
names in a book (like the parca and wurd^ p. 406 n.)^ and pro-
claims the new ways of the world. In the end Old Minne de-
clares that she hopes some day to appear again among men, and
drag the false Minne openly to justice, A song in MsH. 3, 437*
describes how dams Honour sits in judgment, with Loyalty,
Charity and Manhood on her right. Shame, Chastity and Modera^
tion on her left. P. Sachenwirt xxiy. : The poet follows a narrow
path into a great forest, where a high moantain rises to the
cloads : a dwarf meets him at the mouth of a cave, and informs
him of a court to be held in that neighbourhood by dams Con^
sta/ncy and Justice. He goes on his way, till he comes to the
judgment-seat, before which he sees Minne appear as plaintiff,
followed by Moderation, Chastity, Shams, and Modesty, he hears
her cause pleaded and decided, but frau Minne spies him in his
lurking-place. H. Sachs i. 273^: In May time, in the depth of
the forest, on a lofty moss-grown rock, the poet is met by a hairy
wood-wife, who guides him to the tower of dame Charity, shows
him through her chambers, and at last brings him before the
high dame herself, who sends him away not empty-handed. The
rock-dwelling in the wooded mountain seems an essential part of
nearly all these narratives : it is the ruined castle in which the
' white lady ' appears, it is the tower of Veleda, Meuglö^, Brunhild
(p. 96n.). Are the companions, 'playmates,' by whom dame
Honour is attended, as the highest virtue by the lower ones, to
be traced back to a retinue of priestesses and ministering virgins
of the heathen time 7 to valkyrs and messengers of a goddess ?
Dame Era, Aiaa (p. 414 n.) may go a long way back by that very
name : in the story from P. Suchenw. xxiv. 68 is uttered the
notable precept ' 6re all frouwen fin I ' honour all gentle dames
(p. 398 ; and see Suppl.)

As a counterpart, there are personifications of Vices too, but
far fewer and feebler, as our antiquity in general does not go
upon dualism, and in higher beings the idea of the good prepon-
derates. Besides, when malignant daemons do appear, they are
by preference made masculine: zom (anger), hass (hate), neid
(envy) ; though the Lat. ira and invidia are fem., and odium


896 PEB80NIFICATION8.

remains neater, like our general word for vioe (laster) against
the fern, virtue (tagend). It surprises me that no personification
of ' Sünde ' f., sin in the christian sense, is to be found in MHG.
poets, for the word itself may lie very near the old heathen Sonja
(p. 310), inasmuch as . defence and denial includes &ult and sin ;
the notion of ' crying sins, deadly sins * is BibUcal. Neither does
' schald ' f. (causa, debitum, crimen) put in a personal appearance,
the part she played of old (p. 407) seems totally forgotten ; what
lends itself more readily to personification is ScJuinde f. (dedecos).
It would be hard to find the negatives ' un6re, unmilde, onstaete'
treated as persons, and we only meet with Uniriuwe in Fraaen-
lob 258, 5. lisifivu Unfuoge (unfitness) was quoted p. 311 n., but
if, as is likely, the positive Gefuoge contains fuudamentally a
physical sense, it hardly falls under the category of vices, bat like
TJnsselde (p. 878) marks the negation of a state. In the Bible
Guiot (M6on 2, 344) the three fair maids Oharite, Verüe, Droiture,
are confronted by three old and ugly ones, Tratson, Ypocnsie,
Simonie; virtue is always painted fair and godlike, vice fool and
fiendish (see Suppl.).

The personification of Bumour is of high antiquity. It was
very natural to think of it as a divine messenger sent out through
the air, to listen to all that goeson, and bring tidings of it to
the highest gods, who have to know everything. To the Greeks
*Oa<ra (voice, sound) was Jt09 ofyyeXo^, II. 2, 93 ; Saaa ix Aio^,
Od. 1. 282 :

"Ocraa S* ap^ äyy€\o^ &ica Kara tttoKlv ^;^eTO irdvrrf.

Od. 24, 413.

Another name is ^i]fi/rf, Dor. idfiay to whom, says Pausanias i.
17, 1, as well as to "EXeo^t Äl^^ and 'Opfifj, there was an altar
erected at Athens ; the word is conn, with tfnffil, ^/ii9. as the
Lat. Fama is with fis^ and famen (in efiSetmen) ; I incUne to refer
the AS. bdme, tuba, to the same, preferring that spelling to the
commoner b^me. As there would otherwise be nothing in the
Edda parallel to this Fama, it is perhaps allowable to find her in
the goddess Ona, Sn. 38, whom Frigg sends out on her errands
(at eirindum sinum) to all parts of the world ;' through air and
sea she rides on a steed named Eofvarpnir (who flings out the
hoof), she will neither fly nor drive, but ride through the air, and


M£BB (FAMA). 897

all highflown things are said to ' goaafa : ' our Gotfried in a song
puts ' gnaben ' by ihe side of ' flying, flowing, trotting, creeping/
H6fvarpnir may have been a winged horse,^ bnt to the Greeks
and Homans Fama herself was winged, and this appears to me to
haye arisen out of the notion of a bird that bore tidings as a
divine messenger : ' ex ipsa caede volucrem nuntium mittere ' in
Cic. pro Boscio 36 simply means the speediest intimation, conf.
Pertz 2, 578 : ' subito venit nuntius pennigero volatu/ In our
folksongs birds do errands (p. 672), and OSinn has two ravens
for his chosen messengers, but their office could also be handed
over to divine beings of secondary rank, as Zeus employs Iris and
Ossa, and the notion of angel has arisen directly out of that of
messenger. Virgil's famous description of Famay small at first,
but quickly growing to enormous size (Aen. 4, 173) with innu-
merable feathers, eyes, ears, and mouths, seems almost borrowed
from the image of a bird getting fledged; at all events the
St. Gall monk (Pertz 2, 742) delivers himself thus : ' cum fama
de minima meUa (sup. p. 683) super aquilarum magnitudinem
ezcresceret.' Other writers : ' daz mcere (news) d6 vedere gewan,
witen f uor ez ze gazzen,' Mar. 144. ' alsus fiouk Morgftnes tdt,
als ob er flocke i^dsref so flew M.'s death as if it were fledged.
Trist. 5483. ' ein boese masre wirt gar schiere vlücke/ ill news is
soon fledged, Benn. 18210. Yet Yeldeck, just where we might
have expected an imitation of Virgil, has merely : ' d6 daz mcere
uf brach — üz quam — üz ajpranc* En. 1903-16-97, not giving it
wings, though he does make it grow : ' daz mcere wdlisen began,'
9185. 12575; conf. Geo. 521: 'diu mcere in der stunde (illico)
umohsen.' Most of the other poets confine themselves to the
image of flight : ' leidiu niumare (ill news) diu nu fliegent in diu
lant,^ Pf. Chuonr. 7544. * daz mcE/re fluoc do witen,' Mar. 45 ;
' dd daz mcere chom geflogen ' 214. ' d6 flugen disiu m^jere von
lande ze lande,' Nib. 1362, 2; ' d6 fltigen diu mcere von schare
baz ze schare' 1530, 1. 'ob diz m^ere iht verre (far) fliige?^
Wh. 170, 20. ' din mcere flugen über daz velt,' Wigal. 2930. ' s6
daz mcere ie verrer vliuget, 86 man ie m6r gelinget,' the farther it
flies, they tell more lies, Freid. 136^ 3. 'mcere vliegent in diu


1 Like PegABUB; conf. the 0. Boh. gloss of Mater verb. 215 : kridlateo (alatns)
PegasoB eqaQB Neptnni, qui * fama * interpretator.


898 PEBSONIFICATIONS.

lant/ Elarl 116\^ M. Neth. poets also make their fern, niemare
fly: ^niemare ghevloghen/ Floiis 358; bat often^ like Yeldeck
aboye^ they make her run or leap like started game : ' die niemare
liep' 173; 'die niemare sal lopen' 1295; and with this agree the
Dan. ' det springer nn saa vide,' DV. 1, 63, and perhaps the
AS. ' bleed wide sprang/ Beow. 36, if blsdd (flatos, OHO. pl&t)
may here be taken for fama. In a passage quoted above, p. 78,
fama is imagined walking, and ' gressns snos retorqnens.' Now,
vivid as these representations are, it is not personification that
lies at the bottom of them, as we may see by the vagne neater
masre, OHG. mari ; the OHO. mftrida, Ooth. m£ri)« (ns-iddja
m£ri)w is, i^yjBev ^ aicoii ainovy Mark 1, 28) wonld have lent
itself more readily to that, but MHO. had no msBrde in nse,
thoagh Latin writers undoubtedly retained /ama-, e.g. in Helmold
1, 65: 'interim volat haec fama per universam Sazoniam/
Hartmann in Er. 2515 personifies frowe Melde, while l^bo, a
Dan. poet of the 1 7th cent., more floridly names her Fyg-cm^hy
(aestuans per terram, fi-om fyge, ON. fiuka), and gives her a
fiedreham, Nyerup's Digtek. 2, 185. Ovid in Met. 12, 80 seq.
attributes to Fama a house with innumerable approaches, and
this is elaborately imitated by Conrad in Troj. 179®. 180', only
for fame he puts a masc. Liuwst, OHO. hiiumunt, our leumund
(Oramm. 2, 343. Orafi* 4, 1100), who together with his followers
is winged, and flies forth, but signifies more the listening fama ;
conf. Ooth. hliuma=auris, and Liumending = Favor in N. Cap.
51. To such male beings would correspond the Lat. rumor, of
which we read in Isengr. 13 : * Burner per saltus et arva tonans';
or the ON. qvittr : ' s& kuittr flo i bygSum,' Fomm. sog. 9, 237
(see Suppl.).

1 ' Die »chtesal vloao aber al ; * ' ir eohte vlono in die lant,* Kaiaerehr. 6406-79.


Batler k Tanner, Frome, and London.


April, 1882.

A CLASSIFIED LIST

ov

EDUCATIONAL WORKS


GEORGE BELL & SONS.


Fuü Cataloguet vnü be sent pottfiree on a^lieaticn.


BIBLIOTHECA CLA88ICA.

A Beriet of Qreek and Latin AutJurtt with Englith Note$, edited 5y

eminent Scholar», Bvo.

AMhyliu. By F. A. Paley, HA. 18«.

CkMVO'i OratloDM. By G. Long, M.A. 4 Yoia. life., lie., KU., 18«,

DenKMitheiia«. By B. WhkUm, M^. 2 vols. life. eaoh.

Ihudpldas. By F. A. Pal^y, M.A. 8 Tolg. 18«. each.

Bomer. By F. A. Paley, M.A. VoL L 12«. ; Y6L n. 14«.

BarodotuB. By Bev. J. W. Blakeeley, B J). 2 voilfl. 82«.

Heaiod. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 10«. 8d.

Horaoa. By Ber. A. J. Madeane, M.A. 18«.

JuTanal and Penina. By Bev. A. J. Maoleane, ILA. 12«.

Plato. By W. H. Thompson, D JD. 2 vols. 7«. M, each.

Sqpliodlea. Vol. I. By Ber. F. H. Blaydes, M.A. 18«.

Vol. n. Phflootetes. Electra. Ajax and Traohmi«». By

F. A Palqr, M . A 12«.

Taottna: The Annals. By the Ber. P. Frost. 15«.

Terenoe. By £. St. J. Pany, M.A. 18«.

yirgiL By J. Gonlngton, M.A. 8 vols. 14«. each.

An Atlaa of Olaaaloal Oeography; Twenty-four Haps. By
W. HvghM and Geonre Long, lf.A New editUm, wttih ooloarM ootUnak
ImperialSro. 12«. 6d.

Uniform with above,
A Complete Latin Qrammar. By J. W. Donaldson, D J>. 8rd

Xdition. 140.

GRAMMAR-SCHOOL CLASSICS.

A Stria of Qreeh and Latin Authors, vrith Englieh Notes, Fcap, 8m.

OsBaar : De Ballo OaUloa By Qeotge Long, M.A. 5«. 6d

Books L-HL For JmuorClasaea. By a.Lo!iig,MJL 2«. M.

Oatollna, Tlbiilliaa, and Piopertliia. Beleoted Poems. WithLiia»
9y Ber. 4. H. Wmfeidaw. 8«.6d.


n


Gearge Bell and Sons*


Cloero: De Seneotute, Be Amiratia, and Select EpiaUes. By
Geozig« Long, 1C.A. 4i. 6d.

Ck)xiieliiui Nepoe. Bj Bey. J. F. Macmichael. 2«. 6d.

Homer : Siad. Books I.-Xn. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 6«. 6<i.

Horaoe. With Life. By A. J. Madeane, M JL 6i. 6d. [In
2 parte. 3i. 6d. eaoh.]

JuYonal : Sixteen Satires. By H. Prior, M.A. 4s. 6<I.

partial: Select Epigzams. With Life. By F. A. Pal^, MJL 6<.6|L

Ovid : the Fasti. By F. A. Paley, M. A. 5«.

Sallnat: Gatilina and Jngortha. With Life. By G. Long, MJl 5«.

Taaitna : Germania and Agrioola. By Bev. P. Frost. Z», 6d.

"Virgil: Bucolics, Gteorgics, and ^neid. Books 1.-17. Abridged
from ProfeMor Ooninffton's Bdition. Ss. 6d.— .Sneid, Books Y.-XII. 5«. 6d.
Also in 9 Bopazttte Yonunefl, Is. 64. each.

Zenophon: The Anabasis. With Life. By BeT. J. F. Macmichael. 6«.

Also in 4 separate Yohimes, 1«. M. each.

The GyropsBdia. By G. M. Gorham, M.A. 6s.

Memorabilia. By Perciyal Frost, MJl 4m. 6<2.

A €hnunmar-Soho(d Atlas of ClaBsical Gteography, containing
Ten selaoted Maps. Imperial 9%o. fis.

Uniform v)ith the Series,

The New Testament, in Greek. With English Notes, Ac By
Ber. J. V. Maaminhael 7i. Cd.


CAMBRIDGE GREEK AND LATIN TEXTS.

JBschyluB. By F. A. Paley, M.A. Qs.

OfBsar : De Hello G«llico. By G. Long, M J.. 2$.

Oioero : De Seneotute et de Amioitia, et Bplstolsa Seleotss. By

O.Long, H.A Is. 6d.
Oiceronis Oraüones. Vol. I. (in Verrem.) By G. Long, M.A. 3«. 64.
Euripides. By F. A. Paley, MA. 6 vols. 3«. 6d. each.
Berodotos. By J. G. Blakesley, B.D, 2 vols. 7s.
Homerl Sia«. I.-XII. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 2s. 6d.
Horatlus. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. 2s. M.
Juvenal et Persins. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. 1«. 6d.
Luorettus. By H. A. J. Mmiro, M.A. 2s. 6d.
Salhisü Grispi Oatilina et Jugurtha. By G. Long, M.A. 1«. 6<L
Sophocles. By F. A. Paley, M.A. » [In the press.

Terenti Comcsdlss. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 3#.
Thuoydides. By J. G. Donaldson, D.D. 2 toIs. 7s.
"VlrgUicui. By 7. Conington, M.A. 8«. 6d
Zenophontia Xzpedltto Cyil By J. F. Macmichael, BJL. 8f.6d.

KoTiun Testamentum Ghrssoum. By F. H. Scrivener, MJL
4i. 6d. An edition ivith wide margin for notes, half boiuul, ISa


Educational Wbrka^


CAMBRIDGE TEXTS WITH NOTES.

A Seleetion of the mott tuuaUy read of the Oreek and Latin AuthorSj

Annotated far Schools. Fcap, 8t;o. 1«. 6<2. each,, with exceptions,
Xurlpidea. Aloestis. — Medea. — Hippolytns. — Hecuba. — Bacoh».
Ion. 2». — Orestes. — ^PhoenisB». — Troades. By P. A. Paley, M. A.

JBsohyliui. Prometheus YinotuB. — Septem oontra Thebas. — Aga-
memnon. — PersflB. — Eumenides, By F. A. Paley, M.A.

fiophocles. (Edipus Tyrannus. — GSdipus Coloneus. — Antigone.

By F. A Paley, M.A.
Homer. Biad. Book I. By F. A. Paley, M.A. Is.

Terenoe. Andria. — ^Hauton Timorumenoa. — ^Phormio. — Adelphoe.
By Professor Wagner, Pb.D.

doero'i De Beneotute — De Amkitia and Epistolaa Select». By

Q. Long, 1C.A. t

OTld. Selections. By A. J. Macleane, M.A.

Othvn «n prcparatum.

PUBLIC SCHOOL SERIES.

A Series of Classical Texts , annotated hy loeU-knovm Scholars. Cr, Svo.
Aristophanes. The Peace, By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4s. &d,

The Achamians. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4s, 6d,

' ■ The Frogs. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4§, Bd,

Oioero. The Letters to Atticos. Bk. I. By A. Pretor, M.A. 4t. Od.
Demosthenes de Falsa Legationa By B. Shilleto, MA. 6«.
The Law of Leptinea By B. W. Beatson, MA. 8«. Od,

Plftto. The Apoloc^ of Socrates and Qrito. By W. Wagner, Ph.D.

6th Edition. 4s. 6d.
The Phffldo. 6th Edition. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 6s. Od.

The Protagoras. 3rd Edition. By W. Wayte, M.A. 4s, Od.

The Euthypbro. 2nd edition. By G. H. WelU, M.A. 3i.

The Euthydemus. By G. H. Wells, M.A, 4«.

The Republic. Books I. & 11. By G. H. Wells, M.A. 5s. OJ.

FlMLtos. The AuluUria. By W.Wagner, PhJ>. 2nd edition. 4», Od,
Trinummus. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 2nd edition. 4s, Od,

The Menaechmei. By W. Wagner, PhJ). 4s. Od.

Sophoolis TraohinisB. By A. Pretor, M.A. 4s, Od.
Terenoe. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. lOi . Od.
Theooritas. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4s. Od,

Othin tn prtporatum.

CRITICAL AND ANNOTATED EDITIONS.

JDtna. By H. A. J. Munro, M.A. 8«. Od.

Arlstophsöüs Comcediffi. By H. A. Holden, LL.D. 8yo. 2 vols.
23a. 6d. Plays sold separately.

Pax. By F. A. Paley, MJL Foap. 8to. 4*. Od,

Oatollus. By 0. A. J. Munxo, MA. 7s. Od.

Corpus Poetarum LatSnoram. Edited by Walker. 1toI.8yo. 18«.

Horaoe. Quinti Horatii Flacd Opera. By H. A. J. Monro, M.A.

Large 8to. 11. Is.
LI77. The first five Books. By J. Ptendeville. 12mo. roan, 5s,

Or Books I..in.Ss.6d. IT. and V. 8s. 6d.


Charge Beü and Sowf


XAanttni. Titi LocratH Gari de Bernm Hftton Idbci 8«z. Wifli
ftTnuulatioii«^H0tai. Ify H. A. J. M onn ILA. STolLSm. Y«i.I.
T^OEt. (HeirSdiifiMwPrepuiiv.) YoL I L Trimhtioii. (Sold HpM«Mr.|

Ovid. P.OridiiNaaoniBHflroideeXiy. B7A.Fa]iiiflr,MJL SvouCt.

PiopertfauL Sex Anralii Fropertü OManina. By F. A. FiJ^, MJL

8ro. Ok«h,9lk

Sex. Fropertü Bleglanim. Lib. IV. By A. Palmer. Fei9.8T0.5«.

Bophoolee. The AJaz. By G. E. Palmer, M.A. if. 6d

Thnoydidee. The Hiatory of the Peloponneman War. ByBibfaaid
01ifll0to, M .A. BookL 8vo. «lM. BooklLSro. Sil «d.

LATIN AND GREEK CLASS-BOOKS.

AwTflte Latina. A Seriea of l^ogreaaive Latin Ezeroiaea. By
M. J. B. Baddeler» ILA. Fo^. »ro. Put L Aoridenee. Iiw6d. Ftat IL
8tdldm<»»2i. K^,2iL6d.

Ziathi Prose LeMona. ByProtGhiiroh,llA. 6thEdit Fcap.8Ta

Si.6d.

Ziatln Szerdsea and Grammar Papers. By T. GoQina, M.A. 8rd
BdÜbm. Foap. 8to. 9s. 6d.

Unseen Papers hk Prose and Verse. "With Examination Qnestions.
By T. OoUfaii, ILA. find editSon. Feap. 8to. Si. 6d.

Anai^tioal Latin Bzarolaea. By G. P. ICason, B.A. 8rdEdit 8«.M.'

Soala Onsoa : a Series of Elementary Greek Exercises. By Ber. J. W.
Davis, ILA, and K. W. Bsddeley, ILA. ardBditioa. Feap.Svo. Si.«.

Greek Verse Gompoeitlon. By G. Preston, M. A. Grown 8Ta4f.6<L

Bt thi Bby. p. Fbost, M.A., St. Johh's Gollbos, Gambbum«.
BologSB LatfaMB ; or, FiriBt Latin Beading-Book, with English Notes
and a DiotioxuuT'. ITew Edition. Foap. Sro. ai.6d.

Materials for Latin Proae Gompoeltion. New Edition. Fcap.8Ta

Si. 6d. Key, 4«.

A Latin Yerse-Botik. An Introdnetory Work on Hexameters and
Fantaxnotsn. Now Bdition. Foap. 8to. 9c. Koy, 5b.

Analeota Ghneoa ICnora, with Introdnotozy Sentences, English
Notes, and a Diotlonaiy. New Bdition. Feap. 8vo. 8a 6d.

Materials fbr Qreek Prose Oomposltion. New Edit. Feap. Sroi
8a Od. Key, fia

VlorUeglnm Poetloum. Elegiac Extracts from Grid and TibnUns.
New Bdition. WithNotee. Foap. 8to. 8a

By thb Bay. F. E. Gbbtton.
A Ttrst Oheqne-book for Latin Yerse-makera. 1<. 6<K.

A Latin Version for Masters. 3<. 6d.

Beddenda ; or Passages with Parallel Hints for Translation into
Latin Proae and Yerae. Crown 8to. 4a. 6d.

Beddenda Beddita («e« next page).

By H. a. Holdsk, LLJ).
Vollomm Sflynla. Part I. Passages for Translation into Latin

Bkgiao and Heroic Verae. 9th Bdition. PoetSro. 7«. 6d.

■ Part n. Select Passages for Translation into Latin Lyric

and Ckwiio lambie Verae. 8rd Edition. PoatSvo. 5«.

Part in. Seleet Passages for Translation into Greek Verse.


SrdBdition. PoatSro. 8a


EducatUmal Work». 5


F6Ua SIlTulflB, siye Eolqg» Poetannn AsgUooanun in Latmmn et
Oneenm GonvenHB. 8to. VoLLKkad. YoLII. Ut.

VoUoniin OentoriBB. Setoot Passages for Translation into Latin
and Oraak FroM. 7ihBditioii. PiMitSTO. 8k


TRANSLATIONS, SELECTIONS, &c.

*«* Many of the folloiving booiks aze well adapted for School Prises.

JBsohylns. Translated into English Prose by J?. A. Paley, M.A.

Sod Bdltion. 8to. 7c 6d.
Translated into English Verse by Anna Swanwick. Post

8to« 5s.

Anthologia Gneoa. A Selection of Choice Greek Poetiy » with Notes.

9j F. St. John Thaokenj. 40» aind Cheaper Sdäion. 16mo. 4c 6d.

Anthologia Latlna. A Selection of Choice Xiatin Poetry, from
NatrinB to Bo8tliias,with Kotos. BjBer.F. Bt. JobnThadrenj-. Beriaed
and Oheaper Edition. ISmo. 4i. 6d.

Horaoe. The Odes and Carmen Secolare. In English Verse by

J. Oonington, M.A. 8th edition. Focp.Sro. 6c 6d.
The Satires and Epistles. In English Verse by J. Coning-

ton, H.A. 5th edition. ScSd.

Ulnstrated from Antique Qems by C. W. King, M.A. The


text rerised with Introduction by H. A J. Mnnzo, M.A. Large 8to. U. Ic

Horaoe's Odes. Englished and Imitated by varions hands. Edited
hj 0. W. F. Cooper. Grown 8vo. 6c 6d.

Mybss Etonenses, sive CarminTm Etontt Conditorvm Belectvs.
By Bdohard Okee. 8 yoIb. 8to. 15c

Fropertius. Verse translations from Book V., with revised Latin
Text. By F. A. Paley, M.A Foap. 8to. 8c

Plato. Ghxrgias. Translated by E. M. Cope, M.A. 8yo. 7s.

Phüebns. Translated!^ F. A. Paley, M.A. Small 870. i§.

TheaBtetns. Translated by F. A. Paley^M. A. Small 8yo, 4f.

AnsJysis and Index of tiie Dialogues. By Dr. Day. Post

8to. 5f.

Beddenda Beddlta : Passages from English Poetry, with a Latin
Vene Tnuulation. By F. B. Gzetton. Grown 8vo. 0c

SabiinsB CkiroUa in hortnlis Begi« Schol» Salopiensis contexoenmt
tree riri floiibne legendi«. Bditiotertia. 8to. 8c 6d.

Sertnm Garthnsiannm Floribns triun Secnlorom Conteztmn. By

W. H. Brown. 8to. 14c

Thaooritus. In English Verse, by C. S. Calverley, M.A. Crown

8to. [IT«« Bditkn preparing.

Translations into English and Latin. By C. S. Calrerley, M.A.

Poet 6to. 7c 6d.
By B. C. Jebb, M.A. ; H. Jackson, M.A., and W. E. Cnrrey»

M.A Grown Syo. 8c

into Greek and Latin Verse. By B. C. Jebb. 4to. doih


got. 10». 9d.

Between Whiles, ^translations by B. H. Kennedy. 2nd Edition
reyiBod. Grown 8ro. Oc


6 Oeorge Bell and Soruf

REFERENCE VOLUMES.

A Latin Qrammar. By Albert Harkness. Post 8vo. 6s.

By T. H. Key, M.A. 6th Thousand. Poet dro. a».

A Short Latin Grammar for SohooiB. By T. H. Key, M.A.,

F.B.S. lith Bdition. PostSro. Sc. 6<1.

A Guide to tbe Ohoica of Olasalcal Books. By J. B. Mayor, M.A.

Reyiaed Edition. Crown 8yo. 3«.

The Theatre of the Greelui. By J. W. Donaldson, DJ). 8th
Edition. Port 8ro. 5s.

Kei^htley's Mythology of Greece and Italy. 4th Edition. h$.

A Dictionary of Latin and Greek Quotations. By H. T, Büay.
Post 8to. 58. With Index Verbomm, 0s.

A History of Boman Literature. By W. S. Teuffel, Professor at
thfi ünireraity of Tabingen. By W. Wacrner, Ph.D. 2 yoIb. I>6n^ 8vo. 81«.

Student's Guide to the ITniveraity of Cambridge. 4th Edition
revised. Fcap. 8vo. Part 1, 28. 6«l. ; PartB 2 to 6, Is. each.


CLASSICAL TABLES.

Latin Accidence. By the Bey. P. Frost, M.A. 1«.

Latin Versification. Is,

Notabilia Qussdam; or the Principal Tenses of most of the
Irregxdar Greek Yerbi and Elenwntaiy Greek, Latin, and Frendh Oon-
stmotion. New Edition. Is.

Richmond Rules for the OTidian Distich, &q. By J. Tate,

M.A. Is.

The Principles of Latin Syntax. 1«.

Greek Verbs. A Catalogue of Terbs, Irregular and Defectiye; their
leading f ormatione, tenses, and inflexions, with Paradigma for oonjngation«
Bnles for formation of tense«, &o. A». Bj J. S. Baird, T.G.D. 2s. 6d.

Greek Accents (Notes on). By A. Bairy, D.D. New Edition. Is,

Homeric Dialect. Its Leading Forms and Pecoharities. By J. S.
Baixd, T.C.D. New Edition, by W. G. Batherfoid. Is.

Greek Accidence. By the Bev. P. Frost, M.A. New Edition. 1«.


CAMBRIDGE MATHEMATICAL SERIES.

Whitworth's Choice and Chance. 3rd Edition. Crown 6yo. 6«.
McDowell's Exercises on Euclid and in Modem Geometry.

3rd Edition. 6$,
Vyvyan's Trigonometry. 3«. 6(7. [Just publUhed.

Taylor's Geometry of Conies. Elementaiy. 3rd Edition. 4». 6d.
Aldis's Solid Geometry. Srd Edition. 6«.
Gamett's Elementary Dynamics. 2nd Edition« 6«.

Heat, an Elementary Treatise. 2nd Edition. 3«. 6d.

Walton's Elementary Mechanics (Problems in). 2nd Edition. 6s.


Educational Works.


CAMBRIDGE SCHOOL AND COLLEGE

TEXT-BOOKS.

A Series of Elementary Treatises for the use of Students in the

Universities t Schools, and Candidates for the Public

Examinations. Fcap. Qvo.

Arithmetio. By Bey.G.Elsee»M.A. Fcap. 8yo. lOfchEdit. 8«. 6(2.

Algebra. By the Bev. C. Elsee, M.A. 6th Edit 4e.

ATithmetio. By A. Wrigley, M.A. 8«. 6d

A ProgreBsive Course of Examples. With Answers. By

J. Wataon, M.A. 5th Edition. 2s. 6d.

Algebra. R-ogressive Course of Examples. By Bev. "W. F.
M'MioliAel,MA.,andB.Prowde Smith, M.A. 2nd EdiUon. Ss.6d. With
Answen. 4m. 6d.

Plane ABtronomy, Ai) Introduction to. By P. T. Main, M.A.

4th Edition. 4i.

Ck>nio Sectlona treated Geometrically. By W. H. Besant, MJL

4th Edition. 4«. 6d. Solntion to the Examples. 4«.

Slementary COnlo Sections treated Geometrically. By W. H.
Besant, M.A. [In iU Proa.

Statics, Elementary. By Bct. H. Goedwin, D.D. 2nd Edit. 8«.

Hydrostatics, Elementary. By W. H. Besant, M.A. 10th Edit. 4s.

Mensuration, An Elementary Treatise on. ByB.T.Moore,M.A. Qs,

Newton's Prindpla, The First Three Sections of, with an Appen-
dix ; and the Ninth and Eleventh SeotionB. By J. H. Byami, M.A. 5th
Edition, by P. T. Main, M.A. 4s.

trigonometry, Elementary. By T. P. Hudson, M.A. 8«. M.

Optics, GeometrioaL T^th Answers. By W. S. Aldis, M.A. 8f . 6d.

Analytical Geometry for Schools. ByT.G.Vyvyan. 8rdEdit. 4«.6<2.

Qree^ Testament, Companion to the. By A. C. Barrett, A.M.
4th Edition, revised. Fcap. Svo. Ss.

Book of Oommon Prayer, An Historical and Explanatory Treatise
on the. By W. Q-. Humphry, B.D. eth Edition. Fcap. 8to. 4>. 6d.

Music, Text-book of. By H. C. Banister. 9th Edit. rcTised. 5s,

Condse History of. By Bev. H. G. Bonavia Hunt, B. Mus.

Oxon. 5th Edition rerised. 8aL 6d.


ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA.

See foregoing Series.


GEOMETRY AND EUCLID.
Tezt-Book of Geometry. By T. S. Aldis, HA. Small 8yo.

4i.6d. Fart I. 2s. 6d. Part H. 28.

The Xaements of SuolidL By H. J. Hose. Fcap. Svo. is. 6d.

ExerdBes separately, 1«.

The First Six Books, with Commentary by Dr. Lardner.

lOth Edition. Svo. 6«.

The First Two Books ezidained to Begtamers. By C. P.


Maiion, B.A. 2nd Edition. Fcap 870. 2f.6d.


8 GmrmBeO


B|f Ber.


BlrJ.]IeDo««IU

ILA. 4Ük Edü.

B^ Wi> H. BoBBiit

ByCT^Fioi^DJ). 3kd£dit

fWrrym of OwiKfw l rwilflpwi. ■■iimHi at & Mm'i


TRIGONOMETRY.

TngoDc^ff^ry. Ici^odsaäcB to Pl^np Bf Ber. T. G. Yjijan,


By T. P. HadaoD. MJL 3c 6d.

B|y BL T. IfoGve,


ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY

AND DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS.

^y W, P.

of PluM Oo^nUiiftte QeaoMby.

of


8ml Iti.

^yW.a AldiB,
on «bo I»ftnnüal CMwiTnn £;y IC.

on. ^7A.Gl^yl^,]iJL


MECHANICS & NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.

StetioB, Elementery. By H. Goodwm, DJ>. Feip. 8vou Snd


Pynamlos, A TrMUse on Etemeniuy. ^y W. Gaznetl» ILA.

Sud Bdiufon. Crown 8vo. 6c»
TBkmwntary MftchMiiiw, PtoUenu in. By AV. WaHon. ILA. New

Edition. Crowit 8¥<0l 6s.

TheoietkaJ Miwhimir«, PtoMemB in, ByW.Watton. Snd


Educational Works. 9

Hydrodtatiofl. B7W.H.Beflant,M^. Foap.8YO. lOthEdition. is.

HydromeohaziioB, A Treatise on. By W. H. Beeant, MJl. 8to.
New Bditlon reTiaed. lOt. 6d.

DyzuuDÜM of a Particle, A Treatise on the. By W. H. Besant, M.A.

Optiofl, Geometrical. By W. 8. Aldis, M.A. Fcap. 8to. S$. 6d.

Doable Befraotton, A Chapter on Freenel's Theory of. By W. S.
Aldis, M.A 8to. 8«.

Heat, An Elementary Treatise on. By W. Gamett, M.A. Crown
8to. 8nd Edition reriaod. Ss. 6d.

Newton'8 Prinoipia, The First Three Seetions of, with an Appen*
dix ; and the Ninth and Haeremih Beotions. By J. H. Bnuu, HJL 5th
Bdition. EditedbyP. T.Main» H.A. 4«.

Astronomy, An Introduction to Plane. By P. T. Main, M.A.
Vcap. 9wo. doth. 4».

Astronomy, Practical and SphericaL By B. Main, M.A. 870. 14«.

Astronomy, Elementary Chapters on, from the 'Astronomie
Flgviqae' of Biot. By H. Ooodwin, D.D. 870. 3*. 6d.

Pore Mathematios and Natural Philosophy, A Compendium of

VwetB and FormnliB in. Bt O. B. Bmalley. 2nd Bdition, revised by
J. McDowon, M.A. Toap. 8to. 8s. 6d,

Elementary Course of Mathematios. By H. Goodwin, DJ>.

eth Edition. 8to. 16«.

Problems and Examples, adapted to the * Elementary Course of
Hathematioe.' 3rd Edition. 8to. 6«.

Solutions of Goodwin's CoUeotion of Problems and Examples.
By W. W. Hntt, H. A 8rd Edition, revieed and enlarged. 8vo. fla

Pure Mathematios, Elementary Examples in. By J. Taylor. 8yo.
7«.6d.

Meohanios of Oonstruotion. With nxmieroos Examples. By

B. Fenwick, F.B.A.S. Svo. 12«.

Pure and Applied Calculation, Notes on the Principles of. By

Bev. J. OhalliB, M. A Demy Sto. 15a

Physios, The Mathematical Principle of. By Eer. J. Challis, M.A.
Demy Sto. 5«.


.TECHNOLOGICAL HANDBOOKS.

Edited by H. Tbüemau Wood, Secretary of the
Society of Arts.

1. Dyeing and Tissue Printing. By W. Crookes, F.B.S.

^In ths pre»»,

2. Iron and Steel. By Prof. A. K. Huntington, of King's College.

[^Preparing.

8. Cotton Iffanufaoture. By Biehard Marsden, Esq., of Man-
chester. [Preparing.

4. Telegraphs and Telephones. By W. E. Prcece, F.B.S.

[Preparing.

6. Glass Manufiaoture. By Heniy Chance, M JL ; H. Powell, B.A. ;
and John HopkiiiBOii, M. A., LL.D., F.B.S. In th* pr»a».


10 Qeorge Bett and Sans'

HISTORY, TOPOGRAPHY, &c.

Borne and the Oampagna. By B. Bnni, liJL With 85 £n-
gisyingiaadmiapaKadPlftiis. With Appendix. 4ta SLS^

Old Rome. A Handbook for Travelkra. By B. Bum, VUl,
Wi^ Haps and Flan«. Demy 8to. lOt. 6d.

Iffodem Ehixope. By Dr. T. H. Dyer. 2nd Edition, levised and
oontinaed. 5 vols. Demy 8vo. 21. 12». 6d.

TheHifltoryof the mngs of Borne. ByDr.T.BLDyer. 8yo.16(.

The SQstory of Pompeii: its BaildingB and Antiqolties. By
T. H.D|7er. 8rd Edition, bxonght down to 1874. PoetSvo. 7s. 6d.

Anoient Athemi; its History, Topography, and Bemains. ^y
T. H. Dyer. Baper-royal 8to. Cloth. 11. 5«.

The Deollne of the Roman Bepuhlla By G. Long. 5 toIs.
8to. 14«. each.

A History of England during the XIarly and Middle Ages. By

0. H. Peanon, lI.Ju 2nd Edition rerised and enlarged. 8to. VoL L
18«. YoLII. 14«.

Historical Maps of Sngland. By 0. H. Pearson. Folia Snd
Edition rerieed. 8U 6d.

History of England, 1800-15. By Harriet Martineaa, with new
and oopioQS Index. 1 toI. Ss. 6d.

History of the Thirty Years' Peace, 1815-46. By Harriet Mar-
tineaia. 4 toIs. S«. 6d. each.

A Practioal Synopsis of English History. By A. Bowes. 4th
Edition. 8to. 2c

Student's Text-Book of English and Gteneral History. By
D. BealB. Grown S^o. 2«. 6d.

Ures of the Queens of England By A. Strickland. Library
Edition« 8 yoIb. 7s. 6d. each. Cheaper Edition, 6 toIs. 5«. eaoh. Abridged
Edition, 1 yol. 6«. 6d.

Eginhard's Life of Kal*l the Great (Charlemagne). Translated
with Note«, by W. Olaixter, M.A., B.C.L. Crown Svo. 4«. 6d.

OnUlnes of Indian History. By A. W. Hughes. Small post

8to. Sb. 6d.

The Elements of Oeneral Sstory. By Prof. Tytler. New

Edition, brought down to 1874. Small post 8yo. 3«. 6d.

ATLABEa
An Atlas of Classical Geography. 24 Maps. By W. Hughes

and a. Long, M.A. New Edition. Imperial 8ro. 12s. 6d.

A Orammar-Sohool Atlas of dassioal Geography. Ten Maps

■eloGted from the above. New Edition. Imperial 8yo. Ss.

First Classical Maps. By the Bey. J. Tate, M.A. 8rd Edition.
Imperial 8to. 7«. 6d.

Standard Library Atlas of Classical Geography. Imp. 8to. 7«. M.


Educational Works. 11


PHILOLOGY.

WSBSTBB'S DIOTIONARY OF THS ENGLISH LAN-

GUAaE. Wlfh Dr. Malm's lEAsjmologj' 1 vol., 1626 Pr««8, 9000 Ulna.

trations. 21s. With Appendices and 70 additional pages of lUnstra.

tions, 1919 Paffes, 31«. 6d.

' Thb bsst practical Bnolish Dictiovabt bxtavt.'— Quarterly HtnimD, 1873.

Prospeotiues, with specimen pagvs, post free on application.

New DloUozutry of the BngUah Lfuiguage. Combining Explan-
ation with B^7mol097, and oopionsly illustrated by Quotations from the
belt AathoriUes. B/ Dr. Bicbardson. New Bdition, with a Supplement.
2 Tols. 4to. 41. 148. ed.; half russia, 51. 15$. 6d.; rossia, 61. 12s. Supplement
separately. 4to. 128.

AnSyo. Bdit. without the Quotations, ISs.; half russla, 208.; mssia, 24a.

Supplementary English Glossary. Containing 12 ,000 Words and

Meanings occurring in English Literature, not found in any other
Dictionary. By T. la. O. Davxes. Demy 8vo. 16«. *

Dictionary of Corrupted Words. By Bey. A. S. Palmer, {inihspreat.

Brief History of the English Language. By Prof. James Hadley,
LL.D., Yale Ck)IIege. Fcap. 8vo. 1«.

The Elements of the English Language. By E. Adams, Ph.D.
15th Edition. Post Sro. 48. 6d.

Phüologioal Essays. By T. H. Key, M.A., F.B.S. 8vo. 10s. 6d.
Language, its Origin and Development. By T. H. Key, M.A,

F.B.S. 8to. 148.

Synonyms and Antonyms of the English Language. By Arch-
deacon Smith. 2nd Edition. PostSro. Ss.

Synonyms Discriminated. By Archdeacon Smith. DemySya 16«.

Bible English. By T. L. 0. Davies. 6«.

The Queen's English. A Manual of Idiom and Usage. By the
late Dean Alf ord. 5th Edition. Fcap. 8to. 5«.

Etsrmological Glossary of nearly 2500 English Words de-

rlTod from the Greek. By the Bev. E. J. Boyce. Fcap. 8vo. 3«. 6d.

A Syriao Grammar. By G. Phillips, D.D. drd Edition, enlarged.
Sto. 7«. 6d.

A Grammar of the Arabic Language. By Bev. W. J. Beau-
mont, M.A. 12mo. 7s.


DIVINITY, MORAL PHILOSOPHY, &o. .

Novum Testamentum Grsacum, Teztus Stephanici, 1550. By
F. H. Sorirener, A.M., LL.D. New Edition. 16mo. 48. 6d. Also on
Writing Paper, with Wide Margin. Half-bound. 128.

By the same Author.

Oodez Besfls Cantabrlgiensis. 4to. 26«.

A Full Collation of the Codex Slnaitious with the Beceiyed Text
of the New Testament, with Oritical Introduction. 2nd Edition, revised.
Foap. 8vo. 58.

A PUdn Introduotioii to the Oritloism of the New Testament

With For^ Facsimiles from Ancient ManusoT^gto. 2nd Edition. 8ro. 16s.

Six Lectures on the Text of the New Testament For English

Beaden. Crown 8ro. He,


• ■ 1


12 George Bell and Sone'

The New Testament for Ba^UBh Baaden. BythelateELAlfoid,

D.D. VoL I. Part I. 8rd Bdit. 12f. YoL I. Ptet n. Snd Sdtt. IQiuM.
YoLn. Part Land EdiL Ml ToL U. Part IL Sud Kdü. 16iL

The Qreeii Testament By the late H. Alfard, DJ). YoL I. 6th

Bdlt. 11. 8f. YoL n. eth Bdit. IL 4t. Toi. HI. 5tli Bdit. ISk ToL 17.
Part 1. 4th Ibdit. 18c ToL lY. Part n. 4t]i Bdit 14c YoL lY. IL Lte.

Ckmxpanion to the Greek Testament By A. 0. Bacrett, MJL

4th Edition, revised. Eoap. 8to. 5c.

The Book of PsalmA. ANewTranalation, withIntrodii0feioiiB,Ao.
^TtheYerraey. J. J. StewartPerowne, D.D. 8to. YoL L 4tii Bdttk»«
ia$, YoL n. 4th EdiL lec

Abridged for Schools. 8rd Bditian. Grown dra lOt. M,


History of the Artkdes of BeMglan. By 0. H. Hazdwiok. M

Edition. J^ost&ro. 5c

History of the Greeds. By J. B. Lnmby, D.D. 2nd Edition.

Grown Sro. 7c 6d.

Pearson on the Greed. Garefnlly printed from an eady edition.

With AnaljEiB and Index by E. Waif ord, M. A. Poet 9to. 5c

An BSstorical and ICxplanatory Treatise on the Book of

Common Prayer. Bt Ber. W. G. Humphzy, B.D. 6th Edition, enlazged.
Small poet SVo. 4c 6d.

The New Table of Lessons ICxplalned. By Bey. W. G. Hnmphxy,

B.D. Foap. Ic6d.

A Gommentary on the Gospels for the Snndaya and other Holy
Days of the Ohristian Tear. By Ber. W. Denton« A.M. Kew Editioii.
StoIb. 8to. 54c Sold eeparately.

Gommentary on the Splstles for the Sundays and other Holy
Days of the Ohristian Tear. By Ber. W. Denton, A.1L 2 tiIa. 86c Sold
separately.

Gommentary on the Acts. By Bey. W. Denton, A JC Vol. L
8to. 18c YoL n. 14c

Notes on the Gateohlsm. By Bey. Canon Barry, D.D. 6th Edit.
Fcap. 2c

Gateohetloal Hints and Helps. By Bey. E. J. Boyoe, M.A. 4ih

Edition, rerieed. Foap. 2c 6d.

Examination Papers on Beligioiis Instroction. By Bey. E. J.
Boyoe. Sewed. Ic 6d.

Ghnroh Teaching for the Ohnroh's Ghlldren. An Exposition
of the Catechism. By the Bot. F. W. Harper. Sq. foap. 2c

The Winton Ghnroh Gateohist Qaestions and Answers on the

Teaching of the Ofanroh Cateohism. By the late Ber. J. S. B. Mouell,
LL.D. 3rd Edition. Oloth, Sc; or in Foor Parts, sewed.

The Ghuroh Teaoher's Manual of Ghzlsüan Instruotlan. By

Bey. M. F. Sadler. 21st Thousand. 2c 6d.

Short Explanation of the X^istles and Gospels of the Ghxls-

tian Year, with Qnostions. Boyal 82mo. 2c 6d.; oalf , -I«. 6d.

Butler's Analogy of Religion ; with Introduction and Index 1^
Ber. Dr. Steere. BTew Edition. Foap. 8c 6d.

Three Sermons on Human Nature, and Dissertation on

Yirtne. By W. Whewell, D.D. 4th Edition. Foap. 81^0. 2c Sd.


Edueaiional W&rks. 13


IieotoreB on the Higtoiy of Moral Philosophy in England. By
W. WheireU, D.D. Grown 8to. 8t.

Ktef t Ckxaunentary on International lam. By J. T. Abdy,

LL.D. New and Ohmp Bdltlon. Grown 9to. 10i.6d.

A Manual of the Roman OML lam. By 0. Leapingwell, LL J>.
8ro. 12f.


FOREIGN CLASSICS.

A $erie$ for use in Schools, with English Notes, grammoHeal and
eapUmatory, and renderings of difficult idiomatic expressions,

Fcap, Svo.

Sohlller'a 'Wallenateln. By Dr. A. Bnchheim. SrdEdit. 6«.6(i.

Or tbe Lager and Piooolomini, Sa. 6d. WaUenatein's Tod, 8s. ßd.

^ Maid of Orleans. By Dr. W. Wagner. 8«. 6d.

Maria Stuart By Y. Kästner. St.

Ooethe'a Heirmann and Dorothea. By E. Bell, M.A., and

B. W61feL 2«.6d.
Qerman BaUada, from TJhland, Goethe, and Schiller. By 0. L.

Bielefeld. 3rd Bdition. 8s. 6d.
Oharles "XTT., par Voltaire. By L. Direy. 4th Edition. 8«. 6d.
ATentnrea de T616ma6Lue, par F6n61on. By 0. J. Delille. 2nd

Edition. 4t. 6d.

fleleot Vablea of La Fontune. By F. E. A. Oaso. 14th Edition. 8«.
Ploolola, by X.B. Saintine. By Dr.Dubnc. 11th Thousand. 8«. 6d.


FRENCH CLASS-BOOKS.

Twenty Leaaons tn Trenoh. With Yocabnlaxy, giving the Fro-
nnndation. By W. Brebner. Poet 8to. 4e.

Vtenoh Grammar for Pablic SchooU. By Bey. A. G. Clapin, M.A.
Poap. 8ro. 9th Bdition, reviMd. 2a. 6d.

Fbrenoh Primer. By Bev. A. C. Clapin, M.A. Foap. Svo. 4th Edit.

Is.

Primer of Frenoh Philology. By Bey. A. G. Olapin. Fcap. Sto. 1«.

lae Nonveau Tresor; or, French Student's Companion. By
M.KS. IdthEdition. Foap.Sro. 8s. 6d.

F. E. A. GASC'S FEENCH COUBSE.

Tlrat Frenoh Book. Fcap 8to. 76th Thoosand. 1«. 6d.
Seoond Frenoh Book. 87th Thousand. Fcap. 8vo. 25. 6d.
Key to First and Second French Books. Fcap. Svo. 85. 6d.

F^renoh Fablea for Beginners, in Prose, with Index. 14th Thousand.

laau). 2a.
Select Fables of La Fontaine. New Edition. Fcap. Svo. 8«.
Elstolrea Amiiaantiwi et InatraotiveB. With Notes. 14th Thou.

■and. Foap. 8to. 2i. 6d.


14 Owrge Bett (md Sans'

PraoUoal 0«üde to Modem Franah OouTmstlon. 12ttiTlioa-

aand. Foap. 8yo. 2>. 6dL

nmioh Poetry for the Tocmg. With Kotes, 4th Edition. Foap.

8ro. 2i.

Iffeteriale for nrenoh Proee Ckxmpoeltlon ; or, SeleotionB froai

the bMt Engliah ProM Writen. 15th Thoonnd. Foftp. 8ro» ^ 6d.

ProsateurB Ckmtemporaixui. With Notes. 8vo. 6th Edition,
reviaed. St.

lae Petit Ck>mpagnon ; a French Talk-Book for Little Children.

lOth Thousand. lOmo. St. 6d.

An ImproTed Modem Pooket Dioüonary of the French and

Knglish Languages. 90th Thonaaad, with Additions. 16mo. Cloth. 4t.
Also in 2 'vols., in n«at leatherette, St.

Modem Frenoh-EngUsh and EngUsh-Frenoh Dictionary. 2nd

Edition, rerised. In 1 toL ISn 6d. (fonnerly 2 vols. 25t.) •

GOMBEBT*B FBENCH DBAMA.

Being a Selection of the beet Tragedies and Comediee of MoliAxe,
Baoine, Gomeille, and Voltaire. With Arnuneiits and Notes by A.
Gombert. New EdStion, rerised bj F. B. A. Qaso. Foap. 8to. It. eaA;

Bawled. . (jQ„TMrT8.

Houns :— Le Misanthrope. L'Arare. Le Bourgeois GentUhomme. Le
Tartoffe. Le Malade Imaginaire. Les Femmes Savantes. Los Fonrberiee
de Scapln. Lee Prfciensos Ridionles. L'Soole des Femmes. L'BooIe dts
Maris. Le MMecin malgrtf Lni.

RACiva:^Pb6dre. Esther. AthaVe. IphigAaie. Les Plaidenn. La

ThAalde; or, LesFrdresEnnemis. Andromaqne. Britannions.

P. GoairnLXJi .— Le Oid. Horace. Cinna. Polyenote.
YoLTAiai .—Zaire.


GERMAN CLASS-BOOKS.

Materials for German Prose Composition. By Dr Bnchheim»

7th Edition Fcap. 4s. 6d. Kej, 3t.

A German Grammar for Public Schools. By the Bev. A. C.
Clapinnnd F. HoU MOUer. 2nd Edition. Fcap. 2s. 6d.

Kotzebue's Der Gefangene. With Notes by Dr. W. Stromherg. 1«.


ENGLISH CLASS-BOOKS.

A Brief History of the English Language. By Prof. Jas. Hadley,
LL.D., of Yale CToUege. Fcap. 8vo. Is.

The Elements of the EngMsh Langoage. By E. Adams, FhJ>.
18th Edition. FortSvo. 4s. 6d.

The Rtidiments of English Grammar and Analysis. By

E. Adams, Ph.D. 8th Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2t.

By G. P. Masoh, Fellow of Univ. Coll. London.

First Notions c^ Grammar for Young Learners. Fcap. 8yo.
lOth Thousand, doth. 8d.

First Steps in English Grammar for Junior Classes. Dengr
18mo. New Edition. Is.


Educational Works. 15

OafUnes of 'EixgJMi Grammar for the use of Junior Glasses.

aoth Thonaand. Grown 8ro. 2s.

Sngllsh arammar, including the Principles of Grammatical
Anatjsis. 24UxBdition. 77tli Thonaand. Grown 8to. 3«. 6d.

A Shorter English Grammar, with copious Exercises. 8th Thou-
sand. Crown 8vo. 3$. 6d.

Sn^HBh Grammar Praotioe, being the Exercises separately. 1«.

Edited for MiddU-Clau ExaminaHom.

With Notes on the Analysis and Parsing, and Explanatory Tii>™arirp,

MUton's Paradise Lost, Book I. With Life. 3rd Edit. PostSyo.

2».
1-Book H. With Life. 2nd Edit. Post 8vo. 2«.

Bookm. With Life. PoetSTO. 25.

Goldamlth's Deserted Village. With Life. PostSvo. U.^d.

Cowper'8 Task, Book n. With Life. PostSvo. 2«.

Thomson's luring. With Life. Post Svo. 2s.

Winter. With Life. Post 8vo. 2s.


Praotiosd Hints on Teaching. By Bey. J. Menet, M.A. 5th Edit.
Grown 8to. oloth, St. 6d. ; paper, 2s.

Test Lessons in Dictation. 2nd Edition. Paper coyer, Is. 6<f.

Questions for Examinations in English Literature. By Bey.
W. W. Skeat, Prof, of Anglo-Saxon at Oambridge Ünirersitj. 2t. 6d.

Drawing Copies. By P. H. Dehimotte. Oblong 8yo. 12«. Sold
also in parts at Is. each..

Poetry for the School-room. Kew Edition. Fcap. 8yo. 1«. 6d.
Geographical Text-Book ; a Practical Geography. By M. £. S.

12mo. 2a.

The Blank Hapt done up Mpamtely, ito. 2s. oolonied.

London's (Mrs.) Entertaining Naturalist. New Edition. Beyised

by W. S. Dallas, r.L.S. 8*.
Handbook of Botany. New Edition, greatly enlarged by

D. Wooster. Foap. 2s. 6d.

The Botanist's Pooket-Book. With a copious Index. By W. B.
Hayirard. 8rd Edit, revised. Grown 8to. Cloth limp. 4s. 6d.

Xzperimental Chemistry, founded on the Work of Dr. StÖckhardt.
By 0. W. He%|K>n. Poet Svo. St.

Double Entry Elucidated. By B. W. Foster. 12th Edit. 4ta

Ss.6d.

A New Manual of Book-keeping. By P. Crellin, Accountant.
Otown 8ro. Sa 6d.


BOOKS RNI YOUNG
It«


FOK SCEO


BELL^ READING-BOOKS.

lirT«


LOKDOS:
4 Son^ «vw Btawk. Fl


■ a H. k: ^


L " ..1» 1%'^.' I ^ ' » .\^ •'■


?*:«*;i'^?:rii


fll^TVilfii^«*


iiir/iir^jt


ii.x


NOT CWCULATE


■in-i-^n^ji^ t -■■■ ^mixcisitizit mi » 1 V * ^^ ^ *' **-^i ' *•


3 blQS QSS 31Q SSS


i li :;h\ ti I :j


t


*/ ■ '


I


»i^»rf JTi;>'^


»/


i • w i'- 1 f


^ ici :» j/*v


fifJi^iJi^r»«


r i ■ (


■• . .•


'/ ■ I ^


:o J. "«■"»•


.•akiÄ^_v. t^..


=====


===== [next volume/part: Vol. III] =====


=====


Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


TEUTONIC MYTHOLOGY.


JACOB 6BIMM.


I


» «


/ • - • .


TEUTONIC MYTHOLOGY

BY

JACOB GRIMM.

TBANSLAIED FBOM THE FODBTH EDITION.
NOTES ÄHD APPENDIX


JAMBS STEVEN STALLYBRASS.


VOL. III.


LONDON: GEORGfB BELL & SONS, YORK STREET,

COVENT OAEDEN.

18S8.


BuOtr Ji TaHiunr,
The SOwood PHntint
Front», tatd London,


k b k «

• k b »


• • • • *


• • »


k k k
«* % V to k


10259 3


• • •

* •


PREFACE

TO THE SECOND EDITION (1844).

Now that I am able to put my germinated sproat of German
Mythology into its second leafing^ I do it with a firmer confidence
in the unimpeded progress of its growth. When the first shy-
ness was once overcome^ seeking and finding came more quickly
together ; and facts, that rebuked any effeminate doubt of the
reality of scientific discoveries on a field till then considered
barren, started up on every side, till now there is a glut of them.
Well, I have got my joists and rafters, drawn some lines, laid
some courses, and yet guarded against pretending to finality ;
for who would do that, so long as in one place the materials are
wanting, and in another the hands are still full with fetching ?
I wish to explain all I can, but I am far from being able to
explain all I wish.

Criticism, often brilliantly successful on foreign fields, had
sinned against our native antiquities, and misused most of the
means it had. The immortal work of a Soman writer had shed
a light of dawn on the history of Germany, which other nations
may well envy us : not content with suspecting the book's
genuineness (as though the united Middle Ages had been capable
of such a product), its statements, sprung from honest love of
truth, were cried down, and the gods it attributes to our ancestors
were traced to the intrusion of Boman ideas. Instead of dili-
gently comparing the contents of so precious a testimony with
the remnants of our heathenism scattered elsewhere, people made
a point of minimizing the value of these few fragments also,
and declaring them forged, borrowed, absurd. Such few gods as
remained nnassailed, it was the fashion to make short work of,
by treating them as Gallic or Slavic, just as vagrants are shunted
off to the next parish*— let our neighbours dispose of the rubbish
as they can. The Norse Edda, whose plan, style and substance


VI PBBFACE.

breathe the remotest antiqaity^ whose songs lay hold of the heart
in a far different way from the extravagantly admired poems of
Ossian, they traced to christian and Anglo-Saxon inflnence,
blindly or wilfully overlooking its connexion with the relics of
eld in Germany proper^ and thinking to set it all down to nurses
and spinning- wives (p. 1230), whose very name seemed, to those
unacquainted with the essence of folk-lore, to sound the lowest
note of contempt. They have had their revenge now, those
noms and spindle-bearers.

One may fairly say, that to deny the reality of this mythology
is as much as to impugn the high antiquity and the continuity of
our language : to every nation a belief in gods was as necessary
as language. No one will argue from the absence or poverty of
memorials, that our forefathers at any given time did not practise
their tongue, did not hand it down ; yet the lack or scantiness
of information is thoughtlessly alleged as a reason for despoiling
our heathenism, antecedent to the conversion, of all its contents,
so to speak. History teaches us to recognise in language, the
farther we are able to follow it up, a higher perfection of form,
which declines as culture advances ; as the forms of the thirteenth
century are superior to our present ones, and those of the ninth
and the fifth stand higher still, it may be presumed that German
populations of the first three centuries of our era, whose very
names have never reached us, must have spoken a more perfect
language than the Gk)thic itself. Now if such inferences as to
what is non-extant are valid in language, if its present condition
carries us far back to an older and oldest; a like proceeding
must be justifiable in mythology too, and from its dry water-
courses we may guess the copious spring, from its stagnant
swamps the ancient river. Nations hold fast by prescription:
we shall never comprehend their tradition, their superstition,
unless we spread under it a bed on still heathen soil.

And these views are confirmed by what we know to be true of
poetry and legend. If the heathens already possessed a finely
articulated language, and if we concede to them an abundant
stock of religious myths, then song and story could not fail to


EBEFACE. Vll

lay hold of these, and to interweave themselves with the rites and
customs. That sach was the case we are assured by Tacitas ;
and the testimony of Jornandes and Eginhart leaves not the
smallest room for doubt respecting later ages. Those primitive
songs on Taisco, on Mannas and the three races that branched
out^ of him, are echoed long after in the genealogies of Ingo,
Iscio, Hermino; so the Hygelftc of the Beowulf-song, whom a
tenth century legend that has just emerged from oblivion names
Huglacos Magnus (Haupt 5, 10), is found yet again-^as a proof
that even poetry may agree with history — in the ' Chochilaichus '
of Gregory of Tours. If in the 12th and 13th centuries our
country's hero-legend gleamed up for the last time, poets must
have kept on singing it for a long time before, as is plain from
the saved fragment of Hildebrand and the Latin versions of
Rudlieb and Waltharius ; while not a tone survives of those Low
German lays and legends, out of which nevertheless proceeded
the Yilkinasaga that mirrors them back. The rise of our Court-
poetry has without the slightest ground or necessity been ascribed
to the Crasades; if we are to assume any importations from
the East, these can more conveniently be traced to the earlier
and quieter intercourse of Goths and Northmen with the Greek
empire, nnless indeed we can make up our minds to place nearly
all the coincidences that startle us to the account of a funda-
mental unity of the European nations, a mighty influence which
is seen working through long ages, alike in language, legend
and religion.

I am met by the arrogant notion, that the life of whole cen-
turies was pervaded by a soulless cheerless barbarism ; this would
at once contradict the loving kindness of God, who has made
. His sun give light to all times, and while endowing men with
gifts of body and soul, has instilled into them the consciousness
of a higher guidance : on all ages of the world, even those of
worst repute, there surely fell a foison of health and wealth,
which preserved in nations of a nobler strain their sense of right
and law. One has only to recognise the mild and manly spirit
of our higher antiquity in the purity and power of the national


Till PBEFACE.


•


laws, or the talent inherited by the thirteenth century in its
eloquent, inspired poems, in order justly to appreciate legend
and myth, which in them had merely struck root once more.

But our inquiry ought to have the benefit of this justice bo^
in great things and in small« Natural science bears witness,
that the smallest may be an index to the greatest; and the reason
is discoverable, why in our antiquities, while the main features
were efiaced, petty and apparently accidental ones have been
preserved. I am loth to let even slight analogies escape me,
snch as that between Bregowine, Fre&wine, and Gotes firiont
(p. 93).

True to my original purpose, I have this time also taken the
Norse mythology merely as woof, not as warp. It lies near to
us, like the Norse tongue, which, having stood longer undisturbed
in its integrity, gives us a deeper insight into the nature of oar
own, yet not so that either loses itself wholly in the other, or
that we can deny to the' German language excellences of its own,
and to the Gothic a strength superior to both of them together.
So the Norse view of the gods may in many ways clear up and
complete the German, yet not serve as the sole standard for it,
since here, as in the language, there appear sundry divergences
of the German type from the Norse, giving the advantage now to
the one and now to the other. Had I taken the rich exuberance
of the North as the basis of my inquiry, it would have perilously
overshadowed and choked the distinctively German, which ought
rather to be developed out of itself, and, while often agreeing
with the other, yet in some things stands opposed. The case
appears therefore to stand thus, that, as we push on, we shall
approach the Norse boundary, and at length reach the point
where the wall of separation can be pierced, and the two mytho«
logies run together into one greater whole. If at present some
new points of connexion have been established, more important
diversities have revealed themselves too. To the Norse anti-
quarians in particular, I hope my procedure will be acceptable :
as we gladly give to them in return for what we have received,
they ought no less to receive than to give. Our memorials are


PBEFACE. IX

scantierj bat older ; theirs are younger and purer ; t^o things it
was important here to hold fast : first> that the Norse mythology
is genuine, and so must the German be j then, that the Grerman
is old, and so must the Norse be.

We have never had an Edda come down to us, nor did any one
of oar early writers attempt to collect the remains of the heathen
faith. Such of the christians as had sucked German milk were
soon weaned under Roman training from memories of home, and
endeavoured not to preserve, but to efface the last impressions of
detested paganism. Jemandes and Paulus Diaconus, who must
have had plenty of heathen stories still within their reach, made*
bat slight use of the mythical ones. Other ecclesiastics now and
then, for a particular purpose, dole out scraps of information
which are of great value to us: Jonas (pp. 56. 109), Beda
(p. 289), Alcuin (p. 229), Widukind (p. 253), Adam of Bremen
(p. 230). As I have said on p. 9, some monk at St. Gall, Fulda,
Merseburg or Gorvei might have conceived the happy idea of
putting pen to the antiquities of his country, gathering up things
of which the footprints were still fresh, and achieving for the
foreground of our history, just where it begins to disengage itself
from legend, a lasting work, such as Saxo Grammaticus accom-
plished. Even if German tradition was more blurred and colour-
less from the seventh century to the eleventh, than was Danish
in the twelfth, if estrangement from native legend had advanced
more slowly in the far North ; yet Waltharius and Budlieb, or
the rhyme of the boar in Notker, may shew us that in the very
cloisters there was much still unforgotten of the ancient songs.
It is likely that scribes continued for some time to add to the
collection set on foot by Charles the Great, the destruction of
which has proved an incalculable loss, and from which we might
have obtained an abundance of materials and pictures of the
remotest eld. The Middle High-German poets found themselves
already much farther away from all this ; anything they might
still unconsciously borrow froni it must have been preserved
accidentally in traditional forms of poetry or the living idiom
of the people. The very book in which heathen names and cha-


X PREFACE.

■

racters might the most innocently have found a place, Albrecht
of Halberstadt's translation of the Metamorphoses, is lost to ns
in its original form ; when Budolf in his Barlaam from a christdan
point of view refutes the Grecian gods after the fashion of
Chrothilde (see p. 107), he sticks too closely to his text to let
any native characteristics come into his head : the age was too
entirely absorbed in its immediate present to feel the slightest
inclination to look back into its own or other people's distant
past. It is not till the 14th or -15th century that sundry writers
begin to shew a propensity to this. Grobelinus Persona bestows
<a mite (p. 254) ; if Böhmer would but soon give us an edition of
the Magdeburg Schdppenchronick and the Chronicon Picturatum,
both sadly wanted 1 Gonf. Böhmer's Beg. ed. 1849, p. zxi,
pag. 62 ad ann. 1213; Zeuss p. 38. The statements of Botho,
uncritical as they are, claim attention, for in his day there may
have been accounts still afloat, which have vanished since. A
curious one is contained in Joh. Graemer's Ghronica sancti Petri
in monte crucis ad ann. 1468 : 'Matthaeus Huntler in cella Sancti
Martini ad Werram vidit librum Johannis Vanderi, ord. S. Bene-
dicti monachi in Beynertsbom, de omnibus gentilium deastris
in provincia nostra, quem magna cura conscripsit, et quemlibet
deastrum in habitu suo eleganter depinxit cum multis antiquita-
tibus, in quibus bene versatus esse dicitur.' Botho drew his de-
scriptions from figures of idols that were before his eyes ; and at
Beinhartsbrunn in Thuringia there might be similar things
extant, or the very same that found their way to Brunswick, if
only PauUini, whose Syntagma p. 315 furnishes that passage
from the chronicle, were not himself suspicious. The like un-
certainty hangs over Joh. Borger (p. 96), over a Gonradus
Fontanus quoted by Letzner (p. 190), and the Frisian Gappidus
whose work Hamconius professes to have used (see my chap.
XXI, Lotus). Any one that cared to read straight through
Berthold of Begensburg's works, dating from the end of the 13th
century, would very likely, where the preacher gets to speak
of sorcery and devilry, come upon cursory notices of the super-
stitions of his time, as even the later sermons of Johannes


PREFACE. XI

Herolt (my ch. XX KI, Berchta, Holda), Johannes Nider (d. cir.
l-y<0), and Geiler von Kaisersberg offer some details. And even
historians in the 16th and 17th centaries^ who rummaged many
a dosty archive^ such as Aventin^ Celtes^ Freher^ Spangenberger^
Letzner (d. after 1612)^ Nicolaas Gryse (d. 1614)^ mast have had
all sorts of available facts within their reach, though to pick the
grain out of the chaff would no doubt come easier to us than to
them.

Much then is irrecoverably lost to our mythology ; I turn to
the sources that remain to it, which are partly Written Memorials,
partly the never resting stream of living Manners and Story.
The former may reach far back, but they present themselves
piecemeal and disconnected, while the popular tradition of to-
day hangs by threads which ultimately link it without a break
to ancient times. Of the priceless records of the Romans, who
let the first ray of history fiiU on their defeated but unsubdued
enemy, I have spoken in the fourth and sixth chapters. If
among gods and heroes only Tuisco, Mannus and Alx are named
in German, and the rest given in ^ Bomana interpretatio ; ' on
the other hand, the female names Nerthus, Veleda, Tanfana,
Haldana (for EQudana), Aliruna, have kept their original form ;
and so have names of peoples and places that lead back to gods,
Ingaevones, Iscaevones, Herminones, Asciburgium. Christian
anthors also, writing in Latin, prefer the Roman names, yet, when
occasion calls, Wodan, Thunar, Frea, Sahsnot cannot be avoided.
The refined language of the Goths, and the framework of their
hero-legend, lead us to imagine a very full development of their
faith, then just giving way to Christianity, though to us it has
sank into such utter darkness : such expressions as frduja, halja^
sibja^ unhuI]?o, skdhsl, anz, fairguni^ s&uil (as well as sunna),
vaOits, alhs, gudja, hunsl, dul]?s, jiuleis, midjun-gards, adhns,
aj^n, bldtan, inveitan, must have heathen notions lying at their
base, and these would offer themselves far more abundantly if
portions of the Gothic Old Testament had reached us. After
the lapse of a few centuries we find the other dialects all more
or less corrupted when compared with the Gothic, and as a long


Xll PREFACE.

interval had then passed since the conversion of most of the
races, heathenism mnst have retreated farther from the language
also and the poetry. Nevertheless the fragment of Mnspilli,
the Abrenuntiatio, the Merseburg Lay and a few others, still
allow our glances to rove back beyond our expectation ; isolated
words occur in glosses, and proper names of men, places^ herbs,
point to other vestiges j not only do gods and heroes step out
of the mist, as Wuotan, Donar, Zio, Phol, Paltar, Frfiho, Sin-
tarfizilo, Orentil, and goddesses or wise women, as Frouwa^ Folia,
Sindgund, Wurt; but a host of other words, itis, wiht, nrlac,
fuld, haruc, hliodar, pare, sigil, zunkal, etc. are found nneradi-
cated. Of course, among the Saxons, who remained heathen
longer, especially among the Anglo-Saxons, whose language
preserved its warmth better by poetry, such relics are trebly
numerous, for beside W6den, Thunor, Frei, Bealdor, Helle,
£&stre, Hr^'Se, and the rich store of names in the genealogies,
there add themselves Fomeot, W6ma, G^ofon, G-ersuma, Wusc-
fred, Bregowine, Earendel, ides, wyrd, weölcyrge, }>yrs, eoten,
geola, hleodor, bearo, neorxenawong, hasleShelm, Brosingamene,
and many more. What the Middle High German poetry inevi-
tably loses by comparison with the older, is compensated by
its greater quantity: together with hero-names like Nibelunc,
Schiltunc, Schilbunc, Albeiich, Wielant, Horant, which fall at
once within the province of mythology, it has treasured up for
us the words tamkappe, albleich, heilw&c, turse, windesbrflt,
goltwine and the like, while in oft-recurring phrases about des
sunnen haz, des am winde, des tiavels mnoter, we catch the
clear echo of ancient fables. Most vividly, in never-tiring play
of colours, the minne-songs paint the triumphal entry of May
and Summer : the pining heart missed in the stately march its
former god. The personifications of Saslde and Aventiure spring
from a deep-hidden root; how significant are the mere names
of Wunsch and v&Iant, which are not found in all the poets
even, let alone in O.H.German I Yet we cannot imagine other-
wise than that these words, although their reference to Wuotan
and Phol was through long ages latent, were drawn directly


PREFACE. Xlll

and without a break from heathenism. They are a proof of the
possibility of traditions lingering only in certain spots, and thus
finding their way after all to here and there a poet; totally
silenced in places and periods, they suddenly strike up some-i
where else^ though any district^ any dialect, can boast but few
or comparatively few of these; it is not many arch-mythical
terms, like frau, hölle, wicht, that our language has constant
need of, and has never to this day cast off.

If these numerous written memorials have only left us sundry
bones and joints, as it were, of our old mythology, its living
breath still &lls upon us from a vast number of Stories and
Customs, handed down through lengthened periods from father
to son. With what fidelity they propagate themselves, how
exactly they seize and transmit to posterity the essential features
of the &ble, has never been noticed till now that people have
become aware of their great value, and begun to set them down
in collections simple and copious. Oral legend is to written
records as the folk-song is to poetic art, or the rulings recited
by Schöffen (scabini) to written codes.

But the folk-tale wants to be gleaned or plucked . with a
delicate hand. Grasp it rudely, it will curl up its leaves, and
deny its dearest fragrance. There lies in it such a store of rich
development and blossom, that, even when presented incomplete,
it contents us in its native adornment, and would be deranged
and damaged by any foreign addition. Whoever should venture
on that, ought, if he would shew no gap in his harness, to be
initiated into all the innocence of popular poetry; as he who
would coin a word, into all the mysteries of language. Out of
elben (elves) to make elfen, was doing violence to our language ;
with still less of forbearance have violent hands been laid on
the colouring and contents even of myths. They thought to
improve upon the foDc-tale, and have always fallen short of it :
not even where it shews gaps, is any restoration to be dreamt
of, which sits upon it as new whitewash on old ruins, con-
triving with a couple of dabs to wipe out all the charm.
Astonishing are the various shapes its identity assumes.


XIV PREFACE.

additional adornments spring np on ground where we least
expect it ; bat it is not in every soil that it thrives Inxariantly,
here and there it shews scanty or shy ; it is sure to be vigorous
where rhymes and spells abound in it. The heaviest crops
seem to be realized by those collections which, starting from a
district rich in legend, glean cautiously from the surrounding
neighbourhoods, without straying far from its limits; thus
Otmar's Harz-sagen found a favourable field, which is probably
worth going over a second time within the like modest bounds.
Among collections that have lately come to light, I name
Bömer's Tales of the Orla-gau, which, grown up on rich
legendary soil, yield much that is valuable, though the accom-
panying discourses fail to realize the true nature of Folk-legend.
Bernhard Baader's Tales of Upper (Germany afford a rich treasure,
in simple suitable language ; but in Moneys Anzeiger they are
presented in so scattered and inconvenient a form, that they
ought to be re-digested in a new edition: the two different
versions of the story of Dold (quoted on p. 983), are a good
illustration of what I meant just now by 'meagre' and luxuriant.'
Bechstein's Thuringian Legends seem to me only in the last
two volumes to attain the true point of view, and to offer
something worth having. The Legends of Samogitia and the
Mark, collected by Beusch and Kuhn, satisfy all requirements ;
they furnish most copious material, and put to shame the notion
that any district of Germany is poor in popular traditions, which
only elude those who know not the right way to approach them.
Soon perhaps we shall get collections laid out on the same
thoughtful plan from Holstein, Westphalia, Bavaria and Tyrol.

For Denmark too we have a model collection by Thiele, whose
last edition has only just reached me, and still remains unused.
Many of the finest Swedish legends have been given us in various
places, but a still greater number must be lying ungathered :
Afzelius's Sago-hafder, welcome as they are, go too much on
the plan of extracting the juice from whatever came to hand.
Norway can hardly be less stocked with legend than Sweden,
it has moreover its popular lays to shew, into which songs of


PKEFACB. XV

the Edda have been transmuted, witness the lay of Thorns
hammer (p. 181) and the S61ar-lay. In our own day, J. W.
Wolf is labouring on the popular traditions of Belgiufn, and Bob.
Chambers on those of Scotland, with zeal and visible success.

The Fairy-tale (marchen) is with good reason distinguished
from the Legend, though by turns they play into one another.
Looser, less fettered than legend, the Fairy-tale lacks that local
habitation, which hampers legend, but makes it the more home-
like. The Fairy-tale flies, the legend walks, knocks at your
door ; the one can draw freely out of the fulness of poetry, the
other has almost the authority of history. As the Fairy-tale
stands related to legend, so does legend to history, and (we may
add) so does history to real life. In real existence all the out-
lines are sharp, clear and certain, which on history's canvas are
gradually shaded off and toned down. The ancient mythus,
however, combines to some extent the qualities of fairy-tale and
legend ; untrammelled in its flight, it can yet settle down in a
local home.

It was thought once, that after the Italian and French collec-
tions of Fairy-tales it was too late to attempt any in Germany,
bat this is contradicted by fact ; and Molbech's collection, and
many specimens inserted in his book by Afzelius, testify also
how rich Denmark and Sweden are in fairy-tales not yet extinct.
Bat all collections have wellnigh been overtopt lately by the
Norwegian (still unfinished) of Moe and Asbiömsen, with its
fresh and full store; and treasures not a few must be lurking
in England, Scotland, and the Netherlands, from all of which
Mythology may look to receive manifold gain.

To indicate briefly the g^n she has already derived from the
Folk-tale (legend) : it is plain that to this alone we owe our
knowledge of the goddesses Holda, Berhta and Fricka, as also
the myth of the Wild Hunt which leads us straight to Wddan.
The tale of the old beggar-wife is a reminiscence of Grimnir.
Of the wise-women, of swan- wives, of kings shut up in hills we
shoold have learnt little from written documents, did not Legend
spread her light over them ; even the myths of the Sin-flood and


ZVl PBEFACE.

the World's Destruction she has not lost sight of to this day.
But what is most fondly cherished in her^ and woven into the
gayest tissues, is the delightful narratives of giants^ dwarfs,
elves, little wights, nixies, night-hags and home-sprites^ these
last being related to the rest as the tame beasts of the fable
are to the wild and unsubjngated : in poetry the wild is always
superior to the tamed. The legend of the sun-blind dwarb (pp.
466n., 1247) and that of the blood-vat (pp. 468 n., 902) remind us
of the Edda.

In the Fairy-tale also, dwarfs and giants play their part:
Swan-witchen (Swan-white) and Dorn-roschen (Thorn-rose»
Sleeping Beauty), pp. 425, 1204 are a swan-wife and a valkyr;
the three spinning-wives, p. 415, are noms ; the footstool hurled
down from the heavenly seat (p. 136), Death as a godfather
(p. 858), the player's throw and Jack the gamester (pp. SlSn., 887)
reach back to heathen times. Fairy-tales, not legends^ have
in common with the god-myth a multitude of metamorphoses;
and they often let animals come upon the stage, and so they
trespass on the old Animal-epos.

In addition to the fairy-tale and folk-tale, which to this day
supply healthy nourishment to youth and the common people,
and which they will not give up, whatever other pabulum you
may place before them, we must take account of Rites and
Customs, which, having sprung out of antiquity and continued
ever since, may yield any amount of revelations concerning it.
I have endeavoured to shew how ignition by friction, Easter
fires, healing fountains, rain-processions, sacred animals, the
conflict between summer and winter, the carrying-oat of Death,
and the whole heap of superstitions, especially aboat path«
crossing and the healing of diseases, are distinctly traceable to
heathen origins. Of many things, however, the explanation
stands reserved for a minute inquiry devoting itself to the
entire life of the people through the diflFerent seasons of the
year and times of Kfe; and no less wül the whole compass of
our law-antiquities shed a searching light on the old religion


PBBFACE. XYll

and maimers. In festivals and games comes ont the bright
joyous side of the olden time; I have been anzioos to point
oat the manifold, though never developed, germs of dramatic
representation, which may be compared to the first attempts
of Greek or Soman art. The Yule-play is still acted here and
ihere in the North ; its mode of performance in Gothland (p. 43)
bears reference to Freyr. The little wights' play is mentioned
on p. 441 n. ; on the bear's play (p. 785) I intend to enlarge
more fully elsewhere. Sword-dance and giant's dance (p. 304),
Berchta's running (p. 279), Whitsun play (p. 785), Easter
play (p. 780), the induction of summer or May, the violet-
hunt and the swallow's welcome are founded on purely heathen
views; even the custom of the kilt-gang, like that of watch-
men's songs (p. 749), can be traced up to the most antique
festivities.

Such are our sources, and so far do they stUl carry us : let us
examine what results the study of them hitherto has yielded.

Divinities form the core of all mythology : ours were buried
almost out of sight, and had to be dug out Their footmarks
were to be traced, partly in Names that had stubbornly refused
to be rooted out, yet oiSered little more than their bare sound ;
partly, under some altered guise, in the more fluid but fuller
form of the Folk-tale. This last applies more to the goddesses,
the former to the gods. Gods and heroes are found in the very
names of runes, the first of which in Old Norse is Freyr, others
are Thor, Zio, Eor, Asc, Man, but nowhere goddesses.

The gods that have kept the firmest hold are the three marked
in the days of the week as Mercury, Jupiter, Mars ; and of these,
Wuotan stands out the most distinct. Jonas, Fredegar, Paulus
Diaconus and the Abrenuntiatio name him, he towers at the head
of ancient lines of kings, many places bear the indelible impress
of his name. Woedenspanne signified a part of the human hand,
as the North named another part 'ülf-liiSr,' wolf-lith, after the
god T^. Unexpectedly our 13th century has preserved for us

VOL. lu. b


Xviii PREFACE.

one of his names [Wish], which lies in abeyance even in the
Norse system, yet is the one that stands in the closest contact
with the women that do the god's bidding, with the wand that
Unlocks his hoard, with the mantle that carries him through the
air, nay, is the only one that puts all these in the true light.
The Norse name Omi is not quite so clearly explained by the
AS. W6ma, though the word marks unmistakably the stormful
god whom we know more certainly through our l^end of the
' furious host * : the wide cloak and low hat are retained in the
name Hackelbernd, which I venture to trace back to a Gothic
Hakul-bairands (p. 146-7). As Longbeard, the god deep-sunk
in his mountain-sleep is reproduced in the royal heroes Charles
and Frederick : who better than Wuotan, on whose shoulder they
sit and bring him thoughts and tidings, was entitled to inquire
after the flying ravens ? Ravens and wolves scented his march
to victory, and they above all other animals have entered into
the proper names of the people. In the Norse sagas the ques-
tioner is a blind graybeard, who just as ^)lainly is old OSin
again. Father of victory, he is likewise god of blessing and
bliss, i.e. Wish over again, whose place is afterwards occupied
by Sldida (well-being). Since he appears alike as god of poetry,
of measurement, of the span, of the boundary and of the dice-
throw, all gifts, treasures, arts may be regarded as having pro-
ceeded from him.

Though a son of Wuotan and yielding to him in power or
influence, Donar (Thunar, Thor) appears at times identical with
him, and to some extent as an older god worshipped before
Wuotan. For, like Jupiter, he is a father, he is grandfather of
many nations, and, as grandfather, is a god of the hills, a god of
the rocks, a hammer, sits in the forest, throned on the mountain
top, and hurls his old stone weapon, the lightning's bolt. To
him the oak was sacred, and his hammer's throw measured out
land, as did afterwards Wuotan's wand. He rather flies furi-
ously at the giants than fights battles at the head of heroes,
or meditates the art of war. I think it a significant feature, that
® drives or walks, instead of riding like Wuotan : he never


PREFACE. XIX

presents himself in the wild hunt, nor in women's company.
Bat his name is still heard in corses (Waotan's only in protesta-
tions^ p. 132); and as Bedbeard^ Donar might sit in the moan-
tain too. The heroes all go to Waotan's heaven, the common
folk tarn in at Donar's ; beside the elegant stately Waotan, we
see aboat Donar something plebeian, boorish and anooath. He
seems the more primitive deity, displaced in the coarse of ages
(yet not everywhere) by a kindred bat more comprehensive one.

If Wnotan and Donar are to be regarded as exalted deities of
heaven, mach more may Zio, Tins, be accepted as sach, whose
name expresses literally the notion of sky, while Wnotan signifies
the air, and Donar the thunderstorm. And as Wnotan turns the
tide of battle, Zio presents himself as the special god of war ; as
Donar flings the hammer and Wnotan the spear, he is god of the
sword, as exhibited in the names Sahsnöt and Hera. But here
mach remains dark to us, because our legend has lost sight of
Zio altogether. Like Wuotan, he also seems to rush down from
the sky in the form of tempest.

Two others, though never appearing in the week, must yet
be reckoned among the great gods. Froho, a god of hunting,
of generation, fertility and summer, had long planted his name in
the heart of our language, where he still maintains his ground in
the derivatives fr6n and frönen ; his sacred golden-bristled boar
survived in helmet- crests, in pastry, and at the festive meal.
Tear by yeai;.^ kingly state Froho journeyed through the lands
(p. 213. 760). ^'^e is the gracious loving deity, in contrast with
the two last-mentioned, and with Wuotan in one aspect ; for, as
Wish, Wuotan also seems kindly and creative like Froho.

As to Phol, scarcely khown to us till now, I have hazarded so
many conjectures that I will not add to their number here. If, as
appears most likely, he is synonymous with Paltar (Balder), he
must pass for a god of light, but also of fire, and again of tem-
pest; under another view he haunted wells and springs. He
approximates the higher elemental powers, and could the more
easily be pervotcted into a diabolic being. Equally lost to Ger-
many is the nam^ of the Norse Loki, who represents fire in another


XZ PBBFAGB.

aspect, and was still better qualified to stand for the deviL The
stories of his artfulness, his cunning tricks, have reproduced
themselves repeatedly in all branches of our race.

I now turn to the Goddesses. A mother of gods, Nerthos, is
named to us by Tacitus ; her name is the exact counterpart to
that of a Norse god, who confirms her existence, as Freyr would
confirm that of Freyja, had she come down to us only as the
High German Frouwa, and from the Gt)thic fr&uja (m.) we have
the same right to infer a fem. fr&ujd. Say that her name of
Nerthus has long ago died out, if it ever extended to all branches
of our race; a whole group of beings almost identical with her
lives on in fadeless legend : Holde, Berhte, Fricke, Harke, Graue,
Stempe, Trempe. At the first glance none of these names seem
to go very high up ; yet, Berhte at all events is introduced in
poems of the 14-1 5th century, and the matter begins to wear
another look the moment we can set her beside the Carolingian
Berhta, beside the Eddie Biört (p. 1149), beside the deeply rooted
tradition of the ' white lady.' Of dame Holda the legend was
never written down till the 17th century; if Holda was in the
Venus-mountain, which goetf as fiu* back as the 14th, she at once
gains in importance ; then further, in the 12th century we can
point to Pharaildis (p. 284) ; and if, to crown all, Huldana in the
stone inscription is correct (p. 266), we can have but little doubt
of a Gothic worship of Hul]?ö (p. 990). Now, as Berhta and
Holda are adjective names, I was fain to claim for Nerthus also
an adj. basis nairthus, with the sense of mild, gracious, &ir.
Frigg too (p. 301-2) I interpret by the adj. free, fair, gracious.
If Gaue, Gauden, is a corruption of the masc. Woden, it might
stul have an accessory notion of good. Frouwa is obviously
the fem. to Froho, and still asserts her full power in our present
frau. Almost all names' of the female deities have still a trans-
parent meaning; as compared with those of the male, there is
something innocent and inviolable in them, and for that reason
they seem to have been treated tenderly or tolerated. The deli-
cacy and ino£fensive matter of the myth have shielded it longer in
popular legend.


PBBFACB. XXI

The goddess Hellia has exchanged her personal meaning for a
local one, that of hell. Ostara, 'E&stce, is preserved at least in the
name of the high festival ; and Hreda, if my conjectore be sonnd,
in the word for a bride's gerada (outfit), as Zio was in the name
of the sword. Folia and Sindgond have only come to light
through the latest discoveries.

This muster of divinities is strong enough to support the whole
remaining framework of mythology; where such pillars stand, any
amount of superstructure and decoration may be taken for
granted. Considered in and for themselves, almost all the indi-
vidual deities appear emanations and branches of a single One ;
the g^ds as heaven, the goddesses as earth, the one as fathers,
the other as mothers, the former creating, governing, gniding,
lords of victory and bliss, of air, fire and water, the goddesses
nourishing, spinning, tilling, beautiful, bedizened, loving.

As all the sounds of langpiage are reducible to a few, from
whose simplicity the rest can be derived — ^the vowels by broaden-
ing, narrowing, and combination into diphthongs, the mute con-
sonants by subdivision of their three groups each into three
stages, while particular dialects shift them from one stage to
another in regular gradation^ ; — so in Mythology I reduce the
long array of divine personages to their unity, and let their multi-
plicity spring out of this unity ; and we can hardly go wrong in
assuming for deities and heroes a similar coincidence, combina-
tion and gradation, according to their characters and particular

' Thos, to take an example from the Dentals :

T TH D T TH


Greeks


L, Oerm,


H, G^nii.


thogatere dno


daughters two


toobter zwei


It wiU be seen that the High Germ, is always a stage in adTanee of Low Germ.,
tnd this a stage in advance of Greek, Latin, Sanskrit, Ao. The Germ, z is sounded
U ; and $t like A, is a breathing.— Tains.


XXll PREFACE.

fanctions. How Waotan, Donar^ and Zio partly ran into one
another has been shewn ; Logi (lowe, blaze) becomes Loki (lock,
bolt)^ g becomes Jc, the sense of fire is exchanged for that of bolts
and bars (of hell), as Hamar and Hera came to signify the im*
plements they nsed. We have seen Wnotan reappear in long-
bearded Charles, in red-bearded Frederick. On comparing the
Norse hero-legend with the German, we see remarkable instances
of this shifting and displacement of names and persons. Gndron
in the Edda occupies the place of our Krimhilt, while Grtmhildr
is her mother's name ; in the Yilkinasaga Mtmir is the smith and
Beginn the dragon, in the Yolsungasaga Beginn is the smith and
Fftfnir the dragon. If these changes took place at haphazard,
there would be nothing in them ; but they seem to proceed by
regpdar gradation, without leaps.

Among all branches of the Teutonic race there shew them-
selves innumerable varieties of dialect, each possessing an equal
right ; so likewise in the people's religion we must presuppose a
good many differences : the difficulty is to reconcile in every case
the local bearings of the matter with the temporal. If the more
numerous testimonies to Wuotan in Lower Germany would lead
us to infer that he was held in higher esteem by Saxons than by
Alemanns or Bavarians, we must remember that this (apparent)
preference is mainly due to the longer continuance of heathenism
in the north ; that in the first few centuries after conversion the
south too would have borne abundant witness to the god. upper
Germany has now scarcely a single name of a place compounded
with Wuotan (p. 158), Wuotan's day has there given place to
' midweek,' and just there the legend of his ' wütende heer ' is
found more alive than elsewhere I It would be a great thing to
ascertain whereabouts — whether among Goths — ^the designation
Fairguneis prevailed above that of Thunrs. Any condnsion
drawn from the proximity of the Lithuanian Perkunas, the Slavic
Pernn, may seem bold, though it is precisely to these two nations
that the Gothic and High German incline more than the Low
German, even in language: witness Hraodo and Kirt (p. 248).
It seems an easier matter to trace the distinction between Zio


PBBFACB. XXIU

and Era, and follow it up to Swabia and Bavaria ; yet, if my
conjectare be right, the Cherascans must of all races have had
the best claim to Era. Even the name of the plant Ziolinta
(p. 1193) is worth taking into account. Sahsnot, Seaxne&t, was
assaredly an eponymoas deity of the Saxons. How do Paltar
and Phol stand to one another, as regards the nations that were
devoted to themf Phol appears to point, now eastward, now
westward. An important mark of distinction is the change of
gender in the same name of a god among different tribes. In
Gothic the maso. frinja (lord) was still carrent as a common
noan, in O.H. German the fem. froaw&, in O. Saxon only the
masc. fr6ho, frd, A.S. fre4, so that Qoths and Saxons seem to
have preferred the god. High Germans the goddess; in the
North both Freyr and Freyja are honoured alike. Bat the
North knows only the god NiörSr, and the Germans living on
the opposite side of the Baltic only the goddess Nerthus. The
relation of Zio to Zisa, perhaps Isis (p. 298), demands farther
explanation. No doubt the numeroas aliases of that female deity,
who is not yet forgotten in modem legend, are due to differences
of race : Holda shews herself in Hesse, Thuringia, and North
Franoonia, Berhta in Vogtland, East Franconia and sundry tracts
of Swabia, where likewise a male Berhtold encounters us. There
is no trace of either goddess in Lower Grermany, but a dame
Freke now turns np in the Mark, and dame Gaue haunts Meck-
lenburg between Elbe and Weser. Yet in ancient times Holda,
as Huldana, must have reached far westward to the Bhine, and,
if the Yer-hilden-straet (p. 285) was named after her, into the
Jfetherlands, reminding us of the kinship between Chatti and
Batavi ; while the Carolingian Berhta Pedauca and the Biört of
the Edda would betoken a similar extension of Berhta's worship.
We must pay regard to the almost universal rush of nations
toward the West : even Isis and her Snevian ship we managed to
trace as far as the Ardennes.— But, beside the deities, other
portions of mythology must also have their say. Himins and
Mmil, himel and heven are discussed on p. 698, the lapse of Himil
into Gimill on p. 823 ; in Hesse is the borderland between Wights


XXIV PBEFACE.

and Elves, the one belonging to Franoonian^ the other to Saxon
soil : the Low Saxon hiine is out of nse in High Germany, even
in O.H. German the hftni seem to be only Hnns, not giants, and
the M.H. German hione had a very limited drcnlation, being
never heard now in Hesse, Swabia or Bavaria, anlese we are to
look for it in the name of the disease (p. 1163).

Such investigations and similar ones capable of indefimite
expansion, some of them not even dreamt of at present, may
gradually become important to the internal aspect of onr own
Mythology : a still more urgent task is, to establish its relation
to the Beligions of Other Nations ; nay, this is really the hinge
on which mythological study in general turns. But seldom
have their mutual influences or differences been so successfully
explored, as to educe therefrom a safe standard for the treat-
ment of any one mythology.

Every nation seems instigated by nature to isolate itself, to
keep itself untouched by foreign ingredients. Its language, its
epos feel happy in the home circle alone ; only so long as it rolls
between its own banks does the stream retain its colour pure.
An undisturbed development of all its own energies and inmost
impulses proceeds from this source, and our oldest langoage,
poetry and legend seem to take no other course. But the river
has not only to take up the brooks that convey fresh waters to it
from hill and mountain, but to disembogue itself at last in the
wide ocean: nations border upon nations, and peaceful inter-
course or war and conquest blend their destinies in one. From
their combinations will come unexpected results, whose gain
deserves to be weighed against the loss entailed by the suppres-
sion of the domestic element. If the language, literature and fidth
of our forefathers could at no time resist at all points the
pressure of the Foreign, they have one and all undergone the
most disruptive revolution by the people's passing over to
Christianity.

We had long plagued ourselves to derive all languages from
the far-off Hebrew ; it was only by closely studying the history


PBBFACE. XXV

of the European idioms near at hand, that a safe road was at
length thrown open, which, leaving on one side for the moment
the Semitic province, leads farther on into the heart of Asia.
Between the Indian and Zendic languages and the majority of
those which spread themselves over Eorope there exists an
immediate tie, yet of such a kind as makes them all appear as
sisters, who at the outset had the same leading features, but
afterwards, striking into paths of their own, have everywhere
found occasion and reason to diverge from each other. Amongst
all languages on earth points of contact are to be found, any
discovered rule compels us to admit exceptions, and these ta*
captions are apt to be misleading; but the rule teaches us to fix
upon fundamental distinctions, for which we can only expect a
very slow resolution iuto a higher unity. While there is every
appearance of Europe not having contained any aborigines, but
received its population gradually from Asia, yet the figures in
our chronologies do not reach back to the actual descent of all
human speech from one original source; and the strata of our
mountains bear witness to a higher prehistoric age, whose im-
measurable, breadth no inquirer can penetrate. Then, over and
above the original kinship necessarily underlying the facts taught
by comparative philology, we must also assume in the history of
European tongues some external, accidental and manifest inter-
changes of infiuence between them, which, powerful and resultful
as they may have been, are to be carefully distinguished from
that more hidden agency : we have only to call to mind the
former influence of Latin and the later of French on almost all
the other languages, or the origin of English from a mixture of
Teutonic and Bomance elements. The difference between the
two kinds of likeness shews itself especially in the fact that,
while the originally cognate elements of a language remain
flexible and intelligible, the borrowed ones, because they are
borrowed, shew an indistinctness of form and a crippling of
movement. Hence all cognate words are rooted in the essential
life of a language, about which the borrowed ones mostly tell us
nothing : how lifeless, for example, has our adj. rund become !


XXVI PRBFACB.

whereas tHe French rond, from which it comes, can still carry ns
back to roond, reond, the Span, redondo, It. rotondo, and so to
rotnndns, and therefore rota. Again, cognate forms are seldom
confined to one stem or branch, bnt ran impartially throagh
several : e.g, our numerals ; onr ist, Goth, ist, Lat. est, Gr. iari.
Skr. asti; the GK)th. sa, so, )^ata, AS. se, seo, J^aBt, ON. sa, sfi, ]^t.
Or. 6, fj, TO, Skr. sa, s&, tad ; all of them consonances which did
not arise, like that ' mnd,' at some definite assignable period, bat
were there from time immemorial.

These examples are well known, and are here chosen merely to
make good for Mythology also a distinction between material
that was common from the first and that which was borrowed
and came in later. Oar scholarship, disloyal to its country,
inured to outlandish pomp and polish, loaded with foreign speech
and science, miserably stocked with that of home, was prepared
to subordinate the myths of our olden time to those of Greece
and Bome, as something higher and stronger, and to overlook
the independence of German poetry and legend, just as if in
grammar also we were free to derive the German ist from est and
€OTt, instead of putting the claims of these three forms perfectly
on a par. Giving the go-by to that really wonderful and de-
lightful consonance, whose origin would have had to be pushed
far back, they struggled, however much agrainst the grain, to
hunt up any possible occasions of recent borrowing, so as to strip
their country of all productive power and pith. Not content
even with handing over our mythology to foreign countries,
they were eager, with as little reason, to shift its contents into
the sphere of history» and to disparage essentially unhistoric
elements by expounding them as facts.

Why hold our tongues about the mischief and the caprices
of this criticism ? Mone, an honest and able explorer, whose
strenuous industry I respect, will often come half-way to meet
the truth, then suddenly spring aside and begin worrying her.
By hook or by crook the Beinhart of our apologue must be re-
solved into a historical one, the Siegfried of our heroic lay into
Arminius, Civilis and Siegbert by turns, Tanhauser into Ulysses.


PREFACE. XXVll

In all that i liad gathered by a careful comparison of original
anthorities on sorcery and witches^ he of coarse can see neither
circnmspectness nor moderation^ who gravely imagines that
witchcraft was once a reality, who from the minutes of a single
trial in 1628 jumps at once to the Greek Dionysia, makes the
devil Dionysus, and warms up again the stale explanation of
hexe (witch) from Hecate. This is allowing the devil a great
antiquity in comparison with those heroes ; to me Beinhart and
Isengrim seem to reach up far higher than the ninth century^
and Siegfried even beyond Arminius, therefore a long way before
the time when the term devil first came into our language.
Several designations of the giants are unmistakably connected
with the names of surrounding nations; Mone's view applies
them to Indians, Frisians, Persians, according as the words ent
and wrise suit his purpose ; let no one be startled to find that
Caucasus comes from our Gk>uchsberg (cuckoo's hill) !

A later work, whose merits I acknowledge on p. 1070n., comes
in not unseasonably here. 8oldan agrees in my opinion on the
atrocity and folly of the witch-persecutions, but he would dispute
the connection of witches with German mythology, and derive all
our magic and demonology from the Greeks and Bomans again.
The resemblance of the mediasval notions to classical antiquity
strikes him so forcibly, that he seems to think, either that
Germany and all barbarian Europe till their early contact with
the Bomans were without any magic or belief in ghosts, or that
such belief suddenly died out. The Walburgis-night, it seems,
was suggested by Boman lares praestites, even the practice of
bidding for fiefs by floralia and averruncalia, and the cutting
of henbane by the fruges excantare : why may not our es also
come from id, our auge from oculus, our zehn from decem ? At
that rate Wuotan might without more ado be traced back to
Jupiter, Holda to Diana, the alp to the genius, all German
mythology to Boman, and nothing be left us of our own but
the bare soil that drank in the foreign doctrine.

When two nations resemble each other in language, manners,
and religion, such agreement is welcome in proof of their age.


ZXYlll PBBFACB.

and is not to be peryerted to oonolusions in favour of borrowing
or influence which any peculiarity in them may suggest. But
the stamp of authority will be given to research, when side by
side with the string of consonances there also runs an inevitable
string of divergences and transpositions.

In our book of heroes the adventures of Wolfdieterich and
Orendel have in their several ways a striking similarity to features
in the Odyssey, especially does the angel's mission to shaggy
Els and to lady Breide resemble that of Hermes to Calypso, when
she is commanded to let Odysseus go. But such wanderings
of heroes and encounters with wise women and giants seem to
be a common epic property prevailing everywhere, while the very
absence here of all the other main motives of the Greek myth ex-
cludes the supposition of borrowing. We may surely give their
due weight to the many resemblances of Wuotan to Zeus and
Apollo, of Zio to Zeus and Ares, we may recognise Nerthus in
Demeter, Frigg and Freyja in Hera and Aphrodite, Wieland in
Hephadstus and Daddalus, without the whole swarm of Grecian
gods needing therefore to be transported to our soil, or all that
this produced having to be looked for in Greece. Must 'honum
hid hugr i briosti' have somehow got into the Edda from
Homer's eyiKaaae Be oi ^tKov ^rop f The distinction, drawn in
Homer as well as the Edda, between the speech of gods and of
men may signify something to us, and yet be no harder to explain
than the identity of Zio with Zeus, or of Zev^ iran^p with All-
father. It is beautiful how Venus and venustus are made in-
telligible by the ON. vsenn and vadustr, and even by the O. Sax.
superlative w&numo. What is true of the Greek and Roman
mythologies, that with all their similarity they are yet far from
identical, has to be asserted with still more emphasis of the relation
between the Roman and German, inasmuch as Greek literature
left an infinitely deeper dint on the Roman, than Latin literature
was ever able to produce on our antiquity. If in ch. XXXV and
XXXV 11 many thingps are quoted which appear to spring out of
Roman superstition, it is fully justified by the poverty of native
information compelling me to seek a support for it from abroad :


PBEFACE. XXIX

I do not suppose that the old Qerinan fancies abont beasts
crossing one's path^ or about the virtues of herbs^ were in them-
selres any poorer than the Boman.

What I claim for Teutonic nations as compared with the
Greeks and Bomans, must also hold good of them as regards the
Celts, Sla\rs, Lithuanians and Finns, whose paganism was similar
to ours or not so similar. Here however the quantity of coinci-
dences is still more damaging to the theory of plagiarisms, which
would else encumber every nook and comer.

In favour of the study of Celtic languages and legends a whole«
some reaction has set in, insisting that this downtrodden race,
which once occupied wide tracts of Germany, shall receive its
due. By no means poor in memorials, it has an auxiliary resource
in several living tongues, the Armoric, Welsh, Irish and High«
land Scotch. But the paths still lie uncertain and slippery, and
what we concede to the Celts ought not in the zeal of discovery
to be turned against ourselves ; in cases of resemblance what
is genuinely German must put in its claim too. Now Heinrich
Schreiber's interesting studies of grave-mounds, weapons and
fays appear to me at times to stray beyond the true line : surely
the horses' heads on roof-gables in Mecklenburg and Holstein are
more undoubtedly German than the similar ones in Switzerland
are Celtic; and so far as our elfins and white ladies extend, they
have their justification, as the fays have on the other side. Some
obscure names of animals Leo has, I think, succeeded in inter-
preting as Celtic ; so long as he is obliged to leave the main
characters in the fable German, as Beginhart and Isangrim, I have
no fear for the genuineness of our epos ; and the foreignness of
Bubordinate characters tends to throw farther back the date of the
entire poem. Also what he contributes to Nerthus and muspell
(Haupt 3, 226) demands attention. Beside the fays, who answer
to oar swan-maidens, wish- wives and norns, beside Abundia, who
resembles FoUa (fulness), I attach importance to Taranis= Donar,
to Qwydion=Wuotan, to Beal=Phol or Balder, and I am not
Bare but that Hesus is the same as Cheru, and that Segomon (p.
871) ought not to be overlooked. Needfires and May-offerings


XXX PBEFACE.

are subjects for consideration. It woald greatly advance onr
knowledge of Wuotan's true nature, if we could ascertain bow
far tbe Celtic worship of Mercury differed from the Roman ; to
all appearance that deity was greater to the Celts and Grermans
than Hermes-Mercury was to the Greeks and Romans ; to Tris-
megistus and Tervagan I allude on p. 150. All that is left as of
the Celtic religion, even in stray fragments, bespeaks a more
finished mental culture than is to be found in German or Norse
mythology; there comes out in it more of priestly lore. But
in respect of genius and epic matter our memorials are incom-
parably superior.

As the Celts enclose us on the west, so do the Slavs on the
east ; and Slavic writers, like the Celtic, are rather fond, wherever
their ancient faith coincides with ours, of interpreting things
from a Slavic point of view, which can just as well be explained
from a German. The affinity of the two races can be perceived at
once by such old cognate words as the Gothic sunus (son), O.H.
German sunn, Slavic syn; Goth, liubs (dear), OHG. liop. Boh.
liby. Buss, liubo; Goth, liups (people), OHG. liut, Slav, lind;
Goth, hldifs (loaf), OHG. hleip, Slav. khlSb. And the mythic
resemblances are no less significant. Badegast must stand for
Wuotan, Perun for Pairguneis, Fiörgunn, but Svatovit for Zio ;
between Badegast the god of bliss (rad glad, radost joy), and our
Wish, the harmony is yet stronger. Kroto reminds ua of Kirt,
Molnia of Miölnir (pp. 1221. 813). How near the badniak of the
Servians comes to our Christmas fire I their cuckoo-pole to the
Langobardic dove-pole (p. 1 135 n.), their dodola to the fetching-in
of rain (p. 594), the carrying-out of death to the fight of summer
and winter, the vila to our wise-women ! If the elf and dwarf
legends appear less polished than they are among Cek9 And
Germans, our giant legend on tbe other hand has much more in
common with the Slavic and Finnic. No doubt Slav mythology
altogether is several degrees wilder and grosser than German, yet
many things in it will make a different figure when once the
legends and fairy tales are more fully and faithfully gathered in,
and the gain to German research also will be great.


PBEFACB. XXXI

From similar collections of Lithoanian^ Samogitian and Lettish
myths revelations no less important are impending^ as we may
anticipate from the remarkable connexion between the lan-
guages.

More results have already been attained in Finland, whose
people^ comparable in this to the Servians alone, have in their
mouths to this day a most wonderful store of songs and tales,
though in Servian poetry the heroic legend predominates, and in
Finnic the myth. Merely by what Oanander, Porthan and now
Lönnrot have published, an immense deal is bridged over between
the German, Itorse, Slav, Greek and Asiatic mythologies. Bask
(in Afhand. 1, 96) had already derived some Norse names of
giants from Finnic. And further, the distinction we made be-
tween legend and fairy-tale does not at all apply as yet to this
Finnic poetry : it stands at an older stage, where the marvels of
the fairy-tale without any sense of incongruity mingle with the
firmer basis of the folk-tale, and even the animal fable can be
admitted. Wäinämöinen (Esth. Wannemunne) can be compared
to Wuotan both in general, and particularly in his character of
Wish : the Finnic waino and wainotem signify desiderium, wainok
capidus, wainotet desiderare : the Swedish Lapps, with a kindred
language, have waino (wish, desire), and the Norwegian Lapps
vaimel capidus. Thus Wish, Badegast and Wäinämöinen seem
to be getting nearer to each other. This last is a god of poetry
and singing (p. 907), he is constantly called Wanha, the old one,
as the thunder-god Ukko likewise is called father or old, and his
wife Akka mother or old. With the Lapps, Atia means both
grandfather and thunder (see 'old daddy,' p. 168). As Thorns
minni was drunk, so full bowls were emptied in honour of Ukko.
Wäinämöinen wakes Wipune out of her grave (Bune 10), as
O^inn does Yöla. Ilmarinen, the smith-god of the Finns, re-
minds us of Hephadstus and Yölundr, but makes a deeper im-
pression than either ; he fashioned a wife for himself out of gold
(conf. p. 570 n.). To the Lapps, Sarakka means creatress, from
saret to create, a goddess of fortune.

All Finnish nations use Yumala as a general name for the


ZXXll PBEFACE.

Sapreme Being in the sense of oar God or the Slavic Bögh, to
which corresponds the Swed. Iiapp. ynpmel, Norw. Lapp, ibmel;
bat the Syrian have also yen (gen. yenlon), the Permians en, the
Yotiaks inmar, the Tcheremiss yamn. Along the northern edge
of Earope and over the Ural into northern Asia extends this
widespread gronp of nations of the Finn kind, their langaages and
myths shewing everywhere a common character. The Yotiaks,
like the Slavs and Germans, hold the woodpecker sacred (p. 765) ;
bat what I lay special stress npon is the bear-worship of these
nations, which has left its traces in Sweden and Norway, and
betrays the earliest stage of oar Teatonic beast-legend (p. 667).
Poetic enphemisms designate the sacred beast, and as soon as he
is slain, solemn hymns are strack ap as by way of atonement.
Banes 28 and 29 in Kalewala describe snch a hant with all its
ceremonial. Ostiaks in taking an oath kneel on a bearskin, in
heathen sacrifices they covered the victim with a bearskin (p.
1010), and long afterwards they hang bearskins abont them in
the service of the devil (p. 1018). As the bear was king of all
beasts, the terms applied to him of ' old one' and ' grandfieither '
saggest those of the thander-god. The constellation of the
Great Bear (p. 725) wonld of itself seem an evident trace of
his worship even among the Greeks.

Coming down from northern Asia to the tribes of the CaacasoB,
we again meet with the most remarkable coincidences. The
Tcherkesses (Circassians) keep np a worship of the boar (p. 215),
as did the ancient Aestyi and Germani. Both Tcherkesses and
Ossets glorify the same Elias (p. 173-4, conf. p. 185) who is sach
a sacred personage to the Slav races. Even the ancient Alani
and Scythians seem to be linked with the heathen Germans by
their worship of the sword (p. 204) ; Attila means grand&ther,
and is among Hans as well as Germans a name for mountains.
The same inspection of shonlder-blades that Jemandes relates of
Huns goes on to this day among Ealmaks (p. 1113). A good
many Mongolian customs agree with those of Celts and Germans :
I will only instance the barleycorn's beiog the unit of all mea-
surement of land (see my account of it in Bed. Jahrb. for 1842,


PBEFACE. XXXI 11

pp. 795-6) ; conf. the Finnic oHrasen yiveä=liordei granum, Kal.
17, 625. 27, 138.

A still closer agreement with our antiquities than exists among
Finns and Mongols is to be looked for in the more cognate
Zendic and Indian mythologies. That of India is finely wrought
Uke the Gh^ek, but I think the Greek has the same advantage
over it that I awarded to the German as compared with the
Celtic : a certain theosophic propensity betrays itself in the In-
dians as well as Celts, which in the fulness of Greek and German
myth falls more into the background. It seems worthy of notice,
that to the Indian gods and goddesses are assigned celestial
dwellings with proper names, as in the Edda. Among the gods
themselves, Brahma's creative power resembles Wuotan's, Indra
is akin to Donar, being the wielder of lightning and the ruler of
air and winds, so that as god of the sky he can also be compared
to Zio. The unison of our Wish with the notion embodied
in manoratba (p. 870) deserves attention. Nerthus answers to
Bhavani (p. 255), Halja to K&li, and Mannus to Manus (p. 578),
the last two examples being letter for letter the same; but
one thing that must not be 'overlooked is, that the same myth
of man's creation out of eight materials (pp. 564 — 7) which has
already turned up five times, appears in a portion of the Vedas,
the Aitareya Aranya, from which an excerpt is given in Cole-
brooke's Misc. Essays, Lend. 1837, vol. 1, p. 47 seq.; here also
eight ingredients are enumerated : fire, air, sun, space, herb,
moon, death, and water. Naturally the details vary again,
though eren the five European accounts are not without a certain
Indian colouring. Still more interesting perhaps is an echo
that reaches the very heart of our hero-legend. Putraka (in
Somadeva i. 19) comes upon two men who are fighting for some
magic gifts, a cup, a staff, and a pair of shoes ; he cheats them
into running a race, steps into the shoes himself, and flies up into
the clouds with the cup and staff. With the same adroitness
Siegfried among the dwarfs manages the division of their hoard,
npon which lies the wishing-rod (p. 457) ; and our nursery tales,
are full of such divisions (Altd. bl. 1, 297. KM. ed. 5, no. 193.

VOL. ni. c


XXXI V FBEFACE.

2, 502. Bechstein's Märchen p. 75). The same trick decides
the quarrel in Asbiömsen^ no. 9^ p. 59^ and in the Hungarian
tale, Gaal p. 166.

Now whence can these details have been imported into the
homespun faiiy-tale? Every country has them at its fingers'
ends. To take another striking instance : the story of the three
cousins (p. 415) who had spun till the nose of one grew long,
another's eyes red, and another's fingers thick, is told still more
vividly in Norway (A^sb. and Moe, no. 13), and most vividly iu
Scotland (Chambers, p. 54-5). Or the changeling's nn&iling
formula (pp. 469. 927), was that conveyed from Denmark to
Scotland, from Ireland to Hesse ? Was the legend of the willow
that has never heard a cock crow (p. 1243) handed over by the
Romans to the Poles; and the myth of the thunder-bolt by
the Greek to the Slav, by the Slav to the German f Did a little
bird always pick up the legendary seed, and lug it over hill
and dale to other lands ? I believe Myth to be the common
property of many lands, that all its ways are not yet known, but
that it is properest to that nation with whose gods it closely
coalesces, as a word common to several languages may best be
claimed by that one which can explain its root. The legend of
Tell relates no real event, yet, without fabrication or lying, as a
genuine myth it has shot up anew in the bosom of Switzerland,
to embellish a transaction that took hold of the nation's inmost
being.

I do not deny for a moment, that beside this mysterious
diffusion of myths there has also been borrowing from without,
nay, that they could be purposely invented or imported, though
it is a harder matter than one would imagine for this last sort to
take root among the people. Boman literature has from early
times spread itself over other European lands, and in certain
cases it may be quite impossible to strike the balance between
its influence and that inner growth of legend. And nowhere
is extrinsic influence less a matter of doubt than where, by
the collision of christian doctrine with heathenism among the


PBEFACE. XXXY

converted nations^ it became unavoidable to abjare the old, and
in its place to adopt or adapt what the new faith introduced or
tolerated

Oftentimes the Church — and I have specified sundry instances
— either was from the outset, or gradually became, tolerant and
indulgent. She prudently permitted, or could not prevent, that
heathen and christian things should here and there run into one
another; the clergy themselves would not always succeed in
marking off the bounds of the two religions ; their private lean-
ings might let some things pass, which they found firmly rooted
in the multitude. In the language, together with a stock of
newly imported Greek and Latin terms, there still remained,
even for ecclesiastical use, a number of Teutonic words previously
employed in heathen services, just as the names of gods stood
ineradicable in the days of the week ; to such words old customs
would still cling, silent and unnoticed, and take a new lease of
life. The festivals of a people present a tough material, they are
80 closely bound up with its habits of life, that they will put up
with foreign additions, if only to save a fragment of festivities
long loved and tried. In this way Scandinavia, probably the
Goths also for a time, and the Anglo-Saxons down to a late
period, retained the heathenish Yule, as all Teutonic Christians
did the sanctity of Eastertide ; and from these two the Yule-boar
and Yule-bread, the Easter pancake, Easter sword, Easter fire
and Easter dance could not be separated. As faithfully were
perpetuated the name and in many cases the observances of
Midsammer. New christian feasts, especially, of saints, seem
porposely as well as accidentally to have been made to fall on
heathen holidays. Churches often rose precisely where a heathen
god or his sacred tree had been pulled down, and the people
trod their old paths to the accustomed site : sometimes the very
walls of the heathen temple became those of the church, and
cases occur in which idol-images still found a place in a wall of
the porch, or were set up outside the door, as at Bamberg cathe-
dral there lie Slavic-heathen figures of animals inscribed with
funes. Sacred hills and fountains were re-christened after saints.


XXXVl PBEFACE,

to whom their sanctity was transferred; sacred woods were
handed over to the newly-founded convent or the king, and even
nnder private ownership did not altogether lose their long-
accustomed homage. Law-usages, particularly the ordeals and
oath-takings, but also the beating of bounds, consecrations,
image^processions, spells and formulas, while retaining their
heathen character, were simply clothed in christian forms. In
some customs there was little to change : the heathen practice of
sprinkling a newborn babe with water (vatni ansa p. 592, dicare
p. 108, line 5) closely resembled christian baptism, the sign of the
hammer that of the cross, and the erection of tree-crosses the
irmensüls and world-trees of paganism. Still more significant
must appear that passage where Völuspft and the Bible coincide
(p. 811); in the far later Solar-lioS traces of christian teaching
are discernible.

In a conflux of so many elements it could not but happen, even
where the mental conceptions and views of a simple populace un-
able to do without myths had felt the full force of the revolution,
that in its turn the Old, not wholly extinct, should half un-
consciously get interwoven with the irrepressible New. Jewish
and christian doctrine began to lean towards heathen, heathen
fancies and superstitions to push forward and, as it were, take
refuge in all the places they found unoccupied by the new reli-
gion. Here we find christian material in a heathen form, there
heathen matter in a christian disguise.

As the goddess Ostara was converted into a notion of time,
so was Hellia into one of place. The beliefs of our forefathers
about elves and giants got intensified and expanded into angels
and devils, but the legends remained the same. Wuotan, Donar,
Zio, Phol put on the nature of malignant diabolic beings, and
the story of their solemn yearly visitation shaped itself into that
of a wild rabble rout, which the people now shunned with horror,
as formerly they had thronged to those processions.

Veiled under the biblical names of Cain, Elias, Enoch, Anti-
christ, Herodias, there come into view the same old myths about
moon-spots, giants' buildings, a god of thunder and of storm, the


PBEFACE. XXXYll

gracioas (holde) night-dame and the burning of the world. And
what arrests our attention still more is, that to the Virgin Mary
we apply a whole host of charming legends about Holda and
Froawa, noms and valkyrs, as the Romans did those about
VeDus^ Juno and the parcae ; nay, in the fairy-tale, dame Holle
and Mary can usurp the place of gray-hatted Wuotan. What a
tender fragrance breathes in those tales of Mary, and what has
any other poetry to put by the side of them ? To the kindly
heathen traits is superadded for us that sense of superior sanctity
which encompasses this Lady. Herbs and flowers are named
after Mary, her images are carried about, and, quite in accord-
ance with the heathen worship, installed on forest trees. She
is a divine mother, she is a spinning-wife, she appears as maid
of mercy (vierge secourable) to whosoever calls upon her. To
the country folk in Italy, Mary stands well in the foreground of
their religion ; the Madonnas of several churches in Naples are
looked upon as so many different divine beings, and even as
rivals, and a Santa Venere by their side gives no offence. Three
Marys together (p. 416^ note) resemble the three noms and
three fays ; Mary carries stones and earth in her apron (p. 537)
like Athena or the fay. The worship of Mary altogether, being
neither founded on Scripture nor recognised by the first cen-
turies, can only be explained by the fact of those pretty and
harmless but heathen fancies having taken such deep root in
the people that the Church also gradually combined with them
a more daintily devised and statelier devotion (attentio) which
we find woven into numerous legends and sermons.

But Mary does not stand alone by a long way. Immediately
at her side there has grown up in the Catholic and Oreek
churches an interminable adoration of Saints, to make up for
heathen gods of the second or third rank, for heroes and wise-
women, and to fill the heart by bridging the gulf between it and
pare Deity. Dogma may distinguish between Deity and inter-
cessors ; but how many a pious lip, moving in prayer before the
&acred image, must be unaware of this distinction, or forget it 1
And further^ among the saints themselves there are various


XXX VIU PREFACE.

grades^ and the partioalar troubles ander which they can be of
service are parcelled ont among them like so many offices and
lines of business^ so that almost every disease and its remedy are
called by the name of their saint ; this division of tasks has the
strongest analogy to the directions given in Norse and Lithuanian
mythology for the invocation of the several deities (p. 835). The
victorious hero who had slain the dragon made room for Michael
or George ; and the too pagan Siegberg (p. 198), which may
have meant the same as Bresberg (p. 201), was handed over to
Michael, as the mons Martis in France was tamed into a mons
martyrum, Montmartre. It is remarkable that the Ossets have
converted the dies Martis into Greorgeday, and dies Veneris into
Mary's day (Pott 1, 105. 2, 802). The places of OSinn and of
Freyja in minni-drinking are taken by John and by Gertmde,
a saint who in other ways also has changed places with the
goddess (pp. 61. 305. 673); bat we can easily see why the
heathen coantorpart to a saint's legend is oftener to be foand
in the Boman than in onr Grerman mythology. The Chnrch
in her saints and canonizations had not the wit to keep within
bounds, and the disproportion comes out most glaringly in the
fact that the acts and miracles of the Saviour and his apostles
are in some cases outdone by those of the saints. Whoever
would push these investigations further, as they deserve to be
pushed, will have to take particular notice, what saints are the
first to emerge in the popular faith of any country, and which of
them in poems and in forms of benediction have gradually slipt
into the places of the old gods.

Here let me illustrate the more or less thorough interpene-
tration and commingling of Christian and heathen legend by
two examples, which seem to me peculiarly important.

It must be regarded as one of the original possessions common
to our mythologies, that the God, or two gods, or three, descend
from heaven to earth, whether to prove men's works and ways
(p. 337), or in search of adventures. This does violence to the
christian belief in Grod's omnipresence and omniscience ; but it


PRBFACB. XXXIX

is a very pleasing fancy, that of the gods in person walking the
earth nnrecognised, and dropping in at the honses of mortals.
Even the Odyssey 17, 485-7 alludes to snch wanderings, in which
is fonnd the loftiest consecration of hospitality : a man will be
loth to turn away a stranger, ander whose guise a celestial god
may be visiting him. A Greek myth with details appears in the
story of Orion : three gods, Zens, Poseidon, Hermes (some say
Zeus, Ares, Hermes == Donar, Zio, Wuotan) take lodging with
Hyriens, and after being feasted, give him leave to ask a favour ;
he wishes for a son, and they create him one much in the same
way as Kv&sir was engendered (p. 902, conf. 1025n.). Ovid's
Fasti 5, 495 — 535. Hyginns 195 relates the same fable of the
Thracian Byrsens. In the beautiful legend of Philemon and
Baucis (Ovid's Met. 8, 626 — 721), Jupiter and Mercury are travel-
ling, and reward their kind entertainers by saving them from
the impending deluge (p. 580) ; a fable of Phaedrus makes the
divine messenger alone, the god of roads and highways, pass
the night with mortals (Mercurium, hospitio mulieres olim duae
illiberali et sordido receperant). But Demeter also is at times
represented as travelling and associating with men, as would be
natural for all mothers of gods ; Aesop in Fab. 54 makes Demeter
travel with a swallow and an eel, but when they came to a river
the bird flew up, the fish slipt into the water, and what did
Demeter do f With the Indians it is principally Brahma and
Vishnu that visit the earth. In a Lithuanian legend Perkunos
walks the earth at the time when beasts yet spoke ; he first met
the horse, and asked his way. ' I have no time to shew thee the
way, I have to eat.' Hard by was an ox grazing who had heard
the travellei^s request : ' Come, stranger,' he cried, ' I will shew
thee the way to the river.' Then said the god to the horse:
^ As thou couldst not for eating find time to do me a turn of kind-
ness, thou shalt for a punishment be never satisfied ; ' then to the
ox: ^Thoa good-natured beast shalt conveniently appease thy
hunger, and after chew the end at thine ease, for thou wert ready
to serve me.' This myth likewise inculcates kindness to the
stranger, and for Perkunos subsequent narrators could without


X] PREFACE.

scruple substitate the Savionr. In the Edda it is always OSinn,
Loki and Hoenir that go on journeys together^ the same three Ases
that also co-operate in creating (p. 560), for Lo'Sr and Loki are
apparently one (p. 241), and in this connexion Loki has nothing
base or bad about him. Hoenir is called in Sn. 106 sessi, sinni,
mftli OSins (sodalis, comes, collocutor Odini). These three Ases
set out on a journey, and at night seek a lodging ; in the stories
preserved to us no mention is made of a trial of hospitality. In
a later saga OSinn with Loki and Hoenir rides to the chase
(Müller's Sagabibl. 1, 364) ; and a remarkable lay of the Faroe
Isles (Lyngbye pp. 500 seq.) presents the same three, Ouvin,
Höner and Lokkji, not indeed as travelling, but as succouring
gods, who when caUed upon immediately appear, and one after
the other deliver a boy whom giant Skrujmsli is pursuing, by
hiding him, quite in fairy-tale fashion, in an ear of barley,
a swan's feather, and a fish's egg. There were doubtless many
more stories like this, such as the Norwegian tale in Asbiöm. no.
21, conf. p. 423. As bearing upon their subsequent transfer-
ence, it must not be overlooked that in Fomm. sog. 9, 56. 175
OSinn on horseback calls one evening at a blacksmith's, and has
his horse shod ; his identity with Hermes becomes quite startling
in these myths. At other times however it is Thdrr with his
heavy hammer (p. 180) that seeks a lodging, like Zeus, and when
he stays the night at the peasant's, Loki accompanies Th6rr (Sn.
49) ; then again Heimdallr, calling himself Bigr, traverses the
world, , and founds the families of man. The Finnish legend
makes Wäinämöinen, Ilmarinen and Lemminkainen travel (rune
23), quite on a par with OSinn, Loki, and Hoenir.

If now we look from these heathen myths to those in a
christian dress and of a later time, the connexion between them
can be no enigma : that of Perkunos changing into the Saviour
has already set us the key. Either Christ and Peter journey out
together, or one of the two alone ; the fable itself turns about in
more than one direction. Antique above all sounds the visit of
these godlike beings, like that of OSinn, to the blacksmith, and
here the rewarding of hospitality is not left out. In the Norw.


PBBFACE. xli

tale no. 21, the Saviour^ after he has far sarpassed his host in
feats of skilly yet places three wishes at his disposal, the very
same that were allowed the smith of Jüterbok : compare also
Kinderm. no. 147, the Netherl. story of Smeke in WolPs Wodana
p. 54 seq., and H. Sachs iv. 3, 70. Bat in Kinderm. 82, though
the player, like the smith, asks for the tree from which one
cannot get down, the main point with him is the dice, and the
bestowal of them cannot bat remind us of Wnotan the inventor
of dice (p. 150. 1007), and again of Mercary. In H. Sachs ii.
4, 114 it is only Peter that bestows the wishing-die on a lands-
knecht at work in the garden. Bat the Fabliau St. Pierre et le
jongleur (M.6otl 3, 282) relates how the juggler fared after death
in hell ; though nothing is said of travelling or gift-giving, yet
Peter coming down from heaven in a black beard and smug
moustaches and with a set of dice, to win from the showman the
souls entrusted to his keeping, has altogether the appearance of
Wuotan, who is eager, we know, to gather souls into his dwell-
ing; and that tailor who hurled the leg of a chair out of heaven
(p. 136) bad been admitted by Peter. Then another group of
legends betrays a new feature, full of significance to us. The
Saviour and Peter are travelling together, Peter has to dress the
dinner, and he bites a leg off the roast chicken (WolPs Wodana,
p. 180) ; in the Latin poem of Heriger, belonging to the tenth
century, Peter is called in so many words head-cook of heaven,
and a droll fellow secretly eats a piece of lung off the roast, as in
Märchen no. 81 brother Lustig, travelling with Peter, steals the
heart of the roast lamb, and elsewhere the landsknecht or the
Swabian steals the liver. This seems to be all the same myth,
for the circumstance that Peter plays by turns the culprit and the
god whose attendant is in fault, may itself be of very old date :
even the heathen stories may have made OSinn and Loki change
places. Loki is all the more a cook, a roast-stealer, and there-
fore on a line with Peter, as even the Edda imputes to him the
eating of a heart (the suspected passage in Seam. 118^ I emend
thus : 'Loki &t hiarta lundi brenda, fann hann h&lfsvi'Sinn hugstein
konu,' Lokius comedit cor in nemore assum, invenit semiustum


Xlii PREFACE.

mentis-Iapidem mnlieris)^ and in oar ancient beast-fable the sly
fox (Loki still) carries off the stag's heart half-roasted (Beinh.
zlviii. lii) . — ^Nor does this by any means ezhanst the stock of
such tales of travel. Hans Sachs 1, 492 made up a poem in 1557
(and Bare. Waldis 4, 95 before him in 1587) how Peter journey-
ing with Christ wished in the pride of his heart to rule the
world, and could not so much as manage the goat which the
Lord had given into his hands for one day; again Ij 493 how
they arrived at a parting of the roads, and asked their way of a
lazy workman lying in the shade of a peartree, who gave them
a gruff answer ; then they came upon a maidservant, who was
toiling in the sweat of her brow, but, on being asked, immedi-
ately laid her sickle down, and saw the Lord into the right road :
' be this maid,' said the Saviour to Peter, ' assigned to none other
but that man,' (in Agricola, Spr. 854, the maid is idle and the
man industrious). This recalls not only Perkanos with the
horse and ox, but the noms or fays passing through the land
in the legend quoted on p. 409. Old French poems give the
part of short-sighted Peter to the hermit who escorts an angel
through the world (M^n, Ncfuv. rec. 2, 116, and pref. to tome 1);
from Mielcke's Lith. sprachl. p. 167 I learn that the same ver-
sion prevails in Samogitia, and the Gesta Bomanor. cap. 80 tell
of the angelus et eremita. As the gods lodged with Philemon
and Baucis, so does a dwarf travelling in the Grindelwald with
some poor but hospitable folk, and protects their little house
from the flood (DS. no. 45) ; in Kinderm. 87 God Almighty
lodges with the poor man, and allows him three wishes; to Bügen
comes the old beggar-man (sWuotau), gets a night's lodging
from a poor woman, and on leaving in the morning lets her
dabble in the wishing business, which turns out iU for the envious
neighbour. Thiele (Danmarks folkesagn 2, 306) finds the very
same myth in Fünen, and here the traveller is Peter again : the
Norwegian tale makes the Lord God and Peter come to dame
Gertrude and turn the stingy thing into a bird (p. 673). There
is a popular joke about Christ and Peter being on a journey, and
the Saviour creating the first Bohemian; and a Netherl. tale


FBEFACB. Xliii

(Wodana p. xxxvii) about their patting up at an ogre's house
in a wood^ and being concealed hj his compassionate wife^ an
incident that occurs in many other tales.

Afzelins (Sagohafder 3, 155), while he proyes the existence of
these legends of Christ and Peter in Sweden also, is certainly
wroDg in pronouncing them mere fabricated drolleries, not
founded on popular belief. They are as firmly grounded as any-
thing can be on primitive traditions, and prove with what fidelity
the people's memory has cared for our mythology, while MHG.
poets despise these &bles which they could have sung so admir-
ably, just as they leave on one side dame Berhte and Holde and
in general what is of home growth. Yet a couple of allusions
may prove, if proof it needs, that this dressing up of the old myth
was in vogne as early as the 13th century : Bumelant (Amgb.
12^) relates of Christ and Peter, how they came to a deep rivulet
into which a man had fallen, who was doing nothing to help him-
self; and a nameless poet (Mone's Anz. 5, 192) tells of a wood-
cutter whom Peter was trying to hoist into heaven by his mallet,
but when on the topmost rung, the mallet's handle came off*, and
the poor man dropt into hell. The pikeman or blacksmith in the
fiury*tale got on better by flinging his knapsack or apron (sledge-
hammer in Asbiomsen p. 1 36 is still more archaic) into heaven.
Of course these wanderings of the Saviour and one of his disciples
have something in common with the journeys of Jesus and his
apostles in Judea, the dwarf visitor might be compared to the
angels who announced God's mercies and judgments to Abraham
and Lot, as Philemon and Baucis have a certain resemblance to
Abraham and Sarah ; but the harmony with heathen legend is
incomparably fuller and stronger. The angels were simply mes-
sengers; our mythology, like the Oreek and Indian, means here
an actual avatftra of Deity itself.

Another example, of smaller compass, but equally instructive
as to the mingling of christian with heathen ideas, may be drawn
from the old legend of Pruoto. The blissful birth of the Saviour,
the new era beginning with him, were employed in drawing pic-
tures of a golden age (p. 695. 793 n.) and the state of happiness


Xliv PREFACE.

and peace inseparable from it. The Roman Augastns, under
whom Christ was bom, closed the temple of Janas, and peace
is supposed to have reigned all over the earth. Now the Norse
tradition makes its mythic Fr6l$i likewise contemporary with
Augustas, Fro'Si whose reign is marked by peace and blessed-
ness, who made captive giantesses grind heaps of gold for him
(p. 531. 871), and had bracelets deposited on the public high-
way without any one laying hands on them. The poets call gold
' miöl Frö«a,' Fruoto's meal (Sn. 146), to explain which phrase
the poem Gr6ttasaungr is inserted in the Edda; and in Ssm.
151* occurs : ' sleit Fr6l$a friiS fianda & milli.' Rymbegla says,
in his time the fields bore crops without being sown (it is the
blessed Sampo-period of the Finns), and metal was found erery-
where in the ground; nature joined in extolling the prince,
as she does in lamenting his death (p. 591). When Helgi
was born, eagles uttered a cry, and holy waters streamed down
from the hills of heaven (Sssm. 149*) ; in the year of H&kon's
election the birds, we are told, bred twice, and twice the trees
bore, about which the H&k« H&konarsaga cap. 24 has some
beautiful songs. Hartmann, a monk of St. Gall, sings on the
entry of the king : ' Haec ipsa gaudent tempora, floreque vemo
germinant, adventus omni gaudio quando venit optatior.' So
deep a feeling had the olden time for a beloved king. And
Beda 2, 16 thus describes king Eadwine's time: 'Tanta eo
tempore pax in Britannia fuisse perhibetur, ut^ sicut usque hodie
in proverbio dicitur, etiamsi mulier una cum recens nato par-
vulo vellet totam perambulare insulam a mari ad mare, nuUo se
laedente valeret. Tantum rex idem utilitati suae gentis con-
suluit, ut plerisque in locis, ubi fontes lucidos juxta pubUcos
viarum transitus construxit, ibi ob refrigerium viantium erectis
stipitibus aereos caucos suspendi juberet, neque hos quisqnam
nisi ad usum necessarium contingere prae magnitudine vel timoris
ejus änderet vel amoris vellet.' And of several other kings the
tale is told, that they exposed precious jewels on the public road.
Mildness and justice were the highest virtues of rulers, and
'mild' signified both mitis and largus, munificus. Fr6i$i was


PBEFACE.


xlv


called tho fSmildi (bountiful) ; ' fr6iSi ^ itself includes the notion
of sagacitj. When the genealogies and legends make several
kings of that name follow one another^ they all evidently mean
the same (conf. p. 348). Saxo Gramm. 27 makes his first Frotho
sprinkle ground gold on his food^ which is unmistakably that
'PröiSamiöP of Snorri; the second is called 'frcekni/ vegetus;
it is not till the reign of the thirds who fastens a gold bracelet
on the road, that the Saviour is bom (p. 95).

But this myth of the mild king of peace must formerly have
been known outside of Scandinavia^ namely, here in Germany,
and in Britain too. For one thing, onr chroniclers and poets,
when they mention the Saviour's birth, break out, like Snorri
and Saxo, in praises of a peaceful Augustan age ; thus Godfrey
of Viterbo p. 250 :

Fit gladius vomer, fiunt de cuspide falces.
Mars silnit, pax emicuit, miles f uit auceps ;
nascentis Christi tempore pax rediit.


Wemher's Maria, p. 160 :

Dd wart ein chreftiger fride,
diu swert versluogen die smide,
bedin spieze und sper ;
do ne was dehein her
daz iender des gedsahte
daz ez strite oder vsahte,
dd ne was niht urliuge
bi des meres piuge,
noch enhein nitgeschelle.
Mit grdzer ebenhelle
und harte fridliche
stnonden elliu riche.


Then befel a mighty peace,
smiths converted their swords,
both pikes and spears ;
then was there no army
that anywhere thought
of striving and fighting,
then was no war
by the sea's margin,
nor any sound of hate.
In great unison
and right peacefully
stood all kingdoms.


And p. 198 : Aller fride meiste

mit des keisers volleiste

der wart erhaben und geswom

dö Christ was gebom.


xlvi PBEFACE.

Compare En. 18205 — 13^ and Albrecht of Halberstadt's Prolog^?^
which also says that Augustus

machte so get&nen fride (perfect peace)
daz man diu swert begunde smide
in segense (sojthes)^ und werken hiez
zuo den sicheln den spiez.

It is true, none of these passages make any reference to Fruoto ;
but how could the ' milte Fruote von Tenemarke ' have got so
firm a footing in our heroic lays of Gudrun and the Baben-
schlacht, and in the memory of our Court-poets (MS. 2, 221'',
227^Conr, Engelhart, and Helbl. 2, 1808. 7, 866. 18, 111)
without some express legend to rest upon f This I had a pre-
sentiment of on p. 582 from our proper names Fanigolt, Mani-
golt (fen-gold, bracelet-gold); conf. Haupt's pref. to Eogelh.
p. X. And what is more, the Austrian weisthümer (8, 687. 712}
require by way of fine a shield full of ground gold ; and filling
shields with gold meant being liberal. The folk-song in Uhland
1, 76-7 makes the mill grind gold and love. How else to explain
gold-grinding and gold-meal I cannot divine.

I could multiply such examples ; I could also, if the task were
not reserved for others or another occasion, shew in detail that
the same mythic basis, which must be assumed for our own
heroic lays, was not foreign either to the Carolingian poetry,
the product mainly of a German tribe, or even to the Britiah.
Arthur belongs to the 'wild host' and the 'heaven's wain,'
Morgana coincides with noms and elfins. A great deal nearer
still stands Charles with his heroes : he is the Long-beard that
sleeps in the mountain and rides on the Karl-wain, his Karl-
stone is the same as the Woden-stone (p. 155), Eoland stands
on the pillar, Froberge reminded us of Fro (p. 216), and Galans,
who plies the forge for these Frankish heroes, is Wayland,
Wielant, Völundr. Berthe with the foot, progenitress of Charles,
is our Berhta (p. 429) ; and, attached to her, stand Flore and
Blanchefieur with their elvish names (p. 1068). Charles's loved
one was an elfin (p. 485), Auberon is Elberich and elf -king ; and


PREFACE. Xlvii

Maagisj Malagis=MadaIgiB, borders on the elvish. Charles's
hall resembles that of Asgard (p. llSSn.).

If these inyestigations have not been a sheer waste of time
(and to me it seemed worth the trouble to look into the affairs
of oar antiquity from all sides), I may now at length attempt an
answer to questions, or some of them at least, as to what is the
true fundamental character of Teutonic mythology.

Judged by the standard of those mythologies that completed
their career from beginning to end, notably the Greek (with
which nevertheless it has so many important features in common),
it will bear no comparison, if only for the reason that it was
interrupted early, before it had produced all that it could have
produced. As to our language and poetry, they were sensibly
disturbed and hindered too, but they lived on, and could acquire
a new impetus; the heathen faith was cut down to the root, and
its poor remains could only save themselves by stealth under a
new guise. Crude, unkempt it cannot but appear, yet the crude
has its simplicity, and the rough its sincerity.

In our heathen mythology certain ideas stand out strong and
clear, of which the human heart especially has need, by which
it is sustained and cheered. To it the highest jgod is a father
(p. 22), a good father, gofar (p. 167), gaffer, grandfather, who
grants salvation and victory to the living, and to the dead an
entrance to his dwelling. Death is a going home, a return to
the father (p. 839). By the side of the god stands the highest
goddess as a mother (p. 22), gammer, grandmother, wise and
white ancestress. The god is exalted, the goddess beaming
with beauty; both go their rounds and appear in the land, he
instructing in war and weapons, she in spinning, weaving,
sowing of seed ; from him comes the poem, from her the tale.
The same paternal authority is deeply stamped on our ancient
law, the father taking the newborn son on his lap and acknotr-
ledgiug him ; but what we read in some only of our ancient
codes, may have been the rule everywhere, namely, that the
Composition paid to womeii was originally a higher, a double


Xlviii PBEFACE.

one. The German reverence for woman was already known to
Tacitus (p. 397), and history vouches for it in the Mid. Ages:
in the heroic lays a greater stress is laid on Mother XTote than
on the father of the heroes, as Brunhild towers even above
Siegfried (see SuppL). By the side of the beautiful description
of mother's love in the Vita Mahthildis (Pertz 6, 298) we can
put this touch by Rudlieb 1, 52 : ' Ast per cancellos post hunc
pascebat ocellos Mater,' as her son was departing. Whenever
in dry old Otfried I come to the lines iv. 32 : wir sin gibot
ouh wirken, inti bi unsa muater thenkSn (we his bidding also
do, and of our mother think), it moves me to melancholy, I
don't know whether he meant the church, or her that bore him,
I think of my own dear mother (Dorothea Grimm, b. 20 Nov.
1755, d. 27 May 1808). Another thing also we learn from the
oldest history of our people, that modesty and virtue had never
fled from the land; beside Tacitus, we may rely on Salvian
(5th cent.) as the most unimpeachable of witnesses. Refined
grace might be wanting, nay, it has often retired before us, and
been washed out of remembrance; to the Greeks Apollo, Pallas,
Aphrodite stood nearer, their life was brighter like their sky.
Yet Fro and Frouwa appear altogether as kind and loving deities,
in Wuotan I have produced the god of song, and as Wish he
may have been a god of longing and love. However many
blossoms of our old mythology and poetry may lie undisclosed
and withered, one thing will not escape the eye of a judge,
that our poesy still has virgin forms and unlaboured adornment
at her command, which, like certain plants, have disappeared
from hotter climes.

When the plastic and poetic arts have sprung out of a people's
&ith, they adorn and protect it by imperishable works; yet
another fact must not be overlooked, that both poets and
artists insensibly deviate from the sanctity of the old type, and
adopt an independent treatment of sacred subjects, which, in-
genious as it may be, mars the continuity of tradition. The
tragedians will alter for their own ends what epic had handed
down entire; the sculptors, striving after naked forms of beauty,


PBEFACE. Xlix

wiU^ in fayoar of it^ sacrifice if need be the significant symbol ;
as they can neither bring in all the features of the myth^ nor
yet find the whole of them sufficient^ they must omit some
things and add others. Sculpture and the drama aim at making
the gods more conceivable to the mind^ more human; and
every religion that is left free to unfold itself will constantly
&I1 back upon man and the deepest thoughts he is capable of,
to draw from them a new interpretation of the revealed. As
in statues the rigid attitude nnbent itself and the stiff folds
dropt away, so devotion too in her converse with deity will not
be needlessly shackled. In the same way language, even in the
hands of poets, declines from the sensuous perfection of poetry
to the rational independence of prose.

The gprossness that I spoke of would have disappeared from
the heathen faith had it lasted longer, though much of the
roggedness would have remained, as there is in our language
something rough-hewn and unpolished, which does not unfit it
for all purposes, and qualifies it for some. There goes with
the Grerman character a thoughtful earnestness, that leads it
away from vanity and brings it on the track of the sublime.
This was noticed even by Tacitus, whose words, though discussed
in the book (p. 70-1, 104-5), will bear repeating: 'Ceterum
nee cohibere parietibus decs, neque in ullam humani oris speciem
assimilare, ex magnitudine coelestium arbitrantur. Lucos ac
nemora consecrant, deorumque nominibus appellant secretum
fllad, quod sola reverentia vident.' This is no empty phrase,
this 'arbitrantur' and 'appellant' must have come of inquiries,
which a Roman, if he wished to understand anything of the
Germani, had first of all to set a-going. That is how it actually
was in Germany at that time, such answer had German men
given, when asked about the temples and images of their gods.
Temples are first built to hold statues : so long as these were
not, neither were those. Anything mentioned in later centuries,
or occurring by way of exception among particular tribes, seems
to have been corruption and confusion, to which there was no
want of prompting. All the Scandinavian temples and idols

d


I PREFACE.

fall into this later time^ or they have their reason in the difference
of race.

That notable piece of insight shows as the whole germ of
Protestantism. It was no accident^ bnt a necessity^ that the
Beformation arose first in our country, and we should long ago
have given it our undivided allegiance, had not a stir been made
against it from abroad. It is remarkable how the same soil of
Old-German faith in Scandinavia and Britain proved receptive
of Protestant opinion; and how favourable to it a great part of
France was, where German blood still held its ground. Ajs in
language and myth, so in the religious leanings of a people
there is something indestructible.

Gt>ds, i,e, a multiplication of the one supreme incomprehen*
sible Deity, could only be conceived of by Germans as by
others under a human form (p. 316), and celestial abodes like
earthly houses are ascribed to them. But here comes a differ-
ence, in this reluctance to exhibit the immeasurable (that magni-
tude coelestium) in visible images, and confine it between earthly
walls. To make a real portrait of Deity is clean impossible^
therefore such images are already prohibited in the Old Test,
decalogue; ITlphilas renders elStoXov by galiug or galiuga-ga^
(lie-god), meaning that any representation of a god was a lie;
and the first christian centuries abhorred image-worship, though
it gradually found its way into the church again. The statues
of Greek gods, we know, proceeded originally from a sacred
type, which only by degrees became more secular ; the paintings
of the Mid. Ages, and even Baphael's great soul-stirring com-
positions, for want of such a type, were obliged to invent their
figures, the legend from which artists chiefly drew their subjects
being already song or story; accordingly these pictures stand
lower than the works of Greek art, and the spirit of Protestant-
ism insists on their being bundled out of the churches. Bnt
if our heathen gods were imagined sitting on mountains and
in sacred groves, then our medieval churches soaring skyward
as lofty trees, whose sublime effect is unapproached by any
Greek pediments and pillars, may fairly be referable to that Old


FBEFACB. li

German way of thinking. Irmans&l and Yggdrasill were sacred
trees^ rearing their heads into the breezes : the tree is the steed
(drasill, the snorter) on which Wnotan^ the bodeful thrill of
natore, stormfhily careers: Yggr signifies shudder^ thrill of
terror (p. 120, and Snppl.). By the Old German forest-worship
I also expkin the small namber of the priests^ who only begfin
to multiply in temples entrusted to their charge.

Of all forms of belief, the Monotheistic is at once the most
agreeable to reason and the most honouring to Deity. It also
seems to be the original form, out of whose lap to a childlike
antiquity Polytheism easily unfolded itself, by the' loftiest
attributes of the one God being conceived first as a trilogy,
then as a dodecalogy. This arrangement comes out in all the
mythologies, and especially clear, I think, in ours: almost all
the gods appear unequal in rank and power, now superior, now
sabordinate, so that, mutually dependent, they must all at last
be taken as emanations of a highest and only One. What is
offensive in polytheism is thereby diminished (p. 176). For
even in the heathen breast a consciousness of such subordination
could hardly be quite extinct, and the slumbering faith in a
highest god might wake up any moment.

To point out these groups of deities from our half dried-up
sources was beyond my power, but the threes and twelves of the
Edda are indicated, p. 335. The Greeks however differ in hav-
ing only one twelve, consisting of six gods and six goddesses,
while of the ftses and ftsjmjas there are twelve each, making to-
gether twice as many deities as the Greek. Twelve chairs are
set for the gods sitting in council (p. 858). Sometimes the
highest god has twelve inferiors added to him, which raises the
total by one : Loki is called the thirteenth among the gods, and
On& among the goddesses. Snorri 211^ names thirteen &ses, and
eren more ftsynjas. These triads and twelves of the gods are
reflected again in the heroes and wise-women : Mannus begot
three sons, heads of races (p. 345. 395), Heimdall founded three
orders, the Yngltnga saga 2, 7 calls OSin's fellow-gods his
twelve princes (höfdingjar) ; Westmar has twelve sons (Saxo


lii PREFACE.

Gram, p« 68); there were thirteen valkyrs (p. 421)^ and three
noms. In WelFs retinae are twelve heroes (p. 395); king
Charles's twelve might indeed be traced to the twelve aposüesi
and the poem itself points to that> but the same thing is found
in numberless myths and legends. The might of the godlike
king flashes forth yet again in his heroes.

To my thinking. Polytheism almost everywhere arose in in*
nocent nnconsdoasness : there is about it something soft and
agreeable to the feelings; but it will, when the intellect is
roused, revert to the Monotheism from which it started. No one
taunts the Catholic doctrine with teaching many gods, yet one
can see in what respect Catholics stand in the same relation to
heathens as Protestants do to Catholics. Heathenism bowed
before the power of pure Christianity ; in course of time heathen-
ish movements broke out in the church afresh^ and from these
the Reformation strove to purify it. The polytheistic principle,
still working on, had fastened on two points mainly, the worship
of saints, of which I have spoken, and that of relics (conf. 6DS.
p. 149). A stifling smell of the grave pervades the medieval
churches and chapels from an adoring of dead bones, whose
genuineness and miraculous power seem rarely well attested, and
sometimes quite impossible. The weightiest affairs of life, oath-
takings, illnesses, required a touching of these sanctities^ and all
historical documents bear witness to their widely extended use,
a use justified by nothing in the Bible, and alien to primitive
Christianity (conf. p. 1179). But in idololatria and saint-worship
the dominion of the priesthood found its main stay.

Of Dualism proper I have acquitted our heathenism (pp. 895-6.
984). Unlike Polytheism, it seems to me to take its rise^ not in
gradual corruption, but in conscious, perhaps moral, reflexion,
and at a later time. Polytheism is tolerant and friendly ; he to
whom all he looks at is either heaven or hell, God or devil^
will both extravagantly love and heartily hate. But here again
let me repeat, that to the heathen Germans the good outweighed
the bad, and courage fidntheartedness : at death they laughed.

Between deifying much and deifying all, it is hard to draw the


PREFACE. liii

line, for even the most arrant Pantheism will admit some excep-
tions. The limit observed by the Greek and even the Norse
religion appears in those sets of twelve; Personification indeed,
on which I have inserted a chapter, seems to dip into the domain
of Pantheism ; yet when elements and implements are thought of
as divine, they scarcely mean more than our old acquaintances,
the gods, presented in a new form : the air melts into Wuotan,
the hammer into Donar, the sword into Eor, and Saalde (fortune)
into Wuotan again. The human mind strives to conceive the
unfathomable depth of Deity in new and ever new ways. Some
would give our heathenism Fetishism for a foundation (p. 104);
the truth is, hammer, spear, flint and phallus were but symbols
of the divine force, of which there were other types, both material
and moral, equally valid. From thing to person; or from person
to thing, was in this matter but a step. Ab the gods change into
heroes and are bom again, so they sink even into animals ; but
this precipitate of them would require certain explanations, which
I mean to complete once for all in a new treatment of the Beast-
fable. The faster the brood of deities multiplies, the sooner is
faith likely to topple over into denial and abuse of the old gods ;
striking evidences of such atheistic sentiment Scandinavia itself
sappHes, both in undisguised mockery, and in reposing con-
fidence in one's own strength and virtue (p. 6). The former is
expressed in 0. Norse by goSgä (irrisio deorum), O.H. Germ.
kotsoelta (blasphemia). And this revolt of heathens against
heathenism increased as Christianity came nearer: thus the
Nialssaga cap. 105 says of Hialti, that he was charged with
scofSng at the gods, ' varS sekr & J'ingi urn go%g& ' ; conf . Laxd.
p. 180. Kristnisaga c. 9.

An element (aro^x'^ioy, tnr6aTaai^) is firm ground, basis, for
which the Goth still has a good Teutonic name 'stabs' ( = staff,
whence the Bomance stoffa, Stoffe, and so our stuff again), or
'stdma' (whence our ungestüm, OHG. ungistuomi, unquiet). It
meets the eye of man in all its glory, while deity remains unseen:
how tempted he must feel to give it divine honours I But his
senses and his mind link every exhibition of nature's forces with


liv PHBFACB.

snbjeotiye impressions bodily and mental, the promptings of
langaage teach him to connect. How came Zio to unite in him-
self the ideas of sky and war ? The Gothic veihan meant pug-
nare> vaihjd pngna, yeihs sacer, veiha sacerdos (p. 68), the QHG.
wig pugna and Mars (p. 203) ; the hallowed, the holy was at the
same time the bright, the beaming. To the Gothic hveits cor-
responds the Skr. sv^tas (albas), to this the Slav, svety, sviatyi
(sanctus), and sv^t, swiat, svetlo signify mnndos, ooelam, Inz.
Bat again Svetovit, Swantowit, is Area and bellam, and the
parallelism of Wuotan, Donar, Zio to Badigast, Peran, Sretovit
stands onqaestionable : the god of victory shines in the battle.
To the Indians Süryas denotes the son, light, day, and he re-
sembles Zio ; when Sftiyas is taking hold of a victim, it bites his
hand off, and a golden one has to be pat on : is not this T^,
whose hand the wolf bit off (p. 207) f and who knows bat the
like was told of the Slavic Svetovit f It was beaatifol to derive
the eye from the san, blood from water, the salt flow of tears
from the bitter sea, and the more profoand seem therefore the
myths of SiPs hair, of Freyja's tears ; earth and heaven reflect
each other. Bat as even the ancient cosmogonies are inversions
of each other (pp. 568. 570, man made of world, world made of
man), we have no right to refer the heathen gods exclasively
either to astrology and the calendar, or to elemental forces, or to
moral considerations, bat rather to a perpetaal and anceasing
interaction of them all. A pagan religion never dropt oat of the
doads, it was carried on throagh coantless ages by the tradition
of nations, bat in the end it mast rest on a mysterioas revelation
which accords with the marvellons langaage and the creation and
propagation of mankind. Oar native heathenism seems not to
have been oppressed by gloomy fancies aboat the misery of a
fallen existence (like the Indian doctrine of emanation), it
favoared a cheerfol fatalism (p. 860-1), and believed in a paradise,
a renovated world, deified heroes ; its gods resemble more those
of Greece, its saperstition more that of Borne : ' tanta gentium
in rebns frivoUs pleramqae religio est.'

The qaestion has been gravely asked, whether the heathen


PBBPACB. Iv

gods really existed ; and I feel disgust at answering it. Those
who believe in a veritable devil and a hell, who would bum a
witch with a will, may feel inclined to affirm it, thinking to
support the miracles of the church by the evidence of this other
miracle, that in the false gods she had crushed actual fiends and
fallen angels.

Having observed that her Language, Laws and Antiquities
were greatly underrated, I was wishful to exalt my native land.
To me one labour became the other : what was evidence there
was also a confirmation here, what furnished a foundation here
served there as a prop. Perhaps my books will have more in-
fluence in a quiet happy time which will come back some day ;
yet they ought to belong to the Present too, which I cannot
think of without our Past reflecting its radiance upon it, and on
which the Future will avenge any depreciation of the olden time.
My gleanings I bequeath to him who, standing on my shoulders,
shall hereafter get into full swing the harvesting of this great
field.

»

JACOB GBIMM.
Bebuh, 28th April, 1844.


CONTENTS


-♦♦-


VOL. III.


XXX. Poetry
XXXI. Spectres
XXXII. Translation

XXXIII. Devil .

XXXIV. Magic.
XXXV. Superstition

XXXVI. Sicknesses .
XXXVII. Herbs and Stones
XXXVIII. Spells and Charms
Index .


PAGES

899—912

913—950

951—983

984—1030

1031—1104

1105—1147

1148—1189

1190—1222

1223—1249

1251—1276


CHAPTER XXX.
POETRY.

MsBre however means not only fama, bat fabula; and here
some other and more interesting personifications present them*
selves.

We perceive that the existence^ organization and copiousness
of poetry^ as of language itself^ reach back to a remote antiquity^
that the resources and beauties of both gradually decay, and
have to be recruited in other ways. Ancient poetry was a sacred
calling, which bore a direct reference to the gods, and had to do
with soothsaying and magic.

Before our modem names dichter (Ducange sub v. dictator)
and poet were imported from abroad, we had no lack of native
ones more beautiful. At first the inditing« and uttering of poetry
seem to have gone together, the adnger (OHG. sangari, MHG-.
senger and singer) was likewise the poet, there was no question
as to who had made the song. Ulphilas calls the aBo^v Uußa/reis
(OHG. liodari T) ; and perhaps would distinguish him from the
saggvareis (praecentor). Again, aoiBo^ comes from aeiSto, as
olBa from eiBao, the digamma, ascertainable from video and Qoth.
vait, being dropt; we must therefore assume an older afelZ^
and afoiZo^^ the singer and the godlike seer (/xavT^?, Lat. vates)
are one. With this I connect the Goth, inveita (adoro, p. 29) ;
from the sense of celebrating in festive song, might proceed that
of worshipping. In the Slavic tongues slava is gloria, slaviti
venerari, slavik [O. Slav, slaviy, Russ. solov^y] the glorifying
jubilant bird, as wqhdp is from oeiBto, and our nahtigala from
galan, canere. If doi^BS^ means a seeing knowing singer, poet,
soothsayer, why may not a Goth, invaits, supposing there was
such a word, have expressed the same T

When the creative inventive &culty, as in woiTfr^^, i.a, faber

' That eßw I see, and delSta I sing, both change €i into oc proves no connexion
between them, the change being oonunon to many verbs (Xe/irw \oiir6t, Ketfiai koItti) ;
vates, at onoe seer and singer, U an important link. — Tbamb.

VOL. III. ^^ B


900 POETRY.

(and our amid equally stood for the framer of the lied or lay, ON.
lio^a-smiSr), was to be specially markedi this was done by the
OHG. acuof, OS. AS. seop (p. 407-8 n.), which reminds at once of
the supreme Shaper of all things and of the shaping nom. The
ON. has no skdpr^ that I know of, but instead of it a neuter
slealdj which I only grope after dubiously in OHG. (pp. 94. 649),
and whose origin remains dark;' skdldskapr, AS. 8c6pcr<Bfl =
poesis. The Romance poetry of the Mid. Ages derived the name
of its craft from the Tvov. trobar. It. trovare, Pr. trouver,* to
find, invent, and trobaire, trovatorej tr Oliver e is inventor, as scuof
is creator« A word peculiar to AS. is gid, gidd (cantus, oratio);
Beow. 2124. 3446. 4205-12. 4304. 4888, or giedd. Cod. exon.
380. 25 [yeddynges, Chauc.]; giddian (canere, fari), Csedm.
127, 6. Cod. exon. 236, 8. Beow. 1253; gidda (poeta, orator) :
'gidda snotor,' EL 419. 'giedda snotor/ Cod. exon. 45, 2. 293,
20. Leo has traced it in the Ir. hat cit, git (carmen dictum).^

A far-famed word is the Celtic bard, Ir. bard, pi. baird, Wei.
bardh, occurring already in Festus: 'bardvs Grallice, cantor qui
virornm fortium laudes canit.' Lncan's Phars., 1, 447 : ' plurima
securi fudistis carmina bardi ; ' the lark was called bardaea or
bardala (Ducange sub v.), songstress like drfSwv, nahtigala and
slavik. No old authority gives a hint that such bards were
known to the language or customs of Germany (see Suppl.).

^ Biörn givee a neut. skop (ironia, jocns), skoplegr (ridicnlus, almost orimnrrcic^r),
which might make one sceptical of the long Towel in AS. 8o6p, but this is used of a
lofty earnest poet in Beow. 179. 987. 2126, though sometimes of a comicus, sceni-
cus. The OHG. salmsodf »psalmista, and the spelling scof scofiFes (beside scaffan
Bcuofi) in Isidore does not disproTe the long Towel, as the same document puts
biomo, blostar for blnomo, bluostar. An OHG. uo in scuof would remove aU doubt,
but this I cannot lay my hand on. The gloss ' scof, nubilar vel poesis ' seems to
connect two unrelated worda which disagree in quantity, eoop tugurium (our Schop-
pen) and soöph poesis.

^ ON. sk&lda, Swed. sk&Ila, Dan. skolde, Dut. schoudenaglabrare ; with this
agrees the Fr. eschauder, Schauder, M. Lat. excaldare (Ducange sub v.) to scald the
hair ofiF. So that skald would be depilis, glaber (Engl, scald), bald-head, whether
it meant aged minstrel, or that poets shaved their heads f Even soaldeih may
have signified an oak stript of foliage.

s As there is no Latin root, we may suggest our own trefiFcn, ON. drepa [drub] ,
lit. to strike, hit, but also (in antreffen^ to hit upon, find. The Gothic may have
been drupan, as treten was trudan, which would account for the Bomance o.

* Malb. gl. p. 49, conf. Ir. ceat= canere, carmine celebrare. The question is,
"whether, in spite of this Celtic affinity, the word is not to be found in other Teut.
dialects. We might consider ON. go's (mens, animus), OHG. ket, kett, keti, ketti

(Graff 4, 144), the doubling of the lingual being as in AS. bed, bedd, OHG. petti
Goth, badi), or AS. biddan, OHG. pittan (Goth, bidjan). The meaning would be
a minding, remembering ; geVspeki in Sasm. 33^ is the wisdom of yore, inseparable
itom poefiy. ' Gyd, gyddian* seems a faulty spelling : giedd shews the vowd broken.


SCOP. SKALD. GLEOMAN. GLEOCILSFT. 901

Song^ music and dance make glad {rifyrrovai) the heart of man,
lend grace to the banquet {avadiifiara Sairo^, Od. 1^ 152. 21^
430)^ lulling and charming our griefs {ßpor&v deXKtrjpia, Od. 1,
337). God himself, when ailing, comes down from heaven, to
get cheered by the minstrel's lay (p. 381). Ilence poetry is
called the joyous art, and song joy and bliss. We know the gai
saber of the trobadors ; and joculator, joglar, jongleur, is derived
from jocus, joe, jeu, play and pleasantry. Even the Anglo-
Saxons named song and music gleo (glee, gaudium), wynn (our
wanne, wonne), or dream (jubilum) : 'scop hwtlumsang h&dor on
Heorote, ];a W89s hselelSa dre&m,' Beow. 987 ; ' gidd and gleo '
are coapled4025; the song is called 'healgamen' (aulae gaudium),
the harp ' gamenwudu, gleobe&m,' playing and singing 'gamen-
wudu grdtan,' to hail, to wake the frolic wood, Beow. 2123.
4210; 'gleobeäm grdtan,' Cod. exon. 42, 9. ' hearpan grdtan ' and
'hearpan wynnegr6tan' 296, 11. Beow. 4029. Then, beside
gretan, there is used wrecan (ciere, excitare) : ' gid wrecan,' to
rouse the lay, Beow. 2123. 4304. 4888. 'gid ^wrecan' 3445.
4212. 'wordgid wrecan' 6338. 'geomorgidd wrecan/ Andr.
1548. The gleoman, gligman, is a minstrel, gleocrceß the gay
science of music and song. In Wigaloisp. 312 six fiddlers scrape
all sorrow out of the heart ; if one could always have them by !
And Fomald. sog. 1, 815, says: ''leika hörpu ok segja sogar
svä at gaman J^aetti at." I will quote a remarkable parallel
from Finnish poetry. It is true, the lay is called runo, the poet
runolainen, and runoan to indite or sing, the song is laulu, the
singer laulaya, and laulan I singj but in the epic lays I find
ilo (gaudium) used for the song, and teen iloa (gaudium cieo)
for singing ^ (see Suppl.).

A thing of such high importance cannot have originated with
man himself, it must be regarded as the gift of heaven. Inven-
tion and utterance are put in the heart by the gods, the minstrel
is god-inspired : 0e<nn^ aoiSi], Od. 1, 328. 8, 498. aoiSij BeaireaCq^
II. 2, 600. 0€<nri^ aoiBo^ S K€v ripirrfaiv aeiScov, Od. 17, 385.
Gods of the highest rank are wardens and patrons of the art
divine, Zeus and Apollo among the Greeks, with us Wuotan

> ' Tehessä isän Uoa,* Kalew. 22, 236. 29, 227, the father (the god Wäinämöi-
pen) WM making (waking) joy > he sang ; * io käwi ilo iloUe * 22, 215, joy oame to
joy «the song reeoimded, strock op.


902 POBTBY.

and Bragr, Wämämöinen with the Finns. Saga was Waotan's
daughter (p. 810), as the Muse was Zeua's ; Frejja loved the
minnesong : 'henni llkaiSi vel mansongr/ Sn. 29.

On the origin of poetry the Younger Edda (Sn. 82 — 87) gives
at fall length a mytb, which the Elder had alladed to in H&yamftl,
(Sffim. 12. 28-4). Onoe upon a time the Aesir and Vanir made
a covenant of peace, and in token of it each party stept up to a
vessel, and let fall into it their spittle,^ as atonements and treaties
were often hallowed by mingling of bloods (RA. 193-4) ; here the
holy spittle is equivalent to blood, and even turns into blood, as
the sequel shews. The token of peace (grilSamark) was too pre-
cious to be wasted, so the gods shaped out of it a man named
Kvdsirj of all beings the wisest and shrewdest.' This Kv&sir
travelled far in the world, and taught men wisdom (froeiSi, OHG.
fruot)). But when he came to the dwelling of two dwarfs, Fialar
and Oalar (OHG. Filheri, Kalheri f), they slew him, and let his
blood run into two vats and a cauldron, which last was named
OShroerir, and the vats Sftn and BoSn. Then the dwarfs mixed the
blood with honey, and of this was made a costly mead,^ whereof
whosoever tasted received the gift of poesy and wisdom : he be-
came a,8kald or ^ frcßSa-maSr (sage). We came upon a trace
of this barrel of blood and honey among the dwarfs, p. 468.

Fialar and Ghdar tried to conceal the murder, giving out that
Kv&sir had been choked by the fulness of his wisdom ; but it was
soon reported that they were in possession of his blood. In a
quarrel they had with giant SuttfLngr, they were forced to give
up to him the precious mead, as composition for having killed
his father. Sutt&ngr preserved it carefully in Huitbiorg, and
made his daughter the fair GunnlöiS keeper of it.

The gods had to summon up all their strength to reg^n
possession of the holy blood. OSinn himself came from heaven
to earth, and seeing nine labourers mowing hay, he asked them
if their scythes wanted sharpening. They said they did, and he

^ Hr&ki, better perh. hnJd, is strictly matter ejected from the rächen (throat),
OHG. hraoho, as the AS. hraca is both guitar and tussis, spntmn ; oonf . OHG.
hrabhisdn screare, Ft. oracher, Serv. rakati. Bats, khirkat'.

* Creating oat of spittle and blood reminds one of the snow and blood in faiiy-
tales, where the wife wishes for children ; of the snow-child in the Modus Liebino ;
of the giants made out of frost and ice (pp. 440. 465) ; Aphrodite's being generated
oat of sea-foam is a part of the same thing.

t The technical term *inn d^ri miö-5r * recors in S«m. 28^ 38».


A DRIKK. OD-HB(ERI. 903

palled a whetstone ^ out of his belt^ and gave them an edge ; they
cat so mach better now, that the mowers began bargaining for
the stone, bat OSinn threw it np in the air, and while each was
trying to catch it, they all cat one another's throats with their
scythes.* At night OSinn found a lodging with another giant,
Sattftng's brother Bangi, who sorely complained that he had that
day lost his nine men, and had not a workman left. OSinn, who
called himself Bolverkr, was ready to undertake nine men's work,
stipnlating only for a drink of Satt4ng's mead.* Bangi said the
mead belonged to his brother, but he would do his best to obtain
the drink from him. Bolverkr accomplished the nine men's work
in summer^ and when winter came demanded his wages. They
both went off to Snttftng, but he would not part with a drop
of mead. Bolverkr was for trying stratagem, to which Bangi
agreed. Then Bölverkr produced a gimlet named Bati,^ and
desired Baugi to bore the mountain through with it, which
apparently he did ; but when Bölverkr blew into the hole and
the dust flew back in his face, he concluded that his ally was no
honester than he should be. He made him bore again, and this
time when he blew, the dust flew inwards. He now changed
himself into a worm, and crept in at the hole ; Baugi plunged
the drill in after him, but missed him. In the mountain Bölverkr
passed three nights with GunnlöS, and she vowed to let him have
three draughts of the mead: at the first draught he drained
OShroerir, at the second BoSn, at the third Son, and so he had
all the mead. Then be took the shape of an eagle, flew his
fleetest, and Suttftng^ as a second eagle gave chase. The Aesir
saw OSinn come flying, and in the courtyard pf AsgarS they set
out vats, into which OSinn, hard pressed by Sntt&ng, spat out
the mead, and thus it turned into spittle again, as it had been at
first.* The mead is given by OSinn to the &ses, and to men


AS. fain, Bn|^. hone, Swed. hen, Sskr. 8*An*.

* Like Dr. Fmisi fooling the seren topers into euttinff eeeh other's noses off.

* Here OSinn plays the part of Strong Hans (Kinderm. 90), or of Siegfried
with the smith.

* Mentioned also in Sam. 28^ ; evidentlv from ,' rata * permeare, terebrarei
Goth. Tratftn, so that it wonld be Vrata in Oottiie.

* It is added : *en honom var >a btA nor komit at Snttüngr mondi nft honnm,
at hann »endi aptr (behind) tuman vUöSinn, ok yar ^em edU gstt : haf6i Ht hrerr
er TÜdi, ok köUom Ter Ht skAldftfla lat (malomm poetamm partem) ' ; or, as
another MS. has it : *en tumum roepti hann optr, hafa j^at skftldftfl, ok heitir amar


904 POETET.

that can skill of poesy. This explains the flactaating names of
the poetic art : it is called Kvaais bl69 (Kv. sanguis) ; dverga
drecka, fylli (nanorum potns, satietas) j Ofhrceris, Bodhar, Sonar
laug {0., B.f S. aqaa) ; Hnühia/rga laug (Hn. aqua) ; Suitung*
miödr (S. mnlsnm) ; Odina fengr, ßindr, dryckr (0. praeda, in-
vention potus) ; Odins giöf (0. donam) ; dryckr Ä8a7ma (Asaram
potns).

Some of these names are well worth explaining minntely.
Boffn is rendered oblatio^ Son reconciliatio : neither of them^ at
all events when first used by the dwarfs^ can have had any such
meaning yet. We can easily connect bo^n with AS. byden,
OHG. patin (Graff 3, 87) ; son certainly agrees with the OHG.
saona (emendatio), not with Goth, s&an (lytram). Ssdm. 118\ *
234' has 'Sonar dreyri ' in the sense of ' sonar dreyri/ atonement*
blood (conf. sonar goltr, p. 51). More meaning and weight at-
taches to the cauldron's name, which occurs also in Saem. 23^. 28\
88'n the last time spelt correctly. To explain the word, I mast
mention first, that a Goth. adj. Y&ps, dulcis, answers to OHG.
wuodi, OS. w6thi, AS. wSiSe, which is used alike of sweet smell
and sweet sound ; ' sw6g ]?»s w61San sanges/ sonus dulcis canti*
lenae. And further, that an AS. noun w6iS (masc.) is carmen^
facundia : ' w6Sa wynsumast,' carmen jucundissimum^ Cod. oxon.
358, 9. ' w6{Sa wlitegast,' carmen pulcherrimum, El. 748. ' w&S
wera,' prophetia virorum, Csßdm. 254, 23. ' wö'Sbora ' (carmen
ferens), both as poeta. Cod. exon. 295, 19. 489, 17 and as orator,
propheta 19, 18. 346, 21. 'witgena woiSsong,' cantus prophe-
tarum 4, 1. ' wo'ScrsBf t,' poesis 234, 30. 360, 7 synon. with
the Bc6pcv89f)< and^leocraefb above. ' wynlicu wöiSgiefu,' jocun-
dum poeseos donum 414, 10 alluding at once to the gay art and
to Woden's gift. Now, whether the sense of ' sweet, gentle,* la«*

leir (habent id mali poetae, et dioitnr aqnilae lutnm)/ beoanae O'Sizm flew in eagle*i
shape. In Mart. Capella, before Athanada will hand the immortiilitatu poeulum to
Philologia, ' leniter deztera cordis ejns pulsum pectosqne pertractat, ao nesoio qna
intima plenitndine distentom ma^o com tnrgore respiciens, Nid haec, inqtiit,
quibuB plenum pectus geris, coactissima egestione Tomueris forasqne diffuderis,
immortalitatis sedem nullatenus obtinebis. At ilia omni nisu magnaqae vi quie-
quid intra pectus senserat evomebat. Tunc Tero ilia nausea ac vomitio faborata in
omnigenum copias conyertitur litterarum. . . . Bed cum talia yixgo ondanter
evomeret, puellae quam plures, quarum artes aliae, aliae dictae rant discipUnae,
Bubinde quae virgo ex ore diffuderat colligebantt in suum unaquaeque illarum neces>
sarium nsum faoultatemque ooiripiens.' What seemed too gross as yet for immor-
tality becomes here, when thrown up by the bride of heaven, the foundation of
human science. Conf. Aelian's Var. hist. IS, 22.


SONG-RAISER ? INSPIRATION. 905

in the noun w6iS itselfj or was first developed in the derived adj.
(which seems nearer the truths as w6S in some passages of Cod.
axon. 118, 4. 125, 31. 156, 8 means only a load sound, clamor,
without any reference to song) ; it is plain that to it corresponds
the ON. 6'Sr (also masc), which denotes as well poema as in-
genium, facundia. In the former sense its agreement with the
Lat. oda, 6r. ^&7 (contr. from aotSi]), is purely accidental, as the
difference of gender sufficiently shews. It is remarkable that at
the creation of Askr and Embla, Sasm. 3^, Hoenir is said to have
imparted to them the lacking öiS, which on p. 561 I translated
'reason': perhaps 'speech, gift of speech' would be more cor-
rect ? ^ Be that as it may, Offhrcerir seems clearly to be ' poesin
ciens, dulcem artem excitans,' which is in striking harmony with
the AS. ' gid wrecan ' and Finn. ' teen ilea ' above ; hroera, 0H6.
hruoran, MHQ. riieren, means tangere, ciere, and the cauldron
would have been in OHG. Wuodhruori, AS. WöiShrßre. Freyja's
husband 09r (Sssm. 5^ Sn. 37), whom she sought through the
world and bewept with golden tears, may have been a personifi-
cation of poetic art; ' was he the same as Kvasir, who traversed
the world, and was murdered by the dwarfs f

Thus OShroerir contained the sweet drink of divine poesy,
which imparted immortality ; and from the exertions made by the
gods, particularly OSinn, to regain possession of it when it had
fallen into the hands of dwarfs and giants, follows its identity
with amrita, ambrosia and nectar (p. 317-9) ; the ichor in the
veins of gods is like the limpid spittle of the Ases and Vanes.

The pure bee, which has survived from Paradise,' brings the
honey of song to the lips of tho sleeper, p. 696 (see Suppl.).

I cannot resist the temptation to add some more legends, of
how the inspiration of song came to great poets overnight in their
sleep : the story of Pindar is told again of Homer and Aeschylus
under another form.

Helen is said to have appeared to Homer : Xerfovai Si rtve^ Kal

^ Here, as elsewhere, the ON. dialect becomes unsafe for comparison, because
it confomids middle and final d with K.

' The difficulty noticed in the preceding note forbids my inquiring whether
this OKr be related to OiSinn ; the AS. Wdden and wdd (rabies) stand apart from
w6t$ (poesis), oonf. supra p. 131-2.

' Anc. laws of Wales 1, 739 : bees draw their origin from Paradise, which they
left through man's transgression, but Qod gave them his blessing; therefore mass
cannot be sung without wax. Leopreohting's Lechrain, p. 80.


906 POETBT.

Twv 'OfjLfjpib&v CÜ9 hnaratra fEXim;) rff^ wktos ^Ofirjpfp wpoaira^e
iroieXv irepl r&y oTparevaofievfov ewl Tpolav, ßavXofiivri toy hceiv^v
Odvarov ^rjXjoDTOTepov fj rov ßlov r&v oKKtav Karaarrja-ai^ Kal
fiipo^ fiiv Ti Biä rifv ^Ofiijpov ri^yv^» fJMktOTa Si Sia ravrrfv ovr«?
iwa^pohiTov KoX nraph iraaiv ovofMorifv avrov yeviadai, rifv mifjo'iv
[Some of the Homeridad say^ that Helena appeared to Homer hy
nighty and bade him sing of those who warred against Troy^ she
wishing to make their deaths more enviable than other men's
lives. And that partly by Homer's art^ bat chiefly by her, his
poetry was made so lovely and world-renowned]. Isocr. ^E\,
iyxcofitov in Oi*att. Att. ed. Bekker 2, 245.

Bacchas revealed himself to Aeschylus : €^17 Bi Alcr^yXo^ fjLeipd^
KLOV &v KaOevBeiv iv ayp^ ^vkdaafov ara^vkk^ koX oi Aiovwrov
iirioTavra iceXei/crae rpaytpBCav iroulv, 0)9 Bk ^v ^fiipa {ireideaBai
yap iOikei^v) paara i^Brf Tre^/Dco/L^vo? iroieiv, oSto9 fJ^ev ravra eXe-
yev [Aesch. said, that when a boy he fell asleep in the field while
watching grapes, and Dionysus appeared to him and bade him
write tragedy. In the morning, wishing to obey, he composed
quite easily as soon as he tried]. Pausan. i. 21, 2; paara, as
p€ta is said of the gods (p. 320).

As Aeschylus was watching the vineyard, Teutonic herdsmen
were pasturing sheep or oxen when the gift of Wuotan came to
them.

Hallbiöm had long wished to sing the praise of a dead minstrel
Thorleif, but could not, until Thorleif appeared in the hush of
night, unloosed his tongue, and, just as he was vanishing, dis-
played his shoulder (p. 326). Pomm. sog. 3, 102.

The heathen myth was still applicable to christian poets. A
poor shepherd in his sleep hears a voice urging him without
delay to put the Scriptures into Saxon verse ; previously unskilled
in song, he understood it from that moment, and fulfilled his
commission, Opusc. Hincmari remensis (Par. 1615), p. 643. The
like is told in fuller detail of the famous AS. poet Caddmon,
Beda's Hist. eccl. 4, 24 (Frau Aventiure p. 28-9). All these
poets, on awaking in the morning, succeed in a task untried
before (see Suppl.).

Not only does the poetic faculty itself proceed from the gods ;
they invent the very instruments by which song is accompanied.

Apollo, who in Homer plays the phorminx, is said by Galli-


INSTRUMENTS INVENTED. 907

inaclins to Iiave strung the lyre with seven chords ; yet the in-
vention of the lyre is ascribed to Hermes^ who gave it to Apollo.
This is important for ns, as in Waotan there is much of Hermes
and of Apollo, with a preponderance of the former. Ingenuity
is characteristic of Mercury, and I can scarcely doubt that in onr
antiquity, as Wuotan was the inventor of writing and rhythm, so
he was of some instrument to accompany singing.

A confirmation of this is the five-stringed harp (kantelo) of
the Finns, an invention of their highest god Wäinämöinen, who
everywhere represents our Wuotan. First he made kantelo of the
bones of a pike, and when it fell into the sea, he made it again
of birchwood, its pegs of oak bough, and its strings of a mighty
stallion's tail. In the same way Hermes took the tortoise (chelys)
ont of its shell, and mounted this with strings (Hymn to Merc.
24 seq.). Swedish and Scotch folksongs relate, that when a
maiden was drowned, a musician made a harp of her breastbone,
the pegs of her fingers, the strings of her golden hair, and the
(first) stroke of the harp killed her murderess, Sv. folk v. 1, 81.
Scott's Minstr. 3, 81. In one kinderm. no. 28 a bone of the slain
brother is made into a shepherd's whistle, and every time it is
blown, it publishes the crime ; and a Swiss legend tells the same
of a flute (Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 36) . The power of music and
song was explained by giving the instruments a supernatural
origin, and doubtless a remoter antiquity did not leave gods out
of the reckoning.

When Wäinämöinen touches his harp, the whole of nature
listens, the four-footed beasts of the wood run up to him, the
birds come flying, the fish in the waters swim toward him ; tears
of bliss burst from the god's eyes, and fall on his breast, from
his breast to his knees, from his knees to his feet, wetting five
mantles and eight coats, Ealew. rune 22-9. Such tears are shed
^7 Fi^yjft (gr&tfögr, p. 325), her that well liked song, and was
wedded to OSr ; in fairytales lucky maidens have the power to
laugh roses and weep pearls.

The Strömkarl also breaks into weeping when he sings to the
harp (p. 493). But as all nature, animate and inanimate, betrays
her sympathy with human lamentations, so at the sound of the
bewitching albleieh (elf-lay, p. 470), we are told, the rushing
riyer stayed its roar, the fish in the wave clicked with their


908 POETRY.

tongrnes^ the birds of the forest twittered. Next to the gods, it
is elves and watersprites that seem the most initiated into the
mysteries of music, and Hnikarr the teacher of song stands for
OSinn himself (p. 489) .

Bat from gods the gift of poesy passed to particular heroes,
and similar effects are ascribed to their minstrelsy. Two heroes
of Teutonic legend are eminent as minstrels : Horant (Herrant,
AS. Heorrenda, ON. Hiarrandi, conf. Gramm. 1, 352. Z. f. d. a.

2, 4>), of whom it is said in Gudr. 888-9 that by his songrs he
chained all men whole and sick, and that

diu tier in dem walde ir weide liezen stdn,
die wiirme di da selten in dem grase gSn,
die vische die d& selten in dem wäge yliezen,
die liezen ir geverte ;

beasts let be their grazing, creeping things and fishes forsook
their wonted ways. The saga Herrau'Ss ok Bosa (Fornald. sog.

3, 328) couples the Hiarranda-hlioS with the enchanting g^gjar
slagr (giantess's harp- stroke). Then the hero Volker (Folhheri)
plays the fiddle to the Nibelungs 1772 :

under die tare des hflses saz er üf den stein,

küener (bolder) videla^re wart noch nie dehein :

do klungen sine seiten (strings), daz al daz hfts erdoz (rang),

sin eilen zuo der fuoge (art) diu warn beidiu gr6z.

süezer unde senfter gigen er began :

do entswebete er an den betten vil manegen sorgenden man;

he lulled to sleep in their beds full many an anxious man. In
Greek mythology Orpheus and Amphion bear mastery in song.
When Amphion sang, the stones obeyed his lyre, and fitted them*
selves into a wall. Bocks and trees followed after Orpheus, wild
beasts grew tame to him, even the Argo he lured from dry land
into the wave, and dragons he lulled to sleep (entswebete). As
Herm6$r, like him, made the descent to Hades [to fetch Balder
back], and as it is for this same Balder that all beings mourn,
we may fairly suppose that HermoSr too had worked upon them
by music and song, though nothing of the kind is recorded in the
Edda (see Suppl.).

Now if poetry was a joint possession of men and gods, if by


t


HERO-MINSTRELS. 909

gods it had been invented and imparted» it necessarily follows
that antiquity would regard it as a function and business of tbe
priest, and that the notions of priest, prophet and poet would
meet and touch. And here I attach some weight to our finding
the AS. word hregowine (pp. 93. 235), which seems to indicate a
follower and friend of the poet^god Bragi, as we at the present
day call the minstrel a friend or favourite of the Muses. In
lands and times that looked kindly on the tuneful art, we may
e^en suppose that minstrels, especially those of courts, had like
priests a peculiar garb ; particularly instructive on this point is
the information furnished by the Welsh Laws as to the position
and privileges of bards at the king's court, and the Norse sagas
are unanimous on the estimation in which skalds were held.
Poets of the Mid. Ages enjoyed a like distinction at princely
courts, both Teutonic and Romance ; and a close investigation of
this interesting subject might bring out much in our modern
customs, that has its source in the very oldest time^ (see
Suppl.).

I call attention to utterances of MEG. poets, which repre«
sent the art of song as something not acquired, but inborn, i.e.
inspired by God (a sentiment as old as Homer, Od. 22, 347 :
airroSßa/ero^ B* etfjkl, 0e6^ Si fioi iv if>p€<rlv otfia^ iravrola^
hi^vtre). Heinr. von Morunge 1, 53^ says : 'wan ich durch
sane (for song) bin ze der werlte geborn,' it is a burden laid on
him, his mission. Walther 26, 4, referring to God : ' stt ich von
dir beide wort h&n unde wise.' The Wartb. kr. jen. 102 : 'gab
ia Got sinne und sanges site.' Even the later Meistersänger
speak to the same purpose : ' es trieb der Heilig Geist zwölf
manner froh, die fiengen an zu dichten/ Why should not
heathen poets in like manner have traced back their gifts to
Wootan's mead f

The stnging-mcUches also seem to have sprung out of the
simplest nature of poetry itself. As the wise men of old ques-
tioned one another on their knowledge, as heroes proved on each

* Niebohr in Pref. to Merobaudes says : * quern morem eoronajidorum poetarum
earn poeai ipsa, eui semper aliquis bonos mansit, etiam rudibus, quae secutae snnt,
ueciüis perdorasse arbitror.' Bat why go back to the Bomans for what seems to
have been the usage of our own antiquity, when kings, judges, priests, heroes and
miostrels wore garland and fillet, and even the people's poets used to elect a king
of their own 7 * Au pui oA on eorone lea biaus discour,* Benars 1677.


910 POETRY.

other the prowess of their arms, so shehperds and poets sang for
the prize of poetry. OSinn wishes to sound the wisdom (orSspeki)
of the sage giant, Ytng)>orr that of the sage dwarf, the blind
gnest^ that of king HeiiSrekr ; then lays are sung and riddles pro-
pounded, Yaf)^r&%nir expressly stipulating ' höfSi veSja YtS scolom
hollo t, gestr, um geSspeki,' Saam. 38^; they are to wager heads,
as in the contests between cunning smiths or chess-players.
Lives are staked also in the Wartburg war of minstrels : ' nu wirt
gesungen &ne vride . . . stempfel muoz ob uns nu beiden st&n alhie
mit stnem swerte breit, er rihte ab unser eime in roubes site,
dem man valles jehe I ' we'll sing and give no quarter . . . over us
two shall stempfel stand with his broad sword, and despatch as
an outlaw him that g^ts the fall. This transaction is of legend,
not history, but it shews in what a serious light the poetic art
was viewed.

And here let me mention the widely circulated myth of the poet
who sees his property imperilled, because another's memory has
mastered his songs. What passed between Virgil and Bathyllus
is related, with alterations, of Amoldo Danielle and a jongleur
(Diez's Leben der troub. p. 352), but so it is of the Indian Kali-
dasa, whose poem four Brahmans had learnt by heart. The same
Elalidasa and Yalmiki were held to be incarnations of Brahma
himself; what could more firmly establish a poet's reputation
than to pass for an avat&ra of the sublime divinity ?

The gods share their power and influence with goddesses, the
heroes and priests with wise women. Of the Asynjor, Sctga is
named next after Frigg in Sn. 36, and together with 861 in 212 ;
her residence is SökqvtibecJcr, sinking beck, a large and roomy
place ; Sajgones (Saga's ness) in Sasm. 154^ seems also to take its
name from her. In Seam. 41^ Söeqvabeekr is described as a place
where cool waters rush : there 09inn and Saga day by day drink
gladly out of golden cups. This is the drink of immortality, and
at the same time of poesy. Saga may be taken as wife or aa
daughter of O^tnn ; in either case she is identical with him as
god of poetry. With the Greeks the Musa was a daughter of
Zeus, but we often hear of three or nine Muses, who resemble our
wise women, norns and schopferins (shapers of destiny), and dwell

^ 09inn himself ; whose blindness fits in with that of the anolent poets. The
loss of eyes strengthens the memory, it lends the eapaoity and impulse to sing.


BAGA. 911

beside springs or wells.^ The cool flood well befits the swan-
wives^ daughters of Wish. Saga can be no other than onr sage
(saw^ tale), the ' msere' of p. 897 personified and deified.

Oar. 13th cent, poets personify .' ävontiare/ making a frau
Äuentiure, like the norn, foot it overland to the minstrel's hut,
knock and demand admission.^ To this day, when people take
tarns in telling stories, they say ' the märlein goes round from
hoose to house.' Suchenwirth no. xxv describes an apparition
of dame Aventiure on a blooming ea in the forest; she has
travelled through the land to kings and princes as frau Ehre's
messenger, and now presents her report ; putting a gold ring on
her finger, she disappears. I have one thing more to mention,
that M.Nethl. poets make a person of 'aventure' in the sense
of our MHG. frau Ssdlde : ' die Aventure wacht,' Maerl. 2, 14.
'dat rat (rota) van Aventuren/ Rein. 6183, just like Miu Saelde
wacht' and 'Saelden rat' (p. 863-8). I am not aware that in this
they followed the pattern of any Romance poetry (see Suppl.).

That ' passing round ' or alternate telling of myth and märchen
was already a Greek and Roman custom, as we may see by
Ond's Met. lib. iv, where the Minyads during their spinning and
weaving beguile the time by telling tales, 89 :

' utile opus manuum vario sermone levemus,
perque vices aliquid, quod tempera longa videri
non sinat, in medium vacuas referamus ad aures.'
dicta probant, primamque jubent narrare sorores.

167 : Desierat, mediumque fuit breve tempus, et orsa est
dicere Leuconoe, vocem tenuere sorores.

274 : Poscitur Alcithoe, postquam siluere sorores.

Bat it was the festival of Bacchus, the priest had bidden them
keep it, ' immunes operum dominas famulasque suorum,' and the
god avenged himself by turning their web into a tissue of vines
aad ivy, and the Minyads into owls and bats. (The song of
women at the loom is also mentioned by Agathias, p. 29.) Holda
and Berhta are often angry at spinning which desecrates their


^ 0. Boh. glosses in Hanka 56^ : *wodna'»mxiB&* (Jangm. 5, U7). Is this
water-wife, spring-wife 7

' Befs. giyen in my little work qnoted above, p. 810. To these add, from
XJlr. Ton Türheim'8 Wh. 192«, a dialogue of the poet with frau Ayentlure.


912 POETRY.

holy day (pp. 270-4), though otherwise they favour and reward it.
The noma making visitations have spindles, and they sing at
their spinning: the wise women and divine mothers of car
antiquity may be regarded as teachers of song, story and
spindle.


CHAPTER XXXI.
SPECTRES.

A preceding chapter has treated of Souls in their state of
separation from the body and passage to another dwelling-place :
these are the souls that have found their rest^ that have been
taken up into hades or heaven. Thenceforward they sustain only
a more general connexion with earth and the living; their
memory is hallowed by festivals^ and in early times probably by
sacrifices.^

Distinct from these are such spirits as have not become par-
takers^ or not completely^ of blessedness and peace^ but hover
betwixt heaven and earthy and in some cases even return to their
old home. These souls that appear^ that come back^ that haunt^
we call spectres (ghosts) .

The Roman expression for peaceful happy spirits of the dead
was manes, for uncanny disquieting apparitions lemures or larvae;
though the terms fluctuate, for 'manes' can denote spectral
beings too, and ' lemnres ' can have a general meaning (Creuzer's
Symb. 2, 850 — 866). Larva betrays its affinity to lar (p. 500),
and the good kindly la/res were often held to be manes or souls
of departed ancestors. So in our German superstition we find
instances of souls becoming homesprites or kobolds,^ and still
oftener is there a connexion between unquiet spirits and spec-
tres^ (see Suppl.).

' Between the christian All-touU" day (Nov. 2), on which the people visit
ehnrchyards and hang garlands on graves, and the three Boman holidays when the
under world opened (mundtu patei) and the * manee ' ascended (Creazer 2, 865. 0.
Miiller's Etroak. 2, 97), there is a manifest connexion. On the night of Nov. 2 the
Bflthonians set food for the dead, and rejoice when they find any of it gone in the
morning. In the Fellin district near Dorpat the departed souls are received in the
bath-room, and bathed one after the other, HnpePs Naohr. p. 144, conf . Possart^s
Estland p. 172-3 ; exactly as food is set before angels and homesprites (p. 448).

2 I confine myself here to one Hessian folktfde. Kurt^ a farmer at Hachbom,
would not qnit the farm even after his death, bat lent a hand in the fieldwork as
a good spirit. In the bam he helped the labourer to throw sheaves from the loft :
when the man threw one, Kurt wonld throw another. Bat once, when a strange
servant got up into the loft, he would not help ; at the cry ' You throw, Kurt I * he
seized the man and flong him on the thrashingfioor, breaJdng his l^gs.

* Isengrim changes into Agemnnd (p. 611).

913


914 SPECTRES.

For the quiet spirits and their condition^ our language has a
beaatifal adj.^ 0H6. Muri laetus^ mitis, AS« heoru, Beow. 2744^
ON. hyr, MHG. gehiure, our geheuer when we say 'as ist
geheuer^' all is quiet, happy, peaceful. The contrary is ex-
pressed by OHG. and OS. unhiuri dims, saevns, AS. unheoru,
Beow. 1967 (unhiore 4822. unh^re 4236. Csödm. 188, 5), ON.
ohyr, MHG. ungehiure, our ungeheuer : ' es ist ungeheuer,' there's
something wrong. But both words go further, God is c^led
hiuri, the devil unhiuri; ungeheuer is monstrum, portentum in
general. The Gothic form would be hiuria, which seems nearly
allied to hadri (pruna, ember), ON. hyr ignis, and is therefore
the shining, the bright ; if an OHG. gloss in Graff 4, 1014 be
correct, even the non-negative hiuri may signify dims, viz. fiery
in a bad sense, such as we shall find presently in connexion with
ignes fatui. Much the same in meaning with hiuri and unhiuri
are holdo and unholdo (pp. 266. 456), though these are applied
more to spirits and daemons than to human souls ; yet Notker
renders 'manes' by unholdon, so that holdo and unholdo also
appear synonymous here.

The OHG. hispanst fem. (our gespenst n., spectre) meant
properly suggestio (from spanan, suggerere); but as the forms
of confession dealt much with devilish suggestion and entice-
ment, ^ men came to use it habitually of ghostly delusion and
illusion. Boner 94, 54 has ' din gespenst ' (why not gespanst F)
for phantom, apparition. The neuter is found in the Msdre vom
schretel und wazzerber 92 quite in the above connexion: 'des
tiuvels valant und sin gespenste ' ; even earlier, Herbert 3500
couples gespenste and getw&s. Keisersperg (Omeiss 89) has
des teufels gespenst (praestigium) : not tUl recent centuries did
the term become really common, and some spelt it gespengst}

We also say spuTc ; it is a LG. word, which first occurs in the
Chron. saxon. (Eccard p. 1891) in the form spohne ; Detmar 1,
136 has spuky and 2, 206 vorspok praesagium. Nowadays spok,
Nethl. spook, spookzel, Swed. spoke, Dan. spökenis ▲.d. 1618,
spögelse spectrum, spdg jocus; we should therefore expect a
MHG. spuoch. Mod. spuch, but it is nowhere to be found.


^ * Yon des teufels gespenste,* instigation, Oberlin's BihtebnocbL S6.
Frisch 2, 3021^ ; but he thinks it conn, with Lat. $pectTum.


8PECTBES. 915

Gespüc indeed stands in Berthold^ Cod. pal. 35^ fol. 27^ (see
SappL).

More precise is the ON. aptrganga tern., Laxd. saga p. 224^ as
if anima rediens^ Dan. gienförd, gienganger, Pr. revenanty Saxo
Gram. 91 says redivivus ; conf. onr phrase ' es geht um* some-
thing hannts (lit. goes abont) ; ' at hann gengi eigi daaSr/ that
he walk not when dead^ Fomald. sog. 2, 346. To hannt is in
L. Sax. dvjetem^ on the Harz walten (Harry^s Volkss. 2, 46) .

The regular word in ON. is draugr, Fomm. sog. 3, 200 :
OSinn is styled * drauga dröttinn/ Yngl. saga cap. 7, and a
gravemonnd draugahus, Saam. 169*. The word is lost in
Sweden and Denmark, bat lives in the Norweg. drou, droug
(Hallager 20*). It seems to be of one root with 0H6. gitroe,
MHG. getroc, delasive apparition, phantom, used of elvish and
fiendish beings (p. 464); but our verb triegen, 0HG-. triokan
trdc (fallere) has no corresponding driuga in the Northern lan-
guages.^ The Edda uses the analogous svik (fallacia, fraus)
likewise in the sense of a ghostly jugglery, Ssam. 166^. 167*.
And that is also the meaning of the terms giscin and 8(Anleih
qaoted p. 482 ; they can refer to spectres as well as to wood-
sprites (see Suppl.) .

The glosses yield a number of old words for the Lat. larva.
To begin with the earliest, the Florent. 982^ gives talamasga,
and the later M.Nethl. coll. (Dint. 2, 220) talmasge, Kilian too
has ialmasche larva, talmaschen larvam induere; it is the O.Fr.
ialmache, tamasehe in Eoquefort, who explains it as masque, faux
visage, and ' talmache de vaisseau ' is a figare fixed on a ship.^
Other glosses have flathe, and scraz, scrat (p. 478). Mummel is
both larva and kobold (p. 506). Anything nncanny and alarm-
ing, monstrum, prodigium, portentnm, praestigium, acquires the
meaning of spectre too. Again, getwaa (p. 464), Herbort 842.
12856. *ein böse getwds, Vom gelouben 530; the M.Nethl.
ghedwaesy Hon belg. 6, 249 agi*ees with the Lith. dwase, spectre
[v. the LS. verb dwetern above] . In Martina 10 we read ' daz

^ AS. dreogan dre£hi thongh answering letter for letter, never means fftllere,
bat agere, patiaxe, tolerare, to droe ; agreeing with ON. driogr, freqaens.

' Dneaoge sub. y. talamasca, trirtxa, delnsio imaginaria ; the author, cited are
Hinemar in eapit. ad presb. dioeo. cap. 14 ; Begino 1, 218 ; Burchardus wormat. 2,
161, ^o says: Marras daemonum, quas vulgo talanuueaa dionnt, ante se fern
coQsenfciat.' Eztr. from Gonoil. namnetenae cap. 10 ; oonf . Sehmeller 2, 640.

VOL. ra. C


916 8PEGTBBS.

gesehrudel; ' and in Staid. 2, 27. 59. 64 das nachthuri, das ghudi.
The ON. vofa is spectrnni, from vofa ingraere^ imminere; the
drangr is also called a dolgr, foe, Fomald. sog. 2, 868. Fomm.
sog. 3, 200, and from this perhaps comes the upland dodoljor^
manes defanctomm (Ihre's Dial. lex. 82^), if not from dylja
(celare), Sw. dölja (see Snppl.).

Now it is remarkable that even the ON. drangar are described
as begirt with fire : ' hanga eldar brenna/ Fomald. sog. 1, 434.
'Inpu npp haaga eldamir' 1, 518. Loka daun (p. 242) is the
Icel. name of a fiery exhalation. To this day it is the popular
belief all over Germany, that seals which have not attained
heavenly peace roam at night like bewildered birds, in fiery
sha/pe^ on field and meadow, conf. wiesenhiipfer p. 829. The
traveller, who takes them for village lights, ihey lure oat of hia
way, now approaching, now retiring : they perch on his back like
kobolds (Saperst. I, 611), and flap their wings together over him
(Dent. sag. no. 276) ; they lead into bogs, on deceptive devioos
tracks, hirrlig-epor (St. 2, 45), exactly like the butz, p. 507.
The pedestrian tries to keep one foot at least in the carriage-rat,
and then he gets on safely, for ignes fatui have power on foot-
paths only. According to Yillemarquä's Barzasbreiz 1, 100 the
spirit is a child with a firebrand in his hand, which he whirls
ronnd like a flaming wheel ; now he appears as a sick horse, and
when the herdsman would lead him into the stable, hurls the
brand at his head ; now as a bleating goat gone astray, that after
sandown shews itself on the pond, and tempts the traveller into
the water, then scampers off to tease him. In Etner's Unwürd.
doctor p. 747, ' fire-men and frisking goats ' are coupled together.
The phenomenon has a vast variety of names. Our com-
monest one is irUcht (err-light) and, from its resemblance to a
burning wisp of straw, irwisch and on the Rhine heerwisch; in
Austria feuriger mann and fiichtelmann (Höfer 1, 251) from
fuchteln to burnish or jerk to and fro, viz. the fiery blade.' In

^ In Lansitz the ignis lambens that plays about the tops of forest trees is oaUed
feuermarm, Laos, monatsschr. 1797. p. 749.

* These fiezy exhalations also settle on the mattt of ihip», Marienleg. 87« 9S, or
the tpears of warrion. The fonner kind the ancients named after the Dioaeori,
Pliny 2, 87, the modems call it *fen de St. Elme.' For the flaming speais I have
old authorities : * signa (also, püa) militum arsere^' Tao. Ann. 12, 64. 15, 7. * dnae
pueromm lanoeae, emissis flammis, lumen euntibus praebuenmt, ibantqne fal>
gurantee hastae,' Greg. tur. mirao. liart. 1, 10. And a modem instance in Zeiller*B


WILL O' THE WISP. 917

Pictorius p. 524 zensier {vom zeusein, züseln to toy with fire ; other-
wise tuneler, zundler, and in Fischart's Gbrg. 231 zunsel-gespenat^
conf. Höfer sub v. zinserL In Low Gterm. gloiniger (glowing)
man; tuckebold, tuJckebode, not from tiicke malice, but from tuk a
qaick movement (Reinh. p. 109) or ^zucken to dart to and fro,
conf. HG. ziebold butterfly ; in Wesfcph. smalgenfär, which I can
hardly make out. More generally known are dwerlickt (whirl-
ing flame) ; elflicht ; dwellicht (from dwelen, dwalen to stray) ;
Nethl. dwaaUicht ; droglicht (deceptive again), drogfackel, and
in Nassau druekfacJcel, Kehrein's Nas. 81-2. Dan. lygtemand
(lantern-man), hlaasmand (Molbech's Dial. 39) and vätte-lys
(light of wights, sprites) ; Swed. lye-eld, lyktgubbe; Engl.*, with
that fondness for christening which we noticed under home-
sprites (p. 504), Will wiih a miep, Jack in a lanthorn. Lat.
ignis faiuus (Ann. corbei. an. 1034); Fr.feufollet (foUis, p. 508),
fifollet (Plnquet's Gontes p. 13), farfadet, sauterai, also, ace. to
M^m. des ant. 4, 406, a qiLela incomprehensible to me. ' Sloven.
vezha (butterfly, witch), skkopnik, -niak (straw-man, from shkopa,
MH6. scboup), smotava (from smota, error), slep ogeni (blind
fire) ; svetylko (light, dim.), bludicka (from bind, error) ; Pol.
hlednica ; Lans. bludne swieczke ; Buss, blvdidshchiy ogonL I do
not know any very old names even in Teutonic languages, unless
it be irregane and girregar in a Königsberg MS. (Grundr. 345) ;
but Irregane in Ls. 2, 314 is the name of a wandering scholar,
and irrefogel in Haupt's Zeitschr. 1, 438 means the same, conf.
Schm. 8^ 588 ; the Titurel 576 has ' ein irregengel vor allem
valsche.' The two words vatte-lys and elf4icht, shewing a close
connexion with wights and elves, are perhaps the oldest we have.
Sindri (scintilla), a dwarTs name in the Edda, Ssam. 7^ suggests
the Slav homesprite Iskrzycki (iskra spark, p. 513). A story
is told of an irwisch getting caught, and a great many more
coming soon after to claim him back : this represents them as an
elvish people, who stick to one another.^

MisoelL (Nfiinb. 1661) p. U8-4. Dent. sAg. no. 279. None of these refer to souls«
they are rather happy omens of viotory, as will be shewn in eh. XXXV. Shooting
•tars indeed pass for sonls (p. 722), even with the Greenlanders (Majer*s Myth,
lex. 2, 240) and Mongols (Bergmann 8, 42).

> Ad. Kuhn (Pref. to Mark, sagen p. ix) is for regarding all kobolds as orig.
fire-divinHies, and the domestic hearth-fire as the foundation of their worship.
Both kobolds and will o* wisps are called follet (p. 508-14)« and kobolds, like fiery
dragons (p. 691), bring money or com; but the adder too is of kobold nature
(p. 691), and the dominae bring gifts (p. 287), and so do devils.


918 SPECTRES.

Will o' wisps had once, no doubt, a wider meaning, wliict has
now been narrowed down mainly to two classes of unblessed
spirits, the souls of unchristened hahes^ and those of men who in
their lifetime dealt wrongly by the cornfield, who respected nofc
the sacredness of landmarks.' Unrighteous land-surveyors (Swed.
skiäll-vrängare) may be seen hovering up and down the furrows
with a long fiery pole, as if re-measuring the wrongly measured ;
whoso has ploughed of his neighbour's land, whoso has moved
the mark-stone, on him falls the curse of wandering as a will
o^ wisp. Hence about ploughing debatable strips, one hears
the people say: 'ik mag nut spiiken gan,' conf. Deut. sag.
nos. 284-5. Thiele 1, 58 (see Suppl.).

Another class of spectres will prove more fruitful for our
investigation: they, like the ignes fatui, include unchristened
babes, but instead of straggling singly on the earth as fires,
they sweep through forest and air in whole companies^ with a
horrible din. This is the widely spread legend of the furious
host, the furious hunt, which is of high antiquity, and interyreaves
itself, now with gods, and now with heroes. Look where you
will, it betrays its connexion with heathenism.

The Christians had not so quickly nor so completely renounced
their faith in the gods of their fathers, that those imposing
figures could all at once drop out of their memory. Obstinately
clung to by some, they were merely assigned a new position
more in the background. The former god lost his sociable cha-
racter, his near familiar features, and assumed the aspect of a
dark and dreadful power, that still had a certain amount of infla-
ence left. His hold lost upon men and their ministry, he wan-
dered and hovered in the air, a spectre and a devil.

I have already affirmed on p. 132 a connexion between this
wilteude heer and Wu^otan, the god being linked with it in name

1 Bratmschw. anz. 1760 no. 86, 85. Fraetorii Weltbesohr. 1, 262-9. Laos.
monatsB. 1797 p. 747. So far back as the Anegenge 180^. 190i> : *w& mit diu armen
chindeltn dazfiwer haben gesohoufet, diti d& ungeUmfet &n ir schulde scheident von
hinne ; ' bnt here the fire of purgatory is meant.

a Ungerechte siebner, Möser's Patr. phant. 8, 809. * fürig marcTier^* will o'
wisps, in Hebel*s poem. Mone's Anz. 1886, 408. 1838, 223. Westendorp p. 511.

* Yet there are some braiuende geister (blnstering spirits) that go singly too,
as * jongfer Eli * in the Da vert, I>ent. sag. no. 121. Their name of * brans, g.* iB
Tonched for by Plitt's Nachr. von Wetter p. 42.


FüMOUS HOST : WüOTAN. 919

as in reality. An nnprinted poem of Rüdiger von Monir con-
tains among other conjuring formnlas 'bi Wiiotunges her J
Waotunc and Wuotan are two names of one meaning. Waotan,
the god of war and yictory, rides at the head of this aerial
phenomenon ; when the Mecklenburg peasant of this day hears
the noise of it^ he says 'de Wode tut (zieht)/ Adelung sub v.
wuthen ; so in Pomerania and Holstein^ * Wode jaget/ W. hunts
(p. 156). Wuotan appears ridings driving, hunting, as in Norse
sagas, with valkyrs and einheriar in his train; the procession
resembles an army. Full assurance of this hunting Wode's
identity with the heathen god is obtained from parallel phrases
and folktales in Scandinavia. The phenomenon of howling wind
is referred to OSin*s waggon, as that of thunder is to Thorns.
On hearing a noise at night, as of horses and carts, they say
in Sweden ' Oden far forhi.* ^ In Schonen an uproar produced
perhaps by seafowl on November and December evenings is
called Od/ens jagt.^ In Bavaria they say nacht-gejaid or nacht'
gelaU (processio nocturna), Schm. 2, 264. 514 ; in German
Bohemia nacU-^otcZ = spectre, Bank's Böhmerwald pp. 46. 78. 83.
91. In Thuringia, Hesse, Franconia, Swabia, the traditional
term is ' das vmtende heer/ and it must be one of long standing :
the 12th cent, poet of the Urstende (Hahn 105, 35) uses ' daz
wuetunde her ' of the Jews who fell upon the Saviour ; in Bol.
204, 16 Pharaoh's army whelmed by the sea is ' sin wotigez her/
in Strieker 73^ ' daz wüetunde her * ; Beinfr. v. Brnswg. 4^ ' daz
wüetende her*; Mich. Beheim 176, 5 speaks of a 'crying and
whooping (wufen) as if it were das wütend her'; the poem of
Henry the Lion (Massm. denkm. p. 132) says, 'then came he
among daz wöden her, where evil spirits their dwelling have.'
Geiler v. Keisersperg preached on the wütede or wütische heei*?
H. Sachs has a whole poem on the wütende heer, Agricola and
Eiering relate a Mansfeld legend. It is worth noticing, that ace.


^ Loocenii Antiq. STeog. eap. 8. Geijer Sy. bäfd. 1, 268.

* NilBson's SkandinayiBk fauna 2, 106.

t Omeias 86 seq. ; his desGiiption deserves a place here : * And they that so
ran, nm mostly at the fron-fasts, and chiefly at the fron-frat before ChrUtnuu, that
is the holiest tide. And every one runneth as he is in his raiment, the peasant as
a peasant, the knight as a kxüght, so run they in a string, and one beareth the krös
before him, another hi$ head in his hand, and one runneth before, that crieth, Flee
oat of the way, that Qod give thee thy life I Thus speak the meaner sort thereon.
I know nought thereof.*


920 SPECTRES.

to Keisersperg all who die a violent death ' ere that God bath set
it for them/ and ace. to Superst. I^ 660 all children dying un-
baptized, come into the fnrioas host to Holda (p. 269), Berhta
and Abandia (p. 288)^ jnst as they tarn into will o' wisps (p.
918) : as the christian god has not made them his, they fall due
to the old heathen one. This appears to me to have been at
least the original coarse of ideas (see Sappl.).

While in this connexion the meaner sort long cherished the
thought of Wiwtan, or conveniently stowed him away in a cog-
nate verb; it was qnite in the regnlar course of things that the
more cultivated should from an early time put the devil in bis
place« ' Si bliesen unde guUen, vreisliche si huUen, so daz diu
helle wägete, alse der tuvel da jagete/ says Yeldeck in En. 3239.
Caesarias heisterb. 12, 20 tells of a vain woman, who had herself
buried in fine new shoes, and whose soul was therefore hunted by
the infemalie venator : ' ex remoto vox quasi venatoris terribiliter
buccinantis, necnon et latratus canum venaticorum praecedentiam
audiuntur.' ^ ' der tiuwel hftt üz gesaut ein geswarme und sin her/
Rol. 204, 6. ' der tiuvel und ein her/ Kenn. 2249. 2870. The
people in Bavaria say that on Ash- Wednesday the devil chases the
little wood-wife, Saperst. I, 914^. With the devil is associated
the figare of an enormous giant, who can stand for him as well
as for Wuotan ; and this opinion prevails in Switzerland. There
therwild bant is named dursten^gejeg (see durs, )>ur8, p. 521) : on
summer nights you hear the durst hunting on the Jura, cheering
on the hounds with his hoho ; heedless persons, that do not get
out of his way, are ridden over.' Schm. 1, 458 quotes an old
gloss which renders by duris durisis the Lat. Dis Ditis, and
plainly means a subterranean infernal deity.

In Lower Saxony and Westphalia this Wild Hunter is identified
with a particular person, a certain semi-historic master of a hunt.
The accounts of him vary. Westphalian traditions call him


1 Joach. Camerarii Hone snbBee. cent. 2. eap. 100 p. 890 : Oetemm negari non
potest, diabolum yaria ladibria own alias turn praescotim in Tonatione leponun
saepenmnero exereere, com nonnunqoam appareant tripedei claudicanUi et ignns
oetilis, iUisqne praeter morem dependentibne viUiB, atqne Tenatores inaeqnentes
abdnoere stndent vel ad praeoipitia rel ad palndoaa aliaqne pericnloea looa. Imo
Tisa sunt phantatmata et in terra et in nnbibas inUgrai venationei com canibna,
retibns, olamoribtu raneiB tarnen, aliieque instnunentis TonatioiB inetitaere, prae-
ierentia formas hominnm longe ante defnnetorom.

3 Bdef. y. Arz, Bnchsgan p. 230. Staid. 1, 208.


FUBIOÜS host: HAGKEIifiBBND. 921

Hachelbärend, Hackelhemd, Hackelherg, Hdekelhlock. This HackeU
bärend was a hantsman who went a hunting even on Sundays^
for which desecration he was after death (like the man in the
mooD^ p. 717) banished into the air, and there with his hound he
must hnnt night and day, and never rest. Some say, he only
bants in the twelve nights from Christmas to Twelfth-day;
others, whenever the eiarm^unnd hawU, and therefore he is called
by some the joUjäger (from yawling, or Ynlef).^ Once, in a
ride, Hackelberg left one of his hounds behind in Fehrmann^s bam
at Isenstadt (bpric« Minden). There the dog lay a whole year,
and all attempts to dislodge him were in vain. Bot the next
year, when Hackelberg was round again with his wild hnnt, the
hoand suddenly jumped up, and ran yelping and barking after
the troop.* Two young fellows from Bergkirchen were walking
through the wood one evening to visit their sweethearts, when
they heard a wild barking of dogs in the air above them, and a
voice calling out between ' hoto, hoto I ' It was Haekelbloch the
wild hunter, with his hunt. One of the men had the hardihood to
mock his ' hoto, hoto.' Hackelblock with his hounds came up, and
set the whole pack upon the infatuated man ; from that hour not
a trace has been found of the poor fellow.' This in Westphalia.
The Low Saxon legend says, Ha/ns von Hackelnberg was chief
master of the hounds to the Duke of Brunswick, and a mighty
woodman, said to have died in 1521 (some say, bom that year, died
1581), Landau's Jagd 190. His tombstone is three leagues from
Ooslar, in the garden of an inn called the Elepperkrag. He had
a bad dream one night ; he fancied he was fighting a terrific boar
and got beaten at last. He actually met the beast soon after, and
brought it down after a hard fight ; in the joy of his victory he
kicked at the boar, crying * now slash if you can I ' But he had
kicked with such force, that the sharp tiuth went through his
boot, and injured his foot.' He thought little of the wound at
first, but the foot swelled so that the boot had to be cut off his


' Weddigen*8 WettfaL mag. toL 8, no. 18.

* Bedeker'8 WestfiU. sagen, noB. 48 and 47.

* * BignzVr iarl dzap Melbri^a Tonn« ok bAtt hSMS hans viK slagAlar ser oc
■lant kykqva vöt$Ta atnom 4 tönnina, er Aaüi or höfSino, kom H^ 1 blAstr 1 fötinn,
oe feek hann af ^ bana/ Har. saga ens härf. cap. 23. Gnndaiioh the son of
TbaMilo diea of a wonnd in his call inflieted by a boar, MB. 18, 604-6. Conf .
Orion's fate, end of this chapter.


922 SPECTBES.

leg, and a speedy death ensaed. Some say he lies baried at
Wülperode near Hombqrg.^ This Hachelnberg 'fatsches' in
storm and rain^ with carriage^ horses and hounds^ through the
Thüringerwald, the Harz, and above all the Hackel (a forest
between Halberstadt, Groningen and Derenbarg, conf. Praet
weltb. 1, 88). On his deathbed he would not hear a word aboat
heaven, and to the minister's exhortations he replied : ' the Lord
may keep his heaven, so he leave me my hunting; ' whereupon
the parson spoke : ' hunt then till the Day of Judgment ! ' which
saying is fulfilled unto this day.^ A faint baying or yelpiiig of
hounds gives warning of his approach, before him flies a night-
owl named by the people Tutosel (tut-ursel, tooting Ursula}.
Travellers, when he comes their wekj,fall silently on tlieir faces,
and let him pass by; they hear a barking of dogs and the hunts-
man's ^ huhu ! ' Tutosel is said to have been a nun, who afler
her death joined Hackelnberg and mingled her iuhu with his
huhiL^ The people of Altmark place a wild hunter named Eakke"
berg in the Drömling, and make him ride down by night with
horses and hounds from the Harz into the Drömling (Temme,
p. 87). Ad. Kuhn no. 17 calls him Hackenberg and Hackelberg:
he too is said to have hunted on Sundays, and forced all the
peasants in his parish to turn out with him ; but one day a pair
of horsemen suddenly galloped up to him, each calling to him to
come along. One looked wild and fierce, and fire spirted out of
his horse's nose and mouth; the left-hand rider seemed more
quiet and mild, but Hackelberg turned to the wild one, who
galloped off with him, and in his company he must hunt until the
Last Day. Kuhn has written down some more stories of the
wild hunter without proper names, nos. 68. 175. There are others
again, which tell how Hackelberg dwelt in the Soiling, near
üslar, that he had lived in the fear of God, but his heart was so
much in the chase, that on his deathbed he prayed Grod, that /or
his share of heaven he might be let hunt in the Soiling tül the
Judgment'day, His wish became his doom, and oil in that forest
one hears by night both bark of hound and horrible blast of horo.


^ Otmar*B YolkBaagen 249. 250.

^ Like Dümeke's desire to drive his waggon for ever (p. 726).
* Otmar 241. Beat. sag. no. 811. Conf. Qoth. >iatan (ololare), >at-haüin
(taba).


FXJBIOÜS host: HACEEL6EBND. 923

His grave is in tlie Soiling too^ the arrangement of the stones is
minatelj described; two black bounds rest beside bim.^ And
lastly, Kohn's no. 205 and Temme's Altmark p. 106 inform ns of
a heath-rider Bären, whose barial-place is shewn on the heath
near Grimnitz in the Ukermark; this Barents dream of the stampf-
schwanz (bobtail, i.e. boar) points unmistakably to Hackelbärend.
The irreconcilable diversity of domiciles is enough to shew,
in the teeth of tombstones, that these accounts all deal with a
mythical being : a name that crops up in such various localities
most be more than historical. I am disposed to pronounce the
Westph. form Hackelbererul the most ancient and genuine. An
OHG. hahhnl [Goth, hakuls], ON. hökuU m. and hekla f., AS.
hacele f., means garment, cloak, cowl, armour ; ' hence hdkol-
berand is OS. for a man in arniour, conf. OS. w&panberand (ar-
miger), AS. 89scberend, g&rberend, helmb., sweordb. (Gramm. 2,
589). And now remember OSin's dress (p. 146) : the god ap-
p^rs in a broad-brimmed hat, a blue and spotted cloak {hekla
bift, flekkott) ; hakolbertmd is unmistakably an OS. epithet of the
heathen god Wodan, which was gradually corrupted into HackeU
berg, Hackenberg, H(ickeU)lock. The name of the HackeU^ood
may be an abbrev. of Hakelbemd's wood. The ' saltus Hakel *
in Halberstadt country is mentioned first in the (doubtful)
Chron. corbeiense ad an. 936 (Falke p. 708) ; a long way ofi*,
hard by Höxter in the Auga gau, there was a Hacules^ov^
(Wigand's Corv. güterb. p. 94. Saracho 197. Trad. corb. 385)
and afterwards a jETaci^Jbreite ; then in L. Hesse, a HackeUhevg
near Yolkmarsen, and a R<ickelheTg by Merzhausen (bailiw. Wit-
zenhausen). But if a hakel = wood can be proved, the only trace
of a higher being must be looked for in berand, and that may be
found some day ; in ch. XXXIII. I shall exhibit Hakol in the ON.
Hekla as mountain, hence wooded heights, woodland. In any
case we here obtain not only another weighty testimony to
Woden- worship, but a fresh confirmation of the meaning I attach
to the ' wütende heer ' ; and we see clearly how the folktale of
Hackelberg came to be preserved in Westphalia and L. Saxony

1 Eirehbof 8 Wendnnmnt no. 288, p. 842. Dent. Mg. no. 171. The Brann-
Bchw. anz. 1747, p. 1940 says the wUd nonter Hackelnberg lies in the Steinfeld,
under a Btone on which a mole and a hound are carved.

' OHQ. missa-hahol (ca8nla),St. Qall gl. 203 ; miBse-haohil, Gl. herrad. 185^ is
maaa-weed, ohaaaUe, Grail 4, 797.


924 8PECTBBS.

(where heathenism lasted longer) rather than in Sonth Gtermany
(yet see Habsberg, HOgelberg, Moneys Anz. 4^ 300. •HacJUUtat,
Graff 4, 797).

That the wild hnnter is to be referred to Wödan^ is made per-
fectly clear by some Mecklenbarg legends.

Often of a dark night the airy hoonds will bark on open beaihs^
in thickets, at cross-roads. The countryman well knows their
leader Wod, and pities the wayfarer that has not reached his
home yet ; for Wod is often spitefal, seldom merciful. It is only
those who keep in the middle of the road that the rough hunter
will do nothing to, that is why he calls out to travellers: ' midden
in den weg I '

A peasant was coming heme tipsy one night from town, and
his road led him through a wood ; there he hears the wild hunt,
the uproar of the hounds, and the shout of the huntsman up in
the air : ' midden in den weg ! ' cries the voice, but he takes no
notice. Suddenly out of the clouds there plunges down, right
before him, a tall man on a white horse. ' Are you strong ? ' says
he, ' here, catch hold of this chain, we^ll see which can pull the
hardest.' The peasant courageously grasped the heavy chain, and
up flew the wild hunter into the air. The man twisted the end
round an oak that was near, and the hunter tugged in vain.
* Haven't you tied your end to the oak ? ' asked Wod, coming
down. ' No,* replied the peasant, ' look, I am holding it in my
hands.' ' Then you'll be mine up in the clouds,' cried the hunter
as he swung himself aloft. The man in a hurry knotted the chain
round the oak again, and Wod could not manage it. ' You must
have passed it round the tree,' said Wod, plunging down. ' No,'
answered the peasant, who had deftly disengaged it, ' here I have
got it in my hands.' ' Were you heavier than lead, you must up
into the clouds with me.' He rushed up as quick as lightning,
but the peasant mani^ed as before. The dogs yelled, the waggons
rumbled, and the horses neighed overhead ; the tree crackled to
the roots, and seemed to twist round. The man's heart began
to sink, but no, the oak stood its ground. ' Well pulled 1 ' said
the hunter, ' many's the man Fve made mine, you are the first
that ever held out against me, you shall have your reward.' On
went the hunt, full cry : hallo, holla, wol, wol 1 The peasant was
slinking away, when from unseen heights a stag fell groaning at


FUBIOUS HOST: WUOTAN. 925

lis feet^ and there was Wad, who leaps off his white horse and
cuts np the game. ' Thou shalt have some blood and a hind-
quarter to boot/ ' My lord/ quoth the peasant, 'thy servant has
neither pot nor pail.' ' Pull off thy boot,' cries Wod. The man
did so. ' Now walk, with blood and flesh, to wife and child.'
At first terror lightened the load, but presently it gfrew heavier
and heavier, and he had hardly strength to carry it. With his
back bent double, and bathed in sweat, he at length reached his
cottage, and behold, the boot was filled with gold, and the hind-
quarter was a leathern pouch full of silver.^ Here it is no human
bunt-master that shows himself, but the veritable god on. his
white steed : many a man has he taken up into his cloudy heaven
before. The filling of the boot with gold sounds antique.

There was once a rich lady of rank, named frau Oauden ; so
passionately she loved the chase, that she let fidl the sinful word,
'conld she but always hunt, she cared not to win heaven.' Fonr-
and-twenty danghters had dame Oauden, who all nursed the same
desire. One day, as mother and daughters, in wild delight,
bunted over woods and fields, and once more that wicked word
escaped their lips, that 'hunting was better than heaven,' lo,
suddenly before their mother's eyes the daughters' dresses turn
into tufts of fur, their arms into legs, and four-and- twenty bitches
bark around the mother's hunting-car, four doing duty as horses,
tbe rest encircling the carriage ; and away goes the wild train
np into the clouds, there betwixt heaven and earth to hxmt un^
ceasingly, as they had wished, from day to day, from year to
year. They have long wearied of the wild pursuit, and lament
tbeir impious wish, but they must bear the fruits of their guilt
till the hour of redemption come. Come it will, but who knows
when f During the twolven (for at other times we sons pf men
cannot perceive her) frau Oauden directs her hunt toward human
babitations ; best of all she loves on the night of Christmas eve
or New Year's eve to drive through the village streets, and where-
ever she finds a etreet-door open, she sends a dog in. Next morn-
ing a little dog wags his tail at the inmates, he does them no
other harm but that he disturbs their night's rest by his whining.
He is not to be pacified, nor driven away. Kill him, and he turns

1 Lisch, Mecklenb. Jahrbuch 5, 78—80.


926 SPBCTBBS.

into a stone by day^ wliicli, if thrown away^ comes t>ack to the
house by main force, and is a dog again at night. So be
whimpers and whines the whole year round, brings sickness and
death upon man and beast, and danger of fire to the house ; not
till the twölven come round again does peace return to the house.
Hence all are careful in the twelves, to keep the great house-door
well locked up after nightfall ; whoever neglects it, has himself
to blame if frau Oattden looks him up. That is what happened
to the grandparents of the good people now at Bresegardt.
They were silly enough to kill the dog into the bargain ; froxa
that hour there was no ' säg und tag ' (segen bless, ge-deihen
thrive), and at length the house came down in flames. Better
luck befalls them that have done danie Oauden a service. It
happens at times, that in the darkness of night she misses her
way, and gets to a cross-road. Oross'toads are to the good lady
a stone of stumbling : every time she strays into such, some part
of her carriage breaks^ which she cannot herself rectify. In this
dilemma she was once, when she came, dressed as a stately dame,
to the bedside of a labourer at Boeck, awaked him, and implored
him to help her in her need. The man was prevailed on, followed
her to the cross-roads, and found one of her carriage wheels was
off. He put the matter to rights, and by way of thanks for his
trouble she bade him gather up in his pockets sundry deposits
left by her canine attendants during their stay at the cross-roads,
whether as the effect of great dread or of good digestion. The
man was indignant at the proposal, but was partly soothed by
the assurance that the present would not prove so worthless as
he seemed to think; and incredulous, yet ourious, he took some
with him. And lo, at daybreak, to his no small amazement, his
earnings glittered like mere gold, and in &ct it was gold. He
was sorry now that he had not brought it all away, for in the
daytime not a trace of it was to be seen at the cross-roads. In
similar ways frau Qauden repaid a man at Gonow for putting a
new pole to her carriage, and a woman at Göhren for letting into
the pole the wooden pivot that supports the swing-bar : the chips
that fell from pole and pivot turned into sheer glittering gold.
In particular, /rati Oauden loves young children, and gives them
all kinds of good things, so that when children play at/ni Oauden,
they sing :


FUKious host: wuotan. 927

fni Oauden hett mi'n lämmken geven^
darmitt sail ik in freaden leven.

Nevertheless in coarse of time she left the coantry ; and this
is how it came aboat. Careless folk at Semmerin had leflb their
street-door wide open one St. Silvester night ; so on New-year's
morning they foand a black doggie lying on the hearth, who
dinned their ears the following night with an intolerable whining.
They were at their wit's end how to get rid of the unbidden guest.
A shrewd woman put them np to a thing : let them brew all the
house-beer through an ' eierdopp.' They tried the plan ; an egg-
shell was pat in the tap-hole of the brewing-vat, and no sooner
had the ' wörp ' (fermenting beer) run through it, than dame
Oauden^s doggie got np and spoke in a distinctly audible voice :
' Ae bun so old as Böhmen gold, awerst dat heff ik min leder nicht
traht, wenn man 't bier dorch 'n eierdopp bruht,' after saying
which he disappeared, and no one has seen /rau Oauden or her
dogs ever since ^ (see Suppl.).

This story is of a piece with many other ancient ones. In the
first place, frau Oauden resembles frau Holda and Berlita, who
likewise travel in the ' twelves,' who in the same way get their
vehicles repaired and requite the service with gold, and who
finally quit the coantry (pp. 268, 274-6). Then her name is that
of /raw Qaue,frau Oode,frau Wode (p. 252-3) who seems to have
sprung out of a male divinity ^o Woden (p. 156), a matter which is
placed beyond doubt by her identity with Wodan the wild hunter.
The very dog that stays in the house a year, Hakelberg's
(p. 921) as well as frau Gauden's, is in perfect keeping. The
astonishment he expresses at seemingly perverse actions of men,
and which induces him, like other ghostly elvish beings, to
speak and begone, is exactly as in the stories given at p. 469.

At the same time the transformation of the wild hunter into
goddesses appears tf\ be not purely arbitrary and accidental, but
accounted for by yet other narratives.

E. M. Amdt^ tells the tale of the wild hunter (unnamed) in the
following shape : In Saxony there lived in early times a rich and
°^^hty prince, who loved hunting above aU things, and sharply

1 Lisch, MecU. jb. 8, 203—5. In the Prignitz they tell the same stoxy of frau
Gode, Ad. Knhn no. 217.

^ Märchen and jngendexinneningen 1, 401 — 4.


928 SPBCTBES.

punished in Hie sabjects any breach of the forest laws. Once
when a boy barked a willow to make himself a whistle^ he had his
body cut open and his bowels trained roand the tree (RA. 519-20.
690) ; a peasant having shot at a stag^ he had him fast riveted to
the stag. At last he broke his own neck hunting, by dashing up
against a beech-tree ; and now in his grave he has no rest, bat
must hunt every night. He rides a white horse whose nostrils
shoot out sparks, wears armonr, craoks his whip, and is followed
by a countless swarm of hounds: his cry is ^wod wod, hohoj
hallo I ' ^ He keeps to forests and lonely heaths, avoiding the
common highway ; if he happens to come to a cross-road, down
he goes horse and all, and only picks himself up when past it ; he
hunts and pursues all manner of weird rabble, thieves, robbers^
murderers and witches.

A Low Saxon legend of the Tilsgraben or devU's hole between
Dahlum and Bokenem (ELarrys 1, 6) says, Üiemld knight TiUwas
so fond of the chase that he took no heed of holidays, and one
Easter Sunday he had the presumption to say ' he would bring a
beast down that day if it cost him his castle.' At evening the
cock crew out that the castle would sink before night ; and soon
after it sank in the lake with all that was in it. A diver once on
reaching the bottom of the lake, saw the fitter TUs sitting at a
stone table, old and hoary, with his white beard grown through the
table.

In the Harz the wild chase thunders past the Eichelberg with
its ' hoho ' and clamour of hounds. Once when a carpenter had the
courage to add to it his own ' hoho,' a black mass came tumbling
down the chimney on the fire, scattering sparks and brands about
the people's ears : a huge horse's thigh lay on the hearth, and the
said carpenter was dead. The wild hunter rides a black headless
horse, a hunting-whip in one hand and a bugle in the other; his
face is set in his neck, and between the J)lasts he cries 'hoho
hoho ; ' before and behind go plenty of women, huntsmen and
dogs. At times, they say, he shews himself kind, and comforts
the lost wanderer with meat and drink (Harrys 2, 6).

In Central Germany this ghostly apparition is simply called
the wild huntsman, or has some other and more modem naiue

1 * Hoho, wait gut ! * AW. 8, 144-6. Both wod and woit seem to me to refer to
W6dan, Wuotan, as exolamatio&B are apt to contain the names of goda.


PUBIOUS HOST. 929

attached to him. By Wallrod near Schliiclitern in Hanaa country
are seen tall basaltic crags standing up like ruins : there in former
times was the urUd man's house, and you may still see his grey
gigantic figure make its rounds through the forest, over heath and
field, with crashing and uproar (conf. 432. 482). A Thuringian
story contains (and in a clearer form) that Bavarian chase after
the holzweiblein. The wild hunter pursues the moss-folk, the
littU wood-wives ^ ; he remains unseen, but you hear him bluster in
the air, so that it ' crickles and crackles/ A peasant of Arntsch-
gerente near Saalfeld had the impudence, when he heard
shoaling and the bark of dogs in the wood, to put in his tongue
and mimic the huntsmen's cry ; the next morning he found the
quarter of a litth moss-wife hung up outside his stable door, as if
to pay him for his share in the hunt.' ' Dixerunt majores nostri,
tempore melioris et probioris aevi, coneubinas sacerdotum in aere a
daemonibus, non alitor quam feras sylvestres a canibus yenaticis,
agitari atque tandem discerptas inveniri : quod si hominum quis-
piam haec [hanc T] audiens venationem stto elamore adjuverü, Uli
partem vel m^mbrumeoncubinae dissectum adjanuam domus mane
a daemonibas suspensum/ Bebelii Facetiae (Tub. 1555) p. 11*.
Here the wood-wives are replaced by priests' wives, but the same
may already have been done in the 13th cent, folktale. Our
German tradition says nothing about the reason why the airy
hanter pursues the wood-wife;^ among the people of Upper
Germany the wild women themselves play a leading part in the
' twelve nights,' and in Lent they are part and parcel of this


1 These mootUute and hoUweibel belong to the olass of wood-Bprites (p. 488),
forming a link between them and dwarfs ; it is Voigtland legend that knows moat
about them, lliey look like three-year old children, keep on friendly terms with
men, and make them presents. They often help at haymaking, feed cattle, and sit
down to table with men. At flai-harvest the oonntxyman leaves three handfult of
flax lying in the field for the holxweibel (conf. pp. 448. 609) ; and in felling trees, dur-
ing the brief time that the noise of the falling tree lasts, he marke three croetee on the
tnink with his aze : in the triangle formed by these crosses the holzweibel sit and
have respite from the wüd hunter^ who at all times is shy of the cross (conf. Dent.
ng. no. 47). But Voigtland tradition makes the wild hunter himself have the
figure of a email man hideouely overgrown loith mose, who roamed about in a narrow
glen a league lon^ (Jul. Schmidt 140). In the Biesengebirg the night-spirit is said
to chase before hmi the rilttelweihchen, who can only find protection under a tree
at the felling of which the words ' Oott wait's ! ' (not * wait's Gott I ') were uttered,
Dent. sag. no. 270.

' Deut. sag. no. 48. Jul. Schmidt p. 143 ; conf. no. 801, where the dwarf hangs
a chamois before the huntsman's door.

> See below, the story from Boccaccio and that of GrÖnjette.


930 SPECTRES.

heathenish spectredom. Even among the Vicentine and Veronese
Germans, the keenest sportsman will not ventare on the track of
game at the seasons just mentioned, for fear of the wild man and
the wood-wife. No herdsman will drive cattle ont, the flocks and
herds are watered in the stable, children fetching the water in
earthen vessels from the nearest spring. For the wood-wife the
women spin a portion of hair (flax) on their distaffs, and throw it
in the fire as a peace-offering to her (Hormayr's Tyrol 1, 141).
The legend of the udld hunt extends to the Ardennes, and Wolf
in his Niederl. sagen nos. 516-7 (conf. p. 706) justly lays stress on
the fact that the object hunted is usually the boar, that a wood-
cutter who had taken part in the hunt was a whole fortnight salt-
ing hoa^s flesh ; which reminds us of the hoar of the einheriar
(pp. 318, 386), the caro aprina, and the roast boar in the legend
of Walther (Waltharius p. 105) ; and Hackelberg's dream (p. 921)
is about the boar (see Suppl.).

The people dread having to do with these powerful spirits, and
whoever breaks through this backwardness pays for it heavily.
The Westphalian peasant (p. 921) fared worse than he of Saalfeld;
so did a tailor in the Münsterland. When the wild hunt swept
over his house, he mocked the hunter by repeating his huhu, Uif-
klaf after him ; then a horse's foot came through the window, and
knocked him off his table, while a terrible voice rang out of the
air : ' willstu mit mir jagen, sollst du mit mir knagen (gnaw) ! '
DS. no. 309. A girl at Delligsen by Alfeld (Hildesheim
country) tells the tale : Mine mutter verteile, dat de heUjäger
dorch de luft ejaget herre (had been hunting) un jimmer eraupen
' ha ha ! tejif, tejaf, tejaf I ' De knechte (labourers) tau Hohne
ut'n ganzen dörpe keimen eins avens to hope, un brochten alle
de hunne (dogs) ut'n dörpe mit, umme dat se den heUjäger wat
brüen wollen. Da kumte ok dorch de luft en ejaget, un wie hei
ropt 'ha ha ! ' sau raupt de knechte ok 'ha ha I ' un wie de
hunne in'r luft jilpert, sau jilpert un bleft de hunne ut'n dörpe
ok alle ; do smitt de heUjäger ön wat hemnner (somewhat down to
them) un schriet : ' wil ji mit jagen, so könn ji ok mit gnagen !'
Ans se den annern (next) morgen tau seien dauet (went to see),
wat ön de heUjäger henne smetten herre, da ist'n ölen per-
schinken (an old gammon of boar).' An Austrian folktale in
Ziska's Märchen p. 37 tells of another fellow who, when the


FUBIOUS HOST. ' 931

wUde gjoad swept past, had the aadacity to beg for a piece of
game to roast ; the same in a Nethl. story^ Wolf no. 259. On
the other hand, a W. Preussen tale in Tettau and Temme no.
260 BAja, on the Ballerberg in the forest of Skrzjnka^ Stargard
circuity the wild hunter carries on his operations on Bartholomew's
night, and once he flnng a man's thigh ont of the air into the
head forester's carriage^ with the words : ' Something for you
out of oar hunt 1 '

A Meissen folk-tale calls the spectre Hans Jagenteufel and
pictures him as a man booted and spurred, in a long grey coat,
with a bugle over his back, but no head, riding through the
wood on a grey, horse, DS. no. 309. They also tell of a wild
hunter named Mansberg, of what district I do not know.
Swabian stories about Elbendrötsch's^ hunting, about the
Muotes lieer ^, I should like to know more fully ; the castle of
junker Ma/rten, a wild hunter of Baden, stood at the village of
Singen by the Pfinz, and his tombstone is shewn in a chapel on
the way to Königsbach ; the people in the Bahnwald see him at
night with his dogs (Hone's Anz. 3, 363). Johann Hübner the
(me-eyed, rides at midnight on a black horse, DS. no. 128.
Other tales of S. Germany give no names, but simply place at
the head of the wild host a white man on a white horse (Mone's
Anz. 7, 370. 8, 306) ; an old lord of a castle rides a white
horse, which may be seen grazing the meadows, ibid. 3, 259, just
as Oden pastured his steed (p. 155n.). Even Michel Beheim
(bom 14] 6) made a meister-song on Eberhart, count of Wirten-
berg, who hears in the forest a ' sudden din and uproar vast,'
then beholds a spectre^ who tells him the manner of his damna-
tion. When alive he was a lord^ that never had his fill of
hunting, and at last made his request unto the Lord to let him
hunt till the Jvdgment-day ; the prayer was granted, and these
500 years all but 50, he has hunted a stag that he never can
07ertake; his face is wrinkled as a sponge.^ This is only another
form of the L. Saxon legend of Hackelberg (see Suppl.)

1 Onter*8 Idana 1818, p. 88 : 1814, p. 102. Gonf. ' elbentrötsoh' p. 461.

> Wagner's Madamd Jostitia p. 22. Schmidts Wörtb. 391 * stürmet wia '8
Muthetheer * * seia verflchrocka wia wenn (soared as if) 'f Muathe$heer anen vor-
beizoga war,* Neflen's Vetter ans Sohwaben (Stntg. 1887), pp. 164, 258. Is it a
cormp. of ' Wuote$ hör,* Scbm. 4, 202, like potz, kotz (p. 16) 7 or is it muot (ira) •
WQot? Conl. Frdmiiot, p. 891.

' Von der Hagen's (etc.) Bammlong (etc.) 1, 48-4.

VOL. III. D


932 SPECTBES.

Bofc in tlie same Swabia, in the 16th cent, (and why not
earlier ? ) they placed a spectre named Berchtold at the head of
the toutende heer, they imagined him clothed in whiie, seated on a
white horse, leading white hounds in the leash^ and with a horn
hanging from his neck.^ This Berchtold we have met before
(p. 279) : he was the mascaline form of white-robed Berhta, who
is also named Prechtölterli (Grat. Idnna 1814, p. 102).

Here we get a new point of view. Not only Wuotan and
other gods, but heathen goddesses too, may head the farioas
host: the wild hunter passes into the wood- wife, Wödan into
frau Oaiide. Of Perchtha touching stories are known in the
Orla-gau. The little ones over whom she rules are human
children who have died before baptism, and are thereby become
her property (pp. 918. 920). By these weeping babes she is sur-
rounded (as dame Gaude by her daughters), and gets ferried over
in the boat with them (p. 275-6). A young woman had lost her
only child ; she wept continually and could not be comforted.
She ran out to the grave every night, and wailed so that the
stones might have pitied her. The night before Twelfth-day
she saw Perchtha sweep past not far off; behind all the other
children she noticed a little one with its shirt soaked quite
through, carrying a jug of water in its hand, and so weary that it
could not keep up with the rest ; it stood still in trouble before
a fence, over which Perchtha strode and the children scrambled.
At that moment the mother recognised her own child, came
running up and lifted it over the fence. While she had it in her
arms the child spoke : ^ Oh how warm a mother's hands are I
but do not cry so much, else you cry my jug too full and heavy,
see, I have already spilt it all over my shirt.' From that night
the mother ceased to weep : so says the Wilhelmsdorf account
(Bömer p. 142-3). At Bodelwitz they tell it somewhat differ-
ently : the child said, ' Oh how warm is a mother's arm,' and
followed up the request ' Mother, do not cry so ' with the words
'You know every tear you weep I have to gather in my jug/
And the mother had one more good hearty cry (ib. 152). Fairy


^ Historie Peter Leaen des andern Ealenbergers, von AohiUes Jason Wid-
man (ans schwäbisch Hall), Nümb. 1560. Beprinted in Hagen's Narrenbnch, p. 353.
Peter Len here plays a trick on peasants, p. 894, by disguising himsfilf as Berch-
told,


PUBIOUS HOST BERCHTA, HOLD A, POSTEBLI. 933

tales have the story of a little sliroad drenched with tears
(Kinderm. 109. Beusch no. 32. Thorn. Cantipr. p. 501, conf.
Wolfs Wodana p. 153)^ and the Danish folktale of Aage and
Else makes flowing tears fill the coffin with blood j but here
we have the significant feature added of the children journeying
in Perhta's train. The jug may be connected with the lachry-
matories found in tombs ^ (see SnppL).

With Berahta we have also to consider Holda^ Diana and Hero-
dias. Berahta and Holda shew themselves^ like frau Gaude
(p. 925), in the ' twelves ' about New-year^s day. Joh. Herolt,
a Dominican, who at the beginning of the 15th cent, wrote his
Sermones discipuli de tempore et de Sanctis, says in Sermo 11
(in die Nativ.) : Sunt quidam, qui in his xii. noctibus subsequent
tibns mnltas vanitates exercent, qui deam, quam quidam Dianam
vocant, in vulgari ' die frawen unhold/ dicunt cum suo exerdtu
amhulare. The same nocturnal perambulation is spoken of in the
passages about Biana^ Herodias and Ahundia p. 283 seq. It is
exactly the Vicentine wood-wife, who acts along with the wild
man, and to whom the people still offer up gifts. And as Berhta-
worship in the Salzburg country became a popular merrymaking
(p. 279), so a Posterli-hunt, performed by the country-folk them-
selves on the Thursday before Christmas, is become an established
castom in the Entlibuch. The Posterli ^ is imagined to be a
spectre in the shape of an old woman or she-goat (conf. p. 916).
In the evening the young fellows of the village assemble, and
with loud shouts and clashing of tins, blowing of alp-horns, ring-
ing of cow-bells and goat-bells, and cracking of whips, tramp
over hill and dale to another village, where the young men receive
them with the like uproar. One of the party represents the

^ Infantam animae flestes in limine primo,
qnos dnlois viUe exsortes et ab nbere raptos
abatulit atra dies et fnnere mersit acerbo. Virg. Aen. 6, 427.

In the Intiod. to the Pentameron the revival of a dead man depends on a ornae
himg upon his tomb being wept full.

' With Diana agreea the Pol. Dziewanna, Dzietoina (Linde 1, 599^), Dziewiea;
Idfibiuch has the foU. story abont a Ddiwitxa in Up. Lausitz : she was a beautifol
young knenye or princess, who roamed in the woods, armed with the zylba (a jaye-
lin) ; the finest of hounds acoompanied, scaring both game and men who were in
the thick forest at midday. The people still joke any one that spends the hour of
noon alone in the fir-woods : * are you not afraid Dziwitza wiU come to you7 ' But
the also hunts of a moonlight night.

* Is it synon. with frau Fatte (p. 782 n.), and taken from the Slayio * post ' »fast,
jejonium ?


934 SPECTRES.

Posterli, or thej draw it in a sledge in the shape of a puppet^ and
leave it standing in a comer of the other village ; then the noise
is hnshed, and all tarn homewards (Staid. 1, 208). At some
places in Switzerland the StrdggeU goes abont on the Ember-
nighty Wednesday before Christmas^ afBicting the girls that have
not finished their day's spinning (ib. 2, 405). Thns Posterli and
Straggele resemble to a hair both Berhta and Holda.^ At Neu-
brnnn (Würzbnrg conntry) the furions host always passed through
three houses^ each of which had three doors directly behind
one another, street-door, kitchen-door, and back-door; and so
wherever it finds three doors in a line, the farions host will drive
through them. If yon are in the street or yard when it passes,
and pop your head between the spokes of a cart-wheel, it will
sweep past, else it will wring your neck. Old people at Massfeld
tell yon, it used to come down the Zinkenstill by the cross-road
near Benmes bridge, and go over the hills to Dreissigacker.
Many will swear by all that is sacred, that they have seen it
(Bechstein's Frank, sag. no. 137). In Thnringia the farions host
travels in the train of frau Holla (DS. no. 7). At Eisleben and
all over the Mansfeld conntry it always came past on the Thurs-
day in Shrove-tide ; the people assembled, and looked out for its
coming, just as if a mighty monarch were making his entry. In
front of the troop came an old man with a white staff, {he trusty
Eckhart, warning the people to move out of the way, and some
even to go home, lest harm befall them. Behind him, some came
riding, some walking, and among them persons who had lately
died. ' One rode a two-legged horse^ one was tied down on a wheel
which moved of itself, others ran without any heads, or carried
their legs across their shoulders. A drunken peasant, who would
not make room for the host, was caught up and set upon a high
rock, where he waited for days before he could be helped down
again.^ "ELerefrau Holda at the head of her spirit-host produces
quite the impression of a heathen goddess making her royal pro-


1 Gonf . the nightly exourmons of the Scottish df-queen (SootVs Minstr. 2, U9,
161), and of the fay$ (Eeightley 1, 166).

' Hal rides a three-legged one, p. S44.

* Agricola's Spr. 667. Eyering 1, 781^6. Headless figures, beasts two-legged,
three-legged, redhot, are in many ghost stories ; a headless wild hnnter rtms riot
in the Wetteran pieffenbaoh's Wett. p. 280), in Pomerania a headless honeman
(Temme no. 140).


8TBÄGGBLB, EPKHABT, VENUS* MOUNT. 935

gress : tlie people flock to meet and greet ber^ as thej did to
Preyr (p. 213) or Nerthus (p. 251). Eckhart with his white staff
discharges the office of a herald, a chamberlain, clearing the toad
before her. Her living retinae is now converted into spectres
(see Sappl.).

Eckhart the trusty, a notable figure in the group of Old-Teutonic
heroes (Heldensage 144. 190, reeve of the Harlungs, perhaps
more exactly Eckewart, Kriemhild's kämmerer, Nib. 1338, 3) gets
mixt up with the myths of gods. The appendix or preface to
the Heldenbuch makes him sit outside the Venus-mount to warn
people, as here he warns them of the furious host ; so much the
plainer becomes his vocation here, as well as the meaning of the
Venusberg. Eckhart goes before the furious host with Solda, he
is also doomed to abide till the Judgment-day at the mount of
Venus : the identity of Holda and Venus is placed beyond ques-
tion. That mountain (some say the Hoselberg or Horselberg near
Eisenach) is dame HolWs court, and not till the 15-16th cent,
does she seem to have been made into dame Venus ; ^ in subter-
ranean caves she dwells in state and splendour like the kings of
dwarfs ; some few among men still find their way in, and there
live with her in bliss. The tale of the noble Tanhäuser, who went
down to view her wonders,' is one of the most fascinating fictions

> Conf . p. 456. Ventuherg in the Nethl. ohapbook Margaieta Tan Inmbnrg
e. M. 82-4, IÜ80 in the Mörin. Keisersperg (Omeiss 36) makes witches fare to frau
Fenutberg. There most have been a good many of these Venutbergi, partioolarly
in Swabia : one near Waldsee, another by üfhansen near Freibnrg. in which the
Sehnewburger takes np his lodging, like Tanhänser, H. Sohreiber's Tagb. 1889, p.
348. Doubtless the original M. Nethl. poem of Marg. van Limburg (a.D. 1357) also
had Venusberg, as the later ohapbook and Johan von Soest^s paraphrase have
(Mone*r Anz. 4, 168), so that its earliest oocnrrence is rather to be placed in the 14th
cent. A Dresden MS. of the 16th cent. (Hagen's Gmndr. 336) contains a still
imprinted poem on the Veniaberg^ prob, composed in the 14th cent. Job. v. Soest
wrote in 1470, Herrn, von Sachsenheim 1458, and before them Job. Nider (d. 1440)
in his Formicarias names the Venutberg, Job. Herolt speaks, as we saw, of Diana
and frau Unhold ; and next of kin is the mount that houses Felicia and Juno
(p. 961). There may have been similar stories in Italy, for Paracelsus (Strasb.
1616) 2, 291' informs us : * And by the same pygmaei was the Venusberg in Italia
occupied, for Venus herself was a nympha, and the Vewasberg hath been likened
unto her realm ; but she also is past away, and her realm haUi departed with
her and ceased. For who now heareth tell of them, as in the old time when Dann-
hauser and others were therein ? And the same is no fabled song of him, but a true
history.' Again, in the Chirurg. Schriften (Strasb. 1618) p. 332b - < Some that be
▼ery great thereat, do secretly practise nigromancia, as oampisirer (strollers) that
come straight out of the Venusberg, who have dipped their art in the Veltliner, and
have said matins with brother Bekart, and eaten a black-pudding with Danhäuser.*
Afzelius 2, 141 tells of a bridegroom who was 40 years among the elves. AU the
legends place Venus and Holda in elf -mountains.

* Disut. sag« no. 170. As the pope by the dried up stick outs off Tanhanser


936 SPECTRES.

of the Mid. Age : in it the hankering after old heathenism, and
the harshness of the christian clergy, are movingly portrayed.
Eckhart, perhaps a heathen priest, is courtier and conductor of
the goddess when she rides out at a stated season of the year. I
might even make him with his KTfpvKCiov the psychopompos of the
mounted host of the dead (conf . the waggon of souls creaking in
the air, p. 883) ; only he conducts, not the departing, but rather
the returning dead.

As we can also prove Dietrich von Bem^s participation in the
wild hunt (and Eckhart was one of his hero-band), he may stand
as our second native hero in this group. Now the Lausitz
people name the wild hunter Bemdietrich, Dietrich Bernhard, or
Diterbenada; the older Wends have many a time heard him
hunt, and can tell of unsavoury joints that he gives away for
roasting.^ Bemdietrich too is the wild hunter's name in the
Orlagan (Bömer pp. 213-6. 236), where his dogs rouse and chase
the wood-wives. Nay in the Harz, at the Bode-kessel (-crater)
over the Bos- trappe (horse's footmark), stands the wild hunter
turned into stone : ' we call him Bemhart ' was a boy's account,
and the father of the Brunhild that leapt across the Bodetfaal on
her steed is called by the people ' he of Bären ' (von Bern) ; this
is the more significant, as Gibicho also (p. 137) is placed in the
same mountains (Z. f.d. a. 1, 575). But from Fichte, himself a
Lausitz man, we derive the information that knecht Ruprecht (p.
504) is there called Dietrich von Bern (Deut. heldensage p. 40).
The two interpretations admit of being harmonized. Knecht
Ruprecht makes his appearance beside frau Berhta, as her ser-
vant and companion (p. 514-5), sometimes her substitute, and like

from all hope, bo in Swed. tradition the priest Bays to the mnsical * neek : *
' sooner will this oane I hold in my hand grow green and blossom, than thon obtain
salvation ; * the neok sorrowfully throws his harp away, and weeps. The priest
rides on, and presently his staff begins to put forth leaf and flower, he turns back
to tell the marvel to the neck, who then plays joyful tunes the whole night long,
Afz. 2, 156. But this myth of Tanhäuser aocoids with many others, esp. Geltie
ones. Tanhäuier passes many a year with Holda in the mountain, so does Tiimlane
with the queen of fays, Thomas of Ercildon with the fairy queen (ScotVs Minstr. 2,
198. 3, 181 — 8), Ogier 200 years with fata Morgana in Avalon : she had pressed a
garland on his head, which made him forget everything, But the legend is Teu-
tonic for aU that, it is told in Sweden of tibe elf-^ng's daughter (p. 466 and Afz. 2,
141), and in the kinderm. of frau Fortuna, Altd. bl. 1, 297. And so does Odyt$eus
stay with Calypso and with Giroe ; but who would think of deriving the stoiy of
Tanhäuser from that of Ulysses or Orpheus, as Mone does (Anz. 6, 168) f

^ Joh. Hortzschansky's Sitten u. gebr. der Wenden, part 8 (Dessau and Gtörl.
1782) 3, 258. Laus, monatsschr. 1797 p. 749. Liebusoh's Skythika p. 287.


FURIOUS host: DIETRICH BERN. 937

Her a terror to children. Add to this, that both Ruprecht
and Berhia appear at Christmas ; and, what is most decisive of
ail^ Wode in Mecklenburg, like Berhta in Swabia, rons through
the flax on the distaff, and Wode^ like Ruprecht and Niclas,
apportions good or evil to infants.^ So that Dietrich von Bern,
like trusty Eckhart, is entitled to appear in Wuotan's, Holda's,
Berhta's train, or to fill their place. Then, in another connexion,
Dietrich the fire-breathing, painted superhuman, is in poems of
the Mid. Age fetched away, on a spectral fire-spirting steed, to
hell or to the wilderness, there to fight with reptiles till the Judg^
ment-day (D. heldensage 38 — 40). This agrees with our Altmark
story of Backelberg (p. 922) ; and in the compound HackeUberend,
the second half seems plainly to have led to Berend Bernhart and
Dietrich- bern, as indeed the dreams of Hackelberg and Berend
were identical (p. 923). Lastly, perhaps the Nethl. Derk met den
beer (p. 213-4) ought to be taken into account here, not that I
would derive his epithet from a misapprehension of Dietrich von
Bern (see Suppl.).

We have come to know the wild host in two principal lights :
as a nocturnal hunt of male, and as a stately progress of female,
deities; both, especially the last, occurring at stated seasons.
The precise meaning of the word ' host ' calls for a third explan-
ation : it marches as an army, it portends the outbreak of war.

Wtiotan (the old father of hosts, p. 817), Hackelbernd, Berhtolt,
bestriding their white war-horse, armed and spurred, appear
still as supreme directors of the war for which they, so to speak,
give licence to mankind. There is more than one legend of
enchanted mountains, in whose interior becomes audible, from
time to time, drumming, piping and the clash of arms: an
ancient host of spirits and gods is shut up inside, and is arming
to sally out. I do not know a finer, a more perfect legend in
this respect than that of the Odenberg in Lower Hesse, which
stands too in the immediate neighbourhood of a Ovdensberg (i.e
Wodansberg), but distinct from it, so that ' Odenberg ' cannot
be explained by the ON. form OSinn; it may come from öd
(felicitas), perhaps from ddi (desertus). This long while the
people have connected Odenberg not with the heathen deity, but

* Franke'8 Alt und neu Meckl. 1, 67. In Silesia children are stilled with the
night'huntert Dent. sag. no 270.


938 SPECTBES.

with Charles the great hero-king, and even with Charles V.^
This emperor, owing to his treatment of Landgrave Philip, has
left a lasting impression in Hesse : Karle Quintea with his soldiers
is lodged in the Odenberg ; and as the Swabian mother threatens
her infant with the iron Berhta (p. 277), ' Be still, or the Prech-
tölterli will come,' and the Bavarian with 'Hash, there's
Prechte coming to cat yoar belly open,' the Hessian of this
district stills it by the exhortation ' Da, der Quinte kommt ! '
Bat in earlier times they meant Oharlea the Great, as is suffi-
ciently proved by the legend of the thirsting army, known to the
annalists (pp. 117. 153), and' itself a deposit of still older heathen
myths. Charles had moved his army into the moantains of the
Gudensberg country, some say victorions, others in flight, from
the east (Westphalia). His warriors pined with thirst, the king
sat on a aiww-white steed ; then the horse stamped with his foot
on the groand, and broke away a piece of rock ; out of the
opening gushed a babbling spring (pp. 226. 584), and the whole
army was watered. Olisbam is the name of the spring, to
whose clear cold waves the country-folk impute a higher cleans-
ing power than to common water, and women from surrounding
villages come to wash their linen there. The stone with the
hoof-mark may still be seen, let into the wall of Gudensberg
churchyard. After that, king Charles f(mght a great battle at
the foot of the Odenberg : the streaming blood tore deep furrows
in the ground (they have often been filled up, but the rain always
washes them open), the red waves rolled (wulchen) together, and
poured down all the way to Bessa. Charles won the victory:
in the evening the rock opened, took him and his exhausted
soldiery in, and closed its walls. Here in the Odenberg the king
rests from his valiant deeds ; but he has promised to come out
every seven (or every 100) years, and when that time is past,
you hear a rattling of arms in the air, neighing of horses and
tramp of hoofs ; the procession passes by the Glisborn, where
the steeds are watered, then goes on its way till, having finished
its round, it returns at last into the mountain again. Once people
were going past the Odenberg, and heard the roll of drums, but

^ At Broterodd they shew a fann (flag) of KarU$ quifäes, and oonneot with it
the bloody assize held at the place, leally the MHG. * Karies reht ' or * lot,'
Beohstein^s Thür. sag. 2, 95.


FURIOUS HOST : CHARLES, WUOTAN. 939

saw nothing. A wise man bade them look, one after another,
through the ring formed by his arm held a-kimbo : immediately
they saw a moltitade of soldiers, engaged in military exercises,
go in and out of the mountain.^ This looking through the arm
gives assurance of the genuine primitive legend. Saxo Gram,
p. 37 relates, that Biarco was unable to see Othin, who, mounted
on white steed and covered with white shield, was aiding the
hostile army of Swedes. Quoth Biarco to Buta :

At nunc ille ubi sit qui vulgo dicitur Othin
(innipotenSf una semper contentus oeello ?
die mihi, Buta, precor, usquam si conspicis ilium ?
Buta : Adde oculum propius, et nostras prospice chelas,
ante sacraturas victrici lumina signo,
si vis praesentem tuto cognoscere Martern,^
Biarco : Si potero horrendum Friggoe spectare maritum,
quantumcunque albo clypeo sit tectus et album
flectat equum, Lethra nequaquam sospes abibit.
fas est belligeram bello prostemere divam.

Looking through the rounded arm (chela, XfXifj enables one to
see spirits (Altd. blatter 1, 290), so does looking over the right
shoulder (p. 459n., Superst. I, 996) or between a horse^s ears. And
this the Hessian folktale has preserved. Plainly as Wuotan is
indicated on the whole, the story seems at times to shift itself to
Donar, for we are also told of a red rider on a red horse and with
heron's plume of red wool, who on certain days of the year
gallops round the wooded fringe of the Odenberg : it is the ghost
of Garolus quintus^ The description would better fit Frederic
Barbarossa who sits entranced in the Kifhäuser, and red-haired
Donar (see Suppl.).

Similar to this Odenberg host are the excursions of the Bothen-
thaler in Aargau,' of the Bodensteiner to SehnelleriSy^ of the grey
man over the Bockenstul near Geisa in the Fulda country (Bechst.

^ For this and other stories faithfnUy taken down from the lips of the
peasantry, I am indebted to a kind eommunieation from Herr Pfister, ariUl. officer
ol Electoral Hesse.

' As there can be no donbt about Othin, it is singolar that Saxo should call
bim Man. It serves to establish the original nearness of Wuotan to Zio (p. 197).

* Wycs's Beise ins Bemer Oberland 2, 420.

^ Deut. sag. no. 169. Sohnellerts » house of Schnellert, SneUmrt. A mon-
strous spirit named Snellaart in Marg. van Limb. 7^


040 SPECTRES.

Frank, sag. 1, 68)^ and of others in other parts, see Mone's Asz.
3, 259. 8, 306 ; as the host passed over Wolfartsweiler, one of
them shouted down : ' If thou suffer harm, bind thee with red
yam ! ' 8, 307. We read in Heimreich's Nordfries, chron. 2, 93
that outside Tondem in 1637 armies were seen mustering in the
air and fighting, in dear weather.^ An Irish folktale gives an
account of the ancient chieftain O'Donoghue, who yearly on the
first of May, mounted on a milkwhits steed^ rises from the waters
of a lake, to revisit his realm. On an August night, an earl
of Kildare shews himself armed, on a splendid war-horse, and
reviews the shades of his warriors (Elfenm. 192-3. 233).
Strikingly similar to the 'duris, durst' on pp. 521. 920 is a
Finnic Turisas, god of war and at the same time a g^ant (turras,
turrisas, tursas^, who, when a war is imminent, has his drum
beaten high up in the clouds. To the Lettons johoU or murgi
means ghosts, souls of the dead ; when the northern lightft fliclcer,
they say 'johdi kaujahs,' ghosts are fighting, or 'karru lauscha
dwehseles kaujahs,' the souls of fallen warriors fight,^ They
connect the ghostly tumult with a shining phenomenon, as we do
with a sounding one ; it reminds one also of the war stirred np
by our landsknechts in heaven itself, and still more of the ON.
name for war and battle, ' Hiadninga veffr e'Sa el,' Hedaningornm
tempestas vel procella, Sn. 163. In a lengthened fight the
heroes had fallen, when Hildur the valkyrja came to the battle-
field at night, waked them all up, and let them fight it over again,
and so every day till the end of the world they shall do battle by
day and lie dead at night. This, I think, is the very earliest
example of an army warring in the clouds, which was a way of
explaining the natural phenomenon, as we see by the words ' ve^r,
dl.' Of a battle between Swedes and Groats the Thuringians
have a story, that on its anniversary, at 11 o'clock at night, all
the buried soldiers start up and begin to fight afresh till the clock
strikes one, then they sink into the ground and lie quite still
again for a year, Bechst. 4, 231 (see Suppl.).

1 Goiooiiurdim'B Hist, dltalia (1683) p. 22: «BistionaYa per tatto la hn^
essere nel territorio d' Arezzo passati vitibilmente znolti di per Varia tf|/!iutt hmomiti
armati, aopra grosnastmi oayalli e con Urrihile strepito di suoni di trombe e di
tamburi.* Conf. the Dan. legend of KUnUkonig's or ElUkönig*t trooping oot,
Thiele, 1, 98. B, 65. Even children marching with pike and flag portend war,
Superst. I, 106.

~ Stender'B Lett. gram. (1783) p. 262-6. Bergmann p. 145.


4


FURIOUS host: dubs, hbdanings, hellequin. 941

Bat the Romance nations have no less their own traditions
of this aerial host^ which on some points agree exactly with the
German.

In France such an air-pictnre of contending spirits goes by
the name of Hellequin, Hielekin (Bosqnet 70 — 77), and in Spain
of exercUo a/ntiguo} GnUielm. Alvernns (d. 1248) p. 1037 : ' de
eqaitibns vero noctnmis, qni vnlgari gallicano Hellequin, et vol-
gari hispanico exercUus antiquvs vocantnr, nondum tibi satis-
feci, qnia nondnm declarare intendo qui sint ; nee tamen certnm
est eos malignes spiritns esse, loqnar igitnr tibi de his in seqnen-
tibns/ P. 1065 : ' de snbstantiis apparentibus in similitudine
equitantiuTH et bellatorum, et in similitudine exerdtuum innumera-
hilium, interdnm antem et paucorwm equitum/ P. 1067 : ' nar-
latar qnoqne^ qnod qnidam videns hnjasmodi exei'dtum (at a
parting of roads) terrore percnssns a via pnblica declinavit in
agrwin cantiguum, nbi qnasi in refngio, transeunte juxta ilium toto
illo exercitu, illaesos permansit et nihil mali passas est ab illis.
propter quod opinio inolevit apud mnltos, agros gaudere pro-
ketione Oreatoris propter utilitatem hominum, et hac de caasa
non esse accessnm malignis spiritibns ad eos, neqne potestatem
nocendi propter hanc causam hominibus existentibus in eis. Gens
antem idolatrarnm tutelam istam et defensionem, si eam vel cre-
deret vel andiret, numinibvs a/rvorum illam attribueret. opinor
autem^ quod Oererem deam, qme agris praeest, hujnsmodi homi-
nem protexisse crederent, exercitamque illnm intra fines regnum-
que Cereris nemini posse nocere/ P. 1073: 'nee te removeat
aat contnrbet nllatenas yulgaris illa-Hispanoram nomination qua
malignos spiritns, qai in armia ludere ac pugnare videri con-
saevemnt, exercitum antiquum nominant, magis enim anilis et
delirantiam yetnlarum nominatio est quam veritatis.' Badulfas
de Presles ad libr. 15 cap. 23 De civ. Dei : ' la mesgn6e de Helle^
quin, de dame Habende (p. 286), et des esperis quils appellent
fees.' Ducange sub v. In the Jen d'Adan, the maisnie Hielehin
is heard approaching with tinkling bells, the three fays (p. 411)
accompanying, and a sires Hellequins is named. Reiffenberg's
Renseign. p. 94. Vincent, bellov. lib. 30 cap. 118, and after him
Keiaersp. (Omeiss 37-8) mention a certain Natalis, Alle quinti,

^ I.e. the vast throng of the dead (p. S47) : * he geit in 't olde heer *=he dies,
Kanagonift 84*». ' dem alten kaufen zaschioken,' Eeisersp. serm. on Bzant. p. m. 43.


942 SPBCTBES.

Karoli quinti, who when dead appeared again, and, being ques-
tioned on the furious host, reported that it had ceased ever since
CaroluB quintua performed his penance. To the furious host is
here given the name Oaroliquinti, some say Allequinti, obvionslj
the same thing as Hellequin and our Hessian Karlequinte in the
Odenberg, p. 988. Nevertheless it seems a false interpretation
of the older Hellequin, whose mesnie is mentioned several times
in poems of the ISth cent.^ as well as by Guil. Alvemus, and who
cannot therefore be the French king Charles Y. of the latter half
of the 14th cent. That in France too they connect Charles the
Great with the furious host, appears from a Burgundian poem of
the 17th cent., in which Charlemagne bestrides his horse at the
head of the airy apparition, and Roland carries the standard
(Joum. des savans 1832, p. 496). But what if Hellequin were
after all the German helle (underworld) or its diminutive hellekin,
personified and made masculine?' At Tours they say eliasse
briijuet (briguet is hound), and le carosse da roi Hugon^ who
rides round the city walls at night, and beats or carries off
all that encounter him. Here also king Hugo Capet's carriage
represents that of a heathen god \ in Poitou they call it chasse-
gallerie. In the forest of Fontainebleau le grand veneur is
supposed to hunt.

In Gervase of Tilbuiy's time the British woods already rang
ynth king Arthur^ a mighty hunt (Ot. imp. 2, 12) : 'narrantibus
nemorum custodibus, quos forestarios vulgus nominat, so altemis
diebus circa horam meridianam et in prime noctinm oonticinio
sub plenilunio luna lucente saepissime videre militum copiam
venantium et canum et comuum etrepitum, qui sciscitantibus se
de societate et familia Arturi esse affirmant.' The Complaynt of
Scotland p. 97-8 says : ' Arthour knycht he raid on nycht with
gyldin spur and candillycht.' The elf -queen and the fays have
already been spoken of (p. 934n.). Shakspeare (M. Wives of W.
iv, 4. V, 5) tells how ' Heme the hunter doth aU the winter time
at still midnight walk round about an oak/ ^

^ E.g. in Biohard sans pear, in the Boman de Fanvel ; oonf. Jnbinal's Contos 1,
284. Michel's Th4Atre fr. pp. 78— 76.

s Eaoaler's Chron. t. Flandern 8049 : ' ten HalUkiru,' at litue hell (name of a
place).

* M6m. dea antiq. 8, 458. Noei boargaignons p. 237. Thnanns lib. 24 p. 1104.

^ Heme too, if a myth, had got localized : * sometime a keeper here in Windaoz;
forest.' — Tbans.


FURIOUS HOST : ABTHUB, WALDEMAB. 943

Boccaccio (Decam. 5^ 8) haa the story of a ghost who, having
been done to death by his false mistress^ chases her naked
through the wood every Friday, and has her torn to pieces by his
hounds : every time she is slain, she rises again, and the grue-
some hunt begins anew. Manni says the tale is taken out of
Helinand; it may afford some solution of the wild hunter's
pursuit of the wood-wife (p. 929), even if we are bound, as is
fair, to trace the novelist's plot in the first instance to the simple
basis of a folktale. In the poem on Etzel's court, the Wunderer
shews himself almost exactly such a wild man and hunter ; he
chases /ran Beeide with his dogs, and threatens to devour her, as
the hunter does the fleeing wood-wife, or the infernalis venator
a departed soul (see Suppl.). Far more important is a story in
the Eckenlied : Fasolt hunts with hounds a loild maiden in the
forest, just as the wild hunter does the holzweiMein, Lassberg's
ed. 161—201, Hagen's 213—54, conf. 333. This becomes of
moment to our understanding of FasoU, who was a storm-giant
(pp. 530. 636), and here turns up like Wuotan in the wild host.

Between the Norse legends and ours the links are not so far
to seek. The Danes have made a wild hunter of their famous
and beloved king Waldemar. The Zealand fable represents him,
like Charles the Great (p. 435n.), as irresistibly drawn, by a
magic ring, to a maiden, and after her death to a woodland
district. He dwells in the forest of Gurre, and there hunts night
and day ; ^ like Hackelberg, he uttered the presumptuous wish :
' God may keq> his heaven, so long as I can hunt in Gurre for
evermore ! ' So now he rides from Burre to Gurre every night ;
as soon as the ear can catch his ' hoho * and the crack of his
whip, the people slink aside under the trees. Foremost in the
train run coal-black hounds, with fiery red-hot tongues hanging
out of their throats ; then appears Wolmar on a white horse, some-
times carrying his head under his left arm (conf. Superst. I, 605).
If he meets any men, especially old men, he gives them hounds
to hold. He follows one particular route, doors and locks fly
open before him, and his track is named Wolmwi^s street, Volde-
marS'Vej (Antiqvariske annaler 1, 15) ; here one cannot help
thinking of Irmingstrast and Eriksgata (p. 356—361). Those

1 In hnnting he pxactises omelties on the peasantry ; he alao ohases a mermaid,
Thiele 1, 46. 52.


944 SPECTBES.

who have held his hounds he presents with seeming trifles, which
afterwards torn into gold : he will give a ducat for a horse-shoe
(Thiele 1^ 89 — 95). These stories are alike suggestive of Charles
the Great^ of Hackelberg, and of frau Holla or Perhta; conf.
Miillenhofifs Schlesw. hoist, sag. nos. 485-6.

In the I. of Möen is a wood named Grünewald : there every
night the Grönjette hunts on horseback, his head tucked under his
left arm, a spear in his right, and a pack of hounds about him.
In harvest time the husbandmen leave him a bundle of oats for
his horse, that he may not trample their crops that night ; by this
one circumstance we recognise Wuotan (p. 155), and perhaps
Frey (p. 212).^ He is here a,jette, as in Switzerland he is a durst
(p. 940). The ' grön,* I would explain, not by the green colour
of his hunting dress, but by the ON. grön (barba), Grönjette=
ON. graniötunn, bearded giant ; and Qrani (barbatus) is a name
of OSinn (p. 858). Grönjette, like Wolmar, makes the peasants
hold his dogs ; he also hunts the mer woman (conf. wood- wife).
One man saw him return with the dead merwoman laid across his
horse : ' seven years have I chased her, now in Falster I have
slain her.' He made the man a present of the band with which
he had held the hounds, and the longer he kept it, the richer he
grew (Thiele 1, 95-97).

In Fiinen the hunter is Palnejager, i.e. the ON. Palnatoki
(Fornm. sog. 11, 49—99. Thiele 1, 1 10) : a far-famed hero (p. 381).

In some parts of Denmark, instead of naming Wolmar, they
say ' den flyvende Jäger,' flying huntsman, or 'den flyvende Mar-
Jcolfus ; ' in Kallundborg district the hunt is transferred to a
later king : Christian the Second rides on a white horse and with
hlach hounds (Thiele 1, 187).

In Schleswig hunts king Abet: ' in eo loco ubi sepultus est
. . . venatoris cornu inflantis vocem et sonum exaudiri, multi
fide dignirefernnt, et affirmant usque adeo similem, ut venatorem
ibi venari quis diceret, idque saepe a vigilibus qui Gottorpii nocte


^ Still closer comes the statement in Thiele p. 192 : in olden days it vas the
custom in the I. of Möen, when they were harvesting, and had tied the last sheaf
of oats, to throw it on the field with the words : * this for the jode of üpsala, thit
let him have for his horse on Yule-eve I ' and if they did not do it, their cattle died.
The ' jötiinn of Upsala ' is a christian euphemism for Wodan or Ot$inn, whose divine
image is set up at Upsala. The phraseology might originate at a period when
Denmark was converted and Sweden remained heathen.


FURIOUS host: GRÖN JETTE. 945

yigilare sclent audiri : sed et Äbelem multis nostra aetate ap-
paruisse et visum esse constans omniam est ramor^ ore et corpore
atrumy equo pusillo vedum, comitatam canibus tribas venaticis,
qai et saepe specie ignea et ardere visi sunt/ Gypraei Ann. episc.
slesvic. p. 267; conf. Thiele 2, 63. 142. Dahlmann's Dan. gesch.
1, 408. MuUenhcflF ncs. 487-8.

With Swedish traditions of the wild hunter I am imperfectly
acquainted^ but they may safely be inferred from what is told of
the strömkarls-lag (p. 492), that its eleventh variation is reserved
for the use of the night spirit and his host ; and we found a point
of agreement between the * neck ' and our elf-natured Tanhäuser
(p. 936n.). Sweden retains too the primitive fashion of referring
the natural phenomenon to the god (p. 919). Tales are told of
two ardent sportsmen, Nielus Hog and Jennus Maar (Arwidsson
2,71).

One Norwegian story offers rich material. Souls that have not
done so much good as to win heaven, nor yet harm enough to
merit hell^ drunkards, scoffers, tricksters, are doomed to ride about
until the end of the world. At the head of the cavalcade comes
Gurorysse or Reisarova ^ with her long tail, by which you may
know her from the rest ; she is followed by a great multitude of
either sex. Rider and steed have a stately appearance in front ;
from behind you see nothing but Guro's long tail. The horses
are coal-black, have glowing eyes, and are governed with fiery
rods and iron reins : the noise of the troop is heard from afar*
They I'ide over water as over land, their hoofs scarce skimming
the surface. When they throw a saddle on a roofy some person
will presently die in that house; where they expect drunken
revelry, rioting and murder, they come and sit over the door ; ^
they keep still so long as no crime is committed, but when it is,
they laugh out loud^ and rattle their iron rods. They make their
journeys at Yule-tide, when there is much carousing. If you
hear them come, you must get out of the way, or throw yourself
fiat on the ground^ and feign sleep, for there have been cases of

' * Otiro ryseeroTa« Gudrun horse-tail.' — Süppl.

' ■ Quia Mors aecas introitum delectationis posita est.* Begnla Benedioti,
cap. 7.

* Conf. * mane» ridere videns * in the WaltharitiB 1040.

^ As on p. 922 : a preoantion prescribed in all the folktales (Beohstein's Thtir.
sag. i, 234 and Frank, sag. 1, 57). It is practised in Italy when hot winds blow.


946 SPECTRES.

living men being dragged along with the moving mass. An np-
right man, who takes that precaution, has nought to fear, save
that each of the company spits upon him ; when they are gone,
he must spit out again, or he will take harm. In some parts, this
ghostly array is called aaskereia, aaskerej, doakereida, in others
hoakelreia ; the former corrupted from asgard-reida, »reid, the
Asgard march, whether as a passage of souls to heaven, or as a
journey of gods, of valkyrs, visiting earth ; or may it not be more
simply explained by äska (lightning) and reid (thunder) ? in
which case it would be confined more to a manifestation of Thor.
Sometimes you do not see the procession, but only hear it rash
through the air. Whoever does not make the sign of the cross
on his stable-doors the three nights of Yule, will in the morning
find his horses bhum <vnd dripping with sweat (p. 661), because they
have been taken and ridden (Faye 70 — 72).

Ouro is apparently the same as gurri, ON. gifr (giantess, p.
526) ; but gurri is also huldra (Faye 10), who is described as a
beautiful woman with a hideous tail (ib. 25. 39). Huldra maybe
likened to our Holda all the more, because she takes unchristened
infants with her. Ouro, as a leader of the furious host, answers
perfectly to the description given of all the others^ (see SuppL).

If we now review the entire range of German and Scandinavian
stories about the Furious Host, the following facts come to the
front. The myth exhibits gods and goddesses of the heathen
time. Of gods : Wuoian, and perhaps Fro, if I may take 'Berh-
tolt' to mean him. We can see Wuotan still in his epithets of
the cloaked, the bearded, which were afterwards misunderstood
and converted into proper names. Saxo Gram. p. 37 says of
Othin : ' albo clypeo tectus, album (s. 1. pro ' altum ') flectens
eqnum.* Sleipnir was a light gray horse (Sn. 47), what was called
apple-gray (pommel6, AS. »ppelfealo). Then we see both the
name and the meaning [m. or f.] fluctuate between fro Wodan
andfrowa Oode. A goddess commanding the host, in lieu of the
god, is Holda, his wife in fact. I am more and more firmly con-
vinced, that ' Holda ' can be nothing but an epithet of the mild

1 Can the ' Ourre wood * in the Waldemar legend have arisen, like * Hakel
wood,* oat of the personal name? Conf. Halja and hell. In Schmidt's Fastelabend-
samtol. p. 76 we find the combination * der Woor, die Ooor, der tnldejägtr.


FURIOUS host: guro. 947

'gracious' FricJca; conf. Sommer^s Thür. sag. 165-6. And
Berhta, the shining^ is identical with her too ; or, if the name
applies more to Frouwa, she is still next-door to her, as the Norse
Prejja was to Prigg. It is worth noting, that here Norweg.
legend also names a ' Huldra/ not Frigg nor Preyja. The dogs
that sarroand the god's airy chariot may have been Waotan's
wolves setting np their howl. A Scand. story not well authen-
ticated ^ makes Odinn be wounded by a boar, like Hakelbernd,
and this wounding seems altogether legendary (p. 921-2) ; when
the boar sucked the blood out of the sleeping god, some drops
fell on the earth, which turned into flowers the following spring.

These divinities present themselves in a twofold aspect. Either
as visible to human eyes, visiting the land at some holy tide,
bringing welfare and blessing, accepting gifts and offerings
of the people that stream to meet them. Or floating unseen
through the air, perceptible in cloudy shapes, in the roar and
howl of the winds (p. 632), carrying on war, hunting or the game
of ninepins, the chief employments of ancient heroes : an array
which, less tied down to a definite time, explains more the natural
phenomenon (conf. Haupt's Zeitschr. 6> 1291. 131). I suppose
the two exhibitions to be equally old, and in the myth of the wild
host they constantly play into one another. The fancies about
the Milky Way have shewn us how ways and waggons of the
gods run in the sky as well as on the earth.

With the coming of Christianity the fable could not but
undergo a change. For the solemn march of gods, there now
appeared a pack of horrid spectres, dashed with dark and
devilish ingredients. Very likely the heathen themselves had
believed that spirits of departed heroes took part in the divine
procession; the christians put into the host the unchristened
dead, the drunkard, the suicide (conf. p. 822), who come be-
fore us in frightful forms of mutilation. The ' holde * goddess
turns into an ' unholde,' still beautiful in front, but with a tail
behind.^ So much of her ancient charms as could not be stript
off was held to be seductive and sinful : and thus was forged
the legend of the Venus-mount. Their ancient offerings too the

' WasBenberg p. 72. Crenzer's Symb. 2, 98. I fear Budbeok had the boldness
to adapt the legend of Adonis (p. 949n.) to Oden.

' Conf. * fiaa Welt/ dame World, in Conrad's poem p. 196 se^.

VOL. III. 1


948 SPECTRES.

people did not altogether drop^ but limited them to the sheaf
of oats for the celestial steed, as even Death (another hunter,
p. 845-6) has his bushel of oats found him (p. 844).

When bom agadn as heroes, the gods retained their genuine
old character undimmed. Thus we see Dietrich, Ekhart, Arthur,
Charles, Waldemar, Palnatoke, nay, king Christian, significantly
incorporated in the roving company, without the slightest detri-
ment to their dignity or repute among the people. At the same
time its due weight mast be allowed to another view, which
degrades the gods into devils, the goddesses into hags and
witches : here the devil might easily spring out of the giant of
old.

The last lodgment found by the fable is when it settles on
individual hunters and lovers of hunting of modern times, such
as Hackelberg, the heath-rider Bären, squire Marten, Mansberg
the baron, &c. These look almost like historic personages,
but narrowly examined they will in every case melt into mythic
ones. The people's conscientious care to point out Hakeln-
bemd's tomb seems to indicate a heathen worship, to which
even monuments of stone were consecrated.

The similar course taken by the history of the myth in Scandi-
navia and in Germany is a fresh guarantee that the same heathen
faith prevailed there and here. Saxony, Westphalia, Mecklen-
barg, Hesse have still several features in common with the
North ; South Germany has retained fewer. So there come out
points of agreement with Celtic legend ; none with Slavic, that
I can discover, unless the nocturnal rides of Svantovit (p. 662)
are to be taken into account.

I have yet to mention an agreement with Greek fable, which
seems to prove the high antiquity of that notion of a giant and
hunter. To the Greeks, Orion was a gigantic (TreXcopio^) hunts-
man, who in the underworld continues to chase the quarry on
the Asphodel-mead (Od. 11, 572), and forms a brilliant con-
stellation. Homer speaks of Orion's hound (II. 22, 29) seen in
the sky below him -, in flight before him are the Pleiads (a bevy
of wild doves, Od. 12, 62), and the Great Bear herself appears
to watch him {hoKeiei, Od. 5, 274).^ Did our ancestors connect

^ 0. Müller on Orion (Bhein. mos. f. phüoL 2, 12).


FURIOUS HOST : ORION. 949

the same group of sfcars with their myth of the wild hunt ? I
have left it doubtful on p. 727. We might, for one thing,
see such a connexion in Orion's AS. name of boar-throng
(eofor]?ryng) ; and secondly add, that the three stars of his belt
are called the distaff of Fricka, who as ' Holda ' heads the
furious host, and looks after her spinsters just at the time of
his appearing at Christmas. Can it be, that when the constel-
lation takes name from Fricka, her spindle is made prominent;
and when Wuotan or a giant-hero lends his name, the herd of
hunted boars is emphasized 7 The Greek fable unfolds itself yet
more fully. Orion is struck blind, and is led to new light by
Kedalion, a marvellous child who sits on his shoulders. Might
not we match this blind giant with our headless wild hunter ? ^
A feature that strikes me still more forcibly is, that Artemis
(Diana) causes a scorpion to come up out of the ground, who
stings Orion in the ankle, so that he dies :^ when the sign Scorpio
rises in the sky, Orion sinks. This is like Hackelberend's foot
being pierced by the wild boar's tusk, and* causing his death (pp.
921. 947). Orion's [cosmic] rising is at the summer, his setting
at the winter solstice : he blazes through the winter nights, just
when the furious host is afoot. Stormy winds attend him
(nimbosus Orion, Aen. 1, 535) ; the gifl is given him of walking
on the sea (Apollod. i. 4, 3), as the steeds in the aaskereia skim
over the wave. Orion's relation to Artemis is not like that of
Wuotan to Holda, for these two are never seen together in the
host ; but Holda by herself bears a strong resemblance to Artemis
or Diana (p. 267. 270), still more to the nightly huntress Hecate,
at whose approach dogs whimper (as with frau Gaude), who, like
Hel, is scented by the dogs (p. 667),* and for whom a paltry
pittance was placed (as for Berhta and the wild woman, p.


^ A malefactor, whose crime ie not divnlged before bis death, is doomed to
▼ander with his hecuL under kU arm (Snperst. I, 605). Can the being stmck (or
growing) blind be meant to express ghostly wandering ?

' Aratns Phaenom. 637. Oy. Fast. 5, 541. Lncan Fhars. 9, 832. Adonis
got his death-womid from the boar. Nestor (Jos. Müller 101) tells us, it was
prophesied to Oleg that he would die of his horse ; he still had it fed, but would
not see it again. Five years after, he inquired about it, and was told it was dead.
Then he laughed at soothsayers, and went into the stable, where the horse's
skeleton lay, but when he trod on the skull, a snake darted out of it and stong
him in the foot, whereof he sickened and died (see Snppl.).

' Apparently a slip ; for that was Athena.— TaiMB.


950 SPECTRES.

432) at the trivium (OHG. driwikki),i conf. Theocr. 2, 15 and
Virg. Aen, 4, 609 : ' noctumis Hecate triviis ululata per urbes/
Lucian's ^iXoy^evSij^ cap. 22. 24 tells us how such a ^E/cdnj
appeared in the wood to Eucrates^ and the yelping dogs are there
too (see Suppl.)«

Tacitus Germ. 43 thus describes the Harii, a people of N.E.
Germany: 'truces insitae feritati arte ac tempore lenocinantar;
nigra scuta^ tincta corpora^ atras ad proelia noctes legunt, ipsaqne
formidine atque UTnhra feralis exercittis terrorem inferunt, nollo
hostiam sustinente novum ac velat infemum aspectum' (see
Suppl.). Is this about 'host of the dead' and 'hellish array'
Boman rhetoric^ or was it contained in descriptions of this people
given by Germans themselves? An airy host (p. 940) is also
spoken of by Pliny 2, 57: ' armorum crepitus et tubae sonitus
auditos e eoelo Cimbricis bellis accepimus, crebroque et prius et
postea ; tertio vero consulatu Marii ab Amerinis et Tudertibas
spectata arma coelestia ab ortu occasuque inter se coneurreniia,
pulsis quae ab occasu drant.'

^ Cross-roads, the parting of ways, are a trouble to fraa Gande. Festus sab
T. *pilae, effigies * says tiiese were hung up at such places for the Lares.


CHAPTER XXXII.
TRANSLATION.

An idea specially characteristic of our mythology is that of
Entrückung (removal), which, while extending to the subjects of
the foregoing chapter, has a wider range besides.

Verwünschen (ill-wishing) is the uttering of a curse or ban^
maledicere, diris devovere, Goth, fraqvißan, OHG. farwdzan^
MHG-. verwdzen ; as I do not find verwünschen in our older
speech, I explain it simply as the opposite of wünschen (fausta
apprecari), and refrain from supposing in it a Reference to the
old ' wünsch,' the perfection of felicity.^

This banning differs from metamorphosis, inasmuch as it does *
not transform, but rather throws a spell upon things in their
natural shape, only removing them into a new position ; though
common parlance calls whatever is transformed 'verwünscht'
(banned). Further, what is mstam^orphosed remains, till the
moment of its emancipation, in the new shape given it, visible
to all eyes, e.g. the stone or tree into which a man has been
changed; whereas, when a thing is banned, in the sense in
which I use the word, it seems to me essential that it be with»
drawn from our senses, and only re-appear from time to time,
and then in the same shape as before. In other words : what is
metamorphosed remains corporeal, what is banned becomes im-
perceptible, and can only on certain conditions become corporeal
again, in the same way as invisible spirits can at will assume
grosser material shapes. Vanishing^ is therefore voluntary trans-
lation (to another sphere), a prerogative of gods (p. 825) and
spirits, also of some heroes that are possessed of a magic mask
(grtma) or concealing helmet; translated men are spirit-like,

^ Note the O. Fr. ftatitheeiB between iouhait (wish) and dehait (verwiinaohnng) ;
both words are wanting in the other Bomance tongaes, they have their root in
OHO. heiz, ON. heit (yotnm).

* * Fran Saelde venwant,' vaniehed, Etzers hofh. 210.

961


952 TRANSLATION.

and another expression for it is : ' thej sleep,^ they only wake
from time to time^ (see Sappl.).

And not only persons^ but things^ are translatable. Persons
that vanish and re-appear are precisely in the condition of the
spectres dealt with in the last chapter : just as souls of dead men
there got identified with heroes and gods, so here we come upon
the same gods and heroes again. Vanished gods get confounded
with enchanted spell-bound heroes.

With our people a favourite mode of representing translation
is to shut up the enchanted inside a mountain, the earth, so to
speak, letting herself be opened to receive them.^ More than one
idea may be at work here together : motherly earth hides the
dead in her bosom, and the world of souls is an underground
world; elves and dwarfs are imagined living inside mountains,
not so much in the depths of the earth as in hills and rocks that
rise above the level ground ; but popular forms of cursing choose
all manner of phrases to express the very lowest abyss.' The
Swed. bergtagen (taken into mountain) means sunken, bergtagning

^ See the faxnooB legends of the Seven Sleepen (Greg. Tor. mirao. 1, 95. Paul
Diac. 1, 8), and of Endymion, who lies in et^al sleep on Mt. Latmos. Gonl
Pliny 7| 62 : Paemm aestn et itinere fessum in specu septem et qninqnaginta
dormisse annis, remm faciem matationemqne mirantem, velnt postero experrectom
die; hinc pari numero dierom senio ingmente, at tarnen in septimmn et quin-
qaagesimmu atque centesimum vitae dnraret annum ; * and the German sto^ of
the three miners. Shepherds slept in oaves 7 years, or 7 times 7 (Moneys Anz.
7, 54).

' An impatient longing to disappear we express by the phrases * I shonld like
to creep into the earth,* and 'jump out of my skitif* the same thing that is caUed at
the end of the Lament (Nib.) : * sich versliefen nnd tu der hiute triefen in löcher
der steinwende,* trickle away, so to speak. O. iv. 26, 43 has : ' ruafet tbesdn bergon,
bittet sie thaz sie fallen ubar iuih, joh bittet onh thie huhila thaz sie ioih theken
obana, ir biginnet thanne innan erda sliafan, joh snintet filn thrAto.' Hel. 166, 3 :
*■ than gi so gema sind, that in hier hihlidan h6ha bergSst diopo hidelban,* be-lid
and deep be-delve yon. Much of this language is BibliciEd (Isa. 2, 19 ; Hos. 10, 8 ;
Lt^ 23, 30 ; Bev. 6, 16, 16), but the sentiment of many nations wiU run alike in
such matters. Nib. 867, 2 : * mir troumte, wie obe dir ze tal vielen zwene berge,* I
dreamt, two mts fell on thee. That jumping out of one's sMn, like a snake casting
his slough, may also come of joy and anger, O.Fr. 'apoi n' ist desapeW is weU
nigh out of his skin, Ogier 6668. Nethl. * het is om uit zijn vel te springen* So
in our Elis. von Orleans, ed. Schutz p. 223 ; * for joy,* Ettn.*s Unw. doctor 856.
Not unlike is that jumping into stone spoken of on p. 552; as early as Alb. Ton
Halb. 143^ : ' at one leap he turned into stone.'

> They wish you * 100,000 fathom under ground ; * ' as far down as a hare can
run in two years ' ^p. 179) ; * so low, that no cock crows after (or to) thee,* and the
like. What does the last formula mean ? that the cock's crow can no longer, even
in the hush of night, reach the sunken man ? or that those above ground cannot
hear the ciy of the fowl that has sunk with him to the subterranean dwelling? In
Einderm. 2, 32 it is said of the princesses : * se versunken alle drei so deip unner
de eere, dat kien haan mer danach krehete* * So kreet doch kein han nach mir,*
and * kein han fort da nach hrehen that,' H. Sachs üi. 2, 178^. 213«.


HEROES INSIDE HILLS. 953

translation, Sv. visor 1, 1. Afz. 1, 28. 33. In Asbiörnsen and
Moe no. 88 ' indtagen i bierget ; ' and Faye 35-6 quotes striking
instances of this ^indtages i hole og fjelde/ being taken into
height and fell. ON. gdnga inn ifialUt, Nialss. cap. 14. 135 (see
Suppl.).

We understand now, why frau Holda, frau Venus and their
following dwell in mountains : they are sequestered there, till the
time come for holding their progress among men. So live Wodan
and king Charles in the Odenberg,

Here and there a man has gained entrance into such mountains ;
Tanhäuser sojourned many years at the court of Venus. A black-
smith was looking in the underwood on the Odenberg for a haw-
thorn to make his hammer-helve, when suddenly he saw a gap
he had never noticed before in the face of the cliff ; he stept in,
and stood in a new world of wonders. Strong men were bowling
balls of iron, they challenged him to play, but he declined, the
iron balls, he said, were too heavy for his hand. The men were
not offended, they told him to choose what present he would have.
He begged for one of their balls, took it home, and put it among
his stock of iron. Afterwards, wanting to work it, he made it
red hot, but it burst in pieces on the anvil, and every piece was
sheer gold.^ He never again found the opening in the Odenberg ;
he had happened that time to hit the day when it stands open to
men, as it does on certain days of the year to Sunday children.
They see an old man with a long beard, holding in his hand a
metal goblet (as Charles in Romance epic always has the epithet
' a la barbe florie,' and OSinn too was called Larlghardr, Harbarffr,
Siffskeggr). Inside the mountain they have presents given them,
as in the Kifhäuser.

In the Ouckenberg^ near Fränkischgemünden, a kaiser dis-
appeared with all his army a long time ago ; but when his beard
has grown three times round the table at which he sits, he will
come out again with all his men. Once a poor boy, who went
about the neighbourhood selling rolls, met an old man on the
mountain, and complained that he could not sell much. ^ I will

^ This skittle-playing sounds like rolling thunder (p. 167). Th^ say in N.'
Qeim. when it thnnders, * the angels are playing at bowls.'

' Not Goachsberg nor Kaukasus (p. 681) ; but rather the mt of the progenitor
Ouogo (gnggäni, Z. f. d. a. 1, 23), or of the beetle (guegi, p. 183). Meichelb. 1182
ad Guo^nhüsun ; Trad. fuld. 2, 33 in Qougeleibn.


954 TBANSLATION.

shew tliee a place/ said the man^ ' where thou canst bring thy
rolls every day^ but thou must tell no man thereof/ He then led
the boy into the mountain^ where there was plenty of life and
bustle^ people buying and selling; the Jcaiaer himself sat at a
table^ and his beard had grown twice round it. The lad now
brought his rolls there every day^ and was paid in ancient coin^
which at last the people in his village would not take; they
pressed him to tell how he came by it^ then he confessed all
that had taken place. Next day^ when he wished to go into
the mountain^ he could not so much as see it^ let alone find the
entrance (Moneys Anz. 4. 409^ and thence in Bechst. Frank, sag.
p. 103). So between Nürnberg and Fürt stands kaiser Carls
berg, out of which in former times came the sound of singing,
and of which a similar tale is told about carrying bread; in
a vaulted chamber the baker's boy saw men in armour sitting
(Moneys Anz. 6, 174).

In Westphalia, between Lübbecke and Holzhansen, above
Mehnen village on the Weser, stands a hill called die Babüonie,^
in which Wedekind (Weking) sits enchanted, waiting till his
time come; favoured ones who find the entrance are dismissed
with gifts (Bedeker's Westf. sag. no. 21).

An older myth is preserved in the Chron. nrsbergense
(Auersperg) ad an. 1223 (Pertz 8, 261)': In page Wormaciensi
videbantur per aliquot dies non modica et armata muitittuio
equitum euntium et redeuntium, et quasi ad placitum colloquium
nunc hie nunc illic turbas facere, circa nonam vero horam cuidam
monti, quo et exiisse videbantur, se reddere. Tandem quidam de
incolis regionis illius, non sine magno timore hujusmodi tam pro-
digiosae concioni, crucis signaculo munitus appropinquat. Mox
quandam ex illis occurrentem sibi personam per nomen omnipo-
tentis Domini nostri, manifestare causam populi qui sic apparuerit,
adjurat. Cui iUe inter cetera * Non sumus ' inqnit, ' ut pntatis,
fantasmata, nee militum, ut vobis cemimur, turba, sed animal
militum interfectorum, arma vero et habitus et equi, quia nobis
prius fuerant instrumenta peccandi, nunc nobis sunt materia
tormenti, et vere totum ignitum est quod in nobis cemitis, quamvis
id vos corporalibus ocuUs discemere non possitis.' In hujusmodi

^ Seyeral times in MHG. poems * diu wütite Babildne.*


HEROES INSIDE HILLS. 955

comitata dicitnr etiam Emicho comes ante paucos annos (an.
1117) occisus apparaisse, et ab hac poena orationibus et elee^
mosjnis se posse redimi docmsse/ Donnersberg, Tonnerre (p..
170) was then in the Wormazfeld, it must therefore be the
moantain in land out of which the ancient ghosts kept riding :
Bonis of fallen and resuscitated heroes (p. 940), but by the
christian eye seen here in hell-fire.

In the old maun,tain castle of Geroldseck Stegfried and other
heroes are supposed to dwells and thence they will appear to the
German nation in its time of utmost need, Deut. sag. no. 21. A
cleß in a rock by the L. of Lucerne, some say on the Grriitli, holds
in sleep the three founders of the Swiss Federation ; they will
fcake when their country wants them, ibid. no. 297. At the
Ktfhauser in Thuringia sleeps Frederic Barbarossa : he sits at a
round stone table, resting his head on his hand, nodding, with
blinking eyes; his beard grows round the table, it has already
made the circuit twice, and when it has grown round the third time,
the king will awake. On coming out he will han^ his shield on
a withered tree, which wiU break into leaf, and a better time will
dawn. Yet some hare seen him awake: a shepherd having
piped a lay that pleased him well, Frederick asked him : 'fly the
ravens round the mountain still ? ' the shepherd said yes : ' then
must I sleep another 100 yea/rsJ ^ The shepherd was led into

' Similar questions are put by the blind giant in a Swed. folktale, which I
insert here from Bezell's Halland (Götheborg 1818) 2, p. 801 : NAgra sjömän ifr&n
Getinge blefvo pa hafret af stormazne forde emot en okand Ö (seamen from G.
driven by storms to an unknown isle), omgifne af mörker uppstiga de der (landed
in the dark). De blefvo varse en pA afstAnd upptänd eld (saw a lighted fire), och
tkynda dit. Framför elden ligger en ovanligt lAng man, som var blind ; en annan
af lika jättestorlek (another of like giant size), stflr bredvid honom och rör i elden
med en iamsttog. Ben gamle blinde mannen reser sig npp, och fr&gar de ankomne
främlingame, hvarifrAn de voro. De svara, ifrAn Halland ooh Getinge socken.
HvarpA den blinde frSgar : * lefver ennu den hvita qvinnan (lives the white woman
Btill )?* De svarade ja, fast de ej viste hvad han harmed menade. Ater sporde
han : * minne mitt getktu stflr anna qvar (stands my goat-honse yet) ? * De
Bvarade flterigen ja, ehorn de äfven voro okminige om hvad han menade. Dfl sade
han : * jag fiok ej hafva mitt getkus i fred for den kyrkan som byggdes pfl den
platsen. Yiljen I komma lyokligt hem, valan, jag lemnar er dertill tvenne vilkor.'
De lofva, oeh den gamle blinde fortfor : * tagen detta »ölfbältet och när I kommen
hem, B& spännen det pfl den hvita qvinnan^ och denne aik statten den pfl altaret
i mitt gethuM,* Lyckligen flterkonme till hembygden, rfldfrflga sig sjömänneme
hnru de skoUe efterkomma den gamle blinde mannens begäran. Man beslöt at
Bpanna baltet omkring en björk, odi bj&rken for i lüften^ och at sätta asken pfl en
hdle (grave-monnd), ooh straxt star kullen i Oiusan Idga. Men efter det kyrluin är
bygd der den blinde mannen hade sitt gethos, har hon ffltt namnet Getinge. The
* blind g^ant ' banished to the island is a spectral heathen god (conf. Orion, p. 949),
the * white woman * a christian chttroh or an image of Mary ; had they fastened the


956 TRANSLATION.

the king^s armoury^ and presented with the stand of a hand'
basin^ which the goldsmith found to be sheer gold (ib. nos. 23.
296).^ Others make Frederick sit in t^ cave of the rock near
Kaiserslautern (ib. no. 295), or at Trifels by Anweiler, or else in
the Unterberg near Salzburg (ib. no. 28), though some put Charles
the Great here, or Charles V. ; the growing of Üie heard round the
table is related just the same. When the beard has for the third
time reached the last comer of the table, the end of the world
begins, a bloody battle is fought ou the Walserfeld, Antichrist
appears, the angel-trumpets peal, and the Last of Days has
dawned. The Walserfeld has a withered tree, which has been
cut down three times, but its root has always sprouted and grown
into a perfect tree again. When iiext it begins to leaf, the terrible
fight is near, and will open when the tree bears fruit. Then shall
Frederick hang his shield on the tree, all men shall fiock to it, and
make such a slaughter that the blood will run into the warriors'
shoes, and the wicked men be slain by the righteous (ib. nos. 24.
28). In this remarkable tradition may be recognised things old
and very old. — A religious poem of the 16th cent. (Grater's
Odina p. 197) speaks of duke Frederick, who is to win back the
H. Sepulchre, and hang his shield on a leafless tree ; and Anie-
christe is brought in too. — A fragment of an older lay of the
14th cent. (Cod. Pal. 844) says of Emp. Frederick : ' An dem
gejaid er y erschwant (in the hunt he disappeared), das man den
edeln keiser her sind gesach (saw) nyemer mer ; also ward der

sUver belt ronnd it, it would have shot np into the air as the birch did. Another

aoconnt makes the blind giant ask the sailors if the jingling-cow by the chnreh
(meaning the bell or heliiy) were still alive f They answered yes, and he challenged
one of them to hold ont his hand, that he might see if the inhabitants had any
strength left. They handed him a boat-bar made redhot, which he crashed
together, saying there was no great strength there (Faye p. 17). A stoiy in (ad-
man's Bahuslän 153-4 has similar variations : A ship's crew, driven out of their
conrse to an ont-of-the-way coast, see a fire burning at night, and go on shore. By
the fire sits only one old fruxn, who asks a sailor : ' Whence be ye ? * From Hisin-
gen in ßäfve pastorate. ' Ken ye Thorsby too 7 ' Ay, that I do. * Wot ye the
whereabout of Ulfveberg ? ' Ay, it's many a time I*ve passed it, going from Göthe-
borg to Marstrand by way of Hisingen. * Stand t}u great stones and barrows then
yet unremoved f * Ay, but one stone leans and is Uke to fall. * Wot ye where
Glosshed-altar is, and whether it be well kept up ? * I know nothing about that
* Say to the folk that dwelleth now at Thorsby and Thorsbraoka, that they destroy
not the stones and mounds on Ulfveberg, and that they keep in good condition
Glosshed-altar, so shalt thou have fair weather for thy home-return.* The sailor
promised, but asked the old man his name. * My name is Thore Brack, and there
dwelt I of yore, till I was made to flee : in the great mounds of Ulfveborg lies all
my kin, at Glosshed-altar did we sacrifice and serve our gods.'

^ The Kifhauser legends now stand collected in Bechst. 4, 9 — 54.


/


DRY TRBB TURNING GREEN. 957

hochgeporn heiser Friederich do verlorn. Wo er darnacli ye hin
kam^ oder ob er den end da nam^ das kand nyemand gesagen
mir^ oder ob yne die wUden tir (beasts) vressen habn oder zeriseen
(eaten or torn), es en kan die warheit nyemand wissen, oder ob er
noch lebendig ay (be yet alive)/ der gewiszen sin wir fry nnd der
rechten warheit ; iedoch ist nns geseit von pawren (yet we are
told by peasants) solh mer, das er als ein waler (pilgrim) sich oft
by yne hab lassen sehen (seen by them) nnd hab yne offenlich
verjehen (declared), er süU noch gewaltig werden (he shonld yet
become master) aller römischen erden, er süU noch die pfafien
stören, nnd er woll noch nicht nf hören, noch mit nichten lassen
abe, nar er pring (nor rest till he bring) das heilige grabe nnd
darzn das heilig lant wieder in der Christen hant, nnd wol sine
Schildes last hohen an den dorren ast (his shield^s weight hang on
the withered bough) ; das ich das für ein warheit sag, das die
pauren haben geseit, das nym ich mich nicht an, wan ich sin
nicht gesehen han, ich han es auch zu kein stunden noch nyndert
geschribn funden, was das ichs gehört han van den alten pauren
an wan/ — ^A poem of about 1350 (Aretin's Beitr. 9, 1134) says :
' So wirt das vrlewg also gross (war so great)^ nymand kan ez
gestillen^ so kumpt sich kayser Fridrich der her (high) vnd auch
der miltj er vert dort her durch Gotes willen, an einen dürren
pawm (withered tree) so henkt er seinen schilt, so wirt die vart hin
über mar . • • er vert dort hin zum dürren pawm an alles
widerhap, dar an so henkt er seinen schilt, er grünet unde pirt
(bears) : so wirt gewun daz heilig grap, daz nymmer swert darup
gezogen wirt/ — ^Again, in Sibylle^s prophecy, composed in Ger-
man rhyme soon after the middle of the 14th cent. : ' Es kumet
noch dar zno wol, das Got ein keiser geben sol, den hat er be-
halten in siner gewalt und git (gives) im kraft manigvalt, er wirt
genant Fridrich, der usserwelte iiirste rich, vnd sament daz
Christen volgan sich vnd gewinnet daz helge grap über mer, do
stat ein dor boujn vnd ist gros, vnd sol so lange stan bios, bicz
der keiser Fridrich dar an sinen schilt gehenken mag vnd kan, so

1 At the end of the Lament for king Etzel ; * Dee wnndera wird ich nimmer
▼tI, weder er tick vergiengt^ oder in der luft enpßenge, oder lebende würde begraben,
oder te himele üf erhaben, und ob er üz dir hiute trüffe oder sich verblüffe in löcher
der steinwende, oder mit welhem ende er Yon dem übe qnieme, oder waz in zuo eim
meme, ob erfBere in daz apgründe, oder ob in der tiuvel verzlünde, oder ob er sas <i
verncimden, das en-h&t niemen noh erfunden.'


958 TRANSLATION.

wirt der houm wieder gruen gar, noch kument aber gaete jar, vnd
wirt in aller der welt wol stan, der Heiden glouben mnos gar
zergan' (Wackem. Basel MSS. p. 55).^

That the common people disbelieyed the death of Emp. Fred-
erick, and expected him to come back, is plain from the passages
which expressly refer to ' old peasants * ; it had most likely been
the same in the preceding (13th) cent., and was long after.
Impostors took advantage of the general delusion ; one chronicle
(Böhmer 1, 14) relates : ' Ecce quidam traphator surrexit in
mediam, qai dixit se esse Fridericum quondam imperatorem, qaod
de se multis intersignis et quibusdam prestigiis scire volentibus
comprobavit.' King Rudolf had him burnt on a pile in 1285.
Yet Detmar has under the year 1287 : *By der tid quam to
Lubeke en olt man, de sprak, he were keiser Vrederie, de vor-
drevene. Dome beghunden erst de boven (lads) nnd dat mene
volk to hörende sines tusches (fraud), undo deden erne ere
(honour). He lovede en (promised them) grote gnade, oft he
weder queme an sin rike ; he wart up eneme schonen rosse voret
de stat umme to beschowende . . . darna cortliken (shortly
after) quam de man van steden, dat nenman wiste, wor he hennen
vor (fared). Seder (later) quam de mer (news), dat bi deme Bine
en troner (trickster) were, de in dersulven wise de lüde bedroch,
de ward dar brand in ener kopen.' A more exact account in
Ottocar cap. 321 — 6, and the chron. in Pez 1, 1104. The legend
may also confound the two Fredericks, I and II (see Suppl.).^

^ In the MS. ' Historia triam regom * by Job. von Hildesheim (d. 1375) is
mentioned a temple of the Tartars. Bdiind walls, locks and bolts stands tkwithered
trect gaarded by men at arms : whatever prince can manage to hang his shield on
the tree^ becomes lord of all the East ; the Great Khan did succeed, and is therefore
irresistible (Goethe's Kmist n. alt. ii. 2, 174-5. Schwab's Acoomit of the book
p. 181-2). The tree stands at Tauris, form. Sosa. On the other hand, MonteTÜU
reports that * in the vale of Mambre, as one journeys from Ebron to Bethlehem,
stands the woful withered tree that they call Trip, but we name it tree of vietorff;
'tis an oaktree, and thought to have stood from the beginning of the world ; and
before Our Lord suffered, 'twas green and well-leaved, but when God died on the
cross, it withered up . . . 'Tis found written in prophecies, Out of Netherland shall
come a prince with many christians, he shall win these lands, and let sing the mast
under the dry tree, then shall it gather green leaves again, and be fruitful, and Jew
and Heathen all turn Christian. Therefore do they shew it great honour, and over
it keep good ward.' This is from the transl. by Otto von Diemeringen ; the Kethl.
edition names the tree Drip, the Latin one Dirp, and has nothing about the pre-
dicted singing of mass. Was this a Gkrman interpolation, and is the whole a
Westiern legend transported to the East f Or are the German popular traditions
due to reports of Eastern travel? In O. Fr. the tree is called le sec'arbre,l*arbre seek
or supe ; see passages quoted in ThMtre Fr. au moyen &ge, p. 171.

* There is a remarkable phrase : * auf den alien kaiser hinein dahin leben,' to


HEBOES INSIDE HILLS. 959

As Charles's white beard points to Wuotan^ so does Frederick's
red to Donar^ and the like mythic meaning has been put on Olaf's
red beard (p. 548) in Norway.

Frederick Bedbeard in the Kifhäaser and XJnterberg, Charles
Longbeard in the Unterberg and Odenberg^ Holda in the Horsel-
berg^ all express one mythic idea^ bat with a different story
tacked to it in every case. Chai^les fights a stupendous battle^
and is then gathered up in the Odenberg, whence he will issue
one day to new war and victory. Frederick is coming out of the
Unterberg to fight such a battle. In the 13-14-15th centuries
the people associated with it the recovery of the H. Sepulchre :
the heroes of Odenberg and Eafhäuser have no such purpose set
before them. The older programme is^ that upon their awaking
comes the great world-battle, and the Day of Judgment dawns :
of this the mention of Antichrist leaves no doubt. Here we see
connexion with the myth of the world* s destruction (p. 810-2).
The siLspended shield may signify the approaching Judge (RA.
851) ; even the sign of the tree turning green again looks to me
more heathen than christian. It might indeed be referred to
Matth. 24, 32. Mark 13, 28. Luke 21, 29-30 (Hel. 132, 14),
where the omens of the Great Day are likened to the budding fig-
tree as a sign of approaching summer ; but to apply the simile to
the Judgment-day would clearly be a confusion of thought. I
prefer to think of the newly verdant earth after Muspilli (Sssm.
9**), or of a withered and newly sprouting World- tree, the ash
(p. 796-9) ; we might even find in this of the withered tree ^ some
support to my interpretation of muspilli, mudspilli as = arboris
perditio (p. 809). And what if Frederick's asking afber the
Aying ravens should be connected even with the eagle flying over
the new world (Sssm. 9^), or the one sitting on the ash- tree 7 It
might also suggest the cranes which at the time of the great over-
throw come flying through the bread-stalls (Deut. sag. no. 317).


lire in hope of the old k., Simplio. 8, 20. 4, 11; *auf den alten kauer hinein
ttehlen,' Springinsf. cap. 6 ; \.e, reckoning on a possible change in the nature of
things.

' In other eases too the withering or greening of a tree is bonnd up with the
itte of a eonntiy. In Dietmanen stood a marrelloas tree, that ßourished before
the oonqnest, and vnthered on the lose of liberty. There goes a prophecy that * when
a magpie ImUdt an it and hatchet five white eMekentt the coontxy ^nll be free again/
Keooonis 1, 237, conf . 562.


960 TRANSLATION.

In the same way Fischart (Garg. 266-7) couples the enchanted
king's return with the coming of the cranes.^

The myth of the sprouting tree and the battle near it is set
before us with important variations in a Low Saxon legend
(MüUenhoff nos. 509—512. 605; Pref. L.). An ash, it is believed,
will one day grow up in the churchyard of Nortorf in the middle
of Holstein : no one has seen anything of it yet, but every year a
small shoot comes up unnoticed above the ground, and every New-
year's night a white horseman on a white horse comes to cut the
young shoot off. At the same time appears a bUich horseman on a
black horse to hinder him. After a long fight, the black rider is
put to flight, and the white one cuts the shoot. But some day he
will not be able to overcome the black one, the cwA tree will grow
up, and when it is tall enough for a horse to be tied under it (RA.
p. 82 ; conf. the Dan. legend of Holger, Thiele 1, 20), the king
with mighty hosts will come, and a terribly long baitle be fought.
During that time his horse will stand under the tree, and after
that he will be more powerful than ever. In this story one can
hardly help recognising the World-tree and the battle at tbe
world's destruction : the white horseman seems to be Fregr, or
some shining god, struggling with 8urtr the black, and striving
to delay the approaching end of the world by lopping off the
sprout. Heathen gods the two champions are for certain, even if
they be not these. The king, whose horse stands tied up under
the tree, is the same as he whose shield is hung upon the tree, a
future judge of the world.

As the past and the future, the lost paradise and the expected,
do in the people's imagination melt into one,^ they come to
believe in a re-awaking of their loved kings and heroes oat of
their mountain-sleep : of Frederick and Charles, of Siegfried and
doubtless Dietrich too. This is the true hall-mark of the epos, to
endow its leading characters with a lasting inextinguishable life.
But Siegfried is also Wuotan (pp. 26n. 134), Dietrich is Wuotan


^ Other signs that the end of the world is at hand : when the iwan dropt t^
ring from his bill (p. 429) ; when the giant's rib, from which a drop falls once a year,
has all trickled away (Dent. sag. no. 140) ; when the tongue of the balance stands in
(ib. 294) ; when, says a Swed. song, the stone in the green valley falls; when tbe
ship made of men*s nails is bnilt (p. 814).

' P. 822-8 ; even the particles ever, once, one day, olim, apply to both states
of being.


HEROES INSIDE HILLS. 961

future. In the caslle'cellar of Salam^ in the Silesian Zobtenberg^
(p. 937), Charles is Wuotan (p. 394?) ; and Wuotan, after Mus-
pilli, rises on the world anew, a god alive and young again.
Once before, OSinn had departed out of the land to Go^heim
(Yngl. saga, c. 10) ; they supposed him dead, and he came back.
And with long-bearded Wuotan the older legend of a red- bearded
Donar may have started into conscioudness again.

Arthur too, the vanished king, whose return is looked for by
the Britons,^ is believed, riding as he does at the head of the
nightly host, (p. 942), to be lodged in a mountain with all his
massenie : Felicia, the daughter of Sibylle, and the goddess Juno
live in his fellowship, and his whole army lack neither food nor
drink, horses nor raiment.^ That Oralent continues to live, we
are assured at the end of the Lais de Graelent. In a vaulted
chamber near Kronburg in Denmark, mail-clad men sit round a
stone table, stooping down, resting their heads on their crossed
arms. When Holger danske, sitting at the end of the table,
raised his head, the table, into which his beard had grown, went to
pieces, and he said : ' we shall return when there are no more men
in Denmark than there is room for on a wine-butt,' (Thiele 1, 23.
168). The Danes applied every myth to Olger, who does not
belong to them at all, but to the Netherlands ; he is the same
Ogier (Otger, perh. Otacher) that haunts the Ardennes forest, and
is to come back some day.' The Slavs too believe in the return
of their beloved Svatopluk (Sviatopolk), and some parts of
Moravia still keep np the custom of going in solemn procession
to seek Svatopluk (Palacky 1, 135). With this I couple Svegdir's
going forth * at leita Offin/ to look for 0., Yngl. saga 15. The
' seeking God ' on p. 145 was another thing (see Suppl.).

Often the banished one bears no name at all : the shepherd
from the Ostenberg found in the cavern of the Willberg a little
man sitting at a stone table, which his beard had grown through
(Deut. sag. no. 314) ; and a grizzled man conducted the shepherd
of Wernigerode to the treasures of the mountain cave (ib. no. 315),
The beard's growing round or into the stone expresses forcibly
the long duration of the past time, and the slow advance of the

^ * Et priiiB Artunu veniet vetns iUe Biitannns,* Henr. Septimell. in Leyser,
p. 460. ' cujus in Arturi tempore frnotus erit/ ib. p. 477.
s Wartb. kr. ien. hs. 99. 100 (Docen 1, 132.S).
• BarxoiB, prtf aee p. zii. Poloi 28. 86.


962 TBANSLATION.

were found three men sitting at the table (ib. nos. 15. 143), who
are represented as malefactors enchanted. It is easy to trace
the step from heroes shat up in mountains to such as^ haying
died naturally, sleep in their tombs of stone, and visibly appear
at sundry times. At Steinfeld, in the Bremen Marschland, a man
had disturbed a hüne-grave, and the following night three mm
appeared to him, one of them one-eyed (an allusion to Wuotan),
and conversed in some unintelligible language; at last they
hurled threatening looks at him who. had rummaged their tomb,
they said they had fallen in their country's cause, and if he broke
their rest any more, he should have neither luck nor star (Harrys
Nieders. sag. 1, 64).

But as Holda is spell-bound in the mountain, so it is preemi-
nently to white women, white-robed maidens, (pp. 288. 412-8) that
this notion of mountain banishment becomes applicable : divine
or semi-divine beings of heathenism, who still at appointed times
grow visible to mortal sight ; they love best to appear in warm
sunlight to poor shepherds and herd-boys. German legend
everywhere is full of graceful stories on the subject, which are all
substantially alike, and betray great depth of root.

On the Lahnberg in Up. Hesse sat a white maiden at sunrise;
she had wheat spread out on sheets to dry in the sun, and was
spinning. A baker of Marburg was passing that way,' and took
a handful of grains with him ; at home he found nothing bat
grains of gold in his pocket. And the like is told of a peasant
near Friedigerode.

A poor shepherd was tending his flock at the Boynehurg, when
he saw a snow-white maiden sit in the sunshine by the castle-door ;
on a white cloth before her lay pods of flax ready to crack open.
In astonishment he steps up, says ' oh what fine pods I ' takes np
a handful to examine, then lays them down again. The maiden
looks at him kindly, but mournfully, without a word of reply.
He drives his flock home, but a few pods that had fallen into his
shoe, gall his foot ; he sits down to pull off the shoe, when there
roll into his hand five or six grains of gold (Deut. sag. no. 10;
conf. Wetterauische sagen p. 277. Moneys Anz. 8, 427).

In the Otomannsberg near Geismar village, a fire is said to
burn at night. Every seven years there comes out a maiden in


WHITE LADIES IN HILLS, ETC. 963

fnowy garments, holding a hunch of keys in her hand. Another
white woman with a bunch of keys appears on the castle-rock at
Baden at the hoar of noon (Moneys Anz. 8^ 310).

In the castle-vaalt by Wolfartsweiler lies a hidden treasure,
on account of which^ every seventh year wJwn may-lilies are in
bloom, a white maiden appears ; her black hair is plaited in long
tails^ she wears a golden girdle round her white gown, a bundle of
heys at her side or in one hand^ and a bunch of may-lilies in the
other. She likes best to shew herself to innocent children, to
one of whom she beckoned one day from beside the grave below,
to come over to her : the child ran home in a fright, and told
about it; when it came back to the place with its father^ the
maiden was no longer there. One day at noon, two of the goose-
herd's girls saw the white maiden come down to the brook, comb
QJid plait up her tails^ wash her face and hands, and walk up the
castle hill again. The same thing happened the following noon,
and thoagh they had been told at home to be sure and speak to
the maiden, they had not the courage after all. The third day
they never saw the maiden, but on a stone in the middle of the
brook they found a liver- sausage freshly fried^ and liked it better
than they ever did another. Another day two men from Grün-
wettersbach saw the maiden fill a tub with water from the brook,
and carry it up the hill; on the tub were two broad hoops
of pure gold. The way she takes, every time she goes up and
down^ was plainly to be distinguished in the grass (Moneys Anz
8, 304).

At Osterrode^ every Easter Sunday before sunrise, may be seen
a white maiden, who slowly walks down to the brook, and there
washes; a large bunch of keys hangs at her girdle. A poor
linen-weaver having met her at that season^ she took him into
the castle ruins, and of three white lilies she plucked him one
which he stuck in his hat. When he got home, he found the
lily was pure gold and silver, and the town of Osterrode had not
the money to buy it of him. The Easter-maiden's marvellous
fiower was taken by the Duke in return for a pension to the
weaver, and placed in his princely coat of arms (Harrys 2,
no. 23).

One Christmas night, when all lay deep in snow, a waggoner
walked home to his village by a footpath. He saw a maiden in a

VOL. III. F


964 TBANSIiATION.

summer bonnet stand not far off and turn over with a rake some
pods of flax that lay spread oat on the ground. ' I say^ lass, is
that the way ? ' he cried^ and took a handful of the pods ; she
made no answer^ but out him 07er the hand with the rake. The
next morning, when he remembered what he had brought home,
the flax-pods had all turned into gold. He then hurried back to
the spot, where he oould see his footprints of the night before
deep in the snow, but damsel and flax had disappeared (Moneys
Anz. 5, 175).

On a hill near Langensteinbach in the forest is the long-ruined
church of St. Barbara, where the white woman walks by buried
treasures. One leap-year in the spring a young girl went into it,
and saw her step out of the choir, she cried sh 1 and beckoned
the girl to her : her face and hands were white as snow, her
raven hair was thrown back, in the hand she beckoned with she
held a bunch of blue flowers ^ on the other were ever so many gold
rings, she wore a white gown, green shoes, and a bunch of keys at
her side. The terrified g^rl ran out of the church, and fetched in
her father and brother who were at work outside, but they conld
not see the white woman till they askdd the girl, who pointed
and said ' there 1 ' Then the woman turned, her hair hung over
her back to the ground, she went toward the choir, and then
vanished (Moneys Anz. 5, 321).

Into the convent garden of (reorgenthal a maid was going
about the hour of noon to cut grass ; suddenly, high on the wall
there stood a little woman as white as lawn, who beckoned till
the clock struck twelve, then disappeared. The grass-girl sees
on her way a fine cloth covered with flax-pods, and wondering
she pockets two of them. When she gets home, they are two
bright ducats (Bechst. Thiir. sag. 2, 68).

About the underground well near Atterode many have seen
in the moonlight the white maiden dry either washing or wJieat
(ib. 4, 166).

At the deserted castle of Frankenstein near Klosterallendorf, a
maiden clothed in white appears every seven years, sitting over the
vault and beckoning. Once when a man wished to follow her^
but stood irresolute at the entrance, she turned and gave him a
handful of cherries. He said ' thank you,' and put them in his
pouch ; suddenly there came a crash, cellar and maiden had dis*


WHITE LADIBS IK HILLS, ETC. 965

appeared, and the bewildered peasant, on examining the cherries
at home, found them changed into gold and silver pieces (ib. 4,
lU).

A fisherman in the neighbourhood of the Highwayman's hill
near Feeben was throwing out his nets, when he suddenly saw
the fokite woman stand on the bank before him with a bunch of
keys. She said, ' thy wife at home is just delivered of a boy, go
fetch me the babe, that I may kiss him and be saved/ The
fisherman drove home^ and found everything as she had said, but
he durst not take his child out at once, the clergyman advised
him to have it christened first ; after which, when he repaired to
the hill, the white woman sat weeping and wailing, for it was one
of the set conditions that her redemption should be wrought by
an infant unbaptized. So ever and anon she still appears on the
hill, and waits the deliverer's coming (Ad. Kuhn no. 67).

By Hennikendorf not far from Luckenwalde, two shepherds
pastured their sheep. A woman hcdf white^ half blaek, shewed
herself on the mountain, making signs to them. One of them
tardily went up, and she offered him all the gold in the mountain,
if he would come in and set her free. When this entreaty failed
to move him, she said that if he did not release her, there would
not be another bom for a hundred years that could; but the
shepherd did not get over his fear till the hour of deliverance
was past, and the woman sank into the mountain, whence he
could for a long time hear heartrending plaints and moans (ib.
no. 99).

A peasant who kept watch on the bleaching-fioor near
the ruins of Chorin monastery, saw the white woman (known
there as the vigeberscl^f housekeeper, from her carrjring a large
hunch of keys) step in suddenly, and was not a little frightened.
Next morning he told the other men, one of whom asked him
if he had noticed her feet. He said no : ' then * said the other,
4et's all go to-night and have a look.' At midnight they sat
down in the floor, and watched : before long the white woman
came slowly striding, they all looked at her feet, and observed
that they were in yellow (some say, green) slippers. Then the
other man called out, laughing, 'why, she has yellow slippers
on ! ' She fled in haste, and was never seen again (ib. no. 199).

Beside the brook of the Bütow castle hill, a peasant was


966 TEANSLATION.

ploaghing, and often noticed a maiden draw water from it in a
golden bucket and wash herself. At length he summoned np
courage to ask her^ and was told that she was a king's daughter^
and had sunk with the mountain-castle into the ground; she
could only be saved by one who, without halting or looking
rounds would carry her to the Wendish burial-ground at Bütow,
and there throw her down with all his might. The ploughman
ventured on the enterprise, and had safely got to the church-
yard, but before he could fling her off his shoulders, something
clutched his hair from behind, and he was so startled that he
looked round and let his burden fall. The maiden flew np into
the air, complaining ^that she must suffer more severely now,
and wait another hundred years to be saved by a steadier hand.'
Since then she has not as yet appeared again (Tettau and Temme
no. 267).

The Pillberg is a castle that was banned. In the evil hour
from 11 to \2 at noon a woman used to shew herself on it^
smoothing her hair in the sunshine^ and begging the shepherds to
lay hold of her : no harm should come to whoever did so, only
let him hold her tight and not say a word. A man of thirty»
who was still employed as a cowboy, mustered up all his courage
for once, and grasped the hand of the ccLstle-dame ; while he
held, all sorts of jugglery were played upon him, dogs were just
going to bite him, horses to run over him, still he held fast ; but
anguish forced from his breast the moan 'herr Gott, herr Jesus 1'
In a moment the dame was loose from his hand, sobbed out that
she was lost for ever, and vanished (Beusch's Sagen des Sam-
lands no. 8) .

On the hill near Eleinteich a castle is said to have stood, which
has long been swallowed up. The people say their forefathers
still saw with their own eyes a king's daughter come up every
day between 11 and 12, and comh her golden locks over a golden
trough (ib. no. 12).

The Hünenberg by Eckritten was once a holy mount, whereon
the Prussians sacrificed to their gods ; there a dame shews herself
now. A peasant, having heard a good deal about her, rode up
the hill to see her. He did see her too, combing her hair, but
turned tail directly, and was only prevailed on by her prayers
to turn back again. She addressed him kindly, and gave


WHITE LADIES IN HILLS, ETC. 967

him what she had combed out of her hair. He felt so daunted
that he thanked her^ popped the present into his pockety and
rode off j but when he was out of her sight, he threw it away.
He had better have kept it, for at home he found a few grains of
gold still, which had stuck in the corners of his pocket (ib.
no. 13).

I could fill sheets with this kind of stories : with all their
similarity, they differ in details, and I had to pick out what was
characteristic.^ Then, as to locality, they occur not only in
Alamannian, Franconian, Hessian or Thuringian districts, but I
believe all over Germany, notably in Westphalia, L. Saxony, the
Marks, and further East ; no doubt also in Switzerland, Bavaria
and Austria. Schmeller 1, 33 mentions the Loferer Jungfrau of
Salzburg country, and remarks that the story has spread far into
Bavaria. And the people of Friesland, Drenthe and the Nether-
lands have just as much to tell of their witten wijven or juffers in
hills and caverns (J. W. Wolf no. 212), though here they get
mixed up with elvish personages. Thiele^s Danske folkesagn 4,
33 cites a white woman, ' den hvide qvinde ' of Flensburg, who
watching a treasure waits for deliverance ; and 4, 96 a gold-spin-
ning dame in black dress near Yeilefjord in North Jutland. The
Swed. hvita qvinna above, p. 955n., seems to be of another kind.

Sometimes the narrative becomes fuller and like a fairytale :
e.g. that in Bechstein 4, 221 no. 39 of the couple who had set
down their child of five years in the forest while they gathered
wood« but could not find it again, and looked a long time, till the
child came running up with flowers and berries which the white
maid had given it out of her garden. The parents then set off to
see this garden : it was all out in bloom, though the time of the
year was cold ; the white maid beckoned to them, but they were
afraid. The child wished every day to go to her, wept and
moped, sickened and died : it was forfeited to the sky-folk, the
elves (conf. Kinderlegenden no. 3). Again, a man who puts up
at a lonely huntingbox, hears at midnight a scuffing of shoes, the
white woman comes to his bedside, bewails her woe, and craves


I See farther D. Sag. noB. 11. 12. 816. Mone's Ans. 8, 149. 25S-9. 4, 162. 7,
870. 476. 8, 818. Bechst. 1, 121-6. 2, 51. 93. 164. 8, 1801-7. 4, 167-8. 187.
209. 221^9. Frank, sag. 167. 286. Tettan and Temme 166. 189. Harrys 1, 19.
80. 2, 19. 23. Kühn nos. 64. 119. 206.


968 TRANSLATION.

deliverancoj as Condwtrfim^ did of Parzlvftl (Mone's Anz. 6,
896— 8 j andSuppL).

For the origin of these White Women we need not go to the
Celtic matrons and fays (pp. 410-7) who are closely related to
them; our own antiquity brings us to beiogs nearer still. Elfins
and swan- wives appear in white shining garments ; among god-
desses may be named three in particular, of whom the ' white
woman' and finally the 'nun' might be the oatcome: Holda,
who in the very same way combs and bathes in the midday son,
Berhta, white by her very name, who spins and weaves, Ostara
(pp. 290. 780), to whom the people oflfered up may-lilies (p. 58).
Holda and Berhta bestow trifling gifts, which tarn into gold ; the
white women are fond of gold rings and wands (Mone 7, 476),
heaps of gold lie on their laps (8, 185), they give away boxfnls of
gold sand (5, 414). Berhta as the white ancestress appears when
a death is at hand (p. 280) ; so does the white maid (Bechst. 4,
158). Berhta's misshapen foot (p. 280) lies at the root of the
white maiden's goat-foot, her long nails (Mone 7, 476), her green
or yellow slippers (p. 965) ; else why should these have seemed
so strange ? The woman half-white, half-black, resembles Hel
(p. 312), unless one would trace them to the garb of a nun (Mone
3, 259). Even the white man's occasionally displacing the white
dame (6, 69) is like Berhtolt by the side of Berhta. Allegoric
females like those in chap. XXIX evidently have in their manner
of appearing much in common with white women.

Now the pervading thought in all this of being banned and
longing for release I take to be just this, that the pagan deities
are represented as still beautiful, rich, powerful and benevolent,
but as outcast and unblest, and only on the hardest terms can
they be released from the doom pronounced upon them. The folk-
tale still betrays a fellow feeling for the white woman's grief at
the attempted deliverance being always interrupted and put off
to some indefinitely distant date.

The traditional mode of expressing this is peculiar and assuredly
ancient : He that shall some day speed in achieving the deed and
upheaving the hoard (his predestined reward), must be rocked as
a babe in ths cradle made of the wood of the tree that now, but
a feeble Uoig, shoots out of the wall of a tower : should the sapling
wither or be cut away, the hope of release is put off till it sprout


WHTTB ladies: REDEMPTION. 969

anew and be grown a tree (D. sag. nos. 107, 228). Other con-
ditions aggravate tlie difficulty : The cherry-stone, oat of which
the seedling is to sproat, must be carried into the chink of the
wall by a little bird (Bechst. Franken 191) ; among the stones a
double firtree mast spring out of one root, and when it is 100 years
old, two unmarried persons must hew it down on St. Wanibald's
day, the stouter stem shall slide down the hill in a sledge on St.
Dagobert's day, and out of its planks the deliverer's cradle be
made (Moneys Anz. 8, 91) j the walnut-tree is now but a finger
high, whose planks are to form the cradle in which the future
deliverer must lie (7, 365). Sometimes it is merely said, the tree
is yet unplanted, the timber unhewn (6. 397. 7, 476. 8, 63). In
Ad. Kuhn no. 94 the formula runs thus : A lime-tree shall be
planted, that will throw out two plantschen (boughs) above, and
ont of their wood is a poie (buoy) to be made : the first child that
therein lies is doomed to be brought from life to death by the
sword, and then will salvation ensue. In all these tales the ar-
rival of the fature event is linked with the germinating of a tree,
just as the World-fight was made to depend on the sprouting of
the ash (p. 960), or on the dry tree breaking into leaE (pp. 955-7).

Another difficulty put in the way of deliverance is, that the
maiden in some disgusting shape, as a snake, dragon, toad or frog,
has to be hissed three times (D. sag. no. 13. Hone's Anz. 3, 89.
7, 476). Already in the poem of Lanzelot we have this kissing
of the dragon's mouth, who after that turns into a fair lady
(7881. 7907-90).

Now and then the apparition of the white dam^ basking in the
sun, beaming and bathing, melts into the notion of a toater-holde
and nixe (p. 491), a Scand. hafs-fru (Afzelius 2, 150), spirits that
likewise need redemption (p. 498). Twelve white sea-maids come
and join in the dancing of men (Mone's Anz. 5, 93) ; add the
Romance legend of Melusina. But such mer-women generally
assume, wholly or in part, the shape of a fish or snake; and some
white women have h fish's tail, a snake* s tail imputed to them :
a king's daughter was immured in the golden mount as a snake,
and only once in three nights recovered her human form (Kin-
derm, no. 92) ; in the Oselberg by Dinkelabtihl dwells a snake
with woman's head and a bunch of keys about the neck (D. sag.
no. 221 ; and Snppl.).


970 TRANSLATION.

With the notion of mountain-banishment is commonly asso-
ciated that of an enchanted, yet recoverable treasure. Where the
ancient hero or god sits in his mountain cavern, just as in the
hero's gtave or barrow, lies hidden a huge hoard ; and the white
woman, the snake woman, or simply snake and dragon, are they
that guard it.

The Groth. huzd, OHG. hort, AS. heard, ON. hodd, seems to be
letter for letter the Lat. <mst in custos, custodia, and this from
euro (for cuso), so that our hüs (what harbours, shelters) and the
Lat. curia (house and court) will come under the same root ; thus
huzd already contained the notion of keeping watch and ward.
Prom thesaurus, It. Sp. tesoro, Fr. tr&or, was taken the OHG.
treso, dreso. The Ooth. skatts, OHO. 8C4iz meant simply numns,
and has only gradually acquired the sense of our schätz, thesaurus,
gaza; as late as the 13th cent, schätz had simply the meaning of
money, wealth (Flore 7749. Troj. 2689. 3171. MS. 2, 146»),
not of depositing and guarding.

The generally diffused belief that treasures sleep in the bosom
of the earth causes O. v. 4, 23, in speaking of the earthquake at
the Saviour's resurrection, to say : 'sih scutita io gilicho thiu erda
kraftlicho, ioh st sliumo thar ii^b thaz dreao thar in iru lag/
gave up the treasure that in her lay.

The treasure being buried deep down, it follows, that whoever
would gain possession of it, must dig it up (heben, heave). It is
supposed that the treasure moves of itself, i.e. slowly but steadily
strives to come to the surface, it is commonly said, at the rate of
a cock's stride every year (D. sag. no. 212). We saw how the
thunderholt, Donar's priceless hammer, after plunging far into
the ground, pushed its way up in seven years (p. 179). At an
appointed time the treasure is up, and waiting to be released ;
if then the required condition fails, it is snatched away into the
depths once more. Its nearing the surface is expressed by the
phrase ^ the treasure blossoms ' (as fortune blossoms, p. 866), ' it
gets ripe' ; then Mt fade^' (Simpl. 2, 191), has to sink again.
This may refer to the blowing of a flower above or beside it. In
MHG. they spoke of the treasure coming forth : ' wenne hiimt
hervür der hort, der mich s6 riche möhte machen ? ' MS. 1, 163 .
It ripens in most cases every seven years, in some only every
hundred, and that especially under a full moon, or during the


HOARD LIFTED : WUNDER-BLUME. 971

Twelves. Another pbrase is, 'the treasure auna itself': on the
Fridays in March it is said to rise out of the ground to sun itself
(Moneys Anz. 8^ 313)^ and that spreading-out of the wheat and
the flax-pods (p. 962-4) was this kind of sunning ; the treasure
heaves itself up in cauldrons, and then indicates its presence by
a clear blaze shining on it^ as fire flickers over a ghost's barrow
(p. 915-6) ; a bliie flame is seen upon it (Beusch no. 46) ; it has
the appearance of glowing embers, of a brewing-copper full of red
gold (nos. 7. 25-6) ; when a fire bums over it, they say ' the
treasure airs itself J Nevertheless many treasures do not move
toward the surface at all, but have to be sought in the cavern
itself.

Two requisites for raising the treasure are silence and innocence.
Holy divine tasks endure no babble : thus, heilaw&c must be
drawn in silence (pp. 229. 586), in silence herbs of magic power
be picked ; cry out over a treasure, 'twill sink that moment out
of sight (Superst. 214). The harmless hand of childhood is fit
to lay. hold of it, as it is to draw lots ; poor village boys, shepherd
lads, are they that find it (D. sag. 7. 157-8) ; he that is stained
with vice can never come near it (ib. 13).

Whoever spies the treasure should hasten to throw something
on it, both as taking possession, and to ward off danger. It is
recommended to throw quickly over the treasure either bread,
or a piece of clothing worn next the skin, or a three-halfpenny
piece (Superst. I, 218. 224. 612). See the passages on fire,
quoted p. 602-3.

But the hoard is indicated and guarded. Indicated by the
re-appearance of those vanished heroes and white dames ; indi-
cated and watched by dogs, snakes, dragons. Also the flickering
flame (waver-lowe, p. 602) or the flower in bloom bewrays it, and
swarming beetles (p. 694) are a sign of it (see Suppl.).

To get into the mountain in which it is concealed, one usually
needs a plant or root to clear the way, to burst the door.

The folktales simply call it a beautiful wonderflower, which the
favoured person finds and sticks in his hat : all at once entrance
and exit stand open for him to the treasure of the mountain.
If inside the cavern he has filled his pockets, and bewildered
at the sight of the valuables, has laid aside his hat, a warning


972 TRANSLATION.

voice ^ rings in his ear as he departs : 'forget not the best ! ' but it is
then too late, the iron door shuts with a bang, hard upon his heel,
in a twinkling all has disappeared, and the road is never to be
found again. The same formula comes up regularly every time
in the legends of the Odenberg, of the Weser mountains and the
Harz, and in many more (D. sag. nos. 9. 303. 314. Bechst. 1,
146. 3, 16. 4, 210-1. DieffenbacVs Wetterau pp. 284-5. 190) ;
it must be very old,* The flower is commonly said to be blue,
the colour most proper to gods and spirits, yet also I find
'purple Aower' and 'white flower' mentioned. Sometimes it
is called sehlHsselblume (key-flower), because it locks the vault,
and as symbol of the key-wearing white woman, whom l^e
bunch of keys befits as old mistress and housekeeper, and who
has likewise power to unlock the treasure; also luck-flower
(Bechst. 3, 212), but most frequently Wunderblume. When three
wonderflowers are named, it seems to mean three on one stalk
(ib. 1, 146. 4, 209). The sudden violent springing-to of the door
is remarkably like the Edda's 'hrynja honom ^k dhceiyejgi
hlunnblick hallar,' Seam. 226*; 'J^egar laukst hurSin d hcela
hönum,' Sn. 2 ; ' eigi fellr honum J>ft hur8 a hcel^/ Pomald. sog.
1, 204; and twice of the slamming of hell's door (p. 315). A
shepherd boy has the heel of his shoe carried away (D. sag. 157),
as another who hastens away has his heel cut off (Eanderm. 3, 75).
When a shepherd mistook the order, the vault broke down, the
door closed behind him with a crash, but caught him by the heel
of one foot and smashed it, he was long a sufierer, and spent the
money he had brought away on the cure of his foot (Bechst. 4,
211); or, he rushes out, the door slams behind him, and both
his heels are cut away (Harrys 2, 14). I set some value on the
recurrence of these formulas, and should like to trace them in
MHG. poems. A 13th cent, phrase, ' die berge sint nü nach mir
zuo ' (mountains closed behind me now), MS. 2, 145^^ seems to
mean that former chances are now forfeited.

> Afl if thai of the flower itself. Several flowen, esp. the germander (speed-
well) and myoBotis, are popol. called forget-me-not, clearly with reference to their
miraeoloas power. The sentimental explanation arose later.

3 Other formulas : ' je mehr dn zerstreust, je mehr da bereust I * or, * je mehr
du verzettest, je minder du hettest t * esp. when the gold given or gathered has the
appearanoe of foliage or charcoal. In the cavern, where gold lies on the table, the
three old men sitting by it cry to the astonished visitor : * greif einen grif, streich
einen strich, und packe dich t '


HOABD LIFTED : SPRING-WUBZEL. 973

Instead of wonderflower or keyflower, other stories name the
springwuTzel (explosive root), a herb that can be procured in the
following manner : The nest of a green or black woodpecker ^ while
she has chicks, is closed tight with a wooden bnng ; the bird, on
becoming aware of this, flies away, knowing where to find a
wonderful root which men would seek in vain. She comes
carrying it in her bill, and holds it before the bnng, which im-
mediately flies ont, as if driven by a powerful blow. Now if you
are in hiding, and raise a great clamour on the woodpecker's
arrival, she is frightened, and lets the root fall. Some spread a
white or red cloth under the nest, and then she will drop the
root on that, after using it. Mone's Anz. 8, 614 gives a pretty
old passage ont of Conrad von Megenberg : ' Ain vogel haist ze
latin merops, nnd haist ze tütsch hömheckel (tree-hacker), und
nist in den holen bömen, und wenn man im sinü kint versiecht
(nails np) mit ainem zwickel, so bringt er ain kmt (herb) nnd
hält das fur den zwickel, so vert (starts) der zwickel her dan.
Das kmt haist ' herba meropis,' daz spricht hömheckelkrut, nnd
haist in der zöberbnch 'chora,' und wer nit guet daz man es
gemainklich erkant, wan es gänt sloss gegen im nff (not good
to be generally known, for locks fly open before it), damit smidet
nieman, wan der gevangen lyt nf .den lip.' The pecker was
esteemed a sacred and divine bird (p. 678) ; even Pliny 10, 18
reports the myth : ' Adactos cavemis eorum a pastore cuneos,
admota quadam ab his herba, elabi creditur vnlgo. Trebius
auctor est, clavum cnnenmve adactnm quanta libeat vi arbori,
in qua nidnm habeat, statim exsilire cum crepita arboris, cum
insederit clavo ant cuneo.'^ That the woodpecker specially is
acquainted with the magic virtues of herbs, appears from other
tales : he guards them, and flies at the eyes of the man that
wonld pull them up. Thus Pliny says 25, 4, 10 of the peeony :
* preecipinnt eruere noctn, quoniam si picu8 martins videat, tuende

> Oonf. AeUan De nat. an. 8, S5, on the hoopoe. Rabbinic legend mentions
the rock-splitting thamLr^ wliioh Solomon procured in the following way [to get
stone] for his bmldings. He had search made for the nest of a woodcock (groase?)
with chicks in it, and had it covered over with white orystaL The woodeoek came,
and finding it cotdd not get at its yonng fetched the shamir, and was placing it on
the glass, when Solomon*s messenger set np a lend cry that startled the bird and
made it drop the shamir, and the man took it with him (Major's Myth. wtb. 1, 121).
The Oesta Boman. tells nearly the same story of the ontrich and his fetching the
blaster worm thumare (Qr&ss's transl. 2, 227).


974 TRANSLATION.

la oculos impetum faciat;' and 27, 10, 60: 'tradunt nocta
eSbdiendas, qaoniam pico martio impetum in oculos faciente,
interdiu periculosum sit.' That root of explosive power is
supposed to be the euphorbia lathyris, which the Italians call
sferraoavallo, because its power over metals is so great, that a
horse stepping on it has to leave the shoe behind (see Suppl.).

But, beside these plants that make doors fly open, another
very ancient means of discovering and obtaining the gold or
treasure buried in the earth is the wishing-rod. Why should an
OHG. gloss at once render ' caduceus ' by wunacili'gerta (Oramm.
2, 540. Graflf 4, 257), but that this term was thought to come
nearest the sense of Mercury's magic wand f The Latin name
carried nothing on the face of it about wish or wishing (Notker
in Cap. 16. 87 translates it fluge-gerta, virga volatilis). The
notion then of a magic rod with a German name of its own was
of very old standing, and that name moreover is one connected
with the meaning I have more than once mentioüed of the word
' wünsch,' which, like sadlde, signified both the sum total of hap-
piness and a personal being Wunsch or Saelde. The diminutive
form of it in wunscUugertsk leads me to see in this compound
no reference to a person, but to a thing : it is the gerta (yard,
rod) by possessing which a man becomes partaker of all earthly
bliss. The bestowal of that bliss proceeds from Wuotan the
supreme (p. 419).

The 13th century poets also use the term. Conrad in his
Schmiede 664 (614), comparing the Virgin to the rod of Moses :
' du bist diu wünschel-gerte, dar mit (wherewith) Az einem steine
wazzer wart geslagen; ' and 1306 (1261) : ^dü saslden (Sselden?)
Wünschelgerte;' in his Troj. 19888, of Helena: 'schoene als ein
vninschelgerte kam sie geslichen (gliding) üfreht,' as Danish
folk-songs use lilje-vaand (lily-stalk) in a like sense; Troj. 2215:
'alles heiles ein wünscheUris (-spray).' Gotfried in a minnesong
2, 9 : ' der gn&de ein wünscheUruote (-rod).' Nithart in Bosenkr.
3 : ' gespalten nftch der wünschelrvote stam,' cleft like the w.'s
stem. Albr. Titur. has more than once ttmnschel^erte, wilnschd'
ruote 4146, and ' wünschel-säme des varmen ' 4221, because varm,
our fam (the fern, filix), is a healing plant. But the weightiest
passage is that in Nib. 1064 (even if the stanza be an interpola-
tion), just where the hoard of the Nibelungs is described :


HOARD LIFTED : WISHING-ROD. 975

Der wünsch lac (lay) dar under, von golde ein rüeteUn,
der (whoso) daz het erkannet, der möhte meister stn
wol in al der werlte über isltchen (every) man.

Among the gold and gems of the hoard lay a rod, whose miracu-
lous virtue (wünsch) included every good, every joy ; and he that
knows its worth (I put only a comma after rüetelin, and make
^ daz ' refer to it, not to the whole sentence) has power given him
over all men ; the wishing-rod not only made treasures come, it
intensified and continually increased their value.

Here the wishing-rod is called golden. It was commonly picked
off a hazeUbushj according to Yintler it is 'that yearns shoot
(sumer-late) of a wild hazel-tree/ To have it, one must cut by
right-hand moonlight (crescent moon) a bough with a zvnsele,
zwispel (furca), and twist it three times round itself.^ Others
demand a white shoot of hazel or holy-thorn, one that has a twiele
or fork, has shot up in one year, and has not a speck of old wood
in it ; it must stand so that the sun from east and west shines
through the fork, else it is no good. He that would gather it
walks in silence to the shoot, between 3 and 4 in the morning
of a Sunday in full moon, turns his face to the east, bows
three times to the shoot, and says : ' God bless thee, noble spray
and summer's bough I ' Then follow seven spells, given in the
Meckl. jb. 5, 1 10 — 7. That simile of Conrad's makes us imagine
a single slender rod. Several sorts were distinguished, at least
in later times : fire-rod, bum-rod, burst-rod, strike-rod, quake-
rod. The hazel was not used for all, some were made of brass
wire, and perhaps of gold. In Lower Germany they say wiche-
rode, from wicken, to play the witch, tell fortunes. It is all-
important to hold the rod correctly in the hand (grasping the
two tips, so that the stem out of which they spring shall look
upwards) ; it will answer then, the stem will turn toward the
objects it has to point out, and if there are none at hand, it will
keep still. Some say that one point of the fork is held up firmly
in each hand, and if nevertheless one of them bends with irresist-
ible force to the ground, a bed of ore is not far off. There were
also spells to be spoken during the process : ' Bod, rod, 1 ask of

1 Ettner*s ünwürd. doctor pp. 8 — 8. Con!, the forked fir and lime (p. 969), and
the three flowers on one etalk (p. 972) ; a twig with nine tips (Superst. I, 950), a
lime bongh with nine branches (Bhesa dainos 80).


976 TRANSLATION.

thee^ where may the best treasare lie 7 ' By means of the wish-
ing-rod men thought they could discover hidden treasureSj veins
of ore, springs of water (hence in Switzerland they call it spring-
taster, Tobler 80'), nay, even murderers and thieves.^

In Anshelm's Bern, chron. 2, 8, I find the name glücJcs^stablin,
as we had a flower of luck above. The French name is baguette
divinatoire: ace. to the M^m. de I'acad. Celtique 4, 267 'de
coudrier, fourchue d'un c6t6.'

Does the ON. gambanteinn, Saam. 77^, 85^ contain a similar
notion f Teinn is ramus, virga (Goth, t&ins, OHO. zein, AS. t&n,
OS. tSn),* gamban resists all interpretation hitherto. In the last-
named passage gambanteinn is gathered in the forest :

Til holtz ec g^cc (I went) oc til hrfts vilSar
gambantein at geta. gambantein ec gat.

Another passage Sasm. 60^ deals with a ' gamban-sumbl nmgeta,'
which might very well mean a wishing-banquet of the gods. I
would adopt the variant * gaman-sumbl,' and explain gaman as
bliss, just as wunsc seems to belong to wunna. Yet in AS. we
find gomban gyldan, Beow. 21, a distinct word from gomen
(gaudium). Again ' tarns vendi ec }nc dr6p,' with wand of taming
I thee smote, Saam. 84^, is worth weighing : tams vöndr is nn-
doubtedly a rod of magic influence.

A story in full detail of a wishing-staff that St. Columban gave
away to a poor man, and which he smashed at- the bidding of his
wife, may be found in Adamanni Scoti vita S. Columbae cap. 24
(Canisii Lect. antiq., tom. 5).

And now our surest guide to the original meaning of the wish-
ing- rod is the /c7ipvK€iov of Hermes (the cädüceus of Mercury) : a
staff with two snakes twining round it. But these snakes appear
to have been first formed by the boughs of the olive, so that the
older fidßZo^ (Od. 24, 2) probably had the forked figure of our
wishing-rod [' three times twisted,' p. 975]. The Hymn to Merc.
527 calls it 6\ßov xal ttXovtov pdßBov, ypvaeiriv, rpnrirrfKjov
golden (as in the Nib. Lay), three-leaved, bringing luck and

> Literary history of the wishing-rod in the New Lit. Ans. 1807, pp. 845 ^477 ;
eonf. Braanschw. Anz. 1752, p. 1625 ; Goth, tasohenb. 1809, pp. 1 — 19. The asser-
tion that it lins only come into use in Qermany sinoe the 11th cent, seems false.

' It might also mean sagitta, whioh recalls Martin yon Amberg's * nach schätze
mit pfiUn suocheu.*


HOABD guarded: DOG. 977

wealth, Now, aeeiog that Mercury wears the winged petasos too^
as Wuotan was recognisable by his pilei umbracolam, that in this
again there dwells the idea of a wishing -hat (p. 869)^ and that the
bliss-bestowing wishvng^rod must be referred to a personal Wish,
consequently to Wuotan ; I think^ in the concurrence of all these
resemblances there lies an incontrovertible proof of the primitive
unborrowed identity of Wuotan with Mercury, Budolf in his Bari.
274j 25 may very well have meant ' des Wunsches bluome/ as the
numerous examples from his G^rhart (p. 140) shew how familiar
this personification was to him. So in Tit. 5161-9 : 'gezwiet vil
der iDÜnschelrise ' and ' vmnscheUbemdez ris' (see Suppl.).

The mythical aspect of mountain-prisoned treasures, as of
mountain-prisoned heroes and gods, has led us to Wuotan the
supreme maker and giver of all things, 'to whom are known
all hidden treasures,' ^iigl* saga, cap. 7.

Some other things, beside flowers, herbs and rods, are helpful
to the lifting of treasure. Thus a black he-goat that has not a
light hair on him is to be sought out and tied to the spot where
money lies hidden, like a sacrifice to the spirit who guards it
(Moneys Anz. 6, 305). Some prescribe a black fowl without even
the smallest white feather, else the devil breaks the lifter's neck
for him (Sechst. 4, 207). Enchanted money has had the curse
pronounced on it, that he alone shaU find it who ploughs it out
with a pair of black cocks ; one man carved himself a tiny plough
for the purpose, and accomplished the lifting, Beusch's Samland
p. 29 (see Suppl.).

But on the hoard lie dogs, snakes, dragons to guard it, DS. no.
13. 159. Schm. 2, 209.

In Annales Corbej. ad an. 1048 (Paullini p. 386) : ' Aiunt in
Brunsberg magnum thesaurum absconditum esse, quem niger
canis custodit cum oculis igneis ; ' and in the Carmen de Bruns-
bergo (Paullini p. 599) :

Horrendus canis est tenebrosum vinctus ad antrum,

thesauri custos, qui latet imus ibi ;
igneus est visus, color atque nigerrimus illi,

OS patulum, et cunctis halitus usque gravis.

* Under the pear-tree men saw burning coals, and at night a


978 TBANSLATION.

black poodle lying (Mone's Anz. 7, 227). On one chest in the
vault lay a toad, on the other a white dog : when the peasant's
wife struck about with a rod she had got from the white woman^
the dog turned black as coal, at which the woman was so fright-
ened she broke silence, and the deliverance came to nothing
(ib. 5, 820).

No beast has more to do with gold and treasures than the
snake, which coils itself down on the gold-heap (p. 689), shakes
off sparkles (p. 690-1), wears gold crowns (p. 686). We saw the
white woman herself appear half or wholly in serpent shape. By
the water outside the gold cavern a huge hissing snake keeps
watch : hit him boldly on the head, he will arch himself into a
bridge over the water for you, and yon may step over it with a
stout heart, and bring away as much golden earth as yon will
(Bechst. 4, 174). Fani-gold seems to be gold that has lain in
fens with the snakes and dragons (p. 531).

Our earliest antiquity has famous legends of snakes and dragons
on the gold (p. 689-90). It is worth noting, that men were fond
of giving the shape of the snake to costly golden ware in the way
of ornaments and weapons. A heap of gold glittered in the sun,
and a black worm lay coiled around it, yet so > that he did not
reach quite round, and a span's breadth was leflb open : at this
spot the labouring man who had spied the hoard stept in and
gathered gold. When he had crammed his pockets full and even
the smock he had pulled off, it came into his head to call up a
companion and bid her load herself with the rest of the treasure ;
but his voice was drowned in the terrible roar that suddenly
arose : ' out with the coin, out with the coin I ' was the cry, and
the terrified man flung all the money away, and began to flee ;
in a moment worm and treasure sank into the mountain, and the
earth closed up again, the uproar was over and the sun shone
sweetly ; only a few coins remained, which when thrown away
had fallen outside the serpent ring (Reusch's Samland no. 3).

The great hoard on which Fafnir lay was made up of gold that
the gods had been obliged to hand over for the covering and
cramming of Otter, but which Loki had previously taken from
the dwarf Andvari. SigurSr, having got it into his power after
slaying the dragon, conveyed it all safely away on Oram's back,
hence gold was named byrSr Orana (Granonis sarcina^ OHG*


NIBELUNGS' HOABD. 979

would be Krania pardi)^ Sn. 139. It is remarkable that in a
Swed. folksong (A^rvidsson 2, 193) tbe maiden awaiting her
betrothed says :

Yore det den nngersven (were he the^ swain)- so mj'ag skulle ha,

8& forde han det guldet pa gängarens bak !

According to our lay of the Hürnen (horny) Sifrit,^- though the
hero still wins the hoard by slaying the dragon of Drachenstein,
and loads it on hU steed (166>. 4), the origin of the gold is related
di£ferently. It is the Nibelingea horty and Nibling king of dwarfs
leaves it to his three sons (13, 4. 14, 3. 134, 3. 168, 2), two of
whom, when their mountain^ began^ to move (in an earthqaake f )
and threatened to fall in, carried it away without teUing their
brother Eugel,' and hid it in. a cave under the ^ dragon-stone,'
where Siegfried afterwards found it (133> 4. 134, 3; 135, 1). A
dragon that always after five years and a day takes human shape
for one day ' at Easter, had charge of the treasure and of a beau-
tiful princess, a white woman, whom Siegfried*, set free together
with the treasure«

Some things are left obscure in. this account, which are- cleared
up in the epic of the Nibelungs itself. Siegfried acquires the
hort Niblunges not when he kills the lintrache (lithe-dragon), but
when Schilbunc and Niblunc asked him. to divide the treasure, a
thing they could not manage themselves;. and neither could he
(94, 5). The hoard is carried 'uz eime holn beige;' i^parently
it belonged to dwarfs, so* that Schilbunc and Niblunc were of the
elf kindred. Thus in both lays the hoard originates with dwarfs,
and in the Edda with dwarf Andvari; as elvish beings they are
by nature collectors and keepers of subterranean treasure, haunt-
ing the mountame as they do (pp* 448. 452), and they delude
(pp. 464. 915) like spectres. Then the wishing-hat is brought
to mind by the cover-capes and mist-mantles of dwarfs (p. 915) ;
the dwarf race, like the dragons,^ cherishes and guards treasures,

^ The Seifriedsbnrg in the Bhön xnts (Weieth. 8, 535) is unother place about
whieh the hero-legend is told among the common people (Moneys Anz. 4, 410, and
thenee Bechst. Franken 144).

' EogePs prophecy and his conversation with Siegfried (159—164) leave no doubt
of his identity with Gripir in the Edda, bat in point of name with Gripi's father
KvUmi. This EyUmi (insulae, prati ramus, almost a Laufey reversed p. 246} con-
tadns eynOHG. ouwa, augia, which must be in Eugel too.

s Ein tac in der helle hAt leng ein ganzez j&r 28, 2.

4 Mountain-sprites guarding treasure are found in the Schenkofen cavern, in
the Beichenspitz, in the Ziller valley. Muchar's Gastein p. 145.

VOL. III. a


980 TRANSLATION.

and as Dame Holda travels with the Furioos Host and sits locked
up in the mountain^ she too is connected with the elves (p. 452).
Entrance into the caves of dwarfs is found as into enchanted
mountains, and men are carried off to spend some time in the
society of elvish sprites (p. 494), as they do in Dame Venus'
mount (p. 935).

That Nibelung and Schilbung wished to have their father's
property divided, is asserted also in Bit. 80' ; that they eotdd
not divide the treasure, is a highly mythic feature, which I shall
illustrate further on, when I come to treat of Wishing-gear.

As a union with goddesses, wise-women, white-women, results
in danger to heroes, so does their winning of the hoard turn to
their misfortune. He that has lifted the treasure must die soon
(Mone's Anz. 7, 51-3). Because Andvari laid a curse upon the
ring that Loki extorted from him, the same ring brought destruc-
tion upon Hrei'Smar and his sons, who insisted on having it, and
upon SigurS and Brynhild, whose betrothal was accomplished by
it (Sn. 140).

An ON. name for gold is ' orms be^r ' or ' F&fnis boeli,' worm's
bed, dragon's couch, who lies brooding on it, so to speak. BAi
turns into a worm, and lies on his gold-chests, Fomm. sog. 11,
158. draco thesauri custos, Saxo Oram. 101. 'incubas gazae ut
magnus draco, custos Scythici Inci,' Martial 12, 53; miser and
dragon have little joy of their wealth.

Dragons guarding treasure were also known to the Orientals
and Greeks. The hundred-headed sleepless one guarded the
golden apples of the Hesperian grove (Scythici luci), Photius,
Bekk. 150, 6. 16. The ancients were equally familiar with the
notion of griffins watching over gold : * grifen golt,' Parz. 71, 17
seq.

Sometimes, on the spot where treasures sparkle, a calf is said
to lie (Beusch no. 47), not in my opinion as* keeper, but as part,
of the treasure. For treasure-diggers profess to look for the
golden calf, and for the golden hen and twelve chickens,^ by
which plainly something mythical is meant (see Suppl.).

A statement in the Benner 5100 deserves attention, that all
buried, i.e. unlifted unredeemed treasures will one day be Anti-

^ riuqnet'8 Contes populaires de Bayenx. Bouen 1834 p. 21.


• I
I


ENCHANTED CASTLE. SUNKEN HOABD. 981

chrUt's, whose coming we have already seen mixing itself np in
many ways with the fable of the Farious Host and monntain-
prisoned heroes.

The legends largely mn over into each other : what is told of
the doings of elves and dwarfs in monntain-clefls is also related
of noisy sprites haunting deserted houses (p. 514). In one
enchanted castle a maiden with her treasures waits deliverance
(Kinderm. no. 4), another is possessed with devils (ib.no. 81).
And here again comes up the feature, that the spirit nnblest
carries his head under his arm (ib. 3, 15) like the leader of the
Furious Host, and that he gets his beard shaved by the stranger
who is to take off the ban (ib. 3, 9. Moneys Anz. 7, 365. Baader's
Bad. sagen no. 275) ; conf. the well-known fairytale in Mussaus,
and Simpliciss. 1713. 1, 617, who also knows the legend of the
waste castle and the beard-shaving (see Suppl.) . The old fable
of the water-bear lodges sohrats (night-hags) in the forsaken
house, and Beowulf rids the royal hall of GrendeFs nightly visits.
A house like this, in which all is not right, seems to be called
in MHO. wunder-huTc : ' ich sunge ouch wie der (trache ?) lit,
der manigen in der wunderburc verslunden h&t dur stnen git,'
MS. 2, 177*.

Similar to removal into mountains or banishment into the
ground, and proceeding from like causes, there is also a sinking
into the waters. What the elves get hold of in one case, nixes and
sea-sprites do in the other. Holla dwells not only in the hollow
mountain, but in the fountain and the lake.

Accordingly, to spirits of heroes and to treasures we shall see

a residence assigned in water as well as in a mountain. King

Charles sits in the/ouniSatn at Nürnberg, with his beard grown

into the table (Deut. sag. no. 22).^ The Nibelungs' hoard lies

sunk in the Rhine : ' Bin skal rälSa r6gm&lmi, i veltanda vatni

l^saz valbaugar,' Sasm. 248*. In the Siegfried's Lay 167, 4 the

hero himself spills it intiO the stream, that it may not work the

ruin of his Becken, as Eugel has foretold; the Epic however

makes Hagen destroy it, and not till after Siegfried's murder

1077, 8 :

er sancte in d& ze Loche allen in den Bin ;

> Conf. Ettner*8 TJnwüxd. doctor 1720-1.


982 TRANSLATION.

this he did seeretly^ without the knowledge of Chriemhilde^ who
to the last supposes it to be in his hands^ till he answers
2308, 8 :

den schätz weiz nu nieman wan (but) Oot unde min.

No doubt there were other legends which placed it in moun-
tains : the account given by a woman living in Nerike was, that
it lay inside the Kilsherg there, and the key to the cavern was
kept under a rosebush (Iduna 10, 269][. The Ms. 2, 169^ has :
der Imelunge Kort Kb in dem Burlenberge in bf (by them, i.e. the
Bhine-folk) ; but the MsH. 2, 241* reads ' der Nibelunge hort '
and 'in dem Lurlenberge.^ Imelunge may be corrupt for Nibe-
lunge, as Imelöt for Nibel6t (p. 385 n.), and Lurlenberg shall
have its due, if such be the reading, though I had taken Burlen-
berc for Burglenberg, Burglenberg, OHG. Biirgilftnberc on the
Khine near Breisach (Dumbeck p. 339), whene the Harlungs, per-
haps Amelungs, dwelt with their treasure (Heldens. p. 186 — 8).
One of the Venus-hills in the Breisgau and Eckart may also
have to do with it. But the Harlunge gott (Dietr. 7835) enters
into Gothic Amelung legends, and there might be an 'Amelunge
hort' like the famous *Ihrmenrielie8 hort' of which so much is told.
Again, the Yilk. saga cap. 381 makes Etzel the avaricious first
get at Siegfried^s gold which is locked in a mountain, and then
significantly die of hunger, so that the Niflftnga skattr drags him
also to destruction ; while Danish lays have it, that Gremild,
immured in the mountain, pines to death in presence of Nöglings
(i.e. Nibelung's) pelf (Heldens. p. 306). So many conflicting yet
connected accounts may justify us in conceding even to that far
older aurum Tolosanum, which the Teotosages sunh in the lake of
Tolosa, some influence on old Gothic legend.^

Stories of submerged castles are found in abundance. When
the waters are at rest, you may still descry projecting pinnacles
of towers, and catch the chiming of their bells. Scarcely can
enchanted men be dwelling there ; all life is grown dumb beneath
the waves. Three legendary features I will single out. The
approaching doom is commonly announced by talking beasts : the
enormity of the crime whose punishment impends has lent thein
speech, or some magic has opened to man the meaning of their

^ Jastinus 32, 8 ; conf. Dnncker*s Origines Germanicse, p. 31.


SUBMERGED CASTLE. 983

tones. The serving-man tastes a piece off a silver-white snake,
and immediately knows what the fowls, ducks, geese, doves and
sparrows in the yard are saying of the speedy downfall of the
castle (DS. no. 131). This is told of Isang's castle near Seeburg,
a similar story of Tilsburg near Dahlam (p. 774), and no doubt
in other neighbourhoods as well. Another thing we come across
is, that a good man who is sick sends his son out to observe the
weather, and is told first of a clear sky, next of a tiny cloudlet on
the mountain's edge, and by degrees of a cloud as big as a hat,
as a washtub, as a barn-door ; then the old man has himself
carried in all haste up a hill, for the judgments of God are now
let loose on the Suggenthal, Sunkenthal (Moneys Anz. 8, 535 ;
conf. Schreiber's Tagb. for 1840, p. 271). That is a forcible
description of the swift advance of an unforeseen calamity. The
same legend presents us with yet a third feature full of meaning.
When the water had wrecked and swamped all the houses in
Suggenthal, there remained alive only that old man and his son,
and one small infant. This child, a hoy , floated in his cradle all
through the flood, and with him was a cat. Whenever the cradle
tilted to one side, the cat jiin^ped to the other, and restored the
equilibrium ; in this way the cradle safely arrived below Buch-
holz, and there stuck fast in the dald er crown of a tall oak.
When the water had subsided, and the tree was accessible again,
it was fetched down, and child and cat were found alive and un-
hurt. As nobody knew who ^he boy's parents had been, they
named him after the tree-top Dold, and the name is borne by his
descendants to4;hi8 day.(Mone''s Anz. 6, 69 and more completely
8, 535). The story perfectly tallies with that Welsh one quoted
p. 580, where, in«pite of all difference of detail, the main thing,
the child's being saved in the cradle, is related just as it is here ;
which also seems to me to confirm the sense I ascribed to the
ON. lü{$r p. 559n. A pretty adjunct is the companionship of the
auxiliary cat, who tog^ether with cock and dog was required by
simple-minded antiquity to give evidence (BA. 588). From the
name of this foundling Dold (OHG. Toldo, i.e. summit-born) I
understand now what the common people mean by being bom on
an oak or walnut-tree (p. 572n.) ; how exactly the myths of Crea-
tion and Deluge fit in together, is past doubting (see Suppl.).


CHAPTER XXXIII.
DEVIL.

The notion of the Devil and of devilish spirits^ which has by
degrees acquired so wide a compass and struck sach deep root
even in the popular religion^ was unknown to our heathenism.

It seems a general rule^ that a Dualism dividing the Supreme
Being into opposites, where it is not [already] based on the
earliest profound thought of a system^ (such as the Zendic)^
never gets established at a later period except by abstract
philosophizings. To the sensuous mythologies lying in the
great middle it is ill-adapted.

An all-pervading idealistic distinction between a good and an
evil spirit, Ormuzd and Ahriman/ is known neither to the Indian
and Greek theologies, nor to the Teutonic. Before the might of
the one all-governing God the kakodsemon^s power fades away.
Then out of this unity there grow up trilogies (Brahma, Yishnu,
Siva ; Zeus, Poseidon, Pluto 5 Wuotan, Donar, Fr6 ; Här, lafnh&r,
ThrrSi), dodecalogies, and the plenitude of pantheism. But it is
to my mind a fundamental feature of polytheism, that the good
and beneficent principle in the Divine preponderates ; only some
isolated deities, subordinate to the whole, incline to the evil
or hurtful, like the Norse Loki, whose nature even then is more
on a par with that of Hephaestus (Vulcan) than of the christian
Devil. Gk)odness predominates even in elvish sprites : to the
nix, the homesprite, nay the giant, it is but partially that cruelty
and malice are attributed. In harmony with this is the mild
way in which our antiquity pictures death and the underworld.

But for all that, amid the vast variety of character and colour-
ing in these mythologies, the Dualistic antagonism need not
altogether be silent : it does break out in individual features^
without greatly affecting the whole. Under this head come, e.g.

^ The gennine forms are Ahiir6mazdAo and Agrömainyns, bnt the former is
often called Qpentömainyos, iyaßbs dalfiu^^ in contrast to Agrömainjos the Koubs
laitiMv. Buniouf's Comm. bur le Ya^na pp. 90. 92.

08 (


ORIGIN. 985

the myths of Day and Night, of Elves light and dark (p. 444),
of Sammer and Winter.*

The Jewish monotheism accorded to its Satan (1^^) only the
subordinate part of a tempter and tradacer, as is plainly shewn
in the book of Job, and confirmed by the Greek term SiaßoXo^
which the LXX and New T. ase alternately with carav, caravan
(Arabic shaitan) or Batfwv^v (nsoally for Hebr. sh6d *T^V After ji^ i^p,


the Captivity the Jews were more familiar with the idea of
Dualism, and in N.T. times their whole demonology had largely
expanded ; Beelzebub is spoken of as prince of all evil spirits,
whom the 0. T. knows merely as a heathen idol : so that, even
as early as that, false gods come to mean demons or devils.

It pertains to the history of Christianity to* explain how there
came to be added the notion of Lucifer,' a rebel spirit of light
who took up arms against God, and with his adherents (in Matth.
25, 41 the devil has already 'his angels') was banished into
darkness. Luke 10, 18 : idedpovv rov aaravhv &s aarpairrjv €k
rov ovpavov ireaovray as the lightning darts into the ground,
whereas a falling star usually affords a pleasing image (p. 722).
At the same time, this revolt of the Devil and his companions
must be supposed to have had a higher antiquity. Thus arose
the doctrine of a satanic empire in rivalry with the celestial, a
doctrine that daily met with more acceptance: the evil spirits
may be the weaker side and suffer defeat, but they go about
enlisting wicked men, and seek thereby to replenish their host.
Compacts are made with the Devil, and he aids his confederates
even during their earthly life.

From another side, the conversion of the Heathen itself con-
tributed to expand and diversify the prevailing conception of
the Devil's agency. It has been remarked more than once, that
the deserted heathen deities were declared vanquished and shorn
of their strength, yet not downright powerless : their once kindly
benignant sway had turned into a fierce fiendish one. Thas
what the Christians believed about the Devil received at the

^ The old faith of the Slave set np a white and a blaek god : Bdlbogh and
Ghernibogh. Bat this dualism seems to me neither thoroughgoing nor primitive.

' It arose out of Isa. 44, 12 : * how art thou fallen from heaven, fair Morning-
star ! ' But it appears first in Eusebius (Demonstr. evang. 4, 9), not in Tertullian,
nor Irenaos nor Laotantios. Even Jerome and Augustine never call the devil
Ladfer.


986 DEVIL.

hands of the Heathen a twofold enlargement : heathen gods and
spirits already malign and gloomj in themselves readily dropt
into the chr istian category of devilish beings ; wita greater diffi-
culty and more resistance from public opinion, was effected
nevertheless the transmutation of the good gods of old into
spectres and demons. In this process names for the most part
got suppressed or disguised; myths and stories were not so easily
to be abolished.

In not a few cases the Devil may be regarded as a parody
or aping of the true God, as the left or wrong-side (taken mildly,
the foil p. 515) of the Divine Being ^: he wants to have the
same power, enjoy the same honour, and mimic God in every-
thing ; but his contrivances miscarry and come to nought. So
the idea of a Devil^s-mother might have arisen as counterpart
to Mary the mother of God, though she had an earlier prototype
in the giant's-mother (see SuppL) .

All these influences so diverse in kind have joined to produce
such popular notions of the Devil's being and character, as have
existed from the N. T. to our own times. The Devil is Jewish,
Christian, Heathen, a false god, an elf, a giant, a spectre, all
in one. By the addition of him, Christianity could not but
receive, just as heathen Polytheism was expiring, a visible bent
towards Dualism, which afterwards philosophy tried to resolve
into a general principle of good and another of evil. When we
compare the cheerful tone of Greek myths with the harshness
and grimness imparted to the legends of our Mid. Ages by the
intrusion of an ail-too positive Devil, we see that the contrast
comes out not so much in the original texture of the popular
beliefs, which is everywhere the same or similar, as in the colour
laid upon it ; and therefore our inquiry is entitled to resolve
a whole mass of devil-phenomena back into the milder forms of
ancient spirits and gods.

Before I attempt to isolate so much of these traditions as
is due to our Teutonic paganism, or at least that of our next
neighbours, it is even more than usually necessary to make sure
of the various names employed.

1 Gotfried of Viterbo 1, 23 proponnds the query : < Quare oreavit Dens diabo-
lom, oum Bciret eum malam esse lutnram ? Bespondeo, qnia propter opens sui
omatum, sicnt pictor Digram colorem Bubstenkit, at albus apparentior fiat, sic pec
praevaricationem malorum justi clariores Üunt.'


THE WORD DEVIL. 987

The word ieufel, devil, is un-Teatonic^ being simply SLdßo\o<:
retained.^ Ulphilas^ following the Greek text^ distinguishes
diabaulus, satana and unhulßoj translating Saifiov^p by the last^
to which I shall have to come back. In OHG'. satanas is kept
unaltered^ but the diabolus of the Yalgate is cat down to Hviil,
tievalf or to diuval {T.), diufal (0. ii. i, 101), neut. pi. dinfilir (iii.
14, 53), which likewise renders the Lat. daemonium (Fragm.
theot. ii. 14). By this extension of meaning and contraction of
form, we see that the word was getting naturalized and gradually
driving the others out of the field : MHG. tievel, tiuvel, tivel, our
ieufel; AS. deofol. Eng. devil; M. Nethl. duvel, now duivel ;
Icel. djcfull, Sw. djefvul, Dan. djävel. It spread through nearly
all Europe : It. diavolo, Sp. diablo, Fr. diahle, O.Fr. deable ; Pol.
djabel, Boh. d'abel, Buss, diavol, Serv. diavo; the Lettish and
Finnish nations, the last to be converted, have alone forborne
the appellation. And, as in the case of God (p. 15), there occur
euphemisms : HG. deichel, deixl, deigel, deiker, deuker, ^ Swiss
dyggeli, tuggeli (Staid. 1, -325) ; Nethl. ^duker; Swed. djakul,
knaJcul, knäfuel (Ihre's Prov. lex. 93*), also Westph. knuvel for
duvel ; Fr. diacre, Pol. djachel, djasek, djablko and many more.'
Noticeable isN. ps. 90, 13 : ^urtiefel, chuninch anderro tiefelo,'
diab. rex daemoniorum.^ Satan is used rarely in MHG., very
often in modem German ; in the Anegenge 218^ and in Strieker
I find ' der satanat,* the later MLG. Zeno often repeats satanas,
O.Fr. goufre de satenie, satemie, Ben. 20224, 28429, the last
form stretching out a hand to Saturn (p. 249, and Suppl.).

All other names for the Devil can be brought under three
points of view, according as they are drawn from his Character,
his Figure, or his place of Abode* And (o these may be added
Disguised forms of name.

I. From his intrinsic nature the Devil is called the evil, hostile,

^ So is our engel, angel borrowed, both name and thing. Mone, who thinka
' tenfel ' is unborrowed, and identifies both it and diabolns with Dionysos (Anz. 6,
854. 8, 449), will hardly boggle over the Germanness of * engel * either. It is true
6tdßQ\ot (the slanderer), wMch the LXX does not yet have, might in the N. T.
spring out of an Oriental word allied to Pers. div and Lat. diyus (p. 161).

' And even 'der detUicher,* as the Poles say NUmiasgek (=:Qerman) of the
Devil, which may reaUy go back to the Slav deity Nemisa ?

* Zabului, zaholofii which Mid. Age dictionaries and glosses give for diabolus,
and render * contrarius, arena,* is the same word , ' zabuldnes buoch,' Ms. 2, 13».

* Notker*s interpretations of diabolus, * viderriSf niderfal, chuning widerfluzze,*
turn upon the fall, the down-rush, of the devils, Gramm. 2, 763


988 DEVIL.

unlovely (anbolde)^ as antithesis to the good kind gracions God.
The thought is oflen expressed in roundabout phrases or in
adjectives, oflen enshrined in appropriate appellatives : ' der nie
guot geriet/ who never counselled good, Dietr. 40*; 'der ie
tugende störte/ ever thwarted virtue, Eolocz. 254; like the Edda's
' B& er flestu illu rsB^r ' of Loki, Sn. 46, or the epic periphrase in
Beinh. xzxii; xxxvi to describe the fox and wolf as beasts of
devilish nature. ' dich h&t niht guotes Az gel&n,' 'twas nothing
good (= the devil) that left us you, Dietr. 8347 ; as we still
say ' I have looked for him like nothing good.' der Übels tiuvel,
Iw. 4676. Nib. 215, 4. 426, 4. 1892, 4. Ms. 1, 59^ der ubel
vient, Gregor 2849. The evil foe, evil spirit, evil one ; der vbUe
geist, Fundgr. 102, 34. 105, 2. der bSse geist 105, 7. Nethl.
de booze vyand. ' The crooked devils' in Ejnderm. 1, 422 means
the unrighteous, evil ones. A sermon in MHG. has ' der ubile
buman der tivel,' Griefshaber 277. It is remarkable that in ON.
we even come upon ' hinn Uli Odirm/ Fomm. sog. 5, 172. 10,
171. The O.Fr. poets often put maufez, malfez, maufes (pi.
maufS, malf6) for devil ; later maufais, maufaiteur, which leaves
no doubt as to the sense being evildoer, evildoing.^ As early as
585 we have advereariua boni operis (Pertz 8, 3), It. aversiera,*
O.Fr. aversiers, devil. OS. the bal^yiviso, malus, dims, Hel. 33,
2 ; conf. ON. bolvis, Ssem. 77*.93» (bölvlsar konor 197»» are
witches) ; Gt)th. balvav6sei, i.e. balvaveiaei xaKia, 1 Cor. 5, 8 ;
but our pilwiz on p. 472 can hardly be connected. Then OS.
the ledoy invisus, dirus, Hel. 33, 9, leda wihti, maligni spiritus 48,
14; M. Nethl. de lede duveP; OHG. der leidige tiefal, Diut. 3,
59; AS. se Zdda. Again, OS. the hatola, odiosus, Hel. 110, 9;
hetteand herugrim 142, 12, cruel hater and persecutor. AS. se
grimma gcest, M.Nethl. lede gast, Rein. 2841. Of special im-
portance here are names denoting a hostile being, resisting God

1 Here belongs particularly the Slav, bi^, h^ (devil), from which even OHG.
poti, 0. Frifl. bate seems to have come, being unknown to other Tent, tongues ; and
Slav, zli, zly, zlo (evU), Boh. zley-duoh (evü spirit), Slovdn. slödi (slodi, GlagoUta
xxxiz), slo-d^y (evil-doer), slom, slomik, to which again our $ehlimm (OOH. slimb,
Graff 6, 793 obliquus) may be allied ; Slovdn. hudizh, hudir (from hud, mains, Pol.
chudy, miser), dc. Ac. [Are not two roots confounded here : zol, zlo »bad, and
s-lom, iz-16m, raz-16m»dis*mptio, from lomfti, to break f And is zl6di conn, with
Goth, sleidja fierce, Blei)>jan to hurt ?] •

« Mnratori's Antiq. 2, 1090, and la Veriiera in Pulci 6. 43. 21, 27(Vooab. deUa
Crusea sub v.), arutaria Biondelli 249.

* Rein. 1260 intsKts dnvels name »in des lots (leden) duvels.


NAMES TAKEN FBOM HIS NATUBE. 989

and persecntiDg men. The Latin Fathers favour the use of
the term antiqutis hostis (Greg. Magni opp.^ ed. Bened. Paris
1705. 1, 1019; his Moral. 31, 50 and Dial. 2, 80. Bonif. epist.
6, anni 723. Jonas Bobbiens. p. 5 ; Yita S. Bomani 744^. Capi-
tulare in Georgisch 795, and many later records, e.g. one of 1121
in Kremer's Beitr. 3, no. 24). And this our OHG. authorities
imitate : alUfiant (MuspilU 49) ; ftant entrisk (Hymn 24, 9), bat
here we cannot help thinking of the AS. for giant, ent (p. 524),
as giants in general are supposed to be old, stone-old (p. 529) .
AS. se ecUda deofol, se ealda, Ciedm. 267, 5. So ' then altan
satanftsan wilit er gifähan (he wants to catch)', 0. i. 5, 52. der
satan&s altist, Musp. 25. In MHG. : der alte, Qteo. 8376-85 ;
der eheste 8368. In N. Friesland to this day 'de ual (old)
diiiveV Geizh. p. 112;-'in England 'old Nick, old Davy;' in Den-
mark 'gammel Erich' (Holberg's üden hoved oghale, sa 5), which
it would be allowable to trace back even to the divine Erik of
heathen times (p. 361) ; Norweg. gammel 8jur (Hallager 102^) ;
ON. kölski, both senex and diabolns. In the same way God is
called the old (p. 21). Beside 'antiquas hostis' we also find
persequutor antiquua, Vita S. Bom. 743, and callidus hostis, Jon.
Bobb. p. 5. hostis generis humani (ftant mannaskines chnnnes).
Hymn 24, 3. A simple hostis I find but rarely used, and the
Groth. fijands is never anything but i^Opo^ : in OHG., ßant by
itself can be devil; so AS.feond (of Grendel), Beow. 202. 1444-
89; MHG. vient, En. 2525; M.Nethl. viant, Huyd. op St. 3,
88; O.Fr. ennemi; OS. craflag fiund, Hel. 142, 12, unhiurißund
32, 1. 164, 14; MHG. der leidige vient, Fundgr. 66, 4. devboese
vient, Geo. 345, like our böse feind [while Engl, ßend is nothing
but devil] . gerßund, Hel. 32, 2 seems to be a strengthened form
(ger=jaculum, hasta). Out of the OlS.fiandi, taken in the sense
of devil, arose the Dan. fanden, Sw. fanen, fern ^ ; but in ON.
itself andskoti was both hostis and diabolns. A word whose
meaning approaches that of hostis is the OHG. scado (homo
nocivus, latro), which in earlier times was also applied in a good
sense to heroes (p. 342). AS. sceaiSa, OS. skatho, not standing
alone, but in such compounds as AS. hellsceaffa, Csadm. 56, 24.
Thorpe's Anal. 126, 28, leodsceaffa, Caadm. 56, 24, ßeodsceaSa,

^ Conf. p. 916 dSlgr for spectre, deyilish spirit.


990 DEVIL.

Beow. 4550, uhtsceaffa 4536, mansceaffa 1417-68, and OS. men-
Bcado, Hel. 32, 1. 33, 15. 142, lh,wam8cado 31, 17. 164, 4,
liudscado 32, 14. thiodscado 33, l,it designates the Devil. Now
this hostile, hating, harmful being the Goths named the ' unhold/
ungracious one, by which Ulphilas translates, not as a rule
StäßoXo^, but Ba4fi6viov, yet with a vacillation of gender that
claims attention. A masc. unhuißa stands for Baifioviov, Salfuov
in Luke 4, 35. 8, 29. 9, 42 .; for (raravä^ in 1 Cor. 5, 5 ; for
BidßoXo^ in Eph. 4, 27. and prob, ought to be so in Matt. 9, 33.
A fern, unhulßo occurs, always for Bacfiomov, in Mk. 7, 26-9. 30.
Lu. 4, 83. 7,33. John 7, 20. 8,48-9.52. 10,20-1. The plur.
Baifiovva is only once rendered by masc« vnhulßans, Lu. 8, 33, and
everywhere else by fem. unhulßons, Mat. 7, 22. 9, 34. Mk. 1, 32-
4-9.3,15. 5,12. 6,13. 9,38. 16,9. Lu,4,41. 8,27.30-5-8. 9,1.
49. The inference is, that the notion of female demons was the
favourite one with the Goths, and very likely with other Germans,
for in Hymn. 24, 3 the word for diabolus is the OHG. fem.
xLYiholda} If as heathens Üiey had worshipped a goddess HoId&,
how natural, in contrast with her mildness, to regard a malignant
being as a female unhold& ! Thms ülphilas^s preference for the
term goes far to prove a Gothic worship of Hu])>ö ; and the trans-
lation of Diana by Rolda and unholda (p. 267) is worth noting. —
Again, the notion of malice and ill-will carries with it that of
fierceness and wrath : so the Devil is in AS. ' se wrdSa/ CaBdm.
39, 24, in OS. ' the wretha/ Hel. 106, 8. 164, 4 ; AS. ' se rSa^a'
(trux, saevus), Caadm. 271, 12, the OS. would be ' the ruodho ' ;
AS. ' se grama/ OS. ' the gramo/ Hel. 32, 16 ; also prob. AS.
' se modega/ OS. ' the mtiodago/ conf. ^ muodaga wihti ' for evil
spirits in Hel. 120, 9 ; and all four of these epithets denote the
wrathful, furious.' It should not be overlooked, first, that they
are found only in Saxon poets, never in OHG. writers; secondly,
that they express, especially in the plural, more the idea of
demonic spirits than of the Devil : ' )>& graman gydena,' Bth. 35,
6 (dira numina) are the Parcae: gromra (gramra), Cod. Exon.
49, 5 = diabolorum; gramono hSm (daemonum habitatio) in Hel.

^ 0. Slav. nepriyhsiC (fern.) the trngraoious» diabolus; eyen SoUmd himself
occurs as a fern.

' Our MHG. poets never give their Tiuvel the epithets *grimm, grimmig/
these they reserve for Death (p. 849). But in AS. I find (irendel called ' se grimma
g&st/ Beow. 204.


NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS NATURE. 991

103; 10 stands for hell. Of Jadas at the Last Sapper receiving
the sop and taking it into his month, the Hel. 141, 11 says; 'so
afgaf ina th6 thin Codes craft, gramon in-gewitnn an thene licha-
mon, leda wihti/ so forsook him then the strength of God, demons
and devils lodged themselves in his body ; ^ ' gramon habdan thes
xnannes hngi ondergripan,' demons had got the mastery over his
mind 157, 19; ' gramo{no) barn, flundo barn' are the devils*
household 161, 23. 157, 18; * gramono* or ^wretharo willio,'
devils' will and pleasure 106, 3 ; ' modaga wihti ' are unholda 120,
8, conf. modage 157, 18.

This application of gram, wreth, vnuodag to daemons is, to my
mind, a relic of heathen times, which clung to the converted
Saxons as unhulßo had done to the Gk)ths before them. Grendel
is called gram, Beow. 1523, and yrremod 1445 ; an ON. impreca-
tion was ')nc hafi allan gramir !' Siem. 80^, and *gramir hafi
Gunnnar!' 208^, gramir being daemonia and exactly equiv. to the
AS. gramon. Another time Stem. 255^ has ' eigi hann iötnar ! '
where the prose Yöls. saga (Fomald. sog. 1, 214) gives gramir ,
so that here again comes up the affinity of devils to giants. The
use of modag (iratus) for diabolic spirits rather confirms an ex-
planation of 'Maotes her' suggested on p. 931n.

One name, which I have held back till now, is of frequent
occurrence in MH6. poets of the 12-13th cent. : 'der vaUmt/ S.
Uolrich 54\ 69\ 74\ Anegenge 218^ 219\ 220^ Tundal 56,
31; 'din vcdantinne Her6dia' (see p. 283), Fandgr. i. 139, 6;
'der vdlant/ ii. 109, 42. Both. 3106; *valandes man,' Both.
8227. 3366; valant, Bol. 289, 7; 'vdlantes man' 111, 5. 189, 16;
'der übel välant/ Nib. 1334, 1 ; vdlandinne (she-devil) 1686, 4;
vdlentinne 2308, 4. Gadr. 629, 4; ' der vdlant/ Nib. Lam. 625.
Er. 5555. Herbort 7725. Eilhart's Trist. 2837 ; vdlant, Wigal.
8994. 6976. 7022 ; er het gehoeret den volant, er (the sentry)
sprach : ' seht, bi der mure (wall) da hört ich in schrien lAt, ow6 !
er fuor die rise als6 zetal (down), daz im die stein vast walgten
nach (stones rolled after him), ich weiz nicht war im ist so g&ch
(hasty),' Frauend. 375, 12 — 24; 'daz in der vdlant riten sol,'
Welsch, gast 67^ ; ' bi siaer stimme (voice) ich hän erkant, daz
ez waere der vdlant/ ibid. (Beinh. 384, 50) ; ' der leide volant,^
Trist. 8909; 'des vdla/ndes rftt' 11339; 'vdlandes man' 6217.

' ' Altar themo mnase, b6 kleib er SatanAse/ 0. iv. 12, 89.


992 DBVIL.

6910. 16069 ; ^valandes bam' 15965 ; ' tiuvels volant, schrat und
wazzerber ' 92 ; 'do geriet in der y&lant,' Moneys Anz. 8^ 52 ;
vdlant, Ottoc. 453^.^ Certain poets abstain from the word:
Wolfram^ Rudolf^ Conrad. In Mod. Germ, it still lives as a
proper name (Faland^ Phaland^ Poland^ Yolland), otherwise it
rarely occurs : ' der böse volant/ Chr. Weise*s Comödieiiprobe
219; 'janker Volland/ Berthold's Tageb. p. 54. In Henneberg
they say ' der böse fahl ' or *föhl/ Reinw. 1, 30, at Prankfort
'der fold^ßdd.'^ In MLG. once only in Zeno 1166 : 'du arge
volant ! ' and nothing like it in M. Nethl. But neither do I find
falant, volant in OHG., even as a proper name; yet one can
hardly doubt its having existed, for the participial ending, as
in vtant, heilant, wigant, etc., points to an early formation. A
MHG. verb v&len, vselen, occurs only in the Martina 145. 177.
215 and Alb. Titurel, and there it means to fail, err, conf. Schm.
1, 519. Falant must either have meant the same as the adj.
' irri,' iratus, infensus, or else misleading, seducens (Goth, airz*
jfimds, uslatdnds) ; the AS. f»lian or f»lan is scandalizare,
seducere, and its partic. faalend would answer to v&lant. Some
such meaning may lie in the ON. f%la (Saam. 143^. 210^ gigas
femina) and the verb fsla (terrere); in that case it would be
credible that f aland also referred originally to giants. But now
that Vliol (pp. 224 — 9. 614) has come upon the scene, he must not
be left out of sight in attempting to explain a word so incorpor-
ated with our language : the change of a, o into a does occur in
some instances, e,g. tftlanc, tolanc, and the popular forms ' voland,
fold, fuld ' are in its favour ; the participial ending must remain
an open question till further light be thrown on the obscure name
of this ancient god. Even the fierce JJnfalo in Teuerdank may
be taken into the reckoning, as the ' un-' seems merely a prefix
added to intensify the ill-repute of the word ; an Unfahl occurs
elsewhere too as a proper name.' Compare what is said of the
pfahl-mauer (stake-wall) further on^ (see SuppL).

^ Hagene was known as the vdlant aller käniget Gadr. 168| 2. 196, 4 ; all km^s
feared him like a devil. Mone in Ndrl. Tolkslit. 67 makes it mean * yaillant de toms
les rois ' I

> In the Mehlwardein, a local faroe 1837i p. 16 : * ei dor Fidd I *=devil ; so in
another« the Bememer Kerb p. 13.

* In the Nördlingen witoh-trials p. 47 an Apollonia Unfahlin.

* I fear some will take it into their heads to explain phol, phal bj aphsBresis of
the first syllable in deofol, diufal, pretty much as Eblis is deriyed from Obolus.


NAMES TAKEN FBOK HIS FIGUBE. 993

II. Many names of the Devil turn upon his outward Form.
The most striking feature is his lame foot : hence the hinkende
teufel (diable boiteoz), hinJce^bein (limping-leg) ; the fall from
heayen to the abyss of hell seems to have lamed him, like
Heph»staB hurled down by Zeus (p. 241).^ He further re*
sembles that god and the lame smith Wieland (Völundr p. 376)
by his skill in working metals and in building, as also by his
dwelling in a sooty hell. Here the antithesis to clear shining
white Deity demands a dingy black hue, as the dark elves were
opposed to the light. We may therefore balance the white
Baltac (p. 228), the radiant Berhta (p. 272) against the gloomy
powers, light-elves against black-elves, though the two principles
touch, and even generate one another. The word alp seems to
contain the notion of white, night and day come out of one
another. Night was the mother of Day (p. 735), Halja, Demeter,
Diana, Mary (p. 812-3 n.) present themselves half blctck or wholly
darkened.' The dark diabolic principle may be regarded as one
not original, as a &lling away from divine light.

The Devil is called the black : OS. mirki (tenebrosus), Hel. 31,
24. der swarze, Benner 36^« Satan exit ore torvus colore tanquam
carvus, S. Ghdlenlied, 11, 3. er was ewarz als ein rohe, Tund. 51,
17. diabolns in effigie hominis nigerrimi, Cassar Heisterb. 7, 17«
der swarze hellewirt, Ms. 2, 254^. der hellewirt derist^ioars;, Pans.
119, 26. der heUe-mor, Walth. 33, 7. der helsce morSf Fundgr.
1, 25. der heHe^gräve, Anegenge 39, 46. As a dark colour hides,
the evil spirit gets the name of the hidden, the secret : OS.
demea wihti (spiritus latentes), Hel. 31, 20. 92, 2. But in our
folktales he is also indicated as grayman, graymanikin, conf.
grcM told, Dan.Y. 1, 169. 180, which reminds of Wuotan and of
Berhtold ; I therefore lay stress on the fact, that as Berhta and
Berhtolt hand empty spindles (pp. 274-9), the Mark legend tells
exactly the same of the Devil : ' You must not spin of a Thursday
evening, for the evil one would throw an empty spindle into your
room, and call out, Spin that full as well I ' Ad. Kuhn p. 379.
Of shapes of animals, some are ascribed to the Devil chiefly on
the ground of their black colour (see Suppl.).

> n. 1, 592. Thor threatens to lameLoki, Sn. 130, and the lightning-flash has
a maiming power.

' The Bomans called Pluto Jupiter niger, the blaek god. Silias Ital. 8, 116.


994 DEVIL.

Sach animal shape was oflben not made complete^ bat merely
indicated by some addition to a configuration mainly haman,
much as tlie Greeks and Romans represented tlieir satyrs, fauns
or Pan, and to Dionysas, Act»on or lo simply added horns. The
Devil then approximates to those wood-sprites, skrats and pilosi
treated of in p. 478 seq. ; shaped like a man in the rest of his
limbsj he is betrayed by his goat's ear, his horn, tail or horse's
foot. A vftlant is thus described in Tand. 51, 83 : 'er het t;^ der
hende^ an des libes ende einen vreisltchen zagel (tail), der het
manigen isntn nagel (iron nail), manigen haken chmmben, damit
er die tumben chölt nnde stichet.'' Even in heathen times the
gods and ghostly beings could imitate beasts in some part« of
their body : the Triglav of the Slavs had three goat's-heads, and
a mixture of human icith a/nimal forms is extremely common in
the Indian mythology; in the Greek and Teutonic it is rare,
and then but barely hinted at. Hnldra comes before us with a
tail (p. 271), Berhta with the goose-foot (p-. 281), the nix with
a slit ear, and the nixie with wet skirt (p. 491), the hero with
a swan's wing (p. 428) like Hermes with his winged feet, the
water-wife with a snake's or fish's tail ; even the giant has [only]
a finger and toe above the common (^. 527n.). The Devil's
horse-foot may suggest the semi-equine centaurs, as well as the
ON. nennir (p. 490).

Conversion into complete animal form might easily arise out
of this ; or it might be regarded as a prerogative of the higher
being to transform himself into an animal for a time.

The Devil in retiring is compelled unawares to let his horse»
foot be seen (p. 326) ; a kobold (home-sprite) is also horse-footed
(p. 511). To the water-sprite the whole or half of a horses
figure is attributed ; that is why horses are sacrificed to rivers.
A British demon Grant, possibly connected with Orendel (p. 243),
shewed himself as a foal, Gerv. Tilb. in Leibn. 980. Loki
changed himself into a mare, and bore Sleipnir to Sva'Silföri, Sn.
46-7. The Devil appears as a horse in the stories of Zeno and of
brother Bausch, and in legends (Zappert pp. 68 — 71) ; black steeds

^ This many-handedne8$ agrees with that of giants, but I do not remember to
have seen the Devil represented with more heads than one, except in the shape of
a dragon. Antichrist however was pictured with teven headt and a hor$e*a fooU
conf. Zappert ubi supra 73-4.


NAHES TAKEN FBOK HIS FIGITBE. 995

fetch away the damned^ and even conyej heroes like DIeterich to
hell, Yilk. saga 393. Otto Frising 5, 3 (see SappL).

The representation of the Devil in the shape of a lie-goat
goes back to a remote antiquitjf; what can have given it such a
vigorous growth among heretics and witches ? The witches all
imagine their master as a hlcuik he-goat, to whom at festal gather-
ings they pay divine honours ; conversely^ the white goat atoned
for and defeated diabolic influence (Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 33). In
oaths and curses of the 15-16th cent, the he-goat apes the true
God : ' dass in der pock sehend I ' is a frequent formula in Hans
Sachs; they swore 'bei bocks schedel/ skull, 'bei bocke lid/
limbs, as by the limbs of saints, ' bei bocke hulde,' grace.^ Or
can bocke here be a mere variation of ' botz, potz, kotz ' for
Gotts (p. 15) ? It does seem singular that the 13th cent, poets
never use bock in such a sense ; only Martina 156^. 184^ has
helleboc clearly for the Devil. According to Schm. 1, 151, bock"
schnitt means that bilwez-schnitt [cut through a neighbour's
com, p. 475-6], which the people ascribe to spirits and the Devil.
Now the he-goat was the sacred, beast of Donar, whom the
modern notions of the Devil so often have in the background.
In Switzerland the people will not eat goate* feet, because the
Devil appears with such, or you see them when he pulls his boots
off (Tobler 214) ; it might equally well be explained by Donar's
he^goate, whom he served up for dinner, then brought the bones
to life again, and was angry when one of them was broken. But
in fairy-tales the Devil himself appears as a bleating goat, and
already in Gregory the Great's Dial. 2, 30 as 'comu^ et trepidi-
cum ferenSj' which I interpret, in the shape of a three-legged
goat and homed ; three-legged animals being spectral and diabolic
(pp. 920. 934) . The posterli also shewed itself as a goat (p. 933).
May it not be that the figure of the he-goat sacrificed by the
heathen (p. 52) was afterwards by the christians transferred to


1 Appenzeller reimehr. 14. 87-9. 51. 73. 95, and Senkenberg sei. 1, 46. books
angst nnd gut ! Er. Alberus 21. books marter 1 83. dass dioh books esel sohend 1
23. dass dioh box sners sehende I Schreiber*s Freib. nxk. 2, 67. durch bocks
tod ! 3, 404. hoekt lid answers to * Hufel and stn lit,' Mone's Anz. 8, 41.

s « To corse one teg off the devil's body, and the left horn off his head,* Garg.
232". People still say : * he'll deny one of the devil's ear$ off" him and on again,'
Haopt 8, 868; i.e. to onrse and lie so hardily as to do the very devil's figure
a damage. Bat what means the expression : * ir lieget dem tiavele an dax bein '
(Both. 3187) r yon swear falsely f (p. 1008).

VOL. III. H


996 DEVIL.

tlie false god ? In the goat-hallomng of the ancient Prnsaians ^
the victim was lifted ap high.

Next to the goat the boar, which was sacred to Fro among
the ancient gods^ which affords food to the heroes in Walhalla^
and moreover, far from irrelevantly, mingles in the stormfal
march of the Wild Host (p. 921-3), is a devil^s animal;
hence in the roar of the whirlwind, people cry sv-stert and
säU'Zagel (sow- tail), rebuking the Devil by that name (p. 632).
In devils' buildings the sow plays another and perhaps more
prominent part. The Evil One appears as a grunting sow
(Schweinichen 1, 31). But the main point is, that here we
again stumble on the name Phol : the MHG-. fol, fal, ful in
the compound urfal signifies a boar, as is clear from the
Schwabensp. 315 Wack., 204 Lassb., where the readings ^erfaol,
nrf anl, nrfol, urval, wurffel ' are all against ' ursül,' which makes
no more sense than 'halpswnoP in Nib. 878, 3, the variants
' halbfwol, halpfnol, helfolen ' shutting us up to the combination
Jialp'ful, halp'fol, i.e. half-swine as opposed to the full swine
ur-fol, the old boar of five years.^ Not that the god's name is
to be explained by the beast's; on the contrary, in both the
compounds it has been transferred to the beast, and so preserved ;
and as Phol is Paltar, it may now appear less venturesome to
bring in as belonging here Baltero the boar's name in Beinardus.

A soul-snatching u;o{/the Devil was already to the Fathers
(Greg. M. opp. 1, 1486). In the Laws of Cnut he is ^'se wSd-
freca werewulf* (Schmid. p. 148) ; Ditmar of Merseb. p. 253
calls him lupus vorax, and Loki's son is Fenris ülfr ; ont of
MHG. poets I have not noted down a hellewolf, but I hardly
doubt their having used it, as Simplic. 2, 72 still does höUenwolf.
And a Slavic name for the Devil, Pol. wrog, Boh. wrah, Serv-
Slov. vrag, Buss, vrag, vorog, though it means malefactor, enemy,
latro, is the same as the OHGr. warg (lupus), Beinh. xxxvii. The
Devil has monstrous jaws and throat in common with the wolf
and hell : ' des tin vols kiuwe/ Warnunge 540.

A canine conformation of the Devil is supported by many
authorities: hellehunt in the old lay on Georio, Fundgr. 1, 13;


» Luc. David 1, 87. 98. Joh. Voigt 1, 616.

' In MSS. it is hard to distinguiph the long i from f.


NAMES TAKEN FBOM HIS FIGURE. 997

des hellehundes list (canning)^ Hartm. Greg. 163. Renner 289.
vnnt (g^jhoand) in des tiuvels biant, hunt in der helle grunt,
Ls. 8, 124. helleräde, Martina 32^ (Dint. 2, 143), and hellewelf
111% as the Edda already supposes a hvelpr in hell, SsBm. 94%
and the Greek religion a Cerberus (p. 814 n.). A fight with the
/ieZZ-%ounc2 is described in Fundgr. 178, and as a dog the Devil
guards treasures (p. 977). black dog, Superst. Denm. no. 149.
des tiuvels rüden, Renner 23343. H. Sachs iv. 3, 31^ provides
him with a quail-hound (pointer, setter, to catch souls for him ?).^
May not the Latin latro (robber) have come from the barking
animal, like our warg from the wolf ? It makes the Devil re-
semble both animals more (see SnppL).

Foremost among birds comes the raven, whose form the Devil
is fond of assuming, Ls. 8, 256. 'der ungetriuwe hsllerabe/
Ottoc. 298**. 808*. ' volgen wir niht dem swarzen raben ! ' Bol.
38, 23. ' volget dem swarzen raben niht 1 * Karl 19*. ' c'est uns
deables, uns corbiax/ Ren. 28284. The black raven sent out
by Noah is called the foe (feond), Caadm. 87, 11. Not only the
bird^s colour, cunning and quickness, but his old connexion with
Wuotan (p. 671) might, as in the case of the wolf, confirm the
notion. In Gaodm. 188, 6 the full Odinic epithet wcelceosig
(stragem eligens), pertaining to the god's messenger-maidens
(p. 417), seems archaically applied to the raven; it i& true, even
Jerome's commentary on Job 38, 41 had already in a far-fetched
way made the {black) raven mean the Devil. In Danish folk-
songs the vüde ravn, vilde val-ravn (the corvus stragis, GHG.
walahraban) takes exactly the place of the diabolic trold, DV. 1,
186-7. In the puppet-play of Dr. Faust, it i» remarkable that
the raven, who is bearer of the written covenant with the Devil;
is called the bird of Mercury, which would be exactly right of
Wuotan. Within the last few centuries only I find the vulture
(geier) put for the Devil,^ still more frequently the cuckoo, whose
connexion with magic was spoken of, p. 679. Another bifb^


1 WahUlbein (quail-bone, deooy-whistle) des tiuTels/ Berth. 225. * Bast verir-
ret (bo misleftds) ez als ein wahtelbeirit' Jüngl. 1210. * in korne wart ein kündic
wahtel nie so sanfte erbeinett' was ne'er a quail so neatly boned, Ms. 2, 206b.

« • The Yultore take you I * Giyphius p. m. 746. * Where the vulture - . . f *
Etiner's Unw. doctor 3S5. * dass dich der geier sehende ! ' Wackem. Lesebuch
78S, 21. Fundgr. 2, 320.


998 DEVIL.

whose figpire is assamed is the cock : chanticleer and swine bnild
together at the devil's dike (p. 1023), and from nnder the cloak
of the human-shaped Devil peep oat cock's claws in the same
way as the cloven hoof.

Incomparably older and more widely diffused is the manifesta-
tion of the Devil as a snake, worm, or droffon. The serpent that
beguiled in Paradise was taken for the Devil himself. Beside
antiquus hostis^ he is antiquua cmguia, anguifer hoaiis, letifer
anguis, serpens (Greg. M. opp. 1^ 111. Jonas Bobb. pp. 5. 15.
Yita Burgundofarae p. 427. Yita S. Bomani p. 743), serpens
antiquus, Caes. Heisterb. 1, 35, the old dragon, AS. draca, El.
765. The belief is founded chiefly on Bev. 20, 2, and on the
interpretations the Fathers gave of Leviathan. A dragon is
mentioned in Bev. 12, 4, who with his tail drew the third part of
the stars from heaven.^ It is in this Biblical sense that our old
poets call the Devil slamge^ kellewurm, Lohengr. 141, helletradce,
Mart. 141^ ; but there also went with it an inkling of the native
superstition about venomous fire-spitting worms, treasure-guard-
ing dragons (p. 978) and wonderful serpents (p. 684). As a
dragon the Devil appears in numberless folktales, e.g. Deutsche
sag. nos. 520. 858. Here I draw particular attention to that
fairytale, in which it is variously the Devil, or the dragon, or the
bird griffin, that has feathers plucked out of his tail in his sleep,
Kinderm. nos. 29.57. 165. Norske folkev. 1, 31—33. Mailath's
Magyar, m. 1, 179. The dragon of misfortune dogs mankind, and
one whom everything goes against will say, ' On all my luck
the Bevü puts his tail.' To the dragon also may be traced the
Devil's wings, O. Fr. diables enpanez, Mdon's Nouv. t6c. 1, 250,
like angres enpanez 1, 272. When the church represented
Leviathan as an enormous whale, whose cheek Christ pierced
with his hook (Greg. M. 1, 110 ,* conf. supra p. 182), that was an
echo of the huge hostile world-serpent whom Thdrr fished up
from the bottom of the sea (p. 689) . As snake or dragon, the
Devil has enormous jaws and throat (MHG. kdwen, Ms. 2, 166*^),
like hell itself (pp.314. 806-7. 996).

Fly-shape. The LXX translates Baal-zebub, the name of the
god of Ekron, by BdaX fivia, fly-god (2 Kings 1, 2). Ahriman in

^ Der alU ilange mit sinen gen6zen Ton himel wart her abe gestdzen, siiis Itbes
wesen teilt er endria (divides in three), etc. Benner SlOO seq.


NAMES TAKEN FBOM HIS FIGURE. 999

tlie shape of a fly pervaded all nature. Litli. miMsu birbiha, fly-
god (Mielke 231), birbiks nan. blowing, buzzing. Fairytales
have diabolic spirits imprisoned in phials as flies} Loki turns
into a fly (fiuga), when lie wants to defraud Freyja of the
br!stnga-men. Connect with this a Lombard story in Paul Diac.
6, 6 of the ' malignus spiritus ' who settles on the window as a
fly, and gets a leg chopped off; and one in Acta Bened. sect. 1,
p. 238 of a devil being cast out : ' in muscae similitudinem
prorompens cum sanguine de naribus egressus est inimicus.' As
a fly, Loki finds his way into locked rooms through the keyhole,
he can slip even through a needle's eye (Norske folkev. no. 31),
which puts me in mind of his insinuating mother (p. 246). The
Devu, like the giant (p. 555), has the power to make himself
greai or small, N. folkev. 1, 134. 192. Of the elvish nature of
buHerflies, which as psyches (p. 829) may be spirits of good or
evil, we have more to say in the sequel. When stagbeetles and
dungbeetles are taken as devils, it gives assurance of a heathen
point of view (see SuppL).

But also, and that from early times, the Devil has been likened
to two implements, the hammer and the bolt, in which I have
pointed out (pp. 180. 243) the reference to heathen gods. We
have still to consider here what countenance they receive from
the Bible or the Church. Malleus is reckoned among names of
the Devilalready in Jerome's epistle to pope Damasus (366 — 384),
where he expounds the parable of the prodigal son ; Jerome may
have picked up the expression from heathens in Dalmatia, Italy
or Gaul; and he had been on the Rhine. Greg. M. (d. 603) opp.
1, 1125) : 'in scriptura sacra Tnallei nomine aliquando diabolus
designatur, per quern delinquentium culpae feriuntur, aliquando
vero percussio coelestis accipitur . • . nam quia in appellatione
mallei antiquus hostis exprimitur, propheta teatatur, dicens :
qnomodo confractus est et contritus malleus universae terrae I '
(Jerem. 50, 23. conf. 51, 20). The two notions of a chastising
God and of a hostile heathen power seem here to meet. In
Donar's hand the hammer was at once a consecrating and a
crushing tool: siormwvnd, whirlwind, phenomena which old
heathenism ascribed to the lord of thunder, and later superstition

1 Daniflh stoiy of a deyil shut np in a boi, Thiele 1, 18. KM. no. 99.


1000 DEVIL.

•

to giants or devils (p. 635-6. Superst. I, 522, and Esth. 100),
are in some parts of Germany called hammer, either from their
violent destructive action, or because the Devil is imagined to
have stirred them np.^ In Rhenish Westphalia, when the wind
suddenly throws the doors open, or whistles through the house
by fits, they say : ' do es der aul van terjohren I ' there goes the
old one of last year, you know who, we need not mention names.
As the name ham>er for devil never occurs to my knowledge in
poets of the Mid. Ages, I hesitate to derive those imprecations of
the vulgar (p. 181-2) from the m^lletis of the Fathers ; I would
rather believe in an original connexion between the heathen and
Jewish beliefs. And the same might be the case with riegel
(bolt) : vectis is not only a thing to fasten doors with, but to
shove and thump with, lever, pole, almost malleus over again.
Leviathan is called vectis, quia usque ad necem percutit (Greg.
M. 1, 111). The MHG. hellerigel, AS. grendel (p. 243) might be
an imitation of this vectis, and also have an older relation to
Loki.

I think I have often noticed that the Devil unwinds himself
out of a ball of yam. One fairytale makes him roll down the
mountain as a millstone, Altd. bl. 1, 297. This displays his
afiSnity to giants, for Swedish legend tells of giants who, when
firightened at Thor's lightning darting through the air, come
rolling down the mountain into the meadows in various shapes,
mostly as bundles of thread or balls, and seek shelter with the
mowers ; but these, well knowing the danger, keep them back
with their scythes, and it is said to have often happened that the
lightning came down and shivered the scythes, whereupon the
giants with rueful moans rushed back into the mountain (Afzelias
I, 10). It recalls to my mind the windball of the demons,' p.
640 (see Suppl.).

III. From the Devil's abode in hell, whence he has dislodged

> The Moravian peasant oallB the whirlwind hammer (Meinert in the Vienna
Jahrb. toI. 48. Anz. bl. p. 65), which may refer to Donar as weU as the Devil, and
thus agree with the fandes unfolded on p. 632 ; the Devil is described as ventus
wrens and aquilo^ Greg. M. 1, 547. 570, and the Mod. Greeks call him drcMOf, Gramm.
3, 736. It is odd that the Prisoillianists ascribed itomu to the Devil, thunder to his
roaring, rain to his sweat, which sounds very heathenish. The Manicheans too
explained thunderttomu by the fnry of the chained Devil.

^ Witches confessed they had been converted into balls^ and gone bobbing
round stark naked on tables and benches. Weng's Nördl. hezenprocesse p. 54.


NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS ABODE. 1001

the heathen goddess^ are borrowed his frequent names of helle-
warte (-ward), Sumerl. 7, 9. Cod. pal. 361, 7P; hellehirle, Parz.
316, 24; hellegrübel, Mart. 4\ 10\ 72*»; hellewirt, Ms. 2, 175%
and the like. Lohengr. 70, calling him liellescherge (-constable),
says ' er las die sine an sich,^ he gathered his own unto him, just
as Wuotan receives the souls of his heroes.

His dwelling lies in the North, which at once agrees with the
view explained p. 34. ' Leit i norffr (looked to N.) ' occurs in
the singing of a valgaldr (ferale carmen), Ssdm. 9i^; ^diabolns
sedet in lateribus aquiionis, Greg. M. 1, 1186; he claims to rule
' on norffdcele/ Casdm. 3, 8; sets his throne nardernhalp, Diub. 3,
40. Pundgr. 2, 1 1 : ' ni«r ok noi'ffr liggr helvegr ' (p. 802) . The
Esthonian also shuns the north side, Superst. N, 43 ; and the
daemon's waterfall runs north (p. 493).

I will here insert a few terms not touched upon at p. 804,
because I am not sure if they originally belonged more to Hell
or to the Devil. In the old play of Theophilus, after he has sold
himself to Satan, he is conducted to a castle, where it is cold,
but high feasting is kept up: ^up de Ooelgunne' (ill-favour). This
name, aptly expressing the envy and malice of the fiendish nature,
is borne by several places in Lower Grermany : an Ovelgunne in
the Magdeburg country, one in the Münster, near Hortsmar, and
one in the Osnabrück between Witlage and Dümmersee; an öuel-
gunne by Werben in the Altmark, an Ovelgönne in Oldenburg,
an Ovelgünne estate in Eidighausen parish, Minden country, an
Ubelgiinne by Warburg, Paderborn country, and four or five
more in L. Germany. Probably other localities have the same
name, which makes one think of the equally well chosen Ubelloch
(Malpertuis) in our ' Beinhart.' Whether they were so named
in allusion to the Devil, or, as I rather think, to their bleak
northerly aspect, is a point to be determined; in the latter
case the name is fitly transferred to the Devil's dwellingplace,
which is directly opposed to heaven's blessed and blissful hall
of joy (p. 820). — ^Again, they say in L. Saxony: 'na Hekelvelde
varen,' fare to H., Sam. Meiger ccciii* ; in Denmark : ' gaa du
dig til Hälckenfeldt ! ' Lyngbye's Far. qv. p. 549. Thiele 3, 71
spells it ' til Hekkenjjalds ' ; what if the allusion be to Hakelberg,
Hakelbemd (p. 923) ? Veld is not our feld, but the ON. fiall
(fell, mons), as the Dan. form ijäld shews; and Hakelberg may


1002 DEVIL.

be the farions hunter's and therefore the Devil's abode^ nay,
it is evidently Mount Hekla in Iceland, sometimes called Heklu"
fiaüf a rendezvous of witches ; and Fischart G^rg. 119^ calls it
Heckelberg. Hekla itself is apparently named from the shape
of the cloak or cowl (cucullus), as Wddan is the cloaked one,
hacol-berand ; so that there are many points of contact. —
Ahyssus^ whence our nohis^ I have spoken of, p. 805, and only
wish now. to give fuller examples of the latter form. Kilian has :
nobisse (daemon, nanus, cacodaemon), nobisgat (orcus), nobis^
kroech (orcus). I dare say there are even more Nobiskrugs in
L. Grermany than Ovelgunnes, the name is often given to border
taverns [krug=jng, alehouse], where you get as it were into
a new country ; thus yon find a nobiskrug on the Frisian and
Saxon frontier in Ostringien bailiwick, Oldenburg, another
between Altena and Hamburg ; by Kiel, by Münster, out of the
way publichouses receive the name, which does not convey quite
the bad sense of our hell, but rather the ancient one of death
and the underworld: 'he is neLnoba^kroge* means no more than he
is dead. Nobiskrug is also used by HO. writers of the 16- 1 7th
cent., usually for hell, devil's tavern, he being a heVLe-wirt
(-landlord): 'in nobiskrug faren,' Luther's Table-talk, ed. 1571,
418*. ' the rich man's soid in nobiskrug/ Fisch. Gt^rg. 53^. ' that
he die not thus unshriven, and fare perchance to nobis-haus'
Eulensp. 277. ' darauff sie sagt, sie wird dalent me in Nobis-
hrug sein' (=be dead),L. Thumeisser's Nothgedr. ausschr. 1584,
iii. 85. 'dein seel fahr hin in nobiskrug/ Cursus Cleselianus.
' fehrst in nobiskrug/ Ayrer 76^. ' the Devil builds alway his
chapel and nobiskrug, where God his church hath set,' Andr.
Musculus's Hosenteufel 1630, p. 16. 'to have been in nobiskrug/
Ohr. Weise's Florette p. 74. nobishaus, Bure. Waldis 191». 803**.
According to Staid. 2, 240 nobiskratten are the place where
unbaptized children go.

More beautiful is Walther's (123, 38) expression for hell, 'daz
verlorne tal/ recalling Dante's ' citta dolente ' and his ' per me si
va tra h^perdula gente* (see Suppl.).

1 Provenpal a&w, Rayn. 1, 14», oonf. 1, 184»> baratro, baratrmn; Imt even the
Italian has by the side of abUio formed a nabiao (from in-abieso). In B6L, 105, 1
a heathen standard-bearer is caUed AbUie, but the 0. Fr. poem has Abitmes, as if
heU's abyss. The Brem. wtb. 8, 2o4 gives the older form obUkroog, obtkroog.


OTHER NAMES. 1003

rV. Obscure names. On the Goth, skohsl for Saifioviov a con-
jecture was hazarded p. 487, which is strengthened or weakened
by the AS. scocca (also spelt sceocca, scucca^ therefore hardly
scocea) ; with skohsl as it is spelt, the root skaka (qaatio) would
agree^ while skiuha (timeo) would require skuhsl. Still nearer
perhaps is the ON. skass (femina gigas), for which in Saem. 154^
the MS. reads skos. There is one expression for devil now largely
diffused in GrenHany, but nowhere used except as a diminutive :
L. Sax. stöpke, stöpke in der helle, on the Main stebchen, stabchen,
in thieves' slang steppche, stepches, Ü. Sax. stebgen, stopgen,
Thur. stöpfel, Baden steuhel ; what is meant by it is particularly
the flying fiery dragon, who calls at the homes of his devotees,
bringing them money and corn; a fiery man, a will o' wisp
(Snperst. I, 611), and the will o' wisp was called dölgr, foe, fiend
(p. 916) : all this throws no light on the origin of the word. A
L. Saxon and Westphalian name already touched upon p. 52 In.,
is dros, de dros in der helle, dross ; people swear ' bi'm dros* and
curse 'dat di de dros sl&! ' Brem. wtb. 1, 257. The HG. dras,
truos, drus appears to correspond, but is only used impersonally
of pestilence, ch. XXXYI. There is a host of provincialisms
besides, and I can neither quote nor explain them all : in Swit-
zerland they say kuhni, kueni, Staid. 2, 142, perhaps the bold,
reckless one; in Bavensberg district kramberend (conf. Brem.
wtb. under krambeer, krambeker), braniberend (from bram,
broom, genista?), hanax, etc. ; the M. Nethl. barlebaen, barlibaen
(Huyd. op St. 3, 88. Reiti. 5184. Fergftt 1754. 2372. 3763),
occurs pretty often, but is unintelligible, and the Bomance
languages afford no light ; the only thing like it is the O. Eng.
barlibak (ace. to Massinger 1, 80 the name of an evil spirit), and
barlibreak, barleybreak is a play in which hell is represented
(Nares sub v.); a MHG. 'boBser/nmt^c,' Turl. Wh. 136*, said to
be epeltfSmurc in Cod. Pal., seems to contain mure (putridus),
Wh. 23, 5, and the ON. myrkr, AS. myrce (tenebrosus) p. 830 ;
lastly, ' ein tiuvel der hiez oggewedel, der ie die 6rsten lüge vant,'
invented lies, Ms. 2, 250^ : wedel is flabellum, and occurs in other
names for the devil, Griin wedel, Strauss wedel, ch. XXXIV, and

> Beow. 1871 UMum icueeum and icinnum (invisiB daemonibtiB et praestigÜB),
oonf. $einna >eaw (praestigiomm mos), Cod. exon. 862, 4; ieeuecum onsnogan
(daemoniis immolare), Ps. 105, 27 ; Bceucogyldum (soolptUiboB), ib. 26.


1004 DEVIL.

harmonizes with flederwisch, whisk ; and if ogge be the same as
ocke^ ecke^ uoke (p. 237), the OKGr. form would be Uokiwedel,
flabellum horrendum.

Several appellations are proper names of men, bestowed on
the evil spirit either as euphemisms or in good-natured pity, just
as on homesprites (p. 504) and will o' wisps (p. 917). Such are
the Engl, old Davy, old Nick (Nares sub v. Nicholas), though
here there may also be an allusion to Hnikar (p. 488) ; the Dan.
gammel Erik (p. 989) ; the Swiss kueni above may mean Kueni
(Conrad, as the noisy ghost was called Kurt, p. 91 3 n.) ; and is
Benz (in Keisersb. teufel, Oberl. sub v.) Benno f [Bnms's Nickie
Ben 7] ; a Bavar. Muchsel might come from Nepomuk, unless
we prefer Schmeller's interp. ' sly sneak ' 2, 546 [mugger,
s-muggle ?] ; but hardly Stepchen from Stephen T Veiten (Val-
entin) oflen stands for devil (' potz Veiten 1 '), I suppose with an
allusion to välant, p. 991 ; so does ' meister Peter, Peterehen,
Peterle* Ettn. unwtird. doctor 672, and this recalls nicknames
for a thief-taker or constable, who is likewise called meister Peter
or Hemmerlin, RA. 883, so that he lends a name to and borrows
one from the devil, for the devil is ' helPs constable,' he binds
and torments souls, and is called henker, diebhenker [Bums's
auld Hangie] . Now, as soldiers give their provost-marshal the
nickname ' stepchen * too, it is worth considering whether step/el
may not come from the MHG. stempfel, Ms. 2, 2^, which again
brings up the question of frau Stempe's spectral nature (p. 278).
A record of 1177 (no« 71 in Seibertz) has Stempel as a proper
name (see Suppl.).

Such grafting of the Devil on older native beliefs in spirits
and semi-divine beings was altogether natural, as christian
opinion held these to be diabolic, and the people tried to domes-
ticate the outlandish Devil. Hence Fischart could call him butze
(p. 506) : ' may I become the very butz^s if, etc.' Garg. 224*^ ;
and the same in Altd. bL 1, 55. The ekratti (p. 478) of ON.
superstition hovers somewhere between woodsprite, devil and
giant, and so is troll (p. 526) a ' daemon ' in this more compre-
hensive sense.^ In the cursing formulas ' troll hafi J^ik 1 ' or ' troll
hafi ]7ina vini I ' Nial. cap. 38> ' troll hafi ]?ik allan ! ' Kormakss.

^ Trüü ok dvoBttr, Fomald. sog. 2, 248 ; mil ok eigi madr, Finnbogas pp. 264.
292. 340.


MIXED UP WITH OLD GODS. 1005

188, ' tröU taki hann ! ' Orvarrodss. cap. 9, ' fara i trölla hendr ! '
Lazd. p. 230, it answers exactly to our Devil, yet also to the
older and more pagan one : ' eigi J'ik gramir * or ' iötnar ! '
(p. 990-1). In S89m. 39 we read : ' far]?ü nü ]7ar smyl hafi j'ic ! '
It seems that Scandinavian sorceresses call the Devil urdar mdni
(lana saxeti, Biöm sob v.), which I know of nothing to compare
with. And as Loki is next of kin to Hel (p. 312), we find the
Devil in close contact with Death (p. 854) : ^ den tiuvel and den
tot vürhten,' Frid. 67, 9.

So far our survey of a great variety of names (from which how-
ever all merely Jewish ones, like Beelzebub, Asmodi, Belial etc.,
had to be excluded) has already shewn an admixture of heathen
ingredients, or betrayed a still older identity or similarity of
christian and pagan beliefs. Apparently words like gra/tn, un^
hold, and perhaps acado, can only have been applied to the newly
adopted Devil because they already signified to the heathens
a hostile hateful spirit. Old was already said of giants, and
could the more readily be used of the Devil. Wolf, raven, goat
called to mind the animals that escorted heathen gods or were
sacrificed to them. The designations hammer and bolt, and the
northerly residence were, to say the least, in accord with heathen
notions.

Let us try whether these resalts are likewise supported by the
substance of the tales and traditions«

To the new converts the heathen gods were one and all trans-
formed, not only into idoU, i.e« false lying gods (galiuga-gu]?, as
Ulphilas advisedly renders idola), but into devils, i.e. fellows and
partners in a rival kingdom, whose dominion was broken down,
but yet even under retreat, put forth some power. Whoever
clung to the ancient gods and sacrificed to them in secret, was a
devil's servant, and his idolatry a downright dioboUgeld (p. 38-9) ;
formulas of abjuration were imposed, which quote in one category
the devil and the once honoured gods.^ In the AS. Laws deoflum
geldan means simply to serve the old gods. This mode of think«
ingy which gave the ancient deities more than their due, could not

> * FonacluBta diobole (dat.) 7* * Ee forfutcho diahoU end allam dioholgtlde^
end aUdm diobolee weroum end wordmn, Thoner ende Wdden ende Saxnöte ende
alldm tiidm unholdum thd hiro gen6taa sint.


1006 DEVIL.

always be avoided^ so long as a belief in the reality of those gods
was andestroyed in the hearts of men : the new doctrine could
more easily take root and germinate by representing the old as
odious and sinful, not as absolutely null ; the christian miracles
looked more credible when something supernatural was allowed
to time-honoured heathenism too. This view found a precedent
in the New Test, itself : the g^d Beelzebub of the O.T. had dropt
into the class of devils* Long in the habit of regarding Jupiter,
Mercury, Mars and Venus as diabolic beings> how could the
converters, preaching Christianity to our forefathers, have set
Donar, Wuotan, Zio, Frouwa and the rest in any other point of
view?

What is said and sung of the breaking of heathen images of
gods entirely confirms the fact that the false gods were credited
with some degree of diabolic activity. When thrown down, they
complain, as demons, of the violence of the intruders (p. 498-9) :
Perun*8 image, which the men of Novgorod dragged through
their streets and flung into the YolkhoVj broke into waiUngs on
the faithlessness of his former adorers. Olaf talks to the statue
of Freyr (p. 657), and with Thorr he has to stand a regular con-
test (p. 177). St. George compels ApoUo'a image to walk and
speak, Geo. 88 — 85. Mara, a ' lügeliche got,' had prophesied at
Bome the Saviour's birth, and when it took place, his image
suddenly crumbled down: 'als der tievil do verdolte den slac
(tholed, suffered the blow) von himel so gr6zen, er fuor ze sinen
genozen (fared to his comrades) sft verst6zen in die helle, d& ist
er gebunden s6re, daz er niemer m6re her iiz mac gerdchen,'
Maria 191-3. Darius writes to Alexander : if thou get the
better of me, ' so mugen von himele mine gote zo der helle wesen
bote,' Alex. 2542, i.e. they have belied my confidence, and are
devils. Medieval poetry is full of such statements. I have
shewn in ch. XXXI the way in which Wuotan, distorted into a
Wuotunc and wütende (furious) hunter, appearing at the head of
the Wild Host, was made a devil of (p. 920). That is why the
Devil is called helle-jager, Mart. 62*. 174*: 'er rusehte als der
tiuvel in dem rore/ MsH. 3, 187*; 'als in (him) der travel ja^eie,'
Livl. chr. 96^. Our folktales make him either ride a blade steed,
or drive in a magnificent car (Mone's Anz. 8, 184) like Wuotan
and like Donar.


devil's grandmother. 1007

Wuotan was known as the god and inventor of gamirtg, and
of dice in particular (pp. 150. 160) : it was he that gave the all-
winning die to Player Jack in the fairytale. But very commonly
dice«-playing is ascribed to the devil, in folktales he looks on at
the game, especially if played during divine service on Sunday,
and he plays with men, who have to stake their own souls ;^ in
witch-trials he is called Sch^nzerlein,^ dicer, from schanzen to
throw dice, Schm. 3, 374; and he lies in wait for gamblers,
Benn. 11316 seq.

Judaism has devils, but knows nothing of she-devils; all power
for good or evil it places in the hands of male beings (p. 396),
To put it still more generally : gods are altogether the older, and
a strict Monotheism or Dualism recog^ses gods alone ; it is in
the mellower fulness of Polytheism that goddesses first emerge.
The Teutonic paganism, like others, is fond of female deities
and elves: even the Goth, vaihts (genius) is feminine (p. 439).
Divine mothers, bright benignant dames, noms, valkyrs, wood-
wives, water-maidens, formed a main part of the religion : only
kobolds and home -sprites are exclusively male; the very
giantesses are often lovely in mien and manners, and the world
of the dead is ruled by a goddess.

Following this general tendency, as a negative must run on the
lines of the positive, it was Teutonic to the core for TJlphilas to
translate Sa^/AovioK by unhulßo, and not to form a neuter, which
would have been just as easy. To the converted Ooths this
feminine unholda fills the place of what their &thers had believed
in as Holda.

It is no slight confirmation of the diabolic nature of Grendel in
Beowulf, that he has a mother at his elbow, one with even more
of the giant in her than he ; that she tries to avenge his death,
and the hero's exploit is not complete until her discomfiture:
QrendeVs modor 2517-64. 3076. It is a very ancient feature in
our nursery-tales, that in the Devil's dwelling sits likewise his
grandmother (mother, or sister), and when the hero turns in for
shelter, she takes pity on him and befriends him against the
monster, Kinderm. 1, 152. 2, 188 devil's grandmother {eller-
mtUter, great-grandm.). OSinn taunts the Vala with being

^ E.g. in Tettau and Temme*8 Preuss. sagen 197-9. 200-213.
' Nördlinger hexenprooesse, p. 46.


1008 DEVIL.

'I^riggja ];arsa mo&ir,' Saem. 95^. The human guests nsnally
arrive while the devil is oat, they are then concealed by her, and
smelt out by the son on his retnm. So Thdrr and T^r come into
giant H^mir's hoase, where they find his 900-headed grandmother
(amma) and another female, his sweetheart, who hides them
under the cauldron, Saom. 53*. The Indian giant too has a soft-
hearted sister living with him (p. 459). Now those stories of
the devil were known here in the 1 3th cent. ; a poem of the Cod.
Yindob. 428 no. 154 contains the words : ' der donr slahe uns
beide I der tiuvel br&hte mich zuo dir, und dich sin muoter her
ze mir,' his mother brought you to me ; ' mit des Havels muoter
wette loufen,' run a race with; WahtelmsBre 108: 'ist diz der
iufel daz hie vert (rides), oder sin muoter^ oder sin sun? ' Herb.
7729; 'der tufil adir sin eldirmuoter.' Altd. bl. 1, 264; 'des
teufels muster/ CI. Hätzl. 219, 16 ; and in Margareta v. Limburg
she plays an important part (Moneys Anz. 4, 166). We see that
she is by turns represented as all that is bad, outdoing even her
son, and again as of a gentler disposition : ' a widower a widow
wedded, the devil to his dam was added ' (things got worse) says
Burc. Waldis 138* ; ' kam nicht der Mansfelder, der teufel mit
seiner mutter * (omnia mala simul), Berl. kal. 1844 p. 298: 'to
swear one of the hangman's grandam's legs off,' Simplic. 2,. 254 ;
' I fear me not, were it the devil and his dam.' ^-— And this sub-
ject again contributes popular explanations of natural phenomena :
a sure indication of old myths in the background. When rain
and sunshine rapidly succeed each other, ^t is said as a proverb,
' the devil bleaches his grandmother (de dÜ7el blekt sin mom)' :
in Switzld. ' the devil beats his mother/ Tobler 294* (also, the
heathen hold a hightide) ; of a brown complezioned man, ' he's
run out of the devil's bleaching ground (he is dem düvel üt der
bleke lopen)' ; if it thunders while the sun shines, the devil beats
his mother till the oil comes.'^ In Nethl., ' de duivel slaat zyn
wyf,' and ' 'tis kermis in de hel (nundinae sunt in inferno).' In
Fr., 'le diable bat oskfemme/ when it rains amid sunshine (Tuet's
« Proverbes no. 401). In connexion with this ought to be taken

^ Conf. Felner*B Flores philol. cap. 7 p. 103. Names of the devil or his gtand-
mother were given to camion (Hommel 4, 180) ; * Hack vor die höUe '«D.*8 mother
(Stender's Lett. wtb. 2. 337').

* Praetorii Blocksbergverr. 2, 113. Brem. wtb. 1, 97.


devil's OFFEBINGS. 10Ö9

the explanation of crackling fire (p. 242) and of earthquake
(p. 816-7). The last quotation names the wife instead of the
mother^ like the iötan's ^HUa in H^mis-qvi'Sa; and Hagene says
of Brunhild^ who made him feel uncomfortable^ 'j& sol si in der
helle sin des übelen tiuvels brut (bride)', Nib. 426, 4. A Greek,
seeing giant Asprian grind fire out of stones, cries out, 'heir
veret des tuvelis brut/ Both. 1054 ; just as another giant's (the
Windes) bride fares along (p. 632). Percuna tete (p. 173) washes
her son the Thunder-god in a bath : this is the Bavarian ' anel
with her ley' (p. 641). In Austria they tell (Ziska pp. 14 — 16),
of the devil's franel (= ver anel), how she felt dull in hell, and
came for a change to the Highlands (up. Austria), where she got
her son to build her a castle near the Danube, imagining the people
would worship her as much as the virgin Mary ; but as no one
wanted her and the people laughed at her, she was enraged, and
threw a huge piece of rock with a part of her castle into the
Danube, at the spot now called loirbel and strudel, and the ruins
of her house five still named the devil's tower ; conf . p. 592 on
whirlpools. I suppose no one can doubt that all these notions
date from heathen times ^ (see Suppl.).

Private sacrifices, intended for gods or spirits, could not be
eradicated among the people for a long time, because they were
bound up with customs and festivals, and might at last become an
unmeaning harmless practice. We have seen how a clump of
ears was left standing in the field for Wuotan or dame Gaue, and
a bushel of oats was presented to Death or the Wild Hunter.
This the clergy of an older time would at once have set down as
deoflum gelda/n (Leges Wihtraedi 13). It is certain that the
centuries immediately following the conversion still witnessed
lighted candles beside holy waters (p. 584). In Norway lambs
and kids, mostly black ones, were offered to the watersprite
(p. 493) ; and similar sacrifices were in use among the Lettons
and Lithuanians in modern times. Whirlpools and rivers de-
manded goats and horses (p. 592), Hecate black lambs. In a
Hessian folktale the Devil guards a treasure, and will allow
no one to lift it unless he offer to him a black he-goat exactly
a year and a day old. This is an almost invariable incident in

' Mone in Anz. 8, 450 interprets the deyil's mother as Demeter, who in the
Eleasinian mysteries is made the mother of Dionysns.


1010 DEVIL.

treasure-liftings and must have been deeply stamped on the
people^s imagination. To the examples given at p. 977 I will add
one from the mouth of the peasantry in L. Saxony. Whoever
goes into the forest on Shrove Tuesday and sits down nnder a har-
roW| inay look on at everything^ the beasts rushing through the
woods the king on his car with foxes [sorrel horses ?] going be-
fore him^ and whatever there is to be seen that night. A shepherd
who knew this and wished to try it^ went and sat under the harrow
in the wood, and looked through the holes; then, when the devilry
was over^ he tried to creep out ag^in from under the harrow, but
he sat fast, and the Devil stood beside him, shewing his teeth :
' have you got a black 8heq>/ said he, ' one that is coalilack all
over T Give it me, and you'll get loose.' The shepherd lay there
till daylight, then some people passing through the wood tried to
set him free, but could not^ so he had his black sheep fetched, the
Devil took it and flew up in the air with it, and the shepherd got
loose. jB/ac% cocks were also sacrificed (Dieffenbach's Wetterau
279), but there must not be a white feather on them. Sechst. 4,
207. Little men of the mountain can also be conjured up, if you
place a new table for them, and set two dishes of milk, two of
honey, two plates and nine knives upon it, and kill a black hen,
DS. no. 88. Guibertus (vita 1, 24) speaks of a cock-sacrifice that
was still in use in France : ' diabolo gallo litare, ita ut ovum de
quo concretus est, die Jovis, mense Martio, in galUna oonstet ex-
positum ; ' the cock was roasted, and carried to the pond (i.e. to
a watersprite again). In H. Sachs iii. 3, 18^ a man says he
will cover two old women with bear skins, stick them all over with
green lozenges, and give them to the Devil on new-year's day. In
Burcard Waldis 150* we read of 'sending the soul stuck over
with may (or birch) to the DeviU ^ To light a candle to the Devil
(Schweinichen 2, 54) is preserved to this day as a proverbial
phrase. Drink-offerings to the highest gods of heathenism must
after the conversion have appeared devilish. At p. 56 was men-
tioned the hife (cask, bowl ? ) out of which our ancestors drank

^ These must be thoroughly popular phrases. In Christ. Weise's Drei erznar-
ren, Lp. 1704 p. 426 : * if she were my wife, I'd have her gilded and wtuek offer with
roiemary^ put an orange in her mouth, and sell her to the hangman for a snoking-
pig.* In his Klügste lente, Angsb. 1710 p. 124 : * ay, you should itiek him over with
rotemaryt gild hie mout, and iqueeze a Borstorf apple between hie teeth^ you oonld
inyite the Devil to dine off him then.' That is how old-fashioned oockiszy used to
garnish its roast.


devil's offerings. 1011

Wuotan's minne; perhaps even 'Satumi dolium' (pp. 126. 247)
was no bath, bat a drinking vessel. It seems worth noting, that
in an AS. sermon the words in 1 Cor. 10, 20 'non potestis calicem
Domini bibere et calicem daemoniorum/ which Ulphilas renders
verbally (ni inagu)> stikl Franjins drigkan jah stikl skohsl^), are
thus expressed : ' ne mage ge samod drincan ares Drihtnes calic
and ]78es deofles cuppan/ so that ' cnppe * was the technical name
of the heathen vessel. People still say, if yoa leave anything in
yoor glass, that yoa are sacrificing to tlie Devil (Garg. 43^). But
there is also groand for maintaining that a deviPs or helFs hath
was believed in, as we saw before : ' ze helle baden,' Welsch,
gast 105'; 'to get into the Devil's bathroom ' (Sastrow's Life 1,
11) means the height of distress. Popolar legend often speaks
oi devil's baths (see Suppl.).

As in that passage of Wemher's Maria (p. 1006) which describes
the Devil as chained in hell, so through the Mid. Ages in general
he seems to have been imagined as lying bound till the dawn of
the Judgment-day ; then he will get loose, and appear in compaQy
with Antichrist. His liberation from bonds therefore marks also
the time of general confasion and the world's destruction. One
popular tradition makes him lie tightly bound under the table at
which two virgins (evidently norns) are spinning, Deut. sag. no. 9.
In other tales a noose of bast is slipt over his head, which like the
chained wolf he is unable to break, and in that state is mauled
on the anvil with a hammer, which leaves him lamed (Mährische
sagen, Briinn 1817, pp. 69. 72. 128); still better known is the
story of the blacksmith, who gets him to creep through the key-
hole into a sack, and then hammers him to pieces. I hold these
pictures to be heathenish and Eddie (see p. 244) ; as Prometheus
is chained, so Ahrim^n lies fettered for 1000 years, so Loki is
boand ; not only in Germany, but in Scandinavia the expression
'the Deoil is loose/ Nethl. 'de duivel is los,' has been handed
down through many hundreds of years in the people's mouth.^
With this we must connect that of fire breaking «loose (pp. 245.
602), and of rubbing fire out of wood to break the devil's
strength (pp. 606-7). What there is at the bottom of another
saying, ' The BeviVs dead, and any one can get to heaven un-

> Swed. * nu är Fan lös/ Hallman's Skrifter, Stockh. 1820, p. 224.
VOL. III. I


1012 DEVIL.

hindered' (Meinerfs Kuhländchen 215), I do nofc rightly know ;
it can hardly mean the devil's defeat in the christian sense. The
Msere von der wibe list 368 already has a protestation ' durch
des tiuvels tot' I incline to identify it with the exclamation
quoted p. 453 n., Hhe king is dead! ' namely of the dwarfs or
elves.^ The Renner 17982 says : ^waeren die teuf el tot, miinche
und pfaffen ksBmen in not/ be in a bad way (see Suppl.).

To Wuotan, as the war-loving god, were imputed the setting
up and sowing of strife and enmity (p. 145 n.). So Ahriman sows
discord, Death sows his seed (p. 848), and Werre or Discordia
hers (p. 273-4 n.). Shall we set it all down to the sowing of
the devil's tares in Matth. 13, 89, or allow to the notion a more
universal character f ' Sathanas seminavit semen suum,' Bohmer's
Pontes 1, 47. 'den sdmen kan der tiuvel geben,' Freid. 67, 25.
'des tief els same/ Walth. 31, 34. 'der tievel h&t gescet den
sJnen s&men in din lant,' Ms. 2, 111*, 'warp de duvel sin sat
dar in,' Detm. 2, 217.

• It is remarkable that in Beow. 348 seq. the devil is called
gaMbojia, soul-killer, and 3485 bona, shooting with fiery bow ; as
indeed we find in Mod. German 'the murderer from the first'
(Sieben ehen p. 394), 'the cruel hangman of souls* (in Erasm.
Prancisci) ; conf. the Serv. stari krvnik (p. 21). To him, as well
as to Death, are ascribed bands, ropes, bridle and steed : ' diufeles
gi'benti,* O. i. 10, 22. 'mit des tievels bände geseilet,* tied, Karl
33*. 'der tievel hftt mich gestricket, * snared, 17*. ' in des tivels
zoumheften (bridle-fastenings) sitzen,' Tod. gehugde 782. 'an
des tiuvels siln,' cords, Renner 21232; 'bridles and saddles the
devil's horse ' 14429. 'tiuvels seil,* MsH. 3, 218.

To deepen the impression of something horrible, we still say,
the very Devil would shudder and shrink at it, used as he is to
horrors. As early as the 12th cent., it is said (Diut. 3, 59) of

^ In many other cases it is difficult or impossible to trace the origin of the
Devil's connexion with certain superstitions beliefs and modes of speech. People
say : when the shaft is out of your hand, It belongs to the devil (he can steer it to
where it will do mischief). Who runs behind himself (not so fast as he could), runs
into the deviVs arms, makes the deviVi bed, Superst. I, 604. 659. Idleness is the
deviV8 lounge, Nethl. luiheid is duivels oorhussen (pillow). Take the plough off the
drajf, or the devil ileeps under it, ib. 819. When you can't find a thing, the devil
Kolds his hand or tail over it 256. The devil's plough and cushion appear already
in Benner 15597. 15938. • richtuom ist des tivels voeUesUin,* Welsch, gast 125«>.

• des tiuvels dorn; Renner 1748. What does • des iiuveU ziU Itden ' (Walth. 107,
28) mean T his festivals f zHe (pi.), OHG. zltt, ON. tl«ir, festa.


DEVIL. 1013

monsters with flashing teeth : ' swenne si si Idzent plecchen^ sd
mähten sie ioch (eke) den tiufel screcchen.* And MsH. 3, 293* :
. * 80 laog ich hervür, ich möht den tiuvel uz der helle erschrecken,
swenne ich den mtnen kolben üf enbiir ' (see Suppl.) .

Our common folk, when the disagreeable is suddenly brought
forward, or is bound to befall them, are apt, in outcry or curse, to
bring in the Devil or some baneful being that does duty for him :
'has the devil brought you here again?' Platers leben p. 77.
' whence brings him the devil ? ' ' hat dich der tiuvel har getragen ! '
Meyer and Mooyer 48*; 'h&t dich der tiuvel also balde (so soon)
getragen har 1*27^. 'der tiuvel h&t in dar getragen,' Reinh.
1544. 'der tiuvel briLht in hinre her,' Gute frau 783. So in
M. Nethl. : ' galghenere, die lede duvel bracht u here,' Ferg.
4735 ; ' die lede duvel droech u hier ' 520. ' deable li ont amen6,'
Ben. 5051. 8171. 'dise hat der tiuvel gesendet in mtu lant,'
Bit. 10^. 'der tievel sande mich an die stat,' Beinh. 811. 551.
' sus (so) kam er her gerüeret, als den der tiuvel fiieret,' Trist.
6855. ' quis te maleficus hie addnxit ? ' Vita Joh. Gorziensis,
before 984, in Mabillon's Ann. Bened. sec. 5, p. 401. 'does the
ritt (pestis) bring you here now ? ' H. Sachs iv. 3, 5^ ; equivalent
to the Westphalian ' wo ford di de süke her f ' for diseases were
looked upon as demonic beings. But what means that in
Schmid's Schwab, wtb. 544, ' has the zauch brought you back
already? ' I suppose, the hellish hound (tyke, OHG. z6ha, bitch).
Westph. ' fort juw de kiwitt (peewit) nu weer her ? ' instead of the
more usual cu4:koo, vulture, which, like the peewit, are magical
birds, 'h&t mich der guck^uck hergebracht,' Grobianus 97*.
And curses go through the same variations : ' daz dich der tiuvel
hin fiiere ! ' Slfrit 74, 2. ' var du dem tiuvel in die hant ! '
Beinh. 952. 'le diable t'emporte!' 'the geier (vulture) take
you ! ' Gryphius 746. ' the cuckoo and his clerk fetch him ! '
Dan. 'var satan i void ! ' ' die leide ride (mala pestis) müeze in
vellen ! ' Karlmeinet^ Meusebach 162. In the same way are to be
judged the formulas about becoming and being the deviVs, i.e.
falling due to him, where again cuckoo, vulture and the rest can
be substituted. A devil's carl, deviVs child, des tuvelis kint,
Bol. 2, 31 mean those taken possession of by him: curiously
Lamprecht makes Porus exclaim 4452 : dirre tuhilis Alexander
stellet michel 'wunder,' this hero is bold as the devil.


1014 DEVIL.

These qaotations will not appear superfluous, if we will obserre
that they fit themselves to the Devil chiefly in those respects in
which he is a product of heathen god-notions. As we hear it
said just as much : ' what (ill) weather sends you here ? what
tempest (or thunderstorm) has brought you this way ? what, has
the hail beaten you here too? where does the hail beat yoa
from ? ' in Simplic. 5, 2, " TU be the weather^s if . . ./ * TU be
thunder^ s first ! ' ^ and even ' where does the Lord send you here
again from ? ' ; can anything be plainer, than that such phrases
properly refer to the heathen Donar, lord of the weather, conse-
quently that by the Devil afberwards put in his place we are to
understand him ? Or we may, if we please, summon up some
storm-breeding giant, a Blaster, Vader or Pasolt (pp. 549. 630).
We know that thunderbolts are also devil's fingers (p. 179). — ^And
here some other points can be made good. Donar had a red
beard, and our proverb runs : red of beard, devil's weird, ' rode
baert duivels aert (= kind).* We good-naturedly pity in the
words poor devil ; in the 1 7th cent, they still said poor thunder.
Weise's Drei erzn. pp. 14. 335 ; and thunder's child is synony-
mous with deviVs child, ibid. 285. 425. The author of Simplicis-
simus writes both teufelsgeld p. 480, and donnersgeld p. 481, in
the sense of accursed pelf. The curse * zum donner ' stUl means
exactly the same as ' zum teuf el * ; and our ' fahr zum teufel ! *
answers in efiect to the ON. ' far til 09ins ! Offinn eigi fie ! ' as
well as to 'J?ik hafi gramir, iötnar,' p. 991, and to 'dat die de
Earner ! Hamer sla ! ' p. 1 81. To the benediction ' Qott wait's
(God guide it) ! ' corresponds in the mouth of the vulgar the curse
' des walte der teufel ! der donner ! ' Nor be it forgotten, that in
exclamations and curses, of no matter what language, names of
old gods get hardened and fixed; conf. p. 783-4, and Gramm. 8,
297 (see Suppl.).

Again, the Devil stands connected, not only with the gods of
heathenism, but with its daemons, its spirits ; and a good deal of
what was ascertained in ch. XVII. will apply to him. Thus he
is called the wicht, the bösewicht, the hellewicht (p. 441) in the
harshest sense ; the alp, whose spell binds men, may stand for

^ * Ik sen donners 1 ' Hansen's Geizhals p. 120. In Prass. Natangen, Pikollis
(p. 672, surely not akin to Pioken p. 176 ?) takes the place of it : * hat mich heate
der PakulU gedragen ? ' Firmenich's Völkerst. 1, 108.


DEVIL. 1015

him. Like elves he has the power of appearing^ disappearing,
and transforming himself^ only the more sportful mischief of
these sprites becomes grim earnest when applied to him. Like
the alp, the Devil or välant is said to ride men, p. 464: in a poem
of Heinr. von Müglein (Mus. 2, 196) God destines him to ride
a wicked woman ' over hill and dale.' It is a remarkable thing,
that the notion» of wind, wight, thing, and no less those of devil
and vftlant, are used to strengthen a negative, Gramm. 3, 734-6
(see Suppl.).! Now, as the word tropf (drop, ibid. 730) was used
in the same sense, it explains how the expressions 'armer tropf
(poor wretch, fool), armer wicht, armer teuf el * all came to have
one meaning. We either attribute to spirits and the Devil the
swiftness of wind, of the Wild Host rushing in storm, or we
imagine the wind itself a spirit and devil (p. 999) ; hence the
following are synonymous turns of speech : ' sam sie der tievel
vnorte,' as though the d. carried her, Bab. 749. Dietr. 8854, and
' as if the wind drove her,' ' she rushed past me like the zaacU
(tyke, p. 1013),' Schmid's Schwab, wtb. 544.

That morbid imbecile condition of one whom the elves are said
to have touched (p. 461) is undoubtedly analogous to possession
by devils. The difference lies in this, that the Heathen view
makes the spirits operate purely from without, while in Jewish,
Oriental and Christian doctrine the devils take up their abode in
a man's body, and for the abnormal condition to cease, they must
be formally cast out. An actual incarnation took place (p. 338),
and we speak of devils incarnate. Saul is possessed by the evil
spirit. When Nalas had defiled himself, the demon Kalis entered
into him, but retired at length, and passed into a tree (Bopp's
Nalas pp. 234. 267. 196-8). Even our early Mid. Ages furnish
examples : Carl, son of king Ludwig, was a demoniac (Pertz 1,

' Nib. 16S2 : * ioh bringe ia den tiuvel * means I bring yon none at all, as we
say * the devil a bit,* etc. But also the simple indefinite pronoun is intensified by
the addition of devil : * welcher teuf el 9 ' who ? [quisnam, ris rort] Pbil. v. Sittew.
1, 80. ' besehen, welchen tiuvel sie mit im wellen ane-v&hen/ see what d. they
will do with him, Morolt 2650. * zuo welchem tiuvet bin ich geschart ? ' Bit. 7766.
' von welchem tiuvel a sint komen ? ' Dietr. 81^. * welchen tiuvel haste ein wlp an
dir ersehen ? * » who in the world, Hartm. erst, büchl. 818. Cries of surprise :
* wai teufel,* what (the) devil, Dan. * hvad fanden * (intens. * hvad i fandens skind
og been,* skin and bone), * drink then you and the devil I ' (Schlampampe p. 17) are
still common among the people. The meaning of the last is ' vou and whoever it
may be * ; but the combination is iJso a counterpart of the * Qod and I ' explained
on p. 16. * daz weiz er und der tiuvel wol,* Helbl. 7, 125. Curiously in Benner
1745 : ' dem tiuvel von Srst und damAch Qote,* the d. first, and then God.


1016 DEVIL.

495).^ For elves to steal men's children, and put their own
changelings in their place, is heathenish (p. 468) ; for the Devil
to lie hid in the changeling, is not (Zeno 58 seq.). Again,
the devil-possessed are like those houses and tenements where
racketing sprites have made themselves fixtures (pp. 514. 892).^
An early instance of this is that Grendel in Beowulf, who disturbs
the royal hall by his nightly visits. For ' possessed ' (arreptitius,
daemoniacus), having the devil in one's body, the OHG. has the
following terms : finioman, taken up, O. iii. 14, 107 (MHG. ' vil
gar vernomen ich do lac,' I lay insensible, Fragm, 46^) ; ' ther
diufal ist iru inne/ 0. iii. 10, 12; 'gramon in-giwitun/ p. 991
(0. Fr. ' maus esperis li est el cors entres/ Garin p. 280) ; tiuvol-
winnic, tiuvolvnnnanti, Gl. mons. 337. 391. Doc. 239, as well as
tiuvolsioh, AS. deofolseoc (-sick) ; in 0. iii. 14, 63 * thie mit
diufele wunnun/ who had to contend with the devil ; and that is
the meaning of H. Sachs's ' wütig und winnig' 1, 48P. iv. 3,16*.
In the 13th cent, our ' possessed ' was already a current phrase :
'besaz sie der v&lant,' Uolrich 1510. 'nu var hin, daz hiute der
tievel uz dir hol ! ' holla out of thee, Ben. 440. ' der tiuvel var
im in den munt!^ pop into his mouth, Eeinh. 1642. 'var da
dem tievel in die hunt ! ' 852. 'der tiuvel var dir in den hale /'
into thy skin, Morolt 1210. ' der tufil muez im durch daz herze
varn ! ' Grundr. 314. ' tüsent tiuvel uz dir hellen ! ' bark, MsH.
3, 259** (we still say, 'an evil spirit spoke out of him*), 'ich
w8Bn der tiuvel uz beiden lüge,' Reinh. 309. 520 (see SuppL).

The words last quoted bring us to his mendacity. The Scrip-
ture calls him a ' father of lies ' ; ' tievellichen gelogen,* lied like

^ Vita S. Godehaxdi (d. 1038) : In oivitate Batisbona quodam tempore sanctus
Godehardus morabatur, pro negotio forsan sui monasterii ; ubi quaedam olnessta a
daemonio ad earn ducebatur, ut Banaretur ab eo. Quam Tir Dei inspioiens ait :
* responde mihi, immunde spiritus, ad ea quae a te quaero. quid bic agis in cre-
aturaDei?' At daemon ait: * pleno jure est anima ipsius mea, qxxod ineantatrix
est, et per eam multas animas lucratus sum.* Et ait Tir sanctus : * quare propter
incantationem tua est?* £t daemon ait: * nonne legisti quia "DominuB pitkonet^
divinos et incantatores jussit exterminari ? quid enim tales faoiunt, nisi quod mihi
meisque principibus deserviunt ? idololatrae enim sunt, vix enim aliquos tan to jure
possidere possumus quanto hujusmodi Titiis irretitos ; numquid ignoras quod inter
mille incantatrices aut divinos vix una iuTenitur quae Tel qui Telit boo Titium
confiteri ? sio enim ora ipsorum olaudimus, ut de talibus loqui nihil Taleant quoTis
modo.' The bishop casts out the demon. Et sic spiritus iUe malignus abscessit, et
mulier ut mortua cecidit. Sed Tir sanctus subito eam erexit, erecta vero pubUoe
Vitium incantationiSf quod dudum multoties perfecerat, cum lacrymis est confessa,
quam et vir sanctus solvit.

' A deserted castle possessed by the devil, Greg. Mag. dial. 3, 4. Like tormenting
sprites, the deyil thiovrs stone» ^ conf. Greg. Tur. vitae patr. l,Tita Heimcradi cap. 21.


DEVIL. 1017

a devil, says Nib. 2167, 3. What if the corrupt Dan. 'Locke
löjemand, lovmand ' p. 246 had an allasion to ly ve (mentiri) pret.
löi, or if a kinship could even be established between lüge (men-
dacium) and logi (blaze, blast) f Wind means to us a false
allegation, windbag a humbug, liar. A Dan. proverb says :
Mogn er et skadeligt uveir^ (mendacium est tempestas nociva),
Saxo Gram., ed. Müll. p. 200. A liar is also a mocker, hence
'des tievels s^poiy Nib. 2182, 2. 'daz sinen s'poi der tuvel mit
den slnen habe,' Gr. Bud. 1, 9. In Mod. Nethl. ' de vyand heeft
my beet gehad,^ hostis me ludibrio habuit (see Suppl.}.

GrendeVa diabolic nature resembles that of bloodthirsty water-
sprites (p. 494) ; he lives too in moors and fens, and comes up at
night to haunt sleeping mortals : ' com of more gangan,' Beow.
1413; he flies 'under fen-hleoSu^ 1632. He drinks men's blood
out of their veins 1478, like vampires whose lips are moist with
fresh blood. An ON. saga has a similar demon, called Grimr
cegir because he can walk in water as on land, he spits fire and
poison, suclcs the hlood out of man and beast (Fornald. sog. 3,
241-2).

About when in the Mid. Ages did the idea spring up of formal
covetiants and treaties which the Devil concludes with men 7 To
the unfortunate, the desperate, he promises temporal blessings
for a number of years, but bargains for their souls at the expira-
tion of the term, and insists on a written bond usually signed
with the men's blood. This sounds not heathen, but rather as if
invented after the Boman mode of writing had become general
in Europe. The Norse devil ^ tries to strike profitable bargains
too, but never in writing. The most famous and variously told '
tale is that of the vicedominus Theophilus. It is known that
Gerbert, afterwards pope Silvester 2 (d. 1003), was said to have

^ The idtonn p. 547. The transaction is called a purchase.

' The event itself is placed at the beginn, of the 6th cent. ; the oldest work
I know of, that relates it, is Hroswitha's poem Lapsus et oonversio Theophili yice-
domini (0pp. ed. Schurzfleisch pp. 132-145), of the latter half of the 10th cent.
Not long after comes the mention of it by Fulbertus Gamotensis (d. 1029), 0pp.
Paris 1608, p. 136. A Historia Theophili metrioa is attrib. to Marbod (d. 1123),
and stands in his Works (ed. Beaugendre pp. 1507-16). The story occurs in Hart-
mann's poem (12th cent.) Von dem gelouben, 11. 1927-98. Beroeo (d. 1268) merely
alludes to it in Milagros de Maria str. 276, and in Duelo de Maria str. 194 ; so does
a MHO. poet, Altd. bl. 1, 79. Widest diffusion given it by Vincentius BeUovac. in
Spec. hist. 22, 69. Dramatized by Butebeuf (Legrand 1, 333 ; now publ. in Jubinal's
ed. 2, 79-105, and MichePs ThMtre Frani?. 136-156 with notes on its liter, history) ;
and aft. by a Low Germ, poet (Bruns p. 389).


1018 DEVIL.

sold himself to the devil (Anon. Leobiens. in Pez 1, 763). In
the Annolied str. 46-7 is the story of one Volprecht, who gives
himself to the devil; another in Ottocar cap. 835. In most
legends of this kind the Devil nlisses his prey after all, and is
made to give up the damning docnment. The man may have
denied God, but has never renounced the heavenly Virgin, so she
lends a helping hand. In a Swiss folktale the devil bargains
that the contracting party shall never say the gospel of John any
more (de Hänseier uf der lalle ummedrüllen), but he comes to
grief nevertheless, for the poor shepherd lad whistles it from
beginning to end. Another time the Evil one is promised
payment of the sum advanced, at the falling of the leaf; but
when at fall- time he presents himself, and presses the bargain, he
is shown trees in the church, that were cut with the leaves on
(Kinderm. no. 148), or else firs and pines (Woycicki's Klechdy 1,
149). On the whole there are ways more than one, to cheat the
poor devil of his legal due. One who has bound himself to him,
but who for seven years long neither washes nor combs, is rid of
him again ; or he need only have demanded that the devil shall
make a sapling grow, a thing beyond his power (Snperst. I, no.
626). The former is the story of Bearskin (Simplic. 3, 896.
Kinderm. no. 101), and of Brother Sooty (KM. no. 100) : Bear-
skin has to remain seven years in the devil's service, wrapt in a
bea/r's hide by way of cloak, i.e. leading a lazy inactive life (conf.
p. 1010, the bearskin ofiered to the devil). Almost every case
contains this stipulation of seven years to be spent in his service
and lore.^

What has a more direct bearing on our investigation is, that
some of the ON. legends speak of a gefaz Odhi (giving oneself
to 0.) exactly as the christian Mid. .Ages do of writing or vowing
oneself into the Devil's hands. Indeed ' gefa ' seems the most
genuine expression, because the free man, who of his own accord
enters into service and bondage, gives, yields himself: gisSpresi,
servus dedititius (EA. 327); 'begeben' is used in MHG. of
maidens giving themselves up to the church. The Olaf Trygg-
vas. saga tells how king Eirikr of Sweden gave himself to

> Mone*B Anz. 5, 176. In a MHG. poem (Fragm. 20*) an old man is addressed :
* din hundert jftr sint nn komen zno siben jdren üz erwegen, daz din der tivffl
möeze pflegen.'


DEVIL. 1019

0%iiii (at hann gafsc 09ni) in return for his lending him victory
for ten years long, Fornm. sog. 5^ 250 and 10, 283 ; and this last
account calls Oddiner a devil (so in 10, 803 a * diofull meS tLsi6nu
O&ins/ looking like O.). That the ancient god of yictory here
sinks into the Enemy of good, is, from the legendes point of
view, quite in order. The only question is, whether the loan for
ten years, and after that, the king's forfeiture to the god, were
taken over from christian stories of the devil, or had their ground
in heathen opinion itself. In the latter case it may have been
these heathen traditions that first suggested to christians the wild
fiction of a league with the devil. It is true the Norse authorities
say nothing about a bond signed in blood, nor about fetching
away upon forfeiture (see Suppl.) .

How to call to the Devil, when one wishes to have dealings
with him, we learn from a Dan. superstition (no. 148) : Walk
three times round the church, and the third time stand still in
front of the church-door, and cry ' come out ! ' or whistle to him
through the keyhole. That is exactly how spirits of the dead are
summoned up (Superst. G, line 206 seq.). The kiss, by which
homage was rendered to the devil, does not occur till we come to
heretics and the later witches ; it seems either copied from the
secular homagium, or a parody of the christian kiss of peace
during Adoration.

The devil in some stories, who brings money or com to his
friends and favourites, approximates to good-natured homesprites
or elves ; and in such cases nothing is said about a bond or about
abjuring God. He is usually seen as a fiery dragon rushing
through the air and into chimneys (Superst. I, nos. 6. 253.
520-2-3. 858). The Esthonians say, red streaks of cloud shew
the dragon is flying out, the dark that he is returning with booty
(Superst. M, no. 102) ; so the Lithuanians about the red alb and
the blue (N, no. 1). In Lausitz they tell of a com-dragon (zitny
smij) who fills his friend's thrashing floor, a milk-dragon (mlokowy
smij) who purveys for the goodwife's dairy, and a penny-dragon
(penezny smij) who brings wealth. The way to get hold of such
a one is the following : you find a threepenny piece lying some-
where to-day ; if you pick it up, there'll be a sixpenny piece in
the same place to-morrow, and so the value of what you find will
keep rising till you come to a dollar. If you are so greedy as to


1020 DEVIL.

take the dollar too^ yoa get the dragon into year honse. He
demands respectful treatment and good fare (like a homesprite) ;
if goodman or goodwife neglect it^ he sets the house on fire over
their heads. The only way to get rid of him is to sell the dollar,
but below its price, and so that the buyer is aware and silently
consents.^ It is the same with the alraun and the gallows-
mannikin (p. 518 n.). If given away, these breeding-dollars always
come back (Superst. I, no. 781).

But nowhere does the Devil savour so much of heathenism as
where he has stept into the place of the old giant (pp. 999. 1005.
1023-4) . Both of them the thunder-god pursues with his hammer;
as the sleeping giant is struck by Thorns miölnir, so is the devil by
the blacksmith^s hammer (p. 1011) ; ' the devil with three golden
hairs (KM. no. 29) has already been likened to the ON. Ugarthi-
locus (p. 244) . And more especially is he giant-like, where the
people credit him with stupendous feats of building and stone-
throwing ; here he puts on completely the burly, wrathful, spiteful
and loutish nature of the iötunn (pp. 534. 543-54) ; stupid devil
is used like stupid giant (p. 528). The building of christian
churches is hateful to him, and he tries to reduce them to ruins ;
but his schemes are sure to be foiled by some higher power or by
the superior craft of man. Like the giant, he often shews him-
self a skilful architect, and undertakes to build a castle, bridge
or church, only bargaining for the soul of him who shall first set
foot in the new building.

What was once told of the giant is now told of the devil, but
a harsher crueller motive usually takes the place of milder ones.
The giant in building has commonly some sociable neighbourly
purpose (pp. 535-54), the devil wishes merely to do mischief and
entrap souls. Norway has many legends of giant's bridges. The
jutul loves a huldra on the other side of the water ; to be able to
visit her dryshod, he sets about building a bridge, but the rising
sun hinders its completion (Faye 15. 16). Another time two
jutuls undertake the work to facilitate their mutual visits. Over

^ Lausitz. znonatBSchr. 1797, p. 755-^. Conf. the Flem. oorem, Haupt's
Zeitschr. 7, 532.

^ It is no contradiction, that in other stories the Devil has the opposite part of
Donar with his hammer and bolt handed over to him, or again that of the smith,
the limping Hephsestus. A preacher of the 14th cent. (Leyser 77, 10) speaks of
the evil devil's blow-bellows.


DEVIL. 1021

the Main too the giants propose to build a bridge (p. 547),
though the motive is no longer told. When the Demi builds the
bridge, he is either under compulsion from men (Thiele 1, 18), or
is hunting for a soul (Deut sag. nos. 185. 886) ; but he has to
put up with the cock or clvamois which is purposely made to run
first across the new bridge} A Swiss shepherd in a narrow glen,
finding he could not drive his flock over the brook, wished the
devil would bridge it over for him ; instantly the fiend appeared,
and offered to do the work on condition that the first thing that
crossed should be his : it was a goat that led the way (Tobler
214*). In one French story, having reserved for himself every
thirteenth creature that should cross the bridge, he has already
clutched numbers of men and beasts, when a holy man, being
a thii*teenth, confronts and conquers him (M6m. de Facad. celt.
5, 384),^ The churcli-building devil also having bargained for the
soul of the first that should enter, they make a wolf scamper
through the door (Deut. sag. no. 186); he in a rage flies up
through the roof, and leaves a gap that no mason can fill up (the
last incident is in nos. 181-2). On mountains he builds millsy
and destroys them again (nos. 183. 195).* His wager with the
urchitect of Cologne cathedral is remarkable : that he will lead
a rivulet from Treves to Cologne,* before the other can finish his
church (no. 204). In the same way a giantess wagers to throw
a stone bridge over a strait of the sea, before St. Olaf shall have
brought his church-building to an end ; but the bridge was not
half done, when the bells pealed out from the sacred pile. She in
vexation hurled the stones she was building with at the church-
tower, but never once could she hit it ; then she tore off one of
her legs, and flung it at the steeple. Some accounts say she
knocked it down, others that she missed; the leg fell in a bog.


* Before entering a new house, it is safest to let a cat or dog run in first,
Saperst. I, 499.

* The devil is shut up in a tower, where he may get out at the top, but only by
monnting one stair a day, and there being 865 of them, the journey takes him a
▼hole year.

■ A mountain called Teufeltmulin at the source of the rivulet Alp is ment. in
Dombek's Oeogr. pagor. p. 79 ; and a miU Duvelmolen near boest in Seibertz 1,
622. Beohst. Franken p. 107. Baader^s Bad. sag. no. 487.

* By this was meant the old Boman aqueduct (Gelenius de admir. Col. p. 254),
of which an equally fabulous account stands in the Annolied 510 : * Triere was ein
Wg alt, si zierte BdmAre gewalt, dannin man undir der erdin den win santi verre,
mit steinin rinnin, den herrin al ci minuiu, di ci Colue wAriu bedilhoit.*


1022 DEVIL.

which is still named Giögrapatten (Faye p. 119). Bell-ringing is
hated by dwarfs (p. 459), giants (Faye p. 7. 17. Thiele 1, 42),
and devils,^ who keep retiring before it : these legends all
signalize the triumph of Christianity. Oat of some charches the
devil drags the bells away (Dent. sag. 202) : at first he does not
know what the new structure is for, and is pacified by evasive
answers (no. 181) ; but when it stands complete, he tries to
batter it down with stones. DevtTs stones are either those he has
dropt as he bore them through the air for buUding, or those he
carried up the hills when undoing some work he had begun^ or
those he has thrown at a church (nos. 196-8-9. 200. 477). Scan-
dinavian stories of stones hurled by the giant race at the first
christian church are in Thiele 2, 20. 126-7. Faye pp. 16. 18; a
Shetland one in Hilbert p. 483. Frequently such fragments of
rock have the fingers of the devils hands imprinted on them ; a
stone on which he has slept shews the mark of his ear. Dent,
sag. 191. At Limburg near Tiirkheim in the Palatinate is a
stone, which the Evil one was bringing to fling at the church ;
but being only a young devil, he tired of the heavy load, and lay
down to sleep on it ; his figure printed itself on the rock, and he
overslept the time during which the throw ought to have been
made. In the vale of Durbach, on a hill of the StoUenwald,
stand eleven large stones; the twelfth and largest one the devil
was carrying ofi*, to batter down the Wendels-kirk with ; he had
got across the Bappenloch with it, and halfway up the Schiehald,
when he laid his burden down, and had a rest. But after that he
could no longer lift the heavy stone, its pointed end stuck fast in
the mountain, and you may still see the round hole made in it by
the devil's shoulder-bone. So the church was spared, bat the
devil still drives about the place now and then with six he-goats,
and at midnight you hear the crack of his whip (Moneys Anz. 3,
91). — Devil's Dikes ^ are explained by the people as built by the
Devil to mark the boundary of his kingdom (Deut. sag. 188) ; he
is imagined then as the ruler of a neighbouring and hostile
kingdom (a lötunheimr), nay, as disputing with God the possession

' In the Mid. Ages bells were rang to keep off lightning (the heathen Donar)
and the deyil.

' Dike has the donble sense of ditch and earth-wall, both being made by
digging ; hence slso any wall. The Germ, graben, ditch, has in some old words the
meaning of wall.— Tbanb.


DEVIL. 1023

o{ the earthy till at last they agree to divide it^ and the Devil
huilds the boundary-wall (no. 189). Bat these devil's walls and
deviVs ditches alike gather additional significance for us. The
people call the Boman fortifications in Bavaria, Swabia, Fran-
conia and the Wetterau, not only devil's walls, but pfalgrahen,
pohlgraben, pfahltöbel (-mounds), and even simply pfal, pi. pfdle,
which is explained as our pfahl, pale or stake, a word early
borrowed from Lat. pal us (Graflf 8, 331). But these walls have
no stakes in them, only stones and bricks ; it seems more correct
to trace the name to our old friend Phol ; the form Wulsgraben,
which occurs in the Wetterau (DiefiTenb. Wett. p. 142) and is
merely a softened pronunciation of Phulsgraien, is clearly in
favour of it ; and we have seen several instances in which Phol,
Pfal, Pful interchange. What is more, in various places the
devil's wall is also called the schweingraben (swinedike), and a
remarkable Swabian folktale says it was scratched up and rooted
np out of the ground in the night by a chanticleer and a hog.^
Does not that unmistakably point to pfol the boar (p. 996) ? I
have scarcely a doubt that popular tradition and local names will
yield some further confirmations. On this devil's wall the devil
is said to come driving on Christmas night (A.bh. der Münchn.
acad. 1, 23, conf. 38), as nearly all the heathen gods are astir
from then to Twelfthday. Nor ought we to overlook, that in
BQch districts we also come across teufelsgraben, dükersgraben,
e.g. in Lower Hesse, where Boman walls never came : any rocks
and walls that strike the eye are traced back by popular imagina-
tion either to giants and devils, or to Romans (p. 85) and Hel-
lenes (p. 534) . One piece of rock the Devil puts on as a hat, to
shew his enormous strength ; then comes the Saviour, and slips
the same on his little finger (Deut. sag. no. 205), just as Thdrr
keeps outdoing the giant (p. 545) : doubtless a fiction of primitive
times. But when footprints of the Saviour and the Devil are
pointed out on high clifis, from which the tempter shewed and
offered to his Lord the landscape invitingly spread out below
(DS. 184. 192), that seems to be founded on the Bible.' Pro-


' Preacher's Hist, bl., Stnttg. 1818, p. 67. Where the wall runs oyer the
Koohersberg to the B. Mnrr, the coiintry people all call it sohweingraben.

' Ulrichs in his Jonmey through Greece 1, 44 gives the story of a deTÜ*s stone
^ogkri) from which the Deyil preached (X670f).


1024 DEVIL.

jectiog crags are called devil's pulpits (Staid, 2, 85, kanzeli,
fluhkanzel), whence he is said to have preached to the assembled
people (DS. 190. Bechst. 3, 222); perhaps in olden times a
heathen priest stood there, or a divine image 7 or are they simply
ancient Woden's hills ? The devil's beds may be placed by the
side of the Branhilde beds and the like (see Suppl.).

Here I will make room for a few detailed narratives. The
Devil is represented as a masterful giant who will have his tithe
and toll : sometimes he appropriates the first who crosses the
bridge, at other times the last. So from the wheel of fortune
(p. 868) he every year made the last pupil drop off,^ and took
him to himself. A Spanish legend has it, that there was a cave
at Salamanca, where he constantly maintained seven scholars, on
condition that when they had finished their studies, the seventh
should pay the lawing. Once, when a set of students were
taking their leave, and the last was ordered to stay, he pointed
to his shadow, saying ' he is the last I ' So the devil had to take
the shadow, and the pupil escaping remained without a shadow
all his life. Jamieson gives the details of a Scotch superstition :
' Losing one's shadow arrives to such as are studying the art of
necromancy. When a class of students have made a certain
progress in their mystic studies, they are obliged to run through
a subterraneous hall, where the devil literally catches tlve hind-
most in the race, unless he crosses the hall so speedily that the
Arch-enemy can only apprehend his shadow. In the latter case
the person of the sage never after throws any shade, and those
who have thus lost their shadow always prove the best magricians.'
The devil is cheated of his prey, and has to put up with the bare
shadow, like the dishonest man in the sham penance (RA. 678) ^
(see Suppl.).

That significant Norrland story of the giant Wind and
Weather (p. 548), whose connexion with the Devil is placed
beyond a doubt by the observations on pp. 1000-14, is related by
Thiele 1, 45 in the following shape. Esbern Snare wished to
build Kallundborg church, but his means not sufficing, a trold

> ' Da nu einer ins tenfels reder sesse, oder gar in snmpf gefallen were, oder
des tods Schwaden hette ihn ergriffen,* Mathesins 140i>.

3 Chamisso's Peter Schlemihl rests, no doubt, on a legend substantially the
same. Of the homesprite Vollmar, on the contrary, nothing was seen but the
shadow, p. 509.


DEVIL. 1025

offered his assistance on condition that^ when the church was
finished, Esbem should be able to tell the trold^s name, or else
forfeit to him his heart and eyes. The work went rapidly for-
ward^ and only half a pillar was wanting, when Esbem began to
be alarmed, because he knew not yet the trold^s name. Anxious
and sad he wandered in the fields, when at the top of a rock he
heard the voice of a trold-wife : ' hush, hush, my child, to-morrow
comes thy father Fin bringing thee Esbem Snare's heart and
eyes to play with/ Esbem came home comforted ; he stept into
the church, the trold was just bringing np the stone shaft that
was still wanting, when Esbem hailed him by the name of Fin !
In a rage the trold shot np into the air with the half-pillar : that
is why the church stands on three pillars and a half only. Finnr
is the name of a dwarf in the Edda. — The German legend on
p. 549 is told thus in Lower Hesse : A peasant on the EUenbach
(by the Sandershäuser mt. near Cassel) had so much corn to
gather in, that he knew not how to house it all : his barn was too
small, and he had not the money to build a larger. As, thought-
ful and anxious, he paced his fields, a gray old mannikin stept up
to him, and asked the reason of his sadness. When the peasant
had told him the plight he was in, OraymanniJdn smiled and said :
' a barn I would doubtless build for thee, so roomy that thou
canst garner all thy crop therein, and ere to-morrow's dawn shall
it stand ready in thy yard, if thou wilt make over to me whatso-
ever hidden property thou ownesW ^ The peasant thought of
treasures underground, which could do him no good till they
were lifted, and he closed with the stranger's offer : not till he
turned to leave did he notice a cow's foot and horse's foot peep out
from under the gray coat. He went home, and told his wife what
had happened to him in the field : ' my God I what hast thou
done 7 I have a child unborn, and thou hast signed it away to
the Evil one.' The moment it was dark, a tremendous din arose
in the farmyard, carters, carpenters, masons working away to-
gether, the Devil as architect directing the whole business, which
advanced with incredible speed : a few hours more, and the barn

^ H6ttr (hat, gray hat), i.e. Od^tnii (p. 146), after giving Geirhildr his spittle to
be the barm of the ale she was brewing (conf. p. 902), demands what is between her
and the vat, yiz. her unborn child, Fomald. sog. 2, 26. The wilde walrabe (p. 997)
requires of the queen * det du haver under helte dtt,* DV. 1, 187. If only for this
one incident, I hold the Hessian tale to be of heathen origin.


1026 DEVIL.

stood ready built^ the roof was thatched^ the walls filled up^ only
a square or two stood open in the gable. Then the canning wife,
dressed in her husband^s clothes, crept across the yard to the
henhouse, cl,apt her Jiands^ and mimicked the crow of a cock, and
all the cocks set up a crowing one after the other. The evil
spirits scuttled away with a great uproar^ leaving but one gable-
square of the new barn empty : one carter had just come up
with a large stone drawn by four chestnuts, when the Devil
caught him up and smashed him, cart and steeds and all, against
the barn ; his figure was printed on that same stone for a remem-
brance, and may be seen there now. The barn-gable no human
hand has ever been able to close up ; what was built in by day
would always fall out again at night.' The hill where the gray
man first appeared to the peasant is called TeufeUherg. — ^Not far
from fiömhild staqd the Gleichberge, high basaltic hills^ one of
which has its top encircled by a double ring of stones irregularly
piled. Here the Devil once carried a wall round the castle of a
knight, having bargained for the hand of his lordship^s daughter.
But before daybreak the young lady^s nurse slapped her hnees
loudly with her hands, the cocks began to crow, and the devil lost
his bet. Exasperated he destroyed his own work, therefore you
see only ruins of the wall. Another version of the story (Bechst.
Franken p. 261) is, that the nurse, having overheard the compact,
stole out at early morn with a dark lantern to the hen-roost ;
the cock, suddenly seeing the light, thought it was day, and
crowed with all his mights — A mill at Goslitz being badly oflF for
water, the Devil undertook to provide it with plenty by daybreak,
before the cock should crow ; the miller in return bound himself
to give up his handsome daughter. In one night therefore the
devil had nearly finished cutting the conduit from the Elbe to
Goslitz, when the miller repented, and, some say by imitating
the cock's cry, others by knocking his leather apron, made the
cock crow before his time, whereupon the devil departed in anger,
and the trench remained unfinished, Mitth. des Sachs. Vereins,


' Clapping of hands avails in enchantments. Wolfdietr. 1372 says of the
heatheness Maipalie : * sie tluog ir hend te taiiMn,* and inunediately turned into a

CIOW.

' In any ohuroh the hole at which the devil has flown ont can never be closed.
' Same incident in a Thoringian story, Bechst. 3, 224.


DBVIL. 1027

Dread. 1835. 1, 11. — At Geertsbergen in W. Flanders there goes
a similar story of a deviVs barn (duivelschuer), and here too the
farmer is saved by the canning of his wife : lang voor dat de
haen gewoon is te kraeyen, sprong zy het bed uit^ en liep naer
bniten, waer zy een onnoemlyk getal werklieden bezig zag met
de schaer op te maken, aen dewelke nog slechts een gedeelte
van den zymner ontbrak. Zy plaetste haren mond tusschen hare
handen, en schreeuwde zoo sohel als zy maer kon : ' Jcoehelaren
haen I' en alle de hanen in de rondte lieten han eerste morgen-
geschrei hooren. Het werkvolk was verdwenen^ en de schaer
stond er^ doch met dien onvoltrokken gevel ; men heft herhaelde
malen beproefd het gat te stoppen: telkens komt Satan het's
nachts openbreken^ uit weerwraek dat de ziel van den boer hem
zoo loos ontsnapt is.^

The Esthonians call a farm-servant who has charge of the
bams and grains 'riegenkerl/ Once a riegenkerl sat casting
metal buttons^ when the Devil walked np to him, said good day,
and asked, ' what are yon doing there ? ' 'I am casting eyes.'
'Eyes f coald yoa cast me a new pair ?' ' Oh yes, bat I've no
more left jast now.' ' Bat will yoa another time f ' ' Yes, I can,'
said the riegenkerl. * When shall I come again ? ' ' When you
please.' So the devil came next day to have eyes cast for him.
The riegenkerl said, ' Do yoa want them large or small f ' ' Very
large indeed.' Then the man pat plenty of lead over the fire to
melt, and said, ' I can't put them in as yon are, yoa mast let me
tie yoa down.' He told him to lie down on his back on the
bench, took some stoat cords, and boand him very tight. Then
the devil asked, 'what name do yoa go by ? ' 'Issi (self) is my
name.' ' A good name that, I never heard a better.' By this
time the lead was melted, and the devil opened his eyes wide,
waiting for the new ones. ' Now for it ! ' said the riegenkerl,
and poared the hot lead into the deviVa eyes; the devil sprang np
with the bench on his back, and ran away. He was rnnning past
some ploaghmen in the fields, who asked him, ' who's done that
to yon?' He answered, ^issi teggi' (self did it). The men
laughed and said, ' self done, self have.' Bat he died of his new


1 Kmut en letterblad, Qhent 1840. p. 7 ; and from it Wolf no. 187, who gives
similar stories in no. 186 and note p. 686.

TOL. III. K


1028 DEVIL.

eyes, and nobody has ever seen the devil since.^ In this tale the
Devil is more a blandering giant than the malignant Foe of
mankind ; his blinding and the name Issi reminds ns of Homer's
Polyphemus and Ouri^, as well as of the oriental Dep^hoz
(p. 554). In our nursery-tale (KM. 2, 481, conf. Altd. bl. 1, 122)
the grant's eyes are scalded out with oil, and in Lith. the devil is
called aklatia, the blind, blinded. When other Esthonian tales
explain thunder by saying the devil is pursued by Grod, and
fleeing for refuge to the rocks, is smitten down (Superst. M, 61.
64) ; here also God resembles the Scand. Thörr, and the Devu a
iotunn whom he slays (see Suppl.).

It is a vital part of the machinery of medieval poetry, for
heroes to be transported by the Devil through the air from distant
countries to their home, when there is urgent need of their
presence there : some marriage is contemplated, that would rob
them of wife or lover. Thus king Charles (in the Spagna, canto
zxi) rides a devil, converted into a horse, from the East to France
in one night ; later legends make an angel appear to him instead,
and shew him a strong horse, DS. no. 489. The angel visits the
gentle Möringer in like distress (no. 523). But Henry the Lion
and Gerhart (Caes. Heisterb. 8, 59) travel with the devil's aid.
The mere fact that angel and devil can change places here, shews
that no evil spirit was originally meant; it is no other than
Wuotan carrying through the clouds his foster-son (p. 146) ; and
so we get at the real meaning of the question, what devil brings
you here T A devil carries a belated canon from Bayeux to Borne
in time for pontifical mass ; and by the same magic Klinsor and
Oflerdingen get &om Hungary to the Wartburg.

There is no surer test of the mythic element having a deep
foundation, than its passing into the Beast-fable. The Esthonian
tale of the man and the bear going halves in the cultivation and
produce of a field (Beinh. cclxxxviii), which turns on the same
distinction of upper and under growth that we saw at p. 715, is
told in our KM. no. 189 of a peasant and the devil, and in this
form we find it as early as Babelais bk 4>, cap. 45 — 47. Biickert's
Poems p. 75 (Gödeke 2, 416) give it from an Arabian tradition,
the source of which I should like to learn ; while the Dan. story

» BoBenDlanter'8 Beiträge, part 6, p. 61. The devil^ß being buried by beasts is
not in point here.


DEVIL. 1029

in Thiele 4^ 122 relates it of a peasant and a trold. The common
folk in Normandy have to this day a legend of their Mont St.
Michel^ how Michael and the Devil disputed which could build
the finer church. The devil builds one of stone^ Michael con-
structs a handsomer one of ice; when that melts, they both
agree to till the soil, the devil choosing the upper herbs, and
Michael keeping what hides in the ground. In all these tales,
the bear, giant, troll or devil is the party outwitted, like the
giant who built the castle for the gods (see SuppL).

Lastly, the old-heathen nature of the Devil is proved by animals
and plants being named after him, as they are after gods and
giants (p. 532). The libellula grandis, dragonfly, a delicate
slender-limbed insect, is called both enchanted maid and deviVs
horse, devil's bride, deviVs nag, De^n./andens ridehest; in the I. of
Mors a beetle, meloe proscarabaeus, /annen« riihejst (Schade p.
215) ; in Switz. the libellula, deviVs needle, devil* s hairpin, and
the caterpillar deviVs eat} In the vale of Bimella the black
snail, tiufulsnahke, and a tiny black beetle s* bözios ajo, the evil
one's mother, Albr. Schott pp. 275. 834, a counterpart to the
Marienkäfer, p. 694, but also suggestive both of ' devil's needle '
and of Loki's mother NdJ, p. 246; so that Donsk-nadel (p. 490 n.)
may be correct, as the name of an evil river-sprite. In Holland
some herb, I know not which, is called duivels naai-garen (sewing
yarn). The alcyonium digitatum or palmatum is deviVs hand,
manus diaboli, thiefs hand, Engl. deviVs hand or deadman's
hand, Nethl. doode mans hand, oude mans hand, Fr. main de
diable, main de ladre, de larron, conf. Forneotes folme, p. 240.
Lycopodium clavatum, deviVs claw; euphorbia, deviVs milk;
clematis vitalba, deviVs thread ; scabiosa succisa, devil's bite, Boh.
cert-kus ; adonis, deuiVs eye ; convolvulus arvensis, deviVs gut,
etc., etc.' Probably the folktales of an earlier time knew the
exact reasons of such names, conf. Snperst. I, nos. 189. 190. 476.
The thunderbolt, the elf-shot, was also called deviVs finger, pp.
179. 187 (see SuppL).


^ Caterpillan, through shedding their skins, becoming papas, and gradnaUy
changing jErom creeping and dead-like creatures into flying ones, have something
Qucanny, ghostly in them.

' Hypericum perforatum, dert2*«^iy^(, because it drives him away: * dosten,
harthun, weisse heid, thnn dem teuf el vieles leid.*


1030 DBVIL.

In such various ways has a Being who^ taken altogether, was
unknown to the heathen, pushed himself into the place of their
gods, spirits and giants, and united in himself a number of
similar or conflicting attributes. He resembles Wuotan as the
grayman and the cloaked wild hunter, who rides and carries
through the air; as sowing discord, playing dice, and taking
into his service men that vow themselves to him. His red beard,
his hammer and bolt recall Donar. Phol and Zio are connected
with the storm-wind, and the former with devil's buildings. As
for giants, their whole being has most things in common with
that of the Devil.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

MAGIC.

Mirade (wundern) ^ is the salutaiy, magic (zaubern) the hurtful
or unlawful^ use of supernatural powers : miracle is divine, magic
devilish ; not till the gods were degraded and despised was magic
imputed to them.^ Beings midway betwixt them and man, sage
giants, artful elves and dwarfs practise magic; only their skill
seems more innate, stationary, not an acquired art. Man can
heal or poison, by directing natural forces to good or to evil ;
sometimes he even shares the gift of miracle, but when he pushes
the beneficent exercise of his powers to the supernatural point,
he leams to conjure. Miracle is wrought by honest means,
magic by unlawful ; the one is geheuer (blessed, wholesome,
p. 914), the other ungeheuer. At the same time the origin of
all conjuring must be traced directly to the most sacred callings,
which contained in themselves all the wisdom of heathendom,
viz. religious worship and the art of song. Sacrificing and
singing came to mean conjuring; the priest and the poet, confi-
dants of the gods and participants of divine inspiration, stand
next-door to the fortune-teller and magician (see SuppL).

It is so with all nations, and was so with our ancestors : by
the side of divine worship, practices of dark sorcery, by way of
exception, not of contrast. The ancient Germans knew mag^c
and magicians ; on this foundation first do all the later fancies
rest. And the belief was necessarily strengthened and compli-
cated when, upon the introduction of Christianity, all heathen

> I here UBe the yerb wundem transitively (« to do wonders), in which sense
its derivative wunderer meant a wonder-worker. Beinmar says, Ms. 2, 164^ : * wol
dem wnnder, daz der wonderaBie gewundert hAt an der vil süezen.* Qod i» the troe
wunderare, Ms. 2, 171^. Trist. 10018, who of all wonders hath control, Parz. 48, 9 ;
mirabilis Dens, HelbL 7, 12. But also a hero doing godlike deeds, e.g. Erek, earns
the name of wundertere ; in Etzels hofhaltung it is even applied, less fitly, to a
tavam devilish man, p. 948.

^ And a human origin for the same reason, p. 884n. Bnorri calls QSinn
* forspAr, fi&lknnnigr,' and makes him * galdr qvefSa,' Tngl. saga cap. 4. 6. 7. Baxo
Gram. p. 13 ascribes to him * praestigia,' and curiously dirides all magicians

imathematioi ; see Forcellini sub v.) into three kinds, vis. giants, magi and deities
p. 9); oonf . his statements (p. 108) on Thor and Othin * magioae artis imbuti.* So
the Chronioon Erici (circ. 12&) represents Odin as * inoantator et magus.'

losi


1032 MAGIC.

notions and practices were declared to be deceit and sinful
delasion : the old gods fell back and changed into devils^ and all
that pertained to their worship into devilish jngglery. Presently
there sprang up tales of the Evil one's immediate connexion with
sorcery ; and oat of this proceeded the most incredible, most
cmel jambling up of imagination and reality. Magic tricks per-
formed, and those merely imagined, so ran into one another, that
they could no longer be distingnished either in punishing or
even in perpetrating them.

Before proceeding with our inquiry, we have to examine the
several terms that designated witchcraft in olden times. It
seems worth noting, that several of the more general names have
simply the sense of doing or preparing, and therefore mark an
imperceptible lapse of right doing into wrong. The 0H6.
Tcarawan, AS. gearwian, had only the meaning of facere, parare,
praeparare, omare, but the same word in ON. göra approxi-
mates to that of conjm-ing, X)an. /or^ore; goming is maleficium,
gömingar artes magicae, much in the same way as facinus is both
deed and misdeed. Our thun, to do, passes into anthun, to inflict
(by sorcery) ; and the ON. fardce&a (malefica). Seem. 64*. 197^
comes from dkS (facinus).^ Now the Greek and Latin words
epBeiv, pi^eiv, facere (p. 41n.), mean not only to do, but to
sacrifice, without requiring the addition of Upd or sacra, and
SpSetv Ttvi rt is to bewitch ; the ON. biota, beside its usual sense
of sacrificare, consecrare, has that of maledicere; wbether
fomcBslga, sorcery, can be connected with /or», sacrifice, has been
discussed, p. 41. — ^A difficult word to explain is the OHG. zoupar
divinatio, maleficium, zouparari hariolus, zouparon hariolari;
Notker spells zoufer in Ps. 57, 6, zouvei' in Boeth. 29, zouferlih,
zotiverlih in Cap. 45. 99; the MHG. zouber, zoubem answers
exactly to the strict OHG. forms with p, to LG. tover, toveren^
and the same in Nethl. both Mid. and Mod. (conf. toverfe,
Maerl. 1, 260-3, toverare 1, 266. 2, 176-7, toeverfe is a faulty
spelling) ; O. Fris. tawerie, Bichth. 401. 21. The Icelandic has
tößir instrumenta magica, föfrar incantamenta, töfira fascinare,

^ M. Lat. faetura (sortilegiam), faeturare (faaoinare), qffaeturatrix (inoantat-
xix); Ital. /attura (inoantatio), fattucchiero^ -ra^ soroerer, -ress; ProT. faehwrar^
faitnrar, to oonjnre, fachilieira^ faüüeira, sorceress; 0. Fr. faiture, faietureru,
soroery ; Span, hecho (iaoinns), heehiso (inoantatio), heehuar conjure, heekieero, -ra,
sorcerer, -ress.


ZAÜBEB. WrrCHCBAFT. 1033

töfrari magas, töfranom saga, Fornald. sog. 8, 205 ; with whioh
the Norw. tougre fascinare (Hallager 131^) and Swed. tofüer in-
cantatio, iofverhäxa saga, agree ; we may safely sappose a modem
importation of all these Scand. words from Germany, as they
do not occur in ON. writings.^ I am in doubt whether an AS.
tedfor is to be connected with zoupar ; it signifies minium, color
coccineas, and Lye gives (without ref.) tifram depingere, which
ought perhaps to be t^frian. The addition of the adj. red in
read teafor (rubrica) favours the conjecture that tedfor was a
general term for the colours employed in illuminating manuscripts,
and thus may stand for rune« mystic writing, hence our zauher
(magic).* To identify zoupar with zepa/r (p. 40), AS. tedfor with
tiher, is forbidden by the difference of vowel, though it would
bring the notion of magic very near that of sacrifice again. One
would much rather trace zoupar to zouwan, Ooth. t&ujan, AS.
tawian (facere, parare), and assume the operation of some anoma*
lous change of the t^ into v, 6, p.^ Even the Lith. daryti, Lett,
darriht (facere), and the Slav, tvorlti (facere, creare, fingere) are
worth considering. — Another term no less perplexing is one
peculiar to the Saxon branch of our race. In L. Saxony they
still say for conjuring or soothsaying, wikhen, wichen (Ssp. 2, 18.
Homeyer p. 117 var. x) and wigelen (wichelen), for fortune-teller
wikker, wichler, for witch wikkerske, for sorcery wichelie. So in
Nethl. both wikken and wichelen, wikkerij and wichelarij ; M.
Nethl. wikelare ariolus, Maerl. 2, 323. 348, wigelare^ Kästner's
Bmchst. 42^, wigelinge vaticinium 12^. The AS. also has the
two forms: both wiccian fascinare, wicce saga, wiccungdom
(Ga^m. 223, 17) or wiceancrcefl ars magica; and wigUan ariolari,
wigelere augur, wigelung augurium, incantatio; while the Fris.
transposes the letters, wiliga incantatio, Bichth. 401, 21. The
Engl, has witch = wicce ; from the AS. verb has survived its
partic. vncked (perversus, maledictus), and 0. Engl, had an adj.
wikke meaning the same ; add wizard, but all the L-forms have

^ So the Lüneburg Wendie töblctUch sorcerer (Eooard p. 291), tobalar soroerer,
towlatza^ tohlartka soroeress (Jogler^s Wtb.), seem borrowed from German, as other
Blayio dialeoto have nothing similar ; for the SloY^.sd|>er magic, zäprati to oonjnre,
zopemikt -niUa sorcerer, -ress, are certainly the Qerm. zauber, etc.

' Is the derivation of oar ziffer, Engl, cipher, Fr. ekiffre. It. ei/ra, eifera (secret
writing) from an Arabic word a certainty f Daoange sub t. oifrae has examples
from the 12th cent. The AS. word has a striking resemblance.

' Onr gelb, färbe, gerben, mürbe, all have w in MHG.


1034 iCAOic.

disappeared. The word is nnknown to any HG. dialect, old or
new ; ^ yet I believe it springs from a root common to all
Teutonic tongaes, viz, Teihan (no. 201)^ which again had originally
the sense of &ioere, conficere, sacrare, and from which came the
adj. yeihs (saoer), OHO. wth, and the noon vaihts (res), conf.
Slay, tvar, tvor (creatnra, tcrlai^). We know that vafhts, wight,
acquired the sense of daemon (p.440-1), and the ON. vijettr (orm
Yiettr, poor wight) means a witch in Siem. 214^. I treat the kk
in wikken as I did that in Ecke from the root agan (p. 237), and
this is supported by the g in wigelen and ch in wichelen (evidently
a eh = h). — ^Near in meaning, though unrelated in origin, seems
the OHG. vnzago, AS. vniega, witga, Gsddm. 218, 18. 224, 13, cor
weissfige, prophet, soothsayer, but in a good, not in a bad sense ;
the ON. form viihi, SsBm. 63\ 118*, stands for vitugi (oonf. yitag
94*), as ecki, eitki does for eitgi (Gramm. 3, 738), and ysBtki for
TSdtgi. This vitki has been wrongly identified with AS. foicoe :
never does an AS. ee result from tg, though it becomes tch in
English.' The corresponding verb is OHG. wizagan, AS. wUe"
gian, M. Nethl. witegen, Diut. 2, 202^. — Equivalent at first to
wttega and vitki were the ON. spämaÖr^ spdhona, gpadU (pp.
94. 402) : but from signifying the gift of wisdom and prediction
as it resides in priest and poet,^ they gradually declined into the
sense of noxious wizard and witch. Even Snorri's /(yr-spar and
fiöUhunnigr (p. 1031 n.) had already acquired the bad secondary
sense. Fiölkunnigr (multiscius) came to mean magician, and
fiöUhunnatta fiölkyngi, and even the simple kyngi ( = kunnugi)
sorcery. This k^gi was learnt as a profession : * Rögnvaldr
nam fiölkyngi/ Har. Härf. saga cap. 86. Walther 116, 29 says
of a lady wondrous fair : ' daz si iht anders künne (that she was
up to other tricks, knew too much), daz soil man übergeben
(you are not to imagine).' Hans Sachs calls an old sorceress by
turns ' die alt unhuld ' and ' die weise frau ' iv. 3, 32-3 (see
SappL).

> VegioB in the Lex Burg. 16, 8 and OHG. 1, 8 has been taken to mean
magician ; bnt, as the rubric ' viator * in the last passage shews, it is one who
fetches and carries, index, delator.

' Of like meaning are: weiser mann, weite frau, kluge frau ; ON. vUindamaffr,
ssge, natural philosopher, Fomald. sog. 1, 6; Senr. vietcht peritns, vieUhtaU,
-titta venefious, -ca ; Pol. wietxcska sorceress, fortune-teller, wieficiyJba night-hag,
lamia; Slovdn. vexAa witch.

' Analogous is the 0. Fr. devin, divin, magician, diriner.


WITBGA. SPA. GALDOR. 1035

Inasmuch as spying is foreseeing and seeing, there is another
word for conjnring that I can connect with it. Without any
bodily contact, things may be acted upon by mere looking, by
the evil eye : this in our older speech was called entsehen (p. 461).

But as the vates, beside seeing and knowing, has also to sing
the mystic strain and speak the spell, there must from the earliest
times have been words to express conjuring, like our present
besehreien, beschwatzen, berufen, überrufen, beschwören [from cry,
call, talk, swear] . The OHG. halan, A S. gcUcm, ON. gala, was
not only canere, but incantare, a recital with binding power, a
singing of magic words. Such spoken charm was called in ON.
galdr, AS. galdor, OHO. kalstar (not to be confounded with
kelstar, sacrifice, p. 38-9), MHO. galsterie, Schwanr. 813 ; we
find galsterweiber for witches even in Mod. German ; galdr in
itself seems not to have meant anything criminal, for meingaldr
(wicked spell) is particularized, Fomm. sog. 2, 137. ON. galdra
fascinare^ galdramadr incantator, gaJdrakona saga ; AS. galdor^
crmfl magia, galdere magus ; OHO. halstarari incantator, ' Medea
dia handega galsterara,' N. Gap. 100. In like manner the Fr.
charme, cha/rmer come from carmen, and enchanter incantare from
cantns, canere. The M. Lat. carminare, to enchant, gave birth
to an OHG. ga/rminari, germinari incantator, germinod incantatio,
Diat. 2, 826*». Gl. Doc. 213\ germenod, N. Cap. 100 ; which after-
wards died out of the language. The MHG. already used segen
[blessing, from signum] for a magic formula, segencerinne for
enchantress. Chap. XXXVIII. will go more deeply into this
necessary connexion of magic with the spoken word, with poetic
art; but, as the mystery of language easily passes into that of
symbol, as word and writing get indissolubly wedded, and in our
idiom the time-honoured term rune embraces both tendencies ;
it throws some light on the affinity of zoupar with te&for (p. 1033),
and also on the method of divination (p. 1037) by rune-staves.

The Goth, afhugjan, to deprive of one's senses, bewilder, stands
in (ral. 3, 1 for ßaaKaiveiv = fascinare ; ^ AS. dyderian, bedyder*
tan illudere, incantare, perhaps conn, with our HG. tattern, dot-
tern (angi, delirare) ; we now say verblenden, daze, dazzle. That
ON. troll (p. 526), which stood for giants and spirits, is also

. , ' Is this, or is the ItaL fasoiare, the sonroe of Fr. f Acher, formerly fasoher,
irritare, Span, enfadar ?


1036 MAGIC.

applied to magicians, trolUskapr is sorcery, the Sw. troUa, Dan.
trylle incantare, trolldom, trolddom witchcraft; the Gala}^ngslag
p. 137 has 'at velga troll' for oonjaring, which reminds us of
' veckja hildi ' and ' waking the Ssdlde/ p. 864. The Frisians
say tsyoene fascinare, tsyoen-er, ^ster sorcereri -ress, which (as
initial ts before i or y often stands for k) is no doabt to be ex-
plained by the ON. kyu in its collateral sense of monstmm, oonf.
MHG. kander. I cannot satisfactorily accoant for an O.Sw.
vipskipli, Dsed in the Yestgötalag for magic, not of the worst
kind, but what can be expiated by penance : ' far kona me)'
vipakipluin/ "p. Ib3 ; Wär]>er taken me}' vipakipplum/ p. 228;
' convictns de widskiplum* p. 321 ; it is plainly the present vii-
skepelse snperstitio ; skipa is ordinäre, facere, and the wrongness
must lie in the yid; conf. beginn, of ch. XXXV.

We find seiffr meaning magic already in the Edda : ' seid^ hon
knnni/ said of a vala or volva. Seem. 4 ; sei&herendr 118^ are
magicians, who stand on a par with volnr and yitkar ; and the word
becomes commoner in the sagas. If we might spell it 8ey9r (as
one poem has it in Fomald. sog. 2, 180), we should get both
an easy derivation from siö'Sa to seethe, and another point of
contact with Goth. s&u)>s, p. 40. SeiSmaffr is magician, seiSkana,
aeyShona a wise woman, one that skills to seethe and cook magic
remedies.^ Meanwhile sei'Sr occurs clearly as a vowel-change
from si9a^ ^iigl* saga cap. 16-7, Loki reproaches OSinn with
haying practised sorcery : ' )>ik siSa koSo,' Sasm. 63% and I have
never seen siö'Sa put for it; so the two words, even if cognate,
must remain apart, or find their justification in an exceptional
shifting from the 4th to the 5th series of vowel-change.

The OHO. puozan^ AS. hetan, is emendare, but also mederi, to
remedy, heal; in Westphalia böten ^ still expresses the action of
old-fashioned charms as opposed to scientific medicine, Superst.
I, 873 ; the Teutonista gives boUen as synon. with conjuring,
and the M. NethL ut boeten is sanare (Reinh. 5394).^

' Seyffr or aauffr is a poetic word for a fire to oook by: * & seySi bera/ S«m.
54*, to set on the fire, take to oook, make to boil.

' Both de nomin. yet. Qerm. med. p. 139.

* Foreign terms are less interesting, e.g. AS. dr^ magus, pi. dr^as, drycraft
magia, whose Celtic origin is betrayed by the familiar name of Druid ; Ix. draoi
wizard, draoidhetichd sorcery. Nigrdmanzie already in medieval poets, Ms. 3, 10^ ;
* dor list yon mffrdmawA^* Parz. 458, 17. 617, 12, lüt m. answering to ON. iSr6u,
which Bnorri oses of magic ; nigronaiuAe^ Maerl. 2, 261. * der twarzen bvoehe wis,*


SEID-MAN. JTJGGLEB. 1037

Now, as the ooncocting of remedies and that of poisons easily
fall into one^ the OHO. luppi, AS. lyf, MHG. luppe, is used of
poisoning and bewitching : ' lüppe nnd zouber triben/ Berth. 12^
and luppasrinrie 58 is sorceress^ exactly as v&iieficium and venefica
stand related in Latin; and the Goth, lubjaleisei, Oal. 5, 20
is ^pfiaKela, sorcery^ and leisei is like list in zouherlist, Iw. 1284.
Even the Goth, l^keis^ OHG. lähhi (leech, medicns in the good
honest sense), and l&hhinön (mederi), lähhan (remediam) lie at
the root of the words lachsncerinne enchantress, Oberl. bthteb. 46,
lachsnen qnackery, conjuring, lachsnerin witch. Staid. 2, 150.

In Hessian witch- trials of the 16th cent., the usual, nay the
only term for bewitching is derren, prop, nocere ; as even OHG.
tarön acquired, beside nocere, the meanings fraudare, officere,
illadere (see Suppl.).

A part of the diviner's craft consisted in casting and inter-
preting lots. Like the Lat. sortilegium and aortilegus (M. Lat.
sortiarius, whence Fr. sorcier), our old German words hliozan
(Graff 4, 1122), MHG. liezen (augurari, Diut. 8, 107-8. Br.
8128), and hliozari, liezcere (augur, divinator) are applicable to
sorcery. Then from the customary phrase ' mittere, jactare
sortem' seems to have been borrowed the expression zouber
werfen, to throw a spell, Wolfd. 515. 520. 588, jeter un sort,
' maleficium super jactare,' Lex Sal. 22, 4 ; zouber legen, to lay a
spell, Walth. 115, 82. 116, 28-5. The Swed Jjusd to conjure is,
I think, for Jguea, ON. kiösa, choose, spy (Gramm. 4, 848), pick,
eligere sortem; but also the 'vala,' the wise woman and enchant-
ress, is one that ' wales ' or chooses, a valkyrja.

One species of divination was performed with the drinking-cup
(Genesis 44, 5). From the Lat. caueus (for scyphus) are sup-
posed to have sprung cauculator, Capitul. an. 789, § 63 capit. 1,
62. 6, 378, and coelearius, ib. § 18 capit. 5, 69, and from these
the OHG. cauealari scenicus, magicus. Gl. Mens. 877, gougulari,

^j* 7411. * saoohen an den twarzen huoehent* Martina 20*. ' nil 16r etz in dn
f^arzez bvoek, das ime der hellemör hAt gegeben,* Walth. 88, 7. Black art, black
^st, not till a later time. All this came of misunderstanding the Or. ptxpofAorrela,
In the Ulm Yoeab. of 1476 we read : * nigramantia dicitor divinatio facta per nigros,
Le. mortuos, yd super mortuos, Tel cnm mortuis.* A carious statement in Bit. 79
J^ut Toledo : * ein here lit nAhen da bt, d& der lUt mgr&mami von drste wart er-
nmden (first invented) ; * another opinion propounded in Herbort 9872. Our Mid.
Ages saddled the Saracens in Spain and Apulia with its invention : * ein püllisch
«ouber,« Ms. 2, 133»».


1038 MAGIC.

0. ir. 16, 33, koukelari, Qeorgsl. 25, goneaUuom magia, 61. Mons.
375, goukel praestigiam, N. pa. 65, 3 ; MHG. gougel gougeloere,
Walth. 37, 34, our gaukel, jaggle; ON. kuJcl praestig^um^ JculdaTi
magna ; M. Nethl. cokelere hariolaa, Diat. 2, 21 7\ Otliera derive
gaukler from jocalator, and one thing that aeems to be in its
favour ia the mild Ineaning, of mere aleight^f-hand^ which atill
clinga to ganklerei (jagr^I^^)^ ^«®* harmleaa tricka performed by
way of game and recreation ; conf • gongel-biihae (-box), Walth.
38, 6. Bonn. 2244. gongelatok (-atick), Martina 9*. gongel-
f acre (-cart), MaH. 3, 166». 186». gougelapil (-play) 438». goukel-
hüetlJn (-cap). Renn. 16719, conf. Walth. 37, 34. So the Nethl.
guichelen, gochelen, goghelen, guichelaar : ' gokelt onder den hoet,'
Perg. 2772 ; the form gaichelen ia very like wichelen (p. 1033),
and there actually occura an AS. hweolere, hweohlere (auggeating
hweohl, kukT^^, rota) aa another way of apelling wigelere, ao
that one might really conjecture an 0. Frankiah chuigalari, and
from it get cauculator, were not everything elae againat it. I will
juat mention alao the Boh. hauzlo magic, leauzliti to conjure, Pol.
gusla magic, guala/rz conjurer ; thia g form we might be tempted
to refer to the Serv. guale, Buaa. guali, paaltery, aa the bewitch-
ing inatrument, but that the Pol. geale, Boh. hauale, doea not
agree (aee Suppl.).

The varioua waya of naming magic have led ua to the notiona
of doing, aacrificing,^ apying, aoothaaying, einging, aign-making
(secret writing), bewildering, dazzling, cooking, healing, casting
lota.

They ahew that it waa practiaed by men aa well aa women.
Yet even our earliest antiquitiea impute it preeminently to women.
More influential, more expert than the zonparari, wigelere,
apämaiSr, galdrama'Sr, appeara the zouparara, wicce, wihkerake,
kaUtarara, galdrakona^ 8pakona; and to theae muat be added
aome appellationa hardly applicable to any but female witchery.

For the reaaon of thia I look to all the circumatances external
and internal. To woman, not to roan, waa aaaigned the culling
and concocting of powerful remedied, as well aa the cooking of
food. Her lithe aoft hand could beat prepai*e the aalve, weave the
lint and dreaa the wound ; the art of writing and reading ia in

^ Even where the vowel resists, the ooineidenoe is remarkable : f6m and foro,
gelstar and galstar, sauiS and sei'S, zepar and zonpar.


1039

the Mid. Ages ascribed chiefly to women. The restless lives of
men were filled ap with war^ hunting, agricnltare and handi-
crafts ; to women experience and convenient leisure lent every
qualification for secret sorcery. Woman's imagination is warmer
and more susceptible, and at all times an inner sacred power
of divination was revered in her (pp. 95. 897). Women were
priestesses, prophetesses (56n. 94 — 8), their names and fame are
embalmed alike in Old-German and Norse tradition ; and the
faculty of somnambulism still shews itself most of all in women.
Then again, looked at from one side, the art of magic must have
been chiefly monopolized by old women, who, dead to love and
labour, fixed all their thoughts and endeavours on hidden
science.^ Snorri in his curious account of the origin of magic
(Yngl. s. cap. 7) says, that to males (karlmönnum) it seemed un*
dignified to dabble in a doubtful art, so they taught it the god-
dessea or prieatesses, for gySjur can mean either. According to
difierences of national sentiment, the noms and völvas (p. 403),
the Valkyrs and swan-maids approximate to divine beings or
sorceresses. On all this put together, on a mixture of natural,
legendary and imagined facts, rest the medieval notions about
witchcraft. Fancy, tradition, knowledge of drugs, poverty and
idleness turned women into witches, and the last three causes
also shepherds into wizards (see Suppl.).

To the Latin words saga^ striz, striga,^ venefica, lamia, furia
answers our hexe, by which is meant sometimes an old, sometimes
a young woman, and a beauty can be complimented by being
called a perfect witch. The OHG. form of the word is hazus
[pron. hatsus], hazusa, hazasa, GrafE 4, 1091 ; hazzuso (eumeni-


t * Where one man is burnt, there be well ten women burnt * says Eeisersp.
Om. 46 . * ein tounderaltes trip bescheidet den troam/ onrayels the dream, Walth.
95, 8. A * kerling frdd ok framtgn * foretells of a log that is to perish in the fire,
Nialssaga 194-9. Very early times impute to old women more oraft and malice than
to the devil himself, as we see by the pretty story of the hag who set a loving couple
by the ears when the devil could not, for which he handed her a pair of shoes
cautiously on a peeled stick, being afraid of her touch, Morolt 917 — 1007. Hauptes
Altd. bl. 2, 81. H. Sachs ii. 4, 9. Melander's Jocoseria 2, 53. Conde Luoanor cap.
48. No witchcraft comes into the story, though the first account calls her a zouberin.

s * Sagire sentire acute est ; ex quo tagae anus, quia multa scire volunt,' Gic.
de Divin. 1, 81.

> Lex Sal. 22. 67. Lex Alam. add. 22 stria; O.Fr. estrie (see p. 287 dame
Habonde) ; Ital. Strega, stregona (whence perh. the Swiss sträggtU p. 934), a wizard
being stregone. Orig. strix, arply^, was bird of night, owl: *$trige8 ab avibus
ejusdem nominis, quia malefioae muUeres volaticae dicuntur,* Festus sub v.


1040 MAGIC.

dum), Dint. 2, SbO^, is gen. pi. of hazas^ hazes 2, 346*; hezesusun
(furiis) 2, 337^ apparently a corruption of hegezasun ? The GL
Flor. 21 give hegezisse, and that the genaine form in fall was hagazus
or hagazusa (p. 1045n.) we are assured by the AS. hosgtesse, M.
Nethl. hagetisse, Dint. 2, 229^ ha^ghedisse, Hor. Belg. 1, 119: the
contraction of the* first two syll. (as in t&lanc for taga-lank) speaks
for its age and frequent use ; we must therefore prefer the spell-
ing hazus with long a, and in N. Gap. 105 it does seem to be
hazessa, Wackem. lb. 153^ 36 in spite of Graff's hazessa. Barely
do we find a MHG. hegxse, hexae, Martina 90®. 106*, hecse, OberL
bihteb. 46 ; the Swiss say hagsch, Jumgach, Staid. 2, 10 ; at Ulm^
says Schmidts Schwab, id. 156, they call a stingy old woman
liekkäsy only another way of writing hexe. But as the AS., be-
side hcegtesse, has also hcegesse, Engl, hag, MHG. häehel, Ls. 2,
638, Swiss häggele (conf. straggele), the suffixed letters seem to
hare added little to the simple root Ji>ag. The ON. adj. hagr
means dexter, artificiosus, and might have had the full sense of
sagns : our hexe is a deep sly woman. Still the ON. never does
use a masc. noun hagr or a fem. hog in such a way ; and the
Swed. heza, Dan. hex, in their very spelling betray their Mod.
German extraction. For hexen, to bewitch. Up. German dialects
furnish hechsnen, which agrees with an O. Fris. verb hexna
(Bichth. 159, 25, one MS. has hoxna); the Dalecarlian is hägsa,
hugsa [hoax, hocus?]. Down to the 16-1 7th cent., instead of
the rare MHG. forms given above, the preference was given to
unholde (which properly means she-devil^ p. 266), as diu unholde
in Martina 170^ 172^, occasionally backed by a masc. unJwldcere;
in Keisersberg and Sachs unholde is still the usual word, not till
the 17- 18th cent, did heoße become general instead of it. Here
and there the people use a masc. hex for conjurer ; in Swabia der
hengsi (Schmid 273), in Switz. haagg, hagg, hah for cheat, jug-
gler ; even the OHG. hdzus strio (masc. to stria f hardly for
histrio ?) might mean a male. Many have been caught by the
obvious resemblance of the Gr. Hecate, ^EKavq, but the letters
agree too closely, contrary to the laws of change, and the Mid.
Ages would surely have had an unaspirated Ecate handed down
to them ; no Ecate or Hecate appears in M. Lat. or Bomance
writings in the sense of witch, and how should the word have
spread through all German lands ? About the M. Nethl. haghe-


HBXE. 1041

düse, striz, there is this to be said^ that the Mod. Nethl. eghdiase,
egdisse, hcMgdisse is lacerta^ oar eidechse^ OHG. egidehsa, AS.
&Sexe : the lizard does seem to have played a part in magic^ and
witch-trials actually speak of witches giving birth to a lizard in-
stead of the traditional elf^ Mark, forsch. 1, 260 (see SuppL). In
the Span, hechicero, -ra I see again only an accidental likeness
(p. 1032 n.) ; the Span, bruxa, South Fr. bruesche, means a bane-
ful nightbird, but^ like striz^ it has passed into the sense of
witch. Drut, drude is often found as an equivalent for witch^
though strictly it denotes the tormenting oppressive nightmare ;
out of what heathen being this dnU arose^ was shown on p. 423^.
it was so easy for elvish sprites of the olden time to be after-
wards mixt up with human sorceresses ; in the same way biluna,
belewitte (p. 473) will now and then occur in witch-affairs.

Another set of names^ presented to us in the ON. remains,
merits particular attention : here we see the notion of magic
women stand next door to that of giantesses. Troll is the gene-
ral term including at once beings of the elf or giant brood and
those of magic kind (p. 526), yet so that at first the giant
character predominates, and afterwards the diabolic. TröllahaU,
iröllcuikögr, tröllatünga occur in the Landn&mabök; trölUkwpr
may be taken to mean, first the iötunmöiSr p. 530, secondly our
witchcraft and magic. But while scarcely any mention is made
of a tröllmaiSr, there is plenty about the tröllkona, and names for
a giantess like ßagf, akass, skessa (p. 526) are applied without
scruple to witches. Snorri 210 gives a long string of names,
some hard to interpret, which wiU be a task to the student for
some time to come. Others, archaic and poetically conceived,
are told by one who is a tröllkona to Bragi, who meets her at
eventide, Sn. 175. The copiousness of this nomenclature implies
the great antiquity of magic in the North, and its deep-rooted
oneness with the systems of magic all over Europe : the most
significant of these names I shall take up and explain in the
course of discussion.

On such etymological groundwork, of the more general terms
that come under question, may now follow an examination of the
subject itself.

And this time I will commence with Scandinayian sorcery.


1042 MAGIC.

whose more antiquated and to my thinking unadolterated cha-
racter proves above all things that the leading part in it was
taken by women^ not by men.

It is true the Edda classifies magicians as volur, vUhar and
seidberendr, Sasm. 118% of whom only the first are female, the
other two male ; nay, all three are traced np to ViSolfr, Vilmeiffr
and SvcurthöfSi, alleged inventors of magic, about whom there is
nothing conclusive to be said. Svart-höfSi, Blackhead, may come
of the black art, and black as the fiendish colour in general
(p. 993). VilmeiSr, compounded of vil (favor, beneplacitum) and
mei^r (arbor), ought rather to claim kinship with the pleasing art
of poesy (p. 901). Viffdlfr would seem to be the * VUolfiu me-
dendi peritus' mentioned in Saxo Gram. 122. To me however
the first named, the völur, seem to throw the rest into the shade :
that poetic dialogue with Bragi gives the witch a vilsinn volu
(better perh. vilsinni, ace. vilsinna), i.e. a friend and comrade of
the vala. Vitkar, vitJca/r, are the OHG. wtzagon, soothsayers,
vates, which supports my interpretation of YilmeiiSr. 8ei9r has
no right to be monopolized by men : we saw above (p. 1036), and
shall soon make out more exactly, that it pertains to women too,
that seiiSkonor shew themselves no less than seiiSberendr. Both
must have been forthcoming in great numbers in some districts :
in Harald hftrf. saga cap. 36, king Eirikr causes his brother
Bognvald and 80 sei'Smenn to be burnt. The vala or volva is a
prophetess, priestess, norn, a most holy being of the olden time
(pp. 97. 408), and at the same time a seiölcona. Even of the
Eddie vala it is said : ' seiS hon kunni,' Seam. 4^. Such magic
women are Heidr, Harmglöm^ Shuld, etc., all originally air-riding
valkyrs (p. 421) ; in Seam. 154^ volva, akass, valkyrja stand
side by side. Weighty evidence shall be brought by and by of
their wanderings in the wood at even and by night. They roam
through the country with their retinue (meS sitt li^), are reverently
invited in by men, entertained, and called upon to say sooth.
This they do, sitting on a four-legged stool, the seiffhiallr. The
performance is called efla seiff (fixing, instituting magic), Fomald.
sog. 2, 72. 3, 318; setja seiff 1, 97; * sei«rinn vertSr cr^I*-,' is
wrought 1, 12 ; fosra a hiallinn is to conduct to the stool 2, 72.
The later sagas evidently throw in contemptible features. In the
company of äkuld, says Fomald. sog. 1, 97, might be seen elves.


SEIDR. 1043

norns and other such fry (&lfar ok nomir ok annat ill-J>^i). SeiSr
may still come riding with 15 youths and 15 raaids (2, 165. 506),
bat Oddr sets little store by her^ addresses her as ' allra kellinga
örmust/ poorest (wretchedest) of old women 168. 508. So when the
Fomm. 3^ 212 mentions these vagrants, who tell people's fortunes,
the same word is used 214 : 'vol van arma/ miserable witch, like
'twfehavfrue' in the Dan. folksong (DV. 1, 110).^ King Fro«i
wished to get a prophecy out of the völva Hei9r, Pomald. sog. 1,
10: ' giörSi hann }>ä gilda veizlu i mdti henni, ok setti hana &
seiiShiall einn häan ... ok svara mer sem skiotast, seiSkona ! '
When she falters, and will not say all, he threatens to use force :
')>ik skal pina til sagna* (11. 12).* It is worth uoting, that the
sei^r is performed at nighty when men are asleep, by the völvas,
who sally out with their company : ^ menn föru at sofa, en völva
for til ndttfars seiSs me9 sitt li9' 2, 166 ; and the parallel passage
2, 507 says : ' gekk hun }>& üt meff liSi dnu, er a'Srir gengu til
svefns, ok efldi seiffj Ketill was roused at night by a great
uproar in the wood, he ran out and saw a sorceress with streaming
hair (sä tröUkonu, ok fell fax & herSar henni) ; being questioned,
she begged him not to balk her, she was bound for a magic mote,
to which were coming Skelking king of sprites from Dumbshaf,
Ofdti (unfoot) from OfotansfirS, ThorgerSr HörgatröU and other
mighty ghosts from the northland (ek skal till trölla]7ings, }>ar
kemr Skelkingr, norSan or Dumbshafi, konüngr trölla, ok Oföti
ur OfStansfirSi, ThorgerSr HörgatröU ok a^rar stör-vaattir norSan
ur landi), Fomm. sog. 1, 131, conf. 3, 222. The riding out by
night to do magic was called sitja uti (Biöm 2, 251^ explains it :
sab dio noctumis incantationibus operam dare) ; the Norw. Laws
name these jaunts uti-setor to wake up the magic-working sprites :
' späfarar allar oc utisetor at vekja troll upp^ oc fremja me^ \y\
heidni,' Gulath. p, 137. Of the objects of Scand. sorcery I
will give a specimen or two. Fees were given to sorceresses, to
raise up storms: 'sendu eptir seiiSkonum, tveimr, Hei^i ok
Hamglömj ok g&fn )?aim £S til, ai peer sendi vedr • • • ]783r

' Arm poor, slight, miaerable. I named poverty as a cause of sorcery, p. 1039 :
' armer w&rsage, wlssage/ Freidank 124, 1. Ms. 2, 176*, and note to Freid. p. 872.
' armer bleicher (wan) wlssage I ' Herb. 2266.

^ ' >a ist hann taka Finn, einn er margfrö1$r var, oc vildi nej1$a hann til sa'Srar
Bögn (force him to a sooth saw), oc pindi hann^ oc feck Jift ecki af hönam,* Saga
H&lfdanar srarta cap. 8.

VOL. III. L


1044 MAGIC.

efldu seidinn, ok terSast & hiallinn me5 göldrum ok giörnlngum/
Fornald. sog. 2, 72. Magic made men proof against weapons,
invulnerable : ' var seidt at Haraldi^ at hann skyldi ei^ hita iam/
iron should not bite him 1^ 374. ')?eir Idtu seiSa at Ögmundi»
svä at hann skyldi engi iam hita atkvaD^alaus ' 2^ 241 .

Certain features^ that agree with the descriptions to be given by
and by of wiiches' doings^ might be thought plagiarisms. I doubt
it. True, the nocturnal gathering before Skelking, Oföti and
ThörgerB is not altogether in the spirit of ON. religion, but it
may have arisen in Scandinavia itself by the gradual deterioration
of older beliefs. Nowhere is the Devil mentioned, though the ,
' footless one ' may remind us of the horse-footed. This Norse
trölla-ßing is more like the meetings of our night-women, whom
I take to have sprung out of wise- women and völvas ; and this is
fully borne out by the nightly excursion of HeiSr with her party
of 30 persons, and that of Skuld with elves and noms. ThörgerS,
Skuld and HeiS are, like Hulda and Berhta, purely pagan half-
goddesses, round whom gathers the magic ring-dance ; they stir
up storm and tempest, they make invulnerable, they prophesy.
Their seiS-hiallr with four props or prongs (stolpar, stiklar),
Fornald. sog. 1, 12. 3, 319 (see Suppl.), finds nothing to match
it in the German witch-world ; it does remind us of the Delphian
pythia's tripod, and possibly further inquiry may allot a three-
legged stool to German night-excursionists as well, especially as
that article has a sacredness belonging to it from of old, KA. 80.
189. 208; conf. in Superst. F, 59. 60 the sitting on the tripod,
and I, 111 the caution against setting an empty trivet on the fire.
Skuld queens it here, does her spiriting in a black tent, sits on
her magic stool : ' sat i sinu svarta tialdi ä sei^hialli sinum, skip-
tir nA svft um, sem dimm ndtt komi eptir biartan dag,' Fornald.
1, 105. With the Norse enchantresses the power and obligation
to prophesy is still predominant, which in German witches and
night-women falls into the background. Other features of the
Norse faith in magic I can better weave into the account, now to
follow, of our own antiquities.

Christianity found a heathen belief in mag^c- wielding women
existing among Celts and Germans as well as Greeks and Romans,
but has largely modified it ; views held by heretics or imputed to


WITCHES. 1045

them got mixt up with it^ and oat of everything pat together
witchcraft has to be explained. Down to the latest period we
perceive in the whole witch-bnsiness a clear connexion with the
sacrifices and spirit-world of the ancient Oermans, This of itself
proves the gross unfairness and grotesque absurdity of witch-
burning in later times.

A world-old fancy, that has penetrated all nations, finds in
sorcery the power to hide or change onefs figure* Enchanters
would turn into wolves, enchantresses into cats ; the wolf was the
sacred beast of Wuotan, the cat of Frouwa, two deities that had
most to do with souls and spirits. The adept in mag^c assumed
a mask, grima (p. 238),^ a trolls-ham, by which he made himself
unrecognisable, and went rushing through the air, as spirits also
pat on grimhelms, helidhelms (p. 463) ; often we see the notion
of sorceress and that of mash ^ meet in one, thus the Leges Both.
197. 379 have ^ striga, quod est masca/ * si/riga, quae dicitur
masca,^ On this last term I shall have more to say by and by
(see Suppl.).

But sorceresses have also at their command a bird's shape, a
feather-garment, especially that of the goose, which stands for the
more ancient swan, and they are like swan- wives, valkyrs, who
traverse the breezes and troop to the battle. Inseparable from
the notion of magic is that of flying and riding through air (p.
427), and the ancient Thr&'Sr becomes a drut (p. 423), and Holda
9kn unholdin. Like the 'holde' sprites, 'unholde' now float in
the air with the Furious Host. They assemble in troops to fulfil
a common function.

From this subject, then, heathen sacrificial rites are by no
means to be excluded. Our very oldest Laws, esp. the Salic,
mention gatherings of witches for cooking, and I remind the
reader of those Gk>thland stiffnautar (p. 56) at a sacrifice. The
Lex Sal. cap. 67 specifies it as the grossest insult to call a man
yniches^ kettle-bearer: 'si quis alterum chervioburgum, hoc est
9trioportium clamaverit, aut ilium qui inium dicitur portasse ubi

^ ON. Orimat name of a soroeress ; aUo Qrgla (hoirifio), Sn. 210*.

* Can hagebart, lanra. Gl. Herrad. 189* be oonn. with hag in hagezoaa f <A
mask 1b sometimes called ichembart, of wlüoh more hereafter : bearded masks were
worn in masquerades. I am eyen tempted to explain the latter half of hagazasa by
zoaaa (lodix), or znsa (eingnlom, strophiom), Graff 5, 711 ; oonl MHG. ztae
(cirros), Dint. 1, 458-9. 460.


1046 MAGIC.

strias (for striae) eocinantJ In my BA. 645 I Iiave taied to
explain cherviobnrgas.^ He that demeans himself to carry
witches' utensüs becomes contemptible to men ; he may also be
called simply strioportins, witches' carrier, being hired by them
to do it. Now this kettte^bear&r is never named in the later
stories of witches, bat these often take a piper to their meetings,
whose business is to play to their feasting and dancing, without
being exactly an accomplice in the conjuring; and he may be
likened to that menial. The words ubi striae eodnant (some MSS.
coquinant, oacinant; Lex. emend, incorrectly concinunt) imply a
cooking and seetMng (seySr p. 1036) by several witches in com-
mon. In Macbeth three witches — but they are 'weird-sLsters'
too (p. 407), and so suggest the old meaning of dr&t — ^meet on a
heath and in a cave, to boil their cauUron. They are not so
imuch enchantresses in league with the Devil, as fate-annoancing
wise- women or priestesses, who prophesy by their cauldron, p. 56
(see Suppl.).

It may seem over-bold to name Shakspeare's witches in the
same breath with ancient Cimbrian prophetesses, with strigas of
the SaUo Law ; but here we have other links between the oldest
times and the recent.

Speaking of heflawftc (healing waters) in chap. XX, I on
purpose omitted all mention of salt springe, that I might here
bring their sacredness into immediate connexion with the witch-
craft of a later time. Tacitus, in a passage of importance in
many ways. Annals 13, 57, tells us : ' Eadem aestate inter Her-
munduros Chattosque certatum magno praelio, dum flumen
gignendo sale foecundum et conterminum vi trahunt; super
libidinem cuncta armis agendi religions insiia, eos maxime locos
propinqwvre coelo, precesque mortalium a deis nusquam propius
audiri. Inde indulgentia numinum Ulo in a/mne iUisque sHvis
salem provenire, non ut alias apud gentes eluvie maris aresoente,
sed unda super ardentem arborum struem fusa, ex contrariis inter
se elementis, igne atque aquis, concretum.' ' Burgnndieüis and

^ Leo now ezpUdns from the Celtic, that burgius is the tnuty, watchful, henoe
attendant, and ehervio wise-woman, from gear shrewd, and bhith, bhe, woman :
*Bagae mmister.' Also, that ttriopartitu may be the Welsh ystrywa wise, and
porthi helping, serving. All this is stiU very doubtful.

» 'Sed bellum Hermunduris prosperum, Ohattis exitio fuit, quia vietores diver-
samaoem Marti ac Mercurio saoravere: quo voto equi, viri, etmeta vieta oooidioni
oantur. Et mmae quidem hostiles in ipsos yertebant.* The sense of these remark-


SALT. 1047

Alaznanns also fought for salt-spiinga : 'Borgandii salinarum
fininmqae causa Alamannis saepe jargabant^' Amm. Marc. 28^ 5.
That not only in Grermany, but in Gaul, salt was obtained by
pouring water on burning wood^ we know from Pliny 31. 7, 89 :
' Gralliae Germaniaeque ardentibus lignis aquam salsam infundunt; '
hence the ritual that hallowed it may have been common to Celts
and Teutons. Now of streams charged with salt there was
doubtless a good number in Germany, then as now, and it is
hardly possible to say which in particular was meant by Tacitus.^
They rose on mountains, in sacred woods, their produce was
deemed the direct gift of a near divinity, possession of the spot
seemed worth a bloody war, the getting and distributing of salt
was a holy office; would not there be very likely sacrifices and
festivals connected with salt-boiling ? (see Suppl.) .

Suppose now that the preparation of salt was managed by
women, by priestesses, that the salt-kettle, saltpan, was under
their care and supervision ; there would be a connexion established
between salt-boiling and the later vulgar opinion about witch-
craft : the witches gather, say on certain high days, in the holy
wood, on the mountain, where the salt springs bubble, carrying

able words (pp. 44. 120-1) is : the Chatti in ease of Tictozy had deyoted the hostile
armj (div. ao.) to Mars and Mercury ; snoh vow binds one to sacrifice horses, men,
every Uto thing of the defeated. The Chatti had nsed the tow as a threat, the vic-
torious foe fulfilled it as his own. We need not suppose that both sides yowed, least
of all that the Hermunduri vowed to Mars, the Giuttti to Mercury ; for then the
dosing words would have no point. Besides, X think the very peculiarity of this
cruel vow consists in its being made to both ditpemen of victory ^p. 184. 197-8) at
once, the men falling, may be, to Wuotan's shue, the women, children and animals
to Zio's ; none were to escape alive. Had the vow been to one god alone, he would
have been content with part of the spoüs ; that is why Tacitus remarks that such a
vow was ruin to the Chatti. The passage proves that Zio and Wuotan were wor-
shipped by Chatti and Hermunduri ; the Soman conceptions of Mars and Mercury
are out of the question. Can it be, that the honet are named before the metif to
shew which fell to Zio, which to Wuotan ? Beattt^ we know, were satnificed to Mars,
Germ. 9. That it was the custom to devote those who fell in battle to the god, is
witnessed by Hervar. saga 454 : * Hei'Srekr fal (set apart) Q5ni aUanfiarm vol er par
hajdi faUt tU Arbötar.'

^ Surprising how commonly, in names of rivers and towns that produce salt,
the roots hol and «al occur, both originally signifying the same wholesome
holy material (AXt, dX6t, sal, salis ; in the alternation of h and «, the former often
seems more archaic, or more German, e.g. the particle ham, sam; haso, saaa;
hveits, Bvdtas). * In pago SaZogewe, in illo fonte ubi nateitur tal,* Trad. Fuld. 1, 88 ;
Halle on the Sale ifi Saxony, Halle in Bavensberg county, Hall on the Kocher
(boiler?) in Swabia, HalUin on the Sa2f a in Bavaria, ITaZZ and HaUsiadt in Austria,
Hall in the vale of Inn (Tirol), ^Uendorf (for Hall.) in Hesse, and so forth, all have
salt-springs, salt works ; Halle as much as Sala, Salzaha refers to the salt, but why
do the rivers have «, and the towns hf If haUe meant merely the hut or shed
(tabema) in which the salt works are carried on (Frisch 1, 401), such a general
meaning would suit almost any village that has work-sheds.


1048 MAGIG.

with them cooking-vessels, ladles and forks ; and at night their
saltpan is a-glow.' These conjectures are coantenanced by a
poem in the Vienna MS. 428, 154^ either by Strieker or one of
his conntrymen and contemporaries, which I qnote in full :

loh bin gewesen ze Portigfil
and ze Doldt Bunder twftl (Toledo, I aasnn yon),
mir ist kont (ken'd) Ealatr& daz lani,
dÄ man di besten meister vant (foond) ;
ze Choln (Cologne) mid ze Paiis,
dA flint di pfaffen harte vta (exceeding wise),
di besten Yor alien iloben (realms).
Dax faor ioh waerltohen (trayeUed I trnly)
• niwan duich din mfere (merely to ascertain)
waz ein unholde wasre (what a witch was) ?
Daz geh6rt ich nie gelesen (never heard it read),
waz ein unholde mäge wesen (might be).
Daz ein wlp ein ohalp rite (should ride a calf),
daz wiere'n wunderliche site (fashion),
ode rit üf einer dehsen (wand),
ode üf einem hüspesem (besom, broom)
nach salze ze Halle füere (fare to H. for salt) ;
ob des al din welt swfiere (if all the world swore it),
doch wolde ich stn nimmer gejehen (say yea to it),
ich en-hete (unless I had) ez mit mlnen ongen gesehen
wand (for) i6 würde uns nimmer Hure (dear, searoe)
daz salz von dem ungehiure.
Ob ein wlp einen oyenstap über sohrite (bestride)
and den gegen Halle rite
über berge und über tal,
daz fti tffite deheinen Tal (make no ÜJI),
daz geloabe ich niht, swer daz seit (whoever says it),
nnd ist ein Terlamia arbeit (lost labour) ;
und daz ein wlp ein sib tribe (drive a sieve)
suider vleisch and sonder ribe,
dft niht inne wabps (wherein was nongjht),
daz sint allez gelognia mere (all a lying tale).
Daz ein wlp ein man über schrite
and im stn herze üz snite (cat oat his heart),
wie zieme daz (how were that possible) einem wlbe,
daz si snite üz einem libe (body)
ein herze, and stieze dar in Btr6 (staff straw therein),
wie möht' er (how eoald he) leben ode werden frü f
ein mensehe maoz ein herze haben,
ez habe saf od st beschaben.

Ich wil ia sagen miere (give yoa information),
waz sin rehte unholdare (who real sorcerers are) :

^ OHG. salzsati (salina), Balzsdt, AS. sealtse&IS (salt spring). A passage in Ihre
sab V. Mi'jf woold make tms word (see p. 1086) directly appüoable to salt-boiling;
bat, for *saUs oootara,' read * talis cootara.'


SALT. HOBSB-FLESH. 1049

daz sint der herren r&tgeben (coonsellorB of lords)

id ir dre fordern solden and leben,

di siflent in zao den Aren (whisper in their ears)

nnd machent sie ze tören (make fools of them),

si niezent (profit by) ir erbe nnd ir lant

mid Ifizent och si ze hant (make them yeiy soon)

scheiden von dren (part \nth their honour) and yon gaote,

von yroaden (joy) and hdhem mnote.

Ditz ist ein wärez maere (trae tale) :

di selben (these same) unholdare

die Bougent üz (sack oat) herze and blaot,

daz vil mangem (fall many a) herren schaden tuot.

This Halle is probably the one in Austria or Bavaria, so that in
those parts there still prevailed at that time the vulgar belief that
the 'unholden' rode on broomstick, oven-stick or twig (Schm. •
sub. V. dachsen, conf. diesse p. 270 n.) over hill and dale to Halle.
Was it imagined that they fetched their supply of salt home from
there f which seems almost to be implied in the words, ' were it
so, they would not make salt scarce to their neighbours (abstract
it)/ As Christians equally recognised salt as a ^ood and needful
thing, it is conceivable how they might now, inverting the matter,
deny the use of wholesome salt at witches' meetings, and come
to look upon it as a safeguard against every kind of sorcery
(Saperst. I, no. 182). For it is precisely salt that is lacking ^ in
the witches' kitchen and at devil's feasts, the Church having now
taken upon herself the hallowing and dedication of salt. Infants
unbaptized, and so exposed, had salt placed beside them for
safety, BA. 457. The emigrants from Salzburg dipped a wetted
finger in saltj and swore. Wizards and witches were charged
with the mistbse of salt in baptizing beasts. I think it worth
mentioning here, that the mag^c-endowed giantesses in the Edda
knew how to grind, not only gold, but salt, Sn. 146-7 : the one
brought peace and prosperity, the other a tempest and foul
weather.

Equally significant seems to me the use of horseflesh and of
the horse altogether among wizards and witches. It was shewn,
p. 47, that the heathen sacrificed horses to their gods, and any
inclination to eat their flesh was denounced for a long time as
a hankering after heathen ways; it is only in these days

' Also bread, another necessary of life ; yet of coarse the heathen baked for
their banqaets and sacrifices exactly as the christians did.


1050 MAGIC.

that the prejadice against eating so clean an animal begins to
give waj. Well, tibe witches were accused of indulging in
this food at their assemblies^ i.e. of still keeping up heathen
sacrifices. Henry Boguet in his Discours execrable des Sorciers,
Kouen 1608, p. 82-8 asserts, not only ' qu^il y avoit une grande
chaudiere sur le feu, dans laquelle chacun alloit prendre de la
chair,' and ' mais il n'y a iamais du sei/ but also expressly ' que
la chair n'est autre chair que de eheual* If to this we add, that
the nailing up of horses* heads (p. 47)^ must be identified with
those sacrifices, that horses' heads are thrown into Midsummer
fires (p. 618), that the piper at witches' meetings (p. 1046) or
other ghostly beings (p. 849) play on horses* heads,* that the
devil appears with horse's feet, and drinking is done out of
horse-hoofs; the whole thing asiUmes a still more antique ap*
pearance of heathen sacrificial rites (see Suppl.).

But i£ in heathen times the preparation and distribution of
hallowed salt, and the eating of horseflesh stood connected with
sacrifices and popular assemblies (and these were often com-
bined), such connexion is equally proved or confirmed by all
the remaining characteristics of witches' jaunts. Their Times
and Places can in no other way be accounted for.

We know that all over Germany a grand annual excursion
of witches is placed on the first night in May (Walpurgis),
i.e. on the date of a sacrificial feast and the old May-
gathering of the people. On the first of May, of all days,
the periodical assizes continued for many centuries to be held,
BA. 822-4; on that day came the merry May-ridings, p. 775,
and the kindling of the sacred fire, p. 603 : it was one of the
highest days in all heathenism.^ Or if two or three witch-

1 On this fixing-np Festns has passages in striking accord : ' October equut
appellatur, qui in Campo Martio mense Oct. immolatur. Be cajus capite non leyis
contentio solebat esse inter Sabnranenses et BaoraTienses, at hi in regiae pariete,
illi ad tnrrim Mamiliam idflgerent ; ejnsdemqne coda tanta oeleritate perfertar in
regiam, nt ex ea sanguis destillet in focom participandae lei diyini gratia.' And :
' Panibus redimibant caput equi immolati idibas Oct. in Campo Martio, quia id
sacrificinm fiebat ob fmgam eventmn, et eqaos potias quam bos immolabator, qnod
hie bello, bos fmgibns pariendis est aptns.*

* Musicians piping or fiddling on a honest head^ Trierer acten p. 203. Sieg-
burger pp. 228. 289. Death's head for dthem, Bemigius 145.

* A comparison of our witches* dances on May-night with the Floralia, which
lasted from April 28 to May 1 (Hartung's Belig. d. Bom. 2, 142), and from which
all men were excluded (Greuzer*s Symb. 4, 608), may be allowed, provided no
borrowing of the Teutonic and Oeltic custom from the Boman be infeired. JEüghtiy
understood, the Greek Dumytia also present many points of comparison.


witches' jaunt. 1051

festivals be enumerated, as 'in Whitsantide and Autumn/ or
'on St Walbnrg's, St John's and St Bartelemy's/ we have
still the usual holidays and assize-days of the Mid. Ages.
Danish witch-trials name ' Yaldborg aften, S. Hans aften, Maria
besögelsesdags aften.' The people would never have given
up their venerated season of justice to the witches, had not
these been long in prescriptive possession (see Suppl.).

Still more plainly do the Localities coincide. The witches
invariably resort to places where formerly justice was ad-
ministered, or sacrifices were offered. Their meeting takes
place on the mead, on the oak-sward, under the Urne, under
the oak, at the peartree ; on the boughs of the tree sits that
piper whose help they need in the dance. Sometimes they dance
at the place of execution, under the gallows-tree, in the sand-pit.
But for the most part mountains are named as their trysting-
places, hills (at the three biiheln, knolls, three Jcöpchen, peaks),
in fact, the highest points of a neighbourhood. We must not
forget how elves and bilweises are housed in hills (p. 474), nor
that the Servian vilas and Romance fays dwell on mmtntains : a
notable passage about magic wrought on a mount (puegau, pueg,
puy, Lat. podium) was quoted p. 411. The fame of particular
witch-mountains extends over wide kingdoms, in the same way as
high mountains are named after gods, sacrifices, courts of justice.
Almost all the witch-mountains were once hiUs of sacrifice
(p. 58), boundary-hills (malberge, BA. 801-2), or salt-hills. A
hexenbukel is pointed out on the Hirschau boundary-line by
Rothenburg on Neckar, and an unholdenberg near Passau ; but
most of them have proper names of their own. North Oermany
knows the Brocken, Brocks- or Blocks-berg^ the highest point of
the Harz Mts, as the head meeting-place of witches. A con-
fessional of the 15th cent, speaks of sorceresses 'die uf den
Brockisberg varen,' Hoffm. zeitschr. 753; that is the earliest
documentary evidence I know of a superstition that doubtless
reaches to a far older time. Seats of justice the Harz must have

^ ' Mom Bruetenti ' / Only the Brocteri never lived there, bnt on the West-
phalian lippe ; some without any reason connect the name Melibocns with Üie
Brocken. What is the oldest documentary form of the name ? Stieler 160 writes
Broekertb. ; others Proekelib, (Proonlos), Broekeltb,, Blockenb. ; Blocksb. (Brem.
wtb. sub V. bloksbarg) may have arisen by mere softening of r into 2, and can
hardly have anything to do with the Swed. BUkuUa.


1052 AiAGIC.

had more tlian one in the Mid. Ages ; a salt spring it has still
at Jalinshall in Neustadt domain. Bat the name seems to cover
a much wider area, as several huls in Mecklenburg (and no
doubt in other parts of N. Germany) are called hlocTcshergs, Mekl.
jahrsber. 2, 114. 3, 189; also in Prussia (Tettau and Temme
p. 264). Other trysts of witches I can only enumerate incom-
pletely. The Huiberg near Halberstadt is still spoken of; in
Thuringia they flock to Horsejlberg by Eisenach^ or Inselberg by
Schmalkalden ; in Hesse to Bechelsberg or Becktelsberg by Ottrau^
an old Ziegenhain seat of justice ; in Westphalia to Köterberg
by Corvei^ to Weckingsstein (Wedigenstein^ where Wittekind or
Wittich dwells) by Minden ; in Swabia to the Black Forest, to
Kandel in Breisgau^ or to Eeuberg^ by Balingen^ which is noticed
as a witches' mount as early as 1506^ and resembles the Huiberg
above; in Franconia to Kreideriberg by Würzburg, and Staffel-
stein by Bamberg; and probably the Fichtelberg and the Silesian
Biesengebirge have witches' haunts of their own. In Alsace
are named Bischenberg, Biichelberg (conf. Bechelsb.), Schauenberg
and Kniebiss (knee-biting, from the steepness, elsewhere Eiiie-
brecher) ; in the Yosges, Hupella. The Swedish meeting-places
are Bläkullu (Ihre says, an island rock between Smäland and
öland, liter, black mount, a name it prob, shares with other
heights),' and NcMaJjall in Norrland. The Norwegian witches
also repair to Blddkolle, further to Dovrefjeld, Lyderhom by
Bergen, Kiarru in Tvedsogn, to Va/rdo and Domen in Finmarken;
all such trysting-places are called balvolde (bale-wold, campus
malus). In Denmark they say 'fare til Eekkeljjelds' (p. 1001),
i.e. to Mt Hekla in Iceland, Heklufiall ; also ' ride til Trums,
fare til Troms/ meaning Trommenfjeld, a mountain on the Norw.
island Tromsö, high up off the Finmark. The Neapolitan
streghe hold their tryst under a walnut-tree near Benevento,
which the people call the Beneventine wedding; on that very
spot stood the holy tree of the Langobards (pp. 101. 649), so
here again witchcraft stands clearly connected with old heathen
worship. Witches' hills in Italy are the Barco di Ferrara,
Patemo di Bologna, Spinato della Mirandola, Tossale di Ber-

^ Hlhßberg, Paiaoelsi opera 2, 269. 260.

3 Aoo. to Job. WdBthovii Praefatio ad Titas sanotor., a wind and weather
making merwoman was called BlakuUa ; Amkiel 1, 85 sets np a sea-goddeas BlakyUt;
ArndBson 2, 802-5 has hergei bid, the black monnt.


witches' jaunt. 1053

gaino^ and one, ' la eroce del pasticcio/ whose sitaation I do not
know. In France the Puy de Dome near Clermont in Anvergne
is renowned, and other districts have their hills. The Spanish
hechizeras hold their dance on the heath of Baraona, in the sand
of Sevilla, on the pladn of Cimiegola; in Navarre on Aqiielarre,
said to mean in Basque ' goat's meadow.' The Servian witches
dance 'na pometno g^vno,' on the swept thrashingfloor, pro-
bably on a high mountain; those of Hungary on Kopasz tet'6
(the bald crown), a peak of the Tokay wine-hiUs,^ with which
the 'na Lys^gor^' of the Polish witches (Woycicki 1, 17. 2,
77) agrees. A part of the Carpathians between Hungary and
Poland is called in Pol. habia gora, old wives' mountain; I
cannot say if witch-festivals are placed there. The Kormakssaga
pp. 76. 204. 222 has a similar Spakonufell, wise-woman's mount.
The Lithuanians say, on the eve of St. John all the magicians
come flying to Mt Szatria, where a mighty sorceress Jauterita
entertains them.^ It is singular, how all over Europe the
heathen's pilgrimages to feasts and sacrifices are by christians
converted into this uniform sorcery, everywhere alike. Did
the notion take shape in each nation by itself f or, what is less
credible, was the fashion set in one place, and followed every-
where else ?' (see Suppl.)

That the heathen in old Scandinavia already had the notion of
enchantresses riding or driving out at evening and night, is clear
from the Edda. As He^inn roamed the forest alone in the
evening, he fell in with a tröllkona, who offered him her fjlgS
(attendance, like a guardian valkyrja), but he declined it, Ssam.
146^ A legend fraught with meaning is but slightly touched
upon in Sn. 175 : As Bragi the old (p. 1041) drove through a
forest late in the evening, he met a tröükona, who addressed him
in a song and asked, who rideth there f She names to him her
troll names, and he, answering in song, tells her his poetic names.
Hence an enchantress is called qveld-rida, evening-rider. Seam.

^ Bzirmai'B Notitia oomitatns Zempleniensis, Bndae 1803. p. 8 ; and Hnngaria
in parabolis p. 168-9.

* ConrL Sodety's Commiinio., Mitan 1840. 1, 47^

* Noctmnal meetings on monntainB ean also be oonn. with other heathen
notions : giants and elves reside on mouiUaini. Pliny 5, 1 says of Mt Atlas :
* incolarani neminem interdia oemi, silere omnia . . . nootibus micare orebris
ignibns, Aegipanom Satyrommque lascuTia impleri, tibiarom ao fistalanun cantn,
tympanormn et oymbalorom sonita strepere.*


1054 MAGIC.

143^, and myrh'rida 77*, by wliich monstrous mischievons gianU
women are meant, wild women, waldminnes, iamvi'Sjar (p. 483),
whom the heroes are bent on patting down : ' hefi ec qvaldar
qveldri^or,' I have qnelled the witches, says AtlL Their riding
is called gandreiff, vectnra magica, Nialss. p. 195 ; gandr is pro-
perly wolf, they are said to have ridden wolves and bridled them
with snakes : ' fann tröllkono, sft reiS vargi ok haßSi orma i tau-
mom,' Ssdm. 146*. ' Hyrrokin reiff vargi ok hafSi höggorm at
taumum/ Sn. 66. A Bone figore (baatil 1157) represents a troll
riding a wolf, using a bent twig for reins. A Swed. folksong
makes her ride on a bea/r, and use the wolf&B a saddle, the snake
as a whip : ' bjomen den sä red hon uppä, ulfven den hade hon till
sadel derpä, och ormen den hade hon till piska,' Sv. vis. 1, 77.
Nor must we overlook, that the Servian vila, who has much more
of the elf about her, rides a stag, and bridles him with a snaie.
Among names of enchantresses Sn. 210^ has Munnrida, mouth-
rider, perhaps holding the snake-bridle in her mouth f Another
is Munnharpa (Biöm says, rigor oris ex gelu) ; both demand a
more precise explanation, but anyhow -ri'Sa must refer to night-
riding. One poet, Sn. 102, uses the circumlocution qveldrunnin
qven, femina vespere excurrens. The Yestgöta-lag, like the Salic
(p. 1045), speaking of insulting accusations, instances that of
sorcery, p. 38 : ' iak sa at ret a quiggrindu, lösharäß ok i trols-
ham, ];a alt var iam nft nat ok dagher,' and p. 153 has almost
the same words, with lösgiurß added to lösbare]; : I saw thee ride
on the hurdle, loose-haired, loose-girt, in troll's garb, where day
and night divide (in twilight) ; if we might read qyigindu, it
would be 'ride on the calf,' as in the MHG. poem, p. 1048.
Neither this Law nor the Edda tells us of sorceresses assembling
in troops at appointed places, yet the valkyrs ride together by
twelves and twenties. But the idea of nighUriding itself may
be derived even from goddesses : the Hyndlu-lio'S has for its
groundwork, that Freyja seated on her boar, whose bristles glow
in the gloom of night, and her sister Hyndla (canicula) on a wolf,
ride up to holy Valhöll^ (see Suppl.).

In Germany proper, successive stages can be pointed out.
Before Christianity, the old giantesses (etenins) may well have

^ A magioian, who was kveld-STfefr (eyening-sleeper), bean the name Kveldulfr
EgilsB. p. 8 ; it is like the OHQ. Nahtolf by which M. renders Nootomos.


witches' jaunt. 1055

been sorceresses amongst us also, as we still find sach a one in
onr Heldenbach (see p. 556), and a giant plays the host on a
witches' hill. Lisch 5, 83. After the conversion, sorcery links
itself with the discredited gods both foreign and domestic ; not
at once with the Devil yet, whose idea had scarce begun to take
root among the people. The witches are of the retinue of former
goddessesj who, hurled from their thrones, transformed from
gracious adored beings into malign and dreaded ones, roam rest-
less by night, and instead of their once stately progresses can
only maintain stolen forbidden conferences with their adherents.
Even when the bulk of the people was won over to the new
doctrine, individual men would for a time remain true to the old
faith, and perform their heathen rites in secret; but soon these
pagan practices would cease as real facts, and abide in the memory
and shaping fancy of mankind, and the more enduringly if they
were connected with popular feasts and the permitted or pro-
hibited nsage about healings and poisonings. Performance, tradi-
tion, &ncy were mixt up together, and no single century can
possibly have been without the notion of illicit idolatrous magic,
even if we are unable to specify the shape in which it entertaiued
it. Amongst all christians the report of it lasted ineradicable,
assuming a looser or firmer consistency, according as the Church
indulged popular beliefs, or sought more sternly to suppress
them. What she was determined to punish and exterminate,
must gradually have been withdrawn from the mild realm of
fancy, and assumed the harsh aspect of a horrible reality.

Enchanters and enchantresses (I will start with that) attach
themselves to the spectral train of deities, to that Furious Host
with which elvish and all manner of evil beings got associated :
in the Yilk. saga cap. 328-9 the wild host of Ostada (Ostansia,
or whatever the genuine form may be) shews a significant con-
nexion. But enchantresses would be ranged specially with god-
desses, out of whom the christian teachers might make up a
Soman Diwna, a Jewish Herodias, but the populace never entirely
dropt the traditional native names. How natural then, if dame
Holda, if that Freyja or Abundia (whether she be Folia p. 308,
or a Celtic deity) had formerly led the round dance of elves and
hold&n, that she herself should now be made an unholde and
be escorted by unholden (p. 926) ! In the Norw. fairytale no. 15


1056 MAGIC.

the iroldkiaring takes quite the place of dame Holda. In the
Jea d'Adana (supra p. 412 n.) the three fays assemble on a
meadow, where the old women of the town await them : ' or tost
aliens ent par illeuc, les vielles femes de le vile nous i atendent.'
There did exist a fellowship then between fays and witches.

It perfectly agrees with the view propounded, that the Thuring.
Horselberg is at once the residence of Holda and her host (pp. 456.
935. 959), and a trysting-place of witches (p. 1052). Keisers-
berg in Omeiss 36. 40 makes the night-faring wives assemble no
otherwhere but in the Venusberg (p. 953), whereat is good living,
dancing and hopping. Still more decisive are the passages
quoted in the Appendix (Superst. C, int. 44; 10, 1; p. 194\
D, 140 r.), by which it appears, that down into the tenth and
into the 14th cent., night-women in the service of dame Holda
rove through the air on appointed nights, mounted on beasts ;
her they obey, to her they sacrifice, and all the while not a word
about any league with the Devil. Nay, these night-women,
shining mothers, dominae noctwrnas, bonnes dames (p. 287-8), in
Hincmar ' Icmdae sive geniciales feminae/ were originally dsamonic
elvish beings, who appeared in woman's shape and did men
kindnesses ; Holda, Abundia, to whom still a third part of the
whole world is subject (pp. 283-8), lead the ring of dancers, and
on the goddess's itinerant ship dances were trod (p. 260). It is
to such dancing at heathen worship, to the airy elf -dance (p. 470),
to the hopping of will-o' -wisps (p. 916),^ that I trace primarily the
idea of witches' dances ; though festive dances at heathen May-
meetings can be reckoned in with the rest. To christian zealots
all damcing appeared sinful and heathenish, and sure enough it
often was derived from pagan rites, like other harmless pleasures
and customs of the common people, who would not easily part
with their diversion at great festivals. Hence the old dancings
at Shrovetide (p. 770n.), at the Easter fire and May fire, at the
solstices, at harvest and Christmas ; a minuter examination than
has yet been made of the proceedings at these holidays would
bring out many things more clearly. Afzelius 2, 5 informs us,
that to this day stories are afloat in Sweden of dances and reds
performed by the heathen round holy places of their gods : so

^ The ignifl ffttuns is called hexentanz (Sohm. 2, 148), SloTto. vtzha^ prop,
vitoh ; eyen the dead were made to oany on danoes.


witches' jaunt. 1057

wanton were tliey^ yet so enticing^ that the spectators at last
were seized with the rage, and whirled along into the revelry«
When chronicles of oar Mid. Ages occasionally record the dese-
cration of holy days by wild dancing, and that the penalty
imposed was, to keep it up without ceasing for a whole year, DS.
no. 231, this again expresses the disgust of the christians at the
relics of heathenism, and resembles the perversion of Wuotan's
inarch into the 'everlasting hunter's' chase.^ Why Herodias
was dragged into the circle of night-women, was just because
she played and danced, and since her death goes booming through
the air as the 'wind's bride.' In this ghostly band, then,
popular fancy placed human sorceresses too, i.e. women of ill
repute who clung to heathenism, fantastic old wires: 'Et si
aliqua/i?mma est, quae se dicat cum daemonum turba, in simili-
tudinem mulierum transformata, certis noctibus equitare super
quasdam bestias, et in eorum (daemonum) consortio annumeratam
esse ; ' and : ' Quaedam sceleratae mulieres retro post Satanam
conversae, daemonum illusionibus seductae, credunt ee noctumis
horis cum Diana paganorum dea, vel cum Herodiade et innumera
multitudine mulierum, equitare super quasdam bestias, et multa
terrarum spatia tntempestae noctis silentio pertransire, ejusque
jnssionibus velut dominae obedii*e, et certis noetihus ad ejus servi-
tium evocari.' — Such was the earlier way of thinking about
witches' rides ; ' and the names naht-fard, naht-frouwd, naht-rita,
dating doubtless from the heathen time, agreed exactly with the
ON. qreldriSa, myrkriSa on p. 1053-4. I cannot indeed produce


> The eleigy represented dancing as a mimiery of the priestly prooession, and
likened it to the Jewish idolatry with the golden call.

* The extraet from Borohard, Superst. (oonf . Pref. to my First Ed. p. xxiy)
can neither have been derived from the Conndl of Ant^yra a.D. 814, which nas no
SQoh passage in print or MS. ; nor from Augustine, though it oooors in the Tract, de
spiritn et anima cap. 28 (opp. ed. Bened. Anty. 1706. 6, 525) with * et Minerva *
added after Herodiade, for this is a sporioas work, yet of so early a date (6th cent.,
thixÜES Biener, Zeitsdir. f. gesch. reohtsw. 12, 123) that it is bnt little inferior in
yalne for our purpose. Biegino too (ed. Waschersl. 2, 871), the oldest genuine
authority, has prob, drawn from it ; then come Burohard in the 11th, and Ivo (11,
SO) and Gratian in the 12th century. Albertus Mag. in Summa theol. 2, 81 (opp.
18, 180) has : ' cum Diana pag. dea, yel Herodiade et Minerya.' The passage is
said to be also in an unpubL Vita Damasi papae, and there to refer back to a
Synod of Bome of 867 (Soldan p. 75). To me it makes no difference if both Ancy-
ran council and Boman synod a&eady mention the night-faring Diana and Herodiat ;
for Diana, who even to the ancient Bomans ruled the woods, the chase and the
night, must no doubt haye appeared to christian conyerts of the first centuries as
a goddess of magic.


1058 MAGIC.

them from earlier than the 13th century, as Wh. 1, 82^: 'wil
der (MachmSt) helfe spam, so helfen in die nahUvam ; daz sint
alter wibe tronme,^ if M. gmdge help, the night-farers help them.
Ls. 3, 10 : ' ez konde niemen bewam, ich mües eine (alone) uz
fam mit der naht-frouwen (i.e. with the goddess) ; do sprach ich
zao mime gesellen : als schiere s6 (as soon as) ez naht wirt, diu
vart mich niht verbirt, ich sol Itden gröze not, bezzer waere mir
der tot. Ist aber daz mir wol ergät, so kam ich umb die han-
kr&t, des enweiz ich aber niht. Mtn tria, du solt mir ein lieht
kleiben hin an etewaz, daz ich kanne dester baz komen her wider
hein: kleib' ez an einen stein, oder kleib' ez an die want.'
Notice that to the simple-minded man the woman represents her
alleged expedition as a painful necessity.^ In Yintler (Superst.
G, 1. 274) it is said: 'so farent etlich mit der {ncLcJU) far o,u(
kelbem und auf pecken (bocken) durch stain und durch stecke.'
So calves and he-goats are those ' quaedam bestiae/ At p. 723
we saw the word nachtfare fittingly applied even to a star travel-
ling in the sky. John of Salisbury, who lived in England and
France (d. 1182), and believed in demonic influence, has a re-
markable statement in his Polier, ii. 17 : ' Quale est quod noeti*
culam (nocticolam ? noctilucam ?) quandam, vel Herodiadem, vel
praesidem noctis dominam, consilia et converUus de nocte asserunt
convocare, varia celebrari convivia, ministeriorum species diversis
occupationibus exerceri, et nunc istos ad pocnam trahi pro
mentis, nunc illos ad gloriam sublimari; praeterea infantes
exponi lamiis, et nunc frustatim discerptos edaci ingluvie in
ventrem trajectos congeri, nunc praesidentis miseratione rejectos
in ctmas reponi. Quis vel caecus hoc ludificantium daemonum
non videat esse nequitiam ? quod vel ex hoc patet, quod mulier-
culis et viris simplicioribus et infirmioribus in fide ista proveniunt.'
I will add some equally conclusive testimonies from various parts
of France, and all of the 1 3th cent., to the character of these
night excursions; their analogy to the preceding will not fail
to be perceived. The Acta sanct. 32 Jul. p. 287^ draw from
a parchment MS. of the 18th cent, the following, which has
also got into the Legenda Aurea cap. 102, though wanting in
the older biographies of Germanus : ' Hospitatus (S. Grermanus

^ By nightmare (mar »hone) is meant, not the witoh who rides out, bat an
elfin who rides, i.e. presses, on the sleeper, Superst. I, 878l


witches' jaunt. 1059

Antissiodor.) in quodam loco^ cam post coenam iterum mensa
pararetur, admiratus interrogate cal denao praepararent ? Gui
cam dicerent^ qaod bonis illis mulieribus, quae de node incedunt,^
praepararetar, ilia nocte statuit S. Germanus vigilare. Et ccce^
videt multitudinem daemonam in mensa^ in forma hominum et
muliemm venientem. Qai eis praecipiens ne abirent^ cunctos de
familia excitavit, inqairens^ si personas illas cognoscerent ? qui
cam omnes vicinos suos 'et vicinas esse dicerent^ misit ad domes
singoloram, daemonibas praecipiens ne abirent. Et ecce^ omnes
in suis lectulis sunt inventi. Adjurati igitur se daemones esse

dixerunt^ qui sic hominibus illudebant/ Guilielmus Alvernus

p. 1066: 'Idem et eodem modo sentiendum est tibi de aliis
malignis spiritibus^ quos valgus stryges et lamias vocant^ et
apparent de noete in domibus in quibus parvuli nutriuntur^ eosque
de eunabulis raptos laniare vel igne ossäre videntur : ' apparent
aatem in specie vetularum. Yetularum autem nostrarum desipi-
entia opinionem istam mirabiliter disseminavit et proyezit, atque
animis mulierum aliarum irradicabiliter infixit. Similiter et de
dominabtis noctumis, quod bonae mulieres sint, et magna dona
domibus quas frequentent per eas praestentur, mulieribus potis-
simum persoaserunt ; et^ ut ad unum dicam^ pene onmes reliquias
idololatriae retinuit et reservavit et adhuc promovere non cessat

anilis ista ffttaitas.' ^Vincentius Bellovac. in Spec. mor. iii. 3,

27 : ' Cam in quadam parochia homines talibus crederent^ quidam
ribaldi transfiguraverunt se in similitudinem mulierum^ earum
assumto habitu^ et domum cujusdam rustici cum tortiis (torches)
intrantes et choreas ducentes suppressa voce canebant Gallice ' un
en prenes, cent en rendres/ Latine: unum accipite^ centum
reddite I et sic in oculis rustici domum ejus evacuaverunt omnibus
bonis, dicentis uxori suae : tace^ et claude oculos, divites erimus,
quia bonos res sunt/ et centuplicabunt bona nostra/ And
farther on : ' Cum quaedam vetula volens blandire soo sacerdoti

1 Is the OHO. dgengun, lamiae, Diat. 2, 174, to be explained by this nightly
going about t

' When Demeter anointed the child Demophoon with ambrosia by day, fanned
him with her sweet breath, laid him in the ßre at night to consume all that was
mortal in him, the boy throve, till his mother watched and saw and burst into a
loud wail, then the miracle was interrupted, Hym. to Ceres 236—63. So Thetis
anoints her infant Achilles, and hides him in theßre. Conf . however the vapa4>ipfuf
rä ßpi4»i did -nji <p\aybt^ and ponerejuxta iynem^ p. 625.

* Guotiu toihtir, p. 442 ; conf. unrighteous things, p. 1031, sorcery.

VOL. 111. M


1060 MAGIC.

diceret ei in ecclesia : dotnine, multam me debetis diligere, qaia
liberavi vos a morte : quia cum ego vadebmn cum bonis rebus,
media node intravimus domum vestram cum luminaribus, ego
▼idens vos dormientem et nadum^ cooperui vos, ne dominae
nostras viderent naditatem vestram, quam si vidissent, ad mortem
vos flagellari fecissent. Quaesivit sacerdos, qaomodo intraverant
domum ejus et cameram, cum essent fortiter seratae ? Tunc ait
ilia, quod bene intrabant domum januis clausis. Sacerdos autem
vocans eam intra cancellum, clause ostio verberavit earn cum
baculo crucis, dicens : exite hinc, domina sortilega ! Et cum non
posset exire, emisit eam sacerdos dicens : modo videtis quam
fatuae estis, quae somniorum creditis vanitatem/ This priest goes
very sensibly to work with the sorceress, and never dreams of

baiting her as a criminal. Gervase of Tilbury 3, 85 : ' Lamiae

dicuntur esse mulieres quae nodu domos momentaneo discursu
penetrant, dolia vel cophinos, cantharos et ollas perscrutantur,
infantes ex ounis extrahunt, luminaria accendunt, et nonnunqnam
dormientes affligunt.' At 3, 93 he assures us he had known
women who declared 'se dormientibus viris suis cum coetu
lamiarum celeri penna mare transire, mundum percurrere, et si
quis aut si qua in tali discursu Christum nominaverit, statim, in
quocunque loco et quantovis periculo fecerit, corruere ; ' and one
woman had fallen into the Bhone that way. ' Scimus quasdam in
forma cattorum a furtive vigilantibus de nocte visas ac vulneratas

in crastino vulnera truncationesque ostendisse.^ So then the

witches travel in the nightly train of gracious dames/ for whom
men spread tables, as they do for visitant fays and elves (pp. 409.
411. Superst. 0, 198^), because they bring luck or multiply it,
scrutinize the house-gear, bless the babes in the cradle.
Heathenish the superstition was, for the name of Christ might
not be uttered ; but it did not pass for devilish yet. True, the
notion of kidnapping (of which elves also were accused, p. 468)
already mingles with it, and rises to the barbarous height of
roasting and devouring ; but this also hangs on myths about elves
and goddesses, and had always been laid at the door of sorceresses.
One passage even celebrates the compassion of the president and


^ The Maid of Orleans, indicted for sorcery, was asked : * si eile s^ait rien de
ceuz qui vont avecq lei f€ei * /


WITCHES. 1061

directress of the feast, she lias the stolen sacklings carried back
to their cradles (see SuppL).

Crescentia, who had devoted herself to the nurture of children,
is addressed as an unholde : ' Waz huotes dA dose, ubele horri'
blase ? da soldes billecher da ce holze varn, dan die megede hie
bewam ; dd bist ein unholde, und sizist hie behangen mit golde/
She answers : ' Got weiz wol die scnlde, ob ich bin ein unholde,
oder ie dicheinis (any) zouberes gephlac/ Kaiserchr. 12199.
Diemer p. 373 (imitated, Kolocz. 261-2). They believed then in
the 12th cent, that unholden ' fared to the woods,' to the Wild
Host, and ' blew horns,' like Tutosel, who as a tooting hooting
&wl, i.e. strix, travels in the Furious Host (p. 922) ; can ' hor-
tuta,' a word of insult in the Yestgotalag p. 38, have been
hornjmta, homßyta ? ON. ]>iota, ululare, Goth. ]>ut-hatirn adXirirf^,
The precise meaning of dose, unless it be for dw&se, tw&se, getwäs
(spectre, p. 915), escapes me (see SuppL). Such unholden are
much more night-dames, bonae dominae, than devil's partners.
The 'faring to woods and forests' expresses the sentence
pronounced on banished outlawed men, whose dwelling is in
the wilderness, among wolves, BA. 733, to whom the forest be-
comes mother (shuma ti mati !), conf. saltibus assuetus (p. 482).
Vulgar opinion in Sweden to this day suspects old women, who
live alone in the woods, of harbouring and sheltering wolves
when they are hunted : they are called vargamödrar, wolf-
mothers, and such a one is meant in the song of Sämung
(Saemmgr p. 305) : ' inde satt gamla djuramor, rörde med näsa i
brande,' within sat the old beasts' -mother, stirred with her nose
the coals (Afzel. sagohafder 1, 38. 43). The long-nosed hag here
evidently melts into the notion of the alrune who mingles with
wood-schrats, p. 404, and of the wild wood^wife, p. 432 ; she is
like the ON. iumvidja, p. 483.

But what to my mind completely establishes this milder
explanation of witches' doings, which leaves the Devil out of
the reckoning, is the collection of conjuring spells quoted in the
Appendix, vol. 3. Taken mostly from witch-trials of the last few
centuries, when the link between witch and devil was a long-
estabUshed thing to the popular mind, they refer not to devilish
doings at all, but everywhere to elvish or even christian. Some
of them seem to be of high antiquity, of heathen origin, and to


1062 MAGIC.

have been handed down through a long coarse of oral tradition.
Their power to hurt or heal is founded on faith in elves and sprites^
whose place is afterwards filled by angels and holy names. As
elf and elfin, dwarf said she-dwarf, bilwiz and bilwizin are invoked
(p. 472)^ so in the old AS. formula (App. spell i.) ' esa gescot
(ftses' shot)^ ylfa gescot^ hcegtessan gescot' all stand side by side.
Such formulas, whose words must long ago have become unin-
telligible to witches of the 16- 17th cent., at once prove the
injustice of the charge brought against them. It is to me a
significant fact, that the imagination of the tortured witches still
expressly owns to a journey 'auf Venesberg und in das paradis'
(Mone's Anz. 7, 426), meaning therefore the ancient elvish or
even christian abode of bliss, and not a devilish one.

The gradual intrusion of the Devil by whom, according to the
Church's belief, men were possessed (p. 1015), is easily accounted
for. The conception was radically foreign to the Teuton mind,
which tried at first to naturalize it by transferring it to a fe-
male being (p. 990). But when in course of time the christian
notion of a male devil got the upper hand, then all that had been
told of Holda had in its turn to be applied to him. From their
service and attendance on that unhold dame of night, the witches
passed into the Devil's fellowship, whose sterner keener nature
aggravated the whole relationship into something more wicked,
more sinful. Those magic rides by night had merely rested
on the general allegiance due to the people's ancient goddess, in
whose train the women rode ; but now that the Devil came to
fetch the women, and carried them over hill and dale (pp. 1013.
1028), there grew up the idea of an amor<ms alliance between
him and every single witch.

Connecting links may be found in abundance. Ghostly beings
could form close and intimate ties with men; a long line of
neighbourly elves links its destiny to the good or ill fortunes of
a human family, home-sprites devote themselves to a man's
service, and cling to him with obstinate and troublesome fidelity
(p. 518) ; only these attachments are neither founded on formal
compact, nor are they pernicious to man. An equally tender and
an innocent relation subsists between him and the attendant
guardian spirit given him at birth, p. 875.

The witches' devils have jproper names so strikingly similar in


WITCHES* DEVILS. 1063

formation to those of elves and kobolds^ that one can scarcely
think otherwise than that nearly all devils' names of that class are
descended from older folk -names for those sprites. A collection
of such names^ which I have called out of witch-trials^ may afford
ns a welcome glimpse into old elvish domestic economy itself.
Some are taken from healing herbs and flowers^ and are certainly
the product of an innocent^ not a diabolic fancy : Wolgemut (ori-
ganum), Schöne (bellis minor^ daisy), Luzei (aristolochia), Wege^
tritt (plantago), Blwmclienhlau (conf. the marvelous flower, p.
971), Peterlein (parsley) ; exactly such are the names of two
fairies in Midsum. N. Dr., Peaseblossom and Mvatardseed, Names
equally pretty are borrowed from the forest life of the sprites :
Orunlaub (-leaf), Orünewald, Lindenlaub, Lindenzweig (-twig),
Eichenlaub (oak), Birnbaum (pear), Bimbäumchen, Bautenstrauch
(rue), Buchsbaum (box), Hölderlin (elder), Kränzlein (garland),
Spring 'ins'f eld, Hurlebusch, Zum-wald-fliehen ; clad in green (as
the devil is in Kinderm. 101) appear the Scotch elves (Minstrelsy
2, 152-4. 160-4) and Norse huldre (Faye p. 42) ; foliage garlands
must have been largely used in ancient sacrifices as well as in
sorcery, oak-leaves in particular are enjoined on witches, and are
used in brewing storms (Moneys Anz. 8, 129). As the Devil
often presents himself in fair angelic guise (' in young man's
sheen' occurs already in Ls. 3, 72), he receives such names as
Jüngling, Junker, Schönhans, and feather-ornaments or wings
are a favourite ascription, hence the names Feder, Federhans,
Federung, Federbusch, Weissfeder (white-f.), Straussfeder (ostrich-
f.), Strausswedel (-plume), Orünwedel. Of all the names confessed
by witches, none is commoner than Flederunsch (Voigt's Abb.
62-8-9. 105-9. 118. 129), but folktales give that name to ko-
bolds (Jul. Schmidt 158), and carousers in their cups used to
drink 'to all flederwischen ! * (Franz. Simpl. 1, 47. 57): by
flederwisch we mean the end limb of a (goose) wing, used for the
purpose of dusting, hence Kehrwisch also occurs as a devil's name,
aptly denoting the rapid whisking to and fro of a spirit. Then
again proper names of men are in great request, especially in the
familiar fondling form which is also used for kobolds (p. 504) :
Hans, Manschen, junker Hans (squire Jack), Qrauhans (conf.
Grayman, p. 993), Orünhans, Hans vom busch; Heinrich, Orau-
heinrich, Hinze; Kunz, Kiinzchen (conf. Kueni, p. 1003), Konrad;


1064 IfAGIC.

Nickel, Qrosmickel; Ma/rtin (p. 931), Marten; Kaspar, Eäsparle;
Dewes, Bupel, Büppel (p. 504), Rausch (p. 517ii.), Wendel (p. 375
last 1.), Hemmerlin (p, 182), Stöpliel, junker Stof (Christoph, the
first syll. shortened with a purpose ? conf. Stopchen, p. 1003),
some few of them equally savouring of the heathenish and
the devilish; Perlebitz (in some Hessian trials Berlewitzchen,
-witchen), probably the same as pilwitz (p. 472). ^ The following
begin to look suspicious : Leidenoth, Ma^^hleid, Unglück, Beicheher,
Hintenhervor, Allerlei-wolliist (perh. a flower's name), Schwarzhurg,
Dreifuss, Kuhfuss, Kuhöhmchen, Dickbauch ; yet they may also
turn upon the satyr-like shape of the schrats, or upon the weird
and worrying nature of any intercourse with the demonic world.
The old Easter-play supplies the following names, belonging at
latest to the beginning of the 15th century: Kottelrey, Rosen»
kränz, Krezlin, Federwisch, Raffenzan, Binkebank, Spiegelglanz,
8chorbra/nt, ScJioppensiak, Hellekrug, ^ Schorzemage ; they are
easy to explain from what has gone before. Italian streghe call
their devil Martinello, Martinetto, and again Fiorino ; French
trials furnish maistre Persil, Verdelet, Verdjoli, Jolibois, Saute»
buisson. Two more fairies in Mids. N. Dream, Moth and Cobweb,
are worth remembering. All these names have nothing in com-
mon with the names of the Jewish or Christian devil, except with
those quoted pp. 988-9. 1003, and theyare kobolds' names.' Some
of the names in my list appear to belong equally to the witches
themselves, just as elves have several common to both sexes.
Thus the feminine names of plants and flowers are more suitable
to sorceresses (see Suppl.).

Love-afiairs between spirits and men arise out of their familiar
intercourse. She-kobolds are nowhere mentioned, and we are
never told of kobolds having designs upon women ; elves on the
contrary do carry off* maidens, and men live in secret intimacy
with elfins ; thus Helg^ became the father of Skuld by an alfkana,
Fomald. sog. 1, 32. 96. But except that Elberich having made
himself invisible overpowers Otnit's mother, and an alfr does the

^ The Hessian dialeot often inserts an r: at Cassel th^ call beUeyne
berlevne.

^ Mone*s Sohansp. p. 181 has heUekruke for witoh.

• A few times the hellish wooer is called Lucifer or Belzebok, Trier, act. 114 ;
where the nsmejamer is also given, which I do not quite understand : is it jammer
unpleasant [as in jammerschade, a sad pity] , or jammer ailment, epüepqy ?


devil's bbidb. 1065

like to king Aldrian's wife and begets Hogni^ I cannot think of
any instance of such amours as lie at the bottom of all the witch-
stories. The notions of incubus and succubus seem to me not of
German origin^ though afterwards they got mixed up with those
of elf and night-spirit. An AS. manuscript in Wanley, either of
the 12th, 11th, or some earlier cent., speaks of 'monnom, ]>e
deofol mid hsdutS/ In the later doctrine about witches their
prostitution is an essential feature, it seals the compact, and gives
the Devil free control over them : in a pure maid he can have no
part.^ Without this abomination we never come across a witch
at all.^

It is a question, at what period witches' covenants and amours
are first mentioned in Germany. No doubt the first impulse to
them was given by the persecution and consequent spread of
heresies, which after the middle of the 13th cent, came from Italy
and France into Oermany, 5owever guilty or innocent the
heretics may have been, report, magnifying and distorting,
charged their assemblies with idolatrous excesses, whose affinity
to witches^ doings is beyond dispute. Among the heretics them-
selves, with their seclusion, reserve, and constantly repeated
success in attaching new disciples and adherents, some ancient
departures from orthodox faith and ritual kept stubbornly
reproducing themselves ; as persistently did calumnies start up
against them. They were accused of adoring a beast or beast's
head, which presently turned into the Devil, who became visible,
now as a black spirit, now as a bright beguiling angel, his fa-
vourite animal shape being that of a he-cat, or else a toad. At
their meetings, it was said, they slaughtered children and kneaded
their blood in flour or ashes, and after extinguishing the lights,
practised together the lusts of the flesh. Newly admitted mem-
bers were marked by the prick of a needle, the while they cursed
their Maker, and signified their faith and homage to the Evil one,
as to worldly rulers, by a kiss.^ Even in the less offensive teach-


1 • Le dimon ne peat faire paote avec une vierge,' Mich. Hist, de Fr. 6, 68. 169.
160.

s Greek antiqnity had iU fables about the intercoturae of gods with mortalB (p.
343), and so had our heathenism about the union of heroes with swan-wives and
elfins ; at last the far grosser conception could find credence, of a literal commerce
of the Devil with mankind !

* Soldan's Geschichte der Hexenprocesse pp. 103—146.


1066 mAgic.

ing and practice of some heretics there could not fail to be a
mixtnre of heathen things with christian ; the church's zeal had
to bestir itself at once against new errors of doctrine and against
remnants of heathenism that were combined with them. Along
with heretic-prosecutions went rumours of diabolic compacts and
conferences^ which the populace connected with their ancient be-
lief in dsBmonic beings. Traditions of certain men being leagued
with the Deyil had already circulated in the West, at all events
from the 10th cent. (p. 1017) ; the more readily would they now
be extended to women. The earliest certain mention of an in-
trigue between witch and devil is of the year 1275 under an
inquisitor at Toulouse (Soldan p. 147) ; the first half of the 14th
cent, seems to have established more firmly, especially in Italy,
the belief in a diabolic sisterhood (secta strigarum). Bartolus (d.
1357) delivered a judgment on a witch of Ortha and Riparia in
Novara bpric./ the charge was novel to him, and he appeals to
theologians as to the nature of the crime ; from the whole tenor
of his sentence we may assume that seldom or never had a witch
been tried in the Milanese before. Amongst other things he says :
' Malier striga sive lamia debet igne cremari, confitetur se crucem
fecisse ex paltis et talem crucem pedibus conculcasse
se adorasse diabolum, Uli genua flectendo • . . pueros tactu
stricasse et fascinasse, adeo quod mortui fuerunt. Audivi a sacris
quibusdam theologis, has mulieres quae lamiae nuncupantur tacta
vel visu posse nocere etiam usque ad mortem fascinando homines
sen pueros ac bestias, cum habeant animas infectas, quas daemoni

voveruntj Between 1316 and 1334 pope John XXII had issued

a bull without date, ordering the property of convicted sorcerers
to be confiscated like that of heretics. What was then done by
inquisitors and judges Soldan has subjected to a minute investi-
gation (pp. 160 — 210), and I need only single out one or two
facts. Alfonsus de Spina in his Fortalitium fidei (written about
1458) lib. 5 informs us : ' Quia nimium abundant tales perversa^
mulieres in Delphinatu et Gaschonia, ubi se asserunt ooncurrere
de nocte in quadam planitie deserta, ubi est aper quidam in rupe,
qui vulgariter dicitur el boch de Biterne, et quod ibi conveniunt
cum candelis cuxensie, et adorant ilium aprum, osculantes eum in

* Printed in Joh. Bapt. Ziletti conBüior. select, in criminal. caasiB, Franco!.
1578 fol., torn. 1, consil. 6.


devil's bbidb. 1067

ano sao ; ideo captae plares earum ab inqaisitoribas fidei^ et con-
victae, ignibus combnmntar ; signa aatem combnstaram sunt
depicta, qnaliter scilicet adorant cam candelis praedictam aprurrtj
in domo inqnisitoris Tholosani in magna moltitadine camisearumj

sicnt ego propriis oculis aspezi.' Bead throughout caper for

aper^ as bock^ boc^ bouc evidently means the former. Adoring
and kissing of the he-goat or he*cat was just the charge .brought
against heretics^ whose very name (ketzer^ cathari) some derived
from that circumstance.^ This parody of divine worship may
either be connected with goat-sacrifices of the heathen (p. 52) and
the sacredness of that animal^ or explained by the goat's feet
ascribed to the devil from of old (p. 995). Kissing the toad
(Soldan p. 133-6) is wonderfully like those conditions necessary
to the release of ' white women ' (p. 969) ; here heretical
opinions coincide with superstition. In 1303 a bishop of
Coventry was accused at Borne of a number of heinous crimes^
amongst others ' quod diabolo homagium fecerat, et eum f uerit
osculatus in tergo ' ; Boniface 8 acquitted him (Bymer 2, 934 old
ed.). The same charge is commonly brought against the later
witches. Dr. Hartlieb in 1446 mentions 'abjuring God and
giving oneself up to three devils/ Superst. H^ cap. 34.

For four centuries^ beginning with the 14th; what with the
priestly Inquisition^ with the formality of the Canon and Civil
law process simultaneously introduced in the courts^ and to
crown all, with Innocent 8's bull of 1484 (MB. 16, 245-7), as well
as the Malleus Maleficarum' and the tortures of the criminal
court ; the prosecutions and condemnations of witches multiplied
at an unheard-of rate, and countless victims fell in almost every
part of Europe. The earlier Mid. Ages had known of magicians
and witches only in the milder senses, as legendary elvish beings,
peopling the domain of vulgar belief, or even as demoniacs, not

^ * Catari dicnntnr a oato, qnia oscnlantur posteriora eati, in onjus specie, nt
dionnt, apparet eis Lneifer,' Alan, ab Insnlis (d. 1202) contra Valdenses, lib. 1. A
better name for heretics was boni homines^ bona homines (Soldan p. 131), not, I think,
beoanse so many were of good condition, but in harmony with other meanings of
the term (oonf . snpra p. 89). At the same time it reminds as of the ghostly good
women, bonae dominae, p. 287, as * francs hommes * does of the tranches puoelee, p.
410 n. Eyen the gute holden are not to be overlooked.

* Composed 1487 by the two inquisitors appointed by Innocent, Heinr. Insti-
toris in Alemannia and Jac. Sprenger at Cologne, with the help of Joh. Gremper,
priest at Constance. Soon foUowed by episcopal mandates, e.g. at Begensburg
1401-3 (MB. 16, 241-8).


1068 3J1Ä.GIC.

as actaal apostates from God and malefactors arraigned before
a court of justice. A good deal has been made of tbe Annales
Corbeienses^ which do expressly state under the year 914, ' multae
sagae combustae sunt in territorio nostro ' ; but these Annak
were not written till 1464, and have of late been totally dis-
credited. Several ancient Codes lay penalties on sorcery ; ^ but
all the cases that occurred had for their basis real crimes,
murder, poisoning ; the stria is a ' herbaria/ i.e. venefica ; ' for
alleged storm-raising few can have forfeited their lives. Especially
worthy of note are the punishments denounced against precisely
those persons who from a vain belief in sorcery have burnt or put
to death either man or woman ; * not sorcery, but the slaying of
sapposed sorcerers is what the enlightened law pronounces
heathenish and diabolic. On the mere ground of a night-excur-
sion with 'unholden' nobody dreamt of bringing a criminal
charge against women ; that father confessor of the 1 3th cent,
(p. 1060) refutes the confessions of his ' domina sortilega' by
rational argument.^ But when once, by a fatal confusion of

1 Lex Sal. 22. Lex Bip. 83. Lex Visigoth, vi. 2, 2. 3, 4. Lex Alam. add.
22. Capitnl. A.D. 789 cap. 18. Oapit. ii. a.D. 805.

' Meiohelbom no. 688 : a.D. 853, a girl at Freising, venefica ; a.D. 1028, < maUfiea
midier artes malefioas cum tribos aliis molieribns exercens,* Pertz 6, 146 ; aj).
1074 at Cologne, * malier homines pleromque magicU artibtu dementare iniamata,'
Lamb, schafn. p. 375.

> Capit. Caroli de part. Sax. 5 : ' si quis adiabolo deceptns credideiit seonndttm
morem Paganormn, virmn aliquem aut feminam stiigam esse, et homines comedere,
et propter hoe ipsam ineenderit^ vel camem ejus ad oomedendum dederit, capitis sen-
tentia jmmetur.* Lex Both. 379 : * nullus praesumat aldiam alienam aut ancillam
quasi strigam oeeidere, quod ehristianis mentibtu mUlatenus est credendum nee
possibile est ut hominem mulier vivum intrinsecus possit comedere.' How the
wisdom of Charles and Bothar shines by the side of Innocent's blind barbarous bull i
Those ' sagae combustae ' in Westphalia, if the statement be worth believing, were
hardly condemned by the courts, but more likely sacrificed by the mob to such
heathenish superstition as the laws quoted were tiying to stem. In our own day
the common folk in England, France and Belgium take it upon themselves to throw
suspected witches into fire or the pond (Horst's Zauberbibl. 6, 368. 372-4). \^^te*8
Selbome p. 202 : * the people of Tring in Hertfordshire would do well to remember
that no longer ago than 1751 they seized on two superannuated wretches, orazed
with age and overwhelmed with infirmities, on a suspicion of witchcraft ; and by
trying experiments drowned them in a horsepond.' The Gazette des tribunaox
no. 3055, June 4, 1835 relates a trial of supposed magicians, whose family had the
hereditary faculty of charming lice away.

^ It is true the Sachsensp. ii. 13, 7 has : * svelk Jcerstenman ungelovich (un-
believing) is, unde mit tovere umme gat oder mit vorgiftnisse (poisoning), unde des
verwunnen wirt, den sal man upper hort bemen.* Schwabensp. 149. Wackezn.
174. Lassb. Gosl. stat. 38, 20. The words * oder wll* standing after * kerstenman '
in Homeyer, are a later insertion: they are wanting in other laws, and are contra-
dicted by the pron. * den,' him, which follows. That these docs, speak of wizards,
not yet of witokes, seems to fit better their age and spirit ; yet it must be noted,
that they already link apostaoy with witchcraft, conf. Soldan 172 — 4. Biener, in


WITCH-TBIALS. 1069

sorcery with heresy^ the notion gained a footing that every
witch renonnces God and becomes the Devil's^ everything assumed
a new aspect: as the Devil's ally^ apart from any crimes she
might have committed, she was deserving of death, and her sin
was one of the greatest and horriblest. Bat from that time the
earlier notion of possession by the devu ahnost entirely ceased :
imagination had taken a new direction.

Witch-trials of the 16-17-1 8th centuries have been amply
made known, of the 15th few completely.^ One need only have
read two or three of them : everywhere an unaccountable uni-
formity of procedure, always the same result. At first the accused
denies ; tortiired,^ she confesses what all those doomed before her
have confessed, and without delay she is condemned and burnt
(incinerata, as the Malleus expresses it). This agreement in
depositions of imaginary facts is to be explained by the traditional
illusions that filled the popular fancy. I will here attempt to
summarize all the essential points (see Suppl.).'

Zeitschr. f. gesoh. reohtsw. 12, 126, would limit the penal fire of the Sachsensp.
to cases where the spiritual court hands the sinner over, as impenitent, to the
secular.

^ Little can be gleaned from a Traotatos de phitonico contractu fratris Thomae
Mumer, Fxiburgi Brisg. 1499. Mumer tells how in childhood he was crippled by a
witch.

' The hangman*s formula ran : * thou shalt be tortured so thin that the sun will
shine through thee I ' BA. 95. Dint. 1, 106.

s Witch-tiials at Biainz of 1505-11, in Horst's ZauberbibL 4, 210S ; at Frei-
burg of 1546 and 1627— 35, ed. H. Schreiber, Freib. 1886 ; at Quedlinburg of 1569
—78, in 0. 0. Voigt*8 OemeinntitB. abh. Leipz. 1792 pp. 59—160 ; at Trier of 1581,
in Trier, chronik 1825, 10. 196 seq., and of 1625 ib. 108 seq. ;'at Nördlingen of 1590
— 4, ed. Weng, Mördl. 1888; in Elsass of 1615—35, in Lit. bl. der börsenh. Hamb.
1835 nos. 1092-8 ; at Eichstatt of 1590 and 1626—37, repr. Eichst. 1811 ; at Wem-
dingen of 1620, in Hone's Anz. 7, 425—7 ; at Dieburg ol 1627, in Steiner's Oesch.
von Dieb., Darmst. 1820, 67—100; at Buhl of 1628-9, in Moneys Anz. 8, 119—
132 ; at Siegburg of 1636, in P. E. Schwabens Gesch. y. Siegb., Col. 1826, 225—
241 ; in Brandenburg of the 15-18thc6nt., in Mark, forsch. 1, 238—265 ; at Cammin
of 1679. in Pommer. provinzialbl. Stettin 1827, 1, 382—365 ; at Freising of 1715—7,
in Aretin's Beitr. 4, 278 — 827. Useful extracts from Swabian trials of the 15th
cent, are in the notorious Miüleus malefic, (first printed 1489) ; from Lorrainian of
1588 — 90, in Nie. Bemigii daemonolatria ; and from Burgundian (en la terre de
sainet Cyan de Joux) of 1588-9, in Henry Bogvet*8 Disc, execrable des soroiers,
Bouen 1608, repr. Lyon 1610. Less important is S. Meiger de panurgia lamiarum,
Hamb. 1587. 4. On Scandinayia : Nyerup*s Udsigt over hexeproceeseme i Morden
(Skand. Lit.-8elskabs skrifter 19, 339—894. 20, 1-42), in which an extr. from Lern
on Norweg. sorcery (19, 885) is specially instructive ; Trollväsendet i Dalama, Aren
1668— 73, in J. M. Bergman's Beskrifmngom Dalame, Fahlnn 1822. 1, 208—19. I
have also read Girol. Tartarottl del congresso nottumo delle lamie, Bover. 1749. 4 ;
and C. F. de Cauz de cultibus magicis, vindob. 1767. 4 : two painstaking books, the
first reTelling in Ital. prolixity ; D. Tiedemann's prize essay De artium magicarum
origine, Marb. 1787 was of less use to me. On the Metherl. : 8cheltema*s Gesohie-
denis der heksenprocessen, Haarl. 1829 I had not at hand; Gannaert's Bydragen


1070 MAGIC.

The Devil appears in the shape of a fine young man^ gsäy
plumed and amorons ; not till too late does the witch observe the
horsefoot or goosefooi (wOde pflotte fasse, Nördl. hexenpr. 35).
He then compels her to abjore Otoi (p. 818), baptizes her over
again, making her choose sponsors, gives her a new name, and
reveals his own. A mark is printed on her body (p. 1077), and
the place has no feeling ever after ; in some cases hair is plucked
out from the front of the head. He comes sometimes as a mouse,
goat, crow or fly, but soon changes into human shape. Even
after repeated dalliances the witch receives but small presents of
money ; what he gave as glittering Coin is by daylight muck and
dirt.^ The main thing is, that on certain days the Devil fetches
her, or appoints her to go, to rUghtly feasts, which are held in
company with other witches and devils. After anointing her
feet and shoulders with a salve^ or tying a girdle round her, she
bestrides a stich, rake, broom, distaff, shovel, ladle or oven-fork,
and muttering a spell, flies np the chimney, and away through
the air over hill and dale.' A dehselrite, Helbl. 1, 1196 (p. 1049),
a forh-rider, besom-rider all mean a witch, so does quosten-
pinderin, sash-binder, Clara Hatzl. Ixvii^ (quaste = perizoma,
cingnlum). A 14th cent, story told in Herm. von Sachsenheim
(Wackem. lb. 1005-6) makes an old woman at Urach anoint
with salve the calf on which she is to ride. If the hellish wooer
comes to fetch the witch, his seat on the stick is in front, and
hers behind ; or he is a goat, and she mounts him ; or she drives


tot bet oade strafregt in Vlaenderen, BrasB. 1829, repr. Gend 1885, has interestiDg
extra. 476 — ^91 ; some fresh taots are oolleoted in Sohaye's Essai historiqne, Lonv.
1834, pp. 175---203. There is a crowd of other books: Horst's Damonomagie,
Frankf . 1818, bis Zanberbibliotbek, Mainz 1821-6, and Walter Scott's DemonoL and
witchcraft, I have hardly used at aU ; both, based on diligent compilation, lack trae
eritioism and scholarship ; besides, HorsVs work is tnrgid and bad in taste, Scotfs
inexact and careless. Most of the above are far surpassed by Soldan*B Geschichte
der hexen-processe, Stnttg. 1848, a work of whose valae I give a f oUer estimate
in my Preface.

^ Everything divine the devil turns topsyturvy, p. 986 : his gold tnrns into
filth ; whereas, when gods or benignant beings bestow leaves, chips, or pods, these
torn into sheer gold, pp. 268. 276. Hence, when the devil sits, when witches stand
up or dance, etc., they look the wrong way (upside down?).

' Unguentum Pharelis, made of herbs, Superst. H, o. 82; but the usual
witches' salve is prepared from the fat of infants killed while yet nnbaptized :
* unguentum ex membris pueromm interemptonun ab eis ante bi^tismum,* MUleua
malef. ü. 1, 8 (ed. 1494, 61d).

* Simpl. bk 2, cap. 17-8 describes such a flight ; a listener mounted on a bench
gives chase, and in a twinkling gets from the Fulda Buchenwald to Madgebnig
cathedraL


INITIATION. 1071

horses that come oat of the ground. Older acconnts have it,
that the devil takes her inside his dodk, and carries her through
the air, whence she is called mantelfahref mantelfahrerin. At the
trysting-place are many more witches, each with her demon lover ;
they are mostly neighbour women, often such as have long been
dead, some (the superior sort) muffled and masked. But tbeir
wooers are mere servants of the Chief Devil, who in goat-shape,
but with black human face, sits silent and solemn on a high chair
or a large stone table in the midst of the ring, and all do him
reverence by kneeling and kissing. When the Chief Devil takes
a particular fancy to one woman, she is named the witches* queen,
and ranks above all the rest,^ answering to that Norse tröUa
konüngr^ p. 1048. The undelightful meal is illumined by black
torches, aU kindled at a light that burns between the horns of
the great goat. Their viands hicTc salt and bread,^ they drink out
of cows' hoofs and horses' heads. Then they relate what mischief
they have wrought, and resolve on new : if their misdeeds fail to
satisfy the Devil, he beats them. After the feast,^ that neither
fills nor nourishes, the dance begins: up in a tree sits the
mtisieia/n, his fiddle or bagpipe is a horse's liead (p. 1050), his fife
a cudgel or a cat's tail. In dancing the partners face outwards,
turning their backs to each other : in the morning you may see
a circular tragic in the grass, shewing the print of cows' and goats'
feet. The dance, according to Hessian trials of 1631, is like that
of the sword-dancers (p. 804) ; we often hear of one of the
women wearing the giildne schuh on her right foot, would she be
queen or commandress ? Martin von Amberg speaks of ' making
red shoes (schuechel) for the trut'; to dance in? When the
ring-dance is over, they beat each other with swingle-staves and
mangle-bats, and practise lewdness. At last the great goat bums
himself to ashes, and these are distributed among the witches to
work mischief with. A young untried witch is not at once
admitted to the feast and dance, but set on one side to tend toads
with a white wand ; * at home also they breed and maintain these

1 La£Fert*B Bdationea orixninaleB, Celle 1721. pp. 52-4. Horst's Damonom. 2.
876-7.

* Yet they eat bread baked on a Snnday, meat salted on Sunday ; and drink
wine pat in cask on Snnday.

* Distinction of ranks is kept up too : the rich sit down to table first, and
drink ont of sUver goblets, then the poor oat of wooden bowls or hoofs.

* 0, Fr. poets also pot peeled wands in the hands of witches : * nne rielle


1072 MAGIC.

animals : the Hatzlerin Ixviii* already chides a witch as 'inhitzige
krotensaek ! * Such a novice witch the Devil inverts, and sticks
a candle in a part of her person, Thür. mitth. vi. 3, 69. They
go home the same way as they came : the hnsband, who all the
while has mistaken a staff laid in the bed for his sleeping spouse,
knows nothing of what has passed. Whoever happens to get
sight of a witches' dance, need only utter the name of Gk>d or
Christ : it all stops in a moment, and disappears.^ The harm
that witches do is chiefly to the cattle and crops of their neigh-
bours. They know how to drain other people's cows of every
drop of milk, without coming near them, Superst. G, line 132 :
they stick a knife in an oaken post^ hang a siring on it, and make
the milk flow out of the string (Beusch's Samland p. 66) ; or
they drive an o/xe into the doorpost, and milk out of the helve ;
they draw milk out of a spindle, out of a suspended handkerchief}
They tarn good milk blue, or bloody-colour ; their compliments on
entering your house are bad for the milk : if you were just going
to chum, the batter will not come. Sup. I, 823. Hence any
witch is called milch-diebin (as the butterfly is a milk or butter
thief), milch-zaulerin, molken-stehleiin, molken-töversehe, whey-
bewitcher.' Here again comes to light the connexion between
witches, elves and butterflies, for vulgar opinion blamed dwarfs
also for drawing milk from the udders of kine : ON. dverg^speni
means papilla vaccarum vacua. If your milk is bewitched, whip
it in a pot, or stir it about with a sickle : every lash or cut makes
the witch wince. Sup. I, 540. A Wetterau superstition takes
this shape : when a beast is bewitched, they set the frying-pan
on, and chop into it with the grass-chopper behind bolted doors ;
the first person who comes after that is the witch. The power
of witches to draw milk and honey from a neighbour's house to
their own is already noticed by old Burchard, Sap. 0, p. 199*.
Lashing the brooks with their brooms, squirting water up in
the air, shooting gravel, scattering sand toward sunset, witches

barbell, qui port6 a verge pelie plus de qatre Tingts ans/ Benart 28286 ; eonf.
M6on 4, 478, * remest ausi monde com la verge qni est pelie,*

1 DS. no. 251. Wolfs Niederl. sagen 246. 381-2. Wodana zzrn.

* So, by magio, wine is straok oat of the poet, Superst. G, line 262 ; conL the
legend of Doctor Faost.

* On the eye of S. Philip and S. James, i.e. May 1, people in the I. of Bügen
ran about the fields with large fire-bladders : this they call molkentöversehen brennen
Bagian. landgebr. cap. 248. * milchdiebin and onhold/ H. Sachs iii. 3, 5^.


witches' doings. 1073

bring on storm and hail (p. 909)^ to beat down their neighbour's
corn and frait. For the same purpose they are said to boil
bristles or else oak-leaves in pots^ or strew some of those deviVs-
ashes on the fields. These are the lightning or weather witches,
whose doings will come to be treated more fully hereafter. It
is said they stroke or strip the dew off the grass, and with it do
harm to cattle. Sup. I, 1118; also that early before sunrise they
skim the dew off other people's meadows^ and carry it to their
own, to make the grass grow ranker ; hence they may be recog-
nised by their large clumsy feet, and are called thau-streicher (in
E. Friesland dau-striker), though other suspicious characters,
even men, are called the same bad name. This clearly hangs
together with the dew-brushing after the nightly elf-dance, and
the dew the valkyrian steeds shake out of their manes; only
here it is perverted to evil. A witch, by bizming up the legs of
a footstool, can heal the broken bones of one who is absent. If
she is present at a wedding, just as the blessing is pronouncing,
she snaps a padlock to, and drops it in the water : this is called
tying up the laces ; until the padlock can be fished up and un-
locked, the marriage proves unfruitful. Witches can kill men by
dealing pricks to images or puppets ; in churchyards they dig up
the bodies of young children, and cut the fingers off ; ^ with the
fat of these children they are supposed to make their salve.
This seems to be their chief reason for entrapping children ; to
the sorceress of older times kidnapping was imputed far more
freely (p. 1059). From the Devil's commerce with witches pro-
ceeds no human offspring, but elvish beings, which are named
dinger (things, conf. wihtir, p. 440), elbe, holden, but whose
figure is variously described : now as butterflies, then as humble-
bees or queppen (quab, burbot), and again as caterpillars or worms.
Even an OHG. gloss in Graff 1, 243 has : alba, brucus, locusta
quae nondum volavit. The enigmatic beetle and larva shape is
very appropriate to such beings.' They are called by turns good

' Fingen of a babe anbom are available for magio : when lighted^ they give
a flame that keeps all the inmates of a house asleep ; equally useful is the thumb
cut off the hand of a hanged thief. Gonf. Schamberg de jure digitor. p. 61-2, and
Praetorius on thieves* thumbs, Lips. 1677. The Goutume de Bordeaux § 46 treats
of magio wrought with dead children's hands. Thief s hand was the name of a
plant, p. 1029.

' The caterpillar is also called deviVt cat (p. 1029), and a witch, like the dragon-
fly, devil*i bridet deviVt dozy. The Finn, ükon koira (Ukkonis canis) means papilio


1074 MAGIC.

and bad tinngs, good and bad elves, good ^ and bad holden, holder^
chen, holdiJcen, Witches use them to produce illness and swel-
lings in man and beast, by conjuring them into the skin and
bones. But they also make them settle on forest-trees, they dig
them in under elder-bushes: the 'elves/ in gnawing away the
wood of the aspen, waste away the man at whom they are aimed.
The same witch as set the * holden ' on a man must take them off
again ; when she wants them, she goes into the wood and shakes
them oS the trees, or digs them out from under the elder (the
elves* grave). You may know a man into whom holden have been
charmed, by there being no manikin or baby {KOfyq, pupa) visible
in his eyes, or only very faintly (Voigt pp. 149. 152). This is
like the devil's drawing a toad on the pupil of a witch's left
eye. The nine species of holden I shall specify in the chap, on
Diseases. But not unfrequently the demon lover himself appears
in the form of an elf or butterfly. Their daughters born in human
wedlock the witches have to promise to the devil at their birth,
and to bring them up in his service; at great assemblies they
present to him any children they have, lifting them up backwards.
Sometimes they sacrifice black cattle to him. They love to gather
where roads divide; ^ like the devil (p. 999), they can pop in and
out of houses through the keyhole (Sup. G, line 106-7. Tobler
146^) ; where three lights burn in a room, the witch has power ;
ringing of bells they cannot bear. Before the judge they must
not be allowed to touch the bare ground, or they will change
themselves in a moment; they are incapable of shedding a tear;
thrown into water, they float on the top^ upon which fact the

or larva papiUonis, tuonen koira (mortis canis) and $uden korenda (lopi yectis)
butterfly, and Ukon Uhmä (Ü. vaoca) another insect. Swed. trollstända (daemonis
fusus) butterfly. In the Orisons they call a caterpillar bahase, in Switz. (aoc. to
Stalder) palatuct which is our old acquaintance pelewise, pilweise, p. 472-5. A
mythic meaning also lurks in the OHG. huntes-Batul (eruoa), Graff 6, 167, as in
ON. geit'hamr (vespa).

1 CaUed gute holden even when harmful magic is wrought with them, Braun-
Bohw. anz. 1815, p. 726 seq. In the Malleolus I find : ' vermes nocivi qui mlgariter
diountur juger,* and * Alemannico nomine juger nunoupantur, sunt albi ooloris et
nigri capitis, sex f edum, in longitudine medii digiti.* Is jug the same thing as
grieg (pp. IBS. 692} ? Many other designations of the phalaenae overlap those of
will o* wisps or of wiohtels, as xüntUr, firom fluttering round a li^t, land'^urveyortf
(p. 918), night'Owla, etc

' At cro8§-roads the devil can be called up, so can the Alraun.

' Pliny 7, 2 of sorcerers : * eosdem praeterea non poue mergi ne veste quidem
degravatoe.' We are told several times, that the devil, after promising to brmg the
witches in the water an iron bar to make them sink, brings them only a fine needle.


MISERY. 1075

ancient usage of the witches' bath (ducking) was founded^ once
a divine ordeal^ BA. 925. If at the beginning of the action
thej contrive to catch the judge's eye, he turns soft-hearted^ and
has not the power to doom them.

Now it is a characteristic fact, that witches, with all their
canning and the devil's power to boot, remain sunk in misery and
deep poverty : there is no instance to be found of one growing
rich by sorcery, and making up for the loss of heavenly bliss by
at least securing worldly pleasure, a thing that does occur in
tales of men who sign themselves away to the fiend (p. 1017).
These hook-nosed, sharp-chinned, hang-lipped, wry-toothed, chap-
fingered beldams^ practise villainy that never profits them, at
most they may gratify a love of mischief. Their dalliance with
the devu, their sharing in his feasts, never procures them more
than a half-enjoyment' (see Sappl.).

This one feature might have opened people's eyes to the basis
of all sorcery. The whole vrretched business rested on the
imagination and compulsory confessions of the poor creatures.
0(fact there was none, save that they had a knowledge of medi-
cines and poisons, and quickened their dreams ^ by the use of
salves and potions. Galled upon to name their confederates,
they often mentioned dead persons, to shield the living or to
evade inquiry ; any vile thing they stated was set down as gospel
truth. We read of witches confessing the murder of people
who turned out to be alive.* It never occurred to the judges to
consider, how on earth it happened that innumerable meetings
of witches, all at well-known accessible places, had never been
surprised by witnesses whom their road must have taken that
way. By what special licence from God in those times should
a pack of miscreants previously unheard of nestle down all of a
sudden in towns and villages all over the country !

Long before witches were tortured, great criminals had been

^ * Crooked nofle and pointed ohin, look to find the fiend therein 1 * I find a
parallel in ON. names, Hengikepta, Gröttintanna, LotSinnfingra, Sn. 220-1.

> Berthold p. 58 : * sd gdnt eteliche mit boesem zöaberlehe umb, daz si waenent
eins gebfiren (boor's) son oder einen kneht bezoabem. pfi dfi rehte teerin I war
umbo bezouberst du einen grftven oder einen künec niht ffool, why not bewitch a
ootint, a king) ? sd waaiestn ein köneginne 1 ' They say a witoh gets three farthings
richer every seven years, Simplio. 625.

s AUer luibe trawne, Wh. 1, 82*. kerlinga vilUiy S»m. 169.

* Frommann de faooinatione p. 850. Montaigne notices the same fact, livre
3, ebap. 11.

fOL. III. IS


1076 MAGIC.

pat to bodily safferings intended to wring from tliem a confession
of their guilt. The Lex Visig. iii. 4, 10-11 already speaks of
' torqaere ' ; and the triangular beam on which the accused had
to ride was called eqnuleus^ poledrus^ whence comes our falter,
Fr. poultre^ poutre. That ON. extortion of a full declaration^
^pina til sagna' p. 1043^ need not have been borrowed from
witch-trials.

The signing away to the devil^ abjuring of God and adoring
of the goat in witch-stories seems to be of heretic origin ; at the
same time the abjurer parodies the Abrenuntiatio Diaboli enjoined
on catechumens;^ in every other point the heathen element
preponderates. Even the goat^ and the offering of black beasts
(pp. 52. 493. 1009) I cannot but remind us of the old worship of
gods; it is remarkable that a Dalecarlian tradition makes the
devil not occupy the chair of state^ but lie under the table, bound
with a chain (just as with those spinsters in German legend,
p. 1011). The witches there have much to tell about this chain :
when its links wear out, an angel comes and solders them to
again, Bergm. 217-9. Various witcheries were wrought by the
efficacy of salt, Sup. I, 713. 846 ; it seems almost as if we might
assume a connexion between the salt-boiling, salt-grindiiig, saU-
strewing, salt-burning, salt-fetching at p. 1047, and the burning
of the goat, the carrying away and strewing of his ashes?
Equally heathen we found the consumption of horseflesh p. 1049,
The witches' flights were usually performed on May-night, St.
John's night, and at Christmas, but also at Shrovetide, Easter
and other seasons ; these were the days of great heathen festivals,
of Easter-fires, May-fires, Solstitial and Yule fires, and there is
no occasion to see in them a parody of the christian feasts. The
riding by night, the torchlight procession, the penetrating of
locked-up houses, are exactly as in the case of Holda's host ;

^ In the formtilaB : * ik fate an (grasp) disen bitten etock, ttnd verl&te (forsake)
nnsen herre Gott (Cathol. : Marien son nnd Got) 1 * or * her tiede ik in din nist
(nest), nnd verlate nnsen herre Jesum Christ 1 ' In Hessian records of 1633 : * hie
stehe ich uf dieser mist, und verleugne (deny) des lieben herm J. Christ P In
abjuring, she stands on the dunghill, which begins to bum round her, and with a
white stick she stabs a toad (iitache). The standing on dung is also in conjuring-
spells. The white $taff is a symbol of surrender, and after being erasped is thrown
into the water.

' Shepherds reputed to be sorcerers were accused of baptizing their sheep
with gait, Factums et arrest du parlem. de Paris contre des berges Borders
executez depnis peu dans la prov. de Brie but Timprim^ ä Paris 1695. 8, p. 67.


HEATHEN ORIGIN OF DUCKING, ETC. 1077

the sedacers' names, the spells, the brood of ' holden/ the round
dance, all this is elvish.^ A witch's being strengthened by
touching the bare ground (iarSar-megin p. 642) may remind us
of the heathen belief about giants. An application of the Old-
German ducking to witches sprang out of the early practice
of courts which had long used it against sorceresses who
committed actual crimes. I do not know that the blood-mark
imprinted on witches (p. 1070) on forming their hellish compact
is necessarily to be traced to the practice of heretics (p. 1065).
Mingling of blood in oaths and covenants was ancient and widely
spread, BA. 192-3 ; the stigma was known in Germany long
before witches were prosecuted,* the regular name for it being
anamali (Graflf 2, 715). The corresponding ftmaeli in ON. I find
only in the ethical sense of nota=ntuperium ; but when heroes
of old Scandinavia found themselves dying the strä-dau'Si in bed,
they used first to consecrate themselves to OSinn, who would
only take a bleeding hero, by scratch of spear, even as he before
dying gave himself a gash with Gftngnir (p. 147) ; this they
called marka sik geirs oddi, Tna/rha sik OSni, Yngl. saga cap. 10.
11, And I incline moreover to connect the 'tires tftcen,' p. 200,
and even the 'Todes zeichen,' p. 847; about all this. there was
not a thought of criminal sorcery (see Suppl.).

The details of witchcraft, the heart-eating, the storm-raising,
the riding through air, are all founded on very ancient and
widely scattered traditions, which I will now examine more
minutely.

Let a glance at Servian superstitions lead the way. The
veshtitsa is possessed by an evil spirit : when she falls asleep,
he comes out of her, and then takes the form of a butterfly or a
hen, but he is essentially one with the witch. As soon as he is
out, the witch's body lies as if dead, and then always turns
its head about to where the feet lay ; in that state she cannot be
awaked. The witch tries to catch people, to ßat up, especially


^ The honeysuckle, or perh. another plant, is in Lr. Germany called alf-ranke
(elf-vine), hexen-schlinge (Bitter's Mekl. gram. p. 107. Amdt*B March, p. 404).
Any creepers, climbers, or intertwined branches, are named hexen-sehlupf, because
a witch or elf, when porsned, can always $lip through them.

' Berthold p. 381, of the devil : they that fall into capital sin make him glad,
he quickly paints hit mark on them, and will fain have honour by their bearing his
escutcheon.


1078 MAGIC.

young cliildren. If slie finds a man asleep, she pushes a rod
through his left nipple, opens his side, takes out th^ heart and
eats it, and the breast closes up again. Some of the people thus
' eaten out ' die directly, others live on for a time. A witch will
eat no garli4i ; and at Shrovetide many people smear themselves
with garlic on the breast, soles and armpits as a safeguard,
believing that she eats more people in Lent than at other times.
Young and handsome women are never suspected of sorcery,
witches are always old women,^ but there goes a proverb : ' mlada
kurva, stara veshtitsa,' young wanton makes old witch. If once
the witch has confessed and criminated herself, she can never
eat people or practise witchcraft any more. When witches fly
out by night, they shine like fire, their meeting-place is a
thraehing floor (guvno), and each when starting from her kitchen
anoints herself tvith a salve, and repeats a spell which will be
quoted further on. If many children or other people die in a
village, and suspicion falls on some old woman, they bind and
throw her in the water : if she sinks, she is pulled out and let
go ; if not, she is put to death, for witches cannot sink in water.
Whoever kills a snake before Lady-day, and ties a piece of garlic
in its head, and on Lady-day goes to church with the snake's head
stuck on a cap, can tell what women are witches by their congre-
gating round him and trying to filch the snake or a piece of it
(Vuk sub V. vjeschtitza^ pometno, blagovjest).

This remarkable account opens the way to explanations. We
too had similar means of recognising witches. He that has about
him a harrow* s tooth he has picked up, or grains of com found
haked into the loaf, or a Maundy Thursday's egg, will see the
witches at church with milking^pails on their heads. Sup. I, 636.
685. 783. Just the same in Denmark, Sup. 1 69. Bergman p. 2 1 9
says, in Dalame the witches rarely come to church : it is really a
sheaf of straw or a swine-trough that occupies their place, only
no one is the wiser but they of the BläkuUa sisterhood. I do

1 It is ohiefly in Sweden that even innocent children, bojB as weU as girls,
are drawn into the web of sorcery. The devil requires every witch to bring some
children with her ; she wakes them ont of sleep wiüi the words * Devil's brat, come
to the feast ! ' teU them on the roof till her number is fall, then carries them through
the air to the Fiend, who asks them if they will serve him, and writes them down
in his book. He endows them with wisdom, and they are called vU-gdesar, wise
lads. Conf. the children piped out of Hameln. In our Freising records are some
poor beggar boys seduced by the devil.


MEANS OP RECOGNITION. 1079

not know if this pail or trougli has to do with their bewitching
the milk^ or with the Norse belief that giantesses^ ellekoner
and huldre- wives carry a trough on tlieir backs (Faye 118.
MülL sagabibl. 1, 367. Molb. dial. lex. 98). Keisersberg in
Omeiss 36® tells of a night-faring woman who sat down in a
dongh-trough^ anointed herself with oil^ spoke magic words and
slipt away (7). So early as in Sn. 210* we find among names of
sorceresses a Bakrauf, riven-backed, fissura dorsi. In Dan.
' ellekone bagtil haul som et deigtnig/ Thiele 4, 26. All these
resemblances are important. In the Appendix I quote a spell^
where the alb is thus addressed : ' with thy back like a dough*
trough ! ' Both elf and witch are beautiful only in fronts behind
they are disgustingly deformed^ like Gurorysse p. 945, or dame
World in Conrad's poem. Out of the Maundy Thursday egg,
when hatched, comes a fowl of gay plumage, which changes
colour every year : take such an egg with you to church on
Easter Sunday morning, and in sunshine you can tell all the
women who belong to the devil; but they smell it out, and try
to crush the egg in your pocket, so you must be careful to carry
it in a little box, for if they succeed in crushing it, your heart
will be broken too. Tobler 102* informs us of the Swiss super-
stition : ' weme ma n' am Sonntig vor sonna nufgang e nübblätt-
lets chlee (clover) ine schue ina thued, ond mit dem sehne i d'chi-
lacha god (goes to church), so sieht ma's, wenn e häx d'inen ist :
die wo höuder for sitzid (sit hind foremost) sönd häxa.' Also,
whoever at Christmas matins stands on a footstool of nine sorts
of wood, can tell all the witches in the congregation : they
all turn their backs to the altar. But the witches can see him
too, and woe to him if they get hold of him after service ; he is a
dead man, unless he has provided himself with something to
tempt their cupidity, which he must keep throwing out bit by
bit (as in ancient legend the pursued scatter rings and gold
before the pursuing foe), and while they are picking it up, run
as fast as he can, till his home receives him. A parchm. MS. of
the 14th cent, at Vienna (Cod. bibl. graec. 'Vas ^1* 133^) gives a
simpler recipe : ' wil du, daz di vnholden zu dir chomen, so nym
ein leffel an dem fassangtag, vnd stoz in in gesoten prein, vnd
behalt in also vntz in die drey metten in der Yasten (3 matins in
Lent), vnd trag den lefiel in dy metten, so wird ez dir chunt, wor


1080 MAGIC.

sew sinU Mach the same in Mone's Anz. 4, 310 : He that on
the first ' knöpflein ' day shall pull the spoon out of the dough
unseen, and on the second and third day shall again put it in and
pull it out unperceived, so that at length some dough from each
day sticks to it, and shall then take it to church with him on
Christmas day, will there see all the witches facing the wrong
way (or, upside down ?) ; but he must get home before the bene-
diction is pronounced, or it may cost him his life. It is only upon
goiug to church that any of these recognitions can take place ;
but they seem also to depend on your being the first to see, as in
meeting a wolf or basilisk. Another means of recognising a
witch is, that when you look into her eyes, you see your image
reflected upside down.^ Bunning at the eyes is a mark of old
witches. Sup. I, 787 (see Suppl.).

One thing that in our tales of witches has dropt into the rear,
their eating men's hearts out of their bodies, stands in the fore-
front of the more primitive Servian way of thinking« Vuk has a
song no. 363, in which a shepherd boy, whom his sister cannot
wake, cries in his sleep : ' veshtitse su me iz-yele, maika mi srtse
vadila, strina yoi luchem svetlila,' witches have eaten me out,
mother took my heart, cousin lighted her with a torch. Fortis
cap. 8 relates, how two witches took a young man's heart out in
his sleep, and began to fry it ; a priest had looked on without
being able to hinder, and the spell was not broken till the youth
awoke; then, when the priest approached the witches, they
anointed themselves out of a mug, and fled. He took the heart
half-cooked off the fire, and bade the youth gulp it down quick,
by domg which he was completely restored. To me this Servian
witch, making hef appearance at Shrovetide and cutting open
people's breasts, looks uncommonly like our periodical Berhta,
who cuts open the lazy workman's body and stuffs it with chopped
straw, p. 273 ; out of the goddess was made the hideous bugbear.
In many villages, we are told, there are wicked wives that have
a white liver, whose husbands waste away and die. Passages in
the Codes prove that the same delusion prevailed among the
ancient Germans: Lex. Sal. 67, 'si stria liominem comederU/
and what was quoted p. 1068 from the Lex Roth. 379 and the

TmniUa^^'^'u °°*^^? a similar test for magicians : « in altero ocnlo geminam
pupiUam, m altero equi effigiem/ Conf . the^piTople poBseseed by holden, p. 1074.


HEART-EATING. 1081

Capit. de parte Sax. 5. Also the Indie, pagaaiarum : ' quod
f eminae possint corda hominum tollere juxta paganos ; ' and Bnr-
chard : ' nt credas, te januis clausis exire posse, et homines inter-
ficere et de coctis carnibus eoram vos comedere, et in loco cordis
eorum stramen aut lignum ant aliquod hajosmodi ponere, et
comestis iteram vivos facere et inducias vivendi dare.' Notker's
Cap. 105, speaking of ambrones and anthropophagi (man-ezon),
adds : 'also man chit, taz ouh hazessa hier im lande tüen.'^ The
tenth, the eleventh centnry hstd not given up the heathen notion,
nay, it lingers later still. It lies at the root of Diomed's words in
Herbort 9318: 'si Mt min herze mit ir . . . ich h&nnihtin dem
libe, da mfn herze soldo wesen, d& trage ich eine lihte vesen, ein
stro, oder einen wisch ; ' only here it is not an old witch, but his
lady-love that has run away with his heart, in which sense lovers
in all ages talk of losing their hearts.* The poem given p. 1048
speaks of the unholde striding over a man, cutting his heart
out, and stuffing straw in, and his still remaining alive. Says
Berthold (Cod. pal. 85 fol. 28*) : ' pfei ! gelawbestu, das du
ainem man sein herz auss seinem leib nemest, und im ain stro hin
wider stossest ? ' So in the North they speak of a fem. mann-
cetta (not a masc. mann-8stti), and the word is even used for male
magicians : ' troll ok manncetta/ Fomm. sog. 3, 214. A Polish
story in Woycicki makes the witch pull the heart out and put a
hare's heart in its place. Child-devouring ' striges ' in Altd. bl.
1, 125. Our present fairy-tales represent the witch as a wood-
wife, who feeds and fattens children for her own consumption
(KM. no. 15) ; if they escape, she goes after them in league-
boots (nos. 51. 56. 113). Grimly the witch in the tale of Frau
Trude throws a girl into the fire as a log of wood, and snugly
warms herself thereby. That the Eomans believed in witches
consuming particular parts of a man who still lived on, is proved
by the following passages. Petronius cap. 134: 'quae striges
comederunt nervös tuos ? ' cap. 63 : ' strigae puerum involaverunt,


' To this he appends his well-known statement as to the Weletabi or Wilze^
who were accused of eating their aged parents, BA. 488. That the national name
Volot, Velet passed into that of giuit, hence ogre (as in the analogous oases on p.
527), Schafank has ahly expounded in his Slav. stud. 1, 877 ; hut he had no business
to mix up (1, 882) our Welisungs (supra p. 871) with those Wilzen.

' * Rubacuori^ che il cor m'avete tolto ; del petto mio carasti il cuore,' Tom-
maseo^B Canti pop. 1, 88—90.


1082 MAGIC.

et suppostierunt stramenium.' Plautas in Pseud, iii. 2, 31 : 'Bed
strigibus vivis conviais inteaiina quae exedint.' The Atellanic
ghost, the manducusg from mandere, mandacare, is a munching
voracious bogie (butz p. 507), a bugbear to children. Masca p.
1045, Ital. mascliera, may be referred to m&cher, mascher, or
masticare, and the witch is called mask because she consumes
children. The Indian sorceresses also try to get human flesh
to eat, Lomad. 2, 62 (see Suppl.).

Equally ancient is the opinion that the spirit passes out of a
sleeping witch in butterfly shape. Souls in general were likened
to butterflies, p. 829 ; to the Slovens vezha is will o' wisp, but-
terfly and witch. The alp appears as a butterfly or moth, pha-
'laena {nacht-toggeli, Staid. 1, 287), as a devil's beast p. 1029 ; the
witches' holden and elves are butterflies. But our native legend
speaks of other animals too, that issue from the mouths of
sleepers. -King Ounthram, spent with toil, had gone to sleep on
a faathful follower's lap : then the henchman sees a little beast
like a snalce run out of his lord's mouth, and make its way to a
streamlet, which it cannot step over. He lays his sword across
the water, the beast runs over it, and goes into a hill on the other
side. Aflber some time it returns the same way into the sleeper,
who presently wakes up, and relates how in a dream be had
crossed an iron bridge and gone into a mountain filled with gold
(Aimoin 3, 3. Paul. Diac. 3, 34, whence Sigebert in Pertz 8,
319). Later writers tell of a sleeping landsknecht, and how a
weasel came running out of him, Deut. sag. no. 455. But in
more recent accounts it is applied to devil's brides, out of whose
mouth runs a cat or a red mouse, while the rest of the body lies
fixed in slumber (ibid. nos. 247 — 9).^ A miller, cutting firewood
in the Black Forest, fell asleep over the work, and his man saw a
mouse creep out of him and run away ; everybody searched, bat
could not find it, and the miller never awoke. Is all this con«
nected with the witches' mouse-making p. 1090, and this narrow
thread-bridge to be crossed by the soul on its way to the under
world p. 834 ? It is stated, exactly as with the Servians, that
if you turn the sleeper's body round, the beast on returning

^ * For the mouse thai ninneth out (»matrix) lay a sword across the stream,*
Fittner's Hebamme p. 194. In Fisohart^s Plays do. 216 : * there raus a white moose
up the wall.*


i'

/


FOBMS OF EXIT. BBOOMSTICK. 1083

cannot find its way in^ and death ensues^ Snp. 1, 650. That state
of internal ecstasy, in which the body lies in a rigid sleep, our
old speech designates by irprottan (raptus), i.e. tranced.^ Bat
ON. myth has already acquainted us with the greatest of all
possible examples : ' OSinn skipti hömum (changed his shape),
la p6k bükrinn sem sofinn e^ dau'Sr, enn hann yar ^tfugl eSa dyr,
fiskr eiSa ormr, ok for & einni svipstund & fiarlffig lönd, at sinum
erindum e'Sr annara manna/ Yngl. s. cap. 7 ; his body lay asleep
or dead, and he as bird, beast, fish or snake, fared in a twinkling
to far-lying lands (see Suppl.).

Again, the Servian starting-spell, ' ni o trn ni o grm, vetch na
pometno guvno ! ' (not against thorn nor against oak, but to
swept bamfioor), agrees with German ones, usually the word
is : ' auf und davon ! hui oben hinaus und nirgend an 1 ' out on
high, and (strike) against nothing; or 'wol aus und an, »toss
nirgend an I' or ' fahr hin, nicht zu hoch, nicht zu nieder ! ' and
in England : ' tout, tout, throughout and ctbout I ' But if the
witch is pursuing people : ' before me day, behind me night I '
Dan. ' lyst foran, og mörkt bag I ' A Norse magician took a
goatskin, wrapt it round his head, and spoke : ' verd^i ßoka, ok
verSi shripi, ok undr mikil öllum j^eim sem eptir ]>er soekja ! ' be
there mist and magic and much wonder to all that seek after
thee, Nialss. cap. 12. A formula used by Fr. magicians on
mounting the stick is given, but not completely, by Boguet p.
Ill : ^boston blanc, boston noir, etc' Of Indian sorceresses we
are likewise told, that they repeat a formula for flight : Kalaratri
said it and immediately, with her disciples and the cow-stall on
whose roof she stood, she flew alofb and along the path of cloud,
whither she would ; a man, having overheard her, made use of
the same spell to go after her (Somad. 2, 58-9), exactly as in our
tales of witches men get acquainted with their salves and spells,
and pursue them (see Suppl.).

Where is the first mention of stick and broom ridirig to be
found f Actually. I can only produce a tolerably old authority
for riding on reeds and rushes, and even these turn into real
horses. Guüielm. Alvernus, p. 1064: 'Si vero quaeritur de
equo quern advectigationes suasfacere se credunt malefici, credaut,

^ The hinbrüten (ecstasis) of sorceresses, Ettn. Hebamme p. 226. Martin Ton
Amberg : * die kenpretigen,' tbe entranced.


1084 MAGIC.

inquam^ facere de canna per characteres nefandos et Bcriptnras
quas in ea inscribunt et impingunt; dico in hoc^ qnia non est
possibile malignis spiritibas de canna verum equum facere vel
formare, neque cannam ipsam ad hano ludificationem eligant^
quia ipsa aptior sit nt transfiguretur in equum, vel ex ilia generetnr
eqnus^ quam mnltae aliae materiae. Forsitan antem propter
planitiem superficiei et facilitatem habendi earn alicui videatur ad
hoc praeelecta. . • . Sic forsan hao de causa ladificationem istam
e£5cere in canna sola et non alio ligno permittuntur maligni
spiritas, at &.cilitas et vanitas eoram per cannam hominibas
insinuetar. ... Si qais aatem dicat^ qaia canna et calamus habi-
tationes interdnm malignomm spirituum sunt ^ . . . ego non im«
probo/ — More intelligible is the Irish tale of the rushes and com-
stalks that tarn into horses the moment you bestride them^ Ir.
elfenmar. 101. 215. Of such a horse^ after the first time^ you
need only lift the bridle and shake it when you want him^ and
he comes directly (Sup. H^ cap. 31. Spell xvi.). In Hartlieb
(Sup. H, cap. 32) the unholden are represented riding on rakes
and oven-forks, in the older Poem given at p. 1048 on brooms,
dehsen, oven-sticks and calves, in the Ackermann aus Böhmen
p. 8 on crutches and goats, but in the Tkadlezek p. 27 on distaffs
(kuzly). Dobrowsky in Slavin p. 407 mentions the Bohem.
summons * starö baby, na pometlo ! ' old wives, on to your stove-
broom. — Of more importance is what we find in the story of
Thorsteian boearmagn, which Müller 3, 251 assigns to the 15th
century: As the hero lay hid in the cane-brake, he heard a
boy call into the hill, * Mother, hand me out crook-staff and band^
gloves, I wish to go the magic ride (gand-reilS, p. 1054), there is
wedding in the world below'; and immediately the hrokstafr was
handed out of the hill, the boy mounted it, drew the gloves on,
and rode as children do. Thorsteinn went up to the hill, and
shouted the same words : out came both staff and gloves, he
mounted, and rode after the boy. Coming to a river, they
plunged in, and rode to a castle on a rock, where many people
sat at table, all drinking wine out of silver goblets ; on a golden

1 ( Mennige narrinnen fmany a she-fool) and ook mennigen dor (fool) bindet de
düvel up tin ror (the d. ties on to his cane)/ Narragonia 14^ (nothing b'ke it in
Brant). Does it mean devil*8 horses ? Ana does that explain Walther's * üz im
(the blaok book) leset iiniu r6r ' (88, 8) ? A Servian prorerb says : * lasno ye
dyabola a rita svirati,' 'tis easy piping on the devil's reed.


BBOOMSTICK. DISLIKB OF BELLS. 1085

tlirone were tlie king and qaeen. Thorsteinn^ whom his staff had
made invisible^ ventared to seize a costly ring and a cloth,
but in doing so he lost the stick, was seen by all, and pursaed.
Happily his invisible fellow-traveller came by on the other stick,
Thorsteinn mounted it as well, and they both escaped (Fornm.
sog. 8, 176 — 8). If the poem has not the pecaliar stamp of
Norse fable, it teaches none the less what notions were attached
to these enchanted rides in the 14th or 15th century : no devil
shews his face in it. Sticks and staves however seem to be later
expedients of witchery : neither night-wives nor Furious Host
nor valkyrs need any apparatus for traversing the air; night-
wives had already calves and goats attributed to them, p. 1058.
There is a very curious phrase, ' to wake a hedge^stük/ which
has to become a he-goai and fetch the loved one to her lover ;
originally perhaps no other sticks were meant but such as, on
bestriding, immediately turned into beasts (see Suppl.).

As witches slip through keyholes and cracks in the door, p. 1074,
they are able to squeeze themselves into the narrowest space,
even betwixt wood and bark (conf. Suppl. on p. 653). Thus in
H. Sachs ii. 4, 10 the devil first peels the hazel-rod on which
he hands the old woman the stipulated shoes, for fear she might
creep to him 'twixt wood and bark. In Iw. 1208 the utmost
secresy is expressed by : * sam daz holz under der rinden, alsam
sit ir verborgen.' When a Lithuanian convert began to bark the
trees in a holy wood, he said : ' Yos me meis anseribus gallisque
spoliastis, proinde et ego nudas vos (sc. arbores) faciam. Grede-
bat enim decs rei suae familiari pemiciosos intra arbores et cortices
latere.* The Swed. song makes enchanting minstrels charm the
bark off the tree, the babe out of the mother, the hind from the
forest, the eye from out the socket (Arvidsson 2, 311-2-4-7).

Again, the witches' dislike of bells is heathenish : the elves
have it, and the giants, p. 459. Pious prayer and ringing of bells
put their plans out : they call the bells ' yelping dogs/ In a
Swed. folktale (0dm. Bahusl. beskrifn. p. 228) an old heathen
crone, on hearing the sound of the christian bell from Tegneby,
exclaims in contempt : ' nu mä tro. Bulla pa Ballehed har fädt
bjälra,* B. the christian church has got a tinkler. As yet there
is no thought of witchery. But it is told of Swed. witches too,
that they scrape the bells loose up in the belfry : in their airy


1086 MAGIC.

flight when they come to a steeple^ they set the kidnapped
children (p. 1078) down on the church-roof^ who are then mere
jackdaws to look at; in the meantime they scrape the bell loose,
and lag it away, and afterwards let the metal drop through the
clouds, crying : ' never let my soul draw near to 6od, any more
than this metal will be a bell again ! ' (see Suppl.).

The raising of hailstorms and spoiling of crops by magic reaches
back to the remotest antiquity of almost every nation. As
benignant gods make the fruits to thrive, as air-riding valkyrs
from the manes of their steeds let life-giving dew trickle down on
the plain (p. 421) ; so baneful beings of magic power strive to
annihilate all that is green. The Qreek Eumenides (a word that
even our oldest glosses translate by hftzasa) spoil the crops vnth
their slaver^ and the fruit with haHstones, Aesch. Eum. 753-68-77-
95. The Roman Twelve Tables imposed a penalty on him ' qui
f rages exeamtassit . • • sive . • . alienam* segetem pellexerit.' ^ In
the 8-9th cent. ' weather-making ' was alleged against sorcerers
rather than sorceresses; the passages given at p. 638 name only
tempestariif not tempestariae. So in Batherius p. 626 : ' contra
eos qui dicunt quod homo malus vel diaholus ^ tempestatem faciat,
lapides grandinum spergat, agros devastet, fulgura mütai, etc.
Those magicians in Burchard are called immissores tempestatum.
Sup. C, 10, 8; p. 194*. Yet in the North, ThorgerBr and Irpa,
who stir up storm and tempest, are women (p. 637), and the salt-
grinders Fenja and Menja giantesses ; their ship is like the mist-
ship of the clouds. How magicians set about their weather-
making, is nowhere specified. In much later authorities we find
them using a tub or a pitcher^ p. 593. In Ls. 2, 314 Master
Irreganc says (G. Abent. 3, 90) :

und kffim ein wann (tub) in mtn hant,

der hagel slueg (hail would beat) über allez lant.

In the ApoUon. von Tyrland (9183. 10970. 11010 seq.) are
mentioned pitchers, the emptying of which was followed by
showers and hail : one jug engendered lightnings and thunder-
bolts, another hail and shower, a third one rain and nipping

1 *Badi8 adhno antiqnitas oredebat et attrahi ixnbres oazitibxia, et repelli/
Beneca Nat. qoaest. 4, 7.

> The devil brings on gales and thandexstormB, p. 1000 ; bo does the giant, p. 636.


RAISING OF ST0BM8. 1087

winds. A woodcut in Keisersberg's Omeiss (ed. 1516, 36^) por-
trays three naked anbolden sitting on footstools^ distaffs and
horses' heads^ holding up pots, out of which shower and storm
meant up. A passage in the Badlieb is worth quoting: the
repenting culprit begs (6, 48),

post triduiim corpus toUatis ut ipsum
et comburatiSj in aquam cineres jaciatis,
nejvhar abscondat sol, aut aer neget imbrem,
ne per me grando dicatur laedere mundo.

Let her body be taken off the gallows and burnt, and the
cbshes be strown on water, lest, being scattered in air, it should
breed clouds, drought and liail. Just so the deviVs ashes are
strown to awaken storm and tempest, p. 1071-3; the Chronicon
S. Bertini states that Bichilde, before her fight with Robert the
Frisian, threw dust in the, air against the Frisians with formulas
of imprecation, but it fell back on her own head in token of
her speedy overthrow. She meant, like ThorgerSr and Irpa, to
destroy the enemy by tempest. Justinger's Chron. of Bern p.
205 relates how a woman, secretly sent for by a Count of Kyburg,
who promised not to betray her, stood on the battlements of his
castle, and uttering hidden words, raised clouds, rain and storm,
which scaitered his foes (a.D. 1382). The witches of Norway still
proceed exactly as the Yinlanders were said to do (p. 640) : they
tie up wind and foul weather in a ba^, and at the proper moment
undo the knots, exclaiming 'wind, in the devil's name!' then
a storm rushes out, lays waste the land, and overturns ships at
sea. By Hartlieb's account (Sup. H, cap. 34), old women sacri-
fice to devils, that they may make hail and shower. According to
Grerman records of the 16-17 cent., witches assemble in crowds
by waterbrooks or lakes, and flog the water with rods, till a fog
rises, which gradually thickens into black clouds ; on these clouds
they a/re borne up, and then guide them toward the spots to
which they mean mischief. They also place magic pots in the
water, and stir them round.^ The windsach is mentioned a few
times (Voigt 131). They make blue lights trickle into the water,
throvr flintstones into the air, or trundle barrels whose bursting
begets tempest. They gather oak^leaves in a man*s shirt, and

^ Conf. p. 59&-7 on stoim-ralslng by throwing stones and pooling oat water.


1088 MAGIC.

'when it is full^ hang it on a tree : a wind springs up directly^
that drives all rain away^ and keeps the weather fine. Oat of a
small piece of cloud a witch made a deal of bad weather (Arx
Buchsgan p. 103). A violent thunderstorm lasted so long^ that
a huntsman on the highway loaded his gun with a consecrated
bullet^ and shot it ofE into the middle of the blackest cloud ; out
of it (as out of the ship^ p. 638) a naked female fell dead to the
ground^ and the storm blew over in a moment (Moneys Anz. 4^
809). In Carinthia the people shoot at storm-clouds, to scare
away the evil spirits that hold counsel in them. The parson
being credited with power to charm the weather, the women
bring apronf als of hailstones into his house : ' there, that's his
rightful tithe of the weather, as he did not see good to keep it
away'; Sartori's Journ. in Austria 2, 153-4. In some parts of
France whole families are suspected of having the hereditary
power to raise a storm: they meet on the lake-side, not less
than three at a time, and lash the water up with horrible cries ;
this is done at night before sunrise, and a violent storm is the
immediate consequence, M6m. de I'acad. celt. 2, 206-7. Such
people are called meneurs des nuees, M6m. des antiq. 1, 244. In
Germany witches were commonly called, by way of insult, wetter-
macherin, wetterhexe, wetterkatze, donnerkatze, nebelhexe, strahl-
hexe, blitzhexe, zessenmacherin (from the old zessa, storm), and
earlier, wolkengüsse, cloud-gushes, Ms. 2, 140^^. The OHG.
Wolchandrut, a woman's name in Trad. Fuld. 2, 101, need have
had none but perfectly innocent associations : the valkyr either
rides in the clouds or sprinkles from ^h&va fertilizing dew; so
even the strewing of ashes on the field may originally have in-
creased their fertility. Occasionally feldfrau and feldspinnerin
are used of a witch; is it because she passes over field and
meadow, or spins magic threads? (conf. p. 1099). Who knows
but that the popular saying, when it snows, ' the old wives are
shaking their coats out ' (de aule wiver schiiddet den pels ut,
Strodtm. p. 336), is, properly understood, identical with that
on p. 268 : ' dame Holle is making her bed ' ? Goddess, valkyr,
witch: the regular gradation of such myths. To the Greeks
Zeus himself was still ve<l>€\i]y€pira, to the Serbs the vila gathers
clouds. In Scandinavia too, hail and hurricane proceed from
those half-goddesses ThorgerSr and Irpa, not as injurious to


BEWITCHING OF CROPS. 1089

crops^ bnt perilous to armies;^ Sn. 175 makes a sorceress bear
the very name El, procella* (see Suppl.).

Bat sometimes the aim of sorcery is not so mnch to destroy
the produce, as to get possession of it, to carry it off the field,
either to one's own gamer, or that of a favourite.' Even the
Bomans speak of this : ' satas alio traducere messes,' Vii'g* Eel.
8, 99 ; ' cantus vicinis fruges traducit ab agris,' Tibull. i. 8, 19.
People fancied, that when unholden walked through a vineyard
and shooJc the vines, the grapes came out of the neighbour's plot
into theirs (Hartm. segenspr. 341). An old dalesman gave his
granddaughter a staff, and told her to stick it in the com at a
certain spot in a field; the girl on her way was overtaken by a
shower, took refuge under an oak, and left the staff standing
there : when she got home, she found a great heap of oak-leaves
in her grandfather's loft (ibid. p. 342). We also hear of
vine-shoots being boiled in a pot, probably to spoil the vineyard.
The poison-herbs of witches boil and evaporate under the open
sky.

We are told of witches bathing naked in the sand^ or in com ;
I know not for what purpose; Superst. I, 519 speaks of rolling
naked in the flax. Three witches were seen going to a field of
rye, laying aside their garments, and bathing in the com with
their hair hanging loose. When witnesses approached, two
vanished suddenly, leaving their clothes behind, the third hud-
dled her smock on (Voigt 130 — 2). Has this to do with corn-
wives and rye-aunts p. 477 ?

Witches and sorcerers use various implements, of which for
the most part no exact description is given. Of the wand with
which the old magicians are usually armed, I find no mention
in our tales, for when the wishing-rod is named, it is as a higher
and noble instrument ; yet the staff or stick that witches are said

^ As the whirlwind is ascribed to the devil (p. 1008) so it is to witches (Sup. I,
654. 648). Kilian 693 remarks, that it is also caUed varende w%f^ travelling woman,
i.e. air-riding sorceress ; conf. wind'B bride p. 632, and ' rushing like a wind's-bride
through the land,' Simplic. 2, 62.

' Is she called MÖlar 6d2, sun's bale, because she darkens the sun with her
storm-cloud ? Or may we go farther back to heathen times, and impute to the
witch, as to the wolf, a swaUowing of tun and moon f To me it looks the more
likely from the name hveUsvelg himins, swallower of heaven's wheel.

* Conf . the convenient corn-dragon (p. 1019) and home-sprite.

* Fowls are said to ' bathe in sand ' : Lith. kutenas' wisztos iiegzdrosa ; Lett.
perrinatees ; Pol. kuxy si^ w piasku k4pi% ; Serv. leprshatise.


1090 MAGIC.

to ride may originally have been carried in the hand. I also
find the stick spoken of as the wizard's third leg (Mone's Anz. 7,
426). In Bavarian records the so-called making of mice or pigs
(fackel for ferkel) is often mentioned : the witch has a four-
legged implement, dark-yellow, hard and stiff; this she holds
nnder a figure of a mouse or pig that she has made oat of a
napkin, and says ' Bun away, and come back to me 1' the figore
becomes a live animal, and rons away ; probably to fetch her
something of other people's. Hence a witch is called maits^
schlägerin, moose-beater, and a wizard matts-schlägeL In North
German trials the expression is miise-maker, and the process is
different: the witch boils magic herbs, then cries, 'Moose,
mouse, come oot in devil's name!' and the beasts come jump-
ing oot of the pot (Laffert's Belat. crim. p. 57-9). It reminds
one of the destroctive mice created by Apollo Smintheos in his
wrath, and the devastations of lemings in Lapland ; so that this
plague may with perfect right take its place with the desolating
storm and hail, although our witch-trials say hardly anything of
the damage done by the magic beasts (conf. Klausen's Aeneas
p. 73 — 5). One Nethl. story in Wolf no. 401 relates how a
young girl flung two pellets of earth one after the other, and in
a moment the whole field swarmed with mice. Swedish tradition
tells of a bjäraun or bare, which (says Ihre, dial. lex. 18") was a
milking-pail made by tying together nine sorts of stolen weaver's
knots. You let three drops of blood fall into it out of your
little finger, and said :

p& jorden (on earth) skal to for mig springa,
i BlakuUa skal jag for thig brinna I

The name comes from the vessel conveying (bära) milk and other
things to the houses of the devil-worshippers. Hülphers (Fierde
saml. om Angermanland. Yesteras 1780, p. 310) describes it as
a round hau made of rags, tow and juniper, etc., and used in
several magic tricks : it ran out and brought things in. It starts
off the moment the sender cuts his left little finger and lets the
blood fall on it :

smör och ost (butter and cheese) skal du mig bringa,
och derfbr (ekal jag) i helfvetet brinna (in hell-fire bom) 1


APPARATUS : MICE, WAX FIGURES. 1091

Who can help thinking of Goethe's Magician's Apprentice with
his water-fetching broom ?

Of the same kind seems to have been the Icelandic sruickr,
which commonly means a weaver's spool. It is made, says
Biörn, of a dead man's rib in the shape of a snake, and wrapt in
gray wool; it sncks at the witch's breast, after which it can sack
other people's cattle dry, and bring their milk home^ (see
SnppL).

Of wider diffusion is sorcery with the sieve, which I shall speak
of by and by; and with wctx figures, to which if you did anything
while uttering secret words, it took effect on absent persons. The
wax figure {aJtzmcmn) was either hung up in the air, plunged in
water^ fomented at the fire, or stabbed with needles and buried
under the door-sill : the person aimed at feels all the hurts in-
flicted on the figure (Sup. G, line 28; H, cap. 79).^ In Aw. 2, 55
a travelling student says :

Mit wunderHchen Sachen

I£r ich sie (I teach her) denne machen

von wahs einen hobolt,

wil sie daz er ir werde holt (he grow kind to her),

und töuf ez' in den brunnen,

und leg in an die sunnen ;

but counter-agencies make the danger recoil on the conjuror
himself.^ Magic figures can also be baked of dough or lime, and

^ The Lapps have a magie vessel qnohdat (Leem p. 421 gpella govdes), cat out
of fir, pine or birch with the grain running from right to left ; it is open under-
neath, but covered with a sJdn at the top. The Lapl. adepts drum on this skin
with a hammer.

^ Conf. Daamonomanie, Fisohart's transl., Btrasb. 1591 fol. p.143-4.

* I.e. tauche es, dip it into the fountain ; if we took it as taufet baptize, we
should have to read * in dem brunnen.'

4 Schimpf und ernst cap. 272 tells the following story : A certain man went to
Borne, for to seek S. Peter and S. Paul ; and when he was gone, his wife loved
another, that was what men call a scholar-errant, and did covet her to wife. The
woman saith, * my good man is departed unto Bome, were he dead, or couldst thou
take away his life, then would I have thee of all men.' He said, * yea truly I can
take his life ; * and buyeth wax about six pound, and maketh an image thereof.
Now when the good man was come to Bome into the city, there came one to him
and spake : * O thou son of death, what goest thou up and down 7 If none help
thee, this day shall see thee lüive and dead.* The man asked, ' how should that
be ? * And he said, * come to my house, and I will shew it thee.' And having
brought him home, he prepared for him a waterbath, and set him therein, and gave
him a mirror, saying, * look thou therein,' and sat beside him, reading in a book,
and spake unto him, * behold in the glass, what seest thou therein ? ' The man in
the bath said, * I see one in mine house, that setteth up a waxen image on the wall,

VOL. III. O


1092 MAGIC.

wroaght out; of metal, bat wax made by the sacred bee (p. 696)
appears the most appropriate ; their manafacture is a mimicry of
divine creation (p. 570), but it succeeds only up to a certain
point. In Pulci's Morgante 21, 73 a witch possesses an image
made of the pure wax of young bees (delle prime api), and
having every limb except one rib : ^ the witch's own vitality is
bound up with the figure, and when Malagigi melts it at a slow
fire, she dwindles away. That such figures were sometimes
baptized, is shewn by a sermon of Berthold's (Cod. pal. 35 foL
27^) : ' so nimpt diu her und tauft ein wachs, diu ein holz, diu eia
tötenpein (dead man's bone), allez daz sie domit bezouber; '^ and
this proves the connexion of magical appliances with superstitioas
healing appliances. As the sick and the restored used to conse-
crate and hang up in churches an image or a limb of wax, so by
images the witch maimed and killed. No doubt this kind of
conjuring goes back to the oldest times; we find it in Ovid^
Amor. iii. 7, 29 :

Sagave punicea defixit nomina cera,
et medium tenues in jecur egit acus ?

and goeth and taketh his crossbow, and having bent it, will $hoot at the image,^
Then said the other, ' as thou lovest thy life, duck tliee under the water when h«
shall shoot.* And the man did so. And again he read in the book, and spake

* behold, what seest thou ? * The man saic^ * I see that he hath missed, and is ex-
ceeding sorry, and my wife with him ; the scholar-errant aetteth to, and will shoot
the second time, and goeth the half way toward.' * Dack thee when he shall shoot.'
And he dacked. Saith the other, * look, what seest thou ? * The man said, ' I see
that he hath missed, and is sore troubled, and speaketh to the woman, If now I
miss the third time, I am [a man] of death ; and setteth to, and aimeth at the
figure very near, that he may not miss.' Then spake he that read in the book,

* duck thee 1 ' And the man ducked from the shot. And he said, ' look up, what
seest thou ? * * I see that he hath missed, and the arrow u gone into Aim, and is
dead, and my wife bestoweth him in the basement below.* Then said he, * arise now,
and go thy way.' And the man would have given him much, but he would take no-
thing, and said, * pray God for me.' When the citizen was come home again, and
his wife would have kindly received him, he would take no pity on her, but sent to
bid her friends, and spake to them, what manner of wife they had given him, and
shewed them everything, how she had borne herself« The woman stead&Mtly
denied it ; then led he the friends to the place where she had dug him in, and
dug him out again. And the people took the woman, and burned her, the which
was her just reward. — The story comes from the Gesta Bom. (ed. Keller cap. 102 ;
transL ed. Keller p. 160) ; but one ought to compare the fresh story from Finnish
Lapland in Afzelius 1, 48.

^ As the rib serves for further creation (^. 562), and for making miraonloos
apparatus (pp. 907. 1091), imperfect creation is destitute of it.

' Quidam ( Judaeorum) ad similitudinem episcopi (Eberhardi Treverensis, in
11th cent.) ceream ifnaginem lycnis interpositam facientes, clericum ut eam hap*
tuaret pecunia corruperunt, quam ipso sabbato acoenderunt; qua jam ex parte
media consumpta, episoopus coepit graviter infirmari, et obiit (Hist. Trev.).


WAX FIGURE. WEBBWOLF. 1093

CompAre Horace^ Epod. 17, 76: 'movere cereas imagines/
Theocritus 2, 28 has the wax-meliing very plainly : m tovtov tov
tcapov iya> ai>y Saifiovi raKto, &9 raxoiff* im* epoDTo^, bat not that
it was an image. In Virgil, Eel. 8, 74 seq., a magic figure
(terque haec altaria circum effigiem duco) seems to be made of
lime and wax (see Snppl.).

An ancient custom, very similar to this of hanging up and
thawing the atzmann, was to cut out the earth or turf on which
had rested the foot of one whom you wish to destroy. This erd-
schnitt as Vintler calls it (Sap. G, 1. 92) is hung in the chimney,
and as it begins to wither or dry up, the man too shall waste
away (I, 524. 556). It was already known to Burchard (C, p.
200*). To fetch up a comrade from a foreign land, you boil his
stockings ; or you pat his shoes in a new pot, and with it draw
water against the current, then boil the shoes in the pot four days
long; when they are past, he will come, says Hessian superstition
(see SuppL). You can lame a horse by driving a nail into his
recent footprint, and discover a thief by putting tinder in his (I,
978). Pliny 28, 20 says : 'vestigium equi excussum ungula (ut
solet plerumque) si quis coUectum reponat, singultus remedium
esse recordantibus quonam loco id reposuerint ; ^ a cure for hic-
cough if you remember where you put it.

Our magicians have also, in common with those of Greece and
Bome, the power of assuming an animal shape (in itself a divine
attribute, p. 326) : the men prefer changing into a wolf or hawk,
the women into a cat or swan ; to translate it into the language
of our heathen time, they addict themselves to the service of
"Wuotan, of Frouwa. These metamorphoses are either voluntary
or compulsory : the higher being in his might puts on the animal
shape that suits him, or he dooms a man to wear it in punish-
ment or vengeance. In the stories it is often a mother-in-law or
stepmother that transforms children, ON. siiupmoSar shop, Fom-
ald. sog. 1, 31. 58.

Herodotus 4, 105 says of the Neuri, that among Scythians and
Greeks settled in Scythia they pass for magicians (7017x69), be-
cause once a year every Neurian becomes a wolf for a few days,
and then resumes the human form (ca9 €T€09 hcdarov awa^ r&v
Nevp&v S/caaro^ \vK09 ytverai fjfiipa^ oKiya^f xal airi^ oirltrw ^9
TiovTo KarlaTaroi). Similar accounts are in Pliny 8, 34. Pomp.


1094 MAGIC.

Mela 2, 1. Aagustine Civ. Dei 18, 17: 'his ego saepe lupum
fieri et se condere silvis Moerin • • . vidi/ yirg. EcL 8, 97.
A man distinguished by this gift or malady was called
XviedvOpcmro^} a word-formation to which the AS. werewvlf
{Leges Canuti, Schmid 1, 148), Engl, werewolf, exactly corre-
sponds ; Goth, vairavnlfs f OHG. werawolf f MHG. poets have
no werewolf. The ON. uses vargr alone (RA. 733. Reinh.
xxxvii), verAlfr in Sn. 214*^ is a sword's name, the Swed. Dan.
varulff varulv, seem formed' on a Romance or German model. I
find werwolf &rst in Bnrchard (Sup. C, p. 198') ; though Boniface
before him couples ' strigas et ß^os lupos credere ' (Serm., in
Mart, et Dur. 9, 217). The Fr. loup-garou {wa/rou in 0. Fr.
poems) might seem a distortion of warulf ; garulf (Gervase of
Tilb. writes gerulphtis), but then the Breton dialect has also its
llmz-garou, -garo (fr. bleiz, wolf), and den-vleiz, man- wolf (fr. den,
man), grek-vleiz (femme-loup) ; bisclaveret in Marie de France 1,
178 is apparently a corruption of bleizgarv, as the Norman garwal
is of guarwolf The Pol. wilkolak, wilkoteh, Boh. wlkodlaJc,
strictly means wolf-haired, and suggests the hairy wood-sprite,
p. 480. The Serv. vukodlac signifies a vampire. From wilks
(wolf) the Letten forms wilhits (werewolf), Wilkaächa radda ds.
1644.

Our oldest native notions make the assumption of wolf-shape
depend on arraying oneself in a wolf -belt or wolf -shirt (Alfa-hamr),
as translation into a swan does on putting on the swan-shift or
swan-ring (p. 427-8).« One who wears a wolf-belt, ftlfhamr, is
called in OHG. wolfhetan, ON. ulfheffinn (the "5 repres. an orig.
d) ; especially do raging berserkir become ülfheÖhir : ' J?eir höfiSa
vargstakkar fyrir brynjur,' Vatnsdoela saga 36. 'beraerkir )?eir
v&ru kalla«ir Mfhiedar (r. ülfheSnir),' Grettissaga 32». We also
find a man's name UlfheÖinn, and OHG. Wolfhetan, MB. 28, nos.

» Among the iEsopian FablfiB is a merry gest {Ck)r. 426. Fur. 423) : A thief
pretends to his host, that when he has yawned three timet, he becomes a werevoU
(ÖToy o9y x^ftrfeu t/mU /3oXdf , yhofxai Uxot iffBUoP ipSptbrow) ; the timid host nm«
away, and the rogue gets possession of his gfument. Petronius in Sat. 62 mentions
a peenhar method of metamorphosis : • iU^ eircumminxit vestimenta sna, et snbito
Input f actus est ; vestimenta lapidea facta sunt.* Conf . cap. 67 : * si cirenmminxero
illnm, nesdet qua fugiat.' '

« The girdU was an essential article/)! dress, and early ages ascribe to it other
SÄ"^ ^*^*^^ ' ^'^' '^^^^'^ ^^® strfagth lay in his girdle {megingiörS, lern.),


WEBBWOLF. 1095

52. 246. Aparfc from wolves^ we have bi&rnheSinn^ geithe^inn,
i.e. dressed in a bearskin^ goafcskin; as a proper name^ both
Biamhe&inn, Landn. 4b, and a simple He&lnn, ancestor of the
Hiadhingar, AS. Heodeningas fr. Heden or Heoden. The vowel
is therefore e (not e)^ and we must suppose a lost verb OHG«
hetan^ hat^ pi. h&tum^ G-oth. hidan^ had, hfidum. Lye quotes a
' heden, casla/ meaning prob, casula^ robe ; and an ON. geithe-
Sinn is supposed to be 'pallium e pelle caprina'j but I prefer
to take Wolfhetan as a participle. We see then, that the trans-
formation need not be for a magical purpose at all : any one that
puts on, or is conjured into, a wolf-shirt, will undergo metamor-
phosis, remain a wolf nine days, and only on the tenth be allowed
to return to human shape ^; some stories make him keep the
wolf-body for three, seven or nine years. With the appearance,
he acquires also the fierceness and howling, of the wolf: roaming
the woods, he rends to pieces everything that comes in his way.^
Fornald. sog. 1, 50 speaks of a Miosta me^S ülßiandeha/ striking
with wolfs glove, by which a person is turned into a bear, and
wears the animal form by day, the human at night. In a similar
way the notion of werewolves also gets mixed up with that of
outlaws who have fled to the woods. A notable instance is that
of Sigmund and Sinfiötli (ibid. 2, 180-1) : when they sleep, their
wolf-shirts hang beside them.

Werewolves thirst for youthful blood, and carry off children
and maidens with reckless audacity. Out of many stories in
Woycicki 1, 101—113. 152—8 I select only this : A witch
twisted her girdle together, and laid it on the threshold of a house
where there was a wedding ; when the newly married pair stepped


1 It is also beUeved, that every ninth day the seal (Belr) doffe his fishy skin, and
is for one day a man (Thiele 3, 61). In medieval Germany the nine years* wolf was
supposed to give birth to adders, Ms. 2, 234^ ; to which may be compared Loki's
b^etting the wolf Fenrir and the snake lörmungandr (p. 246), and that gandi
again means wolf.

3 A married donple lived in poverty ; yet, to the man*s astonishment, his wife
contrived to serve up meat' at every meal, concealing for a long time how she
obtained it *, at length she promised to reveal the secret, only, while she did so, he
mast not prononnoe her name. They went together to the fields, where a flock of
sheep was grazing, the woman bent her steps toward it, and when they were come
near, she threw a ring over herself, and instantly became a werewolf, which fell upon
the flock, seized one sheep, and made off with it. The man stood petrified; but
when he saw shepherd and dogs run after the wolf, and his wife in danger, he forgot
his promise, and cried * ach Margareit 1 ' The wolf disappeared, and the woman
stood naked in the field (Hess. Folktale).


1096 MAGIC.

over it, the bride, bridegroom and six bridesmen were turned
into werewolves. They fled from the cottage, and for three years
ran howling round the witch's house. At length the day of their
deliverance came. The witch brought a pelisse with the fur
turned outwards, and as soon as she covered a werewolf with it,
his huQian shape returned ; the covering reached over the bride-
groom's body, all but the tail, so he became a man again, but kept
the wolfs tail. Schafarik (Slow. st. 1, 167) observes, that in a
very marked degree these wolf-stories are native to Volhynia
and White Russia, and thence draws an argument for his opinion
that the Neqri were a Slavic race.

According to the French Lai de Melion pp. 49. 50, the man,
when undressed,^ must be touched with a magic ring : forthwith
he turns into a wolf, and runs after game. Marie de Fr. 1, 182
makes a knight become a bisclaveret three days every week, and
run about naked in the wood ; if the clothes he has laid aside
be removed, he has to remain a wolf.* Pluquet (Cont. pop. 15)
remarks, that he can only be delivered by being beaten with a key
till he bleeds.

The common belief among us is, that the transformation is
effected by tying a strap round the body ; this girth is only three
fingers broad, and is cut out of human skin. Such a werwolf is
to be distinguished from natural wolves by his truncated tail.
From the witch-records of Lorrain we learn, that when stalks of
grass were pulled up, blessed and thrown against a tree, wolves
sprang forth, and immediately fell upon the flock; Remigius
pp. 152. 162 leaves it doubtful whether the men that threw the
grass themselves turned into wolves, but from p. 261 we can think
no otherwise. Bodin's Dasmonomanie (Fischart's transl. p. 120
seq.) has several werewolf stories. Rhenish and Westphalian
superstition makes men alone become wolves ; maids and matrons
change into an utterbock (uddered buck, hermaphrodite f ) : an
uncanny old hag is called ' the cursed utterbock 1 ' According to
a peculiar Danish superstition (K, 167), if a bride uses a certain
specified charm to secure painless labour, her sons become var»


' Bnt he begs people to keep his clothes safe for him: ^ma despoille me
gardez,* as in the Aesopian fable : Zioiud cWf tva ^^vKi^yt rd IfiäTid /jlov.

* I have not read Üie O.E. tale of WilUam and the Werewolf in Hartshome*s
Anc. metr. tales.


WOLF. BEAB. CAT. 1097

Hive, her daaghters mwrer (nightmares). Thiele 1, 133 remarks,
that the werewolf goes in human shape by day, yet so that his
eyebrows grow together over the nose,^ bat at a certain time of
night he tarns into a three-legged dog, and can only be set free
by some one calling him 'werewolf.' Barchard's acconnt also
seems to make lycanthropy something innate to man (see Snppl.)

That a change of the human form into that of the bea/r should
also be familiar to Norse antiquity, is no surprising thing, as that
animal was considered rational (Beinh., app» on p. Ivi), and held
in high esteem, p. 667. Finnbogi talks to him, and calls him
bessi, Finnb. saga p. 246. A Danish song makes the trans-
formation take place by tying an iron collar round one's neck,
DV. 1, 184. In Norway it is believed that the Laplanders turn
into bears : of a bear that is uncommonly daring and destructive
they say, 'this can't be any christian bear.' An old bear in
Ofoden's prastegjeld, who had killed six men and over sixty
horses, had the same reputation, and when at last he was slain,
a girdle is said to have been found on him (Sommerfelt Saltd«
prästeg. p. 84).

Conversion into the cat has most of all to do with the works
and ways of home-sprites (pp. 503-9) : there is nowhere the
slightest hint of donning any belt or shirt. It is a common
saying, that a cat of twenty years turns witch, and a witch of
a hundred turns cat again. Yintler (Sup. 6, 1. 232) notices the
assumption of cat-shape. As was the case with night-wives
(p. 1060), examples occur in almost every witch- trial, and particu-
larly common is the story of the wounded cat, whom you after-
wards recognise in a bandaged woman. Cats meeting you are
of double meaning. Sup. I, 643. One should never hurt a strange
cat ; the witch might serve you out. A farmer took on to ail
from the day of his wedding : on that day he had shied a stone
at a cat that walked into his yard with a saddle on her. The
saddled cat is a kind of Puss-in-boots, KM. 3, 259. Wolf's
Wodana pp. 123. 131 has stories of magic cats. But the cat is
also to be spared because she was Frouwa's favorite beast
(p. 305) : if it rains on your wedding-day, they say in the Wette-
ran ' you have sta/rved the cat/ and so offended the messenger or

1 Otherwise a mark of the witoh or wizard who can set the alb on other men :
he oomee oat of their eyebrows in butterfly ahape, Dent. sag. 1, 132.


1098 MAGIC.

handmaid of the love-goddesB. Now night-wives and witches
apparently travel in the train of that divinity*

The goose too is a magic beast, and easily referable to the
nobler swan of older legend. A sportsman shot at some wild
geese and hit one, which fell into the bnshes j when he came up
to the place, there sat a naked woman unhurt, whom he knew
very well, and who begged hard that he would not betray her,
but get some clothes sent her from her house. He threw her his
handkerchief to cover herself with, and sent the clothes (Mone's
Anz. 6, 395). Niclas von Wyle,in the Dedication to his translation
of Apuleius, tells us of a diEferent case, which he had heard from
the lips of Michel von Pfnllendorf, clerk to the Imp. treasury :
An innkeeper had through a wotnan^s witcheries (gemocht, conf .
make = conjure, p. 1082) been a wild goose for more than a year,
and flown about with other such geese, till one day a goose that
he was quarrelling and snapping with, happened to tear from off
his neek the little kerchiff in which the enchantment was knit up :
again therefore a swan-ring, ezcepC that the witch does not wear
it herself, but has changed an innocent man into the beast, just
as werewolves are by turns enchanters and enchanted. In
Kinderm. 193 white, strips of cloth take the place of the swan-
shift.

As the raven stands on a par with the wolf, we may fairly
assume transformations of magicians into ravens, though I can
think of no example : trolds in Dan. songs often appear as ravens,
p. 993. Perhaps witches may be found turning into crows rather,
as we already hear of an öskmey (wish-maid. Vols. cap. 2) : ' hun
br& & sik hraku ham, ok fl^gr ; ' and Marpalie in Wolfdietrich doffe
her gannents, claps her hands (p. 1026 n.) and turns into a erow
(see Suppl.).

If the cast-off clothing, human or animal, be removed (p. 427-9),
a re-assumption of the former shape becomes impossible ; hence
in legend and fairytale the practice of secretly burning the beast's
hide when stript off.* Yet the human shape may be restored on
this condition, that a spotless maid keep silence for seven years,
and spin and sew a shirt to be thrown over the enchanted person,
KM. 1, 53. 246. 3, 84. And such a shirt not only undoes the

* Aw. 1, 166. KM. 2, 264. Straparola 2, 1. Pentam 2 6 Vnk 1 tttJt
seq. Fornald. sog. 2, 160-1. r&nam. z, ö. yujl l. «xix


GOOSE. BAVEN. CBOW. EVIL EYE. 1099

charm, bat makes one spell-proof and victorious (Sap. I, 656.
708) ; ^ in the last passagOj victory in a lawsuit has taken the
place of the old victory in battle. In the Mid. Ages it was called
SL Oeorge^B shirt, and was spun on a Satwrday (Yintler ; conf.
Sup. I, 333 the thread spv/n on Christmas night) ; Wolf dietrich
receives it from Siegminne, i.e. from a wise spinning nom or
valkyr (p. 434) : obviously the old heathen idea was afterwards
transferred to the conquering saint of the christian church. Not
unlike are the golden shirt that defends from drowning, Beow.
] 095, and the frid-hemede (App. Spells x) ; a woven Sag of victory
will be mentioned p. 1112. To me these famous shirts of fate
seem connected with the threads and webs of the noms and dame
Holda. A OAgic weaving and spinning was probably ascribed
to witches, who in Sup. I, 824 sixq qisMqA. field-spinsters ; and Bur-
chard's allusions to the superstition 'in lanificiis et ordiendis
telis ' are worth comparing, Sup. G, int. 52, and p. 193^. Hincmar
of Bheims (0pp. 1, 656) speaks of sorceries ' quas superventas
feminae in suis lanificiis vel textilibus operibus nominant ' ; again
p. 654 : ' quidam etiam vestibvs carminatis indnebantur vel co-
operiebantur.' ' A similar thing is the magic and spell in the
case of swords, conf. p. 687»8 (see Suppl.).

There may be magic in the mere look, without bodily contact,
what our old speech called entsehen (p. 1035), Ital. gettare gli
sgnardi, Neapol. jettatura, fascino dei malvagi occhi. The
bleared, envious, evil eye ^ of a witch who walks in (Sap. I, 787),
let alone her hrecuth and greeting, can injure in a moment, dry up
the mother's milk, make the babe consumptive, spoil a dress, rot
an apple, visu fcaeinare (p. 1066 and Sup. G, p. 199^) : ' the coat
is BO handsome, the apple so red, no evil eye (onda öga. Sup.
Swed. 57) must look upon it ; ' hurtful look, Sup. I, 874 ; obliquus
oeulus, Hor. Epist. i« 14, 37. Of sick cattle eq)ecially they say :

^ This shirt of victory remindB as of the child's shirt of hiek (p. 874), which in
DenmArk is likewise called a rtctor*« shirt (seyers-hue, -hielm, -serk). If we may
ascribe high antiqatty to the phrase ' bom with helmet oDi' such seyers-hielm fore-
tells the future hero. Conf. Bulenger 8, 80 on amniomantia, i.e. divinatio per
amnimn sen membranam tertiam embtyonis.

9 Diaenchanting or defensive shirts have their counterpart in bewitching baneful
ones. In a Servian song (Vuk 8, 80, 1. 786) a gold shirt is neither spun nor woven,
but knitted, and a snake is worked into the collar. The shirt sent to Herakles,
drenched in dragon's blood, is well known.

* Übel ougen^ Pans. 407, 8 are spiteful eyes ; whereas * ein bcsset ottge ' 71» 16 is
a weak, sore eye.


1100 MAGIC.

' some evil eye has been at it * ; to look at a beast with sharp
eyes. In Virgil's Eel. 3, 103 : ' nescio quis teneros oculus mihi
fascinat agnos.' The Renner 18014 says, the glance of the eye
kills snakes, scares wolves, hatches ostrich-eggs, breeds leprosy.
Badulfi ardentis Homil. 42* : ' cavete ab illis qai dicnnt, qaosdam
oculis urentibus alios fascinare.' Persins 2, 34 has urentes oculi ;
and /o^cmord, ßcurKaiveiv with the ancients meant chiefly this kind
of sorcery. The ON. expression is sum-hverfing, look-throwing :
' sundr stank sftla for sion iötnns,' asunder burst the pillar at the
look of the giant, SaDm. 53^* Sttgandi can by his look destroy
anything ; when taken prisoner, they pull a bag over his head
(dreginn belgr & höfut honnm) : he peeps through a hole in the
sack, and with one look spoils a field of grass, Laxd. p. 152-6.
Different and yet similar are the sharp eyes of certain heroes
(p. 391) and maids, e.g. Svanhildr being bound is to be kicked
to death by horses : ' er hnn (when she) bra % sundr augum, piL
)7orSu eigi (dared not) hestamir at spora hana ; ok er Bikki sä
]^t, maDlti hann, at beig skyldi draga & höfu*S henni/ Fomald.
sog. 1, 226. And of one SigurSr we are told in Fomm. sog.
2, 174: 'at hann hefSi snart augnahragffy at allir hnndar hnrf a
frft honum, ok var enginn svä grimmr at ]>yrSi ft hann at rft'Sa,
er hann hvesti augun tmdt )?eim,' as dogs cannot endure the look
of spirits and gods (p. 667). Any one possessed of this perilous
power, who is evil-eyed, can prevent its baneful operation by
directing his looks to a lifeless object. The phrase ' no one shall
say black is your eye' means, no one can exactly report any
harm of you (Brockett p. 66). Has that peculiar conformation
of the witch's eye-pupil (p. 1080) anything to do with her evil
eye ? As a safeguard against its influence, the paw of the blind
mole is worn ^ (see Suppl.) .

But as great beauty enchants by the radiant glance of the
eye, it has also magic power in the smiling of the lips. In a
Mod. G-reek song, when the charming maid laughs, roses fall into
her apron {ottov y€\f, xal wi^TOVve rä ßoSa \ rifv ttoSuiv t^?),
Fauriel 2, 382. In Heinr. von Neuenstadt's Apollonins of
Tyre, composed about 1400, it is asked 1. 182 : 'wft sach man

^ It is another thing for oonjorora to blind the eye» of men by jugglery : * gont
et praestigiatores, qni alio nomine obttrigilli yooantur, qaod praeetringant vel
obstringant homanorom aoiem ooolorum/ Hinom. Bern. ed. 1645. 1, 656.


LOOKS. LAUGHING. KISSING. DBINKS. 1101

rosen lachen f ' and then follows a tale abont a man who laughs
roses :

' der lachet, daz ez vol rosen wasj

perg and tal^ lanb nnd gras.'

A Nethl. proverb (Tninman 1, 306) says : ' als hy lacht, dan
sneuwt het rozen,' The myth must have been very popular, as I
frequently find in records (e.g. Bohmer's Cod. francof. 1, 185),
and even at the present day, the names Rosenlacher, Bosenlächler,
Blumlacher, The same poem of ApoUonius has at 1. 2370 :

er kuste sie wol dreissig stunt (30 times)
an iren rosenlachenden munt (mouth) ;

other passages to the point are quoted Aw. 1, 74-5. Gifted
children of fortune have the power to laugh roses, as Freyja wept
gold ; probably in the first instance they were pagan beings of
light, who spread their brightness in the sky over the earth,
'rose-children, sun-children,' Greorg 48-9, laughing daybreaks
(p. 747), rose-streunng Eos (p. 749). Mart. Cap. says, a silver urn
'qu89 praaferebat Serena fulgentia et vemantis coeli temperie
renidebat' was called risus Jovis (see SuppL).

The hissing mouth has even greater power than the smiling.
It is a recurring feature in our nursery-tales, that a kiss makes
one forget everything (KM. 2, 168. 508), yet also that it brings
back remembrance (2, 463). The unbinding of a spell hangs
upon a kiss (p. 969). In the Norse legends oblivion is produced
by a potion called ominnis-öl (-ale), ominnis-dryckr, the opposite
of minnis'ol (p. 59) : such an öminnisöl Grimhild hands to SigurS,
who thereupon forgets Brynhild ; and GoiSrun, before she could
forget SigurS and choose Atli, had to drink an ominnis-veig,
whose magical concoction the poem describes, SaDm. 223^. 234*.
So valkyrs, elfins and enchantresses offer to heroes their drinking-
horns (p. 420), that they may forget all else and stay with them ;
conf. the Swed. tale in Afzelius 2, 159. 160 and the song in
Arvidsson 2, 179. 282, where the miner makes the maiden drink
of the glömskans horn and forget father and mother, heaven and
earth, sun and moon. Now, seeing that minna in the Swed.
folksongs and minds in the Dan. signify to kiss (minna uppä
munnen, Sv. vis. 3, 123-4. D. vis. 1, 256. 298), as ^tXeZi^ is
amare and osculari, and with us in the 16th cent. ' to set the seal


1102 MAGIO.

of love ' is roundabout for kissing ; there must be a close ooimec-
tion between kissing and the minne-drinking at sacrifices and in
sorcery.^ Bat magic potions are of yarious kinds and extreme
antiquity, their manufacture trenches on the healing art and
poison-mixing (see Suppl.). Love-drinlcs have love-caJc^ to keep
them company. Borchard describes how women, after rolling
naked in wheat, took it to the mill, had it ground against the sun
(ON. andsoBlis, inverse ordine), and then baked it into bread.
Popular superstition in Samland makes out, that when a wife
perceives her husband growing indifferent toward her, she lays
aside a piece of the raw dough from nine successive bakings of
bread or scones, then bakes him a scone out of the pieces, on
eating which his former love returns. The Esthonians have a
karwakak (hair-bread), a loaf into which hairs have been baked
as a charm. The love-apples, in which symbols were inscribed
(Hoffm. Schles. monatsohr. p. 754), are to the same purpose (see
Suppl.).

There are certain safegvMrds in general use against magic One
should not answer a witch's question (Sup. I, 59), rhot thank her
for her greeting (568) ; for certain kindnesses and gifts, if they
are to do you good, it is advisable not to thank any one (398.
Swed. 35. 52. Esth. 94). A witch may be known by her thank*
ing you for lending things (I, 566) ; she never answers three times
(563).— Whatever she praises will turn out ill, unless you
promptly reply with railing, reviling, wishing ' the same to you *
(696), or spitting. To praise one to his face does harm, Pliny
28, 2. ' Si ultra placitum laudarit, baccare frontem ciogite, ne
vati noceat mala lingua future,' Virg, Eel. 7, 27 ; hence in prais-
ing oneself a 'praefiscini' (prae fascino ?) was added. Plant. Aain.
u. 4, 84. Insult and imprecation the ancients turned aside with
the words : eh tceifyaXijv aoi^ on thy head may it fall I — The Mod.
Greeks and Slavs are shy of praise, and try to save themselves
by spitting : a Russian nurse directly spits in the face of one who
cracks up her baby without putting in the precautionary * Grod
save the mark ! ' Before a witch's house you spit three times
(Sup. I, 756), the same in crossing a haunted water by night

ON L^!^*"*^.^" ^^^ ^^^^ ^^ * corruption of mynna (to give month),
weis™* °'''°^^' "'"'''*' ^'^- ^' ^^'5 ^^ **^« ""^^ eiplmition has its


8AFEGÜABDS. ]103

(Swed. 40) ; the Greeks at sight of a madman spat thrice into
their bosom, Theocp. 6, 89. 21, 11. 'ter dictis despue carminibas/
TibnlL i. 2, 55. Home-sprites cannot bear spitting (p. 514) ; conf.
Sap. I, 817. 458. To the same effect, and worth reading, is what
Pliny 28, 4 says on despuere, adaptiere, inspuere, exspuere. — In
case of need yon may withont scrapie strike a suspected witch,
and draw blood (p. 1096), or throw a firebrand at her (Sup. Swed.
d&j.-^Bread, salt and coals are a protective against magic (I, 564.
718), as witches abstain from bread and salt (p. 1071). I fancy
that pipping of the loaf, so distasteful to the wood-wives (p. 484),
was a sacred magic-averting symbol; conf. 'placenta digito
notata ' in Lasicz 49. — Throw a steel over enchanted beasts, and
they are boand to resume their natural shape (Sap. I, 886) ;^
throw a Jcnife marked with the cross over a witch, and you re-
cognise her (554) ; when a man threw steel between the elfin and
the hill, it prevented her going into it (p. 467) ; steel insures the
child in the cradle from being changed. Instances of mag^c thus
averted by steel we find in Faye 20. 24-5-6. 51. 141 ; conf. Sup.
Swed. 71. — ^Witches and devils shun the sign of the cross : that
is why we see so many crosses on the doors the first night in
'May. The peasant ploughs a cross into each comer of his field.
On the cradles of infants before they were christened, the cross
was lavishly employed to guard against elf or devil ; just so the
heathens used their hammer, and there is a remarkable vestige of
it forthcoming still : ' malleum, ubi pnerpera decumbit, obvolvunt
candido linteo* (Gisb. Yoetii sei. disput. theol. ültraj. 1659, pars
8 p. 121.) — No less do evil spirits hate and shun the sound of
hells (pp. 1022-74) ; it disturbs their dance at the cross-road. Sap.
I, 542. — ^To this must be added the methods mentioned p. 1078
of recognising witches and guarding against them (see Suppl.).

These are the most distinctive phenomena in the world of
Magic. Many, indeed most magic appliances run over into
Superstition, between which and magic proper it is impossible
to draw a fixed boundary. I have indeed put forward^ as a dis-
tinguishing mark of sorcery, the malicious design to do mischief,

1 A peasant was driving his waggon one night, when a werewolf approached. To
disenchant him, the man had the presence of mind instantly to tie his flre-tteel to
the lash of his whip, and fling it over the wolfs head, keeping the whip in his
hand. But the wolf oaoght the steel, and the peasant had to save himself by
speedy flight.


1104 MAGIC.

and it does seem to have resulted from inverting the wholesome
use of occalt forces in nature (pretty much as the devil from an
inversion of God, p. 986); but particular applications of the trae
and the false art cannot always be kept apart. As a herb, a
stone, a spell proves a source of healing, so may it also act
perniciously too ; the use was proper and permissible, the abuse
abhorred and punished. A poisoner as such is not a witch^ she
becomes one in the eyes of the people the moment she uses pre-
ternatural means. A wise woman, healing sickness and channing
wounds, begins to pass for a witch only when with her art she
does evil ; her means are as natural as the poison of the mur-
deress. To higher antiquity, witches were priestesses, physi-
cians, fabulous night- wives, whom men honoured, feared, and at
last made light of, but never dreamt as yet of persecuting and
executing. Maidens might turn into swans, heroes into were-
wolves, and lose nothing in popular estimation. In course of
time, when the DeviFs complicity with every kind of sorcery
came to be assumed, the guilt of criminality fell upon all personal
relations [with him] ; but the people for the most part continued
to practise their long-accustomed charms in the innocent sense
of superstition, though a suspicion of sorcery was more likely to
overshadow it now than before.


CHAPTER XXXV.
SXJPERSTITION.

By Saperstition is to be understood^ not the whole body of
heathen religion^ which we think of as a delusion, a false belief,
but the retention of particular heathen practices and principles.
The christian convert rejected and loathed the gods of the hea-
then, but still there lingered in his heart notions and habits,
which having no obvious reference to the old faith, seemed not
directly opposed to the new. Wherever Christianity has left a
vacuum, where its spirit could not at once penetrate the ruder
minds, there superstition or over-belief grew rank. In Low Ger-
man they say bi-glove by-belief, in Nethl. overgelof, bygelof, Dan.
overtro, Icel. hiatru, all modelled on the Latin superstitio, which
itself is traceable to superstes (surviving), and denotes a persist-
ence of individual men in views which the common sense of the
majority has abandoned. A fortune-teller was to the Romans
' superstitiosus homo.' And the Swed. term vidskepelse seems
primarily to mean a sort of magic, not superstition (p. 1036; see
Suppl.).^

There are two kinds of superstition, an active and a passive, one
being more the augurium, sortHegium, the other more the omen
of the ancients.' If, without man's active participation, some
startling sign be vouchsafed him by a higher power, he prog-
nosticates from it good hap or ill. If the sign did not arise of
itself, if he elicits it by his own contrivance, then there is posi-
tive superstition. Naturally Christianity succeeded better in
combating the positive superstition that was mixed up with hea-
then rites, than the negative and involuntary, which swayed the
mind of man as the fear of ghosts does.

1 Also Swed. Bkrok, skrAk, saperstiiio; the ON. skrök, figmenttun. OHG.
gameitheit Süpentitio, yanitas, Graff 2, 702. In Mod. Oeriii. I find zipfeUglaubt^
8chmid*B Sdiwab. id. 647. Lett, hlehnu tuiida, faith in idle things (blehnas).

* Divine- omnipotenoe produoes miracle$ (p. 1031), a ohanoe phenomenon mere
preaage$t onUnat portetUa, in which senae Ulphilas renders ripara by /atlratama,
Mk. 13, 22. John 6, 26. 1 Cor. 12, 12. With tani I can hardly connect anything
but ON. tenlngr, tains, or OHG. seno, proYoco, Graff 5, 673 (see Snppl.).


1106 SUPERSTITION.

The usages of active saperstition always have some practical
aim. A man wants to escape a present evil^ to throw off a sick-
ness^ to get rid of his enemy^ or he wishes to know and secare
his future luck. And here we mast not overlook how often,
according to a difference of period or nationality, the same cus-
toms acquire a new relation and meaning,^ being often torn away
from their connexion, e.g. what had a distinct reference to sacri-
fice will, standing by itself, be unintelligible ; and the same was
the case with the objects of sorcery. What our forefathers hoped
or feared had reference more to war and victory ; the farmer of
today cares about his com and cattle. K the heathen sorceress
with her hail destroys the host of the enemy, the modem witch
makes foul weather for her neighbour's field. So tiie farmer
promises himself a plenteous crop on the strength of an omen
that in olden time betokened victory. Yet farming and cattle-
breeding have a long history too, and a number of superstitious
rites connected with them stretch without a break through many
centuries. Likewise all the superstitions that look to domestic
life, to birth and death, wooing and wedding, are rooted in
nature, and almost unchangeable through the lapse of ages;
superstition constitutes a kind of religion for all the lower kind
of household wants.

Divinations form a leading feature of superstition. Man
would fain lift the veil that time and space have cast over his
weightiest concerns; by the use of mysterious means he thinks
he can arrive at the truth. Divination lawful and unlawful has
always been a function of the priest (or head of a family) and
of the magician (p. 862-3) : the one belongs to religion, the other
to superstition.

Various words for divining and soothsaying were given at the
beginning of last chapter, when we had to settle the meaning of
magic. I have now to add an OHG*. heüison augurari (AS.
hälsian) ; heilisod omen, augurium ; lieilisanri augur (AS. h&lsere),
heilisara auguratriz. In MHG. these words had died out. One

^ It is oonceiyable that remnants of the old Boman divinatio were BtQl in Tog^e
at the time of the Lombards : * habebat tone Agilolf qtiendam de suis arutpieem
puerumt qui per artem diabolicam, quid futurum portenderent ictw Julminum in-
telli^ebat,' Paul. Diac. 3, 30. The Etruscan haruspicia were espeeially directed to
fulgura, 0. MiUl. 2, 82.


DIVINATION. 1107

mast distingaisli them from OHG-. heilizan salatare^ AS. bäletan
(seeSuppL).

The sacred priestly divination appears^ like the priestly office
itself (p. 93)^ to have been hereditary in families. A female
fortune-teller declared that the gift had long been in her family,
and on her death the grace would descend to her eldest dskughter
(Sap. H, cap. 107) : from mother to daughter therefore^ and from
fatlier to eon; by some it is maintained that soothsaying and the
gift of healing most be handed down from women to Truen, from
men to wom,en. To this day there are families that have the
pecaliar gifl of foreseeing what will happen^ especially fires,
deaths and corpses : in L. Germany they call sadi people vorkie^
here, fore-peepers. It is also said they can qtiad sehn, ie. see
or scent any coming misfortune, nay, the power is even allowed
to horses, sheep and dogs : horses prophesy (p. 658), hounds
can see spirits (p. 667). And notice in particular, that such
men can impart their gift to him that treads on their right foot
and looks over their lefi shoulder; this was apparently a very
ancient^ even a heathen posture, it was a legal formality in tak*
ing possession of cattle (BA. 589), and may have been tolerated
among christians in other cases, e.g. one who is doing penance
has to step on the right foot of the hermit, Ls. 1, 593, The first
child christened at a newly consecrated font receives the power
to see spirits and coming events, until some one shall from idle
curiosity tread on his left foot and look over his right shoulder,
when the gift will pass away to him. Sup. I, 996 ; on the other
hand, he that looks through the hop of the wise mxin^s arm
(p. 939) becomes a seer of spirits, he beholds the natural
and preternatural : even to the dog the gift descends, if
you trec^ on his right foot and make him look over your right
shoulder', Sup. I, 1111. Again, children bom with the helmet
can see spirits, ghosts or witches (p. 874n.). In all this we see
the last quiverings of life in practices of the heathen priest-
hood, before they pass into mere conjuring and witchcraft (see
Suppl.).

Divination is directed mainly to the discovery of fidwre things,
they being the most uncertain. The pa^t is done and known,
or can be ascertained in many ways ; what goes on in the present,

«

at a distance, we seldom feel axiy temptation to find out] an
VOL. ni. p


1108 SUPERSTITION.

instance occurred at p. 1091n., where the pilgrim is enabled by
magic to see what is going on at his home. Yet the present has
its pazzles too, when methods have to be decided on, especially
property to be divided.

When events and deeds of 'the past were wrapt in obscurity,
antiquity had a thrice-hallowed means of discovery, the ardeals
or judgments of God, a retrospective divination of sure and
infallible success, such as judicial procedure demanded. Bat
to every German ordeal it is essential that the accused should
perform its ritus himself; in no case could it be placed in the
judge's hands. This ü^t distinguishes it from the sieve-driving
or sieve'tiiming practised since the Mid. Ages, which was per-
formed by wise women, witches, conjurors, and even by respect-
able persons, to bring concecded criminals to light : the woman
held a sieve that was an heirloom between her two middle fingers,
uttered a spell, and then went over the names of suspected
p^^OBS ; when she came to that of the culprit, the sieve began
to sway and tut overJ- The plan was adopted against thieves,
and such as in a tumult had inflicted wounds; and sometimes
to reveal the future, e.g. who should be a girl's sweetheart. I
find the first mention of it in the poem cited on p. 1048 : ' und
daz ein wip ein sib tribe, sunder vleisch und sunder ribe, da niht
inne wasre,' this I take to be a lie, says the author; his in-
credulity seems to rest on the tilting over, the sieve is void,
has neither flesh nor bona The sieve was also laid on a pair
of tongs, which* were held up between the two middle fingers.
In Denmark the master of the house himself took the trial in
hand, balancing the sieve on the point of a pair of scissors. Sup.
Dan. 132. This sieve-running (sieve-chasing, sieve-dance) must
have been very common in France and Germany in the 16-1 7th

1 Siere-niimmg is desoribed differently in the MeckL jahrb. 5, 108 : A neve
inherited from kinsfolk is set up on its edge, an inherited pau of soinon is opened
and .ts points stack into the sieve's edige deep enough to lift it by. Then two
persons of different families take it to a perfectly dark plaoe, put the middle finger
of the right hand nnder the soissora* ring, and so raise the sieve. At the slightest
movement of course the ring will slip off the finger, and the sieve fall, as in the
dark it does not hang quite perpendioular. Then one begins to ask the other : * I
ask thee in the name of G.« etc., teU me truth and lie not, who stole so and so ?
did Bans« Friti« Peter? ' At the name of the guilty par^ the nng $Up$ of, the
nev$ fallM to the ground, and the thief is known. In aU the oUier deaar^oos
I have read, the thing is done in daylight, and the aieye does not falL bat $pim


SIBYE-TüBNINa. KBY-SPINNINa. 1109

cent.» many books mention it» and couple together sieve-tamers
and spell-speakers ; ^ it may here and there be still in use, conf.
Stender snb v. 'seetinu tezzinaht/ and his Gram. p. 299; it
seems the Lettons stick it on a pair of shears. Bat it was already
known to the Greeks» Theooritas 3» 31 mentions a xoaKivofuam^^
and Lacian (Alex. 7) speaks of Koaxivq} fiajrreveaOai among the
Paphlagonians; Potter 1, 766 thus describes the process of Koa-
KivofjMvreia : they held up the sieve by a string» prayed to the
gods» then ran over the names of the snspects ; at that of the
doer the sieve 8et off spinning (see Suppl.).

In the same way people stuck a hereditary key in the Bible
(at the first chap, of John)»' or a cleaver in a wooden ball» which
began to move when they came to the right name» Sup. I» 932.
I surmise that the revolution of the latter-wood worn by sprach-
Sprecher (lotter-buben» frei-harte» H. Sachs iv. 3» 58*) was also
for divining purposes; in the early Fragm. 15® we find: 'louf
umbe lotterholz» lonf nmbe gedräte 1 ' On this I shall be more
explicit in another place.

It may be regarded as a relic of the judicium offae or casei
(BA. 932)» that those suspected of a theflb were made to eat of
a consecrated cheese : the morsel sticks in the throat of the real
thief (Sup. H, cap. 51).»

^ Fisehart's Damonom. p. 71. Hartm. on Spells 99. Simplio. 2, 852. Ettner*8
Apoth. 1187. J. Praetoiitu on Sieve-ninning. Curiae YariBO. 1677. 4. Bommers
Hess, gesoh. 6, 61. In Boignndy * tonai le taimit Noels Borg. p. 874 ; taimi is the
Fr. tamU, Nethl. Uenu, in Tentonista tempse, but in Dint. 2, 209 tempf. If Graff
has not misread this, we might make of Tamfana (pp. 80. 267. 278) a goddess named
After the sieve she held in her hand ; that would look heathenish.

s H. Stahl's Westfal. sagen, Elberf . 1881. p. 127 gives a fuller account : The
hered. key is put inside a hexi^d. Bible, so that the ward part of the key lies on the
words * In the beginning was the Word,* and the ring stands out of the book. They
tie it up tight with strmg, and hang it up by tiie end of the string to the ceiling.
Then two people hold their fingers under the ring, touching it gently, and the
injured pi^ty asks : ' has there been a witch at my cow ? ' The other must say No,
snd the complainant answer Tea, and this they keep up for some time. If the cow
be really bewitched, the Bible begins to turn round, and then more questions are
asked. If there has been no witchery, or the wrong witch is nameid, the Bible
remains stilL The turnings of tieve and key resemble those of the wiskiftg-rod,
p. 976.

' The Observationee ad Ivonis epistolas p. 167 have the following : ' Formulae
in oodicibus monasteriomm, quibus ad detegenda furta jubebatur oratio dominica
Bcribi in pane et caeeo, postea fieri cruces de tremtUo, quarum una sub dextero pede,
Alia super caput suspecti viri poneretur, deinde post varias numinis invocationes
iniprecari, ut lingua et guttur rei alligaretur, ne tranaglutire poiset, sed eorum
[coram?] omnibus tremeret, nee haberet quo requiesoeret. Of. formulam Dunstani
Cantuar. editam a Pitthoeo in glossario capitulariorum.' Against crossing cheeses
(^ eateit eruce nontignandit) several ordinances were issued in the 16th cent. (docs,
of 1480, '48, '70, *77 in Monum. boic. 16. 60. 66. 68. 61).


1110 SUPERSTITION.

Other methods of forecasting the fatnre were likewise available
for detecting thieves or any malefactors.

The lot (OHG. hl6z, Goth, hlduts, AS. hledt, ON. hlntr) was
the venerablest and fairest of all kinds of divination. A difficult
and doabtfnl matter was to be raised thereby above human
caprice and passion, and receive the highest sanction, e.g. in
dividing an inheritance, in ascertaining the right victim (conf. p.
230), and so forth. Lot therefore decides a present uncertainty,
bat it may also extend to the faiure. Originally placed in the
hands of a priest or judge, it afterwards became an instrument
of sorcery (p. 1034-7), and sortilegus, sortiarius, sorcier are all
derived from sotb. Our OHG. hliozan seems in like manner to
have passed out of the meaning sortiri into that of augurari,
incantare, which it retains in its MHG. form liezen, HofiFm.
fundgr. 2, 67. Er. 8123.

It was managed in two ways : the priest or the pater&milias
cast the lot, and interpreted it when fallen, or he held it out
to the party to draw ; the first was for indicating the future, the
last for adjusting the present.

Let Tacitus describe the first kind : ^ Sortium consuetudo
simplex. Virgam, frugiferae arbori decisam, in surculos ampu-
tant, eosque notis quibusdam discretes super candidam vestem
temere ac fortuitu spargunt. Mox si publice consuletur, sacerdos
civitatis, sin privatim ipse pater familiae, precatus decs coelumque
suspicions, ter singulos tollit, sublatos secundum impressam ante
notam interpretatur. Si proMbuerunt^ nulla de eadem re in
eundem diem consultatio; sin permissum^ auspiciorum adhuc

fides exigitur,' Germ. 10. ^Here the lots are but preliminary to

the entire transaction, and if they prove unfavourable, further
divination is not proceeded with, I need not transcribe the
important explanations my Brother has given in his work on
Bunes pp. 296 — 307. A connexion there certainly is between
these lots and the runes and ciphers ; lot-books are mentioned
as early as the 13th cent., Ls. 3, 169. Kolocz. 70 (see Suppl.).

The Armenians prophesied from the movement of cypress
boughs : * quamm cupressorum surculis ranUsque sou leni aive
violento vento agitatis Armenii flamines ad longum tempns in
auguriis uti consueverunt,' as Moses Ohorenensis (ed. 1736, p. 54)
tells us in the 5th cent.


LOTS. WATEB IN A SIEVE. 1111 .

A long array of divmations seems to have been diffased over
Europe by the Greeks and Bomans ; ^ from this soorce come
Hartlieb's accoants of hydromarUia, pyromantia (the fiar- sehen
of Altd. bl. 1^ 365)^ chiromcmtia (MHG-. the tisch in der hanty Er.
8136)^ on which see more in Haupt's Zeitschr. 3> 271 (see Suppl.).
The crystal-gazing of the pure child. Sap. H, cap. 90, is the
' gastromcmtia ex vase aqua pleno, cajas meditullium (belly of the
jar) vocabatar ydarpi].^ '

More to the purpose are customs peculiar to certain nations,
and not traceable to the above source : in these we either find
a different procedure, or the forecasts are gathered from natural
objects by lying in wait, listening, looking.

Our ancestors (ace. to Tac. Germ. 3) contrived to foresee
the issue of a battle by the spirited or faltering delivery of the
war^song.

The ancient Poles reckoned on victory if water draum in a sieve
was carried before the army without running through, I quote
the words of the Chronicon Montis Sereni (Menken 2, 227.
Hoffm. script, rer. lus. 4, 62) : Anno 1209 Conradus, orientalis
marchio, Lubus castrum soceri sui Wlodislai ducis Poloniae,
propter multas quas ab eo patiebatur injurias, obsedit. Wlodis-
laos vero, obsidionem vi solvere volens, collecto exercitu copioso,
marchioni mandavit, se ei altera die congressurum. Vespere
autem diei praecedentis Oderam fluvium cum suis omnibus trans-
^ressus, improvisus supervenire hostibus moliebatur. XJnus vero
eorum qui supanidicuntur vehementer ei coepit obsistere, monens
ne tempus pugnae statutum praeveniret, quia hoc factum nullius
rectius quam infidelitatis posset nomine appellari. Quem dum
dux timiditatis argueret, et fidelitatis qua ei teneretur commoneret,
respondit : ' ego quidem ad pugnam pergo, sed scio me patriam
meam de cetero non visumm.' Habebat autem (sc. Wlodislaus)
dncem belli pythonissam quandam, quae de flumine cribro haustam
nee defluentem, ut f erebatur, ducens aquam exerdtum praecedebat,
et hoe sigiu> eis victoriam promittebat. Nee latuit marchionem

1 Alphabetically arranged in Fabrioil Bibliogr. antiq. (ed. S Hamb. 1760), 4, pp.
693--613. Gonf. Potter's ArchäoL 1, 758-^769.

* Melber de Geroltzhofen says in Vooabnlarina predioantium (sheet B 4) :
* Nigromantia, Schwartz konst die do ist mit vffsehung der dottetit mit den der
nigromanticas zaubert, oder mit den dryen ersten ichollen, die der pfaff wirflt ynsz
grab, oder mit den lopähopffen, die do lauffen by den grehem.* The passage is also
quoted from Melber m JoL Eychman's Yocab. predic, Nümbg 1483.


,1112 ßUPBBSTITIO».

adventns eomm, sed matnre Buis armatis et ordinatis occurrena,
forti congresBU omnes in fugam vertit, pythonissa primüus ynter'
fecta. nie etiam Bupanna viriliter pugnans cum moltis aliis inter-

fectus est. ^What is here an omen of success is elsewhero a

test of innocence : a true-hearted boy ccurries water in a ^ieve, and
not a drop runs out, KM. 3, 254 ; according to Indian belief the
innocent caii take water up in a lump like a ball. 'Exstat
Tucciae vestalis incestae precatio, qua usa aquam in cnbro tulii,
Pliny 28, 3 j a witch sets a girl the task of fetching water in ths
si&ve, Norske ev. 1, 88 ; the vestal had also to carry fire in a
brazen sieve (supra p. 611), and a Dan. fairytale in MolbecVs
Ev. p. 22 actually speaks of carrying the sun in a sieve. The
sieve comes before us as a sacred old-world vessel with miraculous
properties. What the myth imports the proverb treats as sheer
impossibilities : ' er schepfet wazzer mit dem sibe, swer &ne vrte
milte mit sper und mit schilte ervehten wil 6re und lant,' he draws
water in a sieve, who by brute force, etc., Troj. 18536. ' Lympham
infundere cribro,' Eeinard. 3, 1637 (see Suppl.).

By AS. accounts, the Northmen had a wonderful standard
borne before their army, from whose indications they inferred
victory or defeat. In Asser's Vita Alfredi p. 38 ad an. 878 :
' . . . vexillum quod reafan (for raefan, hrsDfen, ON. hrafh) vocant.
Dicunt enim quod tres sorores Hungari et Habbae, filiae videlicet
Lodebrochi illud vexillum tewuertint, et totum paraverunt illnd
uno meriiiano tempore} Dicunt etiam quod in omni hello, ubi
praecederet idem signum, si victoriam adepturi essent^ appareret in
medio eigni quasi corvus vivus volitans ; sin vero vincendi in
futuro fuissent, penderet directe nihil movens : et hoc saepe pro-

batum est.' The Encomium Emmae (Duchesne's Script. Norm.

169) says, the flag was of plain white silk, but in war-time
there became visible in it a raven, with open beak and flutter-
ing wings whenever victory smiled on them, but sitting still with
drooping feathers when it eluded their grasp. Ailredus Bieval-
lensis p. 353 declares this raven to have been the devil himaelf,
who does at times assume the shape of that bird (p. 997) ; we
more naturally see in it the bird of the heathen god of victory
(p. 671) : OSinn might give the victorious host this sign that he

^ The thread spun between 11 and 12 (Snp. I, 841) ooiresponds wonderlolly.


FLAG. NEIGHING. SHOÜLDEBBLADE. 1113

was sending down his messenger. Yet no Scand. story alludes
to snch a flag of victory.

Prophesying from the aospicions neighing of horses has been
dealt with, p. 658. Dempster in Antiq. Bom. 8, 9 says : ' eqnos
hinnita alacriore et ferociore fremita victoriam ominari etiamnunc
militibns persnasam est.' At twelve o'clock on Christmas night
the superstitious listen at crossroadsj at boundary-stones : if they
can hear swords rattle and horses neigh, there will be war the
coming spring (so war is foretold by the neighing in the Furious
Host, p. 988). At the same season maids listen at the stable
door for the neighing of stallions, and if they hear it, make sure
of a suitor presenting himself by Midsummer (Liebusch's Sky*
thika p. 143). Others lie down in the horse-manger at Christmas,
to learn future events (Denis Lesefrüchte 1, 128). Misfortune is
near when the steed stvmbles, e.g. the Servian Shacats (Yuk 1,
240).

Spatulamanda in Hartlieb (Sup. H,.cap.. 115). is a corraption
of scapulimantia, an art that seems not solely derived from
Romans or Byzantines. Lambeck 7, 224 says the Vienna library
has a treatise by Michael Psellus (I know not which one) irepl
u>fAoir\aToaico7rla^, Yintler too« (Sup.. 0, 1. 126) mentions the
inspection of shoulder-bones^. ' IXvinationes sculterren-blat/ Altd*
bl. 1, 865. Jemandes ci^. 37 : ' Attila diffidens suis copiis,
metuens inire conflictum, statuit per aruspices futura inquirere.
Qui more solito nunc peeorum fibras, nunc quasdam venas in
ckbrasis ossibus intuentes, Hunnis infausta denuntiant.' ^ Among
the Kalmuks are sorcerers called daiatehi, because they predict
from the shoulderblade (dala) of sheep, swans and stags. They
let these bones bum in the fire for a time, then report the aspect
of the streaks and lines that have arisen on them. If the fire
have left many black marks on the blades, the dalatchi holds out
hopes of a mild winter; many white marks indicate snow
(Bergm. Nomad, streif er. % 184). The Cherkesses too have
soothsaying from shonlderblades, conf. Erman's Archiv 1842. 1,
123 (see Snppl.).

1 Sneh extispioU were pexf oimed on beaata skia lor HMoriftoe ; but animals
were also killed for the mere purpose of divination : ' Beolaso peotore (of a goote),
extrazit fortissimum jeeur, et inde mihi fntnra praedizlt»^ Fetroo« 1&7« ^ Qois invenit
Jbgamjeeorit f * Cic. de Kat. D, 8, 6.


1114 BWfiHSTmOK.

This 'Oömds yr&ry near the forecastiDg by the goose-bone (ex
anserino sterno), Sup. H, cap. 121, which appears among the
people in laitöf times, probably even now, conf. Sap. I, 341 ; K,
163 ; MecM. Jahrb. 9, 219 no. 46. I have marked a few passages
for extraction. Ettner's Ungew. apoth. p. 1144: 'And what
prognostica most not the breastbones of eopon, goose and duck
yield I If the same be red, they ordain an abiding coldness ; or
if white, clear and transparent, then shall the winter's weather
be endurable.^ Martinsgans by Joh. Olorinus variscns (Magdeb.
1609. 8), p. 145: *Good old ladies, I present to you the breast-
bone, that ye learn thereby to foretell true as the almanack, and
become weather-prophets. The fore part by the throat signifies
the fore-winter, the hinder part the after-winter, white is for
snow and mild weather, the other for gpreat cold.' Ganskönig by
Lycosthenes Psellionoros (Wolfg. Spangenberg) Strasb. 1607,
ciii: 'The breastbone which they call the steed (made into a
prancing horse for children); and well can many an ancient dame,
prognosticating by the same, tell by the hue infallibly, how keen
the winter's cold shall be.' Bhythmi de ansere (in Domau 1,
408) : ' Then in my breast the merrythought, I trow it lies not
there for nought, for men therein may plainly see what winter
weather it shall be, and many a man holds fast thereto, accounting
me a prophet true.'

Those who thus looked after the weather were called weter-
sorgcere, Br. 8127 {weter^vnser man 7510), or weter-kiescare,
-chooser, whence the surname Kieseweiter, Gramm. 4, 848; in
Ranch's Script. 1, 430 I find a place ' bei der weterkiesen/ as if
certain spots were favourable to weather- choosing.

The Esthonians foretold weather and fnMfidness from boumets*
Gutslaff says in his book on Wohhanda p. 209 : ' I am told that
on this beck the husbandmen of old had their augurium respect-
ing weather, which they managed thus. They set in the beck
three baskets in a row, and not heeding the two outer, gave their
mind wholly to the midmost, what kind of fish would come into
the same. For if into this basket were gotten a scaleless fish, as
crab, quab or the like, they had ill weather and unfruitful year to
dread, and were fain to sacrifice an ox for to obtain good weather.
Whereupon they set the baskets in as before, and if again a
scaleless fish were found therein, then a second time did they


MBRRTTHOUGHT. BOWNBT. CORN. CROSS-WAY. 1115

sacrifice an ox, and set the baskets in for the third time. If once
more they fonnd a sealeless fish, then this third time they sacnficed
a child, in hope to get good weather and a plenteous season.
And if yet again fislies not scaly were come into the middle
basketj they rested therewith content^ and with patience abided
it. But when scaJy fish were found therein^ they cast them to
have fair weather and fruitful year^ whereat they rejoiced greatly.'

■ A different thing altogether was the Greek tx^vofiavreia from
fish's entrails (Potter's Archaol. 1, 703).

As horses' neighing was watched for (p. 1113)^ so there was
listening at night in the growing cornfields: going into the
winter*crop on Christmas night to overhear the future^ or on
May-night into the green com, Sup. I^ 420. 854. The cereals
were a sacred things ' der heiUgo ezesg,* N. ps. 140, 7 (Goth,
atisks)^ ' das liebe kom/ Gramm. 3, 665. So then, sitting in the
com, one might hear the sound of voices, hear spirits conversing
on coming events. They listened also at cross-ways. Sup. I, 854.
962, where boundaries touched : the partings of roads ^ were
accounted meeting-places of sprites and witches (p. 1074 and Sup.
1,647), conf. the ON. ')7ar sem götar (roads) mcBtast,' Fom.
sog. 3, 22. Did images of heathen gods stand where the roads
forked f We are told of people praying, sacrificing and lighting
candles ad Mvia, Sup. 0, p. 193* ; and just before that, p. 193*,
we hear of them sitting at the cross- way,^ without the corn being
mentioned : ' iri bivio sedisti supra taurinam cutcm, ut ibi futura
tibi intelligeres T ' To me the bull's hide, like the bearskin
(p. 1010, conf. Beinh. p. Ivi), indicates heathen sacrifice. And
here a Gaelic rite described by Armstrong seems to furnish a
valuable clue : A man is wrapt in the warm skin of an animal
just killed, he is then laid down beside a waterfall in the forest,
and left alone ; by the roar of the waves, it is thought, the future
is revealed to him, and this kind of divination is called taghairn.
The ^ forse ' too was a sacred spot, as well as the forking of roads :

^ A PezBian supeniition: * aitting down at the junction of four eroii-road» on
a Wedn. night, and applying to joorself every sentence spoken by the passers and
oonsidenng it as a good or bad omen,* Atldnson, p. 11. 12.

* If after supper on Ohristm. eve a girl thahei out the tablecloth at a crotncavt
a man will meet her, and give her good even. Of the same height and figure wUl
her future husband be. The shaken cloth has taken the place of the spread, or, of
the animal's hide. Divination by sowing batilicum is known to Vuk 1, 22. no. 86
(Wesely p. 58).


IIIG SÜFEBSTinON.

this last is mentioned in the Edda^ 'opt bölwisar konor sitja
brauto ncer, ^Bdr er deyfa sverS ok sefa/ Ssdm. 197^. Some
people on New-year's day would sit on the house-roof, girt unth
a sword, and explore the future. Sup. C, p. 193^. This again
must have been a holy place, tor sick children were also set on
the roof to be cured, Sup. 0, 10, 14 ; p. 195'. Does this explain
why, when a person cannot die, some shingles in the roof are
turned, or taken right out (I, 439. 721) T Also when a child has
convulsions, a plank is turned, J. Schmidt 121. A peculiar
practice is, to listen while you dangle out of window a ball of
thread fastened to a hereditary key. Sup. I, 954.

Sneezing {irralpeiv, stemuere) has from the earliest times been
fraught with meaning. Some take it for a mild form of apoplexy,
a momentary palsy, during which one loses the free use of his
limbs. Sup. H, c. 74. The Greeks saluted the sneezer with ^di,
Zev a&aovl conf. Anthol. Gr. ii. 13, 11. 'Cur stemumentiH
salutamus 7 quod etiam Tiberium Caesarem, tristissimnm (ut
constat) hominum, in vehiculo exegisse tradunt,' Plin. 28, 2.
' Giton ter continue ita sternutavit, ut grabatum concuteret, ad
quem motum Eumolpus salvere Gitona jubet,' Petron. sat. 98.^
The Arabs too salute at sneezing (Rückert's Hariri 1, 543). In
our Mid. Age poets I find : ' die Heiden nicht endorften niesen,
da man doch sprichet, Nu helfiu Oot ! ' durst not sneeze, though
etc. Turl. Wh. 35. ' Christ iu helfe ! so sie niesm,' Ms. 2, 169\
' durch daz solte ein schilt gesellen kiesen, daz im ein ander
heiles wünschte, ob dirre schilt kande niesen,* Tit. 80. ' so wünsch
ich dir ein niesen,* Ms. 2, 217**. ' wir sprechen, swer niuset. Got
helfe dir 1 ' Kenn. 15190. ' Dens te adjuvet ' (a.D. 1307), Piator.
script. 1, 1024; conf. Königshoven p. 302. Enchanted sprites
sneeze under a bridge, that some one may call out Ood help ! and
undo the spell, DS. no. 224-5-6. Mone's Anz. 4, 308. ' dir h&t
diu katze niht genom,* Helbl. 1, 1393. To the Greeks there
seemed something divine in sneezing : rov irrapfiop 6eov fffovi^^Ba,
Arist. probl. 33, 7; conf. 11, 33. Xen. Anab. iii. 2, 9. Theocr.
7, 96. 18, 16. Words confirmed by sneezing come true. Od. 17,

^ ' Stemviantibas salvere diotnm antiqnior mos quam putatnr,* Valediis in
V alpmana p. 68. ' PonrqQoi on fait des soohaits en favenr de oeux qui ßtetnnenV
Morin in M6m. de Taoad. des insor. 4, 825. J. Qerh. Menschen de antiqno et mo-
demo ritu salntandi stemntantes, Kilon. 1704. Oesoh. der formel • Gott hell dir ! *
beim niesen, publ. by Wieland, Lindau 1787.


SNEEZING. EABS, EYES, KOSE. LOYEB. 1117

541-5. ' stemutcUiones nolite observare/ Sup. A. Whoever
sneezes during a narrative is boand to prove its trath. In the
Christmas nights do not sneeze^ and the cattle will not die. The
passage in Hartlieb, Sup. H, c. 73, is curious; conf. Sup. I, 186.
266. 437 and M (Esthon.) 23 (see Suppl.).

Einging in the ear«, garrula auris, ßo/ißo^, is lucky when in
the right ear. 'Absentes tinnitu aurium praesentire sermones
de se receptnm est,' Plin. 28, 2, conf. Sup. I, 82. 802; booming

in the ear, F, 27. Quivering of the eye : aWercu 6^0a\fA6<;

ßjLo$ 6 Sefto?, Theocr. 3, 37. Itching of brows and cheeks, Sup.
I, 141. D, 38 r. 140 V. 'si vibi*ata salitione insuetum alter
oculorum, dexter vel sinister palpitaret, si concuterentur ac veluti
exsilirent aut trepidarent musculi, humeri aut femora etc., mali
erant ominis,' Dempster's Antiq. Bom. 3, 9 ; conf. Suidas sub v.
oltovitrriK'q, The Indians thought turitching of the right eye a bad
omen (Hirzel's Sakuntala p. 65) . Itching in the right eye has

a good meaning, in the left a bad, says Tobler 30. Bleeding of

the nose : unlucky if on the left side, Sup. I, 825. If in going
cat you catch against the door, or stumble on the threshold, you are
warned to turn back (248. 895). If your right hand itches, you
will part with money, if your left, you will take money. Itching
of the right eye betokens crying, of the left, laughing. If your
soles itch, you are going to dance, if your nose, to hear news.
Whoever gets a yellow finger has lost a relation (see Suppl.).

The many ways of finding out one's lover or suitor that is to
be are, so far as I see, unconnected with Roman or Greek super-
stition. The girl hearkens to the cackling of the cock (Sup. I,
101), or she throws her wreath of flowers (848. 1093 ; conf. 867),
or some particular niglfl; in the year she pulls a billet of wood out
of tite stack or a stick out of the hedge (I, 109. 958; F, 7. 49),
walking to it back foremost ; or on a dark night she clutches at
the flock in hopes of pulling out a ram (I, 952). Walking
backwards or standing naked is a usual requisite in this, as in
other cases (I, 506-7. 928; G, 1. 207). Another way is, being
naked, to throw one's shifi out through the door (I, 955), or to
grasp backwards through the door at the lover's hair (I, 102), or
to spread the table for him (as for noms), and then he is bound to
appear and eat his supper off it. Harrys in Yolkss. 2, 28 de-
scribes the so-called nappeUpfang : in a vessel full of clean water


1118 SUFBBSTITION.

you Bet afloat little pots of thin silver plate marked with ihe
names of those whose fate is in question ; if a yonng man's pot
comes up to a girl's, it will be a match. The same is done in
some parts with simple nutshells.^

Like the discovery of one's fatnre husband, it was an important
matter to ascertain the sex of a ehüd before it was bom. This
could be gathered from the persons one met in going to church.
Sup. I, 488, from previous children (677. 747), from sneezing
(M, 28). That a woman would have none but daughters, was to
be learnt by other signs (I, 678. M, 22). An O. Fr. poem in
M6on 8, 84 has the following :

voire est que je sui de vous grosse,
si m'enseigna I'on ä aler
enior le mostier sam parier
trois tors, dire trois patenostres
en I'onor Dieu et ses apostres,
une fosse an talon fSisse,
et par trois jors i revenisse :
s'au tiers jorz overt le trovoie,
c'etoU 'unfile qu' avoir devote,
et sHl etoit clos, tfetoitfille.

Throwing shoes over one's head, and seeing which way the
points look, reveals the place where one is destined to stay
longest. Sup. 1, 101 ; G, 1. 220. The Sermones disc, de tempore
mention, among superstitious Christmas customs, that of caieeos
super caput jaeta/re, Sermo xi.

They also speak of some ' qui cumulos salis ponunt, et per hoc
futura pronosticant.' Sup. I, 1081 : 'on Christmas eve put a
little heap of salt on the table; if it melts overnight, yon die
next year ; if not, not.' Again, in a house where one lies dead,
they make three heaps of salt (I, 846). This has to do with the
sacred nature of salt (pp. 1046. 1076). Apparently of Greek
origin is the widely received custom of pouring out lead (I, 97;
H, cap. 96) ; even Ihre (de superst. p. 55) mentions it, conf.

\ DiYining by JUberU was another thing : * infra manna meas rt^^TnAliam yjm
poBoit, et cnm cUgitos pariter ezteneos porris apioque Instraeaet, aveUaiuu nuctf
cnm precatione merslt in vinnm ; et sive in Bummom redieraut, aive snbeederant,
ex hao conjeotnra dioebat/ Petron. 187.


BOY OB GIRL? SHOES. SALT. AN-GANG. 1119

' molybdomantia ex plumbi liquefacti diversis motibus/ Potter's
Arch. 1, 839 (see SuppL).

Bat no species of saperstition had more deeply penetrated the
entire Mid. Ages than the presages known nnder the names of
aneganc (an-gang^ coming npon)^ widergcmCj widerlouf. A beast^
a man, a thing, that yon unexpectedly encountered on stepping
out of doors or setting out on a journey at early mom, while yet
the day is fresh, betokened weal or woe, and admonished you to
go on with what you had begun, or to give it up. When Saxo
Gram. p. 84 says ' eongressionum initia,' what was the Norse word
he had in his mind? perhaps vi'Sr-g&ngr, or still better m6t
(meeting) f As the beginning of any business is critical (omina
principiis inesse solent, Ov. Fasti 1, 178), as the first stepping
into a new house, on to a new bridge, is cautiously set about
(p. 1021), and the god or daemon claims the first he meets (see
below) ; so men took note of every sign that attended a purposed
ride or journey. The M. Latin term for it is superventa (sc. res),
what surprises, supervenit (Fr. survient)^; or even, taking it
literally, what floats above us in the air, though that indeed
would only apply to the flight of birds. Hinomar de divortio
Lotharii (supra, p. 1099) says: 'ad haec . • • pertinent, quas
superventaa feminae in suis lanificiis vel textilibus operibus nomi*
nant.' These the Greeks called ivoB^a av/ißoKaj and we have
most of them in common with them, with the Romans, nay with
Oriental nations. In view of the almost universal diffusion of
these ' aDgänge,' it is hardly credible that they first came to the
Germans in the wake of Latin literature : they rest on the older
kinship of all European nations, and the very earliest observer of
our kindred, Tacitus, remarked this mode of divination among
them : ' auspida sortesque, ut qui mazime, observant ... et iUud
quidem etiam hie notum, avium voces volatusque interrogare.'
And of horses, p. 658. Many of our old myths lay a stress on
the primitiae: we need only mention Wodan's promising the
victory to those whom he should first set eyes upon at sunrise,
p. 134 (see Suppl.).

I will first take passages that group several things together,
and then elucidate particulars.

1 [* And overeome ob like a summer's cload.* — Maobeth.]


1120 BüPBBsnnoN.

To begin with Xenophoix's Memorab. i. Ij 4 : aXk' ol iikv
irXelfTTOi, <f>aalv inro re r&v opviOmv teal r&v airarrwpmv airorpi^
irecOal re Kal irporphnaOat. And, i. 1, 14 : tov9 Bk xal 'XMov^
teal ^vKa koI rä rv^oirra Orfpla trifiea-OcUj i.e. ' obvia animalia»*
not^ as some have taken it^ ' yolgaria^ nbivis obvia.'

The earliest evidence from onr own Mid. Ages, bnt one that
speaks very generally^ is fonnd in St. Eligins^ Snp. A: 'nnllns
observet egrediens ant ingrediens domnm, qnid sibi aceumti, vel
si aliqna vox redamantis fiat^ ant qnalis avis eanhu garriat, vel
qnid etiam portaniem videat.' Greg. Tnron. 7, 29 : ' et cnm Uer
ctgeretj nt consnetndo est barbaromm^ auspieia intendere ooepit^
ac dicere sibi esse contraria/ We find more detail in John of
Salisbnry's Polycraticns sive de nngis cnrial. 1, 13^ which how-
ever I do not quote in full : ' Si egrediens limen calcaveris ant in
via offenderis^ pedem contine . . . Cum prooesseris, abscondita
fatnromm aves qnas ominales vocant tibi praennnciabnnt. Qoid
comix loqnatnr diligenter auscnlta^ sitnmqne ejus sedentis ant
volantis nullo modo contemnas. Befert etenim plnrimnm^ a dex-
tris sit an a sinistris^ qua positione respiciat cubitum gradientis,
loquax sit an clamosa^ an silens omnino^ praecedat an sequatnr,
transeuntis ezpectet adventum^ an fugiat, quove discedat. Corvus
vero, quern non minori dUigentia observabis, rebus majoribus
auspicatur^ et usquequaque comioi praejudicat. Porro cygnus in
auguriis ales gratissima nautis, utpote quae aquarum domestica
quadam gratia familiaritatis eorundem secreta praenoverit. Si
avis quae vulgo dicitur albaneUua (see below) praetervolans viam
a sinistris feratur ad deztram^ de hospitii hilaritate ne dnbites^
si contra^ contrarinm ezpectabis. Leporie timebis occursnm^ lupo
obvio congratulaberis ; ovibus gratanter obviam gradieris, dum
capram vites. Bohus trituTantxbus, libentius tarnen wrcmttbuf
obviabis; nee displiceat si viam ruperint, quia mora itineris
hospitii gratia compensabitur. Mulus infaustus est^ asinus
inutilis, equvs quandoque bonus est; habet vero jurgiorum et
pugnae significationem, interdum tarnen ex colore et visu miti-
gatur. Locusta itinerantium praepedit vota^ econtra cicada via-
toris promovet gressum. Aranea dum a superioribus filum ducit,
spem venturae pecuniae videtur afferre. Sacerdotem obvium
aliumve reli^iosum dicunt esse infaustum ; feminam quoque^ quae
capita discooperto inceditj infelicem credcj nisi publica sit.^


an-gang: path-cbossing. 1121

Petrus Blesensis (d. about 1200) epist. 65 : ' Somnia igitur no
cures, nee te illorum errore involvas, qui occursnm leporis timent^
qui mulierem sparsia crinibua, qui hominem orbatum oculis, aut
mutilatwm pede, aut cuculatum habere obvium detestantur; qui
de jucundo gloriantur hospitio, si eis lupus occursayerit aut
columba, si a sinistra in dezteram avis 8. Martini volayerit, si in
egressn suo remotum audiant tonitrum, si botninem gibbosum
obyium habuerint ant leprosumJ^ Hartmann makes bis daunt-
less Erek defy the danger :

8122. Keins swachen glouben er phlac (cherished),
er wolt der wtbe liezen (lot-casting)
engelten noch geniezen (pay for^ nor partake).
Bwaz im getroumen (dream) mahte
dar &f bet er kein ahte (took no heed) ;
er was kein weter'Sorgcere (no weather- watcher) :
er sach im als msare
des morgens über den wee vam
die iuweln (owls) sam den musam
euch hiez er selten machen
debein ^ur uz der spaehen
daz man in dar an ssBhe,
er phlao deheiner spaDbe.
ez was umbe in so gewant^
im was der Useh in der haaU
als maere enge s6 wit^
und swaz ungelouben gtt (gibtj gives)
dftne kdrte er sich nicht an.

This is imitated by Wimtj whose Wigalois also goes forth :

6182. dehein ungeloube in muote (no superstition in mind)
in dem bAse noch M dem wege^
er lie Qiez, left) ez allez an Gotes pflege (care).
Swaz im des morgens wider lief (ran against)^
oder swie vil din hra gerief (how the crow cried),
swie yil der müsäre wnle geflouc (how the m. flew round),
der ungeloube in niht betrouc (deluded) :

^ Oonf. OhxTBOstom (b. 854 d. 407) ad popnl. Antioeh. homil. 91 (0pp. Etonae
1619. 6, 610) : IloXXdjnt i(^ti^ r«t Hpf oUUof Hfp hivrou etSep IbfOpur» irtpi^akfu»
4^ Xt'^c^^^'^ "^ o^iM^aro • • . ^^ dran^ffTf «tip^^ot, ^fffflv, ATpaicrot ^ liftdpa
iiymwu ttr M di-oimi^v ^^P^\ ^<d «U -KP^rr^ Koi roXX^t ißwopUa yi/iowa.


1122 8ÜPEBSTITI0N.

wand' er (for he) niht dar üf ahte (heeded).

Wir haben maneger slahte (many a sort)

bosheit undo geloaben (sin and superstition),

d& mit wir ans nü ronben (whereby we rob us)

alter unser saslecheit (bliss).

ez ist yil manegem manne leit (loth, painful)

swenne im ein idp daz swert git (gives) ;

daz lie der riter &ne nit (W. took no offence),

ern' ahtet niht dar üf ein h&r,

ez wsere gelogen (false) oder w&r :

er het in Gotes gnäde gegeben

beidiu sele undo leben.

swaz im des morgens under gie (ging ; met him),

daz engeflöch (shunned) der riter nie,

wan (for) guoten gelouben het er ie (ever).

Berthold p. 58 : ' So gloubent eteliche an boesen aneganc (evil
meeting) : daz ein wolf guoten cmegane habe, der aller der werlte
schaden tuet, und ist halt so unreine daz er die liute an stinket
(infects), daz nieman bi im genesen mac ; und daz ein geunhter
priester boßsen aneganc habe, an dem aller gloube Itt (faith lies)
... So gloubent eteltche an den miuseam ; so ist dem der hoM
(hare) iiber'n wec geloufen. Als ist ir unglouben als (so) vil, daz
sin nieman ze ende komen mac.' Conf. Sup. I, 128. The word
' aneganc ' is supported by Budolfs Weltchron. (Cod. Zeisb*
114 ), in speaking of Moses :

er verbdt allen aneganc,
vogel-vluo, stimme oder sano,
daz da geloupte nieman an;

and Walth. 118, 16 says of a wretched man : ' wizzet, swem der
anegenget an dem morgen fruo, dome g6t ungeliicke zuo,' whom
he on-gangeth at early morn, on him shall come misfortune.
The Nethl. Beinaert 1055 expresses the notion by ' tektn ende
ghemoet/ token and meeting ; ^ Beineke, ed. Hakemann p. 52, by

gemote, and people still say ' to mote komen.' ^The ON. heill

(omen) is a more general expression ; but one lay of the Edda
(Ssam. 184^) mentions three signs favourable to the warrior at

^ BdB. 1107 : Btdo mochte odb daer ghemoeUn^

hi sonde one quedden ende gtoettn^
die ons nemmermd dade goet.


PATH-CBOSSING. 1123

the swinging of swords (at sverSa svipon) : the first is^ if the
dark raven follow him (fylgja ens deyqva hrafns),^ which calls to
mind the raven in the flag of fortune (p. 1112) ; the other two are
clearly ' angänge/ for it says : ' ef Jrfl ert ut umkominn, ok ert
a braut buinn/ if thoa hast gone out and art on thy road ; then
the second sign is : ^ tv&yii litr ft tfti standa hrodrfusa Kali* thou
seest two fame-thirsty men (warriors) stand on the start ; ' and
the third sign : ' ef |?ft Jnota heyri/r Alf und ask-limom^ heilla
an%t ver8r ef )Hi ser |?ä fyrri fara/ if thou hear a wolf howl
under ash-boughs^ good hap is destined thee if then ' thou see
him run forwards. It is Hnikarr (OSinn) that puts SigurS up to
these omens. But against the three signs of luck are set two
of misfortune : one is^ if the hero have to fight toward set of sun
(si-S-skinaniSi systor mftna) ; another, if in going forth to battle
he trip idth the foot (ef )>A foeti drepr). Then in the Gesellen-
spruche I see notable instances of angang in the frogs of the
pool, the ravens, the three old women, the maiden with the goat
(A. w. 1, 91. 107. 111). Again, Ihre de superst. p. 82 : ' Bjusdem
indolis est, quod tradunt nostrates de occursu hominum et
animalium, e.g. si cui domo sua mane egredienti occurrat mendi-
euSy vetula, claiidus, aut felis, canis, vulpes, lepus, sciurns, is dies
inauspicatus habetur. Observant haec prae aliis sagittarii et
piscatores, qui ejusmodi ominibus oblatis hand raro domum rever-
tuntur et a proposito abstinent.' Lasicz 48 : ' Quin ipse quoque
rex Wladislaus, gente Lituanus, has a matre sua superstitiones
didicerat, ut eum diem infaustum sibi futurum crederet, quo
primum calceum sinistrum fortuito accepisset. Ad hoc movebat
se interdum in gyrum stans pede uno, foras e cubiU proditurns.
Quorum similia multa obseryantur a Samagitis ; quidam infeliciter
se venaturos sibi persuadent si domo egressis mutier occurrat, sen
quis certum numerum capiendorum leporum, vulpium, luporum
nominet.' Lucas David's Chron. i. 146-7 says of the ancient

^ In Kialss. eap. 8 two ayengers of blood have lack, becanse two raveru aceom-
pany them aU the way (hrafnar tyeir flngo ine'S )>eini alia leitS) : do they attend as
OSin's meBsengers ? or because they soent the coming carcase ? Other passages
are : * hrafn at meiiSi hütt kallaISi,* Bern. 208^ ; * hra/n fl^gr auttan af hAmelt$i, ok
eptir honnm dm t sinni,* Fomald. sog. 1, 428.

< What is the exact meaning of * d t&i standa, sitja (Siem. 266*"), spretta (269*) *?
t&i can hardly be Dat. sing, or Aoc. pi. of the fern. iA (toe) ; it seems rather to be
a case of a maso. nonn, and to contain a notion of place.

* I take >& as B tum, eo momento.

VOL. III. Q


1124 ST7PEBSTITI0K.

Prussians, that they regarded an encounter with a dck man as
bad, with a motmted man as good, with a fox or hare aa bad (see
Sappl.).

It is hard to get at the meaning of all these divers prognostics.

First, of human angang. Hi-lack is supposed to follow that of
an old woman, of a woman with disJievelled hair, or what oomes to
the same thing, loosened headband (d^couverte, disoooperta. It.
scoperta). If an old wife meet you in the morning, if yon have
to pass between two old wives, your day is unlucky. Sup. I^ 58.
380. 791. 976. When a huntsman in the morning comes upon
an old woman, he lies down and makes her step over him, to ward
off mischief (Hessian pop. cust.). In Switzerland to meet a
woman is unlucky, at least on New-year's day (Tobler 447**).
Swedish superst. K, 53 holds all meeting with woman-folk bad,
unless it be a lön-hora, as the irapOho^ in Chrysostom betokened
an unlucky day, and the iropvri a lucky. So in Sup. I, 177 : the
virgin or priest is an evil sign, the prostitiUie a good.^ But Ihre
speaks expressly of a uetula, so does Amdt's Journey to Sweden
1, 44, and a Finnish song (Schröter's Bunen p. 67) : ' go fbrth by
early mom, lest ancient crone with crooked chin do squint at thee.'
This last hint plainly sets before us the notion of a witch, still
more does the loose flying hair (p. 1089) that of a night-wtfe
(Sup. I, 878), forttme-teller, heathen priestess, conf. the Cimbrian
TToTuoffpi^ p. 55. Yeldek 2P paints his Sibylla as andfas (her-
rida crinibus), ' daz mies lockehte hieno ir üz den ören ' (non
comptae mausere comae 6, 48). And this view is confirmed by
the approach of a woman spinning being hurtful (Sup. 1, 135), for
a witch is a field-spinster, i.e. a.nom, a fate (p. 1088). So early
as Pliny 28, 5 : ' pagana lege in plerisque Italiae praediis cavetur
ne mulieres per itinera ambulantes torqtieant fuses, ant omnino
detectos ferant, quoniam adversetur id omnium spei, praecipueque
frugum.' This again looks remarkably like the scrutinies held
by our goddesses as to whether spindles were spun full or not,
pp. 269. 274.

And it becomes to my mind doubly clear by the clergyman

' Not trae of Theodora at any rate, a bird who boded ill to the Byzantines:
9f9 7dp roct 6pii<rip AXXwt re Kod dpxofUvris iffikpas ß\da<prifJLot oliavfn^ Procop. Hist,
arc. 9 (ed. Bonn, p. 63).


PATH-CB08SINQ. 1125

being put in tiie like case : a consecrated prieei, says Berthold^
is accounted of ill omen to snch as meet him. I can produce
another pretty old proof from Hincmar 1, 656 : * sunt etiam qui
dicant^ quando in venationem pergunt, quod obviam sibi non
debeant habere derioum; * and more modern ones from Reginald
Scott's Witchcraft (Lend. 1665 fol.) p. 114 : 'if any hunters^ as
they were a hunting, chanced to meet a frier or a priest, they
thought it so ill luck, as they would couple up their hounds and
go horn, being in dispair of any further sport that day ; ' and
from Pauli's Schimpf und Ernst (1555) cap. 358 : ' there went an
old dame to church betimes o' the day, and ^parson meeting her,
did cross herself some six times privily. Wherefore sig^ you
yourself so at sight of me ? quoth the priest ; I hope I be not
the devil. The woman answered. It hath never &iled, an I came
upon a parson betimes of a morning, but some untoward thing
befell me the same day.'

When a company of people suddenly fall silent, they say
' there's a priest passing,' Nethl. ' er gaat een predikant voorby ' ;
every one feels confounded at the omen. And in a better sense
also it is said ' an angel flew across the room,' 'Epfirjq iireurfjjkOe.
In Switzerland they say, there is bad .weather when a clergyman
walks out (Tobler 4S6^).

The sudden appearance oi a holy man interrupts and breaks
up worldly business. Those who met him were bound to shew
respect ; paganism may have prescribed in such a case the im-
mediate performance of a certain formality. Christians would
transfer Üie omen from the pagan to the christian priest ; that of
the heathen priestess or wise woman must have passed over to
night-wives and witches, as the derus admitted no women into
its ranks.

Why should the meeting of a blind (or one-eyed) man, a lame
man, a beggar be considered bad, and that of a hunehiack or leper
good f why that of a walker be interpreted less favourably than
that of a rider (Sup. K, 129 Dan.), and that of a water-bearer also
unfavourably (I, 257)? The blind man, the cloaked [rider]
suggest Wuotan. It seems more intelligible why a man did
not care to have his sword handed him by a woman, and why in
the Edda the sight of two warriors is a pledge of victory.

To lovers the sight of the loved one must have been the


1126 ST7PEBSTITI0N.

welcomest of signs : ' swer si des morgens angesiht, den tac im
niemer leit geschiht/ who npon her at mom doth look^ that day
no manner harm shall brook, Ms. 2, 23^ (see Sappl.).

Animal encounters have their origin in pastoral and hunting
life, they are based on contemplation of natnre and on fabnlons
opinions about the habits of beasts. Under this head there mnst
be a vast deal in Slavic, Esthonian, Finnic and Lithuanian tradi-
tion waiting to be collected, which at present I must do without.
Even Norse tradition seems not to have been accurately noted down
in this respect. Saxo Gram. p. 321 says of Slavs, not of North-
men : ' ad varia quoque negotia profecturi ex prime animalis
oecursu votorum auspicia capiebant; quae si laeta fuissent,
coeptum alacres iter carpebant, sin tristia, refiexo cursn propria
repetebant.' The animals in question he omits to name. Im-
portant above all is that omen in the Edda of the wolf Iwwling
and going onwwrds, whom we may fairly take for the victory-
boding beast of OSinn (p. 668). All other evidence agrees with
it, even the superstitions of to-day. Everywhere the brave un-
daunted wolf, the sight of whom awakens heart and hope, is set
off agains")} the timid cowardly hare, the type of faint heart and
failure. Sigeb. gembl. ad an. 1143: 'obiit etiam Fnlco rex
Hierosolymorum ; qui dum venationi insistens leporem insequitur
ex improviso sibi apparentem, equus cui insidebat se super ipsum
praecipitem dedit, ipsumque vita et regno privavit;' conf.
Vintler, Sup. G, 11. 52 — 65. Again : 'on the way there chanced
a hare to run across their road ; the driver was troubled, and
spake. This betokeneth no good. K contrariwise a ti?o(f had
crossed the road, it were a good sign,' Ettner's Unw. doctor
575-6; conf. Simplic. 2, 74. In Pauli's Schimpf u. E. cap. 138
(ed. 1550 cap. 135) : 'in the morning they set forth, and being
come wellnigh unto the wood. Master, quoth the man, there ran
a wolf before us. The master said he had seen him well enough,
it meant sheer luck.' In Albertini's Narrenhatz, Munich 1617.
p. 96 : ' superstitious numskulls are affrighted if a hare cross the
path whereon they shall walk or ride, supposing that they shall
on that day abide a misadventure.' Göz von Berlichingen in his
Life p. 179 : ' and as we came on, behold, a shepherd feeding his
flock hard by, and for a token, there fell five wolves upon the sheep,


PATH-CB0S8ING. 1127

that laid hold of them roundly^ the which I gladly heard and saw^
and wished them luck^ and us too^ and said to them^ Good lack
to JOTi, good fellows^ good luck everywhere, and I deemed it
lack, for even so should we lay hold one of another/ ^ Here we
have no angang proper described, but we can see the meaning
that warlike nations at first put into it. Wolf, stag, bowr and
bear all stand exactly on a par in respect of their meaning, Sup.
I, 128. The Norwegian thinks it a bad sign to meet a hare, a
good one to meet a bear or a wolf (Danske's Beiseiagtagelser
1799. 2, 297): here the bear, whom the lay of the Baven's
wedding calls the ' ypperste karl i skoven,' is justly placed before
the wolf.' Roman accounts take no notice of the bear, but they
do of the wolf; Pliny 8, 22 (34) : 'inter auguria ad dezteram com-
meantium praeciso itinere, si pleno id ore lupus fecerit, nullum
omnium praestantius.' Pliny also tells us the effect of a footprint
of the wolf, if a horse treads on it : ' tanta vis est animalis, ut ves-
tigia ejus calcata equisafferant torporem ' 28, 10 (44) ; and 'rumpi
equos, qui vestigia luporum sub equite sequantur' 28, 20 (81).
Both John of Salisbury and Peter of Blois have ' ocewrsum leporis
timere.' In addition to Berthold and Hartlieb (Sup. H,cap. 67),
the God. pal. 341. 163* has a passage in point. Feldbauer 240 :

Dar zuo s&h wir einen hasen (hare),
der widerßior v/ns (met us) an dem weg ;
dö däht ich deiz niht eben Isag :
er tet uns den ersten ansganc,
wan daz er snelle für mich spranc.

To Greeks and Bomans apparently it could under favourable
circumstances be a good omen {alaio^).^ The weasel {yaXrj) had
a bad name among them : when it ran across the road, a public
assembly was postponed (Potter 1, 746). Theophrastus in

^ Goethe reoognised the poetic effeet of these wordB, and incorporated them in
his play.

* To Turkish trayellers too the wolf is a grateful, the hare an unwelcome sign ;
"^enna Lit. zeitong 1816. p. 1267.

s Dio Cass. 62, 2 (Beim. 1006-7) : ravra elrw<ra, \ay^ ßih ix roO K6\irw
rpo^Koro (^ Bovrdoi^ica, a Britoness) fuurrtlq, rwi xp^t'^i <oi ^Tei9^ h tUaifp (^poftM^
rl re irMfiot tB» ^c0iv dre/96170'e. Otherwise in Snidas : ^cvett b \ayCn ivrrvYfis
TM€i rplßovs. When Hhe Germans under king Amolf itarted a hare and chased it,
they took Bome (Lintpr. 1, 8), bat hare-hnnting Danes were pat to flight (Neocorus
1, 868 ; here Detmar puts a eat, 1, 164). To be licked by the hare was considered
laoky : * he weened a hare had licked hun,* TrOdelfrau 1682. p. 71.


1128 8T7PERSTITION.

Charact. 16 says^ if a wecLsel run past yoa^ you mnat not go on
till some one else has paced the road, or you have picked up three
stones from it. 80 Gentonovelle cap. 81 : ' qoando I'aomo trova
la don/nola ^ neUa via J The fox'a angang is interpreted variooaly :
as bad in that passage from Ihre, as good by Lithuanian Saperst.
N, 9. Domestic animals^ snch as the traveller keeps on his owrn
premises, and does not meet for the first time in the woods, are
hardly available as omens : they are too common, too tame and
dependent on man, to become significant to him. Yet they aaj,
if on setting out early you meet swine, you will not be welcome
where your steps are taking you; if sheep, you will. According
to some, the wayfarer is a welcome guest if the sheep present
themselves on his right Jumd, and unwelcome if on his /^. The
Etruscans, when a new magistrate rode into his province, observed
what horses and oxen he fell in with (O. Müller 2, 118). Compare
the prophesying by horses (p. 662-4), where it is true there is no
chance meeting of the beast, yet stress is laid on his planting of
the right foot or the leß. An instance in Procop. de b. Pers. 2, 5
p. 172 ought to be added.

The observation of birds was even more minutely carried out
than the encounter of quadrupeds, their free unhindered motion
through the air being of itself enoagh to invest them with some*
thing marvellous and spirit-like. The Greeks had a comprehen-
sive oitovumK'/i (Suidas sub v.), the Romans reduced auspidaSkuA
auguria to a system.' Boh. ptako-prawiti augurari, ptako-westeo
augar, Pol. ptaszo-wieszczek. And heathens of the Teuton race
equally regarded birds as messengers of the gods and heralds of
important tidings (pp. 672, 763). ' What bird has brought that to
year ears ? ' means : who made you believe that, put it into your
head ? ' 'A bird sang that to me : jag horde en fogel f& sjanga,
enfogel var här, och sade för mig det eller det,' said so and so,
Ihre de superst. p. 51. Mod. Greek and Servian folksongs not
unfreqaently open with birds on the wing wheeling this way and


1 Our firäuUifit Bay. mäewieUin, amiiie, Sehm. 2, 576, whSntkUrle, pretty
beastie 8, 869 ; Span, eomadr^a (Beinh. cozziv), Dan. den l^&tuu, polcra : all these
names attest the sacredness of the animal. The Sexrians call her laaitsa, bnt
address her by the oaressing form laza : * lazo lazitohitse ! '

' Jul. Caes. Bulenger de angmiis (Graevii thes. 6).

* Westphal. * weoker Tangel heft dik dat inner amen ehangen f ' Sleoneihinke
p. 8.


PATH-CROSSING. 1129

that, holding a conversation, Wh. MüUer's Saml. 1, 66. 102. 2,
164. 178. 200. Vuk 3, 826. Two black ravens (dva vrana ga-
vrana) caw from the white tower, Vuk. 2, 151 . Theprophetic call
of the cuckoo has been dealt with, p. 675 seq. ; he too belongs to
angang, his voice in the wood falls unexpected on the traveller's
ear, a good sign if on the right hand, a bad if on the left. Pliny
30, 10 (25) : ' aliud est cuculo miraculum, quo quis loco j^nmo audiat
alitem illam, si dexter pes circumscribatur ac vestigium id
effbdiatur, non gigni pulices, ubiounque spargatur ; ' conf. p. 1093
on cutting out footmarks. The Indie, superst. xiii. touches on
auguria aoium. Eligius, Sup. A : 'nee in itinere positi aliquas
aviculas cantofatea attendatis.^ Birds whose encounter is pro-
phetic are called wegvogel, way-fowl. Sup. I, 600, but by far
the best qualified for the purpose were the hrimmende rauhvogel
(rapaces aves) that won victories over other birds, and could pre-
dict the same happy event to heroes ; ^ accordingly birds of prey
play the foremost part in dreams. An anecdote in Procop. de b.
Groth. 4, 20 (ed. Bonn. 2, 560-1) shews how early this superstition
was domiciled among German nations : Hermigiscl king of the
Wami, riding over field, noticed a bird (of what kind, is not said)
on a tree, and heard him caw (so prob, a raven or crow). Under-
fitanding the song of birds, the king informed his followers that
his death in forty days was foretold.' It is ig&or up in the trees
that prophesy to SigurSr (p. 672) ; it is not settled whether they
were swallows, or perhaps she-eagles f Dagr has a sparrow of
understanding, Ingl. saga cap. 21. Several passages in the 0.
Span. Cid prove the observation of birds : 867 al eadr de Salon
mucho ovo buenas aves ; 2376 con Dios e con la vuestra auce ;
2379 con la buen auce (see Suppl.).

And as it was a principal point with the ancients whether the
flight was from right or left, HartUh also (Sup. H, cap. 67) pro-
nounces fiying on the right hand lucky, on the left unlucky. He
Bays the eagle muBtfly pouch-eide of the traveller, i.e. on the side
where his travelling-pouch hangs. Nowhere else do I find the

' FHd. Qoil. Bohwars de antiqniss. ApolIiniB xiatnra, BeroL 1843, p. 16.

' Odrot driip (BpfuylaxXos) ^^ Oodpinaif rois Xoyi/iorrdroct ip X*^Mv ^4^ lirirev6n(P0t
6f»tp Twä iirl ii4v9pov re KoBrifiitnfP eTSe koI iroXXd Kpiif^wrap, efre di rijt 6pPi$os nft
^»i^lvrelff efre dXXo fUp rt i^tirt4rrdfUP09f ^vpetpai ^ rijt Bpvidot fULprtvofihritTtparwwra-
ßupos, rolt irapovcrip cödds f^HUTKcy d>s rtdvi^^erai TcaaapaKwra iinipcut Ö<n'tpw...Ti
T€ffffapcucoarß drb r^t rpoßß-^a€m iifUp^ POff-^ffat rfirpufifprip dpiirXrjffi,


1130 SUPEBSTITION.

' ar ' mentioned, bnt often the musar, in Hartman, Wimt, Bert-
hold ; which Benecke's Diet, to the first-named makes a small
bird of prey, the same that Borchard (Sap. C, p. 198^) calls
muriceps and explains as monser. The poem of the Uebel wip
says 297—301 ;

Swenne ich n&ch gewinne var,
so ist dnrft daz mir der musar
über die straze vliege
nnd mich des niht entriege,
ob ich ir niht enbringe ;

i.e. when I bring her nothing home, I have to make that my
excnse. This bird's flying over the road is a &voarable sign.
In the niad 10, 274 a heron (ipioBio^) flying on the right brings
lack. The raven, a bird of victory to the heathen, is spoken of
in the Norse quotations p. 1123 as ' accompanying,' bat nowhere
else in connexion with angang; of the eroio we hear plenty.
It was lucky 'si comicula ex sinistra in dexteram cantaverit,'
Sap. C, p. 198^; the same in Petr. Bles., except volaverU for
cantaverit ; Eolocz. 146 says of children brought up in laxury,
who never felt the heavy hand of fate : ' si enwizzen wannen
die krdn sint gevlogen/ they never knew whence the crows flew.
Walth. 94, 39 : ' ein unsoiligiu (unblest) kra begonde schrten.'
MS. 2, 80 : ' ez hab ein swerziu kra gelogen,' told lies. On the
other hand : ' alba solet comix affectum scire tacentis,' Beinard.
2, 657. With the crow some would identify the Martin's bird,
whose flight is so fraught with meaning in Peter of Blois and
in Benart 10472, Beinaert 1047, Beineke 942. ' Sant Martins
vogel, wol über her ! daz ist nü gar der niuwe hant,* Liederb.
der Hätzlerin 241^; i.e. such careless calling upon St. Martin's
bird is all the fashion now (conf . ' diu niuwe hant, alte hant,'
Benner 2087 — 2111). A similar invocation in Beinaert: 'al
heil, edel voghel, k6re herwaert dtnen vloghel ! ' But Nemnich
would make the falco c^aneus, a small bird of prey^ the Martinas
bird, Nethl. Martens vogel, Fr. I'oiseau S. Martin, Span, pajaro
S. Martin ; and this would fit in with John of Salisb.'s aJbanellus
(Fr. haubereau), which expressly points to good hospitium, like
Martin's bird in Beinhart [and Petr. Bles.]. I find no clue in
the ordinary legends of the saint, to whom the bird must have


PATH-CBOSSING. 1131

bronght something.^ Again, in Vintler (Sup. G, 1. 158) sant
MaHis'Vogel betokens lack; this spelling would almost lead to
the supposition that Martinsyogel was a cormption of ' Martia
avis/ which would be the woodpecker, the Märzafölli (p. 673).
In Ls. 3, 543 we read : ' sant Martins vögalin din machent
mangen umbecreiz ; ' while another passage (which even Beinh.
cxxvii borrows) in a Pal. MS. (Altswert 77, 19) has again ' Mertiss
vogelin,' and we are told it points the way to the Venus mount,
which adds to its mythical character. Our nursery rhymes give
sunte Martens vögelken a red coat or golden wing, but they are
sung on Martinmas-eve, and bring ns back to the saint. So I
can come to no certain conclusion about this bird. Coming back
to the crowj we have yet more credentials, old and new. Virg.
Ed. 9, 15 : ' ante sinistra cava monuisset ab ilice comix.' Poema
del Cid 11. 12: 'ovieron la comeia diestra/ and ' siniestra.'
Benart 10473, speaking of the oiseau S. Martin : ^ assez si le
hucha ä desire^ et li oisiax vint ä senestre/ The ancients do not
leave out the raven, as Plant. Aul. iv. 3, 1 : ' non temere est, quod
carvus cantat mihi nunc ab laeva manu, semel radebat pedibus
terram, et voce crodbat sua.' Olaf Tryggvason, though a christ-
ian, noticed whether the krakd (crow) stood on her right or leß
legt believing it to bode good or evil to him ; whence his enemies
nicknamed him hrakitbein. The ON. hüngvhrdka foretold famine,
and iUmÖris-hräka ill weather. Cento nov. ant. 32 : ' segnor, je
vit una comacchia in uno cieppo di salice.' ' Or mi di, donna,
verso qual parte teneva volta la coda? ' ' Segnor, ella avea volta
verso il cnl.' ' Conf. the charadrius or galadrot p. 858n.

The woodpecker too was a sacred bird, p.673-5; in Lindenblatt's
Chron. p. 31 : 'ir speht hatte nicht recht geflogen,' i.e. not from
the right hand. To the Romans the screeching parra (green-
pecker f peewit f) boded mischief: 'impios parrae recinentis
omen ducat,' Hor. Od. iii. 27, 1 ; ' picus et cornix est ab laeva,
corvus, parra ab deztera/ Plaut. As. ii. 1, 12. In Sweden the
flight of the lorn (a sort of heron, says Ihre) is presignificant.
Sup. K, 94. To see the magpie from the front is a good sign,
from behind a bad, I, 158. When you hear the first swallow in

1 * The Btoiy of S. Martin and the fnartin is in Bosquet 219. 220.*— Süppl.
* * Me r ha vaticinato la eomacehia, ohe la mia bella donna m' infiooochia/
is fooling me, Tonunaaeo 1, 224.


1132 8X7PEB8TITION.

spring, stop at once (on yonr road), and from under yonr left foot
dig a coal out of the ground, I, 217. Gt, 1. 98 ; just as one cut oat
the footmark on the spot where one heard the cuckoo (p. 1129).^
Ms. 2, 118^. 208^: ' nft j&rlanc stdt yil h6ch m$n muot, ich hdrte
den süezen sane von einer swalwen da n flmoc/ as she flew.
Seirants in Denmark notioe whether they see the stot^ for the
first time flging or standing, Sup. K, 180. With the frog, all
depends on where you see him hop first, an land or in vnder,
I, 287. To meet a hold or plucked hen was reckoned bad :

Enmi sa voie a encontr^
une geline pielee,
qui pasturoit en la charriere ;
a poi ne sen retome arriere,
por ce quil i entendoit sort ;
ik ses piez trueve un baston tort,
ä la geline lest aler,
et ele sen prist ä yoler,
en son gelinois le maudist
' honte li viegne ! ' et il si fist.

Pass^es in Provencal poetry bearing upon angang are collected
in Diez's Lives of the Tronb. p. 22-8 ; they relate to the raven,
crow and varieties of the falcon tribe {alianel, gavatih), the
criteria being their right or left flight, their going or coming, their
crying or keeping silence :

Los destres e'ls senestres, los anans e'ls venens,
d'alhanel, de gavanh, d'autras axij^ls ferens,
del carp e de la gralha, los eridans, Iob taoens.

Poes, der troub. p. 221. One would like to have fuller accounts
of this bird-interpreting as practised in the Mid. Agee (see
Suppl.).*

^ Quam primo hirundinem videriit hoc dio ter : ' rogo te, liirando, at hoo anno
oeoli mei non lippeant,' Fandgr. 1, 835.

' The heathen Axabe watoned the flight of turds : ze^er and Ijavet are ahnoet
synonymons terms [meaning to ezpoand], zeger being used when yon throw a
stone at the bird and ^oat to it ; if then he JUe$ to yonr right hand, it is a .good
sign, if to yoar leß, bad : Ifavet is in general the interpretation of the names, the
alighting and the cries of birds that yon enooanter. The science seems to eidmi-
nate in the knowledge of bird-language, which from the time of Solomon haa never
fallen into oblivion in the East. The raven is reckoned a herald of misfortane
(Bückert*8 Hariri 1, 691-2). Of Indian aagoiy many examples might be given, for
instance in the BAmftyana: *hae ave» tibi declarant horrendnm perienlam im*
minere/ Schlegel's Ind. bibl. 2, 225. A shepherd ascribed the disoomforta that had


PATfl-CBOSSINQ. 1133

Oar early ages appear also to have seen a meai^ing in the fjver^
flight of certain birds. Ms. 2, P on the lord of the Dürings :
' oh ime ein adelar (over him an eagle) z'allen ztten ist mit hohen
flügen gewesen.' Eagles spread their wings over famous heroes
to shade them from the sun : when the heathen deputies oame to
Charles's hall,^ they saw ' daz die adelaren dar en gewenit w&ren,
daz sie scate bdren/ Bol. 21, 20. This evidently stands connected
with the eagle over Charles's palace (p. 633) , perhaps even with
that in OSin's hall, Sasm. 41^ The dove hovering above was
mentioned p. 148 ; supervenire and adumbrare are even Biblical
language. By the side of ' drüpir iöm yfir ' I place an important
stanza of the H&vam&l, SsBm. 12^ :

ominnis hegri, sft er yfir ol^rom ]7ramir,
hann stelr geSi guma ;
]»ess fugls fiö'Srom ec fiotralSr varc
t garSi Gunnla'Sar

(oblivionis ardea, qui super symposiis stridet mentemque hominum
furatur; ejus avis pennis captus sum in domo Gunnladae). It
is OSinn that speaks, who, after intoxicating himself with full
draughts of nectar at the house of Gunnlö'S (p. 903-5), flies away
in eagWs shape, * ominnis hegri ' being a circumlocution for the
divine bird. Hegri stands for h^gri, hrdgri, AS. hrägra, OHO.
heigiro, hreigiro, ipc^Bio^, one large bird instead of another.
When OSinn swilled the drink he had longed for, and enjoyed the
favour of the fair giantess, he was fettered in eaglets feathers,
i.e. put on the form of an eagle. How like the myth of Zeus,
when, transformed into an eagle, he carries off Granymede, and
makes him pour out nectar for him I (see Suppl.).'

The Romans framed a system of augury of their own, not
based on the flight of wildfowl, but on the domestic breed of
poultry. The Greeks practised an oke/eTpvofLavreia by laying

dogged him all day long to the smgle oixoumstanoe, that early in the morning a
mike had crawled aerou hie fath.

^ The deecription of this hall, and the impression its splendonr must have
made on the strangers, is wonderfully like what goes on in Asgard daring Gylfl*s
visit, 8n. 2. Gonf. the similar Lombard story in the Ghron. Salem, by Ariohis
(Perts 6, 479).

* Those words in the HAvamAI, portraying the i nblime raptors of immortality
and Hkewise the art of poesy, Soand. oommentators hare taken for a desoription of
ordinary drunkenness, against whose oonseqnenoes we are warned in an loei. poem
entitled * Ominus hegri.'


1134 SUPBBSTinON.

grains of corn on the letters of the alphabet^ and letting a coek
pick them off. The Soman divination was simpler, according to
the eager or sluggish eating, or refusing to eat, of young fowls ;
every legion had its pollarias, who bred, fed and guarded the
fowls, and the consul held theaugurium in his own house or tent :
' pullis regitur imperium Bomanum, hi jubent acies ' says Pliny
10, 24 ; and Procopius 1, 316 gives examples.^ Yet they also
observed the cries of the cock and hen : ' gallina cecinit ' is
named amongst other bad omens for the bridegroom, in Terence's
Phormio iv. 4, 30 ; the gloss of Donatus makes it mean ' superi-
orem marito esse uxorem/ And in our own superstition (I, 83 ;
L, 23) a hen that crowed like a cock was held in horror. If a
listener under the henroost heard the cock crow, the omen was
happy, if the hen cried, it was sad (1, 105. 1055) ; the same thing
applies to droppings of the cock and hen' (I, 230). The gander
too was supposed to prophesy (I, 847). The Esthonians dis-
tinguish between birds of bare and those of shaggy foot (M, 95).

Oflen it is neither the flight of wayside fowl, nor the chance
encounter of a quadruped, but their appearing, their residing
in the dwellings of men that bodes them weal or woe. The
swallow (L, 9) and the stork are birds of luck (p. 672), one is glad
to see storks build on one's roof (I, 215). He that first sees the
stork fly in spring, is sure to go on a journey. To the Lettons
the titmouse foretokened good, its name is sihle, and sihleht is
to foretell (p. 683). A weasel or snake on the roof boded ill
(Suidas sub v. Xenocrates) ; ' anguis per impluvium decidit de
tegulis,' Ter. Phormio iv. 4, 29. So does a mouse nibbling at
your clothes. Sup. I, 184. Raven, crow or nuigpie on a sick house
is unlucky, or of double meaning, I, 120. 158. 496 (see Suppl.).

There were corpse-birds, birds of dole, whose appearing signi-
fied actual or impending death. I suppose the turtle-dove with
her melancholy wail to have been such to the Goths, by their
calling her hrdivadubo (corpse-dove) ; neither rpuymv nor turtar
conveys this collateral sense, the bird merely mourns her lost
mate ; ' tales about her are coll. in Aw. 3, 34. One of the way-

^ Beoord of 788 in Marini no. 56, p. 94 : < et alia molta de vesiia infideUtate
eognovimna ad pallomm oomtnm * (r. cantnm).

' The Iiangobarda need to erect, among the graTes in their ehnrahyards, poles
(perticas) in memory of their kinsfolk who had fallen in war or in foreign ports : on


COCK AND HEN. COBPSE-BIRDS. 1185

birdsy the owl, is also^ and preeminently^ in place here (Sap. I,
789 ; L, 8). Hartmann contrasts her flight across one^spath with
that of the müsar^ hers appears to have been balefal^ as his was
wholesome : Ms. 2, 174 says ' der iuweln fliie ' ne'er profited the
world. Ovid Met. 5^ 550 :

foedaqae fit yolacris^ ventari nnntia lactos,
ignavus bubo, dimm mortalibas omen.

Here metamorphosis strikes in : the owl was an enchanted person,
and strix, strinx (' e ieetis strix yiolenta canat,' Tiball. i. 5, 52),
bruaa signify at once the bird and the witch that fly by night
(p.l039n.) : ' vlulae, upupas, bubones toto anno in tectis funebria
personantes/ p. 481 n. ; ' male ominatos carUus ulularum/ Ghron.
S. Tradonis p. 879. The OHO. holz-rüna, holz'tnucja, holz-muwo
(Gl. Flor. 988\ 996^. Snmerl. 10, 65. 27, 44. 29, 74) translate
lamia, but they rather express wailing bodeful birds, or sprites
(of both sexes), who are heard whispering and mattering
(rounding, mooing) in the wood, p. 488. Hence also their name
of klag-muhme (wailing aunt), kUig'-mutter, hlage^weib;^ in the
Ackerman v. Böhmen, ed. Hag. p. 88, 'klagmut' should be
amended ' klagmuoter.' In the Upper Harz Magmutter, klag-
weib, klagefrau mean a spectral yet winged being (Spiel's Archiv
2, 247) ; elsewhere it is called weh-klage (Sup. 1, 863), Inch-huhn
(lich-hen), grab-eule, todten^vogel, and in Brunswick the lapsch,
because of its lazy lingering flight (Brauns, anz. 1746. p. 236),
' ignavua bubo,' which again calls up the old sense of feig (fey,
moribundus). Other prognostics of death are, when the raven
belches f Sup. G, L 166, when a cock or hen trails straw, M, 77,


the top of the pole was fixed the wooden image of a dove^ whose head or beak
pointed in the direction where the loved one lay bnried ; Panl. Diao. 6, 84 (not
unlike the gyrating eagle on the palaoe-roof, p. 634). The dove represented the
sorrowing kinsman who set up the pole. Precisely so the Servians of to-day make
the cuchoo moom for them (p. 682) : on a wooden cross 6 feet high are carved as
many cucXeom as there are survivors, esp. sisters, to mourn the dead. A girl who
has lost a brother can never hear the cuckoo sing without breaking into a flood of
tears ; kuknmene I is an interjection of grief, Montenegro, Stuttg. 1837. pp. 99. 100.
AU this setting up of doves and cuckoos brings to mind that of hone$' head» on
poles and roofs (p. 659), of eagU$ on roofs (p. 633-4).

^ The Iiausitz Wends call our wehklage hoU sedleSko, God*B little chair
[saddle?] : it appears either as a white hen, or as a beautiful whiu ehild^ whose
piteous wailing and weeping announces impending misfortune. In Bohemian too
sedUsko is a Beat and also the nightmare, perhaps because the demon mounts and
rides (incubus).


1136 SÜPBBSTITIOy.

when the galadrot (charadrios) tarns his head away from the sick
man (see Sappl.)«

Li the same way other animals give notice of a death : when
a priest is called in, and his horse lowers his head. Sap. M, 35;
when a black ox or cow has been UUed in the honse, I, 887,
which points right back to ancient sacrifices. Also the mole
harrowing in a human habitation 555. 601. 881, the cricket
chirping 555. 600. 930,^ the woodworm ticking 901, and mice
nibbling at the clothes of a sleeper (see SappL).
. Prophetic ante, Sup. K, 88 ; M, 99. A spider running toward
yoo early in the morning is nnlacky, bat there are lack-spinners
too, I, 134. Bosqaet 219. A swarm of bees settling^ on a hoase
betokens fire, I, 160 or some disaster,' from those in Dntsos's
camp downwards (Pliny 11, 18. Dio Oass. 54, 33. Jul. Obse-
qaens de predig. 1, 132).. To Leopold of Austria they foretold
the loss of Sempach fi^ht in 1386 : 'da kam ein xmh geflogen,
in d'linden er genistet hat, an^s herzogen waffen er flog als do der
selbig herzog wol fur die linden zog : das diutet Jrömbde geste, so
redt der gemeine man,' Wackem. leseb« 703. It is osoally a
flight of grasshoppers that annoances stranger guests (Justinger
p. 160, conf. 271), or else a good take of salmon, ib. 379. Other
intimations of comiiig guests in Sup. I, 71-2*3» 889. 1028 ; K, 63
(see SuppL).

Lifeless things, especially elements, can fbmish omens. Flames
standing on the Itshnets or spears of warriors ?rere a prc^rnostic
of victory (i/uvi;? avfjLßoXov), Sasm. 110**^ mentions a fire of this
kind, but not what it signified : ' hyrr leingi mun d brodds oddi
bifaz'; and more plainly 15P: 'a/ geirom geislar (rays) std'So.'
Tac. Ann. 12, 64 : ' signa militum arsere ' ; 15, 7 : ' pila militam
arsere.' Procop. de b. Yand. 2, 2 : rSw hopdrmv avrol^ ra axpa
TTvpl 7ro\7iM tcareKdfiireTO, xal ain&v ai alj(fjuil icaUadai eirl
ir\el<TTOv a^laiv iSo/covv. Greg. Tur. mirac. Mart. 1, 10: 'dum
haec agerentur, duae puerorum loMceae emissis flammis Inmea
euntibus praebuerunt, ibantque fulgurwntes hastaej Before the
battle of Prague in 1620 a will cf wisp settled on the general's

I Sometimes these * heimen or grilUn ' mean prosperity to the house. Sup. I»
818. 609.

1 ' Examen apnm in arbore praetorio imminente eonsederat,' Livy 21» 46.
* iastigiom Capitolii examen apiom insedit,' Tao. Ann. 12, 64.


BEES, FLAMES. THINGS FOUND. 1137

flag, and was taken for a pledga of victorj. This too is the
Dioscnri's^m^j that shone on the masts of ships^ a saving sign
under stress of storm. Further« a ccmdle that aneezes (spits)« a
brand that snaps over (Sup. I« 889) betoken gtiests again ; a candle
that goes out, death (150) ; one that htmis roses (forms wiok-
I^Leads)« good lack (252). To ^11 oil or mne, to pour water
tinder the table, were signs to the ancients, one good, the other
bad. The table sqwaking, the raflers ereakingy justified the
gloomiest auguries (Dempster 3, 9). Water sinJäng away or
rising indicated a death or &mine (p. 590). When the fire
crackles, or salt is spiU, it is a sign of strife. Sup. 1, 322. 534-5.
64« Connect with this the. mythic interpretation of the bickering
fiame, p. 242 : the god is present in the flame as in the bodeful
ihwndetn Oaps formed by earth tumbling in [gropar) prognosti-
cate a death (M, 95) ; from the sound of the fi^st three, dods
thrown into a grave« yon can tell if others will die soon. A
splinter splitting off the floor is a sign of guests (I, 71. 1032),
a hoop bursting oS a barrel, of death (I, 149) ^ (see SuppL).

The custom of sprinkling barleycorns on the hot fireplace,, and
watching if they leap up or lie still, I fitid in Burchard alone.
Sap. G, p. 195^, not in later authors; the Greek Kpidjofuamela was
different.

If in time of war two ears of com were found on one stalk, it
was thought to prefigure the return of peace;' on the contrary,
for the cherry-tree to blossom twice in the yfiar is a sign of war«
Sup. 1, 1116 (see Suppl.).

Other things, without. any augury or sorcery being founded on
them, are considered wholesome or hurtful : particularly things
found, begged gt stolen. Thus the finding of a four-leaved dover,
of three T^ole grains in a baked loaf (Sap. I, 685)« qf a nail or
tooth off a harrow 539. 636« which enable the possessor to discern
witches (p. 1078), invantio acus vel oboli res^rvati (E, 11 r. b.),

^ Sneton. ia Ootav. 92 : * aatji^oia qnaedam et ooiina pro oertisBiiiiif obseirabftt :
■i mane sibi calcem perperam ao HnUter pro dextero indaoexetur, nt dimm (like
WladisUns, p. 1123) ; si tenra marive ingrediente se longinqnam profeotionem forte
roroBUt, nt laetmn, matiuiqae et prosperi reditua.

> Elisab. Charlotte of Orleans writes July 17i 1G95 : * I am well weary of the
war ; pray, dear Louise, acquaint yonrself if it be true that near Giessen they have
found a stalk, which the Landgraf of Darmstatt hath in safe keeping, whexeon are
11 ears, and if the like was foand at the end of the 80 years* war.' It is also
believed that lightning will not strike a house where a stalk with two ears is kept.


1138 SUPBBSTITION.

of a needle (K^ 46) according as it tarns head or point toward
yon (I, 235), of a felloe off a wheel 351, of a horseshoe 129. 220
(Hone's Yrbk 1600) ; a begged loaf 13, a ring made of b^;ged
silver pennies 352; a stolen doster 431, tie of a meal-sack 216,
loaf 183-8, timber 1000 (Firmenich 2, 33), fishing-tackle (K, 48),
weaver's knots. In finding things the favour of fortune comes
into play ; to things begged the labour, to things stolen the risk
of acquisition lends additional value : three gulps of begged
wine drive away the hiccup. And not only stolen property in
a particular case, but a thief s hand (p. 1073n.), a spur made out
of a gibbet-chain (I, 385), the gallows-rope itself (386. 921.
G, L 217), possess a peculiar virtue; conf. the origin of the gal-
lows-mannikin, Deut. sag. no. 83 (see Snppl.).

A wheel placed over the gateway brings luck (I, 307) ; is the
notion of fortune's wheel (p. 866) or the sun's wheel (pp. 620.
701) at work here? Splinters of a tree struck by lightning,
eoffin'SpUnters are of use (I, 171. 208). The bridal bed must
have only dry wood, but off living trees ; ^ other fancies about the
bridal bed 486-7. No picked up feathers, no hen's feathers
should be put in a bed 281. 346. 593.

Choosing of days prevailed among the Jews (Levit. 19, 26.
Deut. 18, 10), Grreeks, and probably all heathens. Hesiod dis-
tinguishes between mother-days and stepmother-days, he goes
over all the good days of Zeus, and all the bad, "Epya c. 'Hßi,
765 (710) seq. Even if our names for the days of the week were
imported from abroad (p. 127), yet native superstitions may have
been mixt up with them from a very early time. ' NuUus ob-
servet ' so preached Eligius, ' qiui die domum exeat, vel qva die
revertatur, nuUus ad inchoandum opus diem aut lunam attendat.'
Hincmar 1, 656 : ' sunt et qui observant dies in motione itinens
et in inchoatione aedificandae domus.' Sneton. in Oct. 92 : 'ob-
servabat et dies quosdam, ne aut postridie nundinas quoquam
proficisceretur, aut nonis quidquam rei seriae inchoaret.' Pliny
28, 5 : ' ungues resecari' nundinis Bomanis tacenti, atque a

^ OdofreduB in I. legata digest, de rapelleot. leg. : * mnlieres qnando nnbmit,
Tolnnt leotnm de ligniB sioois, Bed de arbore Tivente. Bed in omnibna opinionibiu
Bois fatuae Bnnt.*

* The nails in general are carefally watched : when they blossom, i.e. have
Bpecks of white, Inok blossoms too. Mach depends on which hand and what
finger the blossoms are on (Bensch). Pliny toaches more than onoe on the


LUCKY DAYS. GUIDING BEASTS. 1139

digito indice, maltoram pecuniae religiosum/ Even amongst us
tlie superstition survives, that the nails should be cut on a par-
ticular day^ Friday especially. A day that will bring misfortune
is called verworfen^ castaway, accursed (Sup. G, 1. 51).^ The
ancient Germans appear to have kept Wednesday and Thursday
holy above all, after their chief gods W6dan and Thunar : the
Indicnlus has a section ' de feriis quas faciunt Jovi vel Mercuric'
Later on I find no day more superstitiously observed than Thurs-
day, p. 191 ; also by the Esthonians^ M, 59. One should not
move to a new dwelling on Thursday, for birds carry nothing to
their nests that day. On the other hand, Wednesday and Friday
are counted accursed witch'days, I, 613. 658. 745; separately,
WedTiesday 567, Friday 241. 800. M, 59. 60. In records of
witch-trials (see the Quedlinburg), the devils mostly appear on
a Thursday or Tuesday. Monday too is a bad day for a fresh
beginning (I, 771. 821). Tuesday is the time to begin journeys,
to form marriage contracts.' Fat Tuesday, Swed. feUtisdag,
Fr. mardi gras favours enterprises (K, 79. 84). Sunday is lucky
(I, 243. 634). The christians had, beside the great festivals,
many days in the year marked by something special, above all
St. John* 8 ; and almost every holy day stood in a particular
relation to sowing, planting, cattle-breeding and the like. The
Dan. skjer-torsdag in K, 168-9 is Maundy Thursday. Hardly
ever was a nation so addicted to day-choosing as the christians
in the Mid. Ages. The old heathen yule-days and solstices
coincided with Christmas and St. John's (see Suppl.).

Closely connected with angang and day-choosing is another
widely diffused superstition. As a prosperous day's work de-
pended on a &vourable encounter at early morning, as the escort
of wolf or raven, augured victory ; so a tribe on its travels was
guided to its place of settlement by a divinely missioned beast.
Under such guidance colonies were founded, towns, castles.


retegmina unguium 28, 23 : * • pedibtu m&nibiuqae oera permixta ante solis ortom
alienae jannae affigi jabent . . . digitomm resegmina nnguiam ad oavemas
fomiioarom abjici jabent, eamqne qoae prima ooepeiit trahere, ooireptam sabnecti
eollo.' This aignifioanoe of nail-paringi is worth dwelling on, as our heathenism
attribates to them even a greater, making the world's end depend npon them
(p. 814, Naglfar).

^ See passages in a Homily of the 8th cent, on this superst., Pertz's Archiv 6,
600-1.

* So in Bohemia and Moravia. Lowers Denkw. n. reisen 72.

VOL m. B


1140 StJPEBSTinON.

clmrclies bnilt; the rise of new establishments and kingdoms
is hallowed by beasts, which, alien to all haman ends, reveal the
higher connsels of the gods.

Greek and Boman story teems with examples. A raven leads
Battns and his emigrants to Cyrene (xopa^ ^Tiyo-aro, Callim.
Hymn to Apollo 66). The Irpini are so called from irpns, the
wolf that led them (Strabo 2, 208).^ P16ki sacrificed for three
ravens to shew him the way : 'hann fSkk at blöti mikln, ok
blöta'Si hrafna Jn-id, ßd er honum skyldu leid' visa, J;vlat )A höf8a
hafsiglingarmenn engir lei'Sarstein i ]>ann ttma i NorSrlondam/
Isleud. sog. 1, 27 ; the divine bird supplied the place of a load-
stone to seafaring men. It can hardly be a mere accident, that
the guides oftenest named are jast the raven and wolf, Wnotan's
f avoarites, who presaged victory and weal,' In the Vita Severini
c. 28 the bear acts as guide. The hart and hind also shew the
way, as Procopius 4, 5 makes the hind do to Cimmerian hunters.
So in Jemandes of Hunnish huntsmen : ' dum in ulteriori Maeo-
tidis ripa venationes inquirunt, animadvertunt quomodo ex im-
provise cerva se illis obtulit, ingressaque palude, nunc progrediens
nunc subsistens, indicem se vias tribuit . . . mox quoque,
ut Scy thica terra ignotis apparuit, cerva disparuit,' Here, instead
of the hunter story, Sozomen (Hist. eccl. 6, 37) has one about a
herdsman, though he knows the other one too : ' forte fortuna
bos Oestro perdtus lacum transmittit, sequitur bubulcus ; qui cum
terram trans lacum vidisset, tribulibus suis nuntiat. Sunt alii


^ A bird admonished the Aztecs in Mexico to emigrate, by calling down from
the tree * tihoi 1 ' i.e. let ns go I Majer's Myth, taschenb. 1818. p. 63.

* A name of happiest angary for a hero must have been the OHG. Wolf-hraban^
Wolfram, to whom the two animals jointly promised victoiy. And I notice that
no animal*8 name but the wolfs is ever oompoonded with * gang ' : Wolfgang (Lup-
ambnlns a.D. 1000, Act. Bened. sect. 6 pars 1 p. 3) designates a hero before whom
goes the wolf of victory ; a similar presage may He in WUantgang (Gotib. Visanda-
vandalareis, Prooop. de b. Goth. 1, 18 OifUrca^has BcvdoXd/HOf). The heathen faith
alone opens to ns the meaning of old names, which are no product of pure
chance. There may be good reason for supposing that in the quaint old Spell
XIV Martin and Wolfgang are invoked as shepherds* saints : one had sway over
the crow (raven), the other over the wolf. Servian mothers name a son they
have longed for, Vuk^ wolf: then the witches can*t eat him up. So Greekaand
Bomans thought Avic^o-xot LyeiscuB a lucky name, OHG. glosses render lydseos
(the animal) wolfbizo, and there may have been a man^s name Wolfbizo, one bitten
by the wolf, and thereby protected. Vuk sub v. * vuko-yedina ' says, if one in the
family way eats of a lamb or goat that the wolf has bitten to death, the babe she
gives birth to will shew a wound, which they call vukoyedina, i.e. wolfbizo. They
also cut the wolfs bite out of a lamb or goat, smoke-dry it, and preserve it as a
sanative (see Suppl.).


GUIDING BEASTS. BURIED ALIVE. 1141

qni dicunt cervum qaibasdam Hanois venantibus, cam per lacuna
ab illis fogeret^ monstrasse viam/ Hanters the stag leads, herds-
man the ox, heroes the wolf. Bat christians, even warriors, will
rather have the deer for gaide than the heathenish wolf: a doe
shewed the Franks the ford of safety over the Main, Ditm..
Merseb. ed. Wagn. 245 ; conf. Otto Fris. de gestis Prid. 1, 43
[and a white hart over the Yienne]. A raven the christians
woald have taken for a messenger of the devil. Flodoardos in
Hist. Bemens. 1,24 (ed. Daac. p. 145) relates one instance of
the eagle : * conscenso silvosi mentis vertice, dam circamferentes
oculoram aciem de monasterii corde volatant positione, snbito
sablimi coeloram mittitar aliger index a calmine, per qaem coelos
scansaro locas in tern's beato depromeretar Theoderico. Nam
mysticas ales aquila spatiando gyrans et gyrando circamvolans
locam monasterii capacem secans aera designavit. Et ut ez-
pressias ostenderet quid Dominns vellet, unius fere horae spatio
supra nbi ecclesia construi debait lentis volatibas stetit ; et ne
hoc ab incredulis casa contigisse pataretar, ipso natali Domini
die quadriennio continue supervolando monasterium circumire,
mirantibas plarimis, eadem aquila cemebatur/ A flying hen
indicates the site of the future castle, Deut. sag. no. 570. Boun-
daries are hallowed by the running or walking of a blind horse,
of a crab, RA. 86. Where the fratres Philaeni had won the
new frontier by running, they let themselves be buried alive
(hie se vivos obrui pertulerunt). Pomp. Mela 1, 7; the true
reason of this ratification by burial will be made clearer pre-
sently. Remus had seen six, and Romulus twelve vultures fly
auspicious at the founding of their city, Nieb. 1, 248 (see SuppL).

We know how the old Northmen conducted their migrations
and settlements under convoy of the gods. They threw over-
board the öndvegis'SÜlur or »et-etokkar they had brought with
them from the old country, and wherever these drifted to, there
they landed. On such wooden posts was carved an image of the
god in whom they trusted; and he pointed them to their new
habitation ; see esp. the Isl. sog. 1, 76-7. 234.

But not only did beasts point out a place for building on, it
was often thought necessary to immure live animals, even mien,
in the foundation on which the structure was to be raised, as if
they were a sacrifice oflered to Earth, who bears the load upon


1142 BÜPBB8TITI0N.

•

her: by this inhuman rite they hoped to secure immovable
stability or other advantages. Danish traditions tell of a Iamb
being built in under the altar^ that the church might stand un-
shaken ; and of a live horse being buried in every churchyard,
before any corpse was laid in it (p. 844). Both lamb and horse
occasionally shew themselves in church or churchyard, and the
apparition betokens a death (Thiele 1, 136-7). Even under other
houses swine and fowls are buried alive (1^ 198). Superst. I,
472 says, a long spell of good weather can be brought on by
walling-in a cock; and 755 a cow's 'running^ be prevented by
bricking up a blind dog alive under the stable-door. In time of
murrain, the Esthonians bury one head of the herd under the
stable-door, that Death may have his victim (M, 69).^ When
the new bridge at Halle, finished 1843, was building, the common
people fancied a child was wanted to be walled into the founda-
tions. To make Liebenstein Castle impregnable, there was
walled'in a child, whom its mother for base gold had parted with ;
while the masons were at work, says the story, it sat eating a roll
and calling out, ' Mother, I can see you,' then, ' Mother, I see
a little of you still,' and when the last stone was let in, ' Mother,
I see nothing of you now' (Bechst. Thar. sag. 4, 157 ; conf. 206).
In the outer wall of Beichenfels Castle a child was built in alive :
a projecting stone marks the spot, and if that were pulled out,
the wall would tumble down at once (Jul. Schmidt p. 153).
Similar stories in Spiel's Archiv. 1, 160 with the addition, that
latterly, by way of symbol, empty coffins were built in. A ram-
park had to be raised round Copenhagen, but every time it was
begun, it sank down again : so they took a little innocent maiden,
set her on a chair before a table, gave her toys and things to eat ;
then, while she amused herself with eating and play> twelve
master-masons built a vault over her, and amid music and loud
minstrelsy threw up the wall, which hath stood unshaken to this
day (Thiele 1^ 3). Why they kept the child playing and happy,
and prevented her crying, I have explained at p. 46. It is the
vulgar opinion in Greece, that whoever first goes by, where they

^ und hadden de delver eich mit groten Unkosten an holt, balken, strnk
(bmahwood) daran versocht, den ort to dempen, konden nicht ; de olden seden,
*■ Animam quaeri, men scholde ein kat edder hunt darin drenhen* Als diser gebleren,
wert it mit der lichte togeslagen (easily stopt up), Neocor. 2, 840. Conf. in chap.
XXXVI. inserting the shretomotue into the ath.


BriLT IN ALIVE. 1143

are laying the foundation-stone of a new bailding^ shall die
within a year ; the builders, to avert the calamity, kill a lamb or
a black cock on the stone, just as at Frankfort they made a cock
run across the new-made bridge, DS. no. 185. At Arta a
thousand masons wrought at a bridge : all that they raised in the
day rushed down at night. Then sounded the archangel's voice
from heaven : ' unless ye dig thereinto a cliild of man, the masonry
shall not stand ; yet no orphan nor stranger shall ye bury, but
the master-builder's wife.' When the wife came to the workmen,
the master pretended his ring had dropt into the foundation, and
the woman offered to fetch it out, then swiflly they set to work
to tcall her in; dying, she pronounced a curse on the bridge,
that it should tremble like a flower-stalk (Tommaseo's Canti pop.
3, 178). Still more touching is a Servian legend on the building
of Scutari : For three years 300 masons laboured in vain to lay
the foundations of the fortress ; what they built by day, the vila
tore down at night. At last she made known to the kings, that
the building would never hold till two born brothers (or sisters) of
like name were put into the foundation. Nowhere could such be
found. Then the vila required, that of the three wives of the
kings she that carried out food to the masons the next day should
be walled up in the ground. When the consort of the youngest
king, not dreaming of such a decree, brings out some dinner, the
800 masons drop their stones around her, and begin to wall her
in; at her entreaty they left a small opening, and there she
continued for some time to suckle her babe, who was held up to
her once a day (Yuk 2, 5). Once, when the Slavs on the Danube
purposed founding a new city, the heads of the people, after the
old heathen wont, sent out men early before sunrise, to take the
first boy they met and put him into the foundation. From this
child (Serv. diSte, Boh. djte, Russ. dity& pi. deti, Pol. dziecig) the
town took its name of Detinets (Popov's Slav. myth. p. 25). And
the history of Merlin pp. 66 — 72 relates how, king Vortigern
casting to build him a strong tower, it did alway crumble down
or it were accomplished; and the wizards spake sentence, that
the tower should in no wise be achieved, ere that the groundstone
were wet with a child's blood, that was of woman born, but of no
man begotten. May not we also connect with this superstition
some words in a sermon of Berthold p. 167 ? ' und wizze, wanne


1144 SUPERSTITION.

dft kint gewinnest, daz der tiavel reht einen torn mit den hindern
h&t üf dich gemüret/ has with the children reared a very tower
on thy back (see Sappl.).

Sect. 23 of the Indiculus snperst., ' de sulcis circa villas/ leads
ns to infer that roand newly fonnded cities tftiey ploughed fur-
rows, whose sacrednesB was a safeguard against the entrance of
evil. Precisely such was the Etruscan usage ace. to Yarro:
' oppida condebant in Latio, Etrusco ritu, multa, id est, junctis
bobus, tauro et vacca, interiore aratro circumagebant sulcum.
Hoc faciebant religionis causa die auspicate, ut fossa at muro
essent munita ; terram undo exscalpserant fossam vocabant, et
introrsum factum murnm, postea quod fiebat orbis, urbs/ The
bull and cow were white, Ov. Fast. 4, 825 on the pomoerium of
Bomulus :

Inde premens stivam signavit moenia sulco,
alba jugum niveo cum bove vacca tulit.

In the Comitium a vaulted chamber was built, and stocked
with the firstlings of all natural products that sustain man's life,
Fest, sub V. mundus. Nieb. 1, 251.

Some superstitions rites, apparently of great antiquity, are
practised on such different occasions in early and in recent times,
that it is hard to make out their meaning. In Burchard, Sup.
C, 1 95®, a waggon is divided in two, and a corpse on the bier is
carried between ; in I, 929 a girl suspected of pregnancy is made
to pass through a harvest-wain so divided. Waggon and plough
are reckoned holy implements, in the midst of which no cheating
or juggling can subsist.

About walking through a cutting in the ground and the eleß
of a tree, see next chap., under Remedies. It is with a different
view that women creep through the stretched membrane in which
a newborn foal has lain, or through a horse-collar, Swed. sela,
Sup. K, 167.

Again, one is not to stride over another person (Sap. I, 45),
nor sli'p through under the pole of a vehicle 618 ; nor should
women in a certain condition mount a^cfoss the pole or shafts 729.
925 ; they should also avoid having anything hanging or tangled
above them 688. 933. This resembles the rule, not to turn wowi
in the Christmas week (Sup. K, 134), nor beat cattle with turned


DRAWING A FURBOW. DREAM INTERPRETING. 1145

wood 58, lest it cause similar twistings and convalsions in man
or beast.

I close with a few words on interpretation of dreams. To
the A. Saxons dream meant jabilnm, ecstasy (p. 901) ; so is the
OS. 'Drohtines drom'= heaven, Hel. 54, 11. 68,14. 85, 21 to
be taken as 'Dei jubilnm, gandium,' as opposed to 'manno,
liado drom* (p. 795), the transitory dream of this world. For
somninm stood the AS. swefen, OS. suehhan; the ON. svefn is
simply Bomnns, and sofna to fall asleep, MHO. entsweben is
sopire, lall to sleep, which again has to do with OHG. snep (aer),
so that sleeping and dreaming properly mean trance or ecstasy,
the spirit's soaring away into the air (conf. arprettan, p. 1083).
This is closely conn, with Lat. sopor, and sompnus, somnas,
somninm. Both OHG. and ON. seem to confine their troum,
draumr to the sense of somninm. The Gothic word for Sveipo^
(dream) is lost to ns. Instead of onr proverb 'träume sind
schäume/ dreams are foams, I have found a more truly rhjmi-
ing ' träume sind gäume ' (Ettner's Chemiker 469 and Apoth.
132), i.e. observations (MHG. gonme, troume, but schüme).^
Even antiqnity did not believe in all dreams, only in difficult
ones, dreamed at particular times or places. To interpret dreams
is in OHG. antfristdn, N. Boeth. 51, more simply sceidan^ MHG.
scheiden, Dint. 3, 97, bescheiden, Walth. 95, 8. Nib. 14, 2. 19,
2 ; traumscheider meant soothsayer. The AS. had swefn reccan,
ON. dranm rdda (see Suppl.).

Dreams are foretokenings of the future, rising out of images
and impressions of the past; they and the figures in them might
be called a writing or rune of destiny (p. 406 n.), as Wolfram finely
says of Parzival 245, 8 : ' sus wart gesteppet im sin troum mit
swertslegen umbe den soum,' so was embroidered his dream with
sword-strokes round the border. Like the birds, they are
messengers of the gods, and publish their commands ; but other
daemonic beings send them too : ' ir boten kiinftigin leit (coming
sorrows) sanden im slftfe dar,' Parz. 245, 4. On p. 905-6 we
had examples of the inspiring gift of poesy being imparted in a

1 Yet eTen in Diat. 8, 96 : * waz iuwe wire geicilmet,' i.e. dreamt. And schäum
is baoked by a still worse rhyme : * träume amdfäume * (Eirchhofer's Spriohw. 842)
iot/eime.


1146 SUPERSTITION.

dream. As birds play the leading part in angacg^ as dreams
tbemselves are birds and come flying, we can understand why
even the subject-matter of a dream is so commonly a vision of
birds ; in some few dreams of this kind we may perhaps detect
an echo of ancient myths. Kriemhild dreamt that two Migles
caaght and mangled (erkmmmen) before her eyes the wild falcon
she had reared; so I'Sann (the swallow?) was seized by the
eagle Thiassi, and OSinn the divine heron pursued by the eagle
Suttftngr. Such images filled the fancy of the olden time : a
couple of dancers in the RudUeb 8, 49 are thus elegantly de-
scribed : 'ille velut /a/co se girat, et haec ut hirundo.' In Both.
3845 : ' mir troumite n&hte von dir, wie ein valke qnäme gevlogin,
und vuorte dich widir over mere/ In Sv. foms. 2, 64: 'jag
drömte att min herres falkar, de spände mig med sina klor, de
togo mitt hjerta utnr mitt brost, och gjorde sig deraf ett bo.'
And there are disquieting dreams of bears j wolves, boars p. 921-3
(see Suppl.).

Much depends on the time when and the place where dreams
are dreamt. They are truest after midnight, toward morning :
'post noctem mediam, qnando sunt somnia vera/ Ecbas. 227.
Eracl. 3723 ; ghosts appear just before dawn (a case on p. 894).
Yet Herzeloide dreams * umbo einen mitten tac/ Parz. 103, 25.

As it is a grave question with newly married folk, whose
light shall bum longest at the wedding feast, which shall first
fall asleep on the wedding night, or get up from the bridal bed
(Sup. I, 15. 485. 717; M, 17); so the dreams and visions of
the wedding night are prophetic (see Childerich's in Almoin
1, 8). Such a dream of Hvttastiema in Gothland, which ac-
quaints her with her posterity, is mentioned in the Gntalag
p. 106. No less important is the first dream in a new house
(Sup. I, 123; K, 61), but you must have counted all the rafters
before going to sleep. King Grorm is admonished to build a
house on a spot where none had stood before^ and therein to
sleep and dream (Pomm. sog. 11, 4-6; conf. Saxo Gram. 179)^;
whereas Halfdan the black (Saga cap. 7) is advised to dream in
a pigsty e, and the dream will come true. Of dreaming in a new
bedj Pornald. sog. 1, 367. Again, a dream on New-year's night

^ * Yoa*ye ideas like an old house ' we eay on the contrary to one whose remarks
are not to the point.


DREAM INTERPRETING. 1147

comes true (Sap. I^ 528). In Beinh. 88, when Chantokldr has
told his ingeniously constracted dream, it is added : ' manec
troam erscheinet sich über siben jär,' comes to pass in 7 years'
time. A great many dream-interpretations, which the common
people hold firmly to this day^ are to be found in the very earliest
times (see Suppl.).

Certain dreams are so deeply rooted in Teutonic legend, that
Tre must place their origin far back, e.g. that of the treasure
f^hich one is to be informed of on the bridge ^ (see Suppl.) .

Like dreams and angang, some other of the customs we
have noticed eyidently rest on the strength of first and fresh
impressions.

We are glad to be rid of this heap of superstition ; yet, while
it filled the lives of our forefathers with fear, it ministered some
comfort also.

1 AgTicola*0 Spriohw. 623. Praetorins^s Wünschelr. 372. Abrah. a S, Clara's
Jndas 1, 4. Ettner'fl Ung. Apoth. p. 132. Musans^s Volksm. 4, 65. R. Chambers*»
Fireside stories p. 12, which prove the legend rile in various parts of Scotland.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

SICKNESSES.

Bt the anger of the gods diseases are decreed^ yet also their
mercy reveals healing remedies to man. All deities can be healers,
they seem to give their names to the herbs and flowers whose
healing virtues they make known. With the Greeks it is chiefly
Apollo and his sister Artemis from whom this knowledge is
derived ; our Wuotan, where he touches Apollo rather than
Hermes, represents him in the capacity of healer too (p. 149) ;
with Artemis and Athena skilled in leechcrafl, we may here match
our Holda and Frouwa, replaced by Mary in later legend. A
special god of physic, Asklepios or Aesculapius, is Apollo's son
and a mere emanation of him. Of divine heroes, those who
practised this art were Herahles, Prometheus the giver of whole-
some fire, and Chiron : to set by the side of these, we have the
Norse Mimir, our own Wate and Wieland, after whom a healing
plant Wielands-wurz is named, and whose skill in smith-work
resembles that of Prometheus ; conf . chap. AX XVII.

As Homer celebrates Paeon's and Machaon's knowledge of
medicines and wounds, so the Gudmnlied says of Waie :

Si haBten in langer zite d& vor wol vemomen (long known) ^

daz Wate arzet wasre von einem wilden vnbe :

Wate, der vil masre, gefrumete manegem an dem libe.

The wild wife, who doctored (made a doctor of) this far-famed
Wate, might well be a wise-woman, a half-goddess (p. 431-2). So
in Scotch tradition (R. Chamb. p. 84) the mermaid points out
healiug herbs. Several such women appear in the Edda. Eir
belongs altogether to the circle of goddesses: 'hon er Icehiir
heztr/ best of leeches, Sn. 36. I connect her name with the
Goth, dirus nuncius, AS. Arian, ON. eira parcere, and OHG.
Irinc (Goth, Eiriggs?); Eir would be the indulgent helpful

goddess and errand-woman. But another passage, Sasm. Ill*,

iwa


WISE WOMEN. 1149

significantly places her among the handmaidens of wise Menglöd"
(p. 423-4) :

HlifheitiTf önnur Hlifßursa,

l^ri'Sja Thiodvarta,

Biort ok BM, Bliffur, Fri^T,

Eir oc örbo9a.

Some of them 6eem to be giantesses, Hlif]7arsa and örbo'Sa, who
in Sn. 39 is wife to G^mir^ and these fit in with the notion of
wild wife ; but the majority are transparent personifications of
moral ideas^ Fnff the mansueta or parca (Goth, freidian parcere) ,
Hilf tutela or parca, from hlifa parcere, which comes to the same
thing as Eir, and throws a welcome light on the Latin parrxt
itself. All the more right have we now to place Biort in
immediate connexion with Berhta, as I conjectured on p. 272 n.,
and Bliff with Holda : these healing women lead us on to wise
women, divine women. And that the gift of healing is in ques*
tion here, is plain from the preceding and not less important
strophe :

Hyfjaberg |>at heitir, en |>at hefir leingi verit

siukom ok sari gaman :

heil verSr hver, )?ött hafi ärs sott,

ef )>at klifr kona.

I translate it : Hyfjaberg this rock is called, and has long been
to the sick and to wounds a solace ; whole becomes any woman,
though she have a year's sickness, if she climbs it. So that the
rock is a holy place, dedicated to Menglö'S and her maidens,
where every sick woman that climbed it has found relief. The
exact meaning of Hyfjaberg, or as some read it, Hyfvja-, Hyfara-
berg, I cannot yet determine ; enough for us, that such mount
of healing accords admirably with the conception one has to
form of the wise-women of olden time: prophetesses, Parcae,
Muses, all are imagined dwelling on mountains. Menglö9 may
without more ado be taken to mean Freyja (p. 306-7), in
attendance on this highest goddess would stand the other
maidens of like nature ; and to the art of healing we have a
right worshipful origin assigned. Now too it is conceivable, why
Brynhildr, the valkyr dwelling on her mountain, had 'lif meiS
Icekniug' (pharmaca cum medela) ascribed to her in SsQm. 147^:


1150 SICKNESSES.

she is a wise woman skilled in magic, a pharmaceatria, herbaria,
and moreover understands the binding up of wounds (undir
dreyrgar yfir binda, Sasm. 220^), like Hiltgund in Walthar. 1403.
Oddrün lends her aid to women in travail, Sasm. 239, and the
Tristan has made Isote's knowledge of physic famous. At
medicinal springs, by mineral waters, appears the white lady with
the snake (p. 588 n.), the beast of sovereign'st healing power,
servant to Aesculapius himself. The Servian vila too is a
physician, and heals wounds for a high fee, Yuk no. 321 [so the
Bulgarian yuda or samodiva^ Aug. Dozen's Bolgarski pesni no.
8, etc.].

We see from all this, that medical science in heathen times was
half priestly, half magical. Experience and higher culture gave
the priests a knowledge of healing powers in nature, from the
sacredness of their office proceeded salutary spells, the use of
remedies was backed by sacrifice, nay, great cures and the avert-
ing of pestilence could only be effected by sacrifice. Thus all
through the Mid. Ages we find the christian priests also possess-
ors, above other men, of medicine and the art of using it. Yet
some part of the old pagan science passed into the hands of wise
men and women, who by retaining superstitious rites, and mis-
using real remedies, incurred the i-eproach of sorcery. Like
witchcraft (p. 1038-9), and for the same reasons, the old ways of
healing fell mainly into the hands of women (see Suppl.).

A physician was called in Goth, lekeis, 0H6. laJiht, AS. Icece,
ON. Icehiir, Iceknari,^ Swed. lakare, Dan* läge; the Engl, leech
has sunk into the sense of peasant or cattle doctor. The MH6.
Idchencere, Idchencerinne meant sorcerer, sorceress (p. 1037),
tbough still perhaps implying the use of remedies, as in ' l&chenen
und fiirsehen/ Superst. D, 38 r., and lecken ^hee^ng, Quedlinb.
witch-trials p. 77. From Teutonic nations the word must in very
early times have spread to Slavs, Lithuanians, Finns : O.Sl., Boh.,
Buss, lekar^, Serv. liekar^ Pol. lekan, Lith. lekorus. Fin. läakän;
or can we have got it from the Slavs 7 I have tried to shew a
Teutonic root for it no. 300, a Slavic might be harder to find :
to SI. liek, lek (remedium) answers our 0H6. l&hhan. Other

> * L^knis hendnr * ; * Icknir vetm, ok kuimm sir at sUL* Ssm. IM^.


LEECH, PHYSICIAN. 1151

Barnes are taken from the notion of helpings bettering^ as betan,
boten (mederip. 1036) ; ON. groB'Sa (sanare), groe^ari (chirurgus^
medicas), from gr6S (growth^ getting on, gain) ; MHG. heilaBre
(medicus), Karl 45. Oar arzt appears already in OHG. as arzdt,
O. iii. 14, 11, MHG. arzet, M.Nethl. ersetre, Diut. 2, 223*;
O.Fr. artousg artox; the root seems to be the Lat. ars, though
arz&t cannot come straight from artista.^ The Prov. metges,
Ferabr. 547. 1913, mege (Raynonard 3, 173), O.Fr. mires, mirre
are from medicus.^ The ON. 'lif imputed to Brynhild is better
spelt lyf, being the Goth, lubi (which I infer from lubja-leisei,
herb-leasing =^a/7;Aa/iefta, Gal. 5^ 20), OHG. luppi, MHG. liippe ;
from the sense of permissible, healing <f>dpfiafcov, arose that of
poisonous, magical, just as our gift meant at first donum, then
venenum. The luppari (veneficus) has a lupparä (venefica) to
match him, the herb-man his herb-woman, herbaria, pharmaceu-
tria. In Saxo Gram. 16 a maiden cures wounds, at 25 he calls
Wecha medica ; and Thorlacius in Obs. 4, 279 has collected other
instances of women healers.' Amongst our peasantry there are
old women still who profess 'böten,' stroking, pouring, and charm-
ing by spells (Sup. I, 515. 865). It is remarkable that healing
spells can only be handed down from women to men, or from
men to women (I, 793; conf. p. 1107) :. we have seen -how so
ancient a worthy as Wate had learnt his art of a woman. It is
principally shepherds .that now pass for cunning mediciners (Sup»
L, 35 French) ; formerly any kind of herdsmen and hunters :
' bnbulcus, subutcus, venator,' C, int. 43. In the Mid. Ages
itinerant leeches went about the country cheapening their drugs
and skill to the people^ usually attended by a man who played
amusing tricks ; for proofs see Rutebeufs Diz de I'erberie (Meon
nouv. rec. 1, 185—191 ; ceuvres 1, 250-9; simil. in 1, 468 — 477),
and the Easter play in Hoffm. Fundgr. 2, and in 0. Boh. in
Hanka 7, 198. These vagrant herbalists, quacks, lithotomists.


* * TempeHe (medioine) üz würze kraft,' Parz. 643. 23. ' Lfthhinönto temperan-
dOt' oonf . Mou«. 393. [Arz-At, ers-etre are prob, from dpx-tarp6s : the Greek prefix
aroh- becomes erz- in Gennan words. — Tsams.]

s The £d. of the Garin 2, 89 would derive mire from the Arabic emir ; bat a
Fr. r is often dereloped pat of <^ (, as lerre latro, benrre batjram [these by assimil.
with an r abready present] .

* Pomp. Mela 3, 6 of Gaulish women : * patabantar ingeniis singularibas
praeditae, et sanare qaae apad alios insanabilia sant^ ; whereas at Borne we find
women forbidden to treat certain diseases.


1152 SICKNESSES.

are a mine of information on the methods of popular leechcraft.
Greg. Tur, 9, 6 mentions a conjuror and doctor Desiderius, who
wore a coat of goat's hair ; the O. Slav, ball means physician^ bnt
strictly conjuror, Glagolita 67^ (see Suppl.).

Crescentia^ a pious persecuted saint, receives from Peter or
Mary, who fill exactly the place of pagan gods, the gift of healing
all diseases, Kolocz. 267, or ace. to the O. Fr. poem (Mten n. r.
2, 71-3) only leprosy. She herself might pass perfectly for a wise
woman, and is actually charged with being a sorceress. Queens
too in ancient times are credited with power to quench certain
maladies by their touch : in Bother 82^. 33* the queen strokes
the lame and crooked with a stone; and a similar virtue was
ascribed to hereditary sovereigns of France and England (Hone's
Yrbk p. 799). If a woman has had seven sons in succession,
the seventh can heal all manner of hurt (Sup. I, 786) ; by Ettner's
Hebamme 906, Maulaffe 699, his touch cures wens at the throat.
French Sup. L, 22 makes it the fifth son. There is no end of
superstitions about this seventh or fifth son : in E. Friesland they
say he becomes a walrider ; does that mean one who rides to the
foughten field? conf. wel-recke, p. 418n. What seems a counter-
part of it is, that when 7 girls running are born of one maniage,
one of them becomes a werwolf, I, 1121. A child that has never
known its father is able to disperse tumours (fondre les loupes),
L, 21. A firstborn child, that has come into the world with
teeth, can cure a bad bite, K, 29. 37. All this borders closely on
the power to bequeath or transfer the gifb of prophecy and the
art of weather-making, pp. 1 088. 1107: the healing art was as much
sacerdotal as the business of fortune-telling (see Suppl.).

The distinction between sacrifice and healing would perhaps be
stated most correctly by saying, the one was aimed at sickness
threatened, the other at sickness broken out. Preventive sacri-
ficial rites have no doubt been preserved longest in pastoral life :
herdsmen made their cattle run through the flames, once a year,^


^ OneBoman rite I qnote from Cato de re nist. 83 : Votum pro Intbut, nt rale-
ant, Bic facito. Marti üilvano in BÜva interdius, in capita singula, bonm Totom
f aoito, farris adorei libras iii. et lardi p. It b. et polpae iy b., yini aeztarios ires. Id
in nnnm vas liceto conjioere, et yinam item m unmn yas liceto oonjioere. Earn
rem diyinam yel servus yel liber licebit faciat. Ubi res divina facta erit, etatiu
ibidem consmnito. Mulier ad eam rem divinam ne adiit, neve videat qaomodo fiat.
Hoc yotxmi in annas tingulos, si yoles, lioebit yoyere.


HUMAN DISEASES. 1153

or whenever pestilence approached. Bat sacrifices were also
performed in severe cases of actual sickness.

Oar medical learning of today^ as it did not proceed from the
people^ has by degrees banished nearly all oar native names for
diseases^ and replaced them by Greek or Latin words. Bat as
those names often bring us face to face with old-world notions
aboat sickness and its cure^ it will be needful to present at any
rate the most important.

In the Mid. Ages Tcrarik has only the sense of debilis^ infirmus^
OHG. wanorhsil, not of aeger, for which the term was siech, Goth.
siuks, OHG. sioh ; hence morbus was expressed not by krankheit,
but by sucht, Goth, sauhts, OHG. suht, ON. sott, whereas now we
attach to sucht the moral notion of hankerings and only retain its
old meaning in a few compounds such as Schwindsucht, gelbsucht^
etc. There is the same relation between the ON. Jn-a (desiderium,
aegritndo animi) and lihjyrd (lepra), conf. Sw. trä, helletra, Dan.
traa, helletraa, DV. 2, 180. General words, expressing also the
bodily pain of sickness, are OHG. suero, MHG. swer, and OHG.
MHG. we, wetago, wetage (like our siechtage) . But a sick man is
also called in OHG. beitiriso (clinicus), O. iii. 14, 67; MHG.
betterise, Parz. 502, 1. 813, 16 ; AS. beddrida bedridden : a term
specially used of men enfeebled by age, ' der alte betterise,' who
can no longer rise out of bed. In Scand. this painless ailment of
great age was called Ana sott, from king on or Ani, who had
secured long life by sacrificing his sons (p. 46), and at last lived
on milk like a child again, Yngl. saga cap. 29 (see Suppl.) .

It was christian to hold sickness a dispensation of Ood, heathen-
ish to see in it the handiwork of sprites, and something elvish.
Accordingly it is personified : it comes upon, surprises, attacks,
seizes, takes hold of, overpowers man : Saißjuoy hriypae, arvyepo^
Si oi expae haifimv. Od. 5, 396 [the daemon afflicts ; in the next
line the gods heal]. In the Hel. 92, 1 : 'mid suhtium bifangan,
bedrog^ hebbiad sie demea wihti. thea wredon habbiad sie
giwittiu benumune ; * and in Versus Hartmanni (Ganisius ii. 3,
203 : ' fugit pestis ab homine, quam daemon saews miserat' No
wonder that in the Edda an oath is exacted from diseases, as
from living creatures, to do no harm to Balder, Sn. 64. Like
death or destiny (p. 406), pestilence carries oS : * suht farnam,'


1154 SICKNESSES.

Hei. 125, 20; in the Swed. oath 'trä mig!' we must supply
' tage ' take : ita me morbus auf erat ! In the Cod. Vindob- th.
428 no. 94 I find the phrase ' eine suht ligen, zw6 suht ligen/ to
lie one sickness, two s. ; ' sich in die suht legen/ lay oneself (lie
down) into, Eeinh. 802. 320.

This daemonic nature of diseases makes people call them by
friendly flattering names to keep them away, just as they do to
horrible uncanny beasts, and avoid uttering their right name ;
they call a disease the qood, the blessed, Schm. 2, 87. 3, 212. 222,
and the pestilence is addressed as gossip. There will be more
examples to quote in speaking of particular diseases (see Suppl).

Fever, OHG. flsbar, AS.feftyr; Goth, heito, Mat. 8, 15 and
brinno, Mk 1, 31. Lu. 4, 38, both for irvp€r6<:, and both fem.;
OHG. has no corresp. hlz4, prinnA. The Swiss have hitz and
brand (Tobler 74*), and the AS. adl, Beow. 3469. 3692 seems
to be burning fever, from 4d ignis, so that the OHG. would be
eital. An OHG. rito masc, 61. Mons. 391, from rftan to ride,
not from rfdan to writhe, as fever does not twist like the cramp ;
and the AS. word should be spelt rida, not wriiSa; Lye has
rideroff febris. It ia imagined as an elf who rides the man with
rein and spur : ' der alp zäumet dich,* bridles thee ; ' der mar '
ritet dich,' p. 464; ON. * mar a ^rad* hann,' Yngl. s. cap. 16; 'der
rite bestuont in,' stood upon him, Alex. 2208. In En. 10834
and Eracl. 3166 suht, fieber, rite are named side by side, are
therefore distinct; in En. 10350 'suht und rite*; 9694 ' suU
nni fieber' i 9698 'diu minne tuot kalt und heiz mfir dan der
viertage rite/ love makes hot and cold like the quartan ague.
In curses : ' habe den riden und die suht umb dinen hals ! ' about
thy neck, Morolt 715. ' die suht an iwern lösen kragen ! * your
unruly neck, Reinh. p. 302-12. ' nu muoze der leide ride vollen !'
sore fever fell him. Karlmeinet 110. Bide seems to be especially
ague, which is sometimes called /rörer. Sup. 1, 183; though we
also hear of ' ritten frost ' and ' ritten hitze.' Imprecations com-
mon in the 15-16th cent, are : ' may the ritt shake you, the jarritt
(yearlong fever), the gcehe rite (swift r.) be at you I ' ' May the
ritt shake you to your bones,' Garg. 96*. ' Ins ritts namen habt
rhu,' H. Sachs iii. 3, 10*^. They said : 'whence brings him the
ritt^?* the same as the devil, p. 1113. Boner's well-told Fable
48 deserves attention : the rite appears in person (in what shape ?)|


HUMAN DISEASES. 1155

and holds a dialogue with the flea. It is plainly [not ?] of Mid.
Age invention ; Petrarch epist. 3, 13 relates it of the spider and
the gout, and calls it anilis fabella. In Bavaria fever is personi-
fied as beutelmcmn, shaker, Schm. 1, 219; a spell against fever
speaks of 72 fevers. Bassian superstition supposes nine sisters
who plague mankind with fevers ; they lie chained up in caverns,
and when let loose, pounce upon men without pity (Götze's
Huss. volksl. p. 62). My explanation acquires certainty from
the Esthonian phrase ' ay an walgedj ayan halU/ 1 ride the white,
I ride the gray, i.e. I have the ague (Bosenplänter's Beitr. 12,
42-3).

The Greek CTrtaXny?, i<f)id\Tf)<;, literally on-leaper, was a dae-
monic incubus, an alp, elf, who causes the feverish oppression
of nightmare ; and '^ircdXrj^, ^irioXrj^ nightmare, and ^7r/aXo9,
^7r*oXo9 fever, fever-chill, meant the same thing, though gram-
marians tried to separate them by difference of accent. Add to
this, that in Aristot. hist. an. 8, 26 ^TrtbXo? turns up in the sense
of butterfly, and the notions of spirit, elf and butterfly constantly
run into one another (pp. 829. 917). In Lith., drugis is butterfly
and fever-bird, in Lett., drudsis flying moth and fever. Lith.
draggis kreczia, Lett, drudsis kratta; the fever shakes (one).

An AS. manuscript on diseases and remedies quoted by Wanley
pp. 176 — 180 (conf. supra p. 140) has at p. 180 celf-adle Isecedom,
cure for elf-bum, ailfcynne-sealf, elf -salve, nihtgengean sealf,
night-wives' salve.^ Elsewhere I find an ailment celf-sidenne.

By the red and the white dog in Ettner's XJnw. doctor 436 we
prob, are to understand measles or rose-rash ; red dog again in
the Leipz. avanturier 1, 86. The Persians call scarlet-fever
aly and picture it as a rosy maid with locks of flame, Atkinson
p. 49. 50 (see Suppl.).

By gout (gicht f .) we understand a pain in the limbs, arthritis ;
in older Germ, it was neuter : ' daz gegihte brichet (breaks) sie,'
a. Heinr. 886. Ulr. Trist. 1461. 'daz gegihte brach ir hend
und fiieze,' E&b. 1060; hence our ' gicht-ftrucAijr/ palsied, 'daz
wiietende gihte/ Benner 9904. As we also find darm-gicht (in-
testinal g.) for colic, and ' sun-giht ' on p. 61 7n. meant the sun's

^ Ibid. * wii$ felfoynneseaU and wiS nihtgengan, and )>fim monnom /« deofol
mid hamS^ against elf-salve and nightgangers and the men the devil homes (con-
sorts) with (sup. p. 890).

VOL. in, 8


1156 SICKNESSES. '

gait, going, taming, I think gicht was a general term denoting
the shooting, tvnsting and tugging of pain in the body ; and a
derivative corresp. to the Goth, galits (innagahts, Gramm. 3,
518). M. Nethl. jicU, Icel. iU, Sw. giht, Dan. gigt. The Gothic
renders irapoKimKon by us-lißa, as if beside one's limbs, having
no use of them ; an 0H6. urlido is not found. ' Ein siechtuom
heizet j70f/rd^'=: lerne, a lame palsied state, Parz. 501, 26 is a
corruption of podagra, which was also twisted into podagram.
More Tent, are fuoz-mht, AS. fot-adl (podagra) ; zipperlein I
do not find before the 16th cent. M. Nethl. fledersin, fledereiiw
(arthritis), Leven van Jesus p. 52, and ^fl. in vote ende in lede/
Doctrinale 3, 1030; in D'Arsy's Woordenboeck, Amst. 1699,
^ fledecijn, flerecijn, la goutte (chiragra)'; did the word mean a
moth or butterfly that brought on the disease 7 (see Suppl.).

The flying gout that shifts from one part to another (arthritis
vaga) was called in N. Germany (Holstein, the Baltic coast), at
least as late as the 17th cent., ' dat varende, lopende deer/ and
in some parts of L. Sax. and Westph. ' de varen, de varende, de
lopende varen/ the faring, running (sprites or things). So that
this disease again was regarded as a spiritual-animal being which
had been conjured into the body. Still plainer are the names
' die fliegenden elbe/ ' die gute hinderen ' (Brunswk), ' die gute
holde* (abt Göttingen), exactly what the elvish 'things' were
called that witches conjured into people (p. 1074). And they
likewise were imagined in the form of butterflies or worms, which
caused gnawing pains and swellings in the joints of the hands
and feet.^ The disease being an obstinate one, and ofben hard
to cure, the common people set it down as the work of witches.
It is also called the hair- worm, and in the Netherlands ytimpin^
gout. A spell classifies gouts as rtmning, staying, trembling,
evening, and growing gegicht.

But the operations of the holden must have been Ssir more
extensive, and concerned in many more diseases. The HoUemopf,
Wichtelzopf (plica polon.) was spoken of, pp. 464. 474. In Buss,
the plica is volosets, which borders on Vdlos p. 625 n., but comes
from vdlos, vlas, hair. A witch confessed (Yoigt's Abh. p. 122)

1 Joh. Weyer*B Arzneibuch (J. Wier, Piacinarins, b. at Qraye in Brab. 1515, (L
at Teoklenb. 15S8), Frkft 15SS, p. 27. Henr. Meibom de arthritide vaga soorimtiDs.
Helmest. 1668. 1, cap. 1.


HUMAN DISEASES. 1157

that there were nine sorts of holdichen : the riding, splitting,
blowing, wasting, flying, swelling, deaf, dumb, blind.

The Poles also call worms that breed diseases in man biale
ludzie, white folk, i.e. elves (Biester's Neue Berl. mon. sehr.
1802. 8,230).

We apply the term flvss (rheuma) to several morbid affections,
some slight, others dangerous to life, as stickfiuss catarrh, schlag-
flitss apoplexy. The latter is said to touch, hit, strike ; MHG.
der Qotes sloe (stroke) ; later, die gewalt (might) Gottes^ die hand
Oottes, Ettn. unw. doct. 224. 'traf mich Oottes gewalt* = 1 had a
stroke, Brunsw. anz. 1745. p. 2022 (from Life of Mat. Schwarz,
an. 1547) ; conf. supra p. 19n. Yet the 'stroke of God'^ ex-
presses also the quickness and ease of this mode of death (mors
lenis repentina), compared with those that chain us long to a
bed of pain : hence another name for apoplexy was ' das selig/
the blessed. We may compare the dwarf-stroke, dverg-slagr,
palsy, p. 461. The Bohemians distinguish Bozj moc (God's
might) epilepsy, from Bozj ruka (God's hand) apoplexy (see
SnppL).

The term falli7ig sickness for epilepsy occurs as early as Diut.
2, 193^, ^valjandia suht (caducnm morbum)'; Maz fallende
übel* Fundgr. 325 ; ' fallender siechtag,' Hütten 5, 171. Others
wise : the sorrow , the misery, the sore trouble, the evil being, the
scourge, the weed (Jul. Schmidt p. 136). M. Nethl. vollende evel,
Mod. Nethl. vollende ziekte, Sint Jons evel, grot evel, granTischap
Goods, wrath of God, Huyd. op St. 1, 569. In Melander's Joco-
ser. 1, 434: 'may the gnucken touch you!' gnuk being LG.
for knock. ' The tropf has touched him,' Erasm. Alberus 39,
i.e. the stroke [apoplexy ?] ; M. Lat. gutto, gutta cadivo, 0. Fr.
la goute : ' cheent de gote,* Ben. 25203, brought on by holding
the plompe (lotus, p. 654) in the hand. A particular species of
the drop occurs under the name of neseh or nesch-tropf Schmid's
Swab. Diet, gives from a MS. nasch as hiccough, singultus,
which (like sneezing, p. 1116) seems to have been regarded as
a mild case of apoplexy; Popowitsch p. 511 quotes noschtn as
hiccough, and in OHG. we find nescazan as well as fnescazan,
singultire, Graff 3, 782. I derive them all from the Goth, hnasqus

^ A(6f itAariy^y II. 12, 37. 13, 812 ; but not meaning a disease.


1158 SICKNESSES.

mollis, delicatus, AS. hnesc [Engl, nesh, SI. nezhno], to which
also belongs OHG. hnascon, nasc6n, our naschen, to have a sweet
tooth. Moneys anz. 6, 463 pronounces nosch-tropf to be flying
goat, and gives a nösch-segen (-charm) : ' I command thee, noseh,
with all thy fellows, for with thee are the stech and the krampf,
gespat, geschoss, geicht and gesicht,' A further charm speaks of
77 nöschen: ^we will go into the man's house, and suck his
blood and gnaw his bones and eat his flesh'; but they get
conjured into a withered tree. A severer, longer ailment than
hiccough seems to be meant ; Mone connects nösch with ' nesso '
in the OS. spell, but a LG. ss answers to a HG. hs, not to si,
sch ; to me the connexion of the word with naschen, explain it
how you will, seems indisputable : ^ s6 dich diu suht benctsche
(nibble at), daz dir hut und här abe gS 1' skin and hair come off
(see SuppL).

Krampf, spasm, convulsion, in children usually freise, freisig,
gefrais, Sup. I, 474. 722, fräsel, Jul. Schmidt p. 121. 137.
Schäuerchen, LG. schürken (jumping toothache, tic douloureux),
liter, little shiver, twitch. But freisy frais often stands for
epilepsy too (Abele's Gerichtsh. 2, 429. 4, 218. 311).

Leib'Weh, grimmen (krimmen, Nethl. krimpen), gfripes, belly-
ache; die ohere grimme, manns-mutter (Wier 107*) ; ha^hmuit^,
hai'mundy bärmutter, Staid. 1, 136; 'the bermutter has bit me,'
I have the colic, Schm. 1, 217; Austr. bervater and bermutter
(Höfer 1, 77-8) ; ivärmund, Staid. 1, 334 ; tribe, Fundgr. 321, 9

also means colic ace. to Hoffm. Ruhr (dysentery), durchlauf,

darmgicht (ace. to Gloss. Flor. 984*) uzsuht, Gl. Flor. 984* zuzsuht ;
further, in Staid, aussucht (diarrh.). Bothe ruhr (bloody flux),
'der rothe schaden' (Anshelm 3, 236).

Lungensucht, AS. lungenadl (pneumonia); ^schwinge- oder
lunge-sucht ' in Schweinichen 2, 256 is surely for schwinde- ? In
Austria ' der schurund,* our sehwind-su/Jit consumption ; Abeie's
Gerichtsh. 2, 303 says it seizes an ell's length of gut every year.

/Seiien-Ä^cAen (pleuritis), OHG. stechido ; M. Nethl. lane-evtl,
Rein. 5401. Huyd. op St. 1, 569, from lane, Fr. flanc, OHG.
lancha = ilia, lumbus, but I have not found an OHG. lanch-upil
morbus ilium.

Wasser-sucht, dropsy. OHG. has also wazar-chalp (water-calf)
hydrops, Diut. 2, 181. Mone 8, 494; conf. mA)nd-kaib (mols,


HUMAN DISEASES. 1159

caro in utero nascens), Melander's Joe. ii. no. 450, Engl, moon-
calf, misbirth^ about which there must be some floating mythical
notions, for we also find a proper name Sonnenkalb, and aber-
kalb, afterkalb or eberkalb means an illegitimate child (see
SuppL).

For abortus we have misgeburt, fehlgeburt, miskram ; verbs :
to upset, tip over, spill, etc. ^zy heft de kar omgeworpen,'
Tuinman's Spreekw. 1, 88; 'tis gone wrong with her, Schwein.
2, 314, conf. 321 ; not straight, Kantzow 2, 30; Dan. 'at giöre
omslag ' ; of proper birth : to bring to tlie (right) place. Esth.
tüyad nurgad (empty comers), mooncalf; ' uUe kätte minnema,
slip out of (miss) the hands, opp. to ' last pölwede peälet töstma,
get (lift) the child on the knee. We have: 'there's a row,
' the house cracks' (the birth is near), 'the house has tumbled
(it is over), Sachs, pro v. blätt. 14, 127 ; ' the oven breaks down,
Schm. 1, 33. In MHG. ' diu kamer wart entlochen,' unlocked
Mar. 46. Bermutter, which is used of colic, strictly denotes the
hysterica passio, and is represented not only as a toad, Schm. 1,
188, but as a mouse that runs out of the body, and has a sword
laid across the stream for it, Ettn. hebamme p. 194-5, as in the
superstition described above, p. 1082 (see SuppL).

Herz-gespan, tension of heart (cardialgia), herz-spann. Sup. I,
873. 949, otherwise herz- weh, herz-kulk (ventriculi colica): ' some-
thing lies and stands before my heart.' MHG. herze-swer; swer-
mage, Dint. 2,-273. This is not the same thing as the hearts
worm, of which it is vulgarly supposed that every man has one
in him, and would die if it crept out of his mouth (Ettn. hebamme
p. 890), or got on his tongue, Chr. Weise's Drei klügste leute
pp. 8. 9. The ancients called a swelling of the tongue ßdrpaxo^
and rana. The heiss-hunger (hot-), ßovXifio^, appetitus caninus,
was also accounted for by an animal: 'vermis lacertae similis in
stomacho hominis habitat,' Gl. Jun. 381. 'wir suln uns alle
broeten, den zadelwurm testen (kill) der uns dicke hat genügen,'
ofb has gnawed us, Seifr. Helbl. 3, 247.

Headache, Iwubit-we, Fundgr. 320-1; houbit-svht, Diut. 270;
farren, Sup. I, 865. perh. the 'faren' of p. 1156. Tobe-suht
(amentia), Iw. 3233, brain-sickness. WirbeUsucht, vertigo, I,
436.

OHG. huosio, cough, MHG. liuosie, oar liuste (in Zürich wüeste),


1160 SICKNESSES.

ON. hosti, AS. hwosta, Engl, whoost A cold in the head:
schnupfe, schnaube^ schnuder, in Switz. pfniisel; Hildegard has
nasebozy coryza. MHG. struche, Fundgr. 321, 1. Ls. 1, 403-4.
Hoarseness : Jcramme, Fdgr. 322. Catarrh : OHG. tampho, Graff
5, 142, dumpho in Hiideg. St. Anthony's fire (because healed in
his hospitals?) : rothlauf, in Switz. wölken, fliegende wölke, flying
cloud. Staid. 2, 456 (see Suppl.).

Gelhsuht, elephantiasis in GI. Mens. 384 ; our gelbsucht is the
jaundice. ' To fasten yellow smocks on folk,' is that to conjure
the jaundice into them ? Gelesuht and fich are ficus morbus,
piles, AS. fiC'ädl; in Altd. bl. 2, 199 'der rot vich* for hasmor-
rhoids; in Helbl. 2, 1190 'der rote siechtuom und daz vie macht

inch bleich unde gel.' OHG. misal-suht (lepra), GraflF 2, 875;

Goth. ßrutS'fiU, which in Gramm. 2, 20 I traced correctly to
|?riutan [to trouble, tease, our driessen, verdruss], and 2, 598
recognised |>ruts as anom. Gen. for )7rutis. pruts is torment,
vexation, and applied to sickness, leprosy ; the OHG. form would
be druzis'fel. In Slavic languages trud is trouble and illness,
the Boh. trud having exactly the two meanings of dolor and
lepra, Pol. tr%d eruption. OHG. hriupi (scabies), rUda (impetigo),
Gl. Flor. 988^, zittarlüs, tetter-louse, ringworm (impetigo), Diut.
r, 496^. A modern slang term is schneider-courage (Adelung v.
kratze), schneider-kurzweil, tailor's pastime (Ettn. unw. doct.
349). The AS. gicffa (scabies, impetigo), Engl, itch, is the OHG.
juchido, Graff 1, 593. The rose (erysipelas), running fire, ignis
sacer (Ivonis epist. p. 85*. 1 84^), OHG. onto, AS. oma, ON. ama.
Of red spots on a child's face they say 'the Jiidel has burnt
him,' Sup. 1, 473. AS. ßeor,ßeorweorc is inflammation, ßeorwyrm
impetigo vermicularis ^ (see Suppl.).

Stone, gravel, calculorum dolor: in Götz. v. Berlich. 103, 'der
reissende (tearing) stein.'

A sort of excrescence or fungus (suam) was called mal-annvs
(das übel j&r). Spell VII; in Batherii opp. ed Ballerini p. 15;
' carbunculi vel malae pustulae, quem malum vulgo dicunt
malampnum* And the plant used in healing it bore the name
o{ malannus too, OHG. achalm, Graff 1, 132 (see Suppl.).

' The Greeks too fancied the impetigo was cansed by a small beetle. Pliny 27,
11 (75) : lapis vulgaris jnxta flnmina fert mnscum siccnm, oannm ; bio frieatoriütero
lapide, addita hominis saliva; illo lapide tangitor impetigo. Qni tangit, dicit.
<p€vy€T€, Kavdapldesy \jjko5 Aypios iffißc diuK€i, beetles begone, the wild wolf chases yea.


HUMAN DISEASES. 1161

Many other napes of diseases I suppress; a still greater
namber mnst have eladed my research. My design was^ ont of
this neglected mine of wealth in our language to bring specimens
that should prove what mythical fancies the people associated
with the origin of diseases. Like other evils, they seemed to be
destined and devised by gods, spirits, magicians ; nay, to become
themselves malign living agents (p. 1153). Much remains
obscure : what is meant by ulfheit, that plague of plagues (p.
442n.)f what by the haupt-geschein which is exorcized in Ayrer's
Fastn. sp. p. 148-9, and turns up in other stories too (Schm. 3,
866) ? Now in Benner 12180 we find ' ir habt daz hovhUgeachide '
(rh. vermide), meaning apparently folly, infatuation. K ' head«-
sheen * be right, I would explain it by the OHG. houbet-skimo
(capitis radii), N. Cap. 63 : for it is an ailment that throws a
nimbus or nebula round one's head, and makes one see every thing
double; H. Sachs names it ' der plerr, augenplerr/ ii. 2, 27^. iii.
3, 9**. iv. 3, 13**^, and we still say ' die blerr kriegen,' to be lost in
amazement [blurred f]. Eating chervil is supposed to produce
this doubleness of vision, Fragm. 37^*®. Ghkrg. 148*.

A Finnic song makes an old woman, Launawatar (Schröter p.
48 seq.) or Louhiatar (Kalev. 25, 107) become the mother of nine
sons (like the nine holden above) : werewolf, snake, risi (?),
lizard, nightmare, joint-ache, gout, spleen, gripes. These mala-
dies then are brothers of baneful monsters ; and in the song the
last-named disorder is singled out for exorcism.

The Mod. Greeks picture the smallpox as a woman frightful to
children, and euphemistically name her a-vy^tope^evri indulgent,
exorable (conf. ON. Eir), or more commonly evXoyla one to be
praised and blest (Fauriel's Disc. pr61. Ixxxv).

One more disease has to be noticed, which from quite the early
part of the Mid. Ages was ascribed to demonic diabolic agency.
1 begin with a passage in the Yita Gaesarii Arelatensis (d. 542),
said to have been written by his pupils Cyprianus, Messianus
and Stephanus, lib. 2 cap. 14 (Acta Bened. sec. 1, p. 673) : ' lUe
autem, quid infirmitatis haberet ? interrogavit. Dixerunt, doe-
monium quod rnstici Dianam appellant; quae sic affligitur, ut
paene omnibus noctibus assidue caedatur, et saepe etiam in
ecclesiam ducitur inter duos viros ut maneat, et sic fiagris dia*
bolicis occulte fatigatur, ut vox continua ejus audiatur. . . .


1162 SICKNESSES.

Ocnlis meis vidi plagaSj qnas ante aliqaos dies in dorsum et in
scapulas acceperat^ in sanitatem venire^ pridianas antem et in ipsa
nocte impressas recentes inter illas intextas^ quas prius perpessa

fuerat/ Greg. Tur. mir. 5, Mart. 4, 36: 'Cum de cultura

rediret, snbito inter manns delapsa comitantium terrae corrait^
ligataque lingua nullum verbum ex ore potens proferre^ obmutuit.
Interea accedentibus accolis ac dicentibus earn meridiani daemonis
incursnm pati, ligamina herbamm atque incantationnm verba

proferebant/ Ducange has otber passages sub v. daemon tneri-

dianus; the name seems to have arisen out of Ps. 91 ^ 6, where
Notker translates ' mittetagigo tiefel/ whom Greek writers also
call fiea-'qfjLßpiyo^ Saifimv : the disease must have been of an
epileptic nature. The Bohemians name it polednice (meridiana),
but the Poles Dziewanna (p. 993 n.)^ which is Diana again^ and as
Diana often means the same thing as Holda, it is essential to
remember that this goddess also loves to appear at the hour of noon
(Praetor, weltbeschr. 1^ 476), and that white ladies are seen at the
same season (p. 963-4-6)^ whose original is Berhta the bright. So
that the malady can safely be traced to the operation of deities
and elves. That here Holda and Berhta do strike in, has already
been inferred on other grounds, p. 477-8, in speaking of the aunt
in the rye, the woman in the wheat, who passes through the corn
at noontide, like the Wendic pshi-polnitaa : some call her pshi-
polontsa, she appears between 12 and 1 to labourers in heathy
districts, especially to women weeding flax, she is clothed
in white, and talks of flax-raising, how it is planted, reared,
worked and spun ; she is said to have wrung the necks of women
that would not answer her ; the people dread her, and are glad
she has not shown herself this long while past. Observe, that in
Gregory too the demon appeared to the woman at her field labour,
and she falls to the ground, as the Russian peasants do before the
' weeping widow ' who breaks their bones : in Gaul it was taken
for a mental disorder. But in all these shapes of terror we can-
not fail to recognise the motherly divinity of the heathens.

Of course, spirits have equally to do with animal diseases. An
OS. formula adjures the nesso and his nine young ones to depart
out of the flesh and skin of the spur-lamed horse. Dog's mad-
ness is said to come of a worm seated under the tongue, and this
' tollwurm ' can be cut out. One ailment of horses is called the


ANIMAL DISBASES. 1163

7>Iowing worm (Spell XV), which reminds of the blowing holden,
p. 1157. Another, of horses or of oxen, is the hunsche : Staid. 2,
61 makes it burning of the spleen or cold tumour, otherwise called
' the evil wind,' Tobl. p. 70 ; in Lower Hesse it is swollen udder
in a cow, and the charm there muttered against it is :

Die hunache und der drache (dragon)

die giengen über die bache (beck) ;

die hürische die vertrank (was drowned, al. verschwank

vanished),
der drache der versank.

A charm in Moneys Anz. 465 begins : ' there went three blessed
virgins over a huntsehen hill, the huntachen meets them, and one
says, here is the hüntsche.' Certainly the word seems to contain
the OHG. adj. hAnisc, MHG. hiunisch, and may refer to giants
or to Huns (p. 523) ; the 'hünische berg ' tells in favour of the
first, in case a giant's mount is meant. Adelung writes 'der
Inntsch/ and explains it as asthma. A LG. formula substitutes
for hünsche slie, i.e. schleihe, tench (see Suppl.). In popular
belief a witch can charm her elves or holden alike into man and
beast. The Servians call an incurable disease in sheep metil.
They say, once the Germans having caught the Devil, asked him
what was a cure for the metil? He answered, when all the
sheep were dead but one, they must carry the remaining one
round the pen, and then no more would die but that one (Yak
sub v.). In other cases the first head of cattle that falls is to be
buried, and a willow shoot be planted on the mound.

As the several diseases and plagues were ordained and sent by
gods or daemons, there were also special remedies and cures that
proceeded from such higher beings first of all. In the Catholic
superstition of the later Mid. Ages there had grown up a regular
system, as to which particular saint, male or female, was to be
invoked for the several pains and sorrows of almost every limb in
the body^ (see Suppl.).

Out of a mass of superstitious modes of healing, I select the
following.

A very ancient custom was, to measure the patient, partly by

' Haupt*B Zeitschr. 1, 1-13-4. Boquefort sub v. mal.


1164 SICKNESSES.

way of cure, parÜy to ascertain if the malady were gprowing or
abating. We might even quote the Bible under this head, 1 Kgs
17, 21. 2 Kgs 4, 34, where Elijah and Elisha measure them-
selves over the lifeless child, and thereby restore him to life.
And the practice of measuring the limbs when handing tapers up
to the altar (Diut. 2, 292} is worth considering, though it is
supposed rather to keep away coming evils. In the Bthtebuoch
p. 46 the question is asked : ' ob dft ie geloubetöst an hecse und
an lächenerin und an segenerin, und ob du taste daz si dir rieten
(got them to advise thee) ? und ob du ie gesegnet oder gel&chent
wurde oder gemezen wurde, und ob dft ie bekort wurde ? ' In
Ls. 3, 9 a woman, wishing to fool her husband, says : ' tuo dich
her, la dich mezzen/ come and be measured ; then ' also lang ich
in maz, unz er allez vergaz,' I measured him till he forgot every-
thing. Another, who wants to persuade her husband that he is
' niht guoter sinne,' not of sound mind, sajrs to him. Cod. kolocz.
141;

' So habt her, und lat inch mezzen,
ob ihtes (aught) an in si vergezzen.'
Sie was ungetriuwe,
sie nam ir risen (rods) niuwe,
sie maz in nach der lenge,
d6 was ez im ze enge,
sie m^z im twerhes (across) über houpt :
' Bwaz ich spriche, daz geloupt,
bl&set dar durch (blow thro' these) mit gewalt,'
sie nam die nsen zwivalt,
' und tret mir ftf den rehten fuoz,

so wirt in iuwer siihte buoz ('twill boot your sickness) ;
ir suit inch in daz bette legen
und suit inch niergen regen (not stir),
biz daz ir derhitzet (till you get warm)
und ein wenc (a little) erswitzet,
so ezzet drithalp rockenkom (2^ grains of rye),
so wirt iuwer suht gar verlorn.'

Renn. 12183: 'strecket iach nider, und Idt iuch mezzen.* This
measuring is also quoted among sorceries (Sup. D, 38 r. 140 r.).


MEASURING. STREWING ASHES. 1165

Pregnant women measure a wich the length of the saint's image,
and tie it round their body (F, 31). Wier's Arzneibuch p. 31-3
mentions a disease called in the Treves country nacht-grif
(brought on by the grip of a night-spirit ?) ; to ascertain its
presence, yon proceed thus : draw the sick man's belt about his
naked body, lengthwise and breadthwise, then take it oflF, and
hang it on a nail with the words ' God, I pray thee by the
three virgins Margarita, Mariamagdalena and Ursula, be pleased
to vouchsafe a sign upon the sick man, if he have the nightgrip
or. no ' ; then medsv/re again, and if the belt be shorter than
before, it is a sign of the said sickness. By the Schles. prov. bl.
1798. 27, 16 — 20, scarce a village in the Liegnitz country but
has its messerin, always an old woman. When she is asked to
say whether a person is in danger from consumption, she takes
a thread and msasures the patient, first from head to heel, then
from tip to tip of the outspread arms ; if his length be less than
his breadth, then he is consumptive: the less the thread will
measure his arms, the farther has the disease advanced ^conf.
p. 1 168) j if it reaches only to the elbow, there is no hope for him.
The measuring is repeated from time to time: if the thread
stretches, and reaches its due length again, the danger is
removed. The wise woman must never ask money for her
trouble, but take what is given. The Mark, forschungen 1, 247
says a woman is stript, and measured with a piece of red yam
spun on a Sunday. Compare the measuring of corn and water.
Sup. I, 258. 953, and supra p. 491-7 (see Suppl.).

Much can be done by stroking and binding, A patient's body
is commonly stroked with the hand or sleeve or the back of a
knife ; often a thread is also tied round the part affected, or the
medicine tied on by it. Of this binding more hereafter.

In Poland, when the white folk (biaie ludzie, p. 1157) torment
a sick man, a bed of pease-halm is made, a sheet spread over it,
and the patient laid thereon; then a person walks round him,
carrying a sieve-ful of ashes on his back, letting the ashes run
out, till the floor all round the bed is covered with them. The
first thing in the morning they count all the lines in the ashes,
and some one goes silently, greeting no one on the way, and
reports the same to the wise woman, who prescribes accordingly
(Biester's Mon. sehr, as above). The spirits leave their tracks in


1168 SICKNESSES.

fully swathed np. If the part coalesced and soldered together,
as usnally fell oat where the feat was performed with anj
adroitness at all, the party was cored; bat where the cleft
continued to gape, the operation, it was supposed, would prove
ineffectual. We have several persons now living in the village,
who in their childhood were supposed to be healed by this
superstitious ceremony, derived down perhaps from our Saxon
ancestors, who practised it before their conversion to Christianity.

At the south comer of the area near the church, there stood

about twenty years ago a very old grotesque hollow pollard^ash,
which for ages had been looked on with no small veneration as
a shrew-ash. Now a shrew-ash is an ash whose twigs or branches,
when gently applied to the limbs of cattle, will immediately
relieve the pains which a beast suffers from the running of a
shrewvumse over the part affected. For it is supposed that
a shrewmouse is of so baneful and deleterious a nature» that
wherever it creeps over a beast, be it horse, cow or sheep, the
suffering animal is afflicted with cruel anguish, and threatened
with the loss of the use of the limb. Against this accident, to
which they were continually liable, our provident forefathers
always kept a shrew-ash at hand, which, when once medicated,
would maintain its virtue for ever. A shrew-ash was made
thus:^ into the body of the tree a deep hole was bored with
an auger, and a poor devoted shrewmouse was thrust in alive and
plugged in, no doubt with several quaint incantations long since
forgotten. As the ceremonies necessary for such a consecration
are no longer understood, all succession is at an end, and no
such tree is known to subsist in the manor or hundred. As to
that on the area, the late vicar stubbed and burnt it when he was
waywarden, regardless of the remonstrances of the bystanders,
who interceded in vain for its preservation ' ' (see Suppl.).

^ Bob. Plot's Nat. bist, of Staffordahire, Ozf. 1686. p. 222 : * A sapentitioas
custom they have in this conntj, of making nurtrow trees for the core of onaocoont-
able swellings in their cattle. For to make any tree, whether oak, ash or elm, a
nvartrow tree, they oatoh one or more of these norsrows or fieldmioe, which tbej
fancy bite their cattle and make them swell, and haying bored a hole to the center
in the body of the tree, they pat the mice in, and then driye a peg in after them
of the same wood, where they starving at last communicate forsootii sn^ a yirtoe
to the tree, that cattle thus swoln being wiped toith the boughs of it pnssently
recover : of which trees they have not so many neither, but that at some places
they go 8 or 10 miles to procure this remedy.'

» White's Nat. hist, and antiq. of Selbome, Lond. 178D. 4, p. 202-4.


PLUGGING UP. BUBYING. 1169

This superstition of the mouse-ash holds together with some
things we have already touched upon. Thus, plugging ^he
mouse in is very like shutting up one^s ill-luck in the hollow
oak^ p. 878 ; and we are helped out by a statement in Luther's
Table-talk (ed. 1571. fol. 53^}: 'a hole is bored in a tree^ the
soul placed therein^ and a plug driven in afber> that it may stay
in.' We know that on other occasions^ when soul or spirit
quits the body^ it takes the shape of a vnome^ p. 1082.

Baibiht is what the Lettons call a fancied cure for headache :
the sufferer is measured a few times round the head with the
inner bark of the lime, and then has to crawl through this bast.
We also find that through holes bored in this healing tree water
is poured and drunk.^

It partakes of angang, that the first three^ com or sloe blossoms
one sees in the year should furnish a remedy for fever. Sup. I,
695. 718. 784. 1018; conf. the 2i grains of rye, p. 1164.

At the Yogelsberg gouty pei*sons wear on the ring-finger
of the right hand iron rings made out of nails on which meii
have hung themselves. Gout-charms are worn on the breast,
wrapt in unbleached linen, with flaxen threads without a knot.
Both fall under the head of amulets and adligatio. Healing
girdles were already known to Marcellus, AS. hom. 2, 28.

Diseases and remedies are also buried in the ground : in the
ant-hill. Sup. I, 864. Of this class is a cure of epilepsy per-
formed in the 10th cent, by burying peachblossoms, which
Batherius in Praeloquiis lib. 1 (ed. Mart, et Dur. p. 808. ed.
BaUer. p. 31) relates doubtingly: Factum sit, infectum sit,
narratum est quod refero. Cujusdam divitis filius gutta quam
eadivaan dicunt laborabat. Medicorum omne probatissimorum
erga eum inefficaz ingenium ad desperationem salutis patemum
atque maternum deduxerat animum, cum ecce unus servorum
suggerit, ut flores arboris persicae optime mundatos primo lunis

' Phydca Hildegardis 8, 10 do oupresso : Quod n aliqnis homo a diabulo veJ
per msgioa irretitiu est, ^raeiatum lignum, quod cor dicitnr, cum terebro perforet^
et in fictili vase aqoam vivi fontis toUat, et eam per idem foramen in aliud fietüe
▼as fundat, et oum jam infundit dioat : * ego fondo te, aqua, per foramen istud in
virtnoea virtute, quae Deus est, ut cum fortitudine quae tibi adest in natura tua
fluas in hominem ietum qui in sensu suo irretitus est, et onmes contrarietates in
eo destruas, et eum in reotitudinem in quam Deus eum posuit, in recto sensu el
soientia reponas.* Et aquam istam per no?em dies jejunus bibat, et etiam tooiens
hoc modo benedioatnr, et melius habebit.


1170 SICKNESSES.

(i.e. lanae) die Aprilis mensis in vase vitreo coUigerent, qnod
sub radice ejusdem arboris, insciis omnibus, ab nno quo vellent
suffoderetur, eodem die reversuro ipso a quo positum est, anno
vergente, si fieri posset bora quoque eadem, et eflfosso vase floret
in oleum conversos, arb&rem siccatam inventuro, qaod snb altare
positum presbytero quoque ignorante, novem missis super eo
celebratis sanctificaretur, et statim post accessnm ejnsdem morbi
novem vicibus in haustum diatim scilicet aegro daretoTj com
oratione Dominica, ita duntaxat ut post ' libera nos a malo ' a
dante diceretnr ' libera Deus istum hominem (nomine ill.) a gutta
cadiva/ et quibus novem diebus missam quotidie andiret, azjmom
panem cibumque quadragesimalem post jejunium caperet, atque
ita Deo miserante convalesceret. Si tamen factum est, ille con-
valuit, servus emancipatus est, etiam heres adscriptus, medicina
ab innumeris adprobata multis quoque salutis contulit remedia.

The elder-tree is good for toothache and ague : for the former
the sufferer sticks cm elder-branch into the ground with the words
^ begone, bad spirit' ; in the case of ague he puts it in without
saying a word, but his fever sticks to the elder, and then fastens
on the first person who comes to the spot unawares, Dan. Sup.
K, 162. Specially wholesome is an elder that grows over bee-
hives (op bjintjekoven) ; the bast is peeled off upwards (not
down), and a decoction of it is given the patient to drink
(Lapekoer fen Gabe scröar. p. 31-2).

It is worth noticing how the sickness is transferred to a tree,
i.e. to the spirit who inhabits it. Spell no. xxvi begins with
the words : ^ bough, I bend thee, so fever leave me ' ; another has :
' Lift thee up, elder bough ! Antonyms fire, sit on it now ! Fve
had thee a day, thou have it alway!' One that has the gout must
go three successive Fridays after sunset nnder Bkfirtree: 'firtree,
I complain to thee, the gout torments me sore, etc. ' ; the fir
withers, and the gout leaves off. ' Deus vos salvet, sambuce,
panem et sal ego vobis adduce, febrem tertianam et quotidianam
accipiatis vos, qui nolo eam.' Westendorp p. 518 reports a
Nethl. custom : to be rid of ague, one goes early in the morning
(in der nchte) to an old willow, ties three knots in a bough, and
says to it : ' goe morgen, olde, ik geef oe de kolde, goe morgen,
oMe ! ' then he turns, and runs away fast without looking round.
Sup. T, 1074: he that has ' fever- frost ' shall go in silence, and


PASSING IT ON. SWATHING. 1171

across no water, to a hollowed willow, thrice breathe hie breath
into it, quickly block up the hole, and hasten home, neither look-
ing behind nor speaking a word ; and the fever shall keep away.
In Spell xliv the gont is ha/aded over to a young pinetree with a
conrteons ' good morrow, dame Pine ! *

Diseases can likewise be transferred to animals. ' Praecordia
vocamns nno nomine exta in homine, qnomm in dolore cnjns-
cunqae partis si catulus lactens admoveator apprimatarque his
partibns, transire in eum morbus dicitur, idqne in ezenterato
perfasoqae vino deprehendi, vitiato viscere illo quod doluerit
hominis; et obrui tales religio est,^ Pliny 80, 4 [14]. 'Sunt oc-
cnlti interaneorum morbi, de qnibus mirum proditur : si catuli,
priusqua/m videant, applicentur triduo stomacho maxime ac
pectori, et ex ore aegri suctum lactis accipiant, transire vim
morbi, postremo exanimari, dissectisque palam fieri aegpri causas ;
raori et humari debere eos obrutos terra... Quod praeterea traditur
in torminibus mirum est : anate apposita ventri, transire morbum,
anatemque emori,' 30, 7 [20]. So, even within the last few
centuries, people have put young whelps to the human breast,
and let them suck. That a corn (clavus, fjXo^) should be called
by us hen^s eye (Boh. kurj oko), 7nagpie*s eye (Nethl. exter-6g),
and crow's eye, arose out of a belief in the possibility of these
transfers. Tobler 18*^ tells us, if a Swiss calls out on the spot
where a magpie has sat, ' zigi, zigi, agest, i ha dreu auga (Pve
3 eyes), ond du gad zwä,' he gets rid of his magpie's eye.

The flying goat is cared by the patient being completely
swathed in clean flax : when he lies in it snag as a bug in a
rug, a sheepskin is spread over him, and the sweating medicine
administered. This envelopment is a remedy renowned in the old
Beast-fable. The lion taken with a fever is to un'ap himself in
the hide of a wolf of 3^ years who has been flayed alive, and to
sweat; this we have already in the Aesopic fable (Beinh. cclx).
Oar old German poem goes more into minatias : the lion's illness
was caused by an ant having crept into his brain ; Beynard pre-
scribes wrapping the hide of an old wolf about him, patting a
bearskin on him, and a catshin hat on his head : when the cat's
far is warmed, the ant creeps out into it. Sach wrapping in the
newly stript hide of an animal was really practised in the Mid.
Ages on various emergencies, for puny infants prematurely born,

VOL. III. T


1172 8ICENBSSES.

for those cut oat unborn (p. 388)^ for a bad fall. In a Nethl.
comedy of the 16th centtrry, 'De böse frQuwens/ tiiey sew up
the sick woman in a page's skin, ' in eine vrishe pagenhut heneH-
jen! Schmidt on the East Mongols p. 229 remarks, that these
tribes also, to care a disease, pat their feet in the opened breast
of a horse fresh hilled. The application of warm flesh is several
times mentioned: 'viimmi gaUinaceum puUicm per medium divi-
dere, et protinas ealiduvi super vulntis imponere sio nt pars
interior corpori jangatar,' Celsas 5, 27j ^ cut open a black hen,
and lay it on the shaven head,' Ettn. hebamme 795 ; fresh^kiUed
flesh on a wotmd, Belg. mas. 7, 446 (see Suppl.).^

Again, the hirztn Heme, hart-strap, cat oat of Bandolf s hide
for the sick Hon (Beinh. 1951), is foand aotnally prescribed
as a remedy, Bresl. MS. of the 14th centary in Fandgr. 1,
325: 'Far daz yallende nbel. Da salt warten, swenne iz en
an-ge (attacks him), so nim einen hirzinen riemen, unde bint
im den umbo den hals (röand his neck) di wile im we si, onde
sprich, '' In nomine, etc. so binde ich hie den sichthnm dises
menschen in disem knöpfe,'' onde nim den selbem riemen denne,
ande knapfe (tie) einen knoten dar an ; den selben riemen sal man
denne binden dem siechen nmbe den hals ; ande derselbe mensch
sal sich enthalden (abstain) von dem wine onde von dem fleische,
biz (tili) daz er käme da (where) man einen toten man begrabe
(bmying), da sal man den riemen losen dem siechen von dem
halse, onde sal den selben riemen begraben mit dem toten
manne, wan der selbe rieme sal dem toten geleget werden under die
sckuUer (laid ander the dead man's shoalder), ande sal einer
sprechen, der den riemen leget, etc. der sichthnm gewirret im
nimmer mere.' Elsewhere it is prescribed for epilepsy, to gird
oneself with a wolfskin, Belg. mas. 6, 105 (see Sappl.).

The modem pharmacopoeia is almost confined to vegetable and
mineral medicines ; the ancient comprised all manner of animal

^ *Hi8 dleboB ooonlto Dei jadioio idem Eradins (epiac. Leodiensis, d. 971)
morbo, qni lumu dicitur, miserabiliter laborabat. Patiebatnr autem in natibns,
erat igitnr viaere xniBeriam; tarn graviter enim vis Taletadinis grassabator, at
mirom in modnm oames yiri lapino modo oonsomeret, oorroderet, deToiaret;
Bolumque solatium, non qnidem spes evadendae aegritadinis, sed aaltem dilatio
mortis erat, quod quotidie duo pnlli gaUinamm eplimies et evisoerati mane, daoqne
yespere, vice camiam viri consmnendi morbo, ao si lapinae rabiei, apx>onebantiur.*
The chickens were fastened on with bandages, Ghapeaville 1, 191-4. Skin inflam-
mation and eating ulcers are called wolf: one walks, rides, tiH he gets the wolf,
Lat. intertrigo, Qr. Tapdrpip^ia. [Sheepskin proposed for Prince of Wales] •


SWATHING. SYMPATHY. CHARMS. 1173

staffs. The hearts of certain birds, the fleshy blood and fat of
certain beasts possessed a peculiar healing power.^ Monkey's
flesh does the sick lion good (Beinh. cclx), though the ignorant
wolf recommends that of the goat and ram.* The hhod of birds
and of the fox heals wounds, Pentam. 2, 5. Crowds blood be-
witches. Sap. G, L 202. Blood from the cock's comb, brains of
the female hare are of service, Ettn. hebamme 875. Of a piece
with this is the superstitious healing of leprosy by the blood of
innocent boys and pure maids, that of the falling sickness by the
blood of slain malefactors, Sup. I, 1080. Spittle^ and even mere
breathy are medicinal * (see SuppL).

A great many appliances heal or hurt by sympathy. Thus
jaundice is rendered incurable by a yellow-footed hen flying over
the patient. Sup. I, 549; it is cured by looking into black
carriage-grease (66). Spanning a pot or bowl with the hand
brings on tension of the heart (11. 949) ; twisting osiers gives a
wry neck or the gripes (373 ; conf. p. 1146). .Fever is abated or
laid by laying a field under flax while repeating a charm : as the
seed comes up, the fever goes off (Höfer 3, 131). On rose or
red rash (erysipelas) you are to strike sparks with stone and steel
(I, 383. 710) ; to make evil bounce off your body, as water off
the millwheel (p. 593) ; to break a loaf over the head of a tongue-
tied child (I, 415) ; to knock a tooth that is pulled out into the
bark of a young tree (630). The people have many such
specifics for hicconghj earache, toothache, etc., I, 151. 211. 280.
681-4. 722. 950 (see SuppL).

Bemedies are very often tied on, are worn fastened round the
arm,, neck, or waist. These the writers of the early Mid. Ages
call ligamenta, ligaturae, phylaeteria. ^vKa/crjpia are preserva-
tives, protective pendants, amulets, often of thin metal plate
(blech), so that OHG. glosses render them pleh, plehhir, but also
of glass, wood, bones, herbs, silver and gold; Ugaturae ap-
parently mere ties of thread. The later word is an-gehenke,

^ Wanley p. 76 (oonf . 220) cites a * tractatas Idparti f abulosns * : Medicina ex
qnadrnpediboB.

* * Mit der heichen (falioae atrae) füezen wirt dem man mazleide baoz,* Ls. 3,
664.

* Herodotns 2, 111 speaks of a blind man recovering sight ywaiKÖt oifptp

tovffa AT€ipoi,


1174 SICKNESSES.

appendage, I, 869. 870. Cipher-writing and runes were also
appended, not always for healing, but contrariwise to bewitch
and injure. Here are testimonies to both kinds : ' lit clerici vel
\&ici 2)hylacteria velfalsas scriptiones aut ligatvras, quae impru-
dentes pro febribus aut aliis pestibus adjnvare putant, nnllo modo
ab illis Tel a quoquam Christiane fiant, quia magicae artis in-
signia sunt,' Capitul. 6, 72. ^ Admoneant sacerdotes non Itga^
turas ossium vel herbarum cuiquam adhibitas prodesse, sed haec
esse laqueos et insidias antiqui hostis,' Capit. add. 3, 98. In
Greg. Tur. mirac. 2, 45 we read of a sick boy to whom the
wizard (ariolus) was fetched: 'Hie vero venire non diflTerens,
accessit ad aegrotum, et artem suam exercere conatur, incanta-
tiones immurmurat, sortes jactat, ligaturas collo suspendit,* In
Lex Yisig. yi. 2, 4 : ' Qui in hominibus vel brutis animalibos,
seu in agris seu in vineis diversisque arboribus, maleficium aut
diversa ligamenta aut etiam scripta in contrarietatem alterius
excogitaverit facer^.' In Lex Sal. 22, 4 : * Si quis alteri aliquod
maleficium superjactaverit, sive cum ligaturis in aliquod loco
miserit.' The Indiculus (Sup. B ; C int. 43 and p.* 195**) speaks
of such ligaturae and nefaria ligamenta, both healing and hurt-
ful ; Kopp's Palaeogr. 3, 74 seq. gives other passs^es on amulets
and ligatures. Hincmar 1, 654 says : ' Turpe est fabulas nobis
notas referre, et longum est sacrilegia computare, quae ex
hujusmodi de oasibus mortuorum atque cineribus carboniJmsque
extinctis (supra p. 621) • . • cum filulis colarum multi-
plidum, et Jierbis variis ac cocleolis, et serpentum particulis
composita, cum carminibus incantata deprehendentes comperi-
mus.' These particoloured threads remind one of Virgil's verse :
' tema tibi haec primum triplid diversa colore licia circumdo/
and 'necte tribus nodis ter^ios, Amarylli, cohrea^ (Eel. 8, 73-7).^
If it was the Romans that taught our fathers the use of amulets,
they must have done it very early, for what says Boniface?
Epist. 51 (an. 742) : ' Dicunt quoque se vidisse ibidem mulieres
pagano ritu phyhicteria et ligaturas in brachiis et cruribus
ligatas habere, et- publice ad vendendum venales ad com-

^ Among the Lettons the bride on her way to chnroh mast thiow a boneh of
coloured threads and a coin into every ditch and pond she sees, and at each comer
of the house, as an offering to the water and home sprites. Merkel's Letten, p. 50 :
conf. Sup. M, 11.


CHARMS. LOCKING UP. 1175

parandum aliis offerre/ And Beda 4^ 27: 'Nam et mnlti
. . • ad erratica idolatriae medicamiiia concnrrebant, quasi
missam a Deo conditore plagam per incantationes vel phylacteria
. • . cohibere valerent.' A phylactery with relics from neck
to breast in Sigeb. Gembl. 828. In Bonayentarae centiloq. 1^ 29
(0pp. ed. Venet. 5, 180) : ' Maleficium est peritia per qaam
mulieres faciunt aliquas ligaturaa in damnum vel in commodum
alicnjas^ at de crista galli et de rana et de imagine cum eis.'
Even Pliny 80, 1 [80] speaks of tying beetles on. The füli-zant,
foal's tooth, Ms. 2, 160»» I have noticed p. 658 n.; Pliny 28, 19
[78] alludes to this custom also : ' dentes qui eqxds primum
cddunt facilem dentitionem pi*aestant infantibus adalUgati.^
The godfather mentioned with ' fulizant ' is, I suppose, to put
it round the godchild with his own hands ? The tying-on of
simples is treated more fully in the next chap, (see Suppl.).

Bewitching a newly-married couple was alluded to, pp. 1073-96.
The witch, by merely muttering a spell during the wödding, if
she be present, can incapacitate both husband and wife for
having children. Hincmar 1, 654 relates a case, and states the
composition of the material employed as a charm ; on his state-
ment is founded a passage in Gratian's decree ii. 33, 1 §4.
Such sorcery is named tying the senket or nestel, turning the lock,
binding, because it is accompanied by the secret tying of a knot
or locking of a padlock.^ Nestel means a tie (ligula) ; it is a
senket when the ends are tipped with metal, to make it sink
faster. It is also called tying up the breach, tying the tippet or
nether garment, Fr. nouer Vaiguilette. There are said to be fifty
sorts of these ties, and a vast number of unintelligible tie-spellsr
The lock when fastened, the knot when tied, was thrown away,
not hung on the bewitched.

Many forms are observed in pregnancy and childbirth. Sup. I,
41. 176. 293. 337. 364. 489. 561. 654. 673-4. 688. 691. 702. 724—
732. 817. 859. 924-5. 933. M, 12. 18—23. K the woman put
her husband's slippers on, if on the wedding-day the bridegroom
tie the bride's garters, she will have easy labours. Does this
account for the custom, whose antiquity I shall presently prove,
of the bride on the wedding-night exchanging her shift for the

^ Antidotes in Ettn. hebamme p. 294-6. Wegner*8 Sohanplatz p. 625 seq.
' Bodin, transl. by Fischart « p. 74-5. [Tie as many knots as one nas warts, etc.]


1176 SICKNESSES.

bridegroom's shirt ? Vintler says. Sup. G, 1. 1 70 : ' da sind dan
etlich briute (some brides), die legent ir hemd an irs mannes ort
(place).' More clearly in Turlin's Wh. 148: 'diu künigin wart
gebriset in ein heinede ;

als er dir st gelegen bt (lain down beside thee),

und er dar nach entsl&fen si (gone to sleep),

86 lege tougen (stealthily) sin hemede an ;

und ob diu sin gesnochen kan (wit can contrive),

daz ez werde heimlich getan (be secretly done),

sich (see), daz dich iht verdrieze (fail not),

dtn Jiernde sin houpt beslieze (envelop his head) ;

daz sol an dinem vlize st^n (depend on thy pains) :

dar nach soldu über in gdn

an sime hemde, daz wirt dir vromen (pro&t thee).

Among the Grreeks a birth was forwarded or checked by
superior divine beings, the eileithyiai, handmaids of Hera, who
were gradually merged in a single Eileithyia, the Boman Lucina,
In our Edda Oddrun the sister of Atli has skill in childbirth, she
posts over land to the expectant mother, flings the saddle off her
steed and strides into the hall (Ss9m. 239), kneels down before
the maid, and speaks her charm. They spoke of ' kiosa maeiSr
frä mögum ' (exsolvere matres a pueris), S»m. 187^^, and gave
the office to norns. There must have been from the earliest
times sympathetic means of delivering and of obstructing, which
are practised to this day : to cross the legs, to fold the hands
before the woman in labour was obstructive, to leave loose or
disengage was helpful ; probably the energetic unsaddling of the
steed had this meaning. Ovid's Met. 9, 298 :

Dextroque a poplite laevum
pressa genu, digitis inter se pectine junctis
sustinuit nixus ; tacita quoque carmina voce
dixit, et inceptos tenuerunt carmina partus.

31 0. Divam residentem vidit in ara,

brachiaque in genibus digitis connexa tenentem.

314. Exsiluit, junctasque manns pavefacta remisit
diva potens uteri : vinclis levor ipsa remissis.


BINDING, LOOSING. DROPPING-WELLS. 1177

' Assidere gravidis^ vel cam remedium alicoi adhibeatnr^ digiiis
pecHnaiim inter as implexis veneficium est^ idque compertam
tradant Alcmena Hercolem pariente. Pejus si circa unum
ambove genua; item poplites altemis gembus imponi/ Pliny 28|
6 [17]. 'Femnt diffidlea partus statim solvi, si quis tectum in
qao sit gravida transmiserit lapide vel mtdsili ex his qui tria
animalia singulis ictibus interfecerint, hominem, C4>rumi ursum.
Probabilius id facit liasta velitaris, evulsa e corpore hominisj si
terram non attigerit,' 28, 4 [6]^ (see Suppl.).

A poieoning case was sometimes met by forcible remedies : the
man was hung up by the heels^ and after a time one of his eyes
palled out^ in hopes of the venom oozing out at that aperture :
^ tamen intozicatus Albertus in Austria, .et diu per pedes sus-
pensus^ oculum perdens evasit/ Alb. Argent, (ed. Basil. 1569)
p. 167 (see Suppl.).

Water, springs, fire (pp. 1166. 1178) have power to preserve
health or restore it (pp. 686-8. 605-6. 618-9. 621—4) ; especially
a spring that has burst out of the rodk at the bidding of a god or
saint. The snake that lies coiled round the holywell^ or is seen be-
side it (p. 585-8 n.), maybe likened to the serpent-rod of Aescula-
pius. Healing water or oil trickles out of rocks and walls. The
mother that was walled in (p. 1148) continued for a time to nourish
her babe through a hole in the wall, till at last she died. At that
hole there is a contin/ual dropping, women whose milk has run
dry go there to get healed : the mother's milk had streamed so
long that it sets other breasts flowing too. I know of a similar
story in Italy: 'estquoque non procul ab hoc oppido (Verona),
in valle quadam Policella dicta, locus Negarina nomine, ubi
itaxum durissimum visitur, in quo mammae ad justam muliebrium
formam sculptae sunt, ex quarum papillis perpetuae stillant aqtuie,
quibus si lactans mulier papillas aaperserit et laverit, exsiccatus
aliquo (ut fit) vel morbo vel alio casu illi lacieus humor revocatur,'
Hentzneri itinerar. p. 201. A rock which drops milk is mentioned
in Pel. Faber's Bvagator. 1, 449; and the Lith. Laumes papas
(teat) is the name of a hard stone.

To the tombs of saints a direct healing power was ascribed in
the Mid. Ages, everything in contact with them brought help,
even a draught of the water poured over bones, garments,
splinters and earth. Turf and dew off the grave can heal (Greg.


1178 SICKNESSES.

Tar. vitas patn 6, 7).^ Beda 3, 9 tells of St. Oswald : 'In loco
ubi pro patria dimicans a paganis interfectos est, nsqae hodie
sanitcUes infirmorum et hominitm et pecorum celebrari non desinant.
Undo contigit at pulverem ipsum, ubi corpas ejas in terram oor-
roit^ malti auferentes et in aquam mittentes suis per baec infirmis
multum commodi afferrent : qui videlioet mos adeo increboit, ot
panlatim ablata exinde terra f ossam ad meusoram statarae viiilis
reddiderit.' 8,11: * "De pulvere pavimenti in qao aqna lavacri
illias eSasa est, malti jam sanati infirmi/ 3, 13: 'Habeo qaidem
de ligno in qao caput ejas oocisi a paganis infizam est . . .
tanc benedixi aqaam, et ckstulam roboris praefaH immittens obtoli
aegro potandam : nee mora, melias habere coepit.' 4, 3 of St.
Geadda (d. 672): ' Est aatem locus idem sepnlcri tumba in modnm
domunculi facta coopertns, habente foramen in pariete, per quod
sclent hi qui causa devotionis illo adveniunt manum suam immit-
tere, ac partem puluerie inde assumere, quam cum in (iqucis mise^
rint atqae has infirmantibus jumentis sive hominiboa gastandas
dederint, mox infirmitatis ablata molestia, cnpitae sanitatis gaodia
redibunt.' 4, 61 of Eai'oonwald : ' Etenim usque hodie fereirum
ejus caballarium, quo infirmas vehi solebat, servatum a discipalis
ejus, multos febricitantes vel alio quolibet incommode fessos
uanare non destitit. Non solum aatem suppointi eidemferetro vel
appositi curantur aegroti, sed et astulas de illo abaeissde atque ad

infirmos allatae citam illis sclent afferre medelam.' ^Belies not

only heal, but bring fortune, peace and fruitfulness, pretty much
as the jewels of elves and dwarfs did in particular families:
' ubicunqne hae reliquiae fuerint, illic pax et augmentum et leniUu
aerie semper erit ' (Pertz 1, 71).*

1 Greg. Tvr. mirae. 1, 31 takes from Enaebins 7, 18 ihe tale of a metal imagjo
of the Saviour and the woman of OaBsarea, whose issne of blood was atanehed:
* Hnjus ad pedem stataae in basi herba qoaedam nova specie nasdtmr. quae emn
ezorta faerit, creteere usque ad ttolae illius aereae indvmetUi ßmbruun solet. giian
eum Bummo yertioe crescens herba eontigerit^ Tires inde ad depelUndot onme* mtniKm
langaoresque conqoirit ; ita at qnaeeanqne fnerit ilia infirmitas corporis, ^ft"i4n
exigao madefacta salataria graminis depellator; nihil onmino Yiriom gerens. si
antequam aereae fimbriae smnmitatem crescendo contigerit, deoerpator. hanc
statnam ad similitndinem vultus Jesu tradebant, quae permanait etiam ad nostra
(Ensebii) usque tempora, sicut ipsi oculis nostris inspeximus.* — The beantifol myth
is also copied by Agobardus (0pp. ed. Balnze, Par. 1666. 2, 248-9). It was essential
for the plant to have grown up to the hem of the garment, it waa only by toaching
it that it acquired healing efficacy.

' Les reliqnes sunt forz, Dens i fait grant vertuz,

iloc juit ua contrait, set anz out ke ne se mut.


RELICS. LIMBS HUNG UP. 1179

The legends are full of tlie marvellous deliverances vouchsafed
to pilgrim patients at the tombs of saints. An incredible number
of sick had recourse to this method ; but it is cleverly parodied
in our Beast- apologue (Reinh. pp. cv. cxxvi) : the hare with his
fever, the wolf with his earache, are cured the moment they lie
down on the grave of the martyred hen. From such delusion
the heathens were free : I nowhere find it stated that they sought
healing from relics or at the mounds of their kings and giants.
They resorted however to sacred woods, p. 72-4 (see Suppl.) }

In Greece, particularly in Boeotia, it was customary for patients,
on recovery, to set up in the temple a metal model of the part of
the body which had been affected. Amongst avaOrjfiara an in-
scription mentions irpocronrov, rirOo^, aiSoioVf ^eZ/o, &c. ; ' these
votive offerings were afterwards melted down to make sacred
vessels. The custom of votive tablets with limbs depicted on
them may indeed have been imported into Germany by the
Romans while yet heathens, unless we will admit that our fathers
themselves had known them before. The passage from Gregory
given p. 81 says expressly : 'membra, secundum quod unumquem-
que dolor attigisset, sculpebat in ligno,* and further on, ' visi enim
in eo barbari gentili superstitione, modo auri argentique dona,
modo feroula ad potum vomitumque ebrii offerre, cultumque quo
nihil insanius, istic simulacrum inanis dei, ac ut quemque affecti
membri dolor presserat, sculpebat in ligno siAsperydebatque opitu-
laturo idolo.' This was done in Bipuaria in the 6th cent. Eligius
refers to the same thing. Sup. A: 'pedum similUudines, qaos per
bivia ponunt, fieri vetate, et ubi invenerit igni cremate; per
nullam aliam artem salvari vos credatis nisi per invocationem et
crncem Christi ! ' and the Indiculus § 29, ' de ligneis pedibus


tat li OB li omssirent, li nen H sant estendut :

ore sailt bus en peez, unkes pins sain ne fad. Bom. de Gharlem. 192 — 5.

Les reliqaes sont forz, granz vertaz i fait Deas,
qae il ne venent a ewe, nen partissent les gaet,
nenoantret aveogle ki ne seit relnminet,
les oantrez i redrescent, e les mnz fant parier. 255-8.

^ The origin of relio-worship I shall investigate in another place.

' Corp. inscript. 1, 750 no. 1570, where Böokh says : * Donaria medioationis
caasa Amphiarao oblata. qai ez oracalo per somninm dato restitnti in sanitatem
erant, ii partim membri quo laborarant fßgiem dioabant (p. 474 no. 497-8), partim
alia donaria, qaemadmodam etiam in fontem Amphiarai dejioere nommoB solebant.*
Conf. Pansan. 1, 8.


1180 SICKl^SSES. '

vel majiibus pagano ritu'; a woman with a palsied arm is ad-
monished in, a dream ' ut instar semivivae mawum ceream for-
mando exprimeret, et ad sanotae Idae tamnlam deferret ' (begin*
of 10th cent., Pertz 2, 573). At the same time even these aa-
thorities teach us an important distinction : the Greek brought
his avdOfffia ont of gratitude, when the malady wa^ healed ; the
German hang ap the limb in the temple or at the cross-roads^
with a view to obtain relief thereby, ' opitiUaiuro idolo/ and ' per
nnllam aliam artem salvari vos oredatis.' And for this porpose
a wooden or perhaps waxen image safiGiced, which would have
been a paltry present to the succouring deity ; conf. another pas-
sage from Gregory in my BA. 674, and Buinart^s note trhereon.
So that this German heathenry is of a piece with the aoroery
by wax images (p. 1091), and with heathen sacrifices^ which
kept up an analogy between the thing prayed for and the thing
offered : those who wished for children presented a child of wax,
wood or silvery while conversely a figure of wax or silver served
as penance for slaying the body. But what shocked the early
teachers as sheer paganism was afterwards humoured and licensed
by the church. A votive tablet at Alt-öttingen represents an
unhappy man with an arrow passing through his eyebrow into
the eye-pupil (Schm. 1, 242).^ At places famed for pilgrimages
we find hands, feet, etc. of wood or wax fastened to the walls ;
outside the church were hung up the crutches on which the sick
had come, and which they needed no longer in going away
healed: 'ut incredibilis materies acahellorum atque osdUorum
post perceptam sanitatem a redeuntibus ibi remaneret/ Acta
Bened. sec. v, p. 102 ; conf. Pertz 2, 574. Among the Greeks
the sick often slept in the t«mple of the deity in whom they put
their trust, and received in a dream instructions as to cure ; ^
much the same occurs in medieval legends, e.g. that passage in
the Life of St. Ida. Put together with this the first dream in a
new house or stable, p. 1146 (see Suppl.).

There were superstitious signs, by observing which you could

^ DiseaseB alao were hung tip piotoriaUy: thus, before miraonloas images
in Bavaria and Austria, among the waxen hands and feet you may see a crab- or
toad-like figure, understood to be the * ber-mutter * that crawled about in the
body, Sohm. 1, 188. Höfer 1, 78. Wolfs Deutsche sagen p. 491.

' Jac. Phil. Tomasini de donariis ac tabellis votivis, Patavii 1654, 4, cap. 34, p.
214 — 26 vota pro aegrotantium salute.


SIGNS OF DEATH. PLAGUE. 1181

tell whether one dangerously ill would fall a prey or get well :
the cries^ the flighty the wheeling of birds have been noticed on
p. 1135. Barchardt (Sup. C, 195^) instances the lifting up of
stones to see if any live beast were underneath ; which is like
snatching up a handful of earth and looking for a living creature
in it (P, 9). The look of the bird Galadröt, and the position of
Death, whether at the patient's head or feet (p. 868) were sig-
nificant omens. That standing at the feet was an advantage we
find already in Pliny 30, 10 [24] : 'Eundem (ricinum, tick) in
angurio vitalium habent : nam si aeger ei respondeat qui intu-
lerit, a pedibus stanti interrogantique de morbo, spem vitae cer-
tam esse : moriturnm nihil respondere. Adjiciunt, ut evellatur
(ricinus) ex aure laeva canis cui non sit alius quam niger color.'

^It is believed in Scotland to this day, that if you cannot

see the mannikin in the sick man's eye, he is sure to die : the
bystander's image is no longer mirrored in the lustreless pupil
of the breaking eye. And as far back as the AS. dialogue
between Adrian and Eitheus (Thorpe p. 48) : ' Saga me, on
hwäm msBig man geseon mannes de&Sl Ic ye secge, twege
Toanlican beoS on mannes edgximi gif )?A ]?& ne gesihst, j^onne
8 wilt (dies) se man, and bi'S gewiten (gone) 86r J^rim dagum.'
Put by the side of this, that the KOfyq is not to be seen in a
bewitched man's eyes either, and in a witch's eye it is seen
upside down, or double (pp. 1074-80). When a dying man can-
not get his release, a shingle of the roof is to be turned
(Sup. I, 439), three tiles taken up (721), or any hollow house-
utensil inverted (664). The like means are adopted in convul-
sions (853) and childbirth (561) : 'if it go hard with her in
travail, the husband shall take three shingles out of the roof and
put them in again wrong side up,' Ettn. hebamme p. 663 ; conf .
supra p. 1116.

I have kept to the last what I had to say of the plague and
the numerous traditions based on its appearing. After great
floods, when heavy fog and sultry mist poison the air, it suddenly
breaks out and spreads resistless over the earth.

To the Gr. \0ifi69 (p. 888) correspond, in gender as well, our
OHG. sterpo, scelmo (MHG. schelme). Gl. jun. 219 scalmo, fihu-
sterbo, ON. skelmis^drep or drep alone; OHG. wu^l, Diut. 1,


1182 SICEKESSES.

501^» AS. wol, gen. wdles. The Latin names pestis, lues are
fem.^ so are the Serv. kuga, moriya ; bat masc. again the Boli.
Pol. mor, Lith. maras, Lett, mehris. The Serv. Slov. kuga is the
M. Nethl. koghe (Detmar 1, 81. 113. 127. 148. 377), and even
a MHG. poem (Meyer and Mooyer, p. 46^) has Tcoge. MHG.
usually 'der gahe tot,' swift death, Wigal. 8726 (Nethl. gd^ddi,
Maerl. 1, 230. 293) ; but also 'der grosse tod/ great death, Swed.
diger-döden (ON. digr crassus, tumidus); ON. svarti dauSi^ Dan.
' den sorts död/ black death, perhaps even in allusion to Surtr
(p. 809) .1

To the Greeks the whizzing shafts of wrathful Apollo broaght
the plague : a man dying suddenly is slain by Apollo's artillery,
a woman by that of Artemis ; conf. the destroying angel, 2 Sam.
24, 16. Hermes, protector of the flock, carries round it the ram,
to ward off murrain ; afterwards he carries it round the city also,
Kpto^opo9.' Virgins were sacrificed to stay the ravages of pes-
tilence. Pliny 26, 9 [60] says a maiden can cure boils (panos)
by laying verbascum on them: Experti affirmavere pluritnnm
referre, si virgo imponat nuda, jejuna jejuno, et manu sapina
tangens dicat, ' Negat Apollo pestem posse erescere, cui nuda virgo
restinguat!' atque retrorsa manu ter dicat, totiesque despnant
ambo. The ceremony was transferred from the heavy scour^ to
lighter ones : the disrobing of the maiden was required for allay-
ing drought (p. 593-4), and in many other cases (see Suppl.).

That angel of death means Death himself, who comes to gather
his own. A Lombard legend speaks of two angels, a good and
a bad, who traverse the land : ' Pari etiam modo haec pestilentia
Ticinum qaoque depopulata est, ita ut cunctis civibus per juga
montium seu per diversa loca fagientibus, in foro et per plateas
civitatis herbae et fructeta nascerentur. Tuncque visibiliter
multis apparuit, quia bonus et malus angelus nociu per civitatem
pergerent, et ex jussu boni angeli malus angelus, qui videbatur
venabulum manu ferro, quotiens de venahulo ostium eujuseunqve

1 Paul. Diao. 2, 4, paints a desolating plague in colours that recall the vivid
picture Boccaccio has sketched hy way of Introd. to his Decameron. How Sweden
and Norway were wasted daring the Great Plagne, is descrihed in Afzelios 4, 179.
180 and especially in Faye, pp. 135 — 148, after beautiful folk-tales.

^ * Massilienses quoties pestilentia laborabant, umis te ex pauperiorUnu offerfhat
alenduB anno integre publicis et purioribus cibis. Hie postea omatus verbenis et
vestibus saoris eircumdnrehatnr per totam civitatem cum casecrationibus, at in
ipsnm reoiderent mala civitatis, et sic projiciebatur,* Petron. cap. 141.


PLAGUE. 1183

domu8 percu88i88et, tot de eadem domo die sequent! homines
interirent. Tanc per revelationem cuidam dictum est^ quod
pestis ipsa prius non quiesceret quam in basilica beati Petrin quae
ad vincula dicitur, sancti Sebastian! martyris altarium poneretur.
Factum est^ et delatis ab urbe Boma b. Sebastian! reliquiis^ mox
ut in jam dicta basilica altarium constitutum est^ pe8ti8 %p8a
quievit* Paul. Diac. 6, 5. In the year 589, when the Tiber had
overflowed^ and a plague had arisen which carried off many men^
St Gregory ordered a solemn procession of the Cross ; 80 people
in the church dropped down 'alien g&hes' at his feet and died;
then, rising from prayer, ' sach er st6n fif dem Dietriches hAse
einen engel mit pluotigem 8werte, der mUkete daz selbe 8u;ert durch
sinen geren (wiped it on his skirt), do verstuont (understood) der
heilige man, daz der dwige Yater sines zornes hin ze den liuten
erwinden wolte,' would turn from his anger.*

Like such an angel of death, the Norse Hel rides about on her
steed (pp. 314. 844), which is no other than the dead-horse seen
in churchyards, p. 1142 (see Suppl.).

A Yoigtland tradition makes the plague come on as a blue
vapour f shaped like a cloud, Jul. Schmidt p. 158. By this is
meant the sultry mist that precedes a pestilence; ' blue vapour '
suggests the fire of the Thunder-god, p. 178. A plague that
raged in the Odenwald shewed itself in the shape of a little blue
flavfie in the sacristy of the toum-church at Erbach ; and they
walled it in. In Amm. Marcel. 23, 6 (a.D. 363) : ' Fertur autem
quod post direptum hoc idem figmentum (ApoUinis simulacrum),
incensa civitate (Seleucia), milites fanum scrutantes invenere
foramen angustum : quo reseraio ut pretiosum aliquid invenirent,
ox ady to quodam concluso a Chaldaeorum arcanis lobes primor-
dialis exsiluit, quaa insanabilium vi concepta morborum, ejusdem
Yeri Marcique Antonini temporibus ab ipsis Persarum finibus ad
usque BJienum et Qallias cuncta contagiis polluebat et mortibus/
— *— Again, in the year 1709 the plague at Conitz in Prussia was
charmed into a hole of the lime-tree in the charchyard, then a
plug kept ready for the purpose, and fitting exactly, was driven

> Deatsohe predigten ed. by E. Both p. 76 ; oonf. Hoffm. fundgr. 1, 77. Greg.
Txur. 10, 1. 2. Dietrich's Jiouse is the moles Hadriani, named St. Angelo's castle
after tfajs very angel who shewed himself to the praying processionists. Our
legends like to name large Boman buildings after Theoderic, notably the amphi-
tl^tre of Verona, Dent, heldensage pp. 40, 203.


1184 SICKNESSES.

in ; since which she has never contrived to shew her fiuse in the
conntry again (Tettan and Temme p. 222). This agrees with
the bloeking-np of Unsselde and the shrewmonse (pp. 878. 1168),
bnt also with the general notion of diseases being transferable to
trees. The immnring of the plagae in churdi and temple is based
on its having issned from the divinity (see Snppl.).

Angostine's De verbo apostol. 168 pictures the plagae as a
woman thai prowls about, and can be bonght off with money :
' Proverbium est Pnnicam, qaod qoidem Latine vobis dicam, qnia
Pnnice non omnes nostis ; Pan. enim prov. est antiqaam :
Numum vult PestUentia ? daos illi da^ et dacat se/

Daring the great pestilence ander Jastinian^ men saw brazen
barks on the sea^ and black men withont heads sitting in them :
wherever they sailed to, the plagae at once broke oat In a city
of Egypt the only inhabitants left alive were seven men and
a boy ten years old ; they were escaping with their valuables,
when in a honse near the town-gate all the men dropped down
dead, and the boy alone fled ; but under the gate a spectre seized
him, and dragged him back into the house. Soon after, a rich
man's steward came to fetch goods out of the house, and the boy
warned him to haste away : at the same instant both man and
boy fell dead to the ground. So says bishop John (Assemanni
biblioth. orient 2, 86-7).

The Mod. Greeks think of the plague as a blifid woman that
wanders through the towns from house to house, killing all she
can toucL But she goes groping and feeling round the wall, and
if you are wise enough to keep in the middle of the room, she
can't get at you. According to one folk-tale, it is three terrible
women that traverse the towns in company, one carrying a largo
paper, another a pair of scissors, the third a broom. Together
they walk into the house where they mean to find victims : the
first enters their names on her list, the next wounds them with
her scissors, the last sweeps them away (Fauriel's Disc. pieL
Ixzziii). Here are the three Fates (p. 410) or Furies and
Eumenids converted into death-goddesses.

There is a beautiful Breton lay in Villemarqufi 1, 46—51, called
Boaen Elliant, the EUiant plague. A miller, so goes the tale,
saw a wom^n robed in white sitting, staflF in hand, at the ford
of the river, wishing to be carried over. He took her on his


PLAGUE. 1185

horse^ and set her down on the other side. Then she said,
' Yoong maUi and knowst thou whom thou hast pat across f I
am the Plague; and now having ended my joorney round
Bretagne, I will go to mass in Elliant church \ evetj one whom
I touch with my staff, shall speedily die, but thee and thy mother
no harm shall befalL' And so it came to pass : all the people in
that bourg died, save the poor widow and her son. Another
folksong makes him convey her on his sJumlders : nine children
are carried oot of one house, the churchyard is filled up to the
walls : ' beside the churchyard stands an oak, to its top is tied a
white kerchief, for the Plague has snatched away all the people/
She was banished at last by songs being sung about her : when
she heard herself called by her name, she withdrew from the
land, and never came back. The request to be carried across is
exactly like those of the goddess Berhta and beings of elf kind.

Of the Lithuanian Oiltine, plague or death-goddess, I should
like to know fuller accounts. She massacres without mercy :
' kad tawQ Giltine pasmaugtu (plague choke thee) 1 ' is a familiar
imprecation (Mielcke sub v. Donaleitis 141). The plague is also
named Magila [SI. mogfla, a grave], or simply diewe (goddess),
and they say in cursing ' imma ji Magilos, imma ji diewai ! *
From Polish Lithuania, Adam Mickiewicz ^ reports as follows on
the morowa dzievnca, plague-maiden: —

Eiedy zaraza LitwQ ma nderzyö,
j6j przyjtoie wieszoza odgadnie ^rzenica ;
bo je61i sljozzna waidelotom wierzyö,
nieraz na pas^yoh sm^tarzach i bljoniaoh
Btaje widomie morowa dziewiea
w bieliznie, z wiankiem ognistym na skroniaob,
czoljem przenosi bialjowiealde drzewa
a w r^kn ohaatk% Blarwawion% powi^wa.
Dziewiea Bt%pa kroki zljowieszozezni
na dolja, zamki i bogate miasta ;
a lie razy krwawe ehii8tk% skinie,
tyle palacöw zmienia si^ w pnstynie ;
gdzie nog% 8t%pi, &meij gr6b wyrasta.*

^ Eonrad Wallenrod's Poezye, Warzzawie 1832. p. 96.

* * When a plague smites Lithuania . . . then, if we may believe the waidelots,
in lone burial-grounds and fields stands visible the plague-maiden in white raiment
witii fiery wreath about her temples, bears on her brow divining-rods (7), and in het
hand a blood-stained kerchief wavei. The maiden steps with deliberate pace into
villages, oastles and wealthy towns ; whenever she spraids out her gory kerchief,
palaces turn into wildernesses ; where with her foot she steps, a fresh grave grows


1186 SICKNESSES.

Woycicki, 1, 51, calls her Powietrze, which properly means air,
vaponr (p. 1183), but also plagae. Clothed in white, she stalks
along on stilts, tells her name to a man she meets, and wants to
be carried on his shoulders through all the Bassias : amidst the
dead and dying he shall go unhurt. Well, he carries her
through thorp and town : where she waves her kerchief, every-
body dies, and all men flee before them. Arrived at the Pruth,
he thought to drown her, and jumped into the river, but up she
floated light as a feather, and flew to the woodland, while he
sank to the bottom.

In another story 1, 127 she is called Diuma (Russ. Serv.
chnma) : while she prevails, the villages stand deserted, the cocks
are hoarse and cannot crow, the dogs no longer bark, yet they
scent the Plague from afar (p. 666), and growl. A peasant saw
her, in white garb and waving hair, clear a high fence and run up
a ladder, to escape the howling dogs : he hurries up to the ladder
and pushes it over, so that the Plagpie fell among the dogs ; then
she disappeared, still threatening vengeance.

Sometimes the Diuma rides through the wood in a waggon,
attended by owls and uhus (great homed owl) : this ghostly
procession is named Homen, Woyc. 1 ,130 — 3. 159 — 163. But the
Plague could only last till New-year's day ; then those who have
fled troop back to their homes, taking care however not to walk
in through the door, but to climb in at the window,

A tale narrated by a Wendish peasant, Joh. Parum Schulze,^
falls somewhere in the middle of the 1 7th century : So it came to
pass, that a man, as I have always heard tell, that was Niebuhr
by name, where now Kuffalen dwell, that was afterward Luchan,
as he rideth home from town, there comes a man alongside, and
begs that he may ride a little in the cart, for that he was right
weary. This Hans Niebuhr asks him in Wendish, as that tongue
was then commonly used, 'whence, and whither away?' and
takes him up on the cart. At first he will not declare himself,
but this Niebuhr, being somewhat drunken, begins to question
more sharply. Then he declared himself, saying, ' 1 will to thy

up.' I am not Bure that I have rightly rendered • bialjowieskie drzewa/ nor whether
the adj. can be oonn. with * bialowieszcka * p. 474 n.

^ Of Süten village, Küsten parish, Lüneburg. About 1740 he composed &
chronicle, Ann. der Br. Lüneb. ohurlande, jahrg. 8, Hanover 1794. p. 282-3.


PLAGUE. 1187

village with thee, where I have not yet been; for I am der
Pest {m,y Then did Niebuhr intreat for his life, and the Plague
gave him this lesson, that he should leave him in the cart outside
the village, and strip naked and have no clothing at all on his
body, but [going home,] take his pot-hook, and coming out before
his house, run all round his homestead with the sun, and then bury
it under the d-oorstep : ' if one but carry me not in * quoth the
Pest, 'in the smell that hangs about the clothes/ Now this
Niebuhr leaves him in the cart a good piece from the village, for
it was night ; takes the pot-hanger, runs naked out of the village
and all round it, then sticks the iron under the bridge, which iron
I myself saw in the year 1690 when the bridge was mended, but
nigh eaten away with rust. When this Niebuhr came back for
his horse and cart, quoth the Plague : ' had I known this, I had
not declared myself to thee, this device whereby thou hast locked
me out of the whole village.^ When they were come up to the
village, Niebuhr takes his horses out of the cart, and leaves him
sitting thereon. Neither was any sickness from pestilence per-
ceived in that village ; but in all the villages around the plague
did mightily rage.

So far Schulzens homely narrative. Removing the pot-hook off
the hearth seems to stand for leaving the house open : from a
deserted house death has nothing to take. As the retiring house-
holder symbolically ' lets down the haal on the hearth,' the new
one on taking possession must ' tuck it up ' again.^ Running
round the house or village resembles that carrying of the ram
round the city, and the undressing agrees with the Roman
custom.

Then, as the Plague is slow of foot, she gets herself driven
into the village in a cart, or lugged in pickaback, like homesprites
and will o' wisps that jump on men's shoulders, pp. 512-3. 916,

Swedish stories make the Plague enter a village from the south,
and stand still before the first homestead, looking like a pretty
little boy with a rasp or grater (rifva) in his hand, and rasping
with it. When he did that, there still remained one or two alive
in a house, as the grater could not take everything along with it.
Bat when he got to the next village, there came after him the
Plague-damsel (pestflicka), she swept with a broom outside the

^ WoUter'a Dednoiion, beil. nos. 4. 6. 186.

VOL. III. • U


1188 SICKNESSES.

gate, then all in the village died. Bat she was very seldom seen,
and never except at daybreak (Afzelins 4, 179).

In Yestergotland they had decreed a human sacrifice to stay
the ' digerdöd,' and two beggar children having just then come in,
were to be buried alive in the ground. They soon dag the pit
open, gave the hungry children cake spread with lard, and made
them sit down in the pit : while they ate, the people shovelled up
the earth. ' Oh,' cried the younger child, when the first spadefal
was thrown over it, ' here's some dirt fallen on my bread and
lard.' A mound was quickly thrown up over them, and nothing
more was heard of them (Afz. 4, 181). Compare the walling up
of children in the foundation of a new building, p. 1142, and the
offering of a young heifer in the holy fire during cattle-plague,
p. 608.

In Norway the Pesta is imagined as a pale old woman who
travelled about the country with a grater (rive, a toothed instru-
ment for tearing up sods or hay and corn) and a broom (lime) :
when she used the grater, some few got off with their lives, but
where the besom came into play, there perished every bom soul.
A man having rowed her over a piece of water, and demanding his
fare, she said, 'you'll find your quittance on the bench at home; '
and no sooner was he home, than he sickened and died. She
often appears in red clothing, and whoever beholds her falls into
a great fear (Paye p. 135).

The Servians say their Kuga is a real woman, who goes wrapt
in a white veil : many have seen her so, and some have carried
her. She came to one man in the field, or met him on the road,
and said, ' I am the Kuga, carry me to such a place ! ' He took
her up pickaback, and without any trouble carried her whither
she would. The Kagas (plagues) have a country of their own by
the sea, but God sends them when people do wickedly and sin
much. While the plague rages they never call her kuga, but
kuma (cummer, gossip), to make her friendly. And during that
time they dare not leave any vessels unwashed at night, for she
will pass through the kitchen, and if she spy any such, will scoor
and polish all the spoons and dishes (which detains her in the
house) ; at times she even makes away with the bacon out of the
loft, Wtb. sub V. Kuga ; and new ed. of Serv. songs 1, 149 note.

Here again she comes out in the fashion of ancient goddesses.


PLAGUE. 1189

Holda and Berhta^ who cannot abide disorder in the house^
pp. 268. 274.

Among the Slovens^ cattle-plague (kaga) is a spotted calf that
kills sheep and oxen hy its cry (Marko p. 74).

The devil is reported to have said, there was but one cure for
the kuga, that was mattock and hoe, meaning burial (Vuk sub v.
metil).

A Finnic song (Schröter 60) adjures the Plague to take herself
away to steely mountains in the gloomy North : saddje-horse and
carriage-horse shall be given her for the journey. She is called
rutto, the sudden, like our MH6. gähe tdt.

In L. Germany they have folktales about the Heid/mann (heath
man) who peeps in at ycmr vnndow at night ; any one he looks
at then, must die within year and day ; just so does Berhta look
in at the window (p. 274), so does Death (p. 772). In Tyrol too
they tell of a ghost that goes about at the time of one's death :
whatever mndow lis looks into, people die in that house, DS.
no. 266.

In the Lausitz Smertnitsa in white array prowls about the
villages : to whatever house she directs her step, a corpse will
soon be there. In the house itself she announces her presence
by thumping and turning the boards up. Convulsions in the
dying are signs that Smertnitsa is getting the better of them,
Laus. mon. sehr. 1797. p. 756.

There cannot be the slightest doubt left, that all these various
personifications of the plague are to be viewed as effluences of
superior divinities of antiquity, whose might, merciful and awful,
they display by turns. Veiled in white they stride along, like
Berhta, and like the mother that walks in the com at noon.
Plague-maiden and fate-maiden meet and touch, morowa dziewica
with Marena, Morena (p. 771), the harmful goddess with the
healing pitying Eir (see Suppl.).


CHAPTER XXXVn.

HERBS AND STONES.

'Pliny has thrown a peculiar oharm over his Nataral History by
not disdaining to record minutely even the superstitious views of
the vulgar about animals and plants. How his reverence for
antiquity^ his elegance of exposition, stand out against the dry
gravity of our present students of nature, who never waste a
glance on the customs of their country, and to whom all the force
and grace of Teutonic idiom is but small beer (see Suppl.).

^ Krut, steine undo wort haut an kreften grdzen hort' (herb and
stone and wholesome word have of healing powers rich hoard),
says our Freidank 111, 6; and as there lies in dwarfs a special
acquaintance with the healing virtues hidden in herbs (pp.
450-1 n. 457), it is worth noticing, that in the mouth of a king of
that race, Goldemar (pp. 453. 466. 509) is placed the dictum,
' Christianos fidem in verbis, Judeeos in lapidibus pretiosis^ et
Paganos in herhis ponere,' Meibom's Script. 1, 186. Paganism
does present a rich store of mythical notions on the origin and
manifold virtues of these plants.

1. Herbs.

As among men, so among Herbs, the noble tower above the
base : they were created by gods in some secluded sacred spot,
they sprouted up where innocent blood had been shed, they were
brought over by birds, and so on. Under the goddess's footfall
the flower springs up, as all growth withers where sorrowing
lovers part. On the mountain's top, to which the lover had
carried up his dying love, and poured out her last reviving
draught, grew healing herbs that blessed the land at large (Marie
de Fr. 1, 268). Mountains foster what is rarest in the realm of
plants. Zeus and Hera laid them down on Ida's top (II. 14, 347) :

TOAcrt S' VTTO 'xßoav ila <f)V€V veoOrfkia iroitfy,
\wt6v 6* €pai]€VTa IBk KpOKOv Tfh* vaKivOov,
irvKvoy KaX fuiKaxov, h^ awo x^ovo^ ir^oa^ e€pye

1190


HEBBS: OBIOIN. NAMES. 1191

(ander them boantifol earth teemed up a new vegetation^ dew-
sprinkled clover and saffron and hyacinth, thick and soft, etc.).
A similar bed of flowers still haunts the imagination of our
Minnesingers (Walth. 39. 40. Hadlonb 2, 194-5), but men have
to gather the grass and flowers for that amid singing of birds.
To the Medieval way of thinking it was most natursd to make
healing herbs grow out of the graves of holy men«, as we plant
flowers on the tomb and pick some for remembrance.. Even on
the huorco's barrow grows wound-healing rosamarma, the pluck-
ing of which turns men into doves, Pentam. 4, 8. The- saint's
grave nourishes a peartree, whose fruit cures the sick forthwith
(Greg. Tur. mirac. 1, 47). We have seen p. 1178n. how at the
foot of a holy statue a nova species (quite the Homeric veoOrfki]^
above) grew up to the skirt of the robe, and then became a
healing plant ^; with this I connect what Pliny tells us 24, 19
[106] : *herba in capite statxiae nata, collectaque alicujus in vestis
panno et alligata in lino rufo, capitis dolorem confestim sedare
traditur' (see Suppl.).

Many herbs and flowers are named after gods, but as we are*
seldom told the occasion of a name being given, it admits o£
more than one explanation. The god produced the plant, or he*
uses it, he loves it, loathes it, in shape or colour it resembles
some part of his person, his raiment, arms, and so forth. Thus
the names Baldrs bra (p. 222, conf. supercilium Yeneris), Freyju
har (p. 303) come from the beaming lustre of the flower;
Fomeotes folme (p. 240), Niardar vöitr (p. 218) from the leaves
lying like five fingers side by side. Donner-rebe (-vine) is the
Lett. Pehrkones. Donnerhraut, Donnerbesen (p. 183) may, like
barba Jovis, be accounted for by the bushy tanglement of their
tendrils; but how Perunika (p. 183) stands related to Perun,
I do not know. DeviVs-bit is from the marks of teeth supposed
to be visible in its root, and due to diabolic agency. A great
many names are taken from beasts, especially those of our native
fable, and fancy has been equally busy on them.

Of flowers and herbs the Sanskrit distinguishes the wholesome
by the adjunct 'friend,' the hurtful by ' foe,' as Bamapriya, dear

^ The healing power imparted by the »kirt of the garment was very likely
suggested by the Biblical * touching of the hem/ Matt. 9, 20. 14, 86. Mk 6, 56.
Luke 8, 44.


1192 HERBS AND STONES.

to Lakshmi = lotus^ Yamapriya, dear to Tama = ficus indica,
conf. Pott's Etym. for. 2, 424—7. This agrees with OHG, goto-
fargezzan, marrubiam album (Graff 4, 279), MLG. got-vorgheiene
(Bran's Beitr. p. 48) and the phrase ' ergaz im Grot/ Gramm. 4,
175 (supra p. 21) ; the herb is oar andom (horehoand).

Other plants beyond a doubt derive their divine names from
their healing power being first made knoion to mortals by the
gods. With the Greeks, Athena and Artemis appear to have
been active in this line; and I think they are represented
amongst our goddesses by Frigg and Freyja^ or whoever took
their place afterwards, St. Mary above all. The artemisia was
apparently discovered or revealed by Artemis [Pliny 25, 36, 25],
the proserpinaca by Proserpine 27, 12 [104] . The irapOiviov was
shown by the divine IlapOivo^f as Pliny relates, 22, 17 [20] :
' verna carus Pericli Atheniensium principi, cum in aroe templam
aedificaret repsissetque super altitudinem fastigii et inde cecidisset,
hac herba dicitur sanatus, monstrata Pericli soirmio a Minerva,
quare parthenium vocari coepta est, assignatnrque ei deaa^ Of
the lappa he says, 24, 18 [116] : 'medetur et suibus, effossa sine
ferro ; quidam adjiciunt et fodientem dicere oportere, Haec est
herba argemon, quam Minerva reperit, suibus remedium qui de
ilia gastaverint ; ' apyefiov = albugo in the eye. Hermes pulls
out of the ground for Odysseus the <f>dpfiaKov mighty agaiast
magic: ßi&\v Si fitv xakiovat, deoi, Od. 10, 305 (p. 369). Does
the Iris owe its name to the messenger of the gods, or the white
hue of the lily, or other causes? In christian times an angel
reveals the angelica in a dream. Aw. 1, 159 (see Suppl.).

The names borrowed from animals may gain much in meaning
by the animals themselves being connected with the service of
gods. Thus there need only a myth underlie such names as
bären-klaue, wolfs-milch, OHG. wolves-zeisala, AS. wnlfes-tsesel,
and AS. hrsefnes-le&c, to bring to light some relation in which
the herb stands to dawn (p. 743-4), to the hero suckled by the she-
wolf, to the cordial conveyed by the god's messenger. We find
a convincing example in the spechts-wurzel, pecker's root, brought
by the sacred bird (p. 673), who probably gave his name to one
of the grand woods of our olden time, Spehtes-kart (Spessart) :
not only does it serve to burst open the plug, but he protects
the peony especially from being plucked (p. 973). The healiug


HEBBS: NAMES. 1198

iraifovia was associated with Hamv the divine physician, and it
is precisely the wounded Ares that he doctors (II. 5, 900) ; in
which I see a* new point of connexion between Ares and Roman
Mars, whose bird the woodpecker was. Athena too was named
HaiMvia. Now I think it is not without a bearing on this
matter, that our Zio himself has a herb named after him : ON.
Ty-vidr, Dan. Tys^ved, daphne mezereum (p. 199), which might
have been in OHG. Zio-witu, Ziowes-witu, i.e. Martis arbor, lig-
num, frntex ; but instead of exactly this name, we find a cor-
responding one, which I believe I can explain more correctly now
than at p. 428, note 2. I then thought of Sigelint, but as the
spelling Oigelinta, i.e. Zige-linta, preponderates (Graff 5, 627), as
Zilcmt (659) seems synonymous, and as beside Zeiland we have
in Austria to this day Zillind, ZwUind, Zwilinde meaning the
same daphne,^ the real old spelling comes to light, Zio-linta,
answering in form and substance to T^viiSr. For linta is not
only lime-tree, but also liber, bast, and we call the plant in-
differently seidel-baum and seidel-bast (for zeilinde-baum, -bast),
and it is commonly applied as a healing drug (Höfer 3, 135). An
AS. Tiwes-wudu, Tiges-wudu^ Tiges-lind is readily inferred. Now
whether daphne and pseonia be related or distinct, matters nothing
to their mythical analogy ; Pliny says the peony was also called
pentorobon, vevropoßov, from its bearing four or five peas; its
Boh. name is wlci lyko, i.e. wolf's basty Fr. garou, i.e. loup-garou,
werewolf. I will now pick out a few remarkable names of plants
from F. Magnusen's Lex. 758-9. The viola Martis, Fr. violette
de Ma/rs, is in Iceland called 2^«-fiöla, Tyrs-üölski this may be
a mere translation of the Latin name, which alludes more to the
month than the god, like our own marz-viole. There is more in
the Norw. Tyri-hialm or Thor^hialm, Tkoralm, Thor-hat for
aconitum or monk's-hood, to which answers our eisen-hütlein
(iron hat), Swed. Dan. storm-hat, apparently from the flower
resembling in shape a helmet or hat ; but the same plant is called
wolfs-kraut, wolfs-wurz, Dan. ulve-urt, Engl, wolfs bane, Dan.
ulve^banSj ulve-^död, which may be understood of T^r's fight
with the wolf, and moreover likened to the wolfs bast and garou


1 This too in distriots that say Er-tag and not Zis-tag for Tuesday (pp. 124.
201) ; 80 that in the plant*8 name Zio-worahip took a wider range.


1194 HEBBS AND STOKES.

above, as several oüier names waver between daphne and aooni-
tnm. And wolfs bast may even suggest the three bands laid on
the Fenris.<afr, MseSing' (Dan. leding, Molb. dial! lex. p. 317),
' dr6mi ' and ' gleipnir/ S. 38-4-5. There was yet another name
for daphne given on p. 377: Wieland' 8 berry, together with a
Scand. Velands urt for the medicinal valerian ; names which
carry us back, if not to a god, to one of oar greatest heroes of
old, whose father was the wise leech Wate (see Suppl.).

Bat there is only a small number of herbs named after gods
or heroes, compared with those referable to goddesses and wise
women. Most of these are now given to Mary, who in this
case, as in that of pretty little beetles (p. 694) and brilliant stars
(p. 726), replaces the elder ^(mu;a. Frauen-^schühli is trefolium
melilotus, whose flower resembles a shoe, in some places Manen-
pantöffelchen ; was Cypripedium calceolus Veneris formed in
imitation f Frauar-menteli, ösa (our) fraua^menteli (Tobler 204*),
alchemilla vulg., from its leaves being folded mantle- wise. Fraua-
seckeli (-satchel), geum rivale, ibid. Freyju-hAr stands for several
kinds of fern (supra p. 303) ; does it independently answer to
herba capillaris, capillus Veneria in Apuleius's Herb. 47, or was
it borrowed from it f FrauenArän, Marien-thräne, orchis mascula
(Staid. 1, 296), reminds of 'helenium e lacrimis Helenae natum,'
Pliny 21, 10 [33], still more of PreyjVs golden tears, 'gr&tr
Freyju,' Sn. 128. 132 (conf. p. 325), and the flowers and precious
stones that drop when goddesses laugh or weep (p. 1101); a
costly wine is called unser liehfrauen-milch. How a flower came
to be called Mother-of-Ood'a mirror, is told in the nursery-legend.
Frauen-Bchlössli, frauen-sehlüssel, primula veris. Staid. 1, 124,
otherwise himmels-schlussel (heaven's key), schlüssel-blume ;
because it unlocks the spring, or opens treasure f it has yet
more names, and is the medicinal betonica, of which more anon.
As these plants are all natives of our meadows, it is not likely
th^t their names were drawn from Latin, and only came into
vogue in the last few centuries; though in OHG-. glosses we
find no herb compounded with frouwa. It were too daring to
trace the oster-blume (6ster-gloie, Ms. 2, 61^) back to Oetara,
Edstre, as the form of name can, like maiblume, be explained
by the season of its blossoming ; these maybells were offered
in sacrifice (p. 58), were borne by white-women (p. 963), and to


HEBBS: TIME OF CULLING. 1195

pick them before sunrise is recommended in Sup. I, 1075 (see
Suppl.)«

Flowers are a feminine adornment^ young maidens twine the
wreath^ sage matrons cull the herb. Mamer says prettily^ Ms.
2, 174* : 'ez riuchet (smells) als ein edel krüt {^ einer megde haut.'
Why should not the wise women of even our earliest eld have been
skilled in herb-lore ? it is ascribed to witches and old women
stilly and apparently it is not without a meaning that from
healing herbs the witches select names for themselves or their
admirer (p. 1063). All witches' herbs may most appropriately
be called Z^e^cAr^t-kraut, 2^6rti/-kraut (speak ill^ becall, be-
witch), though the names have also been applied to particular
plants.

The culling and fetching of herbs had to be done at particu-
lar times, and according to long-established forms (see Suppl.).

Mostly before sunrise, when the day is young: 'herba qua-
cunque a rivis aut fluminibus ante solis ortum collecta, ita ut
nemo colligentem videat/ Pliny 24, 19 [107]. 'praecipiunt ali-
qui effossuris (anagallida), ante solis ortum, priusquam quidqiiam
aliud loquantur, ter salutare earn, tum sublatam ezprimere ; ita
praecipuas esse vires,' 25, 18 [92]. 'aiunt, si quis ante soils
ortum eam (chamelaeam) capiat, dicatque ad albugines oculorum
se capere, adalligata discuti id vitium'24, 14 [82]. 'ethane
(Samolum herbam) sinistra manu legi a jejunis^ 24, 11 [63].
' radicem (pistolochiae) ante solis ortum erutam involvunt lana '
20, 4 [14] . The viscus was gathered at new moon, prima luna
24, 4 [6] I the verbenaca ' circa Canis ortum, ita ut ne luna aut
sol conspiciat ' 25, 9 [59] . Unseen by man or heavenly body,
silent and fasting, shall the collector approach the sacred herb.
Lilies of the valley are to be culled before sunrise, devil's-bit at
midnight of 8t. John's eve, Sup. I, 190. 1075.

Pliny 25, 3 [6] tells of a plant called by the Bomans herba
Britammica, because brought from the isles between Germany and
Britain (ez oceani insulis extra terras positis 27, 1) : ' Florem
vibones vocant, qui collectus priusquam tonitrua audiantur (is
not that between lightning and thunder 7) et devoratus, secures
a f ulminibus in totum reddit. Frisii, qua castra erant, nostris
demonstravere illam ; mirorque nominis causam, nisi forte con-
fines oceano Britanniae velut propinquae dicavere; non enim


1196 HEBBS AKD STONES.

inde appellatam earn quoniam ibi plnrima nasceretur certam est,
etiamnam Britannia libera.' Here we liave a plant held in
esteem by the ancient Germans themselves^ and the injunction
to gather ib before hearing thnnder (that year 7) sounds quite
Teutonic. It protected from lightning, was therefore sacred to
the Thunder-god, like the house-leek, which is also called
donner-wehr. AS. glosses render the Britannica by hmwen-
hySele ; hsBwen is glaucus, the second word may come from hüS
praeda, or h^Se portus ; in the latter case it would mean some-
thing like blue sea-flower. Anyhow it was a water-plant,
hydrolapathum it is thought. I would gladly recognise in it
the seeblatt so sacred to the Frisians and Zealanders (p. 654),
whose flower is said to be white or yellow ; its names nixblume
and mummel call to mind the Indian names for the lotus, Bam&-
priya, dear to Bama or Lakshmi, and Srtv&sa, Sri's house =
Lakshmi's, who came up out of the sea (see Suppl.).

In digging up a herb, the Roman custom was, first to pour
mead and honey round it, as if to propitiate the earth, then to
cut round the root with a sword, looking toward the east (or
west), and the moment it is pulled out to lift it on high without
letting it touch the ground. 'Favis ante et melle terrae ad
piamentum datis, circumscriptam ferro (verbenacam) eSodi sinistra
manu et sublime tolli/ Pliny 25, 9 [59] . ' et fossuri (iridem),
tribus ante mensibus mulsa aqua cireumfusa, hoc veluti placa-
mento terrae blandiuntur, circumscripta mucrone gladii orbe tripluzi^
et cum legerint eam protinus in caelum attoUunt* 21, 7 [19].
' nigrum elleborum melampodion vocant, quo et domos suffinnt
purgantque, spargentes et pecora^ cum precatione solemni ; hoc
et religiosius colligitur : primum enim gladio circumscribiturj
dein qui succisurus est artum speetatj et precatur ut liceat sibi
concedentibus Diis facere ; observatque aquilae volatus (fere enim
secantibus interest), et si prope advolavtt, moriturum illo anno
qui succidat augurium est' 25, 5 [21]. 'cavent ßfibssuri (man-
dragoram) contrarium ventum, et tribus circulis ante gladio ctr-
cumscribunt, postea fodiunt ad occasuvh spectantes * 25, 13 [94].
In some cases, when the root had been dug out and made use
of, it was put in again, that it might live on : ' hanc (sene-
cionem) si ferro circumscriptam effodiat aliquis, tangatque ea
dentem et altemis ter despuat, ac reponat in eundem locum ita


HEBBS: ÄODB OF COLLING. 1197

nt vivat herha, aiunt dentem earn postea non dolitnram' 25^ 13
[106].

A great point was to guard against cold iron touching the
root (hence gold or redhot iron was used in catting)^ and against
the herb palled up, or the branch cat off, touching the ground :^
'radicem (pistolochiae) ante solis ortum erutam involvunt lana
colons quern nativum vocant. quidam auro effodiendam censent,
cavendamque ne terram adtingat' 20^ 4 [14]. '(viscum) coUec-
tam e robore sine ferro^ si terram non attigit, comitialibus mederi
(putant)' 24, 4 [6]. 'virgam e myrice defractam, ut neque
terram neqiieferrum attingeret ' 24, 9 [41] . ' cavendum ne avulsa
herba terram tangat * 25, 18. ' herba juxta quam canes urinam
fandunt, evulsa ne ferro attingatur, luxatis celerrime medetur '
24,19 [111].

In picking or pulUng up, the operator used the left hand ; in
certain cases he had to do it unbelted and unshod , and to state
for whom and for what purpose it was done : * si quis unum ex
his (pomis Punici mali), solutus uinculo omni dnctus et calceatus
atque etiam anuli, decerpserit duolms digitis, pollice et quarto
sinistrae munus, atque ita lustratis levi tactu oculis, mox in os
additum devoraverit, ne dente contingat, affirmatur nullam ocu-
lorum imbecillitatem passurus eo anno ' 28, 6 [59] . ' praecipitur
ut sinistra manu ad hos usus eruatur (iris rufa), coUignntesque
dicant cujus Aomini« utique causa eximant' 21,20 [83]. 'par-
thenium . . . mag^ contra tertianas sinistra manu evelli earn
jubent, diciqae cujus causa vellatur, nee respicere ' 21, 30 [104].
' psendanchnsa . • • folium ejus sinistra decerpi jubent magi, et
cujus causa sumatur dici' 22, 20 [24]. 'praecipitur ut qai
coUig^t (thlaspi) dicat sumere se contra inguina et contra omnes
collectiones et contra vulnera, unaque manu tollat' 27, 13 [113].
' autumnalis urticae radicem alligatam in tertianis, ita ut aegri
nuncupentur cum eruitur ea radix, dicaturqvs cui et qu^yrum filio
eximatur, liberare morbo tradiderunt' 22, 14 [16]. 'buglosso
inarescente, si quis medullam e caule eximat, dicatqvs ad quem
liberandum febre id faciat' 26, 11 [71]. So Columella 6, 5 of
the radicula, quam pastores consiUginem vocant; ea in Marsis
montibus plurima nascitur, omnique pecori maxime est salutaris :

1 As they would not let witches touch the ground (p. 1074) : the iarSur megin.


1198 HERBS AND STONES.

laeva manu eSbditar ante aolis artum, sic enim lecta majorem vim
creditor habere.

Id our native tradition^ now so scant and faded^ I can find but
little to match fnll accounts like these. An important statement
is that of Borcard on the bilisa (hyoscyamnSj henbane) ^ 'quam
yirginem nudam% minima digito dextrae m/inua eruere faciunt^ et
radicitns emtam cum ligamine aliqno ad minimum digitum dextri
pedis ligare ' ; the object has been stated p. 598. The nudity of
the person pulling it up answers to the above-mentioned laying
aside of belt and shoes^ but the right hand and right foot are at
variance with the Roman preference for left limbs. The whole
ceremony however seems to have been equally known in Gaul^
where the Romans, as will appear by and by, found a herb-
ritual ready organized. An AS. Herbal prescribes thus for sore
eyeSj wi'S e&gena s&re : '€Br 9unna/n upgange o^^Se bwene cer heo
fullice gesigan onginne (begin to sink), gä to 'pmre ylcan wyrte
Proserpinacam, and bevrrit hi &bütan mid anum gyldenum hringe,
and cweS (say) 'psdt ]?& hi to e&gena Isdcedöme niman wille (wilt
take it for cure of eyes) ; sdfter ]>rim dagon gk aefl 'psar-tb ser
sunnangancge, and genim hi and hoh (take and hang it) onbütan
'pBöH mannes swyran (neck); heo frama^S wel.' For self -adle:
' gang on Bunresoßfen, ]7onne sunne on seile sie, Iffßv \ti wite
Elenan standan ; sing J^onne benedicite et pater noster, and sting
"pin seax on pk wyrte. last stician eft to }^onne dsBg, and niht
furdum sc&Se on |>am ilcan ahte, gang »rest to ciricean and ^e
gesena and Gode bebeod. gang }7onne swigende, and J^eah pe
hwaet-hwega egeslices ongean cume, oS'Se man, ne cwe^S |>ft him
8Bnig word to, B&r pii cume t6 ]>8Bre wyrte, pe pt on safen ser
gemearcodest ; sing ]7onne benedicite and pater noster, &delf pi
wyrt, Icet stieia/n poet seaa ]>8eron. gauge eft sw& pd raiSost
maage to ciricean, and lege under weofod mid |>am seaze, Iset
licgean cSISadt sunne uppe sie, llwaesc siS^San, do td drence and
bisceopwyrt and Cristes maales ragu, &wyl ^riwa on meolcum,
geot pTiwa, h&lig waster on ; sing on pater noster and credan etc
and hine efic yrribwrit mid sweorde on iüi healfa on cruce, and
drince J^one drenc, si'S'San him bi'S söna saal.' Here I think a
Latin groundwork, with admixture of christian rites, is self-
evident. Thiers in his Traits des superstitions says : ' Quelques
uns pour se garantir de malSfices ou de charmes vont cueillir du


HEBBS: TIME AND MODE. TTING ON. 1199

grand mating a jeun, sails avoir lave leurs mainsj sans avoir prie
Dieu, sans pa/rler ä personne et sans saluer personne en leor
chemin, nne certaine plante^ et la mettent ensnite snr la personne
inal6fici6e on en8orcel6e. lis portent sur eox nne racine de
Chicoree, qvi'ils ont totichee ä genoux avec de Vor et de Vargent
le jonr de la nativity de saint Jean baptiste^ nn pen avant h
soleil leve, et qn'ils ont ensuite arrach^e de terre avec nn ferre-
ment et beauconp de cör^monies^ aprds Pavoir exorciz6e avec
V^de de Jndas Maohaböe.' This again seems to be Celtic^ and
yet resembles the Soman practices^ warlike Jadas' patriot sword
doing daty for the circle-drawing ' fermm/ In Superst. I, 581^
the lopping is also done with gold instead of iron. When Benart
finds in the meadow the wished-for plants and caationsly pulls it
np^ it is said: '^e Fa triblee n'esqimchie, en9ois la menja sanz
tribler, del remanant ala froter trestotes les plaies qn^il ot| et li
cnir maintenant reclot et f a gariz et trestoz sains' 25105—11.
The herb was neither to be fretted nor squashed ; conf. Michel's
Trist. 2, 50. In Thnmeisser's Erkl. der archidoxen^ Berl. 1575^
when it says fol. 76 : ' Verbeen^ agrimenia^ modeiger Charf rey-
tags graben hilfit dich sehr Das dir die frawen werden holdt,
Doch brauch kein eisen, gratis mit goldt*; I think it must be
drawn from Latin sources. Much more significant is what a
song in the Hatzler book says of the 'herb Hope' 137. 294:
' Daz ist gar ein edel krut. Grab ez stille, nicht ze KU, Schützen
sind darüber gesetzt, Begrif man dich, du wurdst geletzt An
diner saelden höhstem pfant ' ('tis a priceless herb, I trow, dig it
deftly, soft and slow : o'er it are set guards to watch thee ; thou
wouldst forfeit, should they catch thee, thy dearest pledge of
happiness). These warders and watchers of the herb are on a
par with that woodpecker that guards the peony : one would Uke
to know more particulars about them (see Suppl.).

About the tying^on {alligare, usu. adalligare ^) of herbs when
picked or dug up, Pliny imparts the following precepts : ' herba
adalligata lasvo brachio, ita ut aeger quid sit ülttd ig^noret' 24, 19
[107]. ' magi heliotropium quartanis quater, in tertianis ter alli^

^ A onriotiB oompoondssad-ftd-ligare : they most have oeaaed to feel the origin
of the assiinilstion U before they could add a second ad. It is matched, imper-
fectly *ti8 true, by our past part, geglückt (fr. gegelttokth and perfectly by the 0. Fr.
ooncaeillir=conoolligere, oon-con-legere, and the Gk>tL gagamainjan to profane,
gagaTairHan to reconcile.


r

I.


1200 HEBBS AND STONES.

gari jubent ab ipso aegro, precariqne Bolatnmm se nodos libera-
tum^ et ita faoere non exempta herba' 22, 21 [29]. 'sant qui
genicula novem vel anias vel e dnabas tribusve herbia ad banc
articnlomm numemm involvi lana suceida nigra jabeant ad
remedia stramae panorumve. jejunum debere esse qui coUigat,
ita ire in domam absentis cni medeatur, supervenientiqae ter
dicere jejuno jyunwm medicamentnm dare, atque ita adcdligare,
triduoqae id facere. quod e graminam genere irep^^m intemodia
habet, efficacissime capiti intra dolores adalligatar' 24, 19 [118].
'alliget ei Septem folia ^ 26, 11 [71]. 'verbenaca jamentomm
febribus in vino medetnr, sed in tertianis a tertio geniculo incisa,
qnartanis a qaarto,' ibid.^ Or, instead of being tied, it was pat
nnder the patient's pillow : ' sedam, si involutum panno nigra
ignorantU pulvino snbjiciatar' 26, 10 [69]. ' absintbiam somnos
allicit olfactam, ant inscio sub capite positnm ' 27, 7 [28] . As
a rule, the sufferer was not to know what was tied on or laid
under him; knots and joints in the herb bore a reference to the
manner of tying and its repetitions. Often it sufficed if the
protecting plant were held in the hand or worn in the girdle :
' virgam pöpuli in manu tenentOms intertrigo non metuatur' 24,
8 [32]. 'virgam (viticis) qui in manu hdbeant ant in dnetu,
negantur intertriginem sentire ' 24, 9 [38]. ' intertrigines negat
fieri Cato absinthium Ponticum secum habentibus^ 26, 8 [58].
Yet if you fall, holding in your hand the nymphaaa, you become
epileptic (p. 654).

But in many parts of Germany herbs of power used to be
suspended up in the loft, on the main rafter, or over door and
gate ways, and left there all the year round, till they were re-
placed by fresh ones.

The Bomans had a strange custom of laying a sieve in the
road, and using the stalks of gra^s that grew up through it for
medical purposes: 'cribro in limite adjecto, herbae intus ex-
stantes decerptae adalligataeque gravidis partus accelerant ' 24,
19 [109]. The sieve was a sacred utensil (p. 1108-12) : exstare
is extra stare, prominere. This reminds me of our old Weis-
thiimer, which determine the fineness of a tissue by the stalks

^ Wits he&fod-ece (headache) : &delf werfbradan (plantago) bütam tsene »r
Bunnan upgange, bind H moran (berries, seed) ymb )>ffit he&fod mid wrateieidS
)>ra9de. sona him biiS sei.


herbs: tying on, wondbbflowbr. 1201

piercing tlirough it, 1^ 12 : ' item, es sprechint oach die hoflüt,
das si handert und sibentzig ein haobtnoclis gebint dem von
Hünwil, das selb bnobtnoch sölli so swach sin, wenn man das
spreit nf ein wasen, das gens gras and bellen durch das tuoch
mugint essen/ And 1, 254: 'the said cloth shall be spread
over turf and be of such substance that geese can eat grass
through it, and not starve/ This has nothing to do with heal-
ing, but the mode of thought is similar.

Having made these general observations, I will now take up
one by one the herbs most renowned for healing. Tet some of
them seem purposely to have no distinct name g^ven them ; among
these is the herb that kept birds away from millet and panic :
* pestem a milio atque panico, stumorum passerumque agmina,
scio abigi herba cujus nomen ignoium est, in quatuor angulis segetis
defossa, mirum dicfcu, ut omnino nulla avis intret,' Puny 18, 17
[45]. A poem in Ls. 1, 211— • 8 tells of a maiden that was pick-
ing flowers for a garland, and by chance got hold of a herb she
did not know : no sooner was it in her hand than she saw all her
lovers before her, heard their talk, and knew all their thoughts.
At length one of her companions knocked the miraculous plant
out of her hand, it fell into a brook that ran past, and floated
away ; and all the prophetic power was gone. Again, the
nameless bhie wonderflower (p. 964), that suddenly opens the
shepherd^s eyes who has unconsciously stuck it in his hat, and
discloses the hitherto concealed entrance to the treasure (p. 971),
comes before us the more mysteriously, as it cannot in the least
be identified.^ The name forget-me-not, which it may be said to
assume to itself, is supposed to express no more than its senti-
ment, and seems not to have been applied to myosotis till a later
time. A herb with an equally imperative name is reported by
Pliny 27, 12 [106] : ' circa Ariminum nota est herba quam
resedam vocant, discutit collectiones inflammationesque omnes.
qui curant ea, addunt haec verba : '^ Reseda, morbos reseda !
scisne, scisne quis hie puUos egorit f radices nee caput nee pedes
habeant ! '' haec ter dicunt, totiesque despuunt.^ CoUectio is a

^ In Polish qaarries grows a beantifnl blue itarflower with a long stalk (oonf .
trojziele p. 1216), which the peasantry make war npon, because they think old
women and gipsies nse it in bewitching the cows, that they may sock up all the
milk themselves (Pott's Zigeuner p. viii).


1202 HEBBS AHD STONES.

gathering, and ' polios agere ' most refer to this or the inflamma-
tion. What we now call reseda (odorata) is apparently a differ-
ent herb (see Snppl.).

Of roots, the Alrune stands first in fame. 0H6. glosses
already have alruna, alrun for mandragora (Graff 2, 523. Schm.
8, 97), and I have on fair grounds (p. 404) identified the name of
the personified plant with that of wise-women in onr remotest
antiquity. H. Sachs iv. 3, 34 still pictures the Alraun as a god-
dess who meets yon at the crossways.^ Besides, the root itself
has the shape of a man, and the process of polling it up is
described as follows : If a hereditary thief that has preserved his
chastity gets hung, and drops water or seed from him, there
grows up under the gallows the broad-leaved yellow-flowered
mandrake. If dug up, she groans and shrieks so dismally, that
the digger would die thereof. He must therefore stop his ears
with cotton or wax, and go before sunrise on a Friday, and take
with him a black dog that has not a white hair on him ; make
three crosses over the mandrake, and dig round her till the root
holds by thin fibres only ; these he must tie with a string to the
dog's tail, hold up a piece of bread before him, and run away.
The dog rushes i^ter the bread, wrenches up the root, and fiiUs
dead, pierced by her agonizing wail. The root is now taken up

1 This personality of the Alraun oomes ont plaiiJy in a merry tale handed down
by a MS. of the 15th cent. : Dioitnr de qnadam moliere, quae habnit Timm nimis


in horto tno oanapum spissum et longom ? ' quae ait * habeo valde optatnm.* cni
yetola ' yade * inqnit ' tribas noctibus sacoesaive in crepascolo serotmo ad ipsom
hortmn tali modo et forma, prima namqne nocte acdpe nnam libram lardi spiss-
isflimi et optimi quam poteris nabere, secnnda noote duas, tertia yero tree, et semper
ponas dextmm pedem ad oanapum, ac projiciendo lardnm nsqne ad mediom eanapi,
vel citra, haec dices yerba : " Alrawn du yil güet, Mit trawrigem müet Büef ich
dich an, Dastu meinen leidigen man Bringst darzue, Das er mir kein leid nimmer
tue." ' Tertia igitur nocte cum mulier haec yerba replicaret, yetula absoondita in
oanapo jacebat. priiis autem informayerat praediotam mnlierem, quod attentiadma
ausoultaret quae sibi tertia noote dicta Älraton insinnaret. nnde in haeo yerba wb
voce rauca et valde aliena abscondita in canapo respondebat : " Fraw, da aolt haim
gan, und solt güeten müet han, Und solt leiden, meiden, sweigen (bear and forbear
and hold thy peace) ; Thuest du das yon allen deinen sinnen, So machtu wol ein
güeten man gewinnen.** et sie mulier illius yetulae yerba imitabatur, et yiri amari-
tudo in dulcedinem et mansuetudinem yertebatur. — ^Tlie same story in Paulli's
Schimpf u. Ernst 1555 cap. 156 ; a similar in a MHG. poem (Altd. wäld. 8, 160—3)
and a nurseiy-tale (EM. no. 128), where the man, not the wife, consults the hollow
tree or spindletree in the garden (p. 652). The form of address * Alrun, du vü
guote * reminds me of * si vil guote,' said to /ro Saide when she oats oat and olothes.
Walther 48, 7.


MANDRAKE, ALRAUN. 1203

(Pliny's in sablime toUi)^ washed with red wine^ wrapt in silk red
and white, laid in a casket, bathed every Friday, and clothed in a
new little white smock every new-moon. When questioned, she
reveals future and secret things touching welfare and increase,
makes rich, removes all enemies, brings blessings upon wedlock,
and every piece of coin put to her overnight is found doubled
in the morning, but she must not be overloaded. When her
owner dies, she goes to the youngest son, provided he puts a
piece of bread and a coin in his father's coffin. If he dies before
his father, the mandrake passes to the eldest son, who must in
like manner with bread and money bury his brother. All these
provisions sound ancient, and may date from a long way back.
Oar OHG. glosses have 'alruna' for the mandragara occur-
ring several times in the Vulgate,^ Gen. 80, 14 seq., where the
Hebrew text reads dudaim ; but the poetized version in MHG.
translates it erd^ephil, Diut. 2, 79. Now the mandragoras (masc,
Gb. fiavSpayopa^) is thus described in Pliny 25, 13 [94] : 'man-
dragoram alii Circaeum vocant ; duo ejus genera, candidus qui et
mas, niger qui femina existimatur • . . cavent effossuri (album)
contrarium ventum, et trlbiLS circuUs antc^ gladio circumscribunt,
postea fodiunt ad occasum spectantes.' I find more to my pur-
pose this time in two lines of Columella 10, 19 :

quamvis semi-hominis vesano gramine foeta
mandragorae pariat fiores, moestamque cicutam.

' Semi-human mandrake ' goes very well with our legend, and
even ' vesanum gramen ' may agree with it more closely than
appears from the words. Hildegard also in Phys. 2, 102 says :
' mandragora de terra de qua Adam creatus est dilatata est, et
propter similikidinem hominis suggestio diaboli huic plus quam
aliis herbis insidiatur. et ideo, cum de terra efibditur, mox in
salientem fontem per diem et noctem ponatur.' As the French
mandagloire stands for mandragore, I conjectured (p. 402) that the
fee Maglore may have sprung from Mandagloire ; if so, it offers
an exact analogy to our Alrüna the wise-wpman and alrAna the
mandrake, and is not to be despised. I close with an AS. de-
scription in Thorpe's Anal. p. 94, probably of the 10-1 1th cent.,
which confirms the dog^s participation in the act of gathering :

^ Ab a fern. pi. mandragorae ; the LXX has firiKa fuu^dpayopuiff earih-apples.
VOL ur. X


1204 HBRBS AND STONBS.

'I'eos wyrt^ ]ye man fnandragara'm nemneS • . . )K>ime ^ td
hire cymst^ Jionne ongist yt ht bi JrfLin (wilt know her by this) ^
heo on nihte sclneS ealswä leoht-fast (as a lamp). ]K>nne ^di hire
hedfod aerest geseo (first see her head), ]H>nne bewrtt yd hi wel
hra^ mid iseme, ^y IsBs heo ^e »tfleo (lest she flee thee), hire
msdgen (main, might) is sw& micel and swft msBre, ^sat heo nn-
clsdnne man, 'porme he td hire cymeS, wel hraiSe forfleon wile.
forSy yd M bewrit, sw& we asr cwasdon, mid iseme, and swft yd
soealt onbAtan hi delfan, 8w& yA hire mid ykm iseme nä SBt-hrme
(touch) : ac ytL geomlice scealt mid ylpenbaenenon (ivory) stsfe
yk eorSan delfan, and yonne yd hire handa and hire fet geseo,
yomxe hundes gewri'S yd hi (tie her to a dog), nim J^onne J^one
o^me ende, and gewdS to ftnes gwiran (neck), 8w& ]?ast se hund
hungrig si, wurp (throw) him siS&n mete to foran, swä yzdt he
hine fthreecan (reach) ne m»ge, bftton he mid him yk wyrte up-
äbrede.' She shines by night like a lamp, has head, hands and
feet, must be bewritten with iron lest she escape, is not to be
touched with iron, but dug up with an ivory wand : several things
betray a Latin origin (bewritan circumscribere). It is to be
fastened to the dog's neck instead of his taU ; conf . Belg. mns.
5, 114 [Josephus Wars 7, 6, 8 : root Baaras pulled np by dog].
Riny ascribes a ' vim somnificam ' to mandragoras.

Seem. 194* speaks of a svefn-ßom (sleep-thorn) with which
OSinn pricks Brynhild, and she goes to sleep, as Dom-roschen
does in the nursery- tale from the prick of a spindle (p. 419). The
thorn-rose has a meaning here, for we still call a mosslike excre-
scence on the wild rosebush or the whitethorn schlaf-apfel and
schlaf'kunz ; so that the very name of our sleeping beauty con-
tains a reference to the myth. We also use the simple kuenz
(Schm. 2, 314), which can hardly be Kunz the dimin. of Konrad,
but is rather conn, with kuenzel, kiienzen (gathering under the
chin). When placed under a sleeper^s pillow, he cannot wake
till it be removed^ (see Suppl.).

This ' sleep-apple ' is supposed to be produced by a wasp sting-
ing the thorn ; equally rootless, the prophetic gallr-nut on oaks

^ Stinga tvefnßom ooears in Fornald. sog. 1, 18-9. 8, 808-6. In Tristan sleep
is caused by a mere käuelin (onshion), Ulr. 1672-98 ; * der zonberaeie küsselin.*
Heinr. 4911. In a fairy-tale (Altd. bl. 1, 146) by tDriting and Utters (i.e. runes), or
by feathers off the wild shaggy folk (pp. 483. 486), whom fanoy must have pictured as
having wings or feathers.


SLEEP-THOBN. MISTLETOE. 1205

originates in such a puncture, Sup. I, 968 ; Ital. gallozza, Neap.
gliantra, Pentam. 2, 1 : ' tre gliantre mascole.' Growths that
ooold not be traced to seed and root, as probably that bird's neat
on p. 973, seemed miracnlpus and endued with magic power:
gall-nuts are hung on the kitchen roofbeam to protect the house.
The mistel (mistletoe) was accounted specially sacred, being
supposed to have fallen from heaven on the boughs of magnificent
trees like the oak and ash. OHG. mistil (not fem. mistila), Graff
2, 890; MHG. mistel, 'jÄmers mistel,' Martina 161*. With a
shoot of this plant the god Baldr was shot dead : when Frigg
was exacting an oath from all other plants, this seemed to her too
young : ' vex vi&r tein&ngr einn fyrir austan ValhöU, sft er Mia-
tiUeinn kalla^Sr, s& ]>dtti mer ftngr at krefja eilSsins,' Sn. 64 ; and
the Yöluspft sings of it thus. Seam. 6^ :

std« umvaxinn vöUom heerri
midr ok miok fagur Miatilteinn ;

grown high above the field stood the delicate fair mistle-shoot ;
teinn is a branch shot up, Goth, t&ins, OHG. zein, and we may
safely assume a Goth, mistilatdins, OHG. mistilzein. Now in AS\
we find it mistütä, which may easily be a corruption of mietiltan,
and the agreement of this with the Eddie mistilteinn would be
welcome and weighty ; yet ' tft ' may be right after all, and is
supported by the Engl, being mistletoe [but also misseldine] . In
Sweden this evergreen parasite is said to be usually a foot or two
feet long, but sometimes to reach the length of three ells (Geijer's
Häfd. 1, 830). F. Magn. lex. 512 says, in Yestergötland it is
called ve-speltj holy spelt, triticum sacrum. A plant associated
with the death of one of their greatest and best-beloved gods
must have been supremely sacred to all of Teutonic blood; and
yet this opinion of its holiness was shared by Celtic nations.
Pliny 16, 44 [95] assures us of the Celtic belief : ' Non est omit-
tenda in ea re et Galliarum admiratio. Nihil habent druidae (ita
sues appellant magos) visco, et arbore in qua gignatur (si modo
sit robur), sacratius. Jam per se roborum eligunt lucos^ nee ulla
sacra sine ea fronde conficiunt, et inde appellati quoque interpre-
tatione Graeca possint druidae videri. Enimvero quidquid adnas"
catur Ulis, e coelo missum putant, signumque esse electae ab ipso
deo arboris. Est autcm id rarum admodum inventu, et repertum


1206 HEBBS AND STONES.

magna religione petiturj efc ante omnia sexta luna (quae principia
mensiam annoramque hia facit) et secnli post tricesimnm annum,
qaia jam virinm abnnde habeat nee sit sni dimidia. Omnia sanan-
tern appellantes sno vocabnlo, sacrificii^rite sub arbore praeparatis,
daos admovent ccmdidi coloris taurots, quorum camua tunc primum
vificiantur,^ Sacerdos ccmdida veste coitus arborem scanditjfaiee
aurea demetit, candido id excipitnr sago. Tum deinde victimas im-
molant, precantes ut suum donum deus prospemm faciat his quibus
dederit. Foecunditatem eo poto dari cuicunque animalium steiili
arbitrantur, contra venena omnia esse remedio. Tanta gentium
in rebus frivolis plerumque religio est.' This elegant description
is preceded by other statements^ of which I will select one here
and there : ' Visci tria genera. Namque in abiete ac lance steiin
dicit Euboea nasci, hyphecvr Arcadia, viscum autem in quercu,
robore, prune silvesbri, terebintho, nee aliis arboribus adnasci,
plerique. Copiosissimum in quercu, quod dryos hyphear . . .
Adjiciunt discrimen, visco in his quae folia amittant et ipai decidere,
contra inhaerere nato in aetema fronde? Omnino autem satum
nullo modo nascitur, nee nisi per alvum. avium redditum, maxime
palumbis ac turdis : haec est natura, ut nisi maturatum in yentre
avium non proveniat. Altitude ejus non excedit cubitalem, semper
frut(3ctosi ac viridis. Mas fertilis, femina sterilis ; aliquando non
fert.* — With us too a thrush is called mi«^Zer, Schm. 2, 645 (MH6.
mistelaere ?), Engl, mistlebird ; and in some other of our myths
the co7iveyan€e of the seed by birds enhances the holiness of the
virgin plant (p. 969) : there is no human hand at work, and the
finger of God is manifest. Viscum is the Fr. gui, and to this day
the veneration for the plant is preserved in the New-year's gratu-
lation aguilanneuf {p. 755). In Wales they hang mistletoe oi;6r
the doors at Christmas, and call it (says Davies) pren a/wyr, merry
tree, pren uchelvar, tree of the high summit, pren puraur, tree
of pure gold; the second name recaUs the WöUum hsdrri' of
the Edda. But the usual names given for mistletoe are Wei.
olhiach, Bret, ollyiach, Ir. uileiceach, G^el. uileicef i.e. all-healing

^ Steers never yoked as yet, steeds never harnessed, BA. 547 : a sacred use
demands that everything be new.

* Virg. Aen. 6, 205 : Quale solet silvis bramali frigore vUcum

fronde virere nova, qnod non sna seminat arbos,
et croceo fetn teretes ciromndare tranoos ;
talis erat species auri frondentis opaca
ilice, sic leni crepitabat bractea vento.


MISTLETOE. VALERIAN. 1207

[Pliny's omnia sanans], from 'ol, uile/ universal (p. 1213). A
Breton lay (Barzas breiz 1^ 58. 100) makes Merlin at early mom
go fetch the high branch on the oak (warhael, hnelvar ann der-
wen) . Oar old herbals divide mistletoes into those of the oak,
hazel B,nd peartree (eichen-mistel^ heselin-m., birnbäamin-m.), and
none of them most be let touch the ground ; some^ set in silver,
they hang round children's necks. In Prussian Samland it is
called wispe (which looks like viscum, gui, but mistel itself is
often confounded with mispel = medlar) ; it is common on birch,
cherry and lime trees, on the hazel it is rare and wonderful. It
grows in a straight line out of the trunk, and between its smooth
evergreen willow-like leaves it bears berries silvery-white, like
peas or small nuts. Where the hazel has a wispe, there is sure
to be a treasure hidden (Reusch no. 10). Among Slavs I find
the names Boh. melj, gmelj, omSli, Buss, om^la, Pol. iemiel ;
Lith. amalai, Lett, ahmals ; but no legends (see Suppl.).

To viscum may be added two other druidical herbs. Pliny
24, 11 [62-3] : ' Selago legitur sine ferro, dextra manu per
tanicam, qua sinistra exuitur velut a furante, Candida veste vestito
pareque lotis nudis pedibus, sacro facto priusquam legatur pane
vinoque; fertur in mappa nova: hano contra omnem pemiciem
habendam prodidere druidae Gallorum. — lidem Samolum herbam
nominavere nascentem in humidis, et hano sinistra manu legi a
jejunis contra morbos suum boumque, nee respicere legentem,
nee alibi quam in canali deponere, ibique conterere poturis.'
The mode of gathering selago is peculiar : it is to be picked with
the right hand, not bare, but covered with the tunic (conf. p. 971),
then to be drawn out stealthily with the left. In Davies's Br.
myth. 280 it is said to be the herb the Welsh call gr&s Duw
(gratia Dei). YillemarquS thinks it is the aour geoten (aurea
herba) of Breton songs 1, 58. 96, which you must pull up in the
meadows before sunrise, barefoot and bareheaded ; it shines far
off like gold. It is rarely to be found, and only by holy persons.
Some take it for our bärlapp (lycopodium). Samolus is said to
be anemone pulsatilla; Davies p. 274 gives its Welsh name as
gwlydd.

Our baldHan is a corruption of Valeriana, and has nothing to
do with Baldr, after whom a very different herb, the anthemis
cotula, was named Baldrs br& (brow), Sw. Baldersbrä, abbrev.


1208 HEBBS AND STONES.

Barbro. Bat the valerian has a mythical name too^ Velands-urtt
Wayland's wort (p. 377)^ and its healing virtaes are in high
repute. The Servians call it odolidn (from odoli6ti to overpower),
Boh. odolen ; and among the Servian ' Vilinen piesme ' (songs
taaght by the vila herself) is a saw (Vnk^ new ed. 1, 149) : ' Da
2na zhenska glava^ Shto zh' odoliän trava^ Svagda bi ga bnJa^ U
pas ashivala^ I za se nosila ' ; if woman bat knew what is herb
odoli&n^ she would always get it, in her girdle sew it, and aboat
her wear it. The vila warns as not to neglect this precions herb
(see Sappl.).

Henbane (bilsen-hraut) , OHG. püisa, belisa (hyos-cyamos),
see pp. 598. 1198, and SnppL

Sowthistle (eberwnrz, boarwort), OHG. epnrwarz, the carlina
acaalis, Carla-distel ; gprowing on hills, close to the ground with«
out a stalk, with silver-white unfading leaves. During a pestilence,
Charles the Gbeat had gone to sleep laden with care, when an
angel appeared to him in a dream, and bade him shoot an arrow
in the air : whatever herb it lighted npon was sovereign against
the plague. Charles in the morning shot the arrow, and its
point stuck in a sowthistle : they used it for medicine, and the
plague disappeared. He that carries this plant about him, let
him run ever so long, will never tire ; and he can take all the
strength out of a companion that walks with him, hence they
used to tie some to their horses in a race ; when the same was
done unperceived to one of a married couple, the other was sure
to waste away and die. Sowthistle was also nailed inside the
swine-trough, that the pigs might eat over it, whence its name
is supposed to have come (W. Menzel^s Literaturbl. 1844. pp. 9.
10). The name 'eberwurz' probably rests on other grounds,
but ' carlina ' seems to be formed on the legend. King Charles
often had things told him by angels in dreams, and bad dreams
come of fighting with boars ; the herb may have healed the gash
inflicted by the tusk of a boar (see Suppl.).

Betonica. Pliny 25, 46: 'Yettones in Hispania earn quae
Vettonica dicitur in Grallia, in Italia autem serratula, a Graecis
cestros aut psycho-morphon [-trophon?], ante cunctas laudatis-
sima. Exit anguloso caule, cubitorum duAm, a radice spargens
folia fere lapathi, serrata, semine purpureo • • . tantum gloriae
habet, at domus in qua sata sit tuta exUtimetur a piaculü omnibus


SOWTHISTLE. BETONT. MADELGEB. FEBN. 1209

. . . Morsibus imponitar vettonica, cai vis tanta perhibetur, at
inclusae cireulo ejus serpentes ipsae sese interimant flagellando/
Fr. betovne, MHG. batonie : ' alüa wip grabent patoni/ MsH. 8,
193^. ' s6 g6nt eteüche mit boasen bat&nien nmb/ Berth. 58.
^ettlich kandent patoniken graben/ Saperst Gt, 1. 41. 'die \&r
ich batonien graben/ Aw. 2, 56. An Italian proverb recom-
mends the purchase of betony at any price : ' venda la tonica^ e
compra la bettonica/ A description in Martina 27* (Dint. 2, 129)^
' din gelwe batdnie hoi/ seems to contradict the aforesaid purple
(of the seed only ?). In Switzerland badöniJcli is our fluhblume,
cowslip^ and herdsmen bring it home for their sweethearts off the
Alp^ Staid. 1, 124. 386. Apparently several kinds are to be
distinguished : Pol. bukwica. Boh. brkwice^ is by turns betonica^
plantago and primula. The Anglo-Saxons called betonica biscop^
wyrtj from which its sacredness may be inferred (see Suppl.) •

Madalger stands in OHG. glosses for basilicumi in herbals for
senecio as well. The proverb ran^ * Modelgeer ist aller wurzel
ein eer.' In the Westerrich, when a disease breaks out among
swine^ they chop some of this root in with the pigs' wash^
muttering a short prayer: it keeps the schelm from attacking
them. As Heime's father in our heroic legend is called Madelg&r
(p. 387)^ likewise a mermaid's son who puts on a doak of dark-
ness (Morolt 40-1); a mythic significance in the plant's name
becomes credible (see Suppl.).

In the same way I connect Marigold, lapathumj beet^ with that
ancient name of the giant-maiden who could g^nd gold (p. 531).
OKG.faram filix, MHG. varm, vam, AS. feam, Engl. /em.
Pliny 27, 9 [55] tells nothing mythical of the filix. Hildegard's
Phys. 2, 91 : ' in loco illo nbi cfescit, diabolus illusiones suas
raro exercet ; et domum et locum in quo est, diabolus evitat et
abhorret, et fnlgura et tonitrua et grando ibi raro cadunt.' A
Herbal says : ^farnkraut is hard to destroy, without ye stub it
up on the day of John's beheading, then doth fam perish. It
seems to bear neither flower nor seed ; he that will gather fern-
seed must be bold and able to daunt the devil. He shall go after
it on St John's night before daybreak, light a fire, and spread
cloths or broad leaves under the same, so may he take and keep
of the seed.' Many fasten fresh fern over the house^door, then
all goes well as far as the whip on the waggon reaches (about five


1210 HEBBS AND STONES.

paces)^ Sap. I, 988. In Bedeker's Westf. sagen no. 46 we find
some details : Fernseed makes one inuinhle, bat is difficalt to get
at : it ripens only between 12 and 1 on Midsummer nighty and
then falls off directly, and is gone. A man, who on that night
happened to be looking for a lost foal, passed throagh a field
where fernseed was ripening, and some fell in his shoes (like the
flax-pods, p. 962). Coming home in the morning, he walked
into the house, and sat down: he thought it. strange that his
wife and family took no notice of him. * Well,' says he, ' I have
not found the foal.' All those in the room looked startled : they
heard the man's voice, but nothing of him could they see. The
wife began calling him by name, so he came and stood in the
middle of the room, and said, ' What are you shouting for, when
here I stand before you?' The terror was now greater than
before ; till the man, feeling something hurt his feet, as if shingle
had got in his shoes, palled them off and shook them out ; and
there he stood visible to every eye. This is the vninscheUsdmen
des varmen (p. 974). Conrad of Würzburg in a song, MsH.
3, 453» :

Het ich sämen von dem vam,

den würfe ich dar den scheiden,

daz si 'n verslünden, 6 mtn dienest von ir solde scheiden.

'scheiden ' are large fish, shad, siluri, and often used punningly
(Schm. 3, 324. Hof er 3, 65). Had I seed of the fem, says the
lover, I would fling it to yon shadfish to devour, ere my service
should fall away from her ; apparently the seed might have made
his fortune elsewhere, but he gives it up to keep faith with her :
there is no reference to invisibility. In Thiers the fougere (filix)
'cueillie la veille de la St Jean justement ä midi' is said to bring
luck in play to him that wears it.

In the Thüringer-wald fern is called irr-hraut (stray herb),
and by some dtter-kreutich (adder-herb) : if- you step over it
without seeing it, it so bothers and bewilders you, that you no
longer know your whereabouts even in the most familiar parts of
the forest. To prevent or correct year straying, you must sit
down and put your shoes on the wrong feet, or if a woman, untie
your apron and turn it wrong side out ; immediately you know
your way again (Haapt's Zeitschr.. 3, 364. Bechstein's Franken


FEBN. MUGWOBT. 1211

pp. 2Ö9. 286.) No doubt the puzzle^seed had got into the shoe
or cinctare, and fell oat when these were taken off. It is said
also, if you have adder-herb about you, you will be pursued by
adders till you have thrown it away. In some parts they call it
Walburgis'krauL Its Slavio name is Buss, pdporot, Pol. paproc,
O. Boh. paprut, now papradj, kaprctdj, Sloven, praprat, praprot ;
Lith. papariiSf Lett, papardi. Woycicki 1, 94 also says it
blossoms exactly at midnight of St John's eve, and it is a hafd
matter to get hold of the flower (kwiat paproci), for the picking
is attended by storm and thunder ; but whoever gets possession
of it becomes rich, and can prophesy (see Suppl.).

0H6. pipoz, artemisia (GrafE 8, 22, but misplaced and mis-
spelt), MHG. Mboz (rhy. gr6z), Ls. 2, 526; its corruption into
our meaningless beifuss, Nethl. bivoet, is as early as Gl. Jun. 406
hifuz. The word seems pure German, formed from pdzan cudere,
like anapdz incus, anvil, MHG. anebdz, our amboss; and we
ought to pronounce and spell it beiboss. The meaning must
be something like that of beischlag (by-blow), which in the
Logau district means a bastard. In OS. it would be btb6t,
which resembles its Lett, name bihbotes. Our LG. buk, bticJce
seems an abbrev. dimin. of endearment (but-ke) ; ^ Dan. bynhe,
but Sw. grdbo, gray nest. Whoso hath beifuss in the house, him
the devil may not harm ; hangs the root over the door, the house
is safe from all things evil and uncanny. On St John's day
they gird themselves with beifuss, then throw it in the fire, while
spells and rhymes are said (p. 618) ; hence the names Joliannis-
gürfel, sonneiiweixd-gurtel, yürteUhrauty Fr. herbe de S. Jean.
They dig the root up solemnly, twine it into wreaths, hang it
about them, and each flings it into the flame along with any
griefs he may chance to have about him. He that has beifuss on
him wearies not on his way (Megenberg 885, 16) : this is imitated
from Pliny 26, 89 : * artemisiam alligatam qui habet viator
negatnr lassitudinem sentire ; ' also the *Ep/4,ffy€iai iraXaial (ed.
Sillig p. 212) : aprefiiaiav r^v ßordvrjv el ri^ l;^€i iv oSoS, \v€i
rov /cdfiaTov, . The AS. name is mucgwyrt, Engl, mugwort,
muggon : ' wi'S miclum gonge ofer land, ]?yl89s he teorige, mucg^
wyri nime him on hand, a6Ve do on his seo {^ylses he mddige ; and

' Or is it related to Finn, puyo, Esth. poio^ puiyo 9


1212 HEBBS AND STONES.

I^onne be niman wille 8Dr sunnan npgange^ cweSe ]?fts word SBrest :
toUam te^ artemisia, ne lassns sim in via. gesegna hie, ]ioniie )^
npteo/ R. Chambers p. 84 gives some Scotob stories of its
bealing power. A g^l in Gralloway was near dying of consomp-
tion, and all bad despaired of her recovery^ when a mermaid^ who
often g^ve the people good connsel^ sang :

Wad ye let the bonnie may die i' yonr band^
And the mugwort flowering in the land 1

They immediately plucked the berb^ gave her the juice of it, and
she was restored to health. Another maiden had died of the
same disease, and her body was being carried past the port of
Glasgow, when the mermaid raised her head above ihe water,
and in slow accents cried :

If they wad drink nettles in March,

And eat muggons in May,
Sae mony braw maidens

Wad na gang to the clay.

Why should not the Goths already have possessed a bib4uts too f
That they had significant names of their own for herbs and
shrubs, is plain from Ulphilas's translations of the Greek term
by a native one : ßdro^, rubus, becomes aihvatundi, Mk 12, 26.
Luke 6, 44. 20, 87, which apparently contains aihvus equus,
tundi femes (tinder, OHG. zuntara) ; trvKafuvo^ bdinabctgms, Luke
17, 6, i.e. bone-tree, and to this day we call privet (hartriegel,
OHG. hartrugil, harttrugil f Gra£F 5, 501) bonewood. The rea-
sons of the names are lost to us now (see Suppl.).

Hederich is not an old German word, being formed firom the
Latin hedera, only instead of ivy it means ground-ivy, Linn6's
glechoma hederacea, a weed with small bliie flowers. Its native
name is gunde-rehe, gundeUrebe, donner-rebe, gunder^mann, OHG.
gunder-reba, ^acer' (Grafif 2, 354), which cannot mean maple, for
it is always classed among herbs. It was reckoned sanative,
and a safeguard against sorcery; when cows are first driven
out to pasture, they are milked through a wreath of gwfidermann,
and whoever wears this on his head can tell who are wibdea,
Sup. I, 462-8. Qund points to the ancient vallgrr {^.422} ; don*
tier to the flower's blue colour, and to tiie Thunder-god. The
Lettons too have named it pehrkanes from the god Pehrkon.


GBOUND-IVT. DBVIL'S-BIT. GOOD HENRY. 1213

The Boh. ohnica (from ohen^ fire) stands for the yellow hederich
(hedge-mustard ? ) that orerspreads whole fields : if you call out
'hederich' to peasant women weeding it^ they scold you (see
Suppl.).

One kind of st^biosa is named siLceisa, or morsvs diaboli, Teu*
fels'biss or 'Ohbiss, Engl. deviVs bit, Dan. diavels bid, Boh. cert-
kas, cert&w kas, Buss, di&rolskoye ukush^nie [and cherto-grjrz^
ch6rtov ogr^zok] ; but also Boss. ch6rtoy pälets^ devil's thumbs
Pol. czartowe zebro^ devil's rib. The root is stumpy at the end,
as if bitten off. Oribasius says, the devil was doing such mis-
chief with this herb, that the Mother of God took pity, and
deprived him of the power; he out of spite bit the end of the root
off, and it grows so to this day. The man that has it about him,
neither devil nor hag has power to hurt. Some say the devil bit
it off because he grudged men the use of its healing power. If
dug up at midnight of St John's eve, the roots are yet unbitten,
and chase the devil away. Thrown under the table, it makes the
guests fall out and fight (see Suppl.).

Some herbs are called by men's names. Bertram, though
found even in OHG. as Perhtram (Graff 3, 849), MHG. Bei-cht-
ram, Ls. 2, 526, is merely pyrethrum altered to give it a German
sound. What seems more remarkable is * herba boni Henrid '
(chenopodium), or simply bonue Henricus, gut Hevirich; stolz
Heinrich, proud H. fatriplex) ; roth Heinrich, red H., Superst. I,
1 002. I account for it by the old beliefs in elves and kobolds, for
whom Heinz or Heinrich was a favourite name (pp. 503-4), which
was afterwards transferred to devils and witches, and to such
demonic beings was ascribed the healing virtue of the herb.
Even the legend of Poor Henry, whose origin has never been
explored, may have to do with a herb that cured leprosy; and
the ' herba boni Henrici ' is said to have been used as a remedy
for that very disease.

When a universal power to heal all sicknesses was attributed
to a herb, the Greeks called it rh irdvaxe^, ^ iravaKt^a (as the
Celts named the mistletoe olhiach, uileicea^^h), which got person-
ified itself into a daughter of Asklepios, HavaKeia, In our lan-
guage we find no plant named all-heil, all-heila, but there is a
selp'heila (euphrasia), Graff 4, 864, and the herbs heiUaller^welt
(Achillea, millefolium), heiUaller'Schaden (supercilium Veneris), as


1214 HEBBS AND STONES.

well as aller'tnann-hamiseh and neun-inanns-hrafl, 9 man power.
The significance of the nnmber nine shews itself no less in gar-
lands being made of nine sorts of flowers. Heil-haybüo, heal-
head^ Graff 4, 759, is hermodactylns, whatever that may be, and
another name for it is hunt-louch, dog-leek 2, 143 (see Snppl.).

Two herbs commonly coupled together by alliteration are
doste and dordnt (origannm, antirrhinum). 0H6. dosto (Graff 5,
232) is our real native word for what we now call wilde majoran,
thymian (marjoram, thyme), or wolgemut (well of mood). Boh.
dohrd-mysl. For dorant we have sometimes ordnt ; some think
it is not antirrhinum, but marrubinm, OHG. Oot-fargezzan,
Both herbs are shunned by the little- wights and nixes ; hence
the speeches put in their mouths: 'If ye hadn't dordnt and
dosten here, I'd help ye the sooner to sip that beer ! ' ' Up with
your skirts, ye merrimen all. Lest into dost and dordnd ye fall ! '
' See that ye bump not against durdnt, Or we sha'n't get back to
our fatherland.' DS. no. 65. Jul. Schmidt p. 132. Bedeker
no. 45 (see Suppl.).

Along with doste, hart'heu (hypericum, St John's wort), other-
wise called hart'hun (p. 1029n.), will often scare spirits away:
' Marjoram, John's wort, heather white. Put the fiend in a proper
fright.' Hypericum perforatum, ßiga daemonum^ devil's flight
(see Suppl.).

Widertdn (adiantum), formed with the past part, of tuon, to
do, afterwards corrupted into widsrthon^ toidertod : the genuine
form is retained by G. Frank (Schm. 4, 34). The Herbal says :
Therewith be many pranks played, this we let be as foolery and
devilry. 'Tis called maidenhair also, and is of fair golden hue.
The old wives have many a fancy touching herbs, and say the red
steinbrechlin (saxifraga) with small lentil leaves is indeed ahthont
but the naked maidenhair is widerthon, and with these two they
can both ' abthon ' and ' widerthon ' as it please them. Does
this mean, remove and restore virility f in that case abetdn and
widertdn would be opposites, like ' set on ' and ' take off' on p.
1074. Frisch 1, 5^ has abthon trichomanes, polytrichon, and 2,
446^ widerthon lunaria, thora salutifera (see Suppl.).

Some herbs, plantago and proserpinaca, take their names from
growing on the wayside (proserpere) and being exposed to the
tread (plantae) of passengers : OHG. wegarih (Graff 1, 670), our


DOSTE. WATBBEAD. LEEK. 1215

wegericli ; OHQ. wegapreita, onr wegebreit^ AS. wegbrcede, Engl.

waybrede [broad^ not ' bread '], Dan. veibred; OHO. toegaspreüi,

-spreading (Grafif 6, 395). Again, 0H6. wegatreta, vmbitreta

(Graff 5j 552), oor wegetritt ; OHG. wegawaHa, onr wegewarte

(ward, watch, wait), a name also given to cicboriam, succory.

There are some myths about it : the herb was once a maiden that

on the wayside awaited her lover (p. 828), like Sigüne in Tit.

117-8. Paracelsus observes (0pp. 1616. 2, 804), that the flowers

of the Wegwarte turn to the sun, and their strength is greatest

in sunshine, but after seven years the root changes into the form

of a bird (see Suppl.).

Lauch, OHO. louh, AS. le&c (leek), ON. laukr, is a general

designation of juicy herbs ; some species appear to have been

sacred : ' allium (gar-leek) caepasque inter deos in jurejurando

habet Aegyptus,' Pliny 19, 6 [32]. When Helgi was born, and

his father Sigmundr returned from the battle, it is said in

Seem. 150*:

sialfr g^ck visi or vigrymo

iingom fcera itrlauk grami.

In Vols, saga cap. 8 : * Sigmundr var ]?& kominn frft orrostu, ok
gekk meff einum lauk tm6t syni sinum, ok hermeiS gefr hann
houum Helga nafn.' The itr^aukr is allium praestans, allium
victoriale : it is not clear whether the king bore it as home-
returning victor, or whether it was usual to wear it in giving
names. Antiquity sheds no light on either custom.^ When the
drinking-cup was blessed, a leek was thrown into it, Ssom. 195^
(see Suppl.).

The sorbus or service-tree is in ON. reynir, Sw. rönn, Dan.
rönne (rowan ?) : it is a holy shrub, for Thdrr in the river clutched
it to save himself, hence it is said : ' reynir er biörg Thors/ sorbus
auxilium Thori est, Sn. 114. In Sweden they still believe that a
staff of this rönn defends you from sorcery, and on board ship the
common man likes to have something made of rönn-wood, as a
protection against storms and watersprites ; flögrönn is of use in
occult science, Afzel. 1, 19 (see Suppl.).

In Servian, samdokaz and okolochep are herbs which, put in a
love-potion, compel the lover to come to his mistress. Ustuk is

' The Weldh associate their national leek with ▼iotoiy.^Taars.


1216 HERBS ARD STOKES.

bofch a herb and the charm repeated by a sorceress to make a
disease depart (nstoknati), Yak sub w.

The Pol. trojziele (three-herb) is a marvellous plant with blue
leaves and red flowers : it inspires love, makes you forget, and
transports you whither you please ^ (see Suppl.).

In the poem of Elegast 763 seq. there occurs a nameless herb,
which one need only put in the mouth to understand what the
cocks crow and the dogs bark, Yillemarqu^ says, whoever acci-
dentally steps on the golden herb (p. 1207), falls asleep directly,
and understands the speech of dogs^ wolves and birds. In another
. case the knowledge of birds* language comes of eating a white
snake (p. 982), in the Edda by eating of the dragon's heart. A
fairytale makes some one be three years learning what it is that
the dogs bark, the birds sing, and the frogs croak ' (see Sappl.).

2. Stonbs.

Stones are far less mythical than herbs, though among them
also the noble are distinguished from the base. Stones neither
grow so livingly, nor are they so accessible, as plants : whilst any
shepherd or traveller can approach the flower in field or wood,
precious stones are not produced on the surface of our soil, they
are wrung from the bowels of the earth, and imported from dis-
tant lands. There was a meaning therefore in calling herb-lore
heathen, and stone-lore Jewish (p. 1190) : Jewish and Moorish
merchants fetched the gem from the far East. The miraculous
and medicinal power of precious stones was known early in the
Mid. Ages, but never was naturalized amongst us, hence also the

^ Volkslieder der Polen, coli, by W. P., Leipzig 1888, p. 90.

' AS. herb-names, when onoe critically edited from the MSS., promise rich
gleanings for mythology, of which I have given several specimens. I wül here add
a few obscure names : dweorges dwostUf dwosle, dwysle (polegiom, pennyroyal),
was quoted p. 448, and if conn, with ON. * dusü,' levis opera, perh. qoisquilis, and

* dustla,' everrere, it is dwarf's sweepings ; eoUan-erdg is achillea or nymphaea, and
as * collen-ferbtS ' in the poems is proud-hearted, so proud crocus (OHG. kraogo) or
crock, pitcher, whichever we take cr6g to mean ; alf-f^one, OHG. alb-dono, our alp-
ranke (bittersweet?) ; wulfet comb, ohamaelea ; foxes glofa^ bnglossa, OHO. hrindes-
zunga, ox-tongue [or, digitalis?] ; hind-helede, paeonia, Engl, hind-hele, appar.

* oervam celans, defendens,' oonf . * beleihe, heolatS ' (it is spelt both ways) with
heololS-helm p. 468, and beÄh-heolotSe quoted by Lye ; eneow-hoUn^ now i;iificna,
now victoriaJe, i.e. herba victorialis, idaea daphne, Engl. kneelioUy, kneeholm;
hw&tend, iris illyrica, suggestive of *hw&tunga,* omina, auguria; geormen-ledf,
eormen-Udf, geornum-leafa, hoc-leaf a (Haupt's Zeitschr. 9, 408), malva, would in
OHG. be irman-loup (p. 351-2). The OHO. names in Graff 1, 1050-1. 8, 86^—73
are less interesting, and less perfectly preserved (see SuppL).


stones: obphan. 1217

very few Tentonic names for theorij or legends about them : a
fact which goes to confirm the home character of our plant-
myths. The widely circulated works of Marbod^ Evax^ Albertus
Magnus and others on precious stones have left as little of last-
ing legend among the people as Walahfried or Macer Floridus^
who in the dry learned fashion of physicians treat of herbs.
Even Pliny's account in his 36th book seems to have had no
effect at all on our superstitions.^

Yet a few time-honoured myths there are. The Edda names
a holy iarkna-steinn, Saem. 137*». 139\ 213 ^. 238*, which in the
Cauldron-raid was thrown into the^ hot water, and which the
cunning smith Völimdr could manufacture out of children's eyes.
The AS. eorcan-slän glosses both ' margarita ' and ' topazion * ;
in Cod. Ezon. 73, 27. 238, 12. 478, 7 it has the general sense
of precious-stone (eorcnan-stän is appar. a corruption). A cor-
responding Goth. airkna'Stains, OHG. erchan-stein may safely be
assumed, as 'afrknis ' actually means genuine, holy, and * erchan'
survives in similar compounds (Graff 1, 468). But it seems to
be the oval milk-white opal, otherwise called orphanus, pupillus,
MHG. weise (orphan), and so precious that it graced the crown
royal of Germany. Albertus M. says : ' Orphanus est lapis qui
in corona Bomani imperatoris est, neqne unquam alibi visus est,
propter quod etiam orphanus vocatar. Est autem colore vinosus,
sabtilem habens vinositatem, et hoc est sicut si candidum nivis
candens seu micans penetraverit in rubeum darum vinosum, et
sit superatum ab ipso. Est autem lapis perlucidus, et traditur
qaod aliquando fulsit in nocte, sed nunc tempore nostro non
micat in tenebris. Fertur autem quod honorem servat regalem.'
If the OHG. weiso had already had the sense of the stone, it
would hardly fail to appear in the glosses. We find it in full
play in the MHG. poets, ever since the tale was told of how in
distant land Duke Ernst with his sword cut it ont of the living
rock, and presented it as a gift to the king (11. 3604 — 23 and 5543
of the Lay, and in Odo's Latin poem 6, 357). 'Philippe setzen
weisen üf ! ' Walth. 9, 15. ' schouwe wem der weise ob sime nacke
st^, der stein ist aller fürsten leitesteme,' Walth. 19, 3 ; conf.

' Look at the lifeless inventories in Parz. 791 and Fragm. 45«. More inter-
esting is a poem by Strieker (in Hahn 44 — 62) ; and Eraclitu was deep in stone-loie,
Massm. pp. 468—78.


1218 HEBBS AND STONES.

Helbl. 2, 881. 'der künec alsd den weisen h&t/ Ms. 1, 15*. ' wie
si durch den bero har wieder k&men^ d& sie der krdne weisen inne
n&men/ Ms. 2^ 138*. ' den weisen ie yil höhe wao (prized) der
keiser and daz riche^ dar daz (becanse) nie sin geliche wart anter
manigem steine/ Troj. 20. ' ich stich im abe den weisen/ Otto
bart. 814; see also passages in Heinr. von Krolewiz V. U., coli,
in Lisch p. 208. Albert and Conrad account for the name, bj
the stone having no eqaal^ and standing like au orphan cut off
from kin ; so the gloss on Sspgl 3^ 60. The Spanish crown once
had a magnificent pearly which was likewise named huerfana or
sola, and perished at the bnming of the palace in 1734. A
diamond mounted by itself is in French solitaire. But a deeper,
a mythical meaning becomes apparent, which Haupt in his
Zeitschr. 7, 278 disputes. Pupillus means first a little one, a boy
under age, a ward, and then acquires the sense of orphan. Pu-
pilla and KOfyq signify a girl and the pupil of the eye, in which a
child's image is supposed to be seen (p. 1080). Now as Völandr
fashions the iarknasteinn of the eyes of slain children, the stone
might be called either pupilla or pupillus, and so agree with our
'orphanus,' thus erchanstein comes to be 'weise.' Of Thiassi's
eyes were made shining stars, all stars are gems of the sky ; from
this the transition to the sparkling stone was easy enoagh.
Heinr. von Krolewiz, describing the sky as a house, again brings
the eyes into connexion with the orphan, 11. 1194. 1203-16 (see
Suppl.).

The pearl, already in dreams a prognostic of the tear, is made
in the myth to spring out of Venus's tear, as Freyja's tears turned
into drops of gold (p. 1194)^ ; and Wäinämöinen's tears faU into the
sea as pearls, Kalew. rune 22. The pearl then is either metal or
stone. Our ancestors regarded it as a stone found in the sea,
hence eorcanst&n too may have meant pearl, and even the Latin
name unio approaches that notion of the incomparable orphan :
'in tantum ut nulli duo reperiantur indiscreti, unde nomen
unionvm Bomanae imposuere deliciae,' Pliny 9, 35 [56] . ' ideo

1 Not only does Freyja's tear turn into gold, but a Greek myth makes «Xccrpor
arise from the tears of Phaethon's sisters, daughters of the Sun, be that subetanee
gold or ambery suocinum. For amber, Tacitus and Pliny already know a German
word glenim, Gramm. 1, 68 ; an ON. name is rafr, Sn. 166, Sw. raf, Dan. rav; AS.
glosses have eolhsand{m Mone 1106 eolcfang) ; conf. Werlaurs learned treatise on
amber (bemstem), Schlesw. 1840 (see Suppl.).


PEABL. 1219.

unicrnes dictos quia nunquam duo simul reperiantur^' Isid. or. 16,
10. Pliny goes on: 'nam id (nomem nnionum) apad Graecos
non est, ne apad barbaros qaidem inventores ejus aliud quam
Tnargaritae/ If mwrgarita, fiapyapCni^ was the word commonly
used by barbarian pearl-fishers, the Greeks and Romans may have
this time borrowed a word from Teutonic races, in whose lan-
guage the OHG. ma/rigreoz, MHG. mergriez, OS. merigriota, AS.
meregreot, meregrot is perfectly intelligible, meaning grit or pebble
of the sea. It is true we now find the Goth, marhreitus, 1 Tim.
2, 9, imitated from fiapyapiTij^, and that with consonant-change ;
and to correspond to this the OHG. should have been ma/rchriz.
Either OHG., OS. and AS. all strove to accommodate the foreign
word to our idiom (which usually happens in one dialect, not
in three at once), or the Goth had no ' marigriuts ' in his own
language, or did not choose to write it, and so imitated the
outlandish term, which is now stowed away in our female name
Gret-chen. The OHG. perala, berahzy AS. pearl, is appar. from
beryllus, and again transfers the notion of gemmula to the
growth in the shellfish. We might also put by the side of mar-
garita the Skr. marakata, though that signifies, and is directly
allied to, afuipaySo^, fidpajSo^ (emerald).

As erchanstein sprang out of the human eye, and the pearl out
of the oyster, the medieval fancy seems to have been excited
by some other precious stones which grew in or out of animals.
What Marbod cap. 24 tells of the lyncurius may be read at
greater length in Rudlieb 3, 101 — 127 : these brilliant lynx-stones
likewise befit the finger- ring of the queen, the crown of the king.
Some legends speak of stones of power engendered in the head
of the cock, the adder, the toad. Inside the body of a castrated
each of three years grows the aXectorius, Marbod cap. 3 : ' Invic-
tnm reddit lapis hie quemcunque gereutem, Extinguitque sitim
patientis in ore receptus.' The MHG. poem fixes the capon's age
at seven, Albertus at nine years. But a poem in the Vienna
Cod. 428 no. 136 (Hahnes Strieker p. 48) names the enahe^stone
as the right one to bestow victory :

ich beere von den steinen sagen,
die natem und hroten tragen (adders and toads bear),
daz gröze tngend dar an lige (great virtue therein lies),
swer si habe, der gesige (who has them, conquers) ;

VOL. lU. T


1220 HEBBS Ain> STONES.

mohten daz sigesteine wesen (if these be viciiory-stoiies)^
sd Bolt ein wurm vil wol genesen^
der's in stnem libe trüege^
daz in nieman ersluege

(the reptile itself ODght to live long^ and never get killed) ; and
the coeh'Stone as that which allays thirst :

man sagt von hanensteinen,
swer ir in mnnt nem' einen^
daz er guot vur den dnrst im si.

The sacred snake, the adder, who wears crowns of gold (p. 686)
and jewels (Gesta Bom. ed. Keller pp. 68. 152), seems to have
a better right to the stone of victory than the cock. Albertus
mentions a stone borax, which the toad wears on its head, but he
says nothing about its procuring victory : ' borax lapis est, qui
ita dicitur a bufone, quod in capite ipsum portat,' Otnit, Mone
557-8. In Ettm. p. 91 the toad is characterized as Hebrew :

ez ist ftz dem garten ein Abrahemsche krot (conf. p. 1241),
swenne diu gewehset, sie bringet einen stein
daz diu sunne üf erden niht bezzers überschein.

The Dresden poem says more explicitly, that the stone grows on
him, and is of all stones the highest. The Pentameron 4/1
says, the preta de lo gallo grows in the cock's head, and if) a
wishing-stone, by which you can obtain anything. The Oriental
fable of the three lessons taught by the captive bird (Beinh.
cclzzxi. Ls. 2, 655) alludes to such a stone growing in the heart
or crop of a lark or nightingale. The daughter of SigurSr grikr
steals the stone of meiory out of his pocket while he sleeps, and
gives it to Dietleib (Vilk. s. cap. 96-7) ', such a one had king
Nidung too (cap. 25), but neither passage specifies the kind of
stone. Yintler (Sup. 6, 1. 89) does not describe his sigelsiein,
but we find .elsewhere that it could artificially, and in secret, be
blown like glass, cast like metal ; Seifr. Helbl. 4, 124 says of
conspirators : ' ze samen si d6 säzen, sam (as if) sie einen sigstein
bliesen* ; and Mich. Behaim 22, 11: 'gar taugenlichen vor dem
rat zusamen giengen fru und spat, pis sy gussen ain sigelstainJ
Acc. to Hagen's Gölner chron. 1003 the stone wherewith to con-
quer means the diamond. When the poets tell of fingerrings


THÜNDBB-STONE. 1221

that lend victory, that make invisible (e.g. Troj, 9198), their
power always comes of the stone set in them. Marbod cap. 27
on gagathrometts : ' Quem qui gestarit dux pagnaturas in hostem,
Hostem depnlsum terraqne marique fugabit' (see Snppl.).

The ceraunius [Kepavvla^) that falls from heaven is mentioned
"by Marbod cap. 28 : ' Qui caste gerit hanc, a falmine non ferietar^
Nee domos ant villae quibus afEuerit lapis ille/ What he adds :
' Crystallo similem Germania mittere fertnr, Coeruleo tamen in-
fectom rntiloque colore ' is derived from Pliny 37, 9, 51 : ' est
inter Candidas et quae ceraunia vocatur, fulgorem siderum rapiens,
ipsa crystallina, splendoris coerulei, in Germania nascens,' though
the received text has Carmania. There can be no question about
the thunderstone being German (p. 179); and Miölnir, like the
Jiein (p. 908 n.) that OSinn hurled, or that which lodged in Thdr's
head (p. 875), is sure to have been hallowed above all stones.
Miölnir soands remarkably like the Slavic names for light-
ning, molniya, munya ; this last the Servian songs personify
into Munya, and represent as sister to Thunder (Grom), and
bride of the Moon (MiSsets, masc, Vuk 1, 151-4 new ed.), which
jumps with our personification of Hammer (p. 181. 999). So
much the more is Molniya identical with Miölnir. The Romans
too must have regarded the thunderbolt, silex, as a ' Jovis lapis * :
Lapidem silicem tenebant juraturi per Jovem, haec verba dicentes,
' Si sciens fallo, tum me Dispiter, salva urbe arceque, bonis ejiciat, .
ut ego hunc lapidem ! ' Those about to take an oath fetched out
of the temple of Juppiter Feretrius a stafif and ' lapidem silicem
quo f oedus ferirent,' exactly as covenants were hallowed by Thorns
hammer. Ace. to Livy 1, 24, when a swine was sacrificed, it was
struck with this stone : ^ Tu illo die, Jupiter, populum Bomanum
sic ferito, ut ego hunc porcum hie hodie feriam, tantoque magis
f erito, quanto magis potes pollesque ' : id ubi dixit, porcum saxo
silice percussit. This is like our malediction, 'Hammer strike
thee I ' The Finns in like manner called the thunderbolt TTkon-
Tcivi, stone of IJkko the progenitor; the Indians Mr a, Mraha,
Indra^s thunderstane (Pott's Etym. for. 2, 421) or vajra, which
means at once thunderbolt and diamond. As this makes it par-
take the nature of the brightest of stones, our fathers saw in it
the hard flint, the Bomans the silex ; myth and superstition alike
accord to it the noblest powers : ' malleum aut silicem aerium,


1222 HEBBS AND STONES.

nbi puerpera decambit, obvolvtmt candido linteo contra infesta-
tionem feamm^ albarum feminarum^ strygum, lamiamm^' 6isb.
Yoetii sei. disput. theol., Ultraj. 1651. 3^ 121 (see Snppl.).

As there is supposed to be a phUosopher^s stone (lapis sapien-
tam)^ that imparts wisdom^ or the art of making gold and pro-
longing life (paJea'Steinn, wishing-stone^ p. 144)^ Scandinavia also
had its legend of the Uf-steinn. In Kormakssaga cap. 12, p.
116-8 Bersi wears one on his neck^ which brings him succour
in swimming (see Suppl.).

Only large stones^ such as mountains and rocks^ are named
after gods, heroes or giants, who dwell upon them, or hare
hurled them ; rarely particular species of stone, at all events no
healing ones. A certain slate indeed was called giant's bread,
jyvrikling (p. 546), a tufa näckebröd (p. 489), a coal-stone Sur
iarbrandr (p. 809).


CHAPTER XXXVin.
SPELLS AND CHARMS-

A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations nse it both for blessing and carsing.^
Bat these, to be eflTective, xnnst be choice, well knit, rhythmic
words (verba concepta), mnst have lilt and tune; hence all that
is strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician,
IS allied to the forms of poetry.

Expressions for 'saying, singing' pass into the sense of
' conjuring ' : aotSjy (p. 899) becomes eVootSi;, Od. 19, 457, e-n-^SiJ,
our 'sprechen, singen' become besprechen, besingen, schwören
(Groth. svaran = respondere) beschwören (Goth. bisvaran 6p/ci^€iv) ;
so jnrare conjurare, cantare incanteure, The OHG. galstar, AS.
galdor, gealdor, ON. galdr (incantatio) have sprung out of galan
= canere ; the AS. spell, strictly dictum, fabula, Goth, spill, was
tortured into meaning magic spell [and charm, Fr. charme is
from carmen].

Opposed to blessing is cursing, to the wholesome the hurtful.
For the former the Goth still used his native word Jnvßeins
eifXoyia, from ]riu}^jan evXoyetv; the OHG. segan dicatio, dedicatio,
benedictio, comes from Lat. signum, the AS. segen meant merely
Signum in the sense of flag ; MHG. segen, like our own, stands
for magic as well. KaKoTuxyeiv is in ülph. ubil-qi}^an maledicere,
but flÄkan simply plangere, while the OHG. fluochon (MHG.
vluochen, our fluchen) is already maledicere, imprecari, and fluoh
maledictio (masc, quite distinct from fem. fluoh, rupes). OS.
farfldcan maledicere, harm-quidi maledictum. Another word is
OHG, farhuazan, MHG. verwazen^ detestari, condemnare, appar.

1 Pliny 28, 2 [8—5] examines the foree of ' verba et ineantatnenta earmimm ' in
many striking examples.

» • Var hin verw&zen (begone, with a cnrse to you), vil gar verteilter snft ! * Ms,
1, 28s * nn var von mir verwdzen ' and ' dweolich verlorn I * Lb. 8, 77. * var von
mir vent6zen ! * MsH. 8, 441^

1228


1224 SPELLS AND CHARMS.

allied to AS. 'hwÄtung divinatio/ Poenit. Ecgb. 2, 23. 4, 19.
AS. wer g an (misspelt wirgan, wyrgan) maledicere^ detestan,
strictly damnare, Goth, vargjan, OS. waragian. AS. cur8%a%
Engl, curse. The ON. hcßn precatio, AS. hen (p. 81) both border
on imprecatio (see SuppL).

Cursing, ' becrjing, becalling/ may indeed be done aloud, bat
as a rule both blessing and cursing require soft mnrmored
whispered speech. OHG. huispalSn sibilare, Graff 4, 1239, AS.
hvnstlian, as whistling and hissing are imputed to the serpent
who fascinates ; MHG. wispeln : ' wispeln wilde vogel zemt,
hunde ez letzet and lernt/ Renn. 22370 ; the asp will hear no
tuispelwort, Ms. 2, 202**; 'aller würmel (insects') wispel unde
mürmel/ Mart. 74®, for munneln is the same thing too, OHG.
murmulon, mttrmuron, our mummeln, mompeln, to mumble. Paul.
Diac. 1, 13 in describing manumissio per sagittam, adds : 'tm-
murmurantea, ob rei firmitatem, quaedam patria verba,' a Lange-
bardic hallowing spell.^ Similar expressions are OHG. mutUdn,
Graff 2, 707, and our protzeln, pretzeln, propeln, signifying first
the sound of water simmering, and then very appropriately the
muttering of a spell : ^protzeln and wispeln over the sick man'
is to mutter a charm or blessing ; in some parts prebelnj Nethl.
preevelen; Frankens Weltb. 134* has pretzeln (see Suppl.).

But the most legitimate and oldest word of all is the Goth.
runa, commonly the equivalent for fivtrrqpiov, sometimes for
ßovkrf, avfißovXMv. I believe it meant in the first place what is
spoken softly and solemnly, then secondly a mystery : avp^ßoiXwv
is secret counsel. From secret speech to secret writing is but a
step, as the ON. mal means both speech and sign. For ypa^i^,
jpdfifia ITlph. always puts mel, not runa, because none of the
passages happen to speak of secret writing ; one might wager
that runa was the familiar term for this, as the early Franks had
rAna = litera. OHG. rAna, AS. ran, character magicus, mys-
terium, Ceadm. 211, 12. 250, 6. 262, 9, this last with an obvious
reference to 'böcstafas' in 262, 7. ON. run litera, but ruiiA
linea, which coexistence of ü and u assures us of a strong verb
' ritina, raun, runum,' whence also raun (tentamen, experiment),
reyna (tentare), perh. reynir (service or rönn tree, p. 1215). The

^ Ter noviAfl i^Armen nuMrioo demurmurat ore. Or. Met. 14, 57.


BTJKES. 1225

0H6. ränen snsarrare, runazan mnrmarare, MHG. runen, oar
raunen, AS. runian, Engl, round, keep the original meaning of
secret whispering, and OHG. ör-rftno is a confidant, one who
roands things in year ear. The ON. transitive r^na is secretnm
scratari, literas scmtari, and sapplies the link to raon above. In
Ben. 378 aanfle runen stands opposed to public singing. Finn.
runo is a song (p. 901). And now a term that has oflen come
before ns becomes perfectly clear, and what is more, proves a good
fit all round : the wise-woman of the ancient Germans is called
Aliruna, becaose she is alja»runa, and speaking secret words not
anderstood of the common folk, has skill at once in writing and
in magic ; hers is the Gothic rona, hers the AS. rAncrsefb. Ali
can only mean ' other (than common), strange, not vulgar and
profane,' and thus heightens the meaning of runa. And this
name of the heathen priestesses could easily be transferred to the
holy herb (p. 1202) which perhaps pertained to their ritual.

The olden time divided runes into many classes, and if the full
import of their names were intelligible to us, we might take in
at one view all that was effected by magic spells. They were
painted, scratched or carved, commonly on sUme or wood, ' run-
stones, runstaves'; reeds served the same purpose (p. 1083-4).
The OHG. hahalruna, isruna, lagoruna are named after the
letters ' hahal, ts, lago ' ; elofruna and stofruna remain doubtful,
the latter appar. the mere tip (stupf, apex). Helliruna means
necromancy, death-rune, and plainly refers to Halja, Hella; I
connect with it our höllen-zwang, control over hell, by which is
anderstood the mightiest of magic spells, such as Doctor Faust
possessed. Holzruna is to be taken not of a thing, but of a
person, the wood-wife, lamia (p. 433), not without some allusion
to her moaning and muttering. The OHG. women's names
Knndrftn, Hiltirftn, Sigiriün, Fridurftn, Patur&n, are properly
those of valkyrs, but also traceable to a non-personal hundruna,
hiUiruna, eigiruna, friduruna, paturuna ; and it is worth noti-
cing, that the personal names lack the final -a, and are consigned
to a different declension. From the MHG. knierftnen (to croon
over one's knee), MS. 2, 137*, may be inferred a subst. JcnierAne,
The AS. beadorun, Beow. 996 is litera belli =bellum, riza; while
helrune 824 and burgrune (p. 404n.) are a personal furia, parca,
death's messenger ; a gloss in Lye puts it for pythonissa. In


1226 SPELLS AND CHABMS.

SaBm. 194-5 Sigrdrila, i.e. Brynhildr, herself a valkyr, enumerates
to SigurtS the ranes which it was most oeedfol for her to know :
the goblet she hands him is 'fullr Uo9a ok liknstafa, g&Sra
galdra ok gamanruna,^ fall of lays and leech-staves, good spelb
and runes of bliss. She goes on to name sigrunar, olrunar,
hiargrunar, hrimrunar, mdlrunar, hugrunar, runes of victory,
of ale, of the rock, the sea, speech and thought. I am only
doubtf al as to ölrAn, because the proper name Olriin is evidently
the Aliruna of Tacitus; we can scarcely derive all the alirftues
from alus, ölr, ale, and I would rather hazard a guess, either that
ölrün stands for ElrfLn, Elirftn, having got confounded with
ölrftn, or that the 4 of the second syllable converted the a of the
first into ö [quite the rule in declension and conjugation, not
in composition]. In Sasm. 165^ adkrunar contentiones. Danish
folksongs often speak of ramme runer, powerful ranes 1, 235.
280. 2, 38. 8, 335. 4, 47 (see SuppL).

OSinn passed for the inventor of all runes (p. 181-2), and in
him is lodged the greatest command of wards, Yngl. saga cap.
7 : ' ]?at kunni hann enn at gera meS ordum einum (do by words
alone), at slöckva eld ok kyrra sül, ok snüa vindum. OSinn vissi
of allt iarSfö, hvar fdlgit var (earth-fee, where it was hid), ok
hann kunni ];au lie's, er upplaukz fyrir hönum (anlocked itself to
him) iörSin ok biörg ok steinar ok haugarnir, ok bau (bound)
hann meS ordum einum yk er fyrir biuggu (dwelt), ok gekk
(went) inn ok tök ]?ar slikt er hann vildi.' Afzelius in Sagoh. 1,
4 mentions, too briefly and indistinctly, a strange Swedish folk-
tale of one Kettil Banske of Kettilsäs in Alsheda, who stole
Odin's rK^ne-sticks (runekaflar), and with them cast a spell on his
hounds and bulls, nay at last on the merwoman that would have
come to Odin's aid. By this Odin seems to be meant a shepherd
or giant representing the former god; the surname runshe
evidently has to do with the acquisition and possession of the
staves.

Songs and runes then can do very great things. They are able
to kill and bring to life, as well as prevent from dying; to heal
or make sick, bind up wounds, stanch blood, alleviate pain, and
lull to sleep; quench fire, allay the sea-storm, bring rain and
hail ; to burst bonds, undo chains and bolts, open mountains or
close them up, and unlock treasures ; to forward or delay a birth;


BUNBS. CUBSB8. 1227

to make weapons strong or soft, dull the edge of a sword ; loop
np knotS; loose the bark off a tree (p. 1085), spoil a crop (f rages
excantare); call np evil spirits and lay them, to bind thieves.
These wonders lie in the very nature of poesy (p. 907-8). The
Bünatal, Sasm. 28 — 80, specifies eighteen effects of runes (see
Suppl.).

Curses, imprecations have a peculiar force of their own. Our
MHO. poets have ' tiefe flnoohen,' deeply, Ms. 2, 188* ; ' swinde
'fluochen,' vehemently, Helbl. 2, 518 and zom-vluoch, wrath-curse
1, 656. Full of meaning is the phrase : ' ich brach des vluoches
herten Jcieael/ I brake yon curse's stubborn flint, MsH. 2, 339^,
its action is hard as pebbles, and not easy to break. Walther
says 73, 29 :

Zwdne herzeliehe fläeche kan ich ouch,
die fluochent n&ch dem willen min.
hiure müezen's beide esel und der gowk
gehoeren, 6 si enbizzen sin.
we in (woe to them) denne, den vil armen !

(two round curses ken I eke, hitting whomso I bespeak ; them
both ass and gowk shall hear, ere they baited be this year, etc.).
Curses received on an empty stomach are the more effectual. It
is the vulgar opinion in Ireland that a curse once uttered must
alight on something : it will^a^ in the air seven years, and may
descend any moment on the party it was aimed at ; if his guardian
Angel but forsake him, it takes forthwith the shape of some mis-
fortune, sickness or temptation, and strikes his devoted head.
So in the Pentam. 2, 7 a curse takes wing, and mounts to
heaven : ' meaei'O W mardettiune dessa vecchia Vascelle, che
sagliettero auheto 'n delo* When a horse has been cursed, his
hair is thought to be luminous : ' a cavallo iastemmiato luce lo
pilo,^ ibid.

Specimens of the most vigorous cursing might be picked out
of our old poetry ; one in the Edda, Sasm. 144%

nio röstom er ]iü skyldir neSar vera,
ok vazi ]ier & ba'Smi barr !

may remind us of the phrases culled from our common people's
talk, pp. 181-2. 952n. In a minnesong, Ben. 82: 'der nider
schar, daz die vor Teilchen leagen I ' the low set, may they lie out-


1228 8PBLLS AlTD CHABMS.

side of charch (in nnconsecrated gronnd)/ 'der blaomen scMn sol
iemer stn yon ir gewalt gesoheiden/ pat oat of their reach. The
ranes on a tombstone will occasionally end with a curse against
him that shall roll away or remove the stone : * at rySi sa verSi
(may he tarn to rast) sa stain J^ansi velti I * So Latin deeds of
the Mid. Ages wind ap with imprecations on the violator, but
Scriptural ones pronounced by the charch.

Here is a string of curses from a MHG. poem : ' God from
thee thy wife release I Fish, fowl, worm, beast and man Storm
the stronghold of thy peace I Where'er thou go, Be grace thy
foe I All good women's greeting shun thee I Thy seed, thy
crop be cankered too. The curse that dried Gilboa's dew Best
upon thee I ' MsH. 3, 52 (see Suppl.).

Though as a rule sowing is to be accompanied by prayer and
blessing, there are some plants that thrive better under cursing :
' Nihil ocimo (basil) foecundius, cum maledictis nc probris seren^
dum praedpiunt, ut laetius proveniat, sato pavitur terra. Et
cuminum qui serunt, precantur ne exeat/ Pliny 19, 7 [36].'
' Napos serere nudum volunt, precantem sibi et vicinis serere se,^
18,13 [35].

To adjure solemnly is in OHG. munigon inti manon (hortari et
monere), AS. mynegian and manian : ' sis bimunigot thuruh then
himilisgon Got, bisuoran thuruh thes forahta (fear of fiim), ther
alia worolt worahta! ' O. iv. 19, 47. 'ih bimuniun dih' begins
the formula in Spell YU. Even in MHG. : ' des wart vil manec
wilder geist von ir gemuniet und gema/nt/ Troj. 10519 (see Suppl.).

Helliruna, necromantia, shews itself in the lays ßung after the
heathen fashion on graves and barrows, to make the dead speak
or send something out. The Indiculus superst. distinguishes
between ' sacrilegium ad sepulcra mortuorum * and ' sacrileginm
super defunctos, id est dadstsas,* D&d is for d6d, d6d (conf.
n^dfyr, nödfyr, p. 603-4) ; the OS. sisas I take to be the OHG.
sisuwa neniae, of which the sing, would be sisu, siso : sisesang is

^ A Bonuune Ontkirk mast haye meant the Exoommonicated : Bndolphxu de
8olodoro cognomine vor ehilchunt Hartmannas diotoa iwr kilehan (a.d. 1260).
Bolotbnrner wocbenbl. 1827, pp. 128. 160.

* Fischart'B Oarg. 244^ : ' diss f nrmans gebett treibt schif und wagen, ein
banptmansflaoh etzt duroh nenn hämisch, ich könt dannooh wol basilien,
qaendel ond kreasen setzen, dann dieselben Yom flnohen gedeien. daromb wards
Jenes mannes entschnldignng Tor dem riohter, wanimb er sein weib gereuft hette,
nemblich dammb weil er hat ranten setzen müssen ' ; his excuse for thraHhing his
"-^ was, he had to plant some rue.


HELLIBÜKA. BURSTING LOCKS. 1229

carmen lugabre, Diut. 2, 283^. Grafif 6, 281, and an OS. form of
confession has ' ik gihdrda (heard) hetlannnssia endi unhrdnia
(unclean) sespilon/ perh. for sese-spilon, dirge-spells ; the same
obscnre root appears in proper names Sisebntas, Sisenandas, etc.,
etc., Gramm. 2, 476. netlunnussia must mean imprecations,
conf. OS. hatol diras, Hel. 110, 8 and OHG. hazzal malitiosus,
Gl. Hrab. 957*. Neniae are carmina fonebria, hymns in honour
of the dead ; Britferthi vita Danstani (b. 925) cap. 1 (Acta sanct.
19 May) says of that saint : 'avitae gentiliiatia yanissima didicisse
sarmina, et historiarum frivolas colore incantationum nenias.* In
the same way Greg. Tur. mirac. 2, 1 : ' ad yicum in quo fanatici
erroris riaeniae colebantur.' An AS. byrgensa/ng translates epi-
taphium, and Hone's Glosses 943-4 give Ucsang, Ztc2aod* epicedium,
byriensang, hergeUleo9, hyrgleo9 carmen super tumalum. Hros-
witha's Proterius says of an adjuration : ' supra gentilia tumulum
sub tempore noctis atwiis, herebi domino saplex.' The ON.
expression is vaUgaldr qve'Sa, to say corpse-incantation, Sasm.
94* : by it OSinn compelled the vala, on whom snow and rain and
dew had fallen (p. 314), to rise from her barrow and answer him.
Grda's son and Hervor utter formulas almost identical : ' vaki yH
Grda ! vaki ^A go's kona ! vek ek ]nk dau'Sra dura,' Sffim. 97* ;
* vaki )iA Angant^ ! vekr ]ric Hervor einka döttir ykkar Sv&fa
(of thee and Sv&fa),' Fomald. sog. 1, 435 ; after a gpruesome con-
versation with her father, the sword she craves is thrown out of
the barrow. In the same way, at the son's adjuration, a sword is
handed out of the tomb in the folksong of Orm (Sv. fomsänger 2,
446-7. Danske viser 1, 59. 60-6-7), and in a Faroe song of
Virgar, i.e. Wudga, Witege (Lyngbye p. 369). Wolfdietrich
constrains the dead tongue of his buried father to utter seven
words. Cod. Dresd. 313 (see Suppl.). •

As the spoken spell bursts open the tomb, so do locks and bars
give way before it. Ferabras 2759 :

Yenc a I'us de la cambra, si la trobat tancada,
et a dit son conjv/r : tota s'es desfermada.

Though the"following passage in Meier Helmbrecht 1205 mentions
only the act of approaching, the cattle-stealer must, as he drew
near, have uttered some unloosing spell :

Mtn geselle Wolves-driizzel (-throttle, -throat)


1230 SFBLLS AND CHABMS.

üf taot er &ne slüzzel (opens withoat key)

alliu sldz nnd tsenhalt (bolts and iron staples)

in einem j&r h&n ich gezalt (counted)

hundert tsenhalte grdz,

daz ie daz sldz dannen schuz (aye the bolt shot ont of them,

als er von verre gie dour zuo (from far came towards them) ;

ros, ohsen und manic kuo,

die ungezalt sint beliben,

die er ftz dem hove h&t getriben^

daz ie daz sluz von siner stat (from its place)

schoz^ 8wann er dar 2uo trat (when he stept thereto).

Even now some thieves and sharpers have the reputation of being
able to ' bespeak ' their chains and locks, and make them burst.

Grods and daemons could of their mere might raise wind and
storm^ magicians did the same by means of song. Saxo Gram,
p. 71 has a certain Oddo, 'vir magicae doctns, ita ut absque
carina altum pererrans hostilia saepe navigia condtaiis carmine
proeellis everteret.' These tempestarii have been dealt with,
« p. 638. Again : ' carminibus in nimbos solvere coelnm/ ibid. 17.
But song could turn away storm and hail, as well as draw it on :
' cum averti carmine grandines credant plerique, cujus verba
inserere non eqnidem serio ausim/ Pliny 17, 28 [47].

As the whole of sorcery sank into the hands of old wives, and
the faith of bygone times was called kerltnga vula, Ssem. 169,
alter vnbe troums, Turl. Wh. I, 82% ypawSei^ fivOoi, 1 Tim. 4. 7,
in Gothic ' us-al}7an&izö spilla'; the healing formulas handed
down from the past fared no better. Already in the 12th cent,
the Miracula S. Matthiae (by a Benedictine of Treves) expresses
itself thus, Qap. 34 : ' cajus dolore mater affecta medicinam et
anilia adhibuit carmina/ Fez. thes. anec. 2, 3 p. 234 (see Suppl.).

These superstitious formulas are a gain to the history of oar
mythology, they yield information about deities and practices of
heathenism, which but for them would be utterly lost. Even
books by churchmen find room for them, because their use in
certain cases, diseases of cattle for instance, was still considered
lawful and beneficial. A comprehensive collection of them woald
be sure to lead to discoveries, but the time is hardly ripe for it
yet, as they lie scattered, and have to be slowly gathered from


STOBM-BAISING. BOND-SPELL. 1231

the moath of the people and out of witch-trials.^ Here let a few
striking examples place beyond a doubt^ not only their value^ but
their obstinate diffusion through nearly the whole of Europe.

In the Merseburg MS. the first poem is a bond-spell, to be
sung while tying or unloosing bands, and this time relating to
the release of a prisoner :

Eiris sftzun idiaij s&znn hera duoder,
suma hapt heptidun, suma heri lezidun,
suma cl&bddun umbi cuoniowidi :
' insprincg haptbandum, invar vigandum I ' .

Le. Olim sedebant nymphae, sedebant hue illuo (AS. )nder,
thither), aliae yincula yinciebant, aliae exercitum morabantur,
aliae carpebant redimicula : ' exsili e vinculis, elabere hostibus ! *
Wackernagel was the first to penetrate the sense of the last line,
by which the last but one is also made clear: the plucking
(clawing) at the bonds slackens their hold, and the captive then
can slip them off. Of ' hapt heptian ' I have spoken p. 401 ; the
binding and unbinding is alluded to in our minnesongs. Beda 4,
22 tells of a man who could not be kept bound : ' nee tamen vindri
potuity nam mox ut abiere qui vinxerant, eadem ejus sunt vincula
Boluta • . . Interea comes, qui eum tenebat, mirari et interro-
gare coepit, quare ligari non posset, an forte literas aolutorias, de
qimlibus fabulas ferunt, apud se haberet, propter quas ligari non
posset? At ille respondit, nihil se taliiim artiwm nosse.' He
was sold to a third man : * sed nee ab illo uUatenus potuit alligari.'
Beda's explanation of the marvel is, that his friends, thinking him
dead, had had masses said for the deliverance of his soul. The
AS. version goes a step farther, which seems worthy of notice :
' and hine &csade, hwae'Ser he ]?& alysendlican rune cu'Se, and ]4
stdnas mid him dwritene hadfde, be swylcum men le&s spell
secga'S.' What were these stones written over with runes, which

the translator had in his mind f We have to suppose three

sets of women, each plying a separate task (see Suppl.).

The second Merseburg formula is for healing a lamed horse :

Phol ende Wodan vuorun zi holza,

do wart demo Baideres volon sin yuoz birenkit (wrenched) ;

^ Hont borrowed for hia Zanberbibl. a purohm. MS. of the 16th eent. fall of
spells, from which he has extracted nothinis, aud which is miiwing at Treyes eyer
since.


1232 SPELLS AlTD CHABMS.

do bignolen Sinihgunt, Sunna era saister^
do bigaolen Fruwa, Folia era saister,
do bigaolen Wodan, sd he wola conda^
söse bSn-renki, söse blaot-renki,

sdse lidi-renki

bdn zi b£na^ blaot zi bluoda,
lid zi giliden^ söse gelimida sin.

Here is snng an adventure that befell the two gods (p. 224) j and
how Wddan healed the sprained foot of Balder's foal by besing-
ing it (bigalan) . And now the repetition of the song cares other
lame horses too. What the rest of the gods cannot do^ Wodan
can, jast as the Yngl. saga 7 says of him : ' OSinn kunni at gera
me'S ordum (words alone) einnm at slöckva eld ok kyrra sik, ok
snüa vindnm hverja lei's er hann vildi.' He is the greatest magi«
cian or wonder-man of all.

Now observe in what shapes the same spell shews itself survi-
ving in the popalar superstitions of today. In Norway :

JenLB reed sig til hede,

da reed ban sonder sit fble-been (his foal's leg asander).

Jesus stigede af, og lagte det :

Jesus lagde marv i marv,

been i been, kjod i kjod,

Jesus lagde derpaa et blad (thereon a leaf),

at det skulde blive i samme stad.

In Sweden, for a horse's ailment ^/ZtS^ (our anflug, fit) :

Oden sUlr pft berget (stands on the hill),
ban sporjer (speers, asks) efter sin fole,

flöget bar ban f&tt.

spotta (spit) i din band, ocb i bans mun (bis mouth),
ban skall f& bot (g^t boob) i samma stund (hour).

Whilst another begins thus :

Frygge fr&gade frä :
bum skall man bota (heal)
den fl&get f&r (sheep) f

The two Swedish stanzas, evidently incomplete, are given by F.
Magnusen in the Dagen 1842 no. 119, from Mimer, Ups. 1889. p.
277. That similar snatches of song still live in the Netherlands,
I am informed in a letter from Halbertsma : ' Ben mijner beeren
gaf my voorleden jaar een rijm, dat de toverdokters prevelden,
terwljl zij den verrukten voet van een pard (foot of a horse) met


BISLOCATION-SFELIi. 1233

de hand van boven naar beneden stroken, en ako genazen/ I
wish he had sent me the rhyme itself.

What sounds more significant is a Scotch tradition I take out
of Chambers's Fireside stories^ Edinb. 1842. p. 37 : ' When a
person has received a sprain, it is castomary to apply to an
indiyidoal practised in casting the wresting thread. This is a
thread span from hlack wool, on which are cast nine hnots^ and
tied round a sprained leg or arm. Daring the time the operator
is patting the thread roand the affected limb, he says, bat in euch
a tone of voice as not to he heard by the bystanders^ nor even by
the person operated upon :

The Lord rade, set joint to joint,

and the foal slade ; bone to bone,

he lighted, and sinew to sinew.

and he righted. Heal in the Holy Ghost's name! '

Here the spell serves for sprains even in the hnman body, though
it set out with the sliding of the foal ; and to the whispered
words is added a ligature of woollen thread in nine knots.

How exact the agreement, in these perfectly independent ver-
sions, of their ' b^n zi bena, been i been, bone to bone,' their ' lid
zi giliden, kjöd i kjöd, sinew to sinew ' ! Those who cannot
beUeve in the faithful preservation of what is entrusted to popular
memory, have here an example extending from the 10th cent,
to the 19th over Grermany, Scotland and Scandinavia. It is
certain that the same or similar words have been superstitiously
repeated countless times in all the countries of Teutonic tongue.
The Cod. Vatic. 4395 has on fol. 83* the following charm : ' Gott
wurden iiii nagel (Gk>d had 4 nails) in sein hend und faez ge-
slagen, da von er iiii wunden enphie, do er an dem heiligen chreuz
hieng (1. hie), die fünft wunden im Longinus stach, er west
nicht waz er an ihm räch ... an dem dritten tag gepot (bade)
Got dem lichnam, der in der erden lag, fleisch zu fleisch, pluet
zu pluet, adem zu ädern, pain zu pain, gelider zu gelidem, yslichs
(each) an sein stat. bei Demselbigen gepeut ich dir (bid I thee)
fleisch zu fleisch,' etc.

But what is more, a great deal farther back, among the very
oldest Romans, there lingered dislocation-speUs full of unintellig-
ible words. The one partially quoted p. 224-5 from Gate may
as well be inserted in full^ as it throws light on the nature of our


1234 8FELLS Ain> CHABKS.

German charms. ' Lozam si quod est, hac cantiane sannm fiet.
Harandinem prende tibi viridem pedes lY aat V longam.
Mediam diffinde, et dao homines teneant ad coxendices. Incipe
caviare ''in alio. s. f. motas vaetas daries dardaries astataries
Dissunapiter/' nsqne dam coeant. Ferrum insnper jactato. übi
ooierint et altera alteram tetigerit, id mann prende^ et dertra
sinistra praecide. Ad luxnm ant ad fractnram alliga, sannm fiet,
et tamen qnotidie cantato " in alio s. f. vel luxaio. Vel hoc
modo^ hnat hanat hnat ista pista sista, domiabo damnanstra, et
Ivxato. Yel hoc modo^ hnat haut ista sis tar sis ardannabon
dunnaustra.^' ' It is of this invocation that Fliny says at the end
of book 17: * Oarminis verba inserere non equidem serio ausim>
quanquam a Catone prodita, contra luxata membra^ jungenda
arundinum fissurae.' The words do seem nonsense to ns now,
and may also be corrupt; but why should not they belong
originally to the Sabine or some neighbouring langnage of
ancient Italy, that we know very little of? The rhymes iaia
pista sista and the alliteration 'domiabo damnaustra^ (the
' dannabon dunnaustra ' that follows is the same over again, and
ought to have an ' ista pista sista ' before it too) remind us of
the rhyming spell in Virgil's Eel. 8 : ' Limus ut hie duregeü et
haec ut cera liquescit IJno eodemque igni, sic nostro Daphnis
amore.' Diseunapiter is the god invoked, like the Phol and
Wodan of our spells. Marcellus Empiricus, a physician of the
4th cent., has in his De Medicamentis a charm for pain of the
heart : ' In lamella stannea scribes et ad collum suspendes haec,
antea vero etiam cane, Corcu ne mergito, cave corcn ne mergito
cantorem, utos, utos, utos, praeparavi tibi vinum lene, libidinem,
discede a nonita, in nomine Dei Jacob, in nomine Dei Sebaoth ! '
(see Suppl.)

In the Cod. Yindob. theol. 259 Latin and German spells are
intermixed. ' {De eo quo)d »purihalz didmua?^ si in dextero pede
contigerit, in sinistra aure sanguis minuatur; si in sinistro
pede, in deztera aure minuatur sanguis. Ad vermes occidmidos.
Feruina (?) Dei gracia plena, tu habes triginta quinque indices et
triginta quinque medicinas. quando Dominus ascendit ad ooelos
ascendit, memorare quod dixit. Ad apes conformandoa. vos

1 MHO. spurhalz, Dint. 2, 140 ; oonf. din spurgalce, MbH. 8, S78i> (spzinghalt?).


HOBSE-DOCTORING. SHEPHERD'S PBATER. 1235

estis ancill^ Domini (conf. pp. 579. 755), adjaro vos per nomen
Domini, ne fagiatis a filiis hominum. Ad pullos de nido. crescite
et mnltiplicamini et yivite et implete terram. Contra sagittam
didbolu palamiasit. palamiasit. calamia insiti per omne corpas
menm. per ista tria nomina, per Patrem et Filiam et Filium
sanctum, ains ains aius, sanctas sanctns sanctus. in Dei nomine
cardia cardiani de necessa (recessuf) propter ilium malannum
(p. 1160), qnod dominos papa ad imperatorem transmisit, qaod
omnis homo super se portare debet, amen, tribus vicibus. De
hoc quod spurihah dicunt. primum pater noster.

vise flöt aftar themo watare, verbrustun sina vetherun,
thd gih6Iida ina use Drnhtin ; the selvo Druhtin
thie geh^le that hors thera spurihelti !

Contra vermes :

gang üt, neseo mid nigun nesaiJcUnon, üt fana themo marg§ an that
ben, fan themo bdne an that flfisg, üt fan themo fl6sge an thia hud,
üt fan thera • • • strftla ! Druhtin werthe sö.^

The nesso and his nine young ones are the worms to be cast
out. 'Petrus, Michahel et Stephanus ambulabant per yiam, sic
dixit Michahel : Stephani equus infustLSf signet ilium Dens, signet

ilium Christus, et erbam comedat et aquam bibat.' Two of

these charms are about lame horses again, and one about a sick
hofse (Ducange sub. y. infusio, infusus equus). Also the tran-
sitions from marrow to bone (or sinews), to flesh and hide,
resemble phrases in the sprain-spells (see Suppl.).

The oldest and most beautiful charms of all nations pass into
prayers, which were repeated during sacrifice ; the simplest are
found in pastoral life. What a fresh innocence breathes in those
prayers to the Thunder-god (p. 176) I When the Cheremisses
keep their grand feast of Shurem, and bring quiet offerings of
peace, at which no female creature must be seen (conf. p. 1152 n.),
they speak a prayer, out of which I pick a few sentences : ' Who


1 A Ck)d. Tegerns. 524, 2 at Mnnioh has a more complete yersion in OHG. :
* gang Ü2, ruiso mit nion neinncUnorit üz fonna marga in deO lidra, Tonna d6n
&drun in daz fleiak, fonna demu fleiske in daz fel, fonna demo velle in diz tnlli. ter
pater noBter.' So nesao has tt in OHG. too. Tolli, like strfila, is an implement,
conf. MHG. tfiUe, Nib. 897, 8 and Haupt on Engelh. 1916. [StrÄla is arrow ;
tulle the hole in the arrow-shaft for inserting the head. The disease charmed into
yoor arrow, will pass on to your enemy (?}— TainB.]

VOL. III. Z


1236 SPELLS AND CHABMS.

to Gk>d hath sacrificed^ to him God give health and wealth, bestow«
ing on the babes that shall be bom store of money, bread, bees
and cattle. May he caose the bees to swarm this year and make
plenty of honey. When spring draws nigh, O God, let the three
kinds of cattle set ont on their three ways, defend them from deep
mire, from bears, wolves and thieves. As the hops are thick and
springy, so bless ns with good hap and sonnd mind I As the
light bnrneth bright, so live we our life I as the wax daily
addeth to itself,^ so be our increase!' (from Aleks. Faks '0
Chuvashakh i Gheremisakh/ Kazan 1840, in Erman's Archiv
1841, 2nd no.).

' Dapem pro bnbns piro florente facito. Dapem hoc modo fien
oportet. Jovi dapali calignam vini quantum vis polluceto. Eo
die feriae bubns et bubulcis, et qui dapem facient. Gum
pollncere oportebit, sic facias: Jupiter dapalia, quod tibi fieri
oportet, in domo familia mea cuUgnam vini dapi, ejus rei ergo
macte hac illace dape pollucenda esto I macte vino inf erio esto !
Vestas, si voles, dato. Daps Jovi assaria pecuina, uma vini Javi
caste. Profanato sine contagione, postea dape facta serito
milium, panicum, alium, lentim' (Gato de re rust. 132).

Along with this, take (from God. Exon. 5214) an AS. bot, i.e.
puoza (bettering) of barren land blasted by magic. 'Her is seo
bot, hA ];& meaht )>ine cBceras betan, gif hi nellaiS wel weaxan, o%Se
^eöv hwilc unged^fe ]^ing ongeddn bi'S, on dr^ oS^e on lybl&ce.

' Genim }7onne (take then) on niht, oer hit dcugige, feower tyrf
on feower healfa ]7ads landes, and gemearca hft hi aar stödon.
nim ]?onne ele and hunig and beorman, and »Ices feos meolc (each
cai;tle's milk) Jtc on ]i89m lande si, and ealces ireowcynnes (tree-
kind) deal, ]7e on J^asm lande si geweckxen, butan heardan bedman,
and ffilcre namcu'Sre wyrte deal, butan glappcm anon; and do
'ponne hälig waeter ]i8Bron, and dr^e ]7onne Jiriwa (thrice) on ]H>ne
stalSol ]>&ra turfa, and cweSe ]?onne p6a word : Grescite, weaxe^
et multiplicamini, and gemsdnigfealde, et replete, and gefylle,
terram, ]?äs eorSan, in nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus aancti

^ Qaidqaid tangebam ereteebat tanquam favuM^ Petron. oap. iS. 79 ; aUnding to
the steady growth of the honeyoomb in the hive. When the Servian badniak bums
at Ynle, Üie invited polaznik steps up to the log, and strikes it with a shorel
making the sparks fly, and saying : * Kb many sheep, as many goats, as many s^nw,
as many oxen, as many god-sends and blessings, <u here fly »park» I ' Yak's Monte-
negro p. 106.


BLESSINO THE CORNFIELD. 1237

bonedicti, and Pater noster bw& ofb 8w& )?89t o%er. And here
si'S^an )4 turf to cyrcean, and messepreost &singe feower mesaan
ofer )>&m tarfon, and wende man pcet grene to ßam weofode (altar).
and si^S^an gebringe man }4 turf, ßasr hi aer wceron, cer sunnan
setlgange, and nasbbe him geworht of cwiebedme feower Gristes
maolo, and & write on adlcon ende Mattheas and Marens, Lucas
and Johannes, lege J^eet Gristes msdl on ]^one pyt neoiSeweardne,
cweSe ]^onne: Gmx Mattheas, crux Marens, crux Lucas, crux
Johannes, nim ]^onne ]?& turf and sette ]mr nfon on, and cweSe
nigon si^n (9 times) j^&s word : Crescite, and swft ofb Pater
noster. and wende ^e j^onne eistweard, and onlüt (bow) nigon
si&n e&dm6dlice (hnmbly), and cwelS )^onne ]^äs word :

E^tweard ic stände, Arena (favours) ic me bidde,

bidde ic J^one masran Dryhten, b. i. ^. miclan Dryhten,

bidde ic )K>ne hMigan heofonrices Weard.

eordan ic bidde and upheofan,

and yik sölSan sancta Marian,

and heofenes meaht and he&hreced,

padt ic mote Jns gealdor mid gife Dryhtnea

tdSnm ont^nan ]^urh tmmme ge]>anc,

&weccan )>fts wssstmas (fruits) us to womldnytte (our use),

gefyllan )7&a foldan (fields) mid fsoste gele&fan,

wlitigian ]7&s wangturf, swft se wttega cwss'S,

peQt se (he) hsdfde &re (honour) on eorSrice se ]>e (who) selmyssan

dsdlde ddmlice Dryhtnes {nances (for the sake).

Wende ]?e ]^onne ]7riwa sun-ganges, astreece J>e ];onne on andlang,
and &rim ^edv letanias, and cwe8 ]?onne, Sanctus sanctus sanctue,
olS ende, sing ];onne Benedicite aßenedon (outstretched) earmon,
and Magnificat and Pater noster III, and bebeod hit Griste and
sancta Marian and J^asre h41gan rode td lofe and to weorSinga
(to the praise and glory of Ghrist, etc.), and ]^am td sire (to the
benefit of him) ]ye )?89ji land &ge, and eallon )^äm ]^e him under-
)^eodde (subject) sint. ponne (when) ^edt eall ai gedön, )K>nne
nime man uncuff said 89t celmesmannum, and seile him twft swylc
swylce man »t him nime, and gegaderie ealle his svlhgeteogo
(plough-tackle) to gaddere. borige )>onne on ]^am beime etor
and finol and gehftlgode sapan and gehdlgod sealt, nim |?onn6


1238 SPELLS AND CHABMS.

)^t seed. Bete on ];8B3 sulhea bodlg. cwelS j^onne :

Erce, erce, erce, eordan modor^^

geunne \e se alwealda £ce Dryhten (God grant thee)

sBcera weaxendra and wri'Sendra^

e&cniendra and einiendra ;

sce&f tsece ' se sctra (reaper) wsestma,

and )^re br&dan bere waestma (barley's frnit)^

and )f9dTe bwitan hwaete wsBstma,

and ealra eorSan waestma.

geanne him 6ce Dryhten

and his hälige }>e on heofonnm fiint^

\2di his yrS st gefri'Sod (spared) wi'S eahra feonda gehwaBnei

and heo st geborgen (protected) wi'S ealra bealwa gehwylc,

]?ära lybl&ca geond land e&wen.

nn bidde ic J'one Wealdend^ se ]>e Ji&s weorald gescedp,

)>8Bt ne 81 nän to J^aas cwidol wtf^ ne to J'sbs crseftig man,

}fddi ftwendan ne msBge word J^us gecwe'Sene,

)7onne man ]?& 8ulhfor9 drife and ]?& forman furh onaceote (cleaves
the first furrow), ewe"? )?onne :

h&l wes 'p\ifolde,fira modor I

beo ^A grdwende on Codes faffSme (bosom^ lap),

födre gefylled firum to nytte (for use to men) !

nim |?onne celces cynne8 melo, and abace man inneweardre handa
brddne hlaf, and gecned hire mid meolce and mid h&lig wsBtere^
and lecge wider ßä forman furh, cweiS ]?onne :

ful secer f6dres fira-cynne (for mankind)

beorht blöwende, yd gebldtsod weorS

|?aes h&ligan naman, ]>e ^ds heofon gescedp

and 'p&s eorSan )?e we on lifialS.

se God ye yia grundas geweorhte geunne ns gröwende gife^

|?8Bt us coma gehwylc cume to nytte I

ewe's yonne J^riwa Crescite in nomine Patris benedicti amen, and
Pater noster J^riwa.

This notable document, notwithstanding that christian cere-

^ The explanation of thia line attempted on p. 253 remaina a bold gaeas.
Another AS. gealdor, against adder's bite, begins: *flBzoe iBxcre aamem nsdre
eieond bei flamem ni)>»ni,* etc.

' MS. soeafltahen. I take it aa ' manipulnm capiat.'


BLESSING THE CORNFIELD. PLOUGH-CAKE. 1239

iDonies have crept into it, seems to reach far back to the early
times of heathen sacrifices and husbandry. As the daps was
spread and the winebowl emptied to Jove, after which the millet,
panic, leek and lentils might be sown, so ploughing is here
preceded by sacrificial rites. Sods are cut ont from the four cor-
ners of the field, oil, honey and barm, milk of each sort of cattle,
some of every kind of tree (except hard wood, i.e. oak and beech,
RA. 506), and of all name- known herbs (save burs) are laid on
the sods, and holy water sprinkled ; then the ' f oar turfs ' are
carried into church, the green side being turned to the altar,
four masses are said over them, and before sunset they are
taken back to their places in the field. And now the spells
are spoken; unknown seed ia bought of beggar- men (conf. p.
1138), and placed on the plough, another spell is recited, and
the first farrow ploughed with a ' Hail Earth, mother of men,'
etc. Then meal of every kind is taken, a large loaf kneaded
with milk is baked and laid under the first furrow, and one more
spell is spoken. We know the Romans offered meal-cakes and
fruit in their corn-fields; but it seems to me that our own
ordinances (weisthiimer) have unconsciously preserved vestiges
of the heathen rite : ' when the plower cometh to an end of the
furrow, there shall he find a pot of honey, and at the other end a
pot of milk, wherewith to refresh him lest he faint ' ( Weiath. 2,
547, ' melts ' here must be for ' milch,' it cannot be meal or malt).
Further : ' at the plowing shall be brought a loaf so great that
one may stick it on the axle of the plow-wheel, and therewith
plow a farrow ; if the loaf do break when the furrow is done,
and the plower have not another wheel ready to put in its place,
then shall he smart (pay a fine) ; if the bread break ere the fur-
row be finished, let him fare homeunfined' (2, 356). Sometimes
the regulation runs thus : ' if the plower break a wheel, he shall
for penance provide a loaf as large round as the plow-wheel, and
baken of every grain that tite plow doth win ; he shall so softly
drive the plow, that a finch can feed her young on the wheel ' (2,
179. 180), or, as expressed in 2, 547, 'that, if a grain of oat fall
into the wheel, the fowls of the air shall pick it up.' In 2, 120
merely the size of the loaf is determined by that of the plow-'
wheel; but at 2, 128 it says again: 'of the grain that the farm
beareth and the mill breakeih, shall be baken a cake as great as


1240 SPELLS AND CHABMS.

the plow-wheel^ and ihe plower therewith plow : if the wheef
break ere he come to the end^ he is finable, if it break not^ yet
is he finable notwithstanding/ The ' cake of all grain thai ike
mill grinds ' occurs again at 2, 147 ; and the ' rye-loaf to be pat
in place of a plow-wheel that comes off' at 2^ 262. 412. 587.
What is the drift of these cnrions regulations ? Was ever
ploQghman fed on milk and honey 7 were loaves and cakes ever
stack on the axle to cut the first farrow f They are surely the
ancient sacrificial loaves, which with milk and honey poared over
them were laid in the farrow (ad piamentam^ p. 1196), and dis-
tribated to the ploaghmen^ which even the birds were allowed to
peck at ; their being made of all sorts of grain, so as to embrace
the entire prodnce of the field, as the br&de hl&f in the AS. spell
is baked of each kind of meal, goes far to decide.

Yerelias in his Notes to the Hervararsaga p. 189 tells us, that
the Swedish peasants, after baking the jula-galt (Yule-boar p. 51),
dry it, and keep it till spring ; then they grate a part of it in
with the seed-corn and give it to the plough-horses, and another
part to the men that hold the ploughtail : ' Verrem fictum siccant,
et ad veris tempus, cum semina sulcis sunt oredenda, servant.
Turn partem ejus comminutam in vas vel in corbem, ex qao
semina sunt dispergenda, immittunt, hordeoque permixtam eqois
aratoribus, alteram servis stivam tenentibus oomedendam re-
linqunnt, spe forte uberioris messis peroipiendae.^ Here then
is another sacrificial cake, which was mixt with the seed, and
tasted by the ploughing men and animals ; who knows but that
burning the devil, and dividing and scattering his ashes over the
cornfields, a deed the witches were accused of (p. 1073), may
have arisen out of their baking a sacrificial cake in the shape of
an idol ? A cake was also baked at the Bealtine, and distributed
among the multitude, p. 613.

The cultv/re of flax is sure not to have been deficient in
speeches and ceremonies of blessing : to this day the girls sing
all kinds of songs over this work. In some places, at sowing
time, the mistress of the house used to get on the table and
dance, then jump off backwards : the higher she made this leap,
the higher ihe flax would grow (conf. Sup. I, 519). Lasicz p. 50
says of the Samogits : ' Tertio post ilgas die deum Waizganthos
colunt virgines, ut ejus beneficio tam lini quam cannabis habeant


BLESSING THE FLAX. WOLF, FOX. 1241

copiani. übi altissima illaram, impleto placentulis quas sikies

vocant sina^ et starts pede uno in sedili manaqae sinistra sursutn

elata libram prolixnm tiliae vel ulmo detractam, dextera vero

craterem cerevisiae haec loqaens tenet: Waizganthe^ produc

nobis tarn altum linum quam ego nunc alta sum, neve nos nudes

incedere permittas I Post haec craterem ezhaorit, impletumque

rarsas deo in terram effandit^ et placentas e sinn ejicit^ a deastris,

si qui sint Waizgantho, comedendas. 6i haec peragens firma

perstet, bonnm lini proventnm anno seqaenti fatnrum in animum

indacit; si lapsa pede altera nitatur, dnbitat de fatara copia,

fidemqne effectns seqnitur.' In the Wetterau^ at the sowing of

this plantj the dame has to jump up on the fireplace, and cry :

'Heads as big as mine, leaves like my apron, and stalks like my

legs I ' and then the plant will tarn out well (see Suppl.).

How the Romans kept the wolf out of their fields, we are in-
formed by Pliny 28, 20 [81] : 'Lupos in agrum non accedere, si
capti nnius pedibns infractis cnltroque adacto paulatim sanguis
circa fines agri spargatur, atqne ipse defodiatur in eo loco ex qao
coeperit trahi ; ant si vomeremy quo primus sulcus eo anno in
agro ductus sit, excussum aratro, focus larium quo f amilia con-
yenit absnmat; ac lupum nulli animali nociturum in eo agro,
quamdiu id fiat.'

A herdsman* s charm from a MS. of the 15th cent, shews
marks of a far remoter origin : ' ich treip hent aus in unser lieben
Frauen haus, in Abrahams garten (conf. p. 1220), der lieber herr
sant Mertein, der sol heut meines (vihes) pflegen und warten,
und der lieber herr sant Wolfgang, der lieb herr sant Peter, der
hat den himelischen slussel, die versperrent dem wolf und der
vohin im drussel, dass si weder plut lassen noch bein schroten.
Des helf mir der man, der chain übel nie hat getan (i.e. Christ,
oonf. 'sinless man,' p. 24, and the contrast p. 988), und die
heiligen V wunden behüten mein vieh vor allen holzhunden, V
Pater et V Ave Maria.' ^

Here the rhymes peep out fitfully. The wood-hounds are


' Today my herd I drove Into Ova Lady's groTo, Into Abraham*g garden ; Be
(tood St. Marthi This day my cattle*g warden, May good St. Wolfgang, good St.
Peter (whose key can heaven unlock). Throat of woll and vixen block. Blood from
shedding, bone from omnohing ! Help me the holy one, Who ill hath never done,
And his ¥ holy woonds Keep my herd from all wooa-honnds I


1242 SPELLS AND CHABMS.^

Wuotan's forest-hounds (p. 147), the AS, ' holtes gehlftiSan/
silvae latrones, El. 223, the hölzinge (Beinh. p. Iv) ; and that the
fox named with the wolf should be vohe fern., is in harmony with
Goth, fatihd, OHG. foh&. The Wolfgang who is to fend the
flock, is so named either because he gangs against the wolf, or
because the wolf met the hero at a lucky moment, p. 1140 n.

As I have not met with a German bee-spell, I will give a Latin
one in Balnze's Capitul. 2, 663 taken from a St Gall MS. : ' Ad
revocandum examen apum dispersum : adjnro te, mater aviorum,
per Deum regem coelorum, et per ilium redemptorem Filium
Dei te adjure, ut non te in altum levare nee longe volare, sed
quam plus cito potes ad arborem venire (velis) ; ibi te alloces
cum omni tuo genere vel cum socia tua, ibi habeo bona vasa
parata, ut vos ibi in Dei nomine laboretis, etc.' Maier aviorum
(for apum) is the AS. beomodar (p. 697) ; the steadily waxing
comb (p. 1236n.) was heobredd, Cod. Exon. 425, 20, MHG. biebrot
(Gramm. 3, 463), bat also raz and wabe (from weaving, working,
p. 697) ; the hive biekar (vas, Goth, kasi), the fly-hole OHG.
flougar (Graff 3, 163). Oar forefathers had at their service
many more terms in apiculture than we, and prettier (see Suppl.)

As runes were written on bast (limr&uar & berki rista ok 4
baiSmi vi^ar, Saam. 195^; cortex carminibus adnotatus, Saxo
Gram. 44), the olden time may have had some runes for deleting
the bast from the wood. Incantations have power to release the
babe from ante-natal durance, the hard rind from the bast.
Among shepherd lads in almost every part of Germany are pre-
served rhymes, in singing which they keep time by tapping a
piece of billow on their knee with a knife-handle, till they can
slip it off unbroken to make a whistle of The simplest though
not oldest version is : ' Fabian, Sebastian, lat mi de widen-flot
afganl* (Voss on Idyl 6, 179) or in Ditmarsen : 'Fabian,
Sebastian, lat den saflb ut holt gan I' It is believed that on the
day of these two saints (Jan. 20) the sap enters the willow.
In some places both the names are wanting, but the spell is spun
out longer : ' sa sa pipe (prob, for sap-pipe), np'm mölen-dike
(mill-dam) dar sit en man, de heet Johan, de har dre rode stövelu
(3 red shoes) an, de ene horde (belonged) mi to, de anner horde
di to, de drudde horde' m papen to, do kam de de hesse (old
witch) mit en blanken meste (knife), sneet den kiiken den kop


BEE-SPELL. WHISTLE-MAKING. STITCH. 1243

af^ smeet'en in busch^ plampa sä de basch^ is de sapipe noch
nicht goodJ' Halbertsma says in the Overyssel Almanack for
1836 : ' de twijg riip en gesneden zijnde^ slaan (beat) de kinderen
met het hecht (baft) van een mesje op een der groene rijsjes^ tot
dat de bast loslaat^ dien zij er dan heel aftrekken (palled off
whole) en als een pijp gebraiken om op te flaiten of er erwten
door te blazen. Zoo lang het kind met zijn mesje op den bast
tikte^ plag het (he ased) oadtijds de volgende regelen te zingen :
Lange lange pipe, wenneer histou ripe ? Te Meye, te Meye, as
de veageltjes eyer lekt. 'T ketjen op den dyk zat^ sate melk
met brokken (crambs) at. Doe kwam de voele hesse al met de
Bcharpe messe^ wold et ketjen et oor (ear) afsnien; it ketjen
ging ant lopen to hope^ to hope I de voele hesse ging lopen.
Heel of^ half of^ hoawe dijn den kop af^ so dood as een piere,
kamp sun levendage net weer hiere.' Firmenich gives the form
as used in the Nenmark^ p. 121 : ^ sipp sapp seepe, moak mi 'ne
flöte! — Wovon denn ? — Von meieroan (marjoram)^ von thymegoan,
det se balle (soon) ma-g afgoahn/ And in PriegnitZj p. 131 :
' sihbe sibbe sibbe säubken, hat mi del kleine fleutJcen goot afgoahn,
goot afgoahn, bes up (ap to) den letzten hn^akenl'-'^^We can
see how Sebastian got in, from ' sap-pipe, sibbe sabbe/ perhaps
also ' bast.' In the Böhmerwald the willow or alder twig is thas
conjured (Jos. Bank p. 168) : ^pföfferl gei owa, sist schloga do owa ;
lei's rintl o drahdo eiz, heargotl pfeiz I ' little pipe, come off, else
I knock thee off; dear little rind, do draw thee now, my lord god
pipe! Woycicki kl. 1, 92. 151 tells as, that to get a marvellous .
pipe (fayarka) that can make everybody dance, one mast find
in the forest's gloom the green willow that never heard the rush
of water nor the crow of cock : ' co by nigdy nie siyszaia szuma
wody, ni piania kogata.' This detail, expressly picked ap among
the peasantry on the Prath and Dniester, strangely coincides
with Pliny's statement 16, 37 [71] : 'ex qua (sambaco) magis
canoram buccinam tubamque credit pastor ibi caesa, ubi gallorum
cantum frutex ille non exavdiat/ Of peeling the willow there
is nothing said (see Sappl.).

An old AS. spell tor fcer-stice, sudden stitch in the side, was
communicated to me by Price from the Harley MS. no. 585 fol.
186. First, three herbs are to be boiled in batter, feverfew
(febrifagia=febrem fugans, Capit. de villis, Pertz 3, 186), red


12:14 SPELLS AND CHABMS.

nettle that grows through a fence (conf. p. 1200, through a sieTe),
and wayhready OHG. wegabreita, plantago : ' Wr5 fsBrstioe/^/er-
fuge^ and seo redde netele ^ J^orh SBm ^ inwyrS, and wegbrcdde,
wylle in bateran.

Hlüde waron hi, U hlMe, H hi ofer >one hlmw ndon,
weron Anmdde, ^ hi ofer Umd ridon.
Bcyld >A >e, na >ft Hme ultf genesan mAte.

üt, lytel spere, ipf her inne ne 1
8t6d (I stood) under linde, under leohtnm eeylde,
>fler H mihtigan td/hyra maagen bensddon (mastered),
and hi giflUtide g&nu (whiszing lanoes) sendon.
ic him o^Seme eft wiUe eendan (I'U send them baek another)
fleogende fl&n forane td geanes.

At, lytel spere, gif hit her inne sie!
uet smilS, Bl6h seax lytel (hammered little knife)
.•••••• toema wand switSe.

üt, lytel spere, gif her inne sie !
Bex smitSas 8»ton, wflBlspera worhton,
fttspere, nse (was not) innspere.
gif her inne sie Isemes dnl (any iron),
JuegteMsan geweore (witch's work), hit sceal gemyltan (melt),
gif Hi wnre on fell sooten, olStSe w»re on flieso seoten,

olSiSe wflBre on blOd seoten

olS^e WflBre on US seoten, nsfre ne st >!n llf AtsMed,
gif hit wsre ha gtMcot, olSiSe hit wasre ylfa gueot^
o^e hit wiere hagtettan geteot, nn ie wille Hn helpan :
Ha I« td b6te i$a gescoteit M? N t6 böte yl/a geicote*,
)>iB >e t6 b6te hagte$$an ge$eote$. io >tn wille helpan.

fleo )>iBr on fyrgen (flee to the desert) . • • • 1
he&fde hAl westa, helpe )>tn Dzyhten I
mm W>Ane >iBt seax, Add on wntan.'

A few gaps give trouble. The whole is based on the assump-
tion that the stitch is caused by the shots of spirits. Loud over
land and rock have ridden mighty women^ h»gtessan (p. 1040)i
and have sent whizzing darts^ afterwards more narrowly defined
as 'fisa^ ylfa and h»g^ssan gescot^' shot of äses (p. 25)^ of elves
(p. 443) and of witches (though the gen. sing, is used, not pi.
hsegtessena) . The exorcist^ in relating the transaction, calls to
the patient to shield himself, that he may get over the attack, ^
and every now and then puts in the refrain ' Out, little spear,
if herein thou be I ' He goes on to tell how he stood under

1 * Shonld be hnm, conf. hsBmfldta, Cod. Exon. 182, 9.*— Süppl.

' ' Hsne ntS genesan.' In AS. this verb takes the Aoo., not the Gen. as in
OHG : >& siBcoe genes, Beow. 8950. ntSa gehwane genesen hsfde 4789. fela ie
gatSrssa genas 4848. se H gütSe genss, GsBdm. 121, 38.


STITCH IN THE SIDE. BLF-BUBN. 1245

shelter when those women let fly their darta^ and means to send
them a ooanter-shot, a knife^ whose smitmg by a smith is re-
ported, as also that of war*spears by six smiths. Erery bit of
the witches' iron shall melt, wherever it may have been shot,
into skin, flesh, blood or limb ; help is nigh. Lastly : flee thon
(enchantress) to the wilderness! be thon (patient) well in thy
head. Lord help thee I At the conclnsion of the spell the knife
(that forged by the smith f ) is to be dipt in water. Apparently
after ' sooten ' there onght to be ' o^Se waare on b&n scoten ' ;
and perhaps after ' fyrgen ' some such words as * seo J^one flän
Bce&t (or, sende) ' (see SappL).

For other spells hitherto unprinted I have to thank Mr.
Kemble. ' Cwi^ ymbe, nim eor&an, oferweorp mid J^inre swt^Sran
handa under }^inam swi'Sran fdt, and cwet :

fo ic under flat, fnnde ic hit.

hwsßt, eorde mcBg wi9 ealra wihta gehwylce,

and wiiS andan, and wi'S sßminde,

and wi'S ^ micelan mannes tnngan.

and wiiS on forweorp ofer greot }^onne his wirman, and cweiS :

sitte ge, etc.' (here come the verses g^ven at p. 431).

For the water-elf sickness : ' gif mon biiS on wcetercelf-ddle,
)K>nne bee's him yk hand-nasglas wonne, and ];& e&gan tearige,
and wile löcian ni'Ser. d6 him )ns td laaceddme: eofor)nrote,
cassnc, eowberge, elehtre, eolone, mersc-mealwan-crop, fenminte,
dile, lilie, &ttorl&'Se, polleie, marrubie, docce, eilen, felterre,
wermöd, sträwbergean le&f, consolde. ofgeot mid eala'S, dd h&lig
waater to, sing J^is gealdor ofer J^riwa :

•

ic benne äwr&% betest beado-wrce^a,

SW& benne ne bumon ne burston,

ne fundian ne feologan ne hoppettan,

ne wund wazian, ne dolh diopian,

ac him self healde h&lew89ge,

ne ace ]^ )K>n mft, ]^ eor&an on e&re ace (&ge ?) .

sing ]^is manegum slSum. eorde }^e onbere mid ecdlum hire (i.e.
Earth's) mihtum and mcegenum. 'pks gealdor mon maag singan
on wunde.'

The earth, caught up in the right hand from under the right


1246 8PELLS AND GHABMS.

foot^ heals aod shelters ; * might and main ' belong to the eartli.
Halewcege answers to oar heilaw&c, p. 585.

About the elvish mare and nightmare ^ what was said on p. 464-5
is by no means all : they ride not only men but horses, whose
manes in the morning are found dripping with sweat and tangled,
conf. Svantevit's horse p. 662. Gannegieter in Epistola de ara
ad Noviomagum reperta p. 25 says : ' Abigunt eas nympha*
(matres deas, mairas) hodie rustici osse capitis equini tedis injeeto,
cujusmodi ossa per has terras in rusticorum yillis crebra est
animadvertere (conf. p. 660). Nocte autem ad concubia equi-
tare creduntur, et equos fatigare ad longinqua itinera. Iliad
namque datum deabus illis ma^wque, si rusticorum fabulis ere-
dimus, ut manenies loca peregrina adeant^ in equis maneni3>us,
qui tamen viae labores sudore testantnr. Naper confabalatas
mecum villicus aegerrime ferebat equos sues prozima nocte
exagitatos, defluente per corpora sudore; causam cum quaere-
rem, respondit iratus, mairam noctumam equitasse.' To this
maira nocturna, be it akin to matrona (p. 41 7) or even to fiolpa,
one might be tempted to trace our nachtmary nightmare, had we
not a better derivation at hand. To the OHG. marah (equns),
AS. mear, ON. marr, seems to correspond the AS. fern, meare
(surely a better spelling than maere), ON. mara. True, the
0H6. meriha means only equa, not ephialtes, and we now dis-
tinguish mähre from mahr ; on the other hand, in ON. it is to
the fem. mara that the demonic sense attaches, and so early as in
the Yngl. saga cap. 16 king Yanlandi is trodden to death in his
sleep by a mara : ' mara tra'S hann ' ; when his people rush to
his aid, ' tra% hun fdtleggina,' and at last ' kafdi hun höfniSit, sva
at ]?ar do hann.' The image then seems to waver between the
ridden beast and the riding trampling one, just as the devil
sometimes rides men, sometimes as a horse takes them on his
back. Like the mara, we saw p. 278 that the Stempe treads.
Wolf (nos. 249 — 254) gives some good mare-stories from the
Netherlands ; I lay special stress on a spell-song he has against
the sprite, p. 689 :

maer, gy lelyk dier (ye loathly beast),
komt toch dezen nacht niet w6er (again) 1
alle waters zult gy waeyen (shall ye wade).


NIGHTMARE. BLOOD-STANCHING. 1247

alle boomen zult gy blaeyen (disleaf)^

alle Spieren gerst (spikes of barley) zalt gy teilen,

komt my toch dezen nacht niet kwellen I

With this take a Henneberg spell in Hauptes Zeitschr. 3^ 360 :

Das wallala alle berge dorchtra (-trab^ trot)^ ,

alle wasser dorchbat (-bade^ bathe)^

alle bletlich ablat^

onnerdesse wörd*s tak (until it be day) I

Both refer to the spirit's nightly jaant^ it trots over all the hills^
wades (or bathes) through the waters^ strips the treesj counts the
corn-stalks^ until the break of day ; then on the maerentakken
(mistletoes ?) the mare is said to rest. The name ' wallala ' may
come from wallen, wadeln, or be a cry of wail (Gramm. 3, 293),
for the night-spirits (Sup. I, 878) appear as wailing- mothers

(p. 432.3, and Schm. 4, 54). A third spell I take from

Schreiber's Tagb. 1839. p. 321 : * Drude's-head, I forbid thee my
house and yard, I forbid thee my bedstead, that not over me
thou tröstest (trottest ? treadest ?) ; trost to some other house,
till over all hills and waters thou climbest, and all the hedge-
sticks ehlest (zehlest, teilest ?) I Then comes dear day into my
house again.' Drute is the same thing as mahre, as drutenzopf
(plica) is also called marenzopf, alpzopf, and drutenfuss maeren-
voet. I think the most important point is, that the sprite is shy
of daylight, and the dawn scares it away (p. 466 n.) ; the Alvis-^
mal closes exactly like these spells: *nu scinn sunna i sali* ;
conf. ' dagr er nü,' SsBm. 145**. I hope the spell may yet turn
up in other places, and in a purer form.

Healing-spells are fond of beginning with something in the
narrative way, some transaction from which the remedy derives
its force ; and it is here especially that we find heathen beings
left high and dry. When a spell opens with ' Sprach Jungfrau
Hille, blut stand stille I ' who can fail at once to recognise the
old valkyr Hilda, her that can make blood flow and stanch it
again f And even when the opening words are ' Mary fared
afield' or ^ Ohriat he crossed the land'; when a charm against
finger-worm says ' Ood the Father afield did ride, stoutly the hoe

^ traoi^S o^AMi K€Kai909 (ffx^Sw^ Od. 19, 457,


1248 SPELLS AND CHABMS.

be plied^ stabbed ap the worms oatright^ one was black, another
whitOj the third worm it was red; here lie the worms all dead ' ;
it is clear that snch formulas could not have originated in
christian times^ but might well survive among the people^ who
had merely to insert new sacred names. The heathen incident
that would account for the obscure or senseless words, is mostly
hidden from us. On p. 1232-3 'Jesus' and Hhe Lord' have taken
the place of Wuotan. ' Christus in petra sedebat, et virgam
manu tenebat/ Mone's Anz. 7, 609; or again, 'Job went over
land, had his staff in hand/ When ' Jesus and Peter wandering
g^ from country to country to and fro,' it is evidently the same
widely diffused notion as at p. 337 ; but it is not always so easy
to hit upon the heathen names that lie at the bottom. A
favourite way is to start with three personages : as tbe idisi fall
into three sets (p. 1231), so the three Marys look out (p. 416),
like three noms or three &ys. 'Three brothers went afield'
(Keisersb. ameis 50*; 'three blessed br.,' Spell XXXI.). 'Three
virgins come down from heaven to earth, the one Blvt^gulpe, the
next Blut-siiilpe, the third Blut-stehe-still/ Mark, forsch. 1, 262 ;
the last is the maid Hilda named alone in the other spell. I will
only add from Roth, de nominibus vet. Gtermanorum medic,
Helmst. 1735. p. 139 : ^ Juvat subnectere incantationis formulam,
qua in Marchia Brandenb. atque adjacentibns regionibus in
ophthalmia curanda nti sclent anus decrepitae, insanos ritas
deperientes, quam quidem factis variis gesticulationibus ao digitis
ante dolentes oculos ter decussatim motis^ raiieo susurramine
semel atque iterum emutire consuescunt^ ita autem habent:
Ibant aliquando tree puellas in via virente^ prima noverat reme-
dium aliquod contra snffusionem oculorum, altera noverat reme-
dium aliquod contra albnginem, et t^rtia profecto contra inflam-
mationem, eaeque sanabant una ratione omnia, in nomine Patris,
Filii et Spiritus sancti^ Amen' (see Snppl.).

Against particular diseases the remedies are pitted as though
in mortal strife: 'de ros un de wied, de stan in strid, de ros
verswann^ de ijoied gewann'; or, 'deflecht (scrofula) nn de med,
de krakeelten sik, de wied de gewünn, un de flechi verswünn/
Meckl. Jahrb. 5, 102-3 ; or again, ' de flockasch (flugasche) un de
flechte, de flogen wol over dat wilde meer ; de flockasch de kam
wedder, de flechte nimmermehr,' Snp. I, 811 (see-Suppl.).


BLOOD-STANCHING. FOBMS OF SPELL. 1249

Spells for the wishing-rod^ when it is to strike treasure or a
vein of metal, see p. 975 . A formula used in looking for a clay-
pit, in whose earth are to be wrapt up the written slips of paper
which shall clear up a doubtful matter, in Haupt's Zeitschr. 8,
190.

In addresses to animals whose encounter is prophetic, whose
ways are mysterious, we may fairly recognise antique spells,
though their language has undergone a great deal of distortion ;
sach are the rhymes to the swan, p. 429, the stork 672, cuckoo
676, Martin's bird 1180, Mary's chafer 695, and others, whose
essential identity among the most various branches of our race
is an interesting feature.

In Scandinavia, where the reign of heathenism lasted longest,

onght to be found the greatest number of such spells, either in

writing or in the months of the people ; and from them we could

gather most distinctly the connexion, both of the words and

of their import, with heathen notions. The spell by which Qt&sl

was about to disengage the stone from Thor's head, p. 875, is

not preserved in the Edda, but spells quite similar may have

been still muttered over men and beasts in recent times. Much

to be desired is the speedy publication of a collection set on foot

by L. F. Bääf in Sweden, and containing over 2000 articles,

of which a preliminary notice appeared in the monthly Mimer

(Ups. 1838—40) pp. 271 — 7. Among these spells now reduced

to writing, isolated runes can here and there be recognised even

yet, and in some cases their use is enjoined ; thus, on the mode

of compelUng a thief to restore stolen goods on pain of losing his

eye, we find the following prescription : Go at sunset on Sunday

evening to a place that lies high, bearing a bucketful of water,

cnt the rune S, and charge the thief within a certain time to

bring back what he has stolen, or lose his right eye. The rune

S apparently refers to Sunday and sunset, perhaps to syn (sight,

eye) ; does it also in connexion with the water-vessel point to the

word 8& (situla) f Most likely the water was poured out, and

ran down the hill (see Suppl.).

riNis.


INDEX.


-♦♦-


Boxnan figures refer to the Author's Preface.


Aaskereia 946.

&bant, SBfen, aptan (evening) 748.
about, abgott (false god) 14. 106.
Abel 944.

AbentWt 232 n. 239. 748.
&bl8 (hell) 805.

Abraham, abrahemsch 1220. 1241.
abrenuntiatio 161. 203. 1005 n.
Abundia 286. 889. 1056.
abjssus (hell) 805. 1002.
Adam 565. 675.
Adonis 949 n.
Adriani moles 1183 n.
^gel, EigiU 376. 380-2.
felf.&dl (elf.bum) 1155. 1245.
Aeolus 631-4. 640.
ffir-dieg (dawn) 747.
Aesculapius 1148. 1213.
JEsir (gods) 815. 902.
^thel-st&n 119. 394.
Affen-berg 681.
age, generation 792-3.
Agemund 511. 91371.
6-genggun (lamiae) 500 n.
ager-uld (field wool) 871.
ages of the world, four 575.
&-getroc (trickery) 464.
a-gui-lan-neuf 755. 1206.
Agrd-mainyus, Abriman 984 n. 1011.
^ur6-mazdiU>, Ormuzd 984 n.
&ibr (gift) 40.
cUylt (GBgis) 238.

"Ai'Sof Kwirf (Pluto's helmet) 463.
Altf-a, &iza, ehre? 414.
Ajo 362.

dKipducTft (sword) 204.
Akka xxzi.

alah, alhs (temple) 66-7. 106.
alba (elf, etc.) 462. 1073.
Alb-donar 186.

alb-dono, aBlf-)>one, alp-ranke (bitter-
sweet ?) 448. 1216.
Albe-rich, £lf-ric 453.
alb-leich (elf-lay) 470. 107.
alb-schoss (elf-shot) 187. 460.
Albnnea 496 n.
Alcis 66. 71. 366.
alder, erle 653 [Erl-könig] .
aleotoriua (oaponstone) 1219.

VOL. III. ^**^^


Alf-heimr 444.

Al.fö«r 22.

AUr, elf 442.

Alf -rikr 488.

Aliruna xi. 95. 404. 1225.

'A\Korp6ffaX\ot 207 ft.

alo-waldo, al-wealda (almighty) 21.

alp, elf 442. 463.

Alp-drüd, iElf-)>ry« 423.

Alp-ris 465.

alp-ruthe, elf-rod 183-7.

Alps 444.

&lpt, ffilfet (swan) 429. 444 n.

&lptar-hamr (swan-garb) 427.

Ahraun, Alrune 513 n. 1202 n.

alraun (mandrake) 1202-4.

Al-Bvi'Sr 656.

Altanusl62ii.

Al-)>iofr 465.

altissimus 21.

altvil (scrat) 479 n.

al-vitr (all-witting) 425.

Alx xi. 66. 366.

Amala 372.

Amaltheia 872.

Amazons 418.

amber 1218 n.

ambro (obor?) 527 n.

ambrosia, amrita 317.

Amphion 908.

Ana sAtt (second childhood) 1153.

Anar, Onar 735.

AndlAngr 808 n.

and-skotti (foe, fiend) 989.

Andyari 488. 592. 978-9.

anel (granny) 641. 1009.

anemos and aetos 634.

Angandeo 196 n.

an-gang (what meets us) 1119.

Angan-ttr (OSinn) 196 n.

angel xlui. 420 n. 449 n. 576. 875-6.

angels' eyes 146 n.

Angr-boi$a 246.

animal sacrifices 46.

Anningat (moon) 703. 716.

ans, &s, 6s (god) 24-5. 884.

Ans-pirin 26 n. 668.

ant-heiz (yowed offering) 37-8.

Antichrist 810-1. 980-1.

A A


1252


INDEX.


Antilols 449 n. 465.

anti-tago (end-day) 815 n.

Antony's fire 1160.

Aphrodite (Venus) 807. 318 n. 902 n.

ApoUo79n. 111. 115 n. 149. 161 n. 821.

620 n. 812. 901-7. 1006. 1148. 1182.
appearing, disappearing 825-7. 836-8.
aptra-g&nga (ghost) 916.
aqoilo and aqoila 634.
Arakho 707.

aran-scart (orop-lifting) 475.
"Apcof Kwrj, T^-hialm 199. 1198.
Ares (Mars) 111. 197. 201-8-4. 821. 843.

1198.
Arian-rod (sflyer ring, galaxy) 857 n.

412 n.
ArktoB (Ursa major^ 151. 725.
arm-hoop, looking tmo* the 939. 337.
Artemis (Diana) 270. 949. 1148. 118fi.

1192.
artemisia (mngwort) 1192. 1211-2.
Arthur zlvi. 668. 672. 942. 961.
Ar-vakr 656.
arweggers (dwarfs) 454 n.
arzät, ersetre (physician) 1151.
&s, 6b (god) 24-5.
As-biöm (Ases' bear) 25.
As-brü (rainbow) 732.
As-garSr 817.
As-ketiU 68.

&s-megin (divine might) 24-5. 188.
Asa-grim (Thörr) 150.
Asa-heimr 530.
Asa-thdrr 166. 187. 243 n.
Aschanes 572.

aschen-brodel (oinderella) 888.
dses, the (gods) 24-5.
Ashkenaz 572 n.
ash-tree 571-2. 651. 796.
Aski-borg 350. 365.
Askr 560. 571-2.
Aspriän 387. 547. 556.
asses sacrificed 49 n.
astrology 721-2.
asylnm 85 n.
Asynja (goddess) 250 n.
at-bairan (offer, sacrifice) 3d.
Athena (Minerva) 265. 326-7. 837-8.

587-8. 1148. 1198.
a)m (year) 754.
atisks (corn) 1115.
Atlas 570.
AtU 169.

atonement-boar 51. 213.
AtropoB 414-5.
atzmann (wax figure) 1091.
Ancholf 762.
AulSomla 559. 665.
ane, ouwa, ea, -ey 225.
aught, naught 440 n.
Aurinia 95. 408-4.
Aurora 749.


Austheia 697.

Austri, Yestri, NorSri, Su«ri 461.

austr-vegr (east-ways) 187-8.

Avar 292-4-7. 526.

avar& (image) 105 ft. 115-6. 883.

ayat&ra 836-8.

Aye, Yer (frau Ave) 675.

Aventinre 310. 911.

Ayemus 806.

aversiers (devil) 988.

avuiuddn (bless) 88.

Aylesbuxy, Ayleaford 876.

Azdingi 342.

baba, babka (grazmy) 478 n. 641. 784.

Babehüd 424.

babes nnchristened271. 918. 920. 1070 a.

Babildne 385 n. 954. 534.

Bacchus, Dionysus 260. 306.

badi (bed, altar) 68 n.

badniak (yule-log) 628.

Baduhenna 71 n.

Badu-hüt, Beado-hUd 877.

Bffildieg 165. 221-9. 367. 744.

Bak-rauf (elf, witch) 1079.

Balaam's ass 892.

Bald-ander 207 n.

Baldersohwang 222.

Baldr 164. 220. 318. 320. 647. 823.

baldrian (valerian) 1207-8.

Baldrs-berg 222.

Baldrs-br&, Bar-bro (antbemis cotola)

222. 1191. 1207-8.
Baldrs-brond 226.
Baldrs-hagi 225.
Baltero 996.

balvonas, bolv&n (image) 105 n.
band (deity) 26.
banning 951.
ban-Bhi444n.
baptizo, ohrismo 8n.
bard 900.

bare head, elbow, knee 81-3. 652.
Barguest 512 n.
bark 658; 'twixt wood and b. 1039 n.

1085.
barlebaen, barli-bak, -break (deril) 1003.
barn-building 252 n.
Barthel (goblin) 515n.
barzdukkai, berstuhki (dwarf) 448 n.
ßaaKoivia^ fasoino 1100.
Baugi 903.
Bavo's pillar 394.
Bayard 892. 656.
Beal xxix. 228. 618-4.
bealdor (prince) 220.
beal-tine (May fire) 612-4.
bear, king of beasts 667.
bear-skin 1010. 1018.
bear's loaf 783.
Beaw, Beow 165. 369.
Bechte 278. 281.


INDEX.


1253


bedd, weoh-bed (altar) 68 n.

bee 696. 905 n. 1186.

Beelzebub 998-9.

beetles 188. 691-5.

Befana 282.

beh (pitch, hell) 804-5.

Bel, Belenus 222. 618.

beider (fatted ox) 50 n.

belewitte (homesprite) 473.

Beli 530.

Bellona 208. 435.

BelloTesns 614.

bell.ringing 5. 459. 950. 1085.

Belns, Baal 571. 618.

Benz (devU) 1004.

beo-m6dor (queen-bee) 697. 1242.

Beo-wuU 869. 678. 697.

Berche 277.

Bereogrnthia 255 n.

berg-büi, -rind, -risi (giant) 588.

Bergelmir 529. 559. 568. 577.

berg-smed (dwarf) 458 n. 471 n.

berg-tagen (-taken) 466. 952-8.

Berhta 222. 272-282. 416. 429. 480 n.

791. 932. 947. 968. 1162.
Berhtolt 279. 932.
Berleih at Augsburg 298-5.
Bemhart 373. 936.
bertram 1213.

beschaffen, beschert (destined) 862.
beta-bür, -hüs (temple) 85-6.
betan, böten (heal) 1036. 1151.
betony 1208->9.

Betphania (Twelfth-day?) 281. 586.
Bhavani 255.
bianac (blessing) 138 n.
Biarki, Biarco 837. 887 n. 989.
bi-bdz, beifuss (mugwort) 1211-2.
bidental (struck by lightning) 185.
bidjan (pray) .SO.
Bielbogh 222-8. 985 n.
Bif-li«i. Bif-Undi (OSinn) 149. 882.
Bif-röst (rainbow^ 285. 782.
Bil 874. 473 n. (man in moon) 717.
Bildaberta 277.
bildukkas (homesprite) 508.
Büet 453.
BUUch 874. 888.
BiUing 373-4. 454.
bilmer-schnitt (crop-lifting) 475.
büse, bUisa (henbane) 593. 1198. 1208.
bilsen-schnitt (crop-lifting) 476.
Bilskimir 336.
bilwiz (spectre, witch) 472.
binsen-schneider (crop-lifter) 476.
Biöm 668.
Biört 272n. 1149.
birds 669-683.
bird's nest 871. 1205.
birds of omen 1128-1136.
birth 874-5.
Biterolf 869.


biudan (offer, sacrifice) 88.

binds (table, altar) 88. 68 n. 701.

bjära (conveyance) 1090.

black art 1087 n.

black cow, black ox 665 n.

black goddesses 313 n.

BU-kulla 1052.

Blanche-fienr 429 n.

Blaserle 461 n.

Blaster 548. 680.

blate-fuoz (blade-foot) 461.

Blicero (death) 849.

Bits, BlUSur 1149.

Blocksberg 1051.

blood-tree 649.

bldtan (sacrifice) 34.

bldt-lundr (sacrificial grove) 76.

blöt-ma^r (sacrificer) 98.

blöt-risi (giant) 657.

blue fire 178.

bluote-kirl (priest) 87.

Blut-stülpe 1248.

boar-badge 214.

boar-vow, boar's head, 215.

book-schnitt (crop-lifting) 476-7. 995.

bocks-horn (Easter fire) 616 n.

Bo«n 902-4.

Bodrok 7n.

Bodvar-t^r (OKinn) 196.

boBn, b6n (boon, prayer) 81. 1224.

bceuf gras 50 n.

b6gh (god) 18 n.

boghatyr (hero) 843 n.

Bogudes 293-5.

Böl->om 0>om»>urs) 559.

Bolverkr (QSinn) 867. 903.

bom-heckel (wood pecker) 978«

bona dea 2aS.

bona socia 89 n. 288-8. 500.

bonae mulieres, b. res 1059.

bond (gods) 26.

bonfire 629.

bon bomme, bonne femme 89. 526.

1067 n.
boni homines (heretics) 89. 1067 n.
bonne dame 430 n.
bootzi, bngk (bogie, Swiss) 507.
Boreas 631-6.
Borr 849. 530. 559.
bo-trä (goblin's tree) 509. 658.
Bous 368.
bowing 31-2.
Brag 512 n.

Braga-fuU (-bumper) 60. 235.
Braga-rcetSur (-speeches) 236-7.
Bragi 235. 339. 902.
Brahm& xxxiii. xxxix. 562 n. 570-1.

578-9.
bramberend (devil) 1008.
Brana 532.

Brand, Brond 165. 222.
brego (prince] 235-6.


1254


INDEX.


Brego-wine viii. 93. 235. 909.

Brei«a-blik 222. 795.

Breide xxTiii. 874.

Bretannia 832-3.

Brezeliande 411-2.

Bridget 611.

brievara (fate) 406 n.

Bitmir (sea-god) 561.

brim-wylf (water-demon) 496.

briaing (Midsom. fire) 622.

Bristxiga-men 306. 622. 870.

britannlca (water-plant) 1195-6.

Brittia 832-3.

Brocken 1051.

Br&ga (terror) 208.

brood-penny 871.

broomstick-riding 1083.

Brosinga-mene 307.

brownies 445.

Brün-hild xlviii. 423. 936.

Briini 330.

Bnin-matin 748.

Bmnn-akr 236.

bmnnen-hold (fonntain-sprite) 268 n.

Bryn-hüdr 96n. 145n. 403. 423-5n. 427.

551. 820n. 980. 1149. 1204.
Buddha 129 n. 570. 716.
Budhuvaras 129 n.
built-in alive 1141-4.
bu-limus 1159.
bulwechs (spectre) 472.
burg-rüna (fates) 404 n.
Buri 349. 559.
Burlenberg 982.
Bum-acker 236.
Burr 219. 349.
Burri 348.9.
bush-grandmother 484.
butte, butze, butz-igel (bogie) 506-7.

1004.
butterfly 828. 1028.
Bybylus, Babilos 697.

caduoeus (Mercury's 8ta£f) 976.

Cffidmon 906.

Cain 525 71.719.

calendas, oalendean (yule, yule-log) 627.

Calypso xxTiii.

cambio (changeling) 468.

Cambra265n.

oamp-flori (paradise) 822.

caraway-bread 484-5.

Cari zlyi. Ui. 435 n. 938. 953. 1208.

carles- w8Bn (Ursa major) 151. 724.

oarlina (sowthistle) 1208.

Carl-quintes 938.

Carl-stein zlvi.

C&sere 165. 367.

Ca8torll9. 366. 783.

cat 305. 669.

caterpillar 1029 n. 1073 n.

census (yotiye offering) 684.


ceraunius (thunder-stone) 1221.

Cerberus 814 n,

Ceres 254. 809. 941.

Ceridwen*8 chair (rainbow) 733.

chair of God 136. 733.

changeling 468.

chaos 558.

charadrius 853 n.

Chans 143. 436.

Charles, iee Carl.

charm, carmino 1035.

Charon 831. 840-5.

Charos 845-6.

chela (arm hoop) 939.

chelidonisma (swallow song) 763.

Cherusci 204.

chenriobnrgus (witches* porter) 1045-6.

chUdbirth 1159. 1175-7.

child^s caul 874.

Chimken 503-4.

chirihha, cyrice (kirk) 86.

Chiron 1148.

Chlungere (tangier) 274.

Chochilaichus, Hygelic tu

choirs, nine 795 n.

chrene-crud (pura herba) 642-3.

chrismation 3n.

Christ xl. 182. 1247-8.

Christopher 529 n. 540-2.

Clm>do 206 n. 248-9.

Cinderel 388.

Cisa, Zisa 298.

Glaus, Clobes 505. 515.

Clotho 414-5.

cloud 332-3 ; cloud-ship 638-9.

duricaun (homesprite) 508. 513 1».

Cnivida 372.

coboldus (homesprite) 501.

cock, the red (fire) 601. 670.

cock-crowing 670. 952 note*.

cock's bones ! 15 n.

coibhi, coifi (priest) 92 n. 642 n.

complices, consentes (gods) 26.

concubinae 929.

Constantine 85 n.

Copia 889.

cornucopia 869. 870.

corn-wife ffieldsprite) 477.

corpse-biroi, -dove 828. 1134.

cotino (man of God) 88.

cow, black 665 n., miraculous 871.

Crescentia 1061. 1152.

crossbill 183 n.

cross-roads 1074. 1113-5.

Ctitel (planet Venus) 130n.

cuckoo 675-682. 1135 n.

cuckoo-spittle (woodsave) 682.

cudgel jump out 870.

Cura 879 n.

cursing 1227.

cwis (hell) 807.

Cybele's bath 254-5.


INDEX.


1255


cyclop 516 n. 527. 547.
Cyclopean walls 534.
Cypripediom (lady*8 slipper) 1194.

dad-sisas (adjoring the dead) 1227.

Dsdalas 378.

Dseg-brefn (dawn) 743.

dmg-r%äy dags-brün (dawn) 747.

daemones (spirits) 439.

Dagr (day) 735.7.

Ddinn 453.

Dank-r&t 267 n.

Danpr, Danr 266 n. 368 n.

Daphne 827.

d&se (goblin, witch?) 1061.

Datanus 137 n.

dänmling (thumbling) 450-1.

Davy, Old 989. 1004.

day and dies 735 n.

day-choosing 1138-9.

daylight, dwarfs sb j of 466 n.

days of the week 122-130.

dead, feeding the 913 n.

Death 842. 888. 1181.

carried out 766-8.

, dance of 848. 851.

, Gossip xvi. 853.
Decius (dice) 887.
decnmanus nuctns 600.
dehait, sonhait 951 n.
Dehkla 416n. 877.

dehsel-rite (witch's ride) 1048-9. 1070.
Delllngr 735.
Deluge 576-581. 983.
Demar-hilt 422 n.
Demeter (Ceres) xxzix. 22. 212. 250-4.

310. 331. 1059 n.
deofol-gild (idolatry) 82 n. 102. 1005.
Depdghöz 554. 1028.
Derk 214. 268.
Deucalion 573-6-7. 580.
deus, Beds 194. 339.
deyil 984.
devü*s bit 1213.

bride 1009. 1029. 1073 n.

carl, child (demoniac) 1013.

cat (caterpillar) 1029. 1073 n.

dike 1022-3.

hand 241.

miU 1021.

mother, grandmother 1007-9.

devin (divine, diviner) 471.

dew-draggle 387. 786.

dew-striker, -skimmer 1073.

Dhor, Dor 812.

Dhru« 423.

Diana llOn. 195. 283-5-6. 933. 949.

1055-7. 1161-2.
Diana, the black 313 n.
dtar (gods) 195 n.
dice 150. 887. 1007.
diena (day) 195.


Diespiter 195.

Dieterle 717 n.

Dietrich (Theoderic) 373. 531.

Dietrich-bem 213-4. 373. 936.

Dietrich's haus 1183.

dievas, dievaitis (god) 168. 194.

düle-stein (Ud of heU) 806.

ding (thing, sprite) 442. 1073.

Dionjsus (Bacchus) 306.

Dios-curi (Castor and Pollux) 120. 34a.

391. 463. 560n. 916n.
Dirp, Drip, Trip 958n.
dis (wise-woman) 97. 402.
Disbargum 198.
Disen-dach (Tuesday) 125.
Dissunapiter 22 n. 225. 1234.
dives (rich) 194.
Divyaratna 872.
Dobra-srichia (fortune) 877 n.
Dobro-pan (planet Mercury) 130». 150i
dock-dlfar (dark elves) 443-4.
dodola (rain-maker) 593-4.
ddgor, doegr (half-day) 757.
dogs named after gods 7n.
dog's saddle (cankerworm) 1074 n..
Dold 581. 983.
ddlgr (spectre) 916.
ddmes-dag, tuomis-tac 815 n.
Don 150 It.

Donanadel 490 n. 1029.
Donar (r=Th6]T) xviü. 122-3. 166. 812.
donner (thunder) lln. 15n.
donner-aas (cat) 304.

bart, -besen, -kraut 183. 1191.

gueg (beetle) 183.

Donners-berg 170. 186. 955.

Donner-schwee, Doners-we 185.

donner-ziege (snipe) 184.

dorant (snapdragon ?) 1214.

Dom-röschen (sleeping beauty) xvi. 1204.

dorper (giant) 535. 556 n.

Dörru«r 426.

doste (wild marjoram) 1029 n. 1214.

dove 148. 848. 1185 ti.

dragon 978. 980. 998. 1019.

dragonfly 1029.

draugr (spectre) 915.

Draupnir 561. 871.

dre4m (dream, bliss) 795. 901. 1145.

dream-mterpretation 1145-7.

DrebkuUs 817.

Drei-eioh 75.

Drifa 631. 641. 883. 890.

dros, drost (giant) 521-2 n. 1003.

drottinn, diyhten, truhtln .(lord) 22.

drugi thing (spectre) 464 n.

druid, dr^ 1036 n. 1205-6.

drut (goblin) 423. 464. 1041-5.

druten-zopf (plica Polon.) 464. 1247. .

dryad (tree-nymph) 480. 653.

Dualism lii. 984.

duck's foot 450-1 n.


1256


INDEX.


daende (goblin) 500.

daesse, cUvesse (fay) 410 n.

duga (help) 34.

diig&, r&duga (rainbow) 733.

dombr (stupid) 528. 548.

dümeke, doming (dwarf) 726.

dorihil stein (thirl stone) 1166.

Durinn 561.

dors (giant) 521. 920.

dur?a (tnrf) 642.

dasius, daz, duzik (inonbus) 481.

dutten (lubbers) 544.

Drftpara 887.

dverg-m&l (eoho) 452.

dvergr (dwarf) 443-7.

dverg-slagr (palsy) 1157.

dvergB-nät (cobweb) 471.

dwarfs 447-472.

dwolma (chaos) 558 n.

Dwyvan 581.

Dyaus 193.

dyrka (worship) 31.

Dziewanna, Dziewiea 478 n. 933 n. 1162.

Dzuma 1186.

ea, aue, onwe 225. 600.

eagle 633-4 ; ~'s shadow 1133.

ear, ringing in the 1117.

Ear, Eor 202.

Earendel 375.

Earth 250-6; cutting out earth 1093.

earth-ohicken 691.

earth-fire 603.

earth-mannikin 450 n. 454.

earthquake 816.

earth-worm 540. 561.

east, looking to the 34.

Easter cakes, eggs, games 780-1.

fires 43. 615-7.

E&stre 289-291. 616.

eblis (devil) 574.

ebur-hrung (Orion) 359. 727. 949

(Hyades?)730.
echo 452.
Ecke 238. 636.
Eckhart 934-6.
Ecki-sax 238.
eclipses 705-7.
Eersel 154.

ege (awe), egesa, eges-grlme 237-8.
egg origin 560 n.
eggrund (hell) 806 n.
egg-shells 469.
Egi-dora, Eider 239.
Egi-helm 238.
Eigü 374-6. 380. 424.
Eik)>ymir 818.
Eileithyia 1176.
Eim, Lake 559.
EindrifSi 381.

einheri (hero in heaven) 817.
Eir 1148. 1161.


Eisen, Frau 265. 297 n.

Eisen-berta 277. 477.

Eisen-hutel 505 n. 508.

Eis-here 557.

El (tempest, a witch) 1089,

Elbe B. 444 n.

elbe (elf) 442. 1073.

Elbe-gast, Ele-gast 465.

Elben-drdtsch 443. 461. 931.

Elbe-rioh zlvi. 453.

eld-borg (fire) 628-9.

elder, eilen, ell-horn 651-2.

electrum 1218 it.

elf-, »ee »If-, alb-, &lf-, alp-, eile-.

elf-bore (knot-hole) 461.

elf-Ucht (wiU o' wisp) 917.

elf -queen 934 n.

elf-shot 180-7. 460.

elf-trad (-tree) 653.

elf-worship 448.

EUas 173-4. 811.

EUu-Snir 802.

Eliv&gar 558.

elle-folk, -koner, -kong, -skudt, -vild

443. 460n. 461.940n.
£hno*8 fire 906.
Elohim 576-7.
elves 442.
elysium 821-2.
Em-bach 599 n. 674.
Embla 560. 572.
enchant, canto 1035.
endil-meri (ocean) 601.
Endymion 952 n.
eniautos, etos (year) 754-5.
Enoch 174. 811.
enpanez, diables 998.
ent (giant), entisk 524. 534.
entsehen (evil eye) 461. 1035. 1099.
Enyo 208. 435.

Enze-mann, Enzen-bero 524.
Eow^en 161n. 812.
eofor-cumbol (boar's figure) 214.
Eor 201-2.

eorcnan-stftn (orphanns, opal ?) 1217.
eoten (giantj 519.
ephialtes (nightmare) 1155.
lepiphania 281.
epur-helm (boar helmet) 215.
Era, Ere (honour) 414 n. 891-5.
Erce 253. 1238.
Erc-tac (Tuesday) 124.
Erculus 161n. 212.
dre (honour, worship) 29 n. 760 n.
Erabus 575.
Eres-berg 198-9. 20L
Eres-burg 116 n. 199. 201.
Erichthonius 378. 726.
Erik, Old 989. 1004.
Eriks-gata (-road) 235. 360-1.
Ens 208. 435.
Eri-tac, Er-tag (Tuesday) 124. 201-2.


INBBX.


1267


Ermen-rich 372. 982.

Enning-strete 356.

Ero (Sansk. irft, earth) 250.

dsa gescot (gods* shot) 25. 1244.

Esoio349.

Eskja 572.

Essel520n.

eteninne (giantess) 519.

Eticho 372-3. 394.

Etzel 169.

Eugel 471.

eamenides 1086.

Earing 358-9.

Europa 338. 343. 666.

Eve 574-5.

evil eye 1099.

Ewald 454.

d-warto (priest, jadge) 89.

ezercitos antiquas 941, f oralis 950.

eyes, quivering of the 1117.

Ey.limi979n.

fasece (fetch, fye? ) 464».

F&fnir 371-2. 688. 978.

Fairguneis xxii. 172. 256.

fairguni (mountain) 172. 644.

fairhvus (world) 793-5. 826 n.

fairy-rings 187 n. 470.

Falada 659.

F&Unt (devU) 992.

Fama 897-8.

Famars 84. 198.

familiaris 514 n.

fanatici 83-5.

fani-golt (fen gold) 531. 978.

fantasma482. 498-9.

fanum (temple) 84-5.

Far-hauti 246.

farfadet (ignis fatuus) 917.

farhu&zan, verwAzen (curse) 951. 1223.

Farma-t^r (OlSinn) 196.

Fasat 232 fi

Fasolt 232 ft. 239. 527. 636. 748. 943.

Faste, Frau 782. 93ä.

fata, fada, f6e 405-6 n. 410-3.

fatalism 861.

father 22. 168-9.

faunus 481-2. 673.

faüra-tani (portent) 1105 n.

Faxi 656-7.

fays, f6es 410-3. 551 n.

feig, fey (marked to die) 856. 861.

FeUoia 869. 961.

fdmurc (devil) 1003.

Fd Marg&n412n. 820n.

fengari (luminary) 701 n.

Fenja 531. 864.

Fenrir, Fenris-ülfr 214-6. 667. 814.

fern-seed 1209-1211.

Feruina 1234.

fetch, fye (double, wraith) 877 n.

feaer-mann (ignis fatuus) 916 n.


feverfew 1243-4.

fialSr-hamr (wing-coat) 329.

Fialar the cock 670.

Fialar the dwarf 453. 468 n. 902.

Fichte, Frau (pine) 653. 1171.

fiefs proclaimed and bid for 787 n.

field-spinster 1088. 1099. 1124.

Fifel-dor (B. Eider) 239.

fimbul816. 825n.

Finn 219. 380. 454. 548-9. 1025.

Fidhiir 348. 696.

Fiorgyn 172. 256.

fir-tree 653.

fire, perpetual 611.

fire-beetle, für-böter 183.

firgin-bucca, firgen-gast (wild goat) 184.

fitohers-vogel 468 n.

fiur-sehen (pyro-mantia) 1111.

fiag of victory 1112.

Fleder-wisch (devil) 1063.

flehen (soothe, implore) 30.

fliht&re (guardian angel) 875.

Flore 429 n.

Flosi 831.

flower-offerings 57-8.

fly (devü) 998-9.

foal's tooth, f üli-zant 658 n.

Folcwald 165. 219.

Fold, Fuld (devü) 992 fi.

F61k-v&ngr 305.

FoUa (copia) 224. 288. 308. 889. 1232.

follet (follis) 508. 917.

fol-m4ni (full moon) 709.

folter (torture) 1076.

Folz 227.

Fonn 631. 641.

footprint, cutting out the 1098.

fordffitSa (witch) 1032.

forget-me-not 972. 1201.

fdrn (sacrifice) 40-1.

Fornax 256. 629.

Fomeotes-folme (a plant) 240. 532. 1191.

Forniotr 240. 529 631-6.

fors (waterfall) 592.

Forseti 229-232.

forst (hurst, grove) 68.

Fortuna 863-6-9. 877.

Fortunatas 869.

Fosete, Fosetes-land 84. 229-231. 600.

fosse-grim (watersprite) 282 n. 493. 592.

Frank (dog's name) 7 n,

fraua-chüeli (ladycow) 308. 694-5.

frauen-milch (a choice wine) 1194.

frauen-schliissel (cowslip) 1194.

fr&uja, fre&, fröho (lord) 22. 209.

Frea ( = Frigg) 128. 134. 301.

Fre& (AS. for Freyr) 209.

Fre4-l&f 165. 219. 313 n.

Fre&-wine viü. 93. 165. 211. 867.

Frecken-horst, Fraaoing-hyrst 801.

Freke, Fru 304.

Freki 147. 668.


1258


INDEX.


Frene, Fra 306 n.

free (oat, bear) 669.

Frey-faxi 213. 6556.

Freyja (mater of Freyr)liv. 212. 299. 417.

547. S38. 1054. 1101.
Freyja-h&r (eapillaB Veneris) 303.

1191.4.
Freyja-hoena (ladybird) 695.
Freyr 97. 114. 161-2. 630. 656-7. 790.

960.
Freys-vinr 98. 211.
Frey-vi«r 188.
Fricoa («Frigg, O'Sin^s wife) xv. 301.

947-9.
Fricoo (-Freyr) 118. 161.
FrtS (mud) 1149.
fitK-hof (asylom, Banctaary) 85 n.
Friday 123-8. 801-2.
Fri«u-wulf 165. 219.
Friedrich Bedbeard (Barbarossa) 955-9.
friend of God viii. 93.
Frigg (0«in*8 wife) xx. 270. 800. 647 n.

86071.873-4.939.1232.
Frigge-rock (Orion's belt) 270. 302. 726.
Friggjar-gras (herba oonjugalis) 802-4.
frl-mure (deril) 1003.
frisoing (pig, lamb) 50-1.
Fr6 («Freyr) 209. 478. 687.
Fro (-Freyr) 209. 211 ; Frö-bl6t 848.
Fro-berge (Frey's sword?) 216 n.
Fröf^a-miöU (gold) xUv.
FrötSi xliv. 347-8. 368. 531. 864. 871.
Froger 367-8.
Fr6-helm 215.
Fröho (-Freyr) xix. 210.
Fröja(= Freyja) 302.
fromm (pius) 88.
FrO-maot (mirth) 891.
Fro- win, FreA-wine (F.'s friend) 211.
Früa (-Freyja) xx. 224. 299. 1232.
Fruike, Fra304n.
Fruma (gain) 889.
Fmote(-Frö«i)xliü.
Fald (devil) 992 n.
Fulla (copia) 288. 308. 871. 889.
falla-fahjan (worship) 38.
falHbs (full moon) 709.
fnnken-tag (Shrove Tuesday) 628.
Fuoge, Fr6 (fitness) 311 n.
farious host 918-950.
f atter-männchen (homesprite) 510 n.

513 n.
fylgja (guardian spirit) 874-877.

gade-basse (May king) 776. 785.

gade-ild (May fire) 622.

gade-lam (May qaeen) 776.

Gaia 250-4. 575.

galadrot, caladrio (a bird) 853n. 1181.

Galar458. 468n. 902.

galdr (magic spell) 1035. 1223.

gaUng (false god, idol) 15.


gallicena (prophetess) 425 n.

gallows-manmkin 513 n.

Gallns 671.

gamban-teinn (wishing-rod ?) 976.

Gambara 362.

gand-rei1$ (witoh*s jaunt) 1052.

Ganges 600.

G&ng-lati 843.

G&ng-leri, -rft«r (OSinn) 163 n. 325.

Ganna 95-6. 403.

gap ginnünga (chaos) 558.

Gargantua 542. 554.

Garmr (hell-hound) 814.

g&rseog (sea) 601.

Garuda 633-4.

Gauchs-berg 680.

Gauden, Fru xx. 925-7.

Gaue, Fru xx. 252.

Gauta-t^r (OiSinn) 196.

Gantr 164. 868.

G&uts 23. 354 n. 367-8. 872. 888.

gavairH (peace) 17 n.

Geit 164-5. 372.

Geban 289. 600.

Gefjon 239. 311. 580. 861 n.

Gefn (Freyja) 311.

Gefuoge (fitness) 811 n.

gehenna (hell) 800.

GeüAt 739.

Geir-niörSr 217.

Geir-rö«r 529. 531.

geist, ghost, gust 439. 461.

Gelder 220.

gelmir (boisterous ?) 563.

gelstar (sacrifice) 88-9.

gemein-woche (public week) 43. 298.

genesen (get well) 1244.

Geofon 239. 600. 565 n.

George's shirt 1099.

geormen-le&f (mallow) 1216.

gepanta (a ship) 877 n.

GerSr 212. 309. 530.

Oeri 147. 668.

Gör-n6t 371.

Gersimi 886.

Gertrude xxxviii. 60. 270 n. 305. 423 n.

838.
Gertrude's fowl (woodpecker) 673.
gespenst (spectre) 914.
Gestr (QSinn) 826.
getroc, getw&s (spectre) 464. 915.
Gevis 354 n.
Giallar-hom 234.
Gibicho 137. 370. 888.
gid (song) 900-5.
giess-yogel (rainfowl) 674.
giezen (oast, mould) 23. 105 n. 142.
glfr (giantess) 526.
gigant (gianti 525.
gildan (sacrinoe) 38-9.
Giltine (plague) 1185.
GimiU (new neayen) 823.


INDEX.


1259


ginnan (yawn, gape) 820. 408. 558 n. 748.

ginnünga-gap (chaos) 558. 562.

gin-regin fgods) 320.

GiöU (river of hell) 802-3.

girregar (ignis fataoB) 917.

Oisla-han 371.

Giuki 370.

GU«8-heimr (site of Valhöll) 820.

Glasis-landr (-grove) 76.

glass-castle, -honse 820 n.

glass-mountain 820 n. 836 n.

Glauons 696.

gleo, gleo-man, gleo-crasft 901.

Gier 658.

Glis-bom (-bum) 938.

Glitnir (Baldr's haU) 229.

Gloggen-sahs, Mount 444.

gluck-henne (Pleiades) 728.

glücks-haube (child's caul) 874.

Gn& 884. 896-7.

gnid-eld (need-fire) 607.

go, go about, walk (haunt) 915.

goat 184-5. 995. 1076.

goat-hallowing 52. 996.

gobelin (homesprite) 502.

God, go«, gu1$, got 13.

God and me, welcome to 16.

God*s joy 17, industry 17 n., anger 18,
hatr&d 19, goodness 20, power 20-1,
fatherhood 22, chair 136. 733, eye
146n., judgment 1108.

goddess 250.

Gode, Fru258. 927n.

god-forgotten (horehound) 1192.

goS-gft (blasphemy) liii. 7 n. 20.

god-gubbe (Thor) 167.

go«i (priest) 88. 93.

GoiS-mundr 823 n. 398.

Go^ormr, ' Dana go{$ ' 161.

gods 99 ; not immortal 316-320.

gods* images 63-4. 105-119.

gods* language 331-4.

gods' vehicles 107. 327-9.

God-wulf 165. 219. .

gofar, gaffer (Thor) 167.

Göi 253.

gold-burg (pah&ce) 820.

Goldemar 453. 466. 509. 1190.

gold-ferch (-hog) 51. 213.

golden dame 130 n.

gold-homed cows 55. 665.

gold-sele (palace) 820.

Gondul 420-1.

Göntzöl 725-6.

good-fellow (goblin) 500.

good- man (priest) 89.

good people, good neighbours 456.

good-womau 89 n. 429. 430 n. 1059.

goose 1098.

goose-foot 281. 429. 450-1 n.

gömtuga-ve^r (magic wind) 640.

gossamer 783-4.


gota-betti (altar) 68 n.

gotes friunt (friend) viii. 93 n.

gotes ouwe (ea) 225 n.

gotewuoto, godowöde (tyrant) 132.

gotinne (goddess) 250 n.

got-man (man of God) 174 n.

götze (false god, idol) 15.

G6z(»G&uts) 23.368.

Grail, the holy 872.

graman, gramir (devils) 990-1.

Grampus (goblin) 515.

grandfather, AtU xlvu. 169.

Grani (O^inn) 147. 392. 944. 978.

Grant 243. 994.

Gratiae 143.

green meadow, vale 822. 830 n. 980 n.

Grende l 243. 496. 1000. 1016.

grey maii (d^Vil) yyö, iu25.

grey mannikin 449.

Grey-mantle 146 n.

gritSa-mark (token of peace) 902.

gri1$a-8ta'5r (sanctuary) 85 n.

grtSr (giantess) 526.

gri£an 998, griffin's gold 980.

grlma (mask) 238. 1045.

Gxim-hüdr, Kilm-hilt 238. 423.

Grimme 556.

Grimming 171.

Grlmnir (OSinn) xv. 146. 637. 667.

Grimr Oegir 1017.

grindel (bolt, bar) 243.

Grlpir94. 861n. 979n.

Gröa 373-5. 1249.

grom, gmmmel (thunder) 178. 184.

883
Grönjette 944.

Grötti (wishing-miU) 531. 871.
Grzmilas (dog's name) 7 n.
guardian angel 874-7.
Gübich 453. 480.
Gucken-berg 953.
Gudens-berg 152. 938.
gudja (priest) 88.
güete (lovingkindness) 760.
güetel (goblin) 481.
Gull-faxi 655-7.
Gullin-bursti 213-4. 871.
Gullin-tanni 234.
Gull-toppr234.658.
Gull-veig 403.
Gülpe, Blut-gOlpe 1248.
Gümir 237 n.

Gunda-hari, Gunnarr 371. 877 n.
gunde-rebe (ground ivy) 1212.
Gundia, Gunnr, GülS 422. 890.
Güngnir 147. 846. 870.
Gunnlö« 367. 530. 902. 1188.
Guogo943n.

guot, vil guot (right gracious) 1202 tt.
Guro-iysse 945-6.
Gustr 461. 630.
GuBtr&t 748 n.


1260


INDEX.


gate holde (elf) 266. 456. 462. 1067 n.

1074. 1166.
gute Lubbe 626.
Gwodan 134.

Gwydion xxix. 160 n. 867 n. 412 n.
g.tgr (giant) 626. 661.
Oyllir 658.
G^mir287n.

Habonde 286-7.

Hadbarc 428. 484.

Haddingr 342-7.

Hades 813. 836. 804 n. 864-6.

Hading 146.

Hada 196. 207. 223. 888.

hasten gold 689.

lisgeBse, hegtesse (witoh) 1040. 1244.

hsBm 1244 n.

haf-gtgr, hafg-frau (watersprite) 488.

404-7. 662. 869.
Hagano, Hagene 371. 424-8. 434.
hagazusa, hagetisse (witch) 1040.
HagbarSr 398 n.
hagebart (mask) 1046 n.
hag-ridden, hag-rode 464.
hail! 16.

hail-making 1086-7.
hainal (dawn) 749.
Hakel 693.

Hakel-berend 146. 921-3.
Hakel-berg 921-2. 1001-2.
Hakel-block 921.

hakola-bairands (cloak-wearing) 147.
hÄle-wiege (holy water) 1246.
H&lfdan the old 393.
h&lf-risi (half-giant) 533 n.
Halja ( = Hel) 312. 800. 839.
halla (temple) 86.
Hall-biörn 667.
HaUe 1047 n. 1048.
hall-feuer (Shrove Tuesday) 628.
Hallin-ski^i 234.
halp-fal (half -grown boar) 996.
Hamadio, Hamdir 196.
hamadryads 653.
Hamar 181. 883-6 n.
Ham-glöm 637. 1042.
hamingja (guardian -spirit) 874-7.
hammer 11 n. 180-2. 188. 605. 999. 1221.
hampelmann (goblin) 502-8.
hands, bear on the (make much of) 891.
HÄnga-t.tr (0«inn) 146. 196.
Hans, Jack 616 n. 652.
•hans, -hansel in goblins* names 606 n.

611.
Hans aftens Mass (Mids. fire) 622.
hant (fashion) : alte, uiuwe 1130.
hapt (god) 26.
HÄr (high) 162.
HarbarSr 147.
Harke, Frau 263.
Harlunge golt 982.


Harthgrepa 666.

haruc (temple) 68.

harugari (priest) 88.

hasehart (chance) 887.

haspel-holz (spindle-wood) 652.

hatching-dollar 871.

Hati 244. 706.

Haule-mannikins (dwarfs) 466.

Haule-mutter (HoUe) 466.

hawthorn 183 n.

Hazel, Dame ; hazel-rod 661-9.

head-uncovering 82. 165. 662.

HealSo, Hadu 223.

Heardingas 342-7.

heart- worm 1169.

hearth-gods 500.

heathen In.

heathen-pelting 191.

heaven-scaling, -storming 530.

heben- wang (paradise) 821.

Hecate 949. 1042.

heck-mannehen (homesprite) 613.

He«inn 424. 1095.

Hei^i 637.

Hei-Sr 98. 403. 1042.

Hei«-rün 8ia

heila-wfto (holy wave) 585-6.

heil-brunnen (healing springs) 587.

heiligen-forst, -holt, -loh 74-6.

Heiling 453.

heilisari (augur), heilis6d (omen) HOC.

heimchen (elf) 276-6. 446. 459 n. 861.

Heimdallar-vatn 235.

HeimlSallr xl. 22. 238. 361. 671-4.

Heimdalls-houg 235.

Heimo 387. 627. 689. 861.

Hein, Friend (death) 446. 851.

hein (hone, stone wedge) 378. 533-5.

903 n.
heinchen (elf) 459 n. 851.
heinen-kleed (shroad) 446.
Heinz, Heinzelman 503-9.
heiss-hunger (dog-hunger) 1169.
Hekel-berg, -velde K)01-2.
Hekla, Heklu-fiall 923. 1002. 1052.
heklu-maiSr (OSinn) 146. 223. 246. 312.

8^.
Hel 839. 844. 1188.
Hel-blindi 246.

hel-grind (-grating, -rail) 802.
hel-hest (-horse) 844.
hel -kappe (cloak of darkness) 462.
Hel rei« (-ride) 802.
hel sk6 (death-shoe) 836.
hel-viti (-torment) 313. 805.
Hel-voet (-foot) 316 n. 804. 834.
held (hero) 341.
Helena 560n. 906. 974. 1194.
Helga-fell 646.
Helgi 888. 818.
HeHas 370.
Heligo-land 230.


INDEX.


1261


HelinmSlSfi. 834.

heU-bar 243. 1000.

hell-constable 1001.

hell-gate 802-3.

hell-goat 995.

hell-hound 996-7. 814 ft.

hell-jager (hunter) 155. 930. 1006.

hell-raven 997.

hell-wagen (death-car) 802.

hell-weg (death-way) 801.

hella-flur, -wlzi (gehenna) 800-5.

helle-grdve (devil) 993.

helle-kruke (witch) 1064 n.

Helle-put (-pit, -well) 804-7.

helle-warc, -wolf (devil) 996.

helle-warte, -wirt (devil) 1001-2.

Hellenes 534.

Hellequin, mesnie de 941.

helli-rüna (necromancy) 1225-8.

helot-helm (cap of darkness) 463. 870.

Hemmerlin 181. 1004.

Hemming Wolf 381.

hen and chickens (Pleiades) 728.

henbane, »ee bilse.

Hennil (dawn) 749.

Henricns, bonus (chenopodium) 1213.

Heofon-feld in Northumbria 234.

Hephfestns (Vnloan) 241. 308. 378. 472.

571. 984.
Hera (earth ?) 254.
H@ra (Juno) 306-8. 821-2-6. 680.
Herbout 888.
Hercules 103. 111-9. 121. 161 n. 227«.

353. 363 4. 516 n. 547 n. 1148.
Hercules Saxanus 365.
Heremdd 164-5. 224.
her-fa^ir (father of hosts) 22. 133.
Herfiötr 401. 422.

Herimuot 224.

Herja-fö«r, Herjan (0«inn) 22. 817.

Herkja 253.

Herlaugr 394.

Hermen sla dermen 855.

hermae (pillars of Hermes) 118.

Hermes xxviii. 111. 149. 150. 321-7. 343.

354. 516 n. 841-3. 869. 906. 976. 1125.
Hermino 345. 351.

HermölSr 224. 802.

Hermundnri 118. 359.

Heme the hunter 942.

Herodias 283. 632. 883. 933. 1055-7-8.

heros, hero 341.

herra-waga (Charles-wain) 724.

herre (not her, for God) 22.

Hertha 256 n.

hertinga (heroes) 342.

Hern 204. 885 n.

Her-vör 424-5.

her-wagen (Charles-wain) 151.

Hestia 611.

Hesus xxix. 204. 663.

hevan 698.


heven-ring (rainbow) 359 n.

hexe (witch) 1039.

hexen-tuBch (witches* rout) 279 n.

Hia-Sningar 940. 1095.

hi61m-mey (valkyr) 418.

HickenUd 856 n.

Hidimbas (a giant) 555.

Hilde 285. 422 n. 632.

Hilde-grlm, Grtm-hildr 238.

Hilden-straet (milky way) 285. 357 n.

Hüdr, Hütia 422-4.

Hille 1247.

Hüle-snee (HoUe-snd?) 268 n. 804.

Hillegers-berg 537.

Hüta 208. 1247.

Himeles-berg, Himin-biörg 233. 669n.

himel- wagen (Charles-wain) 151. 701 n.

himmel-tatl (-daddy) 168.

hinke-bein (devil) 993.

Hinze, Hiazelman 503.

hiona-graa (conjugalis) 302-4.

hirrlig-spor (devious track) 916.

Hisi 552.

Hiuki and Bil fman in moon) 717.

hiuri, geheuer- (snug, safe) 914.

Hla«-gu«r 424-5.

Hladolet (planet Saturn) 130n.

hlaut-bollar (blood-bowls) 55.

Hldr 240-1. 631. 883.

HlÄs-ey 240.

HltS-ski&lf 135-6. 817 n.

Hilf, Hltf.)>ursa 1149.

Hlin 874. 884-9.

Hlock 401. 422. 887.

Hlö«r 76. 389. 874 n.

Hlö«yn 167 n. 266.

H16r-ri«i, Eind-ri«i (Thörr) 167 ft. 187.

257.
Hludana 256. 266 fi. 883.
Hnikarr. Hniku^r (0«Lnn) 489. 908.
Hnoss 886.
hoard-lifting 970.
hobgoblin 503 ft. 504 ft.
Hödeken 463. 508, conf. 641.
nmi 220-3. 823.
Hoenir xl. 151. 162. 241-2. 823.
hof (temple) 85.
H6f-varpnir 896-7.
högbergs-gubbe (giant) 189. 536-7.
Högni(Hagano)424.
hoho! 928.
Holda XV. XX. 265-272. 285. 456. 487.

596. 883. 911-2. 933-4. 946-7-9. 968.

1055. 1162.
holden 272. 487. 1073-4.
Hölgi, Hölga-brülSr 637.
Holle, Frau 267-8 n. 273 fi. 456. 840.

934-5. 1088.
Holle.frau269fi.
Holle-peter, -pöpel 269. 506. 515.
Hollen-zopf (plica Polon.) 464. 1156.
Holle*s pond 268 fi.


1262


INDEX.


holta.|>drr (fox) 177.

Holywell 587.

Holywood 74.

holz-frowe (wood-wife) 438. 488.

holz-maoja, -runs (wood-wife) 433.

1185.
home-sprite 499-515.
Honour, Dame 891.
Hood, Bobin 504.
hoop-trundling 628.
hoopoo 681-2.
Hopfen-hütel 505 n. 508.
höpt (gods) 26.
Horant 908.

hörga-brü^r, .tröU (giantess) 114. 637.
hom-bUse, -|>uta (witch) 1061.
horn of plenty 869-872.
hom-troU (beetle) 183. 692.
horse 392. 655-664.
horse-flesh 47. 1049.
horse-footed 994. 1050.
horse's head 47-8. 618. 659. 660-1.

787 n. 841-4-9. 850. 1050.
horses* heads on gables xxiz. 660-1.
horses sacrificed 47-8.
Horsel-berg 935. 959. 1052.
hors-gök (snipe) 184.
Hothems 180. 220. 431.
Höttr (01$inn| 146. 1025 n.
household gods 500.
houseleek, stonecrop 183.
Hrfe-svelgr 638-5.
hr&iTa-dnb6 (corpse-dove) 1184.
HrS^Sa 206. 290.
Hrede 289. 885-6.
Hrede.m6na9 (March) 206. 248.
Hregg-mlmir (heaven) 700.
Hrim-fazi 328 330. 641. 655-6.
Hrim-ger5r, Hilmnir 532.
hrlm-|>urs (giant) 532.
Hrddo 206. 248-9.
HroS-vitnir 244.
Hromolan 171.

Hröpta-t^r, Hröptr (0«mn) 196.
hrossa-gaukr, horse-gowk (snipe) 184.
Hross-h&rs-grani (O^inn) 858.
Hrftngnir 321. 527. 533.
Hruod4 290.
Hruodo 206. 248-9.
Hug-dietrich 393.
Huginn 147. 671.
Hugleioh, HygelAc tu.
Huldana xi. xx. 266 n.
huldi (favour, grace) 18.
Huldra 271. 452-3. 946.
Huldre-slat (-lay) 271. 470.
Huldu-fölk 272. 452.
human sacrifices 44.
Hunding 696.
hüne (giant) 522--i. 529 n.
Hunger 888.
hunger-spring 590-1.


Huns 523.

hunsl, hüsel, honsel 39. 40.

hunter, the wild, forions (devil) 1006.

huoroo (ogre) 486.

hfising (homesprite) 500.

Hfitchen (^-Hodeke) 508.

Hfitt, Fran 533.

huzd (hoard) 970.

Hvergelmir 558. 563. 796. 803.

hvita qvinna (white woman) 955 n.

Hyfja-berg 1149.

H^r 529.

Hyndla 98. 813fi. 1054.

Hyrieus xxxix.

Hyirokin (a giantess) 542. 1054.

lafn-hAr (oo-equal) 162.

lalkr 366.

larSar-megin (earth's might) 642.

larSar-men (sward) 807. 643.

iarkna-steinn (orphanus, opal?) 1217.

iam-greipr (Th6r*s gloves) 1094 n.

lam-haus 528. 533.

lam-saxa 321. 530-3.

iam-vi'Sja (wood-wife) 483.

Ibor 862.

Ida 836.

I«avöUr 822.

Idisia-viso 401.

idol-pelting 190-1. 782-8.

I«unn 236. 819. 871.

niy& (EUjah) 166. 173-4.

illumination 630.

Hmarinen xxxi.

image 104-5 n.

images of gods 104-119.

Imelöt 885 n.

Imelunge hort (hoard) 982.

incarnation 33C^.

incense 57.

incubo, incubus 481. 511.

Indra xxxiü. 145. 733. 1221.

ineihan (vow an offering) 37-8.

infem, 'fern (hades) 802.

in-geside (house-god) 500.

Ingo 845-9.

in-goumo (homesprite) 500.

Ino 374. 496n.

insakön (sacrifice) 87.

inveitan (worship) 29.

lo 338. 843. 666.

löfur, Ibor 862.

iohdi (ghosts) 940.

iol (yule) 702.

löriS (earth) 251.

lörmun-gandr 118. 182. 246. 794.

lörmun-grund 118.

iötull (giant) 520.

lötun-heimr 375. 530.

iötun-mötSr (giant's rage) 530.

iötun-ox (beetle) 692.

iötunn (giant) 519.


INDEX.


1263


Iring 234-5. 85^-362. 1148.

Iris 733. 1192.

Irman-sCa 101. 115-9. 353. 799.

Irmenfried, Irnyiit 358-9.

irminllS. 353n.

Irmino 351-362.

Irpa 98. 113-4. 445. 637. 1088-9.

irprottan (tranced) 1083.

Irre-gang 917.

irr-krant (fem) 1210.

irr-lioht, ixr-wisch (ignis fatnos) 916.

Isan-grtn (woli) 238.

Isama 372.

Isamo-dori 80.

Isco 345-9. 571.

IsiB 103. 120. 257-265.

Iskrzycki 513 n. 917. »

ispolin 527.

Isfii (seif) 1027.

Istaeyones 350-1.

Istio 351.

Itermon 165.

itis, idea, die (nymph) 97. 400-1.

luwaring 358-9 n.

I-yaldi 454.

t-vitSr (grove, firmament) 483. 795.

i-Ti-5ja (wood-wife) 483.

Jack giant-killer 531 n.

o' lantern 917.

player xvi. xli. 818. 1007.

pudding, Hans-wnrst 515.

Jameses road (milky way) 357 n.

Btaflf (Orion'B belt) 727.

Janns 22 n.

Jemahid 872.

JesuB 1248.

Jettha96n. 520 ft.

John (Baptist) 284. 1209. 1210- 1-3.

John's eye 588-590.

flres 43. 604. 612. 617-624.

girdle (mngwort) 1211.

head 285. 631.

minne 60-1-2. 628.

• wort (hypericum) 1214.

jüdel (goblin) 481.
Judgment day 815-6.
jnger (witch's worm) 1074 n.
jaggler, gaukler 1038.
jn-glans (acorn) 172.
Jagola (Orion) 726.
Jul (yule) 702.
jul-bock (goblin) 516.
Julias CsBsar 85 n.
jumping into 55 n., j. oat 952 fi.
jung-brunne (fount of youth) 433. 588.
Juniper, Dame 652.
Juno 306. 637. 961. 1176.
Jupiter 22. 44 n. 72. 107. 121-2. 168-9.
175. 189. 190-1. 859. 1101.

Apenninus 169.

-—^ ardens 110.


Jupiter dapalis 1236.

geld (-money) 190.

niger 993.

Jüterbock, smith of, xli.
Jutes, Jutland 519.

kabout (goblin) 502.

kaiser, the old 958-9 n.

Kalewa 552.

EÄU315. 773n.

Kalis 1015.

kalledos (Cbristmas) 627 n.

^llewepoeg 558.

Kämaduh 871.

kamban (human sacrifice T) 44.

kapel-trete (hypocrite) 35 n.

Eftra 423-4-7.

K&ri 240. 631-6. 883.

karo, karawi (sacrifice) 41.

kater-man (goblin) 503.

Katzen-yeit (wood-sprite) 480. 503.

kelkropf, kielkropf (changeling) 468.

iHip (fate) 426. 435.

KTip^Ktiw (Hermes' staff) 976.

Eettil Bunske 1226.

key-turning 1109.

khodit (god) 14.

kidnapping 466-8. 1059. 1073.

kiesen (choose, diyine) 1037.

Kifhäuser 955.

Idlohen, yor (outside of church) 1227-8.

kinan (yawn, gape) 320. 558 n.

kirke-grim 493 n.

kirkonwäki (dwarfs) 457 n,

Eirt 248-9.

kissing 1101.

klag-mutter (owl, woodwife, witch) 432.

1135.
Elaubauf (goblin) 515.
Klinte-könig940n.
klopfer, knocker (homesprite) 505.
klO-sigi (claw-sinking) 633.
klucke, kluck-henne (Pleiades) 728-9.
kobolt (homesprite) 500-1.
koleda (midwinter) 628.
koltki (homAsprites) 480 n.
korr, korred, korrigan (elf) 447. 455.

469 n.
Eotar (man in moon) 719 n.
kotz ! (for Gottes) 15.
Eralemoc (planet Jupiter) 130 n.
Erämpus (goblin) 515.
kres (midsummer) 623.
KrlmhUt 238.
Erishna 884.
Krodo 206 n. 248-9.
Eronos (Saturn) 219. 318. 833 n.
Euga 1188.

kukavitsa (cuckoo) 682.
Eullervo 552.
kumtr (idol) 105 n.
kup&lmtsa, kupöles (John's wort) 624.


1264


INDEX.


Knpalo (lüdBummer fiie) 624.
Kurt 918 ru
knn (moon) 725-9.
KuYdra (god of wealth) 322.
Evftsir xxxiz. 819. 902-5.
kveld-ri'Sa (witch) 1053-4-7.
Kveld-Ülfr 1U54 n.

lAo (saorifice) 39.
laoes, tying the 1078. 1175.
Lachesis 414-5.
Lada 130 n.

Lady-, tee franen-, Freyja , Mary's,
ladybird, ladycow 803. 694.
LaeralSr 818.
Laertes 365-6.
Laima 416n. 877.
lake-herd, see-hirt 480.
Lakshmi 308. 664 n. 1196.
Lamia 500 n. 514.
land-&8 (national god) 188. 217.
land-vsBtt (guardian spirit) 877.
L4ng-barSr (O^inn) 958.
Lang-bein (giant) 533. 556.
lar (house-god) 500. 918.
l-urva (mask, spectre) 500 ti. 918.
Lauf-ey 246. 483n.
laughing 1101.

Lauma's girdle (rainbow) 788.
Laurln 448-9 n. 453. 465-6. 470.
lea, leigh 69 n.
lead, pouring melted 1118-9.
league-boots 871.
leber-mer (liver- sea) 868.
Leda 338. 843. 666.
Leiptr 600.
Idkeis. leech 1150.
Lei 366. 783.
Lemminkäimen 185 n.
Lent, Lenz 754.
L^to (summer) 754. 770-1.
Leucothea 496 n. 747-8.
Leviathan 182. 998.
Liber 212. 306.
Libes, priest of the Catti 91.
Liebino, Modus 561. 902 n.
liezen (cast lots, divine) 1110.
life restored 184-5 n.
ligaturae 1173-5.
LiUth 575.

lind-wurm (dragon) 688.
lios-filfar (light elves) 444.
liuflingar (elves) 456. 471.
Liumending, Liumet (fame) 898.
lock, fastening the 1073. 1175.
Lo«-f&fnir 372.
LoKr 162. 241-2.
log pelting 190. 783.
Logi 240-3. 631. 883. 1017.
Loka-daun (ignis fatuue) 242. 916.
Loki xl. xH. 162. 241^. 308. 827. 888.
547. 883. 1011-7.


Loptr 246. 632. 882.

lot-oasting, -drawing 1037. 1110.

love-apple, -cake, -cUink 1102.

loving-cup 60 n.

Inbbe, lubber 525-6-9.

lubi, lyf (drugs) 1151.

Lucifer 723 n. 985.

Lucina 1176.

lucus, 15h, le&h 69 n.

lüdara, lüVr (ark) 559 n. 580. 983.

ludegheer (man in moon) 720.

ludki (elves) 452-5.

Luna 103 n. 119. 705.

luoti (changeling) 469 n.

Lupus, 8t 175 n.

Lurlen-berg 982.

lutin (homesprite) 508.

Lutter-bom 591 n.

Lutz, Frau (St Lucy) 274 n.

lyncurius (lynx stone) 1219.

l^ng-ormr, l^ngvi (diagon) 689.

Macabre, danse 851.
machandel-boom (juniper) 652.
Machaon 1148.
MadalgSr 387. 484. 1209.
"MsBre (fame) 897.
•magan-wetar (whirlwind) 832. 632.
magic, magician 1031. 1106.
Magila (plague) 1185.
Maglore 412-8 n. 1203.
Magni 189. 321. 828.
Magonia 638-9.
magpie 675.

mi^te, mahmina (mother) 22.
maiden-summer, prop. Mättohen-som-

mer (gossamer^ 784.
mai-käfer (cockcnafer) 698.
maira nocturna 1246.
majalis sacrivus 50.
majority, going to the 847.
Malagis, Maugis xlvii.
malannus (boil ; plant) 1160. 1235.
mal-feu (hell-fire ?) 602.
malleus (devil) 999.
Mallina (sun) 703. 716.
mammelainen (dragoness) 691.
Mamurienda (death) 771.
man in the moon 716-720.
man, mannisko 344-5.
M&na-garmr (moon dog) 244« 705.
Mana-golt 581. 1209.
Manala (hades) 806 n. 855.
mana-s^l« (world) 793-5.
mandragora 1202-4.
manducus (ogre) 514. 1082.
manes (ghost) 913.
man-ezze (ogre) 520 n.
M&n-hart (moon wood) 708.
mani, men (necklace) 806-8.
M&ni (moon) 705. 716.
Mänin-s^o (moon lake) 708.


INDEX.


1265


man-leUca (image) 104 n.

mann-flBta (man-eater, witeh) 1081.

Mannne tu. xi. 344-5. 579.

manön (adjure) 1228.

mano-ratha 870-2.

Mansnetus, St 175 n.

mantel-fabre (witoh) 1071.

Manns 345. 571-8.

mara, meara, msre (nightmare) 464.

1154. 1246.
Marena (death) 771. 841.
mar-g^gr (wateraprite) 488. 492.
mari-greoz, mer-griez (pearl) 1219.
Mari-rok (Orion's belt) 270. 303. 726.
mari-sAivs (ocean) 601.
Marko 392-3. 436.

Markolfns (spectre) 944.
mar-mennill (wateraprite) 434. 487.
Marpalie 1026 n. 1098.

Mars 84. 103-7. 111-9. 133. 196-9. 204-7.
260. 353. 650. 673. 939 n. 1006. 1046-7.
1193.

Marso 362.

Marspiter 196.

Martin, St., cattle's guardian 1241.

Martin's fowl (martin) 1131-2.

Martis fanum, Fa-mars 84. 198.

Mary xzxvii. 174. 182. 268 n. 270. 303-6.
416n. 883. 1148. 1192-4.

Mary's chafer (ladybird) 694.

grass (maidenhair) 303.

image 76». 114 n. 313 n. 595.

shoe (lady's slipper) 1194.

snow 268 n.

thread, yam (gossamer) 471. 784.

Marzana (death) 771. 841.

masca (witch) 1082.

mater deum (Cybele) 254.

mathematioi (magicians) 1031.

matres, matronae 417. 1246.

Matuta 496 n.

man-fez (devil) 988.

May 759-762.

drink 778 n.

fires 43. 612-4. 628.

grave, -king 775-7.

pole 614 n. 778.

riding 774-9.

measuring the sick 1163-5.

megin-giarSar (Thör's belt) 1094 n.

megir HeimlSaUar (created beings) 234.

mein-weke (common week) 298.

meisa (titmouse) 683. 897.

Melde, Frau (fame) 898.

mel-dropi, mele-deaw, mil-ton 641.

Meleager 415. 853-4.

mella (giantess) 526.

Mellonia 697.

Melusina 434.

Memerolt 526.

Memnon 742.

Mendel-berg 170 n. 820.


MenelaoB 822.

Men-glö« 96 ft. 272 n. 307 n. 423-4. 1149.

Menja 531. 864.

Mennor 345.

Mercurius 103-7. 111. 120-2. 128. 132-3.

149. 150-1. 164. 353-4. 386 n. 976. 997.

1046-7.
mer-fei (sea fay) 434.
meridianuB daemon 478 n. 1162.
meri-minni (mermaid) 433-5. 487.
Merlin 469. 507 n. 1207.
Mer-meut 636.
Merovings 391.
Mers-berg, -burg 198-9. 205.
Merseburg Lays 224. 1231.
mer-wlp, mer-wunder 4B3. 488.
merza-folli (woodpecker) 673 n. 678. 1131.
Mesitch 215.

metamorphosis, metempsychosis 951.
metod, meotod, miötutSr (creator) 22.

26-7.
metten (fate) 408 n.
meume-loch (nix's lake) 490.
mezzen (to sbape) 22-3. 105 n. 142.
Michael 636-8. 859. 876. 1029. 1235.
Mi^-garSr (abode of man) 560. 794.
Mit$gar5s-ormr (world-snake) 182. 244 n.

601. 794.
midjxm-gards (world) 794.
Midsummer, Midwinter 757.

fires 43. 617-624.

milk-mother (snake) 687.

milk-stealer (witch) 1072.

Milky way 356-8.

millwheel water 692-8.

milzinas (giant) 526.

Mfma-mei-Sr (-tree) 76. 379. 670.

Mime 380.

Miming 379.

Mimir 94. 378-9. 700-2. 1148.

Mimis-brunnr (-fount) 379. 587. 796.

Mimminc, 376 n.

Minerva 1192.

Minne (love) 893.

minne-drinking 59-63.

minni (nymph) 433-5.

minnis-veig (loving-cup) 60.

MiöU 631. 641.

Miöhih- 180. 238n. 813. 870. 1221.

missere (half-year) 756.

Mist (a valkyr) 421. 883.

mistil-teinn, mistletoe 220. 1205.

Mith-othin 163 n.

Mithras 323.

mock-piety 35 n.

mock-sun 708.

mddra-neeht (Christmas night) 753.

md'Sur-flBtt (lap of earth) 642.

moirai (fates) 414. 435.

molken-töversohe Switch) 1072.

molniya (lightning) 1221.

moly 1192.


1266


INDEX.


monks-hood 1193.

month 708.

mont-joie, mont-giow 170 n. 820.

moon 700-720.

moon's spots 716-720.

mors, mora (elf) 464 ii.

morblen! 15 n.

Morena (death) 771. 841.

morgan, morwen 748.

Morgana xM. 412 n. 641. 820 n.

Morgue 412.

Mormo 500 n.

moss-folk 488-4. 929.

mother earth 253-4. 642. 1238.

mother of gods 254-5.

mountain-wights 454-5.

mouse-maker 1090.

mud-spelli (fire) 808-9.

müemlein, aunty (cat) 1128.

mugwort 624. 1211-2.

mumhart (goblin) 506.

Mämling B. 490.

mummel (water-lily) 489. 506. 654. 915.

Mummel-Bee 490. 597.

Mundü-föri 703.

Muninn 147. 671.

muniön (adjure) 1228.

Mxmn-harpa, -riiSa 1052.

Munya 178 n. 883. 1221.

muome (aunt) 490.

Muotes her (furious host) 15 n. 931.

Musa 902. 910.

Muspell, MuspiUi 11. 558. 601. 807-8.

myrk-ri-Sa (witch) 1054-7.

myrk-Ti'Sr (-wood) 480.

nack-ros, -blad (water-dock) 489.

N&dala 246. 887.

nafn-festi (naming feast) 135 n.

Nagl-far (naU-ship) 814.

Nagl-fari 785.

naht, niht, nött (night] 736.

naht-fara, -frowa (witch) 1057-8.

Naht-olf 1054 n.

nahwe (death) 841.

naiad (fountain-sprite) 435 n.

Nftinn (a dwarf) 453. 841.

n&ir (elves) 445.

NÄ1 246. 1029.

Nanna 220. 232n. 310. 490.

Napf-hans (goblin) 511.

nappel-fang (mating method) 1117 8.

Nah 246.

Narren-berg (fool's hill) 681 n.

Nascentia 858.

nature- worship 243 n.

Naui$ (necessity) 410.

navel-stone, omphalos 806.

nebel-kappe (cloak of dukness) 462.

Neckar K. 490.

nectar 317.

need-fire 603-612.


NehflBa, Nehalennia 257. 419 n. 489.
neiges, notre dame aux 268 n.
neighing of horses 658. 1113.
Nemesis 866. 890.
nennir (watersprite) 490.
Nentigdr232fi.

neorxena-wong (paradise) 405 «. 821.
Neptunus 110. 121-2. 148. 260. 489.

497.
Neri 408.
Nertereani 252 n.
Nerthus (Sansk. Nritns) xi. xx. 217.

251^256. 487. 596.
nesBO (worm) 1162. 1235.
NiarSar-vöttr (spongia marina) 218. 1191.
Nibel6t885n.
«Nibelunge 564. 979.
Nibelung's hoard 871-2. 979.
Nibling 979.
nichus, nicker, nicor (watersprite) 148.

488.
Nick, bid 488. 989. 1004.
nickelmann (watersprite) 488.
Nicolaus, Nidas (goblin) 505. 514-5.
nils (old moon) 710. -
Nideck castle 53a
N»$-höggr 796. 800.
Ni«i 454. 710.

ntS-staung (spite-stake) 659. 660.
Nielsen 504-5.

Nifl-heimr 558. 564. 800-3-6.
Nifi-hel 313. 803.
night 736.

night-folk (elves) 470; (spectres) 921-^.
night-mare, naht-mar 464. 1058«.

1246-7.
night-riding 1053-4.
nigromancy 1036n. 1111 n.
nikuz, nix (watersprite) 148. 489.
nimbus 323.
nimidas (groves ?) 648.
nines 48. 421. 602. 641. 795. 1157.

1161-2. 1214.
NioriSr 216-9. 252-6. 347. 530.
Nissen 504-8. 511.
niQJi>s, niu-mAni (new moon) 709.
nix, nixe (watersprite) 488.
nix-blume (waterdock) 488.
Noah's flood 576.
Nöa-tün 217.

nobis- kratten, -krug ^heU) 805-6. 1003.
nod-fyr, nöt-fiur (neea fire| 603-4.
nönnor OSins (vaJkyrs) 418.
Noma-gest 409. 853-4.
noms (fates) 405-417.
north 34. 493. 802. 1001.
Norvi 735.

N6tt (night) 656. 735-7.
novem capita 53.
nundinae (week) 123.
n^ (new moon) 710.
N^ji. NJr 454. 710.


INDEX.


1267


nymphae 415-6. 481-6. 480.

oaks, holy 72-7. 171-2. 651.

Ober-land 180.

Oberon, Anberon xlvi. 453. 872.

obor (giant) 526.

Oceanaa 237.

October eqaas 1050 n.

O-dÜns-akr 823 n.

Odas-hdm (paradise) 821.

Oddiner 15 n.

Oddrün 1150. 1176.

odebero (stork) 672.

Oden (a giant) 543.

Oden-berg 953.

Oden-waldl59n.

Odens-fors (-fall) 159.

Odens-källa (-spring) 158^

0«-hrcBrir 319. 902-4.

OSinn xl. 131. 318. 320. 347-9. 417-9.

489. 840. 858-9. 873-4. 902-4. 988.

1018-9. 1112-3. 1133. 1226. 1232.
OVins-ey (-isle) 158.

flisor (.flints) 154n.

hani (-hen, a waterfowl) 159.

sabr (-hall) 158-9. 817. 1133.

sten 155 n.

ve (-temple) 158-9.

Odoaoer 373.

odolian (valerian) 1208.

0«r 805. 905.

Oegir 237-240. 311-2. 529. 531. 636. 883.

Oegis-dyr (B. Eider) 239.

Oegis-bialmr (-helmet) 237-8. 870.

Oeso, Oesoingas 350. 572.

OffaS88.

Ofnir 685.

O-föti (onfoot) 1043-4.

Ogautan 640.

Oggewedel (devil) 1003.

Ogier, Otger 936 n. 961.

ogre 486. 554-5.

Ogyges 578.

Okkupeemis 637.

Öku->drr 166. 243n.

Olaf 631. 548-9.

Olafs-källa (-spring) 588 n.

olbrzym (giant) 526.

old, the 21-2. 529. 989.

Olda 271.

01eg949n.

Ölgötze (idol) 15.

Olleras 163 n. 228 n.

ölp (elf) 443.

Ölrün 380. 404. 424-5. 1226.

-olt in giants* names 502. 527.

Olympus 336.

Omacmioa 500 n. 514.

omaya (millwheel water) 593.

Omi 144-5. 208. 237.

öminnis-öl (oblivion's ale) 1101.

on 46. 1153.

VOL. III.


Onar, Anar 735.

öndur-dls (wise woman) 402.

Ons-ftngar (OtSin's ings) 156.

on-seogan (devote, vow) 37.

Onsike 159.

opfer (saorifloe) 35. 41.

G^s mater 254.

Örbo«a 1149.

orone, orken (woodsprite) 486 w.

Oroas 314. 463. 486.

ordeal 1108.

Orentel xxviii. 874.

ÖrgeUnir 529. 532. 559. 563.

Orion xxxix. 726. 730. 948-9.

ör-lög, ur-lao (destiny) 410. 857.

ormr 1 auga (basilisk glance) 238.

Ormuzd 984.

Orpheus 908.

Örvandils-tA (-toe) 875. 723.

Os-beom, Os-pirin 25 n. 668.

oscillmn (mask, head?) 78 n.

Osen-berg 420.

Oska-byr (fair wind) 144-9.

Oska-steinn (philosopher's stone) 1^4,

1222.
Oski 188. 144. 419. 888.
Osk-meyjar (valkyrs) 144. 419.
Osk-opnir 144.
Osna-brück 117 n.
Osning 117.
Ossa (rumour) 896.
Ostaoia 1055.

Ostara, E&stre 290-1. 616. 780-1. 968.
öster-sahs, -spil, -stuopha 780-1.
otawa (bear, Ursa major) 725-9.
Othar 305.

Othin 113. 337. 939. 1031 n.
Oti-geba, E&d-gifu 890 n.
otter-kraut (fern) 1210-1.
ouwe, ea 140. 225. 600.
Ovelgunne (hell) 1001.
oven 629. 883.
Ovida 872.
owl 1185.
oxen 664, sacrificed 49.

Paeon, pasony 1148. 1193.

päiwä (sun) 725-9.

Pakuls (devü) 1014n.

Pales, palilia 227. 625.

Pallas (Athena) 173.

Pallor 207-8. 436.

P&hia-t6ki 881. 944.

Paltar ( ^-Baldr) xix. 220. 738. 996.

Pandora 571-5.

Papa-luga593n.

par son Taube (dawn) 745-6.

paradise 821.

parawari (priest) 88.

parbleul 15 n.

paroae (fates) 406. 858. 990. 1148.

Parjanyas 171 n.

B B


1268


INDEX.


paro (temple) 69.

Paron (dog's name) In.

parBtnk, peratnk (dwarf) 448 n. 450.

Parthenimn 1192.

path-crossing, etc. 1119-1138.

path of birds (milky way) 367 n. 828.

path of clouds (sky) 701.

Tavor 207-8. 436.

peacook-tail (comet) 722.

pearl 1218.

P6daaqne, la reine 281.

Pegasus 897 n.

pehrkones (ground iyy) 184. 1212.

peklo (pitch, heU) 805.

penae (house god) 500.

Peninus 169.

Perahta, Berhta 272-282.

Perendan 130.

Perhten-naht, -tao 281.

Perkunas zzii. xzzix. 171-5. 184.

Perleih at Augsburg 29d--5.

perpetual fire 611.

persona 880.

Perun xx. xxz. 7n. 130n. 171. 773. 1006.

perunika (iris) 183-4. 1191.

pesadilla (nigntmare) 464.

petasus (Mercury's hat) 463. 869.

Peter xl. 151. 667. 1235.

Peterle, Peterken 1004.

Peter-mannehen 510 n.

Peter's dog 667.

Peter's staff (Orion's belt) 727.

peukalo (thumbling) 450 n.

pfal-graben (-dike) 229 n. 1023.

phallus-worship 213 n.

Phan^dis xx. 284-5. 357 n.

Philemon and Baucis 580.

Phoebus (Apollo) 121.

Phol xix. 224-8-9. 285 n. 614.632. 882-3.

992-6. 1023. 1231-2.
Pholes-ouwa (-ea) 225.
Pholes-piunt (-enclosure) 225-6.
Pholes-prunno (-spring) 226.
PhoUdi 227.

Phol's day 614, PhoPB month 788.
phylacteria 1173.
Picker (thunder) 176.
Picus (Jupiter) 249. 369. 673.
pifelahan (sacrifice) 38.
Pikullis (devil) 805. 1014 n.
piladi, bild (image) 105 n.
pileati (priests) 91.
pilma-schnitt (crop-lifting) 475.
Pihiitis 308.

pilosuB (woodsprite) 478-482.
pilwiz (spectre, witch) 472.
ptna til sagna (compel to prophesy) 1043.
pipping a loaf 484-5.
Pitkainen 176.
plague 1181-9.
playing sickness away 831.
pleohir (phylacteries) 1173.


Pleiades 728.

plica Polonica 464-5. 474. 1156.

plompe (waterdock, sea-lily) 654.

plough carried about 263-4.

plover, pluvier 674.

plnostrari (priest) 89.

Pluto 801. 993 n.

Pogh6da (weather) 637.

Pohjola 873.

polar star 723.

Polel 366. 783.

pol-graben (-dike) 1023.

PoUux 119. 366. 783.

polter-geist (noisy sprite) 505. 514.

poludnice (noon-spirit) 478 n. 1162.

Polyphemus 529. 554. 1028.

pompe, tee plompe.

pop^, pop-hans, pop-hart (bogie) 505-6 n.

Poseidon (Neptune) 219. 321-6. 335.845.

692. 817.
possessed 1015.
Posterli 933.
potE ! (for Gottes) 15.
Powietrze (pla,gue) 1186.
Pram2imas 580.
prayer 29-35.
Precht (»Berhta) 277.
Prechtölterli 279. 982.
prein-scheuhe (goblin) 477.
Priapus 213n.'
priest li. 88, priesiess 94.
Prithivi (earth) 303. 642.
Priye 218. 303.

Prometheus 245-6. 317. 1011. 1148.
proof against shot, steel 1099.
proper names given to elves 504. 917.
Proserpina 313 n. 814. 840».
proserpinaca (waybread) 1192-8.
prosopon (person) 880.
Protestantism, germ of xlir. L
Proteus 434 n. 516.
przipolnica (noon-spirit) 478 n. 1162.
Puck, puck, püki 500. 512.
Pulletag 614.
Pulloineke 229 n. 285 n.
Puncher 382.
pura herba 643.

pusilln, pyssling (dwarf?) 449 ii.
Puss in boots 503-9.
Putraka xxxiii.
pygmaei 450.
Pyrpemna (rain-maker) 594.

quail-bone (decoy-whistle) 997 fi.
quec-prunno (-spring) 688 n.
querlich (dwarf) 455.
queste (garland) 58.
quiet folk (elves) 452-6.
qveld-ri{$a (witch) 1053-4-7.

ri (sprite) 496.
racketing sprites 505. 514.


INDEX.


1269


Badbod 230.

Badigast xxz. liv. ISOn. 248-9. 668. 844.

radar (sky) 699.

ragin (deity) 26.

ragna-rökr (twilight of gods) 813.

Bahana (-B&n) 311. 496.

rfthns (demon) 706.

rai (paradise) 821.

rain-bird 674.

rain-bow 731-4.

rain-making 593-5. 175.

r&kshasa (giant) 527. 555.

rakud, reced (temple) 85.

Bam&-pri;^a (lotas) 303. 1196.

rams sacrificed 52.

B&n 311. 496.

Bata-töskr 796.

Bati903.

Bau^-grani (0«inn, Thdrr?) 147.

rants -skeggja'Sr (red-bearded) 177.

Baahe Els, Baach-els xxviii. 433. 588.

Baosch, Friar Bash 517 n. 994.

raven 147-8 n. 576.671-2. 997. 1112. 1140.

Bedbeard 177. 550-1. 959. 961.

redbreast, redstart 183 n. 682.

red etin (giant) 528.

regano-giscapa (deoreta fati) 26-7. 857.

regin (gods) 26.

^eta (easily) 320.

Bei«ar-ttr (ThÖrr) 196.

Beisarova 945.

relics U. 1177-9.

renn-pfad (spirit's track, beat) 508-9.

Berir 367.

Bet-monat (March) 289.

Beaker Uder 779 ft.

reynir, rönn (service-tree) 1215. 1224-6.

Bhea*s bath 254.

Bheda, rhedo 289. 885.

Bhine600.

rib 561-2.

Bicen291n.

rich Ood 20.

riese, risi (giant) 525.

Bfgr 234. 361.

Biks-gata (-road) 361.

Binda, Bindr 251. 665-6.

road, bowing to the 31 n.

Bobigo 477.

Bobin goodfellow 504.

Bocken-stol 939.

Bockert 477 n.

Boden-stein, Boden-thaler 939.

rodor (sky), ro-Sall (san) 699.

roggen-möme (com spectre) 477.

rögnir (gods) 26.

rok (darkness) 813.

rokindnsta 7 n.

Boland 119. 394. 942.

Bomove 77.

roof, sitting on 1078n. 108G. 1116. 1166.

ro^-garden 658. 465.


rose-Iaoghing 1101.

rowan-tree (rone?) 651. 1215. 1224-5.

Boydach, Boysel 154. 248n.

Bübe-zahl, Babe-zagil (woodsprite) 480

Ballal085.

Bamor 898.

rompel-geist (noisy sprite) 605.

Bumpel-stilt 505 n. 548 n.

nines 149. 150.

Baprecht (goblin) 504. 514-5. 986-7.

rasalka (water-nymph) 492.

Bütze 556.

rawwe, de (the shaggy) 495 n.

sacrifice 35-63 ; idea of 41-2.

sacrificial vessels 55-6. 62-3.

8a«r (QSinn) 248.

Sas-fagel 165. 367.

Sa9-hiimnir 185 n. 886.

SsBlde (fortune) 863-9. 943. 1202 n.

Saalde's child, messenger, hat, horn 869.

Ss-landr, Zealand 76.

Ssmlngr 368. 1061.

SaBtere, Sffiteres-byrig 247.

Saga 310. 902. 910.

Sago-nes (-cape) 910.

Sahs-ndt 161-4. 203-7. 216. 865. 885.

saint-eaters 85 n.

saint's glory, halo 823.

saints, worship of xxxvii. 341.

s&ivala, sdola, s&wl 826.

sal (temple) 85.

S&lida (fortane) 865-9.

saljan, sellan (to present) 88.

salt 1046-9.

samo-diva, samo-vila (elfin) 486 n. 1150.

samolus (anemone) 1207.

Sampo 873.

SÄmr (dog's name) In.

sapaade (wise woman) 410n.

Sarakkaxxxi.

saribant (serpent) 685.

Satan 985-7.

Satjar 248 n.

Satamas 107. 121-8. 125-6-8. 246-9.

Saty&-vrata 249. 579.

satyros 480.

sau^r (wether) 52.

san-zagel, sow-tail (devil) 285 n. 682. 996.

84ail (san) 701.

84a|>s (victima) 40. 52-6.

saver (chafer) 693 n.

Sax-ne4t 164-6. 208. 365-7, Bee Sahsnöt.

'sblood! 15 n.

Scamander 600.

scate bAren (eagle's shadow) 1188.

sceat$» (devil) 989. 990.

Sceif 165. 869. 370. 429.

sceld-byrig 700. 818-9, see skialdborg.

Soeldwa 165. 869. 370.

Sehalks-berg (rogae's hiU) 681.

sch&ndle-bach (intermittent spring)591 n


1270


INDEX.


Sch&nnae542.

sohelme (pkgue) 1181.

Bohembart (mask) 1045».

Schenzerlein (doTÜ) 1007.

BC^epfe (shaper, fate) 407 n. 413.

Sohilbnno, Schiltnno 870. 979.

SohlemiM 1024 n.

Bohmagostem (Bousmg) 690 n.

Sohmutzli 515.

8chnellert8 939fi.

Bchrat (woodsprite) 915.

8ohrat-weg («traok, -beat) 479. 508-9.

Bchrawaz (woodsprite?) 479».

Bohrudel, gesohmdel (spectre) 916.

Boilfingas 188. 870.

sctn-leih (apparition) 482. 915.

Bcocca, soeoooa (demon) 1003.

Bo6p (shaper, poet) 407-8 n. 900.

Borat, Boraz (woodsprite) 478-9. 915.

seamleBB ooat 792 n.

Bedal-ganc, setel-gong (setting) 701.

739.
Seia-fioU 863.
Segemon xzix. 871.
Begil (Bnn) 701.
Bei«r (magio) 1086. 1042-4.
Beifrieds-btirg 979 n.
selago 1207.

self done, self have 451 n. 1027.
self-troBt 6.
seUcen-Btert, sellen-toBt (plioa Pol.)

464-5.
semi-deuB 340.
Semper (goblin) 515.
Sess-rymnir 805.
Beven-league boots 871.
Beren-sleepers 952 n.
Bevo mons 863.
shadow lost 1024.
Shamir (rock-blasting plant) 978 n.
Bhaved by a ghost 891.
Shelly-coat (goblin) 512.
shield-bnrg, -maid, see sceld-, skiald-.
ship carried about 258-265.
shipof fools? 258. 688.
shooting star 722. 917 n.
shoulder-blade inspected 1113.
shrew-ash 1168.
ShroYe-fire 627.
Stbilja 665.

StS-grani, -skeggr (OSinn) 147. 953.
StS-höttr ((^inn) 146.
Siegfried zlyiiL 371. 552. 688. 955. 979.
sieye-tuming 1108.
Sif Uy. 244n. 309. 822. 569.
Sifjar-haddr (maidenhair) 809.
Sige-berg 198.

Sige-fugel, -gAr, -ge&t 165. 867.
Sige-her 893.

lint 893. 428. 431-4. 490.

minne 898. 483-4.

sige-wlf (wise woman) 431.


Sig-fö«r (OSinn) 184.

sigh-bro^ (faeiie) 410 n.

sigh-gaoithe (whirlwind) 633.

sighe, ban-sighe (fay) 444 n» 614.

Sigi 867. 888.

Sig-mundr 871. 880-1.

signs (zeichen) 200. 847. 1105.

SigoYCsus 614.

Sigr-diifa 428-5. 890.

Sigr-lami 868.

Sigr-linn, Sigrfin 428-4.

SigorSr 887. 872». 425 fi. 672. 978-9.

Sigt^r (OSinn) 184. 152. 196.

Sigyn246.

sihle (titmouse) 688. 1184.

sihora (domine) 27. 134.

Silfrin-toppr 658.

silvanus 876-9. 480-2.

simulacrum 104-5.

Sindgnnd 224. 806. 705. 1232.

Sindn 917.

Sin-fiötli 880-1.

sin-flut (Deluge) 576 n.

singing match 909. 910.

sinista (elder, priest) 88.

Sinnels 453.

Sintar-fizUo 371.

Sippia (- Sif) 809.

Sisuthros 577.

Sitivrat 130n. 249.

Siva h= Sif?) 809.

Sivara SnarensYend 775.

sjö-rA (watersprite) 496.

Sjur 989.

SkatSi 381. 848. 868. 580. 675. 728.

skftld (poet) 94. 900.

skapa (shape, destine) 407. 861.

skass, skessa (giantess, witch) 526. 1003.

1041.
SkeUdngr 1043.
skiald-bozg 428, see sceldbyrig.
skiald-mey (valkyr) 418. 424.
SkiS-blaVnir 216. 870-1.
skin, jump out of my 952 n.
Skln-faxi 328. 655-7. 788.
Skiöldr 161. 368-9. 370.
Sklmir309. 835. 841n.
skog-snerte (woodsprite) 487.
skog8-r& (woodsprite) 496. 633.
skfthsl (demon) 487. 1003.
Skoll 705. 244.
skörüngr (valkyr) 418n.
skratti (demon, giant) 479.
Skrj^mir 541.

Skuld (the nom) 405. 421-2. 1042-4.
skurd-go« (idol) 112-3.
skür-goS (homesprite) 118. 500.
Slag.fi^r 880. 424-5.
Slavs, gods of the 180 n.
sleep 831. /
sleep-thorn 1204.
Siegel (cudgel) 187 n.


INDEX.


1271


Sleipnir 154. 655-6.

smela (hell) 805.

Smeriis (death) 846.

Smertnitsa (plague) 1189.

Smrt, Smier6 (death) 770-1. 841.

Srnrio-nös (planet MiEurs) 130 n.

smyl (devU) 1005.

snackr (mifk-atealer) 1091. '

Sneer, the old 393. 631.

snake 684-8. 978. 998.

8nake-Bt<vie 1219. 1220.

snakes, queen of 686.

sneezing 1116-7.

snipe 184.

Snoira 889.

snow 268. 304.

snow-child 902 n.

sob6tka (Midsummer fire) 623.

söe-drouen (sea-sprite) 491.

Soini 552.

Sökqva-bekkr 910.

Sol (liatin) 103 n. 119. 602. 705.

861 (ON.) 308. 701-5.

Solomon 247 n. 973 n.

solstice 617. 720.

solstitial fires 43. 617-^24.

Sompar 71 n. 515 n.

S6n 902-4.

sdnar-göltr (atonement boar) 51.

soothsayer 1034.

sorcerer 1032, sorceress 1038.

sortiarius, sortilegns 1037.

Bouohe de noel (yule-log) 627.

sonbait, dehait 951 n.

soul as flower 826-8; bird, butterfly

828-9; mouse, snake, weasel (chap.

34} ; will o* wisp 918; spectre 918-950.
sowthistle 1208.
spaa- wife 400.

sp&-kona (prophetess) 94. 409. 1034.
SpaU 527.

spä-ma^r (prophet) 94. 1034.
Spange (bracelet) 886-7.
sparrowhawk 675.
Bpehtes-hart 1192.
spirit, ghost 439. 461.
spitting 514. 1102-3.
Sporkel (February) 789.
sprain-spells 1231-4.
spring-wurzel (key to hidden treasure)

973.
spuk (spectre) 914.
squirrel 616. 796.
Sretia (fortune) 877.
Sri 664 n. 1196.
Sri-bhr&tri (horse) 664 n.
stabs (stuff, element) liii.
stag-beetle 183.
Stalo 554-5.

stan-weorSung (stone-worship) 645.
StarkatSr 887-8. 898. 581. 858-9.
«tars 700. 721-781.


Staufenberger 419. 429 n.

stein-alt (old as the hills) 533.

stelbom (evening star) 723.

Stempe 278. 1246.

Stempfel (Jack Ketch) 910. 1004.

Stepchen (devU) 1003-4.

Stephanus 1235.

Bteti-got (genius loci) 500.

stilles volk (elves) 452-6.

stollen-wurm (snake) 685.

stoma (element) lüi.

stone, creation out of 572-3.

stone, turning into 548. 551-2.

Stonehenge 552.

stöpke (devü) 1003.

stork 672.

storm-raising 1086-8.

Sträggeli (spectre) 934. 1039 ii.

Strakh (terror) 208.

straszydio (homesprite) 508.

Strecke-fuss (death) 852.

Stribogh 631.

striga, strix (owl, witch) 1039 n. 1045.

ström-karl (watersprite) 488. 492-3. 907.

stuffala (Bootes) 725 n.

Suip, Sufipo 354 n. 363.

Suardones 885.

submersion 981.

subterraneans (dwarfs) 454.

Suculae (Hyades) 730 n.

sutS-nautar (sacnfioers) 56. 1045.

Suevo mons 363.

Sumar 758.

sumer-late (same year*8 shoot) 975.

sun 701-8. 720-1.

sun-rise, sun-set 738-743.

sun*s hatred 19.

sun's wheel 620. 701.

sune-wende, sun-giht (solstice) 617.

Sunia (justice?) 810. 889.

Sunnit 224. 308. 705. 1232.

Sunnen-froh 741.

superstitio 1105.

Buperventa (omen) 1119.

Suptüngr 522.

Süiyas liv.

Surta-logi (burning of the world) 815.

Surtar-brand (coal-stone) 809. 1222.

Surtr 808-815. 824. 960. 1182.

susl (torment) 807.

su-stert (devil) 632. 996.

Suttüngr 367. 522. 902.

sva-datta (self-made) 14.

Sva«U-fari 547.

Sv&fnir 363. 685.

Svan-hvita 425.

Svantewit 591. 662. 844.

Svart-alfa-heimr 445-6.

svart-&lfar (black elves) 444-5.

Bvart-hofSi 1042.

Svfisu'Sr 758.

Svatopolk 961.


1272


INDEX.


Svatovit XXX. Uv. 130 n. 663 f).
Svava 363. 423-4.
STend FaUing 372 n. 420.
SvHSr, Svi«ur 133.
Svin-f jlkja 133.
Bwallow 672.
swan 427-9.
swan-garb 391. 427.
swan-knight 370.
s^an-maiden 281. 426-430.
swan-ring 428-9.
Swan-witohen xTi.
Bwanne-blomme (water-lily) 664.
Bwarth (wraith, doable) 877.
Swefdasg, STipdagr 165. 222. 744.
swine sacrificed 50.
swine-tail (devil) 285 n.
sword-dance 780-1.
Syn (truth) 310. 889.
Sjrr 306.
Syrinx 827.
Syritha305.

tficen (sign) 200. 847.

TfiBtwa 166.

Taga-rod (dawn) 747-8. 889.

talamasca (masK, spectre) 916.

tall (deal, pine) 652.

tamaidto (goblin's hat) 512.

Tamfana, Tanfana xi. 80. 267. 278.

1109 n.
Tamlane936n.

tarns- vöndr (taming wand) 976.
Tanaqvlsl 218.
Tanfa 266ii.
Tanhäuser 936.

Tarams, Tamodormn xxix. 168.
tam-kappe (cloak of darkness) 462. 870.
Tartarus 804 n.
tatennan (goblin) 601-2.
Taunasis 384.
Tohemi-bogh 986 n.
Tchud 627.
TeU xxxiv. 380-2.
tempel- trete (hypocrite) 36 n.
tempeile (medicine) 1161 n.
tempestani (wind-raisers) 638. 1086.
temples xlix. 66.
tempus 790-1.
Termagant 160.
Ters (Priapus) 213 n.
Thanatos 840-1.
Tharapila 77. 669. 826.
thegaUion (highest god) 74.
heihs (time) 790.
iTeihvö (thunder) 178.
theophania 281.
Theophilus vioedominus 1017.
Thetis 344. 496 n. 626. 1069 n.
Theuth 149.
Thiassi 631-2. 728-4.
thiefs thumb 1073 n.


Thio«-varta 1149.

Thiota96.813n.

Hsl (thill of Charles-wain) 161. 724.

Th6r bl6ta (heathenism) 188.

Th6r-dl8, -biorg 97-8.

Th6r-gerSr 98. 113 4fi. 637. 1043. lObti-

9.
Th6r-hiabn (monks-hood) 1193.
Thör-ketiU 63.
Thör.vi«r 188.
Thörr xl. 7«. 113-6. 160-2. X66. 318.

320-1. 63016. 641-5. 564. 868-9.

1031 n. 1215.
Th6rs-brü (bridge), -mörk (wood), -nes

(cape) 186.
Th6r's pillars 119.
Th6rs.vinr (friend) 93.
Thri«i (third) 162.
Thronax 680.
Thrü«gehnir 559. 563.
>rut8fill (leprosy) 1160.
ThrütSr. ThryS 421-3.
Thrymr 629. 631-3. 882.
thumbkin 448 n. 450-1.
Thunar, Thunor 161-6. 813.
thunder, see donner-.
thunder-bolt, -stone 168 tt. 179. 1221.
Thundrl62fi.

Thunres-dffig, Thurs-dttg 126.
Thuro longus 394.
thurs (giant) 620.
>yrel stftn (thirl stone) 1166.
tibr (sacrifice) 40.
Tils 928.

time, timi, tempus 791.
Tina (Jupiter) 168 n. 196. 736.
tin-egm (neeafire) 609.
tir (glory) 196.
Tise, Tisen-dach (day) 298.
Tis-Yclde (-weU) 198.
Tityos 321.
Tins, Tiw 193. 200.
tiuvel-winnic (possessed) 1016.
t!var (gods) 194.
Tivisco 196. 344.
tivor (god) 195.
Tiw, Tiwes-diBgl26. 193.
tjasa (conjure) 1037.
Töki, Toko 380-1.
Toledo 1037 n.
tomte, tomtekarl, tomt-iä (homesprite)

496. 600. 512.
Tonans 168.
torch-procession 629.
Torden-veir 189.
tor-don (thunder) 166.
tord-wifel (dung-beetle) 693.
trami, tremil (devil) 243.
trance 1083.
transformation 1094-6.
transmigration 655. 826.
THb (tremor) 208.


INDSX.


1273


tr6fa6 (ynle-log) 627.

Trempe 278.

tremse-mutter foom bogie) 477.

trick, triegen 4o4.

Trip (the blasted tree) 958 f?.

Tris-megUtos 160.

Trito-geneia 162 n.

Trinwe (fides) 892.

trold, troU (elf, witch) 526. 652. 1054-6.

tröU (spectre) 526. 1004. 1086. 1041.

troU-tnun (devü) 243.

trötsch (elf) 443.

trüa fi mAtt sinn (seif- trust) 6.

troge-tievel (spectre) 464 n.

tnihtin, diyhten (roler) 22.

tmone e lampe 182.

träte (witch, goblin) 423.

Trath 892.

Tuesday 123-6. 193-9.

Tnisoo vii. zi. 195. 344.

Tumbo, the holy 528<9.

Tumme 543.

tongol (star) 700.

tnnkel- Sterne (eyening star) 723.

Tnonela (hades) 855.

tnonen-koira (dragonfly) 1074 n.

Tarisas 940.

Turns 176.

turse, türse (giant, devü) 521.

turtle-dove 1134.

Tntela 889.

Tutosel (night owl, witch) 922. 1061.

Tveggi (second) 162.

twelTCs li. 26.

tylwyth tdg (fairies) 452.

Typhon 637.

T5^r, Tiw. Zio Uv. 193.

-ttr in gods* names 196. 339.

T5^r-hialm (monks-hood) 1193.

Tyrrheni 522.

T^-vi^r (daphne mezer.) 188. 199. 1193.

ndde-hat (cap of darkness) 458 n. 463.

Tifar-skafts (firstfniit) 39.

Ugarthilocus 244. 1020.

nht-scea^a (dragon) 688.

nhta (early dawn) 747.

Ukko xxzi. 62 n. 169 n. 176. 793 n.

Ukon-kivi (thunderbolt) 1221.

Ukonkoira (butterfly) 1073 n.

nlf, ülve, Ulfen (elf ?) 442 n.

ülf-he-Sinn (wolf-belted) 1094.

tmr228n.

TJlysses 365.

nnbaptized 271. 288. 918. 920. 1070 n.

unborn 888.

Unfalo (devil) 992.

Un-fuoge (indecorum) 311 n.

nn-gezibel 40 n.

nn-hiuri, un-gehiure (uncanny) 914.

un-holda (demon) 266. 090-1. 1007.

nnholdsre (sorcerer) 1048-9.


unke (frog, snake) 686 n.

unnar-steinn Hioly stone) 645.

un-quethand (dumb nature) 647.

Un-B8Blde (misfortune) 878.

Uogo 237.

üoke-sahs (-sword) 238.

üoke-wedel (devil) 1003-4.

Uote, Frau 371. 889.

upp-regin (gods) 26.

Uranus 194. 249 n. 575. 700.

Urban 20. 463 n.

Ur^ar-brunnr (-fount) 407. 427. 687.

796.
Ui«r, Wurd, Wyrd (the nom) 405.
ur-fol (full-grown boar) 996.
ur-lac, ör-lög (destiny) 410. 857.
Ursa major 161. 724.
UtgarSa-loki 243-4.
utter-bock 1096.

Yadi, Wada, Wate 376.

vsBtt, vsBttr (wight, df) 441.

vafr-logi (quivering flame) 423-4. 602.

Vaf->rü«nir 529.

vaggs, wang (paradise) 821.

Vagn-höfSi 533.

vaihts (wight, whit) 440.

Vala 98. 403. 813 n. 1042.

Valadamarca, Waladericus (Falada?)

95 fi. 403 n.
vlUant, v&lantinne (devil, she-devil) 991.
Vahi-ski&lf 817 n.
valditoyes (fates) 416 n.
vale of tears 795.
valerian 1207-8.
val-fa-Sir (Ot$inn) 133. 817.
Yal-freyja 305. 420.
Yal-hdll 145. 802-3. 817. 840.
Yali the avenger 163. 321. 823.
YaUs 371.

val-kyrja 146. 400. 417-426. 817. 840.
val-ravn (demon bird) 997. 1025 n.
Yal-tamr 314 n.
Yana-dls (Freyja) 402.
Yanlngi 218.

Yanir 218. 233 n. 443-4 n. 902.
vanishing 951.
Yarunas 249 n.
Yasa-Sr 758.

vatni ansa (pagan baptism) 592.
vätte-lys (ignis fatuus) 917.
ve, vi (temple) 67-8. 159.
Ye 162-3.
Ye-biörg 424.

vefSr-belgr (weather-bag) 640.
YeKr-föhiir 796.
veSr-hattr (windy hat) 641.
Ye-freyja300n.
Yeg-tamr (QSinn) 163 n. 314.
vema (priest) 89.

Yelands-urt (valerian) 1194. 1206.
Yeleda zi. 95. 403.


1274


INDEX.


Veneris oapillas (maidenhair?) 1194.
Venns 114». 255n. 200. d02n. 806. 326.

344. 444 fi. 455. 935. 953.
Venns-berg 935. 1056.
Veorr (Thörr) 187.
VerSandi (the nom) 405.
Veröde (Hilda, Holda) 285.
Vergiliae (Pleiades) 728.
Ver-goden-deel-strdsB (reaper's offering)

253.
Versiera (devil) 988 n.
verwAzen, yerwünschen (onrse, ban)

951. 1228.
▼eshtitsa (witeh) 1077-8.
yesn& (spring) 773. 781.
Vesta 232 n. 611. 1236.
Vestri 461.
▼et-mimir (sky) 700.
Vetr (winter) 758.
▼etr-li«i (bear) 668.
▼ettar (wi^ts, eWes) 457 fi.
▼ezha (ignis fatuns) 917. 1056 n.
Victoria 485. 890.
victory, stone of 1220.
VtSar the avenger 823.
Ti«-bliUnn 808n.
Vi«-förall 163n.
Vi«.dlfr 1042.

Vi«rir (0«inn) 637. 667. 882.
Vidng&uja 376-9.
Vlgagu« (T^, Zio) 198.
vikd, week 126 n.

vfla (iairy sister) 436. 470n. 1150.
Vilanders 207 n.
Vü-biörg 864.
vüoodlac (woodsprite) 480.
ViU 162-8.
ViUdnns 376.
Vü-mei'$r 1042.
vince Lnna I (win Moon) 706.
Vind-Alfr 461.
vind-flot (oload) 639.
vind-hiAlmr (wind-hat) 641.
Vind-ldni, Vind-svahr 758-9.
Vlngnir 187.

Vin-g61f (hall of goddesses) 820.
Vlng-J>drr 187. 910.
Vinland 640.
Virgunt (Fiörjgm ?) 172.
vis-g&ssar (devil's boys) 1078.
Vishnn xxxix. 249. 325. 384. 579. 630.
^ta (to bow) 29.
vitdd (law) 39.

völa, völva (prophetess) 97-8. 408. 1042.
Volant, VoUand (devü) 992.
Volker 908.
Volmar509.
Volos 625 n. 1156.
Volotl081n.
Völsnngs, the 871.
Völondr 877-8. 403. 424. 444.
Völn-spft 97-8.


Vor (faith) 310. 889.

vor-kiekers (foreseersl 1107.

vrag, v6rog (devil) 996.

Vrene 806 n.

vrid-eld (needfire) 607.

Vron-elde (Hilda, Holda) 285. 357 n.

Volcanus 108 n. 119. 602. 705 ut He-

phastns.
vnltor and voltnmns 634.
Vat (false god, Wnot) 131.

WAo-hUt 376. 434. 496.
Wada, Wate 376. 1148.
wadel (lunar phases) 711-2.
waenes )>!sl (Charles-wain) 151.
WiBtlinga-stradt 856-7.
waidelot (priest, magioian?) 1185 fi.
Wäinämöinen xzxi 902-7.
Waizganthos 1241.
waking, watehing 584. 863-4.
waking a hedge-stick 1085.
waking one's lack 864.
Walburgis-kraut (fern) 1211.

-nacht (Mayday eve) 1050.

wald-baner, -gebüre (giant) 533.
Waldemar's way 943.
waldes tore (elf) 483, (giant) 583.
waldin, walledein (witäi) ^3fi.
wallala (nightmare) 1247.
wal-rider, waal-rüter 418 n. 1152.
waltant, wealdend (mighty) 21.
wait-man (wild man| ^.
walt-minne (wood-wife) 434-5. 482-3.
Wandel-muot, Wankel-maot. (fickle-
ness) 895.
Wandü (water) 579.
Wans-boroogh, -dike, etc. 153.
Wara (faith) 310. 889.
warg (wolf) 996.
WArheit (truth) 892.
Warns 131 n.

Wartburg war of poets (a.D. 1207) 910.
wasoh-weiberl (wood-wife) 485 it.
wasser-lüss (watersprite) 488 r.
Wate, Wada 376. 1148.
water-bird 595. 785.
water-kelpie 491.
water-kind (-child) 495 n.
water-lily 654.

water-mom (-sprite) 489. 490.
Waude, Wanden 156 n. 157.
wax-figures 1091^. *i^
Wayluid smith, tu Wielant, Völnndr.
waywarden 407.
wazzer-holde (nymph) 266-8.
weasel 1127-8.
Weather 548. 680.
weather-bird 184.

-cock 670.

^ -witch 1088.

Weckolter, Frau Quniper) 652.
Wedekind 954.


INDEX.


1276


Wedel (lunar phases) 711-2.

Wednes-bnry, -ham, etc. 158.

week 126 n.

week, days of the 122-180.

weg-breite (waybread) 1215.

Weg-dieg 165.

we^e-warte (plantain) 828. 1215.

weichsel-zopf (plica Pol.) 464. 474.

weird.lady, -sisters 407. 412.

weise (orphanns, opal ?) 1217.

Wela, Welo (weal) 163. 862-8.

Welan-ao (-owa ?) 862-8.

Weletabi 1081 n.

Welf (whelp) 378.

Welisnno, Völsüngr 371.

Welnas, Wels 854.

wel-reoke 418 n. 1152.

Wendel (devil, etc.i 375 n.

wendil-meri (ocean) 601.

wer-alt, wer-old, world 792.

were-wolf 1093-7.

werpeya (fate) 416 n.

Werra 273 n. 288. 1012.

Wester-falcna 165. 867.

Wester-gibel 739.

Wester-wald 469.

wester-wAt (child's caul) 874fi«

wetter-aas (oat) 304.

Weyas (wind) 579. 680.

wheel of fortune 866-9. 871.

whüe 790.

whirlpool 592.

whirlwind 229 n. 285 n. 632.

whit, wight 440 n.

white lady 279. 280. 962-8.

Whitsun fowl 674.

king 595, queen 787.

sleeper 786.

Wich, wig (war) Uy. 203. 888.
wiohtel-zopf (plica Pol.) 464. 474. 1156.
Widolt 556.

Widn-kind (wood-child ?) 482.
widn-minna (wood- wife) 434-5.
Wiegles-dor (B. Eider) 239.
Wielant 376-8. 428. 552. 1148.
wiesen-hüpfer (will o' wisp, g^ost) 829.

916.
wig-weorSing (idolatry) 67.
wights 439.

wih, weoh, ve (temple) 67. 159.
wihseling (changeling) 468.
wiht, wight, whit 440.
wihtel, wihtelln 441. 459n. 464. 474.
wild fire 179. 603-5.
wild host, hunt xy. 918-950.
wild man 486. 929.
wildin wlp 481. 488. 929. 1148.
Wm o' the wisp 916-8.
William of Cloudesle 882.
wtl-sAlda, hntl-s&lida (fortune) 857. 863.
wil-weorSunge (well-worship) 684.
Windand-weather 648. 680. 1024.


Wind-helm 641.

Windis-prüt, wind's bride (whirlw.)

632.
winds, four dwarfs 461.
wind-selling 640.
wing-coat 329.
Wintar, Wintarolf 759.
WippeoSOOn.
Wipune zxxi.
Wish, see Wunsch,
wish-wife 419. 429.
wish-wind 149.
wishing-gear 870.

hat 463. 869. 870.

mill, -cloth 871,

rod 419. 870-1. 974-7.

Wislau 785.

witch, wioce 1088.

witches 1038-1104.

witches' dance 1056.

witches' offspring 1078.

Wittich, Wiiugouwo 376. 482.

wizago, wltega (prophet) 94. 1034.

wizards 1032.

wizöd, Tit6d 39.

Wod 182. 156 n. 924-8.

Wödan XY. 66. 131. 224. 801. 924r^.

1231-2.
Wödanes-dag 126.
Wode 156-6. 937.
Wodel-beer 166.
Wödel-ge&t 867. 872.
W6den 110. 121-8. 131, see Wuotan.
Wodenduvel 155.
Wddenes-weg 151-2-9.
Wodens-torp 164.
Wodesteme (a plant) 169.
Wddnes-beorg, -feld 162-8.
Woeden-spanne, Woens-let 164. 160.
Woens-drecht, Woen-sel 158-4-8.
Wöhhanda 176 n. 698.
woitl 928 n.

Wolchan-drüt 428. 1088.
Wold 166.
Woldar 699.
wolf 147-8 n. 244-5. 668. 706-6. 814. 996.

1140 ; she-wolf 807.
Wolf-bizo, Wolf-gang 1140n. 1241.
Wolf-dietrioh xxü. xxYÜi. 898.
Wolf-hetan 1094-6.
wolf-riding 1054.
wolfs-bane 1193.
Wol-gemut 1068.
Wolmar's street 948.
Wolterken, Wouterken 604. 610.
W6ma 144-6. 208. 287. 746.
woman roYerenced 397.
wonder-flower 871. 971.
Wons-beke, W6n-stock 154.
wood-hound 1241.
wood-mower (death) 862.
wood-pecker 678. 688 n. 978.

C C


1276


INDEX.


wood-wife (wald-fran) 4S0-5.

wood-wiyes, utile (holz-weibel) 488. 929.

world 790. 850.

world, baming of the 815.

world-tree 796-800.

Woudan 132.

wraith 877 n.

Wris-berg, wriailio 525. 534.

wadu-adlfen (dryad) 480. 658 fi.

wüeterioh (tyrant) 132.

WüetongeB her (host) 132.

wonder-burg (enchanted castle) 981.

wanderer (wonder-worker) 943. 1031 n.

wunni-garto (paradise) 821.

Wunsch (wish) zii. zviii. xzxi. zlviii.

In. 138-144. 419. 869-873. 888. 977.
wnnsoh-wint (fair wind) 149.
Wuotan xvü. 62. 124. 131. 160. 636-7.

882. 918-9. 931. 9601. 1047 n.
Wnotans-berg 152. 1024.
Waotans-wagan (Charles-wain) 151.
Wuotü-göz 367 n.
Wnotonc 132. 1006.
Word, Wort, Wyrd (fate) 26. 405-6 ?f.

415.
wardh-giscapn (fate's decrees) 408 n.
Wiuo-fre& 144. 165. 211. 367.

Tama-priya (ficas indica) 303.
year 754-7.

Tgg-drasill (world-tree) U. 76. 796-800.
Tggr ((^inn) 144. 208. 888.
ylfa-gescot (elves' shot) 460. 1244.
Tmir 532. 559. 561.


Tngri 346.

youth, fountain of 433. 588.

yule 702.

yule-boar 51. 215. 1240.

yule-fire, -log 627-8.

Yumala xxzi. 176 n.

Yutri-bogh 749.

Zalmozis 145.

zart-garto (paradise) 821.

zauber, tover, te&for (magic) 1032-3

zeit, tid (time) 791.

Zemenyle 253 n.

zepar, tifer (sacrifice) 40.

Zephyr 461 n. 631.

Zeus (Jupiter) 22. 136. 168-9. 173-6.

193-4. 316-8. 321. 335. 636. 690. 859.

901. 1133.
ziefer (sacrifice) 40. 693 n.
Zies-berg 198. 201.
Zies-tac (Tuesday) 123-4.
Ziewonia 773.

Zige-linta (daphne mezereum) 1193.
Zio, Tins, Tiw zix. 123-4. 193. 882-3.

1047 n. 1193.
Zio-wari (-worshippers) 199. 201.
Zisa, Ziza 265. 291-8.
Zisen-berc 296-8.
zlt-YOgel (time-bird) 678.
ziu (turbines) 203. 285 n. 632.
zounds 1 15 n.
zunder (snake) 685.
Zuti-bure, Swiety-bor 76.
Zyyie (god of life), zywieo (ooekoo) 679.


BoUer ft Tanner, Tlie Selwood Frinüng Works, Itome^ and Ijondon.


Fehruarij 1883.

A CLASSIFIED LIST

01*

EDUCATIONAL WORKS

FÜBU8HED BT

GEORGE BELL & SONS.


Full Catalogues will be sent poitjree an application.


BIBLIOTHECA CLASSICA.

A Series of Greek and Latin Authors^ with English Notes j edited by

eminent Scholars, Qvo.

Mnohylvm. By F. A. Pal^y, M.A. 18«.

Oloero's Qratkms. By G. Long, M.A. 4 tqIs. I65., lis. , 16t., I81.

Demosthenes. By B. Whi8t<ni, M.A. 2 yoIb. 16«. each.

Euripides. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 8 toIs. 16«. each.

Homer. By F. A. Paley, M.A. Vol. 1. 12«. ; Vol II. 14«.

Herodotus. By Bev. J. W. Blakesley, B.D. 2 Yolg. 32«.

Hesiod. By F. A. Faley, M.A. 10«. 6d.

Horace. By Bey. A. J. Macleane, M.A. 18«.

Juvexud axul Fersius. By Bev. A. J. Madeanei M.A. 12«.

Plato. By W. H. Thompson, D.D. 2 vols. 7«. 6d. each.

Sophocles. Vol. I. By Ber. F. H. Blaydes, M.A. 18«.

Vol. IL Phiketetea. Eleetia. Ajaz and Traohinia. By

F. A. Foley, M ,A. 12».

Tacitus : The Annals. By the BeT. P. Frost. 15«.

Terence. By E. St. J. Pany, M.A. 18«.

VlrgU. By J. Gozungton, M.A. 8 toIs. 14«. each.

An Atlas of Glassloal Geography; Twenty-four Ma|M$. By
W. Hnghts and Geonra Loog* M.A« New edition, with coloured OutUuesL
Imperial Sto. 128.0a.

Uniform with above.
A Complete Latin Grammar. By J. W. Donaldson, D.D. 3rd

Edition. 1-1«. *

GRAMMAR-SCHOOL CLASSICS.

A Series of Greek and Latin Authors, with English Notes. Fcap. 9vo
Gnsar : De Hello Galileo. By George Long, M.A. 5«. 6(i

Books I.-III. For Junior Classes. By G. Long, M.A. 2«. Cd

Books IV. and V. in 1 vol. 1«. 6<7.

Oatolhis, Tlbullus, and Propertlua. Selected Poems. With Life.

By Rer. Jk. E. Wratislaw. 3«. 6cL


George Bell and Sons*


CAoero: De Senectnte, De Amidtift, and Select EpisÜei. By

OomeUafl Nepoe. By Bev. J. F. Maomiohael. S«. 6d.
Homer : lUad. Bodke I.-Xn. By F. A. Paley, MX 6f . M.

Horaoe. With Life. By A. J. Maoleane, M.A. ' 6«. 6d. [Ln

2 parts. Sc 6d. eaok.]

Juvenal : Sixteen Satires. By H. Prior, MA. 4». M,

Martial: Select Epigtam«. Wi^Uie. 6yF.A.Pal^, MX 6t.M.

Ovid : the Fasti. By F. A. Pal^y , M. A. 5s.

SaUoat: Gatüina and Jngortha. With Life. ByG. Long, MX Si.

Taoltaa : Qennania and Agrioola. By Ber. P. Frost. St. 6d.

Virgil: Bnoolics, Georgios, and £neid, Books I.-IV. Abridged
from ProfeMor Ooniiifftoii'B Bditkm. &. 6d.— JBatid, Books T.-XII. 5c M.
AImIb 9 Bepanit« YoouBM, Ic 6d. eaofa.

Zanophon: TheAnabasis. With Life. By Bev. J. F. MacmiehaeL fa.
Also hi 4 separate rolnmes, U, Bd. eadh.

The GyropsBdia. By G. M. Gorham, M.A. 6t.

Memorabilia. By Perciyal Frost, MX it. 6d.

A Qvammar-Sohool Atlas of Olaaaloal Oeogrmpby, oontaining

Ten seleotod Maps. Imperial 8vow 5c

Uniform vfith the Serie»,
The New Testament, in Greek. With English Notes, &e. By

Bar. J. F. MaomUdiaeL 7c Gd.


CAMBRIDGE GREEK AND LATIN TEXTS.

Asohylna. By F. A. Pal^, MA. 8f .

OsBsar: De Bello OalUoo. By G. Long, MA. 2«.

Oioero : De Seneotate et de Amioltia, et Bplatols» Saleotsi. By

G.Loiig,M.A. U6d.

Cioeronia Qraüones. Vol. L (inYeirem.) ^yG. Long,MA« 8f.6d.

Buripidea. By F. A. Paley, MA. 8 vols. 8f . M. eaofa.

Berodotua. By J. G. BUkesl^, BJD. 2 vols. 7ff.

Homeri Dlaa. I.-Xn. By F. A. Pal^, M.A* 2«. 6d.

Horatlaa. By A. J. Msoleane, M.A. 2«. 6(1.

Jnvenal at Fersina. By A. J. Maoleane, M.A. 1«. 6d.

Lnoretlna. By H. A. J. Mmiro, M.A. 2«. 6d.

SaUoatl Oriapl GatUlna et Jugurtha. By G. Long, M.A. U, 6iL

Sophoolea. By F. A Pal^, M.A. 8#. 6d.

Terenti OomcedisB. By W. Wagner, PhJ). ^8«.

Thuaydldos. By J. G. Donaldson, DJ). 2 vols. 7t.

VIrglUus. By J. Conington, M.A. 8«. 6(Z.

Zenppho&tis XSzpediüo Oyrl By J. F. Manmfflhael, B A. 2«. 6iL

NoTum Testamentom QraeoonL By F. H. Scrivener, MA*
4c 6d. Aa edition ivith wide margin fw note«, balf bound, lie


JSdueoHonat Works. 8

CAMBRIDGE TEXTS WITH NOTES.

A SeUeUon of the mo§t tiniaUy read of the Oreek and Latin ÄtOhon,
Annotated for Sehodi. Feap, Ovo, 1$, 6d. each, with exeeptiom,

XnrlpidiM. Akestis. — Medea. — Hippdytiu. — Heaab» — Baoohji.
Ion. 2#. — Orestes. — ^PhoenissaB. — Troades. ByF.A.Pale7,lilLA«

JBBMobyixm. Framethetifl Vinotiu. — Septem oontra Thebas. — ^Aga-
memnon. — Pers». — ^Eomenides. By F. A. Paley, MJL.

Sopboolaa. (Edipna Tyrannos. — (Edipns Goloneas. — Antigone.

Bj F. A. Palej, M.A.
Homer. Iliad. Book L By F. A. Paley, M.A. 1«.

Terenoe. Andria. — Hanton Timoramenotf. — ^Phonnio. — ^Adelphoe.

By Professor Wagner, Ph.D.

Cloero's De Senectnte, De Amicitia, and Epistolas Seleotas. By

O. Long, M.A.

Ofld. S^eotionfl. By A. J. Madeane, M.A.

PUBLIC SCHOOL SERIES.

A Series of Classical Texts, annotated by wdUaioum Sdtotars, Or. Stw.
Artrtopluuiea. The Peace. By F. A. Paley, M.A. if. 6d.

The Aahamians. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4«. 64.

The FrogB. By F. A. Paley, M.A. if. 6i2.

Oloero. The Letters to Attioos. Bk. I. By A. Pretor, M.A. if. 6<l.
Demosthenes de Falsa Legatlone. By B. Shilleto, M.A. ftf .
The Law of LeptinesL By B. W. Beatson, M.A. 8f. 6d.

Plato. The Apology of Socrates and Crito. By W. Wagner, Ph J>.
7th Edition. 4«. 6d.

The Phiedo. 6th Edition. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 5f . 64.

The Protagoras. 3rd Edition. By W. Wayte, M.A. if. 6d.

The Enthyphio. 2nd edition. By G. H. Wells, M.A. 8f.

The Euthydemns. By G. H. Welk, M.A. if. •

TheBepnblic. Books L<fen. By G. H. Wells, M.A. 6f.6<f.

Flautiu. The Aulnlaria. By W. Wagner, PhJ>. 2nd edition, if. 64.

Trinnmmns. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 2nd edition, if. äL

The Menaeohmei. By W. Wagner, FhJ>. if. 64.

flophooUa Traohlsi». By A. Pketor, M.A. if. 64.
Terenoe. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. lOf . 64.
Theoorltiu. By F. A. Paley, M.A. if. 64.

Other« m ]>rqMinition.

CRITICAL AND ANNOTATED EDITIONS.

JBtna. By H. A. J. Monro, M.A. 8f . 64.

ArlstophanJa ComoBdias. By H. A. Holden, LL.D. 8yo. 2 vols,
8Si. 6d. Play« sold sqianitely.

Paz. By F. A. Pal^, M.A. Foap. 8to. if. 64.

Catollna. By H. A. J. Monro, M.A. 7f. 64.

Oorpos Poetarom Latflnoram. Edited by Walker. IyoI.Svo. 18t.

Horaoe. Qointi Horatii Flaooi Opera. By H. A. J. Monro, M.A.

LaciseSTO. 11. Is.
Llvy. The first five Books. By J. Pkendeville. 12mo. roan, 5f .

Or Books I..IU. SU 6d. IT. ud Y. 8e. 6d.


George Bell and Sons'


LnerettoB. Titi Lnctetii Cari de Benun Katoza Lihri Sex. WHh
a Translation and Kotes. By H. A. J. Knnro, U.A 2 toIb. Sto. YoL L
Text. (New KditioB, Trepaxixig.) YoL n. Tranalatioxi. (Sold aeparmtelj.)

OvkL P. OyidüNasoniBHeroideBXIV. ByA.Falxiier,M^ 8yo.6«.

RropertiTiB. 8ex Aurelü Fropertii Cannina. By F. A. Paley, M.A.
8vo. Oloth, 9t,

Sex. Fropertii Bleglarom. Iiib.iy. By A. Palmer. Fca|>.8T0.5«.
Soplioolee. The Ajax. By C. E. Palmer, MJL 4s, 6dL
Tbuoydides. The History of the Pelopcmneflian War. ByKefaazd

Slülleto, M.A. Bookl. 8to. 6«. 6d. Book 11. 8ro. 5c Cd.

LATIN AND QREEK CLASS-BOOKS.

AnzQia LatSna. A Series of Progressive Latin EzeroiseB. By

M.J.B.Baddele7|K.A. Fcap.Sro. Partl.AccidexuM. 2iid Edition, nrued.
U6d. Pftrtn. 4th Edition, reyised. 2«. Key to Part ü. 2«. 6d.

X«tln Froee LeasoDB. ByProf.Chtirch,M.A. 6thEdil Fd^.dro.

2fl.6d. *

lAtin Szeroiaea and Grazmnar Papers. By T. Collins, MJL 3rd
Edition. Foap. 8to. St. 6d.

XJnaeen Papers in Latin Prose and Verse. With Exaimnation

Questions. By T. OoUins, M Jl. ^d Edition. Fcap.8T0. 2«. 6d.

in Greek Prose and Verse. With Examination Qnestions.

By T. Collins, M.A. Foap. 8to. 3«.

Analytloal Latin Szeroiaee. By C. P. Mason, B.A. 3rd Edit. S<.6d.
Latin Mood Conatruotion. Outlines ol. With Exercises. By

tbe Bey. G. E. C. Casey, M.A., F.L.S., F.O.S. Small post 8to. If. 6dL
lAtin of the Exercises. Is. 6d.

fleala Gnsoa : a Series of Elementary Greek Exercises. By Bev. J. W.
Davis. M.A., and B. W. Baddeloy, M.A. 3rd Edition. FcaprSro. 2t.6d.

QfeekVeraeOompoaition. By G. Preston, M. A. Grown8T0.4«.6d.

Oreek Fartioles and their Combinations according to Attic Usage.
A Short TreatUe. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 28. 6a.

Bt thb Ebt. p. Faost, MJL, St. Johk's Collsox, Cambbidox.
SologSB LathUB ; or, first Latin Beading-Book, with English Notes
and a Diotienary. Kew Edition. Feap. Sro. 2t.6d.

Ifateriala for Latin Frose Oomposition. Kew Edition. Fcap.8T0.

2«. M. Key, 4m.

A Latin Verse-Book. An Introductory Work on Hexameters and
Pentameters. New Edition. Fcap. 8to. 3s. Key, 5«.

Analeota Grseoa Minora, with Introductory Sentences, English
Hote8,andaDiotionai7. New Edition. Fcap. 8vOb 3s. M.

Materials for Greek Froae Oomposition. New Edit. Fcap. 8ifa

3a 6d. Key, 5s.

Floilleginm Foetioum. Elegiac Extracts from Orid and Tibnllns.
New Edition. With Notes. Foi^. 8vo.3s.

Bt thx Bey. F. E. Gbxttox. «

A Ftarat Cheque-book for Latin Vene-makeni. U, 64I.

▲ Latin Version for Masters. 2$. 3d.

Baddenda ; or Passages with Parallel Hints for Translation into
Latin PfOie and Terse. Crown Sro. 4i.6d.

Beddenda Beddlta {see next page).


Educational Works.


AnthologiAanMa. ASeleotionolOhoioeGtreekPoetzy.withNotM.
Bj F. St. John ThM]cer«7. Uh and Chnptr Mition, lemo. 4m. M.

Anthologla Laltna. A Selfiotion of Choioe Lfttin Poetiy, ixom

KaBTioB to Bo9tluiu,inth Notes. ^ Rot. F. St. John TbAckeray. ReriMd
and Cheaper Edition. 16mo. 4«. ed.

Bt H. a. HoiiDEK, LL.D.
FoUorom Silvula. Part I. Passages for Translation into Latia

Elegiac and Heroic Yene. 9th Edition. PoctSro. 7<. 6d.

Part II. Select Passages for Translation into Latin I^yrio

and Cosüc Iambic Terse. 3rd Edition. PostSvo. Si.

Part III. Select Passages for Translation into Greek Versa»


3rd Edition. PoetSro. 8*.

Folia SUvQlfls, sive Eolog» Poetamm AngUoorom in Latinum el
Onecnm oonrems. 8ro. Vol. I. lOn. 6d. Tol. II. 12i.

FoUorum CentorisB. Select Passages for Translation into Latin

and Greclc Prose. 8th Edition. PostSvo. 6s,


TRANSLATIONS; SELECTIONS, &c.

*«* Many of the following books are veil adapted for School Prizes.

.SSfohjlns. Translated into English Prose by F. A. Paley, M.A.

2nd Edition. 8ro. 7«. 6d.
Translated into English Verse by Anna Swanwiok. Post

8to. Ss.

Honoe. The Odes and Carmen SsBcnlare. In English Verse by

J. Conington, M.A. 8th edition. Fcap. 8n>. 6s.6(L

The Satires and Epistles. In English Verse by J. Coning«

ton, M.A. 5th edition. 6t. 6d.

ninstrated from Antique Oems by C. W. King, M.A. Th«


text rerised with Introdnotion by H. A. J. Mnnro, M.A. Large 8ro. II. li.

Horaoe's Odes. Englished and Imitated by various hands. Edited
bj C. W. F. Cooper. Crown 8vo. St. 6d.

Fropertliis. Verse Translations from Book V., with revised Latia
Text. Bj F. A. Palej, M.A. Fciv.Sro. 8«.

Plato. Qorgias. Transkted by E. M. Cope, M.A. 8to. It,

Philebns. Translated by F. A. Paley, M. A. Small 8to. is*

ThesBtetus. Translated by F. A. Paley, M. A. Small 8yo. 4m.

Analysis and Index of the Dialogues. By Dr. Day. PostSvo. 5«.

Haddenda Reddlta : Passages from English Poetry, with a Latin
Yene Translation. Bj F. B. Gretton. Crown 8to. 63.

SabrlnsB Gorolla in hortolis Begi» Sehol» Salopiensis oontexaemnt
tres Tiri floriboB legendis. Bditio tertla. 8ro. 81. 6d. •

TheooritoB. In English Verse, by 0. S. Calverley, M.A. Crown

8fO. New Edition, revined. Crown 8ro. 7s. 6d.

Tranalations into English and Latin. By C. S. Calverley, M.A.

PostSro. 7«.6d.
into Greek and Latin Verse. By B. C. Jebb. 4to. oloth

gUt. 10i.6d.

Between Whiles. Translations by B. H. Kennedy. 2nd Edition.
rerwed. Crown 8ro. 6».


George BeU and Sons'


REFERENCE VOLUMES.

A JjtXtik Qnnmuur. By Albert Harkneas. Poet 8vo. 6f .
B7T.H.Ee7, M^. 6th ThoosancL Post 8vo. 8«.

A Short Latin Qranmuur for SohodlB. By T. H. K^, ILA«»

F.B.8. UthBdition. Port8n>. Ss.6d.

A Guide to the Oholoe of Olmwtoal Book«. By J.B. Ifajor.lLA«

BeriMd Bdition. Crown 8to. St.
The Theatre of the Qreeki. By J. W. Donaldaop, DJ). 8th

Edition. Poet 8to. 5f.

Ktfghtley'B Mythology of Oreeoe and Italy. 4th Edition. &.
A Dictionary of Latin and Oreek QuotatlonB. By BL T. Biley.

Post 8to. 5f. inth Indaz Yerbonim, £.

A Hlatory of Roman Lltaratore. By W. S. Teoffel, Proleanr at
the UniTondty of Tabingen. Bj W. Wagner, FIlD. 2 toIb. DemySvo. SU.

Stodent'B Guide to the Unlvenity of Gamtaridge. 4th Editioa

zerised. Foap. 8to. Part 1, 2a. 6d. ; Parts 2 to C, U each.


CLASSICAL TABLES.

Latin Aoddence. By the Ber. P. Frost, M.A. 1«.

Latin Veralfloation. It.

Hotabllia Qnsadam; or the Prmoipal Tenses of most of the
Irregular Greek Verfae and Klementaiy Greek, Latin, and Fnnoh Oon-
gtmction. New Edition. U.

Blohmond Rules for tho Ovldlan Diatioh, Ae. By J. Taie,

M.A. It.

The Fxlneiplea of Latin Syntax. 1«.

Greek Verbs. A Gatalogae of Verbs, Irregulär and DefeetiTe; their
leading formations, tenses, and inflexions, with ParadSgnu for ooBjngatioa,
Bnles for formation of tenses, te. Ac. Bj J. 8. Baird, T.O.D. 2a. 6d.

Greek Aocents (Notes on). By A. Bany, DJ). New Edition. It.
Homeric Dialect Its Leading Forms and Peculiarities, ^y J. S.

Baird, T.C.D. New Bdition, \xj W. G. Bntherford. It.

Greek Acddence. By the Ber. P. Frost, M.A. NewXdxtian. 1#.


CAMBRIDGE MATHEMATICAL SERIES.

Algebra. Choice and Chance. By W. A. Whitworth, M.A. 3rd

' Edition. 6{.

XncUd. Exercises on EocUd and in Modem Geometry. By

J. McDoweU, M.A. Srd Edition. 6i.

Trigonometry. Plane. By Bev. T. Vyvyan, M.A. 3«. 6d.
Oonios. The Geometry of. Srd Edition. By C.Taylor, DJ). 4«. 6(1.
Solid Geometry. By W. 8. Aldis, MJl. 3rd Editioa. 3«.
Rigid Dynamic^. By W. 8. Aldis, M.A. 4«.
Elementary Dynamics. By W. Gamett» M.A. 3rd Edition. 6c.


Educational Works.


Heat An Elementary Treatifle. By W. Gamett, M.A. 2nd Edit.

3t.6cL

Hydiomeohanlos. By W. H. Besant, M.A., F.B.S. 4ih Edition.
Piurt I. HydrostaticB. 5t.

Mtehanlos. Ftoblems in Elementary. By W. Walton, M.A. G«.


CAMBRIDGE SCHOOL AND COLLEGE

TEXT-BOOKS.

A Series of Elementary Treati$e$ for the tue of StudefiU in the

Univenitiei, BehooUt and Candidatee for the Public

ExandnaOont, Feap, Bvo,

Avlttametlo. By BeT.CEIeee, M.A. Fcap. 8yo. 10th EdH. 8«.6d

Algebra. By the Ber. 0. Eleee, MJL 6th Edit it.

Avlthmetlo. By A. Wxigl^, M.A. 8«. M.

A FrogressiYe Conree of Examples. With Answers. By

J. Watson. M.A. SthBditioii. 2f.6d.

Algebra. FrogressiYe Coarse of Examples. By Bey. W. F.
M'Miohael,M.A.,uidB.Prowde Smith, M.A. 2Bd Sditimu 8t.6d. With
AxiBwen. 4«.6d.

Plane Aatronomy, An Introdnotion ta By P. T. Mais, HA.

4thBditioii. 4t.

Oonio SeotionB treated Geometrically. By W. H. Besant, M.A.

«thBditioii. 4t.M. Solution to the Examples. U.

Slementary Ckmio Beotions treated Geometrically. By W. H.

Besant, M.A. lln the Pnas,

Statics, Elementary. By Ber. H. Goodwin, DJ>. 2nd Edit. 3«.

^drostatioa, Elementary. By W. H. Besant, M.A. 10th Edit. if.

Memraration, An Elementary Treatise on. By B.T. Moore, MJl. 6«.

Newton's Prlnoipia, The First Three Sections of, with an Appen-
dix: and the Kinth and Steventh Sections. By J. H. ETans. M.A. 5th
Edition, by P. T. Main, M.A. 4m,

Trigonometey, Elementary. By T. P. Hudson, M.A. 8«. td,
Optioa, Geometrical. With Answers. By W. S. Aldis, MX 8«. 6d.
Aaalytioaiaeometry for Schools. ByT.G.Vyryan. 8rdEdit.4«.6d.

Qreek Testament, Companion to the. By A. G. Barrett, A.M.

4th Edition, xerised. Vioap. 8n>. 5«.
Book of Oommon Prayer, An Historical and Explanatory Treatise

on the. By W. O. Hnmphry, B.D. 6th Edition. Tixp.Byo. 4b, 9d,

Musle, Text-book ol By H. 0. Banister. 10th Edit, revised. 5s.

Concise History of. By Be7. H. G. Bonavia Hunt, B. Mns.

Oxon. 6th Edition reylsed. 3s. 6d.


ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA.

Ste foregoing Series.


8 George Bell apd Sans'


GEOMETRY AND EUCLID.

Euclid. The First Two Books explained to Beginners. By C. P.
llaaon, B.A. SndBdition. f'oap.Sr». 2s. 6d.

The Enunciations and Figures to Euclid's Elements. Bj Ber.
J. BruBe, D.D. NewBdition. Fcap.Sro. 1«. On Cards, in cue, St. ML

Without the Figures, 6d.

Exercises on Euclid and in Modem Gtoometry. By J. MoDoweli,
B.A. Grown 8vo. Srd Edition reviaed. ßs.

Geometrical Conic SeotionB. By W. H. Besant, Bf.A. 4th Edit.

•is. 6d. Solution to the BxampleiK. 4a.

Elementary Qeometrical Conic Seotlons. By W. H. Besant,

M.A. llnthijprea.

Elementary Geometry of Oonios. By C. Taylor, D.D. Srd Edit

Sto. 4«. 6d.

An Introduction to Ancient and Modem Geometry of Conica.

By 0. Taylor, M.A. 8to. 15«.

Solutions of Geometrical Problems, proposed at St. John's

College from 1830 to 1846. By T. Gaskin, M.A. 8ro. 13s.


TRIGONOMETRY.

Trigonometry, Introduction to Plane. By Bev. T. G. Vyvran,

CharterhouBe. Or. Sro. 3i. 6d.

Elementary Trigonometry. By T. P. Hudson, K.A. Ss, Sd.
An Elementary Treatise on Mensuration. By B. T. Moore»

ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY

AND DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS.

An Introduction to Analytical Plane Geometry. By W. P.

Tnmbnll, ]i.A. 8to. 12s.

Problems on the Principles of Plane Oo-ordinate Geometry.

By W. Walton, M.A. Sro. 16s.

Trllinear Co-ordinates, and Modem Analytical Geometry of

Two DimanaionB. By W. A« Whitworth, M.A. 8vo. 16s.

An Elementary Treatise on Solid Geometry. By W. S. Aldis*

M.A. 2nd Edition revised. 8to. Ss.

Elementary Treatise on the Differential Calculus. By H.

O'Brien, M.A. 8to. 10s. 6d.

Elliptic Functions, Elementary Treatise on. By A. Cayley, MJL
DemySTo. l$s.

MECHANICS & NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.

Statics, Elementary. By H. Goodwin, D.D. Fcap. 8ro. Sad

Edition. 3s.

Dynamics, A Treatise on Elementary. By W. Gamett, M.A.
3rd Edition. Orown Sro. 6s.

Elementary Mechanics, Problems In. By "W. Walton, M.A. New

Edition. Crown Svo. 6.^.


JSducatkmal Works. 9


TheoreUoal Meohanios, Problems in. By W. Walton. 2nd Edit,
rorised and eiÜArgad. Demy 8td. 16i.

HydroBtaüos. ByW.H.Be8ant,M.A. Foap.Svo. 10th Edition. 4j.

Eydromeohanios, A Treatise on. By W. H. Besant, M.A., F.B.B.

8to. ith Edition, reriied. Part I. Hydrostatics. 5s.

Dynamios of a Paxtlola, A Treatise on the. By W. H. Besant, M.A.

[Prqparm^.

Qptios, Oeometrioal. By W. 8. Aldis, M.A. Fcap. 8to. 9b, Bd.

Doable Reteotion, A Chapter on Fresnel's Theory of. By W. 8.
Aldis» M.A. 8ro. Si.

Heat, An Elementary Treatise on. By W. Gamett, M.A. Cro^m
8to. 2ad Edition reriflod. Se. 6d.

Newton's Prinoipia, The First Three Sections of, with an Appen-
dix ; and the Ninth and Blerenth Beotioni. By J. H. Enuu, M.A. fitli
Edition. Edited by P. T. Main, M.A. 4$.

Afffcronomy, An Introdnctioii to Plane. By P. T. Main, M«A«

Fcap. 8to. cloth. 4a.

Astronomy, Praotioal and 8phericaL By B. Bfain, M.A. 8to. 14j.

AitroAomy, Elementary Chapters on, from the * Astronomie
PhyBiqne* of Biet. By H. Goodwin, D.D. 8to. 8a. Sd.

Poie Mathematlca and Natozal PhUoaophy, A Compendinm of

Paots and Forma]« in. By G. B. Smalley. 2nd Edition, revised by
J. KcDoweU, M.A. Fcap. 8to. 8a. 6d.

Elementary Course of Mathematlos. By H. Gtoodwin, D.D.

6th Edition. 8to. 16a.

ProUema and Examples, adapted to the * Elementary Course of

Mathematic«.' 8rd Edition. 8to. 58.

Solutions of Goodwin's CoUeotlon of Problems and Examples.

By W. W. Hntt, M.A. 8rd Edition« revised and enlarged. 8vo. 9*.
Pore Mathematlos, Elementary Examples in. By J. Taylor. 8vo.

7«. 6d.

Mechanics of Construction. With numerous Examples. By

8. Fenwick, F.B.AS. 8vo. 12a.

Pore and Applied Calculation, Notes on the Principles of. By

Bar. J. OhalUs, M. A Demy 8vo. 15a.

Pbysics, The Mathematical Principle of. By Bev. J. Challis, M.A«
Demy 8vo. 5«.


TECHNOLOQICAL HANDBOOKS.

Edited by H. Trüeman Wood, Secretas7 of the
Society of Arts.

1. Dyeing and Tissue Printhag. By W. Crooltes, F.B.S. 0$.

2. 01ass Manufacture. By Heniy Chance, M.A.; H.J. Powell, B. A;

and H. G. Harria. 3s. 6d.

8. Cotton Manufacture. By Biohard Marsden, Esq., of Man-
cheater. [In th» praa«.

4. Telegraphs and Telephones. By W. H. Preece, F.B.8.

[iVaparifif,


10 Oewge BeH and Sons*

HISTORY, TOPOGRAPHY, &c.

Borne and the Campagna. By B. Bam, SLA. With 85 Ea-
grvriagB and 96 Haps and Plans, '^th Appendiz. 4to. SI. 8«.

Old Borne. A Handbook for Travellers. By K Bom, M.A.
With Maps and Plana. DemySro. 10t.6d.

Modem Suxope. By Dr. T. H. Dyer. 2nd Edition, xeviaed and
ooBtinmed. 5to1i. DeiajSvo. 2L12i.6d.

The Hlatory of the Sings of Borne. By Dr. T. H. I)yer. 8va 16^.

The History of Pompeii: its Buildings and Antiquities. By
T. H. I^er. 8rd Edition, brought down to 1874. PortSro. 7s. 6d.

Anoient Athens: its History, Topography, and Bemains. By
T. H. Dyer. Soper-royal 8to. Oloth. iX 5i.

The DeoUne of the Homan Repnblio. By G. Long. 5 toIsl

8ro. 14«. each.

A History of Bngland dnring the Barly and Middle Ages. By

O. H. Paanon, M.A. 2nd Bdition reriaed and eahugvA, 8vo. YoL I.
let. YoL II. 141.

BIstacieal Maps of TBngland. By 0. H. Peanon. Folia 9nd

Bdition raviflod. 31s. 6d.

Wslcfry of IBngland, 1800-15. By Haxxiet Martinean, with new
and oopiona Index. 1 yol. 8s. 6d.

History of the Thirty Years' Peaoe, 1815-46. By Harriet Mar-
tinean. 4 toIb. Ss. 6d. each.

A Praotioal Synopsis of "KngUsh History. By A. Bowes. 4th

Edition. 8vo. 2$.

Student's Text-Book of English and General History. By

D. Beale. Grown Sro. 2s. 6d.

Uyos Of the Queens of England. By A. Strickland. Libraiy

Edition, 8 toIs. 78. 6d. each. Cheaper Edition, 6 toLb. 5s. each. Abridged
Bdition, 1 yol. 6s. 6d.

Hglnhard's Life of Earl the Great (Oharlemagne). Translated
with Notes, b7 W. Glaister, MJL, B.O.L. Grown 8vo. 4s. Gd.

Outlines of Indian History. By A. W. Hughes. Small post

Byo. 8s. 6d.

The Elements of General History. By Prof. Tytler. New
Edition, brought down to 1874. Small poet 8ro. 8s. 6d.

ATLASEa
An Atlas of Olassloal Geography. 24 Maps. By W. Hughes

and O. Long, K.A. New Edition. Imperial 8vo. 12s. 6(1.

A Grammar-Sohool Atlas of COassioal Geography. Ten Haps
■elected from the aboTC. New Edition. Imperial 8?o. 58.

Unit Glassioal Maps. By the Ber. J. Tate, M.A. Sid Edition.
Imperial 8to. 7s. 6d.

Standard Library Atlas of Glassioal Geography. Imp.8T0.7f.6d.


Educational Works. 11


PHILOLOGY.

WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY OF THE ENaUSH LAK-
OÜAOB. With Dr. Mahn's E^jiaoloffy- 1 toL, 1828 pages, 9000 Ulua-
trationa. 21«. With Appendiow and 70 additional pagM of lUiistni-
tlons, 1919 pages, Sit. 6d.
' Tks BBSTPRAoncAL Bhoush Dictiovakt bxtavt.'— ^Mortorly fifOMw, 1873.
ProapectOflee, with speoiaMn pages, post free on sqndioation.
New Diotionaxy of the EngllBli Language. Oombining Explan-
ation with BtjBudogy, and oopiotulj illustrated bj Qnotatioiui from the
best Anthorities. Br Dr. RIohardaon. New Edition, with a Supplement.
8 Tols. 4to. 42. 14t. 6d.; half russia, 51. 15«. 6d.; masia, 61. 12«. Supplement
separately. 4to. 12s.

An8T0. Bdit. without the Quotations, 15«.; half mssla, SOi.j russia, 2^

Supplementary English aiossary. Containing 12,000 Words and

Meanings occurring in English Literature, not found in any other
Dictionary. By T. L. O. DaVies. Demy 8yo. 18«.

Polk-Etymology. A Dictionary of Words perrerted in Form or
Meaning by False Derivation or Mistakrai Analogy. By Rer. A. S. Palmer.
Demy 8to. 21«.

Brief History of the English Language. By Prof. James Hadley,
LL.D., Yale College. Fcap. 8to. 1«.

The Elements of the English Language. By E. Adams, Ph.D.

15th Edition. PoetSro. 4«.6d.
Philologioal Essays. By T. H. Key, M.A., F.B.S. 8yo. 10«. 6<l.
Language, its Origin and Development By T. H. Key, M.A|

7.R.8. 8to. 14«.

Synonyms and Antonyms of the English Language. By Arch-
deacon Smith. 2nd Edition. PostSro. 5s.

Synonyms Discriminated. By Archdeacon Smith. DemySvo. 16«.

Bible English. By T. L. 0. Dayies. 5s.

The Queen's English. A Manual of Idiom and Usage. By the
late Dean Alf ord eth Edition. Fcap. 8va 5«.

Etymologloal Glossary of nearly 2600 English Words de-

rired from the Greek. By the Ber. E. J. Boyee. Fcap. 8to. 3«. 6d.
A Syriao Grammar. By G. Phillips, D.D. 8rd Edition, enlarged.

8ro. 7«.6d.

A Grammar of the Arabio Language. By Bev. W. J. Beau-
mont, M.A. 12mo. 7s.


DIVINITY, MORAL PHILOSOPHY, &o.

Novum Testamentnm Grssoum, Textus Stephanici, 1550. By

F. H. ScriTener, A.M., IiL.D., D.CL. New Edition. Idmo. 4«. 60. Also
on Writing Paper, with Wide Margin. Half -bound. 12«.

By the »amt Author.
Oodez BessB Oantabriglensis. 4to. 26s.

A FuU CoUaüon of the Oodez Sinaitlous with the Beoeived Text
of the New Testament, with Critical Introduction. Sod Edition, rerised.
Ftep. 8tO( 5«.

A Plain Introduotion to the Oritioism of the New Testament.
With Forty Facsimiles from AndentMaansoripts. Srd Edition. 8to.

\ln iht prtu.

Slz Leotores on the Text of the New Testament. For Englidi
Beaders. Crown 8ro. 6«.


12 George Bell and Sons'


The New Testament for IBntflah Baaders. By the Ute H. AUord,

D.D. VoL I. Part I. Srd Edit 12«. VoL I. Put n. find Edit. I(k6«.
YoL n. Pwt 1. 2nd Edit. 16«. Toi. 11. Part II. 2nd Edit. 16«.

The areek Testament By the late H. Alfard, DJ). VoL 1. 61h

Edit. 11. 8«. Vol. II. 6tb Edit. 11. 4«. Vol. HI. 5th Edit. 18«. ToL lY.
Fart 1. 4tli Edit. 18«. VoL lY. Part n. 4,th Edit. 14«. Td. lY. 11. Uk

Oompanlon to the Ghreek Testament. By A. G. Barrett, MX
4tlL Bditton, rerised. Foap. 8to. 5«.

The Book of Psalms. A New Translation, with Introdactions, Ae.

By the Yerr Ber. J. J. Stewart Perowne, D.D. Sro. YoL L 5th SditioB*
13b. VoL n. 5th Edit. 16«.

Abridged for Schools. 8rd Edition. Grown Svo. lOt. 6d.

History of the Artioles of Beligion. By G. H. Hardwick. 3rd

Edition. Post 8to. 5«.

History of the Greeds. By J. B. Lmnhy, D.D. 2nd Edition«.

Crown 8to. 7«. 6d.

Pearson on the Greed. Garef oily printed from an early edition.
With Analysis and Index by E. Walford, M.A. PortSro. 5«.

An Historloal and XUplanatory Treatise on the Book of

Common Prayer. By Bey. W. G. Hnmphxy, B.D. 6th Editioa, enlaxged.
Small post 8yo. 4«. 6d.

The New Table of Lessons E^lalned. By Bey. W. G. Hnmphzy,

B.D. Poap. Ic 6d,

A Commentary on the Qospels for the Sundays and other Holy
Days of the Christian Year. By Bey. W. Denton, A.M. Kew EditioB.
3 yols. 8yo. 64t. Sold separately.

Gommentary on the Splstles for the Sundays and other Holy
Days of the Christian Year. By Bey. W. Denton, A.M. 2 toU. 36i. Bold
separately.

Commentary on the Aots. By Bev. W. Denton, A.M. Yol. I.

8yo. 18s. YoLH. 14i.

Notes on the Cateohism. By Bev. Canon Barry. D.D. 6th Edit.
Foap. 2i.

Cateohetloal Hints and Helps. By Bev. £. J. Boyoe, M.A. 4th

Edition, reyised. Yctng. 2s. 6d.

Examination Papers on Religious Instmotlon. By Bst. B. J.

Boyce. Sewed. Is. 6d.

Churoh Teaohing for the Churoh's Children. An Exposition
of the Oateohism. By the Bey. F. W. Harper. 8q. foap. Si.

The Winton Churoh Cateohlst Questions and Answers on the

Teaching of the Church Catechism. By the late. Bey. J. 8. B. MonseD*
LL.D. 3rd Edition. Cloth, 8s.; or in Vvax Part^ sewed.

The Churoh Teaoher's Manual of Christian Instruction. By

Bey. K. F. Sadler. 24th Thousand. 2a. 6d. •

Short Explanation of the Epistles and Gospels of the Chris-
tian Year, with Questions. Boyal 32mo. 2s. 6d.; caU, 4s. 6d.

Butler's Analogy of Religion ; with Introdootion and Index bj
Bey. Dr. Steere. New Edition. Fcap. 3s. 6d.

Three Sermons on Human Nature, and Dissertation on

Yirtue. By W. Whewell. D.D. 4th Edition. Foap. 8yo. 2«. 6d.


Educational Works, 13


Ii6otare8 on the Histoiy of Moral Philosophy in England. By

W. WheweU, D.D. OrowB 8to. Ss.

XMit*8 Ckmunentary on Intanational Law. By J. T. Abdy,

LL.D. New and Oheap Edition. Grown 8to. lOi. 6d.

A Manual of the Roman OivU Law. By G. Leapingwell, LIj.D«

8to. 12t.


FOREIGN CLASSICS.

A $erUi for u$e in SehooUj with English Noteif grammatical and
explanatory, and renderings of difficult idiomatic expressions.

Feap. Bvo.

Sohlllar's .^ Wallenatein. By Dr. A. Bnohheim. SrdEdit. 6t.6d.
OrtlieIia««riuidPiooolomini,3a.6d. WaUonst«in'i Tod, Sc 6d.

ICald of Orleans. By Dr. W. Wagner. 3«. 6d.

ICazla Stuart By V. Kastner. St.

Ooethe's Hermann and Dorothea. By E. Bell, M.A.| and

B.Wdlfol. 2c 6d.

German BaUads, from Uhland, Goethe, and Sdhiller. By C. L.

Bielefeld. 3rd Edition. 3s. 6d.
Oharles Xn.« par Voltaire. By L. Direy. 4th Edition. 8«. 6(2.
ATentores de T^^maque, par Finalen. By C. J. Delille. 2nd

Kdxtion. 4f . 6d.

Select Fables of La Fontaino. By F. E. A. Gase. 14th Edition. 3«.
Floolola, by X.B. Saintine. By Dr.Dabno. 11th Thoasand. 8i. 6<l.


FRENCH CLASS-BOOKS.

Twenty Lessons In French. With Yocabulaiy, giving the Fro-
nnndation. By W. Brelmer. Poet Sra 4«.

Ftench Grammar for Pablio Schools. By Rev. A. C. Clapin, M.A.
Itep. Sto. 9th Bdition, revifled. 2c 6d,

Ftenoh Primer. By Ber. A. C. Glapin, M.A. Feap. 8to. 4th Edit.

Ic
Primer of SVenoh Philology. ByBev.A. C. Clapin. Foap. Bvo. 1«.
La NouTeau Tresor; or, French Student's Ckimpanion. By

H. E. 8. 16th Edition. Feap. 8to. 8c 6d.

F. E. A. GASC'S FRENCH 0OÜBSE.

Pint Frenoh Book. Foap. %7o. 76th Thousand. Is. 6d.
Second French Book. 42nd Thoasand. Feap. Sto. 2s. M.
Key tOiPirst and Second Frenoh Books. Feap. 8to. 8f . 6d.

Ptench Fables for Beginners, in Prose, with Index, loth Thoasand.

l2nio. 8f. '

Select Fablss of La Fontaine. New Edition. Foap. 8to. 8«.
Histolrea Amüsantes et InstruotlTes. With Notes. 14th Thou.

■end. Feap. 8to. 2s. 6d.


14 George Bell and Sons*

Pvmotleftl OtiidB to Modom French OonTenatton. 13th Thoa-

Band. Fc«p.8to. %B.6d.

SYsBoh Poetry fbr UM You&g. WithNotoB. 4th Edition. Feap»

8vo. 2t.

Material! fbr nenoh Prose Compoeiilon; or, Beleotiene fiom

the belt Kngliah Proae Write». 16th Thousand. Voap. 8vd. 4a. 9d,
Eej, 6b.

Proeatenn Ckmtempondna. With Notes. 8to. 6ih Edition,

reviaed. 5i.
Jjb Petit Oompagnon; a French Talk-Book for Little Childnn.

nth Tbonaand. I6mo. 2a 6d.

An Improred Modem Pooket Diotionaiy of the Frenoh and

EngUalt LangoageB. 90th Thousand, with Additions. 16du>. COoth. 4s,
Also in 8 Tols., m neat leatherotte, 5«.

Modem Iftenoh-lSngllsh and IBngHsh-Frenoh Dtetlonary. Snd

Edition, reriaed. In 1 toL 12a 6d. (formerly 8 vols. S5a)

GOMBEBT'S FBKKCH DEAMA.

Being a Selection of the best Tragedies and Comedies of Molidre,
Badne, OomeiUe, and Voltaire. IVlth Anniments and Hotaa hy A.
Gombert. Kew Edition, rcTised by F. B. A. Gaao. Fcap. 8ro. It. eedii

MoLiKaa :~-Le Kisantbrope. L'Ayare. Le Bourgeois Oentilhomme. La
TartoiEe. Le Ualade Imaginaiie. Lea Fsmmea Banuitea. Lea Pduberiaa
de Soapin. Lea PrMenaea Bidionlea. L'Boole dea Femaiei. L'Bodle dea
Maris. Le XMedn malgr« LvL

IUavB:>-PhMre. Bather. Athalie.- Iphigdnie. Lea Plaidenra. La
ThAalde; on, Lee Friiea Bnnemis. Andromaqne. Britannioos.

P. ComHnLLX:— LeOid. Horaoe. Cinna. Polyenote.

YoLTAiBS :— Zaire.


GERMAN CLASS-BOOKS.

Materials for German Prose Composition. By Dr Boehheim.
7th Edition IVsap. 4i. 6d. K^.Si.

Wortfolge, or Rules and Exercises on the Order of Words in

German Bentonoea. By Dr. F. Stock. Is. 6(1.

A G^erman Qrammar for Public Schools. By the Bev. A. 0.
OlapinaadF. HoUKOUer. 2ndySdition. Foap. 2s. 6d.

Kotsebae*s I>er Geftmgene. With Notes by Dr. W. Strombeig. It.


ENGLISH CLASS-BOOKS.

A Brief History of the English Language. By Prof. ^Taa. Qadley,

LL.D., of Yale College. Fcap. 8yo. Is.

The Elements of the English Language. By E. Adams, PhJ).

18th Edition. Poat8ro. is.6d.

The Rudiments of English Grammar and Analyais. By

E. Adama, Fh.D. 8th Edition. Fcap. Sro. ^


Educational Works. 16

By 0. P. IIabon, FeUow of UniT. GoU. London,
lint Kotloni of Omninar for Tonng Leamera. Fcap. 8to.

lOth Thousand. Oloth. 8d.

lint Stepi In TBngltoh Grammar for Junior Classes. Dsmy

18mo. 32nd Thomand. If.

Outlines of BngUsh Qnunmar for the use of Junior Classes.

81st Thousand. Grown 8yo. 2t.

SSsgUsh Orammar, including the Principles of Qiammatioal
.AniljBis. 25th Bdition. 88th Thooiand. Grown 8to. St. Sd.

A Shorter English Grammar, with copious Exercises. 8th Thou-
■and. Crown 8to. $•. 6d.

gn glia h Grammar Praotloa, being the Exeroises separately. 1«.


Praotioal Hints on Teaching. By Ber. J. Menet, MX 5th Edit.
Crown 8to. doth, 2f. 6d. ; paper, 2i.

Test Iiessons In Dictation. 2nd Edition. Paper oorer, 1«. 6d.
Qnesttons fbr FiTaTnlnatlona in ^^gw«>» Idteratiure. By Ber.

W. W. Bkeat, Prot of Anglo*flazon at Cambridge Uniyernty. 2t. 6d.
Drawixig Copies. By P. H. Dehunotte. Oblong 8to. 12«. Bold

also in parts at Is. each.
Poetry for the School-room. New Edition. Fcap. 8to. 1«. 64.
Geographical Text-Book ; a Practical Qeography. By M. B. S.

12mo. 2t.

The Blank Map« done up sepankte|f , 4to. 2s. oolonred.

Ziondon's (Mrs.) Kntertalning KatoraUst New Edition. Betised
by W. 8. DaUaa, 7.L.B. 5s.

Handbook of Botany. New Edition, greatly enlarged by

D. Wooster. Fcap. 2s. Sd.

The Botanist's Pooket-Book. With a copious Index. By W. R.
Hayward. 3rd Bdit. rerieed. Ciowndro. Cloth limp. 4s. 6d.

Experimental Chemistry, founded on the Work of Br. Btookhardl.

By C. W. Heaton. Poet 8to. 5s.

Double Entry Elooldated. By B. W. Foster. 12th Edit 4ta

3s. 6(1.

A New Manual of Book-keeping. By P. Grellin, Accountant

Crown 8to. 8s. 6d.


Ploture Sohool-Books. In Simple Language, with numerous
ninstrations. Boyal ISmo.

Scbwl Primer. Sd.— fldiool Header. By J. TlUeard. U— Poeter Book
for Schools. U— The Life of Joeeph. Is.— The Soriptnie Parables. Br tha
Ber. J. B. Clarke. Is.- The Soriptore Kiradee. By the Ber. J. B. Clark».
Is.— The Hew Testament History. By the Ber. J. O. Wood, M.A. Is.— The
Old Testament History. By the Ber. J. O. Wood. M.A. U— The Story of
Banyan's POgrim's riogress. U.— The Life of Christopher Colambas. Qy
Sarah Crompton. Is.— The Life of Martin Lather. By Sarah Crompton. U-


16 George Bell and Sans' JEducatümal Works,


SmlalAe

for
InfvUa,


BOOKS FOR YOUNQ READERS.

A Series o/Reading Books designed tofaoUUaUthe euiquisUion f^ftke power
of Reading by very young Child ren. In 8 vols, limp cloth, Bd. each.

T]>e Cat and the Hen. Sam and lila Dog Badleg. ^

Bob and Tom Lee. A Wreck. /

The New-born Lamb. The Rosewood Box. Poor f

Fan. Sheep "Dog. )

The' Stgry of Three Monkeyg.

Story of a Cat. Told by Herself.

The Blind Boy. The Mute Girl. A New Tale of

Babes in a Wood.

The Dey and the Knight The New Bank Note.

The Boyal Visit. A King's Walk on a Winter's Day.

Queen Bee and Busy Bee.

anU'B Gragg.

A First Book of Geography. By the Bev. C. A. Johns.
Blnstrated. Double Bize, 1«.


/or
I. Md U.


S\üic\Ae

for
Stand« rdn
U.klll.


BELL'S READING-BOOKS.

FOB BOHOOLB AND PABOOHIAL LIBBABIES.

Tlie popn]*ritj which the ' Books for Tomg Beaders ' hat« attained is
a snAcient proof that teaehers and pnpils aiUke approve of the ose of inter-
esting stories, with a simple plot in place of the dry combination of letters and
i^Uables, Tnaking no impression on the mind, of which elementary reading-
books generally consist.

The Publishers hare therefore thonght it adyisable to extend the application
of tills prineiple to booki adapted for more advanced readers.

Now Ready, JPott 8vo. Strongly bound.

Grlmm'8 German Tales. (Selected.) 1«.

Andersen's Danish Tales. (Selected.) 1«.

Great Englishmen. Short Lives for Yoong Children. 1«.

Lamb's Tales f^m Shakespeare. (Selected.) 1«.

Bdgeworth's Tales. A Selection. 1«.

Friends in Far and Feathers. By Gwynfryn. 1«.

Parables from Nature. (Selected.) ByMraGatty. 1«.

Masterman Ready. By Capt Maziyat. (Abgd.) 18.M,

Settlers in Oanada. By Capt. lianyat. (Abdg.) l«.6d.

GuUlver's Travels. (Abridged.) U.

Boblnson Omsoe. Is. 6<2.

Marie ; or, GUmpses of Life in France. By A B. Ellis.

Is.

Poetry for Boys. By D. Mnnro. 1«.

Southey's Life of Nelson. (Abridged.) Is.

Llfs of the Duke of Wellington, with Maps and Plans. It.

The Romcmoe of the Coast. By J. BancimaTi.

[In the press. J


Standards

IV. I r.


Standoi-d
VI.


LONDON:
Printed by BnuxeswAts * Sobs, Tower Street, Upper St. Hartin's lane.


V-^^< ? ■**-^' .


DOES NOT CIRCUUTE


■ ■!!?;*. ■


llzlrf'irJI


a bios OSS 310 517


. V li^i


.*^|- ^■'•'


JSvIV? .--.^


^r»' -J f •', •


U . '4


^ V »i'i'1 ■ •■>.


.• *


y .


< T . >■"


; ^


• ^ ' f


•V k"-


. • ■ r


_f ' A^ 1 ■ ■■ <


=====


===== [next volume/part: Vol. IV] =====


=====


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/


y  LIBRARIES       Stanford  uN.VEPs.Tt  LIBRARIES


DIVERSITY    LIBRARIES        STANFORD    UhllVEBSITV    UBRARIi


.IBKARIES        STANFORD   UNIVERSITY     LIBRARIES        STANF


ANFORD     UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES  STANFORD    UNIVEW


STANFORD  university  libraries    STANFORD


O  UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES      STANFORD  UNIVERSITY


^  LIBRARIES       STANFORD   UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES


IIVERSITY    LIBRARIES       STANFORD    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIC


IBRARIES        STANFORD  UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES        STANF<


TANFORO    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES  STANFORD    UNIVERS


STANFORD  university  libraries    STANFORD  t


°  UNIVERSITY


-««o  UNIVERSITY


jv!    .    ,  ,T    LIBRARIES     •     STANFORD    UNIVEHSIT1


FORD    UNIVERSITY     LIBRARIES        STANFORD     UN


IVERSITY    LIBRARIES        STANFORD   UNIVERSITY    L,


RARIES  STANFORD     UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES  S


UISRAHIES        STANFORD     university    LIBRARIES


STANFORD    UNIVERSITY    UBRARtES        STANFORI


UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES  STANFORD    UNIVERSIT'


ANFORD     UNIVERSITY     LIBRARIES    -    STANFORD     UN


J       iVERSITY     LIBRARIES         STANFORD    UNIVERSITY     L


llARlES  STANFORD    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES  S


„IBRARIES        STANFORD     university    LIBRARIES


TANFORD   UNIVERSITY     LIBRARIES         STANFORI


STANFORD     UNIVERSIT


TEUTONIC   MYTHOLOGY.


JACOB    GRIMM.


a  -,...


'J»


TEUTONIC  MYTHOLOGY


BY


JACOB   GRIMM.


TRANSLATED    FROM    THE    FOURTH    EDITION

WITH

yOTES    AND    APPENDIX


JAMES    STEVEN    STALLYBEASS.


VOL.    IV.


LONDON:  GEORGE  BELL  &  SONS,  YORK  STREET,

COVENT  GARDEN.

1888.


ßuUcr  A  rauner.

r»«  Selwood  PHntlnff  Works,

/Vvfiw,  and  London.


102593


•"•••  ••••

•  •  •  •  •  •

•  •    •  ,  •  •

•  •  •  •  •  *


» •  •       ••  ,


PEEFACE.


This  Volume,  answering  to  Vol.  III.  of  the  last  German  edition,
consists  of  two  parts,  a  Supplimbkt  and  an  Appendix.

The  SupPLEXKVT  is  the  cliaracteristic — as  it  is  the  only  strictly
new— part  of  this  Fourth  Edition  of  Grimm's  Mythology.  After
his  Second  Edition  of  1844,  which  was  a  great  advance  upon  the
First,  the  Anther  never  found  time  to  utilize  any  of  the  new
matter  he  collected  by  working  it  into  the  Text;  his  Third
Edition  of  1854  was  a  mere  reprint  of  the  Second;  so  that  the
stores  he  kept  on  accumulating  till  his  death,  and  the  new  views
oflen  founded  on  them  and  on  the  researches  of  younger  in-
vestigators— Kuhn,  Miillenhofll^  Panzer,  Mannhardt,  etc. — all  lay
baried  in  the  MS.  Notes  that  covered  the  wide  margin  of  his
private  copy,  as  well  as  in  many  loose  sheets.  On  the  death
of  Grimmi  his  Heirs  entrusted  the  task  of  bringing  out  a  Fourth
Edition  to  Prof.  Elabd  Hugo  Mstib,  of  Berlin,  leaving  him  at
liberty  to  incorporate  the  posthumous  material  in  the  Text  or
Dotf  as  he  chose.  The  Professor,  fearing  that  if  once  he  began
incorporating  he  might  do  too  much,  and  instead  of  pure
Grimm,  might  make  a  compound  Grimm-and-Meyer  concern  of
it^  wisely  contented  himself  with  the  humbler  duty  of  keeping  it
in  the  form  of  Supplementary  Notes,  verifying  authorities  where
he  could,  and  supplying  References  to  the  parts  of  the  Text
which  it  illustrates.

As  the  Supplement  hardly  amounted  to  a  volume,  the  Pro-
fessor hit  upon  the  happy  thought  of  reprinting  with  it  an
Appikdix  which  Grimm  had  published  to  his  First  Edition,
but  had  never  republished,  probably   thinking  it  had  done  its


IV  PREFACE.

work^  and  perhaps  half  ashamed  of  its  humble  character.  Yet
it  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  parts  of  the  work^  and  mach
the  most  amusing.  It  falls  into  three  unequal  portions :  I.
Anglo-Saxon-  Genealogies.  II.  Superstitions.  III.  Spells.
Of  the  short  treatise  (30  pp.)  on  the  eight  royal  lines  of  our
Octarchy,  their  common  descent  from  Woden,  and  their  points  of
connexion  with  Continental  tradition,  I  will  say  nothing.  The
bulk  of  the  Appendix  (112  pp.)  is  taken  up  with  the  Süpib-
STiTiONS.  After  a  number  of  extracts  from  Medieval  authors,
extending  from  a.D.  600  to  1450,  we  have  a  vast  array  of  Modera
Superstitions  (the  German  part  alone  has  1142  articles),  mostly
taken  down  from  the  lips  of  the  common  people  all  over  Europe,
in  the  simple  language  of  the  class,  the  *^  rude  Doric ''  which  our
polite  grandfathers  used  to  apologize  for  printing,  but  which  in
these  days  of  Folklore  is,  I  am  told,  the  very  thing  that  goes
down.  The  Author's  view  of  Superstition,  that  it  is  a  swidüal,
the  debased  wrecks  and  remnants  of  a  once  dominant  Religion,
of  course  inclines  him  to  trace  these  superstitions,  as  far  as
possible,  to  the  Old  Faith  of  the  Teutonic  nations,  of  which  we
have  still  such  a  splendid  specimen  in  the  Icelandic  Edda. — The
Appendix  winds  up  with  57  old  Spells  in  various  languages

The  Translator.


CONTENTS.


VOL.  IV.

PAÖE

SUPPLEMENT  [Collected  fi-om  the  Author's  post-
hnmons  Notes,  by  Prof.  E.  H.  Meyer  of
Berlin]  :

To  the  Text 1277

To  the  Author's  Preface  in  Vol.  III.  .     1699

APPENDIX  by  the  Author:

Anglo-Saxon  Genealogies   ......  1709

Superstitions 1737

Spells 1849

INDEX 1871


CHAPTER  I.
INTRODUCTION.

p.  1,  note]  Panl.  Diac.  still  uses  heathen  in  the  sense  of  rastici
(Pertz,  Archiv  7,  334).  demo  heidanin  commanei  Diut.  1^  504^.
The  abbrev.  form  held  occurs  even  before  Luther :  heide  rhy.
leide^  G.  Abent.  2,  67.  dieser  zeginer  oder  heit,  Keller,  Fast-
nachts-sp.  p.  823  (like  our  christ  for  MH6.  kristen,  OHG.
christani) ;  yet  the  true  genitive  is  retained  in  Chr.  Weisels  Erz-

narre  190:  des  jungen  heidens  los  werden. Favorite  epithets

of  the  heathen  are  "  wild,  fierce,  grim  '* :  wild  heathen,  wild
men  of  the  wild  heath,  Anegenge  23,  61.  conf.  Rabenschl.  1080.
Neifen  14,  6.  MsH.  1,  152\  die  wuotendigen  beiden,  Kaiser-
chr.  951.  More  freq.  die  iibelen  beiden,  Diemer  158,  18.  162,2.
Morolt  376  seq.  die  bösen  h..  Diemer  170,  24.  179,  17.  der
fiheU  h.,  Pantal.  1034.  der  vil-  arge  h.  1847.  den  h.  gramen,
Servat.  148  (per  contra,  hypocrita  is  transl.  dunni  cristani,  Diut.
1,239»»).  Also  "dogs,''  as  in  Judith  134,39:  )>one  hae«enan
hund.  Olaf  Tryggv.  saga,  cap.  68  :  /mnd-heidinn.  Svenske
vis :   hednings-Atind.      Mor.  418 :    den  heidenschen  hunt.      In

Willeh.  58,  16  the  Sarrazin  ride  on  dogs  and  Jwgs. -Gradually

milder  terms  are  used:  dat  domme  heidine,  Maerl.  3,  128.  des
geloüben  geste  (strangers  to  faith),  Tiirl.  Wh.  15^.  heidinen  die
sunder  ewe  (without  law)  lebeten,  Roth.  475.  People  do  not  like
to  be  taken  for  heathens :  86  bin  ich  niht  ein  heiden,  MsH.  1,  42*.
als  ich  waere  ein  heiden  45^.  Yet  there  is  pity  for  them :  swie
sie  w&ren  heiden,  och  was  zerlarmen  umbe  sie.  Nib.  Lament  437 ;
and  Wolfram,  like  Walther,  speaks  of  them  quite  humanely,  Willeh.
450,  15  :  "  Die  nie  toufes  künde  Enpfiengen,  ist  das  sünde,  Daz
man  die  slnoc  alsam  ein  vihe  (a  sin  to  slay  the  unbaptized)  f
Grozer  sünde  ich  drumbe  gibe:  Es  ist  gar  Ootes  hant-getät,
Zwno  und  sibenzec  spräche  die  er  hat,''  they  are  God's  handi-
work, 72  languages  wherein  He  speaks.

pp.  2-4.]  Heathens  in  Italy  and  at  Rome  as  late  as  Theoderic,
Edict.  Theod.  108.      Salvianus  de  gubern.  Dei,  about  450,  con-

VOL.   IV.  ^^^^  B


1278  INTRODUCTION.

trasts  the  vices  of  christian  Komans  and  Provincials  with  the
virtues  of  heathen  Saxons^  Franki,  Gepidas  and  Huns,  and  of
heretical  Goths  and  Vandals ;  towards  the  end  of  bk.  7,  he  says  :
'  Gothorum  gens  perfida,  sed  pudica  est,  Alamannorum  impndica,
sed  minus  perfida.  Franci  mendaces,  sed  hospitales,  Saxones
crndelitate  efferi,  sed  castitate  mirandi ; '  and  further  on :  '  Vandali
castos  etiam  Romanos  esse  fecerunt;'  conf.  Papencordt  271-2.
The  Bavarian  Batolf  is  converted  in  788  :  coepi  Deum  colere,
MB.  28^,  7.  In  the  times  of  Boniface  and  Sturmi  we  read :  Popnli
gentis  illins  (in  Noricum),  licet  essent  christiani,  ab  antiquis
tarnen  paganorum  contagiis  et  perversis  dogmatibus  infecti,  Pertz
2,  366.  Alamanns,  who  appear  in  Italy  552-3,  are  still  heathens
in  contrast  to  the  christian  Franks,  Agathias  2,1.  1,7.  Eginhard
cap.  7  (Pertz  2,  446)  :  Saxones  cultui  daemonum  dediti ;  cuUum
daem,  dimittere ;  abjecto  daem.  cultu,  et  relictis  patriis  caeri-
moniis.  The  author  of  Vita  Mathildis  (Pertz  12,  575)  says  of  the
Saxons  and  of  Widukind's  family  :  Stirps  qui  quondam  duem.
captus  errore,  praedicatorum  pro  inopia  idola  adarans,  christianos
constanter  persequebatur.

The  Nialssaga  cap.lOl — 6  relates  the  introduction  of  Christianity
into  Iceland  in  995 — 1000.  Yet  at  Nerike  by  Örebro,  as  late  as
the  ]  7th  cent.,  they  sacrificed  to  Thor  on  certain  rocks  for  tooth-
ache, Dybeck  runa  1848  p.  26 ;  and  to  this  day  old  women
sacrifice  to  rivers,  and  throw  the  branch  on  the  stone  2,  3,  15.  vit
erum  heiSia  is  said  in  Olaf  the  Saint^s  time  in  Gautland,  Fomm.
sog.  4,  187  and  12,  84.  In  the  Norwegian  districts  of  Serna
and  Idre,  bordering  on  Dalarne,  there  were  heathens  in  1644,
Sämling  (Christiania  1839)  6,  470-1.  )>a  kunni  enge  maiSr
Paternoster  i  Straumi,  Werlanff.  grenzbest.  20.  37.  In  Sweden
we  hear  of  Oden^ 9  followers  in  1578, 1580  and  1601,  Geyer  Svea-
rikes  häfder  2,  329;  in  a  folk-song  a  woman  dreads  the  heathen
that  haunt  the  neighbouring  wood :  '  locka  till  Thor  i  fjäUy
Arvidsson  3,  504.  Thursday  was  holy  in  Sweden  till  100  or
150  years  ago  (p.  191).  Relapses  into  heathenism  were  frequent
there,  Hervarars.  cap.  20  (Fomald.  sö^.  1,  512).  The  secret
practice  of  it  was  called  launblot,  Fornm.  sog.  2,  243.

The  Slavs  in  Pomerania  heathens  till  begin,  of  12th  centory.
A  heathen  festival  near  Pyritz,  and  that  of  Gerovit  at  Havel-
berg,  Bairthold's  Gesch.  v.  Pomm.  2,  34.  76.    Giesebrecht's  Wend.


INTRODUCTION.  1279

gesch.  2,  265.  309.  Heathen  Rans,  Barth.  2,  100-1.  Pribizlaus
of  Mecklenburg  baptized  in  1164,     Sirantevit^a  temple  destroyed

1168,  Lisch'a  Meckl.  jahrb.  11, 10.97. The  Slavs  betw.  Elbe

and  Oder  were  Christians  for  70  years,  then  relapsed  ab.  1013,
Helmold  1,  16;  adhuc  enim  (1147)  Slavi  immolabant  daemoniis
et  non  Deo  68.  The  Prussians  still  heathen  after  conversion  of
Russians  1,  1.— — «Some  Christians  in  Hungary  in  latter  half  of
lOfch  century,  Diimmler's  Pilgrim  von  Passau  36  seq.  Some
heathens  in  Esthonia  at  the  present  day,  Yerhandl.  2,  36.  The
Lapps  were  still  heathen  in  1750,  Castr^n's  Reise  p.  69.

Mixed  marriages  were  not  entirely  forbidden,  as  Chlodowig's.
example  shows.  Such  too  was  Kriemhilt's  union  with  the  heathen
Efczel,  but  she  takes  care  to  have  her  son  Ortliep  baptized,  Nibel.
1328.

p.  5.]  Between  heathen  baptism  (che  vatni  ausa,  the  dicare
in  nomine  deorum,  Greg.  Tur.  2,  29)  and  christian  baptism,
stands  the  prim-signaz,  Egilss.  p.  263,  a  mere  signing  with  the
cross.  Thus,  Gestr  is  'primsigndr,  eigi  skirSr,'  Fomald.  sog.  1,
314.     The  pains  of  hell  were  made  to  hang  on  being  unbaptized

(p.  918). Whoever  forsook  paganica  vetustas  (Pertz  2,  342),

had  to  renounce  the  gods  :  den  gotenentfarn=:  get  baptized,  Türl.
Wh.  ISO*.  To  abjure  one's  faith  was  abrenuntiare,  aijjurare,
renegare,  reneare,  Ducange ;  Fr.  renter,  O.Fr.  renoier,  MHG.  sich
vemoijieren,  Nib.  1207, 1.  Lament  494.  vemoierien  sich  von  den
Kristen,  Livl.  reimchr.  5719.  M.  Neth.  vernogerde,  Karel.  2,  75.
vernoyert,  Pajin  2,  519.  831.  vemoyert  rh.  verghiert,  Maerl.  3,
140.  OHG.  an^runneo,  anUtrunneo  a^a-^runn^o^^apostata,  rene-
gatus,  Graff  5, 533.  li  cuivers  renoie,  Ducange ;  tornadie,  tamadis
=retrayant.  Other  phrases:  den  touf  hin  legen,  (livl.  r.  6129.
lazen  vom  h'ist  6385.  What  is  meant  by :  '  eosque  (Hessians  at
Amenabnrg)  a  sacrilega  idolorum  censura,  qua  sub  quodam
ehriatianüatis  nomine  male  abusi  sunt,  evocavit'  in  the  Vita
Bonifacii,  Pertz  2,  342  ?  proba1)ly  a  christian  heresy,  as  p.  344-
says  of  Thuringians  :  '  sub  nomine  religionis  falsi  fraires  maxi-
mam  hereticae  pravitatis  introduxerunt  sectam^'  conf.  Bettberg

2,  308. The  Abrenuntiations  declared  the  ancient  gods  by

name  to  be  devils  and  Unholds,  AU  heathen  merrymaking,  espec.
music  and  dancing,  was  considered  diabolic,  pp.  259.  618-9.  770.
Feasts,  games  and  customs  connected  with  the  old  worship  were


1280  INTRODUCTION.

now  diaboli  pompa,  gelp  inti  zierida.  Oriesliaber's  Serm.  p.  48  :
da  man  singefc  und  springet  in  de8  tieveU  dienste  ;  conf.  Ancassin
in  Moon's  Fabl.  1,  385.     Fauriel  3,  190.

p.  5.]  The  mental  protest  against  Christianity  shows  itself  in
the  continuance  of  the  rough  heroic  conception  of  Paradise  (p.
319).  The  christian  paradise  was  often  rejected,  as  by  Kadbod
the  Frisian,  who  withdrew  his  foot  from  the  sacred  font,  because
he  did  not  care  to  give  up  the  fellowship  of  his  forefathers  in  hell
and  sit  with  a  little  flock  in  heaven.  Vita  Bonif.  (Pertz  2,  221).
Melis  Stoke,  rymkron,  1,  24.  Comp,  the  contrary  behaviour
of  Gudbrand  (Maurer  bekehrung  1,  537)  and  of  Sighvatr  at  the
baptism  of  Magnus,  St.  OlaPs  saga  c.  119.  Waldemar  likes
hunting  better  than  heaven,  Thiele  1,  48.  nit  ze  himelriche  sta
woldich  vür  dise  reise,  Roseng.  110.  mir  waere  ie  liep  bl  ir  ze
sin  dan  bt  Got  in  paradts,  MS.  1,  178\  möht  aber  mir  ir  hulde
(her  favour)  werden,  ich  belibe  (I  would  stay)  ftf  der  erden  alhie.
Got  liez  ich  dort  die  werden  (worthies),  MS.  2,  16^.  daz  himel-
rtche  liez  ich  stn,  und  waere  bi  in  iemer  wol  also,  Dietr.  drachenk.
13P.  waz  sol  ein  bezzer  paradis,  ob  er  mac  vrö  beliben  von  wol
gelopten  wiben  ?  MsH.  1,  82^.  si  waere  getreten  durch  F16ren
in  die  helle,  Fl.  5784.  si  me  vanroit  miex  un  ris  de  vous  qu'estre
en  paradis,  Thib.  de  N.  69.  kestre  ne  voudroie  en  paradis,  se
ele  nestoit  mie  75 ;  conf.  113.  The  hered.  sewer  of  Schlotheim  :
'  had  you  one  foot  in  heaven  and  one  on  the  Wartburg,  youM
rather  withdraw  the  first  than  the  last,'  BommeFs  Gesch.  von
Hessen  2,  17.     fall  from  heaven  to  earth,  Schwein.  1,  95.     come

back  from  paradise,  Chans,  histor.  1, 43. Eyvindr,  like  christian

martyrs,  endures  the  utmost  pains  inflicted  by  Olaf  Tryggvason,
and  will  not  apostatize,  Fornm.  sog.  2,  167.  The  Hist.  S.  Cuth-
berti  says :  quadam  die  cum  Onalaf  cum  furore  intrasset  ecclesiam
Guthberti,  astante  episcopo  Cuthheardo  et  tota  congregatione,
'  quid,  inquit,  in  me  potest  homo  iste  mortuus  Cuthbertus,  cujus
in  me  quotidie  minae  opponuntuf  ?  jure  per  decs  meos  potentes,
Thor  et  Othan,  quod  ab  die  hac  inimicissimus  ero  omnibus  vobis,'
Twysden  73-4.  The  heathenism  smouldering  in  many  hearts  is
perceptible  even  in  Latin  deeds  of  1270,  Seibertz  no.  351.

p.  5.]  A  peal  of  bells  was  hateful  to  heathens,  and  therefore
to  giants,  p.  950,  to  dwarfs,  p.  459,  to  witches,  p.  1085.

p.  5.]     Even  in  christian  times  the  heathen  gods  are  credited


INTRODUCTION.  1281

with  sundry  powers.  The  idols  speah.  Pass.  307,  2  seq.  Bari.
342,  8  or  hold  their  peace,  Pass.  306,  24.  34.  The  Livl.  reimchr.
1433  seq.  says  :

Die  Littouwen  vuoren  über  s6,
daz  ist  genant  daz  Osterhap,
als  ez  Perhune  %r  ahgot  gap  (when  P.  existed),
daz  nimmer  so  harte  gevrds  (froze).
Hence  the  qaarrel  between  the  old  and  new  religions  was  often
referred  to  an  ordeal  or  miracle :  '  probemas  miracalis,  qais  sit
majoris  potentiae,  vestri  mnlti  qaos  dicitis   dii,  an  mens   solns
omnipotens  dominus  J.  Chr.  *  cries  the  christian  priest  in  Vita
Ansgarii   (Pertz  2,  702) ;  and  the  rain  falls  in  torrents  on  the
heathen  Swedes  despite  their  praying,  while  not  a  drop  touches
him.     In  Greg.  Tur.  mirac.  I  cap.  81,  the  ordeal  of  water  decides
whether  the  Arian  or  Catholic  faith  be  the  right  one.     In  the
legend  of  Silvester,  the  Jew  sorcerer  first  kills  a  bull  in  the  name
of  his  God,  and  Silvester  brings  it  to  life  again  by  calling  upon
Christ,  W.  Grimm's  Sil  v.  xv. — xx.

p.  6.]  The  Romans  too  had  felled  sacred  trees;  'et  robora  nu-
minis  instar  Barbarici  nostrae  feriant  impune  bipennes/  Claudian
de  laud.  Stilich.  1,  230.  In  the  same  way  the  Irminsnl  is  de-
stroyed, and  Columban  breaks  the  god's  images  and  throws  them
in  the  lake  (p.  116.  109).  Charles  has  the  four  captured  Sara-
cen idols  smashed,  and  the  golden  fragments  divided  among  his
heroes^  Aspremont  IP.  45* — 48*.  Idols  are  broken  in  Bari,  and
Georg.  It  is  remarkable  in  Beda  2,  13,  that  the  Goiß  himself
destroys  the  heathen  temple  (p.  92  n.) .  It  was  a  sign  of  good
feeling  at  least  to  build  the  old  images  into  the  church- walls.

p.  6.]  Heathens,  that  knew  not  the  true  God's  name,  are  not
always  '  wild,  doggish,  silly,'  but  sometimes  '  die  werden  beiden,'
Titur.  55,  4,  die  wisen  beiden,  Servat.  19.  his  sylfes  (God's)
naman,  J^one  yldo  beam  aer  ne  cü'Son,  /rod  fcedera  cyn  ßeäh  hie  fela
winton,  Csadm.  179,  15.

p.  7.]  Trust  in  one's  own  strength  is  either  opposed  to  trust  in
gods,  or  combined  with  it.  In  the  Faereyinga-s.  cap.  23,  p.  101 :
'ek  trüi  ft  mfttt  minn  ok  megin '  and  also  '  ek  treystumsk  hamingju
(genius)  minni  ok  sigr-saeli,  ok  hefir  mer  )?at  vel  dugat ' ;  conf.
'  trüa  magni,'  Fomald.  sog.  I,  438.  The  OHG.  so  mir  ih  !  (Graff
6,   13)  roust  mean  'so  help  me  I  myself.'     MHG.  has  milder


1232  INTRODUCTION.

formulas :  8am  mir  Got  and  min  selbes  lip  I  Tristan  215,  2.  als
in  (them)  Got  und  ir  eilen  geb6t,  Ernst  1711,  als  im  sin  manlich
eilen  jacb^  Parz.  89,  22.  ich  gelove  God  ind  mime  swerde,  Karl-
meinet  122,  34.  M.  Bebeim  266,  22  says :  si  wolten  M  in  (them)
selber  st&n  ;  and  GottheU's  Erzähl.  1, 146  makes  a  strong  peasant
in  Switz.  worship  '  money  and  strength.'  A  giant  loses  his  strength
by  baptism,  Rääf  39.  Doubts  of  God  are  expressed  by  Wolfram :
ist  Got  wise?  .  .  .  h&t  er  sin  alt  gemüete,  Willeh.  66,  18.  20.
h&t  Got  getriwe  sinne,  Parz.  109,  30.     Resisting  his  will  is  'ze

himele  klimmen  und  Got  enterben,'  En.  3500. On  men  who

pretend  to  be  gods,  see  p.  385  n.

p.  7n.]  God  is  threatened  and  scolded,  p.  20.  With  the
mockery  of  Jupiter  in  Plant.  Trin.  iv.  2,  100  agrees  the  changing
of  his  golden  garment  for  a  woollen,  and  robbing  ^sculapius  of
his  golden  beard,  Cic.  de  Nat.  D.  3,  34.  Fri*5|?iofr  said:  'enda
virSi  ek  meira  hylli  Ingibiargar  enn  reiiSi  Baldrs,'  Fomald.  sog.  2,
59  ;  and  pulled  B.'s  statue  by  the  ring,  so  that  it  fell  in  the  fire
86.     King  Hrölfr  already  considers  05in  an  evil  spirit,  illr  audi,

1 ,  95. Dogs  were  named  after  gods  by  the  Greeks  also ;  Pollux,

Onom.  5, 6  cites  Kopa^,  "ApTrvia,  Xdptöp,  AvKirra^.  A  dog  named
Locke,  Sv.  folks.  1,  135.  Helbling's  Wunsch  is  supported  by  a
Wille  in  Hadamar  v.  Laber  289  and  Altswert  126,  23.  Sturm  in
Helbl.  4,  459  may  have  meant  Thunder.  The  lime-bitch  is  called
Hei/a,  Hela,  Döbel  1,  86.  Nemnich  720.  Alke  is  Hakelberend's
dog,  Zeitschr.  des  Osn.  ver.  3,  406.  A  Buland  about  1420,  and
WilUbreht,  Ls.  1,  297-8,  are  exactly  like  men's  names.  Many
names  express  the  qualities  and  uses  of  the  animal,  such  as  Walker,
still  in  use,  and  leading  up  to  old  Norse,  Saxon,  Skirian  and
Suevic  names,  Grimm's  D.  Sag.  468 ;  its  dimin.,  Wackerlein,  Week-
herlin,  Wickerlein,  FischATt^s  Spiele  246.  491.  Is  Wasser,  the
common  name  of  peasants'  dogs  in  the  Mark  (Schmidt  v.  Wem.
253),  a  corrup.  of  Wacker  J  Wackerlos,  Vemim,  dogs  in  Frosch-
meus.  Bbb.  5^ Hüterlinm  Keisersb.  bilg.  140-4-5.  Fondling  names
are  Harm,  Ls.  2,  41 1 .  Holle  im  Crane  p.  30,  Bärlin,  Garg.  258**,
Zuckerl,  Jucnndiss.  54.  To  the  Pol.  gromi-zwiei'z,  bait-hound,
Linde  1,  779*  answers  our  EeizeboU,  Nie.  v.  Jeroschin  80,  12.
Bello,  Oreif,  Pack-an,  Pack-auf  (Medic,  maulaffe  647),  Suoche,
Fichard  3,  245,  explain  themselves ;  also  the  Boh.  greyhound
Bo-let,  fly- to;  O.  Norse  Hopp  and  Hoi,  Hrolfkr.  saga,  Hopf  in


INTRODUCTION.  1283

Ealensp.,  Estula  (es-ta-la  ?),  U6on  3,  394.5.  Ren.  25355.  Not
80  clear  is  Slrom  in  Fritz  Renter's  Jonm.  to  Belligen  2,  98 ;  is  it
'striped'  ?  or  conn,  with  Striun  in  Helbl.  4,  456  from  strinnen^
to  roam  ?  Smutz  in  Labor  358  must  be  conn,  with  schmotzen,  to
coanterfeit  the  hare's  cry,  Schmeller  3, 479.  Trogen,  Sv.  afvent.
1, 51  is  our  Fidel,  trusty.  Oramr,  Pornald.  sog.  1,  87.  Gifr,  Gert,
two  dogs  in  Fiölsvinns-mäl.  Snaii,  Markusson  174*.  Ouldtand
Norske  event.  2,  92.  Yrsa,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  22,  Ursa  in  Saxo.
Bettelmann  in  Bürger  474*  and  Stallmeister  in  Tieck's  Zerbino
express  social  rank,  conf.  Malvoisin,  Ren.  1664.  It  were  too  bold
to  conn.  Lappisch  in  Pauli  Sch.  n.  ernst  77,  with  Sämr  =  Lapp,  in
Xialss.  71,  or  Goth,  Goz  with  the  nation  so  called  (Michel's  hist,
des  races  maudites  1,  355.  D.  Sag.  454)  ;  more  likely  that  the
Silesian  sheepdog's  name  Sachs  (Weinhold)  meant  Saxon ;  conf.
Boh.  Bodrok,  an  Obodrite.  King  Arthur's  dog  Cabul,  Nenn.  78.
Ciprian,  dog's  name  in  MsH.  3,  305*.

p.  8.]  Christ  and  the  old  gods  are  often  worshipped  together.
People  got  baptized  and  believed  in  Christ,  en  heto  ä  Thor  til
allra  storreeSa.  Widukind  (Pertz  5,  462)  tells,  an.  965,  of  an
'altercatio  super  cultura  deorum  in  convivio,  Danis  affirmantibus
Christum  quidem  esse  deum,  sed  alios  ei  fore  majores  deos,  qui
potiora  mortalibus  signa  et  prodigia  per  se  ostentabant.'  ^thel-
bert  of  Kent  let  heathen  idols  stand  beside  christian  altars,  conf.
Lappenb.  Engl,  gesch.  1,  140.  The  converted  Slavs  clung  to
their  old  superstitions.  Dietmar  (Pertz  5,  735)  says  of  the  sacred
lake  Glomuzi :  '  hunc  omnis  incola  plus  quam  ecclesias  veneratur
et  timet ; '  and  at  Stettin  a  heathen  priest  was  for  raising  an  altar
to  the  god  of  the  christians  side  by  side  with  the  old  gods,  to

secure  the  favour  of  both,  Giesebr.  Wend,  gesch.  2,301. It

is  only  playfully,  and  with  no  serious  intention,  that  the  Minne-
song  links  the  name  of  God  with  heathen  deities  :

Ich  h&n  Got  und  die  minneclichen  Minne  (love)

gebeten  fleliche  nu  vil  manic  jar,

daz  ich  schier  nach  unser  drier  sinne

vinde  ein  reine  wip.  MS.  1.  184'.

Venus,  vil  edeliu  kiinegin,

iuch  h&c  Got,  vrowe,  her  gesant

ze  freuden  uns  in  ditze  lant.  Frauend.  233,  26.

The  longer  daration  of  heathenism,  especially  of  Wöden-worship,


1284  INTRODUCTION.

among  the  Saxons,  is  perceptible  in  the  legend  o£  the  Wild  Host,
in  many  curses  and  the  name  of  Wednesday.  There  also  the
custom  of  Need-fire  was  more  firmly  rooted.  The  Lohengrin  p.
150  still  rebukes  the  unbelief  of  the  wild  Saxons.

p.  11,]  Where  there  was  worship  of  springs^  the  Church  took
the  caput  aquse  into  her  department^  Budorflf  15,  226-7.  In
that  spell  where  Mary  calls  to  Jesus, '  zeuch  ab  dein  wat  (pull
off  thy  coat),  und  deck  es  dem  armen  man  über  die  sat  (over  the
poor  man's  crop)/  Mono  anz.  6,  478,  a  heathen  god  is  really  in-
voked to  shield  the  cornfield  from  hail.  Quite  heathenish  sounds
the  nursery  rhyme, '  Liebe  frau,  mach's  tiirl  auf  (open  your  door),
lass  den  regen  'nein,  lass  'raus  den  Sonnenschein,'  Schmeller  2,
196.  Spots  in  the  field  that  are  not  to  be  cultivated  indicate  their
sacred  ness  in  heathen  times,  conf.  gudeman's  croft  in  Scotland,
the  Tothills  in  England,  Hone's  Yearb.  873-4.  To  the  disguised
exclamations  in  the  note,  add  &  Adfuzrep  !  and  the  Armoric  tan,
fire  !     Villemarqu^'s  Barzasbreiz  1,  76 ;  conf.  Pott  1,  Ivii.

p.  12.]  To  these  old  customs  re-acting  on  the  constitution,
to  the  pelting  of  idols  at  Hildesheim  and  Halberstadt  on  Loetare-
day  (p.  190.  783),  add  this  of  Paderborn :  *  In  the  cathedral-close
at  P.,  just  where  the  idol  Jodute  is  said  to  have  stood,  something
in  the  shape  of  an  image  was  fixed  on  a  pole  every  Lcetare
Sunday  down  to  the  16th  century,  and  shied  at  with  cudgels  by
the  highest  in  the  land,  till  it  fell  to  the  ground.  The  ancient
noble  family  of  Stapel  had  the  first  throw,  which  they  reckoned
an  especial  honour  and  heirloom.  When  the  image  was  down,
children  made  game   of  it,   and  the   nobility  held  a  banquet.

When  the  Stapels  died  out,  the  ancient  custom  was  dropped.'

Gontinu.  of  M.  Klockner's  Paderb.  chron.  The  Stapel  family
were  among  the  four  pillars  of  the  see  of  Paderborn ;  the  last
Stapel  died  in  1545,  Erh.  u.  Gehrk.  Zeitschr.  f.  vaterl.  gesch.  7,
379.  Compare  also  the  sawing  of  the  old  woman  (p.  782),  the
gelding  of  the  devil,  the  expulsion  of  Death  (p.  767),  the  yearly
smashing  of  a  wooden  image  of  the  devil,  and  the  '  riding  the
black  lad'  in  Hone's  Yearb.  1108,  Dayb.  2,  467.

p.  12.]  The  Introduction  ought  to  be  followed  by  a  general
chapter  on  the  contents  and  character  of  our  Mythology,  in-
cluding parts  of  Chaps.  XIV.  and  XV.,  especially  the  explanation
of  how  gods  become  men,  and  men  gods.


1285


CHAPTER  IT.
GOD.

p.  13-15.]  The  word  god  is  peculiar  to  the  Germanic  lan-
guages. Guitecl.  1,  81 :  terre  ou  Ion  claime  Dieu  got.  On
goddess  see  beginning  of  Oh.  XIII.  diu  gotheit  occurs  already
in  Fundgr.  2,  91.  In  the  Venetian  Alps^  God  is  often  called
der  got  with  the  Art.,  Schmeller's  Oimbr.  Wtb.  125.  Is  the  Ital.
iddio  from  il  dio,  which  does  not  account  for  iddia  goddess,  or  is
it  abbreviated  from  domen-ed-dio,  which,  like  0.  Fr.  domnedeu,
damleden,  damredeu,  comes  from  the  Lat.  voc.  domine  deus?
Conf.  Diez,  Altrom.  Sprachdenkm.  p.  62.

Got  is  not  the  same  word  as  guot,  though  the  attempt  to  iden-
tify them  is  as  old  as  OHG.  (yet  conf.  the  Pref.  to  B.  Schulase's
Grothic  Glossary,  xviii.)  i  *  got  unde  guot  plurivoca  sint.  taz  (what)
mit  kote  wirt,  taz  wirt  mit  kuote/  Notker's  Booth.  172.  Almost
as  obscure  as  the  radical  meaning  of  god  is  that  of  the  Slav,
bogh,  some  connecting  it  with  Sanskr.  Vagas,  sun,  Höfer's
Zeitschr.  1,  150.  In  the  Old-Persian  cuneiform  writing  4,  61
occurs  bagäha,  dei,  from  the  stem  baga,  Bopp's  Comp.  Gram.
452  ;  Sanslp:.  bhagavat  is  adorandus.  Hesychius  has  ßayalo^;,
Zev^  ippvyio^  (conf.  Spiegel's  Cuneif.  inscr.  210.  Windisch-
mann  19.  20.  Bopp,  Comp.  Gr.  452.  581.  Miklosich  3).  Boh.
bfize,  boiatko,  Pol.  boz^,  boz^tko,  godkin,  also  genius,  child  of
luck.     Boh.  bfizek,  Pol.  bo£ek,  idol.

Beside  gtida,  gods,  John  10,  34-5,  we  have  gupa,  Gal.  4,  8.
The  change  of  )y  to  d  in  derivation  is  supported  by  afgudei  im-
pietas,  gudalans  impius,  gudisks  divinus.  Neuter  is  daz  apgot.
Mos.  33, 19.  abgote  sibeniu,  Ksrchr.  65.  appitgot,  Myst.  1,  229.
Yet,  beside  the  neut.  abcotir,  stands  appetgöte  (rh.  kröte),  Troj.
kr.  27273,  and  abgote,  Maria  149,  42 ;  also  masc.  in  Kristes
büchelin  of  1278  (cod.  giss.  no.  876) :  'bette  an  den  appitgot  J
abgotgobide  in  Haupt  5,  458  is  for  abgotgiuobida.  In  the
Gothic  />o  galiuga-guda  for  eiScoXa,  1  Cor.  10,  19.  20,  where  the
Greek  has  no  article,  we  may  perceive  a  side-glance  at  Gothic
mythology ;  conf.  Lobe  gloss.  76**.  The  ON.  goS  is  not  always
idolum  merely,  but  sometimes  numen,  as  goS  oil,  omnia  numina,
Saam.  67^  siti  Hftkon  meS  heiSin  go's,  Häkonarm.   21.     gau^,


1286  GOD.

usually  latratus^  is  a  contemptuous  term  for  a  numen  ethnicoram ;
conf.  geyja,  to  bark,  said  of  Freyja,  p.  7  note.

Our  götze  occurs  in  the  Fastn.  Sp.  1181.  1332^  where  the
carved  '  goezeu '  of  the  painter  at  Würzburg  are  spoken  of.
Gods'  images  are  of  wood,  are  split  up  and  burnt,  Fomm.  sog.  2,
163.  V.  d.  Hagen's  Narrenbuch,  314.  Platers  leben,  37.  So
Diagoras  burns  his  wooden  Hercules  (Melander  Jocos.  329),  and
cooks  with  it;  conf.  Suppl.  to  p.  108 n.  Agricola  no.  186  ex-
plains ölgötz  as  '  a  stick,  a  log,  painted,  drenched  with  oil,'  Low
Germ,  oligötze  ;  but  it  might  be  an  earthen  lamp  or  other  vessel
with  an  image  of  the  god,  Pröhle  xxxvi.  In  Thuringia  Ölgötze
means  a  baking.

p.  15.]  To  the  distortions  of  God's  name  may  be  added  :  goUf
hingender  gans  !  Geo.  v.  Ehingen,  p.  9.  potz  verden  angatiger
schwininer  wunden !  Manuel,  Fastn.  sp.  81.  Er.  Alberos  uses
'  bocks  angst,'  H.  Seu;hs  '  botz  angst.'  Is  potz,  botz  from  bocks
(p.  995)  ?  Similar  adaptations  of  Dieu,  Baynouard  sub  y.  deus ;
culbieu,  M6on  4,  462.     Ital.  sapristi  for  sacristi.

p.  15.]  The  addition  of  a  Possess.  Pron.  to  the  name  of  God
recalls  the  belief  in  a  guardian-spirit  of  each  individal  man  (p.
875).  The  expressions  not  yet  obsolete,  '  my  God!  I  thank  my
God,  you  may  thank  your  God,  he  praised  his  God,  etc.,'  in
Gotthelf  s  Erzähl.  1,  167  are  also  found  much  earlier :  he  vet
ghesworen  bi  sinen  Gode,  Reinaert  526.  ganc  dinem  Gote  be-
volen,  Mor.  3740.  er  lobte  sinen  Got,  Greg.  26,  52.  durch
meinen  Gott,  Ecke  (Hagen)  48.  saget  iuwem  Gote  lop,  Eilh.  2714.
daz  in  min  Trehtin  löne,  Kolocz.  186.  gesegen  dich  Got  min
Trehtin,  Ls.  3,  10.  je  le  fer6  en  Mondieu  croire,  Benart  3553.
28465.  Mdon  2,  388.  son  deable,  Ren.  278.  890.  Gonf.  'Juno-
nem  meam  iratam  habeam,'  Härtung,  genius.

The  '  God  grant,  God  knows '  often  prefixed  to  an  interroga-
tive, Gram.  3,  74,  commits  the  decision  of  the  doubtful  to  a
higher  power;  conf.  'were  Got,  Gott  behüte,'  Gram.  3,  243- i.
Got  sich  des  wol  versinnen  kan,  Parz.  369,  3;  conf.  'sit  cnra
deum.'     daz  sol  Got  niht  en- wellen.  Er.  6411.     daz  enwelle  Got

von  himele.  Nib.  2275,  1.     nu  ne  welle  Got,  En.  64,  36. Other

wishes:  so  sol  daz  Got  gebieten.  Nib.  2136,  4.  hilf  Got,  Parz.
121,  2.  nu  hilf  mir,  hilfericher  Got  122,  26;  conf.  'ita  me  deus
adjuvet,  ita  me  dii  ament,  amabunt,'  Ter.  Heaut.  iv.  2,  8.  4,  1.


GOD.  1287

Got  hüete  din,  Para.  124,  17,  etc.  Got  halde  iuch  138,  27.
Got  Ion  dir  156,  15.  Got  troeste  inch  des  vater  min  11,  2.
Got  grneze  inch,  Iw.  5997.  The  freq.  formulas  '  God  bless  thee,
greet  thee,'  addressed  espec.  to  wine.  Often  in  MHG.,  '  be  it
God  who ' :  Oot  si  der  daz  wende ;  der  in  ner'  (heal) ;  der  uns
gelücke  gebe.  Er.  8350.  6900.  Hartm.  Erst.  b.  1068.— [Many  new
examples  of '  wilkomen  Got  nnd  mir '  are  here  omitted.]  sit  mir
in  Gate  wilkomen.  Pass.  34,  92.  im  nnd  den  göten  (gods)  wille-
komen,  Troj.  kr.  23105.  God  alone:  Oot  willeknme  here  von
Berne,  Dietr.  Drachenk.  60^.  Me  and  my  wife:  willekomen
mir  und  ouch  der  frouwen  miji,  MS.  1,  57**.  bien  venuz  miner
frouwen  undo  mir,  Parz.  76,  12.

The  Supreme  Being  is  drawn  into  other  formulas  :  dankent
ir  und  Oote,  Lanz.  4702.  des  danke  ich  dir  undo  Oote,  Flore
5915.  Got  und  iu  ze  minnen  (for  the  love  of),  Greg.  3819.  nü
laz  ich  alle  mine  dine  an  Godes  gen&de  unde  din,  Both.  2252.
To  intensify  an  assertion :  ich  fergihe  (avow)  Oot  unde  iu,  Griesh.
pred.  2,  71.  nein  ich  und  Oot,  Ls.  2,  257;  like  the  heathenish
'  Oden  och  jag/  daz  er  sich  noch  Oot  erkennet,  Walth.  30,  7.
Got  und  euch  die  Hute,  Greg.  271.  Got  und  reht  diu  riten  d6
in  ze  heile.  Trist.  (Massm.)  176,  26.  177,  2.  We  still  speak  of
complaining  to  God  and  the  world.  One  could  not  but  love
her,  'da  half  kein  gott  und  kein  teufel*  Höfer,  Lorelei  234.
So,  '  to  her  and  love  * :  ich  hän  gesungen  der  vil  lieben  und
der  Minne,  Neifen  13,  87.  fron  Minne  und  ir,  vil  saelic  wip  20,
33.     ich  wil  dir  und  deinem  gaul  zusaufen,  Garg.  240^.

p.  17.]  God  has  human  attributes :  par  les  ia^is  Dien,  Ken.
505;  so,  Freyr  litr  eigi  vinar  augum  til  |?in,  Forum,  s.  2,  74.
par  les  pies  quide  Diu  tenir,  M^on  Fabl.  1,  351.  wan  dd  Got
hiez  werden  ander  wip,  dö  geschnof  er  iuwem  lip  selbe  mit  siner
hant,  Flore  2,  259.  The  Finns  speak  of  God's  beard.  He  wears
a  helmet,  when  he  is  wrapt  in  clouds  f  conf.  helot-helm,  p.  463,
Grimnir  pileatus,  p.  146,  and  Mercury's  hat;  den  Gates  helm
verbinden,  MsH.  3,  354*;  conf.  the  proper  name  Ootalielm,
Zeuss  trad.  Wizemb.  76,  like  Siguhelm,  Friduhelm.  As  Plato
makes  God  a  shepherd.  Wolfram  makes  him  a  judge,  Parz.  10,
27.  God  keeps  watch,  as  'Mars  vigilat,'  Petron.  77;  conf.
Marsvigila,  Hennil  vigila  (p.  749).  He  creates  some  men  him-
self: Oot  selbe  worht  ir  siiezen  lip,  Parz.  130,  23;  gets  honour


1288  GOD.

by  it :  ir  schöenes  libes  Mt  Grot  iemer  ere,  MS.  1^  143* ;  shapes
beaaty  by  moonlight :  Diex  qui  la  fist  en  plaine  lune,  Dinaax's
Tronvdr^s  Art^siens  261 ;  feels  pleasure  :  dar  wart  ein  waof,  daz
ez  vor  Oot  ze  himel  was  genaeme,  Lohengr.  71.  in  (to  them)
wurde  Oot  noch  (nor)  diu  werlt  iemer  holt,  Dietr.  Drach.  119*.
So  in  O.Norse:  Yggr  var  |?eim  liSr,  Saem.  251*;  conf.  'onus
tibi  hie  dum  propitius  sit  Jupiter,  tu  istos  minutos  deos  flocci
feceris/  and  the  cuneif.  inscr.  '  Auramazd&  thuväm  dushta  biya/
Oromasdes  tibi  amicus  fiat.

p.  17-8  n.]     God's  diligence :  examples  like  those  in  Text.

p.  18.]     Many  new  examples  of  God's  '  anger,  hatred,  etc.*  are

here  omitted. unser  gote  sint  so  guot,  daz  si  dinen  tnmben

muot  niht  rächen  mit  einer  donre-str&le,  Bari.  207,  13.  '  Oot  haz
den  lesten  I '  spr&chen  die  d&  vluhen  hin  (God  hate  the  hindmost,
cried  the  fugitives),  Ottoc.  76*.  s6  in  Oot  iemer  hazze,  MsH.  3,
195^.  daz  in  Got  gehoene,  dishonour,  Lanz.  3862.  er  bat,  daz
Got  sin  en  slac  über  in  vil  schiere  slüege,  very  soon  smite,  Turl.
krone  92;  conf.  OeoßXaßtj^,  Herod.  1,  127.  Got  velle  si  beide,
make  them  fall,  Iw.  6752.  ich  wil  daz  mich  Got  velle  und  mir
sehende  den  lip,  Flore  1314.  Got  si  sehende,  MsH.  3,  187».  fort
mit  dir  zu  Oottes  boden,  Weise  comöd.  39.  Grot  rech'  ez  über  sin
kragen,  Ottoc.  352».  so  muoze  mig  Got  wuorgen,  E[arlm.  368.
nü  brennet  mich  der  Ootes  zan  (tooth)  in  dem  fiur,  Todes  gehugde
679.  so  entwiche  mir  Got,  Flore  5277.  Got  ist  an  mir  verzaget,
Parz.  10,  30.  ist  Got  an  siner  helfe  blint,  oder  ist  er  dran  be-
hübet (deaved,  daft),  10,  20.  die  göte  gar  entsliefen,  Albr.  Tit.
2924.

p.  20.]  The  irrisio  deorum,  ON.  goS-ga  (Pref.  liii.  and  p.  7n.)
reaches  the  height  of  insult  in  Laxdaela-s.  180.  Kristni-s.  cap.
9 ;  OHG.  kot'Scelta  blasphemia,  MHG.  gotes  schelter,  Conf.  the
abusive  language  of  Kamchadales  to  their  highest  god  Kutka,
Klemm  2,  318.  nü  schilte  ich  miniu  abgot,  scold  my  false  gods,
Lament  481.  sinen  zom  huob  er  hin  ze  Gote :  ^richer  Gk>t  un-
guoter !  ^  Greg.  2436-42.  s6  wil  ich  iemer  wesen  gr<vm  den
goten.  En.  7985.  The  saints  scold  (as  well  as  coax)  God,
Keisersb.  omeis  12^.  wafen  schrien  über  (cried  shame  upon)
Gotes  gewalt,  Wigal.  11558.  Got,  d&  bistu  eine  schuldec  an  (alone
to  blame),  Iw.  1384.  Charles  threatens  him :  Karies  ten^a  h
Dieu,  si  confust  son  voisin,  'jamais  en  France  n'orra  messe  ä


GOD.  1289

matin/  Aspr.  35*.  h6^  saint  Denis  de  Francej  ta  somoilles  et  dorz,
quant  faoz  tes  homes  liges  tiens  en  est  li  gran  torz,  Guitecl.  2,
156.  nemt  iuwer  gote  an  ein  seil  und  trenhet  d,  drench  them^
Wh.  1,  83*.  trowet  (believes)  als  dann  8.  Urban  aach^  wenn  er
niht  schaffi)  gnt  wein,  werd'  man  ihn  nach  den  alten  branch
werffen  in  bach  hinein,  Garg.  pref.  10.  In  the  Ksrchr.  14737
Charles  threatens  St.  Peter :  und  ne  mache  dft  den  blinden  hiute
niht  gesunden,  din  h&s  ich  dir  zestöre,  dinen  widemen  ich  dir
zevuore.  God  is  defied  or  cheated:  bus  Oott  selbst  kompt  (to
punish  us),  haben  wir  vogel  und  nest  weggeraumbt,  Garg.
202».

p.  20-1.]  More  epithets  of  God.  He  is  hardly  ever  ad-
dressed as  dear ;  but  we  find  :  an  sinen  lieben  abgoten,  Pass.  306,
20.  ir  liehen  gote  38,  41.  der  zarte  Got,  Ls.  2,  285-6.  Griesh.
22  (5.  9.  17  of  Christ),  der  süeze  Got  von  himel,  Griesh.,  etc.
in  svasugoä,  Ssem.  33*.  tugenhafter  Got,  Wh.  49,  16.  Got  der
geware,  Fundgr.  ii.  90,  41.  here  is  said  of  heathen  gods,  angels,
emperors :   ein  Venus  here,  MS.   1,  55*.     halig  dryhten,  Beow.

1366. God    sees,    tends,   blesses,    loves,    rewards,    honours,

pities,  forgets:  Got  der  müeze  din  pflegen,  Herb.  6160.  Got
gesegene  uns  immer  m6re  7732.  Got  segen  iuch.  Got  lone  dir
8092.  Got  minne  dich,  Eracl.  644.  Got  müeze  mich  eren,
MsH.  1,  59^.  daz  mohte  Grot  erbarmen,  Wigal.  5342.  als  im
Got  ergaz,  forgot.  Herb.  15669.  sd  min  Got  ergaz,  Troj.  kr.
14072.     des  (him)  h&t  Got  vergezzen,  der  tivel  hat  in  besezzen,

Warnung  843.     Our  God-forgotten,  God-forsaken. The  poor

are  Oodes  volk,  Diut.  1,  438 ;  sine  aerme,  Maerl.  2, 230 ;  daz  Gotes
her  (host),  Gute  frau  1492 ;  hence  proper  names  like  Godesmam,,
Trad.  Gorb.  291,  OodasmanniLS,  Pol.  Irmin.  93^  Kotesman,  Trad.

Juvav.  131. ^The  Gen.  Gotes  intensifies  the  adjs.  poor,  wretched,

ignorant,  pure :  owö  mich  Gotes  armen,  Nib.  2090.  ich  vil  Gotes
arrow,  Gudr.  1209,  1.  ich  Gotes  arme  maget,  Dietr.  Drach.
die  Gt)tes  eilenden,  Ernst  3176.  der  Gotes  tumbe,  Helmbr.  85.
der  Gotes  reine,  Marienleg.  189,  428.

p.  22.]  Earthly  titles  given  to  God  :  der  edel  Iceiser  himelbaere.
Tit.  3382.  That  of  the  king  of  birds  :  Gott  der  hohe  edle  adler
vom  himmel.  Berthold  331.  The  M.  Lat.  domnus  is  not  used  of
God,  who  is  always  Dominus,  but  of  popes,  kings,  etc.,  Ducange
sub  V.    O.  Fr.  dame  dieu,  dame  de,  Roquef.  sub  v. ;  Prov.  dami


1290  GOD.

diHeu,  damri  deu,  domini  dieus,  Bajnoaard  8^  68  j  on  dame  conf.
p.  299  n.  Wallach,  dumnedeu  for  God,  domn  for  sir,  lord.  Slav.
kneZf  kniaz,  prince,  is  applied  to  6od  in  Wiggert's  psalms,  conf.
kneze  granitsa  in  Lisch  urk.  1,  9.  So  ava^,  avaaca  are  used  of
kings  and  gods,  espec.  avaxe^  of  the  Dioscuri,  and  the  Yoc.  ava
of  gods  only.

p.  22.]  God  is  called  Father  in  that  beautiful  passage :  ]7onne
forstes  bend  Feeder  onlaete^,  Beow.  3218.  Brahma  is  called
avus  paternus,  Bopp^s  gloss.  217%  and  Pitamaha,  great  father,
Holtzm.  8,  141.  153;  conf.  Donar  as  father,  p.  167.  In  the
Märchen,  God  becomes  godfather  to  particular  children :  in  KM.
no.  126  he  appears  as  a  beggar,  and  gives  his  godson  a  horse,
in  the  Wallach,  märchen  14  a  cow.  The  fays,  as  godmothers,
give  gifts.  The  grandmother  travels  all  over  the  earth.  Klemm  2,
160;  conf.  anel,  baba  (p.  641),  zloto-baba,  gold-grandmother;
mother  (p.  254).

p.  22.]  The  Saxon  metod,  ON.  mwtudr  may  be  conn,  with
Sanskr.  matar,  meter  and  creator,  Bopp's  Comp.  Gr.  1 1 34,  and
mät&,  mother,  creatress ;  conf.  ra/Jkia^  Zev^,

p.  23.]  In  Homer  too,  God  is  he  that  pours :  Zeus  creates,
begets  mankind.  Od.  20,202.  But  Zens  x^€«  vS&>p,  U.  16,  385.
Xiova,  II.  12,  281.  Poseidon  x€€v  d^Xy^  II.  20,  321.  Athena
^ipa  x^v€.  Od.  7,  15.  vttvov  2,  395.  koXKo^  23,  156.  x«P*v  2,
12,  etc.  Conf.  p.  330,  and  '  Athena  ^k€  xofia^/  let  her  hair
stream.  Od.  23,  156.  God  is  he,  '  der  alle  bilde  giuzet/  Dint.  2,
241 ;  der  schepfet  alle  zit  niuwe  sdl  (souls),  di'  er  giuzet  unde  git
in  menschen,  Freid.  16,  25.  the  angel  '  giuzet  dem  menschen  die
efile  in,'  Berth.  209.  God  is  '  der  Smit  von  Oberlande,  der  elliu
bilde  wol  würhen  kan,'  MsH.  2,  247*.  He  fits  together :  das
füege  Got,  Bab.  554.  Qoifiiege  mir'z  ze  guote,  Frauend.  422^  22.
do  bat  si  Got  vil  dicke  füegen  ir  den  r&t.  Nib.  1187,  1,  like  our
eingeben,  suggest,  sigehafte  hende  (victorious  hands)  füege  in
Got  der  guote,  Dietr.  8082.  dd  fuogt  in  (to  them)  Got  einen
wint,  Bab.  619  ;  conf.  Gevuoge,  p.  311  n.  The  Minne  also  fits,
and  Sselde  (fortune) :  dir  füeget  saslde  daz  beste^  Tit.  3375  ;  our
'fiigung  Gottes,'  providence.  God  destines,  verhetiget,  MS.  1,
74»  (the  bridle  to  the  horse) ;  OHG.  firhengan  (even  hengan  alone),
concedere,  consentire.  He  carries,  guides :  Got  truoc  uns  zu  dir
in  das  laut  (so :  the  devil  brings  you),  Dietr.  and  Ges.  656.    mich


GOD.  1291

hat  selber  gewiset  Iier  6ot  von  himel^  Keller's  Erzähl.  G48^  11.
We  say  '  go  with  God/  safely,  a-vv  0€m  ßaivei^;,  Babr.  92,  6.

p.  23.]  Though  Berthold  laughs  at  the  notion  of  God  sitting
in  the  sky,  and  his  legs  reaching  down  to  the  earth,  as  a  Jewish
one,  there  are  plenty  of  similar  sensuous  representations  to  be
gleaned  out  of  early  poems,  both  Romance  and  German :  '  Deo
chi  maent  sas  en  ciel,'  Eulalia ;  etc.  alwaltintir  Got,  der  mir  zi
lebine  giböt.  Diemer  122,  24.  wanti  Got  al  mag  und  al  guot  wil
99,  18.     God  is  eternal :  qui  fu  et  iest  et  iert,  Ogier  4102.

p.  24.]  To  explain  the  Ases  we  must  compare  ahura-mazdas
(p.  984  n.)  and  Sanskr.  asura  spiritual,  living.  Svä  läti  ass  ]?ik
heilan  i  hangi,  Fomald.  sog.  1,  437.  Bin  as-hunn,  Ss^m.  248*.
Domir  asJcungar  188*.  A  friSla  is  called  asa  bloff,  Fornm.  sog.  9,
322,  fair  as  if  sprung  from  Ases  7  yk  vex  mer  aamegin,  iafnhätt
ap  sem  himinn,  Sn.  114.  dsmegir,  Sasm.  94^  asmoffr  opp.  to
jötunmdSr,  Sn.  109.  dsa  bragr  stands  for  Thor,  Ssem.  85^  Some-
times as  seems  to  mean  genius,  fairy :  in  Nials-s.  p.  190  a  Svin»
fells'ds  or  SncEfelUt-as  changes  a  man  that  lives  with  him  into  a
woman  every  ninth  night ;  the  man  is  called  '  bruffr  Svinfells-as,
arnica  genii  Svinfelliani.  Here  also  mark  the  connexion  of  &s
with  a  mountain  (fell  for  fiall  ?) .  The  Saxon  form  of  the  word
is  also  seen  in  the  names  of  places,  Osene-dred,  Kemble  no.  1010
(5,51),  and  Oana-hrugga  (conf.  As-brft,  rainbow,  p.  732).  Note
the  OHG.  Ker-an8j  spear-god,  Folch-ans,  Haupt's  Zeitschr.  7,  529.
That  Annivarii  can  be  interpreted  '  a  diis  oriundi '  is  very  doubt-
fal.  Haupt's  Ztschr.  5,  409  has  '  des  homes  a«,'  prob,  for  '  ast '
bough,  which  may  indeed  be  conn,  with  '  fts '  beam,  for  it  also
means  gable,  rooftree,  firmament,  «p/^a,  fulcrum.  Yarro  says
the  Lat.  ära  was  once  (Ua,  cmsa,  sacred  god^s-seat,  v.  Forcellini.
Pott  1,  244,  Gr.  D.  Sag.  p.  114.  The  Gr.  al<ra  (p.  414)  seems  un-
connected. Bopp  43^  connects  isvara  dominus  with  an  Irish  oe«-
jltear  aesar,  dens,  from  Pictet  p.  20 ;  but  this  contains  fear,  vir.

p.  26.]  '  Hos  eonsentea  et  complices  Etrusci  aiunt  et  nominant,
qaod  una  ariantur  et  occidant  una'  says  Arnobius  adv.  gentes
lib.  3  ;  does  he  mean  constellations  7  conf.  Gerhard's  Etr.  gotth.
p.  22-3.  Does  aJttunga  brautir,  Ssdm.  80^,  mean  the  same  as  &sa,
cognatorum?

p.  26.]  As  consulting  ragin  appear  the  gods  in  Sanskr.  raga-
nas  and  Etrusc.  raaeni^.    The  Homeric  Zeus  too  is  counsellor.


1292  GOD.

fii^o'TODp,  fiTjrUra.  '  condlio  deornm  immortaliam^  consnease  deos
immort/  says  CaBsar  B.  Gall.  1^  12.  14.  The  pi.  regio  occurs
further  in  SaBm.  82*^.  84*  nyt  regin.  86*  vis  regin.  Hakonar-m.
18  raff  oil  ok  regin.  Ssdm.  248**  dolg-rögnir.  Also  rögn  :  höpt^
bönd^  rögn^  Sn.  176.  'wer  gesaz  bi  Gote  an  dem  rate  d&  dia
guote  mir  wart  widerteilet?*  allotted,  Ms.  2,  180".  Jast  as  im-
personal as  the  Gen.  pl.  in  OS.  re^ano-giscapu  sounds  another  in
Hauptes  Ztschr.  2,  208,  where  Mary  is  styled  '  kuneginne  aller
magerte'  virtutum.

p.  26n.]  The  appearing  of  gods  is  discussed  at  p.  386.  Saxo^
ed.  Müller  118,  speaks  of  sacra  denm  agmina.  The  gods  live
happy :  deorum  vitam  apti  sumus,  Ter.  Heaut.  iv.  1,  15.  deus
sum,  sic  hoc  ita  est,  Hecyra.y.  4,  8.  The  beautiful  and  blithe
are  comp,  to  them :  )>yckir  oss  Offinn  vera,  Häk.-m.  15 ;  conf.
Asa-bl6{$  above.  g&  her  für  als  ein  götinne,  Benn.  12277.  &n
wif  ghelic  ere  godinneri,  Maerl.  2,  288.  alse  echter  God  selve
comen  soude,  Lanc.  81821.  Conf.  the  beauty  of  elves  and  angels^
p.  449.  The  I.  of  Cos  seemed  to  produce  gods,  the  people  were
so  handsome,  Athen.  1,  56.  Paul  and  Barnabas  taken  for  Mer-
cury and  Jupiter,  Acts  14,  12.

p.  27.]  On  sihora  arnien  conf.  Massm.  in  Haupt's  Ztschr.  1,
886  and  Holtzm.  in  Germania  2,  448,  who  gives  variants ;  sihora
may  have  been  equiv.  to  fraaja.  Sigora-fre&  in  Cod.  Exon.  166,
35.  264,  8  is  liter,  triumphorum  dominus.  A  warlike  way  of
addressing  God  in  Nib.  Lament  1672  is,  himelischer  degen  !

p.  28.]  At  the  end  of  this  Chap,  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that
some  deities  are  limited  to  particular  lands  and  places,  while
others,  like  Zet»?  iraveWrjvio^,  are  common  to  whole  races.  Also
that  the  Greeks  and  Romans  (not  Teutons)  often  speak  indefinitely
of  'some  god*:  Kai  rt?  Ö609  ^yefiovevev,  Od.  9,  142.  10,  141.
Tt9  fi€  0€&p  o\o<f>vpaTO  10,  157.  adavdrcov  09  Tt9  15,  35.  Tt9
0€6^  i<rat  16,  188.  tI<:  <T(f>iv  t6S"  eeiire  Oe&v  16,  856.  JJ  fjkdXa
T^9  ffeo^  evSov  19,  40.  xai  Tt9  ffeb^  avrbv  ivcUoi  21,  196.  24,
182.  878.  Solemnis  formula,  qua  dii  tutelares  urbium  evocaban-
tur  e  civitatibus  oppugnatione  cinctis  ambiguo  nomine  si  deus,
si  dea,  ne  videlicet  alium  pro  alio  nominando  aut  sexum  confun-
dendo  falsa  religione  populum  alii  garen  t,  conf.  Macrob.  Sat.  3,  9.
Nam  consuestis  in  precibus  '  sive  tu  deus  es  sive  dea  *  dicere,
Arnob.  8,  8.    Hac  formula  utebantur  Bomani  in  precibus,  quando


WORSHIP.  1293

sive  terra  movisset^  si^e  aliud  quid  accidisset^  de  quo  ambige-
batur  qua  causa  cujusque  dei  vi  ac  numine  eSectum  sit^  conf.
Grellins  2,  20  ibique  Gronovius.


CHAPTER  III.
WORSHIP.

p.  29.]  For  veneration  of  a  deity  the  AS.  has  both  weorffsdpe
reverentia^  dignitas,  and  weorffung ;  the  Engl,  worship,  strictly
a  noun,  has  become  also  a  verb  =  t^eord'ian.  The  christian
teachers  represented  the  old  worship  as  diobules  gelp  inti  zierida
(pompa).  In  Isidore  21^  21.  55,  5  aerloa  stands  for  impius.
Beside  the  honouring  of  6od^  we  find  ^das  Meien  ere,*  Ms.  2^
f!2^and  'duvels  ere,  Rose  11200.  D.  Sag.  71.  Gote  dienen.  Nib.
787,1.  or  forchte  (feared)  den  Heilant^  Roth  4415.  Heartfelt
devotion  is  expr.  by  '  mit  inneclichen  muote/  Bari.  187,  16.  an-
da4Mliche  187,  36.  14.  mit  dem  inneren  gebete.  die  andäht  fuor
zum  gibel  aas,  Wolkenst.  p.  24.

p.  29.]  Among  most  nations,  the  Chinese  being  an  exception,
worship  finds  utterance  in  prayer  and  sacrifice,  in  solemn  trans-
actions that  give  rise  to  festivals  and  hightides,  which  ought  to
be  more  fally  described  further  on.  Prayer  and  sacrifice  do  not
always  go  together :  betra  er  obedit  enn  se  oß)l6tit  (al.  ohlotit),
Ssem.  28*».  The  Chinese  do  not  pray,  and  certainly,  if  God  has
no  body  and  no  speech,  we  cannot  attribute  an  ear  or  hearing  to
him,  oonseq.  no  hearing  of  prayer.  Besides,  an  almighty  God
must  understand  thoughts  as  easily  as  words.  Prayers,  the
utterance  of  petition,  gratitude  and  joy,  arose  in  heathenism,  and
presuppose  a  divine  form  that  hears.  Odysseus  prays  to  Athena :
k\v0L  fi€v,  vinf  hri  mp  ßicv  axovaop,  eTrel  'rrdpo^  oOttot  aKovaa^
paioiUvov,  Od.  6,  325.  13,  356.  kKvOv,  ava^  o,  445.  II.  16,  514  ;
Poseidon  and  Apollo  are  addressed  with  the  same  formula.  Gods
are  greeted  through  other  gods:  Yeneri  dicito  multam  meis
verbis  salutem.  Plant.  Poen.  i.  2,  195.  But,  besides  praying
aloud,  we  also  read  of  soft  muttering,  as  in  speaking  a  spell,
Lasicz  48.  Opffaxevetv  is  supposed  to  mean  praying  half  aloud,
Creuzer   2,   285.     Latin  precari   (conf.   procus),    Umbr.  persni

VOL.   IV.  c


1294  WORSHIP.

(Aufrecht  and  Kirchhoflf  2,  28.  167)  answers  to  OHG.  fergon
poscere^  precari,  N.  Cap.  153,  Sanskr.  prach,  Zend,  pere^,  'tases
persnimu/  tacitus  precare,  pray  silently,  ^  kutef  persnimu,*  caate
precare,  A.  and  K.  2,  168-9.  170.  Sanskr.  ^'op  =  submissa  voce
dicere,  praesertim  preces,  Bopp  135*;  conf.  jalp  loqui,  Lith.
kalbu:  faveas  mihi,  murmure  dixit,  Ov.  Met.  6,  327  (p.  1224).
*  gebete  hauen/  chewing  prayers,  occurs  in  Bronner's  Life  1,
475;  'stille  gebete  thauen/  distil,  in  Gessner's  Works  {Zurich
1770)  2,  133.  '  gehet  vrumen/  put  forth,  Gudr.  1133,  1.  beten
und  himelsprekerij  Gefken  beil.  116.  daz  gebet  ist  ein  süezer
bote  (messenger)  ze  himele,  Ernst  20.  Or,  prayer  resounds :  daz
din  bete  erklinge,  Walth.  7,  35.  precibus  deum  puUare  opimis,
Ermold.  Nigell.  2,  273.  Prayer  gushes  out,  is  poured  out :  alse
daz  gebet  irgie,  Ksrchr.  2172.  M.Neth.  gebed  xitstorten,  Soester
fehde  p.  597  ;  now,  bede  störten,  preces  fundere,  like  tränen  st.,
lacripias  fundere.     gepet  ausgiessen,  MB.  27,  353.

p.  29.]  Other  words  for  praying:  Grk.  Sioßiai  I  need,  I  ask,
Uereva)  and  Xlaaofiai  beseech.  ON.  heita  &  einn,  vovere  sub
conditione  contingenti :  het  &.  Th6r,  vowed,  Oldn.  laseb.  7  (conf.
giving  oneself  to  a  partic.  god,  OSinn,  p.  1018-9).  OHG.  Jiaren
clamare,  anaharen  invocare,  N.  Boeth.  146.  OS.  grotian  God,
Hel.  144,  24.  145,  5.  Does  irpoaKwito  come  from  Kvveoa  I  kiss
(as  adoro  from  os  oris,  whence  osculum),  and  is  it  conn,  with  the
hand-kissing  with  which  the  Greeks  worshipped  the  sun;  ttjp  x^^P^
Kvaavre^i  Lucian  5,  1 33 ;  or  from  Kvtov  ?  conf.  trpoa/cvvef:,  fawn-
ing flatterers,  Athen.  6,  259,  see  Pott's  Zählmeth.  255.  l/iaird-
^eadai  is  also  used  of  dogs  fawning  upon  a  master.

p.  30.]  A  suppliant  is  not  only  betoman  in  OHG.,  but  beteman
in  MHG.  Hartm.  büchl.  1,  263.  Prayer,  our  gebet,  is  a  fem.
bete :  mine  flöhe  und  mine  bete,  die  wil  ich  6rste  senden  mit
herzen  und  mit  henden,  Trist.  123,  22  (praying  with  hands,
folded  ?).  The  MHG.  beten  is  always  joined  with  an,  as  prepos.
or  prefix :  an  welchen  got  er  baete,  Servat.  1347.  ein  kreftige
Stat,  do  man  diu  apgot  anebat,  Karl  lOS  Is  it  used  only  of  false
gods  f  conf.  Pfeiffer^s  Bari.  p.  446.

p.  30.]  TheMHG./eAen  supplicare  takes  the  Dative:  deme
heiligin  Geiste  vl6n,  Wemh.  v.  Nieder-rh.  87,  17,  etc.  But
with  the  Accus. :  den  toren  flehen,  Preid.  83,  3.  alle  herren
flöhen,  Walther  28,  33.    fleha  ze  himele /rwme7i,  N.  Boeth.  271  ;


WORSHIP.  1295

conf.  'gebet  yramen'  above.  Evxca-Oat  also  takes  a  Dat. :  ^li,
Od.  20,  97.  AOijprf  2,  261 .  IloaeiSdwvi  8,  43.  iirevxeadai  jipri-
fn8i  20,  60;  oonf.  eif^xß  (or  ip  €u;^at9,  iv  \6yois;)  irpeaßeveiv,
<f>poifud^oßjuii,  ^sch.  Earn.  1.  20.  21.

p.  31.]  Can  Goth,  aihtrdn  and  OHG.  eiscon  be  from  aigan,  and
mean  wish  to  have  ?  OBG.  diccan  occurs  in  MHG.  too  :  digete
gein  Gote^  Altd.  bl.  2,  149.  an  in  gediget,  prays,  Kdh.  Jesu  91,
4.     underdige  supplicatio,  Serv.  3445.

p.  31.]  Postures  in  prayer.  Standing:  din  stei  an  ir  gebete
in  der  kapellen  hie  bi,  Iw.  5886.  an  daz  gebet  stdn,  Zappert
p.  23.  Bowing  :  diofo  ginigen,  bend  low,  0.  iii.  3,  28.  sin  nigen
er  gein  himel  gap,  made  his  bow^  Parz.  392,  30.  Hagen  bows
to  the  merwomen.  Nib.  1479,  1.  As  the  road  is  kindly  saluted,
so  contrariwise :  ich  wil  dem  wege  iemer-mdre  sin  vient  swä  dA
hin  g&st,  be  foe  to  every  way  thou  goest,  Amur  2347.  The
Fiunic  kumarran,  bending,  worship,  is  done  to  the  road  (tielle),
moon  (kuulle),  sun,(päiwällä),  Kalew.  8,  103.  123.  145.  diu  bein
biegen  =  pray.  Cod.  Vind.  159  no.  35.  On  kneeling,  bending,  conf.
Zapp.  p.  39.  ze  gebete  gevie,  Ksrchr.  6051.  ze  Gote  er  sin  gebete
lac,  Pantal.  1582.  er  viel  an  sin  gebet,  Troj.  kr.  27224.  mel
iu  die  bede,  int  gebede,  Maerl.  2,  209.  3,  247.  do  hup  er  ane  zu
veniende :  wo  ime  daz  houbit  lac,  dd  satzte  her  di  fuze  hin,  Myst.
1,  218.  legde  hleor  on  eorffan,  Csadm.  140,  32.  Swed.  böjifalla,
to  kneel  in  prayer.  During  a  sacrifice  they  fell  to  the  ground
pimrovre^  i^  &Ba^,  Athen,  p.  511.  The  Ests  crawl  bareheaded
to  the  altar,  Estn.  verh.  2,  40.  Other  customs :  the  Indians
danced  to  the  Sun,  Lucian,  ed.  Lehm.  5,  130.  Roman  women,
barefoot,  with  dishevelled  hair,  prayed  Jupiter  for  rain.  The
hands  of  gods  are  kissed,  conf.  irpooKwelv*  In  contrast  with
looking  up  to  the  gods,  avto  ßXiylra^,  Moschus  epigr.,  the  eyes
are  turned  away  from  sacred  objects.  Odysseus,  after  landing,  is
to  throw  back  into  the  sea,  with  averted  look,  the  KpijSefjLvov  lent
him  by  Ino,  airovoaf^i  TpaweadaL,  Od.  5,  350.  rapßijaa^  S'  ere-
pmae  ßa)C  Ofifiara,  fiij  Oeb^  elrj,  16,  179.

p.  32.]  Uncovering  the  head :  huic  capite  velato,  illi  sacri-
ficandum  est  nudo,  Amob.  3,  43.  pilleis  capitibus  inclinarent
detractis,  Eckehardus  A.D.  890  (Pertz  2,  84).  Uwt  uwere  kugelen
abe,  und  bitit  Got,  Myst.  1,  83,  25.  son  chapel  oste,  Ren.  9873 ;
conf.  's  chäppli  lüpfe,  Hebel  213.     helme  und  ouch  diu  hüetelin


1296  WORSHIP.

dia  wurden  schiere  ab  genomen^  LaDz.  6838.  sinen  heim  er  abe
bant  (unbonnd)^  und  stürzt'  in  M  des  Schildes  rant ;  des  hiietels
wart  sin  houbet  bl6z,  wan  stn  zuht  war  vil  gröz.  Er.  8963.  In
1  Cor.  11,4.  5,  a  man  is  to  pray  and  prophesy  with  covered
head,  a  woman  with  uncovered,  see  Vater's  note.  Penance  is
done  standing  naked  in  water,  6.  Ab.  1,  7  ;  conf.  Pref.  hm.  The
monk  at  early  morn  goes  to  the  Danube  to  draw  water,  wash
and  pray,  Vuk  ii.  7,  beg.  of  Naod  Simeun.  The  Greeks  went  to
the  seashore  to  pray:  TrfKifia^o^  8*  airdvevOe  kiodv  eirl  6lva
OaXdaarf^f  Od.  2,  260.  ßij  S'  aKitov  iraph  6lva  ....  afrdvevde
Kiwv  fipaS*  6  yepaio^  ^AiroWavt  avafcri,  II.  i.  34.

p.  33.]  Arsenius  prays  with  uplijted  hands  from  sunset  to
sunrise,  Maerl.  3,  197.  in  crucis  modum  coram  altari  se  sternere,
Pertz  8,  258;  conf.  ordeal  of  cross.  Praying  'mit  zertänen
armen,  zei^trenten  armen,  Zellw.  urk.  no.  1029.  775.  Hands  are
washed  before  praying :  x^^P^^  vt^jrufievo^  froXiij^  a\6^,  in  the
hoary  sea.  Od.  2,  261.  12,  336.  Helgafell,  )>&ngat  skyldi  engi
ma'Sr  oßveginn  (unwashen)  Uta,  Landn.  2,  12.

p.  33.]  Xdpi^,  gratia,  is  also  translated  anst.  Goth,  anstdi
audahafta,  gratia  plena !  OHG.  fol  Gotes  ensti,  O.  i.  5,  18.
enstio  fol,  Hel.  8,  8 ;  conf.  *  geböno  fullu '  in  Tat.,  and  AS.  mid
gife  gefylled.  For  ginftda  Otfried  uses  a  word  peculiar  to  him-
self, era^rehti,  Graff  2,  412.  The  cuneif.  inscr.  have  constantly:
'  Auramazdä  miya  upastam  abara,'  Oromasdes  mihi  opem  ferebat ;
'  vashnä  Auramazdaha/  gratia  Oromasdis.

p.  34.]  Other  ON.  expressions  for  prayer :  blota-Bi  OSinn,  ok
bi^r  hann  Uta  a  sitt  mal,  Hervar.  saga  c.  15.  drei'Som  augom
litiff  ockr  J^innig,  ok  gefit  sitjondom  sigr,  Saem.  194*.  mal  ok
raannvit   gefit   ockr  maerom   tveim,   ok   laeknis-hendur  melSan

lifom,  ibid. As  the  purpose  of  prayer  and  sacrifice  is  twofold,

so  is  divine  grace  either  mere  favour  to  the  guiltless,  or  forgive-
ness of  sin,  remission  of  punishment.  Observe  in  Hel.  3,  18:
thiggean  Herron  is  huldi,  that  sie  Hevan-cuning  ledes  dleti  (ut
Deu8  malum  averteret,  remitteret),  though  Luke  1,  10  has  merely
orare,  and  0.  i.  4,  14  only  ginäda  beitöta.  He  is  asked  to  spare,
to  pity:  X\7ieL,  Od.  3,  380.  16,184.  «^etSeo  K  fj^iieov  16,  185.
(TV  hk  SIXccö?  yevov,  Lucian  5,  292.  '  taivu  ainomen  Tapio,'  be
entreated,  Kalev.  7,  243 ;  conf.  roSe  fioi  Kprpfvov  iiXStop,  II.  1,  41 .
Od.  17,  242.     (Kl.  sehr.  2,  458.)


WORSHIP.  1297

The  Hindu  also  looks  to  the  East  at  early  morning  prayer^
hence  he  calls  the  South  daxa,  daxima^  the  right.  In  praying
to  Odin  one  looks  east,  to  Ulf  west,  Sv.  forns.  1,  69.  '  solem
respiciens  is  said  of  Boiocalus^  Tac.  ann.  13,  55.  Prayer  is
directed  to  the  sun,  N.  pr.  bl.  1^  300^  and  there  is  no  sacrificing
after  sunset^  Geo.  2281.  On  the  other  hand,  '  NorÖ'r  horfa  dyr'
occurs  in  Sasm.  7^.  Jötunheimr  lies  to  the  Norths  Rask  afh.  1^
83.  94.   D.  Sag.  981-2.

p.  35 n.]  Mock-piety:  wolt  ir  den  heiligen  die  zehen  (toes)
ahbeissen  ?  Bronner  1,  295.  alle  heiligen  fressen  wollen,  Elis.
V.  Orl.  251.  götze-schlecker,  Sbald.  1,  467.  In  thieves'  lingo  a
Catholic  is  iolefresser,  bilder/resser,  Thiele  317*.  magliavutts,
gotzenfresser^  Carisch  182^  Whence  comes  Ital.  bachettone  ?
conf.  bigot,  Sp.  beato.  die  alte  tempeltreie,  Spil  v.  d.  10  jungfr.
in  Steph.  175.  du  rechte  renne  umrne  id  olter,  you  regular  Ran-
ronnd-the-altar,  Mone  schausp.  2,  99.  frommclien,  as  ea^ly  as
Er.  Alberus  Praec.  vitae  ac  mor.  1562,  p.  90'.

p,  35.]  On  Sacrifice,  conf.  Creuzer  symb.  1,  171.  'opphir=
vota,'  Gl.  Sletst.  6,  672.  Gifts  =  sacrifices,  p.  58.  si  brdhten  ir
ohfer  und  antheiz,  Diemer  179,  25.  In  Latin  the  most  general
phrase  is  rem  divinam  f acere  =  sacrificare ;  we  also  find  commo^
vers,  ohmovere,  Aufr.  u.  Kirchh.  2,  165.  Victima,  the  greater
sacrifice,  is  opposed  to  hostia,  the  less,  Fronto  p.  286.  To  *  obla-
Hones  fur  alien  gebilden  (before  the  statues  and  shrines),  ut  tenor
est  fundationis,  cedens  pastori '  (found,  at  Rüden,  Westph.  1421,
Seibertz  Quellen  d.  Westf.  gesch.  1,  232)  answers  the  Germ.
tinsunga  yisitatio,  oblatio,  Graff  1^  1068,  from  wtsön,  visitare.
tüisod  ^ohlei,  visitatio,  Schmeller  4,  180.  The  Swiss  now  say
tvisen  for  praying  at  the  tombs  of  the  dead,  Staid.  2,  455.

p.  35.]  On  blot,  bloslr  see  Bopp^s  Comp.  Gr.  1146.  Goth.  GuJ>
hlotan,  Deum  colore,  1  Tim.  2,  10.  In  ON.,  beside  gods'  sacri-
fices, there  are  alfa  blot,  p.  448,  disa  blot,  p.  402  [and  we  may
add  the  bl6t-rm  on  p.  557].  blot-haug  and  storblot,  Fornm.
sog.  5,  164-5.  sleikja  blot-bolla,  Fagrsk.  p.  63.  A  proper  name
Bloimar,  ace.  Bldtmär  (-mew,  the  bird),  Landn.  3, 1 1  seems  to  mean
lams  sacrificator,  =  the  remarkable  epithet  blotevogel,  a.d.  1465,
Osnabr.  ver.  2,  223 ;  or  is  it  simply  '  naked  bird '  ?  conf.  spott-
vogel,  speivogel,  wehvogel  [gallows-bird,  etc.].  ON.  blotvargr
=  prone  to  curse,  for  biota  is  not  only  consecrate,  but  execrate.


1298  WORSHIP.

p.  37  n.]  Mit  der  hlofzen  haun,  H.  Sachs  iii.  3,  58°.  eine
breite  blötze,  Chr.  Weise,  Drei  erzii.  194.  der  %oeidplotz,  hanting-
knife,  plötzer, ,  Vilmar  ia  Hess.  Ztschr.  4,  86.  die  bluote,  old
knife,  Woeste.

p.  3 7. "I  Antheiz  a  vow,  but  also  a  vowed  sacrifice,  as  when
the  Germans  promised  to  sacrifice  if  they  conquered,  Tac.  Ann.  13,
57,  or  as  the  Romans  used  to  vow  a  ver  sacrum,  all  the  births
of  that  spring,  the  cattle  being  sacrificed  20  years  after,  and  the
youth  sent  abroad,  Nieb.  1,  102.  ir  obfer  unde  antheiz,  Diemer
179,  25.  geheton  wig-weor&anga,  Beow.  350.  aer]>on  hine  deaS
on«öPf7cfe,  priusquara  mors  eum  sacrificaret,  Cod.  Exon.  171,32;
conf.  MH6.  iuwer  lip  ist  ungeseit,  a<f>aTO^,  Neidh,  47,  17.  What
means  OHG.  frShtan  ?  [frehan  ?  frech,  freak  ?].  N.  Boeth.  226
says  of  Iphigenia:  dia  Chalchas  in  friskinges  wis  frehta  (Graflf  3,
818)  ;  conf.  O^.frett  vaticinium,  divinatio  (Suppl.  to  p.  94),  and
AS.  'on  blote  o««e  on  fyrhte,'  Schmid  272,  368,  where  fear  or
fright  is  out  of  the  question.

p.  38.]  AS.  cweman,  also  with  Dat.,  comes  near  fullafahjan  :
'  onsecgan  and  godum  cweman,'  diis  satisfacere.  Cod.  Exon.  257,
25.  Criste  cweman  leofran  lace  120,  25.  Like  AS,  bring  is  OHG.
antfangida,  victima.  Dint.  1,  240.  What  is  ofiered  and  accepted
lies  :  Theocr.  epigr.  1,  2  uses  Ketadai  of  consecrated  gifts.

p.  39.]  To  AS.  lac  add  lacan  ofFerre,  conf.  placare.  lac
onsecgan,  Cod.  Exon.  257,  30.  lac  xenium,  donum,  lucdaed
munificentia,  Hauptes  Ztschr.  9,  496*.

p.  39.]  On  airapxai  conf.  Pausan.  1,  31.  Callimach.  hy.  in
Del.  279.  Another  definite  term  for  sacrifice  seems  to  be  the
obscure  Goth,  daigs,  massa,  Rom.  11,  16  [is  it  not  dough,  teig,
a  lit.  transl.  of  <f>vpa/jia  ?]  Wizot  survived  in  MHG.  too  :  frone
toizot,  Servat.  3337.  Massmann  derives  hunsl  from  hin]?an ;
Kuhn  in  Berl.  Jb.  10,  192 — 5,  285  from  hu  to  pour,  which  =  öwiv
ace.  to  Bopp  401.  hansljada  (nrivSoßiac  2  Tim.  4,  6.  unhunslags
aairovho^  3,  3.  nfsneißan  =  Oveip,  kill,  Luke  xv.  23-7.  30,  and
vfsnißans  immolatus,  1  Cor.  5,  7  plainly  refer  to  cutting  up  the
victim.  Htinsaloa  in  the  Ecbasis  may  be  either  hunsal-aha
(-water)  or  huns-alah  (-temple),  Lat.  ged.  p.  289.  290.

O.Slav.  ^re5a  =  libatio,  res  immolata,  templum ;  irebishche  ßfofxo^.
'qui  idolothyta,  quod  trebo  dicitur,  vel  obtulerit  aut  mandu-
caverit,'  Amann  Cod.  mss.   Prib.  fasc.  2,  p.   64.     O.Boh.  tfeba,


WORSHIP.  1299

Rass.  treba,  sacrifice.  O.Sl.  trebiti,  Pol.  trzebic,  Serv.  triebiti,
purify;  conf.  the  place-name  Trebbin,  Jungm.  4,  625**.  Pol.
irzeba,  poirzeba,  oportet,  it  is  needful.  Serv.  potreba,  Boh.
potfeba,  need;  conf.  Lith.  Potrimpus  and  Antrimp,  Atrimp,
Hanusch  216-7.  D.  Sag.  328.  Sacrifice  is  in  Lett,  lobars,
Bergm.  142 ;  in  Hung,  aldomds,  Ipolyi  841.

p.  40.]  The  right  to  emend  Äibr  into  tibr  is  disputed  by
Weigand  1997 ;  conf.  Diefenbach's  Goth.  wtb.  1,  12.  On  T€<l>pa
see  my  Kl.  Sehr.  2,  223 ;  Umbr.  tefro  n.  is  some  unknown  part
of  the  victim,  Aufrecht  u.  K.  2,  294.  373.  May  we  connect  the
Lett,  lobars,  plague-offering  ?  Some  wonld  bring  in  the  L6.
zefer  (  =  käfer),  see  Campe  under  ^ziefer/  and  Schmell.  4,  228;
conf.  OHG.  arzibor,  Graff  5,  578,  and  ceepurhuc,  n.  prop,  in
Karajan.  Keisersb.,  brös.  80^,  speaks  of  ungesuber;  we  also  find
unzuter  vermin,  conf.  unaz,  uneatable,  i.e.  vermin,  Mone  8,  409.
The  Grail  tolerates  no  ungezibere  in  the  forest.  Tit.  5198.  The
wolf  is  euphemistically  called  Ungeziefer,  Bockenphil.  2,  28.  The
geziefer  in  the  pastures  of  Tyrol  are  sheep  and  goats,  Hammerle
p.  4.

With  OHG.  wihan,  to  sacrifice,  conf.  the  AS.  wig^weorfung
above,  and  Lith.  weikiu,  ago,  facio,  Finn,  waikutaiu

p.  41.]  The  diversity  of  sacrifices  is  proved  by  Pertz  2,  243,
diversoß  sacrificandi  ritus  incoluernnt;  and  even  by  Tac.  Germ.
9  :  deorum  maxime  Mercuryim  colunt,  cni  certis  diebus  humanis
quoque  hostiis  litare  fas  habent.  Herculem  ac  Martern  concessis
animalibus  placant.     pars  Suevornm  et  laidi  sacrificat.

To  a  sacrifice  the  god  is  invited,  is  asked  to  join  :  KaKkei  rov
deov,  Herod.  1,  132.  iirtKoXeei  t.  0,  4,  60.  eTriKaXiaavre^  t.  0,
a(f>d^ov<n^  2,  39.  The  gods  are  present  at  it,  Athen.  3,  340-1.
Why  bones  are  offered  to  the  gods,  Hes.  theog.  557.  primitiae
ciborum  dec  oSerenda,  Athen.  2,  213.  The  rising  smoke  and
Heam  are  pleasing  to  gods,  Lucianos  Prometh.  19.  e/c  Be  0vfiaT(ov
''H<f>aia'TO^  ou/c  eXafiire,  Soph.  Antig.  1007.  Men  strengtlien  the
gods  by  sacrifice,  Haupt's  Zbschr.  ö,  125.  .They  sacrifice  to
W6da  (Wodan),  crying:  '  Wedki  iaeril*  dear  Weda,  consume!
accept  our  offering,  Schl.-Holst.  landeskunde  4,  246.  The  god
gives  a  sig^  that  he  accepts :  }fk  komu  J^ar  hrafnar  fijugandi  ok
gnllu  hfttt,  as  a  sign  '  at  OSinn  mundi  J^egit  hafa  bldtit,^  Forum,
sog.  1,  131.


1300  W0B8HIP.

p.  42.]  Part  of  the  spoils  of  war  given  to  the  God  of  the
Christians,  Livl.  Reimchr.  2670—73.  S398  to  8401.  6089.  4696.
11785.  11915.  'hrünien,  pfert  und  rische  man'  are  to  be  burnt
in  case  of  victory  4700.  47]  1.  If  victima  is  from  vinco,  it  must
have  been  orig.  a  sacrifice  for  victory,  ON.  sigur-giof,  victim.
The  ehren-gang  in  Müllenh.  Schl.-Holst.  s.,  p.  108  was  once  prob,
the  same.

p.  42.]  In  expiatory  offerings  the  idea  is,  that  the  wrath  of
God  falls  on  the  victim :  cleariy  so  in  the  scapegoat,  Levit  16,  20.
Griesh.  pred.  2,  119;  conf.  Grimm  on  the  A,  Heinr.  p.  160.
Also  in  the  plague-offering  at  MassiUa,  Petron.  c.  141.

p.  42.]  Forecasting  the  future  by  sacrifice :  ante  pugnam  mise-
rabiliter  idolis  immolavit  (Decius),  Jora.  c.  18.

p.  42.]  Sacrif.  til  ars  also  in  Fomm.  sog.  10,  212 :  siSan  gerSi
uaran  mikit  ok  hallaeri,  var  ]>ä  ]>at  ratS  tekit  at  J^eir  blotu&u  Olaf
konung  til  ars  ser.  With  Halfdan's  sacrifice  conf.  the  ifcarofjb-
<j>6vui  offered  by  him  who  had  slain  100  foes,  Paasan.  iv.  19,  2.

p.  44.]  Human  Sacrifice  seems  to  have  been  an  ancient  practice
in  most  nations,  as  well  as  the  burniug  of  live  men  with  the  dead.
On  the  other  hand,  capital  punishments  were  unknown  or  rare.
Hercules,  ad  quern  Poeni  omnibus  annis  humana  sacrificaverunt
victima,  Pliny  36,  5.  Men  were  sacrif.  to  Artemis,  Pans.  7, 19;  to
the  playing  of  flutes,  Aufr.  u.  K.'s  Umbr.  Sprachd.  2,  377.  In
lieu  of  it,  youths  were  touched  on  the  forehead  with  a  bloody
knife,  0.  Jahn  on  Lycoreus  427 ;  conf.  the  red  string  on  the  neck
in  the '  Amicus  and  Amelius.'  God,  as  Death,  as  old  blood-shedder
(p.  21),  asks  human  victims.  Hence  they  are  promised  in  sickness
and  danger,  for  the  gods  will  only  accept  a  life  for  life,  Gesta
Trevir.  cap.  17,  from  Caes.  B.  Gall.  6,  16.  For  sacrificing  a  man
on  horseback,  see  Lindenbl.  68.  Adam  of  Bremen  (Pertz.  9,
374)  says  of  the  Ests  :  ^  dracones  adorant  cum  volucribus,  quibus
etiam  vivos  litant  homines,  qnos  a  mercatoribus  emunt,  diligenter
omnino  probates  ne  macadam  in  corpore  habeant,  pro  qua  refutari
dicuntur  a  draconibus*  While  a  slave-caravan  crosses  a  river,
the  Abyssinians,  like  the  Old  Franks,  make  the  gods  a  thank  and
sin  ofi'ering  of  the  prettiest  girl,  Klöden^s  Beitr.  49.  In  spring  a
live  child  is  sacrificed  on  the  funeral  pile,  Dy beck's  Buna  1844,
5  :  i  J^ann  tima  kom  hallaeri  mikit  k  Rei'Sgotaland.  enn  svll  g6ck
frettin,  at  aldri  mundi  är  fyrri  koma,  enn  peim  sveini  vaeri  blotat,


WORSHIP.  1301

er  aeiSstr  vaeri  j^ar  t  landi,  Hervar.  saga  p.  452^  conf.  454.  On  the
two  Gallehus  horns  is  pictured  a  man  holding  a  child- victim.  Saxo,
ed.  Müller  121^  says  of  Fro  at  Upsala:  'humanl  generis  Jwstias
mactare  aggressos^  foeda  superis  libamenta  persolvit ;  *  he  changed
the  veterem  libationis  morem*  To  the '  sacrare  aciem  ^  in  Tac.  Ann.
13, 57  (p.  1046  n.)  answers  the  ON.  valfola,  Hervar.  s.  454.  Traces
of  GhiJd-sacrifice  especially  in  witch-stories  (p.  1081),  such  as
tearing  oat  and  eating  the  heart.  Bones  collected  and  offered
up,  conf.  the  tale  of  the  good  Lubbe  p.  526,  and  the  villa  of
Opferbein  now  Opferbanm  near  Würzburg,  see  Langes  reg.  3, 101
(year  1257).     4,  291  (year  1285).

p.  46.]  An  animal  sacrifice  was  expiatory  when  offered  to  the
invading  plague,  p.  610.  1142.  Only  edible  beasts  sacrificed:
'cor  non  eis  et  canes,  ursos  et  volpes  mactatis  ?  quia  rebus  ex  his
deos  par  est  honorare  coelestes,  quibus  ipsi  alimur,  et  quas  nobis
ad  victunh  sui  numinis  benignitate  dignati  sunt,'  Arnob.  7,  16.
On  cio^-sacrifice  see  p.  53.  The  colour  and  sex  of  an  animal  were
important  (p.  54),  conf.  Arnob.  7,  18 — 20;  and  in  a  female,
whether  she  was  breeding  7,  22 ;  whether  it  had  hair  or  bristles
(p.  75),  conf.  '  dem  junker,  der  sich  auf  dem  fronhof  lagert,  soll
man  geben  als  off  der  hübe  gewassen  (grown)  ist  mit  federn,  mit
borsten,'  Weisth.  3,  478.  In  buying  it,  one  must  not  bargain,
Athen.  3,  102.     The  skin  was  hung  up  and  shot  at,  p.  650.

p.  46.]  The  people  by  eating  became  partakers  in  the  sacri-
fice, conf.  1  Cor.  10,  18  :  ov^l  ol  iadiovre^  tu?  Ovala^  Koivatvol
Tov  Ovaiaarrfplov  elal ;  p.  41.

p.  47.]  On  sacrificing  Horses  (p.  664)  and  its  origin,  see
Bopp's  Gl.  24%  asvamedha ;  conf.  Feifalik  on  the  Königinh.  MS.
103.  Tyndareus  made  Helen's  wooers  swear  on  the  sacrif.  horse,
and  then  bury  it.  Pans.  iii.  20,  9.  Horses  sacrif.  by  Greeks  to
Helios  ib.  5,  Ov.  Fasti  1,  385 ;  by  Massagetea  to  the  Sun,  Herod.
1,  216.  White  horses  thrown  into  the  Strymon  7,  113.  Uli
(Moesi)  statim  ante  aciem  immolato  equo  concepere  votum,  ut
caeaorum  extis  ducum  et  l^tarent  et  vescerentur,  Florus  116,  21.
May  the  Goth,  aihvatundi,  ßdro^,  refer  to  sacrifilce?  and  was
the  horse  burnt  with  thorn- bushes,  or  was  the  fire  kindled  by
ndfbing  with  them  7

The  ora  in  the  passage  from  Tacitus  might  mean  men's  heads,
yet  conf.  p.  659.     It  has  yet  to  be  determined  how  far  the  bodies,


1302  WORSHIP.

horses  and  arms  of  the  co7iquered  were  offered  to  gods.  To  dedi-
cate the  wfcges-erwe,  spoils  (Diemer  179,  27),  seems  Biblical.
Shields  and  swords  offered  up  to  Mars,  Ksrchr.  3780.  The
Serbs  presented  the  weapons  of  slain  enemies,  Vuk  Kralodw.  88.

p.  47  n.]  Horseflesh  eaten  by  witches  (p.  1049)  ;  by  g^nt«,
Müllenh.  444.  Foals  eaten,  Ettn.  unw.  doctor  838—40.  The
Wild  Hunter  throws  down  legs  of  horse,  Schwartz  p.  11.  Plica
Polonica  attributed  to  eating  horseflesh,  Cichocki  p.  7.

p.  49  n.]  Asses  sacrificed  by  the  Slavs,  Biisching  101-2.  Cos-
mas  speaks  of  an  ass  being  cut  into  small  pieces  ;  see  Yuk's  pref.
to  Kralodw.  .9.  Ass-eaters,  Rochholz  2,  267.  271.  Those  of
Oudenaerde  are  called  kickefreters,  chicken-muncbers,  Belg.  Mas.
5,  440.

p.  49.]  Oxen  w^re  favourite  victims  among  the  Greeks  and
Romans :  toI  S*  iirl  Oivl  OaXdaar)^  iepa  pe^ov  ravpov^  ira/MfieXava^
^Evoai')(6ovi  KvavcxcLLTß  Od.  3,  5  ;  namely,  nine  bulls  before  each
of  the  nine  seats  3,  7.  Twelve  bulls  sacrificed  to  Poseidon  13,
1 82.  To  Athena  pef cw  ßovv  fjvi^v  exfpvpATtoTrov  äSfMijrrfv,  fjv  ovrroit  vno
^vyov  ffyay^v  avrfp,  rrjV  roi  iy(o  pi^to^  j^i/ctok  xipaaiv  Trepi^fva?
3,  382  ;  conf.  426.  437,  auratis  comihus  hostiae  immolatae,  Pliny
33.  3,  12.  Perseus  offers  on  three  altars  an  ox,  cow  and  calf,  Ov.
Met.  4,  755.  hovem  album  Marti  immolare  et  centum  fulvos,  Pliny
22,  5.  niveos  tauros  immolare,  Arnob.  2,  68.  At  the  '  holm-
gang'  the  victor  kills  the  sacrificial  bull,  Bgils-s.  506-8.  raxid^
hanni  n^ju  nauta  blod'i,  Saem.  114**.  The  wise  bird  demands  ^hof,
hörga  marga,  ok  guUhymdar  kyr*  141*.  In  Sweden  they  still
have  Ood's  cows;  does  that  mean  victims,  or  priestly  dues?  A
loaf  in  the  shape  of  a  calf  is  julkiise,  Cavallius  voc.  verl.  28^.  37^
A  sacrificial  calf,  Keller's  Altd.  erz.  547.  The  names  Farrenberg,
Bublemons  seem  derived  from  bovine  sacrifices.  Moneys  Anz.  6,
236-7.  A  cow  and  calf  sacrif.  to  the  plague,  p.  610 ;  a  bla^k  ox  with
white  feet  and  star,  Sommer  150;  conf.  the  couis  head^  Wolfs
March,  no.  222.  A  red  cow,  kravicu  buinu,  Königsh.  MS.  100;
coni.  röte  kalbela  dne  mal,  Griesh.  2,  118  (from  Numb.  19,  2).
diu  roten  rinder,  Fundgr.  2,  152.  Mono  in  Anz.  6,  237  remarks
justly  enough,  that  agricultural  nations  lean  more  to  bovine  sacri-
fices, warlike  nations  to  equine.  Traces  of  bull-sacrifice,  D.  Sag.
128-9.  32.

p.  50.]*    To  majalis  sacrivus  answers  in  the  Welsh  Laws  ^  sus

4


WOBSHIP.  1303

coenalis  quae  servatur  ad  coenam  regis/  Leo  Malb.  GI.  1^  83.  Varro
thinks,  '  ab  suillo  genera  pecoris  immolandi  initiam  primum  snm*
turn  videtor/  Re  Rust.  2,  4.  porci  duo  menses  a  mamma  non
diJQDgontar.  porci  sacren,  puri  ad  sacrificiam  ut  immolentur.
porci  lactentes,  sctcres,  delici,  nefrendes  2,  4.  (Claudius)  cum
regibus  foedus  in  foro  icifc,  porca  caesa,  ac  vetere  fecialium  prae-
fatione  adhibita.  Suet.  c.  25.  duo  victimae  porcinae,  Seibertz  no.
30  (1074).  A  frischling  at  five  schillings  shall  stand  tied  to  a
pillar,  Krotzenb.  w.,  yr  1415  (Weisth.  3,  513).  The  gra^-fAsch-
Ung  in  Urbar.  Aug.,  yr  1316,  seems  to  mean  a  sheep,  MB.  34^,
365.  frischig,  frischling,  a  wether.  Staid.  1,  399.  opferen  als
einen  friakinc,  Mos.  19,  8.  ein  fri»kinc  (ram)  da  bi  gie.  Diemer
19,  19.  With  friscing  as  recens  natus  conf.  (r<f>ayal  veodrfKov
ßoToVf  Munh.  Eum.  428.  King  Hei'Srekr  has  a  göltr  reared,  with
12  judges  to  look  after  it,  Hervar.  saga  c.  14  (Pornald.  sog.  1,
463) ;  conf.  the  giafgoltr,  Norw.  ges.  2,  127.

p.  52.]  "Apua  fj^Xaivav  i^ev^xare,  Aristoph.  Ran,  847.  Men
sacrif.  a  ram,  and  sleep  on  its  hide,  Paus.  iii.  34,  3.  Goats  sacrif.
to  Juno :  aiyo<f>arfa^  Hpt)  15,  7.  Nunc  et  in  umbrosis  Fauno  decet
immolare  lucis,  sen  poscet  agno,  sive  malit  haedo,  Hor.  Od.  i.  4,
12 ;  conf.  bidental,  Suppl.  to  p.  1 74.  A  boy  of  nine  kills  a  black
ffoat  with  white  legs  and  star,  over  the  treasure,  and  sprinkles
himself  with  the  blood,  Sommer^s  Sag.  p.  140;  a  goat  with  golden
horns  150-1.  179.  *diu  dsterwiche  get  über  dehein  geiz'  says
Helbl.  8,  299  ;  does  it  mean  that  only  lambs,  not  goats,  are  eaten
at  Easter  ?  A  black  sheep  sacrif.  to  the  devil,  Firmenich  1,  206'' ;
Sk  sheep  to  the  dwarf  of  the  Baumann's  cav«,  Gödeke  2,  240.  The
Prussian  goat-hallowing  is  described  by  Simon  Grünau  in  1526,
Nesselm.  x.  Lasicz  54;  conf.  Tettau  and  Temme  261.  A  he-
goat  sacrif.  with  strange  rites  in  Esthonia  on  St.  Thomases  day,
Possart  172.

p.  52  ]  Dogs  sacrif.  in  Greece,  Pans.  iii.  14, 9  ;  in  Urabria,  Auf.
and  K.  2,  379.  To  the  nickelman  a  black  cock  is  yearly  thrown
into  the  Bode,  Haupt  5,  378.  Samogits  sacrif.  cocks  to  Kirnos,
Lasicz  47.  When  Ests  sacrif.  a  cock,  the  blood  spirts  into  the  fire,
the  feathers,  head,  feet  and  entrails  are  thrown  into  the  same,  the
rest  is  boiled  and  eaten,  Estn.  ver.  2,  39.  aKVfivov^  irafifieXdva^
(TKvkaKiav  rpiaaov^  Upeuaa^,  Orph.  Argon.  962.  The  bodies  or
skins  of  victims  hung  on  trees,  p.  75 — 9.  650.     in  alta  pinu  votii^i


1304  WORSHIP.

cornua  cervi,  Ov.  Met.  12,  266.  incipiam  captare  feras  et  reddere
pinu  cornua,  Prop.  iii.  2.  19.

p.  55.]  That  the  victim  should  be  led  round  was  essential  to
every  kind  of  lustration,  Aufr.  u.  K.'s  Umbr.  spr.  2,  263.  KripvK€<;
S'  ova  aaTV  Oe&v  Uprjv  eKaTOfJißrjv  vffovy  Od.  20,  276.

p.  55.]  Small  sacrificial  vessels,  which  participants  brought
with  them,  are  indie,  in  Häk.  goda  saga  c.  16,  conf.  'ask  ne
eski,'  ibid.  An  altar  with  a  large  cauldron  found  in  a  grave-moand
near  Peccatel,  Mecklenb.,  Lisch  11,  369.  On  the  Cimbrian
cauldron  in  Strabo,  see  Lisch  25,  218.  Out  of  the  cavern  near
Velmede  a  brewing-cauldron  was  lent  when  asked  for,  Pirmenich
1 ,  334^  [so  Mother  Ludlam^s  cauldron,  now  in  Frensham  Church] ;
old  copper  kettles  of  the  giants  were  preserved,  Faye  9.

p.  57.]  Former  sacrifices  are  indicated  by  the  banquets  at
assizes  and  after  riding  the  bounds.  A  victim's  flesh  was  boiled,
not  roasted,  though  roasting  and  boiling  are  spoken  of  at  the  feast
of  Bacchus,  Troj.  kr.  16201-99.  For  distribution  among  the  people
the  victim  was  cut  up  small :  the  ass,  p.  49;  the  gädda  into  eight
pieces,  Sv.  folks.  1,  90.  94;  Osiris  iuto  fourteen  pieces,  Buns.  1,
508.  Before  Thorns  image  in  the  Gu^brands-dalr  were  laid  every
day  four  loaves  of  bread  and  slatr  (killed  meat).  Forum,  sog.  4,
245-6;  conf.  Olafssaga,  ed.  Christ.  26.  Gruel  and  fish  are  ofiered
to  Percht  on  her  day  (p.  273);  meat  and  drink  to  Souls  (p.
913  n.) ;  the  milk  of  a  cow  set  on  the  Brownies*  stone  every
Sunday,  Hone's  Trbk.  1532.

p.  57.]  Smoke-offerings  were  known  to  the  heathen  :  incense
and  bones  offered  to  gods,  Athen.  2,  73.  thus  et  merum,  Arnob.
7,26.  Irish  tusga,  usga,  AS.  stor,  thus,  steran,  thurificare,  Haapt's
Ztschr.  9,  513^.  At  each  altar  they  set  'eine  risten  flahses,  ein
wahs-kerzelin  und  wirouches  korn,'  Diut.  1,  384.  Also  candles
alone  seem  to  have  been  offered :  candles  lighted  to  the  devil  and
to  river-sprites  (p.  1010.  584).  Men  in  distress  vow  to  the  saints
a  taper  the  size  of  their  body,  then  of  their  shin,  lastly  of  their
finger.  Wall,  march,  p.  288  ;  conf.  'Helena  (in  templo)  sacravit
calicem  ex  electro  mammas  suae  msnsura/  Pliny  33.  4,  23.  The
shipwrecked  vow  a  candle  as  big  as  the  mast.  Hist,  de  la  Bastille
4,  315  ;  so  in  Schimpf  u.  Ernst  c.  403;  otherwise  a  na z;tcu /a  cerea,
or  an  argen  tea  anchora,  Pertz  6,  783-4;  a  *  wechsln  haus*  against
fire,  h.  Ludwig   84,  19;    or  the  building  of  a  chapel.     Silver


WORSHIP.  1305

ploughs  and  ships  oflfered  (p.  59ii.  264n.),  D.  Sag.  59.  Pirates  offer
a  tenth  part  of  their  bootj^  p.  231;  conf.  ivravOa  t^  va^  Tpti]pov^
avoKeiTcu  ;^aX/coOi/  ifißoTiov,  Pans.  i.  40,  4.  Stones  are  carried
or  thrown  on  to  a  grave  (otherw.  branches.  Klemm  3,  294)  :  on
Bremund's  grave  by  pilgrims,  Karlm.  138.  To  sacrifice  by  stone-
throwing,  Wolf,  Ztschr.  2,  61 ;  to  lay  a  stone  on  the  herma,
Preller  1,  250 ;  a  heap  of  stones  lies  round  the  herma,  Babr.  48.
0.  Müller,  Arch.  §  66,  thinks  these  ipfutia  were  raised  partly  to
clear  the  road.  Darius  on  his  Scythian  expedition  has  a  cairn
raised  on  the  B.  Atiscus,  every  soldier  bringing  a  stone,  Herod.
4,  92.  Each  pilgrim  contributes  a  stone  towards  building  the
church,  M.  Koch,  reise  p.  422.  J.  Barrington,  Personal  Sketches
1, 17-8,  tells  of  an  Irish  custom  :  By  an  ancient  custom  of  every-
body throwing  a  stone  on  the  spot  where  any  celebrated  murder
had  been  committed,  on  a  certain  day  every  year,  it  is  wonderful
what  mounds  were  raised  in  numerous  places,  which  no  person,
but  such  as  were  familiar  with  the  customs  of  the  poor  creatures,
would  ever  be  able  to  account  for.  Strips  of  cloth  are  hung  on
the  sacred  tree,  F.  Faber  2, 410.  420 ;  the  passer-by  throws  a  twig
or  a  rag  on  the  stone,  Dybeck  1845,  p.  6.  4,  31  ;  or  nälar  4,  35  ;
the  common  folk  also  put  pennies  in  the  stone,  3,  29,  «nd  throw
bread,  money  and  eggshells  into  springs  1844,  22.  si  het  ir
opfergoldes  noch  wol  tftsent  marc,  si  teilt  ez  siner  seele,  ir  vil
lieben  man,  Nib.  1221,  2  (p.  913  n.),

p.  57.]  Herdsmen  offer  bloody  victims,  husbandmen  fruits  of
the  earth,  D.  Sag.  20.  21.  ears  left  standing  for  Wodan  (p.  154
seq.) ;  a  bundle  of  flax,  Wolfs  Ndrl.  sag.  p.  269  ;  for  the  little
woodwife  flax-stems  or  a  tiny  hut  of  stalks  of  flAxz,  Schönw.  2,
360-9.  sJieaves  of  straw  made  for  the  gods,  6arg.  129^.  The
Greeks  offered  stalks  and  ears,  Callim.  4,  283  ;  hie  placatus  erat,
sen  quis  libaverat  uvam,  sen  dederat  sanctae  spieea  serta  comae,
Tib.  i.  10,  21 ;  tender  oak-haves  in  default  of  barley.  Od.  12,  357.
The  Indians  had  grass-offerings,  Kuhn  rec.  d.  Rigv.  p.  102,  as  the
pixies  received  a  bunch  of  grass  or  needles.  Firstfruits,  0a\v<rui,
to  Artemis,  II.  9,  534.  The  flower-offering  too  is  ancient,  being
one  of  the  Indian  five,  viz.  reading  the  Vedas,  sprinkling  water,
burning  butter,  strewing  flowers  and  sprays,  hospitality,  Holtzm.
3, 123.  The  Sanskr.  «e«a= reliquiae,  flores  qui  deo  vel  idolo  oblati
sunt,  deinde  alicui  traduntur ;    conf.  the  flower-offering  of  Saras-


1306  WORSHIP.

vati^  Somad.  1^  120-1,  and  '  Hallows  an  ofifering  to  the  cloads,
Of  kutaja  the  fairest  blossams/  Meghadftta  4.  For  Greece,  see
Theocr.  epiorr.  1.  The  offering  to  'Venus'  is  hluomeih  und
vingerlin,  Ksrchr.  3746.  In  Germany  they  danced  round  the  first
violet,  p.  762.  The  people  call  a  stone  in  the  forest,  three  miles
from  Marburg,  'opfer-stein,'  and  still  lay  flowers  and  corn  upon  it.
A  rock  is  crowned  with  flowers  on  Mayday,  Pröhle's  Unterharz  no.
347.  263.  The  country  folk  on  the  Lippe,  like  those  about  the
Meisner,  go  into  the  Hollow  Stone  on  Easter-day,  Firm.  1,  334  ;
they  think  of  Yeleda,  as  the  Hessians  do  of  Holda.  The  same
day  the  villagers  of  Waake,  Landolfshausen  and  Mackenrode
troop  to  the  Schweckhäuser  hills,  where  an  idol  formerly  stood,
Harrys  i.  no.  4.

p.  59  n.]  Aelßov  S'  adavarota-i  deoh.  Od.  2, 432.  olvop  €k^€ov,
178*  eifxovTo  0€oU,  II.  3,  296.  Before  drinking,  they  poured  some
on  the  ground  to  the  gods  7,  480 ;  whereas  the  Scythians  spilt
no  mine  (Lncian  Toxar.  45),  and  the  German  heroes  drank  minne
without  spilling  any,  D.  Sag.  236-7.  poculis  aureis  memoriae  de-
functorum  commilitonum  vino  mero  libant,  Apul.  Met.  4  p.m.  131.

p.  61.]  St.  John's  and  St.  Oertrude's  minne:  later  examples
in  Gödeke's  Weim.  Jb.  6,  28-9,  and  Scheller  2,  593.  postea
dominis  amor  8.  Johannis  ministretur,  MB.  35*,  138.  potum
caritatis  propinare,  Lacomblet  487  (yr.  1183).  dar  truoc  man
im  sand  Johanns  minne,  Ottoc.  838**.  Joluinnes  liehe,  J.  m^inne
trinken,  Weisth.  1,  562-4.  trag  uns  her  sant  Johans  min,  Keller
erz.  32.  si  trinkent  alsamt  sant  Ran^  min  34.  In  Belgium  they
said :  '  Sinct  Jans  gelei  ende  Sind  Qertrous  minne  sy  met  u  !  *
Men  pray  to  St.  Gertrude  for  good  lodging,  Eschenb.  denkm.  p.
240.  In  Wolkenstein  114,  miHne  sanct  Johuns  means  the  parting
kiss.  'A  wife  says  at  parting  :*  setz  sant  Jolians  ze  bürgen  (surety)
mir,  daz  wir  froelich  und  schier  (soon)  zuo  einander  komen,
Ls.  3,  313 ;  conf.  drinking  the  scheidel-kanne,  Lüntzel  Hildsh.
Stiftsfehde  80.  In  ON.  '  bad  )?&  drecka  velfarar  minni  sitt,'  Egilss.
p.  213.  People  give  each  other  John's  blessing  at  Christmas,
Weisth.  1,  241-3.  The  two  Johns  are  confounded,  not  only  by
Liutpr.  (Pertz  3,  863),  but  in  the  Lay  of  Heriger:  Johannes
baptista  27mc6r»a  (cupbearer),  Lat.  ged.  des  MA.  p.  336.

p.  63.]  On  the  shapes  given  to  pastry,  see  p.  501  n.  The  forms
or  names  of  oster-flxide  (-pancake),  pfadelat    (patellata),    osier-


TEMPLES.  1307

stuopha  (-scone),  p.  781,  furiwiz  (Graflf  1,  1104),  are  worth
stadjing.  Günther  647 :  '  before  this  sacred  fire  thy  image  now
is  brought  *  reminds  one  of  Yoetius's  straw  figure  set  before  the
hearth.

The  Carrying^abovi  of  divine  images  was  known  to  the  ancients  :
Syriam  deam  per  vicos  agrosque  circumferre,  Lucian  de  dea  Syria
49.  Lncias  cap.  36.  circumgestare  deam,  Apul.  p.m.  194—6.
The  Northmen  of  Gu^brands-dalr  carry  Thorns  image  out  of  his
house  into  the  Thing,  set  it  np,  and  bow  to  it,  St.  Olafs  s.,  ed.
Christ.  23-6.  The  men  of  Delbrück  carried  about  a  false  god
Rilgerio  on  a  long  pole,  Weisth.  3,  101  n.  May  Ulrich  of  Lich-
tenstein's  progress  as  Dame  Venus  be  explained  as  a  custom
dating  from  the  time  of  heathen  progresses?  That  also  was
'at  Pentecost,'  from  April  25  to  May  26,  1227;  Whitsunday
fell  on  May  30.

Here  ought  to  be  mentioned  the  sacred  festivals^  whose  names
and  dates  are  discussed  in  D.  Sag.  71-2.  '  Festa  ea  Germanis  nox
(it  was  sideribns  inlustris,  i.e.  illunis,  new-moon),  et  solemnibus
epulis  ludicra/  Tac.  Ann.  1,  50;  conf.  Germ.  24,  where  the
sword-dance  is  called  ludicrum.  Beside  feasting  and  games,  it
was  a  part  of  the  festival  to  bathe  the  goddesses,  p.  255.


CHAPTER    IV.

TEMPLES.

p.  67.]  For  names  compounded  with  alah^  see  Förstemann.
HalazeS'StaX,  in  Ratenzgowe  (Hallstadt  by  Bamberg),  MB.  28,  98
(yr.  889)  seems  a  misreading  for  Halahes-stat ;  and  Halazzes-stat
28,  192  (yr.  923)  for  Halahhes-stat.  For  the  chap,  in  Baluze  1,
755  has  J7aZaa;-stat,  where  Pertz  3,  133  has  again  Halaz-stat,
bat  Bened.  more  correctly  ilZa^a-stat.  But  even  Pertz  3,  302
has  Halax-stat.  Dare  we  bring  in  the  AS.  ealgian  (tueri)  and
the  Lat.  arcere,  arx  ?  D.  Sag.  319.  Pictet  in  Origines  1,  227
connects  alhs  with  Sanskr.  alka.  What  means  '  alle  gossan  und
alhen  *  in  the  Limbg.  chron.  p.m.  5  ?  With  the  Alois  in  Tacitus
conf.  the  Scythian  tcopatcotf  ff>CkioL  Baifjtove^  =  Orestes  and  Pylades,
Lucian's  Toxar.  7.    D.  Sag.  118.


1308  TEMPLES.

AS.  weoh,  templum:  weoh  gesöhte,  Cod.  Exon.  244,  6.  Doners-
we  in  Oldenburg  seems  to  mean  D.'s  temple ;  and  'Esch-wege  in
Hesse  may  be  a  corrup.  of  Esch-weh,  thoagh  ace.  to  Förstem.  2,
111  it  was  already  in  the  10th  cent.  Eskine-wag,  -weg;  conf.
Wödenes-wege,  p.  162  and  OBins-ve,  p.  159.  Even  in  0H6.  we
find  we  for  wih :  za  themo  we  (al.  parawe)  ploazit^  Gl.  Ker.  27.
In  ON.  Vandils-rc,  Sasm.  166*.  Frös-vi,  Dipl.  Suecan.  no.  1777;
Götä-iot  (Göte-vi)  1776.  It  is  said  of  the  gods:  valda  veom,
SsBm.  4P.  Ska^i  says :  frä  mlnom  veom  oc  vöngom^  67*.  Val-
hallar  til,  ok  vess  heilags  113* ;  does  vess  belong  to  ve,  or  stand
for  vers?  In  Ssem.  23^  (F.  Magn.  p.  255 n.)  '  alda  ve  iarSar/
populorum  habitaculum,  is  opp.  to  utve  =  AtgarSa,  gigantam
habi taenia.  The  Goth,  veihs,  sacer,  OHG.  loih,  is  wanting  in  OS.«
AS.,  and  ON.  Cote-wih,  nomen  monasterii  (Pertz  7,  460),  is
afterw.  Göttweih;  conf.  Ketweig,  Beham  335,  31.  Chefcewic  in
Gerbert  (Diemer's  Pref.  xii.).

p.  68  n.]  Ära^äsa,  ansa,  is  a  god's  seat,  as  the  Goth,  badi,
OKG.  petti,  AS.  bed  mean  both  ara  and  fannm,  D.  Sag.  p.  llo.
fteod-gereordu  (n.  pi.),  epulae,  Caadm.  91,  27.  ad  apicem  gemeinen
gvnbetf  MB.  29*,  143  (yr.  1059).  gumpette,  Hess.  Ztschr.  3,  70 ;
conf.  Gombetten  in  Hesse.  Does  the  OHG.  ebanslihti  (Graff  6,
789)  mean  ara  or  area?  0.  Slav,  kumir,  ara,  idolum ;  conf.  Finn,
kumarran,  adoro,  incline  me.  On  other  Tent,  words  for  altar,
snch  as  ON.  stalli  and  the  plur.  hörgar,  see  D.  Sag.  114-5.

p.  69.]  OHG.  hariLC  seems  preserved  in  Harahes-heim,  Cod.
Lauresh.  3,  187,  and  in  Hargenstein,  Panzer's  Beitr.  1,1;  conf.
Rercynius,  AS.  Besinga-ZtearÄ,  Kemble  no.  994.  ON.  hatim-
broiSom  hörgi  rocSr,  SsBm.  42*.  hof  mun  ek  kiosa,  ok  hörga
marga  141*.  Thors-argrA,  -nerg,  -harg,  now  Thors-hälla,  Hildebr.
iii.  D.  Sag.  115.  The  hof  sometimes  conpled  with  hörgr  occurs
even  in  MHG.  in  the  sense  of  temple,  temple-yard :  ze  hofe  geben
(in  atrium  templi).  Mar.  168,  42.  ze  hove  giengen  (atrium)  169,
30.  den  hof  rumen  (temple)  172,  5;  conf.  ON.  hofland,  temple-
land,  Munch  om  Skiringssal  106-7.  D.  Sag.  116-7.  Likewise
garte,  tun,  pi.  tunir,  wiese,  aue  (p.  225)  are  used  for  holy  places,
Gr.  oKao^.

p.  69.]  OHG.  paro,  AS.  bearo,  are  supported  by  kiparida  =
nemorosa,  which  Graff  3,  151  assoc.  with  kip&rida;  by  AS.
bearewa^,  saltüs,  Hanpt's  Ztschr.  9, 454^,  and  ^  bearo  sette,  weohedd


TEMPLES.  1309

worhte,'  Ciedin.  1 72^  7.  Lactantius'a  '  antistes  nemorum,  luci
sacerdos '  is  rendered  '  bearwes  bigenga^  wuduhearwes  weard '
207,  27.  208,  7.  Names  of  places  :  Parawa,  Neugarfc.  Cod.  dipl.
DO.  30  (yr.  760) ;  Barwiihsyasel,  Müllenh.  Nordalb.  stad.  1,  138 ;
ON.  Barey.  The  OHG.  za  themo  parawe,  Diut.  1,  150  is  glossed
on  the  margin  by  '  to  deme  hoen  althere,  to  demo  siden  albhere,^
Goslarer  bergg.  343.

p.  69  n.]  OHG.  luoc,  specus,  cubile,  delabrum,  Graflf  2,  129.
in  luakirum,  delubris,  Diut.  1,  530*.  loh,  iacas,  Graff  2, 128.  In
Eudolfs  Weltchr.  occurs  beteloch,  lucna,  pi.  beteloecher.  Notker's
Cap.  143  distinguishes  the  kinds  of  woods  as  walden,  forsten,
lohen.  The  Yocab.  optim.  p.  47*  has :  silva  wilder  walt^  nemus
schoener  wait,  lucus  dicker  wait,  saltus  hoher  wait.  Mommsen,
Unterital.  dial.  141,  derives  lucus  from  luere,  hallow.  There  are
hursts  named  after  divine  beings :  Freckenhorst,  Oivekanhorst
(conf.  FrecJcastein,  Oivekansten,  ok  ]At  stendr  enn  Thorsteinn,
Landn.  ii.  12).  It  comes  of  forest-worship  that  the  gods  are  at-
tended by  wild  beasts,  Wuotan  by  wolf  and  raven,  Froho  by  a  boar.

p.  69.]  Worshipping  in  the  still  and  shady  grove  was  practised
by  many  nations.  '  Thou  hast  scattered  thy  ways  to  the  strangers
ander  every  green  tree'  complains  Jeremiah  3,  13.  k\vt6v
aTiffo^  Ipov  lAdrjvalfi^f  Od.  6,  321.  iv  aXa-ei  SevBpijevTi,  ^oißov
'AvoXXMivo^  3,  200.  aXaea  n€pa€<f)ovalr)^  10,  509.  a\cro9  viro
axiepov  exarrjßoXov  AiroWtovo^  20,  278.  Athensdus  4,  371-2,
celebrates  the  cool  of  the  sacred  grove,  inhorruit  atrum  majestate
nemtis,  Claudian  in  Pr.  et  Olybr.  125  (on  nemus,  see  p.  648).  in
too  lueo  etfano,  Plaut.  Aulul.  iv.  2,  8.  luctis  sacer,  ubi  Hesperi-
dnm  horti,  Pliny  5,  5.  itur  in  antiquam  silvam,  stabula  alta
ferarum,  JEn.  6,  179.  nunc  et  in  umbrosis  Fauno  decet  immolare
iueis,  Hor.  Od.  i.  4,  11.  nee  magis  auro  fulgentia  atque  ebore,
quam  ly^coa  et  in  iis  silentia  ipsa  adoramus,  Pliny  12,  1.  pro-
ceritas  silvae  et  secretum  loci  et  admiratio  umbrae  fidem  numinis
facit,  Seneca  ep.  41.  As  the  wood  is  open  above,  a  liole  is  left  in
the  top  of  a  temple,  conf.  the  Greek  hypaethral  temples:  Terminus
quo  loco  colebatnr,  super  eum  foramen  patebat  in  tecto,  quod  nefas
esse  pntarent  Terminum  intra  tectum  consistere,  Festus  sub  v. ;
conf.  Ov.  Fasti  2,  671.  Servius  in  Mn.  9,  448.  The  Celts  un-
roofed their  temples  once  a  year  {airoareya^.),  Strabo  4,  p.  198.
A  grove  in  Sarmatia  was  called  aXievfjut  deoO,  piscatura  dei,  Ptol.

VOL.  IV.  D


1310  TEMPLES.

3^  5.  The  Abasgi  in  the  Caucasus  venerafced  groves  and  woods
(oKaf)  KoX  vka^),  and  coanted  trees  amoqg  their  gods,  Procop.  2,
471 ;  couf.  the  prophetic  rustle  of  the  cypresses  in  Armenia  (p.
1110).  Even  in  the  Latin  poems  of  the  MA.  we  find :  Amoris  nemxis
Paradisns^  Carm.  bar.  162.  circa  silvae  medium  locus  est  occultos,
ubi  viget  maxime  suus  deo  cultus  163.  In  Bckhart  186,  32  the
Samaritan  woman  says,  '  our  fathers  worshipped  under  the  tree^
on  the  mountain.'  In  Troj.  kr.  890 :  si  wolden  gerne  husen  ze
walde  üf  wildeii  riuten.  Walther  v.  Rh.  64** :  in  einen  schoeneu
grüenen  wait,  dar  diu  heidensche  diet  mit  ir  abgöten  geriet  (ruled?) .
In  stories  of  the  Devil,  he  appears  in  the  forest  gloom,  e.g.  Ls.  3,
256,  perhaps  because  men  still  thought  of  the  old  gods  as  living
there.  Observe  too  the  relation  of  home-sprites  and  wood- wives
to  trees,  p.  509.

Worshipping  on  mountains  is  old  and  widely  spread ;  conf.  as,
ans  (p.  25),  and  the  Waotskns- bergs,  Donnera-bergs.  Three  days
and  nights  the  Devil  is  invoked  on  a  mountain,  Miillenh.  no.  227.
Mountain  worship  is  Biblical:  'on  this  mountain  (Gerizim)^'
John  4,  20;  see  Baumerts  Palest,  p.  113.

p.  78.]  Like  the  Donar's  oak  of  Geismar  is  a  large  AoZy  oak,
said  to  have  stood  near  Miilhausen  in  Thuringia;  of  its  wood  was
made  a  cliest,  still  shown  in  the  church  of  Eichenried  village^
GrasshoPs  Mtilh.  p.  10.

p.  74.]  On  tJiegathon,  see  Hpt's  Ztschr.  9,  192,  and  Wilmaas'
essay,  Miinst.  1857.  summum  et  principem  omn.  deorum,  qui
apud  gentes  thegaton  nuncupatur,  Wilkens  biogr.  of  St.  Gerburgis;
conf.  Wigand's  arch.  2, 206.  tagaton  discussed  in  Bitter's  christl.
phil.  3,  308.  It  is  Socrates's  imfiovLov,  Plato's  to  ayadov,  tbe
same  in  Apul.  apolog.  p.  m.  278.  Can  thegatho  be  for  theodo,  as
Tehota  is  for  Thiuda  ?     Förstem.  1,  1148.

p.  75.]  The  holy  wood  by  Hagenau  is  named  in  Chmel  reg*.
Ruperti  1071,  D.  Sag.  497.  fronwald,  Weisth.  1,  423.  On  the
word  bannwald  conf.  Lanz.  731 :  diu  tier  (beasts)  bannen.
Among  holy  groves  was  doubtless  the  Fridewald,  and  perh.  the
Spiess,  both  in  Hesse,  Ztschr.  f.  Hess,  gesch.  2, 163.  Friffesledh,
Kemble  no.  187.  285;  Uswudu  1,  69  is  a  man's  name,  but  must
have  been  that  of  a  place  first.  The  divine  grove  Olaslr  with
golden  foliage,  Sn.  130,  stands  outside  Yalhöll ;  Ssam.  140^  says
HiörvarS's  abode  was  named  Olasis  lundr.


TEMPLES.  1311

p.  75.]  The  adoration  of  the  oah  is  proved  by  Velthem's  Sp.
hisfc.  4,  67  (ed.  Le  Long,  fol.  287) :  Van  ere  eyken^  die  men
anebede.

In  desen  tiden  was  ganginge  mede
tusschen  Ziohgen  ende  Diest  ter  stede
rechte  bi-na  te- midden  werde,
daer  dede  menich  ere  bedeverde
tot  ere  eyhen  (dat  si  a  cont),
die  alse  een  cruse  gewassen  stont,
met  twee  rayen  gaende  ut,
daer  menich  quam  overluat,
die  daer-ane  hinc  scerpe  ende  staf,
en  seide,  dat  hi  genesen  wer  daer-af,
Som  liepense  onder  den  bom,  etc.

Here  is  a  Christian  pilgrimage  of  sick,  people  to  a  cross-shaped
tree  between  Sicken  and  Diest  in  Brabant,  and  the  hanging
thereon  of  bandage  and  staflf  upon  recovery,  as  at  p.  1167.  1179  ;
conf.  the  heathen  oscilla  (p.  78).  The  date  can  be  ascertained
from  Le  Long's  Velthem.

p.  77.]  '  Deo8  nemora  incolere  p^rsuasum  habent  (Samogitae)
....  credebat  decs  iyitra  arbores  et  cortices  latere '  says  Lasicz,
Hpt's  Ztschr.  1, 138.  The  Ostiaks  have  holy  woods.  Klemm  3, 121.
The  Finnic  'Tharapita '  should  be  Tharapila.  Gastrin  215  thinks
-pila  is  bild,  but  Kenvall  says  tharapilla =hoTned  owl,  Esth.  tor-
ropil,  Verhandl.  2,  92.  Juslen  284  has  pöllö  bubo,  and  373
iarJiapöllö  bubo.  With  this,  and  the  ON.  bird  in  Glasis  lundr,
conf.  a  curious  statement  in  Pliny  10, 47  :  in  Eercynio  Germaniae
mltu  invisitata  genera  alitum  accepimus,  quarum  plumae  ignium
viodo  colluceant  noctibus;  conf.  Stephan's  Stoflief.  116.

p.  78  n.]  Oscilla  are  usu.  dolls,  puppets,  OHG.  tocchun,  Graff
5,  365.  They  might  even  be  crutches  hung  up  on  the  holy  tree
by  the  healed  (Suppl.  to  75).  But  the  prop,  meaning  must  be
images.  On  church  walls  also  were  hung  offerings,  votive  gifts,
rarities:  si  hiezen  diu  weppe  hohen  in  die  Tdrclien  an  die  mure^
Servat.  2890.

p.  79.]  A  Celtic  grove  descr.  in  Lucan's  Phars.  3,  399;  a
Norse  temple  in  Eyrbyggja-s,  c.  4.

p.  80.]    Qiefers  (Erh.  u.  Bosenkr.  Ztschr.  f.  gesch.  8,  261—


1312  TEMPLES.

285)  supposes  that  the  templum  Tanfanae  belonged  at  once  to  the
r  Cherusci^  Ghatti  and  Marsi ;  that  Tanfana  may  come  from  tanfo,
trancas  (?),  and  be  the  name  of  a  grore  occupying  the  site  of
Eresburg,  now  Ober^Marsberg  ;  that  one  of  its  trunci,  which  had
escaped  destruction  by  the  Romans  (solo  aequare  he  makes  burn-
ing of  the  grove),  was  the  Irmensnl,  which  stood  on  the  Osning
between  Castrum  Eresburg  and  the  Carls-schanze  on  the  Brans-
berg,  some  4  or  5  leagues  from  Marsberg,  and  a  few  leagues
from  the  Buller-born  by  Altenbeke,  the  spring  that  rose  by
miracle,  D.  Sag.  118.

p.  80.]  To  the  isamo'dori  in  the  Jura  corresp.  Trajan's  Iron
Gate,  Turk.  Demir  Icapa,  in  a  pass  of  Dacia.  Another  Temir  Jcapa
in  Cilicia,  Koch  Anabas.  32.  Müller  lex.  Sal.  p.  36.  Clausura  is
a  narrow  pass,  like  Qepiioirvkai,  or  irvKa^  alone ;  conf.  Schott's
Deutschen  in  Piemont  p.  229.

p.  85.]  As  castrum  was  used  for  templum,  so  is  the  Bob.
hostel,  Pol.  koSciel  for  church.  Conversely,  templum  seems  at
times  to  mean  palatium ;  conf.  '  exustum  est  palatium  in  Thorn-
burg'  with  'exustum  est  famosum  templum  in Thornburg,'  Pertz
5,  62-3,  also  '  Thornburg  castellum  et  palatium  Ottonis '  5,  755.
The  OS.  rdkud  is  both  templum  and  palatium.  Beside  '  casulae '
=fana,  we  hear  of  a  cella  antefana  (ante  fana?).  Mono  Anz.  6,
228.

p.  85.]  Veniens  (Chrocus  Alamann.  rex)  Arvernos,  deluhrum
illud  quod  Gallica  lingua  vo^^o^aZa^e  vocant,  diruit  atque  subvertit;
miro  enim  opere  factum  fuit,  Greg.  Tur.  1,  32.  The  statement  is
important,  as  proving  a  difference  of  religion  between  Celts  and
Germans:  Chrocus  would  not  destroy  a  building  sacred  to  his
own  religion.  Or  was  it,  so  early  as  that,  a  christian  temple  ?
conf.  cap.  39.

p.  85.]  Expressions  for  a  built  temple :  '  hof  fttti  hann  t
tftninu,  ser  J?e88  enn  merki,  )7at  er  nu  kallat  tröllaskeiff/  Laxd.  66.
sal,  Graff  sub  v. ;  der  sal,  Diemer  326,  7.  AS.  reced,  OS.  rakutl,
seems  conn,  with  ra^ha,  usu.  =  res,  caussa,  but  ^  zimboron  th.ia
racha,'  0.  iv.  19,  38  j  conf.  wih  and  wiht.  Later  words :  pltiaz^
hue,  bloz'hus,  Graff  4, 1053.  abgot-hue  fanum  1054.  The  Lausitz
Mag.  7,  166  derives  chirihhd,  AS.  cyrice,  from  circus.  O.  Si.
tzerky,  Dobr.  178;  Croat,  czirkva,  Camiol.  zirkva,  Serv.  to-fct^«,
0.  Boh.   cjerkew,  Pol.  eei^kiew  (conf.  Gramm.  3,  156.       Pref.    t>o


PBIBSTS.  1313

Schnitze  xi.  Graff  i,  481).  The  sanctuary^  ON.  griffastadr,  is  not
to  be  trodden,  Fornm.  sog.  4, 186 ;  beast  nor  man  might  there  be
harmed,  no  intercourse  should  men  with  women  have  (engi  vi"8skipti
skyldu  karlar  vi^  konar  ega  )?ar,  Pornald.  sog.  2,  63.

p.  86.]  Heathen  places  of  worship,  even  after  the  conversion,
were  still  royal  manors  or  sees  and  other  benefices  endowed  with
the  estate  of  the  old  temple,  like  Herbede  on  the  Ruhr,  which
belonged  to  Kaufnngen,  D.  Sag.  589.  Mannh.  Zbschr.  3,  147.
Many  manors  (also  glebe-lands  ace.  to  the  Weisthümer)  had  to
maintain  '  eisernes  vieh,  fasel-vieh,'  bulls  for  breeding  (p.  98)v
la  Christian  as  in  heathen  times,  holy  places  were  revealed  by
signs  and  wonders.  A  red-hot  harrow  is  let  down  from  heaven
(Sommer),  like  the  burning  plough  in  the  Scyth.  tale  (Herod.  4,
5),  D.  Sag.  58-9.  Legends  about  the  building  of  churches  often
have  the  incident,  that,  on  the  destiüed  spot  in  the  wood,  lights
were  seen  at  night,  so  arranged  as  to  show  the  ground  plan  of  the
fatnre  edifice.  They  appear  to  a  subulcus  in  the  story  of  Oanders"
helm,  Pertz  6,  309-10 ;  to  another,  Prickio  by  name,  in  the  story
of  FrecienJwrst,  where  St.  Peter  as  carpenter  designs'  the  figure
of  the  holy  house,  Dorow.  i.  1,  32-3 ;  conf.  the  story  at  p»  54  and
that  of  Wessobrunn,  MB.  7,  372.  Falling  snXruo  indicates  the
spot,  Müllenh.  113;  conf.  Hille-snee,  Holda's  snow,  p.  268  n.  304.
Where  the  falcon  stoops^  a  convent  is  built,  Wigand's  Corv.
giiterb.  105.  The  spot  is  suggested  by  cows  in  a  Swed.  story,
Wieselgren  408;  by  resting  animals  in  a  beautiful  AS.  one,
Kemble  no.  581  (yr  974).

p.  87.]  On  almost  all  our  German  mountains  are  to  be  .seen
footmarks  of  gods  and  heroes,  indicating  places  of  ancient  worship,
e.g.  of  Brunhild  on  the  Taunus,  of  Gibich  and  Dietrich  on  the
Hartz.  The  AUerhätenberg  in  Hesse,  the  'grandfather-hills^
elsewhere,  are  worth  noting.


CHAPTER  V.

PRIESTS.

p.  88.]  Religion  is  in  Greek  evaißeia  and  Oprfa/ceia  (conf.  Oprj'
(TKevo»,  p.  107).  /car  evaißetav^pie,  Lucian  5,277.  Religio  =
iterata  lectio,  conf.  intelligere,  Lobeck's  Rhematicon  p.  65.     It


1314  PRIESTS.

is  rendered  ia  OHG.  glosses  by  heit,  Hattemer  1,  423;  goie-dehii
deyotio^  cote-dehtigi  devoat,  anadaht  intentio,  attentio^  Graff  5,
163.     Pietas^  peculiarly,  by  'heim-minna  unde  mag-minna,*  Hatt.

I,  4^3.  Credisclieit,  Servafc.  762,  is  sham-piety,  conf.  p.  35  n.
'  Dis  fretas '  in  Plaut.  Gas.  2,  5  =  Gote  forahtac,  0.  i.  15,  3.

p.  88.]  Oudja,  go9i,  seems  to  be  preserved  in  the  AS.  proper
name  Ooda,  Kemble  1,  242.  For  ap^t'Cpev^,  Ulph.  has  auhumüh
gudja,  Matt.  27, 62.  Mk.  8,  31 ;  but  auhumists  veiha,  Joh.  18, 13.
The  priest  hallows  and  is  hallowed  (p.  93),  conf.  the  consecration
and  baptism  of  witches.  Göndul  consecrates:  n&  vigi  eh  Jfik
undir  oil  j^au  atkraeiSi  ok  skildaga,  sem  OSinn  fyrimaelti,  Fornald.
sog.  1,  402.  The  words  in  Lactant.  Phoenix,  'antistes  nemomm,
luci  veneranda  sacerdos,'  are  rendered  by  the  AS.  poet :  bearwes
bigenga,  wudubearwes  weard  207,  27.  208,  7.  The  priest  stands
before  Ood,  evavrt  rov  0€ov,  Luke  1,8:  giangi  furi  Grot,  0.  i.  4,

II.  The  monks  form'daz  Gotes  her,'  army,  Beinh.  P.  1023.
The  Zendic  äthrava,  priest,  Bopp  Comp.  Gram.  42.  Spiegel's
Avesta  2,  vi.  means  fire-server,  from  lltars  fire.  Dat.  athr£.  Pol.
xiadz  priest,  prop,  prince  or  sacrificer,  Linde  2,  1164'*;  conf.
Sansk.  xi  govern,  kill,  xaja  dominans.

p.  89.]  Ewart  priest :  ein  ewart  der  abgote,  Bari.  200,  22.
Pass.  329,  56,  etc.  ewarde,  En.  244,  14.  prfetor  und  ir  ewe
wester  243,  20.

p.  89  n.]  Zacharias  is  a  ß-uod  gomo,  Hel.  2,  24.  Oar  kluger
mann,  kluge  f  ran,  still  signify  one  acquainted  with  secret  powers

of  nature;  so  the  Swed.  'de  klokar/  Fries  udfl.  108. The  phrase

'der  guote  man*  denotes  espec.  a  sacred  calling:  that  of  a  priest,
Marienleg.  60,  40,  a  bishop.  Pass.  336,  78,  a  pilgrim,  Uolr.  91.
Nuns  are  guote  frowen,  Eracl.  735.  klöster  und  gv^te  liute,
Nib.  1001,  2,  etc.  die  goede  man,  the  hermit  in  Lane.  4153-71.
16911-8,  etc.  So  the  Scot,  'gxuieman^s  croft*  above;  but  the
name  Outmans-hausen  was  once  Wötenes-hAsen  (Suppl.  to  154).
BonS'hommes  are  heretics,  the  Manichseans  condemned  at  the
Council  of  Cambery  1165;  buonuominij  Macchiav.  Flor.  1,  97.
158.  The  shepherds  in  O.  i.  12,  17  are  guote  man.  Engl,  good-
man  is  both  householder  and  our  biedermann.  Grda  is  addressed
as  goS  kona,  Ssem.  97*;  in  conjuring:  Alrftn,  du  vil  guote  (p.
1202n.)

p.  89.]     Christian*  also,  though  of  Germ,   origin,  seems   the


PBIESTS.  1315

OHG.  heit-haß  sacerdos^  from  heit  =  ordo;  hence,  in  ordinem
sacram  receptns.  MH6.  heithafte  liute,  sacerdotes,  Fundgr.  1,
94 ;  conf.  eithaße  berren,  Ksrchr.  1 1 895.  AS.  gelungen,  reverend,
and  espec.  religiosas,  Homil.  p.  344.

p.  90.]  Agathias  2,  6  expressly  attributes  to  the  heathen  Ala-
manns  of  the  6th  cent,  diviners  (/iavretv  and  XPWH^^^^^)>  ^"^o
dissuade  from  battle;  and  princes  in  the  Mid.  Ages  still  take
clergymen  into  the  field  with  them  as  counsellors :  abbates  pii,
scioli  bene  consiliarii,  Bud).  2,  253.  Ordeals  are  placed  under
priestly  authority,  Saam.  237-8.  In  the  popular  assembly  the
priests  enjoin  silence  and  attention :  silentium  per  sacerdotes,  qui-
bas  tum  et  coercendi  jtis  est,  imperatur.  Germ.  11.  In  addition
to  what  is  coll.  in  Haupt's  Ztschr.  9,  127  on  Must  and  unlnst,'
consider  the  tacitu»  preeari  of  the  TJmbr.  spell,  and  the  opening
of  the  Fastnachts-spiele.

p.  91 .]  The  Goth.  J^oßjcm,  usjrropjan  transl.  iiveiv  initiare,  and
yvfiyd^eiv,  exercere  GDS.  819 ;  may  it  not  refer  to  some  sacred
function  of  heathen  priests,  and  be  connected  with  the  Gallic
druid  (p.  1036  n.),  or  rather  with  pruSr  (p.  423)?  Was  heilac
said  of  priests  and  priestesses  7  conf.  '  heilac  huat,'  cydaris,  Graff
4,  874;  Heilacflät,  God.  Lauresh.  1,  578;  Heilacbrunno,  p.  587;
Heiligbär,  p.  667-8.  Priests  take  part  in  the  sacrificial  feast,  they
consecrate  the  cauldron :  sentu  at  Saxa  Sunnmanna  gram,  hann
kann  helga  hver  vellanda,  Saem.  238* ;  so  Peter  was  head-cook
of  heaven,  Lat.  ged.  des  MA.  p.  336.  344.  Priests  maintain  the
9aered  beasis,  horses  and  boars,  Herv.-s.  cap.  14 ;  conf.  BA.  592.
In  beating  the  bounds  they  seem  to  have  gone  before  and  pointed
oat  the  sacred  stones,  as  the  churchwardens  did  aflerwards ;  they
rode  especially  round  old  churches,  in  whose  vaults  an  idol  was
supposed  to  lie.  Priests  know  the  art  of  quickening  the  dead,
Holtzm.  3,  145.  They  have  also  the  gifts  of  healing  and  divina-
tion :  iarpofiavrt^,  ^sch.  Suppl.  263.

p.  91.]  In  many  Aryan  nations  the  priestly  garment  is  white,
Graecus  augur  pallio  candido  velatus,  umber  et  Romanus  trabea
purpurea  amictus,  Grotef.  inscr.  Umbr.  6,  13.  Roman  priests
and  magistrates  have  white  robes ;  see  the  picture  of  the  flamen

^  The  fidrrit  interprets  dreams,  entrails,  flights  of  hirds,  bat  is  no  speaker  of
oracles,  xfln^f^^^^*  VhViB,  i.  34,  8.  [In  Plato's  Timieas  72  B,  /uimt  (fr.  ludvoiun)
U  the  inspired  speaker  of  oracles.]


1316  PRIESTS.

dialis  in  Hartang  1,  193.  Scbwenck  27;  amictns  veste  alba
sevir  et  praetor,  Petron.  65.  The  Cimbrian  priestesses  in  Strabo
are  Xevx^ifiove^  (p.  55-6),  and  the  Gothic  priest«  in  Jörn.  cap.  10
appear  in  camdidis  vestibus.  The  Gallic  druids  are  arrayed  in
white  (p.  1206),  the  priest  of  Gerovit  in  snow-white,  Sefridi  v.
Ofctonis  p.  128  (Giesebr.  Wend,  gesch.  1,  90).  In  the  Mid.  Ages
too  white  robes  belong  to  holy  women,  nuns,  die  goede  man  met
wüten  clederen.  Lane.  22662-70.

The  Gothic  pileati  (Kl.  sehr.  3,  227.  GDS.  124)  remind  ns  of
the  '  tria  genera  pileorum,  qaibus  sacerdotes  ntantar :  apex,  tutu-
lu8,  galerua*  in  Suetonii  fragm.  p.  m.  335.  The  picture  of  a
bearded  mAn  in  Stalin  1,  161-2,  is  perhaps  meant  for  a  priest.
The  shaven  hair  of  Christian  and  Buddhist  monks  and  nuns  is
probably  a  badge  of  servitude  to  God ;  GDS.  822.

p.  91.]  Snorri  goS,  like  the  AS.  coifi,  rides  on  a  mare,
Eyrbygg.  s.  34 ;  and  the  fiamen  dialis  must  not  mount  any  kind
of  horse,  Klausen  j3En.  1077.  Härtung  1,  194.  Possibly  even
the  heathen  priests  were  not  allowed  to  eat  things  with  blood,
but  only  herbs.  Trevrizent  digs  up  roots,  and  hangs  them  on
bushes,  Parz.  485,  21 ;  in  a  similar  way  do  Wilhelm  the  saint  and
Waltharius  eke  out  their  lives,  Lat.  ged.  d.  MA.  p.  112.

p.  92.]  Among  gestures  traceable  to  priestly  rites,  I  reckon
especially  this,  that  in  the  vindicatio  of  a  beast  the  man  had  to  lift
up  his  right  hand  or  lay  it  on,  while  his  left  grasped  the  animal's
right  ear.  The  posture  at  hammer-throwing  seems  to  be  an-
other case  in  point,  RA.  65-6.     GDS.  124-5. Kemble  1,  278

thinks  coifi  is  the  AS.  ceofa,  diaconus.

p.  93.]  Christian  priests  also  are  called  'God's  man,  child,
kneht,  scale,  deo,  din,  wine,  trut,'  or  '  dear  to  God,'  conf.  Mann-
hardt  in  Wolfs  Ztschr.  3,  143.  Gotes  man  (Suppl.  to  p.  20-1).
Gotes  kint=ipneBt,  Greg.  1355.  Beinh.  714;  or=pi]grim,  as
opp.  to  welt-kind  (worldling).  Trist.  2625.  der  edle  Gotes  hnelit,
said  of  Zacharias  and  John,  Pass.  346,  24.  349,  23.  60;  of  the
pilgrim.  Trist.  2638.  Gotes  riter,  Greg.  1362.  ein  wirer  Gotis
scale,  Ksrchr.  6071.  OHjGr.  Gota-deo,  Gotes-deo,  fem.  -diu  (conf.
ceile  De,  culde,  servant  of  God,  Ir.  sag.  2,  476).  der  Gotes  trit.
Pass.  350,  91.  Among  the  Greek  priests  were  ayx^^^^h  Lucian
dea  Syr.  31 ;  conf.  the  conscii  deorum,  Tac.  Germ.  10.  Amphi-
araus  is  beloved  of  Zeus  and  Apollo,  i.e.  he  is  fidyri^.     On  his


PRIESTS.  1317

death  Apollo  appoints  another  of  the  same  family^  Od.  15^  245.
253.  ^

p.  93.]  If  priesthood  could  be  hereditary,  the  Norse  go"8i
mast  have  been  free  to  marry,  like  the  episcopus  and  diaconus  of
the  early  Christians  (1  Tim.  8,  2.  12)  and  the  Hindu  Brahmin.
Not  so  the  Pruss.  waidlot  or  waidler,  Nesselm.  p.  xv.  and  p.  141.
To  appoint  to  the  priesthood  is  in  ON.  signa  goffom,  or  gefa,
tbongh  the  latter  seems  not  always  to  imply  the  priestly  office :
|>eir  voro  gumnar  goÖom  signaÖir,  Ssom.  117**.  gefinn  O^ni,
Fornm.  sog.  2,  16S.  enn  gaf  hann  (Brandr)  gu9unum,  ok  var
hann  kalla^r  Guff-branar,  Fornald.  sog.  2,  6;  his  son  is  Gu^-
roondr,  and  his  son  again  Gu'Sbrandr  (  =  0H6.  Gota-beraht)  2,  7.
Does  this  account  for  divination  being  also  hereditary  (p.  1107)  ?
p.  93.]  The  god  had  part  of  the  spoils  of  war  and  hunting
(p.  42),  priest  and  temple  w^re  paid  their  dueSy  whence  tithes
arose :  hof-tollr  is  the  toll  due  to  a  temple,  Fornm.  s.  1,  268.  On
priestly  dwellings  see  GDS.  125.

p.  94.]  German  divination  seems  to  have  been  in  request
even  at  Rome :  haruspex  ex  Germania  missus  (Domitiano),  Suet.
Domit.  16.  Soothsayers,  whom  the  people  consulted  in  particular
cases  even  after  the  conversion,  were  a  remnant  of  heathen  priests
and  priestesses.  The  Lex  Visig.  vi.  2,  1  :  *  aiiolos,  aruspices,
vatidnantes  consulere,'  and  5 :  '  execrabiles  divinorum  pronun-
iicUiones  intendere,  salutis  aut  aegritudinis  responsa  poscere.^
Liutpr.  6,  30:  'ad  ariolos ^yel  ariolas  pro  responsis  accipiendis
ambalare,'  and  31 :  'in  loco  ubi  arioli  vel  ariolae  fuerint.'

The  ON.  spä^maö'r  is  called  rdif-spakr,  Sasm.  175%  or  fram-mss
like  the  prophet  Grlpir  172".  175».  ^hfram  um  ser  175*'^.  farit
er)>az  ek  forvissac  175*.  )?ü  oil  urn  ser  orlög  for  176''.  Grlpir
lygr  eigi  177''.  Gevarus  rex,  divinandi  doctissimus,  industria
praenagiorum  excultns,  Saxo  Gram.  p.  115.  (conf.  p.  1034.
1106).  The  notion  of  oraculum  (what  is  asked  and  obtained  of
the  gods),  vaticinium,  divinatio,  is  expr.  by  ON.  frett :  frettir
fiogSa,  Saem.  93*.  fretta  beiddi,  oracula  poposci  94*  geek  til
fretiar,  Yngl.  21  (Grk.  ypaaOai  np  Oetp,  inquire  of  the  god).
Conf.  frghtan,  SnppL  to  p.  37;  OHG.  freht  meritum,  frehiic
meritus,  sacer;  AS.  fyrht  in  Leg.  Canuti,  Thorpe  p.  162.

p.  95.]  German  women  seem  to  have  taken  part  in  sacrifices
(p.  56  n.);  women  perform  sacrifice  before  the  army  of  tb©  Thracian


1318  GODS.

Spartacus  (b.c.  67),  who  had  Grermans  ander  him,  Plutarch  Grass.
All.  The  Bomans  excluded  women,  so  do  the  Cheremisses,  p.
1235-6,  the  Lapps  and  the  Bori&ts,  Klemm  8,  87.  111-3.

p.  95-6.]  A  druias  Gallicana  vaiicinans  is  mentioned  by  Vopis-
cus  in  Aurel.  44,  in  Numer.  13-4;  by  Lampridius  in  Alex.  Sev.
60.  Drusus  is  met  by  a  species  barbarae  muUeris  humana  amplior,
Suet.  Claud,  c.  1.  Dio  Cass.  55,  1.  Chatta  muHer  vaticinans  Suet.
Vitel.  c.  14.  Veleda  receives  gifts :  Mumius  Lupercus  inter  dona
missus  Yeledae,  Tac.  Hist.  4,  61.  A  modei*n  folktale  brings  her
in  as  a  goddess,  Firmenich  1,  334-5.  On  Albf-una  conf.  Hpt's
Ztschr.  9,  240.  Of  Jetiha  it  is  told  in  the  Palatinate,  that  she
sought  out  and  hewed  a  stone  in  the  wood :  whoever  sets  foot  on
the  fairy  stone,  becomes  a  fixture,  he  cannot  get  away,  Nadler  p.
125.  292.  Like  Pallas,  she  is  a  founder  of  cities.  Brynhild,  like
Yeleda,  has  her  hall  on  a  mountain,  and  sits  in  her  tower,  Vols.  s.
cap.  25.  Hother  visits  prophetesses  in  the  waste  wood,  and  then
enlightens  the  folk  in  edlto  monti»  vertice,  Saxo  Gram.  p.  122.
The  white  lady  of  princely  houses  appears  on  a  tower  of  the  castle.
The  witte  Dorte  lives  in  the  tower,  MuUenh.  p.  344.  When  mis-
fortune threatens  the  Pedaseans,  their  priestess  gets  a  long  beard,
Herod.  1, 175.  8, 104.  Women  carve  and  read  runes  :  Kostbera
kunni  skil  runa,  Saem.  252%  reist  runa  252^.  Orn^  reist  rünar  a
kefli,  Fornm.  s.  3,  109.  1 10  (she  was  bom  dumb,  p.  388).  In
the  Mid.  Ages  also  women  are  particularly  clever  at  writing  and
reading.     RA.  583.  ,

p.  98.]  To  the  Norse  prophetesses  add  Qroa  völva,  Sn.  110,
and  Göndul,  a  valkyr,  Fomald.  s.  1,  398.  402,  named  appar.  from
gandr,  p.  1054.  420.  Thorgerffr  and  Irpa  are  called  both  hörga-
brü&r,  temple- maid,  and  Holga-brudr  after  their  father  Hölgi,
p.  114,  637.  A  Slav  pythonissa  carries  her  sieve  in  front  of  the
army,  p.  1111-2;  others  in  Saxo  Gram.  827;  conf.  0.  Prnss.
waidlinne,  Nesselra.  pref.  15.


CHAPTER  VL

GODS.

p.  104  n.]   The  Goth,  manleika,  OHG.  mannalihho  (conf.  avhpia<i
fr.  avfip  man),  lasts  in  MHG.  wehstne  manlich,  Fundgr.  2,  123.


GODS.  1319

goldtn  manlich,  Servat.  2581.  'apud  manlicha/  where  the  image
stands,  Notizenbl.  6,  168.

p.  105.]  Though  Tacitas  mentions  no  image  in  haman  shape^
bat  only  signa  and  formae  {effigiesqne  et  signa  qaaedam  detrada
lucis  in  proeliam  ferunt,  Germ.  7,  conf.  vargr  hängir  fyr  vestan  dyr,
ok  drüpir  öm  yfir,  Ssem.  4P) ; — yet  the  expression '  nwweTiipsnm,
si  credere  velis/  used  of  the  divine  Mother  in  her  bath,  cap.  40,
does  seem  to  point  to  a  statae.

p.  106.]  In  the  oldest  time  fetishes — stones  and  logs — ^are
regarded  as  gods'  images,  Gerh.  Metron.  p.  26.  Gr.  to  ßpira^;  in
the  Tragic  poets  is  a  god's  image  of  wood  (conf.  eUwv),  though
Benfey  1,  511  says  'of  clay;'  ^avov,  prop,  graven  image  fr.  fc«
I  scrape,  often  means  a  small  image  worn  on  the  person,  e.g.  the
Cleo  in  Pans.  iii.  14,  4;  ayaXfia,  orig.  ornament,  then  statue ;
^(oBiov,  liter,  little-animal  15,  8.  Statues  were  made  of  particular
kinds  of  wood  :  ^oavov  ayvov,  of  the  vitex  agnus-castus  14,  7
(conf.  ramos  de  nohilissimo  agno  casto,  Evag.  Fel.  Fabri  1, 156-7),
as  rosaries  of  mistletoe  were  preferred,  cum  paupere  culta  stabat
in  exigua  ligneus  aede  deus,  Tib.  i.  10,  20.  Irish  dealbh,  deilbh,
deilbhin,  deilbhog,  imago,  statua,  figura.  Beside  the  Boh.  modla,
idol  um  (fr.  model  ?  or  fr.  modliti,  to  pray  ?),  we  find  balwan,  block,
log,  idol,  Pol.  balwan,  Miklos.  baVvan\  Wall,  balavanu,  big  stone
(p.  105  n.),  which  Gam ett.  Proceed.  1,148,  connects  with  Armoric
'peulvan,  a  long  stone  erected,  a  rough  unwrought  column.'
OHG.  avara  (p.  115-6)  stands  for  imago,  statua,  pyramis  (irman-
SÜ1),  pyra,  ignis,  Grafif  1,  181 ;  conf.  Oriaches- avara  (p.  297) ;  OS.
avaro  fiUus,  proles,  AS.  eafora.  The  idea  of  idolum  is  never
clearly  defined  in  the  Mid.  Ages:  the  anti-pope  Burdinus  (a.D.
1118.9)  is  called  so,  Pertz  8,  254-5.  Even  Beda's  Hdolis  servire'
2,  9  is  doubtful,  when  set  by  the  side  of  'daemonicis  cultibus
servire '  2,  5.

p.  107.]  On  Athanaric's  Worship  of  idols,  conf.  Waitz's  Ulfila
p.  43. 62.  Glaudian  de  B.  Getico  528  makes  even  Alaric  (a.d.  402)
exclaim  :  Non  ita  di  Oetici  faxint  manesqtis  parentum  !  Compare
the  gods'  waggon  with  saeer  cumis  in  Tac.  Germ.  10  and  Suppl.
to  328-9  below.  Chariots  of  metal  have  been  found  in  tombs.
Lisch  Meckl.  jb.  9,  873-4.     11,  373.

p.  108.]  That  the  Franks  in  Clevis's  time  had  images  of  gods,
is  proved  farther  by  Bemigius's  epitaph  on  him:  Contempsit  ere-


1320  GODS.

dere  mille  Nnmina,  qaae  variia  horrent  portenta  figuris.  On  the
other  hand^  Gregory  of  Tours^s  account  (1 ,  84)  of  the  Alamann
king  Ghrocas  in  the  Srd  century  compelling  St.  Privatns  in  (jaol
to  sacrifice  to  idols,  is  vaguely  worded:  Daemoniis  immolare  com-
pellitur,  quod  spurcum  ille  tarn  exsecrans  quam  refatans;  on
Chrocus  conf.  Stalin  1,  118.

p.  108  n.]  Old  idols  in  churches  were  placed  behind  the
organ  (Melissantes  orogr.  p.  437 — 9)  in  Duval's  Eichsfeld  341.
'An  idols*  chamber  was  in  the  old  choir/  Leipz.  avant.  1, 89 — 91;
'the  angels  out  of  the  firewood  room/  Weinhold's  Schles.  wtb.
17^;  fires  lighted  with  idols,  conf.  Suppl.  to  p.  13 — 15.  Giants'
ribs  or  hammers  hung  outside  the  church-gate,  p.  555  n.;  urns
and  inverted  pots  built  into  church-walls,  Thiir.  mitth.  i.  2,
112—5.  Steph.  Stoflief.  p.  189,  190.  A  heathen  stone  with  the
hoof-mark  is  let  into  Gudensberg  churchyard  wall,  p.  938.

p.  113.]  The  warming  (baka),  anointing  and  drying  of  gods'
images  is  told  in  Fri^]?iof8-s.  cap.  9  (p.  63).  But  the  divine
snake  of  the  Lombards  was  of  gold,  and  was  made  into  a  plate
and  chalice  (p.  684).  The  statua  ad  humanos  tactus  vocalis,  Saxo
p.  42,  reminds  of  Memnon's  statue.  Some  trace  of  a  Danar^s
image  may  be  seen  in  the  brazen  dorper,  p.  535.  On  the  arm-
rings  in  gods'  images  conf.  the  note  in  Miiller's  Saxo  p.  42.  Even
H.  Sachs  1,  224**  says  of  a  yellow  ringlet :  '  du  nähmst  es  Gott
von  füssen  'rab,'  ofi"  God's  feet;  and  ii.  4,  6^:  ihr  thet  es  Gt)t  von
füssen  nemmen.  Four-headed  figures,  adorned  with  half-moons,
in  Janmann^'s  Sumlocenne  p.  192 — 4.  On  nimbi,  rays  about  the
head,  conf.  p.  323  and  Festus :  capita  deorum  appellabantur  fas-
ciculi facti  ex  verbenis.  Animals  were  carved  on  such  figures,  as
on  helmets ;  and  when  Alb.  of  Halberstadt  456^  transl.  Ovid's
'Ilia  mihi  niveo  factum  de  marmore  signum  Ostendit  juvenile,
gerens  in  vertice  picum,'  Met.  14,  318,  by  '  truoc  einen  speht  uf
siner  ahseln/  he  probably  had  floating  in  his  mind  Wodan  with
the  raven  on  his  shoulder.  Even  in  Fragm.  40*  we  still  find :
swuor  bi  alien  gotes-bilden.

p.  114  n.]  Gods'  images  are  instinct  with  divine  life,  and  can
move.  Many  examples  o(  figures  turning  round  in  Bötticher's
Hell.  Temp.  p.  126.  One  such  in  Athenaeus  4,  439 ;  one  that
turns  its  face,  Dio  Cass.  79,  10:  sacra  retorserunt  oculos,  Ov.
Met.  10,  696 ;  one  that  walks,  Dio  Cass.  48,  43.     iBpdei  rä  ^oava


GODS.  1321

Kol  Kivierai,  Lacian  ed.  Bip.  9,  92.  120.  378;  deoram  svdasse
simulacra^  Cic.  de  divin.  2,  27.  simulacruin  Apollinis  Cumani
quatriduo  flevif,  Augnstiu.  Civ.  Dei  3,  11;  Lanuvii  simulacrum
Janonis  sospitae  lacrirnasse,  Livy  40,  19;  lapidam  j?e<tts  =  statua-
rnm  lacrimae,  Glaudian  in  Eufcrop.  2,  43.  simulacrum  Jovis
cachinnum  repente  edidit,  Suet.  Calig.  57.  Flames  burst  out
from  head  and  breast,  Herod.  6,  82.  An  Artemis  drops  her  shield^
Paus.  iv.  13, 1.  Not  only  are  they  spoken  to  (interdiu  cum  Capi-
tolino  Jove  secreto  fabolabatur,  modo  insusurrans  ac  praebens
invicem  aurem,  modo  clarins,  nee  sine  jurgiis.  Suet.  Calig.  22),
but  they  answer.  Being  asked,  ^  visne  ire  Bomam,  Juno  ?  '  she
nods  and  says  yea,  Livy  5,  22,

The  same  in  Teutonic  heathenism.  Th6r^s  image  walks  and
talks,  Fomm.  s.  1,  302.  As  ThorgerS's  image  bends  its  hand
to  keep  the  gold  ring  on,  Mary^s  does  the  same,  see  above,  and
Ksrchr.  13142-265-323.  Vine.  Bellov.  25,  29  foil,  by  Heinr.  de
Hervord  ad  an.  1049.  A  Virgin  sets  the  Child  down,  and  kneels
to  it,  Marienleg.  228 ;  the  Child  is  taken  from  her.  Pass.  144,conf.
Ges.  Ab.  3,  584.  A  Mary  receives  a  shot,  and  saves  the  man  it
was  aimed  at,  Maerl.  2,  202.  A  Crucifix  embraces  a  worshipper,
Keisersb.  seel.  par.  75^;  hows  to  one  who  has  forgiven  his  mortal
foe,  Sch.  u.  Ernst  1522  cap.  628;  'dat  cruce  losede  den  voet,  unde
stotte  ene,'  kicked  him,  Detm.  1,  7.  An  image  6t7e«  the  perjurer's
hand  off,  Sch.  u.  Ernst  c.  249  ;  speaks,  Alexius  444.  490.  Maerl.
2,  201 ;  and  turns  round,  KM.  1  (ed.  2)  xlix.  The  stone  visitant
in  Don  Juan  nods  and  walks.  Gods'  images  fall  from  heaven
ace.  to  the  Scythian  legend ;  so  does  the  figure  of  Athena,  Paus,
i.  26,  7.  Or  they  are  stolsn  from  abroad,  dii  evocati,  e.g.  a
Jano  (Gerh.  Etrusker  p.  31),  and  Artemis  from  Tauris,  Schol.  to
Theocr. ;  conf.  Meiners  1,  420-3.  So,  in  the  Mid.  Ages,  relics
were  stolen.  Again,  idols  are  washed,  bathed,  Schol.  to  Theocr. ;
conf.  the  Alraun,  p.  1203.  They  were  even  solemnly  burnt;  thus
in  the  Boeotian  daadals,  every  60  years,  14  oaken  images  of  Hera
were  consigned  to  the  flames,  E.  Jacobins  Hdwtb.  d.  Gr.  u.  Bom.
mythol.  394.

p.  115.]  The  numbers  three  and  foiir  in  conn,  with  gods'
images  occur  even  later  still.  At  Aign  on  the  Inn  near  Bottal-
munster,  next  the  Malching  post-house,  a  St.  Leonard's  pilgrim-
a(;e  is  made  to  five  brazen  idols,  the  biggest  of  which  is  called  the


1322  GODS.

Worthy,  The  peasants  say  none  but  the  worthy  man  can  lift  it.
If  a  youth  after  his  first  confession  fails  to  lift  the  figure,  he  goes
to  confession  again^  and  comes  back  strengthened.  The  festival
is  called  The  three  golden  Saturday  nights  in  September.  A  girl
proves  her  virginity  (also  by  lifting?).  The  Austrians  have  a
Leonardos  chapel  too,  yet  they  pilgrim  to  Aign,  and  say  '  he  is
the  one,  the  Bavarians  have  the  right  one/  conf.  Panzer's  Beitr.
2,  82 — 4.  A  nursery-tale  (Ernst  Meier  no.  6,  p.  38)  describes  a
wooden  sculpture  in  the  shape  of  a  horse  with  four  heads,  three
of  which  belong  to  Donner,  Blitz  and  Wetter,  evidently  Donar,
Zio  and  Wuotan.

p.  118.]  Similar  to  the  irmen-pillar  with  Mercury^s  image  in
the  Ksrchr.,  is  a  statue  at  Trier  which  represented  Mercury  flying,
Pertz  10,  132.  The  Lorsch  Annals  make  Charles  find  gold  and
silver  in  the  Irmenseule.  There  are  also  stories  of  mice  and  rats
living  inside  statues,  Lucian  somn.  24;  in  Slavic  idols,  says
Saxo;  the  Thor  that  is  thrown  down  swarms  with  large  mice,
adders  and  worms,  Maurer  bek.  1,  536.  What  Rudolf  of  Fulda
says  of  the  Irminsul  is  repeated  by  Adam  of  Bremen  (Pertz  9,
286).  '  irmesuwel  der  cristenheit,'  Germania  1,  451,  conf.  444.
The  Roman  de  Challemaine  (Cod.  7188,  p.  69)  describes  the  war
of  the  Franks  with  the  Saxons  :

En  leur  chemin  trouverent  un  mousiier
que  li  Saisne  orent  fet  pieca  edifier.
une  idole  y  avait,  que  les  Saisnes  proier
venoient  come  dieu  touz  et  gloirefier.
quar  leur  creance  estoit  selonc  leur  fol  cuidier
quele  les  puist  bien  sauver  jousticier.
Neptusnus  ot  ^  non  en  lonneur  de  la  mer.

One  is  reminded  of  the  lofty  Irminsul  by  the  story  of  an  idol  Ltig
or  Heillag y  60  cubits  high,  in  the  Wetterau,  Ph.  Diefienbach  291
(heiliger  16h?).

p.  121.]  On  Caesar's  '  Sol  et  Vulcanuset  Luna,*  see  GDS.  766.
The  Indiculus  comes  immediately  after  the  Abrenuntiatio,  in
which  Thuner,  Woden  and  Saxnothave been  named;  its  Mercury
and  Jupiter  therefore  stand  for  German  gods,  as  indeed  several
German  words  are  used  in  it :  nod-fyr,  nimidas,  frias,  dadsisas.
The  Abrenuntiatio  requires  you  to  give  up  the  trilogy  Thuner,


GODS.  1323

Wöden,  Saxnöt,  and  all  the  unholies  that  are  their  fellows  ;  so
there  were  three  heathen  gods,  and  more.  On  the  trilogy  conf.
Pref.  H.  liv.,  and  in  Verelius,  sub  v.  blotskap,  the  passage  out
of  the  Trojamanna-B.  p.  34,  where  Brutus  invokes  Th6r,  OSin  and
Gejjon.

p.  122.]  Saxo's  way  of  looking  at  the  Norse  gods  is  noticed
p.  384-5.  The  thunder-god,  who  is  Tlwro  at  p.  41,  aud  Thor  at
p.  103,  he  once  names  Jupiter.  Besides,  he  has  Plvio  and  D^  =
Othinus  as  ValföSr  36.  140-7 ;  and  Pro^eiy ina  =  Hel,  43.

p.  123.]  Lepsius,  Einl.  p.  131,  says  the  Egyptian  week  had  not
7,  but  10  days.  '  Nine  days'  time  '  is  a  common  reckoning  among
savages.  Klemm  2,  149.  To  nundinae  corresponds  ivvrifAap,  yet
Nieb.  1,  308,  and  O.  Müller  Etr.  2,  324  think  the  Romans  had  a
week  of  8  days.  The  seven-day  week  is  Semitic,  was  unknown
to  Greeks  or  Romans,  and  rests  on  a  belief  in  the  sacredness  of
the  number  7 ;  conf.  Nessel m.  on  the  origin  of  the  week  (Königsb.
deutsche  gesellsch..  May  22,  1845).     Titurel  2753  :

Die  sieben  stern  sieben  tugende  haltent,

Die  muozen  alle  mensche  haben,  die  da  z!t  der  tage  waltent.

The  Provengal  names  of  days  in  Raynouard  sub  v.  dia,  0.  Fr.
de-mierkes  for  mercre-di,  de-venres  for  vendre-di ;  conf.  Roquef.
suppl.  v.  kalandre.

p.  125.]     MHG. 1.  Sunnentac,  MS.  2,  190^     Amur  1578.

1609-21.     Griesh.  114.    141.     suidac,  Pass.  299,68.  81. II.'

mdntac,  Frauend.  32,  11.     maentaga  82,  1. III.  aftermaentag,

Hätzl.  Ixviii».  aftermoniag,  Uhl.  volksl.  p.  723.  zistag  and
zinatag,  WAckern.  Bas.  hss.  54-7;  also  Schweiz,  geschichtsfr.
1.82-3.  161.  4,149.  ctrw^a^,  Weisth.  1,  759.  2m«^a^,  Dietr.
drach.  320^.  Justinger  59,  Keisersp.  zistig,  Tobler  458.  eHiag,
Fundgr.  1,  75.  MB.  27,  89*  (1317).  132»  (1345).  Lang  reg.
4,  71 1»  (1300).  Grätzer  urk.  of  1319,  etc.;  but  ibid,  erchtag,
1310.  Schwabe  tintenf.  19.  56.  erctag  in  Hartlieb,  Superst.  H.,
cap.  31-2.     erichtag,  Beheim,  76,  16.    H.  Sachs  1,  206^.    Hütten

3,  358.     eretag  in  Guben,  48,  32. IV.  mitwoche,  Bas.  hss.  57.

rnittoelie,  Diemer,  357,  5.  von  dem  mitechen,  Tund.  44,  27.  dee
mütiehen,  MB.  27,  90  (1317).  27,  98  (1321).  der  midechen,
Grätzer  urk.  of  1320,  mitich,  mitichen,  1338.  midechon,  Griesh.
2,  48.  '  an  dem  nehsten  guotemtag  (!),  Schreiber  1,  486  (see  p.
124  n).         V>  Records  of  the  14th  cent,  waver  betw.  doaresdag


1324  GODS.

and  donredag,  Dunratac,  Pass.  57,  87,  efcc.  dünderstag,  dunders-
tag  alw.  in  Conr.  of  Weinsbg.  dorstage,  Schweiz,  geschichtsfr.
3,  260  (1396).     Dunredagh,  Maltzan  2,  6.     Hpt  Ztschr.  5,  406.

donredagh,  Maltzan  2,  45. VI.  phincztag,  Beheim  78,  8.     MB.

27,  131'»  (1343).  vritach,  Griesh.  2,  48.  frehtag,  Grätzer  urk.
of  1310.     des  vriegtages,  S.  Uolrich,  1488.

p.  125.]  OS. These  have  to  be  guessed  from  the  follow-
ing later  forms :  I.  sundach,  Ssp.    sondag,  Pom.  1486.     Klempiu

488. II.  mandag,  ibid. III.  dinsdag,  Coin.  urk.  of  1261.

Höfer  no.  5.  dinstcLg,  1316,  ib.  p.  112;  dynsdais,  p.  277.  dince-
dagh,  Pom.  urk.  of  1306,  p.  354.  dmscdag,  Magdeb.  urk.  of
1320,  p.  142.  dinstagh,  Quedl.  of  1325,  p.  17U.  dingstdag,
Bavnsbg.  urk.  of  1332,  p.  258.  dynstag,  Siebertz  no.  652.  6ö8
(1315-43).  dinxtdag,  Ditm.  landr.  of  1417  ed.  Michels,  p.  32.
dyristhedach,  Detmar  2,  287.  dinschedach,  Weisth.  3,  88.  90.
dyngstedag,  urk.  of  Maltzan  2,  270.  dincaedagh  2,  34.  dinghe-
stedaghes,  dingsted,^  dynsted.,  dyngesd.  2,  179.  210.  207.  142.
dinxstedages,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  405-406.  dingstedag,  Hammer-
broker  recht.  Did  any  Low  German  district  in  the  Mid.  Ages
retain  Tisdag  ?  Scarcely :  all  seem  to  have  forms  beginning
with  din,  agreeing  with  Nethl.  dinsdag,  and  corrup.  from  the
older  disendach ;  hence  our  present  dienstag.  Dinstag  appears
as  early  as  1316  at  Schleusingen,  1320-2  at  Erfurt  (Höfer  p.  120.

146.  153).     dingesdag,  Klempin  488. IV.  gudinsdag,  gudens-

dag,  Höfer  no.  6.  7.  (1261-2).  des  mitwehens,  Maltzan  2,  88.
in  denie  mitwehene  2,  113.  des  mydtoehen,  Hpt  Ztschr.  5,406.
des  middewekenes,  Höfer  166  (in  1323  at  Halberstadt),  mitd-
welceiies  870  (in  1331).     medewekes  360  (in  1324).     middeweke,

Klempin. V.  dunresdach,  Ssp.  donredag,  Klempin.  dunredagh,

urk.  of  Maltzan,  2,  6.     Hpt  5,  406.     donredagh,  Maltzan  2,  45.

VI.  vridach,  Ssp.  frigdag,  Klempin. VII.  sunavent,  Ssp.

2,  66  (one  MS.  satersdach),  sonnavend,  Klempin.  saterdag  is
Nethl.  and  Westph.,  not  Saxon,  saterstag,  Seibertz  724*  (1352).
satirsdach,  Marienlieder.  Hpt  10,  80-1.  saterstag,  Spinnr.  evang.,
Coin  1538,  title.  In  Freidank  169,  15,  one  MS.  changes  '  suoneä
tac'  into  satersdach.  soierdag,  Firmenich  1,  30P;  sorresdUeg  1,
495  at  Eupen.

M.  Nkthl. 1,   sondaeh,  Decker's   Lekensp.    1,    38. II.

maendach,  Decker  ib. III.  dinxdach,  Decker,    disdag  desdag,


GODS.  1325

Coremans  p.  49.    dUendaighes,  Heda  p.  443.     De  klerk  1,  804.

disendach,  Uhl.  1,  415. IV.  woonsdach,  Decker. V.  donre-

dach,  Decker,  donderdaeh,  Lane.  13970. ^VI.  vridach,  Decker.

den  vrindach,  Lane.  25310.  sfnndaghes,  Maerl.  3,  284.  sfnndaechs,

De  klerk    1,  708  in  1303. VII.  saterdach,  Decker.     In  the

Leyen  van  Jezns  p.  27-8.  74-5.  234  the  Jewish  notion  of  Sab-
bath is  lamely  reildered  by  saterdach.

p.  126.]     Fris. III.  tihsdi,  tisdey,  Hpt  Ztschr.  1,  107.

VII.  A  fuller  form  'sn-avend^  occurs  in  the  Gen.  snavendesy
Anhalt  nrk.  of  1332,  Höfer  163.

North-Fris.   forms   in   Outzen,    p.    38. IV.    Weadansdai,

Landeskunde  4,  248.     Winjsday  in  Silt,  MüUenh.  167. V.

Türsdei  and  Tüsdei, VII.  in  =  evening,  eve,  as  in  'gude  e^en

to  ye,'  Shaksp.  good-en.

AS. IV.  Mercoris  die,  hoc  est  Wodnesdag,  Kemble  5,  94

(in  844).

OE. III.  tweisdaie.     IV.  wensdaie,  Garner,  Procdgs,  p.  232.

ON.  in   Gula}?.  p.  9. III.    Tysdagr.    IV.  Offemdagr.    V.

porsdagr.     VL  Freadagr.     VII.  ßvatffagr.

SwiD. 1.   Bunnundaghr,   östg.      (conf.   p.    126  n.).      VIT.

loghurda^h,  östg.

NoBW. rV.  mekedag,     VL  Freadag,  Dipl.  Norv.  vol.  3,  no.

787  (in  1445).

Jut. IV.  Voensdag,  voinsdau,  Molb.  dial.  653.     VI.  Freia.

Vn.  Luora^  Foersom,  p.  12.

Anol. IV.  Vonsdaw.

p.  127  n.]  On  the  Roman  altar  in  Swabia,  see  Stalin,  1,  111.
On  the  circle  of  planetary  gods,  Lorsch  in  Jb.  d.  Bheinlande  iv.
183.  V.  298—314.  The  8  figures  on  the  altar  may  signify  the
gods  of  nundinae.  The  Germ,  week  has  Odin  in  the  middle,  his
sons  Tyr  and  Thor  next  him  :  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter.

p.  129.]  Snorri  too,  in  his  Form41i,  has  interpretations  and
comparisons  with  the  Bible  and  classical  mythology.  Freyr  he
identifies  with  Saturn  (p.  217).

p.  130.]     The  Ests,  Finns  and  Lapps  name  the  days  thus : —

Est. 1,  pühhapääw,  holy  day.     II.   esma^pääw,  first  day.

III.   teisipääw,  second  day.     IV.    Icesknäddel^   mid-week.     V.

'  The  Slavic  ned61ia,  orig.  Sunday,  now  means  week.
VOL.  IT.  B


1326  WODAN.

^lelyapääw,  fourth  day.  VI.  rede  (redi),  fast-day?  VII.  Zau-
pääw;  poolpääw,  half- day.  tt    7     h'

F,KN. 1.  sunnuntai.     II.  maanan.     III.  twtai.  ^  IV.  kesk^

wiycko.  Y.  tuorstaL  VL  peryandai ;  is  this  Peran's  day  dis-
placed (conf.  Perendan  below)?  or,  as  the  Finns  have  no  F,  a
corrup.  of  Fredag?  [Prob,  the  latter,  conf.  Peryedag;  and  the
Finns  are  fond  of  adding  an  N.] .     VII.  lauwandai.

Swkd.Lapp. l.aileh    IL  manodag.   lll.tisdag.    lY.haska

wahko.    V.  tuoresdag.     VI.  peryedag.     VII.  lawodag.

Norw.Lapp. 1,  sodno  helve,     II.  vuosarg,     HI.  viangebarg.

IV.  gaskvohko.    VI.  fastobeive  fast-day,  and  peryedag.


CHAPTER  VII.

WODAN.

p.  131.]     The  name  of  the  highest  god,  whom  the  other  gods
perve  as  children  their  father  (Sn.  23),  often  occurs  in  OHG.,  like
n&rrgott  much  later,  as  a  man's  name :    Wotan,  Schannat  312,
Woata7i   318,   Wuotam,  342.   386-9.     Langobardic    glosses   have
Odan  and  Oodan,  Hpt  Ztschr.  1,  557 ;  conf.  Goddn  5,  1.  2.     In
the  Abrea.  we  find  Woden  ;  perh.  Wedan  too  is  OS.      (Suppl.  to
154) ;  on  Wodaii  conf.  Lisch  Meckl.  Jb.  20,  143.     AS.,  beside
Woden,  has  Othan  (Sup.  to  5)  ;  Offon,  Sal.  and  Sat.  83  ;  Eowäen
(p.  161  n.).     Nth  Pris.  Wede,  Wedke,  MüUenh.  167.    Wedki  ta«ri  !
Landesk.  4,  246.     For  Norse  O^inn,  once  Oddiner,  conf.  Munch
on  Odd's  01.  Tr.  94.     Audon,  Yngl.  c.  7,     Does  Avdun  in  Norw.
docs,   stand  for  0«in  ?     Oden  in  Östögtl.  =  hin  onde,  Almqvist
371\      In   the   Stockh.    Adress-calender   for    1842,  p.  142,  are
actually  two  men  named  Odin.     Rask,  Afh.  1,  377-8,  takes  the
Lett.  Vidvut  for  the  Vodan  of  the  Vides  (Lettons),  while  Vogt  1,
141  makes  Widewud,  Waidewud  a  Prussian  king.     With  Vut  in
the  Orisons,  conf.  Vuodan  in  the  Valais,  of  whom  M.  0.  VuUie-
min  relates  in  his  La  reine  Berte  et  son  temps,  Laus.  1843,  p.  3 :
*  Un  jour  on  avait  vu  Wuodan  desoendre  le  Rhone,  telle  6tait  du
moins  la  croyance  populaire,  Vipee  nue  dans  nne  main,  un  globe
d*or  dans  I'autre,  et  criant  rigon  haionassou  (fleuve  souleve  toi) !
et  le  fleuve  s' ^levant  avait  detruit  une  partie  de  la  ville.*     On  my
inquiring  (through  Troyon)  if  the  name  in  the  story  was  really


WODAN.  1327

Wuodan,  the  answer  was  distinctly  Yes,  and  the  town  destroyed
was  Martigny.  Carisch  182^  has  vutt  idol,  which  some  derive
from  vultus,  vonlt,  face,  or  portrait,  others  from  votum ;  conf.
magliavntts  (Sop.  to  35  n.).

p.  132.]  Wuotan  from  watan,  like  0e6^  from  deeiv,  Sansk.
vddanais,  Schleicher  in  Kuhn's  Ztschr.  4,  399.  He  stands  closely
conn,  with  weathei-,  OHG.  wetar,  aer,  aether,  and  wind  (Sap.  to
115);  he  ia  storm,  byr,  faria,  wild  hunter,  uma,  Tmir,  Jumala,
spirit ;  he  is  also  called  Ofnir,  Vafu^Sr,  Vafj^ru-Snir.  Bat  why  in
Saem.  3^  does  OSinn  give  önd,  and  Hoenir  68,  when  surely  OSinn
should  give  68  ?  The  Bav.  wueteln  is  known  to  H.  Sachs :  das
es  aufwudlet  grün  in  grün  {of  herbs)  v.  377^.  wudelt  das  kraut
auf,  V.  378** ;  conf.  Wuotilgoz,  Wodelgedt,  p.  367  n.,  and  Woden's
relation  to  Ge&t,  p.  164-5.  We  can  put  him  on  a  par  with  Zeus,
Indra,  Loptr :  ai]p,  ov  av  Ti9  opofidaeie  teal  Aiay  Meineke's  Fragm.
com.  4,  31.  ^schylus  in  Eum.  650  says  of  Zeus:  rh  K  aSXa
travT  avo»  re  koI  KaroD  a-rpecfxav  rlOtfatv,  ovSey  aadfialvcov  fjiivei.
Zeas  merely  touches,  breathes  upon  lo,  and  she  conceives  Epapho^
(the  touched),  -^sch.  Prom.  849 — 851.  i^  i'7ra<f>rj<i  ku^  innrvoia^
^W9,  iSsch.  Suppl.  18.  45.  itjxiiTTODp  312.  Oeiai^  iTnirvoiaiq
iraverai,  576.  Dncange  sub  v.  Alt  anus  has  a  peculiar  gl.  Aelfrici :
Altanus  Voden^  quae  vox  saxonice  Wodanum  sen  Mercurium
J'onat  (conf.  p.  162  n.).  In  Wright  17^  '  Altanus  ßoden/  otherw
Men  is  turbo ;  altanus  auster  is  a  wind.  On  Woldan  see  Hpt
Ztschr.  5,  494.

p.  132.]  With  Otfried's  gotewuoto  conf.  a  Schlettst.  gl.  of
the  9th  century :  *  sub  tyranno,  under  themo  godowoden,'  Der
^üeterich,  Servat.  2853.  ein  tobender  m;.,  Bari.  254,  21 ;  conf.
gwyth,  p.  150  n.  In  the  Bifel  the  wild  host  is  called  Wodes-heer,
and  a  savage  monster  of  a  man  Wuodes-yrooT,  Schmitz  1,  233
In  the  Wetterau  band  of  robbers  was  one  Werner  Wuttwuttwutt,
Schwenker  574.     Pfister  1,  157.  162.

p.  133.]     It  is  not  SviöPr,  gen.  Svinns,  but  8vi9nr  ok  SviSrir,

gen.  8viSiirs,  in  Saem.  46^.     Sn.  3.  24.  195. Beside  valfaffir,

herfaÖir  (p.  817),  OSinn  bears  the  names  Rerjann,  Eerteitr,
Gunnarr^lieji.  myth. 641»;  conf.  Herjans  dis,  Saem.  213^  fleygöCi
O.  ok  t  folk  umskaut  5».  valr  la  par  ä  sandi  vitinn  enum
^»neygjaEriggjar  fai5mbyggvi  (ibi  caesi  in  arena  jacuere,  dedicati
unoculo  qui  Priggae  amplexibus  delectatur),  Sn.  1848, 236.


1328  WODAN.

Non  humile  obscnramve  genas,  non  fanera  plebis
PhUo  rapit  vilesque  animaa,  sed  fata  potentam
Implicate  et  claris  complet  Phlegethonta  figaris,

Saxo   Gram.  36. The  boards  head  in  the  Alamann  order  of

battle  is  expressly  acknowledged  by  Agathias  2,  8  {Stalin  1, 160).

p.  134.]  With  Paul  the  Deacon^s  account  conf.  the  older
setting  in  the  Prol.  leg.  Hotharis  in  Hpt  Ztschr.  5,  1.  There
Wodan  and  Frea  remind  you  altogether  of  09inn  and  Frigg  in
the  Grimnism&l.  O.  is  called  Sigr^höfundr,  Egilss.  640,  and  his
dwelling  Sigtunir,  Yngl.  5.  Sn.  15.

p.  136.]  On  name-giving,  ON.  nafn-festi,  see  GDS.  158-4.
With  Eliffsdalf  conf.  Valaski&lf,  p.  817  n.  Does  OHG.  Biighen-
scelp  belong  here?  Cod.  Lauresh.  no.  2597.  The  Gl.  Sletst.
15,  7  have  acelb  fornice,  also  those  in  Hpt  Ztschr.  5,  196.  scdf
fornix,  Graff  6,  479.  biscilbit  in  clida,  Diut.  1,  342 ;  and  clida
belongs  to  hli-8,  OHG.  hlit,  operculum.  The  Lex.  myth.  434
explains  Hli'Sskiälf  as  porta  coeli  tremens.

p.  136-7  n.]  Ood^s  chair  means  also  the  rainbow  (p.  733) ;
Ood's  little  cliair,  among  the  Lausitz  Wends,  the  corpse-bird
(p.  1134).  The  German  marchen  of  the  Tailor  who  climbs  the
Lord's  chair,  of  iron-booted  Ferdinand,  of  faithful  John  and
strong  Francis,  who  arrive  at  a  heaven  with  many  doors  (conf.
WolPs  Dent.  mär.  u.  sagen  no.  5,  KM.  no.  3,  35,  Miillenh.  mar.
no.  xii.),  resemble  the  Greek  notion  of  Zens's  throne  and  the
several  doors  through  which  he  attends  to  the  prayers,  vows
and  offerings  of  men,  Lucianos  Icaromenippus,  c.  25-6.

p.  138.]  Wunsch,  wish,  seems  akin  to  Sansk.  vangksh,  vdnch
opto,  desidero,  Bopp  Gl.  315*.  Pott  1,  235,  which  Bopp  thinks
identical  with  Welsh  gwanc,  desire.  Wish  in  O.Fr.  is  souhait
(p.  951n.)  and  avel,  pi.  aviaux,  Ren.  25131,  26828.  plus  bei  lui
nestuest  souhaidier,  Ogier  1,  140,  Wunsch  is  god  of  bliss  and
love,  who  wishes,  wills  and  brings  good  to  men.  We  still  speak
of  God  as  the  giver  of  all  good,  all  gifts,  Kl.  Sehr.  2,  327-9.
Wünschen  is  to  romance,  exaggerate,  imagine  :  sam  ez  gewünschet
waere,  Rab.  240.  ob  ieman  wünschen  solde.  Nib.  281,  3.  780, 1.
und  der  nu  w.  solde.  Ecke  202  (Hagen).  Also  to  wish  into
being,  create,  Wigq,l.  327.  887.  5772.  so  viel  nur  immer  Gott
Vater  w.  kann,  Zingerle  2,  64.    mit  wünsch,  by  divine  power.


WODAH.  1329.

Tifc.  347;  and  conversely  verwünschen  to  annihilate,  wünschen
lernen,  to  learn  conjuring,  Miillenh.  395.  402.  [Of  wünsch  as
the  Ideal,  a  page  and  a  half  of  examples  is  here  omitted.]

p.  141.]  Wish  personified  appears  most  freq.  in  Hartmann,
which  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  he  got  no  prompting  from  his
French  original.     The  last  line  on  p.  138 :

der  Wunsch  het  in  gemeistert  so,  Greg.  1097.  Er.  2740.     •
only  reminds  ns  partially  of  a  French  poet,  Thib.de  N.  95 :

beneet  soit  le  maistre
qui  tele  la  fist  naistre ;

while  Chrestien's  Erec  has  nothing  similar,  either  here,  or  in
describing  the  horse  {Hartm.  Er.  7375),  or  the  palace  and  twenty
ladies  (8213-77) ;  and  where  Hartm.  boasts  of  his  Enite :

man  sagt  daz  nie  kint  gewan

ein  lip  sd  gar  dem  Wunsche  glich.  Er.  330,

Chrestien's  Erec  407  has  merely :

que  tote  i  avoit  mis  s'entente

nature,  qui  faite  Favoit  (conf.  vv.  415.  425).-

Presently»  however,  in  his  :

ich  waene  Oot  sinen  vltz

an  si  hftte  geleit

von  schoene  und  von  saelekeit,  Er.  338,

where  Chrestien  had  said,  v.  429  :

onques  Dex  ne  sot  faire  miauz
le  nes,  la  bouche,  ne  les  iauz,

Hartm.  draws  nearer  to  his  prototype  again.  His  Wtmsches
gewalt  often  occurs  in  later  writers  :

beschoenen  mit  Wunsches  gewalte,  Flore  6927.

ir  lip  aller  wolgestalt

gar  in  des  Wunsches  gewalt,  Meleranz.  8768.

Wunsches  gewalt  h&n,  Berth.  239.  240.

hie  Wunsches  gewalt,  hie  liep  &ne  leit

in  immerwerender  Sicherheit,   Heinr.   Suso   in   Die   ewige
Weisheit.
Bat  the  phrase  becomes  more  and  more  impersonal :


1330  WODAN.

#

ei  hat  an  ir  wünsch  gewalt,  Altaw.  98.
an  im  lit  der  xvunschgeivalt,  Dietr.  drach.  41^.
drier  wünsche  gewalt,  MS.  2,  145^  (KM.»  8,  146-7).
geben  mit  alles  Wunsches  gewalt,  Pass.  298,  1.
aller  wünsche  gewalt,  Uhl.  volksl.  1,  21.

conf,  i^ova-la^  TV)(elv  irapä  tov  Aio^  alrijaaadav  otov  iirtOviiHy
Athen .  3,  24.  [Another  page  and  a  half  of  examples  is  here
omitted.]

p.  143 n.]  Even  Wolfram  in  Wh.  15,  7  has  'des  Wunsches
zu ' ;  and  des  Wunsches  paradts  actually  occura  in  Bari.  52,  8
and  in  the  Rudolf.  Vilmar  p.  64.

p.  143.]  Wish  is  the  meting,  moulding,  casting,  giving,
creating  (p.  22,  104  n.  139),  figuring,  imaging,  thinking,  faculty,
hence  also  imagination,  idea,  image,  figure.  There  is  about  Wish
something  inward,  uttered  from  within :  der  Wunsch  tihtefj
Troj.  3096,  uz  tiefer  sinne  gründe  erwünschet  mit  dem  munde
2960.  Apart  from  the  passage  in  the  Iliad,  x^P''^  answers  to
wünsch,  not  only  in  Lucian's  Pro  Imag.  c.  26  p.  52  :  KOßriv  to*?
XCipifTLv  aireUaae,  but,  as  God  imparts  wishing,  it  is  said  of
Hermes  :  09  po,  re  irdvrtDV  avOptaircov  epyoiai  x^ptv  fcaX  Kvho^
oird^ei,  Od.  15,  319.  Beside  des  Wunsches  aue  and  heilw&c,  we
have  also  a  wunschsee  and  wunschbninne,  Problems  Unterharz,  s.,
no.  345;  a  Wünschberg  in  Panzer's  Beitr.  1,  116,  Wensdienborch
in  Hpt  Ztschr.  1,  258,  Wunschilburg  in  Henricus  Pauper  115,
Wünschelburg  a  village  near  Glatz.  '  Joannes  Wunschelberg  doctor
vixit  circa  an,  1400,'  Flacius  cat.  test,  verit.  782,  in  Zarncke's
Univ.  Leipzig  764  an.  1427, 888  an.  1438.  A  Wünschmichelbach,
Baader's  Sagen  no.  345 ;  a  Wünschensuhl  near  Marksuhl,  ITiurin-
gia  ;  a  'super  WünscJie '  and  Wunscheidorf,  Rauch  2,  198.  200.

p.  143-4.]  Förstemann  has  no  name  Wunsc,  Wunscio,  which
would  mean  wisher,  adopter,  but  Karajan  quotes  Wensco  and
Sigiwunh  (for  Sigiwunsc,  conf.  Sigt^r),  and  Sigewnses-hoiz  about

Eichstadt  (for  Sigiwunsces-holz),  MB.  31,  363,  year  1080.

The  Oskmeyjar  are  called  nunnor  Herjans,  OSins  meyjar,  Sn.
212*^.  Oskopnir  might  be  connected  with  it  and  explained  as
'stragem,  campum  electionis  aperiens  '  from  opna  aperire,  of
which  the  Vols,  saga  c.  18  makes  uskaptr.  Beside  the  Wuscfred
of  Deira,  a  later  ono  is  mentioned  by  Beda  138,  19.  153,  5.


WODAN.  1331

p.  145.]  As  Wnotan  seods  wind  and  weather,  and  stills  the
stormj  sea^  it  is  said  of  the  christian  God :  daz  er  ans  alle  tage
dienet  mit  weter  ioch  mit  toint,  Diemer  89,  18.  In  Parzival,
Peirefiz  ascribes  it  to  Juno  that  she  daz  weter  fuocte,  fitted  750,

5 ;  dem  Jano  ie  gap  segels  luft  757, 7 ;  segelweter  fuogte  767,  3.

Vyggr  be  terror,  yggdrasill  means  the  horse  of  dread,  the  storm-
courser,  perhaps  the  rushing  god  himself,  as  we  know  that  OSinn
bears  the  surname  Yggr,  and  is  always  figured  as  the  rider  in  the
air,  the  furious  hunter.  In  that  case  Yggdrasils  askr  (Pref.  li.)  is
the  stormf ul  god's  ash.  OSinn  is  also  Hroptr,  alte  damans,  conf.
OBG.  hruoft,  clamor,  GrafE  4,  1137:  Hroptr  gla«r,  Hpt  Ztschr.
3, 154 ;  Hroptat^r,  p.  196.  And  the  surname  Farma-tyr,  Forma-
gud'  may  not  be  out  of  place  here,  as  deus  vecturarum  nauticarum,
from  farmr,  onus  nauticum.  Meßngr,  SeBra.  272*  is  perh.  conn,
with  mafr,  seamew.  Other  by-names  are  Fengr,  Ssem.  184*.
Vols,  saga  c.  17,  p.  157;  Svafnir,  S»m.  93»;  Fiölriir,  Sasm.
10*.  46^  184*.  Vols,  saga  c.  17,  p.  157  and  conf.  136.  193.  200.
323.     He  is  'inn  reginkunngi  baldur  i  brynjo,^  Seem.  272^.

p.  145.]  Similar  expressions  for  dying  are :  AS.  Dryhten
Hcean,  Beow.  373.  ON.  kenna  einom  ftttünga  brautir  til  O&ins
landa,  Saem.  80^.  far  till  Oden,  Geyer  1,  123;  conf.  gefa  Offni,
Landn.  5,  10.  The  miser  collecting  treasures  is  said  in  Sweden
to  fjma  Oden,  Geyer  1,  123.     Kl.  sehr.  8,  197.

p.  145  n.]  The  conception  of  OSinn  as  an  evil  being  is  clear
in  the  ON.  *hva^a  Offins  latum  ?'  quid  hoc  mali  est  ?  shortened  to
'bva&  latum,'  quid  hoc  rei  estf  Wormius  mon.  dan.  p.  11  ;  l&t
is  amissio,  mors;  conf.  our  'was  des  teufels?*  Fomm.  sog.  3,
1 79  has  '  öfögnu'Sr  sendr  af  Offni,*  mischief  sent  from  0. ;  OSinn-
dcell  11,  151  periculosus,  insociabilis,  diflBicilis,  is  interpr.  'illr
vi^fangs*  12,  430;  Offinndcela  6,  374  periculum,  infortunium,
interpr.  '  vandrae^i,  vandamftl,  nandsyn '  1 2,  430.  DsbU  itself  is
mansuetus,  afiabilis.

p.  147.]  OSin's  outward  appearance  is  alluded  to  in  many
other  places;  hinn  eineygji  Friggjar  fa'8m-bjggvir,  Sn.  1848  p.
236.  He  is  Hengikiaptr,  labeo,  cui  pendet  maxilla,  Sn.  146  (p.
1075  n.);  Earbarffr,  Flaxbeard,  from  hör,  linum;  to  SigurSr
appears  the  Longbeard,  and  helps  him  to  choose  Grani,  Vols.  c.
13.  6DS.  688-9.  To  Saxo's '  Othinus  os  pileo  obnubens '  answers
Ilia  surname  Orimnir  larvatus,  from  grima.     As  'Grimnir'  he


1332  WODAN.

ehewB  himself  to  men  in  the  guise  of  a  beggar  to  try  them,  e.g.  to
Geirrö«r ;  as  '  Gestr  blindi '  to  Hei«rekr,  as  '  G&ngr&«r '  to  Vaf-
)?rAiSnir.  Compare  the  German  märchen  of  the  old  Beggar-
woman,  KM.  150,  whose  clothes  begin  to  burn,  as  Grimni's  did.
In  the  case  of  Hei'Srekr,  Gestr  guesses  riddles  for  another^  as  the
miller  or  shepherd  does  for  the  abbot,  Schmidt  85 — 9.  Again
OSinn  appears  as  the  one-eyed  bondi  Hrani,  and  bestows  gifts,
Hrolf  Kr.  saga  c.  39.  46  (Fomald.  s.  1,  77.  94).  The  Pomm.
s.  5, 171-2  says :  'hann  var  stuttklaeddr,  ok  hafSi  sidan  hatt  ni^r
fyrir  andlitit,  ok  b&  6gerla  äsjonu  hans;  skeggja'Sr  var  hann;'
conf.  the  blind  (one-eyed  ?)  Hatt,  Sv.  äfventyr  1,  363.  GDS.
578.  Swed.  legend  gives' OSinn  a  pointed  hat,  uddehatt,  which
agrees  with  the  peculiar  shape  of  certain  tombstones,  wedge-
shaped,  like  a  man-trap.  But  he  is  called  hauga-drottinn,
Yitterh.  acad.  handl.  14,  73.^  Now  uddehatt  is  nsu.  a  dwarf's
hood  or  cape  of  darkness ;  hence  also  he  appears  as  *  lord  of
dwarfs.'  At  the  same  time  the  hat  is  a  wishing-hat  and  Mer-
cury's hat.  He  appears  as  an  old  man^  or  as  a  hunter  on  high
horse  with  three  hounds  which  he  gives  away  to  a  youth;  and
a  Smaland  story  expressly  names  him  Odeti,  Sv.  folkv.  I,  212.
Oammal  gräman  gives  advice,  but  may  not  stay  beyond  cock-
crow, Arvidsson,  3,  3.  Similar  is  the  one-eyed  witch,  Norske
event.  141-2.'  'In  Germany  too  we  can  now  find  many  traces
of  this  divine  apparition.  A  Oraymantle,  a  Broadhat  often  turns
up  in  nursery  tales,  see  Haltrich  p.  10.  39.  44;  an  old  man
fetches  the  children,  p.  4.  He  appears  as  Old  One^eye  45.  55,
as  Stone-goat  44,  Wild-cat  63.  God  comes  in  the  guise  of  an  old
beggar,  stands  godfather,  and  gives  gifts,  KM.  no.  26 ;  or  as  a
grey-bea/rded  mannihin,  Frommann's  Munda.  4,  328;  conf.  the
old  beggar-woman,  KM.  no.  150;  as  One-eyed  Flap-hat,  Alsatia
1856  p.  131.  A  grey  smith  heals,  Hpt  Ztschr.  1,  103.  In  St.
Martin's  cloak  and  hood  Simrock  sees  Wuotan's  wishiug-oloak,
Martinsl.  xvii.

p.  147.]  When  OBinn  hurled  the  spear,  then,  says  the
Völuspft,  was  the  first  war  in  the  world.  He  is  geira  drotiinn,
Egilss.  639.  geiri  undaffr  oc  gefinn  Odhi,  Seem.  27**.  marka  sik
Offni,  p.  1077.  under  Otto  III.  a  man  in  a  dream,  after  taking
a  pious  vow,  was  transfixed  by  two  lances  of  the  martyrs  Crispin
and  Crispinian,  Pertz  5,  787.     The  giant  Oden  in  Sv.  afvent.  455


WODAN.  1333

(some  yeraioDS  omit  the  name)  possesses  costly  things,  as  the
god  does  his  apea/r.  Oat  of  such  notions  sprang  the  OBG.  names
Kerans,  Folchans,  Hpt  Ztschr.  7,  529.  Is  this  spear  more  like
Apollo^a  destractive  dart,  or  the  sceptre  of  Zens  (p.  680)  ?  Is
the  name  of  the  Lombard  royal  line  of  Ounginge  conn,  with
Oungriir  ?  GDS.  687-8.

p.  148  n.]  In  Herod.  4,  15  Aristeas  is  called  Apollo^s  raven,
%.e.  priest,  as  Porphyry  tells  us  the  Magians  called  the  priests  of
the  San-god  ravens.  Three  ravens  fly  with  St.  Benedict,  Paul.
Disc.  1,  26.     In  Goethe's  Faust  12,  127  the  witch  asks  Mephis-

topheles  :  But  where  are  your  two  ravens  f Doves  sit  on  Gold-

Mariken's  shoulders,  MüUenh.  403.  AMove  sits  on  the  head  and
shoalder  of  a  boy  at  Trier,  Greg.  Tar.  10,  29;  one  perches  three
times  on  the  head  of  St.  Severus,  Myst.  1,  226-7,  another  settles
on  St.  Gregory's  shoulder  1,  104.

p.  148.]  Flugu  hrafnar  tveir  of  HniJcars  öxlum,  Huginn  til
hauga,  enn  ft  hrae  Muninn,  Sn.  322.  The  ravens  daily  sent  out
return  at  dogurSarmftli  42;  conf.  F.  Magnusen's  Dagens  tider
p.  42.  fara  Vidris  grey  valgiörn  um  ey,  Saem.  154».  hrafnar  tveir
flagu  merS  J^eim  alia  leilS,  Nialss.  80.  On  Odens  foglar,  Odens
tvalar,  see  Sup.  to  159.

p.  148.]  O&in-Neptunus  resembles  both  Poseidon  and  Zeus,
who  rise  out  of  the  sea  as  bulls.  OSinn  shows  himself  to  Olaf  as
a  boatman,  Twkkva  maffr,  Fomm.  s.  2,  180 ;  and,  as  the  man  in
the  boat,  fetches  Sinfiötli's  body.  Vols.  c.  10.  Like  him  are  the
divine  steersman  in  the  Andreas  (Pref.  xziv.  xmr.),  and  the
thirteenth  man  who  steers  the  twelve  Frisians,  who  has  the  axe  on
his  shoulder,  throws  it  at  a  well-spring,  and  teaches  them  justice,
Bichth.  4S9.  440.  Yet  we  also  come  upon  OSinn  Hnikar  as  a  kdrl
afbiargi,  Saem.  183-4.

p.  149.]  Byr,  Burr  is  QSin's  father,  p.  348-9.  gefr  hann
(0.)  byri  brögnom,  Saem.  113^  A  fair  wind,  ON.  oska-byrr,  is
in  the  Swed.  rhyming  chron.  onsho  bor.  Even  the  German  may
very  likely  have  had  a  wwnsch-biir  as  well  as  wünsch- wint,  for  we
find  in  Pass.  379,  19  :  in  kam  von  winde  ein  ebene  bür,  die  in  die
segele  da  slnoc.  201,  29  :  dö  quam  ein  alsd  geltche  bür.  380,
78 :  das  in  wart  ein  guote  bür.  On  the  other  hand :  so  er  den
wint  ze  wünsche  hat.  Er.  7795.  Wunsches  weter,  Urstende  125,  85.
Got  schuof  im  sanften  snezen  wint,  Ernst  5,  238  (Sup.  to  145).


1334  WODAN.

The  himmlische  kind  makes  guten  wind,  Osw.  960-5.  1220 ;  but
also  the  storm  wind  1137.  2731.  To  the  Greeks  it  was  Zeos
espec.  that  sent  a  fair  wind :  Aw  ovpo^,  Od.  15^  297.  Zeis  ovpov
laWev  15,  475.  Zev^  evdvefjuo^:,  Paus.  iii.  13,  5.  Also  a  ^Epfiry;
aipto^  is  named  '  inter  deos  qui  ad  pluviam  eliciendam  a  mago
advocantur/  Cass.  Dio  71,  19;  and  Hermes  or  Theuth  was  tbe
Egyptians'  rain-god  71,  8  (Sup.  to  175).

p.  150.]  With  the  AS.  dialogue  betw.  Sat.  and  Sal.,  conf.
Kemble's  Salomon  p.  323  :  Mercurius  gigas.  In  Altd.  Bl.  2,  190
the  other  dialogue  is  entitled  '  Adrian  and  Ritheus,'  and  contains
the  words :  '  saga  me,  hwft  wrät  bdcst^afas  aerest  ?  ic  ]?e  secge,
Mercurius  se  gigantJ  In  Smaland  there  rides  a  man  resembling
OiSinn,  with  fiery  breath,  and  a  rune  staff  in  his  mouth,  Hpt

Ztschr.  4,  509. Theuth  not  only  invented  letters,  but  dice:

7r€TT€/a9,  fcvßeia^  as  well  as  jpdfißiaTa,  Plato's  Phaadr.  274.
And  QSinn  is  not  only  the  finder  of  runes,  but  lord  of  dice-
throwing.  An  ON.  dicer's  prayer  is  (Sup.  to  1234)  :  at  )?&
Fiölnir  falla  lätir,  ßat  er  ek  kasta  kann  !  F.  Magn.  lex.  myth.  646
(Fiölnir  =  OiSinn,  Sup.  to  145).  And  there  was  a  proverb:  ]?u  ert
ecki  einn  i  leik,  ef  O&inn  styffr  ßik.  On  the  Devil  as  dicer,  conf.
p.  1007.  Players  invoked  Thörr  and  OSinn,  Frigg  and  Freyja
together  with  Enoch  and  Elias,  Christ  and  Mary,  F.  Magn.  lex.
myth.  646.

p.  150  n.]  On  Owydion  and  Don  see  Villemarque's  Bardes
bretons  388.  The  milky  way  was  also  called  '  Arian  rod  mercU
Don,'  Davies's  Mythol.  205.  Leo  in  Hpt  Ztschr.  3,  224  derives
Gwydion  from  gwyd,  men»,  fi€vo<;  (p.  162  n.),like  OSinn  from  ON.
od'r,  mens.  The  Irish  Jia  Oeden,  Gael,  di  ciadain,  ciadaoin  may
indeed  be  expl.  as  ceud  aoine,  first  fast;  but  see  O'Brien  168'.

The  sentence  in  the  Prol.  legis  SaliceB :  '  Mercurius  Trismegisim
primus  leges  .^gyptiis  tradidit,'  comes  from  Isid.  orig.  5,  3.
Tervagan,  Tervigant  may  have  to  do  with  Trebeta,  Gesta  Trev.
(Pertz  10,  131).

p.  154.]  On  Wodenes'berg,  ^husen,  ^wege  conf.  Förstern.  2,
1566.  in  Wodeneswego  Pertz  8,  604;  de  Wodeneswege  8,  676.
Vudenesvege,  Lisch,  Örzen  2^  161 ;  Oudenswege,  2^,  136.  Agaio,
Wodonesberg,  Lacomb.  l,no.  97. 117.  Witanes-berc  (Wuotanes?),
Cod.  dipl.  Juvav.  95  (an.  861).  Mons  Mercurii,  Fredegar  c.  55.
Then,  Wodensbeorg,  Kemble  5,  78.  137.     Woddanbeorg  3,  457.


WODAN.  1335

Wonhlinc  3,  415.  5,  112.  291.  Woncumb  5,  78.  137.  Wodnes^
detis  5,  238.  Wodnesdic  3,  403.  413.  452-5-6.  460-4-6.  5,  215.
238.  Wonlond  5,  235.  6,  355.  Woddes  geat  5,  78.  137.
Wonstoe  3,  227  {Kl.  Sehr.  2,  57).  Wonäc,  quercus  Jovis  3,  458.
Won-alre  (-aider)  4,  459.  Bat  how  are  Wonred,  Wonreding,
Beow.  5925-38  to  be  explained  ?  OS.  Wetanspeckia  for  Wedanes-
speckia  (-bridge,  wooden  bridge),  Lünzel  12.  53.  Nth  Fria.
Wedes'hoog,  Wens-hog,  Winis-hog,  Miillenh.  167.  Other  names
in  Nordalb.  stud.  1,  138.  Weadanask,  Jb.  f.  Schlesw.-holst.
landesk  4,  248.  Wonsfleth  in  Holstein,  OS.  Wodenstorp,  now
Wunstorf  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  58),  can  ace.  to  Förstern.  2, 1578  be  traced
back  to  Wungeresdorf.  WuninsdoT^,  Caes.  Heisterb.  9,  18.
Wotenes-hüsen,  Trad.  Fold.  Dronke  38,  221.  Cod.  Fuld.  no.  610
p.  274,  now  Gntmanns-hausen  (Dronke  237*).  A  Wons-husen  in
Weimar,  and  one  near  Nidda,  Landau^s  Wetterau  218.  Wonsaz,
Bamb.  verein  10,  108.  A  Wonsees  betw.  Baireut  and  Bamberg;
yet  conf.  '  in  der  wonsass/  MB.  27,  141,  and  wonsassen,  Schm.  4,
80.  Kl.  sehr.  2,  58.  A  Sigeboto  de  WuoJiten-geseze  (Wuotanes  ?)
in  MB.  11,  167.  About  the  Fichtelgebirge  lie  also  Wtmsiedel
(Wotanes-sedal  ?),  Wonsgehai,  Wonsgehäu,  Wmidsgehäu,  Wohns-
gehaig,  a,  village  on  the  Neunberg  by  Mistelgau,  Baireut,  Panzer's
Beitr.  2,  101.  'flumen  quod  vulgo  Wotinprunno  dicitur,'  Sin-
nacher,  2,  635.     TFa^an-brunnon,  Lacomblet  1,  no.  103.

p.  154.]  OSinn  is  a  rider;  hence  called  Atriffi,  he  who  rides
np  ?  (as  Thörr  is  Elorriffi,  p.  167  n.);  conf.  also  Tggdrasils  askr
and  the  story  of  the  World-tree,  p.  960.  The  Hervarar-saga
(Fomald.  s.  1,  486)  has  a  riddle  on  OSinn  and  Sleipnir.  On  a
rune-stone  in  Gothland  is  supposed  to  be  carved  '  Oden  and  his
eight-legged  Sleipnir,'  Dybeck  1845,  91.  The  horse  is  often
mentioned  with  him  :  '  om  Oden  och  hans  has  tar '  they  say  in
Upland  and  Gothland ;  in  Smaland  they  speak  of '  Odens  stall
och  krubba,'  Bääf;  conf.  the  'hunter  on  high  horse,'  Sup.  to  147.
A  horse  with  six  legs  in  Haltrich  35-6  ;  with  eight  49 ;  an  eight-
legged  talking  sun-steed  101.

p.  155  n.]  '  Odinus  pascit  equos  sues  in  follein  inclusus,'  Pall
Vidalin  610;  conf.  '  i  bälg  binda,' Vestg.  lag.  p.m.  48.  veit  ec
at  ec  hSck  vindga  meiiSi  &  naetur  allar  nio,  geiri  undaiSr  ok  gefiun
OSni  sialfr  sialfum  mer,  Sssm.  27^  (see  note  on  KM.  no.  146).
Charles  abo  splits  a  stone  before  the  battle,  Wächter^s  Heidn.


1336  WODAN.

denkm.  42-3 ;  conf .  the  story  of  the  Swedish  general  45^  and
that  of  Hoier^  Benecke's  Wigal.  452.  In  Irish  legend  too  the
divine  hero  Fin  Barre  has  his  horse  shod  by  a  mortal  smithy  and
joggles  the  fourth  leg  in,  Ir.  sagen  2,  85  ;  conf.  Kl.  sehr.  2,  450.
p.  157.]  In  the  district  of  Beilngries,  Bavaria,  the  bunch  of
ears  is  left  for  the  Waudl-gaul,  and  beer,  milk  and  bread  for  ihe
Wavdl'hunde,  who  come  the  third  night  and  eat  it  up.  If  you
leave  nothing,  the  beaver  (bilmer-schnitt)  will  pass  through  your
fields.  In  the  last  cent,  they  still  kept  up  a  harvest-feast  called
Waudh-mahe,  setting  out  fodder  for  the  black  steeds  of  Waude,
while  they  drank  and  sang : —

0  heilige  sanct  Mäha,

beschere  übers  jähr  meha,

so  viel  köppla,  so  viel  schöckla,

so  viel  ährla,  so  viel  tausend  gute  gährla.

If  the  reapers  forgot,  they  were  told  :  '  Seids  net  so  geizig,  and
lasst  dem  heilgen  S.  Mäha  auch  was  steha,  und  macht  ihm  sein
städala  voll ; '  conf.  the  less  complete  account  in  Panzer's  Beitr.
2,  216-7.  Three  stalks  are  left  for  Oswald,  three  ears  tied  three
times  round  with  flowers,  viz.  the  cornflower  (centaurea,  blue),
the  blotze  (red  poppy,  papaver  rho&as),  and  camomile.  The  red
poppy  is  also  called  Miedel-magn  (Mary's  mohn).  Panzer  2,
214-5-6.  Schm.  2,  555.  608;  in  Swabia,  Her-got's  kitele  or
mantele.  The  Russians  leave  a  sheaf  standing  for  Volos  (Veles)^
*  toward  Volos's  beard  (borod).'

p.  159.]  OffinS'Ve  occurs  (988)  in  'episcopatus  Othenes^
wigensis/  Lappenb.  Hamb.  urk.  no.  5.  On-njö,  Oden-tjö  in
Skäne,  Böstanga-socken,  lies  over  a  submerged  castle  named
Odinsgärd  (see  the  story  in  Sup.  to  946),  Dy beck's  Buna  1844,
32-3.  In  OnS'hdlla  were  washed  the  old  men  that  threw  them-
selves down  the  cliff,  Geyer  1,  115.  Onsänger  in  Smäland.
OdenS'brunn  in  Upland,  Wendel-socken,  Dyb.  Buna  1844,  90.
With  Woden  worhte  weos,  conf.  Woldan  hewing  his  church-door,
WolPs  Ztschr.  1,  69.  O^inn,  unlike  Thörr,  hardly  ever  occurs
in  names  of  men :  Bäaf  235-7  gives  Odhankarl,  OdhinkarL

p.  159.]  On  the  plant-name  Woden -tungel,  -star,  see  K.
Schiller's  Ndrd.  pflanzenn.  32 ;  conf.  'Ep/iov  ßdi^,  Mercarii
Burculus,  filix,  and  'Epfiov  ßordviov,  herba  mercurialis,  Diosc.  4,


WODAN.  1337

183-8. Several  birds  were  sacred  to  OSinn  :  '  korpar,  kräkar,

skatar  bor  man  icke  skjata,  emedan  de  äro  Odens  foglar,  dem
han  yid  Olofsmassan  har  hos  sig  %  ätta  dagar,  da  ban  plocker
och  tager  en  stor  del  af  dem.  Ardea  nigra,  en  temligen  stor
fogel  af  hager- slag tet,  kallas  Odens  svala/  Bääf;  see  Sup.  to
p.  148.

p.  160.]  WcBM^et  suggests  ülf.li«r,  p.  207.  Kl.  sehr.  2,  58.
Who  off  a  thief  has  cut  the  thumbs.  To  him  good  luck  in  throw-
iog  comes,  Garg.  192*.  Do  they  say  anywhere  in  Scandinavia
Odensfinger,  Onsfinger  ?  Ace.  to  F.  Magn.  lex.  myth.  639  the
lungs  were  sacred  to  08inn  and  Mercury;  conf.  the  Tables  of
Blood-letting.

p.  162.]  OSinn,  Thotr,  Freyr  in  Snorri's  Edda  131  answers  to
Offinn,  Asahragr,  Freyr  in  Seam.  85^;  and  invocations  in  Swed.
folk-songs  give  him  the  first  place :  '  hjalp  mig  Othin,  thu  kan
hast!  hjalp  mi  Ulf  och  Asmer  Ory  !  '  Arvidss.  1,  69.  The  same
in  Danish :  '  hielp  mig  Othin,  du  kan  best !  hielp  mig  TJlf  og
Asmer  Chribf  Syv  48.  Asmer  Gri^  Asa^grim;  conf.  *  hielp  nu
Oden  Asagrim  !  '  Arvidss.  1,  11.

p.  162  n.]  On  Zeus  rpiro^  and  TpiToyiveia,  conf.  Welcker's
Trilogie  101-2.  At  banquets  the  third  goblet  was  drunk  to
Zeus :  TO  rpirov  r^  SoiT^pi,  Passow  s.v.  awnfip,  Athena  rpiTV},
Babr.  59,  1.

p.  1 62 .]  08inn  =  Ear,  Seam.  46» ;  =  lafnhar  46^ ;  =  priäi  46*.
Bat  where  do  we  find  Tveggi  outside  of  F.  Magn.  lex.  myth.
644?  conf.  Egilss.  610,  where  we  can  scarcely  read  Thriggi
for  Tveggi.  On  the  Sansk.  Ekatas,  B-oitas,  IS-itas  see  Kuhn
in  Höfer  1,  279.  281-9.  Zend.  Thraetaono,  Thrita,  Spiegel's
Zendav.  7.  66.  Thraetaono  =  Feridun,  =  the  ihree-guivered,  says
Leo  3,  192-5  (1st.  ed.).

p.  163.]  ON.  Vili  [weak  decl.,  gen.  Vilja]  would  be  Goth.
Vilja,  OHG.  Wülo.  The  strong  gen.  in  'brü«r  Vilis/  Egilss.
610  is  evid.  a  slip  for  Vilja,  though  we  do  find  the  strong  nom.
Vilir  in  Yngl.  saga  c.  3.  May  we  conn.  Vili  with  the  Finn.
veil,  Lap.  välja,  Alban.  ßeXd,  f rater?  GDS.  271.

p.  163  n.]  Munch  1,  217  thinks  Mithothin  arose  from  mis-
understanding metod ;  to  me  it  is  plainly  Fellow- Othin,  like  our
mit-regent,  etc.  Saxo's  Ollerua  is  the  Eddie  TJllr,  as  is  clear
from  his  using  a  hone  for  a  ship,  Saxo  p.  46.    Yet  UUr  seems  a


1338  THUNAB.

jumble  of  Saxo'a  Olleras  and  Snorro's  Vilir,  Yngl.  c.  3  (Kl.  sehr.
5,425):  ship  Ullur,  Sn.  Hafn.  420  =  skiöldr;  askr  Ullar  426.
Ydalir,  his  hall,  Sfiom.  40^.  Uller  sagr,  F.  Magn.  lex.  766.
Ullar  hylli,  Seöm.  45^;  hringr  U.  248»;  U.  «e^  =  Baldi-  93».
Ullr  is  Thor's  stepson,  Sn.  31.  101-5;  boga-,  vei*5i-,  öndr-,
skialdar-äs  105.

p.  165.]  I  might  have  spoken  here  of  OSin's  relation  to  his
wife  Frigg,  p.  299,  and  to  SJcaffi,  whom  the  Yngl.  saga  c  9  calls
his  wife.


CHAPTER  VIII.

THUNAR.

(Conf.  Kl.  Schb.  2,  402—438.)

p.  166.]  Donar  stands  related  to  donen  extendere,  expansion
of  the  air  (Hpt  Ztschr.  5,  182),  as  tovo?  to  reivto,  yet  tonare  is  in
Sansk.  stan,  resembling  arepTfop,  arovo^  and  our  stöhnen,  KL
sehr.  2,  412.  In  AS.,  beside  Thimor,  of  whom  there  is  a  legend
(p.  812-3),  we  have  also  Dhor,  Sal.  and  Sat.  51.  So  the  rubric
over  John  5,  1 7  has  ßunres-dedg,  while  that  over  John  5,  30  has
ßurS'dseg;  and  the  Norman  Dndo  calls  him  Thur,  Wormius
mon.  24.  The  Abren.  has  Thuner,  dat.  Thunare.  MHG.  still
dunre.  Pass.  227,  81.  Dietr.  drach.  1 10^.  des  dunres  sun  (Boaner-
ges), Pass.  227,  59  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  427).  For  the  compound  Swed.
tordön,  Dan.  torden,  the  Norw.  has  thordaauy  Faye  5,  the  Jemtl.
torriy  Almqv.  297,  Westgötl.  thoiii  and  tänn.  In  the  Dan.  marchea
Torden-vejr  means  Thor,  as  Donner -wetter  in  Germ,  curses  stands
for  Donar.  The  Swed.  Lapps  call  the  thunder- god  Tiermes,
Klemm  3,  86-7,  Ostiaks  Toruim  3,  117,  Chuvashes  Tora,  Tor,
Yakuts  Tanara,  Voguls  Torom,  Raak's  Afh.  1,  44.  33.

p.  167.]  ON.  reiÖ'  is  not  only  vehiculum,  but  tonitru:  lystir
reiÖ^  (al.  j^ruma),  Gula]?.  Häfn.  498.  Norw.  Tharsreia  tonitru,
Faye  5.  Danish  critics  regard  ökußorr  as  a  different  being  from
Asa]7drr,  and  as  belonging  to  an  older  time ;  yet  Sn.  25  places
them  side  by  side,  and  looks  upon  Thor  too  as  Öku)?6rr,  conf.  78.
He  drives  a  chariot;    conf.  the  Schonen  superst.    about   Thor,


THUNAB.  1339

Nilsson  4,  40-4.^  In  öatgötl.  the  aska  is  called  goa ;  when  it
thunders,  they  say  'goa  gar/  Kalen  11»;  goffar  kör,  Almqv.  347,
bat  also  gomor  gär  384,  and  kombondeii  gär  385.  In  Holland  :
'onze  lieve  Heer  reed  (drove)  door  de  lucht/  Father  God  is
rolling  d'hrenta  (milk-vessels)  up  and  down  the  cellar  steps.
Wolf's  Ztschr.  2,  54.  Can  the  old  hitteUkar  (kettle-car  ?)  of  the
giant  with  two  goats  refer  to  Donar's  chariot?  Müllenh.  447;
conf.  Kl.  sehr.  2,  422.  Thorr  carries  a  basket  on  his  back  :  meis,
iarnmeis,  Seöm.  7b\    Sn.  111.     OHG.  meisa,  Graff  2,  874.

p.  167.]  God  thunders  :  die  blikzen  und  die  donrelega  sint
mit  gewalte  in  siner  pflege,  MS.  2,  166**.  Zens  raises  tempest:
0T€  7€  Z€v<i  \atXaira  reivrj,  II.  16,  365;  'what  doth  Zeus?'
meant  how's  the  weather?  0.  Miiller's  Gr.  gesch.  1,  24.
Jupiter,  alles  weters  gewalt  het  er,  Ksrchr.  1152  (p.  630).  In
France:  ni  oistau  nes  Damledeu  tonant,  Aspremont  22^.  nes
Deu  tonant  ni  poistau  oir,  Mort  de  Gar.  145-9.  noissiez  Deu
tonarUy  Garins  3,  205 ;  conf.  '  si  gran  romore  facevano,  che  i  tnoni
non  si  sarieno  potuti  udire,'  Decam.  2,  1.  When  a  thunderstorm
comes  on,  men  say :  '  schmeckste  paur  öchsel  ?  merkste  a
scheindl?'  Weinh.  schles.  wtb.  82;  *ecce  ubi  iterum  diabolus
ascendit ! '  Caes.  Heist.  4,  21.  The  Russians  shout  words  of  in-
sult after  the  retreating  tempest,  Asbjömsen's  Hjemmet  193.

p.  163.]  Thunder  is  God  (or  the  angels)  playing  at  bowls  :
uns  Herr  speelt  kegeln,  Schütze  4,  164.  die  engel  kegeln,
Miillenh.  358  ;  conf.  the  skittle-playing  in  the  Odenberg,  p.  953.
Or  it  is  anger,  and  the  thunder-bolt  his  rod,  Pol.  bozy  pr^ten.

p.  168.]  The  same  Taranis  is  in  the  Vedas  a  surname  of  Indra
the  thunder-god,  he  that  passes  through,  from  taran  =  trans;
and  so  Perun  may  be  conn,  with  Tripa  (but  see  p.  171,  and  Kl.
sehr.  2,  420).  Welsh  taran  thunder,  Gael,  tairneach,  tairneanach;
also  torrunn.  Taranucmis,  Moneys  Bad.  urgesch.  2,  184.  In
Burgundy  a  town  Tamodurum,  whose  later  name  Tonnerre  and
'le  Tonnerrois/  Jos.  Gamier  51,  prove  that  the  notion  of  thunder
lay  in  the  old  name ;  conf.  Kl.  sehr.  2,  412.

p.  169  n.]  Thorr  heitir  Atli  oc  ftsabragr,  Sn.  211*,  conf.  Atli
208*.    The   Lapps   call   their  Tiermes   aiyeke,   and  his   deputy

*  The  samames  HldrriSi,  Siem.  211«,  and  EindriSi  need  not  conflict  with  the
statement  that  Thdrr  walks  or  else  drives  (p.  167  n.).  In  Sn.  101  he  is  called  föstri
Vinffnu  ok  Hlöru.  (p.  187.  257).  In  Sn.  Formili  12  Loride  is  called  Thör's  son,  and
Loricut  Thors  fdstri,  who  has  a  wife  Glora,


1340  THUNAR.

yunkare,  stor-yunJcare,  Klemm  3,  86,  the  Ests  their  Pikker  wana
essay  old  father,  Yerh.  2,  36-7 ;  and  the  American  Indians  their
Supreme  Being  the  grandfather, .  Ylemm  2,  153.  With  the
moontains  Etzel,  Altvater  we  may  perh.  associate  a  high  mountain
Oetschan,  Helbl.  7,  1087  (now  Öftscher),  from  SI.  otets,  foc.
otche,  father;  conf.  KI.  sehr.  2.  421.

p.  170  n.]  The  St.  Bernard  or  Great  Bernard  is  called
Montjovx,  A.J}.  1132.  On  the  jugum  Penninum,  deus  Penninue,
see  Zeuss  34.  99.  Dieifenb.  Celt.  1,  170.  Several  inscriptions
'  Jovi  Pcenino,  Penino'  in  De  Wal  no.  211—227.  A  Mount  of
joy  in  Meghaduta  61 ;  in  Moravia  the  Radoat,  joy.  Finn,  ilo-kici,
stone  of  joy,  Ealev.  3,  471.

p.  171.]  Comes  ad  Thuneresberhc  (jr.  1123),  Erh.  150;  apud
Thuneresberg  133.  Sifrit  de  Tonresberc  (1173),  MB.  33*,  44.
Sifridus  de  Bonresberch  (1241-58)  33%  68.  90.  Of  a  dragon  it
is  said :  er  hete  wol  dri  kiele  verslunden  (swallowed)  und  den
Dunresberc,  Dietr.  drach.  262^  (str.  834) .  vom  Donresberge,  Hpt
Ztschr.  1,  438.  A  Donnersberg  by  Etteln,  S.  of  Paderborn.  AS.
ihinresled,  Kemble  3,  443.  4,  105.  5,  84.  Bunresfeld  3,  394.
5,  131,  conf.  6,  342.  Doneresbrunno,  Ztschr.  f.  Hess,  gesch.  1^
244.

p.  171.]  With  Slav,  grom,  hram  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  418)  put  our
L6.  grurnmeln  of  distant  thunder,  Ir.  crom,  cruim  thunder,  Fr.
grommeler  growl;  also  Lith.  grauja  it  thunders,  growimmas
thunder.

p.  171.]  To  Lith.  Perkuna^  musza,  Nesselm.  41 P,  and  P.
grauja,  grumena  286*,  add  the  phrases :  Perkuns  twyksterejo  (has
crashed),  P.  nzdege  (has  kindled);  Perkino  szowimmas  (stroke),
P.  growimmas  (peal),  P.  zaibas  (flash);  perkunija  thunderstorm.
The  Livl.  reimchr.  1435  says  of  him  :  als  ez  Perkune  ir  abgot  gap,
daz  nimmer  so  harte  gevros.  Near  Battenhof  in  Conrland  is  a
Perkunstein  with  legends  about  it,  Kruse's  Urgesch.  187.  49;  a
Perkuhnen  near  Libau.  Pehrkones  is  hedge- mustard.  The  Lapps
have  an  evil  god  or  devil  perkel,  pergalak,  Finn,  perkele,  Kalev.
10,  118.  141.  207.  327  (Sup.  to  987).

p.  172.]  In  Finn,  the  oak  (tammi)  is  called  God's  tree,  puu
Yumalan,  Kalev.  24,  98.  105-7.  115-7;  conf.  Zeus's  oak  p.  184,
robur  Jovis  p.  170.  Ju-glans,  Jto9  ^aXavo^  =  castanea,  Theophp.
3,  8.  10.   Diosc.  1,  145.    The  oak  being  sacred  to  Thörr,  he  slays


THXTNAR.  1341

the  giants  that  take  refage  under  it ;  under  the  beech  he  has  no
power  over  them.  It  has  been  remarked^  that  lightning  pene*
trates  twenty  times  as  far  into  the  oak  as  into  the  beech^  Fries
bot.udfl.  1,  110.

p.  172.]  A  Swed.  folksong  (Arvidss.  8,  504)  makes  Thdrr
live  in  the  mountain :  locka  till  Thor  i  fjalL  Beside  Fwrgv%n*s
daughter  Frigg^  another  daughter  TörS  is  called  OSin's  wife^  and
is  mother  of  Thdrr.  But  if  Thdrr  he^Fairguni,  he  is  by  turns
OSin's  father  and  QSin's  son ;  and  he^  as  well  as  Frigg^  is  a  child
of  earth  (iörtS),  Kl.  sehr.  2,  415.     GDS.  119.

p.  173.]  Of  Enoch  and  Elias^  who  are  likewise  named  together
in  the  ON.  dicer^s  prayer  (Sup.  to  150),  we  read  in  Fundgr.
2,  112  :

sie  h&nt  och  die  wal  (option),

daz  sie  den  regin  behabin  betalle  (keep  back  rain)

swenne  in  gevalle  (when  they  please),

unt  in  abir  lazin  vliezen  (again  let  flow) ;

ir  zungin  megin  den  himel  besliezen  (shut  up)

unt  widir  Aftuon  (open),

sd  si  sich  wellint  muon.

The  Lithuanians  call  Lady-day  Elyioa  diena,  Hyios  diena,  on
which  it  begins  or  ceases  to  rain.  They  derive  it  from  ilyia,  it
sets  in  (to  rain) ;  iä  it  not  rather  Eliaa's  day  ?  Elias  legends  of
Wallachia  and  Bukowina  in  Schott.  375.  Wolf  Ztschr.  1,  180.
On  Ids  battle  with  Antichrist  conf.  Griesh.  2,  149.

p.  174.]  Hominem  fulgure  ictum  cremari  nefas ;  terra  condi
religio  tradidit,  Pliny  2,  54.  Places  struck  by  lightning  were
sacred  with  the  Greeks,  and  were  called  fiKuamy  ivTfKvaui,  be-
cause  the  descending  deity  had  visited  them.  They  were  not  to
be  trampled:  l^oc  modo  contacta  loca  neo  intueri  neo  calcari
debere  fulgurales  pronuntiant  libri,  Amm.  Marcell.  23,  5.  One
pecaliar  rite  was  thoroughly  Etruscan :  such  a  spot  was  called
hidental,  because  a  two-year  old  sheep  was  sacrif.  there,  Festus
sab  vv.  bidental,  ambidens.  0.  Miiller's  Etr.  2,  171 ;  the  railing
round  it  was  puteal,  and  may  be  compared  to  the  Ossetic  skinpole :
bidental  locus  fulmine  tactus  et  expiatus  ove,  Fronto  277.  Cattle
^trudc  dead  by  lightning  are  not  to  be  eaten,  Westendorp  525.

p.  175.]     v6Td9,  Umbr,  eavUti,  Aufr.  u.  Kirchh.  2,  268.     5e  b^

VOL.  IV.  »


1342  THUNAB.

apa  Zev^  irdyvvxo^,  Od.  14,  457.  Athen.  4,  73.  rov  AC  a\7)0w
^firjv  Bia  leoa/ciyov  oipelv,  Aristoph.  Gloads  373  ;  conf.  imbrem
in  cribrum  gerere,  Plant.  Pa.  i.  1,  100.  Jw  Sßjkßpo^,  Od.  9,
111.  358.  ovT€  neXoTrowfjo-loi^  Saev  6  Beo^,  Pans.  ii.  29,  6.  An
Egypt,  magian  conjares  the  air-god  Hermes  (tof  akpiov)  for  rain,
Cass.  Dio  71,  8.  Indra,  who  has  the  thunderbolt,  is  also  god  of
rain ;  when  he  disappeared,  it  rained  no  more,  Holtzm.  3, 140.  1,
15.  In  Dalecarl.  skaurman  äk,  the  shower-man  rides  =  it  thun-
ders, Almqy.  258;  conf.  Goth,  skura  vindis  sXaiXa*^,  OHG.  smr
tempestas,  grando,  AS.  scur  procella,  nimbns,  ON.  skur  nimbas
(Kl.  sehr.  2,  425).

p.  175.]  Another  rain-procession  in  1415,  Lindenbl.  301.
Petronius's  '  uyidi  tan  quam  mures '  is  like  our  MHG.  in  Eracl.
142^  :  so  sit  ir  naz  ah  eine  mus  (from  Enenkel),  wet  as  a  drowned
rat.  A  prayer  of  the  Ugio  tonans,  likewise  under  M.  Antonine,
brings  on  torrents,  Casa  Dio  71,  8.  A  Hungarian  prayer  for  rain,
Ungarn  in  parab.  90;  others  *in  Klemm  2,  160  (Kl.  sehr.  2,
439—458).

p.  176.]  Pihker,  Kalewipoeg  3,  16.  23.  358.  16,  855.  pikher^
taaii  20,  730.  On  pikker  and  inkne  see  Estn.  Verh.  2,  36-7.  He
is  the  avenging  thrice-nine  god,  that  appears  in  the  lightning,
and  with  red-hot  iron  rod  (raudwits)  chastises  even  the  lesser  gods,
who  flee  before  him,  like  the  giants  before  Thor,  to  human  hearths
2,  36 — 38.  Pikne  seems  an  abbrev.  of  pükäinen,  tonitrn,  which
occurs  in  the  Finnic  form  of  the  Esth.  prayer  for  rain,  Suomi  9,
91,  and  comes  from  pitkä  longus;  pükäikäinen  longaevns,  the
Old  =  Ukko,  says  Gastrin  myth.  39,  or  perhaps  the  long  streak
of  the  lightning.     On  Toro,  Toor,  Torropel  see  Estn.  Verb.  2,  92.

p.  176.]  Ukko  blesses  the  corn,  Peterson  106.  In  a  waste
field  on  the  coast  of  Bretagne  St.  Sezny  throws  his  hammer,  and
in  one  night  the  corn  grows  up  into  full  ripe  ears  around  it,
Bret.  Volkss.  by  Aug.  Stöber,  prob,  after  Souvestre.

p.  177.]  The  Thunder-god  must  be  meant  in  the  story  of  the
red-bearded  giant  and  the  carriage  with  the  golden  he-goai,  Wolf
Ztschr.  2,  185-6.  With  the  N.  American  Indians  both  Pahmi-
oniqua  and  Jhächinehiä  (red  thunder)  are  men's  names,  Catlin
tr.  by  Bergh.  136.  190-1.

p.  178.]  The  three  phenomena  of  lightning  are  described  as
simultaneous  in  Hes.  Theog.  691 :  Kepavvol  Xierap  äfjM  ßponf  re


THXJNAR.  1343

Koi  offTepoTT^  iroriovTO.     Distinct  from  fulgur  is  a  fonrth  notion^
fulgurcUio  (sine  ictu).

p.  178.]  Fulgur  is  called  bliks,  as  late  as  Jnstinger.  Blixberg,
now  the  rained  castle  of  Plixburg  (Plickhs-perckh  in  old  docs.)^
stands  in  the  Münster  valley  near  Colmar,  oppos.  a  dwarPs  moun-
tAin,  Schöpflin  Als.  dipl.  no.  1336.  des  Snellen  blickes  tue,  Preid.
375.  himelbliclee,  Servat.  397.  1651.  Roth.  8536.  In  Styria,
Umlatzen  to  lighten,  weterblicke  fulgura,  Hpt  Ztschr.  8,  137.
mlUrleichy  Stalder  2,  447.  hab  dir  das  plab  f&u&r  !  H.  Sachs
ii.  4,  19*.  blue  light  in  thunderstorms,  Schwab's  Alb.  229.
Lightning  strikes  or  'touches':  mit  blitz  gerührt^  Pelsenb.  1,  7.
It  arises  when  sparks  are  struck  with  the  fiery  axe,  p.  180°.
813;  af  J?eim  liomdm  leipirir  qv6mo,  Seem.  151*.  Kpovihr^^  a(f>Ui
^Xoevra  icepawov,  Od.  24,  539.  äpyrJTt  Kepavv^  5,  128.  131.
fmttZctim  fulgur,  Festus,  Varro  ap.  Non.  6,  2.  Sen.  Thyest.
1089.  ignes  trisulci,  Ov.  Met.  2,  848.  Ibis  471.  tela  trisulca,
Claadian  iii.  Cons.  Hon.  14.  genera  fulminura  tria  esse  ait
Caecina,  consiliarium,  audoritaiis  et  status,  Am.  Marc.  23,  5 ;
conf.  0.  Müll.  Btr.  2,  170.  The  Etruscans  had  nine  fulgurating
gods  2,  84.  In  Bomanic,  lightning  is  cameg,  form,  also  calaverna,
chalavera;  straglUsch,  sagietta,  saetta  lightn.  that  pierces,  also
lüUchertia  (Incemaf).  Lith.  zaibas  lightn.,  Perktino  zaibas  streak
of  lightn.,  from  zibeti  to  shine,  Nesselm.  345.  Mere  fulguratio,
summer-lightn.,  distant,  feeble,  that  does  not  strike,  the  Finns
call  Kalevan  tulet,  K,  valJciat,  i.e.  Galevae  ignes,  bmta  fulmioa
autumnalia,  or  kapeen  tulet,  genii  ignes.  Lightning  is  named
TTvp  Jto9,  Hebr.  fire  of  Ood.

p.  178  n.]  Blecken,  plechazan,  heaven  opening,  reminds  of  the
Bastamae,  who  thought,  when  it  lightened,  the  sky  was  falling
on  them,  Livy  40,  58 ;  conf.  Dnncker  p.  84.  In  Servian  songs
munya  is  the  Vila's  daughter,  grom  her  brother.  Mesets,  moon,
marries  Munya,  Vuk  1,  154  n.  229—231.

p.  178.]  Tonitrus  is  toniris  ehlaccha,  Hattem.  3,  598^.  ton-
nerklapf,  Justinger  383.  'thunderclap  words,'  Fr.  Simpl.  1,  231.
dozes  klae,  Parz.  379, 11.  Troj.  12231. 14693.  donrescal,  Fundgr.
2,  116.  tonnerbotz,  Garg.  270^.  219^  from  donerböz.  ON.
'  fhrugga  tonitru,  conf.  skröggr  fulminans.  Dan.  tordenskrald,
tordenbrag.  LG.  grummeUwier,  ^schuur,  -ta^iren  (-cloud),  Lyra
103.  117,  see  Sup.  to  171.     We   say  thunder  rollt,  grollt  [if


1344  THUNAR.

distant^  grommelt].  As  lightn.  is  a  bird's  glaoce,  thnnder  is
the  flapping  of  its  wing«,  Klemm  2,  155.  Zeas's  eagle  holds  his
lightnings,  and  an  eagle  raises  the  storm-wind^  p.  633 ;  conf.  the
bird  of  DawH.

p.  179.]  Fulmen  is  OHG.  donaratrala,  Grpff  6,  752  and
laucmedili,  GH.  Jan.  191.  Graff  2,  707.  blic-scMz  mit  (or,  an)
dnnr-slegen.  Pass.  89,  49.  336,  9.  des  donres  schuz,  Freid.  128,
8.  donrestrdl  der  uiht  enschiuzet^  Turl.  Wh.  II'.  dornstrdi,
Griesh.  161.  die  donerblicke,  Fundgr.  1,  73.  donresblicke,  Freid.
123,  26.  des  donrhsIaC',  Fundgr.  2,  125.  'ob  der  doner  z'aller
frist  slüege,  swann  ez  blekzend  ist/  if  it  struck  e^erj  time  it
lightens,  W.  gast  203.  swaz  er  der  beiden  ane  quam,  die
sltiOfi  er  alse  ein  doner  sän.  Bother  2734.  do  sluog  er  also  der
tlioner,  for  dem  sich  nieman  mac  be  warn,  Diemer  218,  8.  scKui-
slac,  Helbl.  8,  888.  wolkenschoz,  Lanz.  1483.  weterwegen.  Pass.
336,  10.  2.  OHG.  droa,  drewa  is  both  minae,  oraculum,  and
fulmen,  ictus,  Graff  5,  246 ;  because  lightn.  is  a  bodeful  phenom-
enon ?  0.  Fr.  es  foldres  du  ciel,  Ogier  1,  146.  foudr©  qi  ai-f,
Guiteclin  2,  137.  Le  tonnerre  a  sept  diffSrentes  formes  pour  se
manifester  aux  Polognots.  H  tombe  en  fer,  alors  il  brise  tout;
en  feu,  il  br&le;  en  sovffre,  il  empoisonne;  en  genuille,  il  ^touffe;
en  poudre,  il  ötoardit ;  en  pierre,  il  balaye  ce  qu'il  environne ;
en  bois,  il  s'enfonce  oil  il  tombe,  Mem.  Celt.  2,  211.

p.  180.]  On  thunderbolts  see  the  9th  Bamb.  Bericht  p.  111.
Beside  donnerstein,  we  have  wetterstein,  krottenstein.  Again :
Heire  Oot,  und  liezt  du  yallen  her  ze  tal  ein  stein,  der  mir
derslüege,  Suchenw.  78,  175.  A  fragment  of  thunderbolt  healed
over  in  the  hand  imparts  to  it  enormous  strength,  Hpt  Ztschr.  3,
366.  A  don/nerstral  of  2^  cwt.  hangrs  in  Ensheim  church,  Garg.
216'.  Vestgötl.  Thoi'S'käjl  (-wedge),  Swed.  Tlwr-viggar  (-wedges),
Sjöborg's  Nomencl.  £.  nordiska  fornlemningar  100.  Indra's  bolt
and  flash  are  svarus,  from  svar,  sky,  sun,  Benfey  1,  457 ;  conf.
^Xvata,  Sap.  to  174.  Like  df-shot  is  the  Sansk.  'vitulum  veluti
mater,  ita/u/f/ien  Marutes  sequitur/  Bopp  Gl.  364*;  conf.  mogi-
entis  instar  vaccae  fulmen  sonat  262*.  Athena  alone  knows  the
keys  to  the  thunderbolt  chamber,  ^sch.  Eum.  727,  like  Mary
in  the  nursery-tale  of  the  forbidden  chamber  in  heaven.  Lith.
'  Perkuno  kulka,^  P.^s  ball.     Serv.  strelitsa,  arrow.

p.  181.]    Miölnir  reminds  of  SI.  m'lniya,  molnia  aa-rpamj,  which


THTJNAR.  1345

Miklos.  50  derives  from  midti,  conterere.  The  hammer  is  the
simple^  world-old  implement^  indispensable  to  nearly  every  trade^
and  adopted  by  not  a  few  as  a  symbol.  At  boundaries  the  H  |
hamaramark  was  deeply  graven,  a  cross  with  hooked  limbs ;  •  L
afterwards  a  crossed  oak  served  for  a  landmark,  Kl.  sehr.  2,  4ä.
Od.  In  blessing  the  cap  (signa  full)  the  sign  of  the  hammer  was
made :  hann  gerSi  hamarsmark  yfir,  Häk.  göSa  saga  c.  18.  Thor
mei$  tungum  hamrum  is  also  in  Landstad  14.  Thor's  image  has
a  great  hammer  in  its  hand,  01.  helga  s.  ed.  Christ.  26.  Fornm.
sog.  4,  245.  Uhat  the  hammer  was  portrayed  and  held  sacred,
is  shown  by  the  passage  in  Saxo,  ed.  Müll.  630  :  Magnus,  inter
cetera  traeophorum  snoram  insignia,  inusitati  ponderis  malleos
quos  Joviales  vocabant,  apud  insularum  quandam  prisca  virorum
religione  cultos,  in  patriam  deportandos  curavit.  That  was  betw.
1105  and  1135.  In  Germany,  perh.  earlier,  there  were  hamniets
and  clubs  as  emblems  of  Donar  on  the  church  wall,  or  built  into
the  town-gate;  to  which  was  linked  a  barbarous  superstition
and  a  legend  of  the  cudgel,  Hpt  Ztschr.  5,  72.  To  the  same
cycle  belong  the  tales  of  the  deviVs  hammer ,  which  is  also  called
donnerkuhly  hammerJcuhl,  Miillenh.  268.  601 ;  conf.  p.  999.  Pikne
carries  lightn.  as  an  iron  rod,  see  Sup.  to  1 76.

p.  181.]  Thdrr  sl  foe  to  giants,  p.  531.  As  W6dan  pursues
the  subterraneans,  so  he  the  giants.  Th^y  will  not  come  to  the
feast  where  Tordenveir  appears,  p.  189.  537.  In  Schonen,  when
it  lightens,  it  is  Thor  flogging  the  trolls,  Nilss.  4,  40.  der  (tievel)
wider  nnsih  vihtet  mit  viuren  (viurinen,  fiery)  strdlen,  Diemer
337,  9.

p.  181.]  Hamer  sla  bamer,  sla  busseman  dot!  Miillenh.  603  ;
conf.  Hermen  sla  dermen,  p.  355.  bim  hammer !  Corrodi  Pro-
fesser  16.  58.  Vikari  11.  tummer  und  hammer.  Prof.  96.  'May
heaven's  forked  lightn.  bury  you  10,000  fathoms  underground  ! '
du  widertno  ez  balde,  oder  dir  nimet  der  donner  in  drin  tagen
den  Up,  Wolfd.  881,  8.  4  (Hpt  Ztschr.  4).  A  Danish  oath  is  '  ney
Tlwre  gud!'  Warmii  Mon.  Dan.  13.  dass  dich  der  Donnerstag
(Thar8day  =  Thor),  Ph.  v.  Sittew.  2,  680.  donnstig  !  du  donnstigs
bub  I  Gotthelfs  Erz.  2,  195-6.  The  Lithuanians,  says  ^n.
Sylvias,  ascribe  to  Percunnos  a  great  hammer,  by  means  of  which
the  sun  is  rescued  from  captivity,  -^n.  Sylv.  in  den  Kurland,
send.  2,  6.     N.  Preuss.  pro  v.  bl.  2,  99 ;  conf.  Tettau  u.  Temme


1346  THÜNAB.

28.  Lith.  '  kad  Perkuns  pakiles  deszimt  klafterin  tave  i  zeme
itrenkta  l "  may  P.  arise  and  strike  thee  10  fathoms  into  the
earth,  Schleicher  ber.  der  Wiöner  acad.  11, 108.  110.  The  Etras-
cans  ascribed  the  hammer  to  Mantus,  Gerh.  17.

Beside  the  hammer  Xhorr  had  his  megin^giarfar,  fortitndinis,
roboris  cingula,  and  iarn-greipr,  chirotecas  ferreas,  Sn.  112-3.
er  hann  spennir  ]^eim  (megingiörSum)  nm  sik,  ^k  vex  homing
ds-megn  halfu,  Sn.  20.  ^  spenti  hann  meguigiörö'ufn  114.
This  belt  of  might  reminds  us  of  Laurin  906.  890.  1928 :  ze-
brechent  sin  gürtelin,  do  hat  er  von  zwelf  Tnan  kraft,  A  girdle
imparts  strength  and  wisdom,  Wigal.  332,  and  shews  the  right
road,  22-3.  A  girdle  that  stills  hunger,  Fierabras  209 ;  conf.  the
hnnger-belfc.  A  vidoriae  zona  in  Saxo  ed.  Müll.  124.  Like  Thor's
girdle  is  the  blue  band  in  Norske  folkev.  no.  60,  p.  365.  374-6.
Miillenh.  Schi.-holst.  mär.  11.     Moe's  introd.  xlvi.

p.  183.]  In  the  Alps  the  salamander,  whose  appearance  be-
tokens a  storm,  is  called  wetttr-giogo,  Schott's  Germans  in
Piedmont  300.  346.  A  female  stag-beetle  carries  red  hot  coals
into  houses  (Odenwald).

p.  183  n.]  The  barba  J&vis  is  held  to  have  healing  power,  Caes.
Heisterb.  7,  15.  Jovis  herba,  hus-loek,  Hone's  Quellen  289\
hus'louch,  Mone  8,  403.  donder-loek,  crassula  major,  Mone's  Qa.
283^  duvidar-lok,  Dybeck  1845  p.  61.  Jovis  caulis,  semper-
vivum  magn.,  Diosc.  4,  88.  AS.  ßunor-wyrt,  barba  J.;  house-
leek  planted  on  cottage-roofs.  Hone's  Yrbk.  1552 ;  conf.  p.  1214.
The  Swiss  call  the  donnerbesen  hexenbesen,  witch's  broom.  Staid.
2,  42.  Nemnich  calls  glecoma  hederacea  donnerrebe,  gundrebe.
The  donnemessel,  Urtica  dioica,  resists  thunder.  Finn.  Ukon-
tuhnio,  fungus,  femes;  U.  nauris,  rapa;  U.  lammet,  caltha  palus-
tris; Ukkon-lehti,  folium  (lappa).  Jovis  colus,  Ji09  fjXajcaTfj,
clinopodium,  verbena,  Diosc.  3,  99.  4,  61.  Jovis  madius,  cata-
nance,  herba  filicula  4,  132.  Upa  rov  deoO  ^17709  at  Dodona
Paus.  1,  17.  Jovis  arbor,  Ov.  Met.  1,  104.  A  thunder-tree  in
Tyrol,  Wolf  Ztschr.  While  redbreast  and  beetle  attract  light-
ning, the  wannenweihe  repels  it,  p.  674.  It  was  a  universal
practice  to  ring  the  church-bells  to  drive  the  thunder  away,  i.e.  the
heathen  god,  for  bells  are  Christian.  With  the  Thracians  shoots
ivg  was  a  safeguard  against  thunder  and  lightning  (p.  20),  as
elsewhere  against  an  eclipse,  p.  707.


THUNAR.  1347

p.  184.]  Note  the  Henneberg  saperstition  abont  the  haber-
geiss  Qr  himmeUziege,  phalangiam  opilio,  a  spider  (Maler  Müller),
in  Bruckner's  Henneb.  11.  By  horsgök  was  formerly  meant  a
real  horse,  Rnna  3;  14-5.  The  heaven's-goat  is  in  Finn,  taivaan
vuohi;  she  hovers  between  heaven  and  hell,  bleating  in  the  air,
Schiefn.  Finn.  wtb.  612.  Another  Lith.  name  for  it  is  dangaua
ozys,  Nesselm.  31,  and  Lett.  Pehrkan  ohsols,  Possart's  Eurl.  228.

The  H^misqvi'Sa  calls  Thdrr  hafra  drottinn;  his  goats  are
iann-gniostr  and  tann-grUnir,  dente  frendens,  as  Lat.  nefrendes^^
arietes  (or  porci)  nondam  frendentes,  that  have  no  teeth  yet.
Tanngniostr  (tooth-g^asher)  is  also  a  man's  by-name,  Kormaks.
54.  134-6.

p.  186.]  Donerswe]  Ehrentraat's  Fries,  arch.  1,  435.  Hpt
Ztschr.  11,  878.  de  Donrspah,  ISTotizenbl.  6,  306.  It  seems
Thuris'lo  in  Trad.  Corb.  is  not  Thonares-lö,  bat  giant's  wood,
p.  521 ;  yet  AS.  Thunresled,  Kemble  3,  443.  4,  105.  5, 84.  243.
Scand.  Thörsleff,  Molb.  dipl.  1,  173;  why  not  Thors-?  In
Sweden  are  Thorsby,  Thorshälla,  Thorslunda,  Thorstuna,  Thorsvi,
TharsAker,  Thorsdng,  Thorads,  Tliorsö,  On  Thorstuna,  -&ker,  conf.
Schlyter  Sv.  indeln.  32.  Thorseng  in  Funen,  Thorshöi  in  Schles-
wig, Miillenh.  584.  In  Norway  TkSrsey,  Thorsnes,  Thorshof,
Manch  om  Sk.  107.  Thorsnes,  Landn.  2,  12,  took  its  name  from
a  pillar  with  Thdr'a  image  being  drifted  thither.  Thorsharg^
Thorshälla,  Hildebr.  tom.  3.  Thorsborg,  Gatal.  94,  a  limestone«
moantaia  317.     Thorshafn  in  Faroe.

p.  187.]  To  the  few  German  proper  names  compounded  with
Donar,  add  Donarpreht,  Hpt  Ztschr.  7,  529.  Älbdo7iar.  is  conn,
with  the  plant  albdona.  In  Kemble  no.  337,  for  '  Thoneulf '  read
Thonerulf.  The  Sax.  Chron.,  yr.  920,  has  f^urcytel.  An  0.  Irish
name  Tordealbhach  (»Thoro  similis,  says  O'Brien)  is  worth
noting.  Thorhalli  in  the  Heidarvfgasaga.  King  Toril,  whose
lightning  scorches  the  sea,  burns  up  forests  and  devours  the  city
(Hpt  Ztschr.  4,  507-8),  is  apparently  Thor  himself;  perhaps
Torkil  ?  for  Thorild  is  fem. ;  conf.  Thorkwrl,  p.  181  n.

p.  187.]  Thdr's  by-name  of  Vingthorr,  Saem.  70*;  EindriSi,
Sup.  to  167,  foot-note.  He  is  hard-hnga^r,  Seem.  74^  as  the
iotun  is  hardralSr,  p.  528.  Again,  fdstri  Virtgnis  ok  IT/oru  =  föstri
HlorriÖa,  Sup.  to  167.  Iar9ar  burr,  earth's  son,  Saem.  70*.  68*.
157 ;  Fiorgyvjar  burr,  Hloffynjar  burr,  Yggs  barn  52*.     Is  Veorr


1348  THUNAB.

the  same  as  verr,  yir  ?  conf.  AS,  weor,  but  the  ON.  modification
would  be  viörr.

p.  188.]  Thdrr^  imagined  as  a  son  (in  the  Edda  he  is  either  a
youth  or  in  the  prime  of  manhood)^  does  not  accord  well  with  the
'  old  great^grandfatlier,'  In  Ssem.  54^  he  is  a  gveinn,  but  in  So**
Äsabragr.  Are  we  to  suppose  two  Donars^  then  ?  That  in  the
North  he  may  have  been  feared  even  more  than  OSin  seems  to
follow  from  the  fact  that  so  many  names  of  men  and  women
contain  his  name^  and  so  few  that  of  Odin.

p.  189.]  His  sons  by  larnsaza  are  Magni  and  Moffi,  Sn.  110
(conf.  p.  823),  he  himself  being  endowed  with  ikS-megin  and  is-
moär,  lamsaxa  is  elsewhere  the  name  of  a  giantess.  He  calls
himself  Magna  iaXiT,  Saam.  76*.  His  daughter  becomes  the  bride
of  AMs  48*'^;  is  she  Thrü«r,  robur,  whom  he  had  by  Sif  ?  Sn.
101-9.  He  is  himself  called  ßruffugr  ftss,  Saam.  72^  ßruffvaldr
goSa  76* ;  and  his  hammer  ßruäkamarr  67**.

p.  191.]  Neither  the  log-pelting  at  Hildesheim  (with  which
conf.  'sawing  the  old  woman/  p.  781-2)  nor  the  wJteeUroUing
near  Trier  (Hooker's  Mosel-ld.  1852,  p.  415)  can  be  connected
with  Jupiter.  The  latter  ceremony,  mentioned  first  in  1550  and
last  in  1 779,  took  place  thus.  On  the  Thursday  in  Shrove* week
an  oak  was  set  up  on  the  Marxberg  (Donnersb.,  Dummersb.),
also  a  wheel.  On  Invocavit  Sunday  the  tree  was  cut  down,  the
wheel  set  on  fire  and  rolled  into  the  Mosella  A  wheel,  especially
a  flaming  one,  is  the  symbol  of  thunder,  of  Donar ;  hence  the
lords  of  Donnersberg,  burg-vassals  to  Cochheim,  bear  it  on  their
coat-of-arms,  Hontheim  2,  5,  tab.  v.,  likewise  those  of  Roll  (thun-
der), while  those  of  Hammerstein  have  three  hammers  in  theirs.
The  Signum  of  German  legions,  the  14th  and  22nd,  was  the  rota:
there  is  a  tile  with  *  Leg.  xxii.^'  and  a  six-spoked  wheel  stamped
on  it.  Mainz  and  Osnabrück  have  such  a  wheel  on  their
scutcheon,  Mainz  as  escutcheon  of  the  legions  (Fuchses  Mainz  2,
94. 106).  Krodo  in  Bothe's  Sassenchr.  carries  a  wheel  (p.  206  n.).
Has  that  heraldic  wheel  anything  to  do  with  the  term  rädels-
föhrer,  ringleader  ?

p.  191.]  On  keeping  Thursday  holy,  see  especially  Nilsson  4,
44-5.  tre  Thorsda^s-qvaWAv,  Dyb.  Runa  4,  37.  43.  Cavallius  1,
404.  In  Swedish  fairy-tales  spirits  appear  on  thorsdags-natt,  and
bewitch.     If  you  do  any  work  on  Trinity  Sunday,  the  lightning


zio  (Tiw,  tyr).  1349

tritt  strike  it;  hence  women  are  unwilling  to  do  needlework  that
day,  Hpt  Ztschr.  8, 360.  Similar  desecration  of  holidays  by  weav-
io?i  spinning  or  knitting  is  often  mentioned ;  Servat.  2880  :

wir  säzen  unde  wäben,

do  die  lantliate  ßrten  disen  tac  •  .  .

schiere  rannen  diu  weppe  von  blnote,

daz  ez  nns  des  werkes  erwante.

A  poor  girl  spins  on  oar  Lady's  day,  the  thread  sticks  to  her
toDgae  and  lips,  Maerl.  2,  219.  Of  women  spinning  on  Saturday,
see  Mullenh.  168 ;  they  that  spool  flax  in  church- time  on  Sanday,
tarn  into  stone,  Beusch  no.  30.  Spinning  was  forbidden  on
Gertrude's  day  and  Berchta's  day,  p.  270-3 ,-  among  the  Greeks
on  Bacchos's  day,  p.  911.  Nevertheless  the  yarn  spun  on  such
holy  days  has  peculiar  virtues,  p.  1099;  conf.  the  teig-talgen,
dough-kneading  on  Holy  Saturday  night,  Superst.  G,  v.  194.
Yet  again :  Si  quis  die  t)ominico  boves  junxerit  et  cum  carro
ambulaverit,  dexterum  bovem  perdat.  Lex  Bajuv.  vi.  2,  1.


CHAPTER  IX.
ZIO    (TIW,    TYR).

p.  194.]  In  Umbrian  the  nom.  was  still  Juv,  dat.  Juve,  voc.
Ju pater,  Anfr.  u.  Kuhn  Ztschr.  1,  128:  Juveis  luvfreis,  Jupiter
liber,  Mommsen  139.  What  of  Finn,  taiva^,  coelum  ?  or  even
9ovpos,  the  Assyrian  Mars  (Suidas)  ?  A  divergent  form,  '  vater
Zi '  in  Mullenh.  nr.  410. — •— Dyaus  is  not  only  coelum,  but  a
Vasu-god,  who  for  stealing  the  cow  Nandini  has  to  go  through  a
human  life,  Holtzm.  3, 101 — 6.  Pai-allel  with  the  ideas  belonging
to  the  root  div,  are  those  developed  out  of  Sansk.  sur,  splendeo  :
$ura  dens,  surja  sol,  svar  coelum.

p.  194.]  Spiegel,  Zendav.  6,  connects  6^6^  with  dhi.  Lith.
dievas  god,  deive  goddess,  dievaitiz  (godkin)  thunderer,  dievaite
(goddesskin)  rain-goddess ;  conf.  Pott's  Etym.  forsch.  1st
ed.  56-7.     Benfey's  Orient  1,  510.

p.  195.1  Wackernagel  in  Hpt  Ztschr.  6,  19  retains  Tuisco=:
duplex,  and  explains  it  as  zwitter,  two-sexed,  just  as  Lachm.
makes  tuisc=sbimus,  two  years  old;  and  Miillenhoff  agrees  with


1360  zio  (tiw,  tyb).

them  9^  261.  In  that  case  Taisco  would  have  nothing  to  do  with
Ziu,  and  Tacitus  must  have  indicated  the  marvellous  hermaphro-
dite nature.  It  is  a  question  whether  Zio^  Tio  have  not  per-
petuated himself  in  the  alarm  and  battle  cries  zieter,  seter,
tiodute^  tianuti  and  in  ziu  dar  naher,  Parz.  651^  11 ;  see  Gramm.
3,  303.,  BA.  877.  Leo  in  Hpt  Ztschr.  5,  SI 3.  Again,  did  zw,
tie  (assembly)  originally  mean  divum,  as  in  *  sub  divo,  dio  ^  ?
The  Prov.  troubadours  have  sotz  cii6U=s  sub  divo,  under  the  open
sky,  Diez's  Leb.  d.  Troub.  1 66-7 ;  yet  it  may  mean  sub  Deo.

p.  195.]  From  div  splendeo  (Lith.  zibeti)  .come  div,  diva
coelum,  and  divan,  divasa,  divana,  contr.  dina,  dies,  Bopp  61.
168.  In  Caes.  B.  Gall.  6, 18  Diespiter  is  called  BUpater,  abl.  Bite
patre,  0.  MülL  Etr.  2,  67;  conf.  Dissunapiter,  p.  225.  The
Etruscan  panels  have  sometimes  Tinia  for  Tina.

p.  198.]  The  Germani  sacrificed  to  their  Mars  for  victory:
vestita  spoliis  donabere  quercu  (Mavors),  Claudian  in  Buf.  1, 839.
buic  praedae  primordia  vovebantur,  huic  truncia  suspendebantur
exuviae,  Jom.  5.  hostiles  siutpe^idit  in  arbore  cristas,  CI.  in  Rul
1,  346.  Kuhn  finds  many  points  of  comparison  between  Wnotan
and  the  Boman  Mare,  whom  he  takes  to  have  been  originally  a
god  of  spring.  M&rs  =  Märutas  is  a  by-name  of  Indra,  Hpt
Ztschr.  5,  491-2.  To  Tyr  Viga-guff  corresponds  '  Mars  des  wige
got'  iu  En.  5591.  Troj.  8140.  8241.  Ms.  2,  198^  :  Mars  strUes
got.  Christian  writers  suppose  an  angel  of  victory  marching  in
the  front  of  battle :  coram  eo  (Ottone  imperatore)  angelus  penes
quem  victoria.  Mars  is  a  mere  abstraction  in  Erm.  Nig.  2,  2:
straverat  adversos  Marsque  Deusqae  viros,  and  Pertz  8,  228 :  jam
per  ordinatas  omni  parte  acies  Mars  cmenttie  cepisset  frendere ;
conf.  p.  203.

p.  198.]  Ziesburc,  Augsburg,  Hpt  Ztschr.  8,  587*  Diuepureh,
Lacomb.  83  (yr  904),  Tueburg  20b  (1065),  Diusburg,  all^Duis-
burg,  Thietm.  5,  3.  9.  Düseburg,  Weisth.  4,  775.  A  Doesburgk
in  Gelders;  Tuseberg,  Tyssenberg,  Wolf  Ztschr.  1,  837.  Desberg
near  Vlotho,  Bedecker  59.  Desenberg,  Dieeenberg;  Tietede,  Hamb.
liber  actor.  331-2.  Tiieoad,  Tiiswath,  in  Jutl.,  Molb.  dipl.  1,9.
Zirelberg  near  Schwatz  in  Tyrol,  H.  Sachs  i.  3,  251';  conf .  p.
298,  Zisa,  Zieenburg,  GDS.  541.

p.  199.]  Add  Tived,  Tisved,  Tivebark,  Dyb.  1845,  50-9.  MH6.
zidelbast,  Gervinus  2,  233 ;  conf.  Zigelinta,  p.  1193.


zio  (tiw,  tyb).  1361

p.  200.]  The  very  old  symbol  of  the  planet  Mars  ^  stood
apparently  for  the  war-god's  shield  and  spear.  Here  T^r  reminds
as  of  OSinn  and  his  Güngnir^  p.  147.  With  tire  tdcnian  conf..
ttrfüBd  täcen,  Cod.  £xon.  236^  13;  sigortacen  169^  3.  sigorestacen,
friSotacen  circumcision^  note  on  Elene  156.     Casdm.  142^  29.

p.  202.]  Judges  often  held  their  court  on  Ertag,  see  Kaltenb.
1^  563**^.  580^  j  and  judgment  may  mean  war^  decision^  BA.
818-9.  Was  a  sword  set  up  in  the  court?  On  Famcurs,  Fanmars
see  GDS.  529.  619.

p.  204.]  The  .trinity  of  the  Abrenunt.  requires  a  godj  not  a
mere  hero ;  for  that  reason  if  no  other^  Sah^not  must  be  Mars^
or  at  lowest  the  Freyr  of  the  TTpsal  trinity.  With  Saxnedt
compare  lamsaxa.  Thorns  wife^  Sn.  110.  In  Pomerania  they
still  swear  by  '  doner  sexen/  in  Bavaria  '  meiner  seehsen/  Schm.
3,  193-4 ;  conf.  '  mein  six  ! '

p.  205.]  On  the  divine  Cheru  see  GDS.  612.  Lucian  supplies
additional  proofs  of  the  Scythian  worship  of  the  sword ;  Toxaris
38  :  ov  fui  yap  rov  "Avefiov  teal  tov  AtcipaKijy,  Scytha  4  :  dWa
irp09  ÄKivdicov  #cal  Zap,6\^i,So^,  t&v  irarptptov  fipZv  de&v.  Jupiter
Trag.  42  :  SscvOcu  Akivukt)  6vovt€^  koi  Qpaic€%  Zap,6\^iBt.  Conf.
Clem.  Alex,  admon.  42.  GDS.  231.  Prisons^  quoted  in  Jörn.  c.  5,
ed.  Bonn  201^  17.  224,  remarks  on  the  sword:  "Äpeo^:  ^i<f>o<:  oirep
0¥  Upov  Kai  irapä  räv  SfcvOttc&v  ßaaiXitap  TipMfLevov,  ota  Si)
T^  i<l>6p^  TÜv  TToXefLCJV  ayaxei/ievoy,  iv  toI%  irdXai  dffuiVKrörjvui
Xpovoi^,  etra  Biä  ßoo^  €vp€Ör}yai.  The  Mars  of  the  Alans  is  men-
tioned by  Lucan  8,  223  :  duros  aeterni  Martis  Alanos.  The
worship  of  lance  and  sword  among  the  Romans  is  attested  by
Justin  43,  3 :  Nam  et  ab  origine  rerum  pro  diis  immortalibus
Teteres  hastas  coluere,  ob  cujus  religionis  memoriam  adhuc  deo-
ram  simulacris  hastae  adduntur ;  and  Suet  Calig.  24 :  ires  gladios
in  necem  suam  praeparatos  Marti  ultari  addito  elogio  consecravit.
Caesar's  sward,  preserved  in  Mars's  temple  at  Cologne,  was  pre-
sented to  Yitellius  on  his  election,  Mascou  1^  117.  Later  they
knelt  before  the  sword  at  a  court-martial,  Ambraser  liederb.  370;
conf.  Osw.  2969 :

dd  viel  er  nider  üf  siniu  knie,
daz  swert  er  an  sin  hant  gevie,
und  zöch  ez  üz  der  scheide.


1352  zio  (tiw,  tyr).

der  belt  des  niht  vermeity
daz  ort  (point)  liez  er  nider.

To  Svantevit,  Saxo  ed.  Müll.  824  g^ves  a  conspieuae  granditatis
ensis.  The  Indian  Thugs  worship  on  their  knees  an  axe  or  bill,
which  is  mysterionsly  forged^  Bamasiana  (Calcatta  1836.)

The  war-god  has  also  a  helmet,  witness  the  plant  named  'Äp€o<s
Kvvrj,  Tyr-hialm,  p.  199.

p.  206.]  Hr^^-cyninges,  Cod.  Exon.  319,  4,  said  of  the  wicked
Eormanric,  and  therefore  probably  from  hr6?,  hr68e,  cradelis  (p.
290);  while  Ere9gotum  322,  8  answers  to  ON.  Eei«gotam.  '  Bei
red  brengt  raed  raed/  where  the  Walloon  has  ^  Mars,  Mars,
Coreman's  Ann^e  de  I'anc.  Belg.  16 ;  conf.  Ret-monat,  p.  290.
We  are  not  warranted  in  referring  Hrd'Srs  (or  hrdlSrs)  andscoti,
H^misq.  11,  toT^.

p.  206  n.]  Zeuss  23  believes  in  Krodo,  and  thinks  Beto  in
Letzner  is  the  same.  Crodlo,  Cod.  Laaresh.  1634;  Orodico
1342.  Croda,  Kemble  1,  143;  Creda  1,  159.  177.  Erode  duvd,
p.  248.  I  am  not  sure  but  that  Nitbart's  Krotolf  (Hpt  117)  has
after  all  a  mythical  sound,  and  it  is  followed  by  a  similar  compli-
ment Üetelgdz,  p.  367  n.  Krathabolhl  in  Lüntzel's  Hildesh.  51.
Kreetpfuhl,  Kreetkind,  DS.  1,  415,  A  'rivus  Krodenbek/  Falke'a
Trad.  Corb.  612.  Krottorf  in  Halberstadt  country,  conf.  Krotten-
stein  for  Donnerstein.

p.  207.]  Simrock  thinks  T^r  is  aneJianded  because  a  sword
has  only  one  edge.  Does  a  trace  of  the  myth  linger  in  '  swft  ich
weiz  des  wolves  zant  (tooth),  d&  wil  ich  hüeten  (take  care  of)
miner  hant/  Freid.  137,  23  f  or  in  the  proverb  'brant  stant  as
dem  dode  (Tio  ?)  sine  rechte  hant/  Wolf  Ztschr.  1,  337  ?  Conf.
the  Latin  phrases :  pugnare  aequo,  pari,  certo,  ancipite,  dubio,  vario,
proprio,  suo  Marte.  Widukind  has  coeco  Marte  1,  6,  like  coeco
farore  1,  9.  When  fighters  see  the  battle  going  against  them,
they  leave  off,  and  acknowledge  d>9  irpo^  rbv  Oeov  a<l>iaiv  6  ayitf
ryivoiro,  Procop.  2,  641.  The  fickleness  of  victory  is  known  to
the  Od.  22,  236  :  odirm  irar/j^y  Bl8ov  erepaXxia  vitetfv  (conf.  'ein
Hie-und-dort,'  Geo.  5748).  Victory  and  lack  are  coupled  to-
gether: sig  und  saelden  geben,  Albr.  Tit.  2920-33.  an  sig  u.
sadden  verderben  2929.  •

p.  208.]     Companions  of  Mars :  circumque  atrae  Formidinis


FRO  (fbetb).  135S

ora«  Iraeqne  InsidicLeqae,  dei  comitatus,  agantur^  Aen.  12^  335.
Lucius  comitatur  euntem  (Tisiphonen)^  Et  Pavar  et  Terror,  trepi-
doque  Insania  vultu,  Ov.  Met.  4,  485.  Bellona,  Favor,  Formido,
Claad.  in  Ruf.  1,  342;  MetiM  cum  fratre  Pavore,  De  laud.  Stil.;
hwpetus  horribiUsque  Metus,  la  Pr.  et  Oljbr.  78.  Beifkara  iraviicd,
Procop.  2,  550.  panicus  terror,  Forcell.  sub  vv.  pan,  panicus.
A  ptkuio  foliage-rustling  fright,  Garg.  256^.  So  the  Wend,  volksl.
2,  266*  make  Triakh,  Strakh  dwell  in  a  dismal  haunted  spot ;  SI.
triakh,  trios,  tremor,  is  perh.  the  Goth.  J'lahs.  The  Finn,  kammo
= genius  horroris,  horror.  There  is  an  ON.  saying:  '  Ottar  er
fremst  t  flocki  \f&  fl^a  skal ' ;  is  that  from  otti,  timor  7  conf.  the
Öttar  in  Hjndlulio^.  '  Thä  skaut  (shot)  )>eim  skelk  i  bringu '
.  .  'skaut  skelk  i  bringu  ok  otta/  where  skelk  and  dtta  are
accusatives  of  skelkr  and  6tti,  timor.  Goth,  agis  disdraus  ina,
awe  fell  upon  him,  Luke  1, 12 ;  conf.  AS.  Broga  and  Egesa,  Andr.
xxzii.  and  diu  nsAii-egese,  Diemer  266,  23.  OHG.  gefieng  th6
all6  forhta,  fear  took  hold  of,  T.  49,  5.  There  is  personification
also  in  the  Romance '  negus  neu  pot  ir,  si  nos  torna  espavers,  Albig.
4087.  A  different  yet  lively  description  is,  '  so  that  the  cat  ran
up  tlieir  backs,'  Garg.  256^  218».  Beside  Hilda-Bellona  (p.  422)
appears  a  male  Hildofr,  Sasm.  75^,  like  Berhtolt  beside  Berhta.

p.  208]  Tyr,  who  in  the  HymisqviiSa  accompanies  Thor  to
the  abode  of  Hymir,  calls  the  latter  his  father,  and  Hymi's  con-
cubine his  mother;  he  is  therefore  of  giant  extraction;  conf.
Uhland's  Thor  162-3.  Is  this  T^r  not  the  god,  as  Sim  rock  sup-
poses him  to  be  (Edda,  ed.  2,  404)  ?


CHAPTER    X
PRO    (i^RBTR).

p.  210.]  The  Yngl.  13  calls  Preyr  veraldar  god,  Saxo  calls
Fro  deorum  satrapa.  Goth,  frduja  stands  not  only  for  xvpio^,  but
for  0609.  The  Monachus  Sangall.  says  (Pertz  2,  733) :  tunc  ille
verba,  quibus  eo  tempore  superiores  ab  inferioribus  honorari
demulcerique  vel  adulari  solebant,  hoc  modo  labravit :  '  laete  vir
domine,  laetifice  rex  1 '  which  is  surely  'fro  herro  1 '  OS.,  beside
fr6,  etc.,  has  the  form /rtioAo,  Hel.  15t3,  1 ;  if  it  had  a  god's  name
Fr6,  that  would  account  for  Frös'ä,  i.e.  Fr6's  aha,  ouwa,  ea.


1354  "   FRO  (fbeyr).

AS.  has  other  compounds,  fredbeorht  (freahbeort)  limpidas.  Lye
and  Hpt  Ztschr.  9,  408*;  fredtorht  Hmpidus  9,  611»,  conf.  Donar-
perht ;  fredraede  expeditus  (freahraBde,  Lye);  freÄdrßman  jubilare,
fre&bodian  nnntiare;  a  fem.  name  Fred  ware,  Beow.  4048.  In
Lohen  gr.  150,  zuo  dem  /ron  =  to  the  holy  place.  ON.  has  also  a
frann  nitidus,  coruscus.  From  Fris.  fr&na  may  we  infer  a  fra
dominus  ?  Bopp  (61.  229*)  conject.  that  frduja  may  have  been
frabuja,  and  be  conn,  with  Skr.  prabhn,  dominus  excelsus ;  yet
irpav^,  mild,  seems  to  He  near  [SIby, prav  rectus,  sequns,  pracUi
regere,  would  conn,  the  meanings  of  probus,  irpafo^^  and  fr&uja] .

p.  212.]  Freyr  oc  Freyja,  Saem.  59.  He  resembles  Bacchns
Liber,  Aiovvao^  o  ^\€v6ipio<;.  Paus.  i.  29,  2,  and  Jovis  lufreis,
liber.  From  his  marriage  with  GerSr  (p.  309)  sprang  Fiölnir,
Yngl.  12,  14.  Saxo  ed.  M.  120  likewise  mentions  his  temple  at
Upsal :  Fro  quoque,  deorum  satrapa,  sedem  hand  procul  UpsaUi
cepit.  Froi  gives  food  to  men,  Faye  10.  The  god  traveUing
through  the  country  in  his  car  resembles  Älber,  who  with  larded
feet  visits  the  upland  pastures  (alpe)  in  spring.  Wolf  Ztschr.  2,
62 ;  conf.  Garm.  Bnrana  131* :  '  redit  ab  exilio  Ver  coma  rutilante,'
and  the  converse :  *  Aestas  in  exilium  jam  peregrinatur,'  ibid,
(like  Summer,  p.  759) ;  *  serato  Ver  earcere  exit,'  ib.  135.

p.  213  n.]  On  the  phallus  carried  about  in  honour  of  Dionysos
or  Liber  by  the  Egyptians,  Greeks  and  Romans,  see  Herod.  2, 48.
Härtung  2, 140.  <^aX\ol  kcrraai  iv  roiat  irpoirvXaioKri  Svo  Kopra
fieyakotf  Lucian  De  dea  Syra  16,  where  more  is  told  about  phalli,
conf.  28-9.  An  'idolum  priapi  ex  anro  fabrefactum  '  in  Pertz
5,  481.  Phalli  hung  up  in  churches  at  Toulouse  and  Bordeaux,
Westendp.  116.  The  0.  Boh.  for  Priapus  was  PHpelcal,  Jungm.
sub  v.,  or  Pripegala,  Mone  2,  270  out  of  Adelgar  in  Mar  tone  1,
626.     Slov&n.  Jeurenet,  kurent,  Serv.  kuraU

p.  214.]  OnllinbursU,  conf.  guilt  byrstum,  Sn.  104.  There  is
a  plant  gullborst,  which  in  German  too  is  ebervmrzy  boarwort,
p.  1203.  The  Herv.  saga  c.  14  (p.  463.  531)  in  one  passage
assigns  the  boar  to  Freyr,  in  the  other  (agreeing  with  Ssem.  114*)
to  Freyja.  Perhaps  the  enormous  boar  in  the  OHG.  song,  Hat-
tem.  3,  578,  and  the  one  that  met  Olaf,  Fomm.  sog.  5,  165,  were
the  boar  of  Freyr.  In  thrashing  they  make  a  pig  of  straw,  Schm.
2,  502,  to  represent  the  boar  that '  walks  in  the  corn'  wnen  the
ears  ripple  in  the  breeze,  conf.  AS.  g&rsecg,  ON.  lagastafr;  'the


FRO  (pbeyb).  1355

wild  sow  ia  the  corn/  Meier  schw.  149.  Bocholtz  2,  187;  Me
willen  fftffine  Iftpet  drupe/  Schambach  118^.

p.  215.]  On  eoforcumbul  conf.  Andr.  and  El.  28-9.  Tristan
has  a  boar-shield,  4940.  6618.  Frib.  1944;  'hevedes  of  wild-
bare  (boars)  ich-on  to  presant  brought/  Thom.  Tristrem  1,  75.
Wr&sn,  wraesen  (Andr.  97)  in  Fred-wrasnum  is  vinculum,  and
Preyr  '  leyttir  or  höptom  (bonds)  hvern/  Ssem.  65*  (conf.  p.  1231).
A  helmet  in  Hrolf  Kr.  saga  is  named  Hildisvin  and  Hildigoltr.
Does  '  'Eelmnbt  Eleuther^  in  Walthar.  1008-17  conceal  a  divine
Fro  and  Liber  ?

p.  215.]  On  the  hoards  head  served  up  at  Christmas,  see
Hone's  Tab.-bk  1,  85  and  Bveryday-bk  1,  1619-20.  guldsviu
som  lyser,  Asbjö.  386 ;  the  giant's  jul^galt,  Cavallius  26 ;  juUhos,
sinciput  verrinum,  Caval.  Voc.  Verland.  28^

p.  216.]  SlAShlaÖnir  is  from  ski%,  sktiSi,  asser,  tabula;  Rask,
Afh.  1,  365,  sees  in  it  a  light  Finl.  vessel.  Later  stories  about  it
in  MuUenh.  453.  The  Yngl.  saga  gives  the  ship  to  OSinn,  but  in
S»m.  45^  and  Sn.  48.  132  it  is  Frey's.

p.  217.]  Freyr  is  the  son  of  Niör9r  and  8ka9i,  who  calls  him
'  ennfroöi  afi,'  Seem.  81*.  She  is  a  giant's,  piazi's,  daughter,  as
GrerSr  is  Gymi's ;  so  that  father  and  son  have  wedded  giantesses.
The  story  is  lost  of  Freyr  and  Belt,  whom  Freyr,  for  want  of  his
sword,  slays  with  a  buck's  horn  or  his  fist,  Sn.  41 ;  hence  he  is
called  bani  Beija,  Seem.  9*.  Freyr,  at  his  teething,  receives
Alfheim,  Ssem.  40^.

Many  places  in  Scand.  preserve  the  memory  of  Freyr :  Froso,
Norw.  dipl. ;  conf.  Frosd,  Sup.  to  210.  Fröjrak  (Freyraker),
Dipl.  norv.  1,  542.  Fröslund,  Dipl.  suec.  2160;  Fröswi  1777;
Frösberg  2066.  Frösäker  in  Vestmanl.,  Dyb.  i.  3,  15.  Schlyter
Sv.  indeln.  34.  Fröslöff  in  Zealand,  Molb.  dipl.  1,  144  (yr  1402).
Fröskog  in  Sweden,  Buna  1844,  88.  Fröeunda,  Frösved,  Frösön,
Frötuna,  Frölunda,  Fröjeslunda,  all  in  Sweden.  Frotunum,  Dipl.
suec.  228.  Fryeled,  in  Jönköpings-Iän  is  styled  in  a  doc.  of  1313
(Dipl.  suec.  no.  1902)  Fröle  or  Fröale;  a  Fröel  in  the  I.  of  Goth-
land appears  to  be  the  same  name,  in  which  Wieselgr.  409  finds
ferf=:leiiS,  way;  may  it  not  be  eled,  eld,  fire?  Niardarkof  ok
Freyshof,  Munch  om  Sk.  147.  Vroinlo,  now  Vronen  in  West
Fries!.,  Böhmer  reg.  28.  Mtillenh.  Nordalb.  stud.  138.  A  man's
name  Freysteinn  is  formed  like  Thörsteinn.


1356  FRO  (fketb).

f

p.  217.]  NiörBr  is  called  vieins  vani,  innocuus^  Ssem.  42*.
S89m.  130*  speaks  of '  NiarSar  doetur  niu ;  *  nine  muses  or  waves  ?
conf.  Heimdall's  9  mothers.  NiörSr  lives  at  Noatun  on  the
sea,  and  Weinhold  in  Hpt  Ztschr.  6^  40,  derives  the  name  from
Sansk.  nira  aqua,  niradhi  oceanus;  add  Nereiuf  and  Mod.  6r.
vepov.  Schaffarik  1,  167  on  the  contrary  connects  NiörSr  and
Niörunn  with  Slav,  nur  terra.  Or  we  might  think  of  Finn,  nuori
juvenis,  nuorus  Juventus,  nuortua  juvenesco,  Esth.  noor  young,
fresh,  noordus  youth;  Liap.  nuor  young.  Or  of  Celtic  neart
strength,  Wei.  nerth,  Hpt  Ztschr.  3,  226;  Sabine  JTero  =  forfcia
et  strenuus,  Lepsius  Inscr.  Umbr.  205.  Coptic  neter  god  and
goddess,  Buns.  Egy.  1,  577.  Basque  nariea  north,  and  Swed.  Lap.
nuort  borealis,  not  Norw.  nor  Finn.  That  he  was  thought  of  in
conn,  with  the  North,  appears  from  '  inn  norffri  NiörSr,'  Fornm.

sog,  6,  258.  12,  151,  where  Fagrsk.  123  has  nerffri, Places

named  after  him:  Niarffey,  Landn.  2,  19.  Niatdvik  4,  2.  4.
Laxd.  364.  Niarffarlögr,  01.  Tr.  c.  102.  Fornm.  s.  2,  252  (see
12,  324).  Munches  Biörgyn  121 ;  al.  Marffa-log,  larffar-^ög.  Is
the  Swed.  Närtuna  for  Närd-tuna?  and  dare  we  bring  in  oar
Nörten  by  Göttingen  7  Thorlacius  vii.  91  thinks  niarff-las  in  Som.
109^  means  sera  adstricta,  as  niarff-giorS  is  arctum  cingalam
[niarS-  =  tight,  fast,  or  simply  intensive].  What  means  the
proverb  'galli  ev  k  gicf  Niarffar^  ^  NiörSüngr?  61.  Edd.  Hafn.
1,  632^

p.  218.]  .  Bask  also  (Saml.  afh.  2,  282-3)  takes  the  Vanir  for
Slavs,  and  conn.  Heimdall  with  Bielbogh.  I  would  rather  sup-
pose a  Yanic  cult  among  the  Goths  and  other  (subseq.  High
German)  tribes^  and  an  Asic  in  Lower  Germany  and  Scandi»
navia,  Kl.  sehr.  5, 423  seq.  436  seq.  '  Over  hondert  milen  henen,
Daer  wetic  (wot  I)  enen  wilden  Wenen*  Walew.  5938  ;  appar.  an
elf,  a  smith,  conf.  Jonckbloet  284.

p.  219.]  OSin's  connexion  with  Freyr  and  NiörSr^  pointed
out  on  p.  348,  becomes  yet  closer  through  the  following  circum-
stances. OSinn,  like  Freyr,  is  a  god  of  fertility.  Both  are  said  to
own  SkiSblaSnir  (Sup.  to  216),  both  GerSr,  p.  309.  Fiölnir,  son
of  Freyr  and  GerSr,  is  another  name  of  OSinn^  Sssm.  46^  (p.  348).
SkaSi,  NiörS's  wife  and  Frey's  mother,  is  afterwards  OSin's
spouse.


PALTAB   (BALDEB).  1357

CHAPTER  XL
PALTAR  (BALDER).

p.  220.]  Ace.  to  Saxo,  ed.  M.  124^  Hotherus  is  son  to  Hoth'
brodas  rex  Sueciae^  and  brother  to  Atislus  (the  AiSils  of  Yngl.  s.) ;
Nanna  is  daughter  to  Gevarus  (OHG.  Kepaberi)^  and  no  goddess^
indeed  she  rejects  on  that  ground  the  suit  of  the  divine  Balder.
Balder  seems  almost  to  live  in  Saxony  or  Lower  Germany  •  the
Saxon  Gelderus  is  his  ally  and  Hother's  enemy,  and  shares
Balder'a  overthrow.  Balder  has  come  to  Zealand,  apparently
from  Saxony;  he  never  was  in  Sweden.  Saxo  makes  Nanna
fall  to  the  lot,  not  of  Balder,  but  of  Hother,  who  takes  her  with
him  to  Sweden.  Balder,  mortally  wounded  by  Hother,  dies  the
third  day.  The  tale  of  king  Bolder's  fight  with  king  Hother  is
told  in  Schleswig  too,  but  it  makes  Bolder  the  victor,  Miillenh.
373  ;  conf.  the  tale  of  Balder  and  Rune  606.

p.  221.]  Paltar  also  in  MB.  9, 23  (year  837) .  '  Baldor  servus,'
Polypt.  de  S.  Remig.  55*.  Baaldaich,  Nengart  no.  289.  Lith.
baltas= white,  good  (conf.  Baldr  inn  ^odt,  Sn.  64),  baltorus  a
pale  man ;  and  the  notions  white  and  quick  often  meet,  as  in  Gr.
af}y6^,  Passow  sub  v.

p.  222.]  A  god  BaldacK  is  named  in  the  legend  of  St.  Bar«
tholomew  (Leg.  anr.  c.  118),  also  in  the  Passional  290,  28;  but
in  the  Mid.  Ages  they  said  Baldach  for  Bagdad,  and  Baldewins
for  Bedouins.  Svipdagr,  MenglöÄ's  lover,  is  the  son  of  Sölbiört
(snn-bright)  and  Gr6a.  To  the  proper  names  add  Ostertac,  which
answers  best  of  all  to  Bceldoeg  ^  dies  ignis.  Conf.  also  the  Celtic
Bel,  BelenuB,  ^.  613.

p.  222.]  Baldr's  beaming  beauty  is  expr.  in  the  saying :  fätt
er  liott  a  Baldri;  but  what  means  the  Icel.  saw  :  logi9  hefir  Baldr
at  BaJdrij  Pomm.  sog.  6,  257  ?  Prom  his  white  eyebrow-^a
feature  ascr.  also  to  Bödvildr,  '  meyna  bra-hvito/  Sasm.  139^  and
to  Artemis  Xevtcoff^pvvri — the  anthemis  cotula  is  called  Ballerbro,
Fries,  ndfl.  1,  86 ;  conf.  Dyb.  1845,  p.  74.  He  gives  name  to
Balderes  Ißge,  Kemble,  5,  117  (863),  and  Balteres  eih,  oak.

On  BreiSablik,  conf.  p.  795 ;  add  '  in  manigen  breiten  blichen,'
Tr.  kr.  42475.  Midsummer  was  sacred  to  Balder,  and  the  Chris-
tians seem  to  have  put  St.  John  in  his  place.     The  mistletoe,

'VOL.  IV.  o


1358  PALTAB   (BALDBB).

with  which  he  was  slain^  has  to  be  cat  at  that  time,  Dyb.  Bana
1844,  21-2.  Do  the  fires  of  John  commemorate  the  burning
of  Balder's  body  ?  In  Tegner's  Frithiofss.  xiii.,  Baldersbal  is
lighted  ai  Midsummer. — '  Hvat  maelti  (spake)  OSinn,  a%r  k  \A\
stigi,  sialfr  t  eyra  syni  (in  his  son's  ear)  7 '  Sssm.  88^ ;  otherw.
'  i  eyra  Baldri,  a'Sr  hann  var  &  bäl  borinn  ? '  Fomald.  sog.  1,
487.  Conf.  Plaut.  Trinum.  *j.  2,  170  :  *  sciunt  id  quod  in  aurem
rex  reginae  dixerit,  sciunt  quod  Juno  fabulata  est  cum  Jove/  i.e.
the  greatest  secrets.

p.  224.]  Hö9r  is  called  Baldwr$  bani,  B.  andskoii^  Sasm.  95**  ^\
he  is  brought  and  laid  on  the  funeral  pile  (&  b&I)  by  his  slayer
the  newborn  Yali,  ibid.  The  Edda  does  not  make  him  out  a  god
of  war,  nor  does  the  ON,  höSr  mean  pugna ;  but  the  AS.  heado
does  (Eemb.  Beow.  vol.  1,  and  in  healSol&f,  Beow.  914),  so  does
the  Ir.  cath.  In  Sa^o,  Eothems  is  a  Swed.  hero,  and  not  blind,
but  skilled  in  the  bow  and  harp  (ed.  M.  Ill :  citharoedus  123) ;
he  is  &Youred  by  wood-nymphs,  and  gifbed  with  wound-proof
raiment  and  an  irresistible  sword.  Is  the  Swed.  tale  of  Blini
Halt,  Cavall,  363,  to  be  conn,  with  him  7  Consider  Hadoläva,
Hadeln,  Hatheleria,  Hadersleben;  and  Hothers-nes  (now  Hor-
sens  ?)  in  Jutland  is  supposed  to  be  named  after  him,  Saxo  122.
An  AS.  Hea'Sobeard,  like  Longbeard.

Hermodr  is  in  Sögubrot  (Fomald.  s.  1, 873)  called  '  bazt  hugalSr,'
and  'likeHelgi/  i.e.  comparable  to  Helgi.  In  Beow.  1795  he
is  named  immed.  after  Sigemund ;  he  falls  into  the  power  of  the
Eotens,  and  brings  trouble  on  his  people;  again  in  3417  he  is
blamed.  Does  Hermd^r  mean  miUtandi  fessus  ?  OHG.  Heri-
muot,  Herimaot  (never  Herimuodi),  is  against  it.  HermSdesßom
in  Kemb,  Chart.  3,  387 ;  '  terra  quae  Anglice  Hermodesodes  nun-
cupatur,'  Chartol.  mon.  S.  Trinitatis  (Gu^rard  S.  Bertin  455) .

p.  224.]  The  spell  is  given  p.  1231-2.  On  Phol,  see  Kl.
sehr.  2, 12—17.  F.  Wächter  in  the  Hall.  Encycl.  1845,  art.  Pferd,
pronounces  phol  the  plur.  of  a  strong  nent.  noun  phol,  a  foal.
Thus :  '  foals  and  W6dan  fared  in  the  wood.'  Bat  the  poem
itself  uses  for  foal  the  weak  (the  only  correct)  form  volo;  and
what  poet  would  think  of  naming  the  god's  horse  or  horses
beside,  and  even  before,  the  god  himself  ?  Again,  was  ever  a
running  horse  said  to  fahren  f

p.  226.]    Pfalsau  is  called  Pfoals-owa,  MB.  4,  519  (circ.  1126);


PALTAB   (BALDEB).  1369

PhoU^hau  4,  229;  and  PhoU^u  4,  219.  222-3.  PhüU^ouua,  No-
tizenbl.  6,  141.  Phols-owe,  Bair.  quellen,  1,  279.  To  the  'eas'
enamer.  in  Hpt.  Ztschr.  2^  254,  add  '  des  Wunsches  ouwe/  Gerh.
2308;  'der  junefrouwen  wert*  Iw.  6326  (Guest  196^  lille  at
paceles);  Qotis-werder  in  Prussia,  Lindenbl.  31.  150.  With
Pholet'piuni  conf.  other  names  of  places  also  compounded  with
the  gen.  case:  Ebnres-piant,  Tutilis-p.,  Heibistes-bunta  (Fin.
Wirceb.).

p.  226.]  PfoMbronn  by  Loroh,  Stalin  1,  85.  Pohlborn  on  the
Devil's  Dike,  Wetterau,  p.  1022-3.  Johannes  de  Paleborne,  jv
1300  (Thür.  mitth.  iv.  2,  48) ;  is  this  our  Paderborn  ?  and  may
that  town,  called  in  L.  German  Padelborn,  Palborn,  Balbom,  be
one  of  Balder's  bums  ?  Balbom  in  the  Palatinate,  Weisth.  1,
778-9.  Balde-bumen,  .borne,  Böhmer's  Reg.  231-2,  yr  1302.
Heinrich  von  Pfols-prundi,  surgeon,  brother  of  the  Tent.  Order
about  1460.  Polbom,  a  family  name  at  Berlin.  In  H.  of  Fritz-
lar,  January  or  February  is  Volbome,  conf.  the  man's  name  VolU
born,  Fülld)om,  also  Faulbom,  GDS.  798.  [Plenty  of  Ful-bums,
-becks,  brooks,  -meres,  -hams,  etc.  in  Engl.]  A  PaUgunse  (and
Eirch-gnnse)  in  the  Wetterau,  Arnsb.  urk.  no.  439;  de  phal-
gunse,  p.  267;  palgunse,  p.  298.  Pholnrade,  Thür.  mitth.  vi.
3,  2.  Pfulnrode,  4,  47.  66.  Fulesbutle,  Lappenb.  urk.  no.  805.
812,  yr  1283-4,  now  Fulhsbüttel.  Balderslee  in  Schleswig  is
supposed  to  contain  hlie  refugium,  and  appar.  answers  to  the
place  named  Balderifuga  in  Saxo,  ed.  M.  119.

p.  227.]  That  Phol  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  12)  is  a  fondling  form  of
Balder,  Faltar,  seems  after  all  extr.  probable ;  the  differ,  of  initial

does  not  matter,  as  Liudolf  becomes  Dndo. Beside  the  Celtic

Bel,  we  might  conn.  Phol  with  Apollo,  as  an  a  is  often  prefixed
iu  Grk.  Or  with  pol  in  'Pol;  edepoll'  by  Pollux.  Or  with
phol,  ful=ihoar,  p.  996,  seeing  that  eburespiunt  answ.  to  pholes-
pinnt.  Sup.  to  226.  In  Gramm.  3,  682  I  have  expl.  volencel,
r;inniis.  Gl.  Bern.,  Diut.  2,  214^  by  fol,  fou,  stultus.  A  hero
Phohu  in  Ov.  Met.  12,  306.  On  the  Ethiop  king  Phol,  see  Hpt
Ztschr.  5,  69.

p.  228  n.]  On  l7Z/r«0HG.  Wol,  see  Hpt  Ztschr.  7, 393  ;  bet-
ter to  conn,  it  with  Goth.  Ynl}7us  8,  201 ;  yet  see  Sup.  to  163  n.

p.  229  r.]  The  whirlwind  is  called  Pulhoidchen,  Pulhaud,
Schamb.  161 ;  conf.  infra,  p.  285  n.  632-6.     Beside  Boylsperg,


1360  OTHEB  GODS.

we  find  Boylbom,  Mitth.  Thiir.  Ver.  v,  4,  60.  Fold,  see  p.
992  n.  In  Beinwald's  Henneb.  Id.  1^  37  we  find  the  phrase  ^lo
have  (or  take)  something  for  jonvfolP  means  '  to  lie  on  the  bed
yon  have  made/  Ace.  to  the  Achen  mnndart  56^  the  weavers  of
Aix  call  cloth  made  of  yam  that  they  have  cabbaged /o/ZcA«^  füll-
chen [filch?  Goth,  filhan,  to  hide].  In  Kammerforst^  the  old
ban-forest  near  Trier,  which  none  might  tread  with  gesteppten
leimeln  (nailed  shoes),  dwells  a  spirifc  who  chastises  wood-spoilers
and  scoffers:  his  name  is  Pulch,  still  a  family-name  in  Trier.
And  the  hill  ontside  the  city,  down  which  the  wheel  used  to  be
rolled  into  the  Moselle  (Sap.  to  191),  is  PuUberg.  Near  Wald-
weiler  is  a  Pohlfels,  and  in  Prüm  circuit  a  Pohlbach,

p.  229.]  Forseta-lund  (-grove)  in  Norway,  Munch's  Beskri?.
483.

p.  231.]  Villa  Forsazi  in  page  Lisgau  (Forste  near  Osterode?)
in  a  charter  of  Otto  III.,  yr  990,  BEarenberg's  Gandersheim  625.
Falke  483.  Walterus  de  Forsaten  (Forste  by  Alfeld),  Falke  890,
yr  1197.  In  Saxonia,  in  page  qui  vocatur  Firihsazi,  Einhard's
Ann.,  yr  823  (Pertz,  1,  211)  with  the  variants  :  firihsati,  fiubsazi,
frihsazi,  strihsazi,  firichsare,  virsedi;  in  Ann.  Fuld.  (Pertz  1,
358)  Firihsazi.  The  deriv.  conjectured  at  p.  232  n.,  from  fors,
cataract,  seems  the  safest,  GDS.  757.

p.  232.]  Later  stories  of  fishermen  and  sailors  at  Helgoland,
and  the  carrying  about  of  an  image  of  St.  Giet,  are  in  Mullenh.
no*  1 1 7. 1 81 .  535  ;  conf .  p.  597.  Similar  names,  often  confounded
with  it  (see  Fornm.  sog.  12,  298),  are :  Halogaland,  now  Helgeland,
in  the  north  of  Norway,  and  the  Swedish  (once  Danish)  province
of  Holland,  called  in  u3Elfred*s  Periplus  Halgoland.  Ought  we
to  write  Helgoland  ?  conf.  Heli,  p.  388.


CHAPTER  XIL
OTHER    GODS.


p.  234.]  Heimffallr  is  expL  by  Leo,  vori.  131,  as  heim-dolde,
world- tree.  If  d  instead  of  Ö  were  correct,  it  might  contain  the
AS.  deal,  dealles  (note  to  Andr.  126).  Heim*8all  viSkunnari  enn
vordr  me'S  goiSum,  Ssem.  85%  the  sverd-&s  in  fliminiiör^,  reminds


OTHBB  GODS.  1361

of  the  angel  guarding  Paradise  with  a  sword.  El.  755,  &c.  His
blowing  a  horn  when  Surtr  approaches  recalls  "  the  last  trump ''

{}>at-haum,  Ulph.),  1  Cor.  15,  52. A  Himiles-berc  in  Moneys

Anz.  6,  228 ;  ek.Heofen-feld  in  Northumb.,  Lye  sub  v. Heim-

?allr  is  called  Vindler,  Sn.  105,  Vindlere  in  Resen. Of  Finnish

gods,  Ahti  or  Lemminkäinen  has  the  sharpest  ears,  Kalev.  17,  7

(Anshelm  8,  64  speaks  of  hearing  the  grass  grow). H.  is  son

of  05inn  by  9  mothers,  Sn.  211*.  Laxd.  saga  p.  392;  does  it
mean  his  father  had  9  wives  ?  The  Romans  called  their  Liber
bUmater ;  conf,  the  name  Quatremdre.

p.  234.]  Bigr  is  siigandi,  gangandi,  Seem.  lOO*.  105*.  In
Tngl.  p.  20  he  is  the  first  Danish  king ;  his  son  Danpr  has  a
daoghter  Dr6tt,  the  mother  of  Dyggvi,  and  a  son  Dagr.  Seem.
106^  names  *Banr  ok  Danpr ^  together;  conf.  P.  Magn.  lex.
p.  670.

p.  235.]  Bragi  is  hecksJcrautudr,  scamnorum  decus.  Seem  6P ;
brother  of  Dagr  and  Sigrftn  164;  pi.  bragnar  dat.  brögnnm,
simply  viri  152*.

p.  236.]  A  Bumacher  in  Förstern.  2,  4 ;  brunnacker  in  H.
Meyer's  Zürch.  ortsn.  523.  Weisth.  1,  119;  hence  prob,  the  man's
name  Bninacker  in  Konr.  v.  Weinsb.  3,  4.

p.  237.]  The  t>ager  on  the  Trent,  Oarlyle's  Hero-worship.
AS.  eagor\  in  Bailey's  Diet.  eoyer= flood- tide.  The  Finnish
sea-god,  with  beard  of  grass,  sitting  on  a  water-lily,  is  Ahto^
Ahti,  gen.  Ahin,  Kalev.  22,  301.  29,  13.  15;  conf.  my^KI.  sehr.
3,  122.

p.  238.]  Like  Oegi's  helm  is  the  Exhelmer  stein  on  a  hill  in
the  Eellergebirge,  Hess.  Ztschr.  1,  245.  On  Grimr  cegir,  see  p.
1017.  In  the  helmet  Mit  ein  hiltegrin/  Dietr.  drachenk.  11;
galeae  minaci,  Clandian  in  Prob,  et  Olybr.  92;  terribilem  galeam,
Virg.  Aen.  8,  620.

p.  238.]  Oegir  is  a  iotann,  H^m.  8 ;  a  bergbui  2.  The  ON.
%n,  f., = terror  and  ocean;  ognar  Ziowi=gold,  Ssem.  152*;
ogorlig  Oegisdottor  158*  ;  öfemiÖr  =  Oegir,  Egills.  618.  What
means  Oegis-heimr,  Ssem.  124-5  ?  Egisleiba,  Agistadium,  Hpt's
Ztschr.  8,  588 ;  Agasul  on  L.  Zurich  2,  536,  formed  like  Agadora
(Eider,  p.  239  ?)     oegisandr,  sea-sand,  Bari.  26,  20.

p.  240.]  Eles  deettr  &  v!«  blÄsu.  her  er  sjor  kalla«r  Hier,
\yi  at  hann  hlyr  allra  minnz,  Sn,  332;  hl^r  =  egelidus,  tepidus.


1362  OTHEB  GODS.

OHG.  lÄo.  r&wer,  Graflf  2,  294;  Ir.  lir,  Conan  83-4-9.  93,  192-3.
Diarmid  87. 1 12-4-6  ;  also  har,  Learthonn,  T;  7.

p.  242.]  As  Logt,  the  '  villi-eldr/  Sn.  60^  is  son  to  giant
Forniotr,  so  is  LoJci  a  son  of  giant  Farbaati.  Th^  eating-match
betw.  Loki  and  Logi  is  like  that  of  Herakles  and  Lepreas^  Athen»,
p.  412.     Pans.  5,  5.     Prometheas  is  chained  to  the   rock  by

Hepheestüs,  Loki  by  Logi. Loki,  '  sft  er  flestu  ilia  rae^r/  is

hatefal  to  the  gods  :  er  oil  regin  oegja,  Thorl.  sp.  6,  38 ;  s&  inn
laevUi  Loki,  Ssdin.  67^ ;  in  folksongs  'Loke  leve/  Wieselgr.  384-5,
in  Danish  '  Loke  lyemand/  conf .  the  name  Liuuiso,  Liniso,  Trad,
fold.  2,  32-43 ;  in  Norweg.  '  hin  onde/  Hallager,  as  Oden  is  in
L  828 ;  for  Lokkens  havre  we  have  '  den  ondes  hafre,  Dybeck  rana
1847,  30-1.-— —There  is  a  saying:  'leingi  geingrüoii  ok  Tharr

(»lightning  and  thunder),  Idttir  ei  hr^Sum,'  the  storm  lasts.

ßask  thinks  the  name  akin  to  Finn,  lokki,  wolf;  some  may  think
it  an  abbrev.  of  Lucifer  1  Uhland  takes  Loki  to  be  the  locker-up,
conehtder  of  all  things,  as  Heimdall  is  originator.  To  Logi  conf.
Halogi  for  Hölgi,  Sn.  128.  154.     F.  Magn.  lex.  p.  981.

p.  1243.]  '  Ik  bede  di  grindel  an  deser  helle/  TJpstandinge  553,
seems  almost  to  mean  a  personal  devil.   ,

p.  243  n.]  It  is  true,  another  race  of  rulers  beside  the  Ases  is
imagined,  one  of  whom,  Oylfi  king  of  Sweden,  sets  out  as  gangleri
(pilgrim)  to  spy  out  the  Ases  (Sn.  1.2.2,  &c.),  but  is  cheated  by
them.  But  this  is  an  imitation  of  Eddie  lays,  which  make  OSinn
as  gangly  and  gangr&^r  travel  to  the  giants,  and  talk  with  them.
Sasm.  31-2;  conf.  -4egfir*«  journey  to  Asgard,  and  his  dialogue  with
Bragi,  Sn.  79,  Ac.

p.  245.]  In  Seem.  37»  Fenrir  pursues  Alf-rö?ull,  which  must
mean  the  moon,  the  '  sun  of  the  elves ' ;  conf.  '  festr  mun  slitna
eun  Frecki  renna,'  SsBm.  7-8.  '  man  dbundinn  Fenris-ülfr  fara,'
Hakonarm.  23.  *  Loki  li'Sr  or  bdndum,'  Seem.  96*  (conf.  to^ttnn
losnar  8* ;  is  this  Loki  or  Surtr  ?     Loki  is  Isagiarnliki  ftj^eckr,

monstro  similis  7*). Loki  is   caught  by  piazi,  Sn.  81,  and

expressively  chained  70  (conf.  Seem.  7') ;  so  is  Fenrir  33-4-5 ;
conf.  the  chained  giant  (Suppl.  to  544),  chained  devil  (p.  1011),

chained  Eronos  (p.  832  n.). Loki's  daughter  Hel  esp.  makes

it  likely  that  he  too  was  common  to  all  Teut.  nations.

p.  247.]  AS.  8ator4äSe,  panicum  crusgalli,  is  a  grass  like  the
aypmari^  sown  by  Kronos  (SuppL  to  1192).     One  is  reminded  of


GODDBSSBS— BABTH.  1369

Satami  doliam  by  'Luci/fer  sedens  in  dolvo/  Upstandinge  p.  41,
aod '  des  tiuvels  vaz*  Hpt's  Ztsclir.  1,  327.  What  means  the
ON.  scatumir,  Sn.  222^  ?

p.  248-9.]  Delins  pp.  41.  50  cites  hrodenduvel^  Tcroden-hQxxkßr,
Jprojen-kind ;  is  the  first  ont  of  Botho  ?  In  a  Hildesheim  MS.
of  the  16th  cent.,  Frosch-mens,  we  read  :  'pravi  spiritnsj  id  est^
de  kroden  duveW  in  contrast  with  the  good  holdes.      In   Hh.

Vni*  :    '  misshapen  as  they   paint  the  kroden  teuffeU Jor-

nandes  de  regn.  sncc.  p.  m.  2  has  the  pedigree  '  Saturnas,  Picas,
Faunns,  Latinos' ;  conf.  p.  673  and  GD3.  120.


CHAPTER  XIII.
GODDESSES.

p.  250  n.]  The  MHG.  gotinne  is  in  Sasm.  115*  ^^*a,  yet  in
114^  ey  trA^i  Ottarr  k  aaynjor,  and  61*heilir  aesir,  heilar  dsynjor!
conf.  wdvre:  re  0eol  traaalre  Oiaipai,  II.  8^  5.  19, 101.  Od.  8, 341.
This  word  goddess  acquired  a  lower  sense,  being  used  by  the
people  for  fair  dames  and  pretty  lasses,  Lindpr.  antap.  4,  13.
'Ermegart  Himel-jofin/  Buckert^s  Lndwig  97.  What  is  the
goiin  in  Nithart  MSH.  3,  288*,  who  goes  '  unter  dem  fanen  Az
dem  vorst,  wol  geammet/  and  is  led  out  on  the  green  under  blue
skg  (baldachin),  apparently  by  peasants  at  an  old  harvQst-festi«
val?    conf.  fee,  Suppl.  to  410.

p.  251.]  OHG.  ero,  earth,  answers  to  Ssk.  tVd,  Ir.  ire,  GDS.
55.  Tellve  might  be  for  terulus,  as  puella  for  puerula,  but  the
gen.  is  telluris,  conf.  Ssk.  talay  fundus.  *Eumu8  is  Ssk.  xam&.
laia,  called  irpmrofiavTi^  in  ^sch.  Eum.  2,  corresponds  to  Ssk.
gausy  go,  cow  (p.  665),  the  cow  being  mother  of  the  world  (p.  559) :
&  yrj  Koi  Oeol,  a  frequent  Attic  invocation.  ON.  fold  is  unper-
sonal, yet  is  greeted  in  Sssm.  194*:  heil  sü  hin  fioln^ta  fold!

6D8.  60  (p.  254). Iör9,  earth,  is  called  lonakr's  tree-green,

oak-green  daughter:  dottur  Onars  viiSi-groen,  Sn.  123;  eiki-
groent  Onars  flioS,  Fomm.  sog.  1,  29.  12,  27.  She  is  daughter
of  night  in  Ssom.  194*:  heil  noti  ok  nipt/  but  who  is  eorSan
hrofcr,  Cod.  Exon.  490,  23  ?  lor»  is  also  mother  of  Meili,  Thor's
brother,  Saem.  76»;  Iör8=Ftorji(n  80"»  (p.  172). Ot  Rindr  and


1364  OODDBSSES.

her  relation  to  08in :  '  seid  Yggr  til  Bindr,'  Y.  amores  Rindae
incantamentis  sibi  conciliavit^  Sn.  1848.  1^  236.  Is  AS.  hruse
(terra)  contained  in  gnjusebanh,  tarf-bench^  Sohm.  von  Wem.
114?

p.  251  n.]  At  Attila's  grave  too  the  servants  are  killed :  'et
at  tot  et  tantis  divitiis  humana  cnriositas  arceretur,  operi  depu-
tatoa  truddarunt,  emersitque  momentanea  mors  sepelientibns  cam
sepalto/  Jom.  cap.  49.  The  Dacian  king  Decebalas  buries  his
treasure  ander  the  bed  of  the  Sargetia^  Cass.  Dio  68,  14.  Giese-
brecht  supposes  the  Wends  had  the  same  custom^  Bait.  stud.  11,
28.9.

p.  252.]  Nerthus  is  the  only  true  reading,  says  Müllenhoff,
Ept's  Ztschr.  9,  256 ;  Erthas  is  admissible,  think  Zenss  and
Bessel.  Nerthus  answers  to  Ssk.  Nritus,  terra,  Bopp  202^ ;  conf.
C.  Hofmann  in  Ztschr.  der  morgenl.  ges.  1847.  A  thesis  by  Pyl,
Medea,  Berol.  1850  p.  96  derives  it  fr.  LG.  nerder,  nerdrig,  conf.
viprepo^.  Her  island  can  hardly  be  Bügen  (p.  255-6),  but  perhaps
Fernem  or  Alsen,  says  Müllenh.,  Nordalb.  stad.  1,  128-9.  Her
oar  stood  in  the  grove  (templum)  under  a  tree,  Giefers.  '  Nerthas,
id  est.  Terra  mater  *  strongly  reminds  of  Pliny's  mater  deum  18,
4 :  quo  anno  m.  d.  advecta  Bomam  est,  majorem  ea  aestate  messem
quam  antecedentibus  annis  decern  factam  esse  tradunt.

p.  253.]  Though  the  people  now  imagine  fru  Oode,  Ooden,
Oauden  as  a  frau,  there  appears  now  and  then  a  de  koen  (king)
instead,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4,  385.  Legends  of  fru  Gauden  in  Lisch,
Meckl.  jrb.  8,  203,  &c.  NiederhöfiFer  2,  91  (conf.  p.  926-6-7).
Harvest^home  still  called  vergodensdel  in  Lüneburg,  conf.  Kuhn
and  Schwartz  p.  394-5.  The  Vermlanders  call  Thor's  wife  god-
mar,  good  mother.  Bask,  Afh.  1,  94  derives  ON,  Ooi  fr.  Finn.
hoi  (aurora).     GDS.  53.  93.

p.  254]  Priscas  calls  Attila's  wife  ELpixa  179,  9,  'Pixav  207,
17,  which  easily  becomes  Herka.  Frau  Harke  a  giantess,  Kuhn
146.  371.  Fru  Ea/rke,  ArJce,  Harfe,  Harre,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4,  386,
5,  377.  Sommer  II.  167-8.  147  (conf.  frau  Motte,  12.  168.  147).
A  witch's  daughter  Harka,  Wolffs  Ztschr.  2,  255.  Hdksche,  like
Oodsche  for  Gode,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  377.  Harke  flies  through  the
air  in  the  shape  of  a  dove,  makes  the  fields /rut^/ti/,  carries  a  stool
to  sit  on,  so  as  not  to  touch  the  ground,  Sommer  p.  12;  this  is
like  Herodias  (p.  285)  and  the  wandering  woman  (p.  632. 1058).


KEBTHX7S.      GAÜDE.      HABKE.      CEBES.      ISIS.  1365

p.  254n.]  Mommsen  133  derives  Ceres,  Oscan  Kerres,  from
creare;  Hitzig  Philisfc.  232  connects  it  with  ^ris  =  Ört;  I  with
cera  and  cresco.  For  Demeter  the  Slavs  have  zeme  mate,  mother
earth;  a  dear  mother^  like  {Trvposi)  ^/Xi;?  /ti^fMfjrpo^,  ^sop  (Gorais
212.  de  Furia  367).  Babr.  131;  conf.  jivMrepos  a/cr^,  II.  13,
323,  and  'das  liebe  korn,  getreidelein/  Gram.  3,  665.  GDS.  53.
The  Earth's  lap  is  like  a  mother's :  foldan  sce&t  (  =  schoosz).  Cod.
Ezon.  428,  22.  eorSan  sce&ta  eardian  496,  23.  eorSan  scedtas
hweorfan  309,  22.     grand-bedd  493,  3.

p.  255.]  On  the  goddess's  progress  see  Suppl.  to  252.  With
her  bath  conf.  the  purifying  bath  of  Wiea  (Preller  1,  409),  whose
name  Pott  would  explain  by  €vpeta  =  Ssk.  urvi  fr.  uni  =  varii,
Kuhn's  Ztschr.  5,  285.  The  lavatio  Berecynthiae  is  described  by
Augustine,  Civ.  Dei  2,  4;  conf.  Vita  Martini  cap.  9  (W.  Müller
p.  48) .  The  image  of  Artemis  was  washed  in  seven  rivers  flow-
ing oat  of  one  spring,  Pref.  to  Theocritus ;  the  alraun  and  ali-
rnmna  were  bathed.

p.  256  n.]  The  LG.  farmer's  maxim,  *  Mai-mänd  kold  un  nat
Füllt  schiinen  un  fat,  is  in  Swedish  '  Mai  kail  Fyller  bondens
lador  alV  Bnna  1844,  6.  A  similar  saw  in  Bretagne  about  St.
Anne,  Lausitzer  mag.  8,  51 ;  how  is  it  worded  in  French  7

p.  257.]  On  Tanfana  see  my  KL  Sehr.  5,  415,  etc.  GDS.
231-2.  336.  622.

p.  263.]  From  Bodulf's  account  was  probably  taken  the  16th
cent,  notice  in  Beiffenberg's  Phil.  Mouskes,  tome  1.  Brux.  1838
app.  p.  721  :  '  Sub  Alexandre,  qui  fuit  sex  annis  episcopus
(Leodiensis)  et  depositus  in  Gone.  Pisae  an.  1135,  fuit  quaedam
fiTodigiosa  sen  demoniaca  navis,  quae  innixa  rotis  et  niagice  agitata
malignis  spiritibus  attractu  funium  fuit  Tungris  inducta  Los-
castrum.  Ad  quam  omnia  sexus  appropinquans  tripudiare  et
saltare  cogebatur  etiam  nudo  corpore.  Ad  eam  feminae  de  mane
stratis  exilientes  accurrebant,  dum  dicta  navis  citharae  et  aliorum

instrumentorum    sonitu   resonaret.' Weavers,   whom  Bodulf

makes  prominent  in  hauling  and  guarding  the  ship,  have  some-
thing to  do  with  navigation  :  in  their  trade  they  ply  the  schiff
(shuttle),  and  that  is  why  they  were  called  marner,  Jäger's  Ulm
p.  636-7.  About  carrying  ships  on  shoulders  Pliny  has  another
passage  5,  9:  'ibi  Aethiopicae  conveniunt  naves;  namque  eas
2>licatile8  humeris  transferunt  quoties  ad  catarractas  ventum  est.'


1366  GODDESSES.

Also  Justin  32,  3  :  '  Istri  naves  snas  humeris  per  jnga  montiam
asqne  ad  littus  Adriatici  maris  transtuleruntJ

Additional  traces  of  German  ship-processions  and  festivals.  In
Antwerp  and  Brabant,  near  the  scene  of  that  old  procession,  there
was  about  14QP  '  eine  gilde  in  der  blanwer  scnten/  Hpt's  Ztschr.
1, 266- 7.  At  Shrovetide  sailors  drag  a  ship  abont,  Knhn's  Nordd.
sagen  p.  369.  At  the  Schonbart-mnning  in  Nürnberg,  men  in
motley  used  at  Shrovetide  to  carry  Hell  roand,  inclading  a  ship
and  the  Venus  Mount ;  see  Hist,  of  Schonb.-rnn.  at  N.,  by  the
Oerm.  Soc.  of  Altdorf  1761.  Another  ship-procession  in  Hone's
Everyday-book  2,  851.  In  the  'Mauritius  und  Beamunt,' w.
627 — 894,  a  ship  on  wheels,  with  knights  and  music  on  board,  is
drawn  by  concealed  horses  through  the  same  Bhine  and  Meuse
country  to  a  tournament  at  Cologne;  it  is  afterwards  divided
among  the  garzuns  (pages),  v.  1040.  Is  the  idea  of  the  Ship  of
fools  travelling  fr.  land  to  land  akin  to  this  f  especially  as  Dame
Venus  'mit  dem  ströwen  ars'  (conf.  Hulda's  strohamss,  p.  269n.)
rides  in  it,  ed.  Strobel  p.  107;  'frau  Fenus  mit  dem  stroem
loch,'  Fastn.-sp.  p.  263.  Consider  too  the  cloud-ship  of  Magonia
(p.  689),  and  the  enchanted  ship  with  the  gpreat  band  of  music,
Müllenh.  p.  220.  The  'wilde  gjaid'  comes  along  in  a  sledge
shaped  like  a  ship,  drawn  by  naughty  maidservants,  who  get
whipped.  Wolf's  Ztschr.  2,  32-3.  Nursery-tales  tell  of  a  ship
that  crosses  land  and  water,  Meier  31.  Schambach  18.  Prohle's
Märchen  nos.  46-7.  Wolf's  Beitr.  1,  152,  Ac.  Finn,  march.  2,
l\  Berchta  is  often  ferried  over,  and  of  OSinn  the  SölarlioS  77
(SsDm.  130^)  says :  OSins  qvon  rcer  a  iardar  skipi.

p.  264  n.]  At  Shrovetide  a  plough  was  drawn  through  the
streets  by  maskers,  Biisching's  Wöch.  nachr.  1,  124,  fr.  TenzeL
H.  Sachs  says,  on  Ash- Wednesday  the  maids  who  had  not  taken
men  were  yoked  in  a  plough;  so  Fastn.-sp.  247,  6-7;  'puUiog
the  fools'  plough'  233.  10.  Kuhn  conn,  pfluoe,  plogr,  Lith.
plugas  with  the  root  plu,  flu,  so  that  plough  orig.  meant  boat,
Ssk.  plava,  Gr.  irXoloy.

p.  265 n.]  Drinking-bowls  in  shipshape;  argentea  navis,
Pertz  10,  577.  A  nef  d'or  on  the  king's  table,  Garin  2,  16-7 ;
later  examples  in  Schweinichen  1,  158.  187.  An  oracle  spoke  of
a  silver  ploughshare,  Thucyd.  5,  1 6.

p.  265  n.  2.]     Annitts  Viterb.,  ed.  ascensiana  1512,  fol.  171»^ :


ISIS.     HOLDA.  1367

'ergo  Tenit  (Isis)  in  Italiam  et  docuit  frnmentariam^  molendi-
nariam  et  panificam,  cum  ante  glande  vescerentnr  ....  Yiterbi
primi  panes  ab  Iside  confecti  sunt,  item  Yetuloniae  celebravit
Jasios  nuptias^  et  panes  obtnlit  pritnos  Isis,  nt  in  Y.  antiquitatnm
ßerosns  asserit.  porro,  nt  probant  snperiores  quaestiones^  Yeta-
lonia  est  Yiterbnm/  The  Lith.  Krumine  wanders  all  over  the
world  to  find  her  daughter^  and  teaches  men  agricnlture,  Hanasch
245.  The  year  will  be  fruitful  if  thera  is  a  rustling  in  the  air
during  the  twelves,  Sommer  p.  12  (Snppl.  to  254).

p.  267.]  Goth.  hulß8  propitius  is  fr.  hil]?an,  hsAy,  hnT|>an,  to
bow  (s.  Lobe).  Holle,  Holda  is  a  cow's  name  in  Carinthia.  In
Dietr.  drachenk.,  str.  517-8,  &c.  there  is  a  giant  called  Htdle,  bat
in  str.  993 :  'sprancten  für  fi'owen  Hüllen  der  edelen  juncfrowen
ßn.^  In  Thnringia  fran  WoUe^  Roller  Sommer  10-1.  Holda  in
Cod.  Fold.  no.  523.  Fran  Holla  in  Bhenish  Franconia,  From-
mann 3,  270.  'Die  Holl  kommt'  they  say  at  Oiessen,  'die
Bulla  *  also  beyond  the  Main  abont  Wiirzbarg,  Eestler's  Beschr.
y.  Ochsenfnrt,  Wrzb.  1845,  p.  29.  Fran  Holle  also  in  Silesia.  In
Up.  Sax.  she  was  called  fran  Helle,  B.  vom  abergl.  2,  66-7;  frau

Holt  in  Wolfs  Ztschr.  1,  278. The  very  earliest  mention  of

Holda  is  in  Walafrid  Strabo's  enlogy  of  Jadith,  wife  of  Loais
the  Pions :

Organa  dnlcisoao  percassit  pectine  Jadith ;

0  si  Sappho  loquax  vel  nos  inviseret  Holda,  etc.

p.  267  n.]  With  Kinderm.  24  conf.  the  variant  in  KM.  3,  40
seq.,  Svenska  äfv.  1,  123  and  Pentam.  4,  7.  Mnch  the  same  said
of  the  dialas,  Schreiber*s  Taschenb.  4,  310  (Sappl.  to  410).

p.  270.]  When  fog  rests  on  the  mountain :  'tDame  H.  has  lit
her  fire  in  the  hill.'  In  Alsace  when  it  snows;  '  d'  engele  han  's
bed  gemacht,  d'  fedre  fliege  mnder;'  in  Gegenbadh  427:
'heaven's  feathers  fly';  in  Nassan:  'Dame  H.  shakes  up  her
bed,'  Kehrein's  Nassan  p.  280.  Nurses  fetch  babies  out  of
/ran  Hollen  teieh.  In  Transylvania  are  fields  named  Frau-holda^
graben,  Progr.  on  Carrying  out  Death  1861,  p.  3.  She  washes
her  Teil,  Pröhle  198.  Like  Berthe,  she  is  queen  or  leader  of
elves  and  holdes  (p.  456),  conf.  Titania  and  Dame  Venus.
'Frane  Bercht,  &aue  Holt'  occur  in  the  Landskranna  (?)
HimelstrasZj  printed  1484,  Gefken's  Beil.  112.    In  the  neigh-


1368  GODDESSBS.

boarhood  of  the  Meisner,  Dame  H.  carried  off  a  rock  on  her
thvmh,  Hess.  Ztschr.  4,  108;  a  cave  is  there  called  Kitz-Kammer,
perhaps  because  cats  were  sacred  to  her  as  to  Freya  (p.  305).
On  the  Main^  between  Hassloch  and  Grünenwörth^  may  be  seen
'  fra  HuUe '  on  the  Fra  HuUenstein,  combing  her  locks.  Who-
ever sees  her  loses  his  eyesight  or  his  reason.  Dame  Holle  rides
in  her  coach,  makes  a  whirlwind,  pursues  the  hunter,  Prohle  156.
278.  173,  like  Pharaildis,  Verild  (357  n.).  Legends  of  Hulle  in
Herrlein's  Spessart-sag.  179 — 184.  A /raw  iToIfen-ÄpieZ  (-game)
in  Thuringia,  Hess.  Ztschr.  4,  109.  The  Haule-mutter  (mother
H.)  in  the  Harz,  an  old  crone,  makes  herself  great  or  little,
Harrys  2,  no.  6.  Prohle  278;  conf.  JSauIa-mannerchen  (dwarfs)
in  KM.  no.   13.     She  is  a  humpbacked  little  woman,  Sommer

p.  9  ;  walks  with  a  crutch  about  Haxthausen,  Westph. Again,

queen  Holle  appears  as  hxmsekeeper  and  h£nchwoman  to  Frederick
Barbarossa  in  Kifhäuser,  exactly  as  Dame  Venus  travels  in
Wuotan^s  retinue,  Sommer  p.  6.  In  Up.  Hesse  '  meätt  der  Holle
farn'  means,  to  have  tumbled  hair  or  tangled  distaff,  prob,
also  night-walking :  the  Holle  at  Wartburg  looks  like  a  witcb,
Woeste's  Mitth.  p.  289  no.  24 ;  conf.  '  verheuletes  haar,'  Corrodi

professor  59,  and  a  man  with  shaggy  hair  is  called  holU-kopf,

With  her  sfrohamss  conf.  strowen-ars,  Suppl.  to  263.  Careless
spinners  are  threatened  with  the  verwunschene  frau,  Panzer's
Beitr.  1,  84 :  she  who  does  not  get  her  spinning  over  by  Sun-
day will  have  Holle  in  her  distaff  to  tangle  it ;  conf.  the  Kuga
(p.  1188-9).

p.  272.]  The  Euldarsa-gOf  tale  of  the  sorceress  Hnldr,  is  told
by  Sturle ;  conf.  the  extract  fr.  Sturlunga  in  Oldn.  laseb.  p.  40.
Hvldre-web  in  Norway  means  a  soft  vegetable  material  like
flannel;  and  in  Faye  42  Huldra  is  clothed  in  green.  The  holder
in  Asb.'l,  48.  78.  199  has  a  cow's  tail;  here  it  is  not  so  much
one  hulder,  as  many  huldren  that  appear  singly.  So  in  the
M.Nethl.  Bose  5679 :  '  hulden,  die  daer  singhen ' ;  are  ihese
mermaids  f  In  Sweden  they  have  a  hyUe-fru  and  a  Etldi-moder,
Geyer  1,  27;  conf.  Dybeck  1845,  56.

p.  273.]  The  name  o{  Perahta,  the  bright,  answers  to  Selene,
Lucina,  Luna,  therefore  Artemis,  Diana.  Hence  she  takes  part
in  the  Wild  Hunt,  accompanied  by  hounds,  like  Hecate ;  hence
also,  in  the  LG.  Valentin  und  Namelos,  Berta  has  become  Clarina


HOLDA.      BBBHTA.  1369

[conf.  St.  Lucy,  frau  Lutz,  p.  274  n.]. The  Lith.  Lauma  is  very

like  Berhta  and  Holda :  she  is  goddess  of  earth  and  of  weaving.
She  appears  in  a  hoase,  helps  the  girls  to  weave,  and  gets  through
a  piece  of  linen  in  no  time ;  bat  then  the  girl  has  to  gaess  her
name.  If  she  guesses  right,  she  keeps  the  linen ;  if  not,  the
laume  takes  it  away.  One  girl  said  to  the  lanme  :  '  Laume  Sore
peczin  aada  dfina  pelnydatna/  1.  S.  weaves  with  her  arm,  earn«
ing  bread.  Her  name  was  Sore,  so  the  girl  kept  the  linen,
N.  Prenss.  prov.  bl.  2,  380.  Schleicher  in  Wien.  ber.  11,  104
seq.  says,  the  laame  is  a  malignant  alp  (nightmare)  who  steals
children,  is  voracious,  yet  bathes  on  the  beach,  helps,  and  brings
linen:  a  distinct  being  (11,  96*7)  fr.  the  laima  spoken  of  on
p.  416  n.     Nesselm.  353^.

p.  273  n.]  Wen-e  is  akin  to  Wandel-muot,  Ls.  3,  88.  1,
205-8 :  frd  Wandelmuot  sendet  ir  scheid^sätnen  (seeds  of  divi-
sion) 2,  157.  in  dirre  witen  werlde  kreizen  hat  irre-sainen  (seeds
of  error)  uns  ges&t  ein  frouwe  ist  Wendelmuot  geheizen,  MS.  2,
198^ ;  conf.  the  seed  sown  by  death  (p.  848)  and  the  devil  (p.
1012).  frou  Wendelmuot  hie  liebe  maet  mit  der  viirwitz  segens
abe  (dame  Ficklemind  here  mows  down  love  with  curiosity's
keen  sithe),  Turl.  Wh.  128^

p.  274.]  The  meal  set  ready  for  Bertha  resembles  the  food
offered  to  Hecate  on  the  30th  of  the  month,  Athen.  3,  194 ;  cer-
tain fish  are  'E/edrrf^  ßpoirara  3,  146-7.  323.  Filling  the  belly
with  chopped  straw :  conf.  the  hriamagi,  Laxd.'  saga  226.  As
the  white  lady  prescribes  a  diet  for  the  conntry-folk  (Morgenbl.
1847,  nos.  50 — 52),  they  tell  of  a  dame  Borggabe  (loan),  who
gave  or  lent  money  and  com  to  needy  men,  if  they  went  to
her  cave  and  cried  '  Gracious  dame  B.' ;  conf.  OHG.  chom-gepk
Ceres  J  «amo-kepa  saticena,  Gibicho ;  mn-gebe,  MB.  13,  42.  oti-
geba  (890  n.).  Nycolans  von  dem  crum^n-ghebe,  an.  1334,
Henneb.  urk.  ii.  13,  30.

p.  277.]  Berta,  like  Holda,  is  called  motlier  in  the  Swed.
marchen  p.  366,  gamla  B.,  troUkäring.  In  one  Swed.  tale  a
fair  lady  walks  attended  by  many  dwarfs;  the  room  she  enters

is  filled  with  them,    Wieselgr.   454. Like    the    Thuringian

Perchta,  the  devil  blows  out  eyes,  Miillenh.  p.  202  ;  care  breathes
apon  Faost,  and  blinds  him;  conf.  the  curse,  'Your  eyes  are
mine,'  N.  Preuss.    prov.    bl.   1,  395,   and  'spältle  zustreicheu.


1370  GODDESSES.

aTf/streichen    (stroke   tliem    sliat,  stroke   them    open)/  Meier's

Schwab,  sag.  186. After  the  lapse  of  a  year  the  woman  gets

her  child  back,  Müllenh.  no.  472  ;  so  does  the  man  in  the  wild
hnnt  get  rid  of  his  hump  (Sappl.  to  930) ;  conf.  Steub's  Vor-
arlberg p.  83^  Bader's  Sagen  no.  424^  and  the  Cheese-mannikin
in  Panzer  2,  40.  On  Berhta's  share  in  the  Farioos  Hont^  see
p.  932.

p.  277.]  In  S.  (Germany,  beside  Bertha,  Berche,  we  find  'frau
Bert,  Beitel,  Panzer's  Beitr.  1,  247-8.    The  wild  Berta  wipes  her

with  the  nnspun  flax.     At  Holzbemdorf  in  Up.  Franoonia,

a  lad  acts  Eisen-herta,  clad  in  a  co¥^s  hide,  bell  in  hand ;  to  good
children' he  gi^es  nnts  and  apples,  to  bad  ones  the  rod  2,  117.

p.  278.]  To  the  Bavar.  name  Stempo  we  can  add  that  of  the
Strasburger  Stampho,  an.  1277,  Bohmer's  Beg.  Bndolfi  no.
322 ;  conf.  stempfel,  hangman,  MS.  2,  2^.  3*.  In  Schm.  3,  638
stampulanz^hxigheBx,  2,  248  «^mp0n-Aar=flaz;   conf.  Yon  d.

Hagen's  6.  Abent.  3,  13-4. Beside  Trempe,  there  seems  to

be  a  Temper,  Wolfs  Ztschr.  2,  181,  perhaps  sprang  oat  of
Qaatember  in  the  same  way  as  fraa  Faste  (p.  782  n.),  ibid.  1,
292.  tolle  ^rompe  (trampelf),  Bocken-phil.  2,  16-7.  In  fayoar
of  S  having  been  added  before  T  is  Schperchta  for  Perchta,
Mannh.  Ztschr.  4.  388.  As  Stempe  treads  like  the  alp,  she  seems
ident  with  the  alp-crashing  Maraae.

p.  279.]  In  Salzbarg  coantry  the  Christmas-tree  is  called
Bechl'boschen,  Weim.  jrb.  2,  133.  'in  loco  qai  dicitor  Berten^
wisun/  Salzb.  nrk.  of  10th  cent..  Arch.  f.  östr.  gesch.  22,  299.
304.  Outside  Remshard  near  Günzbnrg,  Bav.,  is  a  wood  *  za  der
dime  (girl).'  The  dime-weiil  ased  to  be  there  in  a  red  frock
with  a  basket  of  fine  apples,  which  she  gave  away  and  changed
into  money.  If  people  did  not  go  with  her,  she  retnmed  weep-
ing into  the  wood.  '  Here  comes  the  dinie-weibl  *  said  children,
to  frighten  each  other.  Seb.  Brant  p.  m.  195  knows  about
Bächtenfam,  B.'s  fern.

Berchiolt  is  a  common  name  in  Swabia,  Bit.  10,  306.  770;
conf.  Berchtols-gaden  (now  Berchtes-g.),  Prechtles-boden-alpe,
Seidl's  Aimer  2,  73.  The  white  mannikin  is  also  described  by
Bader  no.  417.

p.  280.]  When  Malesherbes  was  talking  to  Loais  XVI.  of  the
fate  in  store  for  him,  the  king  said :  '  On  m'a  soavent  racont^


BEBHTA.      OSTABA.  1371

dans  mon  enfance^  qae  toates  les  fois  qa'un  roi  de  la  maison  des
Bourbons  deyait  monrir,  on  voyait  ik  minnit  se  promener  dans  les
galeries  da  ch&teaa  nne  grcmde  femme  vetue  de  blanc/  M^m.  de
B^senval;  conf.  'de  wUte  nn  swarte  Dorte/  Müllenh.  p.  84S-4;
and  the  Klag*mvMer  p.  1135.  The  same  is  told  of  the  It,  bamnghe,
pi.  mnaeighe,  O'Brien  sub.  w.  sithbhrog,  grnagach.

p.  281.]  The  image  of  reins  Pedauque,  Pro7.  Pedauca  (Bayn.
sab  y.  anca),  stands  nnder  the  charch-doors  at  Dijon,  Nesle^
NeverSj  St.  Ponrcin  and  Tonlonse.  The  last  was  known  to
Rabelais :  '  qn'elles  6taient  largement  pattaes,  comme  sont  les
oies  et  jadis  &  Tonlonse  la  reine  Pedanqne.'  This  statue  held  a
spindle,  and  spun,  and  men  swore  '  par  la  quenouille  de  la  reine
P./  Paris  p.  4.  So  queen  Goose-foot  was  a  spinner ;  jet  her
goo8e*foot  did  not  come  of  spinning,  for  the  spinning-u?/i6d{  was
not  invented  till  the  15th  cent.,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  135.  Berhta
cum  magno  feds,  Massm.  Eraol.  385.  Heinricus  Oenee-fuz,  MB.
8,  172.  cagots  with  goose-foot  or  dueJc'e-foot  ears,  Fr.  Michel's
Races  maud.  2,  126-9.  136.  144-7.  152.  M.  G.  Yulliemin's  La
reine  Berte  et  son  temps  makes  out  that  Berte  la  fileuse  was
wife  to  Bndolf  of  Little  Burgundy,  daughter  to  the  Alamann
duke  Borchard,  and  mother  to  Adelheid  who  married  Otto  I. ;
this  Berta  died  at  Payeme  about  970.  To  the  white  damsel  is
gi?en  a  little  white  lamb,  Müllenh.  p.  347.

p.  285  n.]  The  whirlwind  is  called  sau-arsch,  mucken-arsch,
Schmidt's  Westerwald.  id.  116;  in  up.  Bavaria  sau-wede.  When
it  whirls  up  hay  or  com,  the  people  in  Passau  and  Straubing  cry
to  it:  'sau^dreck  !  du  schwarz /ar^Z  (pig) ! '  Sew-zagel,  a  term
of  abase,  H.  Sachs  v.,  347^;  conf.  pp.  632.  996.  In  an  old  Lan-
gobard  treaty  the  devil  is  porcorum  possessor.

p.  291.]  Ostara  is  akin  to  Ssk.  yasta  daylight,  yasas  day,
oshas  aurora,  vastar  at  early  mom ;  conf.  Zend,  nshastara  eastern,
Benfey  1,  28.  Lith.  auszia  it  dawns,  atMSTtnne  aurora;  Ausea
(r.  Ausra),  dea  occumbentis  yel  ascendentis  solis  (Lasicz).  Many
places  in  Germany  were  sacred  to  her,  esp.  hills :  Austerkopp,
Osterk.  in  Waldeck,  Firmen.  1,  324^  conf.  Astenberg  325»;
Osterstube,  a  cave,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  115.  280;  Osterbrunne,  a
christian  name :  '  ich  0.,  ein  edelknecht  yon  Ror,'  an.  1352,
Schmid's  Tübingen  180. Her  feast  was  a  time  of  great  re-
joicing, hence  the  metaphors :  '  (thou  art)  miner  freuden  dster4ae


1372  GODDESSES.

(-day)/  Iw.  8120.  mines  herzens  osterbac,  MS.  2,  223*.  1,37^
der  gernden  dstertac^  Amgb.  3^;  coof.  Meien-tag.  It  is  asnr-
name  in  the  Zoller  coantry :  dictus  der  Ostertag^  Mon.  Zoll.  no.
252-7.     Frideriches  saligen  son  des  Ostertages,  no.  306.

The  antithesis  of  east  and  west  seems  to  demand  a  Weatara  as
goddess  of  evening  or  sundown^  as  Mono  suggests^  Anz.  5>  493 ;
consider  westergibel,  westermftne,  perh.  westerhemde,  wester-
barn^  the  Slav.  Yesnä^  even  the  Lat.  Yespera,  Yesperogo.

p.  296.]  On  the  goddess  Zisa,  conf.  the  history  of  the  origia
of  Augsburg  in  Keller's  Fastn.  sp.  p.  1361.  About  as  fabulous
as  the  account  of  the  Augsburg  Zisa^  sounds  the  following  fr.
Ladisl.  Suntheim's  Chronica^  Cod.  Stuttg.  hist.^  fol.  250:  'Die
selb  zeit  sasz  ain  haidnischer  hertzog  von  Swaben  da  auf  dem
slos  Hillomondt,  ob  Yertica  (Kempten)  der  stat  gelegen^  mit  namen
Emerius,  der  wonet  noch  seinen  (adhered  to  his)  haidnischen  sit-
ten  auf  Hillomondt;  zu  dem  komeii  die  vertriben  waren  aus
Yertica  und  in  der  gegent  darumb^  und  patten  in  (begged  him),
das  er  sie  durch  (for  the  sake  of)  sein  götin,  Zysa  genannt,  mit
veld  begäbet  und  aüfnam  (endow  and  befriend)  ....  Da  sprach
hertzog  Esnerius :  wann  ir  mir  swerdt  pei  den  göttern  Edelpoü
und  Hercules  und  pei  meiner  göttin  Zisa,  so  will  ich  euch  veldt
geben,  &c.'

p.  298.]  With  Oisa  may  be  conn.  Owe,  a  place  in  the  Grisons,
Bergm.  Yorarlb.  p.  43,  and  '  s wester  Zeise/  Bamb.  ver.  10, 143-4 ;
Zaissen-perig,  ZeisUperg,  Archiv,  i.  5,  74.  48.  Akin  to  Oisara
seems  Gizuris  (Zitgers),  a  place  in  Bhaetia,  Pertz  6,  748* ;  Zeizu-
rüperga,  Zeiszaris-p.,  Heizzeris-p.,  Zeizaris-pergan,  Zeizanes-perge^
Notizenbl.  6,  116.  143.  165.  138.  259.  How  stands  it  finally  with
Desenberg,  which  Lambert  calls  Tesenb.  ?  Pertz  7,  1 78.  CJonf .
other  names  in  Moneys  Anz.  6,  235,  and  Disibodo,  Disibodenberg,
Disenb.,  Weisth.  2,  168.

p.  299  n.]  i^rouu;^  heizt  von  tugenden  ein  wip  (called  a yrati
fr.  her  virtues),  Ulr.  v.  Lichenst.  3,  17 :

als  ein  vrou  ir  werden  Up  (her  precious  body)

tiuret  (cherishes)  so  daz  sie  ein  wip

geheizen  mac  mit  reinen  siten,

der  (for  her)  mac  ein  man  vil  gerne  biten  (sue) ;  Kolocz.  129.

p.  301  n.]     A  Swed.  folksong,  not  old,  in  Arvidss.  3,  250  has:


CISA.      KRETA.      GERDR.  1373

'Fröja,  da  berömde  fra,  Till  hopa  bind  oss  ungeta  I '  Fröja  ofbeu
=  Venu8  in  Bellm.  3,  129.  132-5.  M.  Neth.  vraei,  pulcher.  vri
=  vrü.  Pass.  299,  74.

p.  304.]  On  the  etym.  of  Preya  and  Frigg,  see  my  Kl.  sehr,
3,  118.  127.  In  a  Norweg.  tale,  stor  Frigge  goes  with  the  cattle
of  the  elves,  Asb.  Huldr.  1,  201 ;  conf.  206.  Vreke  is  found  in
Belgium  too,  says  Coremans  114-5.  158;  a  Vrekeherg  126.  Fre-
hnteve,  Pertz  8,  776.  Fricconhorst,  an.  1090,  Erh.  p.  131.  Fot
Fruike  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  373  Euhn  writes  Fuik,  which  may
mean  whirlwind,  OJS.fiuka.

p.  306.  Frey  a  and  Freyr  are  both  present  at  Oegi's  banquet,
but  neither  his  GerSr  nor  her  O^Sr,  Saem.  59 ;  yet  she  is  called
O^s  mey  5^  and  Hnoss  and  Gersemi  (p.  886)  may  be  her  children
hy  05r.  When  Sn.  354  calls  her  OSins  friffla,  he  prob,  con-
founds her  with  Frigg  (p.  302) ;  or  is  OSinn  Mars  here,  and
Freya  Venus  ?  On  the  distinctness,  yet  orig.  unity,  of  the  two
goddesses,  see  my  Kl.  sehr.  5,  421-5;  was  O^r  the  Vanic  name

of  OSinn  ?    426-7. To  her  by-name  Syr   the   Norw.  plants

Sturgiüd  (Syr- gull  f),  anthemis,  and  Sirildrot  prob,  owe  their
names,  F.  Magn.  lex.  myth.  p.  361 ;  while  Saxo's  Syntha  is  rather

Sigri«r,  conf.  Sygrutha,  Saxo  329.     GDS.  526. Freya's  hall

is  Sessrymnir,  Sesavamir,  Sn.  28 ;  as  the  cat  was  sacred  to  her,
we  may  perh.  count  the  Eitzhammer  on  the  Meisner  (Suppl.  to
270)  among  her  or  Holda's  dwellings ;  conf.  cat-feeding  (p.  1097).

p.  307  n.]  Manij  men  is  akin  to  Lat.  monile,  Dor.  fiavo^y
fuivvo^,  Pers.  ßiaviaKt)^,  /laviaKop,  Ssk.  mani,  Pott  1,  89.  As  men-
glo^  expresses  a  woman's  gladness  over  her  jewel,  a  Swiss  woman
calls  her  girdle  *  die  freude/  Staid.  2,  515-6.

p.  309.]  On  Fulla,  Sunna,  Sindgund,  see  Kl.  sehr.  2,  17  seq.
GDS.  86.  102.     Fulla  wore  a  gold  headband,  for  gold  is  called

liüfa«band  Fullu,  Sn.  128. Sol  is  daughter  of  Mundilföri  (p.

703),  wife  of  Glenr  (al.  Glomir),  Sn.  12.  126,  or  Dagr,  Fornald.
sog.  2,  7.     Fru  Sole,  fru  Soletopp  occurs  in  pop.  games,  Arvidss.

3,  389.  43^. Skaffi,  daughter  of  piazi,  wife  of  NiörSr  and

mother  of  Freyr  (gen.  Ska«a,  Sn.  82.  Kl.  sehr.  3,  407),  aft.  wife
of  OSinn  and  mother  of  Saemingr,  Yngl.  c.  9.

p.  309.]  In  Sn.  119  Oerdr  is  Od'ln's  wife  or  mistress,  rival
to  Frigg.  There  is  a  Thorgerffr  hörgabrftSr.  A  Frögertha,  come
of  heroic  race,  Saxo  Gram.  b.  6.     Similar,  if  not  so  effective  as

VOL.   IV.  H


1374  GODDESSES.

GerS's  radiant  beanty,  is  the  splendoar  of  other  ladies  in  Asb.
Haldr.  1,  47  :  saa  deilig  at  det  skinnede  af  hende;  in  Garg.  76^  :
her  '  rosen-bliisame'  cheeks  lit  up  the  ambient  air  more  brightly
than  the  rainbow ;  in  Wirnt  die  welt :

ir  Bchoene  gap  s6  liehten  scMn
und  alsd  wunnecUchen  glast^
daz  der  selbe  pallast
von  ir  libe  (body)  erliahtet  wart.

p.  310.]  On  Syn  .and  Vor,  conf.  F.  Magn.  lex.  358-9.  Then
the  compds.  Hervor,  Ounnvör ;  OHG.  Cundwara,  Hasalwara,
Graflf  1,  907;  AS.  Fred^wani,  Beow,  4048.  I  ought  to  have
mentioned  the  ON.  goddess  Ilmr,  fem.^  though  ilmr,  suavis  odor,
is  masc.

p.  310.]  Nanna  in  the  Edda  is  '  Nepi  dottir/  Sn.  31.  66,  and
Nepr  was  OSin^s  son  211.  Saxo  makes  her  a  daughter  of  Gevar
(Kepaheri),  see  Snppl.  to  220.  SsBm.  116^  speaks  of  another
Nanna, '  Nöhkva  döttir.'  Is  '  nönnor  Herjans/  the  epithet  of  the
valkyrs,  SsBm.  4^,  conn,  with  Nanna  f

p.  311  n.]  Fuoge  and  Unfuoge  are  supported  by  the  following :
er  was  aller  tugende  vol,  die  in  diu  Vuoge  lerte  (virtues  that
decency  taught  him),  Pass.  165,  2.  diu  Fäegel,  Füeglerin,  Ls.  1,
200-8.  wann  kompt  Hans  Fug,  so  sehe  und  lug  (look),  Garg.
236^.  daz  in  Unfuoge  niht  erslüege  (slew  him  not),  Walth,  82,  8.
Unfuoge  den  palas  vl6ch,  Parz.  809,  19.     nu  l&t  (leave  ye)  der

Unfuoge  ir  strit  171,  16;  oonf.  fiigen  (Suppl.  to  23). Quite

unpersonal  are ;  zuht  unde  fuoge,  Greg.  1070.  ungevuoge,  Er.
9517.  6527.  swelch  fiirsten  so  von  lande  varn,  daz  zimt  ouch  ira
fuogen  s6,  daz  si  sint  irs  heiles  vro,  Ernst  1800.

p.  311.]  Gefjon  appears  in  Lokasenna ;  conf.  p.  861  n.  Does
hör-^^n  mean  linidatrix?  Saom.  192^;  or  is  it  akin  to  Gefn,
Gefjon  ?

p.  312.]  Snöriz  ramliga  Ran  or  hendi  gi&lfr  d^r  kondngs.
Saem.  153^.  miök  hefir  Ran  ryskt  um  mik,  Egilss.  p.  616.  B&n
lends  Loki  her  net,  to  catch  Andvari  with,  Saem.  180.  Pomald.
sog.  1,  152.  In  the  same  way  watersprites  draw  souls  to  them
(p.  846).  Later  she  is  called  hafs-fruu  :  '  A.,  som  räder  öfver  alia
hvilka  omkommapä  sjön  (perish  at  sea),'  Sv.  folks.  1,  126.  'Blef
sjo'tagen,  och  kom  til  kafsfruu'  132.


NANNA.      FXTOGB,      RAN.      HEL.  1375

ez  ist  ein  geloab  der  alten  yrip,

Bwer  in  dem  wazzer  yerliust  den  lip  (loses  his  life),

daz  der  si  von  Oot  vertriben.     Karajan  on  Teichner  41.

p.  313.]  S16u  I  hel,  Vilk.  s.  515.  i  hel  drepa,  Sasm.  78».  bita
fjl  til  Italia  (bite  a  foal  dead)^  Östgota-lag  213.  höfut  }^itt  leysto
heljo  or,  Ssem.  181*.     Hel  is  a  person  in  SsBm.  188^  :  '  er  ]?ik  Hel

hafi ! '  in  Egilss.  643 :  '  Niörva  nipt  (Hel)  a  nesi  stendr.* The

fara  til  Heljar  was  German  too  (conf.  p.  801  «2) :  Adam  vuor  zuo
der  helle,  und  sine  afterknmen  alle,  Ksr-chr.  9225.  ze  helle  varn,
Warn.  2447.  3220.  3310.  ze  helle  vai^  die  hellevart,  Bari.  323.
28.  /aren  zuo  der  hell  =  die,  Seb.  Brant's  Narr.  57,  9.  ze  helle
vam,  Bing  55^,  27 ;  nn  var  du  in  die  hell  hinab,  das  ist  din  haue
30  ;  ir  muost  nu  reusehen  in  die  hell  20.  ich  wolte  mich  vereloffen
Win  zuo  der  helle  (Helle),  Troj.  kr.  23352.  von  der  hell  wider
kamen  (come  back  fr.  hades).  Brant's  Narr.  p.  m.  207.  in  der
hell  ist  ein  frau  &n  liebe  (without  love),  Fastn.  558, 13 ;  spoken
of  Hellia  ?  or  of  a  dead  woman  ?  Helle  speaks,  answers  the  devil,
Anegenge  39,  23.  do  sprach  diu  Helle,  Grieshaber  2,  147-8.
Bavarian  stories  of  Held  in  Panzer's  Beitr.  1,  60.  275.  297.  Ob-
serve  in  Heliand  103,  9  :  'an  thene  suarton  hel ' ;  conf.  p.  804.

p.  815.]  Sic  erimus  cnncti  postquam  nos  auferet  orcus,  Petron.
c.  34.  rapaeis  Orci  aula  divitem  manet  herum,  Hor.  Od.  ii.  18, 30.
at  vobis  male  sit,  malae  tenebrae  orci,  quae  omnia  bella  devoratis,
Cat.  3,  13.  versperre  uns  (bar  us  out)  vor  der  helle  munt,  Kara-
jan44,  1.  der  hellisch  rochen  steht  offen,  H.  Sachs  i.  3,  343^.
diu  Helle  gar  &f  tet  (opens  wide)  ir  munt,  Alb.  v.  Halb.  17P.
na  kau  daz  verfluochte  loch  nieman  erfüllen  noch  (that  cursed  hole
no  man  can  fill),  der  wirt  ist  so  gitic  (greedy),  Martina  160,  17  ;
cjonf. '  daz  verworhte  hol '  172,  41.  Yet  MsH.  3,  233^  has  :  davon
so  ist  diu  helle  vol. 0.  v.  23,  265 :

then  t6d  then  habet  funtan      Hell  has  found  Death,
thiu  hella,  ioh  firsluntan.         And  swallowed  him  up.

Did  Otfrid  model  this  on  1  Cor.  15,  54-5  :  'Death  is  swallowed
up  in  victory.  0  Death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  0  Hades,  where
thy  victory  f  *  Observe  the  Gothic  version  :  '  ufsaggquij^s  var]?
daHJms  in  sigis.  hvar  ist  gazds  ]?ein8,  datißu?  hvar  ist  sigis
J^inB,  halja  f '    It  is  a  Christian  view,  that  death  is  swallowed  up ;


1376  CONDITION  OF  GODS.

but  most  of  tbe  Greek  MSS.  have  Odvare  both  times,  the  Vulgate
both  times  mors,  whilst  XJlphilas  divides  them  iuto  daufm  and  haija,
and  Otfrid  makes  hell  find  and  swallow  death.  To  the  heathens
haija  was  receiver  and  receptacle  of  the  dead,  she  swallowed  the
dead|  bat  not  death.  One  Greek  MS.  however  has  Odvare  and  aSij
[suggested  by  HosealS,  14?  'Ero  mors  tua,  0  Mors  I  morsus
tuus  ero,  Jnferno/*],  Massm.  63***^  and  ^Si79>  infemus,  in  Matt.
1 1, 23.  Luke  10,  15.  1 6,  23  is  in  AS.  rendered  helle.  So  in  Irish
the  two  words  in  the  Epistle  are  bais  (death),  uaimh  (pit) ;  in  Grael.
bais  and  uaigh  (grave).  The  Serv.  smrti  and  pakle,  Lith.  smertie
and  p6kla,  smack  of  the  Germ,  death  and  hell;  conf.  Hofer's

Ztschr.  1,  122. Westerg.  in  Bouterwek,  Csedm.  2,  160,   sub

v,  hel,  identifies  it  with  Ssk.  k&la,  time,  death,  death-goddess,
and  K&It,  death-goddess.

p.  315  n.]  Hellevot  is  a  n.  prop,  in  Soester's  Daniel  p.  173.
The  following  statement  fits  Helvcetsluis,  the  Rom.  Helium :
Hugläci  ossa  in  Rheni  fluminis  insula  ubi  in  oceanvm  prorumpit,
reservata  sunt,'  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  10.


CHAPTER  XIV.

CONDITION  OF  GODS.

p.  318.]  The  heathen  notion  of  the  power  of  the  gods  is  esp.
seen  in  their  being  regarded  as  wonder-workers,  who  did  not  sink
into  sorcerers  till  Christian  times;  conf.  p.  1031.  GDS.  770.  The
giants  on  the  other  hand  were  looked  upon,  even  by  the  heathen,

as  stupid,  pp.  526-8-9. The  longevity  of  gods  (long-aevi,  lane-

Itbon,  Notk.  Cap.  144)  depends  on  simple  food  and  a  soul  free
from  care  (p.  320-4),  So  thinks  Terence,  Andr.  5,  5  :  ego  vitam
deorum  propterea  sempiternam  esse  arbitror,  quod  voluptaies
eorum  propriae  sunt;  and   the  dwarfs  ascribe   their   long  and

healthy  lives    to    their  honesty  and    temperance   (p.   458).

Amrxia  (Somad.  1,  127)  is  derived  by  Bopp,  Gl.  17*,  from  a  priv.
and  mrita  mortuus,  hence  immortal  and  conferring  immortality  ;
and  ä'fjußpoaia  (279')  fr.  a-fipoaia,  ßporo^  being  for  fiporo^.
Various  accounts  of  its  manufacture  in  Rhode's  Relig.  bildang  d.
Hindus  1,  230.  It  arises  from  the  churning  of  the  ocean,  says
Holtzmann  3, 146—150,  as  ambrosia  did  from  treading  the  wine-


FOOD.      IMMORTALITY.  1377

press,  K.  F.  Hermann's  Gottesd.  alth.  p.  804.  Doves  carry  am-
brosia to  Zeus,  Od.  12,  63 ;  conf.  Athen.  4, 317.  321-5.  Ambrosia
and  nectar  are  Iianded  to  goddess  Calypso,  while  Odysseus  par-
takes of  earfchly  food  beside  her,  Od.  5«  199.  Moirai  eat  the  sweet
heavenly  food  of  honey  (p.  413  n.).  Even  the  horses  of  gods  have
in  their  manger  ambrosia  and  nectar,  Plato's  Phssdr.  247.  Yet
the  gods  eat  white  a\(l>iTov,  meal  (Athen.  1,  434),  which  Hermes
bays  for  them  in  Lesbos.  Ambrosial  too  is  the  odour  shed  around
the  steps  of  deity  (Suppl.  to  327  end),  of  which  Plautus  says  in
Pseud,  iii.  2,  52  :

ibi  odo8  demissis  pedibus  in  coelum  volat ;
eum  odorem  coenat  Juppiter  cotidie.

Whski  nectar  is  made  of,  we  learn  from  Athen.  1,  147-8,  conf.
166.  ^(opoTcpov  vi/erapt  Lucian's  Sat.  7.  purpureo  bibit  ore
nectar,  Hor.  Od.  iii.  8,  12.  TransL  in  OHG.  by  stanch,  stenche,
Graff  6,  696 ;  in  some  glosses  by  seivi,  and  if  seim  be  akin  to
alfia,  our  honig-seim  still  shows  the  affinity  of  honey  to  blood
(pp.  468.  902) ;  consider  the  renovating  virtue  of  honey  as  well  as

blood:  der  So^Zdeii  honic-seim,  Engelh.  5138. The  spittle  of

gods  is  of  virtue  in  making  blood  and  mead  (p.  902) ,  in  brewing
öl  (ale):  hann  lagSi  fyri  dregg  Ardfta  sinn,  Fornald»  sog.  2,26.
Eväsir  is  created  out  of  spittle :  so  came  Lakshmi  out  of  the
milk-sea,  Holtzm»  1, 130,  as  Aphrodite  from  foam,  Sri  from  milk
and  butter  3,  150.

p.  320.]  The  belief  of  the  Greeks  in  the  Immortality  of  their
gods  was  not  without  exceptions.  In  Crete  stood  a  tomb  with
the  inscription :  '  Zeus  has  long  been  dead  {reOvew^  irdXat),  he
thunders  no  more,'  Lucian's  Jup.  tragoed.  45;  conf.  p.  45Sn.
Frigga's  death  is  told  by  Sazo,  ed.  M.  44 ;  dead  Baldr  appears
no  more  among  the  gods,  Saem.  63^ ;  then  Freyr  falls  in  fight
with  Surtr,  T^r  with  Garmr,  Thdrr  with  miSgarSsormr ;  OSinn
is  swallowed  by  the  wolf,  Loki  and  HeimiSall  slay  each  other.
Duke  Julius  302-3.  870    (in  Nachtbüchlein,  883),  says  he  has

heard  that  the  Lord  God  was  dead  (the  Pope  f). OSinn  and

Saga  drink,  Ssem.  41*;  HeimlSall  drinks  mead  41^  and  always
'  gladly ' :  drecka  glöf  41\  dreckr  gladr  4P  (p.  824).  Th6rr  eats
and  drinks  enormously,  SsDm.  73^  Sn.  86,  and  a  Norweg.  tale  of
his  being  invited  to  a  wedding.


1378  CONDITION  OF  GODS.

p.  321.]  Of  a  god  it  is  said :  p^iSion^  iOiKwv,  Od.  16,  198.
prftSiov  Oeotai  211;  of  Ciroe :  pela  irape^eKßowai  Od.  10,  573.
Zens  can  do  the  hardest  things,  ovikv  aaOfuilvwy  fiivei,  .^Esch.
Earn.  651.  In  Sn.  form&li  12,  Thdrr  attains  his  fnll  strength  at
twelve  years,  and  can  lift  ten  bear's  hides  at  once,  Wäinämöinen,
the  day  after  his  birth,  walks  to  the  smithy,  and  makes  himself  a
horse.

p.  322,]     Oot  ist  noch  liehter  (brighter)  denne  der  tac  (day),
der  antlitzes  sich  bewac  (assumed  a  visage)
nftch  menschen  antlitze.     Parz.  119,  19.

It  is  a  mark  of  the  Indian  gods,  that  they  cast  no  shadow,  never
winh^  glide  without  touching  the  ground,  are  without  dust  or
sweat  (their  garments  dustless),  and  their  garlands  never  fade,
Holtzm.  3,  13.  19;  conf.  Bopp's  Nalus  p.  31.  Even  men,  going
into  a  temple  of  Zeus,  cast  no  shadow,  Meiners's  Gesch.  d.  rel.  1,

427. OSinn  appears  as  a  'milcli  maiSr,  herffimikUl,*  Fornm.

sog.  2,  180-1.  God  has  a  beard  :  bien  font  a  Dieu  barbe  defuerre,
M6on  1,  310.  faire  barbe  de  paille  &  Dieu,  Diet,  comique  1,
86-7.  Finn,  to  see  Qod's  beard= to  be  near  him,  Kal.  27,  200.
Vishnu  is  chatur-bhuja,  four-handed,  Bopp's  Gl.  118*;  Siva
three-eyed,  ibid.  p.  160-1.  Zeus  too  was  sometimes  repres.  with
three  eyes.  Paus.  ii.  24,  4;  Artemis  with  three  heads,  Athen.  2,
152.  The  Teut.  mythoh  has  none  of  these  deformities  in  its
gods ;  at  most  we  hear  of  a  Conradus  Dri-heuptl,  MB.  29^  85
(an.  1254).  Yama,  the  Indian  death,  is  black,  and  is  called  kola,
uiger,  Bopp's  Gl.  71^.  Vishnu  in  one  incarnation  is  called
Krishna,  ater,  niger,  violaceus,  Slav,  ehsmyi  (Bopp  83^),  so  that

Chemi-b6gh  would  correspond  to  Krishna^ The  beauty  of  the

gods  has  already  been  noticed  p.  26  n, ;  that  of  the  goddesses  is
sufficiently  attested  by  giants  and  dwarfs  suing  for  them  :  JJrymr
wants  Freyja,  piassi  V&xm,  and  the  dwarfs  demand  the  last  favour
of  Freyja.

p.  323.]  Numen,  orig.  a  vevfia,  nutus,  mesas  the  nod  of  deity,
and  deity  itself,  as  Festus  says  (ed.  0.  Müller  173,  17)  :  numen
quasi  nutus  dei  ac  potestas  dicitur.  Athena  also  '  nods '  with  her
eyebrows:  cV  64>pwi  vevae,  Od.  16,  164.  Diu  (frau  Minne)
winket  mir  nü,  daz  ich  mit  ir  g6,  Walth.  47,  10;  and  Egilss.
p.  305-6  has  a  notable  passage  on  letting  the  eyebrows  fall.    Les


STRENGTH.      BEAUTY.      ANGER.      JOY.  1379

sorcils  abessier,  Aspr.  45^.  sa  (si  a)  les  sorcils  levez,  Paris  oxpt.
p.  104.     Th6rr  shakes  his  beard,  Saem.  70*.

The  anger,  hatred,  vengeance  of  the  gods  was  spoken  of  on
p.  18-9.  They  punish  misdeeds,  boasting,  presumption.  Their
envy,  <f>06yo^,  is  discussed  by  Lahrs  in  Königsb.  abh.  i^.  1,
135  seq.;  conf.  diX/yeiv  (Suppl.  to  331).  t&v  tipo^  <f>0ov€p&v
iaifiopwv  fiffX^^  7670x6,  Procop.   2,  358.     rfj^  tv;^i79  6  <l>d6vo^

2,  178.  iirripeia  Sa//A0K09  =  tantalizing  behaviour  of  a  god,
Lacian  pro  lapsn  in  salat.  1.  Loki  loves  mischief  when  he  brings
about  the  death  of  Baldr.  So  the  devil  laughs  .to  scorn:  der
tiuvel  des  lachet,  Diut.  3,  52.  smutz  der  tiuvel,  welch  ein  rät  1
Helbl.  5,  89.  des  mac  der  tiuvel  lachen  15,  448;  conf.  the
laughing  of  ghosts  (p.  945).

p.  824.]  Radii  capitis  appear  in  pictures.  Not.  dign.  orient,
pp.  53.  116.     Forcellini  sub.  v.  radiatus.     Ztschr.  des  Hess.  ver.

3,  366-7.  äcTpairffv  elBev  ixXdfiyp'aa-av  ültto  tov  7ratS69,  saw
lightning  flash  out  of  his  son  (Asklepios),  Paus.  ii.  26,  4.  do
quam  unser  vröve  zu  ime,  und  gotliche  schine  gingen  üz  irme
antlitze  (fr.  Mary's  face),  D.  myst.  1,  219.

p.  325.]  The  Homeric  gods  are  without  care,  avrol  Si  t
aKTjhie^  elaiy,  II.  24,  526  ;  they  are  blessed,  serene,  and  rejoice  in
their  splendour.  Zeus  sits  on  Olympus,  kvSci  yaltov  (glad  of  his
glory),  repTn-zcipawo^  (delighting  in  thunder),  and  looks  down
at  the  smoking  sacrifices  of  those  he  has  spared.  Ares  too,  and
Briareus  are  KvSei  yalovre^,  A  god  feels  no  pain  :  etfrep  Oeo^  yap
ioTw,  ovK  ala-ß^aerai,  Aristoph.  Progs  634.     So  Gripir  is  ^  glaffr

kondngr,'  SsDm.   172*. The  gods   laugh:  yiXto^  S'  iir    avrm

Tot9  Oeoh  ixiy^Of],  Babr.  56,  5;  risus  «Tbvi^  =  vernantis  coeli
temperies.  Marc.  Cap.  (conf.  giant  SväsuiSr,  p.  758).  subrisit
cnuiels  pater  (Gradivus),  Claudian  in  Eutr.  2,  109.  Callaecia
rUitfloribus  ....  per  herbam  ^a^ere  rosae,  Claud,  laus  Serenae
71.  89.  riserunt  floribus  a,mneB,  Claud.  PI.  Mall.  273;  conf.  laugh-
ing or  sneezing  out  roses,  rings,  etc.  Athena  too  is  said  to
/i6*Sav,  Od.  13,  287.

p.  327.]  For  gods  becoming  visible  Homer  has  a  special  word
ivapyi^^:  ^aXeTTol  Si  0€ol  <l>aiv€a'0ai  ipapyeU,  II.  20,  131.  Oeol
4>alvoyTai  iyapyeU,  Od.  7,  201.   16,  161.     hapyi)^  1i\0e  3,  420.

ivapy))^  avyy ey 6 fievo^,  Lucian's  Sat.  10. Gods  can  appear  and

vanish  as  they  please,  without  any  outward  means :  dwarfs  and


1380  CONDITION  OF  GODS.

men,  to  become  invisible^  need  the  tarn-hat  or  a  miraculous  herb.
No  one  can  see  them  against  their  will :  rtV  &y  Seov  ovk  iOiXoma

6ff>0a\fioi<rip  ISoiT   ^  ivff  ^  evOa  xiovra;  Od.  10.  573. As  a

god  can  hear  far  off:  /c\v€C  Be  kuI  irpoatDdev  &v  Oeo^,  .^sch.  Eani.
287.  375 ;  as  '  Got  und  sin  muoter  selient  dur  die  steine,'  MS.  2,
12^;  so  gods  and  spirits  enter  locked  and  guarded  chambers
nnperceived,  unhindered,  Holtzm.  3, 11.  48.  Dame  Venus  comes
'  dur  gajize  7nüren,'  p.  455-6 ;  the  Minne  conducts  '  durch  der
kemeuäten  ganze  want/  through  the  chamber's  solid  wall,  Frib.
Trist.  796.  St.  Thomas  walks  through  a  closed  door.  Pass.  248,
26-7.  Athena's  messenger  elaijXOe  Trapk  kXtjiSo^  ifAavra,  Od.  4,
802.  iraph  KXtjlSa  \id<r0fj  4,  838.  Loki  slips  through  the  bora
Sn.  356 ;  and  devils  and  witches  get  in  at  the  keyhole.

Examples  of  sudden  appearance,  p.  400;  disappearance,  p.
951-2.  O^inn,  Höner,  Loki  in  the  Faroe  poem,  when  invoked,
immediately  appear  and  help.  Sudden  appearing  is  expressed  in
ON.  both  by  the  verb  hverfa  :  )?&  Avar/ Fiölnir,  Völsungas.  c.  17;
and  by  the  noun  svipr,  Fornald.  sog.  1 ,  402.  Seem.  157*.  der  enget
von  himele  sleif,  Servat.  399.  do  sih  der  rouh  üf  bouch,  der
enget  al  damit  flouch,  Maria  158,  2.  erßior  in  die  lüfte  hin,  die
wölken  in  bedacten,  Urstende  116,  75  ;  conf.  'rt"5a  lopt  ok  log,'
and  p.  1070-1.  der  me^ischlich  schin  niht  bleib  tang,  er  fuor
dahin,  Ls.  3,  263.  Homer  uses  avataaeiy  of  Ares  and  Aphrodite:
avat^avTc,  Od.  8.  361 ;  and  the  adv.  alyfra  as  well  as  KapirdkifjLua^
and  Kpaiirvd,  II.  7,  272.  When  Ovid.  Met.  2,  785  says  of  Min-
erva :  '  baud  plura  locuta  fügit,  et  impressä  tellurem  reppulit
hastä,'  her  dinting  the  ground  with  her  spear  expr.  the  ease  of
her  ascent.  Their  speed  is  that  of  wind  :  17  S*  avifiov  (09  irvoirp
itriaavTO  (of  Athena),  Od.  6,  20.  sic  efiata  rapit  coeli  per  inania
cursum  diva  potens,  unoque  Padum  translapsa  volatu,  castra  sui
rectoris  adit,  Claud,  in  Eutr.  1,  375.  Eros  is  winged,  Athen.  0,
29.  Winged  angels,  pennati  pueri  (p.  505).  Vishnu  rides  on
Garuda,  Bopp's  Gl.  102*.  Indraand  Dharmaas  vulture  and  dove^
Somadeva  1,  70.  Holtzm;  Ind.  sagen  1,  81.  Though  Athena
appears  as  a  youth  in  Od.  13,  222,  as  a  girl  13,  288,  her  favourite
shape  is  that  of  a  bird :  Spvi^  £*  &9  avoTraia  SteTrraro  1,  320.
As  imltures,  she  and  Apollo  settle  on  a  beech-treOj  and  look
merrily  on  at  men,  II.  7,  58.  As  a  swallow,  she  sits  on  the  roof-
tree  amid  the  fighters,  and   thence  {iy^oOev  i^  6po<f)fj<:)  uplifts


DISGUISES.      EQUIPAGE.  1381

the  SBgis,  Od.  22,  297;  so  Louhi  sits  a  lark  on  the  window  of
the  smithy  (Suppl.  to  338)^  and  the  eagle  in  the  dream  e^er  hrl
irpovxoPTi  fieXddptp,  Od.  19,  544;  conf.  the  vulture,  who  the
moment  be  is  named  looks  in  at  the  door,  Meinert's  Kuhl.  165.
165.  Bellona  flies  away  a  bird,  Claud,  in  Eutr.  2,  230 ;  Grestr,
i.e.  OSin,  as  a  valr  (falcon),  and  gets  a  cut  in  his  tail,  Fornald.
sog.  1,  487-8.  Athena  arrj  Sk  Kar  avridvpov  KXiaitf^,  Od.  16,
159 ;  si  mache  sich  schoen,  und  ge  herfür  als  ein  götinne  zuo  der
tür,  Renner  12227.  When  the  unknown  goddess  steps  inside
the  door,  her  stature  reaches  to  the  roofbeam,  fieKaßpov  Kvpe
tcdprj,  then  in  a  moment  she  is  recognised,  Hymn  to  Aphrod.
174,  to  Ceres  189.  A  woman's  spirit  appears  to  a  man  in  a
dream :  siSan  hvarf  bun  &  brott ;  Olafr  vakna'Si,  ok  J'dttist  siä
svip  konunnar,  Laxd.  122.  siSan  vakna'Si  HeSinn,  ok  8&  svipinn
af  Göndul,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  402.     svtpr  einn  var  |>ar,  Saam,  157*.

Fragrance  and  brightness  emanate  from  a  deity,  Schimmelpfeng
100-1.  Hymn  to  Ceres  276—281  (Suppl.  to  318) ;  a  sweet  smell
fills  the  house  of  Zeus,  Athen.  3,  503.  So  with  the  Hebrews  a
elond,  a  mist,  or  the  glory  of  the  Lord  fills  the  house  of  the  Lord,
1  Kings  8,  10-1 ;  2  Chron.  5,  13.  comarum  (of  Venus)  grains
odor,  Claud,  de  nupt.  Heaven  breathes  an  odar  suavitatis,  that
nourishes  like  food,  Greg.  Tur.  7,  1.  The  bodies  of  saints,  e.g.
Servatius,  exhale  a  delicious  odour  (p.  823) ;  conf.  the  flowers  that
spring  up  under  the  tread  of  feet  divine  (p.  330).  The  hands
and  feet  of  gods  leave  their  mark  in  the  hard  stone,  so  do  the
hoofs  of  their  horses  (Suppl.  to  664).  Gods  appear  in  human
form  and  disguise,  OSinn  often  as  a  one-eyed  old  man,  a  beggar,
a  peasant,  to  Hrolf  as  Hrani  bondi  (Hrani  is  a  hero's  name  in
Hervararsaga,  Bani  in  Saxo).

p.  829.]  The  Indian  gods  Hde  in  chariots,  like  the  Grk  :  Indra,
Agni,  Yaruna,  etc.,  Nalus  15-6 ;  7  steeds  draw  the  car  of  Sftryas
the  god  of  day,  Kubn's  Bee.  d.  Bigveda  99.  100 ;  B&tri,  night,
IJsa,  aurora,  are  drawn  by  kine.  Plato  in  Phsedr.  246-7  speaks
of  the  gods'  horses,  chariots,  charioteers,  of  Zeus  driving  a  winged
car.    Seleue  is  appealed  to  :  ttot  ä>K€avov  rpewe  irdXov^,  Theocr.

2,163.     aaripe^,  evKijXoLO  Kar  ävrvya  Nvkto^  oiraiol  2,  166.

The  German  gods  occasionally  drive  in  star-chariots,  or  the  stars
themselves  have  a  chariot,  pp.  151.  723  n.;  conf.  the  car-pro-
cessions p.  336 ;  the  sun  too  drives  a  chariot :  Sol  varp  hendi


1382  CONDITION   OF  GODS.

inni  hoegri  um  himinicJd^r,  Ssem.  1^  (who  is  Vagnarunni  in  Egilss.
610,  OSinn  or  Thörr?).  But  riding  is  the  rule,  though  Loki  says
to  Frigg :  ec  l?vl  r6^S,  er  J;ü  ridf'a  sörat  sifian  Baldr  at  solum,  Sasm.
63^ }  even  beasts  ride  in  the  Beast-apologue,  Renart  10277-280-
460-920.

p.  330.]  When  Athena  sits  with  Diomed  in  his  war-chariot,
the  axle  groans  with  the  weight:  Seivffv  yitp  ayev  Oeov  avBpa
T  apiarov,  II.  5,  888.  When  Ceres  nods,  the  cornfields  shake :
annuit  his,  capitisque  sui  pulcherrima  motu  concussit  gravidis
oneratos  messibns  agros,  Ovid  Met.  8,  780.

p.  331.]  The  gods  appear  in  mist  or  cloud :  Jehovah  to  Moses
in  a  pillar  of  fire.  Dent.  31,  15.  diya  dimovit  Thehul^zm,  juveniqae
apparuit  in  gens,  Claud,  in  Eutr.  1,  390.  (Tci  tenia)  cara  circam-
data  nube,  Ov.  Met.  5,  251.  The  merminne  comes  ''mit  eime
dunste,  als  ein  wint,"  Lanz.  181 ;  in  the  legend  of  Fosete  the  god
vanishes  in  a  caligo  tenebrosa,  Pertz  2,  410.     A  cloud  descends,

and  the  angel  steps  out  of  it,  Girard  de  Viane  p.  153. Gods

and  dsdmons  are  said  to  0i\y€tv,  hoodwink,  delude  (conf.  p.
463-4  of  elves,  and  Suppl.  to  322) :  aWd  fM€  Saifj^toy  OiXyei,  Od.
16,  195;  of  Hermes:  äySp&v  ofifjbara  Oikyei,  II.  24,  343:  of
Poseidon :  dik^a^  Saae  ^aeivd,  H.  IS,  435  ;  of  Athena  :  roif^  ie
I7a\Xa9  ^Adrivalri  deX^ei  koX  firfrtera  Zev^,  Od.  16,  298;  Oca
ffiXyet  1,  57;  but  also  of  Circe  and  the  Sirens,  Passow  sub  v.
ßeXyca.     Hera  holds  her  hand  over  her  prot^gö,  inrepx^ipla,  Paus.

iii.  13,  6. They  take  one  by  the  hair :  arrj  S'  SiriOev,  ^avO^^

&€  /cofir^^  €\€  IlffKeLmvay  IL  1,  197;  by  the  ear:  E^ovo^  irpoa-
eXdoiv  SiriaOey  xal  tov  wto?  /Aov-Xafiofievo^y  Lucian's  Sat.  11.

p.  331.]  The  Grecian  gods  sleep,  Athen.  2,  470;  yet  Ssk.
deus  =  Ztfter  a  somno,  Bopp^s  61.  26*.  A  sick  god  is  healed  by
incense,  Walach.  märchen  p.  228.  They  are  fond  of  play  :
<fn\o7raiyßAOV€^  yap  Kal  oi  &€oI,  Plato  Cret.  ed.  bip.  3,  276.  The
kettledmms  of  gods  resound  from  heaven,  a,ni  flowers  rain  down,
Nalus  p.  181.  238  (conf.  OHG.  heaven  is  hung  full  of  fiddles) ;
'it  would  please  Grod  in  heaven  (to  hear  that  music),*  Melander
2,  no.  449.  Got  mohte  wol  lachen  (at  the  tatermenltn).  Renn.
11526.  Conf.  the  effects  of  music  on  mankind:  when  Salome  is
ill,  there  come  ^zwene  spilman  fiz  Kriechen,  die  konden  generen
(heal)  die  siechen  mit  irem  senften  spil,  des  konden  sie  gar  vil,'
Morolf  1625 ;  '  I  have  my  fiddle  by  me,  to  make  sick  people  well


SLEEP.      SONG.      LANGUAGE.  1383

and  rainy  weather  jolly/  Goethe  11^  11;  the  tinkle  of  bells  a
cure  for  care.  Trist.  398,  24.  39.  411,  9 ;  song-birds  cheer  the
töt-riawes89re,  Iwein  610.  Aucassin's  lay  drives  death  away,
M6oQ  1,  380.  With  the  comforting  of  bereaved  Ska'Si  and
Demeter  conf.  Wigal.  8475 :  '  sehs  videlcere,  die  wolden  im  sine
swaere  (heaviness)  mit  ir  videlen  vertrtben/  and  Orenzer^s  Symb.
i,  466.  Athen,  5,  334.  It  was  a  Lith.  custom  to  get  the  bride
to  laugh,  Nesselm.  sub  v.  praj&kinu.  N.  Preuss.  prov.  bl.  4,
312.  A  king's  daughter,  who  has  a  fishbone  in  her  throat,  is
made  to  laugh,  M6on  3, 1  seq.  The  gods  love  to  deal  out  largess,
are  datores,  largitores,  esp.  Gibika  (p.  137) ;  conf.  borg-geba
(Suppl.  to  274),  oti-geba  (p.  890  n.)  ;  they  are  dr-gefnar,  öl-
f/e/nar,  crop-givers,  ale-givers,  Höstlöng  ii.  2,  11  (Thorl.  sp.  6,
34.  42.  50.  68).

p.  334.]  Gods*  language  and  men's,  Athen,  1,  335.  Lobeck's
Aglaoph.  854.  858*- 867.  Heyne  on  the  first  passage  quoted,
II.  1,  403  :  quae  antiquiorem  sermonem  et  servatas  inde  appella«
tiones  arguere  videntur.  Like  ON.,  the  Indians  have  many  words
for  cloud,  Bopp's  Gl.  16*.  209*.  136^  158^;  but  do  not  attribute
a  separate  language  to  the  gods.  Yet  Somaveda  1,  59.  64  names
the  four  languages  Sanskrit,  Prakrit,  Vernacular  and  Dcemonic,
The  Greek  examples  can  be  added  to :  UTiMyKra^  B*  I^toi  rd^  ye
Bed  fLaxape^  KaXiovaiv,  Od.  12,  61.  di^rol  "Spoira,  aOdvaroi  Sk
HripaTa,  Plato's  PhsBdr.  252.  nyv  S'  ^A^pohiTriv  KiKKrjaKovat
Beoi  T€  xal  avepe^,  Hes.  Theog.  197.  The  difierent  expressions
attrib.  to  men  and  gods  in  the  Alvis-mftl,  could  no  doubt  be  t.aken
as  belonging  to  different  Teut.  dialects,  so  that  Menn  should
mean  the  Scandinavians,  Ooffar  the  GothSi  and  sdl  for  instance
be  actually  the  Norse  word,  stinna  the  Old  Gothic,  GDS.  p.  768.
Kl.  sehr.  3,  221.

p.  335.]  The  Norse  gods  are  almost  all  married;  of  Greek
goddesses  the  only  real  wife  is  Hera.  Gods  fighting  with  heroes
are  sometimes  beaten,  and  put  to  flight,  e.g.  Ares  in  Homer ;  and
he  and  Aphrodite  are  wounded  besides.  Now  Othin,  Thor  and
Balder  are  also  beaten  in  the  fight  with  Hother  (Saxo  ed.  M.
118),  nay.  Balder  is  ridiculus  fuga  (119) ;  but  wounding  is  never
mentioned,  and  of  Balder  it  is  expressly  stated  (113)  :  sacram
corporis  ejus  ^rmt^a/em  ne  ferro  quidem  cedere.

p.  335.]     Apart  from  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva,  the  Indiana


1384  CONDITION  OP  GODS.

reckoned  thirteen  minor  gods,  Bopp's  Gl.  160».  The  former  were
younger  gods,  who  had  displaced  the  more  elemental  powers,
Kuhn's  Rec.  d.  Rigv.  p.  101.  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  3,  126;  conf.
'got  ein  janger  tdr^  (p.  7  n.).  Young  Zeus,  old  Kronos,  Athen.
1,  473.  cot  croni,  deus  recens,  Graff  4,  299.  The  new  year
(p.  755).    GDS.  765.

p.  336.]  Moantaiu-heighta  are  haunts  of  the  Malay  gods  also,
Ausld.  1857,  604*.  irirpa,  Saifiovcop  ava<TTpo<l>ii,  Msch.  Earn.  23.
Olympus  descr.  in  Od.  6,  42 — iß.  To  the  rock-caverns  [at  Ithaca]
gods  and  men  have  separate  entrances,  those  by  the  south  gate,
these  by  the  north  13,  110-1-2.  The  Norse  gods  live  in  Asgard.
Hrei^marr  cries  to  the  Ases :    haldit  heim  he'San,  be  off  home

from  here!    Sasm.  182^. They  have  separate  dwellings,  but

near  together;  conf.  the  Donar's  oak  near  Wuotan's  mount
(p.  170).  ßär  (i  Baldurs-hage)  voru  morg  go9,  Fornald.  sog.  2,
63.  Indian  gods  too  have  separate  abodes :  urbs  KuvSri,  mons
K.  sedes,  Bopp*s  Gl.  19^.  85^.     J*o9  avXiy,  Lucian's  Pseud.   19.

Significant  is  the  ON. :  hefir  ser  um  gerva  sali,  Saßm.  40-1-2.

The  gods  sit  on  thrones  or  chairs  (p.  136),  from  which  they  are
entreated  to  look  down  in  pity  and  protection  :  Z^v^  Bi  yevmire^p
tSoi,  ^sch.  Suppl.  206.  iirlBoi  S*  "Aprefii^  arfvd  1031.  Uta  vinar
augom.  The  gods*  houses  are  marked  by  gates,  Hpt^s  Ztschr.  2,
535.

p.  337.]  The  gods  often  have  a  golden  staff,  with  which  they
touch  and  transform :  j^va^ijf  pdßB^  eK^fkdaaar*  'AOvvrj,  Od.
16,  172.  456.  13,  429 ;  Circe  strikes  with  her  staff.  Od.  .10,  238 ;
conf.  Hermes'  rod,  the  wishing-rod  (p.  976)  and  other  wishing-
gear.  Shiva  has  a  miraculous  bow,  so  has  Indra  ace.  to  the
Vedas.  Apollo's  bow  carries  plague ;  conf.  OSin's  spear  (p.  147).
In  Germ,  märchen  the  fays,  witches,  sorcerers  carry  a  trans-
figuring staff  (p.  1084).

Gods  are  regarded  by  men  as  fathers,  goddesses  as  mothers
(pp.  22.  145.  254).  They  delight  in  men,  avBpaat  repirofievoi,
U.  7,  61 ;  their  kindly  presence  is  expr.  by  the  Homeric  o/a^-
ßaivw  :  09  Xpvatfv  äfiiJHßißfjKa^,  IL  1,  37.  S9  lafxapov  afjL^i"
ßeßrjxei,  Od.  9,  198.  They  love  to  come  down  to  men;  conf.
Exod.  3,  8 :  Karißrfv,  descendi,  hwearf  (p.  325) ;  they  stop  their
chariots,  and  descend  to  earth,  Holtzm.  3,  8.  Nalus  p.  15.
praesentes  caelicolae,  Cat.  64,  383.     Like  the  Ind.  avat&ra  is  a


AGS.      ABODES.      ABMS.      AID.  1385

Oeov  iinhrifila  (visitation),  Lncian's  Conviv.  7.  Gods  are  not
omnipresent,  they  are  often  absent,  they  depart,  Athen.  2,  470.
Japiter  says :  sammo  delabor  Olympo,  et  deus  humana  lustro  sub
imagine  terras,  Or.  Met.  1, 212.  In  the  Faroe  lay,  OSinn,  Hoenir
and  Loki  appear  instantly,  (Appearing  to  a  man  can  be  expr.
by  looking  under  his  eyes,  Btm.  Orendel  pp.  73. 45.  83.  102.)  The
passage :  di  linte  w&nden  (weened)  er  wa-ere  Oot  von  himel,  Griesh.
2,  48,  presupposes  a  belief  in  God's  appearing  (p.  26  n.).  so
ritestu  heim  als  waer  Oot  do,  Dancrotsh.  namenb.  128,  and :  if
God  came  down  from  heaven  and  bade  him  do  it,  he  would  not,
Thumeisser  2,  48.  At  Whitson  the  street  was  hung  with
tapestry:  als  echter  Qod  selve  comen  sonde,  Lana  31321.  God
(or  his  image)  loves  a  place  where  he  is  made  much  of:  Got
mohte  lieber  niht  gesten  uf  der  erden  an  deheiner  stat,  Helbl.  15,
584  ;  '  here  dwells  der  liebe  Gott,'  p.  20  n.  His  return  to  heaven
is  expr-  by :  'do  tmor  Oot  ze  himele  in  deme  gesuneclicheme  bild,'
Diemer  7,  19;  conf.  'ego  in  coelum  migro,'  Plaut.  Amph.  v.  2,

13. Gods  send  messengers,  angels,  those  of  Greece  Hermes,

Iris,  etc.^  who  escort  men  (p.  875),  and  inspect  and  report  the
goings-on  of  the  world,  says  a  pretty  Servian  song  by  Gavrai.
It  is  worth  noting  in  the  prol.  to  Plaut.  Budens,  that  Arcturus
shines  in  heaven  at  night,  but  walks  the  earth  by  day  as  mes-
senger of  Jove.  Gods  assist  at  christenings  (Godfather  Death),
weddings,  betrothals,  Holtzm.  3,  8 ;  and  Mary  too  lifts  a  child
out  of  the  font.  Wend,  march.  16.  They  hallow  and  bless  men
by  laying  on  of  hands :  vigit  ocr  saman  Vao'ar  hendi,  Saam.  74^.
ApoUon  und  Tervigant,  ir  beider  got,  h&t  sine  hant  den  zwein
tjeleit  uf  daz  houbet,  daz  si  helfe  nnberou'bet  und  gelückes
(anrobbed  of  help  and  luck)  solden  s!n,  mit  götltcher  helfe  schin

geschach  daz  ir,  Turl.  Wh.  112»;  like  a  priest  or  father. Gods

(leal  with  men  in  their  sleep  :  a  rib  is  taken  out  of  sleeping  Adam,
to  make  Eve ;  Athena  sheds  sweet  sleep  over  Penelope,  while
she  makes  her  taller  and  fairer.  Od.  18,  188;  Luck  comes  near
the  sleeper,  gods  raise  up  the  fallen  hero,  II.  7,  272.  Their
paltry 'looking  gifts  turn  out  precious  (Berhta's,  Holda's,  Riibe-
zahl's)  :  the  leaves  turn  into  gold,  the  more  fittingly  as  Glasir  the
grove  of  the  gods  bears  golden  leafage.

p.  338.]     Metamorphosis   is  expr.  by  den  Up  verkeren,  Bari.
2-30,  22.     sich  körte  z'einem  tiere  28.     OSinn  vi^brast  i  vals  Itki,


1386  HEROES.

when  HeiSrekr  and  Tyrflng  attack  him,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  487.
Loki  changes  into  a  mare,  and  has  a  foal  (Sleipnir)  bj  SvaiSilfari,
Sn.  47.  falsk  Loki  1  lax  Itki,  SflBm.  68^  Sn.  69.  Heim«aUr  ok
Loki  i  8ela  iikjam,  Sn.  105.  Loki  sits  in  the  window  as  a
bird  113;  conf.  Athena  as  a  swallow  on  the  roof-beam  (p.  326).
Lonhi  as  a  la/rh  (leivonen)  in  the  window  (ikknna),  Kal.  27,
182-5-8.  205.  215  (conf.  Egilss.  p.  420),  or  as  a  dove  (kyyhky)
on  the  threshold  (kynnys)  27,  225-8.  232.  Berhta  looks  in,
hands  things  in,  through  the  window  (p.  274) ;  the  snake  looks
in  at  window,  Firmen.  2, 156.  Louhi,  pursuing  Sampo,  takes  the
shape  of  an  eagle,  denique  ut  (Jupiter)  ad  Trojse  tecta  volarit
avis^  Prop.  iii.  30,  30.  Jupiter  cycnue  et  candidornm  procreator
ovorum,  Arnob.  1,  136  (pp.  666.  491).  In  marchens  a  bear,  eagle,
dolphin,  carries  oiF  the  princess.

p.  338.]  Gods  may  become  men  as  a  punishment.  Dyaus
having  stolen  a  cow,  all  the  Vasu  gods  are  doomed  to  be  bom
men.  Eight  of  them,  as  soon  as  born,  return  to  the  world  of
gods;  the  ninth,  the  real  culprit,  must  go  through  a  whole
human  life,  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  3,  102-6.

p.  339.]  Real  names  (not  merely  epithets)  of  gods  often
become  abstract  ideas  in  Sanskrit.  Indra,  at  the  end  of  a  com-
pound, is  princeps,  dominus,  Bopp  40*;  Sri  is  prefixed  to
other  names  reverentiae  causa,  as  Sriganfisa,  SrimahabhArata
35  7\  In  ON.  one  äs  can  stand  for  another,  as  Bragi  for  QSinn
in  the  saw,  'nioti  bauga  sem  BrO'gi  auga,'  Egilss.  455.  So
Freya,  Nanna,  T^r,  Baldr  become  abstract  terms  (p.  220-1) :
baldr  bryn)?ings,  i.  fetilstinga,  Fomm.  sog.  6,  257.  12,  151.  enn
norSri  niördr  6,  267.  geirniördV  =  heros,  S»m.  266^.  Conf.
Qotes  intensive  (p.  19).


CHAPTER  XV.
HEROES.


p.  841.]  On  demigods,  great  gods,  daemones,  conf.  Boeckh's
Manetho,  p.  488 ;  semidei,  heroes,  Arnob.  2,  75.  The  hero  has
superhuman  strength,  ON.  hann  er  eigi  einhamr,  Fornm.  sog.  3,
205-7;  einhamr,  einhama  signif.  mere  human  strength.  It  is
striking  how  the  Usipetes  and  Tenchtheri  glorify  human  heroes


HEROES.  1387

to  Caesar,  B.  G.  4,  7  :  '  we  yield  to  none  but  the  Suevi,  for  whom
the  immartal  gods  are  no  match.*

p.  343.]  To  vir,  0H6.  wer,  are  prob,  akin  the  Scyth.  olop.
Fin.  Mro«,Kal.  13,04.  21,275.  290;  conf.  Serv.  «ro«A  (p.  369  n.) .
GDS.  286.  Aug.  Civ.  Dei  10,  21.  K.  F.  Herrn.  Gottesd.  alt.
p.  69.  M.  Neth.  helt  as  well  as  helet,  Stoke  3,  4.  Notker's
hertinga,  AS.  heardingas,  El.  25.  130,  recall  Boh.  hrdina,  Pol.
hardzina  (hero),  conf.  Boh.  hrdj^,  Pol.  hardy.  Buss,  gördyi
(proud),  Fr.  hardi,  G.  hart,  herti  (hard).  Arugrim's  eleventh
and  twelfth  sons  are  called  Haddingjar,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  415-6-7.
GDS.  448.  477.  himelischer  degen  in  the  Kl.  1672.  degenin,
heroine.  Renn.  12291.  With  wigant  conf.  the  name  Weriant
freq.  in  Karajan.  Jesus  der  Gotes  wigant,  Mos.  68,  10.  Kämpe
may  be  used  of  a  giant,  MüUenh.  267.  277 ;  beside  cempa,  the
AS.  has  oretta,  heros,  pugil.  Is  not  ON.  hetja  (bellator)  strictly
wrestler,  fencer  ?  conf.  OHG.  liezosun,  palaestritae,  Graflf  4, 1073.
GDS.  578.  With  OHG.  wrecchio,  AS.  ivrecca  [whence,  wretch,
wretched] ,  agrees  best  the  description  of  the  insignes  in  Tac.
Germ.  31  :  NuUi  domas  aut  ager  aut  aliqua  cura ;  prout  ad
qaemque  venere,  aluntur  prodigi  alieni,  contemptores  sui.  Dio-
med  is  avijp  apiafa^,  B.  5,  839.  Heroes  are  rog-hirtingar,  bright
in  battle,  Haralda-mäl  16.  Serv.  yundk,  hero,  yundshtvo,
heroism  ;  so  MHG.  die  mine  jungelinge,  Fundgr.  2,  91,  conf.
Nib.  1621,  2,  and  the  heroic  line  of  the  Ynglingar  (p.  346).  Ir.
trean  hero;  also  faolchu  hero,  strictly  wild  wolf,  falcon,  and
Welsh  gwalch,  falcon,  hero ;  conf.  Serv.  urosh  (p.  869  n.) .

p.  344.]  Heroes  derive  their  lineage  fr.  the  gods :  SigurSr
ormr  t  auga  is  expressly  Offins  aettar,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  258 ;  the
Scythian  Idanthyrsus  counts  Zeus  his  ancestor,  Herod.  4,  126 ;
and  Zeus  does  honour  to  Menelaus  as  his  son-in-law,  yafjißpo^
dio^.  Od.  4,  569.  They  ^q  friends  of  the  gods:  Zeus  loves  both
champions.  Hector  and  Ajax,  II.  7,  280 ;  there  are  '  friends  of
Ares '  and  a  '  Frey's  vinr.'  They  can  multiply  the  kindred  of
the  gods.  Jupiter's  children  are  reckoned  up  in  Bari.  251,  37
seq.;  Alexander  too  is  a  son  of  Jupiter  Ammon  or  Nectanebus  by
Olympias.  '  Galli  se  omnes  ab  Dite  patre  prognatos  praedicant ;
idque  ab  druidibus  proditum  dicunt,'  Caes.  6,  18.  Dietrich
descends  fr.  a  spirit,  Otnit  fr.  Elberichj  Högni  fr.  an  elf,  and
Merlin  fr.  the  devil.


1388  HEROES.

p.  345.]  As  Teutonic  tradition  made  Tuisco  a  '  terra  editas/
the  American  Indians  have  a  belief  that  the  human  race  once
lived  inside  the  earth,  Klemm  2,  159.  Though  Norse  mythology
has  no  Mannus  son  of  Tuisco,  yet  it  balances  GoSheimr  with  a
Mannheimr,  GDS.  768,  conf.  Vestmanland,  Södermanland,  Rask
on  -Alfred's  Periplus  70-1  ;  and  Snorri's  Form&li  12  places  a
Munon  or  Mention  at  the  head  of  the  tribes.  He,  with  Priam's
daughter  Tr&an,  begets  a  son  Tror=Th6r,  fr.  whom  descends
Loritha  =  H16rri«a,  conf.  Pomald.  sog.  2,  13.  GDS.  195.  The
American  Indians  have  a  first  man  and  maker  Manitu,  Klemm

2,  155-7.  On  the  mythic  pedigree  of  Mannus  and  his  three
sons,  see  GDS.  824  seq.

p.  346.]     Ingo  was  orig.  called  Ango,  says  Mannhdt's  Ztschr.

3,  143-4.  He  is  the  hero  of  the  Ingaevones,  who  included  the
Saxons  and  formerly  the  Cheruscans,  consequently  the  Angles,
Angem,  Engem  (GDS.  831.  629.  630),  whose  name  is  perhaps
derived  from  his.

p.  350.]  Did  Dlugoss  in  his  Hist.  Polon.  draw  fr.  Nennius  ?
Jrb.  d.  Berl.  spr.  ges.  8,  20;  conf.  Pertz  10,  314.

p.  350n.]  Ascafna-hurg,  fr.  the  rivulet  Ascafa=  Ascaha,  is
likewise  interpr.  in  Eckehardus'  Uraug.  as  'Ashen-burg  ab
Ascanio  conditore,'  and  is  a  castellum  antiquissimum,  Pertz  8,
259.  578.     On  Asc  and  Ascanius  conf.  p.  572.

p.  351.]  The  old  Lay  of  Patricius  19,  ed.  Leo.  p.  32-3,  has
Eirimoin  (Erimon).     Heremon  in  Diefenb.  Celt.  2^  387-9.  391.

p.  355.]  A  communication  fr.  Jülich  country  says,  Herme  is
used  as  a  not  very  harsh  nickname  for  a  strong  but  lubberly  man.
But  they  also  say,  *  he  works  like  a  Herme,*  i.e.  vigorously ;  and
legend  has  much  to  tell  of  the  giant  strength  of  Herme ;  conf.
Strong  Hermel,  KM.  3, 1 61 .  Herman,  Hermanbock,  Maaler  218**.
Firmen.  1,363^:  'to  make  believe  our  Loft  is  called  Herrn.*
Lyra  Osnabr.  104:  'du  menst  wual,  use  Hergott  si  'n  aalen
Joost  Hierm*  It  is  remarkable  that  as  early  as  1558,  Lindner's
Xatziporus  O,  3^  says  of  a  proud  patrician,  who  comes  home
fuller  of  wine  than  wit :  '  he  carries  it  high  and  mighty,  who
but  he  ?  and  thinks  our  Lord  is  called  Herman,*  On  the  rhyme
'Hermen,  sla  dermen,'  suggestive  of  the  similar  'Ham er,  sla
bamer,  sla  busseman  doet'  (p,  181-2),  conf.  Woeste  pp.  84.  43.
Firmen.  1,258.  313.  360.


INGO.      HERMAN.      MILKY  WAT.      IBING.  1389

p.  357  n.]  Other  foreign  names  for  the  Milky  Way.  American
Indian:  the  way  of  ashes,  Klemm  2,  161.  In  Wallach,  fairy-
tales, pp.  285.  381,  it  comes  of  spilt  straw  that  St.  VenoB
(Vinire)  has  stolen  from  St.  Peter.  In  Basqae :  oeruco  esnebidea,
simply  via  lactea,  f r.  eznea  milk.  Tä^  eh  oupavov  '^vx'Sfv  vofii^o^
AicVa?  oBou^,  Lncian's  Encom.  Demosth.  50.  Lettic :  putnu
zelif-ch,  bird-path,  Bergm.  66  (so  iropo?  olwv&v,  aether,  ^sch.
Prom.  281) ;  also  Deeva  yahsta,  God's  girdle  115,  or  is  that  the
rainbow?  (p.  733).  Arianrod  is  also  interpr.  corona  septen-
trionalis,  though  liter,  silver-circle.  For  the  many  Hangar,
names  see  WolPs  Ztschr.  2,  162-3.

Other  Teatonic  names.  East  Fris.  dat  melkpath,  and  when
nnosaally  bright,  harmswtth,  Ehrentr.  Fries,  arch.  2,  73.  With
galazia  they  seem  to  have  conn.  Oalicia ;  hence  to  Charlemagne,
at  the  beginning  of  the  Torpin,  appears  James  Street,  leading  from
France  to  Galicia.  In  Switzld  :  der  weg  nf  Rom,  Stutz  1,  106.
Westph. :  mulenweg  (Suppl.  to  924),  also  wiärstrate,  weather-
.street,  Woeste  p.  41 ;  so  in  Jutland  veirveven,  Molb.  Dial.  lex.
640,  as  well  as  arlcen  18.  To  ON.  vetrarhraut,  winter- way,
corresp.  the  Swed.  vintergatan;  conf.  Gothl.  kaldgotn,  Almqv.
432,  unless  this  be  for  Karl's-gate.  Do  sunnunpad,  sterrono
Biraza,  wega  toolkono  in  Otfrid  i.  5,  5  mean  the  galaxy  ?  conf.  the
path  of  clouds,  Somadeva  2,  153-7.  58.  61.  Joum.  to  Himavan
1,  106.  Heer-strasze  (-gasse),  viz.  that  of  the  '  wütende  heer,*
in  Meier's  Schwab,  sag.  137-9;  herstrasz,  Mone  8,  495;  Up.
Palat.  hyrstrausz,  heerweg,  Bergm.  115-8.  124;  helweg  (p.  801-2).
Most  import,  for  mythoL  are :  fratien  Hulden  strasze,  vron  Hilden
straet,  Pharaxldis  sidus  (p.  284-5) ;  also  'galaxa,  in  duutsche  die
Brunelstraet*  Naturk.  von  brooder  Thomas  (Clarissas  GheraerC,
p.  278).

p.  361.]  As  we  have  luuaringes-weg  and  Earings-strasz  by
the  side  of  Iringesweg,  so  in  oldish  records  Eurasburg  castle  is
called  Iringesburg,  Schm.  1,  96.  Irinc  is  in  Nib.  1968  a  young
man,  1971-89  a  markgraf  and  H&wartes  man,  and  in  the  Klage
201.  210  ze  Lutringe  geborn.  On  the  meaning  of  the  word
conf.  pp.  727. 1148.  Kl.  sehr.  3, 234.  F.  Magnussen  in  his  Pref.
to  Rigsmäl  connects  (as  I  had  done  in  my  Irmenstrasse  1815,
p.  49)  the  Ericas  of  Ansgar  and  the  Berich  of  Jemandes  with
iiigr,  as  also  the  EriJcsgata  ;  conf.  the  devil's  name  gammel  Erich

VOL.    IV.  I


1390  HBROES.

(p.  989).  That  Erich  was  a  deified  king  is  plain  from  a  sentence
in  the  Vita  Anskarii  cited  above :  '  nam  et  templum  in  hon  ore
supradicti  regis  ditdum  defuncti  statncrnnt^  et  ipsi  tanqnam  deo
vota  et  sacrificia  oflTerre  coeperunt.'

p.  363  n.]  Suevi  a  monte  Suevo,  Chr.  Salem.,  Pertz  5,  512.
a  Suevio  monte,  Hpt^a  Ztschr.  4,  493.     GDS.  323.

p.  365.]  On  the  castra  Herculis  by  Noviomagas,  Ammian.
Marc.  18,  2.  With  the  giant  bones  of  Hugleich  at  the  Rhine-
mouth  (Hpt's  Ztschn  5,  10)  we  may  even  conn,  the  Herculis
columna  which  stood  there  (p.  394).  On  Here.  Saxanus,  Mann-
hdt's  Germ,  mythen  p.  230;  on  the  inscriptions,  Mythol.  ed.  1,
p,  203.  Herculi  in  Petra,  Gruter  49,  2.  veSiov  XiO&Se^  on  the
Rhone,  Preller  2,  147.     Wolfram's  Wh.  357,  25.  386,  6.  437,  20.

p.  366.]  Like  Oastor  and  Polliix,  there  appear  in  Tent,  tales
two  youths,  angels,  saints,  in  a  battle,  or  putting  out  a  fire  (Sappl.
to  Pref.  xliii.  end)  :  '  duo  juvenes  candidis  circumamicti  siolis,
animam  a  corpore  segregantes,  vacuum  ferentes  per  aerem,'
Jonas  Bobb.  in  Vita  Burgundofarae  (Mabillon  2,  421)  ;  conf.  p.
886-7.  duo  juvenes  in  aUns,  putting  out  a  fire,  in  Annal.  Saxo  p.
558.  Chronogr.  Saxo  in  Leibn.  122  fr.  Einh.  Ann.,  Pertz  1,  348.
Again,  the  angel  wiping  the  sword  in  Roth's  Sermons  p.  78,  and
the  destroying  angel.  Lithuanian  legends  have  a  giant  Aids,
Kurl.  Sendungen  1,  46-7.  Jalg  e^a  Jalkr,  Sn.  3;  jalkr  =  senex
eviratus,  says  F.  Magn.

p.  367  n.]  Note,  in  the  Pass.  64,  41  :  ein  wuotegoz  unreiner =
Wuotilgoz:  conf.  '  wuetgusz  oder  groz  wasser,'  Weiath.  3,  702.
and  'in  wueigussen,  eisgussen  und  groszen  stürmen,  3,  704.
Also  p.  164,  and  Wuetes,  Wüetens,  Schm.  4,  203.  GDS.  440.
774-5.

p.  368.]  Sigi  is  0«in's  son,  Sn.  211«.  So  is  Hildolfr,  ibid,,
'  HarbarS's  lord/  SsBm.  75»»,  OHG.  Hiltwoll  So  is  Sigrlami,
Pomald.  sog.  1,  413,  and  has  a  son  Svafrlami.  So  is  Nefr  or
Nepr,  Sn.  211*,  and  has  a  daughter  Nanna  31.  66.  So  is  See-
mingr,  Sn.  211%  Semingr  in  Hervarars.,  Fornald.  s.  1,  416;  conf.
8dmr,  Sdms-ey,  Rask's  Afh.  1,  108.  The  name  of  Gautr,  CWin'a
son  or  grandson,  is  conn,  with  giezon  (pp.  23.  105  n.  142.  164.
367) ;  on  Gautr,  Sn.  195.  0«inn  is  called  Her-gautr,  Egilss.  p.
624,  a\d&  gautr,  Saem.  95\  93^ ;  conf.  Caozes-pah,  -pranno  (-beck,
-bum),  Hpt's  Ztschr.  7,  530.


SCEAF.      GIBIKE,      VALSING.      BILLING.  1391

p.  370.]  The  accounfcs  of  Scedf  in  AS.  chronicles  are  given  by
Thorpe,  Beow.  p.  4.  In  the  same  way  Beaflor  sails  alone  in  a  ship,
a  bandle  of  straw  nnder  his  head,  Mai  35-9,  arrives  51-3,  sails
away  again  152 ;  the  ship  gets  home  180,  39.  Horn  also  comes
ia  a  ship,  and  sends  it  home  with  greetings.  A  Polish  legend
says  of  Piast :  qni  primus  appulerit  in  navicula,  dominus  vester
erit,  Procosius  p.  47.  As  the  swan-children  can  lay  aside  the
swan-ring,  so  can  the  Welfa  the  wolf -girdle  or  whelp-skin.  Klemm
2,  157  has  a  remarkable  story  of  beautiful  children  slipping  oflF
their  dog-skin.  ^Skilpnnt'  in  Karajan's  Salzb.  urk.  must  be  for
Skilpune,  OSinn  is  a  Skilßngr,  Ssem.  47.  Did  the/  and  6  in
Scilfing,  Scilbunc  arises  out  of  v  in  skildva  ?  The  Goth,  skildus
has  its  gen.  pi.  skildive.

p.  371.]  Ell.  sehr.  3,  197.  To  the  Gibi2hen-sieine  enumer.  in
Hpt^s  Ztschr.  1,  573,  and  the  Oebiches-borse  in  Weisth.  3,  344
(borse,  GraflF  3,  215),  add  Oevehen-horst,  Moser  8,  337.  Dorow^s
Freckenh.  222,  and  AS.  Oißcancumb,  Kemble  no.  641  (yr.  984).
The  Nibel.,  which  does  not  mention  the  Burgundian  Gibeche,
has  a  fiirste  or  kiinec  Oibeke  at  Etzel's  court  1283,  4.  1292,  2.
The  Lex  Burg.  3  says :  apud  regiae  memoriae  auctores  nostros,
id  est,  Gibicam,  Godomarem,  Gislaharium,  Gundaharium.  Greg.
Tur.  2,  28  :  Gundeuchus  rex  Burgandionum ;  huic  fuere  qnatnor
filii,  Gundobaldus,  Godegisilus,  Chilpericus,  Godomarus.

p.  371.]  The  diffusion  of  the  FöZ«t2n^a-saga  among  the  Anglo-
Sax,  is  evidenced  by  *  Välsing  *  and '  Välses  eafera '  in  Beow.  1 747-
87.  The  Yölsungs  have  the  snake's  eye  (Suppl.  to  392,  mid.).
The  tale  of  Säufritz  is  told  in  Bader  no.  435.

p.  371  n.]  Mars  segumon,  vincius,  Stalin  1,  112.  Glück  150
says,  segomo  in  nom.  De  Wal.  no.  246  (1847).  Can  it  be  the
same  as  t^yefjuov,  dux  ?

p.  373.]  08inn  himself  is  called  helblindi,  and  Helblindi  is
the  name  of  a  wolf  (p.  246).  Beaflor  is  said  to  have  give  birth  to
a  wolf,  Mai  132,  9;  conf.  the  story  of  the  12  babies  named  Wolf,
MuUenh.  p.  523,  and  that  of  the  blind  dogs,  Pliny  8,  40.

p.  374.]  Pillung,  MB.  9,  10  (yr.  769).  Hermann  Billing,  Hel-
mold  1,  10.  Billung  in  the  Sassen- chron.,  conf.  Förstemann  1,
258.  2,  225.  Oda,  grandmother  of  Henry  the  Fowler,  was  the
daughter  of  a  Frankish  noble  Billung  and  Aeda,  Pertz  6,  306.
tome  BiUingis-huge,  Gl.  to  the  Ssp.  8,  29 ;  conf.  regulus  Obo-«


1392  HEBOES.

tritorum  nomine  Billug,  Helm.   1^  13.     What  means  '  piUungs
ein  w6nic  verrenket '  in  the  Hätzlerin  180,  37  7

p.  376.]  In  Eigls'perge,  MB.  28,  2, 173  (Passan  urbar.).  Juxta
portam  quae  de  Eigeles  (at  Cologne),  Lacomblet  318,  yr.  1134.

p.  378]  The  Heldensage  p.  288  has  two  sons  of  Wieland,
[full]  brothers:  Wütich  and  Wittich  van  der  aiie;  conL  Lat.
Silvanus,  a  forest-god  of  secondary  rank:  Silvani  Incus  extra
mumm  est  avius  crebro  salicto  oppletus,  Plaut.  Aul.  iv.  6,  8.
Ought  we  to  read  Viltinus  for  Vilkinus  ?  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  446b
Schott  conn.  Wate  with  Wuotan,  Introd.  to  Gudr.  Ivi.  To  things
named  after  Wieland  add  the  Wielandstein,  Schwab's  Alp.  p.  136
seq. ;  after  Galans  a  pratum  Oalandi,  now  Prejelan  in  Bourgogne,
Garnier's  Pagi  Burg.  p.  83.  Dan.  Velants-urt,  also  velamsroi,
vendeUrot,  Dyb.  1845,  49. 60.  On  Wielets-kinder  conf.  Schm.  sub
V.  YalföiSur  vel  framtelja,  patris  artem  (mysterium  ? )  enarrare,
SsBm.  1*.  Another  point  of  likeness  betw.  Wieland  and  Hepltas»
tos  is,  that  both  are  masters  of  forging  dwarfs  (p.  471-2).  Their
handiwork  was  famous:  cfyfov  'H^aiaroio,  Od.  4,617.  15,116.
0O9  ''H^^aurro^  Srev^e  7,  92.

p.  380.]  *  Mime  the  old'  in  Bit.  138  seems  to  have  a  ^hort  t,
and  can  hardly  belong  here.  Earajan  in  Verbriid.  von  S.  Peter
has  Mimilo,  Mimistein.  To  Mimigemeford  (conf.  Ledebur's
Bructeri  p.  328),  perhaps  from  an  adj.  mimi-gern,  and  Mimidun
(Mimidomensis  =  Mindensi8,Lappbg  no.  25;  Mimende  on  Weser,
Schrader's  Dyn.  104),  add  a  third  WestpL  locality  Mimegersen,
now  Memsen  in  Hoya  country,  Lappbg  no.  48.  Again,  Mimmelage
near  Osnabrück.  Mimirberh,  perhaps  Mimisberh,  Pertz  8,  776.
The  names  Memeln-brun,  -  -bom,  MemeUbom,  Memilsdorf,
Henneb.  urk.  2,  nos.  153-6.  169.  1,  166. 125,  and  Memelen-bom
(Meibom  by  Eisenach) ,  Thar.  Ztschr.  4,  210  suggest  the  Mimit
brunnr  of  the  Edda.  With  Mimingua,  silvarum  satyrus,  agrees
the  sword's  name  in  En.  5694;  conf.  Mumminc,  Upstdge  137,
(Muma  in  Tfaidrekss.  65).  '  There  are  yet  to  be  considered  Sock'
mimir,  Ssam.  46* ;  Hoddmimir  who  dwells  i  holti  37 ;  Mimsvinr,
Mimisvinr,  Egilss.  641.  Like  Mimics  head  is  VirgiFs  head  which
prophesies,  MSH.  4,  246.  A  head  of  brass  prophesies  in  Val.
et  Ourson  c.  25 ;  enn  epinnen-lioofd  in  the  Dutch  transL  arose
perhaps  from  taking  tdte  d'airain  for  t.  d'araigne.  Heads  often
speak  in  churches,  P.  Magn.  Edda-laere  2,  264.


WBLAND.      MIMI.     TBLL.      DEIFICATION.  1893

p.  383.]  On  Tell  conf.  Bohmer'a  Reg.  p.  197  and  Sinner  in
the  Solothnrner  Wfcb.  1845,  p.  198.  Th.  Platter  87  (abt  1532)
names  him  Wilhelm  Tall,  and  Garg.  180^  Wilh.  Dell,  while  Babe-
lais 1,  23  does  not  mention  him.  A  picture  of  Tell  in  Schwzbg's
Memorial  116*.  Some  stories  make  the  son  shoot  the  apple  off
the  father's  head.  Schützeichel  is  at  this  day  a  family-name  at
Bonn,  Simrock's  Edda  p.  396.

Many  single  heroes  remain  to  be  considered,  snch  as  Poppo
the  strong,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  3,  239,  oonf.  8,  347;  Bugleich  5,  10.
Also  lines  of  heroes :  stirps  Immidingarum  (Sagten)  et  Urbonum
(Bavar.),  Pertz  8,  226.

p.  38S.]  The  (^d  must  stand  at  the  head  of  the  line,  because
he  passes  for  the  father  and  grandfather  of  the  men^  Still  there
remains  an  enormous  difference  between  gods  and  men  j  hence  in
Saxo,  ed.  M.  117,  the  (earthly)  Nanna  rejects  the  suit  of  Balder:
noptiis  deum  mortali  eociari  non  posee,  quod  ingens  naturae
discrimen  copulae  commercium  tollat  »  »  »  »  supemis  terrestria
non  jugari,

p.  385  n.]  Saxo  calls  Othin,  Thor,  etc.  merely  opinaJtwe,  not
naiuralUer  deos  (ed.  M.  118),  and  Balder  a  eemideue  (conf.  p.
340) ;  whereupon  P.  E.  Müller  om  Saxo  p»  54  remarks :  Odin
lired  neither  before  nor  after  Christ.  Old  Conrad  in  his  Trqf.
Kr.  858 — 911  is  not  quite  of  that  opinion:  'si  w&ren  liute  als
ir  nu  stt,  wan  daz  (they  were  men  like  yon,  only)  ir  krefteclich
gewaU  was  michel  unde  manicvalt  von  Teriutern  und  von  steinen
....  ouch  lepten  gnuoge  (lived  plenty)  bt  der  zit,  die  zouberaere
wären,  und  wunder  in  den  j&ren  mit  gougelwise  worhten  (with
jagglery  wrought).'      How   the  old   gods  were   degraded  into

canjurore,  is  shown  p»  1081.  Of  the  deification  of  men  there

are  plenty  of  examples :  '  das  kint  waere  mit  den  goten  ein  got,'
Pass.  298,  27.  The  heathen  adore  Sigelot  as  a  god,  Rol.  198,  21.
Ipomidon  will  be  a  god  himself,  Tit.  3057.  4U7-60.  er  wolde
got  hien  erde  stn,  Diemer  139,  24.  als  er  iz  waere  got  131,  22.
min  wirde  geltch  den  goten  steic,  TurL  Wh.  66".  Of  Caligula :
'  wart  hi  so  sot,  dat  hi  wilde  wesen  god,  ende  hi  seide  openbare
dat  hi  Jupiters  breeder  ware,'  Maerl.  2,  236,  conf.  333.  *  Gram-
baut,  roi  de  Baviere,  se  nommoit  dieu  en  terre,'  and  called  his
castle  Parodie,  Belle  Heldne  p.m.  23.  The  Mongols  practise  the
worship  of  ancestors,  deific.  of  rulers,  EHemm  3,  191-5;  also  vene«
ration  of  saints  and  relics.


1394  HEROES.

p.  392.]  The  Greeks  required  beauty  of  form  in  heroes  as  well
as  gods^  Lacian's  Charid.  6.  7.  Of  Charlem.  it  is  said :  anges
resemble  du  ciel  ius  devol6,  Aspr.  21*.  Heroes  share  the  lofly
stature  of  gods.  Of  Huglaxma  the  legend  says  :  quern  eqaus  a
duodecimo  anno  portare  non  potuit  j  cujus  ossa  in  Rheni  flaminis
insula^  ubi  in  oceanum  prorumpit,  reservata  sunt^  et  de  longinquo

venientibus  pro  miraculo  ostenduntur  (Suppl.  to  365). Many-

handedness  is  often  mentioned.  Ancient  men  with  four  hands,
four  feet,  and  two  faces,  Plato  symp.  189, /our  ears  190.  If  7ap
;fe«p69  ktcaoTt^  an  &fi(ov  ataaovro,  Orph.  arg.  519.  Men  with
8  toes,  6  hands,  Megenb.  490,  2.  30;  conf.  gods  and  giants
(p.  527).  From  the  three-handed  and  three  or  four-elbowed
Heime  (Germ.  4,  1 7)  perh.  the  Heimenstein  takes  its  name,  about
which  there  is  a  folk-tale,  G.  Schwab's  Alb  pp.  161—165.  A
story  about  '  so  Heyne,  so,*  who  helps  to  raise  a  treasure,  in  H.
V.  Herford,  Potth.  p.  93  ;  conf.  Brisinga-men  (p.  306).  A  three-
headed  figure  on  the  Gallehus  horn  discov.  1 734  (Henneb.,  plate

2). Most  akin  to  the  gods  seem  those  heroes  who  are  favoured

with  a  second  birth  (p.  385).  The  fact  of  many  heroes'  names
being  repeated  in  their  descendants  may  have  to  do  with  this
belief,  GDS.  441.  But  Helgi  and  Svava  are  genuine  endrbomir,
Saem.  148.  169.  159^  As  late  as  in  MS.  1,  97»»  we  read  :  '  stürbe
ich  n&ch  ir  minne,  und  wurde  ich  danne  lebende,  so  würbe  ich
aber  umbe  das  wtp  (I  would  woo  her  again)/  Contrariwise  MS.
1,69^:  's6  bin  ich  doch  M  anders  niht  gebom/  Solinus  says
Scipio  was  another  of  the  Unborn,  and  was  therefore  called
CsBsar,  Maerl.  1,  401 ;  conf.  the  Lay  of  Mimmering  tand,  Danske

Vis.  1,  100. Kama,  son  of  the  Sun,  was  bom  with  earrings

and  a  coat  of  mail,  Holtzm.  2,  123-9.  136.  wart  ie  man  mit
wafen  gebom,  Krone  10534;  conf.  'bom  with  a  fiddle.^  To
phenomena  occurring  at  the  birth  of  a  hero,  add  the  storm  that
attended  Alexander's,  Pseudocallisth.  p.m.  12.  Alcmena  tests
Hercules  with  snakes,  which  he  kills  lying  in  his  cradle,  as
Sigmund  does  Sinfjötli  by  kneading  the  dough  that  had  snakes
in  it.  Vols,  saga  c.  7.  KuUenro,  when  3  nights  old,  tears  up
his  swathings.  Gastrin  2,45.  In  the  Sv.  folks.  1,  139.  140,  the
child  walks  and  talks  as  soon  as  bom.  Of  the  grown-up  hero's
strength  the  examples  are  countless.  Tied  to  an  oak,  he  pulls  it
up,  Sv.  foras.  1,  44.  Danske  V.  1,  13 ;  Beowulf  has  in  his  hand


FIGURE.     EQUIPAGE.      SNAKE'S  BYE;  1395

the  strength  of  thiHy,  Beow.  756.  They  ecd  and  drink  enor*
mously,  like  Thörr  (Sappl.  to  320) ;  so  Hammer  grä,  Sv.  foms.  1,

61-2,  conf.  the  giant  bride  1,  71-2.     Syv.  49. Heroes  have

beaming  godlike  eyes,  atiake's  eyes,  ormr  i  auga  ;  so  have  kings,
Saxo,  ed.  M.  p.  70.  Aslög^s  son  (SigurS's  and  Brynhild's  grand-
son) is  called  SigarSr  ormr-i-auga,  gen.  SiguriSar  orm<s-i-anga,
Fornald.  s.  1,  267.  273.  2,  10-4.  Pornm-  1,  115.  His  step-
brothers say  :  eigi  er  oss  i  augam  ormr  ne  franir  snakar,  Fornald.
1,  268  (conf.  orm  fr&nn,  Heimskr.  7,  238.  Sasm.  Hafn.  2,  13).
SigurSr  OSins  aettar,  |>eim  er  ormr  i  auga,  Fornald.  1,  258.
Aslög  prophesies  of  her  unborn  son :  '  enn  &  J?eim  sveini  mun
vera  };at  mark,  at  sv&  man  J'ikkja,  sem  ormr  liggi  urn  auga
sveininam ' — ^a  false  interpretation,  for  not  the  eyebrows  coiling
round,  bat  the  inner  look  (i  aaga)  was  meant,  Fornald.  1,  257.
In  Ssam.  r87*he  is  called  'inn  fran-eygi  sveinn.'  brann  Bryn-
bildi  eldr  or  augom  (fire  flashed  from  B.'s  eyes)  215^  &man
(minaces)  era  augu  ormißeim  eimmfrana  (Völundr)  156^.  hvöss
era  augu  1  Hagals  J?^*a  (Helgi  in  disguise)  158^.     We  still  say:

something  great  shines  out  of  his  eyes.     GDS.  126-7. Other

heroes  show  other  marks :  on  Hagen's  breast  is  a  golden  cross,
Gadr.  143-7.  153;  betw.  Wolfdietrich's  shoulders  a  red  cross,
Hagd.  139.  189.  Valentin  and  Namelos  have  also  a  cross  betw,
the  shoulders,  like  the  mark  of  the  lime-leaf  on  Siegfried's  back,
where  alone  he  is  vulnerable  (as  Achilles  was  in  one  heel),  Nib.
845,  3.  4.  Swan-children  have  a  gold  chain  about  the  nsck,  the
reali  di  Franza  a  niello  on  the  right  shoulder,  Beali  6,  17.  p.m.
344 ;  conf.  the  wolfs-zagelchen  betw.  the  shoulder-blades  (Suppl.
to  1097).  Of  the  Frankish  hero  Sigurd,  the  Vilk.  saga  c.  319
says :  '  bans  homnd  var  sv&  hart  sem  sigg  villigaltar;  sigg  may
mean  a  bristly  skin,  and  seems  conn,  with  the  legend  of  the
bristled  Merowings.^  In  cap.  1 46  we  are  told  that  Sigurd's  skin
grew  hard  as  horn  ;  and  in  Gudr.  101,  that  wild  Hagen's  skin
hardened  through  drinking  the  monster's  blood.  No  doubt  the
original  meaning  was,  merely  that  he  gained  strength  by  it.  The
great,  though  not  superhuman  age  of  110  years  is  attained  by
Hermanaricns,  Jom.  c.  24.  We  read  in  Plaut,  mil.  glor.  iv.  2,
86  :  meri  bellatores  gignuntur,  quas  hie  praegnates  fecit,  et  pueri

'  Thorpe  (ad  Cod.  Ezon.  p.  511)  sees  the  Merowings  in  the  North-Elbe  Maaran-
gani  and  AS.  Myrgingas.    Might  not  these  Mjrrgingas  be  those  of  Mercia  ?


1396  WISE  WOMEN.

annos  octingentos  Tiyniit.  The  gods  bestow  blessings,  the  heroes
emls,  Babr.  63.

p.  392.]  Strong  Franz  also  holds  converse  with  his  knowing
steed,  Müllenh.  p.  422.  The  hero  talks  with  his  sward  as  well  as
his  horse,  Sv.  forns.  1,  65.  Klage  847  seq.  Wigal.  6514.  Drach-
enk.  161*.  Vilkinas.  pp.  54.  160-1.  The  dying  hero  wonld
fain  annihilate  his  sword,  e.g.  the  Servian  Marko  and  Roland,
Conr.  Hol.  237,  3.

p.  394.]  Where  a  god,  devil  or  hero  sits,  there  is  left  a  mark
in  the  stone.  Their  hands  and  feet,  nay,  their  horses'  hoofs,  leave
marks  behind  (Snppl.  to  664).  ons  heren  spronc,  Maerl.  2,  116.
Stone  remains  wet  with  a  hero's  tears  :  hinte  (to  this  day)  ist  der
stein  naz,  d&  Karl  nffe  s&z,  Ksrchr.  14937.


CHAPTER  XVI.

WISE  WOMEN.

p.  396.]  Helen,  as  daughter  of  Zens  and  Leda,  as  half-sister
of  the  Dioscuri,  is  already  half  divine ;  but  she  is  also  deified  for
her  beauty,  as  her  brothers  are  for  bravery,  Ludan  9,  274.  Flore
says  of  Blancheflar,  whom  he  snpposes  dead,  2272  :

inch  het  Got  ze  einer  gotinne

gemacht  in  himelriche

harte  wünnecliche.
Women  have  the  further  advantage  over  the  harder  sex,  of  being
kind   and   merciful,  even  giantesses  and   she-devils  (Snppl.   to
530).

p.  397.]  Soothsaying  and  magic  are  pre-eminently  gifts  of
women  (p.  95).  Hence  there  are  more  witches  than  wizards :
'  where  we  bum  one  man,  we  burn  maybe  ten  women,'  Keisersb.
omeis  46*.  A  woman  at  Göppingen  had  foretold  the  great  fire,
Joh.  Nider  (d.  1440)  in  Formic.  2,  1.

p.  398.]  Woman-worship  is  expr.  in  the  following  turns  of
speech  [Examples  like  those  in  Text  are  omitted],  ich  waen.
Got  niht  80  guotes  hftt  als  ein  guot  wlp,  Frauend.  1,  6.  Art  altos
vrouwen  ende  joncfrouwen.  Rose  2051.  van  vrowen  comt  ons
alle  ere,  Walew.  3813 ;  for  one  reason :  wir  wurden  von  frowen
geborn,  und  manger  bet  gewert,  Otn.,  cod.  Dresd.  167.     daz  wir


WOMAN-WORSHIP.  1397

von  den  lieben  froltn  ftn  alsamen  [zer  werlte]  komen  stn,  M.
Beheim  275,  19.     Renn.  12268.

p.  400.]  The  hero  devotes  himself  to  a  lady's  semce^  $he  will
have  him  for  her  knight :  ich  toil  in  z'  eime  ritter  hin,  Parz.  352,
24.  '  den  ritter  dienstes  biten/  ask  for  his  service  368, 1 7.  dins
ritters  353,  29.  min  ritter  nnd  der  din  358,  2.  Schionatalander
has  to  serve  Signne '  anter  schiltliohem  dache,'  under  shield-roof.
Tit.  71, 4,  he  was  '  in  ir  helfe  erbom '  72,  4;  and  this  relationship
is  called  her  fellowship  73,  1.

do  versaocht  ich  'n,  ob  er  kande  stn

ein  friuni,  daz  wart  vil  balde  schtn.

er  gap  dnrch  mich  (for  me)  stn  hamas  enwee  •  •  •

mange  &ventiare  snoht'  er  bloz  (bare,  unarmed),  Parz.  27, 13.

The  knights  wore  scutcheon  or  jewel,  e^.  a  sleeve,  or  mouwe,
stoucbe  (parts  of  a  sleeve), 'durch  (in  honour  of)  die  frauen.'
The  lady  is  screen,  shield  and  escort  to  the  knight  whose  sword
is  in  her  hand,  Parz.  370-1.  Mch  wil  in  strite  bi  in  sin'  says
Obilftte  to  Gawan  371,  14.  Captives  must  surrender  to  the  con-
queror's lady-love  394, 16.  395,  30.  396, 3 ;  she  is  thus  a  warrior
like  Freya,  a  shield-maiden  (p.  423-4).  The  sleeve  he  wears  as
favour  on  his  shield  has  touched  the  maiden's  naked  a/7»,  Parz.
375,  16.  390,  20.  Er.  2292  seq.  En.  12035  seq.;  a  shirt  that
has  touched  the  fair  one's  form  is  the  knightly  hauberk's  roof,
Parz.  101,  10 ;  conf.  'es  gibt  dir  gleich,  naizwan,  ain  kraft,  wen
du  im  an  den  rock  rüerest  (touchest  his  coat),'  Eeisersb.'s  Spin-
nerin f.  3^.  Schionatulander  nerves  him  for  the  fight,  and  wins
it,  by  thinking  how  Sigune  showed  herself  to  him  unrobed;  which
she  had  done  on  purpose  to  safeguard  him  in  danger.  Tit.  1247 —
50.  1497.  2502.  4104.  4717.

Sed  in  cordibus  milites

depingunt  nostras  fades,

cum  serico  in  palliis

colore  et  in  clipeis  ;   Oarm.  Bur.  148^

Sifrit  gedaht  an  daz  küssen  daz  ver  Erimhilt  im  hftte  getan,
di-von  der  degen  kuene  (champion  bold)  ein  niuwe  kraft  gewan,
Roseng.  1866.  Man  sol  vor  Srste  an  Got  gedenken  in  der  not,
Dar-n&ch  gedenke  an  die  süezen  mündel  röt.  Und  an  ir  edeln


1398  WISE   WOMEN.

minne,  diu  verjagt  den  töfc,  Kolm.  MS.  73,  87.    42,  46.     For

'thinking  of/  see  my  Diet.  sub.  v.  andacht  (devotion). The

ladies  too  call  out  to  their  champion,  or  they  wish :  '  The  little
strength  that  I  have,  I  would  it  were  with  you  I '     As  yon  like  it,

i.  2. ^Woman's  beauty  can  split  rocks :  von  ir  schoene  müese

ein  fels  erkrachen,  MsH.  3,  173*.  It  heals  the  sick:  der  sieche
muose  bi  in  genesen,  Dietr.  Drach.  350*».  sol  daz  ein  siecher  ane
sehn,  vor  fröide  wurde  er  schier  gesunt  310**.  ir  smieren  und  ir
lachen,  und  solde  ein  sieche  das  ansehn,  dem  müeste  sorge  swachen
70*.  A  flight  to  the  ladies  saves  a  man :  hie  sal  die  zuht  vore
g&n,  nn  he  under  den  vrowin  ist  komin,  4626 ;  conf.  4589.  A
lady's  tread  does  not  hurt  flowers:  ich  waen  swelhe  trat  diu
künegin,  daz  si  niht  verlos  ir  Hehten  schtn,  Turl.  Wh.  97*>.  152V

p.  400.]  Sin  pflftgen  (him  tended)  wise  frouwen,  Grudr.  23,  3 ;
they  are  called  blessed  inaids  in  SteuVs  Tirol  p.  319.

p.  401.]  The  OHG.  itis  (Kl.  Sehr.  2,  4  seq.)  is  still  found  in
MHGr,  In  the  Wigamur  1564  seq.  a  maiden  is  called  idis  (mis-
printed eydes,  for  it  rhymes  wis,  pris  1654-90.  1972) ;  she  has  a
limetree  with  a  fountain  of  youth.  Again,  Itisburg,  Dronke  4, 22 ;
Idislind,  Trad.  Wizenb.  (printed  Dislith),  Pertz  2,  389.  Dis  in
Förstem.  1,  335;  is  Gifaidis  1,  451  for  Giafdis?  Cnrtins  in
Kuhn's  Ztschr.  connects  itis  with  dd^vrj,  but  where  is  the  s?  I
prefer  to  see  in  it  the  shining  one,  fr.  indh  =  lncere,  edha,  edhus
=  lignum  (Kl.  sehr.  5,  435).  AS.  tcfe«  =  freolicu  meowle.  Cod.
Exon.  479,  2.  Both  meowle  and  mawi  have  likewise  their  place
here ;  conf.  Meuenhch,  Panzer's  Beitr.  1,  no.  85.   Kl.  sehr.  3, 108.

p.  403.]  ON.  disir  appear  as  parcae :  '  vildu  svft  disir,'  so
willed  the  fates,  Höstl.  (Thorl.  6,  6) ;  talar  dtsir  standa  )?er  &
tvcBT  hliSaXy  ok  vilja  )?ik  saran  sia,  SsDm.  185*.  Sacrif.  off.  to
them :  disablot,  bletu9  disir,  Bgilss.  205-7.  var  at  disa  blotty
reiiS  hesti  um  disckr  salinn,  Yngl.  33.  Of  the  suicide :  heingdi
sik  i  disarsal,  Hervarars.  p.  454 ;  for  ser  i  dtsar  sal  527.  iodffis,
Sn.  202.  GrendeFs  mother  is  an  ides,  Beow.  2518.  2701.  On
Vanadis  and  her  identity  with  the  Thracian  moon-goddess  Bendis,
see  Kl.  sehr.  5,  424.  430  seq.

p.  403.]  Brynhild's  hall,  whither  men  go  to  have  their  dreams
interpreted,  stands  on  a  hiU,  Vols.  c.  25 ;  conf.  hyQaberg  (p.  1149).
völu  leid'i,  divinatricis  tumulus,  Laxd.  328.  An  old  fay  has  not
been  out  of  her  tower  for  fifty  years,  Perrault  p.  m.  3. Of


ITIS   (DIS).      ALRUNA,      NORN.  1399

Veleda  and  the  Goth.  Waladamarca  in  Jörn.  c.  48  we  are  remioded
by  the  wise  horse  Falada  in  the  fairy-tale  (p.  659)^  and  by  Yelen-
tin :  valantinne,  volantinne  alternate  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4^  437.  The
volur  roam  about :  ek  for  1  sk6g  volvu  liJci,  Pomald.  s.  1,  135 ;
I'll  var  völvan  1, 139.  Ssem.  154^.  Other  prophetesses  in  Nialss.
p.  194-9  :  SsBann  kerling,  hon  var  frdäfai  mörgn  ok  framsyn,  en
^SL  var  hen  gömul  miök ;  she  wanted  the  weed  removed^  else  it
woald  canse  a  fire,  which  came  trae.  In  Fornm.  3. 4,  46  :  visinda-
kona,  SÜ  er  sagSi  fyrir  örlög  manna  ok  llf ;  conf.  p.  408.

p.  405.]  Wackernagel  in  Hpt^s  Ztschr.  2,  539  thinks  aZiorunas
:=Aa{u>ranas  =  hellirüna.  A  cave  of  the  Alraun  in  Panz.  Beitr.
1,  78 — 80.     mandragora  alruna,  Hone's  Anz.  8,  397.

p.  406.]  My  resolation  of  ON.  norn  into  Goth,  navaims,  death-
goddess  (Kl.  sehr.  3,  113)  is  opposed  by  Müllenhof  in  Hpt's
Ztschr.  9,  255.  The  '  Nahanarvali '  may  have  been  norn- wor-
shippers, Navarna-haliy  Goth.  NavarnS-haleis^  ON.  Norna-halir,
GDS.  715.  806.  Perhaps  we  onght  to  look  to  the  Swed.  verb
nyma,  warn,  inform,  Sv.  folk  v.  1,  182-3.  In  Faroe  they  say
nodn,  nodnar,  for  norn,  nomir,  äs  they  do  kodn,  hodn,  badn,  for
korn,  horn,  bam,  Lyngbye  132;  so  Nodna-gjest  474.  That
Nürnberg  contains  norn  is  the  less  likely,  as  we  find  it  spelt
NüemA>eTC,  MSH.  3,  296^  Nueren-herc,  Walth.  84,  17.  Nornbom
seems  a  cormp.  of  Nordenbom,  like  Norndorf^  Nornberg,  also  in
up.  Germany.  Conf.  the  Fris.  Non,  Ehrentr.  Fries,  arch.  2,  82 ;
Numhari,  Karajan  83,  6.

p.  408.]  Two  Germ,  tmds,  Muss  and  Kann,  take  their  names,
like  the  three  Norns,  from  simple  verbs,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  88.
OHG.  wurt,  fortana.  Gl.  hrab.  964*  ;  conf.  giwurt,  ungiwurt,  Graff
1,  993-4,  and  perhaps  Goth,  gavairßi,  n.  AS.  seo  tvyrd  gewearf,
G»dm.  168,  3.  hie  Wyrd  forsweop,  Beow.  949.  With  '  me  J^set
Wyrd  gewcef  (wove)  ^  conf. '  wtgspeda  gewiofu  (webs),'  Beow.  1347
(p.  415).  In  Kormakss.  p.  267  comes  Urfr  at  brunni;  conf.
UrSar  lokar,  Ssem.  98».     UrSr  ö«llnga  214*  is  like'dls  Skiol-

danga.' The  Norns  shape  our  destiny,  skapa:   ömlig  norn

tkop  088  i  &rdaga  181*;  in  Faroe  :  tea  heava  mear  nodnar  skapt,
Lyngbye  132.  In  Graff  6,  662, '  steffara=:parca'  is  for  sceffara;
seepfarun^'peLTCAe,  Gl.  Schlettst.  6,457;  they  'sceppen's  men-
schen leven,'  Limb.  3,  1275.  Vintler  v.  146  (see  App.  Snperst.
G)  speaks  of  gaeh-schepfen,  Pfeiffer's  Germ.  1,  238 ;  conf.  Finn.


1400  WISB  WOMEN.

luonnotar,  ylrgo  creatriz^  esp.  ferri^  fr.  laon  to  make:   ^kolroe

neittä  laonnotarta/  tres  saot  virgines  naturae  creatrices. Nonis

are  of  yarious  lineage^  Sadm.  188*:

Bundr-bornar  miok  hugg  ek  at  nomir  sd^

eigo^S  ]7aer  aett  saman,

sumar  ero  o^-kungar^  sumar  d!/'*knngar,

Bumar  doetr  Dvalias  (some^  daughters  of  D.,  a  dwarf).

p.  409.]  On  nomir,  volvur,  spaJconur,  hWcapur  conf.  Maurer
284.  tha  thriu  wufer,  Ehrentr.  Fries.'  arch.  2,  82.  die  drei  heiU
rdthinnen,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  56-7-9.  283,  Slav,  tri  rojenice  or
sujenice,  Valjavec  76 — 91.  Boh.  sudice,  judges,  fem.  (p.  436).
Nomir  nä-gönglar,  nauiS-gönglar,  Seem.  187^  conf.  ed.  Hafn.  173 ;

note  the  t'ofra-norn  (p.  1033). The  Norns  travel:  konur  ]yaer

föru  yfir  land,  er  völvur  vorn  kalla^r,  ok  sögSu  mönnum  forlög  sin,
&rforS  ok  a^ra  hlati,  ]?&  er  menu  vildu  vtsir  verSa.  I^essi  sveit  kom
til  Virvils  bönda,  var  völvunni  J>ar  vel  fagnat,  Forum,  s.  3,  212.
Yölvan  arma  3,  214.  Norns,  parcae,  fays  come  to  ths  infanfs
cradle,  and  bestow  gifts ;  so  does  frau  Saelde  in  Erec  9900.  A
gammal  gumma  prophesies  at  the  birth  of  the  prince,  Sv.  folks.
1,  195 ;  three  mör  (maids)  get  bathed  by  the  girl,  and  then  give
gifts  1,  130  (in  our  Grerm.  tale  it  is  3  haulemänuchen).

p.  410.]  Sasva  Necessitas

clavos  trahales  et  euneos  manu
gestans  ahenea.    Hor.  Od.  i.  35,  18.

Si  figit  adamantinos

sammis  vorticibus  dira  Necessitas

clavos.  Hor.  Od.  iii.  24,  5.

diu  grimme  Not,  Er.  837.  merkja  ä  na^li  Nau9,  Sssm.  194^
Rdnar  ristnar :  a  Nomar  nagli  196*  {clavo,  not  fingernail) ;  conf.
Simplic.  1,  475  (Keller) :  when  Needs-be  rideth  in  at  door  and
windows.

p.  411.]  Of  Greek  mythical  beings  Oalypso  comes  nearest  the
fays,  being  goddess  and  nymph ;  and  in  MHG.  the  goddess  Venus
is  '  diu  feine  diu  ist  entsl&fen,'  MS.  2,  198%  while  a  fay  is  often
called  goddess.   '  gotinne  =  fee,'  Hpt's  Ztschr.  2,  183.   der  gotinne

land,  der  g.  hende,  Frib.  Trist.  4458.   4503. In  Petronius  we

already  find  a  personal  (though  masc.)  fattis :   malus  f.  (ilium


NORN.   PAT.   FATA  MORGANA.  1401

perdidit)  c.  42.  hoc  mihi  dicib  f.  mens,  c.  77.  On  tho  house  of
the  iria  fata  in  the  Forum,  conf.  Gregorovius's  City  of  Rome  1,
371-2-3.  In  the  Eng^adin  they  are  called  fedas,  feas,  also
nymphaa  and  dialas :  they  help  in  loading  corn,  bring  food  and
drink  in  silver  vessels;  three  dialas  come  to  the  spinners,
Schreiber's  Taschenb.  4,  306-7.

p.  412.]  On  the  triafata  see  Horkel's  Abh.  p.  298  seq.,  conf.
the  three  viaidens  in  F.  v.  Schwaben :  twelve  white  maidens  in
MtiUenh.  p.  348.  Fays,  like  elfins,  are  of  unsurpassed  beauty  :
scboener  danne  ein  veine,  Trist.  17481.  plus  blanche  qae  ße.
Orange  5,  3059.  plus  bele  que  f^e  ne  lerine  5,  4725.  pus  bela
qnefada,  Ferabr.  2767.  de  hiaut4  resanbloit  f6e,  Marie  1,  100.
They  hold  feasts,  like  the  witches  (p.  1045-6).  In  an  old  poem  (T)
p.  104-5,  three  fays  prophesy  at  the  birth  of  Auberon,  son  of
Jul.  Cadsar  and  Morgue,  when  a  fourth  comes  in,  p.  106  (p.  32  of
the  prose).  The  fates  are  gifting  a  newborn  child,  when  the  last
one  hnrries  np,  but  unfortunately  sprains  her  foot  (sbotatose  lo
pede),  and  lets  fall  a  curse,  Pentam.  2,  8.

p.  413n.]  Fata  Morgana  is  *  Femurgdn  diu  riche'  in  Lane.
7185,  Fämorgän  in  Er.  5155.  5229,  Feimurgan  in  Iwein  3422.
The  * Marguel,  ein  feine'  in  Er.  1932  is  the  same,  for  she  answers
to  the  Fr.  '  Morgain  la  f^e.'  She  is  called '  Morgiiein  de  elwinne,'
Lanz.  13654.  19472.  23264;  '  Femurga  die  kluoge,'  Tit.  4376;
while  Wolfram  treats  the  word  as  the  name  of  a  country  (p.  820  n.).
On  the  other  hand.  Trist.  397,  14 :  gotinne  üz  Avelün  der  feinen
laut  (fay's  land) ;  Er.  1930  :  der  wert  Avalon,  Fr.  Tile  d' Avalen.
Does  this  go  back  to  an  old  Celtic  belief  7  Michelet  2,  15  men-
tions holy  maids  who  dispensed  fair  weather  or  shipwreck  to  the
Celts.

p.  414  n.]  Alaa  seem  akin  to  lao^t  ilo-o^  and  elBevai :  lao^
equally  distributed,  tcara  i<ra  ex  aequo,  Kar  alaav  convenienter,
aeque.

p.  415.]     Instead  of  KaraK\Si0€%  in  Od.  7,  197  Bekker  reads  :

iaaa  oi  alaa  tcark  xX&ßitTe  ßapeleu
yeivofiiv^  vrjaavro  X/i^9>—

joining  Kara  to  i^o-ainro.  Lucian's  Dial.  mort.  19 :  fi  Molpa  xal
TO  .(f  ap;^9  o$To»9  iiriKeKX&aOai,  Conf,  eiriKXmda)  used  of  gods
and  daemons  (Suppl.  to  858).    Atropos  was  supposed  to  be  in


1402  WISK   WOMEN.

the  sun,  Clotho  in  the  moon,  Lachesis  on  earth,  Pint.  4,  1157.
For  a  beautiful  description  of  the  three  Parcae  (parca,  she  who
spares  ?  Pott  in  Kuhn  5,  250)  see  Catullus  62,  302—321  with
ever  and  anon  the  refrain  :  Currite,  ducentes  subtemina,  cnrrite,
fusi  1  also  vv.  381—885.

Nuhila  nascenti  sen  mihi  parca  fuit.     Ov.  Trist,  v.  3,  14.
Scilicet  hanc  legem  nentes  fatalia  parcae

stamina  bis  genito  bis  cecinere  tibi.    v.  3,  25.
0  duram  Lacheain  !  quae  tam  grave  sidus  habenti

fila  dedit  vitae  non  breyiora  meae.     v.  10,  45.
Atque  utinam  primis  animam  me  ponere  cunis

jussisset  quaevis  de  trihus  una  soror  !     Propert.  iii.  4,  28.
Tres  parcae  aurea  pensa  torquentes.     Petron.  c.  29.
Daz  het  in  vrowe  ChlotS  so  erteilet ;
ouch  was  vil  gefuoc  vro  Lachesis  daran.     Turl.  Krone  7.

Servian  songs  tell  of  a  golden  thread  (zlatna  shitza),  that  nn-
winds  from  heaven  and  twines  about  a  man,  Vuk  1,  54  (Wesely
p.  68).  57-8.

p,  416.]  German  legend  is  full  of  spinning  and  weaving
women  :  kleit  daz  ein  wildiu  feine  span,  Troj.  kr.  2895.  ein
feine  worhte  den  mantel,  Altd.  bl.  2, 231 ;  and  fays  weave  mantles
in  Charlem.  p.  105-6.  paile  que  fist  fere  uneße,  Auberi  37.  in
the  cave  sits  an  old  spinster,  Kuhn's  Westph.  1,  72.  Asbiom.
1,  194;  conf.  the  old  wehster,  Khesa  dainos  198.  Oelueke  span
ipa  kleider  an,  Frauenl.  115, 15.  There  are  usually  three  together:
tresnymphae,  Saxo  p.  43  (ed.  M.  123).  drei  puppen.  Firm.  2,
34.  die  drei  docken,  H.  Sachs  i.  4,  457**.  die  drei  Marien,
Kindh.  Jesu,  Hahn  68.  Uhland's  Volksl.  756.  lb.  1582,  332.
three  Marys  protect  from  fire,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  67.  three  spinning
Marys,  Uhl.  Vksl.  744.  three  old  wives  on  a  three-legged  horse,
Müllenh.  p.  342.  the  trasfeyes,  Alsatia  1853,  p.  172-3.  Many
stories  of  three  women  in  white  or  hlach,  esp,  in  Panzer's  Beitr.
1,  2.  11-4-6-8.  25-8.  35-6-8.  46-8;  they  stretch  a  line  to  dry
the  wash  on  1,  1.  9.  11-7.  25.  59.  129  n.  271-8 ;  sing  at  the  birth
of  acÄi7d  1,  11;  become  visible  at  Sun^wend^tag  (solstice),  1,
38-9  75.  84.  Near  Lohndorf  in  Up.  Franconia  a  lad  saw  three
castle^maid^ms  walking,  two  had  kreuz-rocken  (-distaffs)  with  nine
spmdles  spun  full,  the  third  a  stühles-rocken  with  nine  empty


FATES.   FAYS.   YALEYBS.  1403

ones ;  and  the  others  said  to  her,  '  Had  you  but  covered  your
spindles  once,  tho'  not  spun  them  fall,  you  would  not  be  lost.'
Panz.  Beitr.  2,  136.  A  beautiful  Moravian  story  tells  of  three
maidens  who  marched,  scythe  in  hand,  mowing  the  people  down ;
one,  being  lame,  cannot  keep  up,  and  is  laughed  at  by  the  other
two.  She  in  her  anger  lets  men  into  the  mystery  of  healing
herbs.     Kulda(d'Elv)110.

p.  418.]  Jupiter  sends  out  Yictoria^  as  OSinn  does  valkyrs,
Aug.  Civ.  D.  4,  17  (p.  435-6).  Their  name  has  not  been  found
yet  in  OHG.,  though  Schannat,  vind.  1,  72  (yr.  1119)  has  WaU
hirie,  femina  serva.  With  the  sTdald-nneyar  conf.  schild-knecht,
who  keeps  his  lord's  shield  and  hands  it  to  him,  as  they  to  OSinn.
Maidens  guarding  shield  and  helmet  occur  in  the  M.  Neth.  Lane.
16913.  conf.  16678.  17038.  Their  other  name,  hiabn-meyar  is
made  clearer  by  hild  und  hialmi,  Ssdm.  228%  hialm  geta  ok
ogkmey  verSa  242*.  The  valkyr  is  named  folkvitr  192'.  So,
megeiltchiu  wvp  help  Charles  to  conquer,  Ksrchr.  14950  seq. ;
diu  megede  suln  dir  dine  6re  widergewinnen  14954 ;  der  megede
sigenunft  15029.  Aurelian  led  in  triumph  ten  captive  Gothic
amazons,  Yopisc.  in  Aurel.  34.  Lampr.  Alex.  6320  calls  the
Amazons  urlauges  wip,  Paul  Diaconus  mentions  a  fight  betw.
Lamissio  and  the  Amazons  for  the  passage  of  a  river.  Adam  of
Bremen  4,  19  speaks  of  'amazons  and  cynos-cephali ;  *  conf.  P.
Diac.  1,  15.  hunt-hmhito  in  Graff.  The  Krone  17469  tells  of
*  der  meide  laut,'  land  of  maids.

p,  418  n.]  Hun  var  vitr  kona  ok  vinsael  ok  skörüngr  mikill,
Fomm.  3,  90 ;  hon  var  skorungr  mikill,  virago  insignis,  Nialss.
c.  96 ;  and  Glaumvör  is  skorungr,  Vols.  c.  33  (Kl.  sehr.  3,  407),
skarungr,  Vilk.  c.  212;  but  in  c.  129  8karüngr=hero.  Conf.
skor,  f.  =  barba,  scabellum,  commissura;  skar,  m.^  fungus,  inso-
lentia.     OHG.  8cara  =  acies,  agmen;  scaraman,  scario.

p.  419.]  Where  is  the  garment  mentioned,  in  which  08inn
hid  the  thorn  for  Brunhild  ?  Saom.  194^  only  says  '  stack  hana
svefn-)?omi ; *  Vols.  c.  20  'stack  mik  svefn-)7orni*;  Sasm.  228^
'lank  hann  mik  skiöldom  ok  hvttom.'  On  spindU^stones,  see
Michelet  1,  461.

p.  420.]  Brynhildr  or  Sigrdrifa  fills  a  goblet  (fyldi  eitt  ker),
and  brings  it  to  Sigurd,  Saom.  194^.  Vols.  c.  20.  A  white  lady
with  silver  goblet  in  M.  Koch's  Beise  d.  Oestr.  p.  262.    A  maiden


1404  WISE  WOMBN.

hands  the  horn,  and  is  cut  down^  Wieselgren  455.  Sabterraneans
offer  similar  drink,  Mtillenh.  p.  576 ;  and  a  jatte  hands  a  horn,
whose  drops  falling  on  the  horse  strip  him  of  hair  and  hide^
Buna  1844,  88.

p.  421.]  Nine,  as  the  fav.  number  of  the  valkyrs,  is  confirmed
by  Ssem.  228%  where  one  of  them  speaks  of  atta  systra.  To  cor
surprise,  a  hero  Granmar  turns  valkyrja  in  Asgard,  and  bears
nine  wolves  to  Sinfiotli,  Ssem.  154^.  Fornald.  1^  139 ;  conf.  AS.
wylpen,  wulpin  =  bellona.

p.  428.]  The  valkyrs  ride  through  the  air  (p.  641),  like  Venus
(p.  892)  :  a  thing  aft.  imputed  to  witches  (p.  1088,  &c.).  Twelve
women  in  the  wood,  on  red  horses.  Forum.  3,  135.  By  the  ex-
pression Hl<xckT  for,  Hlöck  seems  to  have  the  task  of  conducting
those  fallen  in  battle  to  O^inn  or  Freyja,  Egilss.  p.  226.  Is
Oondulldidn  to  gand  ?  61.  Edd.  torn.  1  :  '  ^önduU  =  nodulus '  j
BO  that  OSin^s  by-name  Göndler,  Sssm.  46%  would  mean  '  tricas
nectens.'  The  Rota  in  prose  Sn.  39  is  Rotho  in  Saxo  M.  316.
An  OHG.  name  Hilticomd,  ad  pugnam  veniens,  Cod;  Fuld.  no.
153  (yr.  798),  describes  a  valkyr;  conf.  Hruodicoma,  no.  172;
ON.  Hild/r  und  hialmi,  SsBm.  228* ;  AS.  hilde  woman,  Cod.  Exon.
250,  32.  282,  15.  Thi-uSr  is  likewise  a  daughter  of  Th6rr.
Heilah-trftd,  Trad.  Fuld.  2,  46.  träte,  Pass.  K.  395,  77.  frau
Tratte,  Praet.  weltb.  1,  23.     the  drut  (p.  464).

p.  428.]  May  we  trace  back  to  the  walkürie  what  is  said  to
Brunhild  in  Biter.  12617?  'ir  w&ret  in  iur  alten  site  komen,  des
ir  pfl&get  £,  daz  ir  s6  gerne  sehet  stnt,*  you  love  so  to  see  strife.
Brynhildr  is  'mestr  skörungr'  (p.  418  n.).  In  Vilk.  p.  30  she
is  called  'hin  rtka,  hin  fagra,  hin  mikill&ta,'  and  her  castle  Segard.
In  the  Nibel.  she  dwells  at  castle  Isenstein  on  the  sea;  is  called
des  tiufels  wip  (or  brftt),  and  ungehiurez  wip,  417,  4.  426,  4;
wears  armour  and  shield,  407,  4,  throws  the  stone  running,  and
hurls  the  spear;  is  passing  strong  425,  1.  509,  3.  517,  3,  and
ties  up  king  Günther  on  their  wedding-night.

p.  424.]  Like  the  shield-maidens  are  Fenja  and  Menja,  of
whom  the  Grottasöngr  str.  13  says :  i  folk  stigum,  brutum
skioldu  ....  veittum  goÖum  Oothormi  liff.  Clarine  dubs  her
Valentin  knight,  Staphorst  241.  They  strike  up  brotherhood
with  their  prot6g6s ;  so  does  stolts  Signild,  Arvidss.  2, 128 — 130 ;
conf.  the  blessed  (dead  ?)  maiden,  who  marries  a  peasant,  Steub's


WISE  WOMEN.  1405

Tirol  319.  llie  valkyrs  too  have  swan-shifts,  Saam.  228»:  Ißt
hami  y&ra  hugfallr  kondngr  fttta  systra  und  eik  horii  (born  under
oak) ;  conf.  Cod.  Bxon.  443,  10.  26  :  wunian  under  dc-treo;  and
Grottas.  str.  11 :  varum  leikur,  vetr  niu  alnar  fyrir  lord'  nefan.
The  wish-wife's  clothes  are  kept  in  the  oaktree,  Lisch  5,  84-5.

p.  425.]  Brynhildr  first  unites  herself  by  oath  to  young  Agnar,
and  helps  him  to  conquer  old  Hialmgunnar,  Sasm.  194 ;  conf.
174*.  228*  (Vols.  c.  20),  where  it  says  'ei«a  seldak'  and  'gaf  ec
ungom  sigr.'  After  that  she  chose  Sigurd :  sv&  er  ek  haus  mer
til  manns,  Vols.  c.  25.  Such  a  union  commonly  proved  unlucky,
the  condition  being  often  attached  that  the  husband  should  never
ask  the  celestial  bride  her  name,  else  they  must  part ;  so  with
the  elfin,  with  Melusina,  with  the  swan-knight.  Also  with  the  god-
dess Ganga,  who  had  married  Santanu,  bub  immediately  threw  the
children  she  bad  by  him  into  the  river,  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  3,  95-9.
On  the  anion  of  a  hero  with  the  ghostljr  vila,  see  6DS.  130-1.

p.  429.]  Valkyrs  are  to  a  certain  extent  gods  stranded  on  the
world  in  Indian  fashion.  They  stay  7  years,  then  fly  away  to  the
battle:  at  vitja  viga,  yisere  proelia,  Sasm.  133;  so  in  the  prose,
but  in  the  poem  örlög  drygja  (p.  425).  The  misiu  wip  in  the  Nibel.
are  also  called  merwip,  diu  wilden  merwip  1514-20-28,  and  Hagen
hows  to  them  when  they  have  prophesied.

p.  431.]  The  hut  of  the  forest-women  in  Saxo  p.  39  vanishes
with  them,  and  Hother  suddenly  finds  himself  under  the  open  sky,
as  in  witch-tales  (p.  1072).  Gangleri  heyr8i  dyni  mikla  hvern
Teg  frft  ser,  oc  leit  öt  &  hli'S  s^r :  oc  ^k  er  hann  sez  meirr  urn,  )?&
»tendr  hann  uti  a  slettum  velli,  s^r  ]fi,  önga  holt  oc  önga  borg,  Sn.
77.     Such  vanishings  are  called  siott-hverfingar,  Sn.  2.

p.  483.]  Holz'Vnp,  Otn.  Cod.  Dresd.  277;  conf.  dryad,  hama-
dryad (p.  653).  To  cry  like  a  wood-wife,  Uhl.  Volksl.  1,  149 :
schrfi  als  ein  wildez  wip  owe  !  Lanz.  7892.  The  wild  woman's
horn,  gestuhl  (spring,  stool),  Wetterau.  sag.  282  ;  wllde  fräulein,
Woirs  Ztschr.  2,  59  ;  daz  wilde  vrouwelin,  Ecke  172.  In  Schlüch-
tern wood  stand  the  vnld  liouses,  wild  table,  often  visited  by  the
wild  folk,  Buchonia  iv.  2,  94-5;  a  ivillemännches  haus  and  tisch
(table)  near  Brückenau,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  186 ;  conf.  daz  wilde  ge-
twerc  (p.  447).  Wood-wives  are  also  called  dini-weibel  (Suppl.  to
279),  and  carry  apples  in  their  basket,  like  the  matronae  and
Nehalenniae.     At  flax-picking  in  Franconia  a  bunch  plaited  into

VOL.  IV.  K


1406  WISE   WOMEN.

a  pigtail  is  left  for  the  liolz-fräule  (as  part  of  a  sacrifice  was  laid
aside  for  nymphs,  Sappl.  to  433  n.)>  and  a  rhyme  is  spoken  over
it,  Panz,  Beitr.  2,  160-1.  tvitte  wiwer  in  the  forest-cave,  Kuhn's
Westf.  sag.  1,  128.  The  rauhe  (shaggy)  woman  appears  in  the
wood  &t  midnight,  Wolfdietr.  307-8  (Hpt's  Ztschr.  4) ;  the  mother
of  Fasolt  and  Ecke  was  a  rauhes  weih  (p.  483).  Zander's  Tanh.
pp.  7.  17  speaks  of  wald-schälklein  Cupido.  Does  Widukind,  a
very  nncommon  name^  mean  wood-child  ?  conf.  Widnkindes
speckia,  Ltinzel  22,  25.

p.  433  n.]  Weaving  naiads  in  Od.  13, 107.  Fountain-nymphs,
daughters  of  Zeus^  are  worshipped  by  Odysseus  and  in  Ithaca  13,
356.  17,  240 ;  a  part  of  the  sacrifice  is  laid  by  for  them  14,  435.
ß(Ofib^  vvfi<f>d(ov  17,  210.

p.  434  n.]  The  reluctance  of  Proteus  is  also  in  Virg.  Georg.
4,  388 — 452 ;  the  same  of  VertumnuSf  Ov.  Met.  14,  642  seq.
Propert.  iv.  2.

p.  435.]  Bz  ne  sint  merminne  niet.  En.  240,  4,  ein  wise  mer-
minne,  Lanz.  193,  5767.  3585.  6195,  als  Sue  merminne  singhen.
Rose  7896.  A  captive  merwoman  prophesies  ruin  to  the  country
as  far  inland  as  she  is  dragged,  Firmen.  1,  23.  Müllenh.  p.  338.
Queen  Dagmar  hears  the  prophecy  of  a  hav-fru,  D.V,  2,  83 — 85
(in  which  occurs  the  adage  :  vedst  du  det,  saa  vedst  du  mer).
The  mermaid  of  Padstow,  exasperated  by  a  shot,  curses  the  har-
bour, and  it  is  choked  up  with  sand.  For  Melusine  the  common
people  say  m^re  Lusine.  Danish  songs  have  maremind  and  mare-
qvinde,  *waltminne= lamia,'  Gl.  florian.  Fundgr.  1,  396.  walt^
minna  =  echo  (p.  452),  lamia,'  Graff  2,  774.  widuminna,  Gassel
ortsn.  p.  22.

p.  436.]  The  vila  builds  her  castle  in  the  clouds,  her  daughter
Munya  (lightning)  plays  with  her  brothers  the  two  Thunders,  Vuk
nov.  ed.  1,  151-2.  She  sits  in  ash-trees  and  on  rocks^  singing
songs  ;  talks  with  the  stag  in  the  forest ;  bestows  gifts,  and  is  a
physician  (p.  1148),  Vuk  151.  149  n.,  no.  114.  158.  She  resem-
bles the  devil  too ;  holds  night-dance  on  the  hill  (Vuk  sub  v.
vrzino  kolo),  teaches  pupils  to  lead  clouds  and  make  storms,  de-
tains the  last  man.  The  vilas  are  likest  the  white  ladies  (Suppl.
to  968).  With  Mihtati  conf.  Lith.  'ulbauya  volunge/  the  wood-
pecker whines,  and  MS.  2,  94^  :  '  ir  klokent  als  umbe  ein  fftlen
bowax  ein  speht,'  as  woodpecker  about  a  plumtree.


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1407

CHAPTEK  XVII.
WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.

p.  439.]  Augnstine  C.  D.  8^  14  divides  animate  beings  into
three  classes :  '  tripertita  divisio  animaliam  in  deos^  homines^
daemones.  Dii  excelsissimam  locum  tenent^  homines  infimum,
daemones  medium;  nam  deorum  sedes  in  coelo^  hominum  in  terra,
in  aere  daemonam/  The  vettar  have  more  power  o^er  natnre
than  we,  but  have  no  immortal  soul,  a  thing  they  grieve  at  (p.

517).     Fries,  bot.  udfl.  1,  109. The  Goth,  aggilus,  OHG,  engil,

is  not  a  convenient  general  term  for  these  middle  beings,  for  it
conveys  a  definite  Christian  sense.  Iw.  1891  uses  geiat  for  dae-
mon :  ein  unsihtiger  geist.  Oenius  means  having  generative  po wer^
Gerh.  Etr.  gods  pp.  15.  52.  Another  general  term  is  ungethünif
Schweinichen  1,  261-2.  Spirits  are  also  ungeheuer  (p.  914) :  die
ühelen  ungehiuren,  Ges.  Abent.  8,  61,  70-6  ;  elhische  ungehiure  8,
75.  The  Swed.  rä  too  seems  to  have  a  general  sense :  sjö-rA,  tomt-
räfSJcog-rä,  räand,  Runa  1844,  70;  conf.  &s  (Suppl.  to  24  and
498).  Mod.  Gr.  arixciov,  Pauriers  Disc.  prel.  82,  must  be
aToij(€tov  element,  conf.  to  oToix^tov  tov  Trora/xoO  2,  77.

p.  442.]  The  Victovali,  Victohali  are  Goth.  Valhtfi-haleis,  ON.
Vaetta-halir,  fr.  vict,  wiht,  wight,  and  the  same  people  as  the
Nahanarvali  (Suppl.  to  406).  GDS.  715.  Can  vaihtshe  fr.  vaian
to  blow,  and  mean  empty  breath  ?  In  Hpt's  Ztschr.  8,  178  '  iht
(ie-wiht)  übles  ^  is  half  abstract,  like  Goth,  vaihteis  ubilös;  whilst
'eines  boesen  wiehtes  art'  in  Lanz.  8693  (conf.  1688)  is  altogether
concrete;  so  are,  'diz  nngehiure  wiht/  Ges.  Abent.  2,  129;  dat
vule  wicht,  Rein.  8660 ;  dat  dein  proper  suverlec  wechtken  (girl),
Verwijs  p.  88 ;  O,  Engl,  ivight  =  heing,  wife,  Nares's  Gl.  sub  v. ;
illar  vaettir,  Pomm.  4,  27;  ill  vaettr  ok  örm,  Pomald.  1,  487;
rög  vaettr,  Sasm.  67-8;  o-vaettr,  malus  daemon,  our  tin-wesen.
land-vaettir  are  Saxons  'dii  loci  praesidea'  161.  dii  vettrame,
Dybeck  1845,  p.  98.  uppä  vegnar  vaettir,  ex  improvise,  Biöm
sub  V.  veginn  (slain).  The  Norweg.  go-vejier,  good  wights,  whence
the  gU'Vitter  of  the  neighbouring  Lapps,  answer  to  our  gute  wichte,
gute  liolden  (pp.  266.  456. 487);  de  guden  holden,  Gefken's  Beil.  99.
124-9.  A  15th  cent,  description  of  the  ßiesengebirge  has  'nmb
des  weckirchen  oder  hergmönlins  willen,'  Moneys  Anz.  7,  425 ;  is


1408  WIOHTS  AND  BLVBS.

this  word  akin  to  wicht,  as  well  as  ar-weggers  (p.  454  n.)  wHich
might  mean  '  arge  wichte/  malicious  wights  T  ^  Weckerlein  is  a
dog's  name,  fr.  wacker  (brisk,  wide-awake).  WihteUn,  p.  441  n.,
may  mean  simply  a  puppet,  like  tocke,  docke :  bleierne  (leaden)
holder-zu)€rglin,  Garg.  2o3^  A  wichtel-^^ube  in  Sommer  p.  24,
a  wichtelen-ZocA  in  I^nz.  Beitr.  1,  42.  Like  wiht,  dcM  ding  stands
for  nightmare,  Praetor.  Weltb.  1,  27,  as  bones  coses  does  for  booi
genii,  Alex.  289,  24,  and  M.  Lat.  creatura  for  something,  wight,
Ducange  sub  v.

ON.  kynd,  f.,  pi.  hyndir,  is  genus,  ens,  SaBm.  1*.  6\  118*;  kynsl,
kynstr,  res  insolita;  Swed.  kyner,  creaturae,  Runa  1844,  74.*
Akin  to  this  word  seems  MHGr.  kunder,  creature,  being,  thing,
also  quaint  thing,  prodigy :  was  ehunders  ?  Wackern.  lb.  506,
30;  conf.  675,  39.  676,  28.  907,  7.  909,  17.  solhez  kunder  ich
vemam,  MSH.  3,  195^.  tiuvels  hunter,  Bol.  223,  22.  der  tiuTel
und  allez  sin  kunder.  Tit.  2668.  du  verteiltez  k.,  Ges.  Abeut.  3^
25.  bestia  de  funde  s6  sprichet  man  dem  k..  Tit.  2737.  verswin-
den  sam  ein  k.,  daz  der  boese  geist  fuort  in  dem  r6re  2408.  ein
yremdez  k«,  MSH.  3,  171\  ein  seltsaene  k.,  Walth.  29,  5.  ein
triigeüchez  k.  38, 9.  diu  oeden  k.,  MSH.  3, 213*.  das  scheusslich
kunter  I  Oberlin  846^;  but  also  'herlichiu  kunder/  Gudr.  112,  4.
einer  slahte  k.^  daz  was  ein  merwunder,  Wigam.  1 19.  maneger
slahte  k«,  Wh.  400,  28.  aller  slahte  kunterlich,  Seryat.  1954.  k.
dazftf  dem  velde  vrizzet  gras  (sheep),  Helmbr.  145.  der  krebez
izzet  gem  diu  kunterltn  im  wazzer.  Renn.  19669.  OHG.  Chun-
teres  frumere^  Cod«Lauresh.  211.  M.Neth.  conder,  Brandaen  33.
1667.  dem  boesem  unkunder,  Dietr.  9859,  formed  like  ON.
övaettr ;  conf.  AS.  tudor,  progenies,  untydras,  monstra^  Beow.  221.

p.  443.]  OHG.  '  faunos = aZp,'  Hpt's  Ztsohr.  10,  869.  MHQ.,
beside  alp  (dd  kom  si  rehte  als  ein  alp  ftf  mich  geslichen,  Maarit.
1414),  has  an  exceptional  alf:  so  tum  ein  alf  .  .  .  was  nie  so  alf
(both  rhym.  half).  Pass.  277,  69  and  376,  6.  der  unwise  alf  S02,
90.    ein  helfelöser  a// 387,  19.     der  tumme  alf  482.  12.     der  to-

rehte  oZ/684, 40;  conf.  the  name  Olfalf  Karajan  110, 40. Perh.

a  nom.  'diu  elbe'  is  not  to  be  inferred  fr.  the  dat.  'der  elbe'  in

*  Ar-weggere  is  a  name  for  earth-mghtB :  ar-beren»«rd-beeren,  p.  467,  L  8 ;  and
if€^-lin-ii;t/i£-lin  p.  449,  last  1. — Tbanb.

3  Skrymtl,  monstrum,  Vilk.  s.  35,  $kHnuh  Fomm.  4,  56-7,  nsad  like  kynsl.
Ihre  says,  8krym8l=latebra,  Dan.  skrämsel  terriculamentum ;  Neth.  8chr6m  terror,
ON.  Bkraomr  blatero ;  Skrymir  (p.  541).


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1409

MS.  1,  50\  as  Pfeiffer  p.  75  says  the  Heidelb.  MS.  reads  '  von  den
dbenj     The  dwarf  in  Orendel  is  Älban ;  a  name  Elhlin  in  Dint.  2,

107  ;  a  mountain-sprite  Alber  in  Schm.  1,  47. With  the  above

Olfalf  conf,  'ein  rehter  olf'  Roseng.  xiii.,  which  comes  near  MHG.
nlf^  pi.  nlve,  bat  disagrees  in  its  consonant  with  alp^  elbe.  On
the  'other  hand^  '  da  ölp,  da  dölp '  in  H.  Sachs  i.  5,  525^  agrees

with  the  latter;  so  does  OZfeen-berg,  Hess.  Ztschr.  1,  245. The

qaite  reg.  M.  Neth.  alf  (p.  463,  last  2  11.)  has  two  plurals  :  (1)
alven  in  Br.  Oheraert  v.  719.  met  alven  ende  elvinnen,  Hor.  Belg.
6,  44 ;  and  (2)  elven  in  Maerl. :  den  elven  bevelen,  Clarisse's  Gher.
p.  219.  There  is  also  a  neat,  alf  with  pi.  elver ;  conf.  the  names  of
places  Elver^sele,  Elvinnen-herg,    A  large  ship,  elf •sohmte,  Ch.  yr.

1253  (Bohmer's  Reg.  p.  26,  na  190)  is  perh.  fr.  the  river  Elbe.

AS.  £B{/tnnt  means  nymphae,  dftn-ceZ/Snntoreades,  wada-ee2/{nnddry-
ades,  wedter-eelfinne  hamadryades,  BAC-celfinne  naiades,  feld^celfinne
maides,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5, 199.  The  Dan.  assimil.  of  eilen  for  elyen
occurs  indep.  of  composition  :  '  eilen  leger  med  hannom,'  mente
captos  est,  Wormius  Mon.  Dan.  p.  19.  ellenild^'SoTw,  haldrin,
Asbioms.  1,  46*8. 105.  indtagen  af  huldren  1, 99.  To  ölpetrutsch,
&c.  add  elpendroUch,  Orator's  Id«  und  Herm.  1814,  p.  102 ;  Up.
Hess,    'die  ilmedredsche' ;  Fastn.   350   älpetrüll  ;    conf.   trotsch

Moneys  Anz.  6,  229. The  adj.  from  alp  is  elbisch :  in  elbiscker

anschowe,  Pass.  97,  15.  ein  elbiache  ungehiure,  6es.  Ab.  3,  75.
ein  eUnschez  fts  3,  60.  elbischer  gebaere  3,  68.  ich  sihe  wol  daz
d&  elbisch  bist  3,  75.

p.  444  n.]  For  the  Alps  there  occur  in  the  Mid.  Ages  '  elbon
=salpibus,'  Diut.  2,  S50^  aber  ehe,  trans  alpes.  Rother  470.
über  albe  kdren,  Servat.  1075.  zer  wilden  albe  klftsen,  Parz.  190,
22.     gdn  den  wilden  alben,  Bari.  194,  40.

p.  444  n.]  Welsh  gwion  s  elf,  fairy.  On^  banshi,  benshi  see  Hone's
Every  Day  b.  2,  1019,  O'Brien  sub  v.  sithbhrog  (Snppl.  to
280).  becmsighe,  Leo's  Malb.  gl.  37,  sighe  35.  Hence  the  name
of  an  elvish  being  in  the  West  of  Engl.,  pixy,  pexy,  pixhy,  Scotch
paikie,  Jamieson  2,  182,  and  pixie,  Suppl.  219.  For  the  cole-
pixy,  at  frait-gathering  time,  a  few  apples  are  left  on  the  tree,
called  in  Somerset  the  pixhy 'hording  (fairies'  hoard),  Barnes  sub
V.  colepexy.    Picsy-ridden,  i.e.  by  night-mare;  pixyAed,  led  astray.

p.  445.]  The  distinction  betw.  alfa/r  and  dvergar  appears  also
in  Sasm.  28* :  for  dlfom  Dvalinn,  D&inn  dvergom.     By  Alfheimr


1410  WIGHTS  AND  BLVB8.

Bask  understands  the  sonthemmost  part  of  Norway,  Afb.  1,
86-8 ;  by  dvergar  tbe  Lapps  1^  87.  Loki,  who  is  also  called  dl/r,
is  sent  by  O'Sinn  to  Anduari  or  Ändßvari  in  SvartdJfaheim,  Sn.
136;  so  Plutarch  4,  1156  derives  daemons  from  the  servants  of
Kronos,  the  Idasan  Dactyls,  Corybantes  and  Trophoniads.
Curiously  Olafr  is  called  digri  Geirsta^a-aZ/r,  because  he  sits  in

the  grave-mound  at  Geirsto«,  Pornm.  4,  27.    10,  212. Both

albs,  alps  and  the  Lat  albas  come  (says  Kuhn  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.
5,  490)  fr.  Ssk.  rihhus;  conf.  thie  vAzun  man = angels,  O.  v.
20,  9.  die  weissen  männel.  Weise's  Com.  probe  322.  Vishnu  on
the  contrary  appears  as  a  black  dwarf,  Meghaduta  58,  and  again
as  a  l^'own  shepherd-boy  15.  Dwarfs  are  created  out  of  black
bones,  '  or  bldm  leggjom,'  Ssem.  2^.  Migrating  dwarfs  are  either
white  or  black  in  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  14.  StiU  I  think  it  speaks  for
my  threefold  division,  that  the  elves  made  by  witches'  magic  are
also  black,  white  and  red,  where  red  may  stand  for  brown,  though
hardly  for  döckr.  In  charms  too,  the  '  worms '  equivalent  to  elves
are  always  of  those  three  colours ;  an  Engl,  spell  names  '  fairies
white,  red  and  black,'  Hone's  Yeatb.  1534.  And  horses  blacky
brown  and  white  turn  up  in  the  fay-procession.  Minstrelsy  199.

p.  446.]  The  dwarf  Andvari  dwells  in  SvartMfaheim,  Sn.  136 ;
Sn.  ]  6  makes  some  dwarfs  live  in  the  ground  (t  moldu),  others  in
stones  (t  steinum).

447.]  For  duergr,  Saom.  49*  has  durgr,  LS.  twarg,  Westph.
twiark,  L.  Bhen.  qaerge,  Firmen.  1,  511 ;  Up.  Lausitz  querx  2,
264.  ^ gituerg=^xiAn\x&  vel  pomilio,'  Gl.  Slettst.  29,  48.  ein
wildez  getwerc,  Er.  7395  ;  getwergeltn  1096.  daz  tzwerk,  Keller's
Erz.  632,  3.  toildiu  getwerc,  Goldem.  5,  1.  Sigen.  21,  9.  Ecke
81,  5.  A  deed  of  1137  is  signed  last  of  all  by  '  Mirabilis  nanus
de  Arizberg,  nepos  imperatoris  Heinrici,'  MB.  4,405;  was  his
name  Wuntertwerc?  (a  Mirabilis  near  Minden,  yrs.  1245-82,
Wigand's  Wetzl.  beitr.    1,    148.    152.     Henr.  Mirabilis,  D.  of

Brunswick,  d.  1322. Earth- mannikins  do  spin,  Sup.  993 ;  but

their  favourite  line  is  smith-work;  they,  are  'hagir  dvergar,'
S»m.  114\  Knockers  are  little  black  hill- folk,  who  help  to
knock,  and  are  good  at  finding  ore.  Hone's  Yearb.  1533.  The
thunderbolt  was  also  elf-shot,  conf.  Alp-donar  (p.  186*7).  As
smiths  with  cap  and  hammer,  the  dwarfs  resemble  Yulcan,  who
is  repres.  with  hat  and  hammer,  Amob.  6,  1 2  j  conf.  Lateranus


WIGHTS  AND  BLVBS.  1411

(Sappl.  to  511).  Dwarfs  were  worked  on  ladies'  dresses^  dvergar
ä  öxlum,  Seem.  102^.

p.  447  n.]  The  korr,  dwarf,  dim,  korrik,  is  black  and  ugly,
with  deep-set  eyes  and  a  voice  muffled  by  age,  Schreib.  Abh.  v.
streitkeil.  p.  80.  Welsh  gwarchell,  a  puny  dwarf,  gwion,  elf,
fairy,  gwyll,  fairy,  hag.  Lith.  karla,  Tcarlele.  Serv.  malienitza,
manyo,  little-one,  star^mali,  old  little-one,  kepetz.

p.  448.]  The  worship  of  elves  is  further  attested  by  the  alfa-
blot  performed  in  one's  own  house,  Pomm.  4,  187.  12,  84;  a
black  lamb,  a  black  cat  is  offered  to  the  haldren,  Asb.  Huldr.  1,
1 59.  In  Dartmoor  they  lay  a  bunch  of  grass  or  a  few  needles  in
the  pixies'  hole,  Athensdum  no.  991.  The  alp-ranke  is  in  AS.  ailf-
pone,  OHG.  alb-dono,  like  a  kerchief  spread  out  by  the  elves  7  (p.
1216) ;  alf-rank,  amara  dulcis.  Moneys  Anz.  6, 448.  Other  plants
named  after  them  are  elf-blaster,  elf-näfver,  Dyb.  Runa  1847,  31.

p.  451  n.]  The  adage  in  the  Swiss  dwarf-story,  '  salben  tho,
salben  gha*  (conf.  issi  teggi,  p.  1027),  is  found  elsewhere  :  Norw.
*8Jöl  gjort,  sjöl  ha,'  Asb.  Huldr.  1,  11;  Vorarlb.  'selb  to,  selb
ho,'  Vonbun  p.  10 ;  '  salthon,  saltglitten,'  Wolf's  Ztschr.  The
goat^sfeet  suggest  the  cloven  hoofs  of  satyrs,  for  dwarfs  too  '  dart

through  the  wood  on  pointed  hoof/  Dietr.  drach.  140*. The

ill  effect  of  curiosity  on  men's  dealings  with  dwarfs  comes  out  in
the  following : — A  shepherd  near  Wonsgehau  saw  his  dog  being
fed  by  two  dwarfs  in  a  cave.  These  gave  him  a  tablecloth,  which
he  had  only  to  spread,  and  he  could  have  whatever  food  he
wished.  Bat  when  his  inquisitive  wife  had  drawn  the  secret
from  him,  the  cloth  lost  its  virtue,  and  the  zwergles-brunn  by
Wonsgehau  ran  blood  for  nine  days,  while  the  dwarfs  were
killing  each  other,  Panz.  Beitr.  2,  101.

p.  451.]  Angels  are  small  and  beautiful,  like  elves  and  dwarfs;
are  called  geonge  men,  Csedm.  146,  28 ;  woman's  beauty  is  comp,
to  theirs,  Walth.  57,  8.  Frauend.  2,  22.  Hartm.  bk.  1,  1469.
Percival  'bore  angel's  beauty  without  wings,'  Parzif.  308,  2.^
And  dwarfs  are  called  the  fair  folk  (p.  452) ;  sgön-aunken,  Kuhn's
Westph.  sag.  1,  63.  Alberich  rides  '  als  ein  Ootes  engel  vor  dem
her,'  Ortnit  358.  die  kleinen  briute  (she-dwarfs),  vrouwen  also
diu  bilde  get&n  (done  like  pictures),  Alex,  and  Antiloie  (Hpt's

>  Pennati  pueri  already  attend  VenoB  in  CIandian*B  Epith.  Palladii ;  angels  flit
round  the  tower,  Pertz  6,  451«.


1412  WIGHTS  AND  ELVBS.

Ztschr.  5,  425-6)';  conf.  '  Divitior  forma,  qnales  andire  solemns

Naides  et  Dry  odes  mediis  incedere  silvis/  Ov.  Met.  6,452. On

the  other  hand,  Högfni,  whose  father  was  an  alb,  is  pale  and  dun
as  bast  and  ashes,  Yilk.  c.  150;  changelings  too  are  ngly  (p.
468).  We  read  of  demea  wihti  (p.  441)  ;  and  the  red-capped
dwarf  is  black,  Buna  3,  25.  Dwarfs  have  broad  brows  and  2a»i^
hands,  Dybeck  1845,  p.  94;  groze  arme,  kurziu  bein  het  er  n&ch
der  getwerge  site,  Wigal.  6590 ;  and  the  blatevueze  in  Bother
seem  to  belong  to  dwarfs,  by  their  bringing  the  giants  costly

raiment Dwarfs  come  up  to  a  man's  knee,  as  men  do  to  a

giant's:  'die  kniewes  höhen  ....  die  do  sint  eins  kniewes
hoch,'  Dietr.  drach.  299*.  175*^  843*.  Dietr.  u.  ges.  668.  570.
Often  the  size  of  a  thumb  only :  pollex,  Pol.  palnch.  Boh.  palec,
ON.  I^ftralftngr  (Swed.  pyssling :  '  alia  min  fru  mors  pysslingar/
St.  folks.  1,217-8;  ON.  pysslingr,  fasciculus),  Lith.  nykszt^lis,
thnmbkin,  wren,  Kl.  sehr.  2,  432-3.  In  Indian  stories  the  soul
of  the  dying  leaves  the  body  in  the  shape  of  a  man  as  big  as  a
thumb,  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  1,  65.  Bahig  says  the  O.Pr.  borz-
(hickai  is  not  fr.  pirsztas,  finger,  bnt  fr.  barzda,  beard,  the  sub-
terraneans being  often  repres.  with  long  beards. MHG.  names

for  a  dwarf :  der  kleine  mann,  Ernst  4067.  der  wenige  man,  Er.
7422.  Eilh.  Trist.  2874.  der  wenige  gast,  Er.  2102.  weniges
mennel,  Frib.  Trist.  5294.  ein  gar  weniger  man  mit  eiper  giildin
kröne.  Ecke  202.  ein  wenic  twirgelin,  Alex.  2955.  der  kurze
kleine,  der  kleine  recke,  Dietr.  drach.  43*.  68*.  der  wunderkleine,
Altsw.  91.  Serv.  star-mali,  old  little-one.  An  unusual  epithet,
applied  also  to  slaves  and  foreigners,  is  '  le  puant  nain,'  Ben.
4857.  The-  Elf-king  sits  under  a  great  toadstool,  Ir.  march.  2,
4 ;  and  whoever  carries  a  toadstool  about  him  grows  small  and
light  as  an  elf  2,  75.  The  little  man  afloat  on  a  leaf  in  Brandaen
is  on  a  par  with  the  girl  sailing  over  the  waves  on  the  leaves  of
a  waterlily,  Müllenh.  p.  840;  conf.  nökkeblomster  (p.  489).

p.  458.]  Hills  and  woods  give  an  echo :  OHG.  galm,  Diut.  2,
327* ;  MHO.  gal  and  hal.  Dent.  myst.  2,  286 ;  widergalm.  Tit.
891 ;  die  stimme  gap  hin  widere  mit  geltchem  galme  der  wait,  Iw.
618.  They  answer:  consda  ter  sonuit  rupes,  Claud,  in  Pr.  et
Olybr.  125;.  responsat  Athos,  Haemusque  remvgit,  Claud,  in
Eutr.  2,  162  ;  daz  in  d&von  antworte  der  berc  undo  ouch  der  tan.
Nib.  883,  3;  ein  gellendiu  fluo,  Lanz.  7127;  si  schrei,  daz  ir  der


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1413

wait  entsprach,  Bon.  49,  71  ;  daz  im  der  berc  entgegenhält  Er.

7423. ON.  dvergmäli  qvaiS  1  hverjum  liamri,  Fomald.  8,  629  ;

dvergmalenn,  Alex,  saga  35.  67.  AS.  wudu-mfBr,  both  echo  and
nympha  silvestris.  The  woodman  calls  fr.  the  wood,  Megenb.  16,
20.  Böcler's  Saperst.  of  the  Esths  p.  146  gives  their  names  for
the  echo :  squint-eye,  wood's  reply,  elf-son's  cry  ;  Possart  p.  163-4
says,  the  mocking  wood-elf  met«  halias  makes  the  echo  (Snppl.
to  480).  Echo  is  the  silvan  voice  of  Faunns,  Picus  (conf.  wood-
pecker and  Vila),  Klausen  pp.  844.  1141;  the  Mongols  take  a
similar  view  of  it,  Petersb.  bull,  1858,  col.  70.  In  the  Ir.
marchen  1,  292  echo  is  not '  muc  alia,'  but  macalla  or  alia  bair,
Gael,  maetalla,  son  of  the  rock,  Ahlw.  Oisian  3,  336.

As  the  ON.  saga  makes  Huldra  queen  of  dwarfs,  Swedish
legends  have  a  fair  lady  to  role  the  dwarfs ;  even  a  king  is  not
unknown^  as  the  bergkong  (p.  466).  The  English  have  a  qv^en
of  fairies,  see  Minstr.  2,  193  and  the  famons  descr.  of  queen  Mab
(child,  doll  ?)  in  Bom.  and  Jul.  i.  4;  conf.  Merry  W.  of  W.  v.  4.

Aid Morguein  de elvinne,lAnc.  19472.  23264-396-515.  32457.

In  German  opinion  kings  preponderate.  The  Sörla)>&ttr  makes
Alfrigg  a  brother  or  companion  of  Dvalinn,  while  Sn.  16  asso-
ciates Aljnofr  with  him,  Fomald.  1,  391 ;  conf.  'in  dem  Elperichis^
loke,'  Baur  no.  633,  yr.  1332.  'der  getwerge  kiinec  BilM^has  a
brother  Brians,  Er.  2086 ;  Grigoras  and  Glecidoiän,  lords  of  der
twerge  lant  2109.  Another  is  Antilois  (rhym.  gewis),  Basel  MSS.
p.  29^.  On  the  name  of  the  dwarf-king  Lxiarxn,  Luaran,  see
Hpt's  Ztschr.  7,  531 ;  Laurin,  Baur  no.  655 ;  a  Laurins  in  the
Roman  des  sept  sages  (Keller's  Dyocletian,  introd.  p.  23 — 29).
With  Gibich  conf.  Gebhart,  Müllenh.  p.  307;  king  Piper,  or
Pippe  kong  287.  291-2.  Again,  the  Scherfenberger  dwarf,  DS.
DO.  29  ;  Woi'blestrüksken  king  of  earthmannikins,  Firmen.  1,
408--41O.     Albr.  v.  Halb,  fragm.  25  speaks  of  a  got  der  twerge.

p.  453  n.]  The  lament  '  Urban  is  dead  I '  sounds  like  the
Vorarlberg  cry  '  Urhans  (old  Jack)  ist  tödt'  (conf.  Urian,  ur-
teufel,  p.  989,  and  'the  devil's  dead,'  p.  1011^2),  Yonbun  p.  4  ;
ed.  2,  pp.  2.  7.  Fromm.  Mundart.  2,  565.  Kilian  is  dead,
Winkler's  Edelm.  877;  Salome  is  dead,  Panz.  Beitr.  2,  40.
'  Eisch,  Pingel,  Pippe  kong,  Pilatje,  Yatte,  Kind  ist  dot,'  Müllenh.
nos.  398 — 401.  Habel  is  dead,  Preusker  1,  57.  nu  är  Plagg  död,
Runa  1844  p.  44.   nü  er  Ulli  dau«r.  Forum.  1,  211.     Ol.  Tryggv.


1414  WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.

c.  53.  In  a  Cornish  legend  a  beautiful  she-dwarf  is  buried  by
the  little  folk  in  Leland  church  near  St.  Ives  amid  cries  of  Our
queen  is  dead  ;  conf.  Zeus  is  dead^  buried  in  Crete^  thunders  no
more^  Lucianos  Jup.  trag.  45.

p.  454.]  The  dwarfs  names  Dainn^  Näinn  (mortuus)  raise  the
question  whether  elves  are  not  souls,  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  as
in  Ssk.  Indras  is  pita  Marutftm,  father  of  the  winds  =  of  the  dead^
Kuhn  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5, 488-9.  Of  the  dwarf  Alvis  it  is  asked  :
hvl  ertu /67r  urn  nasar,  vartu  t  nött  7ne9  nd  ?  Ssom.  48*.  Dvalinn
&\ir,  Ddinn  d^ergr ;  Dvalinn  sopiens^  Durinn  somnifer  28*.  And-
vari,  son  of  Oinn  181*  means  perh.  cautus  (Suppl.  to  461).
Finnr  reminds  of  Pin  in  the  Norrland  story  (p.  1025),  and  of
father  Finn  in  Miillenh.  p.  300.     Bivor  may  be  conn,  with  dwarf

Bibunc  in   Dietr.  drach. Germ,  names  of  dwarfs :    Meizelin,

Dietr.  dr.  196*.  Aeschenzelt,  Ring  233-9.  Hans  Donnerstag,
Mullenh.  p.  578.  Bohrinda,  MuggaatutZy  Yonbun  pp.  2.  7 ;  conf.
Stutzamutza,  Orossrinda,  Wolf's  Ztschr.  2,  60.  183.

p.  455.]  On  the  arweggers  see  KM  *.  3,  195.  Dwarfs  live
in  holes  of  the  rock:  stynja  (ingemiscunt)  dvergar  fyrir  steins
duruntj  Saem.  8\  Dvalinn  st6"5  i  steins  dyrum,  Hervar.  p.  414.
They  like  to  stand  in  the  doorway,  so  as  to  slip  in  when  danger
threatens.  A  dwarf's  hole  is  in  ON.  gauri,  Yilkin.  c.  16  (the
pixies'  house  or  hole  in  Devon,  Athen,  nos.  988.  991).  They  were
called  veggbergs  visir,  Seam.  9*.  In  Sweden,  berg-rä,  bergr&et,
Buna  3,  50,  iord-byggar  1845,  95,  di  sm&  undar  järdi  60,  höj-
hiergs-gubbe,  conf.  tomte-gubbe  (p.  500),  god-gubbe.  In  Norway,
hou'boer,  dweller  on  a  height.  In  Germany  too,  wildiu  getwerc
live  in  the  mountain  beside  giants,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  521 ;  '  der
hört  Niblunges  der  was  gar  getragen  üz  eime  holn  berge/  Nib.
90,  1 ;  a  wildez  getwerc  is  surprised  '  vor  eime  holen  berge,'  Er.
7396 ;  '  si  knment  vor  den  berc,  und  sehent  spiln  diu  getwerc,'
see  the  dwarfs  play,  Dietr.  dr.  252^  conf.  213*;  twerge  dwell  in
the  Höberg,  Bing  211.  'Daemon  subterraneus  truculentus,  berg-
teuf  el;  mitis,  bergmenlein,  kobel,  guttel;'  again,  'dsdmon  me-
tallicus,  bergmenlein/  for  whom  a  '  fündige  zech '  was  deposited,
Georg  Agricola  de  re  metaU.  libri  XII.     Basil.  1657,  p.  704^

Gän  At  manegen  ruhen  berc,

d&  weder  katze  noch  getwerc

möhte  über  sin  geklummen.     Troj.  kr,  6185.


WIGHTS  AND  BLVBS.  1415

The  term  böhlerB-männchen  im  böhlers-loch,  Bechst.  8,  129^
mast  come  fr.  biihel^  coUis ;  conf.  OHO.  pahiles  perc^  Graff  3,
42  and  the  name  Böhler.  Wend.  ItulJcowa  gora,  little  folk's  hill^
Volksl.  2,  268*.  in  moniania  (Prasiorum)  pygmcei  traduntur,
Pliny  6,  19.     People  show  the  twarg&t^locker,  wüllekes-löcker,  wuU

wecker$'löcker,  vmnnerkeS'gätter,  Kuhn's  Westph.  sag.  1,  63.

They  also  live  in  grave-mounds,  Lisch  11,  866,  in  cairns  (sten«
ros),  and  under  men's  Iwuses  and  bams,  Fries's  Udfl.  109.  These
are  likewise  the  resort  in  summer  of  the  courriquets  of  Bretagne,
who  sleep  on  the  hearth  all  the  winter.  Bat  they  cannot  endare
men's  building  stables  over  their  habitations,  which  the  mack,
sinking  through,  woald  defile,  Miillenh.  p.  575.  297.     Kuhn,  nos.

329.  363  and  p.  323.     Asb.  1, 150-1.     Dybeck  1845,  p.  99.  ^

The  name  of  Subterranean  is  widely  spread:  dat  unner-ersch,
das  unner-eersche,  in  Sylt-oe  önner-erske,  Miillenh.  438.  393.  337.
de  unner-wrsdien  near  Usedom.  In  digging  a  well,  men  came
upon  their  chimney,  and  found  quite  a  housefal,  Kuhn  in  Jrb.
der  Berl.  ges.  5,  247.  erdmännel,  erdweibel,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  71.
Lith.  kaukas,  earth-man,  kaukaras,  mountain-god ;  conf.  semmes
deewini,  earth-gods,  Bergm.  145.  In  Föhr  and  Amrum  önner^
hänkissen,  in  Dan.  Schleswig  unner-vois-töi,  unner-bors-töi,  unners-
hoes-iöi  (tdi  =  zeug,  stuff,  trash),  Müllenh.  279.  281.  337.  Elves
inhabit  a  Bosegarden  inside  the  earth,  like  Laurin,  where  flower-
picking  is  punished,  Minstr.  2,  188.  192.

p.  456.]  Yenus  is  called  a  feine  (Suppl.  to  411),  een  broosche
eluinne,  Matth.  de  Castelein's  Const  van  rhetoriken,  Ghendt
1555,  p.  205 ;  conf.  the  Venas-Minne  hovering  in  the  air,  and
travelling  viewless  as  a  sprite  (p.  892).

p.  458.]  De  guden  holden  are  contrasted  with  the  kröden
dnvels  (Suppl.  to  248-9).  Min  vara  holdo,  verus  genius,  Notk.
Cap.  81.  Is  holderchen  the  original  of  ülleken,  ulken,  Bait.  stud.
12*^,184,  and  uUerkens,  Temme's  Pom.  sag.  256?*     liuflingr^

haldama«r,  Aefint^ri  105. The   Norw.  huldrefolk,  Asb.  1,  77

and  Faroe  hvldefolk,  Athen,  no.  991,  are  of  both  sexes,  though

^  Two  maidens  came  to  a  peasant  when  ploaghing,  and  begged  him  to  leave  off,
they  were  going  to  bake,  and  ^e  sand  kept  falling  into  their  dough.  He  bargained
ior  a  piece  of  their  cake,  and  aft.  found  it  laid  on  nis  plough,  Landau's  Wüste  örter,
P'  138.  So  fairies  in  Woroestersh.  repay  compliant  labourers  with  food  and  drink,
Athen.

*  Arweggen  is  perh.  to  be  explained  by  arwegget»  arbeit,  Firmen.  1,  363,  and
means  workers ;  conf.  weckerohen,  wulweoker.


1416  WIGHTS  AND  ELVBS.

the  females  are  more  spoken  of :  a  female  is  called  hulder,  Asb.
1,  70,  a  male  huldre-Tcall  (-karl)  1,  151.  Dybeck  1845,  56  de-
rives hyll-fru,  hyUmoer  fr.  hyld,  elder-tree. The  good  nature

of  dwarfs  is  expr.  by  other  names :  Norw.  grande,  neighbour,
and  Asb.  1,  150-1  tells  a  pretty  story  of  the  underground  neigh-
bour. Might  not  the  'goede  kinder'  in  Br.  Geraert  718  come  in
here  7  A  guoter  and  a  pilwiz  are  named  together,  Hagen's  Ges.
Abent.  3, 70 ;  '  der  guotaeri  *  is  the  name  of  a  MHG.  poet.  Lith.
balii  imonesy  the  honest  folk,  Nesselm.  319^ As  dwarfs  im-
part to  men  of  their  bread  or  cake,  help  in  weaving,  washing
and  baking,  and  serve  in  the  mill  (Panz.  Beitr.  1,  155),  they  in
return  make  use  of  men's  dwellings,  vessels,  apparatus.  So  the
pixies  in  Devon,  Athen,  no.  991.  In  winter  they  move  into  men's
summer-huts  (sheelings),  Asb.  1,  77,  88.  They  can  thrash  their
com  in  an  oven,  hence  their  name  of  backofen-trescherlein,  Gar.
41*;  once  the  strazeln  were  seen  thrashing  in  an  oven  six  together,
another  time  fourteen,  Schönwth  2,  800,  299.  They  fetch  men
of  understanding  to  divide  a  treasure,  to  settle  a  dispute,  Pref.
xxxiii.-iv.  Contes  Ind.  2, 8.  Somad.  1, 19.  Berl.  jrb.  2, 265.  Erfurt
kindm.  26.  Asb.  p.  52-3.  Cavallius  no.  8.  Wal.  march,  p.  202.
KM.  nos.  92.  133.  193-7 ;  conf.  pt.  3,  ed.  3,  pp.  167-8.  216.  400
(conf.  dividing  the  carcase  among  beasts,  Schönwth  2,  220.
Nicolov.  34.  societas  leonina,  Beinh.  262).  They  let  a  kind
servant-girl  have  a  present  and  a  peep  at  their  wedding,  Mnllenh.
326-7  (see,  on  dwarfs  weddings,  Altd.  bl.  1,  255-6.  Naubert  1,
92-3.  Goethe  1,  196).  Hafbur  goes  into  the  mountain  and  has
his  dream  interpr.  by  the  eldest  '  elvens  datter,'  Danske  v.  3,  4.
They  dread  the  cunning  tricks  of  men ;  thus,  if  you  take  a  knife
off  their  table,  it  can  no  longer  vanish.  Lisch  9,  371.  The  man
of  the  woods,  or  schrat,  like  the  dwarf  in.Budlieb,  cannot  endure
a  guest  who  blows  hot  and  cold.  Boner  91.    Strieker  18  (Altd.  w.

3,  225). If  on  the  one  hand  dwarfs  appear  weak,  like  the  one

that  cannot  carry  HUdebrand's  heavy  shield,  Dietr.  u.  Ges.  354.
4|91.  593,  or  the  wihtel  who  finds  an  ear  of  corn  heavy,  Panz.
Beitr.  1,  181 ;  on  the  other  hand  the  huldre  breaks  a  horse-shoe,
Asb.  1,  81,  fells  a  pine  and  carries  it  home  on  her  shoulder  1,  91.
And  in  Fairyland  there  is  no  sickness,  Minstr.  2,  193 ;  which
accords  with  the  longevity  boasted  of  by  dwarf  Rudleib  xvii.  18,
conf.  Ammian.  27,  4  on  the  long-lived  agrestes  in  Thrace.


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1417

p.  459.]  The  dwarfs  retiring  before  the  advance  of  man  pro-
dace,  like  the  Thnrses,  Jötuns  and  Hunes,  the  impression  of  a
conqaered  race.  In  Devon  and  Cornwall  the  pixies  are  regarded
fts  the  old  inhabitants.  In  Germany  they  are  like  Wends  (the
elves  like  Celts?),  in  Scandinavia  like  Lapps.  Dwarfs  are
heathen :  '  ob  getauften  noch  getwergen  der  b^der  künec  wart  ich
nie/  of  either  dipt  or  dwarf.  Biter.  4156.  The  nndergronnders
fear  not  Wode,  if  he  have  not  washed  ;  conf.  Mtillenh.  no.  500
(p.  458n.).  They  can't  abide  bell-ringing,  Firmen.  2,  264^,  they
move  away.  In  moving  they  leave  a  cow  as  a  present,  Dybeck
1845,  98.  The  subterraneans  ferry  over,  MöUenh.  p.  575 ;  wich-
tels  cross  the  Werra,  Sommer  p.  24 ;  three  wichtels  get  ferried
over,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  116;  conf.  the  passage  of  souls  (p.  832).
As  the  peasant  of  the  Aller  country  saw  the  meadow  swarming
with  the  dwarfs  he  had  ferried  over,  as  soon  as  one  of  them  put
hia  own  hat  on  the  man's  head ;  so  in  the  Altd.  bl.  1,  256  :  when
the  hel-clothes  were  taken  off,  '  do  gesach  he  der  getwerge  me  wen
tüsuntj  When  the  peasant  woman  once  in  washing  forgot  to  put
lard  in,  and  a  wichtel  scalded  his  hand,  they  stayed  away.  The
ülleken  fetch  water,  and  leave  the  jug  standing.  Bait.  stud.  12^.
184.

p.  461.]  Ostgötl.  ekot,  troll-shot,  elf -shot,  a  cattle-disease,  also
elf'bläster,  Dyb.  1845,  51 ;  conf.  äb-gast^  alv-eld,  alv-skot,  Aasen.
Their  mere  touch  is  hurtful  too :  the  half-witted  elben-trötsche
(p.  443)  resemble  the  '  cerriti/  larvati,  male  sani,  aut  Cereris  ira
ant  larvarum  incursatione  animo  vexati/  Nonius  1, 213.  Lobeck's
Aglaoph.  241.  Creuz.  Symbol.  1,  169  (ed.  3).  The  sick  in  Ire-
land are/air^-tffrucfc.— — -The  name  ^ndvan,  like  the  neut.  andvar,
can  be  interpr.  ventus  lenis,  aura  tenuis,  though  Biöm  translates
it  pervigil  (Sappl.  to  454).  With  Vestri,  Vinddlfr  is  to  be  conn.
'Vestralptts  Alamannorum  rex,'  Amm.  Marcell.  16,  12.  18,  2;  it
is  surely  westar-alp  rather  than  westar-halp,  in  spite  of  AS.  west-
healf,  ON.  vestr&lfa,  occidens.  Erasm.  Atberus'  Diet,  of  1540
remarks  :  '  mephitis,  stench  and  foul  vapour  rising  out  of  swamps
or  Bolphurous  waters,  in  nemoribus  gravior  est  ex  densitate  sil-

varum.'     In  the  Dreyeich  they  say  '  der  alp  feist  also.' The

looks  of  elves  bewitch,  as  well  as  their  breath :  eft  ik  si  entsen,
Val.  and  Nam.  238\     byn  yk  nu  untzen  ?  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5, 390.

p.  462.]     Elves  can  get  into  any  place.     The  älfr  enters  the


1418  WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.

house  '  at  luJctum  dyrum  öllam/  Fomald.  1,  313.  They  steal  np
softly^  uBperceived  :  '  se  geit  op  elben-tehnen/  she  walks  on  elf-
toesy  they  say  about  Magdeburg.

p.  463.]  They  can  make  themselyes  invisible :  daz  analutte
des  sih  pergenten  (self-hiding)  trüge- tievels,  N.  Boebh.  42.  ein
unsihtiger  geist,  Iw.  1391.  The  invisibility  is  usually  effected  by
their  head-covenng,  the  nebeUkappe,  Ettn.  Maulaffe  534.  542.
Altswert  18/30.  in  •  miner  riebelhappe^i,  Frauenl.  447,  18;  or
hele-käppel,  Winsb.  26,  5.  Winsbekin  17,  5;  and  the  secret
notches  in  it  are  called  JcappeUsnite  17.  18.  ^  nachUrahen  und
nebeUkäpel/  Katzmair  p.  23-8  (yr.  1397).  It  seems  they  also  wear
a  fire^red  tschöph,  Vonbun  p.  1 ;  and  a  subterranean  has  the
name  of  Redbeard,  Miillenh.  p.  438.  The  huldre-hat  makes  in-
visible, Asb.  1,  70.  158-9,  like  the  thief's  helmet;  the  hat  is  also
called  hvarfs'hatt,  and  the  boys  who  wear  it  varfvar,  Hpt's
Ztschr.  4,  510-1  ;  conf.  *  hverfr  j^essi  &lfr  svA  sem  skuggi,*  Vilk.
c.  150,  The  courriquets  of  Bretagne  wear  huge  round  hats.  Men
cry  to  the  dwarfs,  'zieht  abe  iuwer  helin-kleit ! *  Altd.  bl.  1,  256.
Like  our  dwarfs,  the  little  corybantes  in  antiques  wear  hats.  Paus.
3.  24,  4,     Not  only  Orcus's  helmet,  but  his  eoat  was  known,  for

the  Romans  called  the  anemone  Orci  tunica,  Dioscor.  2,  207.

Conversely,  dwarfs  become  visible  to  those  who  anoint  their  eyes
with  dwarf -salve,  as  in  the  story  of  the  nurse  who  put  the  oint-
ment to  one  of  her  eyes,  and  could  see  the  subterraneans,  till
they  tore  out  the  eye,  Asb.  1,  24-5.  Miillenh.  p.  298.  Dyb.  1845,
94. Poems  of  the  Round  Table  give  dwarfs  a  scourge,  where-
with to  lay  about  them,  Lanz.  428.  436.  Er.  53.  96.  Iw.  4925.
Parz,  401,  16.     Even  Albrich  bore

eine  geisel  swaere  von  golde  an  stner  hant,

siben  knöpfe  swaere  hiengen  vor  daran,

damit  er  umb  die  hende  den  schilt  dem  küenen  man

sluoc  so  bitterlichen.     Nibel.  463-4.

In  Possart's  Estl.  p.  176  the  giants  carry  whips  with  millstones
tied  to  the  tails.

p.  465.]  Old  poetry  is  full  of  the  trickery  of  dwarfs,  who  are
kündic  as  foxes,  endelich,  Dietr.  drach.  17,  *  endelich  und  hec/
'  brisk  and  bold,'  346^.  bedrogan  habbind  sie  demea  wihti,  Hel.
92,  2.     du  trügehaftez  wiht,  Bari.  378,  35.     uns  triege  der  alp,


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1419

Hagen's  Ges.  Ab.  3,  60.  eKs-ghedroch,  Beatrijs  736.  elfs-^Ä«.
drochte,  Maerl.  (Clarisse's  Gheraert  p.  219).  Walewein  5012.
enhörde  ghi  Qoit  segghen  (heard  ye  ne'er  tell)  van  eifs-gedrochte,
Hor.  Belg.  6,  44-5.  Deception  by  ghosts  is  also  getrucnisse,  Herb.
12833.  nngihiare  drugUdinc,  Diemer  118,  25.  121,  3.  May  we
conn,  with  abegetroc  the  M.  Neth.  avondtronJce  ?  Belg.  mas.  2,
116.  In  App.,  spell  xlii.,  an  alb  has  eyes  like  a  teig-trog  (lit.
doDgh- trough).     OetwdSj  fantasma,  is  better  expl.  by  AS.  dwaes,

stultus   (Suppl.  to  916)  than  by  SI.  dushÄ,  soul  (p.  826).

Oppression  daring  sleep  is  caused  by  the  alp  or  mar  (p.  1246)  :
mich  drucket  heint  (to-night)  der  alp,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  8,  514.  kom
rehte  als  ein  alp  üf  mich  geslichen,  Maurit.  1414.  The  trud
presses,  Dietr.  Buss,  march,  no.  16,  conf.  frau  Trade  (p.  423).
Other  names  for  incubus :  stendel,  Staid.  2, 897 ;  rätzel  or  schrätzel,
Praetor.  Weltb.  1,  14.  23  (p.  479) ;  Fris.  woelrider,  Ehrentr.  1,
386.  2,16;  LG.  waalruter,  Krüger  7]*».  Kuhn's  Nordd.  sag.
nos.  338.  358.  p.  419  (conf.  Walschrand  in  the  M.  Neth.  Bran-
daen)  ;  Engl.  hag-Tode,  -ridden,  W.  Barnes ;  picsy-ndden  (Suppl,
to  444 ;  the  pixies  also,  like  the  courriquets  of  Bretagne,  tangle
the  manes  of  horses,  and  the  knots  are  called  pixy-seats,  Athen,
no.  991) ;  Pol.  cma,  Boh.  tma,  Fin,  painayainen,  squeezer,  Ganan-

der  65.      Schröter  50. Other  names  for  plica:    Upp.  Hess»

Eollekopp,  at  Giessen  morlocke,  mahrhlatte,  Jvdenzopf,  A  child
in  Dint.  1,453:

hatte  ein  siechez  houbet  (sore  head),
des  hatten  sich  verhübet
di  harhcJee  alle  garewe.

And  Sibilla  (antfahs)  has  hair  tangled  as  a  horse's  mane,  Eo.
2701.  Scandinavian  stories  do  not  mention  Hollo's  tuft  or  tail,
bat  they  give  the  huldres  a  tail.  This  matted  hair  is  treated  of
by  Gas.  Cichocki  de  hist,  et  nat.  plicae  polonicae,  Berol.  1845,  who
adds  the  term  gwoidziec,  liter,  nail-pricking,  cramping.

p.  465.]  Dwarfs  ride :  diu  phert  diu  si  riten  wären  geltche
gr6z  den  schdfen,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  426;  conf.  Alfcd.  bl.  1,  256.
Dwarfs  mount  a  roe,  Bing  p.  211.  231.  Fairies  ride,  Minstr.  2,
199.  Pixies  ride  the  cattle  at  night.  Athenaeum  nos.  991.  989.
Poike  in  a  red  cap  rides  a  white  goose,  Buna  1844,  60,  as  the
pygmaei  rode  on  partridges,  Athen,  3,  440.     The  ancients  kept


1420  WIGHTS  AND  BIiVBS.

dwarfs  and  dogs,  Athen.  4^  427^  as  men  ia  the  Mid.  Ages  kept
dwarfs  and  fools.  Giants,  kings  and  heroes  have  dwarfs  in  their
retinae,  as  Siegfried  has  Elberich,  and  in  Er.  10.  53.  95.  995.
1030  a  knight  has  a  getwerc  riding  beside  him  and  laying  on
with  his  scourge;  he  is  called  Maledicnr,  and  is  aft.  chastised
with  blows  1066.  Elegast  goes  a  thieving  with  Charlemagne.
In  Wigalois  a  maiden  comes  riding,  behind  whom  stands  a  dwarf
with  his  hands  on  her  shoulders,  singing  songs  1721 — 36 ;  another
getwerc  has  charge  of  the  parrot  and  horse  2574.  3191.  3258-87.
4033.  On  the  train  of  a  richly  bedizened  dame  ride  little  hlcuck
spirits,  giggling,  clapping  hands  and  dancing,  Cses.  Heitsterb.  5,
7  (SnppLto946).

p.  467.]  While  the  Devonsh,  pixies  make  away  with  turnips
(Athen89um  no.  991),  our  German  dwarfs  go  in  for  peas,  erbsen  ;
hence  the  name  of  thievish  Elbeg^t  is  twisted  into  JErhagast :
'  I  adjure  thee  by  thy  master  Erbagast,  the  prince  of  thieves,'
Ztschr.  f.  Thüring.  gesch.  1,  188.  These  thievish  dwarfs  may  be
comp.' to  Hermes,  who  steals  oxen  as  soon  as  he  is  born.  Hymn

to  Merc. Dwarf  Elberich  overpowers  a  queen,  and  begets  the

hero  Otnit  An  alb  begets  Högni,  Vilk.  c.  150.  The  story  of
'  den  bergtagna*  is  also  told  by  Dyb.  1845,  p.  94.  Dwarfs  are
much  given  to  carrying  off  human  brides  and  falling  in  love  with
goddesses,  e.g.  Freya.  The  marchen  of  Pitchers-vogel  is  also  in
Problems  M.  f.  d.  jugend  no.  7,  where  he  is  called  fieder-vogel ;

conf.  Schambach  pp.  303.  369. Little  Snowdrop's  coming  to

the  dwarfs*  cottage,  and  finding  it  deserted,  but  the  table  spread
and  the  beds  made,  and  then  the  return  of  .the  dwarfs  (KM.  no.
53)  agrees  remarkably  with  Duke  Ernest's  visit  to  the  empty
castle  of  the  beah-viouthed  people.  When  these  come  home,  the
master  sees  by  the  food  that  guests  have  been,  just  as  the  dwarfs
ask  'who's  been  eating  with  my  fork?'  Ernst  2091 — 3145.
And  these  crane-men  appear  in  other  dwarf  stories  :  are  they  out
of  Pliny  and  Solinua  7  '  Oerania,  ubi  pygmadorum  gens  fuisse
proditur,  Cattuzos  (al.  Oattucos)  barbari  vocant,  creduntqne  a
gruibus  fugatos,'  Pliny  4,  11,  conf.  7,  2.  Hpt's  Ztschr.  7,  294-5.
Even  the  Iliad  3,  6  speaks  of  cranes  as  avSpdai  irvyfjuaioiai  ^ovov
Ka\  Ktjpa  (fiipovaai.  On  dwarfs  and  cranes  see  Hecatseus  fragm.
hist.  Gr.  1,  18.  The  Finns  imagined  that  birds  of  passage  spent
the  winter  in  Dwarfland ;  hence  lintukotolainen,  dweller  among


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1421

birds^  means  a  dwarf^  Benvall  sab  ▼.  linta  :  conf.  the  dwarf's
name  lindakodonmies^  birdcage  man.  Duke  Ernest's  flight  to
that  country  reminds  of  Babr.  26^  10  :  <f)€vyQ)fi€v  et?  rä  Ilvyfiaiüyv.
As  the  dwarf  in  Norse  legend  vanishes  at  sunrise,  so  do  the  pixies
in  Devonsh.^  Athenm.  no.  991.  In  Swedish  tales  this  dread  of
daylight  is  given  to  giants,  Runa  3,  24.     Sv.  folks.  1,  187.  191.

p.  469.]  The  creature  that  dwarfs  put  in  the  place  of  a  child
is  in  ON.  skiptungr,  Vilk.  167. 187 ;  in  Icel.  umskipttngr,  kominn
af  Mfum,  Finn.  Joh.  hist.  eccl.  Islandiae  2,  369 ;  in  Helsing.
hyiing  (Ostgöt.  moling),  skepnad  af  mördade  barn,  Almqv.  894^;
in  Smaland  illhere,  barn  bortbytt  af  trollen,  litet,  vanskapligt,
elakt  bam  351.  In  MHG.  wehselbalc,  Germ.  4,  29;  wehselhalp,
Keller  468,  32;  wehselkind,  Bergreien  p.  64.  In  Devon  and
Comw.  a  fairy  changeling,  Athenm.  no.  989.  Kielkropf  is  in
OHO.  chel'chropf  in  the  sense  of  struma,  Graff  4,  598,  To  this
day,  in  some  parts,  they  say  kielkropf  for  what  is  elsewhere  called
grobs,  grubs,  wen,  either  on  the  apple  or  at  the  throat,  and  like-
wise used  of  babies,  Reinwald's  Id.  1,  54.  78.  2,  69 ;  also  butzigel,
Adamsbutz  1,  18  (p.  506-7),  conf.  kribs,  gribs  (p.  450  n.).
Luther's  Table-t.  1568,  p.  216-7:  'weil  er  im  kröpf  kielt/
Schm.  2,  290 :  kielkopf  The  Scotch  sühich  steals  children,  and
leaves  a  changeling  behind,  Armstr.  sub  v.  (Leo's  Malb.  gl.  1,  37).
In  Lithuania  the  Laume  changes  children,  hence  Laumes  apmai-
nyias  =  changeling.  Boh.  podwrznec.  Wend,  pfemenk  :  flog  him
with  boughs  of  drooping-birch,  and  he'll  be  fetched  away,  Yolksl.
2,  267-8.  Similar  flogging  with  a  hunting-whip,  Sommer  p.  43 ;
conf.  Prsötor.  Weltb.  1,  365.  It  is  a  prettier  story,  that  the
dwarfs  would  fain  see  a  human  mother  put  their  babe  to  her
breast,  and  will  richly  reward  her  for  it,  Firmen.  1,  274^.  The
joke  of  the  '  müUers  sun '  (p.  468  n.)  recurs  in  the  MHG.  poem
of  '  des  muniches  not,'  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  434.  Other  stories  of
changelings  in  MüUenh.  p.  312-3-5.  DS.81-2.  Ehrentr.  Fries,
arch.  2,  7.  8.

The  singular  method  of  msJcing  the  changeling  blurt  out  his
age  and  real  character  is  vouched  for  by  numberless  accounts.
A  dwarf  sees  people  brew  in  a  hiihner-dopp  (hen's  egg  pot,
see  eier-dopp,  p.  927),  and  drain  off  the  beer  into  a  goose-egg
dopp,  then  he  cries  :  '  ik  bun  so  oelt  as  de  Behmer  woelt,  unn  heff
in  myn  laebn  so  'n  bro  nich  seen,'  Müllenh.  no.  425,  1  and  2

VOL.    IV.  L


1422  "WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.

(Behmer  golt  in  LiscVs  Jrb.  9,  371).  A  Swed.  version  in  Djbeck
'45,  p.  78.  '47,  p.  38.  Tiroler  sag.  ia  Steub  p.  318-9.  Thaler  in
WlPs  Ztschr.  1,  290.  Pröhle  p.  48.  A  Lith.  story  in  Schleicher,
Wiener  ber.  11,  105.  'As  many  years  as  the  fir  has  needles,'
Vonbun  6.  '  IVe  seen  the  oak  in  Brezal  wood '  seems  old,  for
the  Roman  de  Ron  itself  says  of  Breceliande  forest :  '  vis  la  forest,
e  vis  la  terre/  Note  to  Iw.  p.  263.  That  elves  attained  a  great
age,  comes  out  in  other  ways ;  thus  Elberich  is  upwards  of  500,
Ortn.  241.

p.  470.]  Elves  avoid  the  sun  (p.  444  n.),  they  sink  into  the
ground,  they  look  like  flowers,  they  turn  into  alder,  aspen  or
willow-boughs.  Plants  that  grow  in  clusters  or  circles,  e.g.  the
Swed.  hvit'sippan,  are  dedic.  to  them.  Fries  bot.  udfl.  1,  109  ;
so  the  fairy  queen  speaks  out  of  a  clump  of  thorns  or  of  standing
corn,  Minstr.  2,  193.  Their  season  of  joy  is  the  riight,  hence  in
Vorarlberg  they  are  called  the  night-folk,  Steub  p.  82  ;  esp.  Mid-
summer Night,  Minstr.  2,  195,  when  they  get  up  a  merry  dance,
the  elf-dans,  Dybk  '45,  51,  taking  care  not  to  touch  the  herb
Tarald  60.  The  elfins  dance  and  sing,  MüUenh.  p.  341.  Who-
ever sees  them  dance,  must  not  address  them  :  '  They  are  fairies  ;
he  that  speaks  to  them  shall  die.  I'll  wink  and  couch ;  no  man
their  works  must  eye,'  Merry  W.  of  W.  5,  5.  When  the  subter-
raneans  have  danced  on  a  hill,  they  leave  circles  in  the  grass,
Reusch's  Add.  to  no.  72 ;  so  the  hoie-männlein,  who  take  their
name  fr.  hoien,  huien  to  holla,  dance  rings  into  the  grass,  Leopr.
32-4.  107.  113-8.  129.  Schönw.  2.  342.  These  circles  are  called
fairy  rings,  and  regarded  as  dwellings  of  pixies,  Athenm.  no.  991.
The  Sesleria  coerulea  is  called  elf-gräs.  Fries  bot.  udfl.  1,  109 ;
the  pearl-muscle,  Dan.  elve-skiäl,  Nemn.  2,  682.  Elves  love  to
live  beside  springs,  like  Holda  and  the  fays  fp.  412)  :  der  elvinnen
fonteine,  Lane.  345.  899.  1346-94 ;  der  elvinnen  born  870.  1254.

p.  472.]     Dwarfs  grant  wishes  :

ein  mann  quam  an  einen  berch  (came  to  a  hill),

dar  gref  hie  (caught ^e)  einen  deinen  dwerch ;

uf  dat  hie  leisse  lofen  balde  (might  soon  let  go)

den  dwerch,  hie  gaf  em  wünsche  walde  (power  of  wishing)

drier  hande  (3  things).  Cod.  Guelferb,  fab.  109.

They  are  wise  counsellors,  as  Antilois  to  Alexander ;  and  very  skil-


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1423

fill.  Dv^arf  Pacolet  in  Cleomades  and  Valentin  makes  a  wooden
korse^  that  one  can  ride  through  the  air  (like  Wieland  and  Dsadalas).
Not  akin  to  Pakulls,  is  he  ?  ^  Manec  apaehez  were  Bz  worht  ein
wildez  twetc,  Der  listig  Pranzopil/  Wigatn.  2585.  Dainsleifr  is
tlie  name  of  a,  sword  made  by  a  dwarf ^  Sn.  164;  and  Elberich
forged  the  rings,  Ortn.  176.  In  Wigal.  6077  it  is  said  of  a
harnasch  :

er  wart  von  einem  wtbe  It  was  by  a  woman

verstoln  einem  getwerge  Stolen  from  a  dwarf

alrSrst  uz  einem  berge,  Out  of  a  mountain  erst,

d&  ez  in  mit  listen  gar  Where  he  it  with  cunning  quite

het  geworht  wol  di-izec  jar.  Had  wrought  full  30  year.

The  Westph.  schön-annken  forge  ploughshares  and  gridirons  of
trivet  shape,  Kuhn's  Westph.  sag.  1,  66 ;  conf.  the  story  in  Fir-
men.  1,  274».  The  hero  of  the  Wieland  myth  (HS.  p.  323)  acts
as  Hephaestus  or  a  smith-dwarf  (p.  444) .

p.  476.]  Bilwiz  :  called  pilwiz,  Moneys  Anz.  7,  423  ;  billmz,
unholden,  Schleiertuch  p.  244 ;  Cuonrad  de  pilwisa,  Chr.  of  1112.
MB.  29»,  232;  bilweisz,  Gefken's  Beil.  112;  'Etliche  glaben
(some  believe)  daz  kleine  kind  zu  pilweissen  verwandelt  sind,'
have  been  changed,  Mich.  Beham  in  Mone's  Anz.  4,  451 ;  conf.
UQchristened  babes  (Suppl.  to  918).  In  Lower  Hesse  :  '  he  sits
behind  the  stove,  minding  the  hiwitzerclien'  Hess.  jrb.  '54,  p.
252  (al.  kiwitzerchen).  herlewitz  (p.  1064).  an  Walpurgs  abende,
wan  depülewesen  ausfahren,  Gryphius  Domr.  p.  93;  sprechen,
ich  wer  gar  eine  bäleweesse  90;  sie  hau  dich  verbrant,  als  wenn
du  ein  püleweesser  werst  52;  conf.  palause  (p.  1074  n.).  In
Gelders  they  say :  Billewits  wiens  goed  is  dat  ?  also  Pillewits,
l^rillewits,  The  Lekenspiegel  of  Jan  Deckers  (of  Antwerp,  comp.
1330)  says,  speaking  of  15  signs  of  the  Judgment  Day  (iv.  9,  19.
de  Vries  2,  265 ;  see  Gl.  p.  374) :

opten  derden  dach  twaren
seien  hem  die  vische  baren
op  dat  water  van  der  zee,
of  si  hadden  herden  wee,
ende  merminnen  ende  beelwiten
ende  so  briesschen  ende  criten.


1424  WIGHTS  AND  BL\'BS.

dat  dat  anxtelic  gescal
toten  hemel  climmen  sal.

With  beelwiten,  conf.  the  wüten  beiden,  Gefk.  Beil.  157. Bil-

witzes  have  their  '  hkv  verfilzet/  matted^  Bari.  384,  361  (such
hair  and  a  shaggy  skin  Wolfram  impates  to  Gandrie  and  her
brother  Malcre4tiure,  Parz.  313,  17.25).  They  conjure  :  'con-
jarers,  waydelers,  pilwitten,  black-artists '  are  named  together  in
a  decree  of  grandmaster  Conr.  v.  Jangingen,  Jacobson^s  Quellen
des  cath.  kirchenr.  urk.  p.  285.  The  bilmersehniU,  otherw.
bibersclmitt,  performed  on  Easter  or  Whitsunday,  Panz.  Beitr.  1.
240;  called  durchschnitt  in  Leopr.  p.  19,  conf.  Sommer's  sag.
p.  171.     dementis  recogn.  2,  9  (ed.  Gersd.  p.  44).

p.  478.]  Rogyen-muhme  :  called  corn-angel,  steals  children,
Somm.  pp.  26.  170.  BMibigo  frumenti  is  called  aurugo  in  Pertz
8.  368,  wintbrant  in  Hpt^s  Ztschr.  5,  201.  Did  the  Romans  call
the  god  of  com  Robigo  or  Robigus  ?  the  Greeks  had  an  Apollo
ipvaißio^,  mildew-averting,  fr.  ipvaißrj,  robigo.  A  W.Fland.
corn-spell  denounces  the  corn-boar  as  a  duivels  zwgnfje,  Hpt's
Ztschr.  7,  532.  The  Slavs  have  a  similar  field-sprite,  a  corn-wife,
who  walks  at  noon  :  pfipolnir.a,  pfepolnica,  fr.  polnyo,  midday,
or  dziwica,  as  in  Polish,  Wend,  volksl.  2, 268;  she  carries  a  sickle
(conf.  p.  1162).  Hanusch  p.  360-2.

p.  480.]  OHG.  «erahn  =  faunos,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  380.  Gl.
Slettst.  6,  222.  Grafi*  6,  577.  «craven  =  larvas,  Dint.  2,  351*.
The  tale  of  the  schretel  and  the  water-bear  is  also  in  Hpt  6,  174,
and  reappears  in  the  Schleswig  story  of  the  water-man  and  bear,
Miillenh.  p.  257.  In  Up.  Franconia  the  schretel  is  replaced  by
the  holzßräulein,  who,  staying  the  night  at  the  miller's  in  Bern-
eck, asks  :  '  Have  you  still  got  your  great  Katzaus  ? '  meaning
the  bear.  The  man  dissembles ;  the  wood- maiden  walks  into  the
mill,  and  is  torn  in  pieces  by  the  bear.  Beside  schretel  we  have
the  form  srete.  Moneys  Anz.  7,  423 ;  conf.  srezze  vel  srate.  der
schrättlig,  Vonbun  p.  26-7.  d'  schrättli  hand  a'g'soga,  the
s.  have  sucked  it  dry,  when  a  baby's  nipples  are  inflamed  or
indurated,  Tobler  259'.  Schrätels  weigh  upon  the  sleeper  like
the  alp,  Gefken's  Cat.  p.  55.  schrata,  schratel,  butterfly,  Schm.
Cimbr.  wtb.  167.  Fromm.  4,  63.  Fereinschrat,  Ranch  2,  72;
Schratental  and  Schrazental  side  by  side  2,  22;    so,  with  the


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1426

Scratman  already  cited,  we  find  a  'servus  nomine  Scrazman/
Dronke's  Trad.  Fuld.  p.  19 ;  conf .  schratele-mannl,  Anobium
pertinax,  deathwatch  in  Carinthia,  Fromm.  4,  53.  schratzen^
löclier,  -holes,  Paoz.  Beitr.  1,  111.     in  Schrazeswanh,  MB.  35%

109. Graflf  6,  575  has  waU'8crechel  =  t&ixm,  silvestres  homines;

and  Schm.  3,  509  distinguishes  fr.  schratt,  schrättel  an  up.  Palat.
schrahel,  schräcJiel,  which  he  refers  to  schrach,  schroch,  scraggy,
pony.  A  scheizen,  schrezen  to  bleat,  Schm.  3,  405,  is  also  worth
considering.  The  schrachel  is  charged  with  tangling  horses'
manes.  Schrawaz  is  appar.  of  different  origin :  Budbertas
nchrawaz,  MB.  28^  138  (yr  1210) ;  Rubertus  shorawaz  29^  273
(yr  1218).-  The  Swed.  skratt  is  both  fatuas  and  cachinnus  ;  Finn.
kratti  genins  thesauri;  ON.  «fcra^i =iötunn,  Sn.  209^.  skratta-
vardi,  Laxd.  152.  The  Dan.  lay  of  Guncelin  has:  'og  hjelp  nu
rnoder  Skrat !  '  Nyerup's  Udvalg  2,  180.  Sv.  forns.  1,  73.  On
aHvil,   which   corresp.   to  the  Engl,  scrat,   hermaphrodite,    see

Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  400  and  Sappl.  to  498. The  Esths  call  the

wood-sprite  mets  halias,  forest-elf,  who  is  fond  of  teasing  and
who  shapes  the  echo,  Possart's  s.  163-4 ;  conf.  the  Finn.  Eiisi,
Kullervo  (p.  552).  Ir.  geilt,  wild  or  wood-man,  conf.  Wei.  gwyllt,
wild.  But  the  Pol.  Boh.  wood-sprite  horuta  is  orig.  feminine,
inhabiting  the  fir,  like  the  Greek  dryad,  hamadryad.  Homer
speaks  of  spring  and  mountain-nymphs,  Od.  6,  123-4,  and  nymphs,
daughters  of  Zeus,  who  stir  up  the  wild  goats  9,  154.  Haina-
dryads  are  personified  trees,  Athen.  1,  307.  So  Catull.  59,  21 :
'  Asian  myrtle  with  emblos3omed  sprays,  quos  Uamadryades  deae
ludicram  sibi  roscido  nutriunt  humore/  Pretty  stories  of  the
tree-nymph  in  Charon,  Fragm.  hist.  Gr.  1,  35;  others  in  Ov.
Met.  8,  771 ;  the  forest- women  in  line  746  seq.  are  descr.  more
fully  by  Albr.  v.  Halberstadt  280-1.

p.  480.]  The  schrats  appear  singly ;  more  finely  conceived,
these  wood-sprites  become  heroes  and  demigods  (pp.  376.  432).
The  Katzenveit  of  the  Fichtelgebirge  suggests  Katzaus  of  the
preced.  note.  Bubezagel,  Rühezahl,  a  man's  name  as  early  as
1230,  Zeuss's  Herk.  der  Baiern  p.  35,  conf.  Moneys  Anz.  6,  231 ;
a  Hermannus  Ruheza^il  in  Dronke's  Trad.  Fuld.  p.  63 ;  Riehen»
zahl  in  a  15th  cent.  MS.,  Moneys  Arch.  '38,  425 ;  Riehenzagel,
Praetor.  Alectr.  178-9;  Rühezal,  Opitz  2,280-1;  '20  acres  in
the  Rübenzagil/  Widder's  Pfalz  1, 379 ;  conf.  %wi-zagil,  Hasin-zaZ,


1426  WIGHTS  AND  EL^'ES.

Arnsbg  urk.  410.  426.     Strit-zagel,  n.  pr.,  Lang  reg.  5,  107  (vr
1166).

p.  483.]  Garg.  119**  names  together  were- wolves,  pilosi,  goat-
men,  dusen,  trutten,  garausz,  bitebawen.  On  dasii  conf.  Hattemer
1,  230-1.  Add  the  jiidel,  for  whom  toys  are  deposited,  conf.
Sommer's  Sag.  170.  25;  'he  makes  a  show,  as  if  he  were  the
guile/  H.  Sachs  1,  444'»;  ein  güttel  (götze^  idol  ?),  Wolfdietr.  in
Hagen'a  Heldb.  p.  236;  bergmendlein,  cobcle,  gütkin,  Mathesias

1 562,  296'». They  are  the  Lat.  faunus,  whose  lond  voice  the

Romans  often  heard :  saepe  faunorum  voces  exauditae,  Cic.  de
N.D.  2.  2 ;  fauni  vocein  nunqaam  audi  vi  3,  7;  fauTWs  qaomm
noctivago  strepitu  ladoqae  jocanti  ....  chordaramqne  sonos,
dulceisqae  querelas  tibia  quas  fundit,  Lucret.  4,  582 ;  visi  etiam
audire  vocem  ingentem  ex  summi  cacuminis  luco,  Livy  1,  31  ;
silentio  proximae  noctis  ex  ailva  Arsia  ingentem  editam  vocevi,
Silvani  vocem  eam  creditam  2,  7.  On  Faunns  and  Silvanus  see
Klausen  pp.  844  seq.  1141.  Hroswitha  (Pertz  6,  310)  calls  the
forest  pook  where  Gandersheim  nunnery  gets  built  '  silvestrem
locum  faunis  w^ons^/•^5-que  repletum.^  .  Lye  has  wudewasan
(-wasan  ?)  =8atyri,  fauni,  sicurii,  Wright  60*  wudewasan  =  &ci8kri\
(correctly)  vel  invii,  O.E.  'a  i/?oodM;o/Je  =  satyrus'  {wasa  elsewh.
coenum,  lutum,  ooze,  ON.  veisa),  conf.  't£n/deu;iÄ^  =  lamia'  in  a
Lünebg  glossary  of  15th  cent.  In  M.Neth.  faunus  is  rendered
volencel,  Diut.  2,  214,  fr.  vole,  foal ;  because  a  horse's  foot  or
shape  is  attrib.  to  him  ?  conf.  nahtvole  (Suppl.  to  1054).  Again,
fauni  are  night-butterflies  ace.  to  Du  Meril's  art.  on  KM.  p.  40.
The  faun  is  also  called  fantasma  :  '  to  exorcize  the  faniasima,^

Decam.  7,  1.    fantoev,  Maerl.   2,  365. Other  names :  waU-

man,  Iw.  598.  622;  also  in  Bon.  91,  where  Striker  has  wait-
schrat;  waU-tore  440;  walt-geselle,  -genoz,  -gast,  Krone  9266-76,
wilder  man  9255  ;  wilde  leute,  Bader  no.  9261.  346.  With  them
are  often  assoc.  wild  women,  wildez  wip,  Krone  9340;  wald-
minchen,  Colshorn  p.  92  ;  conf.  wildevwibs-bild,  -zehnte,  a  rocky
height  near  Birstein,  Landau's  Kurhessen  p.  615.  Pfister  p.  271 ;
holzweibeUeteine  in  Silesia,  Mosch  p.  4.  The  wild  man's  wife  is
called /awgr^a,  Zingerle  2,  111  (conf  2,  51.  WolPs  Ztschr.  2,
58) ;  fanggen-löcher,  -holes  2,  53 ;  in  Vorarlbg  feng,  fenggi,
fengga-mäntschi,  Vonbun  1 — 6.  Wolfs  Z.  2,  50;  conf.  Fiuz
(Suppl.   to   484).      The    ON.   iviffr  may  be   malus,  perversus.


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1427

dolosasj  conf.  Goth,  invinds,  OS.  inwid,  OHG.  inwitter  dolosus^
ivi^giarn,  Sasm.  138*.  In  Sjrjan.  t;ör«a  =  silvae  genius^  fr.  vor,
silva.

p.  484.]  Of  IviiSjar  and  iarnvi^jar  little  is  known,  but  the
skogs-rä  akin  to  them  was  supposed  to  live  in  trees^  and  any
wrong  done  to  him  brought  on  sickness,  Frieses  Udfl.  1,  109  ;  he
dies  with  the  tree,  conf.  walt-minne  (p.  434),  hamadryas.  The
skograt  has  a  long  tail,  Dyb.  Runa  4,  88  ;  skogeroa  and  sjögeroa

boast  of  their  deeds  and  wealth  4,  29.  40. The  wood-wives  in

Germany  wail  and  cry  (pp.  433.  1135):  'you  cry  like  a  wood-
wife,'  XJhl.  VolksL  149.  The  holz-frau  is  shaggy  and  wild,  over-
grown with  moss,  H.  Sachs  1,  273.  The  Finz-weibl  on  the  Finz
(Bav.)  is  spotted,  and  wears  a  broad-brimmed  hat,  Panz.  Boitr.
1,  22  (Fenggi  in  preced.  note) .  Fasolt's  and  Ecke's  mother  is  a
rauhes  weiby  Ecke  231.  The  holz-weibl  spin  till  *  lichel  *  comes
out,  Mosch.  p.  4.  They  dread  the  Wild  Hunter,  as  the  sub-
terraneans flee  from  Wode,  Miillenh.  p.  372-3.  The  wild  man
rides  on  a  stag,  Riug  32^,  34.  The  Huuter' chases  the  moos-
weibla  or  loh-jungfer  (p.  929),  and  wild  men  the  blessed  maids,
Steub's  Tirol  p.  319 ;  in  the  Etzels  hofh.  the  wonder-worker
pursues  Frau  Saelde  (p.  943),  as  Fasolt  in  Ecke  181—179  (ed.

Hagen  213 — 238.    333)   does  the  wild  maiden. Men  on  the

contrary  are  often  on  good  terms  with  them :  at  haymaking  or
harvest  they  rake  a  little  heap  together,  and  leave  it  lying,  for
'that's  the  wood- maiden's  due.'  In  pouring  out  of  a  dish,  when
drops  hang  on  the  edge,  don't  brush  them  off,  they  belong  to
the  moss-maiden.  When  a  wood-maiden  was  caught,  her  little
man  came  running  up,  and  cried :  *  A  wood-maiden  may  tell
anything,  barring  the  use  you  can  make  of  drip-water/  Panz.
Beitr.  2,  161.  A  thankful  little  wood  wife  exclaims:  'bauern-
blut,  du  bist  gut,'  Börner  p.  231.  To  the  bush-grand motlLtr  on
the  Saale  corresp.  the  Esthonian  forest-father,  tree-host,  Böcler
U6.

p.  485.]  Dwarfs  and  woodwives  will  not  have  cummin-bread,
Firmen.  2,  264''.  A  wood-maiden  near  Wonsgehei  said  to  a
woman  :  *  Never  a  fruitful  tree  pull  up,  Tell  no  dream  till  you've
tasted  a  cup  (lit.,  no  fasting  dream).  Bake  no  Friday's  bread,  And

God,  etc.'     Panz.  Beitr.  2,  161. That  wood-mannikins  and

dwarfs,  after  being  paid,  esp.  in  gold  or  clothes,  give  up  the


1428  WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.

service  of  man^  comes  ont  in  many  stories.  The  wichtels  by
Ziirgesheim  in  Bavarian  Swabia  used  to  wash  the  people's  linen
and  bake  them  bread ;  when  money  was  left  out  for  them  because
they  went  naked^  they  said  weeping :  '  now  we're  paid  off,  we
must  joy';  conf.  N.Preuss.  prov.  bl.  8,  229.  Bader  no.  99.
Vonbun  p.  9  (new  ed.  11—15).  Panz.  B.  1, 40-2-8.  156.  2, 160.
The  same  of  hilUmannihins,  Steub's  Tirol  p.  82  ;  fenggamäntBchi,
Vonbun  p.  3;  norlc,  Steub  p.  318;  futiemiämichen,  Börner  p.
243-6  :  Hob,  Hone's  Tablebk.  2,  658  and  Yearbk.  1533.  A
pixy,  who  helped  a  woman  to  wash,  disappears  when  presented
with  a  coat  and  cap.  Pixies,  who  were  helping  to  thrash,  dance
merrily  in  a  barn  when  a  peasant  gives  them  new  clothes,  and
only  when  shot  at  by  other  peasants  do  they  vanish,  singing
'  Now  the  pixies'  work  is  done.  We  take  our  clothes  and  oflf  we
run,'  Athenm.  no.  991.

p.  487.]  The  huorco  sits  on  a  tree-stump,  Pentam.  1,1.  Ari-
osto's  descr.  of  th^  oreo  and  his  wife  in  Orl.  fur.  xvii.  29 — 65  is
pretty  long-winded :  he  is  blind  (does  not  get  blinded),  has  a
flock  like  Polyphemus,  eats  men,  but  not  women.  Ogres  keep
their  crowns  on  in  bed.  Petit  poucet  p.  m.  162-3.  Aulnoy  p.  m.
858.  539.  Akin  to  orco  is  the  Tyrolese  wood-sprite  nark,  nörhele,
lorlc,  Steub's  Tirol  pp.  318-9.  472  and  Rhsdt.  131 ;  conf.  norg  =
pumilio  in  B.  Fromm.  3,  439,  norggen,  hrggen,  nörggin,  nörklein,
Wolf's  Ztschr.  1,  289.  290.  2,  183-4.  To  Laurin  people  call  :
'  her  Nörggel  unterm  tach  ! '  Ring  52^  2.  The  Finn.  Eiisi  is
both  Orcus  (hell),  giant  and  wood-man.  The  Swed.  skogsnerte,
sJcogsnufva  in  Fries's  Udfl.  110  is  a  beautiful  maiden  in  front,  but
hollow  (ihalig)  behind;  and  the  skogssnua  is  described  in  the
same  way,  Rana,  '44,  44-5.     Wieselgren  460.

p.  488.]  Ein  nierminne.  Tit.  5268.  mareminne,  Clarisse  on
Br.  Gher.  p.  222.  Nennius  says  the  potamogeton  natans  is  called
seeholde;  conf.  custos  fontium  (Suppl.  to  584)  and  the  hollen  in
Kuhn's  Westph.  s.  1,  200.  to  a-TOix^lov  tov  irorafiov,  Fauriel  2,
77.  Other  names:  wilder  wjazzerm an,  Krone  9237;  do,z  meriuip,
who  hurls  a  cutting  spear  at  the  hero,  Roseng.  xxii. ;  sjö-rä,  Dyb.
4,  29.  41.     On  the  hafsfruu  see  Suppl.  to  312.

p.  489.]  Nikhus,  neut.,  Diut.  3,  25.  Karajan  80,  4.  nykus
even  in  a  Wend,  folksong  2,  267*.  mc7ie»«a  =  lymphae,  N.  Cap.
52.     nickers,  Br.  Gher.  719.     Van  d.  Bergh  p.  180  thinks  nikker


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1429

18  for  niger :  '  zoo  zwart  als  een  nikker ' ;  bat  tbe  idea  of  black-
ness may  have  been  borrowed  from  the  later  devil,  neckers,
Gefken's  Beil.  151.  168.  nükeUm&nn,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  378;
conf.  too  the  ON.  Nöckvi,  Sasm.  11 6'.  The  supposed  connexion
of  the  R.  Neckar  with  nicor,  nechar  is  supported  by  the  story  on
p.  493-4. Esth.  vessi  hallicut,  Finn,  weden  haldia,  aquae  domi-
nus, Possart  p.  163;  conf.  Ahto  (Suppl.  to  237).  The  siren,
whom  Conrad  calls  wdsser'tiixey  is  also  called  cajoler,  Boh.  lichoples
(p.  436  n.),  and  ochechuley  Jungm.  2,  903,  wochechule  fr.  lichotiti,
ochechulati,  to  flatter.  Spring-nixen  (f.)  are  the  Swed.  källräden,
Sv.  folks.  1,  123.  A  pretty  Silesian  story  of  the  wasser-lisse  in
Firmen.  2,  334 ;  does  this  represent  wazzer-dieze  ?  The  Lusch  in
Gryphius's  Domrose  is  Liese,  Elisabeth.

p.  490.]  The  nymphasa  is  in  Gkkel.  baditis,  AS.  ed-docce,  Engl,
water-docft,  Bav.  docke,  wasser-dockelein  (tocke,  doll,  girl),  conf.
seeblatt  (p.  654),.  Swed.  näck-ros-blad.  On  näckro8or,  Dybeck  '45,
64-6 ;  necken  har  sin  boning  bland  neckroseme,  och  uppstigande
pa  dess  blad  ännu  stundom  i  man-skens-natten  med  sitt  stranga-
spel  tjuser  ähöraren.  Fries  bot.  udfl.  1,  108.  The  water-maiden
sits  on  leaves  of  the  waterlily,  Müllenh.  p.  340;  a  nix-bitten
(-bütten)  meadow  near  Betziesdorf,  Hess.  Ztschr.  1,  245.     The

Syryän.   kuli=:  genius    aquae,   kuli-ciuri=:  digitus    ejusdem.

Merwomen  prophesy,  sometimes  deceitfully,  like  Hadburc  in
the  Nibel.  When  a  hav-fru  is  saying  sooth  to  queen  Dagmar,
the  phrase  is  used :  '  vedst  du  det,  saa  vedst  du  mer,'  D.  Y.  2,
8-i-4-5.  In  Mecklenbg.  the  water-mom  sends  her  prophetic  voice
out  of  the  water.  Lisch  5,  78.  A  spectre  foretelling  death  shows
itself  on  the  Danube  whirlpool,  Ann.  Altahenses,  yr  1045  (Giese-
brecht  p.  75) ;  conf.  the  soothsaying  merwomen  (p.  434).

p.  491.]  The  Scotch  kelpie  takes  the  shape  of  a  horse,  whose
presence  is  known  by  his  nicker  (neigh) ;  he  draws  men  in,  and
shatters  ships.  Or  he  rises  as  a  bull,  the  waierbull ;  the  same  is
told  of  the  water-shelly,  and  the  Danes  have  a  water-sprite  Dam^
hest,  Athenm.  no.  997.  The  nixe  appears  as  a  richly  caparisoned
foal,  and  tempts  children  to  mount  her,  Possart's  Estl.  p.  163.
This  horse  or  bull,  rising  out  of  the  sea  and  running  away  with
people,  is  very  like  Zeus  visiting  Europa  as  a  bull,  and  carrying
her  into  the  water;  conf.  Lucian,  ed.  Bip.  2,  125.  The  water-
mom  tries  to  drag  you  in,  she  wraps  rushes  and  sedge  about  your


1430  WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.

feet  when  bathing,  Lisch  5,  78.  The  merminne  steals  Lanzelet
from  his  mother^  Lanz.  181 ;  conf.  Sommer  p.  173.

p.  498.]  The  merman  is  long-bearded;  so  has '  daz  mer wunder
einen  hart  lane,  grüenfar  und  ungeschaffen/  Wigam.  177;  its
body  is  'in  mies  geufUnden/  Gndr.  113,  3.  The  mermaid  combs
her  hair,  Müllenh.  p.  338 ;  this  combing  is  also  Finnish,  Kalev.
22,  3Ö7  seq.  The  nixe  has  bat  one  nostril,  Sommer,  p.  41.  The
water- nix  (m.)  wears  a  red  cape,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4,  393,  blue  breeches,
red  stockings,  Hoffm.  Schles.  lied.  p.  8.  The  beauty  of  the  nixen
(f.)  is  dwelt  upon  in  the  account  of  the  wa^serluss,  Gryph.  743,
and  the  wasserlisse,  Firmen.  2,  334.  They  have  wet  aprow,
Somm.  p.  40-5.  Wend.  volksL  2,  267*.  The  nixe  dances  in"  a
patched  gown,  Somm.  p.  44.  The  sea-maiden  shows  a  tail  in
dancing.  Buna  4,  73.  Their  coming  in  to  dance  is  often  spoken
of.  Panzer  2,  nos.  192-6-8.  204-8.  Like  the  sacriSce  to  the  fosse-
grim  clothed  in  grey  and  wearing  a  red  cap,  Buna  '44,  76,  is  the
custom  of  throwing  a  bla^cJc  cock  into  the  Bode  once  a  year  for  the
nickelmann,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  378 ;  and  like  his  playing  by  the
waterfall  is  Ahto's  seizing  Wäinämöinen's  harp  when  it  falls  into
the  water,  KaL  23,  183.

p.  494.]  On  river  sacrifices  conf.  p.  596.  Nixes  (m.)  demand
their  victim  on  Midsum.  day,  Somm.  p.  39 :  '  de  Leine  fret  alle
jar  teine ; '  '  de  Bume  un  de  Leine  slucket  alle  jar  teine,'  Schamb.
spr.  p.  87.  '  The  Lahn  must  have  some  one  every  year'  they  say
at  Giessen.  'La  riviere  de  Drome  a  tons  les  ans  cheval  on  homme/
Plnqnet's  Oontes  pop.,  p.  116.  In  the  Palatinate  they  say  of  the
Neckar:  when  it  is  flooded,  a  hand  rises  out  of  it,  and  carries  off
its  victim.  On  Midsum.  night  the  Neckar-geist  requires  a  living
soul ;  for  three  days  the  drowned  man  can  nowhere  be  found,  on
the  fourth  night  he  floats  up  from  the  bottom  with  a  blue  ring
round  his  neck,  Nadler  p.  126.  At  Cologne  they  say  :  Sanct
Johann  wel  hann  14  dude  mann,  siben  de  klemme,  siben  de
schwemme  (the  seven  that  climb  are  workmen  on  scaffoldings) ;
conf.  *putei  qui  rapei^e  dicuntur  per  vim  Spiritus  nocentis,'  TertuU.
de  Baptismo  (Sudors' 15,  215).

p.  496.]  The  injunction  7iot  to  beat  down  the  price  (p.  495n.)
occurs  also  in  a  story  in  Beusch's  Preuss.  prov.  bl.  23,  124  In
buying  an  animal  for  sacrifice  you  must  not  haggle,  Athen.  3, 102;
the  fish  aper  must  be  bought  at  any  price,  3,  117-8.    '  emi  lienem


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1431

vitali,  qnauti  indicatns  üt,  jubent  magi^  nulla  pretii  cunctatione/

Pliny  28,  13. Lashing  the  water  reminds  us  of  a  nix  who

opens  the  way  to  his  honse  by  smiting  the  water  with  a  rod,  Somm.
pp.  41.  92  ;  hlood  appears  on  the  water,  46.  174 ;  an  apple  aa  a
favourable  sign,  Hoffm.  Schles.  lied.  p.  4.  Grendel  comes  walk-
tng  by  niqhtj  as  the  räkshasi  is  called  '  noctu  iens,'  Bopp's  Gloss.
188*.  ]98^

p.  498. J  Ea  is  neut.,  def.  räet ;  also  räand,  rädrottning,  Sv.
folks.  \,  233.  74  (Suppl.  to  439).  Souls  kept  under  inverted  pots
by  the  waterman  occur  again  in  KM.  no.  100  and  Miillenh.  p.  577.
Neptunivs,  Neptenius  is  also  transl.  altvil,  Homeyer's  Bechtsb.
14.  Watersprites  wail,  or  in  other  ways  reveal  their  presence  :
the  sjö-mor  moans,  Dyb.  '45,  98 ;  conf.  '  gigantes  gemuyit  sub
aquis,'  Job.  26,  5 ;  tJvlk  cfieXXov  rhv  irorafiov  ZiaßaLveiv,  to  Sat-
fioviov  T€  teal  rb  eltoOb^  cqfialov  fidi  yiyveaffai  iyivero,  Plato's
Phsedr.  242.  A  tradition  similar  to  Gregory's  anecdote  is  given
by  Schönwerth  2,  187.

p.  500.]  Penates  were  gods  of  the  household  store,  penus.
Lares  were  in  Etruscan  lases,  Gerh.  Etr.  götter  p.  15-6;  Lasa  =
Fortuna.  A  legend  of  the  lar  familiaris  in  Pliny  36,  70.  Was
there  a  Goth.  ldt  =  domus,  and  did  Luarin  mean  homesprite?
Lares,  penates,  OHG.  husgoia  or  herdgota,  Graflf  4,  151.  Home-
sprites  are  called  hus-knechtJeen,  Miillenh.  p.  318,  haus-puken ;
Russ.  domovoy  ;  tomtar,  Dyb.  4,  26;  Finn,  tonttu,  Gastrin  167.
On  Span,  duende,  duendecillo  conf.  Diez's  Wtb.  485 ;  couroit
comme  un  lutin  par  toute  sa  demeure,  Lafont.  5, 6.  A  genius  loci
is  also  Agathodaemon,  Gerh.  in  Acad.  ber.  '47,  p.  203-4;  conf.
the  bona  socia,  the  good  holden,  the  bona  dea,  bona  fortuna  and
bonus  euenttis  worshipped  by  the  country  folk,  Ammian.  Marc.
582-3.  The  puk  lives  in  cellars,  Mone's  Schausp.  2,  80-6;  niss
puk,  niss  pug,  Miillenh.  pp.  318.  325;  nisebuk,  niskepufe«  321-4.
ML6.  puk  (rh.  struk,  bftk),  Upstand.  1305.  1445.  Lett.  puhkLf,
dragon,  kobold,  Bergm.  152;  cont  pixy.

p.  502  n.]  So,  Manghing  like  pixies.^  [Other  expressions
omitted.]

p.  503.]  To  the  earliest  examples  of  kobold,  p.  500  n.,  add
Lodovicus  caboldus,  yr.  1221,  Lisch,  Meckl.  urk.  3,  71  [later  ones,

including  Cabolt,  Kaboldisdhorpe,  &c.,  omitted] . To  speak '  in

koboldes  spräche'  means  very  softly,  Hagen's  Ges.  Abent.  3,  78.


1432  WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.

A  concealed  person  in  Enenkel  (Ranch  1^  316)  says:  ich  rede  in
chowolcz  wise.  Lessing  1^  292  :  the  kobold  must  have  whispered
it  in  my  ear.  Luther  has  kobold  ia  Isa.  34^  14.  cobel,  der
schwarze  teufel,  die  teuEels-hure,  Mathesius  1562,  154^.  Öo6e-
linus,  a  man^s  name^  Moneys  Heldens.  13. 15.     Hob,  a  homesprite^

Hone's  Tablebk  3,  657  (conf.  p.  503,  n.  1). May  we  bring

in  here  the  klabauter-msbU,  A^i/^er-man,  MüUenh.  p.  320^  a  ship-
sprite,  sometimes  called  kalfater,  Mabater-iaeLU,  Temme's  Pom.
sag.  no.  253,  Belg.  kaboter-maji  ?  Nethl,  coubouton,  Br.  Gher.
719.  The  taterman,  like  the  kobold,  is  painted:  '' m&let  einen
faterman/'  Jnn geling,  545.

p.  505.]  At  Cologne  they  call  homesprites  heizemänncher,
Firmen.  1,  467.  Knecht  Heinz  in  Fischart's  Spiel.  367,  and
knecht  Heinrich.  A  tom-cat  is  not  only  called  Hinze^  but  Heinz,
Henz,  and  a  stiefel-knecht  (bootjack,  lit.  boot-servant)  stiefeU
henz  (boot-puss),  coming  very  near  the  resourceful  Puss-in-boote.
The  tabby-cat  brings  you  mice,  corn  and  money  overnight ;  after
the  third  service  you  can't  get  rid  of  her,  MüUenh.  p.  207.  A
serviceable  tom-cat  is  not  to  be  shaken  off,  Temme's  Pom.  sag.
p.  318.  House-goblins^  like  the  moss-folk,  have  in  them  some-
thing of  the  nature  of  apes,  which  also  are  trained  to  perform
household  tasks,  conf.  Felsenbnrg  1,  240.  The  Lettons  too  have
a  miraculous  cat  Runzis  or  Rmikis,  who  carries  grain  to  his
master,  Bergm.  p.  152;  conf.  the  homesprites  Hans,  Pluquet^s
Contes   pop.   12,  Hänschen,   Somm.   pp.   33-4,   171,   and    Good

Joliann,  Müllenh.  p.  323. On  tbe  Wolterkens  conf.  MüUenh.

p.  318.  In  Holstein  they  call  knecht  Ruprecht  Roppert  319,
with  whom  and  with  Woden  Kuhn  compares  Robin  Hood,  Hpt^s
Ztschr.  5^  482-3.  For  the  nisJcen,  and  the  nis,  nispuJc,  nesskuk
consult  MüUenh.  318-9.  The  home- sprite,  like  the  devil,  is
occas.  called  Stepchen,  Somm.  33.  171;  and  lastly,  Billy  blind,
Minstr.  2,  399.

p.  506.]  The  spirits  thump  and  racket,  Goethe  15,  131.
Klopferle  (knockerling)  rackets  before  the  death  of  one  of  the
family  with  which  he  lives,  G.  Schwab's  Alb.  p.  227.  'Was  fur
ein  polter-geist  handtiert  (bustles)  durch  die  lichten  zimmerf
Günth.  969 ;  plagegeist,  Musffius  4,  53 ;  rumpeUgeist,  8.  Prank's
Chron.  212**;  'ez  rumpelt  staete /ür  sich  dar,'  Wasserbär  112;
bozen  or  mumaniz  in  the  millet- field,  Reimdich  145;  alpa-butz,


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1433

alp  dcemoD,  Vonbnn  p.  46-7-8.  '  Quoth  the  mother :  Nit  gang
hinuBZ^  der  mummel  (or,  der  man)  ist  dusz ;  for  the  child  feareth
the  mummel  (man)/  Keisersbg's  Bilgr.  166^.  To  vermummen
and  verbutzen  oneself^  H.  Sachs  i.  5,  534®.  Not  only  Rumpelstilt,
but  Knirfiher,  Gebhart,  Teperitiren  (MüUenh.  p.  306-7-8),  Titieli
Türe  (Sv.  folkv.  1,  171)  must  have  their  names  guessed.  Other
names  :  Kugerl,  Zingerle  2,  278,  Stutzlawutzla,  Wolfs  Ztschr.
2,  183.

p.  507.]  The  butzen-hansel  is  said  to  go  in  and  out  through
the  open  gutter,  as  other  spectres  pass  through  the  city  moat,
MüUenh.  p.  191.  Buzemannes,  a  place  in  Franconia,  MB.  25,
110-1;  PutzmanSy  ib.  218.  387.  Lutbertus  qui  hudde  dicitur,
Gerhardua  dictna  hudde,  Sudendf.  pp.  69.  70.  89  (yr.  1268),
hutzen-antlitz,  mask,  Anshelm  1,  408.  Garg.  122**;  hutzen^
hkider,  Ansh.  3,  411 ;  does  butzen,  ptUzen  strictly  mean  to  mask
oneself?  The  Swiss  böög,  bögh,  iröö^  =  mask,  bugbear.  Staid.  1,
202.  230;  böggen-weise,  a  Shrovetide  play.  Schreib.  Taschenb.
'40,  230;  bögglman,  Lazarillo  Augsb.  1617,  p.  5  (?).  Bröög
seems  akin  to  bruogo,  AS.  brdga  =  terror,  terriculamentum.

p.  508.]  On  the  Fr.  follet,  conf.  Diefenb.  Celt.  1,  182.  The
folet  allows  the  peasant  who  has  caught  him  three  wishes,  if  he
will  not  show  him  to  the  people,  Marie  de  Fr.,  Fables,  p.  140.
The /ar/ade^  de  Poissy  comes  out  of  the  fireplace  to  the  women
who  are  inspecting  each  other's  thighs,  and  shows  his  backside.
Reveille-matin,  p.  m.  342.  '  Malabron  le  luiton/  Gaufrey,  p.  169.
O.Fr.  ra6af= lutin.  M.Neth.  rebas,  Gl.  to  Lekensp.  p.  569.  In
Bretagne,  Poulpikan  is  a  roguish  sprite,  repres.  as  husband  of
the  fay,  and  found  in  Druidic  monuments.  Lett,  kehms,  Jcehmis,
goblin,  spectre;  also  lulkis,  Bergm.  145.  Is  götze,  Uhl.  Volksl.
754  a  goblin  ?

p.  511.]  'HöddJee  howls  ^  =  it  is  stormy,  Hildesh.  stiftsfehde
pp.  48.  91.  Falke  thinks  the  whole  story  of  Hödeke  is  tmmped
up,  Trad.  corb.  135.  Hütchen  is  a  little  red  mannikin  with
sparkling  eyes,  wears  a  long  green  garment,  Somm.  pp.  26-9.
30.  171.  In  Voigtland  they  tell  of  the  goblin  Pump-hut,  who
once  haunted  the  neighbourhood  of  Pausa,  always  worked  hard
as  a  miller^ 8  man,  and  played  many  a  roguish  trick,  Bechst.  in
Nieritz  volks-kal.  '46,  pp.  78 — 80.  The  same  Pwmp-hut  in
Westphalia,  Kuhn's  Westf.  sag.  2,  279;  mentioned  even  in  Insel


1434  WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.

Felsenbg,  Nordh.  1746,  2,  366—370.  About  Münster  they  dis-
tingaish  between  timp-hüte  and  lang -hüte  :  the  former  are  small,
wrinkled,  hoary,  old-fashioned,  with  three-cornered  hats ;  the
latter  tall,  haggard,  in  a  slouched  hat.  Timp-hat  bestows  posi-
tive blessings,  long-hat  keeps  off  misfortune.  They  live  mostly  in
the  barn  or  a  deserted  loft,  and  slowly  turn  a  creaking  windlass.
In  fires  they  have  been  seen  to  stride  out  of  the  flames  and  strike
into  a  by-way.     Conf.  the  homesprite  DaUkopp,  N.  Pr.  prov.  bl.

1,  394.  Elsewhere  they  live  in  a  corner  behind  tlis  oven,  under
the  roof-beam,  or  in  gable-holes,  where  a  board  is  put  out  to
attract  them,  Miillenh.  pp.  321-2.  332.5-7.     Hpt's  Lausitzer  sag.

•  1, 56  seq. The  goblin  sits  on  the  hearth,  flies  out  at  the  chimney,

shares  the  peasant's  room,  Somm.  p.  27-9.  Spirits  in  the  cellar,
over  the  casks,  Simplic.  2,  264-5  ',  conf.  Abundia  (pp.  286. 1056).
The  goblin  carries  things  to  his  master,  but  can  only  bring  a
certain  quantity,  and  will  change  masters  if  more  be  demanded,
Somm.  p.  27  (see  p.  512).  He  fetches  milk  from  other  men's
cows,  like  the  dragon,  the  Swed.  bare  (p.  1090)  and  the  devil;
here  he  encroaches  on  the  witch  and  devil  province.  He  helps
in  milking,  licks  up  the  spilt  drops,  Miillenh.  p.  325.  Goblins
curry  down  and  feed  the  cattle,  and  have  their  favourite  beasts,
Somm.  p.  36-7;  hence  the  name  futter-mannchen,  Börner's
Orlagau  p.  241-8.  A  homesprite  bier-esel  in  Kuhn's  Nordd.  sag,
no.  225,  conf.  pp.  423.  521.  They  speak  in  a  tiny  voice,  'in  ko-
boldes  spräche,'  Miillenh.  p.  335.  Hagen's  Ges.  Abent.  3,  78 ;
and  yet :  mit  grozer  stimme  er  dd  schrei  79.  As  nothing  was
B?en  of  king  Yollmar  but  his  shadow,  so  is  Good  Johann  like  a
shadow,  Miillenh.  p.  323.  They  are  often  seen  in  the  shape  of
a  toad,  pp.  355.  330,  also  as  torn  or  tabby  cat  (Suppl.  to  505).
The  Albanians  imagine  their  homesprite  vittore  as  a  little  snake,
Hahn's  Lieder  136.     A  good  description  of  the  hobold  in  Firmen.

2,  237-8.  The  herb  agermund,  Garg.  88**,  seems  conn,  with
Agemund,  the  house- daemon  in  Beinardus.

p.  511.]  The  homesprite  being  olKovpo^,  agathodaemon  (p.
485-6),  there  is  milk,  honey  and  sugar  set  on  the  bench  for  him,
as  for  the  nnke,  Schweinichen  1, 261.  In  the  Schleswig- Hoi  stein
stories  they  must  always  have  pap  or  groats,  with  a  piece  of
butter  in.  The  goblin  has  the  table  spread  for  him,  Somm.  p.  82.
Napf-hans  is  like  the  Lat.  Lateranus,  Arnob.  4,  6;  Lateranus


WIGHTS  AND  ELVES.  1435

fleus  est  focorum  et  genius,  adjectusque  hoc  nomine,  quod  ex
latercolis  ab  hominibus  crudis  caminorum  istud  exaedificetar
genus  .  .  •  per  humani  generis  coquinas  currit,  inspiciens  et
explorans  quibnsnam  lignorum  generibus  suis  ardor  in  foculis
excitetar^  habitudinem  fictilis  contribuit  vasculis,  ne  flammarum
dissiliant  vi  victa,  curat  ut  ad  sensum  palati  suis  cum  jocnn-
ditatibns  yeniant  rerum  incorruptarum  sapores,  et  an  rite  pul-
menta  condita  sint,  praegustatoris  fuugitur  atque  experitur  officio.
Härtung  2,  109  says  it  is  Vulcanits  caminorum  deus;  certainly
Varro  in  fragm.  p.  265  ed.  Bip.  makes  Vulcan  the  preserver  of
pots :  Vulcanum  necdum  nooae  lagenae  ollarum  frangantur  ter
precatur  (conf.  p.  447).

p.  512.]  A  goblin  appears  as  a  monk,  Somm.  pp.  35.  172-3.
With  Shelly  coat  conf.  Schellen-moriz  153-4.  Homesprites  de-
mand but  trifling  wages,  as  in  the  pretty  story  of  a  serving
daemon  who  holds  the  stirrup  for  his  master,  guides  him  across
the  ford,  fetches  lion's  milk  for  the  sick  wife,  and  at  last,  when
dismissed,  asks  but  five  shillings  wages,  and  gives  them  back  to
buy  a  bell  for  a  poor  church,  using  the  remarkable  words:  magna
est  mihi  consolatio  esse  cum  filiis  hominum,  Cansar  Heisterb.
5,  36.  On  the  Spanish  goblin^s  cunirucho  tamano,  observe  that
the  lingua  mstica  already  said  tammana  for  tarn  magna,  Nieb.  in
Abh.  d.  Berl.  Acad.  '22,  257.

p.  513  n.]  The  alleriirken  is  a  puppet  locked  up  in  a  box,
which  brings  luck,  Miillenh.  p.  209  ;  conf.  '  he's  got  an  oaraunl
inside  him,'  KM.  183  (infra  p.  1203).  Wax  figures  ridiculously
dressed  up,  'which  we  call  glücks-männchen,'  10  eben,  p.  357;
conf.  the  glüches-pfennig ,  Prediger  märchen  16,  17,  also  the  well-
known  ducaten-kacker,  and  the  doll  in  Straparola  (5,  21).  KM^.
3,  287.  291.  The  Mönöloke  is  a  wax  doll  dressed  up  in  the
devil's  name,  Miillenh.  p.  209 ;  conf  the  dragedukke,  a  box  out  of

which  you  may  take  as  much  money  as  you  will. A  homesprite

can  be  bought,  but  the  third  buyer  must  keep  him,  Miillenh.
p.  322.  One  buys  a  poor  and  a  rich  goblin,  Somm.  p.  33.  Such
sprites  they  made  in  Esthonia  of  tow,  rags  and  fir-bark,  and  got
the  devil  to  animate  them,  Possart's  Esthl.  p.  162  ;  more  exactly
described  in  the  Dorp,  verhandl.  i.  2,  89.  So  the  shamans  make
a  fetish  for  the  Samoyeds  out  of  a  sheep-skin,  Suomi  '46,
p.  37-8-9.


1436  GIANTS.

p.  516.]  On  the  manducus,  see  O.  Mulleins  Etr.  2,  101  (conf.
p.  1082).  '  Qaid  si  aliqno  ad  ludos  me  pro  mcmduco  locem  ?  quia
pol  clare  crepito  dentibus/  Plaut.  Rud.  ii.  6,  52.  This  too  is  the
place  for  scliemen:  'als  dakten  sich  die  schamn  (1.  Schemen)  e,  do
si  diu  hint  schrakien  mit/  to  frighten  children  with,  Jüngl.  698.
Are  Schemen  masks  ?  conf.  '  schönbart '  for  schem-bart,  OHG.
scema= larva,  persona,  like  hage-bart,  Schm.  3,  362.  Graff  6,
495.  On  Ruprecht  see  Kuhn  in  Hpt^s  Ztschr.  5,  473.  von  den
sogenandten  Rupperten,  die  sich  '  bunt  und  rav^h  untereinander
anziehen,^  or  '  einen  rauchen  pelz,'  3  erzn.  369.  Knecht  Ruprecht
(or  Erampus,  Klaubauf,  meister  Strohbart)  is  St.  Nicolas's  man,
Ziska's  Oestr.  volksm.  49,  110.  Hollepeter,  Wolfs  Ztschr.  2,  194.
'  dich  müez  der  Semper  machen  g'sunt,'  the  devil  have  the  curings
of  you !  Ring  14**,  5.  To  him  corresp.  old  Orumbus  with  the
rod,  Firmen.  2,  45,  and  Fiele  Oig  (fidele  geige  ?)  of  the  Kuh-
ländchen,  described  in  Schlegel's  Mus.  4,  119.  Walloon  ^hans--
croufe,  valet  de  S.  Nicolas,'  our  Hans  Buckel  (croufe  =  bosse),
Grandgagn.  1,  271.  As  Niclashas  a  man,  Gargantua  has  a  drole
in  his  retinae,  Mem.  celt.  5, 393-4.  Oar  knecht  Ruprecht  is  Russ.
buka,  Gretsch  p.  109,  Lett,  bubbulis.  His  Styrian  name  of  Klauh^
auf  resembles  the  rointerklaub,  Wolkenst.  p.  67.  A  sooty  face
belongs  to  the  phallophorus  also,  Athen.  5,  254.  St.  Peter,  who
may  be  regarded  as  Ruprechtes  representative,  when  journeying
with  Christ,  always  behaves  as  a  good-natured  simpleton.

As  people  sacrificed  to  forest-women  (p.  432),  so  they  did  to
subterraneans,  Miillenh.  p.  281.  On  feast-days  the  Ossetes  place
a  portion  of  the  viands  in  a  separate  room  for  the  homesprite  to
eat ;  they  are  miserable  if  he  does  not,  and  are  delighted  to  find
a  part  of  them  gone,  KohPs  Süd-russl.  1,  295.  A  Roman  setting
out  on  a  journey  took  leave  of  the  familiaris  :  'etiam  nunc  saluto
te,  familiaris,  priusquam  eo,'  Plant.  Mil.  gl.  iv.  8,  29.


CHAPTER  XVIII.
GIANTS.

p.  518.]  In  some  ways  men,  elves  and  giants  stand  related  as
men,  angels  and  devils.  Giants  are  the  oldest  of  all  creatures,
and  belong  to  the  stone-age.  Here  we  have  to  make  out  more
fully,  that  giants  and  titans  are  the  old  nature-gods.


GIANTS.  1437

p.  520.3  Mere  descriptive  epithets  of  giants  are :  der  groze
man,  Ernst  469.  4288;  der  michel  man,  .Lanz.  7705 ;  der  michel,
der  groze,  Altd.  bl.  2,  149.  So  of  their  coantrj :  unhundigez  Idnt^
Both.  625,  and  der  riesin  lande  761  (  =  iötan-heini,  p.  580);  of
their  nation:  unkundigiu  diet  680.  The  ON.  iotunn,  AS.  eoien
is  supported  by  the  dimin.  Etenca  (?).  Is  EtiovM  (for  Oxionas)
in  Tac.  Germ.  46  the  same  word  ?  Hpt*s  JZtschr.  9,  256.-  Snrely
liethenesberg,  hsdenesbg,  hettesnasmont,  etanasbg  in  Chart.  Sithiense
158.  80.  160-2  are  not  heathen's  hill  nor  hätenbg?  Gi»aff  U
370  has  Entineehurc  (conf.  p.  525).     Etenesleha,   Dronke   233*.

Leo  in  Vorles.  über  d.  gescb.  d.  Dent,  volks  1,  112  agrees

with  me  in  tracing  the  word  to  ON.  eta,  AS.  etan ;  conf.  mann"
aeta  (p.  520n.  and  Snppl.  to  555),  the  giant^s  name  Wolfes  niage
(Sappl.  to  557),  and  a  giant  being  addressed  as  '  dA  ungaeher
fraz!'  Dietr.drach.  288^  Ssk.  kravyad,  Bopp's  Gr.  §  572.  Finn-,
turilas,  tnrsas,  tnrras  =  ec2aa?,  gluto,  gigas;  and  this  is  confirmed
by  the  two  words  for  giantess,  ttyöjätär,  lit.femina  voraz,  fr.  sjön
=edo,  and  jtuijotar,  lit.  femina  bibax,  fr.  jnon=bibo,  Schiefner's
Finn.  w.  606-8.— —Schafarik  1,  141  connects  iöfcun,  jätte  with
gHa  in  Massageta,  Thnssagete  (p.  577n.).  Thorlacius  sp.  6,  p.  24
thinks  iotar,  iötnar,  risar  are  all  one.  Bask  on  the  contrary
distingnishes  Jötunheimar  (jättemes  land)  from  Joilamdi  (jydernes
land),  likewise  Jotann  (gigas)  from  Jöti  (a  Jute),  Afh.  1,  77-8.
6DS.  736;  he  takes  the  iötnar  to  be  Finns  (more  exactly  Kvaener),
and  Jotnnheimar  perhaps  Hälogaland,  Afh.  1,  80-6;  bnt  in  a
note  to  S89m.  83  he  identifies  the  iötnar  with  the  Eistir,  Swed.
jdiie  ochjatiesa,  Cayallins  25.  467.  Jettha,  Jettenberg  may  be  for
Jeecha,  Jechenberg,  as  Jechelbnrg  became  Jethelberg.  Jetene-
burg,  Oetenburg  occnr  in  deeds  of  the  13th  cent.,  Wipperm.  nos.
41.  60.  Jettenbach  on  the  Handsrück,  Höfer's  ürk.  p.  37.  The
giant's  mnnohing,  'mesan,'  p.  519,  should  be  mesan,  OHG.
maosan.

p.  522.]  It  seems  that  ßn/rja  ]7io$  in  SsBm.  82''  does  not  mean
torridomm  gens,  bnt  stands  for  ]7ursa,  )>yr8a.  With  Dan.  tosse
conf.  dysse^troll,  Sv.  foms.  1,  92-8.  Grendel  is  called  a  ßyrs,
Beow.  846.  As  the  mne  ßurs  in  ON.  corresp.  to  ßom  in  AS.,  we
have  even  in  ON.  a  giant  named  Böl-^om,  Ssam.  28*.  Sn.  7 ;
should  it  be  B&])?om,  fire-thorn  ?  It  is  strange  that  Alvts,  though
a  dwarf,  says  :  ßursa  liki  J^ycci  mer  &  )7er  vera,  Sffim.  48*.    OHG.

VOL.   IV.  M


4438  GIANTS.

'dum/«  =  Ditis,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  329\  Gl.  Sletst.  6,  169.  'm«re
von  eime  tursen/  KM.'  3^  275.     In  Thuringia  the  ihursehemantit

'Sechst.  March.  68.  We  still  say  '  der  torsch.'  To  the  Aastrian
families  of  Lichtenfels,  Tiernstein^  Banheneok  and  Banhenstein

-the  by-name  türse,  Ls,t.  iurso,  was  habitual  in  the  12 — 15th  cents.^
Heiligenkr.  1,  82.  4«.  127.  179.     2,  14.  26.     Women  were  called

itursin,  see  Leber's  book.  Türsemül,  peasant's  name^  MsH.  3,
.293^.  '  in  thwisloun;  Falke's  Trad.  Corb.  100-1.  354.  Saracho
p.  7,  no.  81,  ed.  Wigand  281-4.  420 ;  ttirsen^vwe,  etc.  Mone's  Anz.
6,  281  ;  Thyrsentritt,  E.  of  Lechthal,  SteuVs  Rhät  143;  Tirschen-
tritt,  Dirschentritty  GümheVs  Bair.  Alpe  pp.  217.  247;  Dursgesesz,

'Landau's  Wüste  örter  in  Hessen  p.  377 ;  Türschenwald  in  Salsach

•dale,  M.  Koch  221;  TürBtwmM,  Weisth.  4,  129.     Renvall  has

Finn,  turaas,  turrasy  iurrisas,  ^um«  giant,  <un7a«=homo  edax,

Yorax;  merittirscuf,  Schröter  p.  135.   Petersen  p.  42.   GDS.  122-3.

Dionys.  Halio.  1,21  thought  the  Tvpfyqvol  were  so  called  be-

«canse  they  reared  high  towers,  rvpati^.    That  agrees  with  the

i^ants'  buildings  <(p.  584-5).

^p.*524.]    On  Hnnen-beds  and  Hnnen,  see  Janssen's  Drentsche

•oudheden  pp.  167—184,  conf.  GDS.  475.      Does  the  Westph.

'iletind-kleid,  graye*clothes,  mean  hünen-kleid?    or  hence-going

«clothes,  as  ia  seme  parts  of  Westphalia  a  dying  man's  last  com-

«innion  was  called  henne-kost  f 'Als  ein  hiune  gelidet,'  having

giant's  limbs,  Troj.  kr.  29562 ;  liiui\e  is  often  used  in  J.  y.  Soest's
Marg.  von  limburg  (Hone's  Ans,  '34,  218) ;  Ortleip  der  hiunCf
La  3,  401;  ''der  groten  hunen  (gigantam),'  B.  d.  kon.  112.
Strangely  the  hnhnen  in  Firmen.  1,  325  are  dwarfs,  sabterraneans,
who  are  short-lived,  and  kidnap  children,  though  like  hunen  they
live  in  a  hill;  conf.  the  hiinnersk^s,  Kuhn's  Weetf.  sag.  1,  63-4.
As  the  ON.  hAnar  is  never  qaite  synonymoos  with  iötnar  and
]mrsar,  so  the  heunen  are  placed  after  the  giants  aa  a  yonnger
race,  Baader's  Sag.  no.  887.     GDS.  475.

p.  525.]     Other  examples  of  AS.  ent :  gel^fdon  (believed)  on
dedde  entas,  AS.  homil.  1,  366;  on  enta  hl&ve  (cave),  Kemble  4,

49  ;  on  entan  blew  5,  265. Entinea-hnrc,  Graff  1, 370 ;  EnzinS'

perif,  MB.  2,  197 ;  Jnnn-var,  Hess.  Ztschr.  1,  246,  like  Ruosel-
mannes  var.  Hone's  Anz.  '36,  300 ;  ad  giganteam  viam,  entishen
wee,  Wien.  sitz.  ber.  4,  141 ;  von  enten  swarz  unde  grft  kan  ich
nit  vil  sagen,  EM. '  3,  275.


GIANTS.  1439

p.  525.]  Mercnry  is  called  '  se  gygand '  (p.  149) ;  die  ghigante,
gigante^  Eose  5135-82.  Biöm  writes  gigr,  Aasen  152^  has  jygger,
gyvr  for  gygr  (conf.  'ze  Givers/  Sappl.  to  961) ;  giögra,  Faye
6.  A  giant  is  called  kämpe,  MüUenh.  pp.  267.  277.  Otos  and
Ephialtes^  gigantes  though  not  Cyclopes^  are  sons  of  Poseidon^
and  the  cyclop  Polyphemus  is  another.  Ace.  to  Dint.  3^  59  and
the  Parz.  and  Tit.  (p.  -690  n.),  monsters  were  born  of  women  who
had  eaten  forbidden  herbs.

p.  526.]  Does  Hrisberg  stand  for  Wrisberg  ?  Liintzel's  Hil-
desh.  23.     rtesen-kint,  Laarin  2053.  2509.  2604^  and  enzen-kint,

like  menschen-kind^  son  of  man. A  Lubbes-stein  in  MüUenh.

no.  363,  p.  272 ;  Lupperis-grab,  Vilmar  in  Hess.  Ztschr.  4,  79 ;
Liippenharty  I/iippental,  Moneys  Anz.  6,  229;  die  Lupbode,
Prohle's  TJnterharz  p.  212,  conf.  lüppe,  poison  (p.  1151).  ON.
leifi,  gigas,  oleifij  hamanns ;  rumr,  vir  immanis,  gigas.  Whence
comes  trigene  =s  gigantes  ?     Graff  5,  512.

p.  526.]  öi/r=oreas,  SsBm.  143^  (Sappl.  to  525).  Other
terms  for  giantess :  fala,  Saem.  143*»  (conf.  p.  992) ;  hala  143^
144^;  OriSr  in  Sn.  113  is  the  name  of  a  g^gr,  and  her  staff  is

named  Oridarvölr  114. Troll  is  both  monster  and  gianf :  ertu

troll,  Vatnsd.  292 ;  )^  J^ykki  mer  troll,  Isl.  sog.  2,  365 ;  hälf-tröll,
Nialss.  0.  106.  120;  irölla^skog,  Landn.  5,  5;  trölla-sheiS',  curri«
calam  gigantnm  (Snppl.  to  85);  in  Faroe,  trölla-botn  is  giants'
land.  Trollrygr,  Trollagrof,  Werlanff's  Greuzb.  16.  22. 35.  Michel
Beham  had  heard  '  troll  ^  in  Denmark  and  Norway,  says  Moneys
Anz.  4,  450 ;  bat  the  word  had  been  at  home  on  German  soil  long
before  that :  Yor  diesem  trolle,  Ortn.  338,  2 ;  er  schlag  den  trollen
Liederb.  (1582)  150;  ein  rollet*  troU  215;  tointertrolle,  Mooe's
Anz.  6,  236 ;  '  exsnrge  sede,  tu  trolgast,  cito  recede '  says  a  verse
of  the  14th  cent.,  Hpt^s  Ztschr.  5,  463;  einen  dmlgast  laden,
Weisth.  1,  552;  de  DruUhaghsne,  Erhard  p.  144  (yr  1118);  be-
trullet,  Tit.  5215  (El.  sehr.  4,  336).  Bat  whence  comes  the  Fr.
drole,  form,  draule  ?  It  is  rather  a  goblin  like  the  M.  Neth.
drollen,  Belg.  mns.  2,  116.  Kilian  sab  ▼. ;  conf.  Gargantaa^s
drole  (Suppl.  to  516).

p.  527.]  Mylzinunt  kalnay,  giants'  hills,  mylzynum  käpay,
giants'  graves,  Karl.  send.  1,  46-7.  Boh.  obor  appears  as  hobr  in
Wend.  TolksL  2,  268*.  On  the  giants'  name  Volot,  Velet,  Wele^
tabusg  WÜZ,  conf.  p.  1081  n.    The  ylyavrei;  of  the  Greeks  lived  in


1440  GIANTS.

Thrace,  Pans.  1,  25 ;  conf.  the  Arimaspi  and  Cyclopes,  and  the
Ind.  r&kshasas  (p.  555).  To  the  Hebrews  the  Rephaim,  Anakim,
Nephilim  were  giant  nations,  Berthean^s  Israel,  p.  142-3-4.

p.  528.]  The  size  of  giants  is  expressed  in  varions  ways.
Tityos,  son  of  Earth,  covers  nine  roods.  Od.  11,  577;  Otos  and
Ephialtes  in  their  ninth  year  were  cvveaTri/^^et?  in  breadth  and
ivveopyvioL  in  length  11,  307  (conf.  !Ei/tavT09  rerpaTnfxy^,  mean-
ing the  4  seasons,  Athen.  2,  263).  Dante^  Inf.  31,  58—66  poeti-
cally fixes  the  stature  of  Nimrod  at  90  palms,  i.e.  54  feet,  which
comes  to  the  same  as  Ephialtes's  9  fathoms.  '  Cyclopen  hoch
sam  die  tanboume*  tall  aa  firs,  Ksrchr.  357;  'ir  reicht  in  knme
an  die  hnie  (ye  reach  scarce  to  their  knees),  sie  tra^ent  kldfter-
langen  hart/  beards  a  fathom  long,  Dietr.  u.  ges.  621.  Ovid's
pictnre  of  Polyphemns  combing  his  hair  with  a  harrow,  and
shaving  with  a  sithe,  is  familiar  to  ns.  Met.  13,  764.

Giants  have  many  heads :  the  sagas  tell  of  three-headed,  six-
headed,  nine-headed  trolds,  Asbjömsen  p.  1 02-3-4 ;  a  seven-Jieaded
giant  in  Firmen.  1,  333^;  another  is  negenkopp  (9  head),  MüUenh.
p.  450 ;  conf.  the  three-headed  wild  woman  in  Fr.  Amim's  March,
1,  no.  8,  and  Conradus  Druheuptel,  MB.  29%  85  (254).  Pol.
dziewi^-sil.  Boh.  dewe-sil,  dewet-sil  (nine-powered)  ==  giant.  The
legend  of  Eeimo  is  in  Moneys  Unters,  p.  288  seq.,  conf.  Steub's
Rhät.  p.  143.  Ital.  writers  of  the  16th  cent,  often  call  giants
quatromani;  giants  with  13  elbows  in  Fischart's  Garg.;  Bilfinger
in  Swabia  are  families  with  12  fingers  and  12  toes;  ' cum  sex
digitis  nati,'  Hattemer  1,  305*;    conf.   'sextus   homini   digitus

agnatus  inutilis,'  Pliny  1 1,  52. Even  the  one  eye  of  the  cyclops

is  not  altogether  foreign  to  our  giants :  in  a  Norweg.  fairytide
three  trolds  have  one  eye  between  them^  which  goes  in  the  middle  of
the  forehead,  and  is  passed  round,  Jäleträet  74-5 ;  conf.  KM.  no.
130  (such  lending  of  eyes  is  also  told  pf  the  nightingale  and
blindworm,  KM.  ed.  1,  no.  6).  Polyphemus  says :  Unum  est  in
medio  lumen  mihi  fronte,  sed  instar  ingentis  clypei,  Ov.  Met.  13,
850;  these  one-eyed  beings  the  Greeks  called  kyklöpes,  the
Bomans  cocUtes :  coclites  qui  altero  lumine  orbi  nascuntur,  Pliny
xi.  37,  35  ;  decem  coclites,  qaes  montibus  summis  Bhipaeis  fodere,
Enn.  in  Varro  7,   71   (0.  Müller  p.   148) ;    conf.    Goth,  haihs,

fiov6<l)0a\/io<;,  coecus,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  11. A  tail  is  attrib.  to

the  giantess  HrlmgerSr,  Sasm.  144*.     Giants,  like  dwarfs,  are


GIANTS.  1441

sometimes  descr.  as  black:  frftinn  svarti  ^nvs,  Isl.  sog.  1,  207,
conf.  Svart-höFSi ;  a  black  and  an  ash-grey  giant  in  Dybeck  4, 41.
25.  As  Hrftngnir's  head  and  shield  were  of  stone,  Hymi's  haas
(skull)  is  hard  as  stone,  Ssem.  56^.  Thorns  wife,  a  giantess,  is
named  Jamsaxa.     The  age  of  giants  is  the  stone-age.

p.  528.]  The  /tdj.  nadd-gö/gi,  Sffim.  98^,  seems  also  to  express
the  nnbridled  arrogance  of  the  giant :  rUenmaezic,  der  werlte
undersaezic,  Bit.  7837.  The  6r.  Aairidai,  are  braggarts,  and  akin
to  the  Kentanrs.

p.  529.]  The  11  th  cent,  spell '  twmbo  saz  in  berke  ....  tumb
hiez  der  berc,'  etc.,  reminds  one  of  Marcellas '  bard.  p.  29  (Kl.
sehr.  2, 129.  147-8)  :  atupidiuf  in  monte  sedebat;  and  conf.  Affen*
berg,  Giegenberg,  Gkrachsberg  (p.  680-1),  Schalksberg.  Note
that  the  iotann  too  is  called  dttrunnr  apa,  simiarum  cognatas.
Seem.  55*.  The  Frozen  Ocean  is  named  Dambs-haf.  Biörn  says
the  ON.  «^limr^gigas  (dammyT);  conf.  g^gr,  gingi  (p.  525).  In
Fomm.  sog.  1,  804  the  heathen  gods  are  called  blindir,  daufir,
dumbir,  dauffir,

p.  580.]  On  Forniotr  see  GDS.  737.  hin  aldna  (g^gr),  Seem.
5^.  Giants'  names:  Or-gemlir  (our  ur-alte),  pruff-gemlir,  Berg-
gemlir  (var.  -gelmir).  The  vala  has  been  taught  wisdom  by  the
old  giants,  she  says:  ec  man  iötna  ar  ofbama,  ^  er  forSom
mik  froedda  hofSo,  S»m.  1\  The  good  faith  of  giants  is  re-
nowned:  eotena  treowe,  Beow.  2187;  so  Wäinämöinen  is  called
the  old  (wanha)  and  faithful  (waka)  and  trtie  (totinen).  Kale  v.  3,

107;  so  is  God  (p.  21). Polyphemus  tended  sheep,  and  the

Norse  giants  are  herdsmen  too :

sat  )>&r  &  haugi  oc  sl6  hörpa

g^gjar  hirtSir,  gla^r  Egdir,         Sffim.  6*.

G^mir  owns  flocks,  and  has  a  shepherd  82^.  Thrymr  strokes  the
manes  of  his  horses,  just  as  the  Chron.  Trudonis  (ChapeaTille  2,
174)  speaks  of  'mann  comam  equi  delinire.'  Giants  know  nothing
of  bread  or  fire,  Fr.  Amim's  Mär.  1,  no.  8;  the  Finn,  giants  do
vnihoutßre,  Ueb.  d.  Finn,  epos  p.  89  (Kl.  sehr.  2,98).  Tet  they
have  silver  and  gold,  they  even  bam  gold,  Dybeck  4,  33-8.  42 ;
their  horses  wear  iron  rings  in  their  ears  4,  37.  43.  They  not
only  bring  misfortune  on  the  families  of  man,  bat  bestow  luck  4,
36,  e^nd  fruitfulness  4,  45.     Esp.  is  the  giantess,  the  giant's  wife.


1442  GIANTS.

sister^  mother,  merciful  and  helpful  to  heroes  (pp.  555.  1007-8)*
Altd.  w.  8,  179.    Walach.  march,  p.  167.

p.  531.]  A  latish  saga  distingu.  betw.  Jotunheim,  governed
by  Geirrö*8r,  and  Risaland,  by  GoBmandr,  Pomm.  s.  3,  183.  The
giants  often  have  the  character  of  older  Natare-gods^  so  that
iötnar=godsj  Saem.  93*.  The  Serv.  divovi,  giants  (Vuk's  Pref.  to
pt.  I.  of  new  ed.)  either  means  the  divine  (conf.  p.  194)  or  the
wüd ;  conf.  divliy  =  ferns  [Slav.  div  =  wonder].  When  in  our
kinder-marchen  nos.  5.  81-2  the  tailor,  the  carter  or  the  gamester
intrude  into  heaven  (Wolfs  Ztsohr.  2,  2 — 7),  it  may  well  remind
ns  of  the  titans  storming  Olympus ;  conf.  p.  575  on  angels  and

giants. Giants  form  ties  of  love  with  gods  and  heroes :  thos

Polyphemns  is  a  son  of  Poseidon,  Od.  1,  71  seq.  HrimgerSr  the
giantess  wishes  to  pass  ar  night  with  the  hero,  Sasm.  141%  like
the  witch  in  fairytales  and  Marpalie  in  Wolfdietrich.  Freyr
bums  with  love  for  GerSr,  OSinn  spends  three  days  in  the  moun-
tain with  Gunnlöd,  Gefion  the  &synja  has  sons  (bull-shaped)  by  a
g^ant,  Sn.  1.  Yet  hostility  betw.  gods  and  giants  is  the  rule  :
that  these  would  get  the  upper  hand,  but  for  Thdr's  enmity  to
them,  the  Edda  states  even  more  distinctly  than  the  Swedish
proverb :

mikill  mundi  sat  iötna  ef  allir  lifSi,

vsdtr  mundi  manna  und  Mi^garSi.         S«m.  77^.

Conf.  Thors  pjäska  ett  qvinno  troll  baktill  ihaligt,  som  tros  fly
for  blixten  in  i  ett  hus,  der  äskan  da  star  ned,  Almqv.  464*
(pjäska  =  a  dirty  woman).  The  giant  again  is  as-grui,  terror
asarnm.

p.  532.]  ManagoU,  Pistor.  497.  Managold,  Neug.  77.  355.
On  the  myth,  conf.  Kuhn  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  134.  With  Fenja
and  Menja,  who  grind  until  the  cuckoo  calls,  conf.  the  mill-maids
and  cock-crow,  Gr.  epigr.  2,  56.

p.  532.]  Pornald.  sog.  1, 469  says:  ' austan  at  Ymis  dyrum';
and  of  UUr:  'Ullr  rei-B  Tmesver,  enn  OSinn  Sleipni';  did  the
horse  belong  to  Tmir?  Frosti,  Jökull,  horses'  names,  Sask's
Afh.  1,  95.  Esth.  kiihna  isa,  wana  Pahkana,  Bocler  148.  If
Tmir  comes  fr.  ymja,  stridere,  it  is  akin  to  Groth.  iumjo,  turba,
noisy  crowd.  The  noise,  the  roar  of  giants  is  known  to  MHG.,
see  Dietr.  u.  Ges.  891 — 4.  458.  470 ;  is  that  why  they  are  likened


GIANTS.  1443;

to  bellowing  balls?  Rask  in  Afh.  1^  88  derives  tbe  names  of
Herkir  and  Herkja  fr.  Finn.  härJcä,  ox;  but  we  have  also  a  Germ,
giant  Harga,  Wolfs  Ztschr.  2,  25ß,  conf.  Herka  (p.  2bS)  and  next

note^  end. Giants  are  beings  of  Night:  those  of  India  grow

stronger  than  heroes  at  twiliglit,  and  twice  as  strong  in  the  night,
Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  2,  152.  A  Schleswig  giantess  is  '  die  schwarze
Greet*  black  Meg,  MQUenh.  pp.  157.  269.  273-5 >  on  the  other
hand  a  qneen  Margareta,  pp.  342.  14.  18.

p.  533.]     The  Greeks  also  make  giants  live  on  reeks  and  hillsy
Od.  9,  113-4.     They  are  animated  stones,  or  consist  partly  of
stone,  or  they  tarn  into  stone«     The  giant  in  Miillenh.  p.  442!ha8^
a  stone  heart.     HrtmgerSr,  surprised  by  daylight,  stands  i  sieiiis
liki,  Ssdtn.  145^;  conf.  the  Swed.  tales  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4,  503-4.
Bader  no.  486.     Hati  iötann  sat  a  bergi,  8»m.  143*  (Suppl.  to
530).     The  g^gr  lives  in  caves  of  the  rock  {hellir);  as  Brynhildr
fares  to  Hel,  a  g^gr  cries  to  her :  '  skalta  i  gögnum  g&nga  eigi
griotistudda  garffa  mtna  ! '  through  ray  stone-bailt  garth ;  and  B.
answers  :  '  bregSa  eigi  mer,  hruSr  or  steint/  bride  of  stone,  S»m
227  (see  p.  551).     'finna  j^eir  i  helli  nockvoram,  hvar  gygr  sat^
hon  nefndiz  Thöck/  Sn.  68.     A  giant's  cave  np  in  the  wild  moan
tain,  Trist.  419, 10 — 20.    Berg-bui^^gid^nt  is  also  in  Landn.  4,  12
and    Sasm.    52;    oonf.   berges  gnoz,   Er.    8043.      Hobergs-gubbe
(p.  536.7).     Finn,  kallio,  rapes,  =  Goth,  hallas,  ON.  hallr,  hence
kaleva,  gigas ;  another  Finn,  term  for  giant  is  vuoren  väki,  power
of  the  mountain.     To  ßussin  af  biargi  corresp.  Tosseberg s-klätten,
a  place  in  Yarmeland,  Bask's  Afh.  1,  91-2.     Note  the  term  berg-
finder,  monntain-cattle,  for  Gefjon's  children  by  a  giant  are  oxen,
Sn.  1.     One  giant  is  called  kuh-tod,  cow-death,  Miillenh.  no.  328;
conf.  Herkir,  Herkja  in  preced.  note.     Giants  appear  as  wolves,
Sn.  13.

p.  534.]  The  giantess  pelts  with  stones,  the  giant  wears  a
stone  crown,  Braanschw.  march,  p.  64.  Iron  will  not  bite  the
giant :  '  troll,  er  )?ik  bita  eigi  iani/  Isl.  sog.  2,  364.  He  can  only
be  floored  with  gold,  hence  Skiold  wraps  gold  about  his  club,
Saxo  8.  Grendel  too  is  proof  against  iron  sword :  *  \one  synsca-
&ka  »nig  ofer  eorSan  irenn,a  cyst,  gudbilla  nan  gretan  nolde,  Beow.
1596.  Amliotr  in  Hervarars.  has  league^boots,  like  the  ogre  in
Petit  ponoet;  they  denote  the  swift  pace  of  the  giant,  hence
Diut.  1^  403:   'hine  fuor  der  herre,  tlende  alse  ein  rise  duot


1446  GIANTS.

Dyb.  4,  46.  Cavall.  1,  8.  9;  C50nf.  the  story  from  Usedom  (Kuhn
in  Jrb.  d.  Berl.  ges.  f.  d.  spr.  5^  246).  A  captive  giant  is  to  be  let
go  when  he's  palled  all  the  hair  off  a  cow's  hide,  bnt  he  mayn't
pluck  more  than  one  hair  in  100  years,  Wieselg^en  459.

p.  549.]  Similar  building  stories  in  MiiUenh.  nos.  410-2.
Faye  p.  13.  A  Bavarian  tale  of  the  giant  builder,  in  which  a
hammer  is  hurled,  Ober-bair.  arch.  &,  316-7.  A  horse  brings  the
stones,  like  SvaffUfari,  Haltrich  29 ;  conf.  old  Bayard  at  Cologrne
cathedral.

p.  551.]  The  giantesses  spin  like  the  fays,  even  giants  spin,
Firmen.  1,  328.  In  the  Olafssaga  Olaf  fights  the  margygr,  and
brings  away  her  hand  as  trophy,  Fornm.  sog.  4,  56-7-8.  Bed-
bearded  Olaf  is  called  Oiafr  liosiarpr  a  kar  4,  38.  His  pipuga
skägg  could  also  be  explained  as  the  Dan.  pip^skiag,  first  beard.

p.  552  n.}  Instead  of  the  words  in  Danske  v.  1,  223  the
Kämpe  v.  155  has :  sprang  til  flinte-sten  lede  og  eorte.  In  Norske
ev.  1,37.  2,  28  (new  ed.  162.  272) :  ßyve  %  flint,  with  anger.
Norw.  Lapp,  gedgom,  I  turn  to  stone,  am  astounded.  MH6.
wurde  ich  danne  snio  eime  eteine^  Herb.  8362;  conf.  ille  vir  in
medio  ^a^  amore  lapis,  Propert.  ii.  10,  48.  Conversely :  in  baeten
sine  gr6zen  liste  üz  eime  horten  steine  getragen,  Mor.  1562.
Many  Swed.  tales  of  giants  whom  the  first  beam  of  sunrise  turns
into  stone,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4,  503-4.  Cavall.  27.  Norske  ev.  162.
The  mighty  king  Watzmann  is  believed  to  be  a  petrified  giant,
Panz.  Beitr.  1,  246.  Frau  Hiitt  turns  into  stone  because  she  has
rubbed  herself  with  crumbs,  DS.  no.  233;  people  sink  into  the
ground  because  they^ve  trod  on  a  wheaten  roll,  Giesebrecht's

Bait.  stud.  12,  126. Esp.  are  a  bride  and  bridegroom  often

turned  into  stone,  DS.  no.  229.  MüUenh.  pp.  108-9.  595.
Giesebr.  Bait  stud.  12,  114-5.  126.  These  'bride-stones'  are
also  known  to  Norweg.  legend,  Faye  p.  4 ;  nay,  we  find  them
in  France  in  the  noce  pitrifiee,  Michelet  2,  17,  and  even  in  the
WallacL  march.  117.  Once  a  shepherd,  his  sheepdog  and  sheep
were  changed  into  stone  by  frau  Wolle,  because  he  had  rejected
her  petition  for  Wead,  Somm.  p.  11.  The  Wallachians  have  a
similar  story  of  an  old  woman,  her 'son  and  her  sheep,  Schott
114-5;  so  have  the  Servians,  Vuk's  Wtb.  p.  15».  Heinr.  v.  Her-
ford  ad  ann.  1009  relates  after  Will,  of  Malmesb.  (ace.  to  Vincent
25, 10)  how  people  in  a  Saxon  village  disturb  the  Christmas  festi-


GIANTS.  1447

val  by  singing  and  dancing  in  a  charchyard,  and  bow  tbe  priest
dooms  tbem  to  dance  a  wbole  year ;  in  time  tEey  sink  up  to  their
hips  in  tbe  ground,  till  at  the  end  of  the  year  they  are  absolved
by  his  Grace  of  Cologne.  The  place  is  in  some  MSS.  called
Colovize  ;  snrely  these  are  the  men  of  Oolheke  who  danced  with
what  they  took  for  stones^  DS.  no.  232.  A  1  dth  cent,  version  of
the  story  in  Altd.  bl.  1,  54-5.

p.  553.]  Strong  Jack'  is  sometimes  named  der  starke  Hannel
(perk  Hermel),  Siegthal  p.  106.  Finn.  Hiiffi,  gen.  Hiiden^  Hii-
denpoika=wild  man  of  the  woods^  gi&nt,  Salmel.  1^  242.  Lapp.
Hiidda,  Hiita  is  a  malign  deity,  Soomi  '44  p.  30.  The  Esth.
tale  of  Kallewepoeg  is  given  more  fully  in  Poss.  Estl.  p.  174-5.
Lönroty  who  has  collected  from  60  to  70  giant- stories,  relates  in
Krose's  Urgesch.  p.  177:  In  the  sea  near  Abo  stands  a  huge
8tonSj  which  the  Finn,  giant  Kalevampoiha  hurled  at  the  first
church  that  was  built.  He  was  going  to  the  church  himself,  when
he  met  a  man  with  a  sackful  of  worn  shoes,  and  asked  him  how
much  farther  it  was.  The  man  said,  'Yoa  see,  I've  worn  all
these  shoes  through  on  my  way.'  Then  K.  took  up  the  stone  and
slung  it,  but  it  missed  the  mark  and  fell  into  the  sea.

p.  555.]  ON. '  iötunn  s&  er  BrAsi  h^ti,  bann  var  mikit  troll  ok
mann-aeta/  Forum,  s.  3,  214.  0H6.  man-ezzo,  MHG.  man-ezze
(p.  520n.),  AS.  mon.»ta^  Lith.  vyrlde,  viros  edens.  The  Poly-
phemus legend  is  widely  diffused,  e.g.  Sinbad  on  his  third  voyage
punches  out  the  oye  of  a  man-eating  giant ;  conf.  the  story  of
Eigill,  Nilsson  4,  33.  MüUer^s  Sagenbib.  2,  612.  As  the  Oghu-
zian  cyclop  takes  the  arrow  for  a  gnat,  so  in  our  Ring  p.  241 :
'ich  waen,  mich  hab  ein  fleug  gestochen.'  Similar  tales  in  Konr.
V.  Wiirzbg,  MS.  2,  205\  Altd.  w.  ä,  178;  esp.  coarse  is  the  ver-
sion in  the  Leipzig  MS.,  Altd.  bl.  1, 122 — 7.  For  the  giant,  later
stories  substitute  a  murderer,  Mone's  Anz.  'S7,  399.  400 ;  a  rob-
ber,  WaL  march,  p.  167-8-9.  Poets  of  the  13th  cent,  make  12
schächaBre  (robbers)  enter'  the  dwelling  of  a  tur»,  who  eats  up  11
of  them,  MSS.  2,  331^     On  the  merciful  giantess,  conf.  p.  1008.

p.  556.]  A  giant  gets  bigger  as  he  rises  out  of  the  ground,
and  smaller  as  he  sinks  in  again,  Miillenh.  p.  266.  Giants  often
take  the  shape  of  an  eagle  (p.  633),  e.g.  HrcBsvelgr,  Suttüngr,
Thiazi,  Sn.  80-1;  they  are  born  as  wolves  18.  The  story  of  the
flying  giantess  trespasses  on  Beast-legend,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4, 502-3.


1448  CEEATION.

p.  557.]  Our  Court-poets  have  preserved  here  and  there  a
genuine  feature  of  the  folklore  about  giants :  Tristan  taking  the
giant's  hand  with  him  (16195)  is  like  Beowulf  bringing  away
GrendeFs.  Again,  the  old  gianUfafher  carrying  the  heroes  up  a
hill  (Daniel  in  Bartsch  xxviii.)  occurs  not  only  in  Hero-legend,
but  in  Folktale,  Müllenh«  p.  266.  Then,  the  giants  of  the
Trütmunt  in  Goldemar  carry  Umg  poles,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  521 ;
Bunze  swings  a  tree  over  his  shoulder,  Wolfd.  510 ;  one  giant  is
named  Boumgarte  49«S,  3.  Asperi&n  is  styled  the  giants'  spile-
ma/n,  Both.  2161.  In  Lancelot  17247  seq.  are  noticed  the
giants'  ogen  verkeren,  tanden  criselen,  liofl  queken.  A  giant  couple
in  Ecke  7  (Hagen  5,  8)  bear  the  names  vro  Eilte  and  her  Orime,
oonf.  Giimr  and  Hildr,  Vilk.  saga  c.  16.  Note  the  giants'
names  in  Dietr.  drach.,  OhcJeenboz,  Fidelnstoz,  Rumedenwalt,
Schelledenwalt,  Bitterbich,  Bitterkrut,  Hohermuot,  KlingelboU ;  a
Grandengrus f  Grandgrfts  118^.  126^  looks  Bomanoe,  like  Grand-
gosier  (great  gullet)  in  Gargantua.  Wolfes-mage  (-maw)  reminds
of  the  manservant  Wolves^darm  (-gut)  in  Helbl.  1,  372,  and  of
the  Ssk.  Urkodara  (wolf's  belly).  Hitzig  308.  Norse  names:
Buth  i  Skut,  Bolfi  Topp,  Band  %  Handel,  Elling,  Staff,  Dyb.  '45,
97-9  (see  p.  557).  The  connexion  between  giants  and  gods  has
been  pointed  out,  Suppl.  to  p.  531.


CHAPTBB  XIX.
CBEATION,

p.  558  n.]  Conf.  Mnent  werden  (p.  746  n.) ;  zekein,  Wemh.  v.
Niederrh.  11,  18.  Schelling  takes  chaos  to  be  the  Boman
/anii«=:hianu8,  after  Festus  sub  v.  chaos.  The  material  sense
is  also  found  in  the  expressions  '  ingunnen  werden,'  secari,  N.
Arist.  95 ;  '  slti  ingunnen/  cloven,  Diemer  97,  26 ;  M.  Neth.
ontginnen,  secare,  Fergftt  3461.  3565;  conf.  Hpt's  Ztschr.  8,
18—20.

p.  559.]  For  the  notion  of  creating,  the  AS.  has  the  word
frurmceaft,  prima  creatio  :  God  is  fntmsceafla  fred,  Crodm.  195,9.
The  Gothic  renders  /crto-t?  by  gaskafts.  On  our  schöpfen,  bilden,
bilde  giezen,  see  p.  23 :  wsere  ich  nie  gebildet,  had  I  never  been
shapen,  Tit.  3283.     Creature  in  the  Bible  is  in  OHG.  hant4ät,


CREATION.  1445

manu  factam,  N.  Pd.  18,  2;  MHG.  hanUgetai. Haag  thinks

Ymir  the  Pera.  Gajömars,  Gott.  Anz.  '53,  p.  1960.  The  Urth
fr(ym  feet  or  legs  seems  to  be  remembered  in  an  0.  Fr.  poem :
Fanuelj  whom  his  mother  had  conceived  out  of  the  smell  of
flowers,  touches  his  thigh  with  a  knife  that  had  just  cut  an  apple;
the  thigh  conceives  and  bears  St.  Anne;  conf.  Brahma's  creation
(p.  571).     Ukko  yumala  rubs  his  hands,  presses  them  on  his  left

knee,  and  makes  three  maidens,  Kalevala  9,  39^-44. Giants

come  before  the  Ases  (p.  530-2) ;  the  vala  sings,  '  ek  man  iotna
at  ofhoma*  Sffim.  1';  and  Saxo  divides  mathematici  into  (1)
giganies,  (2)  magfi= Ases,  (3)  homines.  The  Indians  say  the  cow
is  mother  of  the  world,  and  must  not  be  killed,  Holtzm.  Ind.
sagen  1,  65.  Of  Bör^s  three  sons,  who  create  man,  it  is  said  in
S»m.  1^ :  hioSum  ypto,  orbes  extulerunt,  they  set  on  high  the
globes  of  heaven  (p.  701).

p.  560  n.]  The  Indian  myth  also  accepts  a  creation  out  of  the
e^9,  heaven  and  earth  being  eggshells,  Somadeva  1,  10;  conf.
the  birth  of  Helen  and  the  Dioscoii  out  of  eggs.

p.  561.]  Ashr  and  Embla  are  known  as  Es  and  Imlia  among
the  Yenisei  Ostiaks,  Gastrin's  Beise  in  Sibirien.  The  division
into  ond,  odr  and  la  ok  litr  is  also  found  in  Plutarch  4,  1154:
'  spirit,  soul  and  body.'

p.  561.]  To  giants,  men  appear  as  dwarfs :  they  nickname  us
earthworms,  and  the  giant's  daughter  takes  the  ploughman  for  a
warm  or  beetle  (p.  540).  As  dwarfs  are  made  out  of  maggots  in
the  Edda,  so  are  men  out  of  ants  in  Ov.  Met.  7,  642 ;  conf.  the
way  bees  are  brought  to  life  (p.  696).  As  fire  is  generated  by
nibbing  wood,  so  are  animals  by  rubbing  the  materials  (Suppl.  to
1100).     Hiisi  makes  an  elg  out  of  various  stuffs,  Kale  v.  7, 32  seq.

p.  567.]  The  two  AS.  accounts  of  the  creatian  of  man  (p.  565,
text  and  note)  derive  blood  from  fire,  whereas  the  Emsig  Code
derives  it  from  water,  as  the  Edda  conversely  does  water  from
blood.     The  eight  parts  were  known  to  the  Indians  also  (Suppl.

to  571. The   Pris.   hfili,   ON.    heili  =  brain,   resembles    Lat.

coelura,  Gr.  KoiXrj  KoiXia,  GDS.  681.  Godfrey  of  Viterbo's  com-
parison of  the  head  to  the  sky,  of  the  eyes  to  the  lights  of  heaven
is  repeated  in  Walther  54,  27  :  '  ir  hovbet  ist  s6  wünnenrtch,  als
ez  utn  himel  welle  sin,  d&  liuhtent  zwene  stemen  abe ; '  and  in
MS.  2,  189^  the  eyes  are  called  stars;  conf.  himmel  and  gaums.


1450  CBEATIOK.

Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  541. A  tear  (thräne)  is  called  in  MHG.  mers

tr&n,  wages  trftn^  Gramm.  1,  170.  The  Edda  accounts  for  the
taste  of  sea- water  by  the  grinding  of  salt  oat  of  the  qnern  Grdtti.
A  tear  bites^  like  salt ;  Bdxpv,  lacmma  [and  tehero,  tearas^  zähre]
comes  from  dak^  to  bite.  The  Etym.  magn.  564^  45  says  :  Ev^*
pltov  Bk  ßvvffv  riiv  OaKaacav  Xeyef  olov — iro\vrpo<f>a  Sdxpva
ßuvff^ — TOv<;  ä\a^  ßovkoiievo^  eiireiv,     Bi5i^='Iyo>,  GDS.  300.

p.  570  n.]  An  Esth.  song  in  Herder  p.  m.  112  tells  of  one
who  shaped  him  a  wife  ont  of  wood,  gilded  her  face,  and  silvered
her  shoulders.  The  Egyptian  notion  as  to  the  origin  of  the  first
man  comes  very  near  that  of  the  Bible  :  Ptah  or  Neph  is  pic  to-
nally repres.  '  turning  the  clay  for  the  human  creation/  Wilkin-
son's Egyptians  p.  85.

p.  570.]  Another  Ind.  story  of  the  creation  in  Suppl.  to  560  n.
The  Pers.  doctrine  is,  that  heaven  and  fire  were  first  created,
then  mountains,  then  plants,  then  beasts.  From  the  horns  of  the
first  ox  sprang  fruits,  from  his  blood  grapes,  etc.,  Gorres  1^
282-8.  The  description  of  Atlas  in  Ovid's  Met.  4,  657  agrees
with  the  Teutonic  myth  of  creation  far  more  closely  than  the
notion  current  among  the  Greeks,  He  lets  Atlas  be  converted
into  a  mountain-chain :  hair  supplies  the  forest,  his  shoulders
and  arms  the  hills,  his  head  the  summit,  his  bones  the  stones.

p.  571.]  The  older  Ind.  myth  makes  the  great  spirit^  mahan
atmd,  produce  the  first  man  out  of  water;  Prometheus  too  forms
men  of  earth  and  water,  Lucian's  Prom.  18 ;  ace.  to  Horace^
Od.  i.  16,  13,  he  tempers  the  given  ' limns'  with  every  possible
ingredient^  conf.  Babr.  66.  The  Greenlanders  think  the  first
man  was  made  of  earth,  and  the  first  woman  of  his  thumb,  Klemm
2j  813,  as  Eve  was  of  Adam's  rib  ;  so  Dakshus  was  pulled  ont  of
Brahma's  toe  (Suppl.  to  559).  The  eight  parts  occur  even  in  the
Bigveda,  Kuhn  in  Höfer  1,  288.

p.  573.]  For  analogfies  in  language  between  man  and  tree,  see
Pott's  Zähl-meth.  234 — 6.  Äskr  and  other  masc.  names  of  trees
indicate  man,  and  femin.  names  woman.  Askr,  Embla  begfin
with  the  samjB  vowels  as  Adam,  Eve ;  conf.  Es,  Imlia  (Suppl.  to
561).

The  term  Kut-stam,  nation,  is  taken  wholly  from  the  vegetable
kingdom,  Otfr.  iii.  12,  7.  Plants  and  rocks  are  not  dead,  they
speak :    Bpvb^  teal  irerpa^  akovew,   Plato's  Phaedr.   276.     Men


CREATION.  1461

arise  oat  of  trees  and  stones  or  mad  :  0  saxis  nimirnm  et  roboi-e
nati^  Stat.  Tfaeb.  4,  339 ;  qai^  rupto  robore  nati^  compositive  Into,
nallos  habaere  parentes^  Javen.  6, 12  (conf.  dieleimtnen^  p.  569 n.).
Men  grow  oat  of  pines  in  Nonnas  (Beinh.  Köhler,  Halle  '53,
p.  24) ;  j&  werdent  solioh  lent  von  homen  nit  geborn,  Wolkenst.
61 ;  stner  spiez-gendze  sweimet  einer  ron  dem  obersten  birboume,
Ben.  419 ;  '  Where  people  come  from  ?  think  I  don't  know  that?
they're  torn  oflF  trees  when  yoong/  Ayrer's  Fastn.  160*;  not
sprang  from  a  hcuseUbttsh,  Schelmafsky,  1,  51 ;  his  father  was
drowned  on  the  nut-tree,  his  mother  carried  the  water  np  in  her
apron  (sieve),  Bruckner's  Henneberg  1 7 ;  a  child  is  exposed  on
an  ash,  and  is  fonnd  there,  Marie  de  Fr.  1,  150—4.  In  a  Finn,
fairytale  a  foandling  is  called  paahaara,  tree-branch;  conf.  oar

Fandevogel  on  the  top  of  a  tree,  KM.  no.  51. Ace.  to  Greek

legend  there  were  only  gods  at  first,  the  earth  bristled  with
forests^  till  Promethens  made  men,  Lncian's  Prom.  12  ;  conf.  the
Prom,  legends  in  Schütze's  Excarsns  i.  to  ^sch.  Prom.;  yet
Zeas  also  makes  men  spring  out  of  the  ground  for  .^lacns  on
his  lonely  isle.  Pans.  ii.  29,  2.  The  throufing  of  stones,  which
tarn  into  men,  is  descr.  in  Ov.  Met.  1,  411;  the  stones  are
styled  ossa  parentis  1,  383.  393,  as  iSschylas  and  Sophocles  call
rocks  the  bones  of  the  earth.  This  sowing  of  stones  reminds  one
o{  mana^seßs=\a6^,  Koa-fio^  (p.  793).  The  Saxons,  named  after
sahs  (saxam),  are  called  in  the  legend  from  the  Eisenacher
Bechtbach  in  Ortloff  p.  700-1  Kieselinge,  petrioli ;  conf.  '  kisila
irqaiken  zi  manne,'  qaicken  flints  into  men,  0.  i.  23,  47.  Giants
spring  out  of  stone,  and  spring  into  stone  again  (pp.  532-3.  552) :
'eine,  di  sing  ioh  atis  eime  steine/  Fandgr.  2,  518;  'nan  sihet
man  wol,  dasz  er  nicht  aus  einem  steine  entsprungen  ist,'  Galmy
230 ;  '  dasz  ich  aus  keinem  stein  gesprungen,*  Schade's  Pasq.  76,
87 ;  '  many  a  man  fancies  he  is  sprang  from  a  diamond,  and  the
peasant  from  a  flint/  Ettn.  Hebamme  15;  'gemacht  aas  hisling^
plut;  flint-blood  (also,  donkey's  rib),  Fastn.  680,  26.  32.  For
other  legends  of  the  origin  of  nations,  see  6DS.  780.

p.  576.]  Ace.  to  Plato's  Symp.  190  B,  there  were  at  first  three
sexes :  appev,  0fj\v,  apBpoyvvov,  descended  from  sun,  earth  and
moon.  It  is  an  important  statement  in  Gen.  6,  4,  that  the  sons
of  Ood  (men)  came  in  anto  the  daunhters  of  men  (giantesses).
Popular  legend  very  remarkably  derives  dwaifs  and  subterraneans


1452  GBEATION.

from  tbe  fallen  angels,  Ir.  elf enm.  ziü. ;  the  '  good  people '  are
not  bom^  but  dropt  out  of  beayen,  Ir.  marcb.  2,  73 ;  tbe  same  witb
tbe  huldren  in  Norway,  Asb.  1,  29.  Tbiele  2,  175  ;  while  Finn.
Job.  Hist.  eccl.  Isl.  2,  868  says  of  tbe  alfs :  *  qnidain  enim  a  Deo
immediate  et  sine  parentum  interventUj  nt  spiritas  qaosdam,
creates  esse  volant;  quidam  vero  ab  Adamo,  sed  antequam  Eva
condita  fait,  prognatos  perbibent.'  A  N.  Frisian  story  has  it,
that  once,  when  Christ  walked  upon  earth,  be  blessed  a  woman's
five  fair  children,  and  cursed  tbe  ^rd/ouZ  ones  she  had  hidden;
from  these  last  are  sprang  the  undergrounders,  MüUenb.  p.  279.
The  same  story  in  Iceland,  F.  Magnusen's  Lex.  842^.     Eddalaren

3,  329.  330.    Faye,  pref .  zxv. Tbe  giant  too  is  called  vdlandes

ham,,  Trist.  401,  7.  Even  the  devil  tries  to  crea^te  (Suppl.  to
1024).  Tbe  Ind.  Visvdkarma,  like  Hephaestus,  fashions  a  woman
at  Brahma's  bidding,  Somad.  1,  173.  On  ages  of  tbe  world,  and
their  several  races,  conf.  Babrins'»  Prologue,  and  the  statue
(p.  792  n.).  Ovid,  in  Met.  1,  89 — 127  assumes  four  ages,  golden,
silver,  brass  and  iron.  ODS.  1 — 5.  In  the  age  of  Saturn  the
earth-born  men  went  naked  and  free  from  care,  lived  on  the  fruit
of  trees,  and  talked  with  beasts,  Plato's  Politicus  272.

p.  581.]  IlaXaiol  \6yoi  of  deluges  {KaraxXua-fioU)  are  ment.
by  Plato  de  Leg.  3,  677.  The  form  #tn-vluot  is  still  retained  in
Mauritius  692,  also  «tn-fiaot  in  Anegenge  22, 17.  24, 13,  but  sint*
vluot  already  in  25,  18,  «tn^waege  23,  54,  mi^-gewaege  25,  7.
Luther  still  says  sind^tLut,  not  siindfiut.  By  the^od  the  race  of
giants  is  extirpated,  Beow.  3377 — 84.  As  it  subsides,  three  ravens
are  let  fly  (p.  1140)  ;  conf.  the  verses  in  tbe  Völusp4  on  the  fall-
ing of  tbe  waters :  *falJa  forsar,  flygr  orn  yfir,  fi&  er  4  fialli  fiska

vei^ir/    Saem.   9^. In  tbe  American  story  of  tbe  Flood  tbe

people  likewise  take  refuge  in  a  ship,  and  send  out  animals,  the
beaver,  tbe  rat.  Klemm  2,  156.  Deukalions  Flood  is  described
in  Athen.  1,  409  and  tbe  first  book  of  Ovid's  Metamorphoses;
conf.  Selig  Cassel's  Denk.  p.  223.  246.  In  Lucian's  account  also,
all  the  wild  beasts  are  taken  into  Deukalion's  ark,  and  live  in

peace  together,  Luc.  de  Saltat.  c.  39. Tbe  Indian  narrative

of  tbe  Flood  is  '  taken  from  tbe  Bible,'  thinks  F^lix  Neve  (De
I'orig.  de  la  trad.  Ind.  du  D^l.,  Paris  '49) ;  tbe  rapid  growth  of
tbe  fish  resembles  that  of  Jörmangandr  when  thrown  into  the
sea,  Sn.  32,  and  of  the  snake  who  wishes  to  be  taken  to  tbe  sea,


ELBMENTS.  1453

Klemm  2,  162;  Mami8  himself  signifies  man^  Kahnes  Beo.  d.
Bigveda  p.  107.     On  the  other  Ind.  story,  that  of  Satyavrataa,

see  Polier's  Mythol.  des  Indous  1,  244 — 7. German  tales  of  a

great  flood  are  told  in  Vonbnn  p.  14 — 16  (conf.  p.  982-3).  Ow
people  still  have  a  belief  that  destroying  water  will  break  oat  of
moantainSy  Panz.  Beitr.  1, 276-7.  Grerman  legend  makes  the  flood
stream  oat  of  the  giant's  toe,  as  it  does  oat  of  Wäinämöinen's  tee
in  Bano  3.  The  dwarf-stoiy  from  the  Bhine  district  in  Firmen.
2,  49  seems  foanded  on  that  of  L.  Than,  DS.  no.  45 ;  the  dwarf
reminds  one  of  the  angel  who  lifts  his  hand  holding  a  cloth  over
the  city,  Greg.  Tnr.  10,  24.


CHAPTEB   XX.

ELEMENTS.

p.  582.]  Before  the  neio  gods  came,  there  prevailed  a  primi«
tive  worship  of  Natnre  (p.  385),  to  which  perhaps  Gsesar's  '  Luna,
Sol,  Yalcanas  'is  to  be  referred ;  we  know  the  giants  stand  for
primal  forces  of  natare,  for  fire,  air,  water,  san,  moon,  day  and
night,  conf.  Plato's  Gratyl.  397.  408.  And  long  after,  in  the
Wamnng  2243  seq.,  there  still  breaks  out  a  natare-worship,  an
adoring  of  the  bird's  song,  of  flowers,  of  grass.  All  mythologies
make  some  gods  represent  the  elements :  to  the  Hindfts  Indra
is  god  of  the  air,  Va/runa  of  water;  to  the  Greeks  Zeus  was
the  same  thing  as  aether,  aer.      The  Persians  worshipped  the

elements,  not  haman«shaped  gods  at  all,  Herod.  1,  131. The

Indians  admitted  five  elements :  fire,  water,  earth,  aether  (akasa»
and  wind  (vaya).  The  Chinese  thought  metal  an  element  of  its
own.  Galen  sets  down /our;  warm,  cold,  dry,  wet  (can  we  make
these  attributes  represent  fire,  earth,  air,  water  f).  How  the  four
elements  run  into  one  another,  is  described  in  MS.  1,  87*;  H.
Sachs  knows  'die  vier  element,'  1,  255 ;  'erde  und  wazzer  nider
swebet,  yiar  und  loft  ze  berge  strebet,'  says  Freid.  109.  24;  conf.
Benn.  6115.  Animals  live  in  all  four  :  'swaz  gfit,  vliuzet,  swebet,'
MS.  2,  183*.  Men  bewailed  their  sorrows  to  the  elements,  to
earth,  to  fire  (p.  642).

VOL.   IV.  N


1454  ELEMENTS.


1.  Water.


p.   584.]     People  sacrificed  to  groves  and  springs :  bI6ta$i
landin,  Landn.  8,  17;  bldta'Si /omn  5,  5  (p.  592) ;  and  Saom.  44*
says  :  heilög  vötn  lil6a  (calent).     The  Hessians  sacrificed  'lignis
etfontibus,'  Pertz  3,  848.     The  Samländer  and  Prussians  denied
the  Christians  access  to  groves  and  springs  lest  they   Bhonld
pollute  them,  Pertz  9,  875;  conf.  Helmold  1,  1.    Prayer,  sacri-
fice and  judgment  were  performed  at  the  spring,   BA.    799.
'  Porro  in  medio  noctis  silentio  illas  (feminas)  adfontes  aquarum
in  orient&m  affluentes  juxta  hortum  domus  egressas  Herwardas
percepit;  quas  statim  secutns  est,  nbi  eas  eminus  colloquentes
audivit,  nescio  a  quo  custode  fontium  responsa  et  interrogantes  et
expectantes,'  Gesta  Herw.  Sazonis,  yr.  1068  (Wright's  Essays  1,
244.   2,  91.  108.    Michel's  Chron.  Angionorm.  2,  70).    An  Engl,
song  has  'I  the  wel  woke/  Wright's  Ess.  1,  245;  this  is  the
ceremony  of  waking  (watching  by)  the  well.     On  the  Bode  in  the
Harz  they  still  ofibr  a  black  hen  (I)  to  the  river-god.      Before
starting  the  first  waggonload  from  the  harvest  field,  they  throw
three  ears  into  a  running  stream  ;  or  if  there  is  none,  they  throw
three  ears  into  the  oven-fire  before  the  waggon  enters  the  stack-
yard ;  if  there  was  no  fire,  they  light  one.     This  is  a  Bavarian
custom,  Panz.  Beitr.  2,  218.     In  Hartlieb's  book  of  all  Forbidden
Arts  we  read  that  lighted  tapers  are  set  in  front  of  water  drawn
from  three  running  streams  before  sunrise,  and  man  legt  dem
Wasser  ere  an,   sam  Gott  selber  (see  p.   586).     The  Romans
cherished  the  like  reverence  for  water:  'flumini  Bheno  pro  salute/
De  Wal.  no.  282 ;  genio  loci  et  Rheno  pro  salute/  no.  288 ;  '  deus
Rheni,'  no.  234.     They  greeted  the  bath  with  bare  head  on  enter-
ing and  quitting  it,  and  placed  votive  gifts  by  the  side  of  springs,
RudorfPs  Ztschr.  15,  216;  they  had  even  ministrifontis  15,  217.
p.  585.]     As  prunno  comes  from  prinnan  to  bum,  the  Romans
spoke  of  torrens  aqua^  from  torrere  to  broil :  '  subita  et  ex  abdito
vasti  amnis  eruptio  aras  habet,'  Seneca's  Ep.  41;  conf.  the  context
in  RudflPs  Zts.  15,  214.    It  is  said  of  St.  Furseus  (d.  650) :  '  fixit
haculum  sunm  in  terram,  et  mox  bnllivit   fons  magnus,'  Acta
Bened.  p.  821.    The  divine  steersman  in  the  Frisian  Asegabuch,
on  touching  land,  flings  an  axe  into  the  turf,  and  a  spring  bursts
up,  Richthofen  440.     A  horses  hoof  scrapes  open  a  well  (Snppl.


WATBB.  1455

to  664  n.).  Brooks  gash  ont  of  Acheldas's  ox-head,  Soph.  Trach.
14.  A  well  springs  out  of  an  ass's  jawbone,  Jadg.  15,  19.  'D6
spranc  ein  branne  8&  ze  stete  üz  der  dürren  molten/  Servatias
1382,  when  the  thirsting  saint  had  'made  a  cross.'  A  spring
rises  where  a  maiden  has  fallen  down,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  198.     A

giantess  produces  water  by another  method,  Sn.  (1848)  1 ,  286.

The  Finns  hare  three  rivers  formed  ont  of  tears,  Kalev.  31,  190  ;
healing  fountains  rise  from  the  sweai  of  a  sleeping  giant,  Kaleri-
poeg  3,  87-9.  TiberiniLs  is  prettily  described  in  Olaudian'a  Prob,
et  Olybr.  209 — 265; '  Bhenas  prq/ec^a  torpuit  urna,'  in  his  Rufin.

1,  133.  The  nymph  holds  in  her  right  a  marble  bowl,  out  of
which  runs  the  source  of  the  rimlet,  Opitz  2,  262 ;  she  pours  the
Zacken  263,  where  the  poet  uses  the  phrase  '  spring-hammer  der
flösse';  80  in  Hebel  pp.  12.  38  the  baby  Wiese  lies  in  silver
cradle  in  her  crystal  closet,  in  hidden  chamber  of  the  rock.  At
Stabburags  well  and  grotto  (Selburg  diocese)  the  people  see  a
spinning  maiden  who  weaves  veils  for  brides,  Kruse's  Urgesch.
pp.  51.  169.  171.  OHG.  Jclinga,  chllnha  ^torrens  and  nympha  ;
conf.  nixe,  tocke  (p.  492  n.).

p.  586.]  At  the  restoration  of  the  Capitol  it  is  said  of  the
Vestals :  aqua  vivis  e  fontibus  amfiibxisque  hausta  perlnere,  Tac.
Hist.  4, 53.  Springs  that  a  saint  has  charmed  out  of  the  ground,
as  Servatius  by  his  prayer,  have  healing  power :  '  die  mit  dehei-
nen  seren  (any  pains)  w&ren  gebunden,  genftde  die  funden  ze
demselben  nrspringe,'  Servat.  1390.  Such  medicinal  springs
were  sought  for  with  rushes,  out  of  which  flew  a  spark,  Ir.  march.

2,  76-7.  The  notion  that  at  holy  seasons  water  turns  into  wlm,
prevails  in  Scandinavia  too,  Wieselgr.  412.  Wells  out  of  which
a  saint  draws  yield  wine,  Mullenh.  p.  102-3 ;  so  in  Bader  no.  338
wine  is  drawn  out  of  a  spring.  The  well  loses  its  healing  power
when  an  ungodly  man  has  bathed  his  sich  horse  iu  it,  Mullenh.
no.  126;  the  same  after  a  noble  lady  has  washed  her  little  blind
dog  in  it,  N.  Pr.  prov.  bl.  2,  44.  On  the  contrary,  fountains  be-
come holy  by  goddesses  bathing  in  them,  e.g.  those  in  which  Sit&
bathed,  see  begfinn.  of  MeghadAta.  Whoever  has  drunk  of  the
well  of  Reveillon  in  Normandy,  must  return  to  that  country,  Bos-
quet 202.

p.  587.]  Holy  water  is  only  to  be  drawn  in  vessels  that  cannot
stand,  but  must  hang  or  be  carried,  and  not  touch  the  ground ^


1456  ELEMENTS.

for  if  set  down  they  tip  over  and  spill  every  drop  (so  the  palled
plant,  the  fallen  tooth,  is  not  to  toach  the  ground,  Sappl.  to
658  n.).  Such  a  vessel,  füttlej  was  used  in  the  worship  of  Ceres
and  Vesta,  Serv.  ad  ^n.  11,339.  Schol.  Cruq.  ad  Hor.  AP.
231.  Forcell.  sub  v.;  and  by  the  Scots  at  the  Well  of  Airth,
where  witnesses  were  examined.  Hone's  Daybk  2,  686,  867.
Metal  vessels  of  the  Wends,  which  cannot  stand,  have  been  found
in  several  places.  Bait.  stud.  11,  31-3-7.  12,  37.  The  Lettons,  in
sacrificing,  durst  not  touch  the  goblet  except  with  their  teeth,
Hpt's  Ztschr.  1,  145.  The  hot  springs  at  Thermopylae  were
called  ;^vTpot  =  ollae,  Herod.  7,  176;  conf.  olla  Vulcani.

Helicbrunno,  MB.  28»,  63;  heilicprunno  11, 109.  heiligbrunno,
29»,  96.  Helicbruno,  Chart.  Sithiense  p.  113.  Helicbrunno,  a
brook  in  the  Netherl.,  Waitz's  Sal.  ges.  55.  On  HeiWronn,  see
Rudorflfs  Ztschr.  15,  226;  conf.  tiobiles  f antes  15,  218.  'Helgi
at  Helgavatni*  Landn.  2,  2 :  Helgavatn,  Urffarvatn  3,  2.  3.
Other  prob,  holy  springs  are  Pholesbrunno  (p.  226),  Oozesbrunno
(Suppl.  to  368).  A  Swed.  song  names  the  Helge  Thors  Tcaila  in
Smaland,  fr.  which  water  is  drawn  on  Holy  Thursday  night  to
cure  blindness.  Others  are  enumer.  in  MüUenh.  p.  595.  Mary
is  called  '  alles  heiles  ein  lüter  ba^ch  *  or  '  heiles  bach/  Altswert  98,
23.  73.  When  the  angel  had  troubled  the  water  in  the  pool  of
BethesJa,  whosoever  then  first  stept  in  was  made  whole,  John  5,
4.    Rivers  were  led  over  graves  and  treasures  (p.  251-2  n.).

p.  588.]  A  youth-restoring  fountain  is  drunk  of  in  May  before
sunrise,  Tit.  6053.  Another  Jungbrunnen  in  the  poem  of  Abor,
Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  6.  7  and  one  in  Wigamur  1611-5  by  a  limetree.
M.  Neth.  joocht'borre,  youth-bourn,  Horae  Belg.  6, 223.  The  eagle
renews  his  youth  at  a  fountain  '  choch-prunnen/  Earajan  82,  12.
98,  5 ;  conf.  Griesh.  Pred.  1,  29.

p.  590.]  More  about  Scandin.  pilgrimages  to  springs  in  Wie-
selgr.  389.  411.  A  Span,  song  tells  of  picking  flowers  on  the
Onadalquivir  on  Midsum.  mom,  Hone's  Daybk  1,  851.  At  War-
saw, June  24,  the  girls  throw  wreaths  of  roses  into  the  Vistula,
and  watch  with  joy  or  sadness  their  various  ways  of  floating  down
the  stream.  This  resembles  the  Midsum.  custom  of  the  Cologne
women  descr.  by  Petrarch,  which  Braun  also  in  No.  23  of  the
Rhein.  Jrb.  traces  to  Christianity.  The  Schweiz,  arch.  4,  87  says
Petrarch  first  came  to  Germany  in  1 356,  but  his  letter  describing


WATER.  1457

the  ceremony  is  dated  1330;  in  1327  he  saw  Laura  at  Avignon,
and  then  set  out  on  his  tour  while  yet  a  youth.  Whom  does  he
mean  by  the  spiritus  pierii  of  the  Bhenish  city  7  Alb.  Magnus
lived  and  taught  at  Cologne,  but  died  in  1280;  his  pupil  Thomas
of  Aquino  also  taught  there  for  a  time.  Duns  Scotus  came  to  C.
in  1308,  and  died  there ;  Meister  Eckhart  (d.  1329)  was  at  C,  so
was  his  pupil  Tauler.     The  University  was  not  founded  till  1388.

p.  590  n.]  Stieler  p.  1402  mentions  the  following  Easter
custom :  '  Habent  Borussi  verbum  schmak-ostem,  quod  significat
obviam  quarto  post  tres  dies  Paschales  Oriente  die  venientes
virgis  caedere,  sicut  Juventus  nostra  facit  quarto  post  ferias  Nata-
litias  die,  et  kindelen  vocant  in  memoriam  innocentium  puerorum.
schmack  Borussis  ferulam  notat.'  It  is  really  more  correct  to
derive  the  word  from  smagac,  to  flog  (see  Weinhold  in  Auf r.  and
Kuhn  1,  255)  than  from  smigust,  ablution.  Easter  rods  adorned
with  many-coloured  ribbons  are  called  schmack-osiemy  Jrb.  d.
Berl.  ges.  f.  d.  spr.  10,  228-9.  In  Moravia  schmeck- ostemy  Kulda
(d'EIv.)  114.  Weinhold's  Schles.  w.  85  distinguishes  between
schmag-oster  and  dyiigus,

p.  591.]  In  Norman  stories,  springs  run  dry  when  misfortune
is  nigh.  Bosquet  201.  Salt  and  medicinal  springs  dry  up  as  soon
as  money  is  asked  for  them,  Athen.  1,  288.  A  countryman  died
of  consumption  after  a  cool  draught  from  a  spring ;  and  immedi-
ately it  ceased  to  flow,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  3,  361 .  When  a  new  spring
breaks  out,  it  is  a  sign  of  dearth,  ibid.  By  the  rising  or  falling  of
water  in  the  Tilsgraben  the  inhabitants  foretell  a  good  or  bad
harvest,  Harrys  no.  2;  conf.  MüUenh.  p.  104.  When  Wartha
flats  in  Werra-dale  have  gone  unfl^oded  six  years  running,  the
farmer  can  eat  ofif  silver  the  seventh  year,  they  say  (Again :  when
the  beaver  builds  his  castle  high,  the  water  that  year  will  run
high  too,  Döbel's  Pract.  1,  36^).  In  Styria  the  hungerbrunnen
are  also  called  hungerlaken,  WolTs  Ztschr.  2,  43.  At  different
periods  the  Nile  had  to  rise  different  heights— 22,  16,  14  or  12
yards  [?] — to  meet  the  wants  of  the  country,  Herod.  2,  13.
Strabo  p.  788.    Pliny  5, 10.    Parthey's  Plut.  on  Isis  and  Os.  p.  243.

p.  592.]  Whirlpool  is  in  OHG.  suarb,  8uirbil= vortex,  Graff
6,  897;  tftMiIm  =  vorago  in  aqua,  6,  873;  hv^rbo  4,  1237.  6r.
Xapv/3St9j  Pott  in  Kuhn  5,  255.  Serv.  kolovrat,  vortex  (lit.
wheel-turn)  and  buk,  waterfall's  roar  (bukati,  mugire).    ^aitwinde


1458  ELEMENTS.

(vel  fltoriD)=gurges,  eedemnde=^  vortex/  Vocab.  ms.  Vratisl.;
aitveinda  =  gurges,  Diefenb.  271**.  Finn. '  korvalle  tulinen  kosken
pyhän  wirran  pyörtehelle/  he  went  to  the  firy  waterfall  (Sw.  eld-
lore),  to  the  holy  flood's  whirl,  Kalev.  I,  177;  conf.  6,  92.  7,  785.

794.8.  17,101.314.   22,10.    26,198. Waterfall  is  in  OHG.

uazarcblingas^njm^hskf  Graff  4,  504 ;  wazardiezo= nymphs  5,  237.
wazzerdurk?  tAenster?  Cataracta,  Trier,  ps.  41,  11.  Windb.  ps.
41,  11 ;  laufen,  Staid.  1,  444.  Gr.  SJfo«  and  StKiy.  The  passage
in  Plutarch's  Csdsar  stands :  iroraßi&v  Sivai^  koI  pevfjuiroiy  ikij-
ßioh  Kai  y^o^oi^.  Homer  has  Trorafio^  apyvpo-hlvri^,  U.  21,  130;
he  pictured  waterfalls  as  horses  flying  headlong :  xapahpa^  piovaat
ef  opionv  hrl  Kap  16,  392.  'Tis  a  being  below  stirs  up  the  whirl-
pool, Leopr.  106 ;  Loki  dwells  in  PriLnangrs-fors,  Seem.  68.  Sn.
69.  At  the  DonaU'Strudel  a  spectre  gives  warning  of  death,
Ann.  Altahens.,  yr  1045;  conf.  the  women  in  the  Nibelg.

p.  596.]  The  Greek  rain-goddesses  are  the  Hours,  who  guard
tbe  cloud-gate  of  Olympus,  opening  or  shutting,  and  by  rain  and
sunshine  ripen  the  fruits.  The  Hora  has  a  goblet,  which  she
rinses  at  the  fountain,  Theocr.  1,  150.  Men  also  sacrificed  to
Zeus  and  Hera,  when  short  of  rain.  Paus.  ii.  25,  8.  Ge  (earth)
is  repres.  in  a  picture,  imploring  Zeus  for  rain  1,  24.  The  Lith.
diewaitis  is  god  of  thunder,  dewaite  szwenta  goddess  holy,  g.  of
rain.  The  Esths  call  hoarfrost '  mother  of  mist,'  Bocler  147.  In
Germany,  as  late  as  the  13th  cent.,  dew  was  honoured  as  a  bene-
volent being,  Parz.  748,  28 :  '  ge£rt  st  luft  unde  tou,  daz  hiute .
moreen  üf  mich  reis.'  Dew  drips  from  the  manes  of  airy  steeds :
of  Hrimfaxi,  S89m.  32**;  of  the  valkyria's  horse   145^  (conf.  p.

641). The  ceremony  reported  by  Burchard  is  also  quoted  in

Mone's  Gesch.  des  heident.  2,  417  from  Martin's  B61ig.  des
(xaules.  The  Servian  and  (ace.  to  Schott)  Wallachian  custom  of
wrapping  round  reminds  me  of  the  Hyperborean  votive  offerings
wrapt  in  ears  of  corn  and  carried  by  two  virgins,  Herod.  4,  33.
Creuzer  2,  117.  Were  the  maidens  themselves  wrapt  np?  and
can  the  five  irep^epie^  who  escorted  them  be  conn,  with  the  rain-
maiden's  name  iropirqpovva  7  conf.  GDS.  865.  In  the  new  ed.  of
Yuk's  Diet,  the  dance  and  rain-soug  are  called  prporyshe  and  the
leader  prpatz.  When  a  priest  touched  the  fountain  with  an  oaken
bough,  the  rain-cloud  rose  out  of  it.  Paus.  viii.  38,  3 ;  so  the
French  maire  dips  his  foot  in  the  well  of  Barenton.     In  Algeria,


WATEB.  1459

when  there  is  a  long  droughty  they  throw  a  few  Marabouts  into
the  river^  like  the  Bavarian  water-bird,  GDS.  54.  Kl.  sohr.  2,
445  seq.

p.  598.]  Nero  was  going  to  measure  the  Alcyonic  lake  with
ropes,  Pans.  ii.  37^  5.  The  story  in  Thiele  3,  73  about  sounding
the  lake  is  Swed.  also.  Buna  '44,  83.  L.  Wetter  cries :  '  mat  min
längd  I  *  Wieselgr.  459.  On  the  Esth.  worship  of  water,  conf.
Kreutzwald's  Pref.  to  Elalewipoeg  xii.,  and  his  and  Neu's  Myth,
lieder  113;  at  114  occurs  the  hauling  up  of  a  goai^s  skulL

p.  601.]  To  the  river  is  sacrificed- (pp.  45.  494)  a  reindeer,
Gastren's  Beise  342.  In  wading  through  clear  water  you  utter
a  prayer,  Hesiod's  Erga  735 ;  in  crossing  a  river  you  take  an
auepidum,  Rudorflf  25,  218.  Water-ordeals  in  the  Rhine,  RA.
935;  conf.  the  Fontinalia,  Rudflf  15,  221.  Lake  and  river  are
often  personified:  in  Irish  fairytales  (I,  86—89.  2,  144—152)
the  lake  is  lent  out,  and  is  carried  away  in  a  many-cornered  cloth.
*  Three  laud  laugha  the  river  gave,'  Fleming  373.  There  is  a
myth  of  a  wood  or  mountain  sprite,  who  acaiters  rivers  into  dust.
Praetor.  Kats&enveit  p.  102 — 6;  conf.  the  stiebende  brugge,  Habsb.
urbar.  94,  4,  i.e.  a  devil's  bridge.  In  Denmark,  on  the  approach
of  spring,  they  say  of  a  god  or  genius :  '  kaster  en  warm  steen  i
vandet,'  F.  Magnusen's  Lex.  958;  do  they  mean  Thor?

Curiously  the  MB.  13,  18.  42  speaks  of  an  Adalbero  filius
DanuMi;  13,  96  Alberus  filius  Danubii;  13,  96  Gk)zwinus  de
Danubio,  Albertus  et  Engelbertus  de  DanvJno.  And  the  Saale,
Neckar,  Lahn,  Leine  are  introd.  as  persons  (p.  494  and  Suppl.) ;
conf.  Hebel's  personific.  of  the  Wiese.

With  the  notion  of  ouwe,  ed  conf.  AS.  holm^mare  profundum,
though  ON.  holmr  means  insula,  and  OS.  holm  even  collis.  The
Celts  too  had  holy  islands.  Hone's  Heident.  2,  377—380.

Our  meer  (sea),  neut«,  though  Goth,  inarei  and  OS.  mart  are
both  fern.,  OHG.  meri,  m.  and  n.,  has  in  it  sonlbthing  divine:
ew  aXa  Siap,  Od.  11,  2  and  elsewhere.  Ocean  is  in  Lettio  deeiva
'^fpe,  God's  river,  Bergm.  66.  To  the  sea  men  sacrificed :  *  nostri
qaidem  duces  mare  ingredientes  immolare  hostias  fiuctibus  con-
Bueverunt,'  Gic.  de  Nat.  D.  3,  20.  Homer  furnishes  it  with  a
back,  VC0TO9,  which  need  not  imply  a  beast's  figure,  for  even  OHG.
has  'mera  buosen,  mors  barm/  bosom,  Graff  3,  154.  It  can  be
angry  with  men :  daz  wilde  mer  ist  mir  gram,  En.  7659 ;  das


1460  ELEMENTS.

wassep  gram,  das  böse  mer,  Diocl.  7336 ;  de  ature  se,  Partonop.  95,
27.  It  is  wild^  it  storms  and  raves:  saevum  mare,  Tac.  Hist.
4,  52  j  über  den  wilden  ae,  MS.  1,  72^;  daz  unlde  mer,  Troj.  kr.
6922,  etc. ;  des  wilden  wages  flaot,  Gerh.  3966,  etc. ;  daz  tobende
mer,  Troj.  kr.  5907,  etc. ;  daz  wüetunde  mer,  Servat.  3260,  etc. ;
la  mer  betee,  Ogier  2816,  Prov.  'mar  betada,^  Bbju.  sub  v.;  de
rusJcende  see,  Uhl.  Volksl.  200-1 ;  das  wibende  wabende  wasser,
Garg.  Ill;  sid  weeter,  Csedm.  7,  2.  The  Fris.  salt,  like  aM,
means  both  salt  and  sea,  Ssk.  lavanambhas,  mare  salsum,  Welsh
hallfor,  salt  sea,  Ir.  moir  salmhar,  AS.  sealt  weeter,  Csedm.  13,  6.
Why  the  sea  is  salt,  is  told  in  Sn.  147.  The  sea  is  pure,  she
tolerates  no  blood,  Anno  227-8,  just  as  the  ship  will  have  no  dead
corpse.  Pass.  f.  379^.     She  'ceased  from  her  raging'  as  soon  as

Jonah  was  thrown  in. Real  proper  names  of  the  sea  are :  Oegxr

(p.  237),  oonf.  AS.  wmter-egesa,  and  '  diu  freise  der  wilden  nnde,'
Tit.  2567;  Oymir,  conf.  gymis  leoff  qveSa,  Tngl.  sag.  c.  36;
Brimir,  akin  to  brim;  and  Oeofen  (p.  239).  Names  of  particular
seas :  wendilmeri,  endilmeri,  lebermeri,  Grafif  2,  820.  To  Alfred,
wendelsoB  is  the  Black  Sea^  only  a  part  of  the  Mediterranean ;  daz
tiefe  wentelmere,  Diut.  3^  48 ;  wendeise,  Tundal  42%  4,  and  often  in
Morolt;  wendelzee,  Bergh's  Ndrl.  volksr.  p.  146.  Then :  lebermer,
Wh.  141,  20.  Tit.  5448.  6005.  Amur  1730.  Fundgr.2,4.  Hpt's
Ztschr.  7,  276.  294.  Wigalois  sub  v.;  in  dem  roten  lebermer,
Bari.  262,  16;  labermer,  Ernst  3210;  leverse,  Walew.  5955;  levei--
zee,  y.  d.  Bergh  103.  127.  With  this  term  oonf.  the  irT^jeufimv
OaXdmo^,  sea-lung,  of  Pytheas;  F.  Magn.  traces  this  lung  to  the
dismembered  Ymir.  For  garsecg,  conf.  my  first  ed.,  Yorr.  zxvii.,
and  Hpt's  Ztschr.  1,  578.  Dahlmann  in  Forsch.  1,  414  explains
gars-ecg  as  earth's  edge;  Kemble,  61.  sub  v.  secg,  as  homo  jacnlo
armatus !  For  garsecg  in  the  Periplus^  Bask  writes  garsege,  bat
explains  nothing;  conf.  Caadm.  8,  1.  195,24.  199,27.  205,3.
Beow.  97.  1034.  The  ON.  lagastajr  is  at  once  sea  and  sown
crop,   Ssam.  50-1;    Gudr.  1126-8  has  'daz  vinstermer,*  sea  of

darkness.   Lastly,  Bumbs-haf,  Dauffa-haf,  Fomald.  sog.  2, 4.

The  sea  advances  and  retires,  has  ebb  and  flood  (on  '  ebb  *  conf.
Gramm.  3,  384  and  El.  sehr.  3,  158) ;  on  the  alleged  Fris.  and
Sax.  equivalents  malina  and  liduna,  see  Gramm.  3,  384  note.
The  ON.  kolga  and  dZ^a =aestu8  maris:  'er  saman  qvomo  kolgo
systir  (fluctus  undantes)  ok  kilir  l&ngir,'  Sffim.  Iö3\     Ebb  and


WATBR.      PIRB.  1461

flood  are  in  Grk.  äßATTtoTi^  and  payia^  Pans.  1^3;  in  Irish  can"
traiht  and  robaH,  Zenss  833.  The  sea-waves  are  oflben  treated  as
living  beings :  'dH  namen  ez  die  unden,  diu  eine  ez  der  andern  gap,
ande  tniogenz  verre  so  hinab/  the  waves  caught  it,  passed  it  one
to  the  other,  etc.,  Pasa  813,  73.  Three  plunging  waves  are  three
witches,  and  get  wounded;  the  waterspout  is  also  a  witch,  Miillenh.
p.  225.  On  the  nine  waves,  oonf.  Passow  snb.  v.  rpiKVfiia,  irevra-
icvfAia  :  '  €p  Tptfcvfiiau^  ^€pofi€v<p/  Procop.  1,  318.  In  a  storm  it
is  the  ntn^A  wave  that  sinks  the  ship,  Wright  1,  290  afber  Leo
AUaiins ;  it  also  occurs  in  Ir.  sagen  u.  march.  1,  86.  ON.  shafl^
nnda  decumana,  probably  no  more  than  a  very  high  one,  from
skefla,  acervare.

2.     FiBB.

p.  602.]  Fire  is  a  living  being.  With  queofiur  conf .  queckiu
lieht,  Ernst  2389.  You  can  kill  it :  trucidare  ignem,  Lucr.  6, 146.
Tou  can  wake  it:  »led  weecan,  Osddm.  175,  26;  bsdlf^ra  msdst
weecan,  Beow.  6281.  It  is  wild :  conf.  *  wildfire '  (pp.  603.  179) ;
Logi  villi-eldr,  Sn.  60;  Hans  Wilds-fewer,  MB.  25,  375;  ein
wüdez  mur  slnoc  in  daz  dach,  Troj.  kr.  11317;  daz  wüde  fiur
spranc  üz  den  vlinzen  herte  12555 ;  daz  grimme  wilde  fiuwer,  Bab.
659 ;  daz  starke  w.  f,  698 ;  daz  w.  f.  üz  den  s werten  spranc  412 ;
daz  grimme  /.  als  ein  loup  ftz  den  huof-isen  stoup  (spirted  out  of
the  horse-shoes),  Dietr.  9325 ;  daz/.  yIoug  freislich  üz  helmen  u.
Az  ringen  8787.  It  is  a  devouring  beast :  strudende  (desolating)
f^,  Casdm.  154,  15 ;  brond  (glÄiJ)  sceal  fretan,  consume,  Beow.
6024.  6228 ;  in  pabulum  ignis,  mfuata/r  (fodder)  des  fiures,  Diut.
1, 496*;  dem  viure  geben  ze  mazze,  as  meat,  Fundgr.  2,  131.  It
is  insatiable,  like  hell  or  avarice,  Freid.  69,  5 ;  the  fire  saith  not
*it  is  enough/  Prov.  30,  16;  eld,  celed  (fr.  alan,  nourish)  means
ignis  pastusj  the  fed  and  steady  flame;  oonf.  iic  hi  Oufiarmv
"H^Murro^  ovK  ekafiire.  Soph.  Antig.  1007.  It>  licks:  Lith.
'ngnis  laizdo  pro  stog%'  at  the  roof;  conf.  tunga,  tungal  (p.  700);
seven  kindlings  or  seven  tongues  of  flame,  Colebr.  Essays  1,  190.
It  snatches,  filches  :  f^res  feng,  Beow.  3525 ;  se  f^r  beoiS  peof,
Ine  43,  like  Loki  and  the  devil.  It  plays :  leüer  här  hiti,  Saam.  9^;
leiki  yfir  logi !  68^;  leihr  yfir  lindar^ddS  192»;  lacende  lig,  El.  579.
1111;  lar  (fire)  super  turrim  saliit,  Abbo  de  b.  par.  1,  548.  It
flies  up  Uke  a  red  cock  (p.  670) :  den  rotlien  hahn  zum  giebel


1462  ELEMENTS.

aasjagen,  Schottel  1116^;  der  rothe  hahn  kräht  ans  dem  dach,
Firmen,  l,  292^;  der  gelbe  hahn,  yellow  cock  1, 208*;  conf.  bläcan
tfres,  ignis  pallidi,  Ceedm.  281,  13;  fire  glitters  with  seeds  of
gold,  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  8,  194;  faces  aureas  qnatinnt  eanuut,
Catall.  59,  92.  It  travels,  nigram  viam  habens,  Bopp's  Ql.  83*.
Holtzm.  3,  194.  In  the  Edda  it  is  brother  to  the  wind  and  sea;
so  Ssk.  pavaka,  fire,  is  lit.  cleanser,  fr.  pA  (Snppl.  to  632,  beg.),
Bopp's  Vocal.  205,  conf.  Gramm.  126  (new  ed.  213-6),  and
pavana,  wind,  is  from  the  same  root,  Bopp  (conf.  Gramm.  124) ;
besides,  fire  is  called  yaynsakhi,  wind's  companion.  It  flows :  daz
vinr^z,  Livl.  reimchr.  5956 ;  in  Holstein,  when  a  fire  breaks  cat,
they  call  it  hot  rain,  Schütze  4,  340 ;  and  the  ON.  hripuffr,  fire,
Ssdm.  40*  seems  to  be  fr.  hripa,  perflaere.

There  was  a  time  when  fire  was  unknoum,  for  the  giants  have
none  (Sappl.  to  530) :  '  fiure  was  in  tiore '  dear,  scarce,  to  them,
Gadr.  104,  1.  That  time  is  still  remembered  in  Kalevala  16,
247-8  (Gastrin  1,  195)  and  onr  nursery  tales.  Fire  belonged  to
the  gods ;  it  was  stolen  by  Promethens,  and  gfiven  to  men.  Ace.
to  a  Finn,  song  it  is  created:  an  eagle  strikes  a  fire  for  Waina-
moinen,  Petersb.  Extract  8.  Other  traditions  make  a  little  bird
(rebl6,  troglodyte)  bring  it  from  heaven,  Plnquet  p.  44.  Bosquet
220.  A  contrast  to  the  fireless  time  is  the  Dan.  arild-tid,  fr.
arild,  fireplace  (ild,  fire),  Swed.  wril,  focus,  Westg.  arell,  Helsing.
areld,

p.  603.]  Fire  is  holy:  ignis  eojcer  meant  lightning,  Amm.
Marcell.  23,  5 ;  conf.  igne  felid,  Grotef.  Umbr,  7,  5.  Fire  is
called  sa^fice-^eater^  Holtzm.  Ind.  a.  ],  24-6,  and  four  times  in
Bopp's  Gl.  40P ;  eldr  s&  er  aldri  aloknaffi  was  called  vig9an  eld,
Landn.  ed.  nov.  p.  336.  Being  often  found  a  hostile  power,  it
was  used  in  cursing,  or  was  conjured  by  a  spell.  Other  Fr.  forms
of  cursing  are :  male  flambe  Varde  I  Ben.  20762 ;  fea  arde  8<m
musel !  Berte  116 ;  conf.  Holland  to  Yvain  p.  222.  The  fire-cry
in  E.  Gothland  was :  himbwr  eUlär  lös,  östg.  lag  229.  Fire^speUs
are  given  in  Mone's  Anz.  7,  422-7.  A  fire  is  adjured  in  these
words :  '  brand,  stand  als  dem  dode  sein  rechte  hand  I  *  be  still  as
the  dead  man's  hand.  Wolfs  Ztschr.  1,  337.  If  you  can  charm
a  fire,  it  jumps  behind  you  while  you  do  it,  and  you  must  run  for
your  life  (Meiningen),  Hpt's  Ztschr.  3,  363.  Remigius  puts  afire
tofiight,  and  locks  it  up,  Flodoardus  1,  12.     White  angels  quench


VISE.  1468

a  fire  (Sappl.  to  xliii.  end,  and  to  366. Kre  can  be  stifled  with

clothes  that  have  been  worn  some  time,  whereas  in  a  Lüttich  legend
the  earth-fire  attacks  some  men  who  wear  new  unwashen  smocks,
and  is  flogged  with  ropes,  rods  and  sticks,  WolPs  NdrL  s.  no.  407.
To  an  outbreak  of  helle-viur,  which  cannot  be  stamped  oat,  you
must  sacrifice  a  knight  in  gorg^us  array,  Ksrchr.  1 188-41.  1 160-*-
72.  1229;  he  tries  whue  on  horseback  to  speak  away  the  fire,
but  Tails  and  breaks  his  neck,  Der  Causenmacher,  a  play,  Leipz.
1701,  p.  152-6,  and  pref.  A  fire  pat  oat  by  means  of  a  horse,
Thür.  Ztschr.  2,  505.  To  extinguish  a  fire,  a  woman  in  childbed,
whose  feet  must  not  totich  the  ground,  is  carried  to  the  fire,  and
ottering  mystic  spells  throws  a  new-baked  loaf  into  the  flames
(Austria).  On  quenching  fires  and  driving  out  cattle,  see  Tettau
and  Temme's  Pr.  sag.  263.  There  are  people  who  see  a  fire  bum-
ing  beforehand :  yon  must  then  take  out  the  beam  they  indicate,
or  conjure  the  fire  into  an  oak  with  a  bung,  Müllenh.  p.  570.
Ossian  speaks  of  pulling  oat  oaJcs,  so  th^t  fire  springs  out  of  them.

Fires  leap  out  ff  the  ground  like  water,  Pau&  ii.  34,  2 :  ein

michel  v4wer  sich  truoe  uf  (üz  T)  der  erden  munde  (mouth),  Pass.
359, 58 ;  als  viurin  urspringe  (fiery  springs)  dft  waeren  ensprungen,
Lanz.  2590.  Btvrnvng  mountains  may  be  seen  on  seals  of  the
14th  cent.^  MsH.  4,  280%  conf.  Pyrmont,  Brennenberg.  Fire
struck  ont  of  a  helmet  may  be  caught  on  a  schoup  (truss  of  rye).
Er.  9206.  Eggs  put  out  fire :  '  holt  lesdd  van  eia,  w&di  ne  bren-
nid';  ovorum  autem  tantam  vim  esse  dicunt,  ut  lignum  eis
perfusum  non  ardeat,  ac  ne  vestis  quidem  contacta  aduratur,  61.
Argentor.  Diut.  2, 194%  Milk,  eanUVs  milk  quenches  fire,  Ferabr.
3348.

p.  603.]  The  Indians  had  three  sorts  of  fire :  common,  celestial,
frictHe,  Holtzm.  Ind«  s.  3,  112.  In  Oegir's  hall  was  '  lysi-gull
fyrir  elds-Uos/  Sssm.  59.  Out  of  helmets  and  swords  came  fire
and  light :  ob  in  des  fiures  zerinnet  (when  short  of  fire),  daz
knnnen  sie  wol  suochen  in  helm-spange.  Tit.  3222 ;  among  the
Ases  the  sword  gives  light,  Sn.  79 ;  it  shines  in  the  dark,  Landn.
1>  5;  'sin  swert  hiez  si  in  bar  nemen  sunder  sin  gewant  •  .  .
daz  er'z  mit  im  naeme,  s&  'r  in  die  helle  quaeme,  in  die  vinster-
nisse,  daz  er  im  gewisse  dftmite  liuhten  solde,'  En.  2858  (she
bids  Aeneas  take  his  naked  sword,  that  when  he  came  into  hell's
darkness,  he  should  light  him  therewith).    Virgil,  it  is  true,


1464  ELEMENTS.

makes  Aeneas  draw  his  sword  (vi.  260.  291),  bnt  not  to  give
light.  Again  :  '  znch  hervor  din  swert,  du  trage  'z  in  dtner  hand
bar,  nnde  liuhte  dir  d&mite'  3172.  Nothing  of  the  kind  in  Vir-
gil.  Flint-eld  is  struck  over  cattle,  Dybeck's  Buna  '44,  7.     If

sparks  fly  out  of  a  beam  that  is  being  hewn,  it  betokens  fire  to
the  house  into  which  it  is  built,  Miillenh.  p.  570.

p.  607.]  Wildfire  is  described  in  Miede's  Hasenmelker  p.  43.
Needfire  must  be  rubbed  by  two  brothers,  or  at  least  two  men  of
the  same  Christian  name,  (Fischer's)  buch  vom  Abergl.,  Leipz.
1791,  p.  177.  Some  new  facts  are  coll.  by  Colshorn  231-2.
350-1.  The  Mecklenbg  custom  is  described  by  Lisch  6^  127;
that  of  the  Moravian  shepherds  by  Kulda  (d'Elv.)  123-4.  A
giant  rubs  fire  out  of  stones.  Bother  1041  (ace.  to  two  readings).
The  notten  held  on  Midsum.  Night,  and  twice  mentioned  in  the
Acct  bk  of  Frankfort  city,  yr  1374,  points  to  the  supposed  root
hniudan.

p.  608.]  Swed.  accounts  of  gnid-eld  (rubbed  fire)  run  thus :
'  Grenom  gnideld  tagen  i  en  ekesticke  (piece  of  oak)  f  ran  ett  snore
(string)  som  sä  länge  dragits  fram  och  ater  (pulled  to  and  fro)  i
en  hus-dörr,  till-dess  det  blifvit  antändt  (kindled),  och  derefber
3  ganger  ansyls  ford  omkring  personen,  samt  med  ett  serdeles
formular  signad,  berökas  och  betas  sjuka  kreatur  (cattle  besmoked
and  cured).'  Again:  'For  samma  andamal  borras  hal  (hole
bored)  uti  en  ek,  hvaruti  genom  en  pinne  eld  gnides,  dermed
antändes  9  sl^igs  trad,  ofver  hvilken  kreaturen  bora  gä ' ;  conf.
Suppl.  to  1089  (?).

p.  609.]  Cows  or  calves  are  sacrif.  elsewhere  too,  to  protect
the  herd  from  plague:  ^^'srhalfvome  mycket  bordö,  skall  man
valdsamt  fatta  an  vid  hufvudet  framslappa  honom  if  ran  kjotten,
och  honom  verkeligen  hals-hugga  ofver  fähu-sträskeln,'  Bäaf.  A
live  cow  is  buried  in  the  ground  against  murrain,  Wieselgr.  409 ;
or  one  of  the  herd  under  the  stable-door  (p.  1142) ;  conf.  WoIPs
March,  p.  327,  where  a  cow's  head  is  cut  ofif  and  laid  in  the  loft
(seep.  1188).

p.  610.]  In  Ssk.  needfire  or  wildfire  is  called  rub-fire,  and  is
produced  by  rubbing  a  male  and  a  female  stick  together,  Böhtling
1,  522,  conf.  1,  404.  Ace.  to  Kuhn's  Bee.  d.  Bigv.  p.  98,  it  is
rubbed  out  of  the  arani  (premna  spinosa).  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  3, 122 ;
is  this  the  aihvatundi  ?     Weber's  Ind.  stud,  2,  4  says  it  comes


FIBE.  1465

out  of  Pmnava,  the  bow  and  arrow  of  self  (the  lotus-flower).  The
Arabs  call  the  old-fashioned  fire-rubbing  sticks  zend  and  zendet,
the  first  being  the  upper  and  male^  the  second  the  female  or  lower
one  with  the  hole  in  it;  striking  steel  and  stone  together  is
reckoned  a  barbarism,  Sückert's  Hariri  1,  648-9.  Finn,  hela-
vcUkya  (fr.  hela^  the  spring  festival),  ignis  non  ex  silice,  sed  ex
lignis  duobus  vi  confricatis  elicitus ;  also  kitkati'Valkya,  rub-fire,
Benvall  1,  64.

p.  611.]  A  perpetual  fire  was  kept  up  by  the  Israelites,  Levit.
6,  12-3;  and  is  still  by  Parsees  and  Guebers,  as  among  the
ancient  Persians.  Such  a  fire  burned  on  the  altar  of  Athena
Polias  at  Athens,  Paus.  L  26,  7,  and  in  the  temple  of  Pan  in  Ar-
cadia, viii.  37,  8.  Famous  oracles  maintained  ever-burning  fires,
as  that  of  Delphi,  whose  priests  in  time  of  war  conveyed  the  sacred
flame  to  Platasa,  Pint.  Numa  cap.  9  ;  conl  Valckenaer  on  Herod.
6, 108 ;  so  the  fires  of  Delos  were  carried  to  Lemnos,  Welcker's
Aeachyl.  Trilog.  p.  247  seq.  We  know  the  undying  fire  of  Hestia,
Vesta.  Colonies  took  their  «acred ^re  with  them  from  the  mother-
city;  if  it  happened  to  go  out,  there  alone  could  they  light  it
again,  Larcher  on  Herod.  1,  no.  360.  Wachsm.  Hell,  alterth.  i.  1,
102.  ii.  2,  118.  Münter's  Bel.  d.  Garth,  p.  49.  The  Samogitians
nourished  a  perpetual  fire,  Lasicz.  56.  On  the  eternal  lamp  in
the  worship  of  Mary,  see  Lange's  Abh.  v.  d.  ewigen  lampe  (Verm,
sehr.,  Leipz.  1832)  pp.  191—204.

p.  614.]  Toland's  Hist,  of  Druids  (quoted  in  Hone's  Yrbk  876
seq.)  supposes  three  bealtines  in  the  year.  May  ],  Midsum.  eve,
Nov.  1.  The  first  of  May  and  of  Nov.  were  called  beltan,  says
Villemarqu^'s  Bardes  Bretons  p.  386-7.  GDS.  108.  On  Bel,
Bee  Diefenb.  Celt.  1,  185,  Stokes  849.  Jamieson  (Daybk  2, 659).
The  great  and  little  Bel,  Meier's  Schwab,  sag.  297.  On  Beltaine,
Belton  eve,  see  Stewart's  Pop.  superst.  258  seq.  Brand's  Pop.
Antiq.  1,  337.  Stokes  349.  Michelet  1,  452  seq.  Ir.  sag.  u.
march.  1,  275-6.  2,  479.  The  May  fire  is  also  called  hoelkerz,
coelceHh,  Yillem.  B.B.  232.  385-6-7,  but  he  does  not  explain  the

word ;  elsewh.  coel  is  omen,  fides,  and  certh  signum. An  Ar-

moric  folk-song  speaks  of  eight  fires,  and  of  the  father^fire  being
lighted  in  May,  Yillem.  Barzas  breiz  1,  8 ;  Hone's  Daybk  2,  659.
866  puts  the  chief  fire  on  Midsum.  Day.  Sambhuinn  means  Nov.  1
(O'Brien :  samhainn  =  Allhallows-tide).     The  Druidic  November-


1466  ELBUBKTS.

fire  was  also  called  tlaehdgha,  tine  Üacbdglia,  O'Brien  snb  v.
The  sacred  fires  are  thas  described  in  O'Connor's  Proleg.  l^  24 :
'daos  ignes  splendentes  &ciebant  driUdae  cum  ü^catUationibiu
magnis  snpra  eis,  et  dncebant  greges  qnos  oogebant  transire
per  eoB  ignes ';  conf .  O'Brien  sub  ▼.  bealtine.  'Eersei  heads  were
thrown  into  the  May-fire  in  Ireland,  Hone's  Daybk  2,  595  (as
into  the  Midsnm.  fire  in  Qermany,  p.  618).

p.  617.]  On  Easter-fires,  conf.  Woeste  p.  288 ;  dat  osieffur  an-
boiten,  J.  v.  Scheppan's  Oster-pred.  p.  8 ;  das  ostermden-luekten
in  Wilster-marsch,  Miillenh.  p.  168.  E^en  in  S.  Oermany,  e.g.
about  Abensberg  in  Lower  Bavaria,  they  used  at  Easter  time  to
bum  the  ostermann.  After  service  at  church  a  fellow  lighted  a
candle,  ran  out  into  the  fields  with  it,  and  set  the  straw  Easter-
man  on  fire.  A  Paderborn  edict  of  1781  abolished  the  Easter-
fire,  Wigand's  Pad.  and  Gorv.  3,  281.  1,  817.  Instead  of  bocks-
thorn  (p.  616  n.),  Groten's  Gesch.  v.  Northeim  1723,  p.  7  says:
'  '  On  this  hill  the  bocks-harn  was  held  within  the  memory  of  man.'
The  Easter  squirreUhunt  in  the  Harz  (p.  616)  reminds  of  the
Lay  of  Igor  (Hanka  p.  68),  where  every  householder  pays  a
squirrel  by  way  of  tax.  Akin  to  Easter-fires  are  the  Walbvrgs
(Mayday)  fires,  Miillenh.  p.  168 :  in  Bugen,  on  Mayday  eve,  took
place  a  molkentaversehen  bemen  with  fire-bladders  (p.  1072  n.),
conf.  Osnabr.  verein  8,  229 ;  on  the  Hundsruck  the  young  men
and  boys  are  allowed  to  cut  wood  in  the  forest  on  St.  Walburg's
eve,  Weisth.  2,  168.

p.  620.]  The  sol-stitium  is  in  Homer  rpoir^  ^Xloio,  Od.  15,
404 ;  afjupl  Oepwa^  rpoira^,  Procop.  B.  G^th.  2,  13 ;  o/i^l  rpoira^
X^^M^p^vd^  3,  27.  The  Bavar.  records  have  sunwenden,  sunbenden,
the  Aleman.  sungiJiten:  *  ze  sungihten/  Weisth.  1,  293.  304.
316 — 8;  zesingeht  1,  325;  nach  sungehten  1,  669;  ze  sungiden
1,  322-3;  zu  sungihie  1,  708;  zu  singihten  1,  745 ;  singiht-tag  1,
727;  sungehUtag  1,  669;  singehtag,  Namenbuchl.  p.  114.  The
AS.  sun^iht,  solstitium,  stands  in  Monolog,  for  June  24  ;  Schilter
on  Eönigsh.  p.  458  has  the  whole  passage.  MHG.  dri  tage  vor
sunegihten,  Lanz.  7051 ;  conf.  het\e-gdht,  N.  Cap.  46,  kirch-jiA«

(-going,   Oberlin). ^Vor   der  sunnewenden,   Bamb.   reht.  ed.

Zöpfl  154;  'hiute  ist  der  ahte  tac  n&ch  sunewenden,  dft  sol  daz
]&rzit  enden.'  Iw.  2940.

Midsummer  was  a  great  time  for  meetings  and  merrymakings :


FIBB.  146T

'ze  einen  annewenden  d&  Stfrit  Httere  namen  gewan/  Nib.  32,  4 ;
Wor  disen  eunetoenden*  Siegfried  and  Kriemhilt  ^isit  Worms
670,  3.  694,  3 ;  and  it  is  daring  the  wedding  festivities  at  Mid-
sammer  that  Siegfried  is  killed,  as  may  be  fairly  inferred,  if  it  is
not  expressed.  The  wedding  in  the  Heanenland  is  to  take  place
'zen  naehsten  eunewenden*  1424,  4;  and  the  heroes  arrive  at
Etzel's  court  'an  eunewenden  dbent'  1754,  1.  On  Midsnm.  day
the  Zurich  people  carry  their  hot  pottage  over  the  water  to

Strassbarg,  Gliickh.  schifif,  v.  194  seq. On  eunwend-fires,  see

Panz.  Beitr.  1,  210  seq.  Sunwent  was  corrup.  into  summit,
Hmmet-feur,  Leopr.  182 ;  »imentfeuer,  H.  Sachs  1,  423**;  somm^r-
feur,  Albertini's  Narrenhatz  100;  8.  Johannis-förle,  Germ.  1,
442.  A  sage  remark  on  the  sonwend-fire  in  Firmen.  2,  703 ;
feuia  hup/a  z*  Jolianne,  Schnegraf  der  wäldler  p.  31.  Always  a
lad  and  lass  together,  in  couples,  jump  over  the  fire,  Leopr.  183 ;
Bome  wantonly  push  others  in,  and  spread  their  coat  over  the  hot
coals,  Gresch.  v.  Ganstall  (Bamb.  ver.  8,  112).  At  Vienna,  com-
mon women,  loose  girls,  danced  at  the  Midsnm.  fire,  Schlager's
Wiener  skizzen  1,  270.  5,  352.  Fiery  wheels  are  driven  in
Tyrol  and  Hungary,  WolPs  Ztschr.  1,  286-7.  270-1,  and  in  Aus-
tria, Duller  p.  46-7 ;  conf .  the  joy- fires  of  Swiss  herdsmen  in  the
Poffdr-nights,  Staid  1,  209.  210.  Prohibitions  of  the  Midsnm.
fire,  Ealtenback's  Pantaid.  98^.  104^

p.  624.]  On  Engl,  bonfires,  see  Hone's  Daybk  1,  827.  846.
851-2.  Brand  1,  299  seq.  In  France  embers  taken  home  from
a  John's-fire,  in  England  any  live  coals  are  a  protection  against
magic.  Hone's  Yrbk  1553.  Brising,  the  Norweg.  for  Midsnm.
fires,  may  be  akin  to  bris=sflamma,  brisas=flammare  (Aasen),  conf.
brasa,  our  prasseln,  to  crackle.  Midsum,  fires  flamed  in  Sweden
too,  9  sorts  of  wood  being  used,  and  9  sorts  of  flowers  picked
for  posies.  Buna  '44,  p.  22.  Wieselgr.  411.  In  Spain  they
gathered  verbenas  in  the  dawn  of  St.  John's  day,  and  lighted
fires,  over  which  they  leapt,  Handbk  of  Sp.  1,  270**.  A  St.  John's
fire  in  Portugal  is  descr.  in  the  Jrb.  d.  Berl.  sprachges.  8,  373.
*  John's  folk '  is  what  the  Letts  call  those  who  bring  John's-
wort  (hypericum,  and  raggana  kauli,  witch's  bones),  and  sing
Bongs,  Stender's  Gram.  p.  50,  Diet.  85' ;  on  St,  John's  morning
a  wreath  of  flowers,  or  hawthorn,  is  hung  over  the  doors,  Fr.
Michel's  Baces  maud.  2,  147.     In  Esthonia  they  light  a  John's


1468  ELEMENTS.

fire,  and  gather  a  bundle  of  sweefc-smelling  herbs;  these  the  girls
pat  under  their  pillows,  and  what  they  dream  comes  true,  Pos-
sart's  Esthl.  p.  172.  On  the  Zobten-berg  in  Silesia  (fr.  Sobota,
sabbath)  the  Slavs  kept  their  ttobotky,  Schafarik  2,  407  of  transL;
it  is  also  called  '  mens  Slesie,  mens  czobothus/  conf .  Dietmar  (in
Pertz  5,  855).  Moravia  too  has  its  John's  fires,  Eulda  (in  d'Elv)
111-2.  Plato  de  Legg.  19,  945  speaks  of  a  festival  following  the
summer  solstice.

p.  625.]  To  Ovid's  picture  of  the  Palilia,  add  that  of  Tibullns
ii.  5,  87 :

at  madidus  Baccho  sua  festa  Palilia  pastor
ooncinet :  a  stabulis  tunc  procul  este,  lupi !
ille  levis  etipulae  solemnis  potus  acervos
accendetf  flammaa  transilietque  sacras.

p.  628.]  In  Christmas-fires,  mark  the  practice  of  saving  up
the  half-burnt  yule-log,  Gefken's  Cat.  56.  Other  fires  are  the
Shrovetide  fire,  Stalder  1,  856,  and  the  so-called  hoop'driving
(burning  wheel)  in  Up.  Swabia  on  the  first  Sunday  in  Lentj  the
N.  Frisian  biiken-brennen  on  Febr.  22,  see  Miillenh.  p.  167.

p.  630.]  Old  examples  of  illumination :  JoL  Chrys.  Or.  in  red.
Flaviani  c.  4  :  Svep  oiv  iiroii^traTe  <rr€<f>ay(iaavT€^  r^v  äyopav
xal  Xvxyov^  äy^aine^.  Greg.  Naz.  Or.  de  red.  Athanasii  21  p.
891  :  €&  Xiyeiv  .  .  .  rratrav  ^rl  KaraarpairTOfiivfiy  iroktp.
Choricii  Gazaei  Orr.,  ed.  Boissonade  '46  p.  101 :  aK€v&n  Si
^(»T09  clfyYaafjLivot^  ev^fiovfiey  rov^  evepyira^.  splendida  fnit
illuminatio;  mos  is  fuit  veterum  diebus  laetis  ac  testis.  Ann.
Worm.  1251  (Böhm.  Font.  2,  168) :  regem  inceneis  candelis  et
campanis  pulsatis  singulis  diebus  festivis  denunciare.  Trees
of  candles  were  carried  in  processions,  Lünzel's  Stiftsfehde
135-6.  279;  vü  lichtes  gap  d&  manec  rone,  TürL  Wh.  99*
(conf.  Saam.  22*:  med  brennandom  liosom  oe  bomom  vi&i).  The
Ksrchr.  91  has  brinnende  olvaa.  Walth.  28,  14  speaks  only  of
ringing  bells :  ir  werdent  h6h  enpfangen^  ir  sit  wol  wert  daz  wir
die  gloggen  gen  in  liuten.

3.    Air.

p.  632.]  Wind  is  in  Ssk.  anila^äyeßio^,  also  pavana,  cleanser,
fr.  pü,  like  p&vaka,  fire  (Suppl.  to  602).    So  in  Finn,  tuuli  ventus.


AiB.  1469

tuK  ignis;  oonf.  *  des  ßuwera  wint/  Gadt.  4&9,  2,  and  viwer-roter
wint,  Nib.  1999,  2.  An  OHG.  »ucp^aer,  Graff  6,  856,  ON.  svif
Binotas  repentinus,  yibratio.  As  Wödan  is  the  aH-pervading
ssther,  Zetis  is  eqniv.  to  <ier:  affp  hv  ay  r&9  ovofidaeve  xal  Ala,
Frag.  Philem.  in  Meineke  4,  82  (Earipides  has  aether  for  Zens).
In  Latin  also,  Jupiter  stands  for  aer,  Yalcken.  ad  Herod.  2,  13;
conf.  'plurimns  /upüer =michil  lufl,*  air.  Gl.  Sletst.  6,  467;
and  Servius  ad  Aen.  1,  51  says  Juno  was  taken  to  mean  air.
The  Greeks  $aerificed  to  Boreas,  Xen.  Anab.  (Koch  92).  The
Scythians  worship  avefio^  as  cause  of  life,  and  the  sword  as  that
of  death,  Lucian's  Tor.  38.  GDS.  222.  459.  The  Finns  call  a
fioKatcla  (calm)  Wäinämöinen's  way,  Väinämöisen  tie  or  kalku:
the  god  has  walked,  and  all  is  hushed;  he  is  named  Suvantolainen
fr.  suvanto,  locus  ubi  aqua  quiescit.  The  Norse  Andvari  is  a
dwarf,  bat  also  ventus  lenis,  contrarius;  conf.  Bifliffi,  oskabyrr
(pp.  149.  637),  Wüetelgöz  (p.  367  n.),  )>oden  (Suppl.  to  132  end).
In  the  Mid.  Ages  Paul  and  John  '  habent  d&  ze  himile  weteres
gewalt,'  Ksrchr.  10948;    they  are  the  weather-lords,  and  their

day  (June  26)  the  hail-holiday,  Scheff  Haltaus  111. Walt--

«nn^ =anster.  Moneys  Anz.  8,  409,  because  it  originates  in  the
forest.  The  winds  have  a  home :  Vvidheim  ytSan  byggja,  Sasm.
10  •,  Wint,  Wintpoz,  Wintesbcd?  are  prop,  names,  Graff  1,  624.
Wind  is  the  windhund  (greyhound),  Kuhn  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,
131,  as  Donner,  Sturm  are  names  of  dogs.  Wind  is  worshipped :
'  des  solt  der  lufi  stn  geret  (air  be  honoured)  yon  spers  krache,'
Tit  2,  2 ;  'er  neic  gegen  dem  winde  der  dft  w&te  von  Gotlinde,'
bowed  to  the  wind  that  blew  fr.  G.,  Helmbr.  461 ;  '  st&  bt,  la
mich  den  wird  anwaejen  (let  the  wind  fan  me),  der  kumt  von
mines  herzen  küneginnen,'  MS.  1,  6^  Wind  is  spoken  of  as  a
person,  it  goee,  stände  still:  spiritus  ubi  vult  spirat,  'der  wint
waeje  als  er  welle/  blow  as  he  would,  Bari.  257,  11 ;/ vl6ch  (flew)
waer  die  wint  ghebdj),'  bade,  Maerl.  in  Kästner  18^.  Winds  ride^
Ahlw.  on  Oisian  2,  278.  They  guide  people:  'quel  vent  vos
jttie?'  Ren.  2127.  3728;  'quel  vent  vos  maine?'  2675;  'quel
vent  vos  mene  et  quel  ore?*  2654= whence  come  you  f  conf.
'what  devily  cucJeoo  brings  you  here?'  (p.  1013).  They  are
loiU,  Trist.  2415.  Greg.  646.  754.  Renn.  22962;  angry:
ensOmet  sind  die  lüfte,'  Dietr.  u.  ges.  393;  'die  lüfte  solden
zürnen*  at  the  height  of  the  towers,  Servat.  84.    The  air  groans,

VOL.  IV.  0


1470  ELEMBKTS.

mutters,  gpiints :  *  grunzet  tone  ungewitere/  N.  Gap.  58;  'grot
wint  ende  gesoech/  Lane.  3899 ;  '  die  winde  begunden  swegden/
began  to  pipe,  Servat.  3283;  conf.  'ap  dem  windea  home,'
Weisth.  3,  231.     On  Fonn,  Dri/a,  Miöll,  see  GDS.  685.

p.  632.]  Of  the  wind' 8  bride  :  mit  einer  windea-hriute  wnrden
sie  getwnngen,  Servat  2302;  in  nam  ein  windes-brtU  2844;
flngen  vaster  dan  ein  w>  b.,  Engelh.  4771 ;  daz  din  to.  6.  geltt,
Hpt's  Ztsohr.  7,  381;  gelich  der  windesbriute,  Troj.  kr.  33571.
Lather  says  windsbraut  for  ventas  typhonicos.  Acts  27,  14.  Old
glosses  have  nimphuSi  nimpha,  storm  wind,  Graff  1,  625 ;  is  this
a  misapplication  of  nimbus  7  or  a  congener  7  In  France  they
speak  of  the  whining  of  Melusine  (p.  434),  who  in  Bohemia  passes
for  a  goddess  of  wind,  and  to  whom  they  throw  flour  out  of  the
window  for  her  children  (Suppl.  to  636) ;  conf.  the  whimpering
of  the  Vila,  and  the  weeping  of  the  Esth.  tuuleema,  wind's
mother,  Böcler  146-7.  Is  the  Swiss  harein,  Staid.  2,  21,  fr.
OHG.  harßn  =  clamare,  Graflf  4,  578,  or  fr.  char6n  =  qaeri  5,  465?
Other  expressions  for  wind's  bride :  unnd-gelle  =  yenti  pellex
(snfi-gelle),  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  290.  Rocholz  2,  408  ;  Bavar.  wind^
gäsperl,  Swab,  vdnd-gaepele,  Leopr.  101.  120;  Bavar.  toindsch-
brach,  •brausz,  Panz.  Beitr.  2,  209;  sau^hegel,  Bocholz  2,  187.
OHG.  w;an(?a= turbo,  Graff  1,  761;  ON.  roka,  turbo.  Other
OHG.  terms:  lin^t^^tiomt^strepitus  (MHG.  iin^e^tötn,  vehementia
aeris,  Superst.  H.  cap.  77) ;  ungewitiri  =  tempestas,  procella,
Graff  1,  630;  arapeit^Ao.  do.  1,407;  Äöi/ft^ tempestas,  Windb.
308.  313;  un«^  =  procella,  tempestas,  AS.  net;  with  ^r0tp  =  agebat
(nnbila  ventus),  Graff  5,  482,  conf.  ON.  drifa,  snowstorm,  drifa

örva,  a  storm  of  arrows. ^Heralds  of  winter  were  '  twer  und

sarin  bise/  MS.  2,  193^;  contrary  wind  is  in  MHG.  twer  or  twere,
and  ON.  And-pvari,  Andvari  is  said  to  be  that  as  well  as  a
dwarf's  name;  conf.  'von  ludbes  geduere/  Himelr.  292  (Hpt's
Ztschr.  8,  153),  '  die  winde  sluogen  in  entwer/  Hpt  7,  378-9.  A
hurricane,  squall,  flaw,  is  called  flöge  in  Pass,  and  Jeroschin ;
windes  vlagen,  Marienleg.  84,21.  87,8;  die  wint  ene  vla^he
brachte,  Bose  13151.  Maerl.  3,  189;  Dut.  vlaag,  Gothl.  flagä,
vindfl/igä,  Almqvist  422^;  'rotteii  und  stumnwinde,'  Luther's
Letters  5,  155.  In  Slavic  it  is  vikhr,  Pol.  wicher.  Boh.  wichr;
Lith.  ummaras,  vSsuUm,  whirlwind  (conf.  our  provinc.  'eilung,'
M.  Neth.  ylinge,  Wessel's  Bibel  p.  7,  with  ON.  el,  jel,  nimbus).


Am.  1471

The  Greeks  had  aehXa^  dveXka,  "KaTKay^^  Ital.  fortana  di  mare  =
storm.

p.  633.]  Zio  resembles  Mars  and  Indras,  the  god  of  winds  and
of  sonls,  who  with  his  Marnts  or  spirits  of  storm  makes  war  on
the  giants  of  darkness,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  488-9.  6,  131.  Wuotan,
the  god  of  the  Wild  Hnnt,  sweeps  like  the  storm  through
open  door»  (p.  926-7,  etc.).  Hodeke  howls  (Snppl.  to  511  beg.).
Both  wind's  bride  az^d  devil  are  called  sow-tail  (p.  996)  or  hammer
(p.  999) :  conf.  sari-kegel,  Bocholz  2,  187 ;  in  Bavaria  wind'Sau,
Zingerle's  Oswalt  83  {alyk,  goatskin,  hurricane).  Fran  Fiuk  or
Frick  also  acts  as  goddess  of  wind,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  376.  6, 131 ;
oonf.  the  fahrende  mutter,  Wolf's  Ndrl.  sag.  no.  518.  At  a
village  near  Passan  they  call  the  whirlwind  miAeml,  aunty :
'  mueml  ist  drin ! '  (m.  is  also  toad) ;  or  else  echratl,  Schm.  8,
519.  522.  The  hurricane  has  hands :  '  nu  bin  ich  Sturmwinden
alr&rst  in  die  hant  gevam,'  fallen.  Trist.  8848.
p.  635.]    Was  thdre  a  wind  named  Vorwitz  (prurient  curiosity)?

do  kam  ein  wint  geflogen  dar,

der  ist  virwitz  genant,

in  h&nt  die  meide  wol  erkant

nnde  ouch  die  vronwen  über  alle  laut.         Renn.  84.

s&n  kumt  her  virwitz  gerant

und  loeeet  den  meiden  üf  (unlooses)  diu  hant.   Kenn.  268.  ^

Conf. '  der  förtoHz,  so  Jungfern  theuer  machet,'  Simplic.  1,  568 ;

'  hine  fyrwit  breec/  Beow.  464.  3966,  5565 ;  vurwitz  segens,  Turl.

Wh.  128'  (Suppl.  to  273  n.) ;  's  sticht's  der  toundenoitz,  Hebel

157;  förwitz,  der  krämer  (huckster),  Uhl.  Volksl.  636. .  OHG.

firiwizi  is  also  portentum,  mirificum,  Graff  1,  1099;  'man  saget

mir  von  kinde,  daz  keme  uns  von  dem  winde/  Erlösung  2440.

As  the  North  had  its  storm-giant  Hrsesvelg,  Kl.  Grooth's  Quick-

hom  calls  a  tempest  '  de  grote  und  de  lütge  windherl ' ;  conf.

'Oott  flieget  den  wind,'  Babenschl.  619;  'der  Gotes  geist  daz

(aazT)  ftf  des  lufkes  vederen,  Aneg.  Hahn  4,  72.    ilioXo9,  4>l\o<i

aOavaroiai  0€oiai^  Od.  10,  2 ;  Kelvov  yäp  rafiiijv  ävißiwv  iroirfo'e

Kpwiap,  10,  21.     Yirgil's  .^lolus  sits  in  a  hollow  mountain,  and

Jano  begs  wind  of  him,  ^n.  1,  52.  64;  conf.  KM.  no.  89  :  'weh',

weh',  windchen  ! '  blow,  blow,  Windie.

^  Conf.  Xvffl'^ufpost  ^^f  MttM.    Tibi  (HTinenaee)  virgines  zonal»  solYont  ainiu.
CfttnlL  59,  68 ;  zonam  BoWere  Tirgineam  65,  28.


1472  BLBMBNT8.

Eagles  were  fixed  ob  gables  or  ihe  top  of  a  tent  pretty  often :
le  grant  tref  Karlemaine  font  contremont  lever,
par  defior  le  pomel  font  Vaigle  d'or  poser,
par  devers  Montanban  en  fist  le  chief  tomer.

Benaos  151,  2—4.

A  golden  eagle  on  the  top  of  tlie  castle,  Anberi  78 ;  high  on  the
tent '  ein  guldtn  ar/  En.  9160.  On  the  inroad  of  the  '  Welschen '
in  978,  conf.  Giesebrecht's  Otto  II.  p.  48. •  In  E;aIeYala,  torn.
2,12  (led.  17,841):

dn  min  dm,  min  sköna  f  ogel,

yänd  (tarn)  &t  annat  hall  ditt  hofynd  (head),

tillslat  (shut)  dina  skarpa  ogon !

A  golden  eagle  on  the  roof  in  Athensus  2,  259 ;  and  observe,
that  atro^  is  both  eagle  and  g^ble.  The  Basqae  egoa,  south
wind,  is  akin  to  egoa,  egaa,  egala,  wing,  Pott  2,  190.  In  Gk)ethe,
winds  wave  their  noiseless  wings.  Thnnder-olonds  are  also
likened  to  the  wide-spreading  root  of  a  tree,  and  called  wind-
vawnel  (-root),  a  sign  of  hurricane,  Schmidt  v.  Wemenchen  131.

p.  636.]  The  wind  \&fed  with  rags  or  tow,  which  is  thrown  to
it,  Leopr.  102.  In  Anstria  too  they  offer  meal  in  a  bread-shovel
out  of  the  attic  window  to  the  storm,  saying  (Popovitch  sab  v.
wind)  :

nimm  hin,  mein  lieber  wind,
trag  heim  deinem  weib  und  kind,
nnd  komm  nimmer  I

Instead  of  giving  the  wind  food,  a  woman  says  '  Fd  rather  stab
the  dog  dead/  and  throws  a  kntfe  into  the  yard  (p.  632  n.) ;  conf.
M.  Koch's  Beise  in  Tirol  p.  87-8.  Winds  were  thought  of  as
meal'devouring  dogs,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  373-6.  6,  131 ;  conf.
Hodeke's  howling  (Suppl.  to  633).  In  a  storm  at  sea  a  dove
appears,  flies  three  times  roand  the  ship,  one  man  puts  oat  his
arm  and  '  de  caada  ejus  ires  tnlit  pennas,  quas  mari  intingaens
tempestatem  compescuit,'  Yenant.  Fortan,  vita  Badegundis,  Acta
Bened.  sec.  1,  p.  332.  The  6r.  OveXXa  snatches  away.  Od.  20,
68-6,  like  the  Norweg.  northwind.  To  hurtful  winds  black
lambs  were  sacrificed,  to  fair  winds  white,  Aristoph.  Ran.  845.
Virg.  ^n.  8,  120.    For  a  favourable  wind  a  he-goat  is  hung  on


Am.  1473

the  mast,  Hone's  Yrbk  1553.  On  Irish  wind- worship,  see  Conan
111—5.

p.  637.]  Divine,  semi-divine  or  diabolic  beings  ezoito  wind
(Snppl.  to  145) :  Got  flieget  den  wint,  Babensohl.  619 ;  in  Serv.
songs  Gk>d  is  implored  for  wind,  Ynk  ii.  561.  1089.  i.  369  (no.
511).  370  (no.  513).  322  (no.  455) ;  Christ  is  appealed  to,  Sv.
vis.  2,  167.  The  saints  invoked  in  a  storm  are  called  wazzer*
heilige,  water-holies,  Marienleg.  p.  85;  the  martyrs  Paul  and
John  '  h&nt  d4  ze  himele  weteres  gewalt,*  Ksrchr.  Diem.  335,  1.
Scr&wune  in  Hpt's  Zeitschr.  6,  290  seems  the  name  of  a  weather-
giant;  Fasolt  chases  a  woman  in  the  mountains.  Ecke  167,  as
Wnotan  does;  conf.  'mein  söhn  Windhsim/  Wolf's  Ztschr.  1,
311.  Is  there  a  special  meaning  in  '  der  wint  von  Aspri&ne  dSz/
whizzed.  Both.  4226 f  'Folks  said  it  wasn't  a  natural  wind,
they  believed  there  wasn't  a  tufel  left  in  hell,  they  was  all  from
home,  trying  to  blueter  us  out  of  our  wits,'  Stolle  170;  conf.
'qael  vent  tos  guie'  etc.  (SuppL  to  632  end).  Oxen  with  their
horns  dig  the  tempest  out  of  a  sand  hill,  Thiele  2,  257.    Müllenh.

p.  128. With  Wftdan  oska-byrr  conf.  Suppl.  to  149.    ON.  byr,

Dan.  bor,  fair  wind.  Low  Grerm.  seamen's  words  are  bo,  a  sud-
den and  passing  squall,  böiges  wetter,  donnerbo,  regenbo,  hagelbo.
Slav,  burta  =  procelIa,  Miklos.  p.  6;  Serv.  bura.  Buss,  burdn,
hurricane,  conf.  ßopia^.  Boreas  helps  the  Greeks,  Herod.  7,  189.
Oo  Juno,  see  Suppl.  to  632  beg.  Can  OSin's  name  of  VHFrir  be
akin  to  AS.  hvriSa,  Aireodasaura  lenis,  hweo9rian^m\irm\irBTe  f
The  Slay,  pogoda  is  in  Lith.  pagada,  fair  wind,  fair  weather.
Mist  in  ON.  is  called  kerlingar  vella,  nebula  humi  repens.

p.  639.]  With  the  provisions  of  the  Lex  Visigoth.,  conf.  the
lodioulus  Superstit.  (in  Pertz  3,  20)  de  tempestatibus  and  eornt-
buB  et  eocleis,  and  the  passage  fr.  Seneca  in  Wolf's  Ndrl.  sag.
p.  693  about  ;^aXa(^o-^i;\a/re9,  hail- wardens ;  iy  Perai?  x^iKalSiy
18  said  of  Zeus,  Lucian  7,  51.

p.  640.]  The  passage  fr.  Bartholom.  Anglicus  is  also  in  Hpt's
Ztschr.  4,  494-5,  where  Wackemagel  understands  Winlandia  as
Finlandia;  and  it  is  true  the  Finns  are  said  to  make  fiölkyngveSr,
Fomm.  sog.  4,  44.  In  a  Lapland  epos  a  maiden  has  three  sorts
of  magic  knots ;  she  unties  the  first,  wind  fills  the  sails  and  the
ship  gets  under  way ;  then  the  second  and  the  third,  followed  by
storm  and  shipwreck ;  conf.  Elemm  3,  100.     Such  wind-knots  a


1474  ELEMBKTS.

woman  on  the  Schlei  and  a  witch  of  Föhr  know  how  to  make,
MüUenh.  p.  222-5  ;  conf.  the  sailor*^  belief  about  wind  in  Temme's
Pom.  sag.  847-8^  and  the  Hollen  in  Gefken's  Gatal.  p.  55.  In
Oenras.  Tilb.  p.  972  ed.  Leibn.  (Liebrecht  p.  21)^  is  a  story  'de
vento  chirothectie  Archiepisoopi  Arelatensis  inchiso,  et  valli  yentis
imperyiae  illato/

p.  641.]  The  oaKo^  of  ^Eolas,  Od.  10,  19,  is  also  in  Ovid's
Met.  14,  224:  .^lon  Hippotaden,  cohibentem  caroere  ventos,
bovis  ineluaos  tergo ;  and  14,  230:  dempsisse  ligamina  yentis.
Eight  whirlwinds  are  hidden  in  a  cap,  Schief ner's  Finn.  m.  p.  611
[a  formidable  '  capfnl  of  wind '].  Conf.  setting  the  cap  this  way
or  that  in  Sommer  p.  80-1,  and  Hütehen,  Hodeke.

p.  641.]  Hail  is  called  in  Ind.  marutphala,  fruit  of  the  Marats,
Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  489 ;  an  ON.  name  for  it  is  stein^oiK,  in  saxa
saeyiens,  Egilss.  600,  an  OHG.  apparently  scratvunc,  Hpt  6, 290.
On  mildew,  conf.  Schmeller  2,  567.  Ace.  to  Jungm.  1,  56^,  baby
(grannies)  are  clouds  heaped  up  like  hills.  Our  people  ascribe
the  rising  of  mountain  mist  not  to  animals  alone;  at  the  Kif-
hauser  they  say :  '  Oho,  Kaiser  Friedrich  is  breufing,  there'll  be
soft  weather,'  Preetor.  Alectr.  pp.  69,  70.

p.  641.]  To  the  Greeks  it  was  Zens  that  shed  the  snow,  II.  12^
280-1 ;  €v$<^€y  6  Zev^,  Babr.  45,  1.  'Die  t&ren  (fools)  sprechent
(in  winter)  snia  sni  I '     Walth.  76,  1.

4.  Eabth.

p.  642.]  Ssk.  dhara.  Or.  ^copa,  Bopp's  Comp.  Or.  p.  804.  Ir.
tir,  Lat.  terra,  '  akin  to  torreo,  and  signif.  the  dry/  Pott  1, 270.
Another  Ssk.  word  is  ksham,  Bopp's  61.  92^.  ON.  hauSr,  nent.,
Saem.  120-6-7.  Groth.  grundtts  fr.  grindan,  as  our  mel»  malm,
molte  (meal,  dust,  mould)  are  fr.  malan ;  schoUe  grund.  Ph.  y.

Sitte w.  601. Epithets  applied  to  the  earth's  outside :  dazpreita

wasal,  Musp.  68;  sid  folde,  Csddm.  154,  5;  on  rumre  foldan,
Exon.  468,  25 ;  evpeia  x^c»^  conf.  Wh.  60,  28.  Altd.  bl.  1,  388.
Erad.  2158 ;  &f  der  scibligen  (round)  erde.  Diemer  214,  23 ;  &f
der  moÜigen  erde,  Mar.  157,  39;  diu  vinster  erde,  Tit.  5120;  in
der  roten  erde,  Karaj.  93,  10;  um  ein  wenig  rothe  erde,  Simpl.  1,
575;  eorSe  eaUgrene,  Csddm.  }3,  3;  Ouds  gröna  jord,  Sy.  folks.
1,  126.  Does  'terra  viva*  in  Maroelius  no.  24  mean  grassy?
conf.  yiya  flamma  (p.  611  n.). But  the  Earth  is  also  Iiebe  erde.


BARTH.  1475

Schweinichea  1, 104 ;  diu  süeze  erde,  Wernher  v.  Ndrrh.  35,  9 ;
hinfoma  fold,  Saom.  55^ ;  'sieht  wie  die  heilig  erd/  looks  (black)
as  earth,  H.  Sachs  v.  368*^,  conf.  airb  ya^  ayla^,  Athen.  3,  494  ;
Swed.  '  Ouds  gröna  jord,'  our  '  Oottes  boden,*  Chapbk  of  Hum.
Siegfr.,  Pol.  manlaffe  p.  281,  Weisen's  Com.  probe  39;  we  say
'  Hide  in  God*8  earth  for  shame ! '  Dying  is  called  ze  gründe
gän;  conf.  'daz  ich  besite  werde  dir  gelich/  soon  be  like  thee,
Wb.  60,  28 ;  '  sich  ans  dem  staube  machen,'  make  oneself  out  of

the  dust,  scarce. The  earth  will  take  in  liquids  :  fold  seal  viiS

flddi  taka,  Ssem.  27^;  but  *  bluot  benimet  (robs)  der  erde  den
magetuom,*  maidenhood.  Mos.  10,  28 ;  dannoch  was  diu  erde  ein
maget,  Parz.  464,  13.  Earth  bears  not  on  her  breast  the  man  of
blood:  'j&  solte  mich  diu  erde  umbo  dis  mort  niht  en-tragen/
Ecke  143  ;  '  mich  wundert  daz  mich  diu  erde  geruochet  tragen/
still  deigns  to  bear,  Greg.  251 1 ;  '  den  diu  erde  niht  solde  tragen/
Wackern.  Ib.  588,  3.  Strieker's  Klage  38 ;  conf.  '  daz  iuch  die
erde  niht  verslant/  swallowed.  Warn.  3203 ;  '  terre,  car  ouvrez,
si  reeois  moi  chaitis  I '  Garin  2,  263 ;  '  heald  }>u  nu  hrüse ! '  Beow«
4489.  So  the  witch  may  not  touch  the  bare  earth  (p.  1074),  holy
water  must  not  touch  the  ground  (Suppl.  to  587) ;  whereas  to  the
saint  she  offers  herself  as  a  seat :  '  diu  erde  niht  en-dolte  daz  er
büge  stn  gebeine  (tholed  not  that  he  bent  his  limbs),  si  bot  sich
her  engeine,  daz  er  als  M  einem  stnole  saz,'  Servat.  1592.  On
earthquakes,  see  p.  816.  Men  confided  secrets  to  the  earth,
liother  a.  Mailer  36-7 :  '  si  klagten  sd  senliche,  daz  in  daz  ertriche
möhte  g'antwürtet  hftn,'  would  fain  have  answered  them,  Mai  44,
21 ;  they  made  their  plaint  to  the  stone,  LiscVs  Meckl.  jrb.  5, 100.
MüUenh.  p.  37,  or  told  their  tale  to  the  dead  wall,  Amim's  March.
1,70.

Much  might  be  said  on  gold,  silver,  iron.  To  the  Finns  iron
(rauta,  Lapp,  route)  is  brother  to  water  and  fire,  Elalev.  4,  29,  and
is  bom  of  virgin's  milk.  There  is  liquid  gold  and  milk  in  amrita
(p.  317).  Gold  is  called  Fr69a  miöl,  Egilss.  p.  450,  ognarliomi^
ooeani  lumen,  Saom.  152%  and  munnfylli  or  munntal  iötna,  Sn.
83;  conf.  'morgenstnnd  hsktgoldim  mund/  though  F.Magn.  derives
those  words  fr .  mund = hand.  Gold  placed  under  a  du  mb  woman's
Umgue  makes  her  speak,  Fornm.  s.  3,  117 — 9;  gold  is  tempered
in  dew,  Tit.  3698  (Tigrisgold,  4348).  On  dragons'  and  gi-iffins'
gold,  see  pp.  978.  980.


1476  EIiBMBNTS.

p.  643.]  For  Ssk.  khusa,  Bopp  in  Gl.  78*.  86^  writes  huia.
I  find  a  reineumi  also  in  Hpt'a  ZtBchr.  5,  364,  reineffras^nlgm,
Snmerl.  54.  Patting  earth  or  tuff  on  the  head  secures  against
magic.  Pans.  Beitr.  1,  240-1.     Enhn's  Nord.  s.  p.  378.

p.  644.]  Emigrants  took  earth  as  well  as  fire  out  with  them
(SuppL  to  611) ;  conf.  the  strewing  of  earth  in  the  Old  Saxon
legend.  p6rhaddr  var  hofgo'Si  i  pr&ndheimi,  hann  f^tist  til
Islands,  ok  t6k  4'Sr  ofan  hofit,  ok  haf%  meS  ser  hpfs-moUina  ok
sAlurnar,  Landn.  4,  6.

p.  644.]  Demeter  meets  Jasion  in  the  thrifallow,  the  fhiitfallest
oomland :  ßiirpf  ^$\i77fT$  ical  evvß  vu^  Sy$  rptiroK^,  Od.  5,  127,
conf.  Hes.  Theog.  971  and  yeio^  rpLwoka^y  II.  18,  541 ;  OHG.
drieka,  GDS.  58.  61-2.

p.  645.]  A  mime  earhetue  near  Jngenheim  is  mentioned  in  a
record  of  1264;  conf.  svetd  gord=sMt  Athos;  an  0/909  lepor  of
the  Get»  named  Ejoyyaimpov,  Strabo  7,  298;  a  holy  mount  9i^9
in  Pontus,  Xen.  Anab.  iv.  7,  11.  The  mountains  named  grands
father  are  discussed  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  1,  26.  Two  adjacent  moun-
tains in  Lausitz  are  named  by  the  Wends  corny  boh  and  bjely  boh,
black  god,  white  god.  Wend.  Tolksl.  2,  285.  The  Ossetes
worship  their  highest  mountains  (brakabseli,  fair  mountains),
EohPs  S.  Russia  1,  296.

p.  645.]  The  notable  passage  on  rock-worship  in  Landn.  2,
12  is  as  follows :  'hann  (Thordlfr)  hafSi  svft  mikinn  atrunaif  ä
fialli  ^yi,  er  stdS  1  nesinu,  er  hann  kalladi  Helgafell,  at  l^ngat
skyldi  engi  maiSr  ojmeginn  Uta;  ok  svli  var  ]wur  mikil/räTAeljft,
at  )^ar  skyldi  engu  granda  1  fiallinu,  hyarki  f6  ne  monnum,  nema
sialft  gengi  brott.  pat  var  trua  )>eirra  )>or61fs  fraenda,  at  ^ir
doßi  allir  ifiallii  (al.  codex :  ]ia  )>eir  doei,  mundi  ]ieir  ißiülU  hverfa
allir).'  And  2,  16:  'höfSu  mikinn  atrinaS  a  holana — trA^Su
]>eir  t^vi,  at  J^eir  doei  i  holana^  (h&ll=  tumulus,  colliculus);  conf.
'  dying  (van%9hing)  into  the  mountain/  The  Icelander  Eodran  of
Yatnsdal  had  a  stone  at  Gilja,  to  which  he  and  his  fathers  sacri-
ficed; they  imagined  the  är^maär  lived  inside  it,  from  whom

fruitful  years  proceeded,  Kristnisaga  c.  2. Stones  prophegy,

Norske  ev.  no.  SO ;  they  are  washed,  anointed,  honoured,  F.  liagn.
Lex.  p.  961.  When  winds  are  contrary,  sailors  wash  a  blue  etcme,
and  obtain  a  fair  wind ;  they  also  take  oaths  upon  it.  Hone's
Yrbk  1553.      People  kneel  naked  before  the  holy  stone.  Hone's


BARTH.  1477

Daybk  1,  825.  2,  1085.  They  creep  through  hollow  stones  (p.
1166)^  they  go  into  hollow  rocks  to  present  offerings  (p.  58) ;  oonf.
the  Gibichen-stones,  the  pottle-stones  with  pits  and  holes,  GKesebr.
Bait.  stud.  12,  114.  128.  'De  his  qoae  faciont  super  peiras'  is
the  heading  of  cap.  7  of  IndicnI.  Saperst.   On  stone- worship  among

Celts,  see  Michelet  2,  16-7. In  Swed.  tales  and  spells  a  stone

is  always  'jord-faat  sten/  one  fixed  in  the  earth,  Rana  '44,  22 ;
&  xarffoBtom  steini  st6S  ec  innan  dyra,  Saom.  99^;  till  enjord-
fasten  sten,  Sv.  folks.  1,  217.  Sv.  afyentyr  1,  282-4-8.  305;
AS.  earSfsBst.  Bat  we  also  hear  of  the  '  wahseiuter  bühel,'  grow-
ing hill,  Lanz.  5132 ;  and  a  Slov.  riddle,  'kai  raste  bres  korenia
(what  grows  without  root)  V  has  the  answer  '  kamen/  stone.  A
distinction  is  also  drawn  between  wcdgende  and  vaste-ligende
steine»  Leyser  129,  85 ;  usque  ad  wagoden  stein,  Mon.  Zoll.  no.
1,  wagenden  stein,  no.  12  ;  giuxppstein,  Stalder  2,  519 ;  Dan.  rokke'
stene,  Schreiber's  Feen  21.  These  stones  by  their  rocking  are
said  to  bring  on  thunder  and  rain,  0.  Müller  2,  840.  Stones  are
often  landmarks :  zn  dem  grawen  stein,  Weisth.  1,  242,  an  dem
blauen  stein  2,  661.

p.  646.]  Giants  and  men  turn  into  stone  (p.  551-2) ;  stones
have  sense  and  feieling.  It  is  true  we  say  'stone-deaf,  stone-
dead,'  stille  sam  die  steine.  Earl  92^.  94*,  and  Othied  iv.  7,  4
calls  them  unthrdte,  pigri;  yet  in  Luke  19,  40  'the  stones  would
cry  out  •/  the  stone  holds  fast,  MüUenh.  p.  142-3.  The  pierres
de  minuit  moTO  at  midnight,  conf .  the  iurning^stones  in  the  Ir.
march.  2,  37 — 44;  the  stone  twms  round  on  Christmas  night,
Harrys  1  no.  84  (conf.  Heusinger  p.  20),  or  when  bells  ring,
Dybeck  4,  48.  Men  complain  to  stones  as  ihey  do  to  earth  (p.
642)  and  fire  (p.  629),  as  if  to  elemental  gods.  The  stone  you
complain  to  changes  colour,  the  whitq  turns  red,  the  red  blue,
Wachter's  Statistik  pp.  13.  156.  '  Si  klagten,  daz  sich  die
mArsteine  mohten  klieben  herdan,'  Klage  977  (so :  '  si  rnoften,
daz  diu  erde  unter  in  sich  mehte  haben  üf  getAn,'  opened  under
them  1073) ;  '  stahel,  vlins  u.  stein  sih  muosen  von  dem  j&mer
klieben,'  Türl.  Wh.  8^;  'klage,  diu  flinse  het  gespalten/  split
flints;  Tit.  8765;  'von  ir  schoene  müeste  ein  yels  erkrachen,'
MsH.  8,  178*  [similar  examples  omitted]  ;  'hiute  ist  der  stein
naz,  dft  Karl  uffe  saz,  vil  heize  weinunde,'  to-day  the  stone  is  wet,
whereon  K.  sat  hotly  weeping,  Esrchr.  14937.     Stones  relent  in


1478  TBEBS  AND  ANIMALS.

the  story  of  Hoyer,  Wigal.  p.  57—9.  452.  Bait,  stacl.  xi.  2,  191.
A  stone  will  not  let  a  fake  man  sit  on  it,  'ftf  der  Eren  (6ren  ?
honour's)  steine  sitzen,'  Lanz.  5178  seq.


CHAPTER  XXI.

TREES   AND  ANIMALS.

p.  647.]  As  Freidank  10,  7  says  that  angels  are  immortal,
that  of  men  the  spirit  is  immortal,  bat  the  body  mortal,  and  of
beasts  both  body  and  soul  are  mortal ;  so  Berthold  p.  364  allo^^
being  to  stones,  being  and  life  to  plants,  Cseling  to  animals.
Schelling  says,  life  sleeps  in  the  stone,  dozes  in  the  plant,  dreams
in  the  beast,  wakes  in  man.  The  Ssk.  a-ga,  na-g^  (non  iens)
=  tree,  hill,  Bopp's  61.  2^.  189\  8o  in  the  Mid.  Ages  the  line  is
drawn  between  '  ligendez  and  lebendez,'  Diemer  89, 24.  Notker's
Boeth.  speaks  of  boame  and  chriuter  (trees  and  herbs)  din  fone
saffe  lebent,  and  of  unliving  lapides,  metalla.     In  Esth.,  beasts

are  ellayat,  living  ones,  and  plants  kasvias,  that  which  lives.

Not  only  do  wild  birds  grieve  at  man's  lament,  Walth.  124,  SO,
and  beasts  and  fishes  help  him  to  monm,  Oes.  Abent.  1,  8,  bat
*  elliu  geschefede/  all  created  things.  May,  summer's  bliss,  heath,
clover,  wood,  san  and  Venus,  MS.  1,3^;  '  gi  bom,  gras,  lof  nnde
krüt  (leaf  and  herb),  helpet  mi  skrigen  over  lüt  (cry  alond) !'
Marienklage  386.  Grass  and  flower  fret  at  misdeeds,  and  monm,
Petersb.  extr.  fr.  Ealev.  p.  25,  and  in  folksongs  wither  up.
Bluomen  brehent  u.  smiei'ent,  MS.  1,44^;  d6  daz  spil  ergangen
was,  d6  lachten  bluomen  n.  gras,  Hagen's  Oes.  Abent.  1,  464 ;
die  bonm  begunden  krachen,  die  rösen  sdre  lachen,  ibid.  Flowers
on  the  heath  quarrel :  '  dd  each  ich  bluomen  striten  wider  den
grüenen  kle  (clover),  weder  ir  lenger  Waere,'  which  of  them  was
taller,  Walth.  114,  28 ;  du  bist  kurzer,  ich  bin  langer,  also  etritens
üf  dem  anger  bluomen  nude  kle  51, 85 ;  vil  maniger  hande  bluomen
kip  (chid),  MS.  1,  35^ ;  bluomen  kriegent  umb  ir  schtn,  Lohengr.
p.  154 ;  bhwmen  laehent  durch  daz  gras,  der  kurzer,  dirre  teuger
was,  Dietr.  drach.  1067;  conf.  El.  sehr.  2,  157.  They  have  their
rules,  Altd.  w.  1,  their  precedences,  their  meanings  and  language,
conf.  the  Flower-games  (Suppl,  to  909). Tree- worship  was


TREES.  1479

highly  developed  among  the  Indiana  and  Greeks.  The  Hindus
with  elaborate  ceremonies  many  trees  to  one  another^  esp.  the
mango  and  tamarind^  shmbs  like  the  rose  and  jessamine^  even
tanks  and  stones^  Sleeman's  Bambles  and  Becoll.  [Horace :  vitem
viduas  dacit  ad  arbores].  Woycicki,  Germ.  ed.  p.  144-6.  For
Greeks^  see  Bötticher.  The  Germans  wake  tree  as  well  as  com^
Zingerle  691 ;  bäamchen^  scJUaf  nicht,  fraa  Holle  kommt  .  .  .
bäamchen^  waeh  auf,  neajahr  ist  da^  Somm.  162.  182 ;  the  forest
sleeps  at  New-year^  P.  Dieffenb.  Wetteraaer  sag.  p.  274;  conf.
Gerhard's  hymn :  '  Nun  ruhen  alle  wälder.'  Tree-tops  wave,  and
carry  messages,  Wolf's  Ztsohr.  2,  161 ;  '  the  birches  know  it
still/  Geliert  3,  888.  Trees  blossom  at  a  happy  event,  and  wither
when  a  death  is  near,  Sneton.  Gulba  1 ;  and  like  the  Emperors,
the  Greeks  had  family-trees.  Yölsnng's  tree,  bam-stockr,  stood
in  the  hall.  Vols.  cap.  2 ;  conf.  our  '  genealogical  tree/

1.  Tbees.

p.  649.]  Akin  to  nimid  is  v^m^m^^^fanum  ingens,  Yenant.
Fort.  1,  9.  Diefenb.  Celt.  1,  83-4:  silva  quae  vocatnr  nemet,
Glück  p.  17  J  Bpv'vißAero^,  Strabo  567.  GDS.  497.  Zeuss's  Die
Deut.  derives  nemet  fr.  neamch=scoelum,  and  sees  in  it  a  'sub
divo,'  therefore  a  contrast  to  wood.  A  Vocab.  optim.  p.  47*
renders  silva  wilder  wait,  nemns  schooner  wait,  lucns  dicker
wait,  saltns  hoher  wait.

p.  651.]  The  Lapps  shoot  blindfold  at  a  suspended  bearskin,
Klemm  3,  14.  Dyb.  Buna  4,  92.  Th#  Amer.  Indians  hang  up
a  bison-skin  on  a  high  pole  to  the  Lord  of  life,  and  then  cut  it
up  into  small  pieces,  Elemm  2,  164;  likewise  a  deerskin  2,  179.
Skins  of  sacrifices  are  hung  up  by  Tungüses,  Osti&ks,  Bori&ts,
Cherkesses,  3,  106.  125.  114.  4,91.  The  golden  fleece  of  the
ram  was  nailed  to  an  oak,  Preller  2,  211.

p.  651.]  That  is  a  pretty  story  of  the  holy  oak,  whose  falling
leaves  people  do  not  touch.  When  it  is  cut  down  and  burnt,  a
dog  appears  in  the  ashes,  and  makes  the  people  take  all  the  ashes
back  to  where  the  tree  stood,  Firmen.  1,  358.  The  oak  as  a  tree
of  plaints  occurs  in  Megenberg,  Hpt's  Zschr.  4,  255.  Messages
are  delivered  to  a  holy  oak,  Livy  3,  25.  Its  great  age  inspired
respect :  '  so  long  as  oaJc  and  earth  do  stand,'  Weisth.  2,  225 :
'while  the  tree  is  in  the  ground  and  the  acorn  thereon,'  3,  779 ;


1480  TBEBS  AND  ANIMALS.

j'ai  Yu  le  gland  et  la  gaule,  Barzas  br.  1,  28.  B2.  On  oak  and
beech,  see  Dyb.  '45,  78-9 ;  oonf.  rr/v  iraXaiäy  if^vyov,  Soph.  Trach.
171.     '  Af  fornam  ßolli/  ex  antiqua  pjna,  Sn.  ed.  '48^  1,  308 ;  bat

'af  eikirota'  310. The  ash  was  also  holy:   fraxinas  qnem

imperiti  8a>eruin  yocant,  Kemble  5,  103  (yr  854).  It  is  hoatQe  to
snakes,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  251-2.  Pliny  16, 14 ;  oonf.  askr  Yggdra-
sill,  and  note,  p.  796.  There  was  a  spell,  that  gave  a  hcuel-rodt
the  power  to  flog  people  in  their  absence ;  in  the  Atharva-veda  a
branch  of  a^vattha  has  the  power  of  destroying  enemies ;  conf.
the  hazel-wand  as  wishing-rod  (p.  975).  Hasalwara  is  a  proper
name.  Cod.  Laaresh.  809.  Lett,  lasda,  lagsda,  Lith.  lazdaaoory-
lus,  bacnlns;  Lazdonasavellanamm  dens,  god  of  filberts.

p.  658.]  It  is  dangerous  to  build  where  an  etder-tree  has  stood,
Pnetor.  Weltb.  1,  16.  Of  the  ronn,  rowan,  a  sacred  tree,  we
read  in  Dyb.  '44,  9 :  rönnen  sade  till  mannen :  '  hugg  mig  ej,
da  blöder  jag,'  hew  me  not,  or  I  bleed,  Wieselgr.  378 ;  conf.  the
Pruss.  tale  in  Tettau  and  Temme  p.  259,  and  the  Finn,  dopua,
arbor  vitas,  'non  casdenda  in  pratis.'  The  evil  WeckhoUerin
(juniper)  is  mentioned  in  the  Herpin,  Hagen's  Oes.  Ab.  3,  zi.
The  Serv.  for  juniper,  boroyitza,  is  from  bor,  fir,  Lett,  paegle,
because  it  grows  under  the  fir;  and  the  Swed.  tall  (fir,  pine)  ia
not  to  be  hewn  either :  do  so,  and  on  turning  round  you'll  see
your  house  on  fire,  Dyb.  4,  26.  44.  Neither  is  the  hawthorn,
Kilsson  6,  4.

p.  653.]  Have  we  any  Grerm.  stories  of  spirits  that  live  in  the
erle  (alder)  f  Groethe's  UlrUking  seems  taken  from  the  Fr.  aulne^
aune=alnus  and  daemon.  Kalis  passes  out  of  Nala  into  the
Vibhitaka,  which  is  regarded  as  haunted  after  that,  Bopp's  Nalus
p.  153.  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  3,  72.  To  the  fig-tree  the  Indians
present  offerings,  which  are  consumed  by  crows,  sparrows  and
cranes ;  hence  their  name  of  sacrifice-eater.  Like  the  maiden  in
the  fine,  the  gods  are  said  to  live  between  harh  and  tree,  Lasicz
46 ;  conf.  creeping  between  wood  and  bark  (p.  1085).  Iw.  1208 :
sam  daz  holz  unier  der  rinden,  alsam  sit  ir  yerborgen ;  O.  Engl.
Iw.  741  :  als  the  bark  hilles  the  tre;  0.  Fr.  Iw.  p.  146:  li  fuz
qui  est  coverz  de  lescorce  qui  sor  lui  nest  (nait).  A  holy  oak
grows  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  slain  king,  Harrys  1  no.  55.

p.  654.]  In  choosing  a  twig  [for  a  wishing-rod  f  ]  it  is  important,
first,  that  it  be  a  new  shoot,  the  sumer-late  (p.  975),  and  secondly.


ANIMALS.  .    1481

that  it  look  to  the  east :  4  baiStni  vi'Sar  J^eim  er  lüta  auatr  limar,
Saem.  195*.  Flowers  were  invoked :  es  sten  dri  rosen  in  jenem
dal,  die  r&fent,  jangfran^  an,  Uhl.  Yolksl.  87.  0  sanctas  gentes,
qaibos  haeo  nascantar  in  hortis  nitmina  !    Javen.  Sat.  15, 10.

2.  Animals.

p.  655.]  Beasts  are  commonly  reg^ded  as  damb :  stambez
tier,  Iw.  7767,  stomme  bdste.  Lane.  18849.  82919,  daz  nn-
sprechende  vihe,  Wamnng  2704;  conf.  mata  animalia,  Dan.
nmalende  beest,  ON.  öm&la ;  '  der  lewe  zeict  im  nnsprechenden
gmoz,'  Iw.  3870.  They  are  ignorant :  tier  vil  nngewizzen,  Er.
5843.  Yet  they  not  only  show  sympathy,  like  stones  and  plants
(Snppl.  to  646-7),  bat  in  argent  cases  they,  like  damb  children,
find  their  tongpies ;  witness  Balaam's  ass,  and  :  armentaqae  Talgo
ansa  loqni,  Claadian  in  Eatrop.  2,  43 ;  attonito  pecudes  pastore
locatos  1,  3.  Oxen  talk,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  no.  255.  Nork  12,  377 ;
ox  and  ass  converse  in  the  Bret.  Tolksm.  87-8,  bat  only  for  an
hoar  once  a  year,  between  11  and  12  on  Christmas  night,  N.
Preoss.  proT.  bl.  5,  468.  Bosqaet  p.  221.  Beasts  can  see  spirits :
Balaam's  ass  saw  the  angel  with  the  sword,  Namb.  22,  23 — ^33 ;
the  dogs  see  the  goddess,  horses  and  hoands  are  ghost-seers
(p.  667),  Panz.  Beitr.  1|  118;  nay  Athenadas  3,  454  says  all  birds
were  men  once.

p.  656.]  Conf.  Ferd.  Wachter's  art.  Pfssdi  in  the  Halle
EncycL,  and  the  beaatifal  Serv.  wedding-song  (Yak,  ed.  nov.  15,
no.  23.  Wesely  p.  55).  Sleipnir  is  the  son  of  Loki,  a  god,  and
SvaiSilfiuri ;  from  him  is  descended  SigorS's  Grani,  Vols.  c.  13,
and  Grani  has  'mans  vid,'  Far.  qvad.  156.  A  sagacions  trnsty
steed  occars  in  Walach.  march,  no.  17,  one  that  gives  advice  in
Sv.  sag.  1,  164;  and  in  German,  still  more  in  Hangarian  fairy-
tales we  have  wise,  helpfal,  talking  horses,  Ungr.  tatos  s.  Ispolyi
(conf.  p.  392).  Skinfaxi  is  a  cow's  name  in  a  Norweg.  tale,  Asb.
Huldr.  1,  202.

p.  658.]  N6tt  rides  on  Erimfaxi,  Dagr  on  Skinfaxi.  The
Indians  thonght  early  hair  on  a  horse  a  lacky  sign,  Bopp's  Gl.
S4*.  The  horse  offered  np  by  kings  at  the  aSvamfidha  mast  be
wkiie.  To  ride  a  white  horse  is  a  privilege  of  gods,  kings  and
heroes,  Pind.  Pyth.  4,  117  :  'K€ViCiinroiy  iraripmv.  A  stallion  with
three  white  feet  and  two  glass  eyes  is  in  Weisth.  2,  618.


1482  TBEBS  AND  ANIMALS.

p.  658  n.]  Helbl.  15^  293  :  ein  hengest  der  noch  nie  gras  an
fulzande  en-beiz.  A  Fülizan  in  Ring  49^  88.  49^,  81 .  The  Serv^.
for  falizant  is  xdrebetiak^  foal'a  (zub  underst.).  A  horse  keeps
his  foal-teeth  till  his  third  year^  then  cnts  his  horse-teeth^
dentes  eqoini^  qaos  nonnisi  trimis  caballis  natura  concedit^  Pertz
8^  214;  jouenes  polains,  qaatre  dens  ot  jet^s,  Ogier  2412;  dentes
eqni,  qui  primi  cadant,  alligati  facilem  dentionem  praestant^
Forcell.  sub.  v.  dentio.

Collo  igitnr  moUi  dentes  nectentar  eqnini,

qai  primi  faerint  puUo  crescente  cadaci.   Serenas  sam.  1040.

The  same  of  a  child's  teeth :  pueri  qai  primus  ceciderit  dens^  at
terram  non  attingat^  inclusus  in  armillam  et  assidue  in  brachio
habitus,  Pliny  28,  4.  GDS.  154.

■p.  659.]  To  Swed.  gnägya  corresp.  ON.  gneggja,  Saem.  144»,
AS.  hnägan,  neigh.  The  Dan.  vrindske  is  our  brenschen,  wren-
sehen,  frenschen ;  conf.  wrene  hengst.  Lex  Sal.  p.  xxviii.  Ssk.
yrinh,  barrire,  Bopp  32^.  Norw.  Dan.  humra,  a  low  humming
neigh.  In  Lanz.  474 :  ez  begunde  stn  ros  weien,  tr&sen  nnde
schreien ;  in  Garg.  240^ :  rihelen  a.  hinnewihelen,  77^  :  hinne-
wiheln.  Is  xvihelen  akin  to  Proy.  eyelhier,  Ferabr.  8613,  and  the
horse's  name  Valentin,  Ital.  Vegliantino  ?  In  Gudr.  1395 :  '  man
hörte  ein  ros  ergrinen '  when  the  battle  began.  Bellona  spuman-
tium  ad  bella  equorum  hinnitu  aures  arrigens,  Pertz  2,  169.

p.  660.]  Vedrebbe  un  teschio  d*  aaino  in  su  un  palo,  il
quale  quando  col  muso  volto  vedesse  verso  Firenze,  Decam.  7,  1.
Bemember  too  the  gyrating  eagle  on  a  roof  (p.  633-4),  and  the
dove  over  a  grave  (p.  1134-5  n.).

p.  660.]  As  to  horses'  heads  on  gables,  see  MüUenh.  p.  239.
Panz.  Beitr.  2,  180.  448-9;  they  protect  the  rafters  from  wind
and  weather.  Lith.  zirges,  roof-rider,  from  zirgas,  horse,  Nesselm.
549 ;  also  ragai,  antlers,  426 ;  conf.  capreoU,  tigna  ad  firmandum,
and  AS.  Heort,  Heorot,  name  of  the  house  in  Beowulf.

p.  664.]  The  Bori&ts  dedicate  to  the  herdsmen's  god  Sul-
bundu  a  horse,  on  which  he  rides  at  night,  and  which  they  find
all  in  a  sweat  in  the  morning,  Elemm  3,  115.  The  horses  ridden
by  spirits  or  night-wives  have  stirrup,  cord  and  wool  in  their
sides,  and  are  covered  with  drops  of  wax,  Eaisersb.  Om.  42*.  43*.
Kalmuks  also  consecrate  a  horse  to  the  god,  and  let  it  ran  loose.


ANIMALS.  1483

Ledebonr  2,  49.  Horses  scrape  np  gold^  like  that  of  Bammels-
berg,  or  a  fountain,  like  Pegasus;  conf.  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  38-9.
163.  186.  201.  The  hoof-prints  of  a  god's  horse  in  stone  were
believed  in  by  the  Bomans :  Ergo  et  illad  in  silice,  quod  hodie
apparet  apnd  Begillum,  tanqnam  yestigiam  nngalae  Castoris  eqai
esse  credis,  Cic.  de  Nat.  D.  3, 5.  A  sacred  white  horse  walks  on
water  without  wetting  his  feet,  Polier  2,  618.

p.  664.]  Foremost  of  yictims  stands  aiva,  a  horse-sacrifice  is
aivamedhaf  Bohtling,  1,  520-4.  The  significance  of  a  horse's
head  appears  in  many  other  customs  I  it  is  played  upon  (pp.  849.
1050-71),  thrown  into  the  Midsum.  fire  (p.  618),  stuck  on  a  pole
or  tied  on  a  person  at  Christmas,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  472-4 ;  in
fairytales  it  works  miracles,  Müllenh.  p.  422,  ofben  serves  as  a
bridge  34.  146.  544,  is  nailed  up  under  the  town-gate  (Falada's),
and  wooden  ones  are  set  on  gables  (p.  660).   GDS.  151.

p.  665.]  Sacred  ooien  of  Artemis  are  mentioned  in  Plutarch's
Lucullus  p.  m.  606.  H&rekr  keeps  a  blotnaut  in  the  forest,
Fomm.  sog.  3,  132.  On  the  bull's  head  in  the  scutcheon  of
Mecklenbg,  see  Lisch,  Meckl.  jrb.  10,  15  seq.

p.  666.]  Oxen  dig  up  a  hurricane  with  tiieir  horns.  A  bull-
calf  is  reared  to  fight  the  dragon,  DS.  142,  Müllenh.  p.  238.
Thiele  1,  125.  Nandini  is  of  all  kine  the  best :  he  that  drinketh
of  her  milk  remaineth  young  10,000  years,  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  3,
99.  100.  '  The  bUick  cow  crushes  him,  has  trodden  him '  means
'  he  is  weighed  down  by  want  and  care : '  so  trat  ihn  auch  die
schwarze  kuh,  Ambraser  lieder  147;  stör  blaa  studj  Norske  ev.  1,
111;  conf.  Hungar.  'has  not  yet  trod  the  black  cow's  heel,'
Wolf's  Ztschr.  1,  271-2.  Beside  the  cow's  name  Auffhumla,  we
have  designations  of  oxen,  as  freyr,  iormunrekr,  reginn,  Sn.  221*
(ed.  Hafn.  587).

p.  666.]  A  most  ancient  and  fierce  göltr,  worshipped  by  the
people,  Fomm.  8.  4,  57-8;  conf.  eburSrung  (p., 727).  Wacker-
nagel in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  280  puts  a  different  interpret,  on  the
Terses  preserred  by  Notker;  but  conf.  the  boar  of  the  Swed.
folktale,  that  goes  about  gfrunting  with  a  knife  in  his  back  (Hpt
4,506-7),  and  the  Dan.  legend  of  Ltmfiorden  (Thiele  1,  131) :  A
sorceress  gave  birth  to  a  pig,  and  he  grew  so  big  that  his  bristles
Btood  up  above  the  foresUirees  (Notk.,  bürste  eben-h6  forste),  and
he  rooted  up  the  earth  so  deep  that  the  sea  flowed  in  to  fill  the


1484  TBBSS  AKD  AKIMALS.

dike;  conf.  Bwine-dike  (p.  1023).  A  rooting  black  hog  foretells
the  fall  of  the  city,  Müllenh.  p.  105 ;  a  Malb.  gloes  calls  the  boar
diramni,  earth-ploagher,  Leo  1,  75.  ODS.  p.  57.  With  Ovid's
descr.  of  a  boar^  Met.  8,  284  seq.,  conf.  Alb.  ▼•  Halberstadt
p.  269,  where  the  tosks  are  an  ein  lane  (Notk.,  senb  sine  saelif-
elnige),  which  is  not  in  Ovid;  'dente  minaz'  we  find  in  Badl.
16,  90.  Yishnn  in  one  incarnation  appears  on  the  sea  as  a  boar.
A  iohüe  go(U  is  reckoned  wholesome  in  a  horse's  stable,  Leopr.
226.

p.  667.]  The  dog  is  named  among  sacrificial  beasts  (pp.  48.
53),  Euhn's  Westph.  sag.  2,  138 :  he  belongs  to  Hecate,  Elan-
sen's  Mn.  1137.  The  dog  knows  Odyssens  in  his  disguise;
bitches  can  scent  a  Faunus :  '  ab  ea  cane  qnae  femina  sit  ex
Primipara  genita  Fannos  cemi/  Pliny  8,  40,  62;  only  a  dog
with  four  eyes  (nellisilm),  i.e.  with  spots  over  his  eyes,  can  see  a
devil,  Esta.  yerh.  2,  90.  A  dog  will  bark  before  a  haonted  rock,
Dyb.  4,  25.  Dogs  go  mad  if  yon  give  them  the  bones  of  the
Easter  lamb,  Eeisersb.  Om.  52^.  Peter's  dog  appears  in  the
legend  of  Simon  and  Peter,  AS.  homil.  p.  372-4.     Pass.  H.  175.

p.  669.]  A  name  similar  to  Velrlidi  is  SamarlilSi,  Fomm.  s.  3,
205 ;  conf.  Gramm.  2,  505.  Other  poetic  names  for  the  bear  in
Sn.  175.  221,  e.g.  iorekr,  eqnos  fugans.  To  Samoyeds  and  Ostiaks
the  bear  is  a  god,  Castr6n  235.  342 ;  the  Finn,  ohio  is  bom  in
heaven,  and  brought  to  earth  in  a  golden  cradle ;  '  to  climb  on
the  bear's  shoulders'  means  to  go  to  heaven;  his  foam  has  virtue,
and  should  be  taken  up,  Kalev.  13,  236.  254.  As  OSinn  has  two
wolves,  the  Finn.  Pahonev  has  great  bloodhounds  in  his  service,
Salmel.  1,  193.  It  is  believed  in  Scotland  that  deer  can  see
spirits,  Arvids.  Ossian  1,  238.  Felts  aurea  pro  deo  colitnr,  Pliny
4,  29,  35;  cats  are  poisonous,  ace.  to  Berth,  of  Begensb.  303;
Unander  connects  fres  with  our  viel-frass,  glutton.  A  story  in
Klemm  2,  159  makes  out  that  the  house-building  beaver  was
once  man.

p.  670.]  A  bird  demands  that  men  shall  sacrifice  to  him  (p.
672) ;  conf.  the  Lettish  bird-cultns  (p.  77),  Giesebr.  Bait.  stud.
12,  128.  139.  The  '  servitium  consuetum  in  blado  et  volatilibus,'
Oh.  a.  1311.  MB.  30^  61  need  not  refer  to  sacrifice ;  it  ipay  be  a
mere  tribute  in  com  and  poultry.  An  angel  is  sent  in  the  shape
of  a  bird,  see  Gbdrun  and  Sv.  vis.  1,  232.4-6.    As  wind  is  repres.


ANIMALS,  1485

ander  the  form  of  an  eagle,  so  the  aar  makes  air  and  shade  (p.
1138),  and  the  cock  perhaps  weather,  conf.  the  weathercock.

p.  671.]  To  the  Dan.  metaphor  corresp.  the  Low  Germ,  'de
raude  han  kreide  ut  den  dack/  Firmen.  1,292^.  Cockcrow  announces
day  :  cTrei  S'  äKi/cT<ap  ^fiipav  iadXTria-e,  Lacian's  Ocypas  114.  A
set  phrase  in  fairytales^is  :  ''Ion  gal  cant6,  e  fought  jhour/  Diet,
langued.  224;  'cokkes  crewe  ande  hit  was  daie/  Sevin  sages  2536;
thaz  huan  gikandit  dages  kunft!,  0.  iv.  18^  34  ;  do  kr&t  der  han,
ez  was  tac,  Altsw.  67,  3 ;  skal  ek  fyrivestan  vindhialms  br&ar
äSr  »algoftiir  sigrßioff  veJci,  Sadm.  166.     It  scares  away  spirits :

Ferant  vagantes  daemonas

laetos  tenebris  noctiam

gallo  canente  extern  tos

sparsim  timere  et  cedere.     Prndentii  Hym.  ad  galli  cantam  10.

A  red  and  a  grey  cock  crow  to  the  spirit,  Minstr.  3,  48,  also  a
white  and  a  grey,  2,  468.  A  black  hen  is  sacrificed  to  the  hill-
mannikins  (p.  1010).  A  black  cock  that  was  bom  lame  takes  the
.«^pell  off  an  enchanted  castle,  MüUenh.  p.  351.  Out  of  a  cock's
egg  is  hatched  a  dragon,  Leopr.  78.  Of  the  longest  iail-feathers
of  a  cock  pall  oat  the  right  one,  and  you'll  open  any  lock  that  you
teach  with  it,  walk  invisible,  and  see  everything,  Luciani  Somn.
28-9.  A  cock  with  ißhite  feathers  is  cat  up,  and  carried  roand
the  vineyard  against  the  wind.  Paus.  ii.  34,  3.     Sacred  cocks  in

Athen.  3,  445. The  cock  on  the  steeple  was  already  interpr.

by  the  Mystics  1,  199  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  Arabic  it  is  called
abol-yaks&n,  father  of  watchfulness.  Fel.  Faber  in  Evagat.  2,  219
thinks :  '  Christiani  cnicem  cum  gallo  ex  institatione  prima  habent
ia  culminibus  soarum  ecclesiarum ' ;  while  the  Saracens  have
'  lanam  comutam  vel  supinam,  quia  gallus  erecto  collo  et  cauda
stans  apeciem  habet  supinae  lanae.'

p.  672.]  To  Osti&ks  the  eagle  is  holy.  Klemm  3,  122 ;  to
Indians  Garuda  is  king  of  birds,  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  3,  137  ;  aquila,

angla= Jovis  ministra,  Grotet  Inscr.  Umbr.  6,  8. The  hawk

was  sacred  to  Apollo,  Schwartz  p.  16-7.  Od.  15,  526:  tclptco^,
asn.  Upa(,  and  the  Egyptians  esteemed  it  a  holy  bird,  GDS.

51.     On  sparrowhawk  and  kestrel  see  Suppl.  to  675. Like

Hugifin  and  Ifutimn,  the  AS.  hyge  and  myne  habitually  go  to-
gether, Pref.  to  Andr.  xxxix.    Ravens  follow  the  hero :  '  Haraldi

TOL.  IV.  p


1486  TBEBS  AND  ANIMALS.

▼er  fylgBum  stz  or  eggi  komun/  Lasebog  112*;  two  ravens  are
gaardian  spirits«  Geser  Khftn  278.  The  raven,  like  the  eagle,  is
displayed  on  flags  (p.  1112) ;  he  is  to  the  eagle  as  the  wolf  to  the
bear  (or  lion).     More  about  the  raven  in  Sohwartz  p.  42-3.

p.  672.]  The  swallow,  OHG.  sualawi,  AS.  swealewe,  ON.
svala,  Dan.  svale,  Lapp,  svalfo.  Goth,  ^valvo  ?  hrazda  ?  Dae.
crusta,  Lith.  kregzde,  Gr.  ;^eX(S(6if,  Lat.  himndo  for  x«pA&»y,
ypiitovy  Wallach,  rendurea,  Alban.  delendnse.  Lett,  besdeliga.
Slav,  lastovice,  vlastovice,  Serv.  lasta,  lastavitza,  Buss,  l&stochka.
Finn,  pääsky.  Est.  päästlenne.  Hung,  fetske.  The  swallow,  w;
^A0f)va/a,  is  the  first  to  pluck  a  borrowed  plume  out  of  the  tcoXow
(daw),  Babr.  72,  16;  in  prose  however  (Cor.  188)  it  is  the  owl
{y\av^.  Mary's  needlewoman,  who  stole  the  ball  of  thread,  was
turned  into  a  swallow,  on  which  the  white  spot  shows  the  ball,
Wieselgr.  478.  Kuun,  like  Procne,  is  changed  into  a  '  swallow '
ace.  to  one  reading,  though  the  usual  reading  is  '  hnot,'  nut.  The
swallow's  young  are  born  blind,  Dyb.  '45,  67;  '  if  one  of  their
chicks  grows  blind,  they  fetch  a  herb,  lay  it  on,  and  restore  the
sight ;  hence  the  herb's  name  of  chelidonium,'  celandine,  Dioscor.
2,  211  ;  and  Megenb.  says  the  same  about  schell  würz  (Suppl.  to
1194).

p.  672.]  The  swan,  OHG.  alpiz,  MHG.  elbez,  AS.  ylfet,  SI.
labud,  lebedi ;  Gael,  eala,  ealadh,  Ir.  ala,  eala,  Wei.  alarch,  eleirch.
'Ulfa  yjtr  mer  )>6tti  illr  vera  hi&  söngvi  svana/  Sn.  27;  ylfete
song,  Cod.  Exon.  807, 6 ;  see  p.  436  and  Schwartz  p.  43-4-6.  The
Finns  call  their  youtsen  a  holy  bird,  pyha  linu,  Kalev.  8,  73.

p.  673.]  The  stork  is  called  odoboro  in  Slettst.  Gl.  36,  33 ;
otfer,  öidifer,  Altswert  71.  In  Lower  Germany  :  Adebar  langbdn,
Mlebät  langbdn,  knepper  (rattler)  langbfin;  in  Groningen  aiber,
eiber ;  in  Gelders  uiver,  heiluiver,  also  heilebaot,  cUbaor,  Simrock
no.  335-6  ;  heilebate,  Hor.  Belg.  7,  27*;  '  to  call  the  stork  heilbott
and  otterwehr/  Froschmeus.  Ji  vii^.  Can  we  trace  it  to  a  Goth,
addja-baira,  egg-bearer,  or  addjd-baura,  egg-bom  ?     EH.  sehr.  3,

147.  164.     Outzen  pp.  1.  2  says,  adebar= spring's  herald The

Esth.  for  stork  is  tone  kurg,  Finn,  nälkäkurki,  hunger-heron  T
Lith.  gandras ;  Lett,  swehts  putns,  holy  bird,  and  melnsprahklis,
black  rump;  Pol.  bocian  and  Boh.  bocan  for  the  black  stork,  Pol.
czapla  and  Boh.  cap  for  the  white;  this  last  is  also  Boh.  'bohdal,'
God-given,  dieudonn^,  Morav.  'bogdal,  bokdal';  conf.  ewreßi-


ANIMALS.  1487

ararov  ^Siov,  ^sop.  Far.  76.  Babr.  13,  7;  candidae  aves,  Joru.
c.  42.     The  Slavic  has  alao  the  congener  of  oar  stork  in  str'k,

Miklos.  p.  87,  Rnss.  sterkh,  Serv.  Shtrk. A  stork  foretells  the

downfall  of  a  city,  Jom«  c.  42.  Procop.  1,  330;  another  saves
his  father,  Babr.  13,  8.  Storks  are  men,  says  the  Spinrocken-
evang.  Samst.  16.  In  striking  harmony  with  Wolfram's  ealogyi
the  stork  in  Babr.  13,  5  says:  oi  tnropov  Kara^Odpt^,

p.  675.]  Ovid  too  has  a  statue  '  gerens  in  vertice  Picum/  Met.
14,  314;  on  Picus,  see  Klausen  844-5.  1141.  Both  picus  and
pica  seem  akin  to  iro^tcCXo^,  variegated;  or  picas  and  s-pecht,
pecker,  go  together.  The  Oreek  for  woodpecker  is  TreXc/ca?,  fr.
viXeicav,  to  hack,  iriXeKv^,  hatchet;  Staid.  1,263  has  tann-bicker,
=  picas  martins;  Lith.  volangS,  wood-hacker,  is  the  greenpecker
LitLgenys,  Serv.  zhunia,  are  also  names  of  the  woodpecker;  Lett,
dsennis,  dsilna,  is  the  bee-eater.  The  Russ.  diatel,  PoL  dzi^ciol.
Boh.  datel  (woodp.)  seems  conn,  with  dzi6ciQ,  ditiik,  d6ti  (child),
perhaps  because  he  was  considered  a  foster-father,  as  Picas  was
to  Romulus.  The  Swiss  merzafüUi  is  in  the  Hennebg  dialect
shortened  into  a  simple  merz :  '  der  merz  hackt  dich,'  Hpt's
Ztschr.  3,  360.  Beside  kliktati,  used  of  the  woodpecker's  whine
(and  of  the  vila's  cry,  p.  436),  we  have  totrkati  =  pulsare  in  arbore,
at  picus  facit.  Lith.  ulbauya  volunge,  the  woodp.  whimpers,  wails.
Ukko  created  the  konkelo  (greenp.),  Peterson  12.  Renvall  snb  v.
The  pecker  kind  are  treasure-birds  (p.  973).  Kuhn  thinks  the
woodp.  is  conn,  with  fire.  What  is  the  meaning  of  '  h&n  ich  in
den  speht  erschozzen  f  *  Hpt  6,  501.

p.  675.]     The  sparrowhawk,  Boh«  krahng,  krahulec^  krahuljk  s

faico  nisus,  Pol.  krogulec,  Linde  1134^;  Hung,  karoly,  karvoly.

The  OHG.  for  kestrel^  wannoweho,  wannunwechel,  Oraff  1^  643,

wannevsechel  in  Ziemann,  sounds  remarkably  like  the  Lett,  vehia

vannags,  sparrowhawk,  lit.  holy  hawk,  for  Lith.  vanagas  is  hawk,

vanagelis   little    hawk.      Garg.   279^  has  the   exclamation :    ir

yfannenwäher  !    This  is  the  name  they  still  give  in  Swabia  to  a

small  bird  of  prey :  they  hang  little  tubs,  or  baskets  {wannen)

OQtside  their  houses  for  it  to  build  in,  and  think  the  house  is  then

proof  against  lightning.  Mono  7,  429..     Frisch  2,  422  has  wanne-

v^eihe,  accipiter  tinunculus,  and  other  forms.^     Does  our  weihe,

^  Tinnncnlas  is  no  doabt  from  Una,  a  Teasel  very  Bunilar  to  wanne ;  see  Yietor
Hehn's  "  Migrations  of  Plants  and  Animals,*^  Engl,  tiansl.  (Swan  Sonnenschein)
p.  487.— Tbihbi..  ;-


1488  TBBBS  AND  ANIMALS.

wio^  wtho  (milvns^  kite)  mean  sacred  bird  ?  conf.  wt^o :  '  mÜTOs
laedere  capitale  est'  in  England^  says  Leo  v.  Roamital  40.
GDS.  50.

The  owl  prophesies  (p.  1135).  The  Greeks  held  it  sacred,  as
bird  of  night,  bird  of  victory,  bird  of  Athena.  The  Amer.
Indians  worshipped  it.  Klemm  2,  164;  and  conf.  the  Esth.
tharapila,  horned  owl  (p.  77).  Ranes  were  marked  '&  nefi  ufflo/
as  well  as  '  &  arnar  nefi,'  Sann.  196*.  On  strix,  <rrpijf,  see  pp.
1039  n.  1045.

p.  678.]  The  cuehoa,  by  calling  ont  his  name,  awakens  joy,
hence  his  Finn,  name  of  Uo-haki,  joy-cnckoo,  Kalev.  14,  226,
mnnaiset  käkeni  5,  196-7  (like  ^yreAAröate-gok)  ;  yet  also  »orrow^
cuckoo,  Castro  292 ;  six  gold  cnokoos,  knns  on  knllaista  käkeä,
Kalev.  14,  31 ;  the  snn  like  a  golden  cnckoo  climbs  the  sky  27,
265.  Lapp,  jäkä,  Syrian,  kök.  Ssk.  k6kila.  Pott's  Zahi-metlu
229.  Mark  onr  exclamation  *  heida-gagnk  \ '  Schulmeisters-
wahl 50^1.  83.  OHG./ok,  CQckoo,  Graff  3,  517,  has  never  been
explained.  On  the  cnckoo,  see  Beusch  in  N.Prenss.  prov.  bl.  5,
321 — 343;  on  the  gncker,  peeper,  Leopr.  p.  79.  Shaksp.,  at
the  end  of  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  quotes  a  verse  on  Spring  and  the
^cnckoo,  and  one  on  Winter  and  the  owl.  The  cnckoo  is  summer's
'warden :  swylce  ge6c  monaS geomran  reorde  singe'S  sumers  weard,
sorge  beodeff.  He  prophesies  to  unplighted  maidens,  conf.  Rana
'44,  p.  10;  'was  der  kukuk  hiure  sane,'  this  year  sang,  Mone's
Schausp.  131,

p.  680.]  Zitefogel,  a  prop,  name,  Mone's  Anz.  3,  13.  The
peasant's  time-bird  is  the  raven,  Kalenb.  p.  m.  284-7.  In  Wilt-
shire the  people  sing :  '  The  cuckoo's  a  fine  bird.  She  sings  as
she  flies.  She  brings  us  good  tidings,  And  tells  us  no  lies.  She
sucks  the  small  birds'  eggs  To  make  her  voice  clear,  And  the  more
she  sings  *'  cuckoo,"  The  summer  draws  near.  The  cuckoo  comes
in  April,  Stays  the  month  of  May,  Sings  a  song  at  Midsummer,

And  then  a  goes  away  J An  Ukrainian  song  of  the  cuckoo  in

Bodenstedt  57.  Ace.  to  a  Germ,  song  of  the  16th  cent.,  the
cnckoo  'hat  sich  zu  tod  gefallen  von  einer  hohen  weide  (willow).'
The  New  Zealanders,  like  the  Poles,  esteemed  the  cuckoo  a  god
(catua),  Klemm4,  371.

p.  681.]  On  the  sceptres  of  Egyptian  gods  sits  the  kuku^
pha's  head,  Bunsen  1,  435;  conf.  the  figure  at  315.  691  with  the


ANIMALS.  1489

kakapha-soeptre,  Pindar's  Pyth.  1,  10  apä  a-Katrrtp  Jio^,  and
the  variant  in  Edda,  Hafn.  2,  202  Gikngnis  ugla.  The  plates  to
Pertz  Scr.  8  show  a  bird  perched  on  the  soeptres  of  the  Germ,
kings  Henry  IV.  and  V,  (conf.  the  eagle  on  Arthur's  sceptre,
Lane.  30791).  The  cackoo  is  the  bird  of  wedlock  and  fecundity,
that  is  why  he  lias  ten  wives  given  him,  Firmen.  2,  243*.  For
Notker's  'ruoh,'  Ps.  67,  11,  both  Graff  4,  1150  and  Hattemer

write  kouk. A  Oauchs-perTc  occurs  in  Tirol,  urbar.  August,  a.

1316.  MB.  34^  360 ;  Qögeleberg^  Pan«.  Beitr.  1,  28 ;  Ooggles-
herg,  Steub's  Rhät.  47;  the  Swiss  name  Gaggenbiihler  pre-
supposes a  GhiggeU'huhel  (-hill)  ;  Oiegenberg  in  Up.  Bhön  and
near  Hersfeld,  Hess.  Ztschr.  1,  245 ;  conf«  Tumbo  saz  in  berge
=  StapidnB  in  monte  sedebat  =  giant.  Henn  von  Narrenberg,
Seb.  Brant  p.  m.  131 ;  an  Affenberg  near  Nürnberg,  Ettn,
Unw.  doct.  698 ;  a  Monlcey^s  mountain  [Jebel  Tsatut,  the  anc.
Abyla]  on  the  African  coast  opp.  Gibraltar.  On  aSenberg,
schalksberg,  see  Kl.  sehr.  2,  147«  G6n  dem  affen-tal  ikzwaten,
Hadamar  444,  4 ;  der  äffen  zit,  Fragm.  14\

p.  682.]  The  cuckoo  is  reckoned  a  miser,  who  when  the  leaves
come  out  in  spring,  dare  not  eat  his  fill,  for  fear  they  should  run
short :  '  sd  der  gouch  daz  6rste  loup  gesiht,  s6  getar  sicVs  gesäten
niht,  er  vürht  ez  im  zerinne,'  Freid.  88,  3 :  more  fully  in  the
Welsche  gast  114*:  conf.  Freid.  Ixxxvii.  In  Ssk.  he  is  called
'abalio  nutritus,' Bopp's  Gl.  209^  Gothl.  gauk-pigä,  en  fagel
som  tros  ligga  ut  gökkens  ägg,  Almqv.  425^.  He  eats  the  hedge«
sparrow's  eggs,  and  puts  his  own  in  her  nest,  Freid.  143,  21«
144, 1 — 10;  this  is  a  fact  of  natural  history,  Döbel  1,  60.  Schu-
bert's Lehrb.  p.  m.  315.  Eckerm.  Gespr.  mit  Goethe  3,  211 — 5.
When  grown  up,  he  is  said  to  devour  his  (foster-)  parents,  ibid.
208,  and  in  winter  to  become  a  bird  of  prey.  He  begins  pretty
early  to  stand  for  the  devil :  '  hvJcuk  hiure  unds  vert  I '  this  year
and  last,  an  old  hand,  Helbl.  4,  800 ;  '  des  wirt  guot  r&t,  'k\ikvLk  I '

8, 1234. Instead  of  the  hoopoo,  the  wryneck  takes  the  place  of

servant  to  the  cuckoo :  Finn,  käen  piika,  cuculi  ancilla,  is  transl.
'jynx  torqnilla'  by  Benvall,  'curruca'  by  Juslen.  The  wryneck
is  said  by  Nemnich  (sub  v.  jynx)  to  come  a  fortnight  earlier  than
the  cuckoo ;  Swed.  gök-tyta,  Wei.  gwas  y  gog,  cuckoo's  hand-
maid. The  bittern  and  the  hoopoo  were  once  cowherds.  Lisch
Meckl.  jrb.  5,  77. The  kibitz,  kywit,  peewit,  which  plays  a


1490  TREES  AND  A27IMALS.

prominent  part  in  the  märchen  of  the  Jnniper-tree^  is  called
girltz  in  Stalder  1,  448:  'in  plover's  reedy  swamp  (giritze-ried)
enchanted  maidens  fly/  Other  tales  of  the  lapwing  in  Nares's
61.  snb.  V.  The  polytrichum  comm.  is  in  Finn,  käen  petkel,
cucali  secaris ;  gaueh-heil  (pimpernel  t),  which  is  not  in  Graff^
and  is  sometimes  called  hnhnerdarm,  morsns  gallinae,  is  in  M.
Nethl.  guyehsUhoyl,  Mone  &,  448.

p.  683.]  The  dove,  a  holy  bird  to  the  Syrians,  was  in  Ssk.
called  kap6ta  and  prttn,  Gr.  wepiarepd,  Lat.  columba  and
palnmba,  Slav,  gölabi,  Lith.  karv^is,  balandis,  conf.  pp.  828.
1134-5  n.  EI.  sehr.  5,  445  seq.  Women  speaking  a  foreign
tongne  were  called  doves^  says  Herod.  2,  57.  Song-birds  seem
to  have  been  called  walt-singer,  Geo.  5849 ;  their  joy  and  grief
were  allnded  to  (p.  750-4).  The  nightingale  passed  for  a  mes-
senger of  Mary,  Leopr.  79.  *  Some  say  the  lark  and  loathed  toad
change  eyes/  Rom.  and  Jul.  3,  5.  The  un-en,  Lith.  nykszt^lis
(thnmbling  and  wren),  Wei.  dryw  (drnid  and  wren),  is  called
'  petite  poulette  an  bon  Dien,^  Bosqaet  220-1.^  Disturbing  the
redhreasi  brings  lightning  on  the  house  221 ;  she  covers  the  face
of  a  murdered  man  with  leaves.  Hone's  Yrbk.  64 ;  on  the  rec?-
tail,  see  Leopr.  80.  The  mei»lin  (tit)  has  an  angel  to  himself,
Keisersb.  Brosäml.  19*;  hunting  the  baum-meise  is  severely
punished,  Weisth.  1,  465.  The  Finn,  tiainen,  Est.  tihhane,  is
helpful,  and  understands  beer-brewing,  Schiefner^s  Finn,  march.
614.  Kautel  1,  110.  A  legend  of  tbe  white  sparrow  in  Rom-
mel's Hess,  gesch.  4,  710  from  Winkelm.  Chron.  p.  58Ö.  On  the
kingfisher,  see  Gef ken's  Beil.  113.

p.  685.]  Transformation  into  a  snaJce  occurs  in  many  fairy-
tales. The  cast  slough  of  a  snake  is  called  aenectus  serpentis  in
Pliny  and  Marcellus  no.  46  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  134, 150),  agreeing  with
ON.  elli'belgr  from  elU,  eld ;  e.g.  at  kasta  ellibelgnum=svemare.
There  is  a  beautiful  legend  about  the  snake  in  Klemm  2,  1 62-3 ;
it  lives  for  ever,  154.  Its  appearing  is  mysterious,  so  is  its
vanishing,  '  des  slangen  sluf/  Freid.  128,  7.  In  Ssk.  it  is  called
the  creeper,  wriggler,  breast- walker,  uraga,  Bopp  52^;  conf.
Genesis  3,  14.     The  Ind.  serpent- sacrifice  lasts  for  years,  it  com-

>  Why  is  the  wren  called  king  in  the  Gr.  ßoffOUa^Kot,  Lat.  regnlos.  It.  reattino,  Fr.
roitelet,  and  Germ.  Zaunkönig  ?  beoaase  of  his  golden  crest  ?  And  is  saankonig  a
transl.  of  re<at-tino,  the  zaon  (hedge)  being  an  adaptation  by  folk-etym.  of  tinot
(laarastinas)  ?— Tbambl.


AHIlfALS.  1491

pels  all  snakes  to  come  np  and  throw  themselves  into  the  fire,
Holtam.  3,  172-3.  186-8.  In  the  PaHhenon  at  Athens  lived  a
serpent  sacred  to  the  goddess,  and  had  a  honej-cake  offered  to
it  every  day,  Herod.  8,  41.     To  the  Romans  also  the  anguis  was

holy^  Klansen  p.  1014. A  caduoens  with  figures  of  snakes  in

Pliny  29,  54  (12) ;  and  snake- figures  may  be  seen  on  the  Stutt-
gart todtenbäume.  A  serpent  on  a  helmet  was  called  ezidemon,
Beneke  sub  v. ;  'ezidemon  daz  edel  kunder,'  Tit.  3311.  Lohen gn
p.  12,  where  his  friedelinne  (lady-love)  is  also  alluded  to.  The
word  is  traceable  to  agatho-daemon,  the  Egyp.  miraculous  ser-
pent kneph,  Gerhard  in  Acad.  Berl.  '47,  p.  203.  Beside  saribant
and  serpant  we  find  a  sarapandra-test,  serpent's  head,  Farz.  50«
5.  68,  8.  As  Ofnir  and  Svafnir  are  the  names  of  two  snakes,  and
at  the  same  time  by-names  of  OSinn,  so  Hermes  is  closely  allied
to  the  agathodadmon,  Gerh.  as  above  204;  and  divine  heroes,
descended  from  OSinn,  also  inherit  the  '  snake  in  the  eye '  (p.
391).  Serpents  lick  the  ears  of  the  sleeping  Melampus,  and  on
waking  np  he  understands  the  speech  of  birds  as  they  fly  past,
and  ever  after  of  all  beasts  that  foretell  the  future  to  man.
Prophetic  Cassandra  too,  and  her  brother  Helenus,  had  their  ears
licked  clean  by  snakes.

p.  687.]  The  Greeks  called  the  liome-snaJce  oUovpo^  o<^i9,
genius  loci,  Gerh.  in  Acad.  Berl.  H7,  203 ;  the  Albanian  vUtore  is
a  homesprite,  imagined  in  the  form  of  a  little  snake,  Hahnes
Lieder  136 ;  the  Samogitian  giuoitos,  black  snakes,  are  fed  and
worshipped  as  household  gods,  Lasicz  51-5-6.  That  of  milJc
drinking  belongs  also  to  the  snake- stories  in  Yonbun  p.  24.
Bader  nos.  98.  106  (on  the  mocken,  p.  686  n.,  see  Schmeller  2,
549.  Stalder  2,  212.  Dint.  2,  84).  Snakes  had  drink  given
them,  Athen.  4,  364 ;  one  that  sucked  milk  out  of  the  breast,  in
Lucianos  Alex.  7.  With  the  Fomeran.  story  of  a  snake  creeping
into  the  pregnant  woman,  conf.  Vopisci  Aurelian.  c.  4 :  '  pueri
ejus  pelvem  serpentem.  plerumque  ciyixiese,  neque  unquam  occidi
potuisse ;  postremo  ipsam  matrem,  quae  hoc  viderat,  serpentem
qucui  familiärem  occidere  noluiase ' ;  and  Spartiani  Sever.  1 :
'  dormienti  in  stabalo  serpens  caput  cinxit,  et  sine  noxa,  experge-

factis  et  acclamantibus  familiaribus,  abut.' More  tales  about

the  '  schlangen-irclnZi '  in  Yonbun  24-5.  Woeste  50 ;  about  the
king  of  snakes  in  Miillenh.  p.  355.     Panzer  1,  183  ;  the  Ssk.


1492  TBEBS  AND  ANIMALS.

Vdsukis,  rex  aerpentum,  Bopp's  Gl.  158».  Holtzm.  3,  148-5.
196-7.  157.  163.  A  Swed.  story  tells  how  the  ormar  elect  e
king,  Dyb.  '45,  p.  100.  A  serpent-king  has  12  heads;  he  that
hews  them  off,  and  carries  them  about  with  him,  is  everywhere
vicf-arious,  Beusch  no.  74  and  app.  When  an  orm  is  challenged
to  fight,  he  keeps  the  engagement,  Dyb.  '45,  p.  95-6.  An  adder
comes  carrying  a  stone  in  his  mouth,  Gresta  Bom.  ed.  Keller
pp.  68.  152  ;  conf.  snake-stone,  unke-stone  (p.  1219-20).  Under  a
hazel  on  which  mistletoe  grows,  lies  a  snake  with  a  precious
stone  on  his  head  (p.  1207).  The  vouivre  wears  but  one  eye  in
the  middle  of  her  forehead,  and  that  is  a  carbuncle ;  when  she
stops  to  drink  at  a  fountain,  she  lays  it  aside  ;  that's  the  time  to
possess  yourself  of  the  jewel,  and  she  is  blind  ever  after.  The
youivre  flies  through  the  air  like  red-hot  iron,  M6m.  des  antiq.  6,
217;  the  like  in  Bosquet  p.  204-6-9.  'Des  Montags  nach  S.
Peters  tach,  so  aller  wurmichleiche  ze  wazzer  g4t,'  Rec.  of  1286  in
Gemeiner's  Regensb.  chron.  1,  423;  F&fnir  also  skreUf  til  vaiz,
Sn.  138.  Vols.  c.  18.  Snakes  love  to  lie  beside  a  spring,  Aus-
land '57,  p.  832^ ;  but  the  ash-tree  has  a  spite  against  the  snake.
Panzer  1,  251.  351.

p.  688.]  The  serpents  healing  power  is  heard  of  pretty  early :
'  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of
brass,  he  lived/  Numb.  21.  9.  Slaver  from  the  mouths  of  three
colubrae  runs  into  the  healing,  strengthening  dish  that  has  been
cooked,  Saxo  ed.  Müll.  pp.  123.  193  (in  two  different  stories)  :
two  snakes  are  black,  one  white.  Eating  of  the  white  snake
makes  you  know  the  language  of  beasts,  p.  193.  DS.^  no.  132.
KM.«  3,  27  (conf.  p.  983  and  Suppl.  to  689.  690).  On  the  other
hand,  venom  drips  from  the  eitr-orm,  Sasm.  69 ;  snakes  are  made
to  suck  their  poison  in  again  with  their  '  deinen  munden,'  Pass.
310,  20.  A  Celtic  story  of  the  anguinum  (ovum)  made  of  ser-
pent's drivel  is  given  in  Pliny  29,  3,  12.  On  magic  wrought  by
means  of  snakes,  conf.  Spalding,  Abh.  d.  Berl.  acad. ;  on  the
snake  as  a  bridge,  and  the  term  bridge's-tail,  brAarspordr,  see
pp.  978.  732  n.

The  toad  also  (kröte,  Gramm.  3,  364)  is  a  venomous  beast
available  in  magic :  she  carries  a  stone  in  her  head  (p.  1220) ;
she  sits  on  fungus  and  on  mushroom,  hence  the  one  is  called
krötenstul,  toadstool,   Dut.  paddestoel^   LG.  ^addenstolj  and   the


ANIMALS.  149?

other  weiss-krötliTig.  Aastrian  names^  besides  krot^  are  heppinpr^
braiding,  noting,  brotze,  auke,  Höfer  2,  47.  175;  in  Bavaria  the
male  is  braate,  broz,  bratz,  Schm.  I,  274,  the  female  höppin,
heppin,  also  maml  (annty),  and  women  are  called  heppin  in  con-
tempt 2,  221.     Add  wetterkröte,  donnerkröte,  blitzkröte.

p.  689.]  dpdKwviB  fr.  Sipxa,  as  X^i9  fr.  the  lost  Sttto)  :  ^sharp-
sighted  as  a  iindwurm,'  Soester  Daniel  p.  141 ;  Gal.  dearc =lacerta.
Dragons  are  akin  to  snakes,  hence  the  *  maltitudo  serpentam  cum
magno  dracone/  Greg.  Tor.  10,  1 ;  conf.  snake-charming  and  the
old  dragon  in  Lncian's  Fhilops.  c.  12.  Dragons  worshipped  by
the  Esths,  Adam.  Brem.  (Pertz  9,  874);  portrayed  on  bronze
kettles.  Lisch  in  Meckl.  jrb.  7,  35—38,  14,  326—330,  interpr.  by

Giesebercbt,  Bait,  stud.  11,  50-1. A  dragon  is  called  ormr  inn

fräni,  Saem.  173^  189»>;  MHG.  tieveU  bote,  Wigal.  5080,  tieveh
trnt  6448  (in  6453  rather  the  giantess).  The  Ari<-orwi  lives  under
the  roots  of  the  oak,  Dyb.  '45,  p.  78 ;  but  they  like  best  to  lie  on
gold,  which  is  therefore  called  linnar  logt,  Sasm.  181* ;  the  dragon
that  brings  yon  money  behaves  like  a  homesprite  (p.  511  ?  1020).
The  dTAgon^afire-apitting  may  have  arisen  from  confounding  the
kindred  notions  of  fire  and  poison,  MüUenh.  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  7,
428.  A  Welsh  dragon  story  in  Peredor,  Villem.  Oontes  2,  193.
Like  snakes  and  toads,  these  '  worms '  also  carry  stones,  but  in
their  belly,  and  so  many  that  you  could  build  half  a  tower  with
them,  Dietr.  n.  ges.  300.  The  dragon  lives  90  years  in  the
ground,  90  in  the  limetree,  and  90  more  in  the  desert,  Van  den
Bergh  p«  73 ;  these  stages  of  development  wore  evid.  suggested
by  the  changes  of  the  caterpillar  and  butterfly.

p.  690.]  Dragons  are  hated  :  '  leiffari  enn  manni  hverjom  enn
frani  ormr  med  flrora,'  Seem.  85*  with  the  note :.  '  vermes,  in
Speculo  regali,  vocantur  leidendi,  odia,  quasi  res  detestabiles/
Therefore  heroes  make  war  upon  them:  Apis  comes  to  Argos,
and  slays  the  dragon's  hroo^,  M^oh.  Suppl.  262 — 7.  There  are
ways  of  guarding  against  them,  and  of  killing  them  :  bläsvorm  in
Mors  is  a  venom-spitting  worm;  he  can  blow  through  seven
church  walls,  but  not  through  knitted  stockings,  Molb.  Dial.  les.
43.  Again :  '  for  att  en  orm  med  säkerhet  skall  kunna  dödas,
ritas  först  kring  honom  en  ring  med  ärs-gammal  hasseUh^äpp,
innan  ban  släs,'  Bääf.  Coats  of  mail  are  hardened  in  dragon's
blood:  gehert  in  traken  bluote,  Ecke  24;  ganz  al  umbo  den  rant


1494  TRBES  AND  ANIMALS.

schilt  gemachet  von  gold  and  dischenblnot^  Wigam.  2105;  swert
gehert  in  drachenblnot^  Drachenk.  11.  It  is  said  of  Alexander:
'  gebeizet  was  sin  branie  in  eines  wurmes  bluote,  hurnen  was  sin
veste/  Diem.  209.  Massm.  1300  seq.  Another  sword  tempered
in  dragon's  blood,  BY.  1,  265.  SigurBr,  after  eating  FdfnVa
heart,  understood  the  language  of  birds  ;  Gudrun  had  eaten  some
too,  SsBm.  211;  conf.  'quin  et  inesse  serpenti  remedia  malta
creduntnr  ...  at  ppssint  avium  sermones  intelligi/  PIidj
29,  4  (Suppl.  to  688).

p.  691.]  In  Serv.  also  smuk,  serpentis  genus.  Boh.  smykaii,
serpere,  ON.  smiuga;  Syrian,  zmey,  snake,  Gabelentz  p.  8.
Fishes  too  deserve  attention :  Athen.  3,  SO-5-6  speaks  of  a  icph^i
1x00^,  thej  were  beasts  of  Artemis  and  Hecate  3,  194;  conf.
Berhta's  herrings  (p.  273).

p.  692.]  For  chafer  there  is  even  an  Egyp,  dieper;  OHG.
chwat-chever  (dung-beetle),  scarabs»us,  Graff  4,  378,  sun-ckever,
brucus,  N.  104,  34;  Westerw,  mai-AZeb^,  Bavensb.  eckern-
schäfer ;  AS.  cynges  cafertün,  aula  regia,  .fflfr.  HomiL  122.
Keverlinge^hurg  and  Soevet'liyige-hnrg,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  7, 559  ;  '  pre-
dium  chauer^och'  (Idh  ?),  MB.  8,  405.  500  (yr  1160),  'hodie
kefer-Joh'  8,  516,  AS.  ceafor-ledh,  Kemble  nos.  570. 1088.-  Conf.
OHG.  muggi-stat,  Graff  2,  654 ;  brem-garten,  brem-stall,  Schm.
1,  258;   bre-garten  =  kitchen-garden,  says  Höfer  1,  113;    Pre-

garten,  a  place  in  Styria,  Bauch  2,  191. The  other  term  loibel

occurs  in  the  adjs.  wiheUvaly  wibel-var,  pale.  Herb.  6880.  12867,
A  Welsh  gtvibeden,  musca,  gwiblo,  to  fly,  swarm.  Kdv0apo9
Koirpov  a^alpav  iron^tra^,  ^£sop.  Fur.  223.  .^ian.  Hist.  anim.
10,  15.  Arist.  Hist.  anim.  5,  19  (conf.  Luoian  8,  428).  The
Cod.  Exon.  426,  11  has  :  'is  }>83S  gores  sunu  gonge  hrs^dra,  ]K)ne
we  wifel  wordnm  nemnalS ; '  in  the  same  way  bees  are  supposed
to  spring  from  putrefaction  (p.  696),  flies  from  the  devil's  rotting
tongue,  Walach.  march.  285 ;  and  chuleih,  scarabadas,  horse-
beetle,  kielecke  or  stagbeetle  (Schm.  2,  269)  seems  to  have  arisen
out  of  chuo^leih,  and  to  rest  on  a  belief  about  the  beetle's  origin
(from  cow-dung?),  Gramm.  2,  503;  conf.  scin-leih,  monstrnm.

p.  693.]  The  lucanus  cervns  (conf.  H.  MüUer's  Griechenth.
446)  is  in  Finn,  tammihärkä,  oak-ox,  Serv.  yelen,  cervns  volans,
Engl.  «<a^-beetle,  stag-Qj,  Fr.  escarbot,  Swiss  gueger,  cerambyx,
holz-6ocA;,  feuer-fcoci,   Staid.    1,  445;  feuer-käfer  in  the   Harz,


ANIMALS.  1495

where  they  wrap  him  in  moss^  letting  the  horns  stick  ont^  and
strike  at  him  blindfold  one  after  the  other  (as  elsewhere  at  the
cock) ;  whoever  hits  him,  takes  him  home  (and  has  luck,  or  some

honour  by  it  ?). ON.  has  also  torS-yfill,  Droplaug.  saga  p.  10 :

tio  sjfnder  sagas  förlätas  (ten  sids  forgiven)  den  som  vänder  om
en  pa  rygg  liggande  tordyfvel,  Runa  '44,  p.  8 ;  conf.  an  Irish  tale
of  the  da4)l,  Conan  124,  and  Schiefner  on  tarwas  pp.  4.  5.  The
Finn,  turila,  turilas  denotes  a  voracious  insect  that  spoils  fruit
and  grass,  either  melolontha  or  gryllus  migratorius,  says  Benvall;
but  the  same  word  means  giant,  conf.  our  heimo.  Any  one  that
sees  the  wern,  mole-cricket,  shall  get  off  his  horse  to  kill  it,  for
it  nibbles  away  the  roots  of  the  com ;  to  him  that  does  so,  the
farmer  owes  a  loaf  of  bread.  The  AS.  eorS^ceaforas  =^tAXkri,  i.e.
scarabasi  terrestres,  was  doubtless  modelled  on  the  passage  in
Pliny.

p.  693  n.]  Hung,  cserehogdr,  maybug,  lit.  oak-chafer,  oak-
worm;  Pol.  chrab^szcz,  chrz^zcz.  Boh.  magowy  chraust,  Russ.
sipli,  O.  SI.  sipl,  Dobrowsky  Inst.  271.  Frov.  bertals,  bertaus.
Mahn  p.  59.  Finn,  lehtimato,  leaf-worm,  melolontha,  Swed.
löfmatk.  Osnabr.  eckeUiiewe,  Lyra  23,  also  eik-schawe,  Müosterl.
ecker-tiefe,  Ravensb.  eckern-^c/tä/er ;  Mark.  Pom.  zebrehnke;
Swiss  bugareje.  Staid.  1,  239.  Walloon :  bahwe,  abalowe,  biese  a
balowe  =  h&nneton,  fr.  baloier  =  voltiger,  and  bizer,  OHG.pisön;
pisewnrm=  oestrum.     Finn,  urolainen,  a  large  beetle,  iiro9= vir,

heros,  Serv.  tirMÄ=picus,  heros. Chafers  carry  a  mirror  about

them  :  children  in  the  Wetterau  hold  a  cockchafer  in  their  hands,
and  sing,  'Mennche,  weibche,  weis'  mer  emol  (do  show  me)  dein
spigelche  1 '  the  outspread  wings  f  The  elben  are  chafers,  chry-
salids,  butterflies^  spirits  and  holden  (conf.  pp.  1073-4.  1155-6).
The  heboid  sits  in  the  box  in  the  shape  of  a  beetle  or  bumblebee,
Sommer  33-4.  171-2.  Panzer  2,  173.  Rochholz  2,  238-9;  the
Dan.  skrukke-trold  is  an  insect  too^  but  a  wingless  one.  The
Pentam.  8,  5  tells  of  a  fay  that  plays  with  a  sweetly  humming
chafer  (scarafone).

p.  695.]  The  coccinella,  Ind.  Indragopa,  Indra's  cowherd,
Bopp  40*.  Schiefn.  on  tarwas  p.  5;  Finn,  lenninkäinen,  y^hich
sometimes  means  the  beautiful  hero  Lemmenkäinen ;  Engl.
Ood^lmighty'8  cou;,  Barnes;  »iinnenkind,  sun's  child,  Schütze  4,
225  ;  Austr.  sonnenkaWel,  sun^s  calf.     Goldwivil,  cicindela.  Dint.


1496  TREES  AND  ANIMALS.

2,  94.  Boh.  slunicko  (little  sud)^  shmecnice,  coccinella^  also  linha,
Pol.  stonka.  Senr.  babe  aud  Tnara,  Mary ;  the  girls  set  it  on
their  finger,  and  repeat  a  rhyme,  Yak  p.  9^.  Lith.  dewo  yauiis,
God's  ox,  God's  birdie ;  so  the  glowworm  is  with  ns  liebe  GoU$
lammje,  Alb.  Schott,  the  dragonfly  miser  lieben  fraueti  rossel,
horsie,  Oadespferd,  God's  horse,  Schütze  2,  6,  but  also  DeoiVs
horse,  needle  and  hairpin  <p.  1029),  Staid.  1,  276,  and  eye-shoots
1,  119 ;  Finn,  tuonen  koira,  death's  dog.  Boh.  had^  hlava,  snake's

head. The  butterfly,  Gael,   eunan-de,  bird  of  God,  Ir,  Gael.

dealan-de  and  Gael,  ieine^de,  both  fire  of  God,  Ir.  anaman^e,
anima  Dei;  conf.  Swed.  käring-själ;  old  woman's. soul,  Ihre  2,
529  {see  p«  829).  Arm.  balafen,  inalafen,  vieloen;  baiafennik
doue,  petit  papillon  de  Diea.  A  butterfly-song  of  Hanoverian
Wendland  soands  like  the  ladybird-song :  *  Bottervägel,  sott  di,
Yäder  unn  moder  röpt  di,  Mul  unn  nese  blött  di ',  thy  mouth
and  nose  are  bleeding ;  otherwise  '  Midsehonke,  midschonke,  sott
di,'  etc.  A  children's  song  at  Liiben  calls  the  butterfly  ketelboter,
kettle-mender,  Firmen.  3, 4S0.

p.  697.]  Bees  live  among  men,  and  the  joys-  and  sorrows  of
the  family  are  duly  reported  to  the  beehives.  Bosquet  217,  esp.
the  death  of  the  master,  '  if  you  wouldn't  have  all  your  hives
waste  away  within  year  and  day '  they  say  in  Münsterland.  The
same  thing  in  Wilts,  Berks  and  Surrey.  Bees  foretell  the  future
to  man  (p.  1136)  :  a  bumblebee  in  the  box  gives  notice  of  spring,
Panzer  2,  173.  '  Apes  fartivae '  do  not  thrive,  Pliny  19,  7,  37.
Bosq.  217.  Their  home  is  carefully  prepared:  'istud  vas  lacte
et  bona  herba  linivimus,'  Acta  Bened.  sec.  2,  p.  133.     They  have

come  down  from  the  golden  age,  Leo's  Malb.  gl.  1, 119. Ssk.

names  for  the  bee  are  madhu-pa,  madhu-kara,  madhu^lih,  honey-
drinker,  -maker,  -licker;  Abrah«  a  S.  Clara  calls  them  mett-
siederi,  mead-boilers,  Schm.  1,  165.  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  369).  Gr.
avdTjScov,  flower-eater;  but  she  drinks  water  too,  aco.  to  a  law-
phrase  in  the  Weisthümer ;  conf.  '  die  bin  netzen,'  to  water  the
bees,  Fischart's  Gesch.  kl.  87*.  A  pretty  name  is  'pini-süga
(bee-suck)  =  thymus,'  i.e.  heath.  Finn.  mehiläiskanerva  =  c\ino-
podium  vulg.     A  queen-bee  settles  on  the  lips  of  a  favoured

person,  Sv.  folks.  1,  78. ^Their  origin  is  miraculous :  '  diu  pie

ist  maget,  wird  &ne  hileichiu  dine  geborn,'  the  bee  is  maiden,
born  without  nuptial  doings,  Predigten  hrsg.  v.  Kelle  40.     '  Der


ANIMALS.  1497

Veldtban/  Strasbg  1556,  bk  15  cap.  1  relates  after  Varro  de  R.
K.  2,  5  how  bees  spring  oat  of  the  decaying  body  of  a  dead  ball.
Miklosich  brings  both  b'ichela,  pchel6  =  eLpis,  and  byk=staaras,
under  boakati=smugire  (the  ham  of  the  bee?).  The  61.  Salom.
make  wasps  come  from  the  rotten  flesh  of  asses^  drones  from  that
of  mules,  hornets  from  that  of  horses,  and  bees  from  that  of  calves,
conf.  Diut.  2,  194 :  tTTTro?  ippifjUvo^  at^K&v  yeveah  co-rt,  Lessing
9,  146  fr.  Aelian  1,  28 ;  and  bees  proceed  from  the  carcase  of
the  lion  slain  by  Samson,  Judg.  14,  8.  An  account  of  the  genera*
tion  of  hornet  and  bee  in  Schröter  p.  136.     Peterson,  p.  55.     In

the  Walach.  March.  284  the  white  bee  turns  black. As  the

bee  in  Oerm.  weaves  (wift,  wabe),  in  Lith.  she  sews  (pri-stiti)  :
'  bittes  daug  pri-sdwo,'  the  bees  hare  stitched  a  good  piece  on.
Bees  build:  iv6a  rißaißwacrovcri,  fiiXiaaai,  Od.  13,  106;  they
build  a  wax  palace,  Stier's  Yolksm.  24.  On  the  church  wall  at
Folsbach  was  carved  a  bummel-nest,  because  the  people  had
carted  stones  to  it  as  diligently  as  the  bumblebee  gathers  honey,
Panz.  Beitr.  2,  173.  A  man  in  Elsass  having  stolen  the  Host
and  thrown  it  in  a  field  of  standing  corn,  it  hung  balanced  on
three  stalks,  and  bees  came  and  built  their  waben  (combs)  round
it,  and  over  it  was  reared  a  chapel,  that  of  the  Three  Ears ;  conf.
Hpt's  Ztschr.  7,  583.  Predigermärch.  10,  12.  Boyes  Rodolphi
de  H.  p.  257.  In  Cass.  Heisterb.  9,  8  the  bees  themselves  build
a  chapel  over  the  Hostie.

In  Virgins  Georg.  4,  68.  75.  106  the  sovereign  of  the  bees  is
called  rex,  and  4,  4.  88  dux,  ductor ;  *  exvt&vi  fürsten  (prince)  h&nt
bien,'  MS.  1,  84*;  Wolgheden,  also  haren  canine  doen  die  bien,'
Maerl.  S,  343;  '  alsam  diu  bin  2uo  den  karn  mit  fröiden  valient,
ob  ir  rehter  unset  (var.  wiset)  drinne  si,'  MS.  2,  3*;  Flem. '  honing
der  bien,'  Hpt.  7,  533 ;  Hennebg.  '  der  hädherr,  der  weisel,'
Brückner.  Cherkess  pslieh,  prince.  Klemm  4,  18.  The  Samogits
allowed  bees  a  god  of  their  own,  Babilos,  and  a  goddess,  Atutheia,
Lasicz  48.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Vita  S.  Galli  (Pertz  2,  7)
says:  in  modum  parvissimae  matris  apis,  conf.  mater  aviorum
(p.  1242);  bienen-mutter,  Haltrich  121.  Their  honey  is  not
everywhere  sweet  :  to  yap  fiiKi  iv  aira^i  roh  Tpaire^ovvro^
X^piot^  wiKpbv  yiverai,  Procop.  2,  464;  fiiki  IIovTiKoy  iriKpov
ion  mlX  afiU<i,  Dio  Chrysost.  Or.  9  (ed.  Beiske  1,  289.  290).

The  devil  appears  as  s^fly,  so  does  Loki  (p.  999).     Spiders  are


1498  SKY  AND  STABS.

akin  to  dwarfs  (p.  471).  Oak  of  all  herbs  the  bee  sacks  sweetness,
the  spider  poison.  Yet  may  the  spider  be  of  good  omen  too ;
thus  the  kind  enchantress  climbs  to  ifae  ceiling  a  spider^  and
drops  down  a  woman,  Arnim's  March.  1, 52-7  ;  conf.  luek-spinner
(p.  1136).  Cobwebs  fluttering  on  the  ceiling  betoken  luck  and
a  wedding.  Lisch  5,  88 ;  conf.  the  fortune-telling  spider's  head
(Suppl.  to  380  end).  Lastly  consider  the  myth  of  Minerva  and
Arachne.


CHAPTER  XKII.
SKY   AND    STARS.

p.  700.]  Himmel  comes  from  hima  =  tego;  the  root  appears
without  suffix  in  O.Swed.  himi-rike;  Bopp  again  would  derive  it
from  kam^splendere.  Gl.  168^  but  this  kam  in  Gl.  65^  means
amare,  which  is  more  likely  to  have  had  the  orig.  sense  of  shelter,
cover;  and  OHG.  himil  already  included  the  meaning  laquear,
lacunar.  AS. '  sc6p  heofon  t6  hrofe/  and  hrftf  is  roof ;  '  s6  himil
thekit  thaz  lant,'  O.  ii.  7,  4 ;  '  mit  dem  himel  was  ich  bedcuJU,'
bethatched,  Tragemund.  We  still  say  'the  sky  is  my  decke
(ceiling,  coverlid),  the  earth  my  bed/  or  '  the  sky  is  my  hoi/  as
the  ON.  calls  it  '  foldar  hattr/  earth's  hat.  The  sky  is  a  vault,
hence  '  under  heofones  hwealf/  Beow.  1146.  It  may  burst  open  :
*  ich  w&nde  der  himel  waere  enzwei,*  in-two,  when  it  thundered,
Dietr.  Drach.  122^  148*  (on  the  comparison  of  heaven  to  the  roof
of  the  mouth,  see  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  541).  A  variation  of  the  idea
in  the  ON.  ^und  himin-skautom,'  under  the  skirts  of  heaven.
SaBm.    173**.     Norweg.    hibnc^leite,  himna-leite  =  horizon,   Germ.

kimm,  kimming, After  death  we  may  go  to  himmel  (not  heven) ;

but  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  in  L.  Saxony  stand  in  heven  (not
himmel)  ;  heven-schery  scudding  clouds,  Brem.  Ndrs.  wtb.  4,  645. '
Heven  seems  more  the  adther,  the  ^  radur,  rodor  *  of  next  paragraph.
In  Austria  they  call  heaven  blo-landl,  Blue-shire ;  and  OHG.  uflih
»Olympus,  supemum.

OS.  radur,  AS.  rodor  (noriS-rodor,  Cod.  Exon.  178,  88)  can
hardly  be  conn,  with  Ssk.  rödas,  coelum  et  terra,  Bopp  295^.
Does  the  (perh.  kindred)  word  aff-rö9uU,  m.,  Ssem.  87»,  mean  the


SKY  AND  STABS.  1499

moon?  With  AS.  sceld-bjrig  counect  another  expression  of
Casdmon's^  182^  22  :  dceg-scealdes  hleo,  day-shield's  (?)  roof.

p.  701.]  Ssk.  idrä,  f.,  Zend.  Star,  Gr.  aar^p,  Lat  siella  fr.
sterna^  is  expl.  by  Bopp^  Vocal.  179  as  that  which  is  strewn  over
the  sky;  by  Benfey  1,  661  as  that  which  strews  its  beams^  from
root  stri.  With  sldus.  Pott  1^  127  compares  Lith.  swidas,  shin-
ing, and  aiSffpo^.  It  belongs  more  likely  to  sido,  consido,  as
perhaps  even  stella  and  star  are  conn,  with  sta,  stand ;  conf.  stal-
baum,  and  '  er  (Got)  sitzet  fif  den  himel-8^d/n '  rhy.  zeln,  weln,
MSH.  2,  236^  MS.  2,  ]66^-— In  Vermland,  tungel  =  stAv,
Almqv.  391*.  Helsingl.  403*;  in  Angermanland,  ^on^6Z=  mane,
Almqv.  307^.  In  several  langaages,  flame  is  called  tongae,  be-
caase  it  licks ;  in  Irish  the  stars  are  rinn,  which  answers  to  the
GraeL  roinn  =  tip.  In  Fnndgr.  I,  145  a  constellation  is  called
lieht'Vaz,  lamp.

The  OHG.  girusti  of  the  stars  agrees  with  AS.  hyrste  ger&n,
rodores  tnngel,  Caddm.  132,  7;  'each  star  sat  in  his  own  little
chair/  KM.  31,  138 ;  '  yrhen  it  thunders,  you're  afraid  a  tron  will
tumble  out  of  heaven,'  Garg.  18P;  the  Xafiirpä  rpdire^a  rov
^\iov,  sun's  bright  table,  Aesop  350.  The  sun  has  a  tent :
'undir  rö^uls  tialdi/  Hervar.  s.  p.  438  (conf.  Psalm  19,  4).  The
stars  are  considered  sons  and  daughters :  '  da  möhten  jxingiu
sünnelin  wahsen  üz  sim  lichten  schin,'  little  suns  grow  out  of,
Wh.  254,  5  (p.  703  end) ;  'eina  dottur  berr  &lf.rö«ull,'  moon  (?)  has
a  daughter,  Sasm.  37*.  In  Lett,  songs  the  stars  are  daules  meitas^
son's  girls,  deeva  deli,  sons  of  God,  Büttner  nos.  15.  1 8  (1842).

p.  703.]  The  sun  is  'der  werlde  scUn*  MS.  1,  54*;  'der
hersehßin/  Fromm.  Mundart.  4,  98.  113  (but  see  Suppl.  to  731) :
se  ceffela  gledm,  Cod.  Exon.  178,  31 ;  beorht  bedcen  Oodes,  Beow.
1134;  skinandi  go9,  Seam.  45*.  195*;  heäffo-sigel,  sol  e  mari
progrediens.  Cod.  Exon.  486,  17  (conf.  p.  223).  Three  suns  are
spoken  of  in  Nialss.  c.   131  end :  til  )^ess  er  ßriar  sölir  eru  af

himuL 0.  Müller  thinks  sol  and  fjfKio^  come  fr.  one  fundam.

form  Savelios,  see  Schmidt's  Ztschr.  2,  124  (Kl.  sehr.  3,  120) ;
Etr.  tisil,  Sab.  ausel,  Bopp^s  Comp.  Gram.  42,  1318-9  derives
the  Zend,  hvare  and  Ssk.  sura,  surya,  sun,  fr.  svar,  svarga=
sky ;  is  Sdryas  the  same  word  as  ^X<09  (for  afiiXio^)  and  sol  ?
(Pref.  liv.,  GDS.  301).  We  might  also  conu.  the  Goth,  sduil  with
sdnlssscolnmna  (Kl.  sehr.  3^    120). The  sun  is  descr.  as  a


1500  SKY  AND  STABS.

wheel  in  Ksrclir.  80 ;  daz  rat  der  sunnen,  Myst.  2^  180.  Hvel,
hweol  is  also  the  spinning-wheel,  and  in  Finn,  the  snn  is  called
Ood's  spindle,  Ealev.  S2,  20  (its  nsnal  name  is  paiva,  sol  and
dies,  bat  also  anrinko) ;  conf»  the  constell.  Frejja's-spindle,
and  Tertnllian's  pectines  solis,  ODS.  107.  Before  the  snn  there
stands  a  shield ;  if  it  fall,  it  will  set  moantain  and  sea  abläse :

Svalr  heitir,  hann  stendr  solo  for,

aciöldr  scinanda  goiSi ;

biörg  oc  brim  ec  veit  at  brenna  scolo,

ef  hann  fellr  !  frft.  Sasm.  45».  195^

Ennias  (in  Yarro  7,  73)  calls  the  son  caeli  clipeue,  and  the  notion

is  Slavic  too,  Hannsch  25&. On  the  snn  as  an  eye,  conf.  Eohn

(in  Höfer  1,  150),  Passow  sab  vv.  j/i/ia,  o<f>6a\fA6^.  Li  solans
qai  toat  agaete.  Rose  1550.  The  san's  eye  hidden  in  the  well
seems  to  be  referred  to  in  sach  names  as  Sunnebrunno  near
Uiisseldoif,  Lacombl.  1,  no.  68  (yr  874) ;  Sonnenbninne,  Mone's
Anz.  6,  227;  Sunnebrunnen,  Sonnebom  in  Saxe  Gotha,  Dronke's
Trad.  Fnld.  pp.  42.  61 ;  Sunnebam,  Landaa's  Hessengaa  181 ;
:Si)mbom  near  Gelnhansen ;  Sunnobmnnon,  Werden's  Beg.  236,

and  oiLgenbrunm  6,  230 ;  conf.  Forstemann  2,  1336. To  AS.

wuldrea  gim,  heofones  gim,  Cod.  Exon.  174,  30,  corresp.  the  Ssk,
«liei  dominus,  diet  gemma=sol,  Bopp  27^  Other  AS.  terms  are  :
fnlea  friffGandel,  Caedm.  153,  15,  heofoncandel  181,  34;  rodores
candel,  Beow.  31^,  woruldcandel  3926;  wyncandel.  Cod.  Exon.
174,31.

p.  704.]  The  Letts  regard  the  sun  and  mo<yn  as  sister  and
brother,  Bergm.  120;  in  Dalecarlia  the  moon  is  called  unkcvrsol,
Almqv.  261  (is  not  that  Lappish,  the  jnnkare's  snn  f ).  Gt>th.
mena,  OHG.  mano,  AS.  mona,  ON.  mani,  all  masc;  Carinth.
monet,  Lexer's  Kämt.  wtb.  Yet  also :  '  diu  maenin  begltmet,'
V.  Gelonben  118  (gllmo,  gleimo,  Graff  4,  289);  diu  maeninne,
MF.  122,  4;  diu  mäninne,  Diemer  341,22.  343,  11.  342,  27;
*  tier  Hun  {sunne)  and  diu  maeninne,*  Karaj.  47,  8  (Ksrchr.  85-
1)0).  MHG.  diu  sunne,  Hpt  8,  544.  Diemer  384,  6;  in  RoUenh.
'  der  harte  mond,  die  liebe  sonn.'  The  Angevins  on  the  contrary
called  '  le  soleil  seigneur,  et  la  lane  dame,*  Bodin's  Bech.  sor
TAnjoa  1,  86;  so  in  Ksrchr.  3754  'der  h&ire*  seems  to  mean  the
sun,  but  in  oontrad.  to  p.  3756. The  forester  kneels  to  sun,


8KT  AKB  STABS.  1501

moon  and  God,  Baader  iii.  21 ;  '  the  worshiped  mn.  Bom.  and  Jul.
i.  1.  Men  prayed  towards  the  son,  N.Pr.  prov.  bl.  1,  300 ;  they
salate  him  (pp.  737.  749)^  esp.  when  rising:  6  hi  eian^KeL  fiiypi
in^  iyivero  Koi  fj/Kio^  avia^^^*  iireira  ^ero  airiäyv,  irpocrev^d^vo^
T^  fl\iffif  Plato's  Symp.  220.  A  fecLst  of  ike  sun  was  held  in
Dauphin^,  ChampoU.  Dial.  p.  11.  On  the  Tartar  worship  of  the
san^  see  K.  Schlozer  82-3.  Among  Tnngüses  an  accused  man
has  to  walk  toward  the  sun,  brandishing  a  knife,  and  crying :
^  If  I  am  guilty,  may  the  sun  send  sickness  to  rage  in  my  bowels
like  this  knife  I'  Klemm  S,  68.  Serv.  '  tako  mi  suntza  1*  Ranke
p.  59.     We  still  say,  when  the  sun  shines  warm,  '  he  means  well

by  us,'  Felsenb.  4,  241. ^The  Moon  is  called  in  Ssk.  niiapati,

noctis  dominus,  or  iiaxtreia,  täräpati,  stellamm  dominus ;  in  Pol.
ksifzyc,  lord  of  night,  and  he  is  shepherd  of  the  stars  (Suppl.  to
722).  The  moon  is  invoked  against  anger:  'heiptom  seal  mana
hveKa,  Seem.  27**;  and  is  asked  for  riches.  With  the  German's
naive  prayer  to  the  moon  to  '  make  his  money  more,'  conf.  a
Swed.  one  in  Wieselgr.  431.  Dyb.  Runa  '44,  p.  125,  and  the
'  monjochtroger,'  Wolf's  Ztschr.  2,  60.  To  avert  the  moon's
evil  influence,  the  Bretons  cry  to  her,  '  tu  nous  trouves  bien,
laisse-nous  bien  I'  When  she  rises,  they  kneel  down  and  say  a
pater  and  ave,  Cambry  3,  35.

p.  705.]  The  sun  and  moon  have  gods  assigned  them :  Bac-
chus is  sol,  Geres  luna,  Macrob.  Sat.  1,  18.  Virg.  Oteo>  1,  5.
Ace.  to  F.  Magnusen,  Freyr  is  sol,  Freyja  luna ;  and  four  names
of  Freyja,  '  Mardöll,  Horn,  Gefti,  S^r,'  or  '  Siofn,  Lofn,  Vor,
Syn '  are  the  moon's  phases,  Lex.  myth.  357-9«     Christ  is  often

likened  to  the  sun,  Mary  to  the  moon. Our  saying,  that  '  die

Bonue  scheint,  der  mond  greint/  is  old  :  M.Neth.  '  seder  dat  die
maen  grin/  Potter  2,  104;  MHG*.  'din  sunne  besohtnet,  diu
maeuin  begltmet/  Y.  Oelouben  118  (Suppl.  to  704).

p.  707.]  In  Pohjola,  sun  and  moon  get  stolen;  the  sun  is
delivered  fr.  captivity  by  Perkun's  hammer,  N.  Pr.  prov.  bl.  1,
299.  Kl.  sehr.  2,  84.  98  j  conf. '  donee  auferetur  luna,'  Ps.  72, 7.
In  eclipses  the  demon  R&hns  threatens  the  sun  and  moon,  Kuhn
in  Höfer  1,  149.  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  3,  151 ;  a  dragon  tries  to
swallow  the  moon,  Gsbs.  heisterb.  3,  35,  yr  1225  (Slaufm.  p.  55) ;

the  Swed.  sol-nlf  is  Dan.  soUulv,  Molb.  Pial.  p.  533. But  the

Ban  may  withdraw  his  light  in  grief  or  in  anger :

VOL.   17.  Q


1502  8KT  AND  STABS.

Sonna  irbalg  sih  (was  indignant)  thrftto    soslichero  d&to  (deeds),
ni  liaz  si  sehaa  worolt-thiot  (-people)       thaas  ira  frönisga  lioht,
hinterquam  in  thräti  (disgust)  thera  armalichun  d&ti.

Otfried  iv.  83, 1.
ioh  harto  thaz  irforahta.  O.  iv.  33,  14.

The  san  hides  his  face  before  a  great  sorrow,  e.g.  at  the  death  of
Christ,  or  that  of  Yon  Meran :  '  es  moht  din  liehte  snnne  ir  schia
da  von  verlorn  hAn,'  Wigal.  8068.  Hrab.  Maums  in  Wh.  Müller
pp.  159.  160.  A  fine  descript.  of  a  solar  eclipse  in  Pindar,  Frag.
74  Boeckh,  84  Bergk.  On  snperstit.  practices  at  the  eclipse  of
989,  Thietmar  of  Mersebg  says  4,  10:  'sed  cnnctis  persoadeo
Ghristicolis,  nt  veraciter  credant,  hoc  non  aliqua  malarum  inean-
tatione  mulierum  vel  esu  fieri,  vel  haic  aliqno  modo  secnlariter
ddjuvari  po^seJ

The  daBmon  that  dogs  the  moon  is  called  by  the  Finns  capeei;
the  capeen  try  to  eat  her  np,  Hiäm  p.  37-9;  Juslen  has  'capei,
eclipsis  lanae.'  Now  Benvall  sab  v.  kuvet,  gen.  kapeen,  pi.
kapeet,  gives  only  the  meanings  'dssmon,  genius,'  conf.  Peterson
p.  31 ;  but  8\ib  V.  hwumet  he  has  'moonlight,  genius  myth,  lunaa
inimicusJ  Compare  that  *  deducere  lunam  et  sidera  tentat '
(Suppl.  to  1089  end),  to  which  is  added:  '£t  faceret  öi  non  aera
repulsa  sonent,'  TibuU.  i.  8,  21 ;  aera  verberent,  Martial  12,  57;
cum  aeris  crepitu,  qualis  in  defectu  lunae  silenti  nocte  cieri  solet,
Livy  26,  5 ;  conf.  Plutarch  4,  1155.

In  lunar  eclipses  the  Ossdts  shoot  at  the  moon,  believing  that  a
malignant  monster  flying  in  the  air  is  the  cause ;  and  they  go  on
firing  till  the  eclipse  is  over,  Kohl's  S.  Russia  1,  305 ;  conf.  the
legend  in  Cass,  heisterb.  Horn.  3,  35  (Mainzer's  Ztschr.  1,  233).

p.  709.]  The  cliange  of  moon  is  called  '  des  m&nen  wandelkere,'
Parz.  470,  7,  'd.  m.  wandeltac'  483,  15,  'd.  m.  wandeP  491,  5.
The  period  of  her  shining  is  ezpr.  by :  Sd  dem  m&nen  stn  zit  In
der  naht  herfür  gtt,'  Er.  1773.  By  new  moon  we  mean  the  true
conjunction  of  sun  and  moon;  but  the  Greeks  reckoned  the
vovfMjvla  from  their  first  seeing  the  young  moon  at  snnset,  there-
fore some  time  after  conjunction,  K.  F.  Hermann's  Gottesd.
alterth.  p.  226.  Full  moon  is  reckoned  in  with  the  'afbniken
maan'  [i.e.  brach,  wa^e],  Goldschm.  Oldenb.  volksmed.  144.
OHG.  mänot'fengida^neomemA,  calendae,   Graff  3,  415,  conf.


SET  AND  STARS.  1503

fengari  p.  701  n. ;  anafang  mdnodis,  N.  80,  5 ;  MHG.  ein  niuwer
mslne  h&t  n&ch  wanscfae  sich  gestalfc,  er  h&t  gevangen  harte  wer-
decliche^'  began  most  worthily,  MS.  2, 99*.  Welsh  blaen-newydd,
first  of  the  new.  The  Esths  hail  the  new  moon  with:  'Moon,  get
old,  let  me  keep  young  1 '  Böcler's  Ehsten  148.  Full  moon :
ein  voller  mäne,  MS.  2,  88* ;  höifylde,  Molb.  Dial,  lexic.  '  Nova
luna  est  comu^a,  unde  plena  rotunda  est,'  N.  Boeth.  171;  from
the  moon's  horns  it  was  but  a  step  to  the  moon* 8  cow,  Pott  2,  252.
The  oath  of  the  Fehm-court  (RA.  51)  has :  '  helen  und  hoden
(conceal)  vor  sunne,  vor  mane,  vor  alle  westermane' ;  what  means
this  last  word  ?  The  sun  is  imagined  standing  in  the  east,  the
moon  in  the  west :  '  Osten  for  sol,  og  vesten  for  maane,  Asb.  og
Moe  2,  6.  seq.

p.  711.]  Taga  blod  emellan  (let  blood  betw.)  ny  och  nedan,
Folks.  1,  111.  Swed.  nedmork  is  the  Gr.  Kvf  {TKOTOfirfVio^,  Od.
14,  457.  Superstitions  about  ned  and  ny,  ned-axel  and  ny-tänd-
niog,  Rääf  110-6.  In  Dalecarlia,  new  moon  is  called  äväxand,
Almqv.  262^;  in  the  Edda,  halfmoon  is  ^inn  skar9i  mdni/  Saem.
134^  as  indeed  Perkuns  chops  the  inoon  in  two,  Bhesa  92.  192.
The  Scand.  ny  is  MHG.  daz  niu;  thus  Diemer  311,  22  :  'alad  si
an  daz  niu  g&t,  und  iewederen  (each)  halben  ein  horn  h&t ' ;  then
342,  27 :  '  din  mftninne  gät  nihfc  ze  sedele,  an  deme  niu  noch  an
deme  wedele*  ]  but  again  841,  21  :  'diu  m&ninne  chrump  wirt
unde  ehleineJ  A  statute  of  Saalfeld,  like  that  of  Miilhausen,  says
(Walch  1,  14) :  '  wer  da  mit  uns  hierinne  in  der  etat  sitzet  nuwe
nnde  wedil  (=a  month),  u.  koufb  u.  verkouft.'  'Neu  u.  volle  des
monds,'  Ettn.  ünw.  docter  485 ;  '  so  hat  Luna  zwei  angesicht,
das  ein  gen  New  u.  Äbnew  gricht,*  Thumeisser's  Archidox.  147 ;

'  Vollmond,  bruch   oder  vollschein,'   Franz.  Bimpl.   2,  801.

Waxing  and  waning  are  '  waJuten  unde  ewinen,*  Bari.  241,  24 ;
M.  Neth.  ' wassen  ende  wanen'  Rose  4688,  conf.  p.  709  n.  [and
Eogl.  wan,  wane,  want,  wanhope].  An  Ind.  myth  of  the  waxing
and  waning  moon  in  Holtzm.  1,  5 — 8.  KM.'  8,  401.  The  moon
changes  about  so,  his  mother  canH  cut  out  a  coat  to  fit  him,  EM.'
3,  847.  Plut.  in  Conviv.  sept.  sap.  Aesop.  Fur.  896.  Corais
825.     Garg.  185\

p.  712.]  Is  wedel  akin  to  Ssk.  vidhu^hmh^  Bopp  821^
Passages  quoted  in  preced.  note  contrast  it  with  new  moon ;  so
'holter  im  wadel  gehouwen,'  Hpt's  Ztschr.  8,  90 ;  but  'a  hole  in


1504  8K7  AND  STABS.

his  schedel  (skull)  hewn  in  bad  wedel/  Uhl.  p.  658.  Ambras.  152.
On  wedel,  good  and  bad  wedel,  and  wedeln  to  wag,  see  Liliencron
in  Hpfc  6,  363-4-8.  Euhn's  Ztschr.  2,  131.  FradaZ^bysopes,
fascicnlas  hysopi,  Dint.  1,  494^

p.  715.]  The  reverse  of  what  Cadsar  saya  about  the  Germans
(de  B.  Gall.  1,  50)  is  told  by  Pansanias  i.  28^  4  of  the  Laoed»-
monians,  who  would  only  fight  at  fulUmoon.  Silver  and  gold  are
brought  out  at  newen  mon,  Sup.  G.  108.  '  Quaedam  faciunda  in
agris  potiua  crescente  luna  quam  senescente;  quaedam  contra,
quae  metas,  ut  frumenta  et  caeduam  silvam.  Ego  ista  etiam,
inquit  Agrasius,  non  solum  in  ovibus  tondendis,  sed  in  meo  capillo
a  patre  acceptum  servo^  ne  decrescente  luna  tondens  calvus  fiapi,'
Yarro  BB.  1,  37.  Moonlight  makes  rotten,  and  barrel  hoops  cut
by  it  will  rot  sooner,  Athen.  3,  7 ;  worms  get  into  wood  not
rightly  hewn :  '  holaer  die  man  nit  zu  rechter  zeit  des  mons  und
monat  gehauen  hat/  Petr.  Mihi  108^;  'si  howent  raif  (they  cut
hoops,  the  rascally  coopers)  an  dem  niwen  män^'  Teufelsnets
11127;  elder  to  be  cut  by  waxing  or  waning  moon,  GotthelTs
Schuldb.  14;  more  food  taken,  or  less^  ace.  to  the  moon,
Bopp's  Gl.  122^.  Without  moonlight,  herbs  lack  scent  and
flavour,  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  1,  6.  8 ;  '  tes  inanen  tou  ist  anagenne,
nnde  same  saphes  undo  marges'  [Moon's  dew  is  regeneration,
the  seed  of  sap  and  marrow  ?] ,  N.  Cap.  25.  Drink  out  of  a  jug
that  the  moon  shines  into,  and  you'll  be  moonstruck  [lunatic,
sleep-walker  ?  ] ,  Stelzhamer  47.

p.  720.]  The  inoo7h's  spots  are  also  descr.  as  a  stag,  Hitzig's
Philist.  283.  In  a  Greenland  story,  while  the  Moon  pursues  his
sister  the  Sun,  she  dabs  her  sooty  hands  over  his  face ;  hence  the
spots,  Klemm  2,  314.  The  New  Zealand  view  is,  that  they  are
like  a  woman  who  sits  plucking  Gnatuh  4,  360.  The  Banthnm
people  think  the  man  in  the  moon  is  a  g^nt,  standing  upright  at
ebb-time,  and  stooping  at  flood,  Müllenh.  p.  360 ;  but  also  in  the
same  neighbourhood  he  is  a  sheep-stealer  or  cabbage-thief,  as  in
Holland,  no.  483 ;  conf.  the  WaUachian  story  in  Friedr.  Müller
no.  229,  and  the  Westphalian  in  Woeste  40.  In  the  Ukermark
he  carries  a  bundle  of  pea-straw,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4,  390 ;  '  und
sprechend  die  laien,  es  sitz  ain  man  mit  ainer  dom-purd  (thorn-
load)  in  dem  monen,'  Megenb.  65,  22.  Ettner'a  Med.  manlaffe
speaks  of  a  bundle  of  wood  to  fire  the  moon  with.    '  Bomo,  nom


SET  AND  STABS.  1505

d'on  volear^  qne  les  gens  de  la  campagne  pr^tendent  6tre  dans  la
lane/  Grandgagnage  1^  86.  Ace.  to  Schott,  the  Old-Chinese
tradition  makes  a  man  in  the  moon  continnally  drive  his  axe  into
the  giant  tree  knei,  bnt  the  rifts  close  np  again  directly;  he
saffers  for  the  sins  he  committed  while  an  anchoret.  At  Wallen-
hansen  in  Swabia  they  nsed  to  ride  races  for  the  dom*büschele :
three  lads  wonld  start  for  the  goal,  the  two  foremost  got  prizes,
and  the  third  had  a  bunch  of  thorns  tied  on  his  back.  In  Bavaria
the  reapers  leave  a  few  ears  standing,  and  dance  ronnd  them,
singing :

0  heiliga  sanct  Mäha,

bescher  (grant)  ma  a  annasch  gahr  (year)  meha

so  vil  körntla,  so  vil  hörntla,

so  vil  ahrla,  so  vil  gute  gährla,

so  vil  koppla,  so  vil  schockla ;

seJiopp  dich  siädala,  schopp  dich  stadala !

0  heiliga  sanct  Mäha  l

The  stalks  tied  together  represent  St.  Mäha's  stadala  (stack),
which  they  stuffed  full  of  ears;  only  we  must  observe,  that  in
Bavaria  the  moon  is  called  tna,  not  mäha,  Panz.  Beitr.  2,  217
(Sappl.  to  157).  TheXbtor  on  p.  719  n.  was  a  herdsman  beloved
by  the  goddess  Triglava,  who  put  him  in  the  moon.  Finn.
/cau^r=moon,  Kalev.  22,  270.  26,  296  or  moon-maiden,  from
Icau,  moon.  Est.  &u,  Mordnin.  ho ;  and  kuumet  is  the  pursuer  of
the  moon,  Peterson  p.  31-3.  In  Brother  Gheraert  ed.  Clarisse
p.  132  the  man  in  the  moon  is  called  ludergehr  ;  conf.  the  Saxon
hero  Lindeg6r  in  the  Nibelungen,  and  Gödeke's  Beinfried  90.

p.  720.]  Ths  sun  dances  at  Easter  (p.  291).  The  Indians  say
the  sun  dances,  and  they  in  imitation  salute  him  with  dancing.
Lucian.  de  Saltat.  cap.  17.

p.  722.]  The  stars  are  said  to  glister,  twinkle,  sparkle :
Sternen  glast,  MS.  2,  5^ ;  ein  stemen  blic,  flash,  Parz.  103,  28.
The  morning  stars  break  out,  like  fire  :  swenne  der  morgensterne
ie  fnieje  uf  brast,  MS.  2,  5^ ;  an  der  sterren  brunste,  burning,
Diut.  1,  352 ;  sterre  e^ibran  u.  schein,  took  fire  and  shone  1,  351 ;
conf.  N.  Cap.  97.    The  sinking,  '  rushing  down '  of  stars  is  in

Grk  at<ra€iv,  Eurip.  Iph.  Aul.  9. In  Hungary  280   native

names  of  stars  have    been  collected,  Wolfs  Ztschr.   2,   160.-


1506  SKY  AND  STABS.

Magyar  Myth.  582 ;  several  names  occur  in  Ossian,  Ahlwardt  2,
265.  277.  8,  257.  Arfvidss.  1,  149.  206 ;  Armenian  names  in
Dulaurier's  Chronol.  arm^n.  '69,  1,  180-1. Stars  were  in-
voked, as  Hesperus  in  Bion  11 ;  they  were  messengers  of  gods,
as  Arcturus  in  the  prol.  to  Plaut.  Budens ;  they  do  errands  for
lovers,  Yuk  no.  137.  Stars  are  kind  or  hostile:  quaeritis  et  caelo
Phoenicnm  inventa  sereno,  quae  sit  Stella  homini  commoda,  qnae-
que  mala.  Prop.  iii.  21,  3;  interpreting  the  stars  is  spoken  of.
in  MS.  1,  1'89**;  Pro  v.  astrucs  (astrosns)  meant  lucky,  and  maU
astrucs  dis-astrous;  ^her  star  is  at  the  heat  (brunst).  .  .  .
till  their  stars  have  cooled  dovm  (versaust,  done  blustering),'  Ph.
V.  Sitte w.  p.  614.  Stars  take  part  in  a  man's  birth  (p.  860)  and
death  (p.  721).  They  have  angels  to  wait  on  them,  Tommaseo
1,  233.  For  the  misdeed  of  Atreuii;  God  changed  the  courses  of
all  the  coDstellations,  Plato's  Polit.  pp.  269.  271.

The  stars  are  the  moon's  flock,  she  leads  them  to  pastnre,
Spee  p.  m.  163.  210.  227.     A  Serv.  song,  Yuk  no.  200,  says  :

od  sestritze  zvezde  preodnitza,
shto  preodi  preko  vedra  neba
kao  pastir  pred  bdlim  outzama.

What  star  is  meant  by  jTr^odn /^za  (percnrrens),  'who  walks
athwart  the  sky,  as  a  shepherd  before  his  white  lambs '  ?  conf.
no.  362 :

osu  se  nebd  zvezdama,
i  ravno  polye  outzama ;

t.6.  heaven  sows  itself  with  stars,  and  the  wide  plain  with  lambs.
So  in  Pentam.  3,  5  (p.  310)  :  quanno  esce  la  luna  a  pascere  de
rosata  le  galinelle  (Pleiades).

On  shooting  stars,  see  Humb.  Kosmos  1,  393 ;  they  are  called
stern-fürwe  (-furbish).  Mono  8,  497 ;  Austr.  steam-raispn,  clear-
ing the  throat,  stearn-schnaitsin,  snuffing,  Stelzh.  135—144;
Gael.  dreuQy  dreag,  A  star  falls  from  heaven  into  the  maiden's
lap,  Miillenh.  p.  409;  conf.  'non  cadere  in  terram  Stellas  et
sidera  cernis  ? '  Lucr.  2,  209.  They  are  harbingers  of  war,  of
dying,  Klemm  2,  161 ;  says  the  folksong :  ^  Over  the  Rhine  three
stars  did  fly.  Three  daughters  of  a  widow  die,'  Simrock  no.  68.
A  comet  is  ON.  luila-stiama,  Ir.  boid-realt,  tail-star,  Ssk*


SKT  AND   STABS.  1507

dhümaketit,  fami  yezillam.  The  Indians  call  the  tail  elephant's
tooth,  the  Chinese  a  broom,  Kosmos  1, 106.  In  Prooopius  I,  167
the  star  is  ^i^ia^,  sword« shaped,  or  irfo^mvLa<iy  bearded.  It  fore-
tells misfortune ;  hence  '  we  name  it  the  dreadful  scourge  of  God/
sBom-rnte,  anger- rod,  Lucae  Chron.  249;  'et  nunquam  caelo
spedatum  impune  cometen,'  Claud.  B.  Get.  243,  crine  vago  217.

p.  723.]  The  Greeks  called  Mercury  XriXßwv,  Jupiter  ^cUdofv,
Saturn  ^aiveav,  Venus  $a><r-0o/9O9  =  Luci-fer,  and  Mars  Ilvpoet^,
five  planets  in  all ;  conf.  Cic.  de  Nat.  D.  2,  20 ;  so  the  third  day

of  the  week  was  ITi/poet?,  the  fourth  XriKßaav, The  evening

star  was  also  called  tier-sterny  *  darumb  daz  die  wilden  tier  dan
herfiir  gent  (wild  beasts  then  go  forth)  auz  iron  walden  und
holern/  Oberl.  1639.  Similar  is  the  Lith.  zwerinnä  fr.  £weris,
fera.  Boh.  zwjfetnice,  wild  star,  evening  star ;  conf,  AS.  swana
steer ra.  Another  Boh.  name  temniee,  dim  star,  is  like  MHG.
tunkelsterne.  Welsh  gweno,  evening  star,  Venus.  The  Lith.
has  also  wahaninne,  evening  star,  atiszrinne,  morning  star,  beside

zwerinne  mazoyi  for  Mars,  and  zwerinne  dideyi  for  Saturn.

The  day  star,  'der  lichte  tage-sterre'  of  Albr.  v.  Halb.  (Haupt
11,  366),  is  Serv.  danitza,  Boh.  dennice,  Buss,  dennitza;  'der
hringe4ag '  in  Scherfer's  Grobian  75  is  modelled  on  luci-fer.
Der  morgensterne,  swenne  er  uf  gat,  und  in  des  lufbes  trüebe  Iftt,
Iw.  627  ;  der  morgenstern  frolockt  reht,  ob  er  brinne,  Hätzl.  3";
ik  fomeme  des  morgensternes  slaeh,  Upstand.  750 ;  '  some  say
the  devil  has  taken  the  daystar  captive,  hence  the  cold  and  ill

weather,'  Gutslaf  s  Wöhhanda  p.  265. The  polar  star,  ON.

hiara-stiama;  OHG.  leite-sterre,  loadstar,  Graflf  6,  723;  MHG.
lettS'Steme,  Trist.  13660,^  also  ruer^sfeme,  Stella  maris,  Griesh.
2, 18 ;  cabhlinn  der  flut  in  Gisian  2, 334 ;  in  O.  v.  17,  31  *  Polonan
then  stetigen,'  nom.  Poloni  ?  conf.  polunoci  [pure  Slav,  for  mid-
night!]  =sep  ten  triones,  Graff  3,  334.  The  Lapp.  ^'uo{d  =  pains
and  Stella  polaris,  because  it  stands  firm  as  a  stake;  Americ.
iehka  chagatha,  star  that  goes  not.  Klemm  2,  161.

p.  724.]  Ace.  to  Seem.  76*  it  was  Thorr,  not  0«inn,  that  threw
Thiassi's  eyes  into  the  sky.  Theodosius  was  changed  into  a  star,
Claud,  de  3  cons.  Hon.  172,  de  4  cons.  428.    John  the  Baptist's

^  LeyUgeätim  in  the  Wetteiaa  (Höfer's  D.  ark.  60.  SohmidVs  GeBeh.  d.  grossh.
Hessen  1,  241)  ia  spelt  in  the  Cod.  Laaresh.  3128—30.  249.  260-2  Leit-kestre,
lieit-OMtre,  Leiz-oastro,  and  has  therefore  nothing  to  do  with  star.


1508  SKY  AND  STABS.

head  was  placed  in  the  sky  (p.  284-5) ,  so  was  that  of  B4lia,
Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  3,  151.

p.  725.]  Ssk.  rxas  pi.,  the  shiners  (the  7  sages),  rxcLS  sing.,
the  shiner =a/9>cro9.  Indra's  car  is  made  of  the  seven  sages;
the  constell.  may  also  be  called  vaJianam,  waggon,  Kuhn  in
Höfer  1,  159.  161.  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  1,  30.  The  Grt  Bear  repres.
the  British  Arthur  (confounded  with  Arotams),  and  the  Lyre  is
his  harp,  Davies's  Mythol.  p.  187.  All  the  luminaries  ride  in
cars:  Muna  rotigerae  vagationis,'  Kemble  5,  195  (yr.  931).
Charles  warn  is  over  the  chimney,  1  Henry  IV.  2,  1 ;  der  wagen
ist  ob  dem  hus,  Keisersb.  Brösami.  70* ;  der  himelswagen  schon
die  deichsei  rückwärts  drehet,  Scherfer's  Grobian  ed.  1708,  p.  72.
An  O.  Belg.  riddle  asks  who  it  is  that  has  to  go  round  on  the
Boodestraat  all  night  in  a  coach  without  horses,  and  appears  in
the  morning :  '  Bruno  heefb  een'  hoets  ghemaekt  Op  vier  wielen,
zonder  peerden;  Brurko  heeft  een'  hoets  ghemaekt.  Die  alleen
naer  Brüssel  gaet ; '  meaning  the  coach  in  the  sky,  Ann.  de  la
Soc.  d'^mul.  de  la  Flandre  occid.  '42,  4,  368.  Oeticum  plan--
strum,  Claud,  de  B.  Qet,  247 ;  and  Alanus  ab  Insulis  (d.  1202)
in  his  Anti-CIaudian  makes  allegorical  females  construct  a
heavetdy  car,  Cramer's  Gresch.  d.  erzieh,  p.  204.  Festus  sub  y.
septentriones,  Septem  boves  juncti.  Yarro  7,  74 :  boves  et  temo»
Ov.  Met.  10,  447.  Ex  Ponto  iv.  10,  39  :  plaustrum.  Gl.  slettst.
1,  2:  Virgilias,  sibinstirne;    and  6,  392.  479:  Majae,  Pliadas,

sihinstimes. Ir.  griogchan,  a  constell. ;  Gael,  grigirean,  Charles

wain,  otherw.  crann,  crannarain  (p.  729  n.) ;  griglean,  griglean
meanmnach,  grioglachan,  Pleiades.  Ir.  camcheachta,  plough,
ploughshare,  seven  stars  of  the  wain.  Finn,  otava  or  otavainen,
ursa  major,  is  distingu.  fr.  vähä  otava,  nrsa  minor ;  yet  otava  can
hardly  belong  to  ohto  (ursus).  In  Ealev.  28,  393-4  otavainen  and
seitsentähtinen  (seven  stars)  are  used  as  if  synonymous,  and  both
have  shoulders.  The  Lapp,  sarw  is  both  alces,  elk,  and  ursa
major ;  in  Ostiak  too  the  constell.  is  called  los,  elk  (Klemm  3,
128),  and  has  a  head  and  tail.  In  Greenl.  it  is  tukto,  reindeer.
Klemm  2,  314.  Fabricius  504^.  In  American,  ichka  shaehpo  is
supposed  to  be  an  ermine  with  its  hole,  its  head,  feet  and  tail.
Klemm  2,  161.  The  Arabs  call  the  two  end  stars  of  the  bear's
tail  mizar  and  benetnash,  and  the  third,  which  is  the  pole  of  the
wain,  alioth;  the  remaining  four  make  the  axles.


SET  AHD  STABS.  1509

p.  727.]  Orion's  belt,  Lat.  jugula,  jugulae:  'nee  Jugulae,
neque  Yesperngo,  neque  Vergiliae  occidnnt/  Plaut.  A.  i.  1,  119;
also  en8%8  and  enaifer,  Forcell.  snb  v.  ensis :  *  niUdumqne  Ononis
ensem,  Ov.  Met.  13,  294.  In  Westgötl.  Frigge-räkken  and
Jacobs  staf;  ON.  ßskikallar,  F.  Magn.  Dag.  tid.  105.  '  Orion
constell.  a  rusticis  vocatar  baculiis  8.  Petri,  a  quibusdam  vero
ires  Mariae/  Gl.  Augiens.  in  Mone  8, 897;  in  Schleswig  Mori-rok
and  Peri-pik,  Müllenh.  no.  484.  Finn.  Kalevan  miekka,  ICalevae
ensis,  also  Väinäniöisen  miekkcu  or  vtkate  (sithe),  Schiefn.  on  Gas-
trin p.  329 ;  Lapp,  niall,  nialla,  which  usually  means  taberna,
repositoriam;  in  Greenl.  the  belt  is  named  sicktut,  the  bewildered,
being  seal-hunters  who  lost  their  way,  and  were  caught  up  and
set  among  the  stars,  Elemm  2,  314;  conf.  the  Lappish  legend
about  the  Pleiades,  below.

p.  729.]  Of  the  7  Pleiads  only  six  are  ever  seen,  Humb.
£o8m.  3,  65 ;  quae  Septem  dici,  sex  tarnen  esse  solent,  Ov.  Fast.
4,  171  (see  p.  728  n.).  AS.  Gl.  'pliadas,  sifansierri*  Oehler  359.
Fr.  Vestoille  poussiniere,  Rabelais  1,  53;  ]b,b  eouzigneiros,  Diet.
LanguedoQ.  127.  The  Hung.,  beside  fiastik,  has  heteveny.  In
Serv.  march,  pp.  15  and  87  appears  a  girl  with  the  golden  hen
and  chickens,  conf.  Vuk  no.  10 ;  the  Wallach,  story  tells  of  a  gold
cluek-lien  and  five  chicks,  Schott  p.  242.^  Syryän.  voykodzyun,
lit.  night-star.  The  Lith.  and  Finn,  notion  of  the  constellation
being  a  sieve  reminds  me  of  Lucianos  Timon  3,  where  the  quak-
ing earth  is  compared  to  a  shaken  sieve. The  Pleiades  are

called  in  Norweg.  Lapp,  nieid-gierreg,  fr.  nieid  =  virgo,  and
gierreg =samling  af  en  rets  besiddere;  but  in  Swed.  Lapp.
suttjenes  r&uko  (Lindahl  406.  443^),  i.e.  far  in  frost :  the  sky,
taking  pity  on  a  man  whom  his  master  had  turned  out  of  the
house  in  the  depth  of  winter,  covered  him  with  this  constellation
(F.  Magn.  in  Dag.  tider  p.  103  gives  tjokka^h^bxi,  which  Lin-
dahl has  not  under  tsakke).  Greenl.  kelluktwrset,  hounds  baiting
a  bear,  Klemm  2, 314.  Fabricius  188*;  conf.  Welsh  y  twr  iewdws,
the  close  pack,  i.e.  Pleiades,  and  eburdrung  (p.  727).    The  Amer.

Indians  worship  this  constell.,  Klemm   2,  112.  153.  173.

Similar  to  the  Lith.  name  for  the  Kids,  viz.  'ploughman  and

*  The  lost  lamb  is  looked  for  at  the  momingstar,  eTeniz^star,  moon  and  sun,
Lith.  in  Bhesa  p.  290-1-2 ;  conf.  p.  707-8,  and  'coming  to  the  tun,  and  asking  him/
H jm.  in  Gerer.  64.


1510  SKY  AND  STABS.

oxen/  is  the  Serv.  voluyara  (fr.  vol,  ox  ?),  a  star  that  ploaghmen
know,  for  when  it  rises  they  look  out  for  their  oxen.  Cassiopeia
is  Lith.  jostandisy  no  doubt  fr.  josta,  girdle.  .  The  Hyades,  AS.
raedgastran.  Lye:  'the  five  in  the  head  of  Taurus';  raedgaesnan.
Gl.  Epin.,  redgaesrum,  Gl.  Oehl.  p.  886.  The  Lyre,  Boh.  haus-
licky  na  nebi,  fiddle  in  the  sky.

p.  731.]  The  constellation  of  the  Bear  is  made  out  from  the
animals  head,  back  and  tail.  A  star  with  the  shape  of  a  child.
Pass.  24,  30  seq. ;  conf.  the  sun  as  a  spindle  (Suppl.  to  703  mid.).
Most  natural  of  all  was  the  making  of  stars  out  of  beaming  eyes
(p.  565-6-8),  as  in  the  story  of  Thiassi  and  the  New  Zealand  one.
Klemm  4,  854-5.  388.

The  northern  lights  (aurora  borealis)  are  called  heerbrand,  heer-
schein,  Frommann  4,  114  (Suppl.  to  703  beg.) ;  Swed.  norr^sken,
Dan.  nord'lys;  Grael.  firchlis,  na  fir  chlise,  the  merry  dancers,
Welsh  y  goleuny  gogleddoL  Finn,  the  fox's  fire;  conf.  Gesta
Bom.  c.  78,  and  note  to  Keller's  Sept  sages  cexx.

p.  734.]  On  names  of  the  rainbow,  see  Pott  in  Aufr.  and
Kuhn's  Zts.  2,  414  seq.  The  ON.  As-brii  is  OS.  Osna-brugga,
Massm.  Egsterst.  34.  Zeuss  p.  11;  regenbogen-ftntcie,  Firmen.
2,  45.  Ir.  and  Gael,  blogha  braoin,  Carraigth.  54.  The  ON.
bruar-spordr,  bridge's  tail,  is  further  illustr.  by  a  MHG.  sparten,
caudae  vulpium,  Griesh.  1,  125.  2,  42.  The  rainbow  is  called  a
messenger  in  Forum,  sog.  9,  518 :  grärr  regen-bo&i  Hnikars  stöiS
ä  grimmum  Göndlar  hinni  J^egna.  Pliny  24,  ]  8  (69)  :  '  coelestis
arcus  in  fruticem  innixus';  more  plainly  12,  24  (52) :  'tradunt,
in  quocunque  frutice  curvetur  arcus  coelestis,  eandem  quae  sit
aspalathi  suavitatem  odoris  existere,  sed  si  in  aspalatho,  inenar-
rabilem  quandam ';  and  17,  5  (3) :  '  terrae  odor  ...  in  quo  loco
arcus  coel.  dejecerit  capita  sua.'     Another  superstition  is,  that  a

treasure  lies  hidden  at  the  foot  of  the  rainbow.  Panzer  1,  29.

Duller  p.  85  cites  the  name  wetter-maal  (county  Guttenstein),
which  I  find  nowhere  else;  regenboum^ins,  Gl.  Sletst.  39,  320.
Finn.,  beside  taivaan^Jcaariy  heaven's  bow,  has  vesi^haari,  water
bow,  Ukon-k,,  saieen-k,,  rain  bow.  To  the  Greenlander  the  rain-
bow is  the  hem  of  a  god's  garment.  Klemm  2,  327.  The  Poles
have  d^ga,  bow,  corresp.  to  Buss.  Serv.  dugd,  but  not  in  the
sense  of  iris,  which  they  call  t^cza.  The  Lettic  has  also  deeva
yohsta,  Bergm.  p.  124,  and  the  Lith.  dangaus  szhta,  heaven's


DAT  AND  NIGHT.  1511

broom.  Schmeller  2,  196  has  'die  hünel-blüe,  rainbow/  conf.
Iris,  who  gives  her  name  to  both  rainbow  and  flower  (Peranika,
Suppl.  to  1216  n.).  Ssk.  Indri  telum,  Bopp  43*.  The  Tartars
make  a  feast  when  the  rainbow  appears^  Kurd  Schlözer  p.  11.

The  Pohjan-daughter  sits  on  the  air- bow  (ilman  wempele),  the
sky-bow  (taiwon  kaari),  weaving,  Kalev.  rune  3  beg.  There  also
sit  the  sun  (Päivätär)  and  moon  (Kuutar),  to  listen  to  the  song
of  Wäinämöinen  22,  17,  spinning  gold  the  while,  till  the  spindles
drop  out  of  their  hands  26,  296.  Ammian.  Marcell.  lib.  xx.,  end :
'  £t  quoniam  est  signum  permutationis  aurae  •  .  •  igitor  aphd
poetas  legimus  saepe,  Irim  de  coelo  miiti,  cum  praesentium  rerum
verti  necesse  sit  status.'


4


CHAPTER  XXni.
DAT    AND    NIGHT.

p.  737.]  On  the  origin  of  fi/uip,  VH'^P^f  Bopp  thinks  differently,
see  6r.  505.  With  Dagr  as  a  mythical  person  conf.  Baldsag,
SwefdsBg ;  of  his  son  [or  father]  Dellingr  it  is  said  in  Fomald.
sog.  1,  468  :  '  uti  fyri  Dellings  dyrum,'  under  the  open  sky.  The
Edda  makes  night  precede  and  produce  day,  conf.  '  nox  dticere
diem  videtur,'  Tac.  G^erm.  11.

In  spite  of  Benfey,  the  Ssk.  nis  and  nakt  seem  to  belong  to
one  root.  In  6DS.  905  I  have  traced  our  nacht  to  nahan.  The
Ssk.  rajani  seems  akin  to  Goth,  riqis,  Ir.  reag,  AS.  racu  (p.  813
end).  Other  words  for  night :  Ir.  oidhche,  aidclie,  Zeuss  257,
Gael,  oiche;  Finn,  yö,  Est.  a,  Hung,  ej,  Lapp,  iya,  ya;  Basq.
gaua,  gauha,  arratsa,  zaroa.  The  Greek  language  has  a  separate
name,  vvkto^  afio\y6<;,  for  the  last  third  of  the  night,  when
dreams  are  true  (p.  1146  mid.);  [but  also  the  first  third,  when
Hesperus  shines,  II.  22,  317].

p.  737.]  Day  and  night  are  holy :  ^  Sla,  Od.  9,  151.  306;
mit  Got  und  dem  heiligen  tag,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  7,  536-7;  so  mir  der
heilige  dacht  107,46.  109,  19;  so  mir  Got  u.  dat  heiige  lieht!
254,  19;  so  mir  dat  heilige  licht!  57,  1.  105,  30;  summer  (so
mir)  der  dach,  der  uns  allen  geve  licht  I  14,  50.  119,  1.  69,  21 ;
God  ind  der  gode  dach  7,  41.  21,  40.  65,  55;  so  mir  der  gode
dach,  so  uch  der  g.  d.  I  33,  39.  219,  62;  durch  den  guden  dach


^1512  DAY  AND  NIGST.

69,  21.  196,  3.  312,  63;  so  mir  der  gaote  tacl  Oes.  Abent.  8,
227 ;  als  mir  helf  der  g.  1. 1  3,  248 ;  dor  dere  van  den  goden  dage,
Lano.  44948 ;  bi  Gode  ende  bi  den  goeden  dage,  Walew.  155 ;
Beioaert,  coming  ont  of  his  hole,  'quedde  den  schonen  dach*.
Rein.  2382 ;  '  Saint  Jonrdhny,'  Th&tre  Pran9.  2,  47;  qui  parati
snnt  diei  maledicere,  MB.  26,  9  (n.  1256),  conf.  '  w6  geschehe  dir
(woe  betide  thee),  Tac,  daz  dn  mich  l&st  bt  Hebe  langer  bliben
niht  I '  Walth.  88,  16.  Of  a  piece  with  the  above  adjurations  is
our  '  as  sure  as  the  day  stands  in  heaven ' ;  OHG.  theist  giwis  io
söV2a^,  O.  v.  12,  33;  MHO.  ich  weiz  ez  w&rez  als  den  tac,  Trist.
6646 ;  '  daz  ist  w&r  s6  der  tac,'  Diemer  78,  8.

p.  738.]  Day  appears  as  a  personality  independent  of  the  sun:
'Awake  the  god  of  day/  Haml.  1,  1;  'hoer  tag,  den  nieman
bergen  kan,'  Spiegel  after  Altsw.  191;  quasi  seuex  tabescit  dies.
Plant.  Stich,  v.  1,  8,  conf.  the  Plautian  phrase  Miem  com-
burere';  mit  rtiolten  den  tag  austragen,  Bure.  Waldis  272^;  eya,
tach,  weres  du  veile,  Haupt  1,  27 ;  herre,  w&  is  (how  goes)  der
tach  ?  En.  297,  18;  ez  was  h6he  üf  der  tach  300,  13 ;  waz  vnzet
mir  der  tach  (got  to  say  against  me),  daz  er  niene  wil  komen?  335,
14;  alt  und  junge  w&nden,  daz  von  im  der  ander  tac  erschine,
Parz.  228,  5.

Uchaisravas,  the  heavenly  steed  of  day,  emerges  from  the
ocean,  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  3,  138 — 140.

Hunc  utinam  nitidi  Solis  praenuntius  ortum

afferat  admisso  Lucifer  albus  equo,     Ov.  Trist,  iii.  5,  55.

'AvLKa  irip  re  nror  inpavov  erpe'xpv  Tir/rot

A&  räv  poBoTra^w  am    ^HKeavoio  <f>€poicai,     Theocr.  2,  174.

The  shining  mane  of  day  agrees  with  the  ancient  notion  that
rays  of  light  were  hairs ;  Claudian  in  Prob,  et  Olybr.  3  addresses
the  sun :

Sparge  diem  meliore  coma,  crinemqt^  repexi
blandius  elato  surgant  temone  jugales,
efflantes  roseum  frenis  spumantibus  ignem  1

Compare  too  the  expression  Donnerstag^s-pferd,  Thursday's  horse,
p.  738.]  The  sun  rises :  er  s6i  rann  up,  Fomm.  s.  8,  114.
Sv.  folks.  1,  154.  240.  Vilk.  s.  310;  rinnet  ufe  der  snnne.  Diem.
5,  28 ;  errinnet  362,  26 ;  der  sunne  von  dir  ist  öz  gerunnen,  MS.
1,  28».     Lith.  utzteka  säule,  up  flows  the  sun,  fr.  tek^ti;  light


DAY  AND  NIGHT.  1513

also  flows  and  melts  asunder,  conf.  '  des  tages  in  zeran/  Wigam«
3840.  '  Morne,  da  dia  snnne  iifgatf  n.  sich  über  alle  berge  l&t/
Dietr.  dracb.  345^;  8w&  si  vor  dem  berge  ufgat^  MS.  1,  193^
conf.  M.  Neth.  baren,  ontplnken  (Suppl.  to  743) ;  £  diu  sänne
üfstige,  climb  np,  Dietr.  dr.  150*;  dei  sänne  sticht  hervor,  Soester-
febde  (in  Emmingb.)  664;  die  sonne  begonste  risen,  Bein.  1323;
li  solanz  est  levez,  et  li  jors  essauciez,  Gaitecl.  1,  241;  'des
morgens,  do  de  snnne  wart/  came  to  be,  Yalent.  n.  Namel.  243^ ;
'wan  dei  snnne  aiiquam/  arrived,  Soester-f.  (in  Em.)  673,  bricht
an  627.  682;  'diu  snnne  üßrat,'  stept  np,  Mar.  leg.  175,  47.  60;
de  sonne  baven  de  banä  guam,  Val.  n.  Nam.  257^;  diu  snnne
ißas  uf  hö,  Franend.  340,  29 ;  bi  wachender  sunnen,  Keyserrepht.
Endemann  p.  26.

p.  740.]  Er  sach  die  sonne  sinken,  Lanc.  16237 ;  diu  snnne
under  sane,  Pass.  36,  40 ;  die  sonne  sane,  soe  ghinc  onder,  also
soe  dicke  hevet  gbedaen,  Walew.  6110 ;  sd  der  snnne  hinder  gegat
(LO.  hintergegangen?),  MS.  2,  192**;  von  der  sannen  üfgange  n.
zuogange,  Griesb.  2,  23;  hinz  diu  snnne  zuo  gie  (went-to)  122;
dd  diu  snnne  nider  gie  (went  down).  Nib.  556,  1 ;  diu  snnne  was
ze  tal  gesigen  (sank),  Wh.  447,  9;  onch  eiget  diu  sänne  sdre  gegen
der  &bentzite  (sinks  low  toward  eventide).  Trist.  2512 ;  alse  die
sonne  dalen  began,  Lanc.  16506;  alse  hi  di  sonne  dalen  sach,
Maerl.  S,  197;  6  sich  diu  sun  geneiget  (stooped),  MSH.  3,  212*;
za  dal  di  sunne  was  genigen.  Dint.  1,  351 ;  des  ftbends  dö  sich
undersluoe  diu  snnne  mit  ir  glaste.  Pass.  267,  51 ;  diu  sunne  ie
zft  ze  tale  schoz  (downward  shot),  Alb.  v.  Halb.  (Haupt  11,  365) ;
der  sunne  ze  &bent  verscein,  Bol.  107,  23.  Ksrchr.  7407;  =  die
sonne  iren  sehin  verluset  (loses  her  sheen),  Keyserr.  Endem.

p.  210 ;  metter  sonnen-scede  (discessn),  Limborch  8,  206. On

coacher,  colcar,  collocare,  solsatire,  see  RA.  817 :  einz  vif  soleil
cachant,  Aspr.  39^;  'und  solar  siot/  tili  set  of  sun,  SsBm.  179^;
'  ontaz  siu  sizzit/  until  she  sitteth,  Fragm.  29,  14 ;  e  die  sonne
gesässe,  Weisth.  2,  453 ;  bis  die  sonne  gesitzt  2, 490 ;  in  sedil  gan
=obire,  Diut.  2,  319\

(Sunne)  gewtted  on  west-rodor,  Cod.  Exon.  350,  23 ;  west  on-
hylde  sweg^lbeorht  hinne  setUgonges  f6is  1 74,  82 ;  bis  die  sonne
wider  der  forste  gibel  sohinet,  Weisth.  3,  498.  Norw.  '  solen  be-
gyndte  at  beide  mod  aas-randen/  Asb.  Huldr.  1, 1,  and '  solen  stod
i  aas^kanten/  1,  27,  went  towards,  stood  at,  aot^s  edge;  for  this


1514  DAY  AND  NIGHT.

and  for  giahamarr,  conf.  F.  Magn.  Dagens  tider  p.  15  and  Bopp's
Gl.  25^:  ^  Ästüf  nomen  möntis  oecidentcUis,  ultra  qnem  solem  ooci-
dere  credunt ; '  it  came  to  mean  snnset,  and  at  last  any  downfall :
'  Day  sinks  behind  the  best  of  mountains,  Ast/  Knrainge  563.
1718.  2393.  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  3,  183-4.  (Pott  in  his  Zählmetb.
264  derives  asta,  sanset,  fr.  as^dejicere,  ponere);  'diu  sunne  an
daz  gebirge  gie/  Ecke  110;  m  clpcu  7)\iov  hrl  roZ^  Speai,  teal
ovjTca  SeBvKevcu,  Plato's  Phsado  116;  ichn  geloube  niemer  m£,  daz
snnne  von  Mycene  g&,  Trist.  8283  (MycensB  in  Argolis^  Sickler
p.  m.  283-4).  In  a  rocky  valley  of  Switzerland,  at  a  certain  hour
once  a  year,  the  sun  shines  through  a  hole  in  the  fnountain-^all,
and  illamines  a  church-steeple ;  conf.  the  sun  shining  into  Belsen

church,  Meier's  Schwab,  sag.  297. 'Dd  diu  sunne  ze  gadeti

soldo  g&n/  Morolt  1402 ;  de  sunne  geit  to  gade,  Brem.  wtb.  1,
474;  fjKto^  tcoifiarai,  Wieselgr.  414;  de  sunne  woU  to  bedde,
Firmen.  1,  329.  M.  Neth.  'die  sonne  vaert  henen  thaerre  rüsten
waert/  Maerl.  3, 124;  umb  jede  abendzeit,  ehe  die  sonne  zu  lutuse
kömpt,  Brehme  B.  1*;  'Moidla  (girls),  geit  hoim  I  Die  sun  geit
no  ;  Kriegt  koene  keen  tanzer,  Wos  steit  ihr  den  do  ?  '— — *  Eh
die  sonne  zu  genaden  get/  Weisth.  1,  744.  2,  492  ;  e  die  sunne
under  zu  genaden  gienge  3,  510.  Does  the  Goth,  remi-sol,  rimi-
sauil,  mean  the  sun  at  rest  f  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  540 ;  quant  li
Bolaus  ganchi  (tottered),  Mort  de  Garin  144.  Note  the  phrase  in
Walewein  8725 :  ^  Doe  begonste  die  sonne  gaen  Te  Oode  van  den
avonde  saen ; '  conf.  Esth.  ^  pääw  lähhäb  loya/  the  son  goes  to  his
Maker  =z sets.  The  light  of  sunset  is  thus  expr.  in  MHG. :  'diu
sunne  z'abunde  schein/  to  evening  shone,  ICarl  3525.

p.  742.]  ON.  glaSr =mtens  and  laetus,  and  we  say  '  beaming
with  joy ' ;  so  the  beaming  sun  is  called  '  Glens  beSja  (hUf-'hlV^/
God-blithe,  Edda  Sn.  Hafn.  1,  330.  Sunnenfroh  (or  Snnnenfro,
Mohr's  Reg.  v.  Fraubrunnen  no.  381,  yr  1429)  may  mean  '  glad
as  the  sun,'  or  '  of  the  sun,'  as  in  Boner  66,  42.  A  maiden  in  a
Swed.  song  is  named  SoUfagr,  var.  Solfot,  Arfv.  1,  177.  180;  at
gULdja  sig=:to  set,  Sv.  afvent.  342.  At  evening  the  sun's  bow
goes  to  joy :  illalla  ilohon,  Kalev.  27,  277.  Ace.  to  Bagen's
Germ.  2,  689  the  sun  has  a  golden  bed,  lies,  sleeps  on  gold :  als
di  sonne  in  golt  geit,  Amsb.  urk.  no.  824,  yr  1355;  gieng  die
sonn  im  gold,  Günther  783 ;  de  sunne  ging  to  golde,  Ges.  Abent.
2,  319 ;  singt  als  die  sonne  fast  zu  golde  wolde  gehn,  Scherfer


DAY  AND  NIGHT.  1515

195. The  san  in  rising  oat  of  tfae  sea^  crackles,  Ossian  3,  131 ;

and  the  image  of  the  zolota  bdba  (golden  granny)  utters  tones,
Hanosch  p.  167  ;  like  Memnon's  statue,  Lucianos  Philops.  S3.

p.   748.]      Oannes   (the  sun)  dips  in  the  sea  every  evening,
Hitziges  Philist.  218.

*H/i09  S'  ffiXto^  iJL€revlc<T€TO  ßovXvrovSe,  Od.  9,  58.    II.  16,  779.

*Hi\io^  fxiv  eircira  viov  irpoo'ißaWep  äpovpa<;

i^  axaXappeirao  ßaOuppoov  ^fliceavolo

ovpavov  elaavidv,  II.  7,  421.     Od.  19,  433.

*iTeX*09  S*  avopovae,  Xitriiv  trepLfcaXKea  \ifitn}v,

ovpavov  69  TToXv^aTueov,    Od.  3,  1.

Occiduo  lota  profunda  sidera  mergi,  N.  221.  '  Sage  me,  for
hwam  seine  seo  sunne  swft  re&de  on  seme  morgen  ?  Ic  )>e  secge,
for  l^am  ^e  heo  cymlS  up  of  poBre  8(b*  Altd.  bl.  1,  190  ;  nu  gengr
sol  i  egi,  Alex,  saga  p.  163.  The  sun  bathes  at  night,  Hpt's
Ztschr.  4,  389.  N.  Pr.  prov.  bl.  1,  298 ;  '  d6  begund'  ez  werden
naht,  und  sleich  diu  sunne  n&ch  ir  aht  umhe  daz  iiorden-merey  als
k'  crept  round  the  northern  sea,  Geo.  6001 ;  weil  die  sonne  nie'

dertunkt,  Schmidt  v.  Wem.  184. But  the  sun  also  goes  into

the  forest.  Swed. '  solen  gär  i  skogen  ' :  sol  gätt  i  skog.  Folks.  1,
155 ;  när  sol  gick  i  skog,  Cavall.  1,  96 ;  '  si]7an  sol  är  undi  vijn/
got  behind  the  trees,  Oestg.  175  (F.  Magn.  Lex.,  sub  v.  land  vidi,
gives  a  differ,  explan.  of  vide,  vij^i)  ;  nä  nu  ned,  du  sol,  i  gran-
skog,  Kalev.  Gastr.  2,  57.  Finn,  kule  (kulki)  päiwä  kuusikoUe  1
Kalev.  19,  386.  412  ;  conf.  'Not  yet  the  mountain,  but  only  those
houses  are  hiding  the  sunshine,'  Goethe's  Eleg.  What  means
'bis  die  sonne  uf  diGu. peinapfel  kommt,'  (Weisth.  3,  791)  ?  till  he
gilds  the  fir  cone  f

Unz  sich  der  tac  uf  machte,  Hagen's  Ges.  Abent.  2,  367 ;  der
tac  der  eleidi  in  (crept  to  them)  balde  zuo,  MS.  1,  17P;  der  tac
der  schleicht  wie  ein  dieb,  Hätzl.  23*;  der  tac  nahen  begunde
n&ch  sinem  alten  vunde,  Türl.  W.  1 25* ;  die  dach  qua/m,  die  niet
onstont,  MaerL  2,  236,  so  that  he  never  stands  still.  The  day
says:  '  I /are  away,  and  leave  thee  here,'  Uhl.  169;  der  tac  wil
niht  erwinden  (turn  back,  leave  off),  Wolfr.  8,  18 ;  der  morgen
niht  erwinden  wil,  den  tac  nieman  erwenden  (keep  off)  kan,  MS.  1,
90^  '  Do  der  tac  erschein/  shone  out,  Parz.  428,  13.  129,  15 ;  d.
d.  t.  vol  erschein,  Er.  623 ;  der  tac  sich  schouwen  liez,  Livl.  3299 ;


1516  DAY  AND  NIGHT.

do  der  morgen  sich  üf-liez,  und  si  sin  entsuoben.  Pass.  80,  79 ;  sich
der  tac  entsUz  (anlocked),  ürstende  118,  61 ;  der  tac  sich  Hz  den
wölken  bot,  Türl.  Wh.  67*;  dö  si  ges&hen  den  morgen  mit  stme
liehte  üfstrichen,  die  vinstre  naht  entwichen  von  des  snnnen
morgenröt,  Pass.  36,  51 ;  der  tac  lühte  schitere  (thin),  Serv.  3237.
Dager  var  Ijus,  Sv.  folks.  1,  129.     La  nuis  sen  ya,  et  li  jors  es-

clari,  Garins  2,  203. 'Der  tac  sich  anzündet/  kindles,  Hätzl.

86* ;  dat  hi  den  dach  sach  baren^  Walewein  384! ;  die  men  scone
baren  sach,  Karel  1,  376.  2,  1306.  594;  dat  menne  (den  dach)
baren  sach  2,  3579,  der  tac  sich  hete  erbart,  Eracl.  4674 :  sach
verbaren  den  sconen  dach,  Lanc.  44532.  45350.  Also  ontplaken  :
'  ontploc  haer  herte  alse  die  dach/  her  heart  flew  open  like  the
day,  Karel  1,  1166.  Walew.  3320.  7762;  conf.  'sin  herte  uer-
lichte  als  die  dach,'  Walew.  9448 ;  ontsprane  die  dach,  Earel  2,
593 ;  die  dach  uten  hemele  spranc,  Walew.  6777.  4885 ;  Fr.  '  le
jour  jaillit ; '  möcht  der  tac  herspriessen,  Hofm.  Gesellsch.  59 ;
Lett.  '  deena  plaukst/  sproats,  bnds.     The  day  stirs :  dag  rinii,

0.  i.  11,  49 ;  naht  rinit,  0.  iii.  20,  15  ;  lioht  rinit,  O.  i.  15, 19.    ii,

1,  47.  The  day  is  rich,  powerful :  '  guotes  ist  er  niht  rteJie{r)
wan  als  des  lichtes  der  tac,'  than  the  day  is  of  light,  Cod.  Vind.
428,  no.  212  ;  reicher  dan  der  tac,  Uhl.  1,  196. Other  expres-
sions for  daybreak  :  'die  Nacht  die  weicht/  grives  way.  Lb.  1582.
42 ;  Niht  forS  gewat,  Cod.  Exon.  412,  12 ;  din  nacht  gemachlich
ende  nam,  Franend.  485,  11;  nns  ist  din  naht  von  hinnen,  Wolfr.
Lied.  8,  16;  nnz  uns  din  naht  gerumet,  Hahn's  Strieker  10,  35 ;
so  lange  bis  die  schmiede  pinken,  u.  der  tag  sich  wieder  vor^
zeiget,  Ettner's  Yade  et  occide  Cain,  p.  9.  It  is  finely  said  in
the  Nib.  1564,  2 :  '  nnz  daz  (until)  din  sunne  ir  liehtez  schinen
bot  (held  out)  dem  morgen  uber  berge ; '  als  der  morgenrdt  der
vinstem  erde  lieht  erbot,  Mar.  169,  28 ;  unz  der  ander  morgenrot
der  werlde  daz  lieht  bSt,  Serv.  1839;  euch  schein  nu  schiere  der
morg^nrdt,  den  diu  sunne  sante  durch  vreude  vür  (Dawn,  whom
the  sun  sent  before  him  for  joy)  daz  er  vrendenriche  kür  yogeln
n.  bluomen  br&hte,  Türl.  Wh.  69*.  Simpler  phrases  are:  dd
begundez  liuhten  vome  tage,  Parz.  588,  8 ;  gein  tage  die  vogele
sungen,  Mai  46,  16.  For  descrying  the  dawn  they  said :  '  nft
kiu8  ich  den  tac,'  choose,  pick  out,  espy,  Walth.  89,  18 ;  kös  den
morgen  lieht  88,  12;  den  morgenblic  erkös,  Wolfr.  Lied.  3,  1;
als  man  sich  des  tages  entete,  Wigal.  5544.


DAY  AND  NIGHT.  151T

p.  744.]     Day  is  like  a  neighing  steed  :
Yelox  Aurorae  nantius  Aether

c^fugal  hinnUu  Stellas.  Claudian^s  4  cons.  Hon.  561.
He  cleaves  the  clonds  :  der  tac  die  wölken  spielt  (split)^  MS.  2y
167*.  So  the  craw  with  flapping  of  her  wings  divides  the  night,,
lets  in  the  light ;  with  her  and  the  AS.  Doeg-hrefn,  we  may  assoc.
the  ON.  names  Dag-hvelp  (quasi  yoang  day)  and  Dag-ulf,  For*
stem.  1,  328.

p.  744]  Day  is  beantifnl :  beau  comme  le  jour,  plus  beao»
qae  le  joar ;  ils  croissoient  comme  le  jour,  D'Aolnoi's  Cab.  des.
f.  243 ;  wahsen  als  der  tac,  S.  Uolr.  328.  S6  der  morgen  enstaty
Herb.  8482  ;  d6  der  tac  werden  began.  En.  11280;  die  naht  \hty
ende  het  waert  dach,  Earel  2,  1305  (conf.  die  nacht  let,  die  hem
verwies,  Floris  1934) ;  der  tac  ist  vorhanden  (here,  forthcom--
ing),  Simpl.  1,  528 ;  d6  gien,c  üf  der.  tac  (went  up),  Wh.  71,  20
[Similar  examples  omitted]  ;  unze  iz  beginne  üfgan.  Diem.  174,
5 ;  es  giengen  nicht  14  tage  in's  land,  Schelmufsky,  conf.  p.  633*  ;
der  tac  gät  von  Kriechen,  MSH.  3,  426*.  Diu  naht  gie  hin,  der
tac  herzuo  (or,  der  morgen  her,  der  morgen  quam,  Pass.  47,  8&.

329,  53.     307,  68   [Similar  ex.  om.]. Day  comes  rapidly:

comes  upon  the  neck  of  you,  Döbel  1,  37* ;  an  trat  der  östertac^
Pass.  262,  16 ;  als  der  snntac  an  gelte/  243,  1 ;  dd  der  ander
morgen  üfran,  Serv.  3410 ;  der  tac  geflozzen  kam,  Troj.  kr.  29651 ;
der  tac  kommt  stolkcn,  Hätzl.  26^ ;  der  tac  &am  einher  walken  28* ;
er  die  mane  sinke  neder,  ende  op  weder  rise  die  dach,  E[arel  2,
1194.  He  poshes  his  way  up :  do  dranc  üf  der  tac,  Rosen-g.  627 ;
begunde  üf  dringen,  etc.  [Similar  ex.  om.]  ;  do  siben  tage  vor^
drangen,  Kolocz  162;  des  tages  wize  ostem  durch  diu  wölken
dranc,  Wigal.  10861.  He  t«  up :  des  morgens,  d6  der  tac  üf
was,  Fragm.  4P ;  nn  was  wol  üf  der  tac.  En.  7252  ;  ez  was  höhe
üf  den  taollUe;  do  was  ez  verre  M  den  tac  10334.

p.  745.]  The  day  may  be  hindered  from  breaking :  '  What
have  I  done  to  the  day  ?  Who  has  led  him  astray  ? '  En.  1384 ;
H.  Sachs  iü.  3,  68*  (ed.  1561),  48^  (ed.  1588)  says  of  a  'day-
stealer '  (idler) :  '  wilt  den  tag  in  der  muUer  umbtragen  ? '  carry
him  about  in  thy  trough,  OHG.  muoltra.  There  is  a  Ä^y  to  the
day,  Sv.  vis.  2,  214.  Vlaemsche  lied.  p.  173 ;  the  key  of  day  is
thrown  into  the  river,  Uhl.  171 ;  '  Had  I  the  day  under  lock  and
key,  So  close  a  prisoner  he  should  be '  169  (conf.  the  day's

VOL.  IV.  B


1518  DAT  AND  NIGHT.

answer).     The  son  is  caught  in  a  noose,  he  cannot  continne  bis
journej,  and  has  to  be  ransomed,  Elemm  2,  156.

A  phrase  nsed  in  Wirzbnrg  comes  very  near  the  Bomance
poindre :  '  der  tag  spitzt  sich  schon/  points,  perks,  pricks  itself
up,  H.  Mailer's  Griechenth.  44 ;  Illyr.  zora  puca,  the  dawn  shoots.
With  ä  la  pointe  du  jour,  conf.  '  matineret  a  punta  d'  alba,*  Mila
y  Puntals  159.  OHG.  striza=jubar  (sub  ortu),  Graff  6,  760;
lucis  diei  spiculum  in  Oriente  conspiciens,  Eemble  no.  581,  p.  106 ;
Mer  tac  die  wölken  spielt/  split  the  clouds  (Suppl.  to  744).

p.  747.]  The  dawn  is  accompanied  by  noise,  esp.  by  agitation
of  the  air :  ich  waen  ez  tagen  welle,  sich  hebet  ein  küeler  vnnt.
Nib.  2059,  2 ;  diu  lufl  sich  gein  dem  tage  ziuhet  (air  is  drawn
towards  day),  diu  naht  im  schier  entfliuhet,  Türl.  Wh.  65*.  We
must  conn,  aurora  and  aipiov  (morrow)  with  aura,  avpa  (breeze) ;
and  AS.  morgen-sweg  may  be  akin  to  swegel  (p.  746).  '  Sol  ek
s&  driupa  dyn-heimum  t/  solem  vidi  mergi  in  oceano  f  mundo
sonoro  ?  Ssdm.  125^.  The  Hätzlerin  80*  speaks  of  the  gewimmer
(whine,  moan,  droning)  of  daybreak ;  '  far  an  eirich  gufuai  mear
a'  grien  o  stuaidh  nan  ceann  glas,'  ubi  oritur  sonore  sol  a  flue-
tibus  capitum  glaucorum,  Tighmora  7,  422 ;  Ssk.  ravi  means  sol,

rava  sonns,  ru  sonare. Alba  is  the  lux  prima  that  precedes

the  blush  of  dawn,  Niebuhr  2,  800 ;  it  is  like  Matuta,  Leucothea.
Burgny's  Glossaire  350*  explains  'par  son*  before  M'aube'  as
'  par  dessus,  tout  ä  la  pointe ' ;  It.  suW  alba.  Our  anbrechen
contains  the  idea  of  noise  :  daz  der  tac  4f  prach,  Diemer  175,  7 ;
de  dach  up  brah,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  399.  Detm.  1,  50  [Sim.  examp.
cm.]  ;  day  breaks  in  through  the  windows,  Felsenb.  3,  458 ;  ich
sihe  den  morgensteme  4f  brehen^  MS.  1,  90^,  conf.  Lith.  brSkszti,
to  glimmer,  dawn ;  erupit  eras,  Walthar.  402 ;  Taube  creva,  M^n
1,  291.  The  noise  of  daybreak  is  sometimes  to  be  expl.  by  the
song  of  the  wakening  birds :  '  der  tac  wU  uns  ersehellen/  ring
out,  Ges.  Abent.  1,  305 ;  der  süeze  «cAaZ  kunt  in  den  tac,  Mai
93,  33 ;  biz  sie  erscfaracte  (startled  them)  der  vogeUsane  93,  32.
With  the  Span.  '  el  alva  se  rie,'  conf.  Turn.  ▼.  Nantes  42,  4 :
'diu  sunne  in  dem  himel  smieret,*  smiles.  Orepusctdum  pre-
supposes a  crepus,  which  must  belong  to  crepare,  as  ^^c»9  murk
is  akin  to  '^o^?  noise,  see  Benfey  1,  617  seq.    Bopp's  Gl.  91.

p.  748.]  Bopp's  Gl.  53^  connects  uhtvo  with  ushas,  from  ush
to  bum,  as  ahtau  with  asht&n ;  die  udit  is  still  used  in  Germ.


DAY  AND  NIGHT.  1519

Bohemia.  l7Äh'.6öa  =  orgia,  GL  sletst.  6,  436,  is  explained  hj
Wackernagel  as  dawn-petition,  Haupt  5,  324.  Diluculo  is  rend,
in  OHG.  by:  in  demo  unterlucJielinge,  Windb.  ps.  260;  fruo
unierlucJielingen  206 ;  dagendeme,  Ps.  Trev.  206  ;  an  demo  dcdithe
260;  piliothe,  Diut  1,  530*.  Falowendi,  /atecndi =crepusculum,
Graff  3,  496-7  (fald  =  falvus,  pallidus) ;  prima  lace  =  in  der  urnich-
den,  Hor.  Belg.  7,  36»»,  for  which  AS.  has  woma  (p.  745),  beside
glommung ^  t^ec^nm  =  crepascalum  (may  we  connect  'as  de  dach
griemelde*  ?  Promman  4,265).  OS.  byrting;  and  with  dags-
brun  is  conn,  the  Pr.  female  name  Brtin-maWn  =  Aurora,  Diet.
2,  325,  misspelt  Brumatin,  M6on  3,  447.  MLG.  dageringe^
diluculum,  Detm.  1,  178.     2,  546.

The  personific.  of  Tagaröd  is  also  indicated  by  the  men's
names  Daghared,  Trad.  Corb.  226,  Dagrim  394.  The  word  is
fem.  in  Gotir.  Hagen  65 :  an  der  dageroit ;  but  the  masc.  pre-
ponderates, both  here  and  in  morgenrdt  (see  quotations  from
Mar.,  Servat,  and  Türl  Wh.  in  Suppl.  to  743  end) ;  yet  '  die
rotbrünstige  morgenröt,'  H.  Sachs's  Wittenb.  nachtigal.  '  Der
tag  graut,'  turns  grey,  dawns ;  conf.  '  es  graut  mir,'  it  frightens
me :  des  tages  blio  was  dennoch  gr&,  Parz.  800,  1.  'Hfiepa  a/i4>^
TO  Xvxavyi^  airo,  dies  circa  ipsum  diluculum  est,  Lucian's
Somn.  33 ;  Arab,  dhenebu-ssirhan,  wolfs  tail,  the  first  glimmer
of  dawn,  that  sweeps  over  the  sky,  then  disappears,  leaving  a
deeper  gloom  behind,  Rückert's  Hariri  1,  215.

p.  748.]  Does  the  obscure  word  morgen  actually  mean  break-
fast? Finn.  murkina=jentaculum,  breakfast- time.  Morning,
like  day,  climbs  up  and  is  high,  hence  the  name  of  Dietrich
der  Hochmorgen,  Bauch  1,  413.  Greek  aipiov  ipOpo^,  to-morrow
morning;  ßaOif^  SpOpo^,  Arist.  Vesp.  216.  Plato's  Crito  43  and
Prot.  310.    Luke  24,  1.

p.  748.]  The  sense  of  downward  motion  in  abend  is  con-
firmed by  'diu  sunne  begttnde  senken  u.  oben  (sinking  and
offing)  tegelich,'  Heinz  v.  K.'s  Kitt.  u.  pf.  5.  AS.  cwUd=
conticinium,  ON.  qveld;  conf.  Goth.  anaqal=^ quies.  ON.  hüm  =
crepusculum,  AS.  glom.  The  ON.  röckur=crepu8culum  (p.  813)
is  in  Swed.  skymming,  Dan.  shumring,  LG.  scliemmer,  ackummeV'
licht;  conf.  Boh.  and  Buss,  sumrak,  and  the  name  Simrock  [sd-
mrak^  8Ti-merki= half-mirk,  subtenebrae,  fr.  mrak,  m6rok  =
Tnirk],    ON.  skoera,  twilight,  Olaf  helg.  s.,  ed.  Christ.  47,  25.


1520  DAY  AJSfD  NIGHT.

Diu  iunhle,  evening  twilight,  Osw.  2018-71;  OHG.  tunehali,
Graff  5,  435.  Swed.  tysmörh,  Dan.  tusmorke  orepusculum  (p.
814  n.).  Vesperzit,  sd  diu  sunne  schale  git  (gives  shadow).  Mar.
158,  7;  conf.  Buaero  r  lyeXto?,  aKiStovro  re  iraaai  aryvutl.  Od.
11,  12.  15, 185.  Twilight  is  also  eulen-fluchi,  or  simply  etde,
owl,  Firmen.  1,  268.  Si  bran  uf  schöne  sam  der  Abentröt,  MS.  1,
84*.  ON.  qmldrodi,  aurora  vespertina.  '  Abentröt,  der  kündet
Inter  moBre/  Walth.  80,  15.  Modem:  'abendroth  gut  wetter
bot,'  or  '  ab.  bringt  morgenbrot,'  or  '  der  morgen  grau,  der  abend
roth,  ist  ein  guter  wetterbot,'  Simrock's  Spr.  20.  19.  7099.
On  the  other  hand :  EudyyeT^^  fiev,  Aairep  17  irapoifiia,  "E<»9
yivoiTo  fir/Tpo^  €Vff)p6vr)^  irdpa,  Aesch.  Agam.  264.

p.  749.]  6Bk.  uSas  aurora,  dual  us&sA,  Bopp's  Gl.  6i^;  Jjst.
aurora  for  ausosa ;  Att.  &09,  Ion.  ^»9,  Dor.  aa>9,  ^ol.  avw^  ;  oonf.
Ostarit  (p.  290).  The  blush  of  dawn  is  expr.  in  &k.  by  narir,
the  virgins,  Gott.  anz.  '47,  p.  1482.  In  Theocr.  2,  147  the
goddess  rosy-armed  is  drawn  by  steeds  (Suppl.  to  738) ;  '  oon-
stiteram  exorientem  auroram  forte  salutoms/  Cic.  de  Nat.  D.  1,
28  (conf.  Creuzer  p.  126).  On  the  Slav.  lutrUhogh  as  god  of
morning,  see  Myth.  ed.  1,  p.  349  n.

p.  750.]  The  origin  of  '  Hennil,  Hennil,  wache  ! '  in  the  Mark
is  still  unexplained.  Observe,  that  tales  are  told  of  Strang
Hennel  as  of  Strong  Hans,  and  that  honidlOf  ace.  to  Wend.
volksl.  2,  270',  actually  means  a  shepherd's  staff.  Like  that
shepherd  in  Dietmar,  the  Roman  fetialis,  when  about  to  declare
war,  entered  the  sanctuary,  and  waved  the  shields  and  lance  of
the  god's  image,  crying,  '  Mars,  vigila  I '  Härtung  2,  168.     Serv.

ad.  Aen.  8,  8. Both  in  France  and  Germany  the  watchman,

the  vr6ne  wehter  (MSH.  8,  428^),  blew  the  day  in  with  his  horn  ;
his  songs  were  called  ta^e-lieder,  aubades.  '  La  gaite  come,  qui
les  chalemiaus  tint,'  Garin  1,  219;  les  gaites  coment  desor  le
mur  anti  2,  117.  158 ;  la  guete  cuida^que  laube  fust  crevee,  il  tret
lejor,  et  huche  et  crie,  M^on  1,  195 ;  et  la  guete  ert  desus  la  porte,
devant  le  jor  come  etß-etele  1,  200.  *Der  wahtaere  diu  tage-liet
(pi.)  86  lute  erhaben  h&t,'  Walth.  89.  35  (see  Lachm.  on  W.  p.
202);  den  tao  man  kündet  dur  diu  Jiom  (pi.),  MS.  2,  190*;  diu
naht  was  ergangen,  man  seile  ez  wolde  tagen.  Nib.  980,  1 ;
wahter  hüet  höh  enbor,  MS.  1,  90*;  er  erschelt  ein  horn  an  der
stunt,  d&mit  tet  er  den  liuten  kunt  des  tages  kunf  t  gewaltidich.


DAY  AND  NIGHT.  1521

Ls.  3,  311.  He  cries  :  'ich  sich  in  her  gdn  (I  see  him  come  on),
der  mich  wol  erfröuwen  mac^  her  gat  der  liehte  schoene  tac/
ibid. ;  smerghens  alse  die  waelUer  blies^  Floris  1935 ;  der  uns  den
tag  herhliesy  Liederb.  of  1582.  28^  anblies  238 ;  der  wechter  blost
an^  Keisersp.  Brösami.  25^;  '  the  watchman  blows  the  rest/  Eb'z.  of
Orl.  502 ;  the  warder  or  '  hansmann '  blows  the  day  off,  he  comes
of  himself.  Drei  Erzn.  p.  443 ;  '  der  wechter  ob  dem  kosten/  the
guard  over  the  coach-boot.  Did  watchmen  cany  a  mace  called
morgensiem  ?  see  Hollberg's  EUefte  Juni  5, 9.  Frisch  1^  670  says
it  was  invented  in  1347.

p.  750.]  Day  is  beautiful  and  joyous  :  der  tac  schoen  u.  grise
8in  lieht  beginnet  mdren,  Troj.  kr.  9173 ;  daz  lieht  mit  vrevden  6f
trat^  Pass.  329,  54.  On  the  contrary,  'das  abendroth  im  westen
welkt/  fades,  pales,  Schm.  v.  Wem.  253.  The  morning  star  is
harbinger  of  day  (p.  752  n.)  :  daz  im  der  tage-sterre  yruo  kunte
den  tac,  Ksrchr.  7885 ;  aarrjp  arfyiXXtov  ^009,  Od.  13,  94.

Birds  rejoice  at  his  coming:  '^vUa  SpviOe^  aa-toai  Trp&roh
Charon.  Fragm.  84^ ;  6  8pvi^  Ttfv  &»  xaX&v,  Athen.  4,  36 :  daz
deine  süeze  vogellin  kan  dingen  (reckon)  üf  den  morgenschin,  u.
sich  des  tages  fröuwen  muoz,  Troj.  kr.  20309;  nam  din  naht  ein
ende,  die  vogel  des  niht  wolden  durch  iemans  freuden  swende
verswtgen,  wan  sie  sungen  als  sie  solden  (would  for  no  man's
pleasure  hush,  until,  &c.),  Tit.  5364;  noch  süezer  denne  dem
vogltn  morgens  vröne,  Frauenl.  Ettm.  p.  27 ;  de  yoghel  den  dach
smorghens  groette,  als  hine  sach.  Rose  7832  (conf.  '  den  kleinen
vogellin  troumet  uf  esten/  dream  oh  the  boughs,  MS.  2,  166*).
Cock-crow  announces  day :  i^ipjeaffai,  r)Srf  akcKTpvovoDV  fSovroDV,
Plato's  Symp.  223 ;  der  han  h&t  zwir  (twice)  gekraet,  ez  n&het
gSn  dem  morgen,  MS.  2, 152*;  as  de  hanens  den  dag  inkreggeden
(crowed-in),  Lyra  p.  114.

p.  752.]  The  swift  approach  of  Night,  its  falling,  sinking,  is
expr.  in  many  turns  of  speech :  ez  taget  lane  (slowly),  u.  nahtet
drat,  Teichn.  70 ;  als  die  nacht  mit  aller  gewalt  (all  her  might)
herein  brach.  Drei  klügste  leute  146.  That  night  breaks  in,
whereas  day  breaks  forth,  has  been  remarked  by  Pott  1,  236 ;  yet
Goethe  says  '  die  nacht  bricht  an/  Faust  126 ;  cum  nox  inrueret,
Greg.  Tur.  10,  24;  wie  die  nacht  herbrach,  Eatzip.  ci^;  biss  das
der  abend  hereindrang  (pressed  in),  Fischart's  Gl.  schif  1131;
forth  of  each  nook  and  corner  crowds  the  night,  Goethe ;  do  viel


1522  DAY  AND  NIGHT.

Etn  gaeher  &bent  an,  Trist.  314  ;  dia  naht  nn  sere  zuo  gäht,  Tiirl.
Wh.  26^;  die  d.  inickt  mit  gewalt  ein,  Maulafie  569;  die  n.  rasche
qnam^  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5^  338 ;  es  schiesst  (et  schütt,  it  shoots)  in
den  abends  Schütze  4,  S3.  Night  came  upon  the  neck  of  ns,
Uogr.  Simpl.  65.  Ettn.  Apoth.  877;  'die  n.  stosst  an/  bumps
against^  Weisth.  1^  305 ;  '  it  was  avent^  de  n.  anstoet/  Beineke  4,
1.  'Niht  becom,'  saperyenit^  Beow.  230;  conf.  el^  oxev  eXdy
BeieXo^  oy^i  Bvtav,  atadarj  S"  ipißcoiXov  apovpav,  J\,  21^  231 ;  ^817
yap  KoX  imjXvOe  SeieXov  fipMpy  Od.  17,  606  ;  as  de  avent  in't  lant
kern,  Müllenh.  p.  201 ;  trat  de  n.  an,  Weisth.  3,  87;  die  n.  betritt
ihn  (tramples)  3,  457;  conf.  'wan  sie  die  n.  betrift/  hits  3,  785,
and  *  bis  die  dämmernng  eintrat/  Felsenb.  4,  63.  2,  599,  herein
tritt/  steps  in  4,  144 ;  '  die  naht  hinzuo  geschreit/  strode  up  to,
Troj.  kr.  10119;  'nahet  in  din  naht/  nears  them.  Nib.  1756,  1;
'  en  hadde  die  n.  niet  ane  gegaen/  not  come  on,  Karel  2,  934  ;  do
din  naht  (der  äbent)  ane  gie,  Lanz.  3210.  Flore  3497.  Diemer
27,  4.  Frauend.  342,  30.  Iw.  3904;  gieng  der  abend  her,  Götz
v.  Berl.  82 ;  hie  mite  gienc  der  ftbent  hin,  a.  dia  naht  heran  lief
(ran).  Pass.  47,  84;  dia*vinstere  n.  her  ouch  swanc,  als  si  in  ir
loufe  lief  36,  41 ;  als  diu  n.  hin  gelief  81,  86;  diu  n.  kumt  daher
gerant,  Dietr.  drach.  336^.

Again,  night  sinks,  bends,  falls:  der  &bent  was  zuo  gesigen,
Diut.  1,  351;  ist  diu  naht  herzuo  gesigen,  Troj.  kr.  11718;  diu
n.  siget  zuo,  Dietr.  drach.  154^;  uns  siget  balde  zuo  diu  n.,  Lanz«
709;  diu  n.  begunde  eigen  an,  Morolt  1620.  3963;  diu  n.  siget
an,  Dietr.  dr.  327^;  diu  n.  vast  üf  uns  neiget   (bends).   Hatzi.

192,  112. Or  day  sinks,  and  night  climbs  :   do  der  tac  hin

seic,  diu  n.  herzuo  steic,  Dietr.  9695;  biz  der  dach  nider  begunde
sigen,  inde  die  nacht  up-stigen.  Karlmeinet  p^  18 ;  li  jours  va  a
declin,  si  aproche  la  nuit,  Berte  54;  li  jors  sen  va,  et  la  nuis
asseri,  Garins  2,  157;  la  nuiz  va  aprodiant,  si  declina  le  jor,
Guitecl.  2,  169;  nu  begund  diu  sunne  sigen,  u.  der  &bentsterne
stigen,  Zwei^oufm.  180;  ez  begunde  sigen  der  tac.  Er.  221;
ä  la  brune,  ä  la  chuie  du  jour.  Similar  are  the  phrases :  der  tac
was  iezuo  hin  getreten.  Pass.  27,  7;  der  tag  gieng  zu  dem  abend,
Uhl.  1,  246;  conf.  ^dagr  var  a  sinnum/  inclined  to  evening,
Seem.  104^.  In  the  same  way:  der  tac  hiemit  ein  ende  nam,
diu  vinster  naht  mit  trüebe  kam,  Pass.  19,  3;  der  tac  sleich
hin,  u.  kam  diu  naht,  Freib.  Trist.  4705 ;  ja  swant  (vanished)


DAT  AND  NIGHT.  1523

der  tac^  u.  wuohs  (grew)  diu  naht^  Heinz  y.^Konst.  Bitt.  a.  pf.
7;  conf.  Lat.  adulia  node;  dd  der  tac  verswant,  6.  frau  2018.
2427;  LG.  'he  letfc  dagen  u,  swinen/  ^ schemmern  u.  dagen/
Strodtm.  200.  238.  Brem.  wtb.  4,  634;  'do  der  tao  zerstoeret
wart  von  der  Tinsternisae  grdz^  u.  din  n.  herzuo  gefloz/  came
flowing  up,  Troj.  kr.  10489  ;  der  tac  gefluze  hin  8519;  do  der  t.
was  ergdn,  Diemer  149,  25 ;  '  als  der  t.  was  gelegen,^  lain  dowD|
Erast4679;  Mo  der  t.  lie  sinen  achin/  let  be,  left  off,  Troj.  kr.
11095  ;  '  der  t.  sin  wunne  verlat/  his  bliss  forsakes,  MS.  2,  192^  ;
der  t.  sin  lieht  verldt  2,  496^ ;  der  t.  lat  stnen  glast,  Troj.  kr.
8480;  do  des  tages  liebt  verswein,  Bari.  368,  3;  si^iSan  ce/bn-
leoht  under  heofenes  hidor  beholen  weorSe'S,  Beow.  821 ;  der  tac
gierig  mit  freuden  hin,  dd  diu  naht  ir  tmeben  schin  über  al
die  werlt  gespreite,  6erh.  4931 ;  sefenscima  ford  gewat,  Csddm.
147,  30;  der  tac  begerte  urloubes  (took  leave)  mit  liuhte,  Tit.
3743.

Night  catches,  grasps:  diu  naht  hegrifet.  Tit.  3752.  Dietr.
dr.  97*.  Heinr.  Trist.  4650;  die  nacht  hevet  mi  hier  begrepen,
Maerl.  3,  157 ;  una  si  begreif  diu  naht,  Wolfd.  302,  1 ;  nnz  daz
si  da  diu  n.  begreif,  Mai  39,  5;  die  nacht  kompt  geslichen,  Ld.
1582,  53.  Night  covers,  spreads  her  mantle:  )>&  com  asfter
niht  on  last  dsege,  lagu-stre&mas  wredh,  Cssdm.  1 47,  32  ;  'ja
waene  diu  n.  welle  uns  nicht  wem  m£r,'  will  not  guard  us  more.
Nib.  1787,  2;  die  nacht  yfBkV  für  äugen,  Drei  kluge  leute  147;
evening  was  at  the  door,  Pol.  maulaffe  171 ;  der  abend  all  bereit
vor  der  hand,  Sohweinichen  1,  87;  dö  man  des  äbindis  intsuob,
Athis  C*,  153.

Night  was  deemed  hateful,  hostile,  Benfey  2,  224 :  6rk  Setkrj,
SeicXoi;  evening  is  akin  to  Seikos  timid,  BeiSoo  I  fear;  conf.  vv^
oXoi],  Od.  11,  19,  naht-eise  horror  noctis,  and  Shaksp.'s  'grim-
looked  night.'  The  Lith.  ^naJctis  ne  brolis,  night  is  no  man's
friend'  occurs  already  in  Scherer's  St.  Gall.  Mss.  34*:  die
lacht  niemand  ze  freunde  hat,  and  in  H.  Sachs  1,  233°.  On
the  other  hand :  '  la  nuit  porte  avis,'  conf.  to  sleep  upon  a  thing.

p.  752.]  'Night  has  the  victory  won*  is  also  in  Rosen-g.
1119;  der  tac  vertreip  diu  vinster  naht,  Frauend.  344,  31;  per
contra:  diu  n.  den  t.  het  verswant  271,  25.  A  full  descr.  of
night's  victory,  with  *  her  dusky  banner  hang  on  all  high  towers,*
in  Ls.  3,307.


1524  SülfMEB  AND  WINTEB.

p.  753.]  The  .notion  of  night's  ghominesM  preponderates:
aW  fgroi  vuu  fUv  irei6<ofA€da  wscrl  fUKalvtf,  Od.  12^  291.  OS.
thiusiri  nakt,  He).  ISS,  4,  etc.;  de  dusters  nacht^  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,
893;  in  dero  naht^finstri  bechlepfet,  N.  Cap.  13;  dia  vinster
n.^  Fraaend.  S39^  SO,  etc.;  dia  ioUvinsier  n.,  Lana.  6538;  dia
swarze  n.,  Herb.  7964.  In  thieves'  lingo^  «ciu^ars  =  night ;
dia  iriiebe  n.,  Wh.  2,  10.  Swiss  *  leidige  nacht/  pitch-dark.
Staid.  2,  98  (kidensring  oat,  pierce) ;  bei  eUUr  naht^  *Abele's
Oerichts-h.  1, 391.  ühl.  Yolksl.  683  (Ambras.  Ldrb.  1582, 377).
AS.  'on  wanre  niht/  pale,  Beow.  1398;  niht  wan  ander  vole«
nam  1295;  conf.  OS.  wanam  andar  wolcnam,  Hel.  .19,  20,  morgac
wanam  21,  1 ;  niht'helma  genipa.  Cod.  Exon.  160,  12  ;  Bceadu»
helma  gesceapa  seriSan  cw6mon,  Beow.  1293;  ON.  grima^  larrs,
means  also  conticiniam,  qaando  omnia    qoasi  obyelata  oalig^ne

videntar. In  voiles-  nacht  (pleine  nait),  Schweinich.  8,  59.  87,

234 ;  '  die  geschlagene  n.,'  stricken,  hashed,  Matth.  Pred.  y.  Lath,
p.  27.  Philand.  2,  83 ;  hehhen  n^  Bein.  2271  (illanis  t) ;  nait
dose,  Baboa  219;  schon  weicht  die  Hefe  n.,  Gk>ethe  12,  242  =
saccincta  nox,  Sid.  Apoll.  Epist.  3,  8;  dW  irs  hii  rpi)(a  vwcrh^
iriv,  fkerh  V  aarpa  ßeßi^si,  Od.  12,  312.    14, 483,  conf.  the  scTen

parts  <^  night,  Fernowls  Dante   2,  229. ^Night  is  long,  w^

IMxpri,  Od.  11,  373;  often  called  iniempesia  nam,  nnseasonable
(for  work) :  dam  se  intempesia  nox  praedpitatj  Cato  de  Mor. ;
conf.  the  ON.  adj.  nioly  SsBm.  51*  (AS.  neol,  neowolcsprona?).
Bat  ako  einf^povrf,  the  kindly  (comforting  f),  Hes.  Op.  et  D.  562  ;
OHO.  kistillandi  naht,  Diat.  1,  251;  'd6  was  dia  susze  n.  for/
gone  by,  Lanz.  1115.  On  modraneei,  see  Hattemer  1,  334.  The
midnight  hoar  is  fittest  for  deciding  the  fates  of  men  (p.  858-9).


CHAPTER  XXIV.

SUMMER   AND   WINTER.

p.  754.]  Winter  is  called  bird-killer,  ols^voKTor^,  Aeseh.
Agam.  563,  and  'der  vogele  n6t,'  MSH.  1,  58^  A  M.Neth.
poem  (Earel  2,  133)  says :  '  so  dat  si  ten  naesten  Meye  motten
yogelen  gescreye  porren  moghen,'  may  march  oat  mid  the  songs
of  birds ;  '  wie  der  Meie  yögelin  vroens  macht,'  gladdens^  elevates,
MS.  1,  31^


StJMHBB  AKB  WINTBB.  1525

p.  755.]  SI.  iar  (spring)  s=y6r  (year),  saysMiklos.  110;  Zend.
ydre  (year),  Pott  2,  567.  Bopp,  conf.  Gramm,  p.  568.  Kulin's
Ztsohr.  2,  269  connects  jh  with  &pa,  hora.  Bekker  in  Monats-
ber.  '60,  p.  161  says  fap  for  fiap^yer.  We  may  also  conn.
(ap  with  f^pi  (early),  as  oar  frühling  with  früh.  Kuhn  thinks
▼er  is  for  ves,  Ssk.  vasantas  (spring) ;  conf.  yasas,  vftsara  (day),
▼asta  (daylight).  Ssk.  vaisara  (year),  Bopp's  01.  806^.  Finn.
vtum  (year),  Esth.  oast,  conf.  Lat.  aestas;  in  Kalev.  1,  248
imosi  year,  and  kesä  summer,  seem  synonymous.  Ssk.  aamd,
annus,  is  fern,  of  sama,  similis,  Bopp  and  GDS.  72  seq.  Lenz
(spring)  is  also  langsi,  lanxi,  lanzig,  Staid.  2,  156;  8(ymer  ende
hntin,  Rose  7826.

p.  755.]  Change  of  season,  change  of  year  is  expr.  by  '  diu
zJt  hit  sich  Verwandelot,*  MS.  1,  78^;  conf.  'in  der  zife  jdren/
years  of  time,  Mai  107,  18.  To  the  Egyptians  the  year  sails
round,  whilst  in  German  '  ana  umb  ham  daz  jftr,'  Otnit  899 ;  ein
umhe-gendez  j&r.  Trist.  Frib.  1079;    ein   m&nd  in  (a  month  to

them)  des  j4res  trit,  Pass.  162,  58;  das  rollende  jähr. In  guU

fan-neuf,  goi  is  mistletoe  (p.  1206) ;  conf.  onr  Germ,  cries :
'  drei  hte/en  (8  blasts  on  the  bugle)  zum  neaen  jahr  1 '  Schm.  2,
156;  'glückseligs  neues  jahr,  drei  hiefen  z.  n.  j.!'  Frisch  1,  452^
from  Besold.  New-year  is  expr.  by  's6  sich  daz  j&r  geniuwet
hit '  in  springtime,  Warnung  2291 ;  or  '  wann  daz  j&r  atus»
ehumpt/  out  comes,  Gtosta  Bom.  Keller  99 ;  do  das  jar  anskomf
Weisth.  8,  650;  but  also  by  the  simple  'New.'

p.  756.]  The  idea  of  the  whole  year  is  now  and  then  per-
sonified, both  in  wishes  and  otherwise:  Got  gebe  uns  wunnecliche
jar,  Beinh.  ace.  to  yar.  2248  (ms.  P.K.) ;  guot  jar  gange  si  a4t
(encounter  them),  Kistener  1188;  conf.  übel-j&r,  mal-anno
(p.  1160  end) ;  do  das  jar  ausUom,  Weisth.  3,  650;  ehe  ein  jahr
in  das  land  kommt,  Drei  Erzn.  266;  ehe  zwei  jähre  in's  land  gehn,
Pol.  maul.  8;  daz  vünfte  j4r  in  gie.  Trist.  151,  27;  that  j&r
furdor  skrSd  (strode),  Eel.  18, 28  (conf.  AS.  forff  gewät  dseg-rtmes
wem  (numeri  dierum  multitude),  Csddm.  60,  1,  see  'dsBg-r.
worn'  80,  20.  156,  51);  le  bonhomme  Vannee,  M6m.  de  Tacad.
celt.  4,  429.  In  the  Bacchiea  pompa  'Eviavro^  appears  as  a
giant  with  four  elbows  {rerpaTq-xyi,  4  cubits  high?),  bearing
Amalthea's  horn,  Athen.  5,  198  (Schw.  2,  268).

p.  757.]     Also  in  Hel.  14,  10 :  'so  filn  wintro  endi  sumdro'


1526  SÜHMBB  AND  WINTEB.

means  the  same  as  AS.  fela  missera ;  but  5^  1.2^  where  Zacharias
says  he  was  '  tadntig  wintro '  old  when  he  married  Elisabeth,
and  has  lived  with  her  'antsibunta  (70)  wintro/  he  is  90  years
old,  and  wintar  stands  for  year.  The  AS.  midwinter,  ON.
miiSvetr,  appears  in  M.  Neth.  as  medewinter,  Lane.  13879,  midde-
winter  23907.  A  computation  of  sumor  and  lencten,  Andr.  &
El  p.  xxiv.  Leo's  Bectitud.  212-3.  The  ON.  doegr  is  Swed.  dygn.
Oadrun  says  in  Sasm.  232^  :  '  for  ek  af  fialli  fimm  dcßgr  tali  ff/
fared  I  from  the  fell  5  days  told  j  conf.  F.  Magn.  Dagens  tider,
p.  28.  The  sacredness  of  Midsummer  and  Midwinter,  of  St.
John's  day,  sunnewende  (p.  617)  and  yule,  favoars  the  dual
division :  on  the  night  of  St.  John,  vigils  are  kept  in  field  and
lawn  under  gold-apple  tree,  Molbech  no.  49.  Norske  eventyr
no.  52.     KM.  no.  57.

p.  758.]  As  to  a  connexion  between  Tacitas's  three  seasons
and  Wodan^s  three  progresses,  see  Kuhn  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  493.
It  seems  to  speak  for  the  three  seasons,  that  often  only  three
assizes  are  recorded  in  a  year ;  and  still  more,  that  three  greai
sacrifices  were  offered,  in  autumn  til  Ars,  in  winter  til  grßSrar,  in
summer  til  sigrs,  Yngl.  s.  cap.  8 ;  tribus  temporibtis  anni,  Lacomb.
no.  186  (yr  1051).  Gipsies  divide  the  year  into  two  and  six
seasons,  says  Pott  1,  66.  The  Persian,  like  the  Spaniard,  had
two  springtimes,  for  Fasli  in  the  Gillistan  speaks  of  the  Shah
Spring,  Shah  Summer,  Shah  Autumn,  Shah  Winter,  and  Shah
New-year  (newrus)  =  March,  who  reintroduces  the  spring.  ON.
haust,  Swed.  höst,is  an  abbrev.  of  herbist,  hsdrfest  [Scot,  hair'st],
see  Gramm.  2,  368.  In  Up.  Hesse  also  they  call  spring  auswärts,
Vilmar's  Hess.  Ztschr.  4,  52.

p.  761.]  Spring  is  expr.  by  the  phrases :  ez  was  in  der  site
aller  bluomen  ursprinc,  Flore  5529 ;  s6  die  bluomen  enspringent
153;  von  den  bluomen  wie  sie  sprangen  821 ;  conf.  flos  in  vers
novo,  Pertz  5,  785.  More  vividly  personal  are  the  adjs.  in :  '  der
lunge  frühling,*  E.  Meier's  Schwab,  march,  p.  303 ;  '  vil  lieber
Sumer,  der  liebe  S.,'  MS.  .1,  167^  MSH.  3,  212»;  diu  liebe
sumerzit,  MS.  2,  108*;  diu  liebe  sumer- wunne,  Dietr.  381  ;
saelige  sumerzit,  MS.  2,  108^  (our  'die  liebe  zeit');  and  even
'  der  heilige  sumer,'  Myst.  i.  312,  2.  To  which  is  opposed  'der
leidig  ynater,'  MSH.  3,  215^;  'die  feile  winter,'  Böse  53.  62.
Both  seasons  come  and  go  :  '  ira  y vers,  si  revenra  estez,'  Orange


SÜMMEB  AND  WINTEB.  1527

2,  75;  OS.  $hred  the  wfntar /or d,  Hei.  6^  13;  biems  saeva  transiit,
Carm.  bur.  193;  swanne  der  winter  abe  gienc,  nnde  der  samer
ane  vienc^  Alex.  5094 ;  Netli.  die  winter  ginc  in  hani,  Maerl.  2,  8
(like  :  binnen  dien  ginc  die  nacht  in  hant,  Lane.  46927) ;  als  die
winter  inginc,  Lane.  36044 ;  geht  der  winter  daher,  Götz  v.  Berl.
246;  der  vorder  Winterhlaub  herwider  hat  gehanset  sich  aut
seinen  alten  sitz,  Wolkenst.  67;  na  ist  der  leide  winter  hie,  Ben.
396;  der  snmer  ist  comen  in  dia  lant^  MS.  2,  83^;  pis  humt  der
samer  here,  Otnit  (Y.  d.  Ron)  29 ;  nnz  ufien  S.  Urbans  tac^  danne
gat  der  samer  in,  H.  Martina  bl.  250 ;  si  jehent,  der  samer  der
si  hie,  MS.  1,  67** ;  es  geet  ein  frischer  freier  sommer  da  herein,

Bergreien  71 ;  ver  redit  optatam^  Garm.  bur.  178. Or,  instead

of  Sammer,  it  is  May,  as  mai-gesäss  means  snmmer-pastare,
Stalder  293 ;  els  der  Meie  in  gat.  Warn.  1887;  an  S.  Philippen-
tage,  so  der  Meie  alrSrst  in  gat,  Franend.  63,  13 ;  alse  die  Mey
in  quam,  entie  April  orlof  nam.  Lane.  23434 ;  '  d4  hat  ans  der
Meie  sinen  kram  (wares)  erloabet,  ze  saochen,  swaz  wir  siner
varwe  gernochen,*  to  pick  what  we  please,  MS.  2,  167*;  des
Meien  blie,  Tit.  32,  2 ;  do  man  des  liebten  Meigen  spil  mit
siner  blüete  komen  sach,  Troj.  6889 ;  Meie,  die  heide  griieze  !
MS.  2,  167^;  der  Meie  hftt  die  heide  geeret  2,  52* :  '  der  winder
twanc  die  heide,  na  grüenet  si  im  ze  leide/  to  spite  him,  Ben.
453;  flower-leaves,  whereon  'der  May  sein  dolden  (ambels)
henget,'  .Snchenw.  46,  28;  des  liebten  Meien  schar  (company)
st&t  bekleit  in  purpur-var  (-hne),  MSH.  3,  195^;  flowers  are
'des  Meien  hünne/  MS.  2,  22%  and  ' svmer-geraete'  1,  194**;
üf  Walp argen  tag  xv,  gebant  Mei-gerten  (-switches),  Weisth.
3,  497 ;  '  giezent  nar  den  Meien  ander  oagen  1  *  sings  a  girl  in
MS.  2,  74** ;  does  it  mean  '  pat  the  garland  on  me '  ?     Mai,  dein

gezeU   (pavilion)  gefeilt  mir   wol,  Wolkenst.    116. May  has

power:  ich  lobe  dich,  Meie,  diner  hraft,  MS.  2,  57*;  des  Meies
virtuit,  Uhl.  1,  178  ;  gfin  wir  zao  des  Meien  hoch-gezite  (hightide),
der  ist  mit  aller  einer  Jerefte  komen,  Walth.  46,  22  (Lachm.  is
wrong  in  note  to  Nibel.  p.  6) .  So :  in  der  samerlichen  mäht,
Parz.  493,  6;  der  snmen  mit  siner  kraß,,  MS.  1^  37* ;  des  Meien
krafl  sie  br&hte  dar,  der  was  der  mälaere  (painter),  Blicker  79  ;
der  winter  twinget  mit  siner  krafl,  MS.  1,  37**;  des  Aberellen
kraft,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  6,  353,  and  so  of  all  the  months.  With
power  is  blended  goodness :  des  Meien  giiete  a.  kraft,  Mascatbl.


1528  SUMMBB  AND   WINTER.

in  Altd.  urns.  2,  189 ;  ze  veld  u.  Af  der  heide  lac  der  Mai  mit
sfner  guete,  HätzL  131,  6.  Suchenw.  46,  15  ;  des  Meigen  gueie,
Hatzl.  159,  584.  Troj.  16218 ;  oonf.  thera  zlti  goati  (SappL  to
791) ;  der  Meie  hete  do  gevrout  (gladdened)  mit  der  liehten
künfte  sin  (his  comiog)  diu  wilden  walfcvogelin,  Partenopier  45,
18 ;  anmer,  du  b&st  manege  guete,  Laclim.  Walth.  xvii.  7.  Sammer
brings  bliss :  si  jehent,  der  sumer  3er  si  hie,  din  wunne  diu  si
komen,  MS.  1,  67^ ;  'heia  sumerwunne,  swer  uns  din  erbunne !  '
grudge  us  thee  2,  63* ;  sit  die  sumerw,  alrfirst  begunde  n&hen  2,
74*;  er  ist  komen  wider  mit  gewalde,  den  der  Meige  hit  vertriben;
snmerw.  ist  im  entrunnen  (fled  before  him)  balde,  der  ist  vor  im
niht  gebliben,  Frauend.  507 ;  sumerw.,  ntg  dem  süezen  Meigen,
MS.  2,22*;  der  sumerw.  güete,  Flore  165;   zur  somerw.,  Banr

no.  718. 1?he  Germ.  Summer  or  May  stands  on  a  par  with

the  Scand.  god  Freyr  returning  from  exile  (p.  212-3),  as  indeed
Maia,  Flora,  Aprilia  were  goddesses  to  the  Bomans.  A  tree
breaks  into  blossom  when  a  god  aetiles  upon  it :

seht  ir  den  boum,  der  d&  st&t,
der  loubes  vil  u.  bluomen  h&t,
I    ein  got  hat  sich  da  nider  gelan  (let  himself  down),
&n  den  (without  him)  mdhte  ez  niht  erg&n,
ez  ist  bi  namen  Teryigant.  Geo.  2162.

The  poet  of  the  Warnung  sings :

nu  minuet  (ye  adore)  bluomen  unde  gras,

niht  in  der  (not  Him  who)  sin  meister  was ;

wlp  unt  vogel-gesanc

unt  die  liehten  tage  lane,

der  Sache  jegeliche  (all  such  things)

nemt  ze  einem  himelriche.  Hpt's  Ztschr.  1,  495.

And  still  more  distinctly  :

einer  a/nhetet  (one  adores)  daz  vogel-sano

unt  die  liehten  tage  lane,

darzuo  bluomen  unde  g^s,

daz  ie  des  vihes  sptse  was  (cattle's  food) ;

din  rinder  vrezzent  den  got  (oxen  gobble  your  god);  ibid.  1,  500.

Green  foliage  is  the  garment  of  May  and  Summer :  quoique  le  bois
reprenne  sa  rohe  d'ete,  Villem.  Bardes  Bret.  215;  sxuner-kleit  hit


8UMMBB  AND  WINTEB.  1529

•
er  ir  geeniten  (cut  out),  MS.  2,  47*  j  der  Sumer  wil  rfchen
manigen  bourn  mit  loubes  wdt  (leafy  dress)  2,  83';  beide  u.  auger
babent  sich  bereitet  mit  der  schoensteu  wot,  die  iu  der  Meie  hat
gesant  (which  May  has  seut  them)  2,  83* ;  herbest,  der  des  Meien
wät  vellet  von  den  risen  (cuts  fr.  the  twigs)  2,  105*;  vil  richer
wot,  die  Meie  h&t  1,  192*;  sich  h&te  gevazzet  (collected)  der  wait,
u.  schoeniu  hleit  gein  dem  sumer  an-geleit  (put  on),  Maurit.  1684 ;
in  Meigeschem  walde,  Tit.  143,  1 ;  solutis  Ver  nivibus  virideni
monti  reparavit  amiclum,  Claud.  B.  Get.  168.

p.  762.]  Winter  is  a  ruthless  ruffian  warrior :  '  spiteful  W.^s
envy'  is  complained  of,  MS.  1,  192*;  'der  arge  Winter  twanc/
oppressed,  ibid. ;  der  W.  bant  (also  twanc)  die  beide  2,  78** ;  nu
ist  der  blüenden  beide  voget  (tyrant)  mit  gewaÜ  üf  uns  gezoget,
hoert  wi'er  mit  winde  broget  (blusters)  1,  193*;  des  leiden
Winters  überlast ,  der  si  verw&zen  (be  cursed)  u.  sin  roup  I  2,  20*.
Winter  has  an  ingesinde,  retinue,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4,  311;  des
Winters  wäfen  tragen  (weapons  carry),  MsH.  1,  328*.  But  May
is  armed  too,  and  fights  him  :  mein  ros  schrait  (my  steed  strides)
g^u  des  Maien  schilt,  Wolkenst.  115;  diu  snnne  dringet  lichtem
Meien  dur  den  g^enen  schilt,  der  von  loube  schaten  birt  (brings
leafy  shade)  den  kleinen  vogellin,  MsH.  1,  150*.  His  fight  with
W.  is  descr.  in  detail  in  the  Song  of  battle  betw.  Summer  and
W.,  Uhl.  Volksl.  p.  23.  The  AS.  already  has :  )?a  W89s  W.
scacen,  faeger  folden  bearm,  Beow.  2266  (yet  see  p.  779  n.) ;
brumalis  est  ferüa  rabies,  Archipoeta  p.  76 ;  Winder,  wie  ist  nu
diu  kraft  worden  gar  unsigeha/t  (un victorious),  sit  der  Meie
sinen  schafl  h&t  üf  dir  verstochen,  MSH.  3,  195*;  fuort  mich
durch  des  Meien  her  (host),  der  mit  ritterlicher  wer  den  W.  h&t
ersl-agen  (slain),  Hätzl.  131,  51 ;  winder  ist  nider  valt  (felled),
Wiggert  87 ;  hin  sont  wir  den  W.  jagen  (chase  away),  Conr.  v.
Ammenh.  extr.  W.  p.  51 ;  wol  hin,  her  W.,  ir  müezt  ie  ze  rume  in
bergen,  Frauenl.  869,  16;  der  snmer?ranne  den  strit  l&n  (drop  the
strife  with),  Flore  150.  Haupt  on  Neidh.  45,  12  takes  Aucholf
to  be  for  oukolf  in  the  sense  of  krotolf  (p.  206) ;  yet  also  Ooth.
anhj6n=tumultuari  might  be  brought  in.  The  n^mea  Maibom,
Meienrü  (Closener  68)  point  back  to  old  customs;  the  island
Meigen-autwe,  now  Meinau,  perh.  to  an  ancient  site  of  the  spring
festival.

p.  762.]     A  sweet  May-song  in  Wolkenst  no.  63,  p.  178  :  liet,


1530  SUMMEB  AlTD  WIKTBB.

dft  si  mite  enpfdhen  den  Meigen.  To  welcome  the  spring  is  in
ON.  ']fkfagna  }>eir  sumri/  Maurer  2, 232  ;  alle  die  vogel  froellche
den  Samer  singende  enphant,  MS.  1^  21^;  entphahen  die  wanig-
lichen  ztt.  Dint.  2,  92  j  ontfaet  den  Mei  met  bloemen^  hi  is  so
schone  ghedaen,  Uhl.  Volksl.  178;  sleust  ans  auf  (unlock)  die  tur,
u.  lest  den  Sumer  herein,  Fastn.  sp.  p.  1103;  ir  suit  den  Samer
gruezen,  u.  al  stn  ingesinde^  MSH.  3,  202* ;  Meie^  bis  (be)  uns
toiHehomen,  MS.  1,  194^ ;  wis  (be)  willehomen,  wunneclicher  Meie
1, 196*.  May  and  Summer  are  distinguished:  sint  willekomen /ro
Sumerzit,  sint  will,  der  Meie  l,  59* ;  ich  klage  dir^  Meie,  ich  klage
dir,  Sum^ervmnne  1,  3^.

'  In  den  Meien  riden '  was  a  real  custom,  Soester  fehde  p.  660.
The  men  of  Mistelgau  near  Baireuth  sent  envoys  to  Niirnbg.  to
fetch  Spring.  Thej  were  given  a  hnmblebee  shut  up  in  a  box
(Suppl.  to  697) ;  but  curiosity  led  them  to  peep  in,  and  the  bee
escaped.  They  shouted  after  it  'na  Mistelgau  1 '  and  sure  enough
the  long  rain  was  followed  by  fine  weather,  Panz.  Beitr.  2,  173;
conf.  Herod.  7,  162,  where  a  country  has  the  spring  taken  out  of
its  year.

p.  763.]  The  coming  of  Summer  is  known  by  the  opening  of
flowers,  the  arrival  of  birds :  der  sumer  ist  komen  schfiue  itber  mer
h&t  uns  ze  lande  brftht  ein  vmnnielichez  her,  MSH.  3,  226%  as  in
Ssk.  spring  is  called  husumakara,  florum  multitudinem  habens ;
d6  man  die  sumerwunne  bt  der  vogel  reise  erkande,  do  löste  der
Mei  die  hliLom^en  üz  den  tiefen  banden  3,  229^ ;  der  sumer  ist  mit
süezem  sänge  schöne  erwecket  3,  24P ;  doch  kam  ich  üf  ein  beide,
diu  was  liehter  bluomen  vol,  d&ran  möht  man  schouwen  wol,  ob
der  Mai  ze  velde  lac,  Ls.  1, 199.  Nithart  leads  the  Duchess,  with
pipers  and  fiddlers,  to  where  he  has  thrown  his  hat  over  the  (first)
viol ;  kneels  down  and  raises  the  hat,  '  ir  l&t  den  sumer  schinen,'
MSH.  3,  202^ ;  's  ersti  veigerl  brock  i'  dir  z'liab,  Firmen.  2,  798,
and  Voss  goes  in  search  of  the  first  flowers  as  spring-messengers,
Ooethe  33,  148 ;  the  first  buttercup  and  hvitsippa  used  to  be
eaten,  Dybeck  *45,  68-9,  conf.  the  first  3  comblossoms,  Superst.
I,  695.  1018.  Tussilago,  coltsfoot,  is  called  sommer^thurlein
(-doorlet)  and  Merzblume,  because  it  springs  up  immed.  after  the
snow  has  thawed;  also  filius  ante  patrem,  filia  ante  matrem,
Nemnich  1515;  Nethl.  zomer-zoetjes  (-sweetie)  =galantha8  nivalis.
Clover  too  is  called  summer/lower,  visumarns,  Kl.  sehr.  2,  159.


SUMMER  AND  WINTEB.  1531

p.  763.]  Ghelidonium,  celandine^  so  called  because  it  comeu
with  the  swallow  and  withers  at  his  goings  Dioscor.  2^  211.  A
spring  song  in  Lacian's  Tragopod.  43 — 53  (ed.  Bip.  10^  4)  makes
blossom,  swallow,  and  nightingale  heralds  of  spring ;  if  you  see
the  first  ploughman  ply,  the  first  swallow  üy,  Sdo.,  Sup.  I,  1086 ;
Qsqne  ad  adventum  hirunäineum  vel  ciconinum,  Sidon.  Apoll.  2,
14 ;  ciconia  redeuntis  anni  jugiter  nuntiatrix,  ejiciens  tristitiam
hiemis^  laetitiam  yerni  temporis  introdacens,  magnum  pietatis
tradit  exemplum^  Cassiod.  Yar.  2,  14 ;  Maien-bule,  sommergeck.
Diet.  2,  506  sub  y.  buhl :  conf.  '  künden  vogel  rehte  schouwen,
b6  lobten  sie  zefrouwen  fur  die  liehten  suinerzit,  MS.  1,  84*.

p.  769.]  Schwartz  de  Apoll.  33  compares  Apollo's  fight  with
the  dragon  to  that  betw.  Summer  and  Winter.  The  song  in
Wiggert  p.  37  says :

Winder  ist  nider  valt  (felled).

Winder,  du  bist  swer  sam  ein  bU  (heavy  as  lead)^

Sumer^  du  kaust  den  Winder  stillen  (bring  to  reason).

In  the  Nethl.  song  of  battle  betw.  8.  and  TT.  (Hor.  Belg.  6,  125
— 146)  Venus  comes  and  reconciles  the  ^brothers';  yet,  at  the
very  end,  it  says  Winter  has  had  to  be  killed — evidently  the  ending
of  an  older  song.  Other  pop.  songs  of  summer  in  Firmen.  2,
15.  34.  On  the  Eisenach  sommer-gemnn,  see  Wolfs  Ztschr.  f.
myth.  3,  157  and  Hone's  Daybk  1,  339  (conf.  the  May  fetched
by  May-boys  in  Lyncker  p.  35-6) ;  the  straw  Winter  is  nailed  to
a  wheelj  set  on  fire,  and  rolled  downhill,  Daybk  1,  340.  In  Fran-
conia  the  girls  who  carry  Death  out  are  called  death-maidens,
Schm.  1,  464.  In  Jever  they  have  the  custom  of  *  msiboem
setten,'  Strackerjan  p.  75.*

p.  781.]  By  the  side  of  May  appears  the  May -bride,  Kuhn's
Sag.  pp.  384.  513,  otherw.  called  buhli,  fastenbuhli.  Staid.  1,
240.     The  plighted  pair  are  sought  for^  Somm.  p.  151,  conf.  180;

*  Oar  people's  love  ofaforett-lifet  which  comes  oat  esp.  at  the  sammer-hoUday,
is  shown  in  the  following  passages :  ze  walde  gie,  Eindh.  Jesa  101,  12 ;  (dancing  on
the  meadow  before  the  wood)  reigen  vUr  den  wait  an  eine  wise  lange,  MS.  2,  55^ ;
ze  hoUe  loafen,  reigen  2,  56* ;  daz  dir  ge  wafde  st&t  der  fnoz  (for  a  dance).  Wins-
bekin  29,  4.  Haapt  p.  78.  Massm.  Eracl.  p.  609  ;  wir  snln  vor  öißemfürhoU  ligen
dareh  der  blaomen  smao  a.  der  vogel  gesanc,  Wigam.  2472 ;  ich  wü  vw  ditem
wUdt  ein  höchzlt  machen,  a.  herladen  u.  bitten  froawen  a.  ritter  stolz  an  diz
grUene  flkrholz  2477 ;  vor  dem  walde  in  eime  tal  da  sach  man  swenze  blicken,  die
megde  warfen  oach  den  bal,  MS.  2,  66^ ;  yU  seh^Vne  ze  walde,  an  dem  werde,  hebent
sich  die  tenze  2,  57^


1532  8Ü10CE&  AND  WINTER.

the  Swedes  call  her  midsummarS'hrudf  Wieselgr.  410.  Dk.  Pot-
ter's Der  minnen  loep  1^  80-1.  Antonios  de  Arena  (a  Provence
poet,  d.  1644)  de  villa  de  Soleriis  (Souliers),  Lend.  1758  informa
us :  '  Gam  igitar  none  se  offerat  hilarissimos  mensis  Malus,  qao
tempore  omnes  populi  voluptati  et  gaudio,  laetitiae  et  omni  solatio
indalgere  solent,  ut  inqoit  gloss,  et  ibi  doctores  in  L  anica,  C.  de
mayauma^  lib.  xi,  tunc  enim  apparent  herbae  frondesqae  virentes
et  garritus  avium,  corda  hominum  laetificantes ;  Banoniae,  et  in
nostra  Provencia,  ac  hie  Avenione,  in  viis  regina»  pro  solatio
faciunt,  quas  viri  coguntur  oscidari.  Item  in  dicto  mense  Malo
amasii,  in  signum  amoris  et  solatii  causa  amicarom,  altiasimas
arbores  plantare  sclent,  quas  Maios  appellant ' ;  conf.  Forcell.  sab
V.  majuma.— ^At  Lons  le  Saunier  and  St  Amour  the  prettiest
girl  is  chosen  to  be  nymphs  du  printemps,  is  adorned,  garlanded
and  carried  round  in  triumph,  while  some  collect  gifts,  and
sing  :

6trennez  notre  ipousee  !

▼oici  le  mois,  le  joli  mois  de  Mai,

^trennez  notre  epouaes
en  bonne  6trenne  1

void  le  mois,  lejoli  mois  de  Mai,
gu'on  VQUS  amine  !

In  Bresse  (now  dept.  Ain)  the  May-queen  or  May-bride,  decked
with  ribbons  and  flowers,  walks  first,  led  by  a  young  man,  while
a  May-tree  in  blossom  is  carried  in  front.  The  words  of  the  song
are:

voici  venir  le  joli  mois,

I'alouette  plante  le  Mai,

voici  venir  le  joli  mois,

Talouette  Fa  plants.

le  coq  prend  sa  volee

et  la  volaille  chante.

See  Monnier's  Culte  des  esprits  dans  la  Sequanie.  In  Lorrain
too  he  is  called  joU  Ma.

The  Italians  danced  at  the  spring  holiday,  Donnige's  Heinr.  YII,
191 ;  conf.  the  May-feast  as  descr.  in  Machiav.  Stor.  Fior.  1,  109.
149.  In  ancient  Italy,  under  stress  of  war  or  pestilence,  they
vowed  a  ver  sacrum,  i.e.  everything  begotten  and  bom  that  spring,


TIME  AND  WOBLD.  1533

Niebubr  1,  102.  The  Servian  Whitaun  queen  ia  called  kralitza^
Vuk  sab  V.

p.  782  n.]  Vier  frone  vasten,  Meinaaer's  Naturl.  p.  8 ;  in  der
fronfasten,  in  den  fronfasten,  Keisersb.  Om.  42-3.  Did  they  have
a  matron  go  about  muffled  at  that  season  7  Er.  Alberus  in  Fab.
39  says  of  a  disorderly  dressed  female  :  '  sie  gieng  gleichwie  ein
fassenacht ' ;  die  liebe  frau  fastnacht  u.  den  jungherm  von  fron'
fasten,  Bienenk.  49^.

p.  784.]  Does  an  AS.  riddle  in  Cod.  Exon.  417-8  refer  to  the
flying  summer  ?  '  spinneweppe,  daz  sumers  ztt  im  gras  üf  grüenen
wisen  lit/  Albr.  v.  Halb.  124^.  An  Ital.  proverb  traces  the
spring  gossamer  to  three  Marys  (see  p.  416  n.):  've'  quant'
banno ^Zo^o  questa  notte  le  tre  Marie  ! '  conf.  Indiculus  19 :  'de
petendo  (pendulof)  quod  boni  vocant  sanctae  Mariae,'  and
Nemn.  sub  v.  fila  divae  virginis.  Mädchen^  or  Mättchen-somnier
is  sapp.  to  mean  Matthias'  summer,  from  its  appearing  on  that
saint's  day.  Yet  we  read :  de  metten  hebbt  spunnen,  Müllenh.
p.  583.  Now  Metje  is  Matilda,  Brem.  wtb.,  and  we  actually  find
a  '  Gobelinas  de  Rodenberg  dictus  Mechtilde-sumer/  Seibertz  2,
286  (yr  1338).  Matthidia  in  Clemens'  Becogn.  becomes  Mehthild
in  Ksrchr.  1245.  Flying  gossamer  is  called  in  India  maitidd''
hvaga,  Märut's  flag,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  490.

p.  786.]  In  England  on  May  1  the  hobby-horse  is  led  about,
and  also  a  bear,  Haupt  5,  474 ;  conf.  the  erbes-bär,  Somm.  p.
155-6.  Pingster-bloemen,  Pinkster-blomen,  Whitsun- flowers,  is
the  name  given  to  the  merry  processionists  at  Jever,  Strackerj.
p.  76,  and  in  Westphalia,  Firmen.  1,  359.  The  Whitsun  sleeper
is  nicknamed  pfinst-lummel  (-looby)  also  in  Mone's  Schausp.  2,
371 ;  in  Silesia  rauch-fihs,  Berl.  jrb.  10,  224.  In  Bassia  the  lie-
abed  on  Palm  Sunday  is  scourged  with  rods,  Kohl's  Buss.  2,  186.
On  taudragil  see  GDS.  509.


CHAPTEB  XXV.

TIME  AND  WOBLD.

p.  791.]  Wile,  stunde,  Graflf  4,  1224,  zit,  wile,  stunde,  Uob.
1554,  and  stund,  weilt  ^t,  Wolkenst.  161  stand  side  by  side ;  so
oar '  zeit  n.  weile  wird  mir  lang,'  I  feel  dull.    Wtle  occurs  even

VOL.  IV.  8


1534  TIBIB  AND  WOBLJD.

with  a  nameral :  unz  (antil)  drie  wile  körnen  hin^  Senrat.  2652.
As  Xpovo^  was  a  god^  and  Kaipo^  is  called  a  grajbeard^  Tom-
maseo  3,  15.  so  is  din  wile  personified^  conf.  vnUscelde^  pp.  857  n.
863;  '  der  wile  nigen^*  bowing  to  w.,  MSH.  1,  358*  ;  undane  der
-wile  sagen,  KL  274;  gert  si  (honoured  be)  diu  wüe  ande  cUrre
tac,  Parz.  801,  10;  «oeZfc  wile,  saelic  zit,  MSBL  1,  296*,  conf.
AS.  «ae^sfelicitas  and  tempas  opportunum ;  gistaant  thera  ziti
^i/a^t  =  instabat  tempus,  0.  iv.  9,  1,  conf.  des  Samers  giiete^  p.

760  n. Above  all,  there  is  ascribed  to  Time  a  coming,  going,

striding,  advancing,  drawing  nigb,  entering.  Ssk.  amasa  time,
from  am  to  go,  Bopp,  see  Gramm.  491-2 ;  Litb.  amiis,  Armor.
amzer,  Kymr.  amser,  Jr.  am.  The  Lat.  seculum  is  fr.  see  to  go,  Ssk.
sac  fr.  sak=s  sequi  (or  secare?  Pott,  2,  588).  The  OHG.  dihsmo,
conn,  with  Goth.  ]?eihs,  means  processus,  successus,  advance,
Graffs,  111.  M.  Neth.  ^u2^  =  ire,  Lekensp.  622.  Gramm.  1,
978;  diu  wile  hete  sich  vergangen,  Osw.  3443 ;  die  tit  ghine  vort,
Maerl.  2,  364;  ]?&  seo  ttd  gewat  ofer  tiber  sceacan,  Csedm.  9,  1 ;
th6  ward  thiu  tid  euman,  Hel.  3,  14.  23-4.  25,  22;  ein  paar
stunden  kommen  Ms  land,  Weise's  Lustsp.  3,  198 ;  es  giengen
nicht  drei  tage  iu^s  land,  Jucundiss.  36  ;  ehe  zwei  jähre  in*s  land
gehen,Po\.  maulaffe  4;  thiu  ttd  was  gindhit,  Hel.  121,  21 ;  nahtun
sih  thio  h6hun  giziti,  O.  iv.  8,  1 ;  zit  wart  gireisot,  O.  i.  4,  11 ;
'  swie  sich  diu  zit  huop,^  arose,  Tit.  88,  4 ;  die  tit,  die  nooit  noch
ghelac,  Eose353;  weil  jetzt  die  zeit  beigeneigt.  Eichst,  hexenpr.
85 ;  thio  ztti  sih  bibrahtun,  O.  iü.  4,  1 ;  thö  sih  thiu  zit  bibrähta,
O.  iv.  1,  7;  d6  sik  de  tid  brächte,  Sachsenchr.  205;  dö  sik
brächten  dusent  u.  twehundert  jar  226 ;  forS  baero  (1.  baeron)
tid,  Caedm.  8.  31 ;  nie  sich  diu  zit  also  getruoc,  Trist.  13,  84;  sik
hadde  de  tid  gedragen,  Sachsenchr.  213;  our  'what  future  time
might  bring  with  it/  Irrg.  d.  liebe  248 ;  '  die  zeit  bringt's.*

p.  792.]  Stunde,  hour,  often  stands  for  time:  'ja  gie  in  diu
stunde  mit  grözer  kurz-wile  hin,*  their  time  went  by  with  much
pas-time.  Nib.  740,  4;  n&ch  des  Merzen  stunden,  Gudr.  1217,  3.
But  the  OS.  werolt'Stunda  =  m\mdus,  Hel.  76,  5.  159,  11.  The
M.Neth.  also  expressed  a  moment  by  'en  stic,'  Rose  1952,  and
by  the  phrases :  '  biz  man  geruorte  die  bra,'  while  one  moved  the
eyelid,  Servat.  342;  biz  ein  brfi.  die  andern  ruorte  3459;  also
schiere  (as  fast  as)  din  ober  br&  die  nideren  geriieret,  Hpt's
Ztschr.  2,213.


TIME  AND  WOBLD.  1535

p.  793.]  Voss  in  Luise  p.  m.  220  ingeniously  derives  werlt,
world,  fr.  werlen,  to  whirl.  The  World  is  often  apostrophized
by  Walther  37,  24.  38,  13.  122,  7.  In  Ssk.  the  ages  of  the
world  are  yv^a,  the  two  last  and  corrupt  ones  being  Bvapara^s
and  Kali's,  Bopp's  Damay.  p.  266.  The  men  of  the  golden  age
are  themselves  called  golden,  Lucian's  Saturn.  8.  20  (ed.  Bip.  3,
386) ;  conf.  our  Schlaraffenland,  Cockaign,  GDS.  1.2.  So  in
Ssk.  the  plur.  of  löka  (mundus)  =  homines;  and  OHG.  AS.  ferah,
feorh  have  '  mid '  prefixed  to  them,  answering  to  mitil-gart,  mid-
dan-geard  :  OHG.  midfiri,  mittiverihi,  AS.  midfeorwe.  Manaseßs
seems  to  corresp.  to  the  Eddie  alda  ve  iar9ar,  Sasm.  23^,  popu-
lorum  habitaculum,  terra  ab  hominibus  inhabitata  (F.  Magn.  p.
255 n.),  to  which  is  opposed  üive^ütgarSar,  gigantum  habitacula.
And  the  Guel.  siol,  seed,  often  stands  for  people,  men.

p.  794.]  Ssk.  loka,  mundus,  fr.  16c,  lucere  ?  conf.  Lat.  locus,
Lith.  laukas  =s campus ;  'disa  aconun  werlt'  in  Notk.  Bth.  147
transl.  pulcrum  mundum.  The  Hindus  also  held  by  three  worlds:
heaven,  earth  and  hell,  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  3,  121 ;  madhyama  loka
=  media  terra,  quippe  qaae  inter  coelum  et  infernum,  Bopp's  Gl.
256^;  or  simply  Madhyama,  Pott  2,  354.  The  Greeks  too  divided
the  world  into  ovpavo^,  yata,  rdprapo^,  Hes.  Theog.  720  (see
Sappl.  to  806).  ON.  heimr  terra,  himinn  coelum,  heimir  in-
fernus  ?  Heimr  is  opposed  to  hel,  Ssem.  94^ ;  liggj^  i  ™illi  heims
ok  heljar,  Fomm.  s.  3,  128  means  to  have  lost  consciousness.
0.  V.  25,  95.  103  puts  all  three  in  one  sentence:  '  in  erdu  joh  in
himile,  in  abgrunde  ouh  hiar  nidare.'  Distinct  fr.  middjungards,
earth,  is  Goth,  mt/^^an^  =  medium  in  the  compound  mi)?garda-
vaddjus,  fieao-Toixov,  Ephes.  2,  14.  'This  myddeUerde/  Ali-
saunder  p.  1 ;  iz  thisu  worolt  lerta  in  mittemo  iro  ringe,  0.  iv.  19,
7;  ert-rine,  Diemer  118,  23.  121,  1 ;  der  irdiske  ring,  Mar.  191,
16.  Earth  is  called  diu  gruntveste.  Bother  3651;  OHG.  crunffesii
fundamentum,  Graff  3,  718.  'Daz  h&  vergieng,'  the  world
perished,  Wolkenst.  180.  In  the  centre  of  the  world  lies  an
old  atone,  under  it  the  measuring  chain,  Temme's  Altmark  p.  33  \
conf.  navel-stone  (p.  806).  Other  names  :  der  maere  meregarte,
Karajan  22,  15;  der  irdiake  gibel.  Mar.  156,  40 ;  daz  irdiake  tal
174,  34.

The  world-anake  has  iU  head  knocked  off  by  a  throw  of  Thör's
hammer,  Sn.  63.     Even  Fischart  in  Gesch.  kl.  3P  says  :  '  When


1536  TIME  AND  WOBLD.

Atlas  wanted  to  shift  the  globe  to  his  other  shoulder,  to  see  what
the  great  fish  was  doing  whereon  the  world  is  said  to  stand  ;*
conf.  Leviathan  >(p.  998).

p.  795.]  The  world  is  called '  der  vrone sal* lordly  hall, Diemer
297,  6,  which  usu.  means  heaven;  but  'der  sal*  326,  7  seenos
to  be  temple.  On  the  other  hand :  *  diz  j&mertal/  vale  of  sorrow,
Renn.  896 ;  diz  dmertal,  Griesh.  Pred.  2,  101 ;  in  ditze  cUageliclie
tal,  Mar.  148,  2.  198,33;  dieses  jammern,  hummerthal,  Schwei-
nichen  1,  17;  'varenöz  disem  eilende,'  misery,  Griesh.  2,  15;
ÖZ  disem  ubelen  too/tale,  Diem.  301,  2;  in  disem  angsi-hause,
Drei  erzn.  270 ;  von  dirre  snoeden  werlt,  Frib.  Trist.  33.

p.  795.]  There  are  several  heavens :  ace.  to  Dint.  3,  41  ten
at  first,  but  after  Lucifer's  fall  only  nine.  The  Finns  too  have
nine  heavens,  taivahan  yheksän  an,  Kal.  10,  190.  28,  308-9;  vor
froeide  zuoden  himeln  (ad  coelos)  springen,  MS.  2,  47*.

p.  800.]  The  World-tree  is  called  askr  Yggdra^lll  in  Ssem.  3*,
but  Yggdrasills  askr  in  8\  44-5.  89» ;  conf.  the  Low  Sax.  legend
of  the  ash  (p.  960).  Again  :  miotviffr  kyndiz  (is  kindled),  S»m.
8*;  miotviff  maeran /lyrir  mold  ne9an  1* ;  which  is  rendered  arbor
centralis,  for  mio7  =  medium,  says  Magnusen.  But  Bask  reads
myotvi^Sr,  and  other  expositors  miötu^Sr.  Is  miötu'Br  the  tree  the
same  as  miotuSr,  God  (p.  22)  f  Again  :  '  it  aldna  tre*  Sesm.  8*;
perh.  also  the  word  aldumari,  seculum  servans  9^  signifies  the

same  world-tree. The  snake  gnawing  at  the  roots  of  the  ash

must  mean  mischief  to  it :  well.  Germ,  superstition  likewise  places
enmity  between  snake  and  ash,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  251-2.  351-2.  A
somewhat  doubtful  legend  tells  of  a  world-old  drude^i-haum  on
the  top  of  the  Harberg  near  Plankstellen  in  Franconia,  that  its
leaves  fr.  time  to  time  shed  golden  drops,  milk  oozed  out  of  ita
roots,  and  under  it  lay  a  treasure  guarded  by  a  dragon  ;  on  the
tree  sat  a  great  black  hird,  who  clashed  his  wings  together  and

raised  a  storm  when  any  one  tried  to  lift  the  treasure  (?)

Similar  to  the  passage  quoted  from  Ot fried  is  another  in  iv.  27,
19:

tho  zeintun  (pointed  to)  worolt-enti  sines  selbes  henti,

thaz  houbit  himilisga  munt,  thie  fuazi  ouh  thesan  erdgrunt,

thaz  was  sin  al  in  wära  umbikirg  in  fiara

obana  joh  nidana.
But  0.  has  nothing  about  birds.    Neither  has  the  legend  on  the


TIME  AND  WORLD.  1537

Wood  of  the  Gross ;  but  it  mentions  the  spring  and  the  serpent.
It  makes  Seth  look  in  at  the  door  of  Paradise  and  spy  a  spring,
which  parted  into  the  four  rivers  Pison,  Gihon,  Tigris  and
Euphrates ;  at  the  source  of  the  Euphr.  stood  a  withered  tree,
with  a  great  serpent  coiled  about  it ;  its  root  ran  deep  down  into
hell^  on  its  crown  lay  a  newborn  babe  in  swaddling-bands.  The
serpent  is  he  of  the  forbidden  fruit-tree,  but  he  answers  to
Nii5höggr,  the  four  rivers  or  springs  corresp.  to  the  three  of  the
Edda,  the  child  on  the  tree-top  to  the  eagle,  and  the  roots  of
both  trees  reach  down  to  hell.  But  the  wood  of  the  Cross  only
comes  of  three  pips  oflF  this  tree,  which  grow  up  into  three  other
trees*  Now  where  did  this  legend  spring  up  ?  and  may  some
heatlien  features  have  been  adopted  into  it?  The  Leg.  Aurea  c.
64  is  very  brief.

With  the  Oriental  fable  of  the  mouse  gnawing  at  the  root  of
the  bush  in  the  well,  ought  to  be  conn,  the  Indian  myth  of  the
thin  stalk  of  grass  hanging  over  a  precipice,  and  unceasingly
gnawed  by  a  mouse,  Holtzm.  3,  1 14.  The  widely  spread  fable
above  has  even  been  painted.  Mono  8,  279 ;  conf.  Benfey's
Pantsch.  1,  80.  2,  528.     Liebr.  on  Barlaam  p.  330-1.

p.  801.]  Gehenna  is  supposed  to  mean  vale  of  sorrow;  pi.
gehenna£,  Amob.  2,  14.  Arab,  iahennem,  Pers.  gehinnom;  the
Turks,  too,  retain  it  in  the  Koran  as  jehenne,  the  abode  of  ehlis,
diabolus.  'AStj^,  atSrf^  is  e^l.  as  the  invisible  (god),  fr.  alBi^^.
Hades  is  addressed  as  a  person  :  &ya^  'AtSrj,  Soph.  Trach.  1085;
80  is  the  Hebrew  Sheol,  b'\Hp,  bnp  Gesen.  73  P  [see  Hosea  13,
14,  and  1  Cor.  15,  55].  Lucian  de  Inctu  2.  3  descr.  Hades  as  a
vast  and  dark  subterranean  abyss,  encircled  by  the  fearful  streams
of  Gocytus  and  Pyriphlegethontes,  and  to  be  reached  by  sailing

over  the  Acherusian  bog. Dietrich  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  7,  305,

says  Niflliel  is  a  place  of  torment  too;  yet  höll  in  Fischart's
Garg.  202",  is  still  a  mere  dwelling  place:  das  (wie  dort  ge-
schriben  steht)  '  ein  so  weite  höUe  find  man  kaum,  da  all  dis  toden
hetten  raum.'  Did  he  take  that  fr.  the  passage  in  Widukind  ?
Simple  dying  is  called  faring  to  hell ;  hence  the  Norse  expres-
sions hel-rei&  {e.g.  Brynhildar),  and  fara  til  Heljar  (p.  313).  It
sounds  purely  local  in  'si  ist  in  der  helle  begraben,*  buried  in
hell,  Kschr.  2530.

p.  801 .]     Leonidas  at  Thermopylae  bids  his  men  break  their


1538  TIME   AND  WORLD.

fast^  for  they  will  sup  in  the  realm  of  the  dead:  hodie  apud
inferos  coenabimus.  'Thorger^r  segir  hätt:  engan  hefi  ec  nätt«
verS  haft,  ok  engan  man  ek  fyrr  enn  at  Freyju/  not  sup  till  I
sop  with  P.  (yr  945),  Egilss.  p.  603  ;  '  lifiS  heilir  herra,  ek  man
hid  Off/ii  gista/  to-day  guest  with  OSin,  Fornald.  s.  2,  366 ;  conf.
the  passage  fr.  Sazo  in  Suppl.  to  818  (Kl.  sehr.  5,  354  seq.)*

p.  802.]  De  olde  helv)eg,  Urk.  of  1518  in  Wigand's  Corr.
güterb.  229;  hellewege,  helleknochen  241.  Brückner  derives  the
Henneberg  'hälweg,  hälwehr,'  boundary,  fr.  häl  (for  hagel).
Herweg  means  also  the  Milky  Way,  Woeste  41 ;  Hans  Helwagen^
MB.  25,  314  (yr  1469).  316.  384.

p.  803.]  Hellia  lies  low.  Beside  the  root  of  a  tree  of  para-
dise Seth  looks  into  hell,  and  sees  his  brother  Abel's  soul.  It  is
curious  that  Brynhild  on  her  heUreiff  drives  through  the  halls
of  a  giantess,  Sasm.  227.  Din  tiefe  helle,  MS.  2,  184^.  Hpt's
Ztschr.  2y  79.  In  the  same  sense  death  is  called  deep :  an  thene
diapun  dod,  Hel.  136,  1,  and  conversely  'in  der  büteron  hella,'
Grieshaber  2,  33.  44.  65.  76.  97.  108.  122;  and  'diu  helle  din'st
ein  bitter  hol/  MSH.  3,  468%  when  usu.  it  is  death  that  is  bitter.

The  Greek  underworld  had  an  opening,  through  which  Pluto

descends  when  he  has  carried  oflf  Proserpine,  Pans.  ii.  36,  7,
while  Dionysus  leads  Semele  out  of  hades  across  the  Alcyonian
lake  ii.  37,  5.  The  Tent,  hell  has  likewise  a  gateway  (mouth),
which  is  closed  up  with  a  grating :  fyr  na^grindr  ne%an,  Ssem.
68*.  86*;  hnigin  er  heUgrind,  when  the  grave-mound  opens,
Hervarars.  p.  347.  OS.  helli-porta,  Hel.  97,  17;  thiu  lieUiporta,
0.  iii.  12,  35 ;  antheftid  fan  helUdoron,  Hel.  71,  9 ;  de  doir
vanner  hellen  mot  aapen  wesen,  Slennerhinke,  beginn.  There  is
a  Höllthor 'Spifze  in  Salzburg,  M.  Koches  Heise  315.  Der  helle
invart  is  a  hole  at  which  all  the  dead  went  in.  En.  2906 — 15 ;
dringet  in  daz  helletor,  Hpt  2,  69 ;  diu  riuwe  (ruth)  st^t  fiir  der
helle  tor,  Warnung  316.

p.  804.]  OHG.  lielli'Stroum^^riidenB,  torrens  infemi,  Graff  6,
754 ;  Höll'haken,  hell-hook,  was  the  name  of  a  whirlpool  in  the
Rhine ;  Fischart's  Glückh.  schif  429.

p.  805.]  Plainly  Christian  are  the  following  notions  :  '  minne
hat  üf  erde  hüs,  ze  himel  ist  reine  für  Got  ir  geleite,  minne  ist
allenthalben  wan  ze  helle/  love  is  everywhere  but  in  hell.  Tit.  51 ;
helle-viur,  -fire.  Kehr.  1138;  daz  winster  viur,  MSH.  1,  298^;


TIME  AND  WOBLD.  1539

'ich  hftn  fiuier  a.  vinster  ze  der  zeswen  ant  ze  der  uoinster/  to
right  and  left,  Todes  gehngede  661 ;  der  helle  fiwerstoi,  Warn.
72;  in  der  helle  brinnen  n.  braten,  Griesh.  2,  76.  108.  123.  Yet
the  heathen  fancy  of  fires  darting  out  of  opened  grave-monnds,
and  of  hauga-eldr  in  general  (Fornald.  s.  1^  437)^  seems  conn,
with  hellfire.  On  the  other  hand  we  hear  of  helle-vro«^^  Tod.
geh.  902.  In  pop.  speech^  hell  is  any  dark  hole  or  corner :  the
tailor  throws  pieces  of  cloth  '  in  die  hölle/  the  prentice  jnmps  np
'  ana  der  hölle '  (fr.  behind  the  chest),  and  makes  for  the  door,
Pol.  maulaffe  4;  kroch  nach  der  hölle  6  ;  geh  hinteren  ofen  in  die

Ml,  H.  Sachs  i.  5,  495'». The  Christian  hell  has  a  pool  of

pitch  and  brimstone :  bech  unde  swebel,  Diemer  313, 9 ;  von  deme
hechen  803,  22;  beh-welle  298,  29.  303,  27;  die  swarzen  pecli-
velle  (I.  -welle),  Tod.  geh.  686 ;  die  bechwelligen  bachs  899 ;  mit
bechwelliger  hitze  929.  In  the  marchen  of  Dame  HoUe  the  gold-
gate  and  pitch-gate  stand  opposed,  like  heaven  and  hell.  Again :
in  dem  swebel,  Warn.  260;  in  den  swebeUsi^en  (-lakes)  baden,
Servat.  3541 ;  din  helle  atinchet  wirs  danne  der  f&le  hnnt,  Kara-
jan  31,  8;  infer  le  puant,  Thib.  de  Nav.  150;  puafine,  Gaafrey
p.  zxz.  The  stench  of  hell  may  have  been  suggested  by  the
nozions  fames  that  rise  out  of  clefts  in  the  earth.

p.  806.]  Greek  opinion  placed  Tartarus  not  inside  the  earth,
but  an  immense  way  off  it.  A  brass  anvil  (;^a\«609  oKßifov)  falls
nine  days  and  nights  fr.  heaven,  and  touches  earth  on  the  tenth ;
it  takes  nine  more  to  reach  Tartarus,  Hes.  Theog.  722 — 5 ;  but
Homer  makes  Hephaestus  fall  fr.  heaven  in  ana  day,  II.  1,  592.
The  Lat.  Avemus  is  Gr.  a^oppo^,  bird-less,  'quia  sunt  avibus
contraria  cnnctis,'  Lncr.  6,  742.  An  AS.  word  for  hell  is  scroBf,
cavern,  Csedm.  212,  10.  MHG.  dbia.  Roth's  Dicht,  pp.  10.  23;
'  daz  abgrunde '  also  occurs  in  Rother  4434 ;  'in  der  helle  gründe
verbrunne  6  ich,'  I'd  sooner  burn,  MS.  1,  56" ;  an  grund  grim-
maro  helliun,  Hel.  164,  5 ;  der  fiirste  üz  helle  abgrunde,  Walth.
3,  12;  de  liellegrunt,  MB.  5,  138;  der  bodengrunt  (bottom)  der
helle,  MS.  2, 147^.  In  Russ.  however  [beside  the  more  nsnal  ad
fr.  aSrjsi]  it  is  called  bez-dnd,  bottom-less,  like  ä^ßva-ao^.  Gonf.
der  erde  volmünde  (fullamunt).  Gute  fran  2022  ;  der  erden  bunder
(ON.  pnndari),  Hpt's  Ztschr.  2,  131.

p.  806.]     On  the  Delphian  navel  as  earth's  centre,  see  Pott's
Zahlmeth.  267;  Zens  ascertains  it  by  sending  out  eagles  or


1540  TIMB  AND  WORLD.

ravens.  To  the  Irish  too  earth's  navel  was  a  stone^  Lappenb.  in
Allg.  encycl.  d.  wiss.,  art.  Irland  49^.  A  stone  in  lielles-grunt
occurs  in  Uhl.  Volksl.  1,8;  the  dille-stein  is  the  stone  '  den  kein
}mnd  überbal,  kein  wind  überwehte,  kein  regen  übersprehte/  p.
7;  über  d'hellplaia  springen,  Vonbun  p.  65.  Dillesiein  means
bottom-'Stone.

p.  807.]  The  underworld  has  its  waters,  streams :  s&  hon  Jiar
vaffa  J^raunga  strauma  menn  meinsvara,  Ssem.  7^ ;  Vaffgelmi  vaiSa
181»;  in  der  helle  baden,  Engelh.  6050;  ze  helle  baden,  MSH.  2,
259*.  260* ;  in  den  swebel-sewen  (brimstone  lakes)  baden,  Senrat.
3541 ;  sele  besoufet  (drenched)  in  hellepine,  MS.  2,  150*.  HeU
is  a  we]l,  a  helle-puzze  (-pit),  obene  enge  (narrow  at  top),  nidene
wit,  Wernh.  v.  N.  41,  5  ;  d&  diu  nnerfulte  hitze  des  abgrundes  öz
diezen,  Todes  geh.  896 ;  helle-eöt,  MSH.  3,  463*  answers  to  the
AS.  sedff  in  the  text ;  Hellekessel,  -kettle,  a  family  name  at  Bonn.
Susi  in  cwissusle  is  appar.  the  ON.  sysla,  negotium,  cura,  labor,
passing  over  into  supplicium,  as  verk  into  verkr,  dolor;  conf.
suslbona,  hell-foe,  Caadm.  305,  1.

p.  807.]  Hell  is  said  in  AS.  to  be  wyrmsele  and  wyrmum  be-
wnnden,  Judith  134,  49.  57 ;  )?aer  bi"?  f;^r  and  wyrm,  Csedm.  212,
9;  ÖZ  diseme  wurmgarten,  Diemer  295,  25.  There  also  dwells
the  helUhound  (p.  996-7.  Suppl.  to  815)  There  were  punish-
ments in  hell  for  heathen  heroes  too:  SigurSr  F&fnisbani  has
to  heat  an  oven,  and  Starka'Br  'hefi  cikla-eld/  Fomm.  s.  3,  200;
conf.  St.  Patrick's  Purgatory  by  Th.  Wright  xi.  and  192.

p.  809.]  Leo  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  3,  226  has  a  Gael,  mudspuä,
mutatio,  which  I  have  not  found  in  any  dictionary.  He  only
gets  it  out  of  muth,  mutare,  and  spuil,  spolium;  but  the  OS.
mudspelles  megin  (like  iarSar  megin)  requires  a  material  sense.
That  of  wood,  tree,  is  supported  by  Sasm.  9*:  'geisar  eimi  vi-S
aldumara,'  the  fire  rages  against  aldurnari,  i.e.  Yggdrasill?
(Suppl.  to  800  beg.).  Lapp,  mu^yra,  muorra  [Mong.  modd]^
arbor;  but  Syrianic  and  Permic  mu,  Votiak  mMzfeni  =  land,
Rask's  Afh.  1,  39.  Finnic,  beside  maa,  seems  to  have  moa,  mua,
Castr^n^s  Syrian.  Gr.  p.  149.

p.  810.]  Surtr  is  a  giant,  not  a  god:  S.  oc  in  svdso  go9,
SsBm.  33*;  S.  ok  aesir  188*;  Surta  sefi  8*  is  supp.  to  mean  fire.
Domesday-bk  has  a  man's  name  Sortebrand.  With  Surtr  conf.
Slav,  ichort,  cert,  czar<  =  devil  [tchomy,  czerny  =  black],  p.  993.


TIME  AND  WORLD.  1541

Maspellz  synirliafa  einir  ser  fy Iking,  er  sü  Hört  miöc^  Sn.  72  ;  the
field  on  which  they  encounter  the  gods  is  called  Vigriffr,  Sssm.
33*.     Sn.  75,  and  also  Oskopnir,  Ssdxn.  188*.

p.  810.]  The  world  is  destroyed  by  fire.  The  Indians  spoke
of '  the  penal  fire  of  the  Last  Day/  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  2,  90  :  '  de-
sfructive  as  the  L.  D.'  2,  86.  99,  An  Ionic  dance  was  called
KocTfiov  i/nrvptoai^,  Athen.  5,  283.  At  Rome  one  foretold
'  ignem  de  coelo  lapsnmm  finemque  mvndi  affore/  Capitolini  M.
Anton.  13.  The  Celts  believed  the  end  of  the  world  would  be
by  fire  and  tpater :  iwiKpania-eiv  Be  irore  koI  irvp  Koi  vB(op,
Strabo  4,  45.  198 :  Ghiel.  brath,  ultimum  orbis  incendium ;  gu  la
hhrath,  in  aetemum,  unquam  ;  conf.  Ossian  3, 433.  AS.  oi  baelee
cyme,  till  fire^s  coming  =  end  of  the  world,  Cod.  Exon.  200,  28  :
nnz  an  die  stunde  d6  allez  sol  verbrinnen,  Karajan  50, 15 ;  grdzer
schal,  als  al  diu  werlt  da  brunne,  Wigal.  7262  :  din  jamertac  wil
schiere  komen,  u.  brennt  dich  darumbe  iedoch,  Walth.  67,  19.

p.  812.]  On  Antiehriift,  conf.  Griesh.  Pred.  p.  150-1  ;  ich  wfine
na  ist  anticrist  den  beiden  cumen  ze  helfe,  6r.  Bud.  14,  9 ;
deable  antecris,  M6on  3,  250;  Tame  emporteirent  Pilate  et
anticris,  Aspr.  9^.  Müllenhoff  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  II,  391  does  not
Bee  so  much  affinity  betw.  the  Muspilli  and  the  Edda.

p.  814.]  Beside  aldar  rök,  ra^na  rök,  we  have  ßioffa  rök,  Saam.
28\  iiva  rök  36»^  yjra  rök  49% /om  rök  63«.  AS.  racu  is  Ssk.
rajani^  night  (Suppl.  to  737).  To  this  Twilight  of  the  gods  O.
Schade  in  his  sixth  thesis  refers  the  saying :  '  it  is  not  yet  the
evening  of  all  the  days.'

p.  815.]  The  stars  fall  from  heaven  (Suppl.  to  817),  the
rainbow  breaks  down.  Atlas  holds  the  vault  of  heaven  on  his
shoulders,  it  must  fall  when  he  removes  them  :  quid  si  nunc
coelum  mat  ?  Ter.  Heaut.  iv.  2.  The  Celts  €(f>a<rav  BeSiivai
lirprore  6  ovpavb^  airoU  ^fiiriaoi,  feared  the  sky  would  fall  on
them,  Arrian's  Anab.  1,  4.  GDS.  459.  460.  Grerm.  superstition
tells  of  a  little  bird  (tomtit)  that  holds  his  little  claw  over  his
head  when  he  sleeps,  to  shield  it  in  case  the  sky  fell  in  the

night. The  ship  Naglfar  is  conn,  with  Naglfari,  the  husband

of  N6tt,  Sn.  11  ;  it  takes  as  long  to  build  as  the  iron-rock  to  wear
away,  which  the  woman  grazes  with  her  veil  once  in  100  years;
conf.  the  cow's  hide  being  picked  clean  by  the  giant  (Suppl.  to
544). It  was  an  AS.  belief  also  that  the  hellhound  was  fought


1542  TIME  AND  WORLD.

with  :  '  si  he  toren  of  hellehundes  td«am/  teeth,  Kemble  no.  715,
yr  1006 ;  hellehunt,  MS.  2,  147^  (Suppl.  to  807.  p.  996-7).  The
Last  Judgment  is  like  the  tribunal  of  Minos  in  the  underworld,
Lucian's  Jap.  confat.  18,  and  the  judgment  of  souls  of  the
Mongols,  Bergm.  3,  35;  conf.  Michael's  balance  (p.  859).  AS.
notions  about  the  end  of  the  world  are  preserved  in  Cod.  Exon.
445.

p.  8 1 7.]  The  Arohipoeta's  poem  on  the  fifteen  signs  is  in  Hpt's
Ztschr.  3,  523—5.  The  signs  vary  in  the  diflTerent  accounts,  see
Sommer  in  Hpt  3,  525—530.  Wiedeburg  p.  139.  Lekensp.
Deckers  2,  264.  Diemer  p.  283—7.  Grieshaber  p.  1 52.  Moneys
Schausp.  1,  315  seq.  MSH.  3,  96\  The  12th  sign  in  the  Latin
poem  above  is  :  fixae  coeli  penitus  stellae  sunt  caswrae  (the  same
in  Griesh.) ;  in  the  Asega-book  the  13th :  sa  faüath  alle  tha
st&ra  fon  tha  himulej  conf.  SsBm.  9^i  hverfa  af  himni  hei«ar
stiörnur.  The  common  folk  held  by  other  prognostics  besides :
when  it  strikes  thirteen  and  the  hens  take  to  crowing,  the  Judg-

ment-day  will  come,  Hpt  3,  367. The  earth  quaked,  ON.  ior«

dusaffi,  Sfiem.  241»».  The  Greeks  ascr.  the  phenomenon  to  Posei-
don, Herod.  7,  129,  or  some  other  god :  rijv  iroXiv  rod  6eov  aei-
aavro^,  Paus,  i  29,  7,  elsewh.  to  Typhöeus,  Ov.  Met.  5,  356 ;  its
cause  is  discussed  by  Agathias  5,  8.  The  Lith.  god  of  earth-
quake is  Drebkullys,  Nesselm.  pp.  154.  208,  fr.  drebeti,  quake,
and  kulti,  strike.  A  New  Zeal,  story  of  earthquake  in  Klemm  4,
359 ;  the  earth  is  carried  by  a  tortoise  2,  164.

p.  818.]  The  Valkyrs  conduct  to  heaven,  as  the  Hours  opened
the  cloud-gate  to  Olympus.  So  too  the  angels  fetch  away  dying
heroes:  la  vos  atendent  li  angesen  chantant,  contre  vos  ames
vont  grant  joie  menant,  Asprem.  22^ ;  lame  emporterent  li  ange
en  chantant  28».  A  cliflf  in  Blekingen  is  called  Valhall,  and  at
two  places  in  Westgotland  are  Valhall,  Vahlehall :  they  are  the
hills  fr.  which  old  men  weary  of  life  threw  themselves  into  the
lake  or  brook  running  below,  in  which  they  were  washed.  Such
water  bears  the  name  of  Odens-källa :  in  taking  possession  of
them,  the  god  first  washed  or  bathed  them;  conf.  Geijer  1,  115

(Suppl.  to  832). Brave  men  go  to  ValhöU:  s&  var  ÄtrünaÄr

heiiSinna  manna,  at  allir  }?eir  er  af  sdrum  andadisk,  skyldn  fara
til  Valhallar,  Fagrsk.  p.  27.  A  servant  goes  not  to  V.  except  in
attendance  on  his  lord,  Pornald.  s.  3,  8.     Vapnor^pvag  goes  on  in


TIME  AND  WORLD.  1543

v.,  for  which  a  son  fits  oat  his  father  by  burying  his  weapons
with  him,  Nialss.  c.  80  ^  '  yH  vart  valkyrja  at  Alfö^ur,  mundo
einherjaraMiT  beriaz  urn  sakar  ßinar/  were  glad  to  be  struck  down
for  thy  sake,  Sfflm.  154^.  When  Häkon  died  a  heathen  and  was
buried,  his  friends  gathered  round  his  grave,  and  in  heathen
fashion  saw  him  off  to  Valhöll :  maelto  ]>eir  syä  fyrir  grepti
bans,  sem  hei^Sinna  manna  var  si^Sr  til,  oc  visodb  honom  til  Vol"
liallar,  Häkonars.  c.  32.  Inde  vota  nuneupat  (Ringo),  adjicitque
precem  uti  Haraldus,  eo  vectore  (equo  sno)  usus,  fati  consortes  ad
Tartara  antecederet,  atque  apud  praestitem  Orci  Plutonem  sociis
hostibusqae  plaeidas  expeteret  aedes,  Saxo  Gr.  147;  conf.  the
prayer  of  Waltharins  1167  :  hos  in  coelesti  mihi  praestet  sede
videri.  Valhöll  is  also  called  hd  hall,  high  hall  (though  only
the  dat.  occurs :  hava  hollo,  Saom.  24^.  30^.  Sn.  3) ;  and  Hropts
sigtoptir,  Saem.  10*.

p.  819.]  The  souls  of  kshatriyas  slain  in  battle  arrive  at
Indra's  heaven,  and  are  his  guests,  Bopp's  Nalas  264 ;  to  warriors
fallen  in  fight  the  gate  of  heaven  is  open,  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  2,  65 ;
conf.  '  en  infer  vont  H  bei  cevalier  qui  sont  morts  as  tornois  et  as
rices  guerres/  Ancassin  in  M6on  1,  355.  Both  AS.,  OHGr.  and
MHG.  phrases  point  to  a  heavenly  castle  :  Oodes  ealdorburg,  Dei
palatinm.  Cod.  Exon.  441,  8 :  rodera  eeaster,  coelorum  nrbs  441,
10.  A  minute  description  of  the  himilisye  Oodes  burg  (Hpt's
Ztschr.  3,  443-4)  says :  diu  burg  ist  gestiftet  mit  aller  tiuride
Tiieist  ediler  geist  gimmon,  der  himel  meregriezon,  der  bürge  funda-
menta,  die  porte  ioh  die  mure  daz  sint  die  tiuren  sieina  der  Gotes
fürst  helido.  A  similar  house,  glittering  with  gold  and  light,
occurs  in  a  vision,  Oreg.  Tur.  7,  1 ;  ir  erbe  soldo  sin  der  himeU
hof,  Lndw.  d.  fromme  2478.

p.  820.]  Heaven  is  '  der  himelische  sal/  Todes  gehug.  942  ;
der  vrdne  sal,  Diemer  301,  3  ;  der  fretiden  sal  besitzen  (possess),
Tit.  5788;  conf.  freuden-tal  besitzen,  in  contrast  with  riuwen-tal
3773-4 ;  it  is  true  a  castle  is  also  called  freuden  zil,  goal  of  joy,
Wigal.  9238.  11615;  hverfa  ikmun-vega  (pleasure's  path)  =  to  die,
Egilss.  622.  The  Mecklenburg  noble,  who  reckons  on  a  merry
drinking-bout  with  Christ  in  heaven,  is,  by  another  account,  fr.
Pomerania,  N.  Pr.  prov.  bl.  3,  477 ;  conf.  '  im  samint  in  (along
with  them)  drinchit  er  den  win,'  Diemer  103,  5 ;  s'aurai  mon
chief  em  paradis  fieri,  on  toz  jors  a  joie,  feste  e  deli,  Aspr.  18*;


1544  TIME  AND  WORLD.

iv  fuiKaptov  vrftTOi^  irlveiv  fura  r&p  ^pcmv,  iv  rw  'HXuai^  Xei-
fi&vi  KaTUKelfievo^,  Lucianos  Jap.  confat.  17.

p.  820  n.]  The  reading  I  proposed  in  Parz.  56,  18  is  now
verified  by  MS.  d ;  conf.  berc  ze  Famorgan  496,  8,  ze  Fdmurgane
585,  14,  and  '  F&morg&n  hiez  daz  lant,'  Türi.  Wh.  24',  see  37*-

De  gldsenburg  npriden,  Uhl.  Yolksl.  p.  16.  The  glass  moufUoM
tarns  ap  in  many  legends  and  marchen :  MüUenh.  p.  386-7.
Ehrentraat's  Fries,  arch.  2,  162.  Sommer's  March.  99  seq.
Bechstein's  Sag.  p.  67.  Akin  to  the  glass  castle  is  the  cload-
castle :  mons  Wolkinburg,  Cses.  Heisterb.  2,  318;  conf.  Böhm.
Cod.  Francof.  247  (yr.  1290).  Lacomblet's  Arch.  2,  11.  19.
Weisth.  2,  713.  The  Vila  bailds  a  castle  on  the  cloud  with  three
gates,  Yuk,  nov.  ed.  p.  151.  It  says  in  Kalev.  2,  25 :  tuulehenko
teen  tupani,  baud  rooms  in  the  air ;  conf.  the  air-castle  on  the
rainbow  (p.  732-3).

p.  821.]      Ssk.  deSas,  land,  Zend,  parädaßshas,  fairest  land,
Benfey  1,  438;    tov  7rapaSetö'oi/=hortum,  Lucian's  Somn.  21;
the  garden  of  the  Vandal  king  is  called  TrapdBeiao^,  Procop.  1,
382,  conf.  434.     Ir.  parrathas,  O.Sl.  poroda.     The  earthly  para-
dise is  the  Rose-garden,  conf.  its  descript.  in  a  Pommersf.  MS.
(Hpt  5,  369).     Roseng.   1028.     Tit.  6044.     Another  term  is
'saltas  wunnilo/  Lacombl.  no.  65  (855) ;  conf.  'lust-wald,'  pleasare-
park.     Weinbold.  in  Hpt  6,  461  after  all  connects  neorxena  with
noma.-^^The  Slav,  rai,  paradise,  Miklosich  73  woald  derive  fr.
rod",  glad,  as  nai  fr.  nad'\     Boh.  raghrad  or  rai-grad,  paradise-
garden,  later  hradiste  (castle),  a  plot  encircled  by  a  roand  wall,
in  which  the  Slavs  held  feasts  and  games,  and  sang  songs ;  so
the  graUhöfe,  grale,     Herod.  3,  26  calls  "Ooo-i?  a  fiaxaptov  viiacKt
a  green  island  in  the  sea  of  sand.     'A  land  flowing  with  milk
and  honey/  Exod.  3,  8.     Mar.  160,  17,  like  Cockaign,  Labber-
land, which  even  the  Greeks  knew  of,  Athen.  2,  526 — 533  [Hor.
Od.  ii.  19,  10:   vini  fontem,  lactis  rivos,  lapsa  melUi].     Conf.
milk,  honey  and  blood  as  food  for  gods  and  drink  for  poets  (pp.
317.  415  n.) ;  mellis  lacns  et  flamina  lactis  erapisse  solo,  Claud.
Stil.  1,85.

p.  823.]  !H\u<Tia  are  places  which  lightning  (the  snn)  has
strack,  Benfey  1,  457 :  iv  rtß  ^H\val^  \€LfjL&vi,  Jap.  confat.  17;
conf.  Plutarch  4,  1154.  0H6.  sunna-felt,  elysium,  Graff  3,  516;
sunno'feld,  helisios  campos.  Gl.  Sletst.  6,  271.     AS.  heofen-feld.


soxjLs.  1545

coelestis  campus  (p.  234)  ;  Hefenfeld,  locus  in  agro  Northum-
brensi.  On  00-^086X09^  Bom.  albucus,  see  Dioscor.  2,  199^  with
whom  Theophrastus  agrees^  while  Galen  descr.  the  plant  very
differently,  see  Sprengel  on  Diosc.  2,  481.

Like  the  children  in  our  märchen,  who  fall  through  the  well
on  Dame  Holla's  meadow,  Psyche  having  jumped  off"  the  high
rock,  'panlatim  per  devexa  excelsae  vallis  subditae  ^7*e7t^ur  cespitis
gremio  leniter  delabitur/  and  then  finds  herself  in  a  heavenly
grove,  Apuleius  lib.  4  in  fine.  Like  the  gardens  of  the  Hesperides
is  the  *  imula  pomorum,  quae  fortunata  vocatur/  v.  Merlini  p.
393;  conf.  the  sacred  apple-wood,  Barzas  breiz  1,  56-7.  90,  and
'fortunatorum  insulas,  quo  cuncti,  qui  aetatem  egerunt  caste
snam,  conveniant,*  Plant.  Trin.  ii.  4,  148 ;  eV  fjMKaptov  vijaoi^
flp<i)fov,  Lucian's  Demosth.  enc.  50.  Jup.  conf.  17.  Cliamp
flory,  la  tanra  Diex  son  jugement,  qnand  il  viendra  jugier  la
gent,  O.Fr.  life  of  Mary  in  Lassberg's  Zoller  p.  74;  an  der
maten  (prato  beatorum),  Flore  2326.  AS.  grene  wongas.  Cod.
Exon.  482,  21  ;  j?es  wang  grena  426,  34 ;  ]>one  grenan  wong
ofgifan  130,  34.  H.  Sachs  iii.  3,  84^  still  speaks  of  paradise  as
tlie  green  valley,  Welsh  gwynfa,  paradise,  strictly  white  happy
land.  The  dead  shall  go  to  Helgafell,  Eyrb.  c.  4;  conf.  the
earthly  paradise  closed  in  by  high  mountains.  Tod.  gehug.  970 — 6.
The  'go%-borinn  Ooffmundr'  in  the  far  off  realm  of  paradiscj
Saem.  153^,  is  Oranmar  in  the  Vols,  saga,  conf.  Granmars  synir^
Saem.  155*>.

p.  823.]  Vt&arr  would  in  OHG.  be  Witheri,  Graff  4,  986 ;
but  Vi&arr,  Witheri  is  more  correct,  conf.  Sfflm.  42» :  hris,  gras^
viS.  There  is  a  saying  about  him :  ViÖarr,  er  gu'S  enn  i  GörSum^
hann  er  lika  i  GrindarskörSum.


CHAPTER  XXVL

SOULS.

p.  826.]  Vvxn  ftnima  and  vov?  mens  are  distinct,  Plutarch  4,
1154.  Beside  the  fem.  seele,  we  find  a  neut.  ferah  with  much
the  same  meaning:  OHG./era&^anima»  Graff  3,  682  (but  smala
){n^t  S3  valgus  683) ;  that  ferah  was  af  them  folke,  Hel.  169,
28,  i.e.  departed  fr.  among  men.     Pers.  fervor,  spirits,  souls.


1548  SÖULS.

(down) ;   när  de  foro  upp,  sä  voro  de  ire^  when  they  flew  up

again,  they  were  three,  Sv.  vis.  1,  312-5.  373.- A  sennrin  bleib

ich  ewiglich,  und  wann  ich  stirb,  wird  ich  a  schwalbnj  Almer  1»
58.  Souls  fly  about  as  ravens ^  Michelet  2,  15 ;  they  swarm
as  little  ducks  J  Ellemm  2,  165;  niyht-owls  rise  from  the  brain  of
a  murdered  man  4,  220.  The  story  of  Madej  is  given  more  cor-
rectly in  Wend,  volksl.  2,  319,  conf.  Walach.  march,  no.  15.  In
Egypt,  hieroglyphs  the  sparrowhawk  with  a  human  head  is  a
picture  of  the  soul,  Bunsen's  Dingbilder  126.  Every  soul,  after
parting  from  the  body,  Iwvers  for  a  time  betwixt  the  earth  and
the  moon,  Plut.  4,  1154.

p.  829.]  The  soul  is  winged,  Plato's  Phaddr.  246.7.8 ;  it  loses
and  then  recovers  its  wings  248-9,  conf.  Gerhard's  Eros,  tab.  1
and  5;  '^vxh  ^'  ^'«  pediwy  Trrufiiytf  jilSo^Se  ßeßiJKet^  II.  16,
856.  22,  361 ;  ^v^V  S'  V^^  6v€ipo^  änroirraßihnj  ireirirqTai,  Od.
11,  222.  Lucian's  Encom.  Demosth.  c.  50  says  of  the  dying
orator:  airenTrf,  evolavit.

The  larva,  the  butterfly  is  called  o  vexvSaXo^.  Swed.  käring^
själ,  old  woman's  soul  =  butterfly,  Ihre  2,  529.  Ir«  anamande,
anima  dei  =  butterfly ;  conf.  the  Faun  as  night-butterfly  (Sappl.
to  483  mid.).  When  a  moth  flutters  round  the  candle,  the  Lithu.
women  say  somebody's  dying,  and  the  soul  is  going  hence^  N.  Pr.
prov.  bl.  5,  160.

p.  829.]  The  soul  runs  out  of  the  sleeper  as  a  mouse,  cat^
weasel,  snake,  butterfly.  Yama  draws  the  soul  out  of  a  dying  man
in  the  shape  of  a  tiny  mannikin,  the  man  turns  pale  and  sinks,
and  when  the  mannikin  comes  back,  he  thinks  he  has  been  asleep,
Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  1,  65.  The  soul  slips  out  of  the  mouth  as  a
little  child,  Gefken's  Beil.  pp.  6.  15  and  plates  11.  12.  It  was
believed  in  Germany  as  well,  that  a  dying  man's  heart  could
pass  .into  a  living  man,  who  would  then  show  twice  as  mach
pluck :  so  Egge's  heart  seems  to  have  passed  into  Fasolt,
Diether's  into  Dietrich  (Ecke  197-8),  each  time  into  a  brother's
body;  conf.  the  exchange  of  hearts  betw.  lovers,  Wigal.  4439.
8813.  MS.  1,  166^  and  the  marriage  of  souls  (Suppl.  to  828).
The  exchange  of  figures,  the  skipta  litum  oc  hömum  (Suppl.  to

1098   end)   is  another  thing. On  the   similar   doctrine   of

transmigration  taught  by  Pythagoras,  see  Phito's  Phsedr.  248-9.
Phaödo  p.  82.      Ov.  Met.  15,  156  seq.      O'Keamey   133.  160.


SOULS.  1549

Gods,  by  way  of  punishment,  are  born  again  as  men  (Suppl.  to
338),  men  are  changed  into  beasts  corresp.  to  their  character,
e.g.  by  the  wand  of  Circe,  RA.  p.  xiv.  Claud,  in  Ruf.  2,  482  seq.
Thorir  hjörtr  is  pursued  by  a  hunter  and  his  hound ;  struck  by
a  javelin,  he  falls  to  the  ground,  but  out  of  his  body  springs  a
stag,  which  again  is  hunted  down  by  the  dog,  and  killed  after
a  hard  struggle,  Maurer's  Bekehr.  1,  29Ö-6.  Animals  too  have
had  many  souls,  like  Lucianos  cock.

p.  830.]  Good  souls  for  a  time  liover  on  Hades*  verdant  mead^
Pint.  4,  1154.  The  soul  feeds  on  the  field  or  meadow  of  truths
äXrjOeia^:  weBlov,  Xeifitoy,  Plat.  Phsedr.  248  (in  the  train  of  God,
avfjinropevdäaa  Oeä,  it  looks  upon  truth,  ibid.).  On  the  green
grass  the  soul  sits  down,  Feifalik  Musp.  p.  5.  '  He  is  going  to
die'  is  expr.  by  'he  is  just  fluttering  away.'  Souls  of  the  dead
hang  over  b,  precipice  by  a  slender  stalk,  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  3,  174.
'  A  medicine  that  sent  her  soul  up  to  the  tip  of  her  tongue/
Rommel  4,  771.  Yulgo  dicitnr,  quod  triginta  animate  super
acumen  acus  possunt  sedere,  ChmeFs  Notizenbl.  6,  386,  fr.  Nicol.
V.  Siegen's  Chron.  yr  1489,  ed.  Wegele  '55,  p.  344.  How  many
souls  can  sit  on  a  nail,  Wigand's  Arch.  4,  321.

p.  832.]  Souls  are  received,  drawn  on,  by  Wuotan,  Frouwa,
R&n  and  Hel,  by  the  watersprites,  by  angels  and  elves,  by  the
devil  (pp.  1001  beg.  1017).  Near  the  places  named  Valhall  there
is  often  an  Odens-kalla  (Suppl.  to  818  beg.),  as  if  Oden,  before
admitting  souls,  should  bathe  them  in  the  clear  stream,  as  the
Greeks  thought  souls  were  cleansed  in  the  rivers  of  Hades,  and
took  the  draught  of  oblivion  in  Lethe.  '  Oden  som  kom  upp  ur
OdenS'kammare  eller  Asne-kafve,  som  ligger  in  Asne-sjö  (fordern
OdeT^sjö),  at  väija  de  slagpie  pä  Brävallahed,  och  föra  dem  pä  ett
gullskepp '  (Rääf) ;  conf.  the  story  of  Haki,  Ynglinga-s.  c.  27.
Old  sea-kings  were  supp.  to  be  buried  in  a  golden  ship,  Miillenh.

no.  501. A  funeral  pile  is  built  up  in  a  ship,  Saxo  Gr.  (ed.

Müller)  p.  235 ;  conf.  the  ship-mounds  thrown  up  over  the  dead,
Worsaae's  Vorzeit  p.  81-7.  A  death-ship  in  Beow.  34;  a  swan-
ship  carrying  a  corpse,  Keller's  Romv.  670.  Jacob's  body  crosses
the  sea  in  a  ship  without  sail  or  rudder.  Pass.  220,  41  seq.
MaerL  2,  341-2,  where  note  the  phrase :  si  bevalen  Oode  te  sine

stierman. In  Friesland  souls  are  supp.  to  sail  over  in  eggshells;

people  break  their  empty  shells,  for  witches  get  into  them  and

VOL.    IV.  T


1S50  SOULS.

plagne  the  sonl  on  her  passage.  Halbertsma  reminds  me  verbally
of  the  naiUparings  (pp.  814. 1138-9  n.)  and  shoelace  cattings^  Sn.
78 ;  the  breaking  of  eggshells  is  still  enjoined  by  snperstition.
An  angel  leads  a  shipfal  of  sonls,  Dante's  Pnrg.  2,  40  seq.  The
boatman  Tempnlagy  ferries  soals  over  the  lake^  Klemm  2,  165.
On  the  Etruscan  Charun  (Gerh.  p.  17)  and  the  passage-
money,  see  Lucian's  De  lactu  10,  Boeckh's  Inscr.  2,  103-4.
GDS.  681.  Money  is  placed  under  the  tongues  of  the  dead,  three
grains  of  corn  under  the  dead  Adam's  tongue.^  In  Germ,  skele-
tons, coins  are  actually  found  in  the  mouth,  Mainzer  Ztschr.  1,
842-3.  Lindenschmitt's  Todtenlager  pp.  16.  51.  Haec  Stygias
referant  munera  ad  undas,  et  calidos  nnmerent  igne  trientes,
Liudpr.  Antop.  2,  26.  Green  apples  were  also  put  in  the  hands
of  the  dead,  Vuk  no.  187.

p.  884.]  On  Procopius's  account  of  the  passage  of  souls  to
Brittia,  see  WerlauflTs  Procop.  p.  7,  who  himself  on  p.  10  seq.
takes  'Brittia'  to  be  Jutland,  'Britannia'  Gt.  Britain,  and
'  Thule '  Scandinavia.— —En  passant  le  lac  de  Vangoisse,  eile  Tit
une  bände  de  morts,  vfitus  de  blanc,  dans  de  petites  barques,
Villemarqu6's  Barz.  breiz.  1,  169.

p.  885.]  A  sharp  bi^idge  leading  across  the  Purgatorial  fire,
and  the  souls  flying  into  it  black  and  coming  out  white,  are
mentioned  in  Walewein  4958.  5825.  5840  (V.  d.  Bergh  102-3).
Over  de  lanJc-brugge  fard=he  dies,  Narragonia  123^;  conf.  the
sword'bridge  (p.  1082).  Angels  conduct  over  the  rainbow-bridge.
The  Arabian  bridge  of  souls  is  named  Sirdt,  Bück.  Hariri  1,
229 ;  the  Chinese  too  have  a  bridge  of  souls,  Maltebrun'a  Pr6cis
3,  627.  Old-Irish  legends  about  it  in  O'Donovan  p.  440-1.  The
cow  driven  across  the  bridge  by  the  sonl  in  the  Tundalas-legend
reminds  of  the  red  cow  being  led  over  a  certain  bridge  before  the
great  battle  by  the  Nortorf  elder-tree,  Müllenh.  no.  509.  The
Greenlanders  believe  the  soul  has  to  cross  an  abyss,  where  turns
a  narrow  wheel  as  smooth  as  ice,  Elemm  2,  317;  this  is  like  the
wheel  in  Wigalois  p.  250  seq.

p.  836.]  On  the  death-shoe,  see  MuUer's  Sagabibl.  2,  171.
Mannhardt's  Ztschr.  4,  421 ;  conf.  V!«ar's  slioe,  Sn.  31.  78 ;  'sal
ä  den,  i  denne  heimen/a^ffce  gjeve  sho,  hau  tar  ink  je  (he  need  not)
barfött  gange  in  hvasse  tynnermo  (al.  paa  kvasse  kehlebro),'  Nor-
weg.  draumkvae  36.     A  dead  woman  '  walks,'  until  her  shoe.


SOULS.  1651

which  they  had  forgotten  to  bum,  is  found  and  thrown  in  the
fire,  Lacian'a  Philops.  27 ;  conf.  Tndicul.  sup.  '  de  ligneis  pedibus
vel  manibus,  pagano  ritn/  The  Blackfoot  Indians,  like  Lithu-
anians and  Poles,  believe  the  soul  has  to  climb  a  steep  mountain,
Klemm  2,  166-7.

p.  888.]  Anima  de  corpore  exivit,  et  paradisi  januam  introivit.
Vita  Mathild.  c.  16.  18.  Prayers  to  St.  Michael  are  said  over  the
corpse  :  di  reinen  guzzen  ir  gebet  Sente  MichaJiele  zu  drSste  sinre
sele.  Dint.  1,  426 ;  Michael  is  '  trost  allir  sfilen,'  Roth.  4438 :  he
brings  the  soul  '  in  Abraham's  barm,'  Hpt's  Ztschr.  3,  522,  conf.
Pfeififer's  Wigal.  p.  840.  Other  angels  may  come  instead  of
Michael :  venerunt  duo  juvenes,  candidis  circumamicti  stolis,  ani-
mam  a  corpore  segregantes,  vacuum  ferentes  per  aerem,  Jonas
Bobb.  in  Vita  Burgundofarae  (Mabillon  2,  421) ;  conf.  the  Gemini
(p.  366).

Qot  sante  eine  engellisehe  schar  (angelic  band),
die  n&men  do  der  seien  war  (care,  charge) ;
si  empfiengen  (received)  an  der  selben  stunde
iegeliches  (each  one's)  sfile  von  sinem  munde  (mouth),
unde  vuorten  wirdecliche  (worshipfully)
si  in  daz  dwige  himelriche.

Oswalt  3097.  3455.

Oat  of  an  old  man  that  is  dying  the  angels  take  the  soul  as  a
young  child  (Suppl.  to  876  end) ;  ir  engel  vil  wol  wisten,  war
(well  knew  where)  ir  sele  selten  komen,  Klage  922.  Angels
rejoice  over  Christians  falling  in  fight,  and  devils  over  heathens,
because  they  get  their  souls,  Türl.  Wh.  22-3  ;  two  youths  (angels)
and  two  hlack  devils  sit  by  the  bedside  of  the  dead,  Griesh.  1,  93 ;
angels  and  devils  take  the  souls  of  Schacher  (assassins  ?),  Mone's
Schausp.  2,  321-2.  The  soul  first  lodges  with  8t.  Qerdrud,  then
sails  over  the  leber-meer  (liver  sea),  Gryse  Ee  lllP;  conf.  Gef-
ken's  Gatal.  p.  54.


1552  DEATH.

CHAPTER  XXVIL

DEATH.

p.  840,]  Death  as  messenger  of  Deity  is  called  der  heilig  iod,
H.  Sachs  i.  5,  528^.  1,  447^.  Death  receives,  fetches,  escorts  :
sän  in  der  t6t  entphienc,  Uolr.  1253 ;  er  h&t  den  tot  an  der  hant
(p.  848);  her  moste  haven  den  t6t,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  2,  183,  We
still  say  '  du  kannst  dir  den  tod  davon  holen/  it  may  be  the  death
of  you,  and  '  mit  dem  tode  abgehen,'  but  more  commonly  without
the  article :  '  mit  tode  abgegangen  ist,'  Mohr's  Reg.  ii.  no.  234  (yr
1365).  MB.  25,  392.  453  (yr  1480);  conf.  wie  tod  verscheiden,
H.  Sachs  (Göz  2,  16.  19),  mit  tode  vallen,  Nib.  2219,  3.  Yet
again ;  si  beliben  mit  dem  grimmen  tfide  1555,  3.  Er  br&ht  ir  (of
them)  vil  manegen  dahin,  da  er  iemer  wesen  solde,  Gudr.  889,
4 ;  conf.  '  si-ne  kumt  niht  her- widere '  928,  2 ;  '  der  tot  der  h&t
die  unzuht,  daz  er  nieman  deheine  fluht  zuo  sinen  friunden  haben

]&t/  has  the  ill  manners  to  allow  no  flight,  Klage  1581. Death

is  a  departing;  the  dead  is  in  OS.  called  gifaran,  Hel.  169,  27,
in  ON.fram^genginn,  Ssem.  83*;  AS.  'he  gewdt/  died,  Homil.  1,
330,  'baefde /ortf-wdbd,'  had  gone  off,  Beow.  3105;  than  im  that
llf  scriffi,  Hel.  169,  20.  Gr.  otx€a'6ai,  to  be  gone,  olx6ß€vo^==
6ava>v.  Gl.  sletst.  8,  35  renders  moriebatur  by  '  towita,  vel  hina-
zoh/  Ssk.  preta,  gone  =  dead,  Bopp  37^  Dying  is  called  uz
varn,  faring  out,  Wels,  gast  5436;  (he  is  dauat,  drauzen,  out^
dead,  Stelzhamer  166.  175);  vervam,  Walth.  23,  23.  MS.  2,
138^;  ^  for  fff erde,  ob  lit,'  AS.  chrono!.;  er  ist  an  die  vart  {journey),
diu  uns  nach  in  allen  ist  vil  unverspart,  Walth.  108,  6.  In  the
Ludwigslied  '  hina^vart/  hence-faring,  is  opp.  to  '  hier- wist,*
here-being;  ich  red  daz  üf  min  hin-vart,  MSH.  3,  298^;  er
swuor  üf  sin  hinvart  301*;  bis  auf  mein  hinefart,  Bergreien  127  ;
die  leste  fa/rt  fam,  Suchenw.  xxziv.  105;  zuo  der  langen  vari,
Lanz.  1949 ;  up  mine  langhe  vaert,  Reinh.  2213;  ON.  long  gdnga,
Sasm.  222^;  on  longne  weg,  Cod.  Exon.  173,  24;  zuo  der  langen

hcrvart,  Ksrchr.  6304 ;  des  todes  hervart.  Mar.  leg.  54,  14. To

join  the  great  host  (p.  847);  conf.  oi  TrXeiove?,  plures  =  mortui,
'  quia  ii  majore  numero  sunt  quam  vivi ' ;  qui  abierunt  in  com»
munem  locum,  PL  Casina,  prol.  19;  versdveiden,  depart.  Renn.
21093 ;  our  '  drauf  gehen ' ;  freude  Idn,  leave  joy,  Parz.  119,  15 ;
swenn  er  dise  freude  Idt,  Wels,  gast  4908 ;  Idtaz,  Islend.  sog.  2,


DEATH.  1553

166.  174;  af geben  gadalingo  gimang,  Hel.  17,  17;  manno-dröra
ageben  103,  4;  forlet  manno  dr6m  23,  7  {conL  sokte  im  erlo
gimang  endi  manno  drdm  23,  33) ;  die  werlt  er  begabt  Dint.  3,  8&.
67 ;  daz  leben  begibt  den  lip,  Maria  23;  von  zite  gdn,  Staufenb.
661 ;  aer  lie  on-weg  hwurfe  gamol  of  geardum,  Beow.  526 ;  hwearf
mon-dredmom    from    3433;     geendode    eorSan    dre&mas,    AS.

chronol.;  lif-wynna  brecan,  Beow.  157. Dying  is  also  called

staying,  being  left :  blivet  doot,  Maerl.  3,  325 ;  '  biliban^  mortuus,'
T.  135,  24.  0.  iii.  23,  55.  Graff  2,  47;  oar  'geblieben,'  left
(dead  on  the  field).  Or  it  is  descr.  as  perishing,  ol  akü^Xore;,  as
going  down  to  the  dust,  x^^^^  Svvat,  II.  6,  411 ;  varen  onder
moude  (mould),  Maerl.  3,  j51  ;  voer  ter  moude  3,  152;^iZ  iarffar
hniga  (bend),  Alfskongs-s.  cap.  13;  conf .  ie^  ter  moude!  Lane.
44032  ;  manger  la  terre,  mordre  la  poussiere.  The  Greeks  called
the  dead  Stffirfrpeiov^,  gone  home  to  Demeter  (earth),  Plut.  4,
1154;  heim-va/rn,  W.  gast  5440;  went,  was  gathered,  unto  his

fathers. Fara  til  heljar=mon  (p.  802);  gen  Totenheim  fwren,

Brant  55,  6;  fara  i  disar  sal,  Fornald.  sog.  1,  527  (conf.  heingja
sik  t  dtsar  sal  1,  454) ;  fara  i  lios  annat,  to  other  light,  S»m.
262«;  sökien  lioht  odar,  Hel.  17,  17;  de  hoc  luce  transire,  Lex
Burg.  14,  8 ;  Esth.  ilma  minnema,  go  to  the  other  world ;  conf.
fifiKiri  oina  iv  ifxiei,  Soph.  Philoct.  415.  An  fridu  faran  (go  to
peace),  thar  er  mina  fordron  dedun,  HeK  14,  22.  For  dying  is  a
going  to  sleep :  den  langen  släf  sldfen,  Kolocz  285 ;  daz  in  (him)
der  lange   släf  gevie  (caught).  Ring  246;  conf.  üf  einem   stro

Ugen,  MS.   1,  25*. The    dead  go  to   (Jod:    Dryhten   secean,

Beow.  373;  si  sin  vor  Ootes  ougen  (eyes).  Trist.  18668;  fore
Meotudes  cneowum  (knees).  Cod.  Exon.  164,  19;  'beholding
God's  mouth  and  beard,'  Kalev.  p.  34;  Oote  hete  geboten  über
in,  Ges.  Abent.  1,  298 ;  wenn  der  grim  tot  über  in  gebiut,  Ls.  3,
124;  'God  came  with  his  mercy,'  Schwein.  2,  167.  184.  252.
^—Various  peculiar  expressions :  '  er  hat  im  den  namen  beno-
men,'  taken  the  name  (life)  fr.  him.  Nib.  1507,  4  :  virwandelen
(change)  disen  lip,  Esrchr.  6318;  des  lebenes  ferwandelen,  Diut.
2,  290;  den  Up,  daz  leben,  verwandeln,  Cod.  Vind.  428,  no.  154;
'tgelach  moeten  betalen,  have  to  pay  the  piper,  Maerl.  2,  238 ;  er
ist  verschlissen,  slit  up,  Vict.  Jacobi  88 ;  Esth.  '  lay  down  the
breath.'  Life  is  expr.  by  '  der  sele  walden,'  Ben.  Beitr.  86,  and
death  by  'he  is  tor  seien  gedegen/  Michelsen  Lub.  oberh«  42  ;


1554  DEATH.

seeltagen,  Haupt  3,  91 ;  our  '  todes  verbleichen/  tum  pale  of
death.  The  word  spalten,  split,  is  often  used  in  conn,  with  death:
stn  houbet  ime  endriu  spielt  (split  in  3),  enniuniu  (into  9)  sich  sin
zunge  yielt,  Reinh.  2248 ;  sin  houbet  gar  zespielt,  Lampr.  Alex.
6922  ;  daz  herze  ir  in  dem  libe  spielt,  Herzmaere  520 ;  bans  hoyed
brast  udi  ni  stykker,  DV.  1,  157;  we  say  the  heart  breaks  in
death,  bursts  with  grief.

p.  841.]  The  Ind.  Yama  is  god  of  justice,  of  death  and  of  the
underworld,  Bopp's  Nalas  pp.  201.  264;  in  this  last  csapacitj
he  is  named  Kala,  the  black,  Bopp's  Gl.  74*» ;  he  answers  to  the
Pers.  Jemshit,  Zend.  Timo.  Tama  sends  his  messengers,  who
conduct  to  his  dreary  dwelling,  Kuruinge  1296.  1360.  1643.
Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  2,  101 ;  conf.  the  death-angels,  Rosenöl  1,  56-7,
the  angel  of  death  and  destroying  angel  (p.  1182).  How  the
Tartars  keep  off  the  angel  of  death  is  told  by  K.  Schlözer  p.  32-3.
Hermes  with  his  wand  drives  the  souls  of  the  suitors  to  the
asphodel  mead.  Od.  24,  1 — 14.  99 — 101.     As  Hermes  is  sent  to

men,  so  is  Iris  to  women. Death  drags  men  away  from  their

houses,  their  buildings  :  thus  Protesilaos  leaves  his  widow  a  half-
finished  house,  56/A09  i7/«T€Xij9,  H.  2,  701.  Apollo  and  Artemis
come  regularly  and  kill  off  the  old  people  with  painiesa  darts,
ayayoi^  ßeKUairi,  Od.  15,  410-1  ;  t^k  ßaiXev  Idprefju^  lojfiaipa
15,478;  alhe  fioi  &9  fiaXaxov  Bavarov  iropoi  lAprcfJn^  arfvij  18,
202.  20,  60-1.  80.  Cliaron  ferries  over  the  water;  so  the  devil
is  repres.  with  an  oar  in  his  hand,  Woeste  p.  49.  '  Valien  in  des
Todes  wäge,'  balance.  Warn.  1650;  *  M  des  Todes  wäge  sweben,'

be  poised  3318. Death  is  sent  by  Ood :  Got  der  sende  an

minen  leiden  man  den  T6t\  MS.  1,  81*;  'sin  wip  diu  schriet
w&fen  üf  den  Tot,  er  si  entsläfen  daz  er'n  niht  welle  besten,'  cries
fie  upon  D.,  he  must  have  gone  to  sleep,  that  he  won't  tackle  the
man,  Teichner  75 ;  d6  ergreif  in  der  T6t,  d6  er  im  am  zuokunji
enbot  (while  he  to  him  his  arrival  made  known),  s6  daz  er  in
geleite,  Greg;  20.  He  knocks  at  the  door :  bereite  ze  Aftuonne
deme  klopphaere,  Uolr.  1329;  so  in  Bemo,  'ut  pulsanti  posset
aperire.^  He  comes  as  a  young  man  :  der  jungelinc,  der  geheizen
ist  T6t,  Ls.  2,  373.  The  Lapland  Yabmen  akka,  uxor  vel  avia
mortis,  sits  in  a  subterr,  cave,  and  was  worshipped  as  a  divine
being,  Lindahl's  Lex.  82^ ;  ich  selbe  sol  hin  in  daz  lu}l,  Fi-aueol.
114,  8;  des  todes  hole  (p.  853,  Gossip  Death's  cavern).


DEATH.  1555

p.  842.]  With  mors  conf.  Zend,  nierethyu,  Bopp's  Comp.  Gr.
46 ;  schmerz,  smart  is  expl.  differently  by  Benfey  2,  89.  A  Norse
word  for  dead  is  ddinn  (p.  453  end);  conf.  Finn.  Tuoni=  mora,
Plato;  Twmen  koira,  death's  dog  =  dragonfly;  Tuonela^orcus.
Prass.  gallcLSi  niors  (the  Lith.  galas,  finis  ?).  Esth.  »iArm  =  mors,
Finn,  surma.  Hung,  haldlj  Finn,  kuolema,  Yotiak  huhm,  Lapp.
yabmen.  Death  is  the  brother  of  Sleep^  who  is  also  personified  :
the  dead  sleep.  It  is  said  of  the  dead  vala :  sefrattu  fyrri,  Sram.
95^;  KotßiijaaTo  yaXKcov  virvov,  II.  II,  241.  As  sleep  is  called
the  sandmaUj  death  is  in  Esth.  called  earthmati,  sandman,  liwa
annus  J  Sand- Jack,  liwa  peter,  Sand-peter;  conf.  Alf.  Maury's  Da
personnage  de  la  mort,  Bevae  Arch.  4th  year,  pp.  305 — 339.

p.  844.]  Death  comes  creeping :  mors  obrepit,  PI.  Pseud,  ii.
3,  20;  mors  imminet,  et  tacito  clam  venit  ilia  pede,  Tib.  i.  10,
34;  d&  kam  der  Tot  als  ein  diep,  u.  stal  dem  reinen  wtbe  daz
leben  fiz  ir  übe,  Wigal.  8032 ;  der  Tot  kumt  gesli4:hen  als  ein  diep,
Cato  397  (mutspelli  also  thiof  ferit.  Hei.  133,  4);  der  Tdt
ersliehet,  wins  by  stealth.  Warn.  3109 ;  der  tot  hat  mich  erslichen,
Hugdietr.  Fromm.  5;  er  ist  mir  na'  geslichen  (crept  after),  der
mich  kan  machen  bla  (blue),  Muskatbl.  18,  36;  der  T.  sUcht
vaste  herein,  Steph.  Stofi.  174 ;  daz  euch  nicht  ubersleiche  der  T.
mit  seim  gereusch,  Wolkenst.  31.  M.  Nethl. :  Srt  die  Döt  belope,
Maerl.  8,  191.  Dir  ist  vil  nahe  der  T6t,  Ksrchr.  5084.  11298;
conf.  AS.  nea-laecan  (Suppl.  to  846  end) ;  swie  mir  der  T.  uf

dem  rücken  waere,  on  my  back,  MS.  2,  46^. Death  is  invoked

by  men  weary  of  life :  er  rief  (cried)  nach  dem  t6de,  Ksrchr.
1724;  T6t,  kvm  u.  toete  mich!  Dioclet.  4732 ;  nun  him  Tot!
Hartm.  1,  büchl.  292 ;  hum  Dot  1  Mar.  kl.,  after  Arnold  28.  440  ;
conf.  iKOiro»  fi^po^,  Aesch.  Suppl.  804 ;  0  Yama,  come,  release
me,  Holtzm.  Kur.  723;  kom  T.,  brich  mir  daz  herz  enzwei,
Hagen's  Gres.  Abent  1,  301 ;  w6  dir  T.,  kum  her,  u.  nim  uns  alle
hin,  Mai  150,  12.  355,  4.  162,  4.  164,  13.  178,  27;  recipe  me  ad
te,  mors,  amicum  et  benevolum,  Plaut.  Cistell.  iii.  9 ;  nu  kum,
grimmeclicher  T.,  u.  rihte  Goto  von  uns  beiden,  MS.  1,17^;  kum
ein  kleines  tödelein,  u.  für  mich  balde  yon  hinnen,  Bergreien
84;  wo  bist  so  lang,  du  grimmer  T.  ?  komb  1  H.  Sachs  iii.  1,
227^;  0  mors,  cur  mihi  se^^a  venis  ?  Prop.  iii.  4,  34,  conf.  Soph.
Philoct.  796;  riep  om  die  ddt,  dat  si  qiuime,  Lanc.  35711 ;  dat  se
<len  d6d  beide  schulden  unde  baden,  dat  he  nihtefisumede  (delay).


1556  DEATH.

wen  dat  he  queme,  nnde  on  (fr.  them)  dat  levend  to  hand  neme,
Everh.  Gandersh.  487* ;  weiz  Grot,  her  Tot,  ir  muezet  Iter,  Apollon.
235 ;  nim  mich  T.,  brich  T.  min  herze !  Altd.  bl.  1,  288-9 ;  6wS
T.,  wes  mid  est  (shnnnest)  du  ?  Ls.  1,  99  ;  wo  T.,  zwiu  sparst  da
mich  ?  Mai  43,  10.  W.  v.  Bheinaa  190*;  eia  T.,  mohtes  du  mich
getoeten  I  Steph.  Stofl.  181 ;  wallan  Dae'S,  wela  Dae-S,  |7at  }fn
me  n'elt  fordemen,  Kg  Leir  160,  20;  he  dex,  la  mort  m^envaie!

Guitecl.  2,   148;   T.,   nu  öuge  dich!     Hag.  Ges.  Ab.  300.

Death  comes  to  give  warning ;  he  may  come  to  terms  or  be  put
off  the  first  two  times,  but  not  the  third.  Similar  to  the  tale  in
Straparola  4,  5  is  that  of  Pikollos,  Hanusch  p.  218.  Death  siht
an,  looks  at  a  man.  Warn.  28 ;  he  beckons  or  points,  BuTs  Adam,
1421.

Death  takes  men  away,  like  Hild  and  Gnnd  (p.  422)  :  din  kint
füeret  hin  des  Todes  wint,  Warn.  1648 ;  daz  in  der  T.  h&t  hin
genomen,  Ulr.  Trist.  20.  Frib.  Trist.  32 ;  Secundillen  het  der  T.
genomen,  Parz.  822,  20;  der  T.  hat  mich  begriffen  (gripped),
Hugdietr.  Oechsle  10;  6  iz  der  T.  begrife,  Diemer  848,  9;  Ab
ergreif  den  vater  euch  der  T.,  Gregor.  1 9 ;  begrift  inch  da  der
T.  413 ;  Den  hat  der  T.  verzimmert,  boxed  up,  Suchenw.  16,
167;  des  Todes  zimmer  19,  17 ;  conf.  diap  dödes  dalu  (Snppl.  to
803)  ;  tödes  muor^  Türl.  Wh.  16\  Death,  like  the  devil,  has  jaws,
a  throat,  to  devour  with :  Valien  in  des  Todes  giel  (gullet) ,  Earl
72* ;  si  liefen  dem  Tod  in  den  rächen  (ran  into  the  jaws,  Theiln.
der  Serben  (?)  p.  23  (yr.  1685) ;  conf.  '  ir  welt  in  gewissen  toi,'
certain  death,  Wigal.  6061 ;  in  den  t6t  riten  6153;  we  say  'den.
in  den  tod  gehn.'

p.  845.]  Death  rides,  as  the  dead  lover  fetches  his  bride  away
on  horseback,  Hpt's  Altd.  bl.  1,  177.  Miillenh.  no.  224;  and  so
far  back  as  Saem.  168** :  mal  er  mer  at  rtfa  roShar  brautir,  IXr
salgofnir  sigrj^io"?  veki  (ere  the  cock  crows) ;  conf.  des  Todes  vnp,
Engelh.  3402  n. ;  ich  gezime  dir  (I  suit  thee)  wol  ze  toibe,  Er.
5896.  Like  the  Schleswig  Hel  (Miillenh.  no.  335),  Wode  also  and
the  wild  hunter  ride  on  a  three-legged  horse ;  Wode  catches  the
subterraneans,  ties  them  together  by  their  hairs,  and  lets  them
hang  on  each  side  of  his  horse,  Miillenh.  p.  373.  On  Boeotian
tombstones  the  dead  man  stands  beside  the  horse,  with  the  in-
scription :  ^pä)9  %ai/>6,  K.  F.  Hermann's  Gottesd.  alterth.  §  16,
20.     Charos  ranges  the  babes  on  his  saddle,  see  GDS.  140-1.


DEATH.  1557

p.  846.]  Death  takes  prisoners.  Yama  leads  away  the  mem-
nikin  he  has  polled  ont  of  the  dying  man^  tisd  to  a  rope  which  he
carries  abont^  Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  1^  64-5.  Bochholz  1^  89  ;  ob  mich
der  Tot  enbindet,  Wh.  68,  22.  Death  throws  his  net  over  us,
Steph.  Stofi.  174;  in  des  T6des  vallen  (snares)  beklemmet,
Mart.  11^;  kämen  zao  des  T6des  valle,  Livl.  1808;  in  des  Tddes
läge  (ambush),  Kl.  1366;  der  T6t  im  daz  leben  stal,  Ottoc.  86»;
die  in  (fr.  them)  het  der  T.  verstolen,  Wigal.  9213 ;  in  het  vil
nach  (well-nigh)  der  bitter  T.  mit  stner  kraft  gezücket  hin  (tugged
away)  5956;  stn  leben  het  gezücket  der  T.  5129;  der  T.  zücket
(rhy.  niderbücket),  Wolkenst.  31 ;  unz  si  der  T.  ersnellet  (till
d.  snaps  her  up),  Hpt's  Ztschr.  7,  331 ;  der  T.  h&t  mich
ergangen f  Ecke  58;  do  nu  der  T.  her  drangt  St.  Louis  60,  17;
thaz  tod  uns  bus  gi-angti,  bus  näher  uns  gifiangi,  0.  iii.  24,  14,
i.e.  brought  us  to  such  straits,  so  nearly  caught  us;  der  Tod
ravscht  her  behend,  r.  durch  die  hechen  her,  B.  Waldis  149*.  163*.
Death  as  conqueror  stands  over  the  prostrate  dying  man  :  des
Tot  gestet  über  in  selben,  Pfaffenleben  33;  conf.  Dietr.  1669:  die
sine  (his  men)  stuonden  über  in.  The  dying  have  fallen  due  to
Death,  become  his  men  ;  hence  we  say  '  ein  mann  (ein  hind)  des
Todes ' :  sonst  war  er  ein  m^nn  des  Todes,  Zehn  eben  p.  226 ;
conf.  Dödis  vuoter  (food)  werden,  IJundgr.  2,  108;  des  Todes
spil  (sport),   Wigal.  10743,  den  T6t  lohen  (with  fortifications),

ibid. The  dying  man  wrestles  with  D.,  Sanders  p.  44;  mit

dem  grimmen  Tode  rane,  Servat.  1771;  mit  dem  T.  h&t  ainen
gera/nc,  Warn.  174  (the  devil  wrestles  too:  mit  wem  die  tievel
haben  ge^-un^en.  Renn.  10727) ;  überwunden  (vanquished)  sich
dem  Tode  ergeben,  (surrender),  WigaL  7662.  Death  is  armed:
A.S.  wiga  wsölglfre.  Cod.  Exon.  231,  8;  vnga  nealaeceiS  164,  4 ;
dead' nealaectCf  stop  stalgongum  strong  and  hre'Se  170,  17;  wir
ligend  auf  des  Todes  spiez  (spear),  Bing  253.  He  shoots  arrows,
like  Charos  (Kindt  1849  p.  17)  :  wceUpilum,  Cod.  Bxon.  171,  16,
wceUstraslum  179,  11 ;  üf  in  sleif  des  Todes  ha^gel  (hail),  G.  schm.
158 ;  in  hat  benomen  des  Todes  schür,  Wh.  256,  6.  He  is  a
hunter,  MSH.  3,  177*.  He  is  likened  to  a  thorn  :  darinne  der  tdt
als  ein  dorn  in  dem  Meien  blüete,  Wigal.  7628.  He  has  a  legal
claim  upon  man :  gait  der  dot  haer  scout  (solvit  morti  debitum),
Maerl.  1,  430 ;  we  say  '  to  pay  the  debt  of  nature.'

p.  847.]     Death  has  an  army :  '  der  Tdt  fuort  in  die  gemeinen


1558  DEATH.

vari,^  the  common  journey,  Ottoc.  86^ ;  '  der  T.  gebiutet  sine  ier-
vart/  army's  march,  BarL  397,  32.  His  badge,  his  iaoen  (SappL
to  200),  is  the  pallid  hne:  des  Tddes  zeichen  in  liehter  varufe,
Nib.  928,  3.  2006,  1;  des  T.  z.  wirt  schin  (is  displayed)  in
swarz-gelber  varwe.  Warn.  128 ;  des  T.  ^100  (yellow),  MS.  2,
166^.  Those  who  are  veig,  fey,  may  thus  be  known,  Belg.  mas.
5,  lis.  On  the  contrary,  in  Wigal.  6151,  a  red  cloth  tied  to  a
spear  betokens  that  a  man  shall  ride  to  his  death  that  day :

An  ein  sper  man  im  do  bant
einen  samet  der  was  rot ;
daz  bezeichent  daz  er  in  den  tot
des  tages  riten  soldo.

Proserpine  devotes  the  dying  to  Orcns  by  cutting  a  lock  of  hair
off  them:

Nondam  illi  flavnm  Proserpina  vertice  crinetn

abstulerat,  Stygioqne  caput  damnavenU  Oreo,     Jßn.  4,  693.

Iris  is  sent  down  to  Dido :

Devolat,  et  supra  caput  astitit:  'Hune  [crinem]  ego  Diti

sacrum  jussa  fero,  teque  isto  corpore  solve'

Sic  ait,  et  dextra  erineiü  secai,  omnis  et  una

dilapsus  calor,  atque  in  ventos  vita  recessit.        ^n.  4,  702.

p.  848.]  Death  mows,  Lett,  nahwe  |4av],  Bergm.  69;  des
Todes  sichel,  Wolkenst.  278.  He  is  a  sitheman,  Shah-nameh|
V.  Gorres  1,  105*6 ;  oonf.  the  3  maidens  that  mow  the  people
down  with  their  sithes,  Kulda  in  D^Elv.  110.

p.  849.]  Death  is  commonly  called  the  grim,  Diemer  87,  9.
14.  Servat.  1771-92.  Hahn's  Strieker  11;  der  T&t  in  mit
grimme  suochte,  Diut.  1,  407 ;  '  der  grimme  tot,'  the  name  of  a
sword,  MSH.  8,  236»;  der  grimnucltche  t6t,  Hagen's  Ges.  Abent
1,  300;  der  arge  tot,  Ernst  1954;  der  übel  tod,  der  büter,  Bing
6^,12.  54V26.  Fr.  'male  mort;'  es  ist  niht  wirsers  danne  der
tot.  Er.  7935 ;  der  leide  dot,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  2,  197  (like  the  devil)  ;
die  ftlle  D6t,  Maeri.  2,  133;  der  gewisse  T6t,  Helbl.  1,  109.
Wi^.  6061.  6132  ;  er  was  des  geicissen  Todes,  Diemer  218, 14;
'  geicis  sam  der  Tot,'  sure  as  d.,  Lanx.  53dl ;  jft  loew^ic  rehte  alsavh
den  T.,  Flore  8756 ;  ich  wda  ex  wdrez  (irue)  als  den  T.,  Trist.


DEATH.  1559

119.  17751.  19147.  Ulr.  Trist.  1964;  der  gemeine  T.,  Hahn  78,
20.  91,48.  Greg.  8769.  Scliwabensp.  p.  179;  dw  gemeinliche
T.,  Klage  534 ;  Odvaro^  ofioio^,  Od.  3,  236 ;  qui  omnes  manet,
conf.  Etr.  Mantus  fr.  manere,  Gerh.  pp.  1 7.  56.

p.  850.]  Dominus  Blicero  is  called  Bleker  in  Coremans  109;
dass  euch  der  blichars  reatl  Garg.  134^;  der  blasse  menschen-
frass  (pale  man-moncher),  Fleming  p.  142  ;  oar  knöchler,  knoch-
enmann.  Bony.  Death  was  depicted  with  frightfal  aspect :  an
sinem  Schilde  was  der  Tot  gemdlt  vil  grusenliche,  Wigal.  2998 ;
conf.  des  Todes  sehüd-gemaele,  Tit.  2689,  the  Harii  (p.  950),  and
the  death's-head  hussars.  On  the  tomb  near  Camae  the
skeletons  are  put  in  a  dancing  posture,  Olfers  in  Abh.  der  Acad.
'30,  pp.  15.  19—22.

p.  852.]  'Friend  Hain  is  not  so  easy  to  buy  oS/  Hans  Wurst
doktor  nolens  volens,  Frankf.  and  Leipz.  1779,  p.  39;  'and  there
Friend  Häyn  did  the  sexton  a  kindness,'  viz.  his  wife  dies  in
childbed,  Kindleben,  Wilib.  Schluterius,  Halle  1779,  p.  114.
Jean  Paul  uses  the  word  in  Q.  Fixlein  p.  170,  and  Lessing  12,
505  (yr.  1778).  But  I  now  find  in  EgenolPs  Sprichw.  bl.  32 1»»
(under  '  sawr  sehen ') :  '  he  looks  sour,  he  looks  like  Renn  the
devil.'  The  other  phrases  are  all  borr.  fr.  Seb.  Frank ;  this  one
is  peculiar  to  Egenolf  s  collection.     Conf.  '  Heintze  Pik,  de  dood,'

V.  d.  Bergh  155. Death  stretches  the  limbs :  als  sie  der  Tdt

gestracte,  Ernst  3011 ;  Odvaro^  ravrfKeyrj^y  laying  out  at  length.
Od.  3,  238.  11,  171  seq.;  'an  deme  Strecke-foisze,'  a  place,
Arnsb.  Urk.  no.  493,  yr.  1319.  Blechezahn  is  also  in  Fleming
p.  424.

p.  85 i.]  Similar  to  the  expression  in  H.  Sachs,  but  not  so
figurative,  is  the  phrase :  '  der  t6t  uns  zucke  daz  leben,'  jerks  the
life  fr.  us,  Benn.  20389.  Hagen's  Ges.  Ab.  1,  299.  On  the  Zt/e-
candle,  see  Wackemagel  in  Haupt  6,  280 — 4;  daz  leben  ist
unstaete,  wan  ez  e^'leschet  der  Tot  als  ein  lieht,  Altd.  bl.  2,  122 ;
the  devil  (here  meaning  death)  is  to  come  for  a  man  when  a
wax-taper  has  burnt  down,  Müllenh.  p.  180.  On  the  torch  of  Eros
(whose  other  attribute,  like  Death's,  is  the  bow),  and  on  his
relation  to  Psyche,  see  Gerhard's  Bros  pp.  5.  15.  32.     KM.*  3,

70. Death  is  a  godfather;    see  also  Phil.  v.  Sittew.  2,  673-4.

Iq  the  same  way  the  hoberges-gubbe,  the  man  of  the  mountain
(miner?)  is  asked  to  be  godfather  (p.  189)^  Müllenh.  p.  289  [In


1560  DESTINT  AND  WELL-BEING.

Sbaksp.  the  jnry  who  convict  are  godfathers].  As  a  godfather,
it  matters  mach  whether  yoa  stand  at  the  head  or  foot :  kopp*
vaddeVj  stert-vadder,  Schütze  4,  194-5.  The  Slav,  story  of
Oodmother  Smrt  in  WolPs  Ztschr.  1,  262-3  may  be  conf.  with
our  märchen  of  Oevatter  Tod,  EM.  no.  44  and  note.  On  ihe
life-or-death-giving  look  of  the  bird  charadriusj  see  Plat«  Sympos.
V.  7,  2.     Physiol,  in  Karajan  p.  104.

p.  855.]  On  the  märchen  of  Death  and  Jack  Player,  see  Pref.
xvi.  xli.  The  Lith.  Welnas  is  called  in  Lasicz  48  vielona,  dens
animaram.  Beside  the  Finn.  Tuoni,  there  is  mentioned  a  death-
god  Kalma,  Schott's  Kallervo  pp.  218.  235.


CHAPTER  XXVIII.
DESTINY  AND  WELL-BEING.

p.  856  n.]  The  Gothic  iov feige,  fey,  is  dauß^ublis  {eTrtOavaTios:),
conf.  ON.  dauff  yfli,  morticiniam.  Faeges  forSsKS,  moribandi
decessus.  Cod.  Exon.  182,  34;  wyrd  ne  meahte  in  fa^um  leng
feor  gehealdan  165,  18.  Die  vege  ddt,  Earel  2,  733;  veige  eben
todt,  Klage  536-9.  1304 ;  sit  lie  man  bi  den  veigen  vil  der  pfafien
üf  dem  sande  (left  with  the  dying  many  priests),  Gadr.  915,  4;
si  was  ze  früeje  leider  veige,  Flore  2163;  d&  vielen  (fell)  die
veigen,  Ksrchr.  4909.  7078 ;  d&  gelAgen  die  veigen,  5247.  7803 ;
'  die  veghe  es,  hie  meet  ter  monde,'  who  fey  is,  mast  to  monld,
Walew.  3876 ;  ni  si  man  nihein  s6feigi  (no  mortal),  0.  i.  11,  10;
dd.  was  der  veige  vanden  (foand,  hit).  Trist.  403,  8;  conf.  der
veige  rise  401,  18;  ir  sit  veige  gewesen,  Wien,  merfart  410.  438;
nnz  der  man  niht  veige  en-ist,  so  emeret  in  vil  kleiner  list  (so
long  as  he  is  not  fey,  a  little  skill  will  set  him  np),  Iw.  1299.

p.  857.]  Destiny  rales  over  the  highest  of  gods :  irrrep  Be  rijq
Ke<l>a\r]^  Tov  2lu>9  etaiv  ^flpav  xal  Molpai,  Pans.  i.  40,  3.  It  is
expr.  by  the  following  terms  :  ON.  shop  16t  hon  vaza,  Saam.
249^.,  OS.  giscapu  mahtig  gimanodun,  Hel.  10,  18;  thin  berhtun
giscapu  gimanodun  11,  17;  regano-giscapu  gimanodun  103,  3;
conf.  torbtlico  tidi  gimanodun  3,  11.     Dan.  den  kranke  skjebne,

DV.  1,  123;  conf.  den  kranke  lykke  1,  195. ON.  örlög,  OHG.

vrlac,  MHG.  urliuge,  urlouc,  Gramm.  2,  790;  vorn  nü  endat  J>aa
alög,  Hervarars.  p.  488 ;  and  the  Sax.  compds  orlag-huila,  orleg-


DESTINY  AND  WELL-BEING.  1561

hmiL ^MHG.  wil'Saelde :  diu  wilsaelde  ie  muoz  irg&n,  Ksrchr.

3493.  3535;  conf.  3122-5.  3130.  Lanz.  1602.  Fundgr.  1,  398;
ein  übel  unlsaelde,  Ksrchr.  1757.  Also  the  nncompounded  mle  :
so  hab  dia  ivile  nndanc !  Biter.  11933;  stn  wile  und  sin  tac^
Ksrchr.  3557;  ^wile  a.  stunde  walzent  al-umbe^'  fate  and  the
hour  roll  round,  3660.  3587.     We  say  'his  hour  has  struck.'

p.  858.]  The  hour  of  birth  and  destiny  is  determined  on  by
night :  ndtt  var  t  boe,  nornir  qvämo^  ]7ar  er  au'Slingi  aldr  umsköpo,
SaBm.  149^;  diu  mir  wart  bescheiden  (she  was  destined  for  me)
von  den  nahtweiden,  d6  si  firste  wart  geborn,  Krone  4840.

Even  in  early  times  destiny  is  placed  in  the  hands  of  gods :

2r€V9  S'  aVTO^  V€ßl€l,  6\ßoV  ^OXv/J/TTlO^  avOpcOTTOiaiV

i<r0Xjo2^  iJSi  tcaKoia-iv,  07ra>9  idiXpaiv»  exdoT^,     Od.  6,  188.

scoKt)  21(09  alaa.    Od.  9.  55.

avepo^  <p  re  Kpovlcov

oKßov  eiriKKdxTQ  yafieovTi  re  yiyvofiev^  re.     Od.  4,  207.

ov  ßioi  roioOrov  iTri/cXtacap  deol  Skßop.     Od.  3.  208.

&9  yap  oi  eTri/ckao-ev  rd  ye  Baifuov,     Od.  1 6,  64.

The  last  three  passages  have  ernKkadw  (I  spin  for)«  the  term
gener.  used  of  the  Fates.

p.  859.]  The  weighing  of  destinies,  performed  by  Zeus  in  the
Iliad,  Ib  called  'weighing  of  souls'  by  Welcker,  Cycl.  2,  189,  just
what  Christian  legend  ascribes  to  St.  Michael :

Sant  Michel  richtet  M  stn  w&ge  (holds  up  his  balance),
und  henket  sich  der  välant  dran  (though  the  devil  hangs  on),
doch  schaffet  er  niht,  der  swarze  man,
wan  sin  sleeken  ist  umbsus  (his  trickery  is  in  vain) .

Conr.  V.  Dankrotsch.  Namenb.  118.     Berthold  p.  17.

p.  860.]  The  stars  have  fnfluence  esp.  on  birth :  tam  grave
sidus  habenti,  Ov.  Trist,  v.  10,  45;  vanar-stiarna  flaug.  ^  var
ec  foeddr,  burt  frä  briosti  mer.  hätt  at  hun  Ü6,  hvergi  settiz,  svä
hau  maetti  hvild  hafa,  Ssem.  126^ ;  'because  their  star  is  at  heat,
or  it  has  cooled  doton  (versauset)/  Phil.  v.  Sittew.  Soldatenl.  p.m.
149.  Other  omens  attending  the  conception  and  birth  of  a  child
are  mentioned  in  Pref.  zliv.  xlv.

p.  862.]  In  the  unavoidableness  of  fate  there  is  something
cruel  and  grudging.    The  luckiest  and  best  men  perish  at  last :


1562  DESTINT  AND  WELL-BEING.

ßJt  sturbens  jamerliche  von  zweier  edelen  frouwen  nit  (women's
jealouay),  Nib.  6,  4;  wie  liebe  mit  leide  ze  jungest  Idnen  han(\Gve
may  reward  with  woe  at  last)  17,  3 ;  als  ie  dia  liebe  leiäs  ze  aller-
jungiete  gü  (tarn  to  woe)  231 5 ;  sd  koma  mein  eptir  munulS,  S»m.
1 29* ;  conf.  these  views  of  the  world's  rewards,  and  Lahrs'  Vom

neide  p.  149. To  the  possession  of  costlg  things  is  attached

misfortune  and  ruin.  In  the  tale  of  Tyrfing  it  is  the  splendid
sword  that  kills;  conf.  the  fatal  sword  (p.  205).  So  the  horse  of
Sejanns  proved  a  fatal  steed,  Grellias  3,  9.  Lehrs'  Vom  neide
p.  154.  To  the  same  category  belong  the  Nihelung^s  hoard,  the
alraun  and  gallows-man  (p.  513  n.).  And  a  union  with  goddesses
and  fays  makes  men  unhappy  (p.  393).

The  Norse  fatalism  comes  out  in  :  '  ingen  man  ar  starkare  an
sitt  öde/  no  man  is  stronger  than  his  fate,  Sv.  folks.  1,  228.  In
Veatergötland  and  Schonen  they  say :  det  var  hanom  odt,  GDS.
125-6.  M.  Neth.  dat  stn  «ai,  dat  moe^  sin,  Karel  2,  1561.  MHG.
poets  have:  daz  geschach  u.  muose  sin,  Türl.  Wh.  29*;  wan  ez
salt  et  sin,  Parz.  42,  6 ;  ez  muoz  also  toesen,  Nib.  1482,  1 ;  swaz
geschehen  sol,  daz  geschiht,  Urstende  104,  48.  Helmbr.  168-3.
OS.  that  it  scolda  giwerihan  sd,  bethin  ni  mahtun  si  is  bemithan
(avoid),  Hel.  150,  19.   152,  4.   Pr.  tot  avenra  ce  quen  doit  avenir,

Garin  2,  201. AS.  n'ass  ic  faege  JA  git  (I  was  not  fey  yet),

Beow.  4289 ;  conf.  '  ez  sterbent  wan  (none  but)  die  veigen  die
doch  vil  lihte  heime  da  muosen  sterben.  Tit.  1799;  nieman
fiterben  mac  (can  die),  unz  im  kumt  sin  tester  tac,  EH.  103 ;  nieman

ersterben  mac,  6  im  kumt  sin  endes-tac,  Lanz.  1613. ^Bgo  vero

nihil  impossibile  arbitror,  sed  utcunque  fata  decreverunt  ita  cuncta
mortalibus  evenire,  Apul.  p.  m.  87;  mir  geschiht  niht,  wan  mir
geschaffen  ist,  ez  muoz  nu  sin,  MSH.  3,  80 ;  ist  ez  dir  beschaffen,
Helmbr.  1297  ;  muoz  ez  wesen,  u.  ist  dir  beschaffen,  Laber  p.  200;
sei  es  uns  mit  heil  beschaffen,  Wolkenst.  1 78 ;  beschaffene  glück,

Ambras,  lied.  p.  224-5-7. ^Mir  ist  niht  beaht,  Flore  1184;  dia

ist  dir  erahtöt  (intended),  Griesh.  2,  18 ;  dem  si  rehte  erahtoi  ist

2,  19. Ih  ward  giboran  zi  thiu,  0.  iv.  21,  80;  wer  zuo  drin

helbling  ist  geborn,  Diut.  1,  325;  ze  drin  seherpJien  gebom,  Rena
15886 ;  dur  sanc  (for  song)  bin  ich  gebom,  MS.  1,  53*  ;  er  wart
zer  fluht  nie  gehorn,  Wh.  463,  19;  ich  wart  in  dine  helfe  erbom,
Tit.  72,  4 ;  Christianchen  ist  nicht  fur  mich  geboren.  Geliert  3,
168.    We  say ;  es  ist  mir  angeboren. ^Til  lykke  lagt,  DV.  3, 5;


DESTINY  AND  WEIiL-BEING.  1563

Dan.  'er  det  saa  läget,  saa  faaer  det  saa  blive';  ez  gSt  keinem
anders  dan  im  wirt  üfgeleit,  Mich.  Beham's  Vom  nnglaaben  4

[necessity  is  laid  -upon  me,  1  Cor.  9,  16]. '  Swaz  dir  enteile  is

get&n,  des  enwirt  dir  niht  benomen/  you  canH  fail  to  have,  En.
82,  6.  87,  21.  117,  1  ;  deme  si  beschert  was,  &  si  wnrde  gebom,,
En.  3993  :  nieraan  gelonben  sol  an  daz  wort '  ez  ist  ime  beschert/
Grermania  3,  233*;  dem  galgen  besdiert,  Renn.  16815;  6st  iu
beschert,  n.  en-mac  niht  anders  sin,  Flore  4588;  nns  wirdet
cnuogiz  kespirre  ioh  peskerit  N.  Arist.,  besJcerit  unde  beskibet  94 ;
waz  ist  ans  beiden  beschert  n.  bescheiden,  Herb.  14054.     We  say :

es   ist    mir    beschieden,   verhängt,   bestimmt,    geschickt. Lith.

lemtas,  ordained;  was  einem  geordnet  sei,  dem  entrinne  man
nicht,  GotthelTs  Erz.  1,  292 ;  es  sei  so  geordnet,  n.  was  sein  moss,
muss  sein  1,  284;  zugeschrempt,  Keisersb.  Von  konfieuten  89^.

Geistl.  lewe  50*;  ez  ist  mir  sus  gewant,P&rz.  11,  8. More

antiqae  are  the  phrases  :

QU  yap  7ra)9  Karaivaofieff  äyyifievoL  irep

et^jiiSao  Bo/JMV^,  rrplv  fiopaifiov  l^fiap  iiriXOr^,     Od.  10,  174.

^Ipav  S'  oirLvd  ^rifu  7r€<f>vyfiivov  cfifievai  avSp&v.     II.  6,  488.

AS.  g»  pk  wyrd  sw&  hio  scel,  Beow.  905 ;  s6  habed  im  wurd-
giscapu  Metod  gimarcod.  Hei.  4,  13,  conf.  18,  10.     45,  14.

p.  863.]  Weal  and  luck  are  all  bnt  personified  in  the  phrases :
kom,  glück,  xl  schlag*  mit  häufen  drein,  Docen's  Mise.  1,  279;
ein  garten,  den  glück  n.  heil  buwet,  Mohr  reg.  v.  Frauenbr.  no.
386,  yr.  1434 ;  heil,  toalde  iz  I  Diut.  1,  353  ;  des  helfe  mir  gelücke  1
Nib.  1094,  4 ;  mine  helps  God  ende  goet  geval !  Walew.  286 ;
an^s  mi  God  ende  goed  geval  I  Karel  2,  3609;  mln  heil,  nu  linge
(prosper)!  Altsw.  14,  31.  96,  4;  Silvio  volgete  gröz  heil,  En.
13138;  die  wile  (meanwhile)  sin  heil  vor  gienc,  7251 ;  to  snatch
the  lack  that  was  going  to  another,  Unw.  dokt  358 ;  those  that
lack  pipes  to  may  dance,  Doceti's  Misc.  1,  282  ;  when  God  and
good  lack  greet  him,  Simpl.  1,  536;    daz  in  daz  heil  verfluochet

(curses  him),  Hartm.  1,  biichl.  782. Without  personification  :

6i  liezen  die  yart  an  ein  heil,  3297 ;  waere  daz  an  minem  heile,
MS.  1,  193**;  vart  inwer  sträze  (go  your  way)  mit  guotem  heile,
Iw.  832 ;  ze  heile  komen,  MS.  1,  75*;  heiles  vurt  waten  (wade
the  ford  of),  Suchenw.  miii.  35;  guotes  ma^nes  heil,  Hpt's
Ztschr.  2, 179;  ich  trowe  mime  heile,  Nib.  2102,  4;  mime  heile


1564  DESTINT  AND  WELL-BEING.

ich  gar  verteile,  MS.  1^  83^ ;  da  mäht  min  heil  erwenden  (canst
thwart),  Walth.  60,  18;  ich  danke  's  mime  heile.  Nib.  1938,  4;
conf.  min  saelde  si  verwdzen  (carsed  be),  Mai  174,  4;  min  saelde
ich  verfluoche,  Flore  1182 ;   ich  ziuhe  ez  üf  (I  lay  it  all  apon)

die  8.  min,  Lanz.  3162 ;  doch  zürn  ich  an  die  s.  min  4300.

More  peculiar  are :  '  wünschet  daz  mir  ein  heil  gevalle/  befall,
Walth.  115,  5;  conf.  M.Neth.  gheval,  lack,  Huyd.  sab.  y.,  and
oar  Veldeke's  'daz  si  mßre  (increase)  min  geval*  1,  21*;  des
heiles  slüzzel  (key)  in  verspart  freade,  Altd.  bl.  2,  236 ;  verlorn
het  er  daz  heil,  Alex.  3389.  '  Wünschen  heiles  vunt/  a  find  of
lack,  Altd.  bl.  1,  339.  MS.  2,  190».  MSH.  1,  357\  Mai  64,  10.
Haupt  7,  117;    heile  bruoder,  fröiden  vunt,  Dietr.  drach.  303^;

der  Saelden  vunt,  MSH.  1,  359* ;  glückes  vunt  351**. Glück,

heil  and  saelde  are  named  side  by  side :  doch  so  was  geludee  a.
Sifrides  heil,  Nib.  569,  2 ;  hdli  joh  salida,  0.  Ladw.  5 ;  man
saget  von  glucke  a.  von  salden,  Herb.  6770;  so  moht  ime  gelUcke
n.  heil  u.  saelde  u.  ere  Afrisen,  Walth.  29,  31 ;  gelücke  inch  müeze
saelden  wem  (may  fortune  grant),  Parz.  431,  15.  Oelucke  is
distinguished  fr.  heil,  Herb.  3238.  15465;  conf.  rvxv»  /M></)a,
eifiapfiivff,  Lucian  3,  276 ;  dea  Fortuna,  PI,  Pseud,  ii.  3,  IS.

There  is  a  white  fortune  and  a  black,  a  bright  and  a  dark :  thia
berhtun  giscapu,  Hel.  11, 16.  23, 17 ;  }?&  bearhtan  gescceß,  C»dm.
273,  20.

Eia,  glücke  !     eia,  heil !

nu  h&st  du  mir  daz  swarze  teil  (black  side)

allenthalben  zuo  gekart  (toward  me  tamed) ;

mir  sint  die  unzen  wege  verspart  (barred),

d&  ich  wilen  ane  ginc  (whereon  I  whilom  went) .

Herb.  15465—69.

Frommann  p.  321  understands  this  of  the  moon's  light  or  dark
disc,  and  seems  to  derive  the  '  wheel  of  fortune '  altogether  fr.
the  lunar  orb.  Conf.  Lett.  '  ak  mannu  baltu  deenu  I  *  my  white
day,  Bergm.  76  (see  p.  1138).

p.  864.]  Of  Saelde's  vigilance  I  have  some  more  examples
[Omitted] :  min  S.  erwachet,  Ls.  2,  509 ;  swer  si  na  solde  schou-
wen,  des  S.  was  niht  entslafen,  Türl.  Wh.  46*.  And  the  same  of
Luck  and  Unluck:  hadde  mi  min  glieluc  ghewaeci,  Marg.  v.
Limbg  1,  1226;   our  unluck  wakes,  Günther  1014;  my  luck  is


DESTINY  AND  WELL-BEING.  1566

fast  asleep  212  (conf.  Dan.  Men  kranke  lykhe/  DV.  1,  195 ;  den
kranke  skjebne  I,  123).  M.  Neth.  die  Aventure  wacht  (p.  911);
erwachet  sin  planet,  Ghron.  in  Senkenb.  3^  459 ;  fartunam  ejus
in  mails  tantam  civilibus  vigilasse,  Amm.  Marc.  14,  10,  conf.  ^  at
vos  Salus  servassit,  Plaut.  Cist.  iv.  2,  76.  The  Laima  (Suppl.  to
877)  also  sleeps  and  wakes  up,  Büttner  no.  761.  Luck  is  coaxed :
se,  gelilcke,  sß,  Walth.  90,  18. Similar  phrases  :  min  weinen-
der schade  (hurt)  wachet,  MSH,  1,  102*;  skade  vaker,  Aasen's
Ordspr.  210;  ^to  wake  a  sleeping  sorrow/  Oedip,  Colon.  510,
ON.  vekja  Nau&,  S89m.  194^  (var.),  like  vekja  vig  105*.  Vreude
diu  ist  erwacliet,  diu  ie  verborgen  lac  (lay  hid),  MS.  2,  99* ;  conf.
wach  auf,  fried,  Fastn.  39,  1 ;  bi  werden  man  (to  noble-minded
men)  so  wacJient  wibes  güete,  MS.  1,  190*;  ir  giiete  u.  bescheiden-
heit  ist  gdn  mir  entslafen  1,  26^ ;  ir  genade  (favour)  mir  muoz
wachen  1,  S3*;  wil  ir  diu  {minne)  ze  herzen  nähen  wachen,  MSH.
1,  316^.  Nemesis,  vengeance,  sleeps  and  wakes.  '  A  place  where
a  certain  danger  waked,'  Serb.  u.  Kroat.  10.

p.  866.]  Fortuna,  like  Yer  Sselde  (Hagen's  Ges.  Ab.  1,  409),
waits  long  at  the  door,  and  is  not  admitted,  Dio  Cass.  64,  1 ;  mir
ist  verspart  (barred)  der  Saelden  tor,  Walth.  20,  31 ;  der  S.  tor
entsliezen  (unlock),  Dietr.  drach.  179*;  conf.  Hpt's  Ztschr.  2,
535  and  dream-gate  (Suppl.  to  1146  beg.).  In  the  same  way:
'  sliuz  mir  ftf  der  vröuden  tor,'  unlock  me  the  gates  of  joy,  MSH.
1,  356*;  gein  dem  süezen  Meien  stSnt  offen  fröiden  tor,  MS.  2,
108*;  der  fröid&ii  tor  ist  zuo  getan  (shut)  2,  198^ :  thro'  portals
wide  poured  joy  into  her  house,  Gotthelf  2,  203  ;  thy  luck  oomes
in  at  every  gate,  Fabricius's  Haustafel  (Y.  f.  Hamb.  gesch.  4,
486) ;  der  genaden  tor,  Hpt  4,  526.— Exulatum  aJbiit  salus,
Plaut.  Merc.  iii.  4,  6;  'des  solt  in  Saelde  unchen,'  quit  them,
Albr.  Tit.  2344 ;  diu  8.  mir  entwiche,  MS.  2, 20*;  conf.  'da  unse
heil  von  uns  trat,'  Pass.  40,  80 ;  '  heill  er  horfin,'  gone,  Yöls.  c.
11 ;  '  la  Fortune  passa,  eile  part  ä  ces  mots,'  Lafont.  5,  11 ;  con-
versely :  '  zuo  gienc  daz  unheil,'  on  came  mischief  (Suppl.  to  879).
Saelde  von  uns  vonit,  Athis  F,  20 ;  S.  wont  im  bi,  n.  vont,  Heinr.
Krone  56^;  dar  Saelden  ane  genge,  Hpt  4,  525;  daz  dich  daz
geliicke  ange,  Diocl.  4376.  8759 ;  alles  glück  weliete  (blew)  dich

an,  XJnw.  doct.  617. Luck  approaches  one  who  sleeps  at  the

well-side,  Babr.  49,  2;  predestined  luck  oomes  overnight,  Am-
bras. 247 ;  conf. '  falling  asleep  betw.  two  lucks^  Altd.  bl.  2j  175;

VOL.  IV.  u


1566  DESTINT  AKD  WELL-BBING.

an  Saelden  Wunsches  arm  entßlafen,  Tit.  1248.  Ipsa,  si  vellet,
Salus  his  circnmfasa,  nt  vulgo  hquimur,  eos  salvare  non  posset,
Liutpr.  Legatio  13.  Er  was  üf  der  Saelden  wege,  Ernst  1843;
conf.  '  86  verst  üf  gelückes  ban/  MS.  1,  88^ ;  hohe  getrat  zo  Sael-
den.  Mar.  164,  30 ;  ich  kan  si  wol  erjagen  (hunt  her  down)  :  si-ne
welle  sich  mir  m6  versagen  (refuse  me  more)  dan  si  sich  deheime
(any  one)  versagte,  der  si  ze  rehte  jagte,  Greg.  1529.  '  Ir  Saelde
diu  sach  sie  an,'  looked  on  her.  Mar.  187,  20;  we  say  'smiled
upon,'  conf.  t^v  tvxv^  vpoa-fieiSi&aayy  Lucian's  Asin.  47,  Fortuna
arridet.  '  Ich  muoz  ir  gruoz  verdienen,'  earn  Fortune's  greeting,
Greg.  1527;  Got  u.  das  glück  grüszet,  Simpl.  1,  536;  daz  mich
vr6  Saelde  ericands  (recognised),  MS.  2,  99»;  s6  volgt  dir  S.  noA,
MSH.  8,  224^;  min  fr6  S.,  wie  sie  min  vergäz  (forgot  me),  WaltL
43,  5.  '  Einer  gelücke  erslichet,  daz  der  ander  niht  wol  kan
erlaufen/  one  creeps  up  to  her,  another  can't  run  her  down,  MSH.
3,  297« ;  das  glück  erschleichm,  Fischart's  Gesch.  kl.  95^  XJhl.
Volksl.  584.     Ambras.  102;  Muck  wants  to  be  boldly  galloped

up  to,'  Polit.  stockf.  p.  240. '  Gelücke  ist  uns  verswunden!

vanished,  Altd.  bl.  2,  150 ;  '  wie  in  gelücke  fldch,'  fled,  Ottoc.
•7 13»;  'vrou  Saelde  Teeret  mir  den  viae/  turns  her  neck  (back),
Frauenl.  447,  22 ;  fortuna  malefida,  Rudi.  1,  11 ;  fortuna  vetvs,
1,  66 ;  vrou  S.  ist  vnlder  dan  ein  r6ch  (roe),  MSH.  2,  815%  conf.
'  gelücke  liefentwerhes/  ran  athwart,  Troj.  12598 ;  S.  wird  pflücke,
Kolocz  100;  daz  wiltwilde  gelücke  springt,  MS.  2, 147*».  '  In  der
Saelden  huote  vam,'  travel  in  her  keeping  1,  88» ;  wlsen  ftz  vrou
.  S.  huote,  MSH.  1,  339»;  conf.  '  cum  fortuna  ludere,'  be  her  play-
mate, favourite,  Pertz  2,  79. '  Der  Saelden  stabe,  dÄ  suit  ir

inch  an  stiuren/  staff  whereon  ye  shall  lean,  MSH.  3,  462*;  sitzen
üf  der  S.  Mr  1,  93*  (MS.  1,  36») ;  daz  inch  vr6  Saelde  Zdae  wifcr-
heren  (send  you  back),  Troj.  9359 ;  wie  dich  diu  S.  fuorte  (led),
Hpt  4,  524.  '  Din  S.  mich  an  sich  nam,  si  riet  mir,'  advised  me,
Wigaro.  4119;  'den  ir  S.  daz  geriet/  for  so  her  luck  advised,
Wh.  451,  4;  'daz  sie  diu  S.  tuon  hiez/  what  S.  bade  her  do,
Eracl.  54 ;  'dar  sin  8.  h&t  erdaht,'  wherever  his  luck  thought
good,  Parz.  827,  17.  'Diu  S.  ir  mit  fllze  pflac/  carefully  tended
her,  Wigal.  8950 ;  vrou  S.  ir  sHure  gap  stner  ammen  (bestowed
her  gifts  on  his  nurse),  din  stn  phlac,  d6  er  in  der  wiegen  (cradle)
lac,'  Er.  9898 ;  von  der  Saelden  gebe,  Altd.  bl.  2,  218 ;  nü  het  diu
vrotve  Saelilcheit  alien- wis  an  in  geleit  (on  him  set)  ir  vil  staetigez


DESTINY  AND  WELL-BEING.  1567

marc,  Greg.  1063 ;  der  Saelden  gundes  teil,  Krone  4888. Er

sitzet  in  S.  vogeUhtise,  Renn.  19512;  kaeme  ich  &f  der  S.  stuol,
Partenop.  93;  der.  S.  dach  (roof)>  MS.  1^  19P;  daz  una  decke
diner  S.  van  (flag),  MSH.  1,  839^;  entsliezen  üf  (anlock)  der  S.
schrin,  Dietr.  drach.  94^;  aller  S.  grunt  105\  308^;  der  S.  seil
(rope)  239\  257»;  der  S.  vaz  (cask).  Hag.  Ges.  Ab.  1,  461 ;  sich
daz  (beware  lest)  din  mnot  iht  trnnken  gS  von  des  geliickes  stoufe
(bowl),  Prauenl.  116,  19;  von  gold  ein  S.  vingerlin  (ring),  Lanz.
4940;  daz  golt  der  S.,  Tit.  4914.  5028;   Saeldenberc,  Mone  1,

346.  7,  819. ^Der  S.  zwic  (twig,  Suppl.  to  977) ;  ein  zwi  daran

diu  Saelde  blüejet,  Hpt  4,  527;  sin  S.  blüete,Wh.  468,  9;  ez
grüenet  miner  Saelden  m  (twig),  Winsbekin  6, 4;  wo  sein  glucks*
grasl  graint,  Stelzhamer  86 ;  gelücke  ist  witen  hie  gesdt  (widely
sown),  Dietr.  drach.  187*.  It  is  prettily  said  :  das  glück  ahhla-
ten  (disleaf)^  Fastn.  sp.  1143,  as  if  to  pluck  off  the  flower  of  luck ;
'luck  brings  roses/  Ldrb.  of  1582,  225;  grozmechtig  hrut-hörh
voll  glück  (huge  hamperfuls),  Fastn.  sp.  884,  24,  conf.  'gelück
in  einem  kreben  (korb,  basket)  finden,^  Hätzl.  85^ ;  der  Saelden
stücke  (pieces,  items?),  Parz.  734,  24;  h&t-er  darzuo  der  S.  swert,
Altd.  bl.  2,  229;  der  S.  sloe  (blow),  Iw.  4141,  conf.  'ne  nos
Fortuna  sinistra  cum  pede  prostemat,'  Gesta  Witigowonis  477;
'  at  first  she  cau't  take  in  her  luck,  by  and  by  she'll  snap  at  its
fists,'  Schoch'a  Stud.  D  3'^;  der  S.  swanz  (tail)  b&t  dich  uyibe-
vangen,  Hpt  4,  520.  '  Der  S.  tou  sin  herze  h&t  genetzet,'  S.'s
dew  has  drenched  his  heart,  MSH.  3,  173^ ;  *  bliss  comes  dewing
down,'  Goethe  14,  74,  conf.  '  alles  heils  ein  Inter  bach,'  limpid
stream,  Altsw.  98,  28 ;   '  luck  snows  upon  us  in  large   flakes,'

Phil.  V.  Sittew.  2,  665. Observe  the  plur.  saelden,  like  '  heilHr

horfnar'  (p.  864-5  n.):  thSn  sdlidon  intfallan,  0.  ii.  4»,  89;  er
mohte  sinen  saslden  immer  sagen  danc.  Nib.  300, 2 ;  waere  'z  an
den  s.  min,  Beinh.  436.  In  Tyrol  (15th  cent.)  e^frau  Selga  rides
at  the  head  of  the  nightly  host,  Germania  2,  438,  but  she  may
be  the  selige,  blissful,  not  our  Saelde.  Conf.  the  Indian  goddess
of  prosperity  Sri,  Holtzm.  3,  150,  the  äryaOtf  TvxVf  *he  bona
Fortuna,  Gerh.  in  Acad.  ber.  '47,  p.  203-4.

p.  869.]  On  fortuned s  wheel  see  Wackemagel  in  Hpt  6,  134
seq.  Cupid  also  has  a  wheel :  .vorsor  in  Amoris  rota  miser,
Plaut.  Cist.  ii.  1,  4.  Fortunae  sinistrorsum  sibi  rotant  volvere
Bentitj   Pertz  8,  235,  conf.  the  image  in   Carm.  burana  p.  1 ;


1568  DESTINY  AND  WELL-BEING.

volubilis^oia  transeuntia  mundi,  Kemble  no.  761  (yr  1038) ;  rota
fatalis  in  'Hemmerlin,  Reber  p.  236 ;  videns  fortunam,  at  solet,
ludicra  rotoreciprocare,  Eckehardi  casus  S.  Gklli  (Pertz  2,  88).
The  mere  turning  of  the  wheel  denotes  the  mutability  of  fate,
Pauriel'a  Pöösie  Prov.  3,  509.  .  Serb,  march,  no.  42,  p.  198.
Meghadüta  ed.  Schütz  p.  41  str.  107,  and  the  passage  fr.  Pia-
tarch,  ibid.  p.  109.

Geliicke  ist  sinewel  (spherical),  Wh.  246,  28  ;  der  liute  heil  ist
ungewegen  u.  sinwel,  Bit.  12440.  Fortune  rises  and  falls,  like  a
wheel  in  motion,  Meghad.  108;  daz  rat  der  fro  Fortune,  Turlin's
Krone  7 ;  Marie,  du  heiles  u.  gelückes  rat,  Hpt  4,  523 ;  dat  rat
van  avontureii,  Rein.  ed.  Will.  6183 ;  mir  g6t  der  Saelden  schtbe
(wheel),  Engelh.  4400 ;  do  unser  schibe  ensamt  gie  (together  went),
Warn.  3048;  wil  mir  der  S.  schibe  g&n,  als  si  dicke  (oft)  hat
get&n,  Dietr.  drach.  12  ;  gelückes  rat  umbo  trtben,  Troj.  13322;
als  sich  k£ret  (turns)  des  gelückes  rat,  Pass.  32,  62  ;  in  bezöch
der  werlde  geKickes  rat  ^56,  15;  si  vuoren  (rode)  üf  gelückes
rade,  Flore  845,  conf.  *  auf  gelukes  choken  varen,*  Suchenw.  27,
115 ;  ich  lige  iemer  under  glückes  rade,  MS.  2,  194*;  ic  was  te
hoghe  gheseten  (sat  too  *high)  op  dat  rat  der  aventuren,  Marg.  v.
Limb.  1,  185 ;  Woldemares  schive  in  groten  lukken  hadde  lopen
(run),  Detm.  1,  99;  gelückes  6örffe,  Tit.  2368;  Unglücke  daz  ge
si  an  (befall  them),  darzuo  der  laster  (infamy's)  schibe  müeze  in
allen  gSn  in  haut !     Dietr.  dr.  148  ^.

Saelde  is  sometimes  called  blind :  sprich  niht  '  Saelde  s!  blint/
des  si  niht  ist,  Cato  442 ;  sia  m&leton  (her  they  painted)  plinda,
Notk.  Boeth.  42 ;  and  avonture  is  blind,  Rose  5067,  or  blind-
folded 5858.  Notker  in  Boeth.  43  translates  '  deprehendisti  coeci
numinis  ambiguos  vultus '  by  '  nü  bechennest  tft  daz  analutte  des
sich  pergenten  (skulking)  truge-tiereles.'  To  Gotfrid's  ^  glesin
glücke'  add  the  ' fortuna i;i^rea '  of  the  Archipoeta  p.  m.  237.

p.  869.]  Der  Saelden  hint,  Freid.  134,  2  ;  Gabriel  salutes
Mary  as  such,  MSH,  3,  18» ;  fron  Saelde  und  Heil,  ir  kiut,  Krone
15827.  23094,  conf.  'sit  in  the  middle  of  God's  lap,'  Drei  kl.
leute  159;  mignon,  Lafont.  5,  o;  frou  S.  ir  stinre  gap  stner
ammen,  diu  stn  phlac,  do  er  in  der  wiegen  lac  (in  his  cradle  lay),
Br.  9898.  'Der  Saelden  bote,'  messenger,  Pantal.  172  ;  Seiden^
but,  Urk.  of  Hanover;  des  st  min  Saelde  gein  im  bote,  Parz.  416,
4.     Like  Saelden  bote   are  also:  Triuwen  bote,  Engelh.  6332;


DESTINY  AND  WELL-BEING.  1569

Erm  bote,  honour's  m.,  Fraaend.  487,  13.  479,  28;  der  E.  holde,
Athis  C  82.  Er.  9962;  der  E.  kneht,  Eagelh.  4152;  der  S.
holde,  Lanz.  1996;  der  8.  hüs-genoz,  housemate,  Wh.  3,  125^;
der  8.  schal,  Er.  2401;  der  Unsaelden  Jcneht,  Hartm.  2,  büchl.
626;  der  fürste  seiden  lierre,  Heldenb.  (1590),  110**,  et  passim.

p.  873.]  Otfrau  Fortuna,  a  kind  of  Venus,  there  is  a  legend
in  Altd.  bl.  1,  297.  With  Fortunatus  conf.  Faustus.  The
wishing-hat  carved  oat  of  a  finger-nail,  Schiefner  on  Kalewipoeg
pp.  146.  154,  resembles  Nagl-far  (p.  814).  On  the  miraculous
making  of  cloths,  see  Rommel  2,  342  fr.  the  Ann.  Erf.  in  Menken
3.  There  is  frequent  mention  of  a  girdle  that  gives  strength
(Suppl.  to  182),  the  strength  of  12  men,  Laurin  1966.  2441,  or
allays  hunger,  Ferabr.  2752.  2800 ;  ON.  hungurhand,  our  schmacht-
rieme.  Saxo  ed.  Müller  114  mentions  an  ^  armilla  possessoris
opes  augei*e  solita,'  a  '  tunica  fe^Tum  spernens '  118,  an  '  insecabilis
testis'  122;  conf.  the  growing  mantle  in  Lanz.  5812,  the  seamless
coat,  the  Kprfhefivov  of  Ino,  Od.  5,  the  breast-net  broden,  Beow.

8095,  the  bread-pocket  in  Wigal.  4469.  5843. Discordia  makes

herself  invisible  by  a  ring,  Troj.  1303-24,  and  the  like  magic  lies
in  the  ring  with  a  nightingale  in  it,  Morolt  1305;  conf.  the
ring  of  Gyges,  Plato's  Rep.  359.  360.  Seven-league  boots,  bottes
de  sept  lieues,  Perrault  167.  Aulnoy  367.     St.  Columban  has  a

wishing-staff  {p.  970), If  Amalthea  (Athen.  4,  345.371)  and

Fortuna  have  a  horn-of-plenty,  '  Fortuna  cum  cornu  pomis,  ficis
aut  frugibus  plena,'  Arnob.  6,  25  (conf.  '  nam  haec  allata  comU'
copiae  est,  ubi  inest  quicquid  volo,'  Plaut.  Pseud,  ii.  3,  5) ;  so  has
our  old  Otfrid  i.  10, 5  a  horn  heiles,  and  Wolkenst.  p.  61  a  Saelden*
horn,  conf.  Oif-horn,  It  is  an  odd  thing  to  speak  of  sitting  down
on  the  bull's  horns,  i.e.  pillars,  of  wealth,  Pentam.  Liebr.  2,  112.

^To  make  a  wishing-net,  you  bum  a  small  boat,  and  sow  flax

in  the  ashes,  which  shoots  up  in  two  days,  is  picked,  baked  and
braked  in  two  days  more,  and  spun,  knitted  and  stitched  in
another  two  days,  Kalev.  26, 188  ;  conf.  Schröter  p.  19.  Wishing^
dice  in  H.  Sachs  ii.  4,  114*^.  On  the  stone  of  victory,  see  p.  1220.
Indra's  spear  that  never  misses,  that  of  itself  comes  back  to  the
hand,  and  even  when  he  lends  it  to  others,  returns  to  his  hand
(Holtzm.  Ind.  s.  2,  137-8.  155),  and  the  javelin  that  flies  back  of
its  own  accord  (Ov.  Met.  7,  684),  are  like  Thor's  hammer,  like
the  sword  that  gives  victory  in  Saxo  ed.  Müll.  115,  like  the  one


1670  DESTINY  AND  WELL-BEING.

that   branduhes   itself  in  Dybeck  ii.  28,  and  Vare  qui   ne  faui

in  the  0.  Pr.  Trist.  1716-45. The  Ssk.  manoraiha,  wheel  of

thought,  may  be  the  same  as  the  wheel  in  Wigalois,  conf.  Saelde's
wheel  and  her^love.  Krone  22855.  23093.  Similar  to  SkUlbladhir,
the  navis  plicatilis  (p.  216),  is  a  tent  in  Lanz.  4898  seq.,  which
folds  up,  and  can  with  ease  be  carried  by  a  maiden.  In  the  land
of  the  ^thiops  '  est  locus  apparatis  epulis  semper  refertus,  et
quia  ut  libct  vesci  völeniibus  licet,  ^\iou  rpdire^av  appellant,  et
quae  passim  apposita  sunt  affirmant  innasci  subinde  divinitus,'
Pomp.  Mela  3,  9;  see  Herod.  3,  17-8,  where  the  earth  itself
covers  the  table  with  meats  overnight;  conf.  the  city  wherein
the  blessing  should  abide.  Geliert  1,  194 ;  before  the  Oral  all
manner  of  meats  and  drinks  stood  ready,  Parz.  238,  10.  239,  1
(the  Oral  suffers  no  vermin  in  Salvaterra,  Tit.  6198 ;  the  name

Oraalanz  as  early  as  10th  cent.,  Irmino  49^). A  wishing-tree

that  bears  clothes,  trinkets,  etc.,  and  wine,  Meghadhüta  ed.  Schiits
p.  25-7 ;  like  the  tree  in  our  fairy-tale,  fr.  which  the  child  shakes
dresses  down.  The  wishing-cow  Kdma-duh  means  '  milkable  at
will,*  Bopp's  Gl.  70^  Weber  5,  442 ;  ace.  to  Hirzel's  Sakunt.
153  Nandini  is  the  lucky  cow  that  grants  all  wishes;  add  the
ass  that  utters  gold,  peau  d'ftne,  and  the  hen  that  lays  golden
^SS^'     ^^  *^®  contest  for  wishing -gear,  see  Pref.  p.  xxxiii.

p.  874n.]  On  lucky  children  and  their  cauls ^  see  Roszler  2,
xcv.  xcvi.  and  837.  KM.^  3,57;  wir  bringen  uUesamen  ein  rot
wammesch  \xS  eT^QU  (pellem  secundinam),  das  mftss  darnach  der
man  (husband)  unter  die  Stegen  vergraben,  Keisersp.  Wannen-
kremer  109^.  In  AS.  the  caul  is  heafela,  hafela,  Andr.  p.
127-8  n. ;  MHG.  hüetelin,  batwät,  Hpt  1, 136-7,  hindbälgel,  Mona
8,  495,  westerhüfe  in  the  Kitterpreis  poem,  westerhuot,  Karaj.  27,
6 ;  conf.  the  westerwät  preserved  in  churches,  N.  Gap.  83,  and
the  baptismal  shirt  of  healing  power,  Dresd.  Wolfdietr.  160-1-2 ;
stera,  vaselborse,  pellicula  in  qua  puer  in  utero  matris  involvitar,
Hoffm.  Hor.  Belg.  7,  19^.  Lith.  namai  kiidihio,  child's  house,
Nesselm.  414.  ON.  Hlö'Sr  is  born  with  helmet  and  sword  (p.
389).    GDS.  121.

p.  876.]  Every  man  has  an  anyel  of  his  own,  bnt  so  have
some  beasts,  Keisersp.  Brosäml.  19^.  Agreeing  with  Cassar
Heisterb.,  the  Pass.  337,  46  says  :  daz  einer  iegelichen  menscheit
zwene  engel  sint  bescheiden :  einen  guoten,  einen  leiden  iegelich


DBSTIN7  AND  WBLL-BEING.  1571

mensohe  bi  im  h&t.  Every  man  has  his  candle  in  the  sky,  Hpt
4^  390  (see  Sappl.  to  722  end).  Do  spraoh  der  engel  woUgetan  :
'  ich  was  ie  mit  dir,  nnt  woldest  nie  gevolgen  mir  (obey  me) ;
▼on  ubele  ich  dich  ch£rte  (turned),  daz  beste  ich  dich  ISrte/
Tand.  46,  60 ;  ich  bin  der  engel,  der  din  pfliget,  Ges.  Abent.  2,
255;  wil  du  dinem  engel  schenken  (wtn),  Oriesh.  2,  50;  anglevs
Domini  te  semper  praecedat,   comitetar  ac  snbseqaatnr,   Vita

Mahthild.   c.   20. ^In   Otfr.  v.  4,  40  the   angel  says  to  the

women  :  j&  birun  wir  in  w&ra  iu  eigene  giburä ^your  servants.
The  angel  is  called  wisaere,  director,  Helbl.  7,  249.  331,  an  in-
visible voice  7,  263.  293.  355 ;  dft  hast  gehört  ein  stimme,  die
Bin  engel  sprach.  Pass.  1 58,  79 ;  (der  werlde  vlnot)  manigen  hin
verdrücket,  ob  in  dar-^  niht  zücket  (plucks  him  out)  sin  engil
mit  voller  krafl,  337,  41.     The  angel  rejoices  over  his  prot6g^,

MSH.  3,  174^. The  heathen  think  an  old  Christian  has  a

young  one  inside  him,  and  when  he  is  dying  the  cmgels  take  a
baby  out  of  his  month,  Ottoc.  440-1  [see  a  mosaic  in  the  cath.
of  San  Michele  Maggiore,  Pavia] .  On  English  guardian-angels,
see  Stewart's  Pop.  superst.  4,  16-7 ;  on  Indian,  Somadeva  2,  117.
Hermes  is  an  escort,  'rrofiiraio<f,  to  men,  Aesch.  Eum.  91.

p.  877.]  .  Biarki's  iear-fylgja  is  in  Petersen's  Hedenold  1,
210-3  ;  a  similar  bear  in  Fomald.  sog.  1,  102-5;  Gunnar's  fylgja,
the  biamdyr,  in  Nialss.  c.  23.  As  swans  are  guardian-angels,
ravens  are  a  kind  of  attendant  spirits  to  heathens  :  Haraldi  ver
fylgSom  (p.  671).     On  'gefa  nafn  ok  fylgja  l&ta,'  see  GDS.

153.4. Hamingja  means  luck,  Fomm.  sog.  4,  44 ;  gcefa  ok  h.

4,  26;  i  hamingju  tauti,  in  the  riot,  full  swing,  of  luck,  Biöm
sub  V.  taut ;  ef  hamingja  fylgir,  7,  280 ;  fylgjor  hans  höfSo
in^md' HeSins,  Saem.  147*.  Gl&m's  dream  of  his  father-in-law's
h.  appearing  as  a  dis,  who  towered  above  the  hills,  is  in  Ytgagl.

sag.  c.  9. Engl,  fetch  :  '  I  had  seen  her  fetch/  Hone's  Daybk.

2,  1011-3-6-7;  in  some  parts  of  Scotl.  fye  for  fetch  1019;  'to
see  his  double  1012;  wiff,  waff,  wraith,  swarth  1019-20.  Ir.
taise,  Conan  105 ;  conf .  Wilh.  Meister,  where  some  one  sees  him-
self sittings  the  white  lady,  the  banshie.

p.  877.]  The  Slav,  dobra  sretia,  Vuk  3, 444,  «re«a  =  luck  788,
looks  very  like  Ssk.  Sri,  Bopp  356^  [but  s-ret-ati  =  convenire,
ob-ret-ati=invenire,  etc.];  sretia  is  bestowed  by  U-sud,  destiny.
'I  am  thy  luck,  thy  brother's  luck/  Serb,  march.no.  13.     The


1572  DESTINT  AND  WELL-BEING.

Lettic  Laima,  Nesselm.  351^  is  distinct  fr.  Laame  353;  LiiL
also  Laima  =z  Gk.  AaifMi,  Lat.  Lamia  (p.  500  n.  Sappl.  to  864
mid.) :  Laima  lerne  saalaz6s  dienat^,  Bhesa  dain.  p.  10.  She  is
comp,  in  Bopp^s  61.  296*  to  Lahshnti,  abnndantiae  et  felicitatis
dea.

p.  879.]  Misfortune  comes^  goes:  chnmet  ein  unheil,  EAisjan
5^  2.  19,  15;  zuo  gienc  in  beiden  daz  unheil.  Dint.  2,  51,  conf.
daz  leit  gieng  ire  zuo  2,  50 ;  hie  trat  min  ungelücJce  fur,  Parz.
688,  29 ;  Unglück  wechst  über  nacht,  n.  hat  ser  ein  breiten  fasz,
Mathesius  (1562)  279»;  Swed.  quick  som  en  o4ycka.  Trouble
does  not  come  alone;  nulla  calamitas  sola;  das  ungluek  was  mit
gewalt  da,  Herbenst.  330 ;  t*  on-geval  dat  es  mi  bi,  Karel  1,  699 ;
on-spoet  (unspeed)  comt  gheresen,  Bose  8780 ;  unheil  unsir  r&mit
(creams,  thickens),  Athis  F  21  ;  'where  has  miafortune  had  you,
that  you  look  so  gory  ? '  Beise  avant.  (1748)  p.  107 ;  unheil  habe,
der  iz  haben  wil  I  En.  1 2859 ;  si  hat  des  ungelucks  jeger  mit
seinen  henden  umbfangen  gar  (ü.'s  hunter  has  her  tight),
Keller's  Erz.  157,  10;  sie  reitet  ungelüehe  (rides  her),  Beham
in  Wien,  forsch,  p.  47* ;  unfal  reitet  mich,  Ambras,  lied.  92,  9 ;
conf.  Death  riding  on  one's  back  (Suppl.  to  844  beg.) ;  was  euch
unfal  geit,  Mnrner  2832 ;  TJnfalo  in  Theuerdk ;  un-gevelle,  Flore
6152 ;  unheil  mich  fuorte  an  stnen  zoumen  (reins),  Engelh.  5502  ;
riet  mir  min  unheil  (advised  me),  Er.  4794 ;  undanc  begnnde  er
sagen  ('gan  curse)  stme  gr6zen  unheile,  Kl.  403  L. ;  stn  ungelucke
schalt,  Lanz.  1951;  min  Unacelde,  Nib.  2258,  1;  Unscelde  si
verw&zen !  Helmbr.  838 ;  Unselden-brunne,  Mone's  Anz.  6,  228 ;
Unscelde  ist  heiles  vient  (foe),  Flore  6158 ;  'misf,  is  at  the  door,
in  blossom,'  Fromm.  4,  142 ;  ungelücJces  zwic  (twig).  Cod.  pal.
355,  116*  [the  oppos.  of  Saelden-zwic,  wishing- rod,  Suppl.  to
977  beg.];  ung.  udnde,  MS.  1,  84^;  thut  ein  ungelück  sich
aufdrehen  (tum  up),  H.  Sachs  iii.  8,  8*.  The  shutting  misf.  up
in  an  'eicher'  is  like  fencing-in  the  Plague  and  spectres,
MüUenh.  p.  196;  the  devil  too  gets  wedged  in  a  beech-tree,
Bechst.  March.  42;  si  haben  ungluek  in  der  kisten  (trunk),
Fastn.  sp.  510,  8.


PERSONIFICATIONS,  1573

CHAPTER  XXIX.
PERSONIFICATIONS.

p.  880.]  Like  the  Gr.  'n'poamtrov  is  the  Goth,  ludja^  Matth.
6,  17,  conf.  Gal.  4,  19.  I  have  found  MHG.  «cAtn  =  eISo9  in  two
more  places:  des  l^wen  schin,  Bon.  67,  42;  sinen  sMn  (image),
Lanz.  4926.  Personification  does  not  give  rise  immed.  io  proper
names,  for  these  tolerate  no  article  (Gramm.  4,  405.  595),  but  to
sach  names  as  '  der  Wunsch,  diu  Ssßlde,  der  Hunger.'

p.  884.]  To  personified  elements  I  have  to  add  the  Slav.
Pogoda  (p.  637),  conf.  Byr;  Ignis,  Aqua,  Aer,  Veritas  in  Scherz
u.  Ernst  (1522-50)  cap.  4,  (1555)  c.  354.  a.  Sachs  L  255;
Frosti,  Logi,  Skialf  (tremor),  Yngl.  sag.  c.  22.  We  say  of  Snow,
'there's  a  new  neighbour  moved  in  overnight'  (pp.  532.  761).
'  Hrim  and  Forst,  hare  hUdntapan  lucon  leoda  gesetu,'  Andr.  1 258
and  Pref.  p.  xxxv.  The  Esths  worship  Cold  (kiilm)  as  a  higher
beings  Peterson  p.  46.  Finn.  Hyytö,  Eyytämöinen  =  geln;
Aeiyämöinen  is  the  wrathful  genius  of  severe  cold.     MHG.  Rife

(p.  761). Was  'die  Beider   the  heath,  thought  of  as  a  person?

she  blushes  for  shame,  Walth.  42,  21.  Men  blessed  the  Way,
and  bowed  to  it  (p.  31  n.).  The  name  of  Hlin  the  äsynja  is
echoed  back  in  AS.  hl(n.  Cod.  Exon.  437,  17,  as  the  name  of  a
tree.  The  George  in  Reinbot's  allegory  is  a  child  of  der  Sunne
and  diu  Rose,  and  is  called  Rosen-hint,  On  N^ji  and  NiiSi,  see
above  (p.  700).  With  the  two  femin.  names  of  months  in  AS.,
Hrede  and  Edstre,  conf.  the  Roman  Maia,  Flora,  Aprilis,  who  are
goddesses  in  spite  of  the  months  Mains  and  Aprilis  being  masc.

p.  887.]  The  sword,  the  biter,  is  often  made  a  person  of.
Ssk.  asi-putri  =iCTxlter,  lit  Sword's  daughter;  conf.  ON.  sultr
(p.  888).  KM.»  3,  223.  The  ON.  air,  awl,  is  brother  to  the
dwarf  or  the  knifr,  Sn.  133.  Does  ^helrn  ne  gemunde  byrnan
siiSe '  in  Beow.  2581  mean  '  the  helmet  forgot  the  coat  of  mail '  7
On  rhedo,  see  GDS.  606.  Strange  that  a  warrior's  garb  is  in
Beow.  903  Ercefflan  l&f,  but  in  4378  [Hre]ffles  Me;  conf.  herge-
wate,  RA.  568.     A  ship  on  touching  land  is  addressed  as  a  living

creature  (p.  1229  ?). It  is  a  confirmation  of  Brisinga  men,

that  the  OS.  Throt-manni,  monile  gutturis,  is  the  name  of  the
town  Dortmund,  and  Holtes-meni,  monile  silvsB,  Trad.  Corb.  no.


1474  PBBSONIFICATIONS.

321,  afterwards  called  Holtes-miniw  884,  is  the  present  Holz-
iniDden.  With  Enoss  is  perh.  to  be  conn,  the  OHG.  female
name  Neosta,  Förstemann  1,  960;  ON.  krenna  hnoss  =^mint.
Mann-gersimar  occurs  in  Thidr.  saga  p.  153.  What  means  the
M.  Neth.  ^want  haer  met  gersemen  doeken'f  Rose  11001;  is
gärs-uma  the  truer  diyision  of  the  word?  Gramm.  2,  151.
Light  is  thrown  on  the  maiden  Spange  by  auff^spaung  Angri,
feminae  jurenculae,  Kormakss.  p.  186 ;  conf.  m(mte;e= maiden  and
sleeve,  fetter  (Kl.  sehr.  5,  441),  erenberga,  both  shirt  and  Erem-
berga,  schilt-vezzel  (-fetter)  =s  scutiger,  sqaire,  Oswalt  3225.  In
the  same  way  as  Hreda,  Hnoss,  Oersemi,  Menja  (p.  306-7)  and
the  Rom.  Oama,  dea  cardinis  (Ov.  Fasti  6,  101 — 168),  are  to  be
expl.  the  gods'  names  Lohi  and  OrentiL  A  beautifnl  woman  was
often  compared  to  some  goddess  of  female  ornament :  hodda  Sif,
hodda  Freyja,  hrtnga  Hlin  in  Kormakss.  26  means  simply  a  lady
adorned  with  rings.  On  the  same  footing  as  the  goddesses  of
nuts,  bees,  dongh,  etc.  cited  by  Lasicz  p.  48-9  stand  the  Pnta,
Peta,  Patellana,  Yiabilia,  Orbona,  Ossilago,  Mellonia  in  Arnob.
4,  7.  8,  and  the  goddesses  of  grains  in  Augustine's  De  Civ.  D.
4,  8  (Rhein,  jrb.  8,  184)  and  many  more  in  the  same  author;
conf.  Robigo,  Rubigo  (p.  477  end).

p.  887.]  Men  greeted  the  player's  die,  botoed  to  it,  Jungl.  389.
On  Decius,  see  M£on  4,  486-7.  Hazart  geta  arriere  main,  Ren.
18599 ;  Hasars,  Myst.  de  Jubinal  2,  388-9.  Dvdpara  et  Kali
sunt  nomina  tertiae  et  quartae  mundi  aetatis,  et  daemones  harum
aetatum,  Nalus  p.  213,  conf.  Holtzm.  3,  23-9  and  Pref.  xi.;  the
dice-playing  of  Yuzishthira  and  Sakuni  was  celebr.,  also  that
of  Nala  and  Pushkara,  Holtzm.  2,  1—11.  3,  23-9.  MHG.  'her
Pfenninc,'  MS.  2,  148«.

p.  888.]  Victory  is  personified  in  the  AS.  phrase :  Sigar  eft
&hwearf  oesotir  wera,  CsBdm.  124,  25.  Similarly  :  *  deme  Orloge
den  hals  broken,'  break  the  neck  of  battle,  Detmar  2,  555 ;
'  Hederlein  brother  to  zenhlein*  (hader,  zank  =s  quarrel),  H.  Sachs
i.  5, 538^;  'der  Rewel  beiszt,'  repentance  bites,  Luther  9,472^;
'  der  Zorn  tritt,'  anger  steps,  PaYital.  86.     On  foßo^,  Pavor  and

the  like,  see  above   (p.  207-8). Goth,   snau  ana  ins  Haiu,

e(f>6aaev  iir^  avrov9  ij  opyij,  1  Thess.  2,  16 ;  'on  dem  h&t  Haz  bi
Nide  ein  kint,'  in  him  hate  had  a  child  by  envy,  MS.  1,  75*;
kämen  üf  des  Nides  trift,  Pantal.  754.     Envy,  like  #floK09,  is  a


PERSONIFICATIONS.  1575

daBmon ;  there  was  a  form  of  prayer  to  keep  him  off,  Lehr's  Vom
ueide  144  seq. ;  Finn,  Kati,  genius  invidiae ;  we  say  '  Envy  looks,
peeps^  oat  of  him/  The  OHG.  Imoiz,  masc,  may  be  the  same,
thoagh  the  Boman  Invidia  is  feminine.    ON.  Topi  oc  Opi,  Tiösull

oc  Oßoii  vaxi  |>er  t&r  me^  trega.  Seem.  85*. IIXovto^,  the

god  of  wealthy  is  blind ;  the  Ssk.  Kuvera  is  ugly,  with  three  legs

and   eight   teeth,  Bopp  78»;  Bicheit,  Br.  1584. Hunger,  se

)>eod-8cea&  hreow  ricsode,  Audr.  1 116,  conf.  our '  hanger  reigns ';
Hunger  is  the  best  cook,  Freid.  124,  17 ;  der  H.  was  ir  beider
koch,  .Wigam.  1070;  Hoiighers  cameriere,  Rose  4356;  der  H.
koch,  der  Ifan^eZ  küchen-meister,  Simpl.  25;  we  say  'Schmal'
hans  is  head*cook  here';  bald  legt  sich  Schm.  in  das  zimmer,
Günther  1050,  conf.  '  Aer  Bigenot  von  Darhion,  her  Diinne-liabe,
MS.  2,  179»;  d6  lag  er  Af  daz  hunger-tuoch  (-cloth),  Fragm.  22»;
am  hunger-tuch  neen  (sew),  H.  Sachs  ii.  2,  80«,  etc.  (Göz  I,  192.
2,52);  der  Hunger  spilt  (gambols),  Sachenw.  18,  125;  da  v&t
Frost  a.  Durst  den  H.  in  daz  här,  u.  ziehent  (clutch  H.  by  the
hair,  and  drag)  gar  oft  in  al  dur  daz  hüs,  MS.  2,  189»;  il  est
Herbot  (affam6),  Trist.  8938;  ther  Scado  flieht  in  gähel     0.  ii.

24,  37. Sleep,  as  well  as  death,  is  called   Sandmann  (Supp.

to  842) :  can  it  possibly  mean  one  who  is  sent  ?  conf.  '  do  sant
er  in  den  slaf  an,'  Anegenge  15,  47;  but  the  other  is  called
P&chmann  (pitch-man)  as  well,  Schm.  sub  v.,  and  Hermann^
Wend,  volksl.  2,  269*.  Sleep,  a  brother  of  Death,  comes  in  the
shape  of  a  bird  (p.  331),  and  sits  on  a  fir-tree  (see  Klausen  p.  80),
like  the  sun  sitting  on  the  birch  as  a  bird,  and  lulling  to  sleep,
Ealev.  rune  8.  A  saint  says  to  Sleep :  '  com,  guaet  knecht,  com
hare  dan !  Maerl.  8,  197.  Sleep  looks  in  at  the  window,  Kante-
letar  2,  no.  175;  he  walks  quietly  round  the  cottages,  and  all  at
once  he  has  you,  Hebel  p.  223  ;  den  Schlaf  nicht  austragen,  i.e.
not  spoil  one's  peace.  Höfer  8,  89.  Deus  Risus,  Apul.  p.  m.  105.
111.  Selp'hart,  Waokern.  lb.  902.  Renn.  270.  Virwitz  (Suppl.
to  635  beg.).

p.  890.]  Attributes  of  gods  come  to  be  regarded  as  separate
beings,  and  then  personified  (Lehrs'  Vom  neid  p.  152),  esp.  as
females.  Oopia  was  set  before  the  eyes  in  a  '  simulacrum  aeneum,
eomu  copiae  Fortunas  retinens,'  Marcellini  comitis  Chron,  p.  m.  51.
Care  is  a  neighbour :  yeirove^  xapBla^  fxipifivai,  Aesch.  Septem
271 ;  conf.  '  ist  zunvel  (doubt)  herzen  nftchgebür.'     Necessity  (dia


1 576  PERSONIFICATIONS.

Not)  parts,  Nauffr  skildi,  Kl.  sclir.  112-3;  si  yä.hteii  als  den
Hüten  toac  (as  became  men),  die  ez  dia  grimme  Not  bat,  Er.  837;
conf.  '  als  in  mtn  wäriu  scalde  bat/  as  my  jnst  right  bade  him  do
1246.  Der  Rät  (advice),  masc,  has  children  by  Scham,  Treue^
Wahrheit,  all  fern.,  Helbl.  7,  50.  A  host  of  such  personifications
(Fides,  Patientia,  Humilitas,  Saperbia,  Luxuria,  Sobrietas,  etc.)
we  find  already  in  Prudentius  (circ.  400),  esp.  in  his  Psychomachia,
with  due  epic  embellishment;  conf.  Amob.  4,  1:  Pietas,  Con-
cordia, Salus,  Honor,  Virtus,  Felicitas,  Victoria,  Pax,  Aeqnitas.
The  Zendic  has  two  female  genii,  Haurvaiat  and  Ameret&t  (whole-
ness and  immortality),  often  used  in  the  dual  number,  Bopp's
Comp.  Gr.  pp.  238 — 240.  The  World  is  freq.  personified  (pp.
792n.  850),  and  even  called  'frau  Spoihilt/  Gramm.  2,  499.

Otfr.  iii.  9,  11  says:  'sd  wer  so  nan  birnarta,  er  frvma  thana
fuarta/  whoso  touched,  carried  off  benefit,  as  we  talk  of  carrying
off  the  bride ;  frum  u.  ere,  Hpt*s  Ztschr.  7,  343-9.  Cervantes  in
D.  Quix.  1,  11  says  finely  of  Hope,  that  she  she^s  the  hem  of  her
garment :  la  Esperanza  muestra  la  orilla  de  su  vestido.  0H6.
Otikepa,  MB.  13,  44.  46.  51  Otegebe,  Outgebe;  conf.  Borg-gabe
(Suppl.  to  274).

Such  phrases  as  'he  is  goodness  itself '  rest  on  personification
too :  vous  6tes  la  bonte  meme.  Avec  la  biaute  fu  largesce  sa  suer
et  honors  sa  cousins,  Guitecl.  1,  116«

p.  892.]  Personifications  have  hands  and  feet  given  themi
they  dwell,  come  and  go.  The  Athenians  have  the  goddesses
UeiOd  and  'Avayxairf  (persuasion,  compulsion),  while  in  Andros
dwell  Ilevirj  and  lA/ifjx^^^V  (poverty,  helplessness),  Herod.  8,  111.
AXijdeia  (truth)  has  fled  alone  into  the  wilderness,  Babr.  127.
Aesop  364.  Another  name  for  Nemesis  was  IdSpdareuL,  unescap*
nbleness.  Exnlatum  abut  Salus,  Plaut.  Merc.  iii.  4,  6;  terras
Astraea  reliquit,  Ov.  Met.  1,  150;.  fugjere  Pudor  Fe)"«wique
Fidesque  1,  129;  paulatim  deinde  ad  superos  Astraea  recessit
hoc  comite,  atque  duae  pariter  fugere  sorores,  Juv.  6,  19;  Virtue
goes,  and  leads  Luck  away  with  her,  Procop.  vol.  2,  407.

Aller  Freuden  fiieze  kören  (turn)  in  den  helle-grunt,  Wara.
1 206 ;  gewunnen  si  der  Fröiden  stap,  Dietr.  dr.  200^ ;  din  mac
mir  wol  ze  Froeiden  hUse  geschragen  (var.,  mich  wol  ze  Fr.  h.
geladen),  MS.  1,  9*;  conf.  Fr.  tor  (Suppl.  866  beg.).  Krutchina,
affliction,  jumps  out  of  the   oven,   Dietr.  Russ.  march,  no.  9.


PERSONIFICATIONS.  1577

Carrying  Fro-muot  on  the  hands  resembles  the  levatio  imperatoris
et  novae  nuptae,  RA.  483.  '  Fromut4oh  cam  feris  ibi  natritis '
mast  be  a  bear-garden^  Dronke's  Trad.  Fnld.  p.  63.     Haupt  in

Neidh.  135  thinks  Frömaot  is  simply  Cheerfalness, Oherech»

ticheit,  die  sware  was^  vlo  tachterst,  Bose  5143;  conf.  Fraaenlob's
poem  on  Oerechtigkeit,  Hpt's  Zeitschr.  6^  29.  Minne,  Trouwe  es
ghevloen^  Bose  5141 ;  din  Triwe  ist  erslagen^  Tod.  gehagde  268;
Treu  ein  wildbret  (head  of  game),  Schweinichen  1^  13;  vet
Triuwe,  ver  Wdrheit,  Helbl.  7,  38;  der  Triuwen  kluse  (cell),
Engelh.  6295;  der  Tr.  bote  6332 ;  in  Tr.  pflege  (care),  Winsb.  8,  8,
conf.  'der  Zühte  sal'  good  breeding's  hall  8,  7;  St.  Oetruwe
(trusty)  and  Kümmernis  (sorrow),  Mone  7,  581 — 4;  nieman  wil
die  Warheit  herbergen,  MüUenh.  no.  210;  Pax  terras  ingreditur
habitu  venusto,  Archipoeta  ix.  29,  3.

p.  893.]  Der  Eren  bote  and  E.  holds  (Suppl.  to  869) ;  frouwen
E.  amis,  Prib.  Trist.  61 ;  daz  Ere  sin  geverte  si,  Türl.  Wh.  125^;
frd  E.  und  ir  hint,  MS.  2,  15P ;  an  Eren  straze  gesttgen,  Pass.
47,  80 ;  Ere  Az  pfade  gedringen,  Ben.  450 ;  in  der  Eren  tor  komen
551,  26 ;  sin  lop  (praise)  was  in  der  E.  tor,  Frauend.  81, 14 ;  sitzen
üf  der  E.  banlce,  6r.  Bud.  11,  20;  saz  üf  der  E.  steine,  Lanz.
5178,  conf.  Br.  1198.  Wigal.  1475;  der  E.  büne  h&t  überdaht,
Engelh.  230;  der  E.  dock,  kränz,  Bauch  1,  319;  verzieret  nü
der  E.  sal,  Walth.  24,  3;  üz  frou  E.  kamer  varn,  MS.  2,  151»;
der  E.  tisch,  Suchen w.  4,  152;  der  E.pflüege,  Amgb.  2*;  in  der
E.  forste,  Gold.  schm.  1874,  conf.  'in  der  Sorgen  forste^  Engelh.
1941 ;  der  E,  krone  treit  (wears),  Boseng.  908;  treit  der  E.  schilt
914;  der  E.  zwi  (bough),  Hpt  4,  546;  er  ist  der  E.  wirt  (host),
MS.  2,  59*;  mantel,  da  fron  Ere  h4t  ir  brüste  mit  bedecket,
Amgb.  18**;  ver  Ere,  Wapenmart!n  6,  55.

Vro  Minne,  MS.  1,  16*.  The  girl's  question  about  Minne  is  in
Winsbekin  34,  8;  der  Minnen  bode,  Partenop.  80-4-6.  101 ;  der
Af.  hraft,  Ulr.  v.  Lichtenst.  35,  15 ;  diu  Minne  stiez  üf  in  ir  krefte
ris  (thrust  at  him  her  wand  of  power),  Parz.  290,  30 ;  der  Minnen
stricke  (toils),  MS.  1,  61»;  Minne  n.  Wisheit,  Flore  3740;  ^ai«
M,  presents  herself  to  two  maidens  as  teacher  of  love,  with  a  rod
(einem  tosten)  in  her  hand,  and  gives  one  of  them  blows,  Hätzl.
165;  a  woman  appears  as  M.'s  stewardess  159\  Can  Liehten-
stein's  progress  as  queen  Venus  be  conn,  with  a  mythical  custom
(p.  259)  ? '  Vrou  Mate  (moderation)    is  en  edel  vorstinne,'


1578  PERSONIFICATIONS.

Pütter  1,  1870;  Max,  aller  tugende  vrouwe,  Pantal.  120;  Maenc-
heit  bint  üf  die  spen  (to  teach  the  baby  temperance?),  Sachenw.
xl.  144;  Zulu,  Maze,  Bescheidenheit,  Mai  176, 13;  Ztickt  a.  Schäme
stänt  an  der  porte,  n.  huotent,  Hpt  2,  229 ;  ze  hant  begreif  sie
diu  Scham,  Anegenge  17,  81.  18,  22 ;  diu  Biuwe  was  sin  froawe,
Parz.  80,  8;  der  Riwe  tor  649,  28;  dia  Vuoge,  Füegel  (p.  311  n.).
A  fairy  castle  under  charge  of  Tugent,  its  8  chambers  with
allegoric  names  painted  by  Scelde,  is  descr.  in  Qeo.  5716  seq.

p;  895.]  The  entire  Boman  de  la  Bose  is  founded  on  allegories ;
and  in  such  there  often  lies  a  mythic  meaning.  Before  sunrise  on
Easter  mom,  appears  the  maid  beside  thefouniain  mid  the  flowers,
Hatzl.  160*;  the  lady  that  appears  is  approached  but  once  in  ten
years  143.  376 ;  under  a  limetree  in  the  wild  wood,  the  fair  ladif
washes  her  hands  143^ ;  a  dwarf  in  the  forest  leads  to  the  three
Fates,  H.  Sachs  v.  333^  or  the  wild  lady  leads  one  about  1,  272«^.
In  the  Trobadors  a  siuging  bird  allures  the  poet  into  a
wood,  where  he  finds  three  maidens  chanting  a  |hrenody,  Diez's
Leb.  d.  troub.  p.  145.  Frau  Wildecheit  leads  the  bard  by  ber
bridle-rein  to  a  level  ground  beside  a  brook,  where  Dame  Justice,
Mercy  etc.  sit  judging«  Conr.  Klage  der  kunst;  in  his  Schwan-
ritter, Conrad  says  wilde  aventiure.  A  poet  snatches  up  his  staff,
comes  upon  a  fair  flowery  field,  where  he  meets  the  Minne-queen,
Hagen's  Grnndriss  p.  438,  or  to  a  lovely  child  by  a  forest-fountain
442.  There  is  a  similar  description  in  Helbl.  7,  28 :  the  poet  in
the  morning  reaches  a  wild  rocky  waste,  sees  two  ladies  in  white
veils,  Joy  and  Chivalry,  wailing  and  wringing  tJieir  luinds;  he
helps  them  to  their  feet  when  they  faint,  but  now  the  Duchess
of  Kärnten  is  dead,  they  will  go  among  men  no  more,  they  live
thenceforward  in  the  wild.  Again,  in  Ls.  2,  269 :  on  a  green  field
the  poet  finds  Dame  Honour  fallen  to  the  ground  in  a  faint,  also
Manhood  and  Minne :  they  lament  Count  Wemher  of  Honberg.
Or  take  the  Dream  of  seven  sorrowing  dames  in  MSH.  8, 171 — 3 :
Fidelity,  Modesty ,  Courtesy,  Chastity,  Bounty,  Honour  and  Mercy
bewail  the  Diiringer  and  Henneberger;  conf.  the  'siben
übelen  wibe,  Vrdzheit,  Unlciusche,  Oritekeit,  Zorn,  Nit,  Tracheity
Hoffart/  Dint.  1,  294 — 6.  The  ladies  lamenting  the  death  of  kings
and  heroes  remind  us  of  the  klage-frauen,  hlage-mütter  (p.  432),
and  the  wood- wives  ill-content  with  the  world  (p.  484).  At  the
end  of  Euripides's  Ehesus  the  muse  mourns  the  prince's  death;


PERSONIFICATIONS.  1679

in  Od.  24^  60  the  nine  muses  come  roand  the  corpRe  of  Achilles,
and  bewail  his  end.  The  lonely  tower  as  the  habitation  of  such
beingrs  occurs  elsewh.  too,  as  '  ttirris  Aleihias '  in  the  Archipoeta;
conf.  ^  Mens  bona,  si  qua  dea  es,  tiia  me  in  sacraria  dono,'  Prop,
iv.  24,  19.

p.  896.]  Diu  Schande  (disgrace)  yert  al  über  daz  lant,  MSH.
3,  448^;  86  h&t  diu  8.  von  ir  vluht,  Kolocz.  129;  ver  8.,  Renn.
12231 ;  8wa  yrd  Ere  wol  geverti  daz  ist  vro  8chanden  leit«  MS.
2,  172;  in  8.  hoi  verkltiset  2,  147\  Unere  laden  (invite  dis-
honour) in  daz  hüs,  Uebel  wlp  815;  Untriuwen  bant,  Wigal.
10043;  Unminne,  MS.,  1,  102»;  Ungenade  (ill-will)  h&b  mich  en-
pfangen  zeingesinde  (for  inmate)  2,  51^;  Unbill  (injustice)  knocks
at  the  door,  Pisohart  in  Vilmarp.  4;  diu  Werre  (p.  273  n).—
Wendelmuot  (Suppl.  to  273  n.);  conf.  'frowe  Armuot  (poverty)
muose  entwichen,  von  ir  hüse  si  fldch/  fled.  Er.  1578;  ez  het
din  groze  A.  zuo  im  gehüset  in  den  glet,  diu  A,  mit  jämer  lit,
Wigal.  5691 ;  sit  mich  diu  A.  also  jaget,  Pass.  352,  89 ;  das  uns
schon  reit  (rode  us) ^rau  Armut,  H.  Sachs  i.  5,  523^;  conf.  'reit
mich  gross  Ungedult/  impatience  524^;  frau  Elend,  Uätzl.  157-8
(there  is  a  Fr.  chapbook  about  bonhomms  Misere).  Missewende
von  ir  sprach,  daz  ir  teil  da  niht  en^waere,  MS.  1,  84*;  Misse*
vende  dia  im  niht  genähen  mac  1,  86\  WS,  wer  wil  nu  Sorgen
walten?  diu  was  min  sinde  (housemate)  nu  vil  manegen  tac  1,
163\

p.  898.]  t^i^v  ^^0^}  H^s.  Op.  761  -2 ;  fdfia  carries  rumours
toZeus's  throne,  Theoer.  7,  93.  There  is  a  Lat.  phrase:  seit
Fama,  seit  cura  deftm,  Forcell.  sub  v.  scio.  JPamoque  nigrantes
snccincta  pavoribus  alas,  Claud.  B.  Get.  201 ;  volat  fama  Caesaris
velnt  velox  equus,  Archipo.  ix.  30,  1.  Humour  is  to  the  Indian
the  song  of  a  by-flown  bird,  Elemm  2,  132;  a  species  of  Angang
therefore  (p.  1128).  Another  phrase  is:  fama  emanavit,  Cic.
Verr.  ii.  1, 1 ;  manat  tota urbe  rumor,  Livy  2,  49.  So  in  German:
daz  meiere  wit  erbrach,  Pass.  285, 20.  71 ,  41 ;  daz  m.  was  erschollen,
Mai  228,  22.  Lanz.  9195;  von  dem  uns  disiu  m.  erschellent  (these
rumours  ring),  Ecke  18 ;  daz  m.  erschal  in  din  lant  liberal,  ez
en-wart  niht  also  begraben,  Kolocz.  85;  daz  tn.  uz  schal  (rang
out),  Ö2  quam,  Herb.  14372-4;  dese  mare  ute  schot,  Maerl.  2,
203.  3,  340;  also  die  mare  dus  (abroad)  üt  sprang,  Hpt  1,  108;
daz  maere  breitte  sich   (spread).  Herb.  502.  1320.  17037,  or:


1580  POBTBT.

wart  breit  2460.  13708;  daz  m.  nü  unten  began,  Türl.  Wh.  28«;
die  mare  ghinc  harentare,  Maerl.  3,  190.  Kästn.  2,  1768;  daz
maere  witen  hreis  (circulated),  Servat.  1856;  die  niemare  liep
(ran),  Walewein  9513.  11067.  Lanc.  35489 ;  nymare  lopt,  Lanc.
26165;  doe  Hep  die  niemare  dor  al  dit  lant  25380.  47053;  die
mare  liep  verre  ende  sere,  Maerl.  3^  193 ;  es  komen  neae  maer
gerant,  Wolkenst.  63 ;  daz  m.  wlten  umms  trat,  sich  umme  iruoc,

Pass.  221,  93.  169,  32. In  the  same  way:  word  is  gone,  Minstr.

3,  92 ;  sprang  )788t  word,  Homil.  384 ;  dat  word  lep,  Detm.  2, 348.
358.  392,  dat  ruchte  lep.  2,  378.  391.  We  say  the  ramoar  goes,
is  noised.  Viel  schiere  vloit^  (quickly  flew)  daz  maere,  Ksrehr.
957.  8415 ;  stn  m.  vlouc  witen  in  diu  lant.  Pass.  204,  24 ;  von
ir  vloiLe  ein  m..  Trist.  7292;  daz  m.  vlonc  dahin,  Troj.  13389;
Bchiere  vlouc  ein  m.  erschollen,  Tiirl.  Krone  68 ;  dd  flaoc  daz  m.
über  mer,  Herb.  13704;  harte  snel  u.  bait  flouc  daz  m.  ze  Rdme,
Pilat.  398 ;  diu  starken  m.  wtten  vlugen,  Servat.  459 ;  din  m.  vor
in  heim  fliegen,  2393 ;  döfltigen  diu  m.  von  hAse  ze  hftse^  Wigal.
34^  3.  So :  der  seal  (sound)  fl^uc  in  diu  lant,  Bol.  215^  7 ;  des
vlouc  stn  lop  (praise)  über  velt,  Hpt  6,  497;  daz  wort  von  uns
fliuget  über  lant,  Herzmsere  169 ;  ON.  sü  firegn  fiygr.  More
striking  is  the  phrase :  diu  maere  man  dd  vuorte  (led)  in  ander
künege  lant,  Nib.  28,  3.  Instead  of  maere  :/rou  Melde,  Frauend.
47,  29.  Esrchr.  17524;  Melde  kumt,  diu  selten  ie  gelac  (lay  still),
MS.  2,  167»;  M.,  diu  nie  gelac,  MSH.  1,  166»;  M.,  de  noch  nie
en-lac,  Karlm.  159,  43;  dri  j&r  so  lac  diu  M.,  Tit.  824;  verm&rt
in  if.,  Lanz.  3346 ;  if.  brach  aus,  Schweini.  2,  262.  Der  wilde
liumst  was  vür  geflogen,  Troj.  24664  ;  nu  fluoc  dirre  liumi  geltche
über  al  daz  künecriche,  WaltL  v.  Bh.  136,  43.  iZufiior= maere,
Eudl.  1,  128.  2,  80.  121.  173;  ^Bum^r  speaks  the  Prol.  to
2  King  Henry  IV.  Lastly:  ^ quidi  managa  bigunnun  wahsan'
reminds  one  of  the  growth  of  maere.


CHAPTER  XXX.
POETRY.

p.  900.]  On  the  connexion  of  the  idea  of  composing  with
those  of  weaving,  spinning,  stringing,  binding,  talking,  see  mj
Kl.  sehr.  3^  128-9.^     The  poet  was  called  a  smith,  songsmith;  in

^  Deilen  nnde  moretit  Sassenohr.  p.  S ;  die  leier  schnüren  ^to  string)  in  Spee  399.


POETRY.  1681

Uigveda  94,  1  :  hancce  bymnam  Agni  venerabili,  currum  velut

*aber,    paramus   mente,    Bopp's  Gl.   260**. With   sciiof,   scop,

poeta,  conf.  OHG.  scoph-sanc,  poesis,  Graff  6,  253 ;.  schopfpuch
(-book),  Karaj.  86,  6;  in  den  schöpf -buochen,  Ernst  103;  conf.
Lachm.  on  Singing  p.  12 ;  marrSr  scopf  Israbel,  egregins  psaltes
Isr.,  Diat.  1,  512*. With  ON.  skald-akapr  should  be  men-
tioned an  OHG.  scaldo,  sacer,  Graff  6,  484 ;  conf.  Gramm.  2,
997.    Holtzm.  Nib.  170.    The  Neth.  schouden  is  M.Neth.  scouden.

With   the  Romance  terminology  agrees  '  poesis  =^7i(imje,'

Diut.  2,  227**;  daz  vand  er  (indited),  Helmbr.  959;  die  vinden
Consta,  ende  mdken  vSrse,  Franc.  1919 ;  de  makere,  die  de  rime

vant  (invented)  1943 ;  er  vant  dise  rede.  Mono  '39,  p.  53.

AS.  gidda,  poeta,  can  be  traced  in  other  Aryan  tongues :  Ssk.
gad,  dicere,  loqui,  gat,  canere,  gatha,  gita,  cantus ;  Lith.  giedoti,
sing,  giesme,  song,  Lett,  dzeedaht,   dzeesma;  Slav,  gudu,  cano

fidibus,   gusli,    psaltery,    Dobrowsky  p.  102. On  the   Celtic

hard,  see  Diefenb.  Celt.  1,  187 ;  bardi,  vates  druidae,  Strabo  p.
197 ;  Bret,  bardal,  nightingale.     Ir.  searthon,  chief  bard.

p.  901.]  On  the  effects  of  song  we  read :  ]7aer  wses  JuBleda
dream,  Beow.  987;  huop  ein  liet  an,  u.  wart  fro,  Hartm.  2,  büchl.
554;  einen /röZicA  geigen  (fiddle  him  into  mirth),  Wigal.  p.  312,
conf.  332.  We  often  meet  with  AS.  '  giedd  wrecan^  Cod.  Exon.
441,  18;  s6«  gied  wrecan  306,  2.  314,  17;  J^ast  gyd  awroec  316
20;  J^e  J^is  gied  wroece  285,  25;  conf.  vröude  wecken,  Türl.  Wh.
116»>.

p.  905.]  The  poet  or  prophet  is  yvfjL(t>6\f)'n'T0^,  seized  by  the
uymphs  (muses),  Lat.  lymphatus.  He  is  goÖ^-mdlugr,  god-
iaspired,  Saem.  57*^ ;  Gylfi  gaf  einni  farandi  konu  at  launum
skemtüuar  sinnar.  .  .  .  en  sü  kona  var  ein  af  Asa  aeti ;  hon
er  nef nd  Gefiun,  Sn.  1 .  Oandharva  is  a  name  for  the  musical
spirits  who  live  in  Indra's  heaven,  Bopp  100**.  God  sends  three
angels  into  the  world  as  musicians ;  and  angeUfiddlers  were  a
favourite  subject  in  pictures.  We  have  the  phrase :  '  der  himmel
hängt  voll  geigen.*

Kväslr  =  &nhe\itus  creber,   Sn.  69;    see   Biörn  sub  v.  qväsir.

Inditing  ig  also  expr.  hyfüegen  (to  mortise),  richten  (righten),  Hpt  6,  497 ;  richUre,
ßoth.  4853  and  conol.;  berihUn,  Freid.  1,  3;  eines  mezzerij  Dietr.  190;  wirken^
Herb.  641 ;  daz  liet  ich  anliffu  (tack  on)  üf  dine  gnÄde  volle,  Mar.  148,  5  ;  der  diz
^aere  anschreip  (jotted  down),  Bit.  2006.  The  M.Neth.  oiit&ind«n= translate,
Maerl.  3,  73.  48 ;  in  dietsce  wort  ontb.  352 ;  in  dietsoh  onbende  228 ;  in  dietsche
(>»<&.,  Böse  29.  Walew.  6 ;  oonf.  AS.  onband  beado-rüne,  Beow.  996.

^OL.  IV.  X


1582  POETBY.

OSin's  9pütle  makes  beer  ferment  (p.  102ri  n.) ;  '  spiitle  tbat
speaks  drops  of  blood,'  EM.  no.  56^  note.  Lisch  in  Meckl.  jrb.
5,  82 ;  a  door,  when  spat  upon,  answers^  MüUenh.  p.  899,  conf.
ftigls  hräki  (p.  682  beg.).  On  'blood and  snow/  see  Dybeck  '45,
p.  69 :  som  bhd  pa  snö.  The  entire  Mid.  Age  had  a  story  roB-
ning  in  its  head,  with  a  playful  turn  to  it,  abont  a  child  made  of
snow  or  ice.  The  10th  cent,  already  had  its 'modus  Liebine';
an  O.Fr.  poem  of  the  same  import  is  in  M^on  3,  215,  a  MHG.
in  Ls.  3,  518  and  Hpt  7,  377;  in  Scherz  n.  Ernst  c.  251  (1550,
183)  the  child  is  called  eis-schmarre,  scrap  of  ice,  conf.  Bore.
Waldis  4,  71  and  Weise's  Erznarren  p.  28.  Pranciscus  makes
himself  a  wife  and  child  of  snow,  Pfeiffer's  Myst.  1,  215.  Who-
ever drank  of  the  dyri  miöÖr  (precious  mead),  the  honey  mixt
with  Kv4sir's  blood,  became  a  shald  :  thus  the  poet  prays  for  a
single  tralisn  (tear)  out  of  the  Camdnae's  fountain,  Trist  123,
38.

OSinn  gains  OShroerir  fr.  Suttftng,  who  then  pursues  him ;  so
Wäinämöinen,  after  winning  Sampo,  was  chased  by  Louhi  in
eagle's  shape  (p.  878).  QSinn  himself  says  in  Hävam&l  23^ :
'  OShroerir  er  nu  uppkominn  A  alda  ves  iarSar,'  and  in  24*  it  is
said  of  him  :  '  Suttüng  svikinn  hann  let  sumbli  fra,  ok  graetta
GunnlöSu.  Other  names  for  the  drink:  Yjy^« /w//,  Egilss.  656;
Ygcu'ar  rwiödr  657  ;  Vidi-isfull  665  ;  ViÖris  ß^  608.  With  arnar
leir  (eagle's  dung)  conf.  leir-skdld,  muck-poet,  Dan.  shams-poet,
Olafsen's  Prize  essay  p.  5.  Like  the'  mead.  Player.  Jack's  seal
is  distrib.  among  gamesters.

Like  w69'bora  is  sn^-bora,  also  vates.  The  d  in  Goth,  veitvodf,
testis,  seems  to  exclude  it,  yet  d  and  ]?  are  sometimes  confounded.
P.  Magnusen  transl.  Offhroeri  ingenii  excitator;  Biöm  makes
hroeri  obturaculum  lebetis.  On  the  relation  of  05r  to  OSinn,  see
Suppl.  to  306.

OSinn  bestows  the  gift  of  poesy  on  StarkaSr.  '  Apes  Platonis
infantuli  met  labiis  inferebant,'  John  of  Salisb.  de  Nug.  cur.  1,
13.  When  St.  Ambrose  lay  in  his  cradle,  a  swarm  of  bees  settled
on  his  mouth.  The  Muse  drops  nectar  into  the  shepherd  Ko-
matas's  mouth,  and  bees  bring  juice  of  flowers  to  it,  Theocr.  7,
60 — 89.  Whom  the  Muses  look  upon  at  birth,  he  hath  power  of
pleasant  speech,  Hes.  Theog.  81—84.  The  gods  breathe  upon  the
poet,  Ov.  Met.  1,  2-3-4.


POETRY.  1583

p.  906.]  To  Hesiod  tending  lambs,  the  Muses  hand  a  spray
)f  laurel,  and  with  it  the  gift  of  song,  Theog.  22 — 30.  In  Lncian's
Rhet.  praec.  4  he  being  a  sheplierd  plucks  leaves  on  Helicon,  and
there  and  then  becomes  a  foet.     The  muses  come  at  early  morn  :

Mirabar,  quidnam  misissent  maiie  Camenae,

ante  meum  stantes  sole  rubente  torum ;
natal  is  nostrae  signum  misere  puellae,

et  manibus  faustos  ter  crepuere  sonos.     Prop.  iv.  9,  1.

Conf.  the  story  of  the  Kalmuk  poet.  Klemm  3,  209.  210,  and
/^oor  shepherds' visions  of  churches  to  be  built  (Suppl.  to  86).
GDS.  821.

p.  908.]  The  first  lay  in  Kanteletar  relates  the  iavention  of
the  five-stringed  harp  (kantelo)  of  the  Finns.  Kalev.  29  de-
scribes how  Wäinämöinen  makes  a  harp  of  various  materials.
Kullervo  fashions  a  horn  of  cow's  bone,  a  pipe  of  bull's  horn,
a  flute  of  calves'  foot,  Kal.  Castr.  2,  58.  When  Wäinämöinen
plays,  the  birds  come  flying  in  heaps,  Kalev.  29,  217,  the  eagle
forgets  the  young  in  her  nest  221.  When  Wipunen  sings,  the
S7in  stops  to  hear  him,  the  nwon  to  listen,  GharUs's  wain  to
gather  wisdom,  wave  and  billow  and  tide  stand  still,  Kalev.  10,
449 — 457 ;  conf.  Petersb.  extr.  p.  II.  In  the  Germ. folksong  the
water  stops,  to  list  the  tale  of  love,  Uhl.  1,  223-4.

Den  ene  begyndte  en  vise  at  qväde,

saa  faart  over  alle  qvinder,

striden  ström  den  stiltes  derved,

som  forre  vor  vant  at  rinde.     D  V.  1,  235.

A  song  makes  tables  and  benches  dance,  Fornald.  sog.  3,  222.
KM.  no.  111.  Sv.  fornvis.  1,  73.  Stolts  Karin  with  her  singing
makes  men  sleep  or  wake,  Sv.  vis.  1,  389  or  dance  394-6.  For
the  power  of  song  over  birds  and  beasts,  see  DV.  1,  282.  Sv.
vis.  1,  33.  On  Orpheus,  see  Hor.  Od.  i.  12,  7  seq.;  conf.  the
Span,  romance  of  Conde  Arnaldos,

p.  909.]  Poets  assemble  on  hills  (as  men  did  for  sacrifice  or
magic),  e.g.  on  the  Wartburg :  au  pui,  oü  on  corone  les  biaus
dis,  Couron.  Renart  1676.  Does  the  poet  wear  garlands  and
flowers,  because  he  was  orig.  a  god's  friend,  a  priest  ?  The  jenx
ilorauz  ofler  H-owers  as  prizes  for  song  :  violeta,  aiglantina,  flor


1684  SPECTRES.

dal  gauch  (solsequium) .  The  rederijkers  too  name  their  rooms
aSter  flowers  ;  is  it  a  relic  of  druidic,  bardic  usage  ?

p.  911.]  The  ON.  Saga  remiads  one  of  the  Gr.  *i?Vi7,  of
whom  Has.  0pp.  762  declares :  öeo?  vi)  ri^  iarv  koX  auriy.  She
converses  with  OSinn,  as  ^dfi,a  conveys  rumours  to  Zeus  (Suppl.
to  898  beg.).  Musa  is  rendered  mngerin,  Bari.  252,  7;  Madete
musas,  daz  wären  sengeren  (rhy.  eren)/  Herb.  1 7865 ;  but  again,

*muse'    17876. Aventiure   answers   to   bona  fortuna    {bonne

aventure),  bona  dea,  bonus  eventus,  Pliny  36,  5.  Varro  RR.  1,
1;  vrouwe  Aventure,  Lane.  18838;  in  the  Rose  the  goddess
Aventure  ==¥oTtun&  5634,  who  has  a  wheel  3933.  4719.  5629.
5864;  e  hÜ8  der  Aventuren  5786.  5810-39  ;  jonste  de  Avonture,
Stoke  1,  39;  maer  d'  Aventure  was  hem  gram,  Maerl.  3,  134;
den  stouten  es  haut  d'  Aventure  2,  46,  like  '  audaces  fortuna
juvat ' ;  alse ,  di  die  Av.  es  hout  2,  93 ;  der  Aventuren  vrient,
ibid.


CHAPTER    XXXI.

SPECTRES.

p.  913.]  In  Mone  6,  467  men  are  divided  into  living,  hover-
mg,  doubtful  and  dead.  Souls  that  cannot  find  rest  in  Hades
and  returning  wander  about  the  grave,  are  mentioned  in  Plato's
Phsedo  p.  81.  The  dead  were  worshipped  :  sandos  sibi  fingunt
quoalibet  mortuos,  Concil.  Liptin.  Feasts  were  held  in  honour  of
them,  as  the  Vers,  fewer-feast,  Benfey's  Monats-n.  151,  the  Rass.
corpse  and  soul   feasts,  Lasicz  58.     Souls  were  prayed  for,  Benf.

Mon.  168-9,  conf.  soul-masses.  Nib.  1221,  2. To  near  (netto

remote)  ancestors  the  Indians  ofifered  up  food  and  drink,  Bopp's
Gl.  p.  143^  n.  198\  79»> ;  conf.  Weber  on  Malavik  103.  One  of
these  sacrißces  was  udaha-harman,  water-libation  for  the  dead,
Böhtl.  and  Roth's  Wtb.  1,  908  ;  so  ;^o^v  ')(juadai,  iraai  vexvecatj
viz.  meal,  wine  and  water  were  poured  into  a  hole.  Od.  10,  517—
520. 11, 25 — 29.  The  souls  eagerly  drink  up  the  blood  of  victims,
which  restores  them  to  their  senses,  Od.  11,  50.  89.  96-8.  148.
153.  228.  390.  The  shades  live  on  these  libations,  Luc.  de  Inctu
9.  The  Lith.  weles  fem.  means  the  figures  of  the  dead,  Mielcke
1,  321 ;  to  the  Samogitian  goddess  Vielona  a  particular  kind  of


SPECTRES.  1585

cake  was  offered :  cum  mortai  pascuntar^  Lasicz  48.  50.     Food
and  drink  is  laid  on  the  grave  for  the  souls.  Pass.  166,  84 — 93.

On  manes,  Mania,  see  Gerh.  Etr.  g,  16;  'in  sede  Ma7iium'=^
in  the  bosom  of  the  earth,  Pliny  33,  1 .  On  lares,  see  Lessing  8,
251 ;  domesticus  lar,  hamingia,  Saxo  Gram.  74.

p.  915.]  Oeheuer,  not  haunted,  is  also  expr.  by  dicht,  tight,
Sup.  I,  768 :  nu  bin  ich  ungehiure,  Wigal.  5831 ;  I  asked  mine
host,  was  he  sure  no  ungeheuer  walked  the  stable,  Simplic.  E.
1028  ;  it  is  unclean  in  that  house.  Nürnberger  11.  In  Notker
'  manes '  is  transl.  by  unholdon,  in  AS.  by  hell-waran  (habi-
tantes  tartaram).

Spuken  (haunt,  be  haunted)  is  also  called  wafeln,  Eosegarten
in  Höfer  1,  877;  AS.  wafian,  ON.  vafra,  vofra,  vofa,  MHG.
waberen.  ON.  vo/iz  =  spectrum ;  AS.  wcefer-syne,  OHG.  wahar-
Mtmi= spectaculum,  GraflE  6,  129.  Kl.  sehr.  5,  437.  The  dead
lie  '  heilir  i  haugi/  at  peace  in  the  cairn,  Hervar.  p.  442 ;  sv&
lati  &8S  )?ik  (God  leave  thee)  heilan  i  haugi  437.  They  appear  in
churches  at  night  or  in  the  dawn,  and  perform  services,  wedding,
barial,  etc. ;  the  sight  betokens  an  approaching  death.  Dietmar
(Pertz  5,  737-8)  gives  several  such  stories  with  the  remark  :  ut
dies  vivis,  sic  nox  est  concessa  defunctis;  .conf.  the  story  in
Altd.  bl.  1,  160,  a  Norweg.  tale  in  Asbiörnsen's  Huldre-ev.  1,
122  and  Schelling^s  Last  words  of  the  vicar  of  Drottning.  As
Wolfdietrich  lies  on  (lie  hier  at  night,  the  ghosts  of  all  whom  he
has  killed  come  and  fight  him,  Wolfd.  2328—34 ;  conf.  Ecke  23
(differ,  told  in  Dresd.  Wolfd.  327—330) ;  also  the  tale  of  the
ruined  church  with  the  coffin,  Altd.  bl.  1,  158.  EM.^  no.  4.  In
the  Irrgarten  der  Liebe  the  cavalier  sees  at  last  the  ghosts  of  all
his  lovess,  p.  610.  Such  apparitions  are  said  to  announce  them-
selves, sich  melden,  anmelden,  Schm.  2,  570.  Schönleithner  16.
Conf.  Diet.  sub.  v.  '  sich  anzeigen./

p.  915.]  To  ON.  aptra-ganga  add  aptr-göngr,  reditus,  Eyrb.
174.  314;  gonger,  Müllenh.  p.  183.  For  'es  geht  um'  they  say
in  Bavaria  '  es  weizt  dort,'  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  98.  Schm.  4,  205-6  ;  in
Hesse  'es  wandert,'  in  the  Wetterau  'es  wannert*  conf.  wanken,
lUineke  934;  Neth.  waren,  rondwaren,  conf.  'in  that  room  it
won't  let  you  rest,'  Bange's  Thür.  chron.  27^.  The  ON.  draugr
is  unconn.  with  Zend,  dnics,  daemon,  Bopp's  Comp.  Gr.  p.  46.
p.  916.]     Instead  of  talamasca,  we  also  find  the  simple  dala.


1586  SPBCTRBS.

larvB^  inonstriiiDy  Graff  5,  397;  talmasclie,  De  Klerk  2,  3474.
The  FioD.  talma  (limas)^  talmasca  (mucedo  in  lingua)«  has  onlv
an  accid.  resembl.  in  soand.  AS.  dunmeru,  spectra,  lemare:>,
larvae  noctarnae«  gedwhnor,  praestigiator,  geJwomervs,  nebolonis,
ffedwomere,  necromantia,  Hpt  9,  514-5.  The  MHG.  geiwas  agrees
(better  than  with  Lifch.  dwase)  with  AS.  dwaes,  stoltus^  for  gettai^
means  stultus  too,  Eilh.  Trist.  7144.  7200.  7300.  An  ON.
skriivetfa,  fr.  veifa,  vapor,  and  sJcra  obliquus?  Vampires  ai-e
dead  men  come  back,  who  suck  blood,  as  the  Erinnyes  sack  tlie
blood  of  corpses,  Aesch.  Earn.  174  [or  the  ghosts  in  the  Odyssejj
conf.  the  story  of  the  brown  man,  Ir.  march.  2, 15.

p.  918.]  The  Insel  Pelseub.  3,  232  says  of  wUl  o'  wisps:
'  from  the  God's  acre  rise  yon  flames,  the  dead  call  me  to  join
their  rest,  they  long  for  my  company.'  OX.  hrcs-lios,  corpse-
light,  hrcevar-lios,  liroevar-eld.  Vafr-logl,  flickering  flame,  is  seen
abont  graves  and  treasures  in  graves  (pp.  602.  971) ;  coDf.
Sigurd's  and  Skirni's    'marr,  er   mic   urn  myrqcan   beri  visau

vafrloga*  Sssm.   82*. Wandering  lights  are  called  '  das  irre-

ding  '  =  ghost,  Schelmufsky  1,  151 ;  der  feuer-mann,  Pomer.  story
in  Bait.  stud.  xi.  1,  74;  brünniger  mann,  Staid.  1,  235;  laufende
fackel,  Ettn.  Unw.  doctor  p.  747.  AS.  dwäs-Uhi.  M.  Neth.
divaeS'fier,  Verwijs  p.  15;  lochter-mane,  Miillenh.  p.  246.  Wend.
blndnik,  Wend,  volksl.  2,  266»»;  Lith.  baltwykszle,  Lett,  leeh
figgiins,  false  fire ;  Lapp,   fjolonjes,  Lindahl  475^ ;  conf.  KM.^  3,

196. On   girregar y   conf. '  Beham    (Vienna)   377,  21;    'eiueu

giiren-gai'ren  enbor- richten,  einen  teuflischen  schrägen  mit
langem  kragen,'  Hag.  Ges.  Ab.  3,  82.  The  kobold'a  name
Iftkrzycki  is  fr.  Sl.  iskra,  spark ;  and  in  Hpt  4,  394  the  lOchte'
männchen  behave  just  like  kobolds.  In  the  Wetteraa  feuruj
gehn  means,  to  be  a  will  o'  wisp.

Unbaptized  children  are  cast  into  the  fire,  Anegenge  2,  13.  II,
'5.  12,  12;  they  go  to  Nobis-kraiten,  Staid.  2,  240;  they  shall
not  be  buried  in  the  holy  isle  (p.  600  n.)  ;  vile  si  da  vunden
hUerliclier  kinde  vor  der  helle  an  einem  ende,  dft  die  müder  wären
mite  tot,  En.  99,  12,  whereas  ^  osten  (ab  Oriente)  schulen  dia
westir-bam  in  daz  himilrfche  varn,'  Karaj.  28,  12.  Unchristened
babes  become  pilweisse  (p.  475) ,  as  untimely  births  become  elbe
(p.  1073);  the  unbaptized  become  white  letiches,  Bosquet  214,
or  kaukas,  Nesselm.  187*».


SPBCTBBS.  1587

p.  920.]  The  Lat.  furia  is  fr.  farere,  OHG.  parjan,  Diet.  2,
534 ;  it  is  rendered  helliwinna,  Graff  1^  881 ;  helUwüterin,  Schadens
Pasq.  100,  9.  103,  25.  117,  79  with  evident  reference  to  Wuotan
and  toüten  to  rage.  Uns  ist  der  tiuvel  n&hen  bi,  oder  daz  wüetende
her,  Maurit.  1559  ;  erst  hub  sich  ein  Scharmützeln  (arose  a  scrim-
mage),  wie  in  eim  wilden  heer,  Ambras,  lied.  p.  151.  Uhl.  1,  657.
Other  names  for  the  Wild  Host :  die  wilde  fahrt,  WolPs  Ztschr.
1,292-3;  in  Styria,  das  wilde  gjaid  (hunt)  2,  32-3;  in  Bavaria,
das  gjoad,  wilde  gjoad,  Panzer  1,  9.  16.  29.  37.  63.  85.  133;  in
Vorarlberg,  das  nachUvolk  or  wüethae,  Vonbun  p.  83 ;  der  wilde
Jäger  mit  dem  wüthia  heer,  GotthelFs  Erz.  1,  221 ;  in  the  Eifel,
Wudes  or  Wodes  heer,  WolPs  Ztsohr.  1,  316.  Firmen.  3,  244»» ;
joejagd,jöjagd,  Osnabr.  mitth.  3,  238 — 240.

p.  924.]  Als  im  der  tiuvel  jagete  nach,  Livl.  reimchr.  7274.
The  devil  is  called  a  weideman,  hunter,  Merwund.  2,  22,  and  in
return  the  wild-hnnter  in  the  Altmark  is  a  JielUjeger,  Hpt  4,  391.
'  Hark,  the  wild  hunter,  passing  right  over  us !  The  hounds
bark,  the  whips  crack,  the  huntsmen  cry  holla  ho ! '  G-oethe's
Götz  V.  B.  8,  149,  conf.  42,  175.  Fischart  in  Lob  der  laute  p.
100  had  already  made  an  adj.  of  the  hunter's  name :  Heckelbergisch
geschrei,  büffen  u.  blasen  des  jägerhoms ;  conf.  supra  (p.  924,
1.  2)  and  Hachelherg  in  the  Bheinharts-wald,  Landau^s  Jagd  p.

190. Another  version  of  the  Hackelberg  legend  is  given  by

Kuhn  in  Hpt's  Ztschr.  5,  379;  conf.  supra  (p.  146-7).  Can  this
be  alluded  to  in  a  stone  sculpture  let  into  the  wall  of  Diesdorf
church  (Magdeburg  country),  representing  a  man  whose  left  leg
is  appar.  being  wounded  by  a  sow?  Thüring.  mitth.  vi.  2,  13
and  plate  7  no.  5.  Somewhat  different  is  the  story  of  the  one-
eyed  wild-sow,  whose  head  laid  on  the  dish  gives  the  master  of
the  hunt  a  mortal  wound,  Winkler^s  Edelm.  371.  The  whole
myth  resembles  that  of  Adonis,  and  the  Irish  story  of  Diarmuid
na  mban  p.  193.     H.  D.  Müller  (Myth,  der  6r.  stamme  ii.  1>  113)

compares  it  to  that  of  Actsdon. Dreaming  of  the  boar,  Budl.

16,  90.  Waltharius  623;  a  boar  wounds  the  Sun  in  her  cave,
Budbeck  quoted  in  Tenzel  and  Mannling  p.  205.  Sackelberg
must  hunt  for  ever :  alhie  der  lib,  diu  sele  dort  sol  jagen  mit
Harren  (his  hound)  dwiclichen,  Labor  568.  Of  him  who  hunts
till  the  Judgment'day,  Firmenich  1,  344.  Müllenh.  p.  584.  In  a
Westph.   folktale   picked    up  orally   by   Kuhn,  giants   call  to


1588  SPECTRES.

Hakelberg  for  help,  he  raises  a  storm,  and  removes  a  mill  into  the
Milky-way,  which  after  that  is  called  the  Mill-way.  In  Catalonia
they  speak  of 'el  viento  del  cazador/  Wolfs  Ztschr.  4,  191.  In
Froramann  3,  271  Holla  and  Ha/ikelhemd  are  associated  in  the
wild  hunt,  unless  Waldbriihl  stole  the  names  out  of  the  Mythology ;
in  3,  273  a  '  Geckenbehrnden '  of  Cologne  is  brought  in.  Tat-
osel  is  fr.  tukn,  bo-are,  Diut.  2,  203** ;  tutco  ^  yXav^,  a  sono  tu  to,
Lobeck's  Rhemat.  320.

p.  927.]  The  wild  hunter  rides  through  the  air  on  a  schimmel,
white  horse,  Somm.  p.  7 ;  conf.  schimmeUreiter  p.  160.  Fitting
a  boot  with  gold  occurs  also  in  a  Hessian  marchen,  Hess.  Ztschr.
4,  117,  conf.  Garg.  241»;  shoes  are  filled  with  gold.  Roth.  21*;
a  shoe-full  of  money.  Panzer  p.  13.

The  wild  hunter  is  called  Ooi,  Kuhn's  Westf.  sag.  1,  8,  and  the
durst  in  Switz.  is  sometimes  gäuthier,  Staid.  2,  517;  do  they
stand  for  Ooden?  Dame  Guuden's  carriage  and  dog  resemble
the  Nethl.  tale  of  the  hound  by  the  hell-car,  Wolf  p.  527.

p.  930.]  A  man  went  and  stood  under  a  tree  in  the  wood
through  which  the  wild  hunter  rode.  One  of  the  party  in  passing
dealt  him  a  blow  in  the  back  with  his  axe,  saying,  '  I  will  plant
my  axe  in  this  tree ; '  and  fr.  that  time  the  man  had  a  hump.
He  waited  till  a  year  had  passed,  then  went  and  stood  under  the
tree  again.  The  same  person  stept  out  of  the  procession,  and
said,  *  Now  I'll  take  my  axe  out  of  the  tree ; '  and  the  man  was
rid  of  his  hump,  Kuhn's  Nordd.  sag.  no.  69;  conf.  Berhia's
blowing  (p.  276-7),  a  witch-story  in  Somm.  p.  56.  Scham  bach
pp.  179.  359.  Vonbun  p.  29  the  schnärzerli  (36  in  ed.  2).  Wolfs
D.  sag.  no.  348-9.     Panzer  1,  17.  63.

In  the  Fichtel-gebirge  the  wild  hunter  rides  without  a  head,
Fromm.  2,  554 ;  so  does  the  wölen-jäger,  jolen-jäger,  Osnab.
mitth.  3,  238—240;  also  the  vfild  h.  in  the  Wetterau,  Firmen.  2,
101 ;  he  walks  headless  in  the  wood  betw.  11  and  12  at  noon,
Somm.  p.  7;  the  wild  h.  halts  at  one  place  to  feed  horses  and
hounds,  p.  9.  In  Tirol  he  chases  the  Salg-fräulein,  WolPs  Ztschr.
2,  60.  35;  he  baits  the  loh-jungfer,  Somm.  pp.  7.  167 ;  so  giant
Fasolt  hunts  the  little  wild  woman,  Eckenl.  167.  173.

p.  931.]  Houses  with  their  front  and  bach  doors  exactly
opposite  are  exposed  to  the  passage  of  the  Furi<ms  Host  (Meinin-
gen),  Hpt  3,  866;    conf.  the  open  house-door   (p.   926-7),  the


SPECTRES.  1589

sitting  over  the  door  (p.  945  end).  The  hell-jäger's  cry  '  Wil  ji
mit  jagen  (hunt  with  us)  ? '  is  also  French :  '  part  en  la  chasse  ! '
Bosq.  69.  The  story  fr.  W.  Preussen  is  like  a  Samland  one  in
Reusch  no.  70*

In  Swabia  the  wild  hnnt  is  also  called  the  mutige  lieer,  Schwab's
Schwab.  Alp  p.  812.  Leader  of  the  Muthes-heer  is  Linkenbold,
who  in  the  Harz  is  called  Leinbold,  ibid. ;  there  is  a  Linkenbolds'
lächle  (-hole)  there.  However,  in  a  Swabian  poem  of  1486
beginning  '  Got  mercurius/  the  wild  hunt  is  called  '  das  wilde
wütiss'her,^     A  frau  Motte  roams  in  Thnringia.

At  Ottobeuern  lovely  music  used  to  be  heard  at  Christmas
time.  If  any  one  put  his  head  out  of  window  to  listen,  and  to
view  the  march  of  Wuete,  his  head  swelled  to  such  a  size  that  he
could  not  pull  it  in  again.  The  full  delicious  enjoyment  was  had
by  those  who  kept  snugly  behind  closed  doors.  The  procession
passed  along  the  fron-weg  up  the  Guggenberg,  or  into  the  deviPs
hole  at  the  Büschel,  where  a  treasure  lies  guarded  by  the  poodle.
On  this  delicious  music  of  the  night-folk,  see  Yonbun  p.  35.

p.  933.]  Unchristened  in/ants  are  the  same  as  the  subterra-
neans and  moss-folk,  whom  Wode  pursues  and  catches,  conf.
p.  483  and  MüUenh.  p.  373.  The  child's  exclamation,  '  Oh  how
warm  are  a  mother's  hands  ! '  is  like  those  of  the  gipsy-woman's
child,  '  There's  nothing  so  soft  as  a  mother's  lap '  and  '  there's
nothing  so  sweet  as  a  mother's  love,'  Müllenh.  no.  331 ;  Lith.
motinSs  rankos  szwelnos,  mother's  hands  soft,  Mielcke  1,  284.
Kraszewski's  Litva  1,  389.  In  Germ,  fairy-tales  the  dead  mother
comes  in  the  night  to  nurse  her  children,  EM.'  3,  21 ;  conf.
Melusine,  Simr.  p.  80.  Müllenh.  no.  195-6-7;  hvert  fell  hldSagt
dbriost  grami,  SsBm.  167^;  a  similar  passage  in  Laxd.  saga  p.
328.

The  wild  host,  like  the  dwarfs,  get  ferried  over ;  the  last  that
lags  behind  is  girded  with  a  rope  of  straw,  Panz.  1,  164>.

p.  935.]  De  la  danza  a^ea  &  que  est^n  condenadas  las  Hero-
diadas  por  la  muerte  del  bautista.  Wolfs  Ztschr.  4,  191.  In
Wallachia  Dina  (Zina)  =  Diana  with  a  large  following  hunts  in
the  clouds,  and  yon  see  where  she  has  danced  on  the  grass  ;  she
can  strike  one  lame,  deaf  or  blind,  and  is  esp.  powerful  at  Whit-
suntide, Wal.  march.  296.

p.  936.]     An  Eckehart  occurs  also  in  Dietr.  9791.     On  the


1590  SPECTBES.

Vefiusberg,  see  Simr.  Amelungen-l.  2,  315.  We  find  even  in
Altswert  82 :  dirre  berc  was  fro  Venus,  conf.  80,  9.  83,  7.  H.
Sachs  has  Venusberg  iii.  3,  3^  (yr  1517).  6^  (1518).  IS«»  (1550).
A  witch-trial  of  1 620  says  :  auf  Venesberg  oder  Paradies  faren,
Mone  7,  426.  There  is  a  Veniisbg  by  Beichmannsdorf  in  Gra-
fenthal distr.  (Meiningen),  near  Saalfeld.  A  M.Neth.  poem  by
Limb.  3,  1250.  1316  says  Venus  dwells  in  the  forest.  The  earliest
descript.  of  the  Horselberg  is  by  Eoban  Hessus  in  Bucol.  idyL  5,
at  the  beginn,  of  the  16th  cent. :

Aspicis  aerio  sublatum  vertice  montem^

qua  levis  occidui  deflectitnr  aura  Favoni,

Horrisomim  Latio  vicinus  nomine  dicit  (by  a  Latin  name),

qui  Nessum  bibit  undosum  Verarimque  propinquum.

Isthoc  ante  duas  messes  cum  saepe  venirem^

ignarus  nemorum  vidi  discurrere  larvas

saxa  per  et  montes,  tanquam  nocturna  vagantes

terriculameota,  et  pueros  terrere  paventes,

quas  lamias  dicunt  quibus  est  exenqytile  lumen,

quas  vigiles  aiunt  extra  sua  llinina  lyncas

esse,  domi  talpa^,  nee  queuquam  cemere  nee  se.

Conf.  Victor  Perillus's  poem  on  the  Hörselberg,  yr  1592  (Jrb.  d.
Berl.  spr.  ges.  2,  352-8) ;  it  is  called  Haselberg  and  Horselbg  in
Bange's  Tbür.  chron.  1599,  p.  57-8.  Songs  about  Tanhauser  in
Uhl.  no.  297,  and  Moneys  Anz.  5,  169—174 ;  a  lay  of  Danhäuser
is  mentioned  by  Fel.  Faber  3,  221.

p.  937.]  At  the  death  of  our  Henry  6,  Dietrich  von  Bern
appears  on  horseback,  rides  through  the  Mosel,  and  disappeai^,
HS.  p.  49.  In  the  Wend,  volksl.  2,  267^  the  wild  hunter  is
called  Dyter-bemat,  Dyter-benada,  Dyke-bemak,  Dyke-bjadnat,
In  one  story  2,  185  he  is  like  the  Theodericas  Veronensis  whom
the  devil  carries  off.  Diter  Bernhard  in  Dasent's  Theophilus  80 ;
brand-aJem  (barren  streaks)  on  the  plains  are  called  by  the
Wends  Dyter-bernatowy  jpuc,  D.'s  path.  Yet,  ace.  to  Panaer  1,
67  it  is  2k  fruitful  season  when  the  wilde  gjai  has  been ;  and  where
the  Rodensteiner  has  passed,  the  com  stands  higher,  Wolf  p.  20.
The  wild  host  goes  clean  through  the  bam,  Panz.  1,  133.

p.  939.]  As  early  as  the  First  Crusade  (1096)  it  was  asserted
that  Carl  had  woke  up  again:    Karolus  resoscitatns,  Pertz  8,


SPECTRES.  1591

215;  conf.  the  kaiser  in  the  Guckenberg  near  Gemünd,  Bader
no.  434,  and  the  Earlsberg  at  Nürnberg,  no.  481.

p.  940.1  On  Schnellerts,  see  Panzer  1,  194  and  the  everlasting
hunter  of  Wlnendael,  Eanst  en  letterblad  '41,  p.  68.  Beiffenb.
Renseign.  214.  The  setting-oat  of  a  carriage  with  three  wheels
and  a  long-nosed  driver  is  descr.  in  the  story  of  the  monks  cross-
ing the  Rhine  at  Spire,  Meland.  1,  no.  664  (p.  832).  Oopiae  eques-
ires  are  seen  near  Worms  in  1098,  Melaud.  2,  no.  59 ;  battalions
sweeping  throngh  the  air  in  1096,  Pertz8,  214;  conf.  Dionys.
Halic.  10^  2 ;  higher  up  in  the  clouds,  two  great  armies  marching,
H.  Sachs  iii.  1,  227».

p.  943.]  Something  like  Heme  the  Hunter  is  Home  tlis
Hunter,  otherwise  called  Harry -ca-ndb,  who  with  the  devil  hunts
the  boar  near  Bromsgrove,  Worcest.  (Athenseum).  The  story  of
the  Wunderer  chasing  Frau  Saelde  is  in  Keller's  Erz.  p.  6 ;  conf.
Faatn.  sp.  547.  Schimpf  u.  ernst  (1522)  229.  (1550)  268.

p.  946.]  Where  Oden's  lake  (On-sjö)  now  lies,  a  stately
mansion  stood  (herre-gard),  whose  lord  one  Sunday  went  a  hiint^
ing  with  his  hounds,  having  provided  himself  with  wine  out  of
the  church,  to  load  his  gun  with,  and  be  the  surer  of  hitting.
At  the  first  shot  his  mansion  sank  out  of  sight.  Buna  '44,  33.

Here  the  huntsman  is  evid.  Oden  himself. Among  the  train

0^  Ouro  rysserova  (  =  Gudron  the  horse-tailed,  Landstad  pp.  121.
131-2)  is  Sigurd  Snaresvend  riding  his  Grani  (Faye  62).  The
members  of  the  troop  go  and  sit  over  the  door  :  the  like  is  told
of  devils,  who  lie  down  in  front  of  lit-hiuser  where  drinking,
gaming^  murdering  goes  ou.  Berthold  p.  357 ;  and  of  the
Devil,  who  sits  during  the  dance,  H.  Sachs  1,  342^^;  'setz  nur
die  seel  auft  überthür '  iii.  1,  261 ;  sein  seel  setz  er  ufE  über  thür,

lats  mit  dem  teufel  beissen,  Simpl.  pilgram  3,  85. Northern

names  for  the  spectral  procession  are :  oskarei-a,  haaskaalreia,
juleikreia,  skreia,  Asb.  og  Moe  in  the  Univ.  annaler  pp.  7.
41-2;  julaskrei'i,  julaskreid'i,  oskerei,  oskorrei,  aalgarei,  jolareiae,
Aasen's  Pröver  27-8.  31 ;  conf.  Thorsrei'8  (p.  166)  and  husprei,
hespi'ei,  thunder.     Lapp,  julheer,  Klemm  3,  90.

p.  949  n.]     The  very  same  is  told  of  Örvarodd  as  of  Oleg,
Fornald.  s.  2,  168-9.  300;  conf.  a  Transylv.  tale  in  Haltrich's
Progr.  p.  73.
p.  950.]     On  Holda^s  sameness  with  Fricka,  see  Kl.  sehr.  5,


1592  TRANSLATION.

416  seq.  The  Gauls  too  sacrificed  to  ÄHemis,  Arrian  de  Yenat.
c.  23.  32.  Hecate  triviornm  praeses,  Athen.  3,  196 ;  men  took
a  sop  with  them  for  fear  of  the  cross-roads  2,  83,  for  Hecate'g
hounds  7,  499  ;  ^EKarr}^  Seiwvov  means  the  bread  laid  down  where
three  roads  met,  Luc.  Dial.  mort.  1  and  22  (note  on  Lacian  2,
397) ;  feros  Hecatae  perdomuisse  canes,  TibuU.  i.  2,  54.

p.  950.]  The  appalling  guise  of  the  Harii  (GDS.  714)  recalls
our  death's-head  cavaliers.  At  the  outset  of  the  Thirty-years
War  there  were  Bavarian  troopers  called  Invincibles,  with  black
horses,  black  clothing,  and  on  their  black  helmets  a  white  death's-
head  ;  their  leader  was  Kronberger,  and  fortune  favoured  them
till  Swedish  Bauer  met  them  in  Mecklenburg,  March  1631.
Frederick  the  Great  had  a  regiment  of  Death's-head  Hussars.
In  recent  times  we  have  had  Liitzow's  Volunteers,  the  Black
Jägers,  the  Brunswick  Hussars.  Does  a  coat-of-arms  with  a
death's-head  occur  in  the  days  of  chivalry  f  We  read  in  Wigal.
80,  14:  an  sinem  schilde  was  der  Tot  gem&lt  vil  grftsenliche
(Suppl.  to  850).  Remember  too  the  terror-striking  name  of  the
legio  fulminatriz,  KepavvoßoXo^.  Secret  societies  use  the  symbol
of  a  death's-head ;  apothecaries  mark  their  poison-boxes  with  the
same.


CHAPTER  XXXII.
TRANSLÄ.TION.

p.  952.]  Verwünschen  is  also  exsecrari,  abominari.  OS. /anr«-
fan,  devovere,  OUG,  far wdzan,  withar-huazan,  recusare,  Graff  1,
1087.  As  abominari  comes  fr.  omen,  so  far-huatan  fr.  hvat,
omen  (Suppl.  to  1105n.).  Beside  the  Fr.  souhait  (which  G^nin
Recr.  1,  201  would  derive  fr.  sonhait,  as  convent  fr.  convent,
etc.)  we  have  also  aliait  in  Thib.  de  N.,  and  the  simple  hau—
luck,  wish.  For  its  root,  instead  of  OHG.  heiz,  ON.  heit,  we
might  take  the  Bret,  hst,  Gtiel.  atVeo«  =  pleasure.  De  soJuiit,  de
dehait,  Guitecl,  1,  169.

Disappeamng  (verschwinden)  and  appearing  again  are  a4>avrj
yepiaOai  and  <l>av€p6v  yevifrffai,  Plato's  Rep.  36Ö.  Frequent  is
the  phrase  '  to  vanish  under  one^s  hand ' ;  conf.  the  clapping  of
hands  in  cases  of  enchantment  (p.  1026)  :  thaz  tha  hiar  irwuntl


TBANSLATION.  1593

mir  untar  theru  Jienti,  0.  i.  22,  44 ;  verswant  den  luten  under  den
handen,  Griesh.  Sprachd.  26  [Late  examples  omitted]  ;  ze  hant
verswant  der  kleine,  Ortnit  141,  4;  vile  schiere  her  verswant  von
sinen  ougen  zeJuint,  daz  her  en-weste,  war  her  bequam,  En.  2621  ;
vor  iren  ougen  er  virswant,  Hpt  5,  533 ;  verswant  vor  sinen  ougen,

Krone  29606  [Simil.  ex.  om.]. Der  engel  s&  vor  im  verswant,

Wh.  49,  27;  do  der  tiuvel  hin  verswant,  Bari.  3027;  dd  der
winder  gar  verswant,  Frauend.  409,  17;  solde  ein  wip  vor  leide
sin  verswunden  MS.  1,  81*;  der  hirz  vorswant,  Myst.  1,  233;  in
den  wint  gähes  (suddenly)  verswunden.  Mar.  159,  7 ;  daz  ver-
swant mit  der  luft,  Pass.  369,  91 ;  der  engel  mit  der  rede  verswant,
Hpt  8,  171  ;  the  devil  says  'ich  muoz  verswinden,'  MSH.  3,
174*:  'von  hinnan  stet  mm  begirde  (desire).  Got  müeze  dich  in
huote  län ! '  alsus  »ti?«In  diu  gezierde,  Diut.  2,251-2;  Sant.  Ser-

vace  do  verswein,   Servat.  3317   [Ex.  om.]. Voer  ute  haren

ogen,  Karel  2,  990 ;  de  duvel  voer  dane  alse  en  roc  (smoke)  te
scouwene  ane,  Maerl.  2,  237 ;  Var-in-d'wand,  N.  pr.  ring  33**,
30.  36%  28.  36.  To  begone  =  OHG.  huerban,  ON.  hverfa:  0«inn
hvarf  J?ä,  Seem.  47 ;  oc  nu  hverfur  )?essi  alfur  so  sem  skiiggi,
(as  a  shadow),  Vilk.  c.  150;  brottu  horfinn,  ibid. ;  ^o  )?&  hurt,

Fornald.  s.  1,  488,  conf.  seykvaz,  sink  away,  Saam.  10**.  229**.

The  translated  sleep,  like  Kronos  p.  833  n. ;  Gawan  falls  asleep
on  a  table  in  the  Grals-halle,  and  awakes  next  morning  in  a  moss,
Keller's  Romvart  660.  Vanishing  is  often  preceded  by  thunder :
ein  grozer  slac,  Heinr.  u.  Kun.  4215.  Erf.  march.  84.  160;
'  there  came  a  crash  (rassler),  and  all  was  sunk  and  gone/  Pauz.
1,30;  Gangleri  hears  a  thunder,  and  Valhöll  has  vanished,  he
stands  in  the  fields,  Sn.  77.

p.  953.]  The  shepherd  Gyges  steps  into  a  crack  of  the  earth
made  during  storm  and  earthquake,  finds  a  giant's  corpse  inside
a  brazen  horse,  and  draws  a  ring  off  its  hand,  Plato's  Rep.  p.  369.
Translation  is  imprecated  or  invoked  in  the  following  phrases  :  in
te  ruant  montes  mali,  Plaut.  Epid.  i.  1,  78;  «ara  t^c  7179  Bvvai
7)ir)(pfif)y,  Lucian  3,  156.     5,  202 ;  'x^aveiv  fioi,  riyv  yfjp  f)ux^/^V^  9,

68.     8,  18. Oedipus  is  swallowed  up  by  the  earth,  Oed.  Col.

1662.  1752 ;  conf.  'slipping  in  like  the  schwick'  (p.  450  n.) ;  die
lufte  mich  verstunden,  Hpt  5,  540 ;  \äap  €0r}K€,  II.  2,  319 ;  XiOo^
€?  avOpdnrov  yeyopipai,  Lucian's  Imag.  1  ;  der  werde  z'einem
sieine !  MS.  1,  6* ;  hon  (GoSrun)  var  buin  til  at  springa  af  harmi.


1594  TRANSLATION.

SaBLD.  211  ;  du-De  betest  ditz  gesprochen,  dA  waerst  benatnen  w-
brochen,  Iw.  153.  We  talk  of  bursting  with  rage  (p.  552  n.),  i.e.,
in  order  to  jump  out  of  our  skin  :  er  wolte  aus  der  haut  fahren^
Salinde  13.

p.  958.]  A  translxiied  hero  is  spoken  of  as  early  as  1 096  :  Inde
fabulosum  illud  confictura  de  Carolo  magno,  quasi  de  mortuis  iu
id  ipsnm  resvscUato,  et  alio  vescio  quo  nihilominus  rediuivo  (before
Frederick  I.  therefore),  Pertz  8,  215  (Suppl.  to  939).  Frederick
is  supposed  to  lie  at  Trifels  in  the  Palatinate  also,  where  his  bed
is  made  for  him  every  night,  Schlegel's  Mas.  1 ,  293.  Then  the
folktales  make  Otto  Bedbeard  also  live  in  the  Kifhäuser,  and  give
him  frau  Holle  for  housekeeper  and  errand  woman,  Sommer  pp.  1 .
6.  1 04 ;  he  gives  away  a  green  tvrig,  which  turns  into  gold,  p.  2 ;
in  the  mountain  there  is  sHttle-playing  and  '  schmaräkeln,^  p.  4.
A  legend  of  Fredk  Redbeard  in  Firmen.  2,  201*.  A  giant  has
slept  at  tlie  stone- table  in  the  mountain  these  700  years,  Dyb.
Buna  '47,  34-5.  Not  unlike  the  Swed.  folktale  of  a  blind  giant
banished  to  an  island  are  the  stories  in  Buna  '44,  pp.  30.  43.  59.
60 :  in  every  case  the  belt  given  is  strapped  round  a  tree  (conf.
Panzer  1,  17.  71.  367),  but  the  other  incidents  differ.  Such
giants  call  churches  de  hvita  Mock-märraima  4,  37,  and  the  beU
bjelleho,  Dyb.  '45,  48.  '44,  59  ;  the  blind  grey  old  man  reminds
one  of  Oden.     Ace.  to  Praetor.  Alectr.  p.  69,  Kaiser  Frederick

seems  to  have  cursed  himself  into  the  '  Kiphauser.' On  the

Frederick  legend,  see  Hpt  5,  250—293.  Closener  p.  30-1  (yr
1285).  Böhmer's  Beg.,  yr  i285,  no.  830,  conf.  824-6.  Kopps
Budolf  pp.  736—749.  Detmar  1,  130  (yr  1250).  Of  Fredk
the  Second,  the  Bepgow.  chron.  (Massm.  711)  says  straight  out :
'  bi  den  tiden  sege-men  dat  storve  keiser  Yrederic ;  en  del  volkes
segede,  he  levede;  de  twivel  warede  lange  t!t; '  conf.  ibid.  714.
Another  name  for  the  auricula  is  berg-kaiserlein ;  does  it  mean

the    wonder-flower    that    shows    the    treasure  ? Fiseharfc's

6eschicht-kl.  22**  says :  avff  dem  keysfir  Friderich  stan  ;  Schiller
120^  (?) :  und  nebenher  hatten  unsere  kerle  noch  das  gefundene
fressen  über  den  alten  kaiser  zu  plündern.  Phil.  v.  Sittew.
Soldatenl.  232 :  fressen,  saufen,  prassen  auf  den  alten  keyser  hinein,
Albertini's  Narrenh.  p.  264;  heuraten  auf  d.  a.  k.  JUnein.
Schmeller  2,  335-6  :  immer  zu  in  d.  a.  kaiser  hinein  sündigen,  auf
d.  a.  k.  fctnat*/ sündigen,  zechen,  i.e.  without  thinking  of  paying.


TRANSLATION.  1595

p.  961.]  The  sleeping  Fredk  reminds  one  of  Kronos  sleeping
in  a  cave^  and  birds  bringing  him  ambrosia,  Pint.  De  facie  in  orbe
Innae  4,  1152-3  (see  p.  833  n.).  Arthur  too  and  the  knights  of
the  Grail  are  shnt  np  in  a  mountain^  Lohengr.  179.  Lanz.  6909.
Garin  de  L.  1,  238;  si  jehent  (they  say)  er  lebe  noch  hiute^  Iw.
14.  Raynonard  sab  v.  Artus.  CsBsarius  heisterb.  12,  12  speaks
of  rex  Arcturus  in  Monte  Giber  (It.  monte  Gibello) ;  conf.  Kaufm.
p.  51  and  the  magnet-mountain  '  ze  Olvers,'  Gudr.  1135-8.  564
(KM.*  3,  274).  Other  instances:  könig  Dan,  Mtillenh.  no.  505;
the  count  of  Flanders,  Raynouard  1,  130' ;  Marko  lives  yet  in
the  wooded  mountains^  Talvj  1,  xxvi. ;  so  does  the  horse  Bayard.
On  the  search  for  Svatopluk,  Swatopluka  hledati,  see  Schafarik
p.  804.

p.  968.]  The  while  lady's  bunch  of  keys  is  snake-bound.  Pan-
zer 1,2.  A  white  warden  with  keys  in  Firmen.  2,  117  ;  drei  witte
jnmfem,  Hpt  4,  392 ;  three  white  ladies  in  the  enchanted  castle,
Arnim's  March,  no.  18 ;  conf.  the  Slav,  vilas  and  villy,  spirits  of
brides  who  died  before  the  wedding-day,  who  hold  ring-dances
at  midnight,  and  dance  men  to  death,  Hanusch  pp.  305.  415;
dancing  willis,  Mailath's  Ungr.  march.  1,9;  Lith.  weles,  figures
of  the  dead.

p.  969.]  A  certain  general  plants  an  acorn  to  make  his  coffin
of,  Ettn.  Chymicus  879.  There  is  some  likeness  betw.  the  story
of  Release  and  that  of  the  Wood  of  the  Cross,  which  grows  out  of
three  pips  laid  under  Adam's  tongue  when  dead.  That  the  pip
must  be  brought  by  a  little  bird,  agrees  with  the  rowan  sapling
fit  for  a  wishing. rod,  whose  seed  must  have  dropt  out  of  a  bird's
bill  (Snppl.  to  977  beg.),  and  with  the  viscum  per  alvum  avium
redditnm  (p.  1206) ;  conf.  the  legend  of  the  Schalksbnrg,  Schwab's
Alb.  p.  32.  Yon  must  fell  a  tree,  and  make  a  cradle  out  of  it;
the  first  time  a  baby  cries  in  that  cradle,  the  spell  is  loosed,  the
treasure  is  lifted,  H.  Meyer's  Züricher  ortsn.  p.  98 ;  conf.  the  tale
in  Panzer  2,  200.  159.  Other  conditions  of  release  :  to  draw  a
waggon  up  a  hill  the  wrong  way,  to  buy  a  piece  of  linen,  to  hold
the  white  lady's  hand  in  silence,  Reusch  p.  437  ;  with  your  mouth
to  take  the  key  out  of  the  snake's  mouth,  Firmen.  1,  332 ;  to  kiss
the  worm,  or  the  toad,  or  the  frog,  wolf  and  snake,  Müllenh.  p.
580.     Somm.  Sagen  p.  21.     Meyer's  Züricher  ortsn.  p.  97.

p.  971.]     Men  do  hnij  treasures  in  the  ground:  the  Koz^cks


1596  TRANSLATION.

are  said  to  keep  all  their  money  underground ;  thieves  and
robbers  bury  their  booty,  dogs  and  wolves  pieces  of  meat.  The
Marsians  buried  the  Roman  eagle  they  had  captured  in  a  grove,

whence  the  Romans  dug  it  out  again,  Tac.  Ann.  2,  25. The

treasure  is  called  lege^'-hort, 'Reun.  17687.  2505;  ON.  toi*rar=
thesauri,  opes  reconditae.  '  Shogs  not  the  treasure  up  toward
me,  That  shining  there  behind  I  see  ? '  Goethe  12,  193.  The
treasure  blooms,  Panzer  1,  1 ;  'for  buried  gold  will  often  shift
about,'  Irrgart.  d.  liebe  503 ;  the  cauldrons  sink  three  ells  a  year,
Dybeck  4,  45.  Once  in  100  years  the  stones  off  the  heath  go
down  to  the  sea  to  drink,  and  then  all  treasures  of  the  earth  lie
open,  so  that  one  need  only  reach  them  out ;  but  in  a  few  winters
they  come  back,  and  crush  those  who  don't  get  out  of  the  way  in
time,  Bret,  march.  88 — 93.  The  treasure  suns  itself.  Panzer  2,
16.  30.  It  cools  (glüht  aus),  Müllenh.  p.  203-4.  Treasure-gold
turns  to  coal,  Lucian's  Timon  1,  110.  Philops.  7,  284  ;  conf.  the
legends  of  Holla,  Berhta,  Fredk  Barbarossa  and  Riibezal.  The
coals  of  a  glowing  treasure  turn  to  gold,  Reusch  no.  25-6-7.
Glimmering  fire  and  coaU  of  a  treasure,  Dieffenb.  Wetterau  p.

275. Signs  of  a  treasure  :  when  a  hazel  bears  mistletoe,  and  a

white  snake  suns  himself,  and  treasure-fire  burns,  Reusch  no.  15.
Where  treasures  lie,  a  blue  fire  burns  (Hofmannswaldau),  or  light
finds  its  way  out  of  the  earth,  Leipz.  avent.  2,  40 ;  it  swarms

with  insects,  etc.  (pp.  692-4). The  treasure-lifter  is  stript  and

plunged  up  to  his  neck  in  water  in  a  tub,  and  is  left  till  midnight
to  watch  for  the  coming  of  the  treasure,  Cervant.  Nov.  de  la
gitanilla  p.  m.  106.  A  beshouted  treasure  sinks,  Wetterau  tale
in  Firmen.  2,  100  ;  conf,  AS.  «inc  =  thesaurus,  opes.  Some  good
stories  of  treasure-lifting  in  Asbiörnsen's  Huldr.  1,  142-3>4.
Ghosts  have  to  give  up  buried  weapons :  saemir  ei  draugum
d^rt  väpn  bera,  Fornald.  s.  1,  436.  A  connexion  subsists  betw.
treasures  and  graves:  the  liauga  eldar,  grave-fires,  indicate
money,  Egilss.  767.  The  hoard  does no^  diminish:  sin  wart  doch
niht  minre,  swie  vil  man  von  dem  schätze  truoc.  Nib.  475,  12.

p.  972.]  The  wonder-flower  is  said  to  blossom  either  on  Mid-
summer night  alone,  or  only  once  in  100  years.  If  any  one,
having  spied  it,  hesitates  to  pluck  it,  it  suddenly  vanishes  amid
thunder  and  lightning;  conf.  britannica  (p.  1195-6),  fern  (p.
1211).     Preusker  1,  9J-2.     Before    the  eyes  of  the  shepherd's


TRANSLATION.  1597

man  a  wonder-flower  ijrows  up  saddenly  oat  of  the  g^und ;  he
pulls  it,  and  sticks  it  in  his  hat ;  as  quick  as  yon  can  turn  your
hand,  a  grey  mannikin  stands  there,  and  beckons  him  to  follow  ;
or  else,  the  moment  the  flower  is  stuck  in  the  hat,  the  white  lady
appears,  Firmen.  2,  175.  The  wonder-flower  gets  caught  in  the
shoe-buckle,  Somm.  p.  4,  as  fernseed  falls  into  the  shoes  (p.
1210),  and  also  ripens  or  blossoms  on  Midsum.  night,  pp.  4.  165.

It   is  called   Schlüsselblume,   Panzer   1,   8S3,   umnderblume,

Wetterau.  sag.  p.  284.  Phil.  v.  Steinau  p.  77 ;  Pol.  dziivaczek,
Boh.  diwnjk,  wonderflower.  The  three  blue  flowers  effect  the
release,  Firmen.  2,  201*.  A  Schleswig  story  makes  it  the  yellow
flower,  and  the  cry  is:  Forget  ru)t  the  best,  Miillenh.  p.  851.
Another  formula  is :  '  wia  meh  as  da  verzötarist  (squanderest) ,

om  sa  minder  host,'  Vonbun  p.  5. As  early  as  the  15th  cent.

vergisse  min  nit  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  flower,  Altd.  w.  1,  151 ;  a
gloss  of  the  time  has :  vergiss-mein-nicht  alleluja,  Mone  8,  103 ;
vergis-man-nicht  gamandria^  ibid.  Vergiss  nit  mein  is  a  blue  flower,
TJhl.  1,  60.  108.  114-6.  129;  blümlein  vergiss  nit  mein,  Ambras,
liedb.  pp.  18.  251.  Bergr.  37.  70;  blümelain  vergiss  ni  main,
Meinert  34;  vergiss  m>ein  nicht,  Menante's  Gal.  welt  p.  70.
Swed.  Jorgät-mig-ej ,  Dybeck  '48,  28 ;  Boh.  ne-zapominka,  Pol.
nie-zapominka,  Russ.  ne-zabudka,  conf.  Weim.  jrb.  4,  108;  das

bliimlein  wunderschön,   Goethe  1,  189. The  heel  cut  off  him

that  hurries  away,  Firmen.  2,  176.  In  a  story  in  Wächter's
Statist,  p.  175-6  the  wounded  heel  never  heals.  A  proverb  says:
'Tis  what  comes  after,  hurts  your  heel.

p.  974.]  The  spring-wurzel  is  in  OHG.  sprinc-wurz,  lactarida,
lactaria  herba,  Graff  1,  1051,  or  simply  springa  6,  397.  Does
pider  it,  diderit  (usu.  diterich,  picklock)  also  mean  a  spring-
wurzel?  Firmen.  1,  271.  The  springw.  or  wonderflower  is
sometimes  called  bird's  nest,  Fr.  nid  d'oiseau,  plante  aperitive,
vuln^raire,  qui  crott  au  pied  des  sapins ;  it  opens  boxes  (folktale
in  Mone  8,  539),  and  makes  invisible,  DS.  no.  85.  Again,  it  is
called  zweiblutt,  bifoglio,  and  is  picked  off  the  point  of  bifurcation
in  a  tree ;  does  it  mean  a  parasite-plant  like  the  misletoe  ?  It
must  have  been  regarded  as  the  nest  of  a  sacred  bird  :  thus  of
the  siskin's  iiest  it  is  believed  that  the  bird  lays  in  it  a  small
precious  stone  to  make  it  invisible,  Hpt  3,  361 ;  conf.  Vonbun's
Vorarlbg  63 ;  Boh.  hnjzdnjk,  ophrys  nidus  avis,  ragwort,   Pol.

VOL.  rv.  Y


1598  TRANSLATION.

gniazdo  ptasze  (see  Linde  1,  728*»). On  the  green-pecker,  Fr.

pivert,  see  Am.  Bosq.  p.  217-8,  and  baum-heckel,  Masaas  2,  108;
picos  divitiis^  qui  aareos  montes  colunt,  ego  solas  sapero.  Plant.
Anlul.  iv.  8,  1.  On  the  legend  of  the  shamir,  conf.  Hammer's
Rosenöl  1,  251.  Altd.  w.  2,  93.  Pineda's  Salomon  (Diemer
p.  44),  samir.  Diem.  109,  19  ;  thanir,  Gerv.  Tilb.  Ot.  imp.  ed.
Leibn.  p.  1000;  thamur,  Vine.  Bellovac.  20,  170;  tamin,  MaerL
in  Kästner  29*.  In  Griesb.  Predigt,  p.  xxv.  is  the  story  of  the
ostrich  2,  122.

p.  977.]  The  Svred.  slag-ruta  is  cat  off  the  flyg-ronn,  bird's
rowan  (or  service)  tree,  whose  seed  has  fallen  fr.  the  beak  of  a
bird,  Djbeck  '45,  63 ;  it  mast  be  cat  on  Midsummer  eve  oat  of
mistletoe  bojighs,  Runa  '44,  22.  '45,  80.  Dan.  önske-qvist,  Engl,
divining-rod,  finding-stick.  Germ,  names:  der  Saslden  zivic,
Altsw.  119.  127,  conf.  ungeliickes  zw!c  (Suppl.  to  879  end);
glücks-ruthe,  Lisch  in  Meckl.  jrb.  5,  84 ;  wiinseheUruote  sunder
zwisel  (without  cleft),  MSH.  2,  339^;  wunseheUris,  Tit.  2509.
5960-82,  w.  über  alle  küneginne,  1242,  wünscheUhemdez  rU
1728;  alles  heiles  wünschel-i^,  Troj.  2217  ;  mins  heils  wünscheU
mote,  Altsw.  118;  der  wünschel-ruoten  hört,  Dietr.  drach.  81 0*.

Nu  hat  gegangen  miner  künste  ruote,  MSH.  8,  81*. The  idea

of  the  wishing-rod  was  not  borrowed  fr.  Aaron's  magic  wand ;
on  the  contrary,  our  poet  of  the  12th  cent,  borrows  of  the  former
to  give  to  the  latter :  Nim  die  gerte  in  dine  hant,  wurche  seichen
manikvalt ;  ze  alien  dingen  ist  sie  guot,  swes  so  wunsget  din  muof.
Not  a  word  of  all  this  in  Exod.  7,  9  ;  the  wishing-rod  however
did  not  serve  the  purposes  of  harmful  magic.  Conf.  the  virgula
divina,  Forcell.  sub  v. ;  Esth.  pilda,  GDS.  159. The  wishing-
rod  must  have  been  cut  at  a  fitting  time  and  by  clean  hands,
Kippe  die  wippe  1688,  D  4^  :  it  is  a  hazel-rod,  and  holy,  Vonban
pp.  6.  7.  64;  a  hazel-bough.  Fromm.  3,  210;  a  white  somer-
laden  heslin  stab,  Weisth.  3,  411.  461.  Stories  of  the  wishing-
rod  in  Kuhn  p.  330.  Miillenh.  p.  204 ;  of  the  old  wiiaschel-stock,
ib.  no.  283.  On  the  manner  of  holditig  it,  see  Hone's  Yearbk
1589.  It  is  called  schlag-ruthe  because  it  anschlägt,  hits  [the  nail
on  the  head]  ;  hence  slegel,  cudgel?  conf.  Parz.  180,  10—14,
and  the  hazel-rod  that  cudgels  the  absent  (Suppl.  to  651  end).

p.  977.]     One  must  drive  a  white  he-goat  through  the  stable,
to  lift  a  treasure  that  lies  there,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  3,  815.


TRANSLATION.  1599

p.  980.]  The  devil  is  by  the  treasure,  and  he  is  blind  too,  like
Plutus  (Suppl.  to  993).  The  Ssk.  Kuvera,  Sk  hideous  being,  is
god  of  wealth.  DU-  is  the  same  as  dimt-,  Pott  1,  101.  When
money  is  buried,  the  devil  is  appointed  watchman,  Müllenh.  p.
202-3,  or  a  grey  man  on  a  three-legged  white  horse  guards  it  102.
Finn.  a,arni  or  kratti  is  genius  thesauri,  conf .  mammelainen  below.
AS.  wyrm  hordes  hyrde,  Beow.  1767.  F&fnir  says :  er  ek  d  arfi
Id  (on  the  heritage  lay)  miklom  mtns  fbi5or,  Ssem.  188** ;  me^an
ek  urn  menjom  lag,  ibid.  '  Lanuvium  annosi  vetus  est  tutela
draconis  ;  '  maidens  bring  him  food  :

Si  fuerint  castae,  redennt  in  colla  parentum,

clamantque  agricolae  'Fertilis  annus  erit  I '     Prop.  v.  8,  3.

Dragons  sun  their  gold  in  fine  weather.  Buna  '44,  44,  like  the
white  maidens.  Some  good  stories  of  the  roving  dragon  in
Müllenh.  p.  206 ;  conf.  the  dragon  of  Lambton,  Hpt  5,  487 ;  be
is  also  called  the  dralcel,  Lyra  p.  137,  the  wheat-dragon,  Firmen.
2,  309.  The  n.  prop.  Otwurm  in  Karajan  begins  with  6t  =  e&d,
conf.  6t-pero.  Heimo  finds  a  dragon  on  the  Alps  of  Carniola,
kills  him  and  cuts  his  tongue  out;  with  him  he  finds  a  rich
hoard  :  locum  argento  septum  possedit,  in  quo  aurea  mala  habuit,

Mone  7,  585  fr.  Faber's  Evagatorium. W.  Grimm  (HS.  p.

385-6)  thinks  the  ring  Andvaror-naut  was  the  most  essential  part
of  the  hoard,  that  in  it  lay  the  gold-engendering  power  and  the
destiny,  but  German  legend  put  in  its  place  the  wishing-rod ;
note  however,  that  such  power  of  breeding  gold  is  nowhere
ascribed  to  Andvara-naut.  Sigurd  first  gave  it  to  Brunhild
(Pomald.  s.  1,  178),  then  secretly  pulled  it  ofi"  again  (187).
Siegfried  in  the  German  epic,  after  winning  the  treasure,  leaves
it  in  charge  of  the  dwarfs,  does  not  take  it  away  therefore,  but
gives  it  to  Chriemhilt  as  a  wedding-gift,  and  as  such  the  dwarfs
have  to  deliver  it  up.  Nib.  1057 — 64.  Once  it  is  in  Gunther's
land,  the  Burgundians  t-ake  it  from  her,  and  Hagen  sinks  it  in
the  Rhine  1077,  3;  conf.  2305-8.  Hagen  has  merely  hidden  it
at  Lochheim,  intending  afterwards  to  fish  it  up  again,  conf.  1080.
So  likewise  in  Saem.  230 :  '  Gunnar  ok  Högni  toko  )?&  guUit  allt,
PiLfnis  arf.'  On  the  fate  bound  up  with  the  gold-hoard  in  the
ON.  (and  doubtless  also  in  OHG.)  legend,  see  Hpt  3,  217.  Finn.
mammelainen,  mater  serpentis,  divitiarum  subterranearum  custos


1600  DEVIL.

(Renvall)  reminds  one  of  ON.  mddir  Ätla= serpens,  Sadm.  243^
Golden  geese  and  docks  also  sit  underground  on  golden  egg»,
Somm.  sag.  p.  63-4.

p.  981.]  In  some  stories  it  is  the  old  man  in  the  mountain
that^  when  people  come  in  to  him^  crops  their  heads  hold,  Somm.
p.  83 ;  then  again  the  spectres  wish  to  shave  the  heard  of  a  man
as  he  lies  in  bed^  Simpl.  K.  921.  980.  In  Musaus  4^  61  both  get
shorn.

p.  983.]  With  Lurlenberge  conf.  *  üz  Lurlinberge  wart  gefnrt
sin  stolze  even  tare/  Bitterpr.^  and  Lurinhere,  Graff  2,  244.  Or
Burlenberg  might  be  the  Birlenberg  of  Weisth.  4,  244.  On  the
sunken  or  de  Toulouse  and  or  de  Montpellier,  see  Berte  20.—
Sinking  is  preceded  by  a  crash  (Suppl.  to  952  end)  :  heyrSi  hann
dyna  mikla,  Sn.  77  \  there  was  a  hang,  and  all  was  sunk  and
gone^  Panz.  1^  30  (in  Schm.  3^  125  a  loud  snore) ;  then  comes  a
cra^h,  and  the  castle  once  more  is  as  it  was  before,  Kuhn's  WestL
sag.  2,  250;  a  fearful  crash,  and  the  castle  tumbles  and  dis-
appears, Schönwerth  3,  52. Near  Staffelberg  in  Up.  Pran-

conia  lies  a  great  pond,  and  in  it  a  great  fish,  holding  his  tail  in
his  mouth;  the  moment  he  lets  it  go,  the  mountain  will  fly  to
pieces  and  fill  the  pond,  and  the  flood  drovm  the  flats  of  Main  and
Rhine,  and  everything  perish,  man  and  beast,  Panz.  2,  192.  A
little  cloud  on  the  horizon  often  announces  the  bursting-in  of  the
flood  or  violent  rain,  MüUenh.  p.  133.  1  Kings  18,  48-4  (Hpt  8,
284).  An  cmgel  walks  into  the  sinking  city,  WolFs  Niederl.  sag.
326.  Of  the  foundling  Gregor,  who  came  floating  on  the  flood,
it  is  said:  der  sich  bat  verrunnen  her,  Greg.  1144.  After  the
flood,  the  baby  is  left  up  in  a  poplar-tree,  Müllenh.  p.  132.  In
the  legend  of  the  Wood  of  the  Cross  also,  a  newborn  child  lies  on
the  top  of  a  tree.     On  the  name  Dold,  see  GDS.  758.


CHAPTER  XXXIII.

DEVIL.

p.  986.]  Schwenk's  Semiten  161  says  the  JDevil  is  a  Persian
invention.  On  Ahuromazdao,  see  Windischm.  Bede  p.  17-8;  the
cuneiC  inscriptions  have  Auramazda,  Gr.  ^flpofida-Of^^.  Ahura  is
the  Ssk.  asura,  Böhtlg555;  and  Benfey  in  Gott,  gel  ana. '62,


DBvm.  1601

p.  1757  conn,  mazda  with  Ssk.  medh&s,  medhäm  =  v6dh&m.  The
lad.  asura  is  evil^  the  deva  good ;  the  Pers.  ahara  is  good^  the
dadva  bad ;  so  heretics  repres.  Ahriman,  the  devil,  as  the  first-
bom  sou  of  Oodj  and  Ormuzd  or  Christ  as  the  second.  The
Yezids  worship  the  devil  mainly  as  one  originally  good,  who  has
rebelled,  and  may  injure,  may  at  last  become  a  god  again,  and

avenge  himself. Lucifer  falls  out   of  heaven  (p.  241) ;   the

angels  fall  three  nights  and  days  fr.  heaven  to  hell,  CsBdm.  20, 12;
sie  fielen  dri  tage  volle,  Karaj.  Denkm.  42,  9;  HephsBstas  falls  a
whole  day  fr.  Olympus  to  Lemnos,  II.  1,  592.  As  God  creates,
the  devil  tries  to  do  the  same ;  he  sets  up  his  chapel  next  the
charch  (p.  1021) ;  he  also  has  12  disciples  ascr.  to  him.  Berthold
321 ;  conf.  devil's  pupils  (Suppl.  to  1024).

p.  987.]  ülphilas  translates  even  the  fem.  ^  Sidßo\o^  by
diabula»  pi.  diaJrulos,  slanderers,  1  Tim.  3,  11.  Among  corrup-
tions of  the  word  are  :  Dan.  knefvel,  snefvel,  Molbech's  Tidskr.  6,
317;  Arab,  eblis,  iblis ;  prob,  our  own  'der  tausend!^  conf.
dusii  (p.  481)  and  daus.  Diet.  2,  855.  Lith.  devaltts,  divulus  =
great  god,  Nesselm.  140*.  Devil,  Devilson  occur  as  surnames  :
Cuonradns  Diabolus  de  Rute,  MB.  8,  461.  472 ;  filii  Tiufelanis
(Suppl.  to  1019  end)  ;  Beroldus  dictus  THaholuSy  Sudendorfs
Beitr.  p.  73,  yr  1271  ;  Cunze  gen.  B-ufiis  heubit,  Amsb.  urk.  787.

The  F'mn.  perkele,  devil,  Kalev.  10,  118.  141.  207.  327  and

lApp,  perkel,  pergalek  (Suppl.  to  171  end)  are  derived  fr.  piru,
cacodaemon,  says  Schief n.  Finn,  namen  611.

Sataixas  in  Diemer  255,  10;  satanat  in  Hpt  8,  155.  355  (the
odious  «.).  Earaj.  Sprachdenkm.  52,  3;  a  pi.  satanasd  in  O.  v.
20,  4.  The  word  sounds  like  scado  (p.  989),  skolisl  (p.  1003),
above  all  like  Soetere,  Saturn  (p.  247).

p.  991.]  Der  tievel  gap  den  rat  (advice),  wander  in  bezeren
ne  h&t,  Fundgr.  2,  87;  als  ez  der  tiufel  riet,  Nib.  756,  9;  der
tiuvel  mir  daz  riet,  Frib.  Trist.  2207.  The  devil  is  called  niht
guotes :  we  say  '  it  smells  here  like  no  good  things ' ;  Lett,  ne
hhbais,  the  not  good ;  Lapp,  pahakes,  the  bad  one.  He  is  called
der  vbel  dtem  (breath),  Fundgr.  2,  18;  unreine  saghe  untwa^,
Bruns  324-5;  conf.  Swed.  Oden  hin  oude,  Ihre's  Dial.  lex.  123*;
der  arge  tumbe,  Martina  160,  23,  as  we  say  '  stupid  devil ' ;  arger
mhi,  Diut.  1,  470 ;  der  sure  wirt  (sour  host),  Helbl.  2,  587 ;  fkz
des  bitteren  tiefeis  halse  (throat),  Griesh.  52;  den  leiden  duvelen


1602  DEVIL.

(odious  d.),  Hpt  2,  197;  der  leidige  tifel.  Mos.  52,  18;  leding,
Cavall.  Voc.  Verland  40» ;  läjing,  l&je,  Wieselgren  385 ;  lioihan,
Dybeck  '45,  72 ;  der  greulich  hat  dich  herein  getrau  (brought),
Uhl.  Volksl.  p.  801.  Lith.  hisasy  devil,  conf.  baisus,  grim.
Finn,  paha,  pahoillinen,    devil;     Esth.    pahalainen,    pcAomen,

Salmelainen  1,  179.  193.    234. In  Scand.  the  devil  is  also

called  skam,  skammen  (shame),  Ihre's  Dial.  lex.  149*».  Djb.  '45,
3.  55.  77.  Is  he  called  the  little  one  ?  '  whence  brings  you  der
lützel  here  ? '  Gryphius's  Dornr.  56,  8.  The  live,  bodily  devil,  or
simply  '  der  leibhaftige,'  the  veritable,  Gotthelf's  Käserei  356 ;
fleiechechter  leibhafter  teufel,  Garg.  229*» ;  ich  sei  des  leibhaßigen
butzen  244*;  der  eihtige  tinvel.  Berth.  37;  des  sihtigen  tufels
kint,  Dietr.  drach.  212^  285*»;  conf.  vif  maufe,  Meon  3,  252;

ainz  est  deables  vis,  M.  de  Gar.  178. Äntiquus  hostis  occors

also  in  Widukind  (Pertz  5,  454) ;  our  Urian  resembles  ür-hans,
Old  Jack  (Suppl.  to  453  n.);  u-tiifel,  Gotth.  Erz.  1,  162.  177.  253.
275.  286,  ur-teufel  2,  277 ;  d'  oude  sathan,  Maeri.  2,  300;  de  uald
knecht,  de  uald,  MiUlenh.  p.  265.  The  household  god  of  the
TchuYHsheB,  Erich  (Götze's  Russ.  volksl.  p.  1 7)  recalls  *  gammel
Eric' ON.  andskoti^ disholus,  hostis;  ther  widarwerto  (un-
toward), 0.  ii.  4,  93.  104;  ti?arc  =  diabolus,  Graff  1,  980;  helle^
ware,  Diut.  2,  291 ;  conf.  ON.  vargr,  lupus,  hostis  (p.  996).  Der
vient,  Pfeiffer's  Myst.  1,  131 ;  der  vint,  Helbl.  1,  1186;  der  leide
vient,  Leyser  123,  11.  38;  Idff-geteona,  Beow.  1113,  is  said  of
sea-monsters,  but  it  means  '  hateful  foe,'  and  might  designate  the

devil. Der  heische  dief,  Maerl.  2,  312  ;  der  nacht-schade,  said

of  a  homesprite,  Rochholz  1,  295  (Kl.  sehr.  3,  407).  Ein  unhuld,
Hagen's  Heldenb.  1,  235.  With  the  fem.  unholdd  in  OHG.
hymns  conf.  'daz  wtp,  diu  unholde,*  Pass.  353,  91 ;  in  Unhulden-
tal,  Bair.  qu.  1,  220 ;  and  the  Servian  fem.  vila  in  many  points
resembles  the  devil.  TJberfengil,  ubarfangari,  praevaricator,
Usurpator,  seems  also  to  mean  the  devil  in  contrast  with  angels,
Hpt  8,  146.

p.  992.]  Der  ubele  valant,  Diemer  302,  28;  der  v.,  Karaj.
89,  14;  diu  vdlendin,  Cod.  pal.  361,  74'';  vdlantinne.  Krone  9375.
9467;  diu  ubele  v.,  Mai  170,  11;  disem  valande  gelich  122,21;
du  urkiusche  der  valande  172,  16  j  ein  vil  boeser  volant,  Turl.
Wh.  136^:  swaz  der  v.  wider  in  tet  (against  them  did),  WelscL
gast  5177;   des  välandes  spot  (mock).  Warn.  2426;  des  r.  hant


DEVIL.  1603

1358.  The  word  occurs  in  the  Erec,  not  in  the  Iwein,  Hpt's
Pref.  XV.  I  find  Conr.  of  Wiirzbg  has  not  altogether  forborne
its  use:  der  leide  välant,  Silv.  4902 ;  wilder  v.,  Frauenl  382,  15  ;
der  v.  müez  si  stillen  123,  19.  It  occurs  but  once  in  M.  Neth.
poets :  die  qnade  valande,  Walew.  8945 ;  (distinct  f r.  it  stands
vaeliant=iV<Ullant  9647,  B,ndfaliant,  valiant,  Lane.  21461.  24643).

Du  poser  feilant,  Fastn.  sp.  578,  21 ;  böser  volant  926,  11 ;

volandes  man,  Hpt  5,  20.  31 ;  der  schwarze  volund,  Mülmann's
Geiszel  273;  der  volland,  Ayrer  340*;  volant  in  witch-trials  of
1515  (WolPs  Ztschr.  2,  77);  den  sol  der  böse  vohmd  holen!
Licht  wer  1758,  128.  In  the  Walpurgis-night  on  the  Blocksberg^
Mephistopheles  calls  himself  junker  Voland,  squire  Y.,  Goethe's
Faast,  p.  m.  159.  In  Thuringia  (at  Gotha)  1  heard  'Das  glab
der  Fold!*  devil  believe  it.  Völundr,  Wayland  seems  unconn.
with  v&lant^  whose  v.  is  really  an  /.

p.  993.]  The  devil  is  lame  in  a  Moravian  story  (p.  1011),  the
same  in  Wallachia,  Fr.  Müller  nos.  216.  221;  conf.  Thör's  lame
goat  (p.  995).  He  is  blind,  Lith.  aklatis;  his  eyes  are  put  out
with  melted  lead  (p.  1027).  He  is  black:  ne  nos  frangat  demon
ater,  Chart.  Sithiensc  p.  8 ;  tenebromis  hostis,  Munteres  Tempelh.
158;  der  swarze  meister,  Hpt  1,  277;  von  dem  tiuvel  hoert  man
wol,  wie  er  swerzer  si  dan  kol,  u.  ist  doch  unsihtic  (yet  invisible),
Ls-  3,  276;  die  swarzen  helle-warten,  Servat.  3520.  In  Tirol  and
the  up.  Palatinate  he  is  called  grau-umzl,  Schm.  4,  208.  He
wears  grey  or  g^-een  clothes  (p.  1063),  and,  like  the  dwarfs,  a
red  cap,  MüUenh.  p.  194.  The  African  Negroes  paint  the  devil
white.  Klemm  3,  358.  364.

p.  995.]  The  devil's  horn  partly  resembles  the  hone  in  Thor's
head  (p.  373) ;  conf.  '  gehurute  helle  ohsen,'  homed  ox  of  hell,
Hpt  8,  151.  236.  He  has  a  tail:  'tied  to  the  devil's  tail,'
Keisersb.  zv.  Staffely  41-3.  59.  Schärtlin  p.  226 ;  the  troll  too
has  a  tail,  Djb.  Runa  '44,  73,  the  Norw.  huldre  a  cow's  tail.  He
has  a  hen*8  and  a  horses  foot,  Lisch's  Meckl.  jrb.  5,  94,  a  horse's
foot  and  a  man's,  Miillenh.  p.  197.  Deoful  warn  and  wlite-leds,
Andr.  1170.

p.  997.]  The  devil  has  horns  and  cloven  feet,  WolPs  Ztschr.
2,  63;  his  goafs  feet  peep  out,  Mone  8,  125,  as  goat's  feet  and
daws  are  ascr.  to  dwarfs  (p.  451  n.) ;  daemones  in  specie  capra-
rum,  Acta  Bened.  sec.  1  p.  33;   devil  as  stein-geisz  [wild  goat.


1604  DEVIL.

Capricorn  f] ,  HaUrich  p.  44.  Pf eiflF.  Germ.  1 ,  484 ;  die  bös  tenf ds
zigen  (she-goats),  i.e.  witches,  Keller's  Altd.  era.  192,  22.  With
*  bocks  lid'  agrees  'des  tiuvela  glit/  limb  of  the  d..  Pass.  377,  24
(Suppl.  to  1019  end);  hox-acheis  habe  ir  sele!  Lindenbl.  123;
'to  pluck  a  horn  out  of  the  devil,'  Garg.  l?*».  Here  belong  the
surnames  Hellboek,  Höllbock,  Denkschr.  der  k.  k.  acad.  5,  20.

The  devil  is  named  Säu-reussel  (sow's  snout),  and  finds  bells.
Ph.  DieflTenb.  Wanderung  p.  73 ;  duivels  zwintje  (pigs),  Hpt  7,
532  (Suppl.  to  478).  The  hog  for  breeding  is  cslleifahl,  Weisth.
2,  528.  There  is  a  hero's  name,  Ur-stvin,  Dietl.  5253;  conf.
ur-ber,  nr-kämpe,  ur-sau,  ur-schwein.  The  devil  is  called  a  luhs,
lynx,  MS.  2,  6\  7»;  a  hare,  Pan«.  Beitr.  1,  137;  an  ape,  becanse
he  apes  God  (Suppl.  to  1024  beg.).

The  devil  was  '  der  vil  ungehiure  JteUe-wolf,*  Hpt  5,  520 ;  die
helle-wargen  7,  376 ;  abstrahis  ore  lupi,  Erm.  Nigell.  4,  370.
GDS.  329.  333.

Helle'hunt=:  Cerhevas,  Gl.  sletst.  4,  32.  Bonn.  289;  der  übele
hunt.  Diemer  309,  22,  der  helle-hunt,  der  hunt  verwäzen  (accursed),
314,  2.  13;  vnor  der  übermnote  hunt  also  tiefe  an  den  helle-gmnt
4,  26;  nit'hunt,  dog  of  spite,  Helbl.  2,  264;  devil  seen  in  dog*9
shape.  Pass.  203,  59.

p.  999.]  Ace.  to  Gryphius's  Sonett.  1,  1  the  devil  is  called
höllen-rabe  ;  he  appears  *  in  ttwarze^'  vogele  bilde,'  Ejsrchr.  4314 ;
der  höllische  geier,  vulture,  Meinert  p.  165 ;  das  hat  sie  der  geier
gelernt.  Lessing  2,  446;  die  höllische  agalaster  (magpie),  der
satan,  Pol.  maulaffe  195,  conf.  Parz.  1 ;  helle-gouch,  EIrolewicz
3879,  conf.  the  cuckoo  and  his  clerk  (p.  681-2) ;  de  bunte  kiwit
hahl  se!  Hanenreyerey  1618  A  v^;  fort  juw  (brings  you)  de
kiwit  nu  weer  her?  B  viii«.  He  has  goose-feet,  crow's  feet,  Thür.
mitth.  vi.  3,  67.  70.

The  serpent  in  Paradise  was  wrongly  supposed  to  be  the  devil,
Schwenk's  Semit.  162.  He  is  called  der  lintwurm.  Mar.  148, 28;
der  aide  helle-trache.  Pass.  13,  23.  101, 47;  der  hellewurm  106, 27 ;
celidriis,  Erm.  Nigell.  2, 191,  fr.  ^cXi/Spo?,  water-snake.  Leviathan
is  transl.  in  AS.  by  sce-draca;  he  is  descr.  'cum  armilla  in
maxilla,'  Vom  geloub.  601,  and  there  is  'ein  rinc  ime  in  siue
nasen  gelegit'  541;  conf.  'in  des  tiuveles  drozzen,' throat,  Rol.
244,  29 ;  den  h&t  des  tiuvels  kiuwe  (jaw)  verslunden.  Warn.  540.

Belzebup,  Karaj.  52,  3;    Belsebüc   in   Fragm.   of   MadelgMs;


DEVIL.  1605

Besebiie,  Walew.  8244;  drukha  fern,  as  a  flj,  Spiegers  Avesta
124.  A  spirit  is  shut  ap  in  a  glass  as  a  fly,  MS.  2,  13«4,  or  in
a  box,  Leipz.  avant.  2, 41 ;  thei*e  is  a  devil  in  the  glass,  both  in  the
legend  of  Zeno  in  Bruns^  and  in  that  of  the  scholar  and  robber
in  H.  v.  Herford,  yr  995  and  in  Körner.

p.  1000.]  The  devil  as  a  hammer  (siege),  Kemble^s  Sal.  and
Sat.  146.  177.  He  is  called  Hemm^rlein,  Ambras,  lied.  142.  As
Donar's  hammer  gradu.  becomes  a  fiery  sword,  it  is  also  said  r
ein^ureo  swert  der  tiuvel  h4t,  Hpt  5,  450  (p.  812.  Suppl.  to  lOlS
end) .  The  devil  rolling  like  a  millstone  resembles  the  troll  rolling
like  a  hall,  Nilsson  4,  40.

p.  1002.]  The  devil  is  Mer  aide  hellewarte;  Pass.  23,  18.
hells'Wirt  99, 11,  der  aide  hellewiht  293,  94 ;  er  rehter  helUschergen
govch,  Mai  156,  40;  hellescherje,  Tit.  5468.  5510;  hellescherge,
Helbl.  2,  603 ;  hellefiur,  Berth.  56 ;  there  is  a  man's  name,  Helli-
tamph  (-smoke),  MB.  14,  424;  der  fürst  üz  helle  abgründe,  Walth.
3,  12,  as  we  say  'the  prince  of  darkness.'  With  hellegrave  (p.
993)  connect  the  prop,  names  Helcrapho,  Böhmer's  Font.  2,  185,
and  Herman  der  hellengrave,  hellegrave,  Mon.  zoller.  no.  305
(yr  1345).  no.  306.

The  devil  dwells  in  the  i^orf A:  cadens  Lncif er  .  .  .  traxit
ad  infemi  sulfnrea  stagna,  in  gelidu  a^uilonis  parte  ponens  sibi
tribunal;  hunc  ferocissimum  lupum  Agnus  mitissimus  stravit,
Raban.  Maur.  De  laud,  crucis,  fig.  10 ;  '  (Lucifer)  chot,  wolti  sizzin
nordin,*  Diem.  94,  16;  entweder  zu  den  genädin  oder  den
ungenadin,  sive  ad  austrum  sive  ad  aquilonem,  Leyser  135,  34.
In  the  N.  lies  Jötun-heimr  (p.  34),  and  the  devil  is  considered  a
giant,  as  Loki  and  Logi  are  of  giant  kin ;  onskar  honom  (wishes
him)  längt  nordan  tillfjälls  (at  the  devil),  Sv.  vis.  2,  163.

They  say  in  Smaland,  'drag  till  Häckenf jails ! '  Cavall.  p.  25*.
On  Hekla,  Heklu-fiall,  see  Bartholin  p.  356 — 360;  fewr  im
Heckelberg  (Mt  Hecla),  Fischart  in  Wackern.  2,  470.

By  desser  korken  buwet  (builds)  de  düvil  einen  Nobis  kroch,
Agricola's  Sprikworde  (1528)  n.  23  bl.  14*;  nohis-haus,  Mono  8,
277;  in  nobis  haus,  da  schleget  das  hellisch  fewer  zum  fenster
hinaus.  Er.  Alberus's  Barfnsser  Milnche  Eulenspiegel  u.  Alcoran
(Wittemb.  1642)  bl.  E  4;  *so  fare  they  on  to  nohishaus,  where
flame  shoots  out  at  the  window,  and  bake  their  apples  on  the  sill,'
Schimpf  u.  ernst  (1550)  c.  233;    'hush,  thou  art  now  in  nobis'


1606  DEVIL.

Aat«M'  =  purgatory,  H.  Sachs  (1552)  iii.  3,  44''';  ir  spart's  (the
Reformation)  in  Nobislcrug,  Fischart's  Dominici  leben  (1571)  jj*.
Nobis  Kracke,  Meland.  Jocoseri.  (1626)  p.  548;  'send  down  to
nobükrug,'  Simpl.  3,  887 ;  '  How  Francion  rideth  in  a  chair  into
the  Nobiskrug  (abyss,  dungeon)/  Hist,  des  Francions  (Leyd.
1714),  Tab.  of  cont.  iz.  In  Celle  they  sing  the  cradle-song:
mAse-kätzen,  wo  wut  du  hen  7  ik  wil  n&  nabers  krauge  g&n.  Od
NäberS'kroeh,  Nobeh-krug,  see  Kuhn  in  Hpt  4,  888-9.  Leo
(Malb.  gl.  2,  42)  derives  'nobis'  fr.  Ir.  aibheis,  abyss;  aibhistar
is  said  to  mean  devil.

p.  1004.]  AS.  scocca  is  found  on  German  soil  too  :  Adalbertns
SGucco,  Annal.  Saxo  (Pertz  8,  690).  Seyfriden  dem  steppekchen,
MB.  16,  197  (yr  1392).  The  devil's  name  Barlabaen  is  also  in
Walew.  9741 ;  Barlibaen,  Limb.  4,  959 ;  Bamebaen,  Barlebos,
Barlebaen,  V.  d.  Bergh  11.  12.  275-6;  borUbuer,  said  of  a  boor.
Rose  2804.      The  word  frimurc  in  Turl.   Wh.   136%  femurc  in

Cod.  pal., reminds  of  Ffimurgan  (p.  820 n.). Names  of  devils:

lasterbalc,  schandolf,  hagendoni  (conf.  p.  1063),  hagelsiein,  Ber-
thold  56 ;  ein  tiuvel  genannt  hsterlinc,  Hag.  Ges.  Abent.  2,  280 ;
lästerlein,  schentel,  Fastn.  sp.  507-8-9.  Does  ON.  /coZ^fei^satanas,
still  very  common  in  Iceland,  mean  senex  procax  7  Swed.  '  hin
hale,*  the  devil ;  Yesterb.  snogen,  the  bald,  Unander  36,  conf.
kahl-kopf  in  Gramm.  2,  374 ;  ödtgöt.  skammen,  skrutt,  skräll,
Kalön  17**  (Suppl.  to  991  mid.).  In  Vorarlberg  j(>m€r  and  holler
are  devils'  names,  Bergm.  p.  94,  jammer  otherwise  denoting
epilepsy,  convulsion  (p.  1064).

Euphemisms  for  the  devil  (p.  987  mid.)  are :  the  OocUbe-with-
us  ;  Meister  Sieh-dtch-för  (look  out,  mind  yourself),  Ettn.  Unw.
doct.  241 ;  Et'Cetera,  Ital.  ceteratojo.  Gipsies  call  God  devel,  and
the  devil  beink,  Pott  p.  67.  The  Dan.  gammel  Erik  is  in  Norw.
gamle  Eirik,  gamle  Sjur,  Aasen  124*.  On  Hemmerlin,  see  Suppl.
to  1000;  Ma/rtinello  (p.  1064).  Pinkepank  in  Hpt  6,  485.
Schimper^schamper,  Schimmer-schemmer.

p.  1006.]  The  devil  appears  as  the  hunter  in  green,  Schleicher
213,  as  Oreen-coat  in  witch-stories,  KM.  no.  101.  In  Ostgotl.
Oden  means  devil.  His  army  is  called  a  swarm :  des  tivelis
geswa/rme,  Rol.  120,  14;  der  tiuvel  h&t  üzgesant  sin  geswarme
204,  6;  geswerme,  Karl  73^;  des  tiefels  her  (host),  Griesh.  2,
26.     Yerswinden  sam  ein  kunder,  daz  der  boese  geist  fuort  in


DEVIL.  1607

dem  rare  (reeds),  Tit.  2408;  der  teufel  fährt  in  wildes  geröhrichtj
H.  Sachs  V.  344-5-6.

p.  1009.]  De  olle  riesen^moder,  MüUenh.  p.  444,  the  giant's
old  grandmother  450,  Brüsi  and  his  mother  worse  than  he,
Fomm.  sog.  3,  214,  all  remind  us  of  the  devil's  mother  or  grand-
mother: des  Übeln  teufeis  muoter,  Wolfd.  and  Saben  487;  a
brachte  hier  ter  stede  die  duvel  ende  sin  moeder  mede,  Karel  2,
4536  :  fraa  Fuik  is  held  to  be  the  devil's  grandmother,  Hpt  5,
373  ;  '  yes,  the  devil  should  have  had  him  long  ago,  but  is  wait-
ing to  find  the  fellow  to  him,  as  bis  grandmother  wants  a  new
pair  of  coach-horses/  GotthelPs  Swiss  tales  4,  51;  der  tüfel
macht  wedele  dms,  u.  heizt  der  grossmutter  den  ofe  dermit  (to
light  his  granny's  fire  with),  Gotth.  Erz.  1,  226;  de  düvel  und
ock  stn  moder,  Soester  Daniel  8. 11 ;  'if  you  are  the  devil,  I  am
his  mother y  Praet.  Weltb.  2,  64 ;  '  who  are  you,  the  devil  or  his
mother?  '  Simpl.  1,  592;  conf.  'ist  er  der  tufel  oder  sin  toip  ?'
Dietr.  dr.  159*;  des  tiuvels  tnuo^er  u.  sin  vnp,  Hatzl.  219*;  diu
ist  des  tiuvels  ivip,  Nib.  417,  4;  des  übelen  tiuvels  brut  (bride)
426,  4.     Mai  172,  10.     Conf.  Death's  mother  (p.  840-1);  'from

Jack  Ketch  to  Jack^s  mother  he  went,'  Pol.  colica  p.  13. To

the  pop.  saws  about  sun  and  rain,  add  the  N.  Frisian :  '  when  it
rains  and  the  sun  shines,  witches  are  buried  at  the  world's  end.'
There  are  m^iny  devils :  steht  in  tausend  teufel  namen  auf !  sauf
(drink)  in  tausent  L  namen !  Diet.  1,  230.

p.  101 1.]  The  devil  demands  a  sheep  and  a  eock,  Gsds.  Heisterb.
5,  2;  or  a  black  he-goat^  Müllenh.  p.  41,  a  bUick  cock  and  he-cat
201,  a  black  and  a  white  goat  203.  With  the  curious  passage  fr.
H.  Sachs  agrees  the  following  :  Of  a  heretic  like  that,  you  make
a  new-year's  present  to  Pluto,  stv/:k  over  with  box,  Simpl.  3,  5.
p.  287.  Boar's  heads  and  bear's  heads  are  still  garnished  so,  and
even  Asiatics  put  fruit  in  the  bear's  mouth.  'The  devil  shall
yet  thy  bather  be,'  Froschm.  J.  2*  (Suppl.  to  247).

p.  1012.]  A  stinking  liair  is  pulled  out  of  Ugarthilorus  ;  seven
hairs  off  the  sleeping  devil  or  gpant,  like  the  siben  locke  (Luther,
Judg.  16,  19)  off  Samson's  head,  Bonn.  6927.  Diu  helle  ist  üf
get&n,  der  tiufel  der  ist  uzgelan  (let  out),  Dietr.  dr.  211^.  121\
143^ ;  Lucifer  waere  uz  gelan,  Tirol  in  Hpt  1,  20 ;  'tis  as  though
the  fiend  had  burst  his  fetters,  Eliz.  of  Orl.  p.  270;  le  diable  est
dechaine,  Voltaire's  Fr&i.  le  gr.  23,   118. With  the  phrase


1608  DEVIL.

'  the  deviVs  dead/  conf.  '  Ulli  er  dau«r'  (p.  458  n.).  Other  ex-
pressiona:  des  tiuvels  Zuoder »esoa  diabolic  MSH.  3,  227^;  'the
d.  may  hold  Ute  candls  to  one  that  expects  the  like  of  him/
Nürnberger  254 ;  '  of  the  d,  and  the  charcoal-burner/  Fastn.  sp.
896,  12;  'looked  like  a  field  full  of  devils/  Zehn  ehen  177;
'  we  avenge  the  devil  on  ourselves,'  En.  1 147 ;  thieves  go  oat
in  odd  numbers,  so  that  the  d.  can't  catch  one  of  them.  Ph..
V.  Sittew.  2,  686 — 690;  c'est  Vhuftoire  du  diahle,  eine  teufeUt-
(jeschichte.     There  was  a  Oesdiichle  vom  henker,  Gotthelfs  Uli  148.

p.  1018.]  The  devil's  seed  occurs  also  in  Dietr.  dr.  281^  and
Boner's  Epilog  51.  His  sifting:  hinet  riteret  (tonight  riddles)
dich  Satanas  alsam  weize,  Diem.  255,  10.  Fundgr.  1,  170.  His
snares  :  wie  vil  der  tnbil  uf  uns  dont  (tendiculas  ponit),  Hpt  5,
450 ;  ira/yl^  is  in  Gothic  either  hlamma,  1  Tim.  8,  7.  6,  9  (ON.
hlömm  =  fustis),  or  vruggo,  2  Tim.  2,  26;  des  tivels  netze,  Mone's
Anz.  '39,  58  ;  des  tiefels  halze,  Griesh.  2,  98 ;  des  tiuvels  stoert,
Ls.  8,  264  (p.  999  end) ;  daz  vindet  der  tiuvil  an  stner  videtn,
Renn.  22629.

p.  1014.]  As  Wuotan  and  angels  carry  men  through  the  air,
so  does  God,  but  much  oftener  the  devil  (p.  1028) :  sit  dich  Oot
hftt  her  getragen,  Hätzl.  167,  48 ;  der  arge  välant  truoc  in  dar,
Laur.  822  ;  noch  waen  (nor  dream)  daz  si  der  tiuvel  Tuorte,  Livl.
1425;  der  t.  hftt  in  her  brftht,  Greg.  1162.  der  t.  h&t  mir  zno
gebrftht,  Helbl.  1, 641.  iuch  brfthte  her  der  tievel  üz  der  helle,  Hpt
1,  400;  die  duvel  brochte  hu  hier  so  na,  Rose  12887 ;  nu  over  ins
duvels  geleide,  Karel  2,  4447 ;  in  trage  dan  wider  der  tüfel,  Diocl.
5566-89;  welke  duvel  hvAcht  n  dare?  Lane.  1528;  brochte  jou
die  duvel  hier  f  Walew.  5202 ;  conf.  '  waz  wundere  h&t  dich  her
getragen  f  Wigal.  5803  ;  welch  tivel  het  dich  hiute  hin  ?  Hahn's
Stricker  14.  We  say  '  where's  the  d.  got  you  f '  i.e.  where  are
you  ?  wo  hat  dich  der  henker  ?  Fr.  Simpl.  1,  57.  The  Greeks
too  said :  rov  S'  apa  t€ö)9  fih  ainiyayev  oUaSe  Bai/jMv,  Od.  16,
870;    Tt9  Balfjuov   roSe    irrjfia    wpoaiffaye ;    17,  446;    aXXd  ae

haifiwv  oiKaK  inre^aydyoi  18,   147. To  the  curses  add:  der

tiuvel  neme  1  Herb.  6178 ;  daz  si  der  tievel  alle  erslft  1  Archipo.
p.  283 ;  our  '  zum  teufel  I '  conf.  '  woher  zum  t  ?  '  Eulensp.  c.
78 ;  louf  zu  dem  t.,  wa  du  wilt  89.  Like  our  '  red  beard,  devil's
weird'  is  the  phrase :  'dieser^*«,  der  auch  euer  hammer  ist,'
Raumer's  Hohenst.  2,   114  fr.  Hahn's  Mon.  1,  122.     The  devil


DEVIL.  1609

laughs  to  see  evil  done^  hence  :  des  mao  der  tiavel  lachen,  Helbl.
4f,  447  (Sappl.  to  323  end) ;  'you  make  the  devil  laugh  with  year
lies/  Garg.  192».

p.  1015.]  The  devil  'over-comes  us  '  like  a  nightmare.  In  a
tale  of  the  10th  cent.^  he  calling  himself  NUliart  joins  the  histrio
VoUarc,  invites  and  entertains  him  and  his  fellows,  and  dismisses
tbem  with  presents,  which  turn  out  to  be  cobwebs  the  next
morning,  Hpt  7,  523.  Strengthening  a  negaUve  by  the  word
'  devil ' :  den  teufel  nichts  deugen,  Eliz.  of  Orl.  447 ;  der  den
ta/el  nützschit  (nihtes  7)  kan,  Ls.  2,  311;  conf.  'hvaSa  Offlne
l&tum  ? '  (Suppl.  to  145  n.) ;  our  *  the  devil  (nothing)  do  I  know ; '
^eit/fefe  wenig,  Ph.  v.  Sittew.  Soldatenl.  p.  191,  our 'verteufelt
wenig.'  Does '  das  hat  den  teufel  gesehen  ^  in  Lessing  2,  479  mean
'  seen  nobody '  or  '  that  is  terrible '  ?  Weldier  teufel  (  =  who  ?),
Berth,  ed.  Gröbel  2,  11.  With  'drink  you  and  the  devil  I '  conf.
'  heft  hu  de  duvel  dronken  ghemakt  ? '  Rose  13166.  With  '  the  d.
.  first  and  God  after  *  agrees  :  in  beschirmet  (him  protects  neither)
der  tiuvel  noch  Oot,  Iw.  4635.

p.  1016.]  The  Jewish  view  of  possession  may  be  gathered  fr.
Matth.  12,  42 — 45;  other  passages  and  an  Egyp.  fragment  are
coll.  in  Mannhdt's  Ztschr.  4,  256 — 9.  Possessed  by  devils  is  in
Goth,  anahahaidans  (fr.  haban)  fram  ahmam  unhrainjaim,  Luke  6,
18 ;  MHG.  ein  hehefi  man,  demoniac,  Uolr.  1348;  behaft,  Diemer
324,  25.  Servat.  2284;  ob  it  beheftet  bist,  MS.  2,  b^ ;  beheftete
lute,  Myst.  1,  135.  147;  ein  behefter  mensch,  Benn.  15664-85.
5906;  sint  mit  dem  tievel  haft,  MS.  2,  82^;  mit  dem  übelen
geiste  behaß,  Warn.  850;   der  tievel   ist  in  dir  gehaft,  Ecke

123;  tiufelhafte  diet  (folk),  Bari.  401,  25. We  say  behaftet  or

besessen :  mit  dem  tiuvel  wart  er  besezzen,  Ksrchr.  13169 ;  der
tivel  hat  in  besezzen,  Warn.  344;  obsesstuf  a  daemone,  Böhm.
Font.  2,  323;  tiuvel-unnnie,  Servat.  783;  tiuveUsiihtic  1079;
gevangen  mit  dem  tiuvel,  Fragm.  36^ ;  des  boten  ich  zuo's  wirtes
maget  mit  werten  h&n  gebunden,  MS.  2, 11*;  die  den  viant  hebben
in,  Maerl.  3,  234.  ON.  )>&  hefir  diofulinn  t  >inni  hendi,  Vilk.  s.
511,  i.e.  he  makes  thy  hand  so  strong;  daz  iuwer  der  t.  mäeze
pflegen  (tend)  I  Herb.  2262 ;  der  t.  mneze  in  walden  9747 ;  daz
iuwer  der  t.  walde  14923.  18331 ;  der  t.  müeze  walden  iuwer
nntriuwe  16981;  var  in  einen  rostüschaer,  Helbl.  7,  744;  va/rt
in  ein  gerihte,  sliefet  in  den  rihtaere  7,  750. A  devil  says :


1610  DBVEC.

sine  at  inirem  in  carpus  tuum,  Caes.  Heisterb.  10,  11 ;  an  eTil
spirit,  whom  the  priest  bids  depart  oat  of  a  woman  (jr  1463),
asks  leave  to  pass  iiUo  others,  whom  he  names,  M.  Beh.  276-7 ;
hem  voer  die  davel  inH  lif  (body),  Maerl.  2,  293;  der  tiavel  var
im  an  die  »wart,  Helbl.  15,  434;  reht  als  waere  gesezzen  der
tavel  in  daz  herze  An,  Dietr.  dr.  117*;  en  scholden  dre  soren
davel  darum  bestan,  Eantzow  2,  351 ;  na  friz  in  dich  den  tiofel

der  dSn  saochet,  MS.  2,  135*». 'The  d.  looks  oat  of  her  eyes/

H.  Sachs  1,  450*;  der  t.  aas  dir  Jcilt,  EeU.  Erz.  327,  15,  kal  328,
23  (and  the  reverse :  Got  dz  ir  jangen  mnnde  sprach,  Parz.  396,
19) ;  der  t.  ist  in  dir  gehaft,  der  fiht  4z  dinem  libe,  Bckenl.  123.
Devils  in  the  body  are  like  the  narren  (fools)  inside  a  sick  man,
who  are  cat  out  as  the  devils  are  cast  ont.  The  devil  is  driven
oat  throagh  the  nose  with  a  ring,  Joseph.  Antiq.  8, 2.  5.  Diseases
wait  for  the  patient  to  open  his  mouth  before  they  can  pass  oat,
Helbl.  7,  101.  Mit  dem  Bötten  eurieren,  adjuvante  diabolo  aegros
sanare,  Leipz.  avantnr.  1,  271.  Yirtaes  also  pass  in  and  oat,
Helbl.  7,  65.102.  113.

p.  1017.]  As  the  gods  diffase  fra>granc£,  legends  medieval  and
modem  charge  the  devil  with  defiling  and  changing  things  into
muck  and  mire  :  der  tiavel  schize  in  in  den  kragen  I  Helbl.  5,
107  ;  Sathanae  pot^mora  petes,  Probra  mal.  220;  welcher  t.  ans
mit  den  Heiden  hete  beschizen,  Morolt  3014;  der  t.  laafc  n.
Iwfiert  zugleich,  Simpl.  1 78 ;  cacat  monstra,  Reinard.  4,  780 ;  die
seind  des  teufeis  letzter  furz,  Rathschlag  in  Parnasso  (1621  4to,

p.  33). The  devil  lies  and  cheats:  der  truge-tievel  (p.  464),

conf.  'dringr  var  Loptr  sX  liuga,  Sn.  '48.  1,  29;  ein  tiavel  der
hiez  Oggewedel,  der  ie  die  ersten  lüge  vant,  MS.  2,  250^ ;  dem  t.
ans  bein  lügen,  Bother  3137.  He  is  called  Mes  nidis  v(Uir
Lucifer,'  Diemer  94,  20.

p.  1019.]  Making  a  cooenant  with  the  devil,  Keisersb.  Omeiss
36-8 ;  he  bites  a  finger  of  the  witch's  left  hand,  and  with  the
blood  she  signs  herself  away;  or  he  smites  her  on  the  face,
making  the  nose  bleed,  Mone's  Anz.  8,  124-5.  The  devil's  mark
(p.  1077) ;  hantveste  (bond),  d&mide  uns  der  dnvil  woldi  bihaldin,
Wemh.  V.  N.  61,  33.  He .  will  make  his  servant  rich,  but  re-
quires him  to  renounce  Qod  and  8t,  Mary,  Ls.  3,  256-7.  An  old
story  told  by  the  monachus  Sangall.  (bef.  887)  in  Pertz  2,  742 :
Diabolns  cuidam  pauperculo  ....  in  humana  se  obviam  tulit


DEVIL.  1611

specie^  pollicitus  Don  mediocriter  illam  esse  ditandum,  si  sod  etatin
vinculo  in  perpetuum  sihi  delegisset  adnecti.  A  similar  story  in
Thietmar  4,  44  speaks  of  prope  jacere  aad  aervire.  One  has  to
abjure  Ood  and  all  the  saints;  the  d.  comes  and  gives  the  oaih,
Hexenproc.  aas  Ursenthal  p.  244-6.  Boaz  hat  beidiu  sdle  and
leben  einem  tievel  geben,  der  taot  durch  in  wanders  vil,  er  füeget
im  allez  daz  er  wil,  Wigal.  8656-9.  7321—6;  when  R.  dies,  the
devils  come  and  fetch  him  8186.  Giving  oneself  to  the  d.  for
riches.  Berth,  ed.  Oöbel  2,  41 ;  wil  er  Oot  verkiesen  nnde  die  s61e
Verliesen,  der  tübel  hilfet  ime  derzao,  daz  er  sp&te  und  fruo  tuon

mac  besuoder  vil  manicfalden  wunder,  Alex.  2837. Kissing  the

devil  (pp.  1065  last  1.,  1067  last  1.,  1071)  ;  dich  en-vride  der  tievel
(unless  the  d.  shield  thee),  du-ne  kanst  niht  genesen,  Nib.  1988, 2.
The  d.  fetches  his  own,  as  OSinn  or  Thdrr  takes  his  share  of  souls  :
der  hel- Scherge  die  sinen  an  sieh  las  (gathered  his  own  nnto
him).  Loh.  70.  The  child  v/nbam  is  promised  to  the  d.  (p.  1025),
Altd.  bl.  1,296-7,  as  formerly  to  OSinn:  gafu  Offni,  Pornm,
sog.  2,  168;  conf.  gefinn  OÖni  sialfr  sialfum  mer,  Saem.  27^.
With  Bearskin  conf.  the  ON.  biam-olpu-maSr,  Kormakss.  p.  114 ;
the  Hung,  bearskin.  Hangar,  in  parab.  p.  90-1 ;  Yölundr  sat  &
berßalli,  Seam,  135*;  lying  on  the  bearskin,  Schweinich.  2,  14;
wrapping  oneself  in  a  bear's  hide,  KM.  no.  85 ;  getting  sewed  up
in  a  bearskin,  Eliz.  of  Orl.  295.

One  who  is  on  good  terms,  or  in  leagne,  with  the  devil,  is
called  devil's  comrade,  partner,  fellow:  valantes  man,  Bol.  216,
7 ;  des  tiveles  higen  156,  4 ;  der  tiuvels  bote,  Hpt.  6,  501  ;  t.  kneht,
Iw.  6338.  6772;  ein  tubels  knabe,  Pass.  172,  59.  175,  16.  296,
27;  oar  ' teufels-kind,'  reprobate;  filii  Tiufelonis  habent  Tiufels-
grub,  MB.  12,  85-7;  Morolt  des  tiuvels  kint,  Mor.  2762;  wftren
ie  des  tivels  kint.  Trist.  226,  18.  The  polecat,  Lith.  szeszkas,  is
called  devirs  child,  becanse  of  its  smell  ?  iltisbalg  (fitchet-skin)
is  an  insulting  epithet  Helle-kint,  Griesh.  2,  81 ;  des  tiuvels
genoz.  Trist.  285,  29 ;  slaefestu,  des  t.  gelit  (lith,  limb)?  Pass.  377,
25;  alle  des  tievels  lide,  Hpt  8,  169;  membrvm  diaboli,  Ch.  yr
1311  in  Hildebrand's  Svenskt  dipl.  no.  1789  p.  15  (p.  997).
What  does  diivelskuker  mean  ?     Seibertz  1,  631.

p.  1024.]  The  devil  has  in  many  cases  taken  the  place  of  the
old  giants  (pp.  1000,  1024) ;  so  the  Finn,  hiisi  gradually  deve-
loped into  a  devil.     One  Mecklenbg  witch-story  in  Lisch  5^  83


1613  DEVIL.

still  retains  the  giant  where  others  have  the  devil ;  conf.  KM.'  3,
206-7.  The  devil  that  in  many  fairy-tales  appears  at  midnight
to  the  lone  watcher  in  a  deserted  castle^  reminds  one  of  Grendel,

whom   Beownlf  bearded  in  HeoroL The  devil  mimics  God,

wants  to  create  like  Him  :  he  makes  the  goat,  KM.  no.  148,  and
the  magpie^  Serb,  march,  no.  18;  conf.  March,  of  Bakovina  in
WolPs  Ztschr.  1,  179.  180.  He  builds  Bern  in  three  nighte,
Pref •  to  Heldenb.  Where  a  church  is  built  to  God,  the  d.  sets
up  his  chapel  hard  by :  in  the  play  of  Caterina,  Lucifer  cries  to
the  devilSy  '  habet  Ach  daz  kapellidien  vor  den  greten^*  ad  gradns
ecclesiae,  Stephan  p.  172.  In  tales  of  the  ehurch^building  devil
they  make  a  wolf  run  through  the  door ;  conf  a  song  in  TJhland's
Volksl.p.  812  and  the  story  of  Wolfgang  in  M.  Koch's  Beise413.

S  war  just  ein  neu-gebautes  nest,
der  erste  bewohner  sollt'  es  taufen ;
aber  wie  fängt  er's  an  ?  er  lässt
weislich  den  pudel  voran  erst  laufen.

Wallenstein's  Camp,  p.m.  38.

Mephistopheles  hates  bells,  Faust  p.m.  438.  Tales  of  deviPf
bridges  in  MüUenh.  p.  274-5 ;  such  a  one  is  also  called  '  die
stiebende  brücke/  Geschichtsf.,  heft  7  p.  36.

There  is  a  deviVs  stone  near  Polchow  in  Stettin  district,  on
which  the  d.  takes  his  noonday  nap  on  Midsum.  day  ;  it  becomes
as  soft  as  cheese  then,  and  the  evil  one  has  left  the  print  of  his
limbs  on  the  flat  surface,  Bait.  stud.  xi.  2,  191.  zii.  1,  110.  A
devil's  chamber  lies  between  Haaren  and  Büren  (Paderborn).
Devü's  kitchens,  Leoprechting  112-3-7.  A  field  named  teufeU-
riltti,  Weisth.  1,  72.  The  Boman  fortifications  in  Central  and
S.  Germany  are  also  called  pfaUliecke,  pfal-rain,  pfaUranke;
Er.  Alberus  fab.  25  has  poUgraben,  Jaum.  Sumloc  p.  17;  die  boU,
poU-graben,  conf.  the  iron  pohl,  Steiner's  Main-gebiet  277-8;
bulweg,  ibid. ;  vml,  wulch  in  Yilmar's  Idiot.  102,  conf.  art.  PfaM-

maver  in  Hall,  encyclop. It  seems  these  Boman  walls  were  not

always  of  stone  or  brick,  but  sometimes  of  pßüe  (stakes)  :  Spar-
tian,  as  quoted  by  Stalin,  speaks  of  '  stipiiibus  magnis  in  modom
muralis  sepis  funditus  jactis  et  connexis ' ;  and  Moneys  Bad.
gesch.  2,  5  mentions  '  pali,'  our  pfcUe,  Near  the  Teufels-mauer
is  situated  a  Pfahls-buck,  Panz.  1,  156,  and  in  the  Wetteraaa


DBVIL.  1613

pohUhom  (Ukerfc  p.  281),  just  like  Pholes-brunvo  (p.  226). Oa

the  other  hand  the  devil's  wall  is  not  only  called  schwein-graben,
bat  also  sau-strasse,  Stalin  1,  81-5.  97.  Ukert  p.  279  ;  and  if
the  former  is  said  to  have  been  'thrown  up  by  a  gockel-hahn
(cock)  and  a  sehwein/  it  puts  us  in  mind  of  the  boar  that  roots
up  earth,  and  bells  out  of  the  earth,  Firmen.  2,  148 ;  oonf.  supra
(pp.  666.  996)  and  the  ploughing  cock  (p.  977).  '  In  beren-loch,
daz  man  nempt  des  tufels  graben,*  Segesser  1,  645.  On  a  giant's
wall  in  Mecklenbg  lies  a  teufels  bach-ofen  (Ukert  p.  314),  just
as  the  people  call  grave-mounds  'baker's  ovens,'  ibid.  p.  280.
Other  places  named  after  the  devil  in  Mone's  Anz.  6,  231.

p.  1024.]  'Devil  take  the  hindmost  I*  Garg.  190^  conf.
sacrificing  the  last  man  to  Mars  227*.  So  the  vila  consecrates
12  pupils  on  vrzino  kolo,  and  the  twelfth  or  last  faUs  due  to
her,  Vuk  sub  v.  vrzino  kolo  (Suppl.  to  986  end).  The  same  with
the  12  scholars  at  Wunsiedel,  Schönw.  3,  56,  and  the  student
of  Plesse  3,  26.     Again  :  '  w&  sit  ir  ze  schuole  gewesen  f  hat  iu

der  tufel  vorgelesen  ? '  lectured  to  you,  Dietr.  dr.  157^. The

devil's  taking  the  shadow  reminds  us  of  the  schatten-bufize
(shadow-penance)  in  German  law.  The  Indian  gods  cast  no
shadow,  which  is  as  it  were  the  soul  of  a  man.  Klemm  2,  309.
Catching  the  shadow  is  also  Wallachian,  Schuller's  Arg^sch  17.
Miillenh.  p.  554.  Winther's  folke  eventyr  p.  18.  Icel.  story  of
SaBmund,  Aefintyri  p.  34-5.  Chamisso's  legend  is  known  in
Spain:  'hombre  que  vendi6  su  sombra,'  Mila  y  Fontals  188.

p.  1028.]  The  hushing  of  the  child  in  the  legend  of  Kallund.
borg  church  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  giant's  child  (p.  548).
Similar  stories  in  Schönwerth  3, 61.  Miillenh.  p.  300-1.  A  cock
that  is  carried  past,  crows  and  puts  the  devil  out  in  his  building,
Sommer  p.  53.  Schönw.  3,  60.  Disappearance  takes  place  after
thrice  clapping  the  hands,  Dybeck  4,  32  (nos.  31  and  33).  With
the  story  of  '  self  done,  self  have,*  conf.  p.  450-1  n. ;  the  tale  of
the  water-nix  and  Selver-gedan,  Hpt  4,  393  ;  the  Engadine  story
of  the  diala  and  the  svess,  Schreiber's  Taschenb.  4,  306.  Yonbun
pp.  5,  6  (ed.  2  p.  8) ;  the  Lapl.  story  of  giant  Stalle,  Nilsson  4,
32 ;  and  the  Norse  one  of  Egil,  ibid.  4,  33.  Miill.  Sagenb.  2,
612.

p.  1029.]  The  division  of  crops  between  the  peasant  and  the
devil  is  also  in  Miillenh.  p.  278.     '  To  raise  com  and  turnip '  is

VOL,   IV.  z


1614  IfAGIC.

the  formula  of  ag^caltnre :  '  ry)?ia  nndir  mghi  ok  rovum/  rye
and  turnips,  östgöt.  lagh  pp.  217.  220.

p.  1029.]  The  dragonfly  is  called  devil's  hoi-se  :  Finn,  pirutn
hsvoinen  =  dwBmonis  eqnus,  pirum  |7UÄ(a  =  daemonis  ancilla.  A
priest^s  wife  is  the  devil's  brood-mare,  App.  Spell,  xxxiv.  Nethl.
duivePS'Jcop  (-head)  =  typha,  our  tuttil-kolbe,  deutel-kolbe.
Teufels-rohr,  conf,  Walth.  33,  8.  Devil's  thread  is  ace.  to  Vilmar
the  cnscnta  epilinum,  called  rang  in  the  Westerwald.  A  farm
named  duoel-Ütes  guiol,  Seibertz  391  (1280).


CHAPTER  XXXIV,

MAGIC.

p.  1031.]  Got  wunderaere,  Gerh.  4047 ;  Got,  da  w.,  Ad.  t.
Nassau  230;  Got  ist  ein  u;.,  Helmbr.  1639;  Krist  u;.,  Walth.  5,
35 ;  Got  wundert,  Engelh.  455.  491.

NA  möhte  iuch  nemen  wunder,

waz  göte  w&ren  bi  der  ztt  ?

si  w&ren  liute,  als  ir  nu  sit,

wan  daz  ir  krefteclich  gewalt

was  michel  unde  manecvalt

von  kriutern  und  von  steinen. — Troj.  kr.  858.

(what  were  gods  in  those  days  ?  Men  like  you,  except  that  their
power  over  herbs  and  stones  was  much).  All  gods  are  magidantf
ibid.  859 — 911 ;  Terramer  calls  Jesus  a  magieian,  Wh.  357,  23 :
Thorns  image  speaks,  walks  and  fights,  but  by  the  devil's  agency,
Fomm.  sog.  1,  302 — 6 ;  a  statue  of  Freyr  gets  off  the  chariot  and
wrestles  2,  73-5 ;  tiuvels  wonent  darinne  (inside  them),  Bol.  27,

8. The  gral  makes  men  magic-proof  even  to  the  fifth  of  kin  :

die  edel  fruht  vom  gr&Ie,  unz  an  die  fünften  sippe  keines  zoubers
str&le  traf  in  weder  rucke,  houbt  noch  rippe.  Tit.  2414.  Mathe-
matici  are  classed  among  magicians ;  thus  Cod.  ix.  tit.  18  treats
'  de  maleficis  et  mathematicis' ;  mathematicns  =  himil*scowari,
stargazer.  Dint  1,  505*;  math.  =  tungel-witega,  steor-gleaw,
Hpt^s  Ztschr.  9,  467^ ;  vaticinatores  et  mathematici,  qui  se  Deo
plenos  adsimulant^  JuL  Pauli  sentent.  5,  21.


MAGIC.  1615

p.  1034.]  The  bad  is  the  not  right :  es  geht  nicht  mit  rechten
dingen  za;  ^das  ich  solcher  frawen  sei,  die  mit  boaen  stitcken
umbgen/  Bodmer's  Rheing.  424»  (yr  1511).  ON.  fordceffu-skapr,
/«n-rfrcdVi-rerÄ  (misdoing)  =venef5cium; /ordö/j-wipr,  Gutalag  77;
fordceßa,  Östg.  lag  225.  AS.  män-fordoedlan  =^m&le&ci,  Beow.
1120.  61.  to  Lex  1  §  2.  Dig.  de  obseq.  par.  (indignus  militia
^udicandus  est  qui  patrem  et  matrem  maleficos  appellaverit)  :  hoc

est  qui  matrem  dixerit  affactoratiicem, OHG.  zoupar,  Graflf  5,

580-1-2.  MHG.  den  selben  zouber,  Hartm.  büchl.  1,  1347,  daz
zouber  1818.  Daz  z.  =  magic  potion:  mir  ist  zouber  gegeben,
Herb.  758,  and  :  Circe  künde  trenke  geben,  salich  zouber,  solche
spise  17681.  M.  Lat.  zobria  f.,  Moneys  Anz.  7,  424;  mit  zouber
varn,  MS.  1,  73^.  Cariously  in  the  Dresd.  Wolfdietr.  162 :  kein
z.  dir  kan  gewinhen  (rhy.  trinken) ;  tover  en  ontfoerdene  mi,
Karel  1,  1469 ;  si  zigen  in  zouberltcher  dinge.  Trist.  272,  2 ;
zouber-liste,  Eracl.   1062 ;  zouberliate  tragen,  MS.  1,  78^  z.  hkn

99^ ^TJmme-gan  (go  abont,  meddle)  mit  toverye  und  wyckerie,

Barmeister^s  Alterth.  25  (yr  1417) ;  tovem  u.  wykken,  ibid. ;
wifken,  Bruns  Beitr.  337 ;  wickerie,  bote,  udchelie,  Gefken's  Beil.
141,  ioverie,  wickerie  124.  Welsh  gwiddan^  witch.  OHG.  wichoa
saltare,  gesticulari,  Graff  1,  708 ;  conf.  Hpt  3,  92.  AS.  hweoler=
augor,  fugle  hweoler,  fr.  hweol,  wheel.  Lett,  deewaredsis  who  sees
God  and  discovers  hidden  things,  conf.  devins  (p.  471).  Batt-
mann  2,  256  derives  xpao»,  I  divine,  fr.  grabbing,  grasping ;  conf.

Gnpir  (p.  471). Weut-hexen,  Gryph.  Domrose  90,  27;  wiza-

nunc,  divinatio,  xvizzigo,  vates.  Gl.  Sletst.  6,  699;  ein  wizzag
gewaere,  MS.  2,  189^;  vitka  lihi  fara,  Saam.  63*;  Engl,  wizard.
ON.  gan,  'magia,'  Biörn ;  but  4nconsultus  gestus,'  Nialss.  p.  683*.
AS.  At(;a<a=omina,  divinationes.  Can.  £dg.  16  (Suppl.  to  1107
beg.) .  Lat.  veratrix,  soothsayer,  sorceress  ;  verare,  to  say  sooth,
conf.  veratrum,  hellebore.  Lith.  ijoardyti,  to  work  magic.  ON.
satt  eitt  sagSak,  I  said  a  sooth.  Seam.  226^.  OHG.  war-secco,
divinator;  der  Wahrsager  tut  mir  waraagen,  H.  Sachs  ii.  4,  12*^,
unser  w,  13^  the  one  who  practises  in  our  village,  as  among
Finns  and  Lapps,  Suomi  '46,  p.  97-8.  Fara  til  fiMkunnigra  Finna,
Fornm.  s.  2,  167;  kynga,  magica,  Laxd.  328;  in  Cavall.  Voc.
verl.  38*  kyng,  sickness.  Leikur,  witches,  yersiformes,  Grdttas.
11.  Betw.  Lauterbach  and  Grebenau  a  divineress  was  called^
hW  kend,  a  blue  child.


1616  MAGIO.

p.  1037.]  Spoken  magic,  spell,  is  in  MHG.  gahter,  Lanz.
7011 ;  mit  galster-liste,  Fundgr.  2,  100;  gaUtem,  Staid.  1,  417.
Garminatar,  carminatria^,  MB.  16,  242  (yr  1491).  Vermeinen,
bewitch,  Schm.  2,  587;  vermaynen  ad  ocalos,  denies,  Mone's
Anz.  7,  423;  verschiren,  fascinare.  Dint.  2,  214*»;  verschiereHj
beswögen,  MüUenh.  p.  560 ;  verruodien  n.  vermeinen,  Gres.  Abent
3,  78 ;  homines  magieis  artihus  dementai'e,  Lamb.  p.  214  (yr  1074).
Kilian  has  ungheren,  work  magic,  unghers,  maleficas,  ungher-hoere,
malefic»,  unghers  eyeren  volva,  q.  d.  maninm  sive  cacodaemonain
ova.  Van  den  Bergh  p.  58  has  Fris.  tjoenders  en  tjoensters,  wizard
and  witch.     Ougpente,  fascinatione.  Gl.  Sletst.  25,  149.

ON.  seifr,  magic :  Gannhildr  lÄt  seiS  efla,  Egilss.  403 ;  m^-
stadr  or  -stafr,  Laxd.  828 ;  conf.  Lapp,  »eita,  Ca8tr6n's  Mn.
207-8.     Boiling  of  herbs  (p.  1089),  of  stockings  (p.  1093).

MHG.  die  huoze  versnoche«,  try  remedies,  charms,  Morolf
916;  sühte  büezen,  heal  sickness,  Preid.  163,  16 ;  de  tene  Mte»,
cure  toothache,  Hpt  3,  92;  boeten,  Gefken*s  Beil.  151.  167;
boterie  124.  175-7;  zanzeln,  work  magic,  Mielcke  36*.

Lupperie,  Gefk.  Beil.  109.  112;  lächente,  Troj.  kr.  27.  234;
laclhenaere  27240,  conf.  963 ;  stria  aut  herbaria,  Lex  Alam.  add.
22.

ON.  bölvisar  konor,  witches,  Ssem.  197^  (p.  988) ;  frceaiy
seien tia,  esp.  magia  nigra  (suppl.  to  1044).

Nethl.  terms  for  sorceress,  witch  :  nacht-loapster  (-rover),  ir^^-
inakster,  weather- maker,  luister-vink,  matterer  in  secret,  grote  hol,
great  horse ;  op  hol  rijden,  work  magic.  Weiland  sub  v.  kol;  in
ma  anwot  sein,  be  bewitched.  Wolf's  Ztschr.  2,  54.  Necroman-
ticus  habebat  cucuUom  ac  tunicam  de  pilut  cftprarum,  Greg.  Tar.
9,  6 ;  conf.  indutns  pellibus  10,  25.

The  AS.  dry,  magus,  comes  not  fr.  Spv<i,  oak  (p.  1215  end),
but  fr.  Jr.  draoi,  with  a  pi.  draoithe,  of  which  the  Romans  made
druidoB,  Leo's  Malb.  gl.  1,  23.  Davies  in  Celt.  res.  had  derived
it  fr.  Wei.  derwydd.  Spells  were  read  out  of  a  book  :  sin  zouber
las,  Pass.  171,  25;  ein  pfaffe  der  wol  zouber  Uis,  Parz.  66,  4;
'  ich  h&n  von  allem  dem  gelesen  daz  ie  gefloz  n.  geflouc '  says  the
soothsayer,  Troj.  kr.  19057;  in  den  swarzen  buochen  lesen,
Ksrchr.  13234.     Finn,  lukia,  to  read,  but  in  the  Ilnnes  always  to

conjure,  Castr.  Pref.  p.  x. Ze  Dolet  ich  niht  lernen  wfl  von

der  nigromanzle,  MS.  2,  63*» ;  zu   Toletum  die  ars  necromantica


MAGIC.  1617

lernen^  Cass.  Heisterb.  5,  4,  conf.  JabinaPs  Mysteres  1^  396 ;
noch  80  lernet  man  die  list  in  einer  stat  zuo  Tolet,  din  in  His-
panten  stdt.  Herb.  562,  conf.  Fromm,  p.  225  and  ze  Dolet  (p.  1048
b^gO  ;  ein  stat  heizet  Persida,  dk  firste  zoaber  wart  erdaht,  Parz.
657,  28.  The  travelling  scholars  roam  fr.  school  to  school,  and
learn  black  art,  H.  Sachs  ii.  4,  19^;  conf.  devil's  pupils,  disciples
(p.  1024).  Oain  ISrte  siniu  chint  (taaght  his  children)  dei  zoaber
dei  hiute  sint,  Dint  8,  59.

p.  1088.]  MHO.  /tezdn=angurari:  stille  {{ezen.  Er.  8687;  ich
kan  vliegen  n.  verliezen,  MS.  1,  89* ;  sahs-luzzo,  magus,  Hattemer
1,  259^.  Zouberse  too  is  sortilega,  Wolf's  Ztschr.  2,  72  ;  kanstu
von  zouber  meisterschafb,  die  wirf  an  sie  (throw  it  on  her),
Laurin  1675.  With  Swed.  tjusa  to  conjure,  conf.  Dan.  hyse,
terrere.  Burt  =:  sortilegium,  burten,  conjure,  divine,  Gefken  99  ;
conf.  Lith  burtas  lot,  burti  prophesy,  bwrtininkas  lot-C€kster,  and
Lett,  hurt  witches,  burtneks  sorcerer.  The  lot  speaks  :  '  al  dar-
nach daz  loz  geseit ;  seit  ez  tool,  misse-seit  ez,'  as  the  lot  shall  say,

yea  or  nay,  MS.  1,  156*. Gougulares  list,  0.  iv.  16,  38;  caucu-

fare,  magus,  Hpt  3,  382 ;  mit  goucgeles  liste,  Fundgr.  2,  99,
gotAcgelare  list  99.  100 ;  de  goucheläre,  MB.  8,  482 ;  ein  goukel,
Eracl.  1110;  gohelt  onder  den  hoet,  Ferg.  2772 ;  under  'm  huot
gaukeln,  Suchenw.  29,  45.  May  we  take  it  as  conn,  with  gouch,
gowk,  cuckoo?  the  Dan.  for  gowk  and  conjure  are  gjög  and
gojgle,  but  the  OHG.  kouh  and  koukalon.  Frdre  Barbarin  in
Flores  practises  sleight-of-hand,  and  is  called  encanteor,  ON.
sum-hverßngar =j)rBest\gis,e,  Sn.  79;  AS.  gedwimor,  gedwymor=z
fantasma,  praestigium.

There  is  an  old  word,  OHG.  hliodar,  AS.  hleofor^sonvLQ,  vati-
cinium,  ON.  hlioff  merely  sonus;  OHG.  hleodar-sdzo  hariolus,
necromanticas,  hleodar-sizzeo,  hleodar-sezzo  ariolus,  hleodar-saza
vaticinium,  Graff  6,  802-4;  lioder-saza,  Hattemer  1,  261;  in
cervulo  =  in  lioder-saza  ,  coragins  =  Ztodir-sdzo,  GL  Sletst.  23,  3.  8;
conf.  Superst.  A ;  the  diviner  then  sits  in  a  chair  7  The  sahs'
Inzzo,  magus,  Graff  6,  91.  2,  822,  appar.  divines  with  a  knife  or
sword.

p.  1039.]  Magic  is  ascribed  chiefly  to  women.  Priestesses,
prophetesses,  were  old,  grey-haired  (p.  96-7) :  Sibylla  '  saz  antfas
(unkempt)  an  irme  bete-hfts,'  Eu.  2694 ;  groz  n.  gra  was  ir  daz
liar,  u.  harte  verworren  (taugled)  als  eines  pferdes  mane  2698 ;


1618  MAGIC.

daz  mies  lokehte  bienc  ir  üz  den  dren  2708.  Neapol.  sdrpvu
bratta  strega^  fr.  scirpus^  a  kind  of  rush.  A  xDunder'oliez  w!p
interprets  the  dream  npon  her  oath^  Walth.  95,  8 ;  vielle  sortiert,
Meon  3^  159;  a  soothsaying /o^^^-mod^i  Arvidss.  2,  5;  kerltifuj'i
villa,  Saam.  169;  alter  vnbe  troumei  Türl.  Wh.  82»;  'a  deril-
ridden  root-delver,  spelUspeaker^  and  wizzened  old  herb-hnnter,'
Grarg.  189^.  Ir.  cailleach  means  a  veiled  woman,  old  woman,
witch. Herdsmen  too  are  sorcerers :  '  for,  you  see,  we  shep-
herds, cat  off  from  the  world,  have  oar  thoaghts  aboat  many
things  while  the  silly  sheep  are  grazing/  Yoss's  Idyls  9,  49.

p.  1041.]  £r6^i/m6  =  eamenide8,  Aö^ft^^striga,  61.  Jan.  378,
381;  /lazztaa  =  eamenides^  Gl.  Sletst.  6,  273;  haghetissen,  Br.
Gheraert  717,  conf.  /t^zo^un  =:palaestritae,  Graff  4,  1073.  Hage-
(Zme= lizard  (0H6.  eg^dehsa),  Gemmnla  Antwerp,  in  Hoffra.
Horae  Belg.  7;  in  the  Ring  210-1  it  is  called  häxe,  219  both  hcue
and  anhold.  Is  the  Lith.  hekszl,  harlot,  formed  fr.  hexe,  a.<
keksztas  fr.  heher,  a  jay  ?  In  the  Bing  p.  230  a  witch  is  called
nächel,  sorceress ;  conf.  '  hägili,  Bt&  I '  stay,  little  witch,  57.  The
Swiss  luigsne  =  hexe  (Staid.  2,  10)  may  hark  back  to  OHG.  hah-
sinon  sabnervare  [hamstring,  cut  the  hächse,  hoagh] ,  for  a  witch
unnerves  (comedere  nervös,  p.  1081  last  1.);  conf.  Fris.  hexna,
hoxna,  hoxne  =  poples.

p.  1042.]  OSinn  is  called  galdrsfoffr,  Saam.  94*.  The  Vilkina-
saga  names  a  sorceress  Ostacia,  who  learnt  magic  of  her  step-
mother (see  p.  1055).  Other  names  of  witches  in  Sk41dskap.
234.  A  sorceress  is  a  vala  or  völva :  seiff-siadr  mikill,  jidttast
menu  )>&  vita,  at  ]?ar  mundi  verit  hafa  völu  lei9i  nockod  (sagae
tumulus),  Laxd.  p.  328.  She  is  also  called /ö^d*:  flögffk  HeilSar-
skög,  Fomm.  3,  122 ;  Nethl.  nacht-loopster,  groie  hoi  (Suppl.  to
1037  mid.) ;  conf.  roer9i  stn  gand, /or  at  seiSa,  Vilk.  saga  c.  328.

p.  1044.]  Gera  seiff-hiall  mikinn;  appar.  a  platform  to  hold  a
good  many :  )?au  foerdust  )>ar  ft  upp  oil  (all),  ];au  kvftiSa  ^arfrceffi
sin,  en  )?at  vorn  galdrar,  Laxd.  142.

p.  1045.]  For  masca,  the  Lomb.  Glosses  have  nasca,  Hpt's
Ztschr.  1,  556;  conf.  talamasca  (p.  915).  With  striga  connect
<rrpvy^  owl,  who  waylays  children,  and  is  kept  off  by  hawthorn,
Jv.  Fast.  6,  130 — 168;  arplyXa  in  Leo  AUatius;  ariyXo^  (7017?)
DC.  Another  word  for  mask  is  schem-bart,  Schm.  3,  362.
Oager's  Ulm  p.  526 :  nu  sitze  ich  als  ein  schempaH  tr&ric.  Renn


MAGIC.  1619

17998;    «cc»ia= larva,   Graff  6,  495-6;    LG.   scheme  m  Voss;
Nethl.  scheem,  scheme,  shadow;  conf.  scheine  in  FraaenL  174.

p.  1046.]  On  cherviohurgtLs,  see  Malb.  gl.  2,  153-4.  Miillen-
hoff  (ia  Waitz  p.  287,  and  Moneys  Anz.  8,  452)  compares  it  with
the  Kepvo<f>6po^  of  the  mysteries.  A  Tyrolese  legend  tells  of
roving  night-wives  and  their  cauldron,  Germania  2,  438.  In  onr
nursery-tales  tvitch  and  old  cook  are  the  same  thing,  KM.  no.  51.

Lisoh's  Meckl.  jrb.  5,  82. On  a  hill  or  mountain  named  kipnla,

or  kipivuori,  kipumaki,  kipuharja  (sorrow's  mount,  hill,  peak),
stands  Kivutar  before  a  cauldron  (kattila,  pata),  brewing  plagues.
In  Kalev.  25,  181,  is  mentioned  a  parti- coloured  milking-pail
(kippa),  182  a  copper  bushel  (vakka),  196  kattila.  Ace.  to
Ren  vail  a  witch  is  panetar,  panuiar.  A  butterfly  is  called  ketteU
böter  (-heater),  and  whey-stealer,  milk-thief  (p.  1072).

p.  1047.]  A  salt-work  is  a  sacred  gift  of  God,  and  protected
by  the  law  of  nations,  Bommel  8,  722.  Salt  is  laid  on  tables
and  altars :  sacras  facite  mensas  salinorum  appositu,  Amob.  2,
67 ;  salinum  est  patella,  in  qua  diis  primitiae  cum  sale  offere-
bantur.     Egyptians  hated  salt  and  the  sea;  their  priests  were

forbidden  to  set  salt  on  the  table,  Plut.  De  Iside  32. The

interchange  of  H  and  S  in  hal  and  sal  is,  ace.  to  Leo  (in  Hpt  5,
511),  syntactic  in  the  Celtic  tongues,  and  Gael,  sh  is  pron.  h,
Hallstadt  is  more  corr.  spelt  Hallstatt,  M.  Koch's  Reise  407.
Ssk.  «ara=:  salt.  Lat.  halec,  herring,  is  akin  to  aM,  salt,  GDS.
300  [So  SI.  seldt,  ON.  sild,  herring,  means  salt-water  fish ;  but
Teut.  haring^heer-Sach,  bee.  it  goes  in  hosts,  shoals,  Hehn's
Plants  and  Anim.  411].

p.  1050.]  Witches  eat  horseflesh,  WolPs  Ztschr.  2,  67.  The
pipe  at  the  dance  of  trolls  inside  the  hill  is  a  horse-bone,  Afzelius
2,  159;  conf.  a  Pruss.  story  in  N.  Preuss.  prov.  bl.  1,  229.

p.  1051.]  The  Witches'  Excursion  takes  place  on  the  first
night  in  May,  Lisch's  Meckl.  jrb.  5,  83.  Wolf's  Zts.  2,  68.
'  The  Esth.  witches  also  assemble  that  night,'  says  Possart  p.
161;  others  say  the  night  of  June  23-4,  i.e.  Midsum.  Eve.
'  They  ride  up  Blocksberg  on  the  first  of  May,  and  in  12  days
must  dance  the  snow  away  ;  then  Spring  begins,'  Kuhn  in  Hpt's
Zts.  5,  483.     Here  they  appear  as  elflike,  godlike  maids.

p.  1053.]  Witches'  Mountains  are:  the  Briickelsperg,  Wolfs
Zts.  I,   6;   several  Blocksbergs  in   Holstein,   Müllenh.  p.  564;


1620  MAGIO.

Brockenshurg,  Diitm.  Sassenrecht  159.  GDS.  582;  the  unhol-
denperg  near  Passau  oocars  already  in  MB.  28^  170.  465.  'At
the  end  of  the  Hilss,  as  thou  nearest  the  Dnier  (Doinger)  wood,
is  a  mountain  very  high  and  bare^  named  uf  den  bloszen  zellen,
whereon  it  is  given  out  that  witches  hold  their  dances  on  Wal-
pnrgis  night,  even  as  on  Mt  Brocken  in  the  Harz,'  Zeiler's
Topogr.  dacat.  Brnnsv.  et  Lnneb.  p.  97.  Betw.  Vorwalde  and
Wickensen  (Brunswk)  stands  the  witches'  mount  Elia».  Near
Brünighausen  is  Kuhesburg,  already  named  in  the  Hildesh.  dioces.
circumscr.,  oonf.  Liinzel  p.  31-8,  which  Orupen  calls  Kokeshurg,
named  after  the  devil's  kitchen.  Witches'  hills  in  Holstein,  and
their  trysts  in  N.  Friesland,  are  in  Miillenh.  no.  288-9.  A  witch-
mtn  near  Jiilchendorff,*  Mecklenbg,  Lisch  5,  83;  is  Koilberg
another?  Gefk.  Catal.  111.  In  Sommer  pp.  56.  174  the
Brocken  is  called  Olockersberg.  Similar  places  are  the  Franco-
nian  Pfetersbeiy  near  Marktbiirgel,  and  the  Alsatian  Büchelberg,
conf.  buhileeberc,  piickelsberg,  Graff  3,  135;  for  other  trysts  of
witches  in  Elsass,  see  Alsatia  '56,  p.  283.  Dwarfs  as  well  as
witches  haunt  the  Heuberg  or  Hoperg,  Ring  211 ;  witckes*  horses
flew  over  Hoperg  234.  In  Tirol  they  meet  on  the  Sehlemkofel,
Zingerle's  Hexenproc.  37;  seven  more  places  are  given  in  his

Sitten  32  and  Alpenburg  255.  262. In  Bleking  the  Swed.

trysting-place  is  called  Jungfru-kullen,  Wieselgr.  398;  in  fairy-
tales Bl&-kulla  or  Heckenjjell,  Cavallius  447-8.  The  vila  holds
her  dance  on  the  mountain-top  (vr),  vrzino  kolo;  there  also  she
initiates  her  pupils,  Vuk  sub  v.  vrzino  kolo.  ^iesogora  seu
Bloksbarch,*  Ceynowa  13,  exactly  translates  Kalenberg,  fr.  lysy
bald,  Linde  2,  1318-9.  Finn,  kipula  or  kippwmaki,  see  Peterson
p.  72-3  (Suppl.  to  1046).  In  Moravia  the  witches  meet  on  Mt
BddoSt,  a  Slavic  mont-joie,  Kulda.  In  Persia  another  name  for
Mt  Demavend  is  Ärezüra,  where  daevas  and  wizards  assemble,
Spiegel's  Avesta  2,  cxiv.

p.  1054.]  In  Vilk.  cap.  328  *  rcerdi  stn  gand '  seems  to  mean
'rode  into  the  air.'  There  is  a  dwarf  named  Oand-alfr^  Saom.  2*»,
and  a  valkyrja  Oöndul  (p.  421).  The  Hachel  rides  on  a  wolf,
Ring  230-7;  witches  fly  on  goats,  210-1.  Matth.  v.  Eemnat
names  unholde  and  na^chthusser  together ;  does  the  word  contain
thusse,  durse ?  In  Passion  4,. 85  it  says:  daz  ist  ein  ndki'Vole,
den  gnoter  werke  tages-lieht  \iX  gesehen  wdnec  iht.     The  Yatns-


MAQIO.  1621

dcBla  p.  106  cap.  26  thas  descr.  a  sorceress  and  her  extraordinary
tam-ont:  )?ar  fer  ]?ft  Inot,  ok  hefir  breitiliga  urn  sik  büit,  hun
hafSi  rekit  fotinnfram  yfir  hö/uÖÜ,  ok  for  öfug,  ok  retti  höfuSit
ut  a  milium  fotanna  aptr;  6fagurligt  var  hennar  augnabragd,
hversa  hun  gat  J?vl  tröUsliga  skotit.  Verlauff's  note  p.  107  says,
the  (old)  GaIl]H>ri8  saga  cap.  17  descr.  the  similar  figure  cat  by  a
sorceress,  to  dull  the  enemies'  weapons.

p.  1061.]  TrolUdances  descr.  in  Afzelius  2,  158-9.  A  remark-
able story  in  Lisch's  Meckl.  jrb.  5,  88  tells  of  a  giant  giving  a
feast  on  a  mountain,  and  thumblings  dancing  on  the  table  before
him;  the  rest  is  like  other  witch-stories.  H.  Sachs  v.  343'^
says  witches  hold  their  dances  and  weddings  on  a  great  beech-tree.
A  musician  comes  upon  a  witches'  dance,  and  has  to  play  to

them,  Firmen.  2,  383-4. AS.  niht-genge,  witch ;  conf.  naht-

egese,  naht-eise  (note  on  Andr.  xxxii);  ncu:ht-ridder8,  Br.  Gher.
715;  nacht'volk,  Vonbnn  p.  34-5.  WolPs  Zts.  2,  58;  glauben,
die  lute  des  nacktes  fam,  Gefk.  Beil.  24;  ON.  Natt-fari,  a  man's
name,  Landnam.  1,  1 ;  varende  vrauwen^^Yf itches,  Belg.  mns.  2,
116.  Br.  Gher.  717;  ausfajirerin,  Judas  erzsch.  2,  107;  naht-
frawe  in  Mono  8,  408  means  midwife ;  nacht^frala  is  the  plant
mirabilis  jalappa,  belle  de  nnit,  Castelli  205.  The  Thessalian
witches  also  fly  by  night :  4>aal  Se  avrifv  koX  vereadat  rrj^  vvkto^,
Lacian's  Asin.  1.  In  Servia  the  magicians  and  their  pupils
travel  with  the  yila.  The  unhuld  fetches  bottles  of  wine  out  of
cellars,  H.  Sachs  i.  5,  532^.  A  story  in  Pertz  2,  741  of  a  pilosus
who  fills  bottles.

p.  1061.]  Ddae  looks  like  AS.  dwaes,  fatuus;  but  in  Reinaert
7329  dosen,  insanire,  rhymes  with  verdwasen,  so  it  can  hardly  be
the  same  word  as  dwasen.  The  Gemm.  Antwerp,  (in  Hoffm.
Uor.  Belg.  7)  has  d<M0=peert8-7lieghe,  hornet,  and  in  the  Mark
they  still  speak  of  a  dasen-sehwarm,  Schmidt  v.  Wern.  276-7.
MHG.  '  daesic  hunt,'  Prauenl.  368,  2.  Heimdall  is  called  homßyt-
valdi,  Saam.  92^

p.  1064.]  Other  herb  and  flower  names  for  the  devil  and  for
witches  in  Wolf's  Zts.  2,  64.  Schöne  is  even  OHG. :  Scönea,  a
woman's  name.  Oräsle,  Kreutle,  Rosenkranz,  Keller's  Erz.  195.
The  elfvor  change  into  flowers  or  branches  by  day  (Suppl.  to  470
beg.).  Is  not  the  devil  also  called  Hagedorn,  like  the  minstrel
in  Berthold  56  ?     Is  Linden-tolde  (-top)  a  witch  ?     Ring  235.


1622  MAGIC.

The  devil  often  makes  a  handsome  figare :  daemon  adolesceniis
venusti  speciem  indaens^  Csds.  Heisterb.  5,  36 ;  hence  the  names
Frisch,  Spring-ins-feld,  Fledcr-wisch ,  Schlepp-hans  (yr  1597),
Thar,  mitth.  vi.  S,  68-9.  The  '  sieben  flederwische  (goosewing
dusters)*  are  witches,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  217;  aWer  fledeinoifche  u.
inaikäfer-ßiigel  gesandheit  (health) !  Franz.  Simpl.  1,  57.  49 ;
hinaas  mit  den  flederurUchen !  Ung.  apotheker  762.  Odier
names :  Zvcker,  Paperle.  Names  of  devils  in  the  Alsfeld  Passion-
play  are  coll.  in  Hpt.  3,  484 — 493.

p.  1069.]  Witches  take  an  oath  to  do  the  devil's  wiU;  see  in
Geschichtsfreund  6,  246  the  remarkable  confession  of  a  witch  of
Ursemthal  (yr  1459).  The  devil's  bride  sits  up  in  the  tree  with
her  '  kalt-samigen  stink-bräutgam,  Oarg.  72^;  devil  and  witch
hold  dance  and  wedding  on  trees  atid  houghs,  H.  Sachs  v.  343^.
In  records  even  of  the  12th  cent,  occur  such  surnames  as  *  Oscu-
lans  diabolum,  Basians  daemonem,  Demonem  osculans,  Bese
diable,*  Gu^rard's  Prolegom.   to  the  Cart,  de  Ghartres  p.  xciv.

What  does  '  osculans  acnionem '  there  mean  ? ^Tres  mulieres

sortilegae  Silvanectis  captae,  et  per  majorem  et  juratos  justiciatae
(yr  1282) ;  the  bishop  claims  that  they  belonged  to  his  juris-
diction, Gu^r.  Cart,  de  ND.  3,  341.  And  even  before  that:
Judices  tanquam  maleficam.  et  magum  miserunt  in  ignem,  Ca^s.
Heist.  4,  99;  this  was  at  Soest,  beginn,  of  12th  cent.  In  Eng-
land :  Proceedings  against  dame  Alice  Kyteler,  prosec.  for  sorcery
1324  by  Rich,  de  Ledrede  bp.  of  Ossory,  ed.  by  Th.  Wright,
Lond.  '43,  Camd.  Soc.  zlii.  and  61.  A  strega  of  1420,  who
turned  into  a  cat,  Beber's  Hemmerlin  p.  248.  About  the  same
time  Wolkenstein  p.  208  says  of  old  women :

Zauberei  und  hupeUspiel,

das  machen  si  nit  teuer  (not  scarce) ;

es  wird  doch  ie  eine  versdrt

mit  einem  heissen  feuer,

'  Yilfewers  zu  1  ist  der  beste  rat  (plan)  /  thinks  Matth.  v.  Eemnat
p.  117;  while  on  the  contrary  H.  Sachs  1,  532®  saw  clearly  that

des  teufels  eh'  und  reuterei  (weddings  and  ridings)

ist  nur  gespenst  und  fantasei  (mere  dreams)  ;

das  bock-faren  kumpt  aus  misglauben  (superstition).


MAGIC.  1623

An  Eogl.  treatise  on  Witches  and  Witchcraft  by  6.  Gifford

1603  has  been  reprinted  for  the  Percy  Soc.  '42. ^The  burning

and  strewing  of  the  ashes  is  found  as  early  as  Rudi.  6,  49  :  Rogo
me  comburatis,  in  aquam  cinerem  jcutiatis.  Pornm.  sog.  2,  163:
Klauf  hann  \^&  pur  t  ski-Sur  einar,  lagSi  i  eld,  ok  hr&ndi  at  öskvj
siiSan  f6kk  hann  ser  log  nökknrn^  kasta'Si  )?ar  ä  öskunni^  ok  gerSi
a€  grants  ]?ann  grant  gaf  hann  blauffum  hundum  (al.  grey  hundum);
conf.  supra  (p.  189).

p.  1075.]  The  witch  holds  up  her  left  hand  in  taking  the  oath
to  the  devil,  Geschichtsfr.  6,  246.  On  the  nature  of  the  mark
printed  on  her  by  the  devil,  see  Moneys  Anz.  8,  124-5.  The
Greeks  too  believed  that  the  Thessalian  sorceresses  anointed
themselves  with  a  salve,  Lucian's  Asin.  12-8.  Apuleius  p.  m.
116-7;  vil  kunnen  salben  den  hübet  (tub),  das  si  obnan  avsfani
(fly  out  at  the  top),  Vintler  (Sup.  G,  1.  180).  A  witch  is  called
forh-rider,  Garg.  47* ;  she  rides  calves  and  cows  to  death  (p.  1048
mid.) ;  she  has  wings,  Müllenh.  p.  212.  The  witch's  or  sorcerer's
flight  through  the  air  is  the  god's  riffa  lopt  ok  log  (air  and  fire)  ;
conf.   the  skipper  and  his   man  sailing  on  watdr,  air  and  land,

Müllenh.  p.  222. In  the  midst  of  the  witches  the  Devil  sits

on  A  pillar  (  =  irmens&l),  Moneys  Anz.  8,  130;  he  sits  with  them
on  the  tree,  holds  dance  and  wedding  on  trees  and  boughs  (Suppl.
to  1069  beg.).  There  are  banquets  of  witches,  as  there  are  of
fays  :'  their  viands  are  tasteless  as  rotten  timber,  or  they  suddenly
change  to  mvck ;  so  all  the  food  the  Huldre  brings  turns  into
cow^s  dung,  Asb.  Huldr.  1,  49.  51.  Sometimes  the  devil  plays
the  drone-pipe,  Thür.  mitth.  vi.  3,  70.  With  the  young  witch
set  to  mind  the  toads,  conf.  the  girl  and  three  toads  in  Lisch's

Jrb.  5,  82. Witches  turn  the  milk,  skim  the  dew,  lame  the

cattle,  and  brew  storms.  The  mischief  is  chiefly  aimed  at  the
corn-fields  and  cattle  (p.  1106) :  they  draw  milk  out  of  a  Icnife,
Asb.  Huldr.  1,176.  Wolfs  Zts.  2,  72.  Müllenh.  p.  222;  they
stretch  a  string,  and  milk  out  of  it,  Mone  8,  131,  or  cut  a  chip
out  of  the  stable-door  for  the  same  purpose  5,  452-3 ;  they  milk
out  of  an  awl  or  the  neck  (handle-hole)  of  an  axe,  Keisersb.
Omeiss  54%  illustr.  by  a  woodcut;  the  senni  milks  out  oi  four
taps  in  the  wall,  Promm.  2,  565.  Witches  make  butter  by  churning
water  with  a  stick,  MüllenL  p.  224 ;  they  ^ filch  people's  milk  fr.
them^'  M.  Beham  in  Mone  4,  454 ;  they  are  called  molken-tover,


1624  MAGIG.

Moneys  Schaasp.  2,  74  (üpstandinge  1116) ;  conf.  App.,  Spell
xiixvii :  '  Up  thro'  the  doada  aad  away.  Fetch  me  Itird  and  milk
and  whey  I  *  Witches  gather  deto,  to  get  people's  batter  awaj,
Müllenh.  p.  565;  oonf.  AS.  ieaw-iricu^^  Cssdm.  3795  (Bont.),
Grein  101;  towe  daz  gelesen  wirt  (gathered  dew),  Notk.  Gap.,

conf.  thaU'ScUepper,  tau-drctgil  (p.  786). ^They  darn  peace  or

no  peace  into  the  bridal  bed ;  they  plait  discord  in,  by  plaiting
the  pillow-feathers  into  wreaths  and  rings,  Müllenh.  p.  223.
Hence  the  tales  about  the  old  wife  that's  worse  than  the  devil :
'  in  medio  consistit  virtus,  like  the  devil  between  two  old  wives/
Grarg.  190^.  An  old  woman  having  caused  a  loving  couple  to  fall
out,  the  devil  was  so  afraid  of  her  that  he  reached  her  the  pro-
mised pair  of  shoes  at  the  end  of  a  stick.  Witches  '  nemen  deu
mannen  ir  gseln/  M.  Beham  in  Mone  4,  451 .  Grasping,  beating,
stroking,  blov^ing,  breathing,  eyeing  are  attrib.  to  witches  (p.

1099),  as  they  are  to  healing  women. In  their  magic  they  use  the

hands  of  unborn  babes,  Fastn.  sp.  p.  1 349.  Thieves  cut  the  thumb
off  an  unborn  child,  and  light  it :  as  long  as  it  bams,  every  one
in  the  house  sleeps ;  spinam  humani  cadaveris  de  tecto  pendunt,
and  nobody  wakes,  C»s.  Heist.  6,  10  ;  'du  haddest  ok  ens  deve»
dumen  bavene  henghen  an  de  tunne '  is  said  to  the  cheating  inn-
keeper, Mone's  Schausp.  2,  87  (a  thief  taken  at  Berlin  in  1846
had  a  green  herb  sewed  into  her  petticoat,  her  herb  of  luck  she
called  it) ;  wngemeilit  hint  [unbetrothed  ?]  are  employed  in  sorcery,
Ksrchr.  2102.  2590;  conf.  Hecta  ex  structis  ignibus  ossa,'  Lach-
mann's  emend,  of  Prop.  iv.  5,  28.  It  is  'thought  that  the  a/6
(nightmare)  cometh  of  untimely  births*  M.  Beham  in  Mone  4,
450.  These  are  divided  into  black,  white  and  red  (Hpt.  4,  389),
which  seems  to  support  my  division  of  elves  into  black,  light  and

brown. The  caterpillar  deviVs  cat  (Staid.  1,  276)  reminds  one

of  katze-spur,  a  hairy  caterp.  so  called  in  the  Palatinate ;  conf.
Buss,  gusenitza,  Pol.  wasienca,  Boh.  hausenka,  La'ngued.  diablotin;
ON.  bröndwngr,  variegata,  Swed.  kälmasL  The  butterfly  is
called  pfeif-mviUr,  Schm.  1,  30,  fifun-trager,  Alb.  Schott  291 ;
conf.  pipolter,  fifolter.      The  witch  is  delivered  of  will  o'  wispsy

Thür.  mitth.  vi.  3,  69. Witches  carry  magic  in  their  hair,

therefore  we  cut  it  off:  this  already  in  M.  Beham's  Wien  p.  274;
conf.  the  weichselzöpfe  (plica  Pol.).  The  witch  chains  her  lover,
the  devil,  with  yam  spun  in  a  churchyard,  Thür.  mitth.  vi.  3,  70.


icAQic.  1625

Witches  float  on  water,  as  GolJrün  says  of  herself:  ^hftfo  mik,
ne  drek&o  h&var  bAror/  SsBin.  26 7* ;  'hon  m&tti  eigi  söeqva/  she
mig'bt  not  sink  265.  The  unsightly  German  witch  is  paralleled
by  the  Finn.  Pohjan  akka  harvahammaa  (thin-toothed).  Kale  v.
2,  187.  205.    5,  135.

p.  1077.]  Heathen  features  are  the  witches'  consumption  of
horseflesh  or  even  man^tt  flesh,  also  their  dislike  of  bells.  With
the  witch's  blood-mark,  and  with  Death's  mark,  conf.  '  stakins
(ariyfiara)  Frdujins  ana  leika  balran/  Gal.  6,  17.  It  is  remark-
able that  a  witch  cannot  weep ;  she  has  watery  eyes,  but  sheds
no  tears.  In  the  Tirol.  Inquis.  (Pfaundler  p.  43) :  sie  sprotzt
mit  den  angen,  weint  ohne  thränen.  Exactly  the  same  is  said  of
Tböck  :  '  Thöck  mnn  grftta  ßurrum  tarum  (with  dry  tears)  Baldrs
b&lfarar.'     Here  the  witch  answers  to  the  giantess.

p.  1080.]  To  lie  under  a  han'ow  defends  you  fr.  the  devil :
stories  in  Miillenh.  no.  290.  Firmen.  1,  206*».  He  that  puts  a
piece  of  turf  on  his  head  will  not  be  seen  by  witches,  Panz.  Beitr.
1,  240-1.  Wearing  Gundermannes  garland  makes  you  see
witches,  Somm.  p.  58.  The  priest  can  tell  witches  by  their  round
hcds,  Geynowa  p.  14.

p.  1082.]  Pol.  iedzona  means  old  witch,  eater  of  men,  esp.  of
children ;  conf.  ifdza,  a  fury.  Wicked  women  with  white  livers
are  also  known  in  France,  white-livered  men  in  Schambach  123*.
Witches  poke  straw  into  the  heart's  place:  )>er  i  briosti  liggr
haltmrisk,  )?ar  er  hiartat  skyldi  vera,  Fornm.  s.  2,  208 ;  Walther
Ströwinherz,  Schreiber's  Frib.  urk.  2,  161.  In  Petron.  c.  63  :
strigae  puernm  involaverant,  et  swpposuerant  stramentitium  vava-
ionem;  and  just  before  :  videt  manudolum  de  stramentis  factum.
At  a  witches'  feast,  boys-  were  usually  killed,  boiled  or  roasted,
and  eaten  up ;  which  reminds  us  of  heathen  practices,  and  those
of  giants.  Such  killing,  cooking,  and  eating  of  children  is  an
antique  and  vital  feature,  KM.  nos.  15.  51-6,  conf.  supra  (pp.
1045  end.  1058 — 60).     Kettle  and  cooking  are  a  part  of  magic.

p.  1083.]  A  beast  crawls  into  the  sleeping  woman's  mouth
Wolfs  Ndrl.  sag.  250,  and  note  p.  688 ;  or  a  snake  creeps  out  of
it,  Walach.  march,  p.  103.  A  white  mouse  slips  into  the  dead
man's  mouth,  Somm.  p.  46 ,-  '  but  alas,  in  the  midst  of  her  song
a  red  mousie  popt  out  of  her  mouth,'  Faust  p.  m.  165 ;  a  bee  flies
out  of  one's  mouth.  Schreib.  Taschenb.  4,  808.     As  the  white


1626  MAGIG.

mouse  runs  ap  the  rampart  in  Fischart's  play^  so  witches  indoors

run  up  the  wall  to  the  raflers,  Process  v.  Ursemthal. With

the  iron  bridge  of  king  Ounthram's  dream^  conf .  the  sward-bridge
in  the  Bom.  de  la  charrette  pp.  23.  84  (Suppl.  to  835) .  When
the  witch  is  setting  out,  she  lays  a  broom  or  a  hcdm  of  straw  in
the  bed  by  her  sleeping  husband,  Mono  8,  126.  With  OHG.
irprottan,  tranced,  connect  ^inbrodin  lac,*  Lachm.  Ndrrhein.  ged.
p.  9,  and  'in  hünr^brüden  gelegen,'  Eleim  dich  p.  52.  Oar
entzückt  is  in  ME6.  '  gezucket  anme  geiste,'  Diut.  1,  466;  als  in
zuckete  der  geist,  Uolr.  1331.  We  also  say  'rapt,  caught  np,
carried  away.*

p.  1083.]  With  the  Servian  starting-spell  agree  the  Moravian,
Kulda  in  D'Elvert  92-3.  German  formulas  in  Mone  8,  126.
Panzer  1,  251.  Miillenh.  no.  291.  Lisch's  M.  jrb.  5,  85.  With
them  compare :  oben  hinaus,  nirgens  an  !  Gallenb.  Wurmld  (?)  86 ;
hui  oben  aus,  und  niergend  an,  Agricola's  Spr.  217.  Kl.  red.
(?  1565)  113^;  hei  op  hei  an,  stött  nernichan,  N.  Preuss.  prov.  bl.
1,  229.  The  cry  of  pursuit  is  in  Schönw.  1,  139;  so  Aschen-
püster  (Cinderella)  cries :  '  behind  me  dark,  before  me  bright ;  *
iScand.  lyst  foran,  og  mörkt  bag,  Norske  event.  1,  121 ;  Ijust  for
mig,  mörkt  efter  mig,  Sv.  afvent.  1,  410.  427 ;  hvldt  fremun^  og
sort  bag,  Abs.  421.  But  *  herop  og  Kerned  til  Mönsaas,*  Asb.
Huldr.  1,  179,  is  another  thing.  An  Engl,  spell  for  faring  to
Elfland  is:  'horse  and  hattock!  with  my  topi*  Scot.  bord.  2,
177-8.     Völund's  speech :  '  vel  ek,  verSa  ek  &  fitjom ! '  is  appar.

a  flight-formula,  for  he  soars  up  immed.  after,  SsBm.  138*.

When  a  sorceress  anoints  her  shoulders,  wings  sprout  out,  Stier's
Ungr.  march,  p.  53.  Faust  uses  a  magic  mantle  to  fly  up ;  conf.
the  remarkable  tale  of  a  dwarf  who  spreads  out  his  cloak,  and
lets  a  man  stand  on  it  with  him,  H.  Sachs  i.  3,  280^.

p.  1085.]  l^he  good  people  (p.  456)  cut  themselves  horses  out
of  switches,  Erin  1,  136.  The  magic  steed  must  be  bridled  with
bast,  or  it  runs  away,  Beusch  p.  23-4.  In  Pacolet's  wooden  horse
one  has  only  to  turn  the  tap  to  right  or  left,  Yal.  et  Orson  c.  26
(Nl.  c.  24).  A  hose-band  tied  round  the  shank  lif^  into  the  air,
Eliz.  of  Ori.  505.

p.  1086.]  The  German  witches  too  are  hindered  in  their  ex-
cursions by  the  sound  of  bells.  If  they  are  late  in  coming  home,
and  the  matin -peal  rings  out  from  a  church,  their  career  stops  as


MAGIC.  1627

if  paralysed^  till  the  last  tone  has  died  away.     The  witch  abases
the  bell,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  20.

p.  1089.]  '  Carmine  grandines  avertere/  is  as  old  as  Pliny  17,
28.  Hail  being  in  grains,  it  is  strewn  oat  by  bashelfals :  t^9
'XjoXd^fl^  oaov  fjiiBifivoi  ^^^^^  BuiaKeSaaOijrmaav,  Lucian's  Icarom.
26.  '  Yon  haiUboiler  / '  is  a  term  of  abase,  Moneys  Schaasp.  2,
274.  Grerman  witches  scatter  a  powder  with  cries  of  alles  schaver,
alles  schauer  I  The  day  before  Walburgis  night,  a  merry  cobbler
mocked  his  maid :  '  Take  me  with  yoa  to  Peter's  mount  I '  When
evening  fell,  there  came  a  storm,  nigh  shook  his  doors  and
shutters  down;  well  knew  the  cobbler  what  it  meant.  The
Esths  know  how  to  produce  cold :  if  you  set  two  jugs  of  beer
or  water  before  them,  one  will  freeze  and  not  the  other;  see
Wnlfstftn's  journey.  The  weather  must  be  well  boiled :  if  the  pot
is  emptied  too  soon,  your  labour  is  lost,  Mone  8,  129.  130.  The
Kalmuks  have  the  same  kind  of  weather-making,  Klemm  3^  204.
Witches  boil  apple-blossoms,  to  spoil  the  fruit  crop,  Mone  8,
129.  Dnll  on  the  fir-tree  pours  out  hail,  Panzer  1,  20.  Says  an
old  woman  dripping  wet,  '  IVe  had  this  weather  in  my  back  this
fortnight.'  When  the  huntsman  heard  that,  he  struck  her  over
the  hump  with  a  stick,  and  said,  '  Why  couldn't  you  Ut  it  out
sooner  then,  old  witch  as  you  are?'  Simplic.  1,  287.  Witches
make  stones  roll  (ein  rübi  gan)  into  the  hay  and  com  fields ;  also
avalanches,  Proc.  v.  ürsernthal  245 — 8.  The  shower-maidens  feed
on  beshowered  (lodged)  corn.  Panzer  1,  88.  Hence  Ph.  v.  Sittew.
and  the  Fr.  Simpl.  1,  53.  68  call  the  witch  '  old  weather  ; '  elsewh.
she  is  hageUanne,  donnerhagels-aas  (-carrion),  7  Ehen  p.  78;
shower 'breeder,  forh-greaser.  Witches  are  weather-makers,  Wolf's
Ndrl.  s.  289.  A  witch  drops  out  of  the  doud,  Bader  nos.  337.
169.  The  Servian  vila  leads  clouds  (vode  öblake)  and  makes
weaiher,  Vuk  sub  v.  vrzino  kolo ;  she  teaches  her  pupils  the  art.
Our  Germ,  phrase,  'the  old  wives  shake  out  their  petticoats  '  =  it
snows,  suggests  the  Wallachian  witch  who  throws  off  her  petti-
coats. The  Indians  of  Surinam  say  their  sorcerers  have  thunder-
storms, violent  showers  and  hail  at  their  command.  Klemm  2,

168. The  O.  Pr.  poets  name  heathen  kings  '  roi  Oaste-ble,'

Guillaume  4,  179.  256  and  'roi  Tempeste,'  4,  257.  26;  couf.
Mätzner  257  and  Tampasie  in  Wolfram's  Wh.  27,  8  (rhym.  with
Faussabre  for  Fauche.pr6,  or  ble  7)     46,  20.  844,  7.  371,  3.  442,


1628  MAGIG.

39.  A  TbesBalian  sorceress  fetches  the  moon  down  from  the
sky^  and  shuts  her  up  in  a  box,  Aristoph.  Cloads  749.  At
vos,  deductce  quibus  est  fallacia  luncB,  Propert.  i.  1^  19;  tanc
ego  crediderim  vobis  et  sidera  et  amnes  posse  cytacseis  ducere
carminibus  i.  1,  23;  illic  et  sidera  primum  praecipiti  deduda  polo,
P/tcebeque  serena  non  alitor  diris  verborum  obsessa  yenenis
pallait,  Lacan.  Phars.  6,  496 ;  cantos  et  e  curra  lunam  deducere
tentat,  et  faceret  si  non  aera  repulsa  sonent,  Tib.  i.  8,  21 ;  banc
ego  de  coelo  ducentem  sidera  vidi,  i.  2,  45 ;  te  qnoqae,  Lana,
traho,  Ov.  Met.  7,  207 ;  in  hac  civitate,  in  qaa  mnlieres  et  lunam
deducunty  Petr.  c.  129.

In  Esthonia  the  witches  knead  stalks  of  rye  together,  and  re-
peat a  spell  over  them ;  unless  the  Jcnota  are  soon  found  out  and
burnt,  the  crop  is  sure  to  fail,  Possart  p.  164,  conf.  162.

p.  1091.]  In  transforming,  the  sorcerer  touches  with  his  staff:
pdßSip  hnfiaaacaOa*,  Od.  13,  429,  conf.  16,  172.  Venus  timehes
the  mouth  of  Ascanins  with  her  feather ,  En.  802 ;  and  Dido
catches  it  (the  magic)  from  his  lips  815.  Mice  are  made  out  of
fallen  pears,  but  without  tails,  Firmen.  1,  276^;  conf.  the  red
mouse  (Suppl.  to  1083  beg.).  Young  puppies  made,  SimpL  2,
296-7  (ed.  Keller),  conf.  328.  Ace.  to  Benvall,  Ijära  is  the  Finn.
para,  genius  rei  pecuarisB  lac  subministraus ;  conf.  Lei>cqaist
De  superst.  1,  53.  Gastr6n  167-8.  Oanander's  Myth.  Feon.  67,
even  Juslenius  sub  v.  para.  In  Angermanl.  it  is  called  bjara,
Almqv.  p.  299;  in  Vesterbotten,  see  Unander  sub  v.  bara;  the
Gothl.  vocab.  in  Almqv.  p.  415  describes  it  as  sm&trollmed  tre
hen,  Esths  make  a  homesprite  out  of  an  old  broom,  Verb.  2,  89  ;
did  Goethe  take  his  Apprentice  fr.  Lucian's  Philops.  35-6  (Bipont.
7,  288)  ?  Even  a  man  is  made  out  of  wood,  and  a  heart  put  in»
side  him  ;  he  walks  about  and  kills,  Fomm.  s.  3,  100.

p.  1093.]  Wax-figures  were  placed  on  doors,  at  cross-roads,
and  on  the  graves  of  parents,  Plato  De  legg.  1 1 ,  933 ;  in  another
passage  (of  Plato?)  Anacbarsis  speaks  of  Thessal.  sorceresses
and  their  wax-figures  ;  the  waxen  image  of  Nectanebns,  Gallisth.
p.  m.  6.  At  a  synod  of  1219  Archbp  Gerhard  of  Bremen  con-
demns the  Stedingers  as  heretics,  charging  them  with  '  quaerere
responsa  daemonum,  cereas  imagines  faeere,  aphitonissis  requirere
consilium,  et  alia  nefandissima  tenebrarum  ezercere  opera,'  Su-
dendfs   Begistr.  2,  158;  '  quaerunt  responsa   daemonum,  oerea


MAGIC.  1629

simulacra  faciant,  et  ia  suis  spurcitiis  erroueas  consalunt  phito-
nissas/  Bull  of  Greg.  9  (1233),  ibid.  2,  168.     On  wax-figures,  see

Osuabr.  verb.  8,  71. M.  Lat  invultuor,  praestigiator  qui  ad

artes  magicas  vultus  effingit ;  invuUare,  fascinare^  Fr.  envoulter,
Dacange  sub  vv.  invultare^^  vultivoli.  They  tried  to  copy  the
featares  of  the  man  they  were  going  to  bewitch  in  the  wax  or
clay  puppet;  they  solemnly  baptized  it^  gave  it  sponsors^  and
anointed  it.  When  they  pricked  it  with  a  needle,  the  man  felt
a  sharp  pain ;  if  they  pricked  the  head  or  heart,  he  died.  They
tried  to  have  an  Easter  candle  out  of  the  church,  to  do  the  work
by.  Sticking  needles  into  a  wax-figure  occurs  in  Kemble's
Chartae,  Pref.  lix.  Ix.,  and  the  story  in  MüUenh.  p.  233 ,-  conf.
imago  argentea  (Suppl.  to  1175  end).  Ferebatur  iTnaginem  quan-
dam  ad  instar  digiti,  ex  Egipto  adlatam^  adorare ;  a  qua  quotiens
responsa  quaerebat,  necesse  erat  homicidium  aut  in  summo  festo
adulterium  procurare ;  conf.  Pertz  10,  460  and  the  thief  s  thumb

(Suppl.  to  1075  end), Outting  out  the  footprint  answers  to

Tffpeiy  TO  f%vo9  teal  afiavpovv,  vestigium  observare  et  delere  (blur),
by  planting  one's  right  foot  on  the  other^s  left  print,  and
one's  left  on  his  right,  and  saying  :  iirißißfiKa  <roi,  icai,  inrepdvw
eifjii,  oonscendi  te,  et  superior  sum  !  Lucian's  Dial,  meretr.  4.
GDS.  137.

Things  that  mahe  invisible  are :  the  tarn-helm  (p.  468),  the
bird's  nest  (Suppl.  to  974),  the  right-hand  tail-feather  of  a  cock
(to  671  mid.),  fern-seed  (p.  1210),  the  ring,  rather  the  stone  in
the  ring  (p.  911),  Troj.  9203.  9919,  and  the  sonnenwedel  (helio-
trope) laid  under  a  stone,  Mone  8,  614.

p.  1097.]  Pliny  8,  34 :  Homines  in  lupos  verti  rursumque
restitui  sibi,  falsum  esse  existimare  debemus.  Unde  tamen  ista
vulgo  infixa  sit  fama,  in  tantum  nt  in  maledictis  versipelles  habeat,
indicabitur.  An  OHO.  name  Weriwolf  occurs  already  in  the  9th
cent.,  Hpt  12,  252,  and  in  Samland  the  name  Warwolf,  A  wer-
wolf  in  H.  Sachs  ii.  4,  16®,  meerwolf,  beer  wolf  in  Bttn.  Unw.  doct.
671.  Werwatz  (watz  =  brood-hog)  is  a  family  name  at  Drei-
eichenhain;  is  it  formed  like  werwolf?     Loups  garous,  Bosquec

p.  223  seq. To  change  yourself  into  a  fox,  wolf  or  cat,  you

use  an  ointment,  Proc.  v.  Ursemth. ;  or  shift  the  buckle  of  a
certain  strap  to  the  ninth  hole,  Reusch  in  Preuss.  prov.  bl.  36,
436   and   23,    127.      GDS.    152;   conf.   the   old  leather  strap,

VOL.   IV.  A  A


1630  MAGIC.

Firmen.  1,  213.  People  with  a  wolf-girdle  are  ulf-heffnar:  is
that  conn,  with  our  heiden,  heiden-wolf  for  nnbaptized  child,  in

Waldeck  lieid-öUeken  ?     PapoUere  '60,  p.  8. By  potting  a  slip

of  wood  (spruoccolo)  in  one's  month,  one  becomes  a  she-bear,
and  man  again  on  taking  it  ont,  Pentam.  2,  6.  If  yon  dash
grass  against  the  stem  of  a  tree,  wolves  spring  out  of  it,
Bemigii  Daemonol.  (1598)  pp.  152.  162.  Sigefridus  dictos  wo^-
vel,  MB.  1,  280,  but  wolvel  (Wölfel  ?)  8,  458.  The  gods  send
Idun  a  wolfskin  :  vargs-belg  soldo,  let  ifaraz,  lyndi  breitti,  Ssem.

89». Were-wolf  stories  in  MüUenh.  nos.  317—320.     Firaien.

1,  363.  332.  212-3.  Lekensp.  2,  91-2.  ON.  t  varg-skinns  ölpn,
Fomm.  s.  10,  201  (61pa,  ülpa=toga,  vestis).  A  were-wolf  may
be  known  by  a  wolfs-zagelchen  (-tail)  betw.  the  shoulder-blades.
Keusch  no.  75  and  note ;  by  a  little  '  raugen  wolfa-zagel '  grow-
ing out  of  the  back  betw.  the  shoulders,  Prenss.  prov.  bl.  26, 435.
117.  172.

p.  1098.]  The  witch  appears  as  a/o«.  Schreib.  Taschenb.  4,
309 ;  as  a  three-legged  hare,  Somm.  Sag.  62  ;  as  a  hol-svört  kMa,
Fomm.  s.  8,  216.  220.  Sv.  foms.  1,  90  seq.  Men  protest :  '  by
eatten,  die  te  (2an«e)i  pleghen  tswoendaghs  !  *  Belg.  mns.  2,  116.
If  a  girl  has  fed  the  cat  well,  the  sun  shines  on  her  wedding-day,
N.  Prenss.  prov.  bl.  3,  470.  Good  stories  of  witches  in  Mnllenh.
pp.  212 — 6 ;  also  that  of  the  cat's  paw  being  chopt  off,  its  turning
into  a  pretty  female  hand,  and  the  miller  next  morning  missing
it  on  his  wife,  227 ;  and  that  of  the  witch  who  is  ridden  as  a
horse,  who  is  taken  to  the  farrier's  to  be  shod,  and  lies  in  bed
in  the  morning  with  horse-shoes  on  her  hands  and  feet  226.  600.
Mone  8,  182.  So  in  Petron.  c.  62  a  were-wolf  has  been  wounded
in  the  neck ;  presently  a  '  miles '  is  found  in  bed,  having  his
neck  doctored :  intellexi  ilium  versipeüeni  esse,  nee  postea  cam
illo  panem  gustare  potui.  The  ofreskr  in  the  evening  sees  a  bull
and  a  bear  fighting ;  the  next  day  two  men  lie  wounded  in  bed,

L^udn.   5,  5. Transformation  into  a  bear  or  fox,  a  swan  or

raven,  is  frequent.  In  Walewein  5598 :  tenen  vos  verbreken ;
and  785 :  versciep  hem.  '  Er  entwarf  sich  zu/  he  changed  into,
Myst  1,  214,  etc.  A  bride  turns  into  a  swan,  Müllenh.  p.  212  ;
a  man  becomes  a  hawk  or  falcon,  and  comes  flying  to  the  tower,
Marie  1,  280,  conf.  292.  Women  often  change  into  toads :  wesen
ene  padde,  en  sitten  onder  die  sille,  Walew.  5639 ;  gienge  ich  als


MAGIC.  1631

ein  krete  gät,  u.  solde  bi  eime  zftne  gku,  Herb.  8364. 1  must

here  remark^  that  verffa  at  göÜum  in  ON.  tales  does  not  mean
taming  into  a  swine,  but  running  about  wild  like  a  boar,  Ver-
laaff  on  Yatnsd.  p.  106-7.  The  magicians  and  enchantresses  in
our  fairytales  often  change  men  into  wolves,  bears,  cats,  dogs  or
swine ;  the  witches  of  a  later  time  have  no  longer  the  power.
Circe's  formula,  when  turning  men  into  swine  by  a  stroke  of
her  rod,  was :  Ipx^o  vvv  av^eovhe,  Od.  10,  320.  The  Lapland
sorcerers  sertd  bears,  wolves,  foxes,  ravens,  to  do  mischief  to
men  :  such  beast  is  then  called  tillej  Lindahl  474*.

It  is  a  different  thing  when  two  persona  exchange  figures.  This  ON.
skipta  litwn  or  hömum,  skipta  litovi  ok  Idtom,  vixla  litum  is  appar.
effected  by  mere  will,  without  spell  or  clothing,  e.g.  betw.  Sigurd
and  Gunnar,  Sflöm.  177-8.  202-3.  Vols.  sag.  c.  27,  betw.  Signy
and  the  sorceress.  Vols.  7.  It  happens  esp.  among  bom  brothers,
who  are  so  like  as  to  be  taken  for  one  another;  but  in  the
Nib.  337,  3.  429,  3.  602,  2  by  the  tarahÄt  which  makes  in-
visible. In  the  same  way  the  wrong  wife  or  lover  is  smuggled
into  bed  at  night,  as  Brangaene  for  Isot,  conf .  Berthe  au  grand
pied  and  the  Fabliau  of  the  hair-cutting.  A  later  and  coarser
version  of  this  is  the  mere  exchange  of  clothes,

p.  1099.]  Magic  lies  in  the  nails  :  des  zoubers  ort-habe  (seat)
ligt  an  den  na^gelen,  Geo.  57**.  Magic  is  fixed  in  the  hair :  con-
sider the  elf-lock,  elf-knot  (p.  464) ;  witches  have  all  the  hair
shaved  off  them,  see  story  in  Klemm  2,  168.  M.  Beheim  273,
26.  274,   7.     Magic  is  taken  out  of  the  hair,  Wolfdietr.  548;

conf.   wolfs  hair  above. Magic   can   make  us  proof  against

sword  and  bullet,  shot  and  stroke ;  e.g.  by  a  thread  of  silk,  RA..
183.  One  so  made  proof  is  called  ek  frozen  man,  Ettn.  Unw.  doct.
641.  653.  683,  iron  man,  ON.  harff^giörr,  poison-proof,  SsBm.  170;
Kyrtil  bitu  eigi  iarn,  Landn.  2,  7.  3,  4.  The  wound-spell  makes
invulnerable ;  but  it  can  be  neutralized  by  first  hiding  a  knife
in  the  ground  and  then  wounding  with  it :  this  is  called  unloosing
the  spell,  H.  Sachs  v.  347°  (conf.  '  digging  something  in  for  a
man,'  iii.  3,  7^),  and  the  exorcist  bannttLch-macher,  hart-macher,
GutslaPs  Wöhh.  207.  337.  Othello  3,  4  has  a  magic  kerchief
wrought  by  a  sibyl :  '  the  worms  were  hallowed  that  did  breed
the  silk.'  A  St.  George's  shirt  is  made  of  yarn  that  was  spun  on
a  Saturday,  Snperst.  6,  v.  182.


1632  KAGIO.

p.  1100.]  Witches  are  accused  of  grasping,  stroking,  dazzling:
'  she  made  a  dutch  at  me  that  will  last  as  long  as  I  live/  Bod-
mann's  Bheingau  p.  425^  yr  1511 ;  or  'ein  boser  angriff^  böser
schlage  herz-griff/  They  tread  the  cattle ;  they  '  bringen  einen
wehtham  za  halse/  they  learn  yon  what  daaing  (hoodwinking)
means^  Bodm.  Bh.  908,  yr  1505.  Magic  is  wrought  by  rubbing  :
the  rubbing  of  wood  brings  forth  a  squirrel,  of  chips  a  marten,
of  leaves  a  bee,  of  feathers  a  flight  of  grouse,  of  wool  a  flock  of
sheep,  Ealev.  13,  160.  220.  280.  17,  328.  467 ;  conf.  the  marchen
of  the  three  brothers,  who  rub  feathers,  hair  and  scales,   and

immed.   eagles,  bears  and  fish  come  to  their  aid. Widely

spread  is  the  belief  in  the  magic  of  the  eye.  Grenzboten  '60,  no.
26.  BXifAfAa,  avairvori  and  0(f>da\fjL6^  ßdaKavo^  are  already  in
Plutarch's  Sympos.  v.  7 ;  nescio  quis  teneros  aadus  mihi  fascinai
agnos,  Virg.  Eel.  3,  108.  Engl,  euil  eye,  Ir.  the  balar,  Conan
p.  82 ;  the  blink  o'  an  ill  ee,  Hone's  Dayb.  2,  688.  His  diebns
ei  (Chilperico)  Alius  natus  est,  quem  in  villa  Yictoriacensi  nutrire
praecepit,  dicens  '  ne  forte,  dum  publice  md^ur,  aliqnid  maU  in-
curra/t  et  moriatur,'  Greg.  Tur.  6,  41.  HHG.  iwerhe  ougen.  On
the  evil  eye,  see  N.  Pr.  prov.  bl.  1,  391 — 3;  der  blich  slangen
toetet,  wolve  schrecket,  strAz-eiger  (ostrich-eggs)  bruetet,  özsatz
(leprosy)  erwecket,  u.  ander  Ivefte  h&t  gar  vil,  Benn.  18016;
men  spit  in  a  pretty  girl's  &ce  for  fear  of  the  evil  eye,  Ir.  march.
2,64.

p.  1101.]  Sft  ze  hant  ir  röter  munt  einen  tAsent  stunt  (times)
sd  schoenen  {rosen,  underst.)  lachet,  MS.  1,  llS  The  name
Boeenlucher  is  in  Michelsen's  Lab.  oberh.  271.  Baur's  Amsb.
158 ;  conf.  '  ad  Bnozinlachan,'  Notizbl.  6,  68.  '  To  laugh  roeee;
Athen.  5,  498.  It  is  derived  fr.  heathen  beings  of  light,  Mann-
hdt's  Germ,  mythen  149.  439;  eamillen»blu<nnen  ströuwen,  swen
sd  lieplich  lachen  wil  ir  munt,  MSH.  3,  212\

p.  1102.]  A  kiss  makes  yon  forget  everything,  MüUenh.  p.
400.  Pentam.  Liebr.  1,  231 ;  so  does  a  bite  of  the  apple,  Norske
folke-ev.  2,  47.  Helen,  like  Grimhild,  makes  a  magic  potion,
mingling  spices  with  the  wine.  Od.  4,  220—230 ;  so  does  Circe
10,  235.  The  Färoese  still  call  the  draught  of  oblivion  ouminni,
Qvad.  p.  178.  180.  The  Servians  make  their  voda  mboraxna  of
mountain-herbs,  Vuk  2,  612-3.  Conf.  ^tKrpov.  love-potion;
mein-blandinn  miö«r.  Vols,  saga  c.  25 ;  scheidel-tranc  gebrdwen.


suPBBS'nnoK.  1633

Amgb.  15*.  Inoendia  inter  epalas  nominata  aqnis  sob  mensis
profasis  ah^ominamur,  Pliny  28,  2.

p.  1103.]  Silence  is  a  Bafeguard  against  magic:  Saxo's'ne
tncauto  effamine  malefioiis  locam  instrnerent '  (p.  659).  Incanta-
tions are  in  Senr.  urotsd,  gen.  unSka,  Boh.  anrok,  conf.  Jangm.
sab  y.  ne-nrocny,  ne-nroka  [reku^  I  speak].  The  Slav,  formula
against  bewitching  is  *  kamen«mira '  [stone  of  peace  ?  ]  ;  conf.
seines  Zeichens,  ihres  Zeichens,  Schmidt's  Westerw.  id.  335,  and
the  phrases :  salya  venia  I  God  forefend  (save  the  mark) !
When  a  man  looks  startled,  the  Serv.  formula  is :  '  zatchttdio*se
prebiyenoi  golidni/  he's  amazed  at  his  broken  leg,  Vnk  sub  v.
zatchuditi-se^  and  Sprichw.  p.  87.  When  something  painful  or
mischievous  is  said,  the  answer  is :  '  u  nashega  tchabra  gvozdene

ushi/  our  tub  has  iron  ears  (handles),  Sprichw.  p.  334. On

spitting  as  a  protection  from  magic,  see  Schwenk^s  Bom.  myth.
399.  The  cyclop,  when  admiring  his  own  beauty,  spits  in  his  lap
three  times,  to  avoid  baskania:  wi  fjtif  ßaa-zcavOä  Si,  rpU  eh
€fi6v  hrrvca  tcoKtror'  ravra  yap  apyatd  fie  KOTxrrrapU  i^eBl"
Sa^ev,  Theocr.  6,  39.  The  cock-pigeon  spits  on  its  young  to  keep
off  sorcery,  Athen.  3,  456-8 ;  et  eum  morbum  mihi  esse,  ut  qui

me  opus  sit  insputarierf     Plaut.  Capt.  iii.  4,  21. An  ear  of

com  protects  from  magic:  a>gs  viiS  fidlk^ngi,  Seam.  27^.  In  the
thresliold  of  the  house-door  yon  bore  a  hole,  put  in  hallowed  herbs,
and  peg  them  in  with  a  harrow' e  tooth,  Mone  6,  460  (p.  1078).
Throw  %  fire-steel  over  anything  ghostly,  and  you  are  master  of  it,
Dybeck  '44,  104 — 6;  conf.  the  power  of  the  eld^etil  over  the
giant,  Cavall.  1,39;  itd-etaalet,  Folke-ev.  2,  82;  e^  flint-eld  is
struck  over  the  cow,  Dyb.  4,  27  and  over  enchantresses  4,  29 ;  or
a  knife  is  flung  '44,  63.  4,  33.  A  magic  circle  is  drawn  :  gladio
circa  illos  circulum  fecit,  monens  sub  interminatione  mortis,  ut
infra  circulum  se  cohiberent,  Csbs.  Heist.  5, 4.  On  Indian  sorcery,
conf.  Central-blatt  '53,  255.


CHAPTER   XXXV.

SUPERSTITION.

p.  1 105.]  6r.  SeiciSaifieor  superstitious,  heiahaifiovia  super-
stition. Tac.  Germ.  45  speaks  of  the  superstitio  of  the  Aestyans.
Pott  1,  157  derives  the  word  fr.  stare  super,  to  stand  by  or  before


1634  SUPERSTITION.

the  god  or  altar.  Wend,  viera  faith,  pHviera,  pHviera  super-
stition [Russ.  suye-v&rie] .  With  the  Swed.  vOske-peUe  agrees
in  part  the  0H6.  uivscaf  saperstitio,  unscaflihho  snperstitiose^
Graff  6«  453  ;  there  are  also  unpiderpi  5,  219  an^  ubirfenkida,  6L
Sletst.  25,  327  both  =  superstitio;  ubarwintelingun  snperstitiose.
Moneys  Anz.  '35,  89.  AS.  ofertaele  snperstitiosus.  Lye.  Later
words:  geloubelin,  Krolewitz  3753;  swacher  gloube,  ungeloube,
£r.  8122-39.  We  have  also  köhler-glaube,  collier's  faith,  and  in
the  Qaickbom  höner-globe.  Superstitiones  religionis  rabi^nes,
Garg.  187*.  On  superstition,  see  Nilsson  6,  3.  Hes.  0pp.  705 —
826.

p.  1105  n.]  Klemm  3,  201-3  divides  magic  into  explorative
and  active.  A  foretoken,  presage,  is  in  Lat.  portentum  from
portendo,  oatentum  from  ostendo,  monstrum  from  monstro
[moneo?],  Cic.  Div.  1,  42  and  Forcellini;  prodigia  ooelestia,
prope  qaotidianas  in  urbe  agrisque  ostentantia  minas,  Livy  2,  42.
OHQ./ora-2?owcAa»,  fore-beacon,/ora-26ieAaH,  foretoken;  btzefchen,
Windbk  Ps.  323.  367.  Signs  appear  before  the  Judgment-day,
bef.  a  death,  a  dearth,  a  war.     To  curse  all  signs,  Hebel  332.

p.  1107.]  OHG.  drewa  oraculum,  droa  fulmen,  Graff  5,  246.
AS.  hwat  omen,  divinatio,  also  hwatung,  OHG.  hvaa  (p.  951),
conf.  hwdtend  iris  (p.  1216  n.) ;  ßigeUhwdte  divinatio  per  aves.
AS.  hwetton  hige,  hael  seedwedon  (on  the  voyage),  Beovr.  407 ;
OHG.  heil'Scowunge  augurium,  Graff  6,  556 ;  heUseouwinge,  Par-
tonop.  20,  18 ;  heilge  scowede  augurium,  Sumerl.  2,  41 ;  kel-
scowinge,  Bilderdyk^s  Yerscheidenh.  3,  143.  Frauenl.  p.  142
uses  künden  for  prognosticate.  Again  kiesen,  choose  =  look  out
for  (in  ref.  to  weather,  Gramm.  4,  848),  conf.  Swed.  tjusa  (p.
1037).  Children  esp.  are  used  in  divination  and  casting  lots;
coni.  pure  children,  Superst.  H,  cap.  55-6-7.  83.

p.  1 107.]  A  remarkable  method  of  acquiring  the  gift  of  divi-
nation occurs  in  the  Swed.  ärs-gäng,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  4,  508  seq.
Both  that  and  the  power  of  healing  are  passed  on  from  women  to
men,  from  men  to  wamsen,  conf.  Firmen.  1, 318.  Sommer's  Sagen
p.  171.  As  in  Superst.  I,  996,  so  in  MüUenh.  399  the  gift  of
spirit-seeing  is  transferred  by  treading  on  the  lefl  foot  and
looking  over  the  right  shoulder.  Prevision  is  the  faculty  of
presentiment  intensified  to  actual  seeing  and  hearing  :  skforeseer,
forepeeper  beholds  funerals,  armies  in  march,  battles,  also  unim-


SUPEBSTITION.  1635

portant  thiDgs,  such  as  a  harvest-wagon  that  will  upset  in  the
yard  in  ten  years'  time,  the  fignres  and  clothing  of  servants  yet
unborn  who  are  lifting  him  off  the  groand,  the  marks  on  a  foal
or  calf  that  shies  to  one  side ;  he  hears  the  tap  of  the  hammer  on
coffin  lids,  or  the  tramp  of  horse.  These  vorkiekers  always
perceive  with  only  0110  sense,  either  sight  or  hearing :  they  cannot
hear  what  they  see,  nor  see  what  they  hear.     They  are  witch'

seers,  god-aeers,  deviUseers, In  ON.  a  ghost-seer  is   ofreskr,

Landn.  3,  14.  4,  12.  5,  5  (p.  344);  or  does  *  ofreskir  menn  s&
Jmt'  in  these  passages  mean  that  even  d-fresk  men  could  see
it  ?  for  Biöm  Haldorson  (sub  w.  freskr,  dfreskr)  maintains  that
freskr  is  the  seer,  and  ofreskr  the  non-seer;  which  seems  right
enough,  provided  that  freskr  means  cat-sighted,  from  fres  (felis).
Oar  nursery-tales  tell  of  these  cat-eyed  men  with  an  eye  for
mice,  KM.'  3,  198;  then  there  is  the  giant  who  gets  cat's  eyes
pat  into  his  head.  Another  term  is  fi-onsk,  som  natten  til  en
höitids  dag,  isar  Jule-natt,  kan  forud-sige  det  til-kommende,
Molb.  Dial.  lex.  138.  Frem-syn  is  to  be  acquired  by  smearing
with  riisarmsod,  or  by  looking  at  a  funeral  procession  through
a  skagle-öiet,  Moe's  note.

p.  1109.]  On  deve-runnijig,  see  MüUenh.  no.  272.  Tett.  and
Tem.  Preuss.  sag.  p.  284.  Erbe-aib  crispula,  a  plant's  name,
Sumerl.  56,  37.  To  detect  the  thief,  a  hoop  is  driven,  Panzer's
Beitr.  1,  210  ;  three  plates  are  laid  for  him,  containing  bread,  salt
and  lard,  Hpt  7,  538 ;  dishes  shaken,  and  froth  observed,  Tett.
and  Temm.  p.  260.  Bait.  stud.  xii.  1,  37-8 ;  '  when  in  a  sword
he  sees  the.  stolen  thing/  Troj.  kr.  27412  (the  sword  holds  in  it  a
spirit,  Frauenl.  p.  142-3 :  ich  h&te  in  eime  swerte  von  äventiure
einen  geist,  daz  er  mir  solde  künden),  Prophesyiug  from  icicles,
Panzer  2,  549;  by  throwing  a  Bible  open  (an  early  practice),
Greg.  Tur.  4,  16.

p.  1110.]  The  lot  is  cast :  16ton  tftn  wisian  )?&  se  tan  gehwearf
Andr.  1099.  The  '  temere  ac  fortuito  spargere '  of  Tacitus  is
like  ON.  '  hrista  teina,'  to  shake  the  twigs,  as  in  Ssem.  52^:
hristo  teina,  ok  &  hlaut  sä.  M.Neth.  si  worpen  caoelen,  Jesus  c.
229,  conf.  'jacere  tales  in  fontem,'  Sueton.  Tib.  14.  Rudorff  15,
218.  Goth,  hlauts  imma  urrann,  eXa^e,  Luke  1,  9.  6DS.  159;
ez  was  in  sd  gevallen,  Livl.  chr.  5724,  ez  was  im  wol  gefallen
1694,  in  was  der  span  gevallen  wol  2483,  in  viel  dicke  wol  ir  span


1636  süPBBSTrriON.

7239;  dat  lot  viel,  Maerl.  2,  169,  die  cavele  viel  2,  60.  We  say
'  to  whom  the  happy  lot  has  fallen.'

The  Scythians  too  divined  by  sticks,  Herod.  4, 67  and  Nicander
(Ur.  Sk.  p.  659);  the  Alani,  Amm.  Marcel.  31,  2;  the  early
Saxons,  Beda  5,  1 1  (mittunt  sortes,  hluian  mid  tdnum) ;  the
Frisians,  whose  Lex  Fris.  tit.  14  says  :  teni  lana  munda  obvoluti.
So  the  Greek  snppliants  bear  in  their  hands  Xev/coare^U
veoSpiirrov^  KXdBovs,  Aesch.  Sappl.  333,  aifv  roiaS^  ueermv
ijx^iptSlot^  ipio<rriirTOi<r$  KkoBoiat  22,  \€VKo<rT€<f>€l^  ucnfpia^
191,  KXdBouri,  veoBpoirot^  354  («XdS-09  is  hlaut-s,  hldz)  ;  ipi^
<rri4>eiv,  Plato  Rep.  3,  p.  398.  Hermann^s  Gottesd.  alt.  p.  105-8
(raw  wool  is  laid  on  the  stone.  Pans.  x.  24,  5).  The  Slavs  cast
lots  with  hlaeh  and  white  sticks,  Saxo  (Müll.  827),  and  divined  by

the  odd  or  even  lines  in  ashes,  ibid. Drawing  lots  with  willow-

haves,  Ettn.  Manlaffe  703;  with  stalks  of  corn.  Yak  no.  254.
BA.  p.  126 ;  sortiri  ex  siiella  (backet),  Plaat.  Casina,  see  Forcell.
sab  V.  sitella ;  'sors  Scotoram,'  Dronke's  Gl.  Fold.  12.  There
were  lot-hooks  to  divine  by :  diz  loss-buoch  ist  nnrehte  gelesen
(wrongly  read),  Wiener  mer-vart  556 ;  a  loz-buoch  in  Cod.  Yind.
2976  (Hoffm.  209).  2953  (H.  366) ;  loss-lmehlein,  Ph.  v.  Sittew.;
lössein  and  lössel-btich,  Schm.  2,  504;  lössel-nächte.  Frisch  1,
623 ;  lösslerei,  lössletin.

p.  11 1 1.]  On  this  motion  of  boughs,  from  which  t&e  Armenians
divined,  see  N.  Cap.  20.  Machen  mur  uz  den  spachen  (p.  1121
mid.) ;  conf.  Saperst.  H,  c.  80,  in  dem  fewre  sehen ;  D,  38r.  and
140r.,  /tir-sehen.  With  'der  tisch  in  der  hant'  oonf.  'mensa
volae,'  Finn,  onnenpöytä,  lack's  table,  fr.  onni  =  fortana.

p.  1112.]  The  Romans  also  spoke  of  drawing  water  in  a  sieve:
cribro  aqnam,  Plaut.  Ps.  i.  1,  100 ;  imbrem  in  cribro,  Pliny  28, 2.
Oar  'emptying  the  pond  with  a  sieve,'  Sommer's  Sag.  pp.  13,
94.

The  Gaals  prophesied  from  the  c^ahaa-pi^  (convalsions)  of  one
devoted  to  death,  when  his  back  was  pierced  with  a  sword,  Strabo
4,  p.  198 ;  the  Cimbrians  from  the  blood  and  entrails  of  their
sacrificed  prisoners  7,  p.  294,  Lat.  exti-spicium.  The  Malays
also  divine  from  the  entrails  of  slaaghtered  beasts^  Aasland
'57,  p.  603\

p.  1113.]     An  ein  schulder-hein  er  sach  (looked),

des  quam  stn  herze  in  ungemach  (became  uneasy).


SUPERSTITION.  1637

Er  sprach :  *  die  Littouwen  liden  ndt,

min  bmoder  ist  geslagen  t6t>

ein  her  (army)  in  minem  hove  lao  (has  Uin)

sit  gester  bia  an  disen  tac ! '

Daz  bein  h&t  manigem  sit  gelogen  (lied).

Li  vi.  chn  3019.  Ocellos  habens  in  «j?a<i4lt«shnmeris^  Pertz  8,
385 ;  expositione  ossinm  apatulae  ala  in  suis  spcUulia,  Fridericas
imp.  De  arte  ven.  1,  26.  Inspection  of  shoalderblades  is  known
to  Ealmaks  (Elemm  3^  199),  Tangnses  and  Bedouins  (3^  109).

p.  1115.]  The  Romans  also  divided  pisces  into  sqtiamosi  and
nan  aqtiamoai,  Festas  p.  253.  W.  Goethe's  Diss.  p.  19.  In
Levit  11,  9  and  Dent.  14,  9  fish  that  have  fins  and  scales  are
pron.  eatable;  oonf.  Griesh.  146.

p.  1117.]  The  rat  wishes  the  cat  joy  when  she  sneezes,  Avada-
nas  2,  149,  150;  irrap^a^  ix  r&v  Se^i&v,  Herrn.  GU}ttesd.  alt.
p.  186;  *!Epc»Te9  hreirrapov,  Theocr.  7,  96;  haec  ut  dixit.  Amor,
siniatra  at  antea,  dexira  stemuit  approbationem,  Catoll.  44,  17;
atqae,  ut  primum  e  regione  mulieris,  pone  tergum  eius  maritus
acceperat  sonnm  sternutationis  .  .  .  solito  sermone  salutem  ei
fuerat  impreeatus,  et  iterate  rursum,  Apul.  Met.  lib.  2,  p.m.  211.
The  '  Got  helfe  dir  I '  is  also  in  Myst.  i.  103,  10  ;  swer  ze  vremden
bliesen  sich  rimpfet  (crumples  up),  daz  ist  ouch  verlorn,  Ettn.
Frauenl.  p.  70.

p.  1117.]  Ringing  in  the  ears:  ißofißet  rä  wra  vfiiv,  Luc.
Dial.  mer.  9 ;  aures  tintnunt,  Pertz  9,  265 ;  sine  aren  songhen,

Walew.  9911. Svpereilium  salit,  a  good  omen,  Forcell.  sub  v.

superc.  On  prophetic  jerks  in  the  limbs  among  Orientals,  see
Fleischer  in  Rep.  of  Leipz.  acad.  d.  w.  '49,  p.  244.

p.  1119.]  The  spells  in  Bums's  Halloween  are  for  discovering
one's  future  lover.  On  Christmas  Eve  the  sleeping  fowls  begin,
crowing,  if  a  girl  is  to  be  married  soon,  Firmen.  2,  377.  Waaf
may  be  poured  instead  of  lead,  Mone's  Anz.  7,  423 :  ceram  in
aqnam  fundere,  Lasicz  56.

p.  1119.]  Angang,  what  meets  you  on  setting  out,  itoOev,
mane,  iv  ^nCO*  ^^  Ovpai^,  iirl  t$  irpanri  i^oS^,  is  significant.
M.  Neth.  £n  goet  ghemoet,  Rose  2715;  gude  u.  boss  motte,  Gefk.
Beil.  100.  Swed.  mot,  mote;  I yks-mot,  eyil  meeting.  Gr.  St;9-
dvrrfTO^  lill-met  by  moonlight,  proud  Titania]  =  boding  ill;  so


1638  8UPBB8TITI0N.

Bv^'K\rfB6via-To^  [fr.  KXfjSeov,  omen].  A  titulas  in  the  Salic  Law
treats  '  de  superventis  vel  exspoliationibus/

p.  1124.]  On  aDgaDg  among  the  Thngs^  see  Con  vers.  lex.  d.
geg.  iv.  2,  55 ;  on  the  Greek  belief  in  it«  Lacian's  Pseadol.  17  (ed.
Bip.  8,  72)  and  Eunuch.  6  (Bip.  5,  208).  Theophr.  Charact.  c.
16  (conf.  Kopp  De  amuletis  p.  42).  '  Consider  too^  that  the  ßigki
and  song  of  all  the  birds  look  favourable ;  if  these  be  not  joyful
signs,  1  have  clean  forgot  the  art;  no  bird  of  bluek  feather,  no
raven,  starling,  crow  nor  ouzel  have  I  seen.  Three  merry  men
have  met  me,  three  men  named  John.  Not  once  have  I  stumbled,
and  wellnigh  do  I  believe  the  stones  move  out  of  my  way  or
flatten  them  before  me.  The  folds  of  my  garment  hinder  me
not,  neither  am  I  weary,  every  mother's  son  greeteth  me,  no  dx>g
hath  harked  against  me,  Wirsung's  Cal.  J  2^.  To  rati  across  one'a
path  is  always  bad,  Büttner's  Lett,  lieder  p.  255.

p.  1126.]  Meeting  an  old  woman  is  called  haring-möte,  Afzel.
2,  148.  '  Unlucky  to  meet  a  red-haired  womaji  bef.  any  one
else  in  the  morning,'  O'Eearney  182.  'The  first  thing  that
meets  me,  were  it  even  a  parson,  a  beggar  or  an  old  woman/
Goethe  in  Weimar  jrb.  5,  458 ;  wizzet,  wem  der  (unsaelige  lip)
anegenget  an  dem  morgen  fruo,  dome  git  nngeliicke  zuo^  Walth.
118,  16  (conf.  'also  wol  ir  g^ anegenget  was,'  Diemer  206,23).
Doch  hftn  ich  ie  gehoeret  wol,  daz  man  die  priester  sckivJien  sol
(should  shun)  ze  sö-get4nen  Sachen,  Heinz  v.  Kost.  Kitter  u.  pf.
303 ;  on  the  other  hand :  swer  in  zuo  einem  m&le  gesach,  der
wände  sin  vürwar  (hoped  verily  to  be)  deste  saeliger  ein  jar.  Gate
frau  970.     Who  looks  at  early  morn  under  the  fair  one's  eyes  is

safe  from  sorrow  all  that  day,  Hätzl.  148^. For  hunters  the

skogs-ra,  for  fishers  the  hafs-fru  is  unlucky  meeting,  Afzel.  2, 148.
1 50.  No  woman  with  spindle  or  distaff  may  tarry  in  my  lord's
mill  (bann-müle),  Weisth.  2,  25.  To  meet  one  that  is  lame  of  the
right  foot,  or  gelded,  or  effeminate,  is  unlucky,  Lncian  5,  208  ;
conf.  Brodaei  Misc.  in  GrsBvii  Thes.  2,  509;  (eunuchas)  pro-
cedentibus  omen,  Claudian  in  Eutrop.  1,  125.  Parsons^  journeys
are  a  sign  of  rain.  Praetor.  Alectr.  163.  About  meeting  a  black
or  a  white  monk,  see  Spinnr.  evang.  Friday  10;  about  a  tfiffor(i
being  handed  by  a  woman,  ibid.  Wednesd.  20.

p.  1128.]  The  Lapps  carefully  observe  what  beasts  they  meet,
Klemm  3,  90.     There  are  beasts  which  are  not  to  be  named  in


suPBKSTinoN.  1639

the  morning :  aitr')(lto  0rfplt»v  r&r  irpmta^  &pa^  ovofiaaOijyai  Svc-
ickrihovitrrmvy  Lac.  Amores  89.  Meeting  with  a  Kwre  bodes  no
good,  WolPs  Dent.  sag.  no.  370 ;  turn  thee  home  if  a  hare  run
across  thy  path,  Keisersb.  Vom  lewen  63^.     On  the  hare  and  the

wolf,  Lappenberg's  Ealensp.  p.  144. The  enconnter  of  a  wolf

estimated  variously :  '  Sed  gravius  mentes  caesoram  ostenta  lu-
porum  horrificant;  duo  qaippe  lupi  sab  principis  ora,  dam
campis  exercet  equos,  yiolenter  adorti  agmen,  et  except!  telis,
immane  rels^ta,  prodigium  miramque  notam  duxere  futuri/  Claad.

B.  Get.  249. '  Sei  weren  einen  wulf  op  dem  wege  vangen

(caught),  dei  quam  utem  holte  gegangen,  des  freueden  sei  sik  ail
int  gemein,'  all  rejoiced,  Soester  fehde  p.  667 ;  '  the  colonel  held
this  brush  with  the  wolves  to  be  a  good  omen  that  they  should
yet  farther  oome  upon  unlooked  for  booty/  Simpl.  2,  74.  Men
wish  the  wandering  fox  luck  on  his  journey,  £ttn.  Unw.  doct.
240.  Do  wart  en  catte  lopende  vor  dem  here  (army),  Detm.  1,
154.

The  weasel  is  changed  into  a  fair  lady,  Babr.  32 ;  it  is  called
vvpxfiiT^a,  Lobeck's  Path.  360 ;  other  names  in  Nemnich  sub.  v.
mustela.  Does  froie  in  Beinh.  clxxii.  answer  to  It.  donnola,  or
is  it  conn.  w.  M.  NetJi.  t;ra6i6=pulcra,  venusta  7  conf.  damoiselle
belette,  Lafont.  3,  17.  In  the  Benart  it  is  caMed  petit  porchaz,  in
the  Beinaert  dene  beja^h,  ON.  hreisiköttr  is  ermine.  Auspicio
hodie  optamo  exiyi  foras,  mustela  murem  abstulit  praeter  pedes,
Plaut.  Stich,  iii.  2,  6.     A  legend  of  the  mustela  in  Marie  1,  474.

p.  1129.]  "Oppi^  came  to  mean  any  auspiciupi,  whether  of
birds  or  not,  Aristoph.  Birds  719 — 721.  A  bird-gazer  oimvUmi^,
II.  2,  858;  Spvtda^  yv&vai,  Od.  1,  159;  Sia^v&vai  TTTY/crei?  opviOtov,
Pans.  i.  34,  3 ;  olcav&v  ad<^a  elBw^,  Od.  1,  202 ;  opvtOaq  Kpivaov,
Hes.  Op.  826.  '  Telemus  Eurymides,  quem  nulla  fefellerat  ales,'
Ov.  Met.  13,  770;  nunc  ave  deceptus  falsa  5,  147;  Sv^'Ouovurro^,

Luc.    Eunuch.    6. OHG.   fogalrarta    augurium,  fogalrarton

augariari,  Graff  2,  536 ;  fogilrartod  auspioium,  61.  Sletst.  22,  3.
AS.  fugel'hwate  augurium  (Suppl.  to  1107).  Boh.  kob,  koba,
divination  by  flight  of  birds ;  koba,  kuba,  falcon.  Not  every  bird
is  adapted  for  divination :  Spviße^  Si  t€  voXXol  inr  avya^  ^cXioio
^i>T&a\  ovSi  T€  irdvre^  ivala-ifioif  Od.  2,  181;  fugl  fr69'hugadr,
Saam.  141* ;  parra,  comix,  picas,  pica  are  augurales.  Aufrecht  in
D-  Zeitschr.  1,  280. Men  watched  the  flight  as  well  as  the


1640  SÜPBBSTTTION.

Bong,  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  2,  44;  qoae  voces  avium?  qwmti  per
inane  volatas  f  Claad.  4  eons.  Hon.  142 ;  die  ferie  dero  fogelo,
ande  dero  singenton  raria,  nnde  die  heileaoda  dero  in  räUe  fare
Bih  fliegenton,  N.  Cap.  17;  ir  yogel  in  vil  wol  sanc,  Li  vi.  7240.
The  Malays  prophesy  from  the  flight  and  cry  of  birds,  AnsL  '57,  p.

608-4,  and  war  and  husbandry  are  determined  by  them. Uf

einem  tcuJi  (roof)  stuont  ein  krä,  si  schrei  vast '  ha  ha  ha  ha,  narre
bistu  da  I '  fool  that  you  are,  V.  d.  Hagen's  G.  Abent.  2,  449 ;  ez
hab  ein  ttoerziu  kra  gelogen  (lied),  MS.  2,  80*;  chant  tttUHre  et
criard  du  corbeau,  Yillemarq.  Bard.  bret.  167.  On  the  lang^uage
of  ravens  and  crows,  and  on  birds  divided  into  castes  like  men,
see  Monats-ber.  d.  acad.  '59,  p.  158-9.    Bulletin  de  Pätersb.  '59,

p.  438. Auspicio,  avi  sinistra,  Plaut.  Epid.  ii.  2,  2 ;  qua  ego

hunc  amorem  mihi  esse  avi  dicam  datum  f  Plaut.  Gas.  iii.  4, 26 ;
dira  avis,  Saeton.  Claud.  22.  Palcherrimum  angurinm,  odo
a^uilae  petere  silvaa  et  intrare  visae  (signif.  8  legions),  Tac.  Ann.
2,  17;  a  Servian  song  addresses  the  high-soaring  far-seang
eagles,  Yuk  1,  43  no.  70  (Wesely  p.  64).  Fata  notant,  stellaeque
vocant  aviumque  voUxtue,  totius  et  sabito  malleus  orbis  ero,
Bicherius  4,  9.  Böhmer's  Font.  3,  51.  Luther  says  somewhere:
If  thou  see  a  little  bird,  pull  off  thy  hat,  and  wish  him  joj,
Schuppius  1121 ;  ichn'  weiz  waa  vogels  hegn  in  vlog,  Jeroschin
132^

p.  1181.]  A  flight  to  your  right  is  lucky,  to  your  left  unlucky,
GDS.  982  seq.  Parra  dextera,  comix  dexira,picU8  sinister,  Grotef.
Inscr.  Umbr.  6,  5.  7.

Tvvy  8'  olmvoiai  rapwrepvyeaai  Kekeuei^

ireiOeaOai,  r&y  ovti  fierarpeTro/A  ovS*  aXeyi^t»,

elr  iirl  Se^C  itaai  irpo^  *II&  r  'HeXtoK  re,

eXr  eV*  dpiarepa  roiye  ttotI  ^ofpov  ^epoevreu     II.  12, 237.

The  Greeks  often  mention  the  eagle:

iiriwraro  ie^io^  (right  hand)  6pvi^,
aUro^  (eagle)  apytfv  yyava  (f>€p»y  oi^eo^cri  ireXmpor
iffiepov  i^  aiX^.     Od.  15,  160.

avräp  6  TOiaiv  apiarepo^  (left  hand)  tjXtßOey  ipn%,
aUro^  vylmrirn^,  Ix^  Be  rprfpiova  veKeiap.     Od.  20,  242.

T#  S'  aierif  (two  eagles)  evpvona  Zeif^


SUPBB8TITI0N.  1641

{j^q9€v  iic  Kopvif^^  ip€o^  irpoiffxe  irereaßai.     Od.  2,  146;
and  then  :  Se^ti»  (right  hand)  iji^av  8id  r  oUia,  k.t.\.  154.
Again^  the  hawk :

hreirraro  Bc^io^  Xpvt^,
iclpKo^  (hawk)  9  ^ÄTToXKfovo^  ra'xy^  ayyeXo^,  iv  Be  iroSeaai
TiXXe  ireXeiav  Sx^ov,  Kara  hi  irre/oa  ^^eSer  Ipa^e
fuaariyif^  vrjo^  re  ical  avrov  TrfKepA^oio.     Od.  15,  528,

The  flight  of  the  mouse-hawk  is  carefally  scanned  by  the  Kal-
muks,  Klemm  8,  202.  We  read  of  Be^io^  ipmSio^  (heron)  in
Hipponax,  Fragm.  50,  of  Be^iij  airrti  (woodpecker),  Fragm.  62 ;
ardeolae  (herons),  altero  ocalo  carentes,  optimi  aagarii,  Pliny  11
87.  52.  Urafn  üfgr  austan  af  h&  mei%  (tr6e),  ok  eptir  honom
öm  i  sinni ;  ßeim  gef  ek  emi  (to  that  eagle)  ef stum  brftiSir,  s&
mnn  &  blöSi  bergja  mtnn,  Hervar.  cap.  5 ;  hrafn  qva'S  at  hrafni,
sat  &  häm  meiiSi,  SsBm.  149^.  Similarly:  yk  qva'S  ]mt  kräka
(crow),  sat  qvisti  &  (on  bough),  Ssdm.  106^ ;  comix  avis  divina
imbrium  imminentium,  Hor.  Od.  iii.  27,  10.  Herrn.  Gk)ttesd.  alt.
§  88 ;  rostro  recurve  turpis,  et  infernis  teuebris  obscurior  alas,
ausjpidum  veteri  sedit  fercde  sepulcro,  Claud,  in  Entrop.  2,  230;
nuper  Tarpeio  quae  sedit  culmine  cornix,  '  est  bene '  non  potuit
dicere,  dixit  '  erit,'  Suet.  Domit.  23. Martens  vögelken,  Fir-
menich 1,  139.  140;  Sunte  Maartens  veugeltje  zat  al  op  een
heaveltje  met  sijn  rood  rood  rokje,  Halbertsma's  Tougvallen  p.
45 ;  Engl,  martin,  hirundo  minor,  Nemn.  p.  1 64 ;  Fr.  martinet,
le  petit  martinet.  There  was  a  society  of  Martins-vogel  in  Swabia
in  1367,  Landau^s  Ritter-ges.  p.  15.*  Dös  vögerl  aum  tannabam
(fir)  eteht  auf  oanm  fuss,  hat  a  zetterl  im  schnaberl,  von  meinm
deamdel  (girl)  ann  grnss,  Seidl  Aimer  1,  24.  The  ehätaka  drinks
nothing  but  rain,  catching  the  drops  as  he  flies ;  he  brings  luck
when  he  flies  on  your  leß,  whereas  most  birds  signify  good  on  the
right,  Max  Müll.  MeghadAta,  p.  59.

p.  1132.]  'H  aiTTff  (a  pecker)  teal  et  n  roiourov  Spveov  Se^ia
irpb^  epwra^  <j>cUp€Tai.  *Eyi}  p,iv,  &  Aeviciinre,  Be^i^  alrrij !
DidymuB  apud  schol.  Aristoph.  Av.  704 ;  irero/ieaOd  re  yap  koI
Tota-iv  iptoai  avveafiev,  A  v.  704,  conf.  Meineke's  Choliambi  p.
122-8.     Pies  en  notnhre  impair,  signe  de  malheur.  Bosquet  219.

*  neu4  kantf  Yindler  in  Hpt  9,  79 ;  of  die  alten  harU  zierlich  gemacht,  Götz  y.
Berlieh.  ed.  ZÖpfl  p.  14 ;  künigin  bin  ich  der  newen  hand,  J.  ▼.  Morsheim,  beginn.


1642  SUPBBSTITION.

On  the  starling's  flight,  Ettn.  Maalaffe  704.  Alban,  espdce
d'oiseau  de  proie,  prob,  de  vautour,  FaariePs  Albig.  p.  664.

The  heathen  Arabs  bef.  Mahomet :  one  who  has  gone  out  tarns
back  immed.  on  seeing  a  raven.  Yet  it  is  a  good  sign  if  a  pair
of  ravens,  messaud  and  messauda  (tn.  and  f .  for  lucky)  cross  one*s
path  in  eqiial  flight ;  else  a  croaking  raven  is  called  the  bird  of
parting,  bee.  he  foretells  a  separation.  There  is  a  bird  whose  crj,
heard  from  the  right,  brings  blessing  to  a  house:  it  is  called
iakuni,  iakunta,  afberw.  kapnyaia,  Kuhn  on  VrihaddSvatft  p.  117.

p.  1133.]     The  over-flight  of  some  birds  is  significant :

Zwoa  schnee-weissi  täuberli  (dovelings)

sant  übawärts  g'flogn,

und  hiaz  hat  mich  mein  dearndl  (girl)

schon  wiedä  bitrogn  (fooled  me  again).    Seidl  Aimer  34.

Pigeons  also  fan  the  king  while  he  dines,  Athen.  2,  487.
Again :

Ob  im  vant  er  einen  am  (eagle),

des  schoene  was  seltsaene ;

er  was  im,  in  waene  (I  ween),

gesant  von  Gote  ze  gemache  (comfort)  :

mit  einem  vetache  (wing)

treip  er  im  den  lufl  dar  (fanned  the  air),

mit  dem  andern  er  im  scJiate  bar.  Servat.  1330.

Albert.  Magn.  De  falcon,  c.  4 :  '  Ego  enim  jam  vidi  qui  aine
ligaturis  intrabant  et  ezibant,  et  nobis  comedentibus  super
mensam  veniebant,  in  radio  solis  se  extendentes  coram  nobis,  quasi
blandirentur  nobis.'  While  Marcian  sleeps,  an  ea^le  flies  above
him,  giving  shade,  Procop.  1,  326.  A  shading  peaeocVs  tail  is
worn  by  ladies,  Yilk.  saga  a  213  and  Ynk  4,  10;  Sk  peacock  fan,
Claud,  in  Eutr.  1,  109 ;  pfaeioine  huote,  Kolocz.  184  [on  'peacock
hats  from  England,'  see  Hehn's  Plants  and  Anim.,  Lond.  '85].
With  ominnis  hegri  connect  'iwer  iegeslichen  h&t  diu  heher
(OHGr.  hehara)  an  geschriet  ime  walde,'  the  jay  has  cried  a  spell
over  you  all,  Wh.  407,  11.

p.  1 134.]  A  sihU  singing  on  your  right  brings  luck,  Biittn.
Lett.  lied.  pp.  248.  266.  The  sight  of  the  first  wagtail  is  signifi-
cant, Klemm  2,  329,  and  to  Kalmuks  that  of  the  snake  3,  202-3.


SUPERSTITION.  1643

The  neighing  of  horses,  sneezing  of  cats,  howling  of  dogs,  each
is  an  omen  :  dir  het  diu  katze  niht  genam,  Helbl.  1,  1392  (Sappl.
to  1 115) ;  on  the  howling  of  dogs,  see  Capitolinus  in  Maxim,  jnn.
c.  5.     Pausan.  iv.  13,  1.

p.  1136.]  Leo  in  Thür.  mitth.  iv.  2,  98  connects  the  Goth.
hrdiva-dubd  with  divan  and  daubs,  dedf  [Hehn^s  Plants  and
Anim.  258].  'Bubo  habet  nomen  a  voce  sua,  et  moratur  in
cavernis  petrosis  vel  muris  antiquis,  et  differt  a  noctua  solum  in
magnitudine,  quia  est  major  ea,  et  bubo  dicitur  letalis  vel  moT'
talis,  quia  mortem  annuntiat,  unde  dicunt  quidam  naturales,  quod
sit  animal  habens  dilectionem  naturalem  ad  hominem,  et  prop-
terea  ponit  se  supra  vestigium  hominis,  et  post  mortem  festinat
ad  amandum  cadaver,  et  dicunt  aliqui  quod  generetur  ex  medulla
Spinae  in  dorso  hominis/  Stephan's  Stofl.  118.

Ter  omen
funereus  bubo  letali  carmine  fecit.      Ov.  Met.  10,  453.

Tectoque  profanus
incubuit  bubo,  thalamique  in  culmine  sedit.       6,  431 .

Infausto  bubone,  Claud,  in  Eutr.  2,  407 ;  a  bubo  prophesies  to
Agrippa,  Joseph.  18, 6.  19, 8  (Horkel  p.  494) ;  bubo,  cartae  funebris
lator,  Marbod's  Garm.  1577.  Hipponax  in  Meineke's  Choliambi
p.  112  calls  its  KpiTftf  (screeching)  vexp&v  ayyeXo^  re  xal  Krjpv^.
As  the  Lett,  uhpis,  hoopoo,  is  a  bird  of  ill-omen,  our  Mwe  (bubo)
heralds  a  speedy  death  in  the  Herod  story,  Pass.  157,  51 — 72.
159,  76 — 83;  der  leidic  hüwa,ere,  der  VMUit-huwer,  Albrecht's
Ovid  177*».  345»;  trftrio  als  ein  unflaetec  hüwe.  Renn.  17993.
The  screech-owl,  kauz  or  käuzlein,  cries :  '  Come  along,  come
along  I '  that^s  twice  the  death-bird  has  called  to  me,  Kehrein^s
Nassau  41  [To  Russian  children  the  owl  cries  shubu,  (I'll  have
your)  fur-coat].  The  same  kind  of  thing  is  the  scuwut  on  the
tree,  Maerl.  2,  323.  348  and  the  vöglein  kreide-weiss  (chalk-
white),   MussBUS   5,   28. The  word   klag-mutter    reminds   of

Berhta,  of  the  white  lady,  the  fylgja  and  the  banshee,  bansighe
(pp.  279.  280).  On  the  WendiRh  waiter,  Ood's  little  chair,  see
Wend,  volksl.  2,  269^.  Somm.  p.  169.  A  death  is  foretold  by
'  la  poule  qui  chante  en  coq,'  Bosq.  219.  Other  omens  of  death
are :  When  the  dead  in  churclies  are  seen  or  heard  at  night
by  the  living,  it  bodes  a  new  event  to  these,  esp.  death  :  quando-


1644  SUFBBSTITION.

canqae  a  Tiventibas  haec  audiaotar  Tel  videntur,  nooutn  aliquid
signat,  Pertz  5,  738.  The  same  if  you  hear  a  grunting  or  sawinj
at  night  5,  738-9 ;  conf.  deathwatch,  next  paragr.

p.  1136.]  The  wood-worm  we  call  todten-ukr  is  termee  pulsa-
torius,  the  Engl,  deathwatdi  «oarabsBas  g^eatus  palsator.  Hone's
Yrbk  823;  ich  hör  ein  würmlin  klopfen,  Garg.  278*;  the  death-
smith  who  thuwpß  in  window  frames  and  walls^  Geliert  3, 148.
Finn,  yumi  and  9einärautio,  wall-smith ;  conf.  the  tapping  home-
sprites.

p.  1136.]  Swarms  of  bees  betoken  a  fire:  molitasque  examen
apes  passim  qne  crematas,  perbacchata  domes  nnllia  incendia
caasis,  Gland.  B.  Get.  241.  Bees  that  fasten  on  70a,  Aelian's
Yar.  12,  40.  Pliny  8,  42;  bee-swarms  and  spiders,  Botticher's
Hell.  temp.  127 ;  ea  hora  tantae  aranearum  telae  in  medio  popnli
cecidernnt,  nt  omnes  mirarentur ;  ac  per  hoc  significatam  est,  qnod
sordes  hereticae  pravitatis  depulsae  sint,  Paul.  diao.  6,  4.  A
flight  of  email  birds,  a  shoal  of  salmon,  are  a  sign  of  guesUj
Justinger  271.  379.  The  aider-beetle  fljing  sonth  is  lucky,  nortli
nnlacky,  Kalewipoeg,  note  on  2,  218.

p.  1 137.]  Other  omens  of  death  are  bloody  weapons,  a  riutin>j
knife,  K&(.  no.  60 ;  but  also  flowers,  Altd.  w.  2,  187.  Hpt  *i,
364.  Oorpse-eandles,  mists  in  churchyards,  prefigure  a  dead
body,  Hone's  Daybk  2,  1019;  an  expiring  lamp  is  a  sign  of
death,  Altd.  w.  2,  186  (weather  also  was  foretold  by  dioinaiio  ejt
lucemis,  Apuleius  ed.  Ruhnk.  lib.  2,  p.  116).  Elmo*s  fire,  Satä-
elmo,  blxiwe  liechter,  Staden's  Heise  p.  102 ;  üf  dem  mäste  dar
enboben  [enhoben?]  ein  yackeln-licht  so  schöne  quam,  Marienleg.
p.  87.     A  crackling  flame  may  denote  a  blessing  :

Et  succensa  sacris  crepitet  bene  laurea  flammis,
omine  quo  felix  et  sacer  annus  erit.     TibuU.  ii.  5,  82.

So  to  Elalmuks  the  fizzing  of  meat  when  roasting,  and  the  sdj-
lighting  of  an  extinguished  fire.  Klemm  3,  203 ;  retulerunt  qui-
dam  de  ipso  (abbate  Sangallensi)  agonizante,  quod  audieraxit
voces  plangentium  et  bullUionem  caldarlorum  (yr  1220).

The  room-door  opens  of  itself  when  there  is  a  death,  Lncse
260-9.  When  a  board  or  shelf  tips  over,  it  is  called  deaih-fall
Bair.  kinderlehre  23.  ON.  fall  er  farar  heill;  in  lapeu  faustam
ominatns  eventum,  Saxo  Gr.  73.     On  the  other  hand,  stumbliryj,


SUPERSTITION.  1645

the  foot  catching,  is  of  ill-omen  in  Earip.  Heracl.  726  seq. ;  ter
pedis  offensi  signo  est  revocata,  Ov.  Met.  10,  452 ;  sed,  ut  fieri
assolet,  sinistro  pede  profectnm  me  spes  compendii  frustrata  est,
Apuleius  p.  m.  80.  Getting  up  too  early,  wrongly,  is  fatal :  si
'wkren  ze  vrao  des  morgens  üf-gestan,  die  maosten  da  daz  leben
län  (lose),  Livl.  1255;  samelich  ze  vruo  hate  des  morgens  üf-
gestän,  der  muoste  da  ze  pfände  län  den  lip  3859.

p.  1137.]  The  notion  that  several  ears  on  one  stalk  signify
peace,  is  apparently  derived  fr.  the  Bible,  Gen.  41,  22;  a  stalk
with  15  ears,  Weller^s  Anm.  1,  221.  A  donble  ear  is  Lett.
yummis,  dim.  yummite,  Büttner  2818.  Good  hap  or  ill  is  fore-
seen by  tying  together  two  ears  of  standing  com,  and  seeing
which  will  shoot  up  higher,  Dybeck  '4b,  p.  52.  Pilgrimages  to
Our  Lady  of  the  Three  Ears,  Keisersb.  Brösami.  56^.

p.  1138.]  Things  found  are  esp.  operative  for  good  or  harm,
e.g.  four-cornered,  four-leaved  clover,  Siinplic.  1,  334.  L.  Sax.
sagen  no.  190 ;  a  whole  grain  in  the  loaf,  Serenas  samon.  935.
Things  inherited,  Müllenh.  no.  315;  begged,  Wolffs  Ndrl.  sag.
p.  414 ;  worn  (pp.  602-3.  1093) ;  rings  made  of  gibbet  irons,  Lac.
Philops.  17.  24;  fingers  of  a  babe  unborn  (p.  1073 n.).

p.  1139.]  Goth,  dagam  vitdiß=^  dies  observate,  Gal.  4,  10.
'Hfiipa  fjbiXaiva,  fii}  KaOapd,  airoippd^  (fr.  ippd^oj),  see  Lucian's
Pseudologista  (17  irepl  rrj^  aTTOippäSo^) ,  couf.  ed.  Bip.  8,  434;  so
airoippdie^  irvkai,  Porta  Scelerata  8,  58.  Dies  foetus,  nefastus,
nefandus,  nefarius,  infandus,  per  qaem  nefas  fari  praetorem ;
dies  inaiufpicatus,  ater.  Henry  lY.  died  on  a  Tuesday,  die
Martis,  qaa  etiam  cuncta  sua  praelia,  paganico  nimirum  auspieio,
perpetrare  consuevit,  Pertz  8,  240.  Napoleon  avoided  Fridays,
Wieselgr.  473.  AS.  nella^  heora  ]nng  wanian  on  Monamdoeg  for
anginne  ]?8ere  wucan,  AS.  hom.  100.

p.  1140n.]  With  Wisantgang  conf.  Wisantes-steiga,  Wisantes
wane  (Neugart).  Should  we  read  Wolf-bizo  (-bit),  or  Wolf-bizo
(-biter),  like  baren- beisser,  bnllen-beisser  (-dog)  ?  Cattle  hilled
or  bitten  by  wolves,  are  wholesome  fare,  Spinnr.  evang.,  Friday  9.
Gr.  XvKoßptöTo^,  and  Plutarch  discusses  'why  wolf-eaten  mutton  is
sweeter,'  Symp.  2,  9.  Wolfleip  Graff  1,  850 ;  Wolfleibseh,  Kopp's
Gesch.  d.  Eidgen.  2,  557;  Wulflevinge,  Gosl.  berggesetze  p.  339  ;
Ulricas  dictus  Wolfleipsch,  der  Wolfleipscho,  Ch.  yrs.1260 — 05.
Neugart  nos.  972.  981.  990-5  ;   lupi  praeda,  Marcellus  no.  53.

VOL.    IV.  •    '  B   B


1646  SüPBBSTinoN.

p.  1141.]  Javenes  .  .  .  missaram  se  esse,  in  qaas  dii  de-
dissent  auguriia  sedes,  ostendit,  Livy  5,  34.  The  Hirpini  were
led  by  the  wolf,  hirpas,  the  Picentini  by  the  pecker,  picas,  the
Opici  by  the  hull,  ops  ?  Wackem.  in  Hpt  2,  559.  Mommsen's
Rom.  gesch.  1,  76.  Bull  and  sow  as  guides,  Klausen's  Aen.
1107 ;  cows  indicate  where  a  church  is  to  be  built,  Wieselgr.  408 ;
milch'Cows  show  the  site  of  the  future  church,  a  black  hull  that
of  the  castle,  Miillenh.  p.  112-3;  a  heifer  leads  Cadmus  to  the
spot  where  he  is  to  settle  [two  milch-kine  bring  the  ark,  1  Sam.

6,  7] . The  Franks  are  shown  their  way  by  the  Rune,  Guitecl.

2,  35  j  a  xohite  ha/rt  walks  before  them  as  God's  messenger,  Ogier
1,  12;  and  a  Westphal.  family-name  Reasford  (Deeds  in  Moser)
points  to  a  similar  event.  A  Delaware  climbed  through  the
mouth  of  an  underground  lake  into  daylight,  killed  a  stag  and
took  it  home,  then  the  whole  tribe  moved  to  the  sunny  land,
Klemm  2, 159.  A  horse  points  out  the  place  for  a  church,  Miillenh.
p.  111-2.  Mxdea  show  where  the  convent  of  Maulbronn  in  the
Black  Forest  is  to  be  founded.     A  hare  guides,  Paus.  iii.  22,  9.

Ravens  are  indicators,  Miillenh.  p.  113;    the  three  in  the

Icelandic  narrative,  flying  o£f  one  after  another,  strongly  remind
us  of  Noah.  The  dove  guides,  Hrosvitha  Gandesh.  253.  261 — 6.
A  vision  reveals  that  a  hird  sitting  on  the  top  of  the  hill  will  flj
up,  and  must  be  followed  :  it  flies  on  before,  then  alights,  and
pecks  the  ground  on  the  spot  where  stones  may  be  quarried  to
build  the  church  with,  Pertz  6,  310;  doves  guide  Aeneas  to  the
golden  bough,  Aen.  6,  191—211.  The  lark.  Paus.  iv.  34,  5;  the
ducking  hen  at  Bremen,  Brem.  sag.  no.  1 ;  the  heaihcock  rising,
Schiiren's  Ghron.  p.  3 ;  fribolum  de  ansere  quasi  dominam  suam
deducente,  Pertz  8,  215  yr  1096,  conf.  Baumerts  First  Cms.  1,69.

p.  1144.]  In  a  dike  threatened  by  the  sea  a  child  is  buried
alive,  Miillenh.  no.  881.  Thiele  in  Danmarks  folkes.  2,  6'S.
Honsdam  in  Flanders,  V.  d.  Bergh  261  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  73).  Fair
weather  was  obtained  by  walling  up  a  peck  of  barley  and  a  bowl
if  water,  Bocken-philos.  6,  88.  A  Königsberg  story  tells  how
they  took  a  fallen  woman^s  child,  a  year  and  a  half  old,  set  it
down  in  a  hollow  stone,  with  a  slice  of  bread-and-butter  in  each
hand,  and  then  walled  it  in,  leaving  only  an  opening  at  the  top;
in  the  morning  the  child  was  gone,  but  after  that  the  building
of  the  wall  went  on  unhindered,  N.  Preuss.  prov.  bl.  465.    At  a


SUPERSTITION.  1647

place  called  the  Nine- ways,  as  many  boys  and  g^rls  were  buried
alive  by  the  Persians,  Herod.  7,  114.  Vortigem's  tower  keeps
falling  down  :  ye  shall  wet  the  foandation-stone  with  the  blood  of
a  boy  born  of  woman  without  man,  Merlin  1,  67.  72-5;  under  it
lie  two  dragons,  1,  91  ;  conf.  Thib.  de  Navarre  2,  160.  Like  the
girl  inclosed  in  Copenhagen  wall  is  the  child  who  is  set  before  a
table  with  apples,  and  kept  shut  up  in   the  cave  for  a   year,

Müllenh.  p.  354. It  is  an  oft-recurring  feature,  that  what  is

built  in  the  day  is  pulled  down  in  the  night,  as  in  the  Bamberg
leg'end  of  the  cathedral  toads.  Bait.  stud.  10,  32-4.  Hanusch  186.
Müllenh.  pp.  112-3.  128.  177.  542;  troll  ned-refvo  om  nätteme
bvad  som  byggdes  om  dagen,  Wieselgr.  p.  408 ;  a  wall  is  torn
down  15  times,  Somm.  p.  9 ;  much  the  same  is  told  of  the  tower
at  Enger,  Redeker's  Sagen  p.  41.  'Tradition  says,  that  as  fast
as  the  workmen  built  it  up  by  day,  it  would  at  night  be  carried
off  by  invisible  hands ^  and  placed  on  the  spot  where  it  now
stands '  (a  Devonshire  leg.),  Chambers's  Pop.  rhymes  14^.  Con-
versely, a  wall  broken  down  by  day  grows  again  overnight,
Müllenh.  p.  349 ;  conf.  the  tree  that  is  cut  down,  and  sprouts
again  (p.  960).

p.  1145.]  0.  SI.  s'^n'^,  Serv.  «an.  Buss,  son,  Pol,  Boh.  sen,
Lith.  sapnas,  dream.  Lith.  megas,  Lett,  meegs,  Pruss.  maiggus,
somnus.  Buss,  migdtl,  wink.  ON.  dur  levis  somnus,  nubes
somni;  höfugr  blundr,  sopor,  Ssdm.  93";  er  )?er  svefn  höfugt?
Iiaxd.  120.     '  Troume  sint  trüge*  says  the  proverb  in  the  Hatz-

lerin  126-7;  traum  trug,  Frankl.  21.  46. ^OHG.  troum-sceido,

'Sceidari,  -interpreter,  lit.  divider,  Graff  6,  439 ;  conf.  vrroKpi'
vaa-Oai,  Od.  19,  535.  555;  iafnan  dreymir  fyrir  vei$rum,  Vols,
saga  c.  25,  and  dreams  are  still  made  to  refer  to  rain.  AS.
swefen-racu,  -interpretation,  swefen-raccere,  -expounder.  Slav.
gaddti,  gaess,  somnia  conjicere;  Swed,  gissa  drömmen;  'elvens
aldste  datter '  is  to  guess  the  dream,  DY .  3,  4 ;  nu  hefi  ek  ßyddan
draum  ]?inn,  Gunnl.  s.  ormst.  c.  2  ;  den  troum  betiuten^  deuten,
MS.  2,  115*.  Griesh.  1,  98;  ontbinden,  untie,  Eose  6134;  con-
jectura,  Plant.  Bud.  iii.  1,  20.     Cura  ii.  1,  31.

p.  1146.]  A  dream  comes  out,  appears;  rann,  up  en  sömn,
Sv.  vis.  1,  299;  wie  der  troum  wolte  uzgen,  Griesh.  2,  133;
der  traum  ist  aus,  Ayrer  177^.  Fichard's  Frankf.  arch.  1,  130.
There  is  a  gate  of  dreams,  Hpt  2,  535;    iv  oveipelriai,  irvKpa^


1648  SÜFEBSTinON.

Od.  4,  809 ;  ip  wvkaifs  dvetpelavi,  Babr.  30,  8;  conf.  the  myth  in
Od.  19,  662—9.  A  dream-vision,  Syjn^,  comes  repeatedly  and
fliea  away,  Herod.  7,  12.  14-5.  17-8-9.  A  dream  appears,
Griesh.  1,  98.  Flore  1102;  erscheine  mir'z  ze  gaote,  Reinh.  73;
hence  ' einen  troam  er  gesach'  Ksrchr.  5473,  troum ireehen  2921.
AS.  hine  gemetie,  there  met  him,  he  dreamt,  Caedm.  223,  20;
gemeted  wear»  225,  21 ;  aseistit  capiti,  Gland.  De  b.  GiIdon.329n.

*Der  troum  ergiene/  came  about,  Ksrchr.  611 ;  'din  troum

irge  dir  ze  heile  ! '  turn  out  well,  1373 ;  we  say  '  comes  true.'
OvK  Svap,  alOC  Sirap,  not  dream,  but  truth.  Od.  19,  547.  20,  90 :
Ihrap  i^  oveipov,  Pindar;  iwer  troum  wil  sich  enden,  Flore  1117.
A  dream  is  a  messenger  of  God  :  sagde  im  an  svefne,  slipandinm
an  naht,  hodo  Droktines,  Heliand  21,  12.  Dreams  are  heavy  and
light :  stärke  drömme,  DV.  3,  8 ;  '  ob  in  nu  ringer  getroumet,'
milder,  better,  Ben.  438.    A  beautiful  dream  is  toeidenliche,  feast-

ing  the  eye,  Ls.  1, 131 ;  muowent  uns  troume  I  KIsrchr.  2948.

Dreams  of  birds  are  esp.  frequent :  mir  (Uote)  ist  getroomet
hinte  (last  night),  wie  allez  daz  gefügele  in  disme  lande  waere  tot.
Nib.  1449,  3.  Vilk.  c.  336;  mir  tronmte  hinte  in  dirre  naht,
zwen  falken  vlugen  mir  ftf  die  hant,  Morolt  2876 ;  a  dream  of  a
raven  and  an  eagle,  Orendel  Ettm.  p.  92,  and  the  like  in  Gunnl.
s.  ormst.  o.  2.  Fomald.  sog.  1,  420.  Penelope  dreams  of  an
eagle  killing  her  pet  geese.  Od.  19,  536 ;  conf.  Aesch.  Pers«  205.
Darzuo  müeze  im  von  eiern  (of  eggs)  sin  getroumet,  i.e.  bad
dreams,  MS.  2,  152*»;   swer  sich  zno  lange  wolde  sumen,  deme

muoste  von  eiem  troumen,  Türl.  Wh.  87*. ^Dreams  of  bear

and  boar  hunting,  Tit.  2877-8 ;  of  a  boar,  Krone  12157,  a  dragon,
Bab.  123-4.  Dreaming  of  beasts  may  be  traced  to  Guardian-
spirits  and  Transmigration,  says  F.  Magn.,  Edda-1.  4,  146.
Dreams  of  a  tree  growing  up,  Ruodl.  16,  90,  of  a  shipxoreck.  Krone
12225,  a  bwming  house,  Lachm.  Ndrrhein.  ged.  18-9,  a  6»"idye,
Kl.  sehr.  3,  414,  a  tooth  falling  out,  Keisersb..Bros.  48*;  mir'st
getroumet  ab  der  guoten,  MS.  2,  115".

p.  1147.]  'Der  lor-boum  habet  tia  natura,  übe  sin  ast  (if  a
branch  of  it)  6f'en  slftfenten  man  geleget  wirt,  taz  imo  \Bar
troumet,"  he  dreameth  true,  N.  Cap.  13.  The  dream  '  under  a
tree '  in  Mar.  155,  21  may  be  for  rhymers  sake  alone :  '  als  einem
man  der  da  gellt,  begrifen  mit  swftrem  troume,  sl&fend  unter
einem  boume,'  conf.  troum,  boum,  Wigal.  5808,     A  dream  in  a


SICKNESSES.  1649

pigstye  comes  true,  Fornm.  s.  10,  169.     The  first  dream  in  a  new

hotute  is  important^  Günther  640. Night  is  descr.  as  «qa/n-

gaman,  draum-^iorun,  Saom.  öl^  Dreams  before  the  dawn  are
true  :  Lenore  starts  up  at  dawn  fr.  heavy  dreams ;  *  ir  getronmde '
at  ^  tcLge^cU/  after  'han-kr&t/  En.  5234;  'troamen^din  dem
tdge*  towards  day^  Bit.  9630 ;  *  in  the  morning  hour,  that  is  called
the  time  of  golden  sleep/  Fastn.  sp..l302;  mir  troumde  nach
mittertuickt,  wie  mir  der  dome  swaere  (that  my  thumb  festered),
und  der  nagel  abe  waere,  Eracl.  3712;  conf.  ipapyh  Sveipov
PVICT09  afAoXy^,  Od.  4,  841.  Lilia  dreams  on  her  wedding-nighty
Gesta  reg.  Francor.  in  Mone's  Anz.  4,  15 ;  der  erste  träum  treugt
nit,  er  pflegt  wol  wahr  zu  werden,  C.  Brehmen's  Gedichte  J  1^

p*  1147.]  On  dreaming  of  a  treaeu/re  on  the  bridge,  see  Kl.
sehr.  3,  414  seq.  One  is  waked  out  of  a  dream  by  cry  of  dismal
crow,  Walth.  95,  1,  by  the  crowing  cock,  the  calling  servant,  Ls.
1,  149.  Do  taget  ez,  und  muos  ich  wachen,  Walth.  75,  24:  ende
ic  ontspranc,  ende  doe  wart  dach.  Rose  14224;  and  with  that  I
woke,  Agricola  624,  and  after  that  it  dawned  625  ;  do  kr&te  der
ban,  ez  was  tac,  Altsw.  67,  3.  To  y(>eak  out  of  a  dream  :  ich  en-
sprich  ez  niht  uz  eime  troums,  Parz.  782,  13 ;  ir  redet  uz  eiine
troume,  Beinh.  p.  202.  He  fought  (in  a  dream),  Lachm.  Ndrrh,
ged.  p.  18-9.


CHAPTER   XXXVI.

SICKNESSES,

p.  1150.]  Apollo  is  called  larpo-fiayrt^,  Aesch.  Eumen.  62 ;
Apollo  Orannus  was  invoked  by  the  sick,  Stalin  1,  67.  112.
Wise  leeches  were  Kaeiapa,  Holtzm.  3,  164-5 ;  lapis  lasides,
Aen.  12,  391 ;  Meges,  Meyrf^,  Forcell.  sub  v.;  Dianoecht,  Keller  on
Irish  MSS.  p.  93/  The  Greeks  venerated  the  Scythian  Toxaris
after  his  death  as  {ei/o?  tarpon,  Lucian's  Scytha  2 ;  Za/^oX^iBo^
iarpoif  Plato's  Charmides  p.  156.  The  grey  smith  appears  to  the
aick  man  in  his  sleep,  and  with  his  pincers  pulls  the  nails  and
spear  out  of  his  hand,  foot  and  side,  Hpt's  Ztschr.  1,  103.  An
angel  reveals  the  remedy  in  a  dream,  Engelh.  5979.  5436 ;  an
angel  visits  the  sleeper,  and  gives  a  willow-bough  to  stop  the
murrain,  Miillenh.  238.     Saints  heal  (p.  1163  end  ;  Pref.  xxxviii.)


1650  SICENESSBS.

6DS.  149.« Women  are  often  skilled  in  leechcraft:  Ängäia

instracts  in  herbs  and  healings  Klausen  1039.  As  Wate  became
a  leech  through  a  wilden  wip,  a  herbalist  traces  his  art  ap  to
'  madame  Trote  de  Saleme,  qui  fait  cuevre-chief  de  ses  oreilles,
et  li  sorciz  li  penden  a  chaaines  dargent  par  desns  les  epaales  ^;
she  sends  her  men  to  all  countries  in  search  of  herbs,  'en  la
forest  d'Ardanne  por  ocirre  les  bestes  sauvages,  et  por  traire  les
oignemenz/  Butebeuf  1,  256  (Another  herbman  calls  himself
hunter  of  Arden-wood  1,  470) .  '  Unde  communiter  Trotul4i
yocata  est,  quasi  magistra  operis ;  cum  enim  quaedam  pnella
debens  incidi  propter  hujusmodi  ventositatem,  quasi  ex  raptura
laborasset,  cum  eam  vidisset  Trotula,  admirata  fuit,  etc.'  Medici
antiqui  (Venet.  1547)  75*;  she  is  named  in  Chaucer's  C.T.  6259.
Ace.  to  Jocher  she  was  a  physician  of  Salerno,  but  the  book  De
morbis  mulierum  was  written  by  a  doctor  who  used  her  name.
Othinus  puts  on  female  disguise,  calls  himself  Veeha,  and
passes  for  a  she-doctor,  Saxo  Gram.  ed.  M.  128;  conf.  AS.  wicee,
saga  (p.  1033).  Three  nymphe  prepare  a  healing  strengthening
food  for  Balder,  Saxo  Gr.  ed.  M.  123  (irigoris  epulum  194).
Queen  Brka  is  a  leech,  Yilk.  saga  c.  277 ;  and  Crescentia  ia  en-
dowed with  healing  power  (p.  1152).  The  meer-frau  in  the  Abor,
like  the  Scotch  mermaid,  gathers  the  healing  herb  on  a  mountain,
Hpt.  5,  8.  Fämurgän  knows  herbs,  makes  plasters  and  salves.
Er.  5212.  7226.  Iw.  3424.  There  was  a  leech  named  Morgan
tud,  says  L.  Guest  3,  163;  but  that  is  the  name  of  a  healing  plant
3,  164;  conf.  Ben.  note  to  Iw.  3424.  Isot,  diu  künegin  von
Irlande,  diu  erkennet  maneger  hande  würze  u.  aller  kritUe  kraft
n.  arz&tliche  meisterchaft.  Trist.  175,  32.  The  loneser-jungfer
knows  healing  herbs,  Firmenich  1,  23 ;  a  meer-weib  gives  help  in
childbed,  MüUenh.  p.  340.  En  gumma  sade,  hon  kände  väl  de
gamlee  ehräck^  men  trodde  dem  ej  ;  hon  viste  huru  man  künde  fa
hjelp  af  dem,  men  att  det  var  syndigt,  Fries's  Udfl.  1,  108.  The
wilde  fräulein  knows  the  root  that  will  heal  a  wound.  Ecke  1 73 —
5.  At  Staffelbach  the  wood^inaidene  came  out  of  the  wood,  and
cried  to  the  people :  '  esst  bimellen  und  baldrian,  so  geht  euch
die  pest  nicht  an ';  therefore  at  harvest  a  bunch  is  left  standing
for  the  wood-mannikin.  The  vila  of  the  woods  is  a  lidkaritsa,
and  demands  a  heavy  fee,  she  is  angry  if  you  refuse,  and  poisons
you,  Vuk  no.  321 ;  conf.  2,  50  and  the  pere-jungfer  with  her


SICKNESSES.  1651

healing  fountain,  Alsatia  '55,  p.  216  (a  place  in  Thuringia  was
called  *in  süezer  heilinge/  Graff  4,  867).  The  name  of  the
Norse  Mr  reminds  one  of  *I/>09>  *Ipo9  ^Alpo^  [so  called  because
he  carried  messages],  Od.  18,  6.  7.  73,  and  of  'Ipt9  the  divine
messenger.     To  Hyfja^herg  corresponds  the  Finn.  Kipu-meki,

Kipu'Vnori,  Zipu-haria,  mount  of  pain. Women  heal,  they

bind  up  wounds,  Roquefort  on  Marie  2,  198 — 202 ;  frowen  die
die  tiefen  wunden  ir  lieben  yriunden  bunden,  Servat.  1 779 ;
do  senten  (segenten,  blessed)  im  die  wunden  die  frouwen  al  ze
hant,  Rosen-g.  1997 ;  dede  si  sine  wenden  wel  besien  ere  jong-
frouwen,  diere  vroet  ane  was.  Lane.  22651 ;  a  virgin  knows  '  der
crude  cracht/  power  of  herbs  11999;  a  woman  gives  a  magic
salve.  Ecke  155-6.  Herdsmen,  shepherds  can  heal  men,  for  they
are  expert  in  treating  cattle,  Yarro  RR.  2,  1.  When  a  patient
dies,  his  doctors  are  killed,  Greg.  Tur.  5,  35.

p.  1152.]  A  physician  was  in  Fris.  called  Utze;  ON.  Wcna  ok
Zoeina  =  Ienire  et  mederi,  Sasm.  236";  Gael.  Zio^A,  whence  Leo
in  Malb.  Gl.  1,  viii  derives  all  the  others ;  Scot,  lighiclie,  physi-
cian ;  OHG.  lachituom,  medicine.  AS.  from,  medicus,  Matth.  9,
12;  conf.  OB.Gt.frumi  thaz  wib,  heal  the  woman,  O.  iii.  10,  19,
thia  fruma  neman  14,  50,  fruma  firstelan  14,  39.  OHG.  gravo,
chirurgus,  Graff  4,  813;  Pris.  greva,  Richth.  786.  MHG.  wise
rnan,  V.  d.  Hagen's  Ges.  Abent.  2,  121.  On  our  arzt,  arznei,
see  Graff  1,  477;  arzenare,  N.  Booth.  217;  ar«a/ere,  medicos.
Lane.  42681,  eraatre  von  wenden  1988 ;  arzatinne,  Trist.  33,  38
(what  is   diet-arzt,   Garg.    72*?);    arza-die,    Ksrchr.    7483-93;

erzenie,  Wh.  60,  23. Leo  in  Malb.  Gl.  2,  88  derives  OHG.

Inppi  from  Gael,  luibh,  herba;  si  machent  Az  krütein  gestüppe
(pulverem),  daz  ist  guot  ze  der  lüppe,  Hätzl.  217":  Swed.  löfja,
läka;  lö^or,  medicamenta;  löjjerska,  vis  qvinna,  Almqv.  390;
hiblei'in,  venefica.  Mono  7,  424.  Diu  zouuerlicha  liant,  herbi-
potens  manus,  N.  Boeth.  197  ;  diu  chriuter  unde  diu  gifUhant  der
Circe  198;  hanUgiß,  Mono  7,  428-4.  Tit.  4518;  so  gloubent
eteliche  an  boese  hantgiß,  Berth.  58 ;  der  Saelden  h,,  Silv.  534 ;
edel  h.  geben,  Troj.  11188 ;  sure  h.  25043 ;  dats  goede  hantgiße.
Rein.  6906 ;  elsewhere  hantgiß  is  strena,  ^trenne ;  leidiu  h,,  Troj.
12884.  The  Lex  Salica  19  says:  si  quis  alteri  herbas  dederü
hibere,  ut  moriatur.  The  sense  of  '  poison '  is  evolved  out  of
each  of  these  three  words,  from  herba  (lubi  ?),  from  dare  (gift).


1652  SICKNESSES.

from  bibere  (potio) ;  for  potio,  liter,  a  driak,  has  become  tbe
Fr.  poison;    conf.   'k  enherber   (to   poison)  m'aprist  jadia  ane

Juise/  Berte  p.  103.     Ducange  sub  v.  inherbare. A  berbman

or  quack  was  called  in  Bavaria  wcdd^haiisl,  wald-mann,  Schm.  4,
G3-4;  wärzier  umb  Bingen,  Oarg.  172^,  h'autnirer  188^  tenfela-
gerittene  wurzeUtelberin,  abgeribene  kraut-grctserin  189*,  olravn-
ilelberin  104*.  'Swiss  women  get  their  100  hei'bs  on  Dannersherg
in  the  Palatinate,  said  thej  were  stronger  there  than  in  Swiss-
land/  Eliz.  of  Orleans  p.  283 ;  ich  waiz  ain  mairin,  diu  vil  mit
dem  kraut  würkt,  Megenb.  386,  32.  Old  wives  pick  herbs  on
John^s  day  betw.  12  and  1,  for  then  only  have  they  power;  with
the  stroke  of  1  it  is  gone;  they  grow  on  Pilgerberg  alone,
Müllenh.  p.  222.  Kfut  temp&m,  Hartm.  büchl.  1,  1307.  Troj-
10635;  ein  temperte  als  wir  gemiscliet  nemen,  Wh.  420,  2;  Infi
tempern  u.  mischen,  MS.  1,  87*.  Another  verb  is  OHG.  lochon,
prop,  mulcere,  fovere:  ir  eigut  siuchi  gilokot,  0.  v.  20,  76;  conf.
IdoßjLai,  lalvwy  fovere,  orig.  said  of  wounds.

p.  1152.]  Our  kropf  (goitre?)  is  called  king*s  evil,  because  it
was  cured  by  the  king's  touch  ;  '  those  who  have  it,  on  drinking
from  the  Count  of  Habsburg's  hand,  are  made  whole,'  Beber's
Hemmerlin  p.  240.  Schimpf  u.  E.  1,  27.  It  seems  a  godfather
could  cure  his  godchild  of  some  diseases  :  '  godfather  and  foaVs
tooth  in  urgent  cases  are  too  weak'  (p.  658  n.).  Among
American  Indians  the  knowledge  of  healing  herbs  descends  from
father  to  son,  Elemm  2,  169;  the  family  of  Diokles  can  cure
disease  and  disablement.  Paus.  iv.  30,  2.  Health  is  regained  by
touching  the  Item,  also  by  mxigie  song:  Serv.  bayati,  incantare
morbum,  dolorem.  To  feel  the  pulse  is  in  MHG.  die  adem  begri-
fen,  MS.  2,  23^;  conf.  ein  ädern  grifen,  Reinh.  2018;  si  marhte
mit  dem  vinger  sin  äder-slän  (throbbing),  Eracl.  3033 ;  der  krafl-
ädern  slac,  Bari.  188,  22.

p.  1153.]  'Nomina  morborum  vernacula'  in  J.  Fr.  Low  ab
Erlesfeld's  Univ.  medicina  pract.,  Norimb.  1724.  Sickness  is
siuche,  Uolr.  1038.  1109.  En.  10833;  MLG.  suke ;  MHG.
siechtuom,  diu  suht,  Fundgr.  2,  46;  gesühte.  Warn.  2192;  aiech
von  ungesühte,  Walth.  20,  4.  Fragm.  46^;  ersochte,  Hpt  8,  167;
werlUsiech,  En.  12908;  die  siechen  u.  die  weichen,  G.  schm.  494,
conf.  ON.  veikr,  infirmus.  veiki  infirmitas,  AS.  wac,  Engl.  weak.
Siec  ende  ongedaen,  Lane.  15338,     Unmahii,  invaletudines,  O.  iii-


SICKNESSBS.  1653

b,  2,  unmahti,  iafirmi  9,  5;  OHG.  ni  mac  ni  touc,  non  valet;
MHG.  niht  en»fn(ie,  aegrotel,  Hagen's  Gres.  Ab.  3,  63 ;  daz  ich
niene  mac,  Ejsrchr.  821 ;  ungewalt,  inraletado^  En.  10230-551;
Slar.  ne^dug,  morbaa ;  Boh.  ne-mosh,  Bass,  ne-mötch,  infirmitas.

Unvamde,  aeger,  Türl.  Wh.  60**. The  contrary :  wolcamde

u.  gesunt,  Iw.  8430.  OHG.  kisunt,  MHG.  gesunt,  M.  Neth.
gesont  (soand^  well)^  hence  ungesuntj  Poor  Heinr.  375.  Ungcmzi,
infirmitas,  0.  iii.  4,  34,  ganz,  integer,  2,  22.  32 ;  M.  Neth.  gans,
whole,  gansen,  to  heal,  Maerl.  1,  313.  2,  359.  Jesus  p.  136;
genesen,  and  gansen  side  bj  side,  Maerl.  1,  313.  The  grand  word
for  sanos  is  GotL  hdih,  OHG.  heil,  ON.  heill,  OS.  hel,  AS.  luU,
Engl,  whole  ;  sanari  is  Goth.  hdiU  visan,  gahdilnan,  while  salrari

is  Goth»  OHG.  ganisan,  AS.  genesan  with  Ace.  (p.  1244  n.).

'  Ghenesen  ende  beeomen/  Maerl.  3,  97 ;  OHG.  chumig,  infirmns,
chumida,  morbas.  M.  Neth.  evel,  our  übel  [so,  king's  evil].  AS.
ddl  ne  jldo,  Beow.  3469,  from  ad,  fire,  heat?  (Sappl.  to  1166
end);  adl  oiie  iren  3692;  ddl  o^lSe  ecg  3523;  adlig,  aeger.
Dan.  uminden,  umänen,  an  indefinite  disease,  Molb.  Dial.  lex.
p.  630,  conf.  ON.  omynd,  monstrum,  forma  laesa.  What  means
'  lAgi  dawaUnii;  O.  iii.  2,  7,  moriens  f  (Graff  5,  346).  Dole  ich
diz  gebende,  Ksrchr.  12704 ;  conf.  ON.  afbendi,  tenesmus,  Dan.

bindsel,  constipation. More  general  are  OHG.  suerido ^snero;

oue^euero,  mctga-^uero,  Graff  6,  888.  OHG.  wewo,  woe,  pain;
manegen  wea  vertreip,  Servat.  1077.  AS.  eee,  ache,  toff-ece,
AS.  co9,  eoSe,  morbus,  pestis;  bän-coÖa,  m.,  God.  Exon.  163,  23.
MHG.  'er  lent/  he  is  laid  up,  Parz.  251,  16;  die  geligrigen,
infirmi,  Mohr's  Beg.  Frauenb.  nos.  828.  235;  die  suht  ligen,
Hpt4,  296.  Gramm.  4,  620;  mi  lega/r  bifeng,  Hel.  135,  12;
legar-faet  121,  16;  bette-rise,  ligerlinc,  Griesh.  116.  124;  beUrise,
Urstende  123,  69.  Ser7at.  3180  (is  pet-ritto  in  the  Strasb.  spell
the  same  thing  f) ;  an  reee-bette  ligen,  St.  Louis  90,  13 ;  le  gisant^
jacens.  Latent.  5,  12;  con£  'so  etiiende  ich  üf  von  dirre  ndt,  u.
waere  iemer  m6  gesunt,  Walth.  54,  9.  Peculiar  is  OHG.  winnen,
furere,  laborare  morbo,  gewinnen  (the  fever),  conf.  ON.  vinna.
In  Cassel  they  say  auf  stutzig  for  ill :  ein  pferd  aufstützig  worden,
Cav.  im  irgarten  53.

p.  1154.]  Sickness  appears  as  a  divine  dispensaiion  in  yovao^
^*09,  Od.  9,  411 ;  ir  w&re  diu  Biiht  gescelien,  Fundgr.  2,  46.  Sick-
i^dss  seizes:  appvoTo^  is  infirmus;  our  an-gegriffen ;  mich  hat


1654  SICKNESSES.

ein  sieoh-tage  begriffen,  Diocl.  6016 ;  ia  ergreif  dia  misel-sabt.
Poor  Heinr.  119;  angriffen  von  einem  boesen  wind^  yon  einem
teufels  kind^  Mone  6^  470;  gesnhte  bestet  uns  (tackles  as),  Hpt
1,  272 ;  do  begnnde  ein  suche  rämen  der  vrowen.  Pass.  K.  425«
20;  vKBrc  ingevood,  morbus  invasit.  Cod.  Exon.  163,  29;  him
faBringa  &dl  ingewod  158,  21.  Our  an/all  (attack),  morbus;
anvellig,  infectious,  Mone  8,  499.  Goth.  *  vas  ana-habaida  brinnön
mikilai/  Lake  4,  38 ;  da  wolt'  mich  hän  ergrummen,  ich  wetz  niht
waz,  Hagdietr.  Fromm.  146  ;  in  stiez  an  einiu  kelte,  Fragm.  19^;
in  Mecklenbg,  if  a  man  is  taken  ill  at  harvest  time,  they  say
'  the  harvest-goat  has  gestoBzen  (butted  at)  him ' ;  den  bete  der

siechtuom  s6  begint  (rhy.  kint),  Uolr.  1523. The  contrary;

den  siechtuom  überwinden  (win  over),  Wigal.  5991 ;  unz  der
siechtuom  vom  im  flöch,  Hpt  5,  278 ;  diu  suht  entweidi  (ran
away)  8,  188.  Iw.  3446;  so  muozen  dir  intwichen  dtne  sahte,
Ksrchr.  838 ;  daz  gesüht  begund  in  fliehen,  Ecke  176;  diu  suht

von  ime^ozj  Diemer  325,  7. The  vovaov  approach  men  oirro-

fiaroi,  and  tny^,  iirel  ifHovr^v  i^etkero  fjuirlera  Zevs,  Hes.  Opp.
102.  Mulierculae  plures  •  •  •  .  a  dasmoniis  vexaniur  (yr  1075),
Pertz  5,  128.  The  witch  cooks,  brews  diseases  ;  so  does  the
Finn.  Kivutar  (Suppl.  to  1046);  she  is  called  'kipia  neito,'
Schröter  34,  *  kipu  tyltö,  kipnian  näto,'  Peterson  75,  '  kipanen
eokko,'  Ealev.  25,  96.  179;  worrying  grey  doga  howl  around  her.
Pet.  74 ;  she  wears  gloves  and  shoes  of  pain,  Kal.  25,  183-4.  In
Lith.  they  say  '  ligga  ne  sessu/  the  sickness  is  no  sister,  does  not
spare.

p.  1155.]  Febris  for  fervebris,  ferbris;  Gael,  ^/iob^r ;  MH6.
biever,  Freid.  74,  9.  Dea  Febris,  Aug.  Civ.  D.  2,  14.  3,  12.  25.
AS.  ddl  ]?earl,  hat  and  heorogrim.  Cod.  Exon.  160,  30;  b4n-
cofa  adU  on-celed  159,  15 ;  adl  me  innan  ceU,  166,  5 ;  conf.  Gael.
teasa^ch,  febris,  fr.  teas,  calor,  fervor.  Dei  heizen  fieber  lascht  er
do  (he  leashes  them  ?),  Diem.  325,  5 ;  soitar  brimi,  morbi  aesto«,
Egilss.  637.     Hippocrates  often  has  irvp  for  irvperd^ :  vapßipor

irvp  €\aß€  3,  6  {yvvaiKa  piyo^  STutfie  1,  5). The  OHG.  rito  is

Norw.  rid,  Aasen  379»»;  are  we  to  conn,  it  with  ON.  hrid,  pro-
cellaf  Lje  too,  by  the  side  of  rideroff,  febris,  gives  hriff-ddl,
hri&ing,  febris,  hri&ian,  febricitare ;  conf.  '  in  bestuont  der  minne
schür;  Parz.  587,  13,  and  Herbert  12836  calls  the  minne  an
elbisch  viure :  Riten  winnanti,  febre  laborans,  Graff  1,  876;  rite


SICKNESSES.  1655

^ouh  fieber,  Diat.  3,  45;  der  rittige,  febricitans,  Griesh.  115;  bo
hat  ir  6re  den  rideriy  Hpt  1,  437.  M.  Neth.  rede  and  redine,
Moneys  Ndrl.  lit.  335.  Belg.  mus.  10,  52;  bevaen  met  enen  rede,
Maerl.  3,  188.  168.  237-8;  viel  in  den  r.  3,  269 ;  quam  mi  an  de
r.  8,  78 ;  hadde  enen  groten  r.  2,  79 ;  genasen  van  den  r.,  Hpt.
1,  104 :  den  vierden  r.  (febr.  quartan.),  Franc.  2882.  Nu  muze
der  leide  ride  Fukarde  vellen!  Karlm.  Lachm.  110;  schütte  in
der  rite !  Pass.  45,  32 ;  habe  den  riden  a.  die  suht  umb  dinen
hals  I  Morolf  715;  das  sie  der  jar-rit  schüt!  Garg.  242^;  die
cortsridene!  Walew.  6164;  conf.  Gl.  to  Lekensp.  p.  573;  das
dich  g£  der  schütler  an  !  H.  Sachs  iii.  3,  8^ ;  kam  sie  an  der
Jrorer,  Altd.  bl.  1,  56 ;  'break  the  neck  of  the  fever/  Bttn.  Unw.
d.  792.  Fever  rides  a  man,  as  poverty  does,  H.  Sachs  i.  3,  245^.
In  Boner's  fable  the  rite  is  made  a  butterfly  ( =  alp,  night-
mare), no  doubt,  that  he  may  the  better  converse  with  the  flea;
conf.  Fastn.  36,  55.  Keller's  Erz.  330.  Like  Petrarch,  H.  Sachs
1.  483  has  a  dialogue  betw.  the  zipperlein  (gout)  and  the  spider
(Kl.  sehr.  5,  400  seq.).  The  spell  in  Bodm.  Bheing.  alt.  p.  710
speaks  of  '  72  riten  ' ;  that  in  Mone  7,  421  of '  77  ritten';  Kulda

132  of  *  99  fevers.' Other  names  for  fever :  M.  Neth.  koorts,

febris,  saghe,  Bein.  391.  AS.  gedrif;  drif.  MHG.  der  begir?
Flore  1005 ;  to  die  of  a  schlirige  fever,  G^rg.  241*,  conf.  schür,
ulcer  259*,  schlir-geschimir  236^.  At  Louvain  fever  is  called  quads
mester.  OHG.  it-slac,  febr.  recidiva,  Graflf  6,  773,  it-slaht  777 ;
avar-sturz,  relapse;  conf.  'modica  pulsatus  febre/  Greg.  Tur.  2,
5.  '  Winter  und  siimer '  are  a  disease  (cold  and  hot  fits  of  ague
alternating?),  St.  Louis  (Bückert)  59,28.  80,  21.  Lat.  quer-
quera,  shivering  fit.  MHG.  qtiartanie,  febr.  quart.,  MSH.  3,
178^;  kartanie,  Waxth.  kr.  str.  51.  Gr.  i/ttmiXo?,  Luc.  Philops.
19.  In  O.  Fr.  they  said  'trembler  la  fievre,'  Meon  3,  88.  Bute-
beuf  1,  290.  Bauart  10150.  Lith.  paszta-hieU,  fever-bird  (kiele,
giskin).  Lett,  drudsis  vinnu  yahi,  fever  rides  him,  Bergm.  68.
Der  rote  suche,  My  st.  1,  104.  Flor  es  beatae  Mariae,  erysipelas,
Ducange  sub  v.  flores ;  Ital.  rosalia.

p.  1156.]  Gout,  OHG.  giht,  fargiht,  Graff  4,  142;  vor  zorne
si  daz  giht  brach,  Mai  69,  2 ;  daz  mich  diu  giht  zubrochin  hat,
Ksrchr.  2776.  4293,  conf.  '  die  alten  d6  der  huoste  (cough)  brach,
y.  d.  Hag.  Ges.  Ab.  2,  290 ;  swen  negt  (whom  gnaws)  daz  giht,
Benn.  9897;  swie  daz  giht  in  stunge,  Helb.   1,  70;  da  ist  si


1656    .  SICKNESSES.

müeode  daz  gegihte,  Ulr.  Trist  1512;  in  die  gichier  fallen^  ELiz.
of  Orl.  41 ;  vergiht,  Todes  geh.  548.  Senrat.  728.  786.  1573.  Hpt
6,  493.  Austr.  'kalt  vergicht/  arthritis  vaga;  iehi,  Hpt  1,  104.
Nethl.  jicht ;  die  jScte,  Maerl.  2,  79;  jiichiech,  paralyticus  2,  112.
317.  838;  do  vil  em  dat  ^'odn^a  in  de  been^  Detm.  2^  482 ;  is  this
gout  or  terror  ?  (the  huk,  angina  nTalaris,  is  allayed  by  the  spell :
'  Hode-joduth  /  I  cannot  galp  the  pot-hook  down/  Lisch's  MeckL
jrb.  6^  191 ;  the  hetsch,  or  the  heller'g$cho$$  bumps  against  me,
H.  Sachs  iv.  3,  76® ;  den  heschsn  gewinnen^  Suchenw.  18,  238 ;
hesche  schlucken) ;  unz  in  dd  slnoc  daz  podagra,  Elsrchr.  5854.
ON.  öhla-eldr,  Forum,  s.  3,  200 ;  AS.  ecilma,  ceeelma,  podagra,
deaggede,  deag^wyrmede,  podagricns,  deaw-ioyrm,  podagra.  ä>-
syniies,  petits  cousins,  Belg.  mus.  8,  183.  Boh.  dna^  gout;  Pol.
dma,  prop,  blast,  breathing  upon.

p.  1 157,  line  6,  a  short  paragr.  was  omitted  from  the  text,  viz. :
^'  A  burning  tumour  at  the  finger-nail  {napü^wx^si)  is  called  the
warm,  the  runabout  warm,  the  unnamed  (bee.  one  was  shy  of
uttering  the  creature's  name),  the  evil  thing;  Engl,  ringworm
[mistake  for  whitlow  f],  Scot,  ringwood,  for  which  B.  Chambers
quotes  two  spells  (see  Suppl.).'']  The  fiying  gout  travels:  fon
farendum  and  (on  fretma,  Richth.  246,  14.  Daz  wilde  viure,  ignis
sacer,  is  called  Antanien  feuer,  Antoni  feuer,  Ettn.  Unw.  d.  136-7,
Tönges'feuer  (Tony's  f.),  Fischart,  Antonien  roch,  plag,  erysipelas,
skin-inflammation ;  bee.  the  Saint  and  his  monks  received  such
patients  into  their  hospital?  conf.  Keisersb.  Omeiss  52.  AS.
ban^coffe,  ossium  morbus,  ignis  sacer.  QothL  flaug-ild,  erysip.  on
the  face,  Almqv.  423%  conf.  ON.  flog.  M.  Neth.  de  rode  gudUe,
Maerl.  2,  290,  gutta  rosea ;  now  roze  drup,  our  roih^lauf,  St.
A.'s  fire.—— Typhus  carbuncularis  acutissimus  is  called  landslip,
deviVs  shot.  '  Of  sacred  fire  are  several  kinds :  one  about  a
man's  waist  is  called  zoster  (girdle),  and  kills  if  it  begirdle  him,'
Pliny  25,  11  (26,  74).  For  this  gout  we  find  the  names  mane^
wurm,  hdr-wurm,  Fundgr.  2,  288.  The  name  of  giehter  (gouts)
is  also  given  to  cramps  and  spasms.  Staid.  1,  443.  A  tumour
at  the  finger-nail  is  in  Pl&ttd.  fit  [whit-low,  white  fire?],  der
ungenannt  vmrm,  Mone  6,  462;  AS.  wyrm,  see  Gramm.  1,  416
ang-nägle,  ongneil ;  die  ungenannten.  Staid.  2,  423  ;  bösthierl,
207.  Elves  suck  at  children's  fingers  and  toes  by  night,  Dyb.
Runa  '48,  p.  33.


SICKNESSES.  1657

p.  1157.]  Apoplexy  is  in  Grk  irXtiyif  Oeov,  Lith.  st&bas.  Got
gebe  den  beiden  stnen  sloe  I  Livl.  chr.  5220 ;  bet  sloghene  Oods
plaghe,  Maerl.  2,  348 ;  plag  di  de  röringj  MüUenb.  p.  191  j  daz
berlin  (fr.  bern,  to  strike  ?) ;  der  tropfe  EJaraj.  Kl.  denkm.  46^  14.
51^  4;  das  dich  die  drüs  (glanders)  rür !  H.  Sachs  v.  364^;  hab
A\T  driU  a.  das  herzeleid !  y.'3t)7;  hab  dir  die  driis  in's  herz
hinein  I  t.  344* :  conf.  dros  (p.  1003  mid.).

p.  1158.]  Epilepsy:  diu  vallunde  suht,  Servat.  1572.  Uolr.
1092.  Esrchr.  6491  \  din  vollende  suht  brach,  Hpt  8^  185  ;  fanra
lerha /aZ/onda  ewele^  Richth.  246;  dat  grote  evel,  Hpt  1^  104;
das  höchste,  Ettn.  Maal.  307.  On  the  Rhön  Mts,  das  arm-  wet^k,
Schm.  4,  139.  Slovdn.  svetiga  Bdlanta  bolzen,  St.  Valentine's
evil.  Lith.  numirrulis,  falling  sickness.  In  the  Wetterau,  das
thun.  Aastr.  die  frais,  whence  Serv.  vras,  OHG.  winnanti,
epilepticas,  Graff  1,  876.  Das  dich  der  tropf  schlag!  Pischart
Nethl.  drop,  dt-vp,  ma/rks-tropf,  Mone  6,  470.     Icel.  flog  (Sappl.

to  1234). Ooute  ne  avertinz,  Ratebeufl^  257;  avertin  de  chief

1,  471 ;  male  goute  les  eulz  li  criere  (put  out  bis  eyes)  I  Trist.
1 919.  Ren.  1702 ;  niale  gote  te  crieve  loil !  Ren.  21198.  25268 ;
la  male  gote  aiez  as  dens !  14322.  Ducange  sub  v.  gutta  quotes
many  kinds ;  avertin,  esvertin,  M6on  1^  391.  OHG.  manöthuilino,
moon-sick,  lunations,  Graff  1,  443  (out  of  its  place).  Concidere
ad  lunae  incrementa,  KarairLirreiv  irpo^  rifv  areXijvffv,  Lucian's
Toxar.  24.  Nasci  =  lentigo,  Graff  2,  1105.  As  there  are  77
Höschen,  so  '  77  sorts  of  zahn-rosen/  Hpt  4,  390 ;  '  77  shot  and
77  plagues,*  Superst.  spell  zxxix. ;  '  77  worms,'  Mone  6,  462 ;
siben  suhte  darzuo  nemen,  Kschr.  6076,  wielde  6095.  What  is
the  unnamed  disease  ?  Moneys  Schansp.  2,  373.

Oar  ohn-macht,  fainting  fit,  is  called  un-maht,  Er.  8825.  Roth.
8015;  si  kam  in  unmaht,  Flore  1055,  v^or  unm.  si  nider-seic
(sank)  1223  ;  in  unm.  vallen,  Reinh.  593  ;  OHG.  mir  unmahtet,
N.  Booth.  131 ;  si  vielen  in  unhraft,  Kl.  1562 ;  haer  begaven  al
die  ledsj  so  dat  si  in  onmacht  sech,  Karel  1,  128  ;  thei'te  begaf  haer
alte  male,  so  dat  si  sech  in  ommacht  1, 241  ;  viel  in  onmaht,  Lane.
17215;  viel  in  ommacht,  Maerl.  2,  222;  von  amaht  si  niderseic,
Flore  1224;  si  kam  in  dm.  1230;  diu  am.  vaste  mit  im  ranc
(wrestled  hard),  Hpt  5,  277;  am.,  Engelh.  6303;  zw6  dmehte  si

enpfienc.  Gute  frau  1650;  abkraft,  H.  Sachs  v.  349^. Viel  in

marmels,  Troj.  10742;  marmels  hingeleit,  Oberl.  de  Conr.  herbip.


1658  SICKNESSES.

52.  Si  Iftgen  ia  unsiJine,  Kl.  1978.  1566-71 ;  vergaz  der  sinne
1563;  do  verlos  ich  alle  mme  sinne,  MSH.  8,  207**;  unversunnen
lac,  Kl.  2092.  Wh.  46,  27.  61,  19;  si  viel  hin  unversunnen,
Parz.  105,  8.  Se  pämer,  pasmer^  Ferabr.  2801,  se  plasmet  3640,
plasmage  2962.  We  say,  my  senses  forsook  me ;  animus  hanc
reliquerat,  Plaat.  Mil.  gl.  iv.  8,  37:  Si  lac  in  einem  twahne,  Er.
6593  ;  daz  im  vor  den  ougen  sinen  vergie  (passed  away)  «tain«
unde  tac,  Laurin  Ettra.  829 ;  er  viel  vor  leide  in  unmaht^  er-n'
weste  ob  ez  waere  tac  oder  na^A^,Beinh.  595.  Sendschreiben  p.  53 ;

er  was  uz  siner  gewalt,  Herb.   10500,  conf.  10604. Mir  ge^

swindet,  Gramm.  4,  231 ;  daz  ir  geswand,  Schreiber  2,  64 ;  ir  was
geswundeuj  Fragm.  42** ;  im  geswant,  Flore  21 78.  2241 ;  swinden,
Jüngl.  656.  Beschweimen  :  AS.  sunma,  deliquium.  Engl,  swoon  ;
hedfod'Sioima,  my  head  swims.  Wan  in  daz  hoabet  dinzet  von
gesühte,    Warn.    2192;    ime   entsweich,   Reinh.    564;     beswalt,

Parfconop.  18,  13.   34,  14;   ontmaect,  Lane.  12042. The  con-

trary :  er  ham  zuo  sih,  Flore  1066,  zuo  ir  selber  kam  1232.
Schreiber  2,  64;  ziw  im  selben  quam,  Gr.  Rad.  H^  13;  zuo  ime
selvin  bequam,  Both.  3035,  conf.  Lanz.  1747;  biz  er  bequam,
Wigal.  5796  ;  doe  hi  bequam,  Maerl.  2,  222.  Lane.  17216  ;  was
vercomen  weder,  Earel  1,  158;  sin  herze  im  widerirat,  Pass.  192,
65;  lierze  gewinnen,  Servat.  3431;  sich  versinnen,  Parz.  109,  18.
Wh.  61,  29 ;  sich  widere  versan.  Er.  8836 ;  er  wart  verriht,
Flore  2230,  harn  ze  gerechen  2231 ;  do  si  wart  ze  vntzen,  Kschr.
11925.  Our  '  bei  sich  sein ';  sumne  ego  aptid  me  ?  Plant.  M.G.
iv.  8,  36.

p.  1159.]  ON.  qveisa,  colica,  conf.  Goth.  qaisv,  &Sk  (Suppl.  to
1212  end;  grimme  muoter,  Mone  8,  495;  bär muter,  Garg.  182*,
bärvatter  69*;  wärwund,  Stald.  2, 435.  Dysentery,  der  rote  suche,
Myst.  1,  105 ;  er  gewan  den  durcligang,  Diocl.  4645  ;  NethL
roode-loop,  dysent.  (not  onr  roth-lauf).  On  üzsuht,  see  Gramm,
2,  794;  der  rothe  schaden,  Stald.  2,  306.  Gotthelf's  Sag.  5,
160-1;  M.  Neth.  menisoene,  melisoene,  Maerl.  3,  177;  O.  Fr.
menoison.  Lang  disease  :  daz  swinde  ?  Myst.  1,  104.  Schm.  3,
539;  OHG.  serwea,  tabescere,  Graff  6,  271.  281  ;  Swiss  serbet,
Stald.  2,  371;  schwienig,\onhxkii  in  Wolfs  Zts.  2,  54;  swin^
segen,  Mone  6,  461;  schwin,  schwein;  verzehrendes  wesen,  con-
sumption, Leipz.  avant.  1, 142.

Stitch  in  the  side,  plearisy :  ON.  tac,  OS.  stechetho,  Hpt,  5,


SICKNESSES.  1659

200.  Oar  darm-winde  (twisting  of  bowels),  conf.  Lith.  klynas^
iliaca  passio;  minerere.

Dropsy  :  Swed.  tnänads-kalf,  män-kalf,  conf.  the  story  of  the
*  frater  Salernitanus/  Aegid.  de  medic,  p.  167.

p.  1159.]  Abortus:  ON.  konnuni  leysiiz  höfn,  foetas  solve-
batur,  abortum  fecit;  Bavar.  hinschlingen  is  said  of  a  cow,  Schm.
3,  452  ;  die  frau  hat  mit  dem  fünften  kinde  umgeworfen,  Claudius
in  Herder's  Remains  1,  423.  Goth,  fitan,  our  kreissen,  to  have
throes:  zimbem,  parturire,  Hag.  Ges.  Ab.  1,  12.  Throes  are
called  a>8ti^€f  or  ßo\ai,  throws  of  Artemis,  Procop.  2,  576  (Suppl.
to  1177  mid.).  'To  give  birth  to'  we  express  by  'come  down
with,  briug  into  the  world/  or  simply  bring,  Schweinichen  1,  38;
Swiss  trohlen,  trollen,  zerfallen,  fall  in  pieces  (come  in  two).
Staid.  1,  307;  MHG.  ze  hemenaten  gan,  Hugd.  107.  Mar.  163,
22  ;  ON.  at  hvila,  Vilk.  sag.  c.  31 ;  die  frau  soil  zu  stuhl  [Exod.
1,  16].  Es  fieng  an  zu  lerachen,  Garg.  102^;  die  balken  knackten
schon,  da  fiel  das  ganze  haus,  C.  Brehmen's  Ged.  (Lpz.  1637)
H  3*.  J  3** ;  conf.  O.  Fris.  benene  burch,  bone  castle  (womb),
Richth.  623^;  fallen  und  in  zwei  stück  brechen,  Diet,  sub  v.
fraueubauch ;  se  is  dalbraken,  broken  down,  Schütze's  Holst,  id.
1,  196;  glückliche  niederbrechung,  safe  delivery,  Claudius  in
Herd.  Rem.  1,  383;  si  ist  entbunden  von  ir  not,  Mai  129,  2.
Schütten,  werfen,  used  of  animals.

pu  1160.]  If  the  newborn  infant  cries,  it  has  the  heart-disease,
and  is  passed  three  times  between  the  rungs  of  a  ladder,  Temme^s
Altmark  p.  82 ;  blatt  und  gesper,  blatt  n.  herzen-gesper,  Mone  6,
468-9;  ir  tuo  daz  herze  vil  wß,  Hag.  Ges.  Ab.  2,  178;  der  klam,
Kolocz.  185,  angina  ?  fr.  klemmen,  to  pinch.  '  Der  herz^wurni
hat  sich  beseicht '  of  cardialgy  and  nausea ;  stories  of  the  heart'
worm,  in  Frisch  447^.  Bttn.  Hebamme  890.  O'Keamey  180.
A  Stockholm  MS.  informs  us :  '  Wannen  ein  vrowe  entfangen
hevet,  so  pleget  gemeinliken  bi  der  vrucht  to  wassene  (grow)  ein
vjorni,  dei  hevet  vlogele  alse  ein  vledermues  (bat)  unde  einen  snavel
as  ein  vogel,  unde  dei  worme  wesset  op  mit  (der)  vmht ;  unde
wan  dei  vrowe  geberet  hevet,  al-to-hant  over  deine  dagen  stiget
(climbs)  hei  op  to  deme  herten  der  vrowen,  unde  dan  to  lesten  so
hellet  (holds)  hei  der  vrowen  herte,  also  wan  men  menit  dat  dei
vrowe  genesen  si,  so  stenret  dei  vrowe  rokelose,  dat  men  nicht
en-weit  wat  er  schellet  (ails  her).'     If  expelled  with  the  foetus  :


1660  SICKNESSBS.

'  dei  oppe  dome  assche  wesset,  dei  ymcht  heit  g^meinliken  kuUen-

sloteU Si  yiennent  li  ver  is  core,  qui  montent  jasqaau  euer,

et  font  morir  d'ane  maladie  c'oa  apele  mort-sobitainne,  Rateb.  1,
257.  '  Grew  in  his  heart  the  zctge-wnrm/  shrink-wonn.  Bare,
Waldis  174*;  die  wwnne  ezzent  uns  daz  herze,  Diemer  290,  10;

the  miser's  heart'Warm,  Festiv.  of  Conan  180. Bulimus,  vermis

lacertae  in  stomacho  hominis  habitans,  Oehler's  AS.  gl.  p.  276 ;
balimas,  toerna.  Dint.  16a.  Wurme  wuohsen  in  ime  honbet  (in
their  heads),  Kschr.  715.  852;  'the  worm  in  man  or  beast,  that
we  cMfaztun  (?)/  Mone  8,  406.

Toothache,  MHG.  zaiuswer,  Freid.  74,  10  (KL  sehr.  2,  115).
Headache  caused  by  cross  black  elves,  Hpt  4,  389.  Spasms  in
head  and  breast  with  cough  are  called  tane-weczel,  J.  Lindenbl.
p.  167  (yr  1404),  conf.  baiier-wetzel,  6r.  ßij^,  Tana-wesekel  is
personified  in  Fastn.  sp.  468.  ON.  qvef,  congh,  cold  in  head  In
the  Wetterau :  krammel  im  hals,  rasping  in  throat ;  vxml,  violent
catarrh,  conf.  OHG.  wuol  (1181-2).

p.  1 160.]  Qelemht  u.  fielt,  Diut.  8,  45.  Marcellns  no.  100;  /i
in  the  chest,  Mone  8,  498  ;  bleeding,  running  vig  8,  409.  OK.
gula,  morbus  regius,  jaundice;  morbo  regio  croceus  effectus,  Greg.

Tor.  5,  4. MHG.  miseUsuht,  Servat.  728.  1570;  musiUuht,

Ksrchr.  4293 ;  hiez  (bade)  die  misels.  abe-gan  726.  4067 ;  mUel-
siech,  Urst.  123,  69.  ON.  lik-ßrä,  lepra,  Fomald.  s.  3,  642.
Biörgyn  p.  107;  likßrär,  leprosus.  M.  Neth.  packers,  leprosns,
Maerl.  2,  227;  lasers,  lazers,  Kausler's  Altn.  denkm.  1,482-3;
OHG.  homgibruoder,  leprosi,  Graff  3,  301 ;  MHG.  made  villtc,
made-weUic,  aissel-viUic,  Myst  1,  418 ;  O.  Slav,  prokaza,  lepra,
Miklos.  34 ;  Gael,  lobharach,  muirea>ch,  leprosus.  The  Lex  Botb.
180  has  Meprosus  aut  daemoniacus,'  and  233  'mancipium  lepr.
aut  daem.*— The  SI.  trud  is  in  Jungm.  tetter,  ringworm,  in
Miklos.  94  dysenteria,  hydropisis.  OHG.  hruh,  scabies,  conf.
Graff  4,  1155;  AS.  hruf,  ON.  Aru/a.  Cüir4Ü8  vel  rudige,  GL
Sletst.  25,  169;  cUaroh,  Graff  4,  1155;  tetra-fic,  Hattemer  1,
262^;  zetem,  flechte,  Hpt  4,  890;  AS.  teter,  Engl.  telUr,
impetigo ;  Austr.  zitierich.  Gr.  Xeiyrfv  impetigo,  SI.  lishdi,
Serv.  litai,     A  kind  of  itch  is  in  Austr.  bam-hakl,  woodpecker.

ON.  skyrbiugr,  Dan.  sJgörbug  ;  schorbock,  Garg.  149* ;  «cW-

bock,  scorbut,  scorbutus.  AS.  />c(w  on  f6t,  in  e&gnm.  The  burzel
is  a  contagious  disease,  Augsb.  chr.,  yr  1387.     Mono  6,  257;


SICKNESSES.  1661

bürzel,  gunbürzel,  Frisch  1,  157.  383.  Sl.  kratel,  an  ailment
that  makes  one  leg  shorter,  Vnk  sub  v. ;  MH6.  ir  bein  (legs)
din  habent  die  muchen,  Fraaenl.  p.  192,  onr  mauke,  malanders,
Frisch.  A  bleeding  boil  is  called  hund  Schüttler,  Panzer  2,  305  ;
«iaz  yn  daz  knalten-uhel  Angeel  Fries's  Pfeiferger.  p.  118  (yr
1388).

p.  1 1 60.]     Entr^  sui  en  mal  an,  Aspr.  1 5*.

p.  1163.]  Smallpox:  Serv.  kraste.  Die  blättern  (pocks)  fahren
auf,  Lpz.  avant.  1,  271.     Urschlechten,  urschlichten  blättern,  conf.

arslaht,  Gramm.  2,  790. The  story  of  a  daemonium  meridi-

anum  is  told  by  Gees.  Heisterb.  5,  2.  The  '  destmction  that
wasteth  at  noonday '  is  trans,  in  AS.  psalms  ed.  Thorpe  p.  253
on  midne  doege  moere  deoful;  inWiggert's  Fragm.  p.  3  von  theme
Jiuuele  mUtentagelichen ;  in  Windberg  ps.  p.  431  vone  aneioufe
ande  tiuvele  deme  mittertagelichen ;  in  Trier  ps.  von  aneioufe
undo  deme  divele  mitdendegelicheme  ;  conf.  the  midday  mannikin,
evening  mannikin,  Börner  249.  Pshipolnitza,  Wend,  volksl.  2,
268;  conf.  metil  and  kuga  (p.  1188).  At  noon  the  gods  take
their  siesta,  the  ghosts  can  range  freely  then,  and  hurt  mankind  :
a  shepherd  in  Theocritus  will  not  blow  his  reed  while  Pan  takes
his  noonday  nap.  With  the  spell  of '  the  hiinsche  and  the  dragon,'
conf.  '  rotlauf  und  drach,'  Hpt  7,  534.  '  God  send  thee  the  fever,
or  the  boils,  or  the  hiinsch  !  *  so  prays  the  peasant  against  his
fellow  man,  Keisersb.  Sins  of  the  lips  38".

p.  1163.]  There  are  healing  drinks,  magic  drinks:  driru:  of
main,  potus  corroborans,  Erceldnn's  Tristram  2,  40-2 ;  drinc  of
might,  philtmm  2,  48.  51;  conf.  fiminnis  dryckr  (p.  1101);  It
lovendris.  Trist,  ed.  Michel  2106  (for  3  years) ;  Engl,  love-drink,
Fr.  boivre  damonr  2185.  A  sick  man  is  fiddled  back  to  health,
supra  (p.  331) ;  into  his  trifling  wound  she  blew.  Geliert  3,  426.
A  blind  king  is  cured  by  washing  in  the  water  of  a  chaste  wife,
Herod.  2,  111.  H.  Estienne's  Apol.  pour  Herodote.  Keisersb.
Omeiss  52*.  (Pref.  xxxviii).

p.  1165.]  Ich  kan  die  leute  messen,  Gryphins's  Dornr.  90;
meten,  Gefk.  Beil.  167 :  'the  third  woman  declared  he  had  lost
the  measure,  and  she  must  measure  him  again,'  Drei  erzn.  p.  361 ;
berouchen  u.  mezzen,  Hag.  G^.  Ab.  3,  70.  Is  this  alluded  to  in
'  ich  mizze  ebener  dan  Getz,  diu  nie  dehein  man  übermaz '  ?
Helbl.  3,  327  ;  messerinnen,  Ettn.  Maul.  657.   Carrying  a  jewelled

VOL.   IV.  c  c


1662  SICENESSBS.

chain  about  one  is  a  remedy,  Bit.  7050 — 55  (Suppl.  to  1218
mid.).

p.  1166.]  Whether  a  man  is  troubled  with  the  white  folk,  is
determined  thus :  Take  8  cherry  twigs,  and  cut  them  into  small
pieces,  saying,  '  one  not  one,  two  not  two,  etc.'  up  to  nine,  till  you
have  81  pieces ;  throw  these  into  a  bowl  of  water,  and  if  they
float,  the  patient  is  free  of  the  white  folk ;  but  if  some  sink,  he
is  still  afflicted  with  them  in  the  proportion  of  the  sanken  sticks
to  the  swimming  ones.  In  Masuria,  N.  Preuss.  prov.  bl.  4,
473.4.

p.  1166.]  We  pour  water  on  one  who  has  fainted:  daz  man
mit  brunnen  si  vergoz,  unde  natzte-se  under'n  ougen,  Kl.  1566 ;
si  lac  in  unsinne  unz  (senseless  till)  man  mit  wazzer  si  verg^
1978.  Wet  grass  is  laid  on  those  that  swoon,  Ls.  2,  283.  To
strike  a  fire,  or  to  puff  it,  is  good  for  a  burn  in  the  foot,  erysipelas
and  sore  eyes,  MüUenh.  p.  210.

p.  1168.]  Poenit.  Ecgb.  (Thorpe  p.  380) :  (>a  cild)  set  wega
gelsatum  )>urh  ßa  eorffan  tih9.  Creeping  through  hollow  sUmeSf
Antiqy.  ann.  3,  27;  conf.  Kuhn  on  Vrihaddevatft  in  Weber's  Ind.
stud.  1,  118-9.  Hollow  round  stones  are  fairy  cups  and  dishes,
Scott's  Minstr.  2,  163.  These  are  often  ment.  in  old  records:
ad  durechelen  stein  (yr  1009)  MB.  29%  143 ;  petra  periusa,  Procop.
2,  609  ;  pierre  percee.  Schreib.  Taschenb.  4,  262-3  (Kl.  sehr.  2, 42).

At  Lauenstein  a  ruptured  child  is  pulled  through  a  splH  oak

by  its  godfathers  bef.  sunrise ;  the  more  carefully  the  tree  is  then
tied  up,  the  better  will  the  rupture  heal ;  but  no  one  will  have
that  oak,  for  fear  of  getting  the  rupture.  The  same  thing  is  done
with  a  young  maiden  ash,  Barnes  p.  326.  Sometimes  the  hair
merely  is  cut  off  and  passed  through,  Meier's  Schwab,  sag.  528.
A  horse  is  cured  by  putting  a  silver  penny  inside  the  split  of

an  aspen  or  hazel.  Mono  6,  476. In  England  they  often  poll

a  sick  child  through  an  ash,  Athnm  '46,  Sept.  5,  no.  984.  They
tie  the  tree  up  with  thick  string,  or  drive  nails  into  it.  Trees  so
nailed  together  are  often  met  with  in  the  woods  :  one  was  found
full  of  nails,  Hone's  Tablebk  2,  466 ;  conf.  the  Vienna  '  stock  am
eisen,'  Ziska's  March,  p.  105.  If  you  have  the  toothache,  walk
silently  into  a  wood  on  a  Thursday  morning,  take  a  nail  with  you,
pick  your  teeth  with  it,  then  drive  it  into  a  tree,  Nilss.  4,  45.
There  is  a  tree  near  Mansfeld  studded  all  over  with  nails,  DS.


SICKNESSES.  1663

no.  487.  In  England  a  child  that  has  the  hooping  cough  is
drawn  three  times  through  an  opening  in  a  hawthorn  hedge.
Ap&l&y  afflicted  with  a  skin-disease,  offers  a  Soma-sacrifice  to
Indra,  who  in  token  of  gratitude  heals  her  by  drawing  her
through  three  openings  in  his  car,  Weber's  Ind.  etud.  1, 118. 4,  8.
p.  1172.]  When  a  headache  will  not  go^  they  vnnd  a  string
three  times  round  the  man's  head,  and  hang  it  up  in  a  tree  as  a
noose ;  if  a  bird  flies  through  it,  he  takes  the  headache  along
with  him,  Temme's  Altmk  p.  83.  If  you  lay  a  child's  chemise,
in  which  it  has  suffered  the  schwere  noth  (fit  of  epilepsy),  on  the
crosS'WaySy  the  disease  will  pass  over  to  him  who  walks,  rides  or
drives  that  way.  Medic,  maulaffe  167.  A  hatchet*wound  is  healed
by  tying  up  the  tool  that  dealt  the  dint.

Herre,  mit  Gotes  helfe
wil  ich,  daz  reine  weife
iuwer  kint  wol  generen  (keep  alive).     Diocl.  4504.

Jaundice  can  be  transferred  to  the  lizard,  Mono  7,  609.  Sick
men  are  wrapt  in  the  hide  of  a  newly  killed  sta^g,  Landulph.  in
Muratori  4,  81.  Wilman's  Otto  3,  244.  A  sickly  child  is  swathed
in  the  shin  of  a  newly  slaughtered  sheep  (in  Shamyl's  camp),
AH  gem.  Ztg  '56,  p.  3323\  The  superimposition  of  warm  flesh
occurs  in  a  witch-trial,  Schreib.  Taschenb.  5,  213.

p.  1172.]  The  deer^strap  must  be  cut  off  the  live  animal,
Ag^c.  Vom  hirscbe  p.m.  238-9 ;  conf.  '  man  sol  den  erheUriemen
(lorum  nauseae)  sniden  dem  der  smacke  (sapor)  wil  verderben.
Tit.  2621.  The  tooth  of  a  weasel  killed  in  a  particular  way  is
picked  up  from  the  gpround  with  the  left  hand,  wrapt  in  the  hide
of  a  newly  killed  lion  (or  maiden  hind),  and  laid  on  the  gouty
feet,  Luc.  Philops.  7.  On  the  healing  virtue  of  a  chamois-bullet,
doronicon,  see  Ettn.  Unw.  d.  180.  A  skin-inflammation  is  called
wolf:

Der  siechtuom  ist  des  Ersten  klein,
und  kumt  den  herren  in  diu  bein,
und  ist  geheizen  der  wolf     Ottok.  91^.

p.  1173.]  Kl.  sehr.  2,  146.  Certain  worms  or  beetles  are
recomm.  for  dog-madness.  'Maz-leide  buoz'inthe  note = cure
for  queasiness   (meat-loathing).     There  is  a  health-giving  dish.


1664  SICKNESSES.

into  which  the  slaver  of  black  and  white  snakes  has  trickled«  Sazo
Gr.  ed.  M.  p.  193-4.  Ein  iglich  tier  (every  beast)  daz  wurde
gesunt^  der  im  gaebe  (if  one  gave  it)  hundes-bluot,  Renn.  19406 ;
blood  heals  wounds^  Lane.  25397-428.  In  the  Engelhart  and
Poor  Henry,  leprosy  is  cared  by  the  blood  of  innocent  babes ;
'  man  swendet  dmosen  mit  nüechterner  speirJieln/  fasting  men's
spittle.  Renn.  5884.

p.  1173.]  A  yellow  bird  by  his  look  removes  jaundice;  it  is
also  cured  by  drinking  out  of  a  waxen  goblet  with  a  raven-ducat
lying  at  the  bottom,  Unw.  doct.  147.  Biting  is  good  for  a  bite:
beiti  (mordax  aliquid)  vi«  bitsottum,  Seem.  27*».  The  huk  is
healed  by  pot-hooks,  Lisch^s  Meckl.  jrb.  6,  191,  hip-gout  (?)  by
gelding,  Greg.  Tur.  10,  15.

p.  1175.]  To  the  M.  Latin  Ugamentum  answers  the  Gr.
irapdpTfifjLa,  appendage,  Luc.  Philops.  8;  breviis  ac  ligcUurUf
MB.  16,  241  (yr  1491);  obligatores,  Ducange  sub  v.  Pertz  3,
100.  Were  wolfs  teeth  hung  on  people  like  the  foal's  tooth
p.  658  n.  T

Ob  ieman  wolle  tumben  spot
und  einen  boesen  wolves  zan
mit  ergerunge  henken  dran.     Pass.  3,  70.
Ir  trnogt  (wore)  den  eiter-wolves  zan.     Parz.  255,  14.

Daz  ich  minne,  ist  mir  niht  an-gebunden,  ez  ist  mir  an-gebom,
MSH.  3,  233^.  Parentes  vero  ejus,  intelligentes  eum  diaboli
immissione  turbari,  ut  mos  rusticorum  habet,  a  sortilegis  et  ariolis
ligamenta  ei  et  potiones  deferebant,  Greg.  Tur.  Mirac.  S.  Mart.  1,
26.  Accidentibus  ariolis  et  dicentibus,  eam  met-idiani  daemonii
incursum  pati,  ligamina  herbarum  at  que  incantationum  verba
proferebant  4,  36.  Ilia  de  sinu  licium  protulit  varii  colons  filis
intortum,  cervicemque  vinzit  meum,  Petron.  c.  131.  Finn,  tyrä,
prop,  testiculus,  then  '  globulus  magicus  nocivus,  instar  testicu-
lorum,  hominibus  et  pecudibus  immitti  solitus.'  Fromm,  on  Herb,
p.  230  quotes  :  imago  argentea,  per  incantationum  modes  multiqae
artificii  virtnte  constructa,  quae  adversus  inoantationes  jam  factas
est  valde  potissima.

p.  1177.]  In  Arabic  a  conjurer  is  called  breather  on  the  hnot$,
who  ties  the  nestel,  and  breathes  or  spits  on  it,  to  complete
the  charm,  Rückert's  Hariri  1,  451.    Sura  113  of  Koran.    Flnoch


SICKNESSES.  1665

(a  carse)^  der  mine  wambe  besperret  (bars  up),  Mar.  158,  38.  The
witch  throws  the  padlock  over  a  loving  pair  at  their  wedding,  to
breed  hatred  betw.  them,  Bechst.  Thür.  sag.  3, 219.  People  choose
the  same  day  for  being  bled.  Trist.  380,  3  [this  appar.  belongs
to  1189  f].  A  lighted  wick  dipt  in  one^s  drink,  and  so  quenched,
lessens  the  drinker's  enjoyment  of  love,  Maroell.  no.  94.    El.

sehr.  2,  142. Labour  is  obstructed  by  nine  wUeh^knots  in  the

hair,  '  the  kaims  (combs)  of  care,'  Minstrelsy  2,  400.  A  shaggy
cap  is  good  for  women  in  child^bands  (-birth),  Herold  in  Oechsle's
Bauemkr.  p.  85.  A  difficult  labour  is  lightened  by  making  two
babies  of  wax;  or  are  they  merely  to  deceive  the  sorceress?
DY.  1,  274-9.  A  man  clasps  his  hands  over  his  knees,  and  the
labour  is  stopt ;  they  make  believe  it  is  over,  he  lets  go,  and  it
goes  on  again,  Asb.  Huldr.  1,  20.  Belts  relieve  the  labour,
Ossian,  Ahlw.  8,  486.  450 ;  \fk  tok  Hrani  belt^it,  ok  lagSi  urn  hana,
ok  litlu  stSar  (soon  afiber)  varS  hun  Ifittari,  Fomm.  s.  4,  32.

The  Lettish  Laima  spreads  the  sheet  under  those  in  labour ;  the
zlotd  b&ba  watches  over  births,  Hanusch  837.  856.  lAprcßn^
ßoXoaiff,  Procop.  2,  576;  ai  Kvt&Kovaai  iwueaXeiaOe  rtfv  "Aprsfuv,
a^mvcrOai  avYfvdfAtf^  on  Si,€/copi]0rfT€,  Sch.  on  Theocr.  2,  66.
Juno  Lucina,  fer  opem,  serva  me  obsecro,  Ter.  Adelphi  iii.  4,  41.

Swelh  wib  diu  driu  liet  (8  canticles)  hat,

s6  sie  ze  keminäten  g&t  (takes  to  her  chamber),

in  ir  zeswen  bevangen  (clasped  in  her  right),

sie  Itdet  (will  suffer)  unlangen

kumber  von  dem  sere,

wand  in  unser  Fröwen  Sre

g'nist  sie  (she'll  recover)  des  kindes  gnaedeclichen  .  .  .

Swä  diu  buochel  driu  sint  behalten,

diu  Maget  wil  der  walten  (Virgin  will  manage),

daz  da  nehein  kint

werde  krumb  noch  blint.     Wemher's  Maria  128-9.

p.  1177.]  The  cure  for  poisoning  is  descr.  in  Megenberg  275^
27.  To  the  foot  of  one  bitten  by  an  adder  is  tied  a  stone  from  a
virgin's  grave,  Luc.  Philops.  11.

p.  1 179.]  '  Man  sol  genasdige  heilige  verre  in  vremden  landen
suochen,'  MSH.  8,  45^  [Chaucer's  '  seeken  straunge  strondes,  to
feme  halwes '] .     The  sick  are  healed  on  the  grave  of  the  pious


1666  SICKNESSES.

priest,  Perfcz  2,  82.  The  myth  of  the  herb  that  grows  up  to  the
skirt  of  the  statue's  garment  is  also  in  Walth.  v.  Rh.  138,  21-58
(p.  1191  mid.).  Relics  bring  lack,  Al.  Kaufmannes  Caesarias
p.  28,  and  the  M.  Neth.  poem  of  Charles,  Hpt.  1,  104.  Miracles
are  also  wrought  on  Pinters  grare,  Benart  29481.

p.  1180.]  Coins  were  laid  at  the  feet  of  a  statue  which  had
cured,  or  was  to  cure,  fever ;  silver  coins  were  stuck  on  its  loins
with  waz^  Luc.  Philops.  20.

Stabat  in  his  ingens  annoso  robore  quercus,

una  nemus ;  vittae  mediam  memoresque  tabellae

sertaque  eingebaut,  voti  argumenta  j^o^nf is.    Ov.  Met.  8,  743.

A  woman  cured  of  toothache  thankfully  hangs  waxen  gums  on
the  grave,  Pertz  10,  522;  a  man  whom  the  saint  has  delivered
from  chains  hangs  up  a  chain,  ibid. ;  so  in  Cees.  Heisterb.  7,  29.
Liberated  prisoners  hang  their  chains  on  the  trees  in  the
goddess's  grove,  Pausan.  ii.  13,  8 ;  those  in  Ma.  on  the  saint's
tomb,  St.  Louis  96,  2;  conf.  Scheible  6,  988-9.  997  and  RA.  674.
'  My  mother  made  a  vow  that  she  would  hang  a  votive  tablet  in
the  chapel  if  I  recovered  my  hearing,'  Brenner's  Life  1,  40.
Hooks  to  which  diseased  cattle  had  been  tied,  also  crutches  after
a  cure  were  left  lying  in  the  chapel,  Miillenh.  p.  105,  and  at
healing  springs,  Ir.  march.  2,  78.  In  some  places  the  inscription
may  still  be  read  :  '  hat  geholfen,'  hath  holpen,  M.  Koch's  Reise
203.  A  waxen  house  is  vowed,  that  the  dwelling  house  may  not
be  burnt  down^  St.  Louis  84,  19.

p.  1182.]  To  OHG.  sierpo,  pestis,  lues,  corresp.  the  AS.
steorfa.  The  schelm  I  explain  fr.  schwort,  GDS.  p.  235>6 :  der
Schelme  gesluoc,  Hpt  5,  552 ;  der  schalm  sliieg  liberal,  LS.  2,
314;  eh  dich  der  schelm  schlecht,  Garg.  102^;  der  seh.  schlägt,
Mone's  Bad.  gesch.  1,  219 ;  schelmen-gruhey  'gasse,  -acker  1,  215
seq.  Leopr.  75-6 ;  keib  und  schelm,  Mone's  Anz.  6,  467-8,  schelmig

u.  hebig  8,  407. OHG.  suhtluomi,  pestilens,  corruptus,  Graff

2,  212 ;  staramilo,  stramilo  6,  712.  Dint.  1,  279 ;  der  hrecheuy
plague,^Panz.  Beitr.  1,  23 ;  dying  of  the  brechen,  H.  Sachs  3,  64^
(cholera  ?);  pisleht,  pestis,  Graff  6,  778  (  =  sieht,  clades,  Diut.  1,
183) ;  der  gehe  tot  in  Pass.  316,  90  is  apoplexy ;  der  sdiwarze  tod
Miillenh.  no.  329  ;  '  how  a  pestilence  could  thus  fall  fr.  the  stars,
and  overrun  the  world/  Ph.  v.  Sittew.  Zauber-becher  p.  238;


SICKNESSES.  1667

die  pestelenz  atöszt  an,  Platter's  Life  66.  71-2. The   Serv.

kratel  is  a  fabulous  disease  that  kills  iu  one  nighty  worse  than  the
plague ;  the  dead  man  has  one  foot  shorten'  than  the  other^  hence
the  name  (krdtak,  curt,  Suppl.  to  1160  end).  iToti^i;  is  a  personif.
plagne  that  robs  mothers  of  their  children,  Pans.  i.  44,  7.  With
Apollo  conf.  OSinn  in  Sasm.  5*:  fleygffi  08inn,  ok  i  folk  urn
shaut  (shot).  The  Lettons  think  it  an  omen  of  pestilence,  if  the
auskuts  shears  the  backs  of  the  sheep  in  the  night,  Bergm.  142.

p.  1183.]  The  angel  that  smites  all  in  Ezek.  9  is  called  der
slahende  engel,  Diemer  327-8.  2  Sam.  24,  16-7.  Deliverance
from  the  plague  is  eflfected  by  a  snow-white  angel,  Greg.  Tar.  4,  5.
Angels  and  devils  go  about  daring  the  plague,  Sommer  p.  55 ;
der  sterbe  erbizet  (bites  to  death,  an  angel  with  drawn  sword),
Griesh.  2,  28;  raging  death  rides  through  the  city  on  a  pale
horse,  Jadas  1,  327  ;  in  times  of  pestilence,  Hel  (m.)  rides  about
on  a  three-legged  horse,  butchering  men,  Mütlenh.  p.  244 ;  ich
hör  aach  das  menlin  kam,  pestilenz,  es  fahet  an  (begins),  Keisersb.
Om.  24.1

p.  1184.]  The  black  death  rises  e^a  a,  black  fog,  Miillenh.  no.
329 ;  the  plague  comes  in  sight  as  a  blue  mist,  Somm.  p.  73,  as
a  cloud,  a  viper,  Villemarq.  Bard.  bret.  120.  The  plague,  in  the
shape  of  a  fog,  winds  into  a  wasps'  hole,  and  gets  plugged  in,
Kulpa  in  D'Elv.  110;  she  comes  in  at  the  window,  a  black  shape^
passes  into  a  bored  hole,  and  is  pegged  in,  Kehrein's  Nassau  54.
^oißo^  äKepa^Kofiri^  TsxiVfiov   veipeXTjy  äirepvKet,   Lac.   Alex.   36.

N.  Marc.  Cap.  30. The  plague  proceeds  from  the  throats  of

pursued  wolves,  Forcell.  sub  v.  Hirpi.  Et  nata  fertur  pestilentia
in  Babylonia,  ubi  de  templo  Apollinis,  ex  arcula  aurea,  quam
miles  forte  inciderat,  spiritas  pestilens  evasit,  atqae  iade  Parthos
orbemqae  implesse,  Capitolinus  in  Yero  8.  With  the  plague  that
is  conjured  into  a  lime-tree,  agrees  the  spider  that  is  banged  in
and  let  out  again,  which  also  runs  about  the  country  as  a  sterbet,
GotthelPs  Erzähl.  1,  84.

p.  1189.]  The  Great  Plagae  is  called  pestis^ara,  Welsh  y  fad
felen,  San  Marte's  Arthur-s.  29.  323.  With  the  leg.  of  Elliant
conf.  Volksmarch.  aas  Bret.  p.  185 — 8.     Souvestre  206-7.     On

1  Domut  Thiedericif  Thietm.  Merseb.  4,  21 ;  * AffpcovoD  wupyoi,  rd0of ,  Procop.  B.
Goth.  2,  22 ;  turri$  Cretcentii  or  Dietricha-haut  in  the  leg.  of  Grescentia  and  the
Two  Dietrichs.  In  Wackem.  Lb.  990,  Dltterich  bauds  the  Engtl-borg ;  it  is  called
Sarsen-burg  in  Myst.  1,  103.


1668  HBRB8  AND  STONES.

the  Lith.  Oiltine,  see  N.  Preuss.  prov.  bl.  8,  471-2.  German
plagae-stories  may  be  seen  in  Woeste's  Volks-überL  44,  Panz.
Beitr.  1,  29  and  Wolfs  Ztschr.  2,  83.  The  pest-frau  is  dreMcd  in
white,  Beider  no.  431.  The  plague  creeps,  crawls  in  the  dark,
Schmidt's  Westerw.  id.  89.  The  Swed.  Plagae-boy  reminds  of
the  girl  who  in  Denmark  indicates  deaths  to  the  kindred  with
a  txDig^  Molb.  Hist,  tidskr.  4,  121 ;  three  plagae-women  walk
through  the  town  with  scythes.     The  plague^maiden  appears  in

wet  garments  and  with  a  little  red  dog,  BuDge's  Arch.  6,  88.

When  pestilence  rises  out  of  Mit-othin's  grave,  the  body  is  dug
up  and  hedged  in  with  stakes,  Saxo  6r.  ed.  Müll.  43  (Sappl.  to
609).  The  abating  of  plagues  by  burying  in  a  hUl  occnrs  in
Sagebibl.  3,  288.  The  cou/s-death,  an  enormous  bull,  approaches
like  the  plague,  MüUenh.  no.  328.  In  time  of  plague,  the  first
liead  of  cattle  that  falls  is  buried  with  a  young  shoot  or  a  willow
planted  in  its  mouth,  Superst.  I,  838.  Mullenh.  no.  327 ;  or  a
bull  is  buried  alive,  Panzer  2,  180,  a  calf  or  cow  sacrificed  (pp.
608.  1142).  At  Beutelsbach  near  Stuttgart,  an  old  woman
during  a  cattle  plague  advised  that  the  hummel  (parish-bull)
should  be  buried  alive  :  wreathed  in  flowers  they  led  him  in  state
to  a  deep  pit ;  three  times  the  mighty  beast  broke  his  way  oat,
but  the  third  time  he  choked.      Hence   the  Beutelsbacher  are

named  Hummelbacher. The  plague  flies  at  people's  necks  as  a

butterfly, ///cr/ö,  Woeste's  Volks-überl.  44-5.  The  Kuga,  like
Berhta,  can't  bear  to  see  the  dishes  not  washed  up.  A  strange
bird  sings  from  the  tree  :  *  Eat  pimpernel,  and  you'll  all  be  well ! '
Herrlein's  Spessart  217.  Rochholz  2, 390-1 ;  somewhat  differently
ia  Schöppner  no.  962.  Leoprechting  101.  Bader  no.  270.
Panzer  2,  161.     Schön werth  2,  380.     8,  21.


CHAPTEK  XXXVII.

HERBS  AND   STONES.

p.  1190.]  Ace.  to  Galen  (De  fac.  simpl.  6,  792-3)  a  Greek,
Pamphilus,  about  the  time  of  Claudius,  wrote  of  herbs  in  alpha-
betic order,  collecting  their  names  and  the  superstitions  about
their  virtues  in  sacrifices  and  incantations.  Were  the  book
extant,  it   would    be  valuable    for    mythology    and    language.


HERBS  AND  STONES.  1669

Possibly  the  names  of  plants  interpolated  in  MSS.  of  Dioscorides
are  oat  of  Pamphilos.

1.  Hbbbs.

p.  1191.]  Kein  dine  hftt  Af  der  erden  an  kreften  also  riehen
hört  (of  powers  so  rich  a  store)  so  steine,  kriuter  unde  wort,  Troj.
10860;  steine,  kr&t  sint  an  tagenden  riche,  wort  wil  ich  darobe
(above  them)  an  kreften  prison,  MS.  1,  12*";  qaae  carmine  sanet
et  herbia,  Ov.  Met.  10,  397.  Würzen  kraft  a.  aller  steine  meister-
Schaft,  MS.  1,  195*;  umrze  des  waldes  u.  erze  (ores)  des  goldes  u.
ellia  abgründe,  din  sint  dir  Herre  künde,  MS.  2,  230;  der  steine
kraft,  der  würze  wAz,  Wh.  2,  14.  What  is  the  distinction  betw.
ÄrrtU  and  wvrz  ?  Ein  hriit,  des  vmrze  (whose  aroma;  er  wanden
helfen  jach  (asserted),  Parz.  516,  24,  conf.  516,  27  :  er  gruobse,
i.e.  the  würz  (  =  warzel,  root).  Krant  is  picked,  wurzel  dug  out;
flowers  too  are  picked  (Walth.  39,  16.     Hpt  7,  320)  or  gathered

(Walth.  39,  1).    Also :  crüt  lesen,  Lane.  29301 . Ein  edel  krut,

Hpt  4,  521 ;  unedel  blnot  (ignoble  blood)  7, 321  (p.  1195);  durch
sine  edel  ez  (daz  krfit)  tragen.  Warn.  1944;  tugeni-frühtic  krintel,
MS.  1,  88* ;  ich  brich  euch  edle  kreuter.  Mono  6,  460 ;  <^dp/MiKov
iaffXov,  Od.  10,  287.  292;  ein  edles  kraut  patientia  samt  dem
kreutlein  benevolentia,  die  gaben  also  süszen  räch,  das  es  mein
herz  n.  sei  durchkruch.  Healing  herbs  are  '  herbes  demanieres,'
Ren.  19257-69;  surdae,  hoc  est  ignobiles  herbae,  Pliny  22,  2,  not

showy,  e.g.  grass. Heil-wurz  is  fetched  from  an  inaccessihU

mountain  by  the  wild  merwoman,  Hpt  5,  8  (Snppl.  to  1192  mid.),
as  dictamnns  is  by  Venus  from  Ida,  Aen.  12, 412.  The  Idaean  bed
of  flowers  is  also  in  Petron.  127;  the  Homeric  veoBfiXia^i  irolri<;
is  in  Hesiod  too,  Theog.  576 ;  a  woodland  bed  [of  flowers  ?]  is
Erek's  and  Enid's  bette-wdt  (-curtain),  Er.  p.  216.  Yuk  1,  no.
224;  mit  rösen  was  ich  nmbestact,  Tragemund.  Where  the
maiden  stood  in  the  garden,  bloom  the  fairest  flowers,  Rhesa
dainos  296 ;  die  boume  begunden  krachen,  die  rösen  sere  lachen,
Ges.  Abent.  1,  464.  Another  planta  e  capite  statuae  nascens
is  in  Athenasus  5,  497.  Liebrecht's  G^rvas.  124.  Gesta  Rom.
K.  138.  Moss  growing  in  a  deatVs  head  is  supposed  to  have
magic  power.  There  is  a  superstition  about  peas  sown  inside  a
skuU.

p.  1192.]     Plants  are  dear  to   God;    He   called  them  forth.


1670  HEBBS  AND   STONBS.

Whether  to  pick  beaatifal  flowers,  or  dur  Oot  stdn  Ian  (for  God's
love  let  them  stand)  ?  Hpt  4,  500.  The  marrabiam  indeed  is
goteS'Vergeten,  gotis-v.,  gotz-vergessen,  Mono  4,  240-8.  8,  493.
407;  gotis'Vergeszene,  Sammerl.  57,  51.  Oe&v  aypcMirt^,  tv
Kpovo^  Koriawetpe'    Olaacns,  having  foand  and  eaten  it,  becomes

immortal,  Athen,  3,  83-4. Alfia  il/oecti?  (blood  of  Ares),  nardns

montana,  Dioscor.  1,  8,  liliam  3,  106;  alfia  ^Epfiov,  verbena  4,
60;  alßia  AOtjvä^;  chamaepitys  3,  165;  atßia  'HpaxXiov^,  crocus
1,  25,  centaurium  minas  3,  7 ;  atfia  rirdvov,  rabns  4,  37.  So :
70V0?  'HpaKXeov^,  myrtns  silv.  4,  144,  ellebomm  alb.  4,  148;
76V09  'Epßiou,  anetham  3,  60,  bnphthalmns  3,  146 ;  701/09  ^p»o9,
polygonum  4,  4  (is  70V09  here  semen,  or  as  the  Lat.  version  has  it,
genitura?).  The  flower  Ata^  first  springs  up  after  the  hero's
death,  Paus.  i.  35,  3.  Plants  often  originate  from  drops  of  blood
(p.  827),  as  the  flower  on  Sempach  field  shoots  up  where  Leopold
has  fallen,  Reber's  Hemmerlin  p.  240.  The  poison-plant  a/coviror
grows  out  of  Cerberus's  drivel  (Ov.  Met.  7,  416.  Serv.  ad  Vii^.
Geo.  2, 152),  as  the  herb  trachonte  does  from  dragon's  blood,  Parz.

483,  6. ApiaroKoxia  (cormp.  into  Osterluzei)  has  reference  to

ÜlpT6fii9  Xo^eia,  and  is  given  to  women  in  childbed.  Herba
Chironis  alsing,  Mone's  Quellen  289*;  herba  S,  Petri,  ibid.  The
Pol.  Dziewanna  is  both  Diana  and  verbascum  thapsas;  Boh.
divizna  (wonder-fiower)  is  oar  himmelbrand  (Suppl.  to  1196).
Baldrs  bra  stands  on  a  par  with  supercilium  Veneris,  Diosc.  4,
113  Bxid  jtingfratien  aug -braune  (virgin's  eyebrow),  achillea  mille-
folium, Nemnich;  conf.  wild-fräulein-kraut,  achillea  moschata.
Staid.  2,  451.  AS.  Sätor-laÖe  (p.  247).  TFberw-Äruid,  angelica  ?
Coremans  53.     Visumarus,  son  of  summer,  of  the  sun  f  (Sappl.

to  1212  end). The  centaury  was  first  pointed   out   by    the

centaur  dm  on;  a  herb  is  named  achillea,  bee.  discovered  by
Chiron's  pupil  Achilles,  Venus  culls  dictamnns  on  Ida  for  her
wounded  Aeneas,  Aen.  12,  412.  The  fjL&ikv  plucked  out  by
Hermes  is,  ace.  to  Dioscor.  3,  46-7,  rata  silvestris  and  leaooium
silvestre.  An  augel  in  a  dream  reveals  the  sowthistle  (p.  1208) ;
the  wounded  Albert  is  shown  the  remedial  herb  in  a  dream,
Felsenb.  1,  232-4;  an  angel  tells  of  a  remedy  in  a  dream,  Engelh.
5437  seq.  One  herb  the  Mother  of  Ood  has  covered  with  her
cloak,  Klose's  Breslau  p.  102 ;  the  empereriz  having  fallen  asleep
on  a  rock  in  the  sea,  Mary  appears  and  bids  her  pull  up  tiie  kerb


HBBBS  AND  STONES.  1671

that  grows  under  her  head,  Mfon  N.  rec.  2,  71-3.  Maerl.  2,  226.
Wackem.  Lb.  995,  29.  Fran  Babehilt  digs  up  and  grates  herb»
for  woands,  Ecken-1.  173 — 6.  The  memiaid  urges  the  use  of
mngwort,  the  vila  of  odoliÄn  (pp.  1208.  1212).  The  vila  gathers
herbs  (bere  bilye)  for  Marko,  Vuk  2,  218  (ed.  '45).

p.  1194.]  In  the  leg.  of  Glaucus  and  Polyidus  a  snake  brings
the  herb  tbat  reanimates  the  dead,  ApoUod.  Bibl.  3,  3 ;  conf.
KM.'  3,  26.  A  weasel  in  the  wood  culls  the  red  flower  that
qaickens,  Marie  1,  474.  Birds  pick  herbs,  and  teach  their  uses
to  man,  e.g.  the  spring- wurzel  (p.  973).  A  raven  comes  flying
with  the  wound-healing  leaf.  Vols,  saga  c.  8.  If  a  swallow* s  chick
grows  blind,  she  fetches  a  herb,  lays  it  on,  and  restores  the  sight;
hence  the  herb's  name  of  chelidonium,  celandine,  Dioscor.  2,  211.
6DS.  204;  and  Megenberg  tells  the  same  tale  of  schelUwurz
(celandine).^  Harts  shew  the  hart- wort  (hirsch-wurz,  -heil),
Megenb.  398,  22—25.  With  Norweg.  l^^yri-hialm  (Tiwes-helm)
coincides  "Apeo^  Kvvfj,  Babr.  68,  4.  Does  0H6.  wat-umrz,  Grafif
1,  768  stand  for  Watin-wurz  ?

p.  1195.]  Mary  has  the  most  herbs  named  after  her,  see
Fries's  Udfl.  1,  87.  Similar  to  the  wine  Liehfrauen»milch  is
!dif>poSiTf)^  ydXa,  Aristoph.  in  a  lost  play  p.  m.  154*;  17809  ye
iriveiv  olvo^  Aif>poS,  yd\a,  Athen.  10,  4445«  Marien-^milch  how-
ever is  polypodium  vulg.,  said  to  have  grown  out  of  the  drops  of
milk  that  Mary  scattered  over  the  land,  F.  Magnus.  361  note ;
conf.  the  Span,  leclie  de  los  viejos,  leche  de  Maria = wine.  Marien
bett'Stroh  is  Eogl.   lady's  bedstraw,  lady  in   the  straw.   Honeys

Yrbk814. Frua^mänteli,  malva  rotundifolia,  Wolfs  Zts.  2,  54.

Vrowen-hdr,  Minnen-hdr,  capillus  Veneris,  Mono  4,  241 ;  conf.
Venus's  eyebrow  (Suppl.  to  1192  mid,).  Nemnich  sub  w.
cypripedium,  adiantum.  Maiden-thräne,  -tear,  resembles  '*Hpa^
Bdfcpvov,  verbena,  Diosc.  4,  60.  Labrum,  lavacrum,  concha  Vene-
ris =dipsacus  sitibundus,  bee.  it  gathers  dewdrops.  Margarethen-
schöckla,  -shoe,  put  in  a  box,  becomes  a  black  worm.

^  A  field-flower,  enphrasia  or  myosotis,  is  called  augen-troit  (eye's  oomfort),
Nethl.  oglien-troott ;  also  augen-dienst  (Blumentrost,  a  family  name  at  Mülhausen) ;
eonf.  *  den  ich  in  mlnen  ougen  gerne  bürge/  Wolfr.  8,  4 ;  ze  sumere  die  ougen
trösten  schoene  wise  (fair  meads  enchant  the  eye) ;  lovely  ladies  were  df^aXßup
d\y7iS6v€s^  eye-smarts.  Daeges  eage,  primula  yeris  [?],  M.  Engl,  daies  eyghe,
daisy,  Alex.  7611.  Clover  too  is  called  ougen  brehendCy  but  Engl,  eye-bright  is
euphrasia.  loh  tuon  dir  in  den  oogen  wol,  Winsbekin  4,  4 ;  er  ist  mir  in  den
ougen  niht  ein  dorn,  MS.  1,  16*^.  2,  98*;  ob  ez  ir  etelfchen  taete  in  den  ougen  w@,
MS.  1,  68^  QDS.  209 ;  oonL  friedeUa  ouga,  Mone  8,  405.  Hpt.  6,  382.


1672  HERBS  AND   STONES.

p.  1195.]  Flowers  are  picked  and  presented  to  ladies^  Hpt  7,
320.  Some  herbs  engender  strife,  esp.  among  women :  ononis
spinosa,  weiber^hrieg^  women's  war,  Lat.  altercam ;  Senr.  hihfe  od
omraze,  herbs  of  hate,  that  makes  friends  fall  oat.  Yak  1,  305  (ed.
'24).  Boh.  bily  is  one  particalar  plant,  tnssilago.  Herbs  were
broken  off  with  the  pommel  of  a  sword.  Lane.  12013,  picked  with
the  left  hand,  bare-footed  (see  selago) .  They  are  gathered  ace.
to  days  of  the  week:  on  Snnday  solsequinm,  Monday  lanaria,
Tnesd.  verbena,  Wednesd.  mercarialis,  Tharsd.  barba  Jo  vis,  Frid.
capillns  Veneris,  Satnrd.  crowfoot  (?  p.  247).  Superst  H,  cap.
31.2.

p.  1196.]  Pliny  26.  5,  14  calls  condurdum  herba  solstitialis,
flore  rabro,  qaae  e  coUo  saspensa  strumas  comprimit ;  conf.  Plant.
Pseudol.  i.  1,  4:  quasi  solstitialui  herba  paulisper  fui,  repente

exortus  sum,  repentino  occidi. Herba  BrUannica  is  called  in

Diosc.  1,  120  Skißio^f  oi  Si  ßperawucrj,  in  4,  2  ßperawiidi  fj
ßerroviteii,  conf.  Diefenb.  Celt.  3,  112.  Cannegrieter  de  Briten-
burgo.  Hag.  Com.  1734.  Abr.  Munting  de  vera  herba  Brit.
Arnst.  1698.  C.  SprengePs  Diosc.  2,  571.  GDS.  679.  An
OHO.  gl.  of  the  12th  cent,  has  'herba  Brit.,  himeUbratU^'  Mone
8,  95;  perh.  'Mmi&rafufa  =  maurella'  in  Graff  3,  309  stands  for
himilbranda.  BiimmeUhrand,  -/(erze  =  yerba8cam  thapsus,  white
mallein,  Schm.  2,  196;  and  hilde-brand,  verb,  nigrum,  2,  178.
Himmelbrand,  brenn^kraut,  feld-kerze,  unholden*kerze=7erb.
thapsus,  says  Höfer  2,  52  ;  unholden^hraut,  Boh.  divizna,  Jongm.
1,371«  (Suppl.  to  1192  mid.).  Instead  of  '  hcewen-hyffele,  bri-
tannica,'  Moneys  Quellen  320^  has  the  forms  haswenrhyldele,  hawen-
ydele ;    may  hylde,   hilde   be  akin   to   helde,   heolode    (hidingi

hidden)  ? Tonnoire,    fleur   du   tonnerre,    coquelioot,    poppy,

Grandg^nage's  Voc.  26;  donner-bart  (-beard)  is  sedum  tele-
phium.  A  fungus  Irov  in  Thrace  grew  during  thunder^  Athen.
1,  288;  subdued  thunder  generates  mushrooms,  Meghad&ta,  p.  4.

On  lotus  see  Klemm  1,  112-3 ;  lotus  caerulea,  Bopp's  61.  39^
46.  Sprengel's  Diosc.  2,  622;  white  and  blue  lotus,  Fries's
Udfl.  1,  107.

p.  1199.].  Mir  wart  ein  krftt  tn  min  hafü,  Ls.  1,  211;  does
that  mean  '  stole  in  unperceived  ^  ?  conf.  if>v  iv  xeipt,  Passow  2,
1042.  Si  sluoc  daz  krftt  mir  üz  der  hant,  Ls.  1,  218.  Of  the
aster  atticus,   Dioscorides  5,   118   says:  ^pov  Si  avaipeßh  rj


HERBS  AND   STONES.  1673

api<rr€pa  ;^6i/>l  rot)  aXyovvro^,  in  the  patient's  left  hand.  Of  the
bark  of  the  wild  figtree,  Pliny  23.  7,  64  :  caprifico  quoque  medi-
cinae  unins  miraculam  additur,  carticem  ejus  impubescentem  puer
impubis  si  defracto  ramo  detrahat  dentibuSf  medallam  ipsam
adalligatam  ante  solu  ortum  prohibere  strumas.  Three  roses  are
picked  off  in  five  pichsy  Amgb.  48**  (conf.  wishing  for  3  roses
on  one  stalky  two  roses  on  one  branchy  Uhl.  Yolksl.  pp.  23.  116.
Reusch  no.   12.     Meinert's  Kuhl.  95 ;  oflfering  3  roses,  Uhl.  p.

257-8).- A  Swed.  account  of  digging  up  the  rönn  (rowan)  in

Djb.  '45,  63.  Am  abend  soltu  sie  (the  vervain)  umJereissen  mit
Silber  u.  mit  golde  u.  mit  siden  (silk),  Mone  6,  474.  When  the
root  is  pulled  out,  the  hole  is  filled  up  with  com,  to  propitiate
the  earth  (Suppl.  to  1241).  The  plant  is  plucked  suddenly^  and
covered  with  the  hand  (Suppl.  to  1214) :  du  solt  ez  (the  shoot)
&z  der  erden  geziehen  vil  lihte.  En.  2806  and  2820 — 5,  where
Virgil  has  no  shoot  to  be  pulled  up,  but  a  branch  to  be  torn  oS.
La  sainte  herbe  qu'a  son  chief  trueve  .  .  ,  tot  en  orant  Verbe  a
coillie,  M6on  N.  rec.  2,  73.

p.  1202.]  The  grasses  growing  through  a  sieve  remind  one  of
the  words  *ßurh  aern  in-wyxf*  (p.  1244).  It  is  curious  too,
that  an  elder  should  be  considered  curative  when  it  grows  in  a
hollow  willow-tree  out  of  seeds  that  thrushes  had  swallowed,
Ettn.  Unw.  d.  161-2.  There  are  herbs,  the  sight  of  which  allays
hanger :  esuriesque  sitis  mm  reparabitur  herbis,  Ecbas.  592.

p.  1204.]  The  mightiest  of  magic  roots  is  mandrake :  abollena
alrun,  Sumerl.  54,  37.  How  to  pull  it  out  is  also  descr.  in
Oeuvres  de  Rutebeuf  1,  474:  Ceste  dame  herbe  (conf.  la  more
des  herbes,  artemisia,  Suppl.  to  1212  beg.),  il  ne  la  trest  ne  giex
(Jew)  ne  paiens  ne  Sarrazins  ne  crestiens,  aios  la  trest  une  beste
muß,  et  tantost  come  ele  est  traite,  si  covieni  morir  cele  beste.  In
like  manner  the  root  Baaras  is  pulled  up  by  means  of  a  dog,
Joseph.  7,  25.  Armenian  '  manrakor  or  hshtak,  a  man-like  root,
is  pulled  out  by  a  [dog  7]  to  which  it  is  tied ;  in  coming  out  it
m^ans  in  a  human  voice/  Artemius  of  Vagarshapat,  transl.  by

Busse  (Halle  '21)  p.  106. Mandragora  g^ows  in  Paradise,

where  the  elefant  goes  to  look  for  it,  Karajan.  MavSpayopa^,
Ilvdayopa^  ävdp<av6fAOp(l>ov,  ^Pe^pMOi  p^Xa  Kay(va,  Diosc.  4,  76.
The  alraun  is  carved  out  of  a  root  (p.  51 3n.).  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  250.
Un  vergier  a  li  peres  Floire,  u  plant^s  est  li  mandegloire,  Flore


1674  HBBBS  AND   STONES.

244.  Mandragora  tvalm,  Mone  8,  95;  von  senfte  der  alrftnen
wart  mich  slafen,  Frauenl.  6^  26 ;  inro  ßjLavSpayopa  icaBev^&p,
Lac.  Timon  2  (ed.  Bip.  1,  331 — 3)  ;  iK  /lavhpetyopou  xeidcuBeiy,

Luc.  Demosth.  enc.  36. On  the  alrune  in  Franenlob's  Minne-

leich  15,  2,  EttmüUer  says  p.  286 :  'they  seem  to  have  believed
that  mandrakes  facilitated  birth.'  This  is  confirmed  by  Adam
Lonicems  in  his  Krenterbach  (1582)  bl.  106*.  'Alraun  rinden
dienet  zu  aagen-arzneyen.  Dieser  rinden  drey  heller  gewicht
schwer,  iiir  der  frawen  gemächt  (women's  chamber)  gehalten,
bringet  ihnen  ihre  zeit,  treibet  auss  die  todte  geburt.'  Alrunen
heizit  er  virbem  (he  is  said  to  have  about  him) :  swenne  er  wil,
sd  ist  er  ein  kindeltn,  swenne  er  wil,  so  mac  er  alt  sin.  Cod.  Pal.
361,  12^  'He  must  keep  an  araunl  by  him,  that  tells  him  all
he  wants  to  know,'  H.  Jörgel  20,  3.  The  mandragora  is  put  into
a  white  dress,  and  served  twice  a  day  with  food  and  drink,  Spinnr.
evangel.  Tuesday  2 ;  conf.  the  tale  of  the  gallows  mannikin,
Simpl.  3,  811.

p.  1204.1  OSinn  sticks  the  thorn  into  Brynhild's  garment
only,  and  throws  her  into  a  sleep  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  276).  In  Tirol
the  schlaf-kunz  is  called  schlaf-putze,  Zingerle  552.  'Hermannus
dictus  Slepe-rose/  Hamb.  lib.  actor.  127,  6  (circ.  1270).  The
hawthorn  is  sentis  canina,  lignea  canis,  Athen.  1,  271.  Breton
gars  spern,  thorn-bush,  in  the  story  of  a  fair  maiden.  Nilsson  6,
4.5  maintains  that  on  ba/rrows  of  the  bronze  age  a  hawthorn  was
planted  and  held  sacred;  and  the  same  among  Celts  (Kl.  sehr.  2,
254.  279).

p.  1207.]  Mistletoe  grows  on  the  hazel,  lime,  birch,  fir,  willow,
and  esp.  oak,  Dyb.  Buna  2,  16.  AS.  dc-mistel,  viscum  quer-
neum.  Mistila,  a  woman's  name,  Mone  5,  492.  Trad.  Fuld.  1,
130.  Schannat  445.  Many  places  named  after  it:  Mistlegau
near  Baireuth;  Mistelouwa,  Mistlau,  near  Crailsheim,  Stalin  1,
599;  Mistelbach,  Frauend.  272,  18.  Ealtenb.  Pantaid.  184^
ad  Misteleberge,  Lacomblet  (yr.  1054)  no.  189;  Mistelveld,
Lang's  Reg.  2,  397  (yr  1248).  3,  55  (yr  1255).  Bamb.  calend.
p.  142;  Mispilswalde,  Lindenbl.  p.  24;  Misterhult  i  Smaland,
Dybeck   '45,   80.      A  sword   belonging   to    Seming^  is   called

Mistilteinn  in  Hervarars.      (Fornald.     sog.   1,  416). Mistü-

tuscus  (1.  viscus),  Hpt  5,  326.  364.     In  some  parts  of  Germany
they  call  mistletoe  henster,  hinster,     Walloon  hamustai,  hamu-


HEBBS  AND  STOKES.  1675

jftaine,  Grandgagnage  1,  270  and  lienistai,  hinistrai^  kinster^
canister,  Grandg.  Yoc.  23-4.  Engl.  iniBseÜoe,  misletoe^  Hone's
Daybk  1,  1637-8.     And  maren-tacke  is   misletoe,  bristly  plant

(p.  1247, 1.  11). Nilsson  would  trace  all  the  Scand.  mistletoe

coitus  to  the  Draidic,  Dybeck  '45,  79.  80.  Ein  mistlein  pater-
no8ter,'MB.  18,  547  (yr.  1469);  mischtlin paternoster,  mispel  and
aieli-misilin  paternoster ,  Roland's  Handlungs-b.  yrs  1445-6-7.
(Pref.  viii.)  Mistletoe  must  be  cut  on  a  Midsummer-nigMe  eve,
when  sun  and  moon  are  in  the  sign  of  their  power  (conjunction?),
Dyb.  '44,  p.  22.  For  the  oak  mistletoe  to  have  any  power,  it
mast  be  shot  o£f  the  tree,  or  knocked  down  with  stones,  Dyb.  '45,
p.  80.     In  Virgil's  descr.  of  the  sacred  bough,  Aen.  vi.,

137.  aureus  et  foliis  et  lento  vimine  ramus,

141.  auricomos  quam  quis  decerpserit  Arhore  fetus,

144.  aureus,  et  simili  frondescit  virga  metallo,

187.  et  nunc  se  nobis  ille  aureus  arbore  ramus,

this  aureus  fetus  is  merely  compared  to  (not  ident.  with)  the
croceus  fetus  of  the  mistletoe;  conf.  Athen.  3, 455-7.  An  oak  with
a  gulden  boagh  occurs  in  a  Lett*  song,  Büttner  no.  2723.  Armor
huelvar,  afl.  heller;  WeL  uehelawg,  uchel/a,  uchelfar,  uchelfel,
JtoUiach,  Jones  p.  391^.  Lett,  ohsa  wehja  /rlohta,  oak-mistletoe,
from  ohsols,  oak,  sjid xlohta,  broom,  plume;  wehja /lohta  is  a  plant
of  which  brooms  are  made.  Does  wehja  mean  holy  ?  conf.
wehja  wannags  (Suppl.  to  675).  Serv.  lepak,  viscum  album,
also  mela,  of  which  Vuk  p.  394  says :  If  a  mistletoe  be  found  on
a  hazel,  there  lies  under  that  hazel  a  snake  with  a  gem  on  his
head,  or  another  treasure  by  the  side  of  it.

p.  1208.]  Welsh  gwlydd  usu.  means  mild,  tender,  gwiolydd
is  violet.  Valerian  is  in  Finn,  ruttoyuuri,  plagne-wort ;  another
Boh.  name  is  kozljk.  A  rare  word  for  valerian  is  tennemarch,
Nemnich.  Mono  8,  140*.  Hpt  6,  331.  Worthy  of  note  is  the
Swed.  tale  about  the  mooring  of  Tivebark  and  Vendelsrot,  Dyb.
'45,  p.  50.  The  Serv.  name  odolidn  resembles  a  Polish  name  of
a  plant»  dotgga,  for  dot^ka  means  upper  hand ;  conf.  Vuk's  Gloss.
sub.  V.  odumiljen.  Odilienus  is  a  man's  name,  Thietmar  4,  37 ;
so  is  Boh.  Odolen  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  393).  Nardus  is  fragrant,  esp.
the  Indica ;  nardus  Celtica  is  saliunco.  NdpSo^  irumfct)  iroXvrifAO^,
John  12,  3  is  in  Goth,  nardus  pistikeins  filu-galaubs.


1676  HBRBS  AND   STONES.

p.  1208.]  Acc.  to  Martin's  Relig.  d.  Gaules,  Belinuntia  comes
fr.  Belenus  (Diefenb.  Celt.  1,  20a.  Zeuss  p.  34),  and  is  a  herba
ApoUinaris ;  Apollo  is  said  to  have  found  it,  Forcell.  sub  t.
Russ.  belena,  Pol.  bielun,  Boh.  bleu,  bljn,  Hung,  belendfa.  Engl.
henbane,  gallinae  mors.

p.  1208.]  On  eberwurz,  see  Beuss's  Walafr.  Strab.  Hortolas
p.  66.  Great  power  is  attrib.  to  the  carlina,  Dyb.  '45,  p.  72.
Another  thistle  is  in  Sweden  called  julUborste,  ibid.,  reminding
us  of  the  boar  Oullin-burM  and  of  eberwurz.  As  Charles's
arrow  &lls  on  the  sow-thistle,  so  does  Cupid's  on  a  flower  to
which  it  imparts  miraculous  power,  love-in-idleness,  Mids.  N.
Dr.  2,  2  ;  and  other  healing  herbs  are  revealed  in  dreams.  In
another  dream  a  grey  smith  appears  to  the  same  king  Karel,
and  with  his  pincers  pulls  nails  out  of  his  hands  and  feet,  Hpt
1,  103.

p.  1209.]  An  AS.  Herbal  says  of  Betonica :  ]>eos  wyrt,  ^
man  beUmicam  nemne'S,  heo  bi'S  cenned  on  maedum  and  on
claenum  d&nlandum  and  on  gefrilSedum  slowum.  seo  deah
gehwaeSer  ge  )?ae8  mannes  sawle  ge  his  lichoman  (benefits  soul
and  body),  hio  hyne  scyldeiS  wi'S  (shields  him  against)  unhyruni
niht-gengum  and  wi'S  egeslicum  genkfum  and  9wefnum,  seo
wyrt  byS  swySe  h&liga,  and  )>us  \ti  hi  scealt  niman  on  Agnstes
möntSe  bütan  iserne  (without  iron),  etc.  MHG.  b<ii6nie  (rhy.
Saxönie),  Tit.  1947:  betoene  (rhy.  schoene),  Hatzl.  163,  86.
Kiarpov  ^Pmßiaioi  oiferrovticffv  KoXovtri,  Piosc.  4,  1.

Verbena  is  akin  to  veru  and  Yirbius,  says  Schwenck  pp.  489.
491 ;  it  stands  for  herbena,  says  Bergk.  It  is  sacred,  and  there-
fore called  iepoßordvff  and  herba  pura,  qua  ooronabantur  bella
indicturi,  Pliny  22.  2,  8.  25.  9,  59.  Wolfg.  Goethe's  Dissert,
p.  30-1.  It  is  called  nrepiarepetov,  bee.  pigeons  like  to  sit  by  it;
also/erran'tt,  Diosc.  4,  60:  fi  a-iSffpin^  4,  33-4-5.  OHG.  Ucama,
isentna,  Graff  3,  864.  1,  491 ;  wincletia  4,  555.  Sumerl.  24,  9 ;
isenarre^  Sumerl.  40,  54;  iserenbart  66,  40.  MHG.  isenhart,
Mone's  Anz.  4,  250  and  Quellen  309*.  Eisen-hraiU,  as  we  still
call  it,  is  thrown  into  St.  John's  fire  (p.  618) ;  conf.  *Liay  aside
the  Johnswort  and  the  t?en?am,*  Whitelaw  p.  112.  Nethl.  &«•-
hrM,  Swed.  jem-ort,  Dan.  jam-urt.  There  was  a  spell  for  dig-
ging  up  vein;ain,  Mone  6,  474.  AS.  cesc-wyrt,  Hpt.  5,  204;
ceac'jjrote,  Lye  sub  v.     GDS.  124.


HEBBS  AND  STONBS.  1677

p.  1209.]  Madelger  ist  ain  gat  erat  wartz.  swer  si  grabn  wil,
der  grab  si  an  Sant  Johans  tag  ze  san-benden  (solstice)  an  dem
abent^  and  beswer  si  also  dri-stand  (adjare  it  3  times  thus) :  '  Ich
beswer  dich,  Madelger,  Ain  wurtz  so  her,  Ich  manen  dich  des
gehaiz  den  dir  Sant  Pettrus  gehiez,  Do  er  sinen  stab  dri^stund
durch  dich  stiez,  Der  dich  usgr&b  Und  dich  haim  trftg :  Wen  er  mit
dir  nmb-faaht  (whom  he  with  thee  begirds),  ez  sy  fraw  oder  man.
Der  mag  ez  in  lieb  oder  in  minn  nimer  gelaan.  In  Götz  namen,
Amen/  wihe  si  mit  andern  crntern.  Kräater-heilkande  (jr
1400)  in  the  Giessen  Papierhs.  no.  992,  bl.  143.

p.  1211.]  Fern,  bracken.  Gr.  irrepK  fr.  its  feathery  foliage.*
Lat.  filix,  It.  felce,  Sp.  helecho,  Fr.  fougere.  Filix  herba,  palmes
Mercurii  (SuppL  to  159) ;  filicina,  filix  minata,  AS.  eofor-feam,
Celt,  ratis,  Wel.  rhedyn,  Bret,  roden,  Ir.  raith,  raithneach,  Gbel.
raineach  (conf.  reinefano),  Pott  2,  102.  Adelang's  Mithr.  2,  68
from  Marcell.  c.  25  (Kl.  sehr.  2,  123).  Finn,  sana-yalka  (word*
foot),  Esth.  sona-yalg,  Böcler's  Abergl.  gebr.  d.  Esten  144.
Lith.  bit'krhle  (bee's  chair)  =  tanacetam  volg.,  Nesselm.  226»
331.  Serv.  pouratish,  tansy,  tanacetam  crisp  am  (fr.  po*
vratlti,  to  tarn  back  ?  ON.  burkni,  filix,  polypodinm,  Swed.
broken,  Vesterb.  fraken,  Dan.  bregne.  Again,  ON.  einstapi,
Jonsson's  Oldn.  ordboc,  Norw.  einstabbe,  einstape,  Aasen  79**.
Nemnich  sab  v.  pteris.  Swed,  orwi6tt»fce.— Den  wilden  varra
treten,  Parz.  444,  7.  458,  17 ;  latentis  odiii  filix  excrevit,  Dietmar
in  Pertz  5,  736 ;  filex  iniqaitatis  exaruit  5,  742.  Fernseed  makes
invisible.  Wolf's  Ztschr.  2,  30  :  we  have  the  receipt  of  femseed,
we  walk  invisible,  1  Henry  IV.  2,  1 ;  Swed.  osynlighets  gras.
As  femseed  in  Conrad  is  thrown  to  the  shad  (schaid-visch,
Beheim  281,  28),  so  bagloss,  which  is  said  to  blind  all  animals
born  blind,  is  scattered  to  fishes,  Rudi.  12,  13.  1\  28.  32—48.
After  walking  naked  to  the  cross-roads  and  spreading  oat  a

pockethandkerchief,  one  expects  femseed,  Zehn  ehen  235. On

Christmas  night,  high  and  low  used  to  walk  in  the  femseed ;
there  you  might  wish  for  anything  in  the  world,  the  devil  had  to
bring  it.  The  Wend,  volksl.  2,  271*  makes  it  blossom  at  Mid-
summer noon  :  get  hold  of  the  blossom,  and  all  the  treasures  of

*  So,  from  the  SIav.  par-Ui,  to  flj,  perö,  wing,  feather,  Hehn  derives  not  only  the
rednpl.  Slay,  and  Lith.  fa-part,  pa-prat,  bnt  the  Tent,  /am  and  even  the  Celt,  ratit
which  stands  (more  Oeltioo)  for  pratis.    Hehn's  Plants  and  Anim.  p.  484. — Tbamsl.

VOL.  IV.  D  D


1678  HEBBS  AND   STONES.

•earth  lie  open  before  you.  Conf.  the  Sloven,  riddle  :  ^  kay  tgvete
brez  tsveta  ?  '  what  blossoms  without  blossom  ?  Anew.  praproL
In  Tirol,  if  you  step  on  an  irr^vmrz,  you  immed.  find  yourself
plunged  in  a  bog  or  a  carrion-pit.  A  story  of  the  irr^hraut  m
Stöber^s  Neujahrstollen  32-3 ;  conf.  Lett,  songs  in  Büttner  nos.
1593.  1912.

p.  1212.]  ArtemUia,  Fr.  armoise,  0.  Fr.  ermoize,  is  called  in
Champagne  marrebore  or  marreborc  (marrubium?),  which  is  supp.
to  mean  la  mere  des  herbes  (Butebeuf  1,  257),  as  in  fact  arte-
misia  is  called  herbarum  mater  in  Macer.  Rutebeufs  Dit
-de  Terberie  1,  257  makes  ermoize  the  first  of  healing  herbs :  Les
fames  sen  ceignent  le  soir  de  la  S.  Jehan,  et  en  font  chapiaux
seur  lor  chiez,  et  dient  que  goute  ne  avertinz  ne  les  puet  panre
n'en  chiez,  n'en  braz,  n'en  pie,  n'en  main ;  mais  je  me  merveil
quant  les  testes  ne  lor  brisent,  et  que  li  cors  ne  rompent  parmi,

tant  a  Perbe  de  vertu  en  soi. The  Germ,  word  for  it  occurs  as

A  man's  name  Peybos  (yr  1330),  Bamberger  verein  10,  107,  and
Beypoz  (yrs  1346-57)  10,  129.  136-8.  U5.  Even  Schannat  no.
348  has  the  name  Beboz  (see  El.  sehr.  2,  899.  Dronke's  Trad.
Fuld.  420);  and  *  beypo88=hTtemesm*  in  Vocab.  Theutoo.
(Nuremb.  1482)  d.  7«.  At  last,  in  Vocab.  ex  quo  Eltuil  1469,
^  a,ttüLmesidk=byifuy88/  and  also  '  incus  =  eyn  anfusse,^  the /in  both
being  appar.  Mid.  Bhenish.*  *  Bismolten,  artemisia,  est  nomen
herbe,  volgariter  byfus  in  ander  sprach  bock,'  Voc.  incip.  Teuton.
^Bibe8  ist  ain  crut :  wer  fer  welle  gaun,  der  soll  es  tragen,  so  wirt
er  nit  müd  sere  uf  dem  weg,  der  tuf el  mag  im  och  nit  geschaden ;
und  wo  es  in  dem  hus  lit,  es  vertribt  den  zober,'  Heilmittelbuch
of  1400  in  the  Giess.  hs.  no.  992,  bl.  128^  'Artemisia,  beyfuss,
^onnenwendel/  J.  Serranus's  Diet.  Latino-Germ.  (Numb.  1539)
66^;  '  in  dem  bifu8*  Monoms  Anz.  '34,  337.  Superstitions  about
it,  Panz.  Beitr.  1,  249.  *  St  John's  coals  (touchstones)  are  found
fr.  noon  to  vespers  of  John's  day  under  thebeyfuss;  alias  non

inveninntur  per  annum,'  Mono  7,  425. ^Artemisia  is  zimber,

zimbira  in  Hattemer  3,  597*;  hergotUholzel  in  Nemnich  p.  466.
AS.  tagant€8  Ae{(2e= artemisia  (tragantes,  for  TpctjaxavSal),
Mone's  Quell.  320»  (conf.  p.  1216  n.).  OHG.  8tapa'KmrZy  stabe^w.,
abrotonum,  Graff  1, 1052.    SumerL  60,  2;  our  stabwurz,  southem-

*  The  oorraption  of  blböz  into  *  our  meaningless  beifoss  *  is  a  fair  example  of
Folk-etymology :  the  herb  is  good  for  the  pedestrian's /«€t.~TBAH8ii.


HEBB8  AND  STONES.  1679

wood.  OS.  staf'Wurt,  dictamnam,  dittany,  Diut.  2,  192.  Arte-
misia is  btiggila  in  Hattemer  1,  314^^  and  Mone  8^  400;  bugel
6,  220 ;  bugge  8,  405 ;  huggul^  Voc.  opt.  p.  51* ;  <f>aal  Se  iv  to«?
ohoLTToplai^  fjLtl  iraparpißea-Oai  rov^  ßovß&va^,  a^vov  pdßSov  v
T^9  dpT€ßiLala^  Kparovfiivf)^  (groin  not  galled  if  one  carry  a
switch  of  agnus  castas  or  artemisia),  Diosc.  2,  212.  Gallic  irovifi,
Dacian  foi/oerriy  (conf.  ?<wo-ti;/),  girdle),  6DS.  208.  Diefenb.  Celt.
1,  172.  Jr.  mugardy  AS.  mucg-tvyrt,  GDS.  708.  Boh.  cemo^byl,
Pol.  czarnO'byl,  Slov&n.  zhernob  (black  herb)  ;  Serv.  bozhye  drutze,
God's  little  tree.

To  Gothic  names  of  plants,  add  vigadeinö,  rplßoXo^  (Snppl.
to  1215).  On  eqnisetam,  see  Pott's  Comm.  2,  27.  OHG.  grert"
sine,  nymphaea,  potentilla,  clavus  Veneris,  Graff  4,  333 ;  MHG.
grensine,  Moneys  Anz.  4,  244-6.  In  a  Stockholm  MS.  we  find  the
spell :  TJnse  \eve  vrowe  gink  sik  to  damme,  se  sochte  grensink
den  langen,  do  se  en  vant,  do  stunt  he  un  bevede.  se  sprak :
'  summe  den  soten  Jesum  Grist,  wat  crudes  du  bist  ? '  '  Junk-
frowe,  ik  hete  grensink,  ik  bin  das  weldigeste  kint,  ik  kan  den
kettel  kolen,  ik  kan  alle  dink  vorsonen,  ik  kan  den  unschuldigen
man  van  den  galgen  laten  gan  ;  de  mi  bespreke  nn  ineges  dages
up  broke,  dem  were  God  holt  und  alle  mannen  kunne  un  golt
sulven.'  in  den  namen  des  Yaders  un  des  Sons,  etc.  Is  grensine
f r.  grans,  prora,  bee.  it  grows  in  front  of  your  boat  ?

Glover,  trifolium,  Dan.  klever,  Germ,  klee:  nübblättlets  klee
(p.  1079  mid.).  Esp.  significant  is  the  four-leaved  (p.  1137  end):
klewer  veer,  Müllenh.  pp.  410.  557 ;  clover  cinquefoil,  Bret,  march.
89.  93 ;  to  send  trefoil  and  wine.  Arch.  v.  Unterfranken  iv.  3,
169.  Glover  is  called  himmeUkraui  in  Bavaria:  schön  blüefs
himeUkraut,  Schm.  2,  196,  conf.  himeUbliie,  reAnhow,  himeUbrand,
mullein  (Suppl.  to  1196);  hergotts-brot  (-bread),  head  of  clover
blossom,  Schm.  2,  231,  conf.  brosam-kraut,  Superst.  I,  369;
Gotis-ampher  (-sorrel),  allelaja,  Sumerl.  54,  35.  Icel.  smari,
ti-ifol.  album;  Jutl.  smäre.  ON.  qveisu^gras,  trifol.  fibrinum,
good  for  colic  and  hysterica  passio  (Suppl.  to  1159  beg.).  Swed.
cäpling :  superstit.  of  the  fyr-väpL,  fem-vapL,  Dybeck  '48,
p.  22.  Gall,  visumarus,  Diefenb.  1,  46  (Suppl.  to  1192  mid.
Kl.  sehr.  2,  156.  171).  Ir.  shamrock,  in  O'Brien  seamrog  (Kl.
sehr.  2,  156),  GDS.  302.  Welsh  meillionen,  Armor,  melchen,
melchon.     Clover  used  in  Persian  sacrifices,  Herod.  I,  132.


1680  HEBBS   AND   STONES.

p.  1213.]  Oar  gunder-männlein,  gundeUrebe,  is  a  tiny  bine
flower,  whereas  OHG.  gunde-^eba =ekcer,  maple;  gunderebe,  acer,
balsamita,  Mone  7,  600.  In  a  charm:  ^guntreben  ger  (maple
shoot  1),  I  toss  thee  np  to  the  clouds/  Mone  6,  468.

p.  1213.]  Morsns  diaboli,  devilsbit,  see  Dybeck  '45, 52.  AS.
ragu  (ragwort)  is  glossed  by  'mosicum,  mossiclum,'  perh.
mosylicum ;  otherw.  raga  is  robigo.  Lye  has  also  '  Cnstes
maeles  raga,  Christi  cracis  mosicam,  herba  contra  ephialten
Valens.'     Schubert  p.  197  :  ragwurz,  orchis.

Sery.  stidak  (shamefaced),  caucalis  grandiflora  :  it  has  a  white
blossom,  with  a  little  red  in  the  middle.  This  red,  they  say,  was
greater  once,  but  grew  less  every  day,  as  modesty  died  out  among
men,  Vuk  sub  v.

Holder  (wolf  s-claw  f ),  when  eaten,  causes  vomiting  or  purging,
ace.  as  it  was  shelled  over  or  under  one,  Judas  1,  169.  Lycopo-
dium  complanatum,  ON.  jafni,  Dan.  joA^ne,  Swed.  jemna,  Vesterb.
J  o/mm,  '

p.  1214.]  A  plant  of  universal  healing  power  is  hetUaller'toeU,
agrimonia,  Mone  8,  103;  allsr  frowen  lieil,  MS.  2,  48»;  giu>tes
viannes  heil,  Hpt.  2,  179.  Lisch's  Meckl.  jrb.  7,  230 ;  conf.  the
ointment  marines  heil,  Iw.  3452.  Er.  7230.

p.  1214.]  Darant  seems  a  corrup.  of  andor,  andom  (hore-
hound) :  trail  your  shirt  in  blue  tharand,  N.Pr.  prov.  bl.  8,  229.
Oothl.  tarald,  äggling,  ett  gras  for  hvilket  trollen  tros  sky,  Almqv.
464».  Hold  up  thy  skirt,  that  thou  graze  not  the  white  orand  !
M.  Neth.  orant,  Mone  6,  448.     Hoist,  galer  orant,  MüUenh.  no.

425. '  A  herb  that  says.  Be  woUgemut,    (of   good   cheer) ! '

Hoffm.  G^sellschaftsl.  136;  die  braune  wolgemut,  Ambras.  lied,
p.  212.  Pol.  dobry  mysli,  good  thoughts.  The  plant  must  be
plucked  hastily,  and  hidden :  ififunreo»^  rbv  opiyavov  iv  XV^
KevOei,  Athen.  1,  262 ;  opt^avov  ßkeireiv,  look  sour,  as  though
you  had  bitten  marjoram.

Porst,  porse  is  strewn  under  the  table,  to  sharpen  a  guest's
appetite,  Fries's  Udfl.  pp.  109.  110 ;  conf.  borsa,  myrtns,  Graff
3,  215.

p.  1214.]  OHG.  hart'houwi  (-hay)  must,  I  think,  be  the
harten-aue  which  the  girl '  murkles '  to  find  out  if  her  lover  loves
her,  Firmen.  2,  234.  Fiedler's  Dessauer  volksr.  98.  In  Sweden
this  hypericam  perforatum  has  to  be  one  of  the  nine  sorts  of


HEBBS  AND   STONES.  1681

fiovoera  that  make  the  Midsum.  nosegay ;  the  picking  of  it  is
descr.  in  Rana  '44,  p.  22-3 :  yon  lay  it  ander  yonr  pillow,  and
notice  what  yoa  dream.  Again,  that  plant  with  St-John's-
blood  sap  (Müllenh.  p.  222)  is  the  liart-hea,  Schub,  p.m.  184.
Schütze's  Holst,  id.  1,  117-8.

OH6.  reinfano,  Graff  3,  521,  Swed.  renfane,  tansy,  seems  to
be  sacred  to  elves,  Fries's  Udfl.  1,  109;  it  helps  in  di£Scalt
childbirth.  Does  the  name  denote  a  plant  that  grows  on  boun-
daries [rain  =  strip  of  grass  left  betw.  hedgeless  cornfields]  f
conf.  rein-farti,  Kl.  sehr.  2,  44.

p.  1214.]  Was  widertan  orig.  widar*dono,  formed  like  »If-
)?ona  ?  yet  it  is  wederiam  in  Sumerl.  55,  49.  The  country-mouse
in  Bollenhagen,  when  visited  by  the  town-mouse,  lays  down  a
bundle  of  widderthan,  that  gleams  like  a  red  poppy.  Widerthon-
moos  (-moss)  is  polytrichum  commune,  Schub,  p.m.  210,  other-
wise called  golden  frauen-haa/r  (conf.  the  holy  wood-moss  of  the
Samogitians,  and  the  special  gods  for  it,  Lasicz  47).  Friscb
calls  widerthon  a  lunaria ;  the  osmunda  lunaria  is  named  ankehr^
kraut  (sweep  to-),  and  is  supp.  to  give  cows  good  milk :

Griisz  dich  Gott,  anJcehr-kraut  I
ich  brock  dich  ab,  u.  trag  dich  nach  haus ;
wirf  bei  meinem  kuhel  (lay  flesh  on  my  cow)   finger-
dick  auf.  Höfer  1,  36.

p.  1215.]  Weg'Wise  =  solaeqxi\\im  in  Albr.  v.  Halb.  129**;
wege-weis  =^  cichoTixim  intybus,  Nemnich;  conf.  AS,  for^tredde^
our  wege- tritt.  D4  wfinic  wege^riches  stuont,  Parz.  180,  7;
other  names  are  weg-luge  (Staid.  2,  439)  from  'luogen,'  and
'  Hdnslein  heVm  weg '  (or  is  it  '  hduslein  bei  dem  weg,'  as  in
Fischart's  Onomast.  221  ?).  Serv.  bokvitza,  plantago,  fr.  bok»
side;  Boh.  cekanka,  fr.  cekati«  wait  [Buss,  poputnik,  podorozhnik,
fr.  ptiti,  dor6ga=way].— Dicitur  quod  tres  rami  corrigiolas
(wegetritt)  coUectae  in  nomine  Trinitatis  et  cum  oratione  domi-
nica,  suspensi  in  panno  lineo,  maculam  oculi  sine  dubio  tollunt,
Mone  7,  424.  Das  edle  kraut  weg-warte  macht  guten  äugen-
schein,  Ambras,  lied.  p.  18 ;  item  es  spricht  alwärtus,  die  wegwart-
wurtzeln  soltu  niecht  essen,  so  magstu  nit  wund  werden  von
hauen  noch  von  stechen,  Giess.  papier-hs.  no.  1029  (conf.  p.  1244).
'Advocati   consueverunt    se  munire  sambuco    et  plantagine  ut


1682  HEBBS  AND  STONES.

▼incant  in  cansis  *  is  Bohemian^  like  that  aboat  the  child's  canl
(p.  874ii.).  The  above  names  remind  us  of  Goth.  vigadein6=
tribolus  (Suppl.  to  1212  mid.),  as  the  Gr.  ßdro^  is  perhaps  from
ßaivoa,  and  the  Lat.  sentis  akin  to  Goth,  sinj^s,  via ;  yet  conf.  EL
sehr.  5,  451  seq.     GDS.  211.

p.  1215.]  Of  the  hek  an  ON.  riddle  says  :  '  höfiSi  sinu  viisar  ä
helvegn,  en  f5tnm  til  solar  sn^r/  his  head  points  to  hell,  his  feet
to  heaven ;  to  which  HeiSrekr  answers  *  höfaS  veit  i  Hlo^Synjar
skaut,  en  blö«  i  lopt/  Fornald.  s.  1,  469  (conf.  the  ßoXßol  in
Aristoph.  Clouds  187 — 193).  Sa/ra-lauk  sid^a,  boiling  wound-
l^ks,  means  forging  swords  1,  468.  With  the  leek  men  divine,
Dyb.  '45,  p.  61 ;  it  drives  evil  spirits  away,  Fries's  Udfl.  1,  109.
House^leeJc,  sempervivum  tectorum,  Swed.  tak-lök,  wards  off
misfortune  1,.  110.  '  Radix  allii  victorialis'  is  neun-hömmlere  in
Staid.  2,  236 ;  in  Nemnich  neun-hemmerlein,  siebenr-hemmerlein.
OHG.  surio,  9urro,  m.,  cepa,  porrum,  Graff  6,  273.

p.  1215.]  The  rowan  or  rönn  (Dyb.  '45,  62-3)  is  called  wild
ash,  mountain  ash,  vogelbeer-baum,  sperber-baum,  AS.  wiee,
Plattd.  hvieke,  Wolfs  Ztschr.  2,  85.  Men  like  a  staff  made  of
pilber^baum,  sorbus  aucuparia,  Possart's  Estl.  163.  Finn,  pihlava,
sorbus,  is  planted  in  holy  places  :  pihlayat  pyhille  maille,  Kalev.
24,  71.  94.     Renvall  sub  v.

p.  1216.]  Hab'mich4ieb  and  wol-gemut  (Suppl.  to  1214)  are
herbs  of  which  wreaths  were  twined,  Hatzl.  15^;  'ein  krenzlin
von  wolgemuot  ist  für  sendez  trüren  guot,'  good  for  love-sick-
ness 162-3.

p.  1216.]  A  wort,  that  the  mermaid  dug  on  the  mount  that
might  not  be  touched,  makes  whoever  eats  it  understand  the
wild  beast,  fowl  and  fish,  Hpt.  5,  8.  9.  A  herb  accidentally  picked
opens  to  him  that  carries  it  the  thought  and  speech  of  others,  Ls.
1,  211-8.  Herb  chervil  blinds  or  gives  double  sight,  Garg.  148*.
Ges.  Abent.  2,  267.  Whoever  carries  herb  assidiose  in  his  hand,
commands  spirits.  Tit.  6047.  When  the  dew  falls  in  May  on
the  herb  parbodibisele,  one  may  harden  gold  in  it.  Tit.  3698-9.
Cattle  are  made  to  eat  three  blooming  flowers,  the  blue  among
them,  so  as  not  to  be  led  astray  into  the  mountains.     Hpt  4,  505.

p.  1216  n.]  AS.  (Blf''J}ona  is  expl.  by  J^ona  or  pone,  palmes,
pampinus,  conf.  OHG.  upar^dono,  sudarium ;  is  alb^dono  then  a
cloth  spread  by  the  elves?     If  aölf-)?one  be  fem.  and  =OHG.


HERBS  AND  STONES.  1685

alb-dona^  dona  must  be  pampinas  (oar  dohne^  springe  or  noose),
coil,  tendril^  and  so  alfranke  (p.  448),  Hpt  5,  182.  AS.  helde
is  sometimes  ambrosia.  Is  hwatend  (iris  Illyrica)  equivalent  to
soothsaying  flower  ?  for  Iris  is  at  once  messenger  of  the  gods,
and  rainbow,  and  a  plant  which  the  Slavs  call  Perunica;  thunder-
flower.  Finn,  wuohen  miekka,  caprae  ensis,  is  also  iris,  sword-
lily. Other   notable   herb-names   in   AS.    are:    Oxan-slippa,

primula  veris,  E.  oxlip,  cowslip,  Dan.  oxe-driv,  ko-driv,  Swed»
oxe4ägg.  Hundes/red,  centauria.  Eofor-ßrote,  apri  guttur,  scilla.
Lust-mdce,  ros  solis,  Nemnich  drosera.   Staid.  1,  336  egelkraat»

Modere,  venerea.   Moneys   Quell.  320**;    Lye  has  mäddere,

rabia,  E.  madder;  Barnes  sub  v.  madders,  mathers,  anthemis,
cotula.  Meiere,  febrif uga,  Sumerl.  56,  58 ;  and  melissa,  meiere
57,  59  (Suppl.  to  1244).  Muiiere,  muiierne,  caltha.  Staid.  2,
226;  Finn,  maiara,  mattara;  Hus  gun  mhaihair  gun  athair/
flower  without  mother  or  father :  *  a  plant  resembling  flax,  which
grows  in  springs,'  Armstr.  368**. Weoffo-bend,  cyclamen  con-
volvulus, E.  woodbind,  wiihe-bind,  M.  Neth.  wede-winde,  Maerl.  3,
205  ;  conf.  weendungel :  *  ik  kenne  dat  kruud,  sede  de  duvel,  do
hs^didiQ  \iQ  weendungel  freten,'  Brem.  wtb.  5,218   (AS.  ^unj,  pL

ßungas,  aconitum,  helloborus). Mage&e,  magoSfe,  buphthalmus;

conf.  *  hay -maiden,  a  wild  flower  of  the  mint  tribe,'  Barnes.
Biacon-weed,  chenopodium,  goose-foot,  Barnes.  Oloden,  caltha;
also  gladene,  gloedene,  Boffen,  lolium ;  conf.  beres-boto,  zizania,
meres'poio,  Graff  3,  81.  LeloSre,  lapathum.  Oearewe,  mille-
folium, yarrow,  OHG.  garewä.  Mihel-ferding,  -fyrding,  a
wound-healing  plant,  from  ferd,  fyrd  =  army,  war?  BroSer-wyri,
herba  quaedam  strictum  pectus  et  tussim  sanans.  Lye.  Hals-wyri,
narcissus,  from  hdlsian  to  make  whole  ?

Peculiar  OHG.  names:  olsenich^  Moneys  Quell.  285^;  olsnic,
baldimonia,  herba  thuris,  Sumerl.  55,  11.  57,  26.  Ducange  sub
V.  ramesdra,  Graff  2,  512.  Striph,  siripha,  Graff  6,  751.  Eri^
galld,  AS.  eorff-gealle,  centaurea  major,  cornflower.  Hrosse-huf,
Graff  4,  1180.  Add  the  plant-names  in  the  Wiesbaden  glosses,
Hpt  6,  323.

Names  still  in  use:  brändli,  satyrium  nigrum,  Staid.  1,  216,
small,  but  scented;  it  is  the  Bomance  waldser,  valser,  Moneys
Anz.  ^39,  391  (gerbrändli?),  conf.  wald-meisierlein,  asperula
odorata,  M.  Neth.  waUmesier,  Mone  6,  448.     Herba  mairis  silvae.


1684  HEBBS  AND  STONES.

Wallach,  mama  padnra,  wood-mother,  wood-wife,  Schott  207.
MannS'kraff,  geam  urbannm,  Hess.  Ztschr.  4,  81.  Tag  und
nacht  4,  94.  Sumerl.  58,  29;  Ssk.  dies  et  nox  in  one  word,
Bopp's  61.  27**;  Pol.  dzien  i  noc,  melampyram  nemorosam,  Linde
1,  595\  PariunnUkraui,  stachys  alpina,  Hess.  Zta.  4,  84.  Braut-
iretie,   erica,   acqatres   a  red  tinge,   Wächter  p.    18;  braut  im

haar,  Sommer's  Sag.  p.  61. Berufo-kraut,  anthyllis  rulneraria,

Somm.  p.  61 ;  vemifiti'lcraut,  maidenhair,  Schm.  2,  587 ;  conf.
beschrei'kr.  (p.  1195).  Eisen-breche,  sferra-cavallo  (p.  974),  E.
moonwort,  lanaria.  Hone's  Yrbk  1551.  Maus-ohrlein,  moase-ear,
herba  clavomm,  nailwort,  makes  horses  willing  to  be  shod
1550.  £a7i^  =  teafels-zwim,  clematis,  Vilmar  in  Hess.  Zts.  4,  94.
Druten^mehl,  hexen-mehl,  semen  lycopodii,  is  sprinkled  over  sore
babies.  Wind-hexe,  rolling  flax,  a  steppe  weed,  Ross,  perekati-
pole  (roll  over  field),  whose  balls  drift  like  thistledown,  Kohl's
S.  Russia  2,  113-4.

2.  Stones.

p.  1218.]  Rare  stones  are  called  '  steine,  die  kein  gebirge  nie
getmoc,  noch  din  erde  brfthte  fur,'  Troj.  kr.  2954.  They  are
known  to  Jews  :  it  is  a  Jew  that  can  tell  Alexander  what  stone
it  is,  Alex.  7075  ;  that  master  of  stone-lore,  Evax  of  Arabia,  Lanz.
8531.  Boundary 'St ones y  drev-heiirn^steine  are  pounded  to  powder,
and  drunk  as  medicine.  Ph.  Dieffenb.  Wander.  2,  73.  Other
healing  stones  are  ment.  in  Lohengr.  str.  652,  defensive  helmet-
stones  in  Aspremont  20.  40-1.  A  stone  that  tells  yon  everything,
Norske  folke»ev.  1,  188;  a  stone  taken  in  the  mouth  g^ves  a
knowledge  of  foreign  tongues,  Otnit  Ettm.  3,  32—25.  Rhön  126;
another,  put  in  the  month,  enables  you  to  travel  over  water,  H.
Sachs  i.  3,  291*.  Simplic.  5,  12  p.  548-9;  and  there  was  a  stone
that  made  you  fly,  Ges.  Abent.  3,  212-7.  The  stone  of  fear  keeps
you  from  being  frightened  :  '  he  hung  a  schreck-stein  on  him,
Pol.  maulaffe  298.

Quattuor  in  cunctis  sunt  insita  mythica  gemmis,
durities,  virtus,  splendorque,  colorque  pereünis

Gotfr.  Viterb.  p.m.  367\

Rings,  finger-rings  derive  all  their  virtue  from  the  stones  set  in
them.     A  vingerlin  that  repels  magic,  and  makes  you  aware  of


HBBBS  AND  STONBS.  1685

it^  Lane.  21451  seq.;  one  that  makes  invisible  (p.  871).     So  a
girdle  with  a  precious  stone  in  it  makes  whole,  Bit.  7050 — 55.

The  arphanus,  wanting  in  Megenberg,  is  ment.  by  Lessing  8,
175-6.  Similar  to  the  orphan  is  the  stone  claugestian  on  the
helmet.  Roth.  4947  seq.  paer  se  beorhta  bedg  brogden  wundrum
eorciianstdnum  e&digra  gehwftm  hUfaff  of  er  liedfde;  heäfelan  lixalS
t^rymme  bij^eahte,  Cod.  Exon.  238;  his  eagan  ont^nde,  bälge
heafdes  gimmas  180,  7;  is  seo,  eaggebyrd  (oculus  Phoenicis)
»tane  gelicast,  gladam  gimme  219,  3.  Hyaena  bestia  cujus  pu-
pillas  lapideae  sunt,  61.  ker.  146.  Diut.  1,  239;  and  Beinhartes
eyes  are  supp.  to  be  carbuncles,  Beinh.  916  seq.  One  stone  is
oculns  felis,  oculus  mundi,  bellocchio,  Nemnich  2,  747-8.
Precious  stones  take  the  place  of  eyes,  Martene's  Thes.  anecd.
4,  6  (Wachsmuth's  Sitten-gesch.  2,  258)  :  in  the  sculptured  skull
of  St  Servatius,  stones  blaze  instead  of  eyes.  Swed.  ögna-sten,
ögon  sten,  eye-stone,  means  the  pupil ;  Dan.  öie-steen,  ON.  au^c^
steinn ;  and  Alexander's  stone,  which  outweighs  pure  gold,  but
rises  in  the  scale  when  covered  with  a  feather  and  a  Utile  earth,
is  an  eye-stone,  Lampr.  Alex.  p.  140 — 3;  see  SchlegePs  Mus.
4,  131-2-3.  Gervinus  1,  549  (ed.  3).  Pupus,  Koprf  o(f>0a\fiov,
Ducange  sub  ▼.  It  is  Oriental  too  to  say  '  girl  of  the  eye ' ;  yet
also  'mannikin  of  the  eye/  Gesenius,  Pref.  xliv.  (ed.  2).  GDS.
127.

p.  1218  n.]  Scythis  succinum  (amber)  sacrium  (not  satriura),
Pliny  37.  2,  40;  ubicunque  quinta  argenti  portio  inest  (auro),
electrum  vocatur  33.  4.  23.  PiUnt-goU,  electrum.  Gl.  Sletst.  39,
391.  Amber  is  in  Buss.  yantdrX,  Lith.  gentdras,  gintdras,  Lett.
dzinters,  zihters,  conf.  OHG.  sintar= scoria,  GDS.  233;  Esth.
merre^Tciwi,  sea-stone,  Finn,  meri-kivi.  On  the  confusion  of
amber  with  pearl,  see  both  Schott  in  Berl.  acad.  Abh.  '42,  p.
361  and  H.  Müller's  Griechenth.  43.  Pol.  bursztyn,  Boh.
agsteyn,  ahsten,     M.Neth.  tammertynsten,  succinus.

p.  1219.]  The  pearl:  ON.  gimr,  m.,  gemma,  Saem.  134**,  also
giin^steinn ;  AS.  gim,  gim-stän.  With  MHG.  mer-griez,  conf.
'  daz  griezende  mer/  Fragm.  45®.  The  diamond  was  taken  to  be
crystallized  water  :  'a  little  frozen  wässerli,'  Anshelm  2,  21 ;  fon
diu  wirt  daz  is  da  zi  (thereby  turns  the  ice  into)  christallan  sA
herta,  so  man  daz  fiur  dar-uber  mach6t,  unzi  diu  christalla  irgluot,
Merigarto  5,  25;  conf.  isine  steina,  ice-stones,  O.  i.  1,  70  and


1686  HEBBS  AND  STONES.

'  crystal  made  of  ice/  Diez's  Leb.  d.  troub.  159.  165.  On  the
Ssk.  marakata,  seeBopp's  Gl.  255-9.  266;  chandra-karta,  gemma
fabalosa^  quae  radiis  lunae  congelatis  nasci  creditor  118\

p.  1221.]  The  Xvyyovpiov  is  also  named  by  Dioscor.  2,  100.
Of  a  stag's  tears  or  eyes  comes  a  stone.  The  dragon's  head  con-
tains a  diamond,  Bosquet  205-6.  The  toad-stone,  which  occurs
e.g.  in  WolPs  Deut.  sag.  p.  496,  is  likewise  in  Neth.  padde-
sten,  Boh.  zhahye  kamen,  O,  Fr.  cra'paudine,  Boquef.  sub  v. ;  the

French  still  say  of  diamonds,  '  il  y  a  erapaud.' There  is  a

serpent's  egg,  which  'ad  victorias  litium  et  regum  aditus  mire
laodatur,'  Pliny  29.  3,  12.  One  Segerus  has  a  'gemma  diversi
coloris,  victoriosos  efficiens  qui  ea  utuntur,'  Caas.  Heisterb.  4,  10.
Sige-stein,  Eracl.  p.  214.  Hahn's  Strieker  p.  49 ;  seghe-sten,
Eein.  5420 ;  sige-ring,  Hpt  3,  42 ;  hiiet  dich  vor  (beware  of)  alter
wibe  gemein,  die  künnen  blasen  den  sigel-stein,  Hätzl.  93^,  34 ;
sigelstein  sniden,  Wolkenst,  40,  conf.  '  ein  hickel  giezen,'  Fragm.
38«.  Renn.  13424,  bickeUstein,  Fragm.  21«.  Can  sigelsteio,
segelstein  have  been  the  magnet  ?  ON.  segel-steinn,  sailing  stone.
TTie  swalloW'Stone^  which  grows  in  the  crop  of  a  firstborn
swallow,  is  known  to  Diosc.  2,  60 ;  conf.  Schm.  3,  399 :  schürf
(rip)  schwalben  auf,  so  vindestu  darinne  ein  roten  (red)  stain.

p.  1222.]  Georg  Agricola  (1546)  De  re  metallica  libri  XII
(BiEisil.  1657)  calls  belemnites  alp-schos,  p.  703^;  brontia  donner-
stein, wetterstein,  gros  krottenstein,  ceraunia  der  glatte  donn.^
der  glat  wett.,  der  glatte  gros  krott.  704*;  ombria  donderst,
wett.,  grosz  krott.  706*.  The  thunder-bolt  has  healing  power,
Ph.  Dieffenb.  Wander,  p.  33;  the  ON.  for  it  is  shruggu-steinn ;
and  we  often  find  pörsteinn  as  a  man^s  name,  e.g.  Egilss.  476.
Another  Finnic  name  for  the  bolt  is  Ukkoisen  naUcki,  U/s  wedge ;
Lith.  Laumes  papas,  L.'s  pap,  Nesselm.  277^  353^,  and  LG.  mare-
tett,  the  (night-) mare^s  teat,  N.Pr.  prov.  bl.  2,  380.  Silex  is  in
ON.  hiegetill,  quasi  rorem  generans.

p.  1222.]  The  diamond  can  only  be  softened  by  goat's-blood,
Pliny  37,  4.  August.  De  civ.  D.  21,  4;  conf.  N.  Cap.  69.  Er.
8428.     Ms.  1,  180*.     Parz.  105,  18.

The  carbuncle  is  taken  from  the  unicorn's  forehead,  Parz.  482,
29  ;  hebt  den  moed  van  een  Espetln,  want  hi  draegt  karbonkelen
in  sin  hoorn,  Ndrl.  Heemskindp.  m.  12.  The  carbuncle  shines  in
the  darkest  night,  and  puts  out  other  stones,  Harfcm.  büchL  1500.


SPELLS  AND  CHABMS.  1687

Reinh.  920.  Morolt  45.  Gr.  Rud.  8,  10  (Vdite-lys  are  in  Dan.
saperstition  small  stones,  which  the  spirits  had  for  lamps,  Molb.
Dial.  663).  The  carbuncle  pales  its  lustre  when  the  hero  dies,
Rol.  196,  19  ;  it  lies  '  ze  Loche  in  dem  Eine,'  Ms.  1, 15*.  Sommer
on  Flore  p.  xxvii.  1667.

The  ma-gnet :  ON.  leidar-nteinn,  Landn.  1,  2 ;  E.  loadsione
[i.e.  leading,  as  in  loadstar].  Prov.  aziman,  ariman,  ayman,  Fr.
aimant,  Sp.  iman.  MHG.  age-stein,  Diut.  1,  60-1.  Trist.  204,
14.  36.  M.  Neth.  toch-aten  diese  up-t6ch,  Maerl.  3,  124.  It
has  been  used  in  navigation  since  the  13th  cent.,  Bible  Guiot
633—653 ;  legend  of  the  loadstone,  Altd.  w.  2,  89.

Stone-coal  is  called  Türken-blat-stein,  stein-öl  Tarken-blut,
Staid.  1,  329.


CHAPTER  XXXVIII.
SPELLS  AND   CHARMS.

p.  1224.]  On  the  power  of  the  three  .words,  Elalev.  9,  34.  161 ;
conf.  Amim's  March.  1,  47.  [Tibetian  .  and  Mongolian  writers
dilate  on  the  force  of  each  syllable-  in  the  Baddhist  formula  'om
mani  padmi  hom.'].  Singing  and  saying  turn  to  magic  :  eV^S^
larp&v,  Plato's  Charmides  p.  156-8 ;  deXicnjpiov,  charm,  incan-
tation; verba  puerpera  diTdt  (Lucina),  Ov.  Met.  10,  511.  OHG.
pügalan  (be-sing)  in  the  Mersebg  spell ;  galdr  gala,  Seam.  97-8-9 ;
rtki  gol  Oddr,  rami  gol  Oddrftn,  bitra  galdra  240*.  Fr.  eharme
is  fr.  carmen :  un  bon  eharme  vos  aprendrö,  Ren.  7650 ;  car-
minare  plagam,  to  charm  a  wound  (away),  Altd.  bl.  2,  323;  conf.
'er  sprach  zer  wunden  wunden-segen/  Parz.  507,  23.  The
sorceress  is  ansprecherin,  Moneys  Anz.  7,  424;  conf.  berufen,
besehreien,  becall,  beery,  Ettn.  Manlaffe  546-7.  ON.  orff-heill,
Saem.  120\  Finn,  sanoa,  to  say  =  conjure;  sanat,  conjuration,
Gastrin.

Blessings  are  pronounced  more  esp.  at  morning  and  evening :
swer  bi  liebe  hat  gelegen  (had  a  good  night),  der  sol  dar  senden
ainen  morgen-segen,  MS.  2,  169* ;  gesegenen  unde  tiefe  beswem.
Mar.  188,  30  (conf.  Hiefe  fluochen,'  p.  1227) ;  beswom  sts  du  vil
tiure  !    Ges.  Abent.  3,  53 ;  einem  die  krankheit  absegnen  (bless


1688  SPELLS  AND  CHABMS.

one's  illness  away),   Thumeyser   2,    92. Cursing   is  MH6.

verwdzen :  var  hin  vet-wäaen,  MS.  2,  1 72^  ;  nu  var  von  mir  o.
Ls.  3^  77 ;  nein  pfai  sie  heat  v.  I  Tit.  600,  2 ;  verfluodiei  a.
verwdzen  wart  vil  ofte  der  tac,  da  stn  gebart  ane  lac  (the  day
that  his  birth  was  on),  Arm.  Heinr.  160;  and  the  contrary:
gehoehet  (extolled)  si  der  süeze  tac,  da  din  gebart  yon  6rste  an
lac,  Winsbekin  1.  To  verwäzen  answers  the  O.  Fr.  dahe,  dahez,
dehait,  dahet,  dehez,  dehe,  daz  ait,  often  preceded  by  ^nal  or  centy
Garin  1,  10.  209.  2,46.  Ren.  404.  1512.  9730.  11022.  Meon's
N.  r^c.  1,  202.  232.  4,  12.  Orange  1,  202.  2, 151,  etc.  Trist.
3072.  Aspr.  1».  46\  23\  Ferabr.  lix\  As  WaUoon  haitl
=  sain,   and    fnuhaüi  =  ma,\Baiii    (Grandgagn.  I,   265),    we    may

sappose  a  Celtic  origin  (Sappl.  to  952). Einen  mit  fluocJie

hem  (smite).  Mart.  163®,  mit  dem  fluoche  seilen  226^  (flüeche
liden,  Walth.  73,  5;  flaoch  bejagen,  MS.  2,  137;  in  sih  selben
luadun  (they  loaded)  mihilan  fluah,  O.  iv.  24,  30)  ;  bist  ande
/Zdfc,  üpstand.  1837  (the  Goth,  beist?);  digen  einen,  precari,
imprecari,  Gramm.  4,  655.  AS.  wyrigean,  maledicere^  Homil.  2,
30.  ON.  hölva,  diris  devovere,  SsBm.  186;  röggva,  a  diis  mala
imprecari  (lit.  to  fold  f  akin  to  röggr,  röggvar,  palliam  plicatam?).
0.  Slav,  klidti,  pres.  kPnu,  Serv.  kleti,  pres.  kanem  [Ross,
kliasti,  klinati] ,  to  carse.

p.  1224.]  The  AS.,  beside  hwistlian,  has  hwisprian,  to  whim-
per. MHG.  slangen  (snake's)  wispel,  Diat.  1,  58  ;  wispier,  who
sweetly  wispelt  to  the  fishes,  Gesta  Rom.  ed.  Keller  p.  65.  OHG.
winison,  to  matter.  Apaleias  p.  m.  79  speaks  of  nutgieum  susur-
ramen.  Piping  too  has  a  magical  effect:  il  dit  an  charme
que  il  avoit  aprins,  trois  fois  siffla,  Garin  2,  104.  A  shirt  laid
lengthwise  on  the  table  is  bemwmured  till  it  stands  upright,
jumps  about,  and  lies  down  again ;  you  judge  by  this  of  the
owner's  illness,  Ettn.  Medic,  maulaffe  269,  270.  Neth.  luisiere»
is  both  to  listen  and  to  speak  low ;  the  witch  is  a  luister^vink,
luister-zuster.

p.  1226.]  MHG.  runen  is  to  whisper :  'daz  ir  mit  ir  rinet,
you  whisper  to  her ' ;  'daz  si  mit  in  niht  runen  kan,'  MS.  2,  83^.

Runes  were  also  cut  on  the  roots  of  trees :  risti  a  roHna  rdnir,
ridSraISi  i  bldiSi^  qvaiS  si&n  yfir  galdra,  g6ck  ofug  ok  andsmlu
(against  the  sun)  um  tr6t,  meiS  mörg  römm  um-msBli ;  he  then
throws  the  wood  into  the  sea,  and  lets   it  drift  to  one^s  de-


SPELLS  AND   CHARMS.  1689

struction,  Grettissaga  c.  85 ;  scera  ä  rötum  r&s  viSar,  Sasm.  29*.
Rune-aticks  had  things  wrapt  and  woven  round  them,  Saem.
195^  like  the  Fris.  tfinar;  lagSi  a  stafi  94*;  hete-rüne  bond.  Cod.
Exon.  416,  6 ;  inwü-räne  279,  7 ;  helli-rüna,  like  M.  Neth.  hel-
seoutainghe  ?  Parton.  20,  13  ;  helUraune,  Mathesius  1562,  154*» ;
liosta  hel'stöfum,  SeBm.  145^  conf.  faesta  feikn-stafa  41^.  For-
nald.  8.  1,  436.  AS. /och-ä^öb/;  bregma  blund^stöfumy  Ssöm.  193^
&t  gaman-rünom  2b'6,  i  vnl-runoni  160'',  maUrunar  214*»,  rftnar
viltar  252%  vilt  rista  252'».

p.  1227.]     The  might  of  the  Word  is  extolled  by  Freidank  67, 1 :

Durch  wort  ein  wilder  slange  gät  (snake  goes)
zem  manne,  da  'r  sich  toeren  lät  (lets  be  fooled) ;
durch  wort  ein  swert  vermidet  (forbears)
daz  ez  nieman  versnidet  (cuts  no  one) ;
durch  wort  ein  isen  niemaix  mac
verbrennen,  gluot  ez  allen  tac.

Er  sprach  ein  wort  mit  grim,  daz  sich  der  here  üf-slöz  (opened),
Altsw.  80;  ja  möht  ich  stt  einen  boum  mit  miner  hete  (prayer),
sunder  wäpen,  nider  geneigen,  MS.  1,  51*.  A  runar-belti  opens
any  lock,  drives  all  disease  away,  Färöiske  qväder  pp.  228.  286;
two  dwarfs  cut  vafrlogi  with  runes  138.  140.  Song  can  burst
fetters,  Somadeva  ],  134.  ON.  pohu-visur  call  up  mist  and
darkness,  Fomm.  s.  3,  97-8.  A  letter  was  tied  round  the  sword,
Wigal.  4427.  7335,  as  runes  had  formerly  been  carved  on  it.
Men  used  to  bind  certain  things  by  oath,  e.g.  swords,  Altd.  bl.
1,  43.  Ligamenta  aut  etiam  scripta  in  contrarietatem  alterius
excogitare.  Lex.  Visig.  vi.  2,  4.

p.  1228.]     Let  one  or  two  good  wisJies  precede  the  curses  :

Got  müeze  im  ere  meren  (add  honour)  I

zno  flieze  im  aller  ssslden  fluz,

niht  wildes  mtde  s!nen  schuz  (shun  his  shot) ;

sins  hundes  louf,  sins  homes  doz  (tooting)

erhelle  im  u.  erschelle  im  wol  nach  firen  !     Walth.  18,  25.

conf.  the  curse,  Ls.  2,  425.     Here  is  a  beautiful  blessing  :

Der  Bumer  si  so  guot  (be  so  kind),

daz  er  die  schoene  in  siner  wunne  (bliss)

l&ze  wiinnecliche  leben  (let  blissful  live)  !


1690  SPBLLS  AND  CHABMS.

Swaz  wol  den  ougen  taot  (whatever  delights  the  eye),
and  sich  den  liuten  lieben  kanne  (can  please),
daz  müeze  ir  din  SsBlde  geben,
swaz  griienez  üf  von  erden  g&,

oder  tonwes  obenan  nider  risen  mnoz  (may  trickle  down),
loup  (foliage)j  gras,  blnomen  und  kl6  (clover) !
Der  vogel  doenen  (melody)  geb  der  schoenen
wiinneclichen  gruoz  (blissful  greeting)  !      MS.  2,  188*.
Again:   ze   heile    erschine  im  tages   sunne,   nahtes   m&ne,  und
iegslich  stem  !     MS.  2,  174^ ;  dtn  zunge  grüene  iemer,  din  bene
ersterbe   niemer  I     Trist.    7797;    Got  laze  im   wol  geschehen!
MS.  1,  74^ ;  Got  des  geve  en  jummer  hSl,  dat  kraket   (so  that
it  roars),  Wizlau  9,  28.

Curses  are  far  more  frequent  and  varied :  mine  vlueche  sint
niht  smal,  Beneke  377.  They  operate  quickly :  ein  swinder  fluoch,
MS.  2,  71*'';  mit  snellem  fluoche.  Tit.  2588;  ein  wilder  fluoch,
Wolkenst.  42.  They  hold  men  like  a  vice :  uns  twingei  noch  des
fluoches  zange,  MS.  2, 166*.  They  alight,  settle,  cling  :  solten  alle
vlueche  kleben,  ez  miiezte  lützel  liutes  leben,  Freid.  130,  12 ;  der
fluoch  bekleip,  Hpt  5,  516 ;  dem  muoz  der  fl.  bekliben  5,  550  ;  der
fl.  klebet  8,  187.  They  bum  you  up,  Nalus  p.  177.  They  take
flight,  they  tarn  home  as  birds  to  their  nest.  Berth.  63  ;  die  fluche

flehen  um   die  wette,  Günther  163, Strong  above  all  is  the

•  curse  of  the  dying  :  J?at  var  triia  J?eirra  i  fomeskju,  at  orfffeigg
manns  msBtti  mikit,  ef  han  bolva^i  6-vin  stnum  me&nafni  (cursed
his  unfriend  by  name),  hence  names  were  suppressed,  Saem.  186'.
Sigfrit,  wounded  to  death,  scolds,  Nib.  929,  3.  933,  4  (see  schelten
below).  A  faither's  blessin^  bigs  the  toun,  A  mither^s  curse  can
ding  it  doun.  A  mother^s  curse  is  not  to  be  turned  aside,
Holtzm.  3,  144.  Effectual  too  is  the  pilgrim's  curse,  Gndr.  933,
and  the  priest's,  Holtzm.  Nib.  117.  The  curse  of  aged  nien  that
fear  God  works  fearful  woe,  Insel  Felsbg  1,  22.  Carters  have
curses  on  the  tip  of  their  tongue.  Philander  2,  345;  so  have
officers,  Geliert  4,  145.

Oaths  and  curses  coll.  by  Agricola  nos.  472 — 502  ;  spelUbindings
in  Ls.  1,  410-1.  2,  424—8.  Seam.  85.  Fornald.  s.  3,  203-4;  a
song  of  curses  on  Otto  III.  in  Pertz  2,  153.  De  Vries  of  Hoofts
Warenar  97 — 100;  Servian  curses  in  Talvj  2,  385.  Vak  nos.
152.4-7.  162.  219.  393.


SPELLS  AND  CHABMS.  1691

The  savage  heartiness  of  the  cursing  is  set  forth  in  a  namber
of  strong  phrases  :  '  his  cursing  was  cruel  to  hear/  Ettn.  Unw.  d.
743  ;  '  he  set  up  a  cursing  and  scolding,  no  wonder  if  the  castle
had  sunk  into  the  ground^  Schweinichen  2,  70  (daz  se  ikfluochten
uiemen,  unde  daz  Hagenen  kint  bleip  unbescholten,  Gudr.  933,  4) ;
er  fahet  an  (begins)  ze  flftchen  u.  ze  schweren,  dass  das  erdtreich
mocht  undergon  (?) ;  '  cursing,  enough  to  send  stones  flying
into  the  sky,'  Käserei  126;  'he  swore  fit  to  make  the  sky  how
down/  Wickram's  RoUw.  9 ;  '  cursing,  so  that  it  might  have
thundered,^  Garg.  149* ;  '  cursing,  till  the  rafters  crack/  Diet,  sub
V.  balke;  *he  curses  all  signs  (omens),  till  the  floor  cracks,'
Hebel  44;  to  curse  all  signs,  Staid.  2,  468  (p.  1105  end);
'swearing  till  the  toads  jump,*  Firmenich  2,  262  (conf.  the
krotten-segen,  Garg.  230*) ;  '  he  curses  one  leg  oflF  the  devil's
haunch,  and  the  left  horn  off  his  head,'  Garg.  232* ;  '  he  cursed

the  nose  off  his  face,'  Schuldban  27  (?). Ejaculations  that  call

upon  God  to  curse  and  crush,  are  the  most  solemn :  daz  ez  Oot
verwaze  !  Er.  7900 ;  s6  si  ich  verw&zen  vor  Ootes  ougen  !  Herb.
1068;  daz  in  Oot  von  himele  immer  gehoene !  Gudr.  1221,  4;
'  Ood's  power  confound  thee!'  Melander  2,  no.  198;  Hercules
dique  istam  perdant,  Plaut.  Gas.  ii.  3,  57 ;  qui  ilium  di  omnem
deaeque  perdant  61  :  Got  du  sende  an  minen  leiden  man  den  tot,
daz  ich  von  den  iilven  werde  enbunden,  MS.  1,  81*  (p.  1161);
swer  des  schuldig  st,  den  velle  Oot  u.  nem  tm  al  sin  ere  81^ ;  Serv.

ubio  glut  Bogh,  Vuk  (ed.  nov.)  no.  254. M.  Neth.  curses  use

the  word  'over'  in  consigning  to  the  devil:  nu  over  in  duvels
ere.  Limb.  4,  62 ;  over  in's  duvels  name  4,  1088 ;  nu  over  in  der
duvele  hant  7,  638 ;  nu  over  in's  duvels  geleide,  Karel  2,  4447.
MHG.  der  tievel  var  ime  in  den  munt  (get  in  his  mouth),  Beinh.
1642  ;  dass  dir  der  henker  in  den  rächen  führe  (in  your  throat),
Felsenb.  3,  443 ;  dass  dich  I  (devil  take,  underst.) ;  dass  dich  das
wetter  verhorne,  Meland.  2,  no.  362 ;  ir  letz'  die  slack  der  schauer

u.  kratz  der  wilde  ber,  Wolkenst.  30. ON.  eigi  hann  iötnar,

gälgi  görvallan,  Sasm.  255* ;  tröU  hafi  )7ik  allan,  ok  svä  gull  ]?it,
Kormakss.  p.  188;  far  ^m  nu  ))ar  er  smyl  hafi  ];ik  (to  one's  ship
on  landing),  conf.  the  formula  of  benediction  in  Kg  Home,  143.*

•  With  the  curse  *  daz  die  vor  kilchen  laegen  I  *  conf.  also  *  Joh.  vor  Ckilkun,*
Oestr.  aroh.  6, 173 ;  ein  j&r  vor  kilchen  st&n,  MS.  2,  121* ;  muoter  diu  ir  kint  Iftt
vor  ipital  oder  kirchen  ligen,  Benn.  18376  ;  an  ein  velt  legen  (in  unconsecr.  ground),
Berth.  230.  830  ;  begrebnUse  uf  dem  velde,  Gefk.  Beil.  10.


1692  SPELLS  AND  CHABMS.

Da  scholt  yaren  in  dat  wilde  brok,  Moneys  Schausp.  2^  100-1 ;  an
den  wilden  wolt  2,  101 ;  conf.  'ze  holze  vara/  Kolocz  262  ;  Klinsör
und  waerest  über  se,  MS.  2,  6* ;  versigelen  müez  er  üf  daz  mer
von  wibe  u.  von  kinde  1,  6*.  Lett,  eiy  vilkam,  go  to  the  wolves ;
vilkeem  apendanis,  wolves  eat  thee,  Stender  860 ;  so  ezzen  si  die
wilden  krän,  Keller's  Erz.  196 ;  yitt  skyli  hiarta  hrafnar  slita,
SsBm.  232^;  dat  uch  de  raven  schinnen,  Karlm.  140,  23;  des
miiezen  si  die  wolve  nagen,  Altd.  w.  2,  56 ;  ir  herzen  müezen
kränvuoz  nagen,  MS.  2,  119^;  den  verraiden  (shun  him)  Hken,
u.  alle  zttelosen  (daisies),  u.  aller  vogelline  $anc  2,  63*;  ich  schaffe
daz  ir  aller  fröiden  struzen  ie  widerspenic  müezen  wesen  1,  4';
Marke  du  versink  2,  79^ ;  ut  te  partes  inclinans  obmat,  ut  te

affiicta  senio  arbor  caeduave  obruat,  Meland.  2,  no.  1.98. Death,

disease  and  sorrow  are  often  imprecated  :  nu  iz  dir  (eat  to  thyself)
den  grimmen  tot,  Ges.  Abent  2,  667 ;  wolde  Got,  waere  din  houpt
ful  (rotting  in  the  ground),  Renn.  12192 ;  daz  dich  o/ezen  die
maden  (maggots),  Helbl.  1,  1212;  daz  diu  ougen  im  ergUisen2f
512  (a  Gaelic  curse :  marbhphaisg,  the  shroud  over  thee  !) ;  so
er  müeze  erhnuren  (?)  8,  227 ;  hin  ze  allen  sühten  2,  745  (conf.
alles,  aller,  Diet  1,  213) ;  s6  dich  diu  suht  benasclie  1,  1202 ;  Got
geb  dir  die  drüs  u.  den  ritten,  Pasq.  1,  157;  diu  suht  an  iuwem
lösen  kragen  (neck),  Beinh.  p.  302.  Dahaz  aie  parmi  le  col,  M6on
N.  r^c.  1,  202.  232 ;  mau-daliet  ait  et  el  col  et  el  r^es,  Orange  b,
2650 ;  cent  deliez  ait  parmi  la  cane.  Trist  3072  ;  tu  ut  oculos  emun-
gare  ex  capite  pei*  nasum  tuos,  Plaut.  Gas.  ii.  6,  39 ;  dass  du  die
nase  in's  gesteht  behältst,  Reuter  olle  kam.  3,  25-6.  48.  301 ;  da
var  diu  suht  in  iuwer  oren,  MSH.  3,  438";  we  dir  in  die  zende
(teeth),  Ben.  324;  la  male  gote  aiez  as  dens,  Ren.  14322;  daz  iu
der  munt  werde  wan  (without)  der  zungen,  Parz.  316,  4;  daz  $i
(the  tongue)  verswellen  müeze,  u.  euch  diu  kel  (gullet),  MS.  2,  5' ;
din  zunge  müeze  dir  werden  lam,  Morolf  1150;  in  müezen  erlamen
die  knübel  (their  nibblers,  teeth  ?),  Hpt  6,  492.  Mod.  '  may  joa
turn  sour.*  Lith.  kad  tu  suruktum  (shrivel  up).  Wafen  über
diu  ougen,  etc.,  woe  to  the  eyes  wherewith  I  saw  thee,  woe  to  the
arms  wherein  I  held  thee,  Ettm.  Ortn,  7,  2 ;  daz  er  immir  ubUjdr

muoze  haben,  Ksrchr.  6958,  conf.  malannus  (p.  1160  end).

There  is  a  curse  beginning  'Als  leit  si  dir  (so  woe  be  to  thee),
Karajan,  Teichn.  41 ;  conf.  'Als  Unglück  dich  (= auf  dich  ?)  fliege.
Kell.  Erz.  244,  31  :  mm  sele  si  ungeheilet,  Rab.  79 ;  daz  si  sin


SPELLS  AND   CHARMS.  1693

g'uneret  (they  be  dishonoured),  MS,  1,  194*.  ON.  von  sß  su
vcsttr  vers  ok  bama,  SsBm.  214^ ;  wan,  waere  et$werzer  dan  ein  hol,
MS.  2,  100^;  der  werde  z'einem  sieine  1,  6*;  on  the  contrary  '  Be
bom  a  man,  Somadeva  1,  7.  1, 81.  Vervluochet  si  der  tac,  diu
wile  (day,  hour),  Mai  137,  38.  138,  1 ;  conf.  vloecte-  die  vsile.
Lane.  12224-755.  16250;  sd  hazz  mich  allez  duz  si,  Helbl.  15,
677.

p.  1 228.]  {Bidam  serentes)  prosequuntur  etiam  cum  malediciisy
Pallad.  Rutil.  4,  9.     Women  boiling  yarn  must  keep  telling  lies,

or  it  will  not  turn  white. A  solemn  adjuration  is  in  Swed.

mana  neder  (to  charm  down  ?),  Buna  '44,  60 ;  M.  Neth.  manen,
bemanen,  Belg.  mus.  2,  116-7.  Finn,  mana^n,  monere,  adjurare ;
manaus  exsecratio.

p.  1229.]  With  hellirüna  take  the  prop,  name  Walarüna,
Karajan  67,  16,  and  the  sepulcrorum  violatrix  mentioned  after
'adultera'  and  'maleficaMn  Lex  Burgund.  34,3.  Gröa  sings
nine  galdra  to  her  son,  and  the  galdr  is  called /öZni/^r,  Saam.  97^.
Conversely  the  child  talks  with  the  mother  at  her  grave,  Bhesa
dainos  22,  and  Svegder  wakes  his  dead  mother  in  the  hill,  DV.
1,  264.  Eulogies  sung  at  the  grave-niound  are  also  ment.  in  Hall-
biöm  p.  859.  Raising  the  dead  comes  easy  to  christian  saints,
but  it  was  more  than  Zeua  could  do :  rovrwv  eiripSa^  ovk  iwoifjae,
Aesch.  Eum.  649.  ^Linguae  defuncti  dira  carmina  Hgno  insculpta
snpponere'  forces  him  to  speak,  Saxo  Gr.  ed.  M.  38.  The  tongue
sings  aloud  after  the  head  is  cut  off,  Ecke  239.

p.  1230.]     WolvesdriizzeFs  and  other  magic  is  ascr.  to  Simon:

Bindet  man  ime  die  vuoze  unde  die  hende,

schiere  Idsit  er  die  gebende ;

diu  sloz  heizit  er  ufgan  (bids  the  locks  open),

nihein  tsen  mac  vor  im  best&n.

in  hulzinen  siulen  (wooden  posts)

machet  er  die  s61e,

daz  die  liute  waenent  daz  sie  leben.

aide  ronen  heizit  er  bem,  etc.  Kaiserchr.  2118.

Much  the  same  is  told  of  OBinn,  Yngl.  saga  c.  7.

p.  1230.]  Es  regnet  u.  schneiet  alles  von  sacramenten  u.
flfichen,  Albrecht's  Fluch.  ABC.  45.     Men  spoke  contemptuously

VOL.    IV.  E   E


1694  SPELLS  AND  CHABMS.

of  a/niles  veteranarum  fabulas,  Pertz  6,  452^,  and  aUes  wibe$
fluochen,  Gea,  Abent,  3,  78.

p.  1231.]  Kl.  sehr.  2,  1  seq.  Hera  duoder  =  AS.  hider  and
]yider,  Hpt  9,  503\  Wright  289^.  Suma  clübodun  umbi  cunio-
widi;  so  three  white  maidens  pick  and  pall  at  flowers  and
wreaths,  Müllenh.  p.  350.  Freyr  also  sets  free  fr.  bonds  (SappL
to  215).     Oröa  sings:

pann  gel  ek  inn  fimta

ef  J^er  fioturr  verSr

borinn  at  bög-Iimnm ;

Leifnis  elda  IsBt  ek  }^r

fyr  legg  af  kveiSna,

ok  stöhhr  J?&  lass  af  limum

en  af  fotumfiotur,  Sasm.  98*.

Minne  so  hint  die  minnecliche,  oder  aber  mich  enr-hint  (love  bind
her  too,  or  unbind  me),  Keller's  Eom-vart  651;  conf.  fceoio-
rUnan  onbindan,  Beow.  996;  'to  burst  bolts  and  fetters,'  St
Louis  86,  7.  96,  2.  Dietm.  of  Mersebg  says:  legimus,  quod
unius  captivi  vincula,  quern  uxor  sua  putans  mortaum  aasidais
procuravit  exequiis,  toties  solverentur,  quoties  pro  eo  acceptabilea
Deo  Patri  hostiae  ab  ea  offerrentur,  ut  ipse  ei  post  retulit,  cum

domum  suam  liber  revisit,  Pertz  5,  740. Side  by  side  with

bond-spells  stand  the  wounds-blessings:  den  vmnt^segen  man  im
sprach,  St  Louis  1531 ;  conf.  the  houpt-segen,  oagen-s.,  pferit-s.
and  wunden-segen  in  Hpt.  4,  577.  By  magic  spell  a  wound  is
quickly  healed,  Holtzm.  Ind.  sag.  2,  176.  The  sword  also  re-
ceives blessing :  swertes  segen,  Frauenlob  p.  77 ;  segent  er  im  daz
swert,  Mai  83,  39 ;  segen  din  swert,  Altsw.  64.

p.  1234.]  Kl.  sehr.  2,  1  seq. ;  to  the  passages  there  quoted
p.  12,  add :  ze  holz  vam,  Hpt  2,  539 ;  ze  holze^  ze  walde  vam,
Hahn's  Strieker  9,  13.  10,  33.  11,  78;  vuor  zi  walde,  Diem.
110,  1 ;  din  setzen  ist  noch  niht  ze  holz  (thy  stake  is  not  yet
lost),  Fragm.  23^.  With  the  first  line  of  the  Spell,  conf.  Petrus
u.  Paulus  gingen  to  holt  un  to  brok,  Lisch  9,  226.     Balder's  foal

must  be  the  horse  that  was   burnt  with  him,  Sn.   18. One

more  spell  for  a  lamed  horse  runs  thus :

Jeg  red  mig  (I  rode)  engang  igjennem  et  led,

saa  fik  min  sorte  fole  vred  (my  black  foal  got  hart)  ;


SPELLS   AND  CHABMS.  1695

saa  satte  jeg  kjöd  mod  kjöd,  og  blod  mod  blod,
saa  blev  min  sorte  fole  god.

Flöget  (ON.  flog,  dolor  acer)  botas  genom  denna  lösning :  pflöget
och  flömdei  skall  flj  nr  bmsk  och  ben  i  stock  och  sten,  i  namn
Fader/  etc.  Da  att  upropas  trenne  ganger :  '  trollet  satt  i  berget,
hasten  (horse)  feck  flöget^  spott  i  hand^  slä  i  man^  bot  i  samma
stand/  Bääf.  Esthonian  spells  in  Ereatzwald  and  Neuss  p.
97-8-9.  122-3.  On  the  cure  for  dislocation  in  Lapland,  seo
Gastrin's  Beise  153.  Ernst  Meier  p.  516.  We  still  say  of  a
platitude,  it  wouldn't  cure  a  lame  jade.  To  the  spell  in  Gato,  add
the  formula  '  mota  et  soluta/  Grotefend's  Bud.  Umbr.  4,  13.  A
similar  spell  in  Athar^a-veda,  4,  12 :  '  Setting  up  art  thou,
setting  up,  setting  the  broken  bone;  set  this  one  up,  Arundhatt  t
What  in  thee  is  injured,  what  is  broken,  thy  Maker  set  it  right
again,  yam^  to  joint.  Gome  marrow  by  marrow,  sxid  joint  by  joint;
what  is  gone  of  thy  flesh,  and  eke  thy  bone,  shall  grow ;  marrow
to  marrow  be  joined,  skin  with  shin  arise,  blood  arise  on  thy
bone;  whatever  was  broken,  set  right,  O  Herb  1  Arise,  walk,
haste  thee  away,  fair  as  a  chariot  runs  on  wheel,  felloe  and  nave.
Stand  firmly  upright  I  If  it  broke  by  falling  in  pit,  or  a  stone
being  thrown  have  hit,  together,  as  parts  of  a  chariot,  fit  limb  Uy
limb  the  Elf  (ribhu)  I '

p.  1235.]  God.  Monac.  lat.  536  sec.  xii.  has  the  spell  altogether
in  narrative  form :  Nesia  nociva  perrezit  vagando  per  diversas
plateas,  quaerens  quem  laedere  posset ;  cui  occurrit  Dominus  et
dixit:  ^ Nesia,  quo  vadis?'  'Yado  ad  famulum  Dei  N.,  ossa
f ricare,  nervös  medulläre,  carnes  exsiccare.^  Gui  dixit  Dominus :
'  praecipio  tibi  in  nomine  Patris,  etc.,  ut  deseras  famulum  Dei,  et
pergas  in  desertum  locum.*  So  in  colic  of  the  head  or  belly,  th&
spell-speaking  old  woman  grasps  the  painful  part,  presses  it
tightly  together,  and  says  9  times :  '  in  the  name  of  God,  etc.,
lady  mother,  I  seize  thee,  I  squeeze  thee,  do  go  to  rest  in  thy
chamber  where  the  Lord  created  thee,'  N.  Pr.  prov.  bl.  3,  472»
In  Masuria  they  say:  'Depart,  ye  white  folk  (biaie  ludzie,  p.  1157)
fr.  this  christened  -Gottlieb,  out  of  his  skin,  his  body,  his  blood,
his  veins,  his  joints  and  all  his  limbs.  Far  in  the  sea  is  a  great
stofie,  thither  go,  thither  sail,  there  drink  and  there  devour,  by
the  might  of  God,  etc.,'  ibid.  3,  474.     And  for  the  evil  eye :


1696  SPELLS  AND  CHABMS.

*  Dropped  the  dew  from  the  sky^  from  the  stone,  on  the  eartL  As
that  dew  vanishes,  has  vanished,  is  blown  away  in  air,  so  may
thrice  nine  encliantmenis  vanish,  perish  in  air  and  he  blown  away/
ibid.  3,  475.

p.  1241.]  Waha,  wax,  is  fr.  wahsan,  to  grow,  as  cera  fr.
crescere;  conf.  'Des  gennhtsam  nam  zuo,  als  ein  teic  wol  erhaben,'
grew  as  a  dough  well  risen,  6es.  Abent.  2,  446.  To  'bare  \i
turf  to  cyrcean*  in  the  AS.  bot  (p.  1237  beg.)  corresp.  the  ^eespi-
iem  terrae  super  altare  ponere,^  Kemble  no.  177.  The  spells  in
it,  and  the  laying  of  a  broad  loaf  in  the  first  farrow,  are  illosk*.
by  Pliny  25.  4, 10 :  'hac  (radice  panaces)  evalsa,  scrobem  repleri
vatio  genere  frugum  religio  est  ad  terrae  piamentnm.'  Bebelii
Facetiae  p.  72:  supplicationes  circnm  agros  fragiferos  fieri  solitae.
As  cakes  were  baked  for  Bealtine,  so  were  '  Siblett  cakes  after

wheat-sowing,^  Hone's  Yrbk  1596. Old  spells  spoken  Atflax-

sowing  in  Schaumbarg,  Lynker  nos.  319,  320,  in  Bavaria,  Panzer
2,  549 — 551,  in  Thuringia,  Meland.  Jocoser.  torn.  2  no.  503.
The  Wallachians  dance  to  the  hemp  (pentru  cinnib),  the  dancer
lißing  her  arms  as  high  as  she  can,  that  the  hemp  may  grow
high,  Schott  p.  302.  At  Newyear's  midnight  the  Esthonian
farmer  throws  a  handful  of  each  sort  of  grain  on  to  the  shelf,
trying  'God  grant  the  grain  this  year  may  grow  that  high,'
Possart's  Estl.  171.

p.  1242.]  In  Strieker's  farce  of  the  Thieves,  Sant  Martin
professes  to  guard  the  oxen  in  the  stall,  Hahn  pp.  22  —27 ;  and
a  blessing  for  swine  says  '  Johannes  videat  illos,  MartiniLs  ezpas-
cat,'  Hattemer  1,  410*.  The  'Abraham's  garden'  in  the  herds-
man's spell  occurs  elsewh.  too :  durch  den  Abrahemsehen  garten,
Orendel  1 240 ;  ez  leit  uns  in  Ahrahames  garten j  MSH.  3,  223^.
A  Finn,  song  in  Kautel.  1,  no.  176  says,  Jesus  guards  the  flock.
Suvetar  and  Etelä  (mother  nature)  watch  the  cattle,  Kalevala
(Gastrin  2,  50).

p.  1242.]  Haltrich  found  a  Grerm.  hee^spell  in  the  pasteboard
cover  of  a  book  (no.  245  of  Schässburg  school  library)  entitled
Disput,  de  Deo,  etc.  Claudiopoli  1570 :  Maria  stund  auf  eim  sehr
hohen  berg,  sie  sach  einen  suarm  bienen  kommen  phliegen.  sie
hub  auf  ihre  gebenedeyte  hand,  sie  verbot  in  da  zu  haut,  ver-
sprach im  alle  hilen  u.  die  beim  versloszen,  sie  sazt  im  dar  ein
fas,  das  Zent  Joseph  hat  gemacht :  '  in  das  solt  ehr  phinjren  (into


SPELLS   AND   CHARMS.  1697

this  shall  ye  üy),  a.  sich  seines  lebens  da  genügen/     In  nomine,
etc.     Amen.

p.  1243.]  'They  made  willow-flutes  and  elder-pipes,'  (rarg.
193';  han  »pelade  barken  af  all  slags  träd  (conld  play  the  bark
off  any  kind  of  tree)^  Arvidss.  2,  311 ;  han  sp,  b.  af  hardaste
träd  2,  314;  han  lekte  barken  af  björke^  af  boke-trä  (birch,
beech)  2,  317;  gerath  wol  (turn  out  well),  pfeifen-holz,  ich  pfeif
dir  ja  wol  darzu,  oder  du  wirst  zum  bolz,  Garg.  213';  will  das,
holz  nit  zu'n  pfeifen  geraten,  ich  pfeif  im  dan  wol,  so  will  ich
singen,  so  gerat's  zum  bolz,  ibid.  Other  rhymes  for  loosening
bark  in  Woeste  p.  20.  Pirmenich  1,  294.  352.  426.  442.  2,  102.
Panzer  1,  269.  Fiedler  97.

p.  1244.]  What  herb  is  febrifuga  ?  for  which  Sumerl.  56,  58
gives  meiere  (Suppl.  to  1216  n.,  mid.);  Ql.  Sletst.  39,  405  febre-
f  agia  matima ;  Dioscor.  3,  7  centaurium  minus,  multiradix,  3,
126  conyza,  intybus ;  *  feaiherfowl,  the  plant  feverfew,'  Barnes.
■A  spell  like  the  AS.  one,  in  which  the  disease  is  bidden
withdraw,  is  in  Serv.  called  vstuk,  fr.  nstuknuti,  to  retire ;  and
the  herb  employed  is  likewise  ustuh.  Not  only  witches,  but  rats
and  mice  are  sung  away,  as  by  the  famed  rat-catcher  of  Hameln.
In  Ireland  it  is  a  gift  of  hereditary  poets,  Proc.  of  Jr.  Acad.  5,
855—366.

p.  1245.]  With  the  AS.  idiom  agrees  the  ML6. :  ic  en-can
der^  honger  niet  genesen,  Yer  Ave  in  Belg.  mus.  6,  414;  conf.  M.
Neth.  ghenesen,  ghenas  =  sanare.  Lane.  1996.  8458.  Maerl.  3,
190.  2,  111;  but  al80  =  sanari,  Maerl.  2,  156,  was  genesen =
sanatus  erat  2,  135.

p.  1247.]  Maren,  nightmares,  Gefk.  Beil.  151.  Bocks-mahrte,
spectre,  Kuhn  in  Hpt  5,  490  ;  kletter-m,,  drück-m,,  Sommer
p.  46.  Sloven,  mora,  both  mare  and  nightm.,  fr.  morim  (I
throttle)  ?  kiki-mora,  nightm.,  Hanosch  333.  In  the  eastern
parts  of  Mittelmark,  murraue  means  oppressive  as  nightmare,
bat  also  a  being  like  the  Harke  or  Holle  of  other  places,  that
has  tangled  eyebrows,  that  mats  the  hair  and  knits  up  branches
of  fir  trees,  Hpt  4, 386.  5, 488.  A  drom  of  the  mere  =  maar-zopf  ?
Dint.  1,  439.     Mare-zitz,  -teat  (Suppl.  to  1222).     Ir.  tromluidhe,

nightm.,   fr.  trom=heavy. Of    7   boys   or    7  girls   born  in

succession,  one  becomes  a  nightmare.     Nightmares  slip  through
a  buckle-hole  in  your  belt,  and  press  you,  Müllenh.  p.  242-3-4 ;


1698  SPELLS  AND  CHABMS.

dich  hat  geriten  der  mar^  Ges.  Abent.  3^  60.  Where  ihe  nuuur
has  alighted  on  the  com,  it  turns  black  or  full  of  cocklea ;  the
hop  on  which  she  has  sat  spoils.  Wolf  p.  689.  On  maar-spells,
see  Hpt  7,  537-8.  Altogether  like  the  Hennebg  spell  is  one
fr.  Euhland :

OUe  wasser  wote  (wade),

oUe  baemer  blote  (un-blade,  disleaf),

oUe  baege  staige  (mountains  climb),

oUe  kieche-speitze  maide  (spires  avoid) !     Meinert  p.  44.

And  they  are  found  in  other  parts  too,  Leopr.  26.  Panzer  I,  269.
Kuhn  p.  461.

p.  1248.]  With  the  spell  '  Sprach  Jungfrau  Hille:  blut  stand
stille!'  oonf.  the  adjuring  of  blood  in  Hpt  4,  391,  and  the
frequent  formula:  stant  pluot  fasto!  El.  sehr.  2,  29;  stand
still,  du  wildes  blut  I  Mone  6,  469  ;  daz  du  verstandest,  u.  nit
md  gangest  7,  420 ;  d6  verstuont  daz  bluot  vil  gar,  Walth.  v.  Rh.
138,  11 ;  verstellen,  to  stanch,  Mone  6,  460.  7,  420.  In  a  spell
for  stanching  blood,  the  history  of  iron  is  related,  EaIov.  rune  3
(noy.  ed.  9).  There  is  a  plant  named  bluot-stant,  Sumerl.  56, 66;
a  Thracian  herb  lay^-aifio^,  Welcker's  Kl.  sehr.  3,  29.     Fris.

'blöd  sTcetta;  protecC,  Richth.  236,  13. In  the  names  Blut-

stülpe,  Blut-gülpe,  stülpen  is  to  stanch,  M.  Neth.  stelpen,  Lane.
3593.  Part.  90,  15 ;  stelpte  mans  bloet.  Lane.  42658,  wenden
gestelpt  44470 ;  thaz  bluot  im  firstulti^se  sisteret,  O.  iii.  14, 22 ;
and  gillpe  resembles  the  Norse  Gylfi.  MHG.  daz  bluot  ver^
straeten,  Pantal.  228.

Sine  wunden  si  besach  (she  examined),

ir  segen  si  darüber  sprach.  Wigam.  5267.

'Holy  Tumbo  bless  this  wound  away'  (p.  528-9.  Suppl.  to  1231

end). Fingerworm-spells,  see  Happel  in  Mannhdt's  Ztschr.

3,  2.  E.  Meier's  Sag.  no.  464-5.  A  red,  a  white,  and  a  black
worm  in  Hone's  Ndrl.  lit.  337 ;  white,  black,  grey  and  green  in
a  Cod.,  Dresd.  M.  21^.  '  Christus  in  petra  sedebat '  sounds  like
'  Tumbo  saz  in  berke,'  Kl.  sehr.  2,  29 ;  Rother  6f  eime  steine
saz,  Both.  442.     [Pillicock  sat  on  Pillicock's  hill,  E.  Lear].

'  Ood  the  Lord  went  over  the  land,  there  met  him  70  sorts  of
gouts  and  goutesses.     Then  spake  the  Lord :  Ye  70  gouts  and


PREFACE.  1699

goutesses^  whither  woald  ye  f  Then  spake  the  70  g.  and  g. :
We  go  oyer  land^  and  take  from  men  their  health  and  limbs.
Then  spake  the  Lord :  Ye  shall  go  to  an  elder-bush,  and  break
off  all    his   boaghs,  and  leave  nnto  (naming  the  patient)  his

straight  limbs.     In  the  name,  etc/ Conf.  '  flaugk  blatter  n.

nicht  znbrist,  das  gebeat  dir  herr  Jesu  Christ/  fly,  pustule,  and
burst  not,  so  bids  thee,  etc.  (1597),  Wolfs  Ztschr.  1,  280.

p.  1248.]  Zeter  und  weide  liegen  in  streite,  Hpt  4,  390;  conf*
'  die  hänsehe  und  der  drache '  (p.  1163) .

p.  1249.]  AnimdU  are  appealed  to :  ' I  pray  thee,  swallow*
Schm.  3,  362;  adjure  te,  mater  aviorum  (p.  1242).  One's  own
powers  are  summoned  up  :  Finn,  nouse  luantoni,  surge  vis  mea  I
Renvall  1,  294^.  Again,  there  are  particular  words  of  great
magic  power :  berlieke,  berlocJce  !  polickey  polueke,  podrei  I  Fr.
Amim's  March,  no.  8 ;  Fr.  brelique  hrehque  f  bei'lik  berloc,
Biondelli's  Dial.  133 ;  conf.  Boh.  perljk  tvdes.


PREFACE.


p.  xziv.]  The  difference  between  the  Norse  and  the  Qemum
system  of  gods  appears  the  more  considerable,  when  we  reflect
that  our  Eru,  Phol,  Saxnot,  Beowulf,  Isis,  Zisa  and  Sindgund
were  unknown  to  the  North ;  that  in  Germany  thus  far  not  a
vestige  is  discoverable  of  Heimdall,  Loki  or  Hoenir  (Färö.  Höner,
not  Hoener) ;  and  that  of  Meili,  the  son  of  OSinn  and  Fiörgyn,

hardly  anything  is  known  but  the   bare  name. Thörr  was

preeminently  worshipped  in  Norway,  Freyr  in  Sweden,  OSinn  in
Denmark  (p.  160-1).  Hälogi,  ThörgerSr  and  Irpa  seem  to  be
local  deities  of  Häloga-land  (F.  Magnusen  p.  981).

p.  zxiv.]  The  result  of  a  new  religion  coming  in  is  mixtwre
with  the  old,  which  never  dies  out  entirely.  The  old  faith  then
becomes  a  superstition,  as  Nilsson  6,  3  very  clearly  shews.

p.  zxvi.]  When  the  rage  for  the  outlandish  and  satiety  with
the  home-grown  had  passed  away  (tanta  mortalibus  suarum
rerum  satietas,  alienarumque  aviditas,  Pliny  12.  17,  38),  there
set-in  the  equally  unwarranted  historical  and  geographical  explan-
ation of  Myths,  the  study  of  whose  inner  sense  is  yet  to  seek.


1700  PREFACE.

Deified  heroes  and  saints,  genealogies  beginning  with  a  god  for
ancestor^  mark  the  point  where  myth  and  history  toach.

p«  xzix.]  Wolfdietrich  has  this  other  point  of  likeness  to
Odyssetuf,  that  he  wears  St  George's  shirt,  as  O.  does  the  scarf
of  Leneothea.  A  further  resemblance  betw.  the  German  mytho-
logy and  the  Oreek  comes  to  light  in  Artemis  and  Hecate,  who
remind  us  of  Berhta;  see  the  Copenhagen  Edda,  pref.  xzrii.  seq.
The  ideas  of  Meleager  and  Noma-gestr  (p.  853  end),  of  fueaoyaia
and  middil-gard  (p.  794),  of  6ßul>a\6<:  and  the  dille-stein  (p.  806),
of  Cerberus  and  the  hell-hound  (p.  997),  of  /crfpvteeioy  and  the
wishing-rod  (976-7),  and  of  sieve-turning  (p.  1108)  are  closely
allied;  and  ^09,  ON.  sol,  Groth.  sauil,  coincide  even  verbally
(p.  701  end).  With  Bonian  usage  agree  our  dislocation-spells
(p.  224-5)  and  lustration  of  highways,  BA.  p.  73.  On  the  other
hand,  the  Zeus- Jupiter  is  in  other  nations  split  up  into  Wuotan,
Donar  and  Zio,  or  Radegast,  Perun  and  Svetovit,  or  Brahma  and
Vishnu,  or  Gwydion  and  Taranis.

p.  zxx.]  Celtic  influence  on  Germ,  mythology  is  pointed  out
by  Leo  in  Malb.  Gl.  1,  39;  from  it  Nilsson  6,  13-4  derives  the
mistil-teinn  and  Baldrs-brand,  believing  as  he  does  that  many
parts  of  Scandinavia  were  once  peopled  by  Celts.  Their  gods
Taranis,  Hesus  and  Teutates  answer  to  Jupiter,  Mars  and  Mer-
cury, see  Stalin  1,  111-2.  109.     GDS.  p.  120.

p.  zxx.]  To  the  old  words  common  to  the  Slavic  and  Teutonic,
add  Goth,  gul)?,  OHG.  kold,  SL  zöloto,  zl&to;  Goth.  |>aiimns,
OHG.  dornu,  SI.  tm,  teöm.  The  SI.  Siva = Ceres  corresp.  to
ON.  Sif,  Sitivrat  to  Saturn,  Priya  to  Frowa  (p.  303),  and  Prove
toFrö.

p.  xxxiv.]  The  harmonies  of  Indian  mythol.  with  ours  may
be  largely  added  to.  Thus  the  Liliputian  floating  on  a  leaf  is
similar  to  Brahma  and  Vishnu  (p.  451),  bald-headed  OSinn  and
his  day  of  the  week  to  Buddha  (p.  129  n.  Iduna  10,  281),
Vishnu's  wheel  to  Krodo's  (p.  249),  Prithivi  to  Pria  (p.  303),
Yama  the  death-god  and  his  rope,  the  cow  of  creation,  etc.,  to
the  corresp.  German  notions,  Garuda's  wings  to  our  wind  (p.
633),  madyamalöka  to  middilgard.  Bopp  in  Gl.  7P  says  E&Ii  is
akin  (not  indeed  to  Halja,  but)  to  hveila,  a  while.

p.  xxxviii.]  Points  of  contact  betw.  Pa^ganism  and  Ohristian-
ism.      On    what  is    christian  in  the  Edda,  see  Copenh.  Edda,


PREFACE.  1701

pref.  xzvi.  6eq.,  and  consider  the  Last  Judgment,  the  angeVs
trumpet  like  HeimdalFs  horn  (p.  234),  Snrtr  like  '  death  the  last
enemy, ^  1  Cor.  15,  26.  While  the  heathen  often  admitted  foreign
^ds  into  the  ranks  of  their  own,  and  assimilated  them,  as  the
Greeks  did  sometimes  to  conciliate  other  nations;  Christianity
was  ezclasive,  and  hostile  to  all  heathen  gods.  Yet  even  the
Christian  church,  involuntarily  or  designedly,  has  adopted  some
heathen  gods  and  practices.  That  saints  of  the  Catholic  chnrch
often  receive  divine  homage,  is  acknowl.  by  Seb.  Frank,  Zeitb.

2,  243*;  conf.  A.  W.  SchlegeFs  Oeuvres  1,  219.  Kingston's
Liusit.  sketches,  Lond.  '45.  The  saints  heal  (p.  1163  end) :  the
Servians  call  Kosman  and  Damian  vratchi,  soothsayers,  phy-
sicians, Yuk's  Wtb.  82 ;  John  the  Baptist  foretells  to  Aeda  the
splendour  of  the  race  that  shall  spring  from  her  daughter  Oda,
Pertz  6,  307.  The  saints  make  rain  (p.  174-5)  ;  as  water  ^saints
they  bring  succour  in  a  storm  (Suppl.  to  637)  :  nay,  nuns  in
German  legends  often  take  the  place  of  white  ladies ,  and  munkar
in  Sweden  turn  up  as  j attar,  Buna  '44,  13.  The  saints  pacify
God's  anger :

Des  mugen  si  in  stillen,

swä  er  zomic  ftf  uns  wirt.  Pass.  312,  56.

Miieze  sin  unser  vorspreche  (advocate),

daz  Got  mit  zome  iht  reche  (not  wreak  in  wrath),

SW&  wir  haben  gesundet.  Servat.  1705.

God's  anger  and  that  of  the  saints  are  estimated  about  equally
in  curses :  '  habbe  he  Godes  unmiltse  and  Sancti  Martines ! '
Kemble  2, 4 ;

Des  haben  in  Sant  Georgen  haz

und  Gotes  vluoch  umbe  daz  !  Helbling  8,  915.

'  Hilf  Sanct  Anna  selb-dritt  I '     A.  and  the  other  .two,  Anshelm

3,  252.

Mary  above  all  other  saints  received  a  heartfelt  adoration,
which,  if  not  in  the  first  centuries,  yet  very  early,  was  promoted
esp.  by  women,  Zappert  16.  Epiphan.  adv.  hssres.  p.  1058  (ed.
Paris,  1622).  Like  Hulda,  she  is  called  'gudmoder,'  Asbjörns.
no.  8,  and  is  a  '  spinster,'  Zapp.  13.  If  in  the  legend  of  Cres-
centia  Peter,  like  a  second  Woden,  appears  as  an  old  man,  con-


1702  PREFACE.

dacts  tlie  heroine  back  from  the  rock  in  the  sea^  and  endows  her
with  the  gift  of  healings  or  himself  heals  {KM.  no.  81) ;  in  other
legends  Mary  takes  the  place  of  Peter^  and  shows  the  empress  a
medicinal  herb.  Both  Christ  and  Mary  leave  the  print  of  their
fingers  and  toes  on  the  rock,  like  the  giants  (p.  546),  or  devils
(p.  1022);  conf.  'ons  Heren  spronc/  onr  Lord's  leap,  Maerl.  2,
116.  The  O.Norw.  Gala]nng^-lang  p.  6  speaks  of  '  signa  til  Krist
)?acca  (thanks)  oc  Sancta  Maria  til  ärs  oc  tilfriffar/  exactly  as  was
done  to  Freyr  (p.  212).  Mary  helps  in  childbirth,  bestows  rain,
appears  among  harvesters,  kisses  and  dries  them,  Maerl.  2,  248.
285-6.  She  instead  of  the  Dioscuri  makes  light  shine  on  the
masts  (p.  1137  beg.) ;  she  or  her  mother  St  Anne  carries  people
from  distant  lands  through  the  air  (Hist,  de  la  Bastille  4, 315),  as
OSinn  did  (p.  146,  Hading),  or  the  devil  (p.  1028).  They  make
two  Virgin  Marys  visit  each  other,  carrying  the  inferior  one  to
the  grander.  Childless  couples  cry  to  St  Verena,  and  she  gives
them  heirs,  Pertz  6,  458—460,  like  OSinn  and  Frigg,  Vols,  saga
c.  2 ;  conf.  the  beginnings  of  many  KM.

p.  xliii.]  The  christian  Gt)d  merely  sends  his  messengers  upon
earth,  as  in  Gregor  2678  :  swenn  dich  unser  Herre  diner  sselden
ermante,  u.  dir  sinen  boten  sante,  den  soldest  du  enphfthen  baz.
But  the  heathen  gods  came  down  themselves :  foru  at  kanna  heim
allan,  Sn.  135.  (KM.^  3,  146).  Zeus,  Hermes  and  Plutus  appear
in  Lucian's  Timon;  conf.  Aristoph.  Lysistrata  808,  Birds  1549;
whenever  3  gods  seek  a  lodging,  Hermes  is  sure  to  be  one,  GDS.
1 23.  Zeus  coming  as  an  unknown  guest,  a  child  is  served  up
for  him  to  eat,  Fragm.  hist.  Or.  1,  31.     The  Dioscuri  also  travel

unrecognised  among  men,  Preller  2,  72. What  the  Lithna*

nians  tell  of  Perkunos's  (or  the  Saviour's)  encounter  with  the
horse  and  ox,  the  Esthonian  legend  relates  of  Jesus,  Neus  435.
Perkunos  and  Pikullos  travel,  and  give  gifts  to  men,  Tettau  and
Temme's  Ostpr.  u.  Litth.  sagen  p.  28.  Also  the  horse,  ok  and
dog  put  up  at  men's  houses,  and  reward  hospitality  by  giving
their  years,  Babr.  74.

In  such  wanderings  there  keeps  recurring  the  antique  incident
of  the  divine  visitor  granting  three  wishes.  'Theseus  Hippo-
lytum,  cum  ter  optandi  a  Neptuno  patre  habnisset  potesiaiem,'
Gic.  de  Nat.  D.  3,  31 ;  het  ich  drier  wünsche  gewalt,  MS.  2, 145;
conf.  EM.  no.  87.     Of  this  kind  is  the  Breton  fairytale  of  the


PBBFACE.  1703

artful  modstaclie,  to  whom  Christ  and  Peter  allow  3  wishes :  he
asks  for  a  pretty  wife,  the  winning  card,  and  a  sack  in  which  to
shnt  the  devil  np.  When  Peter  denies  him  entrance  into  heaven,
he  flings  his  cap  in,  and  so  takes  possession.  Echoes  of  the
player  who  wants  to  get  into  heaven,  and  is  refused  (p.  818  n.),
are  found  in  the  Warnung  2710 — 2806;  so  brother  Lustig  and
Jack  the  gamester  wish  to  get  into  heaven,  EM.  no.  81-2.  Lat.
poem  of  Ma.  p.  343,  conf.  the  &rce  of  the  miller  who  sits  on  his
sack  behind  the  gate  of  heaven,  Altd.  bl.  1,  381.  Qamester
Jack^s  request  for  the  tree  from  which  no  one  can  get  down
resembles  a  story  in  Hone's  Daybk  1,447.  Panzer  1,94;  the
casting  of  dice  for  the  soul  is  also  in  Gsbs.  Heisterb.  5,  34.
Somm.  sag.  175-6.  The  incident  of  the  thieving  cook  meets  us
in  Aviani  Fab.  30:  sed  cum  consumti  dominus  cor  quaereret
apri,  impatiens  fertur  cor  rapuisse  coquus.

Christ,  being  on  a  journey  with  Peter,  pulls  one  ear  out  of  a
sheaf,  and  bums  it  at  the  candle ;  the  grains  keep  spirting  out
till  they  form  quite  a  heap.  This  happens  in  a  bam,  where  lazy
Peter  has  been  cudgelled  by  a  peasant;  and  he  gets  another
backful  of  blows  in  the  inn,  because  he  will  not  play.  Then  the
Lord  made  for  these  peasants  boughs  on  their  trees,  whose  hard-
ness blunted  their  axes,  as  the  request  of  a  rude  set  of  people  for
vines  is  also  granted,  but  the  wine  is  as  good  as  their  manners.
In  a  farrier's  shop  Christ  cuts  a  horse's  foot  off,  shoes  it,  and  puts
it  on  the  beast  again.  Peter  will  not  stop  to  pick  up  haJf  a
horseshoe,  but  Christ  does,  and  buys  cherries  with  it,  which  Peter
is  glad  to  pick  up  one  by  one  to  quench  his  thirst.  In  the
merry  gest  of  the  blind  man  whose  wife  sits  up  in  the  appletree,
or  the  LO.  poem  in  Dasent  zxvi.,  Peter  and  the  Lord  act  the  part
of  Pluto  and  Proserpine  in  Chaucer's  Marchantes  tale,  and  of
Oberen  and  Titania  in  Wieland's  Ges.  6,  87.  Again,  Christ
walks  with  two  apostles  and  three  disciples,  and  comes  upon  the
girl  carrying  water.  Wend,  volksl.  2,  314.  Peter  catches  the
haddock,  as  the  Ases  do  Loki,  and  he  Andvari ;  conf.  Wolfs
Ndrl.  sag.  p.  706,  and  his  Pref.  to  Zingerle  2,  xx.  Peter  comes
from  heaven  to  earth  on  leave,  H.Sachs  iii.  1,  240,  also  i.  94^.  St
Peter  sits  on  the  roof,  throwing  pears  down,  and  St  Clans  throws
rotten  apples  up,  Garg.  75^.  Of  a  like  stamp  are  the  folktales  of
St  Jost  and  the  Bavarian,  Renner  24583,  of  St  Nicolas  and  the


1704  PREFACE.

Bavarianj  Bebelii  Facet,  p.  m.  1136.     The  return  of  saints  to
heaven  is  thus  deser.  in  the  Warnung  1767  :

Die  heilegen  habent  sich  üfgezogen  (hoisted  up),
von  der  kuppel  (dome)  sint  si  geflogen
üf  zuo  ir  Schepfaere.

Here  also  I  must  call  attention  to  Peter  and  Paul  coming  to  aid
the  Christians  in  battle,  Lohengr.  pp.  116 — 9.  158 — 160.  Pref.
Ixxzi.  Youths  (or  knights)  clothed  in  white  appear  on  the  walls
of  Rhodes,  to  repel  the  Turks,  Detmar  2,  417  (yr  1480).  Angels
too  are  called  wiges  wise  in  Hdlj.  149,  10;  they  appear  two  at  a
time,  and  armed,  p.  989.  This  shining  pair  of  champions  reminds
us  of  the  Alci  (p.  366),  and  of  the  Dioscuri  who  on  their  white
steeds  help  the  fighters,  Cic.  Nat.  D.  2,  2 ;  conf.  ed.  Creuzeri  p.
213-4.  Justin  20,  3.  Florus  ed.  Jahn  14, 14.  Suet.  Nero  c.  1.
Klausen's  Aeneas  664-5.  707.  Maerl.  3,  148.  174.  The  Gala-
tians  quail  before  the  rider  on  the  white  horse,  Luc.  Dial.  mer.
13 ;  already  in  Herod.  8,  38  two  armed  and  superhuman  beings
pursue  and  slay  the  foe.

p.  xlvi.]  The  sky  darkens  when  a  villain  is  begotten  or  bom,
Pertz  2,  154 ;  but  nature  rejoiced  when  Georis  was  begot,  261 ;
conf.  the  Alexander-legend  in  Maerl.  1,  264.  With  PrßSi's  blissful
age  conf.  O'Keamey's  Gabhra  p.  104 :  '  They  say  the  times  were
so  prosperous  and  the  produce  of  the  earth  so  abundant,  that
when  the  kine  lay  down  the  grass  reached  above  the  top  of  the
horns.  Hence  it  is  said  that  cows,  whenever  they  lie,  give
utterance  to  three  moans  in  remembrance  of  the  good  old  times
that  once  had  been,  and  lamenting  the  hard  days  in  which  Üiey
live.'  So  we  hear  of  a  Truce  of  God  under  Numa,  Elans.  Aen.
953,  and  under  Solomon,  Diem.  p.  113-4.  The  lines  fr.  Godfirey
of  Yiterbo  are  based  on  Isai.  2,  4  :  et  conflabant  gladios  sues  in
vomeres,  et  lances  suas  in  falces,  conf.  Passional  p.  17.  Jom.  de
regn.  succ.  p.  45.     Ksrchr.  630.

p.  xlviii.]  The  Germ,  reverence  for  woman  is  also  expr.  in :
&re  wol  die  mnoter  din.  Pass.  224,  25.  In  a  Serv.  song  a
daughter  calls  her  mother  '  bela  tzrkvitze,'  white  little  church,
Vuk  1,  17.  no.  27.

p.  xlix.]  The  good  and  evil  of  the  New  are  hinted  by  Paus.  i.
24,  4  in  the  words  :  octi^  Se  rä  ai^v  reyyrf  Treiroirj/Mepa  hrlirpov-


PBBFACB.  1705

Oev  riderai  t&v  €9  äp^at^orrfTa  fiKOvrcov  (become  old-fashioned),
conf.  Leasing  8,  246.

p.  11.]  Even  God,  Christ  and  the  Holy  Ghost  came  to  be
imagined  as  sitting  in  the  wood,  as  the  old  gods  had  been,
Pröhle's  March,  f.  d.  jngend  p.  17.

p.  lii.]  The  descent  of  all  gods  from  a  God  of  gods  is  assumed
even  by  Helmold  1,  83.  In  India  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Siva  are  the
three  supreme  gods ;  all  the  rest  are  under  these ;  their  trinity
is  designated  by  the  sacred  word  om^aum,  Brahma  being  a,
Vishnu  w,  Siva  m,  Bopp's  Gl.  61  •.  GDS.  122.  Beside  this
trinitarian  view,  we  find  a  dual  conception  of  deity  according  to
sex,  as  father  and  mother,  or  as  brother  and  sister :  thus  arose
NiörSr  and  Nerthus,  Freyr  (Fr6)  and  Freyja  (Frouwa),  Berhtolt
and  Berhta,  Fairguneis  and  Fiörgyn,  Geban  and  Gefjon,  Hruodo
and  Hreda.     With  the  Germ,  sunne,  masc.  and  fem.,  conf.  Lunus

and  Luna,  Liber  and  Libera,  GDS.    122. Twelve   gods  are

reckoned  by  Athen.  5,  830  (conf.  Plato's  Pheedr.  246-7),  and  by
Apuleius  p.m.  59;  r&v  StiSexa  ovofia^ofiipwv  0e&v  ärfaXfjLara,
Paus.  i.  40,  2;  si  undecim  deos  praeter  sese  secum  adducat
Jupiter,  Plant.  Epid.  v.  1,  4;  duodecim  deis,  v.  2,  3;  twelve
adityas,  Bopp  30^ ;  tredecim  dii  exceptis  Brahma,  Vishnu  et  Siva,
Bopp's  Gl.  160;  väro  ellifo  aesir  taldir,  Sssm.  117^;  12  ases,  8
asins,  Sn.  79.  In  like  manner,  Hrdlfs  12  heroes,  Sn.  152.
Fomald.  s.  1,  100,  Ealeva's  12  sons,  the  devil's  12  disciples
(Suppl.  to  986  end).

p.  lii.]  The  arguments  with  which  the  Fathers  and  authors
like  Arnobius  combat  the  folly  of  heathenism  in  respect  of  gods,
temples,  images  and  sacrifices,  would  equally  condemn  a  good
deal  in  the  Catholic  doctrine.  Even  a  worldly  delight  in  spring,
flowers  and  the  song  of  birds  is  attacked  almost  as  fiercely  as
polytheism ;  thus  in  the  Warnung  2243  :

Einer  anbetet  daz  vogel-sanc  One  man  worships  the  bird's  song

unt  die  lichten  tage  lane,  and  the  days  so  light  and  long,

darzuo  bluomen  nnde  gras,  flowers  also  and  the  grass,

daz  ie  des  vihes  spise  was :  aye  the  food  of  ox  and  ass  :

diu  tinder  vrezzent  den  got,  bullocks  munch  your  god  !

conf.  2077  seq.  2382  seq.      From  the   Dualism   that  pits  Evil


1706  PRBPACB.

against  Grood  as  a  power^  oar  paganism  is  free ;  for  oar  anoestors,
like  the  Greeks,  throw  Evil  on  the  shoalders  of  a  few  inferior
deities,  or  let  it  come  oat  in  mere  attributes  of  the  gods.


APPENDIX.


I.— ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.
IL— SUPERSTITIONS.
IIL— SPELLS.


im


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.


Authorities  :  Beda,  Hist.  eccl.  1, 15.  2,  5.  Nennius  (Nyniaw),
Hist.  Britonnm,  comp,  in  7th  or  9th  cent.  ?  the  MSS.  are  of  the
10th;  ed.  Gann^  Lond.  1819,  p.  61.  Saxon  Ohron.,  began  at
latest  in  9th  cent.,  continued  and  extended ;  ed.  Ingram,  Lond.
1823,  pp.  15.  23-4.  33-4.  72.  95.  Asaeriua  Menevensis  (d.  90&
or  910),  beginn,  of  his  De  rebns  gestis  Alfred!,  Lond.  1722,
pp.  3.  4.  Ethelwerdus  (d.  1090),  in  Savile,  pp.  833-4.  842.
Florentius  Wigornensis  (d.  1118),  ed.  Lond.  1592,  pp.  218-9.
221.  232.  274.  294,  and  a  collective  prosapia  p.  566.  Simeon
Danelmensis  (circ.  1129),  in  Twysden  p.  119.  Alfredus  Beyer-
lacensis  (d.  1138),  ed.  Heame,  Oxon.  1716.  Ordericvs  Yitalis
(b.  1075,  d.  after  1140),  in  Duchesne's  Scr.  Norm.  p.  639.
Wilelmus  Malmesburiensis  (d.  1143),  in  Savile  p.  17.  Eihelredus
or  Ailredvs  Rievallensis  (circ.  1150),  in  Twysden  p.  350-1»
Henricus  Huntindonensis  (ends  1154),  in  Savile  pp.  310,  313—6,
Oalfredus  Monemutensis  (circ.  1160),  in  Scr.  Angl.,  Heidelb»
1587.  Badulfus  de  Diceto  (ends  1196),  in  Twysden  p.  530.
Joannes  Wallingford  (d.  1214),  in  Gale  p.  535.  Albericus  trium
fontium  (ends  1241),  in  Leibn.  Ace.  hist.  1,  186.  Matthceus
Westmonasteriensis  (14th  cent.),  Francof.  1601,  pp.  99.  142.
Thomas  Otterbourne  (ends  1420),  in  Hearne's  8cr.  rer.  Angl.,
Oxon.  1732;  most  of  the  names  dreadfully  corrupt.  A  con-
fused and  corrupt  Geneal.  from  a  MS.  of  Nennius^  in  Gale's
Appendix  p.  116.  The  collections  in  D.  Langhom's  Ghron.  reg.
Angl.  1679,  8  are  not  to  be  despised :  some  of  the  sources  ho
drew  from  are  now  lost.  *

The  Anglo-Saxons,  who  left  Germany  for  Britain  in  the
5-6th  centuries,  carried  with  them  data  of  the  descent  of  their
noblest  families.  These  all  go  back  to  Woden,  and  some  of
them  a  great  deal    higher,  naming  a  whole  series  of  gods  or

[ '  Conf.  J.  Grimm  *  On  Eemble's  GeneaL  of  Wessex/  Manioh  '86  (Kl.  sohr.  5,
340  seq.)— EHM.,  i.e.  Prof.  E.  H.  Meyer,  Editor  of  Grimm's  D.M.  ad.  4.]
L'  Conf.  the  Geneal.  tables  ooll.  in  Pertz  10,  814.— EHM.]
VOL.  IT.  1709  jf  jf


1710  APPENDIX.

deified  heroes  as  Woden's  ancestors.  After  the  conversion  to
Christianity,  they  tried  to  connect  this  line  of  kings  and  gods
with  the  O.T.  tradition  of  the  earliest  race  of  man.  Such  an
attempt  to  bring  their  still  cherished  heathen  forefathers  into
harmony  with  the  Noah  and  Adam  of  Holy  Writ  can  only  have
been  made  very  early,  immediately  after  their  adhesion  to  the  new
doctrine,  at  a  time  when  the  mind,  convinced  of  the  tmth  of  the
Bible  story,  was  yet  loth  to  part  with  its  native  tradition.  As
a  church  was  often  reared  on  the  site  of  the  heathen  temple,  as
christian  and  heathen  ceremonies  were  fused  together  somehow,
and  to  fortify  the  new  faith  the  debris  of  the  old  soil  was  thrown
in  ;  so  a  simple-minded  people  might  be  allowed  to  retain  genea-
logies interwoven  with  its  past  glory,  and  give  them  as  it  were
a  new  groundwork.  Later  on,  such  a  combination  of  irreconcil-
able facts  would  neither  have  been  attempted  nor  thought
necessary.

Beyond  all  doubt  these  pedigrees  were  pre-christian,  were
known  to  Angles  and  Saxons  in  their  old  home,  and  therefore
must  have  been  equally  diffused  among  other  German  nations
on  the  Continent :  every  part  of  them  shows  connexion  with
national  names  and  old  heathen  poetry.  I  am  inclined  to  credit
the  Frisians,  Westphals,  and  also  Franks  with  possessing  similar
genealogies,  though  the  emigrant  Anglo-Saxons  alone  have
preserved  them  for  us.

Our  earliest  authority  for  these  pedigrees  is  Beda  [d.  735],
and  he  only  mentions  that  of  Kent,  yet  in  such  a  way  that  we
may  safely  suppose  he  knew  them  all.  Succeeding  centuries
furnish  fuller  accounts.

These  lists  of  names  can  have  no  chronological  value  as  regards
the  oldest  times ;  it  is  only  in  giving  the  lines  of  AS.  kings  that
they  become  historical.  But  that  detracts  nothing  from  the  im-
portance of  the  legend.

We  know  that  the  Anglo-Saxons  formed  7  or  8  distinct
kingdoms,  founded  on  a  pre-existing  diversity  in  the  immigrant
tribes,  and  thus  answering  eicactly  to  the  difference  of  their
genealogies.  The  Saxon  Chronicle  says  the  Jutes  occupied
Kent  and  Wight,  the  Saxons  Essex,  Sussex  and  Wessex,  the
Angles  Eastangle,  Mercia  and  Northumberland.  Of  Wessex,
the  state  that  soon  overtopped  and  finally  swallowed  up  the  rest,


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.


1711


the  genealogy  is  the  most  fully  preserved.  Those  of  Eent^
Mercia^  Deira  (Brit.  Deifyr)  and  Bernicia  (Brit.  Bryneich,
Northumbria)  are  also  handed  down  in  old  documents.  Less
genuine,  or  not  so  well  accredited  in  certain  names,  appear  the
lines  of  Eastangle,  Essex  and  Lindesfarn-ey.

It  is  convenient  to  divide  these  genealogies  in  two  halves,  a
Descending  series  and  an  Ascending.  At  W6den's  sons  they
begin  to  split,  in  him  they  all  unite.  I  will  take  first  the  several
lines  that  descend  from  Woden,  and  then  deal  with  the  older
stock,  which  is  the  same  for  all.     Here  I  bring  under  one  view —

Woden's  Posterity.


Kent.

Eastanqlia.

Essex.

Mebcia.

Woden

Woden

W6den

Woden

Wecta

Cäsere

Saxne^t

Wihtlffig

Witta

Titmon

Gesecg

WflBrmnnd

Wihtgils

Trigel

Andsecg

Offa

Hengest  (d.  489)

Hr6*hmund

Sweppa

Angeltheow

Eoric  (Oesc)

Hrippa

Sigefugel

Eomaar

Octa

Quichelm

Bedeca

Icel

Eormenric

Uffa

Offa

Cnebba

^thelbeorht(567)Tidel

-^scwine  (527)  Cynewald

R8edwald(d.617)Sledda

Creoda

Eorpwald  (632)

S89beorht(604)Wibba

Penda(d.656)

Deiba.

Bebnicia.

Wessbx.

LiNDKSFABAN.

Woden

Wftden

Woden

Woden

Waegdaeg

Bssldaeg

Baeldaeg

Winta

Sigegär

Brand

Brand

Cretta

Swasfdasg

Beonoc

Fridhog&r

Qaeldgils

Sigegeat

Aloe

Freawine

Ceadbed

Sasbald

Angenwit

Wig

Bubba

Ssefugel

Ingwi

Gevris

Bedeca

Westerfalcna

Esa

Esla

Biscop

Wilgisl

Eoppa

Elesa

Eanferth

Uscfred

Ida  (d.  560)

Cerdic  (d.  534)  Eatt»

Yffe

Cynric

Ealdfrith

^Ue  (d.  588)

Ceawlin '

[  >  Sacceeded  by  the  brothers  Ceolxlo,  Geolwnlf,  Cynegils,  Cwiohelm,  Lappenb.
1,  164-6.— EHM.]


1712  APPENDIX.

I  begin  with  the  general  remark,  that  seven  sons  are  here
ascribed  to  Woden  (for  Bernicia  and  Wessex  keep  together  üVL
the  third  generation).  Bat  some  chroniclers  give  him  only
three ;  thus  William  of  Malmesbury,  speaking  of  the  Mercian
line,  says  p.  17:  possem  hoc  loco  istius  (Idae)  et  aliomm  alibi
lineam  seriatim  intexere,  nisi  qnod  ipsa  vocabnla,  barbaram
qniddam  stridentia,  minus  quam  vollem  delectationis  lectaris
infnnderent.  Iliad  tamen  non  immerito  notandnm,.  quod,  cam
Wodenio  fuerint  tres  filii,  Weldegius,  Withlegius  et  Beldegius,
de  prime  reges  Cantuaritarnm,  de  secando  reges  Merciomm,  et
de  tertio  reges  Westsaxonum  et  Northanimbrorum  originem
traxerant/

Let  as  now  examine  the  eight  lines  one  by  one.

KENT,  the  oldest  kingdom,  founded  by  the  first  invaders. —
Beda  1,  15:  'duces  faisse  perhibentur  eorum  primi  dao  fratres
Hengistua  et  Horsus,  erant  autem  filii  Vetgittli,  cujus  pater  Veda^
cujus  pater  Voden,  de  cujus  stirpe  multarum  provinciarum  regium
genas  originem  duxit.'^  Ace.  to  that,  Hengest  and  Horsa
would  be  only  great-grandsons  of  Wdden,  but  one  MS.  supplies
a  missing  link :  '  filii  Victgiali^  cujus  pater  Vieta,  c.  p.  Vecia^  c.  p.
Voden*  who  is  thus  great-great-grandfather  to  those  brothers.
Herewith  agree  both  Nennius  :  '  interea  tres  ceolae  a  Germania
in  exilium  expulsae  Britanniam  advenerunt,  in  quibus  domina-
bantur  Hors  et  Henegest,  qui  et  ipsi  fratres  erant  filii  Ouictglis,
Guictlis  filius  Ouicta,  Guicta  filius  Ouechta,  Guechta  filius  Vuoden  ;
and  the  Saxon  Chron.  p.  15:  *  Hengest  and  Horsa  that  wasron
Wihtgilses  suna,  Wihtgils  wass  Witting,  Witta  Wecting,  Weda
Wddning,  fram  tham  Wodne  &wöc  eall  üre  cynecynn,  and
Südhanhymbra  eÄc'  In  Ethelwerd  the  3  links  betw.  Wotib«i
and  Hengest  are  Withar,  Wicta,  Wyrhtels ;  in  Florence  of  Wore.
566,  '  Vecta  sive  Wehia,  Witta,  Wihtgisilus  ;  in  Henry  of  Hunt.
Vecta,  Wicta,  Widgils.

Hengest  had  a  son  Eoric,  sumamed  Oise  (Oesc),  after  whom
all  succeeding  kings  of  Kent  were  called  Oiscingas;  after  Oisc
came  Octa,  Irminric,  Ethelbeii;,  Beda  2,  5.  Oisc  is  called  Aese  in
Sax.  Chron.  and  Ethelwerd.     Florence  has  :  '  Heugistos,  Ori(^$

^  So  in  AS. :  '  wsBxon  tb&  asrest  heora  Utteowas  and  hereiogan  iwegen  gebr5thn
HingUt  and  Horaa,  hi  wsron  WihHgilie$  snna,  thaes  fsder  wies  Wihta  hiten,  and
th»s  Wihtan  feeder  wies  Wdden  nemned,  of  thsBB  strynde  monigra  mcgdlia
•yning>cynn  fruman  Isdde.*


ANGLO-SAXON  GBNEALOGIBS.  1713

cognomine  Aesca,  Octa,  IrmeniHeus,  ilef  Aeifeer^w«/— ^The  names
Hengeat  and  Eorsa  are  taken  from  the  horse ;  one  might  also
snspect  in  Wictgisl,  Wicta,  Wecta  the  presence  of  wieg,  OS.
^ggf  ON.  vigg  (equns),  conf.  Lat.  vehere.  The  ON.  Veg-tamr
(way-tame,  much  travelled),  as  OSinn  once  called  himself,  stands
apart,  though  an  old  king  Wechtam  occurs  in  Hnnibald.  The
Wegdam  in  Otterboume  p.  82  is  accus,  of  Wegda.  Will.
Malmesb.  p.  17  calls  the  head  of  the  Kentish  line  Weldegius,
prob,  a  corruption  of  Wecdeg.  The  Traveller's  Song,  line  43,
brings  up  a  Witta,  king  of  the  Swaefas  (Swabians) ;  could  this
name  serve  to  explain  the  obscure  wittu  in  our  Hildebrand-lied  ?

EASTANGLIA. In  Florence   566   (conf.  233):    'Woden,

Casera,  Titmon,  Trigilsus,  Rothmundu8,  Hrippiis,  WiJtelmiLs,  Vffa
sive  Wffa,  primus  rex  Orientali  urn  Anglorum,'  and  3  kings  after
him,  TKtellu8,  Redwaldus,  Eorpwdldus.  In  Gale's  Appendix:
Woden  genuit  Oassery  genuit  Titinon,  g.  Trigil,  g.  Rodnum,  g.
Kippan,  g.  Otiithelm,  (g.)  Ouechan,  ipse  primus  regnavit  in
Britannia  super  gentem  Eastanglorum,  Gaeca  g.  Ouffan,  g.  Tidil,
g.  Ecni,  g.  Edric,  g.  Aldulfli,  g.  ElriG ;  elsewh.  from  a  differ.
MS. :  Woden,  Casser,  Titinon,  Trigil,  Rodmunt,  Rippan,  Chiillem,
Ouecha,  Ouffa,  Tidil,  Eeni.  In  Langhom:  Oaseras,  Tilmon,
Trigisilua,  Rothimundus,  Hirpus,  Quicelmus,  Vffa.  ^  Of  this  Uffa,
Henry  of  Hunt.  315:  'hoc  regnum  primus  tenuit  Vffa,9k  quo
reges  Orientalium  Anglorum  Yffingos  appellant,  quod  postea
Titulus  (al.  Titilus)  filius  ejus  tenuit,  pater  Redwaldi  fortissimi
regis  Eastangle ' ;  and  John  Bromton^s  Chron.  (Twysden  p.  745) :
'regnum  Eastangliae  incepit  ab  Vffa  rege,  cui  successit  rex
Ticulus  ;  isti  duo  non  fuerunt  multum  potentes,  quibus  successit
potentior  aliis  rex  Redwaldus;  Redwaldo  vero  defuncto,  filius
suus  Erpwaldua  in  regno  Eastangliae  successit.'  Of  all  these,
Beda  mentions  only  Reduald  (jr.  616).'  The  Sax.  Chron.  p.  35
relates  the  baptism  of  Eorpwald  in  632 ;  speaks  of  his  father
Reodwald  p.  32,  yr.  617,  or  (more  correctly)  Roedwald  p.  88,  as
one  of  the  mightiest  of  AS.  monarchs.  So  Will.  Malmesb.  p.
34:  Redvaldvs, primuQ  idem  que  maximus  apud  Orientales  Anglos,
a  Yodenio,  ut  scribunt,  decimum  genu  naotus  (1.  natus).'

^  Oiterboome  has  only :  *  Woden  genuit  Coiere,  a  quo  regnum  Eitangloram
progrediens  derivator.*

[s  Beda  2, 15  (Stevenson  140, 21)  does  name  four :  Ewpuald,  Bedvald,  TytUui,
Ftt/a.— BHM.l


1714  APPENDIX.

The  older  names  seem  good  Saxon.  Hrippa,  Hrippus  answers
to  Hripo  in  Falke's  Trad.  Corb.  7.  104-7.  312  and  OHG.  Hriffo
in  Meichelb.  480.  Rothmund  for  Hrdthmund?  a  name  that  occnis
in  Beow.  2378.  Titmon  resembles  Tiadman  in  Falke  114.
Trigil  may  be  the  OHG.  Dregil,  Wolfdregil,  Wolfdrigil  ?  thongh
in  that  case  we  should  expect  Thrigel.^  Tidil  is  appar.  the  Tndil
of  Falke  37  [and  Tital  in'Sohannat  no.  426.— EHM.].  Uffa  is  the
OS.  Ufib^  and  prob,  the  same  as  the  Offas  of  Essex  and  Mercia,
for  the  Trav.  Song.  69  says  '  Offa  weold  Ongle/  governed  Anglia.
^orp  in  Eorpwald  is  the  OS,  Erp,  OHG.  Erpf,  conf.  ON.  iarpr=
fuscns.  Cwichelm  is  a  good  AS.  name  (Sax.  Chr.  27.  30),  of
which  Wihelm,  Guillem  are  corruptions.

The  CaseraXOaseras  or  Gasser  named  as  Wdden's  son  is  the
same  whom  the  Trav.  Song  celebrates  as  ruler  of  the  Greeks,
1.  39  :  '  Gdsere  weold  ^Creacum ';  and  1.  151  :  'mid  Creacnm  ic
W8BS  and  mid  Finnum^^and  mid  Oasere,  se  the  winbuif^a  geweald
&hte,  wiolane  (  =  welena)  and  wilna,  and  Wala  rices,'  who  wielded
winsome  burghs,  wealth,  what  heart  can  wish,  and  Welsh
dominion.  Here  Saxon  legend  has  turned  the  Latin  Caesar  into
Oasere,  and  linked  him  to  native  kings,  perh.  in  deference  to
that  early  opinion  of  Woden's  having  come  from  Greekland  (p.
163  n.).  Among  Saxons  and  Angles  of  the  5-6th  centuries  there
was  prob,  many  a  legend  afloat  about  an  old  king  Kesor.

ESSEX. — ^Acc.  to  Florence :  TFbcZen,  Eaxneta,  Oesecg,  Äntsecg,
Sv£ppa,  Sigefiigel,  Bedca,  Offa,  Aeswinus,  Sledda,  Sebertus ;  for
Eaxneta  some  MSS.  have  the  truer  form  Seaxnete.  Henry  of
Hunt.  313 :  Saxnat,  Andesc,  Oesac,  Spoewe,  Sigewlf,  Biedca,
Offa,  Erchenwin,  Slede,  SibHct  (al.  Siberct).  Matth.  Westm.  p.
99 :  Erkenwinus,  qui  fuit  filius  Offae,  q.  f.  Bredecani,  q.  f.  Sigewlf,
q.  f.  Spetuae,  q.  f.  Oesac,  q.  f.  Andessc,  q.  f.  Saxuad,  q.  f.  Woden,
Langhorn :  Saxoneta,  Oesacus,  Andescus,  Sueppa,  Sigefugdus,
Bedicanvs,  Ercenovinus,  Alvredus  Beverl. :  Woden,  Seaxeca,
Oeseecg,  Andseng,  Snoppa,  Sigelugel,  Becta,  Osse,  Eswine,  Siedda,
Saherttis?

Of  these,  Aescwine  (Ercenwine)  is  named  as  the  first  king  of
Essex,  Ssebert  (Sigebert)  as  the  first  to  adopt  Christianity  in  604

'  Cursor,  minister  ?  oonf .  (rothio  thragjan,  onrrere,  and  in  OHG.  glosses  trikü,
drikil  (Tema),  prob,  the  ON.  thrieel,  thrall.

*  Ottarbonme  says  little,  and  that  beside  the  mark :  *  Woden  gennit  WaUlgeat^  a
qno  regum  Essexiae  prosapia  sampsit  originem  * ;  conf.  Mercia.


ANGLO-SAXON   GENEALOGIES.  1715

(Sax.  Chr.  29).  Then  the  name  of  Woden's  son  is  very  remark-
able :  Seaxnedt,  evid.  the  Saxnot  named  with  Thunar  and  Waodan
in  the  Abrenantiatio ;  in  OHG.  it  wonld  be  Sahs-n6z,  Saha-
kinoz.^  Oesecg  and  Andsecg  seem  to  be  related  in  meaning;
Bedeca  answers  to  the  OHG.  Patuhho  ;  Sweppa  is  Saxon.

MERCIA.— The  Sax.  Chr.  p.  33-4:  Penda  wa3S  Wybbing,
Wyhba  Grading,  Cry  da  Cynewalding,  Oynewald  Cnebbing,
Cnebha  Iceling,  Icel  Eomasring^  Eomcer  Angeltheo  wing,  AngeU
theow  Offing,  Offa  Waermunding,  Wcermund  Wihtlaeging,  WihtlcBg
W6dening.  At  p.  72  the  line  is  begun  dififerently,  and  carried
up  to  another  son  of  Wybba  :  Offa  waes  Dhincferthing,  Dhincferth
Eanwulfing,  Eanimilf  Osmoding,  Oemod  Eawing,  Eawa  Wybbing,
Wybba  Creoding,  Creoda  Cynewalding,  and  so  on  up  to  Woden.
In  Florence  566 :  Woden,  Withelgeatus,  Waga,  Wihtleagus,  Were-
mundiis,  Offa,  Angengeatus,  Eomerus,  Icelius,  Gnebba,  Cunewaldvs,
Oreoda  sive  Crida  primus  rex  Merciorum,  Wibba ;  p.  232,  with
slight  variations :  Penda,  qui  f uit  Wibbae,  q.  f.  Oridae,  .q.  f .
Ctinewaldi,  q.  f.  Onebbae,  q.  f.  Icelii,  q.  f.  Eome^'i,  q.  f.  Angengeati,
q.  f.  Offae,  q.  f.  Weromundi,  q.  f.  Wightleagi,  q.  f.  Wagae,  q.  f.
Wothelgeati,  q.  f.  Wodenu  In  the  App.  to  Nennius  (Gale  116)  :
Woden  genuit  Guedolgeat,  genuit  Oueagon,  g.  Quithlig,  g.  Queued-
mund,  g.  Ossa,  g.  Ot-igon,  g.  Earner,  g.  Pubba  ;  ipse  Pubba  habuit
ix  filios,  quorum  duo  mihi  notiores  sunt  quam  alii,  id  est,  Penda
et  Eaua.  In  Ralph  de  Diceto  p.  446  :  Offa  fuit  filius  Wingferd,
filii  Ganwlf,  f.  Osmod,  f .  Elpa,  f .  Wibba,  f.  Creada,  f .  Oynewald,  f .
Onibba,  f.  Ydl,  f.  Com,  f.  Angelreu,  f.  Offa,  f.  Wermund,  f.  Witlat,
f.  Woden.  In  Matth.  Westm.  p.  142 :  erat  enim  Offa  filius
Thinferthi,  q.  f.  Eadulfi,  q.  f.  Osulfi,  q.  f.  Eoppae,  q.  f.  Wibbae,
q.  f.  Creoddae,  q.  f.  Kinewoldi,  q.  f.  Onebbae,  q.  f.  Ithel,  q.  f.
Eomeri,  q.  f.  Angelthean,  q.  f.  Offae,  q.  f.  Wei-emundi,  q.  f.  With-
leig,  q.  f .  Wagon,  q.  f.  Frethegeath,  q.  f.  Wode^iu  In  Otterboume
p.  31 :  Woden  genuit  Feothulgeath,  qui  genuit  Va^a,  q.  g.
Wichebeg,  q.  g.  Vermundvm,  q.  g.  Offa,  q.  g.  Engeltheon,  q.  g.
Edomenim,  q.  g.  Icel,  q.  g.  Onibbam,  q.  g.  Kynewaldum,  q.  g.
Cridiam,  q.  g.  Bilbam,  q.  g.  Pendam  primum  regem  Merciorum.
Langhom  seems  to  draw  from  Florence:  Vitelgeia,  Vaga,  Vit-
legius,  Veremundus,  Offa  al.  Uffa,  Angongeta,  Eumerus,  Icelius,
Cnebba,  Cunevaldus,  Crida.

1  Conf.  the  Götting.  Anzeig.  '28,  p.  550.


1716  APPENDIX.

Langhorn^  Florence,  Matthew  and  Gale's  App.  insert  betw.
Woden  and  Wihtlasg  two  names  that  ai*e  wanting  in  Ralph
and  the  Chron.,  Wihtelgedt  (Prethegeat)  and  Waga  (Gaeagon).
As  Florence  pats  Angen-geat  for  Angel-theow,  his  VitheU
gedt  might  elsewh.  have  been  Vithel-theow,  but  Gale  too  has
OuedoUgeat.^  Angen  (Gale's  '  Origon '  is  a  misreading  of  Ongon)
is  unexceptionable,  and  Angentheow  answers  to  the  OHG.  name
Angandio,  perh.  to  ON.  Angant^r,  which  may  be  a  corrup.  of
Anganth^r;  the  pure  AS.  form  is  Ongren^Aeoti?,  Beow.  3931.  4770.
4945-6  7,  conf.  Incgentheow,  Trav.  Song  232.  Offa  (miscopied  Ossa),
which  occurs  twice  in  the  Mercian  line,  is  likewise  found  in  Beow.
3895.  3910.  Wihtlceg  seems  faultless.  Will.  Malmesb.  p.  17  has
Withlegius,  and  even  Ouithlig  in  Gale  confirms  the  short  se  or  e.
Yet  Ralph's  Witlat  agrees  better  with  the  ON.  Vigletus  in  Saxo
Gram.  59;  and  it  is  a  point  of  importance  to  our  whole  inquiry,
that  the  series  Vigletiis,  Vermundiis,  TJffo  of  the  Dan.  genealogy
(Saxo  Gr.  59 — 65)  ^  is  so  evid.  the  same  as  the  Mercian.  For
Gale's  'Pubba'  (AS.  \  for  p)  read  Wuhha,  TFt66a  =  OHG.  Wippo?

DEIRA,— Sax.  Chr.  p.  24 :  Mile  wses  Yffing,  Yffe  Uscfrea-
ing,  Uscfred  Wilgisling,  Wilgisl  Westerfalcning,  Westerfalcna
Saefugling,  Sctfugl  Saebalding,  Scebald  Sigege&ting,  Si^egedt
Swaefdaeging,  Swcefdceg  Sigeg&ring,  Sigegdr  Waegdseging,
Wcegdceg  Wödening,  Woden  Fridhowulfing.  Florence  p.  221 ;
JElla  fnit  filius  Iffi,  cujus  pater  Wiiscfrea,  c.  p.  WilgeUxis^  c.  p.
Westorwalena,  c.  p.  Seomelus,  c.  p.  Suearta,  c.  p.  Soepugelus,  c.  p.
Seabaldus,  c.  p.  Siggeotus,  c.  p.  Suebdegus,  c.  p.  Siggarus,  c.  p.
Weadegus,  c.  p.  Wodenus  ;  and  p.  566  with  a  few  variations  :  Wo»
denus,  Weagdegus,  Siggarus,  Suebdegus,  Siggeotus,  Seabaldu^,  Se-
fugelus,  Sueartha,  Seomelus,  Westerwalcna,  Wilgelsus,  Wnscjrea,
Iffus  dux,  JElla  primus  rex  Deirorum.  Ott^rbourne  p.  32  :  TFo-
den  genuit  Wegdam,  qui  genuit  Sigegarum,  q.  g.  Swealdegem,  q.  g.
Sigegeat,  q.  g.  Etabalem,  q.  g.  Stafugel,  q.  g.  Westerfaldueue,  q.  g.
WigiliSj  q.  g.  Ustfrea,  q.  g.  Uffe,  q.  g.  Ella  primum  regem  Sussex.*

>  May  we  connect  Wedelge&t,  Widhelge&t  with  the  national  name  Wedergedtat^
Beow.  2984.  3224.  4753?

^  The  Genealogia  mnica  in  Langebek  i.  32  has  Vithlek,  Vermund,  XJffi ;  that  at
i.  27  gives  Vithlef,  Vermund,  üß,

[3  On  the  line  of  Meroia,  to  which  0£fa  II  (757)  belongs,  see  Lappenb.  I,  223 ;
conf.  the  two  Offas  above  (p.  388)  —EHM.]

*  Some  other  writers  also  call  the  Deira  genealogy  the  Sussex ;  yet  Sussex  lie«
some  distance  from  Yorkshire.


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.  1717

Langhom :  Vegdegua,  Sigarus,  Suehdegvs,  Siggotus,  SebaldtLS,
Sefugehis,  Suaria^  Somelus,  Vestrofalenas,  Vilgidlus,  Buscreaa,
Tffius,  Alia.  Gale's  App.  mixes  up  the  Deira  line  with  the
Wessex :  Woden,  Beldeyg,  Brond,  Siggar,  Sibald,  Zegulfh,
Soemil,  Sguerthing,  OuilgiUj  Ulfrea,  Iffi,  Ulli.

As  the  Kentish  borrowed  some  names  from  horses^  so  does  this
from  birds^  Sce-fugel  and  Wester-falcna,  whom  the  Chronicle  makes
father  and  son,  bat  between  whom  the  other  lists  insert  two  more
links,  Seomel  and  Swearta  (or  Swearta  and  Seomel).  There  is
also  a  Sige-fugel  (al.  Sigewnlf)  in  the  Essex  lineage.  I  doubt
whether  Sea-fola  in  the  Trav.  Song  230  can  have  anything  to  do

with  this. The  mythic  Westerfalcna  has  perhaps  a  right  to  be

regarded  as  ancestor  of  the  Westphals,  for  the  old  form  of  that
national  name  was  Westfalah,  and  we  know  of  a  hero  in  the
Wessex  line  who  did  give  name  to  a  branch  of  the  nation.  See-
fugel  and  Sce-bald  have  their  first  syllable  in  common.  Sxooefdceg
resembles  the  ON.  Svipdagr,  Saem.  Ill  [Hrölfkr.  »ag.  c.  18—23],
Sinbdagerua,  Saxo  Gr.  9,  though  the/ and p  are  at  variance;  and
it  is  worth  noting  that  his  grandfather  too  is  Wceg-dceg,  and  the
head  of  the  Wessex  line  BceUdceg,  The  relation  of  Wcf^fj-dceg  to
the  Kentish  Weda  I  shall  discuss  by  and  by  in  elucidating  the
Norse  genealogy.

BERNICIA  or  Northumberland  has  its  first  two  descendants
of  Woden  in  common  with  Wessex. — Sax.  Chr.  p.  23  (yr.  547) :
'  her  Ida  feng  to  rice,  thonon  Nordhanhymbra  cynecyn  asrost
onw6c.  Ida  waes  Eopping,  Euppa,  Esing,  Esa  Inguing,  Ingui
Angenwiting,  Angenwit  Alocing,  Aloe  Beonocing,  Beonoc  Brand-
ing, Brand  Basldasging,  Bcellceg  Wodening.'  Florence  218  :  Ida
fuit  filius  Eoppae,  qui  fuit  Inqui,  q.  f.  Angenwit,  q.  f.  Aloe,  q.  f.
Benoc,  q.  f.  Brandi,  q.  f.  Bealdegi,  q.  f.  Wodeni;  but  with  varia-
tions and  additions  in  theprosapia  p.  566  :  Bealdeagus,  Brandius,
Beomus  (for  Benocusf),  Beorno,  Wegbrandus,  Ingebrandun,
Alusa,  Angengeat,  Ingengeat,  Aethelbrihtus,  Oesa,  Eoppa,  Ida
primus  rex  Bemiciorum.  Otterboume :  Woden,  Beider,  Brond,
Benoc,  Aloe,  Agmintus,  Inginus,  Ensa,  Bopa,  Ida.  Langhom:
Beldegus,  Brando,  Benocus,  Beoma,  Vegbrandv^,  Ingebrandus,
AlociAS,  Angongeta,  Ingongeta,  Aethelbertus,  Esa,  Eoppa,  Ida,
Bertram's  ed.  of  Nennius  gives  in  an  appendix :  Woden  genuit
Beldeg,  g.   \^Brand,  g.]   Beomec   [g.  Beorno'],  g.  Oethbrond  [g.


1718  APPENDIX.

Ingebrandufi],  g.  Alu807i,  g.  Inguef,  g.   [^[ngeageat,  gJ]  EdU^ith,

g.  Ossa,  g.  Eobba,  g.  Ida. Of  these  names^  Esa  seems  to  me

akin  to  ds,  pi.  es  (deas  divas)^  and  Ingui  is  the  ON.  Ingvi,  conf.
Ingunar  freyr  andBeow.  2638  fred  Ingwiiia,  2081  eodor  Ingwina.

WESSBX. — Sax.  Chr.  p.  24:  Cerdic  waes  CytiHces  fssder,
Oerdic  Elesing,  Elesa  Esling,  Esla  Gewising,  Oewis  Wiging,  Wuf
Fredwining,  Freawine  Fridhog&ring,  Fridhogar  Brandings  Brand
Baaldseging,  Bceldoeg  Wödening;  the  same  at  p.  95,  except  the
spelling  of  FridhugAr  and  Brond,  and  the  insertion  of  Creoda  be-
tween Cerdio  and  Cynrtc.  The  same  pedigree  stands  in  an  AS.
document  printed  at  the  beginning  of  the  AS.  Beda  of  1643,  p.  5,
and  in  Spelman's  Vita  Alfredi  1678,  p.  199,  except  that  the  latter
has  Winging  for  Wiging,  and  both  have  the  words  'Elesa
Esling,  Esla  Gewising '  on  the  margin,  not  in  the  text.  Asser  :
GynHcy  qui  fuit  Creoda,  q.  f.  Cerdic,  q.  f.  Elesa,  [q.  f.  Esla'],  q.  f.
Oewiss  a  quo  Britones  totam  illam  gentem  Qegwis  nominant,
[q.  f.  Wig,  q.  f.  Fraewine,  q.  f.  Freothegar],  q.  f.  Brond,  q.  f.  Beide,
q.  f.  Woden  ;  the  sentences  in  brackets  are  apparently  taken  from
Florence,  and  wanting  in  the  MS.  Ethelwerd  p.  842  :  Cynrie,
Cerdic,  Elesa,  Esla,  Oewis,  Wig,  Freaioine,  Frithogar,  Brand,
Balder,  Wotlien.  Florence  219 :  Cerdicius,  qui  fuit  Eslae,  q.  f.
Oewisii,  q.  f .  Wigae,  q.  f.  Freawini,  q.  f.  Frethegarii,  q.  f .  Brandii,
q.  f.  Bealdigi,  q.  f .  Wodeni  ;  again  at  p.  566  :  Bealdea^iis,  Bran-
dius,  FreodegariiLS,  Friawinus,  Wigga,  Qewisiua,  Esla,  Eliaius,
Cerdicitis  primus  rex  Westsaxonum,  Kenricus.  Simeon  of  Dnrh.
119  :  Cinric,  q.  f.  Creoda,  q.  f.  Cerdic,  q.  f.  Elesa,  q.  f.  Oewis,  a  quo
Britones  totam  illam  gentem  Oetvis  nominant,  q.  f.  Brand,  q.  f.
Beide,  q.  f.  Woden  [same  as  in  Asser],  Will.  Malmesb.  p.  41 :
Woden,  Beldegius,  Brand,  Fridegarius,  Frewinus,  Wigius,  Oitoius,
Eslius,  Elicius,  Cerdicius,  Creodingius,  Cinricius,  Ethelred
Rieval.  p.  350:  Woden,  Bealdceg,  Brand,  Freadgar,  Frewine,
Wig,  Oewis,  Eda,  Elesa,  Ceordic,  Creoda,  Chenric,  Otterboune:
Woden,  Bealdeath,  Brond,  Frectegar,  Freawinus,  Wicca,  Geisse,
Esla,  Flesa,  Ceredic.  Langhorn :  Beldegus,  Brando,  Fredegarus,
Frevinus,  Vigga,  Oeviscus,  Esla,  Elisius,  Cerdicus.

In  this  series  of  Westsaxon  names,  the  chief  stress  is  to  be
laid  on  Woden's  son  Bceldoeg  (Beldeg,  Beldig,  Beide  in  Asser
and  those  who  follow  him.  Balder  in  Ethelwerd),  evid.  the  Norse
Baldur  son  of  Odin;  Frea-wine  too  resembles  the  ON.   Freys


ANGLO-SAXON   GENEALOGIES.  1719

vinr,  still  more  Frowinua  in  Saxo  6r.  pp.  59,  60 ;  Ealaj  like  the
Northnmbrian  Esa,  may  come  from  ds,  6s.  Oewis  must  have
been  a  distinguished  hero  and  sovereign,  for  a  whole  race  to  be
named  after  him  ;  even  Beda  mentions  the  fact,  where  he  says  of
Cynegils,  a  successor  of  Cerdic,  3,  7 :  eo  tempore  gens  Occiden-
talium  Saxonum,  quae  antiquitus  Oevisse  vocabantur,  regnante
Cynegilso  fidem  Christi  suscepit  (yr  635) ;  and  again  of  Bp.
Byrinus  :  sed  Britanniam  perveniens,  ac  primum  Qeviaaorum  gen-
tem  ingrediens,  cum  omnes  ibidem  paganissimos  inveniret,  etc.

LINDESFARAN. — These  were  a  separate  race,  who  had
settled  in  a  small  island  off  the  Northumbrian  coast,  and
named  it  after  them  Lindesf arena- e&  (Beda,  3,  17.  4,  12.  Sax.
Chr.  ann.  780.  793),  otherw.  Hälig  eüand,  now  Holy  Island.
I  find  their  genealogy  in  Flor.  566  :  Woden,  Winta,  Cretta,
Quelpgilfus,  Ceadbed,  Bubba,  Beda,  Eanferthiis ;  another  edition
more  correctly  makes  the  fourth  name  Queldgils,  the  fifth  Caed-
baed,  and  adds  Biscop  after  Beda,  Eatta  and  Ealdfrith  after
Eanferth.  Bubba's  successor  was  prob,  called  Bedeca  or  Baduca
(like  one  of  the  Essex  line),  for  Eddii  vita  S.  Wilfridi  cap.  3
((jule  p.  45)  relates  of  the  Kentish  king  Erconbert  (d.  664)  :
Rex  secundum  petitionem  reginas,  ducem  nobilem  et  admirabilis
ingenii  quemdam  Biscop  Baduci7ig[myemeris  ad  sedem  apostolicam
properantem,  ut  in  suo  comitatu  esset  adquaesivit.  Biscop's
grandson  Eata  became  (Beda  4,  13)  one  of  the  first  bishops  of
Lindesfam ;  but  the  grandfather  himself,  to  judge  by  his  name,
must  have  held  the  same  sacred  office,  perhaps  elsewhere.

Woden's  Ancestry.

So  far  we  have  dealt  with  Woden's  descendants.  In  treating
of  his  ancestors,  we  shall  again  have  to  separate  the  purely
heathen  ones  from  those  that  were  added  after  the  Bible  genea-
logy became  known.

Some  accounts  reach  back  only  4  generations,  others  8  or  16,
stopping  either  at  Fridhuwulf,  Geat  or  Sce&f.  Generally  speak-
ing, Sce&f  is  the  oldest  heathen  name  in  any  of  the  pedigrees.


Woden.
Fridhuwald.
Frefiwine  (Fredläf).
Fridhuwulf.


Finn.

Godwulf  (Folcwald).

Ge&t.

Tadtwa.


1720  APPENDIX.


Beaw.

Sceldwa.

Heremdd  (Soeaf).
Itermon  (Heremod).


Hathra  (Itermdd).
Hwala  (Hathra).
Bed  wig  (Hwala).
Sce&i  (Hedwig).


The  Chronicle  p.  23  carries  the  Northambrian  lineage  fr.  Ida
up  to  Gedt :  Woden  Freodhol&fing,  Freodholdf  Pridhowulfing,
Fridhotmilf  Finning,  Finn  God  wolfing,  Oodwulf  Getting;  at  p.
24  (under  Deira),  Woden  is  called  Fridhowulfing  ;  at  p.  95  (under
Wessex)  the  line  is  given  more  fully  and  exactly :  Woden  Frid-
huwalding,  Fridhuwald  Fredwining,  Fredwine  Fridhuwulfing,
Fridhowulf  Finning,  Finn  Godwulfiug,  Oodwulf  Getting,  Gedt
Taetwaing,  Tcetwa  Beawing,  Beaw  Sceldwaing,  Sceldwa  Here-
möding,  Hei-emod  Itermoning,  Itermon  Hathraing,  Hathra
Hwalaing,  Hwala  Bedwiging,  Bedwig  Sce^fiug.  Nennius  p.  61
carries  the  Kentish  line  up  to  Geta :  Vuoden  filius  Frealof,  Fr.  f.
Fredulf,  Fr.  f.  Finn,  F.  f.  Foleguald,  F.  f.  Geta,  qui  ut  aiunt  filias
fuit  dei,  non  veii  nee  omnipotentis  dei,  sed  alicnjus  ex  idolis
eorum,  quem  ab  ipso  daemone  coecati,  more  gentili,  pro  deo
colebant.  Asser  p.  4  :  Woden,  qui  fuit  Frithowalde,  q.  f.  Freahf,
q.  f.  Frithuwulf,  q.  f.  Fingodwulf,  q.  f.  Geata,  quem  Getam
jamdudum  pagani  pro  deo  venerabantur ;  qui  Geata  fuit  C(Btta,
q.  f.  Beav,  q.  f.  Sceldwea,  q.  f.  Heremod,  q.  f.  Itemwd,  q.  f.  Hathra,
q.  f.  Huala,  q.  f.  Bedwig.  Ethelwerd  p.  842  :  Wothen,  Fritho-
wulf,  Frealaf,  Frithowlf,  Fin,  Godwulfe,  Geat,  Tetwa,  Beo,  ScyU,
8cef.  Florence  p.  218  (under  Northumbr.)  :  Wodenus,  qui  fnit
Frithelasi  (for  Frithelafi),  q.  f.  Finni,  q.  f.  Godulfi,  q.  f.  Oeatae;
but  on  p.  294  (under  Wessex) :  Wodeniis,  q.  f.  Fritheicaldi,  q.  f.
Frealafi,  q.  f.  Fritheulfi,  q.  f.  Finni,  q.  f.  Godulfi,  q.  f.  Gaetae,
quem  Getam  jamdudum  pagani  pro  deo  venerabantur,  q.  f.
Cedwae,  q.  f.  Beawae,  q.  f.  Sceldwii,  q.  f.  Heremodi,  q.  f.  Itermodi,
q.  f.  Hathri,  q.  f.  Walae,  q.  f.  Bedwigi.  So  the  Wessex  line  in
Simeon  Durh.  p.  119  :  Woden,  q.  f.  Frithuwald,  q.  f.  Frealaf,
q.  f.  Fridrenwulf,  q.  f.  Geta,  q.  f.  Oetwa,  q.  f.  Beaw,  q.  f.  Seldwa,
q.  f.  Heremod,  q.  f.  Itermod,  q.  f.  Hatra,  q.  f.  Wala,  q.  f.  Bedwig.
WilL  Malmesb.  p.  41  :  Wodenius  fuit  Fridewaldi,  Fridewaldns
Frelasii  (al.  Fridelafii),  Frelasius  Fimi,  Fimus  Godwini,  Godwwut
Gesii,  Gesius  Tectii,  Tectius  Beowini,  Beowinus  Sceldii,  Sceldius
Sceaf,     Sceaf   Heremodii,    Heremodius    Stermonii,    Stermonius


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.


1721


Hadrae^  Hadra  Goalae,  Ouala  Bedwegii,  Bedwegius  Stresaei.
Ethelred  Rieval.  p.  351 :  Woden,  q.  f.  Fredewald,  q.  f.  Freolof,
q.  f.  Frederewlf,  q.  f.  Fingondwlf,  q.  f.  Oeta,  q.  f.  Gearwa,  q.  f.
Beu,  q.  f.  Celdwa,  q.  f.  Heremod,  q.  f.  Itermod,  q.  f.  Hathra,  q.  f.
Wala,  q.  f.  Beadwig.  Henry  Huntingfd.  p.  310  (under  Kent)  :
Woden,  filii  Frealof,  f.  Fredulf,  f.  JPVn,  f.  Flocwald,  f.  Je^a,  quem
dixemnt  filiam  dei,  scilicet  alicnjas  idoli.  Ralph  (under  Wessex)
p.  529*:  Woden,  q.  f.  Frederewald,  q.  f.  Freolf,  q.  f .  Fredewlf,  q.  f.
Fringoldxolf,  q.  f.  (7e^a,  q.  f.  Oeatwa^  q.  f.  Beti,  q.  f.  Scsldwa,  q.  f.
H&remod,  q.  f .  Itermod,  q.  f.  Bathka,  q.  f.  WaZa,  q.  f.  Beadurig.
John  Wallingrf.  p.  535  :  Ovodden,  q.  f .  Frithewald,  q.  f.  Frealaf,
q.  f.  Frethewlf,  q.  f .  Fingoldwlf,  q.  f.  Qeata,  quern  Geattam  pagani
jamdudum  pro  deo  venerabantur,  q.  f.  Cetirwa,  q.  f.  Bean,  q.  f.
Celdeioa,  q.  f.  Heremod,  q.  f.  Idermod,  q.  f.  Hathra,  q.  f.  TFa/a,
q.  f.  Beadicing.  Alberic  p.  186 :  Woden  iste  fuit  filius  Frühe-
waldi,  qui  Frelasii,  q.  Finnii,  q.  Oodpulfi,  q.  Oethii,  q.  Rethlii,  q.
Bedvii,  q.  Sceldii,  q.  Sceaf,  q.  Heremodii,  q.  Owale,  q.  Bedwegii,
q.  Steresii.  Matth.  Westm.  p.  142  (under  Mercia) :  FFoden  fuit
filius  Fretheivold,  q.  f.  Freolaf,  q.  f.  Frithewlf,  q.  f.  Godwlf,  q.  f .
Oetae,  q.  f.  Cethwae,  q.  f.  Beau,  q.  f.  Seldv^e,  q.  f.  Heremod,  q.  f.
Itermod,  q.  f.  Hathrae,  q.  f.  Walae,  q.  f.  Bedwi ;  but  p.  166
(under  Wessex) :  Wodenus  fuit  filius  Fretheivold,  q.  f.  Freolaf,
q.  f.  Frethwlf,  q.  f.  Finni,  q.  f.  Godiilfi,  q.  f.  Oetas,  q.  f.  Teathmi,
q.  f.  JBeau,  q.  f.  SeJduae,  q.  f.  Sea/,  q.  f.  Heremod,  q.  f.  Itermod,
q.  f.  Hathrae,  q.  f.  TFaZae,  q.  f.  Bedvii.  Otterbourne  (under
Kent) :  TTTocfe^i,  Frederwald,  Freolf,  Fredwold,  Fyngoldwelth,  Oeta,
Oeiwa,  Beir,  Sceldwa,  Herecude,  Etermode,  Athra,  Wala,  Bedwich,
The  three  generations  immed.  before  Woden  exhibit  a  number
of  variations,  which  I  will  bring  under  one  view :


Chron.  (Wess.)

:  Fridhuwald

FreÄwine

Fridhuwulf

Asser :

Frithowald

Frealaf

Frithuwulf

Ethel  werd :

Frithowald

Frealaf

Frithowulf

Flor.  (Wess.) :

Frithewald

Frealaf

Fritheulf

Simeon :

Frithuwald

Frealaf

Fridrenwulf

John:

Frethewald

Frealaf

Frethewlf

Ethelred :

Frethewald

Freolof

Frederewlf

Ralph:

Frederewald

Freolf

Fredewlf

Matthew :

Fredewold

Freolaf

Frithewlf

1722  APPENDIX.

Fredwine  rests  then  on  the  single  auth.  of  the  Chron.,  and  even
there  some  MSS.  have  Frealafing,  Frealaf.  In  the  following,
there  is  one  link  wanting  :


Chron.  (Northnmb.)

:      ....              Preodholaf

Fridhowulf

Nennius :

....               Frealof

Fredulf

William  :

Fridewald           Frealaf

•  •  .  •

Henry :

....              Frealof

Fredulf

Alberic :

Frithewaldus       Frelasius

....

And  some  have  only  one  name  to  shew  :

Chron.  (Deira)

....

Fridhowulf

Plor.  (Northnmb.)

....               Frithalaf

....

But  as  some  retain  one  name  and  some  another,  it  is  plain
that  the  Wessex  genealogy  of  the  Chronicle  is  the  complete  and
correct  thing.  Fredwine  and  Frealaf  may  be  regarded  as  identical;
no  matter  that  Freawine  occurs  again  in  the  descending  series  of
the  Wessex  line,  for  certain  names  often  repeat  themselves.  If
we  accept  the  Frithalaf  of  Florence  [and  Freodholaf  in  the  Chron.
under  Northnmb.],  we  have  then  Fridho-wM,  FridhoAkt,  Fridho-
wulf in  immed.  succession.^

Finn  and  Oodwiilf  are  thrown  into  one  as  Fingodwulf  in  Asser,
Fingondwlf  in  Ethelred,  Fingoldwlf  in  John,  Fringoldwlf  in
Ralph  [Fyngoldwelth  m  Otterb.].  Both  are  wanting  in  Simeon,
Finn  in  Matthew,  Godwulf  in  Nennius  and  Henry.  Instead  of
Godwulf,  Nennius  gives  a  Foleguald  (Folcwald),  Henry  Flocwald
and  William  Oodwine.

Gedt  (Geata,  Geta,  Jeta,  Gesius)  is  present  in  all.

Tcetva,  Tetwa,  Tectius  appears  also  as  Caatwa,  Cetwa,  Cethwa,
Cedwa,  Cetirwa,  and  Getwa,  Geatwa,  Gearwa,  ßethlius.

Beav,  Beaw,  Beau,  Beawa,  Ben,  Beo,  Beowinus,  Bedvius,  Beir.

Sceldva,  Sceldwa,  Scyld,  Sceldwius,  Sceldius,  Seldwa,  Seldua,
Celdwa,  Celdewa.

Heremod  remains  unaltered  wherever  it  occurs,  except  that
Otterb.  has  Herecude ;  but  it  is  wanting  in  Ethel  word.

liermon,  Itermod,  Idermod,  Etermode,  Stermon;  wanting  in
Ethelw.

^  [FrilSleil  suggests  the  *  jomfrae  Fridlefsborg '  in  the  Dan.  song  of  Toid  af
Hafsgaard,  where  the  Swed.  has  '  jnngfra  Froijenborg»* — EHM.J


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.  1723

Haihra,  Hadra^  Hatra^  Athra,  Hathrus,  Bathka ;  wanting  in
Ethelw.

Hvala,  Huala,  Wala,  Guala ;  wanting  in  Ethelw.

Bedvig,  Bedwig,  Bedwi^  Beadwig,  Bedwigus,  Bedwegius,  Bed-
wing,  Bedwid ;  wanting  in  Ethelw.

Scedf,  Scef,  Seaf  is  not  found  in  Asser  or  Florence  or  any
writers  that  follow  these  two,  bat  only  in  the  Sax.  Chr.  and
four  other  authorities  (Ethelwerd,  Alberic,  Will.  Malraesb.  and
Matth.  Westm.) ;  and  even  here  with  the  important  distinction,
that  whereas  the  Chron.  puts  him  at  the  very  end,  as  father  of
Bedwig,  the  other  four  bring  him  in  near  the  middle,  as  father
of  Sceldwa  and  son  of  Heremöd.

Among  the  names  are  a  few  of  more  than  common  interest.

Fin  is  spoken  of  in  the  Trav.  Song  58  as  ruler  of  the  Frisians  :
'  Fin  Folcwalding  weold  Fresna  cynne,'  which  confirms  the
statement  of  Nennius  that  his  father's  name  was  Folcwald  (or
Folcwalda).  Again,  Fin  appears  in  Beow.  2129-55-86.  2286,
and  still  as  Folcwaldan  siinu  2172;  so  that  the  Kentish  genea-
logy had  preserved  his  name  more  truly  than  the  others.
Observe  too,  that  it  is  side  by  side  with  Fin  that  Beow.  2159-86.
2248  introduces  Hengest,  a  great  name  with  the  [Kentishmen ;
must  not  they  have  been  a  Frisian  rather  than  a  Jutish  race  ?

Fin's  grandfather,  Folcwald's  father,  Qedt,  was  worshipped  as
a  god;  this  is  expressly  affirmed  by  many  chroniclers,  while
Woden's  divinity  is  passed  over  in  silence.  We  come  across
Gedt  in  Beow.  3567-82,  and  if  not  in  the  Trav.  Song,  yet  in
another  AS.  lay  (Conybeare  241)  :  'Qedtes  frige  wurden  grund-
lease.'  The  Sax.  Chr.  and  Ethelwerd  make  no  mention  of  his
godhood.  Nennius  and  his  transcriber  Henry  Huntgdn  designate
him  the  son  of  a  god,  '  filius  dei,  ^  non  veri,  etc. ' ;  with  him
they  close  the  Kentish  pedigree,  and  do  not  name  his  father.
But  Asser  and  those  who  follow  him,  notably  Florence,  Balph
and  John,  say  of  Oeta  himself  '  quem  dudum  pagani  pro  deo
venerabantur,'  and  then  add  the  names  of  his  father  (Cetwa)  and
ancestors.  At  the  same  time  they  refer,  absurdly  enough,  to  a
passage  in  Sedulius  (Carmen  paschale  1,  19.  ed.  Arevali.  Bomae
1 794,  p.  155),  which  speaks  of  the  '  boatus  ridiculus  Getae,'  or  as

^  In  myths  the  ion  of  a  god  seemB  often  ident.  with  the  god  himself,  conf.
TaoitoB  abont  Taisoo  and  Mannns.


1724  APPENDIX.

Sedalius  says  in  prose  '  ridicali  Oetae  comica  foeditate/  evid.  a
character  in  a  play  of  the  Old  Comedy.  That  the  AS.  Oeai  or
Get  was  from  the  earliest  times,  long  before  the  migration  to
Britain,  regarded  as  a  god,  will  be  proved  presently  by  a  Gothic
genealogy,  which  quite  correctly  names  him  Oaut^  as  in  0H6.
he  would  be  ßoz  or  Koz.  In  the  Grimnismäl  (Ssdm.  47'*,  conL
Sn.  24.  195)  Oautt  is  the  name  that  Odhinn  bears  among  the
gods  themselves.

Tcetwa  is  prob,  to  be  expl.  by  an  adj.  test,  lost  in  AS.  bat
extant  in  ON.  teitr,  OKG.  zeiz,  meaning  laetos,  hilaris,  placidos.^
Both  Teitr  and  Zeiz,  Zeizo  were  in  nse  as  men's  names,  bat  the
great  thing  is  that  Odhinn  himself  is  called  Herteitr  in  the  Edda,
Sasm.  46^.  Tastwa  might  bear  the  sense  of  namen  placidam,
benig^um,  the  '  gehiure.'

The  next  three  names,  in  the  order  Beaw,  Sceldwa,  Scedf,  give
us  a  clear  insight  into  the  intimate  connexion  betw.  these  genea-
logies and  the  ancient  poetry  of  the  people.  Beaw,  Beo,  Beu  is
no  other  than  the  elder  Beowulf  who  appears  at  the  very  begian.
of  the  epic  of  Beowulf,  and  is  called  at  1.  37  Scyldes  eafera  (off-
spring), at  1. 16  Scylding  (S.'s  son),  and  who  must  be  distinguished
from  the  younger  Beowulf,  the  subject  of  the  poem.  Beo  stands
in  the  same  relation  to  Beowulf  as  the  simple  form  of  a  name

does  to  the  compound  in  so  many  cases.' Scyld  (Beow.  51}

resembles  the  mythic  Skiold  king  of  Danes  (Saxo  Gr.  5),  and
Skiöldr  the  Skän&nga  godh  (p.  161);  Skioldr  in  the  Edda  is
OSin's  son  (Sn.  146.  193),  from  whom  descend  the  Skioldungar
(Sasm.  114-5),  AS.  Scyldingas.  The  termin.  -tua,  which  makes
Sceldwa  a  weak  noun,  is  also  seen  in  TsBtwa  as  compared  with
Teitr  and  Zeiz,  and  arises  out  of  the  third  decl.,  to  which  skioldr
=  shield  (gen.  skialdar,  dat.  skildi)  belongs,  implying  a  Goth.

skildus  with  gen.  pi.  skildive. ^In  Beow.  7  Scyld  is  expresslj

called  a  Scefing,  son  of  Scedf.  About  this  Sce&f  the  AS.
chroniclers  have  preserved  a  remarkable  tradition  with  which
his  very  name  is  interwoven  (sce&f,  sheaf,  OHG.  scoup,  scoubis],
and  which  is  still  current  in  the  districts  whence  the  Saxons
migrated.     As  far  as  I  know,  Ethelwerd  is  the  first  who  alludes

1  Laetns  is  perh.  for  daetns  (Goth,  tatia)»  as  lingna,  leTir,  lantia  for  dingna,  de^
dantia.

*  So  Wolf  means  the  same  as  Wolfgang,  Begin  or  Begino  as  Beginhart,  Dieto  is
Dietrich,  Linba  as  Liebgart.    Hence  Beowulf  and  Beowine  mean  one  thing.


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.  1725

to  it,  and  that  precisely  in  tracing  up  the  Westsaxon  lineage,
p.  842 :  *  ipse  Scef  cam  nno  dromone  advectus  est  in  insula
oceani,  quae  dicitur  Scani,  armis  circundatus,  eratque  valde  recens
puer,  et  ab  incolis  illius  terrae  ignotns,  attamen  ab  eis  suscipitur,
et  ut  familiärem  diligenti  animo  eam  custodierunt,  et  post  in
regem  eligunt/  Then,  with  some  variations,  Will.  Malmesb.
p.  41:  'iste  (Sce&f),  ut  quidam  ferunty  in  quamdam  insulam
Germaniae  Scamphtam  (al.  Scandeam),  de  qua  Jordanes  historic :
graphus  Gothorum  loquitur,  appulsus  navi  sine  remige  puerulus,
posito  ad  caput  frumenti  manipulo,  dormiens,  ideoque  8ceaf  est
nuncupatus,  et  ab  hominibus  regionis  illius  pro  miraculo  exceptus
et  sedulo  nutritus,  adulta  aetate  regnavit  in  oppido  quod  turn
Slaswich,  nunc  vero  Eitheisi  (al.  Hurtheby)  ^  appellatur ;  est
autem  regio  ilia  Anglia  Yetus  dicta,  unde  Angli  venerunt  in
Britanniam^  inter  Saxones  et  Giothos  constituta.'  And,  in  almost
the  same  words,  Alberic  and  Matth.  Westm. ;  the  former  says  ;
'  in  Scania  insula  quae  est  in  Dania,'  and  again  *  Sleswyk,  quod
Hartebi  dicitur.'  Matthew  :  '  in  quandam  insulam  Germaniae,
Scandalin  nomine ' ;  adding  after  manipulo  :  '  quem  patria  lingua

seaf  (1.  sceaf )  dicimus,  Gallice  vero  garbam.' An  unknown  boy,

in  a  ship  without  oars  (RA.  701),  sleeping  with  his  head  on  a
corn-sheaf,  lands  in  Angeln,  is  received  as  a  miracle  by  the
inhabitants,  is  brought  up,  and  made  their  king :  he  and  his
race  must  therefore  have  appeared  of  sacred  and  divine  origin.
This  legend,  no  doubt,  is  touched  upon  in  the  obscure  opening  of
the  Beowulf,  though  the  incident  is  there  transferred  to  Scyld
the  son  of  Sceaf;  his  sleeping  on  a  sheaf  of  com  is  not  men-
tioned, any  more  than  it  is  by  Ethelwerd,  whose  '  armis  circun-
datus' is  more  in  accord  with  Beow.  72 — 81.  93-4-5.  The
difficult  word  umbor-wesende  can  hardly  mean  anything  but
'  recens  natus.'  *  The  Trav.  Song  64  speaks  of  a  Scedfa  as  lord
of  the  Lombards.  Tales  of  strange  heroes  arriving  asleep  in
their  ships  must  have  been  early  diffused  in  Germany.'

'  Bead  Haithabyf  ON.  Heidhabiery  Heidhaboe,  a  bp*8  see  in  S.  Jutland  [Schles-
wig] .  Ethelwerd  p.  833 :  Anglia  Yetas  sita  est  inter  Saxones  et  Giotos,  habens
oppidnm  capitale  qnod  sermone  Saxonioo  SUswie  nononpator,  seoondam  Tero
DanoB  Haithaby.

*  The  acA.  masc.  like  a  nom.  may  perh.  be  justified,  else  we  must  emend  it  to
wesendne.  A  new  passage  in  Kemble  p.  258:  *umbor  ycelS  )>A  aor  adl  nimeiS.'  may
mean  *  fuwa  prolet  addit  (restituit)  quos  morbus  aufert.'

*  The  swan-knight,  alone  and  culeep^  his  head  reclined  on  his  shield,  arriTes  in

VOL.   IV.  O  O


1726  APPENDIX.

But  the  divine  repnte  in  which  Sce&f  and  Scyld  were  held  is
farther  enhanced  by  one  or  the  other  being  likewise  a  son  of
EeremSd,  a  simple  hero  in  Beow.  1795.  3417,  but  a  distinctly
divine  being  in  the  Norse  mythology.  HermöiSr  in  the  Edda
is  a  son  of  OSinn,  the  AS.  Heremod  of  Itermon.  Iterman  (with
long  i)  can  be  expl.  by  a  lost  adj.  Itor,  Itör,  signifying  like  ON.
ifcr  praeclaras,  eximias ;  therefore,  vir  eximins.  Ittermann  is  still
a  family  name  in  Westphalia.

To  Hathra  I  shall  return  further  on ;  of  Hwala  and  Bedwig  I
have  nothing  particular  to  say.

It  remains  to  be  told  in  what  way  the  chroniclers  tried  to
bring  these  nafcive  gods  and  heroes  into  line  with  the  earliest
generations  handed  down  by  Holy  Writ.

The  Sax.  Chr.  p.  96,  after  'Bedwig  Scedfing,'  inserts  in
brackets,  as  not  found  in  all  the  MSS. :  '  id  est  filius  Noe,  se
W89S  geboren  on  J^aere  aaroe  Noe,^  Lamech,  Maiuaalem^  Enoh,
Jared,  Malalahel,  Camion^  Enoa,  8eth,  Adam  primus  homo  et
pater  noster,  id  est  Christus,  Amen.'  Asser,  who  knows  nothing
of  Sce&f,  gives  his  place  to  Shem,  and  brings  the  two  lines  to
touch  as  follows :  '  Bedwig,  qui  fuit  8em,  q.  f.  Noe,  q.  f.  Latnech,
q.  f.  Mathusalem,  q.  f.  Enoch  [q.  f.  Jared],  q.  f.  MaJaleel,  q.  f.
Cainan,  q.  t  Eno8,  q.  f.  8eth,  q.  f .  Adam.'  The  same  in  Florence
p.  294,  except  that  Seth  is  pat  for  Sem,  and  another  8eth  comes
after  Enos.  Simeon,  Ethelred  and  Matthew,  like  Asser;  bnt
Will.  Malmesb.  p.  41  has  a  way  of  his  own :  '  Guala  Bedwegii,
Bedwegius  8tre8aei,  hie,  ut  dicitur,  fuit  filius  Noae,'  and  the  Une
goes  no  further.  Is  Stresaeus  [Alberic's  Steresias]  a  corrap.  of
Scefius  ?  A  totally  different  harmony  [of  heathen  with  Hebrew],
one  that  does  not  touch  the  AS.  lines,  is  propounded  by  Nennius
p.  54.

Now  to  sum  up  the  gains  accruing  from  these  genealogies
to  our  German  Antiquity.  Names  of  gods  they  off'er,  in  addition
to  Woden:  Oedt,  Bceldceg,  Seaxnedt,  Heremod,  perhaps  Tceiwa.
National  names  are  treasured  up  in  Oewis,  WesterfcUcna,  and  no

Brabant  by  ship^  deliTera  the  land,  and  becomes  its  ruler,  Conrad  of  Wörzb.'s
poem  116—122.    Lobepgrin  p.  19.  Parz.  824,  27.  626,  24.    Here  the  old  Fivikiflb,
Frisian  and  Saxon  traditions  seem  to  harmonize  [Vishna  also  »Uep*  on  the  serpent
in  the  sea,— EBM.].
*  Is  there  an  intended  allaaion  to  the  boy  sailing  in  the  oarless  ship  ?


ANGLO-SAXON   GENEALOGIES.  1727

doabt  in  Saxnedt  himself.  Part  and  parcel  of  our  Hero-legend
are,  ao  far  as  we  can  still  descry,  Scyld,  Seed/,  Beaw;  many  links
are  doabtless  lost,  bat  the  solidarity  with  the  Beowulf  Lay  and
the  Traveller's  Song  is  in  its  full  significance  not  to  be  over-
looked. No  less  important  seems  the  agreement  of  a  string  of
names  in  the  Mercian  line  with  statements  of  Sax:o  Grammaticus.
And  in  some  names  that  stand  side  by  side,  we  may  detect  traces
of  Alliteration,  revealing  the  wrecks  of  heathen  poems  of  a  long
past  age,  e.g.  Hengest  and  Horsa,  Scyld  and  Scedf,^  Fin  and
Folcwald,  Freodhowald  and  Fredwine.

Part  of  the  Saxon  pedigrees  we  have  been  examining  had
found  their  way,  not  later  than  the  13th  cent.,  to  Scandinavia,
viz.  the  series  from  Woden  back  to  Bedwig  and  perhaps  one
generation  more,  and  also  forwards  to  three  sons  of  W6den  and
their  descendants.  That  the  names  were  borrowed  is  plain  from
the  way  Snorri  (in  the  Form&li  to  his  Bdda  p.  15)  preserves  their
Saxon  forms,  and  adds  to  many  of  them  'whom  we  call  so-and-so.'
Bedwig's  father  is  here  given  as  Cesplieth  (al.  Sefsmeg,  Sesep,
Sescef),  which  may  be  the  Saxon  Scef  in  disguise;  then:  'hans
son  Bedvig,  hans  son  Atra  er  ver  köllum  AnnaUy  h.  s.  Itrmann,
h.  8.  Biaf  er  ver  köllum  Biar,  h.  s.  Jat,  h.  s.  Gudolfr,  [h.  s.
Finnr,']  h.  s.  Fiarleif  (al.  Frialaf  r)  er  ver  köllum  Fridkleif,  hann
ätti  thann  son,  er  nefndr  er  (is  named)  Vodhinn,  thann  köllum
ver  Odhinn;  kona  (wife)  hans  hot  Frigidha  er  ver  köllum  Frigg.

It  goes  on  to  say,  that  Odhinn  had  three  sons,  Vegdeg,  Beldeg,
Sigi.  1)  Vegdeg  (al.  Veggdegg,  Vegdreg)  rules  over  East  8  cur  one ;
his  son  was  called  Vitrgils,  and  had  two  sons,  Ritta  (al.  Picta,
evid.  Witta,  Wicta)  the  father  of  Heingest,  and  Sigarr  the  father
of  Svebdegg  er  ver  köllum  Svipdag.  2)  Beldeg  er  v.  k.  Baldr,
rules  over  Vestfal ;  his  son  is  Brandr,  his  son  Friodhigar  er  v.  k.
Frodha,  his  son  Freovit  (al.  Freovin),  his  son  Yvigg,  his  son
Oevis  er  v.  k.  Oave.  3)  Sigi  (al.  Siggi)  has  a  son  Vei-ir  (al.  Rerir);
from  them  are  descended  the  Völsüngar  that  rule  Franken.

But  at  the  back  of  all  this  Saxon  genealogy  Snorri  places
another,  which  interweaves  Greek  names,  and  has  nothing  in
common  with  the  AS.  accounts.  Munnon  or  Mennon,  a  king
in  Xroia,  marries  a  daughter  of  Priam,  and  has  a  son  Tror,  thann
köllum  ver  Thor,^  He  marries  a  wise  woman  named  Sibil
[*  EgilBum  sub  V.  >rör= Odin  and  Thor.— EHM.]


1728  APPENDIX.

(Sibylla)  er  ver  köUum  Sif,  their  son  is  called  Loride,  his  sod
Henrede,  his  Vingethor,  his  Vingener,  his  Moda,  his  Magi,  his
Cespheth,  the  link  that  joins  this  line  to  the  Saxon.^

Similar  and  more  lengthened  pedigrees,  which  add  Hebrew  to
Greek  and  Latin  names,  are  fonnd  in  the  piece  called  Fr&  Porn-
joti  ok  hans  aettmönnum,  in  the  so-called  Langfedga-tal  (Lange-
bek  1,  2),  and  at  the  beginning  of  one  MS.  of  the  Sverris  saga
<Heiraskr.  th,  4).

In  Fomaldar-sögur  2,  13  we  find  the  following  list:  Adam,
Seth,  Eno8,  Kaynan,  Malaleel,  Phareth,  Enoch,  Mathu^alemj
Lamech,  Nov,  Japhet,  Japhan,  Zechim,  Oiprus,  Cretus  edha  Telius
(Coölius),  Saturnus,  Jupiter,  Darius,  Erithonius,  Troes,  Uus,
Lamidon,  Priamus,  Mvnnon  edha  Memnon,  Trorr  er  ver  koUam
Thor,  Löritha  er  v.  k.  Hloridha,  Eredel  er  v.  k.  Eindridka,
Vingithdr,  Vin^inerr,  Modhi,  Magi  er  v.  k.  Magna,  Sexeph,
Bedhuis,  Atra,  Trinan,  Skialdin  er  v.  k.  Skiold,  Beaf  er  v.  k.  Biar,
Oodholfr,  Burri  er  v.  k.  Finn,  Frialafr  er  v.  k.  Bars,  Vodhen  er
V.  k.  Odhinn,  hann  var  Tyrkja  konüngr,  hans  son  Skwldr,  h.  s.
Fridhleifr,  h.  s.  Fridhfrddhi,  h.  s.  Herleifr,  h.  s.  Havardr,  and  so
on  down  to  Haraldr  hinn  h&rfagri  (fair-haired).

In  Langfedga-tal :  Noa,  Japhet,  Japhans,  Zeehim,  Ciprus,
Celius,  Saturnus,  Jupiter,  Darius,  Erichonius,  Troes,  Plus,  Lame-
don,  Priamus,  Priam's  daughter  Troana  marries  Memnon,  whose
son  is  Tror  er  v.  k.  Thor;  then  follow  Hloridhi,  Einridi,  Via-
gethor,  Vingener,  Moda,  Magi,  Seskef,  Bedvig,  Athra,  Hermann,
Heremotr,  Scealdna,  Beaf,  Eat,  Oodulfi,  Finn,  Frealaf^  Voden,
thann  köUum  yer  Oden,  fra  honam  ero  komnar  flestar  konunga
aettir  (most  kings'  races)  i  nordalfuna  heimsins.^

At  the  beginn,  of  Sverris  s.  fPornra.  sog.  8,  2]  :  Adam,  Sethj
Eno8,  Kain,  Malaleel,  Pharet,  Enoch,  Matusalem,  Lamech,  Naif
Japhet,  Japhen,  Zethim,  Ohypris,  Chretis,  Oheli^,  Saturn,  Jupiter^
Dardan,  Ericlionius,  Erea^,  Ilvs,  Lamidon,  Priamus;  Thor,  Jorekr,
Eredeir,  Vingithor,  Vinginer,  Modi,  Magni,  Sesep,  Bedvig,  Attras,
Trinam,  Hermodr,  Skioldr,  Biar,  Qodolfr,  Finnr,  Frialafr,  Odin,
Sigi,  Rerer,  VoUungr,  Sigmundr,  Sigurdr,  Fafnis-bani.

In  looking  over  this  Norse  genealogy,  we  see  that  its  resem-
blance to  the  AS.  ascending  series  ends  with  Bedvig,  or  at  most

[»  Conf.  F.  Magnusen's  Lex.  Myth.  653-4.— EHM.]

*  This  sentence  soands  exactly  like  that  in  Beda  and  the  Sax.  Chr.  (ander  Kent).


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.  1729

with  Sesep,  Seskef,  Cespheth^  which  may  conceal  Sceaf,  Seaf ;
the  older  names  have  nothing  Saxon  about  them.  First  come
a  few  that  have  a  well-defined  position  in  the  ON.  theogony:
Magni,  Modi,  Vingnir,  Vingithor,  Einridi,  Hldridi,  Thor,  all  the
immediate  kindred  of  Thdr,  who  never  once  appears  in  the  AS.
pedigrees.  The  way  they  are  introduced  here  is  rather  remark-
able. First  Thor  himself^  whom  all  the  authorities  on  Norse
mythology  invariably  treat  as  Odin's  son,  is  hero  given  out  for
his  forefather,  and  one  removed  from  him  by  16  or  17  genera-
tions. Then  these  intermediate  links  are  brought  together
curiously  enough.  In  the  Edda,  Hlorridhi  is  a  mere  surname
of  Thdr,  not  a  separate  person.  Eindridhi  (Byndridhi)  is  another
Eddie  name  for  Thdr  (Thorlac.  Observ.  6,  26),  and  the  same  holds
good  of  Vingthorr,  sonr  Sidhgrana  (Saem.  48,  80).  Vingnir  does
occur  sometimes  as  the  name  of  a  giant  (Thorl.  Obs.  6,  25),  but
Modhi  and  Magni  are  Thorns  two  sons,  and  therefore  brothers
(Sn.  76).  I  do  not  mean  to  assert  that  the  author  of  the
pedigree  wilfully  perverted  these  by-names  and  brothers  into  de-
scendants ;  a  confusion  in  the  popular  tradition  itself  may  account
for  it.  And  the  tacking  on  to  Greek  gods  and  heroes  was
natural  enough  at  a  time  when  we  Germans  too  were  tracing  our
Franks  and  Saxons  to  Ascanius  and  Alexander.  From  the
Greek  to  the  Biblical  genealogy  was,  to  be  sure,  as  great  a  leap
as  that  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  straight  to  Noah.

More  important  to  our  inquiry  is  that  part  of  the  ON.  pedigree
which  mainly  agrees  with  the  AS.,  but  differs  in  details.  Atra
is  rendered  by  the  ON.  Annarr,  for  which  the  AS.  would  strictly
be  Odher,  and  that  stands  some  distance  from  the  Hathra  of  the
AS.  record.  Biaf,  Biav  (Beaw)  is  not  far  from  Biafr,  Biar,  and
can  hardly  be  the  Norse  Biörr.  Idt,  Eat  is  not  glossed  by  any
Norse  name ;  would  it  be  Qautr  ?  lotr  ?

But  what  deserves  the  most  attention  is  the  different  account
given  of  Woden's  Posterity.  Here,  as  in  Will.  Malmesb.  (see
just  before  Kent),  only  three  sons  are  given  him,  Vegdeg,  Beldeg,
Sigi ;  the  first  two  agree  with  those  in  Will.  M.,  but  Sigi  has
nothing  to  do  with  his  Wihtlceg.  The  account  of  the  countries
they  ruled  would  of  course  be  totally  different  from  his.  His
Weldeg,  Wihtleg  and  Beldeg  were  forefathers  of  the  families  that
afterwards  governed  Kent,  Mercia  and  Wessex;  but  the  Formali


1730  APPENDS.

of  the  Edda  is  appar.  indicating  their  ancient  seats  before  the
migration :  to  Vegdeg's  line  is  attrib.  East  Saxony,  to  Beldeg^s
Westphalia,  to  Sigi's  Franconia,  Woden's  immediate  descen-
dants were  Wecta,  Witta,  Wihtgils ;  those  of  Odhin  are  likewise
Vegdeg,  Vitrgils,  Victa  (the  last  two  merely  changing  places) ;
bat  from  that  point  the  two  lists  differ.  Without  once  naming
Horsa^  the  Norse  genealogist  gives  Victa  two  sons,  Heingest  whose
line  is  carried  no  further^  and  Sigarr  whose  son  is  Svebdeg,  ON.
Svipdagr}  Bat  this  lands  us  in  the  line  of  Deira,  which^  after
Woden  and  Waegdaeg,  has  Sigegar,  SwoefcUeg.  And  we  now
become  aware  that  Wecta  of  Kent  is  no  other  than  Wcegdceg  of
Deira^  that  the  two  lines  were  at  first  one^  like  those  of  Bemicia
and  Wessez,  and  that  we  can  no  longer  coant  seven,  bat  only

six  sons  of  Woden.     So  much  for  Vegdeg  and  his  line. In  the

second  line,  Beldeg  is  expressly  identified  with  Baldr;  his  de-
scendants are  named  to  the  fifth  generation,  and  agree  with  the
Wessez  line,  except  that  Freodogar  is  said  to   be    the    Norse

Frodhi,  that  Wig  is  called  Yvigg,  and  Oevis  Oaue. The  third

line  is  altogether  new  and  unknown  to  the  Anglo-Saxons,  starting
with  a  son  of  Odhin  named  Sigi,  from  whom  come  Rerir  and  the
Völsftngar,  rulers  of  the  Franks.  This  agrees  with  the  begin-
ning of  the  Völsünga-saga^  which  calls  Sigi  a  son  of  Odhin :
from  him  descend  Rerir  (al.  Berir,  Beirir),  Völsungr,  Sigmundr,
Sigurdhr,  The  word  sig  (victory)  is  a  favourite  in  this  line,
Sigmund's  sister  being  also  called  Signy}  Völsftngr  has  the
form  of  a  patronymic  and  national  name,  pointing  to  a  Valsi  or
Velsi,  which  actually  meets  us  in  the  Wcelseof  Beow.  1787,  where
Sigemiind  too  is  found  1743-62.

The  same  continuation  down  to  Sigurdhr  is  in  the  Sverris-
saga,  but  not  in  the  Langfedga-tal.  The  '  Fornjot  and  his
kin '  gives  quite  a  different  one :  Skiöldr,  already  mentioned
as  an  ancestor  of  Odhin,  reappears  as  his  son,  and  from  him
descends  a  line  of  Norse  kings  to  Harald  the  Fair-haired.^

[^  In  Ordg.  and  FiölBV.  m.  Svipdagr  is  Menglo'S's  loTor.  His  father  is  SAUuört
(Sem.  112*),  his  mother  Grda.— EHM.]

'  In  Sigurdhr  ^  Siguf rid,  Laohmann  (Critik  der  sage  ▼.  d.  Nibel.  p.  22)  oonjec-
tnres  a  god's  by-name  ;  the  line  of  Deira  too  has  componnds  irith  Sig-.  Conf .  what
I  have  said  of  sihora  (p.  27)  and  of  Woden  as  god  of  victory  (p.  134).

>  The  ordinary  Danish  genealogy  begins :  Odin,  Skiold,  FridUif,  Frode,  Tori
Series  279.  Suhm's  Crit.  hist.  1,  355.  [Sognbrot  (Fomm.  s,  II,  412-3):  Tbdrr.
aShin,  Skiöldr,  Leifr=Fridhleifr,  Frodhi.  Prologue  to  Gröttas. :  Skiöldr,  Fri«-
leiir,   Fröi.     In  the  AS.  genealogies  Seeldwa  is  made  an  ancestor  of  Wdden:


ANGLO-SAXOK   GENEALOGIES.  1731

This  last  account  also  contains  some  not  inconsiderable  varia-
tions in  Odhin's  Ancestry.  The  outlandish  Eredei  is  transl.  into
good  Norse  as  Eindridhi,  and  Magi  as  Magni  ;  Trinan  the  corrup.
of  Itrma/a  is  here  (as  in  Sverris-s.),  Hermodr  is  passed  over,  so
is  Eat  (as  in  Sverris-s.) ;  on  the  other  hand,  at  Finn  and  Frialftf
two  names  are  introduced,  Burri  and  Bors,  which  occur  nowhere
else  in  these  lists.

With  such  important  deviations  in  form  and  matter,  we  can
scarcely  say  that  these  Norse  genealogies  were  borrowed  straight
from  the  AS. ;  more  likely  they  travelled  into  Scandinavia  from
some  Saxon  or  Frisian  district,  where  they  were  still  cherished,
say  in  the  10-llth  century.  The  forms  Beldeg,  Vegdeg,  Svebdeg
differ,  though  slightly,  from  the  pure  AS.  BaeldsBg,  Weegdaeg,
SwsBfdseg ;  Atra  from  Hathra,  Skialdun  (Skialdin)  from  Scelwa,
Biaf  from  Beaw.  The  interpolation  of  Thorns  kindred  comes,  of
course,  from  the  Norse  writer.

But  even  if  a  loan  took  place  from  the  Anglo-Saxons,  and  at
the  later  date  of  the  12-13th  century,  it  matters  little  to  the
intrinsic  value  of  these  genealogies.  The  AS.  version  is  of  itself
suflScient  to  vouch  for  their  high  antiquity  and  their  solidarity
with  the  German  system  of  gods.

It  is  much  to  be  lamented  that  in  Continental  Germany,  where
they  must  have  existed,  such  pedigrees  were  never  jotted  down.
Witekind  of  Corvei,  or  his  predecessor  Bovo,  could  have  given
us  priceless  information  about  them.  A  table  in  Sam.  Beyher's
Monum.  landgravior.  Thuringiae  (Menken  2,  829.  830),  which
brings  the  fictitious  line  of  a  Saxon  king  Artharicus  down  to
'  Bodo  vel  Voden/  and  then  foists  in  '  Vecta  vel  Vichtus,  Witta
vel  Wittich,  Witgistus  vel  Witgislus,  Hengistus'  is  taken  from
Petrus  Albinus^s  (d.  1598)  Novae  Sax.  historiae  progymnasmata
(Viteberg.  1585).     Albinus  had  copied  an  AS.  chronicler.

For  all  that,  we  catch  undoubted  echoes  of  ancient  genealogies
in  our  poems  of  the  13th  century.  The  Nibel.  88,  3  and  92,  1
preserves  the  names  of  Schilbunc  and  Nibelune,  and  Biterolf  7821
calls  them  brothers.  Now  Seylfing,  ScUfing  (gomela  S.)  and  the
Scylfingas  occur  in  Beow.  125.  4406.  4758.  4970.  5850.  5931.
The  Edda  (Saem.  47^)  makes  Sdlfingr  a  by-name  of  OSinn,  and

'  SoeldwB,  Fri'Sawnlf,  Fre41Af ,  FrilSawald,  W6den  ';  bo  he  is  in  some  None  ones
(supra  p.  1729),  but  usually  a  «on  of  OSin.— EHM.]


1732  APPENDIX.

the  Hyndlu-lio^S  in  its  genealogies  (Sffim.  114-5)  joins  Skiöldthi"
gar  and  SkiJßngar  in  alliteration.  The  above-mentioned '  Fomjot
and  his  kin '  (Fornald.  s.  2,  9)  connts  among  the  mythic  sons
of  H41fdan  the  Old  a  Shelßr,  and  derives  from  him  and  his  son
Skiöldr  those  two  kindred  races  :  '  that  heitir  SkUfinga  sett  edha
Skiöldünga  aett.'  *  Here  Skelf  seems  a  corrap.  of  Skef,  for  both
Beowulf  and  the  AS.  pedigrees  make  Scyld  or  Sceldwa  the  son
of  Scedf;  and  from  such  corruption  arose  the  different  forms  in
both  countries  independently.^  So  we  must  reckon  Sehilbune
[conf.  Schiltunc,  Hpt.  1,  7],  Seil  fing  as  closely  interwoven  with
the  old  genealogy.  In  Fornm.  sog.  5^  239  Sfdöldr  is  described
as  the  national  god  of  Schonen^  '  Sk&nAnga  godh '  (p.  161).

A  still  more  striking  instance  of  agreement  is  furnished  by  the
Gothic  genealogy  which  Jemandes^  after  saying  that  the  ances-
tors of  the  Goths  were  Anses,  imparts  as  follows :  •  Quorum
genealogiam  paucis  percurram^  ut  quo  quis  parente  genitus  est^
aut  unde  origo  accepta,  ubi  finem  efficit  [percipiatur  ?]  ;  absque
invidia  qui  legis  vera  dicentem  ausculta :  horum  ergo,  ut  ijm  9uU
fabulis  ferunt,  primus  fuit  Gapt,  qui  genuit  Halmal  (al.  humal,
ulmal,  hulmul);  Halmal  vero  genuit  Augis,  Augis  g.  enm  qui
dictus  est  Amala,  a  quo  et  origo  Amalorum  decurrit.  Et  Amala
g.  Isamam,  Isama  autem  g.  Ostrogotham,  Ostrogotha  g.  IJnilt  (al.
Huniul),  Unilt  g.  Athal,  Athal  g.  Achinlf,  Achiulf  g.  Ansilam  et
Ediulf  et  Vuldulf  et  Hermenrich;  Vuldulf  vero  g.  Valeravans,
Valeravans  autem  g.  Vinitharium,  Vinithariua  quoque  g.  Theode-
mir  et  Valemir  et  Videmir;  Theodemir  g.  Theodericum,  Theode-
riciis  g.  Amalasuentham,  Amalasuentha  g.  Athalaricum  et
Mathasuentham  de  Viderico  (1.  Eutharico)  viro  suo,  qui  affini-
tate  generis  sic  ad  eam  conjunctus  est :  nam  supradictos
Hermenricus  filius  Achiulfi  genuit  Hunnimundum,  Hunnimuodas
autem  g.  Thorismundum,  Thoriamundus  vero  g-  Berimundum,
Berimundus  g,  Videricum,  Videricus  g.  Eutharicumj  qui  conjunc-
tus Amalasuenthae  g.  Athalaricum  et  Mathasuentam,  mortuoqae
in  puerilibus  annis  Athalarico,  Mathasuenthae  Viiichis  est  socia-

tus.' Here  again  we  see  historic  kings  melting  into  heroes  of

the  mythic  time  and  into  gods ;  but  the  first  father  of  them  all,

[*  In  Sn.  215*  SkiMngr  is  the  same  of  a  sword.  Skelfir,  Skilfingar  t  aastrvegim,
Sn.  193-4.     Schilpunc,  Ried  no.  68  (yr.  888).— EHM.]

'  The  change  of  Skef  into  Skelf  maj  have  been  encouraged  by  the  better  allitera-
tion of  Skilfing  with  Skiöldüng,  Scylding  with  Scilfing.— Tranb.


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.  1733

no  donbt  an  Ana,  is  he  that  arrests  our  attention.  Oapt  seems  to
me  a  corrap.  of  Qavt,  Oaut.^  This  granted^  Oaut  is  no  other  than
our  AS.  Gedt,  on  whose  brow  the  chroniclers  are  so  eager  to
press  the  crown  o£  godhood.  Now  the  Edda  (Ssam.  47**)  makes
Oautr  a  mere  by-name  of  QSinn,  who  may  therefore  be  reckoned
a  later  re-incarnation  of  the  same  divine  being.  Thus  Oduts,
Gedt,  Gautr,  OH 6.  Goz  stands  at  the  head  of  the  Amalung  family
so  famed  in  song  and  story.

The  Langobardic  genealogy  of  the  Gunings  or  Gugiugs^  pre-
served in  the  Prologue  to  the  Laws  and  in  Paul  Diaconus^  I
leave  on  one  side,  as  contributing  little  towards  clearing  up  the
story  of  the  gods.  It  is  one  more  witness,  among  so  many,  to
the  propensity  of  German  nations  to  draw  up  and  hand  down
lists  of  their  forefathers'  lineage.

Od  that  point,  who  would  not  remember,  first  and  foremost,
the  oldest  word  on  the  origin  of  the  Germani,  as  preserved,  though
but  in  faint  outlines,  by  Tacitus,  and  expressly  grounded  on  their
'  ancient  songs,  which  are  all  the  history  they  have '  ?  (p.  344).
'  Celebrant  carminibus  antiquis,  quod  unum  apud  illos  memoriae
et  annalium  »genus  est,  Tuisconem,  deum  terra  editum,  et  filium
Mannum,*  originem  gentis  conditoresque.  Manno  tres  filios
assignant,  e  quorum  nominibus  proximi  oceano  Ingaevonea,  medii
Herminones,  ceteri  lataevones  vocentur.  Quidam,  ut  in  licentia
vetustatis,  plures  deo  ortos  pluresque  gentis  appellationes,  Maraoa,
Gambrivioa,  Suevoa,  Vandaloa  affirmant.' As  the  Anglo-
Saxons  allowed  their  W6den,  now  three  ^  sons,  now  aeven,  the
same  thing  happens  here  to  the  offspring  of  Mannus.  There  is  no
further  connexion  between  the  two  genealogies ;  but  it  is  curious  to
find  that  in  the  first  century  a.D.,  various  versions  of  the  people's
pedigree  are  already  in  vogue,  and  have  reached  the  Roman's  ear.
He  does  not  tell  us  the  names  of  the  sons,  and  in  guessing  them
from  those  of  the  tribes  they  founded,  we  cannot  feel  sure  of
their  exact  form.  Pliny  4,  4  supposes  five  principal  tribes :
Vindeli,  Ingcievonea,  lataevones,  Hermionea,  Pevcini  ;  the  first  are

^  The  Goihio  u  might  easily  be  miscopied  as  a  v  (V),  and  thus  mistaken  for  a  j>,
just  as  the  AS.  y  is  made  p  in  *  Pubba,  Godpalf  .*

3  This  number  three  is  always  turning  up  in  myths.  Noah*s  3  sons :  Shem,
Ham,  Japheth.  Saturn's :  Zeus,  Poseidon,  Pluton.  The  Scyth.  Targilaus^B :
Leipoxais,  Arpozais,  Eolaxais.  The  Norse  Bör's :  O'^inn,  Vili,  V6.  Fomjot's:
Hlerr,  Logi,  Eari.    Amelanc's :  Diether,  Ermrich,  Dietmar.


1734  APPENDIX.

Tacitus^s  Vcmdali,  The  head  of  the  HermiDones  was  no  doabt
Hermin,  i.e.  Irrnin,  whom  legends  know  of  as  a  godlike  hero ;
that  of  the  Vandals  Vandal^  and  of  the  Sueves  Suef,  Snap,  which
reminds  one  of  AS.  Swcefdceg  and  ON.  Svafnir  (another  by-name
of  OSinn,  SsBm.  47^) ;  the  head  of  the  Grambrivii  perh.  Qambar  ;
OHO.  kambar =8trenaas,  aad  the  Langobard  lineage  has  an
ancestress  Oambara.  Such  a  name  as  Mars,  if  that  was  the
source  of  the  people's  name,  I  have  nowhere  come  across  ;  Tacitus
must  have  found  it  very  acceptable.

The  Ingaevones  and  Istaevones  remain  to  be  considered.
Ingo,  an  OHO.  name^  which  also  forms  the  compounds  Ingumlkr
(Frank.  Hincmar),  Ingurftt^  Inguram,  Ingulint,  Inguwin,  must
previously  have  been  Ingawo,  Inguio,  for  Inguio-mfirus  occurs
several  times  in  Tacitus,  and  it  also  agrees  with  ON.  Ingvu  A
corresp.  Isto,  Istuio  is  wanting.  As  for  the  ending  »aevo,  we  find
Frisaevo,  also  a  national  name,  in  an  inscript.  in  Hagenbnch
173-5,  side  by  side  with  Frisius  171-2-4.  Ingvi  or  Yngvi  in  the
Norse  mythology  is  a  byname  of  Freyr,  and  Ingvi-freyr,  Ingunar-
freyr  seems  to  mean  the  same  thing.  With  this  conf.  '  eodor
Ingwina,  freä  Ingwina,*  Beow.  2081.  2638,  and  above  all  Ingm
in  the  Bemician  line ;  can  there  remain  a  doubt  that  this  name
belongs  to  the  oldest  period  of  the  Oermanic  race,  nay,  that  there

hangs  about  it  an  air  of  deity  ? latuio  is  the  great  difficulty.

1  would  not  willingly  throw  suspicion  on  the  reading  Istaevones,
though  the  fluctuation  between  Tuisto  and  Tuisco  would  almost
tempt  one  to  do  so.  If  we  read  Iscctevones,  and  inferred  an
Iscvio,  Isco,  we  might  connect  this  with  ON.  Askr,  the  first-
created  man,  or  with  Oesc  of  the  Kentish  line,  if  that  be  not  a
little  too  unmythical.  Well,  I  found  a  passage  in  an  unknown
compiler  (Cod.  Vat.  5001  fol.  1 40),^  which  actually  has  «c,  not  gt  :
'  Tres  fuerunt  fratres,  ex  quibus  gentes  xiii.  Primus  Ermenius
genuit  Butes,  Oualan-gutos,  Guandalos,  Gbpidos,  Saxones.  Ingo
genuit  Burgundiones,  Turingos,  Longobardos,  Baioeros.  Esdo
Romanos,  Brictones,  Francos,  Alamannos.'  And,  strange  to  say,
Nennius  (ed.  Gunn  p.  53-4)  has  something  very  similar :  '  Primus
homo  venit  ad  Europam  Alanus  cum  tribus  filiis  suis,  quorum

\}  Glaff  1,  497  has  the  passage  not  only  from  the  God.  Vat.,  but  from  the  Mir
Cod.  8.  Gall.  497 :  Ermimu,  Inguo,  Ittio ;  conf.  Graff  1,  601  and  Pertz*B  Iter  Ital.
and  Men.  10,  814.    Moneys  Ztschr.  2,  256.]


ANGLO-SAXON  GENEALOGIES.  1735

nomina  Hisicion,  Armenon,  Neugio.  Hisidon  autem  babait  filios
qoataor:  Franonm,  Romanum^  Alamannnm  et  Brutonem.  Ar^
ifienon  aatem  habait  filios  qainqae  :  Gotham^  Yäla-gothum^  Cibi-
dum,  Burgundum,  Longobardnm.  Neugio  vero  habuit  tres:
Vandalam^  Saxonem,  Bogannm.  Ab  Hisicione  aatem  ortae  sunt
qaatuor  gentes :  Francis  Latini,  Alamanni  et  Bryttones.  Ab
Armenione  aatem  Oothi^  Wala-gothi,  Cibidi^  Bargandi  et  Longo-
bardi.  A  Netigione  aatem  Bogari^  Wandali,  Saxones,  TuriDgi/
And  then^  through  manj  names  that  have  nothing  German  about
them,  Alanas's  line  rans  up  to  Adam.  Gale^s  ed.  of  Nennius
p.  102  reads  Hisidon,  Armenon,  Negno,  and  the  last  has  4  sons,
Wandalus,  Saxo,  Bogarus,  Targus.  Evidently  Neugio,  Negno
is  a  corrup.  of  Engio,  Enguio,  Armenon  of  Ermino,  while  Hisicio
makes  for  our  snpp.  Hisco,  Isco.  And  that  Nennius  and  the
Vatican  MS.  had  not  drawn  from  the  same  source  is  plain  by  the

difference  in  details,  despite  the  similarity  of  the  whole. The

great  question  remains,  whether  all  these  accounts  were  taken
first  from  Tacitns,  and  then  extended  and  distorted,  unless  we
are  prepared  to  maintain  that,  they  are,  to  my  mind,  of  extra-
ordinary value.  MSS.  of  Nennius  are  supp.  to  be  of  the  tenth
centnry;  of  the  Vatican  MS.,  in  extracting  from  it  many  years
ago,  1  left  the  age  unmarked :  it  can  hardly  be  older  than  the
12th  centnry.  If  we  think  it  likely  that  any  link  between  them
and  the  passage  in  Tacitus  can  be  established,  it  must  be  of  a  time
before  Nennius,  and  therefore  pretty  early  [conf.  6DS.  824-5-9].
Alanus  has  unquestionably  arisen  by  sheer  mistaking  of  the
first  few  strokes,  out  of  Manvs,  i.e.  the  Mannus  of  Tacitus.  This
Mannus  stands  at  the  head  of  the  Teutonic  race,  exactly  as  Woden
does  at  that  of  the  Anglo-Saxon.  It  means  man  in  all  Tout,
tongues:  Goth,  man,  mann,  manna,  AS.  mon,  ON.  madhr,  gen.
manns;  so  does  its  derivative  mannisk,  mannisco,  mensch.
Perhaps  '  the  thinking  being '  from  the  verb  man,  munum  :  an
apt  designation  for  God  as  well  as  God-created  man,  and  cer-
tainly of  high  antiquity.  I  do  not  find  it  as  a  by-name  of  OSinn
or  Woden,  but  one  of  his  ancestors  is  Itermon,  of  which  the  first
part  tter^  ttr  may  be  considered  an  intensive  epithet:  homo
praestans,  hominum  praestantissimos.  Ace.  to  that.  Mannas  and
Woden  stand  for  the  same  thing.  I  throw  out  the  guess,  that  in
heathen  songs  the  god  might  be  called  by  either  name.


1736  APPENDIX.

Lastly,  we  turn  to  Mannas's  own  father^  the  earthbom  Tuisco.
What  if  the  word  be  formed  like  mannisco,  and  abb  rev.  from
Uvdisco?  The  O.Fr.  Tydios  was  shortened  to  Thyois,  Tyois,
Tiois,  Thiodonis-yiMsk  [Dieten-hofen]  to  Thion-ville.  In  Gothic
dialect  the  god  would  be  Thiudiska,  in  OHO.  Diutisco,  the  off-
spring of  the  people  (thinda,  diet)  itself.  And  the  national  name
Teuto,  Tiuto  (OHG.  Dieto)  might  be  near  of  kin  to  Tiadisco. — Bat
an  entirely  different  derivation,  suggested  by  Lachmann,  seema
preferable:  TmsGO  =  Tvisco,  the  twin,  SlSvfio^,  OHG.  Zuisco,
meaning  perhaps  one  of  the  Dios-curi,  the  '  Castor  PoUuxqne'  of
Tacitus  (p.  66)  ?  The  form  Tuisto  least  of  all  lends  itself  to
explanation,  though  there  are  some  derivatives  in  -st,  -ist ;  and
to  connect  AS.  Tastwa  with  Teuto  or  Tuisto  would  seem
hazardous.  Anyhow  we  shall  not  explain  everything;  it  is
enough  to  have  proved  that  in  Tacitus's  German  theogony  we  see
an  unmistakable  connexion  with  later  traditions.


SUPERSTITIONS.


A.  From  a  Sermon  of  St  Elrgiiis  (b.  588.  d.  659)  contained  in  the
Vita  Eligii  of  Audoenas  Botomagensis  (Aldwin  of  Rouen^
d.  683  or  689),  printed  in  D^Achery's  Spicileg.  torn.  5  ed.
Paris.     1661.     pp.  215-9.

Lib.  2,  cap.  16.  Ante  omnia  autem  illad  denuntio  atque  con-
testor^  nt  nullas  Paganorum  sacrilegas  consnetudines  observetis^
non  caraios  (caragios)^^  non  divinos,  non  sortilegos,  non  praecanta-
tores,  nee  pro  nlla  causa  ant  infirmitate  eos  consnlere  vel  interro-
gare  praesumatis,  qaia  qui  facit  hoc  malum  statim  perdit  baptismi
sacramentum.  Similiter  et  auguria  vel  sternutationes  nolite
observarO)  nee  in  itinere  positi  aliquas  aviculas  cantantes  atten-
datis^  sed,  sive  iter  seu  quodcunque  operis  arripitis,  signate  vos
in  nomine  Christi^  et  symbolum  et  orationem  dominicam  cum  fide
et  devotione  dicite^et  nihil  vobis  nocere  poterit  inimicus.  Nnllus
Christianus  observet^  qua  die  domum  exeat^  vel  qua  die  rever-
tatur^  quia  omnes  dies  Dens  fecit;  nullus  ad  inchoandum  opus
diem  vel  lunam  attendat ;  nullus  in  Kal.  Jan.  nßfanda  aut  ridicu-
losa^  vetulas  aut  cervulos^  Skatjotticos  (al.  uleriotcos)  faciat,  neque
mensas  super  noctem  componat,  neque  strenas  aut  bibitiones
superfluas  exerceat.  Nullus  Christianus  in  puras  (al.  pyras)
credat^  neque  in  cantu  sedeat^  quia  opera  diabolica  sunt;  nullus
in  festivitate  S.  Joannis  vel  quibuslibet  sanctorum  solemnitatibus
solstitia  aut  vallaiwiies  (balationes  7)  vel  saltationes  aut  car  aulas
(i.e.  choraulas)  aut  cantica  diabolica  exerceat.  Nullus  nomina
daemontim,  aut  Neptunum  aut  Orcum  aut  Dianam  aut  Minervam
aut  Oeniscum,  aut  ceteraa  ejusmodi  ineptias  credere  aut  invocaro
praesumat.  Nullus  diem  Jovis,  absque  festivitatibus  Sanctis,  nee
in  Maio  nee  ullo  tempore  in  otio  observet,  neque  dies  iiniarum
vel  murorum,  aut  vel  unum  omnino  diem,  nisi  tantum  dominicum.

[1  Daoange  sub  vv.  earagtUf  earanuf .— EHM.]

[9  Ducange  sub  t.  cervtUa,  Ol.  Sletst.  23,  3  in  cervulOf  in  lioden&zA ;  28,  4  in
vetula,  in  dero  yarentun  tragidi ;  23,  8  ooragios,  liodirsAzo. — EHM.]

17S7


1740


APPENDIX.


XVII.     de  observatione  pagana  ia  foco,  yel  in  iachoatione  rei

alicujas.
XYIII.     de  incertis  locis  quae  colnnt  pro  sacris.
XIX.     de  petendo  quod  boni  vocant  sanctae  Mariae.
XX.     de  feriis  quae  faciant  Jovi  vel  Mercurio.
XXI.     de  lanae  defectioDe^  quod  dicant  Viiiceluna.
XXII.     de  tempestatibas  et  cornibus  et  cocleis.

XXIII.  de  sulcis  circa  villas.

XXIV.  de  pagano  carsa  quern  yrias  [Massmann's  Form.  22  :

frias']  nominant^  scissis  pannis  vel  calceis.
XXV.     de  eo,  quod  sibi  sanctos  finguut  qaoslibet  mortuos.
XXVI.     de  simulacro  de  consparsa  farina.
XXVII.     de  simulacris  de  pannis  factis.
XXVIII.    de  simulacro  quod  per  campos  portant.
XXXIX.     de  ligneis  pedibus  vel  manibus  pagano  ritu.

XXX.  de  eo^  quod  credunt^  quia  feminae  Innam  commen-
dent^  quod  possint  oorda  hominum  tollere
juzta  paganos.

Evidently  the  mere  headings  of  the  chapters  that  formed  the
Indiculus  itself,  whose  loss  is  much  to  be  lamented.  It  was
composed  towards  the  middle  of  the  8  th  cent,  among  German-
speaking  Franks,  who  had  adopted  Christianity,  but  still  mixed
Heathen  rites  with  Christian.  Now  that  the  famous  Abrenun*
tiatio  has  been  traced  to  the  same  Synod  of  Liptinae,  we  get  a
fair  idea  of  the  dialect  that  forms  the  basis  here.  We  cannot
look  for  Saxons  so  far  in  the  Netherlands,  beyond  the  Maas  and
Sambre,  but  only  for  Franks,  whose  language  at  that  time  par-
took far  more  of  Low  than  of  High  German.  I  do  not  venture
to  decide  whether  these  were  Salian  Franks  or  later  immigrants
from  Ripuaria.^


C.     From  the  Collect  of  Decrees  by  Burchard  oj   Wotvm    (d.
1024),2  Colon.  1548.

1,  94.  Interrogation  42  ^  :  interrogandum,  si  aliquis  sit  magns,
ariolns  aut  incantator,  divinua  aut  sortilegus,  vel  si  aliquis  vota
ad  a/rbores  vel  ad  fontea  vel  ad  lapides  faciat,  aut  ibi  candelam

[>GDS.  637.— EHM.]  pD.  1026.  Kl.  tchr.  6,  417.— EHM.]

•  This  and  the  foil.  InterrogationB  are  drawn  *e  deoreto  Eatyehuuii  papae  (d.
283),  cap.  9.'


SUPEBSTITIONS.      C.  1741

sea  qaodlibet  munus  deferat,  yelati  ibi  quoddam  numen  sit,  quod
bonam  aat  malum  possit  ioferra    (Repeated  10,  32.)

Int.  43 :  perscratandnm,  si  aliqais  subulcas  vel  babalcns  siye
venator  vel  ceteri  hujasmodi  diaboKca  carmina  dicat  super
panem,  aut  super  herbas,  aut  super  quaedam  nefaria  ligamenta,
et  haec  aut  in  arbore  abscondat,  aut  in  bivio  aut  in  trivio
projiciat,  ut  sua  animalia  liberet  a  peste  et  clade,  et  alterius
perdat.     (Reptd.  10,  18.)

Int.  44  :  perquirendum,  si  aliqua  femina  sit,  quae  per  quaedam
maleficia  et  incantationes  mentes  hominum  se  immutare  posse
dicat,  id  est,  nt  de  odio  in  amorem,  aut  de  amore  in  odium  con-
vertat,  aut  bona  hominum  aut  damnet  aut  surripiat.  Et  si
aliqua  est,  quae  se  dicat,  cum  daemonum  turba  in  aimilitudinem
mulierum  transformata,  certis  noctibus  equitare  super  quasdam
bestias,  et  in  eorum  consortio  annumeratam  esse.  (Beptd.  10,
29.)

Int.  50 :  est  aliquis,  qui  in  Cal.  Jan.  aliquid  fecerat  quod  a
paganis  inventum  est,  et  dies  obserrayit  et  lunam  et  mewses ;  et
homm  effectiya  potentia  aliquid  speraverit  in  melius  aut  in  deterius
posse  converti.

Int.  51 :  est  aliquis,  quodcunque  opus  inchoans,  qui  aliquid
dizerat,  aut  quacunque  magica  arte  aliud  fecit,  nisi  ut  apostolus
docet  omnia  in  nomine  Domini  facienda.

Int.  52  :  quaerendum  etiam,  si  ifiulieres  in  lanificUs  suis  vel
in  ordiendis  telis  aliquid  dicant  aut  observent.

Int.  54  :  est  aliquis,  qui  supra  mor^uum  noctumis  horis  carmina
diabolica  cantaret,  et  biberet  et  manducaret  ibi,  quasi  de  ejus
morte  gratularetur ;  et  si  alibi  mortui  in  vigiliis  nocturnis  nisi  in
ecclesia  custodiantur.

10,  1.  Ut  episcopi  eorumque  ministri  omnibus  viribus  elaborare
stndeant,  ut  perniciosam  et  a  diabolo  inventam  sortilegam  et
maleficam  artem  penitus  ex  parochiis  suis  eradicent,  et  si  aliquem
virum  aut  feminam  hujuscemodi  sceleris  sectatorem  invenerint,
tnrpiter  dehonestatum  de  parochiis  suis  ejiciant  ....  Illud
etiam  non  omittendum,  quod  quaedam  sceleratae  mulieres,  retro
post  Satanam  conversae,  daemonum  illusionibus  et  phantasmatibus
sednctae,  credunt  se  et  profitentur  nocturnis  horis  cum  Diana
Paganorum  dea,  vel  cum  Herodiade,  et  innumera  multitudine
mulierum  equitare  super   quasdam   bestias,   et   multa  terrarum

VOL.    IV.  H   H


1742  APPENDIX.

spatia  intempestae  noctis  silentio  pertransire^  ejusque  jussionibas
velnt  dominae  obedire,  et  certis  noctibus  ad  ejas  servitiom  evo-
cari.  Sed  ntinam  hae  solae  in  perfidia  sna  perissent^  et  non
mnltos  secum  in  infidelitatis  interitnm  pertraxissent !  Nam
innamera  multitudo^  bac  falsa  opinione  decepta^  haec  vera  esse
credit^  et  credendo  a  recta  fide  deviate  et  in  errore  Paganoram
revolvitur.i

10,  2.  Pervenit  ad  nos,  quosdam,  quod  dici  nefas  est,  arbores
colere  et  multa  alia  contra  christianam  fidem  illicita  perpetrare.*

10,  5.  Qai  divinationes  expetunt  et  more  Grentilium  snbse-
qauntnr,  ant  in  domes  snas  hujuscemodi  homines  introdacnnt,
exquirendi  aliquid  arte  malefica  ant  expiandi  causa,  sub  regola
quinquennii  jaceant.*

10,  6.  Si  quis,  Paganomm  consnetudinem  seqnens,  divinos
et  sortileges  in  domnm  snam  introdnxerit,  quasi  ut  maluvhforas
viittat  aut  maleficia  inveniat,  quinque  annos  poeniteat^

10,  8.  Qui  auguriis  vel  divinationibus  inserviunt,  vel  qui
credit  ut  aliqui  bominum  sint  immissores  tempestainm,  vel  si  qna
m ulier  divinationes  vel  incantationes  diabolicas  fecerit,  septem
annos  poeniteat.^

10,  9.  Auguria,  vel  sortes,  quae  dicuntnr  false  sanctorum,  yel
divinationes,  qui  eas  observaverint,  vel  quarumcnnqne  scrip-
turarum  vel  votum  voverint  vel  persolverint  ad  arborem  vel  ad
hipidem  vel  ad  quamlibet  rem,  excepto  ad  ecclesiam,  omnes  ex-
communicentur.  Si  ad  poenitentiam  venerint,  clerici  annos  tres,
laici  annum  unum  et  dimidium  poeniteant.*

10,  10.  Summo  studio  decertare  debent  episcopi  et  eornui
ministri,  ut  arbores  daemonibus  consecratae,  quas  vulgus  colit  et
in  tanta  veneratione  habet,  ut  nee  ramum  vel  surculum  audeat
amputare,  radicitus  excidantnr  atque  comburantur.  Lapides  qno-
que  quos  in  rui/nosis  locis  et  silvestribus,  daemonum  ladificationi-
bus  decepti,  venerantur,  ubi  et  vota  vovent  et  deferunt,  funditns

^  Extra,  above  (p.  283).  The  whole  passage  was  taken  from  the  Coiincil  of
Ancyra  (yr  814).  and  is  also  in  Begino's  De  diso.  eccl.  2.  864.  bat  without  the
words  *  yel  ciun  Heriodiade ' ;  the  Decree  of  Gratian  II.  26.  qnaest.  5,  12  §  1  has  it
complete.

'  E  registro  Gregorii  Magni.

>  E  concil.  Anojr.  cap.  23.

*  Ex  concilio  Martini  papae  (in  Spain,  abt  572),  id  est.  ex  Capit.  Maitmi
Bracarensis  cap.  71 ;  whence  also  Deer.  Grat.  II.  26.  qnaest.  5,  3  §  2.

i  E  poenitentiali  Bomano.

<  From  the  same.


SUPEBSTITIONS.      C.  1743

efiTodiantar,  atqae  in  tali  loco  projiciantar,  ubi  nunqoam  a  cultori-
bu8  suis  yenerari  possint.^

10^  14.  Malier  si  qaa  filiuni  suum  ponit  supra  tectum  aut  in
fornacem  pro  sanitate  febrinm^  unam  annam  poeniteat.^

10^  15.  Non  licet  iniquas  observationes  agere  calendarum^  et
otiis  vacare^  neqae  lauro  aat  viriditate  arborum  cingere  domes.
Omnis  haec  observatio  Paganorum  est.*

10,  16.  Si  quis  calendas  Januarias  ritu  Paganoram  colere,
yel  aliquid  plus  novi  facere  propter  novam  annum^  aut  men&as
cum  lapidibns  vel  epulis  in  domibus  suis  praeparare,  et  per  vicos
et  plateas  cantatores  et  chores  ducere  praesumpserit,  anathema
sit.*

10,  31.  Qaicunque  nocturna  sacrtficia  daemonum  celebrayerint,
vel  incantationibus  daemones  qcMrCunqae  arte  ad  sua  vota  invi-
taverint,  tres  annos  poeniteant.'^

10,  34.  Laici,  qui  excabias  faneris  observant,  cam  timore  et
tremore  et  reverentia  hoc  faciant ;  nallus  ibi  praesamat  diabolica
cannina  cantare,  non  joca  et  saltationes  facere,  quae  Pagani
diabolo  docente  adinvenerunt.^

1 9,  5  supplies  the  remaining  extracts,  the  references  being  to
pages :  ^

Pag.  193^:  si  observasti  traditiones  Paganorum,  quas  quasi
hereditario  jure,  diabolo  subministrante,  usque  in  hos  dies  semper
patres  filiis  reliquerunt,  id  est,  ut  elementa  coleres,  id  est,  lunam
aut  Bolem  aut  stellarum  cursum,  novam  lunam  aut  defectum  lunae,
ut  tuis  clamoribus  aut  auxilio  splendorem  ejus  restaurare  valeres,
aut  elementa  tibi  succurrere  aut  tu  illis  posses ;  aut  novam  lunam
observasti  pro  domo  facienda  aut  conjugiis  sociandis.

Pag.  193<^ ;  observasti  calendas  Januarias  ritu  Paganorum,  ut
vel  aliquid  plus  faceres  propter  novum  annum,  quam  antea  vel

1  E  coDcil.  Namnetensi  (Nantes,  yr  895).  [Mansl  p.  172.  cap.  20.]

'  E  poenitentiali  Bedae.  The  poenitentale  Eogberti  Eboraoensis  1,  83  (yr
748)  in  Mansi  12,  439.  475  has  :  *  Si  malier  fiiiam  snam  saper  domum  leiforncLcem
coUocet,  ideo  nt  febrim  ejus  oarare  velit.*

'  E  decreto  Martiani  papae.

^  E  decreto  Zachariae  papae,  cap.  ii.

*  E  poenitentiali  Romano.

«  E  concil.  Arelatenai  (Aries,  of  which  year  ?)  can.  8.

7  Whence  did  Burchard  draw  this  large  chapter  19,  5  extending  from  p.  188<i
to  201^  ?  (His  19,  4  is  avowedly  from  Poenitentiale  Bomanum,  his  19,  6  fr.  Poen.
Theodori.)  The  German  words  in  it,  *holda,  werwolf,  belisa'  (pp.  194-8.  201)
lead  me  to  think  that,  here  more  than  anywhere,  he  puts  together  what  he  himself
knew  of  German  superstitions,  with  additions  from  other  collections.


1744  APPENDIX.

post  soleres  facere^  ita  dico,  at  aut  mensam  taam  cum  lapidibus
vel  epulis  in  domo  tua  praeparare  eo  tempore,  aut  per  vieas  et
plateas  cantores  et  choros  dticeres,  aut  supra  tectum  domus  tuae
sederes  ense  tuo  circiimsignatus,  ut  ibi  videres  et  intelligeres,  quid
tibi  in  seqaenti  anno  futaram  esset;  vel  in  bivio  sedisti  supra
taurinam  cutem,  ut  et  ibi  futura  tibi  intelligeres,  vel  si  panes
praedicta  nocte  coquere  fecisti  tuo  nomine,  ut  si  bene  elevarentur
et  spissi  et  aiti  fierent,  inde  prosperitatem  tuae  vitae  eo  anno
prae  videres.

Pag.  193*  :  interfuisti  aut  consensisti  vanitatibus  quas  mulier»
exercent  in  suis  lanificiis,  in  suis  tslis ;  quae,  cum  ordiuntar
tolas  suas,  sperent  se  utrumque  posse  facere  cum  incantationibas
illarum,  ut  et  fila  staminis  et  subtegminis  in  invicem  ita  com-
misceantur  ut,  nisi  his  iterum  aliis  diaboli  incantationibus  e
contra  subveniant,  totum  pereat.

venisti  ad  aliqnem  locum  ad  orandum  nisi  ecclesiam,  ...  id
est,  vel  ad  fontes  vel  ad  lapides  vel  ad  arbores  vel  ad  bivia,  et
ibi  aut  candelam  aut  faculam  pro  veneratione  loci  incendisii,  aut
panem  aut  aliquam  oblationem  illuc  detulisti  aut  ibi  oomedisti,
aut  aliquam  salutem  corporis  aut  animae  ibi  requisisti.

Pag.  194*:  credidisti  unquam  vel  particeps  fuisti  illius  per-
fidiae,  ut  incantatores,  et  qui  se  dicunt  tempestatum  immisswre*
esse,  possent  per  incantationem  daemonum  aut  tempestates  com-
movere  aut  mentes  hominum  mutare.

credidisti  ut  aliqua  femina  sit  quae  hoc  facere  possit,  qnod
quaedam  a  diabolo  deceptae  se  affirmant  necessario  et  ez  prae-
cepto  facere  debere,  id  est,  cum  daemonum  turba  in  aimilitudinem
mulierum  transformata,  quam  vulgaris  stultitia  Holdam,  (al.  vn-
holdoAn)^  vocat,  certis  noctibus  equitwre  debere  super  qucudam
bestias,  et  in  eorum  se  consortio  annumeratam  esse.

Pag.  195^:  fecisti  phylacteria  diabolica  vel  characteres  diaboli-
cos,  quos  quidam  diabolo  suadente  facere  solent,  vel  herbas  vel
succinos  vel  quintam  feriam  in  honorem  Jovis  honorasti.

comedisti  aliquid  de  idolothito,  i.e.  de  oblationibus  quae  in
quibusdam  locis  ad  sepulchra  morfuorum  fiunt,  vel  ad  fontes  aut
ad  arbores  aut  ad  lapides  aut  ad  bivia,  aut  comportasti  in  aggerem
lapides,  aut  capitis  ligaturas  ad  cruces  quae  in  biviis  ponnntar.

Pag.  195® :  misisti  filium  tuum  vel  filiam  super  tectum  aut  super
»  •  Friga  holdam '  in  Cod.  Madrid.,  see  KL  Bchr.  6,  416-7.— BHM.]


SUPERSTITIONS.      C,  1745

fomacem  pro  aliqua  sanitate^  vel  incendisti  grana  nbi  mortaua
homo  erat,  vel  cingulum  mortui  pro  damno  alicajas  in  nodos
colligasti,  vel  pectines,  qnibns  mulierculae  lanam  discerpere  solent,
supra  funua  complosüti,  vel  quaudo  efferebatar  fanus  a  domo
plaustrum  in  duo  dividisii  et  fanus  per  mediam  divisioneni  plawttri
asportare  fecisti.

fecisti  ilias  vanitates  aut  consensisti,  qaas  stultae  mulierea
facere  solent,  dum  cadaver  mortui  hominis  adhuc  in  domo  jacet,
currunt  ad  aquam^  et  addu^unt  tacite  vas  cum  aqua,  et  quam
sublevatur  corpus  mortui,  eandem  a^uamfunduntsubtusferetrum  ;
et  hoc  observant  dum  extra  domum  asportatur  funus,  (ut)  non
altius  quam  ad  genua  elevetur,  et  hoc  faciunt  pro  qaadam  sanitate.

fecisti  aut  consensisti,  quod  quidam  faciunt  homini  occiso  cum
sepelitur;  dant  ei  in  vnanum  unguentum  quoddam,  quasi  illo  un-
guento  post  mortem  vulnus  sanari  possit,  et  sic  cum  unguento
sepeliunt.  •

Pag.  195^^:  fecisti  quod  pi ures  faciunt :  scopant  locum  ubi  facere
Solent  ignem  in  domo  sua^  et  miitunt  grana  hordei  locae  adhuc
calido,  et  si  esalierint  grana,  periculosum  eric,  si  autem  ibi  per-
manserint,  bonum  erit.

fecisti  quod  quidam  faciunt :  dum  visitant  aliquem  infirmum,
cum  appropinquaverint  domui  ubi  infirmus  decumbit,  si  invenerint
aliquem  lapidem  juxta  jacentem,  revolount  lupidem,  et  requirunt
in  loco  ubi  jacebat  lapis,  si  ibi  ait  aliquid  subtus  quod  vivat,  et  si
invenerint  ibi  lumbricum  aut  muscam  aut  formicam  aut  aliquid
qaod  se  moveat,  tunc  affirmant  aegrotum  convalescere ;  si  autem
nihil  ibi  invenerint  quod  se  moveat,  dicunt  esse  moriturum.

fecisti  pueriles  arcus  parvulos  et  puerorum  suturalia,  et  pro-
jecisti  sive  in  cellarium  sive  in  horreum  tuum,  ut  satyri  velpilosi
cum  eis  ibijocarentur,  ut  tibi  aliorum  bona  comportarent,  eb  inde
ditior  fieres.

fecisti  quod  quidam  faciunt  in  calendis  Januari,  i.e.  in  octava
natalis  Domini ;  qui  ea  sancta  nocte  filant,  nent,  consuunt,  et
omne  opus  quodcunque  incipere  possunt,  diabolo  instigante
propter  novum  annum  incipiunt.

Pag.  198®:  credidisti  quod  quidam  credere  solent:  dum  iter
aliquod  faciunt,  si  cornieula  ex  sinistra  eorum  in  dexteram  Ulis
cantaverit,  inde  se  sperant  habere  prosperum  iter ;  et  dum  anxii
fuerint  hospitii,  si  tunc  avis  illp.  quae  muriceps  vocatur,  eo  quod


1746  .  APPENDIX.

mures  capiat  et  tnde  pascatur  nominata^  viam  per  quam  vadunt
ante  se  tran^uolaverit^  se  illi  augurio  et  omini  magis  committunt
quam  Deo.

credidisti  qaod  quidam  credere  solent:  dam  necesse  habent
ante  lucem  aliorsum  exire,  non  audent^  dicentes  qnod  posterum
sit,  et  ante  galli  cantum  egredi  non  liceat  et  pericalosam  sit,  eo
qaod  immundi  spiritus  ante  galliciniam  plas  ad  nocendnm
potestatis  babeant  quam  post,  et  gallus  suo  cantu  plus  valeat  eos
repellere  et  sedare,  quam  ilia  divina  mens  quae  est  in  homine  sua
fide  et  crucis  signaculo.

credidisti  quod  quidam  credere  solent,  quod  sint  agrestes
feminae,  quas  silvaticas  vocant,  quas  dicunt  esse  corporeas,  et
quando  voluerint  ostendant  se  suis  amatoribus,  et  cum  eis  dicunt
se  oblectasse,  et  item  quando  voluerint  abscondant  se  et  evanes-
cant.

fecisti  ut  quaedam  mulieres  in  quibusdam  temporibus  anni
facere  solent,  ut  in  domo  tua  mensam  praeparares,  et  tuos  cibos  et
potum  cum  tribus  cultelUs  supra  mensam  poneres,  at  si  veniasent
tres  illae  sorores  quas  antiqua  posteritas  et  antiqua  stultitia  Parcas
nominavit,  ibi  reficerentur;  et  tulisti  divinae  pietati  potestatem
suam  et  nomen  suum^  et  diabolo  tradidisti,  ita  dico,  at  crederes
illas  quas  tu  dicis  esse  sorores  tibi  posse  aut  hie  aut  in  fataro
prodesse.

Pag.  199^  :  fecisti  quod  quaedam  mulieres  facere  solent  et
firmiter  credunt,  ita  dico,  ut  si  vicinus  ejus  lacte  vel  apibu^
abundaret,  omnem  abundantiam  lactis  et  mellis,  quam  suns  vicinus
ante  se  habere  visus  est,  ad  se  et  sua  animalia  vel  ad  quos
voluerint,  a  diabolo  adjutae,  suis  fascinationibus  et  incantationi-
bus  se  posse  convertere  credunt.

credidisti  quod  quaedam  credere  solent,  ut  quamcunque  domam
intraverint,  puUos  aucarum,  pavonum,  gallinarum,  etiam  porcellos
et  aliorum  animalium  foetus  verbo  vel  visu  vel  audita  obfascinare
et  perdere  posse  affirment.

credidisti  quod  multae  mulieres  retro  Satanam  conversae
credunt  et  affirmant  verum  esse,  ut  credas  in  quietae  noctis
silentio  cum  te  coUocaveris  in  lecto  tuo,  et  marito  tuo  in  sinu  tuo
jacente,te,  dumcorporea  sis,jfani/uf  clausis  exire  posse^  et  terrarum
spatia  cum  aliis  simili  errore  deceptis  pertransire  valere,  et  homines
baptizatos  et  Christi  sanguine  redjemtos,  sine  armia  visibilibus,  et


SUPEBSTITIONS.      C.  1747

infcerficere  et  de  coctis  carnibus  eoram  vos  comedere,  et  in  loco
cordis  eorum  stramen  aat  lignum  aut  aliquod  hujasmodi  ponere^  et
comestis^  iteram  vivos  facere  et  indacias  vivendi  dare.

Pag.  200^ :  credidisti  qiiod  qaaedam  jnalieres  credere  solent,
Qt  to  cum  aliis  diaboli  membris  in  quietae  noctis  silentio  clausis
januis  in  a'erem  usque  ad  nubes  subleveris,  et  ibi  cum  aliis pugnes,
et  at  vulneres  alias  et  tu  vulnera  ab  eis  accipias.

fecisti  quod  quaedam  mulieres  facere  solent :  prostemunt  se  in
faciem,  et  discopertis  natibus^  jubent  ut  supra  nudas  nates  con-
ficiatur  panis,  et  eo  decocto  tradunt  maritis  suis  ad  comedendum  ;
hoc  ideo  faciant^  ut  plus  exardescant  in  amorem  illorum.

posuisH  infantem  iuuni  juxta  ignem,  et  alius  caldariam  supra
ignem  cum  aqua  misit^  et  ebuUita  aqua  superfasus  est  infans  et
mortuus.     (Repeated  19^  149.)

fecisti  quod  quaedam  mulieres  facere  solent^  diabolicis  adim-
pletae  disciplinis ;  quae  observant  vestigia  et  indagines  Christian-
orum,  et  tollunt  de  eorum  vestigia  cespitem  et  ilium  observant,  et
inde  sperant  sanitatem  aut  vitam  eorum  auferre.

Pag.  200^ :  fecisti  quod  quaedam  mulieres  facere  solent :  tollunt
testam  hominis  et  igni  comburunt,  et  cinerem  dant  viris  suis  ad
bibendum  pro  sanitate.

fecisti  quod  quaedam  mulieres  facere  solent,  illae  dico  quae
habent  vagientes  infantes^  effodiunt  terram  et  ex  parte  pertusant
earn,  et  per  illud  foramien  pertrahunt  infantem  et  sic  dicunt
vagientis  infantis  cessare  vagitum.

fecisti  quod  quaedam  mulieres  instinctu  diaboli  facere  solent :
cum  aliquis  infans  sine  baptismo  mortuus  fuerit,  tollunt  cadaver
parvnli^  et  ponunt  in  aliquo  secrete  loco,  et  palo  corptMculum  ejus
transfigunty  dicentes,  si  sic  non  fecissent^  quod  infantulus  surgeret
et  multos  laedere  posset.

Pag.  200^ :  cum  aliqua  femina  parere  debet  et  non  potest,  in
ipso  dolore  si  morte  obierit,  in  ipso  sepulchre  matrem  cum  infante
palo  in  terram  transfigunt.

Pag.  200^ :  cum  infans  noviter  natus  est,  et  statim  baptizatiis
et  sic  mortuus  fuerit,  dum  sepeliunt  eum,  in  dexteram  manum
ponunt  ei  pateram  cerea/m  cum  oblata,  et  in  sinistram  manum
calicem  cum  vino  similiter  cereum  ponunt  ei^  et  sic  eum  sepeliunt.

Pag.  201* :  fecisti  quod  quaedam  mulieres  facere  solent :
deponunt  vestimenta  sua^  et  totum  corpus  nudum  melle  inungunt,


1748  APPENDIX«

et  sic  mellito  sao  corpore  supra  triticum  in  qnodam  linteo  in
terra  deposito  sese  hac  atque  iliac  saepias  revolvunt,  et  cnncta
tritici  grana,  quae  hnmido  corpori  adbaerent^  cautissime  collignDt
et  in  molam  mittnnt^  et  retrorsum  contra  solem  molam  circuire
Taciunt,  et  sic  in  farinam  redigant,  et  de  ilia  farina  panem  con-
ficiant^  et  sic  maritis  snis  ad  comedendam  tradant^  at  comeslo
pane  marcescant  et  deficiant.

Pag.  20P :  fecisti  qaod  qnaedam  mnlieres  facere  solent :  dam
pluviam  non  hdbent  et  ea  indigent^  tunc  plares  paellas  congre-
gant^ et  nnam  parvulam  puellam  quasi  ducem  sibi  praeponunt,
et  eandem  denudant,  et  extra  villam^  ubi  herbam  iusqaiamnm
(hyos-cyamum)  inveniunt,  quae  Teutonice  belisa^  vocatur^  sic
nudatam  deducunt^  et  eandem  herbam  eandem  virginem  sic
nudam  minima  digito  dextrae  manus  eruere  faciunt,  et  radicitos
erutam  cum  ligamine  aliquo  ad  minimum  digitum  dextri  pedis
ligare  faciunt.  Et  singulae  puellae  singulas  virgas  in  manibos
habentes  supradictam  virginem  herbam  post  se  trahentem  t»
flumen  proximum  introducunt,  et  cum  eisdem  virgis  virginem
flumine  aspergunt,  et  sic  suis  incantationibus  pluviam  se  habere
sperant.  Et  post  eandem  virginem  sic  nudam^  transpositi»  et
mutatis  in  modum  cancri  vestigiis,  a  flumine  ad  villam  inter
manus  reducunt.

D.  From  the  Zurich  Pap.  MS8.  (Wasserkirch-bibl.)  B  ^/j^.
4to.  written  1393,  perh.  at  Zurich,  cert,  in  Switzld.  (Com-
munic.  by  Wackemagel.)

38.  r.  ...  du  solt  ndt  globen  an  zöber  noch  an  luppe
noch  an  hesse  noch  an  lachenen  noch  an  fur-sehen^  noch  an
messen  noch  an  die  naht-frötven,  noch  an  der  agelster  schrien,
noch  an  die  brawen.  vn  der  wangen  iuchen,  noch  an  die  batenien,
noch  an  deheiner  haut  dinges  das  vnglob  si.

140.  r.  .  .  .  Dis  stuk  seit  (tells)  von  den  lossern  vn  von
den  valschen  propheten.

Die  losserr  vn  die  valachen  gotf&rmigen  wissagen  das  sint  die
Idt  die  inen  selben  zfi-eigenent  vn  zA-legent  (arrogate)  etUcbd

[ '  *  Herbam  quantamvU  invemnnt,  quae  Tentonice  hilisa  Tocatnr/  Cod.  Madrid.,
see  El.  Bohr.  5,  417.  Bilisa  Bounds  like  Pol.  bilica,  bielica,  but  that  is  artemifiia.
Our  hilte,  henbane,  is  Pol.  bielnm,  Buss.  belen&.— EHM.]

['  'EMäi.  fiuT'»ehen  (fire-gazing),  not  für-sehen  (fore-seeiBg).— EHM.]


SUPERSTITIONS.     D.  1749

ding,  dd  allein  des  waren  Gottes  eigen  sint,  &n  alles  yrlöb,  von  ir
eignen  bosheit  vii  ir  grossen  valscbeit.  Das  ist^  das  sd  kdnftig
ding  Yor-wissagent,  vnd  zdhend  da-mit  vnzallich  vil  seien  mit
inen  z&  der  belle,  wan  sd  begnüget  ndt  (for^  not  content)  an  ir
selbs  bosbeit^  si  wellen  öcb  ander  Idt  mit  inen  zieben  in  den
ewigen  tot,  die  si  betrdgent  von  des  tdvels  rat  mit  ir  b&sen  listen.
Nr  sint  dirre  valscben  wissen  yII^  das  ist^  der  lossungen  vnd
solicber  wissagung.  Etlicb  gescbibet  dar  den  bösen  geist
phytonem  appolUnem,  der  ein  vrbab  ist  der  selben  bosbeit.
Etlicb  gescbibet  in  dem  fdr  (fire)^  dd  wirt  genemmet  pyromancia.
Ein  andrd  beisset  cteromaneia,  dd  gescbibet  in  dem  luft.  Ein
audrd  geomancia,  dd  gescbibet  in  dem  ertricb.  Ein  andrd  ydro-
mancia,  dd  gescbibt  in  dem  wasser.  Ein  andrd  beisset  (Here
begins  140.  v.)  nigrotnancia,  das  da  ze  Latine  ist  ein  toter.
Wan  dur  trdgndsse  werdent  etwenne  geacbtet  die  toten  erstan-
den sin  von  dem  tot,  vnd  danket  die  Idt  wie  si  warsagen,  vnd
entwdrten  der  dingen,  der  sd  gefraget  werdin  (for  tbe  dead  are
imagined  to  bave  risen,  and  to  prophesy  and  answer  tbings  tbat
tbey  are  asked).  Ynd  dis  gescbibet  dur  die  anr&ffang  vnd  be-
scbwerang  der  tuvelen.

Hier-vmb  sdlent  elld  M'  (therefore  sboald  all  men)  bekennen
vnd  fdr  war  wissen,  das  ein  ieklicber  menscbe,  wib  oder  man,
der  da  haltet  oder  vebet  (practises)  solicb  toissagung  oder  losen
von  zöber,  oder  bescherten,  oder  luppe.  oder  hezze.  oder  lachnen.
oder  für-sehen^  oder  messen,  oder  der  edelster  schrien,  oder  vogeU
sang,  oder  brawen  oder  wangen  iucken,  oder  von  den  bathinien
oder  debeiner  bant  das  nngelöb  ist.  oder  der  es  gern  hört  vnd
vemimet.  oder  den  gebillet,  die  es  vebent  vnd  haltent.  oder  es
wol  glöbt,  Aid  der  in  ir  boz  zfi  in  tag  (1.  gat,  goes),  Aid  der  sd
in  sin  has  faret,  vmb  das  er  sd  rates  frag  (or  who  brings  them
to  bis  own  bouse,  to  ask  their  advice),  Der  sol  wissen,  das  er
sinen  kristanen  globen  vnd  sinen  tuf  bat  vber-gangen  vnd
gebrochen.  Vnd  das  er  si  ein  beiden.  Ein  abtrdoiger  vnd
ein  vient  Gottes.  Vnd  wisse  sich  swarlich  in-löffen  (incurred)
oder  in-valled  in  den  zorn  Gottes.  Vnd  das  er  ab  sale  varn
in  die  ewigen  verdampndsse.  Es  si  denne  das  er  vor  (unless  be
first)  mit  kristenlicber  penitencie  oder  rdw  werde  gebessert
vnd  gesiint  Got.

[  >  E\id,  fiur-iehen  (fiie- gazing),  oot  für-sehen  (fore-seeing).— EHM.]


1750  APPENDIX.

[Here  follows  within  commas  transl.  of  Barchard  10,  1  above :
Iliad  etiam — revolvitar.]  ''Oach  ist  das  nut  under  we^n  ze
lassenne  oder  ze  übersehenne^  das  etlich  meinieiigu  tciber,  die
da  nach  dem  tdvel  Sathan  bekert  sint,  vnd  mit  der  tdvel  rer-
spottang  vnd  mit  fantasien  oder  trdgndsse  sint  verwiset.  Das  die
globen  vnd  veriehent  das  si  selber  vnd  ein  gr&ssd  mengi  wihtn
ritten  vnd  varen  mit  der  Heiden  güttinnen  dd  da  heisset  Dyana,
oder  mit  Herodiade,  uf  etlichen  walt-tieren  in  der  naeht-stilli  dur
vil  ertriclies  oder  landes.  Vnd  das  si  irem  gebot  gehorsam  sien  als
einer  gewaltigen  fröwen.  Vnd  das  sd  dd  selb  guttinne  ze  benemten
nechten  raffe  zu  irem  dienst.  Vnd  hiervon  haltent  sd.  Vnd
wolti  Got  das  dis  wiber  allein  in  solicher  wis  verdorben  weren
gegen  Got,  vnd  ndt  vil  mit  inen  gezogen  vnd  verwiaet  hettin
in  das  verderben  des  bösen  (141.  r.)  vnglöben.  Wan  ein  vnzal-
lichd  mengi  ist  mit  diser  valschen  wis  betrogen,  die  da  glöbent
das  es  war  si,  vnd  da-mit  das  si  es  glöbent  ab  dem  we|2^  gant
des  rechten  glöben,  vnd  in*wollen  werdent  der  scheüichen
irrange  der  heidenen/'  das  si  glöben  vnd  wenen  wellen,  das
ichtes  iht  gotliches  oder  götlicher  kraflb  vssert-halb  einem  waren
Got  si.

Hier-vmb  sdlent  die  priester  dur  die  kilchen,  die  inen  en-
pholhen  sint,  dem  volk  Gottes  mit  grossem  flisse  steteklich
ob-ligen,  vnd  inen  predion  vnd  sicherlichen  bewisen,  das  si
bekennent  werden,  das  disd  ding  elld  valsch  sint  vnd  ndt  sint
von  dem  göttlichen  geist,  me  das  si  halten  das  dis  trdgnust
ingegebe  si,  entrdwen  (verily)  von  dem  bösen  geist  dem  gemnt
der  glöbigen  werden  (arise)  solichen  wibs  gemut  (sie  omnia),
vnd  dar  vnglöben  er  si  im  selber  hat  undertenig  gemachet.
Alzehant  wandlet  er  denne  aber  sich  in  gesteltnds  vnd  in  glich-
heit  menger  haut  personen.  Vnd  das  gemut  das  er  gevangen
haltet,  das  betrdget  er  in  dem  slaf.  Vnd  offenbart  im  ietzenc
frölichd  ding,  denne  trarigd,  ietz  bekant  personen,  den  vnbekant,
vnd  fürt  die  dur  die  wildinen  vnd  dar  die  lender.  Vnd  so  der
UDglöbig  geist  dis  trdgndg  allein  lidet,  so  haltet  er  ndt  das  dis
in  dem  gemut  gescheh,  sunder  in  dem  libe  (body) ;  wan  wer  ist
der  mensche  der  ndt  in  trömen  vnd  in  Offenbarungen  oder
gesiebten  der  nechten  ndt  vs-geleitet  werde  von  im  selben,  da  er
slaffend  meniges  siht  (sees)  das  er  wachend  nie  gesach  (saw)
oder  villich  niemer  gesiebt  (will  see)  ?     Vnd  hier-vmb  wer  ist


SÜPEBSTITIONS.      D.  1761

also  torebt  aid  so  ynvemuiiftig^  der  disd  elld,  dd  da  allein  in  dem
geist  geschehent^  über  ein  wenet  ynd  haltet  das  es  geschehe  in
dem  libe,  etc.

(Fol.  143.  r.)  .  .  •  Nv  mugent  dis  valsch  vnd  vppig
erznien  (fulsome  remedies)  geteilet  werden  nach  den  menig-
valtigen  durften^  von  der  wegen  sie  geübt  werdent  (classed  acc.
to  their  uses).  Etlich  geschehent  von  der  Idt  siechheit  wegen
oder  des  vihes.  Etlich  fur  unberhaftikeit.  Eclich  fiir  die  erbeit
der  fröwen^  die  mit  gebern  mugen.  Etlich  wider  den  hagel  vnd
das  ungewitter«  Ander  wider  allerlei  pin.  Hier-vmb  ist  den  ze
ratenne,  die  suslichv  ding  lident  (we  advise  them  that  suffer  such
things)^  das  sii  ellu  tuiieUieh  gespenst  lassent,  vnd  den  allein  rates
vmb  ir  nottnrf  fragen  (ask  Him  alone  for  counsel  in  their  need)
vnd  von  im  es  s&chen,  von  des  gewalt  elld  ding  geschaffen  sint^
vnd  von  des  willen  ellii  ding  berichtet  werdent.  Vnd  sdllent
sprechen  demutklich.  'Herre  Got,  kum  vns  ze  helf.'  Wan
(for)  dur  vns  vermugen  wir  nihtes  nit,  sunder  vns  gebristet  (we
fail)  ob  wir  getrüwen  haben  dur  vns.  Vnd  dar-vmb  wer  da
lidet  siechheit,  der  hab  allein  in  die  barmherzikeit  Gottes  ein
gfites  getrüwen,  vnd  enphahi  {receive)  den  heiligen  fron-lichamen
(Lord's  bodj)  vnd  das  heilige  bl&t  vnsers  lieben  Herren  Ihesv
Christi  mit  festem  glöben  vnd  mit  gftter  andaht.  Vnd  begere
och  das  gesegnet  61i  von  der  heiligen  kilchen  getrdwlich.  Vnd
also  nachdem  vns  der  apostel  sprichet,  so  behaltet  das  gebette
des  glöben  (prayer  of  faith)  den  siechen.

Nu  gat  aller-meist  mit  diser  dppikeit  der  zöbrie  vmb  (what
has  the  chief  hand  in  sorcery  is)  die  (143  v.)  bos  kdndikeit  der
valschen  vnd  schedliehen  wiben,  als  och  glich  da-vor  geseit  (said)
ist.  Wan  dik  (for  often)  vnd  vil  als  vil  es  an  inen  ist,  so
enteren  vnd  versmachent  solich  die  sacrament  der  heiligen
kilchen.  Vnd  etwenne  w4rkent  sd  mit  inen,  das  erschrokenlich
och  ze  sagenne  vnd  ze  horen  ist  allen  wol  glöbenden  M°  (men) .
Vnd  hier-vmb  werdent  si  gesehen  böser  vnd  wirser  den  die
tduel.  Wan  die  tuuel  globent  Got  vnd  fdrhtent  in  mit  zittrunge.
Zfl  dem  disc  an  vorht  vnd  an  zitter  gäut  (go  without  fear  or  trem-
bling). Vnd  wurkent  mit  Gottes  fron-licham  vngenemu  vnd  uner-
lichd  ding.  Des  man  ein  gliches  zeichen  oder  wunder  liset  in  der
geschrift  von  eim  wib,  die  in  der  selben  wis  unsers  Herren  fron-
licham  enphieng,  vnd  behftb  den  in  irem  mundt  vi^d  gieng  also


1752  APFBKBIX.

hin,  ynd  huste  iren  man,  vmb  das  sin  minne  grosser  wurde  zu  ir
denne  vor.  und  zehant  wart  dd  hoetie  gewandlet  in  fleisch.
Vnd  do  si  des  gewar  ward,  do  wolt  si  unsem  Herren  wider  ts
ban  geworfen.  Do  wdrkt  vnser  Herre  da  sin  wander,  das  si  in
weder  mocht  ysgewerfen  noc  gesunden  (wafer  in  month,  she
went  and  kissed  her  husband,  to  increase  his  love  for  her  ;  the
wafer  tamed  into  flesh/  and  she  could  neither  spit  it  out  nor
swallow  it),  etc.

(Fol.  144.  r.).  .  •  .  Wie  das  ny  da- vor  geseit  si,  das  man
miden  sdle  solich  erzenie  die  in  solicher  tdael-licher  wis  gesche-
bent«  Doch  wer  der  weri  der  das  heilsami  kmt  mit  den  xij
stdken  des  glöben  vnd  mit  dem  pater  noster  schribe  (144.  t.)
an  einen  brief,  vnd  den  denne  leiti  (then  laid  it)  vf  den  siechen,
vmb  das  Got  aller  ding  schepfer  also  geeret  werde,  das  en-win
ndt  verworfen  noch  versmachet,  so  man  keins  der  vorgenanten
verworfenen  vnd  falschen  dingen  mit  dar-zA  mischelt«  Ynd
zit  halten  erznie  ze  gebenne,  vnd  za  den  lessinen  ist  och  nat  ze
verwerfenne.  vnd  och  beddt  die  der  zit  war-nement  ze  seienne  (sow)
vnd  böm  ze  behöwenne  (hew).  Vnd  zfi  solichen  dingen  die  zu
gebdrschen  (farming)  werken  beh6rent,  die  sint  dar-vmb  ndt  ze
straffene.  Wan  die  natdrlichen  bescheidenheit  mag  man  halten
oder  veben  in  den  dingen.  Vnd  si  heint  och  ein  sicher  bescheiden-
heit Alsdenne  So  man  kein  ander  vppig  haltunge  meinet,  noch  dar-
zfi  lat  gan.  Ze  verstemmenne  snslicher  vertumlicher  vnd  schäd-
licher bosheit  sol  in  allen  wis  geflissen  sin,  vnd  hier  zft  mnnder  sin
die  kdndikeit  der  priester,  der  seien  besorger.  Das  ndt  die  kristen-
lich  geistlicheit  mit  disen  valschen  vorgeseiten  dingen  werde  an-
treinefc  vnd  verwiset.  Vnd  wider  infalle  in  die  sitten  der  heide-
schen vnd  t&uelschen  vngloben,  das  ein  glöb  der  menschen  gemuc
werde  vnd  si,  vnd  ein  miltikeit  der  werken  An  ze  betten  einen
waren  Got  den  Vater  vnd  den  San  vnd  den  heiligen  Geist,  der  da
ist  gebenediet  in  die  weit  der  weiten.^

E.     From   a  paper  MS.  of  the    Basle   Univ.   Libr.,    fol.,    loth
cent.,  marked  Ä.  v.  19.     (Oommanic.  by  Wackemagel.)

l.r.  a.     Incipit  registram  super  libro.  de  supersticionibas  ab

eximio  magistro  Nicolao  magni  de   gawe.  sacre   theologie  pro-

[*  Conf.  the  eccles.  and  non-eoolea.  benedictions  in  HpVs  Ztsohr.  4,  576. -EHM.]


SUPERSTITIONS.      E.  1753

fessore  anno  a  natiaitate  saluatoris  M^cccc^xv^     editio  secandum
ordinem  alphabeti.^

10.  V.  b.  Per  hoc  statim  patet  falsitas  et  error  qaomndum
fatnorum  astronimorum  dicencium  se  posse  facere  ymagines  sub
certa  constellacione,  per  virtutes  suas  cogentes  demones  nt
veniant  ad  istas  ytnagines,  ad  operandum  qaaedam  mira  et  ad
dandum  responsa.  Sed  veninnt  non  coacti  propter  duo^  ut
Thomas  dicit  ibidem  (ante :  sanctas  thomas  parte  prima,  q  ziiij)
in  solncione  2^  articali  et  hoc  incertis  oonstellacionibas.  Primo
quidem,  ut  homines  in  hunc  errorem  inducant  ut  credant  aliquod
numen  esse  in  celis.  Sicut  ynam  vetnlam  noui^  que  credidit
Solem  esse  deam,  vocans  earn  sanctam  dominam.

11.  r.  a.  et  alloquendo  eum  solem.  benedixit  per  eum  sub
certis  verbis^  sub  osseryancia  quadam  supersticiosa^  que  dixit
se  plus  quam  quadraginta  annos  credidisse^  et  multas  infirmitates
curasse.  Insuper  hodie  inveniuntur  homines  tarn  layci  quam
clerici,  literati  quam  illiterati^  et  quod  plus  dolendum  est,  yalde
magni,  qui  cum  novilunium  primo  viderint,  flexis  genibus  ado-
rant,  vel  deposito  capucio  vel  pileo,  inclinato  capite  honorant
alloquendo  et  suscipiendo.  ymmo  eciam  plures  ieiunant  ipso  die
novilunij,  sive  sit  dies  dominica  in  qua  secundum  ordinacionem
ecclesie  non  est  ieiunandum  propter  resurreccionis  leticiam,  sive
quacnnqne  alia  die.  eciamsi  esset  dies  dominice  natiuitatis.  que
omnia  habent  speciem  ydolatrie.  ab  idolatris  relicte.  de  quibus
Jeremie  vij  scribitur.  quod  fecerunt  placentas  regine  celi  s.  lune
ofierendo  eas  ei.  Et  quidam  volentes  hoc  palliare  dicunt  quod
non  honorant  Innam  ieiunando,  sed  omnes  sanctos.  quorum
festa  et  ieiunia  incidnnt  in  mese  lunacionis  vise.  Ecce  qualis
est  ista  excusacio,  etc.

11.  r.b.  Sic  eciam  de  mandate  quo  preceptum  fuit,  quod
nidum  cum  ouia  vel  pullis  et  matre  desuper  incubante  non  de-
bereut  simul  seruare,  sed  matrem  permittere  auolare.  Deut®.  xxij.
hoc  enim  quando  inuenerunt,  trahebant  ad  fecunditatem  et  ad
fortunam,  si  conseruarentur  simiil.  Et  per  oppositum  ad  infortu-
nium et  sterilitatem  quod  gentile  erat.  Sic  modo  vetule  dicunt
inuendonem  actis  vel  obuli  reseruati  esse  prestigium  magne  fortune.
Et  per  oppositum  de  inuencione  magni  thesauri.

11.  y.  b.     Similiter  prohibitum  fnit  eis  ne  yiri  yterentur  yesti-

[>  Several  MSS.  at  Manioh.    Gawe  is  Jauer  in  Schlesien.— EHM.]


1754  APPENDIX.

bus  malieram.  Et  econverso.  Et  de  hac  prohibitione  dicifenT
Deut®.  xxij.  Non  indaetar  mulier  veste  virili,  nee  vir  vtetnr
veste  feminea.  abhominabilis  enim  apud  Deum  est  qui  facit,
quia  mulieres  in  veneracione  Martis  induerunt  yestes  et  arma
vivorum.  et  viri  in  veneracione  Veiieris  vestes  muliernm.  Sio
nunc  fit  in  hominibus  christianis  tempore  carnis  privii,  qoando
seruiunt  deo  ventiis  et  dee  Veneris,  tarn  viri  quam  mulieres.
Item  indsionea  fecerunt  super  mortuos  ad  placandunx  Deum,  ut
vehemenciam  doloris  de  morte  thaurorum  exprimerent.  qood
adhuc  multi  faciunt  christiani  de  morte  thaurorum  suornm,  quod
utique  est  de  specie  plutonis.  Stigmata  vero  et  figuras  adhuc
et  christiani  faciunt  et  vocant  breuia,  et  in  propriis  codicibus,
cartis  alijsque  in  rebus  videlicet  in  metallis  reseroant.  qoe
ydolatria  vera  sunt,  ymmo  Christiane  religioni  contraria  sive
aduersa.

12.  r.  a.  Sed  quia  obseruaciones  eompniorum,  auguriorum^
constelladonum,  sternutadonum,  obuiacioni(m,  dierum  et  horarum,
etigmatumy  caracterum,  yrriaginum,  et  impressionum  astrorum  non
solum  vicine  sunt  ydolatrie,  sed  eciam  vere  ydolatrie  cum  radici-
bus  et  intime  sunt  perscrutanda  (1.  exstirpandae  ?)  quibus  omni-
bus se  fraus  antiqui  serpentis  immiscet,  quemadmodum  prios
dictum  est.

12.  V.  b.  Sed  forte  adhuc  diceres.  videtur  vtique  quod
demones  proprio  generent,  quia  compertum  est  et  apud  wulgares
communiter  dicitur,  quod  filij  demonum  incuborum  mulienbos,
eorum  filijs  subtractis,  ab  ipsis  demonibus  supponantur,  et  ab
eis  tanquam  propra  filij  nutriantur.  propter  quod  eciam  cambiones
dicuntur,  eciam  cambiti  vel  mutuati,  et  mulieribus  parientiboSi
propriis  filijs  subtractis,  suppositi,  hos  dicunt  macilentos,  semper
eiulantes,  lactis  eosque  bibulos,  ut  quod  nulla  vbertate  lactis
vnum  lactare  sufBciunt.  13.  r.  a.  Hij  tamen,  postqnam  in
terris  commorati  sunt,  dicuntur  euanuisse.  .  .  .  Ex  quo
patet  quod  tales  pueri  non  generantur  a  demonibus,  sed  sunt
ipsimet  demones.  sicut  eciam  possent  apparere  in  specie  vetn-
larum  rapiencium  pueros  de  cunis,  que  wlgo  fatue  vocantnr^
de  nocte  apparentes  et  paruulos  ut  apparet  lauare  et  igne  asmre^
que  demones  sunt  in  specie  vetularum.


SUPBBSTTTIONS.      F.  1755

F.     Prom  a  paper  codex  of  the   14th    (1 5th?)    cent.,    in   the
library  at  St.  Florian.     (Communic.  by  Chmel.)

1 .  So  ain  f raw  pracht  wirt  zn  dem  chind,  so  czeuclU  sy  dem
chind  ainen  zwelf-poten,  so  stirbt  das  chind  an  taufF  nicht  (conf.
39  and  H,  50).

2.  item  an  dem  Vaschang-tag,  so  werseyt  sy  prein  an  die  dillen,
velt  er  herab,  so  stirbt  er  des  iars.

3.  item  inilich  essent  sy  des  nachts,  so  waschent  sy  weis  des
iars.

4.  item  ayr  (eggs)  essent  sy,  so  wernt  sy  nicht  hertt  an  dem
pauch  des  iars.

5.  item  so  man  an  dem  Oster-tag  legt  man  wärst  (sausages)
vnder  das  chrawt  vnd  ain  geiis  (goose),  welcher  die  wiirst  siecht,
der  siecht  des  iars  chain  slangen,  vnd  wer  der  gens  ist  (eats),
der  gewint  des  iar  des  ehalten  siechten  nit.

6.  item  den  spekch  (lard)  den  man  weicht  mit  den  praitigen,
do  «miVen^  dy  pawrn  (farmers)  den  phläg  mit,  so  mag  man  sew
nicht  zaubern.    .

7.  item  an  dem  Weihnacht  abent,  so  get  ainew  zu  ainen
scheiterhavffen  vnd  zuht  ain  scheuit  (pulls  a  log)  aus  dem  haufien
[in]  des  teufeis  nam.  pegreifift  sy  ain  längs,  so  wirt  ir  ain  langer
man  (conf.  49).

8.  item  an  dem  Yaschang-tag,  steigt  ains  avf  ainen  pawn
(tree)  vnd  schrait  'alheit!*  mit  schelt- warten  *  trag  die  phaim
Iter  haim/^  so  wirt  des  iars  nicht  natig.

9.  ee  man  zu  der  metten  an  dem  Weihnachtag  get,  so  greifift
ains  vnder  die  panTech  vnd  nymt  ain  hant-uolle  malten  (mould)
heraus,  vint  es  etwas  labentigigs  in  den  molten,  so  stirbt  es  des
iars  nicht.

10.  so  man  die  pal/n  haim- trait  von  kirchen,  so  legent  sy
sew  ee  in  die  chiie  chrip  (lay  it  first  in  the  cows'  crib),  ee  das
sy  sew  under  das  tach  (roof)  tragent.  so  gent  die  chue  des  iars
gem  haim.

11.  item  diQ  pursten  die  man  zu  Aenpal/n  stekcht,  do  pursten
sy  das  viech  (they  brush  the  cattle)  mit,  so  wernt  sie  nicht  lausig.

12.  item  palm  legent  sy  under  das  chrawt  hefen,  so  valient
nicht  fleugen  (flies)  in  das  chrawt.

[  1  *  ja  izz  hie  haim  nioht  olheit/  Helbl.  8,  594.— EHM.]


1756  APPENDIX.

13.  item  si  tragent  vmb  das  haws,  ee  si  sew  hin-in  tragent,  so
esseDt  die  fachs  der  hnner  (fowls)  nicht.

14.  item  an  dem  Weinacht-tag  zu  metten-zeit  get  man  mil
liecht  za  ainem  prxinn  (well),  vnd  lügt  in  den  prunn;  siecht
es  sten  in  dem  prann  ain  man^  so  nymbt  es  des  iars  ainn
man.

15.  'ich  pewt  dir  plater  u.  fel  pey  der  heiligen  sei  die  parn
(bom)  ist  za  Iherasalem  ynd  taufib  im  Jordan,  das  da  nicht
en-peitest  der  mess  vnd  des  ampts,  pey  dem  Vater  vnd  Son
vnd  dem  heyligen  Geist.'  vnd  sprich  z  pr  ur,  vnd  tue  das
drey  mal.

16.  item  so  ainen  von  taten  vischen  trawmt  (dreams  of  dead
fish),  sol  ains  sterben  aus  dem  selben  haus.

17.  item  so  ain  viech  nicht  gen  mag  (if  a  beast  cannot  walk),
so  pintt  man  im  ain  pant  (bindeth  a  band)  an  ainem  Suntag  vmb,
vnd  macht  den  chnoph  oben  za,  so  wirt  im  sein  pazz.

]  8.  item  so  ain  chue  ain  erst-chalb  trait,  so  nympt  die  peyrinn
ain  (Uchen-laub  (farmer's  wife  takes  an  oak-leaf),  vnd  stekcht  en
mitten  ain  nadel  darin,  vnd  legt  es  en  mitten  in  den  sechter,  vnd
nympt  dan  das  vherruckh  mit  dem  hör  vnd  spindl  ab  dem  rokcheo,
vnd  stekcht  es  auch  en  mitten  in  den  sechter,  so  mag  man  der
chue  nicht  nemen  die  milich,  vnd  des  ersten  milcht  sy  in  den
sechter,  do  das  ding  inn  stekcht  die  selb  chue  [am  ersten],  die
weil  das  dinkch  dar-inn  stekcht.

19.  so  man  die  chaee  an  die  waid  (pasture)  treibt,  so  grebt
(buries)  man  ain  eJcIct^  unter  den  gatem,  vnd  treibt  das  viech  dar-
vber,  so  mag  man  sew  nicht  zaubern.

20.  item  Sand  Blasen  wasser  gibt  man  ze  trinkchen  den
iungen  huenrn  vnd  gensen  (fowls  and  geese),  ee  man  sew  ab  dem
nest  nymbt,  so  trait  sew  der  fuchs  nicht  hin,  vnd  sind  sicher
von  dem  orn.

21.  item  so  aine  ain  chalb  verchauß  (sells),  so  sneyt  sy  dem
chalb  das  wedl  ab  ab  seinem  swenczl  (cuts  the  tuft  off  its  tail),
vnd  des  hars  ab  dem  rechten  arm,  vnd  gibts  der  chue  ze  essea.
so  rert  sy  nicht  nach  dem  chalb.

22.  item  so  aine  der  andern  ir  milich  wil  nemen,  vnd  macht  das
sy  pseichent,  so  nymbt  sy  drey  chroten  (toads)  auf  ein  mel-mülter
ain  abichen,  vnd  traitz  der  chue  für,  dy  lerfi  dy  chroten  in  sich,

['  The  word  means  steel.— EHM.]


suPBBSTinoNS.    F.  1757

so  ist  ir  nachpawrin  irer  milich  prawbt  (bereft)^  vnd  sy  hat  dy
milich.

23.  item  so  ains  stirbt^  so  hant  etleich  den  glauben  (some
think) y  di  sei  hob  nicht  rueb  (rah,  rest?),  uncz  man  ir  aus  leitt.

24.  item  etleich  sprechent,  die  weil  man  lewtt  (toll),  so  wert
die  sei  peichtich.  etleich  sprechent,  so  sich  die  sei  schaid  von
dem  leichnam,  so  sey  sy  die  erst  nacht  hincz  Sand  Oerdrawten,
dy  ander  nacht  pey  Sand  Michel,  die  dritt  wo  si  hin  verdint  hab
(has  deserved).

25.  item  ettleich  glaabent,  die  sei  genn  aus  den  weiczen^  an
der  Sambstag-nacht,  vnd  sein  heraussen  vncz  an  den  Mantag,  so
müssen  sy  wider  in  die  pen.

26.  item  ettleich  essent  nicht  fleichgs  des  Phincz-tags  in  der
chottemer/  so  sterbent  sy  nicht  in  dem  sterb.

27.  item  so  ainem  die  oren  seusent  (one's  ears  ring),  so  habent
sy  den  glauben,  man  red  vbl  von  inn.

28.  item  so  ainem  die  chnie  geswellent,  so  get  es  zu  ainer
frawn  die  zwendling  getragen  hat,  vnd  heist  sey  (bids  her)  im
ain  faden  spinnen,  den  pintz  (this  he  binds)  vber  die  chnie,  so
wirt  him  pas.

29.  item  das  die  hüner  haubat  werden  (chicks  be  tufted),  so
sy  die  henn  anseczt,  so  hult  sy  ain  zucxl  an,  vnd  macht  ainen
chTwph  avf  dem  haupp,  vnd  halt  in  also  auf  dem  haupp,  so
geschiecht  es.

30.  item  an  dem  Sunnbent-tag  (solstice),  so  geht  aine  ersling
auf  allen  viern  mit  plassem  leib  zu  irs  nachtpahim  tar  (backwards
on  all  fours,  naked,  to  her  neighbour's  gate),  vnd  mit  den  fuzzen
steigt  sy  ersling  an  dem  tar  auf,  vnd  mit  ainer  hant  halt  sy  sich,
vnd  mit  der  andern  sneit  sy  drey  span  (cuts  3  chips)  aus  dem  ta/r,
vnd  spricht,  zu  dem  ersten  span  spricht  sy  '  Ich  sneit  den  ersten
span.  Noch  aller  milich  wan.'  zu  dem  andern  auch  also,  zu
dem  dritten  spricht  sy  '  Ich  sneit  den  dritten  span.  Noch  aller
meiner  nappaurinnen  milich  wan.''  vnd  get  ersling  auff  allen
viem  her  wider  dan  haim.

31.  item  die  swangem  (pregnant)  frawn  messent  ain  dacht  noch
Sand  Sixt  pild  (measure  a  wick  by  St  Sixtus's  image),  aia  lank

^  Souls  oome  out  of  Pargatory  (OHG.  wizi,  AS.  vdie)  every  Saturday.
'  Thursday  in  the  Whitson  Ember-days  (quatember).
*  '  Wan  milich '  in  orig.

VOL.    IV.  i   I


1758  APPENDIX.

es  ist^  vnd  gaertns  (gird  it)  rber  den  paach^  so  misslingt  in  nicht
an  der  pnrd  (birfch).    oder  des  man^s  gurtl  gnrtn  se  vmb.

32.  item  so  man  in  den  Bauek-nachten  anf  cUn  tisch  siezt,  so
habent  des  iars  dy  lewt  vil  aiss.

33.  item  in  der  lesten  Raudi-nacht  tragent  sy  ain  ganczen  laib
vnd  dies  (loaf  and  cheese)  vmb  das  haus,  vnd  peissent  (bite)
darab.  als  manig  pissen  man  tan  hat  so  Til  schober  (stacks,
cocks)  wemt  im  anf  dem  veld.

34.  das  man  das  viech  des  iars  nicht  schindt  (not  have  to  skin
as  carrion),  item  in  den  Raueh-naehten  so  schird  man  nicht
sponholz  (not  rend  laths,  shingles),  noch  reibscht  (mmmage)  an
den  ofen  nicht,  noch  lakchen  (shreds,  litter)  macht  in  der  staben.
so  wemt  nicht  in  den  velden  plas  fieckch  (bare  patches).  Aber
vmb  das  raissen  dy  spen  vber  den  offen,  das  tut  man  darvmb,  das
der  habem  nicht  prantig  wert  (oats  be  not  blighted).

35.  item  in  den  VtyJer-nachten  trait  man  nicht  reitier  (sieve)
vber  den  hof,  das  das  viech  nick  da-duridi  luey,  das  es  nicht  ward
schiech,  noch  hin  scherS.

36.  item  durich  ain  reitter  saicht  ainew  (if  a  girl  sift),  so
tanczt  man  mit  ir  vor  fur  (in  preference  to)  die  andern  (conf.  60).

37.  item  an  dem  Weihnacht*morgen  haist  man  die  ros  rennen
gen  wasser  (horses  run  against  water),  vnd  wirft  der  (if  he  throw)
ainn  aphl  in  das  wasser  die  weil  es  trincht,  das  der  aphl  gegn  dem
VOSS  rinn,  so  wirt  das  ross  resch  zn  arbait  des  iars.

38.  item  so  ainem  trawmt  wie  der  ofen  nider  sey  genallen,  so
stirbt  aintweder  wirt  oder  die  wirtin  (master  or  mistress).

39.  die  schwangern  frawn,  so  sew  zu  Götz  tisch  gent,  an
demselben  tag  ziechent  si  dem  chind  ainen  Xllpoten,  so  stirbt
das  chind  nicht  (conf.  1).

40.  so  zway  chon-lewt  die  erst  nacht  pey  ligent,  welchs  e^
entslefft,  das  stirbt  ee  (whichever  sleeps  first  will  die  first).

41.  item  man  windt  nicht  wid  (not  twist  osiers)  in  den  Under-
nachten,  das  sich  dy  lewt  in  hrancliait  nicht  mnten  (writhe).

42.  item  man  haspht  nicht,  so  wirt  das  viech  nicht  haspen.

43.  item  an  dem  Weihnachtsabend,  noch  an  dem  rauchen,  so
messent  die  lewt  9  l^ffl,  wasser  in  ain  hefen  (measure  9  spoonfuls
iuto  a  pail),  vnd  lassent  es  sten  vncz  an  den  tag,  vnd  messent  her-
wider  auf.  ist  sein  mynner  (less  of  it),  das  dy  mass  nicht  gancz
ist,  so  chumpt  es  des  iars  in  armüt  (poverty),     ist  sy  gancz,  so


SUPERSTITIONS.      F.  1759

pestet  es  (stay  as  before),    ist  sein  aber  mer,  so  wirt  es  yberflas-
sikleich  reich.

44.  item  man  wirft  gruemat  (throw  after-hay)  vnd  gnietn^
liabem  (oats)  in  denselben  nachten  auf  ain  dach,  ynd  lassentz
darauf  ligen  nncz  sy  ent  nement  (till  those  nights  end),  so
gebent's  es  dem  viech's  ze  essen,  so  schallen  es  die  chran  (crows)
des  iars  nicht  essen,  ynd  wernt  darzne  fruchtper.

45.  item  spanholz  schint  man  nicht,  das  man  des  iars  des  yiech
nicht  schint  (conf .  34) .

46.  item  man  lokcht  dy  saw  für  das  tar  (entice  the  pigs  oatside
the  gate)  an  dem  Weinacht-margen,  vnd  gibt  in  habern  in  ainem
raif  ynd  sprechent :  '  die  meins  nachtpawm  ain  sümpl,  die  mein
cein  grumpV  so  sind  sew  des  iars  frisch,  ynd  seins  natpawr
krankch.     ynd  des  iars  gentz  (they  go)  gem  an  das  yeld.

47.  item  die  paum  chust  man  (kiss  the  trees),  so  werden  se
fruchtper  des  iars.

48.  item  zu  dem  Weinacht-tag,  so  man  gen  metten  gedt,  so
sUcht  ainer  ain  hob  ab  (chops  a  stick  down)  ynd  traid's  mit  im
haim,  ynd  an  dem  Sunbent-abent  legt  er's  an  das  fetor,  so  choment
all  znaubln  [knüppel,  cudgels  ?]  zu  dem  f ewr,  dew  in  der  ganzen
pharr  (parish)  sind.

49.  item  in  den  Unter-nachten  lauffent  dy  iunkfrawn  an  den
sumerlangen  zawn  (hedge)  des  nachts.  pegreiSt  sy  ainen  langen
stehchen,  so  wirt  ir  ain  langer  man  (conf.  7) .

50.  item  allow  milich-hefen  stürzen  sy  (turn  all  the  milkpails
upside  down)  auf  den  tisch,  vnd  rauchentz  (smoke  them),  so
stilt  (steals)  man  in  dy  milich  nicht.

51.  auch  so  man  gen  metten  get.  so  der  mensch  ain  runczt
vnd  get  über  sich,  so  stirbt  er  des  iars  nicht.

52.  item  in  denselben  nachten  ist  chain  mensch  auf  der  weit
nicht,  so  hungert  es  des  iars  nicht  vast,  vnd  gwint  leicht  genüg.

53.  item  zu  derselben  zeit,  so  ains  chrophat  ist  (has  the  goitre),
so  wirt  er  sein  also  an  (rid  of  it?),  so  ains  chlocht,  vnd  spricht
'  se  hin  mein  chroph  an  deinen  chroph,'  vnd  greift  an  den  chrc^h,
and  tut  das  venster  die  weil  auf,  vnd  wirft  in  hinaus,  so  verget  er
im  glucklaw.

54.  item  man  nist  (sneezes)  nicht  in  den  nachten,  so  stirbt
das  viech  nicht.

'  Thrashed,  beaten,  pounded  ?


1760  APPENDIX.

55.  item  den  rauch-scherhen  (censer?)  gebnt  sy  drey  stund
(3  times  vber  sich,  so  peissent  es  (bite  them)  dy  .  •  •  nicht
des  iars.

66.  item  abdroin  phenning,  twecht  man  im  (a  wom-oat  penny,
if  one  twigs  it)^  an  den  Weihnacht- tag,  so  lassent  sich  dy  phening
gem  gwinen.

57.  item  wer  wolf  oder  fuehs  nent,  dem  stet  des  iars  das
gewant  (clothes)  nicht  recht.

58.  item  hent  v.  oren  (hands  on  ears)  habent  sjvber  dcufewer^
so  chnmpt  chain  or-hol  in  das  or  nicht,  noch  dy  negel  swernt
(fester)  in  nicht.

59.  item  so  man  ain  taezs  ^  gen  kirchen  trait  far  (past)  ain
haws^  so  lauft  aine  in  dem  liaas  hin  vnd  seczt  (a  girl  in  the  house
runs  and  sits  down)  auf  ainm  drifüzz,  so  wirt  ir  der  selbe  man
(conf.  65).

60.  das  man  mit  ainer  var  tancz  (sooner  dance  with  her),  ee
das  sy  zu  dem  tancz  get,  so  sicz  auf  ainn  drifues,  oder  ay  saieht
durieh  ain  reitter.  so  tancz  man  mit  ir  var  fur  die  andern  (oonf.
36).

61.  ain  schuester,  so  er  schuech  zu-sneyt  (cuts  oat  shoes),  so
legt  er  das  leder  auf  ain  still,  so  let  es  sich  paid  Terkauffen  (soon
sold).

62.  item  an  ainem  Freytag  sneid  chaine  ab  ainen  pachen  (pock,
pimple),    so  wert  dy  saw  nicht  phinnig  (measly).

63.  item  so  ain  chind  geporn  wirt,  vnd  hat  ainen  roien  rinkeh
vber  den  haU  (red  ring  round  the  neck),     es  wirt  erhangen.

64.  item  wer  VII  paternoster  spricht,  vnd  den  .  .  .  .  iar
gancz  aus,  der  lebt  das  iar  aus.  spricht  er  dew  pl».  nl».  nicht
aus,  so  stirbt  er  des  iars.

65.  item  so  man  ain  tacz  gen  kirchen  trait  (59),  siecht  es  ain
mensch  im  haus  fur-tragen  (carry  it  past),  so  spricht  es  '  meri  *  e$
dasfewr  mit  dem  elkl  (19),  so  stirbt  chains  ans  dem  haaa  nicht

*  Taz,  tax,  doe,  oflfering  ?    Höfer  3,  220.
[»  Merren,  to  stir.  Sohm.  2,  611.--EHM.]


SUPERSTITIONS.     G.  1761

G.     From  Hans  Vintler^s  'Blume  der  Tugend'  comp,  in  1411
(acc.  to  the  Gotha  MS.).i

Die  zaubry  die  ist  Got  fast  vnwerd,

auch  sprechend  sy  '  mich  hautz  gelert  (has  taught  it)

ain  mlinch^  wie  möchtz  pösz  gesin  (be  bad)  ?

daz  sprich  ich  pj  den  trewen  mein^

das  man  ain  sollichen  mnnch  oder  pfaffen  5

also  soltt  straffen  (should  so  chastise) ,

das  sich  zechen  stiessend  daran  ;

wann  sey  (for  they)  sind  alle  samt  jm  pan  (ban),

die  den  glauben  also  fast  krenken  (sorely  wound  religion).  .  .

wann  es  ist  wider  dich,  du  höchstes  Gfit,  10

alles  das  man  mit  zaubry  tfit ;

vnd  wie  fast  es  wider  dich  ist  (how  much  it  is  against),

dannocht  findt  man  (they  shall  yet  find)  z&  disser  friat,

die  zaubry  dannocht  pflegen  (who  yet  practise).

Ettlich  wellent  pfeyl  auss-segnen  (pretend  to  bless  arrows),     15

do  wellent  si  dem  tewffel  bannen,

das  sy  jn  bringent  gfit  (bring  them  wealth)  zfl-samen ;

so  wellent  ettlich  war-sagen  (soothsay),

vnd  vil  wellent  den  tewffel  fragen  (ask)

wa  gfit  lig  (where  riches  lie)  vnd  edel  gestain.  20

Do  habent  denn  ettlich  gemain  (are  in  league)

mit  der  pössen  Erodiana  (wicked  Herodias)^

do  wellent  gelauben  (believe)  ettlich  an  Diana,^

die  da  ain  falsche  göttin  ist ;

vnd  auch  ettlich  mainent  (think)  haben  den  list  (skill)  25

als  sey  die  lewtt  kundent  schiessen  (can  shoot  people)

durch  alles  gemüre  (walls),  vnd  ^  giessen  (cast)

wechesinew  pild  (waxen  images)  mangerlay ;

so  wissen  dissew  das  vogel-geschray  (-cry)

vnd  auch  darzfi  die  trem  auslegen  (dreams  interpret) ;  30

ettlich  kunnent  den  sehwert-segen  (sword-charm),

das  sy  nicht  auf  diser  erden

van  kaimen  dorf  erstachen  werden  (can  be  stabbed)  ;

^  The  text  is  often  corrnpt,  and  I  was  not  able  to  nse  the  Augsbg  ed.  of  1486
(Panzer  1,  164.    2,  58) ;  oonf.  Adelong's  Püterioh  p.  34—88.
'  Orig. :  an  die  dyadema.
*  Orig.  has  this  *  ynd '  at  beginn,  of  line.


1762  APPENDIX.

/

ettlich  knnnent  an  fetor  erkennen

wie  sich  die  each  hie  sol  enden ;  35

80  knnnen  ettlich  jn  der  hand

Bchoawen  (see)  eyttel  laster  vnd  schand.

Yil  allte  weib  knnnend  den  handel  (trade)

za  lieb  oder  findtschafflb  (enmity) ;

ettlich  gebent  losz-bücher  kraSlb,  40

vnd  ettlich  kundent  patonicken  graben  (dig  betonica),

vnd  yil  wellent  den  eya-vogel  haben,

BO  nutzen  ettlich  den  allrawn  (madrake) ;

vnd  ettlich  glanbent  an  die/ratrn

die  haisset  Precht  mit  der  langer^  nas.  45

BO  send  ir  vil  die  yehen,  das  (many  who  affirm,  that)

die  hand-gifft  ^  sy  alz  wol  getan  (is  so  wondroasly  made),

das  sie  sy  von  ainen  man

pesser  (better)  denn  von  den  andern ;

vnd  vil  die  wellend  nit  wandern  (will  not  travel)  50

an  den  verworfen  ta^en  (accnrsed  days) ;

so  send  denn  vil,  die  hie  haben

glauben,  es  pring  grossen  ftum  (benefit),

ob  jn  (if  to  tiiem)  des  morgens  ain  wolf  kam,

vnd  ain  ha^  (hare)  pring  nngelücke  ;  55

vnd  ettlich  liitt  hand  die  ducke,

das  sy  den  tewfiel  petten  an  (adore),

stem,  sunnen,  vnd  auch  den  maun,

Yil  wellent  auf  oblatU  schriben,

vnd  das  fiepper  da-mit  vertryben ;  60

ettlich  segnent  fiir  daz  zene*we  (toothache),

so  hand  ettlich  den  fierde  hie

das  sy  daunon  gauglen  sechen  (thereby  juggling  see)  ;

ist  auch  vil,  die  da  yechen,

sy  kunnend  vngewitter  (storms)  ma/^hen  ;  65

vnd  ettlich  zaubrer  die  wachen

dem  stem  Venus  vmb  die  mynne  (love) ;

so  send  auch  ettlich,  die  schlinden  (swallow)

drey  palmen  an  dem  palmtag,

vnd  ettlich  segnen  den  schlag  70

mit  ainer  hacken  auf  ainen  trischublen  (179),

[}  Hantgift,  Troj.  12334 ;  OberL  sub  y.  (-strena).— EHM.]


SUPERSTITIONS.     G.  1763

ynd  ettlich  stellen  auss  den  kublen  (tabs)
das  schmalz  (grease),  die  weil  man's  rurt  (stirs) ;
ettlich  der  lewt  fort

das  sey  send  jnyisibiiis,  75

vnd  ettlich  habent  den  piffys  (beifuss,  mugwort).
So  sprichet  menger  tamer  lib  (silly  body),
die  teutte  [träte  ?]  sey  ain  altes  weib
vnd  kanne  die  lütt  sagen  (sack  people),

ynd  ettlich  lütt  die  gelaaben  80

der  albe  mynne  die  latte ;  ^
so  sagt  manger  die  tewtte^
er  hab  den  orhen  gar  eben  gesechen  (jast  seen) ;
ynd  ettlich  die  yechen,

das  schrcUtlin  sy  ain  klaines  kind,  85

ynd  sy  al2s  ring  (as  small)  alz  der  wind,
ynd  sy  ain  yerzwifiQotter  gaist  (lost  spirit).
So  glaabent  ettlich  aller-maist,
das  der  sigeUstein  hab  die  kraft

das  er  macht  sygehafft  (yictorioas),  90

ynd  yil  wissen  der  erkennen  silt  (?).
So  natzend  (ayail)  aach  yil  die  erd-schnitt  (slices  of  earth)
za  mangerlay  zaabry  (for  many  kinds  of  magic) ;
ynd  ettlich  schribent  aaf  daz  ply  (blei,  lead)
ynder  der  GrUUmeasz  far  den  warm ;  95

so  nemen  ettlich  far  den  starm
den  eUen-paum,  hor  ich  sagen ;
ynd  ettlich  wellent  kol  graben
wann  sy  den  ersten  schwalm  sechen.

yill  kanden  jn  jr  gwand  spechen  (spy  in  their  clothes)  100

ob  es  glacklich  sail  gaan  (go  lackily) ;
so  habent  yil  lütt  den  wann  (fancy)
das  verbene  daz  selb  kratt  (herb)
mach  die  lewt  ain  ander  trat  (fond  of)>

wann  man  sy  grab  (dig  it  np)  ze  abend ;  105

ynd  aach  yil  pösz  lütt  die  gend  (bad  people  go)
des  nachtes  durch  verschlossen  tür  (closed  door) ;
ynd  ettlich  lütt  tragen  herfür  (bring  oat)
Silber  ynd  gold,  alz  ich  hör  yechen  (as  I  hear  tell),
1  Should  it  not  be  *  mTime  die  tewtu  *  and  *  manger  der  lewtte  *  ? — Tbans.


1764  APPBNBIX.

wenn  sy  newen  mon  seclien ;  110

80  tragent  ettlich  latt  aass

das  waseer  alles  auss  dem  husz,

wenn  man  toUen  traitt  (carry  the  dead)

far  (past)  das  hns,  als  man  aaitt ;

BO  send  ettlich  alz  besint,  11^

wenn  man  jn  junge  honer  (fowls)  bringt^

BO  sprechend  sy  '  blib  (stay)  her-haim

als  die  fad  pey  meinem  pain  (bone  leg)  1 '

und  vil  die  yechen  die  weg-wart  (plaintain)

sey  gewesen  (was  once)  ein  fraw  zart^  120

ynd  wart  jrs  pällen  (waits  her  lover)  noch  mit  schmertzen.

ettlich  legent  dee  widhoffen  hertze  (lay  a  hoopoo's  heart)

des  nachtes  anf  die  schlaaffende  lütt  (on  sleeping  folk)^

das  es  in  haimlich  ding  betiitt  (saggest)

ynd  vil  zaabry  vnrain  (andean) ;  123

die  sechend  an  dem  schulUrr'pain  (by  a  shoalder  blade)

das  (what)  menschen  sol  beschehen  (happen)  ;

ynd  ettlich  die  yechen  (affirm)

das  sy  (that  it  is)  nicht  gfit  daz  man

den  tenggen  Hch&ch  leg  an  (lefb  shoe  pat  on)  130

uor  dem  gerechten  des  morgens  frft ;

ynd  yil  die  yechen^  man  stel  der  h&

die  milch  aas  der  wammen.

do  send  ettlich  der  ammen  (narses),

die  selben  nement  A\e  jungen  kind  ISo

do  sy  erst  geporen  synd^

ynd  stossend's  (pash  them)  durch  ain  hole

do  ist  denn  nichtsz  wole,

oder  es  werd  ain  hören- plässel  darasz  [hom-blase^  p.  1061].

aach  treibt  man  mit  der  fleder-miue  (bat)  140

menig  tewschlich  spil  (jaggling  tricks) ;

ynd  ist  des  vngelaabes  so  yil,

das  ich  es  nit  gar  sagen  kan.

Do  habent  ettlich  lütt  den  wann  (fancy)

das  sy  mainent,  ynser  leben  (they  think  oar  life)  145

das  ansz  daz  die  .  .  .  geben,^

ynd  das  sy  yns  hie  regieren  (goyem  as).

[1  The Imubrk.  MS.  fills  the  gap ;  'die  gaeh  iehep/eiu*^BBM,]


SUPERSTITIONS.     G.  1765

80  sprechend  ettlich  [von?]  diemen  (Maids) ^
sey  ertailen  (apportion)  dem  menschen  hie  auf  erden,
vnd  ettlich  sendent  die  pferde  150

fur  elenpug  (elbow)  vnd  anch  fur  rencken  (dislocat.) ;
Ynd  auch  vil  lütt  die  gedencken
vnd  habent  sein  auch  gantzen  syn  (feel  quite  sure),
sy  mugent  nicht  haben  gwin  (make  gains)
des  tages,  und  sy  fechten  ^  155

ain  pfeyfflin,  als  sy  yechen.
es  spricht  manger  :  '  ich  bin  gogel^
ich  haun  gesechen  Sant  Martis  vogel
hewt  (to-day)  an  dem  morgen  frfi,

mir  stosset  (befalls)  kain  vngelück  nit  zfi.*  160

do  wellent  ettlich  da-pey,
wenn  es  vngewitter  sey  (is  a  storm),
das  sey  alles  von  der  munch  wegen  (because  of  monks)
die  da  gand  affter  der  wege  (going  their  ways) ;
vnd  auch  ettlich  mainent  sicherlich^  165

wenn  der  rapp  kopp^  daz  tütt  ain  lieh  (means  a  corpse).
Ettlich  habent  denn  ainen  newen  fund,
sy  behatten  den  pisz  jn  dem  mund  (wafer  in  mouth)
wenn  man  Aue  Maria  lütt  (rings).

do  send  denn  eitMch  prwtt  (brides),  170

die  legent  jr  hemmet  (chemise)  an  jrs  mans  ort  (place),
so  kan  auch  manger  drew  wort  (3  words)
das  er  nymmer  tewrer  wirt  \
so  ist  ettlicher  hirt  (herdsman)

der  sein  vich  segnen  kan  (his  cattle  bless),  175

das  jm  kain  huse  (hare)  tret  dar- von  (dar-an  7) ;
vnd  ettlich  nement  jrew  hind,
wenn  sy  ain  wenig  hranck  sind,
vnd  legent's  ouf  ain  dryttchvffel ;

nil  kunnen  salben  den  kubel  (grease  the  tub),  180

das  sy  obn-an  ausz  faren  (fly  out  above),
ettlich  spynnen  am  Samps-tag  garen  (yarn),
vnd  machend  dar-usz  Sant  lorgen  hemd  (shirt) ;
vnd  send  ettlich  so  behend  (nimble)

das  sy  varent  hundert  meyl  185

>  For  *  nnz  bj  seohen/  nntü  (unless)  they  see  ?       'Si  corms  ruotet.


1766  APPENDIX.

dar  in  ainer  knrtzen  weil.

Ettlich  prechend  den  latten  ab  (break  off  people's)

die  pain  (bones,  legs),  als  ich  geh6rt  hab,

ynd  legent  dar-ein  porst  (bristles)  vnd  kol.

mangew  maint,  sy  kund  anch  wol  190

segen  (charms)  hyn  vnd  her  wenden ;

ettlich  die  lütt  plendent  (strike  blind)

mit  ainer  hand  von  dem  galgen ;

vill  wend  den  taig  talgen  ^

an  der  hailigen  Samps-tag  naeht.  195

Manger  aach  hara/^tereB  macht

diXJi&z  pirmit  virgineum  (ber-mntter  7),

ettlich  pnctieren  den  lininm

jn  der  kanst  (art  of)  geometria,

so  nympt  der  denn  oben  praw  (eyebrow)  200

non  den  gerechten  augen

ynd  daz  plut  von  den  krawen  (blood  of  crows),

ynd  macht  dar-usz  zaubery ;

manger  nympt  ain  järiges  zwy  (year-old  twig)

yon  ainen  wilden  hasseUpawm.  205

So  send  denn  ettlich  frawen

die  erschlingen  vmb  die  hirchen  '  gen

ynd  hiassent  die  toiten  auf-sten  (bid  the  dead  arise),

ynd  niement  den  ring  (knocker)  van  der  hirchen  tur

jn  die  hand,  ynd  rnffend  '  her  für'  (cry  'come  forth  '),  210

ynd  sprechend  '  ich  rür  disen  rink,

stett  anf,  ir  alten  pärttiing  I '

do  send  auch  ettlich  man,

sie  nement  von  dem  galgen  ain  span  (lath),

ynd  legent  den  ynder  die  kirch-tür,  215

1  For  talken,  knead  the  dough.

'  The  MS.  has  ktuehen,  kitchen ;  which  seema  oat  of  place,  yet  oeenn  again  in
the  Strolling  Scholar^  from  whioh  I  will  extract  a  oorreap.  passage  (Aw.  2,  5d-6} :

Mit  wunderlichen  Sachen  g€n  des  lichtes  m&nen  8chin;

Idr  ich  sie  (I  teach  her)  denne  machen  die  16r  ich  du  ze  ydde  sto,

von  wahM  einen  kobolt,  die  16r  ich  koln  waschen^

wil  sie  daz  er  ir  werde  holt ;  die  brunzen  in  die  aschen,

und  töufen  in  dem  brunnen,  die  Idr  ich  brant  betreehen,

und  legen  an  die  sunnen,  die  Idr  ich  morchen  breeherit

und  wideriins  umb  die  küehen  gdn.  die  Idr  ich  baUnien  graben,

die  unge9proehen  traben^

So  beginn  ich  sie  dan  Idren  die  1er  nahtet  naeket  «ten,

den  ars  des  nahtes  kdren  die  eralingen  gin  demßure  gin.


SUPERSTITIONS.     G.  1767

so  solt  kain  pfennig  gaun  hin  für ;

vnd  ettlich  nutzend  den  strängen  (rope)

da  ain  dieb  (thief)  an  ist  erhangen  ;

vnd  an  der  Ravch-nacht  xoirffet  man  (they  throw)

die  scMch  (their  shoes),  als  ich  gehört  han,  220

uberdaz  haubt  (head)  erschlingen  (from  behind),

vnd  wa  sieh  der  spitz  kert  hyn  (where  the  tips  point  to),

da  sol  der  mensch  beliben  (stay).

Vnd  vil  Intt  die  tribent  (perform)

wnnder  mit  dem  Mff-nagel  (horseshoe  nail),  225

vnd  ettlich  steckend  nadel  (needles)

den  lutten  jn  die  magen  (stomachs) ;

vnd  samlich  lannd  nicht  jagen  (let  not  hnnt)

die  hund  auf  der  rechten  fert  (track).

ettlich  send  so  wol  gelert  (well  taught),  230

das  sy  an  sich  mit  gewalt  (perforce)

nemen  ainer  katzen  gestalt  (shape).

so  findt  man  den  zanbrinin  vnrain  (andean),

die  den  lütten  den  wein

trinkend  auss  den  Jcelem  verstolen,  235

die  selben  haisset  man  vnaerholoD.

So  send  denn  ettliche,

wenn  sy  sechend  ain  Kche  (see  fk  corpse),

so  raunent  (whisper)  sy  dem  totten  zu

vnd  sprechend  ^kum  morgen  frü  (tomorrow  morn)  240

vnd  sag  mir,  wie  es  dir  dort  gee.'

So  faret  man  vber  see

die  lewt  mit  gflttem  winde ;

vnd  ettlich  nement  jre  kinde

wenn  es  nit  geschlanfien  mag  (cannot  sleep),  245

vnd  treitz  herfür  an  die  hayttren  tag,

vnd  legtz  für  sich  (before  her)  ain  aichin  prandt,

vnd  nympt  ain  scheitt  (log)  jn  sein  hand

vnd  schlecht  (beats)  denprandmer  denn  zwir  (twice).

so  gett  ain  andrew  (other  woman)  denn  py  jr  250

vnd  spricht '  waz  newestu  7 '

'  da  nae  ich  hie  na

meins  kindes  mass-laid  vnd  nacht-geschrey  (-crying)

vnd  alle  main  zoDge  en-zway.'


1768  APPENDIX.

So  send  denn  ettlich  also  getan,  ^^^

wenn  sj  den  or-mutzel  ban,

so  nemend  sy  ain  küssy  (pillow)  in  die  hand

vnd  Bchlachend'a  an  den  schlauf  (temple)  zehand

vnd  spricht '  flewch,  flewch,  or-mutzel  I

dich  jagt  ain  küssi-zypfel.'  260

manig  zanbrerin  die  sein,

die  nement  ain  hacken  (hatchet)  vnd  schleichen  wein

auss  ainer  dur  aichin  sanl  (oaken  post) ;

vnd  ettlich  machen  mit  dem  hnul  (ball)

vaden  (of  thread)  mangerlay  traufferey  (trickling) ;  26o

so  nempt  manger  gersten-pry  (barley-pap)

vur  dryaflTel,  h6r  ich  sagen.

Mangew  wil  den  dieb  laben  (thief  revive)

der  an  dem  galgen  erhangen  ist ;

auch  habent  vil  lütt  den  list  (art)  270

das  sy  nützen  daz  totten-t&ch  (shroad) ;

vnd  ettlich  stolen  aus  der  prfioh

dem  man  sein  geschirr  gar ;

so  farent  ettlich  mit  der  far  (=naht-fare)

avff  helbem  (calves)  vnd  auch  pechen  (bocken,  goats)  275

durch  stain  vnd  stecke.

•

H.  From  Doctor  HartlieVs  (physician  in  ordinary  to  duke
Albrecht  of  Bavaria)  Book  of  all  forbidden  arts,  unbelief
and  sorcery  ;  written  in  1455  for  Johans,  markgraf  of  Bran-
denburg. (Cod.  Pal.  478.  Another  MS.  at  Wolfenbüttel  is
mentioned  in  Uffenbach^s  Reisen  1,  310).^

Chap.  31-2.  Of  journeying  through  the  air.  In  the  vile  art
of  Nigramancia  is  another  folly  that  men  commit  with  their
magic  steeds,  which  come  into  an  old  house,  and  if  a  man  will,  be
sits  thereon,  and  rides  in  a  short  time  a  great  many  mile.  When
he  gets  off,  he  keeps  the  bridle  only,  and  when  he  would  mount
again,  he  jingles  the  biidle,  and  the  horse  comes  back.  The  steed
is  in  truth  the  very  Devil.  Such  sorcery  requires  bat's  blood,
wherein  the  man  shall    sign    himself  away  to   the  Devil   with

[>  Additions  in  Mono's  Anz.  7,  815.— EHM.]


SUPERSTITIONS.      H.  1769

unknown  words^  as  'debra  ebra/     This  kind  is  common  with
certain  princes :  Your  Grace  shall  guard  yon  thereagainst.

To  snch  journeys  men  and  women,  the  vnhulden  by  name,  use
also  an  ointment  that  they  call  vngentum  pharelis.  This  they
make  out  of  seven  herbs,  plucking  every  herb  on  a  day  proper  to
the  same,  as  on  Suntag  they  pluck  and  dig  solsequium,  on  Mentag
lunaria,  on  Erctag  verbena,  on  Mittwoche  raercurialis,  on  Phinz-
tag  barba  Jovis,  on  Freitag  capilli  Veneris ;  thereof  make  they
ointment,  mixing  some  blood  of  birds  and  fat  of  beasts,  which  I
write  not  all,  that  none  be  offended  thereat.  Then,  when  they
will,  they  besmear  bench  or  post,  rake  or  fire-fork,  and  speed
away.

Ch.  34.  To  make  hail  and  sudden  shower  is  one  of  these  arts,
for  he  that  will  meddle  therewith  must  not  only  give  himself
to  the  devil,  but  deny  God,  holy  baptism  and  all  christian  grace.
This  art  none  practise  now  save  old  wives  that  be  forsaken  of
God.  Hear  and  mark,  august  Prince,  a  great  matter  that  befell
me  myself  in  the  year  of  Christ's  birth  1446.  There  were  some
women  burnt  at  Haidelberg  for  sorcery,  but  their  true  instructress
had  escaped.  The  next  year  came  I  as  envoy  from  München  to
His  S.H.  the  Palatine  duke  Ludwig,  whom  God  save,  for  if  any
prince  shall  be  upheld  by  his  faithfulness,  then  is  he  evermore
with  God.  In  the  same  days  came  tidings,  that  the  instructress
was  now  taken.  I  prayed  the  Prince  to  let  me  have  speech  of
her,  and  he  was  willing.  He  had  the  woman  and  the  chief  in-
quisitor brought  to  a  little  town  named  Götscham,  into  the  house
of  his  high  steward,  Petter  von  Talhaym.  I  obtained  of  the
Prince  the  favour,  if  the  woman  taught  me  to  make  shower  and
hail,  that  he  would  let  her  live,  but  she  should  forswear  his  land.
I  went  alone  into  a  chamber  to  the  woman  and  the  inquisitor,  and
craved  to  know  of  her  lora  She  said  she  could  not  learn  me  this
thing  but — if  I  would  do  all  that  she  learned  me.  I  asked  what
that  was,  and  so  it  did  not  anger  God  nor  go  against  christian
faith,  I  would  do  it.  She  lay  with  one  leg  ironed,  and  spake  these
words :  '  My  son,  thou  must  deny  God,  baptism  and  all  the
sacraments  wherewith  thou  art  anointed  and  sealed.  After  that
thou  must  deny  all  the  saints  of  God,  and  first  Mary  his  mother,
then  must  thou  give  thee  up  body  and  soul  to  the  three  devils  that
I   name  to  thee,  and  they  will  grant  thee  a  time  to  live,  and


1770  APPENDIX,

promise  to  perform  thy  will  until  the  time  be  ended.'  I  said
to  the  woman :  '  What  shall  I  do  more  f '  She  said  :  '  Nothing
more;  when  thou  desirest  the  thing,  go  to  a  private  chamber,
call  to  the  spirits,  and  offer  them  that.  They  will  come,  and  in
an  hour  make  hail  for  thee  where  thou  wilt/  I  told  her^  I  would
do  none  of  these  things,  for  that  I  had  said  before,  if  she  could
impart  to  me  this  art,  so  that  I  neither  offended  6od  nor  harmed
religion,  I  would  set  her  free.  She  answered  that  she  knew  no
other  .way.  And  she  was  delivered  up  again  to  Hans  von  Tailhaim,
who  had  her  burnt,  for  he  had  taken  her.

Ch.  50.  There  is  another  *  unbelief  (un-gelaube  =  heresy  ?),
if  one  have  lost  anything,  there  be  those  that  beswear  a  loaf,
and  stick  therein  three  knives  to  make  three  crosses  and  a  spindU
and  an  enspin  ^  thereon,  and  two  persons  hold  it  on  the  unnamed
finger,  and  he  beswears  by  the  holy  zwölf-boten  [12  messengers,
apostles  ?  see  F,  1.  39.]

Ch.  51.  Others  bless  a  clieese,  and  think  he  that  is  guilty  of
the  theft  cannot  eat  of  the  cheese.  Although  some  soap  be  giren
for  cheese,  yet  it  is  a  sin.

Ch.  55-6-7.  When  a  master  of  this  art  (Ydromancia)  will  search
out  a  theft^  dig  up  treasure,  or  know  of  any  secret  thing,  he  goes
on  a  Sunday  before  sunrise  to  three  flowing  springs,  and  draws  &
little  out  of  each  in  a  clean  polished  glass^  brings  it  home  into  a
fair  chamber,  and  there  bums  tapers  before  it,  doing  honour  to  the
water  as  unto  God  himself.  Then  he  taketh  a  pure  child,  sets  the
same  in  a  fair  seat  before  the  water ;  and  standing  behind  him,
speaketh  certain  strange  words  in  his  ear.  After  that  he  readeth
strange  words,  and  bids  the  pure  child  repeat  them  after  him.
What  the  words  mean^  can  no  master  expound  more  than  that  a
person  thereby  puts  away  Gk>d  and  gives  himself  to  the  foul  fiend.
So  the  master  having  the  lad  before  him,  bids  him  say  what  he
sees,  asking  after  the  theft  or  treasure  or  what  else  he  will.  The
child's  simplicity  makes  him  say  he  sees  this  or  that,  wherein  the
foul  fiend  takes  part^  making  the  false  appear  in  the  place  of  the
true.

Ch.  58.     There  be  divers  ways  of  drawing  the  water-,  for  some
fetch  it  from  running  waters,  putting  the  same  in  a  glass ;  others
from  standing  pools,  and  boil  it  in  honour  of  the  spirits  whom
[»  SchmeUer  3,  670.— EHM.]


suPEBSTinoNs.    H.  1771

they  suppose  to  have  power  over  the  waters,  the  lord  and  prince
of  them  all  being  Salathiel^  as  the  masters  declare.

Ch.  60.  Some  women  sprinkle  their  herbs  and  plants  with
hallowed  water,  supposing  that  the  worms  shall  not  come  thereat ;
that  is  all  an  '  unbelief/  There  be  some  courtiers,  when  they  get
new  spurs,  do  plunge  them  with  the  rowels  in  a  holy-well,  saying
that  what  they  strike  therewith  shall  in  no  wise  swell ;  that  is  all
an  '  unbelief.'  Some  sorceresses  go  to  a  mill  wheel,  and  catch
the  water  that  flies  off  tlie  wheel  in  the  air ;  with  this  water  they
ply  all  manner  of  sorceries  for  loving  and  for  enmity.  And  who
so  may  not  be  good  man  (husband),  they  help  him  therewith  that
he  can  be  good  man ;  that  is  all  an  '  unbelief.'

Ch.  61.  There  be  bad  christians  that  carry  on  sorcery  with
divers  waters,  as  that  of  the  blest  and  hallowed /on^,  wherein  lies
every  christian's  health  and  wealth,  therewith  they  juggle  and  do
much  that  is  not  meet  to  be  written ;  yea,  an  old  wife  that  hath
gotten  font-water,  she  thinks  to  have  borne  off  the  prize,

Ch.  63.  Another  trick  with  water.  Two  persons  take  two
things,  as  little  sticks  or  straws,  rings  or  small  coins^  and  name  one
after  one  person  and  the  other  after  the  other,  and  if  the  two
things  run  together  on  the  water  in  a  basin,  then  shall  those  two
come  together ;  but  if  one  flee  from  the  other,  they  come  not  to-
gether, and  whose  thing  fleeth  first,  his  shall  the  blame  be.  And
the  masters  of  this  '  unbelief  also  prove  thereby,  whether  of  two
wedded  folk  shall  soonest  die  for  they  think  that  whichever
sinketh  soonest  shall  die  first,

Ch.  67-8.  Now  will  I  write  of  the  fourth  art  that  is  forbidden :
it  is  called  Aremancia,  and  has  to  do  with  air  and  whatsoever
flies  or  lives  therein.  The  art  is  very  strong  among  the  heathen,
whose  '  unbelief  therein  is  so  great,  that  they  honour  the  first
thing  that  appeareth  to  them  in  a  day,  and  worship  it  that  day
for  their  god.  And  evil  christians  do  much  '  unbelief  therewith,
for  they  say,  if  a  hare  do  meet  them,  it  is  a  misfortune,  and  if  a
wolf  meet  them,  it  is  a  great  luck.  Of  'unbeliefs'  there  be  many
in  divers  beasts.  Some  say  that  if  birds  fly  to  one's  right  hand,  it
signifies  great  gain  and  luck,  and  if  they  fly  to  the  left  (glinggen)
side,  it  signifies  unluck  and  loss.  All  that  is  an  '  unbelief.'
There  be  those  that  have  great  faith  in  an  ea^le  (aren),  and  think
whensoever  he  fly  pocket^side,  it  promiseth  great  luck  or  gain.


1772  APPENDIX.

And  so  great  is  the  faith  of  some,  that  they  shift  their  pocket  to
the  other  side ;  if  then  the  eagle  also  turn  him  rounds  as  may  often
hap,  then  have  they  the  fullest  faith,  and  think  it  cannot  fail
.  .  •  .  Without  doubt  the  Devil  is  the  right  inventor  and
inspirer  of  the  art ;  he  it  is  that  changeth  himself  into  the  said
birds  that  he  may  deceive  men.

Ch.  69.  There  be  also  princes,  poor  and  rich,  that  hold  their
hunting  on  certain  days,  and  when  this  or  that  wind  doth  blow  ;
that  is  all '  unbelief.'  .  .  .  Some  men  do  wear  high  feathers  in
their  hats,  that  they  may  know  whence  cometh  the  wind,  supposing
that  in  sundry  matters  they  have  luck  against  the  wind,  and  in
others  with  the  wind :  that  is  all  an  '  unbelief '  and  sorcery.

Ch.  73.  There  is  one  more  'unbelief  in  this  art,  that  is,
when  a  man  sneezeth,  whereby  the  brain  doth  naturally  clear  it-
self, they  hold  it  to  be  a  great  sign  of  luck  or  unluck,  and  draw
forecasts  therefrom,  such  as,  if  the  sneezes  be  three,  there  are  four
thieves  around  the  house.  If  they  be  two,  the  man  shall  rise,  and
lie  down  another  way  to  sleep ;  but  if  thirteen,  then  is  it  exceed-
ing good,  and  what  appeareth  to  him  that  night  shall  in  very
deed  come  to  pass.  Also  in  the  morning,  when  a  man  goeth
from  his  bed,  the  sneezes  shall  mean  other  things  again;  the
things  are  many,  and  it  is  all  a  downright '  unbelief.'

Ch.  74.  Again,  some  natural  philosophers  do  say  that  this
sneezing  cometh  very  nigh  the  stroTce  (apoplexy) .  For  should  the
crude  humours  remain  obstructed  in  the  brain,  and  not  come  out,
the  stroke  would  strike  the  man  right  soon ;  therefore  do  some
masters  call  it  the  minor  applesia,  i.e.  the  lesser  stroke.  For,
when  a  man  sneezeth,  he  is  of  many  of  his  limbs  in  nowise  master,
but  of  God's  grace  it  lasteth  not  long,  the  better  for  him.

Ch.  77.  There  are  also  people,  and  verily  great  princes,  that
do  utterly  believe  and  suppose,  when  greed  uproars  come,  that
then  great  treasons  are  afoot :  that  is  a  great  delusion.

Ch.  79.  We  find  some  sorceresses  that  make  an  image  or
atzman  of  wax  and  other  things.  This  they  make  at  certain
hours,  and  utter  certain  known  and  unknown  names,  and  hang
it  up  in  the  air,  and  as  the  wind  stirs  it,  they  think  the  man  in
whose  name  it  is  made  shall  have  no  rest.  All  this  is  a  great
'  unbelief  and  sorcery.  Some  do  the  same  with  an  aspen4eaf,
writing  their  sorcery  thereon,  and  think  thereby  to  breed  lo?e


SUPERSTITIONS.     H.  1773

between  people.  Of  sach  atzmannen  I  have  read  much  in  the
Art  Magica^  where  the  constellations  are  brought  in^  and  also
some  strange  words,  and  very  many  foreign  things  besides.  All
this  is  downright  sorcery  and  a  wicked  '  unbelief/  And  I  have
heard  say  much,  how  that  women  make  such  atzmans,  and  roast
them  by  aßre,  thereby  to  chastise  (kestigen)  their  husbands.

Ch.  80.  There  be  women  and  men,  which  dare  to  mskke  fires,
and  in  the  fire  to  see  things  past  and  to  come.  The  masters  and
mistresses  of  this  devilish  art  have  particular  days,  whereon  they
have  wood  prepared  for  them,  and  when  about  to  practise  their
art,  they  go  to  bl  private  place,  bringing  with  them  the  poor  silly
folk  unto  whom  they  shall  prophesy.  They  command  them  to
kneel  down,  and  after  worshipping  the  angel  of  the  fire,  to  ofiFer
sacrifice  unto  him.  With  the  sacrifice  they  kindle  the  wood,
and  the  master  looks  narrowly  into  the  fire,  marking  well  what
shall  appear  to  him  therein.

Ch.  83.  The  art  of  Pyromancia  ^  is  practised  in  many  divers
ways  and  forms.  Some  masters  of  the  art  take  a  pure  child  and
set  him  in  their  lap,  then  lift  his  hand  up  and  let  him  look  into
his  nail,  and  beswear  the  child  and  the  nail  with  a  great  adjuration,
and  then  speak  in  the  child's  ear  three  unknown  words,  whereof
one  is  Oriel,  the  others  I  withhold  for  fear  of  oflFending.  After
that  they  ask  the  child  whatsoever  they  will,  thinking  he  shall
see  it  in  the  nail.  All  this  is  a  right  '  unbelief,'  and  thou  chris-
ten-man  shalt  beware  thereof.

Ch.  84.  Another  deceitful  trick  in  the  art  is,  that  the  masters
take  oil  and  soot  from  a  pan,  and  anoint  also  a  pure  child,  be  it
girl  or  hoy,  namely  his  hand,  doing  much  the  same,  and  raise
the  hand  against  the  sun  if  the  sun  be  shining,  else  they  have
tapei's  which  they  raise  against  the  hand,  and  letting  the  child
look  therein,  ask  him  of  what  they  will;  their  belief  is,  that
what  the  child  tells  them  must  be  true;  they  know  not,  alas,
how  the  devil  mixeth  himself  therein,  making  far  ihore  of  wrong
to  appear  than  that  of  right.

Ch.  88.     The  masters  and  their  like  do  also  practise  the  art  in

a   common  looking-glass,   letting  children  look  thereinto,  whom

in  like  manner  they  strongly  beswear  and  whisper  hidden  words

unto,  and  think  to  search  out  many  things  therein.     That  is  all

[»  Fiur-sehen,  Altd.  bl.  1.  3Co.— EHM.]

VOL.    JV.  K  K


1774  APPBNDES:.

an  'unbelief  and  the  devirs  jugglery  and  trickery.  Beware,  0
christian^  I  warn  thee  right  faithfully.  The  same  thing  they  do
in  a  beautiful  bright  polished  sword,  the  masters  thinking  that
some  one  may  haply  ask  about  wars  and  such  deadly  matters ;
then,  if  the  sword  be  one  that  hath  killed  many  men,  the  spirits
shall  come  all  the  sooner  and  quicker.  If  one  will  ask  of  pleasure
and  peace,  find  out  arts  or  dig  up  treasure,  then  shall  the  swori
be  clean  and  maid.en  (unvermailigt,  un wedded,  i.e.  unfleshed).  1
know  a  great  prince :  whoso  bringeth  him  an  old  wom-^ml  swori
(haher  swert),  hath  done  him  much  honour.

Ch.  90-1.  In  Pyromancia  are  many  more  'unbeliefs,*  esp.
one  that  is  thought  to  be  infallible,  and  is  the  vilest  and  worst,
for  the  more  firmly  men  believe  in  such  sorcery,  the  more  is
it  sin.  The  thing  to  be  done  is,  that  boys  shall  see  in  a  crystal
things  to  come  and  all  things.  It  is  done  by  false  castaway
christians,  to  whom  dearer  is  the  devil's  delusion  than  the  truth
of  God.  Some  have  an  exceeding  clear  arid  fair-polished  (^ystal
ovparille  [beryl?  pearl?],  they  have  it  consecrated  and  keep  it
very  clean,  and  gather  for  it  frankincense,  myrrh  and  the  like;
and  when  they  will  exercise  their  art,  they  wait  for  a  very
fiiie  day,  or  have  a  cleaji,  chamber  and  many  consecrated  candles
thereiu.  The  masters  then  go  to  bathe,  taking  the  pure  child
with  them,  and  clothe  themselves  in  pure  white  raiment,  and  sit
down,  and  say  their  magic  prayers,  and  burn  their  magic  oflFer-
iogs,  and  then  let  the  boy  look  into  the  stone,  and  whisper  in  his
ear  hidden  words,  which  they  say  are  mighty  holy,  in  truth  the
words  are  devilish.  After  that  they  ask  the  boy  whether  he
sees  aught  of  an  angel.  If  the  boy  answer  yea,  they  ask  what
colour  he  is  of  ?  and  if  he  say  red,  the  masters  declare  that  the
aiigel  is  angry,  and  again  they  pray,  and  sacrifice  to  the  devil
again,  and  thereat  is  he  well  pleased.  Then  if  the  boy  say  the
angel  is  black,  the  master  saith  the  angel  is  exceeding  wroth,  we
must  pray  yet*  again,  and  bum  more  lights  ;  and  they  pray  onoe
more,  and  sacrifice  with  incense  and  other  things  ....  And
when  the  devil  thinks  he  hath  had  service  enough,  he  makes
appear  the  angel  in  white.  Then  is  the  master  glad,  and  asks  the
boy,  what  hath  the  angel  in  his  hand  ?  and  ceaseth  not  to  ask  till
he  says  '  I  see  a  writing  in  the  angel's  hand.'  Then  he  asketh
on,  until  he  see  letters:  these  letters  the  master  collects,  and


SUPERSTITIONS.     H.  1775

thereof  maketh  words,  nntil  he  has  that  which  he  desired  to
know.

Ch.  94.  It  hath  chanced  doubtless,  that  certain  priests  were
so  captivated  by  these  visiones,  that  they  took  the  sacred  patenas,
whereon  at  Mass  the  elements  are  changed  into  God,  and  have
made  the  children  look  into  them,  believing  that  holy  angels  alone
could  appear  therein,  and  no  devils.  These  have  mightily  mis-
took, etc.

Ch.  96.  Another  trick  of  sorcery  that  is  set  down  to  Pyro-
mancia.  .  .  .  The  masters  take  and  melt  lead  or  tin,  then
pour  it  into  a  water,  and  soon  take  it  out  again,  and  beswear  the
colour  and  little  pits  of  the  lead  or  tin,  and  declare  things  past  or
future  thereby,  which  is  all  an  '  unbelief.'

Ch.  102.  Know  besides,  that  men  do  also  look  2kt  fingers,.
whether  the  little  finger  reach  beyond  the  last  joint  of  the  ring-
finger.  They  say  that  is  a  sign  of  great  luck,  and  the  farther  it
reaches,  the  greater  the  luck;  but  if  the  little  finger  be  even  with
the  said  joint,  the  man  shall  be  unfortunate.  Heed  it  not,  good
christian,  it  is  a  trifle.

Ch.  103.  There  is  a  folk  stroUeth  about  much  in  the  world,
named  Zygainer  (gipsies)  :  this  people,  both  man  and  wife,  young
and  old,  do  greatly  practise  the  art,  and  mislead  many  of  the
simple,  etc.

Ch.  106-7-8.  Of  a  fortune-teller  whom  Dr  Hartlieb  knew,  and
who  gave  out  that  the  art  had  been  in  her  family  for  ages,  and  at
her  death  the  gra/ye  would  descend  to  her  eldest  (daughter).  The
woman  is  well  looked  upon,  and  bidden  to  people's  houses.  I
asked  her  to  impart  her  cunning  unto  me.  She  was  willing,
bade  me  wash  my  hands,  and  dried  them  with  her  own,  and  bent
her  face  very  close  to  my  hands,  and  told  me  things  that
cannot  possibly  happen  to  me.

Ch.  115-6.  Spatulamanda  is  of  the  seven  forbidden  arts  one,
and  is  done  by  a  cunning  outlandish  artifice.  When  I  consider
all  the  arts,  I  find  no  other  '  unbelief  that  hath  so  little  ground,
indeed  I  think  it  to  be  a  mockery.  .  .  .  The  masters  of  this
art  take  a  shoulder  of  a  dead  ox  or  horse,  cow  or  oass  ;  they  have
said  when  I  asked  them,  that  next  to  a  maWs  shoulder,  which  is
best,  any  great  animal's  shoulder  is  good.  They  wash  well  the
shoulder  with  wine,  and  thereafter  with  holy  water ;  they  tie  it


1776  APPENDIX.

op  in  a  clean  cloth,  and  when  they  will  practise  the  art,  they  antie
ity  and  carry  it  to  a  place  outside  of  roof,  then  gaze  into  the
shoulder,  and  think  it  changes  after  every  question.  They  have
neither  lights  nor  sacrifice^  yet  it  is  a  great '  unbelief '  to  wash
the  shoulder  with  holy  water^  and  to  think  the  shoulder  changes
for  their  questions.  Their  faith  is  so  great  that  they  ask  for  no
reasons  of  the  art :  they  speak  out  of  their  own  head  whatsoever
comes  into  it^  to  solve  and  settle  the  questions.  .  .  .  They
think  they  can  search  out  all  things.

Ch.  120.  The  masters  of  this  art  have  also  lavg  fM[H6.  louc,
flame  7  or  lauge^  lye  ?]  and  observe  what  colours  the  shoulder  has
at  the  ends^  in  the  middle  and  in  all  the  parts ;  and  according  to
these  the  devil  suggests  to  them  what  to  believe  and  say.

Ch.  121.  First  I  will  write  of  the  goose-bone  (genns-pain).
On  St  Martin's  day  or  night,  when  they  have  eaten  the  goose,
the  eldest  and  the  wise  do  keep  the  breast-bone,  and  let  it  dry  till
the  morning,  and  then  examine  it  in  every  particular,  before  and
behind  and  in  the  middle.  Thereby  they  judge  of  the  vnnter,  if
it  shall  be  cold,  warm,  wet  or  dry,  and  are  so  firm  in  their  faith,
that  they  wager  their  goods  and  chattels  thereon.  And  thereon
have  they  an  especial  'loss'  (lot-drawing)  that  shall  not  and
cannot  fail,  to  tell  whether  the  snow  shall  be  much  or  little ;  all
this  knoweth  the  goose-bone.  Aforetime  the  old  peasants  in  desert
places  dealt  in  this  matter,  now  is  the  '  unbelief '  grown  in  kings,
princes,  and  all  the  nobility,  who  believe  in  such  things.

Pag.  76^.  77'.  Moreover  I  will  write  thee  a  thing  that  lately
a  great  victorious  captain  told  me,  in  whom  prince  and  peasant
put  great  confidence,  one  for  his  deeds,  another  for  his  wisdom,  a
third  for  his  faith  that  he  had  kept  alway  in  every  need  to  his
own  prince.  This  good  mau  on  St  Nicolas  day  in  this  year
1455  said  to  me,  '  Dear  master,  how  shall  the  winter  be  this  year,
as  ye  star-gazers  opine  f '  I  was  quick  and  quick  (hasty  ?)  as  I
still  am,  and  spake,  '  Lord  Saturn  goes  this  month  into  a  fiery
sign,  likewise  other  stars  are  so  disposed,  that  in  3  years  no
harder  winter  shall  have  been.'  This  dauntless  man,  this
christian  captain  drew  forth  of  his  doublet  that  heretical  '  uo-
belief,'  the  goose-bone,  and  showed  me  that  after  Candlemas  an
exceeding  great  frost  should  be,  and  could  not  fail.  What  I  had
said  he  said  yet  more,  and  told  me  that  the  Teutonic  Knights  in


SUPEBSTITIONS.     I.  1777

Prussia  had  waged  all  their  wars  by  the  goose-bone,  and  as  the
goose-bone  showed  so  did  they  order  their  two  campaigns,  one
in  summer  and  one  in  winter.  And  furthermore  he  spake  these
words,  '  While  the  Teutonic  Order  obeyed  the  bone,  so  long  had
they  great  worship  and  honour,  but  since  they  have  left  it  off,
Lord  knows  how  it  stands  with  them/  I  said,  'Had  the  T.  0.
no  other  art,  help  or  stay  than  the  goose-bone,  then  should  their
confidence  be  small/     With  that  I  parted  from  my  rich  host.

Pag.  76*.  This  know  the  physicians  well,  and  say  that  the
disease  named  bolismus  [ßovkifios;)  or  apetitus  caninus  can
by  no  eating  or  drinking  be  stilled,  but  by  medicine  alone;
ibr  all  food  passeth  undigested  through  the  body,  whereby  the
flesh  falls  away,  but  the  bones  remain  great  as  ever;  and  this
makes  the  child  so  unshapely,  that  men  call  it  a  changeling
(wächsel-kind).^


L  EXTRACTS  FROM  MODERN  COLLECTIONS.

a.  From  the  Chemnitzer  Bocken-phUosojßhie,

1.  Whoever  goes  into  a  childbed  chamber,  carrying  a  basket,  must
break  a  chip  off  the  bcuket,  and  put  ib  in  the  cradle ;  otherwise  he  will  take
the  child*8  or  mother's  reet  (sleep)  away.

2.  When  a  mother  wants  to  know  if  her  child  is  hecried  (bewitched),
let  her  lick  its  forehead :  if  becried,  it  will  taste  salt ;  then  fumigate  with

aweepi/nge  from  the  four  corners  of  tlie  room with  shavings  off  the /our

comers  of  the  table with  nine  sorts  of  wood.

3.  Who  pulls  out  an  article  from  the  wash  upside  doton  or  leftwards,  will
not  be  becried.

4.  Boil  frauen^flachs,  szysche  or  rufhraut,  bathe  the  sick  man  in  the
water,  and  leave  the  bath  ander  his  bed :  if  he  is  becried,  it  will  shrink ;
if  not,  not.

5.  If  you  are  taking  much  money,  put  some  chalk  to  it,  then  had  folk
cannot  get  any  of  it  back.

6.  Wash  your  money  in  clean  water,  and  put  salt  and  bread  to  it,  then
the  dragon  and  bad  folk  cannot  get  it

7.  Women  boiling  yam  should  tell  lies  over  it,  or  it  won't  tarn  white.

8.  To  walk  over  sweepings  is  unlucky.

9.  If  yon  call  a  young  child  little  iyraJ),  it  will  be  stunted,  for  crabs  crawl
backwards.

10.  If  you  set  out  on  a  journey,  and  a  hare  runs  across  your  path,  it
bodes  no  good.

1  At  the  end  of  pag.  78b  stands  the  name  of  the  copyist :  *  Clara  Hätzlerin.'
In  the  same  handwriting  is  Cod.  Pal.  ^^TT.


1778  APPENDIX.

11.  In  drinking  oat  of  a  jug,  do  nob  span  the  lid  with  your  hand,  or  the
next  drinker  will  have  tension  of  the  heart.

12.  Do  not  buy  your  children  rattles,  nor  allow  any  to  be  given,  eUe
they  are  slow  in  learning  to  talk.

13.  For  tongue-tied  children  it  is  good  to  eat  beggar's  bread,

14.  If  in  leaving  home  you  have  forgotten  something,  donH  go  had
for  it,  but  have  it  fetched  by  another ;  else  everything  is  thrown  back
(goes  wrong).

15.  If  a  stranger  comes  into  the  room,  he  shall  sit  doum,  so  aa  not  to
take  the  children's  rest  away  with  him  (see  1).

16.  When  you  cover  a  table,  put  some  bread  on  at  once,  or  a  comer  of
the  cloth  will  trip  some  one  up.

17.  Men  shall  not  stay  in  the  honse  while  the  women  are  stuffing  featker*
into  the  beds,  else  the  feathers  will  prick  through  the  bed-tick.

18.  Set  the  hen  on  to  hatch  while  people  are  coming  out  of  church,  and
you'll  have  plenty  of  chicks  crawl  out.

19.  If  you  want  large-headed  chickens,  wear  a  fine  large  straw-bat
while  you  set  the  brood-hen  on.

20.  The  straw  for  a  nest  should  be  taken  out  of  a  marriage-bed,  from
the  man's  side  if  you  want  cocks,  from  the  woman's  if  hens.

21.  After  washing  in  the  morning,  don't  flirt  the  water  from  your  hands»
or  you'll  waste  your  victuals  that  day.

22.  Never  rock  an  empty  cradle :  it  rocks  the  baby's  rest  away.

23.  The  first  time  a  baby's  naUs  want  paring,  let  the  mother  }nte  them
off,  else  they  learn  to  pilfer.

24.  When  about  to  stand  godfather  or  godmother,  borrow  something  to
wear,  and  your  godchild  will  always  have  credit.

25.  If  you  call  children  alt-männichen,  alt-weibichen,  they'll  be  stunted,
and  have  wrinkles  on  the  forehead.

26.  If  you  want  children  to  live  long,  call  the  boys  Adam,  and  the  girls
Eve,

27.  If  a  child  is  to  live  100  years,  the  god-parents  must  be  fetched  from
three  parishes.

28.  If  you  take  a  child  into  the  cellar  under  a  year  old,  it  will  grow  up
timid.

29.  If  you  let  it  look  into  the  looking-glass  under  a  year  old,  it  will  grow
up  vain.

30.  Children  that  cry  at  the  christening  don't  grow  old.

31.  If  the  first  children  take  their  jparen^'  names,  they  die  before  ihe
parents.

32.  If  a  dog  looks  into  the  oven  when  you  are  baking,  the  loaves  will  be
loose  (p  erlöset),  or  the  crust  leave  the  crumb.

33.  If  there  is  dough  in  the  trough,  don't  sweep  the  room  till  it  is
carried  out,  or  you'll  sweep  a  loaf  away.

34.  The  vinegar  spoils  if  you  set  the  cruet  on  the  table.

35.  If  a  woman  within  siaa  weeks  after  confinement  walks  a  field  or  bed,
nothing  grows  on  it  for  some  years,  or  everything  spoils.

36.  If  a  woman  dies  in  the  six  weeks,  lay  a  mangle-roller  or  a  book  in


SUPERSTITIONS.     I.  1779

the  bed,  and  shake  up  and  make  the  hed  every  day  till  the  six  weeks  are
up,  or  she  cannot  rest  in  the  groand-

37.  Do  not  blow  the  baby's  first  pap,  and  it  will  not  afterwards  scald  its
mouth  with  hot  things.

38.  Would  you  wealthy  be,  cut  the  loaf  quite  evenly.

39.  Eat  not  while  the  deaih-hdl  tolls,  or  your  teeth  will  ache.

40.  If  red  shoes  are  put  on  a  child  under  a  year  old,  it  can  never  see
blood,

41.  If  a  woman  with  child  stands  and  eats  before  the  bread  cupboard,
the  child  will  have  the  wa^tMig^worm  (mit-esser,  fellow-eater) ;  see  817.

42.  To  mend  clothes  on  the  body  is  not  good.

43.  I r  you  sew  or  mend  anything  on  Ascension-day,  the  lightning  will
come  after  him  that  wears  it.

44.  Eating  cracknels  on  Maundy  Thivrsday  keeps  fever  away.

45.  If  you  stride  over  a  child,  it  will  stop  growing.  ^

46.  Who  works  in  wood  will  not  be  wealthy.

47.  Never  shew  a  light  tmder  the  table  where  people  sit,  lest  they  begin
to  quarreL

48.  God-parents  shall  buy  the  child  a  spoon,  lest  it  learn  to  dribble.

49.  If  a  woman  who  is  confined  put  a  black  stom,a>eher  on,  the  child  will
grow  up  timid.

50.  In  the  six  weeks  don't  take  a  child  inside  yowr  cloak,  or  it  will  be
gloomy,  and  always  meet  with  sorrow.

51.  He  that  lends  money  at  play  will  lose.

52.  He  that  borrows  for  play  will  win.

53.  Let  a  mother  who  is  nursing  go  eilenUy  out  of  church  three  Sun-
days, and  every  time  blow  into  her  child's  mouth,  and  its  teeth  will  come
easily.

54.  Between  II  and  12  the  night  before  Ch/ristmas,  the  waier  is  wine.
Some  say,  water  drawn  at  12  on  Easter  night  will  turn  into  wine.

55.  When  lights  are  brought  in  on  Ohristmas'eve,  if  any  one's  shadow
has  no  head,  he  will  die  within  a  year ;  if  half  a  head,  in  the  second  half-
year.

56.  In  the  Twelve  nights  eat  no  lentils,  peas  or  beans ;  if  you  do,  you
get  the  itch.

57.  One  who  is  about  to  stand  sponsor  shall  not  make  water  afber  he  is
drest  for  church ;  else  the  godchild  will  do  the  same  in  bed.

58.  If  you  go  out  in  the  morning,  and  an  old  woman  meets  you,  it  is
a  bad  sign  (see  380).

59.  Don't  answer  a  witch's  question,  or  she  may  take  something  from
you.

60.  Stone-erop  planted  on  the  roof  keeps  the  thunderbolt  aloof.

61    Gret  out  of  bed  backwards,  and  everything  goes  contrary  that  day.
62.  If  the  Jüdel  won't  let  the  children  sleep,  give  him  something  to
play  with.    When  children  laugh  in  their  sleep,  or  open  and  turn  their

^  My  brother  too  »tept  with  one  leg  over  me,  saying  '  Oho  ThömiUn,  now  wiltow
grow  no  more  1 '   Life  of  Thomas  Plater,  p.  19.


1780  APPENDIX.

eyes,  we  say  '  the  Jüdd  plays  with  them.'  Bay,  without  beating  down
the  price  asked,  a  new  little  pot,  pour  into  it  out  of  the  child's  bath,  and
set  it  on  the  oven :  in  a  few  days  the  Jüdel  will  have  sucked  every  drop  ovi.
Sometimes  eggehelU,  oat  of  which  the  yolk  has  been  blown  into  the  child's
pap  and  the  mother's  caudle,  are  hung  on  the  cradle  by  a  thread,  for  the
Jüdd  to  play  with,  instead  of  with  the  child.

63.  If  a  loaf  is  sent  away  from  table  uncut,  the  people  are  sure  to  go
away  hungry.

64.  If  you  spill  salt,  don't  scrape  it  up,  or  you'll  have  bad  luck.

65.  If  you  tread  your  shoes  inwards,  you'll  be  rich ;  if  outwards,  poor.

66.  If  you  have  the  jawndiee,  get  the  grease-pot  stolen  from  a  carrier's
cart ;  look  into  that,  and  it  will  soon  pass  away.

67.  If  a  dog  howls  the  night  before  Christmas,  it  will  go  mad  within  a
year.

68.  Great  evil  is  in  store  for  him  who  harms  a  cat,  or  kills  it.

69.  If  the  eats  bite  each  other  in  a  house  where  a  sick  man  lies,  be  will
die  soon.

70.  A  woman  churning  btUter  shall  stick  a  three-crossed  knife  on  the
chum,  and  the  butter  will  come.

71.  Splvnters  peeling  off  the  boards  in  the  sitting-room  are  a  sign  cf
stranger  guests.

72.  When  the  ea;t  trims  herself,  it  shews  a  guest  is  coming.

73.  If  magpies  chatter  in  the  yard  or  on  the  house,  guests  are  coming.
74  If  ayZea  jumps  on  your  hand,  you'll  hear  some  news.

75.  If  a  child  does  not  thrive,  it  has  the  EUerlein :  shove  it  a  few  times
into  the  oven,  and  the  E,  is  sure  to  go.

76.  To  kill  spiders  is  unlucky.

77.  Let  a  newborn  child  be  dressed  up  fine  the  first  three  Sundays,  and
its  clothes  will  sit  well  on  it  some  day.

78.  If  women  dance  in  the  sun  at  Candlemas,  their  flax  will  thrive  that
year.

79.  If  a  stranger  looks  iu  at  the  room-door  on  a  Monday,  without  walking
in,  it  makes  the  husband  beat  his  wife.

80.  If  a  man  buys  or  gives  his  betrothed  a  hook,  their  love  will  be  over-
turned (ver-blattert,  when  the  leaf  turns  over,  and  yon  lose  your  place).

81.  In  making  vinegar,  you  must  look  sour  and  be  savage,  ^e  it  won't
turn  out  good.

82.  If  your  ears  ring,  you  are  being  slandered.

83.  A  hen  crowing  like  a  cock  is  a  sign  of  misfortune.

84.  He  that  fasts  on  Mauiidy  Thursday  will  catch  no  fever  that  year,  and
if  he  does  he'll  get  over  it.

85.  He  that  lends  the  first  m<mey  he  makes  at  market,  gives  away  his
luck.

86.  When  at  market  selling  goods,  don't  let  the  first  customer  go,  even  il
you  sell  under  value.

87.  A  man  shall  not  give  his  betrothed  either  knife  or  scissors^  lest  their
love  be  eut  in  two.

88.  Bathing  the  children  on  a  Friday  robs  them  of  their  rest


SUPEBSTITIONS.     I.  1781

89.  If  yon  are  fetching  water  in  Rtlence,  draw  it  doum  stream.

90.  Draw  orosses  on  your  doors  before  Wallpurgis-night  (Mayday  eve),
and  the  witches  will  not  harm.

91.  In  going  to  bed,  leaye  nothing  lying  on  the  table,  else  the  oldest  or
youngest  in  the  house  can  get  no  sleep.

92.  If  a  woman  going  to  be  churched  meet  a  man,  she'll  have  a  son  next
time ;  if  a  woman,  a  girl ;  if  nobody,  no  more  children ;  if  two  people,  twins.

93.  If  you  sneeze  before  breakfast,  you'll  get  some  present  that  day.

94.  Don't  let  fire  and  Ught  be  carried  out  of  your  h>ouse  by  a  stranger,  it
is  taking  the  victuals  away  from  the  house.

95.  A  new  maidservant  shall  look  into  the  oven's  matUh  the  first  thing,
she'll  soon  get  used  to  it  then  (see  501).

96.  If  you  are  having  flaa  soton,  give  the  sower  a  fee,  or  the  flax  will
spoil.

97.  If  a  single  woman  on  Christmas-eve  pour  melted  lead  into  cold  water,
it  will  shape  itself  like  the  tools  of  her  future  husband's  trade.

98.  If  you  have  a  wooden  pipe  or  tap  turned  for  you  out  of  a  birchtree
growing  in  the  middle  of  an  anthill,  and  draw  wine  or  beer  through  it,
you'll  soon  have  sold  your  liquor.

99.  He  that  cuts  bread  unevenly,  has  told  lies  that  day.

100.  Single  women  that  want  husbands  shall,  the  night  before  8t
Andrew's  day,  call  upon  that  saint  naked,  and  they'll  see  their  sweetheart
in  their  sleep.

101.  When  a  maid  wants  to  know  if  she  shall  keep  her  place,  let  her  on
Christmas-eve  turn  her  back  to  the  door,  and  fling  the  shoe  off  her  fo^D
over  her  head :  if  the  tip  of  the  shoe  is  towards  the  door,  she'll  have  to  go  ;
if  the  heel,  she  will  stay.

102.  If  a  maid  wishes  to  know  what  sort  of  hair  her  lover  will  have,  let
her  ^ope  backwards  through  the  open  door  on  Christmas-eve,  and  she'll
grasp  the  hair  in  her  hand.

103.  Whoever  finds  by  chance  a  hare-laurel  (?  hasen-lorber)  in  the  wood,
and  eats  it,  will  have  his  share  of  the  hare  wherever  he  goes.

104.  He  that  looks  in  the  mirror  at  night,  sees  the  devil  there.

105.  To  find  out  if  she'll  get  a  husband  during  the  year,  let  the  damsel
knock  at  the  hen-hoiMO  on  Christmas-eve  or  at  midnight:  if  the  cock
cackles,  she'll  get  one ;  if  the  hen,  she  won't.

106.  If  children  in  the  street  ride  with  spears  and  banners,  there  will  be
a  war;  if  they  carry  each  other  on  crosses  (Banbury  chairs)  a  pestilence.

107.  If  you  are  out  of  money,  mind  the  new  moon  does  not  peep  into  your
empty  purse,  or  you'll  be  short  of  money  the  whole  month.

108.  If  the  stork  builds  on  your  roof  or  chimney,  you  will  live  long  and
be  rich.

109.  To  know  if  her  lover  will  be  straight  or  crooked,  a  girl  must  go  to
a  stack  of  wood  on  Christmas-eve,  and  with  her  back  to  it,  pull  out  a  log ;
as  the  log  is,  so  will  the  lover  be  (see  F,  7).

110.  To  know  what  he  is  called,  let  her  stretch  the  first  piece  of  yam  she
spins  that  day  outside  the  house-door,  and  the  first  man  that  passes  will  be
a  namesake  of  her  future  husband.


1782  APPENDIX.

111.  Never  set  a  gridiron  or  Mvei  over  the  fire  without  puttiog  eome-
thing  on  it ;  she  that  does  so  will  have  an  apron  (packers)  on  her  £iioe.

112.  Let  a  woman,  when  going  to  bed»  adkUe  the  stars  in  the  sky^  and
neither  hawk  nor  vulture  will  take  her  chickens.

113.  In  putting  straw  into  a  bed,  don't  leave  the  IcTwts  in  the  sWawhimds^
there's  no  sleeping  on  them.

144.  A  woman  going  to  market  will  get  better  prices  for  her  wares  if
on  getting  up  she  put  her  right  shoe  on  first.

115.  He  that  wears  a  shirt  woven  of  yam,  that  a  girl  under  seven  haa
spun,  will  find  luck  in  it  (see  931).

1 16.  If  it  rain  on  Johns-day,  nuts  ?n1l  spoil  and  harlots  thrive.

117.  Onions,  turned  in  their  bed  on  John's-day,  turn  out  fine.

118.  The  maids  shall  not  weed  the  cabbage-beds  on  BarÜemifs  den/;
Bartlemy  is  putting  [orig.  throwing]  heads  to  the  cabbages,  and  would  be
soared  away.

119.  If  you  find  Skfimr-leaved  clover  [shamrock],  hold  it  dear;  aa  long  as
you  have  it,  you'll  be  happy  (see  G,  62).

120.  A  raven  or  crow,  that  sits  cawing  on  a  sick  house,  betokens  the
patient*8  death.

121.  Shepherds  must  not  namne  the  wolf  daring  the  Twelves,  or  he  will
worry  their  sheep.

122.  If  a  child  has  a  daie-stone  about  him,  he  does  not  fall,  or  is  bo&
much  hurt.

123.  When  you  go  into  a  r^w  house  or  room,  what  you  dream  the  first
night  comes  true.

124  If  a  woman  or  maid  loses  her  garter  in  the  street,  her  hashand  or
lover  is  unfaithful  to  her.

125.  When  a  woman  is  going  to  bed,  she  shall  move  her  chair  from  tie
place  where  she  has  sat,  or  the  alp  will  weigh  upon  her.

126.  While  afire  hums  on  the  hearth,  lightning  will  not  strike  the  house.

127.  A  calf  born  on  St.  Velten's  (Yalentine's)  day  is  of  no  use  for
breeding.

128.  If  a  wolf,  stag,  boar  or  bear  meets  you  on  a  joomey,  it  ia  a  good
sign.

129.  He  that  finds  a  horse-shoe,  or  a  piece  of  one,  has  luck  (see  220).

130.  The  flax  or  tew  that  a  maid  leaves  unspun  on  the  distaff  oi  a  Satur-
day, does  not  make  good  yarn,  and  will  not  bleach.

131.  Let  the  father  put  a  sword  in  the  baby's  hand  directly  it  ia  <^iris*
tened,  and  it  will  be  bold  and  brave.

132.  When  a  boy  is  bom,  let  his  feet  push  against  his  father's  breast,  and
he  will  not  come  to  a  bad  end.

133.  As  soon  as  a  girl  is  bom,  seat  her  on  her  mother's  breaM,  and  saj
'  God  make  thee  a  good  woman ' ;  and  she  will  never  slip  or  oome  to
shame.

134.  If  a  spider  crawl  on  your  coai  in  the  morning,  you'll  be  happy  that
day.

135.  If  a  man  on  a  journey  meets  a  woman  who  is  spinning,  it  is  a  btd
sign ;  let  him  turn  back,  and  take  another  road.


SUPEBSTITIONS.     I.  1783

.136.  If  the  clock  strikes  while  bells  are  ringing,  it  betokens  fire.

137.  Don't  lay  a  new-bom  child  on  its  left  side  first»  or  it  will  always  be
awkward.

138.  On  Wcdpurgis-eve  let  him  that  has  cornfields  fire  his  gan  over  them,
and  the  witched  cannot  hart  the  corn.

139.  A  blue  cornflower  pulled  up  by  the  roots  on  Gorpas  Christi  day
stops  nose-bleeding,  if  held  in  the  hand  till  it  gets  wai*m.

140.  Boot  out  the  reeds  in  a  pond  or  bhe  thorns  in  a  field  on  Äbdon-day
(July  30),  and  they  will  not  grow  again.

141.  If  a  woman's  neck  or  throat  itches^  she  will  soon  go  to  a  christening
or  wedding ;  if  her  head  itches,  it  means  blows.

142.  Bright  Christmas,  dark  barns ;  dark  Christmas,  light  bams.

143.  Whoever  hurts  or  even  sees  an  earth-hünehen  or  a  liovse-oMer,  is
sure  to  die  that  year.

144.  Smear  the  point  of  your  sword  with  ear-wax,  it  will  melt  your
enemy's  courage.

145.  When  two  nursing  mothers  drink  at  the  same  time,  one  drinks  the
other's  müh  away.  And  when  two  people  begin  drinking  at  the  same
moment,  one  drinks  the  other's  colour  away.

146.  If  you  eat  bread  that  another  has  bitten,  you'll  become  his  enemy.

147.  If  a  woman  lets  another  person  wipe  hands  on  her  apron,  that  per-
son will  hate  her.

148.  Swallows  building  on  a  house  bring  poverty,  sparrows  riches.

149.  A  hoop  coming  off  a  cask  on  Christmas-eve  shews  that  some  one  in
the  house  will  die  that  year.

150.  If  the  light  on  the  altar  goes  out  of  itself,  it  shews  the  priest  is
going  to  die.

151.  A  woman  gets  rid  of  earache  by  wrapping  a  man's  breeches  round
her  head.

152.  When  the  maids  are  making  tinder,  they  must  tear  pieces  out  of
men's  shirts ;  tinder  made  of  women's  shifts  does  not  catoh.

153.  Tying  wet  strawbands  round  the  orchard- trees  on  Christmas-eve
makes  them  fruitful.

154.  Fruit-trees  dipt  at  Shrovetide  are  proof  against  worm  and  cater-
pillar.

155.  To  keep  a  cat  or  dog  from  running  away,  chase  it  three  times  round
the  hearth,  and  rub  ib  against  the  chimney-shafti.

156.  If  a  man  sees  a  wolf  before  the  wolf  sees  him,  he  need  fear  no
harm ;  but  if  the  t<;o2/Baw  him  first,  he  is  in  danger  :  some  say  he  will  be
dumb,  or  hoarse.

157.  John's  blood  (plantain),  culled  at  noon  on  John's  day,  is  g^d  for
niany  things.  ,

158.  If  a  magpie  sits  chattering  on  the  infirmary,  before  n9on,  and
looking  our  way,  the  meaning  is  good :  if  after  noon,  and  been  from  behind,
it  is  bad.

159.  The  howling  of  dogs  bodes  misfortune.

160.  A  swarm  of  bees  hanging  on  to  a  house  signifies  fire.

161.  The  lark  sings  as  long  before  Candlemas  as  she  is  silent  after.


1784  APPENDIX.

162.  If  a  bachelor  and  spinster  stand  sponsors  to  a  child,  the  priest
shall  plant  himself  hetvreen  the  two,  or  they  will  always  be  falling  oat.

163.  A  man  shall  not  marry  his  gossip  (fellow-sponsor),  for,  every  time
they  come  together  as  man  and  wife,  it  thunders.

164  Let  him  who  gets  the  first  can  of  beer  oat  of  a  cask  run  away  fast,
and  the  rest  of  that  beer  will  soon  go  off.

165.  Don't  let  a  hdby  tread  barefoot  on  a  tahle :  it  will  get  sore  feet.

166.  Afler  patting  the  candle  oat,  don't  lea\re  it  tipside  down  in  the
candlestick;  else  nobody  can  wake  if  thieves  shoald  come.

167.  A  boy  born  in  the  VeniM-momingstar  gets  a  wife  mach  yoanger
than  himself;  in  the  Veniis-eveningstar  one  much  older.  And  thecontmry
with  girls.

168.  On  rising  from  a  meal,  don't  leave  any  of  yonr  bread  behind;  if
any  one  takes  it  and  throws  it  over  the  gallows,  you  won't  escape  hang-
ing.

169.  An  elder  planted  before  the  stable  door  guards  the  cattle  from
sorcery.

170.  He  that  has  about  him  a  string  with  which  a  rupture  was  boond  np,
can  lift  the  heaviest  load  without  danger.

171.  A  piece  of  wood  off  a  coffin  that  has  been  dug  up,  if  concealed
among  year  cabbages,  keeps  away  the  caterpillars.

172.  Eat  no  soup  at  Shrovetide,  or  yoa'll  have  a  dripping  nose.

173.  On  Nicasitts-eve  write  the  saint's  name  on  the  door  in  chalk,  and
yon  rid  the  house  of  rat  and  mouse.

174.  If  the  carter  plaits  a  sruike*s  or  adder* s  tongue  into  his  whip,  his
horses  can  pull  the  biggest  loads  out  of  the  ditch,  and  will  not  over-drink
themselves.

175.  Make  nests  for  the  hens  on  Peter* s-day,  and  many's  the  egg  they
will  lay.

176.  A  woman  with  child,  who  stands  godmother^  shall  not  lift  the  babe
out  of  the  font  herself;  else  one  child  dies,  the  christened  one  or  hers.

177.  If  the  first  person  you  meet  in  the  morning  be  a  tfirgin  or  a  prUiU
'tis  a  sign  of  bad  luck ;  if  a  harlot,  of  good.

178.  If  a  weaned  child  is  put  to  the  breast  again,  it  grows  np  a  blas-
phemer.

179.  If  a  woman  with  child  pass  under  a  waggon-pole,  she'll  go  over  her
time.

180.  The  seventh  son  is  a  lucky  man,  for  healing,  planting,  or  doing  any-
thing.

181.  Malefactors  on  the  rack  pin  a  paper  to  their  back  with  Psalms
10th  and  15th  written  on  it:  they  can  stand  the  torture  then  withoat
confessing.

182.  If  yon  have  bread  and  salt  about  yon,  you  are  safe  from  sorcery.

183.  For  a  fever :  Take  three  bits  of  stolen  bread,  spit  in  two  nutshen<«,
and  write  this  note:  *Cow,  will  you  go  to  year  stall,  Fever  {frörer,  agne^
go  you  to  the  wall.'

184.  If  a  mouse  has  gnawed  at  your  dress,  it  means  mischief.

185.  If  the  women  or  maids  are  washing  sacks,  it  will  soon  rain.


SUPERSTITIONS.     I.  1785

186.  To  sneeze  while  putbing  your  shoes  on,  is  a  sign  of  bad  luck.

187.  To  pat  a  clean  shirt  on  of  a  Friday  is  good  for'tbe  gripes.

188.  Eating  stolen  cheese  or  bread  gives  yon  the  hiooongh.

189.  li  yon  dig  deviVs  bU  the  midnight  before  St  John's,  the  roots  are
Ktill  unhitten,  and  good  for  driving  the  devil  away.

190.  John's  wort  drives  witches  away  and  the  devil ;  that's  why  he  out
of  spite  pricks  holes  in  all  the  leaves  witli  bis  needle.

191.  When  a  person  dies,  set  the  windows  open,  and  the  soul  can
get  oat.

192.  For  a  child  to  grow  up  good,  its  godmother  or  the  woman  that
carries  it  home  from  charch  must  immediately  lay  it  under  the  table,  and
the  father  take  it  up  and  give  it  to  the  mother.

193.  A  year  without  skating  is  bad  for  the  barley.

194.  If  they  are  bailding  a  weir  across  the  river,  it  will  not  rain  in  that
country  till  they  have  done.

195.  Pat  a  goose  through  your  legs  three  times,  give  her  ihree  mouthfuls
of  chewed  bread  with  the  words  '  Go  in  God's  name,'  and  she'll  always
come  home.

196.  He  that  has  fits  of  cold  fever  shall  crawl  to  a  running  stream,  strew
a  bandfal  of  salt  down-stream,  and  say :  '  In  God  his  name  I  sow  for  seed
this  grain.  When  the  seed  comes  up  may  I  see  my  cold  friend  again.'

197.  The  first  time  you  hear  the  cuckoo  in  spring,  ask  him :  '  Cuckoo,
baker's-man,  true  answer  give,  How  many  years  have  I  to  liveP '  And  as
many  times  as  he  sings,  so  many  years  more  will  you  live.

193.  If  an  unmarried  maiden  eat  the  brown  that  sticks  inside  the
porridge-pot,  it  will  rain  at  her  wedding ;  and  if  it  rains,  the  new  couple
get  rich  (see  498).

199.  To  sell  your  cattle  well  at  market,  smoke  them  with  the  black  ball
dug  out  of  the  middle  of  an  ant'hiU*

200.  Never  hand  things  over  a  cradle  with  the  child  in  it ;  nor  leave  it
open.

201.  A  thief  s  thumb  on  your  person,  or  among  your  wares,  makes  them
go  fast.

202.  If  you  throw  a  banch  of  inherited  keys  at  a  door  when  some  one  is
listening  outside,  the  eckuesdropper  is  deaf  for  the  rest  of  his  life.

203.  Eat  milk  on  Shrove  Tuesday,  and  you'll  not  be  sunburnt  in  the
summer.

204.  If  a  bride  wishes  to  rule  her  husband,  let  her  on  the  wedding-day
dress  in  a  baking  trough,  and  knock  at  the  church  door.

205.  To  wean  a  child,  let  the  mother  set  it  down  on  the  floor,  and  knock
it  over  with  her  foot;  it  will  forget  her  the  sooner.

206.  If  a  dog  runs  between  a  woman's  legs,  her  husband  is  going  to  beat
her.

207.  Put  m^mey  in  the  mauth  of  the  dead,  and  they  will  not  come  back
if  they  have  hidden  a  treasure.

208.  Toothpicks  made  of  wood  that  lightning  has  struck,  send  the  tooth-
ache away.

209.  A  knife  shall  not  lie  on  its  back,  for  fear  of  its  hurting  the  angels.


1786  APPENDIX.

210.  If  two  clocks  in  the  town  happen  to  strike  together,  a  married
couple  will  die.

211.  A  boil  will  safely  heal  ifsqneezed  with  a  three- crossed  knife.

212.  Let  the  bride  arrive  at  the  bridegroom's  hoase  in  the  dark,thesi
they'll  have  every  corner  full.

213.  If  a  dog  mns  through  between  two  friends,  they  will  break  off  their
friendship.

214.  He  that  would  dig  np  a  treasure^  must  not  speak  a  word.

215.  To  draw  storks  to  yonr  house,  make  them  a  nest  on  the  chimnej
füUh  your  left  hand.

216.  If  you  have  a  swollen  neck,  go  in  silence  to  the  mill,  steal  the  tie
from  one  of  the  sacks,  and  tie  it  abont  your  neck.

217.  When  you  see  the  first  swaUow  in  spring,  halt  immediately,  and  dig
the  ground  under  your  left  foot  with  a  knife;  you  will  there  find  a  coal  thai
is  good  for  a  year  against  the  ague  (see  G,  98).

218.  In  digging  for  treasure,  have  bread  about  yon,  and  the  spectres
can't  disturb  you.

219.  Godfather^ s  money  (gift)  makes  rich  and  lucky.

220.  When  yon  have  been  robbed,  drive  an  aocidentally-fonnd  horsesh&e
nail  (see  129)  into  the  place  where  the  fire  always  is,  and  you'll  have  your
own  again.

221.  Bastard  children  are  luckier  than  lawful  ones.

222.  At  a  christening  get  a  mite  of  bread  consecrated,  and  the  child's
parents  will  never  want  for  bread.

223.  He  that  counts  his  money  at  new  moon  is  never  short  of  it.
224  Drop  a  cross-penny  on  a  treasure,  and  it  can't  move  away.

225.  Eat  lentils  at  Shrovetide,  and  money  will  pour  (qnellen,  swell  ?).

226.  He  of  whom  a  boy  (or  girl)  makes  his  (or  her)  first  purchase  st
market,  will  have  good  luck  in  selling  that  day.

227.  Let  a  merchant  throw  the  first  money  he  takes  on  the  ground,  and
plant  his  feet  upon  it;  his  business  will  go  the  better.

228.  For  the  cuckoo  to  sing  afcer  St  John's  is  not  good,  it  betokens
dearth.

229.  When  the  bride  is  fetched  home,  she  shall  make  no  circuity  bat  go
the  comm^mroad;  otherwise  she  has  ill  luck.

230.  If  a  man  passing  under  a  henroost  is  bedropped  by  the  hen,  it  bodei
misfortune,  if  by  the  cock,  good  luck  (see  105).

231.  A  new  garment  should  not  be  put  on  empty,  something  should  be
dropt  into  the  pocket  first  for  luck.

232.  In  choosing  sponsors,  ask  an  unmarried  woman,  else  the  child  will
be  unlucky  in  marriage,  and  also  have  no  children.

223.  He  that  is  lucky  when  young  will  beg  his  bread  when  old;  and
vice  vers&.

234.  He  that  carries  wormwood  about  him  cannot  be  becried  (bewitched).

235.  If  you  find  a  needle,  and  the  point  is  towards  you,  you'll  be  un-
lucky; if  the  head,  lucky.

236.  Put  nothing  in  your  mouth  of  a  morning,  till  you've  had  a  bite
of  bread.


SUPBBSTITIONS.     I.  1787

237.  If  the  first  yV-o^  yon  see  in  spring  leaps  in  water  and  not  on  land,
you  may  expeot  misfortune  all  that  year.

238.  Moye  into  a  new  dwelling  with  a  waxing  moon  or  at/uZ{  moon ;  and
carry  bread  and  saU  into  it,  then  everybody  in  it  will  be  full  and  want
for  nothing.

239.  If  you  hear  horses  neigh,  listen  attentively,  they  announce  good
lack.

240.  If  a  woman  in  the  six  weeks  sjnn  wool,  hemp  or  flax,  the  child  will
be  hanged  some  day.

241.  Women  shall  not  brush  or  plait  themselves  on  a  Friday,  it  breeds
vermin.

242.  If  you  find  money  before  breakfast,  and  there  is  no  wood  under  it,
it  is  unlucky.

243.  He  that  was  bom  on  a  Sunday  is  luckier  than  other  men.

244.  If  after  sunrise  on  Shrove  Taesday  you  thrash  in  silence,  you  drive
the  moles  away.

245.  Stand  with  your  face  to  the  waning  moon,  and  say:  'Like  the
moon  from  day  to  day,  Let  my  sorrows  wear  away '  (see  492).

246.  Don't  leave  the  oven-fork  in  the  oven ;  if  you  do,  the  witches  can
take  a  dollar  a  day  from  the  house.

247.  Nothing  out  of  the  way  shall  be  built,  planted  or  planned  in  a  Leap-
year  :  it  does  not  prosper.

248.  If  in  going  out  your  clothes  get  caught  in  the  door  or  on  the  latch,
stay  a  while  where  yon  are,  or  you'll  meet  with  a  mishap.

249.  Pare  your  nails  on  a  Fi'iday,  and  you  have  luck  (see  340).

250.  If  you  lay  a  broom  in  a  witch'»  way,  so  that  she  must  step  over  it,
she  turns  faint,  and  can  plot  no  mischief.

25L  He  that  has  about  him  an  owVs  heart,  or  the  stone  out  of  a  bafs
back,  or  a  hoopoo's  head,  will  have  luck  in  play  (see  329).

252.  When  the  candle  at  night  burns  rosea  (forms  a  death's  head),  there's
money  or  some  luck  coming  next  day.

253.  Of  the  first  com  brought  in  at  harvest,  take  a  few  of  the  first
sheaves,  and  lay  them  cross- wise  in  the  four  cor}iers  of  the  bam  ;  then  the
dragon  can't  get  any  of  it.

254.  If  it  freezes  on  the  shortest  day^  com  falls  in  price ;  if  it  is  mild,  it
rises.

255.  As  many  grains  as  the  theuerlings  (dear-lings,  a  kind  of  mushroom)
have  in  them,  so  many  groschen  will  corn  be  worth  from  that  time.

256.  If  you  search  in  vain  for  something  that  must  be  there,  the  devu  is
holding  his  hand  or  tail  over  it.

257.  On  your  way  to  market,  see  that  no  one  meets  you  carrying  water;
else  you'd  better  turn  back,  you'll  have  no  luck  buying  or  selling.

258.  By  the  grain  of  the  first  sheaf  you  thrash,  you  may  guess  the  rise  or
fall  in  the  price  of  com,  thus :  fill  and  empty  a  measure  four  times,  making
four  heaps ;  then  put  the  heaps  back  into  the  measure,  and  level  off.  If
grains  fall  from  any  heap,  or  if  they  seem  short,  then  in  the  corresponding
quarter  of  the  coming  year  com  will  fall  or  rise.

259.  Lay  by  some  bread  from  your  wedding,  and  you'll  never  want  it.


1788  APPENDIX.

260.  He  that  keeps  and  carries  abont  him  the  bit  of  coat  be  bnmglit
into  the  world  (the  glücks-haube),  will  prosper  in  everything.

261.  He  that  has  about  him  a  bitten-off  moWe  paw,  will  bay  che^  and
sell  dear.

262.  Deduct  nothing  from  the  cost  of  making  a  child's  first  dree» ;  the
more  you  take  off,  the  less  luck  he'll  have.

263.  If  the  seed  you  are  going  to  sow  be  laid  on  ike  table^  it  will  not
come  up.

264.  The  first  baking  after  Newy  ear's  day,  make  as  many  little  cakes  na
there  are  people  in  the  house,  give  each  a  name,  and  prick  a  hole  in  it
with  your  finger :  if  any  one's  hole  gets  baked  up,  he  will  die.

265.  When  a  child  is  going  to  church  to  be  christened,  lift  htm  out
through  the  window :  he'll  be  the  stronger,  and  live  the  longer.

266.  If  you  are  telling  something,  and  you  or  anybody  sneeze^  the  tale
is  true.

267.  If  two  people  rock  one  child,  it  is  robbed  of  its  rest.

268.  Kever  bum  straw  that  any  one  has  slept  on,  else  he  cannot  rest

269.  If  you  are  taken  ill  at  chv/rch,  you  do  not  easily  recover.

270.  He  that  touches  tinder  with  his  fingers,  cannot  make  it  catch.

271.  If  you  scrape  cheese  on  the  tablecloth,  people  will  dislike  you.

272.  He  that  eats  much  motddy  bread,  lives  to  be  old.

273.  If  the  man  sharpen  his  knife  otherwise  than  on  the  whetstone,
there  will  be  strife  in  the  house.

274.  Who  eats  no  beans  on  Christmas-eve,  becomes  an  ass.

275.  Who  eats  not  of  nine  herbs  on  Maundy  Thursday,  gets  the  fever.

276.  He  that  sews  or  patches  anything  on  his  ovon  body,  shall  always
take  something  in  his  mouth,  or  he  becomes  forgetfuL

277.  If  a  child  in  its  first  year  smell  at  anything,  it  learns  not  to  smell
afterwards.

278.  Your  blessed  bread  (liebe  brot)  shall  not  be  left  lying  on  its  back.

279.  To  eat  up  clean  what's  on  the  table  makes  fine  weathtr  the  next  day.

280.  Let  him  that  has  the  hiccough,  put  a  bare  knife  in  a  caa  of  beer,
and  take  a  long  draught  in  one  breath.

281.  If  a  sick  or  dying  man  has  hen's  feathers  under  him,  he  cannot  die.

282.  To  appease  the  storm-wind^  sJiake  a  meal-sack  clean,  and  say:
'  There,  wind,  take  that,  To  make  pap  for  your  brat ! '

283.  If  after  washing  you  wipe  yowr  hands  on  the  tahUcloih,  you'll  get
warts.

284.  When  the  bells  ring  thick,  there  is  generally  some  one  just  going
to  die ;  if  the  church-bell  rings  clear,  it  means  a  wedding.

285.  When  a  bride  is  on  her  way  to  church,  if  it  rains^  she  has  been
crying ;  if  the  svm,  shines,  laughing,

286.  If  some  one  happens  to  come  where  a  woman  is  ckuming,  and
counts  the  hoops  on  the  chum  first  up  and  then  down,  the  butter  will  not
come.

287.  It  is  not  good  to  look  over  yowr  fingers  or  the  flat  of  your  hand.

288.  If  you  give  a  baby  part  of  a  red  baked  apple  to  eat  the  first  time
instead  of  pap,  it  will  have  red  cheeks.


SÜPBBSTITIONS.      I.  1789

289.  A  baby  does  not  thrive  if  you  call  it  townneJ^en  (mite)  or  jackeL

290.  If  the  cat  looks  at  you  while  she  trims  herself,  yoa'U  get  a  dressing
or  a  wigging.

291.  A  cook  that  lets  the  dinner  hvm  on  to  the  pot,  is  betrothed  or
promised.

292.  A  maiden  who  is  fond  of  caU,  will  have  a  sweet-tempered  husband.

293.  If  a  woman  with  child  walk  over  a  grave,  her  child  will  die.

294.  He  that  has  a  lawsuit,  and  sees  his  opponent  in  cowrt  before  the
opponent  sees  him,  will  win  his  cause.

295.  When  you  are  in  court,  pocket  your  knife  hare,  and  you'll  win  your
cause.

296.  When  any  one,  old  or  young,  can  get  no  sleep,  put  a  ruhe^wisch
(wisp  of  rest)  under  his  pillow,  ie.  straw  that  breeding  women  lay  under
their  backs ;  only  you  must  get  it  away  from  them  without  saying  a  word.

297.  If  you  pity  cattle  that  are  being  killed,  they  can't  die.

298.  Never  lay  bread  so  that  the  out  side  looks  away  from  the  table.

299.  If  you  hear  a  ghost,  don't  look  round,  or  you*ll  have  your  neck
"wrung.

300.  Sow  no  whecU  on  Mawrice's  day,  or  it  will  be  blighted.

301.  It  is  not  good  to  look  over  your  head.

302.  If  you  lop  a  tree  on  John's  Beheading  day,  it  is  sure  to  wither.

303.  If  a  maid  who  is  knecuLing  dough  clutch  at  a  lad's  face,  he'll  never
get  a  beard.

304.  If  your  first  godchild  be  a  bastard,  you'll  be  lucky  in  marriage.

305.  When  you  drink  to  any  one,  donH  hand  him  the  jug  open.

306.  Whoever  can  blow-in  a  blown-out  candie^  is  a  chaste  bachelor  or
maiden.

307.  He  that  makes  a  wheel  over  his  gateway,  has  luck  in  his  house.

308.  If  a  woman  in  the  six  weeks  fetches  spring-water,  the  spring  dries
np.

309.  If  you  turn  a  plate  over  at  a  meal,  the  witches  can  share  in  it

310.  When  a  witch  is  being  led  to  the  stake,  don't  let  her  touch  the
hare  ground,

311.  He  that  gets  a  blister  on  his  tongue,  is  slandered  that  moment;  let
him  spit  three  times,  and  wish  the  slanderer  all  that's  bad.

312.  A  patient  thaD  weeps  and  sheds  tears,  will  not  die  that  time.

313.  When  the  heimen  or  crickets  sing  in  a  house,  things  go  luckily.

314.  He  that  sleeps  long  grows  white,  and  the  longer  the  whiter.

315.  If  on  their  wedding  day  a  bride  or  bridegroom  have  a  hurt  on
them,  they'll  carry  it  to  the  grave  with  them,  it  will  never  heal.

316.  II  the  moon  looks  in  at  the  chamber  window,  the  niaid  breaks
many  pots.

317.  If  anything  gets  in  your  eye,  spit  thrice  over  your  left  arm,  and  it
will  come  out.

818.  Wheal  fogs  fall  in  March,  a  great  flood  follows  100  days  after:

319.  He  that  walks  over  nail  parings,  will  dislike  the  person  they  be-
longed to.

320.  If  a  woman  that  sueMes  a  boy,  once  puts  another's  child,  which

VOL.  IV.  L  L


1790  APFBKDIX.

is  a  girl,  to  her  breast,  the  two  children  wheo  grown  np  will  come  to  shame
together.

321.  He  that  walks  with  only  one  shoe  or  stocking  on,  will  have  a
cold  in  his  head.

322.  When  the  fire  in  the  oven  pope,  there  will  be  quarrelling  in  the
house.

323.  Just  as  long  as  the  meat  on  the  table  keeps  on  fissing  or  simmering,
will  the  cook  be  beaten  by  her  husband.

324.  He  whose  women  mn  away,  and  whose  hones  stay,  will  be  rich.

325.  When  the  candle  goee  out  of  itself,  some  one  in  the  house  will  die.

326.  He  that  smells  at  the  flowers  or  wrecUhs  at  a  funeral,  will  lose  his
smell.

327.  If  you  cut  off  a  staUc  of  rosemary,  and  put  it  in  a  dead  man's  grsTe,
the  whole  plant  withers  as  soon  as  the  branch  in  the  grave  rots.

328.  When  you  eat  eggs,  crush  the  shells  (witches  nestle  in  them),  or
some  one  may  get  the  fever.

329.  He  that  has  on  him  a  moleskin  purse  with  a  hoopoo*s  head  and
penny  piece  inside,  is  never  without  money  (see  251).

330.  When  the  wi/nd  blows  on  a  New-year's  night,  it  is  a  sign  of  pesti-
lence.

331.  If  8  man  eating  soup  lays  his  spoon  on  the  table,  and  it  falls  with
its  inner  side  up,  he  has  not  had  enough ;  he  must  go  on  eating,  till  the
spoon  turns  ibs  outer  side  up.

332.  If  yon  cut  hread  at  table,  and  happen  to  cat  one  more  slice  than
there  are  people,  there*B  a  hungry  guest  on  the  road.

333.  If  you  wear  something  sewed  with  thread  spun  on  Christmas  ect,
no  vermin  will  stick  to  you.

334.  Never  point  with  your  fingers  at  the  moon  or  stars  in  the  sky,  ic
hurts  the  eyes  of  the  angels  (see  937).

335.  Keep  a  eross-hiU  in  the  house,  and  the  lightning  will  not  strike.

336.  In  brewing,  lay  a  bunch  of  great  siinging-netües  on  the  vat,  and
the  thunder  will  not  spoil  the  beer.*

337.  If  a  woman  with  child  has  gone  beyond  her  time,  and  lets  a  hone
eai  out  of  her  apron,  she  has  an  easy  labour.

338.  When  a  wedding  pair  join  hands  before  the  altar,  the  one  whose
hand  is  coldest  will  die  first.

339.  He  that  steals  anything  at  Christmas,  New-year,  and  Twelfthday-
eve,  without  being  caught,  can  steal  safely  for  a  year.

340.  To  cut  the  finger  and  toe  nails  on  Friday  is  good  for  the  toothache.

341.  At  Martinmas  you  can  tell  if  the  winter  will  be  cold  or  not,  by  the
goose's  breastbone  looking  white  or  brown  (see  H,  ch.  121).

342.  Let  farmers  baptize  their  maids  or  souse  them  with  water,  wheo
they  bring  the  first  grass  in  the  year,  and  they  will  not  sleep  at  grass-
cutting.

343.  As  a  rule,  when  a  tempest  blows,  some  one  has  hung  himself.

1  The  thunder-nettU  resists  thunder,  and  is  therefore  put  to  young  beer,  to  keep
it  from  taming.  On  OrOn-d  mnerstag  (Maundy  Thursday)  young  n^ttUs  are
boiled  and  eaten  with  meat     Dav.  Frank's  Meoklenbg  1,  69.


SUPEBSTITIONS.      I.  1791

344.  Hens  hatched  ont  of  eggs  that  were  laid  on  Maundy  Thursday
change  their  colour  every  year.

345.  When  a  child  is  taken  ont  of  doors,  don't  keep  the  upper  half  of
the  door  closed,  or  it  will  stop  growing.

346.  If  feathers  picked  up  on  a  bourn  (between  two  fields)  are  put  in
a  bed,  a  child  can'b  sleep  in  it ;  if  it  is  a  marriage-bed,  the  man  and  wife
will  part.

347.  If  yon  sing  while  you  brew,  the  beer  turns  ont  well.

348.  Salute  the  returning  stork,  and  yon  won't  have  the  toothache.

349.  When  you  go  out  in  the  morning,  tread  the  threshold  with  your.
right  foot,  and  you'll  have  luck  that  day.

350.  When  a  foot-bath  has  been  used,  don't  empty  it  till  next  day,  or
yon  spill  your  luck  away  with  it.

351.  If  you  happen  to  find  the  felloe  of  an  old  wheel,  and  throw  it  into
the  bam  in  the  name  of  the  H.  Trinity,  mice  will  not  hurt  your  corn.

352.  A  silver  ring  made  of  begged  penny -pieces,  and  worn  on  the  finger,
is  sovereign  against  all  diseases.

353.  Don't  keep  putting  the  bathing  toufel  on  and  off  the  child,  or  it
will  have  no  abiding  place  when  old.

354.  Before  a  wedding,  the  bridegroom  shall  broach  the  beer-cask,  and
put  the  tap  in  his  pocket,  lest  bad  people  should  do  him  a  mischief.

355.  Hang  your  clothes  in  the  snn  on  Oood  Friday,  and  neither  moth
nor  woodlouse  can  get  in.

356.  Suffer  thirst  on  Good  Friday,  and  no  drink  will  hurt  you  for  a
year  (see  913).

367.  In  walking  to  your  wedding,  it  is  not  good  to  look  round,

358.  On  coming  home  from  your  wedding,  make  a  black  hen  run  in  at
the  door  (or  window)  first,  and  any  mischief  to  be  feared  will  fall  on  the
lien.

359.  In  moving  to  another  town  or  dwelling,  if  you  lose  bread  on  the
way,  you  forfeit  your  food  ever  after.

360.  In  walking  into  a  room,  it  is  not  good  to  turn  round  in  the  doorway.

361.  A  woman  that  has  a  cold  in  her  head,  shall  smell  in  her  husband's
shoes.

362.  After  pulling  a  splinter  out,  chew  it  to  pieces,  lest  it  do  more  harm.

363.  If  another  looks  on  while  yon  strike  a  light,  the  tinder  won't  catch.

364.  If  a  woman  with  child  jump  over  a  pipe  through  which  a  bell  is
being  cast,  it  will  lighten  her  labour.

365.  A  man  can  pray  his  enemy  dead  by  repeating  Psalm  109  every
night  and  morning  for  a  year;  but  if  he  miss  a  day  he  must  die  himself.

366.  If  yon  steal  hay  the  night  before  Christmas,  and  give  the  cattle
some,  they  thrive,  and  you  are  not  caught  in  any  future  thefts.

367.  Some  houses  or  stables  will  not  endure  white  cattle :  they  die  off,
or  get  crushed.

368.  If  a  corpse  looks  red  in  the  face,  one  of  the  friends  will  soon  follow.

369.  If  after  a  Christmas  dinner  you  shake  out  the  tablecloth  over  the
bare  ground  under  the  open  sky,  brosam-Jcraut  (crumb-wort)  will  grow  on
the  spot.


1792  APPENDIX.

370.  If  yon  drink  in  the  mines  you  must  not  say  '  glück  zn/  but '  gluck
at//  lest  the  building  tumble  down.

371.  In  a  dangerous  plaoe,  if  you  hare  a  donkey  with  you,  the  deril
can  do  you  no  harm.

372.  Put  feathers  in  a  bed  when  the  moon's  on  the  wane,  they'll  Ter;
soon  creep  out  again.

373.  If  yon  twisi  a  toillou)  to  tie  up  wood  in  a  stable  where  hens,  geese
or  ducks  are  sitting,  the  chickens  they  hatch  will  have  crooked  necks.

374.  If  you  haye  no  money  the  first  time  you  hear  the  ciu^oo  call,  you'll
be  short  of  it  all  that  year.

875.  A  baby  left  unchristened  long,  gets  fine  large  eyes.

376.  If  a  maiden  would  have  long  hair,  let  her  lay  some  of  her  hair  in
the  ground  along  with  hop-shoots.

377.  It  is  not  good  to  beat  a  beast  with  the  rod  loüh  which  a  ehüd  hoM
been  chastised,

378.  Every  swallow  you  have  slain  makes  a  month  of  steady  rain.

379.  A  child's  first  fall  does  not  hurt  it.

380.  He  that  walks  between  two  old  women  in  the  morning,  has  no  luck
that  day  (see  58).

381.  When  swaUows  build  new  nests  on  a  house,  there  will  be  a  death
in  it  that  year.

382.  When  the  cats  eat  their  food  up  clean,  com  will  be  dear ;  if  they
leave  scraps  lying,  the  price  will  fall,  or  remain  as  it  is.

383.  To  get  rid  of  the  rose  (St  Anthony's  fire),  have  sparks  dropt  on  it
from  flint  and  steel  by  one  of  the  same  ohristian-name.

384.  In  cutting  grafts,  let  them  not  fall  on  the  ground,  or  the  fruits  will
fall  before  their  time.

385.  A  spur  made  out  of  a  gibbet-chain  without  using  fire,  will  tame  a
hard-mouthed  horse  or  one  that  has  the  staggers.

886.  Hang  in  the  dove-cot  a  rope  that  has  strangled  a  man,  and  the  dof  es
will  stay.
387.  He  that  has  aU'men's'Ormour  (wild  garlic)  on  him  can't  be  wounded.
888.  It  is  not  good  to  bum  brooms  up.

389.  In  a  lying-in  room  lay  a  straw  out  of  the  woman's  bed  at  every  door,
and  neither  ghost  nor  Jüdel  can  get  in.

390.  A  bride  that  means  to  have  the  mastery,  shall  dawdle,  and  let  the
bridegroom  get  to  church  before  her.

391.  Or  :  after  the  wedding  she  shall  hide  her  girdle  in  the  threshold  of
the  honBOf  so  that  he  shall  step  over  it.

392.  She  must  eat  of  the  caudle,  or  when  she  comes  to  suckle^  ber
breasts  will  have  no  milk.

893.  On  no  account  shall  married  people  eat  of  the  houss'-cock.

394.  He  that  sells  beer,  shall  lay  his  first  earnings  under  the  tap,  till  the
cask  is  emptied.

395.  If  you  bum  wheat-straw,  the  wheat  in  the  field  will  turn  sooty  that
year.

396.  Of  A  firstborn  calf  let  no  part  be  roasted,  else  the  cow  dries  up.

397.  Let  no  tears  drop  on  the  dead,  else  he  cannot  rest.


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1793'

398.  When  one  is  aiivred  by  another,  she  mast  not  thank  her,  else  the
finery  will  not  fit  her.

399.  The  fruit-trees  must  not  see  a  distaff  in  the  Twelves,  or  they'll  bear
no  fruit.

400.  A  maid  who  is  leaving  must  make  one  more  mess  of  pottage,  and
eat  it.

401.  He  that  mows  grass  shall  whet  his  scythe  every  time  he  leaves  off,
and  not  put  it  away  or  take  it  home  unwhetted.

402.  When  girls  are  going  to  a  dance,  they  shall  put  »ehrtowzel-kraut
in  their  shoes,  and  say :  '  Herb,  I  put  thee  in  my  shoe,  All  you  young
fellows  come  round  me,  do  ! '

403.  When  the  atm  does  not  shine,  all  treasures  buried  in  the  earth  are
open.

404.  If  your  flax  does  not  thrive,  steal  a  little  Unseed,  and  mix  it  with
yours.

405.  Pat  thd  first  yam  a  child  spins  on  the  mill/wheel  of  a  watermill,
and  she  will  become  a  firstrate  spinner.

406.  If  clothes  in  the  wash  be  lefb  hanging  out  till  sunset,  he  that  puts
them  on  will  bewitch  everybody.

407.  He  that  comes  in  during  a  meal  shall  eat  toith  you,  if  only  a  morsel.

408.  If  a  woman  with  child  step  over  a  rope  by  which  a  mare  has  been
tied,  she  will  go  two  months  over  her  time.

409.  The^«^  meat  you  give  a  child  shall  be  roast  lark.

410.  If  a  pure  maiden  step  over  a  woman  in  labour,  and  in  doing  so  drop
her  girdle  on  her,  the  woman  shall  have  a  quick  recovery.

411.  When  the  carpenter  knocks  the  finrst  nail  in  a  new  house,  if  ^ire
leap  out  of  it,  the  house  will  be  burnt  down  (see  500.  707).

412.  When  the  flax-sower  comes  to  the  flax-field,  let  him  three  times  sit
down  on  the  bagful  of  seed,  and  rise  again  :  it  will  be  good.

413.  If  sparks  of  fire  spirt  out  of  a  candle  when  lighted,  the  man  they  fly
at  will  get  money  that  day.

414.  Beware  of  washing  in  water  warmed  with  old  waggon  wheels.

415.  If  a  child  is  backward  in  speaking,  take  two  loaves  that  have  stuck
together  in  baking,  and  break  them  loose  over  his  head,

416.  Strike  no  man  or  beast  with  a  peeled  rod,  lest  they  dry  up.

417.  Pick  no  fruit  [bruise  no  malt  P]  in  the  Twelves,  or  apples  and  pears
will  spoil.

418.  Do  no  thrashing  in  the  Twelves,  or  all  the  com  within  hearing  of
the  sound  will  spoil  (see  916).

419.  A  shirt,  sewed  with  thread  spun  vn  the  Twelves,  is  good  for  many
things.

420.  He  that  walks  into  the  winter  com  on  Holy  Christmas-eve,  hears
all  that  will  happen  in  the  village  that  year.

421.  Let  not  the  light  go  out  on  Christmas-eve,  or  one  in  the  house  will
die.

422.  It  is  not  good  when  a  stool  lies  upside  down,  with  its  legs  in  the
air.

423.  If  a  man  puts  on  a  woman* s  cap,  the  horses  will  kick  him.


1794  APPENDIX.

424.  In  8 creeping  a  room,  don't  spnnhle  it  vrith  hot  water,  or  those  in
the  house  will  qaarrel.

425.  Ar  the  bride  goes  to  church,  throw  the  keys  after  her,  and  shell  be
economical.

426.  On  her  retarn  from  church,  meet  her  with  caJce  cut  in  slices ;  every
guest  take  a  slice,  and  push  it  against  the  bride's  body.

427.  When  the  bridegroom  fetches  home  the  bride,  let  her  on  the  way
throw  some  flax  awanj,  and  her  flax  will  thrive.

428.  If  an  infant  ride  on  a  hluckfoal  it  will  out  its  teeth  quickly.

429.  Move  to  a  new  house  at  new  tiMon,  and  your  provisions  wiU  in-
crease.

430.  If  you  have  echwdben  (black  worms),  steal  a  drag  (hemm-schuh)  and
put  it  on  the  oven,  and  they'll  go  away  (see  607).

431.  Put  a  stolen  sand-clout  (-wisch)  in  the  hens'  food,  and  they  won'i
hide  their  eggs.

432.  At  harvest,  make  the  last  sheaf  up  very  big,  and  your  next  crop
will  be  so  good  that  every  sheaf  can  be  as  large.

433.  When  dogs  fight  at  a  wedding,  the  happy  pair  will  come  to  blows.

434.  Hit  a  man  with  the  aher-ritchot  a  distaff,  and  he'll  get  an  aher-hein,

435.  If  the  latch  catch,  and  not  the  match,  a  guest  will  come  next  day.

436.  Aiter  making  thread,  don't  throw  the  thread-water  where  people
will  pass ;  one  that  walks  over  it  will  be  subject  to  giddiness.

437.  If  you  sneeze  when  you  get  up  in  the  morning,  lie  down  again  for
another  three  hours,  or  your  wife  will  be  master  for  a  week.

438.  When  you  buy  a  new  knife,  give  the  first  morsel  you  cut  with  it
to  a  dog,  and  you  will  not  lose  the  knifa

439.  If  a  dying  man  cannot  die,  push  the  table  otU  of  its  pUice,  or  turn  a
shingle  on  the  roof  (see  721).

440.  If  you  sit  down  on  a  water-Jug^  your  stepmother  will  dislike  you.

441.  If  you  keep  pigeons,  do  not  talk  of  them  at  dinner-time,  or  they  11
escape,  and  settle  somewhere  else.

442.  He  that  sets  out  before  the  table  is  deared,  will  have  a  toilsome
journey.

443.  When  children  are  '  becried  *  and  cannot  sleep,  take  some  earth  of
the  common,  and  strew  it  over  them.

444.  To  look  through  a  bottomless  pot  gives  one  the  headache.

445.  In  the  bridechamber  let  the  inschlit-light  bum  quite  clean  ouL

446.  On  the  three  Christmas-eves  save  up  all  the  crumhs:  they  are
good  to  give  as  physic  to  one  who  is  disappointed.

447.  If  yon  are  having  a  coat  made,  let  no  one  else  try  it  on,  or  it  wo&*l
fit  you.

448.  If  two  eat  off  one  plate,  they  will  become  enemies.

449.  Light  a  match  ai  both  ends,  you're  putting  brands  in  the  witches'
hands.

450.  When  fire  breaks  out  in  a  house,  slide  the  baHn^  oven  out ;  the
flame  will  take  after  it.

451.  Let  a  woman  that  goes  to  be  churched  have  n^w  shoes  on,  or  her
child  will  have  a  bad  fall  when  it  has  leannt  to  run  alone.


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1795

452.  A  spoon-Btealer  keeps  his  mouth  open  in  death.

453.  If  yon  happen  to  spit  on  yoarself,  you  will  hear  some  news.

454.  When  cows  growl  in  the  night,  the  Jüdel  is  playing  with  them.

455.  If  women  with  child  go  to  the  bleaching,  they  get  white  children.

456.  A  bride  at  her  wedding  shall  wear  an  old  blue  a/pron  underneath.

457.  Put  your  ahoeM  wrong^wUe  at  the  head  of  your  bed,  and  the  alp  will
not  press  you  that  night.

458.  If  she  that  is  confined  stick  needles  in  the  curtains,  the  babe  will
have  bad  teeth.

459.  If  a  woman  wiih  child  tie  a  cord  round  her  waist,  her  child  will  be
hanged.

460.  If  she  that  is  confined  handle  dough,  the  child's  hands  will  chap.

461.  If  glasses  break  at  a  wedding,  the  wedded  pair  will  not  be  rich.

462.  The  first  time  cows  are  driven  to  pasture  in  spring,  let  them  be
milked  through  a  wreath  of  ground-ivy  (gunder-man).

463.  He  that  goes  to  church  on  Walburgis-day  with  a  wreath  of  ground'
ivy  on  his  head,  can  recognise  all  the  witches.

464.  Cows  that  have  calved,  the  peasants  in  Thuringia  lead  oyer  three-
fold iron.

465.  If  a  woman  with  child  follow  a  crimMuU  going  to  execution,  or
merely  cross  the  path  he  has  gone,  her  child  will  die  the  same  death.

466.  Mix  the  milk  of  two  men's  cows,  and  the  cows  of  one  will  dry  up.

467.  Give  no  thanks  for  given  milk,  or  the  cow  dries  up.

468.  As  often  as  the  cock  crows  on  Christmas-eve,  the  quarter  of  corn
that  year  will  be  as  dear.

469.  On  Ash- Wednesday  the  devil  hunts   the  lütle   woodwife  in  the
wood.

470.  He  that  deals  in  vinegar  must  lend  none,  even  should  the  borrower
leave  no  more  than  a  pin  in  pledge.

471.  For  headache,  wash  in  water  that  rebounds  of  a  mill-wheel  (see
766).

472.  A  cock  built  into  a  wall  brings  a  long  spell  of  good  weather.

473.  If  the  Jüdel  has   burnt  a  child,  smear  the   oven's  mouth  with
bacon-rind.

474.  If  a  child  has  the  freisig  (lockjaw  P),  cover  its  head  with  an  in-
herited fish-kettle,  and  force  its  month  open  with  an  inherited  key.

475.  Water  cannot  abide  a  corpse,

476.  Throw  deviVs  bit  under  the  table,  and  the  guests  will  quarrel  and
fight.

477.  To  get  a  good  crop,  go  out  in  silence  on  a  certain  day,  fetch  mould
from  three  inherited  fields,  and  mix  it  with  your  seed.

b.  From  the  Erzgebirge  about  Chemnitz,
(Journal  von  und  für  Deutschland  1787.    1, 186-7.  261-2).

478.  At  the  first  bidding  of  the  banns  the  betrothed  shall  not  be  present.

479.  On  a  barren  wife  throw  a  tablecloth  that  has  served  at  a  first
christening  dinner.


1796  APPENDIX.

480.  At  a  wedding  or  christening  dinner  let  the  buUer-dUhes  ha^e  be»i
began,  or  the  bachelors  there  will  get  baskets  (the  sack)  when  they  woo.

481.  When  the  bride  goes  from  her  seat  to  the  altar,  let  the  bridesmaids
close  tfp  quickly,  lest  the  seat  grow  cold,  and  the  bride  and  bridegroom's
love  cool  also.

482.  If  there  is  a  grave  open  daring  a  wedding,  all  depends  on  whether
it  is  for  a  man,  woman  or  child;  in  the  first  case  the  bride  will  be  a
widow,  in  the  second  the  bridegroom  a  widower,  in  the  last  their  childrea
will  die  soon.

483.  If  a  girl  meets  a  wedding  pair,  their  first  child  will  be  a  daughter;
if  a  hoy,  a  son ;  if  a  boy  and  girl  together,  there  will  be  twins.

484.  Pat  a  key  beside  the  baby,  and  it  cannot  be  changed.

485.  Of  a  wedding  pair,  whichever  gets  out  of  bed  first  will  die  first.

486.  The  godmothers  help  in  making  the  bridal  bed,  the  straws  are
put  in  one  by  one,  and  care  is  taken  that  no  stranger  come  into  the  bride-
chamber.  The  bed  mast  not  be  beaten,  but  softly  stroked,  else  the  wife
will  get  beatings.

487.  If  a  piUow  fall  off  the  bridal  bed,  the  one  that  lay  on  it  will  die
first.

488.  On  the  wedding  day,  man  and  wife  mast  ißosh  croeewiae,  then  they
caa't  be  becried  (bewitched).

489.  Of  the  taedding  bread  and  roll,  some  shall  be  saved,  that  man  and
wife  may  not  want.  Saoh  bread  does  not  get  moaldy,  and  a  piece  of  it
pat  ia  their  pottage  is  good  for  pregnant  women  who  have  no  appetite.

490.  At  the  prayer  for  the  sick,  if  there  is  perfect  silence,  the  sick  man
dies;  if  any  one  oonghs  or  makes  a  noise,  he  gets  well.

491.  If  a  sick  man,  after  receiving  the  sacrament,  ask  for  food,  he  will
die;  if  for  drink,  he  will  recover.

492.  For  increasing  goitre  or  warts,  fix  your  eyes  on  the  waxing  moon^
and  say  three  times :  '  May  what  I  see  increase,  may  what  I  suffer  ce«se,'
(see  245).

493.  Dogs  hotoUng  foretell  a  fire  or  a  death.

494.  New  serva/nts  mast  not  go  to  church  the  first  Sauday,  or  they'll
never  get  used  to  the  place.

495.  Whatever  dishes  the  sponsor  does  not  eat  of  at  the  christening-
feast,  the  child  will  get  a  dislike  for.

496.  Crows  cawing  round  the  house  mean  a  corpse,  if  only  of  a  beasst.

497.  If  the  church  clock  strike  while  the  deaih-btU  tolls,  there  will  die
in  the  parish  a  man,  a  youth,  or  a  child,  according  as  it  is  the  great»  the
middle,  or  the  small  i>ell.

498.  No  bride  shall  move  in  when  the  moon^s  on  the  wane  (see  238) ;  but
wealth  she  will  win,  who  comes  riding  through  rain  (198).

499.  When  you  move  into  a  new  house,  throw  something  alive  in  first,
a  cat  or  dog :  for  the  first  to  enter  a  house  is  the  first  to  die.

500.  When  carpenters  are  felling  timber  for  a  new  building,  if  sparks
fly  out  at  thefi/rst  stroke,  the  building  will  burn  down  (see  411).

601.  Before  you  go  into  the  sitting-room  of  your  new  house,  peep  into
the  copper,  to  get  used  to  the  place.    The  same  rule  for  new  servants


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1797

(see  95);   beside  which,    they  have   to    creep  between  the  legs  of  their
masters.

502.  Journeymen,  the  first  time  they  travel,  mast  not  hoik  rcmnd,  or
they  11  be  homesick,  and  can't  stay  anywhere.

503.  Let  no  strangers  into  the  stable  at  milking  time.

504.  After  candles  are  lighted,  don't  empty  a  washhand  baein  in  the
street,  or  the  family  will  fall  out  the  next  day.

505.  When  children  shed  their  first  teeth,  let  the  father  ewaUow  the
daughter's  teeth,  and  the  mother  the  son's ;  the  children  will  never  have
toothache  then.

c.  Prom  the  Saalftsld  country.
(Joum.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1790.  pp.  26—29;  conf.  Sachs.  Provinz,  bl.  5,  499—612).

506.  On  Christmas-eve  the  girls  sit  up  from  11  to  12.  To  find  out  if
they  shall  get  married  the  next  year,  they  etrip  themsdoes  naked,  stick
their  heads  into  the  copper,  and  watch  the  water  hissing.

507.  If  that  does  not  answer,  they  take  a  broom  and  sweep  the  room
backwards,  and  see  the  future  lover  sitting  in  a  comer :  if  they  hear  the
crack  of  a  whip,  be  is  a  waggoner,  if  the  sound  of  a  pipe,  a  shepherd.

508.  Some  rush  out  of  doors  naked,  and  call  the  lover ;  others  go  to  a
cross-road,  and  call  out  his  name.

509.  A  woman  who  is  confined  must  never  be  left  alone ;  the  devil  has
more  hold  upon  her  then.

510.  She  dare  not  sleep  unless  some  one  watches  by  the  child,  for  »
changeling  is  often  put  in  the  cradle.  Let  the  husband's  trowsers  be
thrown  over  it.

511.  The  village  children  dread  the  minister.  The  unruliest  is  hushed
by  the  threat :  '  Sit  still,  or  parson  '11  come  and  put  you  in  the  pitch -pot.'

512.  If  a  girl  has  not  cleared  her  distaff  the  last  day  of  the  year,  it  is
defiled  by  Bergda  :  this  Bergda  is  a  shaggy  monster.

513.  A  bride  preserves  her  bridal  wreath  and  a  piece  of  wedding  bread ;
so  long  as  she  keeps  that  hardened  lump,  she  never  wants  bread.  When
man  and  wife  are  weary  of  life,  they  eai  it  soaked  in  pottage.

514.  After  the  wedding,  one  of  the  bridesmaids  hurries  home  first,  gets
beer  or  brandy,  and  offers  a  glass  to  the  bridegp-oom,  who  empties  it  and
tosses  it  behind  his  back :  if  the  glass  breaks,  it  is  good ;  if  not,  not.

515.  If  one  is  taken  ill  suddenly  without  cause,  a  scige  old  woman  goes,
wUhotU  greeting  any  one,  draws  water  from  a  spring,  and  drops  three  coals
into  it ;  if  they  sink,  he  is  '  becried ' ;  she  then  draws  nigh,  and  sprinkles
him  three  times  with  the  water,  muttering :  '  Art  thou  a  wife,  let  it  light  on
thy  life !  art  thou  a  maid,  may  it  fall  on  thy  head  !  art  thou  a  servant,  thou
art  served  as  thou  hast  weU  deserved  I '     (See  865.)

516.  When  cattle  are  first  driven  out  in  spring,  axes,  saws  and  other
iron  tools  are  laid  outside  the  stdbU'door,  to  keep  them  from  being  be-
witched.

517.  On  the  great  festivals,  women  do  not  work  after  church,  or  they
would  be  lamed  and  struck  by  lightning  (the  clouds  would  come  after  them).


1798  APPENDIX.

518.  In  setting  cabbages,  women  say :  '  Stalks  (P  dnrsche)  like  my  leg,
heads  like  my  head,  leaves  like  my  apron,  such  be  my  cabbages  I  *

519.  Flax  is  thus  adjured:  '  Flax,  don't  flower  till  youVe  up  to  my  knee,
etc.*  On  St  John's  night  the  girla,  dance  round  thefiaa^  they  wtrip  ihent-
selves  naked,  and  wallow  in  it.

520.  When  the  dragon  is  taking  eggs,  butter,  cheese  and  lard  to  his
worshippers,  call  out  the  Saviour's  name  several  times,  and  he'll  drop
them  all.

521.  If  the  bride  is  coming  to  her  husband's  homestead,  and  the  shepherd
drives  his  sheep  in  her  way,  let  her  give  him  a  fee,  and  she'll  have  lack.

522.  If  a  whirlvnnd  falls  on  the  aftermath,  'tis  the  Evil  One  wishing  to
convey  it  to  those  who  serve  him.     Cry  out,  and  call  him  foal  names.

523.  The  hare  with  his  front-teeth  often  cuts  a  path  across  whole  com-
fields.  They  call  it  pilsen-schneiden,  and  think  the  devil  cuts  the  com  and
carries  it  to  his  good  friends.

524.  Old  women  often  cut  out  a  turf  afoot  long,  on  which  their  enemr
has  trodden  just  before,  and  hang  it  up  in  the  chimney :  the  enemy  then
wastes  away  (see  556).

525.  On  the  last  day  of  the  year,  many  eat  dumplings  (strotsel)  and
herrings,  else  Pei'chte  would  cut  their  belly  open,  take  out  what  they  have
eaten,  and  sow  up  the  gash  with  a  ploughshare  for  needle,  and  a  röhfn-ekain
for  thread.

526.  The  fire  is  kept  in  aU  night  before  Christmas  day,

527.  He  that  goes  to  the  beer  on  Newyear's  day,  grows  young  and  mddy.

528.  A  dream  in  Newyear*s  night  comes  true.

529.  If  the  butter  won't  come,  put  Sk  fire-steel  or  knife  under  the  ohum.

530.  When  your  hands  are  soiled  with  setting  cabbages,  wash  them  in  a
large  tub,  and  the  cabbage  will  have  large  heads.

531.  In  setting  cabha^ges  a  girl  can  find  out  if  she'll  ever  get  the  man  sbe
loves.  She  nips  a  piece  off  the  root  of  one  seedling,  splits  the  renuuniog
part,  and  puts  the  root  of  another  through  it ;  the  two  plants  are  then  set
close  to  a  stone,  and  squeezed  together  tight.  If  they  stick,  the  marriage
will  come  about.

532.  If  you  force  a  man  to  sell  you  something  cheap,  it  won't  last  yon  long.

533.  In  sowing  flax,  throw  the  doth  that  held  the  seed  high  up  in  the  air:
the  flax  will  grow  the  higher.


d.  From  Worms  and  its  neighbourhood,
(Joum.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1790.    pp.  142-3-4.)

534.  A  craxikling  f/re  betokens  strife.

535.  So  does  spilt  salt,

536.  So  do  yellow  spots  on  your  finger :  if  they  are  too  large  to  be  covered
with  a  finger,  the  strife  will  be  serious.

537.  If  the  left  ear  svngs,  evil  is  spoken  of  yon,  if  the  right  ear,  good.

538.  Let  no  fi/re,  salt  or  bread  be  given  out  of  a  hoase  where  a  woman
lies  in.


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1799

539.  He  that  ha»  on  him  a  harrow-nail  (-tooth  P)  fonnd  on  the  highway,
can  recognise  all  witches  (see  636).

54.0.  Bed  milk  of  a  bewitched  cow  shall  be  whipt  with  switchea  while
boiling  :  the  pain  makes  the  witch  reveal  herself  and  heal  the  cow.

541.  He  that  goes  ont  tmwaifhed  is  easily  bewitched.

542.  Ringing  ccmsecrated  bells  on  Walbargis-night  hinders  the  witches
that  dance  with  the  devil  on  cross-roads  from  hurting  any  one.

543.  If  a  coffin  rings  hollow  in  nailing  down,  one  more  in  the  house
will  die.

544.  He  that  is  in  great  tronble  shall  touch  the  great  toe  of  a  dead  man.

545.  The  dead  shall  be  laid  with  their  face  to  the  east,  lest  they  be
scared  by  the  tvinseln  (?)  that  swarm  from  the  west

546.  Combs,  lenives,  cloths,  used  about  a  dead  man,  shall  be  laid  in  the
coffin,  and  be  buried  with  him.

547.  If  a  pregthant  woman  lift  a  child  from  the  font,  either  that  child  or
her  own  will  die.

548.  If  a  Uxrf  be  laid  on  its  brown  side,  witches  can  walk  in.

549.  If  a  yellow-footed  hen  flies  over  a  jaundiced  man,  he  can*t  be  cnred.

550.  To  sow  a  strife  'twizt  man  and  wife,  press  a  padlock  home,  while
parson  makes  them  one.

551.  If  a  garment  or  linen  come  before  a  dead  man's  mouth,  one  of  the
family  will  die.

552.  When  there^s  death  in  a  bouse,  knock  at  the  wine-casks,  or  the
wine  spoils.

553.  If  thirteen  eat  at  a  table,  one  is  sure  to  die.

554.  Into  a  whirlwind  fling  a  knife  with  crosses  on  it,  and  you  know  the
witches  who  made  it.

555.  If  a  mole  burrow  in  the  house  (see  601),  and  the  cricket  chirp,  some
one  will  die ;  also  if  the  hen  crow,  or  the  screech-owl  shriek.

556.  If  one  steals  in  rainy  weather,  cut  out  his  footprint  and  hang  it  in
the  chimney :  the  thief  will  waste  away  with  the  footprint  (see  524).

557.  Combed-out  hair,  if  thrown  on  the  highway,  lays  you  open  to  witch-
craft (see  676).


0.  From  Qemsbach  in  the  Spire  Country,
(Joum.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1787.    1,  454-56.)

558.  Bride  and  bridegroom,  on  your  way  to  church  avoid  the  house-eaves,
and  do  not  loojc  round.

559.  Stand  dose  together  before  the  altar,  lest  witches  creep  in  between
you.

560.  During  the  wedding  whichever  of  yon  has  your  hand  above  the
other* s,  shall  have  the  mastery.

561.  Let  a  woman  with  child,  when  she  has  a  wash,  turn  the  tubs  upside
down  as  soon  as  done  with,  and  she'll  have  an  easy  confinement.

562.  If  sponsors  on  the  christening  day  put  dean  shirts  and  shifts  on,  no
witch  can  get  at  the  child.


1800  APPENDIX.

563.  If  at  night  there*«  a  knock  at  the  door  of  the  lying-in  room,  nerer
open  till  you've  asked  three  times  who  it  is,  and  been  answered  three  times;
no  witch  can  answer  three  times.

564.  In  swaddling  the  babe,  wrap  a  little  hread  and  sdU  in.

565.  In  the  bed  or  cradle  hide  a  sword  or  hti^e  with  its  point  sticking
ont :  if  the  nnholde  tries  to  get  over  mother  or  child,  she'll  fall  npon  it.

566.  If  at  the  wash  a  woman  harrows  lye  and  thanks  you  for  ti,  she's  a
witch.

567.  A  woman  ihst  plumps  butter  on  a  Wednesday^  is  a  witch.

568.  If  you  go  out  and  are  greeted  with  *  good  morning,'  never  answer
'  thank  you,*  bat  only  '  good  morning ' ;  then,  if  one  of  the  greeters  be  s
witch,  she  cannot  hurt.

569.  If  yoar  hens,  ducks,  pigs  etc.,  die  fast,  light  a^irs  in  the  oven,  sod
throw  one  of  each  kind  in :  the  witch  will  perish  with  them  (see  645).

570.  When  a  witch  walks  into  your  house,  give  her  a  piece  of  hread  mith
three  grains  of  salt  sprinkled  on  it,  and  she  can't  hurt  anything.

571.  If  the  cloth  is  laid  ufrong  side  up,  people  can  never  eat  their  fill.

572.  If  you  leave  it  on  the  table  dU  night,  the  angels  won't  protect  you.

573.  Smear  a  goitre  with  the  wick  out  of  a  lamp  that  has  bamt  in  i
dying  man's  room,  and  it  will  heal.

574.  If  you  make  a  promise  to  a  child,  and  do  not  uphold  it^  it  will  have
a  bad  fall.

575.  If  a  woman  set  her  hen  to  hatch  with  her  garters  dangling,  her
hair  streaming  and  her  worst  frock  on,  she'll  have  chickens  with  knobs  oo
their  heads  and  feathery  feet  (see  19).

576.  If  any  one  dies  in  the  house,  shifl  the  beehives,  shake  the  vinegar
and  wine;  or  bees,  wine  and  vinegar  will  go  bad  (see  664,  698,  898).

677.  When  you  buy  poultry,  lead  them  three  times  round  the  tablets  fooU
cut  a  chip  off  each  comer  of  the  table  to  put  in  their  food,  and  they  will
stay  (see  615).

578.  The  first  time  a  pig  is  driven  to  pasture,  make  it  jump  over  a  fiect
of  your  apron,  and  it  will  readily  come  home  (see  615).

579.  If  a  girl  on  St  Andrew's  night  melt  some  lead  in  a  spoon,  and  potrr
it  through  a  key  that  has  a  cross  in  its  wards,  into  water  that  was  drawn
between  11  and  12,  it  will  take  the  shape  of  her  future  husband's  tools  of
trade.

580.  To  measure  a  child  for  clothes  in  its  first  year,  spoils  its  figpire.

581.  A  mouse's  head  bitten  off  with  teeth,  or  cut  off  with  gold,  and  hnng
about  a  child,  helps  it  to  teethe.

582.  The  same  if  you  give  a  child  an  egg  the  first  time  it  comes  into  »
house;  though  some  say  it  makes  them  talkative.

/.  From  Pforzheim»
(Joum.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1787.    2,  341—345.)

583.  A  seven  year  old  cock  lays  a  small  egg,  which  mast  be  thrown  orer
SäTtV^''  hghtning  will  strike  the  house ;  if  hatched,  it  yields  a  hasQi^h
*>o*.  ir  you  ve  a  cold,  drink  a  glass  of  water  through  a  tkree-pnmged  fork


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1801

585.  He  that  eats  a  raw  egg  fasting  on  Christmas  morning,  can  carry
heavy  weights.

586.  Sat  lentils  on  Good  Friday,  and  you'll  not  be  oat  of  money  for  a
year.

587.  If  the  stork  does  not  finish  hatching  an  egg,  one  of  the  highest  in
the  land  will  die.

588.  White  spirits  such  as  have  buried  money  when  alive,  must  hover
between  heaven  and  earth.

589.  At  an  eclipse  of  the  swn,  cover  the  wells,  or  the  water  becomes
poisonous.

590.  If  you  leave  a  glass  of  wine  standing  between  eleven  and  twelve  on
Newyear's  night,  and  it  runs  over,  the  vintage  will  be  good  that  year.

591.  In  going  out,  put  your  right  foot  out  of  the  door  first.

592.  Lizards  were  once  maidens.

593.  A  child  cannot  die  peacefully  on  fotoW  feathers,

594.  It  is  unlucky  to  yoke  oxen  on  Innocents'  day.

595.  If  you  cross  a  bridge  or  see  a  shooting  star,  say  the  Lord's  prayer.
396.  If  you  lay  a  knife  down  edge  upwards,  you  cut  the  face  of  God  or

those  of  the  angels.

597.  If  you  carry  a  rake  teeth  upwards,  or  point  up  with  your  finger,  it
will  prick  God's  eyes  out :  it  also  destroys  the  rainbow.

598.  Where  the  rainbow  touches  the  earth,  tfiere  is  a  golden  dish.

599.  The  gravedigger's  spade  clatters  when  a  grave  is  bespoke.

600.  Crickets,  dogs  and  waybirds  foretell  a  death  by  their  cry.

601.  If  a  mole  burrows  under  the  room,  the  ^andmo^^^r  dies  (see  555).

602.  If  the  palcbce-clock  is  out  of  order,  one  of  the  reigning  family  dies.

603.  If  docks  strike  while  bells  ring  for  prayers,  some  one  dies.

604.  He  that  dawdles  makes  the  devil's  bed  (see  659).

605.  Whoever  commits  a  crime  that  is  not  found  out  in  his  lifetime,
walks  after  death  with  his  head  under  his  arm.

606.  He  that  buries  money  must  walk  after  death,  until  it  is  found.

607.  If  you  don't  pray,  the  Schwaben  (black  worms)  steal  flour  out  of  your
bin.

608.  Schwaben  are  got  rid  of  by  being  put  in  a  box  and  given  to  a  dead
man.

609.  SwaUow's  nests  and  crickets  bring  a  blessing  to  the  house.

610.  Don't  beat  doum  the  joiner's  charge  for  the  coffin,  if  the  dead  are  to
rest.

611.  Cry  to  the  fiery  man :  '  Steuhle,  Steuhle,  hie  thee.  Be  the  sooner  by
me ! '  then  Will  wi*  the  wisp  will  come,  and  you  muse  take  him  on  your
back.    If  you  pray,  he  approaches ;  if  you  curse,  he  flees.

612.  If  you  find  a  tre€isure,  don't  cover  it  with  any  clothing  worn  next  the
skin,  or  you're  a  dead  man ;  but  with  a  handkerchief,  a  crust  of  bread.
The  treasure  appears  once  in  seven  years.

613.  Wednesday  and  Friday  are  accursed  witch-days.  Pigs  first  driven
to  pasture  on  a  Wednesdanf,  don't  come  home  ;  a  child  begins  school  on
Wednesday,  and  learns  nothing.  On  Wednesday  nobody  gets  married,  no
maid  goes  to  a  new  place.


1802  APPENDIX.

614.  Every  one  has  bis  star.     Stars  are  eyes  of  men  [ON.].

615.  The  first  time  pigs  cross  the  threshold,  make  them  jamp  orer  the
wife*s  garter,  the  man's  girdle,  or  the  m>ai$s  apron,  and  they'll  oome  home
regularly  (see  578).

616.  When  a  fowl  is  bought,  chase  it  three  times  round  the  table,  give
it  wood  off  three  comers  of  the  table  with  its  food,  and  it  will  stay  (see
577).

617.  If  yon  lose  a  fowl,  tie  a  farthing  in  the  corner  of  a  tablecloth
npstairs,  and  let  the  comer  hang  out  of  window:  the  fowl  will  oome
back.

618.  If  yon  creep  under  a  carriage-pole,  or  let  any  one  step  over  yon.
you'll  stop  growing  (see  45).

619.  Creep  between  a  cow's  forelegs,  and  she'll  never  lose  a  bom.

620.  Pigs  bathed  in  water  in  which  a  swine  has  been  scalded,  grow
famously.

621.  He  that  stares  at  a  tree  on  which  &  female  sits,  is  stmok  blind.

622.  To  make  a  nut-tree  bear,  let  a  pregnant  woman  pick  the  first  nuts.

623.  If  you've  the  gout,  go  into  the  fields  at  prayer-bell  time  on  %
Friday.

624.  Bain-water  makes  children  talk  soon.

625.  If  yon  laugh  till  your  eyes  mn  over,  there  will  be  quarrels.

626.  If  yon  are  in  league  with  the  devU,  and  want  to  cheat  him,  dont
wash  or  comb  for  seven  years  •  or  else  ask  him  t^  make  a  liUle  tree  gn>\s,
which  he  can't,  and  so  you  are  rid  of  him.

627.  The  thom-'twister  (a  bird)  carries  thorns  to  Our  Lord's  crown.

628.  The  swallow  mourns  for  Our  Lord.

629.  If  yon  pull  down  a  redbreast's  nest,  your  cow  will  f^ve  red  mük,  or
lightning  will  strike  your  house.

630.  When  a  tooth  is  pulled  out,  nail  it  into  a  young  tree,  and  draw
the  bark  over  it;  if  the  tree  is  cut  down,  the  toothache  will  retnrxL
Take  a  sliver  out  of  a  willow,  and  pick  your  bad  tooth  till  it  bleeds,
put  the  sliver  back  in  its  place,  with  the  bark  over  it,  and  yonr  toothache
will  go.

631.  When  a  tooth  falls  out,  pnt  it  in  a  mousehole,  and  say:  'Give  me,
mouse,  a  tooth  of  bone.  You  may  have  this  wooden  one.'    [Baaf  130].

632.  If  a  woman  dies  in  childbed,  give  her  scissors  and  needlecase  (yarn,
thread,  needle  and  thimble),  or  she'll  come  and  fetch  them.

633.  When  a  child  is  dead,  it  visits  the  person  it  was  fondest  of.

634.  One  bom  on  a  Sunday  can  see  spirits,  and  has  to  carry  them  pick-a-
back.

635.  Nail  np  three  pigeon's  feathers  of  the  left  wing  inside  the  cot,  swing
the  pigeons  you  let  in  three  times  round  the  leg^  and  don't  let  their  first
flight  be  on  a  Friday.

636.  Have  about  yon  a  harrow  tooth  found  on  a  Sunday,  and  you'll
see  the  witches  at  church  with  tubs  on  their  heads ;  only  get  out  before  the
P.N.  is  rung,  or  they'll  tear  you  to  pieces  (see  539.  685.  783).

637.  A  child  in  the  cradle,  who  does  not  look  at  you,  is  atoi^.

638.  Take  a  crossed  knife  with  you  at  night,  and  a  witch  oan't  get  near


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1803

yon ;  if  sbe  comes,  throw  the  hni/e  at  her,  and  she'll  stand  there  till  day-
light.

639.  If  the  eldest  ehild  in  the  hoase  ties  up  the  calf,  witches  can't  get
at  it.

640.  If  a  goat  in  the  stable  is  black  all  over,  the  witch  can't  get  in ;  nor  if
the  cow  has  white  feet  and  a  white  stripe  on  her  back.

641.  Any  beast  with  a  black  throat  you've  no  hold  upon.

642.  If  yon  are  afraid  of  a  witch  at  night,  tarn  your  left  shoe  round.

643.  If  you  meet  a  doubtful-looking  cat,  hold  your  thumb  towards  her.

644.  A  drud'e  foot  (pentagram)  on  the  door  keeps  witches  away.

645.  If  a  thing  is  bewitched,  and  you  burtk  it,  the  witch  is  sure  to  come,
wanting  to  borrow  something :  give  it,  and  she  is  free ;  deny  it,  and  she
too  must  burn  (see  569. 692).

646.  If  your  cattle  are  bewitched,  go  into  the  stable  at  midnight,  and
you'll  find  a  stalk  of  straw  Ijing  on  their  backs  :  put  it  in  a  sack,  call  your
neighbours  in,  and  thrash  the  sack;  it  will  swell  up,  and  the  witch  will
scream  (see  692).

647.  Witches  pick  up  money  at  the  cross'ways,  where  the  devil  scatters
it.

648.  They  can  make  rain,  thunder  and  a  wind,^  which  sweeps  up  the  chth
on  the  blearing  ground,  the  hay  in  the  meadow.

649.  They  anoint  a  stick  with  the  words :  '  Away  we  go,  not  too  high
and  not  too  low ! '

650.  When  a  witch  has  gone  up  (in  eostasis),  turn  her  body  upside  down,
and  she  can't  come  in  again.

651.  Under  bewitched  water,  that  will  not  boil,  put  wood  of  three  kinds,

652.  If  a  child  is  *  beoried,'  let  its  father  fetch  three  stalks  of  straw  from
different  dung-heaps  unbecried,  and  lay  them  under  its  pillow.

g.    From  Würtemberg.
(Joum.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1788.  2, 183-4).

653.  Give  no  milk  out  of  the  house  without  mixing  a  drop  of  water  with
it.

654.  On  the  day  a  woman  is  delivered,  or  a  horse  gelded,  lend  nothing  out
of  the  house,  lest  horse  or  woman  be  bewitched.

655.  If  in  bed  you  turn  your  feet  towards  the  window,  you  get  the  con-
sumption.

656.  A  shirt  spun  by  a  girl  of  from  5  to  7  makes  you  magic-proof.

657.  When  a  spectre  leads  you  astray,  change  shoes  at  once,  put  your  hat
on  another  way,  and  you'll  get  into  the  right  road  again.

658.  If  you  talk  of  witches  on  a  Wednesday  or  Friday  night,  they  hear  it,
and  avenge  themselves.

659.  Who  runs  not  as  he  might,  runs  into  the  devil's  arms  (see  604).

660.  Children  dying  unbaptized  join  the  Furious  Host.

661.  If  a  bride  at  the  altar  kneels  on  the  bridegroom's  cloak,  she  gets
the  upper  hand.  And  if  she  gets  into  bed  first,  and  makes  him  hand  her
a  glass  of  water,  she  is  sure  to  be  master.


1804  APPENDIX.

662.  Of  a  wedded  pair,  the  one  that  firdt  rises  from  the  aUar  will  die
first.

663.  If  at  the  altar  they  stand  bo  far  apart  that  yoa  can  see  between  ihem,
they'll  pnll  two  ways.

664.  When  a  sick  man  is  dying,  open  the  windows,  and  stop  up  all  in
the  honse  chat  is  holloWt  or  turn  it  over,  so  that  the  soul  may  have  free
exit  Also  shift  the  vinegar,  the  hirdccige,  the  eaUle,  the  beehives  (see  576.
698).

665.  See  that  the  dead  on  the  bier  have  no  comer  of  the  shroud  in  their
mouth.

666.  Fold  your  thumb  in,,  and  dogs  cannot  bite  you.

667.  Set  the  chum  on  a  '  handzwehl,'  and  put  a  comb  under  it,  and
you'll  have  plenty  of  rich  bntter.

668.  The  first 'time  yoa  hear  the  cuckoo  call  in  spring,  shake  yowrmoiu^
nnbecried,  and  you'll  never  ran  short.

669.  The  boundary  where  a  suicide  is  buried,  will  be  struck  by  ligktniu$
three  years  running.

670.  The  farmer  that  goes  into  another's  stable  for  the  first  time  with-
out saying  '  Luck  in  here  ! '  is  a  witch-master.

671.  Step  into  a  court  of  justice  right  foot  foremost,  and  you'll  win.

h.  From  Swabia.
(Journ.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1790.    1.  441.)

672.  Let  a  woman  in  childbed  take  her  first  medicine  out  of  her  hu^
band's  spoon.

673.  In  the  pains  of  labour,  let  her  put  on  her  hushand*s  slippers.

674.  Put  water  under  her  bed  without  her  knowing  it.

675.  A  child  under  three,  pushed  in  through  a  peep^window,  stops
growing.

616.  Hair  that  is  cut  off  shall  be  burnt,  or  thrown  into  runnif^g  water.
If  a  bird  carry  it  away,  the  person's  hair  will  fall  off  (see  557).

677.  If  a  child  learning  to  talk  says  '  father '  first,  the  next  child  will  be
a  boy ;  if  '  mother,'  a  girl.

678.  If  a  man  drink  out  of  a  crouched  glass,  his  wife  wiU  have  nothing
but  girls.

679.  When  you've  bought  a  cat,  bring  it  in  with  its  head  facing  the  strati
and  not  the  house ;  else  it  will  not  stay.

t.  From  the  Ansba>ch  country.
(Journ.  v.  u.  f.  D.  1786.    1, 180-1.)

680.  She  that  spins  on  Saturday  evening  will  walk  after  she  is  dead.

681.  If  a  dead  man's  linen  be  not  washed  soon,  he  cannot  rest,

682.  He  that  eats  millet-pap  at  Shrovetide  is  never  out  of  money.

683.  Spin  at  Shrovetide,  and  the  flax  will  fail.  The  wheels  mast  all  be
packed  away.


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1805

684.  If  the  farmer  18  tying  8irawhan<ls  at  Shrovetide»  and  uses  but  one
to  a  sheaf  in  a  whole  stack  of  corn,  no  mouse  can  hurt.

685.  Have  about  yon  three  grains  found  whole  in  a  baked  loaf,  and  on
Walburgis-day  yon  11  see  the  witches  and  night-hags  at  church  with  müh-
pails  on  their  heads  (see  636.  783).

686.  In  the  Twelve-nights  neither  master  nor  man  may  bring  fresh-
hlcbckened  shoes  into  the  stable ;  else  the  cattle  get  bewitched.

687.  He  that  cooks  or  eats  peas  at  that  time,  gets  vermin  or  leprosy.

688.  If  a  pregnant  woman  pass  through  the  clotheslines  or  anything
tangled,  her  child  will  tangle  itself  as  many  times  as  she  has  passed
thron gh  lines.

689.  If  a  child  has  convulsions,  lay  a  horseshoe  under  its  pillow.

690.  A  sick  child  gets  better,  if  its  godfather  carries  it  three  times  «p
and  down  the  room,

691.  If  a  mare  foals  at  the  wrong  time,  she  must  have  stept  over  a
plough-fork.    If  you  knock  that  to  pieces,  she  can  give  birth.

692.  When  bewitched  with  vermin,  wrap  three  in  a  paper,  and  harwmer
on  it.  The  witch  feels  every  blow,  and  comes  in  to  borrow  something:  if
yon  refuse,  she  can't  get  free,  and  will  sink  under  the  blows  (see  645*6).

693.  Never  bum  a  broom,  and  you  are  safe  from  Antony's  fire.

694.  When  the  Christmas-tree  is  lighted,  notice  the  people's  shadows  on
the  wall :  those  that  will  die  within  a  year  appear  withoui  heads,

695.  Draw  x,hQ  first  three  com-blossoms  you  see  through  your  mouth,  and
eat  them :  you'll  be  free  from  fever  for  a  year  (see  784).

696.  He  that  passes  palm-brushes  (catkins)  over  his  face,  will  have  no
freckles.

697.  Nor  he  that  washes  his  face  during  the  passing-bell  on  Good  Friday.

698.  When  a  man  dies,  his  bird-cages,  fiower-fots  and  beehives  must  be
differently  placed;  and  you  must  knock  three  times  on  his  Toine-casks
(see  552.  576.  664).

699.  It  furthers  the  dead  man's  rest,  if  every  one  that  stands  round  the
grave  throws  three  clods  in.

700.  The  comb  and  knife  that  have  combed  and  shaved  a  dead  man,  shall
be  put  in  his  coffin ;  or  the  hair  of  those  who  use  them  will  fall  off
(see  546).

701.  If  you  leave  any  of  the  bread  set  before  you,  you  must  at  any  rate
gtow  it  away,  or  you'll  have  the  toothache.

702.  If  you  hand  bread  to  a  pregnant  woman  on  the  point  of  a  knife  or
fork,  her  child's  eyes  will  be  pricked  out.

703.  If  you  sew  or  even  thread  a  needle  on  Ascension  day,  your  house
will  be  strwik  with  lightning  (see  772).

704.  Lightning  strikes  where  a  redstart  builds ;  but  a  swaXiow's  nest
brings  luck  (see  629).

705.  If  children  bring  home  the  female  of  a  sta/gbeeÜe,  get  it  out  of  the
way  directly,  or  lightning  wÜl  strike  the  house.

706.  On  Qood  Friday  and  Saturday  one  dare  not  work  the  ground,  for
fear  of  disquieting  the  Saviour  in  the  sepulchre.

707.  If  the  iMst  nail  the  carpenter  knocks  in  a  new  house  give  fire,  it

VOL.   IV.  M   M


1806  APPENDIX.

will  barn  down  (see  411.  500);  and  if  the  glas$  he  throws  from  the  gahU
after  saying  his  saw  break,  the  builder  will  die ;  if  not,  he  will  live  long.

708.  He  that  comes  into  court,  wearing  a  ehiri  of  which  the  jam  was
spun  by  a  girl  of  five,  will  obtain  justice  in  every  suit.

709.  They  put  turf  or  a  little  board  under  a  dead  man's  chin,  that  he
may  not  catch  the  ehroud  between  his  teeth,  and  draw  his  relations
after  him.

710.  A  girl  can  be  cured  of  8t  Antonyms  fire  by  a  pure  young  man
striking  fire  on  it  several  times.

711.  Who  steps  n>ot  barefoot  on  the  floor  on  Easterday,  is  safe  from
fever.

712.  If  the  first  thing  yon  eat  on  Good  Friday  be  an  egg  that  was  laid
on  Maundy  Thursday,  you*ll  catch  no  bodily  hat-m  that  year.

713.  Three  crumbs  of  bread,  three  grains  of  salt,  three  coals,  if  worn  on
the  person,  are  a  safeguard  against  sorcery.

714.  If  a  woman  getting  up  from  childbed  lace  a  ertist  of  bread  on  her,
and  make  her  child  a  »uller  or  schlotzer  of  it,  the  child  will  not  have
toothache.

715.  If  on  the  wedding  day  the  bridegroom  buckle  the  bride's  left  shoe,
she'll  have  the  mastery.

716.  If  he  tie  her  garters  for  her,  she'll  have  easy  labours.

717.  Whichever  of  them  goes  to  sleep  first,  will  die  first.

718.  If  you  eat  the  first  three  sloe-blossoms  you  see,  you'll  not  have  the
heartburn  all  that  year.

719.  To  get  rid  of  freckles,  take  the  first  goslings  without  noise,  pass
them  over  your  face,  and  make  them  run  backwards.

720.  Turn  the  loaf  over  in  the  drawer,  and  the  drude  can't  get  out  of
the  room.

721.  If  a  man  can't  die,  take  up  three  tHes  in  the  roo/(aee  439).

722.  If  a  child  has  the  gefrais,  put  a  swaXlovo's  nest  under  his  pillow.

723.  He  that  lies  on  inherited  beds,  cannot  die.

k.  From  Austria  above  Ens.
(Journ.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1787.    1,  469—472.)

724.  If  a  pregnaaU  woman  dip  her  hand  in  dirty  water,  her  children  will
have  coarse  hands.

725.  If  she  dtbst  anything  with  her  apron,  they  will  be  boisteroas.

726.  If  she  wear  a  nosegay,  they'll  have  fetid  breath,  and  no  sense  of
smell.

727.  If  she  long  for  fish,  her  child  will  be  born  too  soon,  or  will  die  soon.

728.  If  she  steal  but  a  trifle,  the  child  will  have  a  strong  bent  that  way.

729.  If  she  mount  over  a  waggon-pole,  it  will  come  to  the  gallows;  if  she
dream  of  deadfish^  it  will  die.

730.  If  women  come  in  while  she  is  in  labour,  they  shall  quickly  ioits
their  aprons  off,  and  tie  them  round  her,  or  they'll  be  barren  themselves.

731.  In  fumigating,  throw  in  some  sprigs  from  the  hroom  that  sweepi
the  room.


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1807

732.  When  the  child  is  born,  ehe  shall  take  three  bites  of  an  onion,  be
lifted  and  »et  down  three  times  in  the  stool,  draw  her  thuynhs  in,  and  blow
three  times  into  etkchfist

733.  In  the  six  weeks  she  must  iwt  spin,  because  the  B.  Virgin  did  not ;
else  the  yarn  will  be  made  into  a  rope  for  the  child.

734.  If  the  child,  when  born,  be  wrapt  in/i*r,  it  will  have  curly  hair.

735.  Put  three  pennies  in  its  ^r«^  bath,  it  will  always  have  money;  a
pen,  it  will  learn  fast;  a  rosary,  it  will  grow  up  pious;  an  egg,  it  will  have
a  clear  voice.  But  the  three  pennies  and  the  egg  must  be  given  to  the
first  beggar.

736.  The  first  cow  that  calves,  milk  her  into  a  brand-new  pot,  put  three
pennies  in,  and  give  them  with  the  milk  and  pot  to  the  first  beggar.

737.  The  smaller  the  jug  in  which  water  is  drawn  for  a  little  girl's  bath,
the  smaller  will  her  breasts  be.

738.  Empty  the  bath  under  a  green  tree,  and  the  children  will  keep  fresh.

739.  Three  days  after  birth,  the  godfather  shall  buy  the  child's  crying
from  it  (drop  a  coin  in  the  swathings),  that  it  may  have  peace,

740.  If  the  child  still  cries,  put  three  keys  to  bed  in  ibs  cradle.

741.  If  the  child  can't  or  won't  eat,  give  a  little  feast  to  the  fowls  of  the
air  or  the  black  dog.

742.  If  the  baby  sleep  on  through  a  thunder  storm,  the  lightning  will  not
strike.

743.  The  tahlecloth  whereon  ye  have  eaten,  fumigate  with  fallen  crumbs,
and  wrap  the  child  therein.

744.  Every  time  the  mother  leaves  the  room,  let  her  spread  some  gar-
ment of  the  faiher*s  over  the  child,  and  it  cannot  be  changed.

745.  If  the  churchhig  be  on  Wednesday  or  Friday,  the  child  will  come
to  the  gallows.

746.  Before  going  out  to  be  churched,  let  the  mother  stride  over  the
broom,

747.  If  a  male  be  the  first  to  take  a  light  from  the  taper  used  in  church-
ing, the  next  child  will  be  a  boy ;  if  a  female,  a  girl.

748.  On  her  way  home,  let  the  mother  buy  bread,  and  lay  it  in  the
cradle,  and  the  child  will  have  bread  as  long  as  it  lives.

749.  Before  suckling  the  child,  let  her  wipe  her  breasts  three  times,

750.  The  first  time  the  child  is  carried  out,  let  a  garment  be  put  upon  it
on  the  side  aforesaid  (inside  out).

751.  As  soon  as  you  see  the  child's  first  tooth,  box  his  ear,  and  he*ll  cut
the  rest  easily.

I,    From  Osterode  in  the  Harz,
(Journ.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1788.    2,  425-431)

752.  The  first  time  you  drive  out  to  pasture  in  spring,  put  an  axe  and
&fire'Steel  wrapt  in  a  blue  apron  just  inside  the  stable  threshold  and  let
the  cows  step  over  it.

753.  In  feeding  them  the  evening  before,  sprinkle  three  pinches  of  salt


1808  APPENDIX.

between  their  horns,  and  walk  backwards  out  of  the  stable ;  then  evil  eye$
will  not  aSeot  them.

754.  If  the  girl  wash  the  cow  unwashed,  the  milk  will  not  cream.

755.  For  the  cow  not  to  go  more  than  once  with  the  bull,  a  blind  dog
must  be  buried  alive  just  inside  the  stable  door.

756.  When  jou  drive  the  cow  past  a  witch's  honse,  spU  three  times.

757.  Cattle  born  or  weaned  in  a  wanitig  moon  are  no  good  for  breeding.

758.  If  stoallows*  nests  on  a  honse  are  pulled  down,  the  cows  gi?e
blood.

759.  If  a  witch  come  to  the  churning,  and  can  count  the  hoops  on  ihe
ehum,  the  butter  will  not  come.

760.  Three  grains  of  salt  in  a  milk  pot  will  keep  witches  off  the  milk.

761.  To  make  hens  lay,  feed  them  at  noon  on  Newjear's  day  with  all
manner  of  fruit  mixed.

762.  Set  the  hen  to  hatch  just  as  the  pigs  are  coming  in\  in  carrying  her,
keep  pace  with  the  pigs,  and  the  eggs  will  hatch  pretty  near  together.

763.  Whichever  loses  the  wedding  ring  first,  will  die  first.

764.  Let  a  wedding  be  sA,  fvlUm^oon,  or  the  marriage  is  not  blest.

765.  The  first '  warm-bier '  for  an  accouche  no  one  may  taste,  bat  only
try  with  the  fingers,  or  she'll  have  the  gripes.

766.  To  cure  amspraaig  (a  kind  of  rash)  on  a  child,  get  a  piece  of  wood
out  of  a  miUwhed,  set  it  alight,  and  smoke  the  swathings  with  it  ;  wash
the  child  with  water  that  bounds  off  the  millwheel  (see  471)  ;  what  is  lefl
of  the  wood  shall  be  thrown  into  running  waier,

767.  Wean  no  child  when  trees  are  in  blossom,  or  it  will  be  gray-headed.

768.  While  the  babe  is  unbaptized,  no  stranger  shall  come  in  ;  he  might
not  be  dicht  (=:geheuer),  then  the  mother's  milk  would  go.

769.  If  a  baby  has  the  hinder-scheuerchen  (shudder  P),  let  the  '  goth  *
if  it  is  a  boy,  or  the  godmother  if  it  is  a  girl,  tear  its  shirt  dovm  the  breait,

770.  When  a  baby  is  weaning,  give  it  three  times  a  roU  to  eat,  a  penny
to  lose,  and  a  key,

771.  On  Monday  lend  nothing,  pay  for  all  you  buy,  &8ten  no  stocking
on  the  left.

772.  Ä  stroke  of  Ughtning  wül  find  its  way  to  whate'er  you  work  at  <m
Ascension  day  (703).

773.  On  Matthias-day  throw  a  shoe  over  your  head :  if  it  then  point$
out-of-doors,  you  will  either  move  or  die  that  year.

774.  On  Matthias-day  set  as  many  leuchter  pennies  as  there  are  people
in  the  house,  afloat  on  a  pauful  of  water :  he  whose  penny  sinks  will  die
that  year.

775.  Water  drawn  doumstream  and  vn  silence,  before  sunrise  on  Easter
Sunday,  does  not  spoil,  and  is  good  for  anything.

776.  Bathing  the  same  day  and  hour  is  good  for  scurf  and  other  com-
plaints.

777.  If  a  new  maidservant,  the  moment  she  is  in  the  house,  see  that
the  fire  is  in,  and  stir  it  up,  she'll  stay  long  in  the  place.

778.  In  building  a  house,  the  master  of  it  shall  deal  the  first  stroke  of
the  axe :  if  sparks  fly  out,  the  house  will  be  burnt  down.


SUPBBSTITIONS.      I.  1809

779.  If  a  bed  be  so  placed  that  the  sleeper's  feet  point  owt'of-door$,  he'll
die.

780.  Beuntched  money  grows  less  everj  time  joa  coant  it:  strew  salt
and  diU  amongst  it,  put  a  crossed  twopennj^pieoe  to  it,  and  it  will  keep
right.

781.  A  hatehing'doUar  makes  your  money  grow,  and  if  spent  always
comes  back.

782.  A  woman  that  is  confined  must  not  look  out  of  window :  else  every
vehicle  that  passes  takes  a  luck  away.

783.  He  that  carefully  carries  about  him  an  egg  laid  on  Maundy  Thars-
day^  can  see  all  witches  with  tubs  on  their  heads  (see  636.  685).

784.  The  first  corn-blossom  you  see,  draw  it  three  times  through  your
mouth,  saying  *'  Grod  save  me  from  fever  and  jaundice,"  and  you  are  safe
from  them  (see  695).

785.  Three  knots  tied  in  a  string,  and  laid  in  a  coffin,  send  warts  away.

786.  If  a  woman  have  seven  sons  one  after  another,  the  seventh  can  heal
all  manner  of  hurts  with  a  stroke  of  his  hand.


m.  From  Biel^M.
(Journ.  V.  u.  f.  D.  1790.  2, 389-390.  462-3.)

787.  If  an  old  woman  with  running  eyes  comes  in,  and  talks  to  and
fondles  a  child,  she  bewitches  it ;  the  same  if  she  handles  and  admires
your  cattle.

788.  If  yon  walk  down  the  street  with  one  foot  shod  and  the  other  bare,
all  the  cattle  coming  that  way  will  fall  sick.

789.  If  an  owl  alights  on  the  house  hooting,  and  then  flies  over  it,  some
one  dies.

790.  Wicke-toeiber  tell  you  who  the  thief  is»  and  mark  him  on  the  body.

791.  Old  women  met  first  in  the  morning  mean  misfortune,  young  people
luck.

792.  At  11-12  on  Christmas  night  water  becomes  wine  and  the  caitle
stand  up ;  but  whoever  pries  into  it,  is  struck  blind  or  deaf,  or  is  marked
for  death.

793.  Healing  spells  must  be  taught  in  secret,  without  witnesses,  and
only  by  men  to  women,  or  by  wom^en  to  m£n,

794.  The  rose  (Antony's  fire)  is  appeased  by  the  spell :  '  hillig  ding
wike  (holy  thing  depart),  wike  un  verslike ;  brenne  nich,  un  stik  nich ! '

n.  Miscellaneous.

795.  If  a  woman  tear  her  wedding  shoes,  she'll  be  beaten  by  her  husband.

796.  If  you've  eaten  peas  or  beans,  sow  none  the  same  week :  they  will
fail.

797.  If  she  that  is  confined  go  withotU  new  shoes,  her  child  will  have  a
dangerous  fall  when  it  learns  to  walk.

798.  For  belly-ache  wash  in  brook- water  while  the  death-beU  tolls.


1810  APPENDIX.

799.  When  youVe  bought  a  knife,  give  the  first  morsel  it  cats  to  the  dog,
and  you'll  never  lose  the  knife.

800.  Eggs  put  under  the  hen  on  a  Friday  will  not  thrive  ;  what  chicks
creep  out,  the  bird  eats  up.

801.  He  that  turns  his  back  to  the  moon  at  play,  will  lose.

802.  If  your  right  ear  sings,  they  are  speaking  truth  of  yon,  if  your  left,
a  lie;  bite  the  top  button  of  your  shirt,  and  the  liar  gets  a  blister  on  his
tongue.

803.  If  a  maid  eat  boiled  milk  or  broth  mtt  of  the  pan,  it  will  soon  rain,
and  she'll  get  a  husband  as  sour  as  sauerkraut.

804.  Heilwag  is  water  drawn  while  the  clock  strikes  12  on  Christmas
^night:  it  is  good  for  pains  in  the  navel.

805.  Wayhread  worn  under  the  feet  keeps  one  from  getting  tired.

806.  Have  a  wolfs  heart  about  you,  and  the  wolf  won't  eat  you  up.

807.  He  that  finds  the  white  snake* s  crown,  will  light  upon  treasure.

808.  He  that  looks  through  a  coffin-hoard,  can  see  the  witches.

809.  To  win  a  maiden's  favour,  write  your  own  name  and  hers  on  virgin
parchm>ent,  wrap  it  in  virgin  wax,  and  wear  it  about  you.

810.  He  that  is  born  on  a  Monday,  three  hours  after  sunrise,  about  tlte
summer  equinox,  can  converse  with  spirits.

811.  It  is  good  for  the  flechte  (scrofala)  to  sing  in  the  morning,  before
speaking  to  any  one :  deflock-asch  un  de  fliehte,  de  flogen  wol  over  dat  wilde
raeer  ;  deflock-asch  kam  wedder  (back),  de  flachte  nimmermer.

812.  A  drufs  foot  (pentagram)  must  be  painted  on  the  cradle,  or  the
schlenz  will  come  and  suck  the  babies  dry.

813.  At  Easter  the  sun  dances  before  Betting,  leaps  thrice  for  joy:  the
people  go  out  in  crowds  to  see  it  (Eollenhagen's  lud.  reise.  Altstet.  1614,
p.  153).

814.  If  you  eat  pvXse  (peas,  beans)  in  the  Twelves,  you  fall  sick;  if  yoa
eat  meat,  the  best  head  of  cattle  in  the  stall  will  die.

815.  A  death* s  head  buried  in  the  stähle  makes  the  horses  thrive«

816.  When  sheep  are  bought  and  driven  home,  draw  three  crosses  on  the
open  door  with  a  grey  field-stone  (landmark  P),  so  that  they  can  see.

817.  If  a  woman  that  is  more  than  half  through  her  pregnancy,  stand
still  before  a  cupboard,  the  child  will  be  voracious  (see  41).  To  cure  it,  let
her  put  the  child  in  the  cupboard  itself,  or  in  a  corner,  and,  cry  as  it  may,
make  it  sit  there  till  she  has  done  nine  sorts  of  work,

818.  If  a  child  will  not  learn  to  walk,  make  it  creep  silently,  three  Friday
mornings,  through  a  raspberry  hush  grown  into  the  ground  at  both  ends.

819.  When  the  plough  is  home,  lift  it  off  the  dray,  or  the  devil  sleeps
under  it

820.  The  milk  will  turn,  if  you  carry  a  pailful  over  a  waggon-pole,  or  a
pig  smell  at  the  pail.  In  that  case,  let  a  stallion  drink  out  of  the  pail«  and
no  harm  is  done  (conf.  K  92,  Swed.).

821.  What's  begun  on  a  Monday  will  never  be  a  week  old:  so  don't
have  a  wedding  or  a  wash  that  day.

822.  Plans  laid  during  a  meed  will  not  succeed.

823.  If  a  woman  walk  up  to  the  chum,  and  overciy  it  in   the  words,


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1811

'  Here's  a  fine  vesAel  of  milk/  ib  will  go  to  froth,  and  give  little  butter.
Answer  her :  '  It  would  get  on  the  better  without  your  gab.*

824.  Do  not  spin  in  the  open  country.     Witches  are  caXled  field-spmnera»

825.  If  your  left  nostril  bleed,  what  you  are  afler  won't  succeed.

826.  If  it  rains  before  noon,  it  will  be  all  the  finer  afternoon,  when  the
old  wives  have  cleared  their  throats.

827.  Till  the  hunter  is  near  the  game,  let  his  gun  point  down,  or  it  will
misR.

828.  If  a  corpse  sigh  once  more  when  on  the  straw,  if  it  remain  limp,  if
it  suck'in  kerchiefs,  ribbons,  etc.,  that  come  near  its  mouth,  if  it  open  its
eyes  (todten-blick) ;  then  one  of  its  kindred  will  follow  soon.

829.  If  a  corpse  change  colour  when  the  bell  tolls,  it  longs  for  the  earth,

830.  -Never  call  the  dead  by  name,  or  you  will  cry  them  up.

831.  If  two  children  kiss  that  can't  yet  talk,  one  of  them  will  die  [Rääf
129. 132].

832.  If  two  watchmen  at  two  ends  of  the  street  blow  together,  an  old
woman  in  that  street  will  die.

833.  If  a  stone  roll  towards  a  wedding  pair  walking  to  church,  it  betokena
evil.

834.  If  you  read  tombstones,  you  lose  your  memory  [Nee  sepulcra  legens
vereor,  quod  aiunt,  me  memoriam  perdere.     Cic.  de  Seneot.  31].

835.  Two  that  were  in  mourning  the  first  time  they  met,  must  not  fall
in  love.

836.  A  thief  must  ^^roti^  some  of  what  he  steals  into  water.

837.  At  a  fire,  he  whose  shoes  catch  and  begin  to  burn,  is  the  incendiary.

838.  If  a  farmer  has  several  times  had  a,  foal  or  caff  die,  he  buries  it  in
the  garden,  planting  a  young  wiUow  in  its  mouth.  When  the  tree  grows
up,  it  is  never  polled  or  lopped,  but  grows  its  own  way,  and  guards  the  farm
from  similar  cases  in  future  (Stendal  in  Altmark.  allg.  anz.  der  Deut.  1811»
no.  306;  conf.  Müllenh.  no.  327).

839.^  At  weddings,  beside  the  great  cake,  they  make  a  bachelor's  cake,
which  the  girls  pull  to  pieces ;  she  that  has  the  largest  piece,  will  get  a
hiislMind  first.

840.  A  betrothed  pair  may  not  sit  at  the  same  table  as  the  pair  just
married,  nor  even  put  their  feet  under  it;  else  no  end  of  mischief  befalls
one  of  the  pairs.

841.  In  the  wedding  ride  the  driver  may  not  turn  the  horses,  nor  rein
them  in ;  else  the  marriage  would  be  childless.

842.  At  a  christening  the  sponsors  must  not  take  hold  of  the  wester-hemd
(chrism-cloth)  by  the  comers.

843.  Those  who  have  lost  children  before,  don't  tnke  a  baby  out  by  the
door  to  be  christened,  but  pass  it  out  through  the  window.

844.  A  woman  in  her  six  weeks  shall  not  go  into  a  strange  lumse;  if  she
does,  she  must  first  buy  something  at  a  strange  place,  lest  she  bring
misfortune  to  the  house.

1  Nos.  839  to  864  are  from  Jul.  Schmidt's  Topogr.  der  pflege  Beichenfels  (in
Yoigtland),  Leips.  1827.  pp.  113—126.


1812  APPENDIX.

845.  Nor  may  ehe  drowo  water  from  a  spring,  or  it  will  dry  up  for  seven
jears.

846.  A  corpse  is  set  down  thrice  on  the  threthold  by  the  bearers;  when
it  is  ont  of  the  homestead,  the  gate  is  fastened,  three  heaps  of  eaU  are  made
in  the  death-ohamber,  it  is  then  swept,  and  both  broom  and  sweepings
thrown  in  the  fields ;  some  also  burn  the  bed-straw  in  the  fields.

847.  The  evening  before  Andrew's  day,  the  nnbetrothed  girls  form  a
circle,  and  let  a  gander  in ;  the  one  he  tarns  to  first,  will  get  a  husband.

848.  Between  11  and  12  on  John's  day,  the  nnbetrothed  girls  gather
nine  eorte  of  flowers,  three  of  which  mast  be  willow,  storksbill  and  wild
rne ;  they  are  twined  into  a  wreath,  of  which  the  twiner  mnst  have  «pim
the  thread  m  the  same  hour.  Before  that  fatefal  hoar  is  past,  she  thro^in
the  wreath  hackwarde  into  a  tree ;  as  ofben  as  it  is  thrown  without  staying
on,  so  many  years  will  it  be  before  she  is  married.  All  this  mast  be  done
in  silence.

849.  He  that  has  silently  carried  off  an  wndertaker^e  meaeuret  and  leane
it  against  a  house-door  at  night,  can  rob  the  people  inside  without  their
waking.

850.  A  root  of  cinquefoil  dag  np  before  sunrise  on  John's  day»  is  good
for  many  things,  and  wins  favour  for  him  that  wears  it.

851.  Girls  wear  a  w€up*8  nest,  thinking  thereby  to  win  men's  love.

852.  If  a  man  has  strayed,  and  turns  his  pockets  inside  out,  or  if  a  woman
has,  and  ties  her  apron  on  the  lorong  way,  they  find  the  right  road  again.

853.  If  a  child  has /rcUe{  (cramp,  spasms),  turn  one  shingle  in  the  roof,  or
lay  the  wedding  apron  under  its  head,

854.  At  Christmas  or  Newyear,  between  11  and  12,  they  go  to  a  cross-
way  to  listen,  and  learn  all  that  most  concerns  them  in  the  coming  year.
The  listening  may  be  from  inside  a  window  that  has  the  'trager'  over
it ;  or  on  Walpnrgis-night  in  the  green  com.

855.  If  from  the^res  of  the  three  holy  eves  (before  Christmas,  Newyear
and  High  Newyear)  glowing  embers  be  left  the  next  morning,  yoa'll  want
for  nothing  all  that  year.

856.  It  is  bad  for  a  family  if  the  head  of  it  dies  in  a  waning  mooHt  but
good  in  a  waxing  moon.  It  is  Incky  when  a  grave  turfs  itself  over.  A
reappearance  of  the  dead  is  commonest  on  the  ninth  day  after  death.

857.  If  a  tree's  first  fruit  be  stolen,  it  will  not  bear  for  seven  years.

858.  The  dragon  carries  the  dung  in  the  yard  to  his  friends.

859.  A  woman  with  child  mnst  not  creep  through  a  hedge,

860.  If  a  corpse  is  in  the  house,  if  a  cow  has  calved,  beggars  get  nothing.

861.  Servants  who  are  leaving  take  care  not  to  be  overlapt :  they  go,  or
at  least  send  their  things  away,  before  the  new  one  comes  in.

862.  A  new  manservant  comes  at  midday,  and  consumes  his  damplings
on  the  chimney-seat;  the  mistress  is  careful  to  set  no  sauerhraui  b^ore
him  that  day,  lest  his  work  be  disagreeable  to  him.  One  who  is  leaving
gets  a  service-loaf  for  every  year  he  has  been  in  the  service.

863.  If  three  thumps  be  heard  at  night,  if  the  weh-klage  howl,  if  the
earth-cock  burrow,  there  will  be  a  death.

864.  For  debility  in  children :  their  water  being  taken  in  a  new  pot,  pat


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1813

into  it  tbe  egg  of  a  eoaiblaek  hen  bought  without  bargaining,  with  nine
holee  pricked  in  it;  tie  the  pot  up  with  linen,  and  bury  it  after  aanset  in
an  ani'hül  found  without  seeking.  Any  one  finding  such  a  pot,  lets  it
alone,  lest  he  catch  the  hwried  diaeaee.

865.  In  the  Diepholt  country,  headache  (de  farren)  is  cured  thos:  a
woman  of  knowledge  brings  two  bowls,  one  filled  with  cold  water,  and  one
with  melted  tallow.  When  the  bead  has  been  held  in  the  water  some  time,
the  tallow  is  poured  into  the  water  through  an  inherited  hatchel  (flax-comb),
and  the  woman  says:  '  Ik  geete  (I  pour).'  Patient:  'Wat  gütstP'
Woman :  *  De  farren,*  Then  she  speaks  a  spell,  the  whole  process  is
repeated  three  times,  the  water  is  emptied  on  a  maple-hush  (elder),  the
cold  tallow  thrown  in  the  fire,  and  the  ache  is  gone.  (Annals  of  Brunswk*
Länebg  Ghurlande,  8th  yr,  st.  4,  p.  596.)     See  515.

866.  In  the  country  parts  of  Hildesheim,  when  any  one  dies,  the  grave-
digger  eUenily  walks  to  the  elder-hush  (sambncus  nigra),  and  cuts  a  rod
to  measure  the  corpse  with  ;  the  man  who  is  to  convey  it  to  the  grave
does  the  same,  and  wields  this  rod  as  a  whip.  (Spiel  u.  Spangeubg*8
Archiv  '28.  p.  4.)

867.  On  Matthias  night  (Feb.  24)  the  young  people  meet,  the  girls  plait
one  wreath  of  periwinkle,  one  of  straw,  and  as  a  third  thing  carry  a  handfvl
of  ashes ;  at  midnight  they  go  sHently  to  a  running  water,  on  which  the
three  things  are  to  float.  Silent  and  blindfold,  one  girl  after  another
dances  about  the  water,  then  clutches  at  a  prognostic,  the  periwinkles
meaning  a  bridal  wreath,  the  straw  misfortune,  the  ashes  death.  The
lucky  ones  carry  the  game  further,  and  throw  barleycorns  on  the  water,
by  which  they  mean  certain  bachelors,  and  notice  how  they  swim  to  one
another.  In  other  oases  three  leaves  are  thrown  on  the  water,  marked
with  the  names  of  father,  mother  and  child,  and  it  is  noticed  which  goes
down  first.    (Ibidem.)

868.  In  some  parts  of  Hanover,  churching  is  called  brummie,  because  in
the  villages  on  such  an  occasion,  the  mother  and  father  and  the  invited
sponsors,  both  of  the  last  baptized  and  of  earlier  children,  set  up  a  growling
(brummen)  like  that  of  a  bear.  (Brunsw.  Anz.  1758,  p.  1026 ;  Hanov.
Nützl.  saml.  1758,  p.  991,  where  it  is  brummie.)

869.  Of  elder  that  grows  among  willows,  they  make  charms  to  hang  on
children,  nine  little  sticks  tied  with  a  red  siUc  thread,  so  as  to  lie  on  the  pit
of  the  stomach.  If  the  thread  snaps,  you  must  take  the  little  bundle  off
with  little  pincers,  and  throw  it  in  running  water.  (£ttner*B  Hebamme
p.  859.)

870.  Amulets  of  the  wolfs  right  eye,  pouch  of  stones,  blind  swallows
cut  out  of  his  maw.    (Ibid.  862.)

871.  Puer  si  veri  genitoris  indusium  nigrum  sen  mactdatum  involvatur,
si  epilepsia  ipsum  angat,  nunquam  redibit.     (ibid.  854.)

872.  When  a  child  dwindles,  they  tie  a  thread  of  red  silk  about  its  neck,
then  catch  a  mouse,  pass  the  thread  with  a  needle  through  its  skin  over
the  backbone,  and  let  it  go.  The  mouse  wastes,  the  child  picks  up.  (Ibid-
920.)

873.  When  an  old  wife  blesses  and  betts  (böiet)  tension  of  the  heart,  she


1814  APPENDIX.

breathes  on  the  painful  part  crosswise,  strokes  it,  ties  salt  and  rye-meal
over  it,  and  sajs:  '  Hert-gespan,  ik  segge  di  an,^u^  van  den  ribben^  asse
Jesns  van  den  kribbenl'  If  the  patient  be  seized  with  spasms,  let  bim
stretch  himself  on  a  plum'tree,  saying :  *  Banke-bom,  stand  1  plamke-bom
wasae  (wax) ! '

874*.  Some  men's  mere  look  is  so  hurtffd,  that  even  without  their  know>
ing  it,  they  put  men  and  beasts  in  peril  of  their  lives.

875.  Some  men,  by  bespeaking  (muttering  a  spell),  can  pvU  up  a  horn
in  full  gallop,  silence  awatch-dog,  stanch  blood,  keep  fire  from  spreading.

876.  Yon  may  recover  stolen  goods  hj  filling  a  pouch  with  some  of  the
eaiih  that  the  thief  has  trodden,  and  twice  a  day  beaUng  it  with  a  stick  iäl
fwe  comes  out  of  it  The  thief  feels  the  blows,  and  shall  die  without  fail
if  he  bring  not  back  the  things.

877.  To  save  timber  from  the  woodworm,  knock  it  with  a  piece  of  onk
on  Peter*s  day,  saying :  '  Sunte  worm,  wut  du  herut,  Sunte  Peter  is  komen ! '

878.  If  the  nightmare  visits  you — a  big  woman  with  long  flying  fa&ir—
bore  a  hole  in  the  bottom  of  the  door,  and  fill  it  up  with  sow-bristles.
Then  sleep  in  peace,  and  if  the  nightmare  comes,  promise  her  a  prraent;
she  will  leave  you,  and  come  the  next  day  in  human  shape  for  the  promised
gift.

879.  No  bird  will  touch  any  one's  com  or  fruit,  who  has  never  worked
on  a  Sunday.

880.  He  that  was  bom  at  sermon-time  on  a  Christmas  morning,  can  see
spirits.

881.  Where  the  mole  burrows  under  the  wash-house,  the  miatress  will
die.

882.  If  a  herd  of  swine  meet  you  on  your  way,  you  are  an  unwdcome
guest;  if  nfl^ck  of  sheep,  a  welcome.

883.  If  the  crust  of  the  saved  up  wedding-loaf  goes  mouldy,  the
marriage  will  not  be  a  happy  one.

884  In  some  parts  the  bride's  father  cuts  a  piece  off  the  top  crust  of  a
well-baked  loaf,  and  hands  it  to  her  with  a  glass  of  brandy.  She  takes
the  crust  between  her  lips,  not  touching  it  toith  her  hand,  wraps  it  in  a
cloth,  and  keeps  it  in  a  box ;  the  glass  of  brandy  she  throws  over  her
head  on  the  ground.

885.  The  first  time  a  woman  goes  to  church  after  a  confinement,  the j
throw  on  the  fl^or  after  her  the  pot  out  of  which  she  has  eaten  caudle
during  the  six  weeks.

886.  If  a  suspicious  looking  cat  or  hare  cross  your  path,  throw  a  steel
over  its  head,  and  suddenly  it  stands  before  you  in  the  shape  of  an  old
woman,

887.  He  that  kills  a  black  cow  and  black  ox  may  look  for  a  death  in  his
house.

888.  If  on  coming  home  from  church  the  bride  be  the  first  to  take  hold
of  the  house  door,  she  will  maintain  the  mastery,  especially  if  she  says :
"This  door  I  seize  upon,  here  all  my  will  be  done!"  If  the  bridegroom
have  heard  the  spell,  he  may  undo  it  by  adding  the  words  :  "  I  grasp  this
knocker- ring,  be  fist  and  mouth  (word  and  deed?)  one  thing!  "


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1815

889.  If  magpies  chatter  or  hover  roand  a  hoase,  if  the  logs  at  the  bdck
of  a  fire  jump  over  and  crackle,  gaests  are  ooming  who  are  strangera.

890.  In  setting  out  for  the  wars,  do  not  look  behind  you,  or  you  may
never  see  home  again.

891.  If  joa  leave  yarn  on  the  spool  over  Sanday,  it  turns  to  sausages.

892.  Ghosts  are  banished  to  betwixt  door  and  doorpost;  if  a  door  be
slammed  to,  they  are  too  much  tormented  (995).

893.  Look  over  the  left  shoulder  of  one  who  sees  spirits  and  future  events,
and  you  can  do  the  same.

894.  If  two  friends  walk  together,  and  a  stone  fall  between  them,  or  a
dog  run  across  their  path,  their  friendship  will  soon  be  severed.

895.  If  in  going  out  you  stumble  on  the  threshold,  turn  back  at  once,  or
worse  will  happen.

896.  The  day  before  Shrove  Sunday  many  people  cook  for  the  dear  little
angels  the  daintiest  thing  they  have  in  the  house,  lay  it  on  the  table  at
night,  set  the  windows  open,  and  go  to  bed.  (Obersensbach  in  the  Oden-
wald.)

897.  At  harvest  time  he  that  gets  his  com  out  first,  takes  a  wiUow  bov^gh,
decks  it  with  ftowers,  and  sticks  it  on  the  last  load  that  comes  in.  (Grerns-
heim.)

898.  At  the  moment  any  one  dies,  the  grain  in  the  barn  is  shuffled,  and
the  wine  in  the  cellar  shaken,  lest  the  seed  sown  come  nob  up,  and  the
wine  turn  sour.    (Ibid.)    Conf.  576.  664.  698.

899.  On  St.  Blaise's  day  the  parson  holds  two  lighted  ta/pers  crossed ;
old  and  young  step  up,  each  puts  his  head  between  the  tapers,  and  is
blessed;  it  preserves  from  pains  in  head  or  neck  for  a  year.     (Ibid.)

900.  In  some  parts  of  Westphalia  a  woman  dying  in  childbed  is  not
clothed  in  the  usual  shroud,  but  exactly  as  she  would  hone  been  for  her
churching,  and  she  is  buried  so.

901.  The  ticking  of  the  wood-worm  working  its  way  through  old  tables,
chairs  and  bedsteads  we  call  deadman's  watch :  \x,  is  supposed  that  the
dead  man  goes  past,  and  you  hear  his  watch  tick.

902.^  Set  your  hens  to  hatch  on  Peter-and-PauVs,  they'll  be  good  layers.

903.  Pull  the  TnolehiUs  to  pieces  on  Silvester's,  theyll  throw  up  no
more.

904.  If  the  cuckoo  calls  later  than  John*s,  it  means  no  good.

905.  Thrash  before  sunrise  on  Shrove  Tuesday,  you'll  drive  the  moles
away.

906.  If  it  freeze  on  the  shortest  day,  the  price  of  com  will  fall ;  if  it's
mild,  'twill  rise.

907.  Sow  no  wheat  on  Maurice's,  or  it  will  be  sooty.

908.  Who  at  John's  beheading  would  fell  a  tree,  will  have  to  let  it  be.

909.  A  March  fog,  and  a  hundred  days  after,  a  thunderstorm.

910.  When  the  wind  blows  of  a  New  Year*s  night,  it  means  a  death.

911.  At  Martinmas  you  see  by  the  goose* s  breastbone  if  the  winter  'U
be  cold  or  not.

J  902—919  from  Sohmeller^s  Dialects  of  Bavaria,  p.  529.


1816  APPENDIX.

912.  Chickens  hatohed  out  of  duek*B  eggs  ohange  ooloar  every  year.

913.  Who  drinks  not  on  Chod  Friday,  no  drink  oan  hurt  him  for  a  year
(see  356).

914a.  Stuff  a  bed  with  feathers  in  a  waunng  moon^  and  they  slip  ont
again.

914&.  On  Ash  Wednesday  the  devil  hunts  the  lUUe  wood^tm/e  ihroogh
the  forest.

915.  If  on  Christmas  eve,  or  Newyear's  day,  or  eve  (?)  yoa  hang  a
washclout  on  a  hedge,  and  then  groom  the  horses  with  it,  they'll  grow  fat.

916.  If  yon  thrash  in  the  Baaoh-nights,  the  com  spoils  as  far  as  the
sound  is  heard  (see  418).

917.  8et  no  hens  to  hatch  on  Valentine's,  or  all  the  eggs  will  rot.

918.  Jump  over  John's  fire,  and  yoa'il  not  have  the  fever  that  year.

919.  If  a  horse  he  let  blood  on  Stephen's,  it  keeps  w^l  all  the  year.

920.  A  wonnd  dealt  wich  a  knife  whetted  on  Oolden  Sunday  will  hardly
ever  heal.

921.  If  shooting  at  the  batts  that  Sanday,  yon  wrap  yonr  right  hand  in
the  rope  by  which  a  thief  has  hung  on  the  gallows^  you'll  hit  the  bull's  eye
every  time.

922.  If  a  man  has  a  new  garment  on,  you  give  it  a  slap,  with  some  sach
words  as  '  The  old  must  be  patched,  the  new  must  be  thrashed ; '  aod
the  garment  will  last  the  longer.

923.  Sick  sheep  should  be  made  to  creep  through  a  young  split  oak.

924.  If  a  pregnant  woman  eat  or  taste  out  of  the  saucepan,  her  chüd
will  stammer.

925.  If  on  a  journey  she  mount  the  carriage  over  the  pole  or  the  traces,
the  child  entangles  its  limbs  in  the  navelstring  (see  688.  933).

926.  If  a  baby  cries  much  in  the  first  six  weeks,  poll  it  through  a  piece
of  unboiled  yam  three  times  in  silence.  If- that  does  no  good,  let  the
mother,  after  being  churched,  go  home  in  silence,  undress  in  sHence,  and
throw  all  her  clothes  on  the  cradle  backwards.

927.  The  first  time  the  horned  cattle  are  driven  to  pasture,  draw  a
woman* s  red  stocking  over  a  woodman's  axe,^  and  lay  it  on  the  ihreshM
of  the  stable  door,  so  that  every  beast  shall  step  over  it  (see  752).

928.  To  keep  caterpillars  off  the  cabbages,  a  female  shall  walk  haek-
wards  naked  in  the  fuU  moon  three  times  in  all  directions  through  the
cabbage  garden.

929.  If  a  single  woman  be  suspected  of  pregnancy,  let  the  manservant
pull  a  harvest-waggon  in  two,  and  set  the  front  paH  facing  the  souA  and
the  hind  wheels  the  notth,  so  that  the  girl  in  doing  her  work  must  pass
between  the  two  halves.     It  prevents  her  from  procuring  abortion.

930.  When  a  cricket  is  heard,  some  one  in  the  house  will  die  :  it  sings
him  to  the  grave.

931.  A  shirt  of  safety,  proof  against  lead  or  steel,  must  be  span,  woven
and  sewed  by  a  pure  chaste  maiden  on  Christmas  day;  from  the  neck
down,  it  covers  half  the  man ;  on  the  breast  part  two  heads  are  sewed  on,

^  Any  tUel  tool  laid  on  the  threshold  will  do ;  conf.  Beiohs-Anz.  1794,  p.  656.


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1817

that  on  the  right  with  a  long  beard,  that  on  this  left  a  devirs  faoe  wearing
a  crown  (see  115).

932.  The  key-test :  a  hymn  book  is  tied  np,  inclosing  a  key,  all  bnt  the
ring,  which,  resting  on  two  fingers,  can  tarn  either  way ;  questions  are
then  asked.

933.  A  woman  with  child  may  not  pass  under  any  hanging  line,  else  her
child  will  not  escape  the  rope.  They  avoid  even  the  »tring  on  which  a
birdcage  hangs  (see  688.  925).

934.  In  setting  peas^  take  a  few  «n  your  mouih  before  sunset,  keep
them  in  silently  while  planting,  and  those  you  set  will  be  safe  from  spar-
rows.

935.  The  sexton  does  not  dig  the  grave  till  the  day  of  the  buried,  else
you'd  have  no  peace  from  the  dead.

936.  Children  dying  unhapHzed  hover  betwixt  earth  and  heaven.

937.  Children  must  not  etreteh  the  forefinger  toward  hea^oen  ;  they  kill  a
dear  little  angel  every  time  (see  334.  947).

938.^  Many  would  sooner  be  knocked  on  the  head  than  pass  between  two
femtdee.

939.  One  man  puts  his  white  shirt  on  of  a  Monday;  he'd  rather  go  naked
than  wear  clean  linen  on  Sunday.

940.  I  know  some  that  think,  if  they  did  not  eat  yellow  jam  on  Ash
Wednesday,  nine  sorts  of  green  herbs  on  Maundy  Thursday,  plaice  and
garlic  on  Whitwednesday,  they  would  turn  donkeys  before  Martinmas
(see  275).

941.  Bride  and  bridegroom  shall  stand  so  close  together  that  nobody  can
see  through,

942.  They  shall  observe  the  tap  of  their  first  beer  or  wine  cask,  and  step
into  bed  together.

943.  The  bridegroom  shall  be  married  in  a  baihing  apron,

944.  He  that  wipes  his  mouth  on  the  tablecloth  hath  never  his  fill.

945.  'Tis  not  good  to  have  thy  garment  mended  on  thy  body  (see  42).

946.  The  last  loaf  shoved  into  the  oven  they  mark,  and  call  it  mine  host :
'  So  long  as  mine  host  be  in  house,  we  want  not  for  bread ;  if  he  be  cut
before  his  time,  there  cometh  a  dearth.'

947.  '  On  thy  life,  point  not  with  thy  finger,  thou  wilt  stab  cm  angel!'

948.  '  Dear  child,  lay  not  the  knife  so,  the  dear  angels  tMl  trecui  it  irUo
their  feet  r  If  one  see  a  child  lie  in  the  fire,  and  &  knife  on  its  back  at
one  time,  one  shall  soooner  run  to  the  knife  than  to  the  child  (see  209.
596-7).

949.  Cup  or  can  to  overspan  is  no  good  manners ;  who  drinks  thereof
shall  have  the  heart-cramp  (see  11).

950.'  It  shall  profit  the  sick  to  smoke  them  with  a  rod  that  is  broke  out
of  an  old  hedge  and  hath  nine  ends  or  twigs,

951.  Or  ynthrhay  that  is  fetched  unspoken,  unchidden,  from  the  loft  of  an
inherited  bam,

1  938—949  from  Chr.  WeiBe's  ••  Three  Arrant  Fools,"  Lpsg  1704,  pp.  268—7.
s  950-1  ibid.,  p.  860.


1818  APPENDIX.

952.  On  the  Aheolutitm  nights  (before  Advent,  before  Christmas,  before
Twelfthday,  and  Saturday  in  Candlemas)  the  Gastein  girls,  as  soon  as  it  is
dark,  f^o  to  the  sheep-fold,  and  dtUch  blindly  among  the  flock ;  if  at  the
first  clutch  they  have  caught  a  ram^  they  are  confident  they'll  be  niArried
that  year.'

953.'  Some,  in  the  middle  of  the  night  before  Christmas,  take  a  ref#e2
full  of  water,  and  ladle  it  out  with  a  certain  small  mecuure  into  another
vessel.  This  they  do  several  times  over,  and  if  then  they  find  more
water  than  the  first  time,  they  reckon  npon  an  increase  of  their  ^oods
the  following  year.  If  the  quantity  remain  the  satne,  they  believe  their
fortune  will  stand  still,  and  if  there  be  less  water,  that  it  will  diminish  (see
258).

954.  Some  tie  the  end  of  a  hau  of  thread  to  an  inherited  hey,  and  unroll
the  ball  till  it  hangs  loose,  maybe  an  ell,  maybe  six ;  then  they  pat  it  out
of  window,  and  swing  it  back  and  forwards  along  the  wall,  saying  ^Aori:,
hark !  *  From  the  quarter  where  they  shall  go  a  wooing  and  to  lire,  they
will  hear  a  voice  (see  110).

955.  Some,  the  day  before  Christmas,  cut  wood  off  nine  sorts  of  trees,
make  a  fire  of  it  in  their  room  at  midnight,  strip  themselves  naked,  and
throw  their  shifts  outside  the  door.  Sitting  down  by  the  fire,  they  say :
'  Here  I  sit  naked  and  cold  as  the  drift,  If  my  sweetheart  woald  come  and
just  throw  me  my  shift ! '  A  figure  will  then  come  and  throw  the  shift  io,
and  they  can  tell  by  the  face  who  their  lover  will  be.

956.  Others  take  four  onions,  put  one  in  each  comer  of  the  room,  and
name  them  after  bachelors ;  they  let  them  lie  from  Christmas  to  Twelfth-
day,  and  the  man  whose  onion  then  huds  will  present  himself  as  a  saitor;
if  none  have  budded  the  wedding  won't  oome  off.

957.  Some,  the  day  before  Christmas,  buy  the  fa/g-end  of  a  wheat  loaf
for  a  penny,  cut  a  piece  of  crust  off,  tie  it  under  their  right  arm,  wear
it  like  that  all  day,  and  in  going  to  bed  lay  it  under  their  head,  saying:
'  I've  got  into  bed.  And  have  plenty  of  bread ;  Let  my  lover  but  come.
And  he  shall  have  some/  If  the  bread  looks  gnawed  in  the  morning,  the
match  will  come  off  that  year ;  if  it's  whole,  there's  no  hope.

958.  At  midnight  before  Christmas-day,  the  men  or  maids  go  to  the
stack  of  firewood,  puU  one  log  out,  and  look  if  it  be  straight  or  crooked;
their  sweetheart's  figure  shall  be  according  (see  109).

959.  Some,  on  Christmas  eve,  buy  three  farthings  worth  of  while  bread,
divide  it  in  three  parts,  and  consume  it  along  three  streets,  one  in  every
street;  in  the  third  street  they  shall  see  their  sweetheart.

960.  The  night  before  Christmas,  you  take  two  empty  mUshelU,  with
tiny  wax  tapers  in  them,  to  stand  for  you  and  your  sweetheart,  and  at
them  afloat  on  a  dishful  of  water.  If  they  oome  together,  your  suit  will
prosper ;  if  they  go  apart  it  will  come  to  nought.  (Ung^wiss.  Apotheker
p.  649.)

961.  If  a  master  is  left  in  the  lurch  by  his  man,  or  a  girl  in  the  family

>  Mnohar*8  Oastein  p.  146.

»  963—9  from  Praetorii  Saturnalia,  Lips.  1663.


SÜPEB8TITION8.      I.  1819

way  by  her  lover,  yoa  put  a  certain  penny  in  the  pan  of  a  miü,  and  set
the  mill  going.  As  it  tarns  faster,  such  anguish  comes  upon  the  fagi-
tive,  that  he  cannot  stay,  but  neck  and  crop  he  comes  home.  This  they
call '  making  it  hot  for  a  man.*  (Beschr.  des  Fichtelbergs,  Lpzg.  1716.  4,
p.  154.)

962.  To  discover  what  the  year  shall  bring,  they  plant  themselves  on  a
cross-roads  or  parting  of  ways  at  12  the  night  before  Christmas,  stand
stockstill  without  speaking  for  an  hour,  whilst  all  the  future  opens  on
their  eyes  and  ears.    This  they  call '  to  go  hearken.'     (Ibid.  p.  155.)

963.  On  Andrew's  day  fill  thee  a  glass  with  water :  if  the  year  shall  be
moist,  it  runneth  over;  if  dry,  it  standeth  heaped  atop,  (Aller  Practio
Grossm.)

964.  On  Andrew's  eve  the  maids  mark  whence  the  dogs  hark  ;  from  that
quarter  comes  the  future  husband.

965.  They  tie  a  farthmg  to  their  great  toe,  sit  down  on  the  way  to
church,  and  look  among  the  Matin-goers  for  their  bridegroom.  (Tbarsan-
iier  1,  84.)

966.  To  know  if  an  infant  be  bewitched,  put  under  its  cradle  a  vessel
full  of  running  water,  and  drop  SLnegg  in  ;  if  it  floaif  the  child  is  bewitched.
(Val.  Kräutermanu's  Zauber-arzt  216.)

967.  Evil  persons  in  Silesia  did  upon  a  time  have  a  knife  forged,  and
therewith  cut  but  a  Utile  twig  off  every  tree,  and  in  a  short  time  all  the
forest  perished.     (Carlowitz's  Sylvicuhur  p.  46.)

968.  The  oaJe  is  a  prophetic  tree :  in  gaUnuts  a  fly  betokens  war,  a  worm
dearth,  a  spider  pestilence  (conf.  1046).

969.  Wood  felled  in  the  dog-days  will  not  hum,

970.  A  piece  of  oak  passed  lightly  over  the  body  in  silence,  before  sunrise
CD  John's  day,  heals  all  open  sores.

971.  The  elsheer'tree  is  also  called  dragon-tree:  branches  of  it  hung
over  house  and  stable  on  Walburgis-day  keep  out  the  flying  dragon.

972.  Oak  and  walniU  will  not  agree :  they  cannot  stand  together  with-
out (one  ?)  perishing.  So  with  hlackthom  and  whitethorn :  if  placed  to-
gether, the  white  one  always  gets  the  upper  hand,  the  black  dies  out.

973.  Cut  no  timber  in  the  had  wädel  (waxing  moon) :  timber  [schlag-
bolz  =  strike-wood)  felled  at  new-moon  is  apt  to  strike  out  again ;  that
felled  in  a  waning  moon  burns  better.

974.  When  a  sucking  habe  dies,  they  put  a  bottle  of  its  mother's  milk  in
the  coffin  with  it ;  then  her  milk  dries  up  without  making  her  ill.

975.  If  yoa  have  warts,  nail  a  big  brown  snail  to  the  doorpost  with  a
toooden  hammer;  as  it  dries  up,  the  wart  will  fade  away.

976.  If  an  old  woman  meet  you  at  early  morn,  and  greet  yon,  you  must
answer  '  As  much  to  you ! '

977.  Some  people  can  stop  a  waggon  of  hay  on  its  way,  so  that  it  will
not  stir  from  the  spot:  knock  at  every  wheel-nail,  and  it  will  be  free
again.

978.  In  a  thief* s  footprints  put  burning  tinder :  it  will  burn  him  and
betray  him.

979.  If  a  swallow  fly  into  the  stable,  and  pass  under  the  cow,  she  will


1820  APPENDIX.

give  blood  for  milk :  lead  her  to  a  cross-way,  milk  her  3  time«  through
a  branch,  and  empty  what  you  have  milked  backwards  over  her  bead  three
times.

980.  A  bunch  of  wild  thyme  or  marjoram  laid  beside  the  milk  keeps  it
from  being  bewitched.

981.  If  yon  walk  once  round  your  garden-fence  on  Shrove  Sunday,  not  a
plank  will  be  stolen  out  of  it  for  a  year  to  come.

982.  If  you  have  many  snails  on  your  land,  go  before  sunrise  and  take
one  snail  from  the  east  side;  then  by  way  of  north  to  the  west,  and
pick  up  another;  then  to  the  north;  then  by  way  of  east  to  the  south:
if  you  put  the  four  snails  in  a  bag,  and  hang  them  inside  yoar  chimney,
all  the  snails  on  your  land  will  creep  into  the  chimney,  and  die.

983.  If,  in  cutting  the  vegetables  in  autumn,  a  molehill  be  found  under
the  cabbage,  the  master  will  die.

984.  In  Westphalia,  when  a  loaf  is  cut,  they  call  the  upper  crust
laughing-knosl,  the  under  the  erying'knost.  When  maid  or  man  goes  out
of  service,  they  get  a  jammsr-knoei  (wailing-crust),  which  they  keep  for
years  after.

985.  When  children  have  the  echluckuk  (hioooughP),  their  heart  is
growing.

986.  The  first  stork  a  peasant  sees  in  the  year,  he  falls  on  the  ground,
rolls  round,  and  is  then  firee  from  pains  in  the  back  for  a  year.

987.  On  buying  a  cow  from  another  village,  you  give  beside  the  price
a  milhpenny,  so  that  her  milk  may  not  be  kept  back.  At  the  boundary
you  turn  her  three  times  round,  and  let  her  look  ai  her  old  home^  to  banidh
her  regret.

988.  Many  fasten /en»  in  hloeeom  over  the  house-door:  then  all  goee  well
aa  far  as  the  waggon-whip  reaches,

989.  On  the  first  day  of  Lent,  boys  and  girls  run  about  the  fields  like
mad,  with  blazing  wisps  of  straw,  to  drive  out  the  evil  sower.     (Bhone).

990.  The  first  night  of  Christmas  the  people  of  the  Bhon  roll  on  a«-
thrashed  pea-straw.  The  peas  that  drop  out  are  mixed  with  the  rest,
which  improves  the  crop.

991.  On  Innocents'  day,  every  adult  is  flogged  with  a  rod,  and  must
ransom  himself  with  a  gift.  The  trees  too  are  beaten,  to  promote  their
fertility.

992.  Whoso  doth  any  sewing  to  bed  or  clothing  on  a  Snnday,  canno:
die  therein  till  it  he  unripped.

993.  If  you  rise  from  the  spinning-wheel  without  twisting  off*  the  strap,
the  earth-mannikin  comes  and  spins  at  it :  yon  don*t  see  him,  but  you  hear
the  spindle  hum.

994.  A  beggar  that  would  pay  his  debt  in  full  ought  to  say  as  many
paternosters  as  it  would  take  blades  of  grass  to  cover  the  bread  given  him.
As  he  cannot,  he  says '  Gk>d  yield  ye  I '

995.  Never  slam  the  door :  a  spirit  sits  between,  and  it  hurts  him  (8921

996.  The  first  child  christened  at  a  newly  consecrated  font  receives  the
gift  of  seeing  spirits  and  things  to  come,  until  some  one  out  of  curiosity
step  on  his  lejtt  foot  and  look  over  his  right  shotMer;  then  the  gift  psMei


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1821

over  to  him.    Bat  that  can  be  prevented  by  the  sponsors  dropping  a  straw,
a  pin  or  a  piece  of  paper  into  the  basin.

997.  He  that  is  always  praying,  and  prides  himself  on  it,  prays  himself
through  heaveut  and  has  to  mind  geese  the  other  side.

998.  If  yon  drop  hread-and-hutUr,  and  it  falls  on  the  battered  side,  yoa
have  committed  a  sin  that  day.

999.  When  girls  are  weeding,  they  look  for  the  little  herb  '  Uif  in  de
meute '  (love  meet  me),  and  hide  it  about  them :  the  first  bachelor  that  then
comes  towards  them  is  their  sweetheart.

1000.  Whoever  builds  a  house  roust  use  hotighi,  stolen  and  given  timber
to  it,  or  he  has  no  luck :  a  belief  so  general  in  Lippe,  that  even  a  large
farmer  who  has  wood  of  his  own,  will  steal  a  beam,  then  go  and  accuse
himself,  and  pay  for  it.

1001.  When  the  holy  wea/^er  (lightning)  strikes,  it  can  only  be  quenclhed
tcith  milk,  not  with  water  (conf.  1122).

1002.  In  weeding  flax,  the  girls  pull  up  the  weed  Red  Henry  (mercury  P) :
whichever  way  the  root  grew,  from  there  will  come  the  sweetheart;  if  it
grew  straight  down,  the  girl  will  die  soon  (conf.  Dan.  Sup.  126).

1003.  Whoever  is  the  first  to  see  the  stork  come  in,  and  to  bid  it  welcome,
not  a  tooth  of  his  will  ache  that  year.

1004.  If  you  go  to  bed  without  clearing  the  table,  the  youngest  in  the
house  will  get  no  sleep.

1005.  If  a  maid  have  not  spun  her  distaff  clear  by  Sunday,  those  threads
will  never  bleach  white.

1006.  She  that  sets  the  gridiron  on  the  fire,  and  puts  nothing  on  it,  will
get  an  apron  in  her  face  (be  wrinkled).

1007.  If  you  stand  a  new  broom  upside  down  behind  the  street-door,
witches  can  neither  get  in  nor  out.

1008.  If  a  woman  purse  her  babe  sitting  on  the  houndary-stone  at  the
cross-way,  it  will  never  have  toothache.  *

1009.  Children  horn  after  the  father's  decUh  have  the  power  of  blowing
away  skin  that  grows  over  the  eyes  for  three  Fridays  running.

1010.  Why  give  ye  not  the  hones  of  the  Easter  lamb,  that  is  blessed,  unto
dogs  P  They  will  go  mad,  say  ye.  Ye  may  give  them,  it  harmeth  not
(Keisersb.  Ameisz.  52).

1011.  Wouidst  Zame  a  horse  P  Take  of  a  tree  stricken  by  hail,  and  make
thereof  a  nail,  or  of  a  new  gallows,  or  of  a  knife  that  hath  been  a  priest's
cell- woman's  (conf.  priest's  wife.  Spell  xxxiv),  or  the  stump  of  a  knife
wherewith  one  hath  been  stuck  dead ;  and  push  it  into  his  hoofprint.  (Cod.
Pal.  212,  53»».)

1012.  To  know  how  many  '  good  holden '  are  conjured  into  a  man,  he
shall  draw  water  in  silence,  and  drop  burning  coals  out  of  the  oven  into
it :  as  many  coals  as  sink  to  the  bottom,  so  many  good  holden  has  he  in
him.

1013.^  If  a  tempest  lasts  three  days  without  stopping,  some  one  is  hang-
ing himself.

^No8.  1018—1104  from  the  New  Bnnzlau  Monthly  for  1791-2.
VOL.  IV.  N  »


1822  APPENDIX.

1014.  Who  bathes  in  cold  water  on  Easterdaj,  keeps  well  the  whole
year.

1015.  If  yoa  go  out  on  important  business,  and  an  old  woman  meet  you,
it  is  unlucky ;  if  a  young  girl,  lucky.

1016.  When  the  night-owl  cries  by  day,  a  fire  breaks  out.

1017.  If  yon  look  at  a  bahe  in  swaddling-bands,  cross  it  and  say  'God
guard  thee ! '

1018.  Whoever  sees  the  corn  in  blossom  first,  and  eats  nine  of  the  We«-
soins,  will  keep  free  from  fever  (oonf.  718).

1019.  If  a  howling  dog  holds  his  head  up,  it  means  a  fire ;  if  down,  a
death.

1020.  Whoever  on  St.  John's  Eve  puts  as  many  John's  worts  as  there
are  people  in  the  house,  into  a  rafter  of  his  room,  naming  the  plants  after
the  people,  can  tell  in  what  order  they  will  die :  he  whose  plant  withers
firat  will  die  first  (conf.  Dan.  Sup.  126).

1021.  It  is  not  good  to  point  with  your  finger  at  where  a  thunderstorm
stands,

1022.  Blood  let  out  of  a  vein  should  always  be  thrown  into  running
water.

1023.  Let  no  milk  or  butter  be  sold  out  of  the  house  after  sunset.

1024'.  Moles  are  removed  from  the  face  by  letting  a  dead  person's  hand
rest  on  them  till  it  grow  warm.

1025.  The  rainwater  left  on  tombstones  will  send  freckles  away.

1026.  If  you  see  blue  fire  bum  at  night,  throw  a  knife  into  it,  and  if  you
go  there  before  sunrise,  you  will  find  money.

1027.  Hairs  that  comb  out  should  be  burnt :  if  a  bird  carries  them  to  its
nest,  it  gives  you  headaches,  or  if  it  be  a  staar  (starling),  staar-blindnees
(cataract).

1028.  When  the  sehalaster  (magpie  P)  cries  round  the  house,  guests  are
near.

1029.  If  you  have  the  hiccough,  drink  out  of  your  jug  (mug)  over  the
handle,

1030.  When  it  rains  in  sunshine,  the  sky  drops  poison.

1031.  Let  a  sold  calf  be  led  out  of  doors  by  tJie  tail,  and  the  cow  will  not
fret ;  let  a  bought  cow  be  led  into  stable  by  the  tail,  and  she'll  soon  feel  at
home.

1032.  When  the  ^or  splinters,  suitors  are  coming.

1033.  When  a  hanged  man  is  cut  down,  give  him  a  box  on  the  ear,  or
he'll  come  back.

1034.  If  the  moon  shine  on  an  unbaptized  child,  it  will  be  moonstruck.

1035.  If  the  dead  man*s  bier  falls,  some  one  will  die  in  3  days ;  it  will
be  one  that  did  not  hear  it.

1036.  If  your  right  hand  itch,  you'll  take  money;  if  your  left,  ycull
spend  much.

1037.  When  a  sudden  shiver  comes  over  you,  death  is  running  over  your
grave.

1038.  If  the  altar-candle  goes  out  of  itself,  the  minister  dies  within  a
year.


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1823

1039.  If  you  ran  in  one  boot  or  shoe,  you  lose  your  balance,  unless  you
run  back  the  same  way.

1040.  A  horse  goes  lame,  if  you  drive  a  nail  into  hiB  freeh  footprint  (conf.
1011).

1041.  On  Christmas-eve  thrash  the  garden  with  a  flail,  with  only  your
shirt  on,  and  the  grass  will  grow  well  next  year.

1042.  As  long  as  icicles  hang  from  the  roof  in  unnter,  so  long  will  there
be  flax  on  the  distaff  the  next  year.

1043.  If  a  straw  lies  in  the  room,  there  is  snow  coming.

1044.  Oood  Friday's  rain  must  be  scratched  out  of  the  ground  with
needles,  for  it  brings  a  great  drought.

1045.  If  the  godfather's  letter  be  opened  over  tlie  chtld^s  mouth,  it  learns
to  speak  sooner.

1046.  Flies  in  gdllnuts  betoken  war,  maggots  bad  crops,  spiders  pestilence
(conf.  968).

1047.  Rods  stuck  into  the  flax-bed  keep  the  cattle  unbe witched.

1048.  Three  knocks  at  night  when  there's  nobody  there,  some  one  at  the
house  will  die  in  3  days.

1049.  If  a  woman  dies  in  childbed,  wash  out  her  platsche  (porringer)
directly,  or  she  will  come  back.

lOoO.  If  bride  and  bridegroom  on  the  wedding  day  put  a  three-headed
bohemian  (a  coin)  under  the  sole  of  their  right  foot,  it  will  be  a  happy
marriage,

1051.  Snow  on  the  wedding  day  foretells  a  happy  marriage,  rain  a
wretched.

1052.  If  you  stir  food  or  drink  with  a  knife,  you'll  have  the  cutting
gripes ;  if  with  tkfork,  the  stitch.

1053.  When  one  is  dying  hard,  lay  him  on  the  change  (where  the  ends  of
the  boards  meet),  and  he'll  die  easy.

1054  Give  your  pigeons  drink  out  of  a  human  skuU,  and  other  people's
pigeons  will  come  to  your  cot.

1055.  When  hens  crow,  a  fire  breaks  out.

1056.  A  house  whei*e  cock,  dog  and  cat  are  bla^k,  will  not  catch  fire.

1057.  One  where  the  chain-dog  is  burnt  to  death,  will  soon  be  on  fire  again.

1058.  If  the  butter  won't  come,  whip  the  tub  with  a  willow  rod,  but  not
one  cut  with  a  knife.

1059.  To  win  a  maiden's  love,  get  a  hair  and  a  pin  off  her  unperceived,
twist  the  hair  round  the  pin,  and  throw  them  backwards  into  a  river.

1060.  If  by  mistake  the  pall  be  laid  over  the  coffin  wrong  side  out,  another
in  the  house  will  die.

1061.  When  you  buy  a  dog,  a  cat  or  a  hen,  twirl  them  3  times  round  your
right  leg,  and  they'll  soon  settle  down  with  you.

1062.  Under  a  sick  man's  bed  put  a  potf ul  of  nettles :  if  they  keep  green,
he'll  recover;  if  they  uyither,  he  will  die.

1063.  A  worn  shirt  shall  not  be  given  to  be  a  shroud,  else  he  that  wore  it
will  waste  away  till  the  shirt  be  rotten.

1064.  If  a  women  in  childbed  look  at  a  corpse,  her  child  will  have  no
colour.


1824  APPENDIX.

1065.  A  hanged  man's  fifiger  hang  in  the  cask  makes  the  heer  sell  fast

1066.  If  it  rain  on  the  bridal  wreath,  the  wedded  pair  will  be  rich  and
frnitfal.

1067.  In  measuring  grain,  sweep  the  top  towards  you,  and  yon  sweep
blessing  into  the  honse ;  if  yon  ttoeep  it  from  you,  yon  send  it  into  the
devirs  hand.

1068.  If  a  child's  navel  sticks  out,  take  a  beggars  staff  from  him  siZeni/y»
and  press  the  navel  with  it  cross-wise.

1069.  To  make  a  broodhen  hatch  eocles  or  hens,  take  the  straw  for  her
nest  from  the  man*s  or  the  woman* s  side  of  the  bed.

1070.  He  that  has  white  specks  on  his  thumb-nails,  he  whose  toeih  stand
close  together,  will  stay  in  his  own  country.

1071.  If  wife  or  maid  lose  a  garter  in  the  street,  her  husband  or  lover  is
untrae.

1072.  To  find  out  who  has  poisoned  yoar  beast,  cut  the  creature's  heart
out,  and  hang  it  pierced  with  30  pins,  in  the  chimney;  the  doer  will  then
be  tormented  till  he  come  and  accuse  himself.

1073.  Wheat,  sown  in  MichaeVs  week,  turns  to  cockle;  barley,  in  the
first  week  of  April,  to  hedge- mustard.

1074.  If  you  have  fever-frost  (ague),  go  in  silence,  without  crossing
water,  to  a  hollow  willow  tree,  breaihe  your  breath  into  it  three  times,  stop
the  lu)l6  up  quick,  and  hie  home  without  looking  round  or  speaking  a  word :
the  ague  will  keep  away.

1075.  Young  mayfiowers  picked  before  sunrise,  and  rubbed  together
under  your  face,  keep  summer-freckles  away.

1076.  A  woman  with  child  shall  not  sit  down  on  any  box  that  can  snap
to  under  her,  else  her  child  will  not  come  into  the  world  until  yon  have  s^^i
her  down  on  it  again  and  unlocked  it  three  times.

1077.  If  you  see  dewless  patches  in  the  grass  before  sunrise,  yon  can  find
money  there.

1078.  Let  linseed  for  sowing  be  poured  into  the  bag  from  a  good  height*
and  the  flax  will  grow  tall.

1079.  If  you  have  fever,  walk  over  nine  field-boundaries  in  one  day,  and
you'll  be  rid  of  it.

1080.  Or :  hunt  a  black  cat  till  it  lies  dead.  It  is  good  for  epilepsy  to
drink  the  bhod  of  a  beheaded  man,  and  then  run  a^fast  and  far  aa  you  can
hold  out.

1081.  On  Christmas-eve  make  a  little  heap  of  salt  on  the  table :  if  it  melt
over  night,  you'll  die  the  next  year;  if  it  remain  undiminished  in  the  morn-
ing, you  will  live.

1082.  Whoever  on  St  Walpurg's  eve  puts  all  his  clothes  on  wrongsid^t
cut,  and  creeps  backwards  to  a  cross^way,  will  get  into  witches'  company.

1083.  If  the  reel  hung  awry,  and  the  thread  dangled  dotonwards,  when  a
child  came  into  the  world,  it  will  hang  itself.  If  a  knife  was  lying  «i^«
upwards,  it  will  die  by  the  sword.

1084.  The  smallest  box  in  the  house  is  usually  placed  before  the  child-
birth bed :  if  any  one  sit  down  on  it,  and  it  snap  to  of  itself,  the  woman
will  never  be  brought  to  bed  again.


SUPERSTITIONS.      I.  1825

1085.  As  many  times  as  tho  cock  crows  during  service  the  night  before
Christmas,  so  many  böhmen  will  the  quarter  of  wheat  fetoh  the  coming
year.

1086.  Whosoever  shall  spy  the  first  ploughman  ply,  and  the  first  swallow
fly,  on  a  year  of  good  luck  may  rely.

1087.  If  a  spinster  in  spring  time,  when  birds  come  back,  see  two  wag-
tails  togetlier,  she'll  be  married  that  year.

1088.  If  a  bridal  pair  on  their  way  to  the  wedding  meet  a  cartload  of
dung,  it  betokens  an  unhappy  marriage.

1089.  Before  sowing  barley,  let  the  seed  run  through  a  Tnan's  shirt,  and
the  sparrows  will  spare  it.

1090.  If  yon  eat  peeled  barley,  apoplexy  cannot  strike  you  while  there  is
a  grain  of  it  left  in  your  stomach.

1091.  If  you  strike  a  light  on  the  comer  of  the  table  or  fireplace,  the
'  brand '  (blight)  will  fall  on  your  millet.

1092.  When  the  women  are  going  to  wash,  every  one  in  the  house  must
get  up  in  a  good  temper,  and  there  will  be  fine  weather.

1093.  Spinsters  on  St  John's-eve  twine  a  wreath  of  nine  sorts  of  flowers,
and  try  to  throw  it  backwards  and  in  silence  on  to  a  tree.  As  often  as  it
falls,  so  many  years  will  they  remain  unmarried  (conf.  848).

1094.  If  a  chip  in  the  fire  in  wintertime  has  a  large  catstail,  it  is  a  sign
of  snow;  and  if  the  catstail  splits  down  the  middle,  of  guests.

1095.  It  is  not  good  to  waUc  over  sweepings  (see  Swed.  1).

1096.  Children  beaten  with  rods  off  a  broom  that  ha^  been  used,  waste
away.

1097.  If  you  want  your  cows  to  give  much  milk,  buy  a  summer  from  the
eummer-children,  and  stick  it  over  the  stable- door.

1098.  The  first  time  the  cows  are  driven  to  pasture,  you  tie  red  rags
round  their  tails,  so  that  they  cannot  be  bewitched.

1099.  If  you  want  the  witch  to  have  no  hold  over  your  cattle,  shut  a
bear  up  in  their  stable  for  a  night :  he  scratches  out  the  hidden  stuff  that
holds  the  magic,  and  when  that  is  gone,  they  are  no  longer  open  to  attack*

1100.  Flax  bought  on  St  Lawrence  day  will  get  *  burnt*  (blasted).

1101.  If  you  had  something  to  say,  and  forget  what,  step  out  over  the
threshold  and  in  again ;  it  will  come  into  your  head  again.

1102.  Let  a  beemaster  at  honey  harvest  give  away  to  many,  and  the  bees
will  be  generous  to  him.

1103.  On  Christmas-eve  put  a  stone  on  every  tree,  and  they*ll  bear  the
more.

1104.  When  a  girl  is  born,  lay  over  her  breast  a  net  made  of  an  old
(female)  cap,  and  the  alp  (night-elf)  will  not  suck  her  dry,

1105.  On  AUhallows-eve  young  folks  in  Northumberland  throw  a  couple
of  nuts  in  the  fire.  If  they  lie  still  and  bum  together,  it  augurs  a  happy
marriage;  if  they  fly  apart,  an  unhappy  (Brocket t  p.  152).

1106.  When  the  bride  is  undressing,  she  hands  one  of  her  stockings  to
a  bridesmaid,  to  throw  among  the  assembled  wedding-gnests.  The  person
on  whom  the  stocking  faUs  will  be  married  next  (ibid.  218).

1107.  Bride  and  bridegroom,  at  the  end  of  the  wedding,  sit  down  on  the


1826  APPENDIX.

bridal  bed  in  all  their  clothes  except  shoes  and  stockings.  Each  brides-
maid in  turn  takes  the  bridegroom's  stocking,  stands  at  the  foot  of  the  bed
with  her  back  to  it,  and  throws  the  Hocking  loith  her  left  hand  over  her
right  shoulder,  aiming  at  the  bridegroom's  face.  Those  who  hit  will  get
married  soon.  The  joung  men  do  the  same  with  the  bride's  stocking
(ibid.).

1108.  On  St  Mark's-eve  some  yoang  people  watch  all  night  in  the  church-
porch,  and  see  the  spirits  of  aü  thai  are  to  die  thai  year  go  past,  dressed  as
usual.  People  that  have  so  watched  are  a  terror  to  the  parish :  by  nods
and  winks  tJiey  can  hint  men's  approaching  deaths  (ibid.  229).  In  £.  Fries-
land  they  say  such  people  '  can  see  quad '  (bad).

1109.  On  Christmas-eve  the  yule-clog  is  laid  on,  and  if  possible  kept
burning  2  or  3  days.  A  piece  of  it  is  usually  kept  to  light  the  next  year's
log  with,  and  to  guard  the  household  from  harm  (ibid.  243).  If  it  will  not
light,  or  does  not  burn  out,  it  bodes  mischief.

1110.  In  spring,  when  the  farmer  goes  a6eld,  and  turns  up  the  first
furrows  with  unbolted  plough,  he  sprinkles  this  earth  in  the  four  comers
of  the  living-room,  and  all  the  fleas  retire  (Kriinitz  1,  42).

1111.^  Dogs  and  black  sheep  have  also  the  gifli  of '  seeing  quad,*  and  yon
may  learn  it  of  them.  When  the  howling  dog  has  a  vision,  look  through
between  his  ears,  and  lift  his  left  leg  ;  or  take  him  on  your  shoulder,  and  so
look  between  his  ears.  If  you  wish  to  be  rid  of  the  art,  you  can  transfer  it
to  the  dog  by  treading  on  his  rigJUfoot  and  letting  him  look  over  yaw  right
shoulder.

1112.  Whichever  way  the  howling  dog  points  his  muzzle,  from  the  same
quarter  will  the  coming  corpse  be  brought.

1113.  Sometimes  the  steeple-bells  give  out  a  dull  dead  clang :  then  some
one  in  the  parish  will  die  soon  (conf.  284).  When  the  death-bell  tolls»
whichever  side  of  it  the  tongue  touches  last,  from  that  side  of  the  village
will  the  next  corpse  come.

1114.  If  a  cabbage- plant  blossoms  the  first  year,  or  gets  white  places  on
its  leaves,  a  misfortune  will 'happen  in  the  owner's  house.

1115.  A  house  beside  which  a  star  has  faUen  will  be  the  first  to  have  a
death.

1116.  It  betokens  war  when  the  cherry-tree  ihssoms  twiee  in  a  year.

1117.  When  the  sun  shines  on  the  altar  at  Oandlemas,  expect  a  good  flax-
year.

1 118.  A  witch  can  hurt  cattle  by  skimming  the  dew  off  the  grass  in  their
pasture.

1119.  Eggshells  should  be  smashed  up  small;  else  the  witch  may  harm
the  men  that  ate  out  of  them,  and  the  hens  that  laid  them.

1120.  If  you  find  something  eatable,  throw  the  first  mouthful  away,  or
witches  may  hurt  you.

1121.  When  7  girls  running  are  bom  of  one  marriage,  one  is  a  were*
wolf.

1122.  When  lightning  strikes,  the  fire  can  only  be  quenched  wOh  milk
(conf.  1001).

» 1111—1123  E.  Friesl.  superst.  (Westfäl.  Anz.  for  1810,  nos.  68—72).


SUPEBSTITIONS.     I.  1827

1123.  If  yon  point  your  finger  cU  the  moon,  you'll  get  a  wooden  finger.

1124.  Wisps  of  straw,  taken  out  of  a  bed  on  which  a  dead  man  has  lain,
and  stuck  up  in  the  cornfield,  keep  the  birds  away.

1125.  Birds  are  kept  out  of  the  com,  if  in  harrowing  you  go  to  the  left,
and  say  a  certain  spell,  but  you  must  have  learnt  it  from  one  of  the  opposite
sex.

1126.^  If  a  child  look  into  a  mirror,  and  cannot  yet  speak,  it  is  not
good.

1127.  Two  babes  that  cannot  talk  shall  not  be  let  kiss  one  another,

1128.  Crickets  or  ofen-eimichen  bring  ill-fortune.

1129.  Ye  shall  not  spin  nor  wash  while  a  dead  person  is  yet  above
ground.

1130.  Three  drops  of  blood  taMing  from  one's  nose  signifieth  something
strange.

1131.  On  the  sea  one  shall  not  say  thurm  or  kirche,  but  stifle  spitze  and
the  like.

1132.  One  shall  not  speak  the  while  aywther  dnnks.

1133.  It  is  not  good  that  two  drink  together.

1134.  Wood,  when  it  lies  on  the  fire,  and  by  reason  of  wetness  letteth
out  air  and  fumeth,  it  signifieth  chiding.

1135.  When  a  mess,  though  it  be  off  the  fire,  still  simmers  in  the  pot,  'tis
good  warrant  there  be  no  witches  in  the  house.

1136.  Pocks  can  be  sold,  and  he  that  buys  gets  not  so  many  as  other-
wise.

1137.  When  one  hath  to  do  out  of  doors,  and  tumeth  about  in  the  door,
and  goes  not  straightway,  it  is  not  good.

1138.  Itching  of  the  nose  signifies  a  sudden  fit.

1139.  If  a  nail  being  driven  into  the  coffin  bends,  and  will  not  in,
another  shall  follow  soon.

1140.  Go  not  into  service  on  a  Monday,  nor  moye  into  a  house,  nor  begin
anght,  for  it  shall  not  live  to  be  a  week  old.

1141.  To  stretch  over  the  cradle  is  not  good,  thereof  comes  tension  of  the
heart,

1142.  When  ye  move  into  a  house,  if  ye  bring  salt  and  bread  first  there-
into, ye  shall  lack  therein  nothing  needful.

I  1126^1142  from  *  Des  uhralten  jungen  leiermatz  lastigem  correBpondenz-gelst,'
1668,  pp.  170—176.


1828  APPENDIX.


K.    SCANDINAVIAN.


a,  Sweden.*

Febsonal  Fronouks:

Ee.                   She.

It.

They.

N.        han            hon  (Dan.  hnn)

det

de  (Obsol.  the)

G.        bans          hennea

dess

deras  (Dan.  deres).

D.A.    honom       henne

det

dem  (Obsol.  them).

(Dan.  ham)

Foss.  Fbon.  :  M.F.  sin,  N.  sit,  Fl.  tina,  his,  her,  its,  their  (own),  Lat

8UUS.

Indep.  Art.  :  M.F.  en,  N.  et.

Indep.  Feon.  :  ndgon,  nagot  (Dan.  nogen,  noget),  some,  any.  Ingen,  intit,
none.

Def.  Art.  :  nsaallj  a  Suffix :  M.F.  -en,  -n,  N.  -et,  4,  Fl.  -ne,  -no.  Tbng
in  No.  9,  ako'H,  the  shoe;  fot-en,  the  foot;  golfv-et,  the  floor;  in  No.  12,
$kar-na,  the  shoes.

Passive  formed  by  adding  -«  to  the  Active :  No.  19,  lögarB^  is  or  are
bathed ;  lägge-e,  is  or  are  laid.

An  initial  j  or  v  (Engl,  y,  w)  is  often  omitted  before  an  o  or  u  sound:  at
year,  ung  yoang;  ord  word,  urt  wort.

SwED.  often  changes  Id,  nd  to  II,  nn :  skulle  should,  andre,  annars,  etc
other.    The  reverse  in  Dan.  :  /aide  fall,  mand  man.

1.  Ej  mä  man  mota  sopor  i  dörren,  om  man  vil  bli  gift  det  &ret  (one
must  not  meet  sweepings  in  the  doorway,  if  one  would  get  married
that  year).

2.  Om  en  flicka  och  gösse  äta  af  en  och  samma  hetn,  bli  de  kära  i
hvar-andra  (if  a  girl  and  boy  eat  off  one  morsel,  they  get  fond  of  each
other).

8.  Midsommars-nat  skal  man  lagga  9  slags  hlomster  under  hufvudei,  el
drömer  man  om  sin  fäste-man  eller  fäste-mö,  och  fär  se  den  samma  (dreams
of  his  or  her  betrothed,  and  gets  to  see  them).

4.  Ej  mä  ung-karl  (young  fellow)  gifva  en  flicka  knif  eller  hnap-nalar
(pins),  ty  de  sticka  sonder  kärleken  (for  they  put  love  asunder).

5.  En  flicka  mä  ej  se  sig  i  spegelen  sedan  ned-mörkt  är,  eller  vid  Ijns  (not
look  in  her  glass  after  dark  or  by  candle),  at  ej  förlora  manfolks  tycket  (not
to  lose  men's  good  opinion).

6.  Brüden  skal  laga  (the  bride  must  contrive),  at  lion  f&rstfar  se  hrud^
gummen,  b&  far  hon  husbonda-kastet  (mastery).

7.  Hon  skal  under  vigslen  (at  the  wedding),  for  samma  orsak  (reason)
aäita  sin  fat  framfor  hans  (in  front  of  his).

>  Nos.  1 — 71  from  Erik  Femoto*s  Beskrifning  ofver  Wänneland  (Oötheborg  1773,
pp.  264—260) ;  72—109  from  Hülphers's  Beskrifn.  ofver  Norrland,  4  (Westeria
1780,  pp.  308—310) ;  110—125  from  Johan  Odman's  Bahusläns  beskrifn.  (Stockh.
1746,  pp.  75—80).


SUPEBSTITIONS.       K.  1829

8.  Äfven  for  samma  skäl  (reason)  skal  hon  laga,  at  hon  satter  Big  först
ned  i  hrud-stolen  (sit  down  first  in  the  bridal  chair).

9.  For  samma  orsak  skal  hon,  liksom  af  Täda  (accident),  aläppa  ekon  af
foten,  eller  näs-duken  (drop  her  shoe  or  kerchief),  eller  n&got  annat  pa  golf'
vet  (floor),  som  brudgammen  af  hoflighet  bugar  sig  (politely  stoops)  at
bjelpa  til  rätta.  Hans  öde  blir,  at  kroka  rygg  under  hela  ägtenskapet
(bend  the  back  all  his  married  life).

10.  Bmden  skal  st&  hrudgwnmen  nära,  at  ingen  framdeles  mä  tränga  sig
dem  imellan  (no  one  in  fatnre  squeeze  in  between  them).

11.  De  hälla  (they  hold)  i  kyrkan  et  hatid  eller  kläde  imellan  sig,  at  de
m&ga  bli  ensame  tilhopa  (dwell  in  unity  together).

12.  Bägge  bora  hafya  pengar  i  skoma  (both  shoold  have  coins  in  their
shoes),  at  mynt  m&  aldrig  tryta  (never  ran  short).  •

13.  Den  som  (the  one  who)  under  vigslen  lutar  (turns) /rd»  den  andra,
dor  (dies)  först ;  äf ven-8&  den  som  ser  bast  ut  (looks  best).

14.  Brüden  skal  taga  med  sd  manga  fingrar  pa  hara  kroppen  (touch  her
bare  body  with  as  many  fingers),  under  det  hon  sitter  i  brud« stolen,  som
hon  vil  hafya  manga  barn  (as  she  wishes  to  have  children).

15.  At  hon  mä  f&  lätt  barn-säng  (easy  child-bed),  skal  hon,  vid  hem-
komsten  fr&n  kyrkan,  til  vänster  spänna  ifiän  huk-hjolen  om  hon  ridet,
men  fimmelstdngen  om  hon  &ket  (undo  leftwards  the  saddle-girth  or  the
traces).

16.  At  brnden  mä  bli  god  mjölk-ko,  möter  hänne»  moder  hanne  pä  garden,
da  hon  kommer  ur  kyrkan,  med  et  mjölke-glae,  at  ut-dricka.

17.  Til  mat  (for  food)  pä  första  barn-bängen,  skal  hon  förse  sig  (provide
herself)  med  en  kdka  och  en  ost  (cheese),  som  hon  har  hos  sig  ligande
(lying  by  her)  i  brud-sängen.

18.  Nar  bam  äro  nyss-födde,  lägges  (when  babes  are  newly  bom,  there
is  laid)  en  bok  under  der  as  hufvud,  at  de  mä  bli  nimme  at  läsa  (quick  at
reading).

19.  När  de  fÖrsta  gangen  lögas  (when  they  are  bathed  the  first  time)
lägges  penningar  i  vatnet,  at  de  mä  bli  rika.  En  pung  (purse),  med  pengar
Uli,  sys  ok  kring  hcdsen  (is  sewed  also  round  the  neck).

20.  Nägot  üifadrens  kläder  bredes  pä  flickO'barn  (is  spread  over  girl-
babies),  och  modrens  kjoriel  pä  gösse,  at  fä  tycke  hos  andra  köuet  (to  find
favour  with  the  other  sex).

21.  Modren  hör  möta  bamet  i  dörren,  när  det  fores  bort  (when  it  is
carried  off)  til  Christendom;  men  när  det  fores  hem,  sedan  (after)  det
är  dopt,  skal  man  möta  det  i  dörren  med  en  hröd-kaka,  at  det  aldrig  mä
fattas  bröd  (that  it  may  never  want  bread).

22.  Sä  länge  bam  ej  fädt  namn,  mä  ej  elden  sldckas,  (the  fire  go  out).

23.  Ej  mä  man  gä  mellan  eld  och  spen*bam  (between  fire  and  sucking
babe).

24.  Ej  mä  man  sent  bära  in  vatten,  dar  (bring  water  in  late  where)  s pen-
barn  är,  utan  at  kasta  eld  dertUi  (without  patting  fire  therein).

25.  Ej  mä  nägon  som  (Let  no  one  that)  kommer  in  i  huset,  taga  et
barn  i  sina  händer,  atan  at  förut  taga  i  elden  (without  first  touching  the
fire).


i830  APPENDIX.

26.  När  bam  fä  snart  t&nder,  T&nta  de  snart  nya  syshon  efter.  (IE
children  teethe  qnickly,  they  expect  new  brothers  and  gisters  soon).

27.  Om  bam  trifvas  gerna  i  varnU  vaUen,  bli  de  horaktiga^

28.  Ej  m&  man  vagga  torn  vagga  (rock  an  empty  cradle),  iy  bamet  blir
gr&tt  och  olätigt.

29.  När  etf&rai-födi  ham,  som  ftr  födt  med  tänder  (bom  with  teeth)»  biter
öf^er  onda  betet  (r.he  evil  bite),  b&  blir  det  läkt  (it  will  be  healed).     See  37.

30.  Bam  m&  ej  p&  en-gang  lasa  och  ata  (at  once  read  and  eat),  tj  det
far  trögt  minne  (sluggish  memory).

31.  Bamet  skal  först  taga  i  (toach)  hv/nd,  men  ej  i  katt,

32.  Om  barn  leka  med  eld,  (play  with  fire)  f&  de  svärt  at  häUa  sit  vattec.

33.  Barn  som  är  afladt  fore  vigslen  (begotten  before  marriage)  skal
modren  sjelf  hdlla  vid  dopet  (hold  at  the  font),  eljest  blir  det  icke  ägta  (else
not  legitimate) ;  men  är  det  födt  förut  (if  bom  before),  skal  hon  häÜa  dei
pa  a/rmen  när  hon  st&r  brud  (is  married).

34.  Om  den  sjuke  \ix  främmande  mat  (stranger's  food),  blir  ban  friak.

35.  For  läke-medel  (medicine)  bör  man  ej  toxica  (not  thank),  ty  det  bar
ingen  verkan  (for  then  it  has  no  effect).

36.  Ej  mä  man  g&  Öfver  grafvar  med  öpet  s&r  (open  sore),  ty  det  lakes
sent  eller  aldrig  (heals  late  or  never).

37.  Onda  hetet  botas  (is  cured)  af  förstfödt  barn  med  tänder  (see  29).

38.  Ej  mä  man  fore  morgonen  omtala  (talk  of),  om  man  sedi  spoke  (seen
a  spectre),  at  ej  bli  kramad  och  spotta  blod.

39.  Sedan  nedmörkt  är  (after  dark),  m&  man  ej  gä  til  vatten,  et  ej  f  &  onda
hetet.

40.  For  samma  orsak  (reason),  eller  ock  at  ej  bli  kramad,  skal  man  spotta
3  ganger  (spit  3  times),  da  man  gär  qfver  vatten  sedan  nedmörkt  är.

41.  For  den  sjaka  bör  man  lata  bedja  (have  the  sick  prayed  for)  t  3
kyrkor,  dock  bör  gerna  där-ibland  vara  (but  among  them  shonld  be)  en
offer-kyrka  sä- som  Gunnarskog,  Yisnum,  B4ida,  om  man  bor  dem  sä  nar
(lives  near  enough).  Det  mäste  da  hastigt  slä  ut»  antingen  til  heisa  eller
döden  (speedily  issne  either  in  healing  or  death).

42.  Stora  fiskars  tänder  böra  uphrännas,  at  bli  lyklig  i  fiske.  (Big  fish«-
teeth  shonld  be  bamt,  to  be  lucky  in  fishing).

43.  Man  bör  ingen  tilsäga  (teil  no  one),  da  man  gär  ästad  at  fiska;  och
ej  omtala,  antingen  (nor  talk  aboat  whether)  man  fär  mycket  eller  litet
(see  109).

44.  Ej  heller  bör  nägon  /rammende  (nor  must  any  stranger)  fä  se  hur
micket  fisk  man  fätt.

45.  Kär  man  ror  ut  frän  landet  at  fiska,  mä  man  ^  vända  hdie»
aneöls.

46.  Knapnälar  (pins)  fundna  i  kyrkan  och  dar  gjorda  til  mete-hrokar  (and
there  made  into  bait-hooks)  nappa  bast,  eller  äro  gäfvast.

47.  Gär  qvinfolk  (if  a  female  walks)  ojver  mete-spo,  nappar  ej  fisken.

48.  Stulen  fieke-redskap  (stolen  fishing-tackle)  är  lyklig,  men  den
bestnlne  mister  lyckan  (the  person  robbed  loses  the  lack).

49.  Ej  mä  man  köra  lik  (drive  a  corpse)  til  kyrka,  ty  hasten  blir  skamd
(the  horse  gets  shy).


SUPBBSTITIONS.      K  1831

50.  Ej  tn&  man  lysa  under  hordet  (shew  a  light  under  the  table),  at  ej
gästerne  skola  bli  o-ense  (get  dis-nnited,  qaarrel).

51.  Ej  mä  man  vända  am  (turn  back),  da  man  gär  i  nägot  ärende  (any
errand),  at  det  icke  mä  aflöpa  ilia  (turn  out  ill).

52.  For  knapnälar  mä  man  eJ  tacha,  ty  de  tappas  bort  (get  lost).

53.  Qoinfolha  mote  wr  ondt,  om  det  ej  är  en  lönhora,

54.  Kommer  en  främmande  in,  der  Ijiie  stöpee  (v^here  candles  are  being
dipped),  skal  ban  toga  i  elden,  eljest  losnar  talgen  af  Ijusen.

55.  Ej  mä  man  spinna  om  Torsdags  qvall  (evening),  eller  i  Dymmel-
veckan  (Carnival);  ty  det  spinner  efter  om  natten  (spins  on  all  night).

56.  Kommer  främmande  in,  der  korf  kokaa,  spricker  ban  sonder.

57.  Om  nägon  som  bar  onda  ogon  (evil  eye)  ser  da  man  slagtar,  bar
kreaturet  ondt  for  at  do  (the  beast  dies  hard).

58.  Slär  man  (if  you  beat)  kreatur  med  vriden  vidja  (turned  wood),  far
det  tarm-topp  (bowel-twisting).

59.  Yander  man  toflor  eller  skor  m^d  tan  in  at  sängen  (slippers  or  shoes
with  the  toes  towards  the  bed),  sä  kommer  maran  (the  mare)  om  natten.

60.  Pdsk-aflon  skal  man  göra  kors  (Easter-eve,  make  a  cross)  öfver  fäbus-
dörren  (cowhouse-door)  for  troU-käringar.

61.  När  man  liggerförsta  gangen  i  et  hua,  skal  man  räkna  bjelkama
(coant  the  rafters),  sä  blir  sand  (comes  trae)  hvad  man  drÖmer.

62.  Om  man  glönier  nägot  (forget  something)  da  man  reser  bort  (sets
out),  är  godt  hopp  för  de  heroa  yarande  (home- stayers),  at  den  resande
kommer  tilbaka ;  men  ee  eig  tübaka  (to  look  back)  är  ej  godt  marke.

63.  När  kattor  tvätta  sig  (wash),  eller  skator  skrodta  (magpies  scratch)  vid
husen,  vänta  de  främmande  (they  expect  strangers).  Har  en  sölaktig  mat-
in oder  eller  värdslös  piga  icke  förr  sopat  golf  vet  (not  before  swept  the
floor),  sä  bör  det  da  vist  ske  (be  done  then).

64.  Den  som  om  Jul-dagen  for  at  kommer  hem  frän  kyrkan,  slutar  (will
finish)  först  sin  ande-tid.

65.  Om  man  gär  3  ganger  kring  käl-Bängen  (round  the  cabbage-bed)
sedan  man  satt  kälen,  blir  ban  fri  for  mask  (free  from  slugs).

^.  Om  qvvnfolk  klifver  öfver  skaklor  (dimb  over  the  shafts),  skenar
basten  eller  blir  skämt.

67.  När  väf'Stolen  tages  ned  (loom  is  taken  down),  skal  man  kasta  et  eld-
kol  där-igenom  (burning  coal  through  it) ;  sä  far  man  snart  up  ny  väf.

68.  Lägges  eld  i  karet  fore  mäskningen,  sumar  ej  drikat  (if  fire  is  put  in
the  vessel  before  malting,  the  drink  will  not  turn  sour).

69.  Jul-afton  kastar  man  etifvu  rdghalme  etrd  i  taket  (rye-straws  into  the
roof).  Sä  mänga  strä  som  fastna,  sä  mänga  trafvar  rag  fär  man  det
äret.

70.  Tom  8<ik  mä  ej  bäraa  oknuien  (empty  sacks  not  to  be  carried  untied).
Gär  en  hafvande  bustru  där-efter,  sä  blir  hännes  foster  aldrig  matt  (baby
never  satisfied).  Men  räkar  en  ko  (but  if  a  cow  chance)  pa  den  olykliga
vagen,  sä  tar  (gets)  hon  sig  aldrig  kalf.

71.  Bä  man  lögar  sig,  sattes  etdl  i  vaJtnet  (in  bathing,  steel  is  put  in  the
water),  och  nacken  bindes  sälunda :  *  Näck,  näck,  stäl  i  strand  !  ^r  din  var
en  Btäl-tjuf,  mor  din  var  en  näl-tjuf ;  sä  längt  (so  far)  skal  du  vara  här«


1832  APPENDIX.

ifr&D,  som  detta  rop  höres  (as  this  cry  is  heard).*     Och  dl.  ropa  alle  med
iü}\-h&\B:*Eohaglar

72.  Om  körnet  väl  vil  niylla  sig  (monlds  well),  är  iekn  til  god  irs-Täxt
(year's-growth).  När  gödningen  om  vären  (manure  in  spring)  sk&ttaa  af
kälan,  hvaräst  den  legat  öfver  vinteren,  ka^tae  ndgre  hom  in,  braknin^&i.
Likesä,  när  man  sär  (sows),  bör  en  na/vo-mtilZ  läggaa  i  säd-slcorgen  (hand-
ful of  mould  be  put  in  the  seed-basket) ;  den  dagen  bÖr  ock  e;  iagas  tU
ifrän  gran-gärden.

73.  Om  P&ak-lördag  biases  (on  Easter  Saturday  they  blow^  med  en  lAng
lur  genom  fäbus-glnggen  (through  the  cowhouse  window) ;  «d  läaigi  Ijudet
dd  höre  (far  as  the  sound  is  heard),  sä  l&ngt  bort-blifva  o-djuren  (beasts  of
prey  keep  away)  det  äret.

74.  När  man  söker  efter  boskap  1  skogen  (seek  cattle  in  the  wood),  och
rdkar  en  kakling  (talg-oze)  pa  högra  banden  (and  a  fatling  turn  np  on  your
right),  skal  det  sökta  finna  igen.

75.  Släppes  seinen  (if  the  swine  are  let  out)  Lucii  dag,/d  de  ohyra  (un-
canny) ;  likesil  sagas  de  bli  aker-gangset  om  de  komma  ut  at  P&skafton.

*7Q.  Gär  man  vilse  (astray)  i  skogen,  skal  man  stul-vcmda  sig  (T&nda  nt
och  in  pa  klädema),  sä  komraer  roan  til  rätta  (see  G^rra.  852).

76  h,  Om  boskapen  Mikelsmäss-afton  höres  iysi  in  (are  driven  in  silently),
skal  ban  vara  rolig  (quiet)  i  fäbuset  heia  äret.

77.  När  kon  blir  Sprüngen  af  ozen,  bÖr  man  med  kohslef  sld  kenne  p>i
ryggen,  annars  bottnar  hon  (fär  ej  kaifven  frän  sig).

78.  När  askan  (ashes)  brinner  väl  ihop  (together),  görs  boskapen  väl  til
(blifver  dragtig,  breed  well).

79.  At  boskapen  skal  sjelfmant  (may  of  themselves)  komma  hem  ur
skogen,  mäste  sparas  af  FeUTiadags  mat  (some  of  Shrove  Tuesday's  food
saved  up),  at  ge  da  den  (against  when  they)  om  vären  först  slftppes  ut.

80.  Yid  första  bö-ladningen  (hay-loading)  sages,  at  da  drängen  (if  the
lad,  manservant)  först  fär  in  sin  ho-famn  (fathom  of  hay),  skal  ox-kalfvar
födas ;  men  tvärtom,  da  figan  (and  the  contrary  if  the  maid)  har  förträdet.

81.  Om  den,  som  byter  sig  til  en  hast  (if  he  who  acquires  a  horse)  eller
annat  kreatur,  later  det  äta  af  en  jordfast  sten,  sä  trifves  det  väl.  Nägre
här  af  svansen  bindas  ok  for  den  orsaken  uti  spiället.

82.  När  en  byter  sig  til  hemman  (homestead),  hör  litet  fyllning  tagss
ifrän  gamla  stall  och  fähus,  och  läggas  i  hvar  spiUa  elles  b&s  i  det  nya,  a:
kreaturen  mä  trifvas.  Äfvensä  sattes  en  stor  gran  i  fähus-dörren,  at  krea-
turen  mä  gä  der-igeuom  första  gangen.

83.  Alt  fullgjordt  arbete  korsas  öfver  (all  finished  work  has  the  sign  of
the  cross  made  over  it).

84.  Om  man  Fet-Tisdag  gäri  ränbaka  at  äka  pä  skida,  ok  inäktar  sil
utan  at  falla  kuU  (without  falling),  skal  det  äret  blifva  längt  lin  (the  flax  be
long).

85.  Oamet  far  ej  tvettas  i  nedan  (not  washed  downwards),  ty  di  blir  det
gräf.t.

86.  Om  alt  är  under  las  (lock  and  key)  Michelsmäss-afton,  skola  tjufvar
ej  göra  skada  (thieves  do  no  harm)  det  äret.

87.  Om  et  kom  eller  annat  finnes  under  boi'det  (if  some  grain  or  other  be


SUPERSTITIONS.      K.  1833

found  under  the  table),  d&  der  sopas  (swept)  Ny-&r8  morgen,  skal  blifra
ymnog  ärs-yext  (pretty  good  harvest).

88.  När  man  p&  de  3  första  sädes-dagar  (days  of  sowing)  satter  3  stickor
i  en  myr^sidk  (ant-hill),  far  man  se,  hyUket  Bade  bast  lyckas :  kryper  myran
ö/versi  pä  den  3,  blifver  den  lykligast.

89.  Ar  sjö-redskap  stalen,  bör  den  rökas  med  widen  eld  (if  sea-tackle
is  stolen,  it  should  be  smoked  with  need- fire).

90.  Yil  yörten  ej  rinna  genom  rasten,  bör  man  sätta  en  ull-aax  emellan
banden  och  rdstJearet

91.  När  brännvins-pannor  vera  i  brnk  (use),  troddes  (tt  was  believed)  at
bränningen  geek  bast  i  nedanet,  om  pannan  da  var  förfärdigad;  och  tvär-
torn  (and  v. v.).

92.  D&  8Vin  kommo  at  lukta  eller  smaJea  (smell  or  taste)  af  brännvins-
ämnet  (vapour),  skulle  heia  bränningen  förolyckas,  sä  framt  ej  en  hästfecJe
bldsa  (would  be  a  failure,  unless  a  horse  blew)  i  pannan  eller  piporna  (see
Germ.  820).

93.  Fäik-natten  ligga  i  strutnpor  (stockings)  yar  at  förekomma  (prevent)
skabb.

94.  När  hmen  ses  flygaoch  strika  öfver  isen,  skal  bli  manga  o-ägta  hai^
det  äret.    Den  som  daras  af  honom,  far  sära  händer  (see  119).

95.  Gropar  värtiden  p&  g&rdeu  (cracks  in  the  yard  in  springtime)  betyder
at  n&gon  snart  skal  do  i  huset.

96.  Om  n&gon  mistänkt  kom  (suspicious  person  came)  i  g&rden,  skulle
man,  at  undgä  (escape)  spädoms  säudningen,  äntingen  eld  henne  (either
beat  her)  sd  at  hloden  rann,  eller  Jcasta  eldhrandetteren  sädan  (such  a  one).

97.  När  bruden  är  klädd,  bor  hon  först  fä  se  brudgumen  i  ein  shrud,  at
äktenskapet  m&  blifva  kärligt.

98.  När  bruden  kommer  fr&n  kyrkan,  skal  hon  sjelf  spänna  if  ran  eller
sadla  af  (unharness  or  unsaddle)  hasten,  at  hon  matte  lindrigt  fä  bam.

99.  Äfven  bör  hon  da  först  gä  i  kok-stugan  (kitchen),  och  se  i  sap-vran,
at  hennes  föda  mä  bli  tilräkelig.

100.  Dansar  bruden  med  pengar  i  sJcona  (money  in  her  shoes),  kan  ingen
trolldom  bita  pä  henne.

101.  När  en  qvinna  lyktat  sin  väf  (has  finished  her  weaving),  och  tar  en
spjelka,  som  eutiti  väf ekelet,  rider  derpd  ut  genom  dön-en,  och  möter  en  man,
sä  skal  den  hafvande  hustrun,  hon  täuker  pä  (the  woman  she  thinks  of),
fä  et  gosB-bam ;  men  tvärtom  (and  v.  v.).

102.  Dricker  hafvande  hustrun  ur  breda  karl  (out  of  a  broad  vessel),  blir
barnet  bred-mynt  (wide-mouthed).

103.  Gär  hon  genom  et  hag-skott,  d.  ä.,  der  gärds-balken  slutas,  skal  hon
fä  fall-pjuka.

104.  Om  barnet  far  sof va  (go  to  sleep)  i  christnings-klädema,  skal  det
ej  bli  okynnigt  (not  be  stupid),  utan  godt.

105.  När  epjäü  om  qvällen  skjutes,  hafva  de  ock  fordom  haft  en  särdeles
(special)  sang:  *  Skjuter  jag  mitt  sqjall  sent  om  en  qväll  (late  of  an  even-
ing),   .    .    .    aldrig  (never)  skal  min  eld  slackas  ut.'

106.  Den  somyor«^  komme/r  frdn  kyrka  JuUdageji,  troe  (is  believed)  först
fä  sä  och  berga  (sow  and  reap),  samt  vara  främst  i  alt  arbeto  (all  work).


1834  APPENDIX.

107.  Tväi-vcUtn  ntsl&s  aldrig  efter  eol-gdngen  (washing-water  ia  never
emptied  after  sunset),  ntan  at  deri  stickes  eld  (without  fire  being  pal
therein)  i  stallet  for  spottning  om  dagen.

108.  D&  boskapen  forst  om  y&ren  utslappes  (let  out  in  spring),  ga  de
öfver  eld  i  et  rykande  fnöeke  eller  annat  ämne  (vapour).

109.  Man  bör  g&  bort,  utan  at  saga  tu,  eller  möta  nägon,  om  fiske  i  Tissa
sjöar  skal  lyckas  (if  fishing  in  oertain  lakes  is  to  prosper;  see  43).

110.  Ibland  (among)  the  storre  amuleter  &roho-trä  (dwelling- trees),  storm
Tiogar  och  berg,  uti  hvilka  man  tror  (believes)  underjordskt  foUc  bo;  ak  akta
de  sig  hogeligen,  at  icke  allenast  intet  hugga  (are  careful,  not  only  to  heir
nothing)  afalikt  bo'trä, — ^til  undvikanda  (avoidance)  af  o-lycka,  som  skedde
in  Foss-pastorat  for  2  &r  sen,  t&  en  bonde  inbillade  sig  (imagined)  at  han
fädt  sin  o-lycka,  for  thet  ban  allenast  högg  en  gren  (cut  a  branch)  a/  $Uki
ho'trä,  ok  giorde  knä-fall  ok  bad  om  förlätelse,  hvarföre  ban  blef  skrifutd
ok  mäste  plikta;— utan  ok  hälla  the  eärdeles  (but  also  keep  espec.)
Torsdage  qyäller  si  heliga,  at  the  hvarken  tora  hugga  eile  spinna,  at  icke
tomte  gtfJ)bM'ne  (lest  the  homesprites),  som  bo  i  eddanne  bo-trä  när  vid
garden,  mä  fortörnas  (be  ofiended)  och  vika  bort  med  all  välsignelse.

111.  The  lata  intet  gärna  (willingly)  n&gon  brud  fä  god  hast,  at  rida  p&,
ty  om  hon  intet  er  mö  (for  if  she  be  no  maid),  blir  ban  aldrig  god  therefter.

112.  T&  the  äro  faste  eller  vigde  (betrothed  or  married),  lagar  braden,  at
ingen  kommer  at  gä  emeüan  brudgummen  ok  Kenne,  ty  eliest  tro  the,  at  the
bli  snart  skilge  genom  döden  eller  eliest  (soon  parted  by  death  or  otherwise).

113.  När  bruden  kommer  til  bröllops  g&rdsens  ägor  (wedding  boose's
grounds),  komma  the  emot  brudgummen  ok  henne  med  br&nnevin,  ock
dricka  til  hela  foliet  (whole  party)  frän  kyrkan :  tä  hon  el&r  bägaren  med
dricken  bak  om  eig  (throws  the  cup  of  brandy  behind  her),  ed  langt  (&r)
hon  kan,  i  hopp,  at  hennes  ägo-delar  skola  blifva  fbrmerade  (increased).

114.  Mdten  (the  food)  star  pa  bordet^  natt  ok  dag,  s&  länge  bröllopet
pästär  (lasts),  i  then  tron,  at  brude-folken  aldrig  skal  fattas  (lack)  mat
eller  dricka.

115.  F&  the  bam,  sä  lata  the  intet  gema  sina  bam  döpas  p&  aamma  dsg
the  äro  födde  (born).  Hvarföre  the  dömma  (deem),  at  the  ba^n,  som  om
Sondag  födas  ok  döpas,  intet  skola  länge  lefva.  Men  (but)  lef va  the,  tror
man,  at  intet  troll  eller  spoke  (no  witch  or  bogie)  kan  giora  them  ekada.

116.  DöpeUe-vatnet,  ther  i  (baptism- water,  wherein)  bamen  dopte  äro,
söka  the  micket  efter,  thet  the  sedan,  om  the  prästen  o-vitterligit  knnna  fi.
(can  get  it  unknown  to  the  priest),  bruka  (use)  til  at  bota  siukdommar  med.

117.  Til  sina  siuka  (to  their  sick)  kalla  the  intet  gärna  prätien,  forräo
the  ligga  pä  thet  yttersta  (till  the  last  extremity);  ty  the  tro,  at  the
o-felbart  (without  fail)  do,  sedan  the  tagit  Herrans  helga  nattvard  (supper).

118.  Hnstroma  akta  noga  (watch  strictly)  sina  barn :  tils  the  bli  döpte,
ha  the  altid  etdl  ok  sy-ndler  (needles)  i  bwnete  kläder,  at  the  icke  af  spoken
skola  blifva  förby tte  (not  become  booty  of  bogies).

119.  Om  vären  äro  the  micket  rädde  törfogle-rop  (much  afraid  of  birds'
cries)  at  the  icke  skola  dd/ras  (fooled)  af  them,  särdeles  göken  (osp.  the
cuckoo) ;  therf  ore  gä  the  1  April  ok  Maji  aldrig  ut  fastandes  (never  go  oat
fasting).    See  128.


SUPERSTITIONS.      K.  1835

120.  Om  en  flicka,  enka  (widow),  eller  karl  blir  ddrad,  tror  then  samma
Big  bli  gift  (fancy  they'll  be  married)  thet  &ret;  om  gamla  ok  gifte  bli
ddrade,  befara  the  thet  äret  sv&ra  siakdommar  eller  olycks-fall.

121.  Somlige  bruka  sl&  sina  spada  (backward)  barn  3  ilag  med  riset  i
ändan,  inoan  mödrarna  g&  i  kyrkan,  eller  h&lla  sin  kyrko-g&ng  Cchurch-
iQg) ;  og  tÄ  mena  the,  barnen  skola  fä  godt  minne  (memory).

122.  Som  (as)  the  i  gamla  dagar  dyrkat  elden  (worshipped  fire),  sä  ha
the  okf  bar  s&  väl  som  an  i  Norriget,  brukat  dricka  eldborgs  skdL  ^  hvar
Xyndel-roässo  (ty  ^  kindel '  pa  gammal  Giötiska  betyder  lius) :  hvarföre,
när  the  skulle  dricka  eldborgs  ekdl,  täden  the  2  eiora  liua  ok  satte  pä  golf-
Tet  (lit  2  great  candles  and  set  them  on  the  floor),  emillan  hvilka  lades  et
hyende  (a  pillow  between),  pä  hvilket  alia  som  i  huset  Toro,  then  ene  efter
then  andre,  sknile  sätta  sig  ok  dricka  eldborgs  ekdl  med  dricka  i  en  trä-
skäl  (wooden  cnp).  Ok  när  the  ntdrnckit,  skulle  skälen  kaeta^  bak  öfver
hufvudei  i  golfvet,  Hvalfdes  tä  skälen  Öfver-ända  (if  the  cup  tipped  over),
trodde  the  at  then  skälen  kastat  (he  who  threw  it)  skulle  thet  äret  do;
men  stod  han  rati  upp,  Tore  tekn  at  ban  skulle  lefva.

123.  Innan  dager  har  hustrun  (housewife)  lagt  eld  i  bak-ugnen,  ok  tä
thet  bast  brunnit,  haft  tilreds  en  smör-klening  (buttered  slice)  pä  kake-
bröd,  jämte  en  skäl  öl  (ale).  Therpä  har  hon  kallat  alt  sitt  bus-folk  ihop
(together),  ok  stält  them  i  en  half-mane  mit  for  ugns-holet  (oven's  month).
Ok  tä  the  alia  under  knä-böjande  ok  lyck-onskan  (Luck-wishing)  atit  en  bit
af  smör-kleningen  ock  druckit  hvar  (each)  sin  drick  eldborgs- ekdl,  sen
hafva  the  kastat  thet  öfvriga  af  kleningen  ok  dricken  uti  elden,  i  tro
(belief)  at  thet  äret  bli  bevarade  för  elds-räda  (safe  from  fire-aocidents).

124.  Sä  ha  the  ok  brukat  iända  eld  pä  then  halmen  lik  ha  legcU  (burn  the
straw  a  corpse  had  lain  on),  ok  thet  strax  efter  liket  blif vit  burit  til  grafva,
tä  the  noga  sedt  pä  röken  (watched  the  smoke).  Om  ban  slagit  ned  pa
garden^  tä  the  säkert  trodt  (firmly  believed)  nägon  af  närmaste  släkten
(kindred)  pä  garden  skulle  snart  föija  efter.  Men  ther  han  gik  längt  i
högden  eUer  längden  up  ivädret  (air),  skulle  siukdomen  ok  döden  fijtta  sig
ther  ban  i  öster  eller  Tester,  som  röken  for  (£.  or  W.,  as  the  smoke  went).

125.  Pä  det  liket  icke  skulle  spöka  (that  the  dead  might  not  haunt),
brukade  the  at  strö  hö^frö  (strew  rye-seed)  pä  kyrko-vägen  ok  grafven,  tä
the  mänte  (then  they  thought)  at  Satan  ingen  makt  bade  (see  150).

b.  Denmark.'

126.  Det  er  skik  (custom),  at  pigerne  (girls)  paa  S.  Hans-dag  plukke  de
saa-kaldte  8.  Hans  urter  (worts,  herbs),  og  satte  dem  i  bjelkeme  (beams)
under  loftet,  for  at  (so  that)  de  deraf  kunne  slutte  sig  til  det  tilkommende
(guess  the  future).  Saaledes  pleie  de  (thus  they  are  wont)  at  satte  en  urt
for  sig  og  en  for  kiäresien  (sweetheart) ;  og  hvis  disse  da  voxe  sammen  (if
these  grow  together),  betyder  det  bryllup  (marriage).  Ogsaa  Bätte  de
saadanne  (such)  urter  i  bjelken  for  deres  paarörende  (relatives),  at  de  deraf
maa  kunne  vide  (know),  hvo  der  skal  have  langt  liv,  og  hvo  et  stakket

1  Drinking  the  fire*8  health ;  prevalent  esp.  in  Erokstad  and  Naf verstad.
9  From  ThuU'i  Danske  Folkesagn  S,  96—124.


1836  APPENDIX.

(and  who  a  short).  Voxer  urten  op,  i-mod  loftet  (toward  the  ceiling),  da  er
det  g:ode  tegn ;  men  voxer  den  nedad  (downwards),  da  befeyder  det  sygdom
og  död.

127.  Naar  piger  og  karle  yille  have  at  vide,  hvo  der  akal  skifte  (leave),
og  hvo  der  skal  blive  (stay)  i  haset,  da  koste  de  en  shoe  over  hovedei  mod
dören.  Falder  (falls)  da  skoen  saaledes,  at  holen  vender  (the  heel  points)
mod  dören,  da  betyder  det,  at  peraonen  skal  blive ;  men  vender  taaeu  mod
dören,  da  er  det  tegn  til,  at  han  skal  skifte.

128.  Seer  man  forste  gong  i  aaret  gjogen  (cuckoo),  medens  man  endnn
(still)  er  fastende,  da  hedder  det '  gjögen  gcunter  os ! '  (i  Fyen :  '  g.  daarer
OS ! ') ;  og  er  det  et  mandfolk,  skal  han  i  dette  aar  ikke  hitte  kreatnrer
(not  find  cattle) eller  andet  hvad  ban  monne  söge.  Erdet  en  pige,  maa  ban
vel  vogte  (gaard)  sig  for  nng-karlene,  at  ban  ikke  bliver  gantet  (fooled)  af
dem.  Er  det  garale  folk,  da  have  de  vel  aarsag  til  at  frygbe  (reason  to
fear)  for  sygdomme  (see  119).

129.  Naar  tjeneste-folk  (servants)  gaae  i  tjeneste,  da  maa  de  vel  give
agt  paa,  hvem  de  mode  (notice  whom  they  meet).  En  gaaende  betyd»
ondt,  men  ridende  godt.

130.  Naar  tyende  (servants)  fSrste-gang  see  starken  flyende,  da  betyder
det,  at  de  endnn  i  samme  aar  skulde  komme  at  skifbe.  Men  see  de  den
staaende,  da  skulle  de  blive  i  deres  tjeneste.

131.  Naar  noget  er  hort-stjaalet  (stolen),  dakan  man  lade  (let)*  en  emed
slaa  ölet  ud  paa  ty  ven  (knock  the  thief's  eye  oat).

132.  For  at  optage  en  tyv,  besynderligen  mellem  tyendet  (espec.  araong
servants),  bar  det  tilforn  väret  skik,  at  lade  soldet  lobe  (it  was  the  castom
to  let  the  sieve  run).  Husbonden  pleiede  (nsed)  da  at  tage  et  sold,  og  satte
det  i  li ge-vägt  |7aa  spidsen  afen  sax  (balance  it  on  the  points  of  scissorB)^
derpaa  at  opremse  navnene  (then  call  ont  the  names)  paa  alle  sine  folk,  og
vel  give  agt  paa  soldet,  som  ufeilbarligen  (anfailingly)  kom  i  hecageUe
(motion),  naar  tyvens  navn  nftvntes.

133.  Naar  noget  er  hort-stjaalet,  da  skal  man  henvende  sig  (resort)  til  de
saa-kaldte  kloge  folk,  hvilka  have  den  evne,  at  de  knnne  tvinge  ^force)
tyven  til  at  bringe  det  stjaalne  igjen.

134.  Fra  Jule-dag  til  Nyt-aars-dag  maa  man  ikke  satte  nogen  ting,  som
löher  rundtt  i  gang  (set  nothing  that  runs  round  a-going),  altsaa  hvarken
spinde  eller  vinde,

135.  Jule-nai  vid  midnats-tid  reiser  qp'dget  sig  pa  stalden  (the  cattle  rise
in  their  stalls).

136.  Naar  man  Jule-aften  sidder  til  bords,  og  Önsker  at  vide,  om  nogen
blandt  de  tilstede  värende  (wish  to  know  if  one  of  those  present)  skal  doe
indennäste  Jul,  da  kan*man  erfare  dette,  naar  man  gaaer  stiltiende  udenfor
og  kiger  ind  igjennem  en  vindues-rude  (go  silently  outside,  and  peep  in
through  a  pane).  Den  som  man  da  seer  at  sidde  ved  bordet  uden  hored
(without  head),  skal  doe  i  det  kommende  aar.

137.  Yed  gjeste-bud  (feast)  er  det  ikke  godt  at  sidde  tretten  (13)  till  bords,
thi  da  maa  en  af  dem  doe  forinden  (before)  aaret  er  omme.

138.  Om  Fredagen  skal  man  skjäre  (pare)  sine  nagle,  da  faaerman  lykke.
Naar  man  har  klippet  sine  nagle  eller  sit  haar,  da  maa  det  afklippede  enten


süPBBSTinoNB.    E.  1837

brandet  eller  graves  ned  (either  barnt  or  buried) ;  thi  dersom  onde  menne-
eker  faaer  fat  paa  aaadant  (for  if  bad  men  get  hold  of  sach),  da  kanne  de
dermed  forgjöre  (ando)  den  person,  aom  har  baaret  det.

139.  Hvo  der  finder  en  afhrudt  eye-naai  (broken  needle)  paa  galvet,
förend  ban  har  last  sin  morgen-bön,  faaer  enten  hag  eller  onde  ord  (blows
or  ill  words).

140.  Staaer  bvnene  CLohne  paa  et  lüg  (if  the  eyes  of  a  corpse  stand  open),
betyder  det,  at  snart  nogen  af  samme  fakmilie  skal  folge  ef cer.

141.  Kläder  og  linned-stykker,  som  have  tilhört  en  afdod  (belonged  to
one  dead),  henfalde  og  gaae  let  i-tn  (to  pieces),  altsom  legemet /orroodner
(rots)  i  graven.

142.  Man  maa  ei  give  et  lüg  ga/ag-JcLoavr  af  en  endnu  levende  (of  one  yet
living)  med  i  graven;  thi  altsom  klädeme  forraadne  i  jorden,  saa  vil  ogsaa
den,  som  har  baaret  (he  who  has  worn)  disse  kläder  tilfom,  tid  efter  anden
forsvinde  og  hentäres  (day  by  day  waste  away).

143.  Naar  talgen  (tallow),  som  sidder  omkring  et  brandende  ly$,  böier
sig  ligesom  en  hövle-spaan  (shaving),  da  betyder  det,  at  nogen  skal  doe,
og  er  det  sädvanligen  (asnally)  den,  til  hvem  hövle-spaanen  peger
(points).

144.  Naar  man  om  morgenen  finder  hlaa  pletter  (blue  spots)  p&  sit  legeme,
da  er  det  dödning-kneh,  og  har  det  slägtninges  eller  kjäre  venners  (kins-
man's or  dear  friend's)  när  fore-staaende  d5d  at  betyde.

145.  Naar  en  ekade  (magpie)  satter  p&  hnset,  da  kommer  der  fremmede
(strangers).

146.  Naar  man  förste-gang  om  aaret  hörer  gjögen  at  knkke  (cnokoo
sing),  da  skal  man  spörge :  '  Hvor  gammel  bliver  jeg  P '  eller  ogsaa :  '  Hvor
länge  skal  det  vare,  indtil  det  eller  det  skeer  (till  so  and  so  happens)  P '
Og  giv«r  den  da  svar  ved  at  knkke  (answer  by  cnckooing).

147.  Naar  man  finder  en  fire-Jelöver,  eller  en  tviUing'nöd  eller  en  ahiUvng,
skal  man  vel  gjemme  det  (save  it  up),  eftersom  sligt  bringer  lykke.

148.  Naar  man  vil  see  djäolen,  eller  have  med  ham  at  gjöre  (to  do),  skal
man  gaae  ire  gange  om  kirken,  og  tredje  gang  standse  ved  kirke-dören,  og
enten  raabe :  '  Kom  hernd ! '  eller  ogsaa  flöite  igjennem  nögle-hnllet.

149.  Naar  man  öosker  at  vide,  om  en  afdod  mand  har  i  levende  live
havt  med  fanden  at  bestille  (dealings  with  the  devil),  da  skal  man  hige
igjewnem  eeUtoiet  paa  de  heste  (peep  through  the  harness  of  the  horses),
som  träkke  bans  liig-vogn;  og  hvis  det  saa  har  väret  (if  it  was  so),  da  vil
man  see  en  eort  hund  at  sidde  bag  (black  dog  sit  at  the  back)  paa  vognen.

150.  Frygter  man  for  spögerie,  skal  man  ströe  hÖT'fröe  for  dören,  da  kan
intet  spögelse  komme  over  dör-tärsklen  (threshold).    See  125.

151.  Naar  man  slaaer  en  heste-ekoe  fast  paa  dör*trinnet  (nail  a  horse-shoe
on  the  doorstep),  da  kan  intet  spögerie  komme  derover.

152.  Naar  man  om  morgenen  kommer  alt-fortidligt  (too  early)  i  kiricen,
da  kan  det  vel  bände  (happen),  at  man  seer  de  döde,  hvorledes  de  »idde  i
etole-stademe.

153.  Troldene  tör  (dare)  ikke  nävne  Korsets  navn  (the  Cross's  name),
men  kalde  det  blot '  hid  og  did*  (merely  Hither^and-thither).

154.  Naar  man  er  paa  fiskerie,  da  maa  man  vel  vogte  sig  for  at  trotte

VOL.  IV.  O  0


1838  APPENDIX.

om  fangtien  (gaard  againBt  quarrelling  over  the  lake) ;  ej  heller  maa
man  wis-undB  (grudge)  andre,  thi  da  forsvinde  fiskene  straz  fra  stedet.

155.  Er  nogen  död,  aom  frygtes  for,  at  han  vil  gaae  igjen  (who  yon.  fear
will  come  again),  da  kan  man  hindre  sligt  ved  at  ka9ie  en  skaal-fuld  va%d
(capful  of  water)  efier  Uget,  naar  det  ud-bäres.

156.  Det  er  daarligt  at  skyde  (silly  to  shoot)  paa  et  spögelse,  thi  hugle%
farer  iübage  (ball  flies  back)  paa  den,  som  ud-skyder.  Men  lader  man
bössen  med  en  Bölv-lmap  (silver-button),  da  vil  den  visselig  traflk    *

157.  Den  tredje  nat  efler  begravelsen  pleie  de  döde  at  gaae  igjen.

''58.  En  fragtsommelig  (pregnant)  kone  maa  ei  gase  over  et  ated,  hvor
man  har  seihet  en  kniv,  thi  det  voider  en  sväar  forlösning.  Men  naar
man  i  forveien  spytter  tre  gange  paa  stedet,  da  har  det  ei  £are  (no
danger).

159.  Naar  et  bam  veies  strax,  som  det  er  födt  (weighed  as  soon  as  bom),
da  vil  det  siden  ei  trives  (not  thrive  afterwards).

160.  Naar  man  löfter  et  bam  ud  af  et  vindue,  og  tager  det  ind  igen
gjennem  et  andet  (in  again  through  another),  da  vil  det  aldrig  aiden  bare
större  (never  grow  bigger).

161.  Naar  en  harseUqvvnde  doer  uden  at  vare  bleven  forlöst  (dies  with-
out being  delivered),  da  vil  han  fyrretyve  uger  deref ter  föde  (give  birth
40  weeks  after)  i  graven.  Derfor  gives  hende  tuMl,  traad,  sax  (needle,
thread,  scissors)  og  andet  sligt  med,  at  hun  selv  klm  sye  böme-töiet  (sew
the  baby-linen).

162.  Det  er  et  godt  middel  imod  tand-pine  (remedy  for  toothache),
först  at  tage  en  hylde-pmd  i  munden  (elder-twig  in  mouth),  og  der-näst
stikke  den  i  vaggen  (wi^ll)  med  de  ord :  '  Yiig  bort,  du  onde  aand  (go,  evil
spirit) ! '  Saa  er  ogsaa  gavnligt  mod  kold-feber  (good  for  agae),  at  stikke
en  hylde^nd  i  jorden,  dog  uden  at  male  (without  speaking)  et  ord  der-ved.
Da  holder  feberen  sig  til  hyldepinden,  og  hanger  sig  ved  den,  der  n-beldig-

viis  först  kommer  til  stedet. In  a  MS.  of  1722  :  Paganismo  ortnm  debet

superstitiOi  sanibuewn  non  esse  ezscindendam,  nisi  priua  rogata  per-
missione,  his  verbis :  '  MiUer  aamhuci,  mater  aamhudt  permitte  mihi  tnam
caedere  silvam ! '  Yidemus  quoque  rustioos  orsuros  caesionem  arboris
ter  exepuere,  quasi  hao  exoretione  vettae  aliosque  latentes  ad  radioem  axbons
noxios  genios  abaoturos*  Passim  etiam  obvium,  quod  bacillum  vel  fractnri
vel  dissecturi,  partem  abruptam  abscissamve  non  projiciant  in  terram,
nisi  ter  in  extremitatem  fragminis  exspuerint,  cujus  quidem  rei  aliam
non  nomnt  rationem,  quam  cnrasse,  ne  quid  sibi  a  vettis  nooeator.

163.  Af  bryst-benet  (breast-bone)  paa  Mortene-gaase»  kan  man  see
hvorledes  (how)  vinteren  vil  blive.  Det  hvide  deri  (white  therein)  er  tegn
paa  snee,  men  det  brune  paa  meget  stärk  knlde.  Og  er  det  at  m&rke,
at  den  forreste  deel  ved  halsen  spaaex*  (part  by  the  neck  foretells)  om
vinteren /or  Juul,  men  den  bageste  (hindmost)  om  vinteren  efler  Junl.

164.  Oft  händer  det,  at  söefolk  i  rum  söe  see  et  ekib  (ship),  i  alle  maader
som  et  andet,  at  seile  forbi  (sail  past),  og  i  samme  stund  forsvinde  (vanish)
for  deres  aasyn.  Det  er  dodning^eeileren,  som  varsler  om  (annonncea),  at
et  skib  snariigen  (soon)  skal  gaae  under  paa  det  samme  sted.

165.  Naar  man  taler  om  phadelige  dyr  (noxious  beasts),  da  raaa  man  ikke


SUPEBSTITIONS.      K,  L.  1839

nävae  deres  rette  navn,  men  omacrive  det  (periplirase  it),  og  saaledes  kalde
rotteme  (call  rate) '  de  lang-rampede,'  masene  (mice) '  de  smaa  graa.'

1^.  Naar  man  Til  vide  sin  tilkommende  lykke  i  det  nye  aar,  da  skal
man  tage  et  hröd,  en  kniv,  og  en  ekiUvng,  og  dermed  gaae  nd  at  see  maanen,
naar  nyet  iändes  (moon  newly  lighted).  Og  naar  man  da  slaaer  op  (opens)
i  en  Psalme-bog,  vil  man  af  dene  indhold  knnne  slatte  sig  til  det  yigtigste
(gnesB  the  weightiest).

167.  Naar  en  pige  yed  midnat  nd-spänder  mellemjire  kieppe  den  hinde,  i
hyilken  föllet  er,  naar  det  kastes  (stretch  betw.  four  sticks  the  afterbirth  of
a  foal),  og  derpaa  nögen  kryher  det'igjennem  (creep  naked  through  it),  da
▼il  hnn  kunne  föde  born  uden  smerte  (without  pain).  Men  alle  de  drenge
(boys)  hnn  nndfanger,  blive  vär-ulve,  og  alle  de  piger  blive  marer}

168.  ShjeT'Toredag-aflen  (Maundy  Thnrsd.)  kaster  bonden  oxer  ogjern-
hüer  paa  de  he$aaeds  ogre  (axes  and  iron  bolts  on  the  sown  fields),  og
fllster  staal  paa  alle  döre,  at  ikke  gamle  kjerlinger  (lest  old  witches)  skulle
skade  ham.

169.  Naar  en  kommer  til  kirke  Shjer-Torsdag,  og  haver  da,  uden  selv  at
vide  det,  et  kimeke'äg  (chicken's  egg),  det  er,  det  forste  äg  en  hone  lägger,
paa  sig ;  saa  vil  ban  see  alle  de  qvinder,  der  ere  hexe,  at  gaae  lige-som  med
Bie-hötter  eller  malke-hötter  paa  hovtdet  (see  Germ.  788).


L.    FRENCH.»

1.  Le  24  d^mbre,  vers  les  six  heures  du  soir,  chaque  famille  met  a  son
feu  une  Enorme  bAche  appel^  Bouche  de  noeL  On  defend  aux  enfans  de
s'y  asseoir,  parceque,  leur  dit  on,  ila  y  attraperaient  le  gale.  Notez,
qu'il  est  d'usage  dans  presqne  tons  les  pays,  de  mettre  le  bois  an  foyer
dftns  tonte  sa  longueur,  qui  est  d'environ  4  pieds,  et  de  I'y  faire  brdler  par
nn  bout.    See  28.

2.  Le  jour  de  la  fdte  de  la  Trinity  quelques  personnes  vont  de  grand
matin  dans  la  campagne,  pour  y  voir  lever  trois  eoleils  ä  lafois,

3.  Le  24  Juin,  jour  de  Saint  Jean,  quelques  personnes  vont  aussi  sur
une  montagne  ^lev^e,  et  y  attendent  le  lever  dn  soleil,  pour  le  voir  danser.

4.  Les  herbes  et  plantes  m^dicinales,  cueillies  la  veille  de  la  Saint  Jean,
passent  pour  avoir  plus  de  vertus,  surtout  centre  certains  maux.

5.  La  coupe  de  cheveux  ne  doit  se  faire  que  lorsque  la  June  est  nowoeUe,
sans  cela  les  cheveux  ne  pourraient  plus  pousser.  On  ne  doit  point  jeter
la  reooupe  des  cheveux  sur  la  voie  publique,  les  soroiers  pourraient  y  jeter
nn  sort.

6.  Les  linges,  qui  ont  servi  an  pansement  des  maux,  ne  doivent  dtre  ni
brM^s  ni  jet^s  daos  la  rue,  pour  les  mSmes  motifs.

*  *  Om  bruden  kryper  genom  en  sela  (horse-oollar),  f&r  hon  bam  utan  möda,  hvU-
ke  dock  skola  blifva  maror.*    Westerdahl's  Beskrinung  om  Svenska  seder,  p.  28.

3  From  M6moire8  de  I'aoaddmie  oeltique :  Nos.  1—10  (Commeroy  en  Lorraine)  3,
441—450  and  4,  83-4.  Nos.  11—13  (Sologne)  4,  93-4.  Nos.  14—20  (Ghartres)  4,
242.  Nos.  21-2  (Gironde)  4,  268.  Nos.  23—28  (Bonneval)  4,  428.  Nos.  29—32
(Pyr^n^es)  5,  386—390.  Nos.  33—35  (Bonnevai)  M6m  dee  antiquaires  1,  289—
242.


1840  APPENDIX.

7.  Si  qaelqa'an  menrt,  on  yoile  leg  glaoes  de  sa  chambre.

8.  Loraqn'ane  peraonne  est  gravement  malade,  on  a  soin  d'observer,  ai
qnelqae  hQ>ou,  chouette  on  ehathtuml  yiennent  voltiger  aatoor  de  lliabi-
tation.

9.  L'hirondeUe  est  nn  oisean  d'henreux  presage;  anssi  ne  la  d^range-t-
on  jamais,  D^tmire  son  nid,  o*est  d^tmire  on  att^nner  lea  heareoBes
destin^,  qn'on  y  attache  en  fayenr  de  la  maison.

10.  L'araignee  est  nn  signe  de  bonhenr,  et  annonoe  particnli^rament
de  I'argent  ponr  la  peraonne,  snr  laqnelle  eile  est  tronv^.  Plus  nne
arable  est  garnie  de  toiles  d'araign^,  pins  eile  est  digne  de  regards  de  la
Providence.

11.  Si  nne  jewne  taure  »*egare  la  premiere  fois  qn'eUe  est  mise  wiz
obamps,  les  Solonaises  vont  jeter  denx  liards  dans  la  sermre»  se  mettent
a  genoax,  et  disent  tont  bant  cinq  pater  et  cinq  ave,  qn'elles  addressent  an
bon  saint  Hubert ;  oette  pri^re  fidte,  elles  sont  bien  sAres  qne  les  kmps
respecteront  la  tanre,  Mt-elle  an  milieu  d'enx,  et  qn'ils  la  rameneront  m^me
a  la  bergerie.

12.  Dans  la  nwU  dn  jour  de  noel^  jnsqn'ä  midi,  les  cbevanx,  les  Taches,
les  bmafs,  les  tanreaux,  les  ftnes  pcurletU,  Ces  animanx  se  plaignent  on
s'applandissent  dn  traitement  de  lenra  maitres.  Ce  don  de  la  parole  leor
arriye  senlement  avant  minnit  sonnant,  et  finit  h  midi  dn  jonr  de  noel,  on
p1nt6t  si  la  peraonne,  qui  les  soigne,  est  conpable  d'on  p^h^  morteL

13.  Le  mdme  jonrde  noel  il  ne  fant  pas  mettre  paltre  les  b^tes  h  come
avant  midi,  parceque  de  suite  eUee  se  hcAtraienit  et  se  blessendent  eat*
tainement.

14.  La  Yeille  de  noel,  pendant  la  g^nMogie  qui  se  chante  ik  la  mease  da
minuit,  tons  les  trhore  eaehie  s'ouvrent.

15.  Dans  la  plupart  des  ^glises  de  campagne  on  fait  encore  aujonrd'hm
des  offrandes  de  la  premiere  gerbe  defroment  coup^  dans  nn  champ.  Ges
premioes  de  la  moisson  ne  re90tvent  d'autres  omements  qu'en  paUle  plos
on  moins  fa^onn^  Oette  gerbe  est  presque  tonjoura  surmont^  d*nne
croix  aussi  en  paille.

16.  L'usage  des  hrandone  est  consaor^  partout  les  premier  et  second
di manche  de  cardme.  On  va  brdler  dans  les  champs,  on  snr  les  chemins
vioinaux,  des  flambeaux  formes  de  paille  en  chantant :  *  BrandonSj  brdlei
pour  lea  filles  h  marier  ! '  ^

17.  Quaüd  le  mari  met  Vanneau  an  doigt  de  la  mari^  il  ne  le  porte  que
jasqu'd  la  second  jointure.  Oelle-ci  doit  done  vite  le  pousser  a  la
iroisiemef  afin  d'emp^her  le  malefioe  des  sorciers,  qui  n'ont  que  cet
instant  du  passage  de  Tannean,  pour  I'op^rer  la  noudre  de  I'aiguiUette.

18.  Les  marina  entendent  la  messe  h  genonx.  A  r^yangile  on  a  soin  de
remarquer  leqnel  des  deux  ^poux  se  Uve  le  premier  ;  on  en  angnre  qne  c^est
lui  qui  sera  le  maStre.

19.  Au  moment  qu'on  montre  le  bon  dieu  de  la  messe,  oeux  qui  se  trou-
vent  places  anpr^s  des  nmri^s,  leur  frappeni  trots  petite  conps  sous  les

^  Gonf.  M6m.  des  antiquairea  1,  237 :  '  Brandelons,  brftlez  par  oea  Tignea,  par  oet
bids ;  brandelons,  brülez  pour  oes  fiUea  k  marier.'  Pais  on  s'terie ;  *  Mais  les
vieilles  n'en  aoront  pas.*


SUPEB8TITI0NS.      L.  1841

tdUms,  a^eo  le  manche  d'an  couteaa,  pour  empdoher  qa'ils  ne  deviennent
jalonx.

20.  En  sortant  de  r^glise,  on  conduit  la  mari^  en  face  d'ane  image  de
la  Tierge,  aapres  de  laquelle  est  attach^  ane  qoenomlle  garnie  de  chanvre,
on  la  loi  präsente ;  eile  file  deux  ou  troie  aiguiUeee,  et  I'emporte  chez  eile;
eile  fait  filer  on  file  le  reste,  et  rend  ensuite,  a/oee  Veeheveau  de  fil  qui  en
est  prorenu,  cette  m6me  quenoaille,  qa'eile  a  ea  soin  de  gamir  d'aatre
chanvre.

21.  Un  enfant  m&le  qui  rCa  foa  cormu  eon  phre^  a  la  yertu  de  fondre  lee
loupe«,  en  les  touchant  pendant  trois  matinees  de  suite,  ^tant  ä  jenn  et
recitant  quelques  priores.

22.  Le  cinqui^me  des  enfons  miles  venus  an  monde  et  de  suite,  guerü  Us
mau»  de  rate  par  le  simple  attouchement  r^p^t^

23.  A-t-on  chez  soi  une  poule,  qui  ehcunte  eomme  le  cog,  on  se  d^pSohe  de
la  tuer  ou  de  la  vendre,  dans  la  crainte  qu'elle  n'attire  quelque  malheur  sur
la  maison.

24.  Eet-on  en  Toyage,  si  Ton  rencontre  dans  son  chemin  des  pie»  par
nombre  impair,  c'est  malheur.

25.  Quand  on  veut  savoir,  quel  mari  ou  quelle  femme  on  ^pousera,  il  est
d'usage  de  se  leyer,  le  premier  jour  de  mars,  au  coup  de  minuit  et  pendanb
que  Pheure  sonne.  On  marche  trois  pas  en  avant  de  son  lit,  en  pronon9ant
oes  paroles :  'Bon  jour  Mar»,  de  Mars  en  Mars,  fais  moi  voir  en  mon  dor-
mant la  femme  que  j'aurai  en  mon  viyant !  *  On  reyient  h  son  lit  en  mar-
chant  en  arri^re ;  on  se  recouohe,  on  s'endort,  on  reve,  et  Thomme  ou  la
femme  qui  apparaissent  alors,  sent  le  f utur  ^pouz.

26.  Ceux  qui  possklent  de  mouehe»  ä  mid,  out  grand  soin,  lorsqu'il
meurt  quelqu'un  dans  la  maison,  d'aller  d'abord  annonoer  ä  chaque  rucKe
r^y^nement  fAcheuz,  qui  yient  d'ayoir  lieu,  et  d'y  attaoher  ensuite  un  petit
moreeau  ff  Stoffe  noire.    Sans  oela.  Us  p^riraient  bient6t.

27.  La  yeille  de  Saint  Jean  nn/eu  dejoie  est  allum^  dans  un  carrefour.
Au  milieu  du  feu  on  place  une  longue  perohe,  qui  le  domine,  et  qui  est
garnie  de  feuillages  et  de  fleurs.  Le  derg^  se  rend  en  grande  pompe  au
lien  de  la  c^r^monie,  allume  le  feu,  entonne  quelques  chants,  et  se  retire ;
ensuite  les  assistants  s'en  emparent,  aoMtent  par  dessu»,  et  emportent  chez
euz  quelques  tieona,  qu'ils  placent  sur  le  del  de  leur  lit,  comme  un  pr^
seryatif  centre  la  foudre.

28.  La  yeille  de  noel,  ayant  la  messe  de  minuit,  on  place  dans  la  chemin^
de  I'appartement  le  plus  habits  une  htiche,  la  plus  grosse,  que  Ton  puisse
rencontrer,  et  qui  soit  dans  le  cas  de  r^sister  pendant  trois  jours  dans  la
foyer ;  c'est  ce  qui  lui  a  fait  donner  la  nom  de  trißU,  tr^fou^  trois  feux
(seel).

29.  Une  jeune  fille  qui  desire  sayoir  son  futur  ^poux,  se  leye  ayant  le  jour
le  premier  mai.  Elle  prend  un  seau,  qu'elle  nettoie  ayec  une  brauche  de
romarin,  et  s'achemine  yers  quelque  fontaine  solitaire.  Bendue  Ik,  eile  se
met  k  genoux  sur  le  bord  de  la  fontaine,  fait  une  pri^re,  plante  sa  brauche
de  romarin  dans  un  buisson  yoisin,  et  remplie  son  seau  de  I'eau  de  la  fon-
taine. Elle  attend  alors  le  lever  du  aoleiL  Anssit^t  qu'il  commence  k
paraitre  sur  I'horizon,  eile  s'approche  du  seaa,  en  trouble  Veau  avec  la  main


1842  APPENDIX.

gauehe,  et  dit  oes  trois  mots :  '  Ami  rabi  vohi ! '  Bile  doit  r^p^ter  neuffoii
)a  memo  chose,  et  avoir  fini  lorsqne  le  soleil  parait  en  entier.  Ale»,  si
eile  u'a  ^t^  vne  par  personne,  ni  en  Tenant  a  la  fontaine,  ni  pendant  lea
c^r^moniee  qa'elle  j  a  faites,  eile  voit  aikfond  du  $eau  la  figure  de  oelni*
qn'elle  doit  ^poaser.

30.  Un  jeune  homme,  poar  oonnaitre  la  coalenr  de  cheveox  de  celle»  qoi
doit  etre  sa  femme,  fait,  la  yeille  de  S.  Jean,  troitfoU  le  towr  dufeu  dejaie,
prend  an  tUon  enflammS,  le  laiase  ^teindre  dans  sa  main  gancbe,  et  le  soir,
arant  de  se  oouoher,  le  met  sons  le  chevet  de  son  lit,  enyeloppe  d*ane
chemise  qa'il  a  port^  troia  jours.  II  hnt  que  toot  cela  se  fasse  las  yenx
dos.  Le  lendemain  matin,  au  lever  du  soleil,  le  jeune  homme  trouve,
autour  de  son  tison,  des  cheveuz  de  la  oouleur  que  doivent  avoir  oenx  de
sa  future  dponse.

31.  II  est  d'usage  de  se  marier  äjeun.  On  croit,  que  oenx  qui  y  man-
queraient,  sans  des  motifs  bien  puissants,  n'anraient  que  des  enfants
mueU,

32.  Les  ^poux  ont  grand  sein,  le  jour  de  leur  mariage,  de  mettre  du  $el
dans  leur  poche  gauche  avant  de  se  präsenter  k  Teglise.  Ge  sei  empöche
le  ncsnd  de  raiguilletie.

33.  La  ro9ee  de  la  nuit  de  la  8,  Jean  gu^rit  la  gale,  et  le  premier  eeau  tire
d'un  puits  ä  Pinstant  du  minuit,  qui  commence  le  jour  de  S.  Jean,  gu^rit
de  la  fievre.  Pres  de  Nogent-le*Botrou  il  y  a  nnefontaine  c^l^bre  pour  sa.
vertu  curatrioe  pendant  toute  la  nuit,  veille  de  S.  Jean.  Hommes  et
femmes  entrent  dans  ses  eaux  et  s'y  lavent :  nulle  id^e  d'ind^cenoe  ne
trouble  la  c^r^monie.

34.  Le/eu  de  8.  Jean  ne  brüle  pas,  on  pent  en  prendre  ä  la  main  lea
tisons  enfiamm^s.

35.  Pour  se  d^fendre  de  la  puissance  des  bergers  sorciera,  on  met  dn  eel
dans  sa  poche,  et  en  passant  devant  le  berger  on  dit  tout  bas :  *  Berger
sorcier,  je  ne  te  orains  ni  te  redoute.'

M.     ESTHONIAN.^

1.  Marriages  take  pliH»  at  the  time  of  new  moon^

2.  If  the  suitor  rides  to  the  house  where  he  goes  a- wooing,  he  is  careful
not  to  take  a  mare,  else  there  would  be  only  daughter»  bom  of  the  mar-
riage.

3.  When  the  bride  is  betrothed,  a  red  string  is  tied  round  her  body ;  and
when  the  wedding  is  completed,  she  mast  so  inflate  herself  as  to  hrenk  the
string.    A  sure  preventive  of  difficult  confinements.

4.  In  many  places  the  young  couple  rwn  out  of  church,  hand  in  hand,  at
the  top  of  their  speed,  to  secure  rapid  progress  in  their  basiness.

5.  When  the  bride  is  fetched,  if  she  falls  on  the  way,  it  betokens  the
early  death  of  her  first  three  or  four  children.

6.  If  they  see  the  suitor  arrive  on  horseback,  they  hasten  to  undo  hi»
saddte-girth.    This  also  tends  to  facilitate  childbirth  in  the  future  wife.

^  Etwas  über  die  Ehaten  (Leipz.  1788,  pp.  55-88).  Nos.  98-99  firom  HiqMra
Topogr.  naohr.  von  Lief-  und  £hst-land  (Riga  1777.    2, 184—145).


suPBBSTmoNS.    L,  M.  1843

7.  The  bride  must  not  oome  oat  by  a  gale  through  which  a  corpse  has
lately  been  carried  out.

8.  When  the  bride  is  fetched  in,  she  mast  wear  no  chains  or  bells,  bat
be  led  in  in  solemn  suence ;  else  she  will  have  restless  noisy  children.

9.  Directly  the  wedding  is  over,  the  strongest  of  the  relations  or  gaests
lifle  the  hide  and  bridegroom  aloft,  thereby  to  heighten  their  married
bliss.^

10.  As  soon  as  the  wedded  pair  have  stept  into  their  honse,  a  watchman
mast  stay  a  good  while  by  the  hotuehold  fire,  that  no  stranger  may  come
near  it,  and  contrive  secret  sorcery  to  their  hart.

11.  The  moment  the  bride  enters,  she  is  led  through  every  part  of  the
honse,  parlours,  bedrooms,  bathrooms,  stables  and  gardens ;  and  is  boond,
as  she  holds  her  husband's  happiness  dear,  to  drop  ribbons  or  m^mey  into
each  part,  even  into  the  well  and  the  ^6.

12.  When  she  sits  down,  they  set  a  male  child  in  her  lap,  that  she  may
have  the  power  to  bear  men-children.

13.  In  some  parts  they  used,  during  the  wedding  feast,  to  stick  two
moords  into  the  waü  over  where  the  bride  and  bridegroom  sat;  the  one
whose  sword  kept  up  the  longest  vibralion,  would  live  longest.

14  At  the  meal  they  are  wilfully  wasteful  of  the  beer,  and  spill  it  about,
80  that  superfluity  may  house  with  the  happy  pair.

15.  Whichever  of  the  ^ir  first  goes  to  sleep,  dies  first.

16.  Bain  on  the  wedding-day  means  frequent  weeping  for  the  wife.

17.  At  the  marriage-feast  they  set  two  candles  before  bride  and  bride^
groom;  the  one  whose  light  goes  out  first  of  iuielf,  is  sure  to  die  first.

18.  The  bridegroom's  attendant  outs  a  small  piece  off  a  whole  loaf,
butters  it,  and  puts  it  in  the  bridals  mouth.  Her  children  will  then  have  a
small  smooth  mouth.

19.  In  bringing  the  young  wife  into  the  husband^s  house,  they  puU  down
the  fence  on  both  sides  of  the  entrance,  that  she  may  drive  in  swiftly
without  hindrance.  Then  her  confinements  will  come  off  quickly  and
easily.

20.  Women  with  child  are  careful,  in  lighting  a  fire,  not  to  throw  the
wood  in  against  the  branches,  else  they  would  have  a  difficult  labour.

21.  A  difficult  labour  is  listened  by  the  husband  striding  over  the
wife.

22.  No  pregnant  woman  will  sit  on  a  water-vessel,  lest  she  have  too  many
daughters,  or  the  fruit  be  lost  in  the  water.

23.  If  two  pregnant  women  sneeze  together,  they  will  have  dcwghters;  if
their  husbands  sneeze,  sons,

24  In  beginning  a  loaf,  a  pregnant  woman  cuts  a  very  small  slice  first,
that  her  children  may  have  pretty  little  mouths.

25.  To  change  the  bastels  (bast-shoes)  once  a  week  in  the  middle  of
pregnancy,  and  to  throw  salt  three  times  behind  oneself  shortly  before  con-
finement, will  ease  the  labour.

26.  None  shall  step  over  the  feet  of  a  pregnant  woman,  lest  her  children
get  crooked  misshapen  feet.

1  BA.  433.


1844  APPENDIX.

27.  A  newborn  babe  is  not  placed  at  once  in  the  mother's  arms,  bat  first
laid  at  her  feet,  that  her  Ufl  foot  vmaj  touch  Ua  mouth  ;  then  it  will  not  be
rebellions.

28.  A  newborn  baby's  haJtih^ater  is  emptied  on  the  most  oat-of-the-
way  spot,  lest^  if  many  trample  on  it,  the  child  be  down-trodden  and
despised.

29.  The  midwife  with  the  baby  shall,  soon  after  the  birth,  take  the
wppermoBt  seat  at  table ;  it  will  then  be  more  highly  esteemed.

30.  Never  pass  anything  over  the  hahy*8  head,  or  it  won't  grow ;  if  such
a  thing  happens,  pnll  the  hair  on  the  top  of  its  head  apwarda.

31.  What  a  heby  firtt  dutches  at,  shows  what  will  be  its  fayonrite  ooca-
pation.

32.  The  first  time  a  babe  is  laid  in  the  cradle,  they  put  a  kntfe,  a  erac»-
key,  and  some  red  yam  beside  it ;  these  defend  it  from  sorcery.

83.  One  bom  on  one  of  the  last  days  of  a  week,  will  marry  late  or  never.

34.  If  a  married  woman  has  hoys  only,  it  is  a  sign  of  war ;  if  girU  only,
of  peace.

35.  When  a  priest  visits  a  sick  man,  they  watch  the  gait  of  his  horae  as
he  draws  near.  If  the  horse  hangs  its  head,  they  despair  of  the  patiait's
recovery.*

36.  A  funeral  must  on  no  account  cross  a  cornfield,  even  when  it  lies
fallow.

37.  By  a  corpse  they  lay  a  brush,  money,  needles,  and  thread.  Some
brash  the  dead  man's  head,  and  lay  the  brush  beside  him,  to  bring  him
peace.

38.  Some  drive  a  naü  into  the  threshold  every  time  a  person  dies  in  the
house.

39.  The  vehide  that  has  carried  a  corpse  is  not  admitted  within  (he  gate
at  once,  bat  left  ontside  for  a  time;  else  more  of  the  family  would  follow.

40.  The  straw  on  which  the  sick  man  died,  is  all  carried  out  and  bnmt :
hy  footprints  in  the  ashes  they  can  tell  if  the  next  loss  will  be  of  man  or
beast.

41.  If  one  dies  At  new  moon,  he  takes  all  the  luck  with  him;  if  in  fi^rrmo-
tide,  he  is  buried  as  plainly  as  possible.

42.  On  All  Souls  day  every  family  makes  a  feast  for  its  departed  mem-
bers, and  visits  the  churchyards.  In  some  parts  they  set  food  for  the
deceased  on  the  floor  of  a  particular  room.  Late  in  the  evening  the  master
of  the  house  went  in  with  a  pergel  (a  lighted  brand  split  down  its  length),
and  invited  the  deceased  by  name  to  eat.  After  a  time,  when  he  thonght
the  souls  had  made  a  hearty  meal,  he,  while  beating  his  pergel  to  pieces  em
the  threshold,  bade  them  go  back  to  their  places,  and  not  trample  the  lye
on  their  way.  If  there  was  a  bad  crop,  it  was  ascribed  to  the  souls  having
been  entertained  too  scantily.'

43.  About  the  Judgment-day  the  Esthonian  has  the  notion  that  all  the
churches  wiU  then  topple  over  towards  the  North»  He  cannot  bear  the
thought  of  being  buried  in  that  part  of  the  charchjrard.

'  Conf.  Hupers  Topogr.  Naohr.  2, 146.        «  More  fully  in  Thorn.  Hum  1,  49.


SÜPEBSTITIOKS.      M.  1845

44.  Till  the  baby  is  baptized,  it  has  a  h/mnbook  laid  under  its  head,  and
afire  kept  up  beside  it,  to  ban  the  deyil,  and  keep  him  from  changing  the
child.

45.  Daring  baptism  they  fix  their  eyes  on  the  baby,  to  see  if  it  holds  %U
head  i«p  or  leteU  sink  down.  If  up,  it. will  haye  a  long  life;  if  down,  a
short.

46.  Sometimes,  during  the  senrioe,  the  father  rime  rapidly  roimd  the
ehureh,  that  the  child  may  be  gifted  with  fleetness  of  foot.

47.  If  by  bribing  the  sexton  they  can  get  the  haptiemal  water,  they
dash  it  ae  high  as  they  can  up  the  wall  The  child  wül  then  attain  high
honours.

48.  Daring  baptism  you  must  not  talk,  or  the  child  will  talk  in  its  sleep.

49.  Don't  have  a  baptism  directly  after  a  burial,  or  the  child  will  follow
the  dead.

50.  Leave  the  chrisom  baby's  hands  free;  it  will  then  be  quick  and  in-
dustrious.

51.  During  baptism  a  sponsor  shall  not  look  about  him,  or  the  child  will
see  ghosts.

52.  Many  tie  rings  to  the  swaihings  of  a  chrisom  boy,  to  make  him  marry
early.

53.  They  do  not  like  a  child  to  be  baptized  on  another  child's  birthday.

54.  In  the  chrisom  child's  clothes  some  insert,  unobsenred,  money,  bread,
and  garlic ;  then  the  first  two  will  never  fail  him,  and  the  last  protects
from  sorcery.

55.  A  chrisom  chUd^s  sleeping  shows  it  will  not  live  long.

56.  When  none  bwt  girls  are  brought  to  the  font,  they  will  go  unmarried
long,  perhaps  always.

57.  No  sponsor  eats  flesh  just  before  the  christening,  else  the  baby  will
have  toothache.

58.  Parents  who  lose  their  first  children  call  the  next  ones  Adam  and
Eve,  and  they  live  (see  Germ.  26).

59.  They  will  have  no  christening  on  a  Friday ;  on  Thwrsday  it  has  more
power.

60.  A  child  christened  on  a  Friday  grows  up  a  rogue,  and  comes  under
the  hangman's  hands.

61.  Thunder  comes  of  God  cha^ng  the  devil,  overtaking  him,  and  dashing
him  down.  During  the  storm  they  make  doors  and  windows  fast,  lest  the
hunted  devil  take  refuge  in  their  house,  and,  as  God  is  sure  to  catch  him
up,  the  house  be  thunderstruck.

62.  Some  during  a  storm  fasten  two  knives  outside  a  window,  to  prevent
being  struck.

63.  Many,  the  first  time  they  hear  thunder  in  the  year,  take  a  stone,  tap
their  forehead  with  it  three  times,  and  are  free  from  headache  for  a  year.

64.  Anything  struck  by  lightning  they  muse  over  grKvelj,  especially
certain  riven  rocks ;  they  think  the  devil,  having  taJeen  refuge  in  or  under
them,  was  there  surprised  and  slain.

65.  Many  take  the  rainbow  to  be  Thunder's  sickle,  with  which  he  pun-
ishes  malignant  under-gods  who  try  to  injure  men.


1846  APPENDIX.

66.  Many  believe  in  the  power  of  man  to  raise  wind,  and  to  change  its
direction.  For  this  purpose  they  wonld  hang  up  a  snake,  or  set  op  an  a»,
in  the  direction  whence  they  wished  for  a  wind,  and  try  to  aUure  U  bjf
fohUiUng,

67.  A  sndden  noise  on  Neuhyear^s  night  foretells  the  death  of  an  inraateL

68.  They  give  wild  beasts  periphrastic  names,  and  avoid  their  real  ones,
when  they  have  to  speak  of  them.  The  fox  they  call  HdUktM  (grey-ooat),
the  bear  Layfcdgk  (broad-foot).

69.  The  first  time  they  drive  their  cattle  ont  in  the  year,  they  bnry  eggi
wider  the  ihreehold  over  which  they  most  pass,  whereby  all  discomfort  is
banned  away  from  them.  Once,  when  a  cattle  plague  broke  out,  it  was
found  that  they  buried  one  head  of  the  herd  under  the  eiahle  door,  as  a
sacrifice  to  Death,  and  to  stay  the  murrain.

70.  If  the  cattle  return  from  pasture,  still  chewing  grass,  there  will  be  a
hay-famine.

71.  They  send  the  wolf  to  the  rightabout  by  sprinkling  salt  on  his  iraek.

72.  A  great  howlvng  of  wolves  at  early  morning  foretells  plague  or  fiunine.

73.  Formerly  the  Ehsts  believed,  when  they  heard  a  great  howling  of
wolves,  that  they  were  crying  to  Qod  for  food,  and  he  then  threw  them
dumplings  doumfirom  the  cUmds.

74.  If  the  wolf  carries  off  a  sheep  or  pig,  they  let  something  faü,  of  thör
clothes  or  of  what  they  have  in  their  pockets,  believing  that  the  wolf  will
then  find  his  load  too  heavy,  and  drop  his  prey.

75.  Some  wear  the  tip  of  a  hen's  wing  about  them,  and  think  it  promotes
early  rising.

76.  They  do  not  like  to  name  the  hare  often,  they  think  it  tempts  him  to
come  and  damage  their  rje-grass.

77.  If  a  coek  or  hen  walking  in  the  yard  trails  a  s^raio  after  it,  there  will
soon  be  a  corpse  in  the  house,  its  sex  depending  on  that  of  the  fowL

78.  You  can  enable  a  hen  to  lay  eggs  by  beating  her  with  an  old
broom,

79.  Some,  the  first  time  of  driving  out  cattle,  put  an  egg  before  the
stahU'door;  the  beast  that  treads  on  it  is  ripe  for  death,  and  they  try  to
sell  it

80.  They  gladly  sell  the  first  ealves  of  young  cows,  where  the  mistress  is
her  own  mother's  ^a^  child;  such  a  calf  cannot  thrive.

81.  The  yoke  just  taken  off  or  about  to  be  pvi  on  must  not  be  laid  on  the
bare  ground«  or  it  will  chafe  and  wound  the  ox.

82.  Afire  may  be  checked  by  throwing  in  a  live  black  hen  as  a  sacrifice,

83.  In  clearing  out  the  com  and  fiour  bins,  leave  a  litth  behind,  or  it  wiU
bring  misfortune.

84.  No  £armer  is  willing  to  give  earth  off  his  cornfields,  he  thinks  it  is
parting  with  a  good  piece  of  his  prosperity.

85.  Let  no  one  step  over  yowr  girdle ;  it  brings  on  the  itch.

86.  One  is  careful  not  to  be  beaten  with  dry  twigs,  it  brings  on  con-
sumption or  leanness.

87.  In  cutting  a  new  loaf  they  throw  some  aside  ;  from  a  full  cup  they
let  some  drops  faU  on  the  ground.    It  is  a  sacrifice  to  the  Invisible  Spirit


8UPEBSTITION8.      M,  N.  1847

88.  Many  a  man  looks  glam  if  yon  try  to  find  oat  the  depth  of  hia  weU^
it  would  dry  ap  if  yoa  did.

89.  One  does  not  like  giving  all  the  money  in  his  purse  at  once;  if  it
can't  be  helped,  let  your  spittle  fall  in  the  purse.

90.  They  are  anxious  not  to  have  chthee-prope  stolen :  their  loss  runs
them  short  of  ash.

91.  The  first  time  the  cowherds  drive  home  in  the  year,  they  are  on
axriving  sprinkled  unth  tocUer;  it  is  thought  to  be  wholesome  for  the
cattle.

92.  ^0  shearing  of  sheep  ai  seed-time,  for  then  the  wool  does  not  grow
again  properly.

93.  Ihmg  fatten  off  the  cart  is  not  to  be  picked  up  again :  it  breeds  ver-
min.

94  At  flax-picking  there  is  no  talking,  no  question  answered,  no  greet-
ing returned ;  otherwise  the  flax  does  not  answer  well.

95.  If  the  first  that  dies  in  a  farmer's  new  abode  be  a  beast  with  hairy
legs,  a  blessing  rests  on  the  house ;  if  a  bird  with  bare  legs,  the  farmer
mopes,  dreading  losses  and  poverty.

96.  At  night  when  candles  are  lighted,  the  people  sigh  and  cross  them-
selyes.

97.  Eveiy  time  they  kill  anything,  if  only  a  fowl,  they  put  a  piece  of  it
behind  the  cattle-shed  as  a  sacrifice»

98.  On  the  accursed  spot  where  a  house  was  burnt  down,  they  never
bnild  a  new  one ;  if,  in  laying  the  ground-beam,  a  single  spark  is  kindled
by  a  by-blow,  it  foretells  a  new  fire,  and  they  look  out  another  place  to
build  on.

99.  On  the  site  where  a  cowhouse  is  to  be  built,  they  first  lay  rags  and
herbs ;  if  black  ants  creep  on  to  them,  it  is  a  good  sign ;  if  red  ants,  the  place
ia  pronounced  unfit  to  build  on.

100.  A  whirlwind  is  the  work  of  evil  spirits  :  where  you  see  dust  gather-
ing, you  should  throw  stones  or  a  knife  into  the  heart  of  the  whirl,  and
pursue  it  with  cries.

101.  At  a  wedding  the  bride  treads  on  the  bridegroom's  foot,  that  she
may  never  be  oppressed  by  him.

102.  Bed  streaks  in  the  sky  shew  that  the  dragon  is  setting  out;  a  dark
hue  in  the  clouds,  that  he  comes  home  with  booty.  Shooting  stars  are
little  dragons.

N.  Lithuanian.*

1.  When  the  elf  is  red,  he  brings  people  gold;  when  blue,  corn  or  ill-
Inck.

2.  It  is  not  good  for  a  corpse  to  lie  so  that  it  can  be  seen  in  the  glass ;
some  say  the  dead  man  gets  up  and  looks  at  himself.  Better  hang  it  else-
where.

3.  On  New-year's  eve  nine  sorts  of  things — money,  cradle,  bread,  ring,
death's  head,  old  man,  old  woman,  ladder,  and  key — are  baked  of  dough,

>  Besseldt  in  Büsohing's  Wöch.  Nachr.,  b.  3  (Breslau  1817).  pp.  223.  839.


1848  APPENDIX.

and  laid  under  nine  plates,  and  every  one  has  three  grabs  at  them.    What
he  gets  will  fall  to  his  lot  daring  the  year.

4.  The  same  evening  every  girl  takes  tow  or  flax,  rolls  it  into  a  little  haü^
sets  it  alight,  and  tosses  it  np.  She  whose  ball  rises  highest,  or  boms
longest,  will  get  married  that  year.

5.  If  yon  spin  on  Shrove  Tuesday,  the  flax  will  not  thrive;  if  yon  go  far
a  drive  there  will  be  good  flax.  All  over  lithnania  they  drive  on  that  day;
if  the  gentlefolk  don't  themselves,  they  let  their  servants.

6.  Sow pecu  when  the  wind  sets  from  a  soft  (rainy)  quarter;  then  tiiej
will  boil  well.

7.  Grass  moton  nnder  a  new  moan  the  cattle  reject,  or  eat  relnctantly.

8.  The  death  of  the  master  or  mistress  mnst  be  told  the  horses  hyßngUng
the  keys,  also  to  the  other  cattle,  especially  the  bees.  Otherwise  the  cst^
fall,  the  trees  decay,  and  the  bees  ^e  out  or  move.

9.  If  a  hare  rans  across  yoar  path,  it  means  bad  Inck ;  a  fox  on  the
contrary  a  safe  journey  and  good  news.

10.  If  yon  take  needle  in  hand  on  Good  Friday,  the  lightning  will  be
after  yon  (see  Germ.  43).    All  work  on  that  day  is  fraught  with  miachiell

11.  Girls  must  be  weaned  by  a  waning  moon,  or  they'll  have  too  lazge
a  bosom;  boys  at /«U  moon,  that  they  may  grow  big  and  strong;  bau
no  children  during  the  passage  of  birds,  else  they'll  be  restless  and
changeable.

12.  When  visitors  drive  away,  don*t  sweep  your  floors  directly  after;  it
would  bring  them  ill-luck  on  their  journey.


SPELLS,


L  Ä8.  apellfor  pricking  pains,    Harl.  MSS.  no.  585.  fol.  186  (eommnnic.

by  Price).     See  p.  1244.
II.  Ä8.  tpea  for  ferHUsdng  land.    Oxf.  MSS.  na  5214  (Jan.  103).    See

p.  1236.

m.  Exordemus  ad  pecudes  inveniefidas.^

Ne  fontolen  ne  lorholen  nftn  uht  tbäs  dhe  io  Age,  ne  mA  the  mihte
Herod  (no  more  than  H.  could)  arne  Drihten.  Ic  gethohte  äöe  £4d  Eldaan,
and  10  gethohte  Grist  on  rdde  Abangen.  8v&  io  thence  this  f  eoh  t6  findanne,
nfts  t6  othlborganne  and  t6  vitann&  n&s  t6  othTyroeanne  and  t6  laBanne.
ntts  t&  odhlsBdanne.  Qdrmund,  Qodea  dhegen,  find  that  feoh,  and  före  th&t
feoh.  and  hala  th&t  feoh  and  heald  that  feob,  and  f§re  h&m  that  feoh.
that  he  nsdfre  n'&bbe  landes  th&t  he  hit  odhlsBde,  ne  foldan  th&t  odhfdrie
ne  hüsa  that  he  hit  odhhealde.  Qif  hit  hvA  ged6,  ne  gedige  hit  him  naaf re
binnan  thrim  nibtum.  onnne  ic  bis  mihta  bis  mägen  and  bis  mihta  and
his  mnndcrSftas.  call  he  yeomige  syfi  er  vitdu  veomie,  &▼&  hredhel  theo
BT&  ihidek  se  dhe  bis  feoh  odhfergean  thence,  odhde  dhis  orf  odhehtian
dbence.    amen.

This  man  soeal  cvedban  dhonne  bis  ce4pa,  bvilcne  man  forstelenne.  cydb ,
88r  be  asnig  other  vord  cvedbe :  Bethlem  bAttaa  seo  barb,  dhe  Grist  on
geboren  vas.  seo  is  gemsarsdd  ofer  ealne  middangeard.  svft  dbeos  deed
yyrtbe  for  mannnm  maare.  per  craoem  xpL  And  gehide  the  thonne  ihriva
edstf  and  credb  thriva :  -f  ^^  ^b  Oriente  redncat.  and  thriva  veH,  and
CTcdb  ;  crux  xpi  ab  occidente  redncat  and  thriva  Mh,  and  ovedh  thriva :
crux  xpi  a  meridie  redncat.  and  thriva  north,  and  cvedh:  crnx  xpi  abscondita
snnt  (fhitP)  et  inventa  est.  Jndeas  Grist  fibengon.  gedidon  him  d»da
thft  vyrstan.  bielon  that  hi  forhelan  ne  mihton.  sv&  nsfre  theos  d»d
forbolen  ne  vyrtbe.  per  cmcem  xpi.  Gif  feoh  sy  undemnmen.  gif  hit
sy  hor$t  9vng  on  hUfeotere  odhdbe  on  hia  hridel.  gif  bit  sy  other  feoh,  sing
on  thai  hofree,  and  ontend  dhreo  candela,  and  dr^p  on  that  ofrec  veax
thriva^  ne  mag  bit  the  manna  forhelan.  ^if  bit  sy  inorf  sing  onfeover
hedlfa  thus  hiises  and  sane  on  middan :  crux  xpi  redncat.  cnix  xpi  per  fartom
periit,  inventa  est.  Abraham  tibi  semitas  vias,  montes  concludat  Job  et
flamina,  Isao  tibi  tenebras  indacat.  Jacob  te  ad  indicium  ligatum  per-
dncat.

1  Nos.  m.  IV.  from  Wanley's  Oatal.  114-6  (oonf.  110».  186^  198^  276»).  eoneoted
by  Eemble*8  tranioripts.  Many  more  AS.  spells  might  be  called  out  of  MSS.  sited
by  Wanley,  pp.  44.  88.  238.  231-2-4.  247.  804-5.

1849


1860  APPENDIX.

IV.  Benedidion.

Ic  me  on  thisse  gyrde  belüoe,  and  on  Godes  helde  bebeode,  yidh  (against]
thane  sära  stce,  vidh  thane  s&ra  siege,  vidh  thane  grymma  gryre,  yidh  thaoe
micela  egaa,  the  bidh  aaghyam  lUdh,  and  yidh  eal  that  Ifidh,  the  in  t6  knde
fare.  Bige-gealdor  ic  begale  (sing),  eige-gyrd  ic  me  yege.  yord-^ige  and
yeorc-sige.  Se  me  dege  ne  me  meme  gemjrre.  neme  maga  ne  geayenoe.
ne  me  naafre  mfnnm  feore  forht  ne  geyurdhe.  ao  gehsle  me  Aelmihtig
and  Snnu  fr6fregftst  ealles  yaldres  yyrdig  Drihten.  Sy&sy&  ic  gehtrde
heofna  soyppende  Abrahame  and  Isace  and  svylce  men,  Moyaes  and  Jacob
and  Dayit  and_  Josep  and  Enan  and  Annan  and  Elizabet,  Saharie  and  ec
Marie  m6dar  xps.  and  e&c  thsB  gebrödhm  Petrus  and  Paulas  and  eac  Üiüsend
thira  engla.  clipige  ic  me  to  fire  yidh  eallam  feondam.  Hi  me  fSrion  and
f ridhion  and  mtne  fSre  nerion.  eal  me  gehealdon,  men  geyealdon.  Yoroes
sttrende  si  me  ynldres  hyht.  hand  ofer  he4fod  hftligra  ruf  sige-ro&a  soeote
Bodh-fastra  engla  biddn  ealle  blidhn  mdde  that  me  beo  hand  ofer  heafoi,
Matheos  "hdm,  Marens  hyme  leoht  Itfes  rdf .  Lucas  min  wwrd  Booarp  and
scireg.  scud  Johannes  ynldre  geylitegdd.  yega  Seraphin.  Fordh  ic  geftre.
frind  ic  gemdte.  eall  engla  blied.  e&diges  Ure.  bidde  io  na  God  sigeare
Godes  miltse  sidhfat  gddne.  smylte  and  lihte  yind  yeredhnm  yindss
gefran  circinde  yäter  simblige  haledhe  yidh  eallam  feordum.  Freond  ic
gemote,  yidh  that  ic  on  this  almihgian  (sic)  m6te  belocun  yidh  thi  lldfaan.
se  me  Itfes  eht  on  engla  blA  blssd  gestathe16d,  and  inna  h&lre  hand  hofna-
rtces  bl»d,  thfi  hyile  the  ic  on  this  life  yunian  m6te.    amen.

y.    Äc^uraüo  contra  gra$idmem.
(Munich  MS.  of  11th  cent.,  Cod.  Tegems.  372.)

Signo  te  oernomine  Domini  ....  Bdinro  te  diahole  et  angelat  tax»
.  .  .  .  adjure  yos  ....  at  non  feratis  grandinem  neqae  aliqoam
molestiam  in  terminum  istam,  et  non  habeatis  dicere  coram  Deo,  quia  nemo
yobis  contradizerit.  contradicat  yobis  Deus  et  Dei  filius,  qui  est  iniUam
omniam  creaturarum.  contradicat  yobis  sancta  Maria  ....  adjoro
te  Mermeut,  cum  sociis  tais,  qui  posUus  e«  super  tempestaiem,  per  illias  nomen
te  adjure,  qui  in  principio  fecit  coelum  et  terram.  adjuro  te  Mermeui  pv
illius  dexteram,  qui  Adam  primum  hominem  ad  imaginem  suam  plasmayit
adjuro  te  Mermeut  per  Jesum  Christum  filiam  Dei  unicum  ....
conjuro  te  daemon  et  scUanas  .  .  .  .  te  conjure,  ut  non  habeas  hk
potestatem  in  isto  loco  yel  ini  sto  yico  nocere  nee  damnum  fiusere,  nee
tempestatem  admittere  nee  pluyiam  yalentissimam  jacere,  eta

A  German  weather-speU  in  a  later  Munich  MS.  (Cgm.  734,  f.  206)  has:
'  ich  pent  (bid)  dir  FasoÜ,  dass  du  das  wetter  yerfirst  (remoyest)  mir  and
meinen  nachpauren  an  schaden  (without  hurt).'

VI.    For  a  sick  Horse  (p.  1236).

(from  Cod.  Yindob.  theol.  259,  bottom  of  right-hand  page.)

Petrus  Michahel  et  Stephanus  ambulabant  per  yiam.  sic  dixit  Mi^iahel.
Stephani  equus  infasus.  signet  ilium  Deus.  signet  illnm  Ohrirtas  et
erbam  comedat  et  aquam  bibat.


SPELLS.  1851

YIL    Oontra  mcilum  malcmnum,
(from  a  Bonn  MS.  of  1070-90,  in  Wackernagers  Wossobr.  Gebet  67-70.)

Cnm  minimo  digito  ciroamdare  locnm  debes  nbi  apparebit,  his  verbis :
ich  bimaniun  dih  auam  pi  Gode  jonh  pi  Christe.  Tunc  he  craoem  per
mediam  -|-  efc  die :  daz  th,  niewedar  ni  gitno  noh  tolc  noh  tdt  honpit.
item  adjnro  te  per  Patrem  et  Filinm  et  Spiritam  sanctam  nt  amplins  non
orescas  sed  arescas.

VIIL    For  a  hhody  fluni.

(Cod.  Vindob.  R  3282,  fol.  32.  Twelfth  cent.)

Dere  h^ligo  Christ  was  geboren  ce  Betlehem,

dannen  quam  er  widere  oe  Jerosaldm,

d&  wart  er  getoufet  vone  Johanne

in  demo  Jord&ne,

dao  verstaont  (stood  still)  der  Jord&nis  flaz

unt  der  sin  runst.

als6  verstant  du  bluot-^inna

daroh  des  heiligen  Christes  minna,

du  verstant  an  der  n6te,

alsd  der  Jordan  t^te

dno  der  gnote  see  Johannes

den  heiligen  Christ  toufba.

verstant  dh  hluot-rinna

darch  des  heiliges  Christes  minna.

VIII»>.    BlesHng  on  a  Journey  (Dint.  2,  70).

Ic  dir  nAoh  sihe,  io  dir  nach  sendi  mit  minen  fanf  fingirin  fwnvi  tmdi
funfzio  engilL  Got  dich  gisandi  heim  gisendi.  offin  si  dir  daz  sigi-dor,
sami  si  dir  daz  slegi-dor^  (s.l.  for  '  selgidor ' ;  query,  saalde-dor  P).  hitlozin
si  dir  daz  wagi-dor,  sami  si  dir  daz  wafiri-dor.  ^  des  guotin  sandi  Uolrichis
Begin  vor  dir  undi  hindir  dir  undi  obi  dir  nndi  nebin  dir  si  gid&n,  sw&  dt
wonis  (dwellest)  nndi  swft  du  sis,  daz  d&  alsi  guot  fridi  si,  alsi  d&  wsari,  d&
min  frauwi  sandi  Marie  des  heiligiu  Cristes  ginas  (was  recovering).

IX.    The  same  (An  Engelberg  Cod. ;  Dint.  2,  293).

Herre  see  Michahel  hiute  wis-tn  (be  thou)  N.  sin  schiU  nnd  sin  sper,
roin  fronwa  s^  Maria  si  sin  haJsperge  (hauberk),  hiute  mnoze  er  in  deme
heiligin  fride  sin,  dk  Got  inne  w&re,  d6  er  in  daz  paradise  ch&me.  Herre
Got  du  mnozist  in  hescmnin  vor  w&ge  und  vor  wafine,  vor  finre,  vor  allen
sinen  fiandin  gesinnlichen  nnd  ungesiunlichen.'    er  mnoze  alse  wol  gese-

1  Gate  of  the  flood ;  conf.  Egudor,  vol.  i.  239.

<  Conf.  MS.  2, 198b :  •  der  frdiden  tor  ist  zuo  getan:


1852  APPENDIX.

ginSt  tin  b6  das  heilige  wiu6t  w&re,  das  mia  herre  boo  JobanneB  mime
herrin  dem  almehtigen  Qote  in  den  mand  fl6zte,  do  er^n  in  dome  Jordino
tonfte.  amdn.

In  nomine  Domini,  daz  heuige  lignum  domini  ffisegine  mioh  hiate,
nnden&n  nnd  oben&n,  nUn  hueh  ti  mir  heinMi,  mm  hens  n  mir  gtäheU^^  mw
hotkM  9%  mir  «^nln  (my  belly  of  bone,  heart  of  steel,  head  of  stone),  der
gnote  Böi  Seveiin  der  phlege  min,  der  gnote  söe  Petir  nnde  der  gaote  see
Stephan  gesegineigvn  mich  hinte  for  allir  minir  ftande  gew&fine.  in  nomine
Dei  patris  et  Filii  et  spiritas  sancti.  alse  milte  nnd  alse  linde  (sofb)  mnoDS-
ta  hinte  sin  Mn  mime  libe  (body)  swert  nnd  aller  slahte  gesmide,  86  miner
frouwnn  söe  ACariun  sweiz  (sweat)  w&re,  d6  si  den  heiligin  Grist  gebsre.
Pater  noster.


X.    From  a  Mtinieh  M8.  (Hoffm.  Fnndgr.  343).

Ich  sHef  mir  hinte  snoze

date  mines  Trehtins  f  nozen.

daz  heilig^  himel-chint

daz  si  hint»  min  firide-BchiU.

daz  heilige  himelohint  bat  mich  hint  df  stan,

in  des  namen  nnd  gn&de  wil  ich  hint  üf  g4n,

nnd  wil  mih  hinte  garten

mit  des  heiligen  Gotes  werten,

daz  mir  aUez  daz  holt  si  (be  graoions)

daz  in  dem  himel  st,

din  türme  nnd  der  mdne

nnd  der  iage-sieme  sc6ne.

mins  gemuotes  bin  ih  hiate  bait,

hinte  springe  ih,  Herre,  in  dinen  gewalt

sant  Marien  liohemede

daz  si  hinte  min  fiid-hemede,

aller  miner  viende  gew&fen

diu  ligen  hinte  nnde  sl&fen

nnd  sin  hiat  alsd  palwahs

als  wflBre  miner  vronwen  sant  Marien  yahs,

d6  si  den  heiligen  Christum  gebsBre,

nnd  doch  ein  reiniu  mait  waare.

min  houpi  si  mir  hinte  etceltn,

deheiner  slahte  (no  kind  of)  w&fen  snide  dar  in.

min  swert  eine  wil  ih  von  dem  eegen  soeiden  (exempt  from  the

spell),
daz  snide  und  bfze  allez  daz  ih  ez  heize.
Ton  minen  banden
nnd  von  niemen  andern ;
der  heilige  himel-trdt
der  si  hiute  min  hdlsperge  guot.


BPELL3.  1853

XI.     Tobias's  blessing  on  Tobifs  journey.
(Brauns wg.  nacbr.  1755,  p.  321.    Boffm.  Fandgr.  261). »

Der  gaote  bdrre  saate  Tobias,

der  Gotes  wizage  (prophet)  was,

sinen  lieben  sun  er  sande

s6  Terre  in  yremdia  lande.

Bin  sun  was  ime  vile  liep,

unsanfte  er  von  ime  scbiet  (parted),

umbe  in  was  im  vil  leide  (very  sad),

er  sande  in  über  vierzec  tage^weide  (40  days'  journey).

Er  sprach :  "  der  Got  der  vor  niemen  verborgen  (hidden   ist,

und  des  eigen  schale  (servant)  du  bist,

der  an  niemanne  wenket  (is  faithless),

die  armen  vil  wol  bedenket,

der  müeze  dich  hiute  behüeten

durch  sine  vaterliche  güete

über  velt,  durch  wait

vor  aller  noete  maneo-valt,

vor  hunger  und  gevrcerde.

Got  müeze  min  gebete  erhosren,

86  du  sl&fest  oder  wachest

in  holze  oder  ander  dache.

din  viende  werden  dir  gevriunt.

Got  sende  dich  heim  vil  wol  gesunt

mit  vil  guotem  muote

hin  heim  zuo  dinem  eigen-guote.

gesegenet  si  dir  der  wec  (way),

aber  strftze  und  über  stec,

d4  vor  und  dft  binden

gesegenen  dich  des  Hdrren  vünf  wanden.

ietweder  halben  dar  en  eben

gest6  dn*  der  himelische  degen.

in  Gotes  vride  dd  var,

der  heilige  engel  dich  bewar.

der  Up  (body)  st  dir  beinin,

ez  herze  si  dir  sieinin,

ez  houbet  st  dir  stcehelin,  •

der  himel  si  dir  schiltin,

diu  helle  si  dir  vor  versperret,

allez  übel  si  vor  dir  verirret  (miss  its  way),

ez  paradis  si  dir  offen,

alliu  w&fen  si  vor  dir  verslozzen  (shut  np),

daz  si  daz  vil  gar  vermiden  (avoid)

daz  dich  ir  dekeinez  steche  noch  en-sntde  (none  prick  or  cut).

1  First  4  lines  borrowed ;  see  Eschenbg's  Denkm.  p.  279.    Tobias  segen-spr.
H.  Sachs  1, 439<>.

VOL.  IV.  P  P


1854  APPENDIX.

der  m^ne  and  ouch  dia  sanne

din  liahten  dir  mit  wanne.

des  heiligen  geistes  siben  gebe

lazen  dich  mit  heile  leben.

der  gnote  sante  Stephan

der  alle  sin  n6t  überwant  (overcame  his  troable)

der  gest^  dir  bi  (stand  by  thee),

SW&  dir  dtn  n6t  kunt  si.

die  heiligen  zwelf  boten  (apostleR)

die  Sren  (commend)  dich  vor  Gote,

daz  dich  diu  herschaft  gerne  sehe.

allez  liep  müeze  dir  gescfhehen.

sante  Johannes  nnd  die  vier  dvangeliste

die  raten  dir  daz  beste,

min  frouwe  sante  Mane

dia  hSre  unde  vrie.

mit  des  heiligen  Kristes  bluote

werdest  du  geheiliget  (ze  gnote),

daz  din  sdle  (so  du  sterbest)

des  himel-rtches  niht  verstözen  werde

nach  den  weltlichen  ^ren.

Got  gesegne  dich  dannoch  mdre.

pante  Galle  diner  spise  pflege  (tliy  food  prepare),

sante  Gertrüt  dir  gnote  herberge  gebe  (lodging  give).

sselec  si  dir  der  lip  (body),

holt  (kind)  si  dir  man  unde  wip,

guot  rd.t  (counsel)  dir  iemer  werde,

daz  du  gsehes  ]6des  (sudden  death)  niene  ersterbest."

Als6  segente  der  guote

Santobias  sinen  sune,

nnd  sande  in  d6  in  ein  laut,

ze  einer  stat,  dia  hiez  ze  Medi&n,

diu  burc  diu  hiez  ze  R&ges :

sit  wart  er  vil  f  1 6  des.


Got  sande  in  heim  vil  wol  gesunt

mit  vil  gaotem  muote

hin  heim  ze  sinem  eigen-gnote.

Also  müezest  du  hiute  gesegenet

des  helfen  hiute  die  heiligen  namen  dri,

des  helfe  hiute  diu  wihe,

min  liebe  vrouwe  Marie,

des  helfen  mir  allin  diu  kint

diu  in  dem  himel-riche  sint,

und  der  guote  Santobias

nnd  sin  heiliger  trut-sun.    amen.


SPELLS.  1855

XII.    For  stolen  goods}
(MS.  ori347  at  Sant  Faal  in  the  Lavant  valley.)

Darnach  dise  nacbgende  gebette,  daz  solta  dri-stunb  sprechen  in  eim
gadem  (chamber),  daz  dich  niemen  irre  (diatorb),  so  kument  darin  engel
und  sagen t  dir  daz  da  fragest :

"  Der  heilig  Crist  vuor  Ton  himele  mit  cngein  manegen,  do  f aort  er  an
sineu  henden  en  Frones-bilde  (Lord^s  image),  under  einem  boame  er
geraste  (rested),  do  entslief  er  so  vaste.  do  komen  die  leidigen  diebe,  und
rerstalen  im  sin  Frones  bilde,  do  er  erwachte,  trarete  er  so  vaste.  do
sprach  diu  genedige  min  frowe  sant  Marie,.' des  sol  guotrat  werden,  wir
sulen  uf  diser  erden  von  dem  heiligen  kinde  daz  dink  noch  hi-naht  (to-
night) vinden.' — Sabaoth  Herre,  ich  bitte  dich  durch  din  einborn  sun
Jesum  Christum,  daz  du  vergebest  mir  min  sünde,  und  gib  mir  ein  guot
ende.  Jesu  Crist,  des  waren  Gotes  sun  du  bist,  ich  bit  dich,  und  man  dich,
daz  du  dis  dinges  verrihtest  mich."

Disen  selben  segen  mäht  du  ouch  sprechen,  so  dir  oder  eim,andern  diner
guten  früuden  üt  (aught)  veretolenwiirt,  daz  gar  schedelich  si  und  redelich,
nüt  umb  kleine  üppig  sache,  nuwent  da  ez  noturf tig  und  redelich  si ;  wände
(for)  so  di  segen  ie  edeler  und  ie  besser  sint,  ie  minre  (the  less)  sü.helfent
da  man  sü  bruchet  unnotdurf teclich  (spells  lose  their  virtue  if  used  on.
trifling  occasions).

XIII.    Exorciem  of  Gout  (MS.  at  Göttweich ;  of  1373).

Ich  vit'beden  dir,  gycht,  bi  der  heylgir  wandillungin.  vnd  bi  den  heylgin
Y  wunden  vnsers  barren  Jesu  Christi  vnd  bi  deme  bluode  dat  Gote  vyt
(out  of)  sinen  Y  wunden  ran.  vnd  bi  dem  erstin  menschin  dat  Got  vf
erden  ye  gemacht,  oder  ye  liz  geborren  werden.  Ich  virbeden  dir  bi  den
drin  nagellHf  de  Gode  durch  sine  hende  vnd  durch  sine  7usze  wrde  gesl-igen.
Ich  virbeden  dir  bi  den  vyer  hulden  (4  gracious  ones)  de  da  stu^nde7i  vf  zvotyn
unoszin  vnd  sprachin  vys  (out  of)  zweyir  maodir  libe,  *  wer  si  bede  van  rechiir
Ijbden,  vmme  allis  dat  mogelioh  is,  des  wulden  si  in  geweren.'  d&t  was
Maria,  Godis  muodir,  vnd  was  Jesus  Christus,  vnd  was  min  f  ran  we  sancte
Elsebe,  vnd  was  myn  herre  sancte  Johannes  der  deufir.  Ich  virbeden  dir
bi  deme  bebiuden  vrdeü  (varying  verdicts)  das  Got  wil  gebiu  ubir  mich
vud  ubir  alle  doden  und  lebenden.  Ich  virbediu  dir  bi  deme  fronen  crnce
vnsers  herren  Jesu  Christi,  da  he  de  martil  ayn  leyt  (duflered)  durch  mich
vnd  alle  cristeneyt.  Ich  virbedin  dir  bi  der  gotligir  krafc  de  da  ist  in
hymil  vud  in  erden,  dat  du  mir  Godes  knegthe  (servant)  nyt  in-schadcs  an
alien  minen  glederen  (limbs),  an  haubde,  an  hirne,  an  augen,  an  cendeu
(ceeth),  an  armen,  an  henden,  an  vingeren,  an  rippeti,  an  rucke,  an  lenden,
an  huffin  (back,  loins,  hips),  an  beynen,  au  vuozin,  an  ceiu  (toes),  an  äderen
(veins),  noch  an  alien,  da  ich  mich  mach  keren  (may  turn)  oder  wenden.
Des  helfe  mir  de  Godis  kraft,  vud  dat  heylgo  graf,  da  Got  selve  inne  lach
(lay),  da  her  bebede  (quaked)  allit  dat  da  was.  Pylatus  sprach, '  hais  du
gesugthe  odir  gegichteP'  neyn,  ich  in-han  sin  nyt, — It  sy  vrauwe  oder

^  Nos.  XII.  XIII.  XIV.  communic.  by  Hoffmann.


1856  APPENDIX.

man,  der  düse  wort  ubir  yme  dreyt,  der  aal  sigchir  sin  (may  be  sure)  dat  in
de  geychte  Dummer  gelemen  kan  (never  can  lame).  Ich  geleufe  dat  kejn
wif  noch  keyn  man,  der  düse  wort  ubir  sprechen  kan.  want  der  sunder
(for  the  sinner)  an  deme  cruoe  genade  gewan.  De  mach  mich  Godis  knegt
N.  gesunt  an  seien  und  an  übe,  as  Maria  was,  do  si  irs  lieben  kyndis  genas
(got  well),    amen.

XIY.    Herdsman* s  charm  (see  p.  1241).
XV.    Far  the  blowir^  Worm  (Cod.  Pal.  367, 173»»).

DIs  ist  eyn  guter  eeyn  vor  den  hlasinden  worm :  ''  Der  gute  herre  seothe
lob  der  lak  in  deme  miste,  her  clagete  deme  heilge  Criste,  wi  syn  gebeyne
essen  die  worme  cleyne.  Do  sprach  der  heilge  Crist,  wen  nymandt  besser
ist.  ich  gebite  (bid)  dir,  worm,  du  siest  wies  (white)  adir  swartz,  geel  adir
gruene  adir  roet.  in  desir  stundt  siestu  in  dem  pferde  toet.  in  Gotis
namen  amen."  Nota,  man  sal  das  pferdt  nennen  alz  is  gebaret  is  (by  hue
of  hair ;  see  XXXV).— Dis  ist  eyn  eeyn  vor  den  pirczU :  *  "  Horestn,  worn
yn  fleische  und  in  beyne.  vom  em  was  das  heilge  euangelium  meyne.  da
seist  weis,  swartz  adir  geel,  grüne  adir  roet.  der  gehütet  myn  herre  senthe
lob  in  desir  stunt  siestu  in  desem  pferde  toet.  in  Crotis  namen  amen.*'
Nota.  man  sal  deme  pferde  treten  uf  den  vorder-fuss,  und  sal  ym  runen
(whisper)  in  das  rechte  oer  desen  segn  (conf.  BA.  (


XVI.     Conjuring  a  magic  Horse  (Cod.  Pal.  212,  45»>).

Wiltu  machen  ein  pferd  das  dich  trag  wo  du  wilt,  so  nymb  ein  plut  von
einer  fledermaus  (blood  of  a  bat),  wen  es  dan  nacht  ist,  so  gang  zu  einem
liaus  heimblich  an  das  ende  sin,  und  schreib  an  die  haus-tur  und  die
.  .  .  .  in  namen  omnii.  geapha.  diado.  wen  du  si  geschriben  hast,
so  gang  dan  ein  weil,  und  kom  dau  herwider,  so  findestu  ein  ros  bereit  mit
sail  und  mit  zäum  (bridle)  und  mit  allem  gezeuge.  Wen  du  dan  uf  das  ros
wilt  sitzen,  so  tritt  mit  dem  rechtem  fuss  in  den  linken  Stegreif,  und  sprich
die  beschwerung :  ^*  Ich  beschwer  dich,  ros,  bei  dem  Vater  und  bei  dem
Sone  und  bei  dem  heiigen  Geist,  und  bei  dem  schepfer  himelreichs  und
erdreichs,  der  alle  ding  aus  nichts  gemacht  hat.  Ich  beschwer  dich,  ros,
bei  dem  lebendigen  Got  und  bei  dem  waren  Got,  bei  dem  heiligen  Gor,
das  du  an  meinem  leib  noch  an  meiner  sei  noch  an  meinen  glidem  ni:
geschaden  mugst,  noch  mit  keinerlei  hindernus."  So  sitz  frolich  nf  das
pferd,  und  solt  dich  nit  segen,  und  forcht  dich  nit.  Wan  du  komst  an  di
stat  do  du  gern  werest,  so  nymb  den  zaurnb  vnd  grab  in  under  die  erden.
Wan  du  das  ros  wilt  haben,  so  nymb  den  zaumb  und  schutel  in  vast,  so
komt  das  ros.  So  beschwer  es  aber  (again)  als  vor,  und  sitz  doruff  und  rit
wo  du  wilt,  und  hig  (look)  das  du  den  zaumh  wol  behaltest  (keepest).
verleurstu  den  zaumb,  so  mustu  das  pferd  wider  machen.'

*  Bürzel,  gun-birzel.    Frisch  1,  167«.  383*.

'  Conf.  supra,  Hartlieb,  p.  1768.  The  importance  of  bit  and  bridle  in  magic
horses  is  seen  in  the  stoiy  of  King  Beder  in  the  Arabian  Nights.


SPELLS.  1857

XV  IL     Conjuring  the  Hedge-Biick}

Geh  za  einem  zann-stecken  and  sprich:  Zaunstechsn^  ich  weck  dich!
min  lieb  das  wolt  ich.  ich  beger  (desire)  vil  mer,  dan  aller  teufel  her
(host).  Her  zu  mir,  so  rar  ich  dich  zaanstecken.  alle  tenfel  müssen  dich
wecken,  und  füren  (lead  thee)  in  das  hatis,  do  mein  lieb  geb  in  und  aus.
dass  da  müssest  faren  in  die  vier  wend  (4  walls),  wo  sich  mien  lieb  hin  ker
(turn)  oder  wend !  es  ist  aller  eren  wol  wert,  ich  send  ir  einen  hoch  (zum
pfert).  Ich  ruf  each  heut  alle  gleich,  bei  den  drei  nageln  reich,  und
bei  dem  rosen-farben  blnt,  das  Gott  aus  seinen  heiligen  wunden  floss,
ich  beut  (bid)  each  tenfel  her.  ir  bringet  zu  mir  mein  lieb  N.  her,  zwischen
(twixt)  himel  und  erden,  das  es  nil  herür  (touch)  die  erden,  fürt  es  oh  allen

bäumen  her,  als  man  Maria  theb,  do  si  fur  in  ires  Kindes  reich." Und

nim  die  caracteres  alle  zu  dir,  und  blas  dreimal  aaf  die  haut,  und  schlage
dreimal  gegen  in  (them),  so  mügen  sie  dir  nit  geschaden.

XVIII.     Against  Wolves,  etc.

Christ  sun  gieng  unter  tbür,  mein  fi-au  Mafia  trat  herfür:  'Heb  uf
Christ  snn  dein  hand,  und  versegen  mir  das  viech  und  das  land,  das  Icein
wolf  heiss,  und  kein  wulp  stoss,  und  kein  dieb  komm  in  das  gebiet.  Da
herz  trutz  markstein,  hilf  mir  das  ich  kom  gesunt  und  gevertig  heim ! '
(Oonf.  XL^)

XIX.     Das  die  Wolf  das  viech  nil  essen.

Ich  beschwer  dich,  Wolf-zan  (-tooth),  bei  dem  vil  heiligen  namen,  und
bei  dem  tu  heiligen  Barn,  den  unser  liebe  frau  trug  an  irem  arm,  das
du  noch  alle  dein  genossen  das  viech  nit  beissen  noch  stossen.  Es  muss
dis  nacht  sein  als  war  und  als  vast,  als  das  heilig  paternoster  was,  das  Got
aus  seinem  munde  sprach.

XX.     On  Going  Out.

Hude  (co-day)  wil  ich  uf  sten,  in  den  heiigen  friden  wil  ich  gen,  do
unser  liebe  fraue  in  gieng,  do  sie  den  heiigen  Crist  inphieng.  Noch  hüte
wil  ich  mich  gorten  (gird)  mit  den  heiigen  fanf  werten,  mit  den  heiigen
sigeringen,  mit  allen  gaten  dingen.  Allez  daz  dages  aU  sy  daz  sy  mir  holt  l
unser  lieben  frauwen  zunge  sy  aller  miner  fiende  münde!     amen.

XXI.    For  a  Journey,

Ich  dreden  hude  ([  tread  to-day)  uf  den  phat,  den  unser  herre  Jesus
Cristas  drat,  der  si  mir  also  sÜ4S  und  also  gut !  nu  helfe  mir  sin  heiiges
rose-farbes  blut,  und  sin  heiige  fünf  wunden,  das  ich  nimmer  werde
gefangen  oder  gebunden !  von  allen  minen  fienden  mich  behude,  daz
helfe  mir  die  here  hude   (heavenly  care),  vor    ....    fliessen,  vor

^  Nos.  XYXT-XXXVII  from  Mone's  Anzeiger  for  1834,  p.  277 ;  the  same  Anz.  for
*34,  p.  46,  has  a  Woand-spell  and  a  Blood-epell  from  a  Wolfenb.  MS.  ;  and  those
for  '33,  p.  234,  and  '87,  p.  464,  a  spell  against  soreery,  and  a  few  against
tire.


1858  APPENDIX.

swerten  and  vor  schiessen,  vor  aller  slacht  angehüre,  vor  schnöder  gesell-
Schaft  und  abentüre  ;  das  alle  mine  bant  von  mir  enbunden  werde  zq
hant  (at  once),  also  unser  here  Jesus  inbunden  wart,  do  er  nam  die  himel-
fart!

XX IL     Ain  schöner  segen,  alle  Sehtemer  zu  thun.

Am  Mantag  vor  der  Fronfasten  (ember-week).  der  Maniag  is  kraftiger
dan  die  Fronfasten,    vor  aufgang  der  sonne,   tmheschrauen.     sprich  also :

"  Hier  ein,  in  dese  hof-stat  gebe  ich  'nein,  solche  laud  beschlies^t
(encloses)  Got  mit  seiner  aignen  hand,  er  beschliesst  sie  also  fest  mit
dem  süssen  Jesu  Grist,  disen  gibel  oben  und  disen  gibel  unden.  diser
gibel  unden,  der  ist  mit  engein  überzogen  verbunden.  Feuer  vom  dach,
dieb  vom  loch,  rauher  vor  der  thür!  unser  liebe  frau  trit  heut  selbst
darfür,  das  ave-maria  sei  vor  der  thür,  das  paternoster  der  rigel  (bolt)
darfür.  und  was  der  lieb  h.  Lorenz  bat  gegert,  das  bat  der  heilig  Crist
bewert,  das  niemant  stärker  ist  dan  der  heilig  Grist,  der  gebe  herein
und  nemb  was  hier  innen  ist.  im  namen  "t"  "f*  +  amen."  15  pat.,  15  ave,  und
credo.

XXIII.    Against  Hail,

Item,  mach  den  pfeil  (i.e.  figure  of  an  arrow)  auf  die  erden  gegen  den
wetter,  oder  auf  ein  deller  (plate),  und  setz  in  gegen  dem  wetter ;  und  nim
ein  weich-brun  (holj-water  pot),  und  spnta  dreu  kreuz  gegen  dem  wetter
im  namen,  u.  s.  w.  und  sprich :  "  Ich  pent  (bid)  dir,  schaur  und  hagl,  in
der  kraft  der  heiigen  drei  nagl,  die  Jesu  Gristo  durch  sein  heiige  hend
und  fnss  wurden  geschlagen,  er  du  kumbst  zu  der  erd,  das  du  ^u  wind
und  wasser  werd,  im  namen  etc."  mach  dreu  kreuz  mit  dem  weieb-
brun  gegen  das  wetter.

XXIV.  For  a  Fire.

Wellent  ir  feuer  leschen  (quench),  so  sprechent  wie  hernach  folgt ;  auch
das  ir  ain  prant  (brand)  von  demsel  higen  feuer  in  der  hand  höht,  wo  aber
sollicbes  nit  beschehn  möcht,  sol  es  dannacht  mit  andacht  gesprochen
werden :  "  Unser  lieber  herr  Jesus  Ghristns  gieng  über  land,  und  er  fand
einen  riechenden  prant,  den  hueb  er  uf  mit  seiner  gotliohen  hant,  und
gesegent  disen  riechenden  prant,  das  er  nimer  weiter  kum.  in  dem  namen
etc.*'    und  darzue  bett  5  p.  -5  a.  1  er.

XXV.  Against  Fire»

^  Wer  feuer  verhüet,  dass  sein  haus  und  statel  nit  prinnent  werd,  der
mach  alweg  mit  der  band  ein  creuz,  und  sprech  wie  hernach  folgt :  "  Ifet»
haus  das  sei  mir  umbeschwaifen  mit  engelischen  raifen,  mein  haas  sei  mir
bedeckt  mit  einer  englischer  deck  1  das  helf  mir  Gotea  minn,  der  sei
alzeit  haus-vater  und  wirt  darin  I "


SPELLS.  1859

XXV^    For  a  Fire,

Sprich :  "  Feuei\  ich  gepeab  (bid)  dir  in  dem  uamen  Jesu,  das  da  nit
weiter  kumest.  helidU  (hold  in)  dein  funk  und  flammen,  wie  Maria  ir
jangfraaschaft  and  er  (honoar)  behalten  hat  yor  alien  mannen,  das  sei  dem
feaer  zne  puess  zeit  (conn ted  as  quittance)  in  namen  etc."

XXVI.    Against  Fever.

Zwig,  ich  huck  dick,  Bett  n&  mid  mich  (twig,  I  bend  thee,  fe^er,  void  me)^
bi  dem  heiligen  nagel,  der  unserm  lieben  herren  Cristo  Jesa  darch  sin
rechten  hand  ward  geschlagen!  und  als  menig  bluts-tropf  dar-von
ran,  als  meniger  rett  mid  mich,  und  gang  mir  ab  I    im  namen  u.  s.  w.

XXVI r.    Against  Diseases.

Ich  stand  uf  den  mist  (dunghill),  and  ruf  zu  werden  Crist,  das  er  mir
buss  (rid  me  of)  die  rechten  s/por en-fuss,  und  das  hewpt-gescheuh  and  den
herz-ritte^it  und  allen  seinen  sitten,  und  gel-sucht  und  sibenzich  gesucht ;  und
ist  ir  keiner  mer  (any  more),  den  buss  mir  Gott  der  herre,  and  gang  aus
her  ruch'hein,  und  gang  aas  her  ripp,  and  gang  ab  in  das  wilt  zorach !
das  buss  dir  der  man,  der  den  tot  an  dem  heiigen  creuz  nam.

XXVIII.    Against  the  Worm.

"Ich  beschwör  dich,  Wurm  und  Würmin,  hei  der  waren  Gottes  minn,
and  bei  der  waren  Gothait  got,  das  dein  alter  (matter)  und  dein  blut  werd
lauter  und  auch  rain  (pare)  als  unser  lieben  frauen  gspint,  die  sie  gab
Jesn  Crist  irem  lieben  kint !  im  namen  Got  des  yaters  etc."  Itom,  nim
den  gerechten  dum^n  (right  thamb)  in  die  gerechte  hant,

XXIX.     Tlie  Same.

'*  Wurm,  bist  du  dinne,  so  beut  ich  dir  bei  sant  ....  minne,  da
seiest  weiss,  schwarz  oder  rot,  dass  da  hie  ligest  tot ! "  Ist's  ain  vich
(animal),  so  streichend  im  mit  der  rechten  hand  über  den  rucken  ab.
ist's  dan  ain  mensch,  so  iiemend  im  den  finger  (take  his  f.)  in  die  hand,
and  sprechend  5  yatter  unser,  5  ave  Maria  und  ain  gtoben  (belief).

XXX.    Against  Ague.

Grüss  dich  Gott,  yil*heiliger  tag!  nimm  mir  mein  77  kalt-wee  ab;  is
eben  einer  drnnder,  der  nit  zu  erbitten  ist,  so  nem  mir's  der  lieb  herr
Jesus  Crist,  der  am  heiigen  fran-kreuz  verstorben  ist.  in  dem  namen
u.  s.  w.

XXXI.     To  be  worn  under  the  right  arm  24  hours.

Es  giengen  drei  selige  brüder  aas  in  guter  frist  (time),'  begegnet  inen
herr  Jesus  Christ,  unser  lieber  herr  Jesus  Christ  sprach :  '  Wo  welent  ir
hin !  * *  Wir  welent  hinter  den  zäun  (hedge),  wir  welent  suclien  das

1  Rett 'mnie  (febris).    *  Mit  der  motten  du  mich  mit  I  *    Eolooz  263.

-  A  spell  in  Keisersp.  Ameis  50*  begins :  *  Es  giengen  drei  brüder  über  feld.'


1860  APPENDIX.

kraut  (seek  the  herb)  das  zue  alien  wanden  gaefc  ist,  es  sei  gleich  gehauen
oder  gestochen '  (a  cut  or  a  stab).  Unser  lieber  herr  J.  Cr.  sprach  :  '  Gant
anf  Messias  berg,  nement  die  wol  von  denen  schafen,  and  das  moes  von
denen  steinen,  und  das  ol  von  denen  bemen.'  drnok  darein  nnd  daranf,
PO  heilt  die  wände  von  grnnd  anf,  es  sei  gleich  gehauen  oder  gestochen  oder
hrochen,  wie  es  niöcht  ergangen  sein,  so  sol  es  weder  geachwelen  oder
schweren  (swell  nor  fester),  sol  anch  keines  eiters  begeren  (con f.  XXXIX).
Wie  Lucas  anf  Severines-berg  hat  gesprochen,  wie  die  Juden  unsem
herm  J.  Chr.  unib  nnschnlt  haben  gestochen,  das  wait  Got  der  vatter
n.  8.  w.

XXXI I.    A  fine  charm  for  Stanching  Blood,

In  unsers  herren  Gottes  herz  da  etuenden  (stood)  drei  roson.  die  er>t
ist  sein  dngent,  die  ander  ist  sein  vermögen,  die  dritt  ist  sein  will — Pluet
sieh  et  ill !  im  namen  n.  s.  w.

Another:  Longinas  der  man,  der  nnserm  herren  Jesu  Crist  sein
gerechte  Seiten  hat  anf-getan  (opened),  daraus  rann  wasser  und  bluet — ich
beschwöre  dich,  hluet,  durch  desselbigen  bluets  ehre,  das  du  nimer  hlueteM
mere  !  im  namen  u.  s.  w.

Another:  0  Got,  der  immer  ewig  ist,  der  aller  menschen  hilf  und  trost
ist— ich  but  dir,  hl^t,  das  du  etil  standist,  als  die  menschen  am  jüngsten  tag
(last  day)  still  stan  müssend,  die  nicht  nach  Gottes  willen  haut  getan  (have
done).

XXXIII.    For  the  Nail  in  a  horse^s  eye,

Welches  ros  (whose  horse)  den  na^el  het  in  dem  ougen,  der  sol  ain  stro
nemen  ain  nacht,  als  dick  er  mag,  und  sol  im  sin  atem  (breath)  in  das  oag
nüchter  knchen  (breathe,  fasting),  und  sol  mit  seinem  finger  gen  dem  oug
grifen,  und  sol  sprechen :  "  Ich  gebüt  dir's,  Nagel,  bi  dem  vil  haiigen
Gottes  grab,  da  Got  in  selber  lag  una  an  (until)  den  haiigen  Oster-tag,  das
du  verschwinist,  Nagelt  und  dörrest  (dwindle  and  dry  up),  als  die  Juden
taten,  die  verschwinend  und  verdorrenden,    das  gebüt  der  Yatter  u.  s.  w.'*

XXXIV.    For  the  Worm  in  horses.

Welches  ros  (whose  horse)  die  würm  in  dem  gederm  (guts)  hat,  and  in
dem  magen,  der  sol  das  ros  mit  seinem  linken  fuss  stossen,  und  sol
sprechen :  **  Wurm,  und  al  di  würm,  die  in  dem  ros  sind,  das  euch  des  ros
lib,  flaisch,  gederm  und  bain  also  laid  sige  (as  loathsome  be)  ae  niessen
nnd  ze  brachen,  nnd  euch  das  als  nnmar  (distasteful)  sig,  als  nnserm
Herren  ains  pfaffen  wip,  die  des  tüfels  veU-m^eh  (field-mare)  t^  als  was
müssent  ir  (so  surely  may  ye)  in  dem  ros-flaisch  sterben,  das  gebüt  euch
n.  s.  w.*'

Welches  ros  den  use-wetfenden  (vomiting)  tourm  hat,  der  sol  sprechen :
"  Ich  gebüt  euch,  wurm  und  würmin,  das  du  des  rosses  flaisch  und  baio
und  al  sin  lip  [lassest],  das  dir  darin  sig  als  wind  nnd  als  we,  und  dir  darione
sig  als  laid,  als  S.  Petem  was  nnsers  Herren  marter,  do  er  vor  den  richtem
und  den  Juden  fioch ;  dar  dir  darinne  werd  als  we,  unz  das  er  das  wort


SPELLS.  1861

gesprecb,  das  S.  Peter  sprach,  do  er  ze  Bom  ze  dem  ersten  in  das  münster
trat;  das  ir  uss  dem  ros  fliessend, oder  aber  beruss  fallend,  oder  in  dem  ros
sterbend,  und  ewer  d*heiner  nimmer  lebend  werde,  das  gebüt  euch  der
man  der  die  marter  und  den  tod  laid  (safiered)."

XXXV.    For  a  Horse.

Item  ain  pfart,  das  sich  strichet,  so  züch  es  unter  den  bimel  an  ainem
Sontag  frü  vor  der  sunnen  vfgang,  und  Jcer  dem  ros  den  kapf  gegen  der
spinnen,  und  leg  dine  zwen  dumen  (thumbs)  crüz-wis  über  ain  ander,  und
halt  die  hend  umb  den  fuss,  doch  das  sie  den  fuss  nit  an  rüren  (not  touch),
und  sprich :  "  Longinus  war  ain  Jud,  das  ist  war.  er  stach  unsern  Herrn  in
sein  siten,  das  ist  war  (und  nem  das  pfärd  bei  der  vaib),  das  si  dir  für  das
streichen  gut!"

XXXVI.     Ott  losing  a  Horse-shoe.

Item  ain  pfärd,  das  ain  isen  verliert,  so  nim  ain  brot-messer  (bread-
knife),  und  umb-schnit  im  den  huf  an  den  wenden  von  ainer  fersen  (hecl)
zu  der  ander,  und  leg  im  das  messer  crüz-wis  uf  die  solen,  und  sprich  :
*'  Ich  gebüt  dir,  huf  und  horn,  das  du  als  lützel  zerbrechist,  als  Got  der
herr  die  wort  zerbrach,  do  er  himel  und  erd  beschöf."  Und  die  wort  sprich
dri-stunt  nach  einander,  und  5  pat.  n.  und  5  ave  Maria  ze  lob ;  so  trit
das  pfärd  den  huf  nit  hin,  bis  das  du  glichwol  zu  ainem  schmit  komen
magst.

XXXVII.     Wo  man  die  Müich  stelt,

Nimb  weich- wasser  (holy  water)  und  spreng's  in  den  stall,  nimb  gun-
reb°n  (ground-ivy),  geweicht  salz  und  mer-linsen  (duckweed) :  ich  gib  dir
heut  gunreben,  merlinsen  und  salz ;  gang  uf  durcJh  die  toolJceti  und  bring
mir  schmalz  und  milich  und  molken!

XXXVIIT.»    Against  thtt  HoldicJöcn.

Fahr  aus,  und  fahr  ein  in  N.  wie  bist  du  hereingekommen  ?  du  sollt
gedenken,  dass  du  da  wieder  heraus  komnrat.  wer  dich  herein  gebracht
hat,  soll  dich  wiederum  herausbringen,  er  sei  lieioder  sei;  und  sollst  einen
beweis  (sign)  von  dir  geben,  dass  man  siebet,  dass  du  hinweg  bist.

Another:  Das  walte  Got  und  der  teufel!  fahr  hin  da  du  nutze  bist,  und
tlin  wie  ich  empfangen  habe !

Another:  ÄUe  immd  alle  ut !  so  spricht  die  liebe  Jungfrau  sente  Ger-
drnt.

Another:  Wolanf  elh  und  eibin,  zwerg  und  zwergin,  unterwärts  und  obcr-
wärts.  du  sollst  zu  dem  und  dem,  du  sollst  seine  beine  necken  (torment),
du  sollst  sein  fleisch  schmecken,  du  sollst  sein  blat  trinken,  und  in  die  erde
sinken  !    in  aller  teufel  namen.

Another :  Du  elben  und  du  elbinne,  mir  ist  gesagt,  du  kannst  den  könig
von  der  königin  bringen,  und  den  vogel  von  dem  yiest,  du  sollst  noch  ruhen

'  Nos.  XXXVni.  XXXIX.  from  Voigt'e  Quedlinburg  Witch-trials.


1862  APPENDIX.

noch  i*a8teti,  du  kommst  dean  unter  den  buscb,  das  du  den  menschdi
keinen  scbaden  tfaust.

Another :  Op  nnsers  Gottes  berge  ist  unsers  herrn  Gottes  bpm  (vrell),  in
unsers  berrn  Gottes  born  ist  unsers  herrn  Gottes  nap  (bow]),  in  unsers
herrn  Gottes  nappe  ist  unsers  herrn  Gottes  appel,  liegt  sente  Johannis
evangeh'nm,  das  benimmt  einem  (rids  one  of)  die  bösen  dinger,  der  liebe
Gott  wolle  helfen,  dass  es  vergehe,  und  nicht  bestehe !

Another :  Joseph  und  gardian  die  giengen  vor  Gott  den  herrn  stau ;  da
sie  vor  Gott  den  herrn  kamen,  trauerte  (sorrowed)  Joseph  also  sehre.  Es
sprach  Gott  mein  herre:  'Joseph,  warum  trauerst  du  so  sehr?'— 'Die
unterneen  kleine  wollen  ausfaulen  (the  underground  tiniea  want  to  ro^^
mein  fleisch  und  meine  beine/ — '  Ich  verbiede  es  den  untersen  kleinen,  das
sie  nicht  ausfaulen  mein  fleisch  und  meine  beine  ! '  ^

Another:  Die  heiligen  Drei  Könige  giengen  über  das  feld,  do  mtc^ei^
ihnen  (met  them)  alp  und  el&m.'  Älbinne,  das  solt  du  nicht  thun,  kehre
wieder  um.'    im  uamen  u.  s.  w.

Another :  Hebhe-mutter  und  hoch-mutlerf  lege  still  ein  deinem  blöde,  als
Jesus  lag  in  seiner  mutter  schote.

XXXIX.    Against  Diseases,

Unser  herr  Jesus  Christus  und  dieser  wasser-flnss.  ich  veibüssedir,
sieben  und  siebenzig  schuss  (77  shot) ;  sieben  und  siebenzig  seiuhe,  die  seind
mehr  denn  wir  verbüssen ;  weichen  von  diesem  geruch  (?)  neunerlei
gesckuss !  das  sei  dir  zur  busse  gezählet  (counted  as  quittance),  im  namec
etc.

Es  giengen  drei  Salomon  über  einen  öl- berg,  sie  giengen  über  eine  grüne
aue,  da  begegnet  ihnen  Marie  unse  liebe  fraue  : '  Wohin  ihr  drei  Salomen  ? '
— '  Wei  willen  hen-gahn  ut,  und  seuken  mangerlei  god  krut  (see  XXXI),
dat  stikt  nicht,  dat  bnkt  nicht,  dat  kilU  nicht,  dat  swült  nicht.*  im  namen
u.  s.  w.

Unse  leve  frue  ging  still  over  land,  se  gesegene  desen  hitligen  brand,  6mX
he  nich  quillt  oder  schwillt  und  inworts  fritt  I

Wollet  ihr  hören  des  Herrn  wunder  grot,  da  Jesus  Christus  von  Marien
auf  den  erdboden  schot,  in  einer  hilligen  spangen,  damit  sie  den  herreo
Jesum  Christ  empfangen,  sie  trug  ihn  unterm  herzen  vierzig  wochen  ohne
schmerzen,  sie  trug  ihn  gen  Betlehem  in  die  Stadt,  da  Jesus  drinne  geboren
ward.  Sie  schickten  ihn  über  das  wilde  meer,  es  wäre  noth  sie  hinter  ihn
kämen,  drei  scharfe  dornen  mit  sich  nähmen,  das  eine  was  de  harte  nagel.
de  ward  dem  heiligen  Christ  durch  bände  und  füsse  geschlagen.  Die
falschen  Juden  waren  oft  behende  (quick),  sie  warfen  ihm  ein  dornen  krön
auf  sein  baupt,  dass  ihm  sein  rosin-farbnes  blaut  durch  seinen  braunen  bsrt
flosB.  Johannes  thät  einen  hellen  schrei :  '  Hilf  Gott,  mir  bricht  mein  hers
entzwei,  die  mutter  Gottes  will]  gar  verderben,  J.  Christus  wird  gar  am
kreuze  sterben.'  Wie  he  do  gestorben  was,  do  verwandelt  sich  laub  und
gras,  und  alles  was  auf  dem  erdboden  was.     Ut  welken  munde  (out  (f

1  A  similar  formula  in  the  little  Book  of  Bomanus  (Qörres^s  Volksbücher,  p.  SOo).
s  The  orig.  has  absurdly  *  alfinadi  alfinie,*  evid.  for  the  L.  Sax.  alfindi  elßti.


SPELLS.  1863

whose  month)  dies  gebefc  wird  gesprodieo,  der  wird  (may  lie  be)  nicht
gehauen  oder  gestochen,  dem  wird  kein  haus  ve^'hrant,  kein  jungfränlicii
herz  wird  auch  zu  schänden,  keiner  frauen  ....  gelangen !  das  helf
mich  Qoti  und  seine  heiligen  fünf  wunden.

XL.    Fragm,  of  a  'prayer  against  Fire  and  Tempest,

(Andr.  Grjphiiis*  Horribilicr.  p.  768.)

Das  walte  der  es  walten  kann !  Matthes  gang  ein,  Pilatus  gang  aus,
ist  eine  arme  seele  drans  (i.e.,  out  of  hell).  '  Arme  seele,  wo  kommst  du
her  (from)P  ' — *  Aus  regen  und  wind,  au«  demfeuHgen  ring*

XL.*    Beginning  of  a  Spell  (14th  cent.).

unser  Herr  saz  und  stunt  under  der  kirch-tür,  da  kam  sein  lieb  traud
muter  gangen  (herfür) :  '  Draut  son,  mein  herre,  wie  siezest  du  trawren  so

sere  P  ' *  Ach,  herczen-liebew  muter  mein,  solt  ich  nit  trawrig  sein  P '

Da  kom  ich  an  hulwechs  perg  gangen,  da  schoz  mich  der  bulwechst  da  schoz
mich  die  bulwechsin,  da  schoz  mich  als  ir  hin-gesind  (all  their  household),
etc.    Conf.  XVIII.

XLI.    For  a  Fire.

A  fire  can  be  charmed,  if  he  that  speaks  the  charm  ride  three  times  round
the  flame;  it  will  then  go  out.    But  the  third  time,  the  fire  makes  a  rush

at  him,  and  if  it  catch  him,  he  is  lost. *  Feuer,  stand  stille  um  der  worte

willen,  die  S.  Lorenz  sprach,  da  er  den  feurigen  rost  ansach  (looked  at  the
burning  gridiron).'

Another:  'Gott  grüsse  dich,  liebes  feuer,  mit  deiner  flamme  ungeheuer!
das  gebeut  (bids)  dir  der  heilige  mann  Jesus,  du  solt  stille  stan,  und  mit
der  flamme  nit  für  bass  gan  (no  further  go)!  im  namen  etc.'

Another :  '  Feuer-glut,  du  solfit  stille  stehn,  und  wie  das  liebe  Marien-
kind die  marter  am  kreuze  hat  ausgestanden,  der  hat  um  unserer  sünde

willen  all  still  gestanden.* While  uttering  these  words  three  times,  one

shall  take  a  little  earth  from  under  one*s  right  (or  left)  foot,  and  cast  it  in
the  fire  (conf.  a  Danish  spell  in  Nyerup's  Morskabsl.  200).

XLII.    Against  Elbe,

Ich  beschwöre  dich,  alb,  der  du  äugen  hast  wie  ein  kalb,  rücken  wi^  ein
teig4rog,  weise  (shew)  mir  deines  herren  hof !

Ihr  elben,  sitzet  feste,  weicht  (budge)  nicht  aus  eurem  neste !  Ihr  elben,
ziehet  fort,  weicht  bald  an  andern  ort !

Im  thume  steht  die  rosenblume,  sie  ist  weder  braun  noch  fahl,  so
müssen  die  hilf -dinger  (bip  or  thigh  elben)  zersteuben  und  zerfahren
(disperse),  und  kommen  der  hirtischen  Margareten  in's  teufeis  namen
an !     (Carpzov's  Pract.  rer.  crim.,  pars  1,  qnsBst.  50,  p.  420).

In  burying  her  elben,  the  witch  puts  a  little  wax,  some  threads  of  flax,
and  some  cheese  and  bread  in  the  grave  with  them,  and  accompanies  the


1864  APPENDED.

action  with  the  words:  'Da,  elben,  da,  wringet  das  wachs,  spinnet  das
flachs,  esset  den  käse,  esset  das  hrot,  und  lasst  mich  ohne  noth ! '  (Elias
Casp.  Beichardt's  Verra.  beitr.  3,  369).

XLIIL    For  Fever,  etc.

Fieber  hin,  fieber  her!  lass  dich  blicken  nimmer  mehr!  fahr  der  weil
in  ein  wilde  au  !  das  schaft  dir  ein  alte  frau.  Tartel-täabchen  ohne  gallen;
JeaÜe  gichtclien,  du  sollst  fallen  !

For  worm  in  the  finger.  Gott  vater  fährt  gen  acker,  er  ackert  fein
wacker,  er  ackert  würine  heraus,  einer  war  weiss,  der  ander  schwarz,  der
dritte  roth  ;  hie  liegen  alle  wurme  todt.

.  For  ulcered  lungs.  Scher  dich  fort,  dn  scbändliches  hrust-geschwär,  von
des  kindes  rippe,  gleich  wie  die  knh  von  der  krippe  !  (see  Superst.  873).

For  harm-grund.  To  uproot  this  eruption,  wash  in  a  pool  where  cats
and  dogs  are  drowned,  saying  the  words:  *In  dit  water,  worin  versupen
manch  katt  und  hund,  darin  still  ik  di  barmgrund.  im  namen  u.  s.w/
(Schittze's  Hoist.  Id.  1,  70).

XLIV.    For  the  Gout.

Before  daybreak  on  the  first  of  May,  the  gouty  man  must  go  into  the
wood,  tliere  silently  let  three  drops  of  his  blood  sink  into  the  split  of  a
young  piyie,  and  having  closed  up  the  opening  with  wax  from  a  virgin  bee-
hive, must  cry  aloud :  *  Give  you  good  morning,  Madam  Pine,  here  I  brin^
you  the  gout  so  fine;  what  I  have  borne  a  year  and  a  day,  you  shall  bear
for  ever  and  aye !  Earth^s  dew  may  drench  yon,  and  heaven's  rain  ponr,
but  gont  shall  pinch  you  for  evermore  t '  (Ernst  Wagner's  ABC  eines
henneberg.  fiebel- schützen,  Tub.  1810,  p.  229).

XLV.     For  Women  in  Labour.

Unser  liebe  frau  und  unser  lieber  herr  Jesus  Christ  giengen  mit  ein-
ander durch  die  stadt  :^  '  Ist  niemand  Iner  der  mein  bedarf  (has  need  of
me)P  Liegt  ein  krankes  weih,  sie  liegt  in  kindes  banden.  Gott  helf  ihr
und  ihrem  lieben  kind  von  einander  !  das  thu  herr  Jesu  Christ,  der  schliess

auf  (may  he  unlock)  schloss^  eisen  und  bein ! ' Con  f.  the  following  in

Mone's  Anz.  for  1834,  p.  278 :  Ich  bitte  dich,  Maria  nnd  Jesu  Christ,  das
mir  das  schloss  verschlossen  ist>  der  Maria  ruhet  unter  ir  brüst,  das  mir
das  schloss  wider  uf  wisch  (fly  open).

XLVI.     To  forget  JTomen  (conf.  ON.  orminnis-öl).

Ich  weiss  wol  wo  du  bist,  ich  sende  dir  den  vater  herrn  Jesu  Christ»  ich
sende  dir  der  treusten  boten  drei  (three  messengers),  die  anf  erden  und
himmel  sind,  den  einen  in  dein  gemüte,  den  andern  in  dein  geblüte,  den
dritten  in  deines  herzens  block :  Gott  gebe  dass  oüe  weiber  und  mägde  in
deinem  herzen  verstochen  (moulder)  I  Ich  sende  dir  den  süssen  herm
Jesum,  den  süssen  herrn  Christum,  die  stumpfen  nägel  drei,  die  Gott  dem

1  Many  such  beginnings,  e.g. :  '  Christ  and  his  mother  came  out  of  a  wood,  vent
over  field  and  went  over  land,  up  hill,  down  hill,  faggot  in  hand,  etc.'


SPELLS.  1865

herrn  warden  geschlagen,  den  einen  durch  seine  hände,  den  einen  durch
seine  füsse,  den  dritten  durch  sein  herze:  Gott  gebe  dass  du  müssest
vergessen  alle  weiter  in  deinem  herzen !    im  namen  etc.

XLVIL     To  stop  Thieves}

Wie  Maria  im  kinde-bette  lag,  drei  engel  ihr  da  pflagen  (tended),  der
erste  hiess  S.  Michael,  der  ander  S.  Gabriel,  der  dritte  hiess  S.  Bafael.
da  kamen  die  falschen  Juden,  und  wollten  ihr  liebes  kindlein  stehlen.    Da

sprach  Maria:  *  S.  Petre,  bind!' Petrus  sprach:  'Ich  hab  gebunden

mit  Jesu  banden,  mit  Gottes  selbst-eignen  (very  own)  banden.'  Wer  mir
ein  diebstal  thut  stehlen,  der  muss  stehn  bleiben  wie  ein  stock,  über  sich
sehen  wie  ein  block,  wann  er  mehr  kann  zählen  (count)  als  sterne  am
himmel  stehn,  alle  sohnee-flocken,  alle  regentropfen,  wann  er  das  alles
kann  thun,  mag  er  mit  dem  gestolen  gut  hin-gehn  wo  er  will,  wann  er's
aber  nicht  kann,  so  soll  er  stehn  bleiben  mir  zu  einem  pfand  (pledge),  bis
ich  mit  meinen  leiblichen  äugen  über  ihn  sehe,  und  ihm  ur-laub  (leave)
gebe,  wieder  zu  gehn.  '

XL VIII.    To  root  one  to  the  spot.

Hier  stand  so  fest,  als  der  bäum  hält  sein  äst  (boughs),  als  der  nagel
in  der  wand  (wall),  durch  Jesum  Marien  söhn ;  dass  du  weder  schreitest
noch  reitest,  und  kein  gewehr  (weapon)  ergreifest!  In  des  Höchsten
namen  solt  du  stehn.

XLIX.     The  Same.

Ich  tha  dich  anblicken,  drei  bluts-tropfen  sollen  dich  erschricken  in  dei-
nem leibe,  der  erste  mit  einer  leber,  der  zweite  mit  einer  zunge,  der  dritte
mit  einer  mannes  kraft.  Ihr  reitet  oder  geht  zu  fuss,  gebunden  sollt  ihr
sein  so  gewiss  and  so  fest,  als  der  bäum  hält  seine  äst  (boughs),  und  der
ast  hält  seine  uest,  und  der  hirsch  (hart)  hält  seine  zungen,  und  der  herr
Christas  ans  hat  das  himmelreich  errangen  (won);  so  gewiss  und  wahr
sollt  ihr  st&n,  als  der  heil.  Johannes  stand  am  Jord&n,  da  er  den  lieben
herrn  Jesum  getanfet ;  und  also  gewiss  und  wahrhaftig  solt  ihr  stehn,  bis
(tili)  die  liebe  göttliche  mutter  einen  andern  söhn  gebähret,  so  gewiss
solt  ihr  sein  gebunden  zu  dieser  tag-zeit  und  stunden  (hour) !

L.     To  make  oneself  Beloved.

Ich  trete  Über  die  schwelle  (threshold),  nehme  Jesum  zu  meinem  gesellen
(companion) ;  Gott  ist  mein  schuh^  himmel  ist  mein  hut  (hat),  heilig  kreuz
mein  schwert ;  wer  mich  heute  sieht,  habe  mich  lieb  und  werth  I  So  bef ehl
(commit)  ich  mich  in  die  heilige  drei  benedicts  pfennung  (keeping  ?),  die
nenn-mal-nenn  (9  X  9)  geweihet  nnd  gesegnet  sein ;  so  befehl  ich  mich  in
der  heil.  Dreifaltigkeit  leuchtnng;  der  mich  heute  sieht  and  hört,  der
habe  mich  lieb  und  werth.    im  namen  etc.

>  Similar  Danish  spells  in  Nyerup's  Morskabsl.,  pp.  197-8.


1866  APPENDIX.

LI.     To  make  oneaelf  Invisible,

Grüss  euch  Gott!  seid  ihr  wol-gemut  (are  ye  merrj)  ?  habt  ihr  ge-
trunken des  berrn  Christi  blut  P '  Gesegne  mich  Gott,  ich  bin  wol-gemut,

ich  habe  getrunken  des  herrn  Christi  blut.'  Christus  ist  mein  matäel,
roch,  etock  und  fu88,  seine  heilige  fünf  wunden  mich  verbergen  thun  (do
hide).  Bep.  *  Gesegne  mich— Christi  blut.'  Christus  der  herr,  der  die
blinden  sehend  gemacht,  und  die  sehenden  blind  machen  kann,  wolle  eure
angen  verdunkeln  und  verblenden  (darken  and  dazzle),  dass  ihr  mich  nicht
sehet  noch  merket  u.  s.  w.

SWEDISH.
LH.    (from  Fernow's  Wärmelaud,  p.  250  seq.)

Sanct  Johannes  evangelist,  han  bjgde  bro  (built  bridges)  for  Jesnm
Christ,  v&r  Herre  är  min  brynja  (armour),  och  Jesus  är  min  föravar.  ser
väl  för  (provides  against)  min  fall  idag  och  hvar  d&g,för  den  lieta  dd  (hot
fire), /or  den  hvassa  arm  (sharp  worm). /or  den  biinda  man,  som  alia  v&bla
villa  kan.  Den  ena  bön  (prayer)  för  min  nöd,  den  ara  fÖr  min  död,  den
tredje  för  min  fattiga  själ  (poor  soul).

Afton-hön  (evening  prayer).  Jag  lägi^er  i  v&rs  Herrea  tröst,  korsa
(crosses)  gör  jag  för  mit  bröst.  eigne  mig  8ol,  och  eigne  mig  Mdne  (snn
and  moon  bless  me),  och  all  den  frögd  som  jorden  bär  (joy  that  eanh
bearp).  Jorden  är  min  brtjnja,  och  himmelin  är  min  ehjöld,  och  jungfru
Maria  är  mit  evärd,

liter:  Nu  g&r  jag  te  sängje  (bed),  med  mig  har  jag  Guds  äugle,  tolf  (12)
te  band  och  tolf  te  fot,  tolf  te  hvar  ledamot  (limb).

ännu  en  annan :  Yär  herre  Jesus  rider  öfver  hede  (heath),  d&r  möter  kan
den  lede  (evil  one).  '  Hvart  (whither)  skal  du  hän  p  '  sade  vär  herre  Jesus.
— '  Jag  skal  ät  kött  at  suga  blodJ — '  Nej,  jag  förmenar  dig ;  da  skal  ur
ben  och  i  kött  (out  of  bone  and  into  flesh),  fir  kött  och  i  skinn,  ur  tkinn
och  ändä  at  helfvetes  pina !  *  genom  tre  namn.

At  döfva  verk  (to  allay  pain) :  Yär  herre  Jesus  rider  in  pi  kjrko-g&rd,
dar  döfde  han  b&de  verk  och  ear.  JesuB  eonmade,  verken  domnade  ;  Jesus
vahnade,  verken  saktnade.    genom  tre  namn.

DANISH.
Llir.     (from  Nyerup's  Morskdbsl.  200.  201).

At  dolge  eg  og  od  (to  blunt  the  edge  and  point).  Las  disse  ord  stras
naar  (as  soon  as)  du  seer  knivene  eller  svärdene  dragne:  '  Stat,  eg  og  od,
med  de  samme  ord  soni  Gud  skabte  himmel  og  jord.  slat,  eg  og  od,  med
de  samme  ord  som  Gud  skabte  sig  selv  med  kjöd  og  blod  i  jomfru  Maria
liv !  i  navn  Gud  faders  etc.'

Yor  herre  Christus  red  i  herre-färd,  dövede  han  alle  dragne  svärd;  alle
de  vaaben  (weapons)  som  han  saae,  dem  tog  haue  eg  og  odde  fra,  med  sine
to  händer  og  med  sine  ti  fingre,  med  sit  velsignede  blod,  med  sin  värdig
)iellig  aand  (spirit)  og  med  sit  hellige  kors,  med  sine  tolv  engle  og  med  sine


SPELLS.  1867

toi 7  apostle.  Fra  Mod  og  nd  til  od,  det  hvide  skal  ikhe  hide  (white  shall
not  bite),  det  rode  skal  ikhe  hlöde,  förend  Christus  sig  igjen  ]ader  föde  (till
C.  again  be  born),  dat  er  skeet  og  skeer  aid  rig  mere.

Jesus  gik  ad  vejen  f  ram,  der  mödte  ham  Bylla  den  Ude  og  gram.  '  Hvor
vil  du  gange  P'  siger  Jesus. — *  Jeg  vil  gaae  til  N.  N.* — *  Hrad  vil  du
der  P  *  siger  Jesus. — *  Jeg  vil  hans  blod  lapt,  jeg  vil  hans  he7i  hidt,  og
hans  händer  elldt,  jeg  vil  hans  hilse  fortappe.' — *Nej,*  siger  Johannes
evangelist,  'detskal  du  ikke  gjöre;  mens  Jesu  navn  mane  dig  of  hlodi
flod  I  Jesn  navn  mane  dig  af  be^n  i  ateen  !  Jesu  navn  mane  dig  af  hold
i  mold  !    Jesu  navn  mane  dig  ud  til  Verdens  ende  !

Jesus  ban  sig  under  espen  stod,  ban  svedte  vand  (water),  han  svedte
hlod.  Flye  ägterosen  for  ordet  (before  the  word),  som  den  döde  ujider
jorden,  eom  duggen  (dew)  for  dagen !  Jeg  binder  dig  med  min  haand,  og
med  Jesu  haand,  med  jomfru  Marias  haand,  med  de  ni  (nine)  gode  Guds
engler,  med  hvid  uld  (wool)  og  grön  gras  og  den  heilig  Aands  saude  last.
i  navn  eta

Lucia  den  blide  skal  flye  mig  ad  vide  (sweet  St  Lucy  let  me  know) :  hvie
dug  jeg  skal  brede  (whose  cloth  I  shall  lay),  hvis  seng  (bed)  jeg  skal  rede,
hvis  bam  jeg  skal  bare,  hvis  kjäreste  (darling)  ^e^  skal  vare,  hvis  arm  jeg
skal  sove  i  (sleep  Ib).

Fkom  Jutland.

A  ligger  mä  paa  mi  by ver  ley  (I  lay  me  on  my  right  side),  saa  souer
a  paa  vor  fron  Frey.  Herud  (get  out),  Ragirist !  herind,  Mari  med  Jesu
Christ!  Herud,  dit  slemme  skaan  (6Ith)!  herind,  Marl  med  det  lille
baan  !

Tvil  det  satter  a  mellem  deiden  aa  mä  (this  Til  put  twixt  the  d.  and
me) :  '  Du  gjör  di  finger  for  brey  (too  broad),  aa  di  taa  for  laang '  sagde
jomfru  Mari.— *  Da  skal  a  hind  dem  i  en  silke-iraa*  sagde  Jesns;  *  vig
bort,  du  deusl,  aa  i  7  ond  aander!'  Saa  satter  a  vor  Haris  12  eggler
omkring  mä,  to  ve  min  hoved,  to  ve  hver  a  min  bien  (2  at  each  leg),  to
ve  mi  hyver  aa  to  ve  mi  venster  sie  (left  side) ;  saa  vil  a  si  paa  den  deuel
der  skal  gjOr  mä  nöy.    i  Giösus  naun,  amen.

Liy.    In  anointiiig  with  salt  for  the  Gripes  {?).

(fr.  Skand.  Lit.  selsk.  Skr.  19,  376.)

Christus  gik  sig  til  kirke,  med  bog  i  bände;  kom  selver  jomfru  Marie
prangende.  *Hvi  falder  du  löd  (pale),  min  välsignede  sou  ?  * — '  Jeg  haver
faaet  stärk  greh,  min  velsignede  moder.'

LV.    Against  Oripes}

Jeg  gior  at  dette  menneske  for  herg-greb,  for  söe-greb,  for  dodmans  greh,
for  alle  de  greb,  som  falder  imellem  himm^l  og  jord,    i  de  tre  navn  etc.

1  Nos.  LV — LVIII  from  Haus  Hammond's  Nordiska  Missions-historie  (Ejöbeoh.
1787),  pp.  119.  120.


1868  APPENDIX.

LVI.    Against  Bendsel  (goat,  rheamatisro).

JesuB  gik  Big  efter  vejen  frera,  der  mödie  han  slangen  (snake).  '  Hror
bar  da  agtet  dig  P  '  Bagde  der  herre  Jesas.  Saa  svarede  haa  :  '  til  den,
Bum  Bvag  er  (is  weak).'  Saa  svarede  den  herre  Jesus :  '  Jeg  skal  dig  igieo
vende  (turn  thee  back),  hiem  igien  sende,  jeg  skal  sende  dig  udi  hiergtt
hlau  (into  the  blue  mtn),  der  e^al  da  staae,  saa  länge  som  yerden  (world)
Btaaer,  jeg  skal  binde  dig  med  mine  ti  fingre  og  med  UAv  Gads  engle/
ndi  tre  navn  etc.

.    LVII.    For  a  Broken  'Bone,

Jesus  reed  sig  ttl  heede  (heath),  der  reed  han  syndt  (asander)  sit  fole-
been»  Jesus  stigede  af,  og  lagte  det  (doctored  it).  Jesus  lagde  maiT  i
marv,  been  i  been,  kiod  i  kiöd..  Jesus  lagde  derpaa  et  blad,  at  det  skolde
blive  i  samme  stad.    i  tre  navne  etc.

LVIII.    Against  Qvärsil  (a  horse-disease).

Jeg  gior  at  dette  best  for  qvärsil  udi  3  navn.  der  ere  3  ord  som  dover
(allaj)  qvärsil :  et  er  jorden,  det  andet  er  solen,  det  tredie  er  Jesa  Christi
moder  jomfrue  Marie.

LIX.    Fo7'  Nettle-sting,

When  badlj  stong  with  nettles,  you  take  a  few  leaves  of  dock,  dockon
(rumex  obtusifolius),  spit  on  them,  and  rub  the  place  with  them,  attering
the  words  :  'In  dockon  (elsewh.  dock),  out  nettle  ! '  In  Chaucer's  TroiL  and
Cr.  4,  461 :  '  Nettle  in,  dock  out'  A  Mid.  Lat.  saw :  '  Exeat  artica,  tibi  sit
periscelis  arnica!' — Brockett's  Glossary  of  North-country  words,  p.  57.
[Out  nettle,  in  dock  !  Barnes,  p.  49.]


A  more  copious  Collection  of  such  Incantations  (of  which  but  a  bare
beginning  is  here  made)  would  be  needed  to  throw  a  full  light  on  their
origin  and  drift.  But  older  documents  seem  indispensable ;  *  many  are
taken  down  from  the  people's  mouth  corrupt  and  unintelligible.  Their
substance  is  often  antique  and  highly  poetic ;  some  are  distingaished  by  i
compressed  conciseness,  e.g. '  Oben  aus,  und  nirgend  an  I '  or  '  Wer  mich
Bcheusst,  den  schiess  ich  wieder,'  and  '  Shot  me  thon  hast,  I  shoot  thee
again.'

The  same  incidents,  the  same  turns  of  expression,  re-appear  in  different
couDtries  :  a  sign  of  long  and  wide  diffusion.  Thus,  the  elf  or  devil,  bound
on  a  mischievous  errand,  is  met  and  baulked  (XXXYIII.  LII.  LIII.  LYI) ;
then  again,  the  meeting  of  those  in  search  of  remedies  forms  a  prelude
(XXXI.  XXXIX).  The  successive  casting-out  from  marrow  to  bone,  fr.
bone  to  flesh,  fr.  flesh  to  skin,  in  YI  and  LII,  shews  the  oneness  of  the

^  Horst  (Zanber-bibl.  4,  S6S)  got  a  number  of  Spells  out  of  a  15th  cent,  parehment
at  Trier,  but  does  not  give  them  in  his  book,  whioh  has  a  wearisome  abundance  of
worthless  things.  Probably  the  little  Book  of  Bomanus  (Görres  no.  34)  oontains
available  matter.


I


SPELLS.  1869

Old  German  spell  with  the  Swedish.  It  is  anoient  too  for  protection  to  be
expressed  by  gates  (VHP),  hauberk,^  skirt,  shield^  helmet  and  sword  (lY.
X.  L.  LH),  or  bja  body  of  hone,  a  heart  of  stone,  a  head  of  steel  (IX.  X  XI).
Often  Alliteration  still  peeps  out  through  the  Rhyme,  e.g.  in  the  numbers
77  and  55  (XXX.  XXXIX  VHP),  and  in  the  AS.  spells  IIL  IV.

As  alliteration  and  rhyme  are  mixed,  the  contents  seem  also  to  combine
a  worship  of  Heathen  and  Christian  beings.  Mary  stands  side  by  side
with  Earth  and  8un  (LVIII),  also  with  Earth  and  Heavsn  (II).  8un  and
Moon  are  invoked  in  X  and  LII,  and  in  XXXV  the  head  must  be  turned
toward  the  8wn :  a  primitive  worship  of  Elements.  The  Jutish  formula
LIII  retains  even  the  goddess  Frey  a,  if  the  translation  be  correct :  'Hay
me  down  on  my  right  side,  so  shall  I  sleep  with  lady  Freya.'  Who  is
Bagirist?  (ON.  ragr=timidus,  malus,  conf .  JBo^i  og  Bdstei  herud  Bagi
Bist,  Antiqy.  anm.  3,  44).  ByUa  too  in  LIII  seems  a  nickname  (conf.  Bulla
8.  2.  298).

Many  spells  rest  on  mere  sympathy  between  the  simile  and  the  desired
effect.  The  blood,  the  fire,  are  to  stand  as  still  as  Christ  hung  on  the  cross
(XLT,  sanguis  mane  in  venis,  sicut  Christus  pro  te  in  poenis;  sanguis
mane  flxus,  sicut  Christus  crucifixus);  as  Jordan  stood  at  the  baptism
(VIII);  as  mankind  will  stand  at 'the  Judgment-day  (XXXII).  The  fire
is  to  keep  in  its  sparks,  as  Mary  kept  her  maidenhood  (XXVI) ;  the  worm
in  the  flesh  to  feel  such  pain  as  Peter  felt  when  he  saw  the  sufierings  of
his  Lord  (XXXIV) ;  the  hoof  to  break  as  little  as  ever  God  broke  his  word
(XXXVI).  Yet  sometimes  the  formula  of  the  simile  bears  a  direct  re-
lation to  the  effect,  as  in  VHP,  where  a  peace  is  prayed  for,  like  that
which  prevailed  at  the  birth  of  Christ.

Our  poets  of  the  I3th  cent,  mention  several  spells,  but  quote  none.
•  Das  swert  bedarf  wol  segens  wort,'  Parz.  253,  25 ;  *  swertes  segen  §ren,'
MS.  2,  233*;  *  wunden  segen  sprechen,'  Parz.  507,  23.  Only  in  Dint.  1, 362
are  a  few  words  introduced  of  a  Blessing  on  a  Journey :  '  guot  st  iu  weter
nnde  wint ! '  An  dbent-segen,  a  morgen-segen,  are  alluded  to  in  MS.  1, 184*.
2,  36*;  conf.  1,161*.  2,  207^  A  morning-blessing  composed  by  Walther
stands  in  his  works  24, 18.

*  A  MS.  at  Cambr.  Univ.  LI.  1, 10  has  a  Latin  spell,  entitled  LoHea,  with  an
AS.  interlinear  version :  *  hano  loricam  Lading  cantavit  ter  in  omni  die.'  There
are  89  lines  of  rhyme,  imploring  protection  for  all  parts  of  the  body  and  in  all
dangers.    The  first  four  lines  are :

Suifragare,  trinitatis  unitas,
unitatis  saffragare  trinitas,
BofFragare  quaeso  mihi  posito
maris  magni  velat  in  perioulo.

It  is  not  very  poetical,  nor  always  intelligible ;  but  it  is  of  the  9th  cent.


VOL   17.  Q   Q


INDEX    TO    VOL.    IV.


Aaskereia  1591.

abgott  (false  god)  1285.

Abraham*B  garden  1696.

abrennntiatio  1279.

abrotonum  (soathern-wood)  1678-9.

Act£Bon  (like  Hackelberg)  1587.

Ad,  old  buildings  asoribed  to  1444.

Adam  1450. 1550.  1595.

Adams-bntz  (changeling)  1421.

Adonis  (like  Hackelberg)  1587.

Adrasteia»  Nemesis  1576.

wSSacas  1451.

Aegir,  jonmej  to  Asgard  1362.

Mollis,  ruler  of  winds  1471-2. 1474.

Affenberg  (apes*  hiU)  1441.  1489.

Agasül  1361.

Agatliodffimon  1431-4.  1491.

Agemond  (a  homesprite)  1434.

Agistadimn  (under  Oegir)  1361.

Agnar  (Bryxmild's  first  choice)  1405.

Agsteyn  (amber,  pearl  ?)  1685.

Ahriman  (devil)  1601.

Ahti.  Ahto  (sea-god)  1361.  1430.

Ahurö-mazd&o,  Ormusd  1291.  1600.

&ibr  (gift)  1299.

aihvatundi  (bramble-bush)  1301.

air-castle  (paradise)  1544.

AXffa  (fate)  1401.

Ajax,  Alat  (his  flower)  1670.

AJdnakes  (sword-god)  1351.

alah,  alhs  (temple)  1807.

Alban  (dwarf's  name)  1408-9.

Alb-donar  1347.

alb-dono,  fell->one  (bittersweet  ?)  1411.

1682-8.
Alber  (a  mountain-sprite)  1354. 1409.
Alberloh  (fairy  king)  1411-8.
Alcis  (a  giant)  1390.
aldumari  (world-tree)  1536. 1540.
Aletheia  (truth)  1576-9.
alf,  elf  1409-10.  1452.
Alf-heimr  (Elf-land)  1355. 1409-10.
Alfrigg,  Elberich  (fairy  king)  1413.
AlfröSull(moon?)  1362.
alhait,  olheit  1755,  no.  8.
Aliruna,  Albruna  1318. 1399.
Alke  (a  dog's  name)  1282.
Allerhätenberg  (a  hill  in  Hesse)  1313.
allerürken  (homesprite  7)  1435.
alp  (eU)  1408-19. 1763,  line  81.


Alps,  called  albe,  eke  1409.

Alraun,  Aliruna  1899.

ahraun  (mandrake)    1399.  1435.    1562«

1673. 1762,  line  43.
Altanus  (a  wind,  Woden)  1327.
al-tvil  hermaphrodite)  1425.  1431.
Al-vis  (Thör*B  son-in-law)  1348.
Amaltheia*8  horn  1525. 1569.
Amazons  1403.
ambrosia,  amrita  1376-7.
Ameretät  (immortality)  1576.
andaoht  (devotion)  1293. 1314.  1399.
and-skoti  (foe,  fiend)  1602.
Andvara-naut  (Sigurd's  ring)  1599.
Andvari  (a  dwarf)  1410-4-7. 1469. 1470.
anel  (granny)  1290.
anemoB  (wind)  1469.
angang  (what  meets)  1637. 1762,  line  52.

1771.  oh.  67.    1777.  no.  10.    1781,

no.  92.
angels  1411. 1570-1.
announce,  anmelden  (of  ghost)  1585.
anses  (gods)  1732-3.
Ansivarii  1291.
anst  (grace)  1296.
ant-heiz  (vowed  ofifering)  1298.
Antichrist  1541.
Antony's  fire  1656.
Apis  1493.

ApoUo  1531.  1554. 1649.  1676.
appearing,  disappei^ing  1379-80.
aptra-gftnga  (re-venant)  1585.
"Apeof  Kwri,  T^r-hiaUn  1352.  1671.
Ares's  blood  (a  plant)  1670.
&r-gefnar  (crop-givers)  1383.
Arianrod  (milky  way)  1334. 1389.
ariolus  (soothsayer)  1317.
Aristeas  1333.
Amliotr  (a  giant)  1443-4.
arrow-spell  1761,  line  15.
&rs-gftng  1634.
Artemis  (Diana)  1321. 1357. 1365. 1488.

1494. 1554. 1592. 1665.  1670.
artemisia  (mugwort)  1678.
Arthur  1595.
ar-weggen)  (earth-wights)  1408  n.  1414-5

n.
Asa-bragr  (Th5rr}  1348.
Asa-grim  (OtSinn)  1837.
Asa-thörr  1388.


1871


1872


INDEX.


Ases,  the  (gocU)  1291. 1581.

AsgarSr  (Ases*  land)  1384.

Askibnrg  for  Asoafna-b.  1388.

▲skr  (first  man)  1449-50. 1734.

Asmer  grib  (QSinn)  1337.

Aspri&n  (a  giant)  1448.  1473.

asses  saoriflced  1302.

ast  (bongh,  akin  to  As  7)  1291.  '

Asta  (a  moontain  in  the  west)  1514.

Astnsa  (jastioe)  1576.

asnra  (spirit)  1291.

ftsynja  (goddess)  1363.

Athena  (Minerva)  1821.  1380-1-2. 1670.

Athrava  (priest)  1314.

Atlas  1450.  1536.  1541.

AtH  (Thftrr)  1339-40.  1600.

At-ri«i  (0»inn)  1336.

Atropos  1401-2.

Attüngr  (kindred  ?)  1291.

atzmann  (wax  figure)  1772-3.

Anoholf  1529.

Andon  (OSinn  ?)  1326.

aoga-steinn  1685.

anlne  (alder,  Erlkönig  ?)  1480.

ansa  vatni  (pagan  baptism)  1279.

Austheia  (bee-goddess)  1497.

Ao'Sumla  (cow  of  creation)  1483.

Avalön,  isle  of  1401.

avarA  (image)  1319.

avat&ra  (incarnation)  1384-5.

Ayentinre  (fortune)  1585.

baba,  zloto-baba  1290.

Babehüd  1671.

BabiloB  (bee-god)  1497.

Bacchus  1354.  1501.

backofen-drescher  (dwarfs)  1416.

badi  (bed,  altar)  1308.

BaBldaBg.  1357.  1717.  1729-30.

Balaam's  ass  1481.

Baldach  1357.

Baldr  1357.   1377.  1383-6.   1392.  1625.

1694.
Baldrs-hagi  1384.
baly6nas,  boly&n  (image)  1319.
ban-shi  1409.  1571.
bare  head  1454.
bark,  *twizt  wood  and  1480.
barlebaen  (a  devil)  1606.
Barwithsyssel  1309.
barzdukkai  (dwarf)  1412.
baum-heckel  (tree-peoker)  1598.
Bayard  1446.  1595.
beal-tine  (May  fire)  1465.
Bearskin  1011.
Beaw,  Beow  1722.
Bechl-boschen  (Xmas  tree)  1870.
Beelzebub  1604-5.
bees  1476.
Bel,  Belenus  1357.
BeU  1855.
Belinnntia  1676.


bell-ringmg  1280.  1417.  1468.  1626-7.

Bellona  1352-8.  1381.

Bendis  (moon-goddess)  1398.

Beowulf  1448.

Berecynthia  1365.

Bergelmir  1441.

berg-mannlein  1414.

Bertita  1366. 1494.  1797-8.

Berhtolt  1370.

berlicke  1699.

bdtan,  böten,  büezen  (heal)  1616.

betonica  1676.

bibemell  (pimpernel)  1668.

bfbdz  (mugwort)  1678.

Bibuno  (a  dwarf)  1414.

bidental  (struck  by  lightning)  1341.

bidjan  (pray)  1294.

Bifli«i,  Biflindi  (OiSum)  1469.

biiken-brennen  1468.

BUet  (king  of  dwarfs)  1413.

bilewit,  bilwiz  (spectre,  witch)  1423-4.

bilfinger  (12  fingered)  1440.

Billing  1391-2.

BiUy  bUnd  1432.

bilmer-schnitt,    pilsen-s.     (crop-lifting

1424.  1798.
bird's  nest  1597.
birds  of  omen  1639.  1771-2.
bitebau  (faunns)  1426.
Bivor  (a  dwarf)  1414.
bjara  (conveyance)  1628.
blate-fuoz  (blade-foot)  1412.
blessed  maids  1398.  1404-5.
Bliceio  (death)  1559.
Blocksberg  1619.
bl6tan  (sacrifice)  1297.
boar-badge  1355.
boar's  head  1328.  1355.
bocks-mahrte  (spectre)  1697.
bogk  (bogie)  1433.
böhlers-männchen  (hill-folk)  1415.
BölJ>om  (a  giant)  1437.
bona  dea,  b.  soda,  b.  fortnna  1431.
bonus  eventus  1431.
Boppe,  Poppo  (a  hero)  1393.
Boreas  1469.  1473.
Borg-sabe  (loan-giver)  1369.
Börr,  nifi  three  sons  1449.
boruta  (wood-sprite)  1425.
bo-tra  (goblin's  tree)  1834.
botz,  potz  (for  Gottes)  1285.
Bragi  1861-2.  1386.
Brei«a-blik  1357.
brem-garten  1494.
Brezeliande  1422.
Brians  (a  dwarf)  1413.
Brimir  (the  sea)  1460.
farising  (Midsummer-fire)  1467.
Bitstnga-men  1578-4.
Brittia  1550.
Brdga  (terror)  1353.
broomstick -nding  1628.


IKDEX.


1878


Bronel-straet  (milky  way)  1389.
Brunhild,  her  footmarks  1313.
Branmatin  (Aurora)  1519.
Bnmn-akr  1361.
Bruno's  ooaoh  (Great  Bear)  1508.
Brynhildr  1318.    1398.    1403-5.    1443.

1699. 1674.
built-in  aliye  1646-7.
bu-limns  (dog-hanger)  1660.  1777.
BuUer-bom  1312.
bulweohs  (spectre)  1868.
B^  (Ino)  1450.
Bnrlenberg  1600.
Burr  (iair  wind)  1333.
bush-grandmother  1427.
bntze,  butz-igel  (bogie)  1421.  1433.
Byr  (fair  wind)  1333.

GiBsarl4f4.  1714.

Cain  1444.

Callaeoia  1379.

Calypso  1400.

cambio  (changeling)  1754.

capeet  1502.

oaragins.  1737-8.

caraway-bread  1427.

Carl  1335-6.   1594.  1676.

Cama  1674.

C&sere,  Ciesar  1714.

Cassandra  1491.

Castor  1890.  1438.

Cerberus  1670.

Ceres  1365.  1382.  1417.  1501.

certain  bridge,  certain  death  1550-8.

cervula  1737.

chafer  1494.

changeling  (weohselbalg)  1421.  1777.

Chans  (grace)  1330.

Charles  wain  1508.  1582.

Charon  1550.  1554.

ohelidoninm  (celandine)  1531.

Chern,  Heru  1361.

cberrioburgas  (witch's  porter)  1619.

chüd's  caul  1570.  1788.

Chiron  (a  centaur)  1670.

Christmas  fires  1468.

Chronos,  Xp6pos  (time)  1534.

chnleih  (horse-beetle)  1494.

church  1312-3.

Circe  1631-2.

Cisa,  Zisa  1372.

Clarina  1368-9.  1404.

Clotho  (a  fate)  1402.

cloud-castle  1544.

clouds,  path  of  1389.

clutched  by  a  witch  1632.

cock-chafer  1495.

cock-crowing  1485.

coibhi,  coifi  (priest)  1281.  1816.

complices,  eonsentes  1291.

Constantine  1444.

Copia  (plenty)  1575.


cornucopia  1569.

Corybantes  1418.

cow-death  1443.

crane-men  1420.

Cross,  wood  of  the  1595.

crystal,  looking  into  1774.

cuckoo  1488.  1785-6.  1792.  1804.  1834.

1836-7.
cummin-bread  1427.
Cundrie  1424.
cursing  1690.
cyclop  1439.  1440.  1444.
cyno-cephaJos  (dog-headed)  1403.

dad-sisas  (adjuring  the  dead)  1739,  ii.

daemon  (spirit)  1407.  1410.

Dagr  (day)  1361.  1373.  1481.  1511.

dah6,  dehait  (opp.  to  souhait)  1688.

daigs  (sacrifice)  1298.

D&inn  (dead :  a  dwarf)  1414.

D&ins-leifr  (a  sword's  name)  1423.

Dakshus  1450.

Dalkopp  (a  homesprite)  1434.

Damhest  (a  watersprite)  1429.

Dan  1595.

danitza,  dennitsa  (morning-star)  1507.

Danpr,  Danr  (dawn)  1361.

Danubii  filias  1459.

dAse  (goblin,  witch?)  1621.

day  1611—21.

day-choosing  1645.

Death  1552.

death-bird  1643.

Death,  Gossip  1560.

death's  head  1559.

death-shoe  1660.

decumanus  fiuctus  (tenth  wave)  1461.

dehait  (opp.  to  souhait)  1688.

Delltngr  1511.

Demeter  1366.  1383.  1476.

Deucalion's  flood  1452.

devü's  bit  1795.

carl.  chUd  1601.    1611.

Umb  1604.  1611.

mother  1607.

dew-skimmer,  tau-dragil  1533. 1624.

dewaite  szwenta  (goddess  of  rain)  1468^

dialas  (fays)  1401.

Diana  1737.  1741. 1750. 1761.

Diarmuid  na  mban  1587.

dice  1334. 1674.

dicht  (snug,  safe,  sound)  1586. 1808.

Diespiter,  also  Dis  pater  1350  1387.

Dietrich,  his  footmarks  1313. 1387.

*s  house  1667  n.

Bern  1590.

dievas,  dievaitis  (god)  1349.
dille-Btein  (Ud  of  heU)  1540.
Dina  (Diana)  1589.
ding  (thing,  sprite)  1408.  1862.
Dionysus  (Bacchus)  1354. 1538.
Dios-curi  (Gemini)  1390-6. 1449.


1874


INDEX.


dirae-weibel  1370. 1405,

dts  (wise  woman)  1898.

disappearing  1592.

Dit,  dlTit-  (Pluto,  Plntos)  1599.

divoyi  (giants)  1442.

docke  (water-dock)  1429.

ddgor,  doegr  (half-day)  1526.

dogs  named  after  gods  1282.

Dold  1600.

Don  1884.

Donar,  Thonar.  Thdrr  1310.  1838.

donner-bart  1346. 1672.

besen,  -gneg  1346.

nessel,  -rebe  1346. 1790  n.

Donners-berg  1840.

Doners-w6  (-temple)  1847.

Dor,  Dh6r  1338.

dorant  (snapdragon  ?)  1680.

doste  (wild  marjoram)  1680. 1820.

dove  1888. 1490.  1547.

dragon  1493. 1531. 1599.  1798.  1812-9.

1847.
dragon-fly  1614.
dragon-tree  1819.
dreams,  interpretation  of  1647.
drangr  (spectre)  1585.
Drebkollys  (earthquake)  1542.
Drtfa  (a  wind-goddess)  1470.
dröle  (-troll?)  1439.
dmcs,  drakhs  (daemon)  1585. 1605.
dmden-banm  1536.
dragi-dinc  (spectre)  1419.
dmids  1315. 1616.
drnt  (goblin)  1404.
draVs  foot  (pentagram)  1803. 1810.
diyads  1412.
di^  (magician)  1616.
dnende  (goblin)  1431.
Duisburg  1350.
Dumbs-haf  1460.
Durinn  (a  dwarf)  1414.
dusii,  dusen  (incabi  ?)  1426.
Dvalinn  (a  dwarf)  1414.
DT&para  1585. 1574.
dverg-mAl  (echo)  1413.
dvergr  (dwarf)  1409.
dwarfs  1409.  1861.
Dyggri  1361.
Dyaus  (sky-god)  1886.
Dziewanna  1670.

Eager  1361.

eagles  fan  the  king  1642.
ears,  ringing  in  the  1637.
earth,  slices  of  1763,  line  92.
earth-mannikins  1410. 1415. 1820.
earth-worms  (men)  1445. 1449.
east,  looking  to  the  1297.
Easter  1808.  1810.
Easter-cakes  1206-7.
Easter-fires  1466.
echo  1412-3.


Eokhart  1589-90.

Egesa  (awe)  1853.

Egisleiba  1361.

ehren-gang  1300.

Eigil  1392.        0

Eindrit$i  1339  n.

einhamr  1386-7.

einheri  1548.

Eir  1651.

Eirimoin  1888.

Eisen-berhta  1370.

elbe  (elf)  1495. 1546. 1861-2-3-4.

Elbegast,  Elegast  1420.

Elbendrötsoh  1409. 1417.

Elberich  1420-2.

eldborg  (fire)  1835.

elements  1453.

Elenther  1855.

elf -blaster,  -näfver  (plants)  1411.

elf -gras  1422.

elf-shot  (thunder  bolt)  1410-1.

Elias  1841.

Ehno*s  fire  1644.

Elver-sele,  Elyinnen-berg  1409.

elysium  Hightning-stmck)  1341.  1544-5.

Embla  (first  woman)  1449. 1450.

endr-bomir  (twice-born)  1394.

Eniautos  (year,  as  giant)  1525.

Enoch  1341.

ent  (giant)  1438. 1444.

eofor-cumbol  (boar*s  figure)  1355.

eoten,  eten  (giant)  1487.  1444.

Epaphos  (begotten  by  touch)  1827.

Ephialtes  (a  giant)  1440.

epidemia  (visitation)  1885.

firagrehti  (grace)  1296.

Ere  (honour)  1676.

Erik  1389-90.  1602.

Erinnyes  ^furies)  1586.

erl-könig  (alder  king)  1480.

ipfULta  (cairns)  1805.

Er-tag  (Tuesday)  1851.

Etionas  1437.

Etzel,  AtU  (Th5rr)  1339-40.

Eve  1450.

evü  eye  1682.  1808. 1814.  1826.

d-warto  (priest,  judge)  1814.

Exhelmer  stein  1861.

ezidemön  (serpent  on  helmet)  1491.

Fftfnir  1492. 1494. 1599.

Fairguneis  1341.

fairy  rings  1422.

Falada  1399.

Fama  1579. 1584.

Famars  1351.

familiaris  1436.

F&morgAn  1544. 1650.

fantasma  1426.

Fanuel  (St.  Annexe  father)  1449.

farfadet  (ignis  fatuus)  1438.

farhu&tan  (curse)  1592.


INDEX.


1875


Farma-t^r  (OSixm)  1331.

Fasolt  (a  giant)  1473.  1588.

Faste  1370.

fasten-bähU  (liay.bride)  1531.

fata,  fada,  f6e  1401.

fatalism  1562.

Fates  1401-2. 1746.

fatus  1400-1.

fannns  1426.

Fanstas  1569. 1629.

fajB,  f6es  1401.

febriliiga,  feyerfew  1697.

feig,  f ej  (marked  to  die)  1560.

FdmnrgAii  1401.

feng  (wild  woman)  1426.

Fengr  (OKinn)  1331.

Fenja  1404.  1442.

Fenrir  1362.

fergön  (asli;,  pray)  1294.

Feridun  1337.

fem-seed  1677.

fenrer  (sonls)  1545-6.  1584.

fetch  (double,  wraith)  1571.

feaer-mann  (ignis  fatans)  1586.  1801.

Fiele  Gig  (a  giant)  1436.

field-spinster  (witoh)  1811.

Fin  Barre  (a  hero)  1336.  1444.

Finn  (a  dwarf)  1414. 1723.

Finz-weibl  (wood-wife)  1427.

Fiolnir  (OSinn)  1331. 1334. 1354. 1356.

Fiörgyn  1341. 1363  end.

fire-gazing  1748  (d).  1762,  line  34. 1773,

fixe,  perpetual  1465.

firwitz  (presumption)  1471.

Fitohers-Yogel  1420.

Fiuk,  Frick  1471.

fleder-Togel  1420.

Flederwisch  (devil)  1622.

flehen  (implore)  1294-5.

flower-offerings  1305-6.

foal's  tooth,  füli-zant  1482.  1794.

Folch-ans  1291. 1333.

Fold,  Fnld  (deyil)  1603.

foil  (one's  *  thorn  in  flesh')  1360.

foUet  (fairy)  1483.

fols  (cuckoo)  1488.

Fönn  (a  wind-god)  1470.

Fontinalia  1459.

fools  cut  out  of  the  sick  1610.

Foob,  Ship  of  1366.

torämütk  (sorcery)  1615.

forget-me-not  1597.

Formido  1352-8.

Fomiotr  1441.

Forseti  1360.

Fortuna  1564.

fosse-grim  (water-sprite)  1430.

Fr&nangrs-iors  1458.

Fred  (Wödan's  wife)  1328.

Fre&wine  1718—22.

Frecken-horst  1309.  1318. 1373.

Freke  1373.


freskr(8eer?)  1635.

frdtt  (diYination)  1298. 1317.

Freyja  1354. 1373.  1501. 1538. 1867-9.

Freyr  1325. 1354.  1442.  1501. 1528.

Freys-vinr  1387.

Fricca  1591-2.

Frick,  Fiuk  1471.

Friedrich  Bedbeard  1474.  1594.

Frigg  (0«in'8  wife)   1328.  1373.  1377.

1744  n.
Frigge-r&kken  (-distaff,Orion's  belt)1509.
friscing  (pig,  lamb)  1303.
FritJuwulf  1719—22.
Fr6  1353.
Fro  1354-6.

Frö^a-miöll  (gold)  1475.
Frögertha  1373.
Fröja  1373.

Frö-muot  (mirth)  1577.
FrÖ8-&  1353-5.
Frosti  (a  giant)  1442.
Fruike,  Fru  1373.
Fruma  (gain)  1576.
frum-sceaft  (creation)  1444.
Fuik  1373.
Fulla  1373.

fuUa-fahjan  (worship)  1298.
Fuoge,  Fr6  1374.
furia  1587.
furious  host  1587.
furiwiz  1307.

fürwitz  (presumption)  1471.
futter-männchen  (homesprite)  1434.
fylgja  (guardian  spirit)  1571.

gach-schepfe  1399.

gäuthier  (spectre)  1588.

Gala,  Gd  (earth)  1363. 1458.

galdr,  galster  (magic  spell)  1616-8. 1850.

galiug  (false  god,  idol)  1285.

gallows-mannikin  1562.

gahn  (echo)  1412.

Gand-&lfr  (a  dwarf)  1620.

Ganders-heim  1313.

gandharva  1581.

gandr  1620.

Ganga  1405.

G&ng-leri,  -HXt  (0«inn)  1332. 1593.

Gargantua,  chaire  de  1445.

g&rsecg  (sea)  1460.

Garuda  (king  of  birds)  1485.

Gaste-bli  1627.

Gauchs-berg  (cuckoo's  hill)  1441. 1489

Gauden,  Dame  1588.

gäuthier  1588.

Gautr  1390. 1733.

G4nts,  *  Gapt '  1732-3.

Ge4t  1719—24.

Gebhart  (an  elf)  1433.

Gefjon  1823.  1374.  1442-3. 1581.

gehenna  (hell)  1537.

geira-dxOttinn  (QSinn)  1332.


1876


INDEX.


geir-niöi^r  (hero)  1386.

Geir-röfir  (a  giant)  1442.

aeirsta«a-&lir  (Olafr)  1410.

geist,  ghost  1407.

Gelder  1357.

genesen  (get  well)  1653.

Genisens  1737.

Geofen  1460.

George^s  (St)  shirt  1765,  Hne  163.

GertSr  13o4-6. 1378-4.  1442.

G^r-ans  (spear-god)  1291. 1333.

Gersioii  1574.

Gertrud  1306. 1551. 1757.

Gestr  (0«inn)  1332. 1381.    '

getw&s  (fantasma)  1419.  1586.

Gevams  1817.

Giant  1437-9.

Giber  mons  1595.

Gibioho  1313. 1391. 1477.

gid  (song)  1581.

giezen  (cast,  mould)  1290.

GilaidiB  1398.

Gif-hom  1569.

glfr  (giantess)  1439.

gift-hant  1651.

gigant  (giant)  1439.

GUtine  (plague)  1668.

ginnünga-gap  (ohaos)  1448.

gipsies,  Zygainer  1775.

girregar  (ignis  fatuus)  1586.

Giyekan-horst  1309.

Gtvers-berg  1439. 1595.

glas-burg  1544.

Glasir,  Glasis-lundr  (-gxove)  1385.

Glaukos  1192.  1671.

Glenr  1373. 1514.

glucks-haube  (ohUd*s  oaul)  1570.  1788.

gnid-eld  (needfire)  1464.

goa  (thunder)  1339.

goat-men  1426.

goat-saorifioe  1303.

gobelin  (homesprite)  1432.

God,  gud,  g&S  1285.

God  and  me,  welcome  to  1287.

goddess  1363.

Gode,  Fm  1364.

god-forgotten  (horehound)  1670.

gof$-gft  (blasphemy)  1288.

god-gubbe  (Thor)  1414.

God  'fanighty's  cow  1495.

god-mAlugr  (inspired)  1581.

god-mor  (Thör's  wife)  1864.

Gol^mundr  (a  hero)  1442. 1545.

God's  judgment  (ordeal)   1281;  anger,

hatred  1288;  goodness,  power  1289;

fatherhood  1290.
gods*  images  1819. 1320-1-2.

language  1383.

vefaloles  1319.

God  threatened  1288.9.
gofar,  gaffer  (Thor)  1339.
G6i  1364. 1588.


Göndul  (a  valkyr)  1318.  1404.

good  man,  g.  woman  (priest,  nun)  1314.

good  neighbour  (dwarf)  1416.

good  people  (elves)  1452.

gota-deo  (priest)  1316«

Gota-hehn  1287.

gotes  friunt,  kint  (priest)  1316.

gotewuote,  godowdde  (tyrant)  1387.

gotinne  (goddess)  1363. 1400.

götze  (false  god,idol)  1286.1319— 81. 143S.

go-vejter,  gu-vitter  (good  wights)  1407.

Gözes-brunno  (spring)  1456.

Grau,  the  holy  1598. 1595.

Grani  (0«in's  horse)  1481. 1591.

Granmar  1545.

Greet,  schwarze  (a  giantess)  1443.

Grendel  1431. 1443-8.  1574.  1618.

grensino  (nymphsa)  1679.

grey-man,  Grey-mantle  1332.

grey-smith  1332. 1649.

grilSa-statSr  (sanctuary)  1313.

Gilme  (a  giant)  1448.

Giimnir  (OtSinn)  1331-2.

grindel  (bolt,  bar)  1362.

GrAa  (a  prophetess)  1318.

grandfather  1340. 1476.

Grumbus  1436.

Guckenburg  1591.

gud.  gu«  (god)  1285.

GuVbrandr  1280. 1817.

gudeman*s  croft  1884.

gudja  (priest)  1314.

guetel  (goblin)  1426.

Guggenberg  1589.

GuUin-bnrsti  (Prey's  boar)  1354. '

gun-bet  1308.

gunderebe,    gunderman?    (ground-iTy)

1625.
Gunginge  1333. 1733.;
Güngnir  1333.

GunnaiT  (OiSinn)  1327. 1599.
Gunnlöd  1442. 1582.
Gunnvör  1374.
Gurorysse  1591.
gwion  (elf)1409.
Gwydion  (W6dan?)  1384.
Gyges,  ring  of  1569.
g^gr  (giant)  1439.
Gylfi  1362. 1698.
G^mir  (a  giant)  1441. 1460.

Habel  1413-4.

Hachel  (a  witch)  1618. 1630.

Haddlngr  1887.

Hades  1537. 1548

Hadu,  Hadu-l&va  1358.

Hadu-wart  1389.

hafs-frun  (mermaid)  1874. 1428.

hag,  hagetisse,  hagazusa  1618.

hag-ridden  1419.

Hagedorn  (deril)  1606. 1621.

hft  höU  (ValhöU)  1543.


INDEX.


1877


bail-making  1769.

bail-wardens  1473.

Hakelberg  1587.

Halgoland  1360.

Halja  1376-6.

Halle  1619.

Hilogi  1362.

hamadryads  1426.

hamars-mark  1344-6.

bamingja  1671.

bammer  1344-6. 1606.

band,  under  one's  1692-3,

Hans,  Jack  1447.

hant-gift  1661. 1762,  line  47.

HÄr  (high)  1387.

Har-barör  (0«inn)  1331.

hardened,  made  proof  1631.

harein  (noise  of  wind)  1470.

Harga  (a  giant)  1448.

Hani  1692.

Harke,  Fran  1364.

harno  (temple)  1308.

Hasalwara  1374.

hatching-dollar  1809.

Hati  (a  giant)  1443.

Hatt  1332.

bauga-dr6ttinn  (OSinn)  1832.

haoga-eldr  (rock-fire)  1639.

Haule-mutter  (HoUe)  1368

Haaryat4t,  (wholeness)  1676.

heart-worm  (-bom)  1660.

heathen  1277

heathen-wolf  1630.

Hecate  1369. 1494. 1692.

heer-brand  (aurora  b.)  1610.

heer-schein  1499. 1610.

heer-strasze  (highway)  1389.

beila-w&c  (holy  wave)  1810.

heil-brunnen  (healing  springs)  1466-6.

heiliges  wetter  (lightning)  1821.

HeiUug  1322.

heil-rathinnen  1400.

heil-schanen  (augury)  1634.

heimchen  (cricket)  1816.

Heim«aUr  1360-1.  1377.  1621.

Heimo  (a  hero)  1394.  1440. 1699.

Hein,  Friend  (death)  1669.

Heinz  (tom-cat)  1482.

heita  (pray,  vow)  1294.

heithaft  (priest,  priestly)  1316.

heize-männoher  (homesprite)  1432.  «

Hekel-berg,  -velde,  Hecla  1606.

Hel  1862.  1376.  1637. 1667.

hela-valkya  (frictüe  fire)  1466.

Hei-bUndi  1391.

bele-kappe  (cap  or  cloak  of  darkness)

1418.
Helena  1396. 1449.
Helenus,  1491.
Helga-fell  1476. 1646.
hel-grind  (-grating,  -rail)  1638.
Heligoland  1360.


helle-book  (devil),  -rabe,  -ware,  -wolf

1604 ;  -grave,  -scherge,  -warte,  -wirt

1606.
heUe-hunt  1640-1-2.  1604.
helle-putze  (pit)  1640 ;  -tor,  -viur  1638.
helli-porta    1638:    -stronm,    -strauma

1640;  -winna,  hell-wüterin  (fury)

1587.
hell-jager    1617;    -wagen    1638;    -weg

1389. 1638.
Helmn6t  Elenther  1355.
Hel-rei«  (-ride)  1638.
Hel-voet  (-foot)  1377.
Hengi-kiaptr  (CWinn)  1331.
Heugist  1712-3.

henne-kleid  (grave-clothes)  1438.
Hennil  (dawn)  1620.
Heorot  1482.

HephiBstos  (Vulcan)  1461. 1639. 1601.
Hdra  (Juno)  1321.  1458.
iterakles's  blood,  H.'s  seed  1470.
Herbot,  Herbout  (hunger-stricken)  1676.
Hercules  1390. 1691.
Heroynia  1308. 1811.
herd-got  (hearth-god)  1431.
Heremdd  1722.  1726.
Herrgautr  (OSinn)  1390.
Herjan  (QSinn)  1327. 1374.
Herkir,  Herkja  (giants)  1443. 1650.
Hermen,  sla  dermen  1888.
Hermes    1334-6-7.    1842.    1491.    1564.

1670.
HermöiSr  1358.
Herne  the  hunter  1591.
Herodias  1689.  1741-2  n.  1760.  1761.
Her-teitr  (0«inn)  1327. 1724.
hertinga  (heroes)  1387.
Heru  1361.
Hervor  1374.
Hesperides  1545.

heze  (witch)  1618. 1789.  1802.8-4.  1809.
hezen-besen  (houseleek)  1846.
hialm-mey  (valkyr)  1403.
Hiisi  (woodsprite)  1425.  1447.
Hilde-gilm,  Grtm-hildr  1361.
Hilden-street  (milky  way)  1319.
Hildi-göltr,  -svin  (-boar)  1356.
Hildi-moder  1368.
HUd-61fr  (son  of  OlSmn)  1853. 1390.
Hildr  under  hehnet  1404.
Hilgerio  1307.
Hille  1698.

Hille-snd  (Hollo's  snow)  1813.
Hilte  (a  giantess)  1448.
Hilti-ooma  1404.
himel-blfie  (rainbow)  1511.
Himeles-berg,  Himin-biörg  1360-1,
himel-wagen  (Charles  wain)  1608.
himmel-brand  (white  mullein)  1672.
himmels-ziege  (a  spider)  1846.
hiuri,  geheuer  (snug,  safe)  1685.
mdr  1861-2.


1878


INDEX.


HU«.8kiAU  1328.

Hlin  1578.

hliodar-sAzo  (wisard)  1617.

Hlö«yn  1847.

Hlöok  (a  valkyr)  1404.

H16ra  1839  n.

H16r-ri«i  1339  n.  1728.

HnikArr  (QSixm)  1833.

HnosB  1574.

hobbyhorse  1538.

hobgoblin  1432.

Hodd-mlmir  1892.

flödeken  1488. 1471. 1474.

H0«rl858.

högbeigs-gnbbe  (giant)  1414. 1448-4.

Högni  1412. 1420.  1599.

hoie-männlein  (elf)  1422.

Hoier  1336.

Hoida  1367. 1591-2. 1744.

holden  (elves)  1407.  1821.  1855,  xiii.

Hölga-brü«r  (ThörgertSr,  Irpa)  1318.

HoUe,  Fran  1367. 1545. 1588.

Hollen-stein,  -teioh  1367.

Holle-peter  1536.

Höll-haken  (-hook)  1538.

holy  weather  (lightning)  1821.

holz-fraole  (woodsprite)  1406. 1424-7.

holz-mann  (woodsprite)  1413.

holz-wtp  (woodsprite)  1404. 1427. 1795.

Hood,  Bobin  1482.

hörga-brütSr  (ThörgerSr,  Irpa)  1818.

horn  of  plenty  1569.

Home  the  hnnter  1591.

hom-lmta  1621.

Horsa  1712-3.

horse-flesh  1302. 1619.

horse-footed  1603.

horses'  heads  on  gables  1482.

horses  sacrificed  1301.

Horselberg  1590.

hors-gok  (cuckoo)  1846-7.

Hothems  1357.

Hours  1458. 1542. 1560.

Hrädlan  l&f  1573.

hne-lios  (ignis  fatuus)  1586.

Hne-svelgr  1447. 1472.

hriuYa-dubd  1648.

Hrani  böndi  (OlSinn)  1332. 1381.

Hr§«-cyning  1352.

Hrim-faxi  1458. 1489.

Hrtm-gerSr  (a  giantess)  1440. 1442-3.

Hris-berg  1489.

Hrö^rs  andscoti  1352.

Hrdptr  (0«inn)  1331. 1548.

Hrüngmr  (a  giant)  1441.

Huginn  1833. 1485-6.

Hngleich,  HygelAc  1898.

Huldre-web  1868.

huldre-hat  1418.

huldren  1452.

Huldu-fdlk  1415-6.


human  sacrifices  1800.

hune  (giant)  1438.

Hunger  1575.

hunger-spring  1457.

Hunsaloa  1298.

hunsl,  hüsel,  housel  1298.

hunter,  the  wüd  1556. 1587-8.

hunt-houbito  (dog-headed)  1403.

huorco  (ogre)  1428.

hfis-got  (homesprite)  1431.

hvarfs-haU  1418.

hv&t  (omen)  1592. 1634-9.

hyitsippan  1422.

Hyfja-berg  1651.

HyUe-fru  1868.

H^mir  (a  giant)  1853. 1441.

hyp»thral  temple  1809.

lafn-hAr  (co-equal)  1887.

lAlkr  1390.

iam-greipr  (Th6r*8  gloves)  1346.

lam-saza  (Thör's  wife)  1348. 1351. 1441.

iam-vitSjur  1427.

Idanthyrsus  1887.

idol-pelting  1284.

i^dzona  (witch)  1625.

iUuminations  1468.

images  of  gods  1819.

incense  1304.

incubus  1754.

Indra    1839.    1342.    1350.   1386.  1414.

1471. 1495.  1543. 1569.  1663.
Ingo  1388. 1717-8. 1734.
Ino  1450.

invultare  (fascinate)  1629.
lo  1327.
iodute  1350.
lor«  (earth)  1868.
lörmungandr  1452-3.
lötun-heimr  1437. 1442. 1605.
iötunn  (giant)  1437.
Iring  (a  hero)  1389.
Iris  1511. 1554-8. 1688.
Irmansül  1312. 1822.
Irmino  (a  hero)  1784.
Irpa  1818.

irr-kraut,  -würz  (fern)  1678.
irr-licht  (ignis  fatuus)  1586.  1801.
tsama  (verbena)  1676.
Isamo-dori  1312.
Iseo-stein  1404.
Isis  1867.

Iskrycki  (a  homesprite)  1586.
Istaevones  1783.
Istio  1734.

Itermon  1722. 1726. 1735.
itis  (nymph)  1398
i-vivir  (woodsprite)  1427.

Jack  player  1442. 1560.

James's  road  (milky  way,  etc.)  1389.

Janus  1448.


INDEX.


1879


Jasion  1476.

Jemshid  (death-god)  1664.

Jettha  1318. 1487.

Jodnte  1284. 1860. 1666.

John  (Baptist)  1469. 1696. 1783-8. 1812.

John's  BYB  1626. 1822-6-8. 1839. 1841-2.

—  fires  1466-7-8. 1816. 1842.

minne  1806.

morrow  1466. 1889.

wort  (hyperioom)  1836-6.

judel  (goblin)  1779-80. 17925.

jn-glans  1840.

Jolitts  CflBsar  1444.

jnnciroawen-wert  1369.

jnng-bninne  (fount  of  youth)  1466.

Juno  1821. 1469-71. 1666.

Jupiter    1822-8.     1889.    1469.    1788-9.

1740.
—  Anunon  1387*
JuY  1849.

Kaiser,  the  old  1494.

Kfila  (god  of  underworld)  1564.  1574.

Ealeva  1343.  1446.  1609.

Kalis  1480.  1686.

Kallewepoeg  1447.

Kahna  (death-god)  1660.

KAma-duh  (wishing-cow)  1670.

Kann  (possibility)  1899.

Kama  (son  of  the  Sun)  1894.

Katzans,  Katzen-veit(woodBprite)  1424-6.

kaukas  (elf)  1416.  1686.

kel-kropf,  keel-kropf  (changeling)  1421.

K§r-ans,  Gir-ans  (spear-god)  1291. 1383.

kessel-fang  (water-ordeal)  1281.

k^,  inherited  1786.  1818.

kiesen  (choose,  foresee),  1684.

Kifhäuser  1694.

kikimora  (nightmare)  1697.

kilchen,  vor  (outside  the  church)  1691  n.

kinen  (yawn,  gape)  1448.

kint  ungemeHit  1624.

Kipn-mäki  (mount  of  pain)  1661.

kitz-kammer  (cave)  1868.  1878.

Kiyutar  1619.  1664.

klag-mutter  (owl,  woodwife,  witch)  1643.

klabater-man  (sbip-sprite)  1432.

Klaubauf  1486^

klokar  (wise,  holy  men)  1814.

klopfer,  knocker  (homesprite)  1482.

knockers,  1410.

kobolt  (homesprite),  1481-2.  1495.

koelkerz  (May  fire)  1466.

kölski  (devU)  1606.

KÖpoKoi  (Orestes  and  Fylades)  1407.

korr  (dwarf)  1411.

Kotar  (man  in  the  moon)  1506.
Joeide-weiss  (death-bird)  1643.
^reka  (Attila*s  wife)  1864.

Kiünhüt  1599.  1632.

Krishna  1878.

kroden-duYel  1868.  1416.


Krodo  1862.

Kronos  1862-8.  1884.  1696.

krotten-stein  (thunderbolt)  1844. 1686.

Krumine  (Geres)  1367.

Knga  1668.

Kullervo  (woodsprite)  1426.  1683.

Kümmemiss,  St.  1577.

kunder  (creature)  1408.

kuu  (moon)  1606.

kuntar  (man  in  the  moon)  1505.  1611.

Kuvdra  (god  of  wealth)  1384. 1575. 1699.

KvAsir  1377. 1681-2.

kynsl  (creature)  1408.

Uo  (offermg)  1298.

Lacheeis  1402.

lady-bird,  God  *lmighty's  cow  1495.

liBYlsi  Loki  1362.

laga-stafr  1864.

Laima  (fate)  1665.  1571-2.  1665.

Lakshmi  1877.  1572.

land-v8Btt  (genius  loci)  1407.

lang-hüte  (homesprite)  1434.

Lanuvium  (dragon  of)  1599.

LapithfiB  1441.

lar  (house-god)  1481.

Lateranus  1410-1.  1484-6.

Lauma  1369.  1421.  1686.

laun-blöt  (secret  paganism)  1278.

Laurln  (a  King  of  dwarfs)  1413.

lead,  pouring  melted  1763,  line  94.  1776

(96).  1781  (97).  1800  (579).
league-boots  1443-4.
leber-mer  (liver-sea)  1460. 1551.
Leda  1396.
leifi  (giant)  1489.
lenz  (spring)  1526.
LeucotheaU518.
Liber  1864-5.
liezen  (to  divine)  1617.
ligatnne  1664.  1741.  1744.
Linkenbold  (wild  hunter)  1589.
linfllngr  (elf)  1415.
Liviso  1362.
log-pelting  1848.
Logil862.  1605.
loh-jungfer  1688.

Loki  1862. 1886. 1481. 1674. 1605.
Loptr  1610.

lösl-nächte  (Absolution-days)  1818.
lot-casting  1685.  1748-9.
Louhi  1381.  1386.  1582.
Luaran  1418.  1481.
lubbe,  lubber  1439.
Lucifer  1362.  1607.  1512.  1686.   1601.

1605.
Ludna  1666.

ladegheer  (man  in  the  moon)  1505.
Lug,  Heillug  1822.
Luna  1822.
lunam  deduoere  1628.
Lurlenberg  1600.


1880


INDEX.


latin  (goblin)  1431.  1488.

macaUft  (echo)  1418.

Madalgdr  1677.

Madhyama  (the  earth)  1585.

Maere  (fame)  1579-80.

magician  1614.

Magni  1348. 1728-9.

Mäha,  St  1336. 1505.

MaSas  1531-2.

majalifl  eacrivas  1302-8.

malannus  1851,  vii.

Mal-cre&tim«  1424.

Maledionr  (a  dwarf)  1420.

malina  (tide)  1460.

mammelainen  (she-dragon)  1599.  1600.

Mana-golt  1442.

mana-86)>8  (world)  1451.

mandragora,  mandrake  1673.

mandncuB  (ogre)  1486.

manes  (ghost)  1585.

man-ezze,  man-nta  1437.  1447.

man-leika  (image)  1318-9.

Mannus  1388.  1735.

manön  (destine)  1560.

Manoratha  1570.

MantuB  (death)  1345.  1559.

Manas  1453.

mara  (nightmare)  1697.

mar-g^gr  (giantess)  1446.

Mari-rok  (Orion's  belt)  1509.

Marko  1595.  1671.

MarpaUe  1442.

Mars  1350-1-2.  1471.  1613.

Mars  Thüros  1349.

Mars  vigila  I  1520.

Martin,  St  (cattle's  guardian)  1696.

Martin's  fowl  1641.  1765,  line  158.

Marates  1344.  1350. 1414. 1471-4. 1546.

Mary  1402.  1671.

masca,  mask  1618-9.

mathematici  (magicians)  1449.  1614.

matronae  1405.

Matata  (dawn)  1518.

May  1527-8-9.

bride  1631-2.

chafer  (cock-chafer)  1495.

pole  1529.

riding  1530-1.

measoring  1661. 1748  (88  r.).  1818(953).

Meffngr  (0«inn)  1831.

megin-giorS  (Thdr's  belt)  1346.

meise,  meislin  (titmouse)  1490.

Melde,  Fran  (fame)  1580.

melden,  announce  (of  ghosts)  1585.

Melusina  1405.  1470.

Menelaos  1387.

Men-glötS  (jewel-glad)  1373.

Menja  1404.  1442.

Mennon  1388.

Mercurius  1322.  1834.  1739-40.

meridianus  diemon  1661.


meri-minni  (mermaid)  1406. 1428. 1430.

Mermeut  1850.

Meravings  1395  n.

mer-wtp  (mermaid)  1405.  1428.

merza-fdlli  (woodpecker)  1487.

metod  (creator)  1290.

mets  halias  (woodsprite)  1418.  1425.

Meuen-loch  1398.

Michael  1542.  1551.  156L  1757.

midsummer,  midwinter  1526.

mUky  way  1389.  1588.

millwheel  water  1771.  1795.  1808.

milf.ina«  (giant)  1439.

Mime,  Miming,  Mtmir  1892.

Minerva  1787-8.

Minne  (love)  1283   1577.

minne-drinking  1306.

Minos  1542.

MiöU  1470.

Miölnir  1344.

miotyi«r  (Yggdrasill)  1536.

Mirabilis  1410.

mistil-teinn,  mistletoe  1598.  1674.

Mith-othin  1837.  1669.

mock-piety  1297.  1314.

M6«i  1348.  1728-9.

m6dra-necht  (Christmas  night)  1724.

moirai  (fates)  1401-2.  1560-1.

molken-tover  (milk-bewitcher)  1623-4.

monjochtroger  1501.

Mönöloke  1435.

Montjoie,  Montjoux  1340.

mooA  1500—5.  1787.  1792-4-6.  1808-12.

moon's  spots  1504.

morgen  1519.

Morgana  1401. 1413.

moss-maidens  1427.

Motte,  Frau  1864. 1589.

Mount  of  Joy  1340.

mouse-making  1628.

mud-spelli  (fire)  1540.

mummel  (goblin)  1433.

Mundilföri  1873.

Muninn  1333. 1485-6.

Munon  1888.

Munya  (lightning)  1406.

Muotes  ner  (furious  host)  1589.

Marraue»=  Holle  1697.

Muses,  the  1582-3.

Muss  (necessity)  1899.

näck-ros  (water-dock)  1429.

nafn-festi  (naming-feast)  1838.

Nahanarrali  1899.

naiad  (fountain-sprite)  1406. 1412.

NÄinn  (dead  :  a  dwarf)  1414.

Nandini  (wishing-cow)  1349. 1483.  1570.

Nanna  1857. 1374. 1398.

Napf-hans  (gobUn)  1434-5.

narren  (fools)  cut  out  1610.

Narron-berg  (fools'  hiU)  1489.

narren-schif  (fools'  ship)  1366.


INDEX.


1881


Naseentia  (fate)  1738.

Nau«  (necessity)  1400.  1565. 1575-6.

navel-stone,  omphalos  1539-40.

nebel-kappe  (cloak  of  darkness)  1418.

Neoessitas  1400.

Neckar  1429. 1430.

nectar  1376-7.

need-fiie  1464-5.  1739,  xiy.

Nehalennia  1405-6.

neighing  1482.  1787.

Nemesis  sleeps,  wakes  1565.

neorzena-wong  (paradise)  1544.

Neph  (an  Egyptian  god)  1450.

Nepr  (son  of  OSinn)  1374. 1390.

Neptnnos  1322.  1333.  1431.

Nereus  1356.

Nerthus  1364.

Nesia  1695.

Nibelunge-hort  1562.

nichns,     nicker,    nioor    (water-sprite)

1428-9.
nickelmann  1429.
N»S-höggr  1537.
Nifl-hel  1537.
night  1521-4.
egese,  -eise  (-horror)  1353.  1523.

1621.

folk  (elves)  1422. 1587-9.  1621.

frau  1621. 1748.

mare  1814.

vole  1620.

weide  (nom)  1561.

nimbns  (a  glory)  1379.  1470.

nimidas  (groves?)  1479.  1739,  vi.

NiörSr  1355-6.

nlradhi  (ocean)  1356.

nis,  nisken  (homesprite)  1432.

Nithart  (devil)  1609.

niu,  ny  (new  moon)  1508.

nix,  nize  (watersprite)  1429.

Nöa-tün  1356.

Nobiskratten  1586.

nobis-krug  1605-6.

Nökkvi  1374. 1429.

nönnor,  QSin's  (valkyrs)  1374.

nork  (woodsprite)  1428.

noms  (fates)  1428.

North  1297.  1605.

northern  lights  1510.

N6t  (necessity)  1400. 1576.

n6t-hemd  (shirt  of  proof)  1816-7.

Nött  (night)  1481.  1541.

notten  (robbing  needfire)  1464.

nnmen  (nod,  deity)  1378.

nandinsB  (week)  1323-5.

Nürggel  1428.

n^  (new  moon)  1503.

nymphiB  1401-2.

oaks,  holy  1479-80.
Oannes  (the  san)  1515.
Oberland,  the  Smith  of,  1290.


odebero  (stork)  1486.
Oden  1326.  1331-2-3.  1591. 1601.
Odens-källa  (-spring)  1336. 1542-9.
05-hrcerir  1682.
OiSin-karl  1336.

0«inn    1326.   1366.   1377.   1381.   1393.
1442. 1491.  1538.  1611.  1618.  1667.
O^inn-dfiBll  (un-gentle)  1331.
0-Sins-ve  (-temple)  1336.
odolifin  (valerian)  1675.
0«r  1373.

Oegir  1361. 1460.  1463.
oegi-sandr  (sea-sand)  1361.
Oegis-hialmr  (helmet)  1361.
Ofnir  (a  snake)  1491.
d-freskr  (ghost-seer)  1635.
Oggewedel  (devil)  1610.
ogre  1428.
Öka.>örr  1338.
Olaf  1446.

old  one,  the  1441.  1602.
Oleg  1591.

ol-gefnar  (ale-givers)  1383.
öl-götze  (idol)  1286.
Ollerns^tJUr  1387-8.
Olympus  1384.

ö-minnis-öl  (drink  of  oblivion)  1632.
Onar  1363.

Ons-anger  (Odin's  ings)  1336.
Ons-kalla  (OSin*s  fount)  1336.
Opfer-bem  1301.
Orcus  1375. 1418.  1428.
Örgelmir  1441.
Orion  1509.

Ormuzd,  Ahurd-mazdAo  1600.
Orva-rodd  1591.
oscillum  (models)  1311.
Oska-byr  (fair  wind)  1333.
Osk-meyjar  1330.
Osk-opnir  1330.  1541.
Osna-brilok  1291.  1510.
Ostacia  (a  sorceress)  1618.
Ostarft  (Easter)  1371. 1520. 1808.  1810«
Ostar-tac  1357.  1372.
oster-flade,  -stuopha  («cakes)  120Ö-7«
Oswald  1386.
Othin  1280. 1282.
Oti-geba  1369. 1576.
Otos  1440.
Ottarr  1353
Otwurm  1599.
oxen  sacrificed  1302.

Pacolet  (a  dwarf)  1423. 1626.

Pakuls  (devü)  1428.

Pale-bom  (-spring)  1859.

PaliUa  1468.

pahn  1755. 1762,  line  69. 1805.

Paltar,  Balder  1857.

Pan  1661.

paradise  1544.

Pare»  (fates)  1402.  1746.


1882


INDEX.


paro  (temple)  1308-9.

path-crossing,  tee  angang.

PaoluB  1469.

pATaka  (fire)  1462. 1468.

Pavor  (dread)  1352.

P6daaqae  1371.

Pegasus  1483.

pehrkones  (ground-ivy,  hedge-mustard)

1340.
Peitho  (persnasion)  1576.
penas,  penates  (house-god)  1431.
Penia  (poverty)  1576.
Peninns  (Jupiter)  1340.
Perahta,  Berhta  1368.
Peri-pik  (Orion's  belt)  1509.
Perkele  (devU)  1340.
Perkunas  (thunder-god)  1281. 1340-4-5.

1501-3.
perpetual  fire  1465.
Perun  (thunder-god)  1339.
Pemnika  (iris)  1511. 1683.
Peter,  St.  1436.
petrifaotion  1446.
pfadelat  (cake)  1306-7.
pfafTen-kellerin,  -wtp  (priesVs  wife)  1621.

1860,  xxxiy.
pfal-graben  (-dike)  1612.
phaUus  1854. 1436.
Pbaraildis  unguentum  1769.
Phol,  Pholes-ouwa,  -piunt  1358-9.
Pholes-pruxmo  (-spring)  1359. 1456. 1613.
Piast  1391.

Pious  (woodpecker)  1487.
piderit  (picklock)  1597.

pileati  (priests)  1316.
pilosas  1426.
pilwiz,  bilwiz  1423.
Piper,  Pippe  kong  1413.
Pita-maha  (Brahma)  1290.
pixy  1409. 1431.
plague  1667.
Pleiades  1509.
plica  Polonica  1419.
plough  carried  about  1366.
Pluto  1323.  1328.  1538.
Plutus  1575.  1599.
Pogh6da  (weather)  1573.
Pchjan*s  daughter  1511. 1625.
PohjoU  1501.
Poine  (plague)  1667.
pol-graben  (-mke)  1612.
Pollux  1390.

polter-geist  (noisy  sprite)  1432.
Polyphemus  1439. 1440-2.
Poppo  (a  hero)  1393.
porperüna  (ram-maker)  1458.
Poseidon  (Neptune)  1542.
possessed  1609.
poster-nights  1467.
Potrimpus  1299.
potz !  (for  Qottes)  1285.


Poulpikan  (an  elf)  1433.
preoari  ^ray)  1293-4.
Precht,  Berhta  1762.
Priapus  1354.

priest's  wife  1821. 1860,  zxxiv.
prlmsignaz  1279.
Pripegala  1854.
Prometheus  1451. 1462.
proof  against  shot,  steel  1681.
Prosexpina  1323. 1538. 1558.
Proteus  1436.

pnipolnica,  pshipolnica  1661.
Psyche  1545.
Ptah  1450.

puk,  püki  (homesprite)  1431.
Puloh  (woodsprite)  1360.
Pulloineke,  Pulhoidoben  1359.
pump-hut  (goblin)  1433-4.
pygmsi  1415.  1420.
pyssling  (dwarf)  1412.

r&  (sprite)  1407. 1431.

rabat  (goblin)  1433.

racketmg  sprite  1432.

Badbodl280.

rädels-führer  (wheel-beaxer)  1348.

Badost  (joy)  1340. 1544. 1620.

ragin  (deity)  1291-2.

Bagirist  1867.  1869.

ragna-rokr  (twilight  of  gods)  1541.

B&hus  (demon)  1501.

rfti  (paradise)  1544.

rainbow  1510-1. 1550. 1801. 1845.

rain-making  1342.  1458.

rajani  (night)  1541.

rftkshasa  (giant)  1440.

rakud,  reoed  (temple)  1312.

Ban  1374.

rauch-fihs  (Whitsun  sluggard)  1533.

rauch-nacht  1758. 1767,  Ime  219.

Bedbeard  1418.

redbreast  1490.

Uia  (easUy)  1378.

Bekan  (Attila's  wife)  1364,

relics  1666.

religio  1313.

Beto»Krodo  1352.

Bhea's  bath  1365.

ribhus  1410.

Btgr  1361.

Bindr  1363-4.

Bisa-land  1442.

Bobigo  1424.

Bobin  goodfellow,  B.  Hood  1432.

rodor  (sky)  1498.

roggen-möme  (corn-spectre)  1424.

rose-garden  1415. 1544.

roses,  to  laugh  r.  1632.

Botal404.

rowan-tree  1682.

Bübezahl  (woodsprite)  1425.

ruhe-wisoh  1789,  no.  296.


INDEX.


1883


Bulla,  ByllB  1867-9.
Bnmoor  1580.
BumpelstUt  1433.
rnnes  1318. 1688-9.
Bnnze  (a  giant)  1448.
Baprecht,  kneoht  1432. 1436.

sacrifice  1297. 1304.

sacrificial  vesselB  1304.

SflB-fugel  1717.

S»lde  (fortone)  1564—9.

Saslde'a  wheel,  messenger,  horn  1568-9.

Sffimingr  (son  of  OtSin)  1373.  1390.

SsBtere  1601.

Saga  1377.

sahs-lazzo  1617.

Sahsnöt  1351.

sal  (hall,  temple)  1536.

salg-ofnir  1485.

SÄUda  (well-being)  1564—9.

salt  1619.

Sampo  1582.

SAmr  1390.

Sand-Jack,  Sand-Peter  (death)  1555.

Santann  1405.

Sarrasins  1444.

Satan  1601.

Satom  1325.  1362-3.

Satj&vrataa  1453.

satyr  1411.

sau-arsch,  sau-kegel  (whirlwind)  1371.

1470.
Saa-reuBsel  (devil)  1604.
Bavelios,  f|Xiot,  sol  1499.
savitn,  {ferSt  (rain)  1342.
Sazne4t  1351. 1715.
sc&tnrnir  1363.
Sce&f  1391. 1719-20.  1723.
Boeffara  (fate)  1399.
Sceldwa  172:^-4. 1731.
Schalks-berg  (rogue's  hill)  1441.
schate  bar  (shade  supplied)  1642.
Schellen-moritz,  Bhelly-coat  1435.
schelme  (plague)  1666.
schem-bart,  Schemen  (mask)  1436.
Schilbuno  1891. 1731-2.
Sohlemihrs  shadow  1613.
schlenz  1810,  no.  812.
sehmagostem  1457.
SchneUerts  (a  spectre)  1591.
Bchön-bart  1866.  1436.
Bchrat  (woodsprite)  1424. 1763,  line  85.
schratzel  (woodsprite)  1410. 1424-5.
schrawaz  1425.

Bchreck-stein  (stone  of  fear)  1684.
Scüftngas  1891.
Bcocca  (demon)  1606.
BOörftngr  (yaDiTr)  1403-4.
ScrAwunc  (weather-giant)  1473.
sorAz  (woodsprite)  1424-5.
Seyld  1724.
Sdgard  (Brynhild's  castle)  1404.


Segumon,  Mars  1391.

sei^r  (magic)  1616-8.

self  done,  self  have  1411.  1613.

Selp-hart  1575.

Semele  1538.

Sessxymnir  (Freyja's  hall)  1373.

seven-league  boots  1569.

sgön-aunken  (dwarfs)  1411.

shadow  lost  1613.

Shamir  (rock-blasting  plant)  1598.

Shelly-coat  (goblin)  1435.

shield-maiden  1397. 1403-4.

ship  carried  about  1365-6.

ship  of  fools  1366.

shoulder-blade  inspected  1636-7.  1764,

line  126. 1775-6.
shooting  star  1506. 1801.
shower-man  (god  of  rain)  1342.
Shrove-fire  1468.
StS-grani  (OSinn)  1729.
Siegfried  1599.
sieve-turning  1635.
Sif  1348.
Sigelöt  1393.
Sigewunsc  1330.

Sigi  (son  of  OSinn)  1390. 1729.80.
Sigmld  1404.
Sigor  (victory)  1574.
Sigrdrlfa  1403.
Sigrhöfundr  (OSinn)  1328.
Sigrlami  (son  of  OSinn)  1390.
SigrtSr  1378.
sigstein  (stone  of  victory)  1568.  1686.

1763,  line  89.
Sigtünir  (Oi$in's  dwelling)  1328.
SigurSr  1387.  1395- 1403-5. 1540.  1591-

9.  1730.
sihle  (titmouse)  1642.
sihora,  sire,  sir  1292.
silvanus  (forest-god)  1892. 1426.
Sindbad  1447.
Sindgund  1373.
sin-flut  (Deluge)  1452.
sjd-mor  (watersprite)  1481.
Ska^i  1338. 1355-6. 1373.  1888.
skild  1581.
skam  1602.

skiald-mey  (shield-maiden)  1408.
Ski1Sbhi«nir  1355-6.  1570.
Skilftngr  1391.
Skin-fazi  1481.
Skiöldr  1443. 1724. 1781.
skiptfingr  (changeling)  1421.
skog-snerte  (woodsprite)  1428.
skogs-rä  (woodsprite)  1427.
skörüngr  (valkyr)  1403-4.
skratti  (woodspnte,  giant)  1425.
slag-mta  (divining  rod)  1598.
Sleep  1575.
sleeping-thorn  1674.
Siegel  (cudgel,  divining  rod)  1598.
Sleipnir  (OtSin's  horse)  1885. 1481.


1884


INDEX.


Smertis,  Smrt  (death)  1560.

smoke-offeriDgB  1304.

snake  1490-1-2.

sneezing  1116-7.         *

snow  1313. 1573.

snow-child  1582.

8ob6tka  (midenrnmer  fire)  1468.

Bdokmimir  1392.

Bol  (Latin)  1322. 1499.  1753.

S61  (ON.)  1873.

solsatire  (sunset)  1513.

solstice  1466.

soothsaying  1635-6. 1775.

sorcerer  1614 ;  sorceress  1617.

souohe  de  noel  (ynle-log)  1839.

sower,  the  evil  1820.

sow*s  dang,  tail  1371.

Spange  1574.

spiders  1497-8.

spiel-hansel  (Jack-player)  1442. 1560.

spirit,  ghost,  geist  1407.

spitting,  a  defence  from  magic  1633.

spring-worzel  1597.

8r6tia  (fortune)  1571.

äri  (fortune)  1567.

stab-wnrz  (southern-wood)  1678.

Stampho,  Stempo  1370.

Starka«r  1540.  1582.

stars  1505— U).  1802.

Stempe  1370.

stendel  (nightmare)  1419.

Stepchen  (goblin,  devil)  1432.

Stenble  (ignis  fatuus)  1801.

stone,  turning  into  1446.

stonecrop  1779,  no.  60.

stor-y-unkare  1340.

Strakh  (terror)  1353.

striga  (witch)  1618.

Btroh-ars  1366

stroking  (by  a  witch)  1632.

subterraneans  1415. 1451-2.  1862.

Suevo  monte  1390.

Sumar  1526.

Sumar-li-Si  1484.

Summer  and  Winter,  brothers  1531.

Sun  1499  ;  sun-fair,  -glad  1514.

sun's  well  1499.

sune-wende,  sun-giht  (solstice)  1466.

sune-wend  fires  1467.

Sunna  1373.

sunna-felt  (elysium)  1544.

Buperventa  (omen)  1638.

sure  bridge,  sure  death  1550-8.

Süryas  (sun)  1499.

Sartr  1540.

sü-stert,  sow-tail  (devil)  1471.

Suttüngr  1447. 1582.

Suvantolainen  1469.

SvaiSil-fari  (a  horse)  1446.

Sv&fnir  (a  snake)  1331. 1491.

Svafr-lami  (OCin's  grandson)  1390.

Svalr  (sun's  shield)  1500.


Svantevit  1352.

Svart-&lfa-heim  1410.

Svart-höf$i  (a  giant)  1441.

Svi«ur  1327.

Syipdagr,  Swefdsg  1357.  1717.  1730.

swan-knight  1725-6  n.

sword-magic  1635. 1774.

sword-spell  1761,  line  31.

Syn  1374.

S^r  (Freyja)  1373.

Syritha  1373.

TiBtwa  1722-4.

taivas  (sky)  1349.

talamasca  (mask,  spectre)  1585-6.

tanewezel  (spasms)  1660.

Tanfana  1312. 1365.

Tanhäuser  1590.

tann-gniostr  (tooth-gnashing)  1347.

Taranis  (thunderer)  1339.

Taranuenus  1339.

Tamodurum  1339.

taterman  (goblin)  1432.

Tohert  (devü)  1540.

TeU  1393.

Temper  1370.

tempeile  (medicine)  1652.

Tempests  1627.

Tepentiren  (a  goblin)  1433.

Termagant  1334.

Terror  1352.

Tharapila  1311. 1488.

thegathon  1310.

Theuth  (god  of  rain)  1334.

Thiassi,  tiäzi  1362.

thief  s  helmet  1418 ;  thumb  1624.

Thock  (a  giantess)  1443.

ThdrgertSr  1318.

Thör-ketiU.  Durcytel  1347.

Th6rr  1280-3.  1323. 1377-8. 1442. 1507.

1728.
Thdrs-reia  (thunder)  1338.
Thdr-stemn  1309. 1686.
Thraetaono  1337w
Thri«i  (third)  1337.
M^jan  (initiate)  1315.
Thrü«gelmir  1441.
ThrütSr  1315. 1348. 1404.
Thrymr  (a  giant)  1441.
Thunar,  Thörr  1338.
thunder  1845,  no.  61.
thunder-bolt,  -stone  1686.
Thüros  (god  of  war)  1349.
thurs  (giant)  1437-8.
Thursday  1348-9.
tibr  (sacrifice)  1299.
Tiermes  (thunder-god)  1338-9.
Timp-hüte  (homesprite)  1434.
Tina  1350.
tiodute  I  1350.
Tityos  1440.
Tive-bark  tied  on  1675.


INDBX.


1885


Tiviaeo  1849.

toad  1492.8.

loadstone  1686.

iomte  (homesprite)  1481.

Torden-yeir  1338.  1345.

tor-don  (thunder)  1338.

tord-wifel  (dungbeetle)  1494>6.

Toril  1347.

Toro  1342.

TozariB  1649.

tranced  1626.

tranaformation  1630-1.

transmigration  1548.

Tras  (tremor)  1353.

trdba  (sacrifice)  1298.

trees,  marriage  of  1479.

tr6fn6  1841,  no.  28.

Trempe  1370.

Tri-glaya  1505.

TfHKv/äa  (third  wave)  1461.

Trismegistos  1334.

Tristan  1448.

TpcTO-Vveia  1337.

troU,  tiöll  (spectre)  1439. 1621.

troU  skot  1471.

Trör  1388.

Trotnla  1650.

trad,  trate  1419.

trae  as  day,  as  death  1512.  1558.

trage-tiefel  1419.

Trdt-munt  1448.

Toisoo  1349. 1388. 1733.

Tnmbo,  the  holy  1441.

Tuonela  (hades)  1555.

tnonen  koira  (dragon  fly)  1555.

turilas,  Turisas  1487-8.  1495.

torse,  türse  (giant,  devil)  1438.  1447.

Tutosel,  1588.

Typhöeos  1542.

Tyr,  Tiw,  Zio  1350-8.

Tyrrhenians  1438. 1444.

nbarfangftri  (devil?)  1602.
udde-hatt  (cap  of  darkness)  1382.
Ugarthilocas  1607.
nhta  (early  dawn)  1518-9.
XTkko  1342.  1449.  1686.
ülf-heSinn  (were- wolf)  1630.
üllerken  1415.
Ulli  1414.

UUr  1337-8.  1359.  1442.
unchristened  1586-9.  1817.
Un-fuoge  (indecoram)  1374.
un-gehiure  1407.  1585.
nn-gethüm  (monster)  1407.
un-holda,  un  huld  1602. 1769.
Un-saelde  (ill-luck)  1572.
Urban  1418.
UrSar-brnnnr  1899.
Urian  (devil)  1602.
nr-lao,  ör-lög  (destiny)  1560-1.
urolainen  (beetle)  1495.

VOL.   IV.


or-teofel  1602.

Utohaisravas  (steed  of  Day)  1512.

vAdanas  1827.

Ya-Sgelmir  1540.

vett,  viettr  (wight,  elf)  1407.

vafr-logi  (quivering  flame)  1586.

vaihts,  wiht  (elf)  1407.

Yala  (prophetess)  1398-9.  1618.

v&lant  (devü)  1452.  1602.

vAlantinne  (she- devil)  1399.

Yala-ski&lf  1328.

Valentin  (a  horse)  1482.

YalhöU  1542-8. 1598.

valkyria  1408. 1458.  1542.

valr  (the  fallen  in  fight)  1828.

Yals  1391.

vampire  1586.

Yana-dis  1398.

Yanir  1356.

vassogalate  (temple)  1312.

YAsukis  (king  of  snakes)  1492.

vätte-lys  (fairy  lights)  1687.

ve,  weoh  (temple)  13(>8.

Yecha  1650.

Yteher  (evening)  1372.

Yegdeg,  Wiegdsg  1780.

Yeg-tamr  (OlSinn)  1718.

Veleda  1399.

Yelnies  1606«

Yendels-rot  tied  on  1675.

Veneris,  capillus  1671.

Venus  1400.  1415. 1581.

Venus  Mount  1590.

Yeorr  (Thdrr)  1347.

ver  sacrum  1532-3.

YergiliflB  (Pleiades)  1608.

Ver-goden-deel  strüsz  (reapers*  offering)

1364.
Yertumnns  1406.
VesnA  (spring)  1872.
Vespera  1872.
Yestralpus,  Yestri  1417.
vettar  (wights,  elves)   1407.  1838,  no.

162.
vetula  1737.
Victoria  1403.

victory,  stoneof  1568. 1686, 1763,  line  89.
Victovali  1407.
VfiJarr  1545.
Yidevut  1326.

Vi«rir  (0«inn)  1383.  1473.  1582.
Vielona  (god  of  souls)  1560.  1584  5.
vigaddnd  (tribulus)  1679.  1682.
Viga-gulS  (war-god)  1350.
Vlg-rWr  (battle-field)  1541.
Vila  (fairy  sister)  1406. 1470.  1595. 1071
Vili,  Yilir  1337.
Vilkinus  1392.

vince  Luna  I  (win,  Moon)  1740.
Vind-Alfr  1417.
Yind-heim  1469.

B    B


1886


INDEX.


Vindler  (Heim«allr)  1361.

Vinguir  1339  n.  1729.

Ving-törr  1347. 1729.

Yishim  1484.

Yisvakarma  1452.

Yüland,  junker  (devil)  1603.

voleucel  1369.

Vollarc  1609.

Voloa  1336.

Volot  (a  giant)  1439.

Volsunge  1391.

vöiu-leiöi  (vala's  tomb)  1618.

Vor  (faith)  1374.  1385.

Torkiekers  (foreseers)  1634-5.

Vorwitz  (presumption)  1471.

Yulcanus  1322.  1410.  1435.  1456.

Yuodan  1326-7.

Yut  1326.

vutt  1327.

wnal-riiter  (nightmare)  1419.

\?adel,  wadal  (lunar  phases)  1819.

wahr  (true)  1512.  1568.

waidelot  (priest)  1317.

Wäinämölnen  1378. 1441.  1453.  1462-9.

1511.  1582-3.
wake,  tree  I  1479.  wake,  Fortune  !  1676.
W'aladamarca  1399.
Walarüna  1693.
Walburgis-uight  1619-20.  1781-3.  1799.

1805.  1812-9.  1824.
Walburg's  fire  1466.
wald-frau  (forest  woman)  1406.
Wttld-singer  1490.
\valks,  wanders  (of  a  ghost)  1586.
wal -rider  (nightmare)  1419.
wait-man  (wild  man)  1426.
walt-mione  (wood- wife)  1406.  1426.
"Wandel-muot  (fickleness)  1369.
wauno-weho  (sparrow-hawk)  1487.
AN'artburg  war  of  poets  1583.
wasser-liiss  (water  sprite)  1429.  1430.
Wate  1392.
water-bird  (sluggard)  1459.

kelpie,  -mom  1429.

saints  1473.

Watzmann  (a  giant)  1446.
Waude,  Waudl-gaul  1336.
wax-figures  1628.  1637.  1761.  1772.
weasel  1G39.
weather-cock  1485.

lords  (Paul,  John)  1469.

witch  1627.

wechsel-balg  (changeling)  1421.  1777.
Weckolter,  Ij'rau  (juniper)  1480.
wedel  (lunar  phase)  1819.
Wedki  1299.

week,  days  of  the  1323 — 6.
Wegdffig  1729-30.
wege-warte  (plantam)  1547.
weichsel-zopf  (plica)  1419.
Weidewut  1326.


weise  (orphanns)  1685.

weise  frau  1398.  1405-6.

weis-hexen  1616.

w^les,weldkas  (ghosts)  1546.  1684.  1595.

Welf  (whelp)  1391.

Welnas  (god  of  souls)  1560.

Wendel-muot  (fickleness)  1369.

wendil-meri  (ocean)  1460.

Wensco  1330.

were-wolf  1629-30.  1746.  1826.

Westerfalcna  1717.

wester-barn  1586.

hemd  (chrism-cloth)  1811.

m&ne  1503.

w&t  (chUd^s  caul)  1670.  1686.

Westralp  1417.

wetter-giogo  (salamander)  1346.

leich  (lightning)  1343.

stein  (thunderbolt)  1344.

wheel  of  fortune  1567-8.

wheel-burning  1467-8.

wheel-rolling  1348.  1371.

whirlwind  1798-9.  1847.

white  lady  1318.  1371.  1401.  1571.  1595.

wicke-weib  (witch)  1809.

Widu-kind  1406.

widu-minna  1406.

Wielant  1392.

wih,  weoh  (temple)  1308.

wiht,  wight  (ell)  1407.

wild  fire  1464.

wild  host,  hunt  1587.

wildiu  wlp  1405-6.  1426.

wil-s&lda  (fate)  1561.

wind  1846.

Windis-prüt  (whirlwind)  1470.

wind-selling  1473-4. 1742-4. 1762.  line  C3,

Wintar  1529.  1531.

Winter-troU  1429.

Wipune  1583.

wise-woman  1398.  1405.

Wish  1328.  1422-3.

wishing-gear,  etc.,  see  wiinschel.

wisod  (sacrifice)  1298.

witch,  see  hexe.

Wittioh  1392.

wizago,  wizard  1615.  1748-9.

wiz6d  (sacrifice)  1298.

Wödan  1326-8.  1526.

Wode  1417.  1556.  1587.

Wödenes-weg  1334.

Wödens-torp  1335.

Wöden-tungel  (-star)  1336.

Wödes-heer  (-host)  1327.

Woens-let  (lith,  -limb)  1337.

Woldan  1327.

wolf,  she-wolf  (valkyr)  1404.

Wolf-bizo  1645.

wolf-riding  1618.

Wolken-burg  1544.

woman  reverenced  1396.

wood-pecker  1598.


INDEX.


w^""""^'  r  ^^dfrau.  holzweib.
-wood-wose  (eatyr)  1426
wool,  wrapt  in  1636.
\v  orblestrükaken  1413.
^wodewdsa,  wudewicht  Vsatyr)  1426.
wndu-maer  (echo)  1412-3
wuetendes  beer  (furious  host)  1587.
^«'Tiet-gußz  1390.

wüllekes-löcker  (dwarfs  caves)  1416.
^P^\^ylP«n  (Talkyr)  1404.'
ArVunschelburg  1330.
wünschel-dinge  (wishing-gear)  1384.

-prte»  -rothe  (-rod)  1598

— — — -hut  (-hat)  1669.
-WTiader-bluiue  1696-7.
wunderer  (wonder-worker)  1591.  1614
wunnü6  (paradise)  1544.  '  ^^*-

Wunsch  (wish)  1328.  1422-3
^Vuotan  1326-8.  1471
^Vuotilgöz  1390.  1469.
Tvurm-garten,  -sal  (hell)  1540.
Wurd,  Wurt,  Wyrd  (destiny)  1399.


1887


Wusc-freÄ  1330.

Yama  (death)  1378.

Yggdrasil  1331.  1536.

Yggr  1288.  1331.  1347.  1582.

Ymir  1442.

Yngvi,  Ingui  1717-8.  1734.

yrias  1740,  xxiv.

yule-clog  1826.

Zeus  1327.  1333-4.  1337-9.  1343.  1377.

1414.    1429.    1458.    1469.    1471-4.

1539.  1560-1.
ziefer  (sacrifice)  1299.
Zies-buro  (Augsburg)  1350.
Zio  1471.
Zisa,  Csia  1372.
zit-vogel  (time-bird)  1488.
zloto-baba  1290.

zwerg,  Zwergin  (dwarf)  1409.  1861.
Zygainer  (gipsies)  1775.


UaUer  *  Tanger.  The  Beiwood  PriuiUi^'  W„rk».  Fromc,  and  Loado..


August  1888.

A  CLASSIFIED  LIST

OP

EDUCATIONAL   WORKS

rüBLXIHXD  BT

GEORGE  BELL  &  SONS.


FM  CakUogueM  wiü  be  sent  pott  free  on  c^liMtUm.


BIBUOTHECA  CLA88ICA.

A  Beriet  of  Qreek  and  Latfn  Authortt  wUh  EngUth  Notet,  edited  bp
eminent  Seholart,    Ovo.

JDiohylna.    By  F.  A.  Palej,  SIA.,  LL.D.    18«.

Oloaro'B  Orattoni.    By  G.  Long,  M.A.  4  tqIb.   16«.,  14«.,  18«.,  18«.

DemoBthenes.    By  B.  Whiston,  MA.    2yo1b.   16«.  each.

IhiripldM.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  SIA.,  LL.D.    8  TOI0.    18«.  each.

Homer.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  MJL,  LL.D.    VoL  L  12«. ;  Vol  n.  14«.

BarodotoB.    By  Bey.  J.  W.  Blakesley,  B.D.    2  yoU.    82«.

Heidod.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.,  LL.D.    10«.  64.

Horaoe.    By  Bey.  A.  J.  Madeane,  M.A.    18«.

JuTonal  and  Penliui.    By  Bey.  A.  J.  Madleane,  MA.    12«.

Luoan.    The  Fhanalia.    By  C.  E.  Haskins,  M.A.    14«.

Plato.    By  W.  H.  Thompson,  DJ).    2  yola.    7«.  6d.  eaoh.

Bqphoolef .    Vol.  I.    By  Bey.  F.  H.  BlajdeB,  M.A.    18«.

Vol.  n.    Philootetea— Eleotra— Ajaz  and  TzaohinisB.    By

F.  A.  PiJ^,  ILA.,  LL.D.    12».     Or  the  4  pUyi  separately,  3a.  6d.  eaok.
Taoitiu :  The  Annals.    By  the  Bey.  P.  Fzoet.    16«.
Teranoo.    By  E.  St.  J.  Paizy,  M.A.    18«.
YfarglL  ByJ.  Conington,M.A.   Beyised  by  Professor  H.  Nettleshlp.

Srob.    l^each.
An  Atlai  of  Olaaaioal  Oeograpby;  Twenty-four  Maps.     By

W.  HnghM  and  George  Long,  M.A.    New  edition«  with  ooloaved  Onttineii

ImperialSro.    U«.«!

Untform  with  above,
A  Ck»ni>tota  lAtln  Omnmar.   By  J.  W.  Donaldson,  DJ).    8rd


Saison.   14«.


Oeorge  BeUamdSaiuf


QRAMMAR-8CH00L  CLASSICS.

A  Seriei  of  Gruk  and  Latin  Amthon,  with  English  Xoie$,
Fcap.  8vo.

Ommt:  De  BaDo  Oflllloou    Bj  Getsge  Long,  ILA.    4».

BoobL-HL  ForJuziiorClaflne.  By  G.  Long,  M^  If.  6d.

BooksIV.uidY.   lf.6dL    Books  YL  and  YIL  Ij.  6<L

OrtolhM,  TlbolhM,  and  Bropertim,  Selected  Föema.  Withldia.
Q7BaT.A.H.Wntidaw.    2i.M.

Oloaro:  De  Seneetate,  De  Aminitia,  and  Beleel  Epiatlea.  3j
G«orf»  LoBff,  li.A.    Si.

Oomattna  K^poa.    By  Bev.  J.  F.  Maiwniflharf.    St.

Hboier:  Diad.    Books  L-XH.     ^y  F.  A.  Pal^,  lUu,  LU).

4c6d.    Also ia Sputa, 2c 6d.6Mh.

Honoe.     With  Life.    By  A.  J.  Madeane,  1C.A.     at.Gd.     In

S  putii  2i.  «Mil.
JOTmal:  Sixteen Satirai.    By H.  Prior, ILA.    8f.6«L

Mtetial :  SeleetEpigiama.  WUhLife.  By F.  A. Vüßj, MJL, LLJ).
4«.6d.

Orld:  theFaatt    By  F.  A.  Pal^y,  M.A.,  LLJ).    8t.6«L    BookaL

andn.    l«.6d.    Books  UL  And  IT.  Is.  6d.

Sallnat:  CaiOina  and  Jngortha.  With  Life.  By  O.  Long,  M.A*
uid  J.  O.  Fmer.    3i.  6d.«  or  aepantely,  2«.  eaoh.

Tadtoa ;  Gennania  and  Agrioola.    By  Be?.  P.  Froat.    2t.  6«L

Tbgil:  BoooUea,  Georgioa,  and  £neidf  Books  L-IV.  AWdgad
from  Profeaor  Goninfftom's  SditioB.  4«.  6d.— Aiaid.  Books  Y.-XIL  U,  6d.
Also  in  9  sepuTBte  YMomes,  as  follows.  Is.  6d.  Mch :— Bnoolk»— Georgics,
I.  and  n.— G«or^cs,  IlL  and  lY.— ^neid.  I.  and  IL— iBneid,  III.  and
IV.— Aneid.  Y.  and  YL— iBneid,  YH.  and  YIII.— iBneid,  IX.  and  X.—
^neid,XLandZU.

Zanophon:  The  Anabasis.   With  Life.  ByBer.  J.F.MaemiohaeL

3c  6d.  Also  in  4  sepanie  volnines.  U.  &/.  eaoh:— Book  I.  (with  Life,
Introdneuon,  Itinerary,  and  Tliree  llaps)— Books  n.  and  HL— lY.aad  Y.
— YLandYIL

The  CyxopaBdla.   By  O.  M^Gorfaam,  M.A.   3«.  6d.  Booka

L  and  U.  Is.  6d.— Books  Y.  and  YI.  Is.  6d.

■  Memorabilia.    By  PeroiYal  Frost,  MA.    3«.

A  Onanxnar-Sohool  Atlaa  of  iOlaaaloal  Oaognplqri  oontaining
Tea MlMtod nape.    JaqpnuJafO.   fie

Uftt/bm  with  ihA  SeriM.

Thtb  New  Teatamaat,  in  Greek.  With  Bnfl^ish  Notes,  te.  Bf
BST.  J.  f .  ICMmiohML    4s.6d.    In  parts,  sewed,  6d.  each.


Edueatianal  Works.


CAMBRIDGE   GREEK  AND   LATIN   TEXTS.

JBiohTlna.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.,  LL.D.    2s.  M.
OmnJti  Da  BaUo  GkOUoo.    By  G.  Long,  MA.    1«.  %d.
Cloaro:  De  Seneotate  et  De  Amioitia,  et  Epktol»  Seleotn.

B7a.Loiig,M.A.    U6d.

OloeroniM  Oratloiiee.    InVenem.    By  G.  Long,  MA.    2«.6«L

Xnripldef.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  MA.,  LL.D.    8  Tola.    2f.6eoh.

Herodotai.    ^  J.  G.  Blakesl^y,  B.D.    QtoIb.    69.

HomerllUaik    L-XH.    By  F.  A.  Pa^y,  MA.,  LLJ>.    1«.  6d.

Homttna.    By  A.  J.  Maeleane,  M.A.    1«.  6<i.

JaveiiBl  et  Pentos.    By  A.  J.  MadLeane,  M.A.    U.  6d.

Luoretinf .    By  H.  A.  J.  Monro,  MA.    2«.

SaUnatt  Oriapl  OatUlna  eb  Jugturtha.   By  G.  Long,  MA.  1«.  6d.

flophoolea.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  MA.,  LL.D.    2s.  6d.

Terantt  Ck>moBdl».    By  W.  Wagner,  PhJ).    2$.

mraoydldei.    By  J.  G.  Donaldeon,  D  J>.    2  voia.    4i.

VlrgUlna.    By  J.  Conington,  MA.    2«.

Xanophontia  Sxpeditio  OyrL  By  J.  F.  Mawniehael,  B  A.  1«.  64*

KoTQin  Teatamentnin  Gmce.  By  F.  H.  Soriyener,  MA.,  D.OJL.
4m.  9d.  An  editioii  with  wide  margin  for  notet.  half  bound«  M».  Esmo
ICajob,  with  additioxud  Beadlnga  and  References.    7a.  6d.    Sm  po^«  9.


CAMBRIDGE  TEXTS  WITH   NOTES.

A  BdscHon  of  ih^  mod  tiraally  read  of  ths  GradJE  and  Latin  AuOicn,  AwnoUdadfiir
Behool»,  Edited  by  iD«ll-fcn<non  CUutUal  Scholars.  Foap.  8w.  U.  6d.  saeh»
wUh  awoaption»,

^taohylna.  Promethens  Ymotoa. — Septem  contra  Thebaa. — Aga-
memnon.—PeriBB.—Enmenides.~Choephoror.  By  F.  A.  "Paiay,  M.  A ,  LL.D.

■nnpldea.  Aloeatia.—Medea. — Hippolytaa.— Heouba.-—  Baootua.
—Ion.  2a— Orestes.  ~  Phoenii8SB.—Troades.—Heroale8  Parens.— Andro-
mache.— ^Iphigenia  in  Tanris.— Sopplices.    9j  F.  A  Palej,  M.A,  LL.D.

Somer.    Biad.    BookL    By  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.,  LL.D.    1j.

Bophoolea.  (Edipoa  Tyrannna. — (Edipna  Coloneua. — Antigooa
— Eleotra— Ajax.    By  F.  A  Paley,  M.A..  LL.D.

Xenophon.  Anabasis.  In  4  vols.  By  J.  E.  Melhniah,  MA.»
Assistant  Classical  Master  at  Bt.  Panl's  School.

Xenophon.    Hellenics,  Book  II.    By  L.  D.  DowdaU,  M.A.,  B.D.

[Shortly.

Oloero.  De  Seneotate,  De  Amidtia,  and  EpiatoUB  Select«.  By
G.  Long,  M.A.

Ofld.  Fasti.  By  F.  A.  Paley,  M. A,  LLJ).  In  8  Tola.,  2  booka
in  each.    2a  each  rol.

Orld.  Seleotlona.  Amorea,  Triatia,  Heroidea,  Metamorpboeea.
07  A  J.  MadMine,  M.A.

Terence.  Andria ^Hauten  Timonmienoa.~PhaRmo.~Adelphoe.

Bf  Professor  Wagner,  Ph.D.

TlrgU.  Profeaaor  Ckmington'a  edition,  abridged  in  9  Tola.,  2  booka
iaaaoh.  ^

OtMrs  w  pfvparniOA.


Oearge  Bett  and  Sons*


PUBLIC  SCHOOL  SERIES.

ASenetofClatBiealTextM,am%otatedlfifwdi4Mown8ehol^^  O.Smi

▲ilitophanei.    ThePeaee.    ByF.  A.  Pal^,MA.,IiLJ).    4i.6A.
^—  Thfl  Aflharniftnii.    Py  F.  A.  Ffel^,  MJL,  LLJ>.    4»,  M
— ^  Thfl  Frogi.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  MJL,  LL.D.    4§,  6«L
CHotro.    Thfl  Letten  to  AttioiiB.  Bk.I.  By  A.Pfttor,]f^  4i.6d.
DemottlwnM  da  FalM  LegatioiM.    By  B.  ShiUeto,  lUL    6«.

The  Law  of  Leptine&    By  B.  W.  Beataon,  MJL    8f .  M.

Llyy.    Book  XXI.    Edited,  with  Introdaction,  Notes,  and  Map«,

bj  the  B«T.  L.  D.  DowdaU.  H.A..  B.D.  8«.  6d.      [Book  XX0.  m  tU  prw»
Book  XXII.    Edited,  Ac,  by  Bey.  L.  D.  Dowdall,  M.A.,.

B.D.    3s.6<l.
Slato.    The  Apology  of  Soorates  and  Orito.  By  W.  Wagner,  PhJ>.

lOfehBditUm.    3t.  6d.    GhMp  BdiUon,  Ump  oloth,  2i.  6d.

The  Fh»do.    9th  Edition.   By  W.  Wagner,  PhJO.    5«.  6d.

The  Protagons.  4th  Edition.  By  W.  Wayte,  M.A.  4i.  6d.

■  The  Enthyphzo.   8rd  Edition.    By  G.  H.  Wella,  M.A.   8f»
The  EathydemoB.    By  G.  H.  Wells,  ICA.    4ff.

The  Bepablic.  Books  L  <ft  IL    By  G.  H.  Wells,  MJL  drd

Bdition.    5s.  M.
Plftatna.  TheAnlnlaxia.  By  W.Wagner,  PhJ>.  8rdEditian.[4t.6d.

■  Trinimunas.  By  W.  Wagner,  Ph  J>.  8rd  Edition.    4i.  <kL
The  Menaedhmei.  By  W.Wagner,  PhJ).  2nd  Edit.  4s.  $&

The  Mostellaria.  By  Prof.  E.  A.  Sonnenschein.    5f .

The  Budens.    Edited  by  Prof.  E.  A.  Sonnenschein.

[In  {h4  jntfk
WaphoeXiM  TraoUniss.    By  A.  Pretor,  MJL    4i.  fkL
BophoolBS.    Oedipos  Tyrannns.    By  B.  H.  Kennedy,  D.D.    5t,
TaMDoe.    By  W.Wagner,  PhJ).    2nd  Edition.    10t.  6«L
Theoorltas.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.,  LL.D.    2nd  Edition.    4i.  6d»
Thuoydidea.    Book  YL    By  T.  W.  Dongan,  M  Ju,  Fellow  oi^St.
Jolin'i  CtoUog«»  Ounbridg«.     Sil

0*Mn  tu  prQMratioii.


CRITICAL  AND  ANNOTATED  EDITIONS.

AzlftQphanla  GomoBdi«.    By  H.  A.  Holden,  LLJ).    aro.    2  toIb»

SSkSd.    Fl4jBMldBepMmtd7.
Oalpumius  Sloulns.    By  0.  H.  Keene,  MJL    Grown  8?o.    6«.
Corpiif  Po0tarom  LattauHTum.  Edited  by  Walker.  IvoLSro.  18t».


Educational  Works.


Boraoa.    Qiimti  Hocatii  FlaMi  Openu    By  H.  A.  J.  Monro,  M.A.

Lug«  8to.    11.  U,
Xiyy.    The  fint  fire  Books.    By  J.  FrendeTille.    12mo.  roan,  5$.

Or  Booki  I.-in.  3a.  6d.    lY.  and  Y.  3s.  6d.
XucretlUB.    With  Commentair  by  H.  A.  J.  Munro.    4th  Edition.

Vols.  I.  and  II.  Introduotion,  Text,  and  Notes.    ISs.    YoL  III.  Tran«.

lation.    6«.
OYld.  P.OridiiNasonisHeroidesXiy.   ByA.PaImer,M.A.  8TO.0ff.
P.  Ovidii  Nasonis  Ars  Amatoria  et  Amores.    By  the  Bev.

H.  WUiiams.  M.A.    3«.  6d.

MetamorphoBes.   BookXHI.  By  Chas.  Haines  Keene,  M.A.


Epistolarum  ex  Pento  Liber  Primns.  ByC.H.Eeene,M.A..  8».

Propertlna.    Sex  Aorelii  Propertii  Carmina.    By  F.  A.  Paley,  li.A.,

LL.D.    8to.    Cloth,  di.
Sex  Propertii  Elegiarum.    Libri  IV.    Recensuit  A.  Palmer,

Ck>lleffii  Sacrosanctaa  et  IndiridnsB  TrinitatuB   juxta  Dnblinnm  Socias.

Fcap  8vo.  Sa.  6d.
Bophooles.    The  AJaz.    By  C.  E.  Pahner,  M.A.    8«.  6(2.
^^—'  The    Oedipus   Tyrannus.     By  B.   H.  Kennedy,  D.D.

Crown  8vo.    8«.

Thnoydldes.   The  History  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.   ByBinhard
8hilleto,M.A    Book  I.    8to.    <k6d.    BookH.    Sro.    St.  6d.


LATIN  AND  GREEK  CLASS-BOOKS.

PacUiora.  An  Elementary  Latin  Book  on  a  new  principle.  By
the  BcT.  J.  L.  Seager,  M.  A.  [In  the  pre»»,

JTirst  Latin  Lessons.    By  A.  M.  M.  Stedman,  M.A.     U,

Miscellaneous  Latin  Exercises.*  By  A.  M.  M.  Stedman,  M.A.
Foap.  8vo.    1j.  6d.

JIasy  Latin  Passages  for  Unseen  Translation.  By  A.  M.  M.
Stedman,  M.A.    Foap.  870.    U.  6d.

A  Latin  Primer.    By  Bev.  A.  C.  Clapin,  M.A.    Is.

Aozllia  Latlna.  A  Series  of  Progressive  Latin  Exeroises.  By
]f.J.B.Baddel07.M.A.  Foap.Sro.  PartLAooidenoo.  3rdBditlon,reTiMd.
2aL    PartlL    4th  Bdition.  NTised.  2i.    Kay  to  Part  II.  2«.  6d.

.Scala  Latina.  Elementaiy  Latin  Exercises.  By  Bev.  J.  W.
DaTiB,M.A    New  Edition,  with  Yocabnlary.    Foap.  8to.    8c  6d.

Latin  Prose  Lessona.     By  Prof.  Church,  M.A.     8th  Edition.

Foap.  8to.    2s.  6d.

Ijatin  Bxerdses  and  Orammar  Papers.    By  T.  Oollins,  HA.    5th

Edition.    Foap.  8vo.    2«.  6d.
Unseen  Papers  in  Latin  Prose  and  Verse.    With  Examination

Qnestiona.    Bt  T.  CoUins,  M.A.    4th  Edition.    Foap.  8to.    2i.  6d.
in  Greek  Prose  and  Verse.    With  Examination  Questions.

B7  T.  CoUina,  M.A.    3rd  Edition.    Foap.  8to.    3«.
Sasy  Translations  from  Nepos.  Csraar,  Cioero,  Livy,  fto.,  for

Retranalation  into  Latin.    With  Note»,  by  T.  CoUina,  M.A.      [Preparing.

fTales  for  Latin  Prose  Composition.  With  Notes  and  Vocabu-
Ury.    By  G.  H.  Weill,  M.A.    2a.


Oearg$  BeU  amd  Santf


lAtinVooabulaiiMforBapettttoii.  By  A.  BC  M.  Stedmaii,  ILA.

Stad  Editioii,  reriaed.    Fcasp.  8to.  1«.  6d.
AiMlytloia  lAtin  EzeralfleiL    By  0.  P.  Mmqii,  BJL     4th  BdiL

PwtI.,U.6d.    Fftrtn.,2i.6d.
lAtin  SzamlnaUon  Papers  in  Grammar   and  Idiom.     By

A.  M.  IL  Stedmui,  K.A.    Crown  8vo.    2s.  6d.    Key   (for  Toton  aad

PriTSto  Btodente  mkj),  S».

Chreek  Examination  Papers  in   Grammar  and  Idiom.    By*

A.  M.  If .  Stednuui,  ILA.    2«.  6d.
■cnla  Onaoa :  a  Series  of  Elementary  Greek  ExereisesL  By  Be?.  J.  W.

DftTis,]LA..aiidK.W.Baddel^j,]LA.    SnlBdition.    Foap.Sro.    Si^W»

:  VerM  Ckmipoiitlon.    By  G.  Preston,  M.A.    5th  Edition.

Grown  8ro.    4r.  6d.

:  Partioles  and  their  Gombinations  aooording  to  Attio  usage.
A  Short  Treatifla.    BtF.  A.  Piü«j,  M.A.,  LL.D.    Si.  6d.

Greek  Testament  Seleotiona.    By  A.  M.  M.  Stedman,  M.A.    2nd
Edition  enlarged,  with  Notes  and  Tooabniary.    Fcap.  8to.    2i.  6d.

Bndiments  of  Attio  Ck>nstraotion  and.  Idiom.     By  the  Ber.
W.  0.  Ck>mpton,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Uppingham  SohooL    St.

Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin  Prose.    By  Prof.  H.  Nettle-
ship,  M.  A.    3s.    Ke7(forTatorBon]j),4s.6d.

Bt  thb  Ext.  P.  Fbost,  HA.,  St.  John*8  Coixbox,  GiicBxiDex.

■cdogfl»  LatinsB;  or,  First  Latin  Beading-Book,  with  English  Note»
and  a  Dictionary.    Kew  Edition.    Foap.8TO.    ls.6d.

Materials  for  Latin  Prose  Ckimpositlon.  New  Edition.  Foap.  8¥a

2s.    K^  (for  Tutors  only),  4t.
A  Latin  Verse-Book.    An  Introdnotory  Work  on  Hexameters  and

Pentameters.    New  Edition.    Foap.  8to.    2s.    Key  (for  Tutors  only),  £«.
Analeota  Grsdoa  Ifinora,  with  Introdoetory  Sentences,  Bn^^ish

Notes,sad  a  Diotionaiy.    Hew  Edition.    Foap.Sro.    2aL
Materials  for  Greek  Prose  Composition.    New  Edit.    Feap.  Sro.

2s.  6d.    Key  (for  Tutors  only),  5s.
llorllegiam  Poetioom.    Elegiac  Extracts  from  Ovid  and  TilmQiis»
New  Edition.    With  Notes.    Foap.8TO.2s.


Anthologia  Grsdoa.  A  Selection  of  Choice  Greek  Poetry,  with  Notes»
Qy  F.  St.  John Thaoksray.    4th and Cksopsr Edition.    lOmo.    4t.6d.

Anthologia  Latina.  A  Selection  of  Choice  Latin  Poetry,  from
Nnrins  to  BoSthins,  with  Notes.  ^  Ber.  F.  St.  John  Thscketay.  Bensedl
sad  Ohoeper  Edition.    16mo.    4s.  M.

Bt  H.  a.  Holdxn,  LL  J).

FoUoram  BilYula.    Part  I.    Passages  for  Translation  into  Latii»

Elegiac  and  Heroio  Verse.    10th  Edition.    PostSro.    7s.  6d.
Part  n.    Sdect  Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin  lonn»

and  Comic  lamhic  Verse.    Srd  Edition.    PostSro.    5s.
Klla  SUmlss,  si^e  Edog»  Poetarom  Anglicomm  in  Tiatiiwim  ei

Ctanonm  oonrersM.   8to.    V6L  n.  12s.
MUomm  Oentaziss.    Select  Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin

and  Greek  Prose.    lOthEditlon.    FostSro.   8s.


Educational  Works.


TRANSLATIONS,  SELECTIONS,  &o.

*«*  Many  of  the  fdllowing  books  are  well  adapted  for  School  Priaes.

JDioliylna.    Trazulated  into  BngUsh  Ftoee  by  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.9
LL.D.    SndBditioii.    8to.    7t.6d.

—  Trazulated  into  English  Verse  by  Anna  Swanwiok.    4th
EcUtion.    PostSro.    5i.

Boraoe.    The  Odes  and  Carmen  Seeolare.    In  English  Verse  by

J. OoBington, If JL    lOtheditu».    f<»p.8T0.    £k6d.
The  Satires  and  Epistles.    In  English  Verse  by  J.  Goning-

tomM.A.    7th  edition.    ef.6d.
Plato.  Qorgias.  Translated  by  E.  M.  Cope,  M.A.  Svo.  2nd  Ed.  7t.
Philebus.  Tran8.byF.  A.  Paley,M.A.,LL.D.  Sm.8yo.  4«.

—  The»tetu8.  T»nß.byF.A.PaIey,M.A.,LL.D.  Sm.8vo.  4«.
■  Analysis  and  Index  of  the  Dialognes.  ByDr.  Day.  PostSyo.  5j.
Bophooles.    CBdipus  Tyrannas.    By  Dr.  Kennedy.    U,

ThaoorltoB.    In  English  Verse,  by  0.  S.  OalTerley,  M.A.    New

Edition,  rerifled.    Grown  8vo.    7s.  6d.
Tranalatlima  mto  English  and  Latin.    By  G.  S.  CalTerley,  M.A«

PostSro.   7s.  Sd.
Translations  into  English,  Latin,  and  Greek.  By  B.  C.  Jebb,  M.A.,

H.  Jackion,  Litii.D.,  and  W.  B.  Cnrrey,  If  .A.    Seoond  Edition.    8s.
Bztraots  for  Translation.    By  B.  G.  Jebb,  M.A.,  H.  Jackson,

Litt.D.,andW.  E.Carre7,]f.A.    4s.  6d.
Between  Whiles.     Translations  by  Bev.  B.  H.  Kennedy,  DJ).

2nd  Edition,  reriaed.    drown  8to.    fis.


REFERENCE  VOLUMES.


A  lAtln  Ononmar.    By  Albert  Harkness.    Post  8vo.    6«.

By  T.  H.  K^,  M.A.  6th  Thousand.  Post  8to.    8«.

A  Short  Latin  Ghrammar  for  Bohoola.     By  T.  H.  Key,  M.A.

f.B.8.    lethBdition.    FoctSro.    8s. Sd.
AGhddatotheOholoeofGlaaBioalBooka.  By  J.  B.  Blayor,  MJL

8rd  Edition,  with  a  Snpplementuy  Liit.    Crown  8to.  4s,  6d.    SnppU-

SMtttary  List  separatelj,  Is.  6d.

The  Theatre  of  the  areeka.    By  J.  W.  Donaldson,  D.D.    8th
Edition.    PontSYO.    fis.

Kelghtley'a  Mythology  of  areeoe  and  Italy.    4th  Edition.    5s«


George  Bett  and  8owf


CLASSICAL  TABLES.

lAtln  AooideDiOe.    B7  the  Ber.  P.  Froet,  M^    U.

lAtln  VandfioatloiL    1«.

Notetaillft  QiUBdam;  or  the  Prindpftl  Tenaei  of  most  of  the
ImgnlAr  Greek  Verb»  and  Blaiiieiitaiy  Oredc,  Latiii,  and  Franeh  Onr
■tmotioii«    Now  Bffltion.    Ifc

Blohmond  Bolei  for  the  Oiidian  Dletloh,  Ae.    By  J.  Taie»

MJL  u.
The  Frlnolplei  of  Latin  Syntax.    1«.

Greek  Verbe.  A  Catalogae  of  Verbs,  Irregular  and  DefeotiTe ;  their
leading  formations,  tenaea,  and  inflaxlonii,  with  Paradigma  for  oonjagatikn«
Bnleafor  formation  of  tenaei.  Ac  A».  B7J.B.Baiid,T.0.D.  8th  £d.  Si;  6«.

Greek  Aooents  (Notes  on).   By  A.  Barry,  DJ).  New  Edition.  If.

Homerlo  Dlaleot    Its  Leading  Forms  and  Peooliarities.    3y  J.  8.

Baiid,T.O.D.    New  Edition,  by  W.  G.  Batheiford,  LL.D.    Ic
Greek  Aooldenoe.  By  the  Be?.  P.  Froet,  M.A.   New  Edition.  Is.


CAMBRIDGE    MATHEMATICAL    SERIES.

Arithmetio  for  Sohools.  By  G.  Pendlebniy,  M.A.  2nd  Edition,
rerised,  4a.  6d.  Or  in  two  parts,  2«.  6d.  each.  Sxamplea  (nearlj  800(Q,
withont  answers,  in  a  separate  toL  8s.

Algebra.  Choioe  and  Chance.  By  W.  A.  Whitworth,  MJL  4th
Bdition.    6s.

Euclid.     Books  I.-YL  and  part  of  Books  XI.  and  XIL    By  H.

Deighton.  4s.6d.  Books  I.  and  II.,  2g.   [A  Key  to  tU  SnreiM»  im.  thsyrm»,
Euolid.     Exercises  on  Endid  and  in  Modem  Geometiy.     Bj

J.  IfoDowell.  If  .A.    Sid  Edition.    6i.
Trigonometry.  Plane.  By  Bot.  T.Vyryan,  MJL.  BrdEdit.   8f.6d

Oeometrioal  Oonio   Bectiona.     By  H.  G.  Willis,  MJL    Bfan-

chester  Qrammar  SohooL    7a.  dd,
OoDloa.    The  Elementary  Geometry  of.    5th  Edition,  revised  and

enlarged.    By  C.  Taylor,  D.D.    4b.  6d.

Solid  Geometry.    By  W.  S.  Aldis,  BiJL    4th  Edit,  rerised.    6f.

Oeometrioal  Optloe.    By  W.  B.  Aldis,  M.A.    2nd  Edition.    4«.

BlgUL  Dynamloe.    By  W.  B.  Aldis,  MA.    4s.

Elementary  Dynamics.  ByW.Gamett,M.A.,D.C.L.  4th  Ed.  6t.

Dynamics.  A  Treatise  on.  By  W.  H.  Besant,  D.Sc,  F.B.S.  7«.  6d.

Heat  An  Elementary  Treatise.  By  W.  Gamett,  M.A.,  D.CX.  4th
Edition.    4»,

Elementary  Physics.    Examples  in.    By  W.  Gallatly,  M.A.

[latksprsML

Hydromeohanios.    By  W.  H.  Beaant,  D.Sc,  F.B.a    4th Edition.

PartL    HydroetatioB.    6s.
Mathematical  Examples.    By  J.  M.  Dyer,  M.A.,  and  B.  Prowde

Smith,  If. A.,  Afststant  Masters  at  Cheltenham  College.  [In  tks  yma.

Xeohanice.    Problems  in  Elementary,   ^y  W.  Walton,  ICJL    6«.


Educational  Works.


CAMBRIDGE   SCHOOL  AND   COLLEGE
TEXT-BOOKS.

d  Series  of  Elementary  TreaHeetf&r  the  tue  ofStttdetUt,

Arlthmetlo.    By  BeY.G.El8ee,M.A.  Foap.  Sva  13th  Edit.  8s.  dd

ByA.Wiigl^,li.A.    8s.  6d.

-  A  ProgresfiiTe  Ck>iirBe  of  Examples.    With  Axuwera.    By


J.  Watwn,  M.A.    6tb  Edition.    8s.  6d.

Algebra.    By  the  Bev.  G.  Elsee,  M.A.    7th  Edit.    4t.

Progreamve     GourBe     of   Examples.       By  Bey.    W.    F.

M<l£iQh«el.M.A.,  and  B.Prowd«  Smith,  M.A.   4thBditton.    St.  6d.  Witb
Ajuwem.  4c.  6d.

Plane  Afltronomy,  Axi  Introdnotion  to.    By  P.  T.  Hain,  M.A

5th  Edition.    4f.

Oonio  Seotlona  treated  Geometrically.  By  W.  H.  Besant,  D.Sc.
eth  Edition.    4f.6d.    Solution  to  the  Examples.    4s.

EnnnciationB  and  Figures  Separately.    Is.  6d.

Statu»,  Elementary.    By  Bev.  H.  Qoodwin,  D.D.    2nd  Edit.    8s.

Hydroatatios,  Elementary.  By  W.BLBesantiD.Sc.  12th  Edit.  ii.

Mensuration,  An  Elementary  Treatise  on.  By  B.  T.  Moore,  M. A.  5s.

Newton's  Frlnoipla,  The  First  Three  Sections  of,  with  an  Appen-
dix; and  the  Ninth  and  BleTenth  Sections.  By  J.  H.  Eraos.  1£.A.  5tl
Edition,  by  P.  T.  Main.  M.A.    4s.

Axialytloal  Geometry  for  Schools.  By  T.  Q.Vyvyan.  4th  Edit.  4s.  6<i

Qreek  Testament,  Companion  to  the.  By  A.  0.  Barrett,  A.M.
5th  Edition,  roTised.    Fcap.  Svo.    St.

Bodk  of  Oommon  Prayer,  An  Historical  and  Explanatory  Ti«atis€
on  the.    By  W.  O.  Humphry,  B.D.    6th  Edition.    Foap.  8vo.    2$,  6d.

Mnslo,  Text-book  of.  By  Professor  H.  0.  Banister.  18th  Edition,
reyised.    5«.

Concise   History   of.     By   Bev.  H.  G.   Bonaria  Hont.


Mus.  Doa  Dublin.    9th  Edition  reyised.    8s.  6d.


ARITHMETIC   AND   ALGEBRA.

See  the  two  foregoing  Series»


BOOK-KEEPING.

Book-keeping  Papers,  set  at  various  Public  Examinauone.
Collected  and  Written  by  J.  T.  Medhnrst,  Leoturer  on  Book-keeping  in
the  CMty  of  London  Oollege.

a2


10  George  Bett  and  Sam^


GEOMETRY  AND   EUCLID.

BaoM.    Books  I.-YI.  and  part  o!  XL  and  XXL    A  New  Trans.

latioB.    B7  H.  DeightoB.    (See  Oambridge  Mathematiaal  B«riei.  p.  8.)
'The  Definitions  of,  with   Explanations   and   Exercises,

and  »a  Appendix  of  SzecoiMB  on  the  Hist  Book.    Bj  B.  Webls  ILA.

Grown  8to.  Is.  6d.

Book  I.    With  Notes  and  Exereises  for  the  nse  ol  Fta-

pentoiy  Sohoola,  Ae.    B7  Braithwnite  Amett,  1£.A.    8to.  U,  6d.

The  First  Two  Books  explained  to  Beginners.    By  C.  P.


]iMon.B.A.    SndBditUnu    ]taap.8TO.    2b.  6d.
The  Tinimcriatlona  and  Figures  to  JBiudld's  gtomenta.    B7  Be?.

J.Bn«e,D.D.    NewBdition.    1Vi^>.8to.    U.    Witkoot  the  VIgai««,  M.
■zaralaas  on  BooUd  and  In  Modem  OeometiX.  ByJ.MeDowell,

B.A.    Grown  8vo.    Srd  Edition  reriaed.    Sil
Oeometrioal  Clonic  Seotions.   By  H.  G.  Willis,  M.A.   (See  p.  8.)
Oeometrloal  Gonio Sections.    By  W.  H.  Besant, D.Sc  (8eep.9.)
XLementary  Geometry  of  Oonioa.   By  0.  Taylor,  DJ>.  (See  p.  8.)

An  Introdaotlon  to  Anoient  and  Modem  Oeometry  of  Oonloa.

Bj  0.  Tajlor,  D.D.,  Mnster  of  St.  John's  CoU.,  Gamh.    8to.    15s.
Bolntlona   of  Geometrloal   ProUema,  proposed  at  St  John's

GolkgefiOBi  1880  to  1846.    9j  T.  GMkln.  X.A.    8va.    Us.


TRIGONOMETRY.

Trigonometry,    Introduction  to  Plane.    By  Bey.  T.  G.  Yyvyan,

Ghuterhooae.    8kd  Edition.    Gr.  8fO.    8s.  6d.

An  laementary  Treattoe  on  Mencnratlon.    By  B.  T.  Mook,

X.A.    fis.


ANALYTICAL  GEOMETRY

AND   DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS.

An  Introdxiotlon  to  Analytloal  Plane  GeoDMtaT.    By  W.  P.

TambiiU.lLA.    8?o.    Us.

PtoUema  cm  the  Prtnolples  of  Plane  Oo-ordinate  GeoDMtry.

B7W.  Walton,  M.A.   8?o.    16s.

TriUnear  Oo-ordlnatea,  and  Modem  Analytloal  Geometer  of

Two  Dimensions.    By  W.  A.  fHiitworth,  X.A.    8vo.    ISil
An  Elementary  Treatise  on  Solid  Geometry.    By  W.  B.  Aldis,

X.A.    4th  Edition  reused.    Gr.  8vo.    6s.
miptio  Fnnctiona,  Elementary  Treatiae  on.  By  A.  Oaylqy,  D.Sc

Professor  of  Pure  ICatkematics  at  Gambridge  Unirerilltf.  Deiny8va.  Us.


Bdueatwnal  TTorkB.  11


MECHANICS  &   NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY.


Btatioi,  Blementaiy.  By  H.  Goodwill,  DJ).  Foap.  8^a  Snd
Edition.    8b.

Djnamlot,  A  Treatise  on  Elamentaiy.    By  W.  Gamett,  M^.,

D.O.L.    4thBditloiL    Grown  8vo.    Oil
DynamioB.    Bigid.    By  W.  8.  Aldis,  IIA.    4t.
Dynamioi.   A  Treatise  on.   By  W.  H.  Besant,  D.Sc. , F.B.S.  7t.  6d.

Elementary  Meohanloa,  Problems  in.   By  ^N.  Walton,  HA.  New

Edition.    Grown  8vo.    6t.
Theoretloal  Meohanloa,  Problems  In.    By  W.  Walton,  M.A.     8rd

Edition.    DemySvo.    16i.

HydroBtatios.  ByW.H.Besant,D.6o.  Feap.Svo.  13th  Edition.  4m.

Hydzomeohanloa,  A  Treatise  on.  By  W.  H.  Beeant,  D.8c.,  F Jt.B.
Bra    4th  Edition,  rariaod.    Fnrtl.    Hydroctatii».    St.

OptioB,  QeometrioaL  By  W.  B.  Aldis,  MJL  Grown  8yo.  2nd
Edition.    4f.

Double  Reflraotioii,  A  Chapter  on  Fresnel's  Theoty  of.  By  W.  8.
AldiB,X.A.    8to.    81.

Heat,  An  Elementary  Treatise  on.  By  W.  Gamett,  M.A.,  D.G.L.
Crown  8vo.    4tii  Edition.    4s.

Newton's  Prlnoipla,  The  First  Three  Seotions  of,  with  an  Appen-
dix;  and  tht  Ninth  and  Blomith  Seetiona.  9j  J.  H.  Brana,  MJL  Mh
Edition.    Edited  by  P.  T.Main.  ILA.    4a.

Astronomy,  An  Introduction  to  Plane.  By  P.  T.  Msin,  M.A.
Foap.  8vo.  oloth.    6th  Edition.    4c.

Prsetioal  and  Spherioal.    By  B.  Msin,  ICJL    8yo.    14i.

Elementary  Chapters  on,  from  the '  Astronomie  Physique '

ofBiot.    B7  H.  Qoodwln.  D.D.    8to.    8a.6d.

Pure  MathematloB  and  Natural  Fhiloa<q;»li7,  A  Gompendimn  ol
EMta  and  Torara]»  in.  Bj  O.  B.  SmnUqr.  2nd  Edition,  reriaed  by
J.  MoDowoU.  M.A.    Itaap.  8to.    8a.  6d.

lUamentary  Mathematioal  Formulss.  By  the  Ber.  T.  W.  Open-
ahaw,H.A.    U6d.

Mamantary  Oouaa  of  Mathnmattoa.    By  H.  Goodwin,  D.D.

eth  Edition.    8n>.    leiL
VloUemB  and  ISzamplea,  adapted  to  the  *  Elementary  Gonrse  of

Mathemntioa.'    8rd  Edition.    8n>.    Sc

86lationB  of  Goodwin's  GoUaotion  of  ProUems  and  Bzamplaa.
97  W.  W.  Hvtt.  ILA.    «rd  Edition,  rerlaed  and  «nhuvML    8n>.    9a.

A  CoUeotion  of  Examples  and  Problems  in  Arithmetic,
Algebra,  Goometry,  Logarithma,  Tiigonometxj,  Conio  Sootiona,  Meohaniea,
4o.,  with  Anawera.  By  Bar.  A.  Wrigley.  90th  Thooaand.  8f.  6d.
Kaj.    l(k.6d.


12  Gearge  Bett  and  Sone^


TECHNOLOQICAL    HANDBOOKS.

Edited  by  H.  Tbuzman  Wood,  Seeretazy  of  the  Society  of  Arts.

1.  I>76tiig  and  TlMue  Printing.     By  W.  Crookea.  VJLB.    6s.

2.  aiass  BCanofaotore.  By  Henry  ChaDoe,M^;  H.  J.  Powell, 6.A.;

and  H.  O.  Harris.    St.  6d.
8.  Ootton    Iffuinfaoture.    By  Biohard  Bfursdeii,  of  Manchester.
8rd  Edition,  rsTiaed.    0«.  6d.

4.  Ohemlatry  of  Ck>al-Tar  Goloura.    By  Ptof.  Benedikt.   Tttauh

lated  by  Or.  Enaoht  of  Bradford.     5i.

5.  Woollen  and   Worsted  Cloth  BCanufiustise.     By  Boberte

Beaumont,  Auifltant  Leoturer  at  Yorlcshiro  CoUeffe,  LeedB.    7t.  6d.
Othen  in  preparation.


HISTORY,  TOPOGRAPHY,  fto.

Borne  and  the  Oampagna.  By  B.  Bom,  SIA.  With  85  En-
graTings  and  M  Map«  and  FlaoB.    With  Appendix,    ito.    SI.  St.

Old  Rome.  A  Handbook  for  Tra^llers.  By  B.  Bom,  HA.
With  Maps  and  Plans.    Demj  8vo.   10».  6d.

ICod«m  Xniope.  By  Dr.  T.  H.  Dyer,  tod  Bdilion,  lerised  and
oontinned.    5  toIs.  Demj  8to.    21. 12t.  Od.

The  History  of  thAKinga  of  Rome.   ByI>r.T.H.I>yer.   8^.16«.

The  History  of  Pompeii:  its  Buildings  and  Antiquities.    By

T.  H.  Djer.    Srd  Bdition,  brought  down  to  1874.    Fostdro.    7t.  6d.
The  City  of  Rome :  its  ffistoiy  and  Monoments.    2nd  Edition,

refTised  hy  T.  H.  Dyer.    St.
Andent  Athena*,  its  Histoiy,  Topography,  and  Bemaina.    By

T.  H.  Djar.    Bnper^oyal  8ro.    Oloth.    II.  St.
The  I>ec]lne  of  the  Roman  Repablio.     By  G.  Long.     6  vote.

Sto.    14t.  each.

A  History  of  ffingland  dining  the  Baily  and  Ifiddlo  Ages.    By

0.  H.  Pearson,  H.A.    2nd  Bdition  rerlsed  and  «nlaiged.    8?o.    ToL  L
ISt.    ToL  n.  14t.

mstorloal  Maps  of  Bngland.    By  C.  H.  Pearson.    Fdio.    Srd

Bdition  rerised.    SUed.
EOstory  of  England,  1800-46.   By  Harriet  Martineau,  with  new

and  oopions  Index.    5  rols.  St.  6d.  each.
A  Praotioal  Synopsis  of  English  History.    By  A.  Bowes.    9tb

Edition,  rerised.    8ro.  1«.
Utos  of  the  Queens  of  Bngland.    By  A.  Strickland.    labraiy

Edition,  8  toIs.  7t.  6d.  each.    Oheaper  Edition,  6  vols.  5s.  each.    Abridffed

Edition.  1  Tol.  Sil  6d.    Mary  Qneen  of  Soots,  2  vois.  St.  eadi.    Todor  and

Stuart  Prinoesoes,  St.
Bginhard'a  Life  of  Karl  the  Qreat  (Charlemagne).  Translated,

with  Notes,  by  W.  Olaister,  H.A.,  B.O.L.    Grown  8ro.    4t.  6d.
The  Elemente  of  (General  History.     By  Prof.  Tytler.     New

Edition,  brought  down  to  1874.    Small  Poet  8to.    St.  6d.
History  and  Geography  Examination  Papers.    Compiled  by

C.  H.  Spence,  M.A.,  Clifton  College.    Grown  8to.    St.  6d.


EdueaÜanal  Works.  18


PHILOLOGY.


W1IB8TEB*8  DIOTIONABT  OF  THB  XNaiJBH  Z.AM-
aUAGB.  With  Dr.  Kahii'i  BtTmology.  1  rol.  1028  iM«e8,  9000  lUi».
tmtioiifl.  8U ;  half  oalf,  ao«. ;  calf  or  half  nusia,  31s.  6d. ;  nusia,  21.
With  AppendioM  and  70  additional  pi^ef  of  Dlnstrations,  1919  pagM^
8U6d.;  half  calf,  21.;  calf  or  half  msida,  21.  2s. ;  nusia,  21.  lOi.

*TnBB8TFK40naiJ.BM0LIBHDZ0TX0VABT  IXTAST.'— <)liaTtfliyJlfViM0,1878.

ProtpeotoMif  with  ipeoimen  pagw,  port  free  on  appboation.
Blohardflon's  Philologioal  Dlottonaxy  of  the  BngUsh  TATignaga.

Gombining  Explanation  with  Ethology,  and  oopionalj  illnstrated  bj
QootationB  from  the  best  Authorities.  With  a  Supplement.  2  rola.  4to.
fi.14t.6d.    Supplement  leparatdj.    4to.    12s.

Brief  HlBtory  of  the  English  Language.  By  Prof.  James  Hadl^,

I1L.D.,  Yale  College.    Foap.Sro.    Is.

The  Blaments  of  the  Bngllsh  Language.  By  E.  Adams,  Ph J>.
21st  Edition.    PoetSro.    4s.  6d.

Phlkdogioal  Essays.    By  T.  H.  Key,  M.A.,  FJt.S.    Sro.   lO$.fUU

Language,  Its  Origin  and  Development     By  T.  H.  Key,  M^«

T.B.8.    8ro.    14s.

Synonyms  and  Antonyms  of  the  English  Language.  By  Arah-
deaoon  Smith.    2nd  Edition.    PoetSro.    5si

Synonyms  Disorimlnated.  By  Arehdeaoon  Smith.  Demy  8va
2nd  Edition  reyised.   14s.

Bible  English.  Chapters  on  Words  and  Phrases  in  the  Bible  and
Prayer  Book.    By  Rer.  T.  L.  O.  Dariee.    5s.

The  Queen's  English.  A  Manual  of  Idiom  and  Usage.  By  the
late  Dean  Alf ord     eth  Edition.    Foap.  870.    Is.  sewed.    Is.  6d.  doth.

▲  History  of  English  Rhythms.  By  Edwin  Guest,  M.  A.,  D.O.L.
LL.D.    New  Edition,  by  Professor  W.  W.  Bkeat    Demy  8to.  18s.

moments  of  Comparative  Grammar  and  Philology.  For  use
in  Schools.  Bj  A.  G.  Price,  H.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Leeds  Grammar
SohooL    Crown  8to.    2s.  6d.

Questions  for  Examination  in  English  Literature.  By  Prof.
W.W.  Bkeat.    2nd  Edition,  revised.    2s.  6d.

Xtymologioal  O-lossary  of  nearly  2500  BngUsh  Words  da-
riTed  from  the  Greek.  By  the  Ber.  E.  J.  Boyoe.    Foap.  8vo.  8s.  6d.

A  Syrlao  Orammar.  By  a.  Phillips,  D.D.  8rd  Edition,  enlarged.
8to.   7«.6d.


14  Oeov^e  Bell  and  Sana*


DIVINITY,  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  fto.

Bt  thb  Bst.  f.  H.  Scbitxmxb,  A.M.,  LL.D.,  D.GX.

Vomm  T6BtaiiMntiim  Onsoe.  EdHio  major.  Being  an  enlaiged
Bdition,  containing  the  Beadinn  of  Westoott  and  Hort,  and  thoae  adoptod
hj  theBeriMn,  ko.    7«.  6d.    For  other  Sditimu  •*•  page  8.

▲  Fbkln  Introdnotlon  to  the  Oritloiain  of  the  New  Teitamenl
With  Forty  FaioainülM  from  Andent  Hannioripta.    SrdBditioii.  SniwlSi.

Mz  Leotnree  on  the  Text  Of  the  Kew  Teitttment  ForBngliBh
Rndank    OkownSro.    6i.

Oodex  Bei»  Oentatariglenili.    4to.    2df .


ne  Kew  Teitament  for  Ihi^Uah  Beadert.  BythelafteH-AUoid,
D.D.  VoL  I.  Put  L  8rd  Bdit.  12i.  YoL  I.  Put  n.  Snd  BdiL  lOkM.
YoLn.  Put  Land  Bdit.  16t.    YoL  IL  Part  IL  Sod  BdÜ.  16^

ne  Gh«ek  Teirtament    By  the  late  H.  Alfoid,  DJ).    VoL  I.  Ttfa

Bdit.  11.  8i.    Yd.  n.  8th  Bdit.  lt.  4a.    Yol.  HI.  lOth  Bdit.  ISi.   YoL  lY.
Put  L6th  Edit.  18t.    Yol.  lY.  Part  n.lOth  Bdit.  14a.    YdLIY.lLlSfc

OomiMmlon  to  the  Greek  Teatament    By  A.  C.  Banett,  HA.

Ath  Bdition,  rariaed.    ]taap.8TO.    5t.
neBookofPiahni.   A  New  Translation,  with  Introdnetion0,Ao.

BTtheYor7BeT.J.J.BtewartPerowno.D.D.    8to.    YoL  L  eth  BdltioB.

1ft.    YoL  n.  eth  Edit.  16a.

Abridged  for  Sohoola.    6th  Edition.    Grown  8va    lOt.  6d.

fiOatonr  of  the  Artidlea  of  Bellglon.    By  0.  H.  Hardwiek.    9td

Edition.    PoatSvo.    fik
fiOatonr  of  the  Greeds.    By  J.  B.  Lnmby,  DD.    3rd  Edition.

Orown  8n>.    7t.  6d.
Veanon  on  the  Oreed.    Garefnlly  printed  from  an  early  edition.

WithAiM]jBlsa&dIndazbjB.Walfoid,M.A.    PoitSto.    Si.
Liturgies  and  Offices  of  the  Ohnroh,  for  the  use  of  English

BeaderB,  in  ninatration  of  the  Book  of  Oommon  Prajer.    By  the  Bar.

Bdward  Bnrhidge,  M.A.    Crown  8to.  9«.

An  Hlatorioal  and  Xzplanatory  Treatise  cm  the  Book  of

Common  Prayer     Bt  Bev.  W.  O.  Homphry.  B.D.    6th  Edition,  «nlazvad.
Small  Poet  8to.  2f.  6d. ;  Cheap  Edition,  Is.

A  Oommentary  on  the  Qospels,  Epistles,  and  Aota  of  the

Apoaüee.    By  Ber.  W.  Denton,  A.M.   New  Edition.   7  tola.  8ro.  Sa.  each.

Kotes  on  the  Oateohlsm.    By  Bt  Ber.  Bishop  Bany.  8th  Edit.

Vhv.    Sil

The  Wlnton  Ohnroh  0«teohlst  Qnestions  and  Answers  on  the
Teaohing  of  the  Chnroh  Oateohiam.  By  the  late  Ber.  J.  8.  B.  MobmU.
LL.D.    4th  Edition.    Cloih,  Si. ;  or  in  #imr  Puta,  aewed.

The  Ohnroh  Teaoher's  Manual  of  Ohristlan  Instmotton.  Bj
Bar. M.F. Sadler.    SSth Thonaand.   9i.6d.


Educational  Works.  15


FOREIGN   CLASSICS.

A  Seria  for  uu  in  Schools,  vfith  English  Notes,  grammatical  and

explanatory,  and  renderings  ofdifficuU  idiomatie  expressions,

Feap.  Bvo,

BohUtor'l  Wallaniteln.    By  Dr.  A.  Baohheim.  6th  Edit,    os,
OrfheLagerandPioooloiiiini,8s.6<l.    WalleiiBteixi'B  Tod,  2a.  6d.

MaldofOrlaana.   By  Dr.  W.  Wagner.   2nd  Edit.   1«.  6d.

— —^  Mula  Stuart    By  V.  Kästner.    2nd  Edition.    1«.  6(f.

Qoethe'i  Hennann  and  Dorothea.     By  E.  Bell,  M.A.,  and
KWOfeL    U6d.

Ctannaa  Ballada,  from  Uhland,  Ooethe,  and  Sohiller.    By  G.  L.
Bielefeld.    8rd  Edition.    U  6d.

Oharlet  ZIL,  par  Voltaire.    By  L.  Direy.    7th  Edition.    1«.  6d.

▲TontoreB  da  T616maqiie,  par  F6ntion.    By  0.  J.  Delille.    4th
Bdition.    2a.  M.

MleotFabtoa  of  La  Fontaine.  ByF.E.A.aaBo.  18th  Edit.  l«.6d.

Ploolcda,  by  X.B.  Saintine.  By  Dr.Dnbno.  15th  Thousand.  1«.  6d.

liamarüne'a    Le  Tailleur  de  Pierrea  de   Saint-Point.      By
J.  Bolelle,  4tb  Thonaand.    Foap.  Syo.    U  6<i.

Italian  Primer.    By  Bev.  A.  C.  Clapin,  M.A.    Fcap.  8yo.  1«.


FRENCH   CLASS-BOOKS.

Vtanoh  Ommmar  for  Pablic  Sohoola.  By  Ber.  A.  0.  Clapin,  M.A«

Itaap.  8vo.    nth  Bdition,  reyiMod.   2a.  6d.
n«noh  Primer.  ByBev.A.0.01apin,M.A.  Feap.Syo.  7th  Ed.  If.
Primer  of  Frenoh  Philology.    By  Bev.  A.  0.  Olapin.    Foap.  Sto.

SrdBdit.    U.

ZiO  NouTeav  Tr^aor;   or,  French  Stadent*8   Companion.     By
M.B.8.    ISthEdition.    Itaap.  8vo.    la.  6d.

nench  Examination  Papers  in  Miscellaneous  Grammar  and
Idioms.    Compiled  by  A.  M.  M.  Stedman,  M.A.    2nd  Edition,  reriaed.
Oro?m  8va  2a.  6d.
Key  to  the  above.    By  G.  A.  Schrumpf,  Univ.  of  France.  Grown
8to.    5a.    (For  Teaohen  or  Private  Stndenta  only.)

Manual  of  French  ProBody.     By  Arthur  Gösset,  M.A.     Crown
8to.  8a.


16  George  Bell  and  Sons*

F.  E.  A.  GASG'S  FRENCH  OOUBSB.

Flnt  Franoh  Book.    Foap.  8yo.    98th  Thonsand.    1«.
Beoond  Frenoh  Book.    47th  Thonsand.    Foap.  8yo.    lt.  64.
Key  to  First  and  Seoond  Frenoh  Books.  5th  Edit.  Fcp.  8vo.  St.  6^
Vrvnoh  Fables  for  Beginners,  in  Prose,  vith  Index.  15th  Thousand.

18mo.    U6d.
Bdeot  Fables  of  La  Fontaine.  18th  Thousand.  Foap.S^.  l«.6d.

Hlstolre«  Amüsantes  et  InstniotiTeB.    With  Kotes.    16th  Thoo-
nnd.    Itaap.  8vo.    8s.  6d.

Praotioal  Guide  to  Modem  Frenoh  Gonvenatlon.  17th  Thoa-

■and.    Foap.  8vo.    U.  6d.
Firenoh  Poetry  for  the  Young.   With  Notes.   5th  Edition.   Fcsp.

Sto.    2t.
Materials  for  Frenoh  Proee  Ck>mposltlon ;  or,  Seleotions  from

the   best  Bnglidi   Ftom  Writen.     ISth  TbooHod.    Vm^  «ro.    Sa

Kej,  da
Prosatenrs  Oontemporalns.     With  Notes.     10th  Edition,  re-

▼iMd.     12ino.3i.6d.

Le  Pettt  Gompagnon;  a  French  Talk-Book  for  Little  Children.

llth  Thonsand.    ISmo.    Is  6<1.
An  Improved  Modem  Pooket  Biottonaxy  of  the  Freneh  and

English  Langnagea.  88th  Thousand,  with  Additions.   lOmo.    2a.  6d.
Modem  B^renoh-TBngllsh  and  Engllsh-Frenoh  Dlotlonary.    Srd

and  Oheaper  Bdition,  rerised.    In  1  toL  10s.  6d.
The  ABO  Tourist's.  Frenoh  Interpreter  of  aU  Immediate

Wants.    By  F.  B.  ▲.  Oaao.    Is.


GOMBEBT'S  FBENCH  DBAMA.

Being  a  Selection  of  the  best  Tragedies  and  Oomedies  of  Molite.
Badne,  OomeUlA,  and  Yoltaixe.  With  Aivamants  and  Notsa  by  A.
Gombert.  N«w  Bdltion«  roTised  b7  F.  B.  A.  Gase.  Foap.  8vo.  Is.  aadi;
sewed,  6d.

OOVTSHTS.

MoL»BBt—Le  Misanthrope.  L'ATare.  Le  BonngMis  GentiOioBUM.  Jm
Tartoife.  Le  Halode  Imwginaire.  Les  Femmes  Bayantes.  Les  Fonzterisa
de  Soapin.  Les  PrMeoses  Ridiooles.  L'Boole  das  Fsmaies.  L'BooIb  dis
Maris.    Le  MMedn  nalgr^  Lni

BACzirst— PhMz«.  Bsther.  Athalie.  IpUg^nJe.  Les  Flaidoan.  La
ThAialde;  ou,  Lee  Frtres  Bnnnnis.  Andromaqne.    Bxttaanloas.

P.  OornvKLLB:— LeOid.    Hoznoe.    CHnna.    Polyeoote.

YouTAiaa :— Zaire.

GERMAN  CLASS-BOOKS.

Materials  for  German  Prose  Composition.  By  Dr.  Bnehheim.
llth  Bdition,  thoroughly  rerised.  Foap.  4s.  6d.  Key,  Parte  L  and  IL,  Ss.
Parts  in.  and  IT.,  4s.

German  Conversation  Grammar.  By  L  Sydow.  2nd  Editioo.
Book  I.    Btymology.    2s.  6d.       Book  11.    Syntax.    Is.  6d.


Educatiofial  Works.  17

Wortfolge,  or  Bolei  and  XzendBas  on  the  Order  of  Words  In
Germaii  Sentenoea.    IBj  Dr.  F.  Btook.    1«.  6d.

▲  German  arammar  for  Pablio  SohoolB.    By  the  Bev.  A.  0.

Cn»idnaiidT.HoUMfi]ler.    4thBditlon.    Itaq^    2«.  6d.
A  Oerman  Primer,  with  Xzercisea.    By  Bev.  A.  0.  Clapin.    li.
Ktotaehne'e  Per  Qefkngene.  WithNotesliyDr.W.Btrambeig.  U.
German  Examination  Papers  in  Grammar  and  Idiom.     By

B.  J.  Morioh.    2i.  6d«  [ffy  i»  th«  prt «a.


MODEBN  GEBMAK  SCHOOL  CLASSICS.

Small  Crown  8to.

German  Examination   Course.      By  Prof.  F.  Lange,   Ph.D.
Elementary,  2i.    Intermediate,  2i.    Adyanoed,  Ij.  6d.

Hoy's  Fabehi  For  Kinder.  Edited  by  Ptof .  F.  Lange,  Ph.D.  Is,  6d.

Beohstein's  Marohen.    Edited  by  Prof.  H.  Hager,  Ph.D.

Benedix's  Dr.  Wespe.    Edited  by  F.  Lange,  Ph.D.    2«.  6{2.

Sohiller's  Jugendjahre.    Edited  by  Prof.  H.  Hager,  Ph.D.

Holfinan's  Meister  Martin,  der  Eüfoer.     By  Prof.  F.  Lange,  Ph.D.

U6d.
Heyse's  Hans  Lange.    By  A.  A.  Macdonell,  M.A.,  Ph.D.    2«.

Auerbaoh's  Anf  Waohe,  and  Boquette's  Der  Gefirorene  Kuss.
By  A.  A.  Macdonell,  H.A.    2fl.

Mosers  Der  Bibliothekar.    By  Prof.  F.  Lange,  Ph.D.    2«.

Xber's  Eine  Frage.    By  F.  Storr,  B.A.     2t.

Freytag's  Die  Journalisten.    By  Prof«  F.  Lange,  Ph.D.    2«.  6d.

Gutzkow's  Zopf  und  Schwert.    By  Prof.  F.  Lange,  Ph.D.    2#.

German  Epio  Tales.    Edited  by  Earl  Nenhaos,  Ph.D.    2t.  6a.

Humoresken.    Novelletten  der  besten  dentschen  Humoristen  der

Gegenwart.   Bdited  by  A.  A.  MaodoneU,  H.A.  Oxon.   Anthoriwd  Edition.

•  [In  prtiparatUM,

ENGLISH   CLA88-BOOK8.

CkmiparatiTe  Grammar  and  Philology.    By  A.  C.  Prioe,  MX»

Aflsiatant  Haeter  at  LeedB  Qrammar  School.    2i.6d.

n«  Elements  of  the  English  Language.    By  E.  Adams,  PhJ).

SlitEdittini.    Poatavo.    4t.6d.

The   Rudiments  of  English  Grammar  and  Analysis.    By

B.  Adami,  Fh.D.    16th  Thonaand.    Foap.  Svo.    1«;
A  Concise  System  of  Farshig.   By  L.  E.  Adams,  B.  A.    1$,  6<l.

Examples  for  Grammatical  Analysis  (Verse  and  Prose).    Be»

lected,  fto.,  Vy  F.  Bdwarda.    6d.
Notes  on  Shakespeare's  Midsummer  Night's  Dream.    By  T»

DnfT  Bamett,  B.A.    If.    Jnlini  Cieear,  1«.    Henry  V.,  it.


18  George  Bell  and  Sana'


By  C.  P.  ILkBOH,  Fellow  of  Uniy.  OoU.  London.
FInt  Kotloni  of  Qnsmuur  for  Toong  LeaniecB.    Foap.  8fQL

35thto40thThoiunuid.    COoth.    9d.

Flnt  Step«  In  Xn^Uih  arammar  for  Junior  Claonoo,  D&bbj
\Smo,    44th  ThooMoid.    Ij;

OntUnei  of  HSn^Uah  anusimar  for  the  Use  of  Junior  CImmi.
05tli  to  70th  Thoiuaiid.    Orown  8to.    81.

English   Ghrammar,  inolnding   the   Prineipleg  of   Gramnuitieal

AoaljBiB.    SOth  Edition.    120th to  124th Thoaaaad.    OzownSfo.    Sft.«L

A  Shorter  EngUih  Grammar,  with  oopiona  Ezerdses.  80th  to
SSrd  Thonaand.    Orown  8to.    Sc.  Od.

Frngllwh  arammar  Praotioe,  being  the  ExeroiaeB  separately,    li.

Code  Standard  arammars.  Parts  I.  and  IL,  2d.  each.  Parts  lEL,
XV.,  and  Y.,  3d.  each.

Notaa  of  laossons,  their  Preparation,  Ac.  By  Jos^  Biokard,
Park  Lane  Board  School,  Leeds,  and  A.  H.  Tajlor,  Bodily  Board
School,  Leeds.    2nd  Edition.    Crown  8ro.  28.  6d.

A  Byllabio  System  of  Teaching  to  Read,  oomhining  the  advan-
tages of  the  '  Phonic '  and  the  '  Look-and-Say '  Systems.  Crown  Bra.   U.

Praotloal  Hlnta  on  Toaohlng.  By  Bev.  J.  M enet,  M.A.  6th  Bdik
revised.    Orown  Syo.  paper,  &.

How  to  Earn  the  Merit  Grant  A  Manual  of  School  Manage-
ment. By  H.  Major,  B.A..  B.Sa  2nd  Edit,  revised.  Fart  L  Infui
School,  8s.   Part  II.  4s.    Complete,  6t.

Teat  Leaaona  in  Dkitauon.    4th  Edition.    Paper  oover,  1«.  6d.

Drawing  Oopiea.    By  P.  H.  Delamotte.    Oblong  8to.  12f .    Sold

also  in  parts  at  Is.  eaoh.
Poetry  for  the  Schoolroom.    New  Edition.    Feap.  8to.    1«.  6d.
The  Botaniat'a  Pooket-Book.    With  a  copioas  Index.    By  W.  &

Hayward.    5th  Edition,  revised.    Orown  8vo.  doth  limp.   4s.  6d.
Kzperimental  Chemlatry ,  founded  on  the  Work  of  Dr.  Stöckhardl

By  0.  W.  Heaton.    Post  8vo.    5«.
Ijectures  on  Musical  Analysis.     Sonata-form,  Fugue.    Blua-

trated  from  Classical  Masters.    By  Prof.  H.  0.  Banister.    7a  6d.


GEOGBAPHICAL  SEBIES.    By  M.  J.  Barb»oton  Wabd,  MJL

The  Map  and  the  Compass.  A  Beading-Book  of  Geography.
For  standard  I.    €d.

The  Bound  World.  A  Beading-Book  of  Geography.  For
Standard  n.    lOd.  ^

The  Child's  Geography.  For  the  Use  of  Schools  and  for  Home
Tuition.    6d.

The  Child's  Geography  of  England.  With  Introdnetoiy  Exer-
cises on  the  British  Isles  and  Empire,  with  Qnestioi».  2s.  6d,  Withoofc
Questions,  2s.


Geography  Szamination  Papers.    (See  History  and  Geography
Papers,  p.  12.)


Educational  Works.


19


Helps'  CkyoTse  of  Poetry,  for  Schools.  A  New  Selection  from
the  Bnglish  Poets,  oarefollT  compiled  and  adapted  to  the  aeTeral  standaida
\>j  B.  A.  Helps,  one  of  H.]!  Inspeotora  of  Sohools.

Book     L    Infant!  and  Standards  L  and  II.    134  pp.  imall  8to.    M.
Book   II.    Standards  III.  and  IV.    224  pp.  crown  8to.    Is.  6d.
Book  III.    Standards  Y.,  YI.,  and  YII.    352  pp.  post  8yo.    2s.
Or  in  PARTS.     Infants,  2d. ;   Standard  I.,  2d. ;  Standard  U.,  2d.
Standard  IIL.  4d.


Plotcure  Sohool-Books.     In  Simple  Language,  with  nnmeroiu

ninstrations.    Royal  lOmo.

The  Infant's  Primer.  8d.~Bohool  Primer.  6d.~Sohool  Reader.  Bj  J.
TSUeard.  U.— Poetry  Book  for  Schools.  1«.— The  Life  of  Joseph.  U.— The
Soriptore  Parables.  By  the  Rer.  J.  B.  Olarke.  U~The  Soriptare  Miraolea.
By  the  Rer.  J.  B.  Olarke.  U—The  New  Testament  History.  By  the  Rer.
J.  a.  Wood,  H.A.  Is.— The  Old  Testament  History.  By  the  Rey.  J.  a.
Wood,  M.A.  Is.— The  Story  of  Banyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress.  Is.— The  Life
ef  liwtin  Lather.    By  Sanh  Orompton.    Is.


BOOKS  FOR  YOUNQ  READERS.

A  Series  qfJReading  Books  designed  to/aciliUUe  the  oe^isiHon  qfthepower
^f  Reading  hy  very  young  Children,   /nil  vols,  limp  cloth^  Qd.  each.
Those  with  an  asterisk  have  a  Frontispiece  or  other  lUostration.
♦The  Two  Parrots.    A  Tale  of  the  Jubilee.    By  M.  E.


Wintle.    9  Blnstrations.

*The  Old  Boathouae.  Bell  and  Fan;  or,  A  Cold  Dip.

«Tot  and  the  Cat    A  Bit  of  Cake.    The  Jay.    The
Black  Hen's  Nest    Tom  and  Ned.    Mrs.  Bee.

♦The  Cat  and  the  Hen.    Sam  and  his  Dog  Bedtog.
Bob  and  Tom  Lee.     A  Wreck.

The  Rosewood  Box.    Poor


\


♦The  Kow-bom  Lamb.
Pan.    Sheep  Bog.

♦The  Story  of  Three  Monkeys.

♦Story  of  a  Oat    Told  by  Herself.

The  Blind  Boy.    The  Mute  QirL    A  New  Tale  of
Babes  In  a  Wood.

The  Dey  and  the  Knight    The  New  Bank  Note.
The  Royal  Yisit    A  King's  Walk  on  a  Winter's  Day.

^^Qoeen  Bee  and  Busy  Bee.

♦anil's  Crag.

♦A  Fbrat  Book  of  (Geography.  By  the  Ber.  C.  A.  Johns.
Hlastrated.    DvnUe  ibe.  Is.  ^


SuttQUe

/or
IfifanU.


SuttoNs

/or

[SUmdmrde

LMIL


Syllabio  Spelling.
8tHndardI.,Sd.


By  C.  Barton.    In  Two  Parts.    Infants,  3d,


20       Oewge  Beü  and  8owf  Educaiumal  Works.


BELU8  READINQ-BOOKS.

VOB   80HO0LS   AND    PABOOHIAL    LIBBABISS.
NcwSeadif,  PoftSvo.  8trong^fhomldineloth^lM,  eacK

<Uf e  of  CkdmnboB.

«Oflmm's  Gennan  TUea.    (Seleeted.)

«AadBiMii'sDuiiahTUM.    mustiatecL    (Bekotad.)  ^
<iwt  BnglltihTnwi     Short  Liyes  for  Young  Ghüdran.*  \  staid«
Great Sn^IlBhwomen.    Short Lires of .  '  XQ-^^-

Gnat  Sootamen.    Short  Liyes  of.

•jUataiiiaii  Baady.  ByCapt  Maajftt  Uliu.  (Ahgd.)

*Soottfs  Taliaman.    (Abridged.)
^FHandfl  In  Fur  and  Faathen.    By  GivynfiTn.
«DioicenB'8  Utile  NelL   Abridged  from  the  « The  Old
Cnrioiity  fiOiop.'

PafaUeafirom  Nature.   (Seleeted.)  ByMz&Gtotty.

Ijamb's  Talaa  ftom  Shakespeare.    (Selected.)

Sdgeworth'8  Tales.    (A  Selection.)
•anUlTer*!  Travels.    (Abridged.)
*Boblnson  Orosoa.    lUaetrated.
•Arabian  lights.   (A  Selection  Bewritten.)

♦The  •^Hcar  of  Wakefield,

«SetUers  In  Canada.    By  Gapt  Manyat.   (Abridged.)

Marie:  Glimpses  of  Ufe  In  Franoe.  ByA.B.E]lifl.

Poetry  for  Boys.    Selected  by  D.  Mnnia
«Southey's  Ufe  of  Nelson.    (Abridged.)
•UüB  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  withMape  sndPIans.  /
*Slr  Boger  de  Ctoverley  and  other  Essays  from  the


ir.MV.


TU.


Tales  of  the  Ooast    By  J.  Bimdman.

^  Th§a0  VoUumn  an  Uhuinied,


J


Vnifofm  with  the  Series^  in  ling»  eloth,  6d.  each.

Shakespeare's  Hasrs.     Eemble's  Beading  Edition.    With  Ex-
jianatorj  NotM  for  Bohool  Uae.
JULIUS  CfiSAB.     THE  HBBOHAin?  OF  YENIOB.      KING  JOHK.
BBNBY  THX  FIFTH.       MAOBBTH.       AS  YOU  LIKE^IT.


Iiondon :  GEOBGE  BELL  *  SONS,  York  Street,  Coveat  Genteiu


^LIBRARIES  STANFORD    UNIVERSITY  LIBRAP"^


»JIVtRSITY    UIBRARIES       STANFORD     UNIVERSITY


.(BRARIES        STANFORD  UNIVERSITY    LtBRARtES


STANFORD    UNIVERSITY   LIBRARIES  STANFORD


STANFORD    university    UBRAR.es      STANFC


*°UNIVERSITY    libraries        STANFORD  UNIVE


V  LIBRARIES     STANFORD  university  LiBRARi


MIVERSITY    LIBRARIES        STANFORD     UNIVERS(T>


LIBRARIES    •    STANFORD  UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES


STANFORD    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARIES  STANFORD


STANFORD   university   libraries     STANF


'^UNIVERSITY    libraries       STANFORD  UN  IVEF


?IES  STANFORD    university   LIBRA


ii^f^j7 -V7.il


VI  =  ■  T'i.'


■    '.•«At  •"  "•   *\*

Does  NOT  CIRCUUTE


ä  ?ffe>-i


■-i*-«*.


ill

3  bios  OeS  310  33S


!i'»;i"i;.  Trti;


2j;|^'*»i»;.  ■;


lOl


»iJ^tla  :  -»-^  -


4Z*.sy'  7


vtr     ^  .-;.


.  ■  :*!?S  ■  .  'T^


■  *^ ,: « i  •/  *  .
