The Cheyenne Indians, Vol. 1 (George Bird Grinnell, 1923)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/CheyenneIndians1). Vol. 1 (History and Society): Grinnell's definitive Cheyenne ethnography - the arrow renewal, tribal government and the old nomadic life.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DANCERS WITH WILLOWS, MEDICINE LODGE 

THE 

CHEYENNE INDIANS 

THEIR HISTORY AND 
WAYS OF LIFE 

BY 

GEORGE BIRD GRINNELL 

Photographs by Elizabeth C. Grinnell 
and Mrs. y. E. Tuell 

VOLUME ONE 

NEW HAVEN 

YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON • HUMPHREY MILFORD • OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

MCMXXIII 

Copyright 1923 by Yale University Press 
Printed in the United States of America 

PREFACE 

M Y first meeting with the Cheyenne Indians was 

hostile, and after that, though often in the country 
of the Cheyennes, I never knew them until their 
wars were over. 

My first visit to their camp was in 1890 when, at the invita¬ 
tion of my old schoolmate and friend, Lieut. Edward W. Casey, 
22d Infantry, who had enlisted a troop of Cheyenne scouts, I 
visited him at Fort Keogh and made their acquaintance. Lieu¬ 
tenant Casey was killed in January, 1891, and his scouts were 
disbanded a little later. 

From that time on, no year has passed without my seeing 
the Cheyennes in the North or in the South, or in both camps. 
I have been fortunate enough to have had, as interpreters in 
the North, William Rowland, who married into the tribe in the 
year 1850, and later his sons, James and Willis. In the South, 
Ben Clark helped me; and until his death in 1918 George Bent, 
an educated half-breed born at Bent’s Old Fort in 1843, who 
lived his life with his people, was my friend and assistant. He 
was the son of Owl Woman and Col. William Bent, a man of 
excellent intelligence and of extraordinary memory. 

After a few years’ acquaintance, the Indians began to give 
me their confidence, and I have been able to some extent to 
penetrate into the secrets of their life. On the other hand, I am 
constantly impressed by the number of things about the In¬ 
dians that I do not know. 

In describing the life, the ways, and the beliefs of the Chey¬ 
ennes, I have gone into details which may sometimes appear 
superfluous; but after all, if one is to understand the viewpoint 

v 

PREFACE 

of the Cheyennes, this seems necessary. These primitive people 
in certain ways live more in accordance with custom and form 
than we do, and a comprehension of the motives which govern 
their acts cannot be had without these details. 

I have never been able to regard the Indian as a mere object 
for study—a museum specimen. A half-century spent in rub¬ 
bing shoulders with them, during which I have had a share in 
almost every phase of their old-time life, forbids me to think 
of them except as acquaintances, comrades, and friends. While 
their culture differs from ours in some respects, fundamentally 
they are like ourselves, except in so far as their environment 
has obliged them to adopt a mode of life and of reasoning that 
is not quite our own, and which, without experience, we do not 
readily understand. 

It is impossible for me to acknowledge all the kindness that 
I have received during my long association with the Cheyennes. 
My Indian friends have always been cordial and helpful. To my 
interpreters, Ben Clark, George Bent, William Rowland and 
his sons, as well as to Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Eddy and to Mr. and 
Mrs. A. C. Stohr, I owe much. 

The illustrations shown are a few of the many photographs 
taken by Mrs. Grinnell and by Mrs. J. E. Tuell, who have 
kindly permitted their use. They picture some of the old-time 
practices and ceremonies, never to be seen again. 

Rev. Rodolphe Petter has been most generously helpful to 
me on the linguistic side; and finally, my friend, Frederick W. 
Hodge, so well equipped with general knowledge of American 
Indians, and the first living authority on the Indians and the 
history of the southwest United States, has performed for me 
the great service of reading over my manuscript. George E. 
Hyde has helped me with the index. To all these persons, past 
and present, my thanks are due. 

G. B. G. 

New York 
August, 1923. 

vi 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Preface ........ v 

Early Cheyenne History ..... i 

Divisions. Names. Genesis. Migration. Settlements in Minnesota 
and the Dakotas. Contact with the whites. 

Old-Time Ways ....... 47 

Life in early days. Transportation. Dress. 

Village Life ....... 63 

Incidents of a day. Gathering food. Names of the Cheyenne 
months. 

Certain Camp Customs ..... 73 

Smoking. Story telling. Forms of sacrifice. 

Social Organization ...... 86 

Camp circle. Tribal divisions. Family groups. 

The Boy and the Girl . . . . . . 102 

Child training. Naming the child. Little boys hunting. Advice to 
girls. Boy’s first buffalo hunt. 

Woman and Her Place . ..... 127 

Courtship. Love charms. Marriage ceremonies. The mother-in-law. 

Divorce. Relationship terms. 

Women’s Societies . . . . . . 159 

Quilling society. Decoration of dressed skins. Symbolism of colors. 

Industries . . . . . . . . 170 

Implements for war. Musical instruments. Horse equipage. The 
pipe. Woman’s tools. Tanning. Dress. The lodge. Pottery. House¬ 
hold furniture. 

• • 

vn 

CONTENTS 

Subsistence and Hunting . 

Foods of early days. Agriculture. Flesh food. Primitive hunting 
methods. Buffalo hunting. Other big game. Beaver. Wolves. Eagles. 
Fishing. 

Games and Amusements . 

Some children’s games. Men’s games. Wheel games.. Gambling. 
Women’s games. 

Tribal Government ...... 

Chiefs. Offenses against tribesmen. No formal laws. 

2 47 

312 

Vlll 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

Dancers with Willows. Medicine Lodge 

• 

Frontispiece 

Valley of the Lame Deer River. Tongue River 
Indian Agency. 

Facing Page 

16 

A Fashion of Old-Time Dress . 

• 

tt 

a 

32 

Big Woman. 

• 

it 

tt 

48 

Using Smoother on Quills 

• 

tt 

tt 

64 

Returning to the Camp .... 

• 

tt 

tt 

80 

Women Traveling. 

• 

tt 

tt 

96 

Women with Travois, Digging Roots 

• 

tt 

tt 

96 

Teeth’s Grandmother .... 

• 

tt 

tt 

112 

Red Bead Woman, Smoking . 

• 

tt 

tt 

128 

Wool Woman. Bowl and Horn Spoon 

• 

a 

tt 

144 

Little Creek Woman Working on a Moccasin 

• 

te 

tt 

160 

Thinning a Hide. 

• 

a 

tt 

176 

Red Bird’s Shield. 

• 

tt 

tt 

192 

Women’s Implements .... 

• 

it 

tt 

208 

Smoking Utensils ..... 

• 

tt 

tt 

208 

Fleshing a Hide ..... 

• 

tt 

tt 

224 

Model of Ornamented Lodge . 

• 

tt 

u 

240 

The Trail from the Timber 

• 

tt 

tt 

256 

Digging Pommes Blanches 

• 

tt 

tt 

272 

White Bull. 

• 

tt 

tt 

288 

Pounding Cherries .... 

• 

tt 

tt 

304 

Drying Meat. 

• 

tt 

tt 

320 

Playing the Seed Game .... 

• 

tt 

tt 

336 

Group of Singers . 

• 

u 

tt 

352 

Map of the Cheyenne Country 

• 

At end of Volume 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

DIVISIONS, NAMES, GENESIS, MIGRATION 

T HE Cheyennes are one of the westernmost tribes of 
the great Algonquian family. They formerly lived far 
to the east of their present range, in fixed villages 
and cultivated the soil; but moving west and southwest, becom¬ 
ing separated from their kindred of the East, they at last thrust 
out into the plains beyond the Missouri, and secured horses. 
In later days they were a typical Plains tribe of buffalo hunters, 
possessing energy and courage, and taking rank as one of the 
most hardy and forceful tribes of the great central plains. 

The Cheyennes today are settled in two divisions: the 
Northern Cheyennes in Montana, where in 1921 they num¬ 
bered 1411 individuals, and the Southern Cheyennes in Okla¬ 
homa, numbering in the same year 1870, giving a total for the 
tribe of 3281 persons. The arbitrary and modern division into 
Northern and Southern sections means nothing more than that 
a part of the tribe elected to reside in one region, and a part in 
another. The separation began about 1830. At first the move¬ 
ment was slow, but the building of Bent’s Fort in Colorado in 
1832 hastened it. Constant intercourse has always been carried 
on between the two divisions, and they regard themselves 
merely as two different camps of the tribe. Until the white 
occupancy of the plains made this impossible, Northerners 
moved south from time to time and remained there, and South¬ 
erners moved north. Often members of the same family lived, 
some in the North and others in the South. Frequent visiting 
still goes on by way of the railroads, and there are still changes 
of location by individuals or families. 

1 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The Cheyenne tribe, which we know is made up of the de¬ 
scendants of two related tribes, the Tsis tsis' tas, or Cheyenne 
proper, and the Suh' tai, who are said to have joined the Chey¬ 
ennes after they crossed the Missouri 1 and perhaps not much 
more than two hundred years ago, or in the early part of the 
eighteenth century. The Cheyennes were also called Ni dm a- 
he' tan iu, the Sandhill Men. 

For years during our first knowledge of the tribe, the name 
Cheyenne was supposed to be derived from the French word 
chien, “dog,” and this appeared to receive confirmation from 
the fact that an important soldier society of the tribe was called 
Dog Soldiers. The tribal name is now known to be an abbrevia¬ 
tion of the Sioux terms Sha hi' ye na, or Sha hi' e la, “red 
talkers,” meaning “people of alien speech”—those who talk a 
language which is not intelligible. The Sioux speak of people 
whose language they understand as “white talkers,” and of 
those whose language is not understood as “red talkers.” Thus 
Sha ia = sha, “red,” and i'a , l “to speak,” or “words,” means 

1 James Mooney states that the Suhtai crossed the Missouri River before 
the Cheyennes, but the Cheyennes, some of them of Suhtai descent, do not tell 
it so. Those whom I have questioned, both Northern and Southern Cheyennes, 
all declare that the Cheyennes crossed the Missouri before the Suhtai. Ben 
Clark and William Rowland, men of good intelligence, married into the tribe 
and residing with them for from thirty to fifty years, tell the story as the 
Cheyennes relate it. These men, through their long association with the tribe, in 
the course of which they must have heard the tribal traditions over and over 
again, are much more likely to have received a correct idea of the general 
Indian belief than any brief sojourner among them. 

Yet it is but fair to say that there may be here a misunderstanding and that 
the present-day Cheyenne traditions may mean merely that the last meeting— 
we are told of others much earlier—took place on the west side of the Missouri 
River. Since the movements of the tribes were by individual camps and in no 
sense as a tribal body, it is, I think, impossible to learn that any camp of either 
tribe first crossed the Missouri. Each tribe might well enough have assumed that 
the other w*as a newcomer in the region. Up to the end of the eighteenth cen¬ 
tury there were camps of Tsistsistas and Suhtai on the Missouri River as well 
as far west of it. 

2 The interpretation of the word Cheyenne is probably as given, yet today 
many of the Sioux declare that the term was applied to the Cheyennes because 
when the Sioux first met them, the Cheyennes were painted red over the whole 
body and their clothing was painted red. The same thing is said of the Crees, 
who in early days also painted the whole body red. Among the names applied 

2 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

“to speak in a language not understood.” Among several Plains 
tribes the name for the Cheyennes is a variant of the Sioux 
name, as for example, when the Arikaras and the Pawnees call 
the Cheyennes Shar' ha. This term obviously suggests the word 
Chaa, applied by La Salle in 1680 to a group of Indians that 
visited him at Fort Crevecceur, not far below the present site 
of Peoria, Illinois. Only a few days before this visit, some 
Ma tou ten' tas came to La Salle. 3 If the Matoutentas were 
Otoes, it may have been from them that La Salle secured the 
name of his visitors, for at that time the Otoes were near neigh¬ 
bors of the Cheyennes. 

The tribe does not use the name which we have given them. 
They call themselves Tsistsistas, which the books commonly 
give as meaning “people.” It probably means related to one 
another, similarly bred, like us, our people, or us. The Rev. 
Rodolphe Petter has pointed out that it may be translated “cut 
people,” “gashed people,” for the two words are nearly alike. 
This last meaning is practically that given them on the prairie 
in early times by whites and Indians alike, and evidently comes 
from the distant sign which they used to designate themselves, 
which means “cut arms.” If one is speaking by signs to a 
Cheyenne close at hand and asks his tribe, he will make on the 
back of the left forward-directed forefinger two or three diago¬ 
nal cross lines drawn toward his body with the right fore¬ 
finger, and this is often explained as “striped feathers”—refer¬ 
ring to those used on the arrows. The sign at a distance is, as 

to the Crecs by certain Missouri River tribes are some that resemble that 
applied by the Sioux to the Cheyennes. Maximilian gives the Hidatsa name for 
Cree as Schahi; Matthews as Shat ye; Hayden gives the Sioux name for Cree 
as Shi e ah la, or as Shi t ya. Mooney and Thomas say that these last are 
Assiniboine names meaning “enemies,” “strangers.” They may well mean 
strangers in speech, speaking a strange, unknown tongue. 

The Cheyennes today consider the Crees to be related to them, and many 
years ago William Jackson, who had been brought up among the Crees, told 
me that the Cree name for the Cheyennes was Ka nea hea was' tsik, which was 
said to mean “they talk a little Cree ” meaning that the Cheyenne language 
somewhat resembled the Cree. 

8 Margry, Decouvertes, vol. n, p. 54. 

3 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

said, that for “cut arms,” but that sign has been misinterpreted 
by the Blackfeet, who have mistaken it for the somewhat 
similar sign for “spotted,” and call the Cheyennes “spotted 
people,” a designation which seems without appropriate mean¬ 
ing. It has been said that the terms “gashed or cut people,” and 
“cut arms,” were applied to them from their old practice of 
cutting strips of skin from their arms and other parts of the 
body to offer in sacrifice, to bring good fortune. The name 
“Black Arms,” supposed to have been a designation of the 
Cheyennes, may also have arisen from a misunderstanding of 
the sign. 

The early history of the Cheyennes, like that of all of their 
neighbors, is vague. Their movements may be traced back for 
more than two hundred years, but beyond that the investigator 
comes to a point beyond which all is conjecture. From their 
own traditions and from the fact that they are of the western 

Algonquians, whose current of migration was in a general west¬ 
erly and southwesterly course, we may conclude that the Chey¬ 
ennes came from the Northeast or East, but whether they 
reached the upper drainage of the Mississippi River along the 
southern shores of the Great Lakes, or along the northern 
shores and around the west end of Lake Superior, it would seem 
now impossible to learn. 

Previous to the year 1880, certain Cheyenne traditions bear¬ 
ing on the earliest tribal wanderings were gathered at Fort 
Reno, Oklahoma, from a number of the oldest Southern Chey¬ 
ennes, by the late Ben Clark, and the country described in 
these accounts as the primitive home of the Cheyennes seems 
to suggest the region lying north of the Great Lakes and toward 
Hudson Bay, rather than that south of the lakes. 

According to one of these tales, the Cheyennes formerly lived 

were in a great cave; it was dark, but 
a distant light was seen, and traveling toward it they found an 
opening and came out upon the earth. At first the light hurt 
their eyes, but it was not always light. There were night and 

under the ground. They 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

day. They found themselves in a new country, rough and 
strange, where rocks and stones were strewn all over the 
ground. Small animals with long ears—rabbits—were seen, and 
killed for food, and for a long time these were their only sup¬ 
port. Their robes, or coverings for warmth, were made of rab¬ 
bit-skins, 4 and their shelters were made of the stones which 
were so abundant. They journeyed on and came to a large 
river on which timber grew. Here a star fell from the sky and 
set fire to the timber, and in this way the Cheyennes learned 
of fire, to cook by and for warmth. They continued to travel 
and came to the shores of a great water where were found many 
things showing that other people had camped there. Hammers 
and axes of stone were found hidden in the soil, and wooden 
tent-pins were standing in the ground, even to the water’s edge. 
The Cheyennes remained here for a long time. 

When again they began to travel, they moved westward and 
at length reached a 
were attacked by the Ho' he, or Assiniboines, who already pos¬ 
sessed guns. The Cheyennes were finally driven westward and 
reached the Missouri River —R o' mi ta i. a 

Clark credits this information to such men as Bull Tongue, 
Many Magpies, Stone Calf, and others, who were living be¬ 
tween 1865 and 1875. A considerable portion of what he gives 

country which was very level. There they 

4 Robes of woven strips of rabbit-skin have always been used by the Indians 
of the North. Mackenzie (Voyages, p. 44, London, 1801), found the Hare 
Indians clad in hare-skins. Note the suit of hare-skin in the Museum of the 

American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York. 

5 Eomitai is variously translated and there are various explanations of the 
name. One meaning is, “It gives fat.” The word is often translated “greasy.” 
It is said that long ago, when the Cheyennes first reached the Missouri River, 
they found on its banks many recently drowned fat buffalo. They named the 
river from this welcome food supply. Some of the Southern Cheyennes say that 
when they first saw the Missouri it was rising, and that great masses or lumps 
of froth were floating down. This froth resembled the foam which formed on 
the water in their kettles, when boiling pounded bones to extract the grease; 

and the name was given to the stream from these masses of greasy looking foam 
C American Anthropologist , N. s., vol. vm, 1906, p. 16). After this paper 
appeared, Mr. R. Petter wrote me that “fatty foam” or “greasy foam” is the 
true meaning. 

5 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

I have never heard. The story of the Cheyennes having 
emerged from under the ground may perhaps have been bor¬ 
rowed by them from the Arikaras or the Mandans, with whom 
for many years they were closely associated. 

The Northern Cheyennes tell of having lived for a long time 
on the border of some great water, the winter home of multi¬ 
tudes of migrating wild fowl. Each autumn these birds passed 
over them in great flocks and alighted in this water, where they 
spent the winter, and when spring came and the first thunders 
were heard, the wild fowl rose and flew over them and away, 
to disappear in the North. The climate of this country must 
have been mild, because, at that time, it is said, the people wore 
no clothing. 

From this great water they started on their journey toward 
the West. They tell of moving from some distant land by boats, 
which they cannot describe. They were poorly equipped with 
weapons, and were unable to capture large animals, except 
occasionally in snares. Their flesh food consisted largely of 
small animals—skunks are particularly mentioned—and the 
water fowl which bred in the lakes found everywhere in that 
region. When the birds came in spring and built their nests, 
the people gathered great quantities of eggs for food, and when 
the old birds shed their flight feathers many were captured, and 
when the young were partly grown these were killed. 8 Thus so 
long as the fowl remained they subsisted chiefly on them. 

Their movement from the Northeast brought them to the 
edge of some large body of water which it became necessary to 
cross. The distance between shores was great, and landmarks 
could not be distinguished, or perhaps wild rice, rushes, or 

6 “The In di a n s were much fatigued, having been employed in running after 
wild fowl which have lately cast their feathers.” (Mackenzie, Voyages, p. 26, 
London, 1801.) Geo. H. Wilkins says: “During the summer [near Kellett Point, 
Banks Island] the white geese especially can be driven about in flocks when 
they are molting, and killed like sheep. At this time of the year they are not so 
very fat and are much better if killed earlier in the season,” i.e., before molting. 
(Ill Report on Topographical and Geographical Work, Canadian Arctic Expe¬ 
dition, p. 55, Ottawa, 1917.) 

6 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

other growths were so high above the water as to obstruct the 
view; at all events it was needful to learn what course was to 
be followed. Young men were sent forward to discover what 
lay beyond this water, and in order to mark the route followed 
they placed in their canoes poles, which, as they advanced, they 
thrust into the mud of the bottom and left standing. They 
reached the other shore and found themselves in a flat country, 
which seemed to be flooded, for as they went forward in their 
canoes trees stood all about them in the water. At length they 
turned about, and following the sticks standing in the water, 
readily found the way back to their people. When the whole 
tribe advanced, the marked way was again followed. 

Where this was we do not know, nor where the Cheyennes 
went from here. They speak next of a very flat country in 
which grew a tall red grass which they gathered and tied in 
bundles to use for fuel, for in that land there was little or no 
wood. Up to this time they are believed to have lived in shelters 
made by setting poles in the ground in a circle or oval, bending 
them over toward a common center to form a roof, and build¬ 
ing up the sides with grass, earth, and sods; in other words, in 
permanent earth lodges. 

It is told by the Cheyennes of today that soon after they 
reached the flat country of their tradition, they were attacked 
by the Hohe, or Assiniboines, and perhaps by the Crees. These 
possessed firearms—guns presumably obtained from the Hud¬ 
son Bay Company or from still earlier traders on Hudson Bay. 
These attacks of the Hohe drove their tribe in a southwesterly 
direction until they reached the Missouri. 

Some years ago Mr. F. W. Hodge edited a manuscript dated 
about 1660, by Dr. Thomas Hutchins, then physician at York 
Factory, at which time, as was inferred from the manuscript, 
many Crees went there to trade. This manuscript is, or recently 
was, in the London Archives of the Hudson Bay Company. 

The earliest Indians that came to trade to the shores of Hud¬ 
son Bay appear to have been the Crees, for according to the 

7 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Jesuit Relations for 1657-1658 there was some small traffic to 
the shores of the bay as early as that time. Mention is made of 
a Cree having spent the winter with the traders there and 
promising to return in the spring with many of his countrymen. 
This was presumably at Port Nelson. 1 

Soon after this the Assiniboines who lived about the Lake of 
the Woods, and the Crees who occupied the country of the 
Kaministiquia River, came to fighting. The Crees were the first 
to receive arms from the English by way of Hudson Bay, and 
fought the Assiniboines, their nearest neighbors. These, finding 
themselves the weaker, asked for peace, took Cree wives, and 
later joined the Crees against the Sioux. 3 However, this peace 
between the Crees and the Assiniboines may have been broken 
from time to time, for Raudot, writing from Quebec in 1710, 
says that the Assiniboines would readily come to trade on the 
shores of Lake Superior if they were not at war with the 
Christenaux (Crees).* 

On the other hand, Lewis and Clark state 10 that in 1806 the 
Cheyennes declared that they had been driven from the Red 
River country by the attacks of the Sioux, and the Sioux tradi¬ 
tion recorded by Dr. Riggs states that the Sioux and Ojibwas 
both attacked the Cheyennes and drove them to the Missouri, 
where they formed a new village and planted on the east bank 
of the river. After a time the tribe crossed to the west bank and 
had a fortified village there. In 1804 the ruins of a Cheyenne 
village were pointed out to Lewis and Clark by an Arikara 
chief. 11 As I shall try to show, these statements as to hostilities 
between the Cheyenne and the Sioux are unsupported by any 
evidence from either tribe. 

The Cheyennes now came into touch with two tribes of the 
Missouri, the Mandans and Arikaras. Mandan tradition given 

7 Jesuit Relations, Thwaites ed., voL xliv, p. 239 tt seq., Cleveland, 1899. 

8 Margry, vol. vi, p. 82. 

8 Ibid., p. 14. 

10 Original Journals of Lewis and Clark, vol. vi, p. 100. 

11 Also Ordway Journal, Wis. Hist. Colls., xxn, 1916, p. 154. 

8 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

to Maximilian tells us that they were attacked by the Chey¬ 
ennes soon after that tribe arrived on the Missouri, and that a 
war ensued; 15 but peace was at length made, and for a long 
time the two tribes were on terms of close friendship—as they 
were in the days of Lewis and Clark. This tradition of war 
between the Cheyennes and Mandans I do not trust. No pres¬ 
ent-day Indians have ever heard of it, though stories are often 
told of fights with the Arikaras. In these friendly relations the 
Arikaras also were usually included, and the oldest Cheyennes 
of the last generation—1890-1900—often spoke of the time 
when the two tribes lived together at the mouth of the Moreau 
or Owl River; the Arikaras lived farther down, near the Chey¬ 
enne River. 1 * 

After the Cheyennes had crossed the Missouri River and a 
part had worked their way out on the plains to or near the 
Black Hills, they met with a numerous company, the Suhtai, 
who spoke a dialect of the Cheyenne language—rougher, 
harsher, and more guttural. Cheyenne tradition says that long, 
long ago, very far back, long before they began their westward 
migration, the Suhtai had been their enemies. They used to 
fight with them, but at last the two tribes discovered that they 
spoke the same tongue, and so were related. When this was 
learned they became friends and made an alliance. Later, still 
in the North, they separated and for a long time did not meet. 
Some informants have been told that the two tribes came 
together and separated three times. When the Suhtai joined 
the Cheyennes in the Black Hills country they were at once 
recognized by their speech, which was so similar to the Chey¬ 
enne tongue that it could be understood, though many words 
differed from those used by the Cheyennes. 

12 Maximilian, Travels, vol. n, p. 369 et seq., Paris, 1841. 

23 Renaudiere found the “Rickaras” on the Missouri, ten leagues above the 
Mahas in 1723 (Margry, vi, p. 39 2 ); just below Cheyenne River, Lewis and 
Clark (Orig. Joum., vol. 1, p. 176) passed a Ree village which may have been 
abandoned about 1750, and another near Owl River perhaps abandoned about 
1796. 

9 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

For many years after crossing the Missouri River, the Suhtai 
lived near and in association with the Cheyennes. 1 * Yet they 
retained their tribal organization and spoke their own dialect as 
late as the year 1832, when William Bent, going north from 
the recently completed fort on the Arkansas to find the Chey¬ 
ennes, came upon the Suhtai camp, and by them was told where 
to look for the Cheyennes. Bent, who spoke Cheyenne, declared 
that he had difficulty in understanding the speech of the Suhtai. 
Not very long after this, the Suhtai appear to have joined the 
Cheyennes permanently and to have become a part of the 
tribe, regularly camping and living with them. When this took 
place the old Suhtai dialect began to be lost. Though it was still 
spoken by the old people, the children who were born and 
reared in the Cheyenne camp naturally spoke the dialect of 
their fellows, and today few old men or women remain who can 
recall any of the old Suhtai who spoke that dialect. 

The old-time beliefs and ways were more enduring, and a 
multitude of customs of the Suhtai, handed down to their chil¬ 
dren, are practiced in the tribe today. One of the important 
mysteries of the Cheyennes is the so-called buffalo hat, Is' si- 
wun, which it is believed was brought to the Suhtai by that 
tribe’s culture hero. 

Nothing is known of the Suhtai before they reached the 
plains. Perrin du Lac, who saw some Cheyennes before the 
earliest American explorers, speaks of them as in three bands— 
Chaguyenne, Ouisy, and Chousa—terms which suggest Chey¬ 
enne, Omissis, and Suhtai. Mr. Petter, however, our first 
authority on the Cheyenne language, is quoted as referring 
these names to Hev' a tan iu, 0 miss' is, and Ho tam’ i tan iu — 
but the last-named group is a soldier organization, not a divi¬ 
sion. 

In the year 1905 I requested the late Dr. William Jones, who 
was then investigating the Ojibwa and other Algonquian tribes 
in Minnesota and Manitoba, to make inquiry concerning the 

14 Ben Clark, MS., circa 1880. 

IO 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

Suhtai, or any tribe whose name might suggest that word. He 
wrote me: 

The nearest I can find to your Suhtai is Sho' ta wi ni' ni wug. The 
last part of the word, “t ni ni wug,” is the plural of “i ni ni,” which 
means “man,” but no one seems to know what Shota means. The 
word was given me by the chief of the Bear Island Pillagers, in 
answer to my question about Suhtai. He said it was the name of a 
people who used to live east of this place, meaning between Leech 
Lake and Lake Superior, but that he had never heard of them— i.e., 
of their present existence—nor where they went. The man who told 
me this is Madcigado, who claims to be seventy-five years old. 

It would seem therefore that there is a tradition of a people locally 
known as Shohta, who in early times lived west of the western end of 
Lake Superior, and perhaps before the Ojibwa had worked as far 
west as this point. 

The full name of these people, Shotawininiwug, is now used by the 
Ojibwa to designate the Hebrew race; the fact that it ever applied 
to a tribe of Indians having apparently been forgotten. 

It is perhaps worth noting in this connection that a very aged 
Cheyenne woman who was once the wife of Charles Auterbees 
always spoke of the Suhtai as Soh' ta. 

The early French traders and Lewis and Clark considered 
the Suhtai—as in fact at that time they were—a tribe distinct 
from the Cheyenne, and called them Staitan, which seems to 
be the answer made by some Suhtai, who, when asked who he 
was, replied, “Suh' tai he tan,” meaning, “I am a man of the 
Suhtai.” 

When the three allied tribes, Tsistsistas, Suhtai, and Ara- 
paho, camped together, the Suhtai village was to the north, the 
Cheyennes next to them, and the Arapahoes to the south. For 
this reason, perhaps, one of the Cheyenne names for a division 
of the Arapahoes is Num o sin' ha nhV a, “build their fires to 
the south.” This relative situation of the camps may possibly 
have some reference to the order in which the three tribes 
crossed the Missouri River. 

ii 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

At the present day the Suhtai remain among the Cheyennes 
merely as the name of a division. The old dialect has disap¬ 
peared. The meaning of the name is not known. Tangle Hair 
believed it was derived from issuht', “ridge,” which suggests 
that it may mean “dwellers on the ridge.” 

Even after the Cheyennes had reached the Missouri River, 
while some of them stopped there, others still seemed disposed 
to roam. Information from different men—one of whom himself 
remembered a time when some Cheyenne still lived on the Mis¬ 
souri River—shows that after they had come to that stream 
and settled there to cultivate their crops and live their lives, 
there was a tendency among some of the more restless people 
to go farther, to work out on the plains, where buffalo were 
abundant. A part remained in different camps on the Missouri 
River, sedentary, and occupying permanent houses, and a part 
began to wander out onto the plains. Elk River (born about 
1810) says that one band that remained on the Missouri River 
moved down below the Standing Rock, and then, changing 
their minds, moved again and went on farther down, estab¬ 
lished a new village, there planted their corn and tobacco, and 
raised crops for many years. His mother’s statement will be 
given farther on. 

The people who began to wander out on the plains at first 
merely made hunting journeys, and returned with their meat 
to the village; but gradually these hunting excursions lasted 
longer and longer, until a time was reached when they prac¬ 
tically lived on the plains and visited the river. Wandering 
farther and farther, those who had left the Missouri River 
reached the Black Hills, about which they lived, and which for 
generations was the center of their wanderings. Elk River de¬ 
clared that it was that division of the tribe that first reached 
the Black Hills which first met the Arapahoes there, and gave 
Curly as the name of the head chief of that tribe at the time. 

The streams running from the Black Hills were pleasant to 
live on. Food was abundant, and after the Cheyennes had made 

12 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

successful killings of buffalo, the people, when they visited 
their relatives on the Missouri River, were accustomed to carry 
back quantities of dried meat and present it to those who were 
farming there. The accounts of the visitors, confirmed by the 
gifts of food which they brought, formed a constantly increas¬ 
ing temptation to those who still lived on the Missouri River; 
and the ultimate result—though it may have taken generations 
to bring it about—was that most of the Cheyennes moved out 
to the plains, but the final exodus probably did not take place 
until the early part of the nineteenth century. 

Lewis and Clark speak of the Cheyennes as established in 
1804 in two places, of which the explorers knew, for they speak 
of them as the Sharha, people on the other side, and the Wee- 
hee-skeu, people on this side. 15 

SETTLEMENTS IN MINNESOTA AND THE DAKOTAS 

In their progress through the new western country, the early 
travelers found here and there camps of Indians, and heard of 
other camps which they did not see. Accustomed to the seden¬ 
tary habits of white people, the explorers seem to have taken it 
for granted that any place or point occupied by a tribe of In¬ 
dians was the home of that tribe and that it remained perma¬ 
nently in that tract of country—had always been there, and 
always would be there. Writers who followed the early travelers 
shared that belief and copied their statements. 

Such permanence of occupancy is not likely ever to have 
been true of the Plains Indians. The conditions of their lives 
and the difficulties of obtaining food were such that they were 
seldom all together. Usually they were scattered out over a 
wide extent of territory, each little group endeavoring to find 
some place where enough food to support them could be had. 

It is true that certain tribes of Plains Indians which de¬ 
pended largely on agriculture occupied permanent villages and 

15 Orig. Joura., vol. 1, p. 190. 

13 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

were to some extent sedentary. They made periodical hunting 
trips, in summer and in winter, which lasted for two or three 
months, when the tribe returned to its permanent villages. Yet 
from time to time, through scarcity of food, attacks by enemies, 
or from unknown causes, these sedentary tribes modified or 
even entirely changed their ways. In historic times some tribes 
of Pawnees abandoned their permanent villages, moved away, 
and built new ones far from the old. Aged Sioux men—Santees 
in recent years located at the Standing Rock Indian Reserva¬ 
tion—have declared to me that their fathers had told them that, 
many years before, their people lived in permanent (earth) 
lodges 14 and that it was not until they had commenced to move 
out onto the plains and toward the Missouri River that such 
permanent villages were abandoned and skin tipis exclusively 
adopted. 

While the permanent houses of the Mandan, Hidatsa, An¬ 
kara, and Pawnee endured to very recent times and have been 
described in many books, those of the Cheyennes are known 
only from tradition and from the suggestions of early writers; 
and soon after the beginning of the nineteenth century the 
greater part of the tribe had probably abandoned permanent 
houses, had to a great extent lost attachment for certain par¬ 
ticular localities, and had become wanderers, as they continued 
to be until the end of the Indian wars. Notwithstanding this 
change of habit, they still cultivated the ground and raised 

crops. 

From the statements of the oldest Cheyennes, and from what 
we know of Indian character and ways, it is probable that at 
the time when some of their villages were 
at certain points, a part of the Cheyennes were still pushing 

permanently situated 

westward, and that the tribe was partly migratory and partly 

sedentary, some established in one place and some moving 

about. It is possible that the permanent villages on the Yellow 

16 Winchell, N. H., Habitations of the Sioux in Minnesota, Wisconsin 
Archaeologist, vol. vn, no. 4, p. 155. 

14 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

Medicine River in Minnesota, and on the Sheyenne River in 
North Dakota, and perhaps others, were occupied during the 
same period, that even at this time there may have been a 
settlement of Cheyennes on the Missouri River, and that other 
groups may then have been wandering on the plains after the 
buffalo. 

In the last of the eighteenth and in the early part of the 
nineteenth century, camps of the Cheyennes were found over a 
wide territory extending from west of the Black Hills to the 
Missouri River on the east, and from the Little Missouri River 
toward its mouth, south at least as far as the Arkansas River, 
and perhaps still farther. There is mention of Cheyennes in 
New Mexico before the beginning of the eighteenth century. 
Of this tribe, as of others, but—so far as I know—more of this 
tribe than of most others, it may be said that they were scat¬ 
tered over a very wide area. 

As already noted, La Salle saw the Chaa (? Sharha) in 1680 
when they told him that they lived about the head of the Great 
River. There is extant also a letter written by De Vargas, in 
May, 1695, in which he says that certain Apaches from the 
east, “who are called Chiyenes,” had recently come to Santa 
Fe. 1T Just who these people may have been is uncertain. It is 
not said that they called themselves Chiyenes, but were called 
Chiyenes. The term Apache is said to signify enemy, a person 
not one of the Pueblo tribes and presumably hostile. Mr. F. W. 
Hodge believes the term was applied by the Spaniards of New 
Mexico to any non-sedentary tribe, one at enmity with Pueblo 
Indians and Spaniards alike. A common Spaniard term for 
hostile, or wild, Indians was gentiles. 

Mr. Hodge thinks the Vargas reference to the Chiyenes not 
doubtful, and that he could not possibly be mistaken in the 
name. It may well be that even at that early date a party of 
Cheyennes had drifted far southwestward after buffalo. The 
Comanches made their appearance in New Mexico in 1700. 

17 Twitchell, New Mexican Archives, vol. I, p. 265. 

15 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Carver, in 1766, mentions the Schians as found in the great 
ramp that he visited on the Minnesota River. The Schianese, 
he says, live farther to the west. Nearly one hundred years 
later Riggs and Williamson repeat Sioux traditions which de¬ 
clared that in earlier times the Cheyennes had lived on the 
Minnesota River, but had moved westward. 

Two points of permanent occupancy seem generally ac¬ 
cepted: (1) the earth-lodge village on the Sheyenne River, a 
tributary of the Red River from the west, near the present 
Lisbon, in North Dakota, and (2) the two neighboring village 
sites on the Missouri passed by Lewis and Clark in October, 
1804, which an Arikara chief told them were formerly occupied 
by the Cheyennes. 

In the Smithsonian Report for 1871, Dr. Comfort describes 
his investigations into certain mounds which he found near 
Kettle Lakes, west of Lake Traverse, which he speaks of as 
made by the Cheyennes. 

Disregarding the earliest and very vague traditions of the 
Cheyennes with regard to their most ancient wanderings, and 
treating Tsistsistas and Suhtai as a single group, we find that 
there still remain in the tribe accounts of a time when they 
lived on the borders of large lakes in a region which was wholly 
timbered. This country was presumably in the present state of 
Minnesota, or to the northeast of that. Later they speak of a 
blue water, or river, flowing through a “blue earth” country, 
near which they lived for a long time. This was perhaps the 
Minnesota River country. 

Dr. T. S. Williamson 18 records among the “common and 
most reliable traditions” of the Sioux, one which states that 
when the ancestors of the Sioux first came to the Falls of St. 
Anthony the Iowas occupied the country about the mouth of 
the Minnesota River, and the Cheyennes dwelt higher up on 
the same stream. He states also that the Cheyennes formerly 

18 Minn. Hist. Soc. Colls., voL I, p. 242. 

16 

I 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

planted on the Minnesota between the Blue Earth River and 
Lac qui Parle. 

Writing about 1850, Dr. Riggs 19 says that “two hundred 
years ago or thereabouts the Cheyennes had a village near the 
Yellow Medicine River in Minnesota, where are yet visible old 
earth works; that from there they retired to a point between 
Big Stone Lake and Lake Traverse, where they had a village, 
and then moved to the south bend of the Sheyenne River, a 
tributary of the Red River of the north.” This last village is 
the one near Lisbon, North Dakota. From the site on the Shey¬ 
enne River the Cheyennes are assumed to have moved toward 
the Missouri River, and when they reached it are said by Riggs 
to have had a village on the east side and afterward to have 
crossed the river and to have lived with or near the Mandans. 

Dr. Comfort, in his account of Indian remains 20 (near Fort 
Wadsworth, west of Sisseton, South Dakota), speaks of the 
occupancy of the region by the Cheyennes as well known, and 
states that “the Cheyennes about one hundred years ago were 
dispossessed of. the soil by the Dakotas.” The village referred 
to by Dr. Comfort is not the Lake Traverse village said by 
Riggs to have been occupied next after that on the Yellow 
Medicine, but Comfort speaks (p. 398) of mounds and earth¬ 
works on the shores of Lake Traverse which might be the 
traditional site referred to by Riggs. 

Rev. Dr. T. S. Williamson- 1 says of the return of the Sioux 
to the Minnesota River, perhaps many years after their first 
visit: 

The Cheyennes were then in the upper part of the valley; and 
near the Yellow Medicine a fortification is still plainly visible, which 
it is said was made by them near a good spring of water; and in 
1853, when the first plowing for the Sioux was done in that region, 
large quantities of muscle shells were turned up near the remains of 
this fortification, indicating that the ground had been cultivated. The 

19 S. R. Riggs, contr. to North American Ethnology, vol. ix, p. 193. 

20 Smithsonian Report for 1871, p. 402, Washington, 1873. 

21 Minn. Hist. Soc. Colls., vol. m, p. 284. 

17 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Sioux who expelled the Iowas, a kindred race, made a league with 
the Cheyennes, who, though of a different origin, have ever been 
counted a part of the Dakota nation. 

Of the settlement on the Yellow Medicine, Dr. Riggs says: 

The excavation extends around three sides of a somewhat irregular 
square, the fourth being protected by the slope of the hill, which is 
now covered with timber. After the filling up of years, or perhaps 
centuries, the ditch is still about three feet deep. We found the east 
side in the middle of the ditch to measure thirty-eight paces, the 
south side sixty-two and the west side fifty. The north side is con¬ 
siderably longer than the south, the area enclosed is not far from 
half an acre. On each of the three excavated sides there was left a 
gateway of about two paces. 25 

An early reference to the village on the Sheyenne River ap¬ 
peared in 1863, from the pen of the same author. 2 * He says: 

22 Minn. Hist. Soc. Colls., vol. 1, p. 119. 

23 St. Paul Daily Press, August 5, 1863. 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

The village stood on the southeast side [of the river] on a high 
piece of land abutting on a swale which contains springs of living 
water. More than fifty years have passed since its abandonment by 
the Cheyennes, but the fortifications are all easily traced. The ditch 
that encircled the village proper is now, in places, three feet deep. 
It terminates at either end at the bluff bank, and is the shape of a 
half-moon, a little gibbous. It includes between two and three acres 
of ground. This place was thickly settled with houses. Some sixty 
or seventy of these houses stood inside the fortifications. Then out¬ 
side the city were suburban residences, but they were not sunk into 
the ground nearly so much as those on the inside. 

In 1850 the stream on which this village site stands was still 
called by the Sioux Sha V e na wo ju' pi, “Where the Cheyennes 
Plant.” 

Later Dr. Riggs wrote: 

Dakota tradition says that it was for a great many years success¬ 
fully defended by the Cheyennes against the hostile Sioux, that many 
bloody battles were fought there, the Sioux often being driven back 
with great slaughter. 

In a periodical entitled The Monthly South Dakotan (vol. n, 
no. 4, August, 1899) is a description of the village by the Hon. 
A. L. Van Osdel of the Sibley Expedition of 1863—the one that 
Dr. Riggs accompanied. The account possesses a certain inter¬ 
est, but apparently the writer has endeavored to make it vivid 
by suggesting that the site had been recently abandoned. In 
fact, in one place he says: “Several old dirt lodges were still 
standing, delapidated and in the lost [sic] stages of decay. 
These old structures were built in a circular form and were 
from fifteen to twenty feet in diameter.” Interesting, however, 
is the fact that this writer has hit upon the truth as to the 
enemies with whom the Cheyennes fought, and declares that 
the battles of those who formerly occupied this place were with 
the Assiniboine Sioux. This he repeats more than once, and in 
this he is right, for the fighting of the Cheyennes was with the 
Assiniboine Sioux, and not with any other Sioux. 

19 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The village on the Yellow Medicine was of small extent and 
could have been occupied by only a small number of people. 
One-half an acre of land—Dr. Riggs’ estimate—would have 

5 • 

Plot of Cheyenne village- Courtesy of Prof. O. G. Libby and Mr. A. B. 

Stoat. 

20 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

held but a few lodges. The village on the Sheyenne River was 
much larger, yet its 60 or 70 lodges would hardly have housed 
more than 500 or 600 inhabitants. 

Dr. Riggs and Dr. Williamson seem to assume that the dif¬ 
ferent village sites in Minnesota and North Dakota were occu¬ 
pied successively, but I believe that this was not the case. It 
seems more probable that several of the various villages were 
occupied at the same time and were merely different permanent, 
if scattered, camps or villages of distinct bands of Cheyennes, 
just as, a few generations ago, different sections of the Pawnee 
tribe occupied their permanent villages at distances one from 
another in portions of Kansas and Nebraska. 

Although, so far as known, the Cheyennes were never a large 
tribe, yet as long ago as 1820 Morse 24 gave their numbers as 
about thirty-five hundred, and this did not include the Suhtai, 
then not identified with the Cheyennes. In none of the known 
settlements of the Cheyennes east of the Missouri River could 
such a number of people have been accommodated. 

I have no doubt that for a long time a number of contem¬ 
porary Cheyenne villages were scattered along the Minnesota 
River and to the westward, and that some of these, after they 
had been occupied for a generation or two, were abandoned 
and new locations sought. At all events the trend of tribal 
movement was westward, and this at last brought the Chey¬ 
ennes to the Missouri River. 

In the movement of a group of Indians, a camp or village 
followed its own ideas as to where it wished to go, and usually 
did not consider the movements of other camps. It moved inde¬ 
pendently. There was no contemporaneous tribal migration. 
The different camps did not unite in a forward movement. The 
trend of the tribal movement being westward, a group moved 
on, established itself at a point, and remained there for a time 
—perhaps for many years, perhaps for a generation or two. 

24 Report to the Secretary of War of the United States on Indian Affairs, 
pp. 251, 254, 366, New Haven, 1822. 

21 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Later, some village behind it moved forward, passed the first 
village and stopped somewhere beyond. The gradual westward 
progress consisted of a succession of such movements, the tail 
of the long procession often becoming the head, and the differ¬ 
ent camps or villages moving on successively and passing each 
other. Since for all the people the important question was that 
of subsistence, it is evident that when a place was found espe¬ 
cially favorable for the procuring of food, the camp would 
remain there longer than it would in a place where subsistence 
was less easily had—would be likely to remain, in fact, until 
food became difficult to obtain. Thus in the tribal movement 
westward the rearmost camps of the migrating Cheyennes were 
constantly moving onward and passing those in advance of 
them. 

Most early writers who mention the Cheyennes speak of 
them as having been driven southwest by the Sioux, but I be¬ 
lieve that these statements are due to misunderstanding. Al¬ 
though Lewis and Clark, 1804, the Rev. Mr. Riggs, 1850 or 
thereabouts, and W. P. Clark, 1884, all repeat the same story, 
I am convinced that it is misleading. Long-continued inquiry 
among the Cheyennes reveals no account of any wars with 
those tribes which we commonly called Sioux—that is, the 
southern branches of the Dakota group. Carver speaks of the 
Cheyennes as camped in 1766 with the Nadouwessi of the 
Plains; Trudeau, 1795, speaks of Sioux as associated with the 
Cheyennes; and Henry, 1806, speaks of Sioux and Arapahoes 
as in company with the Cheyennes when they visited the 
Hidatsa to make a binding peace with them. The western Sioux 
today declare that they have always been friends of the Chey¬ 
ennes, and Rev. T. S. Williamson says, as previously stated, 
that the Cheyennes “have ever since [their first meeting] been 
counted a part of the Dakota nation.” John Hay, 25 in his notes 
on Capt. Mackay’s Journal, writing of the years 1794 and 

25 Extracts from Capt. Mackay’s Journal and others, Proceedings State 
Historical Society, Wisconsin, 1915, Separate no. 171, p. 208. 

22 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

1795, says that the Cheyennes, or Shayen,—who formerly 
lived on the tributary of the Red River of that name,—“were 
so harassed by the Assiniboine and Sious” that they had to 
leave their village and go to the Missouri River. 

The Hohe—the Assiniboines—however, are constantly 
spoken of by the Cheyennes as enemies, and inquiry among 
the Yankton, Hunkpatina, and Teton Sioux, now settled on 
the Missouri River in North Dakota and South Dakota, seems 
to show a general agreement that the Assiniboines were their 
enemies also, while the Cheyennes were their friends. The 
Assiniboines used to make war journeys against Sioux and 
Cheyennes alike. This hostility is spoken of by Henry in 1806. 
I believe that the Cheyenne tradition of their being driven 
south refers to early attacks on them by the Assiniboines, per¬ 
haps in company at first with the Crees and later with the 
Ojibwa. That there may have been occasional individual quar¬ 
rels between Cheyennes and Sioux and between Cheyennes and 
Mandans is possible and even likely, but I believe nothing in 
the nature of a general war. 

Through Dr. A. McG. Beede, of Fort Yates, North Dakota, 
I learned that the Teton Sioux, now allotted and scattered over 
the Standing Rock Indian Reservation, declare that on the 
west bank of the Missouri River, not far from Fort Yates, 
there were formerly two Cheyenne villages, and with Dr. Beede 
I visited these sites. 

The more northerly of the two is situated on a bluff above 
the Missouri River on the south side of Porcupine Creek, less 
than five miles north of Fort Yates. The village has been partly 
destroyed by the Missouri River, which has undermined the 
bank and carried away some of the house rings, but many 
remain. A few are still seen as the raised borders of consider¬ 
able earth lodges, the rings about the central hollow being from 
twelve to fifteen inches above the surrounding soil, and the 
hollows noticeably deep; usually, however, the situation of the 
house is indicated merely by a slight hollow and by the peculiar 

23 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

character of the grass growing on the house site. The house 
rings nearest both Porcupine Creek and the Missouri River 
stand on the bank immediately above the water, and some of 
those on the Porcupine may also have been undermined and 
carried away by that stream when in flood. 

This settlement must have been large. It stands on a flat 
which slopes slightly toward the river, and the houses were 
close together. Many of them were large, one being sixty feet 
in diameter. Besides the large houses there were many smaller 
ones, probably occupied by small families, by old people living 
alone, or used as menstrual lodges, or perhaps even for dogs. 
We counted more than seventy large house sites, taking no 
account of the small ones. The houses extend several hundred 
yards back from the river, that is, toward the west, and 150 or 
200 yards north and south. It is probable that once they were 
much more numerous, and they may even have extended a 
long way down the river. Two miles below are evidences of 
another village, 

village. On the site of this last old village, many years ago, a 
group of Standing Rock Sioux built a number of log houses, 
the foundations of which have largely obliterated the evidences 
of the earlier Cheyenne village. This log-house village was 
known locally as “Slobtown.” 

On the gently rising land to the west of the Porcupine village 
the Cheyennes are said to have planted their corn, as also on 
the flats on the north side of the Porcupine River. The village 
site now stands on the farm of Yellow Lodge, a Yankton Sioux, 
who stated that he had always been told by the old people that 
this was a Cheyenne village, and that in plowing he had often 
turned up pottery from the ground. Most of this pottery was 
broken, but he had found some pots that were perfect. He had 
turned up also glass beads, which he described as like the 
charms or beads which we know the Cheyennes used to manu¬ 
facture—in later times perhaps from pounded glass like those 
said to have been made by the Mandans. 

24 

said by the Sioux also to have been a Cheyenne 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

In company with Dr. Beede, I visited the village site at the 
farm school, less than fifteen miles south of Fort Yates, said 
by the Sioux to be of Cheyenne origin. This is just over the 
boundary line between North Dakota and South Dakota, per¬ 
haps three miles south of the mouth of Blackfoot Creek and a 
mile below what I suppose to be Eagle Feather Creek. It is 
east and a little north of the Cheyenne Hills. 20 Just above 
Blackfoot Creek and on the state boundary line is an old village 
site with three mounds and many house sites, said by the Sioux 
to be Man dan. 

The farm school buildings are in the middle of the old Chey¬ 
enne village. To the south and southeast of the school are a 
dozen or twenty house rings, 
river, are others. Within the boundaries of the school are three 
low mounds. From one of these, excavated to make a root 
cellar, a considerable quantity of pottery fragments were 
thrown out. On another mound stands the Roman Catholic 
Chapel; and a low mound almost within the school enclosure 
is partly occupied by one of the office buildings of the school. 
Here were found a few pieces of pottery, one of them orna¬ 
mented. 

This village was large, and the way in which the houses at 
its border were placed suggests that attacks by enemies were 
not anticipated. The cultivation of the soil, the erection of the 
school buildings, and the westward movement of the Missouri 
River, which continually undermines the high bank and causes 
it to drop into the river, have greatly reduced the area of the 
village. 

The Sioux told of a Cheyenne village site on Grand River 
about seven miles below the post office of Bull Head, and near 
the camp where Sitting Bull was killed in 1890. The Sioux and 
Cheyenne name for Grand River signifies Ree River. 27 Old 

26 See War Dept, map, Capts. D. P. Heap and William Ludlow, 1875, and 
sectional map of South Dakota, Rand, McNally & Co., Chicago, 1889. 

27 War Dept, map, Capts. D. P. Heap and William Ludlow, 1875. 

25 

and to the north, close along the 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Cheyennes used to tell of the days when the Cheyennes camped 
on the river of Big Round Rocks—the Cannonball—and of 
when they lived on the Ree River, Ond' ni o' he. 

There is still extant among the Cheyennes a song in which 
Ree River is mentioned. A young girl fond of a boy sings a 
song asking him if he intends to go to Ree River to marry. It 
is supposed that the boy was in the habit of leaving his home 
camp where lived the girl who made the song, to visit the vil¬ 
lage on Ree River, and she suspected that he was fond of some 
girl in that village. 

There was no difficulty in finding the village site on the north 
side of Grand River, a mile or a mile and a half below Sitting 
Bull’s camp. Here were a few house rings, within one of which 
was a hollow,—a cache which had fallen in,—and a few hun¬ 
dred yards farther down the river, on a higher bench, many 
more house sites, some of them forty feet in diameter. They 
were often overgrown with low bushes. The village was large 
and the houses ran back nearly a half mile from the river. 
Sometimes they stood close together, and the general plan of 
the village reminded me much of the old Pawnee village on the 
Loup River in Nebraska. On a sandy ridge near the river bank 
were found a number of large caches, apparently distant from 
any house sites. Some of these occurred in pairs—two deep 
holes rather close together. According to Sioux tradition some 
of the lodges here were so large that the Cheyennes took their 
horses into their houses at night for protection. 

The account given by Mackenzie 38 of his visit to the Chey¬ 
enne camp south of the Hidatsa in 1806—although he says 
nothing as to the direction in which he traveled on his way to 
that camp—mentions crossing the “Clearwater,” Heart, and 
Cannonball rivers, and suggests that the Cheyenne camp of 
220 lodges that he visited was on what we know as Grand 

= 8 Les Bourgeois de la Compagnie du Nord-Ouest, 1st Ser., p. 376, Quebec, 
1889. 

26 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

River. In 1811, the Astorians 23 under Mr. Hunt found on “Big 
River”— i.e., Grand River—a large camp of Cheyennes. 

Sioux tradition declares that the village on the Porcupine 
River was established about 1733 or a little earlier, perhaps 
1730; they fix the date as about one hundred years before the 
star fell—1833. It was occupied for fifty years or more, and 
then the people abandoned it and moved over to a point on 
Grand River twenty miles above its mouth. The date of the 
removal is given as about the time of the great flood at this 
point, which, it is said, took place about 1784. The Cheyenne 
village remained on Grand River for a long time, probably as 
late as 1840, for Red Hail, a Sioux (born 1833), often told Dr. 
Beede of visiting the village as a small boy, six or eight years 
of age, and eating green corn there. 

The Cheyennes who settled on the Porcupine are said by the 
Sioux to have been the first of the tribe to reach the Missouri 
River at that point, though long before this there were Chey¬ 
ennes west of the Missouri. The story is that they came from 
some village described as being on the Minnesota River, near 
where Mankato now is, near the mouth of Blue Earth near the 
old Sioux Crossing,—Traverse des Sioux,—perhaps in the 
locality referred to by Williamson and Riggs. At that old vil¬ 
lage, according to Sioux tradition, there are mounds built by 
the Cheyennes, and there they raised their crops. 

From this Minnesota home these Cheyennes had journeyed 
westward, had passed by the Cheyenne village on the Sheyenne 
River, and gone beyond that to a small flat on the headwaters 
of Maple Creek, west and a little south of the present town of 
Kulm, North Dakota. 30 At that point—near Kulm—they had 
built a village and had lived there for a few years. Dr. Beede 
tells me that he has seen there the remains of houses and some 

29 Irving, Astoria, vol. n, p. 69, London, 1836. 

30 General Sully marched over this ground in 1863, and in September fought 
the battle of Whitestone Hills not far from where Kulm now stands. 

27 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

small mounds. This village was soon abandoned and they 
moved on westward. 

Some time after the Cheyennes had established their village 
on Porcupine Creek—still according to Sioux tradition—an¬ 
other group of Cheyennes made their appearance on the Mis¬ 
souri River, crossed it to the village of their friends on Porcu¬ 
pine Creek, remained there for a time, and after no very long 
stay moved south to a point a short distance south of the 
present North Dakota and South Dakota boundary line, where 
they established a village a little up-river and northeast of the 
Cheyenne Hills—the farm school Cheyenne village, which the 
Sioux call the Cheyenne Plantings. This group of Cheyennes 
is said to have been the one that long occupied the village on 
the Sheyenne River, near the present Lisbon, North Dakota. 
It is possible that these Sheyenne River Cheyennes may have 
built and for a time occupied the village two miles below the 
Porcupine on the site of which “Slobtown”—already referred 
to—was afterward built. They lived at the Cheyenne Plantings 
—the farm school site—for about twenty-five years, and then 
moved up Grand River to Dirt Lodge Creek, where they built 
a village of earth houses. This is some distance west of the 
point on Grand River where the Cheyennes of the Porcupine 
River settled. 

The winter count of Blue Thunder, a Sioux historian still 
alive, records that it was 127 years ago, or in 1795, that the 
Cheyennes left the farm school village and moved up to Dirt 
Lodge Creek. The Sioux say that the Cheyenne village, near 
the present Lisbon, had been there for a long time, and the 
village was very old. It had often been unsuccessfully attacked. 

According to Sioux traditions there was a Cheyenne village 
on the east bank of the Missouri River, opposite the farm 
school village and one on the Little Cheyenne River in South 
Dakota, near the former town of Forest City. This settlement 
on the Little Cheyenne, referred to by Riggs, 31 is one of the 

31 Contr. to North American Ethnology, vol. rx, p. 194. 

28 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

many places still known to the Sioux by the name of Sha hi'- 
en a wo ju. It was occupied for a long time, and from it the 
people moved south. Old Sioux today talk about the village 
near Forest City, opposite the present Cheyenne River Indian 
Agency,— i.e., on the Little Cheyenne River—and of the fences, 
made of sticks set up in the ground criss-cross, and filled in 
with brush and weeds, which enclosed the corn-fields at that 
place. Of late years, if a Sioux builds a fence where the care¬ 
lessly set posts lean—are not upright—or are placed too close 
together, the Sioux in derision say it is like the fence about 
Shahienawoju, referring to this old village on the Little Chey¬ 
enne. (See Appendix A.) 

It seems probable that the last of the Cheyennes left the 
Missouri River and moved west toward the Black Hills more 
recently than is generally believed. They were at the mouth of 
White River not long before the advent of Lewis and Clark, 
and there planted near their village corn and tobacco, which 
they returned to harvest at the beginning of the autumn. 32 

This was precisely the method of the Pawnees. They planted 
and cultivated their corn in the spring and early summer, and 
then set out on the summer buffalo hunt, from which in early 
autumn they returned to harvest the crop. It was perhaps mere 
accident that Lewis and Clark did not come upon an occupied 
Cheyenne village. 

' Near the end of the eighteenth century—if we may believe 
Cheyenne accounts and confirmatory traditions of the Sioux— 
several Cheyenne and Suhtai villages were still occupied along 
the great river and its tributaries. 

In the year 1877 Little Chief’s band of Cheyennes, while 
being taken south, was for some time detained at Fort Lincoln, 
North Dakota, and among them were the mother of old Elk 
River and part of her family. During their stay at Fort Lincoln, 

32 Perrin du Lac, Voyage dans les deux Louisianes, etc., Paris and Lyon, 
1805, p. 259: “Sement pres de leur village du mais et du tabac, qu’ils viennent 
recolter au commencement de l’automne.” 

29 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

this old woman took her daughter-in-law and granddaughter 33 
about to various localities not far from the post, and with 
laughter and tears pointed out to them the well-known places 
where, as a girl, she had played and worked. She said that at 
the time of which she then told, her group of Cheyennes lived 
in a permanent village on the east bank of the Missouri River 
and planted there. In the large houses of this village, the grand¬ 
mother said, there were often a considerable number of people 
—two or three or four families. The small house circles seen 
in the villages were where menstrual lodges had stood, or those 
occupied by old women who lived alone, as often they did when 
they were old, and believed that they had not long to live. Elk 
River was a Suhtai. 

White Bull, a Northern Cheyenne (born 1834), declares that 
in 1832, when High Backed Wolf,Limber Lance, and Bull Head 
returned from Washington—the first Cheyenne delegation to 
visit the seat of government—the Cheyennes were still farming 
on and near the Missouri, and this confirms the Sioux tradition. 
It was soon after the death of High Backed Wolf in 1833 34 that 
an increasing number of the Missouri River Cheyennes began 
to take to a wandering life and some of them to go south. Up to 
this time many Cheyennes and many Suhtai were planting on 
the Missouri River. The different camps of Cheyennes, and 
of Suhtai, were sometimes on one side of the Missouri River 
and sometimes on the other. Yet, according to Cheyenne and 
Sioux tradition, there were Cheyennes far west of the Missouri 
River 150 years before that time. 

The original map sent back by Lewis and Clark in 1805, and 

33 This daughter-in-law and granddaughter I knew well. The granddaughter 
is living. 

34 Donaldson in his Catalog of the Catlin Indian Gallery says, p. 88, that 
Catlin painted Wolf on the hill—High Backed Wolf—in 1834, but this appears 
to be an error. Donaldson’s map of Catlin’s routes does not agree with this 
date. The Cheyennes, including High Backed Wolfs two daughters, say that he 
died in 1833, and fix the date by the star shower of that year. They knew that 
High Backed Wolf had been painted by Catlin. It used to be said that the stars 
fell from the sky because of the death of so important a man. 

30 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

perhaps quite forgotten until unearthed by the late Arnold 
Hague and published in Science, November 4, 1887, shows 
Cheyennes, Suhtai, Kiowas, Kiowa-Apaches, and Comanches 
all scattered about the Black Hills, camped in localities where 
they might have been in Verendrye’s time. 

Much of the information shown on this map concerning terri¬ 
tory away from the route of travel along the Missouri River 
came from Indian and early Spanish and French trader 
sources, but the map is remarkably accurate so far as the 
region east of the Rocky Mountains is concerned. So far as it 
goes, it confirms statements made by the Cheyennes and other 
tribes of the traditional recent entry of the Dakotas into the 
Plains country. The map is dotted with names of tribes, but 
north of the Platte River, except for the Poncarars on the head 
of the Niobrara, no Dakota names seem to be found west of 
the Missouri River, though there are a number on that stream. 
The Brule Sioux were on the Missouri between the mouth of 
White River and the Teton, and the Okandandas Sioux just 
below the mouth of the Cheyenne River. There were other 
tribes of the Dakotas on the river farther up toward the Can¬ 
nonball, but most of the Sioux were still on tributaries of the 
Mississippi. 

On the head of the North Fork of the Cheyenne River, that is 
to say, north and west of the Black Hills, were the Cheyennes, 
a group of NV mou sin (Comanches), a camp of Do' taine 
(Kiowas), a group of Cata' ka (Kiowa-Apaches), while on 
the heads of the South Fork of the Cheyenne River and White 
River were the Stai' tan, or Kites (?), the Suhtai. 

On the tributaries of the North Platte, or at its head, were 
two camps of Arapahoes, and a little south of them, another 
camp of Kiowas. In other words, according to the earlier maps 
and the independent testimony of the Indians met with by 
Lewis and Clark, there were few Sioux west of the Missouri 
River, which is just what all the oldest Cheyennes have de¬ 
clared. 

3i 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The Assiniboines, who were then the westernmost of the 
Dakotas, seem to have been on the north side of the Missouri 
River, along the Assiniboine River and its tributaries, and the 
White Earth River, while north of them were the Crees. 

Not a few traditions exist among the Cheyennes of the first 
appearance of Sioux immigrants toward the Black Hills coun¬ 
try. One of the early meetings told of was at some point on the 
plains west of the Missouri River. A party of Cheyennes met a 
party of Sioux, but each group was suspicious of the other and 
they did not approach closely, but at a distance talked by signs. 
From each party, at the request of the other, an arrow was shot 
over, which, taken back to the home village, should bear wit¬ 
ness to the truth of the statements made by each. This comes 
from White Frog (born 1840), and the story was told by his 
grandfather, who died before White Frog was born, said to 
have been one hundred years old—so old, according to the 
accounts, that for a long time before his death he was too feeble 
to walk. These Sioux were met, according to the statement, 
when the grandfather was a young man, about twenty years of 
age. This would make the date of meeting about 1760. 

On another occasion a small party of Sioux, poor and on 
foot, were discovered by some Cheyennes. There was much 
discussion as to whether they should be allowed to come into 
the camp or should be killed, but since they carried a buffalo 
head, which represented food, it was finally decided to receive 
them as friends. 

The Sioux remained with the Cheyennes for some months 
and when they went away the Cheyennes gave them two colts, 
for the Cheyennes then had a few horses; not everyone in the 
camp had a horse, but here and there a man had one or two. 

The Sioux were not seen again for two or three years. Then 
they returned to the Cheyenne camp, and with them came a 
few more Sioux. They stayed for a time and were given more 
colts. 

After that they began to come in greater numbers. They are 

32 

A FASHION OF 

-TIME drp:ss 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

supposed to have gone back to their village in the East and 
reported there, “We have found a tribe of people who have 
animals that they can ride and that carry things on their backs, 
while we have only dogs and must walk, and ourselves carry 
our possessions.” 

This tradition was commonly known by all old Cheyennes 
twenty years ago, and has been told me by such men as Old 
Little Chief, Spotted Wolf, Bull Thigh, Iron Shirt, and others, 
—all men born in the early years of the nineteenth century. 

CONTACT WITH THE WHITES 

The Cheyenne tradition of their first meeting with the whites 
is vague as to time and place. The usual account is substan¬ 
tially that given by Clark. 35 Once long ago a man in a starving 
condition wandered into the camp. When they saw him, the 
people said to one another, “This is one of the persons that 
Sweet Medicine told us we should meet,” for the man had hair 
all over his face and his skin was white. The Cheyennes took 
him into a lodge, gave him food and clothing, and nursed him 
back to health. He remained with them for a long time—so long 
that he learned to speak their language—and explained that 
he had been with two or three other men in a boat which had 
upset and that his companions had been lost. He told them that 
his home was far off toward the sunrise and that he wished to 
return to it, but he said, “Some day I will come back and will 
bring you things that will be useful to you.” 

The man went away, and one day, a long time afterward, 
the people heard a noise like thunder—the report of a gun. 
Everyone went out from the camp in the direction from which 
the sound came to see what it was, and there they saw, coming, 
this white man and others with him. He had with him guns, 
knives, flint-and-steel, needles, and many other things which 
he gave them in exchange for skins. 

35 Indian Sign Language, p. 98. 

33 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

With pieces of iron that he brought, he made arrowpoints 
which they at once saw were better than theirs of stone or 
bone, so that all who could procure it used the iron for arrow- 
points. With these arrows they could kill animals much more 
easily than with those made of stone. They, therefore, threw 
away their stone points. 

This man who had first come among them remained with the 
Cheyennes until he became old, and at last he died. Sometimes 
he made journeys to the east and took back with him in a boat 
the furs for which he traded. Of the first white men that came 
among them some, they say, could write, but they did not write 
on paper, but on a black rock—no doubt slate. Some of the old 
men have heard that this first white man was a Spaniard. There 
is no hint as to whence he came, nor of the situation of the 
camp that he reached. 

Another account says that the first Frenchman came to the 
Cheyennes where they were farming on the Missouri River. 
Some say that this was at the mouth of the Cheyenne River. 
This man is said to have carried his property on a sort of low 
two-wheeled cart, all tied up with rawhide and with solid 
wheels. The rims of the wheels were wrapped with rawhide. 
The cart made a loud squeaking or screaming noise, and was 
hauled by dogs. Long before the man arrived they heard a loud 
sharp sound, and wondered what it was. When the man reached 
them they made signs to him, asking what caused this strange 
noise. He pointed to a long stick—a gun—that he held in his 
hand, and indicated that this made the noise. They asked him 
to do it again, and he loaded the gun and fired a shot, and some 
of the children and women and men thought it was the thunder 
and fell down on the ground. All were much frightened and 
ran away. The man remained with them for a time and then 
went away, saying that he would return. He did come back, 
but in a boat. They looked down the river and could see the 
flag and the boat under it, coming very slowly. 

Standing All Night stated that in his early days most of the 

34 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

Sioux were still east of the Missouri, and that it was from that 
direction also that the Arapahoes had originally come. He said 
too that once on the other (east) side of the Missouri he and 
some other Cheyennes met two white men—people with fair 
faces and with beards. When they saw them, the Indians were 
frightened and ran away, for they thought that they must be 
mysterious people, who perhaps had come out from the ground 
or out of a hill. The white men motioned to them to approach, 
but the Indians ran off and moved their camp away from the 
locality. In other words, these particular Indians had not 
before seen white men. 

Elk River believed that the first white men the Cheyennes 
saw were the French, Mai vi' hto, “red white men.” They were 
good friends to the Cheyennes. It was from the French that 
they got their first guns. 

Cheyenne tradition, known to all the older men, declares that 
in early days, probably long before the Cheyennes met the 
French, wandering Mexicans were accustomed to make frequent 
journeys north to trade with all the northern Indians, who at 
that time lived about the Black Hills—Kiowa, Comanche, Chey¬ 
enne, Crow, and Arapaho. These Mexicans went as far north 
as Tongue River and the neighborhood of the Big Horn Moun¬ 
tains. The ciboleros, or buffalo hunters, spoken of in books on 
the early West, were no doubt the last of these. They brought 
with them for trade, the Cheyennes tell us, a certain dry, hard 
bread, of which the Indians were very fond, salt, arrowshafts, 
bows and partly manufactured bows, and sheet iron for arrow- 
points. Indeed, many of the oldest men among the Northern 
Cheyennes believe that it was from these Mexicans that the 
Cheyennes procured their first metal arrowpoints. The dog- 
drawn cart before referred to is quite suggestive of a diminu¬ 
tive carro of New Mexico in earlier days. 

The articles brought by the Mexicans were exchanged for 
dried meat, parfleche, robes, back-rests, moccasins, and various 
other things, which the Indians had in abundance. It was from 

35 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

one of these Mexican traders that the so-called “iron shirt”— 
a coat of mail—was obtained by an Arapaho or a Flathead and 
finally passed into the possession of the Cheyennes, who re¬ 
tained it until the year 1852, when Alights On The Cloud, who 
was then wearing it, was killed and the shirt was captured by 
the Pawnees and destroyed. 38 

Alexander Henry the Younger, 37 in speaking of the Chey¬ 
ennes at the time of his visit to the Mandans, July, 1806, says, 
“Many of the European dresses I saw were of Spanish manu¬ 
facture.” He says also that “last fall two Spaniards came up 
the river which runs to the S. in a wooden canoe or a boat, 
loaded with goods, who passed the winter among them, dis¬ 
posed of all their property, and sold very cheap, giving a large 
double handful of gunpowder and 50 balls for one beaver.” 
The river that runs to the south was perhaps the Platte River. 

The French had been meeting the Cheyennes in the Black 
Hills country long before the advent of Lewis and Clark. Mar- 
gry gives a letter 38 stating that a certain Frenchman had gone 
with the Pawnees to visit the Arikaras before 1734, that he had 
found mines there, and was likely to return for further investi¬ 
gation. If this Frenchman went to the Arikaras, he no doubt 
saw the Cheyennes, and he or some one of his companions may 
have been the Frenchman spoken of by the Verendryes as 
being in the country which they reached. 30 It may well be that 
when the Verendryes passed southwest from the Mandan vil¬ 
lage they met the Cheyennes, though this is suggested merely 
by the name Gens du Serpent in the Verendrye account given 
to a tribe not then identified. After the Cheyennes, or a portion 
of them, had moved out on the plains toward the Black Hills 
and the Little Missouri, they met in that region the Comanches, 
whom they called Snake men (Shi sht m wi he' taniu ), an 

38 The Fighting Cheyennes, p. 75, N. Y., 1915. 

87 Henry, New Light on the Early History of the Greater Northwest, 
Coues ed., vol. i, pp. 383-384. 

38 Margry, Decouvertes, vol. vj, p. 453. 

80 Margry, ibid., p. 608. 

36 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

equivalent of the Verendryes’ Gens du Serpent, made unmis¬ 
takable by the sign for snake. 

The Cheyennes use the name Sus' so ni for the mountain tribe 
called by the whites Snakes or Shoshonis. They recognize their 
close relationship to the Comanches but call them by a different 
name. Lewis and Clark called the Comanches Gens du Serpent. 

Mr. Will believes 40 that the Verendryes met the Cheyennes, 
who he intimates were the Gens de la fleche collie, which he 
says was the name commonly used for the Cheyennes by the 
French. I have not understood this to be the case. 

The Verendryes had no interpreter and probably communi¬ 
cated with the Indians by signs, and evidently the sign for a 
particular tribe would be common to all tribes of the region. 
The Cheyennes, Kiowas, and Arapahoes all apply an equiva¬ 
lent of the name “Snakes” to the Comanches. The term as 
denotive of enemies or an enemy people was employed by 
many Algonquian tribes, and may have that meaning here. 

Lewis and Clark speak of the French as with the Cheyennes 
in the Black Hills. John Valle, who wintered on the Chien 
River, under the Black Mountains, 41 was familiar with the 
region and described the animals found there and some of the 
birds. Lewis and Clark hired “a Canadian Frenchman who had 
been with the Cheyenne Ind. on the Cote Noir last summer 
descended thence the Little Missouri”—Baptiste Le Page, who 
took the place of Newman, who had been discharged. 

Perrin du Lac saw Cheyennes at the mouth of the White 
River in 1802, and says that most of them had never seen a 
white man, yet the French had been with some of the camps 
for years. He speaks of them as wanderers, but says that they 
sow near their village maize and tobacco, which they harvest in 
autumn. I have already referred to Indian testimony that about 
the beginning of the last century there were Cheyenne villages 
along the Missouri River in the present North Dakota and 

40 American Anthropologist, vol. xix, p. 291. 

41 Lewis and Clark, Orig. Journ., vol. 1, p. 176. 

37 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

South Dakota, and to the testimony of a daughter of Elk River, 
whose grandmother, born about 1786, pointed out to her, in 
1877, places not far from the mouth of Heart River, where in 
the grandmother’s girlhood her people had cultivated their 
crops. 

One of the early Frenchmen among the Cheyennes, whom he 
called Chaguiennes, was Jean Baptiste Trudeau, 42 who was 
among the Arikaras in 1795, and whose trading house, “the 
House of Troodo where he wintered in ’96,” mentioned by 
Lewis and Clark, and later by Chittenden, was situated on the 
left bank of the Missouri River, a little above and opposite the 
site of Fort Randall. 

Early in July three Cheyennes came to Trudeau, reporting 
to him that the Kiowas, the Arapahoes, and Pitapahotoes were 
camped near their village, and that these three men had come 
on to investigate the report that strange white men with much 
powder and merchandise had come to the Arikaras. Trudeau 
says that these Cheyennes came from a village called Ouify 
(Ouisay), or Omissis. A little later, Trudeau sent back the 
Cheyenne messengers with tobacco and presents for the inquir¬ 
ing tribes as evidence that the white man was actually there. 

Trudeau’s mention of the Kiowas as camped on the Chey¬ 
enne River, and as coming in a wholly friendly way to the 
Arikara village, is complete confirmation—if that were needed 
—of the Cheyenne tradition of the existence of the Kiowas at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century in the country between 
the Missouri River and the Black Hills, while the Lewis and 
Clark map and statements of Perrin du Lac 43 as to the battle 
of the Cheyennes with the Halitanes, in what is perhaps the 
same region, confirm similar statements as to the Comanches. 

Lewis and Clark speak of the Cheyennes as very shy and un¬ 
willing to have to do with the whites, and state that one head 

42 Proceedings Missouri Historical Society, vol. iv, p. 46, 1912. 

43 Perrin du Lac, Traveb through Two Louisianas, p. 72, London, 1807. 

38 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

man, to whom a medal had been given, after a time returned it, 
being afraid to keep it. 

Old men among the Cheyennes have always declared that 
they have been told that, when the whites first came into their 
country, the chiefs advised all their people to have nothing to 
do with the newcomers, but to avoid them, and that usually this 
instruction had been followed. This may perhaps refer to the 
prophecy made by the culture hero, Mot si i u, who, when he 
left his people, warned them that only harm would come to 
them by association with the whites. A few years later, how¬ 
ever, the Cheyennes had become somewhat accustomed to see¬ 
ing white people. 

A group of Cheyennes was met by Major Long’s expedition 
to the Rocky Mountains in 1819-1820, and by Glen’s trading 
camp, as noted in the diary of Jacob Fowler. They were living 
in association with a mixed camp of Arapahoes, Comanches, 
Kiowas, Kiowa-Apaches, and other Indians; and according to 
their own statements and those of Bijeau, one of Major Long’s 
interpreters, they had been with these bands for at least three 
years prior to 1820. 

Inquiry among the Southern Cheyennes fails to identify this 
band. All the oldest Southern Cheyenne men and women de¬ 
clare positively that no Cheyenne ever lived south of the Platte 
prior to 1826, and that it was in that year that the Cheyennes 
and Arapahoes began to move south to the Platte to live. Left 
Hand Bull, who was eighty-four years of age in 1900, and so 
was born about 1816, said that when he was small, “just a 
little boy,” the Cheyennes and Arapahoes were living in the 
Black Hills, when thirty or forty lodges of Gros Ventres and 
twenty of Blackfeet came down from the North and joined 
them. These Blackfeet were a war-party on their way to steal 
horses from the Kiowas and Comanches. He saw the Blackfeet 
march through the camp in a long line, singing a song to the 
effect that they knew better how to go to war than anyone else. 
They kept on south and took a large herd of horses from the 

39 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Kiowas and Comanches. This made the Cheyennes and Arapa- 
hoes jealous, and soon afterward the Arapahoes and part of the 
Cheyennes moved down to the Platte and began to make raids 
on the Kiowas and Comanches. Left Hand Bull fixed the date 
of this movement to the Platte as 1826. The Cheyennes who 
went south with the Arapahoes at this time were mostly Hair 
Rope people (He'v ataniu), and their leaders were Yellow 
Wolf, Medicine Snake, and Afraid Of Beavers. The Cheyennes 
are said to have met the Bent brothers on one of their first 
expeditions south, and the building of Bent’s Fort on the 
Arkansas in Colorado resulted from this meeting, said to have 
been in 1827. Except for the building of that fort the movement 
of the Cheyennes toward the Arkansas would probably have 
been much slower than it was. 

Black Moccasin (born about 1807) is reported to have 
stated that these northern Indians, the Gros Ventres and a few 
Blackfeet, joined the Cheyennes and Arapahoes near the Black 
Hills, and that a few years later they left the Cheyennes and 
Arapahoes on the Platte and returned north. It may be noted 
also that the Cheyennes state that the Gros Ventres were 
camped with the Cheyennes and Arapahoes at the time when 
the Crows came down there to make peace with the Cheyennes 
after the great Crow battle about 1820.“ As recently as 1890 
I found among the Southern Cheyennes two men of Blackfeet 
blood who had married Cheyenne women, and were living in 
the Cheyenne camp. This suggests that notwithstanding the 
more or less frequent wars between the two tribes, some 
friendly intercourse was occasionally kept up between Chey¬ 
ennes and Blackfeet. The Arapahoes and Atsena came together 
at frequent intervals. 

The oldest Northern Cheyennes, however, have stated that 
in early days some camps of their people were accustomed to 
procure British and American goods at the Arikara and Man- 
dan villages on the Missouri, and to make journeys west and 

44 The Fighting Cheyennes, p. 29, and Bent letters to George Hyde. 

40 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

south to meet the Arapahoes, Kiowas, and other Indians to 
barter their goods for horses and Spanish goods from the south. 
One such story especially tells of a camp that went south to 
the Arkansas River at the beginning of the last century, and 
sounds very much like the account quoted below as given by 
James. At all events among the Northern Cheyennes up to 
recent times there has been a clear memory of such early trad¬ 
ing journeys by their people, in large parties or small. It 
appears also that some of the French traders of those times had 
the confidence and even the affection of some of the young 
Indians. Elk River used to tell of two young men who, against 
all the persuasions of their tribe, joined a party of white traders 
and went away with them, and were not seen for years. Later, 
still with the traders, they returned to the tribe and were urged 
to abandon their white friends and to remain permanently with 
the tribe. The young men refused to do so, declaring that the 
whites had treated them well and that they preferred to live 
with them. These two young men went away with the whites 
and never returned. 

At another time three other Cheyennes went off with French 
traders and never came back to stay, though once or twice they 
returned in company with the traders. One of these men was 
named Hair Newly Cut—the name referring to the ancient 
practice by the Cheyennes of cutting all the hair off the head 
except a little on the top. 45 

James’ narrative of Long’s expedition to the Rocky Moun¬ 
tains gives us the first definite account of the Cheyennes south 
of the North Platte River. The narrative seems to refer back 
to the year 1815, though the date is variously given as winter 
of 1814-1815,1815, and 1816. The story was told James by the 
interpreter Bijeau, who had been one of the trappers of the 
Chouteau and DeMun party in 1816-1817. This man, Joseph 

45 A custom perhaps borrowed from the Sioux. See Carver, Travels, p. 226, 
London, 1778. 

41 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Bissonet, signed an affidavit made by some of Chouteau and 
DeMun’s men in St. Louis, September, 1817. 

About four years previous to the time of our visit there had been 
a large encampment of Indians and hunters on this creek [Grand 
Camp Creek]. On that occasion three nations of Indians, namely 
Kiawas, Arrapahoes and Kaskaias or Bad-Hearts, had been assem¬ 
bled together, with forty-five French hunters in the employ of Mr. 
Choteau and Mr. DeMun of St. Louis. They had assembled for the 
purpose of holding a trading council with a band of Shiennes. These 
last had been recently supplied with goods by the British traders on 
the Missouri and had come to exchange them with the former for 
horses. The Kiawas, Arrapahoes, &c. who wander in the fertile plains 
of the Arkansa and Red [i.e., Canadian] River have great numbers 
of horses which they rear with much less difficulty than the Shiennes, 
whose country is cold and barren . 48 

The British traders commonly supply the Minnetarees or Gros 
Ventres of the Missouri with goods; from these they pass to the 
Shiennes and Crow Indians, who in their turn barter with remoter 
tribes; in this manner the Indians who wander near the mountains 
receive their supplies of goods and they give a decided and well 
founded preference to those which reach them by this circuitous 
channel over those which they receive from any other source. 

In another place James says that this mixed group of Indians 

formerly carried on a limited trade with the Spaniards of Mexico, 
with whom they exchanged dressed bison skins for blankets, wheat, 
flour, maize, &c., but their supplies of these articles are now cut off 
by a war which they at present are waging against that people. They 
also at distant periods held a kind of fair on a tributary of the Platte 
near the mountains (hence called Grand Camp Creek), at which they 
obtained British merchandise from the Shiennes of Shienne River, 
who obtained the same at the Mandan village from the British 
traders that frequent that part of our territory. 

46 James, Long’s Expedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky Mountains, voL 
1, p. 502, Phila., 1823. 

42 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

This passage seems to imply that the Cheyennes had been 
supplying these bands with British goods for a number of years 
after the old trade in New Mexico had been broken up because 
of hostilities. 

The description of the South Platte given by James makes 
it difficult or impossible to locate Grand Camp Creek. He says 
that on July 6 the party marched up the Platte and halted at 
ii a.m. near the mouth of Defile Creek, which is perhaps the 
modem Plum Creek. Of other days’ journeyings we are told 
that the party marched until 11 a.m. and camped after making 
about sixteen miles along the Platte Valley, and it is perhaps 
safe to assume that they made this distance July 6, and that 
their camp of that day was about five miles below Clear Creek, 
which James calls Medicine Lodge Creek. Grand Camp may be 
either the modern Bear Creek or another stream near to it. On 
the other side of the mountains, in the southern part of Carbon 
County, Wyoming, there is a Grand Encampment Creek, tribu¬ 
tary to the North Platte. The James’ Grand Camp Creek was 
on the South Platte. 

As already stated, we know nothing definite as to who these 
Cheyennes were, when they came south and when they returned 
to their own tribe. Bijeau told James that the Cheyennes had 
come south—about 1816—to trade with the Kiowas and other 
Indians on Grand Camp Creek, and it may be inferred that 
Bijeau was present during this trading fair. We may believe 
that these Cheyennes were the same that Long’s party met on 
the Arkansas in 1820, for from what Bijeau said to Mr. Say, 
several of them were recognized by Bijeau. 47 

On another page James says: 

The Shiennes or Shawhays, who have united their destiny with 
these wanderers [the Arapahoes, Kiowas, and others, met on the 
Arkansas in 1820], are a band of seceders from their own nation; 
and sometime since, on the occurrence of a serious dispute with their 

47 James, ibid., vol. n, p. 197. 

43 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

kindred on Shienne River of the Missouri, flew their country and 
placed themselves under the protection of the Bear Tooth. 48 

In another place 49 Bear Tooth is spoken of as the great chief 
of the Arapahoes; his word was law, not only to his own peo¬ 
ple, but to the other tribes which usually camped with his band. 
This man was farther down the Arkansas and does not appear 
to have been met by Long’s people. 

Of these people with Bear Tooth James says: 

These nations have been for the past three years wandering on the 
head waters and tributaries of Red River, having returned to the 
Arkansa only the day which preceded our first interview with them 
[July 26] on their way to the mountains, at the source of the Platte 
River. They have no permanent town, but constantly rove, as neces¬ 
sity urges them, in pursuit of the herds of bisons in the vicinity of 
the sources of the Platte, Arkansa and Red Rivers. 80 

Further on he writes: 

These nations are at war with all the Missouri Indians as far down 
as the Osages, who are also included amongst their enemies, and it 
was rumored that hostilities had recently commenced between them 
and the Shiennes upon the river of the same name. 81 

This last statement was probably not fact, for at this time 
(1820) the Cheyennes and Sioux were actively engaged in 
fighting the Crows, and the oldest Cheyennes living in recent 
years have always given us to understand that the war between 
their tribe and the Kiowas and Comanches began about 1826. 

The remains of large Indian camps seen on the Arkansas by 
Long’s party in 1820, and extending from the canyon and 
Fountain Creek down to and below the Huerfano in Colorado, 
were no doubt old camps of these Indians. The descriptions of 
some of them indicate that they were winter camps. 

48 James, ibid., p. 186. 

**Ibid., p.367. 

*°Ibid., p. 187. James always calls the Canadian, the Red River, from its 
color of course. 

51 James, ibid., p. 368. 

44 

EARLY CHEYENNE HISTORY 

There were perhaps Comanches with these, for in the winter 
of 1819-1820 a fight took place between a large war-party 
of Skidi Pawnees and a greatly superior force of mounted 
“Ietans, Arrapahoes and Kiaways,” among whom were these 
Cheyennes. The Indians met by Major Long told the party the 
detailed story. 

A war-party of ninety-three Skidi Pawnees went south on a 
horse-taking expedition against these Indians, were discovered, 
and a desperate fight ensued. The Pawnees, caught in the open 
plain, were surrounded, but after hard fighting a remnant of 
them succeeded in breaking through the mounted enemies and 
reached a small timbered creek. They left fifty-three of their 
men, including all their leaders, dead or wounded, on the 
ground, and of the forty men who reached the shelter all but 
seven were wounded. The attacking party now drew off and 
the surviving Pawnees began their homeward journey. On 
going into the fight they had, as usual, discarded all their cloth¬ 
ing, and during the homeward march had nothing to wear 
except the green hides of a few buffalo that were killed. Those 
of the party too severely wounded to walk were placed on pole 
drags, which were drawn by the unwounded and the slightly 
wounded men. 

It was from Captain Bell, attached to Long’s expedition, 
that Jedidiah Morse received his information about the Chey¬ 
ennes who had ‘‘attached themselves to the Arrapahuys.” 52 

None of these earlier accounts seem to mention the Suhtai, 
except Captain Bell, in whose statement, published in Morse 
(1822), is given the number of Staitan or Kite Indians who 
roved from the headwaters of the Platte to the Rocky 
Mountains. 

In the Journal of Jacob Fowler 53 it is stated that his party 
met a large group of Indians, said to have included Arapahoes, 

52 Morse, Report to the Secretary of War on Indian Affairs, New Haven, 
p. 2 S 4 , 1822. 

83 Journal of Jacob Fowler, pp. 54-55, N. Y., 1898. 

45 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Kiowas, Comanches, Kiowa-Apaches, Cheyennes, and Snakes, 
amicably traveling together. These Indians were then at war 
with the province of San Antonio, now Texas, in northeastern 
Mexico, but were at peace with the Spaniards of New Mexico. 
A similar state of things existed at a much later date. Though 
these tribes were then at peace, a few years later bitter war 
existed between the Kiowas and Comanches on the one hand, 
and the Arapahoes and Cheyennes on the other. 

Not long after Jacob Fowler met these Cheyennes, they 
began to get liquor and were soon greatly affected by it. In the 
North alcohol had for many years been one of the chief articles 
of trade with the Indians, and it now began to make its en¬ 
trance into the southern country. A few years later, in 1833, 
the Rev. Moses Merrill reports that two men who had come 
into his missionary station near Bellevue, Nebraska, declared 
to him that half of the furs purchased in the Indian country 
were obtained in exchange for whiskey. “They also stated that 
the Shiennes, a tribe of Indians on the Platte River, were 
wholly adverse to drinking whiskey, but five years ago; now— 
through the influence of a trader, Capt. Gant 54 who by sweet¬ 
ening the whiskey induced them to drink the intoxicating 
draught—they are a tribe of drunkards.” 

One has only to read the younger Henry’s account of his 
daily life, or Larpenteur’s story of his experiences, 55 or the Rev. 
Moses Merrill’s diary, to see how almost universal, where the 
Indians could obtain it, the use of alcohol had become. Ac¬ 
counts of the wars between Cheyennes and the whites have 
been given in an earlier volume. 56 

54 Gant’s post on the Arkansas was on the north bank of the river, sue miles 
below Fountain Creek. The post was built in 1832. It is mentioned by Col. 
Henry Dodge and by Sage. 

55 Larpenteur, Forty Years a Fur Trader, Coues ed., N. Y., 1898. 

56 The Fighting Cheyennes, N. Y., 1915. 

46 

OLD-TIME WAYS 

W E have some accounts—at second-hand to be sure 

—of the manner of life of the Cheyennes in the 
early days, four or five generations ago. These 
reports came from people born about the middle of the eight¬ 
eenth century and were made to men who now are old. 

In 1869 died Standing All Night, an old Ankara who from 
young manhood had lived with the Cheyennes. At the time of 
his death he supposed that he was more than one hundred years 
of age. As far back as extended the memory of men who then 
were old, he had always been regarded as an old man. During 
the last years of his life he was feeble, toothless, and subsisted 
on fluids. Men still living testify to his high reputation in the 
tribe, and even in 1919 he was spoken of as a person excep¬ 
tional for his trustworthiness and for his knowledge of the 
tribal lore. By men who knew him well—Two Crows, Little 
Hawk, Porcupine, and George Bent—I have been told much 
of what Standing All Night related as to certain customs in 
vogue in his youth. 

In early life he lived in an earth lodge on the Missouri River 
with the Mandans, and had married a Mandan woman. At that 
time a group of the Cheyennes occupied a village near to the 
Mandans and adjacent to the Arikaras. The date, if the state¬ 
ments about the age of Standing All Night may be trusted, 
would be between 1750 and 1800. Even if he were much 
younger than he believed, he must have lived with the Man¬ 
dans long before they saw Lewis and Clark. 

Doll Man, who died in 1871, said to have been more than 
eighty years of age, declared that he was born on the Missouri 

47 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

River in a camp of Cheyennes that dwelt permanently near or 
with the Mandans. These Cheyennes only occasionally went 
out on the plains to hunt buffalo. Doll Man also had married a 
Mandan woman. It may have been this man who accompanied 
the little party headed by White Thunder, which about 1835 
visited the Pawnees in an endeavor to make peace and to re¬ 
cover the medicine arrows. 1 

Old women, born in the early years of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury, used to relate stories which they had heard from their 
elders. These women were Twin Woman, Crow Woman, and 
Lightning Woman. Crow Woman was captured from the Crows 
as a child about 1820. These old people have told of many 
events of times long past—periods that cannot be identified. 
Some of them had heard that in old times canoes were made 
by hollowing out logs by fire, and that sometimes a family 
would work for a long time over a log, keeping the fires burn¬ 
ing day and night, until the log was properly hollowed. It is 
possible that this story may have come in from some other 
people. 

Of the early days north of the Missouri, when the Cheyennes 
were constantly in fear of the Hohe, it is related that early each 
evening the crier went about the camp and called out, directing 

the night they were attacked and had to run out, they would 
not be obliged to go barefoot. Near by they had places selected 
to which they could run in case of an attack, and all about the 
camp were breastworks or places of defense, where young men 
watched all night to warn the people if an attack was threat¬ 
ened. These young men were armed with bows, and a few had 
lances, but they had no guns. Standing All Night used to say 
that in his time they had horses, but very few guns. 

The same informant stated that they caught fish in devices 
1 American Anthropologist , n. s., vol. xn, p. 542. 

48 

BIG WOMAN 

OLD-TIME WAYS 

like nets, of parallel willow twigs, described elsewhere; made 
and used stone axes, and knives of flint and bone, as well as 
earthenware pots. These last were occasionally in use up to 
the middle of the nineteenth century. 

In the old, old times, even before they had dogs, the houses 
were built of the shoots of a kind of willow, the twigs of which 
are reddish in color and very tough. These houses must have 
been tightly built, for it is said they used to moisten clay and 
mix it with pounded stone, so as to make a mortar, with which 
they plastered the whole outside of the house, leaving a round 
hole at the top. The lower walls leaned in, and the roof leaned 
in still more and was rounded over, making a structure which 
suggests those houses formerly used by the Sauk and Fox of 
Iowa. Sometimes, instead of using this plaster or mortar to 
cover the houses and to keep out rain and snow, they covered 
the dwellings with mats woven of rushes. When the warm 
weather came, the people moved out of their winter houses, 
and made summer shelters of woven willows, some peeled, and 
some unpeeled, which gave the houses an ornamental pattern. 
Such dwellings were not plastered. The houses were built 
together—in a town—from which the people often moved off 
on hunting excursions, returning as soon as they had obtained 
a supply of food. 

The permanent houses described as occupied in that northern 
country by a big river, where it was very level, and where they 
used bundles of a tall red grass for fuel, were built of poles set 
in the ground, and brought together at the top. The openings 
between the poles were stuffed with grass, and over the outside 
they put sheets of bark to keep the grass from working out. 
Within, the houses were lined with dried hides with the hair 
on them. 2 The door of the lodge opened into a passageway, not 
straight, but zigzag, to keep the wind and snow from blowing 

2 Compare Life and Correspondence of Major Cartwright, vol. n, p. 309, 
London, 1826. 

49 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

into the lodge, for in that country it was very cold. Houses such 
as these were built only in places where they intended to spend 
the winter. In such houses the floors were dug out, so as to give 
more head room; the doors were small, and in entering it was 
necessary to creep on hands and knees. 

On making camp, when they were moving about, they thrust 
into the ground the ends of the short travois poles used for the 
dogs’ loads and bent them over toward each other, to make a 
framework on which to support the covering of the shelter. 
Outside this framework bundles of grass were heaped up and 
were covered with bark. Into these houses many persons used 
to crowd for warmth and protection from the weather. Later 
they made better shelters for their journeyings, but not at all 
like the lodges of later times. They were still frames covered 
with hides, and when fires were lighted in them the hides were 
partly removed from the top, so that the smoke might escape. 

Skin lodges were then unknown, and even after they had 
been devised, their adoption was slow. At first they were small 
and were few in number, and from various remarks that I have 
heard I am inclined to think that the skin lodge did not very 
long precede the advent of the horse. Aged women, still alive 
in 1915, spoke of a time when the possession of a lodge was 
the exception among the Cheyennes. The complete and com¬ 
fortable lodges of modern times were the ultimate development 
from the windbreaks of undressed hides set up over a frame¬ 
work of poles. It was, they say, only after reaching the Black 
Hills and procuring long poles that they made their first big 
lodges. Old women long continued to use the old-time small 
lodges with short poles. 

The first lodge of modern shape is said to have been sug¬ 
gested by a man who was handling a large poplar leaf, and 
quite by accident bent it into the shape of a cone—that is to 
say, of a lodge, such as are used today. As he looked at the 
leaf it flashed into his mind that a shelter like that would be 
better than those they then had. He showed it to the people, 

So 

OLD-TIME WAYS 

and they made lodges in the shape of this leaf, and have used 
them ever since. 

Probably as recently as 1830 or 1840 the people used large 
stones to hold down the edges of the lodge covering. This was 
done in winter, when they could not drive pins into the frozen 
ground. This practice explains the stone circles often seen on 
the prairie. Wherever these circles of stones were found, we 
may feel sure that there was a winter camp, and frozen ground. 

A Cheyenne friend once said to me: “In ancient times people 
used to camp on the tops of high bluffs. In such places we still 
find circles of stones where the lodges have been, with fire 
places and bed places marked out. Sometimes we can even see 
the place for the door. People seem to have been foolish then, 
camping as they did so far from water.” I explained to him that 
these camps high up in the hills and far from the streams were, 
as a matter of fact, camps made in late winter and early spring, 
when water was found standing in every hollow of the prairie. 
At that time the people were not obliged to camp by the river 
or a spring, but could and did camp almost anywhere, because 
almost everywhere there was water. 

In those times long ago when they lived near the lakes told 
of in the North, geese, ducks, cranes, coons, and skunks con¬ 
stituted a large part of their summer food. In winter, the whole 
camp, men, women, and children, and dogs, went out to sur¬ 
round deer and drove them into snowdrifts. Out in the tall 
grass prairie were stony hills, where skunks were abundant. 
Each fall when the skunks were fat, all the people in the camp 
moved out to these hills and hunted skunks. At the end of 
the hunt all the skunks were brought in and laid out in rows 
and then divided—a certain number to each family. Around 
these hills there was little or no wood. The people collected tall 
grass, tied it in long bundles, and used it as fuel. One end of 
the bundle was lighted and it burned for a long time. 

On the shores of the lakes were found eggs and birds’ 

Si 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

feathers, and while the waterfowl were laying there was a con¬ 
tinual search for the eggs. 

When the old birds had lost their feathers in the molt, they 
were killed, and as the young birds grew large they also were 
killed. Sometimes the young feathers on the growing birds were 
boiled, for the nutriment contained in the soft and swollen 
ends. 

By means of devices elsewhere described, they caught many 
fish, and by boiling the fishbones secured a fine clear white oil. 
At this time it is said they made their clothing of the skins of 
small animals sewed together. 

In those days their weapons were few. They surrounded 
animals and killed them with arrows armed with points of 
stone, bone, or horn. Some of these points were short, and some 
long. After they had killed large animals, they skinned them 
with knives of flint or bone. Some of these knives were small, 
hardly larger than arrowheads; but others were ten or fifteen 
inches long. The knives often had no handles attached to them, 
but had a rounded handhold which sometimes was wrapped 
with a piece of hide, or the stone cutting edge was sometimes 
attached to a handle of bone or of wood. 

When the Cheyennes first found the buffalo they had no 
knowledge as to how to dress hides. Later, the Sioux on the 
east side of the Missouri showed them how to cut hides in two, 
dress them, and sew them together again. These they used as 
robes. After they had reached the Black Hills the Kiowas and 
Comanches taught the Cheyennes how to dress buffalo-hides 
in one piece, and also showed them the use of a mixture for 
softening the hide. 

At this time, as in later days, they used the bone of the hock 
of large animals as a flesher. They ground down the dorsal 
spine of large animals on a stone, and with this sharp edge 
hacked the notches in the cutting edge of the flesher. 

52 

OLD-TIME WAYS 

The details of buffalo hunting will be described later. The 
best time to kill buffalo, the old men say, was in winter, in the 
deep snow; for they used to make snowshoes, which supported 
them, while the buffalo sank deep in the snow, and the people 
could run up close beside the buffalo and kill them with their 
lances. Then they carried in the meat, or at a later time brought 
it in on the dog travois. But in early times, when snow was on 
the ground—if the snow was crusted or if a frozen stream was 
near—they spread out a hide, packed the meat in it, and lacing 
it up flesh-side out, dragged it into camp over the snow. 

In the days before they had flint-and-steel, fire was often 
made, as among many people, with fire-sticks. The revolving 
stick was of some hard wood, and the piece, or hearth, which 
received its point, was of softer wood. Some men made a spe¬ 
cialty of manufacturing fire-sticks, while others could not make 
them at all. After a set of sticks had been made, the maker held 
them up to the sun and prayed over them, asking that they 
might be blessed and might prove useful. Gentle Horse (born 
1800) stated that the lower of the two fire-sticks (the hearth) 
was commonly cottonwood, while the upright or twirling stick 
was a straight shoot of greasewood. 

A little white quartz sand was often put in the hole in the 
hearth, and powdered dry buffalo-chip, or dry white sage 
leaves, about the edges of the hole, to serve as tinder, and this 
readily caught fire. Sometimes in kindling a fire they rested the 
lower stick on a buffalo-chip, and the hot spark dropping from 
this stick ignited the dry chip, which would smolder for a long 
time. In modern times, fire-sticks were sometimes made from 
the central flower-bearing stalk of the soapweed (yucca). Both 
the twirling stick and the base stick were of this wood. In their 
war journeys not very long ago, probably between i860 and 
1870, the Southern Cheyennes used such fire-sticks if their 
matches became exhausted. The earlier sticks were as described 
by Gentle Horse. In using the soapweed sticks, the twirling 

53 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

stick was pointed, and a little hole made in the base stick to 
receive that point. With these it did not take very long to 
make a fire. The sticks were revolved between the open hands. 

Elk River stated that in ancient times fire was often made by 
splitting a flint stone, and then placing the dry rotten root of 
soapweed on one surface of the flint rock and rubbing it briskly 
with the other. Sparks were obtained also by knocking together 
two hard stones. 

As fire was difficult to produce, it was transported from place 
to place. Sometimes a dry buffalo-chip was ignited, and this 
burned slowly and lasted a long time, perhaps during the whole 
march to the next camp. Often fire was carried with them by 
means of a burning stick. 

When the leaders of a traveling village reached the place 
chosen for the camp, the young men at once collected piles of 
wood; and as soon as anyone came in who carried fire, these 
piles were kindled and from them the different women procured 
coals for starting their individual fires. 

In later times, however, they carried the living fire, smolder¬ 
ing, and often renewed, in a fire horn. I have explained 3 how 
the Blackfeet Indians did this; and the Cheyenne method was 
much the same, except their horns were smaller. In later times, 
after they obtained flint-and-steel, the fire horn was used for 
carrying the unlighted punk, to protect it from wet and wear. 
This punk was usually dry, rotten cottonwood, or box-elder 
wood, or the dry, rotted root of the soapweed. They cut off the 
end of the sheath of the horn, making a hole large enough to 
receive the stick of punk. The larger open end of the horn was 
plugged with a stopper of wood, and the stick of punk was of 
such length that, when put in the horn, the end for lighting 
met the wooden plug, and the fire was extinguished. Horns for 
carrying punk were in use up to about 1870. They were usually 
carried in a deerskin sack, sometimes in the ball pouch, or 
sometimes merely tied to the shoulder belt. The stopper in the 

3 Blackfoot Lodge Tales, p. 200. 

54 

OLD-TIME WAYS 

small opening of the horn was not always tight, and sometimes 
leaked a little, so that in a storm, dampness or water might 
get into it, and the end of the punk get wet. When this took 
place, the end which became wet was the holding end, not the 
fire end. 

The first flint-and-steel is said to have been obtained from 
Mexicans. 

In those ancient times, when the people moved, they carried 
on their backs all their possessions, including the smallest chil¬ 
dren and their food. This was before they had dogs to help 
them. In the old-time dresses the shoulders were always naked, 
and carrying these heavy loads must have been hard, for the 
lines must have chafed their shoulders. To transport the meat 
to the camp a hide was cut in several pieces, and in each piece 
was packed as much meat as a man or a woman could carry. 
The hide was laced up, and the pack was put on the back, and 
held there by straps passing over the head and chest. In winter, 
however, they tied up their belongings in bundles, put them on 
a dried hide, and walked along, dragging the hide, which was 
thus like a loaded sled. 

Strong Left Hand was told that when dogs were first seen 
they were wild on the prairie and were of different colors. This 
dog was different from the wolf, and seemed an animal that 
might be easily tamed. Sometimes the people fed the dogs, 
going out near to them and holding up a piece of meat so that 
they might see it, and then putting it on the ground and leav¬ 
ing it. The dogs would come up and eat it. In that way they 
began to grow tame, though at first very timid. At length, when 
a dog saw a person coming with a piece of meat, it ran up to 
him and wagged its tail, for it knew it was to be fed. Finally, 
they put strings on the dogs and led them into the camp. This 
happened long, long ago. After they got dogs these increased 
very fast. After they had many dogs it occurred to someone 

55 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

that the dogs might carry some of their things, so the dogs 
became a help to them in their moving, and a large dog was 
valuable. Hotam' means a full-grown dog. 

Elk River (born about 1810) described these dogs in more 
detail: 

These dogs, though big, were not like wolves. They were of differ¬ 
ent colors—black, white, yellow, and spotted. They had long bodies, 
and feet that turned out, though not like the little dogs of today 
that have crooked feet. Sometimes today one sees a dog built like 
these old-time dogs, though much smaller. They had these large dogs 
until after I was a young man. They were a great help to women in 
getting wood. Some women had ten or twelve dogs, and packed them 
all, for they carried packs on their backs, besides hauling the travois. 

On the travois hauled by the dogs were packed chiefly small 
articles, the small lodges, and sometimes the children. Usually 
the dogs were led by the women, so that runaways were infre¬ 
quent. These early dogs are said to have been so large and 
strong that one of them could haul two children on a travois. 

In those days the women’s dresses were very different from 
those worn today. They were made of buffalo-skin—sometimes 
of lodge covering ( mohsih” kun), or of tanned deerskin. The 
dresses of the early part of the nineteenth century, of deerskin, 
reached down about halfway from the knee to ankle. Midway 
between the waist belt and the border of the dress there was a 
flounce about four inches wide. Such dresses, formerly orna¬ 
mented with porcupine quills, later had two rows of blue beads 
running across the front above the belt (the waist), with orna¬ 
ments of porcupine quills—knots, as it were—hanging down 
from them. The dress was held up by a strap which passed 
over the left shoulder, and the short sleeve was open above, so 
that the arm was bare. The right arm was covered by a short 
sleeve, nearly to the elbow, laced above, and tied at its lower 
end. Across the bare left arm the woman might paint a red 
stripe for every coup her husband had counted. 

56 

OLD-TIME WAYS 

The most ancient dresses worn by the women, of which there 
is any recollection, are described as consisting merely of two 
rectangular pieces of dressed skin, tied together with strings 
which passed over the shoulders and supported the dress, and 
tied together also, at intervals at either side, with strings, and 
held by a belt or thong about the waist. In the same way the 
leggings of the men and the sides of their shirts were tied 
together with strings at what would now be the seams, for at 
that time the art of sewing was unknown. Carver’s figure 4 of a 
Nadowessie woman, already referred to, shows a costume 
which suggests the Cheyenne women’s dress, though it is 
shorter, barely reaching to the knees, but its support over the 
shoulders on either side seems to be a mere knot or string. 
Carver, it is to be remembered, mentions the Cheyennes as one 
of the bands of Sioux. 

“In the time of our grandmothers,” old women say, “per¬ 
haps a hundred years ago [1800], the dresses worn by women 
were longer [i.e., hung down farther] on the right side than on 
the left. The right arm had a short sleeve; there was a strap 
over the left shoulder, and the hide was doubled back, hanging 
down from the upper chest in a loose flap, ending in an edge 
which ran diagonally from the right shoulder in front around 
the body to below the left shoulder-blade.” 

The first belts were of parfleche tied together with tanned 
leather strings. The first ornamented belts were straps of par¬ 
fleche, to which were sewed the little coarse beads that the 
Cheyennes had obtained. After these belts came straps of par¬ 
fleche on which were placed flat brass buttons of various sizes, 
which they obtained from the Hudson Bay Company. Holes 
were made in the parfleche, and the eyes of the buttons were 
passed through the holes and fastened there with strings of 
deerskin. 

At that time, women’s leggings were fringed at the bottom 

4 Carver, Travels in the Interior Parts of North America, p. 230, London, 

1778. 

57 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

and up the sides, as they never have been in modern times. 
They were commonly painted yellow, and were often marked 
with horizontal black cross-lines around the leg. This painting 
continued to recent times. 

The early moccasins, to be described later, were made of a 
simple piece of deerskin sewed in a single seam at the side, and 
a sole was afterward sewed on over the deerskin. Such mocca¬ 
sins were worn by old Suhtai within the memory of men still 
living. 

Black Eagle, who gave me his ancient scalp shirt about 1906, 
said: “The man who put us on earth invented the fashion of 
these shirts. They come from the old people who lived on the 
Missouri River and in the Black Hills. This shirt was made by 
my wife’s grandfather, Horn, who gave it to his son, Brave 
Wolf [often spoken of as Maple, or Box Elder], the father of 
my wife. When I was made a chief, at the age of twenty-five, 
the shirt was given to me, and I have had it ever since—more 
than forty-two years.” 

No man might wear a scalp shirt unless he was brave, and 
had counted one or more coups. The owner must be brave in 
fight, the first to advance and the last to retreat; he must pick 
up a dismounted comrade; should he fail in these things, he 
must give up the shirt and lose his honor. The cost of the cere¬ 
mony of making the shirt was considerable, for it could be 
made only by a man who had worn one. In making a scalp 
shirt, men were called in who had counted coups, and a coup 
was counted for each scalp-lock put on. A scalp shirt and its 
obligations might be given away by the owner, but the gift did 
not carry with it the right to make one. The owner of a scalp 
shirt ranked as a chief; he must not get angry if his horses 
were stolen, and if his wife was carried off, or ran away, he 
must not seek revenge; if a man killed his relations he might 
not personally revenge them, but must leave this to other mem¬ 
bers of the family. If he gave away his scalp shirt, he aban- 

58 

OLD-TIME WAYS 

doned those obligations, and again became as other men. People 
did not like to wear the garment, because of the cost of having 
one made and the customs to which the owner must conform. 
If a scalp shirt was captured by the enemy, the responsibilities 
which went with it were lost. 

Arapaho Chief, a Northern Cheyenne (still alive in 1917), 
told Bent that his youngest wife took advantage of the fact 
that he was having a scalp shirt made to run away with an¬ 
other man. Little Wolf was counting his coup on the scalp shirt 
when one of Arapaho Chief’s sisters came to the outside of the 
lodge and called to Arapaho Chief that his wife had run off. 
Arapaho Chief merely filled his pipe, smoked, and passed it to 
the other men, saying that he had no fault to find with her; no 
pipe or present was ever sent to him. 

In the early days—say before the nineteenth century—the 
men wore no scalp-lock, but often wore the hair behind stuck 
together with pine gum in several or a dozen little strings, hang¬ 
ing down the back, and this continued down to and beyond 
1850. In those days the Cheyennes were noted for their very 
long hair, and the old books speak of this. As a rule, today, 
these people have long, but not unusually long hair; yet occa¬ 
sionally an old Indian is seen whose hair, if free, would drag 
on the ground. Red Eagle, who lived on the Northern Chey¬ 
enne Reservation, wore his side-braids doubled up twice, yet 
they reached below his waist; while when he was sitting, a foot 
or more of his scalp-lock rested on the ground. 

It is said that three or four generations ago the women used 
to braid the hair somewhat as they do now, and to wear as 
ornaments little fringed rolls of deerskin tied to the outside 
of the braids, close to the head. On the outer side of the deer¬ 
skin rolls some women always tied sprigs of sage. Following 
this came a fashion in which the women doubled the braids up 
two or three times, and tied these bundles and the deerskin 
rolls behind the head. 

59 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Then came another method, which was practiced in 1830 or 
thereabouts and was remembered by women whom I knew well. 
This custom was to wear the hair, not hanging down as at pres¬ 
ent, but each braid was doubled up several times at the side 
in a little pack and fastened above and behind the ear, close 
to the head. Each bundle of hair was wrapped about with a 
little beaded or quill-ornamented rectangular piece of deerskin, 
so that on each side of the back of the head these bunches of 
hair stood up “like two little stub-horns.” After the hair had 
been fixed in this way, the smooth hair on top of the head— 
not on the bunches—was painted with a red streak, from 
before backward, for every coup that the woman’s husband 
had counted. 

It is interesting to note that Carver 3 tells that the women 
that lived to the west of the Mississippi, namely, the Nadou- 
wessie and the Assinipoiles, divided the hair in the middle of 
the head, and formed it into two rolls, one against each ear. 
Carver says, to be sure, that these two rolls stood at the front 
of each ear, and this may be a modification before or after the 
Cheyenne fashion, which old women who were living in recent 
years remember to have seen practiced by their grandmothers. 

In those old times the Cheyenne men dressed their hair very 
differently from the modern fashion. They say that in times 
very far back—long before the memory of the oldest person— 
they cut off much of the hair of the head. Some wore a narrow 
roach, and some a wide one, while others had a circular crown- 

piece, on which the hair was long, the rest of the hair being 
pulled out, so that the head was elsewhere naked. This has been 

people, 

to the present time. It was a fashion of long ago. In later times 
the men commonly cut off all the hair except a little on the 
top of the head. This way of wearing the hair is of course com¬ 
parable with certain familiar fashions of modern times, when 
the Pawnees, Osages, Raws, and others, wore such roaches. 

and through them comes down 

told by the very oldest 

5 Carver’s Travels, p. 230, London, 1778. 

OLD-TIME WAYS 

The figure of a man of the Nadowessie in Carver 0 shows him 
apparently without hair over most of his head, but with a 
crown-tuft of longer hair, in which feathers are tied. 

Among Indians, as among white people, the fashions 
changed. After the practice of wearing the roach, or a tuft of 
hair, became obsolete, they used to cut the hair square across 
the forehead, and stiffen it with clay, so that it stood straight 
up; then, stringing little shells on deerskin strings, they tied 
them to the hair on the front of the head, so that two of these 
strings of shells hung down on the right side of the face. The 
men braided the back hair somewhat as they do now. The cut¬ 
ting of the hair across the forehead and stiffening it with clay 
is said to have been an old method of hairdressing practiced 
by the Crees. 

By a later fashion the hair was cut off on one side only and 
left on the other; thus there was only one braid, and one ear 
was covered by the hair and the other exposed. The covered ear 
was usually not ornamented, but in the exposed ear often many 
holes were bored, each of which held an ornament. This prac¬ 
tice may have been continued to some extent up to modern 
times, for the right ear of my friend, White Elk, had been many 
times pierced, while in the left ear there was only a single hole. 

The old-time people wore rings in their noses. An old woman, 
now, or very recently, alive in the Cheyenne camp, can remem¬ 
ber three old men who wore such nose ornaments. They took 
the shells of mussels and carved them into different shapes, and 
tying the shell to a deerskin string, passed the string through a 
hole in the septum of the nose. After the fashion of wearing 
shells passed out, they wore rings of metal in the nose, and 
after the nose ornament ceased to be fashionable, the practice 
arose of wearing earrings. These, up to the present time, were 
inserted in half a dozen holes cut in the cartilage of the ear, 
near its margin, but a long time ago—seventy-five or a hundred 

6 Carver, loc. tit., pi. 3, p. 230. 

6l 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

years—a long hole was cut in the cartilage near the margin, 
reaching from the top to the lobe; the hole was distended by a 
stick passed through it, until it healed, and then the margin 
of the ear was wrapped with beads strung on sinew. Adair and 
J. Long saw this fashion among other Indians in the eight¬ 
eenth century. Big Woman told me that she remembered that, 
as a little girl, playing with her grandmother, she could put 
three of her fingers through each of the holes pierced in her 
grandmother’s ears. This fashion must have disappeared about 
the middle of the last century. Big Woman’s grandmother and 
her aunts were the last ones whom she remembers to have 
practiced it. 

The first bracelets that women wore were of hoop iron, some¬ 
times brightened with a file. After this came bracelets made of 
brass wire, wound around the arm. Other old women, however, 
say that among the earliest ornaments they had were blue 
beads, copper bracelets, and finger rings of wound wire. 

62 

VILLAGE LIFE 

INCIDENTS OF A DAY 

I F in imagination we can carry ourselves back sixty or 
seventy years, to the time when the Indians wandered free 
and before their lives had been greatly modified by the 
influence of civilization, we may picture some of the features 
of the daily life of the Cheyennes in the days of the buffalo. 

The camp was pitched in a broad bottom, and the lodges 
stood in a great circle whose diameter was half a mile or more 
—three arrow flights from a strong bow, and as far as a man 
can throw an arrow by hand. It was summer, and most of the 
women had renewed their lodges, so that they stood white in 
the dim light of the early morning. The sun had not yet risen, 
but already the fires were kindled, and from the lodges gray 
columns of smoke were rising through the still air. From all 
quarters of the camp women were hurrying down to the stream, 
or coming from it, carrying to the lodges water for the morning 
use; for the Cheyennes did not use water that had stood all 
night—they called it dead, and said that they wished to drink 
living water. As the light grew stronger, men and boys—some 
of them little fellows just able to walk—came from the lodges 
and hurried down to the stream, to plunge into it; for the early 
morning bath was a regular practice. This was done by all at 
most seasons of the year; but some of them omitted the bath 
in winter when the streams were frozen, while others broke the 
ice and bathed in the cold water. This was for good health, to 
make them hardy, and also to wash away all sickness. The 
custom was peculiar to the men; women did not do it. The 
practice was similar to that of the Blackfeet. 

63 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The rising sun looked down upon a camp full of moving 
people. The women were cooking the meals, the men and boys 
were returning to the lodges. The pot was removed from the 
fire, and with a sharpened stick the meat taken from it and 
put in wooden bowls, or in dishes made of buffalo-horn. Before 
eating, most of the boys rode out into the hills, and drove in 
the herds of horses, from which certain ones were selected to 
be tied in front of the lodges, to be at hand for any use, while 
those—usually the most valuable ones—which during the night 
had been tethered there, were turned loose and taken to the 
hills to graze, under the charge of a son or a nephew of the 
lodge, or perhaps of some poor orphan who lived there, receiv¬ 
ing his food and clothing and in return performing the various 
small services that all boys were expected to render to older 
persons. 

The morning meal ended, many of the men saddled their 
horses and started out to hunt; but before this the voice of the 
old crier was heard, shouting out to the camp the commands 
of the chiefs, the order of the day, or perhaps only some items 
of personal news. He commenced at the opening of the circle, 
which always faced the rising sun, and riding around, within 
but close to the lodges, first to the south, then to the west, then 
to the north, and so back to the east again, called out the news, 
repeating his announcement at frequent intervals. Perhaps it 
was that the camp was to remain in this place for one, two, or 
three days; perhaps that men were not to disturb the buffalo; 
perhaps that some soldier band was to have a dance that night; 
or merely that some warrior or chief had lost a piece of 
property, and people were notified of its ownership. At first the 
crier’s voice came to the distant lodges merely as a faint, dron¬ 
ing shout, without words, but it told the people that he was 
coming, 

tinguish what he was saying. A woman, eager for news, stepped 
out of her lodge to hear the better, and exchanged with some 
interested neighbor comments on the announcement. 

64 

and as he drew nearer, they began to listen, to dis- 

USING SMOOTHER ON QUILLS 

VILLAGE LIFE 

Now, some woman who was making a new lodge carried out 
and spread on the ground the dressed skins to be used in its 
construction. Before day came, she had sent a messenger to 
call her friends to come and help her sew it, and the lodge 
cutter was already standing over the skins, preparing them for 
the sewing. The women who were to help in the work, some of 
them carrying their bundles of sinew thread, began to arrive 
from various quarters of the camp. Many hands made light 
work, and before night the sewing of the lodge was completed. 

Long before this the children had scattered out to play. Some 
of the tiniest, unless they had older sisters or cousins to take 
charge of them, stayed close by their mothers; but the older 
ones scattered to the river, where the boys were swimming and 
diving in the warm water, or were running races on the sand¬ 
bars, or perhaps burying each other, all except the head, in the 
sand, already heated by the strengthening sun. Other lads were 
busy near a mud-bank, modeling images of animals and people 
and lodges from the tenacious clay, and setting them in the sun 
to dry. 

Some of the older boys and young men were practicing at 
shooting with the bow, or at throwing arrows, or were playing 
one of the wheel games, or sliding their slender, straight throw- 

Big girls, not yet old enough to work at dressing hides, gath¬ 
ered in groups to play the football game elsewhere described. 

During the morning parties of women and young girls started 
off to get wood, perhaps only two or three together, perhaps 
fifteen or twenty. They were a merry group, laughing, joking, 
and playing tricks on one another. When the place was reached 
where they were to get wood, some gathered the sticks lying 
on the ground; others climbed up into the trees, breaking off 
and throwing down the dead branches, while those below 
trimmed and made them ready for the ropes. The wood was 
divided into even loads, and when all these were prepared, each 
woman took hers on her back, and, in single file, they set out 

65 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

for the camp, separating as they reached it, each turning off 
to her own lodge. In winter when there was snow on the ground, 
the companies of women made hard-beaten roads to and from 
the timber, where they gathered their fuel. 

Other groups of women and young girls went out into the 
hills to gather roots, and were seen walking across the wide 
prairie, armed with their root-diggers, and then climbing the 
hills, and at last—mere dots in the distance—scattering out 
and occupied in their work. 

The men left in the camp sat about in the shade of the 
lodges. Some smoked and gossiped; others worked at different 
implements which they were fashioning, a bow, arrows, a pipe, 
a pipestem, a whetstone, or what not. Old men discussed the 
happenings of past years, their war journeys, their meetings 
with other tribes, visits that they had received from white 
people, or mysterious events that had taken place within their 
knowledge. Sometimes, near groups of these old men might be 
seen two or three growing boys, seated at a little distance be¬ 
hind them, eagerly drinking in the talk that flowed from the 
lips of these wise elders. 

Some young men devoted much time to their personal ap¬ 
pearance, plucking out the hairs from eyebrows, lips, and 
cheeks, combing and braiding their hair, and painting their 
faces. After this had been done to the dandy’s satisfaction, he 
dressed himself in his finest clothing, and a little later rode 
about the camp so that people might admire him. 

For plucking out the hair, a pair of tweezers was used, called 
the “eyebrow plucker,” from which we might infer that the 
Cheyennes practiced plucking the eyebrows before they re¬ 
moved the hair from the face by the same process. This last 
custom is still very generally practiced, although some men 
now allow the eyebrows and lashes to remain, more especially 
the eyelashes. At present some Cheyenne young men shave 
instead of plucking the hair from the face. 

Before this some old women dragged out their green hides, 

66 

VILLAGE LIFE 

and spread them on the ground, and were hard at work over 
them. Others pounded berries under a shade; others still sewed 
clothing. 

As midday approached, and the sun grew hotter, many of the 
people retired to the lodges; the lodge-skins were raised all 
about and they sat there in the shade, while a warm breeze blew 
through the lodge. 

As the afternoon advanced, men were seen returning from 
the hunt, riding horses laden with meat. Each dismounted 
before his lodge, and his women took the load from the horse, 
and either turned the animal loose, or, if it was a fine running 
horse, took it down to the stream and washed from it the blood 
and dirt with which it was likely to be covered. 

Suddenly, from a near-by hill, sounded the war-cry, and 
there was a little stir among the growing men of the camp. The 
women and girls who had been off to dig roots were announcing 
their return and signaling with their blankets, and a crowd of 
men rushed out to try to rob them of some of their spoils, while 
the women in the camp hurried out of the lodges to see the fun. 

As they were returning to the camp, the girls who went out 
to dig bear-roots and turnips tied their roots in small bundles 
of five or six. Often some girl who was slow at digging, and 
had secured but few roots, might propose that they should 
divide into two parties and gamble for the bunches of roots. If 
all agreed, one of the women threw her root-digger as far as she 
could, and the others stood in a row and threw their root- 
diggers at the first one. If a woman’s missile touched the mark, 
her side won. If a root-digger from each side hit it, the game 
was a draw, while if none of the root-diggers thrown hit the 
mark, it also was a draw. They competed as well by throwing 
the short root-diggers so that they should strike on one end and 
keep turning over, end for end, as they went. The farthest 
throw won. Some root-diggers would not go at all; they perhaps 
just stood in the ground, or bounded off to one side. In these 

67 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

contests, they tied the small roots in bunches of five or ten, and 
wagered these bunches, or a number of them. 

In the same way, and for the same purpose, they threw the 
front marrow-bone of a buffalo, the metacarpal. It was thrown 
on the ground, so as to strike on its end, and then bound, turn¬ 
ing over and over, end for end, to go as far as possible. Often, 
before betting, a woman might throw the bone, and then go to 
it and put her foot on it, and say, “If you do not win for me, 
you shall be pounded up and used to get grease from.” This 
was a jocular threat, the expression of a hope that she might 

win. 

Now, when the women were returning to camp with their 
roots, and when they had come within sight of the camp, they 
sat down in a line, and each woman put her roots a little way 
in front of her on the ground. Then some woman shouted the 
war-cry, and signaled to the camp with a blanket, as if a war- 
party were returning. When the people saw this, some of the 
young men took the parfleches used under the stone anvils on 
which meat and berries were pounded, and carried them as 
shields, while some had already made imitation shields of wil¬ 
low twigs. These young men mounted the oldest, laziest, ugliest 
horses they could find, and charged out on the women, who 
were busily gathering sticks and buffalo-chips with which to 
defend themselves. 

When the two parties were close together, the girls pelted 
the men, who dodged and protected themselves behind their 
shields, and there was much confusion. Only a man who had 
been wounded in war, or had had his horse shot under him in 
real warfare, was permitted to take the roots away from the 
girls. Such men might do so, though before they secured their 
plunder they received a plentiful pelting. A man who was hit 
by a missile was supposed to be wounded, and out of the game. 
Other men might not dismount. However, after a time the men 
got some roots, and they retired to some hill to eat them, while 
the girls went on to camp with those they had saved. 

68 

VILLAGE LIFE 

The parties who had been gathering roots were made up of 
little girls, grown girls, married women, and old women. They 
were not so attacked when they went for berries or cherries, 
but only when they went for pomme blanche. 

Among the Southern Cheyennes it is said that mounted men 
used to steal upon and surprise the women, and after counting 
a coup to take their roots. If the women discovered the men 
coming, they sounded an alarm, and all rushed together to 
defend themselves. With a root-digger they drew on the ground 
before them a little furrow to represent breastworks. It was 
understood that no man might pass that furrow to take roots, 
unless he had counted a coup or killed an enemy within breast¬ 
works. If none of the men had performed this feat, none might 
enter, and they rode about outside the circle, while the women 
hooted at and derided them. A man who had counted a coup 
within breastworks, however, dismounted and entered the 
circle, told of his coup, and took what roots he wished, some¬ 
times loading himself down with them. 

As the sun fell, and it grew cooler, people came out of their 
lodges, and the scene grew more active. Now the feast shout 
was heard, and children were seen going to and fro across the 
circle, carrying messages of invitation. Working women and 
working men had long ago put away their tasks; the evening 
meal was being prepared. From the hills, horses were driven in, 
and, followed by great clouds of dust, rushed down the bluffs 
and into the camp, where, after some had been caught, the 
others turned about and returned to the hills. 

As darkness settled down, the bright firelight shone through 
the yellow lodge-skins; sparks came from each smoke-hole, as 
the fire was mended or fresh wood thrown upon it. For three 
or four hours the camp was a busy place. People were passing 
back and forth in all directions. Music began to be heard: 
songs for dancing from some lodge where young men and 
women were having a social dance; the quicker, more lively 
music of the gambling songs, from some home where the game 

69 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

of “hiding” was being played; the droning, minor chant of a 
doctor, whose song was a prayer to the favorable spirits for 
help; or the love notes of some boy, who was playing his flute 
on a hill away from the camp. To most of the songs time was 
kept by drumming; it might be on a large drum, for the 
dancers, or on a small hand drum, for the doctor; or perhaps 
only on a parfleche or on the ground, by the gamblers. Over 
all the camp there was the hum which always accompanied the 
assembling of a number of people, and this was broken by the 
neigh of a colt, the barking of dogs, the yelp of some sportive 
boy, the shout of some old man calling a friend to a feast, the 
musical laughter of the women, and in the distance the shrill 
howl of coyotes. Then suddenly the people seemed to grow 
fewer; one by one the fires burned down, and at last the camp 
was as silent as the prairie had been before the people moved 
in. 

Long after the people had gone to bed, young people might 
be awake and stirring, and perhaps doing reckless things. One 
night, many years ago, Buffalo Wallow Woman, then a young 
girl, in company with another girl, her special friend, went out 
of the lodge late, after all the people were asleep. Lying on the 
ground near the lodge was a three-year-old colt that had never 
been ridden. He was fast asleep and his nose was resting on the 
ground. Buffalo Wallow Woman said to her friend, “I could 
ride that colt.” 

“Do not be foolish,” said the other girl; “he would throw 
you off.” Buffalo Wallow Woman gathered her blanket close 

to sing a song, and then jumped on the colt’s 
back. She remembers how it sprang to its feet, and the first 
few bucks, but after that she must have lost her wits, and just 
clung to the horse. 

The animal rushed about through the camp and frightened 
all the horses, which stampeded with a great noise. The people 
awoke and rushed from their lodges, and the horses dashed out 
of camp toward the hills. The next thing that Buffalo Wallow 

70 

about her, began 

VILLAGE LIFE 

Woman remembers is that the colt stopped at the edge of a cut 
bank, while she flew over its head and alighted in the willows 
below. She was frightened, and under the cover of the bluff and 
the darkness crept back into the camp. It took the people a 
long time to gather their horses. 

At the breaking up of any large gathering, as the camp at 
the Medicine Lodge, or at the renewing of the arrows, there 
was a general presenting of gifts, chiefly of women’s things. 
The women relations of a young married man presented to his 
wife or to his mother-in-law food, dishes, shawls, or blankets, 
which the wife or mother-in-law distributed among the girl’s 
female relations. These, on their part, were likely the next day 
to bring similar gifts—sometimes even lodges and lodge-poles 
—which they presented to the girl or to her mother, and which 
by them were given to those relations of the husband who had 
made the other presents. At these large gatherings the well-to- 
do young men usually possessed large new lodges, like those 
owned by the chiefs and the heads of the soldier bands. Such 
lodges were especially visited by parties of serenaders who 
were looking for presents. 

NAMES OF THE CHEYENNE MONTHS 

Here are incorporated the names of the Cheyenne moons 
or months, with their respective meanings, the first list being 
that given by Wolf Chief, the other by Big Knife. 

Ok sey' e shi his, Hoop- and- 
stick game moon; January. 

Mak ok sey' i shi, Bighoop-and- 
stick game moon; February. 

Pun u tna es' si ni, Light snow 
moon; also called Shi iv i ne, 
Dusty moon; March. 

Ka tihk tsi' tit si, January. 

Mdh kohk tsi' tit si, February. 
Big wheel moon. A few buf¬ 
falo calves and colts appear, 
but it is still cold. 

Pd 5 tan e! ishi, March. Buf- 
f al o-and-horses-begin-to-fill- 
out moon. 

7i 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Mat si' o mi isk'i, Spring moon; 
April. 

There is no name for May and 
June, but they are referred to 
as “the time when the horses 
get fat.” 

Hivi its V i shi, Moon when the 
buffalo bulls are rutting; 

July- 

The Cheyennes have no name 
for August, but it is referred 
to as “the time when the 
cherries are ripe.” 

To no' ish i, Cool moon; Sep¬ 
tember. 

Se' in e, Moon when the water 
begins to freeze on the edge 
of the streams; October. 

Hik'd mini, Freezing moon; 
November. 

Mak hik o min i, Big freezing 
moon; December. 

Mahk e 5 me' shi, April fat 
moon. 

Hohk tsi' et si, April moon, 
when they play wheels. When 
high water comes, the wheels 
and the sticks are thrown 
into the stream and carried 
off by the water. 

6 assi' o wah' tut’, May moon, 
shiny, or bright; ball game 
month; because during this 
month the sun shines bright. 

June, July, and August moons 
are just summer; green grass 
is up, the hot weather comes, 
and they do not count the 
moons until the plums get 
ripe. 

Wah' ka nun e ishi, September 
moon. Plum moon. 

His'si ke vin his', October. Dust 
or dirt in the face, from the 
dry dust blowing. 

He koninhist', November. 
Hard face, referring to the 
cold. Leaves falling, and a 
little ice formed at the edge 
of the rivers. 

Mahk he kon in' i, December. 
Big hard face. Strong cold. 

72 

CERTAIN CAMP CUSTOMS 

I N the ordinary life of the camp there is much of custom 
and ceremonial, all of it interesting, but so great in volume 
that it is impossible to learn any great part of it, or, within 
any ordinary limits, to set down even the part that one has 
learned. 

A good part of the life of home and camp was conducted after 
established forms which were supposed to be known to every¬ 
one, and the failure to observe these conventions was formerly 
regarded by Indians as an extraordinary proceeding, much, in 
fact, as a breach of good manners would be looked at by well- 
reared people in civilized society. Thus, in the old days it was a 
common remark among Indians that white men did not seem to 
know how to act—how to conduct themselves. Of course, in 
these later times, a long experience of the white man’s igno¬ 
rance and disregard of their methods and ways of life has more 
or less accustomed them to such violations, and they no longer 
feel their former sense of injury and indignation at what they 
regard as his bad manners. 

In entering the lodge the visitor turned to the right, and 
paused or sat down. The owner was sitting on his bed at the 
back of the lodge—the west side, or perhaps farther to the 
south—and when he welcomed the person entering, he asked 
him to come back and sit down. The place of honor was at the 
left of and next to the owner, who with his family lived to the 
left of the door, though his sleeping place might be at the back 
of the lodge. It was not etiquette to go to that part of the lodge 
occupied by the family, nor to pass between the fire and the 
owner of the lodge; nor, indeed, was it good manners to pass 

73 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

between anyone sitting in the lodge and the fire. Well-bred peo¬ 
ple passed behind the sitters, who leaned forward to give them 
room. 

In the lodge, as a member of the owner’s family, there was 
often a boy or a young man who was not related to it. Boys 
from ten to fifteen years of age, orphans or young relatives 
who had no one to care for them, often lived in a man’s lodge 
and herded his horses, and performed other small services. The 
lad received his food and clothing, and after a time, when the 
lodge owner thought best, he gave him a pony. When the boy 
was fifteen or sixteen years of age, he perhaps went on the 
war-path. If on this first war-path he did well, showed courage, 
or was so fortunate as to capture horses or to count a coup, he 
no longer herded horses when he returned, but he still lived 
in the lodge, hunted, and turned in his meat there, and re¬ 
mained a member of the family. Such boys did not make the 
fires, but they cut the tobacco, lighted pipes, and carried mes¬ 
sages. The fires were lighted by the women. 

In old times smoking was an important ceremony, which 
different men practiced in different ways. In some cases no one 
might leave or enter a lodge while the owner was smoking. 
Some men went so far as to tie up the door of the lodge. No 
one must stand up or walk about in the lodge. Certain men, 
who were very particular, when about to smoke took down 
everything that was hanging up in the lodge, on the back-rests 
or to the lodge-poles. When they smoked they began by cere¬ 
monially pointing the pipestem to the sky, to the ground, and 
to the four directions, in order, and saying: “Spirit Above, 
smoke. Earth, smoke. Four cardinal points, smoke.” Then the 
man made his prayer for help. The smokes to the four cardinal 
points were offered to the spirits who dwell in those quarters. 

The pipe when passed always went with the sun, from right 
to left, starting from the owner of the lodge. When the man 
sitting next to the door had smoked, the pipe might not be 
passed across the doorway, but was handed back all around 

74 

CERTAIN' CAMP CUSTOMS 

the circle—no one smoking—to the man on the opposite side 
of the door. He smoked, and then the man on his left, and so 
the pipe went on to the owner, or until it was smoked out. In 
primitive times they had a native tobacco that they cultivated 
and used for smoking. 

At present, in the South, they mix dried leaves of the sumach 
with the tobacco they smoke. In old times they put a little 
buffalo grease with this. In the North they use “red-willow” 
(cornel) bark with tobacco. 

The Cheyennes think it unlucky to touch anything with the 
stem of the pipe while smoking. The pipe must be held straight 
up as it is passing from man to man, not passed across the body 
the stem or bowl first, but held upright, the bowl down. Still 
there are various individual ways of passing the pipe. Some 
hold it so that the neighbor can take hold of the top of the 
stem; others, so that he can grasp the lower part. Others point 
the stem downward, and others still—and this is more usual— 
rest the bowl of the pipe on the ground as it passes. Many men 
will not receive the pipe unless it is passed to them in what 
they consider the proper way. 

Often they make a prayer as they take the first smoke— 
sometimes a very long prayer. In old times some men would 
not smoke unless a little powdered buffalo-chip was scattered 
on top of the tobacco when lighting it. This was only to make 
the fire catch more readily. Some would not smoke unless alone. 
Nowadays, old men when cleaning the pipe empty the ashes 
carefully into a little tin can, on which the cover is replaced. 
None will scatter their ashes after smoking, but keep them 
carefully in a little pile near the edge of the fire. This has some 
relation to the sacredness or solemnity of the act of smoking. 
When old men are smoking, nothing must be beaten in the 
lodge. There must be no sudden noise. No one must tap on a 
stick. Dishes must not be knocked together. No one should 
walk in front of the smoker; that is to say, between him and 
the fire. In old times, as a rule, only the older men smoked. 

75 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Young men were advised not to do so, as it would make them 
short-winded, so that they could not run long and far. In old 
times many men would not smoke if a woman was in the lodge. 

In buffalo days men were continually calling to the feast. 
The crier was asked to go out and call the names of those 
invited, mentioning each man’s name, and bidding him to the 
lodge of the host. If it was not a formal feast given to a large 
number, but only two or three men were invited, the host might 
send a boy or even a little child, who would go to the man’s 
lodge and say, “My father calls you.” The meal usually con¬ 
sisted of roasted ribs or boiled hump ribs, or boiled tongue, of 
the buffalo. 

A feast was begun and ended with prayer, and before eating, 
a little from each kettle was offered to the spirits, the food 
being held up to the sky and then placed on the ground at the 
edge of the fire. Private persons did the same when eating, in 
the lodge or elsewhere. The food offered lay where it had been 
deposited by the fire till the lodge was swept. When it had been 
held up to the sky and then placed on the ground, it was sup¬ 
posed to be consumed, and no longer to be of any value. 

At feasts were often related the stories and traditions of the 
tribe. A person might make a feast and ask a certain man or 
woman to come and tell a particular story. After the guests had 
eaten, he or she would tell the story, and at its close might 
possibly present the story to some individual in the lodge, and 
after this had been done that person might tell it. At such 
gatherings people who were well known as story-tellers were in 
great demand. 

When a man desired to have stories told in his lodge for 
entertainment at night he sent to some old man well known as 
a story-teller a message asking him to come to his lodge and 
eat. A comfortable place was fixed for the guest to sit and lie, 
and food was prepared, but not cooked. Meantime the news 
that such a man was to tell stories at this lodge had gone 

76 

CERTAIN CAMP CUSTOMS 

through the camp and very likely many people gathered there 
to listen. 

When the old man came in and sat down, a pipe was offered 
him, and he smoked. When he received the pipe he raised and 
lowered it four times, touching the bowl of the pipe to the 
ground four times, and after he had finished smoking he went 
through the ceremonial motions of passing hands over legs, 
arms, and head. This was a promise to tell the truth—that is, 
to relate the stories as he had heard them—and a prayer for 
help to do this. Then food was cooked and set by the side of 
the fire. 

Many of the stories told by the Cheyennes were the prop¬ 
erty of particular families, and might be related only by mem¬ 
bers of these families, grandparents and parents carefully 
teaching the children these tales of the past. Such stories were 
often personal property, and only those tq whom they had been 
presented might repeat them. 

Certain stories were told in sections. A short story might be 
told, and at a certain point the narrator stopped and after a 
pause said, “I will tie another one to it.” Then there was a long 
pause; the pipe was perhaps lighted and smoked, and a little 
conversation was had; then the story-teller began again, and 
told another section of the tale, ending as before. Such stories 
were often told in groups of four or six, and might last all 
night. At less formal gatherings a man might tell a story, and 
when it was finished might say: “The story is ended. Can any¬ 
one tie another to it?” Another man might then relate a story, 
ending it with the same words, and so stories might be told all 
about the lodge. 

When a sacred story was to be told the people were called 
into the lodge, the door was closed, and everyone sat quite still. 
No one was permitted to enter or go out while the narrator was 
speaking. Playing children were told to keep away, because if 
any noise were made in or near the lodge, something bad would 
happen—someone might get sick or die, or might be killed. 

77 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Sacred stories were told only at night, for if they were related 
in the daytime, the narrator would become hunchbacked. 

Speech-making, story-telling, and conversation were the 
usual forms of entertainment among the Cheyennes at their 
more or less formal feasts; but on some occasions feasts were 
given which were attended by the members of two of the 
soldier bands, for the purpose of determining which band had 
among its members the most men who had performed brave 
deeds. 

When a competition of this sort took place, the two bands 
were ranged on opposite sides of the lodge, facing each other. 
Those present did not at first speak, except when asked. Some 
elderly man was chosen to preside, one who had no special 
affiliation with either party, and so was disinterested. He sat 
at the back of the lodge with the pipe lying on the ground 
before him, the bowl pointing to the south. The umpire had 
already thought over the list of brave deeds to be brought up. 
Before him were a number of counters, consisting of small 
sharpened sticks, which he thrust upright into the ground for 
the purpose of marking what had been related—the points 
gained by either party. 

When all were ready to begin, he passed a counter to the 
man sitting at one end of the line. The counter passed from 
hand to hand until it reached the man for whom it was in¬ 
tended, and then the umpire asked, perhaps, “Which one of 
you ever counted coup on a man who carried a gun?” If the 
man holding the stick had not done this, he passed it to his 
next neighbor; and so it went from hand to hand until it 
reached one who had done this thing, when he narrated the 
circumstance, perhaps mentioning the name of some witness to 
the deed. 

Sometimes most unlikely things were suggested by the 
umpire, as when the stick was passed for a man who, riding 
a spotted horse, had touched an enemy carrying a gun. With- 

78 

CERTAIN CAMP CUSTOMS 

out a word the stick passed from hand to hand until it reached 
a man on the north side of the lodge, who said: “At such a 
time and such a place, when riding a spotted horse, I touched 
a Ute. He held his gun in one hand, and was trying hard to get 
away.” 

“Ah,” said the umpire—Woman’s Heart, a Kiowa,—“that 
will not do. He must have shot at you.” So the stick went on, 
and no one claimed the deed. When one side had counted a 
coup, and received credit for it, the stick was passed again to 
that side. A man who had more than once performed the feat 
mentioned might ask to have a second or a third stick passed 
to him, receiving them up to the number of his coups of the 
kind in question. When the coup had been related, the stick 
which had been passed for it was returned to the umpire, who 
thrust it in the ground to his right or left hand, according as 
the winning was by the party to his right or left. 

In case neither side had been able to count the coup sug¬ 
gested, or if both sides had counted it, so that they were even, 
the stick was passed alternately to one side and the other. After 
four passings of the stick, someone might suggest that the pipe 
be lighted, and for a time smoking and conversation followed. 
The partaking of this pipe was a pledge of the smokers’ truth¬ 
fulness ; and the purpose of the pipe lying on the ground before 
the umpire was also to insure truth-telling. No one would ven¬ 
ture to lie or to exaggerate under such circumstances. 

After the pipe had been smoked out, the contest began again, 
and with intermissions for smoking was likely to last all night. 
Whichever side had the most sticks received a feast the next 
day from the losing side. 

Young men who had not done much in war never took part 
in such a competition. It was participated in chiefly by those 
who had been to war many times. 

Among the Cheyennes, just as among all people, civilized 
and savage, the belief prevailed that personal suffering was 
acceptable to the supernatural powers, and would be likely to 

79 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

secure their favor. Just as the devout Christian in a civilized 
community may, during certain seasons of the year, wear a hair 
shirt, refrain from eating meat or using tobacco, or may give 
up going to the theatre, in the belief that this sacrifice of self 
is acceptable to God, so the Cheyenne who wished for good 
fortune—for success in his undertakings, or to avert an evil 
chance—cut strips of skin from his body, or starved, or swung 
to the pole, believing that by this sacrifice of self he would 
gain the favor of the Maiyuri, those mysterious powers 
which controlled the affairs of men, and brought good fortune 
or bad, according as they were reverenced or neglected. It has 
been said elsewhere that in old times men going on the war¬ 
path used to slice bits of skin from their arms in sacrifice, and 
in earlier days—at the time when they wore nose-rings—men 
used to take narrow cross-strips of skin from the arms, fre¬ 
quently from shoulder to wrist, and sometimes cut similar strips 
from the legs. These were offered in sacrifice—a part of the 
body given to He' amma wi' hio, to bring good fortune. Some¬ 
times, in the same way, a narrow strip of skin was cut out, run¬ 
ning in a spiral from the middle of the chest around over its 
surface, as large as a dinner plate. Besides this, there were 
many other forms of personal sacrifice, of which the suffering 
in the Medicine Lodge is that best known. 

Many years ago, when they went on the war-path, and felt 
that they were in danger, young men used to promise the spirits 
that if they were saved from danger they would cause them¬ 
selves to suffer. 

In those old times, young men used to go off on the hills and 
fast for four nights. This was called a wu wuri, starving. They 
did this in order that they might be fortunate, and might not 
be hit in battle. When they slept, they lay on their faces, with 
their heads toward the east; they had no shelter and no cover¬ 
ing. They might smoke three times each day—at sunrise, at 
noon, and at the going down of the sun. 

The young man might ask an instructor to take him up on a 

80 

RETURNING TO THE CAMP 

CERTAIN CAMP CUSTOMS 

high hill, on the right-hand side of a river; that is to say, either 
on the south or the west side; or to a point of rocks on the 
right-hand side of a lake. The young man must lie there for 
four days without eating or drinking. Usually such young men 
took up with them white sage, to lie on as a bed, and a filled 
pipe. Sometimes, if the sun was very hot, the man stuck a bush 
in the ground to give him a little shade. Usually he made an 
offering to Heammawihio, which he left there when he went 
away from the spot. These votaries did not choose places which 
were especially dangerous, but went to the tops of hills, open 
to the view, from which they could see off over the prairie. 

If the dreams which a man had during this ordeal were favor¬ 
able, he usually remained for four days; but if unfavorable, he 
was likely to stop and to return to the camp. If he fasted to the 
end, after four days the old man went to him and brought him 
down to the camp. They did this only in summer. This is said 
to have been purely a sacrifice, and not an attempt to dream 
for power; but often those who lay there did have dreams, and 
what they dreamed surely came to pass. If the Maiyun came 
to the man and talked to him, and smoked the pipe, he would 
be successful. Not everyone starved, and to only a part of those 
who starved did the vision come. 

In another form of personal sacrifice the suffering was more 
acute, though shorter lived. When a young man intended to 
sacrifice himself in this way, he went out in the afternoon and 
cut a stout pole to take up on the hill with him. To the top of 
this pole a rope was tied. 

At daylight the next morning the young man filled a pipe 
and went to the home of a man who had done what he now 
intended to do. He entered this man’s lodge and offered the pipe 
to him. The man took the pipe and smoked. When he had 
finished smoking, he said to the young man, “Well, friend, what 
is it?” The young man replied, “I wish you to go up on the 
hills with me.” 

When they started, the young man took with him the pole 

81 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

he had cut, and when they reached the place the old man dug 
a hole in the ground and planted the pole there. He then took 
hold of the rope, and tested the pole to see that it was firm in 
the ground, and that there was plenty of room for the young 
man to swing. 

The young man sat down, facing the east, holding his shoul¬ 
ders well back, and his arms and wrists at his side. The old 
man pinched up the skin of the breast on either side, ran a 
knife through it, and then taking two skewers, about three and 
a half inches long, he passed one through the cut on each side 
of the breast. From a knot tied in each end of the rope, two 
flat ends of hide ran out, and from these ends hung heavy deer¬ 
skin strings, slit like a buttonhole. The eyelets of each string 
were slipped over each end of either skewer. Then the old man 
stepped behind the young man, lifted him up and drew him 
back, so as to see if the rope was tight and the pull on its two 
branches even. After that the old man said, “Now, walk up 
that way [to the right, i.e., south] and back four times.” He 
walked about one-quarter of a circle to the right four times 
and back. He might then walk one-quarter of a circle to the 
left, walking a half-circle in all. The pipe was left at the end 
of the quarter-circle to the right (at the southern limit of his 
walk), and it was there that he smoked three times during the 
day. All the time that he was walking, the man was sagging 
back on the rope, trying to tear the skewers through the skin 
of the breast. He never succeeded in doing this, however; the 
skin is too tough. 

The man who had given the instruction then went back to 
the camp, and at sundown came again, and with a knife cut the 
skin across behind each skewer, so as to free it. The skin cut 
off was placed, with a prayer, on the ground at the foot of the 
pole and left there. He then untied the rope from the pole, 
rolled it up, and returned to his lodge, taking the young man 
with him. At the left of the back of the lodge the young man 

82 

CERTAIN CAMP CUSTOMS 

found his food in a bowl, and some water. The old man offered 
these to him, and first he drank his water, then ate. 

Men suffered in this way in order that they might be for¬ 
tunate in war—might take horses, or might count a coup—or it 
might be done as the result of a dream. 7 It was often done just 
before going on the war-path. The same man might do it 
several times. 

Sometimes this sacrifice was made in the night, in which 
case assistance was asked of some old man who had suffered 
in the night time. The boy or young man was obliged to find out 
for himself the name of one who had done this same thing at 
night. The sufferer was made fast to the pole just as the sun 
was setting, and was set free just as the sun rose. 

If done at night, the young man contemplated the spirits, 
and often during these sufferings he saw wonderful visions. 
Men were pierced and swung to the pole at night in the same 
way as during the day. There were different opinions as to 
which form of suffering was the more acceptable to the Maiyun. 

Sometimes in the day a young man might have several buf¬ 
falo-skulls attached to slits cut in the skin of the back, over 
the shoulder blades, and drag the skulls up and down over the 
course where he walked. This was sometimes done at the camp, 
and after the circle of the lodges had been put up the young 
man might start at the opening of and within the circle, and go 
all around the circle to the point from which he had started. 
There the old man awaited him, and took off the skulls, which 
were placed in line in the opening of the circle, facing inward. 
In taking off the skulls, the drawn-out skin was cut off, and the 
old man held each piece to the sun, and down to the ground, 
and toward the four directions, and then buried it in the 
ground. This might be done at any time when the young man 
wished to pay his vow. Often it was done at the time of the 
Medicine Lodge, but might be done at any time. 

7 See “The Cheyenne Medicine Lodge,” in American Anthropologist , N. s., 
vol. xvi, p. 24s. 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Besides offering the pipe to the instructor, the young man 
was obliged to make him a liberal payment. 

Sometimes when the Medicine Lodge was being made, a 
young man might have a slit cut in his shoulder, and tie to the 
shoulder a shield, which he wore through the ceremony. 

When, at the Medicine Lodge or at any other time, men 
swung to the pole in this way, if they broke away, then they 
stopped and retired. 

Sometimes a young man might take a buffalo-skull to the 
top of a hill, and from sunrise to sunset stand on it without 
eating or drinking, all the time looking at the sun. Sometimes, 
toward evening, friends would go up to the place to bring him 
down to the camp, and would find him so stiff from standing 
on the skull all day in one position that he could hardly move. 
When he did this, he stood facing the east in the morning, and 
turned, following the sun until it disappeared in the west. 

The young man might stand in the same way on the ground, 
motionless, except as he turned with the sun. He might rest 
four times during the day, sitting down for a little while. This 
was regarded as an easy thing to do. 

A young man might ask an old man if he knew how to stand 
in the water. The old man, if he assented, took him to a stream, 
and led him into the water until it was about up to his chest, 
and there'he must stand all night. While standing there, the 
man might see some good sign, or something that was bad. If 
what he saw portended evil, he usually gave up, and left the 
water. 

Once in a Medicine Lodge ceremony the father of Stacey 
Riggs, looking at the top of the center-pole, saw there himself. 
His fingers were cut, and his head hair gone; he stopped danc¬ 
ing. His wife asked him why he had stopped, and he told her 
what he had seen. Afterward, when he was killed by the Utes— 
in 1864, not far from Bent’s stockade, on the Purgatoire River 
—he was scalped, and his fingers were cut, just as he had seen 
himself in the Medicine Lodge. 

84 

CERTAIN CAMP CUSTOMS 

Old Whirlwind, as a young man, sleeping on a high hill for 
four nights, without food or drink, had a vision in which he saw 
himself, but with gray hair. This was a sign to him that he 
should live until he was old—until his hair was gray. He did 
live until his hair turned gray, and died an old man. He was 
in the Sauk and Fox fight, and was in great danger there. 

A friend who starved himself twice, once lying down and once 
standing up, prayed that he might be helped through his life, 
might live to old age, and that whenever they had war he might 
kill an enemy. It has been so up to this time. When he went up 
on the hill to perform this sacrifice, he was told to stand up, 
but that just at noon he might sit down for a short time. After 
he had been standing for nearly twenty-four hours he was so 
stiff and sore he could hardly sit down. Each man who went 
out to perform this sacrifice was instructed in what he must 
do by older persons who knew—who themselves had been 
taught, and had made this sacrifice. Such instructors were not 
necessarily possessed of spiritual powers. 

85 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

W E know little about the early relations of the dif¬ 
ferent groups that make up the Cheyennes of 
today. That the tribe is composed of Tsistsistas 
and the Suhtai, who were later absorbed by them, we are quite 
sure, but some old men have declared that originally there was 
a third tribe, Hets tsi o mis' tane, pipestem men. It has been 
suggested by one man that this last name was possibly the 
same as Issi o me' tane. 

Old people have told me that from 1845 t0 1865 many Suhtai 
still lived in the camp and practiced their old-time ways. Their 
clothing differed somewhat from that of the Cheyennes. The 
men did not wear breechclouts, but wore flaps hanging from 
the belt in front. The men’s leggings were made each one from 
a whole deerskin, drawn tight about the leg above the knee 
but very loose below, folded over double in front, and tied 
behind in a bow-knot. The moccasin was sewed on one side 
only, being all in one piece, with a parfleche sole sewed on 
outside. 

The woman’s dress in front came up to the chest, and then 
the skin of the dress was turned over and hung down in a flap. 
At the left shoulder the material of the dress was gathered in a 
bunch, and a strip of skin passed over that shoulder, to sup¬ 
port the dress on that side. The arms and shoulders were bare. 
The Suhtai women did not sew their dresses, but tied them 
together at the sides with strings. 

Short Old Man, one of the last of the Suhtai, could not 
endure the smell of coffee. He and his wife did not like to ride 
on horseback, but usually walked and led the horse. Once while 

86 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

crossing the Arkansas River, Short Old Man fell off his horse. 
He said that the water sweeping under him made him dizzy. 
Once he was persuaded to go on a buffalo hunt on horseback, 
but as soon as his horse began to run, he fell off. When he and 
his wife became very old, the Cheyennes used to put them on a 
travois when the camp moved. This always made them sick. 
Short Old Man always smoked “red-willow” bark with his 
tobacco, and placed a little powdered buffalo-chip on the filling 
of the pipe. These two never wore blankets, but always buffalo 
robes; in winter with the hair on, and sheets, so called, tanned 
without hair, in summer. They bathed every morning, winter 
or summer, cutting a hole in the ice if necessary. After their 
bath they returned to the lodge and made the fire. 

Short Old Man wore the Suhtai flap and leggings, and his 
wife wore a buffalo-skin dress painted red. The man wore his 
hair rolled up on his head and coiled in a peak on his forehead; 
his wife wore her hair loose. They painted themselves with old 
Indian earth paint, and never used the new colors that the 
Cheyennes traded for at Bent’s Fort. Their ways must have 
been notably different from those of most of the Cheyennes, 
for old people now relate that as very little children they used 
to run away from these Suhtai through fear. The man carried 
a quiver of buffalo-skin. His left arm was cross-scarred from 
wrist to shoulder, showing where he had removed strips of skin 
in sacrifice. 

Since the Suhtai existed as a separate tribe up to 1831, we 
may assume that not a few of the original tribe members sur¬ 
vived up to the year 1870 or later; and in accounts of fights 
between white troops and Cheyennes, we sometimes read of 
the killing of old men or women whose dress suggests that they 
were of the original Suhtai. Such a woman was killed at the 
fight of Summit Springs in 1869. 

After the tribal groups had coalesced, all the people of the 
whole Cheyenne camp usually met together at least once a year 
at certain important religious festivals. The great camp was 

87 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

arranged in a wide circle with the lodges three or four deep, 
the opening of the circle being to the east or southeast. 

In those days there were ten groups or divisions of the tribes, 
which in 1902 I stated were clans, that is to say, bodies of 
kindred, supposed to be descendants of a common ancestor. 
Further investigation extended over a dozen or fifteen years 
has led me to modify this conclusion. Certain very old men 
have told me that they have always heard that in the earliest 
times of which anything is known there were the three divisions 
of the tribe, Hevataniu, Suhtai, and Omissis, and that all the 
others have split off from them. The statement made by Perrin 
du Lac, who spoke of these people as in three villages, Chaguy- 
enne, Chousa, and Ouisy, seems to point in the same direc¬ 
tion. Yet this means little, for he speaks only of the villages 
that he met and heard of, while the traditions of Cheyenne, 
Sioux, and Arikara tell of a time after the Cheyenne had 
reached the Missouri River, when their villages were many and 
widely scattered. 

Most old people who tell of these divisions or bands agree 
that they were ten in number, including the Suhtai, yet old 
men differ as to the position in the camp-circle occupied by 
these different groups, each of which had its own place in the 
circle, all its members camping together. These differences of 
memory seem to indicate that the group places in the circle 
were not firmly fixed and may have changed from time to time. 

While there are differences of opinion as to the positions in 
the circle which the groups occupied, it is generally agreed that 
the group I vis tsi nth” pah pitched its lodges immediately 
south of the opening of the circle, and the group Omissis 
camped immediately north of the opening. The four men 
quoted below for the order of these group positions were prob¬ 
ably bom between 1809 and 1835. Porcupine Bull was a 
Southern Cheyenne, Tangle Hair and Elk River were Northern 
Cheyennes, while White Bull was formerly in the South, but 

88 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

spent his latter years in the North. This is the order given for 
the period 1850-1860 by these four men: 

Porcupine Bull Tangle Hair White Bull Elk River 

1. I vis tsi nih” pah I vis tsi niW' pa I vis tsi nih” pah I vis tsi nih ,f pa 

2. Suh' tai Ho iv i man ah” Issid me' tan e Hon is' ku (?) 

3. Wuh' td piu Hev' a tan iu Hot' no wd Odhk to un' a 

4. Hev' d tan iu Iss i 6 me' tan iu Ho ivi man dh' Suh' tdya 

5. Ho iv i md ndh' Wuh' ta piu Mdh sih” ko ta Is si 0 me' tan e 

6. Is' si 6 me' tan e Ohk' to on' a Ohk td kun ah' Ma sih” ko ta 

7. Ho}' no wd Hoj' no wa Wuh' td piu Wuh' ta pi u 

8. Ohk' to 6 nd Suh'tai Hev'a tan iu Tut o' i ma nah' (?) 

9. Mdh sih” ko ta Mdh sih” ko ta Suh' ta ya Hi' vd tan iu 

(Ho tdm i tan' iu) 

10. 0 mis' sis 0 mis' sis 0 mis' is 0 mis' sis 

The order in which these group divisions were camped fol- 
lowed the numbers given in the table. No. i was immediately 
south of the opening in the east or southeast side of the main 
camp-circle, the lodges of each group being placed close to¬ 
gether. No. 2 was south and west of No. i, and so on follow¬ 
ing around the circle to Omissis. Standing within the circle, not 
in the center but toward its south border and forty or fifty 
yards from the circle of lodges, were the two sacred lodges in 
which were kept the sacred medicines of the Cheyennes, the 
arrows, Ma huts', in the easternmost, and the sacred hat, or 
bonnet, Issiwun, in the westernmost. Except for these two, 
which were usually marked with double crosses—signifying 
grasshoppers or dragonflies—there were no other lodges within 
the circle, save when on special occasions—as for a dance, a 
council, or some other important event—a large lodge might 
be put up in the center of the circle. 

It may be conjectured that the fashion of camping in a circle 
is comparatively modern and was not adopted until the per¬ 
manent houses, which the Cheyennes once occupied, had meas¬ 
urably been abandoned and the people had become nomads, 
following the buffalo. The practice may have been borrowed 

from some other tribe, for it was practiced by many of the 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Plains people, for example, by the Arapahoes and Kiowas, who 
were early associates of the Cheyennes, but not by the Coman- 
ches, with whom also the Cheyennes were often in contact. 

THE CHEYENNE CAMP CIRCLE 

Numbers indicate positions of different tribal divisions. A, lodge 
of medicine arrows; B, lodge of the buffalo cap, issiwun. 

The most aged men of the Cheyennes from about the year 
1890 on for twenty-odd years have declared to me that in old 
times the different groups were supposed to be bodies of kin¬ 
dred, descendants of a common ancestor, but this was not 
thought to be true of the Suhtai. The further fact that some 
informants declare that some of the named divisions have split 
off from other groups implies that the formation of the groups 

90 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

is comparatively recent. The amount of testimony received 
from a number of old men as to the practice of exogamy in old 
times cannot be ignored, yet at the same time the evidence of a 
clan system is not conclusive. 

In old times, these old men declare, the rule forbidding mar¬ 
riage within the tribal group was absolute, and not to be vio¬ 
lated. Descent was matrilineal. A woman born into the group 
remained all her life a member of that group, and her children 
were members of it. When a man married a girl he went to live 
with her group, though always known by his own group name. 
His position in this group was what he himself made it. The 
famous Black Kettle, who was killed in the so-called battle of 
the Washita in 1868, was a Suhtai who married a girl of Wuh- 
tapiu. He went to live with that group and became its chief. 
His children belonged to their mother’s group, and not to his 
own. The reason now given for this rule is that there was 
always a possibility that a man might throw away his wife and 
take a new one, and that in such a case the wife and children 
must be cared for by the woman’s group; that is to say, by her 
relations. When the woman’s sons grew up and married, each 
went to live with his wife’s group. Rarely, if the father was 
divorced from his wife and took a new one from another group, 
he might take with him to the group he was now to live with his 
eldest boy, if he was approaching manhood; but this boy was 
always spoken of as belonging to the group of his mother. A 
man might live in several groups during his life, a woman in 
but one. 

Each tribal group or division had its own special tabus, cere¬ 
monies, and special medicines connected with the group cere¬ 
monies, but it is not now possible to learn much about these 
ancient practices, because the rigid observance of these customs 
passed out of use long ago. It is stated that when the tribe 
lived in the North they followed closely the customs that had 
been handed down to them, but with the migration, the break¬ 
ing up into separated settlements, and the invasion of their 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

old country by civilization, these old customs were neglected, 
forgotten, and lost. In fact, the ancient customs and beliefs 
as to relationships and groups have been so very greatly modi¬ 
fied that it is now impossible to find among young people any¬ 
one who knows about these old matters. Such young people 
positively assert today that the tribal descent is in the male line, 
and it cannot be doubted that present-day investigation would 
lead people to that conclusion. The old men up to twenty or 
twenty-five years ago, however, were unanimous in saying that 
the children belonged to the mother’s group. 

In the effort to learn something definite about exogamy 
among the Cheyenne groups, I made—about 1902—detailed 
inquiry concerning more than fifty marriages of old people, 
with the result that in all cases, except where the Suhtai were 
concerned, the man and the woman had belonged to different 
groups. Their customs permitted the Suhtai to marry among 
themselves and it was even said that they sometimes married 
their own relatives. A case is given of a Suhtai man, Long 
Neck, who married his aunt. Among the Cheyennes, on the other 
hand, there still exists the strongest feeling against marriage 
between relatives, no matter how distant, and by many old 
men the clans or groups are still considered as bodies of kindred 
—descendants of a common ancestor. Many old men have 
declared to me that the members of a clan consider all of the 
clan their relations and it is certain that usually marriages took 
place between men and women who belonged to different 
groups. In old times if a young man wished to marry some girl 
in his own clan the old people, when they learned of it, asked 
him what he meant and whether he wished to marry his 
relative. 

About the year 1900 a Northern Cheyenne came down to 
Oklahoma and persuaded a daughter of Hunter to elope with 
him. The young man took the girl up to Clinton, Oklahoma, 
where his aunt lived and stopped there in order to make the 
marriage formal by presenting horses and other gifts. William 

92 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

Fletcher of Darlington, an educated Cheyenne and half-brother 
to Hunter, was sent to Clinton to represent the girl’s family at 
the intended marriage. When Fletcher reached the place, how¬ 
ever, and found out who the Northern Cheyenne was, he said: 
“I will have nothing to do with this marriage. This young man 
is kin to our family and is trying to marry one of his own 
relations. That cannot be, and I will have nothing to do with 
the matter.” 

One of the first things to be done in considering a marriage 
was to find out whether any relationship—no matter how dis¬ 
tant—existed between the young man and the girl. If there 
was found to be any kinship whatever, the marriage was for¬ 
bidden. The rules with regard to intermarriage or even courting 
among relatives were seldom infringed. Girls were closely 
watched as well as the young men who came to court them, 
and if one of these young men was related to the girl, both he 
and the girl were warned. Often young people did not know 
very much about these degrees of relationship and were likely 
to make mistakes. From hearing the talk of their mothers the 
girls were likely to be better informed than the boys. If a girl 
knew or learned of any relationship between herself and a 
suitor she always told him of it and warned him not to come 
again. If, through inadvertence or lack of knowledge of his 
relationship, a young man tried to court a girl who was related 
to him or even a member of the same division, the old women 
spoke to him and the young man, warned of the mistake, was 
much mortified. 

It is said that the men of 0 iv' I ma nah' were the first to 
marry within their own division, but that this did not begin 
until after the Sand Creek massacre. The cholera of 1849, 
which decimated some of the camps, may have had something 
to do with the breaking up of old customs. 

1. I vists' tsi nW pah. This word is said to mean “dosed gullet” 
or windpipe, or “closed aorta.” The Northern Cheyennes say that 
the last name was given because on one occasion when a war party 

93 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

was without a pipe they made one from the scorched or dried aorta 
of a buffalo. The explanation of the term “closed gullet” refers to the 
killing by a man of a medicine beaver, the eating of which caused 
all who partook of it to choke and thereafter made the flesh of the 
beaver, a beaver-skin, or anything pertaining to a beaver, tabu to 
these people and to their descendants. 

The women of this group sit on the ground with their feet to the 
left and are called the left-foot sitters —Na miihkt si vd iu. In all 
other groups the women sit with the feet to the right. 

Ivists — aorta; nth’ pah signifies stopping or closing a hole. 

2. Otv'imanah'. Scabby band; a trivial story is told about this 
group, whose horses one winter are said to have been afflicted with 
mange or scab. 

3. Hev' a tan iu. In one place Mr. Petter calls these people “pelt 
men” or “fur men,” and in another place “rope men.” The derivation 
has been given me as from Heva' 0, a hair rope, and he tan, man. 
This group was so called because they used ropes twisted of hair, 
while the other people for the most part used lines of rawhide. The 
old women of the present southern group made hair ropes by twist¬ 
ing buffalo forehead hair on a wooden hook. Some people say that 
the people of this group were more devoted to catching horses than 
others and were constantly making war journeys against the Kiowas 
and Comanches, and for these journeys were always making hair 
ropes to use on the captured horses. This seems to imply that the 
name was given since this group moved south, which probably is not 
true. 

There are various trivial explanations of the name. 

4. Issio me' tan iu. Hill people or men on the ridge. Presumably 
given from some supposed preference of this group for camping on 
high ground. Isiom', hill; hetan, man. 

5. Wu! ta piu. This is given as a Sioux word meaning eaters and 
is thus an equivalent of Omissis. It is said that one-half of these 
people had the name Wutapiu and the other half were called Ho- 
dhkts' i tan, logmen—so called because it was their custom, when cold 
weather came on, to go into the thick timber and remain there all 
winter without moving about. While camped there—if the snow be¬ 
came deep—they chopped down large cottonwood trees in order to 

94 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

provide twigs, bark, and browse with which to feed their horses. 
Camping places such as these, which show the stumps of trees felled 
when the snow was deep, are occasionally seen in the former range 
of the Cheyennes, but I do not know that the practice was confined 
to the Cheyennes; in fact, one has heard of it among the Sioux as 
well. The famous old Bark, Ugly Face—Abert—belonged to this 
group. 

6. Hof no wa. Poor people. I know of no explanation of this 
name. 

7. Ohk to unna. This name is explained as lower jaws protruding; 
that is to say, undershot. It is said also to carry the idea of the jaws 
moving, some say eating so eagerly that the lower jaw protrudes. It 
has also been explained to mean people drifted away. 

A dance peculiar to this group, said to have been practiced by the 
young men before they started out to war, was known as the deer 
dance. It was held before a special lodge known as the deer lodge, 
which was not pinned together in front, but was open to the east. 
Some of the described practices suggest the Massaum ceremony, for 
lines of cottonwood branches extended for about thirty yards to the 
east from the front of the lodge. 

The dancers carried each a shield and a lance and were painted 
yellow over the whole body, except one man, whose body was painted 
black, and who was known as the black deer. Each man held in his 
hand with the lance shaft the dried tail of a mule-deer. The dancers 
imitated the action of the deer, and the ceremony was for protection 
against wounds or death in war as well as against sickness. It is 
understood that the dance has not been practiced since about 1870 
and its details are forgotten. 

8. Siih' tai. The meaning of this tribal name seems to have been 
forgotten. Some old men have said that it was from Issuht; inter¬ 
preted as ridge or hill. Other definitions imply a speech difficult to 
understand, or perhaps talk like the cry or grunt uttered by buffalo 
in the rutting season. Willis Rowland, however, declares that the 
word seems to contain the meaning of backward or behind, and Mr. 
Petter feels confident that it contains this idea and may very likely 
mean “people left behind.” 

9. Mah sih' ko ta. This term has been defined as lying on the side 

95 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

with the knees drawn up. Mr. Petter gives it as reclining with one 
knee bent and the foot over it, and says that it is from the same root 
as the word cricket, ma sis kot. 

This group was characterized by an unusual number of gray-haired 
children. It was finally absorbed by the soldier organization, Ho- 
tamitaniu, and is now seldom spoken of, though perfectly well 
remembered. 

io. 6 mis’ sis. Eaters. This, the largest group of the Cheyennes, 
never moved south in numbers. It now constitutes the northern sec¬ 
tion of the tribe, which in numbers almost equals the southern, and 
is made up almost wholly of Omissis and of Suhtai. The southern 
people used to say that the name was applied to the group because 
thev were not scrupulous as to their food—which is only another 
way of saying that their food habits did not agree with those of the 
people who gave the name. They would eat anything. They are said 
to have preferred tainted meat, and a lodge owner who possessed 
some meat that had begun to spoil would invite friends to a feast as 
to something especially delicate. As lately as the middle of the last 
century it is said that buffalo humps were kept until they had begun 
to spoil and then were cooked. 

Other men say that the name was applied because the men of this 
group were especially active and energetic, were successful hunters 
and usually had abundant food—plenty to eat. 

As with many other group names this one was perhaps at first 
applied in derision, as a nickname, but has been so constantly used 
that the term has lost the significance it once had. 

Besides the names of divisions or clans there are or were 
many other families, camps, and groups—people who remained 
together for a time and at length came to receive an association 
name or nickname which might later be used as well to desig¬ 
nate their descendants. 

Most of these names were no doubt originally applied in 
order to identify the various camps which in early days were 
scattered from the watershed of the Red River of the North as 
far west as the Rocky Mountains, and perhaps from the Yel¬ 
lowstone River south nearly to the Arkansas River. In primi- 

96 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

tive times, and indeed up to the end of the Indian wars, the 
tribe during the greater part of the year was divided into small 
companies, for each of which the important work in life was 
self-support—the task of securing food sufficient to carry it on 
from day to day. These camps wandered about from place to 
place, sometimes coalescing with another camp, occasionally 
losing families or individuals, who went off to visit temporarily, 
or, perhaps, permanently to unite with other camps. Occasion¬ 
ally two of these camps met, remained together for many 
months, and then separated to go in different directions. The 
different camps were often reported on and discussed by their 
tribes fellows and the need early grew up of some means by 
which to identify these scattered camps. So they soon came to 
receive names, sometimes that of the chief of the camp, some¬ 
times a nickname derived from some characteristic of the peo¬ 
ple or some characteristic of one of the people. Indians are 
notably quick to observe a peculiarity, and at once to seize on 
some salient characteristic of an individual, an animal, or a 
group of living creatures, and from this characteristic to apply 
some expressive name. 

New camp names were growing up all the time, as the Rev. 
Mr. Petter has pointed out, and as I stated nearly thirty years 
ago. Many of those now existing have not had a long life. 
When the people were migratory, as in the old days, their camp 
groups were ever shifting and new names were constantly being 
applied to the groups that were forming. 

Many of these names have their origin in most trivial hap¬ 
penings. Thus An sko' vin is —narrow nose bridge, Petter— 
were a family who seemed narrow between the eyes or had the 
eyes close together. In later times Broken Dish or Crow White, 
Wohk' pi uhk o, who for a time lived in the North and later 
came south with Dull Knife, was their leader. 

Mohk sta' he tan iu, commonly called Ute people—literally, 
black men—is a name that has long been in the tribe. The 
ancestor of the group, Mo e' ma han', Elk Man, is said to have 

97 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

been dark in color, like the Ute. Most of his descendants are 
still dark and with very large noses. They are not thought to 
have had relationship with any Utes. 

A family name Mot' si yu, which I have referred to as a 
clan name, Mooney calls the equivalent of Monsoni and Dr. 
Petter follows him. A number of old women declare that this 
name is not that of a Cheyenne division. The word is Sioux— 
the name of a little group of Sioux who a long time ago joined 
the Cheyenne. 

The name Ta to' i man ah' is explained by a recent story 
that the leader of this division had killed people of his own 
tribe, and that thereafter his people avoided others of the tribe. 

Many years ago orders had been given that no one should 
disturb the buffalo, and the soldiers had been directed to keep 
everyone in camp. They were waiting for the buffalo to get 
together in such numbers that, in the chase, everyone might 
have an equal chance to secure food. Buffalo Chief was in 
charge of the Dog Soldiers. A certain man had disobeyed the 
order not to hunt and had gone out secretly and killed buffalo 
and brought in the meat. The Dog Soldiers went to his lodge 
to destroy it as a punishment for his disobedience. While the 
soldiers were cutting up the lodge the owner came out and 
struck one of them. Buffalo Chief, the leader, seeing his young 
soldiers being struck, shot at the man and killed him. The wife 
ran out of the lodge with a butcher knife in her hand and he 
shot and killed her. 

Buffalo Chief was now ordered to leave the camp. He 
gathered together all his relations and friends and they went 
off and for a long time camped by themselves, for now Buffalo 
Chief was an outlaw. At length, after they had been out away 
from the main camp for a long time, the people of Buffalo 
Chief’s camp began to avoid the other people whom they met; 
were shy about speaking to them. Hence they were called 
Tatoimanah, the shy or backward band. This happened in the 
spring at the Black Hills near Nov i vdos'. 

98 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

Later Buffalo Chief again did something like this. 

Buffalo Chief was well liked by many people and more and 
more families came to join his camp. At this time they were on 
the Platte at the mouth of Crow Creek. The main camp was 
below, where a little stream called Outer Edge Creek flows into 
the Platte. 

Two of Buffalo Chief’s men went down to the main camp. 
One of them was wearing a porcupine-quilled robe that he had 
borrowed from Buffalo Chief’s son. The two men reached the 
main camp after night and found people there drinking some 
whiskey that they had got. A woman got drunk and her hus¬ 
band accused her of having been caught by the two young men 
from Buffalo Chief’s camp, but nothing certain was known of 
it. Four men left the main camp to go to Buffalo Chief’s camp 
to get satisfaction for this. These men were Bear Louse, Yellow 
Bull, Gray Tangle Hair, and Little Man, but Little Man did 
not reach the camp. 

When they got to Buffalo Chief’s camp, because of the robe 
that he owned, they accused Differently Colored, Buffalo 
Chief’s son, of having committed the crime. The son denied 
that he had been away from camp, but the men from the main 
camp insisted that they were right, but said if he would give 
them certain horses that he owned they would forgive what he 
had done. When the three men had walked up to him and 
spoken to him he was out getting his horses. They told him 
what horses they wanted—a certain fast horse and a mare. 

He said to them, “You are accusing me of something that I 
have not done,” but they kept talking to him. He cut out of the 
bunch the horse that was fast and said to them, “You cannot 
have this one, but you can have any of the others.” They 
insisted that they wanted this horse. 

While they were disputing Buffalo Chief came out of his 
lodge and went to where the three men were talking to his son. 
When he got there he spoke to Bear Louse and said, “My son 

99 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

has offered you any horse that you like out of the bunch, but 
that particular one I do not think he will give up.” 

Bear Louse said: “Ah, I have been looking for you ever since 
you took to killing people. I have been to war in my time and 
have beaten enemies over the head with my whip. I shall have 
this horse, which is the only one I want. I will knock you sense¬ 
less too.” 

Buffalo Chief turned about and went into his lodge, took his 
gun by the muzzle and put it under his blanket so that it would 
not be seen that he had a gun, and came out again holding it so. 
He said to Bear Louse, “You had better take one of those 
horses down there; this one you cannot have.” 

Bear Louse said: “I will have this one; I will have him dead 
or alive. If he is not given to me I will shoot the horse.” 

Buffalo Chief said, “If you shoot the horse I shall shoot 
you.” 

Bear Louse shot at the horse and almost at the sound of his 
gun Buffalo Chief’s gun sounded and Bear Louse fell over 
dead. 

Differently Colored shot Yellow Bull and killed him. Gray 
Tangle Hair started to run and had crossed a ravine when Buf¬ 
falo Chief shot at him and broke his leg. 

Buffalo Chief had a peculiar way of handling his gun. After 
loading it he used to hit the stock on the ground. He never 
missed his aim. 

Some other family and camp names are: 

Na ko' i ma nah. The bear people, may have received the name 
from some important individual in the camp. 

Wdhk' po tsit —commonly called “white crafty” or “white cunning,” 
and also sometimes spoken of as the White Wolf band. These people 
had the reputation of being more or less ill conditioned and disputa¬ 
tious, quarrelsome and hard to get along with. The name was con¬ 
sidered a bad name because of this reputation. The founder of the 
family was Wdhk po tsit' si ma han, and the name was given him on 
account of his bad disposition. The family was once large. 

ioo 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 

No ta min '—facing the north—may perhaps have had some rela¬ 
tion to the Arapahoes or to the people who were commonly known as 
Gros Ventres of the prairie. 

Ho nis' ku. Elk River long ago gave me this as a group name, but 
I have nothing about it except the name. 

The readiness with which nicknames, applied to camps, 
bands, and sections of tribes, may grow up is indicated by a 
number of local names which have been given and become cur¬ 
rent among the Northern Cheyennes within comparatively few 
years. Thus, the Lower Tongue River Cheyennes are called 
Scabby Band, because, it is said, Badger, a principal man 
among them, had a skin disease. Those who live on Upper 
Tongue River are called the Backward or Shy Band, because 
they prefer to camp by themselves. The Lame Deer Indians 
are called Black Lodges, because they are on especially friendly 
terms with the band of Crows known as Black Lodges, while 
the Rosebud Cheyennes are called the Ree band, because 
among them there are several men who are Arikaras or have 
much Ree blood. 

The last seventy-five years have wholly transformed the 
Cheyennes, and the diseases introduced by the whites and the 
wars that have been carried on and the changed conditions 
generally have destroyed great numbers of the tribe. It is said 
that the cholera of 1849 almost put an end to the group Ma- 
sihkota, while perhaps half of the whole tribe died. Ohkto- 
unna were nearly exterminated and so were the Hofnowa. 
There are left still many of the Hevataniu, Suhtai, Omissis, and 
Oivimanah. It is said that there are many women of the Ivists- 
tsinihpa left alive, but few men. On the other hand, the condi¬ 
tions that have existed since 1890 or 1895 have so greatly 
reduced the death rate among the Cheyennes that they are now 
perhaps nearly as numerous as they were reported to be by 
Morse in the year 1822, and are likely to increase. 

101 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

P EOPLE who know of the Indian only from books think 
of him solely as a warrior. As they have heard of him 
chiefly when he is at war, they do not realize that this 
phase of his life occupies but a small part of his existence, or 
that aside from this he has a communal and family life on 
which his well-being depends. He has a wife and little ones 
whom he loves as we do ours; parents and grandparents whom 
he respects for their experience and the wisdom derived from 
it; chiefs and rulers to whose words he listens and whose 
advice he follows, and spiritual directors, who tell him about 
the powers which rule the earth, the air, and the waters, and 
advise him in his relation to the forces of the unseen world. In 
other words, his is a complex life, not devoted solely to one 
pursuit, but full of varied and diverse interests. He must pro¬ 
vide food for his family, must maintain his position in the 
camp, and must uphold the standing of the tribe in its relations 
to other peoples. All these duties call for the exercise of a dis¬ 
cretion and self-restraint in his living which can be acquired 
only as a result of some system of education. 

Even those who have had much to do with Indians hardly 
realize that their children are taught. They see the little boys 
constantly playing about the camp, engaged in sham battles, 
or swimming in the stream, or, in winter, sliding down hill on 
sleds made of buffalo-ribs, or throwing their javelin-like darts, 
or practicing with the bow and arrow, or stealthily hunting 
small birds or rabbits; and, contrasting this life of freedom 
with that of the white child, who spends much of his time in the 
schoolhouse, they assume that the Indian child grows up with¬ 
out instruction and without guidance. Yet no group of people 

102 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

could possibly live together in peace and harmony if each mem¬ 
ber of it followed his own inclinations without regard to the 
wishes and rights of his fellows. Like other people, the Indians 
have sufficient care for their own comfort to see to it that no 
member of the tribe shall unduly interfere with this, or infringe 
on the rights of others. 

Among the Cheyennes the men were energetic, brave, and 
hardy; the women virtuous, devoted, and masterful. Though 
they were savages of the stone age, their code of sexual moral¬ 
ity was that held by the most civilized peoples. Such fathers 
and such mothers were likely to produce and rear children like 
themselves: impatient of control or restraint, perhaps, and 
fierce and cruel in taking revenge for injuries, yet after all 
possessing many of the qualities which we wish to see in our 
children: courage, independence, perseverance—manliness. 
These qualities they inherited, but how were they brought out? 

The Indian child was carefully trained, and from early child¬ 
hood. Its training began before it walked, and continued 
through its child life. The training consisted almost wholly of 
advice and counsel, and the child was told to do, or warned to 
refrain from doing, certain things, not because they were right 
or wrong, but because the act or failure to act was for his 
advantage or disadvantage in after life. He was told that to 
pursue a certain course would benefit him, and for that reason 
was advised to follow it. His pride and ambition were appealed 
to, and worthy examples among living men in the tribe were 
pointed out for emulation. Of abstract principles of right and 
wrong, as we understand them, the Indian knew nothing. He 
had never been told of them. The instructor of the Indian child 
did not attempt to entice him to do right by presenting the hope 
of heaven, nor to frighten him from evil by the fear of hell; 
instead, he pointed out that the respect and approbation of 
one’s fellow men were to be desired, while their condemnation 
and contempt were to be dreaded. The Indian lived in public. 
He was constantly under the eyes of the members of his tribe, 

103 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

and most of his doings were known to them. As he was eager 
for the approval of his fellows, and greedy of their praise, so 
public opinion promised the reward he hoped for and threat¬ 
ened the punishment he feared. 

Indians never whip their children, nor punish them in any 
way. Sometimes a mother, irritated by the resistance of a yell¬ 
ing child, will give it an impatient shake by one arm as she 
drags it along, but I have never witnessed anything in the 
nature of the punishment of a child by a parent. 

When a Cheyenne baby was born it was warmly wrapped up, 
and for a time carefully protected from the weather. During 
the first two or three months of its existence, if the weather was 
cold or stormy, the child was carried about in its mother’s arms, 
and was not laced on a baby-board or cradle until it had be¬ 
come so hardy as to be able to endure some degree of exposure. 
Old people say that in earlier days, when the tribe lived in 
lodges, and moved about over the prairie, a large proportion 
of the children born in winter died. It can readily be under¬ 
stood that while living this nomadic life it might have been 
very difficult to protect new-born children from the cold. 

As soon as the child had become strong and hardy enough, 
and the weather had grown milder, it was lashed on the cradle 
or baby-board. During a good part of the time it was carried 
about on its board, which, when the mother put it down, was 
sometimes hung up to a lodge-pole, or leaned against the side 
of the lodge in the camp. When the child was not on the board, 
and was not scrambling about on the ground, it was carried on 
its mother’s back, her blanket or robe holding the little body 
close to hers, passing around her shoulders, and being held by 
her in front. The child’s head was a little higher than the 
mother’s; its hips lay between her shoulders, its heels showing 
through the blanket just above her loins. In such a position the 
child seemed perfectly comfortable and at home. It ate, if the 
mother passed food to it over her shoulder, or slept, its head 

104 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

rolling about on its neck, as its mother moved, like a toy 
Chinese mandarin. 

The mothers played with their babies, and tried to keep 
them amused and quiet. 

When the camp moved, the women carried the babies on 
their backs, or hung the boards on saddles or travois poles, 
while the little boys old enough to look out for themselves ran 
along on foot, or rode colts or horses, as the case might be. The 
little girls rode by twos or threes on top of the packs. Many 
children, however,—too young to be allowed to go without the 
guidance of some older person, yet too old and big to be carried 
by an overworked woman who was busy driving and minding 
half a dozen pack-ponies—were carried on a travois, confined 
in a cage made of willow twigs and shaped like a sweat-hou?e. 
The flat bottom rested across the travois, which was hauled by 
some steady old packhorse. In old times, when many children 
were carried in travois hauled by dogs, runaways sometimes 
occurred, though not often. A dog, tempted by the sudden 
appearance of game, might start off in pursuit, and, tipping 
over the travois, leave the child howling on the prairie, to be 
recovered by the alarmed mother. Usually, however, the mother 
led the dog that hauled her baby. 

When a little baby reached the age of from three to six 
months, it was time for its ears to be pierced. At the next Medi¬ 
cine Lodge, therefore, or at any great dance or gathering of 
the people, the mother took the child to the place of the meet¬ 
ing; and the father requested the old crier to call out and ask a 
certain named person to pierce the child’s ears. The person 
invited to do this might actually pierce the ears, or might 
merely pierce them ceremonially— i.e., make the motions of 
piercing them. Before doing either, he counted a coup, telling 
of some important act performed in war. If the man merely 
performed the operation ceremonially, the ears might afterward 
be pierced in fact by anyone, without ceremony. As an ac¬ 
knowledgment of the service, the father presented the person 

I0 5 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

with from one to three horses, and perhaps other good presents. 
If a man should have his child’s ears pierced without this cere¬ 
mony, it would create a scandal in the camp. People would say 
that he had no affection for his child. 

In ancient times the person who actually pierced the child’s 
ears made a long cut in the outer margin of the ear, from the 
top nearly to the lobe, and the strip on the outside was wound 
with beads or with brass wire. 

A father who was very fond of his child, and could afford it, 
might have the child’s ears pierced several times. He might give 
a horse each to two or three different men for the same service. 
In one reported case, a man gave eight horses for this purpose. 
Such liberality showed the man’s affection for his child, and 
caused him to be talked about and praised. 

Wealthy people sometimes had their child’s ears pierced even 
before birth, making up an image on the occasion of some great 
dance, and having the ears ceremonially pierced. This was an 
old-time way. 

Occasionally, among tribes on the buffalo plains, we find 
accounts of cases where a father himself has been obliged to 
care for and bring up an unweaned babe, without a woman’s 
help. I have heard of such instances among the Cheyennes. 
Young Woman, who was born in 1830—three years before the 
stars fell—has told me that she was so reared. Her mother was 
an Arapaho, and her father half Cheyenne and half Arapaho. 

When her father was a young man returning from the war¬ 
path, he learned that his wife had run off with another man. 
Instead of returning to the camp, he sent a friend to it to get 
his little baby, and when it was brought to him, he carried it 
from where they were camped, on the head of the Platte River, 
south to Bent’s Fort, on the Arkansas. The baby was un¬ 
weaned, and to support it he killed cows which had calves, and 
cutting out the udders gave them to the child to suck. In the 
same way he killed female deer and antelope, and let the child 
suck the udders. So he nourished her until he reached the Chey- 

106 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

enne camp, where a woman took charge of the child. Afterward 
she lived among the Northern Cheyennes. A like case was that 
of Arapaho Chief, a Northern Cheyenne. 

At first children are called only by pet names. Mok' so is, 
meaning “pot belly,” is a term of endearment for a little boy; 
Mok' si is' is a term for a little girl. 

Such names were used only for very small children. When a 
child reached the age of five or six years, a more formal name 
was given it. A boy might be named after his father’s brother, 
or after his grandfather. A good name was always chosen, 
though he might have also a nickname by which he was com¬ 
monly called. A woman’s daughter might not be named after 
the relations of the mother, but after some relative of the 
father. In fact, children were almost always named after their 
father’s relatives. 

Formal names were always given to children by the time 
they were six or seven years of age, and sometimes much ear¬ 
lier. Not long after a child was born, the father’s brother-in- 
law or father might send for the baby, and when it was brought 
to him might take it in his arms and give it his name, and a 
horse. He would say, “I give him my name,”—Navi'hisht 
nat' a mlt” “my name I give to him”—or the order might be 
reversed. Then he specified which one of his names he wished 
given. 

If the uncle did not send for the child, the father was very 
likely to give the child the name of one of its uncles; or if it 
had no uncle, of its grandfather. A cousin, or some near rela¬ 
tive, notified the man whose name had been given to the child, 
and he was expected to present to it a horse. The name having 
been given and the horse received, the same horse was given 
away when the child’s ears were pierced. 

In the case of a girl, the same thing happened. The father’s 
sister very likely made a cradle for the baby, whom she herself 
wrapped up and put in the cradle, and then gave her a name 
and a pony. After a time the man gave his sister a horse in 

107 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

return for the cradle. If the sister did not offer to name the 
child, the mother might choose a sister-in-law’s name, and she 
was expected to give a horse. The child might be named after a 
brother or a sister killed in battle. Then, of course, no horse 
was given. Names thus remained in families. Such a name the 
child retained until he had made a journey to war. 

The infant’s education began at an early age, its mother 
teaching it first to keep quiet, in order that it should not dis¬ 
turb the older people in the lodge. Crying babies were hushed, 
or, if they did not cease their noise, were taken out of the lodge 
and off into the brush, where their screams would not disturb 
anyone. If older people were talking, and a tiny child entered 
the lodge and began to talk to its mother, she held up her 
finger wamingly, and it ceased to talk, or else whispered its 
wants to her. Thus the first lesson that the child learned was 
one of self-control—self-effacement in the presence of its 
elders. It remembered this all through life. 

This lesson learned, it was not taught much more until old 
enough, if a boy, to have given him a bow and arrows, or if a 
girl, to have a doll, made of deerskin, which she took about 
with her everywhere. Perhaps her mother or aunt made for her 
a tiny board or cradle for the doll, and on this she commonly 
carried it about on her back, after the precise fashion in which 
the women carried their babies. She treated her doll as all chil¬ 
dren do theirs, dressing and undressing it, singing lullabies to 
it, lacing it on its board, and, as time passed, making for it 
various required articles of feminine clothing. Often as a doll 
she had one of the tiny puppies so common in Indian camps, 
taking it when its eyes were scarcely open, and keeping it until 
the dog had grown too active and too much disposed to wander 
to be longer companionable. 

As soon as she was old enough to walk for considerable dis¬ 
tances, the little girl followed her mother everywhere, trotting 
along behind her, or at her side, when she went for water or 
for wood. In all things she imitated her parent. Even when only 

108 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

three or four years of age, she might be seen marching proudly 
along, bowed forward under the apparent weight of a back- 
load of slender twigs, which she carried in exact imitation of 
her mother, who staggered under a heavy burden of stout 
sticks. 

Boys learned to ride almost as soon as they learned to walk. 
From earliest babyhood infants were familiar with horses and 
their motions, and children two or three years of age often rode 
in front of or behind their mothers, clinging to them or to the 
horses’ manes. They thus gained confidence, learned balance, 
and became riders, just as they learned to walk—by practice. 
They did not fear a horse, nor dread a fall, for they began to 
ride old gentle pack-ponies, which never made unexpected 
motions; and by the time they were five or six years of age, 
the boys were riding young colts bareback. Soon after this they 
began to go into the hills to herd the ponies. They early became 
expert in the use of the rope for catching horses. 

Little girls, too, learned to ride at an early age, and while 
they did not have the practice that boys had, they became good 
horsewomen, and in case of need could ride hard and far. 

In summer little girls as well as little boys spent much time 
in the water, and all were good swimmers. The courage of such 
children in the water is shown by an incident in the lives of 
three old women who in 19x2 were still alive on the Tongue 
River Indian Reservation. When ten or twelve years of age, 
these children had been sent down to the stream to get some 
water. Their mothers were at work fleshing buffalo-hides and 
had so many to work on that the hides were beginning to get 
dry. The little girls were sent to get water to keep the hides 
damp until their mothers could flesh them. They went to the 
stream, and one of them proposed that before carrying up the 
water they should take a swim. They took off their clothes and 
ran out onto a fallen tree that projected over the water; and, 
when about to dive in, one of them noticed a hole in the bank 
deep under the water, and proposed that they should see where 

109 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

it led to. They swam under the water into the hole. It was dark 
and nothing could be seen; but the little girls felt something 
large and soft pass by them, going out of the hole as they were 
going in. They went on a few feet and saw a little light and, 
raising their heads, found themselves in a beaver’s house. A 
little frightened by the creature that they had met in the water, 
which was of course a beaver, they did not like to go back and, 
seeing the opening at the top of the house through which light 
filtered, they readily broke a hole through the roof and crept 
out onto the bottom. Here they found themselves in the midst 
of a thick growth of wild roses and had a very difficult time, 
and were much scratched up in getting out of the bushes. This 
must have taken place perhaps between 1850 and i860, and the 
women were Buffalo Wallow Woman, Omaha Woman, and the 
wife of Big Head, who was sister to White Bull. 

Little companies of small boys and girls often went off camp¬ 
ing. The little girls packed the dogs, and moved a little way 
from the camp and there put up their little lodges—made and 
sewed for them by their mothers—arranging them in a circle 
just as did the old people in the big camp. In all that they did 
they imitated their elders. The little boys who accompanied 
them were the men of the mimic camp. 

In the children’s play camps the little girls used tiny lodge- 
poles—often the tall weed-stalks that are used for windbreaks 
about the lodge—and the boys sometimes acted as horses and 
dragged the lodge-poles, or hauled travois with the little babies 
on them. To the sticks they rode as horses, as well as on the 
dogs, they sometimes fixed travois. 

When the lodges were put up the boys used to stand in line, 
and the older girls asked them to choose their mothers. Each 
boy selected the girl who should be his mother, and they played 

together. The girls played in this way until they were pretty 

well grown, fourteen or fifteen years of age; but the boys gave 

it up when they were younger, for they strove to be men early, 

and usually soon after they had reached their twelfth year they 

no 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

began to try to hunt buffalo, killing calves as soon as they could 
ride well and were strong enough to bend the bow. 

Sometimes two camps of children, one representing some 
hostile tribe, were established near each other. The boys of one 
camp would go on the war-path against those of the other, and 
they fought like seasoned men, taking captives and counting 
coups. They tied bunches of buffalo-hair to poles for scalps, 
and after the fight the successful party held dances of rejoicing. 
They carried lances made of willow branches, shields made of 
bent willow shoots with the leafy twigs hanging down like 
feathers, and little bows and arrows, the latter usually slender, 
straight weed-stalks, often with a prickly-pear thorn for a 
point. After the camp had been pitched, another party of boys 
might attack it, and while its men were fighting and charging 
the enemy, trying to drive them back, its women, if they 
thought the battle was going against them, would pull down the 
lodges, pack up their possessions, and begin to run away. In 
such a battle the men might often shoot each other, and when 
the wounded fell, men and women rushed out and dragged them 
back, so that the enemy should not touch them and count a 
coup. If the village was captured, all the food its people had 
was taken from them. This often consisted chiefly of roots 
gathered by the women, and tender grass-shoots, of which they 
often gathered a great deal. 

The little boys when playing at going to war rode sticks for 
horses, and each one also led or dragged another stick, which 
represented another horse, the boy’s war-horse. If an attack 
was threatened by a pretended war-party, those attacked 
changed horses, and leaving their common horses and their 
things together in one place, they rode out to meet the enemy 
and the battle began. The opposing forces charged and re¬ 
treated forward and backward, just as in a real battle. Each 
party knew or suspected where the others had left their things, 
and if one group drove back the other, it might capture its 

hi 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

opponent’s horses and other property and thus win a great 
victory. 

In their pretended buffalo hunts also the boys rode sticks for 
horses, and lashed them with their quirts to make them run 
fast. Sometimes, when buffalo were close by and the real 
hunters of the big camp killed them near at hand, the little 
boys rode their stick horses out to the killing ground and 
returned to the play camp with loads of actual meat tied be¬ 
hind them on their horses. Some boys merely picked up pieces 
of the meat that had been thrown away, but often a good- 
natured hunter would give the lads pieces of meat to use in 
their camp. 

If there were no buffalo about, perhaps some children went 
out from the camp, and returning by a roundabout way, pre¬ 
tended to be buffalo. Others in the camp, discovering them, 
prepared to go out to surround them. The children representing 
the buffalo went out on the prairie in a company; they were 
both boys and girls—bulls and cows. Some pretended to be 
eating grass, and some were lying down. 

The boys who were to run buffalo had small bows and 
arrows. Those who represented the buffalo carried sticks three 
or four feet long, sharpened at one end. On this sharp end was 
impaled the flat leaf of a prickly-pear, which still bore its 
thorns. In the middle of the leaf, on either side, was rubbed 
a little spot of dirt. This leaf had two meanings: it represented 
the buffalo’s horn or weapon of defense, but, besides this, the 
little spot of dirt represented the buffalo’s heart. If an arrow 
pierced this, the buffalo fell down and died. 

Some of the boy buffalo runners started out on the hunt far 
ahead of the others, so as to get beyond the pretended buffalo 
and cut off their flight. The others formed a wide crescent when 
making the charge. When the proper time came, the hunters 
rushed toward the herd, which in turn ran away. The larger 
boys, who represented the bulls, ran slowly behind the herd, 
and the hunters avoided them, because, if wounded, they might 

112 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

turn to fight, and chase those who were pursuing them; and if 
they overtook the pursuers, might strike them with the prickly- 
pear leaves which they held on the sticks, and fill the hunters’ 
skin with thorns. If this happened, it was told through the camp, 
“A bull has hooked and hurt” so-and-so. If the dirt-marked 
center of the prickly-pear leaf was hit, and the buffalo who 
carried it dropped to the ground dead, the hunters pretended 
to butcher it, and to carry the meat home. 

With their dog travois, the little girls followed the hunters 
out to the killing ground. 

Often some of the buffalo proved too fast for the hunters 
and ran a long way off, and then stood on the prairie and looked 
back. The hunters could not overtake them. 

appear on the prairie 
not far from camp and pretend to be wild horses, and others 
started out from camp on their stick horses to chase and try 
to catch them, throwing ropes over those that they overtook. 

The little girls often had trouble with their pack-dogs, just 
as did their mothers in real life. Many old and gentle dogs 
stayed about with them, but others, younger and more playful, 
were hard to catch when they wished to move camp, or might 
even run away and go back to the real camp. 

Food must be had for the mimic camp, and the children went 
down to the creek to get fish. They thrust straight twigs in the 
mud of the bottom, across the stream in a half circle, the con¬ 
cavity being upstream. The sticks were so close together that 
the fish could not pass between them. In the middle of the 
stream, in what would be the center of the circle, if it were 
complete, a taller twig was thrust into the stream-bed, to the 
base of which a piece of meat was tied. Above the half-circle, 
on one bank, was fastened a flexible fence or gate of willow 
twigs closely strung together on sinew, and made like a mat¬ 
tress or a back-rest. It was long enough to reach from one bank 
to the other. 

When all preparations had been made, the boys went a long 

“3 

Perhaps a number of the boys might 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

way up the stream, and entering it, formed a line across it, and 
came down, wading through the water, beating it with sticks, 
making a great noise, and so driving the fish before them. If 
the water was roily, the girls who remained below near the trap 
perhaps saw no fish, but if there were many there, they tugged 
at the meat and shook the willow twig which stood alone. Then 
the girls quickly entered the stream, and stretched the flexible 
fence or gate across it, making it impossible for the fish to pass 
up the stream. All now plunged into the water, and with their 
hands caught and threw out on the bank the fish that were con¬ 
fined between the half-circle of twigs and the fence above it. 
In this way they caught many fish, and these they cooked and 
ate. 

The children did not stay out all night, but during the day 
they pretended that it was night, and went to bed. During the 
day they moved the camp often; even every hour or two. 

These children imitated the regular family life, pretending 
to be man and wife, and the tiny babies—who were their 
brothers and sisters—served them for children. Little boys 
courted little girls; a boy sent to the girl’s lodge sticks to repre¬ 
sent horses, and if his offer was accepted received with her 
other sticks and gifts in return. Babies able to sit up were taken 
out into these camps, but not those that were too young. Some¬ 
times a baby might get hungry and cry, and its little sister who 
was caring for it was obliged to carry it home to her mother, 
so that the baby might nurse. 

Soon after the little boy was able to run about easily, a small 
bow and some arrows were made for him by his father, uncle, 
or elder brother, and he was encouraged to use them. When 
he went out of the lodge to play, his mother said to him, “Now, 
be careful; do nothing bad; do not strike anyone; do not shoot 
anyone with your arrow.” He was likely to remember these oft- 
repeated injunctions. 

After that, much of his time was spent in practice with the 
bow. He strove constantly to shoot more accurately at a mark, 

114 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

to send the shaft farther and farther, and to drop his arrow 
nearer and nearer to a given spot. As he grew more accustomed 
to the use of the bow, he hunted sparrows and other small birds 
among the sagebrush and in the thickets along the streams, 
with other little fellows of his own age; and as his strength 
and skill increased, began to make excursions on the prairie for 
rabbits, grouse, and even turkeys. Little boys eight or ten years 
of age killed numbers of small birds with their arrows, and 
sometimes even killed them on the wing. 

Though he keenly enjoyed the pursuit, the Cheyenne boy did 
not hunt merely for pleasure. To him it was serious work. He 
was encouraged to hunt by his parents and relatives, and was 
told that he must try hard to be a good hunter, so that hereafter 
he might be able to furnish food for the lodge, and might help 
to support his mother and sisters. When successful, he was 
praised; and if he brought in a little bird, it was cooked and 
eaten as a matter of course, quite as seriously as any other food 
was treated. The first large bird, or the first rabbit, killed by 
the boy, he exhibited to the family with no little pride, in which 
all shared. 

In their hunting, these tiny urchins displayed immense cau¬ 
tion and patience, creeping stealthily about through the under¬ 
brush of the river bottom, or among the sagebrush on the 
prairie, striving to approach the woodpeckers climbing the 
trunk of a cottonwood tree, or the blackbirds swinging on the 
top of a bush, or the meadow larks stalking about in the grass. 
The care with which they twisted and wound in and out of 
cover when approaching the game, taking advantage of every 
inequality in the ground, of the brush, and of the clumps of 
rye grass, was precisely what they would have to practice when 
hunting later in life. At first, to be sure, they missed most of 
their shots, but they did not become discouraged, and now and 
then they killed a bird. 

As a boy grew older and more skillful, he often took with 
him two or three little boys when he set out to kill small birds. 

«5 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The bigger boy shot the birds with blunt arrows, and the little 
fellows gathered them up and carried them, by passing the 
heads under the gee-string, about the waist. Sometimes when 
the boys had enough birds, they chose a place for camping and 
built a fire. They picked and dressed the birds, and roasted 
them on the coals. 

The older boys often set out in companies of four or five, 
and traveling across the prairie, a bow-shot apart, beat a con¬ 
siderable width of country. If game was detected, they strove 
to approach within shot before startling it, and often succeeded. 
Jackrabbits, however, were likely to bounce up under their 
feet, and to scurry away, pursued by a flight of arrows. If the 
animal escaped, the boys watched it, if possible, until it had 
stopped for the last time, taken its last look about, and settled 
down to hide. Then, having closely marked the spot, they very 
slowly and cautiously approached it in a half-circle, scanning 
the ground with the utmost care. If one discovered the rabbit 
squatting close, he indicated its position to the others, and they 
tried to surround and, if possible, to shoot it, before it started 
to run. They were often very successful in this hunting. Some¬ 
times in the spring they succeeded in killing a kid antelope or 
two—a great prize. 

While engaged in this hunting, the boys not only learned 
how to approach and secure game, but also unconsciously 
picked up a knowledge of many other things incidental to suc¬ 
cess in life. They came to understand the signs of the prairie, 
to know the habits of wild animals, learned how to observe, 
how to become trackers, where the different birds and animals 
were found, and how they acted under different conditions; and 
were training themselves to habits of endurance and patience. 

s grew 

parents and uncles always to be quiet when older people were 
about, not to be noisy, not to play in the lodge, not to run in 
front of anyone. In the lodge they were not allowed to pound 
or knock on anything, and especially not to tap or hack with a 

larger they were often warned by their 

As little boy 

116 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

knife any stick in the lodge, and above all not to tap on a stick 
in the fire. To do this might cause bad luck; a boy who did 
any of these things might even cut off his finger. 

If by an unlucky chance a boy at play threw a stone or a 
piece of dirt or a mud ball against the lodge of a priest—a 
medicine man—it was necessary, to avert bad luck, that he 
should be purified by the medicine man, who unwrapped his 
sacred bundle, and with long ceremony and much passing of 
hands over the offender, and wiping him off with white sage¬ 
brush, prayed that his error might be pardoned. Unless this 
were done, the medicine would be broken, and many evil things 
might happen. Perhaps the lad might be struck by lightning. 

From the beginning the boy was taught that his chief duty 
in life was to be brave, and to go to war and fight. He was 
treated always with great consideration, for it was remembered 
that he might not be long with his people, that in his first fight 
he might be killed; and, therefore, while he was with them 
they wished to treat him well—to make him comfortable and 
happy. For this reason, a boy was better treated than a girl. 
He had a good bed, often at the back of the lodge. For a lad to 
bring in a stick of wood or a bucket of water was considered 
unfitting. If he did a thing like this, it was talked of in the 
camp as something to be regretted, as more or less of a scandal. 

When a boy was about twelve years of age, some old grand¬ 
father began to talk with him, and advise him as to how he 
should live. He was instructed in manly duties. He was told 
that when older people spoke to him, he must listen and must 
do as they told him. If anyone directed him to go after horses, 
he should start at once. He should do nothing bad in the camp, 
and should not quarrel with his fellows. He should get up 
early; should never let the sun find him in bed, but must be 
early out in the hills looking for the horses. These were his 
especial charge, and he must watch them, never lose them, and 
see that they had water always. He was told that when he grew 
older it was his duty to hunt and support his mother and 

117 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

sisters. A man must take good care of his arms and keep them 
in good order. He must never boast. To go about bragging of 
the brave things that he might intend to do was not manly. If 
he performed brave deeds, he himself should not speak of 
them; his comrades would do that. It was predicted that if he 
listened to the advice given him he would grow up to be a good 
man, and would amount to something. In this way their fathers, 
uncles, and grandfathers talked to the boys, and often wise old 
men harangued little groups who were playing about the camp. 

A boy had usually reached his twelfth, thirteenth, or four¬ 
teenth year when he first went out to hunt buffalo. Before this 
he had been instructed in the theory of buffalo running, and had 
been told how and where to ride, and where to hit the buffalo 
if he was to be successful. If on his first chase a boy killed a 
calf, his father was greatly pleased, and, if a well-to-do man, he 
might present a good horse to some poor man, and in addition 
might give a feast and invite poor people to come and eat with 
him. Perhaps he might be still more generous, and at the end 
of the feast give to his guests presents of robes or blankets. As 
soon as the boy reached home and his success was known, the 
father called out from his lodge something like this: “My son 
has killed a little calf, and I give the best horse that I have to 
Blue Hawk.” If he gave a feast, he explained again, saying: 
“My little boy has killed a calf. He is going to be a good man 
and a good hunter. We have had good luck.” The man to whom 
the horse had been presented rode about the camp to show it to 
the people, and as he rode he sang a song, mentioning the name 
of the donor and telling why the horse had been given to, him. 

Bird Bear, whose boy name was Crow Bed, told me that as a 
child his father talked to him but little, while his grandfather 
gave him much advice. This was natural enough, since at that 
age the father was still engaged in war and hunting, which 
occupied most of his time, while the older man had passed the 
period of active life. 

Crow Bed was quite young when he went on his first buffalo 

118 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

chase, but he had a good horse, and was soon among the buf¬ 
falo and close up alongside of a little calf. He was excited and 
shot a good many arrows into it, but he kept shooting until the 
animal fell. After he had killed the calf he felt glad and proud. 
He dismounted and butchered the calf, and with much labor 
put it on his horse and took the whole animal home, not cutting 
the meat from the bones and leaving the skeleton on the 
ground, as a man would have done. When he reached his lodge, 
his people laughed at him a little for bringing it all home, but 
his father praised him and said that he had done well. “After 
a little while,” he said, “you will get to killing larger ones, and 
pretty soon you will kill big buffalo.” 

His father then shouted out, calling a certain man named 
White Thunder to come to the lodge and see what his son had 
done; that he had brought meat into the camp. After White 
Thunder had come to the lodge, his father presented to White 
Thunder the horse the boy had ridden and the pack of meat 
that he had brought in. The incident was discussed all through 
the village, so that everyone knew of Crow Bed’s success. 

A year or two later, when a party was made up to go to 
war against the Snakes, his grandfather advised Crow Bed to 
go with it. Before they started out the old man said to him: 
“Now, when the party is about to make a charge on the enemy, 
do not be afraid. Do as the others do. When you fight, try to 
kill. When you meet the enemy, if you are brave and kill and 
count a coup, it will make a man of you, and the people will 
look on you as a man. Do not fear anything. It is not a disgrace 
to be killed in a fight.” 

When Crow Bed started, his father gave away the best horse 
that he had, because his son was starting on his first war-path. 
He cried out, asking any poor person in the village who needed 
a horse to come and see his son starting to war for the first 
time. He did the same thing when Crow Bed returned from the 
war-path, although on this first war journey the party had 

119 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

traveled for many days without finding enemies, and returned 
to the village without accomplishing anything. 

My friend, Shell,—who died years ago, more than eighty 
years of agetold me that his instruction came chiefly from 
his father, who gave much advice to him and to the other boys 
of the family. He remembered especially the father’s warning 
to his children to be truthful and honest, never to lie. His father 
was a chief, and almost every night there were many people 
in his lodge, talking about different things, and the children 
listened to the conversation of their elders, and learned much. 
Shell was thirteen years of age the summer when he went on 
his first buffalo hunt. His father was a skillful arrow-maker, 
and the boy had plenty of arrows; and as he was riding a good 
horse, he killed three calves on this first chase. After the hunt 
was over, his father, who also had been running buffalo, came 
back and asked the boy if he had killed anything. Shell pointed 
out the three calves, and his father got off and cut up the meat. 
When they reached the camp, his father called out to a certain 
man to come and see what his son had done. When the man 
reached the lodge, his father gave him the horse Shell had rid¬ 
den, and the pack of meat which it bore. 

As Shell and his brothers grew older, his father used to teach 
them all good things, but especially that when they went to 
war they must be brave. That is why the Cheyennes used to 
fight so hard. They were taught it from childhood. 

His father used to tell him never to associate with women, 
and, above all, never to run off with one. He would say: 
“Whenever you find a woman that you love, give horses and 
marry her. Then you will be married in the right way. When¬ 
ever a man runs off with a woman, both are talked about, and 
this is bad for both.” 

Older men gave much advice to their grandsons, sons, and 
nephews, and tried constantly to warn them against mistakes 
and to make life easier for them. A well-brought-up man was 
likely to advise his grown son that occasionally, when he killed 

120 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

a good fat buffalo, he should seek out some old man who pos¬ 
sessed spiritual power and offer him the meat, in order to secure 
his friendliness and the benefit of his prayers. If the old man 
accepted the present the carcass was pulled around on its belly 
until the head faced the east. The old man slit the animal down 
its back, took out the right kidney, and handed it to the young 
man, who pointed it toward the east, south, west, and north, 
then up to the sky, and down to the ground, and placed it on a 
buffalo-chip. The old man was likely to say to the young man: 
“May you live to be as old as I am, and always have good luck 
in your hunting. May you and your family live long and always 
have abundance.” As the old man went back to camp with the 
meat, he called aloud the name of the young man, so that all 
might know he had given him a buffalo. This was an ancient 
custom. 

The training of the little girls was looked after even more 
carefully than that of the boys. Their mothers, aunts, and 
grandmothers constantly gave them good advice. They recom¬ 
mended them especially to stay at home, not to run about the 
camp, and this was so frequently impressed on them that it 
became a matter of course for them to remain near the lodge, 
or to go away from it only in company. Both mothers and 
fathers talked to their daughters, and quite as much to their 
sons, but in a different way. The mother said: “Daughter, when 
you grow up to be a young woman, if you see anyone whom 
you like, you must not be foolish and run off with him. You 
must marry decently. If you do so, you will become a good 
woman, and will be a help to your brothers and to your 
cousins.” They warned girls not to be foolish, and the advice 
was repeated over and over again. 

As a girl grew larger she was sent for water, and when still 
older she took a rope and went for wood, carrying it on her 
back. The old women early began to teach the girls how to cut 
moccasins, and how to apply quills and to make beadwork. As 
they grew older they learned how to cook, and to dress hides, 

121 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

but girls were not put regularly to dressing hides until they 
were old enough to marry. 

Boys and girls alike had each some special friend of their 
own sex to whom they were devotedly attached, and each pair 
of friends talked over the advice received from parents. 

Children seldom or never quarreled or fought among them¬ 
selves, and though, as they grew older, continually engaging 
in contests of strength, such as wrestling and kicking matches, 
and games somewhat like football, they rarely lost their temper. 
Two boys might be seen swaying to and fro in a wrestling bout, 
each encouraged by the shouts of his partisans among the on¬ 
lookers, and each doing his best. When finally one was thrown 
all the spectators raised a great shout of laughter, but he who 
had been overcome arose laughing too, for he realized that the 
others were not ridiculing him, but were showing their enjoy¬ 
ment of the contest they had witnessed. The Cheyenne boys are 
naturally good-natured and pleasant, and the importance of 
living on good terms with their fellows having been drilled into 
them from earliest childhood, they accepted defeat and success 
with equal cheerfulness. Among a group of white children there 
would be much more bickering. 

Usually, but by no means always, the Cheyenne boy learned 
to kill buffalo before he made his first journey to war. Some¬ 
times—as in the case of Bald Faced Bull, elsewhere mentioned 
—the little fellow’s ambition for glory, and ignorance of what 
war meant, led him to join a war-party at a very tender age. 
Little boys who did this received much consideration from the 
older members of the party, and were carefully looked after. 
They were taken in charge by some older man, and were kept 
apart from the younger members, who would be likely to tease 
and embarrass them, and in all ways the journey was made 
easy for them. Yet when the moment came to fight, they were 
given every opportunity to distinguish themselves, which meant 
to fight and to be killed. Because on the occasion referred to 
Bald Faced Bull was riding a very fast horse, he was chosen 

122 

THE BOY AXD THE GIRL 

as one of ten to charge the camp of the enemy, the most dan¬ 
gerous work in the fight. While such little boys did not often 
accomplish any great feat, yet sometimes they did so, and 
returned to the village covered with glory, to the unspeakable 
delight and pride of their families, and to be objects of respect 
and admiration to their less ambitious and energetic playfel¬ 
lows. Even when they did nothing especially noteworthy, they 
were undergoing a training, were learning to know themselves, 
and to be steady under all conditions, and were hardening 
themselves to the toils which were to be their most important 
occupation for the next twenty-five years. 

If on such a journey the boy performed any especially cred¬ 
itable act—if by some chance he killed an enemy, or counted a 
coup—some one of his near relations, his mother or aunt or an 
uncle, gave away a horse on the return of the party, and pre¬ 
sented him with a new name. If the mother gave the horse, she 
selected a name that her brother had borne; if the aunt, she 
chose her brother’s name; if the uncle, his brother’s name. The 
name was always a good name—that of some brave man. The 
name before being given was discussed in the home and chosen 
with deliberation. If the name given was that of a living man, 
that man took another name, perhaps that of his father or of 
ari uncle. 

A result of all this training was that the best of the Cheyenne 
youths had for their highest ambition the wish to be brave and 
to fight well; and hence they desired always to be going to war. 
If a few of them were traveling over the prairie in time of war, 
and people were seen, there was immediate rejoicing. “Ha!” 
one would say to his neighbor, “there are some people at last. 
Now we are going to have a good time. Now we will have fun. 
Hurry! hurry! Get ready to fight! ” Meantime, any loads car¬ 
ried on the saddles, all extra clothing, and often the saddles 
themselves, were stripped from the horses and thrown on the 
ground, and the party, laughing and chattering in the highest 
possible spirits at the prospect of a fight, set out in hot haste to 

123 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

attack the strangers. If these proved to be friends, the disap¬ 
pointment of the young men was great. I recall a case in which 
a party of Cheyennes, scouting for the Government, charged a 
group of about their own number, which they presently dis¬ 
covered to be other scouts of their own people under command 
of the late Lieut. Edward W. Casey. They were much cast 
down. 

A boy’s education by advice and admonition usually ended 
with his first journey to war. When he had made that, he was 
supposed to have reached years of discretion and to have 
acquired by practical experience enough discretion to decide 
for himself what he ought to do, or to consult with older men 
and ask their advice. The first war journey was often long and 

returning to the v 
with nothing to show for his trip, but with a store of practical 
knowledge which would be useful to him all his life long. 

Some of the young Cheyenne boys were practical jokers and, 
like many practical jokes, theirs were sometimes thoughtless 
and cruel. Little Hawk, bom between 1840 and 1850, was a 

hard and without any results, the boy 

practical joker about whom many stories were told. Sometimes 
he hid by the trail along which the women passed in going for 
water; and when a woman passed, carrying a skin full of 
water, Little Hawk shot an arrow through it, and laughed 
delightedly at the sight of the water spurting in two straight 
streams from the holes where the arrow had gone in and come 
out. The water-skin was ruined beyond repair. 

As late as the middle of the last century, the Mexicans often 
came north to the Cheyenne camp to trade; and brought with 
them some foods that the Cheyennes were very fond of. Once 
when the Mexicans had come to the camp, and almost the 
whole tribe had gone out to where the Mexicans were, to get 
a taste of the food they brought to trade, Little Hawk went 
around among the lodges, and from every lodge that had no 
occupant he took from the quivers all the arrows, carried them 
to his own lodge and hid them behind its lining. That night 

124 

THE BOY AND THE GIRL 

an alarm was given that Pawnees were about and had already 
taken a bunch of horses. It was ordered that all should arm 
themselves and scatter out on the edge of the camp to guard it. 
The men seized their bows; but when they took them, there 
were no arrows in the cases. It was a time of great confusion; 
but at length someone shouted out that Little Hawk must have 
done this and, rushing to his lodge, they found their arrows. 
Some of the men cried out: “Divide them up now and let us 
start out to meet the enemy. We can exchange arrows tomor¬ 
row.” 

On another occasion, one night the people heard a loud shout 
saying, “The Mexicans have come to trade; they are camped 
here just outside the circle.” All the women jumped out of bed, 
got together the things that they had to trade, and rushed off 
in the direction of the voice. When they got outside the circle 
they could see no camp, and looked around, not knowing what 
to do. Then from behind them on the other side of the camp 
came the shout, “The Mexicans are camped here, and have 
plenty of things to trade.” At once the women, thinking they 
had made a mistake, turned about and ran in that direction; 
but when they reached the border of the camp on that side, no 
Mexicans were to be found. Then the cry sounded from still 
another direction, saying: “This is where the Mexicans are; 
come this way”; and some of the women started, but presently 
someone shouted out, “Oh, it must be Little Hawk who is call¬ 
ing us about from one place to another.” It proved to be Little 
Hawk, and there were no Mexicans. 

About the middle of the last century the Cheyennes still, to a 
large extent, made their war journeys on foot; and were ex¬ 
tremely tough and enduring. Such men lived until a few years 
ago; and an example of this came out in a story told of an 
incident that happened to She Bear when a young man. 

She Bear possessed a sense of humor which made him quite 
ready to laugh at a joke even if it were against himself. He said 
that when he was a young man he heard of a dance that was to 

125 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

be held in two or three days at a neighboring camp, distant 
from his home about seventy-five miles, and set out to walk 
to that camp to attend the dance. 

He had gone about half the distance, and was walking along 
singing to himself and practicing his dancing steps as he 
walked. Presently someone behind him said: “You are dancing 
well; the girls will look at you”; and turning about he saw close 
to him Spotted Wolf, who also was on his way to the dance and 
had been watching She Bear from a place of concealment. She 
Bear told this as a joke on himself; but the interesting part of 
the story seemed to me that a young man should start off to 
walk seventy-five miles in order to attend a social dance. 

126 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

STATUS OF WOMEN 

O N few subjects has there been such persistent misun¬ 
derstanding as on the position of women among the 
Indians. Because she was energetic, always busy in 
the camp, often carried heavy burdens, attended to the house¬ 
hold duties, made the clothing and the home, and prepared 
the family food, the woman has been pictured as the slave of 
her husband, a patient beast of burden whose toils were never 
done. The man, on the other hand, was said to be an idler who 

all day long sat in the shade of the lodge and smoked his pipe, 
while his industrious wives ministered to his comfort. Most of 

those who have written of Indian life seem to have compre¬ 
hended nothing of the strenuous labors of the hunt, and of the 
war-path, and to have realized not at all that the woman was 
the man’s partner, who performed her share of the duties of 
life, as he performed his, and who wielded an influence quite 
as important as his, and often even more powerful. 

It is true that the women performed many laborious tasks— 
tasks that civilized man regards as toil—and that the work 
done by the men—hunting and going to war—are occupations 
that civilized man is disposed to regard as sport or recreation; 
but for this division of labor there were good reasons. The work 
of providing food and of defense against enemies was hard and 
dangerous; while fighting and the use of arms were no part of 
woman’s work. As almost everywhere in the world, her share in 
the life of the community was the care of the household—the 
welfare of the family. The man’s duty was to defend his wife 
and children, and the tribe at large, in case of an attack, and if 

127 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the enemies were too strong to be defeated and driven away, 
at least to fight them off, to hold them in check, so that the 
women and children might escape by flight. To fight to advan¬ 
tage, to be in a position to repel enemies that might try to kill 
his people, a fighting man must be unhampered by a load, and 
must be light and active, so that he might get about quickly 
and have an equal chance with the attacking party, who pre¬ 
sumably were prepared for war. Chiefly for this reason, the 
men, carrying only their arms, commonly went ahead, and the 
women, following behind, looked after the children, bore the 
burdens, or cared for the animals which transported the camp 
property. At an earlier day, before the white man had come, 
before the Indians had obtained horses, and when enemies were 
not so often encountered on the prairie, the whole marching 
camp—men, women, children, and dogs alike—carried loads, 
apportioned according to the strength of the bearer. 

In the Cheyenne camp, as everywhere in the world, the man 
was the provider, the one who procured the food and most of 
the material for the needs of life, while the woman bore the 
children, cared for the home, and thus did her share of the 
most important work that the Indians knew—the promotion of 
the tribal welfare. The man and the woman were partners, 
sharing equally in the work of the family, and often in a deep 
and lasting affection which each bore toward the other—an 

marriage, 

lasted often to the end of life. I have seen many examples of 
such attachment, seldom expressed in words, but shown in the 
daily conduct of life, where in all his occupations the man’s 
favorite companion was the wife he had courted as a girl and 
by whose side he had made his struggle for success and now at 
last had grown old. 

Among the Cheyennes, the women are the rulers of the camp. 
They act as a spur to the men, if they are slow in performing 
their duties. They are far more conservative than the men, and 
often hold them back from hasty, ill-advised action. If the 

128 

affection which, beginning in youth with love and 

RED BEAD WOMAN, SMOKING 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

sentiment of the women of the camp clearly points to a certain 
course as desirable, the men are quite sure to act as the women 
wish. 

In the severest winter weather, women did not do much at 
the dressing of robes, but on pleasant days in winter they often 
worked at that task. A winter camp was usually made at some 
point where there was abundant timber; and in some sheltered 
place among this timber the women cleared away the weeds 
and undergrowth from a considerable space, hung up robes or 
lodge-skins about it to serve as windbreaks, and building a 
big fire in the middle, worked about this at their tasks. Such a 
place was comfortable, almost like the inside of a lodge, except 
that it was open at the top. 

Family rank, which existed among the Cheyennes as among 
other Indians, depended on the estimation in which the family 
was held by the best people. A good family was one that pro¬ 
duced brave men and good sensible women, and that possessed 
more or less property. A brave and successful man has raised 
his family from low to very high rank; or a generation of ineffi¬ 
cient men might cause a family to retrograde. 

The passage of a girl from childhood to young womanhood 
was considered as hardly less important to the tribe than to her 
own family. She was now to become the mother of children and 
thus to contribute her part toward adding to the number of 
the tribe and so to its power and importance. 

When a young girl reached the age of puberty and had her 
first menstrual period, she, of course, told her mother, who in 
turn informed the father. Such an important family event was 
not kept secret. It was the custom among well-to-do people for 
the father of the girl publicly to announce from the lodge door 
what had happened and as an evidence of his satisfaction to 
give away a horse. 

The girl unbraided her hair and bathed, and afterward older 
women painted her whole body with red. Then, with a robe 

129 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

about her naked body, she sat near the fire, a coal was drawn 
from it and put before her, and sweet grass, juniper needles, 
and white sage were sprinkled on it. The girl bent forward over 
the coal and held her robe about it, so that the smoke rising 
from the incense was confined and passed about her and over 
her whole body. Then she and her grandmother left the home 
lodge, and went into another small one near by, where she 
remained for four days. 

If there was no medicine, no sacred bundle, and no shield in 
her father’s lodge, the girl might remain there; but if she did 
so, everything that possessed a sacred character—even the 
feathers that a man wore tied in his head—must be taken out. 

At the end of the four days, her grandmother, taking a coal 
from the fire, and sprinkling on it sweet grass, juniper needles, 
and white sage, caused the girl, wrapped in a robe or sheet, to 
stand over the smoke, with feet on either side of the coal, puri¬ 
fying herself. This was always done by young unmarried 
women. 

For four days a woman in this condition might not eat boiled 
meat. Her meat must be roasted over coals. If the camp moved 
she might not ride a horse, but was obliged to ride a mare. 

Young men might not eat from the dish nor drink from the 
pot used by her; one who did so would expect to be wounded 
in his next fight. She might not touch a shield or any other war 
implement, nor any sacred bundle or object. A married woman 
during this time did not sleep at home, but went out and slept 
in one of the menstrual lodges. Men believed that if they lay 
beside their wives at this time they were likely to be wounded 
in their next battle. Women in this condition were careful to 
avoid entering a lodge where there was a medicine bundle or 
bag. For four days women did not walk about much. They 
spent almost all their time in the small lodge. 

The owner of a shield was required to use special care to 
avoid menstruating women. He might not go into a lodge where 
one was nor even into a lodge where one had been, until a cere- 

130 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

mony of purification had been performed. If the woman 
thoughtlessly visited the lodge of a neighbor, no shield owner 
might enter it until sweet grass and juniper leaves had been 
burned in the lodge, the pins removed and the lodge covering 
thrown back, as if the lodge were about to be taken down. 
When this had been done, the covering might be thrown for¬ 
ward again, and pinned together. The lodge having been thus 
purified, the shield owner might enter it. 

The Cheyenne young women and young girls always wore 
the protective rope, and most of them still do so. This is a small 
rope or line which passes about the waist, is knotted in front, 
passes down and backward between the thighs, and each 
branch is wound around the thigh down nearly to the knee. 
The wearing of this rope is somewhat confining, yet those who 
wear it can walk freely. It is worn always at night and during 
the day when women go abroad. 

It is a complete protection to the woman wearing it and is 
assumed by girls as soon as the period of puberty is reached. 
All men, young and old, respect this rope, and anyone violating 
it would certainly be killed by the male relations of the girl. 
I have heard of one case where a middle-aged man attempted 
to disregard this protection. The girl and her mother were the 
only two of the family left, all their male relatives having died. 
Not long after the attempt was made, the mother and daughter, 
arming themselves with heavy stones, waylaid the man, took 
him by surprise, gave him a frightful pounding, and left him 
for dead. He recovered after a long siege, during which he 
received sympathy from no one. 

In the Cheyenne camp, love and courtship and marriage had 
their place, as they have the world over. 

In modern times the young Cheyenne lover did his courting 
in the old-fashioned Sioux manner. When he became fond of a 
girl, he went near to the lodge in which she lived, and, wrapped 
in his blanket or his robe, which was over his head and hid his 

131 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

features, he stood there, waiting for her to come out. When she 
passed, on her way to get wood or water, or on her return, he 
stepped up beside her, and threw his arms and his blanket 
around her, quite covering her person with the blanket. Then 
he held her fast and began to talk with her. If she did not like 
this, she broke away from him, and he went away, much morti¬ 
fied; but if she listened to him, he might talk to her for an hour 
or two—perhaps much longer. If she did not come out of the 
lodge, he might wait four or five hours, and then go off, to 
return and try once more. 

A girl whose beauty or whose pleasing manners made her 
popular might have a number of suitors. Often, when a girl had 
been off with some of her fellows to get wood, or gather roots, 
or play football, she might find on her return to the lodge 
several young men standing near it, waiting to talk with her 
and court her. The young men did this in turn, the first to 
arrive having the first opportunity. If two or three young men 
were waiting for her, the first to reach her took her in his arms 
and talked, and the others stood at intervals toward the lodge 
door, each awaiting his turn as she came on. The man nearest 
the door was usually he who talked the longest with her. If 
only one young man was waiting, he and the girl might sit down 
by the lodge. Very likely the girl’s younger sisters, as well as 
the young men, were watching for her return, and when the 
lover threw his arms around the girl to hold her, her young 
sisters might run up and take the rings off his fingers or the 
bracelets from his wrists, or might even twitch off one or more 
of his silver hair ornaments. Whatever they did, he paid no 
attention to them. All this is borrowed from the Sioux within 
the last century. 

In old times, however, courting was not done in this way. 
Then, no boy would ever have thought of throwing his arms 
around a girl. He waited for her, as she was going for wood or 
water, and as she passed him, plucked at her robe to attract 
her attention, and stop her. Usually she stopped to converse, 

132 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

but if she did not stop, the young man felt that he had been 
badly treated and went away, mortified at the rebuff. Some¬ 
times young men did not dare to go as far as to pull at the girl’s 
robe. They stood at a little distance, and whistled or called to 
her, to endeavor to get her to look at them, in the hope that she 
would smile, or in some way encourage them to be a little 
bolder. 

When meeting girls in front of the lodge and courting them, 
young men did not usually talk to the girls of love, but con¬ 
versed on general topics, giving the news and discussing the 
affairs of the camp. A young man who wished to ask a girl to 
marry him did not often put the question himself, but requested 
some friend to meet the girl and ask her if she would marry 
him. This is of more modern times. In earlier days some aged 
friend or relation was sent to convey this message. 

In olden times the young people used to wear rings; at first, 
made by themselves, of horn, and later of metal. Often two 
young people would plight their troth by an exchange of rings. 
If a young man wished a girl to marry him and spoke to her 
about it, she might say to him: “Are you telling the truth? If 
you are, take off my ring,” and she held out her hand. He took 
the ring and put it on his finger. If he asked her if she was tell¬ 
ing the truth, she did the same thing. In this way they promised 
to marry each other, although some time might elapse before 
the marriage took place. Sometimes it might not take place at 
all, but if the girl did not marry the man to whom she was 
pledged, but married another, the man whose ring she had 
taken might send someone to ask her that his ring be returned 
to him, and in such case it was sent back. On the other hand, 
if the man married another girl—not the one to whom he had 
given his ring—she who had received the ring might throw it 
away, signifying that at the same time she threw away both 
ring and man. 

Sometimes, when the young people were talking outside the 
lodge, a boy might slip the wristlet off a girl’s arm and take it 

133 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

home with him. If the girl was willing that he should keep it, 
she said nothing; but she might go in and say to her mother, 
“So-and-so took my wristlet and carried it away, and I do not 
want him.” In such a case the family sent a messenger for the 
wristlet, and the young man gave it up. 

A girl was not likely to become engaged to a young man who 
had not been to war, because of the feeling that one who had 
not been to war was not yet a man, that is, grown up. 

The flute was sometimes played by young men merely for 
the pleasure of making sweet sounds. Others played it in order 
to help them in their courtship. Some flutes had a special power 
to influence girls. A young man might go to a medicine man 
and ask him to exercise his power on a flute, so that the girl 
he wanted would come out of the lodge when she heard it. The 
young man began to play the flute when he was at a distance 
from the lodge, but gradually approached it, and when he had 
come near to the lodge he found the girl outside waiting for 
him. 

If a young man fell in love with a girl who did not care for 
him, he might fill a pipe and take it to a medicine-man who had 
power in affairs of love, ask him for help, and tell him his 
troubles. Perhaps the medicine man gave him some spruce gum, 
used for chewing, and told him that if he could get the girl to 
chew it her thoughts would constantly be of him. The young 
man might himself offer the gum to the girl, or might persuade 
some woman friend, married or unmarried, to induce the girl 
to take it. If the girl chewed it, her thoughts were certain to 
turn to the young man, and she thought of him constantly. 

The white-tailed deer 1 are powerful in love affairs, and are 
to be asked for help. Those who have these deer for their 
helpers wear on the shoulder belt the tail of a deer, with some 
medicine tied to it. Such ornaments were made for those who 
have love troubles. Those who understood the deer and its ways 
taught the young man what to do. In approaching her he should 

1 Timber deer waving —ma Id 1 ewdsi dm std sin' ni. 

*34 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

always walk up to the girl on the windward side, so that she 
might get the scent of the tail and of the medicine. 

The following story bears on these beliefs: 

There was a young man, afterward named Black Wolf, who loved 
a girl in the next camp, and wished to go to see her. It was some 
distance away, and two days and one night were required to reach 
it. The young man asked Elk River’s wife to give him some food so 
that he might stop on his journey and eat. 

As he was traveling he came to a ridge, from which he saw a stream 
running in the direction he wished to go. He went down into the 
valley, toward the stream, and as he approached it he saw some 
lodges in a thick growth of willows, and up the creek a large lodge 
standing near the bank. He determined to go to this lodge, but went 
down to the stream to follow it up on the ice, for it was winter. As 
he went along, he said to himself, “The camp is not so far off as I 
had thought; here it is now.” 

When he had come near to the lodge he stopped to look at it and 
to see whose it was. There was a light within, and he saw standing 
near the lodge young men playing on the flute, as if courting. In the 
lodge he could hear people playing the finger-bone game. He deter¬ 
mined to enter and ask the people there where he should go to find 
his relatives in the camp. He peeped in through the door and saw 
within a number of beautiful girls and fine-looking young men, some 
playing the finger-bone game and some the seed game. Some of the 
girls had on striped Navaho blankets, and some painted robes—all 
very pretty. The young men, too, were finely dressed. The young 
people outside stood about, wearing their robes hair-side out. When 
he saw all these girls, he felt bashful, and did not go in. Presently 
he went around to the back of the lodge to think what he should do. 
There he stopped and considered, and taking courage, started back 
to the door, intending to enter; but as he was walking he turned his 
head, and for a moment looked away from the lodge, and when he 
looked back, the lodge was not there. Instead of all these beautiful 
girls and men, there were deer, going off through the timber. He 
wondered to himself what had happened, and went down through 
the timber and continued on his way, often looking back and fearing 
lest something bad might come to him before he could get away. 

135 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

All night he went on, and near morning stopped, and built a big 
fire and rested there nearly all day. He pondered so much on what 
he had seen that he forgot to eat until just before he started on. Night 
began to fall before he had gone far, and just before dark he saw 
smokes and heard dogs barking. He knew he must be near the camp 
and stopped to rest. 

That night he went down into the camp, and walked about, look¬ 
ing for some of his people with whom he might stop. As he passed 
each lodge he stood still listening for a voice that he knew, and at 
last he found the right lodge and went in. He did not stay there 
long, but said to his relations, “I have come a long way to see my 
sweetheart,” and went out again. He went about through the camp 
looking for the girl’s lodge, but when he found it, he saw a young 
man there courting her, and other young men waiting. He stepped 
back out of sight to wait until some of them had gone away. 

When all had gone, he stepped up, and the girl looked at him, and 
knew him, and said, “Ah, it is you!” and she hugged him. “How did 
you get here?” she asked. “Did you come out of the sky, or did you 
creep up out of the earth?” 

The young man said, “I came through today”—which was not 
true. “I thought about you the other evening, and started off to find 
you. I do not suppose that you have thought much about me.” 

“Yes,” said the girl, “I have thought of you many times. Every 
time I see the ring you gave me I feel lonely, but I cannot get to 
where you are; it is too far to go.” They kissed each other. 

The young man had gone to the camp to give back the girl’s ring 
and to take his own from her. He did this because he was going to 
war. He did not wish to be killed with the girl’s ring on his finger. 

Before he had left his own camp an old man had cried through the 
village that the camp was to be moved to a certain place. The young 
man waited in the girl’s camp so that his own camp might be moved 
before he returned to it. 

After he had been in this camp four days and four nights, he said 
to the relative with whom he was stopping, “Give me some food for 
my journey; I think that by this time the camp is moved, and I shall 
go back there.” They gave him some pounded meat and tallow. He 
wanted to see his girl again before he started, and that night he went 

136 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

to her lodge and she came out to meet him. He said: “I have come 
to see you once more. Tonight I am going home.” 

“Why are you going home?” asked the girl. “May I go home with 

you?” 

“No ” said he, “I cannot take you now. I am going to war as soon 
as I reach home. When I return from war I will take you to my 
camp.” The girl cried. 

The young man left her and started. He traveled until he reached 
camp. After two days’ rest he set out on his journey to war, and 
before he returned he had counted a coup. After his return they had 
a great war dance, and danced all night. Elk River gave away a 
horse, and changed the young man’s name to Black Wolf. He was 
the father of that Black Wolf who was Brave Wolf’s son-in-law. 

From the deer Black Wolf received the power to make any 
girl fall in love with him. He could put his medicine on a look¬ 
ing-glass, and flash it on the girl’s eyes, and she would fall in 
love with him. He was a great man to make flutes for lovers, 
and wore a white-tailed deer’s tail on a belt which passed over 
his shoulder. Men who were unfortunate in love used to go to 
him to get help. He was very skillful in playing the finger-bone 
game and the seed game, but he hardly ever gambled in that 

way. 

MARRIAGE 

A Cheyenne boy was expected to court a girl from one to five 
years. After he felt sure of her consent, he applied to her 
parents for theirs, sending either an old man some friend or 
relation—or perhaps an old woman—his mother—to ask the 
girl in marriage. With the messenger he sent the number of 
horses that he could give. The messenger tied the horses in 
front of the father’s lodge, and then went in and delivered the 
message, saying, “Such a young man [naming him] wishes 
your daughter [naming her] for his wife.” The messenger did 
not wait for an answer, but at once went away. 

Sometimes the father decided for himself whether or not he 

137 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

would consent to the marriage, but at other times he sent for 
his relatives to talk the matter over and to ask their advice 
before giving an answer. If this was unfavorable, the horses 
which the young man had sent were turned loose and driven 
back to his father’s lodge; but if the marriage was acceptable, 
the girl’s father sent her, and with her a number of horses, 
often greater than that sent by the young man, to the lodge 
of the young man’s father. 

The horses sent by the young man stood in front of the lodge 
of the prospective father-in-law until the question of the 
advisability of the marriage had been decided. Sometimes they 
stood there all day. Often not horses alone were sent, but any 
other presents that the suitor thought might be acceptable. 
Thus, if the girl had a young brother who was fond of going to 
war, the suitor might send a war-bonnet, or even his whole war 
outfit, bow, arrows, quiver, and his war clothes; or even a gun 
or a six-shooter. 

The horses might not stand before the lodge of the girl’s 
father more than one night; that is, twenty-four hours. They 
must be accepted or sent back within that time. Thus, there 
was no long engagement after the boy asked for the girl. The 
matter was soon decided, and the marriage often took place 
within twenty-four or forty-eight hours. 

A young man who was courting a girl would often try to per¬ 
suade her to run off with him and be married at once. She 
would not directly refuse, but would put him off, saying, “No, 
I cannot do it today; let us wait until some better opportunity 
occurs.” If she had been given to a brother or a cousin to dis¬ 
pose of in marriage, she would be quite sure to reply to such a 
request, “No, I think too much of my brother—or cousin—to 
do that.” 

A girl might receive attention from ten or twelve young men; 
to be courted by five was very common. Sometimes an elope¬ 
ment actually took place, but in old times not often; usually a 
girl cared too much for her reputation to do a thing of that 

138 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

kind. Marriage without the consent of the parents and the con¬ 
ventional exchanging of gifts was thus very unusual, and when 
one took place, the father or brother might follow the couple 
and bring back the girl. More than once men have been killed 
on this account. 

Sometimes it might happen that horses were sent, and the 
girl’s hand was asked in marriage at a time when her brother 
was absent from the camp. He had a most important voice as to 
whether the marriage should or should not take place, and if 
he were absent, the horses might be returned to the sender, and 
the young man asked to send them again later. Usually, how¬ 
ever, the suitor knew that the girl’s brother was absent, and did 
not send to ask for her at such an inopportune time. He chose 
the most favorable occasion for getting a speedy and satisfac¬ 
tory answer. 

In some cases parents gave a daughter over to a particular 
brother or cousin who was said to “own” the girl, that is, to 
have the charge or control of her disposal in marriage. When 
an offer of marriage was made for the girl in the absence of this 
young man, word was sent back that the person who had 
charge of the girl was absent. She could not be disposed of 
without his consent. 

The young man who fell in love with a girl was likely to do 
everything he could to secure the favor of the one who con¬ 
trolled her marriage. If a suitor and the girl’s brother were to¬ 
gether on the war-path, the suitor might roast meat and bring 
it to the brother, or in various ways might try to make things 
easy for him. After a time he sent a friend to tell the brother 
that he loved his sister and wished to make her his wife. 

The brother returned no answer, but when he reached home 
he told his mother of the kind things the young man had done 
for him and why he did them. The mother told this to the girl. 
If she was willing to accept the young man, she made no com¬ 
ment, but if unwilling, she said, “No, I do not wish to marry 
that young man”; and that ended the matter. 

139 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

When the brother—or cousin—in charge of the girl made 
up his mind that the marriage might take place, he was likely 
to call into his lodge his brothers or cousins, or both, and tell 
them what was in contemplation. The matter was discussed. 
Some of those present might feel doubtful as to what should 
be done and might ask to have other relatives sent for to ex¬ 
press their opinion. If the decision was favorable, the news was 
conveyed to the suitor, who called together his friends and told 
them that he was about to send presents to a certain lodge; 
that is, to the lodge of the brother or cousin who had charge of 
the young woman. His relatives and close friends contributed 
what they could afford. The horses were loaded, sent to the 

brother’s lodge, and tied there. 

Then the brother or cousin again sent for the friends and 
relatives with whom he had consulted about the marriage, and 
said to them, “There are the horses and other things.” One by 
one they went out, and each took what he wished, it being 
understood that he was to return as much as he took. One per¬ 
haps led away a horse with its load. Another might say, “I do 
not think I can afford all this,” and took from the pack a num¬ 
ber of articles which he left on the ground. So all the presents 
were disposed of. A horse or two was always left for the young 
man who had control of the girl. Each man who took anything 
away would bring back something of about the same value— 
often of greater value—to be sent with the girl as a wedding 
gift. Property equal to or more than had been sent to the 
brother’s lodge usually went with the girl. The girl did not set 
out for her new home on that day. She might go the next day 
or the day after that, but, at all events, within three or four 
days, and the time of her going was known. 

Sometimes a girl who was fond of a man might learn that 
some other richer suitor was about to propose for her, and to 
send horses to her father. If she discovered this, she might 
anticipate the matter by running off with the man she loved. 
Perhaps then her parents might pretend anger with her, or 

140 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

really feel it, and when they learned of her act might send word 
to her not to return to their lodge, or might refuse to receive 
her if she came. In that case she went to the lodge of some near 
relative, an uncle, aunt, or favorite cousin, and was married 
from there. After a little while her parents again became 
friendly, and the old affectionate intercourse was renewed. 

If a man whom she did not love sent horses for the girl, and 
she loved someone else, her parents would often try to make 
her marry the man who had offered himself; they talked to her, 
persuading and commanding her, and might induce her to 
accept the man against her will. They did not, however, beat 
or abuse her. In a case of this kind, the girl in her despair might 
go out and hang herself. Not a few cases of this kind have 
happened; for many girls were so obedient and so careful of 
appearances that they would not consider a suggestion to elope 
with their lover. Because her mother scolded her for meeting 
a young man of whom the mother did not approve, the sister 
of three women well known to me knotted a rope about a sage¬ 
brush root, on top of a high cutbank, put the noose about her 
neck, and swung herself over the bank. In very recent years 
one or two girls have hung or shot themselves for such reasons. 
At present, however, young people usually solve the problem 
by eloping; but in old times they did not do this, for an elope¬ 
ment was disgraceful, and was regarded as no marriage. But if, 
after it had taken place, the boy sent the customary gifts, this 
made the marriage valid, and the disgrace was wiped out. 

Sometimes it might be understood beforehand with the girl’s 
parents that she should run .off with the young man. This was 
informal and unusual, but where a girl loved one man, and her 
brothers and cousins favored another, while the parents sym¬ 
pathized with the girl, they might encourage her to marry the 
man of her choice, merely to avoid trouble in the family. In 
such a case the girl might go off with the young man to his 
father’s lodge. 

The next morning the young man’s parents were likely to 

141 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

dress the girl finely, put her on a horse, and send her, with 
other horses and many good presents, back to her father’s 
lodge. When she reached her former home, her father and 
mother sent for her brothers, cousins, and all her kinsfolk. 
They came to the lodge, and the men divided the horses among 
them, while the other presents, dresses, blankets, and so on, 
were distributed among the women relatives. Then the girl’s 
mother cooked food for a feast, and her father gave away 
horses to anyone whom he might select, to show that he was 
pleased with the match. Late in the day, when they were ready 
to return to the lodge of the young man’s father, the girl’s male 
relations would bring horses to take back with her, and the 
women would bring presents of all sorts, sometimes even 
lodges. Besides the horses which they brought, young men used 
to bring many arrows. All these things they took back to the 
lodge of the young man’s father, and they were divided among 
his kinsfolk. 

During the four, five, or six years over which in old times 
a young man’s courtship extended, he seldom or never made 
direct presents to the girl, but often made gifts to her father. 
If he returned successful from a war trip, he might drive four, 
five, six, or eight horses to her father’s lodge, and leave them 
there. While a girl’s lover—who was regularly courting her— 
was absent on a war journey, she might ornament a pair of 
moccasins, and perhaps a pair of leggings and a robe, with 
quills, and when he returned might present them to him, with 
a horse. This was an evidence of affection and appreciation. 
She, however, very seldom received a gift from him, unless 
perhaps a brass ring, or some trifling, inexpensive trinket. If 
he wished to make a present to her, and so to testify to his 
affection for her, he made it to her father. The marriage cere¬ 
mony began when the young man sent his mother, or some 
other person, to the lodge with horses, to ask for the girl’s hand. 

To send as marriage gifts for a girl horses just taken from 
the enemy was the highest compliment that could be paid to the 

142 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

girl and to her family. Sometimes a young man very much 
devoted to a girl and eager to make a good impression on her 
family, went on the war-path, took horses and sent them as a 
present for the girl. A striking example of this took place— 
probably about the middle of the last century—when Beaver 
Claws, wishing to marry Elk River’s daughter, went off on the 
war-path, found a camp, from which he took seventy horses, 
brought them all safely to the Cheyenne camp, and drove them 
home to Elk River’s lodge, where he left them. When he 
reached his own home, he told his relatives what he had done; 
that he wished to marry Elk River’s daughter, and that those 
horses about Elk River’s lodge were all his, and had been left 
there by him. The marriage was arranged, in accordance with 
his hopes. A gift so large as the one made by Beaver Claws was 
unprecedented, and the memory of the occurrence has lasted 
to this day. 

Beaver Claws died in the autumn of 1905, an old man, said 
to have been eighty-seven years. He was a half-brother of the 
well-known chief, Two Moon, who, however, was much 
younger, having been born about 1847. Beaver Claw’s father 
was an Arapaho, while Two Moon’s father was an Arikara. 

After it had been determined to return a favorable answer, 
the horses presented by the young man were at once given to 
the near and dear relatives of the girl. One might go to a 
favorite brother, another to an uncle who was very fond of her, 
perhaps another to a favorite first cousin. Each of these rela¬ 
tives was likely then to catch his best horse and send it to her 
father’s lodge, to go with the horses that were to be sent to the 
young man. Besides the horses, they usually sent other good 
presents. It was generally known beforehand that the marriage 
was likely to take place, and some preparations for it had been 
made. 

The girl was now put on one of the best horses, which was 
led by a woman not related to her, and her mother followed 
behind, leading a number of the horses, all of which wore ropes 

143 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

or bridles. The other horses were all led by women. Before they 
reached the lodge of the young man’s father, some of his rela¬ 
tives came out, carrying a fine blanket, which was spread on 
the ground; the girl was lifted from the horse and set in the 
middle of the blanket, and the young men, taking it by the 
corners and edges, carried her into the lodge. Sometimes, in¬ 
stead of carrying her in the blanket, the horse which she rode 
was led close to the lodge door; the women ran out from the 
lodge; the girl dismounted, put her arms about her mother-in- 
law’s neck, from behind; other women took hold of her ankles, 
and lifted her feet from the ground, and she was thus carried 
into the lodge without stepping across the threshold. This was 
all done in silence. 

When the girl set out she was dressed in fine new clothing, 
but after she had been taken into her mother-in-law’s lodge, 
the sisters or cousins of her husband took her to the back of the 
lodge, removed the clothing that she wore, and dressed her in 
new clothing they had made, combing and rebraiding her hair, 
painting her face, and hanging about her various ornaments as 
gifts. 

The husband’s mother had of course prepared food, and 
when the young people had seated themselves side by side, she 
offered it to them. That prepared for the girl was cut into small 
pieces by the mother-in-law, so that the girl need make no effort 
in eating. 

After the marriage had taken place, the girl’s mother began 
to make up her wedding outfit, and in this work the mother-in- 
law also took part. The girl’s mother usually provided the lodge 
and most of its furniture, such as beds, back-rests, cooking and 
eating utensils. Many of the other things, however, were fur¬ 
nished by the uncles, aunts, and other relatives of both the 
young people. When all these things had been prepared and 
were ready, the mother of the girl would pitch the lodge— 

usuallv somewhere near her own—and would furnish it with 
* 

all the articles that had been contributed; and then would go 

144 

WOOL WOMAN 

BOWL AND HORN SPOON 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

to her daughter and say: “Daughter, there is your lodge; it is 
your home; go and live in it.” 

Sometimes the lodge was made in advance, and the day 
before the couple were married was pitched in the circle, near 
the home of the father of the young man or woman. If near the 
lodge of the wife’s father, it was set a little back of that lodge, 

in order that the young man might not see his mother-in-law 

too often. 

After a girl had been married and had gone to her husband’s 
lodge, she might still make use of the protective string for a 
period of from ten to fifteen days. The husband would respect 
the string for that length of time, but usually not longer. The 
Cheyennes say that this custom had the advantage of enabling 
the newly married couple to get used to each other, to sleeping 
together. Men tell me that they used to lie awake all night, talk¬ 
ing to their newly married wives. 

After marriage the young man did his best to support his 
wife by hunting. All their relatives made them presents, and 
the young couple usually started in life with a good outfit; but 
all the presents were made after the marriage. 

The connection between a young married couple and their 
parents was closer with the girl’s parents than with the boy’s. 
If the boy was a good hunter, he strove to supply meat for his 
father-in-law’s lodge; but he seldom or never visited it and of 
course he never spoke to, or knowingly went near, his mother- 
in-law. This old custom is now dying out. There are today 
mothers who live with their daughters. 

Since a newly married young man was expected to bring in 
plenty of meat, he often took two or three extra packhorses to 
the hunting ground. If he failed himself to kill enough meat, 
his friends made it a point of honor to see that his horses were 
loaded. Sometimes when he returned from the hunt, he stopped 
a hundred or a hundred and fifty yards from his own lodge, and 
his wife and sister, if he had any, or some of his wife’s friends, 
led the horses to his mother-in-law’s lodge, and she took care 

US 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

of the meat. A part of it was cooked and a feast given to his 
friends, his wife asking some old man to call out the names of 
the husband’s friends, inviting them to the feast. This old man 
generally sat inside the lodge door. 

The owner’s wife brought in the food to her lodge from his 
mother-in-law’s lodge and it was cut up before being brought 
in. This was an act of courtesy between mother-in-law and son- 
in-law, and creditable to both. 

When all the guests had arrived, the owner of the lodge said, 
“Everything is here; you may eat.” Then the old man directed 
several of the young men to serve the food. He said, “First put 
out some for yourselves,” for in the helping the dish was sup¬ 
posed to be emptied. Generally a very large portion was handed 
to the old man first; then, turning to the back of the lodge 
where the owner sat, the server pulled from the pot and placed 
on his hand five small pieces of meat and invited the owner of 
the lodge to step forward. He did so, holding his hands, palms 
up, stretched out in front of him. The five pieces of meat were 
put on his right hand at the four compass points and in the 
center of the palm; then he turned his right hand over on the 
left palm, leaving the meat on his left hand and made the usual 
offering to the four directions —Niv stan i vo'. This was the 
sacrifice offered and the blessing asked at an ordinary feast. 
After this was done the people ate. 

Should there be more food than could be eaten, that remain¬ 
ing was given to the old man to take home to his wife and 
family. He strung the meat on a sharp stick and took home any 
fluid food in a bucket lent by the owner. His wife afterward 
returned the bucket. 

If visitors came to a village, the old custom was for them to 
occupy the lodge of some newly married couple, who would 
give them possession and sleep elsewhere. This was an honor 
to the visitor. 

Among people of good family, indirect courtesies often 
passed between a wife’s mother and her son-in-law. It was not 

146 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

uncommon for a woman to make a lodge for her son-in-law, 
ornamenting it with quilled, painted, or beaded linings, pillows, 
bed-covering, and other furniture. Often a newly mar ried 
woman had little to do, her mother looking after everything, 
even to making moccasins for the son-in-law. 

Since a man was not permitted to speak to nor even to look 
at his mother-in-law, it was usual for her to ride up behind the 
lodge and slip into it at a time when she knew he was abroad. 
Nevertheless, a young man sometimes presented—but always 
through another—a horse to his mother-in-law. This was a 
creditable thing for him to do, and was an honor to the woman. 
It happened only among well-to-do people. 

A woman might face her son-in-law if she chose formally to 
present him an ornamented robe. She selected for garnishing a 
good robe, but one on which the hair was not heavy, for the 
quills were more easily put on such a robe and the work looked 
better..The woman spread out the dressed robe, and on the 
flesh side marked the patterns where the quills were to go. 
After these had all been put on, she sewed on the final orna¬ 
ments, which were usually little bits of red cloth. Then she 
cooked food for a feast, and sent for her son-in-law to come to 
her lodge, where were gathered all the members of the quilling 
society. Except these members, no one save the young man 
might enter. His new robe was spread at the back of the lodge, 
so that he should sit down on it, and in front of the lodge a 
horse was tied for him to ride away on; this also was a gift 
from his mother-in-law. When he entered the lodge door he 
turned to his right, walked around to the back, and sat down on 
the robe, which he drew up over his shoulders. Then his 
mother-in-law took a coal from the fire, and put it down before 
him, and sprinkled on it some sweet grass; and the young man , 
with the robe over his shoulder, bent forward over the coal, and 
let the smoke arise within the robe and cover his body. This was 
to give him a good heart—to make him feel happy. After this 
had been done, the young man rose and went out. He did not 

147 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

eat—the food was eaten by the members of the quilling society, 
or was taken by them to their lodges, where anyone might 
eat it. 

After an exchange of gifts such as described, the mother-in- 

law tabu ceased to be in force. 

# 

When a child was to be born, a woman relative of the father 
usually made a cradle for it, though some woman not a relative 
might make one. When the cradle was brought to the lodge and 
presented, the father perhaps gave a horse to each one who 
brought a cradle. The mother of the girl to be confined asked 
certain women to assist at its birth. They—or even a male doc¬ 
tor called in for the purpose—gave the girl medicine from time 
to time, so that she might have an easy delivery. The medicine 
given was the root of Balsamorrhiza sagittata, called by the 
Cheyennes hi tu' ne iss c' e yo, or bark medicine. 

When the birth was about to take place, they had a bowl 
ready in which to wash the child, and a knife—in old times of 
flint, and later an arrowpoint—was at hand to sever the umbili¬ 
cal cord, which was wrapped once about the finger and cut off 
short. The child was wrapped in a sheet or cloth, the inner sur¬ 
faces of the legs being first dusted with powder from the prairie 
puffball, so that the tender skin should not chafe, and the navel 
was dried with the same dust. 

The child was then put in its cradle. At first it was not 
allowed to nurse from its mother, but some other woman who 
had a young child nursed it. The medicine women for four 
days freed the mother’s breasts from the early mammary secre¬ 
tion. During this time the mother was given doses of mot si'- 
i yurt, the milk medicine (Actxa arguta), to induce a free flow 
of milk. Four days after birth the child might nurse from its 
mother. 

At any time after the child had become strong, the father, 
as already stated, might lead out his best horse, and giving it 

148 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

away with other presents (and perhaps even his war-bonnet), 
might have his child’s ears pierced—not actually, but formally. 

It was long the custom that a woman should not have a 
second child until her first was about ten years of age. When 
that period was reached, the man was likely to go with his 
wife and child to some large dance or public gathering, and 
there, giving away at the same time a good horse to some friend 
or even to some poor person, to announce publicly that now 
this child was going to have a little brother or sister. To be 
able to make such an announcement was a great credit to the 
parents. The people talked about it and praised the parents’ 
self-control. 

Families were sometimes large. Shell’s father had ten chil¬ 
dren, eight by one wife. Shell had eleven children, but was 
married several times. An old man named Half Bear had four 
wives and more than thirty children. Twins were not uncom¬ 
mon. 

Young mothers sang to their babies to put them to sleep, and 
had many stories which they told to children a little older, with 
the same purpose. While such stories were being related the 
little child did not speak, and very likely had fallen asleep 
before two or three of them had been told. The tales were 
usually about small animals—about the mice, the little ground 
squirrels, or the chipmunks. 

One or two examples will show their character. 

This is what a little skunk says: 

After the sun goes down I wander from place to place, looking for 
something to eat. If I find a trail, I follow it, and follow it, looking 
for something to eat; and I never stop until daylight. When daylight 
begins to come I look about for a place to lie down. I stop looking 
for food and lie down for the day. All day long I lie there with my 
little slim feet and my little long face. 

This happened to an old frog: 

A frog lived near the stream. She had many children. A snake 
came swimming down the stream and swam into the frog’s house. 

149 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The frog was very much frightened, but she said: “Here is my 
brother come to see us. Brother, here are all your nephews and nieces. 
They are all named after you.” Meantime the snake was looking 
about, waiting to get a chance to catch one of the children. “I am 
very glad to see them,” said the snake. 

The old frog whispered to her children to run. She said to the 
snake, “I will go out and get a little wood to make a fire.” To the 
children she said, “Run away now; we are in a bad place; we are in 

danger.” 

The little frogs all hopped into the stream and swam away and 
were saved. 

An old woman who told such stories might give one or more 
of them to one of the children in the lodge, after she had told 
it to the child so often that it knew it by heart and could repeat 
it. Little girls sometimes told these stories to their parents, and 
if they made mistakes might be corrected by them until they 
were letter-perfect in the tales. 

A marriage custom among the Cheyennes that was very 
strong was this: If a young man killed in battle had sisters or 
female cousins, and a friend took special care of his body, one 
of these sisters or cousins was likely to be given the friend for 
a wife, to show the family’s appreciation of what he had done. 
The family of one so killed were grateful to a man who cared 
for his body, took his own blanket to wrap about it and carried 
the body to a proper place for leaving it. It was difficult or im¬ 
possible formally to bury one who had been killed at a distance 
from home, and the most that could be done would be to put 
the body in a suitable place. If the wolves devoured the dead 
man, that was not regarded as a misfortune. If a young man 
died from sickness and some young friend made a special cere¬ 
mony of mourning for him, he also was likely to have a wife 
given him in acknowledgment of this. Marriages of this sort 
often took place. 

In 1865, on Tongue River, there died a very old man named 

ISO 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

Bull Could Not Rise Up. Long before that a small war-party 
of Cheyennes had gone off to take horses, and far over near the 
Missouri River a young man belonging to the Ivistsinihpah had 
been killed by the Crows. Bull Could Not Rise Up was with 
the war-party, and the young man who was killed was his close 
friend. 

About one year afterward, Bull Could Not Rise Up got a 
sack made of old lodge-skins and one night went off alone. No 
one except his family knew that he had gone. All alone he made 
the journey to the place where his friend had been killed, to 
bring the young man’s bones back to the village. This was a 
dangerous trip for a man alone and on foot, for in those days 
grizzly bears were abundant and were the thing most to be 
feared on the prairie. He was of course safe from the enemy, 
for he could hide and his tracks could not be followed. The 
sack was to hold the bones of his friend. He found the place 
where his friend lay, and gathering up the bones put them in 
the sack and set out on his return. When he drew near to the 
village, he left the sack of bones on a near-by hill, and went 
to his lodge, and after a time told what he had done. When the 
people learned that he who had been killed had now been 
brought back, they all ran to this hill, everyone mourning and 
wailing for the one that had died. 

All the people in the village felt that Bull Could Not Rise Up 
had done a great thing in going after the bones of the dead 
man; and the same day the young man’s family put up for him 
a fine lodge, and three wives—sisters and cousins of the young 
man—were given to him. 

Bull Could Not Rise Up did not believe in ghosts. On one 
occasion while he was with a war-party a ghost came to the 
camp. All the men were frightened and ran out of the camp and 
hid from this ghost, but Bull Could Not Rise Up paid no atten¬ 
tion to it, but went on eating his food, and after a time the 
ghost went away without harming anyone. 

An odd custom referring to the old law as to early rising, 

151 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

and indirectly to marriage, was related to me by Picking Bones 
Woman. 

In those days—the early part of the nineteenth century—it 
was the custom, when a young man was first married, for many 
of his closest friends to visit him and, going to his lodge in the 
evening, to stop and sleep there. This old practice was still in 
vogue as recently as 1850. 

The day after her marriage, when Picking Bones Woman 
arose in the morning, all the men who had come to visit her 
husband were still asleep. When she went out of the lodge, her 
uncle asked her if the young men were up and had eaten. She 
told him that they were not up; that all were still asleep. Her 
uncle said, “Do not wake them; let them alone,” and went 
away to another part of the camp to find some man who had 
counted many coups. 

This man, carrying in his hand a long, thick stick, came to 
the lodge just after the sun had risen. Outside the lodge door 
he counted a coup in a loud voice, to awaken all the young men 
within. They knew what was coming, and putting their robes 
about their heads, ran out of the lodge as fast as they could 
go; and as each ran out the man with the stick struck him a 
hard blow, and counted a coup. It was an old custom that if 
these visitors did not get up in the morning when they were 
called and told that their food was ready, they should be called 
in this way, and that the brave who called them, and carried 
the stick, should drive them down to the river and into the 
water. 

The young men ran toward the river, and the brave after 
them, all running as hard as they could go. The young men 
dropped their blankets and robes, and as they ran tried to pull 
off their moccasins and leggings, racing fast, and with their 
breechclouts flying out behind them. They ran into the stream, 
and plunged into the deep water, and rose again, shaking their 
heads. Some had not had time to take off their moccasins or 
leggings, but got their clothing wet. 

152 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

On another occasion, Gentle Horse was in the lodge with a 
newly married pair, and rushed out, holding his robe tight 
about him to protect himself from the blows. He ran down to 
the river, with the brave close behind him, and plunged into 
the water, robe and all. 

Sometimes, if a large stream was not near, the man would 
chase the young men out on the prairie, following them and 
beating them until he grew tired of the sport. Those he was fol¬ 
lowing were not permitted to resist. 

The Cheyennes did not take many wives. The largest num¬ 
ber I have heard of for one man was five. These were sisters 
who were married to Crooked Neck. When he was made a 
chief, he gave three of his wives away, but lived always with 
the other two. Younger sisters were the potential wives of an 
older sister’s husband, but were not always married to him. 
Men seldom married a second wife who was not related to the 
first. When they did so, there was usually trouble, and the first 
wife was likely to leave her husband. 

If a man found it impossible to live peaceably with his wife, 
he might divorce her in public fashion, notifying everyone that 
he abandoned all rights in her that he might possess. This 
action was usually taken in the dance lodge at some dance or 
gathering of his own soldier society, and according to a certain 
prescribed form. Before he acted the man notified his soldier 
band of what he purposed to do. At a set time in the dance, 
therefore, the singers began a particular song, and the man, 
holding a stick in his hand, danced by himself and presently 
danced up to the drum; struck the drum with the stick; threw 
the stick up in the air, or perhaps toward a group of men in the 
lodge, and, as he threw it, shouted: “There goes my wife; I 
throw her away! Whoever gets that stick may have her!” 
Sometimes to this was added, “A horse goes with the stick!” 
If this last was said, the person who secured the stick received 
the horse—but not the wife. 

i53 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

If the man threw the stick across the dance lodge at a group 
of men, each one of them was likely to dodge, or jump to one 
side, to avoid being hit. If one of them was hit, or was narrowly 
missed by the stick, other men were likely to joke him, and to 
say: “Ha! you want that woman, do you? I thought I saw you 

reach for that stick!” 

By this act the man renounced all rights to the woman 
thrown away, and if anyone married her, the husband might 
not claim any gift or payment. 

To be treated publicly in this way was a disgrace to a woman. 
In any dispute or quarrel that the woman might be engaged in 
later, the matter was likely to be brought up, and her opponent 
miaht say, “Well, I never was thrown out of the dance by the 
drum.” If by chance a man married a woman who had been 
thus disgraced, and if they ever wrangled, he was likely to 

remind her of it. It was not forgotten. 

This ceremony occurred but seldom, yet it is still well recog¬ 
nized. Perhaps the last case on the Tongue River Indian Reser¬ 
vation occurred in 1899. 

A woman was in no sense the property of the man she mar¬ 
ried. If a man grew tired of his wife, or for any other reason 
divorced her, except by the drum, anyone else who married her 
must settle with the husband, often by paying him what he had 
given for the woman. If a woman ran off with another man, 
the latter must pay the injured husband. This usually settled 
the matter amicably; but sometimes the husband was angry, 
and might kill the man, or the woman, or both. Or, if the matter 
was not satisfactorily settled, he might kill horses belonging 
to his successor, or might injure him in some other way. 

If a man stole another’s wife, that is to say, either eloped 
with her or took her after her husband had thrown her away, 
he was likely to take an early opportunity of sending to the 
husband an old man carrying a filled pipe. The old man was 
authorized to talk to the injured husband and to offer him the 
pipe, telling him to ask for what he wished. If the husband 

i54 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

smoked, the matter was settled amicably. The husband might 
ask for, and would receive, what he regarded as a suitable pay¬ 
ment. In a case which occurred in 1877, Roan Bear eloped with 
another man’s wife. Later, when the pipe was sent to the hus¬ 
band, he smoked, and sent back word that he wanted a dog 
to eat—a woolly dog. This was the valuation he placed on the 
woman. 

If, however, a chief’s wife ran away with a man, no one 
might come to offer him the pipe. His dignity would not permit 
him to take revenge on the woman, and to receive payment for 
such an injury would be disgraceful. When the chief decided 
to overlook the offense, he summoned his soldiers to his lodge, 
formally filled his own pipe, and smoked there with them. The 
purpose of this formal act was well understood. The similar 
conduct of the owner of a scalp shirt is explained elsewhere. 

Young girls, as they were growing up, often had a number 
of horses given them by fathers, brothers, and near relatives. 
When the girl was married, the horses she possessed remained 
hers, and were entirely free of any control by her husband. 
The increase also was hers. Such property she was free to sell 
or to give away, or to bequeath by will, as she might choose. 
She might, of course, give one or two or more horses to her 
husband, and often did so; but those she retained were her 
own. There have been, and are, women in the tribe as wealthy, 
or nearly so, as any men. 

The Cheyenne young man was not permitted to speak to his 
adult sister. While the little children of a family played together 
until they approached manhood and womanhood, still, young 
men might not speak to their sisters after the latter had grown 
up—when they were about fifteen years old. Until very recently 
this law has been rigidly observed. If a man went to the lodge 
of his brother-in-law to speak to him, or to get some article, 
and found him absent, he did not address the wife—his own 

155 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

sister—on the matter, but spoke to a child about it. Thus, he 
might ask a little child—even a new-born babe—in the 
mother’s hearing, for the article which he required; or might 
give it a message for his brother-in-law. If he came to borrow 
something, very likely the wife presently took the article and 
put it down somewhere in his sight, and after a time the man 
took it and went away. The message left with the child in the 
wife’s hearing was always delivered. The practice continued to 
old age. 

The women of the Cheyennes are famous among all western 
tribes for their chastity. In old times it was most unusual for a 
girl to be seduced, and she who had yielded was disgraced for¬ 
ever. The matter at once became known, and she was taunted 
with it wherever she went. It was never forgotten. No young 
man would marry her. This seems the more remarkable, since 
the Arapahoes, with whom the Cheyennes have been so long 
and so closely associated, are notorious for the looseness of 
their women. 

On the other hand, since the marriage tie among the Chey¬ 
ennes, as with other Indians, is not a strong one, and a man 
might divorce his wife, either for cause or at his own caprice, 
there were occasional slips on the part of the married woman, 
who might divorce her husband by running off with another 
man. 

Among the Cheyennes, as already said, the women have 
great influence. They discuss matters freely with their hus¬ 
bands, argue over points, persuade, cajole, and usually have 
their own way about tribal matters. They are, in fact, the final 
authority in the camp. There are traditions of women chiefs, 
and of women who have possessed remarkable mysterious 
powers or have shown great wisdom in council. If in later days 
the women did not take part in councils, they nevertheless 
exercised on the men of their families an influence that can 

156 

WOMAN AND HER PLACE 

hardly be overestimated, and in the councils so frequently held, 
where only men spoke, this influence of the women was always 
felt. 

In old times women sometimes went to war, not necessarily 
to fight and take horses, but as helpers; yet many accounts are 
given of cases in which they have fought, and have struck their 
enemies. Sometimes women charged and counted coup on the 
killed. In later days, however, it was unusual for women to go 
to war; and in modern times they have not taken part in coun¬ 
cils. Yet, sixty years ago women went to war, and even in the 
latest hostilities women occasionally accompanied the men. 

Buffalo Hump said to me: “A brave woman down in the 
south rode with her brother into battle. Her brother’s horse was 
killed, and she stayed in that place and fought where her 
brother fell. They were at close quarters, and the woman 
fought the enemy off until a young man came up and took her 
brother on his horse and got him away.” 

Another woman was prominent in Crook’s fight on the Rose¬ 
bud. This was the sister of Chief Comes In Sight, who in the 
early part of this century was still living in Oklahoma. I have 
already given an account of this battle, and of the achievement 
of Buffalo Calf Road Woman (Muts i mV u no).* How highly 
the Cheyennes thought of her is shown by the fact that they 

Brother.” 

RELATIONSHIP TERMS 

A woman’s children called their mother’s sister, mother, and 
her brother, uncle. They called their father’s brother, father, 
and the father’s sister, aunt. 

Some relationship terms are these: 

Father, also father’s brother (my), ne'hyo. 

Mother, also mother’s sister (my), nah'koa. 

2 The Fighting Cheyennes, p. 323. 

157 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Father’s sister (or father’s brother’s wife) = aunt (my), nahan 
(ehyai', your aunt). 

Mother’s brother = uncle (my), nakhan (hishish', that person’s 
uncle). 

The personal possessive pronoun is always present in these terms. 
Brother, also male cousin, nahnih’, my elder brother; see'was'sin- 
mi t, younger brother; tsl' hi ni hit, elder brother. 

Sister, also female cousin (man speaking), nah'kahim. 
Brother-in-law (my) (used by men), nit'ohph. 

Sister-in-law (my) (used by men), nit' am (if used by women means 
brother-in-law). 

Son, naha'. 

Grandfather (my), namshim'. 

Grandmother, also mother-in-law (my), nish' ki. 

Grandchild (my), nish' a. 

Son-in-law (the same). 

A father’s brother, being father, the previous generation, that is, 
the great-uncle, is called grandfather. The father’s sister, being aunt, 
her mother would be also aunt. 

A sister’s children (nephews) (male), na tsin' os ta. 

A sister’s children (female), he'hyamin'. 

A brother’s children (same as one’s own) (my), na nis' 5 ne. 

WOMEN’S SOCIETIES 

)4 S the Cheyenne men had their soldier and other societies 
/\ or associations, so among the women societies existed 
A m which they felt were quite as important as those of 
the men. Yet, because the association of a man with men be¬ 
comes closer and more intimate than any he can have with 
women, less is to be learned of the women’s societies than of 
those of the men. Nevertheless, some detail has been given me 
of the ceremonial of one or two of these. There are probably 
others of which I know nothing. 

Some Cheyennes declare that women who have been to war 
constitute a society, but what ceremony there may be con¬ 
nected with it, I do not know. It may be that instead of con¬ 
stituting a society, they constituted a class. It is said that 
women who have quilled thirty robes are in a group by them¬ 
selves, as are also those who have made a lodge alone; that is 
to say, without the assistance of any of their fellows. This 
would mean the tanning and softening of the hides, their fitting 
and sewing, and the making of the lodge-poles. 

Women who had performed these operations were few in 
number. They were highly respected for their extraordinary 
achievements. 

Of the women’s associations referred to the most important 
one was that devoted to the ceremonial decoration, by sewing 
on quills, of robes, lodge coverings, and other things made of 
skins of animals. This work women considered of high impor¬ 
tance, and, when properly performed, quite as creditable as 
were bravery and success in war among the men. The guild of 

159 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

quillers included the best women in the camp. Its ceremony and 
ritual have been handed down from mythic times. 

When a young woman greatly desired some good fortune— 
as the success of a brother or husband going to war, or the 
restoration to health of a sick brother or a child, she might 
vow that if this good fortune came to her, she would embellish 
a robe with quills for some priest, doctor, or warrior. 

Such a piece of work must be done in prescribed ceremonial 
fashion, and the girl must be taught to perform it by some 
member of the quilling society who had previously done the 
same thing. The making and offering of such a robe in the 
prescribed way secured the maker admission to the society of 
women who had done similar things. Thereafter she might 
attend their feasts, and, having herself been taught, might 
teach others. 

The name of this society is Me e no' 1st st, 1 which means 
quillers—those who apply quills to leather. They had a spe¬ 
cial crier, an old man, who called out through the camp what 
they were about to do. 

The girl or woman who had pledged herself to ornament the 
robe went to some old woman who belonged to the society, and, 
after making her a present, told her what she wished to do, 
and asked her assistance. The old woman directed the candi¬ 
date to hold her hands out in front of her, palms up and edges 
together. The old woman bit off a piece of a certain root, 
chewed it fine, and spat on the hands ceremonially, and the 
candidate made the ceremonial motions, passing her right hand 
over the outside of her right leg, from ankle to hip, her left 
hand over her right arm from wrist to shoulder, her left hand 
over her left leg from ankle to hip, and her right hand over the 
left arm from wrist to shoulder. Then the hands were placed 
on the head, and passed backward from the forehead. 

The candidate now inquired of this old woman—usually 
some near relative, if the girl had one who belonged to the 

1 £me i tu”, she sews on quills. 

160 

LITTLE CREEK WOMAN 

WORKING ON A MOCCASIN 

WOMEN’S SOCIETIES 

society—as to the forms and ceremonies to be observed in 
inviting people to the feast, and in cooking the food. After she 
had been instructed as to these things, she asked the crier to 
go out and announce the feast. All those invited belonged to 
the society of quillers, all of whom must have ornamented 
lodge linings, back-rests, robes, possible sacks, stars for lodges, 
or baby cradles, in this ceremonial manner. Sometimes only one 
section of the society might be asked—only those who had 
quilled robes, or who had ornamented baby cradles or stars. 

Among the Northern Cheyenne women there seem to be 
divisions or grades of the quilling society not recognized in the 
South. These divisions from lower to higher begin with: (i) 
moccasins; (2) baby cradles; (3) stars for ornamenting 
lodges; (4) buffalo-robes; (5) lodge linings, back-rests, and 
possible sacks. A woman in any of these grades might call a 
meeting in her own class, but all who belonged to any of the 
divisions higher than that class were privileged to attend. 

When the guests were expected, the giver of the feast sat at 
the back of the lodge, and next to her on her right was the old 
woman who was instructing her. After the members had arrived, 
but before the ceremonies began, the old crier was perhaps told 
to call out, asking some poor person to come and see the candi¬ 
date—whose name was mentioned—quill the first robe she had 
ever ornamented. The invited poor person came, and for com¬ 
ing received a good present—usually a horse. 

The man or woman who had received the gift left the lodge 
after the ceremonies were over—before the food was served— 
and (if a man) mounting the horse rode about the camp, sing¬ 
ing a song in which he told that the candidate, whom he named, 
had presented him a horse on the occasion of the ornamenting 
of her first robe. 

When the old women first assembled they described the work 
that they had done, telling of the robes and other things that 
they had ornamented. This recital was formal in character, and 
among women closely paralleled the counting of coups by men. 

161 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

If possible, a woman’s statement was verified by a witness, or 
if not by a witness, by affirmation over the arrow or the pipe. 

The instructress then exhorted the candidate, and offered a 
prayer, asking for her throughout her life good fortune, health, 
abundance, and success of all kinds; that her children, if she 
should have any, might do well and have plenty. 

To this feast, from two to four men—good warriors—had 
been asked, and at the end of the old woman’s speech, one of 
these rose to his feet and counted several coups—perhaps all 
he had ever made. After he had finished the narration, he 
reached forward and touched the edge of the kettle with the 
edge of his hand. The kettle, on this as on many other occa¬ 
sions, was regarded as standing for an enemy. 

After the warrior had counted his coups, the instructress 
took from the kettle a piece of meat, and tore from it five small 
pieces which she put in her right palm. Then the old woman— 
the one either at the right or the left of the door, as might be 
indicated—rose and went over to the back of the lodge. She 
stretched out her right hand to the instructress, and received 
in it in ceremonial order the five little pieces of meat, which she 
then transferred to her left palm; she turned, went to the door, 
and passed out as she had come in. That is to say, if she had 
come in from the north, she went out toward the north. In other 
words, she did not pass in front of—did not cross—the door¬ 
way; no one might do that. She then walked around the lodge 
until she came to the star or ornament which was toward the 
east, when she took a piece of meat in her right hand, lifted it 
to the east, and holding it there for a moment, made a prayer, 
slowly lowered it to the earth, and placed it lightly on the 
ground. She passed on around the lodge to the south, and did 
the same, and so on, opposite the other stars on the lodge, each 
of which faced a cardinal point. When the fourth piece of meat 
had been put down, she did not keep on around to the lodge 
door and enter, but turned about and went back all around the 
lodge, and went in as she had come out. Then she went to the 

162 

WOMEN’S SOCIETIES 

fire, held the fifth piece of meat to the sky, and after a prayer 
placed it at the edge of the fireplace. If there were several ket¬ 
tles, five pieces of food were taken from each kettle, and each 
set of offerings was treated in the same way. 

While all this was going on, the instructress was exhorting 
the girl, telling her to note well what was being done, and to 
remember everything, so that hereafter, when she should be 
called to instruct at a feast of this sort, she might perform her 
part well. 

Now the giver of the feast served the food. Each woman had 
brought her own dish, usually a large one, which was to be 
nearly or quite filled. Of this food she ate a portion, and took 
the remainder home with her. Soon after they had eaten, the 
feasters dispersed to their homes. 

Later, the candidate asked some old woman to come to her 
lodge and, with white clay and a stick, to draw on the robe the 
pattern for the intended ornamentation. For this service she 
presented the old woman with a pair of moccasins, or some 
article of clothing, and gave her something to eat. 

The lodge in which the feast was held was not necessarily 
owned by the candidate; it might be borrowed for the occasion. 
Usually it was one of those ornamented with four circular 
pieces of deerskin or buffalo-cow skin, decorated with vari¬ 
colored quills in concentric circles, sewed on the lodge covering 
halfway between the ground and the smoke-hole. These repre¬ 
sent the four points of the compass. The two which looked 
toward the south and east were on either side of the door and 
were higher than its top. The ones toward the north and west 
were opposite these, on either side of the back. 

The quilling society is considered very old, and the knowl¬ 
edge of the use of quills in the ornamentation of robes and 
dresses is said to have been brought to the tribe by the hero 
of a widely distributed story among Plains tribes which I have 
called The Buffalo Wife. The traditional account of the cere¬ 
mony, given elsewhere in this work, rests on the authority of 

163 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Picking Bones Woman, who herself had quilled thirty robes, 
a very remarkable achievement. She has long been dead. 

The smoother was made from the shoulder blade of a buffalo, 
and was about a foot long and three-quarters of an inch wide. 
It was used to smooth and flatten out the quills as they were 
being put on the robe. The operation of quilling a robe was 
something sacred, and the women working at it usually sat at 
the back of the lodge, as far as possible from the door. No one 
was permitted to pass in front of them. The woman who was 
quilling a robe did not take the robe out of the sack in which 
it was kept. Instead, she pulled from the sack only a portion 
of the robe she was working on, and thus did not soil the robe. 
Having in the sack all the articles she needed, she could con¬ 
tinue her work without delays. A man might not rest his head 
against one of these robes which was being worked on; if he 
should do so, a bull might kill him. While working on the robes, 
the women covered their hands with white clay, or sometimes 
with burned gypsum, so as to keep their hands from soiling a 
robe. 

The Southern Cheyennes no longer work in quills, because 
they have none, since there are no porcupines in the country 
which they now inhabit. Besides quills and grass, they formerly 
made use of the long, slender, black roots of a plant which 
grows along the streams in the valley of the Canadian. These 
they dye, and still put on canvas or cloth, somewhat as they 
used to put on quills. Twisted cornhusks, sometimes dyed, have 
recently been used in ornamentation as tassels. The sinew used 
in sewing on quills was very fine, and the sewing was wholly 
under the quills, so that it did not show. 

All this quilling of robes was woman’s work. Except in cases 
where an instructor was required, men were not permitted to 
enter the lodge where the ceremony was going on. For the 
women it was in a way almost as serious as the occupation of 
making shields for the men. Though men might not enter a 
lodge where women were putting on these things, there were 

164 

WOMEN’S SOCIETIES 

some exceptions, thus: When women were in the lodge, orna¬ 
menting the linings, sewing stars, or putting on the final orna¬ 
ments (hi nitn'niva nists', singular), a very brave man who 
had counted many coups might go up to the lodge door, strike 
the lodge, and counting a coup might enter and take a pot of 
the food standing by the fire, and carry it away with him. This 
was done partly as a joke on the women, but they did not object 
to it, for it showed a respect for their ancient custom. 

When the men contemplated doing this, they were likely to 
get together in a lodge and select someone who, when on the 

to go ahead as a 
scout to see what the women had to eat. He went to the lodge 
where they were at work and looked in, and then returned to 
report. As soon as the women saw him, they knew his purpose, 
and prepared for the visit of the one who would come after him 
by filling one or two kettles with food and placing them near 
the door, so that the visitor might take them. The scout having 
reported, they chose the bravest man, who acted as stated. He 
usually took with him a man to help carry the food away. When 
he entered the lodge, the women were ready for him, and said, 
“There it is,” and he took the two nearest kettles and went 
away. On one occasion when I was in the camp when a lodge 
was being decorated, this action was proposed, but the man 
selected to go as scout refused to “bother the women.” 

Among the Southern Cheyennes a woman who had quilled 
thirty robes was supposed by that action to have secured for her¬ 
self good fortune throughout her life, and was expected to live 
to old age. The woman who gave me this account explained 
that it was because she had done this that she was old, and that 
a number of her companions sitting about were also old. Among 
the Northern section a woman who has ornamented a lodge— 
put stars on lodge covering, decorated door, lining, and back¬ 
rests, and a robe for the owner—had done the most important 
work that a member of the quilling society can do. At all meet¬ 
ings of these quillers, before the food was served it was usual 

165 

war-path, had first discovered the enemy, 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

for one old woman after another to get up and tell of the robes 
she had quilled, just as a warrior would recount his brave 

deeds. 

When a woman who was quilling a robe made a mistake in 
her work and put on a line of quills in the wrong place, as some¬ 
times happened, the mistake could be corrected only by the 
performance of a certain ceremony. She must call in some brave 
man, who counted a coup over the robe, reciting what he had 
done, where he had done it, and winding up with the statement, 
“And when I scalped him, I did it in this way.” As he said this 
he passed the blade of a knife under the defective work, cutting 
the threads and so removing the work. In performing this 
operation he did not use his own knife, but one kept for this 
use by the quilling society. 

When sewing stars on the lodge, if a woman made a mistake, 
four brave men were sent for, each of whom had counted a 
coup. If a star was put on in the wrong place, it was taken off; 
a man came up to the place, took the awl, counted his coup, 
returned the awl to the woman, and she sewed the star on again. 
The coup was to be counted only for those stars where a mis¬ 
take had been made. 

A man might not touch the decorations for a new lodge until 
they had been sewed on. 

In sewing the stars on a lodge, a large one at the back below 
the smoke-hole—representing the sun—was sewed on first; next 
the one facing south; then the one to the west; then the one to 
the north, and last the one to the east. When the buffalo-tails 
were attached to the stars—which in the case of those facing 
the four directions was not done until the lodge had been raised 
—the woman who was making the lodge came out of the door, 
carrying the buffalo-tails, followed by the instructors, and 
turned to the south. When they reached the south star, the 
instructors and the lodge woman raised the lodge covering, 
passed under it directly across the lodge, and raising the cover¬ 
ing on the other side, came out under the north star. Then they 

166 

WOMEN’S SOCIETIES 

walked around to the east star, raised the lodge covering, and 
passing under it crossed the lodge and came out under the west 
star. Then they passed around from west to north, east, and 
south, and attached the first tail at the south star, and then 
passed around, attaching a tail at the west, north, and east star, 
successively. In pinning down this lodge, the first pin to hold 
down the covering was driven under the south star. Before 
being passed into the loop, it was moved forward and back 
toward the loop four times; then it was driven into the ground 
with four blows. The other pins were driven without this cere¬ 
mony. The four pins first driven were those under the four 
stars in the usual order. Afterward the whole covering was 
pinned down without ceremony. 

After the lodge was finished and set up, the women cooked 
food, brought it into the lodge, and set it in the center. Then 
the crier called up the people, and they stood off at a little dis¬ 
tance from the front of the lodge. A man who had counted coup 
on an enemy in a lodge, walked up to the door, struck the lodge, 
and counted that coup. If he had taken an enemy’s horse, he 
told of it. No one could go in until this man had counted a coup, 
and had himself entered. He was the first to go in. 

For the ornamentation of clothing, robes, and lodges, porcu¬ 
pine quills, dyed in various colors, were most often used. A 
certain reed ( fEquisetum) was also employed, as well as the 
slender black root and a black grass. A few years ago beautiful 
reed and quillwork was often seen on robes, moccasins, and 
tobacco pouches. The quills and reeds were then always fas¬ 
tened to the leather with sinew thread. Later, as white men’s 
manufactures became more familiar articles of trade, hawk- 
bells and red cloth were used to ornament women’s dresses, 

then shells of different kinds, and finally imitation shells of 
porcelain. 

The quillwork and beadwork on the war shirts often con¬ 
sisted of concentric circles—or sometimes a many-pointed star 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

—representing the sun. The patterns on the upper side of a 
moccasin were often symbolic or pictographic. The design 
might represent lodges, or rivers, or people going to war. A 
common checkerboard pattern refers to the lining of the third 
stomach of a buffalo. This looks like a series of little uncovered 
boxes—somewhat like a honeycomb, in fact. 

Although the tendency among observers is to see a meaning 
in every Indian design, many of these designs are not always 
symbolic. Often a woman makes a bead or quillwork design 
merely because she thinks it pretty, to satisfy her own idea of 
beauty. If asked what the design means, she may try to explain 
it, if she feels an explanation is expected, or she may say that 
she did it merely because it pleased her fancy. 

Yet, as Mr. Petter has well pointed out, the decorative art 
of the Cheyennes in former days was in charge of certain 
women’s societies, which were conducted with definite cere¬ 
monies and to which an initiation was required. These women 
were called the selected ones, Mon in V heo, and to them was 
referred a great deal of the decorative work by the use of quills, 
feathers, fine roots, cornstalks, and paintings, which the Chey¬ 
ennes used. The women of this society were usually elderly 
and were those who understood the meanings of the different 
designs. Most women still follow the old designs in their bead- 
work, but they are not held by the old traditions, and are intro¬ 
ducing changes according to their fancy. The selected ones 
“had strict rules in their designs and they kept secret the mean¬ 
ing and arrangement of the colors, as well as the relation of the 
designs to each other. The designs were always symbolic and 
talismanic, representing concrete organic objects, whereas the 
colors were more emblematic of the abstract in creatures and 
creation, e.g., white for active life, very light blue for quietness, 
peace, serenity (from tlie cloudless sky); green for growing 
life; red for warmth, food, blood, home (from blood); amber 
yellow, ripeness, perfection, beauty (from the sunsets); black 

168 

WOMEN’S SOCIETIES 

for cessation of enmity, hostilities (from a dead glow being no 
more hot). The meaning of the colors ramifies as they are com¬ 
bined, or, according as they are lighter or darker shade.” 2 
2 Petter, English-Cheyenne Dictionary, p. 97. 

169 

INDUSTRIES 

T HE industries of the Cheyennes were few and simple. 
Their clothing was made of the skins of wild animals, 
dressed soft, sewed with sinew, often highly orna¬ 
mented with the quills of the porcupine, and trimmed with fur 
or feathers, or with the hair of enemies. Their dwellings, in 
historic times, were also made of the skins of large animals and 
were warm, comfortable, light, and easily transported. Their 
cutting tools, and also their hammers, were usually of stone, 
while other implements were fashioned of wood, bone, or horn. 
Some of their knives were of bone. Their dishes were of wood, 
horn, or clay; and their pots for cooking, of fired clay, were 
strong and durable. In old times the paunch or hide of the buf¬ 
falo often served as a kettle for boiling or stewing. Cups and 
buckets were made from the lining of the buffalo’s paunch, 
stiffened above by a circular wooden ring sewed to the mem¬ 
brane with sinew, the holes being plugged with tallow. 

Among the Indians there was practical community in the 
matter of food. A man who was hungry need never suffer. If he 
entered the lodge of some neighbor or acquaintance—unless it 
was a time of actual starvation—food was at once set before 
him. In the same way, as happens often among groups of sim¬ 
ple civilized men, there was community of labor in some mat¬ 
ters and a general spirit of helpfulness, which made easy for 
members of the tribe certain tasks which, without the aid of 
friends and neighbors, could not readily have been accom¬ 
plished. Examples of this were seen in the way in which women 
of the camp often came together for the purpose of helping one 
another to make new lodges; and among men in the organized 

170 

INDUSTRIES 

fashion in which certain hunting operations were performed. 
This spirit of kindliness to one’s neighbor, and this willingness 
to be of assistance to one another, were characteristic of all 
Indians, who, within the tribe, were a friendly, good-natured 
people. Although they had not formed habits of continued 
labor, they were always willing to take hold to help, even 
though this willingness did not result in any very long-con¬ 
tinued effort. 

With the coming of the white man, metal took the place of 
stone among the Cheyennes. After a time they ceased to make 
pottery; their ancient dishes were discarded for those of civili¬ 
zation, and the bowl made from the shell of the turtle, or from 
a knot knocked from a box-elder or other tree, began to take 
on a sacred character and came to be used only for the mixing 
of medicine by a doctor, or for the special dish from which he 
ate or drank. Until very recently, among the older Cheyennes, 
there were still some who would not eat or drink from the metal 
dishes made by white men. 

As brass kettles and tin cups took the place of earthenware 
pots and the cups made of buffalo paunch, so the gun and its 
powder and ball in time supplanted the bow and its arrow; and 
at last the soft, warm, and comfortable skin clothing gave place 
to the cast-off uniforms of United States soldiers. But this rela¬ 
tion is of an earlier day, when the bow was the usual weapon 
used in hunting and in war, though even then its stone or bone 
point had passed out of use, and the sheet-iron arrowpoint, filed 
to a sharp edge and then whetted on a smooth river pebble, 
gave to this weapon a range and a penetration which it could 
not have had in the olden time. 

In the life of the Cheyenne camp, woman was an equal part¬ 
ner with man, and the division of duties which existed between 
the sexes appeared in their industries. The men usually made 
men’s utensils and weapons, and many of the ceremonial imple¬ 
ments, while the women provided the articles used in the house- 

171 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

hold, as well as the dwelling, the family clothing, and the cook¬ 
ing utensils. 

The Cheyennes knew nothing of the art of weaving, though 
certain simple attempts in this direction were seen, as in the 
snowshoes, made by crossing strands of rawhide over a hoop, 
or the similarly interlaced rawhide used in the wheel with which 
they played a favorite game. They braided or twisted ropes of 
sinew for use in softening the hides which they dressed; these 
were either plaited in four strands or were tightly twisted in 
two. They made ropes of the hair of the buffalo’s head, twist¬ 
ing long strands on a hook, afterward twisting them tightly 
together. 

ARMS 

In modern times, that is to say, after the Cheyennes had left 
the Missouri River and moved out onto the plains and had begun 
to give less attention to agriculture and to devote themselves 
more and more to the pursuit of the buffalo, this animal fur¬ 
nished a very large proportion of the articles that they pos¬ 
sessed, except such tools as were made of stone, or of stone 
and wood. To enumerate the articles manufactured from the 
products of the buffalo would be to give almost a catalog of 
their implements. 

The Bow. Of the primitive utensils of the Cheyenne, perhaps 
the most important was the bow, on which he depended largely 
for subsistence, and almost altogether for defense. Yet it would 
seem that it is not very long since the Cheyennes began to use 
bows and arrows in war, and that it is still more recently that 
they learned how to feather the arrow. The Cheyennes say that 
the first people with whom they fought on their journey toward 
the plains were the Assiniboines, whom they met after that 
tribe had obtained guns. Some of the Cheyennes were killed 
and the others ran away. The Assiniboines tell the same story, 
and say that in this first great fight with the Cheyennes the 

172 

INDUSTRIES 

latter were armed only with sharpened sticks and did not seem 
to know what guns were. In their fighting they ran up close to 
the Assiniboines, who easily killed many of them. 

From the traditions told by old people today, we may pic¬ 
ture the development of the arrow from a mere unfeathered 
dart to an implement which had the accuracy and considerably 
more than the range of the best old-fashioned revolving pistol. 
It is obvious that the tradition of the Indians cannot go back 
to the origin of the bow, but at least we have some accounts 
of its manufacture and improvement. 

Some of the earliest stories of the Cheyennes refer to a time 
when they ensnared the animals which formed a part of their 
subsistence, and then beat them to death with clubs. They say 
that at that time they had no bows, but their weapons were 
chiefly clubs, or stones tied to the end of sticks. With these they 
killed animals after they had been snared or had been driven 
into some situation from which they could not escape. 

Nevertheless, the Cheyennes developed a very excellent bow 
which they used with great skill. The modern bows made by 
the Cheyennes were short—three and one-half to four and one- 
half feet was the usual length. They were made of wood, or of 
the horns of animals—the elk, the buffalo, or the mountain 
sheep. A certain juniper tree (Jutiiperus scopulorum, Sarg.) 
was regarded as furnishing the best bow wood used in later 
times. 1 Usually a small upright tree was chosen, or a stick was 
split from a larger tree if the grain of the piece was straight. 
The heart wood was not used. This juniper wood was used for 
their bows by many of the Missouri River Indians, including 
Assiniboines, Arikaras, Mandans, and Hidatsas. After they 
had reached the country where it grew, Osage orange (bois 
d’arc ) was used to some extent, more especially in the southern 
country, where juniper was not always to be had. It furnished 
a good bow wood. Cherry was not good, for “it did not have 

1 From the twigs of this tree the early whites of the Missouri River distilled 
an oil which, mixed with grease, made a good salve. 

173 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the right spring.” In later times, when hickory became acces¬ 
sible, this was a highly esteemed bow wood. 

Bows of elk-horn were made in two ways. In one, the maker 
filed flat, and glued together, a number of straight pieces of the 
horn, and then wrapped them with sinew. Another method was 
to take a whole long, more or less crooked, antler and treat it 
in one piece. If such a bow was to be made, an antler as nearly 
straight as possible was chosen, and was then whittled, scraped, 
and rubbed until fairly thin. It was soaked in water, and little 
by little more of it was taken off until it had become quite thin. 
It was still crooked, but by heating it before the fire and greas¬ 
ing and working it, it became more or less limber. In this 
crooked form, the bow was finally completed, being shaped, the 
nocks cut for the string, and die whole implement finished. 
During all this time it was constantly being worked and made 
more pliable, and finally, when it had become quite flexible, the 
bow was firmly lashed to a straight stick and left there until 
entirely dry and straight. Sinew was now applied to the back, 
and when this had been done and the glue had dried and 
hardened, the implement was complete and ready for use. Such 
bows were fine to look at, but they were more for show than for 
use. They did not last very long, but were likely to break when 
they became old. Bows were made of buffalo-horn by gluing 
together a number of straight pieces and wrapping the splices 
with sinew, as elsewhere described. 

Bows made of the horn of the mountain sheep were durable 
and very useful, and long ago many of these were possessed by 
the Cheyennes. They were made by splitting the ram’s horn 
into long pieces, which were steamed or boiled, drying them 
straight, and then binding and gluing them together. After this, 
they were backed with sinew and were very strong and springy. 
There was another fashion of making the sheep-horn bow: The 
horn was cut in a spiral about the horn and so across the grain. 
This worm of horn was then boiled and stretched, and again 
boiled and again stretched along a long stick, until the piece 

174 

INDUSTRIES 

was made straight. The strip was thick and wide, and the bow 
consisted of this single piece, not of several strips. After it had 
been made straight, it was whittled and scraped down to proper 
thickness, and was then rubbed with a smooth stone until it 
became everywhere smooth. The sinew was now applied to the 
back with glue, and the sinew covering was smoothed with a 
buffalo-rib. The bow was now lashed to a straight pole to dry. 
Sometimes it was left straight and sometimes was given a 
double curve. In the latter case, two little blocks or bundles 
were placed under the bow, each about one-quarter way from 
either end, and the bow was firmly tied down close to the pole 
in the middle and near the ends. When fully dry, the bow was 
trimmed and smoothed down, any loose ends of sinew being cut 
off with a sharp knife. After this, the ends where the bowstring 
fitted on were wrapped with sinew, applied with glue. Finally, 
when the bow was finished, a coating of glue was applied to the 
back, and on this wet glue was scattered burnt gypsum to 
whiten the back of the bow. The under surface, where the horn 
showed, might be painted with any color. The last thing put on 
was the deerskin handhold, which was wrapped on the bow in a 
string about three-quarters of an inch wide, and held in place 
by glue. The whitening for the back was applied to all the 
best bows, no matter of what material they were made. Even 
hickory bows were often so treated. 

The glue used in the manufacture of bows and arrows was 
made from the chippings from the rawhide of the neck of a 
buffalo-bull, or even from the shavings cut from any buffalo- 
hide in the process of thinning it down. These shavings were 
boiled with water, and made a strong glue, which was some¬ 
times almost as thick as molasses. This jelly-like soup was 
often eaten, and was very good. 

After a piece of wood chosen for a bow had been seasoned 
and shaped with a knife, and then scraped as smooth as pos¬ 
sible with the edge of the knife, it was rubbed with a piece of 
buffalo-rib until smooth and polished. Then the glue was spread 

*75 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

smoothly and evenly on the back with a stick, and the sinew 
from the back of the buffalo-bull, on either side of the spine, 
was applied fresh, and was smoothed down with the rib pre¬ 
viously used in smoothing the wood. The layer of sinew might 
be a thirty-second of an inch thick, and over this was applied 
another coating of glue. The bow was then hung up in the 
lodge, and in forty-eight hours was dry and ready for use. 

Not all men made bows in the same way. Different men had 
different methods, and each thought his way the best. Also, at 
different periods of time different methods prevailed—the 
fashions changed. In applying the sinew, some people laid it on 
the back of the bow in wide long pieces, while others thought 
it better to split it and apply it in small threads. 

In ancient times they made bowstrings of the twisted bark 
of an unidentified tall weed (a milkweed), and later of hair, 
using any kind that was strong enough, and twisting it tight by 
means of a wooden hook. It is impossible to say when sinew 
bowstrings replaced those made of hair, but it was not until 
after women had learned that sinew could be used as thread 
for sewing. They had killed some large animal and had 
brought in the meat. A woman who was cutting up this animal 
noticed the great tendon which lies under the shoulder blade, 
and said to her husband, “I believe that from this a bowstring 
could be made that would be better than one of hair.” They 
tried it and found it good, and have ever since used this for 
their bowstrings. So they owe their bowstrings to a woman. 
Bowstrings were made of the sinew of the buffalo-bull. 

There was a wide variation in the power of different bows. 
Some men could not bend the bows commonly used by other 
men. I estimate the extreme range of the Cheyenne bow at 
about four hundred yards; in other words, it will throw an 
arrow to that distance. Some men declare that the best bowmen 
could send an arrow five hundred yards, and old men say that 
in days of the old smoothbore flintlock trade guns the bow at 

176 

INDUSTRIES 

long-distance shooting was a more effective weapon than the 
gun. 

An item in one of the English papers speaks of archery rec¬ 
ords made by men in England which approached this distance. 
For example: in The Shooting Times, July 22, 1905, reference 
is made to “a shot” by Sir Ralph Payne Gallwey of three hun¬ 
dred and sixty-seven yards. This is said to have been made with 
a Turkish compound bow, with which some very long shots 
have been made. A correspondent of the same journal says, “It 
is recorded that the then Sultan of Turkey in 1798 shot an 
arrow nine hundred and seventy-two yards with one of these 
bows.” Other shots are instanced, with English bows, of three 
hundred and sixty or three hundred and forty yards. 2 

At the most effective range—say from forty to seventy 
yards—an Indian could handle a bow and arrows more rapidly 
and more effectively than the average man could use a revolv¬ 
ing pistol of that time. The effectiveness of the bow and arrow 
in hunting is discussed in the chapter on that subject. 

Stories are told of an occasion when the Cheyennes armed 
with bows kept off an attacking party of Crows who had some 
guns. I have no doubt that the sinew backing of the Indian 
bow added much power to the implement. 3 

There were different modes of handling the string and arrow 
in drawing the bow. Some Cheyennes merely held the arrow 
between thumb and forefinger, and pulled straight back on the 
arrow and so on the string, others assisted this by having the 
middle finger pull on the string, while others still held the arrow 
between the forefinger and middle finger hooked over the 
string, and held the arrow in its place by the thumb. Each 
man’s way seemed to him the best, which only means that, hav¬ 
ing practiced this method most, he could produce the best 

2 See Roberts, The English Bowman, London, 1S01. 

3 For the power of the bow in skilled hands, compare Cabeza de Vaca, p. 31, 
Hodge ed., Scribner's, N. Y., 1907. 

177 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

results with it. In other words, the methods were individual 
and not tribal, as has been suggested. 4 

The Arrow ( Mah ). Arrows were the most precious posses¬ 
sions of the primitive Indians. If a man wished to marry a girl, 
he might offer ten arrows as a gift to the girl’s father. Men 
always gathered up their arrows, devoting much time to search¬ 
ing for them and trying never to lose one. They were too hard 
to get and cost too much effort to be wasted. In the same way, 
if the points were lost from the arrows, they searched for them 
long and carefully. 

The old men who made the best arrows were proud of their 
skill and were greatly respected for it. There was a great dif¬ 
ference in arrows, and it was essential for the best work that 
the shaft should be properly proportioned. The proportions 
between the shaft, head, and feather were quite definite, and 
if these were preserved the arrow did excellent work; other¬ 
wise it was a failure. Great skill and judgment were required 
to make a perfect arrow. An arrow too light in the shaft would 
not fly steadily; one too heavy would not carry its force long 
enough. A good, well-balanced arrow, when it struck the mark, 
tilted up at the feather-end, while the feather-end of a bad 
arrow dropped down. At gatherings and feasts, men often spoke 
of such matters, telling how their arrows acted. The subject was 
of general interest, and when it was under discussion, those 
present always listened. 

The Cheyennes were thought to have the best arrows of any 
Indians in their country. The old-time arrow makers always 
made arrows by tens, and those of each ten were the same; 
thus each man bought his arrows in tens and all were alike. 
Each arrow maker manufactured his arrows after his own 
fashion. 

Arrowshafts were usually made from the straight shoots of 

4 Handbook of American Indians, Bull. 30, Bureau American Ethnology, pt. 
1, p. 93 » quotes Dr. Morse as describing four methods of holding the arrow and 
the bowstring; but the conclusions drawn as to these methods are erroneous. 
The methods described are merely those practiced by individuals. 

178 

INDUSTRIES 

the cherry bush, but some arrow makers used the straight 
shoots of the currant, and others those of “red-willow” and 
rose. Such shoots were employed because most easily smoothed 
and straightened. The shoots were cut in regular lengths, ac¬ 
cording to the rule of the arrow maker, who usually measured 
the shafts on his arm, from the tip of the middle finger nearly 
halfway up the humerus. They were then tied up in bundles 
and hung up in the lodge until dry. 

In collecting the sticks for arrowshafts, arrow makers were 
always careful in peeling them to see that they were strong 
enough to go through the straightening process, for it was 
deemed very unlucky for the maker and his family if he broke 
an arrow-stick while straightening it. In handling his arrow- 
sticks, the Cheyenne always pointed them toward the fire in 
looking at them to see if they were straight, and never allowed 
them to be directed toward anyone in the lodge. 

When the arrowshafts that had been hung up in the lodge 
were thoroughly dry, they were taken down by the arrow 
maker and the bundle opened and inspected. Most of the shafts 
were nearly straight, and those which were not so were straight¬ 
ened by bending with an arrow-straightener. Often this was 
made from the spine of the vertebra of a large animal through 
which had been drilled a hole a little larger in diameter than 
the shaft’s thickness; or sometimes the straightener was the 
horn of a female mountain sheep, in which holes had been 
drilled. The arrow was passed through one of the holes and 
bent this way and that until perfecdy straight. This work was 
often done also with the hands and the teeth. 

In preparing the shaft of the arrow, three other important 
tools were used. These were: (i) grooved sandstone slabs for 
reducing the shaft; (2) a rib pierced with a circular hole into 
which extended a little projection from the margin of the hole 
—or a flint with a semicircular notch and a projection—for 
making the grooves in the shaft; and (3) a rib with a circular 

179 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

hole the exact size of the completed shaft, for standardizing the 
diameter of the arrow. 

After the shaft was straightened, the two grooved blocks of 
sandstone, three or four inches long, with flat meeting faces, 
were used to reduce and to smooth and round the arrow. Plac¬ 
ing the shaft in one groove, the other groove was fitted over it, 
and holding the two stones together with the left hand, the 
maker pulled the shaft back and forth to smooth it. 

From the upper end of the feathers on one side of the shaft, 
toward the point of the arrow, a straight groove ran all the 
way to the arrow’s head; on the other side a winding or zigzag 
groove was made, reaching from the feather to the arrowpoint. 
These grooves were made either with the bone or the flint in¬ 
strument already mentioned. In the latter, a notch had been 
chipped out wide enough for the arrow to lie in, but in the 
middle of this notch was left a small projecting point of the 
flint. Holding this flint notch downward in the thumb and two 
fingers of the left hand, the maker placed the arrowshaft in the 
notch and with the right hand pulled it toward him, pulling 
straight for the straight groove and with a twisting motion for 
the zigzag one. 

Much speculation has been indulged in as to the meaning of 
these grooves. The most popular explanation is that they were 
made for the purpose of permitting the blood to escape, so as 
to weaken the wounded animal, or that they symbolized the 
lightning, and so would be more fatal. What seems quite as 
probable is that these grooves may have been made to counter¬ 
act the tendency of the wood to warp or spring and become 
crooked. 

In a paper on the life of the Plains Indians, written by 
Francis La Flesche, 5 an old Omaha arrow maker is quoted as 
saying on this point: 

Every sapling out of which the arrow is made has some defect, 
however faultless it may appear to be. The good arrow maker takes 

5 The Southern Workman, vol. xxxiv, no. u. 

180 

INDUSTRIES 

a great deal of pains to smooth out and straighten the imperfections 
by oiling and heating. But the wood, in time, will spring back because 
of its inherent defects, unless these grooves are cut in the shaft soon 
after the seasoning and straightening. 

After the shaft had been brought down to the proper size and 
the grooves made in it, the shaft was thrust into and pushed 
through the circular hole in the rib standardizer with a twisting 
motion. This polished the shaft and at the same time left little 
fine ridges running about it which could be felt as the fingers 
were passed over them, but were almost too small to be seen. 

The arrow’s flight depended largely on the feathers. If they 

were good and well put on, the arrow carried well. Turkey- 
feathers or buzzard-feathers were the best for arrows, because 

blood does not affect them. Feathers of hawks and eagles, if 
wet with blood, are injured by the wetting. However, the 
feathers of these birds were used for ceremonial arrows. 

The Cheyennes tell of a time before the use of feathers on 
the arrow, when they were accustomed to shave up from the 
shaft of the arrow, all about the shaft, a number of fine shav¬ 
ings, which they left attached to it. These shavings, standing 
out from the shaft, acted as steadiers for the arrow’s flight. 
After they had learned to place feathers on their arrows and 
had begun to use feathered arrows in fighting with other tribes, 
they often found on the prairie arrows shot at them by their 
enemies, which had no feathers, but instead bore, each one, 
two little bunches of fine shavings whittled up from the shaft 
and left attached to it by one end. These shavings were cut and 
bent upward toward the arrowpoint in two places on the shaft, 
one close to the notch and the other farther toward the point. 
The use of such arrows may have been general among the 
prairie tribes until a comparatively recent date. 

The late Joseph Kipp, born 1849, told me that as a small 
boy (say about the year i860) he used to see among the Man- 
dans, near old Fort Clark, shaved-up arrows (like those de¬ 
scribed by the Cheyennes as used anciently) employed by little 

181 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

boys in their first hunting to kill small birds. Sometimes these 
boys’ arrows had three small twigs tied about two inches back 
from the sharpened, fire-hardened point, in such a manner as to 
form a triangle, which gave a larger striking surface. Some such 
arrows were shaved up at two or three points on their length, 
the obvious purpose being to make them fly steadily. From 
what we know of Cheyenne history, it seems evident that the 
arrows of the Cheyennes and of the Mandans might have had 
much in common. 

While the earliest arrows used by the Cheyennes were with¬ 
out feathers, feathers came into use after a time, but at first 
only two, instead of three. Thus, these arrows in their feather¬ 
ing seem to have resembled some of those used by the Eskimo, 
as shown in certain illustrations. The two feathers used were 
not split and glued to the shaft as in modern times, but notches 
were cut in the shaft above and below, and the entire feather 
was tied on each side of the shaft. One vane of each of the 
two feathers was thus crushed against the shaft of the arrow. 

After the arrows with two feathers had been used for a long 
time, an old man spoke to the people, telling them that their 
arrows were not good and that he had a plan for a better one. 
He took the longest feather that he could get, split it, and 
wound it spirally from near the nock of the shaft as far as it 
would go toward the point, tying it with sinew at either end, 
as before. Such arrows shot well, and were better than those 
that they had used hitherto. Even to this day little boys some¬ 
times make and use such arrows. It was a long time after this 
that the present style of arrows came into use, having three 
feathers cut, trimmed, and glued to the shaft. 

In modem times when a man intended to make a number of 
arrows, the feathers were prepared in advance. The shafts were 
split and cut so that the feathers should all be of proper length. 
When applied, the tip of each end of the split feather shaft was 
touched with glue and put on in its proper place and then 
wrapped in position with a thread of sinew. This was repeated 

182 

INDUSTRIES 

until the three feathers were in place, when the final and com¬ 
plete wrapping was done above and below the feathers. The 
arrowshaft was held in the right hand, the sinew in the left, 
and the sinew was applied by turning the shaft with the fingers 
in such manner that the sinew was laid on from right to left. 
Subsequent to this came the painting of the arrow—above or 
below, or both above and below the sinew—with the owner’s 
private mark. In putting on the paint near the feathers, the 
shaft was turned in the hand from right to left. 

In trimming the feathers for arrows, they were placed on a 
hard surface, usually a flat piece of elk-horn. This was used so 
they should be trimmed evenly, and the knife should not sink 
into the surface on which the feather rested. 

In the distal end of the arrowshaft a notch was cut in which 
, the arrowhead was set, held in place with glue, and then at once 
wrapped with wet sinew, which soon dried. In applying the 
sinew, the shaft was turned, so as to lay on the sinew from right 
to left. The points of the arrows were of chipped or ground 
stone, bone, deer antler, or of the sole of the hoof of the buffalo, 
cut off, pared down, and dried; and it is possible that other 
portions of the hoofs of various animals may have been used. 
The Cheyennes, like the Blackfeet and the Pawnees, say that 
wounds made by the old stone arrowpoints were more likely to 
be fatal than those made by the arrowpoints of later times. 

As soon as the white man came, metal began to take the place 
of many of these piercing materials, yet for a long time metal 
was hard to get, while the demand for arrows was constant. 
In Elk River’s young days (say from 1820 to 1840), he has 
told me, arrows with stone points were not infrequently found 
on the prairie, showing that they had been used only a short 
time before. The thin part of the shoulder blade of animals, 
ground down and shaped, was still used. It may readily be un¬ 
derstood that if a man possessed a small portion of metal, tin 
or sheet-iron, it would have been more useful to him as a knife 

183 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

than if divided and used to head a few arrows, some of which 
might soon have been lost. 

Often just above the nock in the shaft—which of course was 
parallel with the notch for the arrowpoint—was a little con¬ 
striction caused by cutting away the wood, and on the swell 
below this were made little cross notches or scratches to give 
a good finger hold. 

In making an arrowhead of stone, and later of iron, the 
Sioux often fashioned a barb on each shoulder, while the Chey¬ 
ennes made no barb. Their arrows were either square on the 

shoulder, like this /\^ , or rounded, like this 

The sheet-iron arrowheads were small, and the arrows short 
and fine. 

Quivers and Bow-cases. These, sewed together and carried by 
a band over the right shoulder, were often made of otter, pan¬ 
ther, and buffalo-calf skin, the tails usually being left attached 
to the skin and hanging down. All these animals were believed 
to possess spiritual power, and the use of their skins tended to 
impart some of this power to the user of the quiver. 

The Cheyennes in ancient times used to a considerable extent 
arrowheads and knives of stone. Black Moccasin, who died 
about 1884, remembered when such implements were still often 
employed. Persons recently living were told by their grand¬ 
fathers that in their time, say early in the nineteenth century, 
such implements were in use. Some knives were made of the 
ribs of elk or moose. 

For their cutting and piercing implements they employed the 
hardest stones they could secure, usually flint. When a suitable 
stone had been found for making a celt, it was broken off to 
the right length by a sharp blow of a small stone hammer; it 
was then held in the left hand and rested on a block of wood, 
and repeated blows were given it with the hammer, it being 

184 

INDUSTRIES 

turned and chipped by these blows until the desired edge and 
point were produced. When a knife—or an arrowpoint—had 
been worked down quite thin, but had not yet received a satis¬ 
factory cutting edge, the piece was held in the left hand, be¬ 
tween the thumb and forefinger, while a small stone punch was 
held between the fore and middle fingers. The punch was 
pressed against the edge of the blade, and was struck sharp 
downward blows with a hammer, each blow taking off a small 
flake, and this process was continued until the edge was 
finished. A better cutting edge was finally given by the flaking 
off of small chips from near the margin. The flint was held in 
the palm protected by a wad of hair or piece of tanned hide 
and a small point of antler or bone suddenly applied with force 
against the stone at the required point. This pressure cracked 
off a small chip and the operation was repeated as needed. The 
back of a completed knife was sometimes inserted in a split 
stick which served as a handle. The stick was tightly lashed 
with wet sinew or fine rawhide strings, and when these dried, 
the stone edge and its handle were firmly bound together. Such 
knives served efficiently for slitting killed game up the belly 
and legs. 

The manufacture of cutting implements of stone is quite 
fully discussed in the Handbook of American Indians.® 

Knives were made also of the bosse ribs—the dorsal spines 
—of the buffalo, with handles tied to them, the edge of the bone 
being rubbed down until sharp; but for a long time only a few 
of these—perhaps three or four—were possessed in a camp. 
After the Cheyennes secured hoop-iron, they sometimes in¬ 
serted a metal cutting edge in such bone knives. The first metal 
knife told of was a flat piece of iron found on the prairie, which 
when rubbed down to an edge proved much more useful than 
the old knives of bone. 

A stone axe shaped like an ordinary woodsman’s axe, and 

8 Bull. 30, Bureau American Ethnology, pt. 2, p. 638, Washington, 1910. 

185 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

with an oval hole drilled part way through the stone in the 
position and shape of the hole through an ordinary axe-head, 
was formerly owned by Crazy Head. The stone appears to be a 
hard slate, and the cutting edge is somewhat rounded. Crazy 
Head stated that he received the axe when a very young man 
(say about 1865), and that it has always been in his family, 
handed down from father to son. He believes that the old-time 
people made it for use as an axe—for cutting, but that gradu¬ 
ally it has acquired a spiritual power. Since it came to him, this 
object has been used only to carry in war as a spiritual protec¬ 
tion, being held in front of the body by the man who carried it, 
the cutting edge vertical and to the front. Borne in this way, 
it was believed that it would split and turn aside arrows or 
bullets shot at the holder. The shape of the implement suggests 
that it may have been made after white men’s axes had been 
seen. 

The woman’s maul or mallet will be spoken of elsewhere. 
The man’s so-called war-club is similar, but with a much 
lighter head, and a longer and more springy handle. Usually 
it is provided with a loop near the handhold, to slip over the 
wrist. 

The Lance was a favorite weapon. The ordinary type was a 
wooden shaft, six to seven feet long, armed, in modern times, 
with an iron or steel point. This might be of any shape—the 
blade of a sabre or a knife, an old bayonet, or some other piece 
of iron. In ancient times the lance-head was of chipped stone, 
often leaf-shaped. This head was bound to the shaft with sinew 
or rawhide thongs. Lances were used in war and in the chase 
of the buffalo. 

There were several types of ceremonial lances, most of them' 
belonging to the soldier bands. These were used in the dances 
of the various societies; and were also carried in war, but as 
ceremonial rather than lethal weapons—chiefly for the purpose 
of touching the enemy. One of these lances was called hdhk- 

186 

INDUSTRIES 

tsim ', 7 a word commonly translated “wheel,” but perhaps hav¬ 
ing reference to the bent or curving shape. The circular wheel 
used in a game bears the same name. At the distal end, the 
shaft of this form of lance is bent somewhat in the shape of the 
conventional shepherd’s crook. The shaft was commonly bound 
with otter-fur, and variously ornamented with feathers. Other 
types of lance, belonging to other soldier bands, were straight 
throughout, and the shaft was covered by a case made of deer¬ 
skin—latterly of red or blue cloth—from which the feathers of 
eagles or turkeys or of hawks depended. All these articles are 
old. 

The so-called “contrary lance,” or lightning lance (ho nuhk 
ka wo'}), a ceremonial weapon carried by the Contraries, is 
described elsewhere. It was shaped like a bow, and strung, but 
at one end bore a lance-head, or point of stone or metal, and 
was adorned with feathers of war birds. These contrary bows 
or lances were usually very ancient, but if one were lost or 
sacrificed, another might be made to replace it. 

The Shield was perhaps the most important part of the equip¬ 
ment of the Cheyenne warrior. This was a circular piece of 
dried and toughened bull-hide, carried on the left arm, light, 
but strong enough to stop an arrow, or to turn a ball from an 
old-fashioned smoothbore gun. Originally carried in order to 
ward off missiles and spear thrusts, the shield in later times 
exercised a protection that was in part physical and in part 
spiritual; indeed, most shields were believed to possess strong 
spiritual power. It might exercise in behalf of him who carried 
it not only the general protective influence due to its sacred 
character, but also might endue him with those qualities attrib¬ 
uted to the heavenly bodies, birds, mammals, and other living 
creatures whose images were painted on it, or portions of 
which were tied to it. It might afford also protection from the 

7 See Games. 

187 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

elements, for some shields were sacred to the thunder and to 
the lightning. 

A shield adorned with the feathers of the eagle was believed 
to give its owner the swiftness and courage of that bird. If the 
feathers of the owl were tied on it, the man perhaps shared the 
owl’s power to see in the dark, and to move silently and un¬ 
noticed. The figure of a bear painted on the shield, or its claws 
attached, gave him the bear’s toughness; and so of many of the 
qualities which belonged to the animals which the Cheyennes 
regarded as possessing superhuman powers. 

Not everyone possessed a shield. For the greater part, they 
were owned only by men of years and discretion. Boys and 
very young men seldom carried them, unless some older friend 
or relative lent or gave his shield for this purpose. When this 
was done, the borrower was carefully instructed by the owner 
as to the spiritual power of the shield, and the ceremonies to be 
practiced in using it. A young man who carried a shield, and 
who failed to perform the ceremonies appropriate to it, would 
certainly be wounded in the fight in which he bore it. 

There seem to have been three kinds of shields known to the 
Cheyennes. Of these the most important were the group shields, 
said to have belonged to certain groups or divisions, and per¬ 
haps never going out of them; although we may suppose that 
the Dog Soldiers, an organization made up of persons belonging 
to different bands, and which at length came to represent the 
old division, Masihkota, may have had members who carried 
shields belonging to other bands. To another class belonged the 
dream shields, the fashion and painting of which had been 
taught to some man by a dream. These shields, though made in 
much the same way, and with a ceremony not less elaborate, 
possessed less protective power than the group shields. Finally, 
we are told of shields without spiritual protective power; they 
were commonly unpainted, and were used merely to ward off 
the arrows or blows of the enemy—were thus literally par- 
fleches. 

188 

INDUSTRIES 

The group and the dream shields were made with elaborate 
ceremony, and various ceremonial acts were practiced in their 
use. In addition, they were hedged about by various duties and 
tabus, which made the ownership of such a shield a matter of 
much responsibility. So seriously did the duties and restrictions 
weigh on some shield owners that occasionally a man might 
determine to free himself from these responsibilities by giving 
up his shield, and might present it to the sun or to some other 
power, taking it out of the camp and leaving it hung on a pole 
on the top of a hill. Or, he might take it down to the river, 
where, tying stones to it, he deposited it with some ceremony 
in the stream. A shield thus relinquished by its owner was 
never disturbed; no one would dare touch it, knowing that if 
he did so bad luck would surely follow. 

In the more recent wars with United States troops, the Chey¬ 
ennes at length came to realize that the shield afforded little 
physical protection against the balls from modern rifles, but 
they did not lose faith in its spiritual assistance, and carried 
shields until the fighting ceased. At present, however, old-time 
shields are no longer found among the Cheyennes. Many have 
been sacrificed or abandoned, some have been buried with their 
owners, or with the dead children of their owners, while a few 
have been lost or given to white men; so that, as far as I can 
leam, there does not now remain a single shield in either section 
of the tribe. 

Constructed on the same general principle as that of other 
Plains tribes, the Cheyenne shield has some characteristics of 
its own. It was made from the shrunken rawhide of the buffalo- 
bull’s neck, but if a deerskin cover was used over the bull’s 
hide, the Cheyennes often stuffed the space between the shield 
and its covering with feathers, or with buffalo or antelope hair, 
thus deadening the force of arrow or bullet, and increasing the 
protection it gave. 

When a shield was to be made, a circular hole was dug in 
the ground, a foot or more deep, and a little wider than the 

189 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

intended diameter of the shield. A fire was built near this hole, 
in which stones were heated red-hot. About half the fresh skin 
of a buffalo-bull—the front part of the hide—was spread over 
the hole, and pinned down all around, to hold it in place for a 
time. At one side near the fire there were no pins, and a place 
was left where the hide could be raised. 

When the stones in the fire were hot, the edge of the hide 
was lifted and a number of these stones were placed in the hole. 
Water was poured on them, and the skin was clapped down on 
the ground and held there. The hot steam rising from the hole 
contracted and thickened the skin on all sides. Sometimes a 
single steaming was enough to bring the hide to the proper 
thickness, or again a second treatment was needed; in any 
event, the hide was kept over the steam until it had become as 
thick as possible. While the hide was being shrunk from be¬ 
neath, hot water was poured on the hair side from above, and 
a man with a knife or scraper removed the hair. When the 
steaming had been completed, the hide was taken off the hole, 
and with an awl a small hole was made as near the middle of 
it as possible, and a strand of sinew passed through the hole. 
By this string it was held up, and from this as a center one-half 
the intended diameter of the shield was measured off on all 
sides, the circle was marked all around, and the hide cut off, 
so that it was a perfect circle of the size required. A parfleche 
was now spread on the ground to keep the shield from the dirt, 
and placing it on the 
efface all the wrinkles and to make it smooth. It was then put 
out to dry. 

The holes through which the strings for the armhold—or for 
any of the attachments—were to pass, were afterward burned 
in the hide with a heated iron rod or wire. 

A well-dressed antelope-skin was chosen to make a cover 
for the shield, and on this cover were to be painted the birds, 
animals, or symbols, which the shield-maker selected. When 
this painting was to be done, the shield-maker called into the 

190 

parfleche it was pounded with a stone to 

INDUSTRIES 

lodge a number of men to sing with him. All the singers were 
brave men, warriors; all wore feathers on their heads, some¬ 
times the complete stuffed skins of different hawks tied to their 
scalp-locks, and perhaps a lock of hair cut from the scalp of an 
enemy. The lodge door was shut, and a stick was put up to 
warn people not to enter. The paint used for the shield cover 
was mixed with glue made from scrapings of buffalo-hide. This 
made a durable paint, which did not rub or wear off. 

Before the painting was begun, the shield and its cover were 
placed at the back of the lodge, resting on a bed of the stems of 
white sage, which kept the shield from touching the ground. 
Between the fire and this bed of sage four small sticks were 
thrust into the ground, forming the corners of a small square, 
in the middle of which a coal from the fire was put on the 
ground. Dried sweet grass was sprinkled on the coal, and the 
shield-maker held his hands over the smoke and then made 
the ceremonial motions. The pipe was filled, lighted, and passed 
around the circle. When it had been smoked out, the ashes were 
emptied from it, and it was filled again and placed on the 
ground between the four sticks and the shield. Then followed 
a song, and the man who was making the shield painted for a 
short time. Again the pipe was lighted and smoked out, another 
song was sung, and the shield-maker painted again. They 
smoked four times and sang four times, all the songs being dif¬ 
ferent. Then they rested and talked for a time, again smoked 
and sang as before, and so it went on until the painting was 
finished. 

After the painting was finished, the cover was rested on the 
shield, and to the cover were attached the feathers of the dif¬ 
ferent war birds that were to go on the shield. Then the painted 
cover was fitted on the shield, the feathers properly arranged 
and over all was put a plain deerskin covering. To the outside 
cover, all around the border of the shield, were now attached 
fine feathers; sometimes only a few, sometimes many. An arm- 
hold of otter-skin, by which to carry it, was attached to the 

191 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

back of the shield. After all these things had been done, the 
singers rubbed white clay all over their bodies, and over the 
feathers and skins of the birds which were on their heads. 
Often the painting was done directly on the bull’s-hide shield, 
to which also the protective medicines and decorations were 
attached. 

While all this had been going on, the female relations of these 
men had been cooking food, and when the ceremony was over, 
this was brought to the front of the lodge, passed in to the 
singers, and they ate. After this the shield was taken close to 
the door, and people—men, women, and children—were called 
into the lodge. They passed by the shield and put their hands 
on it, just touching it with one hand. In front of the lodge, and 
not more than twenty-five feet distant, a sweat-lodge had been 
built. The shield was now taken out and placed on top of this 
sweat-lodge, and the singers and painter all entered it and sang, 
while taking a sweat. After they had finished, they came out, 
still singing, but as each one passed out the door, he stopped 
singing. The ceremony was now concluded. 

A tripod had already been set up behind the lodge, and the 
owner hung the shield on it, where it remained until he was 
ready to go to war. 

If the shield fell to the ground, it was not permitted at once 
to pick it up. It must be covered by a skin or a blanket, and 
allowed to lie on the ground for a time. When taken up, some 
of the “medicine”—pulverized leaves—from the bundle tied to 
the shield was sprinkled on a coal, and the shield passed 
through the smoke. After this, it was hung on the tripod as 
before. 

A shield had very strong power. No one might handle it with¬ 
out the owner’s permission. The shield songs were particularly 
sacred; they were connected with the thunder and the light¬ 
ning, and could be sung only at special times, and by special 
men. 

The old men who made shields possessed some special spirit- 

192 

RED BIRD'S SHIELD 

INDUSTRIES 

ual power: had perhaps been helped by a bird or turtle, or a 
buffalo-bull, or by some spirit. They had been taught by older 
shield-makers how the work should be done. A man who wished 
to have a shield made, asked a shield-maker to help him— i.e., 
to make a shield for him—by offering him a filled pipe; and the 
shield-maker, by smoking, consented to grant the request. One 
for whom a shield had been made, having been taught the 
secrets and the ceremonies, might himself become a shield- 
maker. If the man for whom it had been made captured a horse 
on his first war journey after receiving the shield, he was ex¬ 
pected to present the horse to the shield-maker. Each maker 
made all his shields alike, and painted them in the same way. 
There is not now alive in the tribe a man of those who used 
to make them. 

The shield was indeed a powerful helper, and every adorn- 

significance. Thus, Red Bird’s 
shield, now in my possession, had on it four claws of a grizzly 
bear in two pairs, a turtle’s tail, a round leaden ball, and the 
feathers of eagles and owls. The bear has great strength and 
courage, and is hard to kill; therefore, the man who carried the 
shield would have strength, courage, and likewise be hard to 
kill. The turtle possesses much spiritual power, and also is 
hard to kill. If you cut off its head, it will still move, and per¬ 
haps even walk away. So the man who carried this shield, even 
if badly wounded, would be likely to recover. Moreover, the 
turtle knows how to hide; it can dive to the bottom of the 
water and stay there concealed for a long time. The leaden ball 
would turn aside the bullets of the enemy. The feathers of the 
birds gave to the man who carried the shield the powers pos¬ 
sessed by those birds. 

This shield is painted red, with a crescent moon on it. It was 
the last shield in the Northern Cheyenne tribe. One of the 
bear’s claws is missing; it was shot away in a fight with the 
Crows, on an occasion when Big Head was carrying the shield. 

This shield was made by Oak (Oumsh'), who gave it to his 

193 

ment it bore possessed a distinct 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

son Oak, who was the father of Great Eyes. The younger Oak 
carried it to war as a young man—before he was married. He 
gave it to Great Eyes, who at the age of sixty was killed at Fort 
Robinson, Nebraska, in January, 1879. Two Moon believed 
that the shield was made about 1780, and so is more than a 
hundred and forty years old. When the outbreak at Fort Robin¬ 
son was about to take place, Great Eyes gave the shield to his 
nephew, Red Bird, then only a boy. In the rush from the bar¬ 
racks, Red Bird was shot in the knee, but managed to crawl 
into a hole, and there tied up his leg, cut two forked sticks for 
crutches, and many days later hobbled into the house of John 
Shettler, a mile and a half below the post. During all his diffi¬ 
culty and suffering, for he had almost nothing to eat all this 
time, he did not abandon his shield, but still had it on his back 
when he came to the house. He was afterward sent to Pine 

Ridge. Red Bird was sound and whole in 1895, but has since 
died. This shield is said to belong to the Mahsihkota group. 

Flocco, who once borrowed a Mahsihkota shield to carry to 
war, was told by the owner that before it was used it must be 
purified in the smoke of juniper needles. 

“When you put the cover on,” added the owner, “the deer¬ 
skin strings which hold the bear-claws must be loosened, so 
that they may lie down; but when you take the cover off, and 
go into a fight, the strings must be tightened, so that the claws 
will stand out stiff, and be directed toward the enemy. When 

purifying the shield you 

A 

directions (Niv' start i vo') and last hold it over the smoke, 

and then raise it toward the sky and shake it. Then you must 
move it four times toward the right front of your body, and 
hang it over your body on the right side. In riding forward 
toward the enemy, you must keep on the right-hand side of 
your party, and quite away from them. Some shields may be 
supported on a single pole, but this must be on a tripod. In the 
morning it must be hung out facing the sun.” 

At night the women wrapped this shield up in a good blanket, 

194 

INDUSTRIES 

moved the tripod close to the front of the lodge, and it was 
left there till the morning, when the women took the blanket 
off. Feathers of the short-eared owl (Asio flammeus) were tied 
in a bunch below the moon painted on it. The tail, made of 
dressed buffalo-hide ( mohk' stk or mohksi' ya), was tied to the 
parfleche below the moon with three strings. 

About 1868, Crazy Mule, then a strong medicine man and a 
prophet, or foreteller of events, made four shields, all alike, each 
with a Thunder Bird in the center, with four circular black 
spots—the four directions—near the border. When the first 
enemy was killed after the men who carried these shields ob¬ 
tained them, each man was obliged to eat a small piece of the 
enemy’s heart. These shields had a special name; they were 
called Hole-in-the-shield (Hoh' tahk ho wan ). An ordinary 
shield is Ed wan'. The Thunder Bird on the shield was to give 
its owner the courage and swiftness of the eagle and the power 
of the Thunder Bird. 

The owners of these shields seldom smoked in their lodges. 
Usually they smoked out on the prairie alone, and in situations 
where no one could approach them without being seen. If one 
of them wished to smoke in his lodge, the women were obliged 
to go out, and a stick was put across the door as a sign that no 
one should enter. While the shield owner was smoking, no one 
else might be in the lodge, unless perhaps the owner of another 
one of these shields. These two might smoke together. When 
smoking, the position of the bowl of the pipe was reversed, the 
opening being held toward the ground. These men might drink 
only from a dish made of some natural material, as a wooden 
bowl, or sheep-horn dish, or a turtleshell. No vessel made of 
tin or other metal might be used. A crockery bowl, however, 
might be drunk from. 

The feathers and heads of the sandhill crane were often 
attached to shields, for this bird possesses strong protective 
power and his voice is alarming to enemies. The head was some¬ 
times fastened on the center of the shield. 

195 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Mr. John J. White, Jr., of New York, owns an old-time 
buffalo shield, found in the neighborhood of the Custer battle¬ 
ground in southern Montana, which is an example of a dream 
shield. 

This shield, about the history of which nothing was known 
for many years, was at length identified by the wife and son 8 
of its former owner. The son, White Shield, said of it: 

The man who made this shield was Whistling Elk, the father of 
Spotted Wolf, and my grandfather. At the time it was lost, it be¬ 
longed to Spotted Wolf. He had lent it to his adopted son, Yellow 
Nose, a Ute captive, who is believed to have lost it from his saddle, 
while going from the point on the upper Rosebud where the Chey¬ 
ennes had a fight with General Crook’s command—June 17, 1876— 
to the camp on the Little Big Horn River, where afterward they 
fought with General Custer’s men. 

When a young man, Whistling Elk went to a certain lake, and out 
on a rocky point running into the water. He carried with him a 
buffalo-skull, and putting it on the ground, lay down by it, and there 
fasted and prayed for five days and five nights. On the morning of 
the fourth day, a buffalo raised its head above the water and sang a 
song, directing Whistling Elk to make this shield and describing how 
it should be made. 

The painting on the shield consists of a pair of long, slender, up¬ 
ward-directed horns, a little above the center of the shield; below 
them is a large disc surrounded by dots; between the horns is a red 
disc also surrounded by dots, and there are four dark discs evenly 
distributed near the border of the shield. These discs on the outer rim 
represent the four directions; the disc below the horns is the moon; 
the red disc between the horns, the sun; and the dots are stars. The 
horns represent the animal that took pity on Whistling Elk and 
taught him how to make this shield. The moon is the spirit that dur¬ 
ing the night protected the brave who carried the shield, and the sun 
protected him during the day. The upper round spot to the left of 
the horns represents the wind which comes from the setting sun. The 
upper spot at the right of the horns represents the wind from the 

8 Both since dead, Wind Woman about 1915, and White Shield about May 1, 
1918. 

X96 

INDUSTRIES 

north, the lower spot on the right, the wind from the east, and the 
lower spot on the left, the wind from the south. The spirit which 
controls the south wind is supposed to have the greatest power when 
prayed to for help. 

When carried in battle, a piece of lodge-skin was fastened to the 
bottom of the shield, hanging down, and across this lodge-skin were 
four rows of eagle-feathers. 

All these statements are confirmed by Wind Woman, the 
widow of Spotted Wolf, who recognized the shield as soon as 
she saw the painting. 

Four of these shields were made, two of them being given to 
Whistling Elk’s nephews, one to his son, and one to his grand¬ 
son, Little Magpie. Two of the shields were buried with their 
owners; one of them was left in the hills as a sacrifice, and the 
fourth is in Mr. White’s possession, and has been lent to the 
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation. 

There have been cases where men have devised a new paint¬ 
ing for a shield, pretending to have dreamed of the painting. 
Such shields, however, have often proved ineffectual, and the 
men carrying them have been killed by balls or arrows which 
pierced the shields. 

Each tribal group had its own method of treating the shields 
before its warriors went to battle. The hill men, Hissiometaniu, 
before charging, used to run their horses over the prairie, stoop 
down to the left and sweep the shield over the grass; then raise 
it above the head, hold it toward the sun, and shake it. Unless 
this were done they were likely to be wounded. 

Ivistsinihpah burned sweet grass, sage, and other medicine, 
which was always carried tied to the shield. They passed the 
shield four times through this smoke, and then held it up to 
the sun and shook it, and afterward moved it down toward the 
body four times, putting it on the arm the fourth time. 

A shield belonging to the family Mowissiyu 9 was called the 

9 Said to be a family of Sioux which has long lived with the Cheyennes. The 
Monsoni of Mooney. 

197 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

day shield. The painting on it represented the day, the sun 
being in the center of the shield, with blue clouds above it. The 
painting was done on the bull-hide; there was no cover. Eagle- 
feathers hung down from the lower border of the shield, and 
at the sides were attached the tail-feathers of eagles. On each 
side of the shield, tied to the strings where the otter-skin band 
was attached, was a small, round, polished stone, like a boy’s 
marble. Representations of rabbit tracks were painted on the 
obverse of the shield. 

When this shield was to be used, the man who was to carry 
it held it, in order, to the east, the zenith, and the west—to the 
rising sun, the sky, and the setting sun. The sun was believed 
to enter the shield, and, when the face of the shield was turned 
toward the enemy, to go out of it again and to blind the enemy 
—dazzling their eyes. 

Mad Wolf carried this shield in battle several times, and on 
two occasions, failing to handle it exactly as he should have 
done, he was wounded. 

A shield of the Hevataniu had a painted deerskin cover. At 
the top was a green crescent moon, the horns directed upward. 
To the right of the moon, in black, was painted a bear, and to 
the left of the moon a buffalo, the heads of both animals di¬ 
rected toward the moon, so that they faced each other. In the 
center was painted a red sun. From the sun, in the four direc¬ 
tions, black zigzag marks representing lightning flashes ex¬ 
tended to the circumference of the shield. On each of the two 
zigzag lines directed toward the bottom of the shield, two bear’s 
claws were fastened with deerskin strings. About the margin of 
the shield a dozen tufts of yellow horsehair hung down. A long 
tail of dressed hide (mohksiya), with eagle-feathers tied across 
it at different points, was pendent from just below the moon. 

In the morning the shield must face the east, and in the mid¬ 
dle of the day must face upward toward the sun. In the middle 
of the day the shield was taken from its tripod, placed on the 
ground, and wrapped in a black bearskin, nicely dressed, 

198 

INDUSTRIES 

painted with rings of red about wrists and ankles, and with a 
bunch of eagle-feathers tied between the shoulders. At night the 
wrapped shield was brought around to the door and left out¬ 
side. At the first meal in the morning a bit of food was held 
toward the shield, and then placed at the edge of the fire near¬ 
est the door. This was giving food to the bear. 

Each of the different divisions of the tribe is said formerly 
to have had its own shield; but each man knew only the shield 
of his own division. 

Various tabus were connected with the different shields. 
Men who owned certain shields were not permitted to eat 
entrails; others were not permitted to take food from the fire 
with a metal implement—could not do this with knife or fork, 
but must use a sharp stick. Some might not eat the heart of 
any animal, nor anything from the kettle in which the heart 
had been cooked. Others might not eat of the neck, nor others 
of the ham of the buffalo. To some the placenta of the buffalo 
was forbidden. If by accident a man entered a lodge in which 
was a menstruating woman, he must at once purify himself by 
taking a sweat. 

The possessor of a Hevataniu shield was not permitted to 
eat of the heart of any animal, nor of meat boiled in the same 
kettle with the heart. A tabu such as this was exceedingly in¬ 
convenient, for it was a common practice to cook the heart of 
the buffalo in the kettle along with other meat, and in a friend’s 
lodge a man might unwittingly eat of it and thus invite mis¬ 
fortune. To free himself from the operation of this tabu it was 
required that the man should eat the heart of an enemy. On one 
occasion Wolf Chief thus escaped the danger from the violation 
of the tabu. He declared to me that he never tasted anything 
so disagreeable as the human heart which he ate. He could 
hardly swallow it. 

They had killed a Crow in battle, and taking out his heart, 
cut it in thin flakes, which they dried as women dry meat. After 
the flesh had been dried, it was pounded up fine. A sweat-house 

199 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

was built, and those who were to take part in the ceremony 
entered it and took a sweat. After this, each inmate of the 
sweat-house took a pinch of the dried heart, raised it slowly 
to the sky, called like a crow, and swallowed it. All who had 
done this might thereafter eat the heart of any animal. Those 
who ate at this time were Wolf Chief, Bear Shield, and Big 
Man. On another occasion other men ate a part of a Crow’s 
heart raw, with the same purpose— i.e., purification, and to free 
themselves from the tabu. 

In connection with the ceremonial eating of the heart of an 
enemy in order to remove the tabu from certain shield owners, 
it may be asked what evidence there is to show that the Tonka- 
was were cannibals in the ordinary meaning of the term. They 
had this reputation among their neighbors, and Mooney voices 
it, but did they do more than practice the ceremonial eating 
of the flesh of enemies? On certain ceremonial occasions, 
notably when they killed an enemy, the Tonkawas did eat 
human flesh. They took out the enemy’s heart, and cutting it 
in small pieces boiled it in a kettle with sacred corn, and had 
a ceremonial feast at which each man, among other things, ate 
a piece of the heart. The well-known Black Beaver, the Dela¬ 
ware, who was present at such a feast, told what was done 
there, and declared that the feast was ceremonial. Such cere¬ 
monial eating of the flesh of an enemy was practiced by many 
tribes of Indians, and the statement of Black Beaver seems 
plausible. 

Shield-makers always warned the men for whom they were 
making shields that if they did not carefully observe the cere¬ 
monies connected with the shields they would be hit in battle 
by bullets or arrows. 

Once a shield was made which near its border had four round 
holes in the four cardinal directions. An arrow passed through 
one of these holes and killed the owner of the shield. The peo¬ 
ple believed that he must have failed to observe the law of his 
shield. 

200 

INDUSTRIES 

There is said to have been a shield for which a new covering 
had to be made every time the owner counted a coup. 

Certain shields carried by old-time warriors have been 
roughly described to me. One of these had a half-moon at the 
upper border, a sun in the middle, and about the margin four 
inward directed points, representing the four cardinal direc¬ 
tions. This was owned by the grandfather of Little Chief, 
Southern Cheyenne. It came from the Suhtai. 

Another, called the bear’s ear shield, had two bear’s ears 
painted on it near the upper border. It belonged to the North¬ 
ern Cheyennes. 

A very old shield carried by Tall Bull, who was killed in 
1869, had painted on it the figure of a bear. 

The shield owned by Starving Elk—the father of Starving 
Elk killed in 1879 by Little Wolf—was a dream shield, made 
by Animal’s Foot. It had a half-moon close to the top of the 
margin; four inward directed points, representing the four 
directions; in the center was a bat with spread wings, head 
upward, and about the bat, nearly opposite the four points 
representing the cardinal directions, were four fork-tailed 
(barn) swallows, their heads toward the center of the shield. 
This shield had a long tail with three horizontal rows of eagle- 
feathers. Before going into battle it was required to hold this 
shield four times over the smoke of burning sweet grass, and 
then to put it on the arm. The wearer must then turn once 
around till he faced as he had stood before. Before and after 

9 

turning, he faced the enemy. 

Somewhere near the Black Hills, east and north, is a butte 
or mountain—believed to be Bear Butte 14 —which is called 
Medicine Lodge. Some people say that the first shields came 
from there. It was long ago that a man went up on this butte 
to remain there for four days without food or drink. After he 
had been there two days a person came to him and said, “Come 
down and go into this hill with me.” The young man arose and 

10 Navi vo ds, Teaching Hill, i.e hill where people are taught. 

201 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

followed the person, who went part way down the butte and 
then went into it. The man found himself in a lodge, and about 
it he saw hanging many different shields. An old man—the 
chief man of the lodge—gave the young man seven differently 
painted shields. 

When the young man returned to his home, he brought with 
him these shields, and soon afterward he began to make other 
shields like those he had seen in the lodge, as the old man had 
directed and taught him. Shields, therefore, would seem to be 
closely related to the medicine lodge. 

The man who brought these shields told his people that they 
must make their shields like them; so thenceforth all the tribal 
groups had shields which were always the same. Other shields 
were dreamed of by people who suffered on the hills. 

At a time when Young Woman was grown, after she had 
married, they moved close to the hill called the Medicine Lodge, 
and camped there for five days. Her husband, whose name was 
Itching, went over the hill and dreamed that he went into the 
lodge in the hill and saw these shields, and noticed particularly 
two shields of the kind which he afterward used to make. These 
had painted deerskin covers. 

Group shields were not many in number. At one time the 
Issiometaniu group had only three—owned by Black Moon, 
Lump Foot, and Touching Cloud (Alights On The Cloud). 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 

The drum was an important musical instrument, and was 
used in doctoring, dancing, gambling, and in religious cere¬ 
monies. Its chief function was to mark time. Drums were of 
varying sizes, running from those so small as to be held in the 
hand, to large ones which rested on the ground and about which 
five or six drummers might sit. 

Hand drums were made of a green willow stick, three or four 
inches in diameter, shaved thin with a knife, then heated over 
the fire, greased, and worked until it was gradually bent into a 

202 

INDUSTRIES 

circle whose ends overlapped. Notches were cut in the margins 
of the stick over the lapped ends, which were then bound to¬ 
gether with strong sinew. The hair was scraped from an old 
horse-hide (which was thought to make the best drums), and 
this, after having been thoroughly wetted, was bound tightly 
over the wooden ring, covering the upper side. From the lower 
edge of the ring, four or five rawhide strings crossed it, knotted 
together where they intersected, and serving as a handhold. 

The drum was beaten with a short stick, which might be 
bare, or might have a little deerskin or buffalo-hide wrapped 
about the beating end. 

The rattle, commonly used in the dance and in doctoring, was 
formed, in the usual way, of two hemispheres of rawhide sewed 
together with sinew, in the hollow of which a number of small 
stones were placed. The two pieces of which such rattles were 
made were almost circular, but running from one side of each 
of these discs was a strip of hide, perhaps an inch wide, and 
when the wet rawhide was sewed together, these pieces, from 
three to five inches long, were joined by two seams on either 
side of a straight stick which formed a handle. After the sewing 
was finished and the rawhide had dried, the rattle was often 
painted red, and perhaps, at a point of the rough sphere oppo¬ 
site the handle, and in the seam, were attached a few crow or 
magpie feathers, or sometimes the down-feathers of an eagle. 
Rattles were of different sizes, the sphere sometimes being from 
two and a half to three inches in diameter, and sometimes much 
smaller. Rattles were sometimes made from the scrotum of a 
buffalo-bull. 

A rattle carried by the Crazy Dog Soldiers, and used in their 
dances in comparatively modern times, was formed of long 
strips of bull’s hide, so put together that the rattle was a rough 
cylinder, bent around from both sides of the handle, so that it 
enclosed an empty space. 

The handles of rattles were sometimes wrapped with red 
cloth, or perhaps with finely tanned antelope-skin. Rattles used 

203 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

by the doctors to drive away evil spirits which were afflicting 
people with disease were usually small. Some of these are very 
old, and legends or myths of various sorts are told of them. 

War whistles were made from the wing-bone—humerus, or 
ulna—of the eagle or of the sandhill crane. Both these birds 
were esteemed as powerful war helpers—the eagle from the 
fact that he captures his prey and lives on flesh, and the whoop¬ 
ing crane because of his resonant voice, which was felt to be 
alarming. Moreover, the crane is a bird of great courage, and 
if wounded and unable to fly away, fights hard, and will even 
attack a man if he comes near it. It does not seem to fear 
anything. Courage like this was greatly desired by every 
warrior. 

As stated, the feathers of cranes were used in the ornamenta¬ 
tion of shields, not because they were good to look at, but 
because of the bird’s power in war. 

These war whistles were made by cutting off both ends of 
the bone, making a notch in the side near the mouthpiece, and 
then so stopping the hollow of the bone with pine gum as to 
deflect the air blown through the bone and cause a shrill whis¬ 
tling sound. Such whistles were usually hung about the neck by 
a deerskin string, and were blown when men went into battle. 
Sometimes the down-feather of an eagle was tied to the whistle. 
As elsewhere shown, they were used by persons who were suf¬ 
fering in the Medicine Lodge. 

A flute, or flageolet, much used by young men, was made by 
whittling out, as perfectly as possible, a cylinder of juniper 
wood about eighteen inches long, which was then split and each 
half dug out to make a shell. The two halves were then fitted 
and glued together, and held in place by a lashing of sinew 
or deerskin strings. The six fingerholes were made by burning 
with a hot iron. In recent times the ornamentation was usually 
beads of various colors, strung on a thread of sinew and 
wrapped close about the cylinder; but in earlier days dyed 
porcupine quills were wrapped about the instrument above and 

204 

INDUSTRIES 

below the holes, and near the mouthpiece. A short distance 
below the mouthpiece was often carved the figure of some 
animal, very often a horse or a bear, standing out on a block 
from the surface of the cylinder. Sometimes the flute was 
carved at one end to imitate the head of a snake or a duck. 

Flutes were of two kinds, one simply for making music, and 
the other—made for the owners by men who were believed to 
possess peculiar powers—had the property of charming the girl 
the man loved and making her love him. Both kinds were used 
in courting. They were played only at night. Not very many 
years ago it was common, on the Tongue River Indian Reserva¬ 
tion, to hear the plaintive but pleasing notes of these flutes 
sounding from the neighboring hills. 

Some men, no doubt, performed chiefly for their own satis¬ 
faction, and wandered about playing all night long. Early in 
the evening the faint notes of the instrument were heard a long 
distance from the camp, and the music might move along from 
point to point until the player had gone all about the camp’s 
circle. Later in the night the sounds often drew nearer and were 
heard immediately outside the camp and moving around it; 
toward morning they might come from within the circle, and 
perhaps be in the middle of the camp. By daylight the music 
ceased. 

Heard at night and from a distance, this music, strange and 
plaintive, was very charming, and had about it not a little 
romance. Sitting in the lodge at night, the occupants might 
listen to the distant sounds with very different feelings—the 
traveler merely with enjoyment of the sweet music; the older 
people with complete understanding of what it meant and with 
an amused tolerance; while the notes might quicken the pulse 
of some young girl busily engaged at her task and seeming to 
regard nothing else, until, when the sounds had closely ap¬ 
proached, she put aside her work and, pushing open the hang¬ 
ing door, walked swiftly off a little way from the lodge to meet 
him whose playing she had recognized. 

205 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 
HORSE EQUIPAGE 

The Cheyennes were excellent horsemen, spending much of 
the time in the saddle, and during the last years of their wars 
making their excursions against their enemies chiefly on horse¬ 
back; consequently the saddle was an important part of each 
man’s equipment. 

The Saddle. The saddles of old times were high-peaked as to 
both pommel and cantle, which consisted of the two prongs 
of a forked stick, before and behind, which rested on the two 
flat side-pieces supported by the horse’s back, to which side- 
pieces they were bound with strings of rawhide. Over this 
frame, wet rawhide was tightly stretched and sewed, making 
the saddle very firm. The stirrups were short, and the rider, 
who was obliged to lift his leg high to clear the tall cantle, 
mounted with some effort. In war or in the buffalo chase the 
man commonly rode without a saddle, or rode on pads. 

Saddles of more modern time were made of two flat side- 
pieces of wood, lashed to a low-arched pommel and cantle, both 
formed from the antler of a deer, the natural bend being used. 
Sometimes a prong was left on the antler forming the pommel, 
about which the turn of a rope might be taken to render easier 
the leading of a horse. The whole was covered with wet buffalo 
rawhide, sewed with sinew. Such low saddles are comparatively 
modern inventions. The Cheyennes learned to make them from 
the Kiowas, and also from the Crows; for both these tribes 
used them. At an earlier date the Kiowas and Crows alike 
used high-peaked saddles, somewhat similar to those later used 
by women. But on one occasion, when the Kiowas were off on a 
very long war trip, their saddles from much use became worn 
out and broken, and they killed bulls and deer, and made 
saddles of the low type. In making these saddles, the horn 
foundation was fashioned by men, but the saddles were usually 
put together and covered by women. 

For the making of saddles the horns of deer in the velvet 

206 

INDUSTRIES 

were especially desirable. Such horns were easily bent and 
shaped, and easily cut; yet they dried out hard and, having 
been wrapped with strands of wet rawhide, were very strong. 

Men who had gone on the war-path on foot to take horses 
often made riding pads which sometimes they carried with them 
from the camp. These were commonly formed of a long strip 
of dressed buffalo-hide—a piece of a robe—or even of a strip 
of blanket. The hide was folded over so as to make a double 
strip about a foot wide and four or five feet long. The long fold 
and one end were sewed up with sinew, and in the other end 
dried grass was stuffed evenly throughout and then also sewed 
up. Such a pad was girthed about the horse’s chest; it was long 
enough to come down to the rider’s knee on either side, and 
wide enough to give him room to sit comfortably. 

After the pad had been in use for a time, the stuffing became 
packed hard. A slit, large enough to introduce the hand, was 
then cut lengthwise in the top of the pad, and the stuffing was 
taken out and replaced with fresh grass or with buffalo-hair. 
Little strings, fastened to the edges of this hole, were tied 
together to keep the stuffing from working out. When not in 
use the stuffing was removed, when the pads were light and 
took up little room. 

Women’s saddles up to modern times were of Arab type— 
very high before and behind, and with pommel curved forward 
and cantle curved back. Both were usually flattened so as to be 
from four to six inches wide. Women’s saddles were often 
highly ornamented with brass tacks, leather fringes, and bead- 
or quillwork, and often had on the front of the pommel an 
upright projection on which a baby-board might be hung. 
Highly ornamented, fringed, quilled, and beaded saddle-cloths 
of tanned hide were used by well-to-do young women. 

Stirrups. The old-time stirrups were made by women. They 
were of a single piece of green wood, about two inches wide, 
shaved down flat and thin. On either side of the place where 

207 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the foot was to rest, the wood—a willow which they call big 
willow—was cut almost through at right angles to the length 
of the stick; the green wood was then bent up at right angles, 
and the ends brought together to form the sides and top of the 
stirrup. The two long ends, which ran up from either side, 
were made narrow by cutting them away at the sides, and were 
bent toward and across each other, and on down over the oppo¬ 
site side of the stirrup, almost or quite to the level of the foot¬ 
rest. At different points above and on the sides, they were 
lashed in place with wet sinew. Over this wooden frame, green 
buffalo-hide was stretched and sewed together round the semi¬ 
circle above the foot and in the middle beneath the foot-rest. 
This, when dried, made a firm, strong stirrup. 

THE PIPE 

The early pipes of the Cheyennes were straight (cigar¬ 
shaped), somewhat like the modern automobile pipe. Until 
quite recently—within my knowledge of the tribe—many men 
still smoked these straight pipes, made of the shank-bone of a 
deer or an antelope, cut off at either end, the marrow punched 
out, and the mouth-end pared down and made smooth. Before 
being much used, such a pipe was commonly wrapped with the 
ligament from the back of a buffalo-bull’s neck, and this, when 
dried, made so complete a reinforcement of the bone that the 
pipe might last a very long time. Pipes of similar form were 
made of stone, but were not common, and as they grew rarer 
came to have a sacred character, and were smoked only at 
particular times. The pipe used at the Medicine Lodge is 
straight and of stone. The straight bone pipes were easier to 
carry than the more bulky and elaborate stemmed pipes, and 
were therefore often taken on war expeditions by preference for 
ordinary smoking. Such pipes were used by Kiowas and Co- 
manches as well as by Cheyennes. The straight pipe is an old, 
primitive form. I have unearthed such stone pipes from prehis¬ 
toric burial places in southern California. 

208 

INDUSTRIES 

The usual modern pipes were fashioned much like those of 
the Sioux and other prairie tribes, and while often of red cat- 
linite, were sometimes of a soft black slate, which was easily 
carved. Frequently they were somewhat elaborate in the carv¬ 
ing, and some of them were inlaid with lead. Such pipes were 
whittled with a knife, and there was a great difference in the 
work performed by different men. Of late years redstone pipes 
of this character have been turned out in quantities from white 
men’s factories, for the soft catlinite is easily worked on a 
lathe. 

Formerly there were war medicine (sacred) pipes. One of 
these is described elsewhere. 

WOMAN’S WORK 

Root-digger. At certain seasons of the year the Cheyenne 
woman spent much time unearthing from the prairie the wild 
roots which form a part of the people’s food. This work was 
done with a root-digger (his'so), a slender, sharp-pointed im¬ 
plement to be thrust into the ground to pry out the roots. In 
modern times the root-digger has been of iron—any sort of an 
iron bar. In earlier days, however, these implements were of 
wood, usually of ash, the point sharpened and hardened in the 
fire. One kind of root-digger was two and one-half to three feet 
long, and had a knob at one end to protect the hand. The point 
was thrust into the ground, near the root, and as the soil was 
often hard, considerable force was needed to force the point in. 
The woman commonly folded her robe, or blanket, and putting 
it between her body and the blunt end of the root-digger, as she 
knelt or squatted on the ground, pushed the tool into the soil. 
A shorter form of root-digger was pressed into the ground by 
pushing the knee against it. A third form was a long stick, as 
tall as a man and forked at the upper end, which the woman 
used somewhat like a crowbar, as she stood erect. These long 
root-diggers were sometimes painted red over the lower half 
and black at the handhold. When the points of root-diggers 

209 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

became blunt, they were sharpened with a knife, and rehard¬ 
ened in the fire. Long ago they used prongs of elk-antler as 
short root-diggers—those pressed against the knee—and some¬ 
times they used tent-pins. It is said also that still farther back 
the longer root-diggers were pointed with the tips of elk-ant¬ 
lers, lashed to sticks with wet rawhide. 

The root-digger was given to them by the Creator, for their 
support, and it possessed something of a sacred character. The 
short root-digger was used in the Medicine Lodge for cere¬ 
monially digging the holes which were to receive the center 
pole, and other holes in which were to stand certain branches 
used in building the altar, and at this ceremony it was put in 
the Thunder’s nest and sacrificed along with an arrow. The 
two were offered, as I conceive, as a part of the general peti¬ 
tion that food—both the flesh of animals and the fruits of the 
earth—might be abundant. Besides this, the root-digger was 
used in connection with certain forms of sweat-house, to make, 
ceremonially, the holes in which the willow branches forming 
the frame of the sweat-house were set in the ground. 

Mauls. Stone hammers were an important part of the 
women’s domestic equipment and varied in size according to 
their uses. Large stone mauls were employed as axes to break 
up tree trunks into pieces small enough to be carried on the 
back for fuel, to drive tent-pins, and to break the large bones of 
animals. Smaller hammers were employed to break bones into 
small fragments before they were boiled for the grease, and 
hammers still smaller were used in pounding choke-cherries for 
cooking or to be dried for winter use, as well as for pulverizing 
dried roots and dried meat. These smaller hammers were used 
on flat, circular stones—anvils—one surface of which was often 
worn quite flat, or even hollowed out, by continued use. When 
in use, these stone anvils, which usually show that they have 
been taken from river beds, but which may be found on the 
prairie as part of the glacial drift, were often placed on a cir¬ 
cular or an oval piece of rawhide in order that fragments of 

210 

INDUSTRIES 

bones, choke-cherries, or dried meat, while being pounded, 
might not fall on the ground, but might be picked up, and if 
necessary pounded still further. This hammer and anvil ar¬ 
rangement represents, of course, the mortar and pestle so con¬ 
stantly used for pulverizing food by different tribes the con¬ 
tinent over. 

The mauls or hammers were formed in the usual way, by 
pecking out about the short diameter of an oval stone a groove 
in which, when deep enough, a wythe was laid, running around 
the stone and then off at right angles to the stone’s axis, to form 
a handle. The wythe was held in place and protected by a 
covering of buffalo-hide put on wet and sewed with sinew, and 
this rawhide covered also the long handle. Sometimes berries 
were pounded with a small hammer-head which had no handle, 
or, where no particular force was needed, any oval stone not 
much larger than an egg might be held in the hand to pound 
berries. 

Such small hammers were used for breaking up the flints 
for making arrowpoints. 

Similar hammers, with longer handles and with longer, 
larger, and sometimes ornamented heads, were carried in war, 
and formed the weapon commonly called “skull-cracker,” or 
“war-club,” sometimes used in battle to strike the enemy. 

Combs. A long time ago they used combs made of the rough 
skin of the end of a buffalo-tongue, scorched, so as to harden it. 
They still to some extent make and use combs or hair-brushes 
from the tail of the porcupine. The fresh skin is stretched over 
a stick, sewed tight, and dried, and the quills trimmed off 
evenly. The long seam where it is sewed together is often 
beaded or ornamented with quills. 

Receptacles. Spoons and ladles used in cooking, filling water 
vessels, and in skimming off the grease from boiling bones, 
were made chiefly of horn of the buffalo or the mountain sheep, 

211 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

but sometimes of wood or of the carapace of a tortoise. What 
may have been used before the Cheyennes reached the plains, 
we do not know, but very likely birch-bark. The horn spoon 
was made by boiling or steaming the horn, and as it became 
soft, by bending it into the required shape and letting it dry. 
These objects were made by the women, who took great care 
to see that they dried slowly and did not lose their shape. Some 
of the sheep-horn ladles were very large, with long handles. 
Such spoons and ladles were practically indestructible, and 
were handed down in families for a long time. I have never 
seen spoons made from antlers. 

Bowls used to hold food or for drinking, or as vessels in 
which to mix medicine, were made of wood or of the carapace 
of the turtle. The wooden bowls were carved out indifferently 
by men or women. Sometimes the large knots on trees were 
hollowed out by fire and the knife. In Oklahoma flat bowls or 
dishes were commonly made from the wood of the pecan or the 
poplar, while deeper similar bowls were carved from oak. Some 
bowls were flat and others quite deep. They varied much in 
size, and usually were not ornamented. 

Vessels for carrying water were most often made from the 
paunch of the buffalo. The lining was stripped off smooth, and 
a little hoop made from a slender stick was tied about the open¬ 
ing of the paunch. A stick was then fastened across the hoop 
and to this stick a string was tied to carry the vessel. They 
filled this receptacle with a horn ladle, and sometimes, when it 
was nearly full, tied a string around it just below the hoop, to 
keep the water from spilling. Temporary drinking-cups, shaped 
somewhat like a cup or tumbler, were made from buffalo- 
paunch lining, with a hoop above and at the bottom, sewed to 
the membrane. The awl holes were shopped with tallow. 

Paunch water receptacles were used as recently as 1860- 
1870, but without the hoop and stick. They were merely tied 
about the neck with a string. 

Other old-time water-skins were made of buffalo bladder or 

212 

INDUSTRIES 

of buffalo pericardium, whence the general name for the vessel 
— histai' wittsts —literally, “heart covering,” i.e., the pericar¬ 
dium. This suggests that the original water-skin was made from 
the pericardium, and that the other parts of animal used were 
later adaptations. These membranes, when freshly taken, were 
blown full of air and allowed to dry. Before they became too 
dry they were taken down and rubbed between the hands to 
soften them, and this seemed also to make them thicker. Water¬ 
skins for the special use of babies or small children were 
usually made from the pericardium of the buffalo. 

The durability of such skins in summer depended on the care 
taken of them. In hot weather, if they were not kept filled, they 
emitted a disagreeable odor after three or four days, and had 
to be thrown away; but if kept filled, or, when empty, exposed 
to the sun and dried, they lasted a long time. In the lodge they 
were tied to the lodge-poles at one side of the door, or they were 
hung outdoors on a tripod in the shade. On the march they 
were suspended from the platform of the travois, or, if to be 
used during the march, from the arched, covered roof of the 
travois platform. 

Tanning. As the skin clothing they wore and the skin lodges 
they lived in were made by the women, the implements with 
which she tanned her skins were very important to the Chey¬ 
enne woman. These were four in number: (i) The scraper, by 
which the blood, fat, and flesh were removed from the inner 
surface of the green hide; (2) the flesher, commonly a piece 
of elk-horn, bent at a right angle, and armed anciently with a 
cutting edge of flint and in modern times with a more or less 
keen steel blade, so that the whole implement formed a little 
adze for thinning the hide; (3) the proximal end of the hu¬ 
merus of the buffalo, cut off just below the articulation, the 
rough surface of which rubbed over the smoothed flesh surface 
of the hide served to abrade it, so that it might readily absorb 
the tanning mixture; (4) the softening rope, or the shoulder 
blade of the buffalo, to be described later, either of which was 

213 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

used to break up the fiber of the hide, and to make it soft and 
pliable after the tanning was completed. 

The scraper, in old times, was an oval, flat stone, often a 
slate or quartzite pebble chipped down so as to have a rather 
sharp and even edge all around. Sometimes it was large enough 
to be used in both hands. In modern times crescentic metal 
scrapers, shaped like an ordinary chopping knife and set in a 
handhold of wood, were sometimes used. 

Another form of scraper was the cannon-bone of a buffalo, 
cut off diagonally from above downward toward the distal end, 
and with the sharp edge notched. Through the proximal end 
of such a scraper a hole was usually drilled for a thong of 
tanned buffalo-hide, which formed a loop through which the 
hand was passed. 

More recent scrapers were made from a section of the barrel 
of an old-fashioned, smoothbore gun. A piece of the barrel ten 
inches long was sawed off and at one side split for two or three 
inches from one end, the split cylinder opened, pounded out 
nearly flat, and then notched or toothed. The cylindrical part 
of the barrel above the opening, to be held in the hand, was 
usually wound spirally with a thong of tanned buffalo leather. 

The obvious use of all these forms of scrapers was to go 
over the flesh side of a green hide stretched out and pinned 
down to the ground, or put in a frame, and to scrape from it 
all blood, fat, and particles of flesh that still clung to it. To get 
the best results in tanning, it was important that before it dried 
the hide should be freed from everything that might interfere 
with its drying evenly. 

The adze-like flesher (2) was used to chip off thin flakes 
from the flesh side of the hide, so as to reduce it to the proper 
thickness for tanning, or to remove the hair from the other side. 
In ancient times the cutting edge of this implement was of 
flint, bound to the horn with strings of rawhide, or sometimes 
of sinew. These elk-horn fleshers did not wear out, and were 
handed down from mother to daughter or niece, perhaps for 

214 

INDUSTRIES 

several generations. It was a matter of pride for a woman to 
possess a flesher made by her grandmother or her grand¬ 
mother’s mother. I have seen many that have been so long in 
use that deep, smooth cavities have been worn in the hard elk- 
horn, where the thumbs of successive generations of women 
have held it while working. Women kept the metal blades of 
their fleshers sharp by whetting them, usually with a smooth 
quartzite pebble from the river gravel. 

One of these fleshers was given me by the wife of White 
Bull, when she was sixty-five or seventy years of age. Its first 
known owner was Magpie Woman; when she grew old she 
gave it to her daughter, Sun Woman; when Sun Woman grew 
old she gave it to her daughter, Hole In The Nose, but Hole In 
The Nose fell sick and died, and Sun Woman kept it, and when 
she died it came to Bull Wool Woman, the wife of Frog, who 
was a distant relation of Spotted Wolf. From her it passed to 
her daughter, White Bull’s wife. Bull Wool Woman had been 
dead nearly fifty years when the implement came into my 
hands, when it was perhaps 140 to 150 years old. In old times 
they often made a flesher for a little girl, which at first she 
played with and later learned to use. The girl might keep count 
of her age on the flesher, scratching a line across it each year 
until she married. After this, she recorded the years of her 
children on it in the same way. 

An implement for removing the hair from a hide was shaped 
somewhat like a carpenter’s spoke-shave, and might be formed 
of a somewhat bent willow stick an inch in diameter. In the 
concave part of the bend a lengthwise groove was dug out, into 
which was set a sharpened scale of bone, six or eight inches 
long and one inch wide. One edge of this blade was fitted and 
glued into the groove. In practical use the other sharp edge was 
drawn down over a hide supported on an inclined pole, to take 
the hair from the skin. In later times this tool was made with 
a blade of metal. I am not wholly clear that this is a primitive 
implement, though I believe it to be so. 

21S 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The operation of tanning skins was similar among various 
Indian tribes, yet not always the same. The essential opera¬ 
tions were the preparation of the hide, the application of the 
tanning mixture, and the subsequent working of the skin. 

Brains, liver, soapweed, and grease were used for tanning. 
The root of the soapweed was gathered, peeled, and pounded 
up fine, and the pulverized brains, liver, and soaproot were 
thoroughly mixed together. Grease of any kind was then added 
to the compound, but when especially nice white tanning was 
desired, bones were pounded up and boiled, and the grease or 
oil extracted from them was used. This tanning material was 
applied to both sides of the hide, and was thoroughly rubbed 
in. The hide was then folded up and put aside overnight, so 
that the mixture should soak all through the skin. The next 
day it was unfolded and laid out in the sun to dry. After it 
was dry, the tanned skin was softened as a robe is softened, by 
pulling to and fro through the hole in a shoulder blade, or 
against a rope of buffalo sinew. The rope was tied above to a 
tree or a post and ran diagonally down to a peg fastened in the 
ground. The rope was stretched tight. The woman knelt on the 
ground and pulled the hide back and forth, flesh side against 
the rope, until it was softened. Some women preferred to use 
a buffalo shoulder blade in softening a robe. The inner part 
of the bone was cut away, leaving, however, a strong border. 
Then, by its joint, the shoulder blade was securely tied to a 
tree or to some immovable object, and the robe was passed 
through the hole in the bone and pulled backward and forward 
against the bone. Sometimes a stick, smoothed down on two 
sides to a blunt edge, was fastened to a tree above and to the 
ground below, and the robe was pulled backward and forward 
against the edge of the stick. I have never witnessed this 
process, but I have seen a woman softening a skin by pulling 
it backward and forward in this way against the blunt edge of 
an old scythe fastened as described. 

216 

INDUSTRIES 

The work of softening a robe was long and laborious, but 
the women were industrious, and, moreover, time was not im¬ 
portant to them. A woman worked until she was tired, and 
then put her task aside, to be resumed at her convenience. 

Dress. The early clothing of the Cheyennes was made from 
the dressed skins of animals. For women’s dresses, and for 
leggings and the upper part of the moccasins, the skins of the 
deer, antelope, or mountain sheep were used. Such skins were 
smoked before being made into clothing, so that the garment 
might be easily softened after being wet. The leggings of old 
men, and the dresses of older women, were usually made from 
buffalo cow skin, and for this purpose old skins that had served 
as the upper part of lodge coverings were often employed. Such 
skins had been thoroughly smoked, and were always very soft 
and durable. 

The Cheyenne women were good tanners of buffalo skins, 
and many of them tanned deerskin well. When tanning the 
skins of deer or antelope, or of mountain sheep, the most skill¬ 
ful were careful not to break into the epidermis when they 
removed the hair. In this way their deerskins had a smooth, 
even surface. A deerskin that was very thick might be thinned 
down, and so made rough, on both sides. Such a skin would be 
used for the uppers of a moccasin, but not for leggings, shirts, 
or tobacco pouches. 

Sewing. There was a time when the art of sewing was not 
known, and when the dresses of women, like the leggings of 
men, were tied together at the seams with leather strings, 
passed through holes in the edges of the front and back pieces 
of the dress. The dresses of old Suhtai are said to have been 
so made as late as 1850-1860. In modern times all clothing was 
neatly sewed at the seams with sinew thread, which was very 
durable. Such thread was made from the sinew lying either 
side of the dorsal spines of the buffalo. It was taken off in long 
pieces, or straps, and dried, and strands of it were split off with 

217 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the finger nails as needed by the women, then moistened in the 
mouth, rolled on the knee with the palm of the hand, and 
pointed for an inch or two from the end. With an awl a hole was 
made in the leather, the fine point of the thread was passed 
through the hole, and pulled tight with the fingers. 

The awls used in early times were the spines taken from the 
side of the head of large catfish, which were strong and very 
sharp-pointed; or were tough thorns; or were pieces of bone, 
sharpened to a fine point. When metal came into use, awls and 
needles were among the earliest implements traded to the In¬ 
dians; but we may imagine that so long as they used leather 
for clothing, the use of the needle as such never made any great 
progress among them, but that it was employed as an awl to 
make the hole, and that the sewing was done in the old-fash¬ 
ioned way. In later times, the slender piece of sharp-pointed 
metal used as an awl was commonly set in a wooden handle, 
four or five inches long, or in a handle made of the ligament 
from the back of the neck of some large animal, dried to the 
hardness of horn or bone. A worn-out knife-blade was often 
ground down to form an awl. 

A thread used in the old days, before they discovered the 
possibilities of sinew for sewing, was the twisted bark of a cer¬ 
tain plant, possibly a milkweed. This weed grows from four to 
six feet tall and has a stem about as thick as a man’s finger. 
When ripe, it bears on the top two nearly spherical pods which 
contain something like cotton. Thread made of this bark was 
tough and useful. 

As the women were the manufacturers of the clothing, they 
carried the articles for sewing. These were the awl and sinew, 
together with porcupine quills, dried black grass, and fine roots, 
which they often used in decorating the tanned skins. All were 
carried together in a little sack or case, usually made of dressed 
buffalo cow or calfskin, with the hair left on, which was tied 
to the belt. Such sewing cases opened at the top with a covering 
flap, and were often ornamented about the edges with a sort 

218 

INDUSTRIES 

of binding of porcupine quills. The flap was tied down by a 
deerskin string, which met another string from the side of the 
case. 

The porcupine quills, which (because of their extreme sharp¬ 
ness and their way of working through or into almost anything 
with which they came in contact) could not be carried loose, 
were always wrapped up in a little case made of the pericar¬ 
dium of the buffalo. Sometimes also the awl, if small enough, 
was put in this case, to render its point harmless. 

Moccasins. The moccasins of modern times were of deer¬ 
skin, the upper commonly cut in one piece, with a single seam 
at the back, and to the lower border of this upper was sewed 
the parfleche sole of buffalo-hide. In making moccasins the sole 
was sewed to the upper from the inside, so that when the sewing 
was completed the moccasin was inside out. The seam at the 
heel, however, was not yet sewed. The moccasin was turned 
right-side out with a stick, and the heel was then turned down, 
sewed from the inside, and turned back. The beading, porcu¬ 
pine quillwork, or other ornamentation, was put on the upper 
before it was sewed to the sole. 

In ancient times the moccasin was made differently. There 
was one large piece, comprising what is now the upper, with a 
flap which passed across under the whole sole of the foot, and 
was sewed to the other side of the upper by a single seam. 
After this was completed, the parfleche sole was sewed on the 
outside. People now say that these moccasins were more com¬ 
fortable and much more durable than those more recently in 
use. Almost always the moccasins of modern times have two 
little tails of deerskin, an inch or more long and an eighth of 
an inch wide, which project backward from the heel, at the 
point where the heel seam joins the sole. In old times it was not 
uncommon for a woman to sew to the heel of each of her hus¬ 
band’s finer moccasins a buffalo-tail, or a strip from the beard 
of the buffalo, which trailed behind him as he walked. 

219 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Summer moccasins are without ankle flap, but those for 
winter have a loose piece about the foot opening, three or four 
inches wide, behind and at the sides of the ankle, which is 
drawn up and around the ankle, and tied, to keep out the snow. 
For very cold weather the Cheyennes sometimes used hair 
moccasins; that is to say, soleless moccasins, made from old 
buffalo-robes, the hair side in. These were a great protection 
against cold. 

Beads, fringes, porcupine quills, and the little conical metal 
ornaments, so common in the old Indian trade, were used to 
adorn moccasins. If there was a row of tin tinklers on the 
moccasins, they were worn on the outside of the middle line of 
the foot, running from the instep nearly, or quite, to the toe. 

The modern moccasin with the parfleche sole is no doubt of 
recent development among the Cheyennes. In ancient times, 
when they lived in the humid timbered country of Minnesota, 
and farther east, their moccasins, as described to me, were like 
those of the woods Indians of today, made of a single piece of 
deerskin and without a sole. It was only after they had come 
out on the high dry plains, where the cactus grows, that the 
need was felt of a foot-covering that would resist the thorns. 
The change of footgear may have come about within the last 
three hundred years. The old Suhtai moccasins, as described, 
were seemingly of a style midway between the earliest mocca¬ 
sins and those of modern times. 

Leggings. Men’s leggings were of the usual plains type; that 
is to say, they reached from the ankle nearly to the crotch on 
the inside of the leg, came up somewhat higher on the outside, 
and were tied to the belt, over the hip, by a long strip of deer¬ 
skin. Usually they were fringed, and often were cut in what is 
called a “fork”; that is, there was a long, loose, triangular piece 
of deerskin on the outer side of the leg, running from the calf 
to the ground. As a man walked, this piece flapped forward and 
backward. Leggings were sometimes beaded, but usually the 

220 

INDUSTRIES 

ornamentation was attached to the fringe, and might consist of 
shells, elk-teeth, the spurious hoofs of the buffalo, buttons, bits 
of chain, large beads, or anything that took the wearer’s fancy. 
I know of no special significance to the “fork” in which the 
leggings were cut, and believe that it was merely for ornament. 
I have occasionally seen tobacco sacks made of leather in the 
same shape; that is to say, with a wide fringed flap toward the 
lower end. 

Breechclout. Until recently all the older Cheyenne men wore 
the breechclout, which they still appear to regard as a sign of 
sex. Among the Northern Cheyennes, until about 1900, all still 
wore the breechclout under the trousers, and the string about 
the waist, next to the skin. They said that if they took that off 
they would lose their manhood. Apparently the string about the 
waist, on which the breechclout hangs, is as important as the 
breechclout itself, or perhaps the string may represent the 
whole article. Little boys, as soon as they can walk, have the 
string put upon them, and wear it constantly but wear no 
breechclout. Among the Southern Cheyennes I believe that this 
practice has passed out of use to some extent, but it prevailed 
much longer among the Northern people. Just before his death 
in 1904, it was said of Old Little Wolf that he was the only one 
in the camp who commonly left off the breechclout when assum¬ 
ing trousers. 

Shirts. Deerskin shirts were a part of the ceremonial war 
clothing of the men. These had sleeves, were commonly fringed, 
and reached halfway to the knees, thus passing over the tops 
of the leggings. They were made of the skins of deer and also 
of antelope or mountain sheep. Such war shirts were trimmed 
along the seams with the scalps or hair of enemies, and elabo¬ 
rately ornamented with beads; or, in earlier times, with porcu¬ 
pine quills. 

The buffalo robe was worn by both sexes. The head was on 
the left side of the body, the tail on the right side. 

221 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Ornaments. In the first half of the last century, silver plates 
were used as hair ornaments. Silver coins, ranging in size from 
a dollar to a dime, were hammered out thin, and a number of 
these, of varying sizes, were attached to the scalp-lock with 
deerskin strings, passing through holes in the center of each 
silver disc. The largest coin was above and the smallest below. 
At a later time, similar ornaments of German silver for this 
use were imported by traders. Men’s side-braids were com¬ 
monly wrapped with bands of otter-fur, and sometimes with 
brass wire. The braid was tied at the end with a little deerskin 
string. Frequently a small strand of the forehead hair, on the 
left side, was drawn down over the left eye, and wound with 
brass wire to which a few large beads were sometimes attached. 
Often a stone arrowpoint with a little deerskin bundle of medi¬ 
cine was tied to a man’s scalp-lock. After the introduction of 
domestic cattle, some men wore cow-tails tied to the scalp-lock, 
and later still to their hats. 

Eagle-feathers were commonly worn in the hair by older 
men, and down feathers of the eagle were often tied to the 
head at the base of the scalp-lock. There is now said to have 
been no significance in the use of these soft feathers, but at 
one time it unquestionably had a meaning. In the ceremony of 
the Medicine Lodge today these eagle-feathers are constantly 
used. 

Eagles’ tail-feathers were prized for making war-bonnets— 
either a chaplet of feathers, standing upright about the head, 
or with two long tails, ornamented with feathers, standing at 
right angles to the rawhide support, hanging down the man’s 
back, and so long that they trailed the ground as he walked. 
These feathers were set in a strip of stiff parfleche, and tied 
so that they stood erect. In modern times these eagle-feathers 
often bore tips of tiny red feathers or of dyed horse-hair at¬ 
tached to the ends of the eagle-feathers with plaster of Paris 
(burned gypsum). 

222 

INDUSTRIES 

Long, long ago, we are told, the Cheyennes manufactured 
for themselves what might be called beads, but perhaps were 
small charms made of some vitrified substance—perhaps of 
pulverized glass—after the white people were met. Such beads 
are said to have been made within two or three generations. 
Many of them were fashioned in the shape of a lizard; that is, 
a four-legged object with a long tail and a small head. The 
ceremony connected with making such objects was secret, and 
he who wished to possess one was obliged to go to some person 
who himself had been taught the ceremony, and to ask that 
person to teach him how to make one. A payment was made 
for the service. The two went away together to conduct the 
ceremony in private. It is believed that in old times, long before 
the whites came, these beads were made from the quartz sand 
found on ant-hills, and that this was melted in an earthen pot. 
The secret of making them now seems to be lost. 

In later times they melted the glass, with which to make the 
beads, in the ladles used in melting lead for their bullets. These 
ornaments or charms were made in various shapes, often in the 
form of a lizard, as said, or flat on one side and round on the 
other. Sometimes they had a perforation through which a string 
might be passed; at other times merely a constriction between 
two ends about which a string was tied. The mold was made 
of clay. 

The first European beads possessed by the Cheyennes were 
white, coarse, and imperfect in finish, but were highly valued. 
Few of these are now in existence. 

Besides the armlets of brass and copper wire, necklaces of 
elk-teeth, deer-teeth, and fish vertebrae, were worn in old 
times. The earliest known bracelets are said to have been from 
lengths of hoop-iron wound about the wrist or arm and kept 
brightened by rubbing on a stone or with a file. As soon as 
beads came to be easily obtained, necklaces of fish vertebrae 
passed out of use. Few are now to be seen. 

223 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Women’s Dress. The woman’s dress consisted of a smock or 
shirt made of the skins of deer, sheep, antelope, or elk, reaching 
from the neck halfway from knee to ankle. The sleeves were 
like a cape, open below, and hung down to the elbows. Often 
there was a cape from one sleeve across the back to the other 
sleeve. Women wore moccasins, also leggings pulled on over 
the moccasins and tied under the sole of the foot, and reaching 
up to and tied below the knee. Hanging down on the outer side 
of each leg, and reaching nearly to the ground, was a leather 
string—nowadays sometimes a narrow strap, which may be 
ornamented at the ends with brass-headed nails. These were 
the garters with which the leggings were tied below the knees. 
Tied about the thighs and waist they wore a sort of clout; and 
at night the protective string ( nihpihist') was used, as else¬ 
where described. 

Women’s dresses of the olden time were ornamented with 
elk-tusks, and the capes with stained porcupine quills. One 
hundred elk-teeth used to be worth a good horse. A dress thus 
ornamented would sometimes weigh ten or twelve pounds. I 
once counted on a single dress between 900 and 1000 elk-teeth. 

It has already been intimated that the fashions in dress 
changed among the Cheyennes, and for the oldest modes of 
dressing, of which we have any knowledge, reference should 
be made to an earlier chapter. 

THE LODGE 

In primitive days, and in fact up to the time of Lewis and 
Clark, or the beginning of the nineteenth century, the Chey¬ 
ennes to a considerable extent occupied permanent villages of 
earth lodges. We may take it for granted that these were not 
markedly different in construction from those of other earth- 
lodge tribes in the Plains country. The Pawnees, Mandans, 
Arikaras, and Hidatsas, all built houses of similar type; yet, so 
far as I know, no one has ever seen a Cheyenne earth lodge. We 

224 

FLESHING A HIDE 

INDUSTRIES 

may suppose that these dwellings, the sites of some of which 
are known, consisted of upright posts set in the ground, that the 
roofs were constructed of poles, grass, and earth, and that the 
walls were of sod or soil, piled up to a considerable thickness. 

In modern times, however, the Cheyenne lodge has been the 
ordinary buffalo-skin conical movable shelter so well known by 
its Sioux term, tipi. 

During much of the summer and autumn little shelter from 
the weather was actually needed on the high dry plains of the 
Cheyennes’ prairie home, but in winter and spring, when the 
weather was bitterly cold and snowy, or very rainy, the buffalo- 
skin lodge furnished a warm and comfortable home. Such 
lodges were constructed of the hides of a number of buffalo- 
cows, sewed together, and stretched over a conical framework 
of poles. The beds were ranged around the walls, and a fire 
burned in the middle. To the poles—all around the lodge among 
the well-to-do, but at all events over the bed of the man of the 
lodge—there was tied within the lodge-poles a buffalo cow skin 
lining, which reached to a height of five or six feet above the 
ground, and protected the person lying under it from any water 
which might leak through the lodge-skins or trickle down the 
poles, and also from any wind that might blow in under the 
lodge covering. The lining helped the draft in the lodge, and 
thus added to its comfort. Oftentimes it was highly ornamented 
with pictographs drawn on it by the lodge owner, or by his 
friends, or by some young man who painted on it scenes of 
battle and other adventures representing the deeds of aged 
men. 

The skin lodge, though apparently conical in shape, is not 
a true cone; the windward side—that opposite the door—being 
shorter, that is, nearer the vertical than is the leeward side. In 
other words, the poles on the leeward side are more inclined, 
because in case of a heavy westerly wind they must offer 
greater resistance to its pressure. The space of ground covered 
by the lodge is thus not a true circle. 

225 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The size of the Cheyenne lodge was usually determined by 
the number of horses possessed by the lodge owner; i.e., by the 
owner’s wealth. If a man had but few horses, his lodge was 
small; if he had many, it was large. There was a reason for 
this: Two horses were needed to drag the poles of a big lodge, 
and one to carry the lodge itself—three horses, therefore, for 
the transportation of the lodge alone, to say nothing of other 
property and the members of the family. 

For a lodge of eleven skins, eighteen poles, that is to say, 
sixteen poles within and two for the wings, were needed. A 
sixteen-skin lodge required twenty-two poles. The larger the 
lodge, the more poles were needed. From the great number of 
poles that they used, it resulted that the Cheyennes had well- 
stretched, nice-looking lodges. The Northern Cheyenne women 
declare that an odd number of hides should always be used 
for a lodge, and that if the number was even the lodge never 
came right. Lodges of different sizes might require eleven, thir¬ 
teen, fifteen, seventeen, nineteen, or twenty-one skins. For the 
sewing of these skins much thread was needed. Each strap of 
buffalo sinew made a bundle of thread, which was tied up to¬ 
gether. For a lodge of eleven skins, four sinews were required; 
for one of fifteen, seven sinews; for one of seventeen skins, 
eight sinews. These were the more common sizes; the numbers 
of sinews required for others have been forgotten. The Southern 
Cheyennes say that an even number of skins might be used for 
a lodge. 

For the purpose of lodge making, the hides of old buffalo- 
cows, just shedding the winter coat—in April or May—were 
preferred. These hides were supposed to be the easiest to tan, 
possibly, they say, because the old cows were then thin in flesh, 
and their hides thicker, and so more easily worked. 

On account of the greater ease with which they were dressed, 
cow-hides were used for lodge-skins and robes, though a bull- 
hide, up to a three-year-old, might be used for a robe. For the 

226 

INDUSTRIES 

rest, bull-hides were used for moccasin soles, parfleches, shields, 
and other thick and heavy articles. 

When a hide was to be tanned for a lodge-skin, the hide was 
made smooth, and all flesh and gristle removed from the flesh 
side, but on that side it was not much thinned down. The hair 
was then taken off, and the hide thinned down with a flesher 
from the hair side, thus reversing the process by which a robe 
was tanned. The thinning down was continued until the hide 
was of even thickness throughout. An experienced woman 
judged of the progress of her work and determined where fur¬ 
ther thinning was needed by doubling up the hide and feeling 
it with the fingers. 

The hides were fleshed down quite thin, and were then 
thoroughly rubbed with the rough surface of the proximal 
articulation of a humerus where it had been cut off from the 
shaft, as before described. The smooth ball-joint being held in 
the hand, the flat rough cancelli of the bone roughened the 
surface of the hide. 

When a woman who was preparing to make a new lodge had 
gone as far as applying the tanning mixture and drying the 
hides for it, she made a feast and to it invited some of her 
friends—usually as many as she had skins, or perhaps not quite 
so many. She already had provided herself with about as many 
softening ropes as she had hides. 

When the friends had come and had eaten, she gave to each 
one a hide and a rope. The different women took them to their 
homes, wet the hides again, and on the following day softened 
them, so that all the hides for the lodge might be finished in one 
day. This was a friendly service, to be repaid in kind as the 
occasion arose, and was precisely similar to the old-fashioned 
community barn-raising, quilting, and corn-husking bees of 
our ancestors. 

When a woman had all her skins tanned, she perhaps also 
had all her threads made, having been working at them at odd 
times for some weeks. Sometimes, if behindhand with her 

227 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

thread-making, she might ask one or more of her friends to 
come to help her. The service was a friendly one, and was not 
paid for. The woman had long been saving the sinews of the 
buffalo that the husband had killed, and now with her guest 
she split these dry strips of sinew, and twisted and pointed the 
strands. In this way she made many bundles of thread for the 
sewing of the lodge. 

When all the materials had been made ready for the making 
of the lodge, the woman made preparations for a feast, for she 
intended to invite a number of women to eat with her, and to 
help her sew together the skins to make the lodge covering. 
Among those invited was some woman who was especially skill¬ 
ful as a lodge-maker. This lodge-maker possessed no patterns, 
but measured and fitted everything by the eye alone. 

At dawn of the appointed day, the hostess sent for the lodge- 
maker, and when she had come, said to her, “I wish you to 
cut my lodge for me.” 

“Where are your knife and paint?” replied the lodge-maker. 
The woman brought out a sharp knife and a whetstone, and 
some paint mixed with grease, and the lodge-maker painted 
her own face, hands, and arms, and put on her head, in the 
parting of the hair, a pile of paint mixed with grease, which she 
would use for marking the skins. 

The two women spread out the skins for the lodge on the 
ground, as nearly as possible in the shape which they were to 
assume when sewed together, and the lodge-maker stood over 
and considered them. Perhaps she shifted the position of several 
skins, so as to make a better fit and easier work. Where she 
wished a piece of the hide cut off, she touched her finger to the 
paint in the parting of her hair, and marked where the knife 
should go, much as a tailor marks a garment with his chalk. 
Perhaps she “tacked” the skins together here and there, not 
cutting off the threads, but leaving them long. After this was 
done, a messenger was sent to summon the sewers. 

When they came, a meal—their breakfast—was served. After 

228 

INDUSTRIES 

they had eaten, the sewers went to the prepared skins, and sit¬ 
ting down on them, with knives, awls, and thread began to sew 
with the threads the lodge-maker had left hanging. As the 
afternoon wore on, the hostess again prepared food, and after a 
while the women ate. By night the lodge was completed. The 
last part to be finished appears to have been the bottom, where 
the most patching had to be done, and where the lodge cover¬ 
ing flared out a little to receive the pins that were to hold it to 
the ground. The hide at the back and top of the lodge just 
below the wings—the one to which the pole was tied when the 
lodge was to be raised—was placed neck up, and two strips 
of hide were left at its upper edge. Not far below these two 
strips, the strings which tied the lodge covering to the pole were 
sewed on. When the lodge was to be raised, the two strips of 
the hide were wrapped about the pole, and the strings were 
tightly tied over them. The other hides were placed horizon¬ 
tally, neck toward the door. 

When the sewing was finished, the lodge-maker went over 
the lodge with white clay mixed with water, which was rubbed 
into the covering—all the women working at it. When this was 
done, all turned to and put up the lodge, stretching it nicely, 
and pinning it down tight. The dampening which it had just 
received enabled them to stretch it well. After this was done, 
all ate again and went home. 

The lodge-maker herself, if a good-natured woman, of kindly 
disposition, sewed on the wings, and made their pockets. If she 
did not possess the proper temperament, another woman was 
chosen for this task. If the wings and pockets were sewn by a 
wrangling, fault-finding woman, the lodge, it was said, would 
always be smoky. The lodge-maker sewed on the strips at the 
back of the lodge, where it was to be tied to the pole. She 
received a present—a pair of moccasins, a robe, a blanket, a 
wooden bowl, or what not. The sewers received nothing except 
the feast, but any one of them at any time was likely to call on 
the hostess for a similar service. 

229 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

New lodge-poles had perhaps been made for the new lodge, 
or sometimes old poles were used; a new lodge did not neces¬ 
sarily have new poles. Some women made the lodge covering 
first, and then got out the new poles for the new lodge; others 
made the poles first. Lodge-poles were cut at the season when 
the sap was in the tree, and the poles were easy to peel. When 
this time came the camp moved up into the hills, and those 
who needed new lodge-poles secured them. If, by any chance, 
the lodge, when first put up, did not quite fit, or failed to sit 
well on the poles, it was altered when next taken down. 

The people at large knew that a certain woman’s lodge was 
to be made, but no one of the various lodge-makers knew that 
she was to be called on this particular occasion, nor did the 
sewers know that they were to be invited, until the time had 
come. 

Even the largest lodges were approximately circular at the 
base—though actually they were oval—longer from door to 
back. A part of the old, worn-out lodge covering was cut up for 
clothing and other purposes. Sometimes the lower part of an 
old lodge was used as a lining for a new one. Old men used 
moksiya for leggings; women made sacks of it for carrying 
meat. 

In olden times, at the making of some specially painted 
lodges, the lodge covering, after being painted, was spread out 
where everybody in the camp might walk over it. This was be¬ 
lieved to drive sickness away from the camp. On such occasions 
the women took their little children by the hand and walked 
over the lodge covering. If the ornamented pieces of hide repre¬ 
senting stars were to be sewed on such a lodge, they were put 
on as soon as the painting was finished, and in some cases, as 
already said, a man counted a coup as each one was sewed in 
position. Usually four stars were put on, and four coups 
counted. The day after this was done—the paint thus being 
allowed to dry—the lodge was spread out in a narrow place 
between two sand-hills, where people were likely to pass, and 

230 

INDUSTRIES 

an old man rode about the village and shouted out that it was 
desired that everyone should walk over that lodge. This was 
done over the lodge of old Half Bear, who was the keeper of 
Issiwun and the father of Coal Bear, who died about 1896. 

In making the lodges for the hat (Issiwun) and for the 
arrows (Mahuts), and perhaps the lodges of the Contraries, a 
special ceremony was performed. After the lodge-skins had 
been fitted, but before the sewing had begun, a warrior, chosen 
from among certain invited men who were sitting about the 
skins spread out upon the ground, rose to his feet, walked over 
the skins, and as he did so counted a coup. Until this had been 
done, the women might not walk over the skins and sew them. 

Whenever a new lodge was made and set up, and was ready 
for occupancy, it must be ceremonially treated before it might 
be entered by persons generally. The women who were erecting 
it passed in and out, but no one else. The ceremony was per¬ 
formed by some man who had killed an enemy in the enemy’s 
lodge. To this man, and to other brave men, a feast was given 
by the lodge owner. 

On an occasion when I saw this ceremony performed, Little 
Bear was chosen to count the coup and to dedicate the lodge. 
After the lodge had been set up and prepared, the women all 
drew back, and Little Bear, with a number of the old brave 
men, advanced toward it. Those accompanying him stopped at 
a little distance from it, and stood or sat in a wide half-circle. 
Little Bear, holding in his hand a small stick, walked to the 
door, and struck the lodge on the left-hand (south) side of the 
door, and about halfway between the ground and the door’s 
apex. Then facing toward the spectators, he said: “We started 
on the trail after Utes. All were mounted—a large party. Poor 
Bull and Big Bow [Kiowas] were with us. About the middle of 
the day in the Raton Mountains [in New Mexico] we overtook 
the enemy. They were in camp—five lodges of them. We 
charged upon them, and I rushed to the lodge on the left hand. 
Just before I reached the door, a Ute put his head out, and I 

231 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

stabbed him with my lance. We scalped him. Besides this, I 
took some horses.” When he had said this, he turned about and 
entered the new lodge. The other men then rose and followed 
him in; first the more important ones, Little Chief, Man Above, 
Long Neck, Man On The Cloud—all the bravest men. The 
other less important men went in afterward. Man Above was 
said to have killed sixteen Indians in war, besides some white 
men. 

The Arapahoes had a similar ceremony of dedicating a lodge, 
but with them the coup was counted by a man who, riding a 
white horse in battle, had counted coup on an enemy also riding 
a white horse. If no one could be found who rode a white horse, 
and counted coup on an enemy riding a white horse, the cere¬ 
mony might be performed by one who had counted coup on a 
man riding a dark horse, but wearing a white coat. 

A Cheyenne warrior might dedicate an Arapaho lodge after 
his tribal method. If no Arapaho or Cheyenne could be found 
to dedicate the lodge in the manner of his own tribe, a Chey¬ 
enne who had performed the Arapaho feat might dedicate the 
lodge, or an Arapaho who had performed the Cheyenne feat 
might dedicate it. If no one could be found to dedicate a lodge 
in either of these two ways, a man might do it who had touched 
an enemy inside of breastworks. 

The fireplace in the Cheyenne lodge is usually roughly rec¬ 
tangular—an oblong excavation in the earth, longer from east 
to west, and six to eight inches deep. Sometimes it is shaped 
like a half-moon, and sometimes like a heart. In the southern 
country it is not surrounded by stones—perhaps because there 
stones are extremely scarce. 

A fireplace is sometimes dug somewhat in the form of an 
equal-armed cross, the arms pointing in the four cardinal direc¬ 
tions (nivstanivoo). This term is constantly used for the four 
directions, and in making a sacrifice with the five pieces of 
meat, held up to the east, south, west, and north, and to the 
sky, and then placed on the ground at the edge of the fire. 

232 

INDUSTRIES 

In offering to the cardinal directions, certain poles of the 
lodge represented them—the one immediately to the south of 
the door, the three which were tied together to support the 
frame of the lodge, and the back pole. The pole at the south 
of the door represented the east; the first, second, and third 
tied poles, the south, west, and north, in that order; while the 
back pole, to which the lodge covering was tied, represented 
the sky. These different supporting poles stood in the general 
direction of the cardinal points, while the back pole supported 
the lodge, which to those within represented for the time the 
overarching sky. The Cheyennes, like some other tribes, regard 
the earth’s surface as flat, and the sky as a huge arched vault 
which bends down to meet the earth. It is a covering or shelter, 
just as the lodge is a covering. The conception is not novel. 

In modern times most Cheyenne lodges were not painted. 
The hat and the arrow lodges were painted black below and 
red above—whether symbolizing the two colors of the arrow- 
shafts, or the night and the day, is uncertain. The lodges of 
the Contraries were painted red. There were some exceptions, 
as below, but as a rule the lodges were plain. 

Old-time Painted Lodges. In old times a few of the Chey¬ 
ennes had painted lodges, but the custom was abandoned long 
ago. 

The lodge of old Yellow Wolf, killed at Sand Creek in 1864, 
was painted yellow, I am told. On the lodge covering, to the 
north and again to the south of the door, were painted two 
buffalo-bulls, each about two feet high, standing head to the 
door, and following each bull were several cows. At the back 
of the lodge, three feet or more from the ground, was a red 
disc, perhaps two and a half feet in diameter—the sun—and 
over this, and just below the smoke-hole, was the morning star, 
a green disc about ten inches in diameter. Above the door was 
a blue crescent moon. The wings and top of the lodge were 
painted black, representing the night, with equal-armed crosses, 
indicating stars, on the wings. Yellow Wolf was the chief of the 

233 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Hevataniu. His son was Red Moon—really Red Sun—named 
for his uncle, Red Sun, a younger brother of Yellow Wolf. 

Old Red Sun’s lodge was yellow, and above black, like his 
brother’s. The stars on the wings were green. The morning star 
was green, and about ten inches in diameter. Toward the four 
directions (nivstanivoo) stood four men. Each had two horns 
on his head, and instead of hands and feet had wolf-paws, and 
held in his hands a pipe, bowl up. From the center of the red 
sun at the back two buffalo-tails hung down. The disc was 
about three and a half feet in diameter. The crescent moon 
over the door was green, and very large, perhaps two and a 
half feet in diameter. 

A lodge marked with crosses belonged to a man called Dif¬ 
ferent Tails, who was a leading man of the Himoweyuhkis. 
The name means a tail having feathers of various colors, from 
the tail of an eagle killed long ago, which was thus colored. 
It is an old family name. Different Tails was a cousin of Ed¬ 
mond Guerrier. Old Owl Man painted these lodges as described. 
After they were painted, four days and four nights were de¬ 
voted to dancing. 

Old Spotted Wolf had a painted lodge, which he was advised 
to make by the buffalo, in a dream. A great snake-like animal 
was painted all about the lodge, the head being on the left side 
of the door, and the tail on the right. Close above the body of 
the snake, as if looking over it, appeared about forty-five buf¬ 
falo-cow heads. A night owl was painted on either side of the 
door, a crescent moon over the door, a sun on the back of the 
lodge, and a crescent moon also at the back, just below the 
smoke-hole and over the pole to which the lodge was tied. 
Below the half-moon at the back of the lodge the constellation 
“seven stars”—the Pleiades—was painted. 

The painting of the lodge scarcely ever went out of the group. 
A man might present it to his daughter’s husband, who because 
of his marriage had come to live with the group to which she 
belonged. 

234 

INDUSTRIES 

To the ends of the wings, and sometimes to the ends of the 
lodge-poles, were often tied pieces of the skin which carries the 
long hair from the fore leg of the buffalo. Holes were burned in 
the ends of the lodge-poles, and the hide attached to the ends 
with deerskin strings. When, as was sometimes the case, every 
pole in the lodge was so ornamented, it looked at a little dis¬ 
tance as if a crow were perched on each lodge-pole. Such an 
ornament is called a nim'hdyoh, meaning “over the smoke” 
(plural, nim'hoyun). 

POTTERY 

Although the Cheyennes were without cooking baskets such 
as more westerly tribes used for boiling food, they cooked—in 
early and even in later times—in essentially the same way. 
Their kettle was the hide or the paunch of an animal, which 
either lined a hole in the ground or was suspended bag-like 
from sticks set in the ground. Into this tight vessel holding 
water, red-hot stones were put, until the water boiled. At some 
time, and in some fashion, they learned to make a serviceable 
pottery, which began to pass out of use only about 1850, when 
trade with the whites brought them metal vessels. Much earlier 
than this they had stone receptacles, similar to those told of by 
the Blackfeet. These were durable and useful, but were hard 
to make, and owing to their weight exceedingly difficult to 
transport. 

As the earthenware vessels passed out of use so long ago, we 
can know little about them and the method of their manufac¬ 
ture, except by the stories told us by the few old people still, 
or recently, alive, who preserved clear recollections of the 
ancient art of pot-making. One of the last of these ancient 
Cheyenne pots was buried about 1896 with the old woman who 
owned it. The accounts given here come from old women, who 
received them from their mothers and grandmothers; but it 
would probably be difficult now to find among either section of 

235 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the Cheyennes more than two or three old women who know 
how to make the old-time pottery. The accounts here given are 
precisely as they were repeated to me, and from them a reason¬ 
ably clear idea may be had of the ancient industry. 

Broken Jawed Woman—daughter of High Backed Wolf 
(died 1833), painted by Catlin—said to me: 

In the days when we lived on the Missouri River, our dishes were 
made of wood, stone, and earthenware. We used a sort of clay, which 
was moistened and shaped, to make dishes. Pots were made for cook¬ 
ing, and we boiled meat in them. The small flat dishes were used to 
eat from, and the deeper ones to cook in. 

My mother used to tell me of the time when we made earthen 
pots. They used a kind of stone, pounding it all up fine, and after 
mixing this with clay they wet the mixture with water. Taking a lump 
of the mixture they shaped it with their hands, first making a de¬ 
pression in it, and with a fine smooth stick they patted out the inside 
of this depression until it was large enough; then with the stick they 
patted it all over the outside surface, and smoothed it. They fixed 
pieces on the upper part of the clay for handles, to lift the pot with, 
and after the vessel was dry they greased it all over, inside and out, 
with tallow. A place was smoothed off on the ground, and on this 
they put the pot, and covered it over with bark, gathered from dried 
trees, which was then set on fire. This bark made a strong heat. They 
let the pots bum, until they were red-hot, and then took the fire away 
from them, and left the pots there to cool slowly. Then they took 
them out, all smooth, hard, and nice. Sometimes they burned only 
one pot at a time, sometimes two or three, and sometimes a great 
many. 

Some of the earthenware pots used by the Cheyennes were shaped 

like this: Many were in use as recently as the time of 

the Horse Creek treaty [1851]. 

236 

INDUSTRIES 

Little Woman gave the following account of the way in which 
pots were made in primitive times, received from her mother, 
whose age in the year 1902 was said to be one hundred and 
twelve years. She was certainly very old. 

When they wished to make pots (kso e '?) or dishes of earthen¬ 
ware, a smooth round hole was dug in the ground, and was lined with 
a thick layer of wet day. The day was put on so thick that it would 
hold water. After this was done, the hair having been removed from 
the hide from a buffalo-bull’s head, where the skin is thickest, the 
hide was cut in small pieces, put in the hole, and the hole was then 
filled with water. In a large fire built near at hand, they now heated 
stones as hot as they could get them, and with wooden tongs took 
the red-hot stones, one by one, and put them in the hole with the 
water and the hide. As the stones became cool, they took them out 
and put in other hot ones. Soon the water was boiling, and they kept 
it boiling constantly. As the scum rose to the top, it was skimmed off 
and put in a dish. After the hide had been boiled to rags, and all the 
glue got from it, they took clay—of different colors—and mixed the 
clay with the gluey water and the scum which had been skimmed off. 
This was the material for their pots. 

Some pots were made of clay of only one color, and some of clays 
of different colors, so that some dishes were white, some red, some 

blue, and others of several colors, depending on the clay that had 
been used. The glue with which the clay was mixed made it stiff and 
tough. Some people shaped their pots with the hands, smoothing 
them with the moistened palm, while others used a flattened stick for 
this purpose. When the pots were properly shaped, they were put out 
to dry, the glue keeping them from cracking. While they were drying, 
a hole was dug in the side of a hill, making a kind of oven, which 
was filled with wood and fired. After the wood had burned to coals, 

these and the ashes were raked out, and the dishes were put in and 
left there, the hole being tightly closed with a large stone, so that 
all the heat was kept in. 11 

For the bails on the kettles, a strip of green rawhide was put across 

11 In such a case it would seem that the vessels were not actually fired, but 
were merely kiln-dried, the glue holding them together. That no great heat 
could have been applied is shown by the way in which the bails were put on. 

237 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the top, running from one side of the mouth to the other close to 
the top, and knotted there. This green hide was covered everywhere 
with a thick coating of clay, which kept it from cooking. Some pots, 
moreover, were strengthened with a strip of green hide running 
around the mouth, and thickly covered with clay. 

Various shapes of pots and dishes are shown by the following 
figures, drawn by the Indian woman: 

Another ancient woman said: 

The old women used to take clay and wet it; it would then stick to 
their hands, and they kneaded it as bread is kneaded. Having mixed 
a little sand with the clay, they shaped the pots, using chiefly their 
hands and water, but also using a flattened stick in shaping and 
working the clay. While these pots were wet they were very fragile, 
and had to be handled carefully. They were put in the sun to dry, 
and after they had dried, were greased all over, inside and out. A 
deep hole was dug in the ground, and a fire built in it, so as to heat 
it thoroughly. Then the pots were put in the hole, and a fire made 
over them—a very hot one—so that the pots became red-hot. The 
purpose of greasing the pots was to make them fire properly; if they 
were not greased, they would not fire at all. 

238 

INDUSTRIES 

Of this clay they made pots, cups, platters, and dishes. The pots 
were not ornamented. 

From all this it would seem that some of the pottery—that 
mixed with glue—was merely kiln-dried, but the pots for cook¬ 
ing were fired, as Broken Jawed Woman says. Mixed with the 
clay was a tempering of sand, and great heat would be required 
to cause this material to burn very hard. Bear Black says the 
pots were quite durable, and did not break easily. 

Mrs. Red War-bonnet, mother of Kingfisher, a woman of 
sixty-five or seventy years, who has married grandchildren, 
gave me a small earthenware cooking-pot that had been used 
for mixing medicine. It is thick and heavy. Mrs. Red War- 
bonnet was a sister of Mrs. White Bull, Wool Woman, and 
Mrs. Rowland. Her mother, a noted potter, made this pot. She 
said that as such vessels were shaped wholly by hand, the work 
of making them was slow; it took from two to four days to 
make one, depending upon its size. 

I once showed fragments of pottery, picked up on the site 
of a forgotten Cheyenne village on the Missouri River, to a 
Northern Cheyenne woman, about fifty years of age, who at 
once said, “My grandmother used to make dishes like that,” 
and then described the method of making them. This woman’s 
grandmother was born on the Missouri River and lived there 
till grown. 

From the information obtained, it seems that the pots, made 
from a mixture of pounded stone and clay, were worked out of 
a single lump of clay, and not coiled. A flattened, bent stick 
was used to hollow out and shape the mass, and what was taken 
from the inside was added to the top, thus increasing its size. 
The ornamentation was once made with a string of twisted 
grass pressed into the surface of the plastic clay. In later times 
a string of twisted sinew was used for the purpose. The grass 
string seems to have been sometimes left on the pot, to be 
burned away in the firing. Previous to the firing the pot was 

239 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

greased. These pots were burned on the ground by piling about 
and over them dried bark, or dried willow wood, which by some 
women was thought to produce greater heat than any other 
wood. Half a dozen women might be making pottery at one 
time, and in such a case all of them would fire their pots at the 
same time. Such a combination saved time and trouble. 

Not all the pots were fired. Some were only greased, the 
grease being frequently applied until the clay was permeated. 
The grease prevented the clay from drying and cracking. Such 
unfired pieces were used for platters and dishes, but not for 
cooking. Clay pots for carrying water, and often for cooking, 
had perforated ears, or lugs, on opposite sides of the rim, 
through which a rawhide string was passed for use as a bail in 
carrying. 

Some years ago, the late Col. W. H. Robinson presented to 
the American Museum of Natural History a perfect pot found 
near Fort Yates, North Dakota. This was locally called a Ree 
pot, perhaps because the Arikaras were the people then best 
known as makers of pottery. It was found partially covered by 
soil within a few miles of the old Cheyenne village on the Por¬ 
cupine, and I suspect is of Cheyenne manufacture. It is without 
ornamentation, has two handles, and has evidently been used 
for cooking. 

I had thought it possible that the Cheyennes learned the 
art of pottery-making from the Arikaras and Mandans on the 
Missouri River, but the late Dr. William Jones, who made in¬ 
quiry for me among the Ojibwas, told me that two or three 
generations ago those people made pottery of a mixture of clay 
and pulverized mussel-shells. This information came from 
Madcigado, already mentioned, who, in 1905, declared that he 
was seventy-five years of age and said that during his father’s 
time pottery was made by the Ojibwas. His father died twenty- 
seven years before, aged ninety years. 

The Ojibwas cooked by means of heated stones put into bark 
vessels holding water, and also cooked in birch-bark vessels 

240 

MODEL OF ORNAMENTED LODGE 

INDUSTRIES 

filled with water and set on the fire. The bark would not burn, 
they say, because of the water in the vessel. 

HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE 

Important among the furniture of the Cheyenne lodge were 
the back-rests and the mattress, which together made up the 
formal lodge bed. Both these were made soft and comfortable 
by coverings of well-tanned buffalo-robes and other skins, 
and formed easy lounging and sleeping places. 

The mattress—if it may be so called—seven or eight feet 
long and four feet wide, was formed of willow rods almost as 
thick as a man’s forefinger, strung on long lines of sinew, and 
was thus flexible and could readily be rolled up. Its use was 
to keep the bed raised above the soil or to smooth out the 
inequalities of rough ground. 

On the mattress were often spread mats woven of a certain 
bulrush or tule known as mo um' stat (?) (Scirpus nevadensis, 
S. Wats.). These mats were loosely woven and were in general 
use, for the plant grows abundantly in wet places. In modern 
times, since the introduction of the gunny-sack, which also is 
constantly used as a foundation for the bed, the gunny-sack is 
called by the name applied to this rush. The name “pretty 
plant” refers to its smooth and graceful shape. 

The mattress and back-rests were not commonly used during 
the march, but when a permanent camp was made, the domicile 
was arranged as neatly and comfortably as might be. 

At such a permanent camp, after the lodge had been pitched, 
the women usually cleared away all the grass, sagebrush, or 
roots, on the ground it covered, lowering the surface of the soil 
two or three inches, except for a border four or four and a half 
feet wide, all about the walls of the lodge, slightly higher than 
the general surface of the lodge floor. On this little bench the 
beds were spread. The earth removed by the women with 
knives, hands, and spoons, was piled on a blanket or a par- 
fleche, dragged outside, and emptied on the prairie. After this 

241 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

soil had been removed, a slightly deeper excavation was made 
in the very middle of the lodge, to form the fireplace. 

This left the lodge floor—in dry weather, and in certain 
soils—very dusty, and the dust was laid with water freely 
sprinkled about, either from spoons or from the mouth. This 
wet soil was then walked over and patted down, and when 
partially dried was swept and the dust thrown into the fire¬ 
place. The women and children then went off up and down the 
creek, and returned with great bundles of rye grass, which they 
spread on the little bench that was to hold the beds. On the 
rye grass the mattresses were unrolled and spread. Before this, 
however, the lodge lining had been tied to the lodge-poles and 
extended as far as it would go around the lodge. It covered the 
bed of the lodge owner at least, and very likely the couches of 
the women and children as well. Tied to the poles at a height of 
from four to five feet, the lining was brought down inside the 
poles and parallel to the lodge covering, and then turned in 
toward the fireplace, so that when the beds were put down they 
rested on its turned-in border. In this way, any wind which 
blew under the lodge covering and into the lodge never directly 
reached the persons sitting on the beds, but was deflected up¬ 
ward by the lining, passed over the heads of the occupants, and 
then descending, furnished draft for the fire. 

If several mattresses were put down in the lodge, they were 
spread in their proper places, perhaps four feet distant from 
each other, and between the head and foot of the two mat¬ 
tresses was set up a tripod of slender, usually painted, poles tied 
together near their tops with strings passing through holes 
burned through the ends. Sometimes these supports of the 
back-rest had four legs instead of three. These were spread, and 
from two of the three poles, above where they were tied to¬ 
gether, were hung two back-rests, one for each bed. These were 
supported by the tripods, and the vacant spaces between back¬ 
rests formed convenient cupboards for storing household 
articles. This was repeated between each two of the mattresses, 

242 

INDUSTRIES 

so that each mattress had a back-rest at its head and one at its 
foot. In the lodge of a well-to-do person, there were likely to be 
not fewer than six such back-rests. From the tripods which sup¬ 
ported each pair was usually hung by the head—either by a slit 
cut in the robe or by a loop sewed to it—a buffalo-robe which 
reached down over the whole back-rest and onto the bed, form¬ 
ing a comfortable seat. On the mattress were spread two or 
three robes. 

The back-rests were formed of slender willow shoots strung 
on sinew. The shoots were much smaller than the rods used 
in the mattress, and the back-rest was usually not less than 
eight feet in length. At the top, where it hung from the tripod, 
it was often not more than eleven inches wide, but below this, 
toward the bed, the willow shoots became constantly longer, 
until finally, five or six feet from the top, they were perhaps 
three feet two inches in length. From this point on, the width 
increased very slightly. The leather loop for hanging the back¬ 
rest over the tripod was often one and a half or two inches wide, 
and was strongly fastened to the upper part of the back-rest. 
Sometimes this loop was nicely beaded or ornamented with 
quills. Back-rests were often painted; there might be a dozen 
shoots without painting, then a dozen painted red, and so on 
alternately. In later days the ends of the twigs on both sides 
were sometimes bound with red or blue cloth, with a beadwork 
edging, and no doubt in earlier times deerskin bearing quill- 
work may have been used in the same way. 

When prepared for transportation, mattresses and back-rests 
alike were rolled up into compact bundles and lashed with 
strings, so that they would carry well on a horse. We may 
imagine that these devices for comfort are of comparatively 
modern invention, since it is inconceivable that in the days 
when the Indians were foot travelers and carried most of their 
possessions on their backs, they would load themselves down 
with luxuries such as these. The acquirement of the horse by 

243 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the Indians of the plains meant a literal lightening of their 
burdens. 

In the vacant spaces between the back-rests, and in the nar¬ 
row intervals between the edges of beds and the lodge lining, 
were stored practically all the lodge furniture and the extra 
food that had been laid up against a possible season of scarcity. 
This food for the greater part was in the form of dried meat, 
though there might be sacks of pounded meat, of dried corn, 
dried roots, and fruit. In times of plenty, when buffalo were 
abundant and many were killed, the women dried great quanti¬ 
ties of meat, and on the day following a successful hunt the 
camp was red with meat and white with sheets of backfat, 
hanging on the drying scaffolds. When the meat exposed to sun 
and wind had become hard and black, it was taken down and 
crushed flat, and put away in parfleches, in which it was car¬ 
ried about from place to place. 

In parfleches also the women carried sacks of dried berries 
and dried roots, gathered during the proper seasons and kept 
for use during the winter and spring; and in others were orna¬ 
ments, wooden bowls and dishes, small horn spoons, and any 
odds-and-ends. In fact, the contents of a parfleche were a 
perpetual surprise, for it might contain anything from an elk’s 
tooth to a twenty-dollar gold piece. 

Parfleche is a trapper French term of the Old West to denote 
several different things. Originally it meant a shield—Fr., parer 
and fleche, to ward off, or parry, an arrow. The shield being 
made of rawhide, the term grew broader in its significance, so 
that a parfleche might be any rawhide, and finally any article 
made of rawhide. The so-called parfleche in which the women 
carried their articles was, in fact, the Cheyenne trunk. Made 
from heavy buffalo rawhide from which the hair had been re¬ 
moved, it was so cut as to be from two to three and a half feet 
long and from a foot to eighteen inches wide, when folded. 
The oblong piece of rawhide was folded over for from nine 
inches to a foot on each side, the long way of the piece of hide, 

244 

INDUSTRIES 

and then at both ends, at right angles to the first fold, for a 
foot or fifteen inches, so that these ends almost met. Leather 
strings laced together the two ends, and the shape of the case 
was convenient for packing on a horse’s back. It suggested in 
its shape and appearance a letter envelope and was somewhat 
distensible, so that many things might be put in it. Originally 
made from the untanned hide of the buffalo, these parfleches 
were in later days made of the hides of domestic cattle. Often 
they were more or less elaborately ornamented by painting in 
straight lines and triangles. Women expended much effort in 
making and in keeping them clean and freshly painted. When a 
woman was looking for something that was not easy to find, 
she might drag out from between or under the beds half a 
dozen parfleches, one after another, to be unlaced and its con¬ 
tents picked over in the search for the missing article. A more 
or less cubical parfleche, shaped like a trunk, was sometimes 
seen. This is perhaps a survival from their earlier eastern range 
near the Ojibwas, who used birch-bark containers of the same 
form. 

Other receptacles used for holding women’s things were what 
trappers used to call “possible sacks”; that is to say, sacks 
which might hold almost anything—one’s “possibles,” or small 
articles. These were commonly made of tanned deerskin, eight¬ 
een inches long by fifteen inches deep, often rounded, though 
sometimes square at the corners below, the opening above being 
covered by a long flap which tied down with leather strings. 
Such possible sacks were often elaborately adorned with porcu¬ 
pine quills, dyed horse-hair, conical tin ornaments purchased 
from traders, and various other articles. In them were carried 
small ornaments; a multitude of little sacks, as those contain¬ 
ing medicine, or sewing articles, or counters in some game of 
skill or chance, baskets and ornamented plum-stones used in 
the seed game, and many other things. Clothing for small chil¬ 
dren was packed in such sacks, and generally they were used 

245 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

to keep together in one package small articles that would be 
difficult to find if put loose in a parfleche. 

At present the only basket used is the one for playing the 
seed game. This was made sometimes of grass, or of split willow 
twigs, or of split strands of yucca. Often it was made of the 
roots of the young red-willow (cornel), which were dug up 
and soaked in water for a long time. The root stems were 
scraped down till all were of the same size. A single slender 
shoot of red-willow runs up spirally around the basket, and the 
roots were woven over this back and forth, covering the shoot. 
If a single shoot was not long enough, another was added. 

Although at present they manufacture only these baskets, 
the women were formerly expert basket weavers. As recently 
as the middle of the nineteenth century all women wove baskets 
from a certain grass ( Elcocharis, sp.). These were of varying 
sizes and were used for different purposes. A very small basket 
was often fastened at the head of the baby-board as a shade for 
the baby’s face. Small baskets were used for dishes, and large 
ones as burden baskets, to carry on the back. Mothers made 
tiny baskets as playthings for their children. 

Only a general description can be given of the implements 
used by the people. Further accounts of their life will suggest 
other aspects of their industries. 

246 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

VARIOUS EARLY FOODS 

T HE most important task before the Cheyenne man 
was to provide food for his family—his first thought 
was to support life. It is commonly assumed that the 
Indian lived solely by hunting and fishing, and subsisted alto¬ 
gether on flesh, but this is not true. A considerable portion of 
his sustenance was derived from the soil. Like most tribes, the 
Cheyennes cultivated the ground, and raised corn, squashes, 
beans, and tobacco. At their proper season, wild fruits and 
roots were gathered, and these furnished an important part of 
their living. 

We learn only by tradition about the subsistence of the 
Cheyennes before they reached the buffalo plains. They know 
nothing about when or where they first obtained the corn, but 
their old stories point to a long residence in a country where 
the sugar-maple grows, and they say that sugar formed a part 
of their food. They had always been hunters, and their code 
permitted them to eat all flesh—most birds and mammals, as 
well as fish and some reptiles, creatures which are an abomina¬ 
tion to certain Plains tribes. 

In that early period of their wanderings spoken of by the 
Cheyennes as “long, long ago, when they were in the North,” 
they say that they had little knowledge of large food animals. 
There was a time when they subsisted almost wholly on small 
animals with long ears—rabbits—and at another period they 
lived chiefly on fish. At a later day, they visited in summer 
lakes and streams, and gathered the eggs of wild fowl and 
killed the young, not yet able to fly, as well as the adults when 

247 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

they were molting and had lost their flight feathers. In autumn, 
when the skunks were fat, it was their custom to move to cer¬ 
tain hills where these animals abounded, and they secured great 
numbers of them. Such places were visited time after time, 
and much food secured. These hunts were systematized and 
well managed. All those in the camp were expected to take part 
in them and to act under the orders of designated leaders. The 
food secured was common property, and its legitimate share 
was assigned to each family. 

After the Cheyennes reached the region of the Great Lakes 
and the country where the wild rice grows, they no doubt har¬ 
vested this crop, which furnished them a winter food, as at 
the present day it gives partial subsistence to their relatives, 
the Ojibwas and the Menomini. 

After they had left the Missouri River and come out on 
the plains, their food was essentially that of the other Plains 
Indians of that region, and since they ranged north and south 
for a great distance along the eastern flanks of the Rocky 
Mountains, they had a considerable variety in wild food plants, 
birds, and mammals. 

A tea was made from the leaves of the “red leaf wood.” This 
is a small shaggy bush, with very hard wood, very narrow 
leaves, and a yellow flower, growing not more than three or 
four feet high. The tea made from these leaves, or from the 
root, is red, like sassafras tea, and tastes somewhat like green 
tea. It does not grow in the North, but is found in South Da¬ 
kota and Oklahoma. It is called “red medicine” and is used 
in doctoring. A tea was made also from the leaves of a certain 
mint. 

Up to the middle of the last century the Cheyennes pounded 
up and boiled as a mush, with a little buffalo fat, the large 
acorns of one of the southern oaks. These were best prepared 
by roasting or parching the acorns in the shell; then, after 
removing the shells, the kernels were pounded fine and the 

248 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

meal was spread in the sun to dry. This meal furnished a fairly 
palatable food. 

In the southern portion of their modern range they had other 
nuts, and gathered the pods of the knife-scabbard tree, mut- 
ko a min' o (Gymnocladus ), and parched them, when they 
broke open, freeing the kernels, which were soft, almost like a 
cooked bean. 

They had a sweetening after they came out on the buffalo 
plains, and before they received sugar from the whites. In early 
spring, as soon as the weather began to grow warm, they tapped 
the box-elder tree and used the boiled sap as sweetening. Often 
the sap was boiled in a kettle with the shavings from the inner 
side of the hides of animals, and this made a kind of sap candy, 
which was greatly relished. In modern days, when they had 
coffee, but no sugar with which to sweeten it, they sometimes 
used box-elder sap instead of water to boil their coffee. 

They now call sugar sweet water— vik' a ma' pi, sometimes 
pronounced ve' a ma' pi. They used to call it mish ke mai’- 
mapi, box-elder water; from mishkemai', box-elder tree + 
mapi, water. They have the same name, mishkemaimapi, for 
the sap of the maple. The sap of the box-elder is very sweet, 
and a sugar may be made by boiling it, as is sometimes done 
today. 1 The Pawnee name for sugar, likits' u, is said to signify 
wood water, but may perhaps mean rather the juice of the 
cornstalk. 

Some Cheyennes say vikamapi is derived from mishkemai¬ 
mapi, literally, maple water; that they first applied that name 
to sugar, but that the traders incorrectly pronounced it vik' a- 
ma' pi. The word would thus be of modem coinage. It seems 
more probable, however, that vikamapi is from vik'iene, 
sweet, and mapi, water, i.e., sweet water. 

The cultivation and harvesting of vegetable foods were the 
work chiefly of the women; and at the proper season of the 

1 Gilmore, Uses of Plants by the Indians of the Missouri River Region, 33d 
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 1919. 

249 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

year—in spring for roots, and in late summer for berries— 
parties of women of all ages, with their children, set out to 
garner the natural crops. 

Berries were dried for consumption in winter, when they 
were boiled, either alone or with meat. Fresh choke-cherries 
were pounded fine and mixed with pulverized buffalo meat and 
tallow to make pemmican. Fresh or dried, they used sarvis- 
berries, plums, choke-cherries, sand-cherries, bull-berries, and 

currants. After these fruits had been pounded fine so that seeds 
or pits had been thoroughly broken up, the moist mass was 
pressed into flat, thin, rectangular cakes, perhaps two and a 
half inches by two inches, and laid out on a skin or a piece of 
cloth to dry in the sun. When thoroughly dried, the cakes were 
packed away in small rawhide sacks, which again were stored 
in the larger parfleches. 

The pomme blanche 2 was gathered in June, for a little later 
the root becomes good for nothing, while the tops fall off in 
July. The roots vary in size from that of a pigeon’s egg to a 
large root four inches long and from two to two and one-half 
inches in diameter. They were cooked fresh, or were dried for 
winter use. Sometimes they are eaten raw, but if too freely 
indulged in cause indigestion and discomfort. Raw, the taste 
of the roots somewhat suggests a chestnut. The larger roots 
were cut in pieces for drying, and Hinds 3 relates how he saw 
the Crees cutting these roots into shreds for this purpose. The 
Cheyennes more commonly cut them into thin, lengthwise 
slices, which soon lose their moisture. The dried pieces are 
often pounded fine on the same stones used in pounding berries, 
and then are used as a thickening for soup. 

The women speak of about thirty-five or forty plants which 
serve them as food, of which sixteen or more are fruits, and 
eight or ten roots. I do not think that the Cheyennes ever knew 
the camas, which does not grow on the plains. They do, how- 

2 Tipsin of Gilmore. 

3 Hinds’ Canadian Red River Exploration, vol. I, p. 319, London, i860. 

250 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

ever, eat the bulbs of several lily-like plants, such as the 
mariposa lily. 4 

When the first shoots of the so-called red cocklebur, or wild 
licorice (mat kant no was), appear in spring, these are watched, 
and when they have grown to the height of a foot, they are cut 
and eaten raw. They are sweet and tender. The tender stalks 
of a milkweed are used in the same way. 

In wet places along the river bottoms, they say, are some¬ 
times found plants described as like Sagittaria growing thick. 
The stalk of this is said to have been eaten. 

A root, somewhat like a potato, with a red skin, many tubers 
growing on the root tendrils of a single plant, grows on a climb¬ 
ing vine. The tuber is more than an inch and a half in diameter. 

Elsewhere is presented a list of the plants employed by the 
Cheyennes for various purposes. 

AGRICULTURE 

Before they had left their eastern home, the Cheyennes were 
an agricultural people, and they have continued to farm, with 
some periods of interruption, to the present time. According 
to statements made to me by old women and men who died 
between 1900 and 1915, and others living in 1918, they farmed 
regularly on Grand River, on the Little Missouri and the 
North Platte, and on the Laramie. Up to the year 1876 they 
kept up their Corn Dance, and retained the sacred ear of corn 
which is supposed to have been raised from the original seed 
brought out by one of the two similarly dressed young men 
who went into the spring and received the buffalo meat, corn, 
and other things, from the old woman within the hill. Watched, 
cared for, and reverenced, this ear would make the crops grow 
well. After corn-growing had been abandoned, as it was in war 
times, the ear was still kept as a sacred object. Incidentally 
they say that a long time ago the Arikaras stole their corn, 

4 DeSmet, Western Missions (p. 81), says roots of water arrow (Sagittaria 
rigida) and of wild lily (Convallaria corealis) are prized by Indians. 

251 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

meaning, I suppose, that the Arikaras obtained their corn by 
taking it from the Cheyennes. 

They relate that the Corn Dance came down from the time 
when they first planted, and was practiced up to the date of the 
Mackenzie fight (1876), but that since they have had agencies, 
and lived with the white people, the dance has been given up. 

The Corn Dance was, they say, practiced by young girls and 
middle-aged women, who danced in a circle. Men sang for the 
dance, and shook a gourd rattle, which they called and which 
represented a squash (ma oh ?). The woman who led the dance 
carried the sacred ear of corn on a stick which was fitted into 
a hole in the butt of the ear. In later times the dance was occa¬ 
sionally held as a social performance—one of rejoicing—as, for 
example, on the return of a successful war-party, in which no 
one had been wounded. They say now that in the dance no 
motions of hoeing corn were made. It is not known whether 
there was any ceremonial previous to the dance. 

The corn was planted in quincunxes, four grains at the 
corners of the square, and one in the middle; and the grains 
were put in the ground with the soft end up. In plantings which 
have taken place since 1850, old men and old women have been 
seen to carry water from the stream to water the hills of corn. 
It is said that some of the hoes which they used in cultivating 
their corn were made of stones—sometimes chipped to a proper 
flat shape; but sometimes, also, they found natural stones, 
which could be lashed to a stick and used for the purpose. Hoes 
were made also from the shoulder blade of buffalo or of elk, 
lashed to a handle. Indeed, they used for this purpose any bone 
that they could fashion to the required shape. 

Mr. Mooney’s statements 5 as to the farming practices of the 
Cheyennes seem to indicate that he was unaware—because 
they are not mentioned in that locality by Lewis and Clark— 
that these people formerly lived on the Little Missouri (Ante¬ 
lope Pit) River—and that they grew crops up to the middle 

5 Handbook of American Indians, pt. i, p. 251. 

252 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

of the nineteenth century. But the early Spanish manuscript 
map brought back by Lewis and Clark shows a camp of “Cha- 
quieno” Indians near the head of the Little Missouri.® 

The testimony that they farmed up to 1865 is too general to 
be ignored. As already stated, the Sioux still refer to a number 
of old Cheyenne village sites as Cheyenne planting places, and 
give various details as to the crops they grew and the way in 
which they protected them up to the time when they moved on 
farther west. 

Many old Cheyenne women who were born in or near the 
Black Hills early in the last century, and who lived on the 
streams flowing out from them, have repeated to me time and 
again that they commonly planted corn patches, as their 
mothers before them had done, and had taught them to do. 

Accounts of the capturing of eagles, as practiced from early 
times down to the first half of the nineteenth century, describe 
as a ceremony connected with this eagle catching the prepara¬ 
tion of a certain sort of ceremonial food, which consisted in 
part of balls of pulverized corn. 

The growing of corn is always referred to as a common inci¬ 
dent of old-time village life, and there is no doubt that it was 
usually grown. Knowing the conservatism of Indian women, 
we may feel certain that they would not easily have laid aside 
the agricultural practices that had come down to them through 
the generations, but that even after they had moved out onto 
the plains, wherever the situation was favorable, and there was 
a prospect that they would return during the summer, the old 
women planted their crops and impressed on their daughters 
the duty of doing likewise. 

In a recent conversation with Hankering Wolf, who was a 
boy of thirteen at the time of the Fort Laramie Treaty (1851), 
he incidentally mentioned that the year before that council was 
to be held the Cheyennes put in their crops on a broad flat on 
the Platte River, just below the main canyon and above the 

6 Orig. Journ. of Lewis and Clark, Atlas, map 2. 

253 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

first small canyon above Fort Laramie. It was from this point 
that they moved down to the treaty ground at Horse Creek. 

When the Cheyennes lived along the Missouri, and no doubt 
later, after they had moved to the Black Hills, they had at 
least two kinds of beans, of which one was wild and one culti¬ 
vated. One of these varieties is described as shaped like a lima 
bean and was whitish in color; the other was spotted yellow 
and white, or purple and white. According to Short Woman, 
the mother of Elk River, one of these kinds of beans was com¬ 
monly cultivated; the other kind, believed to be Falcata 
comosa, grew wild. This plant has small beans produced from 
the flowers, and bears also large beans at the ends of leafless 
colorless branches prostrate on the ground in the dense shade 
of the upper branches. These are the beans spoken of as used 
among die Sioux. 7 In the document cited the statement was 
made that these beans were a favorite food of the passenger 
pigeon, and that they were collected by mice. Indian women 
often tell of finding caches in which the mice had stored con¬ 
siderable numbers of these beans. 

FLESH FOOD 

After the Cheyennes moved out to the great plains a marked 
change took place in their habits. Here they found buffalo in 
great numbers, yet more or less migratory with the seasons. 
The tribe, which hitherto had been chiefly sedentary, occupy¬ 
ing permanent villages and tilling the soil, modified its ways of 
life when it met the new conditions. The necessity of following 
the buffalo from place to place led to the abandonment of per¬ 
manent habitations, while the increased supply of flesh food 
rendered less imperative the cultivation of the soil, though it 
was still practiced until the active wars of 1868 to 1878 made 
agriculture no longer possible. In the North, cultivation of the 
ground began again after the surrender, and in varying degree 
has continued ever since. 

7 Patent Office Report for 1849-1850 (Senate Doc. 20), p. 451. 

254 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

In modern times the buffalo formed the chief sustenance of 
the people, and, as with most other prairie Indians, practically 
all parts of the animal were eaten. The tongue and nose were 
delicacies, while the liver sprinkled with gall was a favorite 
dish; the small intestine, filled with chopped meat, was roasted 
or boiled; the marrow-bones were split and the contents eaten, 
and, as will be seen farther on, almost the whole of the animal, 
except the bones and hoofs, was used for food in some form 
or other. 

A favorite dish was the flesh of a yellow calf boiled with 
pomme-blatiche roots in a liquor made of water and the grease 
from the bones of fat cows. The lungs of the buffalo were cut 
open, dried, and roasted on the coals. They were good. The 
Pawnees formerly boiled them with their corn. 

The Cheyennes cooked blood in the rennet of the buffalo. 
They built a good fire, and when it had burned down to coals, 
a bed of hot ashes was raked out in front of the fire; the rennet 
was filled with blood, and tied with sinew at the small end; it 
was placed on the hot ashes, and the woman who was cooking 
it tapped it constantly with a stick, and rolled it over and over 
in the ashes until the blood boiled and cooked. After it had been 
cooking some little time, she tested it every now and then, 
pulling it out of the ashes, and pricking it with a small and very 
sharp stick. If blood ran out of the puncture, the cooking was 
not complete, and it was put back again. At length, when no 
blood followed the pricking, the rennet was pulled out, opened, 
and the cooked blood eaten. It was no longer fluid, but was 
hard, like jelly. 

The hide of the buffalo-bull was eaten. One way of cooking 
it was in a saucer-shaped depression dug in the ground, and 
lined with grass or leaves, on which were spread out large pieces 
of the fresh hide. Over the hide were two or three layers of 
green leaves, and on the leaves were placed a number of ribs 
or other flat bones to hold the leaves down. A layer of about 
four inches of clay was spread over this and was pounded down 

255 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

solidly and smoothed off, and on this floor of clay was built a 
large fire of dry wood which was kept burning for three or four 
hours. Then the fire was swept aside, the clay, bones, and leaves 
were removed, and the hide taken out. The hair slipped off 
easily from the hide, which was quite tender and very good. 

Many women saved the scrapings from the hides which they 
tanned, and dried and put them in parfleches, against a time 
of scarcity. Then they were boiled and made a palatable food. 

The flesh of the buffalo, including the back fat, was cut in 
thin slices and dried in the sun or on lines stretched in the 
lodge. 

Pemmican was made by roasting dried meat, and pounding it 
fine with a stone maul on a hard, flat stone which rested on an 
oval, somewhat dish-shaped, parfleche. The operation was not 
unlike that of pounding cherries. The Cheyennes, however, 
made pemmican on a small scale—for present use only and not 
to store. 

When young dogs were needed for a feast, they were 
strangled by the women of the family. A string was looped 
around the neck of the dog, each end of which was held by a 
woman, who drew the loop tight, so that the animal hung sus¬ 
pended between the two executioners. 

Originally, it is said, the Cheyennes did not cat dogs, but 
were driven to it by hunger; or perhaps the custom was bor¬ 
rowed from some other tribe. They eat young wolves and 
coyotes, as they do young puppies, and also young wildcats 
and panthers, usually not by choice, but in case of need. Badg¬ 
ers and skunks are good to eat, but otters are not. They eat 
neither birds of prey nor crows, except under stress of hunger. 
The magpie they do not eat at all, because, they say, it won 
for them the race during the contest to see whether the buffalo 
should eat the people or the people should eat the buffalo. They 
are very fond of turtles. 

Though the Cheyennes ate horseflesh, they preferred other 
meat. The Kiowas, on the other hand, liked horseflesh, and are 

256 

THE TRAIL FROM THE TIMBER 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

said to have preferred fat colt to fat cow. Young fat horse is 
excellent meat—tender and sweet. It is better not to cook the 
flesh at once, but to allow it to hang for a day to get rid of a 
certain taste it has when fresh killed. The flanks and breast 
and the back of the neck under the mane were greatly 
esteemed. Roast ribs and liver roasted on the coals were excel¬ 
lent. 

Deer, elk, wild sheep, and antelope, were all taken and the 
flesh used. 

HUNTING METHODS 

The Food Quest. The hardships of the Indian war-path have 
often been spoken of, but little seems to have been written of 
the labor of his hunting. Most civilized writers seem to have 
assumed that hunting was all pleasure. This view is taken be¬ 
cause to the white man hunting is a pastime, a recreation, and 
we assume that it is so to all people. To the Indian, hunting 
was work, and often work of the hardest kind. 8 This aspect of 
hunting has often been learned by the white man—as the mar¬ 
ket hunter—when necessity and not pleasure has been the 
motive for the pursuit. To the Plains Indian hunting was never 
a recreation, but was the chief labor by which he supported life. 

Writers, quite ignorant of Indians, but who wish to give local 
color to fanciful descriptions of Indian hunting, sometimes 

8 This is a point apparently little understood. One writer has mentioned it— 
but in quite another connection—while discussing the Indian’s idea of the 
future life. “To us Europeans hunting is more or less an amusement, but to 
the Indian it is a toil, and frequently a most fatiguing mode of life. In many 
Indian dialects the words ‘hunter’ and ‘hunting’ are synonymous with ‘work’ 
and ‘working.’ A good hunter is a clever and industrious workman. As, then, 
the idea entertained by most nations of paradise is, that it will be without toil 
or labor, it is to me more than doubtful whether they regard the chase as an 
element of their paradisiac existence. Among the Ojibbeways I never heard that 
they held such a view. I once asked a man of their tribe, who was describing 
paradise to me, and did not at all allude to hunting, ‘And then you will go 
every day to hunt and kill a countless number of animals?’ ‘Oh no!’ he replied 
dryly, ‘there is no hunting or labor in paradise.’”—Kohl, Kitchigami, p. 212, 
London, i860. 

257 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

describe the hunters as yelling in the excitement of the chase. 
It would be as fitting to write of a farmer as yelling in the 
excitement of plowing or of milking his cows. 

Although making some provision against a time of scarcity, 
as did most tribes of the buffalo plains, the Cheyennes yet 
often faced want. Winter and summer the camp must be sup¬ 
plied with food, and no matter how tempestuous the weather 
or how bitter the cold, if food was lacking, men were obliged 
to hunt. Often, while out in winter after buffalo, they were 
chilled to the bone by the bitter winds and were caught in 
blinding prairie snowstorms and obliged to camp for days, per¬ 
haps, without fuel, often freezing hands and feet. If the buffalo 
disappeared, the young men must make long journeys in search 
of them, and often their sufferings from fatigue, hunger, and 
cold were very great. At such times the women were safe at 
home in the camp, by the fire, having no labor to perform more 
arduous than gathering the daily supply of wood and trans¬ 
porting it to camp. 

Horses and Firearms. With the advent of the horse, metal, 
and the gun, the primitive means of taking food began to be 
supplanted by the new and more effectual methods. The enclo¬ 
sure into which some food animals were driven was gradually 
abandoned; the snares with which they caught others were 
given up; stone-throwing was no longer practiced, and people 
ceased to lie in wait for animals to come to them, since now on 
horseback they could overtake these animals, kill them, and 
transport the capture to camp. 

While the greater facility with which food was now secured 
at first seemed to make life easier for the Indians, it may also 
have tended to reduce their earlier industry in hunting and to 
make them less careful of their food supply—more wasteful. 
On the other hand, since Indians are conservative, slow to 
change their ways, and to some extent had always striven to 
save up food against a time of scarcity, and since, also, the 

258 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

acquisition of these new things—the iron-pointed arrow, the 
swift horse, and the far-killing gun—followed one another 
very rapidly, it may be doubted if at first they greatly influ¬ 
enced the view which the Indians took of food, and their habits 
of providing for future needs. Yet toward the end of the buffalo 
days, when traders became more numerous and more eager to 
secure robes, and offered almost any price for them, there was 
great waste of food by the Indians, who destroyed the buffalo 
largely for their hides, and thus brought themselves down to 
the level of the white skin-hunter. 

Primitive Devices. Of the primitive methods of taking food, 
a few have been practiced by boys up to very recent times. One 
of these was stone-throwing; and almost up to the present time, 
in autumn, when blackbirds were abundant, little boys killed 
them by throwing stones at the thick flocks. In recent times, too, 
a man was occasionally found who possessed especial skill in 
stone-throwing. Such a man was Strong Left Hand, who died 
in 1905, more than eighty years of age. Stories of his skill and 
success by this primitive means were told and wondered at in 
both sections of the tribe. These are some examples of his 
achievements with the stone that he related to me. He said: 

I was on a war-path, and we had been shooting at buffalo. They 
had started to run, and as the last one was going by I ran ahead of 
it, and as I did so, picked up a stone from the ground. As I got in 
the buffalo’s way, it charged me, and raised its tail, showing that it 
was angry. Just before it reached me, I threw the stone and hit it in 
the forehead, and it fell over, dead. 

Once, when I was out on the prairie with Sleeping Rabbit, I killed 
an antelope with a stone. I was lying on a hill watching, and the 
antelope was coming toward me, and stopped to nibble at some 
brush. I threw the stone just as the antelope raised its head, hitting 
it on the head and killing it. 

One morning a man was trying to catch one of his horses that was 
hard to catch and would not let anyone get near it. The man who 
owned it had been trying for a long time to catch it, and when I 

259 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

passed he was angry and called out to me, “Friend, kill that horse 
for me!” I picked up a piece of bone that was lying on the prairie, 
and threw it at the horse, which was about fifty yards off, and struck 
it on the head and killed it. 

Once there was an eagle’s nest in the cliff near where we were 
camped. It was high up on the rocks, and could not be reached either 
from above or from below. Sits In The Night came to me and said: 
“Friend, there is an eagle’s nest here that I cannot get at. I want the 
eagle. Will you go and kill it for me?” The nest was too high above 
the prairie to be reached by a stone, and it could not be seen from the 
top of the cliff above it. So when I went there I knew I should be 
obliged to wait until the eagle flew out, and by the time the bird 
came in sight it would be a long way from me—a long throw. When I 
crept up to the cliff, the bird must have heard me, for it flew out, and 
I let fly the stone, and hit it, and killed it, and it fell to the ground 
dead. 

Anciently, no doubt, stone-throwing was a constantly em¬ 
ployed and successful way of killing game. The enormous 
abundance of food animals and birds, and their tameness in 
those primitive times, make it altogether probable that men 
possessing anything like Strong Left Hand’s accuracy of aim 
and his power might kill much game by this means of hunting. 
Many men employed this method of killing game, and of these, 
many no doubt became skillful and successful stone-throwers. 

Until the old free life was broken up, the little boys, to secure 
feathers, employed an old hunting custom, now almost forgot¬ 
ten. It was practiced by boys of from ten to fifteen or sixteen 
years to kill crows and magpies for their feathers, or food birds 
that might happen to alight near where the hunters were hid¬ 
den. This was usually on some open space near which stood 
small trees. More often than not it was on the bank of a river, 
or on some old sandbar or island in the river; at all events, 
where there were clumps of willow brush with open spaces 
among them. In these clumps of bushes the boys lay hidden. If 
clumps of willows were not found in a convenient situation, 

260 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

they cut willow branches and thrust the butts in the ground in 
a small circle, bringing the tops together above a shallow hole 
scooped out in the sand, and tying them there. A door was left 
for entrance, and for this door a cover was woven of coarse 
grass. When the hunter entered the place of concealment—the 
“blind”—he pulled down the door behind him. Often four or 
five such shelters were built in a row thirty or forty feet apart, 
each to be occupied by a hunter. 

On the little trees and bushes they hung scraps of hide and 
the trimmings of buffalo-robes, and on the ground where the 
birds were expected to come were scattered pieces of tallow, up 
to within a few feet of the shelter. This bait was renewed every 
day. Not far from the shelter, and where the bait was scattered, 
little forked sticks were set in the ground in pairs, and the 
forks of each pair supported a crossbar on which the birds 
might alight. In the front of the shelter, looking toward the 
bait, an opening thinly covered with grass was left to shoot 
through. 

After getting into his shelter, which he did before daylight, 
each boy kept very quiet, and sat watching and ready to shoot, 
the point of the arrow he was to discharge protruding through 
the grass. The arrows were either blunt-headed or perhaps had 
sharpened wood points, and when the birds flew down to eat 
the bait, they were within close range. The boys did not leave 
their shelters to collect the birds that they killed, nor did they 
make any noise which might alarm the other birds. Even if a 
wounded bird flew off a short distance, he who had shot it did 
not go out in pursuit. After the other birds had flown away, 
however, as they always did when the sun got high, the boys 
went out and gathered up what they had killed, and went home. 

If a hawk made his appearance near at hand, this alarmed 
the other birds, which flew away. Sometimes, however, the 
hawks descended to the bait, and were killed. This was the 
boys’ method of getting feathers. 

261 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 
BUFFALO HUNTING 

The camp moved about from place to place, following the 
buffalo; and, as a result of the habits of these animals, a set of 
tribal laws had grown up to govern the hunt. Since the Chey¬ 
ennes depended on the buffalo for food, it was obviously neces¬ 
sary that the hunting should be organized; in order first, that 
large quantities of food might be killed at one time; and 
second, and more important, that the animals which were to 
furnish this food should not be disturbed or frightened and so 
driven beyond the reach of the people. No doubt the laws gov¬ 
erning this hunting developed slowly, but they long existed. 
Their utility was generally recognized, and they were sup¬ 
ported by public opinion. Their enforcement was in the hands 
of the soldier bands of the camp, who rigidly carried them out. 

When buffalo were plenty, small parties or single individuals 
were not permitted to chase the buffalo alone. There was no 
individual hunting. When one man hunted buffalo, all joined in 
the chase. Anyone found going out alone and running buffalo 
was severely whipped by the soldiers, with quirts, ramrods, or 
bows. If he were obstinate, and persisted in disobeying the law, 
they might cut up his lodge, chop up the poles, and perhaps 
even kill his horses, this of course being the equivalent of a 
fine, more or less heavy. Men who violated the law were some¬ 
times beaten until they could hardly walk, and could not get 
about for several days.® When the camp moved up near the 
mountains, into a country where deer and elk were plentiful, 
and where there were only a few buffalo-bulls, each man was 
free to hunt as he pleased; but such a hunter, if he came upon 
buffalo in numbers, did not disturb them, for he knew it was 
wrong to do so—not just to the other people of the camp. 

0 There was a special word for the infliction of the penalty; i.e., tuhk' a ydts, 
v.t., “to punish” (for a fault committed). It refers especially to the custom of 
punishing for disobedience to any order or rule which had been made and 
previously proclaimed; as on a buffalo hunt, if a person slipped out and hunted 
alone, so as to disturb the buffalo before the time set for the chase, the offender 
was whipped and might have his horse killed or his gun broken. 

262 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

The chiefs decided when the buffalo surround was to be 
made. They gave their orders to the soldiers, and from that 
time forward the soldiers had charge of the hunt. The day 
before the surround, it was cried through the village that on the 
morrow all would chase buffalo. I have frequently described 
the operation of killing buffalo with the bow and arrow; and 
the method pursued by the Cheyennes was not markedly dif¬ 
ferent from that practiced by other Plains tribes. In the differ¬ 
ent stories told in this book, examples are given of the way in 
which buffalo hunting was practiced. 

An old-time method of killing buffalo among the Cheyennes 
was with the lance. The rider usually ran up on the right side 
of the animal, and held the lance across his body, the right 
hand the higher. The buffalo was a little ahead of the horse, 
and the man, using both hands, thrust with his lance down¬ 
ward and forward. When the buffalo felt the prick of the lance, 
it usually ran still faster. Sometimes it tried to turn to charge, 
but as the man held the lance against it, and pressed it into 
its side, the buffalo always gave way, and ran on. Sometimes 
the lance-point might strike a rib, and the man was obliged to 
make a second thrust. Perhaps the first thrust hurried the 
buffalo along, so that the man fell behind; but he whipped up 
his horse, and again got near enough. Often, instead of thrust¬ 
ing for the heart, they thrust down for the kidneys, so striving 
to break down and cripple the animal. The lance was more 
commonly used in earlier days than it was after sheet-iron 
arrowheads and firearms were procured, yet it was used by 
war-parties in modern times, i.e., from 1865 to 1875 or 1880. 

I have often adverted to the power of the bow, and the Chey¬ 
ennes were good bowmen. The older men tell me that the bow 
was an effective weapon—that is to say, a killing weapon—up 
to from three to four hundred yards. This refers to the use of 
the weapon in war. In chasing buffalo, if the dart entered at the 
right point, the Cheyenne killed his buffalo with a single arrow. 
Big Ribs, a Northern Cheyenne at Pine Ridge, and Strong Left 

263 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Hand, at Tongue River Agency, are known each to have shot 
one arrow through two buffalo, killing both at a single shot. 
Strong Left Hand’s bow was very powerful, and few men could 
bend it. Walks At Night, also called Wrinkled Wolf, who had 
once chased a buffalo-cow which stopped to fight, shot an arrow 
entirely through her, so that it went on and then stood free in 
the ground beyond her. Left-hand Wolf did the same thing 
with a buffalo-bull that stopped to fight, and Left-hand Bull 
was a powerful bowman. 

In a number of instances men, in the chase, have killed buf¬ 
falo with their butcher knives. This was done by a friend, who 
held the knife in his right hand, ran up close beside a cow, and 
thrust the blade several times into her flank. 

Big Ribs, when chasing buffalo on one occasion, sprang from 
his horse to the back of a bull, and, while riding it, cut out a 
kidney through the flank. This was done about the year 1870, 
and merely as an act of bravado—to show what he could do. 

In the old days, when buffalo were killed close to the camp, 
the women and children all went out to them, to assist in secur¬ 
ing the meat. The men who had been killing buffalo would ask 
a child, often a mere baby, if it had ever before been present 
at a chase, and if it had not, would take a handful of blood and 
smear it all over its face. The children were not permitted to 
wash off this blood until they had returned to the camp. 

In the olden time, before they had horses, the Cheyennes— 
as so often told of other Indians—made foot surrounds of the 
buffalo, 10 and also drove them into pens. Such enclosures were 
usually built under a cutbank or bluff, which formed one or 
more walls of the pen; the other sides were merely bushes or 
branches stuck in the ground. From the entrance of the pen 
diverging lines of bushes, like the wings of a chute, extended 
out on the plains. 11 The Indians partly enticed and partly drove 
the buffalo between the wings, which guided them into the en- 

10 Compare LePage duPratz, vol. m, p. 210, Paris, 1758. 

11 Compare UmfreviUe, Present State of Hudson’s Bay, p. 160, London, 1790. 

264 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

closure. Though the animals might readily break through the 
walls of bushes, they seldom did so, for they were afraid of 
them, and merely ran round and round within the enclosure 
until exhausted. Meantime the Indians closed in on them, and 
began to shoot them down with arrows. Usually most of those 
in the pen were killed, though often a few broke through the 
lines and escaped. It is perhaps better to give the account of 
these hunting methods received from an old Cheyenne; an 
account which no doubt is substantially correct, and may well 
enough have come to this man from people who had learned 
the methods through practice. 

The statement that the changes in customs and the improve¬ 
ments in methods were revealed to men in their dreams, is 
merely his method of explaining the order and manner in which 
these changes took place. The Cheyennes are firm believers 
in dreams. Like the prophets of old, they often received in 
sleep suggestions from supernatural sources—were warned in 
a dream. Such visions, the Indian says, are sent to tell us what 
is going to happen, and the warning which they convey must 
be obeyed. This is White Hawk’s relation: 

In those days the arrowpoint was made of stone. There were birds, 
and so they got feathers for their arrows in order that they should 
fly straight. Men were always out from the camp looking for food. 
When any of these men found a herd of buffalo, twenty or thirty or 
forty, he returned to the camp and reported to the chief. Then all 
who had bows and arrows made ready, and went with these men to 
near where the buffalo were, and there formed a big circle as far as 
possible from the buffalo, but entirely surrounding them. The side 
of the circle to the leeward of the buffalo, and the two other sides 
across the wind were formed first. The windward side was formed 
last. Then the men began to close in on the buffalo, until, as the 
circle grew smaller, the hunters were closer together. When the buf¬ 
falo began to smell the people, they ran away; but those toward 
whom they ran would yell and toss their robes, and the buffalo 
turned, Inn icin g for another place, and from being always turned 

265 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

back they were soon running in a circle. When the hunters got pretty 
close, all the most active young men—those who had strong arms to 
pull the bow, and who could shoot straightest—ran in close to the 
buffalo and began shooting their arrows at them, while the buffalo 
were running round in a circle, not trying to break through the line 
of the people. The old men say that in this way they sometimes 
killed a whole herd, none of them breaking out. At times a few would 
break out and get away, but often all were killed. 

The people had dogs, and when the buffalo were skinned and cut 
up, they packed meat on their dogs, and then every man, woman, 
and child able to walk carried a pack to camp. They left nothing 
behind, but carried everything in. Even the bones were carried in, 
and the entrails, for buffalo were hard to get and were had only 
occasionally, and the people felt that nothing was to be wasted or 
left behind. 

Later, after they had learned to surround the buffalo in this way, 
some old man was told in a dream of another and better way. That 
he should take the wing of some large bird, perhaps an eagle and 
perhaps some other big bird, and that the people should take their 
lodges up on the prairie and pitch them in a circle, leaving an open¬ 
ing at one side. When the buffalo were dose, two old men, each 
carrying one of these large wings, should go out toward the buffalo 
and wave the wings in the air, beckoning to the animals, and that 
these would come toward them. They did this, and as the buffalo 
came toward them, the men moved away and the buffalo followed, 
and so the men led them right into the circle of the lodges, where 
the people killed them. The buffalo seemed to be gentle and did not 
run, but stood about, waiting to be killed. 

In later times, another man had a dream about the way to kill 
buffalo. His dream said to him: “You shall take your people and 
have them make a large pen out of wood and brush, with a gap in 
one side, and a chute with diverging wings running far out on the 
prairie, fences which shall hide the people from the buffalo. Then 
you shall take certain young men of the camp and go out with them 
on the prairie, and you can bring the buffalo into this pen.” 

The man had the people build the pen and the wings as he had 
been told, and took his young men and told them what to do, and 

266 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

went out and led the buffalo into the pen without trouble. After that 
they could always go out and bring them. 

Before they set out to bring the buffalo, the old man told his 
young men to strip naked down to their moccasins, and to paint their 
faces, arms, legs, and bodies with red earth. The medicine man and 
another old man, each carrying a wing, went before the painted men 
singing their mysterious songs. The painted young men divided into 
two equal parties, and followed these two old men, behind and out¬ 
side of them on either side. When the old men got near the buffalo, 
they beckoned to them with the wings, and soon the buffalo began to 
come toward them. Then the old men turned about and walked 
toward the chute in front of the buffalo; and on either side of them, 
but a long way off, walked the two parties of painted young men. 
The young men did not sing, but if at any time the buffalo tried to 
turn aside in either direction from following the old men, the young 
men held their hands up to the sky and waved them in a certain way, 
and the buffalo turned back . 12 After the old men had led the buffalo 

in between the wings, the opening between the wings was filled by 
the two parties of painted men who had followed them out, and all 
sang. The young men who had been chosen to do the killing had been 
hidden behind the walls of the chute, and after the buffalo had passed 
them, they climbed over this fence and followed them, hurrying them 
into the pen. While they did the killing, the painted men stood there 
at the gap of the chute, and kept on singing until all were killed. 

When the buffalo that were following the two men who called 
them with the wings had come to the entrance to the pen, these medi¬ 
cine men walked a little to one side of the entrance, still singing and 
waving the wings toward the entrance, and the buffalo walked into 
the pen. Then, while the painted young men walked up and formed 
a line in the entrance, the medicine men walked along outside of the 
fence, and close to it, around the pen to the back, opposite the 
entrance. They stood at the back of the pen and sang their mysteri¬ 
ous songs all the time while the men were killing the buffalo, and 

when they were through killing, sat down on the ground and re- 

12 Compare this method of directing the buffalo with that practiced in more 
recent times by the Red River half-breeds. Hunting at High Altitudes, p. 258, 
Harper & Brothers, 1913 (Forest and Stream, vol. lxxiv , p. 969). 

4 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

mained there till the skinning and cutting up was finished, and the 
meat was taken to camp. 

The best pieces of the meat were selected for the two men who had 
called the buffalo, and the painted men were then allowed to go into 
the pen and to select for themselves the next best portions. 

Such were some of the primitive methods of taking buffalo, 
when they first hunted them on the prairie; but long ago, in the 
North, before they reached the plains, and when they lived in 
a country of heavy snowfall, they followed them in winter on 
snowshoes and chased them into snowdrifts in ravines. When 
they had driven buffalo into such drifts, they set the dogs free 
to worry them, and ran up and killed them with the lance, in 
the manner figured by Catlin, and described for killing moose 
in the Jesuit Relations and in Perrot. 13 They led the dogs on the 
hunt and had trained them how to act. After the buffalo had 
been killed, the dogs stood about, and the owners, while cutting 
up the buffalo, fed them freely. Then they put packs of meat 
on the dogs and started back to the village. After the packs had 
been taken off, in the village, all the dogs would start back to 
eat more. Bitches that had pups would come back to camp and 
disgorge what they had eaten for their young to feed on, and 
then the mothers would run back again to eat more. 

This, the old men tell us today, was the easiest and most 
successful of the old methods. 

Near some of the places where the Cheyennes brought the 
buffalo into a pound or enclosure and killed them, there were 
formerly to be seen piles of buffalo-horns heaped up, which, as 
described to me, were similar to the piles of horns made under 
like conditions by the Blackfeet that I have seen near their 
killing places. Remains of such piles of buffalo-horns used to 
be seen at a point west of the Black Hills in the latter part of 
the last century, but must long since have disappeared. 

The dangers of the modern buffalo hunt to the men who 

13 Blair, Indian Tribes of Upper Mississippi Valley, etc., voL i, p. 107. 

268 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

practiced it have been described in another volume. 14 They 
were many, and almost every year a few men were killed in 
hunting. One danger, not commonly recognized because un¬ 
usual except at one season of the year, was the pugnacity of the 
bulls, and their occasional pertinacity in pursuing men. 

The rutting season was in June and July, and then the buf¬ 
falo-bulls, when chased, were often ready to fight. Many years 
ago a bull followed Four Bulls five miles before the man man¬ 
aged to get out of sight behind a hill, when the bull stopped. 
Four Bulls was riding a fast gray horse, and had gone to help 
Crooked Neck, who was being chased, when the bull left 
Crooked Neck and followed Four Bulls. This was a four-year- 
old bull. 

Wolf Chief described a similar experience: 

In the spring of 1868 I set out with a boy to hunt buffalo. We had 
four horses, two to ride and two led horses to pack. We had gone 
ten or twelve miles from camp when on looking over a hill I saw 
buffalo, and we changed to our running horses. A herd of cows was 
near us, and beyond them a herd of bulls. This was in May, when 
the buffalo were shedding their coats. I was riding a sorrel horse, 
captured in Texas, which was very fast. The country, on the head 
of the Washita where we were, is level. Our camp was on the Beaver, 
above where Fort Supply is now. I had two pistols, each with six 
loads, and the boy had a bow and arrows. 

I said to the boy, “Do you kill some calves, and I will kill some 
of the larger buffalo.” I rode fast down to the herd of cows, and they 
started to run, and soon I shot three. When the cows began to run, 
the bulls started too, and ran after the cows, and I thought that I 
would kill one or two bulls, for in May they are fat—much fatter 
than the cows. 

I raced up to the herd, and shot a fine four-year-old bull that had 
large smooth horns. Then I rode on to another bull, and shot it. 
When I rode up to the second bull I turned in ahead of the first one, 
and after the second one had fallen with a broken back, I looked 

14 American Big Game Hunting, p. 19s, Forest and Stream Publishing Co., 
N. Y., 1893. 

269 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

behind me and saw the first bull coming. A little blood was dropping 
from its mouth, and I thought it was badly hit. 

I turned my horse to finish it, and rode alongside and shot it again. 
When I fired, the bull turned away, and I supposed that I had not 
hit it in the right place, and rode on after it to shoot again, when 
suddenly the bull made a short turn and rushed toward me. I shot 
at it, but it still came on. I turned my horse in one direction and 
another, trying to avoid it and get out of sight, but the bull followed 
every turn I made, and I saw that it was going to chase me. 

The boy, Little Bear, was a long way off, and I did not ride toward 
him because his horse was not very fast. I turned and tried to run 
away from the bull, but he came on, running fast, and kept following. 
He came after me, sometimes going slowly, and then suddenly would 
begin to run fast and try to catch up to me. He seemed to measure 
his gait by that of the horse. 

Several times I turned about and shot at the animal, but I do 
not think I hit him. I did not fire the last two loads in my pistol; 
I saved them in case my horse should be run down. It was a busy 
ride. With one eye I was obliged to keep watching the bull, and at 
the same time it was necessary to look out for holes in the prairie. 
If my horse had stepped in a hole, and had fallen, that would have 
been the end of me. 

Above the river, where the village was, there is a hill, and when 
I reached the top of this hill, looking over toward the camp, I kept 
right on, but the bull, surprised at what he saw, stopped, and stood 
looking down toward the big camp. 

Soon he began to bellow and paw the ground, thrust his horns into 
it, and throw the dirt on his back. After he had done this for a little 
while, he turned about and went straight back as he had come. My 
horse was wet with sweat, and staggering from fatigue. 

I went down to the camp and got a fresh horse, and started back 
to where I had left the boy. When I reached the place, I found 
Little Bear up on a hill looking for me. He said to me, “I saw the 
bull close to you, and I made up my mind that he had killed you.” 

By many of the buffalo-eating tribes the white buffalo, on 
account of its rarity, was deemed mysterious, and in this matter 
the Cheyennes were like other Indians. White buffalo, and the 

270 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

way in which they were regarded by the Cheyennes, seem 
worthy of special mention. 

George Bent was the last surviving son of Colonel William 
Bent, an historic character of the early West, whose name sug¬ 
gests a host of recollections to anyone familiar with western 
history. His mother was a Cheyenne woman. He was born in 
1843 near Bent’s Old Fort, one of the early trading posts of the 
Arkansas River. 

George Bent traded with the Cheyennes and Arapahoes for 
many years, and during these years met other tribes of Plains 
Indians. He stated that in his time he had had five white robes. 
In the first one, the tips of the hair were white and the bases 
black, giving the effect of a silver gray. This was a five-year- 
old cow, killed by Crazy Mule, whose wife dressed and painted 
it, after he had performed the required ceremonies. Crazy Mule 
was a medicine man, and possessed the power to remove the 
tabu against dressing a white robe, which existed among the 
Cheyenne women. 

The second robe was that of a three-year-old bull, obtained 
from Big Wolf. It was white. 

He procured the third from Heap 0’ Birds, whose proper 
name was Many Magpies. This was a three-year-old cow, 
described as “claybank” in color—a dark cream. 

The fourth robe was from a two-year-old heifer, a dappled 
gray obtained from Wolf Man. 

The fifth was that of a two-year-old bull, described as yel¬ 
lowish fawn color, obtained from Starving Elk. 

The Cheyennes regard a white buffalo as mysterious—sacred 
—and in ancient times, if a Cheyenne killed a white buffalo, he 
left it where it fell, taking nothing from it, and not even putting 
a knife into it. 

Some of them say that the white buffalo belongs far to the 
north; that it comes from the place where, according to tradi¬ 
tion, the buffalo originally came out of the ground. They regard 
it as the chief of the buffalo. This feeling was confirmed by an 

271 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

observation made many years ago. A war-party went up north 
against the Crows. One day they came to a hill, and when they 
looked over it they saw great numbers of buffalo, lying down, 
and among them a perfectly white cow. When the buffalo got 
up and went to water, the white cow went too, and it was 
noticed that none of the other buffalo went very close to her. 
They did not seem to fear her, but they did not crowd upon 
her, but gave her plenty of room, as if they respected her. 

In old times the hide of a white buffalo was not used, but was 
sacrificed to the Sun or to the Great Power (Heammawihio). 
Such an offering has been made within sixty years; and a story 
of the sacrifice was told me by Bent, as he witnessed it. He 

said: 

In 1867 I happened to come into Eagle Chief’s camp just after 
a white buffalo had been killed. The man who had killed it came in 
with the hide tied on his horse; he rode into the center of the camp- 
circle, stopped there, and dismounted. He did not take the hide off 
his horse, but stood there in the center of the circle holding his horse. 
The Indians began to look through the camp for some one who might 
take the hide from the horse with the prescribed ceremony. This 
could be done only by a man who had counted a coup by pulling an 
enemy off his horse in battle. Presently Left Hand, an Arapaho, came 
up carrying a stick in his right hand. He stopped by the horse, 
pointed with the stick in the direction of the place where the event 
had taken place, and then told how he had seen a Ute coming, had 
stepped behind a tree and waited until the Ute rode by him, and then 
had sprung upon him, pulled him from his horse and killed him with 
a knife. Then he struck the white buffalo-hide with his stick, and 
took it from the horse and placed it on the ground, where it remained. 
The man who had killed it had brought in no meat, for the carcass of 
a white buffalo may not be eaten; it must be left on the ground. If 
the meat were eaten, the buffalo might never again return to that 
place. 

The next day a pole was set in the ground to which the white 
hide was to be tied. Before this was done a very large sweat-house 
was built, and many of the old men went in to take a sweat and pray. 

272 

DIGGING POMMES BLANCHES 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

Before they went in, women came in crowds, bringing their children, 

and various offerings—calico, beads, moccasins, and other gifts_ 

which were to be tied to the pole and given to the sun. Before it was 
folded up to be tied to the pole, the hide was painted on the hair side 
with blue paint. The folded hide was tied to the pole by an old man 
who was naked, and was painted. While he was tying the hide to the 
pole he was constantly praying, and as each child was brought to him 
with an offering he prayed, passing his hands over its head, arms, and 
sides, and asking for good luck for it, for long life, health, and abun¬ 
dance of everything. Other old men stood about the man who was 
tying the hide, praying fervently. 

Unless specially painted by some medicine man who has the 
power to do this, and prayed over, and so absolved from the 
consequences of violating the tabu, no Cheyenne woman may 
dress a white buffalo hide. The painting is done with red paint 
applied about both wrists, both ankles, and on the face—a ring 
over the forehead, down the cheeks, and across the chin below 
the mouth. Some of the hides obtained by Bent were dressed 
by captive women of other tribes—one, for example, by a 
Kiowa woman, and one by a Pawnee woman—who were not 
bound by Cheyenne customs and subject to Cheyenne fears. 
The ceremony of tanning the white buffalo hide procured by 
Bent from Many Magpies is described elsewhere. 

HUNTING OF OTHER BIG GAME 

Elk, Deer, and Wild Sheep. According to tradition, the Chey¬ 
ennes, when they lived in the timber in the East, used to sur¬ 
round the elk and the deer, and sometimes drive them into 
enclosures. This has been known as a practice of some forest 
tribes since the seventeenth century. 15 They say, too, that in 
ancient times when they found, in the timber, a place where 
an elk trail passed under a tree, they tied a rope of rawhide 
or sinew to a branch, arranging the rope so that the noose 
would hang down over the trail at about the height of an elk’s 

15 Lahontan, Voyages to North America, vol. i, p. 65, London, 1703. 

2 73 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

head. If an elk in passing ran its head into the noose and 
became frightened, it gave a quick jump, drew the rope tight, 
and so was strangled. Obviously, if elk were trapped in this 
way, deer, moose, and caribou were also thus taken in the 
ancient days when they lived in the timber to the eastward. 

This tradition is well founded. The Cheyennes of modern 
times on the plains, when they tell of snaring elk, speak, of 
course, of the only large deer which they know. They have no 
tradition of the moose, nor of the caribou. These animals have 
been forgotten. Yet we are told by Perrot 1 * that the Saulteurs, 
or Ojibwas, made a practice of snaring moose, and so success¬ 
fully that in one winter (1670-1671) they snared no fewer 
than 2400 moose on the Island of Manitoulin. Caribou were 
captured in the same way, the animals being driven among 
“trees and poles planted at intervals, in which they stretched 
snares of rawhide, which enclose a narrow passage purposely 
left. When all these snares have been prepared, they go far 
away, marching abreast and uttering loud yells; this unusual 
noise frightens the animals and drives them to flight on every 
side; no longer knowing which way to go, they encounter this 
obstruction which has been made ready in their course. Not 
being able to clear it, they are compelled to follow it until they 
reach the passage in which the snares are laid with running 
knots, which seize them by the neck. It is in vain that they 
strive to escape; rather, they tear up the stakes and drag these 
with them as far as the larger trees; in short, their utmost 
efforts to extricate themselves only serve to strangle them 
more quickly.” 

Wistar 17 tells us that certain tribes of California Indians 
that he met practiced snaring the elk after the year 1850. He 
speaks of it as commonplace, and saw the snares and how 
effective they were. He says: 

16 Blair, Indian Tribes of the Upper Mississippi, vol. 1, p. 221, 1910. 

17 Autobiography of Isaac Jones Wistar, vol. 1, p. 196, Philadelphia, 1914. 

2 74 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

Before taking leave with reluctance of the Bald Hills I must not 
forget to mention the extraordinary skill of those Indians in snaring 
elk and other large animals in nooses of stout rope made by them¬ 
selves from bark, which sometimes got them into trouble with the 
whites as in the following case: At Durkee’s some of his friendlies 
once confided to me with much secrecy a mysterious accident they 
had met with which they feared would peril their friendly relations 
with Durkee, who while protecting them from others was sometimes 
disposed to be rather violent with them himself. Accompanying them 
therefore at their urgent request some miles to the top of the ridge 
they pointed out an unlucky ox belonging to Durkee which must 
have been dead for a fortnight and still lay just as he perished in a 
running noose set for elk on a well-marked runway. The noose had 
been skillfully arranged by placing a log for the game to step over 
and a branch necessary to stoop under, the two together well cal¬ 
culated to divert attention from the snare itself. Two long brush 
fences extended from the spot on either hand obtuse angled toward 
each other so that any animal traversing the runway would surely 
be led directly to the noose and get entangled while avoiding the 
obstacles placed to distract his attention. Unfortunately Durkee’s ox, 
unaccustomed to such fiendish contrivances in the far-off Missouri 
prairies of his youth, had in this case fallen an easy victim and 
perished by a lingering and solitary death. 

This method was practiced also by the Beaver Indians of the 
Liard River. Keith, describing the way in which these Indians 
kill large game animals, says that “they sometimes entangle 
them in snares made of green cords,” and gives details similar 
to Perrot’s account: 

The method by which they entice the moose deer into the snare 
is performed thus: they clear a narrow road by felling the underwood 
and placing it on each side of the road so as to make an impediment 
for the animal to get in; in this road they leave small openings here 
and there upon each side, into which they set their snares with a 
piece of wood five or six feet long tied to the end of the snare, in 
order to entangle the animal in the thick woods, when taken. 13 

18 Les Bourgeois de la Compagnie du Nord-Ouest, vol. n, p. 66, Quebec, 1890. 

275 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The Cheyennes appear to have no definite traditions of a 
time when they were accustomed to drive elk over a bank or a 
cliff into an enclosure or pit below, yet no doubt this was done, 
for the affiliated Arapahoes tell of the capture of elk in num¬ 
bers by this method in old times, and Blackfoot stories refer 
to the practice. The ungulates, which collect in great herds, 
readily lend themselves to this method of capture. West of the 
Black Hills is a place where in early times the Arapahoes drove 
elk over the cliff, and after they had finished killing and caring 
for the meat, it was their practice to carry the horns of the 
animals to a great pile of elk-horns already heaped up and add 
them to it, so that at length there was an immense pile of these 
antlers. This heap of elk-horns was not far from where the 
Cheyennes had a place for killing buffalo and where they piled 
up the horn-sheaths of buffalo in the same way. 

In his report of the trip up the Missouri River in 1850, pub¬ 
lished in the Smithsonian Report for that year, Culbertson 
speaks of a great pile of elk-horns heaped up, no one knows 
how long before, which gave its name to Elk Horn Prairie lying 
sixty or seventy miles above Fort Union. Culbertson visited the 
place and declares that at the time neither whites nor Indians 
knew anything about the origin of this pile of horns, and that 
the Indians had no traditions about it. 

It is altogether probable that all the Plains Indians—cer¬ 
tainly Arapahoes, Blackfeet, and Cheyennes—captured elk 
by this method. 19 

Deer were usually shot with arrows, something that was not 
difficult, since in old times they were very numerous, seldom 
frightened, easily approached, and the arrow made no noise. 
We may presume that the animal shot at, if wounded, did not 
connect its hurt with the hunter, even if it saw him. 

In the country which the Cheyennes occupied in ancient 
times there were no wild sheep, and it was only after they had 
reached the plains that they met with these animals. 

19 Compare Napi story, Blackfoot Lodge Tales, p. 158. 

276 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

In early days wild sheep were very numerous, and very un¬ 
suspicious and gentle. Of all the larger food animals they are 
said to have been the easiest to kill—less shy, even, than the 
buffalo. Moreover, they were exceedingly abundant in many 
places, as, for example, on the prairie, near the bad lands of 
all the streams running through the northern plains country, 
and about the high buttes that rise from the prairie. In the 
bluffs along the Yellowstone, White River, the branches of the 
Cheyenne River, and along the Little Missouri, as well as in 
the Black Hills as recently as 1860-1870, sheep were very 
plentiful and were usually killed with arrows. 

It is well understood that most hoofed game—buffalo, ante¬ 
lope, deer, elk, and sheep—usually travel by certain estab¬ 
lished trails. In the days of their abundance, they always fol¬ 
lowed such trails and were not turned from them except by 
some alarming object. The Indians, who were constantly 
studying the habits of the animals on which they subsisted, 
were well informed as to their ways, and commonly built their 
pens, pitfalls, and other traps, lay in wait for, and laid their 
snares on or near these trails. The Indians expected the game 
would come to them, instead of their being obliged to search 
for the animals and bring them to the traps. This was not only 
a labor-saving practice, but also added greatly to the proba¬ 
bility of success in securing food. 

Antelope. Few people today realize that in old times the 
antelope in their range were probably more abundant than the 
buffalo. They were found in vast numbers over all the plains, 
but because of their small size and inconspicuous coloring, they 
did not impress those who saw them as did the black herds of 
the larger animals. The Cheyenne captured antelope in great 
numbers, leading them into enclosures as they did the buffalo. 
The methods by which this was done varied, for each man who 
possessed the mysterious power to accomplish the work exer¬ 
cised that power in his own way. 

277 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The older people have always said that when the Cheyennes 
first came west of the Missouri River and had worked out 
toward the Black Hills, they found many antelope pits already 
existing along the different streams. What tribe had dug and 
used these pits is not known. The pits or ditches were usually 
found near where two branches of a stream came together. The 
wings—often bushes piled up close together—which guided the 
antelope toward the pit were built along the borders of these 
small streams. Behind the fences and the brush wings the men, 
women, children, and dogs lay hidden. Resting on the piles of 
brush at frequent intervals were poles with one end on the 
ground whose weight should hold down the brush. The Chey¬ 
ennes repaired many of these old pits, and used them. In those 
days it was very easy to pit antelope, since they were enor¬ 
mously abundant and overran the whole country. It may be 
that it was from their neighbors the Kiowas that the Cheyennes 
learned how to catch antelope in pits. 

I shall let White Bull tell how Red Lodge did this. He said: 

When I was a young man, more than fifty years ago [say 1855], 
my people had only a few guns. Not many white men had come into 
the country, and we still took the food animals in the ways that 
our people had always used. 

When they were going to catch antelope there was always some 
one medicine man who told the people what they must do, and who 
watched to see that they did it. The man whom I saw do this was 
named Red Lodge. His lodge was always painted red, and from this 
fact he had that name. When the people needed antelope to eat, or 
their skins for war shirts, and when the spirits were favorable, then 
Red Lodge determined that antelope might be taken, and told the 
people what they should do. 

In a broad flat they began to build two straight, tight, brush 
fences, eight or ten feet high, as if for the opposite sides of a square 
pen. From the ends of these fences on one side two lines of brush 
heaps about five steps apart stretched away onto the flat for 400 or 
500 yards, the ends of the two lines constantly becoming farther and 
farther apart. This made two wings, which ran out from the ends of 

278 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

the tight fences, to direct the antelope to the pit. Between the ends 
of the tight fences opposite the side from which the wings extended, 
the people dug a big hole in the ground, reaching from the end of one 
fence to the end of the other. The side of this hole toward the opening 
between the wings was straight across, stretching from the end of 
one fence to the end of the other; the other side of the pit was round¬ 
ing—a part of a circle. They dug this pit about five feet deep and 

with sides straight up and down. On the rounding side of the pit 
they drove stakes in the ground and tied low bushes to them, but 
on the straight side they stuck in the ground bunches of grass, some 
of it standing up straight and some hanging over the edge of the 
pit so as to hide it. Outside of both the straight, high, tight fences 
and outside the wings they dug trenches, deep enough for people to 
get into and to be hidden when they were lying down. After all this 
had been done, they made many clubs, which were put on the ground 
at each end of the pit close to the ends of the high fences. 

When all this was nearly finished, Red Lodge had his lodge cleaned 
up and prepared for the ceremony. The beds were taken out; all the 

279 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

family moved out and slept elsewhere. Only Red Lodge remained 
in his lodge. If the camp was new, and the ground not yet worn bare, 
and roots of grass and of weeds were still left on the floor of the 
lodge, the women cleared these away, so as to leave the ground bare 
and smooth. Then they gathered white sage, and covered the floor 
of the lodge next to the walls with these stems, the tops of the stems 
pointing toward the fire. From one of his sacred bundles Red Lodge 
took many antelope feet, which had been cut off at the pastern joint, 
and had been bent and dried so that they would stand upright on the 
ground. One of these feet was the right fore foot of a buck, the foot 
with which he paws the ground. This pawing foot Red Lodge put 
down on the floor of the lodge, about three feet from the wall and 
to the left of the door, and so to the right of the lodge man’s bed. 
The other feet were placed on the ground, standing on their soles in 
circles all about the fire; but in front of the door these circles did not 
meet. Here, opposite the door, was left an opening about three feet 
wide. There were four circles of these antelope feet about the fire, 
one inside the other. 

After the lodge had been prepared, Red Lodge went into it alone 
and made his medicine [i.e., exercised his spiritual power]. No one 
knows what he did while he was there. For one day and one night 
he ate nothing, and all night long he sat in the lodge and sang. After 
he had made his medicine and was ready to call the antelope, he 
painted himself like an antelope—his mouth black, his back red, his 
belly, arms, legs, rump, and face white, and painted red streaks 
across his upper chest. On each temple, and running down on his 
cheeks, he painted an antelope hom, black. Then he was ready, and 
he came out of his lodge, naked except for his breechclout and moc¬ 
casins. In his hand he held his own medicine pipe, which was painted 
red over bowl and stem. Now he walked to the opening in the pen 
where the wings met the fences; there he stopped and filled and 
lighted his pipe, then walked between the wings out onto the prairie, 
sang his sacred songs and held his pipe up to the Great Power [He- 
ammawihio], and then out toward the prairie where the antelope 
live. Then he walked back, still singing, between the wings and the 
fences until he reached the edge of the pit, where he rested the bowl 
of the pipe upon the ground, and prayed. Four times he went back- 

280 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

ward and forward, and sang his antelope songs. The fourth time, 
after he had touched the ground with the pipe bowl, he went around 
to the back of the pit, and placed his pipe on the ground there. The 
bowl was toward the pit, and the stem was leaning against a support, 
so that it pointed diagonally upward. 

When he had placed the pipe on the ground, two young men, who 
had already been told what to do, started out toward the prairie, one 
on the right and one on the left, following out the wings so as to 
come in behind the antelope, and all the people hid themselves in the 
trenches that were dug outside the high fences and the wings. 

Now, after this, Red Lodge walked about within and without the 
fences, holding in his hand a feather which he waved in the air, and 
as he walked and waved the feather, he was singing his sacred songs. 

After a little time, the young men who had been sent out and were 
running on the prairie far beyond the ends of the wings, discovered 
antelope coming, and when they saw them they gave a loud, high- 
pitched call, which could be heard a long way. This was a signal to 
the people that the antelope were coming, and when they heard it 
everyone was glad. When the antelope had passed these young men, 
they turned in and ran along behind the animals, keeping up this 
calling until the antelope had come between the wings and were close 
to the pen. After the young men themselves got within the wings 
they began to call differently, and to imitate the hooting of an owl. 

As soon as the antelope had come to the opening between the 
fences, all the people who had been hidden in the trenches rose and 
rushed toward the opening and closed it by crowding into it. They ran 
toward the antelope, which now were frightened and were going so 
fast that they could not stop, and rushed on and fell into the pit. 
Then men and women seized each a club, and jumping into the pit, 
knocked the antelope on their heads. After all were dead, the people 
climbed out of the pit. 

Now Red Lodge went around behind the pit, took his pipe and 
filled it, and then sprinkled on top of the tobacco a little powdered 
buffalo-dung. Then he went back thirty or forty steps from the 
rounding side of the pit, struck fire, and lighted his pipe. He looked 
about on the ground until he found a small flat stone, which he 
picked up. He went around the fence, and entering the opening, 

281 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

went close to the edge of the pit, placed this little flat stone on the 
ground, sat down, and, resting the bowl of his pipe on the stone, he 
smoked there alone. 

As Red Lodge smoked, he pointed the stem of his pipe at the ante¬ 
lope, trying to point at each one, and to offer a smoke to each. Next 
he smoked to the little flat stone and then gave four smokes to the 
direction from which the antelope came. After he had done all this, 
he smoked his pipe out. When he was about to begin to clean his 
pipe, he first pointed it in the direction whence the antelope came; 
then he knocked out some of the ashes on the flat stone, and pointed 
the pipe in the same direction. He knocked out more ashes and 
pointed again, and so until he had pointed four times and knocked 
out all the ashes on the stone. Now he took the stone, holding the 
ashes on it, went down through and across the pit to the other side, 
where he climbed out, holding the stone carefully, and going slowly, 
so that he should not spill the ashes, and walking away a few steps, 
poured the ashes off the stone to the ground in four places, finally 
putting down the stone and leaving it there. 

After this had been done, the people went into the pit and began 
to cut up the antelope. First they picked out a young fat antelope— 
one about two years old—fat and tender. That was taken out to some 
high hill where everything could see it, and without being skinned 
it was cut up into small pieces, and left there to be eaten by the 
birds and by the wolves. It was a sacrifice. 

After these ceremonies had been performed, the meat was divided. 
The medicine man let his lodge remain as it was over the next night. 
That night he cooked, and called in his friends, and they sat around 
the lodge behind the circles of antelope feet and ate. When the 
medicine man put away these antelope feet, he did it alone. No one 
knew what he did. 

If after the antelope had come between the fences and before they 
reached the pit, they should by any chance turn back and get away 
without falling into the pit, it was certain that some one of the medi¬ 
cine man’s family or relations would die. 

This is the way, my friend, in which we made our living in old 
times. Then the animals which we ate were plenty, and our maiyun 

282 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

(mysterious power) was strong. Now there is nothing to eat on the 
prairie. Those were happy days. 

In 1858, on a creek running into the Arkansas which the 
Cheyenne called Short Timber River, 20 antelope were captured 
in a similar way. William Bent’s train was traveling with the 
Cheyennes. 

At this time White Faced Bull, the father of Porcupine Bull 
—who witnessed the occurrence and was still living in 1914, 
when he gave me his recollections of what took place—made 
the medicine for calling the antelope, and the next day brought 
them in. This White Faced Bull was the uncle of old White 
Faced Bull and of £ hyoph' sta, Northern Cheyennes, who 
have died within a few years. 

During the preliminary ceremonies White Faced Bull with a 
number of older men began to sing in the lodge, but before the 
singing began certain young men, Porcupine Bull among them, 
stood outside the lodge and with sticks beat on the poles in the 
time of the song which was to be sung. They struck the four 
important poles, the three which are tied together and the one 
at the back, to which the lodge covering is tied. They tried to 
strike first the pole to the east, then the one to the southwest, 
then the one to the northeast, and last the pole to which the 
lodge covering is tied. After those outside had struck these 
poles the singing began. During this singing, if all was to go 
well, antelope hair would begin to fall in the lodge. The amount 
of antelope hair that fell showed how successful the drive was 
to be. If only a little fell, few antelope would be taken; if 
much, many antelope would be killed. 

This was the song that all sang, addressing the medicine 
man: 

White Faced Bull, come crying, and bring with you your ante¬ 
lope arrow = Hotiia' wo' he is wo' kai hi' ma hots' nth’ no a ka nihsts 
[:nih no a ka nihsts, addressed to a single person]. 

2 ° Now WUd Horse Creek. 

283 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

They sang this three times, and as they sang it the fourth 
time the air in the lodge suddenly became filled with antelope 
hair, flying about the lodge. When the hair commenced to fly, 
White Faced Bull said to his fellows: “There, I told you that 
if plenty of antelope hair fell from the lodge-skins we should 
have good luck: You can see how it is for yourselves!” 

The next morning two implements called antelope arrows 
(wo' kai hi tna hots') were made. They looked like this: 

The pole is three feet long and the hoop about ten inches in 
diameter. At four places about the hoop and to the pole at the 
center of the hoop, were tied strips of rabbit-skin, and with 
each strip a single raven-feather. To the upper end of the up¬ 
right, by a string, was tied a gray-eagle feather. The pole and 
hoop were of slender willow twigs, a half or three-quarters of 
an inch in diameter. Hoops and uprights were painted black. 
They were made in public, out of doors, and without ceremony. 
All might watch the operation. 

After these antelope arrows had been made, White Faced 

284 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

Bull took them in his hands, mounted his horse, and rode off in 
the direction in which the antelope were thought to be, and the 
whole camp—men, women, and children—followed him. After 
a time White Faced Bull stopped and dismounted. All the dif¬ 
ferent bands of soldiers formed in one broad-fronted line, 
abreast. White Faced Bull on foot stood about thirty feet in 
front of the line. He spoke and said, “Have two young unmar¬ 
ried women come up here.” Cow Woman (Oohk'sta) came 
and sat on one side of White Faced Bull, and then Single White 
Buffalo Woman (Wohk' pi mi hih’) came and sat on the other 
side. Both young women were strong and plump and of good, 
kindly disposition. If the women selected were ill-natured, the 
antelope would act badly and could not be caught. If one or 
both women were lean or thin, the antelope caught would be 
thin and poor. White Faced Bull sat down on the ground be¬ 
tween the two young women, wearing his robe hair-side out. 
The young men—the soldiers—who had been told what to do, 
began changing their horses. 

White Faced Bull held the antelope arrows, one in each 
hand, and raised and crossed his arms four times, at each cross¬ 
ing drawing his arms toward his body, for the purpose of draw¬ 
ing the antelope toward him, to call them. While doing this, he 
told the girls what to do: they must go straight ahead and look 
straight ahead; if they looked back or to either side, the ante¬ 
lope would do the same. He crossed his arms a fifth time, and 
the girl on either side grasped from the hand of White Faced 
Bull the arrow which was nearest her, each seizing the shaft 
above White Faced Bull’s hand. As soon as they had taken the 
arrows, the girls started on a run diagonally forward. After 
they had gone a little way, they were followed by two young 
men riding fast and long-winded horses, who were supposed to 
be their sweethearts and to be trying to take the arrows from 
them. After the young men had started, the soldiers moved 
forward in two long lines on either side, following these two 
young men, and all the young men followed the soldiers. White 

285 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Faced Bull sat there. No one knew where the antelope were or 
even if there were any antelope. 

Soon the young men riding each on the outside of one of the 
girls overtook them and reached down and took from each her 
arrow, and the girls dropped back. 

After the young men had gone, the old men, the women, and 
the children stepped up into the places where the young men 
had been, and stood on either side of White Faced Bull, making 
a long line, reaching forward at the ends—a crescent—so as to 
make the beginning of a circle. At the ends of the line were 
many young women who were riding good horses. They held 
in their hands the forked poles that women use to support 
their drying scaffolds. 

The leading young men, who carried the antelope arrows, 
rode fast out on the prairie, getting farther and farther apart, 
until at length the distance between them must have been two 
miles; and now it was seen that between them there were many 
antelope, which, instead of running away, began to run toward 
White Faced Bull. When the young men in either line—those 
who were following the men who carried the antelope arrows— 
saw that there were many antelope between them, and that 
they were running thick together, then the two men with the 
antelope arrows turned and rode toward each other, and those 
who followed them began to close in. The leaders continued to 
ride toward each other, and then passed each other, and each 
rode back on the outside of the lines to where White Faced 
Bull was standing. The other mounted men did not follow them, 
but met and closed in on the antelope, riding not behind the 
antelope but rather at the sides of the herds. The young men 
were whooping and calling, to drive the antelope toward White 
Faced Bull. 

The leading young man who reached White Faced Bull first 
handed him his antelope arrow. Then the other came up and 
gave him the other arrow. Now White Faced Bull stood holding 
one antelope arrow in each hand. 

286 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

Porcupine Bull was back near his father, and he had seen, a 
long way off, the soldiers tossing their robes as a signal that 
something was coming. The women and children now dis¬ 
mounted and formed a circle about White Faced Bull, and the 
old men began to call out to him to get into the center of the 
circle. The people in the circle all held their blankets or robes 
spread out behind them, and got close together so as to make 
a barrier that the antelope could not get through. 

White Faced Bull called his son to come with him into the 
middle of the circle. Now the antelope were coming fast, and 
soon they entered the circle, which by this time was almost 
complete. It was still large, but was growing smaller all the 
time. White Faced Bull held the antelope arrows in his hands 
and made motions with them, and whenever he did so the ante¬ 
lope turned in the direction toward which he motioned. There 
were many antelope, and when one band suddenly turned and 
ran into another, the antelope piled up in a struggling heap, so 
that many were knocked down and broke their legs, or were 
hurt in other ways. 

When the antelope began to run around inside the circle, 
they made the old man dizzy, and he said to his son, “Let us 
get out of here! ” As he started to move, the antelope stopped 
and looked at him, and the old men on the outside cried, “Do 
not move! ” He stopped and made a motion with his arrows, 
and the antelope moved in the direction in which he motioned. 
He caused them to run first one way and then another. He did 
this to confuse them, so that they would run first in one direc¬ 
tion and then in another, and against and over one another. 
They soon became entirely exhausted. 

When this took place all the people broke out of the circle 
and ran toward the antelope. It had been ordered that morning 
that neither guns nor bows and arrows should be used. The 
women were armed with forked sticks, poles, and axes with 
short, straight handles, even root-diggers, which they used to 
knock down the antelope. Men used ropes and boys did the 

287 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

same, catching the antelope and dragging them away. Women 
who knocked down antelope claimed those that they had killed. 
Some stranger Indians were present in the village, but they 
were not allowed to enter the circle for fear they might shoot 
and hurt someone. 

The very few antelope which got out of the circle were fol¬ 
lowed by the mounted men and all killed. With the antelope 
were wolves, coyotes, kit foxes, and rabbits. 

The antelope killed in the circle were all dragged to its center 
where White Faced Bull had stood, and were placed in rows— 
all the oldest bucks in a row together, then a row of younger 
ones, and then others still younger in rows, till they reached the 
kids. The females were all placed in similar rows by age. White 
Faced Bull selected his antelope, choosing only two for himself, 
but all the tongues came to him. The two girls and the two 
young men who carried the antelope arrows were called up and 
told to choose each an antelope. Then the men cut out the 
tongues, and two women carried them in a big blanket to 
White Faced Bull, telling him that there was his food. They 
made-heavy loads for the two women. 

There were six hundred lodges of Cheyennes, and every 
woman had an antelope. The antelope were so many that the 
leanest ones were not saved—only their hides were taken off. 
Bent’s wagon train had all the antelope it could use. 

A buck antelope had helped White Faced Bull and once 
coming up to him had sung this: 

His turn i urn! Hi ta in V dm. 

The words of the antelope song sung by White Faced Bull 
are mostly forgotten, but one of the songs was recalled and 
sung by Porcupine Bull: 

Hi ta in i' 6 mon i, Na mss' on i. 

(All will be gone My children) 

This is repeated in several songs. 

288 

WHITE BULL 

ONE OF GENERAL MILES* SCOUTS 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

On three occasions afterward White Faced Bull did this 
same thing, but none of the other surrounds was as successful 
as this one. 

Old Indians say that in leading the antelope into pits, ante¬ 
lope arrows were often used and moved in the same way, and 
that the medicine man who was drawing the antelope to the pit 
motioned toward it with the antelope arrows. 

Antelope were last called into the pits on Antelope Pit River 
—the Little Missouri—in 1865, by Curly Hair. His daughter 
was still alive a few years ago, at Cantonment, Oklahoma. 

This account of the antelope drive may be compared with the 
very similar description of the same operation among the 
Kiowas, 21 who appear to have carried antelope arrows not un¬ 
like those used by White Faced Bull. There are minor differ¬ 
ences in the two accounts, but on the whole the resemblance 
is close. Mr. Mooney, however, intimates that the antelope 
drive was made only in seasons of scarcity, and only in winter, 
at which season the antelope were accustomed to gather in large 
herds, while in spring and summer they scattered. The Chey¬ 
ennes, on the other hand, made antelope drives at any season 
of the year, whenever antelope skins were required for women’s 
dresses. It is true that in winter the antelope went in large 
herds; but it is also true that in early days they were enor¬ 
mously abundant, and in favorable localities large numbers 
were seen at any season of the year. 

A woman born in the winter of 1851-1852 described an ante¬ 
lope pit she had seen as a girl, which was made additionally 
safe by having erected just beyond it a sort of fence made of 

poles set in the ground at an angle and crossing each other near 
their upper ends, and there tied together. Behind these poles 
branches and weeds were piled up so that it was impossible 
to see through the obstruction. Across the top of the pit were 
laid several large logs, on which, after the antelope were in the 

21 Mooney, Kiowa Calendar, p. 288. 

289 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

pit, women walked out and lying down on the logs reached 
down and killed the antelope by blows on the head. 

The antelope arrows described by Porcupine Bull were used 
only on the flat prairie and for the purpose of drawing the 
antelope into a circle of people. Other antelope arrows, de¬ 
scribed by Little Hawk, consisted of a long upright, with a 
short cross-piece tied to it near the upper end. The upright and 
the cross-piece were wound with a strip of wolf fur, and to the 
top of the upright was tied a magpie feather. 

In ancient times, long before they had horses, certain men 
are said to have possessed especial skill in calling the antelope 
and to have devoted much of their time to this work. It is said 
that these men often remained in certain favorable situations 
to perform this function while the tribe moved off and left 
them. These men gave all their time to leading the antelope 
into pits, killing them, and drying the meat and skins, which 
the tribe found on its return. 

The number of men and women still alive who have wit¬ 
nessed this method of securing antelope justifies the belief that 
it was in use up to the year 1870 or even later. 

Bears. The Cheyennes killed no grizzly bears on the plains 
for they feared them. That black bears were often killed, how¬ 
ever, is shown by the frequent statements that the skin of the 
black bear was commonly used as a covering or wrapper for a 
shield. 

She Bear told of the killing of a black bear that must have 
happened not long after i860. While riding over the prairie 
with a friend of his own age, a bear came out of a ravine not 
far off. The two boys raced after it on horseback, overtook and 
shot it with arrows, and finally killed it. 

Stories are told of man-eating grizzly bears, animals that 
habitually preyed on the people, lying in wait for and capturing 
them, and even driving large camps away from favorite camp¬ 
ing places. Such stories go back to a time before the coming of 

290 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

the whites, for the acquisition of horses and of iron-pointed 
arrowheads tended to put the Indian more nearly on an equal¬ 
ity with his brute enemy than he was when he traveled afoot 
and his piercing weapons were of stone. In primitive times 
every advantage was with the bear. It was swift of foot, en¬ 
during, and hard to kill. Its tough muscles, heavy fur, strong 
hide, and thick coating of fat were hardly to be pierced by the 
primitive arrow. 

Horses. While in later years the Cheyennes secured their 
horses chiefly by capture from their enemies, in earlier days— 
say in the latter part of the eighteenth and the first half of the 
nineteenth centuries—they captured many wild horses. There 
were professional horse-chasers, who devoted much time to this 
work, and who possessed swift and enduring horses, which were 
kept always in good training, so that they should be strong, 
tough, and long-winded. 

The first horses on the recent plains were brought by Coro¬ 
nado, who, on his march from Mexico to Quivira in Kansas, 
penetrated almost to the Missouri River, and not very long 
before this the mounted troops of De Soto had crossed the 
Mississippi and come almost to the edge of the plains. No 
doubt horses were lost by both expeditions, and those that thus 
escaped found themselves in a favorable environment, in which 
there were no natural enemies. Since there was nothing to check 
their increase, they multiplied astonishingly. As early as 1680 
there were horses among the Pawnees and other tribes of the 
Missouri, and from that time on horses spread with great 
rapidity from south to north. 

The Spaniards in Mexico possessed great herds, and while 
many of them were branded, many escaped the iron and be¬ 
came truly wild. These wild horses were captured by the Span¬ 
iards in various ways, usually in corrals toward which the 
horses were driven between diverging wings until they entered 
the pen. They were seldom run down and captured with the 

291 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

rope. The Kiowas followed the practice of penning wild horses 
employed by the Spaniards, but among the Cheyennes I find 
no tradition of any such method of taking horses. 

However, in the year 1836, members of Cheyenne war- 
parties who had gone from the Black Hills southward almost 
to the Washita River, in what is now Oklahoma, found a great 
corral which had been used for catching horses. This pen was 
situated in a park or opening in the black-jack timber which 
formerly covered much of the country of central Oklahoma, 
but was later largely destroyed by prairie fires. This pen was 
not circular in shape, but was oval, the opening being at one 
end. The fence was not made after the fashion of a white man’s 
fence, but was a stockade formed of black-jack posts set on end 
in the ground and close together. On the outside of the fence 
brush and the limbs of trees were piled against the stockade. 
The wings of underbrush were heaped up high and wide, so 
that a horse could neither see through nor jump over them. 
The corral showed that it had been used for catching horses, 
yet not for a long time, for in many places the posts which 
formed the fence were partly rotted and were falling down. 

Though at first greatly puzzled by this enclosure, the Chey¬ 
ennes who discovered it at length reasoned out what it had been 
used for, and years afterward, when peace had been made 
between the Cheyennes and Arapahoes on the one side and 
Kiowas and Comanches on the other, the Kiowas explained to 
the Cheyennes the purpose and the manner of use of the struc¬ 
ture. Of the horses driven into this corral the best young ones 
were roped and dragged out to be used, while the older and 
otherwise less useful animals were butchered for their flesh 
and hides. The Kiowas used horse-hide for all purposes for 
which the skins of large animals are employed—for moccasins, 
lodge linings, lodge coverings, and even for robes and sheets. 

It is impossible to say whether the Kiowas may have bor¬ 
rowed from the Spaniards this custom of impounding horses, 
or whether it was an adaptation of the old-time Indian method 

292 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

of catching buffalo and antelope. The latter conclusion seems 
more probable, and it is certain that the methods pursued in 
getting the horses between the brush wings leading to the corral 
were the same as were practiced in bringing in antelope and 
buffalo. 

The Cheyennes did not become expert in the use of the lasso, 
or reata, employed by Mexicans and cowboys before the second 
half of the nineteenth century. They used the slip-noose, to be 
sure, but did not throw the rope. Their method was to hold the 
loop open by tying it with light strings to a hoop formed of a 
long willow twig, which was passed over the head of the wild 
horse, if the rider could come close enough to do this. 

A further development of the use of the slip-noose was a 
change by which the rider carried a light pole, to which the 
loop of the rope was attached by strings, so that this loop might 
be passed over the head of the horse. It was probably not until 
after the year 1850 that the horse-chasers learned to throw the 
rope with much success. Still later, as certain horse-catchers 
became more skillful with the rope, they began to carry extra 
ropes coiled and tucked under their belts. Another man on a 
good horse followed the one who used the rope, and when the 
wild horse was noosed, the second man took the rope and 
choked down the wild animal, leaving the roper free to follow 
another wild horse. 

It will readily be understood that, provided things were 
otherwise nearly equal, a horse running free could not be over¬ 
taken by one that was carrying a hundred and fifty or two 
hundred pounds of weight, and from this it follows that the 
horses captured were chiefly old and slow ones, and that the 
best horses always escaped. For this reason a favorite season 
for chasing wild horses was toward the end of the winter or in 
early spring, when, through insufficient food and cold weather, 
a proportion of the wild herds had become thin and weak. The 
horse-chasers, on the other hand, watched their running horses 
with care and endeavored to keep them in good condition, and 

293 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

at this season it was not difficult for them to overtake mares 
that were thin from suckling their colts, or those that were 
heavy with foal. 

When the wild horse had been caught, the work was only 
half done. It was necessary that the animal should be kept 
from running away, and yet the men of the party could not be 
constantly occupied in watching the horses. This difficulty was 
overcome by the device of taking with them on their expedi¬ 
tions for horses a number of gentle mares to be used in han¬ 
dling the wild horses when first taken. Some of these gentle 
mares were commonly driven out on the chase. The captured 
wild horse was choked down, thrown to the ground, and its 
feet tied. A head-stall, or hackamore, was put on its head, a 
rope tied about the neck with a knot that would not run up, 
and the rope passed down through the head-stall. A gentle mare 
was then brought up, and after a knot had been tied in her tail, 
the rope leading from the wild horse’s head was tied about the 
mare’s tail with a slack of three or four feet between the head 
and the tail. To keep the struggling wild horse from injuring 
the mare during its first efforts to escape, her tail was bent 
around to one side and the loose end of the rope was passed 
along her side to the base of the neck, where it was tied about 
the neck just in front of the shoulders by a knot that could not 
draw up. To prevent this large loop from slipping forward, it 
was tied to the mare’s mane, just above the withers, by a deer¬ 
skin string. 

The feet of the wild horse were now untied. When it sprang 
up it plunged and struggled for a time, but soon became quiet 
and thereafter followed the mare without trouble. Three or 
four days later, when it had come to know the mare well and 
perhaps to be attached to her, it was set free, and thereafter 
followed her about wherever she went. The mare was then used 
to tame another horse, and if the party was out for a long time 
some mares might have eight or ten captured horses following 
them about. These wild horses were readily broken to the sad- 

294 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

die. While they were “tailed” to the mare, the owner would 
occasionally go up to the mare, pat her for a little while, and 
then pass on to the young horse, handling it and gentling it. 
In this way it became accustomed to the sight and smell of 
man, and no longer feared him. Sometimes after the horse had 
become somewhat gentle, a young man would spring on its 
back and at once jump off again. The wild horse soon learned 
that it was not to be hurt. The man who mounted would pres¬ 
ently sit on the horse for a little while, and then the old mare 
might be led about by someone while the young man was sitting 
on the wild horse’s back. Thus the work of breaking it to ride 
was not long. 

It rarely happened that a horse tailed to a gentle mare would 
attempt to drive her away from the camp and out on the prairie 
—in some direction that he wished to take. This was provided 
against, however, by hobbling the mare so that she could go 
only slowly. 

The wild horses ran on the prairie in bands of from thirty 
to fifty mares and young animals, all of them under the leader¬ 
ship of some old stallion who kept them together and drove 
intruders away. Such an old stallion drove out of the herd all 
of the young colts, two, three, and four years old, and these 
were often found on the prairie by themselves in considerable 
herds. Indian horse-catchers, if such a herd of young horses 
was seen—and they were readily recognized by their shorter 
manes and tails, and light frames—often drove out toward such 
a company a few gentle mares, when the wild horses usually 
ran toward and mingled with them, and after a time the herd 
could be approached, driven together, and perhaps many of the 
young horses caught. If it were practicable to give them time to 
become acquainted with the old, gentle mares, they often did 
not attempt to run away, and many of them were captured. 

Beaver. Until intercourse with white men had taught them 
that the skins of beaver had a value for trading purposes, the 

295 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Cheyennes made no systematic effort to trap these animals. 
They killed them for food and used the skins for clothing, and 
they trained dogs to hunt them. 

When a beaver-dam and houses were found, it was the prac¬ 
tice to break away the dam so as to lower the water about the 
houses, and then to find the hole by which the beaver entered 
the house or the bank. The dogs used were small enough to 
enter this hole and yet were of fair size. A dog, sent into the 
hole, found the beaver and barked at and worried it until it 
became angry, so that it fought back and finally followed the 
dog out. As the dog gradually backed away, barking at the 
beaver, it made short rushes at him, and finally the dog backed 
clear out of the hole, and when the beaver jumped out after 
the dog, the man standing there knocked the beaver on the 
head with a club. They also shot beaver with arrows, watching 
for them by their ponds; and in the same way they occasionally 
shot otter. The fur of the otter was highly valued for covering 
for bow-cases and quivers, and for hair wrapping. 

In connection with the first method of catching the beaver, a 
mysterious story is told: 

A long time ago a beaver-dam had been found and broken down. 
Close by was a large camp of Cheyennes, and people came out to 
see what was being done. When the water had receded, an unusually 
large hole was seen, leading into a beaver house. One young man 
said to the others, “I will creep in there myself and see if I can find 
the beaver.” He went into the house, feeling with his hands as he 
went; presently he felt something alive, and supposed it was a 
beaver’s hind leg. He called out, “I have got him by the hind leg! ” 
By this time many people—men, women, and children—stood about 
on the bank watching. 

A woman in the crowd called, “Hold him! I will run and get a 
rope, and you can tie it to the leg and we will pull him out!” The 
woman ran to the camp and got a buffalo-hair rope, and it was passed 
into the hole to the young man, who tied it to the leg and himself 
came out. Men and boys took hold of the rope and began to pull on 

296 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

the beaver, but it seemed heavy. They could hardly move it. They 
kept pulling and pulling, and presently there appeared at the hole 
a man’s foot, and then the whole of a person appeared, sitting up 
and holding back, but hitching himself along as he was pulled. It 
was an old man with long white hair—an Indian. 

Just as he came in sight the rope slipped off his foot, and the 
people, who were frightened at what they saw, all ran away. Only 
the young man remained; he stood there coiling the rope, and when 
he had finished he hung it on the limb of a tree, when he too ran 
away. No one ever went back there again, for they were afraid of the 
place. They often talked of this, and the people thought that this 
must have been a mysterious beaver that had changed itself into a 
man, to keep the Cheyennes from killing it. 

Toward the end of the eighteenth century the Cheyennes no 
doubt had learned the value of beaver-fur from the French 
traders who had penetrated the Black Hills. According to Per¬ 
rin du Lac, 22 they were great beaver hunters and killed many, 
which they sold to the Sioux. Before this they had perhaps 
learned the uses of the steel trap, yet it may be doubted if they 
were ever a tribe of trappers. I have heard in modern times of 
only one Cheyenne who made a business of trapping with steel 
traps. Trudeau 2 * says that in 1795 the tribes living on the 
Cheyenne River, above the Cheyennes, did not gather fur at 
all, and that a good trade with them might be set on foot if 
horses were furnished him with which to take trade goods to 
these people. 

Gray Wolves. Big wolves were caught in pitfalls, made so 
deep that the animals could not jump out, the sides being dug 
away toward the bottom, so that the hole at top was somewhat 
smaller than the width at the bottom, which was about six feet. 
On opposite sides of the opening of this hole, two pairs of 
stakes were driven in the ground, two inches or more apart, and 
between these stakes on either side, and reaching across the 

22 Travels in Louisiana, p. 63, London, 1807. 

23 Missouri Hist. Soc. Colls., vol. 1v, p. 9, St. Louis, 1912. 

297 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

hole, was laid a pole to which a bait of small pieces of meat 
was tied. The horizontal pole at either end was lashed to the 
two stakes between which it lay, and thus could not be moved. 

Large weed stalks were split and laid close together from 
the pole to the ground on either side, and over these grass and 
earth were scattered, so that the covering of the pit looked as 
nearly as possible like the ground about it. The wolf, attracted 
by the bait, ventured out on the split weeds, which broke with 
his weight and let him fall into the pit, either as he was reach¬ 
ing for the bait or leaving it. 

Trapping Foxes. Except for purposes of ornamentation, the 
old-time Cheyennes made little use of small furs. For clothing, 
shelter, and bedding they used the skins of large animals. 
Nevertheless, they trapped foxes in deadfalls. 

In constructing the trap a little trench was dug in the ground, 
and over it was built a small house of willow twigs, thrust in 
the ground on either side of the trench and bent in a half¬ 
circle. Over these twigs was put grass, and then earth, and on 
the earth were placed the thorny leaves of the prickly-pear 
(Opuntia), so that the fox should not dig nor scratch at the 
roof of the house, which was open only at one end. Leading 
up to the little door of the house a fence was built on either 
side of the trench, and at the door a dead-fall of ordinary type 
was arranged, the fall log and the bottom log being lodge-poles. 
The bait was a bit of tallow slightly roasted, and placed on a 
spindle inside the house. A pull at the bait dislodged the spindle 
and the supporting stick (called mo wish kuri, finger), and the 
log fell on the fox’s neck or back, killing it. 

After a trap had been set, the person who had made it often 
went off to one side a little distance and sang, calling the foxes. 
Sometimes when one of these traps was first made, the women 
and children would gather around the singer and dance to the 
time of the song, the words of which ran as follows: 

298 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

Come, fox, I have meat for you— 

Ni nai' is ma ho' is tam' i na' hit ho e' wo 
Come, fox, I have food for you —Ni nai' is ma ho' is tam' i na' hit 
Come, fox, I have food for you —Ni nai' is ma ho' is tam' i na' hit 

Small Wolves. Sometimes larger traps of this type were 
made, in which coyotes were caught, and sometimes, but not 
often, big wolves got into them and were secured. However, 
such deadfalls were not set for these large animals, which 
were usually too strong for them. 

Eagle catching. The feathers from the tail of the eagle were 
highly valued for use in adornment and for trade with other 
tribes, and at the proper season of the year some men devoted 
much effort to catching the birds. This, however, might not be 
done by everyone, for the eagle catchers were regarded as 
possessing much spiritual power. They alone might make the 
eagle medicine. 

Eagle catching was practiced in the spring, when the birds 
first appeared, and again in the fall, when they were going 
south. Only certain people engaged in this work—chiefly old 
men—those who had ceased going on the war-path. The young 
men who wore war-bonnets rarely caught eagles themselves, 
but procured the feathers from the old men. While engaged in 
the work of eagle catching, these old men used only one certain 
vessel to drink from in the evening, and this vessel no one else 
might use. At this time these men were obliged to keep to some 
extent apart, and were not allowed to touch even their own 
children; each one slept by himself. 

Each man had his own method, and each thought his own 
way the best. The Cheyennes always declared that they were 
the most successful eagle catchers, and that after them came 
the Arapahoes. 

Two or three of the different methods practiced by men who 
were well known as eagle catchers are given here. 

A man who wished to catch eagles for the first time offered 

299 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the pipe to one who understood this, and by him was taught the 
secrets of the work. 

One who intended to go out to catch eagles made his prepa¬ 
rations in his lodge, alone. The lodge was cleared out and the 
floor about the fire was covered—not very thickly—with white 
sage, the stems pointing away from the fire. While the eagle 
catcher was making his medicine, the fire was burning brightly, 
and he sang alone in the lodge all through the night. 

After he had made the medicine, he left the camp without 
telling where he was going. In a suitable place on a hill he dug 
a pit large enough for a man to sit in with outstretched legs, 
but not long enough for lying down. Often the pit was small 
at the top, but hollowed out under the sides. He carried the 
earth from this pit far away, and scattered it. He covered the 
narrow hole by laying across it lengthwise a pole, to which was 
tied long grass, which hung over on each side and concealed the 
hole. Spaces through which he could look were left in this 
grass, or sticks covered with grass were put over the opening 
of the pit. 

The digging of the pit was a work of time, for eagles are 
keen-sighted and wise, and the earth and rubbish must be car¬ 
ried a long distance. Before going into the pit, the eagle catcher 
took a sweat-bath, so as to dispel the human odor. He went to 
the pit for four successive days, and on the evening of the 
fourth day, when he returned to his lodge, he took four sweat- 
baths. 

The bait, tied down so that it should not be carried off, was 
often a fresh wolf skin to which a piece of the meat was 
attached, laid flesh side up across the sticks; or it might be a 
rabbit. The sticks laid across the mouth of the pit were far 
enough apart so that the hands might be passed between them. 
The floor of the pit was covered with white sage, which men 
carried up in their blankets from the lower ground. Very early 
in the morning, before he started to go to the pit, the man 
combed his hair and painted himself all over with red grease- 

300 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

paint, the grease being the fat of eagles. He set out long before 
daylight so as to be there before the eagles were moving about. 

After all had been made ready, the man went to the place 
and entered the hole while it was still dark. When in the pit 
he did not eat or drink. He must go for four successive days. If 
he tried for four days without success, he thought that some 
mistake had been made—that the laws had not been properly 
followed. He had with him a small rope of buffalo hair to be 
used to kill the eagle by strangling it. Some people used a bow¬ 
string for this purpose, while others merely broke the eagle’s 
neck. The man sat in the hole and waited for the eagles to 
come. Perhaps a bird flying over saw the bait and kept circling 
about it, getting lower and lower. 

Until it began to eat, the eagle was very cautious, hovering 
around the bait, stretching out first one foot and then the other, 
before alighting. The man heard its feet strike when it alighted, 
and while the eagle was tearing at the bait the man very slowly 
reached up through the grass and grasped the bird by the feet. 
He pulled it into the pit, slipped over the head the noose of the 
rope, or a bowstring tied to his foot so that he could pull 
strongly, and killed it by strangling. Men have been known to 
catch as many as twenty eagles in one of these pits, and to have 
caught several in one day. Once a man named Wolf Fire got 
hold of an eagle so large that it nearly pulled him out of the 
pit. 

Each night the man took his eagles home, for it was the law 
that the eagles must be brought to camp just as they were 
caught. Not a feather must be pulled out in the pit. At the 
camp, close by his lodge, two forked stakes had been set up 
in the ground, in the forks of which lay two slender poles, 
like lodge-poles. These were tied together at one end, but were 
loose at the other. When the man brought home an eagle he 
slipped its foot between the two poles at their loose ends, 
brought the ends together, and slid the foot along until it was 
firmly held. There he left it hanging. Some men were free to 

301 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

leave the pit at any time, but might not enter it except at night, 
when it was dark; others might not leave the pit until sundown, 
no matter how many eagles had been caught. 

When a man had caught as many birds as he needed, he 
stopped. After this he began to pluck the feathers from the 
birds, taking only those from the tails and the wings. He put 
the feathers away, carried the bodies off a long way from camp, 
placed them on the ground side by side in a row, and left them 
there. The feathers he gave to the people, who gave him some¬ 
thing in return, perhaps a horse for twenty or thirty feathers. 
Four kinds of eagles are known—the eagle that has a white 
head, and the gray one that is its young, and the war-eagle and 
its young. 

The method of eagle catching was closely similar to that 
practiced by the Arikaras and the Blackfeet. It was not with¬ 
out its dangers. It is related that an eagle once killed a Sioux 
Indian by piercing an artery in his arm with its talons, so that 
the man bled to death. 

Another method practiced in the early part of the nineteenth 
century was described by Ridge Bear, who had it from his 
mother, who was born before 1820. 

When a man purposed to catch eagles, he, with his family, 
moved away from the main camp, put up his lodge wherever 
he had decided to stop, and near it put up another lodge. The 
floor of the second lodge was smoothed and leveled, and all 
around its border next to the lodge covering was spread a nice 
bed of white sage. This lodge was for the eagles that he ex¬ 
pected to catch: they were to be placed on the bed of sage, 
with the heads pointing toward the fireplace. The man pre¬ 
pared a number of balls of pounded corn and a number of balls 
of pounded meat, and these were placed about the edge of the 
bed in pairs—a ball of meat and a ball of meal together—as 
many pairs of balls as he hoped to catch eagles. 

The man greased his whole body with eagle fat so as to con- 

302 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

ceal the human scent. He entered the pit in the morning before 
daylight and remained there until after sundown. 

In the evening when he returned from the pit with the eagles 
he had caught, he called to his family as he approached the 
camp and told them to enter the eagles’ lodge. He went in and 
placed his eagles on the bed of sage, the head of each one being 
near a pair of the balls of food. Then to each one of his family 
the man gave a mouthful of food from two of the balls. The 
family then left the lodge and the man remained there for the 
night. 

Four days were spent thus in eagle catching, and at the end 
of this time the man moved to the main camp with his eagles. 

Some people were fortunate in eagle catching, while others 
never caught any eagles. It was thought that those who were 
continually unlucky were not likely to live long. 

Often there was great rivalry among eagle catchers, each one 
trying to outdo the other, and some would not stop at any¬ 
thing to attain their desires. A story is told of Ridge Bear’s 
grandfather, who is supposed to have sacrificed his daughter 
to the maiyun in order that he might have success in eagle 
catching. 

Some eagle catchers, especially those beginning the work, 
did not offer the eagles food when they brought them in. They 
were laid in a place by themselves. He who had killed them 
took a pipe and held it to each bird, asking it to take pity on 
him. This was in his own lodge, which had been cleaned out and 
the floor covered with white sage. Every time he caught birds, 
he called in the old eagle catchers who had taught him, and 
filled his pipe and offered it to each bird, saying: “I did not 
kill you without thought [i.e., without a reason]. We want to 
wear you.” Food and water were then passed into the lodge, 
and one of the old eagle catchers put medicine on the food. 
After that the novice drank the water, then ate, and did not 
drink again before he started out before daylight the next day. 
Before sleeping, he removed the feathers and piled them up in 

3°3 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

his lodge, but took out the bodies and left them a long way off. 
The feathers were not touched again till he had finished his 
four days’ hunt. Then he divided the wing-feathers among 
those whom he wished to have them. The old men used wings 
for fans. There were always many buyers for the tail-feathers. 
Eagles were the only birds in connection with the killing of 
which there was a ceremony. 

On the highest of the three bald hills in the Muddy Divide 
a little east of south of Lamedeer, to the northeast of the house 
of the late William Rowland, Sr. (now occupied by Ed. Powell), 
are two unroofed shelters—eagle pits—of stones and logs, the 

walls being about four feet high. These hills are about as high 
as the Tongue River Divide. On two of them are monuments, 
a few great stones heaped up to a height of four or five feet, 
and of about the same diameter at the bottom. One of the hills 

that bears a monument has at the other end of its highest part 
the eagle pits referred to. These constitute a single structure, 
or perhaps two adjoining structures, roughly built of the irregu¬ 
lar, large, burned rocks which crop out in a ledge on the summit 
of the hill. Advantage has been taken of this outcrop in building 
the shelters, and one great rock projecting from the ground 
to a height of six or seven feet forms the wall of a part of each 
pit. Other rocks, estimated to weigh several hundred pounds 
each, appear to be in place. Other stones, large and small, have 
been used to make a wall for the two structures, the ground- 
plan of which is something like the rough sketch which is 
shown on the following page. 

The long chamber lies about north and south; the oval 
chamber is east of the long chamber and at its north end. The 
walls within and without are irregular, for some of the stones 
project more or less into the chamber. The lesser width of the 
long chamber is i foot 11^2 inches, and its length 7 feet 2 
inches, or long enough for a man to lie down in. The average 
height of the wall of this chamber is nearly four feet, but the 
great stone at the north end, already spoken of as apparently 

304 

POUNDING CHERRIES 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

in place, is higher than a man’s head—seven or eight feet. The 
wall of the oval chamber is not quite so high as that of the 
long chamber. The width of the oval enclosure from east to 
west is 5 feet 3 inches, and its length about 6 feet. This would 
be too short for a man to lie in, because of the irregularity of 
the walls. 

Compared with the country immediately surrounding it, the 
elevation of this construction is considerable, and a bait ex¬ 
posed here would be more likely to attract a bird’s eye than one 
at a less altitude. It is thus very favorably situated. 

Such pits were used not for catching eagles only, but also the 
larger hawks, whose feathers were much used for purposes of 
ornamentation. 

When I first saw these pits, many years ago, no vegetation 
grew in them, though they showed no signs of recent use. In 

305 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

1916, however, seeds of the black currant, presumably dropped 
by birds, had sprouted, and several hardy plants were growing 
in the enclosures. 

The structures are old, but how old no one can tell. It is 
possible that they may have been built by the predecessors of 
the Cheyennes in this country, Crows or others, but they have 
undoubtedly been used by the Cheyennes. There are said to be 
other such shelters in these hills. 

The monuments spoken of are watchers’ stations for young 
men looking out for enemies or for game. They appear to be 
not so old as the eagle pits. 

Such enclosures were roofed with slender poles or long weed- 
stalks, and the bait spread on the roof. Certain old men say 
that the eagle catcher, after going into the enclosure, remained 
there night and day until he was ready to give up his attempt 
to catch eagles for the time being. He did not leave the shelter; 
he neither ate nor drank, nor wore any robe or blanket while 
he remained in it. This was partly an act of sacrifice, but be¬ 
sides that, if the eagle catcher was hungry, the eagles that he 
was trying to catch were likely to be hungry also, and so would 
descend to his bait. When he was successful in catching eagles 
—getting perhaps ten on one expedition—he was permitted to 
paint his hands in token of his success. 

The main use of the feathers was for war-bonnets, and in 
those days two or three horses might be paid for a war-bonnet. 
The small feathers were sometimes used to feather arrows. 

In later times eagles were secured also by finding a place 
where the birds roosted. Under the tree a bark house was built, 
which the man entered, carrying his rifle, and patiently waited 
there until the eagle alighted in the tree, when he shot it. 

The old method of eagle catching began to pass out of use 
when the Cheyennes obtained guns. It has not been extensively 
practiced for about three generations, but was in common use 
by the grandfathers of the old men of the present day in the 
early part of the last century. The last man who ever used one 

306 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

of the pits was Red Wolf, who died in 1893. Since about 1860- 
1861 such pits have not been used much, if at all. The people 
say they came to fear the practice, and abandoned it. 

Turtles. In the country of the Northern Cheyennes there are 
few water turtles, but they are abundant in the southern coun¬ 
try, and are commonly captured and eaten. In the pools and 
streams where turtles are plentiful, those searching for them 
often watched on the bank for the turtles to come to the sur¬ 
face of the water to breathe. When the men or boys saw them, 
they dived into the stream, swam under the turtles, and usually 
caught them in their hands. 

Sometimes men waded along in the water in a long line, 
feeling for the turtles with their feet. If one was felt, they tried 
to determine the direction it took in trying to escape, and one 
man after another plunged under the water and endeavored to 
grasp it with the hands. Often they succeeded. 

Sometimes a circle was formed of men, women, and children, 
surrounding a place in the water where turtles were known to 
be abundant. The people closed in slowly, and sometimes the 
turtles all moved to the center of the circle, or some of them 
tried to pass through the ring of people to go to the bank. If a 
man chanced to step on one of the turtles, he kept his foot on 
it, pressing it against the bottom, and called one of his fellows, 
who dived down and, following the man’s leg, caught the turtle. 
When a man put his foot on a snapping turtle, he knew what 
it was by the notched ridge on the back, and could tell where 
it should be caught; that is to say, either by the tail or the 
hind leg. These turtles were not to be caught near the head, 
because they bite; indeed, people were sometimes severely 
bitten by snapping turtles. Soft-shell turtles were hard to catch, 
for they swim fast, are smooth and slippery, and so are hard to 
hold. 

Where there is moss on the bottom of a stream or a pond, 
the turtles are easily caught, for they become entangled, but 

307 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

where there is no moss on. the bottom, they are hard to catch, 
for they can swim and walk fast. In such a case horses were 
sometimes driven into the water, and the turtles kept moving 
until they became tired and remained in one place. 

Sometimes when turtles were abundant, and only one or two 
men or boys were together, they tied grass and willows about 
their heads, and very slowly approaching a turtle at the surface, 
put the hands under it and caught it. 

Turtles were killed by putting their heads in a fire, after 
which the side, near the hind legs, was opened and the entrails 
drawn out and thrown away. Then a large fire was built, and 
the turtles were placed about it, standing up on the edges of 
their shells, and thus roasted. Some people boiled the turtles 
in their shells. 

Fish catching. The Cheyennes formerly caught fish, and in 
this respect were quite unlike some of their neighbors on the 
plains. It may be conjectured that they brought from their 
earlier eastern home their fondness for fish, as well as the 
methods which they employed in taking them. A story describ¬ 
ing the earliest fish catching practice treats of a period long, 
long ago, but after the people had obtained bows and arrows: 

A long time ago a man and his wife who were traveling alone far 
from the main camp had almost nothing to eat. The woman dug 
roots and gathered berries when she could find any, and the man 
hunted hard and tried to kill either game or birds, but they were 
near starvation, for they found little to eat. They were camped by a 
small stream, and, as the man was walking along the bank one day, 
he saw something dart through the water. He looked again, and saw 
fish, many little ones, and some big—half as long as his arm. When 
he returned to camp he spoke to his wife about this, telling her that 
he had seen fish in the stream. He said, “If we could catch some of 
these fish, then we should have something to eat.” 

He thought much about this, and at last decided what to do. He 
went to where willow bushes grew near the camp, and cut many 
small, slender shoots, which he took to camp. Then he and his wife 

308 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

tied these sticks close together, and made something like a back-rest, 
long enough to reach across the stream, which was only two or three 
steps wide and about half a leg deep. Then he said to his wife, “Come 
now, take one end of this and we will go to the stream.” When they 
had got there he said to her: “Now, let us put the edge of this into 
the water so that it reaches the bottom, and then drag it slowly up 
the creek. The water is shallow, and if any fish come against it, we 
will try to catch them.” 

As they went along they watched for fish, and if one got against 
the willows near the woman, she reached over very slowly and 
grasped it and threw it out on the bank. If one got against the wil¬ 
lows on the man’s side, he did the same. In this way they caught 
many fish—all they wanted. They pulled the willow net out of the 
water, and the man said: “Ah! in this way we can live. We can catch 
fish. We will save this and keep it.” They went to camp with their 
fish . 24 

Standing All Night, the aged man already mentioned as hav¬ 
ing died in 1869, used to tell how the Cheyennes subsisted 
before they reached the buffalo country. At certain seasons they 
were accustomed to make journeys to some great lakes, which 
constantly appear in their traditions. These lakes were so large 
that one could not see across them to the other side, and in 
their waters were many fish, some of them quite large. It was 
their practice to make nets of willow twigs tied together with 
strings of bark and sinew, and to stretch them out diagonally 
from the shore into the shallow water. These nets were often 
very long. Men stationed along the net held it in place, and 
other men, with women and children, went farther along the 
shore of the lake and entered the water in a line, some of them 
going out as deep as they could go, and walked toward the net, 
driving the fish before them. When they reached the outer end 
of the net, it was slowly moved in toward the shore, enclosing 
a large space; then it was gradually dragged up into the very 
shallow water, and men, women, and children got within it and 

24 Compare, as to the Pima, Lloyd, Aw aw Tam Indian Nights, p. 60, West- 
ville, N. J., 1911. 

309 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

threw the fish out on shore. In this way they commonly caught 
many fish, some of them very large, possibly sturgeon. After 
being secured, these fish were carried to the camp on the backs 
of people, or packed on the dog travois. The larger fish were cut 
in pieces before they could be put on the travois. In the camp 
they were dried in the sun, the larger ones being cut in strips. 
The bones of the larger fish were pounded and boiled for 
grease, just as in later days buffalo bones were pounded and 
boiled. From the largest of these fish they got a white sinew. 

In modern times they caught fish in a pound or pen made of 
willow saplings. Such a pen was built by the direction and 
under the charge of a medicine man, who during the night, 
when the fish were expected to enter it, remained in his lodge, 
not going out. His face was painted red, and his robe was drawn 
up over his head so that he was wholly covered and could see 
nothing. All night he sat alone and silent in his lodge. 

The people who built the fish-weir drove into the ground in 
the stream-bed willow saplings as thick as a man’s wrist, and 
fastened them together with strings of rawhide. The saplings 
were in a circle as close together as possible, an opening or gate 
being left on the up-stream side. The weir was ready for the 
reception of the fish in the evening. Pieces of meat to serve as 
bait were laid in the water at the back of the weir. 

A man was appointed especially to watch this trap. While it 
was building he took willow twigs, and from them wove a sort 
of oval basket about twenty inches long, and eight inches in 
diameter, with a hole about six inches in diameter in one end; 
to the other end were fastened two short willow sticks which 

served as handles for the basket. In the morning, after day¬ 
light, the man went to the trap and looked about its walls to 
find a place where he could work his hand and arm in between 

the willow saplings, so as to feel whether there were any fish 
inside. If he felt fish, he called the people to come. Then taking 

the basket, he went to the lower part of the weir and squeezed 

the saplings apart, so as to leave an open space, against which 

310 

SUBSISTENCE AND HUNTING 

he put the opening of the basket. The fish began to come out 
through the opening in the walls, and to pass into the basket. 
From that the man took them in his hand and threw them out 
to the people on the bank. As long as he could get fish, he kept 
throwing them out on the bank. Sometimes he might be at it 
all day long. 

Sometimes, but not often, the fish in the trap became fright¬ 
ened and swam out at the up-stream opening. Such traps have 
been used, certainly later than the year i860, to capture 
suckers and whitefish in the Laramie River. 25 

« See also The Boy and the Girl, page 113. 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

1 IKE people the world over, the Cheyennes had their 
sports. From their earliest years the children played 
about the camp, grubbing in the dirt, dabbling in the 
water at the edge of the stream, heaping up along the trails 
piles or ridges of dust, which represented breastworks or the 
walls of lodges; or, as they grew older, swimming in the 
streams, and making mud images in summer, while in winter 
they slid down hill, or played upon the ice. So it went through 
life, at least to middle age; and if the games of older people 
were more serious than those of the children, they still fur¬ 
nished the amusement which is as necessary to primitive as to 

civilized man. 

The amusements of these people, like their very lives, were 
simple. Without books and without any of the varied forms 
of public entertainment known to civilized life, their diversions 
were almost altogether social. Visiting, feasting, the dance, and 
competitions of skill in various games, constituted their forms 
of recreation. It resulted that they were great gossips, visiting 
from lodge to lodge, carrying to each other items of news, on 
which they commented at great length. The frequent feasts 
furnished opportunity for the discussion of news, and for 
bringing forward suggestions bearing on the welfare of the 
tribe. Much as in many of the simpler communities of our 
own country in earlier days, the religious ceremonies at which 
from time to time they assembled were regarded by many of 
the people less as occasions for worship than as exciting and 
interesting entertainments. 

Some of us have known of country districts where formerly 
a funeral was regarded as an event which no one would miss on 

312 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

any account—a gathering which for weeks afterward furnished 
subjects for conversation to the country-side. So it was with 
the Cheyennes. The great ceremonies of the Medicine Lodge, 
or the renewing of the medicine arrows, while to many of the 
older people occasions of much solemnity—seasons of prayer 
and humiliation, and devout worship—furnished to the younger 
people also an opportunity for meeting friends and relatives 
from whom they had been long separated, and for indulging 
in a more or less protracted course of social excitement, from 
which for months or years they might have been or might be 
debarred. On such occasions young men had the opportunity 
to see young women who had grown up since they had last 
met; girls attended the social dances so frequently held, and 
young people generally renewed earlier acquaintance—and met 
other young folks hitherto known but slightly, or not at all. 

If this was true among the Cheyennes as a tribe, it was 
equally true when the whole great camp of the Cheyennes met 
that of some other tribe, perhaps as large, and mingled more or 
less freely with its members. Then, sometimes, a boy courted 
a girl of the other tribe who took his fancy; or a Cheyenne girl 
was sought in marriage by a young man of the strangers. 

Among boys and young men there were many games and 
sports—contests of skill, usually in some athletic struggle. 
Each one was eager to outdo the others, whether in shooting 
at a mark, or throwing sticks, or wrestling, or at the kicking 
game. At this last sport the Cheyennes were skillful; and while 
most often it took place within the camp, it was sometimes 
practiced on a larger scale when the Cheyennes were camped 
near some other tribe, and the contest was between the boys 
of the two tribes. 

These competitive games continued from childhood to middle 
life, and when men became too old to take part in them, they 
still enjoyed watching the games and seeing practiced by those 
coming after them the sports in which as young men they had 
participated. Besides the different diversions of the children, 

3i3 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

such as holding mimic camps of their own, and pretending to 
hunt buffalo, or to fight other groups of boys, who represented 
enemies, as already described, there were many games for 
children, or young folks, closely similar to those played by 
civilized children. 

In winter the Cheyennes used to slide down hills on sleds 
made of buffalo-ribs placed side by side, with a stick tied across 
each end. This was done not merely by children, but by young 
men and boys and even by older active men, but not by women. 
For sliding down hill they chose a long slope, preferably end¬ 
ing on a frozen river. Girls and young women made toboggans 
from a slab split from a tree and used these, but not the rib 
sleds, for their coasting. The rib sleds went faster than a horse 
could run. 

In winter, little boys and very small girls slid down snow- 
covered hills on pieces of rawhide (an ha si yan'l, sliding down 
hill); and even in summer very little boys might be seen slid¬ 
ing down steep banks in similar fashion. Their mothers en¬ 
couraged them to do this, for it was a convenient and labor- 
saving method of wearing the hair off the buffalo-hide that they 
wished to use for the soles of moccasins. The removal of this 
hair is said to have been a slow process in ancient times, but 
later, after they devised bone scrapers for removing the hair, 
or had obtained metal ones, it was more easily accomplished. 

Very small children were and are fond of playing in the 
dirt, in which respect they do not differ from children of other 
races. They often built up ridges of dust, making them like 
breastworks. They were straight, or circular, or took the form 
of squares, perhaps, with a gateway in one of the sides. Often 
today they build houses, stables, and corrals in imitation of 
those of their parents, laying out the ground-plans with rows 
of stones, and sometimes having in the corrals mud images of 
horses, buffalo, and cattle. In the cutbanks along the streams 
I have found niches dug out in which children had stored 
figures whittled from clay—some like little cubes or rhombs, 

3i4 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

some shaped like bricks, while others had a bottle-like form. 
Some of the niches were packed full of such geometrical forms, 
and were evidently children’s storehouses for their blocks. Lit¬ 
tle boys were much given to modeling figures of animals and 
men from clay, and some of these were remarkably good. 

In summer children spent much time in the water, and boys 
and girls alike were expert swimmers. 

The little boys spun tops (ni to' ho yin = “whirling,” i.e., 
whipping tops) on the ice or on the hard, frozen ground, whip¬ 
ping them with a whip-lash of several strands, and trying to 
see who could keep his top spinning the longest, or could drive 
it farthest over the rough ground, before it fell over. On the 
contests they bet their tops. One of two boys whipped his top 
along the ground until it fell; the place was marked, and then 
another started, and if his top went beyond this place he won 
the other top. 

The little boys had tops also which they spun with a string, 
much as white boys spin theirs. The tops were made of cotton¬ 
wood or ash, and were provided with a bone point or peg, or, 
in later times, when it could be had, a brass tack was used. 
These tops were spun on ice, or on hard ground, or even on a 
circle tramped hard in the snow. The strings used were twisted 
from the milkweed ( ?) that grows along the streams. The boys 
wagered their tops as tq which one should spin the longest. 

These were winter games played chiefly on the ice, as stated. 
Mr. Petter has pointed out the well-known fact that when the 
ice broke up in spring, tops, whips, and other implements of 
winter games were thrown into the water. It was believed that 
to play winter games in summer would make hairs grow on the 
body, and these it would be necessary to pull out. 

Some of the games 1 played by the children were these: 

Ne e' wat se' um (Carrying head downward). Two parties of 

l Many of these games had a wide currency among North American tribes, 
and most of those played with the implements have been described by Mr. 
Culm in the 24th Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology. 

315 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

girls and boys sat opposite one another, about thirty feet apart. 
A boy was chosen, who went out midway between the two 
parties, closed his eyes, and turned around two or three times. 
The children of both parties called to him, “Come this way! 
Come this way! ” He went to one line or the other, and caught 
a child, put it on his back, holding it by the feet, head down¬ 
ward, and carried it to a certain place, where he left it. Those 
whom he left there were obliged to remain. When all had been 
carried there, he lay down in front of them, as if to watch 
them and keep them from running away, and all began to pat 
him with their hands, and to sing in chorus, “Poor wolf! Poor 
wolf!” 

Ok 6 me! hin im (Coyote game). One boy, whose part is to 
attack, acts as the coyote. Another boy stands in front of his 
fellows, to protect them. All the others stand in line, one behind 
another, and each holding to the boy before him. It iS the part 
of the leading boy to keep the coyote away from the line of 
boys behind him. In front of the protector stands the coyote, 
making dashes at the boys and trying to get behind the one 
who is holding him off. The protector runs toward the coyote, 
and then, when the coyote dashes toward him, jumps back and 
keeps jumping back and forth in front of the coyote, throwing 
up his arms. The coyote tries to touch a boy in the line, and 
one so touched is out of the game and retires. The boys are 
ranged in order of size, the tallest in front and the littlest one 
at the tail of the line. As thev move from side to side, the end 
of the line of boys is likely to move rapidly, so that in this 
respect the game is somewhat like the white children’s game 
“snap the whip.” 

Mamau! is kart it' (Jumping from side to side). This may 
be called a game or dance. The tallest child was in front of a 
line, and the others followed in order of size, each one holding 
to the one in front of him. They danced along, jumping from 
the ground, with both feet, a little forward at each jump, and 

3i6 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

calling out in time, “Hagh! Hagh! Hagh!” If one of them 
laughed aloud, all the others fell on that child and beat it with 
their hands. 

Suhk' pa kbit (Running through the line). In this game the 
children stood in a circle, holding hands by locking the bent 
fingers of each hand in the bent fingers of the children on either 
side. A boy was chosen to be in the middle of the ring. He con¬ 
stantly tried to break out of the circle, by separating the hand¬ 
hold of some two of the children. If he succeeded in doing so 
and escaped from the ring, all pursued him, and those who 
overtook him slapped him with the open hand. 

Nah' kart ists (Playing bear). A boy was chosen to go into 
the underbrush where there were cherries or plums, and sit 
down there. He was the bear. Boys and girls went to the place 
to gather fruit, and while at work picking it, the bear charged 
upon them. As soon as he appeared, all would cry out, “Look 
out for the bear!” Often he caught a child and threw it down, 
and pretended to be eating it. The boys gathered about him, 
and pretended that they were shooting at him, picking up 
handfuls of dust and throwing them at him, at the same time 
making with their mouths a noise like the explosion of a gun. 
At last the bear appeared to be killed, and fell down, and the 
boys pretended to cut him up, using their hands for knives, 
as in the sign for skinning. 

There are several variants of this game. 

Sham fights. The small boys used to have sham battles, in 
which the weapons were a lump of stiff, moist clay, held under 
the left arm, and a slender switch, four or five feet long, car¬ 
ried in the right hand. A boy pressed a small lump of clay 
about the end of the switch and threw it, just as a white boy 
throws a green apple from a switch. Groups of boys, so armed, 
often had mimic combats with one another, two parties on foot 
carrying on a battle in which they retreated and attacked like 
real warriors, or sometimes several boys on foot would attack 

317 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

one mounted on a pony, following him up as he retreated, or, 
with shrieks of excitement, seeking cover if he charged. 

Nit at is tai' wa (hus) turn. This game is sometimes called 
throwing fire. It is played like the preceding, but at night. Each 
party has a big fire, and after they have put the clay ball on the 
end of the switch, the ball is thrust in the fire. Coals are likely 
to stick to the clay, and the ball of clay is then thrown with the 
switch. If fire clings to the clay, the missile can be seen and so 
avoided. 

A favorite game with small boys and young men was that 
of throwing a straight, slender stick. They held the stick by one 
end and pressed the other end against the ground, bending it 
once or twice, and then, by an underhand throw, darted it along 
close to, and parallel with, the ground—less than a foot above it. 

£' hyo an is' ko (Arrow mark). Boys and young men threw 
arrows at a mark, the first arrow thrown being the mark at 
which all subsequent throws were made. If an arrow thrown 
at the mark lay across it, this was a good throw; but if another 
one stuck in the ground, so as to touch the feathers of the 
mark, this throw was better. The boy whose arrow struck 
closest to the mark won. 

Young and even middle-aged men sometimes engaged in the 
sport of throwing arrows, which often were really darts. The 
sticks were about twice as long and thick as an arrow, had a 
slight swell or enlargement toward the point, a spike three or 
four inches long for a head, and feathers reaching a consider¬ 
able distance— i.e., much farther than on an arrow—up the 
shaft. Just above the feathers, little tufts of down of various 
colors indicated the ownership of the darts. The distance 
thrown was forty or fifty yards. The one first thrown stood in 
the ground, and formed the mark for the succeeding darts. 
At the end of the throwing, the arrows stood in a fairly close 
sheaf, within a space of three or four feet. Sometimes the 
arrows of two throwers stood so close to the one first thrown 

3i8 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

that it was difficult to decide which one was nearest, and the 
distances had to be measured carefully with a little stick or 
with two matches held side by side. 

Crowds of young and middle-aged men often stood about 
the mark at which contestants threw, and by exclamations or 
grunts, approved or derided the throws. 

Onimo'tan' hasiyowuhk'ivst (Swinging around horn). A 
man’s winter game was played with a limber twig, fifteen to 
eighteen inches long, one end of which was fastened in a hole 
drilled in the center of the butt of a point of buffalo-horn, while 
to the other end a bunch of feathers was attached, to make it 
fly well. The player twirled this twig a few times in his hand, 
and threw it down on the ground by an underhand cast, so that 
the horn-tipped end struck the ground, perhaps eight feet in 
front of him, at a very slight angle. The stick then glanced up, 
and flew a long way before the tip again struck the smooth 
ground, or the ice, and so scaled along, constantly ricochetting, 
often for a long distance. Four or five men might play at this 
game, preferably on ice or crusted snow, each trying to throw 
his stick farther than the other. 

Hek 5 nim ( uhk) stum' (Throwing (i.e., sliding) bone) 
( hek , bone; uhk, throwing). In another game, which the Chey¬ 
ennes were especially fond of playing on the ice in winter, they 
used a slightly curved piece of buffalo-rib or elk-rib, eight or ten 
inches long which was cut away on each side to make it sharp in 
front, and at the other end pierced diagonally with a hole on 
each edge, in which holes were fixed the quills of feathers, so as 
to make the instrument fly evenly. This bone the men threw 
underhand. When it struck the ice on the convex side, it 
glanced up from it, and flew along, sometimes ricochetting 
several times. The object was to see who could throw the far¬ 
thest. Two different parts of the rib were used to make this 
implement. If made of the distal portion, the bone had a curve 

3i9 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

slightly different from that made of a part of the rib near the 
spinal column. 

Ewo'istsirri tsis. The kicking matches which frequently 
took place were in the nature of sham battles. While these con¬ 
tests perhaps never had any serious results, nevertheless they 
were violent. The boys and young men kicked each other with 
one or both moccasin-shod feet, kicking either from the ground, 
or jumping up in the air and lashing out sideways with both 
feet. The blows dealt were often severe, yet the contests were 
always good-natured. 

Sometimes, when the Cheyennes were camped near the Sioux 
or the Arapahoes, the boys of the camp assembled and went out 
on the prairie near the other camp, and called out, “Co'ho l 
Co'ho! Co'ho!" This was a challenge, and soon the boys of the 
other camp were seen gathering, and came out to meet the 
Cheyennes. When the camps were large, the contestants might 
number several hundred, ranging in age from twelve to twenty- 
five years. 

It was the rule that under no circumstances should the hands 
be used; also, if a boy sat down, no one kicked him until he 
rose to his feet. Thus, a small boy might sit down if he saw a 
big boy or a man about to kick him. There was nothing dis¬ 
graceful about this. Of course, if a boy continually sat down 
to avoid being kicked, he was laughed at, and soon was con¬ 
sidered a coward. 

A young friend of mine was once kicked in the back of the 
head, with both feet, by a larger boy, and knocked about 
twenty feet. 

Grown men occasionally played the kicking game, and some¬ 
times, just before the Medicine Lodge, the different soldier 
bands challenged one another to kick. 

NV hi wan uh" (Wrestling). The Cheyennes were great wres¬ 
tlers, and practiced it from the age of seven or eight years to 
middle life. They never used the feet or legs in tripping; but 

320 

DRYING MEAT 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

endeavored to swing the opponent off his feet, or bend him back 
by main strength. They were tremendously wiry and strong, 
and very difficult to handle. 

The wheel game, so widely distributed over the continent, 
was played in several forms. In one of these, called l' u tsiihk- 
nia, the wheel (hohktsim?) was used. It was practiced chiefly 
by boys and young men, and was played in two ways. 

Hohktsim appears to mean “binding something together,” 
and refers to the lashing together of the two ends of the stick 
which forms the hoop or rim of the wheel. The wheel, the 
shinny-ball, and the football are all so called. Old people used 
to call wagons hohktsim'e, because of the shape of the wheels. 
Wagons are now called a mo' in V u, which carries the same 
idea. 

Some wheels of the Southern Cheyennes were divided into 
rough quadrants by double lines of rawhide, cross-laced, as above. 

321 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

The center hole was called the heart ( histsis ), or sometimes 
the blood (ma?); the rectangular spaces which crossed the 
pairs of dividing lines, close to the heart, represented bulls 
( hotu'ao ); the small spaces in each quadrant were cows (mih', 
singular; is'siwun, plural); while the triangular meshes just 
within the wooden rim of the wheel were wolves (holme', singu¬ 
lar; hohne'hiu, plural). The four small circles between the 
parallel lines separating the quadrants, and dividing the groups 
of bulls, are called o kom', coyote. The small triangles within 
those parallel separating lines are he tsista' ha ya, ears. 

They generally played with hohktsim in spring, after the 
cold had gone, and when the buffalo were shedding their coats. 
This was called the “clear day game,” for when the players 
threw their wheels up into the air, each made a prayer that as 
his fell it might bring with it good weather. 

The wheel varied in diameter from eight to fifteen inches or 
more. It was rolled along the ground, and the sticks thrown at 
it were straight, peeled, and from three to six feet long. Usually 
they had two or three prongs, three or four inches long, pro¬ 
jecting from the end which was to strike the wheel, where small 
branches had been cut off from the sapling. The players com¬ 
monly wagered their throwing sticks on the game. These sticks 
were often ornamented by wrapping them, sometimes spirally 
and sometimes horizontally, with strips of bark, and then by 
holding the stick over the fire the unprotected part was smoked 
or charred black, while the protected part remained white. This 
white part they painted yellow’ with the dung of the buffalo 
fetus. 

The game was played between two opposing parties, per¬ 
haps a dozen or fifteen on a side. Each lad had a stick, and 
some might have two or three. From six to ten wheels might be 
employed. When the game began, all the wheels were in the 
hands of one party, whose members rolled them swiftly, by 
overhand throws, to the opposing party, which stood forty or 
fifty yards distant. These threw their sticks at the wheels as 

322 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

they approached or passed. To merely strike and throw down 
the wheel counted nothing; but if the point or one of the prongs 
of the shaft passed through the meshes of the rawhide netting, 
and held it, the wheel was “killed,” and was not rolled back, 
but was retained by the side that killed it. The party that had 
received the wheels now rolled back all those which it failed 
to kill, and the opponents killed such of them as they could. 
The others were again rolled back. After all the wheels had 
been killed, each party started in pursuit of some of the oppos¬ 
ing party, throwing at the boys the wheels that they had killed 
and so retained. They threw them hard and tried to hit. Those 
thrown at strove to protect themselves with their robes, or to 
catch the wheels on their sticks. 

A wheel might be thrown only once, unless the boy thrown 
at was able to catch on the fly, and hold on the point of his 
stick the wheel thrown at him. If he could do this, he might 
throw it back at one of the opposite party. A hard blow could 
be dealt with one of these wheels—quite hard enough to knock 
a boy down. 

There were different methods of throwing the wheels toward 
the opposing party. If a boy threw a wheel high in the air, it 
was understood that he was trying to bring good weather. If 
he threw it in a curve, he was very likely to call out, “I am 
beckoning it [i.e., good weather] to come!” When one wheel 
was thrown, closely following another, the boys would shout 
out, “Ha! He is following his wife!” 

Hohktsim was also used in a game for men alone, in which 
from two to six players might compete. The wheel was rolled 
by a disinterested man, and the players were armed with 
throwing-sticks. A place was marked in the ground where the 
feet of the thrower should stand. The first player took his 
position there, and threw at the wheel as it rolled by him and 
then retired to give place to another, and so on until all had 
thrown, each thrower standing in the same place. 

The man who threw the wheel stood at a little distance, and 

323 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

to one side, and rolled it in front of the thrower, perhaps two 
yards from him, perhaps six or eight yards. Five points made 
the game. If the point of the thrower’s stick pierced the larger 
center mesh of the wheel—the blood (ma?)—it counted five, 
or game. If his point, however, pierced one of the four large 
circles, in the divisions of the four quadrants called okom' 
(coyote), it counted nothing, but the man was entitled to an¬ 
other throw. If it entered one of the small meshes called he'- 
tsista! ha ya, it counted one, and the man kept on throwing until 
he missed. The place where the string passes over the rim is 
called wihiokots; to catch the stick on this was to win the 
game. On this game players bet anything they might choose, as 
horses, blankets, robes, or arrows. 

Another game, ah'koinis, was played with a wheel (ahk 
oi yii ) nearly two feet in diameter, not cross-meshed with raw- 
hide, but open. The sapling that formed its circumference was 
an inch or more in diameter. This game was perhaps borrowed 
from the Sioux. It is described in Mr. Meeker’s paper 2 on Sioux 
games, under the name pain yan kapi. 

The rim of the hoop was adorned with beaver-fur, beads, 
and other ornaments. The hoop was marked at the four 
quarters successively with one notch, two, three, and four 
notches. Two sticks about four feet long, tied together with 
two four-inch strings, were used to throw at the hoop, which 
was rolled slowly by the players, who threw the two sticks held 
together in one hand in such a manner as to make the hoop 
fall on them. If the single notch rests on either stick it counts 
io for the player; if the second notch rests on one of the sticks 
it counts 20, the third notch counts 30, and the fourth 40. The 
game is 800, for which there are counters of 10’s and 100’s. 
Often it takes a long time to play the game. As always, there 
was much outside betting on it. 

This game of the old life seems essentially like the Blackfoot 

2 Bull. Free Mus. Sd. and Art, Univ. of Pa., vol. m, no. 1, p. 23, Jan., 1901. 

324 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

game itse'wah. It was not a boy’s pastime, but was played by 
men of all ages up to middle life. Different wheel games were 
apparently played in some form among all North American 
tribes. In ancient cliff-dwellings of Colorado, one or more 
of these rawhide netted hoops have been found, indicating that 
this game—like many others, civilized and savage—was played 
in ancient times. 

Ni tai' ah tsim' a kuh' urn (Going to play). The wheel was 
placed on the ground, and the first boy, holding his stick in his 
hand and standing by the wheel, jumped from it as far as he 
could. His back was now toward the wheel, and without turn¬ 
ing around he looked back over either shoulder, and threw his 
stick over his shoulder at the wheel behind him. 

None of the other throwers jumped from the wheel before 
throwing their sticks. All took their places in the tracks made 
by the boy who had jumped from where the wheel lay. Often 
no one of them all hit the wheel, but the player whose stick 
was nearest to it took the sticks of all the others. The sticks 
were left lying on the ground where they had fallen, and the 
winner picked them all up. 

Oho knit' (Knocking the ball). The shinny game was not 
originally a Cheyenne game, but was borrowed from the Sioux. 
It was played by two parties, armed with curved sticks, some¬ 
what like hockey sticks, and a flattened ball, from 2^/2 to 4 
inches in diameter, made of deerskin, often beaded or quilled, 
and stuffed with hair. At each end of a level space of ground, 
200 to 250 yards or more in length, two low mounds were 
heaped up—or sometimes poles were erected—20 or 30 yards 
apart. Sometimes, indeed, the field was as much as a quarter of 
a mile long. The object of each party was to drive the ball 
between the mounds its opponents defended. The number of 
players on each side must be equal. The ball must be driven 
between the mounds. If it passed outside of either mound, this 
counted nothing. Usually the players were afoot, but occasion- 

325 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

ally they were on horseback, which, of course, suggests the 
game of polo. Most of the players on either side stood near the 
goals, but the fastest runners stood off at either side. In the 
middle of the field stood the two leaders, and at the same time 
each tried to strike the ball with his stick, and to knock it off 
toward the fastest runner at his own side. If one of these got it, 
he usually kept it for a long time, for it was often difficult to 
overtake him. The ball might thus travel a long way over the 
prairie before it came near the goal posts, where the crowd of 
players was thick. There might be interference, one player 
getting in the way of another, or running against him, so as 
to delay him or to prevent his getting the ball. The ball might 
not be touched with the hand, nor might the hand be used in 
grasping a player. It is evident that the swiftest runners were 
the most successful players, and they were in great demand. 

No' o its inis' ta (They are hiding). The well-known game 
usually called “hands” was played constantly. The man who 
manipulated the bones was called i no 6 its an tv, i.e., one who 
is hiding (something). Each of the two parties who gambled 
against each other had two bones or small sticks, one marked— 
as by a string tied about it—and one plain. The two parties 
sat in a line or half-circle opposite each other, and between the 
two lines lay the eight, sometimes ten, counters, which must be 
gained by one side or the other before the game was won. Each 
side chose a man to guess for it; that is, one whose duty it was 
to announce in which hand the man held it who was hiding the 
bone. Certain men were considered especially expert in detect¬ 
ing the position of the marked bone, while others were almost 
equally skillful in hiding it. This skill was so well recognized 
that an effort was always made not to have two good guessers 
on the same side, the players protesting that this would not be 
fair. 

All the players commonly sang one of the many gambling 
songs, and several beat time to the song, either on the ground 
with a stick, on a parfleche, or on small hand-drums. 

326 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

When all was ready for the play, each guesser sat a little 
in front of the line of his own party, holding in his hand the 
bones that belonged to his side. Each player had already made 
his bet, usually with the man opposite him; but if a bettor 
could not wager enough property to cover the whole bet offered 
by any man, the wager might be shared by someone else; so 
that one man might be betting with two or three others. 

The guesser of one side now gave his bones to someone who 
was skillful in passing and hiding them. This man, moving his 
hands in time to the singing, and making many gestures to con¬ 
fuse his opponent, raising his hands high, bringing them down 
close to the ground, and putting them behind his back, at length 
thrust out his closed hands, holding, of course, the marked bone 
in one hand or the other, and the opposing guesser, after a 
time, chose the hand which he supposed held it. If he was suc¬ 
cessful, his party then hid their bones, and if the opposing 
guesser also chose the hand which held the marked one, the 
game began again. If, however, he failed to guess right, his 
party gave up their bones and one counter. If both guessers 
were unsuccessful, the game began again. 

After one side had secured both marked bones, the two might 
be manipulated according to the directions of the guesser on 
that side, one man or two men handling the two bones. 

The guesser used various signs to indicate which hand of 
the opponent he chose. The simplest sign was to point with the 
forefinger at the hand chosen, but there were many others, 
some of them devised to puzzle the opponent. The forefinger 
and thumb of right hand extended, all the other fingers closed, 
palm held toward opposing player, meant (where two men were 
manipulating the bones) the two outside hands, that is to say, 
the right hand of the man on the right, and the left hand of the 
man on the left. But the same gesture, with the middle finger 
also extended, meant in the middle; that is, the hands of the 
two men which were toward each other, or the inner hands of 
the two men. The first two fingers of the right hand extended 

327 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

and pointing to the left, the back of the hand being toward the 
opposing player, meant the hand in the direction opposite to 
which the guesser was pointing; one finger meaning the direc¬ 
tion in which the finger pointed, while the two fingers reversed 
the sign apparently made. If the guesser held in the hand a 
little stick, or some small object, like a small pebble or a bit 
of charcoal, this when shown—as it must be by the guesser, 
who must at once open his hands just as the holder of the 
bone did—reversed the apparent guess. 

The game was won when one side had taken all the counters. 3 
Sometimes the game lasted all night; sometimes it was finished 
almost at once. For high stakes, like a horse, it might be ar¬ 
ranged that six games, or 48 points, must be won. 

To drop the bone to the ground was to lose the game, all the 
counters being given up to the opposing party when this hap¬ 
pened. 

A variant of the hand hiding game, known as beaver game, 
is played by two persons. The object to be hidden may be held 
in the hand or may be placed on the ground on either side of 
the hider. 

Another variant is the moccasin game, played with a pair of 
moccasins on the ground before the hider. He may put the 
object to be hidden in the moccasin, or may hold it in the hand. 
There were two sticks to be hidden, each bearing a different 
mark. 

Certain signs for the four places where the sticks may be 
hidden are as follows: The forefinger, pointed toward the 
hider’s right arm, would signify that the objects were in the 
right hand and the left moccasin; pointed to the left arm it 
would signify left hand and right moccasin; the thumb and 
forefinger extended means that the objects are held in both 
hands, while all the fingers extended and pointed a little down¬ 
ward means that the objects are in both moccasins. The name 

3 Compare this with Mooney’s account of the same game among the Kiowas, 
in his Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians, p. 348. 

328 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

of this game is homo! i yuts mots an iv' (homa’, beaver; * yuts, 
I play; motsaniv’, moccasin). 

Women and girls, as well as men and boys, had their sports 
and games, which tested their strength, skill, and agility. They 
were often swift runners, good swimmers, and excellent horse¬ 
women, and skillful at ball and at throwing sticks. They were 
industrious and faithful in performing their daily tasks, at 
which they chattered and gossiped, yet they found abundant 
time for active recreation, whether in throwing the long and 
slender willow sticks, in kicking the football, in playing the 
finger game, or in gambling at the seed game. Usually girls 
and women played by themselves, yet occasionally a lad of thir¬ 
teen or fourteen might be seen with a group of girls older than 
himself, kicking the football. 

Nit' an i tai' sin iin. In winter young girls played on thick 
ice a game which suggests bowling. The two parties sat on the 
ice, perhaps ten feet apart, and in front of each, lying on its 
side, was a small cylinder of wood, four inches long and as 
thick as the finger, one of twenty or forty equally divided be¬ 
tween the. two parties. Each girl was provided with several— 
sometimes ten—small spherical stones, about an inch in diame¬ 
ter, which they rolled at the sticks in turn. When a stone from 
one girl hit the stick lying in front of the others, a mark was 
made on the ice. If the stick was not hit, the opposing side 
rolled the stone back, trying to hit the stick in front of the other 
group. Each hit counted a point, and when a certain number 
of hits had been made, the game was won, and the girls who 
had lost the game tossed over to the others the beads that had 
been wagered. 

In' ni tun is’ to (The finger game). This was played with 
the “fingers,” netuyesun' (the bone). This implement con¬ 
sisted of four of the phalanges of a deer or an antelope, in 
which holes were drilled lengthwise, and also from side to side. 

329 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

These four bones were strung lengthwise on a thread of sinew 
or a string of deerskin, and this in turn was attached to a long 
pin made of wire, or in old times a pin made from a slender 
bone. To the holes in each end of each bone were tied small 
loops of beads, and at the free end of the most distant bone, 
a larger loop. The pin was held in the right hand; the string 
attached to its hand-end swinging forward; the bones were 
thrown forward and upward, and an effort was made either to 
transfix a bone by driving the pin through the holes drilled, or 
to catch one of the beaded loops. The four bones were marked 
—beginning with the one nearest the pin—I, II, III, IIII. To 
pass the pin lengthwise through any bone counted io, 20, 30, 
or 40, according to the number of the bone pierced. To catch 
one of the beaded loops at the juncture of two bones, or the 
large loop at the end of the last one, counted but one; but to 
catch two of the beaded loops at the juncture of two bones, 
each loop being attached to a different bone, won the game. To 
catch the end of one of the bones, and the first side hole, 
counted game, provided the opposing side had not yet made a 
count; but if the other side had counted, the game began again, 
all the counts being canceled. 

To catch one of the bones through one of the transversely 
drilled holes gave the player the game. To catch any two of the 
bones lengthwise counted but two. The game might be played 
by any even number of persons, but there were two sides, the 
players sitting alternately as to sides. It is still played, chiefly 
by young people—girls and men—but it is really a girls’ game. 4 

0 assi'oph (Football). This game was played by young 
women. The ball used was eight inches in diameter, stuffed with 
antelope hair, and covered with deerskin. Three hundred slen¬ 
der sticks, twelve or fifteen inches long, were prepared for 
counters, and were placed in the center of the circle where two 
women stood to care for them. The players were even in number 
—eighteen or twenty—divided into two parties. They stood 

4 Compare Hind, Labrador Peninsula, vol. I, p. 277, London, 1863. 

330 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

alternately around the circle in a close ring. The one who began 
the game took the ball, and, balancing it on her instep, kicked 
it up a little way, caught it on the instep, kicked it again, and 
continued this as long as she could. The object of the game 
was to keep the ball on the foot or in the air—off the ground— 
as long as possible. Usually they began to kick with the right 
foot, but if that foot became tired, an expert player might kick 
the ball over and catch it on her left foot, and continue kicking 
with that foot. Some people among the Northern Cheyennes 
say that only one foot could be used (they could not change 
feet), and sometimes the players grew very tired from stand¬ 
ing for a long time on one foot. Sometimes the side which 
kicked first chose its best player, and she might perhaps keep 
the ball going until the three hundred counters were exhausted, 
and the game was won. While she was kicking the ball a girl 
might support herself by a stick four or five feet long, held in 
the left hand, or under the left armpit. If the girl dropped the 
ball, the one standing next to her, and so of the opposing party, 
took it up and began. If she missed, the one next on the left 
took it and tried. The girl who was kicking counted aloud, and 
the opposite side watched her kicks, and listened to her count. 
Among the Southern Cheyennes it was not usual to have two 
women in the center of the circle to care for the counters. 

When the girl who had been kicking finished her turn, she 
stepped up to the counters and took away as many sticks as she 
had made kicks, and put them to one side. The next one took 
her share of the sticks. Each one who kicked afterward put 
the counters that she gained with those of her side. When the 
counters in the center had been exhausted, they began to take 
from each others’ piles, until one side or the other had won all 
the counters. 

On this game the women wagered beads, earrings, bracelets, 
everything they possessed. Sometimes they had a regular feast 
before the game began. This was a winter game, played chiefly 

33i 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

by unmarried girls, though young married women often took 
part in it. 

I'whustists (Throwing ball at one another). This was a 
modification of the football game. The players agreed on the 
number of times the ball was to be kicked, perhaps 150 or 200 
times. The one who kicked the most out of that number seized 
the ball and threw it at another girl; if she was hit she picked 
up the ball and threw it at someone else. Of course, the slowest 
girl was likely to get hit. A girl who thought she was about to 
be hit by the ball usually got hold of a piece of brush or a 
forked stick, and protected herself with the branch, knocking 
the ball away, so that it should not touch her person. 

I kd' koe has in e' ya, also Boe ha sin' ists (Throwing up in 
the air). The Cheyenne seed or basket game was played with a 
shallow bowl or basket and five plum-stones, or flat pieces of 
bone or antler, mon shi mo ut'. The bowl was from two to three 
inches deep, eight inches across at the top, flattened or not on 
the bottom, and woven of grass or fiber of yucca or strips of 
red-willow twigs. It was nearly half an inch thick, and was 
strong. The five dice, which were usually plum-stones, were 
unmarked on one side, but on the other, three were marked 
alike and two bore a different mark. A common device was 

this: representing the paint pattern often used by girls 

on their faces, the cross being on the bridge of the nose, 0 the 
side marks on the cheeks, and the upper and lower ones on the 
forehead and chin respectively. The other two stones were 

sometimes marked thus: representing the foot of a 

5 The paint cross on the girl’s nose represents the morning star, and so 
indirectly Cushing is right as quoted by Culin, 24th Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 59. 

332 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

bear. Sometimes a small spherical “lucky” stone (no anV o ’, 
mixer) was thrown up with the seeds. 

The plum-stones were placed in the basket, tossed up, and 
as the basket was brought to the ground were caught in it. The 
combination of the marked sides which lay uppermost after 
the dice had fallen determined the count of the throw. 

The players sat opposite one another, and, if several were 
playing, in two rows facing each other. Each individual bet 
with the woman opposite. Each player was provided with eight 
sticks, which represented the points that she must gain or lose 
to win or lose the game. When a player had won all the sticks 
belonging to her opponent, she had won the game and the 
stake. 

There were several combinations of marks and blanks which 
counted nothing for or against the player making the throw, 
except that she lost her chance to make another throw. Others 
entitled the thrower to receive one, three, or even all eight 
sticks, and each throw that counted anything entitled the 
player to another throw. Each player on the side of the thrower, 
i.e., in the same row, won from or lost to the one opposite to 
her as the thrower won or lost. If the woman making the first 
throw cast a blank, she might make another throw and on fail¬ 
ure she passed the basket to the one sitting next her. If this one 
made a throw that counted, she had another, and another, until 
she threw a blank, when the basket passed on. When the basket 
reached the end of the line, it was handed across to the woman 
at the end of the opposite row, and in the same way traveled 
along the opposite line. 

In making the throw, the basket was raised only a little, 
and the stones tossed only a few inches high. Before they fell, 
the basket was brought smartly down to the ground, against 
which it struck with some little noise. Some of the throws are 
given below, the sides of the seeds being designated by their 
marks: 

333 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

2 pairs counted i point, or i stick. 

5 blanks counted i point, or i stick. 

The marked sides of all the seeds uppermost gave the highest 
possible count, and the game was won. 

3 blanks and 2 of a kind counted 3 sticks, or 3 points. 

3 similarly marked seeds and 2 blanks counted 3 points. 

The lucky stone had no value in the count, but it was said 
that it made the counters turn over. Any of the players might 
put in the lucky stone, and if beaten was privileged to keep it 
in the basket. If she won the round, however, one of her op¬ 
ponents might ask her to withdraw it and might put in her own 
lucky stone. 

After each eight points were won, the loser “washed” the 
bones or seeds—rubbed them between her hands—and threw; 
and then the winner washed them and threw. 

In the South the counters were usually of black walnut or of 
mulberry wood. In the South, too, the count is sometimes 10. 

The seeds might be marked according to the fancy of the 
maker; perhaps with a lizard, a bird, a horned toad, a skunk, 
buffalo tracks, or a bug. 

The women did not sing at this game, but they chattered 
and joked continually as the play was in progress. 

&' hyo es tsim' as. An athletic game in great favor among 
the women was the contest with throwing-sticks. These were 
straight, slender sticks, usually of willow, about twice as long 
as the men’s throwing-sticks—not far from six feet—but like 
those, carrying on one end a tip, usually of elk-antler or of 
buffalo-horn, although I have seen some made from the horn 
of the domestic cow. Sometimes these tips were six inches long, 
and quite heavy, but usually they were not more than three or 
four inches in length. The horn tips were drilled out to a depth 
of an inch or two, to receive the end of the throwing-stick, 
which was simply twisted into the hole. Women threw these 

334 

GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS 

long sticks by an underhand throw, the object being to make 
the stick slide a long distance over smooth ground, ice, or 
crusted snow. Many women were extremely expert, and over 
favorable ground would send the stick to an astonishing dis¬ 
tance. The motion of throwing the stick was exceedingly grace¬ 
ful, and the contests were very well worth watching. 

On this, as on most other games, the women bet quite heavily. 

The Twenty-fourth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ameri¬ 
can Ethnology contains, in Mr. Culin’s splendid monograph, a 
vast mass of information on Indian games. In the Cheyenne 
Dictionary prepared by Rev. Rodolphe Petter there is much 
detail regarding Cheyenne games. 

335 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

T HE government of the prairie Indians, while varying 
in some particulars among the different tribes, was 
democratic in form and in fact. The will of the peo¬ 
ple was the force that controlled, and the chiefs, however great 
their power and influence, seldom attempted to run counter to 
public opinion. 

CHIEFS 

Among the Cheyennes there was a governing body of chiefs, 
not all of equal authority, which decided a variety of questions 
coming before it, its decisions, if necessary, being enforced by 
power of the soldier bands. Yet this council of the chiefs, 
always endeavoring to act for the best interests of the tribe 
and striving to lead public opinion, seldom attempted to force it. 

In the Cheyenne view, the first duty of a chief—though not 
always the one first spoken of—was that he should care for 
the widows and the orphans; and the second that he should be 
a peacemaker—should act as mediator between any in the 
camp who quarreled. The dignity of a chief did not permit him 
to take part in any quarrel; he might not take personal venge¬ 
ance for an offense committed against himself; to do so would 
result in loss of influence. 

Since so much depended on his example and precept, a chief 
must be brave in war, generous in disposition, liberal in temper, 
deliberate in making up his mind, and of good judgment. A 
good chief gave his whole heart and his whole mind to the work 
of helping his people, and strove for their welfare with an 

by other rulers of 
men. Such thought for his fellows was not without its influence 

336 

earnestness and a devotion rarely equaled 

>✓/ /// 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

on the man himself; after a time the spirit of good will which 
animated him became reflected in his countenance, so that as 
he grew old such a chief often came to have a most benevolent 
and kindly expression. Yet, though simple, honest, generous, 
tender-hearted, and often merry and jolly, when occasion de¬ 
manded he could be stern, severe, and inflexible of purpose. 
Such men, once known, commanded general respect and admi¬ 
ration. They were like the conventional notion of Indians in 
nothing save in the color of the skin. True friends, delightful 
companions, wise counselors, they were men whose attitude 
toward their fellows we all might emulate. We do not commonly 
attribute to Indians a spirit of altruism, but it was seen in some 
of these old-time chiefs. 

Among the Cheyennes there were forty-four chiefs—four 
principal chiefs, and four from each of the ten bands of the 
people. The four chiefs of each band, who were in constant 
touch with their own constituents, knew and accurately re¬ 
flected their opinions. Each group was thus equally represented 
in the council of the chiefs, and presumably by men of suffi¬ 
cient intelligence and influence effectively to present its views 
to the council. The four head chiefs—though usually men of 
special influence and importance—possessed, in weighty mat¬ 
ters, little more actual authority than other members of the 
council, yet from their position, and the qualities which had 
raised them to that position, their advice and opinions usually 
received greater consideration than those of other speakers. 

Of strong influence in the government of the tribe was the 
sentiment of the soldier bands. These were the police and chief 
fighting force of the tribe, and at different times one or another 
band might possess special influence on account of its bravery, 
its success, and the self-confidence which followed this success. 
If for a series of years one of the soldier bands had been gen¬ 
erally fortunate in war, had performed feats of daring which 
reflected special credit on it, and for this or any other reason 
had come to have an exalted opinion of its own importance, it 

337 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

might at times exercise pressure on the chiefs, and induce the 
council to act in some particular way that it desired. Or, the 
chiefs, recognizing the popularity and influence of the band, 
might defer to it, ask advice of its chiefs, or might even submit 
to it the decision of weighty questions. It was thus sometimes 
possible for the council of the chiefs and one of the soldier 
bands to overrule the wishes of the majority of the tribe. Yet 
this was not likely to occur, or, if it did happen, some change 
of sentiment soon took place, and the pendulum of public 
opinion swung back again. 

At the meetings of the council of chiefs, questions of interest 
to the tribe were considered. Concerning minor matters, one of 
the principal chiefs was likely to express his opinion, and, if 
supported by another principal chief, the council assented with¬ 
out debate. Questions of greater importance, such as moving 
the camp when buffalo could not be found, of undertaking a 
tribal war, or of seeking an alliance with other tribes for the 
purpose of proceeding to war against a common enemy, were 
discussed at great length, the deliberations perhaps extending 
over several meetings. In such debates the talking was done 
chiefly by the older men—those of greatest experience—yet 
after the elders had stated their views, middle-aged men ex¬ 
pressed theirs, and even younger men might speak a few words, 
suggesting a different point of view, or giving new reasons for 
or against a certain course. 

Such councils were conducted with much form and with a 
degree of courtesy that could hardly be exceeded. Usually the 
subject of the council was known in advance and to some extent 
had been discussed. When all the chiefs were present, a few 
minutes of silence ensued, then one of the older men arose and 
introduced the subject at issue. His remarks were followed by a 
brief silence for consideration, when another old man followed 
him and the discussion continued. Sometimes there were wide 
differences of opinion among the men, yet each was listened to 
gravely and with respect, and no matter how earnest the debate 

338 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

might become, no man ever interrupted a speaker, nor did any¬ 
thing like wrangling occur. 

This has always been a characteristic of public meetings 
among Indians, and in old times such courtesy and deliberation 
were invariably practiced. So long ago as the end of the eight¬ 
eenth century Le Page du Pratz said of the Natchez: 1 

When the natives converse together, however numerous the assem¬ 
bly be, never more than one person speaks at once. If one of the com¬ 
pany has anything to say to another, he speaks so low that none of 
the rest hear him. Nobody is interrupted, even with the chiding of a 
child; and if the child be stubborn, it is removed elsewhere. In the 
council, when a point is deliberated upon and debated, they keep 
silence for a short time, and then they speak in their turns, no one 
offering to interrupt another. 

While these discussions were commonly confined to the coun¬ 
cil of the chiefs, and only a few other old men were present in 
the lodge, the meetings were in no sense secret; for in summer, 
when the weather was warm and the lodge-skins were raised, 
a considerable audience might gather and listen to what was 
said. 

When a decision had been reached, it was announced to the 
camp by the crier, who, mounting his horse, heralded the news 
as he rode about the circle, from the opening on the east, 
toward the south, then to the west, then to the north, and so 
back to the east again. After the council was concluded, the 
different chiefs talked of its proceedings with the people gen¬ 
erally, so that full publicity was given without delay to all acts 
of the governing body; whatever they did was thoroughly can¬ 
vassed through the camp, and the public feeling about it at 
once known. If by any chance this public feeling was adverse, 
and personal argument by the individual chiefs and the soldiers 
who favored it failed to convert the people to their views, the 
action taken was likely to be modified to meet the public 
opinion. 

1 Du Pratz, History of Louisiana, Book HI, p. 238, London, 1763. 

339 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

In practice, however, this did not happen. The popular pulse 
had been felt and the public sentiment well ascertained before 
the council met. The older men were always conservative and 
slow to take any action that was radical; it was seldom that a 
decision had to be reconsidered. 

The war chiefs of the Cheyennes were the chiefs of the dif¬ 
ferent soldier bands, and led these bands when any duties were 
to be performed. They were not especially leaders of war- 
parties, for any man who could enlist followers might lead a 
party to war. 

The four principal chiefs of the tribe were equal in authority, 
and the others of the forty-four chiefs were really counselors, 
whose authority as chiefs extended no further than over their 
own immediate following. However, their positions as coun¬ 
selors commanded respect, and led the people to listen to the 
advice which they gave. 

Chiefs were chosen to hold office for ten years, for it was 
thought that this period was long enough for anyone to serve. 
Yet, if, at the end of ten years, a chief had proved himself a 
good one, he might be chosen to serve a second term. The sol¬ 
dier chiefs—that is, the chiefs of the different soldier bands— 
were elected and changed at the same time. 

Of the forty-four chiefs who had held office for ten years, 
four, or sometimes more, were usually elected for a second 
term, and of these, four were likely to become the head chiefs. 
While the soldier chiefs held office for ten years, as did the 
others, still, if one did anything wrong he might be removed 
from his office, and a new chief chosen for the remainder of the 
term. A soldier chief elected for a second term became the head 
man of all the soldier chiefs. 

Any one of the four principal chiefs of the tribe might, at the 
end of the ten-year period, choose his own successor, and so 
might name his own son to follow him at the end of his ten 
years of office. If a son was chosen, he was likely to be a good 
man and the choice to be acceptable to the whole tribe. Thus 

340 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

in a sense the office of principal chief was hereditary. The son 
might decline to serve, as in the case of Bull Hump, son of Dull 
Knife, of the Northern Cheyennes. Bull Hump, though named 
by his father and the choice of the tribe, refused to take his 
father’s place, on the ground that chiefs were then (1883) no 
longer needed. If a chief had no son whom he wished to succeed 
him, he might choose another man, who in turn might select 
his son. If the son of a dead chief was a boy too young for the 
position, someone was elected to fill the father’s place, but 
when he became a man the boy might be made a chief, if he 
had proved himself fit. 

If, as often happened, a principal chief died or resigned and 
failed to nominate anyone to take his place, his successor might 
be chosen from among the forty-four head men, but was quite 
as likely to be selected from among the braves of the tribe 
who did not belong to this council. 

The choice of a chief was an important matter, and there 
was much discussion as to the best man for the place. A large 
lodge was pitched, a feast was made, and all the chiefs were 
called together to consider the man for this position—one who 
was brave, whose heart was strong as well as big—a man 
generous and wise. 

They endeavored to choose a man of even temper, liberal and 
brave; they never selected one who was quick-tempered or 
stingy. They used to say that a man of mild temper and gener¬ 
ous disposition was wise. Regard was had for a man’s judgment 
and discretion, and for the quality of his mind as respects 
justice. 

Among those qualified for the position of chief, there was no 
strife as to who should secure it, no “wire-pulling” or intrigue. 
If a man who had been chosen as chief declined to accept the 
office, he might have to be persuaded to accept, or he might 
definitively decline. In not a few cases men have refused the 
office, often on the ground that the responsibility was too great. 

34i 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

Roman Nose, 5 who was several times selected as chief, was an 
example. 

Each chief of those who exercised the right to nominate his 
successor was careful to choose a good man—one who would be 
acceptable to the chiefs and to the people. When the time came 
for the assembling of the new chiefs, it was the duty of each 
outgoing chief to fetch his successor to the first meeting. For 
this° service his successor presented the outgoing chief with a 
horse. 

In old times, when the chiefs wished to take some action, a 
council was called to consider the matter, often without notify¬ 
ing the head chief. When the council had decided on a certain 
course, the head chief was sent for, and the decision announced 
to him. If two of the principal chiefs were in the camp, both 
were sent for to attend the council. After these head chiefs had 
been told of the decision, and had considered it, they very likely 
approved the action of the council and directed that it be car¬ 
ried out; but if they thought the decision unwise, they said so, 
and gave their reasons for it, telling the council that they must 
not act as proposed. The council usually accepted this decision. 
In such a case the head chiefs thus possessed the veto power. 

Sometimes, on the other hand, the head chief gave a feast, 
called the council together, and told them that he thought it 
would be well to do some particular thing—for example, to 
move away to a certain place—and asked the guests what they 
thought of this. If, after talking the matter over, they did not 
agree with him, he usually said no more about it. Having asked 
their advice, he felt that he must abide by their decision. 

It is said that when the forty-four head men were first 
chosen, forty-four official sticks were made, to represent them. 
Each stick was about a foot long, as thick as the finger, and 
sharpened at one end. They were always carried about with 
the camp—by one of the chiefs, or, as is believed by others, in 
the bundle with the medicine arrows. When the chiefs were to 

2 Killed in 1868 at Beecher’s Island. See The Fighting Cheyennes, p. 277. 

342 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

be called together, one of the forty-four sticks was set in the 
ground before the seat of each chief, and messengers were sent 
to summon them. As each man came to the place of assembly 
and sat down, the stick before his seat was taken up and put 
back in the bundle, until, when all were present, the forty-four 
sticks had been returned. 

When one or more chiefs were to be elected to take the place 
of men who had died or resigned, as many of the forty-four 
sticks as there were vacancies were taken into the lodge where 
the council was held, and for each vacancy to be filled a stick 
was thrust into the ground in front of the place where each 
new man was to sit, to be removed when he had been called 
and had taken the seat to which he had been elected. 

Middle-aged warriors and old men attended such meetings, 
and in public speeches talked over the various men available, 
saying what they thought of each. The discussion and the ex¬ 
pressions of opinion usually showed very clearly who was the 
most popular man for the place. There was no formal balloting, 
but when the sentiment had crystallized on the one man, two 
messengers were sent to bring him to take his place among the 
chiefs, and when he came he was asked to sit in the seat of the 
man who had died or resigned. Sometimes, and especially often 
in later times, the man chosen might decline the office, and 
another man must be selected. Old men resigned from this 
council when they had passed the period of active usefulness. 
The intention of a man to abandon the office was usually known 
in advance and his successor chosen before he formally 
resigned. 

It is said that long ago if the man chosen for the position 
refused to accept it, misfortune was likely to happen to him; 
he would not live long. It was held to be a man’s duty to accept. 

At the decennial election of chiefs, ten small sticks were 
prepared to mark the years that had elapsed since the last elec¬ 
tion, and after the choice had been made, these sticks were put 

343 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

aside—some say in the bundle with the arrows, some say with 
the sacred hat. 

The two youngest of the forty-four chiefs acted as door¬ 
keepers, and also as messengers for the chiefs, and sometimes 
they held over for a second term. When the chiefs had decided 
on any course of action, the doorkeepers were sent to summon 
the two principal men of one of the soldier societies—perhaps 
of the Him' owe yuhk' is, or of the Fox Soldiers. When these 
soldier chiefs came, the chiefs told them what had been decided 
on, and directed them to inform their soldiers, which they did 
at once. The orders of the chiefs were conveyed to the men of 
the camp in this way. A little later the old crier on his horse 
rode about the camp, calling out the orders, so that all the 
women and children might become informed. 

There were certain old rules governing chiefs which have 
long passed out of use. One of these was that if a woman went 
to a chief’s lodge to borrow fire, he was expected to give her a 
horse. If a chief, riding a fresh horse, met on the prairie a 
woman whose horse had become exhausted, the chief should 
dismount and give to the woman his horse to ride into camp. 

Long ago it was unusual for anyone to go to the lodge of one 
of the principal chiefs to borrow anything. If an individual 
asked the chief to lend him something, the chief at once pre¬ 
sented the article to the borrower, so it came about that people 
seldom tried to borrow anything from a chief. 

A chief, after a man had shaken hands with him, was sup¬ 
posed not to become angry with that person under any circum¬ 
stances. The man might quarrel with, or abuse, or even whip, 
the chief, and he would not resist. But this might happen only 
four times; the fifth time the chief was ill-treated he was free 
to resent the injury. 

Nothing definite is known about the origin of the system of 
selecting chiefs, but some short tales are told about it. One of 
these attributes the system to the culture hero Motsiiuiv, and 

344 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

comes from Tangle Hair, an old man whose mind was well 
stored with legendary lore. In substance it is as follows: 

The man who had brought the buffalo said, “Now you must make 
chiefs.” He took four sticks and stuck them in the ground, one at the 
door, one at the back, and one on each side, so that there was a stick 
toward each of the four cardinal points. Between each pair of these 
first sticks, ten others were set in the ground, making in all forty- 
four. The people were called in, and from the four bands of soldiers 
forty-four chiefs were chosen. Then he said to the people, “Now, the 
smartest men among you must look about over the earth and examine 
the plants and herbs that grow, and you will find medicine with 
which to doctor the sick, and you can cure them. Now you have 
buffalo, and you must kill them to eat, and to make robes for your 
beds, and clothing. From their hides you can make everything that 
you need to wear. When you go out to hunt, you will find many other 
animals, deer, elk, and smaller creatures, and you can use their skins 
also to make clothing.” 

Two other stories are more modern, dating back only to the 
time of the Cheyennes’ active wars with the Hohe, or Assini- 
boines. The first is this: 

Before the Cheyennes saw any white people, or had any guns, the 
Assiniboines came to war against their camp, and, as they already 
had guns, they used to kill many Cheyennes, who had only bows and 
arrows, and to take many prisoners—women and children. 

In one fight the Assiniboines captured a handsome young Chey¬ 
enne girl. The man who captured her was a principal chief of the 
Assiniboines. He already had a wife, but he took this girl home, and 
had her also for his wife. His first wife used to abuse the girl, and 
was always quarreling with her, and at last the chief who had cap¬ 
tured her said to the girl: 

“I am tired of this. I will have something made up for you to eat, 
and some moccasins made for you, and you will take your moccasins 
and what I give you to eat, and you will start off from here in the 
night, and go home to your people.” 

While she was in the Assiniboine village, this chief used to make 

345 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

feasts, and call to them forty-four men, all chiefs and head men of 
the tribe. He had a fine large pipe, and they used to smoke this pipe. 

The girl went away to her home as the Assiniboine chief had 
ordered. When at last she got to her own village, she had been gone 
a year or more. After she had been at home a little while she said to 
her father, “I want you to kill forty-four buffalo, and bring the hides 
to me. I want also forty-four pipes.” 

Her father did as she had asked, killing for her the forty-four 
buffalo, and bringing in the hides, and also getting her the pipes for 
which she asked. 

She had all the hides dressed, and ornamented the robes and the 
pipestems with porcupine quills, just as the Assiniboine robes and 
pipes had been ornamented. After they were finished, she asked her 
father to call to his lodge all the principal men of the Cheyenne 
camp. After they had gathered, she herself selected forty-four men, 
to each of whom she gave a pipe, and about each one she put a robe, 
and told them that this was the number of head men in the tribe with 
which she had been living, and this was the way they were marked, 
and that these forty-four men, who were now the heads of the tribe, 
must assemble whenever anything was to be done, and must hold 
councils and make laws for the tribe. So this became a custom in the 
Cheyenne tribe, and has been followed ever since. Whenever one of 
these men was killed, or died, some one was chosen to replace him; 
so that until recently the number was always forty-four. All the men 
chosen must be good men, brave, wise, and generous. 

This happened a long time ago, before the Cheyennes crossed the 
Missouri River. The last time they did it was in 1874. Before this 
woman made that law the Cheyennes always had only one chief. 

Another version is more detailed, and is made more credible 
by its supposed connection with a well-known man who was 
killed about the middle of the last century, and whom people 
living recently still remembered. It is as follows: 

The Assiniboines captured a Cheyenne married woman. Her hus¬ 
band’s name was Red Painted Robe. Her name was White Buffalo 
Woman. She was the last woman that the Assiniboines ever captured. 

While the Assiniboines were taking her back with them, she gave 

346 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

birth to a child. White Buffalo Woman was very handsome. When 
she reached the Assiniboine camp she was taken into the lodge of the 
man who had captured her, and put on the north side of the lodge. 
This man had a handsome young wife. 

After some days the wife cut some parfleche soles and moccasin 
pieces, and gave them with some sinew to the Cheyenne woman, 
saying to her, “Make yourself some moccasins, and make them 
strong.” While White Buffalo Woman was doing this, the wife made 
a large parfleche sack, and put in it dried meat and back fat. When 
the moccasins were finished, she put them in it also, and in one of 
the moccasins she put some parfleche, some sinew, and an awl. 

When she had done this, she said to the Cheyenne woman, “When 
your moccasins wear out, make others for yourself with these things.” 
“Take this rope too,” she added, and she put in the sack a line of 
buffalo-hide. 

After all was ready, the Assiniboine woman put the sack behind 
her own bed, so that no one should suppose that it belonged to the 
captive and ask questions about it. After a few days she said to the 
Cheyenne woman: “Tonight we are going to have a big dance, and 
my husband is going to it. I wish you to go to your home. I will go a 
little way with you and help you. You know the trail you came over, 
but you must not follow that trail, for war-parties are going back 
and forth on it all the time, and you may meet one. When you are 
traveling, therefore, keep to one side of this trail, near enough to it 
so that you will not be lost, but far enough away so as not to be 
seen. Now, you know that you must travel through some heavy 
timber, so at night when you stop to sleep, find some leaning tree 
that has partly fallen down, climb up into it, and sleep in the forks, 
for there are many bears in the country that you must pass through. 
Take also this root-digger, and at night when you stop, always put 
it on the ground with the sharp end pointed in the direction you are 
going, so that in the morning, even though the sun may not be shin¬ 
ing, you will always know which way to proceed. If my people follow 
you to try to overtake you, you must remember that it is the medicine 
of the Assiniboines to follow an escaping person for one day only. 
If they do not overtake him in one day, they return. There is now 
only one war-party out; if you see them coming toward you, and 

347 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

they pass you, you may then take the regular trail and go on to your 
home.” The Assiniboine woman gave her one of those axes with a 
round hole in the back and a short handle . 3 

That night the two women left the camp; and the Cheyenne 
woman started on her way, carrying her boy on her back. She did as 
her friend had told her, and traveled onward for many days. 

She was always watching, and one day she saw people coming 
along the trail toward her. She lay down in the grass, and remained 
there for a long time, and when she looked again the people had 
passed her, and were becoming smaller in the distance. Then she 
took the trail boldly, and followed it back to the Missouri River. It 
was in the spring and the ice was about ready to break up, but where 
the Assiniboines had crossed they had laid poles on the ice, making a 
sort of bridge, and she crossed there. 

Before this she had eaten all her food and was growing thin and 
weak, but from time to time as she came to old carcasses of bulls 
lying on the prairie, she cut out pieces of the hides and gnawed on 
them. At last she came into the Cheyenne camp on the Little Mis¬ 
souri River. When this woman came back to the Cheyennes she told 
them how the Assiniboines used to make medicine to surround the 
buffalo, and also about how they chose their chiefs. 

Her son, whom she brought with her on her back, they called 
Tsi nim' o —Tobacco. He became a great Cheyenne chief. He 
was killed in 1846 by a soldier or a teamster on the Arkansas, 
below where Garden City, Kansas, now is. The troops had had 
a little fight with the Comanches near where Fort Lamed was 
built later (in 1859) at the mouth of Pawnee Fork. Tobacco 
was crossing the Arkansas near the soldier camp. The sentry 
challenged him, but as Tobacco knew no English, he did not 
halt nor speak, and the soldier fired and killed him. The place 
is still known to the Cheyennes as “Where Tobacco Was 
Killed.” When killed he was an old man between sixty and 
seventy years, and so may have been born 1780-1790. 

3 A “T. Gray” axe, so stamped in the metal—one of the early axes used in 
the western Indian trade. 

348 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 
OFFENSES AGAINST TRIBE FELLOWS 

Crime as understood by civilized people scarcely existed in 
the Cheyenne camp. Such a thing as theft was unknown. Some¬ 
times it might occur that an individual rode, without permis¬ 
sion, horses belonging to someone else. This was seldom done, 
but occasionally a man used the property of another, and so 
persistently as to cause a quarrel between himself and the 
owner. Such a quarrel once resulted in the death, at the hands 
of the owner, of the man who used the horses. On another 
occasion the owner of the horses, after fair warning, knocked 
the trespasser down with a club, and gave him a thorough beat¬ 
ing, which ended the matter. 

If a dispute serious enough to threaten real trouble took 
place between important men, the matter was talked about in 
the camp and, coming to the ears of the head men and chiefs, 
they discussed it, and perhaps called a council and summoned 
these men before it in order that their difficulty might be settled 
quietly. To such a council the men sent for always came. Each 
stated his case, and the council decided the question on its 
merits. Very likely they decreed that one of the men should 
pay something to the other. The council’s decisions were 
usually fair and just, and were accepted by the disputants, but 
occasionally some headstrong man might refuse to accept the 
decision, and the trouble continued until a quarrel arose, and 
perhaps one of the men was killed. If by accident a man killed 
anyone in the camp—man, woman, or child—the matter came 
before the council, which decided how much he should pay to 
satisfy the relatives of the dead. 

Public opinion was the law of the camp, and few were bold 
enough and reckless enough to fly in the face of it. Conformity 
to the rules of conduct established by custom and enforced 
by the chiefs was insisted on, and infractions were punished 
with a severity measured by the injury done, or likely to be 
done, to the community by violating these laws. As is else- 

349 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

where said, offenders often were severely whipped by the sol¬ 
diers, or their property might be destroyed, their lodge-poles 
broken, or their horses killed. 

On the whole, however, infringement of the rights of others 
was unusual. Once in a generation, perhaps, a man killed an¬ 
other in a quarrel, or in a drunken row, or in self-defense. The 
causes of such occurrences were often alcohol or fights about 
women. Sometimes one murder led to others. 

The death of Walking Coyote in 1855 and the events con¬ 
nected with it show something of how quarrels, fights, and 
killings occasionally took place in the Cheyenne camp. 

In the year 1854, White Horse, then chief of the Fox Sol¬ 
diers, stole the wife of Walking Coyote, who was very fond of 
her and brooded much over the trouble. He sent word to White 
Horse to send back the woman, saying that if he did not do so 
he would kill him. No attention was paid to the message, and 
after a time Walking Coyote went to Yellow Wolf, who had 
adopted him, and said: “Father, as you know, White Horse 
has stolen my woman and I have sent word to him many times 
to send her back, but he does not do so. Now I intend to kill 
him, and I ask you not to interfere with my trouble, not to ask 
me to refrain from killing this man.” 

Walking Coyote knew that Yellow Wolf loved him better 
than he did any of his own sons and daughters, and he sus¬ 
pected that Yellow Wolf might ask him not to take revenge 
on White Horse, and if Yellow Wolf asked this, Walking 
Coyote felt he must obey him. 

One day in the summer of 1854 Walking Coyote with War 
Bonnet rode up to St. Vrain’s Fort (on the South Fork of Platte 
River in Colorado) from their camp twenty miles below. White 
Horse was living in a camp of Cheyennes there. Walking 
Coyote rode into the fort and saw White Horse and his wife— 
not the woman who had been stolen—sitting on a bench in the 
hall of the fort. When the two saw Walking Coyote, they arose 
and walked toward the hands’ messroom, and Walking Coyote 

350 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

jumped off his horse and shot White Horse with his gun, the 
ball passing through the upper part of the chest and killing 
him at once. Then Walking Coyote and War Bonnet led their 
horses outside the gate of the fort, and sat down there, and 
Walking Coyote said, “If anyone has anything to say to me, 
I am here.” 

After they had sat there for a short time, Little Wolf, a 
cousin of Yellow Wolf, came out and said to Walking Coyote, 
“This is all over with; you should now go back to your camp.” 
The two men mounted and rode to camp. 

Shortly after this the woman returned to Walking Coyote’s 
lodge. After this killing, Winnebago ( Nahk' to win) renewed 
the arrows because of the killing. A little later he stole from 
Walking Coyote the woman that White Horse had stolen and 
went up north with her. 

Walking Coyote sent word to him, saying, “I am not going 
to kill another man for this woman, but I shall take your wife, 
Spirit Woman” ( Asi'moni ). Before Nahktowun returned 
from the North, Walking Coyote went to Nahktowun’s lodge, 
and, entering, took Spirit Woman by the arm and said, “Come 
along now!” She went with him, for she feared him. 

When Nahktowun returned from the North and found what 
had happened, he was angry, so that night he took his gun, 
went to the lodge of Walking Coyote, looked in at the door, 
saw him sitting on his bed, where he was resting after returning 
from the buffalo hunt, and putting the muzzle of his gun 
through the door he shot Walking Coyote, killing him. 

Next morning he went again to Walking Coyote’s lodge, took 
Asimoni, and made her go back to his lodge. 

After the killing of Walking Coyote the arrows were re¬ 
newed, perhaps by Red Moon. 

One day, eight years later, in the spring of 1863, Nahktowun 
was sitting behind his lodge filing arrowpoints, which he had 
fastened into a cottonwood stick to hold them. While he was 
doing this Kutenim came up and began to discuss with him 

35i 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

the question of a horse, the ownership of which had been in 
dispute between the two. Kutenim was a distant relative of 
White Horse. As Nahktowun was working away, Kutenim be¬ 
came more angry at him and abused him, and finally Nahkto¬ 
wun jumped to his feet and raising the stick which he had 
been using to file his arrowpoints, struck Kutenim on the head 
with it and knocked him down. Kutenim jumped up and ran 
to his lodge, which was near by, to get his rifle, while Nahkto¬ 
wun strung his bow and took a handful of arrows from his 
quiver. Presently Kutenim ran out of his lodge and fired at 
Nahktowun, and the ball passed close to his head. Nahktowun 
drew his bow and shot Kutenim in the left breast. Kutenim 
dropped his gun, and drawing his butcher knife, rushed at 
Nahktowun, who ran away, but Kutenim overtook him and 
slashed him on the arm, and then fell dead. 

The men round about, seeing what had happened, did not go 
near the two. Only old women and old men ran up to them. 

The Bowstring Soldiers, who then had charge of the camp, 
wanted to punish Nahktowun for killing Kutenim by whipping 
him. They consulted the chiefs, who advised them not to notice 
the affair at all, and nothing was done to Nahktowun. 

The arrows were renewed not long afterward. 

In the summer of 1864 Nahktowun was living with the Ara- 
pahoes. He had an Arapaho woman, and some people began to 
talk as if Rising Fire, Ho ist o'ha a (Smoke Rising), were try¬ 
ing to steal the woman. This made Rising Fire unhappy, and 
the more he thought of it the worse he felt, and the angrier he 
became toward Nahktowun. Finally he said to some of his 
friends, “I shall have to kill Nahktowun; he killed my cousin 
and now he is talking about me.” 

His friends replied: “You ought to do so, because if you do 
not kill him, he will kill you. He has already killed two men and 
is an outlaw, and if he feels like it he may cut your throat or 
shoot you.” 

Not long after this, Nahktowun, who was a Dog Soldier, was 

352 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

invited by one of the Dog Soldiers to come over and eat at his 
lodge. He therefore moved over from the Arapaho camp near 
Fort Lamed on the Arkansas and camped with the Cheyennes 
who were on the Saline. On the day of the feast he started, with 
Little Robe and Good Bear, to walk to the lodge of the host. 
On their way they passed the lodge of Rising Fire, who 
was sitting inside looking out the door, and as they passed 
he shot Nahktowun with a gun and broke his spine. When 
Nahktowun fell, Little Robe and Good Bear stepped to one 
side, and Little Robe called out to Rising Fire, “Well, you have 
begun your work; now come out and finish it.” 

Rising Fire took an old brass-mounted horse pistol, walked 
over to where Nahktowun lay, and blew out his brains. Meh- 
him' ik (Eagle’s Head) renewed the arrows 4 on the Solomon. 

While certain customs and rules prevailed, there was no 
form of law as we understand it. There was no such thing as a 
legal death penalty. If a man killed a tribe fellow, he was often 
obliged to flee, at least for a time, for he was likely to be killed 

4 The statement has often been made that the renewing of the medicine 
arrows was an annual ceremony, something that took place as a part of the 
religious ceremonial of the Cheyenne tribe. It was not an annual ceremony, nor 
in any sense regular. It was not like the Medicine Lodge in some tribes, nor 
like the Green Com Dance in others. 

The arrows are renewed whenever it is necessary, that is to say, whenever 
anyone makes a vow to renew them. This vow may be made merely as a 
matter of sacrifice, or it may be made for the general purification of the tribe 
after the killing of one of its members by a fellow tribesman, or after suicide 
by a male member of the tribe, or in the case of an accidental shooting within 
the tribe, whether the victim was a man or a woman. They were not renewed 
where women hung themselves, as they sometimes did when disappointed in 
love affairs, nor in any case of suicide where there was no spilling of blood. 
It was necessary to renew the arrows—in the case of death within the tribe— 
only where blood had been shed. This blood, as has been repeated, appears on 
the arrows, when they are opened and looked at, not only on the points, but 
also on the shafts and sometimes on the feathers. The arrows might be renewed 
when a man had shot himself, attempting to commit suicide, but had afterward 
recovered. 

The pledge to renew the arrows might not be made by the man who did 
the killing—who spilled the blood—but must be made by another. Moreover, 
as elsewhere stated, the renewing of the arrows, while it cleansed the arrows 
and purified the tribe, did not expiate the guilt of the man who spilled the 
blood. 

353 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

by some near relative of the dead man. If he saved himself by 
flight, the council considered the case, and the chief called in 
the relatives of the dead man and from them learned how much 
it would take to satisfy them for their loss. The relatives of the 
slayer were then called together and the penalty stated to them. 
When they had paid over this fine to the dead man’s relatives, 
the slayer might return to the camp. Whether the matter was 
thus settled or not, the man who had done the killing was 
ostracized by his fellows, temporarily expelled from camp, and 
lost all standing in the tribe, which he never recovered. He was 
obliged for a time to camp away from the main tribe, and often 
he went away from their camp and spent a year or more with 
some other tribe. A common refuge for Cheyennes was the 
Arapaho camp, where no guilt attached to them and they were 
regarded as being as good as anyone else. Lapse of time might 
cause partial forgetfulness of the event by the people at large, 
but this forgetfulness never extended to the relatives of the 
man who had been killed. Their anger flamed hot long after all 
others in the camp had measurably forgotten the deed and in a 
sense had condoned it. Nevertheless, the slayer of a tribesman, 
or indeed of anyone belonging in the camp, even though he 
might be a member of another tribe, remained all his life a 
marked man. 

The slayer of his fellow might not eat in the same lodge with 
other people, nor from their dishes, nor might he drink out of 
their cups. He had a special dish, a cup of his own, and if by 
any chance he drank from a cup not his own, the cup was 
often thrown away; if not, it was purified as stated below. No 
one would smoke with him. He might not receive the pipe as it 
was passed from hand to hand, but carried his own pipe and 
tobacco. If unmarried, he probably never took a wife, for no 
woman would consent to live with him. 

If anyone had unwittingly eaten or drunk from the dish or 
cup that an outlaw had used, and discovered it, he performed 
a ceremony to purify the utensil, rubbing his right hand on the 

354 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

ground and then over the dish, and repeating the motions with 
left and right hand again until the dish had been rubbed over 
four times. The same ceremony was performed in case a man 
smoked a pipe that an outlaw had used. The stem was held 
down to the ground, bowl up, the hands rubbed on the earth 
and then passed over the stem. 

It was said that his pipe did not taste or smell as it should, 
that he was not a fit person to smoke with. The word okkliwus, 
meaning “one who has killed another,” carried the idea of 
decay, putrefaction, rotting. 

If people were talking and the murderer came up to join in 
the conversation, someone might tell him to be silent, that he 
should not speak. It was supposed that such a man suffered an 
inward decay, and would ultimately die and blow away. He 
was supposed to smell bad, either from this decay or from the 
bad dreams and thoughts that he must suffer. It was believed 
by some that from time to time he would vomit portions of his 
own dead and decaying flesh. A part of this old belief was that 
a man who had done this could never get close to the buffalo, 
because the buffalo would smell this dead or decaying flesh and 
would run away. 

An outlaw appears actually to have lost his membership in 
the tribe, and the fact that he was not allowed to camp with it 
seems to have been a real expulsion. The man was “thrown 
away.” True, after the gravity of the offense had been partly 
forgotten with the lapse of time, he might come back to the 
tribe, but could never recover his old standing. Not only was 
the man himself hopelessly disgraced, but his whole family lost 
caste. A young man or woman wishing to marry a daughter or 
a son of an outlaw was felt to have more or less disgraced his 
own family. It made no difference how prominent the man 
might have been nor how good his family, the commission of 
the act of bloodshed cast a stigma over his family and his rela¬ 
tions shared in the disgrace. The matter was not only talked 
about and reprobated at the time, but often the blight remained 

355 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

on the children of the outlaw long after he was dead, and in 
any quarrel or dispute with other members of the tribe the 
disgrace was likely to be mentioned and thrown in the face of a 
child or relation, even when he or she was fifty or sixty years 
of age. 

The killing of one man by another in a private quarrel was 
extremely rare, but there have been cases where men most 
eminent in the tribe did this and thereby at once lost all credit 
and influence. Instances of this are the cases of Porcupine Bear, 
—the Lame Shawnee—of Gentle Horse, and, last of all, of 
Old Little Wolf, the greatest of modern Cheyennes. Porcupine 
Bear, when he killed Little Creek, was chief of the Dog Sol¬ 
diers; Gentle Horse was a brave of great influence; and Little 
Wolf, when he killed Starving Elk, was the fighting chief of 
the tribe. These men by their acts separated themselves from 
their offices, and became outcasts. 

It was not solely the killing of a blood member of the Chey¬ 
enne tribe that was regarded as so heinous an offense; the same 
feeling existed if the man killed had been adopted into the 
tribe. There were many men in the camp, by birth Sioux, Ara- 
paho, Ponca, or others, who had married Cheyenne women and 
had Cheyenne children, and who were regarded as Cheyennes. 
If one of these was killed, the murderer became an outlaw. 
Such cases were Nahktowun, the Arapaho who killed Walking 
Coyote, a Ponca; and Gentle Horse, who killed his brother-in- 
law, a Sioux. The two men killed had married among the Chey¬ 
ennes and been adopted into the tribe, hence their slayers be¬ 
came outlaws and were treated as such. 

The fact that they were outlaws justified the chiefs of the 
Cheyennes in not allowing Porcupine Bear and his party to 
count the first coup in the fight with the Kiowas and Coman- 
ches in 1838. At the time they were regarded as not being mem¬ 
bers of the tribe, and the coup was no more to be allowed to 
them as Cheyennes, than it would have been allowed to the 
member of any foreign tribe as a Cheyenne. 

356 

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT 

Those who committed these acts were often men of great 
bravery, whose success in war and whose standing in the tribe 
had made them somewhat arrogant and impatient of those who 
did not do as they had ordered. Such cases were those of Gentle 
Horse and of Little Wolf. Other men committed murder in 
revenge. When the crime was committed by a common man 
in the heat of temper, he had abundant leisure for repentance, 
and was often in a constant state of nervousness and alarm, 
fearing that he might be killed by a relative of the man he had 
slain. 

An illustration is the case of Nahktowun who, after he had 
killed Walking Coyote, as before stated, fled to the Arapahoes 
and lived with them for some years. On one occasion, with his 
wife, he went out to kill a buffalo, and while in a stream valley, 
saw some buffalo approaching. He hastened to intercept them 
as they came down to water, and finally, to avoid observation, 
was obliged to get down very low and to creep along the 
ground. His wife followed close behind him. She happened to 
look to one side and saw, over a little ridge and close to them, 
the humps of some buffalo they had not seen, which had come 
up another way. To call Nahktowun’s attention to these, she 
reached forward and touched him with a ramrod which she held 
in her hand. Nahktowun sprang to his feet with a scream, and 
fell backward off the bank. He said afterward that while he 
was approaching the buffalo, he kept thinking of how he had 
killed Walking Coyote and that someone was likely to shoot 
him, and he was very nervous and anxious. The unexpected 
touch, while in this mental condition, startled him so that he 
lost all self-control. 

Small matters of dispute were settled privately, either by the 
parties themselves, or by their relatives. The council seldom 
occupied itself with private quarrels, unless they had a bearing 
on the general welfare. If, however, a man was worried about 
some small dispute, he might carry the matter to the chiefs, 
or to two or three of them, and ask their advice. He invited 

357 

THE CHEYENNE INDIANS 

them to eat with him, stated his case, and asked their opinions 
as to what he should do. 

It will be seen, therefore, that in the government of the tribe 
there was no tribal machinery for the punishment of crimes 
against individuals. The soldiers interfered to prevent or punish 
acts by individuals which were against the general welfare— 
which seemed to threaten the tribe as a whole; but a harmful 
act against a person was punished, if at all, by the injured indi¬ 
vidual or by members of his family. 

The references to the killing of one tribesman by another 
must not lead to the inference that such occurrences happened 
often; indeed, they were most unusual. The first killing referred 
to—that by Porcupine Bear—took place in 1836-1837; and 
the last one—by Little Wolf—in 1879. In other words, there 
were only five or six such cases in more than forty years. 

358
