The Odd-Fellow's Improved Manual (Aaron B. Grosh, 1868)
=======================================================
History, defence, principles and government of the Independent Order of Odd Fellows. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1871 edition.

5

LIBRARY

1

1

4

OP  THE

1

j

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

J

i

4

*

GIFT  OF

4

i

MRS.  MARY  WOLFSOHN

4


IN   MEMORY  OP

I


HENRY  WOLFSOHN

|j



\  CE

gfci^j  ^  ^  ^r  ^  '**  ^  Ji*^i  ^^«fc^^^^^^J

tf¥  A

THE
I  UNIVERSITY  )


Engi'  fiui  Printed,  by  J  !>!

And  Hath  made  of  one  tlood  all  nations  of  men.  for  to  dwell-  cm

T  IK

Flf  3  LA  B  E  16PH  S  ^

THE

ODD-FELLOW'S

IMPROVED  MANUAL:

4

CONTAINING

THE   HISTORY,  DEFENCE,  PRINCIPLES,  AND   GOVERNMENT

OF  THE  ORDER;  THE  INSTRUCTIONS  OF  EACH  DEGREE,

AND  DUTIES  OF  EVERY  STATION  AND  OFFICE

IN

ODD-FELLOWSHIP;

DIRECTIONS  AND  FORMS  FOR  LAYING  CORNER-STONES,  DEDICATING

CEMETERIES,  HALLS,  ETC.,  MARSHALLING  PROCESSIONS,  ETC.;

ALSO,  ODES,  WITH  MUSIC,  FOR  VARIOUS  OCCASIONS,  AND

THE  MOST  NEEDED  BUSINESS  FORMS.

EMBELLISHED  WITH  A  PORTRAIT  OF  GRAND  SECRETARY  JAS.  L.  RIDGELY,
AND  ENGRAVINGS  OF  THE  EMBLEMS,  ETC.

or  Tnt1  "


BY

.  A.  B.  GHOSH,

P.  G.  AND  P.  C.  P.  OF  THE  R.  W.  GRAND  LODGE  AND  R.  W.  GRAND  ENCAMPMENT
OF  PENNSYLVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA:

THEODORE   BLISS   &  CO.

1871.

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1868,  by
THEODORE    BLISS  &  CO.,

in  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the
Eastern  District  of  Pennsylvania.

PRINTED  BY   SHERMAN   &  CO.

ENDORSEMENT  OF  THE  MANUAL,

By  members  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.  in  1852.

THE  undersigned  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United
States  at  its  Annual  Session,  1852,  hereby  recommend  to  the
brethren  at  large,  the  Manual  of  Odd-Fellowship  of  Bro.  P.  G.  A.
B.  Grosh,  as  a  complete  and  faithful  history  of  the  Principles,  In-
structions, Work,  and  Organization  of  the  Order.  It  is  full  and
accurate  in  its  details,  harmonious  in  conception  and  execution,
and  its  instructions  may  be  confidently  relied  upon  as  correct.  It
is  a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  brother  desirous  of
having  an  intelligent  comprehension  of  Odd-Fellowship.

Signed  by  67  R  W.  Grand  Representatives  including  Past  Grand
Sire  Thomas  Wildey.  Similar  endorsements  were  given  by  various
Grand  and  Past  Grand  Masters,  Grand  Scribes  and  Grand  Secre-
taries, &c.,  then  and  since.

ENDORSEMENTS  IN  1867.

From  the  correspondence  in  relation  to  the  revision  of  the  work
—  THE  IMPROVED  MANUAL  —  we  select  the  following,  merely  to  show
that  the  original  work  had  not  been  superseded  in  16  years  by  any
later  production.

Bro.  N.  C.  Nason,  R.  W.  G.  Scribe  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of
Illinois,  and  Editor  of  the  (Odd-Fellow's)  "Memento,"  published
in  Peoria,  wrote  on  May  27th,  1867:

"I  am  gratified  to  know  that  you  are  engaged  on  a  revision  of
the  Manual.  In  common  with  the  brethren  generally  who  are
familiar  with  the  work,  I  have  always  regarded  it  as  by  far  the  best
bo:Jc  on  Odd- Fellowship  ever  published;  and,  when  revised,  I  doubt
not  it  will  be  even  better  than  before."

iii

iv  ENDORSEMENT   OF   THE   MANUAL.

Under  date  of  "July  27th,  1867,"  he  further  remarks:

"I  have  always  considered  the  work  so  nearly  perfect,  that  it  is
not  likely  that  I  can  suggest  any  improvements ;  nevertheless  I  will
take  time,  as  soon  as  I  can,  to  give  it  a  thorough  and  critical  read-
ing."

Rev.  Bro.  W.  J.  Chaplin,  Editor  of  the  (Odd-Fellow's)  "Olive
Wreath,"  Chicago,  111.,  wrote  in  May,  1867:

"In  relation  to  the  aid  you  speak  of  in  revising  your  Manial,  I
will  say  that  I  think  it  almost  perfect  as  it  now  is.  I  regard  it  a*  by
far  the  best  book  in  the  market,  and  I  so  tell  all  Odd-Fellows.  If  you
can  make  it  better,  I  shall  say  AMEN."

Under  date  of  "July  29th,  1867,"  he  again  writes:

"  As  it  now  is,  it  is  worth  all  other  books  combined,  which  have  been
written  in  exposition  of  Odd-Fellowship.  But.  if  it  can  be  improved,  I
shall  be  pleased  to  bear  witness  to  the  superior  merits  of  the  new
edition."

Bro.  Joseph  B.  Escavaille,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Maryland,  wrote  under  date:

"Baltimore,  July  25,  1867.

"  I  have  always  looked  upon  your  Manual  as  the  best  work  of  the
kind  published  upon  the  subject-matter  of  Odd- Fellows  hip  ;  and  I  would
not  like  to  undertake  to  improve  it,  with  any  suggestions  of  my

own It  would  afford  me  much  pleasure,  however,  to  render

you  any  assistance  in  my  power,  or  furnish  you  with  any  informa-
tion at  my  command,  in  the  contemplated  revision  of  your  Manual."

Bro.  J.  W.  Bradford,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Texas,  says,  June,  1868:

"  I  am  free  to  say  it  is  far  the  best  book  that  I  have  seen."

Bro.  W.  C.  Earl,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Ohio,  says,  June  24,  1868:

"  I  shall  take  pleasure  in  commending  the  Manual  to  all  who  are
interested  in  the  literature  of  our  Order."

We  omit,  for  want  of  space,  many  similar  kind  notices  and  offers
from  valued  brethren,  and  all  the  numerous  notices  of  our  Odd-
Fellow  periodicals  to  the  same  purport,  on  learning  the  Author's
intention  to  thoroughly  revise  the  Manual.

PREFACE

TO  THE  "IMPROVED  MANUAL  "  — 18C8.

THE  Manual  submitted  to  the  brotherhood  sixteen  years
ago  has  met  with  approval  and  success  far  beyond  my
most  sanguine  hopes.  Most  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  United  States,  at  its  next  session,  and  (then  and
since)  numerous  most  eminent  brethren,  including  the
Grand  Scribes  and  Grand  Secretaries  of  our  State  Grand
Bodies  generally,  commended  it  to  all  who  desired  full
and  correct  knowledge  of  the  principles  and  usages  of
Odd-Fellowship.  For  these  numerous  voluntary  com-
mendations I  was  and  am  very  grateful.

And  now,  with  these  sixteen  years  of  added  experience,
aided  by  some  of  our  ablest  brethren,  I  have  carefully  con-
formed the  Manual  to  the  present  condition,  usages  and
wants  of  the  Order.  To  secure  all  possible  aid  and  in-
formation for  this  revision,  in  May,  1867,  I  addressed
every  Grand  Scribe  and  Grand  Secretary  of  the  State
Grand  Lodges  and  Encampments,  beside  other  distin-
guished brethren  —  over  fifty,  in  all  —  and  solicited  copies
of  constitutions  of  their  Grand  and  Subordinate  bodies,
and  requested  their  individual  corrections  and  advice.
Every  one  kindly  sent  documents,  and  many  added  judi-
cious comments  and  advice.  A  few  friends  (among  whom
I  must  specially  name  Grand  Secretary  Ridgely,  of  the
G.  L.  U.  S.)  revised  the  book,  noted  valuable  corrections
and  remarks  on  its  margins,  and  sent  me  these  precious
tokens  of  their  goodwill.  I  have  most  gratefully  profited
by  these  numerous  documents,  criticisms  and  annotations
1*  v

VI  PREFACE

The  brief  historical  sketch  of  the  Order  has  been  en-
tirely rewritten,  and  brought  up  to  the  present  year,  and
the  biographic  sketch  of  Father  Wildey  added.  The  lan-
guage of  the  Emblems  (so  various  as  to  be  sometimes  in-
harmonious, being  derived  from  different  authorities)  I
have  simplified,  and  harmonized  with  the  lessons  of  each
degree  to  \\hich  they  belong  —  retaining  every  explana-
tion heretofore  most  approved.  And  to  each  degree  I
have  assigned  its  special  emblem  —  the  PECULIAR  emblem
of  that  degree  —  being  thereto  advised  by  many  eminent
and  experienced  brethren.  To  arrange  the  emblems  con-
sistently— to  give  expressive  unity,  directness,  and  ful-
ness to  them  —  cost  me  more  thought,  anxiety,  and  re-
writing, than  all  other  portions  of  the  work.  I  am  happy,
therefore,  in  having  won  the  praises  of  P.  G.  Master  Fred.
D.  Stuart,  of  this  city,  and  of  P.  G.  Sire  J.  B.  Nicholson,
of  Philadelphia,  on  this  portion  of  my  labors ;  for  they
had  this  subject  under  consideration  for  several  years,  as
a  Committee  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.

Those  forms  for  dedications,  &c.,  which  the  G.  L,  U.  S.
has  declared  "  shall  be  used,  and  none  other,"  will  bo
found  here,  pure  and  unmixed.  Hence  no  Encampment,
Lodge,  or  brother  need  fear  that  this  guide  will  "  lead  to
bewilder,  or  dazzle  to  blind,"  or  conduct  into  "  by  and
forbidden  paths."*

The  additional  and  original  Odes  by  Mrs.  F.  W.  Gillett,
of  Michigan,  and  Revs.  D.  K.  Lee,  D.  D.,  of  New  York,  and
A.  C.  Thomas,  of  Pennsylvania  —  written  expressly  for  this
Improved  Manual  —  will  be  read  and  used  with  delight
and  profit.  And  the  Business  Forms,  so  much  commended
heretofore,  have  been  revised,  and  added  to,  as  experience
suggested.

I  have  thus  labored  to  make  this  a  complete  Manual  and

*  Notice  of  any  error,  in  doctrine,  law,  usage  or  fact,  will  be
gratefully  received  and  promptly  corrected.

TO   THE   IMPROVED   MANUAL.  VU

a  correct  Guide ;  but  aware  of  human  imperfectic  m,  and
deeply  sensible  of  my  own,  I  dare  only  hope  that  it  is  an
improvement  on  what  an  indulgent  brotherhood  has  pro-
nounced "  the  standard  work  of  the  Order  " —  and  as  such
I  offer  and

DEDICATE  IT

To  ALL  INQUIRERS  who  desire  to  know  what  Odd-Fellow-
ship is  —  its  aims,  means,  and  measures  —  and  how  it
attained  its  present  form  and  power.

To  THE  FAMILIES  AND  FRIENDS  OF  ODD-FELLOWS,  that
they  may  be  induced  to  encourage  their  "  loved  ones  "  to
be  Odd-Fellows  in  deed  and  verity.

To  ALL  ODD-FELLOWS,  of  every  degree,  rank,  and
station,  as  a  Teacher  and  Guide  to  direct  them  onward
and  upward  in  the  performance  of  duty  as  members  and
officers  —  as

"Brethren  of  our  Friendly  Order."

And  may  our  Heavenly  Father,  who  is  especially  "  the
Father  of  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow's  God,"  bless  its
instructions,  so  as  to  imbue  all  our  minds  and  hearts  with
the  love  of  God  and  of  humanity — that  thus  we  may  pro-
mote the  welfare  of  our  Order,  the  ele"  ation  of  our  race,
and  the  glory  of  our  God.

A.  B,  GROSH.

WASHINGTON,  D.  C.,  July  1st,  1868.

EXTRACTS   FROM   THE   PREFACE   TO   THE   ODD-FELLOW'S
MANUAL  OF  1852.

A  FEW  remarks  will  inform  the  reader  why  I  prepared  this  book,  and
what  were  my  supposed  qualifications  for  the  work.

I  was  initiated  in  Oneida  Lodge,  No.  70,  at  Utica,  N.  Y.,  September
8th,  1842.  The  nearest  Lodge,  on  the  one  hand,  was  at  Rochester  —  on
the  other,  at  Schenectady.  Few  of  the  members  knew  much  more  of  the
principles,  usages,  and  workings  of  the  Order  at  large  than  myself.
Periodicals  and  other  publications  of  the  Order  were  almost  unknown
among  us.  The  Lodge  itself  was  a  new  one.  Often  and  sadly,  as  I  passed
onward  through  the  degrees,  and  through  the  chairs,  did  I  feel  the  need
of  such  a  Manual  as  that  I  now  present  to  my  brethren  of  the  Order.

As  years  rolled  over  me,  my  station  being  among  the  working  men  of  the
bodies  to  which  I  was  attached,  I  gained  experience  and  found  able  coun-
sellors, and  from  time  to  time  furnished  such  items  as  I  deemed  useful  to
the  fraternity  for  publication  in  the  "  Golden  Rule,"  the  "  Covenant,"  and
the  "  Ark."  Thus  gathering  experience  and  materials,  with  no  particular
view  to  making  a  book,  I  was  urged  by  several  distinguished  brethren  to
prepare  a  full  and  complete  Manual  for  the  Order.  I  have  done  what  I
could  to  gratify  their  wishes.

The  First  Part  is  for  the  general  reader.  Yet  it  may  furnish  needed
information  for  not  a  few  members  of  the  Order.

The  Second  Part  is  for  Odd-Fellows  only.  Yet  those  out  of  the  Order
may  there  learn  what  we  are  obligated  to  perform,  and  may,  perhaps,  read
a  page  of  duty  to  guide  themselves.  a

The  Third  Part  contains  ceremonials  for  all  public  occasions  of  the  Order,
with  suitable  brief  Addresses,  Invocations,  Prayers,  Responses,  Ac.,  which
may  be  interesting,  perhaps  even  profitable,  to  all.

Appendixes  A  and  B  contain  Odes  and  Music  for  various  occasions,  and
blank  Forms  prescribed  by  our  Grand  Bodies,  besides  others  which  are
useful  in  the  transaction  of  the  business  of  our  Order.

The  whole  is  arranged  so  as  to  commence  with  the  Inquirer  merely,  and
proceeds,  in  regular  succession,  to  instruct  and  direct  all  in  their  duties
as  Odd-Fellows,  and  Committee-men,  and  Officers,  from  the  initiate  up  to
the  highest  degree  and  highest  office  in  the  Order.

In  all  this  I  have  not  wrought  alone.  Professor  PATTERSON  *  has  so
materially  assisted  me  in  the  preparation  of  the  various  ceremonials,  that
the  credit  of  this  portion  of  the  work  is  in  a  measure  due  to  him.  He
has,  moreover,  carefully  examined  and  approved  the  entire  work.  To
WILLIAM  CURTIS,  Esq.,  for  many  years  the  well-known,  efficient  Grand
Secretary  and  Grand  Scribe  of  the  R.  W.  G.  L.  and  G.  E.  of  Pennsylvania,
I  am  also  indebted  for  judicious  counsel  and  criticism  in  preparing  the
work.  To  several  others  I  owe  gratitude  for  kind  suggestions;  and  L
have  freely  copied  not  a  few  extracts  from  the  essays  of  my  co-laborer.;  in
our  periodicals.  But  the  written  as  well  as  the  unwritten  work  of  the
Order  I  have  considered  sacred  from  revelation.  A  few  quotations  it  has
made  from  prior  sources,  I  have  felt  at  liberty  to  use  from  the  same  foun-
tains; also  a  few  phrases  which,  by  frequent  quotation  in  orations,  <fec.,
have  become  common  property.  But  beyond  this  I  have  not  advanced.
Yet  every  doctrine,  principle,  and  precept  it  enjoins  will  be  found  here  in
regular  order,  mingled  with  a  few  additional  remarks  of  my  own.

*  Henry  S.  Pa  terson,  M.  D.,  Post  G.  Master,  and  Past  R.  W.  Grand  Rep  reset  ta  live
of  the  G.  Lodge  f  Pennsylvania  —  since  deceased.

viii

CONTENTS.

PART  FIRST.
MATTERS  EXTERNAL  TO  THE  ORDER.

PAGE

CHAPTER  I.  —  History  of  the  Order 13

Origin  and  Uses  of  Secret  Societies  — Antiquity  of  our  Order —
Origin  in  Great  Britain  —  Convivial  Practices  —  The  Inde-
pendent Order  —  Origin  in  the  United  States  —  Biographic
Sketch  of  Thomas  Wildey —  The  Order  under  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States.

CHAPTER  II. —  Objections  and  Inquiries  Answered 50

Our  Name  —  Obligations  and  Penalties  —  Regalia,  Emblems,
&G.  —  Expense  of  Regalia  —  Our  Secrecy  —  Exclusiveness  —
Exclusion  of  the  Poor,  <fec.  —  Our  Benefactions  arc  General  —
Interference  with  other  Institutions.

CHAPTER  III. —  Our  Government,  Principles,  &c 71

Our  Government  —  Principles  —  Objects  —  Measures  and
Operations  —  The  Duties  of  Odd-Fellowship  —  Privileges  of
Odd-Fellows.

CHAPTER  IV.  —  Application  and  Admission 86

Proposition  —  The  Admission.

PART  SECOND.

MATTERS  INTERNAL  TO  THE  ORDER.

CHAPTER  I. —  On  Initiations  in  General 90

The  Lodge,  from  the  German,  (Poetry.)

CHAPTER  II.  — -  Of  Initiation 93

The  Initiation  —  Regalia  —  Emblems  —  Conduct  of  a  New
Member.

CHAPTER  III. —  Of  the  First,  or  White  Degree 107

Introduction  —  Regalia  —  Color  —  Emblems.

CHAPTER  IV. —  Of  the  Second,  or  Covenant  Degree 116

Introduction  —  Scripture     Lesson  —  Regalia  —  Color  —  Em-
blems.

CONTENTS.

PA41

CHAPTER  V. —  Of  the  Third,  or  Royal  Blue  Degree 131

Introduction  —  Regalia  —  Color  —  Emblems  —  Concluding
Remarks  —  Verses  by  Hampson.

CHAPTER  VI.  —  Of  the  Fourth,  or  Remembrance  Degree 140

Introductory  —  Abou  Ben  Adhem,  (Poetry)  —  Scripture
Lesson  —  Regalia  —  Color  —  Emblems — Additional  Remarks
on  Memory.

CHAPTER  VII.—  Of  the  Fifth,  or  Scarlet  Degree 153

Introductory  —  Colors  of  the  Degrees  —  Emblems  of  the  De-
grees—  Regalia  —  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth,  (Poetry.)

CHAPTER  VIII.—  Of  the  Degree  of  Rebekah 164

Introductory  (to  Ladies)  —  Do.  (to  the  Degree)  — Colors,  Re-
galia, and  Emblems.

CHAPTER  IX. —  Of  the  Subordinate  Lodge 173

How  Commenced — The  Petition  —  Preparations  for  Institu-
tion—  First  Business  Meeting  —  Increase  of  Members  —
Opening  Lodge  —  Working,  with  Order  of  Business  —  Closing
Lodge  —  Work  out  of  Lodge.

CHAPTER  X. — Duties  and  Deportment  of  Odd-Fellows 189

Lodge  Attendance  — Payment  of  Dues  —  Conduct  in  Debate

—  Gentlemanly   Deportment — Correctness     in   Working  —
Voting  and  Balloting— Duties  to  Self,  Family,  and  Others.

CHAPTER  XL — Of  Committees  and  Committee-Men 202

General  Duties  of  Committee-men  —  Investigating  Commit-
tee—  Finance  Committee  —  Auditing  Committee  —  Trustees
and  Curators  —  Charges  and  Trials  —  Relief  Committee  and
Watchers.

CHAPTER  XII. —  Of  the  Appointed  Officers 218

Chaplain  —  R.  and  L.  Scene  Supporters  —  R.  and  L.  Sup-
porters of  the  V.  G.  —  Do.  of  the  N.  G.  —  I.  and  0.  Guardians

—  Conductor  —  Wardens.

CHAPTER  XIII.—  Of  the  Elective  Officers 225

Treasurer  —  Permanent  Secretary  —  Recording  Secretary  —
Vice-Grand  —  Noble  Grand  —  Sitting  Past  Grand  —  Rules
of  Order  and  Debate  —  Use  of  the  Gavel.

CHAPTER  XIV. —  Of  Degree  Lodges,  Committees,  and  their

Officers 247

Constitution  i — Conferring  Degrees— Officers  and  their  Duties.

CONTENTS.  XI

PAGE

CHAPTER  XV.—  Of  Past  Official  Degrees 251

Past  Secretary  —  Past  Vice-Grand  —  Past  Noble  Grand  —
For  what,  and  by  whom,  conferred.

CHAPTER  XVI. —  Of  Subordinate  Encampments 254

How  Commenced  and  Instituted  —  Opening,  Working,  Clos-
ing—  Application  and  Admission  —  Committees  and  Ap-
pointed Officers  —  Elective  Officers  —  Conferring  the  Degrees.

CHAPTER  XVII. —  Of  the  Patriarchal  Degree 263

Introduction  —  The  Ten  Commandments  —  Emblems  —  Con-
cluding Remarks.

CHAPTER  XVIIL—  Of  the  Golden-Rule  Degree 271

Introduction  —  Parable  against  Persecution — Note  on  Ori-
ginals of  said  Parable,  and  the  Parsee,  the  Jew,  and  the
Christian  —  Emblems.

CHAPTER  XIX.—  Of  the  Royal  Purple  Degree 283

Review  of  the  Eight  Degrees  —  Introduction  to  the  R.  P.  D.—
Scripture  Lesson  —  Emblems  —  Pilgrimage  of  Life,  (Poetry.)

CHAPTER  XX. —  Of  Grand  Encampments 296

How  Commenced  and  Constituted  —  The  G.  E.  Degree  —
Members,  Representatives,  and  Committees  —  Appointed  and
Elective  Officers.

CHAPTER  XXL—  Of  State  Grand  Lodges » 305

How  Commenced  and  Constituted  —  The  Grand  Lodge  De-
gree—  Members,  Representatives,  and  Committees  —  Ap-
pointed and  Elective  Officers.

CHAPTER  XXII. —  Of  Districts,  their  Committees  and  Officers,  312
Dist.  Grand  Committees  —  Appeal    Committees  —  D.  D.  G.
Patriarchs  —  D.  D.  G.  Masters  —  Institutions  and  Installa-
tions—  Insubordination  and   Disorder  —  Reclaiming    Char-
ters.

CHAPTER  XXIII.  —  Of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States.  320
How   Constituted   and   Supported  —  Members,   Representa-
tives, and  Officers  —  Appointed  Officers  —  Elective  Officers  —
Regalia  and  Jewels.

CHAPTER  XXIV.  —  Miscellaneous 326

Diplomas  and  Cards  —  Pass-words  —  Examination  of  Visitors
—  Honors  and  Courtesies  —  General  Interdicts.

xii  C  O  N  T  E  N  T^S.

PART  THIRD.
OF  PUBLIC  CEREMONIALS  OF  THE  ORDER.

PAGE

CHAPTER  I.  —  Of  Marshalling  Processions 332

CHAPTER  II.  —  Laying  Corner-stones  for  Public  Structures.

For  0.  F.  Halls 334

CHAPTER  III. — Dedication  of  an  0.  F.  Hall  or  Lodge-room.  345

CHAPTER  IV. — Public   Installation  of  Subordinate   Lodge

Officers 353

CHAPTER  V. — Dedication  of  an  0.  F.  Cemetery  or  ^Burial-lot.  372
CHAPTER  VI.  —  Funeral  Ceremony 377

APPENDIX  A.

ODES  for  Various  Occasions,  with  Music 383

Two  Dedication  Odes,  by  A.  B.  Grosh  —  Dedication  Ode,  by
Rev.  A.  C.  Thomas*  —  Ode  for  Laying  a  Corner-stone,  by
Mrs.  F.  W.  Gillett*  — Do.,  by  Rev.  D.  K.  Lee,  D.D.*  —
Another,  Author  unknown  —  Hymn,  Dedication  of  a  Ceme-
tery, by  A.  B.  Grosh*  —  Funeral  Ode,  by  Rev.  J.  G.  Forman

—  Do.,   by  Rev.  D.  K.  Lee,  D.  D.*  —  Do.,   by   Rev.  A.  C.
Thomas*  — Rebekah  at  the  Well,  by  Rev.  A.  C.  Thomas*  —
Daughters  of  Rebekah,  by  Rev.  D.  K.  Lee,  D.  D.*  —  The
Rainbow,  by  Mrs.  S.  J.  Hale  —  Dismission,  by  A.  B.  Grosh

—  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth,  by  James  Montgomery.

APPENDIX  B.
FORMULARY,  containing  many  Blank  Forms  infrequent  Use..   397

*  Written  for  the  Improved  Manual.

THE

ODD-FELLOW'S
IMPROVED    MANUAL.

PART  FIRST.

External  10  lite  @rdtr.

CHAPTER  I.

HISTORY   OF   ODD-FELLOWSHIP.

§  1.   Origin  and  Uses  of  Secret  Societies.

THE  earliest  records  of  human  history  furnish  proofs
of  the  existence  of  secret  associations  among  nearly  all
the  nations  of  the  earth.  They  have  everywhere  accom-
panied, if  they  have  not  advanced  civilization,  and  been
the  conservators,  if  not  the  promoters  of  religious,
scientific,  and  political  truth.

Picture-writing  and,  afterward,  hieroglyphics  or  ab-
breviated symbols,  were  at  first  the  only  means  men
possessed  of  recording  doctrines  or  events,  or  discoveries
in  science  and  the  arts.  And  as  nearly  all  learning  was
confined  to  the  priesthood  and  royal  family  of  each
nation,  these  hieroglyphics  readily  suggested,  if  they
did  not  constitute  an  exclusive  art  by  which  they  com-
municated with  each  other,  and  handed  down  to  their
successors  those  doctrines,  discoveries,  and  state  secrets
which  they  deemed  it  improper  to  disclose  to  the  world.
2  "  13

14  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Hence  in  nearly  every  nation  —  in  Egypt,  Assyria,
Greece,  Eorae,  Gaul,  Germany,  and  Britain  —  religious
mysteries  were  the  foundation-doctrines,  and  the  priest-
hood were  the  founders  of  secret  societies.  Even  the
rites  of  religious  worship  were,  in  most  cases,  but  acted
symbols  —  speaking  of  common  religious  ideas  to  the
multitude,  but  conveying  deeper  meanings  to  the  ini-
tiated eye.

That  these  early  societies  were  often  perverted  and
grossly  abused,  is  readily  admitted.  But  that  furnishes
no  argument  against  their  proper  use.  All  associations
have  been  corrupted  or  perverted.  Written  language
is  abused  every  day  —  the  tongue  itself  is  an  unruly
member,  breathing  not  only  prayers  to  God,  but  curses
on  our  fellow-man  —  yet  no  one,  for  that  alone,  would
doom  society  to  solitude  and  silence,  or  abolish  pen  and
press  forever.

On  the  contrary,  the  vast  utility  of  ancient  secret
associations  of  priests,  philosophers,  and  patriots,  in
advancing  religion,  conserving  literature,  art,  and
science,  and  in  ameliorating  the  condition  of  states  and
communities,  has  commended  them  to  the  imitation  of
the  wise  and  good  in  all  subsequent  ages  of  the  world.
Christianity  availed  itself  of  the  principle  in  its  early
progress.  When  the  iron  heel  of  the  bigot  and  tyrant
was  raised  to  crush  the  springing  germ  into  the  dust,  it
was  removed  into  privacy  and  was  nurtured  in  secret
until  the  storm  was  overblown,  or  its  strength  was
increased  to  endure  the  tempest.  Says  one,  whose
opposition  to  Romanism  is  undoubted :  "  No  instructed
man  can  deny  that  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  pre-
sents one  of  the  most  solemn  and  majestic  spectacles  in
history.  The  very  arguments  which  are  employed

HISTORY   OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  15

against  its  rites,  remind  us  of  the  mighty  part  which  it
has  played  on  the  theatre  of  the  world.  For  when  we
say  that  the  ceremonies  of  its  worship,  the  decorations
of  its  altars,  and  the  evolutions  of  its  priests,  are  con-
ceived in  the  spirit  of  Heathenism,  how  can  we  forget
that  it  was  once  the  witness  of  ancient  Paganism,  the
victor  of  its  decrepit  superstitions,  the  rival,  yet  imitator
of  its  mythology?  When  we  ask  the  use  of  the  lights
that  burn  during  the  mass,  how  can  we  fail  to  think  of
the  secret  worship  of  the  early  Christians,  assembled  at
dead  of  night  in  some  vault,  beyond  the  eye  of  observa-
tion ?  When  we  wonder  at  the  pantomimic  character
of  its  services,  its  long  passages  of  gesticulation,  are  we
not  carried  back  to  the  time  when  the  quick  ear  of  the
informer  and  persecutor  lurked  near,  and  devotion,
finding  words  an  unsafe  vehicle  of  thought,  invented
the  symbolical  language  which  could  be  read  only  by
the  initiated  eye?"*  That  which  has  proved  so  bene-
ficial, though  now  it  has  ceased  to  be  appropriate,  or
been  corrupted,  may  well  be  imitated,  and  superseded
by  that  wherein  is  life  and  purity.

The  Albigenses,  Waldenses,  Cathari  and  other  early
Reformers,  during  the  long  persecutions  of  the  Papacy,
prior  to  the  Reformation,  also  found  in  secret  associa-
tion, remote  from  the  eye  of  the  persecutor,  safety  in
worshiping  God.  And  all  through  the  dark  night  of
feudal  ages,  the  various  mechanic  crafts  and  guilds,  and
other  secret  associations,  kept  the  feeble  light  of  knowl-
edge, virtue,  and  freedom,  glimmering  amid  the  sur-
rounding gloom  of  semi-heathen  darkness,  until  the
world  at  large,  awaking  from  its  leaden  sleep,  lit  its
thousand  torches  at  the  hardly  preserved  tapers,  and

*  Martineau's  "Rationale  of  Religious  Inquiry,"  Lecture  II.  p.  19.

16  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

threw  the  blaze  of  a  general  revival  of  religion,  letters,
arts,  and  sciences,  once  more  over  our  benighted  race.

And  since  that  revival,  similar  associations  have
aided  no  less  in  speeding  onward  the  flood-tide  of  civili-
zation, humanity,  and  freedom,  to  its  present  full-flow-
ing progress.  The  reform  that  has  swept  away  doc-
trines and  institutions  of  Error  and  of  "Wrong,  grown
hoary  with  ages  of  general  acknowledgment  and  reve-
rence, replacing  them  with  the  True  and  the  Right,  has
oft  been  nourished  in  the  silent  secresy  of  a  few  chosen
souls,  until  it  gained  strength  to  go  forth  boldly  and
grapple  successfully  with  the  monster  errors  and  giant
vices  of  the  age.  And  the  revolution  that,  in  a  few
days,  overturned  thrones  and  banished  tyrants,  replac-
ing the  one  with  better  institutions,  and  giving  the
abused  powers  of  the  other  into  rightful  hands,  fre-
quently gathered  its  earthquake-power  in  the  privacy
of  isolated  circles,  which  met  to  pray  and  deliberate  for
their  country's  welfare,  and  separated  to  spread  abroad
the  light  and  strength  whicli  Heaven  gave  the  few,  to
direct  the  minds  and  nerve  the  arms  of  the  many.

We  may  be  told,  however,  that  error,  vice,  and  diplo-
matic despotism  have  also  had  their  secret  organ  i/a-
tions  —  even  a  " Holy  Alliance!"  True;  so  also  have
they  had  their  public  meetings  and  national  congresses.
Shall  we  reject  the  latter  also,  because  bold,  bad  men
have  used  openness  and  publicity  for  evil  purposes?

Among  so-called  secret  societies  of  modern  times,  we
know  of  none  that  has  excelled  the  beneficent  influence
of  Odd-Fellowship,  within  its  own  pale,  in  relieving  the
sick  and  distressed,  and  especially  in  preventing  suffer-
ing and  poverty  in  the  families,  of  its  members.  Nor
is  there  one  whose  measures  of  relief  and  benevolence

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  17

have  been  more  generally  copied  than  those  of  this
"  friendly  Order ; "  and  seldom,  if  ever,  (astonishing  as
it  is  in  this  age  of  improvement,)  with  any  important
addition  enhancing  their  efficiency.

An  institution  manifesting  so  much  influence,  per-
forming so  much  good,  preventing  so  much  evil,  and
increasing  so  rapidly  and  widely  its  numbers  and  its
power,  may  well  attract  public  attention,  and  excite  a
laudable  desire  to  know  its  origin,  progress,  principles,
resources  and  measures,  its  aims  and  objects.

§  2.  Antiquity  of  the  Order.

A  love  of  mystery  and  blind  veneration  for  antiquity
has  induced  most  associations  to  claim  an  origin  trace-
able to  the  remotest  ages  of  the  world.  There  have  not
been  wanting  well-meaning  Odd-Fellows  to  render  that
doubtful  service  for  our  Order.  Confounding  principles
with  the  institutions  embodying  them,  they  have  claimed
equal  antiquity  for  both.  And  similarities,  which  can
easily  be  found  between  the  modes  of  initiation  and
other  ceremonials  of  ancient  associations  and  those  of
our  own  Order,  have  been  triumphantly  appealed  to,  in
proof  of  the  unwarranted  assumption.  And  even  where
such  likeness  could  not  be  found,  it  wras  easy  to  draw
upon  imagination  for  facts,  and  cover  modern  inven-
tions with  a  seeming  rust  of  ages.

A  brief  enumeration  of  some  of  these  fabulous  histo-
ries of  our  Order  may  serve  to  guard  the  unwary  against
further  imposition.  The  greatest  exertion  of  tradition
was  to  make  our  great  forefather,  Adam,  the  founder
of  our  Order.  Prying  Mother  Eve  was  probably  ex-
cluded, and  all  her  daughters  with  her!  Grand  Sire
Wildey,  during  his  visit  to  England,  in  1826,  procured
"2*

18  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

from  one  of  the  lodges  there,  an  emblem  representing
Adam  laying  the  foundation-stone  of  the  Order,  which
emblem  he  presented  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United
States.

Another  tradition  declares  that  the  Order  was  founded
among  the  Jewish  priesthood,  by  Moses  and  Aaron.
James  Spry,  C.  S.,  in  his  "  History  of  Odd-Fellowship"
in  Great  Britain,  mentions  such  an  Order  among  the
Jews  while  captives  in  Babylon,  to  enable  them  to  cir-
cumvent their  oppressors  and  maintain  fidelity  to  their
religion ;  and  which  was  kept  up  until  after  their  sub-
jugation by  the  Romans.  Some  members  being  or-
ganized as  a  Roman  legion  in  A.  D.  79,  and  proving
faithful,  the  Emperor  named  them  Fellow  Citizens,  and
Odd  Fellows,  and  gave  them  a  "Dispensation  engraven
on  a  golden  plate/7  with  emblems  of  mixed  Jewish  and
Roman  ideas.  (Another  tradition  makes  this  a  Chris-
tian legion!)  By  the  Romans  the  Order  was  intro-
duced into  Britain  in  A.  D.  98,  and  remnants  of  its
practices  remained  up  to  Saxon  times,  when  they  were
lost  to  public  view!

Other  fables  have  ascribed  our  origin  to  the  Goths,
Huns,  Scandinavians,  Suevi,  Moors  —  down  through
Spain,  Portugal,  France  —  thence  to  England  as  a
"  Loyal  Grand  Lodge  of  Honor"  in  the  18th  century,
when  it  became  the  "  London  Order  of  Odd-Fellows!"
All  these  and  other  baseless  and  silly  stories,  after
repeated  calls  for  testimony,  have  been  utterly  discarded
as  proofless  and  absurd,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
United  States.  —  See  Journal,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  336,  337,

Accordingly  P.  G.  M.  Ridgely,  Grand  Secretary  of
our  National  Lodge,  publicly  declared  in  his  Oration,
iu  Boston,  June  19,  1845,  after  dwelling  on  the  anti-

HISTORY   OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  19

equity  and  divine  origin  of  our  foundation-principle,
human  fraternity:  —

"  I  know  that  it  has  been  not  unusual,  on  occasions
like  the  present,  to  claim  for  Odd-Fellowship  affinity
with  secret  institutions  which  had  their  origin  in  periods
of  time  when  the  passions  of  men  were  fiercest,  and  the
midnight  of  idolatry  overshadowed  and  blighted  the
promptings  of  the  human  heart.  I  am  here  to  repudiate
such  associations."

"  Although  we  may  discover  a  similitude  in  the  fact
of  initiation,  in  rites,  ceremonies,  and  in  gradations  of
degrees,  between  those  institutions  and  Odd-Fellowship,
we  will  find  no  traces  of  the  principles  of  fraternity,

which  distinguish  eminently  our  affiliation."

"Odd-Fellowship  invokes  not  the  aid  or  sanction  of
such  ages  to  consecrate  its  principles ;  and  if,  in  truth,
these  could  be  summoned  to  attest  its  antiquity,  they
would  rather  awaken  just  indignation  against  its  cha-
racter, than  serve  to  commend  its  merits  to  an  en-
lightened public  opinion.  Dismissing  therefore,  and  I
hope  for  ever,  the  Oracles  of  Egyptian  or  Grecian
philosophy,  and  the  still  more  absurd  pretences  which
would  discover  the  sources  of  Odd-Fellowship  in  the
Roman  Camps;  and  assuming  that  its  benign  principles
have  been  drawn  from  the  image  reflected  upon  man  in
his  creation,  let  us  turn  to  a  truthful  narrative  of  the
origin  of  Odd-Fellowship,  and  its  capacity  to  compass
the  brotherhood  of  man."

§  3.   Origin  in  Great  Britain.

The  origin  of  Odd-Fellowship  as  an  institution  is
involved  in  obscurity.  When  the  small  stream  first
issues  into  the  light  of  history,  it  is  very  humble  also.

20  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

The  Nile,  though  known  long  before  the  days  of
Joseph,  has  only  lately  had  its  sources  discovered  by
Europeans.  Mr.  Spry,  in  his  "  History  of  Odd-Fel-
lowship," says,  that  "  in  the  early  part  of  the  last  cen-
tury, the  writer  Daniel  De  Foe  mentions  the  Society
of  Odd  Fellows;  and  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for
1745,  speaks  of  the  Odd  Fellows'  Lodge  as  a  place
where  very  comfortable  and  recreative  evenings  may  be
spent."  In  1788,  as  we  learn  from  his  Biography,
James  Montgomery,  the  poet,  wrote  the  song  given  in
Appendix  A,  beginning

"When  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth  abound
Among  a  band  of  brothers, "

for  a  society  in  London,  bearing  the  motto  of  our
Order,  and  presumed  to  be  a  lodge  of  "Ancient  and
Honorable  Loyal  Odd  Fellows."  All  beyond  these
dates  is  mere  conjecture.  We  only  know  that  when
Odd-Fellowship  comes  into  the  domain  of  certainty,
the  Fatherhood  of  God  and  brotherhood  of  man  are
its  foundations  of  precept  and  of  practice.  Nor  can
we  trace  the  precise  steps  by  which  our  peculiar  m en-
ures of  mutual  relief  in  sickness  and  distress,  and  pro-
vision for  the  burial  of  the  dead,  and  care  for  the
widow  and  orphan,  grew  up  among  our  predecessors.
But  knowing  that  it  was  an  institution  originated,  by
common  circumstances  of  want  and  providence*  and
cemented  by  social  feelings  frequently  indulged  until
they  warmed  into  a  fraternal  glow,  we  can  readily
imagine  how  great  principles  would  be  suggested,  and
measures  for  carrying  them  out  be  successively  improved.
They  were  toiling  laborers,  in  a  land  and  under  a
government  where  hard-handed  industry  is  less  esteemed

HISTORY   OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  21

than  here ;  where  distinctions  of  rank  and  wealth  are
greater  than  we  have  ever  known.  Their  daily  labor
barely  sufficed  to  procure  them  daily  bread.  When
sickness  came,  gaunt  and  terrible  want  was  not  far  off.
When  calculating  wealth  refused  them  the  privilege  to
toil  for  bread,  they  lacked  means  to  seek  employment
elsewhere,  and  support  their  families  meanwhile.  When
on  the  bed  of  disease  or  death,  none  could  spare  time
to  smooth  the  creased  pillow,  or  moisten  the  fevered
lips,  or  speak  calmness  to  the  delirious  mind.  When
they  looked  forward  to  the  close  of  this  "  fitful,  feverish"
life,  beyond  it  was  only  a  pauper's  coffin  to  be  pressed
into,  a  pauper's  grave  into  which  to  be  huddled  out  of
sight,  without  a  breathed  prayer  over  the  dead,  or  a
whispered  text  of  hope  and  consolation  for  the  living.
And  for  the  surviving  partner  and  bereaved  children
no  future  was  presented,  but  trundling  them  from  par-
ish to  parish  until  they  were  thrust  into  the  vice  and
infamy  of  the  almshouse ;  or,  perhaps,  thrusting  them
into  the  streets,  to  grow  up  beggars  or  criminals,  if
they  did  not  earlier  perish  in  the  gutter !  Such  were,
most  probably,  the  circumstances  and  prospects  of  not
a  few  who  commenced  our  Order,  devised  its  first  crude
measures  of  relief  and  burial  of  the  dead,  and  based
the  whole  structure  on  the  Fatherhood  of  God  and
the  Brotherhood  of  man.

Feeling  that  Rank  and  Wealth  would  degrade  them
if  they  could,  they  resolved  to  support  and  aid  each
other,  and  to  contribute  weekly  a  portion  of  their  scanty
earnings  for  that  purpose.*  Feeling  also  how  sectarian

*  The  "  Odd  Fellow's  Keepsake"  states,  that  the  early  English
lodges  were  supported,  and  their  members  relieved,  by  each  mem-

22  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

and  party  strifes  estrange  men  from  each  other,  and
render  them  powerless  and  abject  by  such  divisions,
they  excluded  all  such  topics  and  distinctions  from
their  meetings,  and  resolved  only  to  know,  to  labor  for,
and  to  love  each  other  as  men  —  as  BRETHREN.

§  4.  Convivial  Practices.

At  that  period  (and  is  it  not  too  much  the  case  at
this?)  convivial  practices  were  common  everywhere,
among  nearly  all  associations  and  gatherings  of  men.
But  especially  in  Great  Britain,  all  social  and  moral
societies,  even  vestry,  presbyterial,  and  other  church
meetings  for  business,  were  stimulated  freely  with  in-
toxicating drinks  and  the  fumes  of  tobacco.*

ber  and  visitor  paying  a  penny  to  the  secretary  on  entering  a  lodge.
If  a  brother  needed  aid,  a  sufficient  sum  was  voted  him.  If  out  of
work,  he  was  furnished  with  a  card  and  funds  to  reach  the  next
lodge.  If  unsuccessful  there,  that  lodge  provided  for  his  further
progress,  and  thus  he  went  on  until  he  found  employment,  when
he  deposited  his  card  in  the  nearest  lodge.'  When  a  lodge's  funds
ran  out,  it  sent  word  to  other  lodges,  and  visitors  were  sent  to
swell  the  penny  collections.  It  was  common  for  a  whole  lodge
thus  to  visit  a  needy  lodge,  and  hundreds  of  Odd-Fellows  went,
week  after  week,  until  the  exhausted  treasury  was  replenished.

This  contribution  system  was  superseded  by  our  more  reliable
system  of  stated  benefits,  based  on  regular  weekly  or  quarterly
dues  —  making  donations  on  special  occasions  only.

But  weekly  dues  were  collected  weekly  up  to  1835.  The  warden
with  his  axe,  heart  in  hand  uppermost,  went  to  each  member,  re-
ceived his  weekly  due,  and  announced  the  payer's  name  to  the
Secretary.  After  1835  larger  amounts  began  to  be  paid,  and  reg-
ular quarterly  accounts  kept,  as  at  present.

*  Even  so  late  as  1835,  Rev.  Heman  Humphrey,  D.  D.,  President
of  Amherst  College,  Mass,  gave  a  discouraging  view  of  the  habits
of  clergymen  and  church-members  generally  in  Great  Britain.  He
says,  quoting  from  another,  "In  some  presbyteries,  (in  Scotland,)

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  23

We  need  not  wonder,  therefore,  that  Odd-Fellows,  at
that  early  day,  were  addicted  to  practices  which  greater
light  and  a  purer  morality  now  declare  to  be  "  incon-
sistent with  our  laudable  profession."  Meeting,  as  they
did,  in  public  houses  of  not  the  most  select  character,
the  only  places  open  to  men  of  their  humble  pretensions
and  limited  means,  the  beer-mug,  the  pipe,  and  the
toast  circulated  freely,  as  the  song  and  jest  excited
their  mirth  and  hilarity ;  until,  by  frequent  repetition,
calling  for  increased  indulgence,  it  is  no  wonder  that
the  noble  objects  of  their  meetings  were  too  frequently
made  but  secondary  to  mere  sensual  gratifications.  The
wonder  is,  not  that  those  early  Lodges  were  so  greatly
convivial  clubs,  but  that  they  did  not  become  merely  such.*

the  presbyterial  dinner  is  furnished  with  liquor  by  fines  imposed
on  various  occasions,"  and  paid  by  the  clergy!  —  See  Foreign  Tour,
Vol.  2,  pp.  5-32.

*  We  give  a  specimen  or  two  of  the  songs  said  to  have  been  sung
in  those  early  Lodge  meetings,  that  the  reader  may  see  the  moral
progress  of  the  order,  by  comparing  them  with  the  Odes  and  Songs  in
use  at  the  present  day,  as  given  in  Appendix  A

The  following  is  said  to  be  a  chorus  :  —

"Then  let  us  be  social,  be  generous,  be  kind,

And  let  each  take  his  glass  and  be  mellow ;
Then  we  '11  join  heart  and  hand,  leave  dissension  behind,

And  we  '11  each  prove  a  hearty  Odd-Fellow.

And  the  following  is  said  to  have  been  a  long-standing  favorite  :—

"  Oh  what  pleasure  for  to  meet

With  friends  so  blithe  and  jolly,
Who  all  delight  for  to  dispel

The  gloom  of  melancholy !
Then  let  us  throw  all  care  aside

Let 's  merry  be  and  mellow  ;
May  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth  at

With  every  true  Odd-Fello^X^\  §  R  A  /?*?*

VWIVERSfTr

24  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

The  singularity  of  its  name,  and  humility  of  its  origin,
needed  not  these  convivial  practices  to  bring  the  insti-
tution into  suspicion  and  disrepute,  nor  a  defective  or-
ganization to  involve  it  in  trouble  and  internal  dissension.
On  the  extension  of  the  Order  to  Liverpool,  the  lodges
united  in  a  more  general  system,  under  the  title  of  "  The
Union  Order  of  Odd-Fellows,"  having  London  as  its
seat  of  government.  This  arrangement  continued  until
about  1809,  when,  after  the  institution  of  Victory  Lodge
in  Manchester,  some  intelligent  men  perceived  the  ne-
cessity of  reforming  the  convivial  practices  of  the  brother-
hood, and  making  mutual  relief  and  charity  the  main

"  True  Friendship  is  a  treasure  great,

As  such  we  may  regard  it ;
May  discord  ne'er  our  Lodge  intrude,

Nor  any  thing  retard  it;
But  let  the  song  and  toast  go  round,

And  every  heart  be  mellow ;
And  may  our  motto  still  be  found
In  every  true  Odd-Fellow."

A  contrast  no  less  gratifying  can  also  be  made  between  the  Gen-
eral Rules  and  Regulations  of  that  and  a  later  period,  and  the  state
of  the  Order  at  this  time,  and  especially  on  this  continent.  Fines
were  common  then,  for  going  to  sleep,  for  getting  drunk,  for  noisy
demonstrations,  and  for  introducing  improper  toasts  or  songs,
during  lodge  meetings.  No  such  penalties  are  needed  now,  for  the
General  Law  of  the  Order,  that  "no  refreshments  of  any  kind,
except  water,  shall  at  any  time  be  allowed  in  the  Lodge-room,  or
in  any  of  the  apartments  or  passages  thereto  belonging,"  renders
them  unnecessary.

If  those  early  Rules  were  "behind  the  age"  to  which  they  be-
longed, (which  we  much  doubt,)  the  present  General  Law  in  this
country  was,  when  framed,  in  advance  of  not  a  few  of  the  associa-
tions of  that  period.  Surely  an  institution  capable  of  such
reform  and  progress  cannot  be  wanting  in  religious  principle  and
moral  power.

HISTORY   OF   ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  25

objects  of  their  meetings.  But  after  agitating  the  sub-
ject for  years,  they  found  that  even  the  partial  reform
they  advocated  could  not  be  effected  without  an  entire
change  of  the  Order.

§  5.   The  Independent  Order,

A  Convention  of  friends  of  reform  was  accordingly
held  in  Manchester,  in  1813,  when  several  lodges  se-
ceded in  due  form  from  the  Union  Order,  and  consti-
tuted the  "  Independent  Order  of  Odd-Fellows. "
Under  the  impulse  of  improved  practices,  this  new
Order  advanced  rapidly,  and  soon  overshadowed  the
rival  whence  it  sprang.  In  1825  it  increased  the
efficiency  of  its  government  by  instituting  a  Central
Standing  Committee  in  Manchester,  to  govern  the  Order
in  the  interim  between  the  sessions  of  the  Annual  Mov-
able Committee,  as  the  Chief  Lodge  is  termed.

But  the  unwieldy  size  of  the  Annual  Movable  Com-
mittee soon  led  to  the  assumption  and  abuse  of  power
by  the  Central  Committee,  which,  in  turn,  led  to  various
attempts  at  reform,  and  revolutions  and  secessions  on
their  failure.  Plence  in  1845,  according  to  the  Oration
at  Boston,  by  P.  G.  Master  Ridgely,  "  there  are  many
ramifications  of  Odd-Fellowship  from  the  parent  stock
in  England,  all  of  which  form  distinct  communities,
holding  no  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  each  claim-
ing to  strive  in  the  cause  of  human  benefaction,  under
the  banner  of  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth."

Turn  we  now  to  the  origin  and  history  of  Odd-Fel-
lowship in  America.

§  6.   Origin  in  the  United  States.

Several  attempts  were  e;  rly  made  to  establish  Odd-
3

26  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Fellowship  on  this  continent,  but  from  various  causes
all  successively  failed.  The  early  mode  was  by  self-
institution.  Any  number  of  Odd-Fellows  united  to-
gether, formed  a  lodge,  and  received  a  charter  from
any  neighboring  lodge,  with  power  to  grant  charters
in  return.  It  is  claimed  that  lodges  were  started  in
this  manner  during  the  last  century.  Br.  John  Duncan,
at  the  institution  of  Washington  Lodge,  No.  1,  in  Balti-
more, said  he  had  been  initiated  in  a  lodge  in  that
city,  in  1802.  Shakspeare  Lodge,  No.  1,  was  instituted
in  New  York,  December  23d,  1806;  flourished  until
1811;  was  heard  of  again  in  1813;  shortly  after  dis-
solved, and  was  revived  in  1818,  and  continued  in
existence  until  1822,  —  part  of  the  time  as  Franklin
Lodge,  No.  2,  as  stated  by  the  "Odd-Fellow's  Text
Book."  Prince  Regent's  Lodge  was  instituted  by  some
,  Englishmen,  in  New  York,  in  1816,  but  its  name  gave
it  an  odor  of  nationality,  and  prevented  its  prosperity,
and  it  ceased.  The  next  was  Washington  Lodge,  No.  1,
of  Baltimore,  in  1819  —  then  Franklin  Lodge,  No.  2,
of  same  city,  in  1819  —  next  Massachusetts  Lodge,  No.  1,
in  Boston,  March  26th,  1820  —  next  Franklin  Lodge,
No.  2,  New  York,  January  27th,  1821  — next  Penn-
sylvania Lodge,  No.  1,  Philadelphia,  December  26th,
1821.  Columbia  Lodge,  No.  1,  Washington  Lodge,
No.  3,  and  Columbia  Lodge,  No.  4,  New  York,  were
all  instituted  in  1822.  These  were  all  formed  by  self-
institution,  and  those  in  each  city  were  generally  ignorant
of  the  existence  of  those  in  the  other  cities ;  and  oven
as  late  as  1823  some  of  them  believed  themselves  the
only  lodges  in  the  United  States.

But  the  earliest  successful  institution  of  Odd-Fellow-
ship  in   this  country,  and   the  commencement  of  our

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  27

v

present  Order,  dates  no  further  back  than  April  26,
1819.  The  history  of  the  Order  is  so  blended  with
that  of  its  founder,  that  I  give  a  brief  biographical
sketch  of  this  remarkable  man,  principally  compiled
from  a  Eulogy  on  his  life  and  character  by  P.  G.  Master
Jas.  S.  Ridgely,  of  Baltimore,  Md.

THOMAS  WIKDEY  was  born  in  London,  England
January  15,  1783.  At  14  years  of  age  he  was  appren-
tice to  a  coach-smith.  When  21  years  old  he  was
initiated  into  Lodge  17  of  the  Order  of  Odd-Fellows,
in  London,  and  served  in  every  station  up  to  the
highest,  with  such  ability  and  zeal  as  to  win  the  sub-
stantial approval  of  his  brethren  at  the  age  of  23.
Three  years  after  his  initiation  he  led  in  organizing
Morning  Star  Lodge,  No.  38,  in  a  distant  quarter  of
the  city,  that  he  might  thus  extend  the  influence  and
benefits  of  the  Order.  He  was  unanimously  chosen  its
first  presiding  officer ;  and  during  ten  years  of  member-
ship he  was  three  times  elected  to  the  same  chair.
These  lodges  were  all  self-instituted — the  Manchester
Unity  not  having  yet  been  organized.

He  embarked  for  America,  July  30th,  1817,  and
reached  Baltimore  September  2d,  where  lie  soon  found
employment  at  his  trade.  The  prevalence  of  yellow
fever  that  autumn,  exercised  his  sympathies,  and  showed
the  necessity  for  an  order  like  ours.  The  following
year,  meeting  with  his  fellow-countryman  and  brother
Odd-Fellow,  John  Welch,  they  agreed  in  trying  to
establish  a  lodge  in  Baltimore.  Their  first  call  for  a
meeting  on  March  2d,  1819,  though  continued  for  one
month,  drew  only  two  coadjutors,  whereas  three  were
necessary.  The  call  was  renewed  for  April  13th,  when
Mes-rs.  John  Duncan,  John  Cheatham,  and  Richard

28  THE  ODr -FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Rushworth  met  with  them,  and  arranged  preliminaries;
and  on  April  26th  they  organized  Washington  Lodge,
No.  1,  by  self-institution.  Within  one  month  they
changed  its  organization  and  working  to  the  Independent
Order,  and  took  measures  to  procure  a  charter.  Frank-
lin Lodge,  No.  2,  was  opened  soon  after.  On  January
17th,  1820,  Abercrombie  Grand  Lodge,  of  Manchester,
granted  a  dispensation  —  but  it  never  reached  them.
Through  P.  G.  John  Crowder,  of  Duke  of  York  Lodge,
Preston,  (who  visited  Baltimore  in  1819,)  that  lodge
issued  a  charter  on  February  1st,  1820,  which  was
received  and  accepted  in  due  form  October  23d,  follow-
ing; and  in  June,  1821,  the  General  Committee  of  the
Manchester  Unity  confirmed  it,  thus  constituting  Xo.  1
"Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland  and  of  the  United  States,"
with  power  to  charter  lodges  accordingly.

Prior  to  this  there  was  no  Grand  Lodge  in  our  coun-
try. The  P.  Gs.  of  each  lodge  were  a  Committee  of
Supervision  and  Grievance,  with  advisory  powers  only  ;
but  their  decisions  were  generally  sustained.

The  working  of  a  Grand  and  a  subordinate  lodge
under  the  same  charier,  proved  very  inconvenient,  and
at  the  instance  of  P.  (J.  John  Kntwistle,  on  Februarv
22d,  1821,  Washington  Lodge  surrendered  its  Grand
Lodge  charter  to  the  P.  Gs.  of  Washington  and  Frank-
lin Lodges,  and  the  ''Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland  and
the  United  States"  thus  constituted,  granted  subordi-
nate charters  to  Nos.  1  and  2.  Br.  Wildey,  the  first
N.  G.  of  Washington  Lodge,  was  chosen  first  Grand
Master.

At  this  period  the  White,  Blue,  and  Scarlet  degrees
were  the  only  degrees  of  the  subordinate  lodge.  The
I  ink  and  Green,  compiled  by  P.  G.  Entwistle,  were

HISTORY    OF   ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  29

called  the  "  intermediate  degrees/'  and  were  yet  un-
known in  England.  The  Golden  Rule  degree  was  con-
ferred in  Grand  Lodge,  on  P.  Gs.  only,  for  a  charge  of
75  cents.  The  special  meetings  of  P.  Gs.  were  called
"  Grand  Committees,"  and  their  proceedings  required
the  confirmation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  annual  session
to  render  them  final.

For  several  years  the  Order  made  but  little  progress
Its  founder  and  members  were  comparatively  obscure
men.  Its  name  excited  prejudices,  which  their  con-
vivial practices  confirmed,  and  thus  obscured  its  merits
from  the  more  strict  and  respectable  class  of  humane
men.  But  Br.  Wildey,  conscious  of  good  motives,  and
confident  of  the  great  benefits  the  Order  must  confer  if
successful,  persevered,  bating  no  jot  of  hope  or  effort.

In  1822,  having  ascertained  that  there  were  lodges
in  Philadelphia,  New  York,  and  Boston,  efforts  were
made  to  effect  a  general  union.  " Massachusetts  Lodge"
was  the  first  to  respond  by  application  to  the  "  Grand
Lodge  of  Maryland  and  the  United  States"  for  a  charter,
which  was  granted  April  13,  1823,  and  G.  M.  Wildey
was  empowered  to  institute  the  same,  and  open  a  Grand
Lodge  also.  On  his  way  to  execute  this  mission,  he
induced  "  Pennsylvania  Lodge,  No.  1,"  to  make  a
similar  application.  In  New  York  he  reconciled  the
contending  lodges,  by  inducing  "  Columbia  Lodge,  No.
4"  (the  only  one  possessing  a  charter  from  England)
to  give  up  its  charter  for  one  from  Baltimore.  Thus
all  disputes  about  legality,  seniority,  and  supremacy
were  happily  settled  by  the  kind  and  j  ersuasive  elo-
quence of  Br.  Wildey,  and  all  the  lodges  then  existing
ID  the  United  States  were  united  in  one  system,  under
one  acknowledged  legal  Head.
8*

30  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

The  charters  having  been  applied  for  and  duly-
granted,  the  Grand  Master  instituted  them  as  follows: —
"Massachusetts,  No.  I,"  June  9th,  1823,  and  the  Grand
Lodge,  June  llth,  1823;  the  Giand  Lodge  of  New
York,  June  24th,  1823;  and  "  Pennsylvania,  No.  1,"
and  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania/'  June  27th,  1823.

The  complex  National  and  Maryland  State  Grand
Lodge  proving  dissatisfactory  to .  other  State  Grand
Lodges,  the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland  and  of  the
United  States,"  resigned  its  charter  to  the  State  Grand
Lodges  collectively,  and  united  with  them  in  organizing
a  distinct  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  on  January
15,  1825,  which  held  its  first  annual  communication  on
Washington's  birthday  following.  And  thus  was  com-
pleted the  admirable  structure  which  has  proved  so
effective  in  promoting  the  welfare  and  growth  of  Odd-
Fellowship  in  this  hemisphere.

Before  entering  on  the  history  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.,  we
will  close  our  brief  sketch  of  the  labors  of  Br.  Wildey.

It  was  important  that  our  National  Head  should  be
legally  recognized  by  the  Manchester  Unity,  and
measures  adopted  to  maintain  uniformity  in  ritual  and
working,  in  both  countries.  "  Br.  Wildey  volunteered
the  pilgrimage,  and  crossed  the  ocean  at  his  own  cost,
reaching  Liverpool  on  the  17th  of  June,  1826.  He
was  most  affectionately  received  by  the  authorities  of
the  Order  at  Manchester,  and  was  greeted  as  the  Father

and  Founder  of  American  Odd-Fellowship He

was  conducted  throughout  the  entire  jurisdiction  —  from
city  to  city,  from  town  to  town,  from  village  to  village —
everywhere  received  by  Committees  of  the  Order,  and
brethren  anxious  to  do  him  honor."  He  taught  them
the  Covenant  and  Remembrance  degrees  —  which  they
adopted,  —  and  the  Grand  Lodge  degree  —  which  they

HISTORY    OF   ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  31

declined,  as  unnecessary  in  their  organization.  They
granted  his  every  request,  save  the  great  object  of  his
mission  —  the  independent  sovereignty  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.
in  this  country.  Before  his  return,  they  intimated  the
desire  of  the  Order  to  present  him  personally  a  valuable
token  of  their  esteem  for  him  and  his  labors.  He  tear-
fully and  eloquently  thanked  them,  but  declared  that
the  common  cause  would  be  better  served,  and  himself
most  highly  honored,  if,  instead  of  a  gift  to  himself,
they  would  grant  to  the  G.  L.  U.  S.  exclusive  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Order  in  America.  This  self-sacrificing
wish  was  heard  in  silence ;  but  on  the  day  fixed  for  his
return,  he  was  surprised  by  a  visit  of  the  Grand  Officers,
who,  after  an  address  by  Grand  Master  Derbyshire,
among  other  valuable  tokens,  placed  in  his  hands  a
charter  beautifully  executed  on  parchment,  dated  back
to  May  15th,  1826.  That  charter  filled  the  wish  of  his
soul,  and  completed  his  great  mission,  by  granting  sole
jurisdiction  over  Odd-Fellowship  in  this  country  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States.

Encampments  were  yet  unknown.  The  Patriarchal
and  Royal  Purple  degrees,  received  about  this  time,
were,  like  the  Golden  Rule  degree,  conferred  in  Grand
Lodges,  and  on  Past  Grands  only.  But  on  June  14th,
1827,  the  G.  L.  of  Maryland  instituted  "Jerusalem
Encampment,  No.  1,"  with  Br.  Wildey,  its  originator,
as  Chief  Patriarch;  and  empowered  it  to  confer  the
sublime  degrees  on  members  of  the  Scarlet  degree.  And
while  he  thus  labored  at  home  for  the  improvement  of
the  Order,  without  stint  of  money  or  of  time,  he
travelled  and  toiled  for  its  extension  and  welfare  abroad.
He  made  official  visits  to  State  Grand  Lodges,  instituted
subordinate  lodges  and  encampments  in  new  States,  in-
structed the  brethren,  adjusted  conflicts,  and  stilled  dis-

32  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

sensions  by  "  pouring  oil  upon  the  troubled  waters."
He  carried  the  Order  into  Delaware,  Ohio,  Kentucky,
Louisiana,  and  Virginia  —  everywhere  a  persuasive
master-spirit  of  fraternity  and  benevolence.

After  serving  as  Grand  Sire  from  1825  to  1833,  he
continued  to  serve  the  Order,  gratuitously,  as  General
Agent.  In  this  capacity  he  visited  the  northern  and
eastern  States  in  1835,  Virginia  in  1837,  Pennsylvania,
Virginia,  Ohio,  Kentucky,  Indiana,  Mississippi,  Ala-
bama, Illinois,  Missouri,  and  Iowa,  in  1838,  and  Ten-
nessee, Arkansas,  and  Texas,  in  1839;  —  travels  then
often  toilsome  and  costly.  He  thus  added  State  after
State  to  the  Order,  and  bound  them  by  the  strongest
ties  in  fraternal  union.  Session  after  session  the  Head
of  the  Order  bowed  to  him  in  grateful  acknowledgment
of  his  self-sacrificing  zeal  and  immensely  valuable  la-
bors ;  and  a  gold  medal,  at  one  period,  and  a  service  of
plate  valued  at  $500,  at  another  time,  were  presented
to  him  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  as
tokens  of  its  admiration  and  esteem.*  To  the  end  of
his  long  and  useful  life,  he  never  was  absent  from
his  seat  in  Grand  Lodge,  however  distant  its  place  of
meeting,  except  on  three  occasions  when  severe  ill-
ness prevented.  Nor  was  he  a  mere  observer — he
served  actively  on  Committees  to  near  the  close  of  his
36  years  of  membership  therein.  "Throughout  his
whole  career  as  an  Odd-Fellow,  private  interests,  health,
comfort,  worldly  advantage  in  all  its  forms,  were  sur-
rendered freely  and  nobly  upon  the  altar  of  that  Order
which  he  loved  and  cherished  with  a  devotion  that
never  wavered,  but  that,  as  age  advanced  upon  him  and
infirmities  increased,  became  more  and  more  intense."

*  These,  and  other  precious  tokens  from  various  lodges  and  en-
campments, are  now  preserved  by  the  Order  in  Maryland.

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  33

Thus  loving  and  beloved,  seeing  his  life-work  pros-
pered and  prospering,  this  aged  Father  of  a  numerous
brotherhood  which  soothed  and  sustained  his  feeble
form,  went  gently  and  peacefully  down  the  declivity  of
life  to  the  boundary  river,  and  there,  at  the  good  old
age  of  eighty-one  years,  passed  over  into  immortality
on  the  19th  of  October,  1861 — full  of  honors  as  of
years.  Everywhere  the  Order  sorrowed  at  his  depar-
ture, yet  in  gratitude  that  he  had  been  spared  so  long
and  to  accomplish  so  much  for  humanity ;  and,  reciting
his  virtues  and  his  labors,  they  lovingly  and  reverently
buried  his  errors  and  his  failings  with  the  aged  frame
forever,  in  Greenmount  Cemetery,  of  his  adopted  city.

In  January,  1865,  the  corporate  authorities  granted
"a  spot  of  ground  in  the  square  located  on  North
Broadway,  and  bounded  by  Fayette  Street,"  for  a  monu-
ment to  his  memory.  And  in  September  following,
the  Order  had  erected  upon  that  elevated  spot,  a  noble
monument  to  the  Father  of  American  Odd-Fellowship
—  a  rocky-faced  granite  base  ten  feet  square,  from
which  rises  a  marble  base,  bearing  the  inscriptions  —
on  the  northwest,  —

The  site  for  this  monument  was  unanimously  voted  by
the  Mayor  and  City  Council  of  Baltimore.

On  the  northeast, —

He  who  realizes  that  the  true  mission  of  Man  on  earth
is  to  rise  above  the  level  of  individual  influence,  and  to
recognize  the  Fatherhood  of  God  over  all,  and  the  Broth  •
erhood  of  Man,  is  Nature's  true  nobleman.

The  opposite  sides, —

THOMAS  WILDEY,  Born  January  15,  1783.  Died
October  19,  1861.

34  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MAXUAL.

Above  this  base  rises  the  pedestal,  bearing  on  the
south  side,  the  Seal  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United
States,  in  has  relievo  —  and  on  the  eastern  and  western,
carvings  in  similar  style  of  Faith  and  Hope.  The
northern  face  bears  the  inscription, —

This  column,  erected  by  the  joint  contributions  of  the
Lodges,  Encampments,  and  individual  members  of  the
Independent  Order  of  Odd- Fellows  of  the  United  States
of  America,  and  jurisdictions  thereunto  belonging,  com-
memorates the  founding  of  that  Order  in  the  City  of
Baltimore  on  the  26th  day  of  April,  1819,  by  THOMAS

WlLDEY.

Above  the  whole  towers  a  life-size  figure  of  Charity
protecting  orphans.  The  entire  height  of  the  structure
is  fifty-two  feet,  and  is  executed  in  chaste  and  beautiful
style.

The  Order  as  founded  by  Bro.  Wildey,  was  simply  a
humane  institution  —  its  main  objects  were  to  relieve
brethren,  bury  the  dead,  and  care  for  the  widow  and
orphan.  But  gradually  there  were  infused  into  its
lectures  and  charges  much  moral  and  (unsectarian)  re-
ligious instruction  ;  and  at  each  revision  these  principles
were  increased,  and  deepened,  and  strengthened,  until
its  beneficial  and  relief  measures,  from  being  ends,  have
become  means  to  a  higher  and  greater  end  —  "to  im-
prove and  elevate  the  character  of  man ;  to  imbue  him
with  conceptions  of  his  capability  for  good ;  to  en-
lighten his  mind ;  to  enlarge  the  sphere  of  his  affections,
and  thus  to  lead  him  to  the  cultivation  of  the  true  fra-
ternal relations  designed  by  the  Great  Author  of  his
being."  Bro.  Wildey  planted  the  seed  and  cultivated
the  tree.  It  bore  fruit  richer  and  better  than  he  had
anticipated.  "He  builded  better  than  he  knew;"  but

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  35

as    Founder   and  Architect  he  dwelt  in  the   Temple
which  he  had  reared  for  more  limited  objects.

His  cherished  aims  and  details  wrere  all  retained,  but
directed  beyond  the  merely  social  and  physical,  to  the
moral  and  spiritual  —  to  lift  its  members  up  to  their
proper  position  —  to  hold  man  "to  a  strict  standard  of
duty  —  to  impress  him  with  the  value  of  character
among  his  fellows,  and  lead  him  to  a  true  appreciation
of  his  whole  duty,  whether  tcT  God  himself,  or  to  his
brother  man  adrift  amid  the  storms  and  breakers  of
life."  (P.  G.  M.  Ridgeiy's  Eulogy.}

§  7.   The  Order  under  ike  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United
States.

Thomas  Wildey,  First  Grand  Sire  — 1825  to  1829.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  organized
January  15th,  1825,  held  its  first  annual  communica-
tion, February  22d,  following,  but  immediately  ad-
journed to  March  30th,  following,  when  its  officers
were  installed,  and  reports  received,  showing  four
Grand  and  nine  subordinate  lodges  in  connection.

One  of  its  first  acts  was  to  step  out  in  advance  of
nearly  all  social  organizations  of  that  period,  by  de-
creeing that  in  no  case  should  any  refreshments  except
water  be  used  in  any  of  our  lodge-rooms.

In  October,  1826,  the  Grand  Charter  from  the  Man-
chester Unity  was  received  through  Grand  Sire  Wildey,
and  accepted.  That  Charter  ratified  and  confirmed  the
former,  and  "  doth  also  hereby  grant,  authorize  and
empower  the  Grand  Sire,  Deputy  Grand  Sire,  Repre-
sentatives and  Proxies  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
United  States  of  America,  to  conduct  the  business  of
Odd-Fellowship  WITHOUT  THE  INTERFERENCE  OF  ANY

36  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

OTHER  COUNTRY,  so  long  as  the  same  is  administered
according  to  the  principles  and  purity  of  Odd-Fel-
lowship."

In  November  1827,  a  charter  was  granted  for  Central
Lodge,  No.  1,  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  which  was  insti-
tuted on  the  26th  of  that  month.  And  the  year  closed
with  four  Grand  Lodges,  having  17  subordinates  be-
side two  in  the  District  of  Columbia.

In  1828  Stranger's  Refuge  Lodge,  of  New  York,
denied  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  State  any  save  ad-
visory powers,  and  refused  obedience  to  its  decisions.
The  Grand  Lodge,  after  all  other  means  failed,  expelled
the  ^subordinate  lodge,  and  was  sustained  by  the  G.
L.  U.  S.  The  expelled  lodge  applied  to  England ;  but
receiving  no  countenance,  it  submitted,  and  was  re-in-
stated in  1829.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District  of
Columbia  was  instituted  Nov.  24,  1828.

Thomas  Wildey  re-elected  Grand  Sire  — 1829  to
1833.  Degree  Lodges  were  established  in  1829,  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.  Prior  to  this,  de-
grees were  conferred  in  the  lodge-room  <>n  Sundays.
Though  at  first  resisted  as  an  innovation  on  the  char-
tered rights  of  subordinates,  Degree  Lodges  have  now
become  general  where  lodges  are  numerous.  Country
and  other  isolated  lodges  confer  degrees  after  the  regular
lodge-meeting;  and  in  some  States  they  are  conferred
by  Degree  Committees,  or  Deputies  appointed  for  the
purpose.

This  year  also,  it  was  decided  that  the  powers  of  the
Grand  Sire  were  confined  to  those  expressly  named  in
the  Constitution  —  rejecting  vague  "ancient  usage."

The  anti-masonic  excitement,  which  began  in  western
New  York  two  years  before,  now  spread  over  neighbor-

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  37

ing  States,  and  extended  to  all  "  secret  societies."  In
Massachusetts,  the  Order  died  away.  In  Rhode  Island,
where  it  had  just  been  planted,  it  took  no  root.  In
New  York  a  contention  about  the  seat  of  the  Grand
Lodge  (New  York,  or  Albany  ?)  aided  the  opposition
and  stopped  all  growth.  In  Pennsylvania  the. 50  sub-
ordinates of  1832  declined  to  40  in  1839.  In  Dela-
ware the  Grand  Lodge  was  not  instituted,  though  a
charter  had  been  granted.  Almost  everywhere  the  ex-
citement lessened  our  numbers  or  prevented  increase.

James  Gettys,  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  Grand
Sire  — 1833  to  1835,  the  term  having  been  shortened
to  two  years.  He  was  succeeded  by  George  Keyser,
of  Maryland,  Grand  Sire  — 1835  to  1837.  Efforts
were  again  made  to  induce  the  English  lodges  to  dis-
continue their  convivial  practices  and  to  cease  changing
the  work  of  the  order  without  consulting  or  notifying
us,  "  that  uniformity  of  action  and  principle  might
exist  between  us."  As  the  Manchester  Unity  had  re-
vised the  lectures  and  entirely  changed  the  initiation,
&c.,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  now  made
a  thorough  revision  of  our  ritual,  rejecting  much  of
the  old  version,  and  purging  out  many  crudities  in
style  and  sentiment.  In  1836  James  L.  Ridgely,  of
Maryland,  was  chosen  Grand  Sire,  but  declining,  Sam-
uel H.  Perkins,  of  Pennsylvania,  was  elected  at  a
special  session  in  May,  1837,  and  installed  at  the  fol-
lowing annual  communication ;  when,  also,  further
correspondence  was  ordered  with  the  Manchester  Unity
in  reference  to  their  alterations  of  the  work  of  the
Order.

In  1838  P.  G.  Sire  Wildey  reported  what  jurisdic-
tions he  had  visited,  and  among  the  lodges  and  en-
4

38  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

campments  instituted  by  him  was  "  Lone  Star  Lodge
No.  1,  in  Texas,  opened  July  25th,  1838  —  the  first
charter  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United
States  to  a  foreign  country.

In  1839,  no  quorum  appearing,  the  annual  commu-
nication was  not  held;  but  at  a  special  session  in  April
following  they  installed  Zenas  B.  Glazier,  of  Delaware,
Grand  Sire.  The  correspondence  with  the  Manchester
Unity  showed  that  it  agreed  to  interchange  the  A.  T.
P.  W,,  but  made  no  promise  to  cease  lodge  conviviali-
ties, or  to  consult  us  on  alterations  of  signs,  &c.  In
1840  Grand  Encampments  were  admitted  to  representa-
tion, in  despite  of  earnest  opposition,  because  the  quali-
fication of  the  R.  P.  D.  for  all  G.  Representatives  suf-
ficiently protected  the  patriarchal  branch,  whose  mem-
bers were  also  represented  as  members  of  lodges.  The
regalia  of  the  Order  was  also  regulated,  and  the  five
degrees  arranged  as  they  are  now  numbered.

In  1841  Jas.  L.  Ridgely  was  a  second  time  elected
Grand  Sire,  and  again  declined,  when  John  A.  Ken-
nedy, of  New  York,  was  elected  and  installed.  The
grievances  caused  by  the  Manchester  Unity  continuing
and  increasing,  the  Grand  Sire,  in  February,  1842,
deputed  P.  G.  M.  James  Alcock  to  confer  with  the
English  Board  of  Directors,  and  arrange  for  consulta-
tions about,  and  notices  of  alterations.  But  the  Direc-
tors refused  to  entertain  such  propositions,  and  referred
the  whole  subject  to  the  Annual  Meeting  of  Deputies.
G.  Secretary  Ridgely  and  G.  Chaplain  I.  D.  William-
son were  then  deputed  to  attend  that  annual  meeting  —
where  they  were  kindly  received,  but  their  efforts  for
peace  and  harmony  set  at  naught.  Consequently  the
annual  communication  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.  in  1842  was

HISTORY    OF   ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  89

mainly  occupied  in  considering  the  report  of  its  depu-
ties. And  here,  that  our  allusions  and  the  action  of
our  National  Lodge  may  be  clearly  understood,  we  will
briefly  state  those  difficulties.

The  government  of  the  Manchester  Unity  of  the  I.
O.  O.  F.  was  ostensibly  vested  in  the  Annual  Mov-
able Committee — a  Convention  of  one  delegate  from
each  lodge,  beside  deputies  from  each  district,  some
2000  or  3000  members — which  met  on  Whit-Sunday
each  year.  But  all  power  during  the  interim  was
vested  in  a  Board  of  some  twenty  Directors,  all  located
in  Manchester.  This  Board,  few  in  numbers,  located
together,  and  united  in  interests,  exerted  controlling
influence,  and  altered  ritual  and  signs  almost  at  will.
As  we  were  not  notified  of  these  changes,  their  new
members  were  excluded  from  working  with  us,  for
which  we  were  reproached,  censured,  and  threatened  !
The  British  lodges  had  a  uniform  initiation  and  card-
deposit  fee  ;  ours  varied  according  to  cost  and  style  of
living,  as  did  also  our  benefits ;  yet  the  Manchester
Unity  insisted  that  we  should  admit  to  membership
and  benefits,  their  members,  at  a  less  sum  than  was  paid
by  our  American  brethren.  Add  to  this,  that  their
"  convivial  practices  "  lowered  the  character  of  most  of
their  members  below  the  moral  standard  here,  and  our
grievances  become  apparent.  Their  demands  involved
an  entire  change  of  our  government,  of  our  standard  of
morality,  and  more  than  a  surrender  of  our  chartered
sovereignty ;  for  we  had  not  the  voice  granted  to  their
humblest  lodge  in  the  alterations  made  in  signs  and
ritual.  As  our  Order  neither  used,  nor  required  them
to  use  any  " oaths"  whatever,  the  pretence  that  the
insurmountable  difficulty  on  their  side  was  that,  by  the

40  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

law  of  the  land,  they  could  not  adopt  our  "  oaths  of
initiation/'  &c.,  is  not  correct.  (See  Spry's  History,  p.
50.)  Of  ccurse,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States
approved  the  acts  of  its  deputies,  thanked  them  for  their
services,  and  unanimously  severed  the  connection  with
the  Manchester  Unity ;  and,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the
Unity  had  altered  the  ancient  land-marks,  violated  the
principles  and  changed  the  work  of  the  Order,  and
attempted  to  invade  our  chartered  rights,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States  declared  itself  the  only
Fountain  and  Depository  of  "  Independent  Odd-Fel-
lowship "  on  the  Globe.

The  Manchester  Unity,  in  accordance  with  its  fre-
quent threats,  subsequently  attempted  to  establish  lodges
in  this  country,  but  failed.  Our  National  Grand  Lodge
attempted  establishing  lodges  in  Great  Britain,  but
failed  also.  And  thus  each  order  has  remained  pos-
sessor of  its  own  jurisdiction.

In  1843,  Howell  Hopkins,  of  Pennsylvania,  was  in-
stalled Grand  Sire.  A  dispensation  was  issued  for
opening  "  Prince  of  Wales  Lodge,  No.  I/'  in  Montreal,
Canada,  under  the  standing  rule  of  establishing  lodges
in  any  country  where  there  is  no  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Order.  At  this  time,  also,  proxy  representation  in  the
G.  L.  U.  S.  was  happily  abolished.

In  1844,  P.  G.  M.  Rev.  E.  H.  Chapin,  of  Massa-
chusetts ;  P.  G.  M.  J.  L.  Ridgely,  of  Maryland ;  P.  G.
Rev.  J.  D.  McCabe,  of  Virginia ;  P.  G.  Sire  John  A.
Kennedy,  of  New  York,  and  P.  D.  G.  Sire  Win.  W.
Moore,  of  District  of  Columbia,  were  appointed  to  revise
the  entire  ritual  of  the  Order.  Originally  prepared  by
different  persons  without  mutual  consultation,  and  since
then  altered  in  portions  at  various  periods,  changes  were

HISTORY   OF   ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  41

required  to  harmonize  it  in  sentiment  and  in  style,  and
especially  to  make  it  properly  solemn,  impressive,  and
attractive  to  the  improved  taste  and  feelings  of  the
brotherhood.  "  The  revision  (says  Brother  Bidgely)
may  be  said  to  have  literally  excluded  all  of  the  English
work,  and,  in  a  great  degree,  to  have  been  original.  It
wholly  rejected  the  old  charge,  mainly  borrowed  from
the  Masonic  Order,  and  substituted  the  present  Past
Grand's  charge.  This  charge  is  intended  as  the  basis
or  substratum  of  our  Moral  Temple."

In  1845,  Thomas  Sherlock,  of  Ohio,  was  installed
Grand  Sire.  Honorary  membership  was  now  abolished,
as  inconsistent  with  fraternal  equality  and  mutual  relief.
Lodges  were  permitted  to  grant  travelling  certificates
to  wives  and  widows  of  members,  securing  to  them  the
aid  and  protection  of  the  Order.  The  Order  in  British
North  America  was  now  constituted  separate  and  inde-
pendent ;  but  as  this  measure  failed  after  a  few  years'
trial,  it  is  merely  named  here.  The  term  of  office  in
subordinates  was  changed  from  three  to  six  months.  A
splendid  gold  watch  with  chain  was  presented  to  G.
Secretary  Ridgely  as  a  token  of  appreciation  of  his
services  in  editing  the  Covenant  and  Official  Magazine
for  several  years,  and  of  long  continued  labors  as  Grand
Recording  and  Corresponding  Secretary.  And  at  a
special  session  the  revised  Lectures  and  charges  were
adopted,  and  the  Order  put  in  possession  of  its  present
harmonious  and  beautifully  impressive  ritual.

In  1847,  Horn  R.  Kneass,  of  Pennsylvania,  was  in-
stalled Grand  Sire.  A  movement  to  change  the  repre-
sentation in  Grand  Lodges  and  Grand  Encampments
had  commenced  three  or  four  years  before  this.  Origi-
nally, every  Past  Grand  and  Past  Chief  Patriarch  be-

42  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

came  a  permanent  representative  of  his  subordinate,
on  entering  the  Grand  body,  without  power  of  the  sub-
ordinate to  control  or  remove  him.  As  each  subordi-
nate passed  from  two  to  four  chief  officers  each  year,
when  the  subordinates  became  numerous,  the  represen-
tation in  Grand  bodies  became  unwieldy,  and  their
power  was  generally  wielded  by  the  numerous  repre-
sentatives located  in  and  near  the  seat  of  the  Grand
Lodge  and  Grand  Encampment  —  usually  a  city,  having
many  subordinates  —  not  a  few  of  whose  P.  Gs.  and  P.  C.
Ps.,  as  proxies,  cast  also  the  votes  of  distant  lodges  and
encampments.  The  election  of  Grand  officers  being  held
only  in  the  Grand  bodies,  few  beside  the  nearest  resident
Past  Grands  and  P.  Chief  Patriarchs  could  participate
therein.  All  this  centralization  of  absolute  power  be-
came more  and  more  grievous  as  the  Order  increased,
until  a  general  demand  was  made  for  a  limited  repre-
sentation by  annual  elections  in  the  subordinates ;  and
for  the  election  of  Grand  officers  by  voting  in  the  sub-
ordinates. Such  a  great  change  was  naturally  resisted
as  an  invasion  of  "  vested  rights  "  and  dangerous  to  the
stability  of  the  Institution.

New  York,  which  had  already  2000  members  in  her
Grand  Lodge,  and  was  yearly  adding  800  to  the  num-
ber, led  the  van  of  the  reform.  In  1846,  when  over
100  amendments  to  the  G.  L.  Constitution  were  pending,
the  reformers  offered,  and  the  conservatives  finally
agreed,  to  hold  a  Convention  of  delegates  to  frame  a
new  constitution.  The  Convention  met  and  adopted  a
new  constitution  with  only  two  dissenting  votes ;  but
in  the  December  session  of  the  Grand  Lodge  the  con-
servatives set  it  aside,  on  the  plea  that  the  proceedings
had  been  unconstitutional.  The  next  February  session

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.

the  country  lodges  came  in  great  force,  making  it  the
most  numerous  attendance  ever  known  ;  but  the  Grand
Master  overruled  all  motions  to  restore  the  new  consti-
tution, and  refused  to  entertain  any  appeal  from  his
decisions.  An  appeal  was  made  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  United  States,  which  decided  that  the  new  consti-
tution in  an  amended  form  should  be  passed  upon  at
the  next  session  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York.
This  was  done  in  November,  after  various  efforts  to
evade  or  compromise,  and  the  new  constitution  was
adopted  by  202  lodges  for,  and  77  against — three
lodges  giving  tie  votes.  But  in  December  the  Grand
Master,  by  proclamation,  declared  the  old  constitution
yet  in  force.  A  session  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
United  States  was  petitioned  for,  but  G.  Sire  Kneass
refused  to  call  it,  and,  instead,  sent  a  Commission  to
New  York  to  examine  the  case  and  report.  The
Commission  being  deemed  illegal  and  prejudiced,  the
reform  party  refused  to  attend ;  whereupon  an  ex  parte
examination  and  report  was  made,  and  the  Grand  Sire
proclaimed  the  minority  to  be  the  legal  Grand  Lodge.
At  the  annual  communication,  in  1848,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States,  by  a  vote  of  47  to  24,  re-
ceived the  old  constitution  representatives,  and  rejected
the  others.  The  dissenting  24  Grand  Representatives
protested  against  this  decision,  and  published  two
addresses  signed  in  full  —  one  advising  the  rejected
party  not  to  organize  a  new  Order,  but  to  stand  fast,
pledging  another  effort  to  obtain  a  just  decision; — the
other,  calling  on  the  Order  at  large  to  decide  whether
our  government  shall  be  "  one  of  defined  powers  and
limited  authority,  or  of  personal  discretion  and  unde-
fined prerogative."

44  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

In  1849,  R.  H.  Griffin,  of  Georgia,  was  installed
Grand  Sire.  Two  delegations  from  New  York  again
appeared.  A  special  committee  reported  in  favor  of
dividing  the  State,  granting  to  the  minority  the  South-
ern, and  to  the  majority  the  Northern  District  —  and  it
was  done.  The  spirit  of  reform  had  spread  into  other
States,  meanwhile,  and  now  appeared  in  the  National
Lodge  itself.  The  Grand  Lodge  adjourned  to  meet  in
Cincinnati  (but  under  protest,  that  Baltimore  was  its
permanent  seat) ;  and,  that  proposed  reforms  might  be
fully  considered,  the  annual  communication  was  to  be
preceded  one  week  by  a  special  session.  Unfortunately
various  difficulties  arose,  and  among  them  the  cholera
in  the  Mississippi  valley,  which  prevented  the  special
session.  But  at  the  annual  communication  Past  Grand
Sires  were  declared  not  entitled  to  vote  unless  they
were  Grand  Representatives  also.

In  1851  Wm.  W.  Moore,  of  the  District  of  Columbia,
was  installed  Grand  Sire.  Ample  atonement  was  now
made  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Northern  New  York  for
unintentional  injustice  of  previous  years.  At  this
session  Schuyler  Colfax,  of  Indiana,  reported  the  "De-
gree of  Rebekah,"  for  the  wives  of  scarlet-degree  mem-
bers. It  is  carefully  guarded  against  even  the  appear-
ance of  impropriety,  and  has  been  received  with  much
favor  by  many  jurisdictions  and  their  "  Daughters  of
Rebekah."  In  1852  the  "  London  Order  of  Odd-Fel-
lows," (England,)  numbering  233,000  members,  pro-
posed a  union  with  us.  The  proposal  was  respectfully
declined,  mainly  on  the  reasons  that  entered  into  our
severance  from  the  Manchester  Unity.

In  1853,  in  Philadelphia,  Wilmot  G.  De  Saussure,
of  South  Carolina,  was  installed  Grand  Sire.  Grand

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  45

lodges  now  existed  in  all  the  States  and  some  of  the
Territories.  In  1854,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  British
North  America  having  abandoned  its  sovereignty  by
neglect  of  the  subordinates,  those  lodges  yet  remaining,
again  came  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  United  States.  A  new  constitution  and  by-laws
were  now  adopted,  embodying  the  reforms  of  previous
years.

In  1855,  Wm.  Ellison,  of  Massachusetts,  was  in-
stalled Grand  Sire.  Every  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand
Encampment  was  represented  at  this  session.  In  1856,
D.  G.  Sire  G.  "W.  Race  presided,  the  Grand  Sire  being
too  unwell  to  attend.  The  Grand  Sire's  address  referred
very  feelingly  to  the  storm  already  gathering  over  the
nation,  and  reminded  the  brethren  that  Odd-Fellowship
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  distinctions  of  parties  and
of  sects — that  the  earth  is  our  country,  and  the  human
race  our  nation.

In  1857,  G.  W.  Race,  of  Louisiana,  was  installed
Grand  Sire.  F.  D.  Stuart,  of  the  District  of  Colum-
bia, was  voted  a  testimonial  for  his  arduous  services  in
arranging  the  secret  work  of  the  Order — and  a  silver
tea-set  was  subsequently  presented  to  him.  In  1858,
Grand  Lodges  (five  subordinates  in  each)  had  been  in-
stituted in  Kansas  and  Nebraska.  The  Constitution
was  amended  to  permit  elective  officers  to  make  motions
and  debate,  but  not  to  vote;  and  non-elective  officers
also,  if  permitted  by  a  majority  vote.  By  amendment
adopted  in  1857,  the  Grand  Sire  was  to  be  installed  at
the  same  session  at  which  he  was  elected ;  and  Samuel
Craighead,  of  Ohio,  was  thus  chosen  and  installed  at
this  session.  The  Fortieth  Anniversary  of  the  Order
(April  26,  1819)  was  directed  to  be  generally  cele-

46  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

brated;  and  in  1859  the  good  effects  were  so  apparent
as  to  lead  to  desire  its  celebration  annually.  The  Order
had  been  planted  in  the  Sandwich  Islands,  and  now
came  an  application  from  the  Grand  Lodge  (and  its
seven  subordinates)  of  Victoria,  Australia,  for  admis-
sion—  on  which  further  correspondence  was  ordered.

In  1860,  at  Nashville,  Tenn.,  D.  G.  Sire  E.  H.  Fitz-
hugh  presided,  the  Grand  Sire  being  too  unwell  to
attend.  The  Legislature  had  placed  the  State  Capitol
at  the  disposal  of  the  brethren,  and  the  communication
was  unusually  interesting.  Visits  were  paid  to  the
widow  of  President  Polk,  and  to  the  tomb  of  Jackson
at  the  Hermitage.  The  present  forms  for  dedicating
Halls  and  laying  Corner-stones  were  adopted,  and  it
was  ordered  "  that  these  forms  be  used  by  the  Order,
and  no  other."  Robt.  B.  Boylston,  of  South  Carolina,
was  installed  Grand  Sire, —  but  this  joyous,  brotherly
meeting  was  soon  followed  by  the  strife  of  civil  war !

In  1861,  D.  G.  Sire  Milton  Herndon,  of  Indiana,
presided ;  the  civil  war  had  separated  the  Grand  Sire
from  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  only  15  Grand  Lodges  and
7  Grand  Encampments  were  represented.  It  was  a  sad
session;  much  business  was  deferred  because  of  absent
representatives.  The  Grand  Lodge  was  in  debt,  with
diminished  resources,  and  Grand  Representatives  essayed
to  lighten  the  burden  by  donating  a  portion  of  their
mileage.  In  1862,  in  addition  to  the  continued  separa-
tions by  war,  the  venerable  presence  of  Father  Wildey
was  missed  ;  he  had  departed  October  19th,  1861.  Only
11  Grand  Lodges  and  11  Grand  Encampments  wi-iv
represented ;  but  the  Grand  Lodge  was  out  of  debt  for
the  first  time  in  several  years,  with  ample  resources  for
the  current  year.  J.  B.  Nicholson,  of  Pennsylvania,

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  47

was  installed  Grand  Sire.  In  1863,  correspondence  had
been  held  with  the  Order  in  Virginia  and  Georgia,  by
flags  of  truce,  and  Louisiana  had  also  been  heard  from
Thus  far  the  Order  was  sundered,  but  its  parts  not
alienated.  In  the  Sandwich  Islands  it  was  prospering,
but  in  Vermont  it  was  in  danger  of  dying  out.  In
1864,  the  Grand  Lodge  met  in  Boston — all  the  juris-
dictions represented,  except  those  of  the  Southern
States.  Virginia  and  Louisiana  had  again  responded  to
our  greetings.  The  law  forbidding  all  edibles  or  bever-
ages, except  water,  as  refreshments,  in  any  lodge-room,
ante-room  or  hall  connected  with  or  adjoining  thereto,
and  under  control  of  any  lodge  or  encampment  of  the
Order,  was  reiterated ;  and  all  processions  or  use  of  the
name  and  regalia  of  the  Order  forbidden  in  connection
with  any  celebration,  anniversary,  ball,  or  party,  where
intoxicating  drinks  were  to  be  used.  Isaac  M.  Veitch,
of  Missouri,  was  installed  Grand  Sire.

In  1865,  those  who  had  been  separated  by  war  were
again  united  in  peace;  all  the  State  jurisdictions  were
again  represented,  except  North  Carolina  and  Florida ;
and  the  State  of  New  York,  long  divided,  was  again
to  form  but  one  jurisdiction;  the  two  Grand  Lodges
and  the  two  Grand  Encampments  petitioned  for  such
union,  and  the  G.  L.  U.  S.  granted  their  petitions,  and
enacted  the  unions  to  take  place  the  following  August,
which  took  place  accordingly.  In  1866,  every  jurisdic-
tion, except  the  Lower  Provinces  of  British  North
America,  was  represented.  The  monument  to  Father
Wildey  was  appropriately  dedicated  by  a  Grand  pro-
cession, solemn  ceremonies,  and  an  unveiling  of  the
statue  of  Charity  which  crowns  the  monument.  The
corner-stone  had  been  laid  on  the  preceding  anniversary

48  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

of  the  Order  (April  26th)  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mary-
land. All  use  of  the  name,  or  sanction  of  the  Order  to
any  lottery,  raffle,  or  gift  enterprise,  was  expressly  for-
bidden. An  appeal  was  made  to  all  subordinates  for
aid  to  the  Southern  lodges,  destroyed  or  desolated  and
impoverished  by  the  war;  and  a  duplicate  of  the  por-
trait of  Grand  Sire  Boylston,  of  South  Carolina,  de-
ceased, was  ordered  to  be  sent  to  his  widow.  James  P.
Sanders,  of  New  York,  was  installed  Grand  Sire.

In  1867,  met  in  New  York  city.  A  charter  for  a
Grand  Lodge  in  Colorado  was  granted.  The  26th  of
April  was  established  as  the  anniversary  of  the  Order,
and  all  Grand  Lodges  and  Grand  Encampments  were
requested  to  instruct  their  subordinates  to  celebrate  it
annually.  Several  most  prominent  public  institutions
of  charity,  Jewish  and  Christian,  were  visited  by  the
Grand  Lodge,  on  invitation,  with  highly  interesting  and
profitable  results  to  all  parties.

The  decided  refusal  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
United  States,  at  this  session,  to  make  alterations  in  its
ritual  or  secret  work,  is  an  indication  that,  for  manv
years  at  least,  the  Order  will  remain  stable  and  uniform
in  its  teachings  and  language,  as  it  ever  must  be  in  its
deeds.

We  have  thus  traced  the  history  of  our  Order,  from
its  first  appearance  as  an  institution,  as  fully  as  our
limits  would  permit.  The  feebly  glimmering  spark,
momently  threatened  with  extinction  by  the  want  of
proper  elements  on  which  to  feed  its  fire,  has  increased
to  a  glowing,  generous  flame,  abundantly  able  to  sup-
port its  own  combustion,  and  give  warmth  and  life  to
all  around.  That  band  of  five  brethren  in  Baltimore,
in  1819,  has  grown  into  a  mighty  army;  has  overspread

HISTORY    OF    ODD-FELLOWSHIP.  49

the  land  with  its  lodges  and  encampments ;  has
mightily  grappled  with  forlorn  destitution  and  suffer-
ing, and  driven  back  the  waves  of  ignorance,  vice,  and
selfishness  everywhere,  and  has  moulded  into  a  kindred
likeness  of  benevolence,  not  a  few  institutions  nearly
as  powerful  for  good  as  itself.  Surely,  when  we  view
the  difficulties  that  beset  Odd-Fellowship  everywhere,
the  humble  lives  and  scanty  means  of  its  early  mem-
bers, and  then  look  at  its  past  progress  and  present  con-
dition, we  may  say,  "'  It  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is
marvellous  in  our  eyes!"  Says  Brother  Eidgely,  in
his  "Eulogy  on  the  Life  and  Character  of  Thomas
Wildey:" — "Odd-Fellowship  was  organized  in  1819.
During  its  first  decade,  it  made  but  little  progress.
....  Since  1829  [to  1862,  only]  it  has  gathered
within  its  folds,  by  initiation,  426,963  members.  Its
revenue,  derived  from  weekly  contributions  (varying
from  six  to  twelve  cents)  from  these  members,  has
amounted  to  $20,368,057.  Of  these  receipts  (after  dis-
bursements for  ordinary  expenses  amounting  to  $5,-
092,000)  it  has  applied,  for  the  relief  of  the  sick,  the
burial  of  the  dead,  and  the  education  of  the  orphan,
the  sum  of  $8,804,000,  leaving  a  balance  of  $6,472,000
for  the  same  objects.  These  funds,  thus  employed,  have
relieved  558,068  members,  and  37,567  widowed  fam-
ilies.'*' In  Maryland  alone,  "  where  this  branch  of  the
Order  is  much  cherished,  during  this  period,  2,744
children  have  been  in  charge  of  the  Committee  on  Edu-
cation, of  which  number  1,193  are  still  under  care,  and
over  500  have  been  placed  at  trades  or  other  industrial
pursuits."  All  this  in  less  than  one-third  of  a  century !
We  would  not  even  seem  boastful ;  but  with  gratitude
to  Him  who  has  given  "  the  increase  "  to  the  planting
5

50  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

and  watering  by  our  Fathers,  we  humbly  ask  —  What
institution,  of  such  humble  origin,  scanty  means,  and
with  so  many  difficulties  and  obstacles,  has  accomplished
more  good  and  prevented  more  suffering,  in  so  few
years  ?  With  our  increased  numbers  and  means,  what
may  not  —  what  WILL  not  be  expected  from  our  Order
in  the  next  thirty  years !  Brethren  —  Daughters  of
Rebekah  —  Odd-Fellowship  expects  every  member  to
do  full  duty;  —  let  us  be  up  and  doing,  in  the  name  of
God  and  humanity !

CHAPTER  IT.

OBJECTIONS   AND    INQUIRIES   ANSWERED.

Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?  .  .  .  .  Come
and  see. — JOHN  i.  <!<>.

Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance,  but  judge  righteous
judgment. — JOHN  vii.  iM.

ODD-FELLOWSHIP  having  increased  so  rapidly,  and
spread  its  organizations  so  widely,  within  a  few  years,
naturally  attracted  the  attention  of  nearly  all  classes  of
the  community.  Rising,  too,  as  it  seemed,  out  of  the
midst,  and  in  defiance  of  a  violent  excitement  against  a
supposedly  similar  institution,  every  objection  urged
against  that  was  pressed  against  this.  Some  yet  regard
it  with  horror.  Mystery  they  deem  but  another  name
for  evil,  and  all  "secret  societies"  dangerous  to  the
moral,  social,  and  political  well-being  of  the  country

OBJECTIONS   AND    INQUIRIES   ANSWERED.  51

A  few  regard  it  with  contempt,  believing  it  a  chiMish
mummery,  calculated  to  enroll  only  weak  minds,  fond
of  the  notoriety  acquired  by  singularity  of  name  and
conduct,  and  vain  of  queer  titles,  banners,  and  regalia.
Others,  viewing  its  rapid  increase,  are  disposed  to
examine  it  more  closely,  to  learn  what  has  thus  ex-
tended its  operations  in  the  land.  And  not  a  few,  who
have  noted  its  deeds  of  benevolence,  and  its  salutary
social  influences,  desire  to  trace  its  outer  deeds  to  its
inner  life,  and  ascertain  what  are  really  its  ultimate
aims  and  highest  objects,  and  what  the  means  by  which
it  purposes  to  accomplish  them.

To  all  these,  and  especially  to  the  latter  two,  we  now
address  ourselves,  in  all  truthfulness  and  honesty.  We
will  endeavor  fairly  to  state  and  candidly  to  answer
objections,  unfold  our  principles,  and  declare  fully  our
objects.  And  the  portions  prepared  especially  for

"  Brethren  of  our  friendly  Order,"

of  every  degree,  station,  and  office,  will  further  disclose
the  life  which  animates  us  in  all  the  obligations,  duties,
privileges,  and  operations  of  our  fraternity.

§  1.   Our  Name.

It  seems  that  of  a  mere  convivial  club,  Dr>  at  best,
of  light-minded  persons,  who  delight  to  practice  "frolic
and  fun,"  and  affect  singularity  of  conduct  to  gain  no-
toriety among  the  curious  and  ignorant.

The  names  Nazarene  and  Christian  were  once  terms
of  even  greater  obloquy  and  reproach  than  is  that  of
Odd-Fellow.  Yet,  in  despite  of  odium  and  singularity
then,  none  are  now  more  honorable  and  honored  in

52  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Christendom.  Condemn  us  not,  then,  merely  because
of  our  name.

True,  it  is  a  singular  one ;  but  we  chose  it  not.  It
came  to  us,  attached  to  an  institution  which,  for  many
years,  in  another  country,  had  fulfilled  its  great  motto,
"FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  AND  TRUTH,"  by  visiting  the  sick,
relieving  the  distressed,  and  burying  the  dead.  Hence,
singular  as  that  name  is — yea,  odious  as  it  may  sound
to  some  —  it  has  been  rendered  dear  to  our  hearts  by.
the  glorious  deeds  of  benevolence  and  philanthropy
performed  under  it,  and  by  the  great  moral  and  reli-
gious principles  associated  with  it,  until  its  singularity
is  lost  in  its  moral  value  and  beauty.  To  us,  Odd-
Fellow  is  an  honorable  name.  We  love  to  wear  it,  and
to  bear  its  reproach  we  deem  an  honor.

To  be  an  Odd-Fellow,  in  the  sense  it  has  in  our
minds,  you  must  act  and  speak  like  an  honest  man;
you  must  do  all  the  good  to  mankind  that  is  in  your
power ;  you  must  reverence  God ;  do  to  your  neighbor
as  you  would  have  him  do  unto  you,  and  keep  yourself
free  from  all  excess  and  pollution.  Alas,  that  some
who  bear  the  name  do  not  sustain  the  character !  To
do  the  work  of  an  Odd-Fellow,  you  must  attend  the
couch  of  the  sick  and  dying,  the  side  of  suffering  and
distress,  the  house  of  mourning,  the  grave  of  the  de-
parted, the  abode  of  poverty  and  want,  and  "visit  the
widows  and  fatherless  in  their  afflictions,"  as  well  as  the
Lodge-room,  where  social  intercourse  and  fellowship
abound.  Become  an  Odd-Fellow,  and  sustain  the  cha-
racter, and  perform  the  duties,  and  share  the  privileges
of  that  name,  and  it  will  sound  as  sweet  to  you  as  it  a
dear  to  us.

OBJECTIONS    AND    INQUIRIES    ANSWERED.  53

2.   Our  Obligations  and  Penalties.

We  have  been  branded  as  "  an  oath-bound  association,
whose  members  are  obligated,  by  bloody  penalties,  to
favor  each  other  wrongfully,  and  to  punish  violations  of
these  obligations  in  some  severe  and  terrible  manner;"
yet  there  is  not  a  single  obligation  administered  among
us,  inconsistent  with  any  duty  we  owe  to  self,  family,
country,  mankind,  or  to  our  Creator.  All  the  aid  we
are  to  render  each  other,  is  and  must  be  within  the
limits  of  strict  humanity  and  patriotism,  of  morality
and  religion.  We  invoke  no  penalty  on  life  or  limb,
person  or  property :  nothing  but  the  social  and  moral
consequences  which  follow  the  violation  of  any  similar
pledge  of  sacred  honor  among  the  rest  of  mankind;
consequently,  no  one  among  us  is  bound,  in  any  way,
to  revenge  any  revelation  which  an  unworthy  member
may  make.  We  are  not,  therefore,  an  oath-bound  in-
stitution, nor  are  our  obligations  oaths — no  jurist  would
call  them  such — but  simply  solemn  pledges  and  cove-
nants, wherein  our  yea  is  "yea  and  amen."

§  3.   Our  Regalia,  Emblems,  $c.

They  are  denounced  as  childish,  foolish,  unbecoming
good  men  and  serious  purposes  and  philanthropic
deeds.

An  unthinking  young  man  ridiculed  a  grave  gentle-
man whom  he  saw  engaged,  with  soap-suds  and  a  pipe,
blowing  bubbles  in  the  air.  Yet  that  ridiculed  man
was  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  who,  by  that  seemingly  childish
employment,  was  ascertaining  the  laws  of  the  Almighty
in  relation  to  light  and  colors  !  One  of  our  uses  of
5*

54  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

regalia,  is  to  teach  us  to  beware  horf  we  judge  men  by
mere  appearances.

Possibly  the  objector  himself  wears  some  simple
article,  given  him  as  a  memento  by  a  dear  friend ;  or
keeps  near  him  some  seemingly  unmeaning  thing  to
remind  him  of  important  duties  to  God  and  man.  Per-
haps he  statedly  observes  some  ceremony,  full  of  solemn
teachings  to  his  soul.  However  childish  that  memento
or  token,  however  senseless  that  ceremonial  may  seem
to  others,  to  him  they  are  above  all  value,  because  full
of  precious  memories  and  solemn  teachings.

Such  our  decorations,  emblems,  and  forms  are  to  us.
The  light  shed  on  their  meaning,  as  we  advance  in  Odd-
Fellowship,  and  their  novel  applications  to  impress  on
our  minds  important  principles  and  precepts,  render
them  peculiarly  pleasing  and  highly  useful.  The  thought-
ful Odd-Fellow  is  continually  reminded  by  them  of  im-
portant duties  to  God  and  man.

Besides  this,  our  regalia,  jewels,  and  some  of  our
emblems  are  used  to  mark  grades  and  stations  among
us.  As  such,  they  are  not  more  puerile,  certainly,  than
the  laced  coats  and  caps,  the  plumes  and  epaulettes  of
the  military,  or  any  other  badges  used  among  men  to
distinguish  station  and  office.  But  they  are  not  only
our  uniform,  the  very  colors  are  made  to  teach  us  im-
portant lessons  and  duties.

§  4.    The  Expense  of  Regalia,  £c.

It  is  possible  that,  in  some  cases,  more  money  is
expended  in  furnishing  our  Halls  and  Lodge-wardrobes
than  is  necessary  to  instruct  mind  and  heart,  to  refine
the  taste,  and  to  administer  to  comfort  and  convenience.
As  with  churches  and  with  individuals,  so  with  Lodges

OBJECTIONS    AND    INQUIRIES   ANSWERED.  55

and  Odd-Fellows — the  desire  for  display  too  often  out-
runs ability  and  utility.  We  will  not  defend  any  extra-
vagance ;  yea,  we  even  condemn  it,  let  the  censure  fall
where  it  may.  But  within  the  reasonable  limits  of
ability  and  utility,  how  stands  the  objection  to  Odd-
Fellowship  on  the  score  of  useless  expense  for  finery  ?

Our  rooms  should  be  made  pleasant  and  comfortable
for  all  classes  of  our  members,  to  induce  their  attend-
ance, and  render  the  transaction  of  our  business  a
pleasant  duty.  If  the  wealthiest  are  willing  to  abate
some  of  the  luxurious  comforts  of  their  homes,  and  learn
the  uses  of  simple  conveniences,  the  poorer  brethren
should  not  object  to  some  expense  beyond  their  frugal
accommodations,  where  they  may  learn  the  cares  and
proprieties  belonging  to  a  richer  style  of  living.  Even
should  it  lead  the  humble  man  to  aspire  after  more
comforts  and  greater  neatness  than  he  is  accustomed  to
in  his  own  home,  so  as  to  lead  to  habits  of  more  pro-
ductive industry  and  economy  to  procure  them,  we  do
not  think  himself  or  family  will  be  injured  thereby.

But,  aside  from  this  homeliest  view  of  the  subject,
taste  and  propriety  require  that  there  should  be  a
fitness  between  the  means  and  the  end.  The  emblems
by  which  important  truths  are  illustrated  and  enforced,
should  not  be  so  clumsy,  inelegant,  and  coarse,  as  tc
mar  the  teaching.  The  decorations  among  which  men
meet  to  learn  the  gentlest  and  most  beautiful  practices
of  Christianity,  should  not  be  ungraceful  and  tawdry.
The  school  for  the  elevation  of  human  aspirations  and
character,  should  not  be  clad  in  uniforms  calculated  to
drag  down  the  imagination  and  belittle  the  feelings.

"But  if  the  Order  aims  to  benefit  the  poor,  why  not
bestow  its  cost  in  charity  ?"  If  the  owner  of  the  Koohi-
noor  diamond,  estimated  worth  thirty  millions  of  dollars.

56  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

were  to  sell  it.  to  give  the  money  to  the  poor,  some  one
else  must  buy  and  possess  it,  and  so  become  subject  to
the  same  reproach:  "Better  sell  it,  and  give  the  money
to  the  poor  !"  Could  it  be  made  to  furnish  "well-paid
employment  to  hundreds  wrho  need  it,  the  case  would
be  different.  The  cost  of  our  decorations  has  been
employed  in  giving  needed  labor  (and  by  that  labor,
honorable  subsistence)  to  hundreds  and  thousands  of
industrious  men,  women,  and  children.  So  far,  then,
it  has  not  been  expended  in  vain.

"But  of  what  utility  was  that  labor?''  When  the
humble  and  grateful  Mary  (Mark  xiv.  3-9,  and  John
xii.  3-8)  took  "  a  pound  of  ointment  of  spikenard,  very
costly  j  and  anointed  the  head  and  feet  of  Jesus,"  there
was  complaint  that  the  expensive  article  had  not  been
sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor.  But  Jesus  declared
that  the  act  had  a  utility  worthy  of  its  cost ;  and  re-
minded them  that  the  poor  could  be  remembered  at
any  other  time  and  in  some  other  manner.  So,  if  our
regalia  and  emblems  tend  to  increase  our  benevolence,
and  stimulate  us  to  greater  activity  in  well-doing,  then
is  their  manufacture  no  idle  work,  their  cost  no  useless
expense.  The  food  or  raiment  that  money  would  have
purchased,  would,  in  a  few  months,  have  been  consumed
or  worn  out :  that  is,  supposing  that  amount  would  have
been  furnished  by  its  contributors,  if  they  had  not  been
incited  by  Odd-Fellowship,  which  is  not  certain.  But
here  remain  these  decorations  and  emblems,  still  teach-
ing their  lessons  of  benevolence,  continuing  for  many
years  their  influence  in  leading  hundreds  to  remember
their  poor  and  distressed  brethren,  their  families,  and
the  widow  and  the  orphan.  That  they  do  this,  and
much  more  of  good  besides,  we  are  well  persuaded  ;  and

OBJECTIONS    AND    INQUIRIES   ANSWERED.  57

so  would  be  the  objector,  could  he  place  himself  fully
under  their  influence.

'<  For  ye  have  the  poor  with  you  always,  and  when-
soever ye  will,  ye  may  do  them  good."  When  any  sick
or  distressed  brother,  when  any  widow  or  orphan  of  a
deceased  Odd-Fellow,  asks  our  aid  and  receives  it  not,
because  we  have  expended  beyond  our  proper  ability  in
decorations,  jewels,  or  regalia,  then  let  censure  come  in
its  severest  form  !  But  till  then,  we  trust  that  no  Odd-
Fellow  will  lack  emblems  to  refine  the  taste,  and  instruct
mind,  heart,  and  hands  in  well-doing.

§  5.   Our  Secrecy.

Ring  what  changes  you  may  upon  the  suspiciousness
of  secrecy,  the  tendency  of  evil  to  seek  darkness  and
mystery,  and  of  good  to  come  to  the  light  that  it  may
be  manifest,  still,  you  will  hardly  contend  that  secrecy
is,  in  itself,  and  necessarily,  a  conclusive  proof  of  evil.
If  not,  then  it  is  uncharitable  to  condemn  any  individual
or  institution  on  the  score  of  secrecy  alone.  Now  let  us
fairly  understand  each  other.  Our  secrecy  "hath  this
extent — no  more:" —

1st.  We  are  secret  (as  every  family  is  or  should  be
secret)  in  regard  to  the  personal  affairs  of  any  member
which  are  submitted  to  us  for  counsel,  aid,  admonition,
rebuke,  or  punishment.  They  are  his  secrets,  not  ours,
much  less  the  world's.  And  baser  would  we  be  to  pub-
lish them,  than  if  we  were  to  squander  property  or
money  that  had  been  solemnly  confided  to  our  keeping.

2d.  We  are  secret  (as  a  merchant  is  secret  in  regard
to  correspondents  and  customers)  in  concealing  the
names  of  informants,  and  their  information  concerning
the  character  and  standing  of  applicants  for  member-

58  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

ship.  We  have  no  right,  morally,  to  injure  those  who
confide  in  us ;  and  even  the  laws  of  our  country  would
punish  as  libel  or  slander  the  exposure  of  the  applicant's
faults.

3d.  We  are  secret  (as  Christ's  followers  are  com-
manded to  be)  in  bestowment  of  donations  to  distressed
brethren  or  their  families.  Unfeeling,  indeed,  must  be
the  prying  soul  that  would  insult  the  relieved  by  pub-
lishing their  poverty  in  boasting  of  his  own  charity !
May  Odd-Fellows  ever  be  reproached  for  secrecy  rather
than  be  guilty  of  such  unchristian  conduct !

4th.  We  are  secret  (as  every  banker  and  business-
man is  secret)  in  our  modes  of  ascertaining  whether  a
stranger-applicant  is  a  partner  in  those  funds,  a  portion
of  which  he  is  about  to  withdraw.  Each  bank  or  mer-
chant has  secret  signs  by  which  he  knows  whether  the
draft  presented  him  is  genuine.  We  have  signs  and
tokens  by  which  to  know  men,  whether  they  are  genuine
Odd-Fellows,  whether  they  are  entitled  to  receive  what
they  ask.  A  meddling,  prying  fellow,  seeking  to  find
out  and  counterfeit  the  secret  signs  of  a  trader,  would
be  rewarded  for  his  ingenuity  with  the  contempt  of  all
honest  and  honorable  men,  even  if  the  worthy  forger
escaped  the  penitentiary !  Of  what  higher  estimation
is  he  deserving  who  impertinently  seeks  to  possess  him-
self of  the  secret  signs  (and  expose  them  to  others  pro-
bably no  honester  than  himself)  by  which  we  guard  the
treasury  of  the  dependent  sick  and  distressed,  the  widow
and  the  orphan  ?

5th.  We  are  secret  in  our  forms  and  ceremonies  of
initiation,  and  the  use  of  our  emblems  in  the  instruction
of  our  members.  This  use  renders  the  lessons  more
impressive  ;  and  to  disclose  the  mode  of  teaching  would

OBJECTIONS    AND    INQUIRIES    ANSWERED.  69

deprive  the  instruction  of  the  charm  of  novelty,  and
impair  its  efficacy.

That  this  is  the  utmost  extent  of  our  secrecy,  honest
and  truthful  men  of  all  denominations  among  us  are
ready  to  testify.  These  secrets,  then,  belong  to  no
individual  alone,  and  therefore  no  one  has  a  moral  right
to  disclose  them.  They  are  the  Order's  only.  They
concern  not  the  world,  and  belong  not  to  the  public.
An  individual  out  of  the  Order  has  no  more  right,  in
morals  or  propriety,  to  pry  into  them,  or  demand  their
revelation,  than  he  has  to  turn  eavesdropper  among
neighbors,  or  ask  a  wife  to  reveal  the  confidential  con-
versations of  her  husband.  The  disposition  to  acquire,
and  expose  the  secrets  of  others,  is  as  wrong  as  any
iniquity  it  seeks  to  uncover :  as  impertinent  as  peeping
into  a  business-man's  letters  or  a  neighbor's  market-
basket  or  dinner-pot.  And  yet  there  are  persons —
honest,  high-minded  people  in  all  else — who  have  al-
lowed this  spirit  so  far  to  govern  them,  that  they
condemn,  without  evidence,  every  so-called  "  secret
society,"  and  pry  into  its  private  affairs,  and  encourage
others  to  expose  them  to  the  public.  Surely  such
conduct  must  arise  from  a  want  of  due  consideration  of
what  is  due  to  their  own  characters  as  honest,  decent
men  !  The  same  principle,  applied  to  individuals,  would
justify  a  clergyman  for  exposing  cases  of  conscience
confided  to  him  by  his  flock ;  an  attorney  for  betraying,
unto  loss  of  property,  character,  and  even  life,  his  client ;
a  physician  for  disclosing  the  affairs  of  his  patient,
and  all  he  sees  and  hears  in  the  houses  he  visits;  and  a
military  commander  who  informed  the  enemy  of  his
plans  of  action,  and  the  countersigns  on  which  depend
the  security  of  his  army  !  Such  anti-secrecy  people,  to
be  consistent,  should  have  no  secrets  of  their  own,  and

60  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

keep  none  confided  to  them  by  their  families  and  friends ;
should  expose  their  most  private  thoughts  and  feel-
ings to  the  public  ;  relate  their  domestic  conversations
and  conjugal  endearments;  expose  purse,  pocket-book,
and  private  papers  at  all  times  and  places ;  never  vote
a  folded  ticket,  seal  a  letter,  receive  secret  advice,
bestow  private  alms,  or  offer  secret  prayer  !  For,  if
secrecy  is  wrong,  or  proof  of  evil,  all  these  things  are
evils.

We  will  only  add  that,  properly  speaking,  Odd-Fel-
lowship is  NOT  a  secret  society.  Our  Constitutions  and
By-Laws,  our  times  and  places  of  meeting,  the  names
of  our  officers  and  members  generally,  the  amounts  and
sources  of  our  receipts,  the  items  of  our  expenditures,
our  principles  and  objects,  the  proceedings  generally  of
our  National  and  State  Grand  Bodies,  all  these  are  as
public  as  those  of  any  legislature  or  other  public  de-
partment in  the  country.  As  well,  therefore,  might
you  call  any  individual  or  family,  the  United  States
Senate,  or  President's  Cabinet,  or  a  Grand  Jury — all
of  whom  have  secrets — "a  secret  person,"  "a  secret
family,"  "a  secret  senate  or  cabinet,"  or  "a  secret
jury,"  as  to  call  us  "a  secret  society,"  merely  because
we  have  secrets.

§  6.   Our  Exclusiveness.

Some  complain  that  we  do  not  invite  all,  and  receive
all  who  apply,  without  regard  to  sex  or  health;  that
we  select  the  few,  only,  who  perhaps  least  need  our
moral  inculcations  and  pecuniary  aid.  If  our  principles
are  so  moral,  and  our  teachings  so  pure  and  salutary,
and  our  objects  so  benevolent,  why  not  throw  our

OBJECTIONS    AND    INQUIRIES   ANSWERED.  61

portals  open  to  the  world  at  large,  and  so  extend  to
the  utmost  the  utility  of  our  principles  and  organization.

The  selection  of  a  few  individuals  out  of  the  mass,  to
unite  them  in  associated  efforts  for  the  diffusion  of  im-
portant principles,  and  to  exercise  them  in  the  practice
thereof,  that  they  may  become  the  teachers  of  others,
appears  to  be  the  method  of  Divine  Providence  itself.

When  God  determined  to  institute  among  men  a  pure
worship  of  himself  as  "  God  of  the  whole  earth,"  he
called  Abram,  of  Ur,  in  Chaldea,  to  be  his  "  friend"
and  agent  in  the  work.  Revealing  himself  to  the  pa-
triarch, he  constituted  him  the  progenitor  of  that
"  chosen  people"  who  were  to  be  the  depository  of
Divine  truth  until  the  world  should  be  prepared  to
receive  and  practice  the  mysteries  of  human  redemption.
Every  precaution  was  taken  to  make  these  selected  pupils
of  Grod  "a  peculiar  people."  They  were  to  be  "  Odd
Fellows"  among  the  nations  around  them,  not  only  by
hereditary  descent,  but  also  by  a  singular  form  of
government,  a  singular  code  of  laws,  and  a  singular
ritual  of  worship,  all  adapted  to  keep  them  from  mingling
with  other  nations  and  adopting  their  idolatries.  The
decorations  of  their  temple  and  tabernacle,  the  regalia
of  their  priesthood,  the  emblems  for  their  instruction,
were  all  prescribed  for  them,  even  to  form,  color,  and
material.  The  mode  for  initiating  proselytes  from  other
nations  was  clearly  defined ;  and  certain  physical  de-
fects and  conditions  of  health  were  made  causes  of
perpetual  exclusion  from  "the  congregation  of  Israel."
Whole  nations,  even,  on  account  of  their  mental  or
moral  condition,  or  associations  connected  with  their
history,  were  excluded  en  masse.  Thus  prepared,  these
pupils  of  Jehovah  gradually  developed  the  lessons  of

62  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Divine  Providence,  and  became,  in  turn,  the  teachers
of  mankind.

When  the  Shiloh  (according  to  the  Christian  faith)
appeared  on  earth,  he  pursued  the  same  system  of  se-
lecting a  few  from  the  mass  for  the  purpose  of  private
instruction  and  associated  effort.  Step  by  step,  Jesus
advanced  his  Apostles  in  the  knowledge  which  they
were  afterward  to  teach  the  world  by  example  and
precept.  And  -when  the  proper  period  arrived,  in  obe-
dience to  the  Master's  command,  they  went  forth  and
proclaimed  openly  what  they  had  learned  in  secret.

The  same  method  was  observed  by  the  early  teachers
of  Christianity,  in  the  formation  of  churches  of  the
faithful.  And  their  peculiar  discipline,  and  their  system
of  mutual  aid  and  relief  among  themselves,  have  con-
tinued, to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  down  to  the  present
day.

If  we  leave  the  theatre  of  special  providences,  we
find  the  same  system  of  selection  for  the  inculcation  of
truth  and  duty  adopted  by  the  wisdom  of  all  ages.
The  family,  if  we  may  consider  it  as  a  merely  natural
institution,  is  such  an  association.  Private  in  its  cha-
racter, secreting  from  the  public  its  dearest  and  holiest
operations,  it  teaches  its  members  not  only  those  prin-
ciples and  precepts  which  are  to  be  entertained  and
practiced  among  its  own  members,  but  those  also  per-
taining to  the  social  circle,  the  political  gathering,  the
worshiping  assembly,  and  the  world  at  large.  Each
family  has  its  peculiar  modes  of  teaching  and  training,
which  it  shrinks  from  exposing  to  the  cold  and  unsym-
pathizing  curiosity  of  strangers.  And  some  of  these
are  secret  not  only  to  those  that  are  without,  but  even
to  a  portion  of  the  household  itself.

Odd-Fellowship  stands  on  the  same  general  basis  of

OBJECTIONS   AND    INQUIRIES   ANSWERED.  63

necessity  and  utility  in  its  selections  and  exclusions.
It  has  its  own  mission  to  perform,  its  special  principles
and  their  applications  to  teach,  and  its  own  peculiar
methods  of  culture  and  training.  That  its  operations
may  be  in  fraternal  harmony,  it  requires  a  selected
number,  qualified  to  aid  in  preparing  each  other  for  the
proper  discharge  of  their  special  and  general  duties  to
themselves  and  families,  to  the  Order,  and  to  mankind,
and  to  God.

§  7.   Our  Exclusion  of  the  Poor,  Feeble,  $c.

It  is  sometimes  objected  to  us  that  we  pass  by  the
indigent  poor,  and  the  constitutionally  enfeebled,  who
most  need  our  benefits;  whereas,  if  our  pretensions  of
ameliorating  human  poverty  and  suffering  were  genuine,
we  would  admit  the  crippled,  deformed,  diseased,  and
indigent,  instead  of  excluding  even  the  healthy  poor  by
requiring  of  them  pecuniary  fees  and  contributions  be-
yond their  ability  to  pay.

As  our  means  are  necessarily  limited,  so  must  be  our
plans  and  efforts.  "What  king,  going  to  make  war
against  another  king,  sitteth  not  down  first  and  con-
sulteth,  whether  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to  meet
him  that  cometh  against  him  with  twenty  thousand?
Or  else,  while  the  other  is  a  great  way  off,  he  sendeth
an  ambassage,  and  desireth  conditions  of  peace."  (Jesus,
in  Luke  xiv.  31,  32.)  Our  means  of  relief  are  but  as
one  thousand  compared  to  the  vast  army  of  suffering
and  want  which  we  are  urged  to  meet,  and  which  num-
bers its  hundreds  of  thousands ;  how,  then,  could  we
hope  to  prevail  against  it — how  save  ourselves  from
overwhelming  defeat  and  utter  loss  ?  We  have  appor-
tioned our  labor  to  our  means  ;  we  have  selected  an

64  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

enemy  of  our  own  strength,  whom  we  can  keep  at  bay,
and  hope  ultimately  to  conquer.  Should  we  succeed,
and  still  have  means  left,  we  will  then  enlarge  our  field
and  use  our  means  for  additional  efforts.

But  how  soon  would  our  means  be  exhausted,  if  we
admitted  the  impoverished  and  diseased  indiscriminately
to  share  in  them.  Or,  rather,  our  means  would  never
be  accumulated,  but  drained  as  rapidly  as  they  flowed
into  our  treasury ;  for  there  would  be  many  to  demand,
and  but  few  to  contribute.  And  when  those  who  raised
the  fund,  came  to  need  it,  they  would  also  be  added  to
the  unsupplied  many  whom  even  the  public  charity
cannot  relieve.  Better,  then,  the  constantly  increasing
good,  however  limited  at  present,  than  the  great  but
decreasing  effort  which  can  confer  but  a  temporary
benefit,  and  must  end  in  only  another  addition  to  the
general  misery.  For,  let  the  individual  of  a  large
fortune  attempt  to  relieve  all,  by  a  lavish  expenditure
of  his  wealth,  and  he  himself  will  soon  need  alms.

That  we  require  the  poorest  applicant  to  contribute
as  much  as  the  wealthiest,  is  true,  as  it  is  a  matter  of
necessity.  Equality  in  payments  is  essential  not  only
to  equality  in  benefits,  but  also  in  feelings.  We  aim  to
abolish  all  considerations  of  wealth  or  poverty  in  our
fraternity;  to  make  all  feel  that  as  Odd-Fellows,  at
least,  they  are  not  only  brethren,  but  equals.  He  who
did  not  pay  an  equivalent,  would  feel  degraded  at  re-
ceiving benefits  :  would  feel  that  they  were  not  his  just
due,  but  alms.  Under  this  feeling  of  dependence  oil
his  wealthier  brethren,  he  would  not  feel  free  to  act  and
speak  in  opposition  to  their  wishes — would  not  feel  that
he  had  an  equal  right  to  direct  the  expenditure  of  our
funds,  or  the  affairs  of  the  Order.  Hence  we  pay  the
rich  member,  when  sick,  the  same  amount  per  week

OBJECTIONS   AND    INQUIRIES   ANSWERED.  65

that  we  pay  to  our  poorer  brethren.  We  would  con-
serve the  independence  of  the  latter,  and  exclude  all
feeling  of  moneyed  superiority  from  the  former.  They
must  not  only  be  told  that  all  are  equal,  but  they  must
be  made  to  know,  to  REALIZE  it  in  every  possible  way,
that  they  may  freely  act  on  it  under  all  circumstances.

Even  when  extraordinary  events  render  it  necessary
to  give  extra  aid  to  an  unfortunate  brother,  it  still  comes
from  a  fund  he  aided  to  create  for  such  purposes,  and
to  which  even  his  wealthiest  brother  may  be  reduced  to
apply.  His  relief  comes  not,  therefore,  even  then,  from
one  or  a  few  individuals,  but  from  all,  himself  included.

Now  let  us  turn  from  defence  to  advocacy,  from
denial  to  assertion.  Not  only  are  we  not  exclusive  in
any  bad  or  improper  sense,  but

§  8.   Our  Benefactions  are  General.

The  charity  of  Odd-Fellowship  begins  at  home,  but
it  does  not  operate  there  only.  The  Gospel  designed
for  the  whole  world,  began  with  its  Founder,  was  ex-
tended to  his  disciples,  spread  to  the  Jews,  and  only
after  it  had  been  preached  for  several  years  at  Jeru-
salem, was  Paul  made  an  Apostle,  and  sent  to  preach
its  "unsearchable  riches"  to  the  Gentiles.  So  with
every  work  of  benevolence,  every  enterprise  for  the
general  good.  It  must  have  a  beginning,  then  an  en-
larged theatre  in  its  progress,  before  it  can  fill  the
bounds  of  its  consummation.  Girard,  in  his  provisions
for  the  education  of  orphans,  strictly  speaking,  excluded
none ;  his  aim  was  to  include  certain  children  who  had
before  been  excluded.  From  the  entire  mass  of  chil-
dren in  the  world  who  were  excluded  previously,  he
commenced  selecting  as  large  a  number  as  the  paeans
6*

66  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

assigned  would  allow.  He  broke  the  total  exclusion
always  existing,  by  a  partial  inclusion,  designed  to  go
on  increasing  toward  a  still  greater  inclusion  as  the
means  therefor  should  increase.

So  with  any  good  deed.  It  is  aiming  at  the  general
benefit  by  a  breaking  up  of  the  exclusion  from  good,
that  previously  existed.

So  with  our  Order.  It  is  breaking  up  the  exclusion
that  exists  all  around  us,  by  including,  one  after  an-
other, as  many  as  our  means,  measures,  and  objects  will
allow.  If  any  thing,  it  is  extending  itself  too  rapidly
and  greatly.  Out  of  the  millions  of  men  and  families
who  need  such  instruction  and  aid  as  we  provide,  but
who  were  excluded  therefrom,  we  select  thousands,  and
for  them  we  break  the  bonds  of  exclusion  from  these
blessings,  and  by  them  we  extend  these  blessings  again
to  other  thousands  still.  Thus  the  exclusion  existed
before  our  Order  was  organized;  and  its  operations
have  been,  not  to  increase,  but  to  lessen  that  exclusion.
And  this  work  it  is  pursuing  with  unflagging  energy
and  unabated  power,  as  rapidly  as  its  means  increase
and  its  agencies  are  multiplied.  If  the  past  may  be
regarded  as  a  prophecy  for  the  future,  so  rapidly  is  it
lessening  the  number  of  the  excluded,  and  increasing
that  of  the  included,  that  a  period  may  arrive  when
there  will  be  no  more  exclusion  of  any.

But  there  is  another  sense  in  which  our  benevolence
is  general.  Our  benefactions  are  not  confined  within
the  Order.  We  allude  not  to  the  donations  sent  to  the
famishing  millions  of  Ireland,  or  distributed  with  liberal
hand  among  the  uninitiated  whom  general  calamity  had
reduced  to  destitution  and  want.  Every  good  deed
performed  to  a  single  individual  expands  its  beneficial
effect^,  directly  or  indirectly,  still  further.  The  aided

OBJECTIONS    AND    INQUIRIES    ANSWERED.  67

individual  is  thereby  enabled  to  aid  others :  the  bene-
faction he  receives,  he  passes  along  the  line  of  humanity
till  it  is  partaken  of  by  many.  Hence,  every  want  we
relieve  is  so  much  subtracted  from  the  pressing  claims
on  society  at  large.  And  every  case  of  suffering  we
prevent,  (and  our  prevention  far  exceeds  our  relief ^  is
so  much  saved  from  the  general  amount  of  constantly
recurring  suffering,  pauperism,  and  crime.  For  we
wait  not  until  a  brother's  illness  has  utterly  exhausted
his  means,  reduced  his  family  to  want,  and  broken
down  his  manly  spirit  into  a  tame  submission  to  a  life
of  dependence  and  pauperism.  No ;  we  step  in  at  the
beginning  of  illness,  and  we  keep  afar  off  the  utter
poverty  which  might  bring  submission  to  pauperism  or
drive  to  crime.  The  aid  we  give  is  received  with  a
proper  dignity  and  self-respect,  so  that  when  ability
returns,  the  family  resume  their  usual  avocations,  bless-
ing the  Order  which  sustained  and  aided  it  without
bestowing  alms  !  Who  will  say  that  a  general  benefit
is  not  bestowed  on  society  at  large,  by  this  peculiar
work  of  Odd-Fellowship  ?

The  Friends,  (commonly  called  Quakers,)  and  a  few
other  religious  denominations,  are  accounted  worthy  of
double  honor  as  members  of  community,  because  they
not  only  support  their  own  poor,  so  that  no  member  of
their  churches  ever  becomes  a  public  charge,  but  they
also  pay  their  full  share  for  the  support  of  the  poor
generally.  We,  also,  support  our  own  poor,  and  thus
relieve  the  public  of  so  much  of  the  burden  that  would
otherwise  swell  the  demand  for  more  taxes.  And  yet,
as  citizens,  Odd-Fellows  give  in  private  charity  and
pay  in  public  taxes  no  less  than  others  who  are  so
ready  to  sneer  at  the  "  benevolence  of  Odd-Fellowship,"
and  cry  out  against  "the  selfishness  and  exclusiveness"

THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL,

of  the  Order.  Why  not  give  our  institution  credit
then,  for  a  general  as  well  as  special  benevolence  ?
Why  continue  to  assert  that  our  good  deeds  are  con-
fined to  the  Order,  and  are  therefore  narrow,  restricted,
and  selfish  ?  They  reach  out  their  tendrils  of  aid  be-
yond where  the  vine  runs  in  its  restricted  training.
And  most  of  those  aided  by  its  measures  and  means,
are  thus  taught  that  heavenly  sympathy  which  disposes
them  to  use  the  means  thus  furnished  for  the  blessing
of  others  in  their  turn.  And  thus  good  offices,  which
had  their  spring  in  Odd-Fellowship,  are  sent  around
the  ever-widening  circle  of  humanity.

§  9.  Interference  with  other  Institutions.

We  have  sometimes  been  accused  of  interfering  with
other  institutions,  assuming  their  duties,  operating  to
their  disadvantage ;  placing  our  Order,  in  fact,  as  the
all-in-all,  even  to  the  neglect  and  abandoning  of  the
religious  institutions  of  all  denominations,  collectively,
"the  Church/'

When  the  Patriarchs  Abraham  and  Lot  were  some-
what involved  by  the  quarrelsome  conduct  of  their
respective  herdsmen,  the  brave,  peaceable  father  of  the
faithful  would  not  allow  his  duties  to  be  compromised
by  a  small  matter  of  profit  or  loss.  "  And  Abram  said
to  Lot,  Let  there  be  no  strife,  I  pray  thee,  between  me
and  thee,  and  between  my  herdsmen  and  thy  herdsmen :
for  we  be  brethren.  Is  not  the  whole  land  before  thee?
Separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,  from  me :  if  thou  wilt
take  the  left  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  right ;  or  if
thou  depart  to  the  right  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the
left."  (Genesis  xiii.  8,  9.)  In  the  same  benignant  spirit
we  would  say  to  every  good  institution,  and  every  be-

OBJECTIONS    AND    INQUIRIES    ANSWERED.  69

nevolent  soul  who  may  harbor  a  suspicion  of  our  inter-
ference :  View  the  vast  field  of  human  ignorance,  desti-
tution, suffering,  and  crime  around  us.  See  how  very
little  of  the  mighty  waste  .has  ever  been  improved,  or
even  disturbed  by  all  the  agencies  ever  set  in  motion.
Does  it  not  make  the  whole  heart  sick  and  the  head
faint  to  contemplate  the  almost  hopelessness  of  re-
lieving all  that  destitution  and  wo,  and  removing  all
that  ignorance  and  crime  ?  Is  there  not  more  than
enough  for  us  all  to  do  ?

Odd-Fellowship  has  not,  cannot  assume  a  hostile
attitude  to  any  religious,  moral,  or  benevolent  institu-
tion. We  war  only  with  vice  and  misery.  Individuals
among  us,  enthusiastic  in  praise  of  the  Order,  may
have  incautiously  claimed  for  it  more  than  it  merits.
Others,  alienated  from  institutions  of  religion  by  various
causes,  may  pretend  to  have  found  in  Odd-Fellowship  a
complete  substitute  for  any  or  all  other  institutions.
But  the  great  mass  of  the  Order,  by  their  actions,  have
shown  that  they  believe  our  Order  to  be  but  one  among
the  many  agencies  of  Divine  Providence  for  the  ame-
lioration of  human  suffering,  the  removal  of  evil,  and
the  elevation  of  human  character.

Says  the  Kev.  D.  W.  Bristol,  D.  D.,  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  Church,  "  That  the  Christian  Church  covers
the  whole  ground  of  human  obligation,  civil,  moral,
and  religious,  we  most  cheerfully  admit.  It  is  indeed
governed  by  the  most  perfect  and  beneficent  code  which
could  have  been  given  to  the  world ;  one  which  bears
in  its  unrivalled  excellencies,  the  indelible  impress  of
its  Divine  origin.  But  by  such  a  conception,  can  any
one  suppose  we  should  be  justified  in  renouncing  all
other  institutions  and  societies,  because  the  constitution
of  the  Church  had  preoccupied  the  ground  ?  What,

70  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

then,  would  become  of  civil  government,  and  all  the
moral  institutions  which  have  arisen  legitimately  out
of  this  religious  constitution  ?  Other  societies  are  esta-
blished and  justified  under  the  same  beneficent  influence,
such  as  Temperance,  Moral  Reform,  Peace,  Tract,
Christian  Alliance,  Seaman's  Friend,  and  all  humane
societies — all  having  their  constitutions  and  by-laws,
boards  of  officers,  with  all  the  attendants  of  separate
organizations,  even  terms  of  membership,  peculiar  to
each.  But  who  ever  supposed  that  these  excellent
societies  were  substitutes  for  the  Christian  Church  ?
It  is  judged,  and  we  apprehend  correctly,  too,  that
although  these  came  immediately  under  the  rule  of  the
great  constitution,  yet  that  they  could  be  better  pro-
moted by  a  separate  organization  than  in  the  usual
course  of  moral  charities :  hence  they  were  established.
We  hold,  and,  we  think,  justly,  the  same  course  of
reasoning  on  the  subject  of  Odd-Fellowship." — Golden
Rule,  Vol.  III.  p.  365.

It  appears  to  us  that  the  duty  of  every  true  Christian
— of  every  good  man — is,  to  judge  the  tree  by  its  fruits
— every  man  and  every  institution  by  its  works.  And
it  appears  to  us  a  dictate  of  common  sense,  that  the
institution  which  is  doing  works  of  benevolence  and
charity  cannot  be  obnoxious  to  condemnation,  or  con-
sidered in  opposition  to  any  other  good  cause  or  asso-
ciation. The  beloved  disciple  once  erred  on  this  point
— "  Master,  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  name,
and  he  followeth  not  us ;  and  we  forbade  him,  because
he  followeth  not  us.  But  Jesus  said,  Forbid  him  not :
for  there  is  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  my
name,  that  can  lightly  speak  evil  of  me.  For  he  that
is  not  against  us  is  on  our  part/'  (Mark  ix.  38—40.)

We  repeat  it,  then,  Odd-Fellowship  interferes  with

or  THC
WN1VER8ITY

OF

ODD-FELLOWSHIP — ITS    GOVESMMff,  ETC.  71

no  organization  of  a  moral,  religious,  or  benevolent
character.  She  bids  a  hearty  "  God  speed"  to  every
association  that  would  rob  mankind  of  their  sorrows  or
vices ;  and  leaves  each  to  manage  its  peculiar  portion
of  well-doing  in  its  own  way  and  season,  without  at-
tempt at  interference  or  self-appropriation.  And  it
cannot  be  that  her  lessons  or  labors  will  effect  any
deterioration  of  the  characters  or  influence  of  her  mem-
bers, so  that  they  will  be  worse  men  in  any  domestic,
social,  political,  or  religious  circle  in  which  they  may
move.  That  some  few  in  our  Order  are  not  made  better
and  wiser,  is  no  more  the  fault  of  our  teachings  and
operations,  than  it  is  of  religion  that  some  of  its  pro-
fessors are  ignorant,  hypocritical,  or  vicious,  in  despite
of  all  its  holy  teachings  and  salutary  influences.  "  Judge
not,"  then,  "according  to  the  appearance,  but  judge
righteous  judgment."

CHAPTER  III.

ODD-FELLOWSHIP — ITS    GOVERNMENT,  ETC.

HAVING  given  a  brief  history  of  our  Order,  and  an-
swered the  most  prominent  objections  usually  offered
against  it,  we  will  now  give  a  bird's-eye  view  of  its
form  of  government,  and  then  state  definitely  what
Odd-Fellowship  consists  in,  how  it  operates,  and  the
advantages  that  may  reasonably  be  expected  from  a
union  with  it.

72  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  1.   Our  Government.

Our  form  of  government  is  a  peculiar  one,  having
grown  up,  successively,  as  developed  by  our  circum-
stances and  our  necessities.  'Even  the  writers  in  oui
own  Order  are  not  agreed  as  to  its  precise  character:
one  portion  declaring  that  all  its  power  and  life  flow
from  the  head  down  through  the  subordinates,  and
calling  it  a  patriarchal  government ;  and  another  por-
tion insisting  that  the  power  and  being  rest  in  its  base
and  flow  upward,  and  calling  it  republican.  Some
designate  it  as  an  aristocracy,  and  others  as  being
nearer  a  democracy.  It  will  be  seen,  we  think,  by  the
history  we  have  given  of  the  changes  which  have  been
gradually  made  in  the  government  of  the  Order,  that  it
has  assimilated  to  the  government  of  this  country,  and
is  now,  really,  a  fraternal  republican  union,  composed
of  constituencies  in  Subordinate  Lodges,  represented  in
State  Grand  bodies,  and  all  united  in  a  Supreme  .Na-
tional Lodge.

1.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  is  consti-
tuted of  Representatives  from  State  Grand  Lodges  and
Grand  Encampments,  one  for  each  having  less  than  one
thousand  members,  and  two  for  each  having  more  than
that  number,  chosen  for  two  years,  but  so  arranged  that
one-half  retire  every  year.  It  claims  supreme  jurisdic-
tion in  the  general  laws  and  usages  of  the  Order,  the
lectures,  charges,  and  unwritten  work,  and  as  a  court  of
final  appeal,  and  is  the  National  Legislature  of  the  Order.
It  has  power  to  create  Grand  Lodges  and  Grand  Encamp-
ments where  none  legally  exist,  and  subordinate  Lodges
and  Encampments  where  there  are  no  Grand  Bodies  of
that  grade,  and  to  recall  the  charters  of  the  same.  Ita
officers  and  members  must  be  Past  Grands  of  the  Royal
Purple  degree  —  must  reside  in  the  jurisdiction  and  be

ODD-FELLOWSHIP — ITS    GOVERNMENT,  ETC.  73

members  of  the  Grand  Encampment  or  Grand  Lov*ge
electing  them,  and  therefore  contributing  members  of  a
subordinate  Lodge  and  subordinate  Encampment  in  that
jurisdiction.  Its  elective  officers  are  chosen  every  two
years  at  the  annual  session,  held  on  the  third  Monday  (and
week  succeeding)  in  September,  and  usually  in  Baltimore.
The  Grand  Corresponding  and  Recording  Secretary  and
the  Grand  Messenger  are  the  only  officers  who  receive
compensation  for  their  services ;  but  the  travelling  ex-
penses of  the  other  officers  in  going  to  and  from  the  ses-
sion are  paid,  together  with  five  dollars  per  day  while
actually  employed.  Grand  Representatives  receive  five
dollars  per  day,  and  five  cents  per  mile  travelled,  in
attending  the  sessions.  Its  revenues  are  derived  from
fees  for  Charters,  the  sale  of  the  books  and  odes  of  the
Order,  and  a  tax  of  seventy-five  dollars  on  the  State
Grand  Bodies  foreach  Representative  to  which  they
are  entitled,  beside  ten  per  cent,  on  the  revenue  of  all
Subordinate  Lodges  and  Encampments  existing  where
there  are  no  State  Grand  Bodies  of  those  branches.

2.  State  Grand  Lodges  consist  of  the  Past  Grands  in
their  respective  jurisdictions,  (not  less  than  seven  in  num-
ber,) who  have  received  the  Past  JSToble  Grand's  degree,
and  been  admitted  to  receive  the  Grand  Lodge  degree,
the  same  being  contributing  members  of  a  Subordinate,
in  good  standing.  In  most  Grand  Lodges,  the  power  of
voting  (except  for  Grand  Officers)  and  deliberating  is  re-
stricted to  a  certain  portion  of  their  number,  chosen  for
that  purpose  by  themselves  exclusively,  or  by  the  sub-
ordinate Lodges.  But  all  Past  Grands  in  good  standing
are  permitted  to  attend  the  sessions,  and  are  eligible  to
office,  in  Representative  Grand  Lodges  as  in  others.
Each  Grand  Lodge  is  to  the  subordinate  and  degree

74  THE    ODD-FELLOW'S    MANUAL,.

Lodges  in  its  jurisdiction,  what  the  Grand  Lo.lge  of  the
United  States  is  in  its  province;  subject,  however,  to
the  national  head.  Its  revenue  is  derived  from  fees  for
charters  and  dispensations,  and  a  percentageon  the  reve-
nues of  its  subordinates.

3.  Grand  Encampments  are  to  the  Patriarchal  branch
of  the  Order  what  the  Grand  Lodges  are  to  the  other
branch ;  are  constituted  of  P.  C.  Patriarchs,  (and  in  some
States  of  P.  H.  Priests,)  and  are  generally  governed  and
conducted  in  the  same  manner,  having  supervision  and
authority  over  subordinate  Encampments  only.

4.  Encampments  are  constituted  wholly  of  brethren
who  (having  received  the  five  subordinate  degrees  of
the  Order)  have  received  the  Patriarchal,  Golden  Rule,
and   Royal   Purple  degrees — the  sublime  degrees,   as
they  are  often  termed.     They  must  be  duly  chartered
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  or  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the   State   in  which  they  exist,  must
pay   a    percentage   of  their  revenue    annually  to    the
power  under  which  they  exist,  and  must  submit  to  be
governed  by  the  same  in  all  general  laws  and  usages.
They  transact  business  in  the  Royal    Purple  degree.
When  a  member  loses  his  good  standing  in  his  Subor-
dinate   Lodge,  his    membership    in    the    Encampment
ceases  also.     They  are  benefit-paying  bodies.

5.  Degree    Lodges   are   chartered  by  State   Grand
Lodges   only  for  the  purpose   of  conferring   degrees.
They  can  hold  no  property  beside  their  furniture,  re-
galia, &c. ;  nor  receive  dues,  beyond  the  mere  degree
fees;  nor  pay  benefits  to  their  members.      They  are
constituted  of  the  members  of  the  various   Lodges   in
the  vicinity,  who,  after  being  judged  worthy  to  receive
the  five  degrees,  have  here  attained  to  the  fifth  degree ;

ETO.  75

for  Degree  Lodges  do  business  in  the  scarlet  (or  fifth)
degree  only.

6.  Subordinate  Lodges,  like  subordinate  Encamp-
ments and  Degree  Lodges,  derive  their  powers  from
the  chartering  power,  and  exercise  no  legislative  func-
tions except  to  make  their  own  By-Laws,  and  in  the
management  of  their  pecuniary  affairs.  They  consist
of  free  white  males,  of  twenty-one  years  and  upward,
believers  in  a  Supreme  Intelligence,  the  Governor  of
the  Universe,  who  having  been  accepted  and  initiated
into  the  Order,  continue  to  pay  their  dues,  and  properly
demean  themselves  according  to  the  Laws  of  the  Order.
Five  are  necessary  to  constitute  a  Lodge,  and  while
that  number  desire  to  retain  their  charter,  the  Grand
Lodge  will  not  permit  the  Lodge  to  be  dissolved.  A
member  may  withdraw  at  any  time,  on  application,  and
by  paying  up  all  arrearages,  either  to  unite  with  any
other  Lodge,  or  utterly  from  the  Order.  In  due  season,
after  initiation,  he  may  apply  for  and  receive  certifi-
cates entitling  him  to  receive  the  first  five  degrees  of
the  Order,  for  the  sums  and  on  the  conditions  prescribed.
And  after  receiving  these,  he  can  apply  for  admission
into  an  Encampment.  All  subordinate  Lodges  require
dues  to  be  paid,  and  pay  benefits.

After  a  member  has  served  in  an  appointed  office  the
requisite  term  of  twenty-six  nights,  he  becomes  eligible
to  the  Secretary's  or  Vice-Grand's  chair ;  and  after  six
months'  (or  twenty-six  nights')  service  as  V.  G.  he  is
eligible  as  N.  G.  And  after  the  same  service  as  N.  G.
he  is  entitled  to  admission  into  the  Grand  Lodge  to
which  he  may  be  attached.

7.  The  degree  of  Rebekah  is  conferred  without  charge,
in  a  Subordinate  Lodge,  on  the  wives  of  fifth-degree

76  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

members,  (and  widows  whose  husbands  died  in  good
standing,)  in  the  presence  of  their  husbands  or  proper
guardians.  Xo  dues  or  benefits  are  attached,  but  it
brings  them  into  closer  relations  to  the  Order,  and
enables  them  to  make  themselves  known  to  scarlet
members  when  needing  aid  or  protection.

§  2.   Our  Principles.

To  a  good  and  energetic  man,  who  will  use  the  facili-
ties the  Order  affords  for  self-improvement  and  well-
doing, its  means  and  advantages  are  so  numerous,  and
its  agencies  so  far-reaching,  that  our  language  may
appear  faint  and  cold  compared  with  the  reality.  And
yet  we  fear  to  speak  unguardedly.  We  would  not  raise
expectations  that  may  be  disappointed.  Let  it,  then,
be  fully  understood  here,  once  for  all,  that —

1.  Odd-Fellowship  is  not  the  regalia  or  decorations
of  its  officers  and  members,  nor  the  banners  and  dra-
pery of  its  Lodge-rooms.     These  have  their  meanings
and  uses,   but   they  are    not  Odd-Fellowship.      They
should  be  used  as   not  abusing  them,   and  valued  for
their  teachings ;  but  they  could  all  be  changed,  or  dis-
pensed with,  and  Odd-Fellowship  still  remain.

2.  Nor  is  it  its  form  of  government.     That  has  gone
through  great  and  almost  total  changes,  (and  may  be
as   greatly   changed   again,)    and   yet    Odd-Fellowship
survives,  essentially  the  same  as  ever  in  its  principles.
It  is  not  best,  therefore,  to  be  hypercritical  about  any
remaining  defects  in  the  forms  in  which  its  power  is
lodged,   or  the  modes  by  which  that  power  opcr.
These,  it  is  true,  should  manifest  fully  the  beneficent
spirit  of  the  Order,  and  conform  to  the  institutions  of
the  land,  and  the  spirit  of  the  age  we  live  in,  and  should

ODD-FELLOWSHIP — ITS    GOVERNMENT,  ETC.  77

operate,  in  the  most  kind  and  effective  manner,  to  ele-
vate the  condition  and  ameliorate  the  present  wants
and  sufferings  of  our  race.  But  our  Order  is  a  pro-
gressive one :  it  has  greatly  progressed  in  the  past,  and
progression  is  even  now  gently  and  yet  surely  at  work
in  it.  And,  under  every  form  of  government  through
which  Odd-Fellowship  has  passed,  or  may  yet  pass,  it
has  always  consisted  of  the  same  general  principles,
and  wrought  out  the  same  general  good.  Its  ability  to
conform  its  government  and  measures  to  its  own  spirit,
is  greater  now  than  ever ;  and  in  due  season,  therefore,
all  needed  changes  and  additions  will  undoubtedly  be
effected.

3.  Odd-Fellowship  is  not  its  mere  ritual  and  cere-
monial.   Whatever  language  may  be  used  in  its  lectures
and  charges,  whatever  emblems,  signs,  or  pass-words  it
may  prescribe   to  insure  the  instruction    and   mutual
recognition  of  its  members,  these  are  but  means ;  the
objects  they  aim  to    effect  are  the  ends.     Instruction
may  change  or  alter  its  drapery,  but  the  lessons  taught
— the  ideas  embodying  the  principles — these   are   the
spirit  and  the  life.     It  is  not  well,  therefore,  to  rest  in
these  outer  habiliments,  or  to  stumble  at  any  seeming
unfitness  in  them ;  but  to  pass  on  and  secure  the  reali-
ties they  unfold  and  impart.

4.  Nor  is  Odd-Fellowship   even   the  works  of  the
Order :  it  consists  not  wholly  in  deeds  of  mercy,  be-
nevolence, and  brotherly  love.     These,  it  is  true,  are
its  genuine  manifestations,  without  which  we  might  pro-
nounce it  asleep  or  departed :  these  are  the  outward
appearances  by  which  it  discloses  its  inner  life  and  its
true  self.     But  to  produce  these  works,  there  must  be
an  interior  spirit,  working  out  for  itself  this  living  form
and  action.

78  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

This  internal,  truly  living  spirit  of  Love  and  of  univer-
sal fraternity,  pervading  all  our  rituals  and  ceremonies ;
recognized  in  emblems,  colors,  and  regalia ;  using  every
adjunct  for  strengthening  its  influence  on  the  soul;
speaking  to  ear  and  eye  in  every  lecture,  charge,  sign,
and  token,  and  to  the  touch  in  grip  and  pressure ;  and
manifesting  itself  (silently,  like  rain,  and  sunshine,  and
electricity)  in  beneficent  organizations  and  institutions ;
this  soul  of  all  its  teachings  and  workings  is  Odd-
Fellowship,  the  hidden  name  in  the  white  stone,  which
he  knoweth  best  who  most  truly  possesses  it.

The  Fatherhood  of  God  and  the  Brotherhood  of  man,
then,  are  the  great  principles  of  our  Order,  embodied  in
the  mottoes  thereof,  "  In  God  we  trust,"  and  "Friend-
ship, Love,  and  Truth."  To  illustrate  these  principles
on  the  limited  scale  prescribed  by  human  abilities  and
our  pecuniary  resources,  we  have  united  in  Lodges,
each  of  which  is  a  mutual  improvement  and  mutual  aid
association.  And  further  to  extend  our  operations,  and
increase  our  advantages  and  usefulness  together,  we
have  united  all  these  Lodges  in  a  general  Order,  which
we  desire  to  render  universal  as  the  family  of  man  on
earth.

§  3.   Our  Objects.

It  is  unfortunate  for  our  Order,  and  for  not  a  few
of  its  members,  that  too  much  prominence  has  been
generally  given  to  its  feature  of  pecuniary  benefits  in
seasons  of  sickness  and  death,  and  pecuniary  aid  in
circumstances  of  want  and  distress.  This,  though  a
laudable  and  useful  trait  in  our  operations,  is  hardly  a
tithe  of  our  aims  and  objects.  By  this  undue  promi-
nence of  the  pecuniary  relief  afforded,  even  our  own

ODD-FELLOWSHIP — ITS    GOVERNMENT,  ETC.  79

members  hare  had  their  attention  and  efforts  greatly
withdrawn  from  the  moral  and  social  influences  which
the  Order  is  so  eminently  calculated  to  promote.  But
so  it  is :  the  sudden,  the  palpable,  the  material,  more
readily  gains  attention  than  the  gradual,  the  insensible,
and  the  moral.  All  can  see  the  visitation  of  the  sick,
the  relief  of  the  distressed,  the  bounty  bestowed  on  the
widow  and  the  orphan  whose  necessities  called  for  aid;
but  few  stop  to  estimate  the  suffering  prevented  in
thousands  of  families,  by  relief  given  before  poverty
called  attention  to  thejr  situation.

So  men  look  with  interested  eye,  and  a  ready  appre-
ciation of  utility,  on  gurgling  spring,  and  rolling  river,
and  heaving  ocean.  But  how  few  consider  the  gentle
mist  that  rises  in  the  morning  sun  to  fall  in  the  evening
shower  on  broad  prairie  and  in  fertile  valley ;  and,
after  working  fruitfulness  there,  to  percolate  in  crystal
drops  through  every  vein  of  rock  and  earth,  until  it
shall  burst  forth  again  in  cooling  spring  and  mountain-
rill,  to  feed  the  mighty  river  and  replenish  the  briny
deep.

Men  look  at  our  system  of  weekly  benefits,  mutual
relief,  watchings  at  the  sick-bed,  burial  of  the  dead,
and  support  of  widow  and  orphan ;  but  their  thoughts
seldom  stray  beyond  these  to  the  humanizing  influences
which  the  performance  of  these  deeds  exerts  on  their
doers;  nor  yet  to  the  social  and  moral  tendencies  of
the  other  means  employed  by  Odd-Fellowship  for  the
improvement  and  elevation  of  human  character.

When  the  dark  war-horses  of  the  storm  scud  across
the  sky,  shaking  the  rain-drops  from  their  shaggy  manes
as  they  snort  aloud  in  thunder,  the  electric  flash  is
noticed,  and  all  its  brightness  commented  on.  As  it
descends  on  lofty  mansion  or  towering  oak,  shattering

80  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

them  as  in  wanton  sport,  its  effects  are  readily  seen
and  estimated  in  the  destruction  it  has  caused.  Even
when  human  skill  produces  it  from  the  battery,  and
sends  it  along  the  imprisoning  wire,  bearing  messages
across  continent  and  ocean  with  a  speed  greater  by  far
than  that  of  our  earth  as  it  revolves  around  the  sun,
men  still  note  its  wonders,  and  speculate  on  its  vast
utility  to  the  world.  But  few  consider  the  daily,  mo-
mently effects  of  the  same  fluid  in  our  own  organism,  as
it  passes  from  point  to  point,  feeding  the  vital  fires
within,  giving  circulation  to  the  fluids,  movement  to  the
muscles,  and  the  power  of  thought  to  the  brain.  Few
think  of  its  constantly  wonderful  operations  when,  trans-
fused through  the  atmosphere  and  permeating  all  mat-
ter, it  imparts  vitality  to  all  nature,  covering  the  earth
with  verdure  and  filling  it  with  fruitage.

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  then,  that  so  many,  even
among  Odd-Fellows,  have  overlooked,  or  at  times  for-
gotten, the  most  important  uses  and  aims  of  Odd-Fel-
lowship to  be,  the  imbuing  of  the  minds  of  our  brethren
with  proper  conceptions  of  their  powers  and  capacities,
giving  them  just  and  practical  views  of  their  duties  and
responsibilities,  exhibiting  their  dependence  upon  God,
and  bringing  them  to  a  knowledge  and  practice  of  the
true  fraternal  relations  between  man  and  man.  And
in  this,  though  we  begin  in  the  Lodge,  and  with  Odd-
Fellows  and  their  families,  we  fix  no  bounds  or  limits
but  our  abilities  and  our  means :  our  charity  begins  at
home,  but  ends  only  with  the  removal  of  all  suffering
and  distress.

§  4.   Our  Measures  and  Operations.

Each  Lodge  is  not  only  a  Beneficial,  or  Mutual  Aid
Society,  but  also  an  Association  for  mental  and  moral

ODD-FELLOWSHIP — ITS    GOVERNMENT,   ETC  81

improvement,  whose  meetings  and  operations  are  de-
signed to  improve  and  elevate  the  characters  of  its
members.  But  we  are  farther  reaching  in  our  benefits
than  such  associations  usually  are.  All  our  Lodges  are
united  in  one  common  Order,  so  that,  under  certain
simple  regulations,  the  member  of  any  one,  when  absent
from  home,  can  receive  from  any  other  the  fellowship,
the  attention,  and  the  relief  he  would  be  entitled  to
from  his  own  Lodge.

Every  person  who  believes  in  a  supreme  intelligent
Creator  and  Ruler  of  the  universe ;  who  is  of  good  cha-
racter, sound  health,  the  proper  age  and  sex,  and  able  to
earn  a  livelihood  for  himself  and  family ;  who  has  been
accepted  as  a  member,  and  contributes  the  stated  sum
regularly,  is  entitled  to  a  certain  weekly  stipend  during
disability  to  labor,  and  this,  whether  rich  or  poor,  at
home  or  abroad.  If  needing  more  aid,  he  is  not  allowed
to  suffer.  If  be  needs  attendance  at  night,  two  watchers
are  regularly  provided  every  night,  without  care  on  his
part,  or  trouble  to  his  family.  If  travelling,  and  he
needs  assistance,  any  Lodge  where  he  may  be  will
render  the  same  services  for  him.  If  he  dies,  a  stipu-
lated sum  is  paid  to  his  family  to  bury  him  properly,  or
his  brethren  attend  to  that  duty  for  them.  If  his  wife
dies,  a  similar,  but  generally  smaller  allowance  is  made
to  pay  the  expenses  of  her  funeral.  If  he  leaves  a
family,  our  covenanted  vows  embrace  their  care  and
welfare  in  our  special  duties.  And  during  life,  we
claim  the  privilege  of  observing  his  deportment  in  arid
out  of  the  Lodge  with  a  brother's  love  and  watchfulness,
that  we  may  promote  his  proper  interests,  encourage  him
in  well-doing,  and  correct  his  errors  and  irregularities;
or,  failing  in  this  after  reasonable  time  and  efforts,  that

82  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

we  may  save  the  Lodge  from  his  evils,  and  his  brethren
from  their  bad  influences.

But  it  is  with  the  restraining  and  reformatory  influ-
ences of  Odd-Fellowship  as  it  is  with  its  prevention  of
poverty  and  physical  suffering:

'*  What's  done  we  partly  may  compute,
But  know  not  what's  resisted."

Many  who  were  inclined  to  narrowness  of  soul  or
vicious  conduct,  have  been  slowly  but  surely  improved,
and  even  entirely  reformed,  by  the  gentle  influences  of
our  Order;  and  many  others,  if  not  reformed,  have  been
prevented  from  becoming  worse  by  their  connection  with
us  :  and  yet  one  member,  grossly  vicious  and  expelled,
has  drawn  on  us  more  public  animadversion  than  all
these  have  brought  us  in  commendation.  Yea,  often
have  we  been  condemned  as  encouraging  the  unworthy
by  associating  with  them,  when  we  were  laboring  hope-
fully to  reform  them,  and  associating  with  them  to  pre-
serve them  from  worse  influences.

Our  meetings  are  generally  business  meetings,  to
attend  to  the  foregoing  duties.  But  we  lose  not  sight
of  labors  to  promote  benevolence  and  charity  to  all
mankind,  as  well  as  among  our  fraternity.  In  the
transaction  of  our  business  we  pursue  strict  parlia-
mentary rules,  that  our  members  may  be  qualified  for
any  public  stations  to  which  they  may  be  called  by
their  fellow-citizens.  And  when  business  has  been  per-
formed, we  indulge  in  social  intercourse,  and  even  in
cheerful  and  innocent  hilarity  and  amusement.  But  in
all,  strict  order  and  decorum,  good-fellowship  ami  pru-
dence are  constantly  to  be  kept  in  view.

The  government  and  arrangement  of  degrees  and
stations  of  the  Order  will  be  further  unfolded  in  their

ODD-FELLOWSHIP ITS    GOVERNMENT,  ETC.  83

proper  place,  and  we  therefore  pass  them  here  with
the  remark  that  we  have  few  salaried  officers,  and  they
earn  all  they  receive.  Aside  from  the  necessary  ex-
penses of  sustaining  such  a  wide-spread  and  efficient
organization,  our  funds  are  sacredly  devoted  and  ap-
plied to  the  sole  objects  for  which  they  are  contributed,
and  by  the  very  persons  who  contribute  them.

§  5.   The  Duties  of  Odd- Fellow  ship.

The  great  duties  of  our  Order,  by  and  through  which
we  aim  to  improve  and  exalt  the  character  of  our  mem-
bers, are  few  in  number: — 1.  To  visit  the  sick.  2.  To
relieve  the  distressed.  3.  To  bury  the  dead.  4.  To
educate  the  orphan.  To  these  we  have  added,  by
charges  and  obligations,  two  others,  viz.,  to  aid  the
widow,  and  to  exercise  over  each  other  fraternal  watch
care,  and  moral  discipline.

Simple  as  these  are  they  cover  the  whole  ground,
when  viewed  through  our  great  principles.  And  though
designed  for  special  application  to  the  Order,  yet  are
they  always  stated  and  enforced  in  a  general  sense.
The  funds  contributed  for  the  use  of  members  and  their
families  only,  are  generally  applied  as  designed.  But
members  are  never  instructed  that  they  may  rest
satisfied  with  performing  these  duties  to  Odd-Fellows
alone.  On  the  contrary,  general  benevolence  and
charity  out  of  the  Lodge  are  inculcated  in  it.

§  6.   Privileges  of  Odd-Fellows

Let  no  one  unite  with  the  Order  merely  to  learn  its
secrets,  wear  its  regalia  and  decorations,  or  insure  him-
self provision  in  case  of  sickness  and  distress.  These

84  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

are  privileges,  it  is  true,  to  those  who  have  other  and
nobler  objects  in  view;  but  they  cost  more  of  labor,
and  time,  and  money  than  they  are  worth  to  the  merely
curious,  vain,  or  selfish  man.  Such  will  find  it  a  burden
to  perform  an  equal  share  of  our  duties  and  labors,  and
lie  may  possibly  be  insured  against  sickness  as  certainly
and  more  cheaply,  in  a  mere  insurance  association.

But  to  one  whose  generous  heart  delights  in  well
doing,  and  admires  our  principles,  and  desires  to  find
means  for  increasing  his  usefulness  to  suffering  man,
our  Order  presents  the  strongest  inducements.  We
open  for  him  a  field  beyond  the  limits  of  his  party  or
his  church,  as  well  as  within  it,  needing  his  labors  and
offering  joyous  recompense  for  his  toils.

No  church  in  its  present  state  is  extensive  enough  in
its  fellowship  to  embrace  many  good  men  who  need  the
ministration  of  kindred  spirits,  nor  far-reaching  enough
to  reach  even  its  own  members  when  distant  from  it,  and
needing  aid  and  protection.  But  if  an  Odd-Fellow,  far
away  from  kindred  and  home,  falls  down  by  the  way-
side, penniless  and  faint,  he  has  but  to  inform  the
nearest  Lodge,  and  hands  arc  reached  out  to  provide,
and  watchers  are  at  his  side  to  uphold  his  drooping
frame.  Or,  if  he  falls  under  the  cold  suspicions  of  an
unfriendly  world,  and  is  cast  unmeritedly  into  a  felon's
cell,  brothers  are  active  around  him  with  counsel,  and
labor  to  remove  the  dark  web  of  circumstances  that
becloud  his  fame  or  endanger  his  life,  to  secure  him  a
fair  trial,  and,  if  just,  a  proper  acquittal  and  a  safe  re-
turn to  society  and  friends.

In  doing  this,  and  other  deeds  of  like  kindness,  we
interfere  with  no  individual  duty ;  call  for  no  neglect
of  proper  interests ;  supersede  no  social,  ecclesiastical,
or  political  action.  We  leave  every  member  free  as

ODD-FELLOWSHIP — ITS    GOVERNMENT,  ETC.  85

before  in  his  obligations,  duties,  and  opinions.  But  we
enlarge  his  acquaintance  around  him,  and  associate  him
in  labor  with  thousands  with  whom  he  has  never  before
acted.  We  open  all  around  him  a  field  for  benevolence,
in  which  his  feet  had  never  trod,  nor  his  mind  and
hands  labored.  We  increase  his  means  and  measures
for  blessing  others,  and  thus  happifying  himself,  by
placing  the  resources  of  our  Order  at  his  disposal.  We
extend  indefinitely  his  operations,  so  that  the  suffering
and  needy,  at  the  extremities  of  our  vast  brotherhood,
may  feel  the  succor  and  share  the  bounty  he  aids  in
directing.  And,  by  the  most  beautiful  lessons,  we  in-
struct him  in  those  great  principles  which  will  not  only
inform  his  own  mind  and  render  more  susceptible  to
goodness  his  own  heart,  but  will  enable  him,  if  he  so
wills,  to  become  an  apt  teacher  and  ready  example  to
others,  in  all  those  virtues  that  adorn  and  bless  hu-
manity.

"If  lie  so  wills."  The  sands  of  the  arid  desert  as  well
as  the  soil  of  the  fruitful  field,  drink  in  the  sunshine  and
the  rain  that  come  from  above.  Pharisee  and  Sadducee,
as  well  as  the  loving  heart  and  believing  soul,  sit  under
the  teachings  of  the  same  gospel.  But  how  widely
different  the  effects  of  these  same  influences  on  each !
So  in  Odd^Fellowship  there  are  those  who  profit  not  by
precept  and  example ;  who  remain  exclusive  amid  all  its
liberality ;  selfish,  in  the  profusion  of  its  generosity ;
penurious,  surrounded  by  its  charity  and  benevolence;
and  vicious  and  hateful,  though  enveloped  in  its  atmo-
sphere of  purity  and  loving-kindness.  We  say,  therefore,
"if  he  so  wills" — for,  after  all,  it  depends  on  himself
whether  he  will  profit  by  our  teaching  and  training.

To  all,  then,  who  are  willing  to  learn  and  to  do  good,  we
give  the  invitation  to  join  our  ranks.  And  to  remove
8

86  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

any  lingering  scruple  of  the  conscientious,  we  say>
should  Odd-Fellowship  tender  you  any  obligation,  or
require  of  you  any  duty,  conflicting  with  the  duties  you
owe  to  God,  to  humanity,  to  your  country,  your  family,
or  your  friends,  we  enjoin  you  to  leave  it  for  ever,  as
hollow  in  its  pretensions  and  unworthy  the  favor  of
community.

CHAPTER  IV.

APPLICATION   AND    ADMISSION.

Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you. — MATT.  vii.  7.

IF  you  can  satisfy  your  mind  and  feelings  so  as  to
accept  the  invitation  with  which  we  closed  the  preceding
chapter,  and  if  qualified  to  become  a  member,  apply  to
some  member  of  the  nearest  or  most  convenient  Lodge
for  a  copy  of  its  Constitution  and  By-laws.  Having
carefully  examined  these,  with  such  explanations  as
your  Odd-Fellow  friends  can  impart,  you  will  know
what  is  required  of  you,  and  be  able  to  send  in  your
application.

And  here,  outside  the  threshold,  Odd-Fellowship  com-
mences its  requisitions.  Your  first  step  of  duty  is  CON-
FIDENCE. Confidence  in  the  principles  and  aims,  the
means  and  operations  of  Odd-Fellowship,  as  an  institu-
tution  for  the  proper  development  of  man's  powers  and
affections,  and  the  relief  and  amelioration  of  hum  an
want  and  suffering, — as  an  effort  to  open  for  man,  where-
ever  he  may  be,  a  school  for  moral  and  social  culture —

APPLICATION   AND   ADMISSION.  87

a  home  for  the  solace  of  his  woes  and  miseries  : — Confi-
dence in  the  men  and  women  generally  who  compose  its
vast  constituency,  that  though  frail  and  fallible  all,  and
recreant  to  duty  some  of  them  may  be,  yet  generally,
their  past  deeds  and  progress  prove  them  to  possess
good  motives,  right  aims,  and  honest  professions : — Con-
fidence that,  as  a  body,  they  will  faithfully  carry  out
their  principles  into  practice  in  their  conduct  to  you,  to
each  other,  and  to  the  world ;  and  Confidence  in  your-
self, that  you  can  assume  the  solemn  obligations  and
pronounce  the  solemn  vows  of  Odd-Fellowship  truth-
fully and  honestly.

Such  confidence  involves  a  further  duty,  which  you
are  now  required  to  exercise — FRANKNESS,  CANDOR.
You  ask  the  revelation  of  important  mysteries — to  be-
come a  partner  in  weighty  trusts  and  valuable  rights
and  privileges.  Show  yourself  worthy,  by  the  utmost
frankness  and  candor  in  relation  to  all  matters  that
may  be  lawfully  inquired  of  yourself.  Answer  every
question  placed  properly  before  you,  promptly  and
truthfully,  as  you  would  that  those  you  seek  should
answer  yours  in  due  season — as  you  desire  to  be  trusted
and  honored  after  your  admission.  We  may  say  further,
that  evasion  or  concealment  will  probably  be  of  no
avail ;  for  the  information  required,  has,  in  all  proba-
bility, been  already  obtained  from  other  sources.  Nor
need  you  shrink  from  scrutiny,  if  honest  and  sincere,
for  no  indelicate,  no  improper,  no  irrelevant  or  merely
curious  question  will  be  proposed.  Excepting  in  regard
to  your  religious  faith  in  God,  and  your  relations  to  the
Order,  the  questions  are  merely  such  as  a  health  or  life
insurance  company  require  to  be  answered  in  good  faith.

88  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  2.   The  Admission.

Permit  here  a  suggestion  on  a  delicate  subject.  Re-
jection is  possible — not  by  any  means  probable,  how-
ever— even  to  a  good  and  proper  applicant.  The  Lodge,
or  some  of  its  members,  may  desire  a  further  acquaint-
ance with  the  temper,  character,  habits,  or  health  of  the
candidate  ;  and  so  may  reject  him  to  obtain  six  months
more  of  time.  Or  even  personal  prejudices,  contrary
to  every  principle  and  law  of  the  Order,  may  induce
some  members  to  risk  the  penalty  by  rejecting  the  ap-
plicant on  those  grounds  alone.  It  is  prudent,  there-
fore, in  view  of  these  possibilities,  to  confide  the  know-
ledge of  your  application  to  no  one  out  of  the  Order.
And  should  you  be  rejected,  take  it  meekly  and  quietly,
and  patiently  wait  your  time  when,  if  you  know  yourself
to  be  worthy,  you  may  apply  again  under  more  favorable
circumstances.  A  rejection  by  no  means  implies  con-
demnation of  your  character :  it  is  merely  an  expression
of  disinclination  to  admit  you,  for  whatever  reason  ;  and
the  reason  may  be  simply  a  want  of  knowledge  on  the
part  of  those  who  reject.

But  if  admitted,  having  manifested  the  requisite  con-
fidence and  frankness,  go  on  your  way,  all  attentive  to
the  solemn  lessons  in  store  for  you.  Fear  nothing,  be
appearances  what  they  may.  It  is  contrary  to  our
usages  (whatever  may  have  been  the  customs  of  "  olden
time")  to  treat  an  initiate  with  levity  or  rudeness,  or
in  any  manner  unbecoming  the  courtesy  with  which
gentlemen  should  conduct  toward  each  other.

The  solemnities  of  initiation  may  be  novel,  even
startling  by  their  novelty,  but  they  are  perfectly  chaste,
dignified,  and  serious  as  the  lessons  they  are  designed

APPLICATION   AND   ADMISSION.  89

to  teach.  They  might,  with  perfect  propriety,  be  ad-
ministered in  the  presence  of  our  wives,  mothers,  sisters,
and  daughters,  so  far  as  speech  and  correct  action  are
concerned.  Give  yourself,  then,  passively  to  your  guides,
to  lead  you  whithersoever  they  will.  Answer  seriously
and  plainly  all  questions  proposed ;  obey  promptly  all
directions  given  you :  and  thus  keep  your  mind  atten-
tive to  the  ceremonial,  that  you  may  clearly  understand
its  import,  and  receive  the  instructions  imparted  in  its
lessons,  and  lay  them  to  heart  in  your  career  as  an  Odd-
Fellow.

Be  not  afraid  of  any  hopeless  entanglement.  If  dis-
satisfied, you  may,  at  any  time,  withdraw  honorably,  if
free  from  debt  and  not  under  charges — or,  you  may
procure  a  withdrawal  card  to  join  some  other  Lodge.
Of  course,  it  is  presumed  that  you  will  not  do  so  hastily,
nor  with  any  purpose  derogatory  to  your  honor  as  an
honest,  truthful  man.  (See  Part  Second,  Chapter  24,
§  1,  on  "  Diplomas  and  Cards.")
8*

PART  SECOND.

3flnthni  Stehmal  in  tjjj  (Drhr.

CHAPTER  I.

ON   INITIATIONS   GENERALLY.

I  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  they  know  not;  I  will  lead  them
in  paths  that  they  have  not  known :  I  will  make  darkness  light  be-
fore them,  and  crooked  things  straight.  These  things  will  I  do  unto
them,  and  not  forsake  them  — ISA.  xlii.  16.

EVERY  Odd-Fellow  should  keep  clearly  impressed  on
his  mind  and  heart  the  lessons  taught  at  initiation.
They  are  a  guide  to  understand  properly  all  that  follows
after — an  epitomized  summary  of  the  great  principles
and  objects  of  the  Order.  They  contain  the  germs  which
after-instruction  and  his  own  practice  should  develop
and  mature  into  blossoming  and  fruitfulness.  In  one
word,  what  regeneration  by  the  word  of  truth  is  in  re-
ligion, initiation  is  in  Odd-Fellowship.

In  this,  as  in  many  other  particulars,  our  Institution
has  instinctively,  as  it  were,  copied  after  nearly  all  secret
associations  of  a  religious  and  moral  character.  "In
Egypt,  the  most  ancient  among  the  ancient  nations,
an  institution  of  this  kind  existed  from  the  earliest
period.  Of  the  nature  of  that  institution  we  know  very
little.  History  informs  us  that  many  benefits  were  sup-
posed to  be  derived  from  a  participation  in  the  secrets
of  the  society  ;  that  those  secrets  were  revealed  only  to
90

ON   INITIATIONS    GENERALLY.  91

the  initiated,  and  that  the  mode  of  initiation  was  well
calculated  to  make  a  serious  and  abiding  impression  on
the  mind  of  the  recipient.

"  Besides  the  Egyptian  Mysteries,  as  they  are  called
by  historians,  we  find  scattered  throughout  all  Europe,
and  a  large  portion  of  Asia,  associations  founded  on
similar  principles,  characterized  by  similar  ceremonies,
and  having  similar  objects  in  view.  Of  most  of  these
our  information  is  scanty  and  imperfect ;  but  enough  is
known  to  prove  the  identity  of  their  origin  and  object.
These  were  all  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  Mysteries  of
the  Cabiri,  a  name  which  is  itself  a  mystery,  and  which
no  learning  or  research  has  yet  been  able  satisfactorily
to  explain."

"  Among  all  the  mysteries  of  the  ancients,  those  cele-
brated at  the  city  of  Eleusis,  and  hence  called  the
t  Eleusinian  Mysteries,'  are  best  known.  These  were
copied  from  the  Egyptian,  and  bore  a  general  corres-
pondence to  all  similar  institutions ;  and  hence  an
account  of  one  is,  in  the  main,  an  account  of  all  the
others.  Not  that  all  agreed  in  the  particular  detail  of
their  practices  or  objects,  but  in  their  outline  they
agreed  in  holding  similar  principles  for  similar  pur-
poses. Now,  a  careful  comparison  of  all  the  ancient
rites,  as  they  existed  anterior  to  the  Gospel,  leads  to
the  following  conclusion.  It  was  a  leading  character-
istic of  all  the  ancient  rites,  that  they  began  in  sorrow
and  gloom,  but  ended  in  light  and  joy ;  they  were  all
calculated  to  remind  men  of  their  weakness,  their  igno-
rance, their  helplessness,  and  their  sinfulness  of  cha-
racter ;  of  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  life,  and  of
the  ills  which  flesh  is  heir  to ;  of  the  punishment  of
guilt,  the  reward  of  virtue,  and  the  rising  of  the  just  to
life  eternal  and  immortal.  In  all,  too,  the  mode  of

92  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

initiation  was  calculated  to  make  a  deep  and  lasting  im-
pression upon  the  mind  of  the  candidate.  For  these  pur-
poses, striking  exhibitions  of  the  consequences  of  sin,
and  the  pleasures  of  virtue,  were  presented  for  con-
sideration, in  sudden  and  striking  contrast,  and  every-
thing was  designed  to  impress  the  candidate  with  a
lively  sense  of  what  was  thus  represented."

"If,  now,  we  follow  down  the  history  of  these  ancient
mysteries,  until  the  religion  of  the  Cross  had  been  pro-
claimed throughout  the  world,  we  shall  find  them  essen-
tially changed  in  their  religious  character;  no  longer
professing  to  convey  religious  blessings  or  spiritual
privileges,  but  holding  out  promises  of  such  advantages
and  benefits  as  men  can  afford  to  their  fellow-men,  but
still  inculcating  virtue  by  the  highest  and  strongest  sanc-
tions. We  might,  would  time  permit,  follow  down  the  his-
tory of  the  associations  to  the  present  time,  and  should  thus
find  that,  from  the  earliest  ages  to  the  present  day,  there
have  been  similar  associations  founded  upon  the  same
general  principles,  with  similar  rites  and  ceremonies,  and
with  similar  objects  in  view.  Yet  the  rites  and  ceremo-
nies have  not  been  the  same ;  for  membership  in  one  would
not  introduce  a  person  into  any  other.  Such  an  investi-
gation, also,  would  show  us  that  these  rites  and  ceremonies
were  originally  of  a  religious  character,  copied,  in  the  first
instance,  from  a  divine  institution,  and  that  for  ages  they
were  mighty  agents  in  preserving  and  perpetuating  a
knowledge  of  the  truth,  both  as  regards  God  and  man."

The  great  German  poet  and  philosopher,  Goethe,  in
the  following  Ode,  traces  an  analogy  between  the  ini-
tiation in  a  lodge  (undoubtedly  Masonic,  but  equally
applicable  to  one  of  our  Order)  and  human  existence.  Its
mysterious  beauty  will  speak  to  every  heart ;  but  the  ini-
tiated will  feel  it  most,  as  they  will  understand  it  best : —

THE   INITIATION.  93

THE   LODGE.

TRANSLATED  BY  THOMAS  CARLYLM.

The  worker's  ways  are
A  type  of  existence,
And  in  his  persistence

Is  as  the  days  are

Of  men  in  this  world.

The  future  hides  in  it
Good  hap  and  sorrow ;
YTe  still  press  thorough  —

Naught  that  abides  in  it

Daunting  us  —  Onward  !

And  solemn  before  us,
Veiled,  the  dark  portal,
Goal  of  all  mortal.

Stars  silent  o'er  us  —

Graves  under  us  silent.

But  heard  are  the  voices  —
The  voice  of  the  sages,
The  worlds  and  the  ages.

Choose  well ;   your  choice  is

Brief,  and  yet  endless.

Here  eyes  do  regard  you
In  eternity's  stillness;
Here  all  is  fulness,

Ye  brave,  to  reward  you ;

Work,  and  despair  not.

With  these  introductory  remarks  on  the  general  aim
and  teachings  of  all  ceremonials  of  initiation,  we  are
prepared,  I  trust,  to  understand  more  clearly  the  mys-
teries, lessons,  and  duties  inculcated  in  our  initiatory
rites,  and  their  application  to  the  degrees  which  follow
after.

CHAPTER  II.

THE    INITIATION.

1.  A  THOUGHTFUL  man's  first  entrance  into  a  lodge,
unknowing  what  is  to  be  transacted  there,  is  a  serious
event.  There,  for  a  time,  he  is  to  be  isolated  from
general  society,  in  a  retreat  sacred  to  benevolence  and
peace,  away  from  the  world,  with  its  selfish  toils  and

94  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

cares,  its  factitious  distinctions  and  social  vices,  sur-
rounded wholly  by  those  who  have  vowed  to  devote
their  lives  to  fraternity  in  Odd-Fellowship.  His  object
is  to  learn  their  principles,  to  assume  their  vows,  to
unite  in  their  labors.  That  he  may  do  so  properly,
they  require  him  to  pass  through  rites  which  shall  teach
him  his  present  condition  as  a  social  being,  and  the
primary  principles  of  the  condition  he  is  about  to  enter.

2.  Consider,  then,  the  social  state  of  man  without  a
knowledge  and  practice  of  those  relations  which  bind
him  to  his  Creator  and  his  fellows.     How  isolated  his
position ;  how  surrounded  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance
on  every  side;  how  feeble,  helpless,  dependent,  in   a
world  that  appears  adverse  and  antagonistic !     If  he
find  a  guide,  he  knows  not  whether  to  trust  or  doubt
him ;  and  he  is  yet  in  such  need  of  one  that  he  follows
whithersoever  he  is  led.

3.  Himself  bound,  by  his  ignorance  and  fears,  in  the
indurating  fetters  of  selfishness,  he  knows  not  that  any
have  more  light  and  freedom  than  are  his  ;  and  yet,  not
fully  realizing  his  own  need  of  both,  he  may  marvel  if
told  that  nearly  all  mankind  are  in  darkness  and  chains
which  they  neither  behold  nor  feel.     It  is  not  until
some  voice  greets  his  ear  with  a  promise  of  instruction,
that  he  begins  to  conceive  that  the  chaos  around  him
may  be  resolved  into  order,  the  discord  to  harmony.
This  conception  leads  him  to  desire  that  wisdom  which
shall  shed  light  upon  his   darkness,   and  unravel  the
perplexities  which  bewilder  his  soul.

4.  And  yet  the  first  ray  of  light  will  but  increase  the
apparent  gloom ;  for  it  will  exhibit  more  strongly  the
vanity  of  human  pursuits  and  possessions,  the  brevity
of  life  and  the  certainty  of  death,  and  all  life's  evils
fearfully  aggravated  and  increased  by  the  strifes,  dis-

OF    INITIATION.  95

cords,  and  dissensions  which  flow  from  human  ignorance
and  folly,  and  end  at  last  in  death  itself.

5.  Yet  contemplate  the  scene.     From  all  that  gloom,
light  will  shine  forth  to  guide  aright.     It  will  humble
human  pride.     It  will  awaken  compassion  for  others.
It  will  arouse  the  soul  to  a  just  sense  of  its  responsi-
bility to  God,  and  its  duty  to  man.     It  will  fill  his  heart
with  a  salutary  horror  'of  that  monster,   SIN,   whose
power  has   arrayed  man   against  his  fellow-man,  and
washed  the  earth  with  tears  and  deluged  it  in  blood.
It  will  bid  him  beware  that  his  own  heart  does  not
cherish  moral  evil,  that  bane  of  happiness  and  peace,
that  fountain  of  discord  and   strife,  that  inflictor   of
guilt  and  shame,  and  wo  and  death,  which  must  reign
until  men  learn  to  obey  the  law  of  truth  and  love,  and
the  earth  is  filled  with  righteousness  and  peace.

6.  As  he  thus  realizes  his  own  mortality,  its  possible
nearness,  and  his  own  dependence  and  helplessness,  he
will  the  more  willingly  ponder  the  ties  that  bind  him  to
the  woes  and  sufferings  of  all  around  him,  and  joyously
look  forward  to  that  bright  era  when  all  these  woes  and
pains  shall  be  banished  by  the  prevalence  of  benevolence
and  peace,  by  the  reign  of  brotherhood  and  love  !    Then
"  the  LORD  shall  judge  among  the  nations,  and  shall  re-
buke many  people;   and  they  shall  beat  their  swords
into  plowshares,  and  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks :
nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither
shall  they  learn  war  any  more."*

7.  Even   animals  would  seem  to  be  blessed  in  the
change.     "  The  wolf,  also,  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and
the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid ;  and  the  calf,  and
the  young  lion,  and  the  fatling  together,  and  a  little  child

*  Isa.  ii.  4.

96  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

shall  lead  them.  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed ;
their  young  ones  shall  lie  down  together,  and  the  lion
shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox."*

8.  And  such  a  period  may  be  expected  on  the  ground
of  man's  origin    and   nature,   also.     For   God    "hath
made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all
the  face  of  the  earth."f

9.  Let  him   not  wonder   that   he    is  yet  unable  to
behold    steadily  this  light  through  surrounding  dark-
ness.    Man  advances  gradually  in  light  and  knowledge.
But  how  can  he  apply  these  principles  of  fraternity  so
as  to  enlighten  and  liberate  his  own  soul,  then  enlighten
the  darkness   and  break  the  bonds  of  others,  and  so
hasten  the  coming  of  that  age  when  this  Aceldama
shall  be  a  blossoming  Paradise,  and  clashing  interests
and  jarring  strifes  give  place  to  a  universal  union  of  all
energies  for  the  general  good,  to  a  community  of  happi-
ness and  peace  ?

10.  Let  him  hear  the  voice   of  Antiquity,  speaking
through  the  lips  of  the  aged  and  wise  ;  it  will  utter  the
lessons  of  goodness  and  wisdom  acquired  by  experience
and  observation.     Righteousness  secures  present  pro*
vision  and  protection  as  well  as  future  prosperity  and
safety.    "  Godliness  (i.  e.  God-likeness)  is  profitable  unto
all  things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of
that  which  is  to  coine."J     The  Psalmist  therefore  truly
declared,   "I  have  been  young   and  now  am  old;  yet
have  I  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his   seed
begging  bread.  "§

This  teacher  of  past  ages  also  says  that  Friendship,
Love,  and  Truth  are  not  only  a  safeguard,  but  a  remedy
for  all  the  social  and  moral  evils  that  afflict  our  race,

*  Isa.  xi.  6,  7.  f  Acts  xvii.  26.

1 1  Tim.  iv.  8.  J  Psalm  xxxvii.  26.

OF    INITIATION.  97

Remember  well  this  great  lesson — forget  it  not.  Ad-
vance in  it,  that  further  instruction  may  unfold  its  ap-
plications to  our  duties  and  our  wants.

11.  Good   conduct  only,   not  mere  professions   and
seemings,  can  procure  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  the
good  and  wise.     But  let  the  Odd-Fellow  add  to  good-
ness, prudence.     Let  caution    guard   his  lips  and  his
ways.     We  would  say  to  him  :  "  Bestow  not  your  con-
fidence   too    hastily.     Be  just  to  yourself  as  well  as
generous  to  others.     Be  just  especially  to  those  who
confide  in  you.     Keep  their  secrets  more  carefully  even
than  your  own.     Watch  over  their  interests,  and  pro-
mote their  welfare  with  the  unsleeping  vigilance  of  a
sentinel  in  the  presence  of  armed  enemies.     Not  only
do  not  wrong  a  brother,   but  never    allow  him  to  be
wronged,  if  in  your  power  to  prevent  it  or  warn  him.
Fidelity  in  duty,  honesty,  then,  is  the  duty  of  all  in
our  singular  fellowship ;  the  honesty  of  a  warm  heart
and  a  sound  mind ;  honesty  to  those  without  and  those
within ;  honesty  to  yourself  and  all  around.     For  we
are    Odd-Fellows    only  when  we   act    and    speak    like
honest  men."

12.  This  learned,  and  a  new  light  will  break  in  upon
the  mind,  and  the  heart  beat  more  freely.     The  outside
seeming  is  known  not  to  be  the  inward  reality.     The
world  may  move  in  a  vain  show,  each  man  striving  to
disguise  himself  from  others,  often  even  from  himself.
But  in  our  Lodge-room  we  expect  brethren  to  lay  a^ide
the  deceitful  mask,  and  look  each  other  lovingly  in  the
eyes,  knowing  and  known  of  each  other  as  they  are.
Let  those  who  unite  with  us  learn  that  the  homely  garb,
the  rude  appearance,  "the  rough  form,  often  encloses  an
unruffled    conscience  and  a    humane    heart,  while   the
costly  dress,  the    polished    manners,  and   the   courtly

98  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

speech  often  hide  a  heart  festering  with  corruption  and
black  with  selfishness  and  cruelty.  "A  man  may  smile,
and  smile,  and  be  a  villain  still."  Be  not  deceived,
then,  by  the  exterior  appearance  of  men  and  things,
but  wait,  and  learn,  and  «  judge  righteous  judgment."

13.  Keep  in  remembrance  the  signs  and  words  im-
parted to  you,  to  enable  you  to  enter  these  courts,  and
to    recognize    and    be    recognized    of    your    brethren.
Trifling  as  they  may  seem  to  some,  they  are  the  key  to
our  treasures  and  our  mysteries.     And  in  their  use,  re-
member that  they  are  pledges  of  secrecy  to  the  brother-
hood from  you,  and  to  you  from  us.     Remember  also,
that  the   OMNISCIENT  ONE  observes   your   every  dis-
charge of  duty  and  use   of  privilege.     Let  your  hand,
then,  be  open  as  day  to  greet  a  brother  with  frankness,
or  to  aid  him  with  cheerfulness  and  love.     Show  due
courtesy    to    your    brethren,    and    salute   respectfully
those  who  preside  over   the   Lodge,  as  the  representa-
tives of  the  Lodge  itself.

14.  The  forms  through  which  you  have  passed  are
not  what  they  seem   to  many.     Under  each  act  and
emblem  there  is  deep  significance.     So  in  life.     Apply
your  instructions  there,  and  every  thing  becomes  vocal
with  wisdom.     The  eyes  blinded  by  the  darkness  of  a
dungeon,  are  naught  to  the  blindness  of  the  moral  sense
obscured   by  indulgence  in   selfishness  and  sensuality.
The  fetters  on  a  martyr's  limbs,  what  are  they  to  the
chains  which  evil  passions  and  bad  habits  impose  on  the
inner  man,  and  whose  iron  does  indeed  enter  the  soul  ?
May  your  initiation  and  consequent  practice  aid  in  re-
leasing you  from  all  blindness  of  mcral  vision,  set  you
free  from  the  fetters  of  ignorance  and  error,  and  bring
you  from  a  death  in  selfishness   into   a  life   of   active
benevolence  and  v'rtue.

OF    IMITATION.  99

15.  Odd -Fellowship    is   a   miniature  representation,
among  a  chosen  few,  of  that  fraternity  which  God  has
instituted   among  men.     Few  as  are  those  who  would
represent  it,  the  great  principle  is  wide  enough  for  all.
On    the   broad    platform    of  brotherhood,   all    nations,
parties,  and  sects  can  meet  and  freely  mingle  in  offices
of  needed  kindness  and  mutual  well-doing.     Fraternity,
therefore,  is  the  corner-stone  on  which  our  forefathers
based  our  Order;  fraternity  in  the  family  of  mankind,
illustrated  in    our   family,   the   Lodge,  and   the   Order.
As  all  men  have  God  for  their  Father,  all  are  brethren;
and  we  would  illustrate  this  great  fact  in  all  our  offices
of  mutual  aid,  relief,  sympathy,  and  benevolence.

16.  Recognizing   the    Fatherhood  of  God,  Odd-Fel-
lows bring  not  into  a  Lodge  the  classifications  of  human
society  without.     No  high,  no  low,  no  great,  no  small^
no  rich,  no  poor,  no  nation,  party,  or  sect  do  we  know
among  us.     All  are   one,  all   fellow  men,  all  brethren.
As  one  family  we  meet  together,  to  counsel  and  aid  in
measures  for  the  relief  of  distress,  for  mutual  instruc-
tion, watch-care,  and  fellowship,  and  for  the  discipline
and  improvement  of  character.     An  altar  dedicated  to
such  offices  must  be  served  with  clean  hands  and  sur-
rounded with  pure  hearts.     All  discord  r.ud  strife,  all
alienation  of  heart  must  be  kept  away  from  our  meet-
ings.    And  yet  while  we  exclude  all  party  and  secta-
rian distinctions  from  our  Lodges,  we  require  no  sacri-
fice of  opinions,  no  loosening  of  obligations  to  Church
or  State,  no  swerving  from  principle,  no  lessening  of
devotion  to  God.     On  the  contrary,  we  teach  that  no
man  can  be  a  good  Odd  Fellow  who  neg^cts  any  duty
he  owes  to  his  Creator,  his  family,  his  country,  or  his
fellow-man.

17    But  guard  against  a  too  common  error.     Ours  is

100  1HE    ODD-FELLOWS    MANUAL.

not  a  mere  beneficial  society,  nor  designed  only  to
aid  its  members  in  danger  and  distress.  Great  and
good  as  are  these,  they  are  more  our  means  than  our
ends  By  associating  together  for  benevolent  purpo'ses,
we  hope  to  improve  and  elevate  the  characters  of  our
brethren,  to  enlighten  their  minds,  to  teach  them  their
capabilities  for  usefulness,  to  expand  their  affections,
that  they  may  not  "give  up  to  party  what  was  meant
for  mankind.''  In  one  word,  all  our  operations  are  de-
signed to  lead  each  other  to  the  knowledge  and  practice
of  the  true  brotherhood  of  man.

18.  Believing  that  every  one  we  thus  receive  and  in-
struct will  be  benefited  thereby,  we  gladly  greet  each  ini-
tiate as  a  brother  beloved,  and  welcome  him  with  fraternal
grip  to  the  obligations  and  privileges  of  our  beloved  Order.

19.  Remember  that  when  on  the  surging  waters  of
human  life,  far  from  haven  and  from   home,  you  may
summon  any  brother  to  your  aid.     But  forget  not,  also,
that    the    obligation  is   mutual.     When   you  are   sum-
moned, you  also  are  bound  to  fly  and  save  your  perish
ing  brother  from  sinking  in  despair.

§  2.  Regalia  of  an  Initiate.

The  regalia  of  a  newly-initiated  brother  is  a  white
apron  only.

Without  any  ornament  of  colored  fringe,  its  simplicity
and  purity  well  denotes  the  position  of  its  wearer  in  the
Order.  The  primary  principles  of  Odd-Fellowship,
blended  in  the  one,  great,  all-including  principle  of  fra-
ternity, are  his ;  but  only  in  the  germ,  waiting  the  un-
folding of  blossoming  and  fruitfulness.  The  elementary
lesson  has  been  imparted ;  but  it  is  not  yet  made  appli-
cable as  a  means  to  acquire  tho  ibstruser  lessons  which

OF    INITIATION.  101

follow.  He  has  the  materials ;  it  is  his  now  to  apply
them  in  detail,  until  their  utility  shall  create  for  them
every  desired  ornament,  every  needed  grace  and  virtue.

§  3.  Emblems  of  the  Initiatory  Degree.
The  emblems  usually  connected  with  this  first  stage
of  our  Order,  are  the  following :

1.  THE  ALL-SEEING  EYE.

Emblem  of  Omniscience — the  special  emblem  of  the
Initiate.

"  Enveloped  in  a  blaze  of  light  and  glory,  it  reminds
us  that  the  scrutinizing  gaze  of  Our  Father  is  ever  upon
us,"  beholding  all  our  actions  and  even  our  thoughts ;
for  He  "searcheth  the  heart  and  trieth  the  reins."

On  entering  or  leaving  a  Lodge,  we  note  it  as  a
reminder  of  the  instructions  at  our  initiation,  and  it
serves  to  keep  us  steadfast  in  our  integrity.  Although,
to  mortal  vision,  "clouds  and  darkness  are  round
about"  the  Invisible  One,  yet  we  know  that  "judgment
and  justice  are  the  foundations  of  His  throne,"  and
that  "  He  dwelleth  in  light,"  and  "  in  Him  is  no  dark-
ness at  all."  "If  I  say,  Surely  the  darkness  shall

cover  me,  —  even  the  night  shall   be  light  about  me.
9*

102  THE  ODD- FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Yea,  the  darkness  hideth  not  from  thee  ;  but  the  night
shineth  as  the  day  :  the  darkness  and  the  light  are  both
alike  to  Thee."

But  this  emblem  also  teaches  us  the  soul-cheering
truth  that  God  looketh  kindly  and  pityingly  upon  us ;  for
"He  remembereth  that  we  are  dust;"  —  and  that  He
provideth  for  all  our  wants,  and  is  so  minute  in  His  pater-
nal care,  that  even  the  hairs  of  our  heads  are  numbered.

Let  us,  then,  gratefully,  as  well  as  reverently,  so  live
under  His  all-seeing  eye,  that  we  may  thank  Him  for
the  past,  rejoice  before  Him  in  the  present,  and  cherish
an  humble  hope  in  Him  for  the  future  —  thus  fulfilling
the  great  motto  of  our  Order

"  IN  GOD  WE  TRUST."

II.  THE  SKULL  AND  CROSSED  BONES.
Emblem  of  Mortality.  —  It  reminds  us,  not  merely
that  "  dust  we  are,  and  unto  dust  we  must  return,"  but
also,  "  that  we  are  solemnly  bound  to  commit  the
mortal  remains  of  a  departed  brother  carefully  and
lovingly  to  the  tomb,  to  cherish  a  lively  recollection
of  his  many  virtues,  and  to  bury  his  imperfections  with
his  body  beneath  the  clods  of  the  valley."

OF    INITIATION.

103

It  also  teaches  us  the  vanity  of  worldly  things  —  the
instability  of  wealth  and  power,  and  the  certain  passing
away  of  all  earthly  greatness.  This  lesson,  as  melan-
choly as  it  is  truthful,  humbles  pride,  awakens  com-
passion for  others,  rouses  the  soul  to  a  proper  sense  of
responsibility  to  God,  and  of  duty  to  our  fellow-men ;  and
creates  a  deep  abhorrence  of  SIN  —  that  greatest  of  all
evils  —  that  bane  of  human  happiness  and  peace  which
has  bathed  the  world  in  tears  and  deluged  it  in  blood.
Thus  it  inspires  us  to  labor  for  the  spread  of  that  great
law  of  human  brotherhood,  which  shall  yet  bind  all
nations,  kindreds,  tongues,  and  peoples,  in  the  bonds
of  benevolence  and  peace.

III.  THE  THREE  LINKS.

Emblem  of  F.  L.  &  T.  —  It  represents  the  all-encir-
cling chain  of  sympathy  that  unites  us  as  one  in  our
aims,  labors, and  abundant  rewards;  and  reminds  us  that
we  are  thus  bound  for  our  own  and  each  other's  welfare.
And  it  teaches  us,  (as  we  have  learned  from  the  lips
of  Antiquity,)  that  the  best  safeguard  against  the  ills
of  life  will  be  found  in  the  practice  of  Friendship,
Love,  and  Truth.  —  " FORGET  IT  NOT!"

104  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

IV.  THE  AXE.

Emblem  of  Pioneering.  —  It  reminds  us  that  as  the
trees  of  the  wilderness  must  fall  before  the  axe,  ere  the
sunlight  can  disperse  its  gloom  and  the  land  become  a
fruitful  field;  so  must  Divine  Truth  be  applied  to  every
cumbering  tree  and  poisonous  vine  within  us,  before
we  can  realize  the  genial  glow  and  fully  profit  by  the
influences  of  Fraternity  in  our  lodge,  our  Order,  and
in  the  family  of  man.  It  thus  teaches  us  to  clear  away
every  blinding  prejudice  and  passion — " every  tree  that
bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit "  —  and  cast  them  into
the  consuming  and  purifying  fires.

[In  many  lodges  it  is  customary  to  collect  donations
for  the  needy  and  distressed  on  the  Warden's  axe,  which
has  painted  on  the  side  presented  for  the  donation  the
expressive  Heart  in  HandJ]

V.  THE  HEART  IN  HAND.

Emblem  of  Sincerity  —  and,  included  in  this,  Candor
and  Frankness.  Though  the  insignia  of  the  P.  G.,  yet
it  is  an  emblem  of  the  initiate,  to  remind  him  of  the  P.
Q's.  charge  —  that  "basis  or  substratum  of  our  Moral

THE    INITIATION.  105

Temple/'  which  oar  feet  press  at  our  entrance,  and
whose  lessons,  opening  as  we  advance,  precede  us  through
all  the  degrees  and  offices  of  the  Order.

It  reminds  us  that  there  should  be  no  improper  con-
cealment of  feelings  and  purposes  among  brethren  —
that  our  greetings  should  be  of  the  heart  as  well  as  of
the  hand  —  "that  what  the  one  in  love  dictates,  the
other  in  alacrity  should  perform."  And  it  teaches  us
that  when  distress  and  suffering  call,  the  hand  should
be  "  open  as  day  to  melting  charity,"  and  the  heart
warm  as  mother-love  to  sympathy  and  relief,  remember-
ing that  "  the  Lord  loveth  the  cheerful  giver."  And
it  also  teaches  us,  not  only  sincerity  in  affection  and
frankness  and  candor  in  expression,  but  that  "with
pure  hearts  and  clean  hands  "  must  we  come  to  perform
the  mission  of  an  Order  dedicated  to  Trust  in  God,
and  to  "  FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE  AND  TRUTH."

§  4.  Conduct  of  a  New  Member.

A  sense  of  propriety  will,  of  course,  withhold  an
initiate  from  taking  an  active  part  in  the  proceedings
of  his  lodge  on  the  night  of  his  initiation.  The  By-
Laws  of  many  lodges  expressly  prohibit  his  voting
until  he  has  been  a  member  for  one  week.  Let  him,
then,  be  careful  to  observe  what  must  appear  to  him  the
odd  ways  of  transacting  business  and  exchanging  cour-
tesies in  the  Lodge-room,  that  he  may  learn  their  use
and  meaning,  and  acquire  facility  in  their  performance.
After  one,  or  at  most  a  few  evenings,  he  will  understand
well  his  position,  and  be  prepared  to  discharge  its
responsibilities.

Aim  to  become  a  working  member.  There  is  gen-
erally enough  to  do  for  all  who  attend  the  meetings  and

106  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

are  willing  to  work.  Signify,  therefore,  your  readiness
to  serve  the  lodge  in  any  capacity  that  may  be  as-
signed you,  and  then  wait  patiently  until  your  services
are  required.

If  called  to  serve  in  any  office,  or  on  any  committee,
inform  yourself  well  in  regard  to  the  duties  thereof,  and
the  best  modes  of  performing  them.  Apply  to  the
principal  officers  or  oldest  members  of  the  lodge  for
such  information,  if  not  found  in  our  books  or  periodi-
cals within  your  reach.  Then  devote  yourself  earnestly
to  the  work  assigned  you.  You  will  thus  be  useful,
not  only  to  the  lodge  and  the  Order,  but  to  yourself.
We  always  get  some  good  when  we  do  good.

But  you  will  find  your  knowledge  of  the  Order,  and
your  sphere  of  action  in  it,  quite  circumscribed,  until
you  advance  further  in  its  gradations.  As  soon,  there-
fore, as  the  proper  probation  has  elapsed,  apply  for  the
degrees.  The  qualifications  for  obtaining  these,  vary
a  little  in  the  different  States.  In  general,  a  member
is  required  to  have  been  an  initiate  three  months  before
he  can  receive  the  first  and  second  degrees,  a  month
more  before  he  can  receive  the  third  and  fourth  degrees,
and  then  a  month  more  before  he  can  receive  the  fifth
degree.  The  prices  of  the  degrees  also  vary  in  the
different  States.  In  some  lodges,  also,  the  benefits
during  sickness  or  disability  are  increased  as  the  mem-
bers advance  in  the  degrees.  The  Constitution  and
By-Laws  of  your  Lodge  will  give  you  all  needed  and
correct  information  on  these  particulars.  In  some  cases,
the  degrees  are  conferred  earlier  by  dispensation  ob-
tained through  the  Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the
District,

The  mode  of  applying  for  the  degrees  usually  is,  to

OF    THE    FIRST,    OR   WHITE    DEGREE.  107

deposit  the  amount  required  for  the  certificate  with  the
Secretary  of  the  lodge,  and  then  procure  a  brother  to
prefer  your  request  in  open  lodge,  at  the  proper  season.
On  this  request  a  ballot  is  had,  at  which  none  can  vote
but  those  who  have  received  the  degree  applied  for,
and  if  favorable,  (as  it  is  sure  to  be  if  the  applicant  is
an  active,  well-behaved  member,  and  duly  qualified,)
the  certificate  is  granted.

The  officers  or  older  members  of  the  lodge  will  give
you  the  requisite  information  for  further  proceedings,
which  vary  according  to  the  usages  of  different  State
Grand  Lodges.  But  in  no  case  will  you  find  any  diffi-
culty in  comprehending  the  steps  to  be  taken,  or  in
complying  with  the  required  forms.

CHAPTER  III.

OP   THE    FIRST,  OR   WHITE    DEGREE.

1.  HAVING  acquainted  yourself  with  the  elementary
principles  and  general  objects  of  the  Order,  and  exer-
cised yourself  in  its  measures  and  operations,  as  none
but  the  initiated  can  do,  you  can  judge  your  ability  to
fulfil  any  further  similar  engagements  into  which  you
may  be  required  to  enter  as  you  advance,  and  whether
the  obligations  imposed  by  a  further  development  of
our  principles  would  prove  burdensome.  The  gratifica-
tion of  mere  curiosity  will  hardly  compensate  you  for
the  duties  you  will  thus  assume.  A  higher  aim,  the
love  of  the  beautiful,  the  good,  and  the  true,  can  alone
yield  you  a  full  equivalent  for  your  expenditure  of
money,  time,  and  labor.

108  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Having  decided  these  questions,  and  obtained  the
requisite  certificate,  you  are  prepared  to  advance  a  step
in  extending  your  hand  for  the  relief  and  comfort  of
the  fraternity  throughout  the  world.

2.  Remember  what  was  before  taught  you  of  our
general  principles,  and  of  the  necessity  of  their  prac-
tical application  in  our  lodges.     No  man  is  so  isolated
as  not  to  have  some  fellow-beings  in  whose  joys  or  suf-
ferings he  sympathizes.     In  ministering  to  the  wants
of  his  family  or  friends,  he  is  taught  the  dependence  of
man  on  his  fellow-man.     But,  unhappily,  "  the  cares  of
this  world   or  the  deceitful  ness  of  riches "  too  often
blunt  our  natural  sympathies.     As  one  beloved  object
after  another  is  removed,  the  affections  contract ;  or  as
the  desires  of  the  merely  animal   man  are  ministered
unto  overmuch,  the  heart  becomes  callous,  and  misan-
thropy or  selfishness  renders  us  more  indifferent  to  the
woes  of  mankind.     Hence  the  importance  of  association
for  philanthropic  purposes,  that  we  may  keep  alive  our
humanity,  and  enlarge  the  sphere  of  our  affections  and
sympathies,  by  continual   exercise.     By  such  associa-
tions, the  combined  operations  of  the  many  are  rendered
more  effective;  and  all,  acted  upon  by   emulation  in
good  works,  are  rendered  more  zealously  active  in  well-
doing, and  thus  the  world  is  benefited,  and  ourselves
improved  and  blessed.

3.  The  bonds  of  our  fraternity  draw  us  together  in
our  lodges;   they  induce    us   to   feel  and  relieve   each
other's  distresses;  they  lead  us  to  console  the  afflicted  ;
they  render  our  assemblages  the  image  of  a  family  of
brothers;  they  make  us  respectful  to  those  in  authority;
they  teach   us  obedience  to  reasonable  requirements;
and  they  gladly  constrain  us  to  give  advice  and  support
to  thone  who  labor  to  promote  the  welfare  of  our  Order.

OF    THE    FIRST,    OR    WHITE    DEGREK.  101)

4.  Our  laws  teach  us  respect  for  ourselves,  temper-
ance in  our  desires,  chastity  of  person,  and  purity  in
heart  and  mind.     Drunkenness  is  a  worse  than  beastly
vice.     It  deprives   man  of  his  reason ;    it  disqualifies
him  for  business ;  it  wastes  his  substance ;  it  ruins  his
health ;  it  subverts  his  morals ;  it  destroys  his  domestic
happiness  and  peace  ;  it  overthrows  his  character  and
influence ;  and  if  it  cuts  not  short  his  life,  it  makes  his
old  age  a  scene  of  beggary,  disease,  and  shame.     "  Be
temperate,    therefore,    in    all    things/'      Impurity    in
thought  and  unchaste  conduct  are  as  cause  and  effect;
and  if  the  former  is  cherished,  the  latter  will  follow.
It  is  no  less  fatal  to  self-respect,  to  health,  to  fortune,
and  to  reputation,  than  intemperance  in  food  and  drink.

"The  sacred  lowe  o'  weel-placed  love,

Luxuriantly  indulge  it;
But  never  tempt  th'  illicit  rove

Though  naething  should  divulge  it:
1  waive  the  quantum  o'  the  sin,

The  hazard  of  concealing  ;
But,  och  !   it  hardens  a'  within,

And  petrifies  the  feeling."  BURNS.

5.  Our  laws  extend  the  love  of  self-good  to  the  love
of  mankind.     The  chief  attributes  of  our  fraternity  are
Benevolence,  Brotherly  Love,  and  Charity.

Benevolence,  or  the  willing  of  good,  is  the  spring  of
all  kindly  emotions  and  exertions  for  others.  Its  pos-
sessor desires  to  assuage  the  woes  of  the  sorrowing ;  to
heal  the  wounds  of  the  afflicted;  to  infuse  strength  into
the  weak  by  his  words  and  example,  and  to  relieve  the
distressed  from  his  abundance.

Brotherly  Love  craves  the  strengthening  influence  of
frequent  association,  and  increases  by  the  interest  thus
created  in  each  other's  welfare,  and  by  mutual  labors
10

110  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

to  promote  each  other's  happiness.  United  in  morality
as  well  as  in  honor,  our  secrecy  can  be  no  cloak  foi
evil  —  no  seducing  lure  to  sensuality  or  vice ;  but  merely
a  means  to  increase  our  zeal,  and  unite  and  strengthen
our  energies  for  well-doing,  and  to  guard  us  from
imposition.  It  makes  us  powerful  for  good ;  but  dis-
unites and  weakens  us  when  we  would  use  it  for  evil.
The  laws  of  God  which  regulate  our  conduct,  we  urge
on  all  around  us,  especially  that  comprehensive  law,
reaching  far  as  man  is  found,  "  WHATSOEVER  YE  WOULD

THAT  OTHERS  SHOULD  DO  TO  YOU,  DO  YE  EVEN  SO

UNTO  THEM."  Acting  thus  in  our  affiliation,  strengthens
the  ties  of  our  friendship,  and  widens  and  deepens  the
foundations  of  our  Brotherly  Love.

Charity  applies  Benevolence  and  Brotherly  Love  to
near  and  immediate  use,  and  projects  them  far  and
wide  into  society  around  us.  While  it  incites  us  to
minister  to  the  needy  and  suffering  of  our  lodges,  it
also  embraces  the  human  race  in  its  desires  and  efforts.
It  is  patient,  persevering,  and  enduring.  Though  un-
worthy objects  may  deceive  us,  and  abuse  our  aid,  yet
it  will  not  suffer  us,  on  that  account,  to  cease  from  pity-
ing and  relieving  other  and  more  worthy  objects  who
may  come  after  them.  Thus  evinced,  we  feel  that  "  it
is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  Like  Mercy,
its  quality

"  is  not  strain'd  ;

It  droppeth  as  the  gentle  rain  from  heaven
Upon  the  place  beneath  ;  it  is  twice  blessed;
It  blesseth  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes:
'Tis  mightiest  in  the  mightiest;  it  becomes
The  throned  monarch  better  than  his  crown ;
*******
It  is  an  attribute  to  God  himself."

OF   THE    FIRST,    OR   WHITE   DEGREE.  Ill

The  charitable  are,  indeed,  "  imitators  of  God,  as
dear  children."  The  relieved  are  monuments  of  their
goodness,  and  their  own  souls  are  filled  by  the  All-
Good  with  a  joy  which  the  selfish  or  cruel  never  know.
Respected  by  all,  and  beloved  by  the  poor,  the  home
of  the  charitable  is  the  abode  of  peace  and  content-
ment. He  can  say,  "  When  the  ear  heard  me,  then  it
blessed  me ;  and  when  the  eye  saw  me,  it  gave  witness
to  me :  because  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried,  and
the  fatherless,  and  him  that  had  none  to  help  him.
The  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish,  came
upon  me ;  and  I  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  leap  for
joy."  *  With  "  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward
God  and  man,"  he  lives  in  the  esteem  of  the  good  ;
gray  hairs  are  to  him  a  crown  of  glory ;  and  his  de-
parture from  earth  is  but  a  translation  to  a  blissful
immortality.

6.  Fidelity  to  these  principles  and  practices  will,
indeed,  constitute  you  a  member  in  this  onward  step  of
our  beloved  Order,  make  you  an  honored  pillar  in  our
temple,  a  blessing  to  community,  and  an  ornament  of
society  in  all  your  relations  thereto.

§  2.  Regalia  of  ike  First  Degree.

The  regalia  for  a  brother  of  this  degree  is  a  white
collar  trimmed  with  white  fringe  or  ribbon.  A  white
rosette  may  be  worn  at  the  point  or  joining  of  the  collar,
in  front.  (Aprons  are  abolished  in  this  and  subsequent
degrees  (and  offices]  of  the  Lodged)  The  color  of  your
regalia,  and  the  emblems  of  this  degree  generally,  will
remind  you  that  the  purity  and  innocence  required  in
your  initiation  are  still  to  be  maintained  in  connection

*Job  xxviii.  11-13.

112  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

with  the  more  active  and  enlarging  duties  to  which  this
advance  conducts  you.

§  3.   Color  of  the  First  Degree.

The  color  of  this  degree  is  white,  and  has  its  special
as  well  as  general  significancy.  It  refers  to  Faith  f
especially  in  its  practical  form,  Fidelity,  as  well  as
Purity.  An  able  writer,  from  whose  essay  on  the
colors  of  our  Order,  published  in  the  Covenant,  in
1842,  we  shall  frequently  quote,  says  of  the  color  of
this  degree :  —

"  WHITE  has  ever  been  regarded  as  emblematic  of
purity  and  sincerity.  Thus  in  the  Apocalypse  it  is
said,  '  I  will  give  him  a  white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a
new  name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth,  saving  he
that  receiveth  it.'  *  He  that  overcometh,  the  same  shall
be  clothed  in  white  raiment.'  (Rev.  ii.  17,  and  iii.  5.)"
As  the  white  stone  and  the  white  raiment  were  to  be
the  reward  of  "  him  that  overcometh,"  it  is  evident  that
persistent  fidelity  —  Fidelity  unto  victory — is  signified.
"  Near  the  Capitol  at  Rome  stood  the  temple  of  FIDES.
When  the  priests  offered  their  bloodless  sacrifices  to  her,
their  faces  and  hands  were  shrouded  in  white  cloths,
thereby  intimating  that  faith,  or  fidelity,  should  be
close  and  secret.  She  is  called  by  Virgil  (JEn.  i.  292),
'  Cana  Fides,9  probably  because  candor  is  essential  to
fidelity.  One  of  the  symbols  of  this  goddess  was  a
group  of  two  young  virgins  clad  in  snowy  vestments,
and  joining  hands  ;  which  act  signifies  a  pledge  of  faith
for  future  friendship.  In  Physics,  white  is  a  result  of
the  union  and  reflection  of  all  the  primary  rays  of
light:  hence  it  is  metaphorically  used  to  signify  a  col-
lection and  reflection  of  those  graces  and  virtues  which
adorn  and  dignify  the  character."

OF   THE    FIRST,    OR   WHITE    DEGREE.  113

§  4.  Emblems  of  the  First  Degree.
The  emblems  usually  assigned  to  this  degree  are, —

I.  THE  GLOBE  IN  CLOUDS.

Emblem  of  the  world  of  mankind — the  special  emblem
of  the  First  Degree.  It  represents  the  earthly  home  of
man — the  field  of  our  life-efforts  and  labors  —  the
nursery  of  immortality.  It  reminds  us  that  the  world
in  which  we  have  now  advanced,  as  it  were,  one  step,
and  put  forth  our  hand  anew  for  greeting  and  labor,  is
still  partly  in  clouds  ;  and  therefore  there  is  much  to
learn  and  to  teach  in  this  great  field,  over  which  our
brethren  are  so  widely  scattered ;  and  it  teaches  us  that
as  light  is  dispersing  those  clouds,  so  may  our  light  aid
in  dissipating  the  ignorance  which  yet  obscures  those
true  relations  that  bind  man  to  his  Creator  and  to  his
fellow-man.  It  thus  incites  us  to  meet  together  as
brethren,  and  apply  the  light  and  warmth  augmented
and  strengthened  by  our  union,  wherever  ignorance
needs  the  one,  or  want  and  woe  the  other.  W*  thereby
10*

114  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

quicken  our  sympathies  —  become  "  more  helpful  to  the
distressed  —  more  regularly  thoughtful  of  the  happiness
of  others" — until,  by  increasing  faith  and  hope,  we
have  a  prelibation  of  that  grand  period  when  the  whole
world  shall  bask  in  the  light  of  God's  Fatherhood,  and
all  its  vast  fraternity  reflect  to  heaven,  in  gratitude  and
praise,  the  radiance  of  His  glory.

II.  THE  BEE-HIVE.

Emblem  of  Associated  Industry :  —  It  represents  order
and  unity  in  working  —  good  government;  and  re-
minds us  of  our  obligations  to  meet  together  as  one
family,  to  aid  and  relieve  those  in  distress — thus  quick-
ening and  strengthening  our  sympathies  for  suffering
humanity,  and  inducing  us  to  store  up  all  needed  sup-
plies for  their  gratification.  It  likewise  teaches  us
proper  subordination,  and  the  distribution  of  tasks  and
labors  to  accomplish  common  aims, — to  gather  sweets
from  even  the  refuse  of  life,  and  honey  from  poisonous
weeds — to  shun  idleness,  and  all  misuse  of  time  and  of
means  ;  and  that  <{  if  we  would  pass  the  winter  of  age

OF   THE    FIRST,    OR   WHITE   DEGREE.  115

in  comfort  and  cheerful  abundance,  we  must  improve
the  summer  of  our  lives  under  the  guidance  of  economy
and  well-directed  industry."

III.   THE  LAMB.

Emblem  of  Innocence:  —  It  represents  the  primal
state  of  man,  and  reminds  us  that  if  we  would  enter
the  paradise  yet  left  us,  we  must  regain,  as  far  as  pos-
sible, that  primitive  condition  of  soul  —  "a  conscience
void  of  offence  toward  God  and  toward  men."

To  encourage  such  effort,  it  teaches  us  that  "  we  are
the  people  of  God's  pasture,  and  the  sheep  of  His  hand ;
and  that,  if  we  are  "  willing  and  obedient,"  He  will
make  us  "  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures,  and  lead  us
beside  the  still  waters."

IV.   THE  SUN.

Emblem  of  Light  and  Heat:  —  It  represents  the  uni-
versal beneficence  and  vivifying  power  of  God  ;  and
reminds  us  how  constantly  He  blesses  all — "the  evil
and  the  good,"  "the  just  and  the  unjust."  It  thus
teaches  us  to  imitate  that  goodness,  that  we  "  may  be
the  children  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven."

116  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

No  clouds  or  mists  that  pass  over  the  sun,  sully  its
brightness  or  dim  its  glory.  So  whatever  storms  deform
our  atmosphere,  they  cannot  affect  the  clearly  shining
light  within  the  soul,  if  with  divine  trust  and  patience
we  endure  them  as  merely  outward  evils,  or  as  Heaven-
appointed  trials.

CHAPTER  IV.

OF   THE   SECOND,   OR   COVENANT   DEGREE.

1.  Having  evinced  a  willingness  to  enter  into  any
proper  obligation  within  your  ability  to  perform,  you
are  now  presented  with  an  opportunity  of  forming  a  still
closer  and  more  precious  covenant  with  your  brethren.

2.  The  first  degree  treats  mainly  of  Charity  as  mani-
fested in  Benevolence  and  Brotherly  Love.     The  great
lesson  of  thi?  degree  is  to  show  the  application  of  that

OF   THE   SECOND,    OR   COVENANT   DEGREE.  117

principle  in  the  action  of  mutual  counsel,  relief,  and
sacrifice,  according  to  our  peculiar  measures  of  cove-
nanted love.  But  before  we  enter  on  the  special  obli-
gations of  this  degree,  permit  some  quotations  from
Holy  Writ,  to  show  that  such  a  covenant  as  ours  ha?
the  Divine  sanction.

3.     SCRIPTURE  LESSON.

1  SAMUEL  xvii.  57,  58,  AND  xviii.  1-4. — And  as  David  returned
from  the  slaughter  of  the  Philistine,  [Goliath,]  Abner  took  him,
and  brought  him  before  Saul,  with  the  head  of  the  Philistine  in  hi?
hand.  And  Saul  said  to  him,  Whose  son  art  thou,  young  man!
And  David  answered,  I  am  the  son  of  thy  servant  Jesse,  the  Beth-
lehemite.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  speak-
ing unto  Saul,  that  the  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  with  the  soul  of
David,  and  Jonathan  loved  him  as  his  own  soul.  And  Saul  took
him  that  day,  and  would  let  him  go  no  more  home  to  his  father's
house.  Then  Jonathan  and  David  made  a  covenant,  because  he
loved  him  as  his  own  soul.  And  Jonathan  stripped  himself  of  the
robe  that  was  upon  him,  and  gave  it  to  David,  and  his  garments,
even  to  his  sword,  and  to  his  bow,  and  to  his  girdle.

4.  But  SauPs  envy  at  the  superior  praises  lavished  on
David  by  the  people,  begat  bitter  enmity  in  his  heart
against  the  shepherd-warrior,  arid  led  him  to  make
several  attempts  to  take  the  life  of  David.  After
which  we  read —

1  SAMUEL  xix.  1-7. —  And  Saul  spake  to  Jonathan  his  son,  and  to
all  his  servants,  that  they  should  kill  David.  But  Jonathan,  Saul's
son,  delighted  much  in  David ;  and  Jonathan  told  David,  saying,
Saul,  my  father,  seeketh  to  kill  thee.  Now,  therefore,  I  pray  thee,
take  heed  to  thyself  until  the  morning,  and  abide  in  a  secret  place,
and  hide  thyself:  and  I  will  go  out  and  stand  beside  my  father  in
the  field  where  thou  art,  and  I  will  commune  with  my  father  of  thee  ;
and  what  I  see,  that  I  will  tell  thee.  And  Jonathan  spake  good  of

118  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

David  unto  Saul  hip  father,  and  said  unto  him,  Let  not  the  king  sin
against  his  servant,  against  David ;  because  he  hath  not  sinned
against  thee,  and  because  his  works  have  been  to  thee-ward  very
good  For  he  did  put  his  life  in  his  hand,  and  slew  the  Philistine,
and  the  LORD  wrought  a  great  salvation  for  all  Israel :  thou  sawest  it,
and  didst  rejoice;  wherefore,  then,  wilt  thou  sin  against  innocent
blood,  to  slay  David  without  a  cause  ?  And  Saul  hearkened  unto  the
voice  of  Jonathan  :  and  Saul  sware,  As  the  LORD  liveth  he  shall  not
be  slain.  And  Jonathan  called  David,  and  Jonathan  showed  him  all
those  things :  and  Jonathan  brought  David  to  Saul,  and  he  was  in  his
presence  as  in  times  past.

5.  But  soon  the  evil  spirit  again  came  upon  Saul,
and  his  attempts  on  David's  life  compelled  the  young
man  to  flee  to  Samuel  in  Ramah.  And  being  pursued
there  by  the  malice  of  the  king,  we  read —

1  SAMUEL  xx.  1-23. — And  David  fled  from  Naioth  in  Ramah,  and
came  and  said  before  Jonathan,  What  have  I  done  ?  what  is  mine
iniquity  ?  and  what  is  my  sin  before  thy  father,  that  he  seeketh  my
life  ?  And  he  said  unto  him,  God  forbid  ;  thou  shalt  not  die :  behold,
my  father  will  do  nothing,  great  or  small,  but  that  he  will  show  it
me ;  and  why  should  my  father  hide  this  thing  from  me  ?  It  is  not
so.  And  David  sware  moreover  and  said,  Thy  father  certainly
knoweth  that  I  have  found  grace  in  thine  eyes ;  and  he  saith,  Let  not
Jonathan  know  this,  lest  he  be  grieved  :  but  truly,  as  the  LORD  liveth,
and  as  thy  soul  liveth,  there  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death.
Then  said  Jonathan  unto  David,  Whatsoever  thy  soul  desireth,  I  will
even  do  it  for  thee  And  David  said  unto  Jonathan,  Behold,  to-
morrow is  the  new  moon,  and  I  should  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  king
at  meat :  but  let  me  go,  that  I  may  hide  myself  in  the  field  unto  the
third  day  at  even.  If  thy  father  at  all  miss  me,  then  say,  David
earnestly  asked  leave  of  me,  that  he  might  run  to  Bethlehem,  his
city ;  for  there  is  a  yearly  sacrifice  there  for  all  the  family  If  he
say  thus,  It  is  well ;  thy  servant  shall  have  peace :  but  if  he  be  very
wroth,  then  be  sure  that  evil  is  determined  by  him.  Therefore  thou
shalt  deal  kindly  with  thy  servant ;  for  thou  hast  brought  thy  ser-
vant into  a  covenant  of  the  LORD  with  thee :  notwithstanding,  if
there  be  in  me  iniquity,  slay  me  thyself;  for  why  shouldest  thou
bring  me  to  thy  father  ?  And  Jonathan  said,  Far  be  it  from  thee :

OF    THE    SECOND.  OR    COVENANT    DEGREE.  123

for  if  I  knew  certainly,  that  evil  were  determined  by  my  father  to
come  upon  thee,  then  would  not  I  tell  it  thee  ?  Then  said  David  to
Jonathan,  V  ho  shall  tell  me?  or  what  if  thy  father  answer  thee
roughly  ?

And  Jonathan  said  unto  David,  Come,  and  let  us  go  out  into  the
field.  And  they  went  out,  both  of  them,  into  the  field.  And  Jona-
than said  unto  David,  0  LORD  God  of  Israel,  when  I  have  sounded
my  father  about  to-morrow  any  time,  or  the  third  day,  and,  behold,
if  there  be  good  toward  David,  and  I  then  send  not  unto  thee,  and
show  it  thee ;  the  LORD  do  so,  and  much  more  to  Jonathan  :  but  if
it  please  my  father  to  do  thee  evil,  then  I  will  show  it  thee,  and  send
thee  away,  that  thou  mayest  go  in  peace  ;  and  the  LORD  be  with  thee
as  he  has  been  with  my  father.  And  thou  shalt  not  only,  while  yet
I  live,  show  me  the  kindness  of  the  LORD,  that  I  die  not ;  but  also
thou  shalt  not  cut  off  thy  kindness  from  my  house  forever ;  no,  not
when  the  LORD  hath  cut  off  the  enemies  of  David,  every  one  from  the
face  of  the  earth.  So  Jonathan  made  a  covenant  with  the  house  of
David,  saying,  Let  the  LORD  even  require  it  at  the  hand  of  David's
enemies.  And  Jonathan  caused  David  to  swear  again,  because  he
loved  him  :  for  he  loved  him  as  he  loved  his  own  soul.  Then  Jona-
than said  to  David,  To-morrow  is  the  new  moon  ;  and  thou  shalt  be
missed,  because  thy  seat  will  be  empty.  And  when  thou  hast  stayed
three  days,  then  thou  shalt  go  down  quickly,  and  come  to  the  place
where  thou  didst  hide  thyself  when  the  business  was  in  hand,  and
shalt  remain  by  the  stone  Ezel.  And  I  will  shoot  three  Hrrows  on
the  side  thereof,  as  though  I  shot  at  a  mark.  And  behold,  I  will
send  a  lad  saying,  Go,  find  out  the  arrows.  If  I  expressly  say  unto
the  lad,  Behold,  the  arrows  are  on  this  side  of  thee,  take  them  ;  then
come  thou  :  for  there  is  peace  to  thee,  and  no  hurt,  as  the  LORD  liveth.
But  if  I  say  thus  unto  the  young  man,  Behold,  the  arrows  are  beyond
thee ;  go  thy  way :  for  the  LOBD  hath  sent  thee  away.  And,  as
touching  the  matter  which  thou  and  1  have  spoken  of,  behold,  the
LORD  be  between  thee  and  me  forever.

6.  The  plan  thus  devised  was  put  in  execution.     We
have  the  result  in  the  following  : —

1  SAMUEL  xx.  35-42. — And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning,    hat
Jonathan  went  out  into  the  field,  at  the  time  appointed  with  Dfifid,
and  a  little  lad  with  him.     And  he  said  unto  his  lad,  Run,  find  out
11

122  THE    ODD-FELLOW'S    MANUAL.

now  the  arrows  which  I  shoot.  And  as  the  lad  ran,  he  shot  an  arron*
beyond  him.  And  when  the  lad  was  come  to  the  place  of  the  arrow
which  Jonathan  had  shot,  Jonathan  cried  after  the  lad,  Make  speed,
haste,  stay  not.  And  Jonathan's  lad  gathered  up  the  arrows,  and
came  to  his  master.  But  the  lad  knew  not  any  thing:  only  Jonathan
and  David  knew  the  matter.  And  Jonathan  gave  his  artillery  unto
the  lad,  and  said  unto  him,  Go,  carry  them  to  the  city.  And  as  soon
as  the  lad  was  gone,  David  arose  out  of  a  place  toward  the  south,  and
fell  on  his  face  to  the  ground,  and  bowed  himself  three  times;  and
they  kissed  one  another,  and  wept  one  with  another,  until  David  ex-
ceeded. And  Jonathan  said  to  David,  Go  in  peace,  forasmuch  as
we  have  sworn,  both  of  us,  in  the  name  of  the  LORD,  saying,  The
LORD  be  between  me  and  thee,  and  between  my  seed  and  thy  seed
forever.  And  he  arose  and  departed ;  and  Jonathan  went  into  the
city.

7.  Much  as  has  been  said  of  the  devoted  friendship
of  Damon  and  Pythias,  in  the  days  of  the  tyrant  Dio-
nysius,  of  ancient  Syracuse,  it  may  be  doubted  whether
its  tenderness  and  fidelity  equalled  that  which  bound  in
one  life,  as  it  were,  the  hearts  of  David  and  Jonathan.
The  heathen  friends  were  of  the  same  station  in  life;
but  the  Jewish  friends  were  of  almost  opposite  con-
ditions at  its  commencement.  David  an  humble  shep-
herd ;  Jonathan  a  prince,  distinguished  in  arms,  and
the  heir  of  Saul,  the  Hebrew  king.  The  tyrant  who
menaced  the  heathen  friends  was  a  stranger  to  them
in  blood ;  but  the  jealous  and  bitter  enemy  of  David
was  Jonathan's  own  father,  whom,  in  all  else,  the  noble
son  reverenced  and  obeyed.  And  yet,  notwithstanding
their  wide  difference  in  rank,  Jonathan  honored  and  com-
forted his  persecuted  shepherd-friend,  and  defended  his
character  against  the  suspicions  of  his  vindictive  sove-
reign. And  when  the  kingly  wrath  would  no  longer  bo
restrained,  he  entered  into  the  most  solemn,  intimate
c  venant  with  David,  by  which  they  vowed  to  sustain
and  aid  each  other  even  unto  death.  "  Jonathan  loved

OF   THE    SECOND,    OR    COVENANT    DEGREE.  128

David  even  as  his  own  soul."  And  when  Jonathan  fell
on  the  field  of  battle,  David  not  only  poured  out  to  his
memory  one  of  the' sweetest,  tenderest  elegiac  bursts  of
poetry  ever  devoted  by  the  living  to  the  dead,*  but  he
extended  his  attachment  to  a  maimed  son  of  his  friend,
giving  him  a  home  in  his  own  house,  and  bestowing  on
him  the  large  inheritance  of  Saul.

8.  Such  is  the  covenanted  friendship  we  would  esta-
blish in  this  degree;  such  the  obligations  we  would
mutually  cherish:  to  consider  each  other  as  friends,
as  brethren  in  soul,  whom  we  would  aid  and  support  in
affliction  and  persecution ;  whom  we  would  rescue  from
impending  peril  caused  by  mere  imprudence,  the  evil

*  It  is  worthy  a  place  in  this  connection:  —

"  The  beauty  of  Israel  is  slain  upon  thy  high  places ;  how  are  the
mighty  fallen !  Tell  it  not  in  Gath,  publish  it  not  in  the  streets  of
Askelon  ;  lest  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines  rejoice,  lest  the
daughters  of  the  uncircumcised  triumph  !  Ye  mountains  of  Gilboa,
let  there  be  no  dew,  neither  let  there  be  rain  upon  you,  nor  fields
of  offerings ;  for  there  the  shield  of  the  mighty  is  vilely  cast  away,
the  shield  of  Saul,  as  though  he  had  not  been  anointed  with  oil.

"From  the  blood  of  the  slain,  from  the  fat  of  the  mighty,  the  bow
of  Jonathan  turned  not  back,  and  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not
empty.

"  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  lovely  and  pleasant  in  their  lives,  and
in  their  death  they  were  not  divided :  they  were  swifter  than  eagles :
they  were  stronger  than  lions

"Ye  daughters  of  Israel,  weep  over  Saul,  who  clothed  you  in
scarlet,  with  other  delights  ;  who  put  ornaments  of  gold  upon  your
apparel.

"  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  in  the  midst  of  the  battle !  0  Jona-
than, thou  wast  slain  in  thy  high  places !  I  am  distressed  for  thee:
ray  brother  Jonathan.  Very  pleasant  hast  thou  been  unto  me.  Thy
love  was  wonderful :  passing  the  love  of  women !  How  are  the
mighty  fallen,  and  the  weapons  of  war  perished!" — 2  SAMUEL  i.
19-27.

124  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

designs  of  enemies,  or  mere  accident;  whose  advantage
and  interest  we  would  point  out  to  him,  when  so  doing
does  not  conflict  with  our  duty  or  the  rights  of  others.
And  in  such  covenanted  love,  we  would  also  aid  his
family,  vindicate  his  reputation,  and  save  his  property,
person,  or  life,  when  in  our  power,  and  consistent  with
Our  other  obligations  to  God  and  man.

9.  Such  covenants  may  be  condemned  by  the  unso-
cial, the  cold-hearted,  and  the  worldly  wise.  But
though  they  should  not  be  lightly  entered  into,  neither
should  they  be  utterly  rejected.  They  are  needed  in  a
world  like  ours,  where  wrong  and  affliction  so  greatly
prevail.  The  man  strong  in  health  and  confident  in
prosperity  to-day,  may  be  helplessly  weak  in  adversity
and  illness  to-morrow.  No  one,  therefore,  is  above  the
need  of  such  covenants,  none  so  lowly  that  they  cannot
perform  some  of  their  duties.  We  would  unite  the
good  and  the  true  of  all  classes  and  conditions,  in  one
great  covenant  of  friendship  for  the  benefit  of  all.

And  such  covenants  have  the  sanction  of  the  wise  and
good  of  all  ages.  God  himself  made  a  covenant  with
Noah,  and  set  its  token  in  the  heavens  as  a  testimony
to  after  generations.  He  also  made  a  more  solemn  one
with  Abraham,  by  which  that  patriarch  became  known
as  "the  Friend  of  God.'*  Similar'  was  his  covenant
with  the  Jewish  nation.  And  among  men  they  seem
essential  to  society  itself;  for  man's  necessities  ever
create  mutual  dependence,  and  call  for  mutual  sympathy
and  support.  Labor  has  them,  Commerce  has  them :
they  ai*e  made  on  the  ocean  and  on  the  land,  where-
ever  man  goes  or  dwells ;  and  in  all  the  concerns  of
nations  and  of  individuals.

But  we  would  infuse  into  ours  more  of  the  heart  and
its  kindly  feelirgs  :  more  of  that  inner  life  which  shall

OF    THE    SECOND,  OK    COVENANT    DEGREE.  125

give  it  a  greater  influence  for  virtue  and  humanity.
We  would  make  it  a  covenant  of  deep,  fervent,  mutually
sustaining  friendship,  such  as  cemented  David  and
Jonathan,  pledging  life-long  devotion  and  kindness  OD
the  altar  of  honorable  affection,  and  based  on  the  great
foundation-truth  of  human  brotherhood.  And  by  such
covenant  we  would  illustrate  and  make  better  under-
stood this  universal  relation  of  man  to  his  Maker
and  his  fellows.  For,  oh,  how  sadly  unnoticed,  how
grievously  neglected  are  even  its  lightest  claims  and
lowest  applications  by  the  world  at  large !  Breaking
bread  to  the  hungry,  holding  the  cup  to  the  thirsty  lip,
watching  by  the  sick-bed,  succoring  the  needy,  clothing
the  naked,  taking  the  outcast  under  the  domestic  roof,
how  few  do  this  heartily,  especially  when  the  object  is
an  alien  to  their  country  and  a  stranger  in  blood  !  Yet
they,  also,  are  children  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  and
our  brethren.

Our  covenant  is  to  extend  these  principles  and  in-
crease these  practices,  by  a  practical  illustration  in  our
fraternity ;  to  extend  them  in  the  world  around  us,  and
thus  break  down  the  barriers  that  keep  man  from  feeling
for  his  brother  man.  We  obligate  ourselves,  not  to
shield  or  countenance  each  other  in  wrong-doing  of  any
kind,  but  to  realize,  as  far  as  possible,  in  our  associa-
tion, those  benefits  which  would  enure  to  the  world
were  the  souls  of  all  men  as  truly  united  in  the  bonds
of  true  benevolence  as  were  the  hearts  of  Jonathan
and  David  in  their  covenanted  friendship.

§  2.  Regalia  of  the  Second  Degree.

The  proper  regalia  of  this  degree  is  a  white  collar
which  must  be  trimmed  with  pink  fringe  or  ribbon  to
11*

126  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

designate  the  degree.  The  collar  may  be  ornamented
with  a  pink  and  white  rosette,  which  is  to  be  worn  at  its
point  or  joining  in  front.

§  3.   Color  of  the  Second  Degree.

The  color  of  this  degree  is  pink,  on  which  the  cor-
respondent of  "The  Covenant/'  before  quoted  from,
(under  the  White  Degree,)  beautifully  remarks  :  —

"  PINK  was  the  hue  by  which  the  ancients  repre-
sented youth  and  modesty.  It  denotes,  in  poetry,  the
spring-time  of  life,  when  faith  is  the  most  confiding,
the  affections  most  vigorous,  and  friendship  is  most
constant.  Nature  herself  seems  to  have  dictated  the
choice  of  this  ray  as  figurative  of  those  very  qualities
with  which  the  imagination  has  coupled  it.  In  the
prismatic  spectrum,  the  red  ray  (of  which  pink  is  but  a
modification)  is  the  most  calorific  and  least  refrangible
of  all :  the  moral  paralled  is,  our  covenant  love  should
be  ardent,  and  never  turn  from  its  purpose."

§  4.  Emblems  of  the  Second  Degree.
The  emblems  usually  assigned  to  the  Second,  or  Cove-
nant Degree,  are :  —

I.  THE  BUNDLE  OF  RODS.

Emblem  of  Strength  in  Union — the  peculiar  emblem
of  the  Covenant  degree.

This  memento  of  a  dying  father,  to  teach  his  children
the  value  of  union,  speaks  no  less  impressively  to  our
larger  brotherhood.  It  reminds  us  of  the  power  of
each  member  to  sustain,  and  be  sustained  by,  the  others,
when  all  are  bound  into  one  bundle  by  the  bands  of
F.  L.  &  T. —  making  the  interests  and  labors  of  all,  the
common  property  of  each.  In  Odd-Fellowship,  union
is  strength  indeed.  One  rod,  separated  from  the  rest,

OF    THE    SECOND,    OK    COVENANT    DEGREE.

127

can  easily  be  broken,  —  one  brother,  isolated  by  selfish-
ness, may  be  disheartened  and  destroyed,  —  but  in  the
firmly  bound  bundle,  each  brother  can  easily  resist  evil
and  accomplish  good.  Each  strengthens  the  others
against  unhallowed  opposition,  and  all  stand  firm  and
unmoved  in  the  mighty  power  of  our  Fellowship.

II.  THE  QUIVER  AND  THE  Bow.

Emblem  of  Preparation.  —  "  In  peace  prepare  for  war."
Truly,  the  bow  is  unstrung,  the  quiver  unslung,  the
arrows  undrawn  —  but  all  are  ready!  They  remind  us
of  the  ancient  mode  of  warfare,  and  of  the  manifestations
of  devoted  friendship  between  Jonathan  and  David.

The  unstri  ng  bow  teaches  the  benefit  of  relaxation

128  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

from  undue  tension  of  mind  or  body,  when  recreation
can  be  safely  sought; — and  the  full  quiver  as  impres-
sively teaches  the  importance  of  preparation  for  action,
even  in  our  hours  of  ease  and  enjoyment.

The  true  Odd-Fellow  will  always  have  ready  his  quiver
and  his  bow  to  guard  a  brother  from  danger,  or  to  pro-
mote his  welfare — a  brother,  ever,  in  war  as  in  peace.

II J.  THE  THREE  ARROWS.

Emblem*  of  War — reminders  that  "we  war  against
vice  in  all  its  forms.  Friendship  towards  man  prompts
the  contest — the  gentle  influences  of  Love  supply  the
weapons  —  Truth  consecrates  the  effort  and  leads  to  vic-
tory." Thus  they  teach  us  to  guard  the  loved  one  from
evil,  to  repel  impending  danger,  and  secure  safety.
They  are  not  to  be  used  wantonly,  or  to  destroy  aught  but
evil  and  wrong — only  for  benefit  and  salvation  to  inno-
cence and  suffering.  They  refer  us  to  "the  plan  adopted
by  Jonathan  to  apprise  David  (whom  he  loved  with  a
fondness  exceeding  woman's)  of  the  good  or  ill  intended
by  Saul,  and  teach  us  that  every  laudable  effort  should  be
put  forth  to  save  a  brother  from  the  hand  of  an  enemy."

IV.  THE  RAINBOW.

Emblem  of  Safety  —  God's  own  Token  —  one  of  the
most  beautiful  of  Nature's  emblems,  and  of  the  most

OF    THE   SECOND,    OK    COVENANT    DEGREE.

129

impressive  in  our  Order.  It  reminds  us  of  God's  cove-
nant with  Noah  for  the  safety  of  the  earth  and  man-
kind ;  and  of  ours  with  our  brethren,  to  serve  them
with  ardent  love  and  steadfast  purpose.  When  it  ap-
pears in  the  heavens,  "all  woven  with  light,"  the  true
Odd-Fellow  will  read  its  divine  language  with  feelings
of  admiration  and  gratitude  to  Him  who  set  it  there,  as
a  sign  and  a  token  — and  its  special  meaning,  with  a
heart  increasing  in  love  to  his  Covenanted  brethren,
and  strengthening  in  resolve  to  render  them  service
with  the  same  fidelity  and  devotion  which  he  expects
from  them  in  his  hour  of  need  or  peril.

V.  THE  STONE  EZEL.

Jonathan  and  David  at  the  Stone  Ezel,  though  not  an
emblem  of  the  Order,  is  so  common  among  our  represen-
tations, and  so  suggestive  of  the  devoted  friendship  our
Covenant  degree  is  designed  to  cherish,  that  we  give  it
place  in  the  list.  The  selections  of  Scripture  quoted,
sufficiently  explain  the  event  that  made  it  memorable.

OF    THE    THIRD,  OR    ROY^L    BLUE    DEGREE.  13]

CHAPTER  V.

OF  THE  THIRD,  OR  ROYAL  BLUE  DEGREE.

§  1.   Object  of  the  Third  Degree.

1.  THERE  is  a  progressive  harmony  and  consistency
in  the  teachings  of  our  ritual,  which  may  be  overlooked
by  the  unobservant  brother  as  he  passes  through  the
several  degrees.     The  first  degree  teaches  the  loveliness
of  charity,  as  manifested  by  a  benevolent  heart,  feeling
good-will  to  all,  and  warm  sympathy  for  the  afflicted.
The  second  degree  teaches   the  devotion   of  fraternal
love  in  a  covenant  for  mutual  relief.     The  third  degree
exhibits  the  same  friendship,  not  as  expecting  mutuality
of  benefits,   but    self-sacrificing,    tested   by   adversity,
exercised  toward  brethren  who  may  be  strangers,  though
members  of  the  great  family  of  Odd-Fellowship.

2.  The  strongest  test  of  that  mutual,  disinterested
regard,  is  adversity.     "  Prosperity  makes  friends,  ad-
versity tries  them,"  is  a  motto  no  less  true  than  ancient.
In   prosperity,  gratitude   for   gifts    or    expectation    of
favors,  may  call  forth  warm  professions,  and  we  may
deceive   even  our  own   hearts   with   a  belief  of  disin-
terested  regard  for  each   other.     But  adversity   tries
these  professions,  and  removes  all  self-imposed  disguises.
A  call  to  give  up  ease  or  property,  or  risk  life  or  repu-
tation  to   serve  a  friend,  will  test  the  value  of  youi
professions  and  the  depth  of  your  attachments.    Genuine
friendship   abides  this   test,   meets  sacrifice   with  firm
resolve,  and  smiles  encouragement  in  the  darkest  hour*

132  THE    ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

3.  Among  the   worthies  named   in    Holy  Writ,    the
great  lawgiver  of  the  Jews  illustrated  such  friendship
on  the  largest  scale,  in  behalf  of  his  entire  countrymen.
We  present  him,  then,  as  an  illustration  of  the  principle
taught  in  this  degree,  and   constituting  its  main  obli-
gation.

4.  The  eventful  life  of  this  extraordinary  man,  fur-
nishes many  of  the  symbols  and  emblems  of  our  Order,
the  use  of  which  impresses  on  the  mind  the  virtues  he
illustrated,  and  incites  us  to  copy  his  laudable  example.
His  moral  law  has  become  the  basis  of  law  and  morals
for  the  civilized  world,  and  is  the  regulator  of  our  con-
duct.    His  strict  reverence  of  the  Great  Supreme  we
deem   peculiarly   worthy   of  our    imitation.      And    hip
command  in  regard  to  his  distressed  brethren,  should
be  adopted  by  us  in  reference  to  ours,  and  be  religiously
observed  by  every  brother  of  this  degree: — "  And  if  thy
brother  be  waxen  poor,  and  fallen  in  decay  with  thee,
then  thou  shalt  relieve  him  ;  yea,  though  he  be  a  stranger
or  a  sojourner,  that  he  may  live  with  thee."51      When
you  behold  his  want,  or  hear  his  cry  of  distress,  let  hia
appeal  to  Heaven  find  in  you  God's  agent  to  minister
rescue  or  relief.

5.  But  the  Jewish  lawgiver  is  not  the  only  example
history  furnishes  of  disinterested,  self-sacrificing  friend-
ship,    Heathen  nations,  even,  have  felt  its  beauty  and
illustrated  its  excellence.      Damon   and   Pythias   have
often    been    referred    to.      The    mythology   of    Greece
furnishes    some    probable   instances  of   an  early  anti-
quity; arid  its  history  relates  not  a  few  others  among
its  bravest  warriors.     Homer  seems  to  consider  such  an
affection,  on  the  part  of  Achilles,  to  a  fellow-chieftain,

*  Leviticus  xxv.  35.

OF  THE  THIRD,  OR  ROYAL  BLUE  DEGREE.    133

necessary  to  the  perfection  of  his  character.  And
among  the  Romans,  some  of  their  most  distinguished
citizens  were  held  in  high  esteem  for  having  manifested
such  friendships.  But,  as  before  remarked,  Moses
exemplifies  the  principle  of  self-sacrificing  friendship
in  a  high  degree  and  to  a  great  extent.  The  more  the
Jews  were  oppressed  and  contemned,  the  stronger  grew
his  love ;  and  the  higher  himself  was  exalted  to  wealth
and  'honor,  the  more  willingly  did  he  sacrifice  his
emoluments  and  prospects,  to  serve  his  people,  to  share
their  afflictions,  and  to  deliver  them  from  bondage.
Delicately  reared  in  a  luxurious  court,  educated  in  all
the  learning  of  the  Egyptian  monarchy  and  priesthood,
adopted  as  a  member  of  the  royal  family,  and  favored
with  the  highest  honors  and  brightest  prospects,  still
his  heart  was  with  his  humble  kindred,  and  yearned
toward  his  degraded  and  oppressed  countrymen.  And
he  voluntarily  gave  up  all  the  worldly  advantages  of
his  station,  and  devoted  life  and  reputation  to  share
the  afflictions,  and  break  the  bonds,  and  exalt  into  a
great  nation,  the  Hebrew  people,  "  choosing  rather  to
suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy
the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season ;  esteeming  the  re-
proach of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of
Egypt/'*  So  steadfast,  so  devoted,  was  the  sentiment
of  fraternity  that  united  him  with  his  race  !

§  2.  Regalia  of  the  Third  Degree.

The  proper  Regalia  of  the  Third,  or  Royal  Blue
Degree,  is  a  white  collar  trimmed  with  light  blue  ribbon
or  fringe,  to  designate  the  degree.  The  collar  may  also

•*  Hebrews  xi.  25.
12

134  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

be  ornamented  with  a  rosette  of  ivhite,  pink,  and  blue,
at  its  point.

§  3.    Color  of  the  Third  Degree.

The  name  of  this  degree  declares  the  color  thereof —
Royal  Blue.  The  writer  quoted  from,  on  the  colors  of
the  previous  degrees,  says  of  this  : —

"  BLUE  is  the  characteristic  color  of  the  Third  De-
gree. I  have  already  showed  that  the  Roman  mythol-
ogy arrayed  Friendship  in  white,  and  that  Love  was
clothed  in  pink;  popular  usage  has  assigned  to  blue
the  representation  of  Truth" — and  especially  of  acted
truth — truth  in  the  performance  of  duty — as  we  say
of  one  thus  characterized,  "  he  is  tried  and  true"  or  "  he
is  true  blue."  "Thus,  in  the  order  of  graduation, ^e
present  to  the  eye  an  allegorical  display  of  the  three
cardinal  virtues  of  Odd-Fellowship,  FRIENDSHIP,
LOVE,  and  TRUTH.  The  azure  vault  of  heaven,  and
the  deep,  blue  sea,  are  also  employed  to  symbolize
Truth.  In  conformity  with  this  exposition,  and  tend-
ing to  substantiate  its  correctness,  is  the  vocal  con-
comitant of  the  P.  S.  (sometimes  called  the  S.  of  D.)

of  this  degree,  in  which  the  letters  or  words

,  when  simply  considered,  are  an  appeal  for  the

truth  as  well  as  of  the  urgency  of  our  condition  and
desires.  Beautifully  apposite  with  its  ideal  use  is  the
chemical  effect  of  the  blue  ray :  when  it  is  made  to  fall
for  some  time  on  the  needle,  the  rod  acquires  polarity,
and  points  '  true' to  its  mysterious  attraction  in  the
chambers  of  the  north."

§  4.  Emblems  of  the  Third  Degree.
The  symbols  and  emblems  usually  assigned  to  the
Third,  or  Royal  Blue  Degree,  are  —

O*  THE  THIRD,  OR  ROYAL  BLUE  DEGREE.     135

I.   MOSES'  ROD.

Emblem  of  Authority  and,  Power. —  The  special  token

and  emblem  of  the  third  degree.  It  represents  the  Rod
used  in  the  wonders  which  Jehovah  wrought,  by  the
agency  of  Moses,  for  the  deliverance  of  his  people ;
and  thus  reminds  us  of  that  great  Lawgiver  —  the  vir-
tues he  illustrated,  and  the  true  friendship  and  self-
sacrifice  he  manifested  on  so  large  a  scale.

In  the  idea  of  authority  and  power  are  included
those  of  discipline,  correction,  and  support ;  for  God's
rod  is  spoken  of  as  a  soother  and  sustainer  : — "  Thy  rod
and  Thy  staff  they  comfort  me,"  said  the  Psalmist
Probably,  the  long  rod  or  staff  used  in  traversing  rocky
and  mountainous  paths  was  meant.  This  token,  there-
fore, appropriately  reminds  us  of  the  "  large  brother-
liness  "  of  Moses,  who  "  forsook  honors  and  riches  to
deliver  from  bondage  his  despised  and  persecuted
brethren,"  and  willingly  shared  their  afflictions  "for
the  love  he  bore  them."  And  thus  the  brother  of  the

136

THE   ODD-FELLOW  S   MANUAL.

Royal  Blue  is  taught  to  be  such  a  comforting  and  sus
taining  Rod  to  the  weak,  the  needy,  and  the  afflicted  —
as  God's  agent,  steadying  their  steps,  and  bearing  theii
burdens.

II.  NOAH'S  ARK.

Emblem  of  Preservation. —  It  represents  the  divinely
appointed  means  for  saving  the  few  who  re-peopled  the
world;  and  teaches  us  u  to  give  heed  to  every  divine
admonition,  and  seek  every  refuge  of  grace  provided
for  us."  We  are  preserved  that  we  may  bless  others ;
and  commanded  to  bless,  that  we  may  be  blessed.

III.  THE  DOVE.

Emblem  of  Constancy. —  It  represents  the  faithful
messenger  that  brought  to  righteous  Noah  the  olive-
leaf  of  peace  —  the  pledge  of  God's  continued  favor  —
and  teaches  us  that,  if  constant  in  our  reverence  of
God,  and  in  "  keeping  His  commandments,"  we  "shall
behold,  amid  all  the  storms  and  tempests  of  life,  tokens
of  Divine  approbation,  and  receive  the  visits  of  the
celestial  messenger,  the  Holy  Spirit/'  The  dove  is  also
an  emblem  of  harmlessness  and  innocencv.

OF    THE    THIRD,  OK    ROYAL    BLUE    DEGREE.  137

IV.    THE  SERPENT.

Emblem  of  Wisdom. —  It  represents  "  the  brazen  ser-
pent erected  by  Moses,  according  to  God's  direction,  to
heal  the  Israelites  when  bitten  by  the  fiery  serpents
sent  among  them  to  chastise  them  for  their  sins."  In
the  infancy  of  nations,  wisdom  included  every  degree
of  knowledge,  and  especially  its  applications  for  healing,
which,  again,  was  synonymous  with  salvation .  The  New
Testament  makes  the  raising  up  of  the  brazen  serpent
a  prefiguration  of  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  for  the  moral
healing  of  mankind.

We  are  taught  by  this  emblem  the  wisdom  of  pru-
dence in  carefully  and  rigidly  proving  all  who  claim  to
be  brethren,  as  specially  instructed  to  do  in  this  de-
gree—  thus  guarding  ourselves  and  our  Order  against
imposition.

The  serpent  with  tail  in  mouth,  forming  a  circle,  was
an  emblem  of  eternity  among  the  Egyptian/s.
12*

J38  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  5.   Concluding  Remarks.

The  three  degrees  received,  have  put  you  in  pos-
session of  peculiar  means  for  conferring  and  receiving
benefits  for  and  from  your  brethren  in  the  Order,
even  when  they  are  utter  strangers  to  you,  and  you  to
them.  But  forget  not  that  every  privilege  has  attached
to  it  a  corresponding  obligation  resting  on  you  to  make
it  a  privilege  to  your  brother  also,  when  he  requires  it.
If  he  is  bound  to  give  you  timely  warning  of  danger,  to
caution  you  against  your  own  imprudence  or  the  evil
designs  of  others,  or  to  risk  his  property,  life,  or  reputa-
tion in  a  lawful  effort  to  rescue  yours  ;  you  are  no  less
bound  to  him,  to  render  like  offices  in  the  day  of  trial,
need,  and  peril.  That  demand  may  never  be  made:
but  when  made,  may  it  not  find  you  faithless  to  obliga-
tion and  recreant  to  duty  !

The  less  trying  but  equally  important  and  more  fre-
quently needed  duties  of  ministering  to  the  sick  and
needy,  have  thus  far  been  faithfully  fulfilled  by  our
brotherhood  generally ;  indeed,  so  far  as  my  informa-
tion extends,  I  might  say,  universally.  The  dreaded
cholera,  small-pox,  ship-fever,  and  other  malignant
diseases,  whose  terrors  have  turned  hearts  to  stone,  and
paralyzed  even  the  domestic  affections,  have  been  met
with  calm  resolve  by  numerous  Odd-Fellows  in  various
sections;  and  stranger-brethren,  deserted  by  conductors
of  public  conveyances,  have  been  housed,  and  tended
with  care,  rescued  from  inhumanity  and  disease,  and
restored  to  their  families  and  friends,  when,  had  it
not  boen  for  our  noble  institution,  they  must  have
miserably  perished  by  the  wayside,  and  been  hurried
to  unnoted  graves !

OF   THE   THIRD,    OR    ROYAL   BLUE   DEGREE.  139

Nor  have  the  still  more  frequent  duties — fit  prepara-
tions for  these  rarer  events — attention  and  aid  to  the
brethren  of  our  own  vicinities,  been  less  faithfully  and
devotedly  performed.  Thus  may  it  ever  be — and  more
faithfully,  more  abundantly,  as  the  Order  grows  in
number?,  and  increases  in  means,  and  extends  abroad
in  the  world!

"  No  altars  smoke,  no  offerings  bleed,

No  guiltless  lives  expire  ;
To  help  a  brother  in  his  need
Is  all  our  rites  require.

'*  Our  offering  is  a  willing  inind

To  comfort  the  distressed  ;
In  others'  good  our  own  to  find —
In  others'  blessings  blest.

"  Go  to  the  pillow  of  disease,

Where  night  gives  no  repose,
And  on  the  cheek  where  sickness  preyo
Bid  health  to  plant  a  rose.

"  Go  where  the  friendless  stranger  lies

To  perish  in  his  doom  ;
Snatch  from  the  grave  his  closing  eyes,
And  bring  his  blessing  home.

t;  Thus  what  our  heavenly  Father  gave,

Shall  we  as  freely  give ;
Thus  copy  Him  who  lived  to  save,

And  died  that  we  might  live."  HAMPSON.

140  THE   ODD-FELLOW'S    MANUAL.

CHAPTER  VI.

OF   THE    FOURTH,  OR    REMEMBRANCE    DEGREE.

§  1.    Object  of  the  Fourth  Degree.

1.  A  BROTHER  who  has   studied  well   and   practised
faithfully  the  principles  of  the  preceding  degrees,  is  pre-
pared and  worthy  to  enter  into  the  obligations  of  the
Degree  of  Remembrance.

2.  All  the  preceding  had  reference  to  the  principles
of  human  brotherhood  as  applied  to  the  members  of  the
Order  especially.     This  degree  extends  it  to  universal
love — that  sentiment,  that  fact  which   extends  beyond
and  underlies  the  distinctive  ties  of  nations,  communities,
parties,    sects — to    mankind,    the    great    Brotherhood.
Every    influence    that    paralyzes    goodness,    contracts
sympathy,  limits  affection,  and  generates  the  exclusive-
ness  which    characterizes   clannishness,   partyism,  and
selfishness,  comes  from   a  disregard  of  this  great  prin-
ciple.    Man   forgets  or  overlooks  the  fact  that  his  fel-
low-man is  a  being  like  himself,  and  that  the  interests
of  each  are  interwoven  with  the  welfare   of  all.     We
would  therefore  urge  our  brethren  to  acquaint  them-
selves with  man  as  man — with  man  every  where.     The
minor  or  limited  affections  for  self,  for  family,  for  party,
for  country,  are  very  good,  and  beautiful,  and  useful  in
legitimate    operation  as  they  are    natural.     But  they
are  not  "the  be-all  and  end-all"  of  the  soul's  duty  in
love.     "  Every   man  is  the   centre  of  the  universe  of
souls,  and  the  first  circle  is  his  own  family.     It  is  truly

OF    THE    FOURTH,   OR    REMEMBRANCE    DEGREE.      141

said  that  <  charity  begins  at  home.'  All  good  affections
must  begin  in  the  centre  ;  but  the  defect  in  general
practice  is,  that  they  do  not  travel  extensively."*
These  inner  affections  are  not  inconsistent  with  the
outer,  not  opposed  to  the  universal.  The  love  of
mankind  and  the  citizenship  of  the  world  coexist  with
the  most  ardent  affection  for  family  and  fatherland.
We  should  remember,  then,  that  mankind  is  our  family,
the  earth  our  country,  and  the  race  our  nation  also.
Yea,  we  should  even  go  further.  As  all,  of  every
grade,  station,  and  clime,  are  one  with  us  in  nature,  and
all  alike  immortal,  ours  is  a  family  of  soul  or  spirit,  and
not  of  mere  flesh  and  blood,  and  we  are  citizens  of  the
universe.  If  men  could  but  be  imbued  with  this  fact,
so  as  to  act  upon  it,  the  lesser  affections  would  not  be
weakened,  but  would  grow  stronger  in  the  strength  of
the  larger ;  and  happier  families  and  more  loving
nations  would  banish  clashing  interests,  discordant  feel-
ings, hoary  prejudices  and  wrongs  from  our  earth,  and
make  the  world  a  Paradise.

3.  Revelation  is  explicit  in  making  the  love  of  man
the  pre-requisite  to  even  the  love  of  God.     "  But  whoso
hath   this  world's    goods,  and  seeth  his    brother   have
need,  and  shutteth  up  his  bowels   of  compassion   from
him,  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him  ?"     Again,
"  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he
is  a  liar  :  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he
hath  seen,   how  can   he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not
seen?"f

4.  The  following  beautiful  little  poem,  by  Leigh  Hunt,
also  teaches  that  we  must  love  the  visible,  before  the

*  Autobiography  of  Rev.  A.  C.  Thomas,  p.  183
1  John  Hi,  17.  and  iv.  20.

142  THE    ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

love  of  the  Invisible  can  grow  up  in  the  soul ;  that  he
who  loveth  truly  his  fellow-man  will  also  love  God,  the
Father  of  all  humanity.

ABOU  BEN  ADHEM.

Abou  Ben  Adhem  (may  his  tribe  increase!)
Awoke  one  night  from  a  deep  dream  of  peace,
And  saw  within  the  moonlight  in  his  room,
Making  it  rich,  and  like  a  lily  in  bloom,
An  Angel  writing  in  a  book  of  gold.
Exceeding  peace  had  made  Ben  Adhem  bold,
And  to  the  presence  in  the  room  he  said,
"  What  writest  thou  ?"     The  vision  raised  its  head,
And  with  a  look  made  of  all  sweet  accord,
Answer'd,  "  The  names  of  those  who  love  the  Lord."
"  And  is  mine  one  ?"  said  Abou.     "  Nay,  not  so,"
Replied  the  Angel.     Abou  spoke  more  low,
But  cheerly  still,  and  said,  "I  pray  thee,  then,
Write  me  as  one  that  loves  his  fellow-men."
The  Angel  wrote,  and  vanish'd.

The  next  night

It  came  again  with  a  great  wakening  light,
And  show'd  the  names  whom  love  of  God  had  blest,
And  lo !  Ben  Adhem's  name  led  all  the  rest.

5.  Not  only  is  this  degree  designed  to  impress  uni-
versal love  on  the  mind,  but  also  the  teachings  of  Divine
Wisdom  contained  in  the  Book  of  Books,  in  connection
with  the  lessons  imparted  in  the  preceding  degrees.
Hence  we  term  it  the  Degree  of  Remembrance.  The
following  selections  fr^tn  the  Bible  may  serve  to  show
the  importance  of  acquiring  that  Wisdom,  and  of  per-
forming the  duties  it  enjoins.

6.     SCRIPTURE  LESSON.

Hear,  ye  children,  the  instruction  of  a  father,  and  attend  to  knoxv
understanding;  for  I  give  you  good  dc?trine,  forsake  ye  not  my  law
— PEOV  iv.  1,  2.

OF    THE    FOURTH,    OR    REMEMBRANCE    DEGREE.      143

That  tliou  mayest  regard  discretion,  and  that  thy  lips  may  keep
knowledge,  my  son,  forget  not  my  law,  but  let  thine  heart  keep  my
commandments ;  for  length  of  days,  and  long  life,  and  peace  shall
they  add  to  thee.  Let  not  mercy  and  truth  forsake  thee  :  bind  them
about  thy  neck ;  write  them  upon  the  table  of  thine  heart ;  so  shalt
thou  find  favor  and  good  understanding  in  the  sight  of  God  and
man. — PROV.  v.  2,  and  iii.  1-4.

Hear,  for  I  will  speak  of  excellent  things,  and  the  opening  of  my
lips  shall  be  of  right  things.  For  my  mouth  shall  speak  truth,  and
wickedness  is  an  abomination  to  my  lips.  All  the  words  of  my
mouth  are  in  righteousness,  there  is  nothing  froward  or  perverse  in
them.  They  are  all  plain  to  him  that  understandeth,  and  right  to

them  that  find  knowledge Wisdom  is  better  than  rubies,

and  all  the  things  that  may  be  desired  are  not  to  be  compared  with

it The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  evil,  pride,  and  arro-

gancy ;  and  the  evil  way,  and  the  froward  mouth,  do  I  hate.  Counsel
is  mine,  and  sound  wisdom :  I  am  understanding ;  I  have  strength.

The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  of  his  way,  before  his
woiks  of  old.  I  was  set  up  from  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or
ever  the  earth  was.  When  there  were  no  depths,  I  was  brought  forth ;
when  there  were  no  fountains  abounding  with  water.  Before  the
mountains  were  settled,  before  the  hills,  I  was  brought  forth  :  while
as  yet  he  had  not  made  the  earth,  nor  the  fields,  nor  the  highest  part
of  the  dust  of  the  world.  When  he  prepared  the  heavens,  I  was
there ;  when  he  set  a  compass  upon  the  face  of  the  depth  ;  when  he
established  the  clouds  above ;  when  he  strengthened  the  fountains  of
the  deep  ;  when  he  gave  to  the  sea  his  decree  that  it  should  not  pass
his  commandment;  when  he  appointed  the  foundations  of  the  earth:
then  I  was  by  him,  as  one  brought  up  with  him  ;  and  I  was  daily  his
delight,  rejoicing  always  before  him:  rejoicing  in  the  habitable  part
of  his  earth  ;  and  my  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men.

Now,  therefore,  hearken  unto  me,  0  ye  children ;  for  blessed  are
they  that  keep  my  ways.  Hear  instruction,  and  be  wise,  and  refuse
it  not.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily  at  my
gates,  waiting  at  the  post  of  my  doors.  For  whoso  findcth  me
findeth  life,  and  shall  obtain  favor  of  the  Lord.  But  he  that  sinneth
against  me,  wrongeth  his  own  soul :  all  they  that  hate  me  love
death.—  PROV.  viii.  6-14  and  22-36.

All  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  yo
even  so  to  them ;  fo^  this  is  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.

144  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all
thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind.  This  is  the  first  and  great  com-
mandment. And  the  second  is  like  unto  it,  Thou  shalt  love  thy
neighbor  as  thyself.

Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them
that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them  that  despitefully  use  you  and  per-
secute you ;  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your  Father  which  is  in
heaven ;  for  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,
and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust.  For  if  ye  love  them
which  love  you,  what  reward  have  ye?  Do  not  even  the  publicans
the  same  ?  And  if  ye  salute  your  brethren  only,  what  do  ye  more
than  others?  Do  not  even  the  publicans  so?

Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven
is  perfect. — MATT.  vii.  12;  xxii.  37-40;  and  v.  44-48.

7.  The  above  are  but  a  few  of  the  inculcations  of
Divine  Wisdom  and  Divine  Love.  In  their  spirit,  per-
form  your  duties  to  yourself  and  to  your  neighbor.

(1.)  Deal  justly.  Deal  justly  with  yourself,  your
family,  your  friends  and  acquaintances,  and  with  man-
kind.

Consider  well  your  obligations  to  promote  the  public
welfare  and  advance  the  improvement  of  mankind  ;  for
all  such  labors  will  redound  to  your  own  good ;  but  a
drone  in  community  is  a  curse  to  himself  and  a  burden
to  others.

(2.)  Be  temperate.  Be  temperate  in  using  the  gifts
of  God's  temporal  bounteousness.  Use,  "  as  not  abusing
them."  Be  temperate  in  indulging  the  passions  of
your  mind,  and  in  using  the  physical  powers  of  your
frame.  Be  temperate  in  exercising  even  your  rights,  and
your  privileges  and  authority.  With  the  same  prudence,
form  your  opinions,  express  your  thoughts,  and  seek
the  gratification  of  your  lawful  desires.  But  especially
be  temperate,  and  govern  thoroughly  your  appetites.
«  Wine  is  a  mocker  ;  strong  drink  is  raging  ;  and  who-
soever is  deceived  thereby  is  not  wise/'  u  He  that

OF    THE    FOURTH,  OR    REMEMBRANCE    DEGREE.       145

loveth  pleasure  shall  be  a  poor  man  ;  and  he  that  loveth
wine  and  oil  shall  not  be  rich."  "Be  not  among  wine-
bibbers,  among  riotous  eaters  of  flesh  ;  for  the  drunkard
and  glutton  shall  come  to  poverty,  and  drowsiness  shall
clothe  a  man  with  rags."  "Who  hath  wo?  Who  hath
sorrow  ?  Who  hath  contentions  ?  Who  hath  babblings  ?
Who  hath  wounds  without  cause?  Who  hath  redness  of
eyes?  They  that  tarry  long  at  the  wine;  they  that
seek  mixed  drink."  "Better  is  a  little  with  the  fear
of  the  Lord,  than  great  treasure  and  trouble  therewith.''
"  Better  is  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love  is,  than  a
stalled  ox  and  hatred  therewith."

(3.)  Be  loving.  Be  loving  unto  all,  but  especially
to  the  suffering  and  needy.  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the
law,"  "  the  bond  of  perfectness,"  and  of  it  it  is  written —
"  Charity  suffereth  long  and  is  kind ;  charity  envieth
not ;  charity  vaunteth  not  itself ;  is  not  puffed  up  ;  doth
not  behave  itself  unseemly ;  seeketh  not  her  own ;  is
not  easily  provoked ;  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  re-
joiceth  in  the  truth  ;  beareth  all  things ;  believeth  all
things ;  hopeth  all  things ;  endureth  all  things.  Cha-
rity never  faileth."

§  2.    Regalia  of  the  Fourth  Degree.

The  prescribed  regalia  of  the  Fourth,  or  Remem-
brance Degree,  is  a  white  collar,  which  must  be  trimmed
with  green  ribbon  or  fringe,  to  designate  the  degree.
As  in  the  other  degrees,  the  collar  may  also  be  orna-
mented with  a  rosette  of  the  colors  of  this  and  the  pre-
ceding degrees  —  usually  worn  in  front,  at  the  point  or
joining  of  the  collar.

13

146  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  3.  Color  of  the  Fourth  Degree.

The  color  of  this  degree  is  green.  "  It  is  he  most
widely  diffused  of  all  the  tints  which  adorn  the  material
world.  Nature  has  clothed  herself  in  this  rich  garni-
ture throughout  her  solid  domain  ;  yet,  although  it  is
so  lavishly  spread  before  us,  from  mountain-top  to  dell,
the  eye  never  rests  upon  it  without  a  sense  of  refresh-
ment and  delight.  In  very  remote  ages,  green  was
happily  chosen  from  all  its  sister  rays,  to  be  the  symbol
of  memory  and  eternity.  As  an  oasis  is  never  forgotten
by  the  traveller  who  crosses  the  arid  plains  of  Sahara,
so  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  those  scenes  and  asso-
ciations on  which  the  mind  lingers  with  peculiar  fond-
ness, as  things  '  dwelling  greenly  in  our  memories/  or,
as  (  verdant  spots  in  the  desert  of  our  days7  —

'and  lie  down  at  eve,
In  the  green  pastures  of  remembered  days.'

The  evergreen,  too,  which  lifts  itself  over  the  grave
of  some  loved  one,  seems  to  respond  to  our  sighs  with
an  instructive  language — '  He  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth;
thy  brother  shall  rise  again  ! ' '

§  4.  Emblems  of  the  Fourth  Degree.
The  emblems  usually  assigned  to  this  degree,  are  — «•
I.  HORN  OF  PLENTY.

Emblem  of  Abundance^- the  peculiar  emblem  of  thi*
degree,  arid  fit  representation  of  a  memory  stored  with
knowledge,  wisdom,  and  goodness.  It  reminds  us  that
the  end  of  acquisition  is,  that  we  may  abound  unto
others  —  overflow  with  the  gifts  received,  and  find  in-
crease in  giving.  And  it  teaches  us  to  gather  knowledge
— to  get  wisdom,  especially  that  Divine  wisdom,  which,
rising  above  the  merely  selfish  and  clannish,  shall  teach

OF    THE    FOURTH,    OK    REMEMBRANCE    DEGREE.        147

us  to  behold  man  and  his  true  interests  in  "  the  light
from  above."  Then  shall  we  love  and  observe  justice  to
all  around  us  —  be  temperate  in  the  right  use  of  all  gifts
and  blessings,  and  exercise  "  love  without  dissimulation."
And  it  includes  in  this  instruction,  the  lesson,  "  that
if  we  are  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  our  duty,  we  shall
ever  find  in  the  resources  of  our  Order  an  ample  supply
for  our  wants."  "  When  poverty  like  an  armed  man
threatens  us  with  destruction,  and  the  garments  of
wretchedness  are  prepared  for  our  beloved  offspring,
then  shall  the  Horn  of  Plenty  in  our  noble  Institution
empty  its  stores  at  the  door  of  our  abodes."

II.  THE  SCALES.

Emblem  of  Equity.  —  It  represents  the  weighing  of
evidenr.3  and  opinions,  to  determine  their  true  values
and  relations ;  and  reminds  us  that  though  the  love  of
family  and  country  are  natural,  and  may  be  made  useful :
yet  we  must  not  stop  with  these,  nor  array  them  in  con-
flict with  our  more  comprehensive  duties  to  mankind
and  to  God.  It  thus  teaches  us  "  that  mankind  is  our
family — our  country,  the  earth — our  nation,  the  human
race  —  that  all  men  are  one — from  the  monarch  on  his
throne  to  the  beggar  in  his  rags,  all  have  one  nature,
all  are  immortal,"  and  God  is  the  equal  Father  of  all.

THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

III.  THP:  SWORD.

Emblem  of  Justice.  —  It  represents  the  defending  and
enforcing  power  of  Righteousness  —  and  reminds  us
that  God  requires  us  to  decide  justly,  after  weighing
equitably  ;  and  to  defend  the  right  even  (if  need  be)
unto  death.  In  this  contest  the  sword  is  ever  drawn,
and  therefore  needs  no  scabbard.

These  united  emblems  admonish  us  to  "judge  not
according  to  the  appearance,  but  to  judge  rights  >u-
judgment" — and  teach  us  that  "however  much  of  par-
tiality may  exist  in  the  world,  yet  among  Odd-Fellows
both  justice  and  mercy  are  administered  without  regard
to  the  artificial  distinctions  of  society.  In  the  lodge,
rich  and  poor,  high  and  low,  learned  and  unlearned,
meet  as  brethren,  and  unitedly  engage  in  the  work  of
benevolence  and  charity."

§  5.  Additional  Remarks.

This  degree  has  many  beauties  and  merits  peculiarly
its  own.  And,  like  its  color,  there  is  refreshing  in  it.
The  faculty,  also,  which  it  addresses  and  stimulates  to
action,  is  so  useful  and  interesting,  that  it  is  worthy
of  a  degree  devoted  to  its  gratification  and  c  ftlti vaticm.

OF    THE    FOURTH,   <,>R    REMEMBRANCE    DEGREE.       149

Though  memory  luu  reference  only  to  the  past,  it
constitutes  the  foundation  of  human  progress.  By  it
we  retain  the  successive  steps  of  advancement,  and  each
becomes  the  elevation  whence  we  can  reach  higher  and
further.  Without  memory,  we  could  not  advance  be-
yond the  first  experience  of  sensations  and  perceptions,
the  first  elements  of  knowledge,  and  the  first  essays  at
exertion.  Every  effort,  however  often  repeated,  must
be  a  mere  experiment :  every  attempt  at  acquisition  of
information,  only  a  groping  in  the  dark.  Perpetual
infancy  in  intellect  and  morals  would  be  the  condition
of  the  human  race  ;  indeed,  even  existence  could  hardly
be  continued.

But  riot  only  is  the  Divine  Benevolence  manifested
in  thus  enabling  us  to  retain  and  use  all  the  treasures
of  knowledge  and  experience  acquired  in  the  past,  and
thus  live  over  again,  at  will,  the  joys  arid  pleasures  of
former  years  ;  but  more  merciful  still  is  the  wise  ordi-
nation which  has  made  the  remembrance  of  even  past
sorrows  and  sufferings  a  pleasure.  It  must  be  that  they
will  be  remembered.  Their  lessons  are  as  essential  to
our  improvement  as  any  others  we  learn :  perhaps  even
more  so.  Yet  were  our  first  acuteness  of  anguish  to  be
retained  in  all  our  recollections  of  them,  life  would
become  a  curse  under  the  inflictions  of  memory  alone.
Sorrow  after  sorrow,  suffering  on  suffering,  would  be
added,  like  the  lengthening  links  of  a  growing  chain,  to
the  already  intolerable  load  of  anguish  and  gloom,  until
the  soul  would  sink,  overwhelmed,  under  it.  Added
bitterness  would  at  last  convert  every  drop  of  the  foun-
tain to  gall  and  wormwood,  without  any  possibility  of
again  restoring  it  to  pristine  purity  and  sweetness.
Cloud  comminpling  with  cloud,  the  storms  of  life  would,

at   last,  have    no  calm,   no    sunshire    between,   during
13*

150  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

which  blossoming  could  occur,  or  the  wilted  herbage
become  freshened  and  green  again.

But  now,  how  different !  The  sharp,  rending  pangs
of  sorrow  and  suffering  once  past,  they  gradually  soften
down  and  become  mellowed  by  time,  until  it  is  even
pleasurable  to  recall  them  to  mind,  and  meditate  on
their  uses,  and  draw  from  them  salutary  benefits.  The
waters  of  Marah  so  insensibly  lose  their  bitterness,  that
we  cannot  tell  when  they  were  changed.  We  only
know  that,  whereas  we  once  shuddered  and  revolted  at
tasting,  we  now  seek  the  fountain  and  feel  refreshed  at
drinking  largely  there.

Even  the  remembrance  of  guilt,  after  it  is  removed
by  sincere  repentance,  is  not  always  painful ;  at  least,
not  wholly  so.  And  thus  the  promises  of  God  are  con-
firmed by  our  experience,  that  a  period  will  arrive  when
the  redeemed  from  sin  may  find  the  joys  of  salvation
enhanced  by  a  remembrance  of  former  guilt  and  shame,
having  been  forgiven  much,  ami  therefore  loving  most.

But  even  without  this  hope,  how  much  cause  have  we
for  gratitude  to  the  Father  of  our  spirits  that  he  has
endowed  us  with  memories  which  may  be  exercised  and
strengthened ;  that  lie  has  so  constituted  this  precious
faculty,  that  nearly  all  its  exercises  yield  blissful  sensa-
tions only ;  that  seldom  are  we  compelled  to  say,  ID
the  words  of  Goldsmith —

44 Oh  Memory!  thou  fond  deceiver;

Still  importunate  and  vain !
To  former  joys  recurring  ever,

And  turning  all  the  past  to  pain."

Without  memory,  life  would  be  a  stereotyped  infancy.
Without  such  a  memory,  man's  progress  would  be  but
an  increase  of  agony  and  sorrow,  in  perpetually  accu-

OF    THE    FIFTH,  OR    SCARLET    DEGREE.  153

mulating  accretions  of  shame,  torment,  and  remorse.
Surely  these  facts  and  reflections  should  render  more
precious  to  every  Odd-Fellow,  the  Degree  of  Remem-
brance.

CHAPTER  VII

OF   THE    FIFTH,  OR    SCARLET    DEGREE.

1.  HAVING  been  duly  prepared  to  receive  this  highest
degree   of  our   subordinate  Lodges,  by  a  diligent  ac-
quaintance with  those  which  have  preceded  it,  and  a
proficiency  in  their  duties  and  workings,  the  candidate
will  do  well  to  give  earnest  heed  to  the  instructions  he
will  receive  from  those  who  confer  this  degree  on  him.

2.  The  former  degrees  have  been  devoted  to  the  de-
velopment and  applications  of  LOVE  ;  this  has  for  its
great  theme,  TRUTH  as  a  principle  of  sentiment  and  of
action.     Love  in  the  heart  and  Truth  in  the  understand-
ing are  closely  related.     Both  issue  in  the  words  of  the
mouth   and   the  actions  of  the  life ;  and  are  unitedly,
therefore,  the  foundation  of  moral  duty.     Love  is  the
motive    power    prompting    to    right  action — Truth  the
guiding    light   to    direct    it.      Truth    is    therefore    the
crowning    virtue.     It    is    the    great    good    sought    by
candor ;  the  great  object  of  all  our  researches.     Every
appeal  for  righteousness  and  virtue  rests  on  it ;  for  it  is
opposed  to  all  iniquity  and  wrong,  all  error  and  igno-
rance.    To  dwellers  in  time  it  may  seem  tedious  in  its
progress,  and  hopelessly  to  struggle  for  conquest ;  but
eternity  will  prove  it  omnipotent,  and  show  it  to  be  ihe
victor  at  last.     So  sings  the  poet : —

154  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

"  Truth,  crush'd  to  earth,  shall  rise  again,

Th'  eternal  years  of  God  are  her's  ;
But  error,  wounded,  writhes  in  pain,
And  dies  amid  her  worshippers."

He,  therefore,  who  has  Truth,  is  the  only  good,  the
only  strong  man — others  merely  seem  so.  It  is  in  him  a
perpetual  power,  springing  up  continually  to  eternal
life.  As  such,  he  is  an  example  in'  speech  and  action,
blessing  and  purifying  others,  and  blessed  and  purified
in  return.  Whatever  mutations,  whatever  convulsions
and  storms  rage  around  him,  he  is  stable  and  he  is  sure.

In  this  spirit,  and  desiring  to  be  thus  truthful,  should
every  Odd-Fellow  assume  the  obligations  and  discharge
the  duties  of  this  degree.

3.  As  the  imperial  virtue,  Truth  appropriates  to  this
degree  all  preceding  colors  and  emblems.  White  re-
presents its  purity,  Pink  its  steadiness  of  purpose  or
irrefrangibility,  Blue  its  persistence  in  right  speech
and  action,  Green  its  perpetual  freshness  and  eternity ;
and,  as  the  cardinal  virtue,  it  appropriates  to  itself  the
Scarlet  badge,  and  sways  a  sceptre  of  dominion  over  the
rest.  He,  therefore,  who  has  this  virtue  enthroned  in
his  soul,  is  priest  and  monarch  of  himself  and  all  around
him ;  for  its  power  gives  him  ministry  and  dominion.
This  is  why  the  brother  of  this  degree  finds  all  stations
of  the  Lodge  open  to  him,  and  is  enabled  to  speak  as  by
authority  concerning  the  laws  of  our  Order.  This  is
why  we  expect  his  life  to  be  an  example,  and  his  word
a  precept.  This  is  why  we  expect  him  to  understand
and  preserve  inviolate  our  mysteries,  and  to  observe
that  his  brethren  do  the  same.  If  faithful  in  these
duties,  he  will  show  the  world  that  virtue,  only,  ennobles
men  among  us,  and  that  our  honors  have  been  judi-
ciously conferred  in  his  case.

OF    THE    FIFTH,BOR    SCARLET    DEGREE.  155

4.  The  propriety  of  the  colors  heretofore  named  has
already  been  explained.  The  selection  of  SCARLET  as
the  special  color  of  this  degree,  will  be  seen  to  be  no
less  appropriate.  For,  as  justly  observed  in  the  article
already  freely  quoted  from,*  "Scarlet  vestments,  as
allusive  to  the  glory,  dignity,  and  excellence  of  the
sacerdotal  office,  are  given  to  the  Fifth,  or  Degree  of
the  Priestly  Order.  God  said  to  Moses,  <  Thou  shalt
make  holy  garments  for  Aaron,  thy  brother,  for  glory
and  for  beauty.'  (Exod.  xxviii.  2.)  In  the  several  spe-
cifications which  follow  the  Divine  charge,  we  find  that
scarlet  was  ordained  to  be  a  constituent  part  of  the
robe,  the  ephod,  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod,  and  of
the  breast-plate  of  judgment.  (Exod.  xxviii.  passim.)  It
also  entered  into  the  composition  of  the  ten  curtains  of
the  tabernacle,  of  the  vail  of  the  most  holy  place,
(Exod.  xxvi.  1,  31,)  and  of  the  hangings  of  the  gate  of
the  court.  (Exod.  xxvii.  16.)  Thus  it  became  pre-emi-
nently a  sacred  dye.  In  its  typical  character,  perhaps
it  had  reference  to  the  blood  of  the  victimsf  which  were
sacrificed  by  the  High-Priest's  hands,  as  an  atonement
for  sin.  The  prophet  Isaiah  seems  to  favor  this  hypo-
thesis :  <  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as
white  as  snow.'  (i.  18.)  As  a  token  of  glory,  rank,  and
power,  it  was  worn  by  monarchs  not  less  extensively
than  the  imperial  purple.  (Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  28,  29,
where  the  scarlet  robe  was  put  on  Christ,  in  mockery  of
the  regal  claim.)

*  "  Covenant  and  Official  Magazine  of  the  G.  L  U.  S."  for  1842,
p  71.

f  "The  life  of  the  flesh  is  the  blood  thereof;"  (Gen.  ix.  4;  Lev.
xvii  11  ;  and  Deut.  xii.  23.)  So  Truth,  the  Ufa-giving  element  of  the
soul,  is  emblematically  pointed  out  as  the  pure  and  proper  offering
on  the  altar  of  Divine  Truth.— -A.  B.  G.

156  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

"  Grouping  these  emblematic  colors,  as  they  succes-
sively appear  in  the  five  degrees,  they  clearly  convey  to
every  Odd-Fellow  this  sentiment :  —  '  FRIENDSHIP,
LOVE,  and  TRUTH:  ETERNAL,  GLORIOUS!'  —  a  senti-
ment as  worthy  to  be  had  in  honor,  and  to  be  pro-
foundly cherished  in  the  heart,  as  was  the  aphorism  of
Solon,  ivjjdi  csau76v,  (KNOW  THYSELF,)  to  be  inscribed
on  the  Delphic  Oracle  in  letters  of  gold/'

Such  is  the  language  of  the  colors  entitled  to  be  worn
by  brothers  as  they  advance  toward  and  attain  this  de-
gree ;  especially  by  him  whose  life  makes  them  his  true
colors  —  whose  mind  and  affections  reflect  truly  the
ideas  and  moral  principles  they  represent.

5.  All  the  emblems  heretofore  explained,  belong  to
this  degree,  for  in  their  true  symbolic  meanings  they
all  teach  truth.  Truth  in  the  abstract  —  pure  truth,
freed  from  the  attributes  of  materiality  —  cannot  be  as
easily  received  and  understood  by  man  in  the  flesh,  as
when  presented  in  a  material  garb.  Hence  parables
and  apologues,  which  are  but  word-emblems,  are  so  ac-
ceptable among  all  nations;  and  this,  too,  is  why,  in  all
ages,  the  various  objects  in  nature  have  been  used  as
symbols.  Humanity  seems  to  require  such  representa-
tions. They  are  found  in  use  as  far  as  history  reaches
among  the  mists  of  the  past.  Their  language  seems
the  only  one  that  escaped  and  survives  the  confusion  of
Babel.

In  using  them,  only  be  careful  that  you  attach  true
and  good  ideas  to  them ;  for,  like  men,  they  may  be
made  to  speak  falsehood,  and  instruct  in  evil.  Use  no
false  emblems,  nor  yet  true  ones  in  a  false  sense.  Be
your  actions  (which  are  deed-emblems,)  and  your  words
(which  are  sound-emblems,)  the  transcript  of  your  mind

OF    THE    FIFTH,    OR    SCARLET    DEGREE.  157

and  heart,  and  may  these  latter  ever  be  the  abode  of
Truth.

6.  The  emblems  properly  belonging  to  this  degree,
are: —

I.  AARON'S  BUDDED  ROD.

Emblem  of  Life-giving  Truth  —  the  special  emblem
of  the  Priestly  degree.  It  represents  the  Rod  of  Aaron,
who  was  "  instead  of  a  mouth  "  to  Moses,  and  "  spake
all  the  words  which  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  Moses,
and  did  the  signs  in  the  sight  of  the  people."  Exod.  iv.:
16-30.  Thus  it  reminds  us  of  Aaron,  the  worker  of
Jehovah's  wonders,  and  the  minister  at  His  altar  to
speak  the  words  of  Divine  Life  to  His  people.  And
as,  through  Aaron,  God  interposed  "  in  behalf  of  His
ancient  people,  it  teaches  us  to  look  unto  the  same
Divine  Being  in  our  day  of  oppression  and  trouble,
assured  that  He  who  made  the  Rod  of  Aaron  to  bud
will  protect,  cheer,  and  sustain  those  who  trust  in  Him."

But  the  brother  of  this  degree  is  especially  taught,

that  he,  himself,  should    represent  the  owner  of  that

rod,  wrho  spake  the  life-giving  words,  and  wrought  the

works  of   divine  power.      To  "speak   the  Truth  in

H

158

THE   ODD-FELLOWS    MANUAL

Love  "  is  the  cardinal  duty  of  this  degree.  Thus  cor-
rect the  errors  and  confirm  the  faith  of  your  brethren :
it  is  your  office  —  your  right  —  your  DUTY!  Acting
the  truth  in  love,  deal  justly,  and  be  merciful  to  your
brethren  of  the  human  race.  Living  the  truth  in
word  and  deed,  show  the  moral  influence  of  our  Insti-
tution. Based  on  universal  fraternity,  constructed  of
the  various  applications  of  brotherhood  to  mutual  re-
lief and  general  sympathy,  it  sends  you  forth  to  be  a
true  man  among  men  — to  illustrate  the  principles  of
Friendship  and  Love  with  all  the  power  of  Truth.
Be  a  true  member,  then,  of  that  ancient  order  of  which
it  was  said,  "  The  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge/'
and  strive  to  hasten  the  period  when  every  man  shall  be
"  a  king  and  a  priest  unto  God."  And  as  Divine
Truth  from  Aaron's  lips  gave  life  to  the  dried  wood,
so  will  it  give  interest,  knowledge,  and  life  to  the  les-
sons of  our  ritual  and  emblems,  and  the  application  of
our  principles  and  measures,  if  you  will  but  speak  it  in
the  demonstration  of  its  spirit  and  its  power.

II.  THE  COFFIX.

OF    THE    FIFTH,    OR   SCARLET    DEGREE.  159

Emblem  of  Certain  Truth. —  It  represents  that  most
certain  but  too  little  heeded  truth,  that  the  honors  of
the  world,  the  applause  of  men,  the  distinctions  of
birth,  wealth,  fame,  all  end  in  that  "  narrow  house."

"Can  storied  urn  or  animated  bust

Back  to  its  mansion  call  the  fleeting  breath?
Can  Honor's  voice  provoke  the  silent  dust,

Or  Flattery  soothe  the  dull,  cold  ear  of  death?

"The  boast  of  heraldry,  the  pomp  of  power,

And  all  that  beauty,  all  that  wealth  e'er  gave,
Await  alike  th'  inevitable  hour  :

The  paths  of  glory  lead  — but  to  the  grave  !  "

"  There  —  (so  it  teaches  us)  —  there  the  distinctions
of  this  life  cease,  and  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  proud
and  the  humble,  the  high  and  the  lowly,  sleep  together!
All  are  on  a  level  at  last!"  And  there,  too,  ttiustwe
meet  —  in  a  brief  period,  at  longest  —  as  weak,  as
lowly,  as  mute  as  the  rest.  Only  the  good  or  the  evil
we  do  will  survive  us,  to  hallow  or  to  blast  our
memories  in  the  hearts  of  those  we  have  benefited  or
injured.

Say,  my  brethren,  shall  our  names  live  on,  after  us,
for  blessing  or  for  cursing  ?

Answer  it  now  and  henceforth,  in  blessing  and  being
blessed  !

III.  MOON  AND  SEVEN  STARS.
Emblem  of  Natural  (material)  Truth.  —  As  the  sun,
the  great  fountain  of  light,  represents  Truth  in  its  ful-
ness and  glory  —  too  great  and  too  bright  for  mortal
vision  to  comprehend  fully  and  to  behold  clearly  —  so
the  moon  and  stars  represent  it  in  those  reflected  forms
in  which  it  is  adapted  to  our  capacities  and  our  wants.
But  by  the  aid  of  science,  they  remind  us  that,  however

160

THE    ODD-FELLOWS    MANUAL.

plainly  seen,  they  are  not  what  they  seem ;    but  are
more  and  greater  —  not    mere   surfaces  of  diminutive

size,  almost  within  roach  ;  but  immense  orbs  immeas-
urably distant.  And  thus  they  teach  that  even  of
visible  things  "  we  know  but  in  part ;"  and  understand
not  the  essence  and  inward  modes  of  their  existence.
Be  humble,  then,  in  your  knowledge,  for  "  what  we
know  is  little,  but  what  we  do  not  know  is  immense."
Be  patient,  therefore,  with  the  ignorant  and  those  who
differ  from  you — strive  to  enlighten  the  one,  and  to
consider  v:herefore  the  other  sees  not  as  you  do ;  that
all  may  glory  in  the  measure  of  truth  God  giveth  us  to
profit  withal.*

*  "The  seven  Stars  remind  us  of  the  seven  pillars  in  the  house
of  wisdom,  the  seven  stars  and  seven  churches  in  Asia;  and  they
caution  us  to  beware,  lest,  by  a  neglect  of  duty,  we  are  blotted
from  the  horizon  of  moral  goodness,  to  wander  starless  in  the  night
of  destitution.  They  also  represent  the  seven  spirits  of  God,  and
gladden  our  hearts  with  the  assurance,  that  if  we  are  wise,  and
turn  many  to  righteousness,  we  shall  shine  as  the  stars  of  the  fir-
mament forever  and  ever.

"The  Moon,  reflecting  the  light  of  the  Sun,  represents  to  us  the

OF    THE    FIFTH,    OR   SCARLET    DEGREE.  161

IV.  THE  BIIJLK.

Emblem  of  Revealed  (Spiritual)  Truth, — the  re-creative,
only  real  and  enduring  Truth.  "  For  the  things  which
are  seen  are  temporal;  but  the  things  which  are  not
seen  are  eternal."  The  Bible  is  therefore  "  placed
among  our  emblems,  because  it  is  the  fountain  whence
we  draw  instruction,  the  storehouse  whence  our  pre-
cepts are  derived,  and  most  of  our  emblems  are  found
in  its  pages."  No  lodge  can  be  held  without  it.

Its  teachings  of  God,  and  His  Fatherhood  —  of  man,
and  human  brotherhood  —  as  well  as  "  the  first  and
great  command,"  and  "  the  second  commandment  which
is  like  unto  it,"  on  which  "  two  commandments  hang
all  the  Law  and  the  Prophets" — give  this  emblem
peculiar  value'  to  all  Odd-Fellows  of  every  sect  and
every  creed.  And  in  view  of  our  certain  mortality,  all

welcome  smiles  of  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth,  shining  in  the
night  of  misfortune ;  and  teaches  us  that  as  her  rays  are  only  re-
flected from  a  greater  luminary,  so  all  the  glory  and  beauty  of  this
earth,  all  the  wisdom  and  goodness  man  can  exhibit,  are  but  re-
flections caught  from  Jehovah,  the  great  Source  of  life,  light,  and
love."—  Richmond  (Va.)  Odd-Fellow,  1842.

162  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

need  its  teachings  of  a  future  life.  Assure  \  that  man
must  die,  we  desire  to  be  assured  that  the  ever-living
God  is  our  Father,  and  will  make  us  the  sharers  of
His  immortality  and  eternal  life,  as  revealed  in  that
Book  of  Books.

7.  The  Regalia  of  this  degree  is  a  white  collar
trimmed  with  scarlet  ribbon  or  fringe ;  and,  as  in  the
preceding  degrees,  the  collar  may  be  ornamented  with
a  rosette  of  the  proper  colors.

NOTE. — "All  members  of  a  Subordinate  Lodge  may  wear  I?n.<rttps,  displaying  tho
colors  of  the  degrees  they  have  taken." — Digest  G.  L.  U.  8.

These  are  usually  worn  at  the  point  or  joining  of  the
collar.

We  would  here  urge  on  our  brethren  everywhere  a
strict  conformity  and  rigid  adherence  to  the  forms,
colors,  trimmings,  and  jewels  of  regalia,  &c.,  as  pre-
scribed by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States.  Let
no  lodge  allow  any  member,  or  visitor  even,  to  wear
colors  or  jewels  to  which  he  is  not  entitled,  whether  in
a  lodge-room  or  a  procession.  Trifling  as  these  are  in
themselves,  they  are  important  in  their  use ;  and  awk-
ward and  injurious  mistakes  have  occurred  by  thus
misusing  them.  It  is  only  by  general  care  in  this  mat-
ter that  we  can  hope  to  avoid  former  confusion  and  dis-
cordance in  the  uniform  of  our  Order,  and  the  badges
of  rank  and  service  established  by  its  authority.

We  feel  that  we  cannot  close  our  remarks  on  the
degrees  of  a  Subordinate  Lodge  with  any  thing  more
beautiful  and  appropriate  than  the  following,  from  the
pen  of  (then)  Miss  Malvina  Jane  Church,  (now  the
wife  of  Rev.  W.  E.  Manley,)  which  appeared  in  the
"Golden  Rule"  for  August  1st,  1846:  —

OF    THE    FIFTH,  OR    SCARLET    DEGREE.  163

"FRIENDSHIP,    LOVE,  AND   TRUTH.*'

Three  golden  arrows  in  the  quiver,

Fill'd  else  with  darts  of  strife ;
Three  sunny  islands  in  the  river,

Tbe  rapid  stream  of  life —
Three  stars  in  heaven's  gem-deck'd  attire,

That  never  fade  or  dim  ;
Three  harp-notes  in  the  spirit-lyre,

Notes  angels  love  to  hymn.

Three  charms  to  guard  the  heart  from  sorrow,

To  keep  aloof  life's  woes  ;
Three  whispers  of  a  brighter  morrow,

The  morrow  of  repose —
Three  links  amid  the  golden  fetters,

That  heart  to  heart  entwine ;
Upon  life's  scroll  three  mystic  letters,

Placed  there  by  hand  divine.

Three  watch-lights  on  the  stormy  highlands,

Of  earth's  wave-beaten  strand  ;
Three  harbors  'mong  the  rocky  islands,

Begirt  with  treach'rous  sands —
Three  life-preservers  on  Time's  ocean,

With  dangerous  reefs  below  ;
Three  voices  mid  the  heart's  commotion,

To  hush  its  strains  of  wo.

Three  blossoms  from  the  land  of  flowers,

To  cheer  the  fainting  soul ;
Three  rays  of  beauty  from  the  bowers,

Beyond  life's  utmost  goal —
Three  strains  of  rapturous  music  swelling,

Around  the  burial  sod ;
Three  pillars  in  the  holy  dwelling —

The  temple  of  our  God.

164

THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANI

CHAPTER  VIII.

OF   THE    DEGREE    OF    REBEKAH,  OR    LADIES'  DEGREE.
§  1.   Prefatory  Remarks.

THIS  degree  was  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
United  States,  at  its  session  in  September,  1851,  and
went  into  operation  with  the  year  1852.  The  Com-
mittee previously  appointed  to  prepare  it,  were  llepre
»entatives  Schuyler  Colfax,  of  Indiana  ;  Win.  T.  Martin,
of  Mississippi ;  and  E.  G.  Steele,  of  Tennessee.  But
it  is  understood  that  the  Chairman,  Br.  Colfax,  is  the
author  of  the  degree,  as  he  has  been  from  the  beginning
the  earnest  and  able  advocate  for  it.

OF  THE  DEGREE  OF  REBEKAH.  165

"The  degree  of  Rebekah  is  an  honorary  degree,  to  be  conferred
upon  such  scarlet  members  and  their  wives  as  may  desire  to  receive
it."  It  "  is  a  necessary  qualification  for  office  in  all  lodges  that  are
in  possession  of  it."  It  is  to  be  conferred  without  pecuniary  charge
of  any  kind,  and  "  on  the  wives  of  scarlet  members  as  a  matter  of
course;"  so  no  ballot  is  had.  And  it  '•  may  be  conferred  upon  the
widows  of  Odd-Fellows  who  were  in  good  standing  at  the  time  of
their  death,  upon  application  therefor  in  open  Lodge," — they  being
accompanied  by  other  ladies  who  have  received  or  are  to  receive
the  degree.  Any  Grand  Lodge  may  charter  '*  Degree  Lodges  of  the
Daughters  of  Rebekah,"  (each  Lodge  of  not  less  than  five  members
of  each  sex,)  to  confer  that  degree  on  such  candidates  as  present
tin  required  certificates  from  a  proper  Lodge  —  to  choose  officers
of  the  same  titles,  etc  ,  as  in  a  working  Lodge,  (except  that
the  N  G.  must  be  a  P.  G  ,  and  the  Warden  and  both  Guardians
must  be  of  the  Scarlet  Degree,)  —  and  to  enact  By  laws  regulating
membership,  dues,  bem-fits.  etc.,  as  in  other  subordinates,  and  as
prescribed  by  the  Grand  Lodge. — Condensed  from  Jour.  G.L  US.,
pp.  2ii<V>,  l2(J7o,  4888,  4884;  and  from  Digest,  pp.  44,  45.

Application  having  been  made  to  the  working  Lodge,
and  granted,  for  this  degree  —  and  the  appointed  time
for  conferring  it  having  arrived  —  the  ladies  will  be
brought  into  the  ante-room,  and  will  there  take  off
shawls  or  cloaks,  and  bonnets,  for  their  own  comfort.
As  there  is  nothing  improper  or  offensive  in  the  cere-
monial, (which  must  be  conferred  in  the  presence  of
their  husbands  and  each  other,)  none  need  feel  the  least
hesitancy  or  timidity  about  entering  the  Lodge-room.

As  the  "Daughter's"  standing  depends  on  her  hus-
band's, it  is  her  interest  (and  her  right)  to  know  that  he
is  "  free  from  all  charges,"  moral  and  pecuniary,  that
she  may  retain  her  "good  standing/'  and  the  benefits
and  advantages  accruing  to  her  family  through  his
connection  with  the  Order.  This  degree  makes  mani-
fest to  both  their  mutual  interests  and  duties  in  Odd-
Fellowship,  and  thus  qualifies  each  to  be  a  better  u  help-
mate "  for  the  other.

166  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  2.   Of  the  Degree.

1.  As  the  degree  is  designed  to  unite  the  wives  and
widows  of  members  more  intimately  with  the  work  of
Odd-Fellowship,  we  address  our  remarks  to  the  women
only.

2.  No  lady  should  assume  the  responsibilities  of  this
degree,  who  feels  not  a  desire  to  devote  herself  for  life,
when  her   other  duties  will  permit,  to  "  visit  the  sick,
relieve  the  distressed,  bury  the  dead,  and  educate  the
orphan."     She  who  feels  this  desire,  and  is  resolved  to
follow  its  dictates,  whatever  the  circumstances,  or  what-
ever the  opinions  of  the  world  around  her,  is  worthy  to
receive  its  honors.

3.  Not  only  should  such  a  resolve  exist,  but  a  deter-
mination to  obey  it  in  the  true  spirit  of  our  Order  and
of  religion  itself,  quietly  and  noiselessly,  like  the  drop-
pings  of  the  gentle  rain,   or   the   distillations  of  the
silent   dew  on  parched   herbage  and   drooping  flower.
In  Bible  language,  "let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what
thy  right  hand  doeth."

4.  Can  you,  will  you  thus   promise   to  do  good  to
your  fellow-beings,  as  good  should  always  be  done  by
the  votaries  of  our  Order  ?     Such  is  the  path  we  have
trodden.      The  malice   of  bigotry,   the  opposition    of
ignorance,  the  misrepresentations  of  prejudice  assailed
us  at  every  step,  but  our  Order  pressed  onward,  not
pausing  even  for  defence ;  doing  good  for  evil,  giving
blessing  for  curses,  and  even  benefiting  those  who  most
aided  to  injure  us.     Will  you  walk  with  us  in  this  path  ?
Can  you  resolve  to  labor  with  us  in  such  works  of  for-
bearance and  love  ?

5.  Before  you   answer,   consider   well.      Our  Order

OF    THE    DEGREE    OF    REBEKAiI.  167

scorns  to  receive  unwilling  vows.  Though  arduous  and
difficult  its  duties,  they  are  joyous  in  themselves  and
rich  in  their  compensations.  We  offer  you  no  worldly
honor  for  your  sacrifices  ;  for  often  the  world  knows
not  or  understands  not  either  your  motives  or  your
deeds.  We  can  only  promise  our  countenance  and  aid,
the  approval  of  your  own  conscience,  the  blessings  of
those  you  have  succored,  and  the  rewards  of  our  Great
Parent.  Consider,  then,  what  is  involved  in  the  duty
of  loving  your  neighbor  as  yourself.  It  may  call  you
from  the  bowers  of  pleasure  to  the  couch  of  the  pained
and  suffering ;  from  amid  the  joyous  and  gay  to  the
abode  of  poverty  and  wo;  from  a  social  or  domestic
circle  of  peace  and  comfort  to  watch  through  the  weary
night  hours;  to  wipe  the  clammy  death-sweat  from
the  brow,  or  press  with  balmy  hand  the  bounding
pulse;  to  give  the  healing  medicine,  or  speak  calm-
ness to  the  delirious  thoughts;  to  pour  oil  into  the
flickering  lamp  of  life,  or  close  the  fading  eye  as  the
last  prayer  bears  on  its  wings  the  departing  spirit  into
the  presence  of  its  God.  Is  this  too  much,  too  great  a
sacrifice  for  you?  Then,'  retire  in  peace:  pronounce
not  the  vows  we  ask  !

6.  You  hear  all  this,  you  consider  it  well,  but  you
waver    not,    you    draw    not    back !      Such    is    woman's
courage  and  humanity !     We  welcome  you,   therefore,
to  duties  so  honorable,  so  peculiarly  adapted  to  your
loving    hearts    and    sympathizing    natures.       Through
long,  long  years  you  cheered  us  onward,  rejoicing  in
our  prosperity  and  blessing  our  labors.     Advance,  now,
with  us,  by  receiving  this  degree,  which  we  have  esta-
blished as  a  pledge  of  our  confidence  in  your  goodness
and  fidelity.

7.  Sacredly  guard  from  exposure  by  any  means  the

168  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

signs  and  words  by  which  you  may  be  known  as  a
member  of  this  degree,  and  demand  aid  and  counsel
from  the  brotherhood  in  seasons  of  difficulty,  danger,
or  distress.  Make  full  trial  of  those  whom  you  would
address,  and  confide  in  them  only  after  careful  and
rigid  examination.

8.  These  signs  and  words  are  never  to  be  used  in
a  light   or   trifling  manner,   or   for  purposes   of  mere
curiosity.      They   are   meant   to  be   useful,   and   their
utility  makes  them  important.     One  of  them  is  changed
every  year.    So  long  as  your  husband  retains  his  moral
and     pecuniary    standing    in    his    Lodge,    it   will    be
given  you,  annually,  by  him,  or,  in  his  absence,  by  the
presiding  officer  of  his  Lodge.

9.  Having  united  with  our  Order,  we  would  direct
and  stimulate  you  in  the  performance  of  the  duties  it
enjoins,  by  referring  you   to    illustrious   examples    in
your  own  sex.     And  nobler  specimens  of  humanity  and
true  womanhood  can  nowhere  be  found  in  past  ages,
than  are  named  to  us  in  the  Book  of  Books.

10.  Behold  the  hospitality  of  the  modest  and  grace-
ful REBEKAH,  readily  ministering  to  the  stranger  and
his    thirsty,  way-worn  cattle.     It  was   her    character-
istic  when    Isaac    became    her  husband,   as    God   had
appointed ;   it  remained  hers  when  she   was  the  aged
mother  of  a  family.     Mark  the  confiding  piety  of  THE
WIFE  OF  MANOAH,  encouraging  her  husband  to  trust  in
God,  and  herself  to  hold  converse  with  the  Angel  which
gave  her  promise  of  Samson.     Also,  the  devotion  of
HANNAH,  dedicating  her  child  Samuel  unto  God  from
his  infancy.     See  also  the  zeal  and  courage  of  patriotism
in  DEBORAH,  the  widow  who  was  a  bright  star  of  hope
in  her  country's  trouble ;  and   at  whose  word,  it  was
said,  "  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  Sisera."

OF  THE  DEGREE  OF  REBEKAH.          169

And  the  self-sacrificing  love  of  countrymen,  so  like  that
of  Moses,  by  whom  was  it  better  evinced  than  by  the
queenly  ESTHER  ? — risking  station,  and  life  even,  to
save  from  massacre  her  father's  people.  The  steadfast
filial  piety  and  devoted  affection  of  RUTH  fills  one  of
the  most  beautiful  biographical  narratives  of  the  Bible.
How  tender  and  how  beautiful  her  language  to  her
widowed  and  childless  mother-in-law,  Naomi !  "Entreat
me  not  to  leave  thee ;  for  whither  thou  goest  I  will  go ;
where  thou  lodgest  I  will  lodge  ;  thy  people  shall  be  my
people,  and  thy  God  my  God.  Where  thou  diest,  will
I  die,  and  there  will  I  be  buried.  The  Lord  do  so  to
me,  and  more  also,  if  aught  but  death  part  thee  and
me."  Consider  also  the  virgin  prophetess,  MIRIAM,
the  sister,  the  almost  mother  of  Aaron  and  Moses.
From  the  hour  in  which  she  watched  over  the  latter  as
he  was  rocked  by  the  waters  of  the  Nile,  to  the  hour  of
her  death,  she  proved  herself  a  noble,  high-minded,
generous,  brave,  loving  sister  and  woman,  And  thus,
from  SARAH,  the  wife  of  the  Friend  of  God,  and  the
mother  of  patriarchs,  down  to  MARTHA  and  MARY,
to  the  women  who  watched  when  the  disciples  fled,  to
DORCAS  who  cared  for  the  poor,  the  history  glows  and
brightens  with  woman's  worth  and  loveliness.  Before
these,  how  the  glory  of  Cleopatra  and  Aspasia,  of
Elizabeth  of  England,  or  Catharine  of  Russia,  "  loses,
discountenanced,  and  like  folly  shows."  We  therefore
hold  up  for  your  imitation  the  goodness  of  those  whose
modesty  and  worth,  whose  domestic  and  public  virtues,
prove  them  women  indeed.

11.  For   woman's  work  is   to  do  good.     Men  need
banding  together,  to  stimulate  their  better  affections ;
but  in  woman,  benevolence  and   humanity  are   spon-
16

170  THE    ODD-FELLOW'S    MANUAL.

taneous.*  In  entering  into  closer  union  with  our
Order,  therefore,  you  need  only  follow,  as  before,  the
promptings  of  your  ever-ready  sympathies,  to  perform
its  duties  and  fulfil  its  obligations.  In  your  families
and  neighborhoods,  wherever  misery  can  be  relieved,
want  supplied,  or  sorrow  consoled,  there  is  the  work  of
a  daughter  of  Rebekah.

12.  And  in  return  for  the  aid  you  bring  us,  we  pledge
duty  and  devotion  to  you.  For  at  no  time  has  woman
been  excluded  from  our  cares  or  labors.  Rather,  for
her  has  our  Order  been  founded  and  improved.  For
wife  and  children,  rather  than  for  self,  has  the  husband
and  the  father  given  it  his  labors  and  his  means.  For
them  has  the  largest  portion  of  our  benefits  been  pro-
vided. When  her  partner  in  the  household  is  laid  on

*  The  great    traveller,  Ledyard,  truly  says — "I  have   observed

among  all  nations,   that  the   women are    the  same  kind,

civil,  obliging,  humane,  tender  beings ;  that  they  are  ever  inclined
to  be  gay  and  cheerful,  timorous  and  modest.  They  do  not  hesitate,
like  man,  to  perform  a  hospitable  or  generous  action  ;  not  haughty,
nor  arrogant,  nor  supercilious,  but  full  of  courtesy  and  fond  of
society  ;  industrious,  economical,  ingenuous  ;  more  liable  in  general
to  err  than  man,  but  in  general,  also  more  virtuous,  and  performing
more  good  actions  than  he.  I  never  addressed  myself  in  the  language
of  decency  and  frienship  to  a  woman,  whether  civilized  or  savage,
without  receiving  a  decent  and  friendly  answer.  With  man,  it  has
often  been  otherwise.  In  wandering  over  the  barren  plains  of  in-
hospitable Denmark,  through  honest  Sweden,  frozen  Lapland,  rude
and  churlish  Finland,  unprincipled  Russia,  and  the  wide-spread
regions  of  the  wandering  Tartar,  if  hungry,  dry,  cold,  wet,  or  sick,
woman  has  ever  been  friendly  to  me,  and  uniformly  so ;  and  to  add
to  this  virtue,  so  worthy  of  the  appellation  of  benevolence,  these
actions  have  been  performed  in  so  free  and  so  kind  a  manner,  that
if  I  was  dry,  I  drank  the  sweet  draught,  and  if  hungry,  ate  the
coarse  morsel,  with  a  double  relish."— SPARKJJ'S  Life  of  Ledyard,  262.

OF  THE  DEGREE  OF  REBEKAH.          171

the  bed  of  sickness,  for  her  we  pay  the  benefits.  When
she  is  weary  with  watching  at  his  bedside,  we  send
brethren  to  relieve  her.  When  death  removes  him.  we
give  her  double  what  he  is  allowed  when  she  is  taken
away.  And  when  the  widow's  home  is  hers,  with  its
loneliness  and  gloom,  strong  hands  and  warm  hearts
form  a  protection  around  her,  to  supply  her  wants,  and
cherish  her  and  hers,  for  the  sake  of  him  to  whom  they
pledged  a  love

"  Failing  not  when  life  has  perish'd,
Living  still  beyond  the  tomb."

But  now,  more  than  ever,  if  possible,  do  we  pledge
our  means,  resources,  and  powers,  to  promote  your
welfare  and  secure  your  interests.

13.  You  learn,  then,  that  our   Odc?-Fellowship  is  a
unity  of  hearts  and  purposes  to  resist  the  heartlessness
and  selfishness  of  the  world  around  us.    Having  become
one  with  us  and  of  us  in  that  fellowship,  and  assumed
our  obligations,  we  can  better  demonstrate  to  you  that
our  greatest  duty  and  highest  aim  is  the  promotion  of
a  practical,   loving  fraternity  of  mankind.      For  the
entire  human  race  is  but  one  family,  not  only  physically,
but  spiritually,  not  only  theoretically,  but  really  and
truly.     Each  member,   therefore,  is  bound  to  aid  the
rest.     Our  mission  is  not  a  narrow  one.     "None  of  us
liveth  to  himself."     We  are  created  and  placed  here  to
labor  for  our  fellow-men,  to  advance  our  age,  elevate
our  country,  and  improve  our  race.

14.  With  such  teachings  within  our  Temple,  leading
to  corresponding  practices  without,  our  Order  will  with-
stand all  the  shocks  of  opposition*  and  the  changes  of
public   opinion,   and  grow  firmer  and   stronger   in  its

172  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

moral  power,  until  <  the  wreck  of  matter  and  the  crush
of  worlds"  changes  our  theatre  of  action  to  one  of  re-
pose, our  labor  to  reward.

§  3.  Regalia  of  the  Degree  of  Rebekah.

The  regalia  of  this  degree  (out  of  the  Lodge)  is  a  pink
and  green  ribbon  intertwined  and  twisted  together,
which  may  be  worn  as  a  bow,  collar,  bracelet,  or  as  a
trimming  on  any  part  of  the  dress,  according  to  the
wearer's  taste  and  fancy.

§  4.   Colors  of  the  Degree.

The  colors  (for  there  are  two)  of  this  degree  are  pink
and  green,  whose  emblematic  significations  have  already
been  explained  in  our  remarks  on  the  Covenant  Degree
and  the  Degree  of  Remembrance,  to  which  the  reader
is  respectfully  referred.

§  5.  Emblems.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  attached  no
special  emblems  to  this  degree.  Our  lady  readers  can
find,  in  the  symbolical  language  we  have  unfolded  in
the  other  degrees,  not  a  few  which  may  be  chosen  as
mementos  of  duty  and  encouragement.  And  every
female  example  of  the  Old  Testament,  to  whom  we  have
referred  them,  will  furnish  an  abundance  in  her  eventful
history

OF   THE    SUBORDINATE    LODGE.  173

CHAPTER  IX.

OF   THE    SUBORDINATE   LODGE.

§  1.  Members  and  Qualifications.

A  SUBORDINATE  Lodge  is  constituted  of  ret  less  than
five  brethren  in  good  standing,  including  one  qualified
to  preside  over  its  meetings.*  It  must  be  regularly
chartered  and  instituted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
United  States,  or  by  some  Grand  Lodge  recognized  as
legal  by  our  national  Grand  Lodge.  The  following  di-
rections are  deemed  proper,  for  those  who  desire  to  get
up  and  organize  a  Lodge.

§  2.  How  Commenced.

If  desirous  of  forming  a  Lodge  in  your  vicinity,
ascertain  first  how  many  brethren  can  be  found  willing
to  unite  in  that  object.  This  may  be  done  by  private
inquiry,  or  by  calling  an  informal  meeting  by  public
notice.  Should  a  sufficient  number  of  the  proper  cha-
racter (for  this  is  an  all-important  consideration)  not  be
found,  ascertain  whether  any  members  of  the  Order,  at

*In  some  States,  under  particular  circumstances,  there  must  be
more  than  five  petitioners  for  a  Charter  In  others,  all  the  officers
must  receive,  or  have  received,  the  five  degrees,  which  may  be  con-
ferred on  the  first  officers  of  a  new  Lodge  by  special  dispensation.
Previous  service  is  also  dispensed  with  in  the  same  manner.  The
Constitution  and  By-Laws  of  each  Grand  Lodge,  or  any  of  its  officers
or  active  members,  rill  furnish  the  necessary  information.
15*

174  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

a  distance,  can  be  induced  to  unite  with  you  temporarily.
Or,  what  is  better,  find  the  necessary  number  of  proper
individuals  willing  to  proceed  to  the  nearest  Lodge,  and
be  there  initiated  for  the  purpose  of  uniting  in  a  peti-
tion for  a  charter.

Much  prudence  and  forecast  are  necessary  in  these
preliminary  operations.  Guard  against  imposition.
Scrutinize  the  moral  and  social  fitness  of  proposed
associates.  Calculate  carefully  the  probabilities  of
being  joined,  after  the  Lodge  is  instituted,  by  proper
persons,  and  in  sufficient  numbers,  to  render  the  Lodge
truly  respectable,  morally,  and  to  secure  it  sufficient
pecuniary  ability.  For  on  first  impressions  may  de-
pend its  entire  acceptability  to  those  who  are  worth
having ;  and  the  expenses  of  starting  a  Lodge,  furnish-
ing a  room,  &c.,  are  too  great  to  be  made  a  matter  of
mere  guess-work  and  risk.  Consider  well,  therefore,
every  step  before  it  is  taken,  and  make  haste  very  de-
liberately.

§3.   The  Petition.

Having  obtained  the  number  of  properly  qualified
coadjutors,  ascertain,  from  some  reliable  person,  pre-
cisely what  is  required  of  petitioners.  In  most  juris-
dictions, withdrawal  cards,  stating  each  brother's  rank
and  station,  must  accompany  the  petition.  (See  No.  9,
Appendix  B.)  The  Charter  fee,  which  varies  in  diifer-
ent  States,  (but  usually  thirty  dollars,)  must  accompany
it,  and  will  be  returned,  if  the  petition  is  not  granted.
Sometimes,  instead  of  the  cards,  there  is  sent  merely  a
certificate  from  the  nearest  D.  D.  G.  Sire  or  D.  D.  G.
Master,  (as  the  case  may  be,)  stating  that  they  are  in  his
hands,  and  are  correct,  as  set  forth  in  the  petition.

If  the  Lodge  is  to  be  located  in  a  State  or  Territory

OF    THE    SUBORDINATE    LODGE.  175

•where  there  is  no  Grand  Lodge,  the  petition,  &c.  must  he
addressed  to  :he  R.  W.  G.  Lodge  of  the  United  States,
and  forwarded  to  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  same,  (at
Baltimore,  Md.)  But  if  where  there  is  a  State  Grand
Lodge,  address  it  accordingly,  and  make  the  Charter
fee  and  other  requisites  correspond  with  its  require-
ments.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  requires  the
expenses  of  its  Grand  Officer  or  Agent  who  opens  the
Lodge  to  he  paid  by  the  petitioners.  But  in  most  of
the  States,  the  Grand  Lodge  pays  this  expense.  Of
course  the  brethren  will  provide  him  and  those  who
assist  in  opening,  with  proper  quarters  and  accommo-
dations, and  thus  honor  their  visitors  and  themselves
with  fraternal  hospitality.  But  great  care  should  be
taken  to  ascertain  clearly  all  the  probable  expenses,  and
keep  an  accurate  account  thereof,  for  future  settlement.

§4.  Preparations  for  Institution.

Having  ascertained  that  a  Charter  can  be  had,  get
applications  for  admission  and  initiation  from  all  whom
you  design  receiving,  (having  first  canvassed  their  cha-
racters, and  unanimously  agreed  to  elect  them,)  with
the  proposition  fee  of  each.  Arrange  your  Lodge-
room,  making  it  and  premises  secure  against  eaves-
droppers and  burglars,  and  rendering  it  as  convenient
and  comfortable  as  your  means  will  allow.  Neatness
and  comfort  are  secured  cheaply,  in  comparison  with
mere  show  and  splendor ;  and  the  latter  without  the
former  are  very  dear,  indeed  !  Purchase  your  regalia
and  jewels,  your  furniture,  wardrobe,  &c. ;  and  see  that
they  are  substantial,  as  well  as  appropriate  in  appear-
ance arid  cost.  Refresh  each  other's  memories  as  much

176  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

as  possible  in  the  ceremonials  and  work  of  the  Order,
that  the  institution,  installation,  and  initiations  may  be
impressive  and  correct.  Agree  on  the  officers,  so  as  to
have  the  election  brief  and  unanimous,  and  the  ap-
pointments promptly  made  and  accepted.  All  these
and  kindred  matters  should  be  determined  and  arranged
before  the  arrival  of  the  person  who  is  to  open  the
Lodge.  Then  when  the  time  arrives  for  institution,  &c.,
every  thing  is  ready  in  turn  ;  the  petitioners  are  on  hand,
the  Lodge  is  opened,  the  officers  are  elected  and  in-
stalled without  delays  and  strifes,  the  applications  for
membership  are  referred  to  the  proper  Committee,  and
forthwith  reported  on  in  due  form  ;  and  the  initiations
follow  with  all  the  facility  and  impressiveness  of  an  old
and  well-working  Lodge.  How  much  more  delightful
and  salutary,  than  where  every  thing  is  left  to  the  last
moment,  and  then  crowded  through  with  contentions,
anxieties,  and  bungled  performances,  to  be  remembered
with  shame  and  vexation  for  years  afterward !

§  5.   The  First  Meeting.

At  the  first  meeting  after  institution,  as  there  need
be  no  initiation,  see  that  all  the  new  officers  and  mem-
bers understand  correctly  their  duties,  and  are  practised
in  their  performance.  Have  all  the  bills  duly  made  out,
certified  to  be  correct  by  the  proper  Committee,  and  pass
a  vote  providing  for  their  payment  out  of  the  first  funds
in  the  Treasury.  Of  course,  provision  has  been  pre-
viously made  for  a  loan  of  money  or  of  credit,  by  one
or  more  of  the  members,  to  meet  such  demands ;  but
this  vote  by  the  Lodge  is  necessary  to  sanction  ancl
adopt  such  proceedings,  and  to  relieve  those  brethren.
Appoint  (or  continue)  the  Committees  to  procure  neces-

OF   THE    SUBORDINATE    LODGE.  177

saries  yet  needed,  to  audit  accounts,  &c.  And  thus
prepare  for  the  correct  working  and  prompt  transaction
of  business  by  the  Lodge  at  future  meetings.

§  6.  Increase  of  Members.

The  great  aim  of  a  new  Lodge  generally  is  to  in-
crease its  membership.  This  desire,  if  not  regulated  by
great  wisdom  and  prudence,  will  work  incalculable  and
lasting  injury  to  the  welfare  of  the  Order.  Our  views,
gained  by  experience  and  observation  in  a  wide  field,
will  be  found  in  our  remarks  on  "The  Ballot,"  and  on
the  duties  of  "Investigating  Committees/'  in  a  subse-
quent part  of  this  work.  But  allow  us  to  add  here,  that
numbers  are  not  always  strength:  they  may  even  prove
weakness.

Suppose  that  in  looking  around  for  members,  you
find  the  most  desirable  men  generally  averse.  Some
are  afraid  of  your  debt ;  others  of  popular  opinion ;
others  still  of  family  prejudices  and  opposition,  and  so
they  promise  to  "consider  the  subject,  and  decide  by-
and-by."  In  other  words,  they  will  "wait  and  see.''
Can  you  remove  the  difficulty  by  inducing  men  careless
of  character,  of  doubtful  health  and  habits,  or  stil)
more  objectionable  tempers  and  dispositions,  to  propose  ?
Suppose  you  try  it.  Your  brethren,  equally  anxious  for
increase,  or  tender  of  your  feelings,  elect  them  because
you  have  urged  them  to  join.  So  they  are  initiated ;
and  what  is  the  effect  ?

Popular  prejudice  is  increased ;  the  objections  of
families  to  their  members  uniting  with  you  are
strengthened;  the  m'erely  indifferent  are  not  excited  to
feel  an  interest  in  a  Lodge  composed  of  such  materials.
But  new  members  have  been  added  and  the  debt  is

178  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

lessened.  Yes ;  and  they  feel  desirous  of  controlling
a,ifairs  in  return.  One  is  brought  up  under  charges  for
neglect  of  his  family,  or  violation  of  some  of  the  de-
cencies or  moralities  of  life.  The  others,  being  similarly
disposed,  acquit  him  in  despite  of  proofs.  The  habits
of  the  doubtful  grow  decidedly  worse  under  such  disci-
pline, but  it  is  vain  to  try  to  expel  them.  Good  mem-
bers grow  disgusted,  neglect  attendance  at  Lodge-meet-
ings, and  thus  criminally  resign  the  reins  wholly  to
bad  hands.  Claims  for  benefits  come  in.  It  is  pretty
certain  that  they  are  false,  or  were  caused  by  immo-
rality ;  but  how  prove  it  ?  And  if  proved,  how  prevent
their  being  granted  notwithstanding  ?  More  doubtful
candidates  are  proposed ;  for  crows  flock  to  the  carcass ;
and  you  rouse  up  and  reject  them.  Then,  essaying  to
redeem  the  Lodge  from  bad  management,  you  induce  a
few  resolute,  good  men  to  apply.  They  are  rejected,
because  you  rejected  the  others.  How,  now,  stands  the
case  ?

Members  have  been  gained,  but  public  confidence  has
not  been  gained ;  character  has  not  been  improved ;
money,  even,  has  not  really  been  gained.  Your  num-
bers are  not  strength,  but  weakness,  and  unless  help  and
health  come  by  your  vigorous  action,  and  aid  from
abroad,  or  from  the  Grand  Lodge,  your  Lodge  must
die ;  and  the  whole  Order,  and  all  good  men,  will  say,
AMEN  !

Be  cautious,  then,  whom  you  propose.  Remember
that  admission  into  the  Lodge  is  admission  to  your
family  at  sickness  and  death,  and  admits  you  to  share
in  their  characters  in  public  estimation.  A  charge
anciently  given  to  an  initiate  of  our  Order,  contained
the  following  excellent  advice  and  admonition : —
"  Should  yo*i,  at  any  time,  propose  a  friend  to  become  a

OF  THE  SUBORDINATE  LODGE.          179

member  of  this  Order,  see  that  he  is  such  a  one  as  will
be  likely  to  conform  to  the  laws  of  our  Society ;  since
nothing  is  so  painful  to  the  feelings  of  faithful  Odd-
Felloivs,  as  to  see  the  requirements  of  the  institution  pro-
faned and  trodden  underfoot."

§  7.   Opening  Lodge.

All  rites  and  ceremonies  should  have  for  their  aim,
the  instruction  and  improvement  of  those  concerned.
They  should  be  simple  in  character,  adapted  to  the
purposes  designed,  and  easy  of  performance.  And
they  should  be  performed  with  earnestness,  precision,
correctness,  and  in  proper  time  ;  and  attended  to  with
due  observation  and  silence.  Such  are  the  ceremonies
of  opening,  working,  and  closing  a  Lodge  of  our  Order.
The  officers  and  members,  therefore,  should  make  them-
selves perfectly  familiar  with  all  their  details,  so  as  to
understand  and  perform  them  correctly.

Precisely  at  the  appointed  time,  (allowing  but  a  few
minutes  for  differences  of  time-pieces,)  the  proper  officer
should  put  on  his  regalia,  take  his  chair,  and  give  the
signal.  Punctuality  in  this  matter  is  highly  important.
It  will  not  only  avoid  late  hours  for  closing,  which
cause  so  much  inconvenience  and  dissatisfaction  in
families,  but  it  will  secure  prompt  attendance  and
proper  despatch  of  business.  The  officers,  therefore,
should  be  rigidly  punctual  themselves  ;  and  if  not,
should  be  held  accountable  for  all  delay  in  opening  by
those  whose  patience  they  abuse,

At  the  signal,  if  not  before,  each  member  will  quietly
put  on  the  appropriate  regalia  previously  provided  by
the  Warden,  and  move  to  his  station,  there  to  await  in
silence  the  examination.  This  should  be  carefully  made

180  THE    ODD-FELLOW\S    MA  NTT  41,

by  the  proper  officer,  at  least  once  a  month  not  omit-
ting any,  to  refresh  the  memories  of  brethren,  and  make
them  attentive  to  the  word.

In  the  same  respectful  silence,  all  should  listen  to  the
recital  of  duties  by  the  several  officers.  It  is  a  mistake
to  suppose  that  these  concern  the  officers  only.  Every
member  should  know  what  duties  he  may  lawfully  re-
quire each  officer  to  perform.  And  as  any  brother  may
be  called  on  to  fill  a  vacancy  for  an  evening,  or  may  be
appointed  or  elected  to  fill  the  offices,  it  is  his  duty  to
learn  in  season  what  duties  he  will  then  be  required  to
discharge.  Even  those  who  have  learned,  should  be
silent  and  attentive,  so  as  to  present  a  proper  example
to  new  members,  and  not  distract  the  attention  of  others
from  any  business  of  the  evening.

Careful  heed  should  be  given  to  the  solemn  charge
of  the  N.  G.  to  each  officer  and  member  to  perform  his
duties,  and  to  observe  those  principles  which  constitute
each  lodge  a  family  and  secure  fraternal  feeling  and
humane  conduct  among  its  members.  These  recitals
are  not  mere  forms,  nor  an  empty  sound  of  words ;  they
have  deep  significance,  and  are  designed  to  subserve
important  ends.  Let  us  guard,  then,  against  a  listless
delivery  or  an  inattentive  hearing  of  them.

In  those  State  jurisdictions  where  it  is  customary,
the  following  prayer  is  offered  by  the  Chaplain  or  bro-
ther designated  for  that  purpose  ;*-

*  Adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  to  exclude
prayers  offensive  to  members  of  the  Order  in  many  of  our  lodges.
It  is  also  ordered  that  on  all  occasions  of  the  Order,  *•  the  same
spirit  as  observed  in  the  foregoing,  shall  be  strictly  followed  by  the
officiating  clergyman  or  chaplain."

*'  It  i,s  desirable  and  eminently  proper  that  all  lodges  should  open

OF    THE   SUBORDINATE    LODGE.  181

PRAYER. — Thou  King  eternal,  immortal,  and  invis-
ible !  the  only  wise  God,  our  Saviour !  Thou  art  the
Sovereign  of  universal  nature,  the  only  true  object  of
our  best  and  holiest  affections.  We  render  Thee  hearty
thanks  for  that  kind  providence  which  has  preserved  us
during  the  past  week,  protecting  us  from  the  perils  and
dangers  of  this  life;  and  for  permitting  us  now  to
assemble  in  Thy  name  for  the  transaction  of  business.

We  humbly  beseech  Thee,  our  Heavenly  Father,  to
preside  over  our  assembly,  to  breathe  into  our  hearts
the  spirit  of  love  and  of  a  sound  mind  ;  and  may  each
and  all  be  governed  by  an  anxious  desire  to  advance
Thy  glory  and  ameliorate  the  condition  of  mankind.

Let  Thy  blessing  rest  upon  our  Order,  upon  all  the
Lodges,  Grand  and  Subordinate,  belonging  to  our  entire
family  of  brothers.  Let  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth

and  close  with  prayer."  "Each  subordinate  lodge  may  determine
for  itself  upon  opening  and  closing  its  sessions  with  prayer,  and  may
determine  upon  the  form  to  be  used." — Digest,  G.  L.  U.  S.,  p.  123.
The  following  excellent  form,  long  used  in  New  York,  and  still
offered  in  some  lodges  there,  is  equally  free  from  objections  with
that  prescribed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States: —

PRAYER  AT  OPENING. —  Almighty  and  most  merciful  God,  we  adore
Thee  as  the  Creator  of  all  worlds  and  the  righteous  Governor  of  all
beings ;  upon  whom  we  are  dependent  for  life  and  all  its  blessings,
and  without  whose  favor  no  human  enterprise  can  permanently
prosper.  Lift  upon  us,  we  pray  Thee,  0  Lord,  the  light  of  Thy
countenance,  and  bless  us  while  we  are  together  this  evening.  May
all  things  be  done  in  the  spirit  of  charity  and  brotherly  kindness,
and  may  our  labors  of  love  be  blessed  to  the  promotion  of  the  best
interests  of  our  beloved  Order.  Hear  us,  0  God,  in  behalf  of  the
stranger,  the  sick,  the  afflicted,  the  widow,  and  the  orphan  ;  and
bless  them  as  Thou  seest  they  may  need.  Keep  us  ever  in  Thy  fear
and  wisdom,  and  save  us  all  with  an  everlasting  salvation :  and  to
Thy  Great  Name  be  all  the  glory,  as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is
now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world  without  end.  Amen.
16

182  THE    ODD-FELLOAV'S    MANUAL.

prevail,  until  the  last  tear  of  distress  be  wiped  away,
and  the  Lodge  below  be  absolved  by  the  glory  and
grandeur  of  the  Grand  Lodge  above.  This  we  ask  in
humble  dependence  upon,  and  in  most  solemn  adoration
of  thy  One  mysterious  and  glorious  Name.  Amen.

In  all  Lodges  the  ceremony  is  then  concluded  by
singing  an  appropriate  Ode,  when  the  Lodge  is  declared
duly  opened,  all  sectarian,  political,  or  other  improper
utterance  prohibited  under  penalty,  and  the  brethren
are  expected  to  enter  on  the  proper  business  of  the
evening,  and  the  diffusion  of  principles  of  benevolence
and  charity.

§  8.    Working  of  the  Lodge.

Subordinate  Lodges  are  termed  "  working  Lodges,"
(in  distinction  from  Grand  Lodges,  which  are  legislative
bodies,)  because  in  them  candidates  are  initiated,  moral
and  social  instructions  given,  and  provision  directly
made  for  performing  the  active  works  of  Odd-Fellow-
ship, by  the  officers  and  members,  during  the  ensuing
week.  But  even  the  business  transactions  have  an  aim
beyond  themselves,  the  salutary  exercise  of  the  moral
and  mental  powers  of  the  members  in  social  communion,
and  the  increase  of  their  affections  in  all  that  relates  to
our  great  fraternity.

As  the  prescribed  "Order  of  business"  is  merely
general,  we  will  designate  the  special  items  properly
coming  under  each  rule  : —

I.   Calling  the  Roll  of  Officers.

1.  Charge  each  absentee  in  the  Roll-book  with  the  proper  fine  for
non-attendance,  or  other  neglect  of  duty ;  and  note  his  absence  on
the  minutes.

OF   THE    SUBORDINATE    LODGE.  183

II.  Reading  Minutes  of  the  preceding  Lodge-night.

1.  If  any  special  or  adjourned  meetings  have  been  held  within  the
week,  read  them  in  collection,  and  call  for  corrections.

2.  If  no  objection  be  made  to  any  of  the  Minutes,  they  are  con-
sidered approved,  of  course.

3.  Read  the  names  of  absentees  on  previous  nights  ;  if  excuses  are
accepted,  erase  the  lines  from  Roll-book.

III.  Does  any  brother  know  of  a  sick  brother,  or  a
brother  in  distress?

1.  Announcement  of  new  cases  of  illness.

2.  Report  of  Relief  Committee,  by  their  Chairman.

3.  Appointment  of  watchers  for  the  sick  during  the  ensuing  week,
including  the  next  Lodge-night ;  so  as  to  allow  time  to  notify  absent
watchers.

4.  Ordering  drafts  in  favor  of  brethren,  widows  and  orphans
entitled  to  benefits  or  needing  aid.

IV.  Consideration  of  previous  proposals  for  member-
ship.

1.  Reports  of  Committees  of  Investigation.

2.  Acceptance  of  Reports  and  balloting  for  Candidates.

V.  Candidates  admitted.

N.  B. — Special  care  should  be  taken  to  have  every  officer  prepared
and  at  his  post,  and  every  thing  ready,  that  perfect  order  and
silence  may  be  maintained.

VI.  Has  any  brother  a  friend  to  propose  to  become  a
member  of  this  Order  ?

1.  Propositions  received  and  read.

2.  Propositions  accepted,  if  correct,  and  Committees  appointed,
and  endorsed  thereon.

VII.  Unfinished  Business  appearing  on  the  Minutes^
to  be  attended  to.

1.  Reports  of  Standing  Committees  received  and  acted  upon.

2.  Reports  of  Special  Committees,  also.
8.  Other  unfinished  business,  in  order.

184  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

VIII.  Has  any  brother  any  thing  to  off er  for  the  good
of  the  Order?

1.  Communications  from  the  Grand  Lodge,  from  Dist.  Grand  Com-
mittees, from  the  Dist.  D.  Grand  Master,  from  other  Lodges,  and
miscellaneous,  in  the  order  here  named.

2.  New  business,  applications  for  degrees,  cards,  &c.

3.  Permanent  Secretary's  Report  of  the  receipts  since  previous
meeting,  which  must  be  entered  on  the  Minutes.

IX.  Closing  the  Lodge.

N.  B. — Allow  sufficient  time  for  any  excitement  to  subside,  officers
to  complete  business  on  hand,  &c.,  before  closing,  that  all  things
may  be  "done  decently  and  in  order."

The  above  order  of  business  should  be  adhered  to  at
all  stated  meetings.  If  circumstances  require  an  early
attention  to  some  item  coming  late  in  order — say,  the
Report  of  a  Committee — it  can  be  reached  thus : — As
the  N.  G.  announces  each  item  in  order,  a  motion  is
made  and  carried  to  lay  it  on  the  table  until  after  the
Report.  Thus  each  item  is  passed  until  you  reach
"unfinished  business,"  when  the  Report  is  received  and
acted  on.  Then  the  items  "laid  on  the  table"  are  in
order,  and  are  taken  up  regularly  as  before,  and  com-
pleted.

It  will  be  seen  that  our  duties  to  the  sick,  the  dis-
tressed, the  widow,  and  the  orphan,  are  especially
considered  at  every  Lodge  meeting,  and  (if  need  be)
provided  for  during  the  ensuing  week.

While  all  business,  debates,  &c.  should  be  conducted
in  a  strictly  parliamentary  manner,  care  should  be  taken
not  to  render  the  intercourse  of  the  brethren  cold  and
formal.  Respect  and  courtesy  to  all,  mingled  with
that  deference  to  motives,  if  not  opinions,  which  fra-
ternal love  inspires,  should  never  be  forgotten  in  the

OF  THE  SUBORDINATE  LODGE.         185

Lodge.  But  if  forgotten  by  the  speakers,  the  proper
officer  should  promptly  and  firmly,  yet  gently  remind
them  of  their  temporary  aberration.  Those  personali-
ties and  sarcasms  which  many  mistake  for  wit  and
humor,  but  which  ruffle  the  temper,  wound  the  feelings,
and  excite  ill-will  among  brethren,  are  as  entirely  out
of  place  in  a  Lodge-room  as  in  a  Church.  But  plea-
santry, real  wit  and  humor,  without  a  sting,  are  com-
mendable when  time  allows  and  the  subject  invites
their  indulgence.

But  when  serious  things  and  solemn  rites  are  before
the  Lodge,  especially  during  initiation  and  while  con-
ferring degrees,  every  thing  like  levity  and  jesting
should  be  promptly  repressed,  and,  if  need  be,  rebuked
or  punished.

By  properly  and  earnestly  performing  the  work  of  a
Lodge,  every  member  and  officer  has  his  work  as  an
Odd-Fellow  duly  laid  out,  prepared  and  furnished,  that
he  may  carry  forward  and  complete  it  during  the  week
If  he  does  his  duty  out  of  the  Lodge  as  prescribed
within  it,  he  will  be  made  a  wiser,  better,  and  happier
man;  the  brethren  will  be  edified  and  stimulated  to
good  works,  and  the  Lodge  will  become  a  powerful
agent,  in  God's  providence,  for  promoting  among  men
the  manifold  blessings  of  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth.

§  9.   Closing  the  Lodge.

Appropriate  to  the  opening  and  working  of  a  Lodge,
is  the  impressive  ceremonial  of  closing  the  same.

The  business  of  the  evening  having  been  transacted,
the  Vice-Grand,  Officers,  and  brethren  are  requested
to  place  themselves  in  proper  position  to  aid  the  desig-
nated officer  who  is  to  close  the  Lodge.  The  desire  of
10*

186  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

the  N.  G.  being  formally  declared,  the  Lodge  is  pre-
pared for  closing,  and  an  appropriate  Ode  is  sung.

The  particular  duties  of  each  officer  at  closing  are
then  rehearsed,  and  should  be  attentively  listened  to,
in  order  that  none  may  be  delinquent  for  want  of  know-
ledge, or  be  held  accountable  for  neglect  of  duties  not
pertaining  to  his  charge.  Members  are  commended  for
their  attention  to  the  business  of  the  evening,  and  bro-
thers thanked  for  their  presence,  and  all  are  invited  to
attend  on  any  future  evening.  Arrangements  are  made
for  collecting  the  regalia  and  implements  of  the  Lodge,
inspecting  their  condition,  and  placing  them  in  their
depositories.  And  finally,  the  brother  in  charge  of  the
entrance  prepares  the  way  for  the  departure  of  the
brethren.

Thus  admonished  and  prepared,  in  some  jurisdictions,
the  Lodge  unites  with  a  Chaplain  in  the  following

CLOSING  PRAYER. — Almighty  Fatner  :  dismiss  us,  we
implore  thee,  with  thy  blessing.  Let  all  we  have  done
upon  this  occasion,  meet  acceptance  and  favor  in  thy
sight ;  and  may  we  still  continue,  through  thy  aid  and
assistance,  to  increase  the  usefulness  of  our  institution
to  ourselves  and  to  all  mankind.  Amen.*

*  The  following  is  the  form  that  was  formerly  used  in  New  York,
and  yet  is  in  at  least  some  Lodges : —

CLOSING  PRAYER. — We  bless  thee,  0  Lord,  that  we  have  been  per-
mitted to  enjoy  this,  another  Lodge-meeting.  Pardon  what  thou
hast  seen  amiss  in  us :  and  now,  as  we  are  about  to  separate,  may
thy  blessing  be  with  us,  and  with  all  our  brethren  throughout  the
globe.  May  brotherly  love  prevail,  and  every  moral  and  social
virtue  adorn  our  lives,  while  members  of  this  Lodge  below ;  and  at
last  may  we  be  admitted  to  the  joys  of  a  better  world :  and  thine
be  the  power  and  glory,  forever  and  ever.  Amen.

OF  THE  SUBORDINATE  LODGE-          187

After  the  prayer,  the  Lodge  is  declared  duly  closed,
the  time  of  the  next  meeting  is  proclaimed,  and  the
brethren  separate,  as  brethren  of  one  family  always
should  depart  from  any  assemblage,  IN  PEACE.

We  close  this  section  with  the  earnest  admonition  of
Past  D.  G.  Sire,  Albert  Case : —

fc<  Brethren,  may  it  never  be  said  by  the  uninitiated,
that  we  are  deficient  in  those  practical  characteristics
of  the  Order,  which,  when  truly  and  systematically
adhered  to,  cannot  fail  to  distinguish  us  above  those
who  refuse  to  knock  at  the  door  of  our  temple,  and
gain  a  knowledge  of  our  mysteries.  Let  us  not  forget
that,  while  we  cultivate  the  perfection  of  our  fraternal
duties,  we  shall  improve  in  the  knowledge  of  Deity,  of
our  duty  to  Him,  to  our  neighbor,  and  to  ourselves :
Friendship  will  bind  us  together,  Truth  will  direct  us,
and  Love  will  make  our  labors  easy;  so  that,  at  the
last,  when  we  are  summoned  from  the  terrestrial  Lodges
to  the  Grand  Lodge  Celestial,  we  may  leave  form  and
ceremony  behind,  find  our  work  approved,  and,  as  the
mysteries  of  Heaven  are  unveiled  to  our  admiring  vision,
we  may  arrive  at  its  perfection,  and  enjoy  its  benefits
throughout  ages  eternal."  Even  so  may  it  be  !  Amen.

§  10.    Work  out  of  Lodge.

Closing  the  Lodge  does  by  no  means  suspend  the
work  of  its  officers  and  members.  Proper  provision
having  been  made  and  instructions  given,  in  the  Lodge,
the  Committees  are  now  to  pursue  their  labors :  the  sick
are  to  be  systematically  and  kindly  visited,  the  dis-
tressed are  to  be  relieved,  the  widows  and  orphans  to  be
attended  to,  and  the  needy  and  suffering  to  be  searched
out  preparatory  to  being  reported  at  the  next  meeting.

188  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

The  principles  of  good-will  and  brotherly  love  are  to  be
carried  out  in  social  and  domestic  intercourse,  outside
the  walls  of  the  Lodge-room.  The  world  itself  is  one
vast  Lodge  of  brethren,  and  the  lessons  acquired  in  the
weekly  meeting  of  the  few,  should  be  reduced  to  daily,
constant  practice  among  the  many.  And  especially  is
that  temple,  the  body,  which  is  the  residence  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  to  be  further  enlightened  and  purified,  and
rendered  the  abiding-place  of  Friendship,  Love,  and
Truth.

To  prepare  the  Odd-Fellow  for  these  daily  duties  and
privileges  of  life,  and  to  direct  him  in  their  proper  per-
formance and  use,  is  the  great  end  and  aim  of  the
weekly  meeting  in  the  Lodge-room.  The  work  of  the
Lodge  being  but  a  school  to  exercise  him  in  his  proper
work  of  Odd-Fellowship  in  his  own  heart,  in  his  family,
and  in  the  world  at  large.  The  tokens  and  emblems  of
the  one  are  designed  to  direct  his  mind  to  the  sun,  the
moon,  the  stars,  the  light-woven  bow  on  the  cloud,  the
open  hand,  and  all  the  other  visible  and  invisible  ob-
jects in  the  other,  which  speak  of  God's  goodness,  and
man's  duties,  and  nature's  blessedness,  and  make  them
incitements  to  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  and  virtue.

Careless,  indolent,  or  ill-instructed,  therefore,  must
he  be,  who  rests  satisfied  with  a  mere  attendance  on
Lodge-meetings,  and  whose  mind  and  heart  reach  not
beyond  the  mere  routine  of  its  workings,  the  letter  of
its  lectures  and  charges,  or  the  outward  appearance  of
its  forms,  emblems,  and  allegorized  representations.
The  true  Odd-Fellow,  using  these  but  as  an  outline
map,  will  study  them  that  he  may  fill  up  their  vacancies,
understandingly  mark  out  his  journey  in  the  world,  and
pursue  his  life-pilgrimage,  knowing  whence  he  cometh,
whither  he  goeth,  and  what  he  doeth.

DUTIES    AND    DEPORTMENT    OF    ODD-FELLOWS,        189

CHAPTER  X.

DUTIES   AND   DEPORTMENT   OF   ODD-FELLOWS.

EACH  member,  whatever  be  his  rank  or  station  in  the
Order,  has  certain  duties  to  perform  and  obligations  to
discharge  by  virtue,  simply,  of  his  membership,  as  an
Odd-Fellow.  These  exist  and  surround  him  in  every
situation  and  condition  in  which  he  may  be  placed  in
life,  public  and  private,  in  the  Lodge  and  in  the  bosom
of  his  family.  He  is  an  Odd-Fellow,  first,  middle,  and
last:  an  Odd-Fellow  always,  whether  a  Grand  Master
or  a  mere  initiate,  wherever  and  whatever  he  may  be.

And  in  consequence  of  these  acknowledged  duties
and  obligations,  we  claim  the  privilege  of  observing  the
conduct  of  all  our  brethren,  as  well  out  of  the  Lodge  as
in  it,  for  brotherly  approval,  advice,  admonition,  or
correction.  A  few  special  remarks,  then,  on  those
duties  which  each  member  of  our  Order  owes,  as  an
individual  Odd-Fellow,  seem  appropriate  in  this  place.

§  1.  Lodge  Attendance.

Some  members  are  very  faithful  in  Lodge  attendance
until  they  have  "passed  the  Chairs,"  or  until  they  find
they  cannot  succeed  in  doing  so,  and  then  their  zeal
suddenly  cools  down,  and  they  seldom  attend,  except  to
pay  their  dues,  and  even  these  they  sometimes  send  in
by  a  neighbor  !  Be  not  one  of  these.  And  never  vote
for,  or  aid  in  any  way  to  elevate  to  the  honors  of  the

190  THE    ODD-FELLOWS    MANUAL.

Order,  any  brother  whom  you  have  good  reason  to
believe  one  of  this  class.  They  love  not  the  principles
— their  hearts  are  not  in  the  works  of  Odd-Fellowship.
It  is  time  that  those  who  unite  with  us,  not  because
they  love  to  do  good,  but  for  "  the  loaves  and  the
fishes,"  should  learn  that  they  have  mistaken  their  aim,
that  we  prefer  to  honor,  above  all  others,  the  workers  in
our  ranks,  the  lovers  of  our  principles.

P.  G.  M.  A.  E.  Glenn,  Editor  of  «  The  Ark/'  Columbus,
0.,  speaks  very  plainly  to  those  who,  from  any  light
cause,  have  allowed  their  zeal  to  cool  down  into  ab-
senteeism : —

"Tell  us  why  you  neglect  the  Lodge?  Where  are
you  on  the  evenings  of  our  meetings  ?  What  has  hap-
pened to  wean  you  away  from  the  Hall,  where,  in  other
days,  you  were  always  present  ?  Are  you  tired  of  Odd-
Fellowship  ?  When  you  were  sick,  and  in  distress,
were  you  neglected  ?  When  you  needed  watchers,  did
you  not  have  them  ?  When  you  were  entitled  to  bene-
fits, were  they  not  paid  you?  If  you  have  been  neglected
in  any  manner,  have  you  made  complaint,  and  has  no
remedy  been  applied  ?  If  so,  then  we  must  acknowledge
you  have  had  some  cause  for  absenting  yourself  fr<  m
the  Lodge.  But  we  think  few  cases  of  neglect,  such  as
we  have  mentioned,  have  ever  occurred.  We  do  not
know  of  one ;  and  consequently  there  must  be  other
reasons  for  being  absent  from  the  Lodge.  We  hope
and  trust  brothers  have  not  found  other  places,  apart
from  their  families,  where  they  can  spend  their  evenings
more  agreeably  than  among  their  brothers  in  the  Lodge-
room.  We  would  not  insinuate  such  a 'thing;  but  we
know  there  are  many  who  never  come  to  the  Lodge,
that  could  do  so  as  well  as  not,  and  who  should  attend.'*

The  same  writer  also  properly  adds — "  What  is  more

DUTIES    AND    DEPORTMENT    OF    ODD-FELLOWS.        191

discouraging  to  those  who  always  attend,  upon  whom
mainly  depends  the  Lodge  business,  than  to  see  a  thin
attendance  ?  It  would  oftentimes  seem  as  though  but
few  had  any  regard  for  the  Order ;  and  yet,  those  who
do  not  attend  are  generally  the  first  to  complain  if
they  are  neglected  in  sickness,  or  fail  to  receive  benefits
when  entitled  to  receive  them.

"  The  sociability  which  should  always  exist  among
Odd-Fellows,  and  particularly  between  members  of  the
same  Lodge,  cannot  exist  if  they  do  not  meet  once  a
week  in  the  Lodge-room.  These  meetings  make  us
more  familiar,  we  know  each  other  better,  and  are
more  sociable  and  friendly.  When  one  is  summoned  to
watch  with  a  sick  brother,  and  he  goes  to  the  house  of
one  he  has  not  met  in  the  Lodge  for  a  year,  does  he  feel
like  watching  with  a  brother  ?  Does  the  sick  brother
feel  as  though  Odd-Fellows  were  with  him  ?  Certainly
not  to  the  degree  he  would,  if  they  had  met  weekly  in
the  Lodge-room."

P.  D.  G.  Sire,  Albert  Case,  while  editor  of  "The
Covenant,"  also  urged  to  the  same  purpose:  " There
are  many  reasons  to  be  urged  in  favor  of  a  general
attendance  on  the  meetings  of  the  Lodge.  Our  Lodges
are  deliberative  assemblies,  and  the  business  they  transact
is,  I  apprehend,  of  more  importance  than  many  of  the
members  imagine.  The  reception  of  members,  the  dis-
position of  the  funds,  and  all  the  immediate  and  direct
operations  of  the  institution,  is  the  work  of  the  Subordi-
nate Lodges.  The  entire  character,  standing,  and  sue
cess  of  the  Order,  depend,  in  a  great  degree,  on  the
manner  in  which  the  business  of  these  Lodges  is  con-
ducted.

"If  the  meetings  of  subordinate  Lodges  are  neglected
by  the  members,  the  business  may  be  transacted  in  B

192  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

careless,  loose,  and  injudicious,  if  not  in  an  unlawful
manner.  In  such  an  event,  negligence  will  be  apt  to
mark  all  its  operations,  the  inevitable  consequence  of
which  must  be,  that,  from  want  of  suitable  attention  to
the  qualifications  of  candidates,  bad  men  will  obtain
admittance,  the  funds  will  be  squandered  or  misapplied
to  improper  purposes,  and  the  Lodge  ultimately  ruined,
and  an  injury  inflicted  upon  the  character  and  interests
of  the  institution  generally.  Therefore  it  is  the  duty  of
every  member  to  attend  the  meetings  of  his  Lodge  as
often  as  circumstances  will  admit.  He  should  not  ne-
glect them  for  any  trifling  cause.  The  interests  of  the
institution  and  his  Lodge,  which  it  is  his  duty  to  watch
over,  and  labor  to  promote,  and  to  guard  against  abuse,
demand  it."  His  own  interests,  in  case  of  sickness,
travel,  and  distress  ;  and  the  interests  of  his  family,  in
case  of  his  decease,  demand  it.

§  2.  Payment  of  Dues.

Even  heaven-born  benevolence  must  have  material
means  by  which  to  operate  in  this  world.  Hence
another  important  duty  of  each  member  is,  the  prompt
payment  of  his  dues.  He  owes  it  not  only  to  himself
and  family,  but  to  the  Order.  John  Randolph  professed
to  have  found  that  the  philosopher's  stone  consisted
simply  in  these  four  words — "Pay  as  you  go."  But  an
Odd-Fellow  will  more  surely  find  it  in  the  three  words —
"Pay  in  advance."  There  are  few  old  members  of  the
Order  who  cannot  relate  some  case  of  peculiar  hardship
caused  by  non-payment  of  dues.  Some  good,  but  care-
less brother,  who  neglected  this  small  item  of  duty  until
he  was  suddenly  called  out  of  this  life,  was  found  to  be
not  beneficial,  and  his  widow  and  orphans,  when  most

DUTIES    AND    DEPORTMENT    OF    ODD-FELLOWS.      193

in  need,  were  left  destitute  of  all  legal  claims  on  the
funds  he  had  for  years  been  aiding  to  accumulate.
Such  cases,  too  frequently  occurring  in  our  Lodges  and
Encampments,  may  be  yours.  Let  every  member,  then,
be  careful  to  keep  himself  "  good  on  the  books."  Arid
as  the  surest  mode  of  providing  against  occasional
scarcity  of  cash,  or  sudden  and  long  absences  from
home,  see  that  you  are  always  in  advance  of  the  claims.
Let  a  memorandum  be  kept  in  some  book  or  place  where
it  will  be  seen  frequently,  not  only  by  yourself,  but  by
your  wife  or  other  interested  person,  lest  you  may  forget
it  and  fall  behind  the  times.  Better  even  pay  for  six
months  ahead,  at  the  commencement  of  a  term,  than
fall  in  debt  to  your  Lodge  or  Encampment.  But,  at  all
events,  be  sure  to  "pay  in  advance."

§  3.   Conduct  in  Debate.

Exercise  yourself  in  the  discussions  of  your  Lodge  ;
not  for  the  purpose  of  mere  debate,  contention,  or  "love
of  opposition,"  but  to  improve  yourself  in  suitably  exr
pressing  your  sentiments,  and  to  render  yourself  useful
to  the  Order.  For  this  purpose,  make  yourself  well
acquainted  with  the  rules  of  order  and  debate,  that  you
may  not  violate  them.  Note  what  is  peculiarly  easy
and  correct  in  the  style  and  manner  of  others,  that  you
may  engraft  it  on  your  own.  Study  well  each  subject
you  intend  to  discuss,  in  all  its  bearings  and  tendencies,
that  you  may  have  a  well  digested  opinion  of  your  own
to  express.  Avoid  every  appearance  of  disrespect  for
the  opinions  and  motives  of  others,  and  strive,  not
merely  to  repeat  what  others  have  said  as  well,  before
you,  but  to  shed  new  light  upon  the  question.  And
clothing  your  ideas  in  few  words,  fit  and  expressive,  de-
17

194  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

liver  them  in  a  clear  tone,  in  a  calm  but  impressive
manner,  and  then  take  your  seat.  A  wordy,  windy-
speaker,  or  one  who  "  tears  a  passion  to  tatters,  to  very
rags,"  every  time  he  rises,  as  well  as  one  who  is  always
"bobbing  up  and  down"  to  sputter  out  his  ideas,  is  sure
soon  to  lose  all  respect  and  influence,  if,  indeed,  he  does
not  so  vex  the  Lodge  as  to  induce  it  to  vote  down  nearly
every  measure  he  advocates  !

Do  not,  then,  suffer  your  temper  to  be  ruffled  by  any
opposition,  or  misrepresentation  even.  If  the  latter  is
plausible,  and  seems  likely  to  mislead  others,  a  calm,
plain  correction  will  put  all  right  again.  If  it  is  forced,
and  evidently  made  to  gain  a  point,  depend  on  it,  the
good  sense  of  your  brethren  will  perceive  it  as  clearly
as  yourself,  and  rebuke  it  more  effectually  than  you
could  do.  Be  sure  to  be  always  "in  order."

§  4.   Gentlemanly  Conduct.

The  world  once  thought,  as  a  few  seem  yet  to  sup-
pose, that  to  be  an  Odd-Fellow,  a  man  must  be  "  a  jolly,
roystering  blade,"  full  of  quirps  and  jests,  ready  to
crack  his  joke,  or  sing  his  song,  or  play  off  some  rude
trick  on  a  stranger,  or  engage  in  a  drinking  bout  or
gormandizing  feast.  And  though  a  very  few  among  us
may  furnish  some  faint  shadow  for  such  an  opinion,  how
widely  different  is  the  requirement  of  every  part  and
portion  of  all  our  lectures  and  charges  !  Odd-Fellows
should  all  and  always  be  gentlemen.  And  by  this  term
we  mean  precisely  what  the  word  itself  means — men  of
kind,  gentle,  affectionate  hearts;  conjoined,  if  possible,
with  refined  tastes  and  cultivated  minds,  with  courteous
speech  and  easy  manners.  But  let  the  mental  qualifica-
tions and  outward  appearance  be  whai  they  may,  the

DUTIES    AND    DEPORTMENT    "F    ODD-FELLOWS.       195

heart  must  be  right.  That  right,  and  the  man  will  be  a
gentleman — one  of  nature's  making.

Honesty — that  primal  qualification,  without  which  no
man  can  be  an  Odd-Fellow  —  absolutely  requires  that
brethren  whose  mottoes  are  "Ih  God  we  trust/'  and,
"Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth,"  and  whose  work  is
"  the  diffusion  of  the  principles  of  benevolence  and
charity,"  should,  in  all  their  intercourse  with  the  world
and  each  other,  (and  especially  in  the  Lodge,)  illustrate
those  mottoes  and  diffuse  those  principles  by  a  living
example.  And  whoso  does  this,  is  a  gentleman,  belongs
to  the  highest  style  of  man.  We  care  not  what  rnay  be
his  descent,  his  occupation  in  life,  (provided  it  be  honest,}
his  personal  appearance,  or  his  dress  :  true  gentility  re-
sides not  in  these  fortuitous,  factitious,  or  external  cir-
cumstances, but  in  the  heart  of  the  man.  And  hence
every  true  Odd-Fellow — he  who  is  friendly,  truthful,
sympathizing  and  benevolent  in  soul,  is,  and  will  be
always,  a  gentleman.

Cheerful,  or  mirthful  even,  he  may  be  in  all  proper
times  and  places ;  but  he  will  not  jest  with  sacred
things,  nor  treat  the  solemnities  of  our  mysteries  with
a  levity  unbecoming  one  who  understands  their  mean-
ing and  importance :  least  of  all  will  he  indulge  in
rudeness  of  speech  or  vulgarity  of  action  on  any  occasion
requiring  decency  of  conduct  and  seriousness  of  mind.

§  5.    Correctness  in  Working.

We  have  treated  elsewhere  of  the  importance  of  re-
membering what  is  called  the  written  and  unwritten
work  of  the  Order,  but  its  utility  induces  a  few  addi-
tional remarks  in  this  place.

The  ideas  as  well  as  language  employed  in  the  initia-

196  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

tory  ceremony,  and  in  the  lectures  on  the  degrees,  are
beautiful  and  instructive  enough  to  pay  for  the  labor  of
carefully  stowing  them  away  in  the  memory.  But  where
the  verbal  memory  is  not  very  good,  the  sentiments
themselves,  in  their  regular  order,  should  be  thus
treasured  up.  Many  an  hour  of  meditation  may  be
profitably  occupied  in  considering  their  teachings.

And  especially  should  the  working  language  of  every
Lodge-night  be  committed  to  memory  by  every  brother
aspiring  to  bear  an  office  or  pass  the  Chairs  of  his
Lodge.  The  recitals  of  each  officer  are  brief,  and  in
familiar  language,  and  may  be  readily  committed  in
turn  by  any  one  who  will  give  attention  to  them.  The
practice  of  using  the  book  is  a  clumsy  and  embarrassing
one  ;  one  that  greatly  impairs  the  intended  effect  of  the
work  of  each  evening  and  of  initiation  ;  and  one,  too,
which  all  State  Grand  Bodies  should  utterly  abolish  and
forbid,  as  a  few  have  already  done.

When  we  consider  our  unwritten  work,  however,  that
it  is  the  universal  language  by  which  alone  we  may
know,  or  be  known  of,  a  brother  of  whatever  nation  or
language,  and  give  or  receive  aid  without  fear  of  impo-
sition, its  correctness  becomes  a  matter  of  very  great
importance.  Our  former  illustration  of  a  common  vault
and  lock,  with  separate  keys  for  each  owner,  is  an  ap-
propriate one.  Look  at  those  keys.  They  are  precisely
alike;  each  slit  and  curve  in  any  one  is  found  in  all  the
rest;  and  each  finds  a  corresponding  projection  or  in-
dentation in  the  lock  to  answer  to  it.  The  lock  of  the
treasure-vault  is  unalterable ;  but  the  keys  may  be
filtered  if  their  owners  please.  Suppose  several  of
these  proprietors  (considering  these  slits  and  curves  t<>
be  umere  trifles")  alter  their  keys  to  suit  the  fancy  of
each.  What  is  the  consequence  ?  Needing  some  of

DUTIES    AND    DEPORTMENT    OF    ODD-FELLOWS.      197

the  treasure  in  the  vault,  they  apply  their  keys  to  the
lock,  but  they  will  no  longer  fit  and  open  it.  Having
no  other  proof  of  part-ownership,  they  must  lose  their
share  of  the  treasure,  unless  they  can  alter  their  keys
back  again  to  the  original  pattern.  So  with  our  un-
written work,  and  the  immense  moral,  social,  and  pecu-
niary treasures  of  the  Order  of  which  that  work  is  the
key.  Let  no  one  presume  to  alter  it,  to  suit  an  idle
fancy,  or  neglect  to  render  himself  perfect  in  its  use.
Obtain  the  correct  mode  of  performing  it,  from  the
proper  sources,  and  then  impress  it  strongly  on  your
memory,  that  you  may  retain  it.

§  6.    Voting  and  Balloting.

As  the  laws  and  acts  of  our  Lodges  are  designed  to
be  an  expression  of  the  will  of  the  members,  it  becomes
the  duty  of  every  member  to  vote  when  required,  on  any
subject  of  interest  or  importance  to  his  brethren  or  the
Lodge.  But  especially  is  this  the  case  in  the  admission
of  new  members.  Here  each  vote  counts,  and  the  omis-
sion of  a  single  negative  may  work  great  injury  to  a
Lodge  and  the  Order.  The  responsibility  of  each
member  is  therefore  increased,  just  in  proportion  to  the
power  vested  in  him  to  prevent  the  evil.  Now,  while
some  of  our  brethren  are  too  ready  and  willing  to  use
the  black  ball,  there  are  others — far  too  many,  who
shrink  from  using  it  under  almost  any  circumstances,  as
if  it  were  a  base  instrument.  And  not  a  few  others,
irritated  by  an  occasional  wrong  use  of  the  secret  nega-
tive, would  abolish  it  altogether,  and  require  every
brother  to  state  his  objections  in  the  open  Lodge.  Let
us,  therefore,  consider  the  uses  and  abuses  of  our  ballot.

The  secret  ballot  was  instituted  to  afford  the  utmost
17*

198  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

freedom  in  expressing  the  individual  will.  By  it,  the
most  timid  is  enabled  to  give  his  assent  or  dissent  to
the  placing  of  every  stone  in  the  great  Temple  of  our
Fraternity,  unawed  by  the  wealthy  or  influential  brother
at  his  side ;  fearless  of  the  betrayal  of  his  vote  to  the
candidate  by  any  weak  brother  who  may  happen  to  be
in  the  Lodge ;  secure  from  the  knowledge  of  the  can-
didate, even  should  he  afterward  be  admitted  to  mem-
bership. Thus  the  absolute  freedom  of  choice  is  secured,
as  fully  and  perfectly  as  human  wisdom  can  contrive
means  to  do  so.  And,  surely,  in  a  brotherhood  so
closely  united,  the  fullest  freedom  in  rejecting  proposed
associates  should  not  only  be  allowed,  but  insisted  on.
And  every  brother  who  will  rightly  consider  the  subject,
will  perceive  that  it  is  his  duty  not  only  to  maintain
that  right  for  others,  but  to  exercise  it  himself.

True,  it  may  be,  and  sometimes  is  abused.  But  this
only  calls  more  loudly  for  its  right  use  and  careful
preservation  in  its  greatest  purity.  And  for  this  pur-
pose, our  laws  providing  against  the  indulgence  of
personal  pique,  or  party  or  sectarian  prejudices,  should
be  rigidly  enforced  against  all  offenders.  Nor  only
this,  but  every  brother  should,  by  unvarying  precept
and  example,  enforce  the  right  use  of  the  ballot,  by
carefully  abstaining  from  any  wrong  use  of  it  in  his
own  case.

If  a  candidate  is  proposed,  with  whom,  unfortunately,
we  have  had  a  collision  in  business,  in  politics,  in
religion,  or  in  social  intercourse,  we  should  at  once
institute  a  rigid  scrutiny  of  our  opinions  and  feelings
concerning  him.  The  circumstances  which  led  to  that
collision  should  be  inquired  into  anew.  Our  own  doings,
and  sayings,  and  deportment,  during  it,  should  be  passed
in  careful  review.  If  this  still  leaves  us  averse  to  him,

DUTIES    AND    DEPORTMENT    OF    ODD-FELLOWS.       199

we  should  inquire  concerning  his  principles  and  disposi-
tion, of  his  most  intimate  friends.  If  these  are  good-*
if  no  other  act  than  that  collision  testifies  against  him,
we  may  be  sure  that  we  rest  under  some  mistake  or
misunderstanding  which  a  friendly  interview  would
remove.  Seek  him,  then,  and  an  enemy  may  be  lost
and  a  friend  gained,  in  whose  favor  we  may  conscien
tiously  vote.  A  worthy  brother  once  observed,  "If
the  difficulty  is  only  between  the  candidate  and  myself,
I  always  vote  for  him;  because  I  know  that  if  he  will
only  come  into  our  Lodge,  and  heed  the  principles  of
the  Order,  we  shall  soon  be  friends  again."  He,  under-
stood the  uses  and  tendencies  of  our  Order.

But  if,  after  all  efforts,  you  are  compelled  to  consider
a  candidate  deficient  in  moral  or  social  qualities,  your
duty  is  clear,  is  imperative — CAST  THE  BLACK  BALL.  If,
in  safety  to  yourself,  you  can  forewarn  his  friends  of
your  intention  and  the  reasons  therefor,  do  so,  that  he
may  be  duly  admonished,  and,  if  possible,  reformed.

Many  brethren,  not  considering  all  the  doubts  and
motives  which  may  induce  a  brother  to  cast  a  black
ball,  nor  all  the  meanings  that  ball  is  therefore  intended
to  express,  have  come  to  consider  this  small  but  powerful
weapon  of  an  Odd-Fellow's  will  as  having  only  an  evil
meaning.  This  is  a  great  and  injurious  error.  It
expresses  not  only  a  sense  of  condemnation,  but  of
doubt  or  indecision.  It  may  imply  that  the  voter  knows
the  candidate  to  be  unworthy,  but  it  may  also  mean
that  he  lacks  evidence  to  satisfy  him  that  he  is  worthy.
Black-balling  a  candidate,  then,  is  not  "branding  him
as  a  bad  man,"  as  some  brethren  suppose,  and  who
therefore  refrain  from  using  it  in  cases  of  mere  doubt,
to  the  great  injury  of  the  Order.

In  most  cases  of  doubt,  or  want  of  sufficient  evidence,

200  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

ask  a  postponement  of  the  ballot,  giving  the  reasons,
that  information  may  be  furnished,  and  that  you  may
vote  understandingly  and  decidedly.

Remember,  then,  that  the  secrecy  of  the  ballot  must
be  maintained  in  its  purity.  Resist  every  attempt  to
impair  or  lessen  its  security ;  above  all,  to  abolish  it.
Let  no  abuse  of  it  ever  induce  you  to  deprive  the  Order
of  this  safeguard  to  a  free  expression  of  the  will  of  each
member.  If  a  man  is  not  positively  known  to  be
worthy  of  admission,  let  no  motives  of  false  delicacy,
or  fear  of  giving  offence,  induce  you  to  refrain  from
casting  a  black  ball.  But  in  casting  it,  be  careful  to
avoid  even  the  appearance  of  mere  personal,  party,
sectional,  or  sectarian  motives.  And  be  vigilant  in
preventing  any  abuse  of  it  by  others.  However  disa-
greeable and  painful  the  duty,  see  that  our  laws  in  this
respect  are  faithfully  obeyed  by  others  as  well  as  your-
Belf.

§  7.  Duties  to  Self  and  Family.

The  love  of  self  is  made,  by  Christianity,  the  measure
of  love  for  our  neighbor,  not  forgetting  that  "  our
neighbor  is  the  suffering  man,  though  at  the  farthest
pole."  We  are  to  love  our  neighbor  as  ourselves,  not
better  than  ourselves.  While  we  do  unto  others  as  we
would  have  them  do  unto  us,  we  must  also  remember
that  "  he  who  provideth  not  for  his  own,  and  especially
for  those  of  his  own  household,  hath  denied  the  faith,
und  is  worse  than  an  infidel."  Odd-Fellowship  in  its
teachings  is  perfectly  accordant  with  this  instruction.
Its  groat,  first  qualification,  Honesty,  covers  the  entire
ground  of  all  man's  relations  and  connections  in  life.
No  man  can  be  a  good  Odd-Fellow,  who  neglects  his

DUTIES    AND    DEPORTMENT    OF    ODD-FELLOWS.       201

business,  suffers  his  affairs  to  become  embarrassed,  pro-
vides not  well  and  truly  for  his  family,  leaves  his  duties
rest  with  added  care  on  his  wife  and  children,  « to
attend  to  Odd-Fellowship."  Attend  to  0  dd- Fellow  ship  !
Mistaken  man:  in  that  very  neglect  he  is  neglecting
our  Order.  He  is  providing  trouble  for  his  brethren  in
the  accumulation  of  troubles  for  himself  and  family.
He  is  imbittering  the  minds  of  that  family,  and  arraying
its  influence  and  the  influence  of  its  friends,  against  the
Lodge.  He  is  bringing  reproach  on  himself  and  on  us ;
for  we  are  likely  to  be  censured  as  the  cause  of  his
neglect,  and  his  seducers  from  duty.

There  are  special  occasions  enough,  when  duty  to  the
Order,  or  to  its  sick  and  distressed  members  and  fami-
lies, calls  our  members  from  their  domestic  affairs,
without  making  ordinary  occasions  an  excuse  for  wast-
ing whole  days  and  half  nights  in  mere  talking,  loitering,
and  idleness,  under  pretence  of  "  attending  to  the  duties
of  the  Order."  Two,  or  at  most  three  evenings  a  week,
to  attend  subordinate  and  Degree  Lodge,  and  Encamp-
ment, are  usually  sufficient.  And  if  these  be  rightly
improved,  your  family  will  willingly  submit  to  your
absence  on  the  few  special  calls  that  occur  in  the  course
of  each  year.  Only  be  faithful  and  attentive  to  your
home  duties,  and  you  will  find  no  difficulty  in  gaining
their  hearty  assent  to  your  attention  to  Lodge  and
Encampment  duties.

So  in  the  other  relations  of  life.  Odd-Fellowship
requires  of  her  members  attention  to  them  all,  public
and  private.  It  is  the  mark  of  a  narrow  soul  or  an  ill-
regulated  mind,  to  become  absorbed  in  one  set  of  duties
and  relations,  to  the  abandonment  or  partial  neglect  of
the  rest.  And  it  is  a  sad  mistake  to  spend  the  precious
moments  waiting  to  perform  some  great  deed  of  good,

202  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

when  every  hour  may  witness  some  small  kindness
shown,  some  little  utility  performed.  For,  after  all,
life  is  made  up,  not  of  great  necessities  and  wants,  not
of  great  acts  and  performances,  but  of  numerous  small
ones.  Each  passing  hour  bears  on  its  wings  some  call
for  duty  to  self  and  others.  Do  that,  hour  by  hour,
and  your  whole  life  will  'be  one  of  utility  and  blessed-
ness. It  were  as  absurd  to  ask  to  live  your  life  by
years  at  a  time,  instead  of  moments  in  succession,  as  to
dream  of  performing  your  duty  in  great  deeds  alone,
to  the  utter  neglect  of  the  small  but  constantly  recur-
ring kindnesses  to  your  family,  your  friends,  and  com-
munity around  you.  Be  an  Odd-Fellow,  then,  always
and  everywhere;  in  your  closet,  at  your  fireside,  in  the
social  circle,  at  the  festal  board,  in  the  abode  of  poverty
or  house  of  mourning,  at  the  public  gathering,  and  in
the  Lodge-room,  remember  and  live  the  teachings  of
Odd-Fellowship,  that  you  may  be  a  blessing  and  a
praise  to  it  and  to  the  world.

CHAPTER  XI.

OF   COMMITTEE-MEN   AND    COMMITTEES.

IN  large  Lodges,  or  those  whose  situation  and  cir-
cumstances create  a  large  amount  of  business,  special
meetings  and  long  sessions  may  generally  be  avoided
by  intrusting  the  arrangement  arid  consideration  of
matters  requiring  much  time  and  labor,  to  well-chosen
Committees.  But  men  who  are  careless  in  attendance,
or  indolent  in  working,  or  deficient  in  patience  or  judg-

OF    COMMITTEE-MEN    AND    COMMITTEES.  203

merit,  should  never  be  placed  on  such  Committees,  or,
indeed,  on  any  Committees ;  or  if  placed  there,  should
be  compelled  to  perform  the  duties  assigned  them  by  a
rigid  enforcement  of  the  laws.

§  1.    General  Duties  of  Committees.

The  first-named  member  of  a  Committee  is  the  Chair-
man thereof  until  the  Committee  meets  and  chooses  its
Chairman  in  due  form.  As  a  false  delicacy  frequently
prevents  any  movement  to  elect  a  Chairman,  care  should
be  taken  to  place  the  most  active  and  best  qualified
brother  at  the  head  of  each  Committee.  But  as  this
cannot  always  be  done,  any  error  in  the  appointment
may  easily  be  remedied  by  the  person  appointed.

Thus,  if  appointed  on  a  Committee  for  which  you  are
sure  you  are  not  qualified,  and  cannot  qualify  yourself,
or  whose  meetings  you  cannot  attend,  at  once  respect-
fully decline  serving,  frankly  stating  the  reasons,  that
another  better  qualified  or  prepared  may  be  appointed
in  your  stead.  Never  accept  an  office  of  any  kind
which  you  feel  confident  you  cannot  render  yourself
competent  to  fill,  or  to  whose  duties  you  cannot  attend.

If  appointed,  and  induced  to  accept,  resolve  to  attend
to  it  as  if  you  alone  were  the  Committee.  Fix  a  time
and  place  for  the  meeting,  with  consent  of  the  other
members,  and  notify  the  absent  ones  accordingly.  Be
there  yourself  precisely  at  or  before  the  minute  ap-
pointed. If  others  are  negligent  in  such  promptness,
impress  upon  their  minds  the  importance  of  punctuality,
even  if  it  has  to  be  done,  as  a  last  resort,  by  reporting
their  neglect  to  the  Lodge.  No  man  has  a  right,  social
or  moral,  to  waste  the  precious  time  of  others  by  keep-
ing them  waiting  on  his  tardy  movements.  Even  fifteen

204  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

minutes  thus  lost  would  make  an  aggregate  of  one  hour
where  four  brethren  are  concerned  in  it.

If  you  are  the  first  named  of  the  Committee,  as  soon
as  the  first  meeting  assembles,  require  them  to  elect  a
Chairman,  on  the  ground  that  every  body  of  men  has  a
right  to  choose  its  own  officers.  This  done,  urge  the
entire  attention  of  the  Committee  to  the  business  in
hand,  until  all  is  accomplished  that  can  be,  at  that
sitting ;  until,  if  possible,  the  whole  affair  is  thoroughly
investigated,  and  the  full  report  is  understandingly
agreed  to  and  signed.  "  Business  first,  pleasure  after-
ward." It  is  wrong  to  spend  time  in  chit-chat,  or  idle
discussions,  to  the  delay  of  business.  It  only  confuses
the  mind,  and  often  keeps  brethren  from  other  engage-
ments, or  their  families,  and  leads  them  to  feel  careless
about  attending  thereafter,  when  such  waste  of  time  is
the  consequence.  Postpone,  therefore,  every  thing  till
after  the  main  object  of  your  meeting  has  received
proper  attention.

Some  Committees  are  so  important,  and  their  duties
so  regularly  recurring,  as  to  require  more  than  the
above  general  remarks.  We  give  them,  therefore,
special  directions.  Their  number  and  their  names  vary
in  different  Lodges,  but  the  following  subjects  embrace
them  all :- — 1st.  Investigation  of  applications  for  mem-
bership. 2d.  Examination  of  articles  furnished  and
bills  presented.  3d.  Examination  of  the  accounts  of
the  Treasurer  and  Secretary  at  the  close  of  each  term
or  quarter.  4th.  Disposal  and  management  of  the
funds,  loans,  bonds,  &c.  held  by  the  Lodge.  5th.  Su-
pervision of  the  regalia,  furniture,  fixtures,  and  other
properties  of  the  Lodge.  Gth.  Trial  of  members
charged  with  offences.  7th.  Relief  of  disabled  mem-
bers and  distressed  brethren.  In  some  Lodges  the  *2d

OF    COMMITTEE-MEN    AND    COMMITTEES.  205

and  3d  are  performed  by  the  same  Committee ;  and  in
others  the  3d,  4th,  and  5th  are  discharged  by  the
Trustees  of  the  Lodge.  The  interested  reader  will  ex-
amine accordingly,  under  those  several  sections.

§  2.  Investigating  Committee.

There  is  no  Committee  more  important  than  this,
especially  in  new  Lodges,  where  there  is  a  strong  desire
to  increase  the  membership  rapidly  ;  or  in  large  towns
and  cities,  where  men  are  not  personally  so  well  known
to  each  other,  and  where,  therefore,  the  Lodge  must
rely  wholly  on  the  report  made  to  it  respecting  a  can-
didate. If  this  Committee  is  careless  in  the  performance
of  its  duty,  or  lax  in  its  standard  of  social  and  moral
qualifications,  in  but  a  single  instance,  a  grievous  if  not
irreparable  injury  may  be  inflicted  on  many  brethren,
on  the  Lodge,  and  on  the  Order.  Years  may  elapse
before  the  evil  can  be  arrested ;  certainly  before  its
consequences  can  be  repaired.

Even  a  man  esteemed  to  sustain  a  good  moral  cha-
racter, may  be  socially  such  that  his  admission  will  be
worse  than  that  of  an  outright  bad  man.  The  latter
would  be  ejected  at  once,  easily  and  lawfully ;  but  the
former  may  foment  disturbances  and  strifes,  and  get  up
factions  and  divisions,  and  introduce  annoyances  in  the
shape  of  unpleasant  words  and  looks,  so  cunningly,  that
charges  and  specifications  cannot  easily  be  preferred,
or  conviction  procured ;  and  yet  a  nest  of  wasps  would
be  scarcely  a  less  evil  in  the  Lodge  each  night,  than  all
would  at  last  acknowledge  him  to  be.  But  before  such
unanimity  can  be  produced,  the  injured,  the  peaceably
disposed  and  the  honorable  will  have  left,  disgusted  and
grieved,  and  the  Lodge  is  not  only  weakened,  but  its
18

206  THE    ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

character  almost  ruined  in  public  estimation.  And  all
this,  merely  because  an  Investigating  Committee  was  in
an  easy  humor,  or  too  indolent  or  careless  to  make  the
necessary  inquiry.

Therefore  we  say,  let  no  man  be  placed  on  that  Com-
mittee as  a  mere  compliment.  Select  active,  resolute
men,  who  understand  the  duty,  and  will  perform  it
faithfully;  men  of  good  moral  and  social  character,
and  who  will  require  the  same  in  others.

And  let  every  member  of  such  a  Committee  feel  re-
sponsible, as  if  he  were  the  Committee ;  as  if  the  entire
character,  funds  and  welfare  of  the  Lodge  rested  on  his
decision.  Let  him,  in  making  inquiry,  insist  on  having
sufficient  time  to  write  abroad,  if  the  candidate  is  not  an
old  resident.  Demand  at  least  as  careful  inquiry  as  you
would  concerning  an  individual  to  whom  you  are  about
to  lend  a  large  sum  of  money.  Reflect  that  our  Lodge
is  our  family,  and  that  admission  into  it,  frequently,
almost  necessarily,  admits  into  our  domestic  circles  also.

Now,  what  characters  are  we  willing  to  receive  into
the  intimacy  of  a  fraternal  intercourse  with  ourselves,
our  wives,  brothers,  sisters,  sons  or  daughters?  Does
this  question  go  too  far  ?  Consider  a  few  consequences
of  admission  into  our  Order.

1st.  If  laid  on  the  bed  of  sickness,  the  candidate  (if
become  a  member)  may  be  the  visitor  to  call  on  you
freely,  mingle  with  your  family,  and  impart  to  them  the
benefits  allowed  by  your  Lodge.  Is  he  such  a  one  as
you  would  allow  in  this  intimacy  when  you  are,  perhaps,
unconscious  of  his  doings,  and  at  all  events  unable
closely  to  observe  his  conduct  ?  Is  he  a  man  of  princi-
ple, of  honor,  of  goodness  of  heart  ?  If  not,  why  report
in  his  favor  ?

2d.  When  you  are  sick  or  dying,  he,  if  a  member,

OF    COMMITTEE-MEN    AND    COMMITTEES.  207

may  be  detailed  to  sit  at  your  bedside  during  the  silent
watches  of  the  night.  He  will  mingle  with  your  loved
ones  when  they  most  need  sympathy  and  support,  and
when  this  want  will  render  them  most  open  and  con-
fiding. He  will  administer  the  medicines  on  which  your
life  depends,  when  your  family  sleep  under  the  double
influence  of  deep  grief  and  great  weariness,  and  he  is
required  to  attend  you  with  all  a  nurse's  prudence  and
a  brother's  tenderness.  And  should  death  invade  the
citadel  of  life,  he  will  be  amid  your  mourning  family ;
perhaps  at  midnight ;  their  aider,  consoler,  and  friend.
Is  he  the  man  of  kindly  feelings  and  purity  of  life  to  be
thus  deeply,  confidingly  trusted  in  the  craving  want  of
sympathy,  in  the  unguarded  hours  of  mourning  agony  ?
If  not,  how  can  you,  in  justice  to  your  own  and  your
.brethren's  families,  refrain  from  doing  your  utmost  to
keep  him  out  of  your  Lodge  ?

3d.  When  your  mortal  life  has  been  dissolved  by  the
chemistry  of  death,  your  widow  and  orphans  may  become
the  charge  of  your  "  brethren  of  the  mystic  tie."  Then
the  proposed  candidate,  if  a  member,  may  be  brought
into  a  peculiar  nearness  to  them  as  an  official  guardian
and  adviser.  These  duties  may  pave  the  way  to  many
opportunities  to  pervert  the  tender  principles  of  youthful
gratitude  and  confidence,  and  abuse  the  trust  of  the  widow
and  her  orphans.  Though  a  majority  of  the  Lodge  guard
carefully  their  interest  in  its  funds,  his  injuries  may  reach
deeper,  far  deeper  than  they  can  guard  against.  Has
he,  then,  that  humanity  which  will  make  him  truly  fra-
ternal in  watching  over  their  interests  and  welfare?
Will  he  often  "visit  the  widow  and  the  fatherless  in
their  afflictions,"  and  yet  prevent  his  visits  from  being
a  blighting  curse,  by  keeping  "  himself  unspotted  from

208  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

the  world  ?"  Can  you  answer  positively  in  the  affirma-
tive ?  If  not,  how  can  you  report  favorably  ?

The  man  of  lax  morals  or  loose  principles ;  the  de-
spiser  of  public  opinion  in  matters  of  reputation;  the
slanderer  and  contemner  of  female  virtue  ;  the  man  who
readily  infers  evil  of  others,  and  is  free  to  insinuate  his
surmises  against  reputation;  the  unfeeling,  the  selfish,
the  vindictive,  the  jealous,  the  avaricious,  the  mean
in  conduct,  are  unfit  to  be  members  in  our  living
Temple  sacred  to  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth.  That
some  such  are  already  within  its  walls,  but  adds  to  the
earnestness  of  our  entreaty,  to  bring  in  no  more  such  to
fill  up  the  vacancies  we  are  making  among  their  number
by  suspensions  and  expulsions.

But  if  satisfied,  from  an  examination  of  the  candi-
date's life,  and  especially  his  conduct  in  his  family  or
among  his  intimate  associates,  that,  notwithstanding  the
frailties  common  to  our  nature,  he  is  still  a  man  of
humanity  and  sound  principle,  and  worthy  a  seat  in
"our  family,"  report  in  his  favor  at  once.  The  influ-
ences of  Odd-Fellowship  cannot  render  such  a  one  worse,
but  will  certainly  make  him  a  better  man.  But  if
doubtful,  merely  DOUBTFUL,  report  it,  and  give  the
Lodge  the  benefit  of  your  doubt.  Rejection  is  but  for
a  few  months,  not  for  all  time.  It  does  not  decide  that
he  is  positively  unworthy,  but  only  that  he  is  not  known
to  be  worthy.

§  3.  Finance  Committee.

The  members  should  be  practical  men,  well  acquainted
with  business  in  general,  that  they  may  judge  correctly
concerning  charges  made  for  work  done  or  articles  fur-
nished, and  therefore  of  the  quality  of  workmanship,

OF   COMMITTEE-MEN    AND    COMMITTEES.  209

materials,  and  goods.  They  should  be  in  attendance  at
each  Lodge  meeting,  and  not  only  read  each  bill,  and
know  that  the  work  or  articles  were  ordered,  (of  which
the  Recording  Secretary  can  inform  them,)  but  they
should  ascertain  from  the  Committee  or  officer  ordering
the  same,  that  the  bill  is  correct ;  and  then  examine  the
work  or  articles  themselves,  and  see  that  they  are  what
were  ordered.  At  least  a  majority  of  the  Committee
should  endorse  the  bill  as  correct,  and  the  Secretary
should  not  read  it,  nor  the  Lodge  order  it  paid,  without
such  endorsement.

§  4.  Auditing  Committee.

The  members  of  this  Committee  should  be  careful
accountants  and  good  bookkeepers.  They  should  meet
for  their  quarterly  work  at  least  before  the  first  night
of  the  new  quarter.  When  assembled,  the  Permanent
Secretary  and  the  Treasurer  should  also  be  present  to
aid  them  in  their  investigation,  and  the  Recording
Secretary  with  his  books,  should  also  be  on  hand,  with
all  bills,  receipts,  and  other  vouchers.  If  the  books  have
been  properly  kept,  and  the  vouchers  regularly  labelled
and  filed,  the  task  will  be  comparatively  easy  and  brief;
and  if  they  have  not  been,  it  is  the  Committee's  duty  to
report  the  neglect  and  the  delinquent  to  the  Lodge.
And  in  no  case,  and  under  no  circumstances,  not  even
with  the  most  exact  and  scrupulous  officers,  should  any
pecuniary  act  be  taken  for  granted,  or  any  part  of  the
examination  be  lightly  or  carelessly  hurried  through  or
passed  over.  No  man  is  infallible  ;  none  are  exempted
from  occasional  mistakes ;  and  the  very  portion  thus
slighted  may  contain  the  important  error.

Now  for  the  mode  which  frequent  experience  has
18*

210  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

taught  us  is  the  best  in  which  to  conduct  the  examina-
tion.

The  Chairman,  the  Permanent  Secretary,  the  Re-
cording Secretary,  and  the  Treasurer,  (each  of  whom
has  a  Report  to  draw  up,)  will  provide  themselves  with
materials  for  taking  notes  of  all  such  items  as  they  may
desire  to  embody  in  their  Reports.  Then,  one  of  the
company  will  take  the  Record  Book  and  the  bills  and
receipts;  a  second,  the  Draft  Book  and  cancelled  drafts;
a  third,  the  Treasurer's  Book  and  his  receipts  to  the
Permanent  Secretary;  a  fourth,  the  Permanent  Secre-
tary's Blotter  or  Nightly  Book,  and  a  fifth,  his  Ledger.
The  whole  can  be  gone  through  with,  in  the  order  here
named,  night  by  night,  beginning  with  the  last  Quar-
terly Reports  and  the  first  night's  record  of  the  quarter."
Each,  in  turn,  will  find  in  his  book,  or  vouchers,  the
items  or  amounts  named,  (if  there,)  and  call  them  out,
and  check  each  with  a  pencil  to  note  it  as  correct.  If
not  correct,  make  it  so,  or,  if  doubtful,  make  a  memo-
randum of  item,  book,  and  page,  for  future  reference.
If  every  thing  is  correctly  entered  and  properly  vouched,
then  go  through  again,  as  before,  to  add  up  the  amounts
of  each  entry  or  page,  and  see  that  the  footings  are
correct,  and  your  work  of  auditing  is  completed.

The  Chairman,  Secretaries,  and  Treasurer,  having
taken  down  the  items  for  their  Reports,  can  now  pro-
ceed to  draw  them  off  in  due  form  for  presentation  to
the  Lodge.

If  the  auditing  is  carefully  performed,  in  the  above-
described  method,  it  will  not  "need  doing  over  again."
Only  remember  that  nothing  is  gained,  but  much  time
and  labor  may  be  lost,  by  being  in  a  hurry;  therefore
"make  haste  slowly,"  and  as  you  proceed,  be  sure  of
each  item  and  of  each  figure;  for  every  figure  is  &fact

OF    COMMITTEE-MEN    AND    COMMITTEES.  211

§  5.   Trustees  and  Curators.

In  nearly  all  our  Lodges,  the  duties  of  these  two
offices  are  vested  in  the  Trustees  alone ;  we  therefore
treat  of  both  in  the  same  section.

These  officers  should,  at  regular  intervals — say,  semi-
annually — carefully  inspect  all  the  regalia,  furniture,
and  other  personal  effects  of  the  Lodge,  noting  their
condition,  putting  them  in  good  repair,  and  report  their
probable  value  to  the  Lodge,  with  suggestions  for  addi-
tions, or  their  better  preservation.  To  facilitate  their
labors,  they  should  enter  a  list  thereof  in  the  Trustees'
Book,  (for  every  Lodge  should  insist  on  such  a  book
being  kept  by  its  Trustees  and  Curators,)  with  the
original  cost  of  each  article.  And  in  the  same  book
they  should  also  enter  this  Report  in  full.

The  funds  of  the  Lodge,  whenever  they  accumulate
in  the  Treasury  to  an  amount  greater  than  is  necessary
to  meet  the  probable  demands  of  the  Lodge  for  current
expenses,  should  be  promptly  and  carefully  invested  by
them,  to  the  best  advantage.  They  should  ask  the  best
security — the  first  bond  and  mortgage  on  real  estate  of
double  the  value  of  the  loan,  if  it  can  be  procured — and
at  least  ample  security  besides  the  mere  credit  of  the
borrower,  however  fair  his  reputation  or  ample  his
means.  For  as  they  will  demand  this  of  the  poor  bor-
rower, who  will  find  it  difficult  to  procure  security,  fair
dealing  should  lead  them  to  require  it  of  the  wealthy
one,  who  can  easily  procure  it.

A  regular  statement  of  all  such  transactions,  with  the
payments  of  interest,  should  be  kept  in  the  Trustees'
Book,  ready  for  immediate  use,  arid  the  reference  of
the  Lodge,  and  of  the  Auditing  Committee.

212  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

It  is  their  duty,  also,  to  consult  the  Lodge  in  regaid
to  making  all  loans,  or  withdrawing  them.  They  should
collect  all  interest  moneys  as  soon  as  they  become  due
to  tho  Lodge.

They  should  never  be  authorized  to  draw  money,
except  from  the  Treasurer,  by  draft  ordered  by  the
Lodge ;  and  should  be  required  to  pay  over  promptly
all  moneys  received  by  them  for  the  Lodge,  to  the  Per-
manent Secretary,  to  be  reported  in  his  receipts  to  the
Recording  Secretary,  and  paid  over  to  the  Treasurer.
This  regular  proceedure  in  money  matters  should  never
be  departed  from,  lest  confusion  scarce  to  be  remedied
creep  into  the  financial  affairs  of  the  Lodge.

§  6.   Charges  and  Trials.

Except  for  non-payment  of  dues,  (in  which  case  no
trial  is  needed,*)  no  brother  can  be  suspended  or  ex-
pelled without  opportunity  afforded  him  for  a  fair  trial.
Nor  can  he  be  put  on  trial,  unless  charges  specifying
the  particular  acts  of  his  offence  be  first  submitted  to
the  Lodge  of  which  he  is  a  member,  by  a  brother  of  the

*  The  ordinary  operations  of  a  Lodge  for  non-payment  of  dues,
are — 1.  When  a  member  is  in  arrears  for  thirteen  nights,  he  is  de-
prived of  the  right  of  visiting  any  Lodge  except  his  own,  (and  that
only  by  special  permission  of  the  N.  G.,)  by  having  the  Term  P.  W.
withheld  from  him.  He  is  also  declared  not  entitled  to  benefits ;
though  in  no  case  would  a  donation  be  refused  to  him  in  case  of
need.  2.  When  he  is  twelve  months  in  arrears,  he  is  duly  notified  of
the  fact,  if  within  reach  of  a  notice ;  and  if  payment  be  not  made  in
proper  season,  he  is  reported  to  the  Lodge,  and  declared  by  the
N.  G.  to  be  suspended  for  non-payment  of  dues.  The  process  of  his
restoration  diifers  in  the  several  States,  but  is  generally  given
clearly  in  the  By-Laws  of  each  Lodge

OF    COMMITTEE-MEN    AND    COMMITTEES.  213

Order.  When  such  charges  are  presented,  or  a  brother
asks  the  mediation  of  the  Lodge  in  regard  to  some
fellow-member  by  whom  he  feels  aggrieved,  the  Lodge
refers  the  case  to  a  special  committee  of  five  members,
the  peers  of  the  accused.  This  Committee,  whose
duties  are  sometimes  so  arduous  and  painful,  is  one  of
the  most  difficult  to  instruct  in  their  duties.  A  few
very  general  directions  and  remarks  are  all  we  can
pretend  to  offer  them.

1st.  The  charges  should  be  brief,  clearly  expressed,
and  must  embrace,  besides  the  general  charge,  distinct
specifications  of  the  particular  words  or  acts  complained
of,  and  the  time  ivhen,  and  the  place  where  committed ;
and  it  would  be  well  if  there  could  be  added  the  circum-
stances which  go  to  make  up  the  intent  or  character  of
the  offence.  But  if  there  be  only  a  general,  vague
charge,  without  specification  of  the  offence,  the  Com-
mittee should  return  the  charges  to  the  Lodge,  without
further  action.

2d.  If  the  charge  or  complaint  is  in  due  form,  and
the  offence  is  not  probably  a  heinous  one,  they  will  do
well  to  examine  the  parties  alone,  separately,  and  see
whether  it  may  not  be  satisfactorily  adjusted,  without  a
formal  trial.  Not  a  few  difficulties  may  thus  be  settled,
alienated  friends  reconciled,  and  the  peace  and  har-
mony of  the  Lodge  be  preserved.  In  this  case,  they
will  report  to  the  Lodge  that  the  case  has  been  settled
to  the  mutual  satisfaction  of  the  parties,  and  ask  to
have  themselves  discharged  from  the  further  considera-
tion thereof.

3d.  If  a  mutual  adjustment  cannot  be  effected,  or  if
the  case  is  one  that  should  not  be  settled  privately,  a
trial  is  inevitable.  Good  common  sense  directing  a
sincere  desire  to  do  justice  in  ihe_lpye  of  salutary

214  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

mercy,  is  the  best  guide  for  the  Committee.  No  spec-
tators should  be  allowed  in  the  room.  In  some  States,
we  believe,  even  counsel  for  the  parties  are  not  allowed:
the  parties  must  plead  and  manage  their  own  cause.
The  witnesses  should  be  admitted  one  at  a  time,  an<l
examined  fully,  separate  and  apart  from  each  other.
The  parties  should  not  be  allowed  to  prompt  them,  or
interfere  with  or  interrupt  them  in  any  way ;  nor,  when
examining  them,  to  put  to  them  leading  questions.
Yet  every  opportunity  should  be  afforded  to  either
party  (and  especially  to  the  accused)  to  elicit  all  the
information  necessary  to  a  full  and  fair  decision  of  the
case.  The  "  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  the  Order,"  pub-
lished by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,*  directs
that,  "If  a  member  of  a  Subordinate  refuse  to  stand
trial  upon  charges  duly  preferred,  he  cannot  in  his
absence  be  tried,  but  may  be  expelled  for  contempt.
If  a  member  acknowledge  his  guilt  upon  charges  pre-
ferred, the  penalty  may  be  imposed  without  trial.
Upon  the  trial  of  a  member  charged,  an  ex  parte  state-
ment cannot  be  produced  as  testimony;  his  wife  cannot
be  permitted  to  testify ;  but  all  evidence  tending  to  a
fair  investigation  of  his  case  may  be  admitted." — Di-
gest. G.  L.  U.  S.,  various  Sections.

4th.  Having  fully  examined  the  case,  and  taken
down,  carefully,  minutes  of  the  testimony,  they  will
dismiss  the  parties,  and  consider  it  maturely,  and  make
up  their  verdict.  If,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Com-
mittee, the  accused  is  innocent,  they  will  at  once  acquit

*  Every  brother  who  designs  being  active  in  Lodge  or  Encamp-
ment should  be  well  acquainted  with  this  Digest  and  that  of  his
State  G.  L.  and  G.  E.  Each  Lodge  should  place  its  copies  of  these
where  officers  and  members  may  study  them.

OF    COMMITTEE-MEN   AND    COMMITTEES.  215

him.  If  guilty,  but  not  meriting  suspension  or  ex-
pulsion, their  decision,  whatever  it  may  be,  terminates
the  case,  (unless  either  party  appeals  to  the  Lodge,)
and  they  simply  report  their  decision.  But  if  an  appeal
is  made  to  the  Lodge,  the  whole  case  is  opened  by
presentation  of  the  minutes  of  testimony,  and  the  state-
ments of  the  parties,  when,  (if  no  want  of  formality  or
,  of  fairness  on  the  part  of  the  Committee,  be  shown,)  a
vote  of  the  Lodge  determines  the  matter.  If  defect  is
pointed  out  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Committee,  the
case  may  be  referred  back  again,  with  instructions,  or
be  given  to  a  new  Committee.

The  Committee  are  competent,  also,  to  present  the
accuser  for  trial  and  punishment,  if  they  believe  he  has
been  actuated  by  unworthy  and  improper  motives  in
bringing  charges  which  he  was  unable  to  prove.

But  if  the  case  is  one  involving  suspension  or  expul-
sion, the  Committee  must  report  to  the  Lodge  a  reso-
lution to  that  effect,  along  with  their  report  of  the  trial.
The  Lodge  will  then  appoint  a  time  for  considering  the
resolution,  (fixed  by  the  Constitution  and  By-Laws  of
the  Lodge,  and  usually  two  weeks,)  and  notify  the
accused  to  be  present.  At  that  time,  the  resolution  is
acted  upon,  and  the  Lodge  may  vary  the  penalty  at  its
pleasure.  A  vote  of  two-thirds  of  the  members  present
is  necessary  to  suspend  or  expel ;  but  a  majority  only
is  necessary  on  an  appeal  from  a  decision  by  the  Com-
mittee :  that  is,  for  a  penalty  less  than  suspension  or
expulsion.

If  a  brother  feel  aggrieved  by  the  decision  of  tho
Lodge,  he  can  appeal  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  or  its  Grand
Master — stating  specifically  wherein  the  rules  or  forms
of  trial  are  believed  to  have  been  violated,  or  injus-
tice done.  A  few  additional  remarks  on  the  subject

216  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

will  be  found  under  the  head  of  District  Grand  Com-
mittees and  Appeal  Committees.

§  7.  Relief  Committee.

This  Committee  usually  consists  of  the  N.  G.,  V.  Gv
and  Recording  Secretary  of  the  Lodge ;  but  in  some
Lodges  an  addition  is  made  to  it  of  the  Treasurer  and
three  others,  so  as  to  have  one  member  for  each  day  of
the  week.  In  this  case,  the  N.  G.  visits  the  sick  or
distressed  brother  the  day  after  the  Lodge-meeting,
and  leaves  with  his  family  the  order  drawn  for  benefits.
The  Treasurer  visits  him  the  day  after  this,  and  pays
the  order.  The  other  members  follow  in  succession,
one  each  day.

A  few  remarks  on  the  manner  of  visiting  the  sick,
may  not  be  unnecessary  here.  This  most  important
duty  of  our  Order  should  never  be  neglected ;  but  it
should  also  be  performed  with  due  regard  to  the  welfare
of  the  sick  brother,  and  the  comfort  of  his  family.

1st.  Ascertain  the  condition  of  the  sick,  and  the
propriety  of  visiting  him  at  his  bedside,  either  from  the
family,  or,  what  is  better,  from  his  physician ;  and
govern  yourself  strictly  by  the  directions  of  the  latter
in  all  subsequent  calls.

2d.  Be  gentle,  easy,  and  noiseless  as  possible  in  your
approach  toward  a  very  sick  man,  to  whom  you  should
be  announced,  before  you  enter  the  room,  by  some  one
of  the  family  or  his  nurse.  Be  calm  in  appearance,
gpeak  in  a  moderate,  smooth,  and  pleasant  voice,  (a
whisper  is  more  annoying  to  most  persons  than  a  loud
voice,)  ask  but  few  questions,  and  be  careful  not  to
converse  too  much,  or  on  trying  subjects.  When  a
patient  is  very  weak,  speaking  and  hearing  are  quite

OF   COMMITTEE-MEN    AND    COMMITTEES.  217

fatiguing.  From  two  to  five  minutes,  in  such  cases,  are
long  enough  for  an  ordinary  visit.

3d.  When  the  patient  is  recovering,  and  needs  com-
pany to  cheer  him  up  and  occupy  his  time,  give  him
due  attention  yourself,  and  induce  those  brethren  to
call  upon  him  with  whom  he  was  particularly  intimate,
or  to  whom  he  felt  great  attachment.  A  wealthy  bro-
ther, of  respectability  and  influence,  can  at  such  times
show  his  sense  of  our  principles  by  visiting  his  more
humble  brethren  with  whom  he  is  well  acquainted,  and
by  leaving  with  them  books  and  papers  to  occupy  their
time,  or  sending  them  such  little  delicacies  as  their
varying  and  capricious  appetites  may  crave.  And  the
visits  of  the  brethren  generally  will  be  acceptable,  and
should  be  paid.

4th.  In  visiting  widows  and  female  orphans  of  the
Lodge,  greater  circumspection  generally  is  needed  than
in  visiting  those  of  our  own  sex.  Let  two  of  the  Com-
mittee, in  such  cases,  visit  in  company,  or  one  with  the
physician,  or,  better  still,  if  married,  or  if  you  have
near  female  relatives,  induce  one  of  the  ladies  to  ac-
company you  ;  or,  best  of  all,  organize  a  Visiting
Committee  of  Daughters  of  Rebekah,  to  whom,  in  con-
nection with  their  husbands,  brothers,  or  sons  of  the
Committee,  all  visitation  might  be  confided.  No  man
can  equal  woman's  tenderness  and  tact  in  the  sick-room,
or  with  the  distressed  family,  or  the  mourning  group.

Lastly.  Time  your  visits  to  suit  the  most  convenient
hours  of  the  family,  and  especially  to  meet  the  best
intervals  of  the  patient.  Be  sympathising,  but  hopeful
and  cheerful  in  your  intercourse  with  them ;  for  much
depends  on  the  state  of  feelings  that  may  be  inspired
in  the  patient  by  the  countenances  and  words  oi  those
around  him.

19

218  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Watchers  with  the  sick  will  find  in  the  above  direc-
tions a  few  hints  that  may  guide  them  in  the  propel
mode  of  performing  their  duties.  The  rest  they  will
receive  from  the  physician  or  the  regular  nurse.

CHAPTER  XII.

OF    APPOINTED    OFFICERS.

§  1.  Appointment  and  Service.

THE  Officers  of  a  Subordinate  Lodge  are  divided  into
elective  and  appointed.  The  appointed  officers  are  the
R.  and  L.  Scene  Supporters,  R.  and  L.  Supporters  of  the
Vice  Grand,  R.  and  L.  Supporters  of  the  Noble  Grand,
I.  and  0.  Guardians,  the  Conductor,  and  the  Warden ;  to
which  is  added,  in  some  Lodges,  the  Chaplain.  All  these
are  appointed  by  the  N.  G.  on  his  installation  into  office,
except  the  R.  and  L.  Supporters  of  the  V.  G.,  who  are
appointed  by  the  V.  G.  at  his  installation.  Twenty-six
nights'  service  in  one  or  more  of  these  offices  qualifies
the  incumbent  to  be  a  candidate  for  the  Vice  Grand's
chair,  provided  he  has  attained  sufficient  degrees  and  is
competent.  The  general  and  special  duties  and  powers
of  each  officer  are  defined  in  the  charge  books,  installa-
tion service,  and  in  the  Constitution  and  By-Laws  of
each  Lodge.  But  it  may  be  useful  to  enumerate  the
most  importan*  of  them  in  this  \york.

OF   APPOINTED    OFFICERS.

219

§2.   The  Chaplain.

JEWEL. — The  proper  and  usual  jewel  of  this  office  is
the  Holy  Bible,  made  of  white  metal.*

REGALIA.  —  A  white  sash,  (usually  silk  or  satin,)
trimmed  with  white  or  silver  fringe  and  lace,  and  orna-

*  To  save  repetition,  we  will  say  here,  once  for  all,  that  in  Subordi-
nate Lodges,  the  jewel  is  usually  suspended  from  the  side  of  the  collar,
on  the  left  breast ;  and  in  Grand  Lodges,  in  front,  at  the  joining  of
the  collar,  or  is  suspended  by  a  ribbon  or  chain  around  the  neck,  so
as  to  depend  in  front,  in  about  the  same  position.  Where  officers
wear  the  sash,  it  is  suspended  from  that,  where  it  crosses  the  left
breast.

Another  tasteful  mode  is  to  suspend  it  from  the  point  or  joining  of  a
gorget,  or  smaller  collar,  worn  over  and  within  the  larger  one,  so
as  to  have  it  suspended  n  front,  on  the  breast.  There  is  no  specific
law  or  usage  regulating  his  subject,  that  we  know  of.

220  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

mented  with  rosettes  exhibiting  the  colors  of  the  degrees
received  by  the  wearer,  or  with  white  rosettes  only.

STATION. — Usually  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Past
Grand,  (about  the  middle  of  one  side  of  the  room,)
whose  chair  he  occupies  during  service.

DUTIES. — To  open  and  close  the  Lodge  with  the  ap-
pointed prayers,  and  to  officiate  at  the  funeral  of  a
brother,  and  on  other  public  occasions.

§  3.  R.  and  L.  Scene  Supporters.

REGALIA. — White  sashes  sometimes  trimmed  with
white  ribbon  or  fringe  and  rosettes.  The  manner  of
wearing  the  sashes  is  sometimes  varied  by  different
Lodges,  for  the  sake  of  effect.  There  is  no  jewel  at-
tached to  this  office ;  the  skull  and  cross  bones,  or  band
and  links,  have  been  proposed.

STATION. — In  front,  but  a  little  to  the  right  and  left
of  the  Vice  Grand's  chair.  Their  chairs  are  usually
placed  on  the  floor  of  the  Lodge,  in  front  of  the  plat-
form occupied  by  the  V.  G.  and  his  Supporters.

DUTIES. — They  deliver  the  charges  of  their  office  at
initiations,  bear  their  wands  of  office  (white)  in  proces-
sions ;  and  at  funerals,  the  same,  trimmed  with  crape.

§  4.  R.  and  L.  Supporters  of  the  V.  Gr.

REGALIA.  —  Blue  sashes  —  may  be  trimmed  with
white  lace  or  fringe  —  and  should  be  worn  as  those  of
the  Scene  Supporters,  to  produce  uniformity.

STATION. — On  the  right  and  left  of  the  Vice  Grand,
as  their  titles  indicate.  In  some  Lodges,  they  are

OF  APPOINTED  OFFICERS.  221

placed  a  little  forward  of  the  V.  G.,  and  on  the  second
step  of  the  platform.

DUTIES. — The  Right  Supporter  should  be  proficient
in  the  business  and  work  of  a  Lodge,  as  he  is  the  official
adviser  of  the  Vice  Grand,  and  occupies  his  chair  during
any  temporary  absence  of  that  officer.  And  both  should
be  quick  in  detecting  any  irregularities  in  entering  or
leaving  the  Lodge,  as  it  is  their  duty  to  correct  every
member  or  visiter  who  is  not  in  proper  regalia,  or  who
addresses  the  chairs  incorrectly.

§  5.  R.  and  L.  Supporters  of  the  N.  Gr.

REGALIA. —  Scarlet  sashes  —  may  be  trimmed  with
white  lace  or  fringe.  The  sashes  should  be  worn  in
uniformity  with  those  of  the  other  chair.

STATION. — At  the  right  and  left  of  the  N.  G.,  to  cor*
respond  with  those  of  the  opposite  chair.

DUTIES. — The  Right  Supporter  should  be  well  versed
not  only  in  the  business  and  work  of  the  Lodge,  but  also
in  the  rules  of  order  and  debate ;  as  he  is  the  official
adviser  of  the  N.  G.,  and  must  occupy  his  chair  during
the  temporary  absence  of  that  officer.  It  is  also  his
duty  to  open  and  close  the  Lodge  in  due  form  when  di«
^ected  by  the  N.  G.

The  duty  of  the  Left  Supporter  is  to  correct  every
brother  (whether  visiter  or  member)  who  is  not  in
proper  regalia,  or  does  not  address  the  chair  correctly.

The  Supporters  of  both  chairs  occupy  their  respective
posts  in  regard  to  the  principal  officers,  at  funeral  and
other  processions,  bearing  their  wands  of  office,  of  the
proper  colors,  (blue  and  scarlet})  and  trimmed  suitably
£ ^r  the  occasion.
19*

222  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  6.  I.  and  0.  Guardians.

JEWEL. — The  prescribed  jewel  of
these  offices  is  Crossed  Swords  made
of  white  metal.

REGALIA. — For  the  Outside  Guar-
dian,(a  scarlet  degree  member,)  a  scar-
let sash — and  for  the  Inside  Guardian,
a  blue  sash.  They  may  be  trimmed
with  white  lace  or  fringe.  Both  Guar-
dians wear  swords  while  on  duty.

N.  B. — We  have  given  the  above  as  the  general  usage  in  those
States  in  which  we  are  acquainted.  The  usage  in  some  sections  may
be  different.

STATION. — The  Outside  Guardian  is  stationed  at,  or
within  sight  and  hearing  of,  the  outer  door,  after  the
Lodge  is  opened.  Before  it  is  opened,  at  the  proper
signal,  he  must  secure  the  outer  door,  return  to  the
Lodge-room  and  wait  for  orders  beside  the  inner  door.
The  Inside  Guardian  8  station  is  in  the  Lodge-room,  at
the  inner  door.

DUTIES. — The  Outside  Guardian  has  charge  of  thfe
anteroom.  He  must  prevent  any  one  from  entering
from  without,  who  has  not  the  regular  P.  W.,  except  by
special  orders  from  the  N.  G.,  to  whom  he  will  imme-
diately communicate  any  unauthorized  demand  for  ad-
mission, or  other  questions  of  doubt,  through  the  I.  G.
Guarding  the  first  entrance  to  the  Lodge,  his  office  is  a
very  responsible  one,  and  requires  much  courtesy,  com-
bined with  great  decision  and  energy  of  character.

OF    APPOINTED    OFFICERS.

223

The  Inside  Guardian  must  always  be  ready  to  com-
municate with  the  0  G.  He  is  to  admit  no  one  (except
by  special  orders  of  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  Lodge)
who  is  not  in  propjr  regalia,  and  in  possession  of  the
explanation  of  the  P.  W. ;  and  must  allow  none  to  pass
out  and  return,  who  has  not  the  evening  word,  or
V.  G.'sP.  W.  He  will  always  report  to  the  officer  in
charge  of  the  Lodge.  When  an  intruder  or  disorderly
member  is  to  be  ejected  from  the  Lodge-room,  both
these  officers  should  act  promptly  and  vigorously,  but
with  as  much  mildness  as  is  consistent  with  the  necessity
of  such  a  painful  duty.

§  7.    The  Conductor.

JEWEL. — The  jewel  of  this  office
is  Crossed  Axes  of  white  metal.  In
some  Lodges  the  Conductor  bears
the  Axe  as  an  emblem  of  his  office ;
in  others,  a  long  black  staff,  sur-
mounted with  a  white  or  gilt  globe,
or  an  open  hand  bearing  a  heart  in
the  palm.

REGALIA. — A  black  sash,  some-
times trimmed  with  white  lace  or
fringe.

STATION. — "  The  Warden  should  sit  to  the  right  and
in  front  of  the  N.  G.  The  Conductor's  place  is  to  the
left,  and  in  front  of  the  N.  G.  These  places  are  the
ones  recognized  by  the  most  established  usages  of  the
Order,  and  we  do  not  think  it  right  to  deviate  from  the
jld  customs." — Editorial  in  Covenant,  vol.  iv.  p.  238.
Deviations  are  made,  however.  In  some  Lodges,  the

224  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Warden,  and  in  others  the  Conductor  occupies  a  chair
fitted  up  purposely,  opposite  the  P.  G.

DUTIES. — The  Conductor  is  ex-officio  the  assistant  of
the  Warden,  when  not  engaged  in  his  own  special  duties.
But  in  Pennsylvania,  (and  possibly  in  some  other  States,)
a  "Junior  Warden"  is  appointed,  and  the  Conductor  con-
fined to  the  duties  proper  to  his  own  office.  This,  though
a  deviation  from  law  and  usage,  is  a  very  convenient  and
useful  arrangement.

The  Conductor  is  to  receive  the  candidates  in  the  ante-
room, and  deliver  the  charge  of  his  office  at  the  proper
season.  He  should  have  a  ready  memory  and  be  a  good
speaker,  as  he  is  to  make  the  first,  and  therefore  most
important  impression.

§8.    The  Warden.

JEWEL. — Crossed  Wands,  of
white  metal.  He  sometimes
bears,  as  a  badge  of  his  office,  a
long  black  staff,  usually  sur-
mounted with  a  ball,  gilt  or
white.

REGALIA. —  A  black  sash  —
should  be  trimmed  and  worn  to
correspond  with  the  Conductor's.

STATION. — This  has  been  treated  of  under  the  pre-
ceding section.

DUTIES. — The  office  is  an  important  one,  and  requires
much  personal  attention.  He  has  charge  of  the  entire
wardrobe  of  the  Lodge,  and  must  place  the  regalia  for
the  use  of  the  officers  and  members  before  the  Lodge
opens,  and  replace  it  in  its  proper  depository,  after  the

OF    ELECTIVE    OFFICERS.  22o

Lodge  closes,  reporting  any  damage  it  may  have  sus-
tained to  the  N.  G.,  and  receiving  his  orders  in  relation
to  it.  In  short,  he  has  a  general  supervision  of  the  fur-
niture of  the  Lodge-room,  and  his  duty  is  to  make  it
comfortable.  He  must  examine  every  person  present
before  the  Lodge  is  opened,  reporting  promptly  to  the
N.  G.  every  one  he  finds  not  fully  qualified  to  remain  in
it.  At  least  once  a  month  this  examination  should  be
thorough,  passing  by  no  one.  He  is  to  deliver  all  sum-
monses that  may  be  issued  by  the  Lodge,  and  is  the
Messenger  of  the  Lodge  during  its  sessions.  Surely
such  an  office  requires  an  active,  attentive,  and  obliging
brother  for  its  incumbent;  and  even  the  aid  of  a
"  Junior  Warden"  will  hardly  make  it  a  sinecure  !

His  official  charge  is  an  important  one,  not  easy  to
deliver  effectively,  and  requires,  therefore,  not  only  a
good  memory  and  delivery,  but  talent  besides,  of  a
peculiar  order.  The  office  accordingly  ranks  high  in
the  Lodge,  and  is  rarely  too  well  filled.

CHAPTER  XIII.

OF    ELECTIVE    OFFICERS.

THE  elective  officers  of  a  Subordinate  Lodge  are  the
Treasurer,  the  Permanent  and  the  Recording  Secretaries,
the  Vice  Grand,  and  the  Noble  Grand.  The  Treasurer
and  the  Permanent  Secretary  are  usually  elected  for
one  year.  Sometimes  the  duties  of  both  Secretaryships
are  performed  by  one  person;  and  in  Pennsylvania,
both  are  divided  between  two  persons ;  the  Secretary,
who  is  elected  for  one  year,  having  supervision  of  the
accounts  and  records;  and  the  Assistant  Secretary,  who

226  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

is  elected  for  six  months,  aiding  in  either  or  both  de-
partments, and  acting  as  a  member  of  the  Relief  Com-
mittee. Other  officers,  as  Trustees,  &c.,  may  be  elected,
by  provision  of  the  By-Laws  of  each  Lodge,  but  are  not
necessarily  considered  as  known  to  the  Order.  And
the  N.  G.,  after  serving  his  term,  becomes  for  the  next
term  the  "  Sitting  Past  Grand"  of  the  Lodge,  without
election  or  appointment.

The  qualifications  for  onrce,  as  to  aegrees,  differ  in
various  States  ;  but  in  nearly,  if  not  quite  all,  the  elec-
tive offices  must  be  filled  with  Scarlet  Degree  members.
As  no  one  should  wear  a  color  in  his  regalia  to  which
he  is  not  entitled  by  degree,  all  the  offices  should  be
filled  with  members  of  the  degree  implied  by  their
regalia.

To  constitute  an  election  to  the  elective  offices,  a
majority  of  all  the  votes  cast  is  necessary.  And  twenty-
six  nights'  service  as  Vice  Grand  is  necessary  to  eligi-
bility to  the  Noble  Grand's  Chair.

The  special  duties  of  officers  vary  in  different  juris-
dictions, and  even  the  general  duties  prescribed  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  are  varied  in  some
States  by  regulations  peculiar  to  themselves.  The  Con-
stitution and  By-Laws  of  each  subordinate,  and  the  in-
structions given  at  installation  and  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  each  State,  will  be  their  guide  in  all  that  is  peculiar
as  well  as  general.  Here  we  can  only  note  what  we
deem  most  important  in  either.  Though  the  Treasurer
has  precedence  of  the  Permanent  Secretary,  yet  for
convenience  in  consulting  the  duties  of  both  Secreta-
ries continuously,  we  here  consider  first.

OF  ELECTIVE  OFFICERS.  227

§  2.    The  Treasurer.

JEWEL. — Crossed  Keys  of  white
metal.

REGALIA.  —  A  green  collar,
trimmed  with  white  (silver)  lace  or
fringe,  to  correspond  with  the  other
official  regalia.

STATION. — On  the  left  of  the  No-
ble Grand,  on  a  line  and  a  level  with
the  Recording  Secretary.

DUTIES. — He  is  the   Banker  of

the  Lodge,  and  should  therefore  be  a  good  bookkeeper,
a  rigid  accountant,  and  a  man  of  strict  integrity  and  re-
spectable business  talent,  Whatever  his  wealth  and
standing  in  society,  his  bond,  with  ample  security,  should
be  as  rigidly  required,  before  installation,  as  if  he  were
the  poorest  member.  As  the  ability  of  the  Lodge  to
aid  its  members  in  distress  and  furnish  relief  to  their
families  depends  mainly  on  the  proper  management  of
its  funds,  the  Lodge  cannot  be  too  careful  in  filling  this
office  well,  and  then  in  keeping  it  well  filled.

He  should  keep  careful  watch  over  all  the  moneyed
affairs  of  the  Lodge.  He  should  insist  on  receiving  all
moneys  through  the  Secretary,  and  on  having  all  the
forms  and  safeguards  of  business  observed  before  he
receives  or  pays  out  a  cent.  His  books  should  ever  be
ready  for  an  exhibition  of  the  Lodge  funds,  and  every
voucher  be  properly  labelled  and  filed.  He  should  be
present,  if  possible,  at  every  stated  meeting,  to  receive
the  receipts  at  the  close ;  and  at  the  end  of  each  term
lie  should  present  his  books  and  vouchers  to  the  Auditing
Committee,  aid  them  in  their  labors,  and  make  out  a
full  report  of  his  own  department  for  the  Lodge.

228  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  3.    The  Permanent  Secretary.

JEWEL. — Crossed  Pens  of  white
metal.

REGALIA.  —  A  green  collar,
trimmed  with  white  (or  silver)
lace  or  fringe,  to  correspond  with
the  preceding.

STATION. — This  varies  in  dif-
ferent Lodges.  At  the  side  of  the
room,  opposite  the  P.  Grand's
chair,  when  not  otherwise  occu-
pied, or  at  the  side  of  the  V.
Grand's  chair,  opposite  the  I.  G.,

is  a  good  place,  convenient  of  access,  and  aside  from
the  other  business  of  the  Lodge.

DUTIES. — He  is  the  bookkeeper  and  accountant  of
the  Lodge.  He  receives  all  moneys  paid  the  Lodge,
giving  a  receipt  therefor,  in  each  case,  and  pays  the
same  over  to  the  Treasurer  each  evening,  taking  his  re-
ceipt for  the  same  in  a  small  book  kept  for  that  purpose.
His  accounts  should  be  regularly  posted,  that  he  may
render  to  any  brother  a  statement  of  his  account,  on
demand,  or  to  the  N.  G.  a  statement  of  the  arrears  of
the  brethren,  at  any  time.  At  the  end  of  each  term  he
will  aid  the  Auditing  Committee  in  their  duties,  and  pre-
pare the  semi-annual  Report  for  the  Grand  Lodge  to
which  his  Lodge  is  attached.

As  so  much  of  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  Lodge
depends  on  a  careful  attention  to  the  accounts  of  the
same  with  its  members,  too  much  vigilance  and  exact-
ness cannot  be  exercised  by  this  officer.  We  hope  to  be
excused,  therefore,  for  occupying  considerable  room

OF    ELECTIVE    OFFICERS.

with  some  remarks  on  Lodge  bookkeeping,  a  confused
or  vague  subject  even  to  some  businessmen;  and  one
that  has  cost  not  a  few  Lodges  many  dollars  in  the  pur-
chase of  successive  sets  of  books  to  meet  the  change  of
system  introduced  by  each  new  officer  in  succession.
We  give  the  results  of  the  experience  of  several  able
officers  and  past-officers  in  that  department.

(1.)   The  System  by  Double  Entry.

A  correspondent  of  the  "Ark,"  published  in  Colum-
bus, Ohio,  in  October,  1849,  published  directions  on  this
subject,  which  he  carefully  revised  and  republished  in
December,  1850,  with  the  approval  of  the  editor,  him-
self a  Past  Grand  Secretary,  as  "  the  best  that  can  be
adopted."  We  therefore  give  it  nearly  entire,  as  fol-
lows : —

System. — No  system  of  bookkeeping  will  combine  all  necessary
debits  and  credits  as  that  known  as  "double  entry."  If  the  single
entry  system  is  adopted  by  a  Lodge,  or  by  the  bookkeeper  of  the
Lodge,  in  order  to  make  all  the  necessary  debits  and  credits  it  will
require  much  more  labor  and  care  to  keep  the  accounts  correct,  and
is  more  liable  to  omissions  and  errors.  It  is  found  to  be  advantageous
to  a  Lodge  to  continue  a  competent  bookkeeper  a  longer  time  than
the  term  prescribed  by  law.

Benefits  shall  be  drawn  and  paid  weekly  by  the  N.  G.  or  V.  G.  of  the
Lodge,  and  ought  to  be  announced  weekly,  or  at  the  first  ensuing
meeting  of  the  Lodge,  in  order  to  be  entered  on  the  minutes.  Debit
benefit  account  and  credit  the  brother  the  amount  of  benefits  an-
nounced, then  debit  the  brother  and  credit  Treasurer  for  the  amount
of  the  order.  Accruing  quarterly  dues  must  be  deducted  and  paid
from  benefits  as  they  become  due.  Benefits  ordered  to  be  placed  to
the  credit  of  a  member  is  the  same  as  that  much  cash  paid.

Petitions. — The  money  accompanying  a  petition  ought  to  be  kept
in  the  petition  until  the  night  of  initiation,  when  the  full  amount
should  be  credited,  and  the  candidate  debited  to  "  initiation  fee. "
20

230  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

The  dates  and  amount  of  debit  and  credit  should  correspond.  The
card  deposited  with  a  petition  of  a  member  of  the  Order  ought  to  be
well  secured  by  wafer  to  the  petition,  and  both  filed  away  together.

Letters. — You  ought  to  preserve  a  copy  of  your  official  letters  sent
away,  particularly  those  regarded  as  important.

Fines. — A  good  time  to  debit  fines  is  when  the  brother  fails  to  be-
come excused,  and  when  the  record  is  made  that  he  is  fined.  To  de-
bit each  absent  officer  at  each  meeting  when  he  is  absent,  would  in-
crease the  number  of  entries  of  debits  and  credits,  which  can  be
avoided  as  above  stated.

Deposite  of  Cards. — In  opening  the  books  of  a  new  Lodge,  or  at  any
time  thereafter,  the  fee  must  be  debited  to  the  brother  who  is  elected
to  membership,  and  credited  to  card  deposite  account.  The  initia-
tion account  and  this  account  ought  not  to  be  mingled  together.  The
date  of  membership  should  commence  with  the  introduction  of  the
member,  and  his  signing  the  Constitution  of  the  Lodge.  But  what-
ever date  is  prescribed,  he  is  chargeable  with  dues  from  that  date.

Degrees  and  Cards. — Debit  the  applicant  for  degrees  or  cards  only
on  the  evening  the  same  is  granted.  The  cash  for  degrees  is  required
by  law  to  be  paid  on  the  evening  of  application ;  if  not  then  paid,
payment  ought  to  be  made  on  the  evening  of  election.  Degrees  con-
ferred on  a  member  to  qualify  him  to  fill  an  office  in  opening  a  new
Lodge,  must  be  charged  up  against  such  member  [if  not  gratuitous]
as  though  he  had  applied  for  them  at  any  other  time.

Notices. — It  has  been  customary  to  notify  each  member  of  the  time
of  the  election  of  officers.  In  a  corner  of  the  written  or  printed  no-
tice the  amount  of  arrearages  might  be  stated,  so  as  to  enable  the
brother  to  come  prepared  to  pay  his  indebtedness.

Quarterly  Dues. — In  the  week  previous  to  the  last  meeting,  [at  the
end  of  each  term,]  charge  up  the  term  dues  under  the  date  of  the
last  meeting  [of  the  term].  On  the  night  preceding  the  last,  meet-
ing in  each  term,  have  prepared  a  list  of  the  members  who  are
indebted,  with  the  amount  due  by  each.  In  that  list  include  the
dues  of  the  expiring  term.  In  cases  of  withdrawal,  expulsion,  or
death,  debit  the  account  of  the  expelled,  &c  ,  with  the  amount  of
dues  up  to  the  time  of  withdrawal,  &c.

Collection  of  Dues. — It  is  the  duty  of  the  Permanent  Secretary  to
receive  all  moneys  due  the  Lodge.  It  is  the  interest  of  the  Lodge  to
have  payments  made  regularly  as  the  dues  accrue,  and  the  Perma-
nent Secretary  ought  to  consider  it  his  duty  to  call  on  all  the  mem-

OF  ELECTIVE  OFFICERS.  231

bers,  as  far  as  he  can,  who  are  not  prompt  in  paying  up.  He  ought
also  to  see  that  the  requirements  of  the  laws  in  regard  to  the  appli-
cations for  degrees  and  cards  are  complied  with.  In  the  absence  of
any  provision  in  the  Constitution,  requiring  collections  to  be  made
by  the  P.  S.,  it  might  result  to  the  advantage  of  some  Lodges  if  they
would  adopt  a  provision  in  their  By-Laws  imposing  that  duty  on  him.

Cash. — The  money  accompanying  petitions  ought  not  to  be  entered
or  credited  on  the  cash  receipts  until  initiation,  or  election  on  card
deposited,  for  fear  the  petition  may  be  withdrawn,  or  the  applicant
rejected.  If  the  money  should  be  entered  on  the  account-book  pre-
vious to  election,  and  afterward  the  petition  be  withdrawn,  you
would  be  opening  a  new  account  which  would  not  be  continued.  It
is  no  advantage  to  fill  your  account-book  with  such  names.  Cash  is
debited  and  the  members  credited  for  payments.  The  P.  S.  is  ac-
countable for  all  cash  entered.

Receipts. — The  Treasurer's  receipts  to  the  P.  S.  ought  to  be  taken
in  a  small  book  kept  for  that  purpose.

Fractions. — Avoid  fractions  of  a  cent,  as  they  are  very  trouble-
some. [Doubted  whether  the  saving  of  trouble  would  pay  for  the
loss  of  money  where  the  dues  are  six  and  a  fourth  cents  weekly.]

Watch  Notices  and  Sick  List. — The  P.  S.  is  required  to  make  out
these  notices,  but  no  law  says  he  shall  serve  them.  A  small  book,
that  can  be  carried  in  the  pocket,  should  be  kept  as  a  sick  list,  to
contain,  first,  a  list  of  the  members  of  the  Lodge,  with  parallel  lines,
in  which  a  mark  should  be  made  to  credit  watching  with  a  sick  bro-
ther ;  second,  to  give  the  date,  the  names  of  the  watchers,  and  the
name  of  the  person  with  whom  he  watched.  The  first  list  to  occupy
a  few  pages  in  the  first  part  of  the  book ;  the  second  list  requires
more  paper.

Register. — You  are  required  to  keep  a  correct  register  of  the  mem-
bers, with  the  date  of  initiation,  name,  number,  how  admitted,  age,
occupation,  residence,  date  and  number  of  degrees  taken,  time  of
withdrawal,  [or  suspension,  expulsion,  &c.,]  and  a  column  for  P.
Grands.  Also  a  register  of  notices  of  expulsion  from  and  by  othei
Lodges,  with  the  cause,  &c.

Letter  Book. — The  Letter-Book  should  contain  an  abstract  of  your
Semi- Annual  Reports.  A  copy  is  required  to  be  taken  and  kept.

Reports. — You  are  required  to  report  to  the  Grand  Lodge  semi-
annually  the  amount  of  receipts:  viz.,  initiations,  cards  deposited,
term  dues,  degree  fees,  fines,  and  donations.  Ascertain  exactly  on

232  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

what  basis  the  Grand  Lodge  requires  the  percentage  to  be  estimated,
and  calculate  accordingly.  If  the  following  course  is  pursued,  justice
will  be  done  to  both  Lodges.  It  has  been  adopted  by  the  one  in
Columbus.  At  the  end  of  each  term,  take  the  amount  placed  to  the
credit  of  each  of  these  accounts,  first  deducting  all  the  debits  that
occurred  during  the  term,  and  report  them  as  receipts.  Some  in-
dividuals may  be  in  arrears  at  the  time,  but  they  must  be  overlooked
until  any  one  of  such  may  be  expelled.  When  any  member  is  expelled,
debit  the  account  of  term  dues  with  the  amount  of  arrears,  and  deduct
that  amount  from  the  amount  credited  to  that  account  during  that
term,  and  report  the  remainder  as  the  receipts  on  which  to  pay  per-
centage. The  reason  for  this  procedure  is  this : — The  Lodge  has
already  paid  percentage  on  the  amount  of  arrears  of  the  expelled
member,  and  as  the  Lodge  has  not  received  any  money,  it  is  but
justice  to  cancel  an  equal  amount  of  dues  of  the  current  term.  In
the  event  of  reinstation  and  full  payment  of  dues,  then  the  amount
paid  by  the  person  reinstated  must  be  reported  as  receipts  during
that  term.  In  your  Report,  if  you  put  opposite  each  name  of  mem-
bers initiated  or  admitted  on  card,  their  number  on  the  Register,  it
will  enable  the  officer  of  the  Grand  Lodge  to  discover  any  omission,
and  to  find  the  proper  name  on  his  Register,  where  two  or  more  may
be  nearly  the  same.

Great  care  should  be  taken  in  making  out  the  Report,  to  have  it
declared  "  correct,"  and  it  should  be  ready  for  approval  at  the  first
meeting  of  the  term,  [and  be  signed  by  the  N.  G.  of  the  past  term,]
and  immediately  forwarded  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  with  the  amount
of  percentage  due ;  also,  if  possible,  with  a  certificate  in  favor  of
the  new  Past  Grand.  A  list  of  Past  Grands  is  required  to  be  fur-
nished at  the  end  of  the  year,  on  your  Report.  In  some  conspicuous
place,  write  the  day  of  the  week  on  which  your  Lodge  meets.  This
Report  should  be  ready  to  be  enclosed,  with  amount  of  percentage
and  P.  Grand's  certificate,  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Ohio,  on  the  day  following  the  first  meeting  of  the  term.

Balance  Sheets. — You  will  prepare  a  balance-sheet  of  all  debits  and
credits  standing  in  your  Ledger,  for  the  Auditing  Committee,  and
file  it.

Balancing  Accounts. — Often  balancing  accounts  consumes  paper
without  effecting  much  good.  In  accounts,  such  as  quarterly  dues,
initiations,  &c.,  where  there  is  no  debit,  avoid  the  common  practice
of  balancing  bj  merely  drawing  a  line  under  the  credit  column,  and

OF    ELECTIVE    OFFICERS.  233

setting  down  the  total  amount.  This  may  be  done  with  initiation
account,  degrees,  &c.,  where  there  are  a  number  of  entries.  In  the
account  of  quarterly  dues,  once  a  year  is  often  enough.

Accounts. — In  order  to  keep  a  good  set  of  books,  it  is  necessary
that  the  following  accounts  be  opened,  viz.,  Cash,  Treasurer,  Initia-
tion, Cards  deposited,  Quarterly  Dues,  Degrees,  Expense,  Benefits,
Grand  Lodge,  Charity ;  and  it  may  be  necessary,  for  convenience,
k>  add  the  following: — Travelling  and  Visiting  Card,  Widows  and
Orphans,  Percentage,  Representative  Tax,  Regalia,  Emblems,  and
Jewels.  It  will  be  found  convenient  to  the  accountant  to  have  a
number  of  pages  left  for  each  of  the  first,  second,  third,  sixth,
seventh,  and  eighth  accounts  named  above.

The  foregoing  directions,  though  intended  only  for
the  meridian  of  Ohio,  are  applicable  generally.  And
though  adapted  for  the  system  of  double  entry,  many
of  them  will  be  found  equally  useful  where  the  system
of  single  entry  alone  is  used :  as  it  is  used  in  our
Lodges  very  generally,  especially  in  Pennsylvania,  in-
cluding Philadelphia.

(2.)  The  System  by  Single  Entry. — In.  many  Lodges,
keeping  the  books  by  double  entry  would  only  increase
trouble  and  perplexity,  and  is  totally  unnecessary,
especially  where  the  duties  of  accountant  and  recorder
are  performed  by  but  one  Secretary.  We  add,  then,
in  addition  to  what  is  applicable  in  the  foregoing,  a  few
remarks.

The  Permanent  Secretary  will  need

1.  A  Blotter,  (or  Day  or  Night  Book,  as  some  term
it,)  in  which  to  record  each  payment  of  any  kind  as
soon  as  made.  Enter  it  carefully,  and  legibly,  stating
for  whom,  for  what,  and  by  whom  it  is  made.  At  the
close  of  each  Lodge-meeting,  add  up  the  receipts  since
the  last  meeting,  and  report  the  amount,  with  the  names
of  payers,  to  the  Lodge,  that  errors  may  be  corrected,

and  the  amount  be  entered  on  the  Minutes.
20*

234  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

2.  A  Ledger,  in  which  allot  to  each  member  a  portion
of  a  folio,  whereon  to  post  the  payments  from  the  Blotter.
The  charges  for  dues  should  be  made  quarterly.

3.  Book  of  Blank  Receipts ,  so  that  he  can  readily
fill  and  cut  out  one  for  every  payment,  and  mark  in  the
margin  the  amount,  date,  and  name  of  payer.

4.  Receipt  Book,   in  which  to  take  the  Treasurer's
Receipt  for  each  evening's  payment.

5.  Register,  containing  a  list  of  members  in  order  of
initiation  or  admission,  when  admitted,  and  how;  age,
residence,  occupation  ;  date  of  taking  each  degree,  and
office  held ;  time  of  withdrawal,  death,  suspension,  &c.
This  book  is  generally  kept  by  the  Recording  Secretary,
as  also  Nos.  6  and  7  following.

6.  Black  Book,  containing  a  list  of  rejections,  sus-
pensions, and  expulsions,  of  your  own  or  neighboring
Lodges,  with  dates  and  causes,  when  known.

7.  Sick  and  Watch  Rolls  may  be  in  the  same  book.
The  first  should  contain  the  name,  when  reported,  dates
of  benefits,   dates   of  watches,   and  date  of   recovery.
The  latter,  a  complete  list  of  members,  should  have  a
column  to  enter  date  of  service,  (or  neglect,  paid  by
fine.)

8.  Letter  Book,  containing  copies  of  all  important  or
business  letters  sent,  numbered  to  correspond  with  those
to  which  they  reply,  or  with  the  replies,  on  your  files.
In   this  book   copy  at   length  your   Reports,   and    an
abstract  of  the  Reports  of  the  Treasurer  and  the  Au
diting  Committee,  for  reference.

When  benefits  are  awarded,  immediately  calculate
the  brother's  indebtedness,  ^if  any,)  and  hand  the  memo-
randum (with  a  receipt)  to  the  Treasurer,  to  be  deducted
by  him,  paid  to  you,  and  credited  to  the  sick  brother.
This  saves  the  sick  the  trouble  of  sending  his  arrears

OF    ELECTIVE    OFFICERS.

235

to  the  Lodge  by  a  special  messenger,  and  is  a  safe-
guard against  his  running  into  arrears  sufficient  to  work
loss  of  benefits  during  his  illness.

The  foregoing,  it  is  hoped,  will  prove  sufficient  to
guide  the  unpractised  officer  of  a  new  Lodge;  at  least
until  experience  shall  make  him  acquainted  with  the
many  details  of  his  duties.  One  thing  let  the  Lodge
be  resolved  against — frequent  changes  in  its  modes  of
keeping  accounts.  They  are  not  only  costly  and
troublesome,  but  by  the  copying  which  they  render
necessary  with  every  new  set  of  books  opened,  they
render  mistakes  almost  unavoidable  and  past  searching
out  for  correction.  Adhere,  then,  to  the  system  first
chosen,  and  keep  in  office  your  Permanent  Secretary  so
long  as  he  performs  well  and  can  be  retained.

4.   The  Recording  Secretary.

JEWEL. — The  jewel  of  this  is
the  same  with  the  preceding
officer — Crossed  Pens  of  white
metal  worn  suspended  from  the
collar.

REGALIA. — Also  the  same  as
the  preceding — a  green  collar,
trimmed  with  white  (or  silver)
lace  or  fringe,  to  correspond  with
the  Permanent  Secretary's.

STATION. — On  the  right  of  the
Noble  Grand — not  on  the  same
level,  though  sometimes  a  little  in  advance ;  but  always
on  a  line  with  the  Treasurer.

236  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

DUTIES. — He  is  the  recorder  of  the  proceedings  ot
the  Lodge,  and  its  general  corresponder,  and  the  cus
todian  of  its  seal  and  its  documents  generally.

As  the  rights  and  privileges  of  members,  and  the
existence  of  the  Lodge  itself,  in  cases  of  charges  against
either,  may  depend  upon  the  records,  it  is  very  im-
portant that  they  be  correctly  kept,  and  by  some  regular
system.  Let  the  first  draft  be  taken  down  on  a  quire
or  two  of  paper  stitched  in  a  cover,  from  whence,  after
being  approved  by  the  Lodge,  they  should  be  carefully
and  neatly  copied  into  the  Minute  or  Record-Book.

The  following  general  directions  we  copy  from  the
"Ark,"  for  December,  1850,  where  they  appear  with
the  approval  of  its  practical  Editor:  they  are  as  good
as  our  own  experience  could  offer : —

Minutes. — Much  care  should  be  taken  to  keep  a  neat  record  of  the
transactions  of  your  Lodge.  There  ought  to  be  the  space  of  three
to  six  lines  left  between  the  proceedings  of  each  meeting.  Leave  a
blank  line  between  the  record  of  each  subject:  it  will  enable  you
more  readily  to  find  any  matter  of  record  at  any  future  day.  After
reading  the  minutes  of  the  previous  meeting,  and  approval,  is  a  good
time  to  require  absentees,  if  present,  to  offer  their  excuses.  When
absentees  offer  their  excuses,  the  result  should  be  recorded  imme-
diately after  the  approval  of  the  minutes,  that  the  record  of  the
absentees  and  the  excuses  for  previous  absence  may  be  near  together,
and  easily  found.  All  unimportant  unsuccessful  motions  might  be
omitted,  and  yet  the  record  be  true  as  to  the  proceedings.  The
record  of  each  meeting  ought  to  be  headed  with  the  name  and  number
of  the  Lodge,  and  the  date ;  and  closed  by  the  attest  and  signature
of  the  Secretary.  The  By-Laws  of  the  Lodge  ought  to  be  neatly
copied  in  the  Minute-Book,  [or  Constitution  and  By-Laws,  when
printed,  pasted  in,]  when  the  same  is  adopted,  with  sufficient  space
for  adding  all  amendments,  whenever  made.  [All  questions  of  order
and  precedents,  should  also  be  entered  in  a  separate  place  for  con-
venient reference,  as  well  as  in  the  minutes.]  A  list  of  payments
by  members,  or  aggregate  of  receipts  of  the  evening,  as  reported  by

OF  ELECTIVE  OFFICERS.  237

the  Per.  Sec.,  ought  to  be  embraced  in  the  minutes,  just  previous  to
the  signature  of  the  Secretary.  [If  degree  certificates  are  granted,
enter  the  fact,  payment,  &c. ;  but  the  conferring  of  degrees  by  the
officers  of  the  Lodge  belongs  to  a  separate  book,  kept  for  that  pur-
pose, A.  B.  G.]

Cards.  —  The  dues  of  an  applicant  for  a  Visiting  Card  must  be
paid  up  to  the  time  the  card  extends,  with  cost  of  card,  previous  to
its  delivery  —  for  final  card  to  the  time  of  granting  the  same,  to-
gether with  the  cost  of  it  as  fixed  by  law.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  mem.
ber  having  a  Visiting  Card,  to  return  it  at  the  expiration  of  the
time  for  which  it  was  given.

Degrees.  —The  applicant  for  degrees  is  required  by  law,  [in  Ohio,]
to  be  free  from  indebtedness  to  the  Lodge.  The  degrees  must  be
paid  for  at  the  time  of  application,  or  previous  to  balloting  for  the
same,  as  the  election  for  degrees,  where  payment  is  not  made,  is  not
valid.

Filing. — Letters  and  other  valuable  papers  received,  ought  to  be
carefully  folded,  numbered,  nature  and  date  intelligibly  endorsed  on
one  end,  and  filed  away :  the  letters  and  notices  by  themselves,  and
the  following  in  different  packages,  viz.  Petitions,  Reports,  Bills  and
Accounts,  Bonds  and  Agreements,  Certificates  for  Benefits,  Visiting
Cards  returned,  Miscellaneous.

Postage,  $c. — Keep  an  account  of  postage  paid  and  stationery  fur-
nished, and  present  a  bill  of  the  same  at  the  end  of  the  quarter  or
term.

Officers'  Bonds,  as  required  by  the  Constitution,  ought  to  be
prepared  by  the  Secretary  for  .the  signatures  of  the  officers  elect
and  their  sureties,  and  the  same  presented  to,  and  approved  by,  the
Lodge,  before  their  installation.

Seal. — All  official  documents,  to  be  legal,  must  have  the  seal  of  the
Lodge  impressed  legibly  thereon.  [No  seal  is  legal  that  is  not  im-
pressed upon  the  document  itself — pasting,  or  otherwise  merely
attaching  a  seal,  will  not  answer;  for  it  might  be  wetted  and
removed  to  any  other  document,  and  thus  dangerous  imposition  be
practised  —  hence  the  propriety  of  this  decision.  A.  B.  G.]  An
improper  use  is  sometimes  made  of  the  seal.  The  Secretary  has  no
right  to  put  the  seal  to  letters  which  are  not  properly  official  letters:
letters  that  the  Lodge  did  not  order  him  to  write,  and  which  it  is
not  his  duty,  as  that  officer,  to  write,  are  not  official.

Reports. — At  the  end  of  each  term  make  out  a  correct  report  of

238  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

initiations,  &c.,  for  the  use  of  the  Per.  Sec.  and  the  Auditing  Com-
mittee, whose  meeting  you  should  attend  with  your  books,  ready  to
give  any  explanation  or  information  they  may  require.

The  above,  prepared  for  the  meridian  of  Ohio,  may
require  a  little  modification  in  a  few  States ;  but  will  be
found,  generally,  very  correct  and  useful  to  the  new
officer.

No  person  is  privileged  to  interfere  with  the  books
and  papers  of  either  of  the  Secretaries,  except  the
Noble  Grand,  the  M.  W.  Grand  Master,  or  the  R.  W.
D.  G.  Master  of  the  District,  and  the  proper  Committee
appointed  in  pursuance  of  the  Constitution  and  By-
Laws  of  the  Lodge.  They  are  subject  to  examination
by  a  Committee  trying  any  member  on  charges,  as  any
other  witness,  when  their  books  and  papers  may  be
required  to  be  produced ;  but  only  under  their  charge
and  custody.

In  no  case,  should  any  vote  or  resolution  actually
passed  by  the  Lodge  be  omitted  or  erased  from  the
record,  however  erroneous  in  spirit,  or  unlawful  in
import.  It  may  be  rescinded  or  annulled  at  a  future
meeting,  but  the  record  of  the  act  and  of  its  correction
should  both  appear  on  the  minutes.

As  the  Permanent  Secretary  is  a  paid  officer,  usually,
(his  arduous  duties  requiring  pecuniary  compensation,)
the  Past  Secretary's  degree  is  conferred  only  on  the
Recording  Secretary,  who  is  ex  officio  a  member  of  the
Visiting  or  Relief  Committee.

OF    ELECTIVE    OFFICERS.

239

§  5.    The  Vice  Grand.

JEWEL. — The  Vice  Grand's  jewel  is
an  Hour-Glass  of  white  metal.

REGALIA.  —  A  blue  collar,  trimmed
with  white  or  silver — generally  lace  or
fringe  of  silver  bullion,  (and  sometimes
ornamented  with  silver  stars,)  to  corre-
spond with  the  other  official  regalia.

STATION. — At  the  end  of  the  room
nearest  the  entrance,  and  in  the  chair
trimmed  with  blue.

DUTIES. — As  the  second  officer  of  the  Lodge,  and
the  probable  and  almost  certain  successor  of  the  Noble
Grand,  his  requisites  and  qualifications  should  in  no-
wise be  inferior  to  those  demanded  by  the  first  chair.
He  should  be  as  well  acquainted  with  the  merits  and
qualifications  of  the  members,  and  with  the  business  of
the  Lodge,  and  with  the  rules  of  order  and  debate.

His  express  duty  is  to  advise  and  (if  need  be)  correct
the  N.  G.  if  that  officer  commits  an  error  —  even  pub-
licly, if  necessary.  When  the  N.  G.  is  absent  from  his
post,  the  V.  G.  must  take  his  chair  and  regalia,  and
perform  all  his  duties,  except  delivering  the  P.  G's.
charge.  At  initiations  he  will  place  a  P.  G.  or  P.  V.
G.  in  the  V.  G's.  chair ;  and  he  may  then,  or  in  con-
ferring degrees,  place  a  P.  G.  in  the  N.  G's.  chair.

He  has  the  appointment  of  his  own  Supporters,  and
should  select  competent  persons.  His  Right  Supporter,
especially,  should  be  an  experienced  brother,  capable
of  advising  him  in  cases  of  doubt  and  difficulty,  and

240  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

filling  his  chair  during  a  temporary  absence.  In  some
States,  he  appoints  a  portion  of  each  Committee.  He
assists  in  examining  each  ballot,  and  in  maintaining
order  generally.  He  superintends  the  entrance  and
exit  of  the  brethren,  and  furnishes  the  P.  W.  for  the
evening  to  his  R.  Supporter,  as  soon  as  the  Lodge  is
opened.  He  is  entitled  to  the  A.  T.  P.  W.,  that  he
may  properly  examine  visitors.  He  is  also,  during  his
term  of  office,  a  member  of  the  Relief  Committee.  And
he  should  use  all  diligence,  while  in  the  second  chair,
to  commit  the  entire  ritual  of  the  first  chair,  and  other-
wise qualify  himself  for  performing  well  its  duties.

§  6.    The  Noble  Grand.

JEWEL. — The  Crossed  Gavels,
made  of  white  metal,  are  the  jewel
of  this  office.

REGALIA.  —  A  scarlet  collar
trimmed  with  white  or  silver  —  gen-
erally ornamented  with  lace  and
fringe  of  silver  bullion,  and  with
stars,  to  correspond  with  the  other
official  regalia.

STATION. — At  the  upper  end  of
the  room,  in  the  principal  chair,
which  is  designated  by  scarlet  hangings  or  decorations.
This  is  usually  placed  on  a  platform  of  three  steps.

DUTIES. — He  is  the  Presiding  Officer  of  the  Lodge,
the  superintendent  of  its  officers  and  its  members,  and
the  custodian  of  its  Charter,  Charge-books,  and  pro-
perty generally.  He  has  not  only  his  own  special
duties  to  perform,  but  must  see  that  all  his  subordinate
officers  properly  and  promptly  perform  theirs  also ;  and

OF   ELECTIVE   OFFICERS.

must  allow  no  invasion  of  the  rights  and  interests  of
his  fellow-members  or  of  the  lodge.  He  should  be  an
example  in  obedience  and  respect  to  superiors,  and  to
the  constitution  and  laws  of  his  lodge  and  of  the  Grand
Lodge.  In  the  absence  of  all  P.  Gs.  he  may  deliver
the  P.  G.'s  charge  at  initiation,  and  install  his  successor
and  other  officers  of  his  lodge.

He  will  give  the  Term  P.  W.  to  none  but  members  in
good  standing,  or  to  such  brethren  as  he  may  be  law-
fully directed  to  give  it.  He  will  find  the  welfare  of
the  Lodge,  and  of  each  member,  best  promoted  by
rigidly  enforcing  a  prompt  payment  of  their  dues,  and
withholding  from  delinquents  the  proper  privileges  of
the  Order.

The  Charges  and  Lectures  placed  in  his  custody,  he
will  especially  secure  and  guard  against  exposure  or
damage.  Making  copies  of  portions,  though  allowed,
should  be  sparingly  and  cautiously  permitted ;  and  the
return,  for  destruction,  of  such  written  parts  should  be
strictly  insisted  on.

To  understand  his  duties  properly,  he  should  care-
fully study  the  Installation  service,  the  Constitutions
and  By-Laws  of  his  Grand  and  subordinate  lodges,  the
Digests  of  the  Laws  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.,  and  of  the
State  Grand  Lodge,  and  Cushing's  Manual;*  and
should  read  attentively  the  latest  proceedings  of  the  G.
L.  U.  S.,  and  of  his  State  Grand  Lodge,  that  he  may
be  well  advised  of  late  decisions.  An  ignorant  man,

*  Every  lodge  should  have  two  copies  of  the  Manual  and  Digest,
for  the  use  of  its  V.  G.  and  N.  G.,  and  an  additional  copy  of  each
for  the  use  of  members  generally  during  sessions.  But  the  diligent
and  active  Odd-Fellow,  especially  if  he  aspires  to  pass  the  chairs,
should  have  a  copy  of  each  for  his  own  use.
21

THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

one  inattentive  in  the  proceedings  of  the  legislative
bodies  of  the  Order,  is  unfit  for  a  Noble  Grand.

It  is  of  the  utmost  mportance  that  he  really  preside
over  his  lodge  during  exciting  debates,  which  will  some-
times arise.  Pie  should  then  be  especially  calm,  atten-
tive, wary,  prompt,  firm,  and  decided.  Better,  even,
decide  a  point  of  doubt  wrong,  but  promptly,  than
decide  it  right  after  much  irresolution  and  delay.  But
although  he  must  even  seem  stern  at  periods  of  excite-
ment, let  there  appear  no  tumult,  no  passion,  no  preju-
dice or  partiality  in  his  mind  or  manner.  His  voice
should  be  rather  more  subdued  than  usual,  instead  of
louder ;  and  in  giving  his  decision,  let  it  be  done  "  in
few  words  fitly  chosen."  State  the  positions  of  both
parties  fairly,  add  the  reasons  for  deciding,  and  then
pronounce  it  firmly,  and  invite  an  appeal  if  any  are  dis-
satisfied. Happy  is  the  Lodge  that  has  Noble  Grands
able  thus  to  act,  and  competent  thus  to  preside  over  it.

As  guardian  of  the  widows  and  orphans  of  the  lodge,
and  as  the  chief  official  visitor  of  its  sick  and  distressed
brethren,  he  has  great  means  and  powers  for  usefulness
and  good.  By  advising  with  the  able  and  influential
brethren  he  can  procure  needed  employment  for  the
poorer  and  more  needy,  and  secure  little  attentions  and
kindness  most  grateful  and  salutary  for  the  sick  and  the
suffering.  It  is  not  enough  that  he  coldly  and  formally
visits  the  sick  and  dependent  at  stated  intervals  as  a
mere  officer.  He  is  the  representative  of  the  humanity
and  benevolence  of  the  Lodge,  an  embodiment  of  the
spirit  of  our  Order,  the  father,  as  it  were,  of  his
brethren  ;  consequently  there  must  be  heart  in  his  looks
and  words,  and  sympathy  in  his  every  action.  He  must
not  only  visit  in  person,  but  see  that  every  member  of

OF    ELECTIVE   OFFICERS.  24o

the  Committee  and  the  appointed  watchers  attend
j: roper ly,  heartily,  to  their  duties ;  and  if  needed  or  de-
sirable, let  him  spare  no  efforts  to  induce  members  gen-
erally to  visit  the  languishing  with  offices  of  brotherly
love  and  kindness.

Much  depends  on  his  appointments.  Good  readers
or  speakers  are  needed  for  Conductor  and  Warden.
The  latter,  also,  should  be  a  lover  of  order,  neatness,
and  cleanliness,  who  will  not  allow  a  litter  in  the
lodge-room,  nor  confusion  and  rags  in  the  wardrobe.
On  Committees,  of  which  he  generally  appoints  the  ma-
jority, if  not  the  whole,  no  idlers  and  incompetent  men
should  be  placed  for  chairmen ;  and  it  were  better  still
if  they  were  left  off  entirely.  And  his  Right  Supporter
should  be  experienced,  observant,  and  trusty,  that  he
may  be  a  reliable  adviser  and  aid.

In  transacting  the  business  of  the  Lodge,  let  no  time
be  wasted.  See  that  everything  is  ready  before  open-
ing, and  then  quietly  and  orderly  proceed  from  item  to
item,  without  delaying  to  invite  discussions.  If  debates
arise,  seek  to  confine  them  to  the  point  in  dispute,  that
they  may  not  be  unduly  prolonged;  and  allow  no  dis-
cussion except  on  a  clearly  stated  motion,  duly  made
and  seconded.  The  most  tedious  and  irritating  debates
frequently  arise  on  some  "  suggestion,"  when,  had  all
discussion  been  repressed  until  a  motion  had  been  made,
none  would  have  occurred.  A  Lodge  is  an  assemblage
for  transacting  important  business,  not  for  mere  exer-
cise in  discussion.  Do  the  business,  then,  in  the  shortest
time  and  best  manner,  allowing  just  as  much  explana-
tion and  discussion  as  are  necessary  to  its  being  well
undrrstoc  d  and  generally  acquiesced  in  by  those  inte-

244  THE    ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

rested.  If,  after  this,  there  is  time  to  spare,  let  it  be  em-
ployed in  social  and  fraternal  intercourse  and  innocent
enjoyment.

§  7.   The  Sitting  Past  Grand.

JEWEL. — A  five-pointed
star,  with  a  heart  and  hand
in  the  centre,  made  of
white  metal.  The  heart
may  be  of  cornelian,  or
other  red  substance.

REGALIA.  —  "  Past
Grands  shall  wear  scarlet
collars  or  sashes  trimmed
with  white.  The  collars  or
sashes  may  be  trimmed  with
silver  lace  or  fringe,  and
those  having  attained  the

royal  purple  degree  may  have  trimmings  of  yellow
metal."-  -Journal  G.  L.  U.S.,  1868,  p.  4357.  The
sash  is  generally  worn  at  the  East  and  in  New  York,
and  the  collar  in  Pennsylvania,  &c.

STATION. — About  midway,  at  the  side  of  the  room,  on
the  right  of  the  N.  G.  The  chair  is  decorated  with
scarlet  trimmings  or  drapery.

DUTIES. — The  office  is  simply  a  sequel  to  that  of  N.  G.,
who  becomes  the  sitting  P.  G.  of  the  Lodge,  as  a  matter
of  course,  on  passing  his  chair.  His  duties  are  to  de-
liver the  charge  to  a  candidate  at  initiation,  and,  in
many  Lodges,  to  officiate  as  outside  Conductor,  and  in
examining  and  introducing  visitors,  in  which  latter  case
he  must  possess  the  A.  T.  P.  W.

OF  ELECTIVE  OFFICERS.  245

In  the  absence  of  the  N.  G.  and  V.  G.,  a  P.  G.  should
take  the  K  G's  chair ;  and  if  no  V.  G.  or  P.  V.  G.  is
present,  place  a  scarlet-degree  member  in  the  V.  G's
chair.

§  8.  Rules  of  Order  and  Debate.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  and  nearly
all  the  State  Grand  Lodges  and  Encampments,  have
enacted  rules  for  the  governance  of  their  subordinates ;
and  the  former  has  adopted  "  Cushing's  Manual "  *  as
the  guide  and  authority  of  our  Order.  These  works
being  accessible  and  easily  procured,  renders  unnecessary
any  attempt  to  furnish  rules  in  this  place.

§  9.    Use  of  the  Gavel.

This  instrument  has  two  uses  in  Odd-Fellowship,  one
as  the  tongue  or  voice  of  the  lodge  in  the  hands  of  its
officers,  the  other  as  an  emblem  or  jewel.  It  is  not
used  as  an  operative  instrument,  as  in  Masonry ;  nor  do
our  books  ever  contemplate  its  use  in  Encampments,
though  some  do  use  it,  but,  as  we  think,  improperly.
The  presiding  officers  of  Patriarchal  bodies,  by  consult-
ing the  charges  and  emblems  of  authority  delivered  at
their  installation,  will  perceive  that,  not  the  gavel,  but
another  instrument  is  given  them  for  the  purpose  of
signifying  their  authority  and  wishes.

But  the  use  of  the  gavel  seems  to  be  not  so  well
understood  in  our  lodges  as  it  should  be.  A  frequent
or  continual  rapping,  instead  of  promoting  order  and
attention,  increases  noise  and  confusion.  Custom  re-
quires it  to  be  used  in  commanding  attention  or  silence,

*"  Manual   of  Parliamentary  Practice.     Rules  of  Proceedings
an</  Debate  in  Deliberative  Assemblies."     By  Luther  S.  Gushing.
21*

246  THE   ODD-FEL1  DW's   MANUAL.

or  requiring  members  to  be  seated,  &c.  One  rap,  and
that  by  the  N.  G.  only,  (or  his  E.  H.  S.,  by  his  direc-
tion,) is  sufficient  for  that  purpose ;  and,  after  custom
has  established  this  use,  will  be  more  effectual  than
many.  Rarely  should  it  be  repeated  immediately ;  and
never  should  it  be  repeated  by  the  V.  G.  for  that  pur-
pose. The  V.  G.  may  give  it  when  the  N.  G.  is  so
engaged  that  he  cannot  attend  to  it.

The  raps  of  the  N.  G.  are  never  to  be  repeated  by  the
Y.  G.,  except  in  cases  where  the  written  work  calls  on
him  specially  to  do  so,  or  in  the  case  above  named.  The
directions  of  the  books  are  special,  and  are  to  be  strictly
complied  with.  By  carefully  observing  this  rule,  much
unnecessary  noise  will  be  avoided ;  and,  when  once
established,  every  member  will  be  saved  the  perplexity
now  so  frequently  caused  by  a  too  free  use  of  the  in-
strument.

The  P.  G.  is  not  an  executive  officer,  and  is  therefore
no  more  entitled  to  use  a  gavel  in  his  chair  than  the
Secretary  or  Treasurer.  He  is  to  command  order  only
by  his  example.

DEGREE  LODGES  —  COMMITTEES  —  OFFICEES.         247

CHAPTER  XIV.

OF  DEGREE  LODGES,  OR  COMMITTEES,  ETC.,  AN  )  THEIR
OFFICERS.

VARIOUS  modes  have  been  adopt-
ed in  the  several  States  for  confer-
ring degrees.  Subordinate  lodges,
to  ballot  for  (or  confer)  degrees,
must  close  finally,  in  full  form,
and  then  open  in  the  first  degree,
confer  it,  and  close.  Dismissing
those  not  further  qualified,  it  opens
in  the  second  degree,  and  so  on,
regularly,  through  all  the  degrees
required  to  be  conferred.  In  this  case  the  regular
officers  of  the  Subordinate  Lodge,  or  persons  selected
by  them,  officiate.  In  some  States  a  Lecture  Master,
appointed  by  the  D.  D.  G.  Master,  calls  qualified
brethren  to  his  aid,  and  confers  the  degrees  awarded  by
the  lodge,  usually  soon  after  the  lodge  closes ;  in  others,
a  Committee  of  Past  Grands,  or  of  the  officers  and
qualified  members  of  the  lodge,  confer  the  degrees  at
stated  seasons;  but  as  in  all  these  modes  the  same  duties
are  performed  that  occur  in  a  Degree  Lodge,  we  have
thought  proper  to  present  our  general  directions  in
treating  of  that  organization  and  its  officers.

248  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  1.   Constitution  of  Degree  Lodges.

The  legality  of  Degree  Lodges  is  recognized  .  y  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  but  their  establish-
ment is  left  to  the  option  of  the  State  Grand  Lodges,
who,  again,  leave  the  matter  to  the  discretion  of  their
subordinates  and  fifth  degree  members.  The  price  for
degrees  is  left  to  the  control  of  State  Grand  Lodges.

When  the  requisite  number  of  scarlet  degree  mem-
bers of  any  locality  wish  to  establish  a  Degree  Lodge,
they  will  proceed  to  organize  informally,  and  petition
their  Grand  Lodge  for  a  charter,  as  directed  in  the  case
of  a  Subordinate  Lodge.  This  charter  empowers  them
to  confer  the  five  degrees  on  those  who  present  the  pro-
per certificates,  to  elect  as  members  all  fifth  degree
members  in  good  standing,  who  apply  for  admission,  to
receive  the  prescribed  fees  for  conferring  degrees,  and
for  membership  ;  but  to  impose  no  dues,  pay  no  benefits,
hold  no  property  beyond  what  is  necessary  for  perform-
ing their  work,  and  enjoy  no  representation  in  the
Grand  Lodge.  It  opens  in  the  fifth  degree,  and  can
transact  no  business  (save  conferring  degrees)  in  any
other.

§  2.   Conferring  Degrees.

Too  little  care  and  attention,  generally,  has  been
bestowed  on  this  important  portion  of  instruction.  They
are  generally  conferred  at  the  close  of  the  ordinary
Lodge-meeting,  when  members  are  tired,  and  desire  to
go  home  to  rest,  and  few  therefore  remain  to  give  the
work  due  effect.  In  Degree  Lodges,  also,  the  attend-
ance is  generally  thin,  and  the  work  is  treated  with  too

DEGREE   LODGES  —  COMMITTEES  —  OFFICERS.         249

much  indifference,  and  hurried  through  as  a  thing  more
desirable  to  be  rid  of  than  to  perform.  The  offices
not  being  legal  qualifications  for  other  stations  beyond,
having  no  official  degrees  when  passed,  and  no  special
honors  or  emoluments  attached,  are  frequently  poorly
filled  and  irregularly  served.  Frequent  absences  re-
quire frequent  changes  in  temporary  supplies,  many  of
whom  are  but  imperfectly  acquainted  with  the  written
and  unwritten  work,  and  therefore  differ  considerably
from  each  other  in  their  instructions  to  the  candidates.
All  these  evils  combined,  in  some  sections,  tend  greatly
to  mar  the  beauty  and  harmony  of  the  instructions  of
our  subordinate  degrees.

The  evil  suggests  its  own  remedy :  let  it  be  applied
wherever  possible.  If  conferred  by  the  Subordinate
Lodge,  let  it  set  aside  one  evening  every  month  to  con-
fer degrees,  omitting  initiations  and  all  other  than
absolutely  necessary  business.  Let  them  be  conferred
deliberately ;  by  none  other  than  good  readers ;  and
have  the  candidates  carefully  and  correctly  instructed
by  a  competent  Teacher.  If  by  a  Committee,  let  them
secure  a  good  attendance  of  well  qualified  brethren.  If
by  a  Degree  Lodge,  let  it  secure  competent  and  zealous
officers,  who  will  perform  their  duties  correctly.  And
if  the  number  of  candidates  is  too  great,  as  frequently
happens  in  large  cities,  let  them  meet  oftener,  that  the
work  may  be  well  and  understandingly  performed.

§  3.   Officers  and  their  Duties.

The  officers  of  a  Degree  Lodge,  as  prescribed  by  the
Lectures,  are  a  Noble  Grand,  a  Deputy  Noble  Grand,
an  Assistant  Noble  Grand,  a  Vice  Grand,  a  Past  Grand,
a  Conductor,  ind  an  Inside  and  an  Outside  Guardian,  to

250  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANILA L

which  are  added,  for  the  transaction  of  its  business,  a
Secretary  or  Scribe,  and  a  Treasurer.  In  Pennsylvania,
where  these  Lodges  originated,  the  ancient  names  are
retained  of  High  Priest,  Deputy,  and  Assistant  High
Priest,  Warden,  &c.

The  jewels,  regalia,  and  robes  of  these  offices  are  not
prescribed  by  law,  and  consequently  vary  more  or  less
in  nearly  every  Degree  Lodge.  In  Pennsylvania,  gene-
rally, they  approximate  closely  toward  those  of  Encamp-
ment offices ;  in  other  States,  those  of  the  Subordinate
Lodge,  except  that  the  colors  are  for  the  fifth  degree.

The  duties  of  the  several  officers  correspond  generally
to  those  of  similar  officers  in  the  Subordinate  Lodge.
Where  there  is  any  deviation,  it  is  clearly  noted  in  the
book  of  Lectures.  The  Assistant  and  Deputy  of  the
principal  officer  are  seated,  respectively,  at  his  left  and
his  right  hand.  The  stations  of  the  others  correspond
precisely  to  the  stations  of  the  corresponding  offices  of
the  Lodge.

The  Principal  and  his  Assistants  should  be  good,
ready  readers,  as  should  the  Vice  Grand  (or  Warden)
and  the  Past  Grand.  If  the  Conductor  is  to  instruct
the  candidates,  as  is  sometimes  done,  he  should  be
thoroughly  instructed  himself,  and  regular  in  attend-
ance. But  the  chief  officer  should  perform  that  duty
in  person,  aided  (if  need  be)  by  his  Assistant.

The  same  remarks,  as  to  reading  and  instruction,
apply  to  a  Lecture  Master.  And  great  care  should  be
used  to  impress  the  candidate  with  the  importance  of
remembering  the  mode  of  proving  strangers,  and  our
rule  in  regard  to  challengers.

The  Scribe  should  be  required  to  notify  each  Lodge
what  degrees  are  conferred  on  its  members,  and  when
they  were  conferred,  that  the  Secretary  may  enter  the

OF    PAST    OFFICIAL    DEGREES.  251

information  on  his  books  for  the  use  of  the  Subordinate
Lodge.

CHAPTER  XV.

OF    PAST    OFFICIAL   DEGREES.

THESE  belong  properly  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  but  we
introduce  them  here  for  convenience.  They  can  be  con-
ferred only  by  some  one  specially  authorized  to  confer
them  by  the  Grand  Lodge  itself;  usually  some  Grand
Officer,  or  the  D.  D.  Grand  Masters,  and  sometimes  by
a  Degree  Lodge.

They  are  conferred  only  for  services  rendered,  save,
in  the  case  of  a  new  Lodge,  the  first  N.  G.  may  receive
the  Past  V.  G.'s  and  the  P.  Secretary's  degree  ;  and  the
first  V.  G.  the  Past  Secretary's.  In  some  States  they
are  made  requisite  to  holding  office  in  the  Grand
Lodge.

The  Past  Official  Degrees  for  the  Encampment  were
abolished  years  ago ;  and  as  there  are  no  prescribed
lectures  to  accompany  these,  they  might  as  well  have
been  treated  in  the  same  manner.  Seldom  do  any
remarks  accompany  the  imparting  of  the  unwritten
language.  We  have  therefore  but  few  comments  to
offer.

§  1.  Past  Secretary's  Degree.

If  with  proper  integrity  you  have  recorded  the  pro-
ceedings of  your  Lodge,  you  are  entitled  to  receive  the
honors  of  this  degree,  and  the  S."  and  P.  W.  by  which  to

252

THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

be  known  of  all  others  of  similar  merit.  You  have
magnified  and  made  honorable  a  toilsome  office,  already
rendered  illustrious  by  the  many  great  and  noble  men
who  have  performed  its  duties.  Ezra,  and  Daniel,  and
the  prophets  generally  are  classed  as  Scribes.  But  the
Great  Scribe,  who  writeth  his  laws  on  the  universe  and
in  the  hearts  of  men,  as  his  Finger  inscribed  THE  LAW
on  the  tables  of  stone,  has  Himself  crowned  the  office
with  the  excellency  of  glory.  How  terrible  that  writing
on  the  palace-wall,  which  only  His  prophet  could  inter-
pret to  the  dismayed  Belshazzar :  "  MENE,  MENE,
TEKEL,  UPHARSIN!"  (Daniel  v.  25.)  May  a  similar
sentence  never  be  written  against  any  Odd-Fellow  !

There  is  no  prescribed  Emblem,  Jewel,  Regalia,  or
Color  for  this  degree.  Its  recipient  retains  those  of  the
office  passed.

OF    PAST    OFFICIAL    DEGREES.

253

§  2.  Past  Vice  Grrand's  Degree.

If  you  have  faithfully  aided  the  Noble  Grand  in  re-
straining and  suppressing  all  disorder,  and  enforcing  the
laws  of  our  institution  ;  and  if  you  have  carefully  ad-
ministered the  obligation  and  impressively  delivered  the
charge  in  every  case,  you  are  worthy  of  this  honorary
degree.  For  by  your  fidelity  has  your  (color]  been
honored  and  ita  illustrious  exemplar  been  imitated.
And  in  truth  there  is  no '  inapt  resemblance  between
your  humble  duties  and  those  of  Moses  at  Sinai.  Both
delivered  the  law,  obligation,  and  charge  of  their  office
faithfully,  and  bound  those  under  their  instruction  to
order  and  obedience.

The  Emblem,  Jewel,  Regalia,  and  Color  of  this  De-
gree are  simply  those  of  the  office  passed.
22

254

THE    ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

§  3.  Past  Noble  Grand's  Degree.

Having,  with  proper
dignity  and  paternal  re-
gard, extended  the  arm
of  authority  over  your
Lodge,  and  maintained
its  order  and  promoted
its  welfare,  you  are  trans-
ferred to  a  chair  of  equal
honor  but  greater  repose,
and  are  prepared  to  enter
a  Lodge  of  higher  rank
and  more  extended  duties.
In  your  comparative  ease  here,  and  more  extended  field
of  active  duty  there,  cease  not  to  remember  gratefully  the
kind  partiality  and  unbought  favors  of  your  brethren,
whose  suffrages  carried  you  through  the  chairs  of  the
Lodge,  and  have  thus  elevated  you  to  the  dignity  of
membership  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  your  State.
Jewel. — A  five-pointed  star.

CHAPTER  XVI.      .

OF   SUBORDINATE   ENCAMPMENTS.

IN  this  department  of  our  labors,  references  to  our
former  remarks  will  be  necessary  in  all  matters  where
Lodges  and  Encampments  are  similar.

OF   SUBORDINATE    ENCAMPMENTS.  255

§  1.  How  Commenced  and  Constituted.

To  become  a  member  of  an  Encampment,  an  Odd-
Fellow  must  have  received  the  Fifth  Degree.  And  to
retain  membership  in  it,  he  must  continue  in  good  stand-
ing in  a  Subordinate  Lodge.  In  fact,  good  standing  in
the  Subordinate  Lodge*  is  absolutely  essential  to  his
good  standing  everywhere  else  in  the  Order — in  En-
campment, Degree  Lodge,  State  Grand  Lodge  or  En-
campment, or  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States.
Remember  this.

An  Encampment  is  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  United  States,  or  a  Grand  Encampment  (recognized
by  the  same)  of  the  State,  District,  or  Territory  wherein
it  is  located.  It  must  be  constituted  of  at  least  seven
Odd-Fellows  who  have  received  the  "Sublime  Degrees,"
as  its  three  degrees  are  collectively  termed.  And  it
should  be  commenced  and  organized  preparatory  to  in-
stitution, as  recommended  for  Subordinate  Lodges,
Chap.  IX.  §§  1-4,  with  these  differences.  There  must  be
seven  petitioners,  their  cards  deposited  with  a  D.  D.  G.
Patriarch,  if  not  forwarded ;  (or  a  D.  D.  G.  Sire,  if  to  be
chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  ;)
and  the  Petition  is  forwarded  to  a  Grand  Encampment,
(if  not  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States.)  See
form  of  petition,  No.  1 0,  Appendix  B.  It  will  be  insti-
tuted by  a  G.P.,  or  a  D.  D.  G.  P.,  or  a  P.  C.P.  specially
authorized  ;  by  a  D.  D.  G.  Sire,  if  chartered  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States.

*  Which  signifies  contributing  membership  therein,  and  freedom
from  any  disability  by  reason  of  non-payment  of  dues,  or  from
charges  under  the  penal  provisions  of  the  Order.

256  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§2.   Opening — Working — Closing.

For  general  information,  see  Chap.  IX.  §§  7-9.  The
Encampment  working  differs  from  that  of  the  Lodge
chiefly  in  this.  The  Lodge  is  of  the  tivie  type :  the  En-
campment is  of  the  military;  but  Patriarchal,  and
therefore  pastoral,  also.  The  Encampment  opens,  and
closes  finally,  in  its  highest  degree,  as  it  transacts  all
its  business  in  that  degree  only.  It  opens  and  closes  in
each  degree  (with  peculiar  ceremonies)  which  it  confers
during  each  session.  But  while  the  military  forms  are
observed  in  its  opening  and  closing,  the  business  is
transacted  as  in  the  Subordinate  Lodge,  the  officers  re-
cite their  duties  at  opening,  and  it  is  always  opened  and
closed  with  prayer  by  the  proper  officer.

With  the  additional  instructions  afforded  by  the
sublime  degrees,  the  Patriarch  will  find  our  general
remarks  on  the  duties  of  Odd-Fellows,  in  Chapters  IX.
and  X.,  applicable  to  the  duties  devolving  on  him  as
an  Encampment  member.  But  we  must  first  conduct
him  into  that  honorable  station.

§  3.  Application  and  Admission.

Having  received  the  degrees  of  the  Subordinate
Lodge,  you  will  naturally  desire  to  advance  further.
The  Sublime  Degrees,  with  their  rich  stores  of  instruc-
tion, lie  before  you,  only  waiting  your  application  to  be
opened  to  your  eager  mind.*  Procure,  then,  a  copy  of

*  Some  Encampments  do  not,  others  do,  pay  sick  and  funeral
benefits  —  generally  the  same  amount  as  the  Subordinate  Lodges
in  their  vicinity.  These  benefits,  of  course,  enhance  the  price  of
admission.  The  three  degrees  of  an  Encampment  usually  cost
from  nine  to  twenty  dollars.  The  prices,  as  well  as  the  benefits,
vary  considerably,  not  only  in  different  States,  but  even  in  neigh-
boring Encampments.

OF   SUBORDINATE    ENCAMPMENTS.  257

the  Constitution  and  By-Laws  of  the  nearest  Encamp-
ment, and  study  them  by  the  aid  of  some  friendly
Patriarch  of  your  acquaintance.  Then  procure  from
the  N.  G.  and  Secretary  of  your  Lodge,  a  certificate  of
your  standing  and  grade  therein.  Sign  an  application,
(forms  are  in  Appendix  B,)  and  deliver  these  docu-
ments, with  the  proposition  fee,  to  your  friend,  who
will  do  the  rest.  If  elected,  go  forward  with  a  stout
heart,  fearing  nothing ;  for  others  have  passed  the  way
before  you,  and  invite  you  onward.  Novelty,  even
startling  novelty,  you  will  find,  as  once  before;  but
let  it  not  deter  you  from  close  attention  to  the  more
valuable  lessons  concealed  beneath  it  in  every  degree
through  which  you  pass.

§  4.   Committees  and  Appointed  Officers.

For  the  duties  of  Committees  in  the  Patriarchal
branch,  we  refer  to  Chap.  XL ;  they  are  as  applicable
as  in  the  Subordinate  Lodge.  And  as  the  Patriarch  is
already  familiar  with  the  duties  of  Lodge  officers,  (Chap-
ters XII.  and  XIII.,)  but  few  words  will  be  necessary  to
define  the  peculiar  duties  of  officers  of  an  Encampment.

The  Appointed  Officers  of  an  Encampment  are — the
1st  and  2d  Guards  of  the  Tent,  appointed  by  the  High
Priest,  and  the  1st,  2d,  3d,  and  4th  Watches,  the  Sen-
tinel,* and  the  Guide,  who  are  appointed  by  the  Chief
Patriarch.

1.  GUARDS  OF  THE  TENT. — They  act  as  the  Sup-

*  In  Pennsylvania,  and  probably  elsewhere,  to  save  the  Junior
Warden  the  necessity  of  frequent  visits  to  the  ante-room,  to  examine
and  admit  members  and  visitors,  an  Outside  Sentinel  is  appointed
also.  Such  an  office,  though  evidently  not  contemplated  by  the
work,  nor  authorized  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  is,
like  that  of  Junior  Warden  in  the  Lodge,  a  very  useful  and  con-
venient one.
22*

258  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

porters  of  the  High  Priest,  and  as  his  Messengers.
They  should  always  be  on  duty  as  sentinels,  at  each
side  of  the  Tent.

2.  THE  WATCHES. —  When  on  duty,  each  should
have  a  specified  station,  which  he  should  not  leave  on
any  account.  They  should  know  their  parts  well,  and
rehearse  them  effectively.

3.  THE  SENTINEL.  His  Jewel
is  Crossed  Swords,  in  a  Triangle  of
yellow  metal.

His  duties  correspond  to  those
of  the  Inside  Guardian  of  a  Lodge.
Where  there  is  an  Outside  Sentinel,
his  duties  correspond  to  those  of
the  Outside  Guardian.

4.  THE  GUIDE. —  His  duties  are  similar  to  those  of
Conductor  in  the  lodge.

§  5.   The  Elective  Officers.

The  Elective  Officers  of  an  Encampment  are  —  a
Junior  Warden,  a  Treasurer,  a  Scribe,  a  Senior  Warden,
a  High  Priest,  and  a  Chief  Patriarch.  Usually  service
for  one  term,  or  twenty-six  nights,  in  an  appointed
office,  renders  eligible  to  an  elective  office;  and  one
term  in  any  of  the  inferior  elective  offices  renders  the
incumbent  eligible  to  the  chair  of  the  High  Priest  or
Senior  Warden ;  and  after  one  term
in  that  office,  he  is  eligible  for  elec-
tion as  Chief  Patriarch;  but  this
arrangement  depends  on  the  regula-
tions of  each  Grand  Encampment.
1.  THE  JUNIOR  WARDEN. — The
Jewel  of  this  office  is  a  Crook,  within
a  Triangle  of  yellow  metal.

OF   SUBORDINATE   ENCAMPMENTS.  259

His  duties  are,  to  examine  the  Patriarchs  at  opening ;
to  see  that  the  officers  are  at  their  stations ;  to  open  and
close  the  Encampment  in  each  degree;  to  assist  the
Chief  Patriarch  and  High  Priest  as  required  ;  to  pre-
side in  the  absence  of  the  superior  officers,  (if  the  local
laws  permit ;)  to  examine  every  brother  that  applies  for
admission,  and  see  that  he  is  in  proper  regalia,  and
addresses  the  chairs  properly.

2.  THE  TREASURER. —  His  Jewel
is  Crossed  Keys,  within  a  Triangle
of  yellow  metal.

His  duties  correspond  to  those  of
the  same  officer  in  a  Subordinate
Lodge.

3.  THE  SCRIBE. — The  Jewel  is
Crossed  Pens  in  a  Triangle  of  yel-
low metal.

His  duties  are  the  same  as  tnose
of  an  only  Secretary  in  a  Subordi-
nate Lodge.

4.  THE  SENIOR  WARDEN. — The
Jewel  is  Crossed  Crooks  within  a
Triangle  of  yellow  metal.

His  duties  are  analogous  to  those
of  a  Vice  Grand,  whose  chair  he
occupies  when  the  encampment
meets  in  a  Lodge-room.  He  pre-
sides in  the  absence  of  the  C.  P..
and  is  entitled  to  the  T.  P.  W.

260  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

5.  THE    HIGH    PRIEST. —The
Jewel   is    a   Breastplate  within    a
Triangle :  the  former  may  be  co-
lored appropriately,  the  latter  of
yellow  metal.

His  station  is  within  the  Tent,
behind  the  Altar,  and  the  Tent  is
usually  placed  at  the  side  of  the
room,  on  the  right  of  the  C.  P.

His  duties  are  to  offer  up  the  prescribed  prayers  at
opening,  closing,  and  in  conferring  the  degrees ;  to
instruct  candidates  and  members  in  the  Lectures,  &c. ;
and  to  administer  the  other  dutie's  of  his  office.

6.  THE   CHIEF  PATRIARCH. —
The  Jewel  represents  an  Altar  with
Crossed  Crooks,  within  a  Triangle
of  yellow  metal.

His  duties  are  similar  to  those
of  the  Noble  Grand  of  a  Lodge,
whose  chair  he  occupies  when  the
Encampment  is  held  in  a  Lodge-
room  ;  and,  like  him,  he  is  entitled
to  the  T.  P.  W.,  and  superintends  the  examination  of
visitors  by  card.  He  should  possess  the  same  high
moral  and  social  qualifications ;  the  same  mental  activity
and  acquirements ;  the  same  business  tact  and  energy ;
the  same  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  characters  and
abilities  of  the  brethren  under  his  charge ;  the  same
ready  knowledge  of  the  laws  and  usages  of  the  Order,
and  the  rules  of  debate ;  the  same  dignity  of  carriage,
evenness  of  temper,  firm  decision,  and  courtesy  of
manners ;  and  the  same  kindness  of  heart,  that  are
pre-eminently  required  in  the  Presiding  Officer  of  a
Lodge.

OF   SUBORDINATE    ENCAMPMENTS.  261

The  regalia  of  the  Patriarchal  and  Golden  Rule  de-
grees is  black  gloves  and  a  black  apron,  only;  and  of  the
Royal  Purple  degree,  the  gloves  with  a  purple  collar
only,  the  collar  to.be  trimmed  with  gold-colored  lace  or
fringe,  or  both.  The  Past  Chief  Patriarch  wears  no  collar,
and  no  apron  —  only  a  purple  sash,  trimmed  as  above.

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  the  apron  is  abolished  in  the
royal  purple  degree,  (as  in  all  Lodge  degrees  except  the
initiatory,)  and  in  all  offices  of  the  Order.  Notice,  also,
that  no  sashes  are  to  be  worn  instead  of,  or  in  addition
to,  the  above  Encampment  regalia  —  the  words  being
"  purple  collars  only  "  — and  for  Past  Chief  Patriarchs,
"  collars  or  sashes  "  only.  (For  Past  Grand  Patriarch's
jewel  and  regalia,  see  close  of  Chapter  XX.)

We  would  repeat  here  what  we  have  said  on  the  use
of  the  Gavel,  Chap.  XIII.  §  9.  In  the  Encampment,
the  officers  use  their  emblems  of  authority  in  the  same
manner  as  the  gavel  is  used  in  the  lodge  :  always  con-
forming, of  course,  to  the  directions  of  the  written  work.
The  C.  P.,  only,  commands  silence  and  order,  and  the
rising  and  seating  of  the  Encampment,  in  all  those
cases  where  the  book  does  not  direct  otherwise.  And
the  Senior  Warden  assumes  to  do  so  only  when  the
C.  P.  is  so  engaged  that  he  overlooks  or  cannot  attend
to  it.  A  careful  examination  of  the  installation  cere-
mony and  the  charges,  in  connection  with  the  above
remarks,  will,  it  is  believed,  tend  to  lessen  the  per-
plexity often  occasioned  by  the  abuse  of  the  emblem  of
authority,  and  abate  not  a  little  of  the  unnecessary
noise  occasioned  by  its  too  frequent  use  by  the  second
officer.

262  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  6.   Conferring  the  Degrees.

But  one  degree  should  be  conferred  on  an  applicant
at  any  session  ;  and  this  should  be  well  and  properly
conferred.  Not  only  impart  and  use  correctly,  and
with  precision,  the  P.  W.,  S.  and  G.,  for  they  are
the  keys  which  admit  a  man  to  the  privileges  and  be-
nefits of  our  meetings,  but  strive  also  to  excel  in  the
appropriate  manner  of  delivering  our  lectures  and
charges,  and  conferring  the  Patriarchal  degrees.  We
have  not  yet  given  sufficient  attention  to  this  subject.
They  are  of  a  higher  order  and  different  character,  and
require  more  care  than  those  that  have  preceded  them.
And  yet  we  have  given  them  less  attention  and  labor.
Encampments  generally  have  looked  at  each  other,  not
to  copy  improvements  but  to  justify  defects  and  excuse
irregularities.  If  this  practice  is  continued  until  it  be-
comes general,  our  course  must  be  downward,  and  end
in  riot  and  disorder.

We  have  said  elsewhere  that  the  Odd-Fellow  should
be  always  a  gentleman,  in  the  proper  sense  of  that
word.  The  Patriarch  should  be  especially  such,  "  seri-
ous and  thoughtful."  He  should  ever  conduct  as  one
in  the  Encampment,  and  never  subject  any  one  entering
it  to  any  treatment  that  is  boorish.  Every  part  of  our
Patriarchal  work  is  designed  to  set  forth  and  illustrate
serious  and  important  lessons,  and  to  make  a  salutary
impression  on  the  minds  of  our  members.  But  if  per-
formed in  a  hurried  or  confused  manner,  no  proper  or
definite  impression  can  be  made.  If  performed  in  a
burlesque  or  trifling  mode,  it  will  excite  only  ridicule  or
disgust.  By  converting  serious  things  into  jest,  and
mingling  buffoonery  with  prayers,  we  lower  our  OWD

OF  THE  PATRIARCHAL  DEGREE.         263

self-respect  and  blunfc  our  moral  feelings,  while  we  out-
rage decency  and  wound  the  sensibilities  of  others.  If
we  perform  the  work  in  a  rude,  coarse  manner,  we
rouse  feelings  in  the  candidate  directly  opposed  to  those
it  was  designed  to  inspire,  destroy  the  entire  effect  of
our  beautiful  ritual,  and  wound  the  feelings  of  the  can-
didate, if  not  injure  his  person,  and  drive  him  from  us
disgusted.  Depend  upon  it,  that  if  a  public  excitement
is  ever  got  up  against  our  Order,  the  improper  modes
of  performing  our  work  pursued  by  some  Encampments
will  be  the  fuel  to  feed  its  destroying  flames.

CHAPTER  XVII.

OF   THE    PATRIARCHAL   DEGREE.

§  1.  Introduction  to  the  Degree.

1.  THOUGH  teaching  peaceful  lessons,  the  Encampment
assumes  military  forms.  The  candidate  is  therefore
met  with  a  more  rigid  scrutiny  and  in  a  sterner  man-
ner than  on  his  entrance  into  the  Subordinate  Lodge.
He  need  not  wonder,  then,  at  the  strict  watch  which
will  be  kept  over  him,  nor  the  restraints  that  will  be  im-
posed on  him  until  he  has  passed  the  ordeal,  and  proved
himself  to  be  no  enemy  in  disguise,  but  a  true  Odd-Fel-
low. Let  him  rely  on  the  kindness  of  his  guardian  to
sustain  and  defend  him  until  justice  awards  him  release,
and  the  benevolence  of  the  Patriarchs  greets  him  with
hospitality  and  fraternal  welcomes.

264

THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL,

2.  The  pilgrimage  of  human  life  has  many  such  trials.
The   impatient  and  passionate,  acting  on  impulse,  but
aggravate  their  evils ;  but  he  who  wearies  not  in  duty,
acting  on  principle,  at  last  passes  beyond  the  darkness
and  difficulty,  and,  trusting  in  God,  finds  those  who  re-
fresh his  spirit  with  counsel  and  repose.

3.  A  true  Patriarch  never  closes  his  tent  against  a
stranger  in  distress.     Hospitality  is  not  only  a  sacred
but  a  pleasing  duty,  acknowledged  such  in  all  ages  and
among  all  nations.     As  a  Patriarch  who  has  needed  it,
be  therefore  ready  to  grant  it.     Our  God  is  the  universal
Father.     He  teaches  us  to  be  kind  even  unto  the  evil
and  the  unthankful,  by  his  sunshine  and  his  rain,  which

OF   THE    PATRIARCHAL    DEGREE.  265

he  dispenses  to  all  alike.  But  while  it  is  our  dity  to
minister  to  the  wants  of  the  stranger,  without  inqiiring
into  his  country,  or  his  creed,  or  even  the  causes  of  his
misfortunes,  it  is  also  a  duty  we  owe  to  self  and  family
to  admit  no  treacherous  or  vicious  person  into  our  con-
fidence, or  give  him  power  to  harm  ourselves  or  others.
We  have  a  right,  therefore,  after  relieving  immediate
necessities,  to  examine  carefully  the  pretensions  and
characters  of  those  with  whom  we  hold  intercourse.
On  these  principles  every  Lodge  and  Encampment
claims  to  examine  rigidly  all  who  ask  admission  to  their
mysteries,  or  claim  to  enter  their  portals  as  Odd-Fel-
lows.

4.  And  here  you  will  find  your  previous  instructions
in  Odd-Fellowship  of  essential  service  to  you.     May
you  be  able  to  show  that  you  have  not  been  an  inatten-
tive hearer,  nor  a  heedless  performer  of  their  inculca-
tions, that  you  may  enter,  without  difficulty  or  delay,  on
the  privileges  and  duties  now  opening  before  you  in  the
Patriarchal  degree.

5.  Your  first  lesson  of  duty,  as  a  Patriarch,  will  be
found  in  the  following  admirable  summary : —

EXODUS  xx.  1-17.

And  God  spake  all  these  words,  saying,  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,
which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house
jf  bondage.

I.  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me.

II.  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any  like-
ness of.  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  that  is  in  the  earth  be-
neath, or  that  is  in  the  water  under  the  earth.     Thou  shalt  not  bow
down  thyself  to  them,  nor  serve  them:   for  I,  the  Lord  thy  God,  am
a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children
unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  me :  and
showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love  me  and  keep  my
commandments.

23

266  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

III.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain  :
for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain.

IV.  Remember  the  sabbath  day,  to  keep  it  holy.     Six  days  shalt
thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work ;  but  the  seventh  day  is  the  sab-
bath of  the  Lord  thy  God  :   in  it  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work  ;   thou,
nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,   thy  man-servant,  nor  thy  maid-ser-
vant, nor  thy  cattle,  nor  the  stranger  that  is  within  thy  gates ;   for  in
six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  in
them  is,  and  rested  the  seventh  day ;   wherefore  the  Lord  blessed  the
sabbath  day,  and  hallowed  it.

V.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  that  thy  days  may  be  long
upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee.

VI.  Thou  shalt  not  kill.

VII.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery.

VIII.  Thou  shalt  not  steal.

IX.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour.

X.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,  thou  shalt  not  co-
vet thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his  man-servant,  nor  his  rnaid-servant,
nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  thing  that  is  thy  neighbour's.

6.  As  if  prostrate  at  the  foot  of  the  Sacred  Mount,
receive  this  Law  to  govern  your  future  actions.     For
Virtue  founded  on  Truth  is  the  basis  of  our  affiliation.
It  should  be  the  aim  of  your  life,  for  by  it  only  can  the
great  and  good  in  your  nature  be  developed.     All  the
feelings,  passions,  and  impulses  lead  only  to  evil,  without
it.     But  with  it,  all  tend  to  good,  to  happiness,  which
vice  promises  but  never  bestows.     Virtue  increases  and
exalts  even  the  common  joys  of  sense.     Its  influence
extends  to  all  the  avocations  of  life,  strengthens  the
affections  and  sympathies,  gives  wisdom  to  youth,  ac-
tivity to  manhood,  and  glory  to  age :  it  is  a  safeguard
in    prosperity,  a    solace  in   adversity,   a   comforter  in
affliction:   it  opens  to  us  every  true  enjoyment  of  life,
ind  passes  with  us  into  life  eternal.

7.  The  regalia  of  this  degree  is,  a  black  apron,  and

OF    THE    PATRIARCHAL    DEGREE.

267

gloves  of  the  same  color ;  for  black  is  the  color  of  this
degree.  Its  signification  is  explained  in  the  lecture.

You  will  remember,  also,  the  signs  and  tokens  of
this  degree ;  for  by  them,  only,  can  you  establish  your
claim  to  admission  to  the  Encampment.

The  explanation  of  the  symbols  of  the  Order,  given
in  this  degree,  are  worthy  your  attention  and  remem-
brance ;  especially  as  presented  in  three  great  divisions
—  teaching  our  duty  to  God,  to  our  fellow-men,  and  to
ourselves.

§  2.  Emblems  of  the  Patriarchal  Degree.

I.  THE  TENT.

Emblem  of  Hospitality:  —  the  peculiar  emblem  of
this  degree.  It  is  always  represented  open,  to  remind
us  that  when  we  needed  hospitality  we  found  it,  and
should,  therefore,  be  ready  to  grant  it  when  needed  by
others.  But  while  it  is  our  duty,  and  should  be  our
pleasure  to  "  entertain  strangers,"  we  are  admonished
that  we  owe  it  to  ourselves  and  our  families  to  admit
"no  enemy  in  disguise"  — no  treacherous  or  vicious
person,  to  our  homes  and  our  bosoms.

This  emblem  discourses  "to  us  of  the  ancient  patri-
archs, who  abode  in  tents  ; "  and  teaches  us,  "  that  in
this  world  we  have  no  continuing  city,"  but  are  "  pil-

268  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

grims  and  sojourners"  who  seek  one  to  come.  "Soon
will  our  earthly  tents  be  struck,  and  we  pass  beyond
the  swelling  waters."

"  Here,  in  this  body  pent.

Absent  from  heaven  I  roam,
Yet  nightly  pitch  my  tent

A  day's  march  nearer  home  "

II.  THE  CROOK.

Emblem  of  Guidance  and  Protection:  —  It  represents
not  merely  the  instrument  whereby  the  shepherd  directs
his  flock  in  its  migrations,  and  protects  his  sheep  from
the  wolves;  but  that  higher  reality,  of  which  the  shep-
herd's crook  is  but  an  emblem — the  guiding  wisdom
and  protecting  power  of  the  Great  Shepherd,  who  has
led  and  defended  us  that  we,  in  turn,  might  be  good
shepherds  unto  all  those  placed  under  our  care,  or  con-
trol and  influence.

III.   THE  THREE  PILLARS.

Emblems  of  Faith,  Hope,  Charity: — the  Wisdom,
Strength,  and  Beauty  of  Religion,  and  the  supports  and
ornaments  of  our  Temple  of  Universal  Brotherhood.

Every  time  we  enter  an  encampment  they  remind  us
of  the  Wisdom  of  humility,  the  Strength  of  trust,  and
the  Beauty  of  kindness  which  brought  us  to  the  emblem-
atic Tent,  and  before  its  solemn  altar.  And  they  teach
us  to  cherish  and  cultivate  these  treasures  and  virtues
of  the  soul,  by  an  observance  of  the  Great  Law  of  duty
to  God,  duty  to  our  neighbor,  and  duty  to  ourselves.

§  3.  Concluding  Remarks  on  this  Degree.
Th/3  simplicity  of  the  Patriarchal  life,  and  the  purity
of  fa'th  by  which  the  Patriarchs  were  guided,  form  a
pleasing  picture  in  contemplating  antiquity.  The  world
has  advanced  in  civilization  and  knowledge,  but  still
the  heart  looks  back  with  regret  at  its  departure  froir

OF    THE    PATRIARCHAL    DEGREE.  269

those  simpler,  though  ruder  habits  of  early  virtue  and
goodness.  In  our  Tents  we  may  revive  much  of  what
thus  charms  us.  And  in  our  lives  we  may  copy  that
confiding  faith  and  guileless  simplicity.  By  practising
universal  fraternity,  we  may  extend  further  and  further
around  us,  the  golden  links  which  chain  heart  to  heart
in  a  stronger  and  broader  sympathy,  till  at  last  they
bind  the  earth  in  concord  of  virtue  and  peace.

To  effect  this,  let  each  heart  combine  its  wishes  and
energies  with  every  other  heart  having  the  same  object,
irrespective  of  sect  or  nation,  that  all  may  work  together
for  the  general  good.  Cherish,  then,  the  teachings  of
our  Order,  till  your  soul,  imbued  with  their  spirit,  gives
forth  their  beauty  and  their  power.  Consider  the
stranger  still  as  a  man  :  give  him  needed  sustenance
and  repose,  whatever  his  country  or  his  creed,  his  vices
or  misfortunes,  that  you  may  influence  him  for  good.
But  your  brother  Patriarchs,  let  them  especially  share
your  sympathy  and  experience  your  aid.  Unite  with
them  in  all  good  works.  Let  not  contention  or  envy
separate  you,  for  ye  are  brethren.  If  one  injure  you,
consider  well.  It  may  have  been  undesignedly,  or
under  some  misconception.  Be  candid  with  him,  and
frank.  State  the  wrong  fairly  and  kindly.  If  he  re-
pent, wipe  oif  even  the  remembrance  of  the  wrong,  that
it  stand  not  against  him.  Remember  that  you,  too,  are
fallible ;  that  you,  too,  may  need  kindly  correction  ;  that
you,  too,  may  stand  in  need  of  fraternal  forgiveness.

Such  are  the  principles  a  Patriarch  must  practise.
Not  alone  entering  our  Tents,  not  alone  learning  our
mysteries,  not  alone  wearing  our  badge,  not  alone  bear-
ing the  offices  and  honors  of  our  Order,  can  make  a
man  an  'Odd-Fellow ;  but  living  an  Odd-Fellow's  life.
"If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."

23*

OF   THE    GOLDEN    RULE    DEGREE.  271

CHAPTER  XVIII.

OF    THE    GOLDEN    RULE    DEGREE.

§  1.  Introduction  to  the  Degree.

1.  THE  candidate  for  this  degree  should  be  firm  and
decided  in  his  answers  to  all  questions  asked  him,  and
patient  in  all  required  of  him,  that  he  may  the  better
understand    its    instructions    as   they   are    successively
unfolded  :  especially  its  great  lesson  of  charity,  evinced
in  what  is  usually  termed  toleration.

2.  Behold  the  necessity  of  this  lesson  in  our  world.
Religion  is  often  measured  by  state  lines  and  regulated
by  statute  law.     The   Christianity  which   is  lawful  on
one  side  of  a  mountain,  or  stream,  or  even  an  imaginary
line,   is    punished  with   confiscation,   imprisonment,   or
death,  on  the  other  side.     Does  God  require  this  at  the
hands  of  one  portion  of  His  children  toward  the  other
portion,  their  brethren  ?     Has  He  instituted  such  laws  :
does  He  inflict  such  penalties  for  differences  of  opinion  ?
Then,  if  we  take  into  consideration  all  the  religions  in
the  world,   how  much  greater   the   intolerance  !      Not
only  between  the  North  and  the  South  of  Europe,  but
the  European,  living  amid  the  refinements  of  art  and
science,   is  but  little  in   advance  of  the  Asiatic,  who,
though  living  in  the  land   of  Adam,  of  Noah,  of  Abra-
ham, and  other  Bible  worthies,  rejects  that  Book  and
clings  to  the  Shaster  or  the  Koran,  and  calls  all  infidels
who  acknowledge  not  the  authority  of  Confucius,   or
Mahomet,  or  Brahma.     The  African  who  bows  before

272  THE    ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

his  many  gods,  also  deems  all  the  world  sinners  against
Heaven,  because  they  kneel  not  at  his  altars.  Thus
the  Tables  of  the  Law,  the  Cross,  and  the  Crescent  are
clashed  in  angry  warfare,  which  convinces  none  and
debases  all,  and  must  therefore  be  abhorred  of  the  God
of  the  whole  earth,  who  is  the  Father  of  all  spirits.
For  when  did  not  persecution  and  intolerance  rather
confirm  than  convince  those  against  whom  it  was  waged?
A  standing  proof,  it  would  seem,  that  Providence  would
rather  prosper  wrong  ideas  than  bloody  practices.  Error
of  the  head,  even  though  it  mislead  the  heart,  appears
more  favored  than  that  bloody  zeal  which  would  immo-
late on  its  altar  a  brother  who  is  deemed  in  error.

3.  Is  it  not  desirable  that  among  all  these  nations,  so
diverse  in  faith,  in  manners,  and  in  customs,  but  so
similar  in  cruel  zeul  and  bloody  intolerance,  a  better
principle  should  obtain  :  one  that  would  not  only  gently
remove  the  fetters  of  the  body,  but  those  of  the  soul
also,  that  the  mind  might  freely  examine  truth  :  one
which  would  trample  under  foot  those  prejudices  which
deprive  the  freeborn  soul  of  its  priceless  birthright  to
seek  God  freely  and  worship  him  voluntarily,  as  the
best  information  may  lead  judgment  and  conscience  to
dictate  ?

Brethren,  let  this  be  our  work.  Boldly,  freely,
unawed  by  danger,  let  us  assert  our  right  to  seek  and
obey  divine  truth :  assert  it  not  only  as  our  right,  but
as  the  right  of  others,  of  ALL.  The  authority  of  con-
science in  religion  must  be  paramount.  Those  high
moral  affections  and  duties  which  have  the  Creator  as
their  object,  no  human  legislation  can  or  should  restrain
or  suppress.  In  our  Tents  no  sectarian  or  national
distinctions  are  recognized.  All  are  entitled  to  the
rights  which  each  claims  fur  himself.  All  are  equal,

OF    THE    GOLDEN    RULE    DEGREE.  273

all  are  brethren :  owning  one  origin,  one  nature,  one
destiny.  Living  the  same  life,  one  interest  thrills  alike
in  every  heart.  If  our  brother  suffer,  we  feel  his  an-
guish ;  if  he  prosper,  we  share  his  joy.  The  pains  and
woos  of  each  swell  the  common  tide  of  humanity's
evils,  in  which  we  have  an  equal  share  and  a  common
lot.  All  our  rights  are  based  on  the  same  great  founda-
tion. He,  therefore,  who  assails  a  brother's  rights,
attacks  our  own :  an  invasion  of  his  welfare  is  an  ag-
gression on  ours  ;  for  our  rights  are  the  same,  and  our
happiness  is  increased  by  the  enjoyments  of  those  who
surround  us.  It  is  our  recognition  of  this  great  prin-
ciple that  leads  us  to  claim  and  to  grant  sympathy  in
suffering,  unity  in  working,  freedom  in  thought  and
worship,  and  to  resist  the  force  that  would  invade  the
natural  rights  of  the  human  soul.

4.  Corroborative  of  the  instructions  of  this  degree
are  the  sentiments  of  the  wisest  and  best  of  mankind.
The  following  Parable,  generally  ascribed  to  Dr.  Frank-
lin, and  familiar  to  the  schoolboy  of  the  passing  gene-
ration, sets  forth  very  beautifully  the  inconsistency  and
wickedness  of  a  persecuting  spirit.

PARABLE  AGAINST  PERSECUTION.

Aram  was  sitting  at  the  door  of  his  tent,  under  the  shade  of  his
fig-tree,  when  it  came  to  pass  that  a  man,  stricken  with  years,  bear-
ing a  staff  in  his  hand,  journeyed  that  way.  And  it  was  noonday.
And  Aram  said  unto  the  stranger,  "  Pass  not  by,  I  pray  thee,  but
come  in,  and  wash  thy  feet,  and  tarry  here  until  the  evening  ;  for
thou  art  stricken  with  years,  and  the  heat  overcometh  thee."

And  the  stranger  left  his  staff  at  the  door,  and  entered  into  the
tent  of  Aram.  And  he  rested  himself.  And  Aram  set  before  him
b^ead  and  cakes  of  fine  meal,  baked  upon  the  hearth.  And  Aram
blessed  the  bread,  calling  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  But  tno
stranger  did  eat,  and  refused  to  pray  unto  the  Most  High,  saying,

274  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

'  Thy  Lord  is  not  the  God  of  my  fathers,  why,  therefore,  should  I
present  my  vows  unto  him?"  And  Aram's  wrath  was  kindled,  and
he  called  his  servants,  and  they  beat  the  stranger,  and  drove  him
into  the  wilderness.

Now  in  the  evening  Aram  lifted  up  his  voice  unto  the  Lord,  and
prayed  unto  him.  And  the  Lord  said,  "  Aram,  where  is  the  stranger
that  sojourned  this  day  with  thee?"  And  Aram  answered  and  said,
"  Behold,  0  Lord,  he  ate  of  thy  bread,  and  would  not  offer  unto  thee
his  prayers  and  thanksgivings.  Therefore  did  I  chastise  him  and
drive  him  from  before  me  into  the  wilderness."

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Aram,  "  Who  hath  made  thee  a  judge  be-
tween me  and  him  ?  Have  not  I  borne  with  thine  iniquities,  and
winked  at  thy  backsliding;  and  shalt  thou  be  severe  with  thy  bro-
ther, to  mark  his  errors  and  to  punish  his  perverseness  ?  Arise,  and
follow  the  stranger,  and  carry  with  thee  oil  and  wine,  and  anoint  his
bruises,  and  speak  kindly  unto  him.  For  I,  the  Lord  thy  God,  am  a
jealous  God,  and  judgment  belongeth  unto  me.  Vain  is  thine  obla-
tion of  thanksgiving  without  a  lowly  heart.  As  a  bulrush  thou
mayest  bow  down  thy  head,  and  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  trumpet ;
but  thou  obeyest  not  the  ordinance  of  thy  God  if  thy  worship  be  for
strife  and  debate.  Behold  the  sacrifice  that  I  have  chosen.  Is  it
not  to  undo  the  heavy  burdens,  to  let  the  oppressed  go  free,  and  to
break  every  yoke  ?  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  to  bring  the
poor  that  are  cast  out  to  thy  house  ?"

And  Aram  trembled  before  the  presence  of  God.  And  he  arose,
and  put  on  sackcloth  and  ashes,  and  went  out  into  the  wilderness  to
do  as  the  Lord  had  commanded  him.*

*  It  is  said  that  Dr.  Franklin  was  at  a  large  party  among  several
dignitaries  of  the  Church  of  England,  when  the  subject  ^f  compel-
ling conformity  to  an  established  church,  by  law,  was  introduced.
After  several  of  the  clergy  had  defended  the  obnoxious  principle,  the
doctor  was  called  on  for  his  opinion.  He  recited  to  them,  as  Scrip-
ture, the  above  parable;  and  they,  deceived  by  its  style,  and  the
doctor's  gravity,  suspected  not  the  deception,  but  acknowledged  its
force,  and  yielded  the  argument.

Whether  the  occasion  and  result  were  exactly  as  above  stated,  or
not,  it  is  true  that  the  parable  was  published  as  Dr.  Franklin's,  and
that  it  was  alleged  that  he  stole  it  from  Jeremy  Taylor,  who  closee

OF    THE    GOLDEN    RULE   DEGREE.  275

5.  A  Lodge  or  Encampment  sometimes  presents,  in
its  assemblage  of  persons  of  various  nations  and  creeds,
a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  excellency  of  toleration,
and  of  the  possibility  of  a  «  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the

his  work  on  the  "  Liberty  of  Prophesying,"  with  the  following  ver-
sion of  the  same  story.

"  I  end,"  says  he,  "  with  a  story  which  I  find  in  the  Jews'  books  : —
When  Abraham  sat  at  his  tent-door,  according  to  his  custom,  to
entertain  strangers,  he  espied  an  old  man  who  was  a  hundred  years
of  age.  He  received  him  kindly,  washed  his  feet,  provided  supper,
and  caused  him  to  sit  down  :  "but  observing  that  the  old  man  ate  and
prayed  not,  nor  begged  for  a  blessing  on  his  meat,  asked  him  why  he
did  not  worship  the  God  of  heaven  ?  The  old  man  told  him  that  he
worshipped  the  fire  only,  and  acknowledged  no  other  God;  at  which
Abraham  grew  so  zealously  angry,  that  he  thrust  the  old  man  out
of  his  tent,  and  exposed  him  to  all  the  evils  of  the  night,  and  an  un-
guarded condition.

"  When  the  old  man  was  gone,  God  called  to  Abraham,  and  asked
him  where  the  stranger  was  ?  He  replied,  « I  thrust  him  away,  be-
cause he  did  not  worship  thee.'  God  answered,  '  I  have  suffered
him  these  hundred  years,  although  he  dishonored  me,  and  couldst
not  thou  endure  him  one  night,  when  he  gave  thee  no  trouble  ?'  Upon
this,  saith  the  story,  Abraham  fetched  him  back  again,  and  gave
him  hospitable  entertainment  and  wise  instruction.  '  Go  thou  and
do  likewise,'  and  thy  charity  will  be  rewarded  by  the  God  of  Abra-
ham."

Now  here,  it  must  be  confessed,  is  the  story,  leaving  to  Dr.  Frank
lin  only  its  dress  and  its  interesting  auxiliaries.  That  the  doctor
did  not  himself  claim  to  be  the  author  of  the  story  is  rendered  highly
probable  from  the  fact  that  it  is  not  found  in  the  authentic  edition
of  his  works,  published  by  Wm.  Duane,  Philadelphia.  But  the  ori-
ginal, from  whence  Jeremy  Taylor  got  his  version?  It  is  given  in
Dr.  Priestley's  works,  quoted  in  Latin  from  "  Shebeth  Jehudah.  The
Tribe  of  Judah,  the  Virgin  Daughter  of  Solomon;  containing  the  va-
rious Calamities,  Martyrdoms,  Dispersions,  &c.,  of  the  Jews.  Trans-
lated from  Hebrew  into  Latin,  by  George  Gentius.  Hamburg,  1680."
A  friend  has  furnished  us  with  the  following  translation.

276  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

bond  of  peace"  amid  a  diversity  of  faith.  It  thus
truly  prefigures  that  glorious  era  when  the  Golden
Rule  shall  have  been  received  and  obeyed  by  all  the
tribes  and  nations  of  men.  The  high  barriers  which,  in

"The  most  noble  author  Sadus  relates  that  that  venerable  exam-
ple of  antiquity,  the  patriarch  Abraham,  celebrated  for  the  glory  of
hospitality,  thought  it  not  happy  nor  fortunate  for  him,  unless  he  had
received  some  guest,  whom,  as  a  presiding  genius  of  his  household,
he  might  serve  with  all  kind  offices.  Once  upon  a  time,  when  he  had
no  guest,  and  had  sent  abroad  to  seek  for  a  stranger,  he  perceived  a
man  bowed  down  with  years  and  wearied  with  travelling,  lying  un-
der a  tree.  Approaching  him,  he  led  him  home  as  his  guest,  and  che-
rished him  with  every  attention.  When  the  supper  was  ready,  and
Abraham  and  his  family  addressed  themselves  to  prayer,  the  old
man  stretched  forth  his  hand  to  the  food,  making  no  show  of  religion
or  piety.  Seeing  which,  Abraham  thus  addressed  him  :  *  Old  man,  it
scarcely  becomes  thy  white  hairs  to  take  food  without  previous  ve-
neration of  the  Deity.'  To  whom  the  old  man  replied,  *  I  am  a  fire-
worshipper,  and  ignorant  of  that  sort  of  manners,  for  our  fathers
have  never  taught  me  such  piety.'  At  which  words,  Abraham,  horri-
fied that  he  had  intercourse  with  a  fire-worshipper,  as  one  profane
and  a  stranger  to  the  worship  of  his  God,  removed  him  from  the  table,
and  drove  him  from  his  house,  as  an  offence  to  his  company,  and
an  enemy  to  his  religion.  But  behold,  the  Great  God  at  that  mo-
ment admonished  Abraham.  •  What  dost  thou,  Abraham?  Becomes
it  thee  to  have  done  this?  I  have  given  this  old  man,  although  un-
grateful to  me,  life  and  sustenance  for  more  than  a  hundred  years ;
canst  thou  not  give  the  man  one  meal,  nor  bear  with  him  even  a  mo-
ment?' Being  thus  admonished  by  the  Divine  voice,  Abraham
brought  back  the  old  man  from  his  journey,  and  attended  him  with
such  kind  offices,  piety,  and  converse,  that  by  his  example  he  led
Him  to  the  worship  of  the  true  God."

Such  is  the  version  of  1680.  The  original  of  all,  by  "  the  most  no-
ble author  Sadus,"  (believed  to  be  Arabic,) — who  will  furnish  that?

Long  as  this  note  already  is,  we  cannot  refrain  from  adding  to  h
the  following  appropriate  parable  by  Krummacher.

OF    THE    GOLDEN    RULE    DEGREE.  277

the  world,  separated  men  from  each  other,  are  here  re-
moved. They  have  left  their  prejudices  at  the  door,
and  mingle  in  one  circle  of  brotherhood,  harmony,  and
love.  The  descendants  of  Abraham,  the  diverse  fol-
lowers of  Jesus,  the  Pariahs  of  the  stricter  sects,  here
gather  around  the  same  altar,  as  one  family,  manifest-

"THE  PARSEE,  THE  JEW,  AND  THE  CHRISTIAN."

"A  Jew  stepped  into  a  Parsee  temple,  and  saw  there  the  holy  fire.
He  spake  to  the  priest:  What!  do  you  worship  the  fire?  Not  the
fire,  replied  the  priest:  it  is  to  us  an  emblem  of  the  sun,  and  of  its
genial  light  Then  asked  the  Jew,  Do  you  then  worship  the  sun  as
your  God?  Do  you  not  know  that  this  also  is  a  creation  of  the
Almighty  ?  That  we  know,  answered  the  priest,  but  man  being  de-
pendent on  his  senses,  needs  sensible  signs  in  order  to  apprehend
the  Most  High.  And  is  not  the  sun  the  type  of  the  invisible,  incom-
prehensible Source  of  light  that  embraces  and  blesses  all?

"Then  the  Israelite  answered:  Do  your  people  then,  distinguish
the  type  from  the  prototype  ?  Already  they  call  the  sun  their  god,
and  even  sinking  from  this  again  to  a  lower  image,  bow  before  the
earthly  flame.  You  charm  his  external  and  dazzle  his  internal  eye ;
and  while  you  hold  up  before  him  the  earthly  light,  you  withdraw
from  him  the  heavenly.  You  should  not  make  unto  thee  any  image,
nor  any  likeness  at  all.

"  How  then,  asked  the  Parsee,  do  you  designate  the  highest  na-
ture ?  The  Jew  replied,  We  call  it  JEHOVAH  ADONAI,  that  is,  the
Lord  who  is,  who  was,  and  who  will  be  !  Your  word  is  great  and
glorious,  said  the  Parsee,  but  it  is  fearful.

"  A  Christian  then  stepped  up  and  said,  We  call  him  OUR  FA-
THER. The  Gentile  and  the  Jew  looked  on  each  other  with  amaze-
ment, and  said,  That  is  the  nearest  and  the  highest.  But  who  gives
you  the  courage  thus  to  address  the  Eternal  ?  Who  else,  said  the
Christian,  but  He,  the  Father  himself?  *  *  *  *  *

"  And  when  they  understood  it  they  believed,  and  lifted  up  their
eyes  joyfully  toward  heaven,  and  said,  full  of  fervor  and  spirit,
Father !  dear  Father  !

"  And  now  all  three  shook  hands,  and  called  themselves  BROTHERS."
24

278  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

ing  no  differences  of  creed  or  worship,  and  discord  and
contention  are  forgotten  in  works  of  humanity  and
peace.  Such  scenes  lead  the  lover  of  God  and  of  man-
kind to  sigh,  "  Oh  when  shall  the  warrior's  spear  be
broken,  and  his  sword  rest  within  its  scabbard,  and  the
united  thoughts  and  energies  of  man  be  given  to  the
service  of  humanity  in  the  cultivation  of  fraternal  love,
justice,  mercy,  and  true  righteousness — to  the  service
of  God,  in  seeking  to  know  him  better,  to  love  him
more,  and  to  serve  and  obey  him  in  all  things  !"

6.  And  that  glorious  and  blessed  era  will  yet  come.
Patriarchs,  Prophets,  and  Apostles  have  not  predicted
it  in  vain.  Good  men  and  true  will  not  lose  the  labor
with  which  they  have  sought  to  effect  it.  And  the
principle  of  Toleration,  based  on  fraternity,  as  combined
with  the  active  benevolence  of  our  beloved  Order,  will
enable  us  to  be  co-workers  with  them  in  hastening  its
coming.  Hence  let  us  ever  remember  that,  from  what-
ever cause,  men  do  not  think,  any  more  than  they  look
alike.  And  while  we  tolerate  neither  laxity  of  principle
nor  viciousness  of  conduct,  we  may  safely  allow  each
man  to  form  and  indulge  in  his  own  opinions,  while  we
unite  with  him  in  practising  those  great  precepts  which
belong  to  all  religions,  and  which  all  acknowledge  to  be
paramount  as  rules  of  life.  The  Golden  Rule  finds  a
ready  response  in  every  conscience.  All  will  assent  to
its  rightfulness  and  its  importance.  Let  us  then  not
cease  its  practice,  while  we  urge  the  reasons  for  our
faith.  On  it  let  us  all  unite  in  furthering  the  mission
of  Odd-Fellowship,  till  man  everywhere  shall  behold  in
every  fellow-man  a  brother  ;  till  all  shall  realize  that
SIN  is  the  worst  evil,  and  HATRED  the  worst  sin,  to
individuals  and  to  the  race ;  till  mankind  shall  indeed
be  one  family,  a.nd  one  great  law,  the  law  of  LOVE,  shall

OF  THE  GOLDEN-RULE  DEGREE.          279

bind  continents,  isles,  and  nations  in  one  community
forever.  For  this  "  consummation,  devoutly  to  be
wished,"  let  us  hope,  labor,  and  ever  pray  unto  that
God  who  is  Love,  even  the  Father  of  all.

7.  The  color  of  this  degree  is  that  of  gold — yellow.
Regalia  is  black  gloves  and  a  black  apron.

§  2.  Emblems  of  the  Golden- Rule  Degree.

I.  THE  ALTAR  OF  INCENSE.

Emblem  of  Worship:  —  the  peculiar  emblem  of  this
degree.  It  represents  the  universality  of  the  spiritual
instinct  in  men  to  "  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might
feel  after  Him  and  find  Him  ;"  and  to  worship,  whether
on  an  altar  of  earth,  or  of  stone,  or  of  the  living  heart,
only.  And  it  reminds  us  that  to  this  highest  interest
of  man,  as  to  all  others,  we  are  to  apply  the  GOLDEN
RULE  —  "All  things  whomsoever  ye  would  that  men  should
do  'unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  unto  them"  And  it  enjoins
this,  not  to  make  us  indifferent  in  our  religious  faith
or  practice,  but  to  impress  upon  us  the  great  duty  of
TOLERATION  —  not  as  a  policy,  but  as  a  principle  taught
by  the  Divine  Benignity  and  Compassion.  For  "a
zeal  according  to  knowledge"  makes  us  compassionate

280  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

toward  those  who  bow  not  at  our  altar,  and  enjoy  not
our  hopes  and  consolations ;  and  thus  increases  our
efforts  to  convert  them  to  our  faith.

And  it  further  instructs  us  that  "  God  now  requires
His  people  to  offer  unto  Him  the  incense  of  prayer  and
praise,  of  gratitude  and  thanksgiving ; "  and  that  among
the  "acceptable  sacrifices  of  God,  are  a  broken  spirit:
a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart'7  He  will  not  despise.
"Therefore,  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and
there  rernemberest  that  thy  brother  hath  aught  against
thee,  leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  thy
way ;  first  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  THEN  come
and  offer  thy  gift."— Matt.  v.  23,  24.

II.  THE  TABLES  OF  THE  L.u\.
Emblem  of  Divine  Government: — -It  represents  the
common  basis  of  the  three  great  religions  of  the  world
(Judaism,  Christianity,  Mohammedanism)  which  recog-
nize the  One,  only  living  and  True  God — and  the
foundation  of  all  governments  which  acknowledge  God
as  the  Ruler  of  nations,  and  the  interests  and  welfare
of  the  human  race  as  their  end  and  aim.  This  Law  is
a  constantly  operating  fact  in  the  progress  of  religions

OF  THE  ROYAL  PURPLE  DEGREE.

and  of  human  governments  among  men,  teaching  us
faith  and  trust  in  the  Divine  Ruler.

This  common  basis  of  religion  and  of  morals  teaches
Christians  that  having  received  so  much  through  the
Jew,  they  may  well  bear  with  his  supposed  deficiency
until  they  can  impart  to  him  again  ; — and  the  Moslem,
that  the  foundation  on  which  he  stands  is  also  the  com-
mon ground  of  the  others; — and  the  Jew,  as  his  Law
progresses  among  the  nations,  moulding  legislation  and
elevating  morality,  even  while  he  is  without  a  national
home,  it  instructs  in  patience  and  in  hope,  and  to  follow
with  his  love  wheresoever  his  Law  goes  in  blessing  and
in  triumph.

Followers  of  different  Teachers,  ye  are  worshippers
of  One  God,  who  is  Father  of  all,  and  therefore  ye  are
brethren  !  As  such,  Charity,  and  speaking  the  truth
in  love,  should  prevail  among  us  — unity  in  good  works,
wherein  all  agree ;  toleration  in  opinions,  wherein  we
differ.

CHAPTER  XIX.

OF  THE  ROYAL  PURPLE  DEGREE.

§  1.  Summary  of  preceding  Degrees.
As  this  is  the  highest  degree  of  the  Subordinates,  it
may  not  be  amiss  in  this  place  briefly  to  array  the  line
of  special  principles  and  applications  of  Fraternity
through  which  the  candidate  has  passed  in  arriving  at
it.  The  First  Degree  inculcated  Fidelity  as  its  leading
idea,  illustrated  by  Purity,  Benevolence,  and  Charity.
The  prominent  idea  of  the  Second  Degree  is  Covenanted
Love,  (as  in  the  case  of  David  and  Jonathan,)  illustrated
by  deeds  of  mutual  relief  in  seasons  of  difficulty,  danger

284  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

and  distress.  The  Third  Degree  prominently  sets  forth
an  extension  of  this,  in  self-sacrificing  Friendship  on  a
larger  scale,  (as  in  the  case  of  Moses,)  illustrated  by
risking  ease,  property,  and  even  life,  to  save  a  brother.
The  Fourth  Degree  makes  the  principle  of  universal
Love  its  theme ;  Love,  not  to  the  Order  only,  but  to  all
mankind,  as  underlying  all  the  preceding.  The  Fifth
Degree  makes  Truth,  in  action  and  in  sentiment,  its
leading  idea,  illustrated  by  correctness  of  speech  and
conduct,  by  fraternal  watch-care,  and  loving  correction
of  our  brethren.  The  Patriarchal  degree  makes  special
application  of  the  foregoing,  in  the  duty  of  Hospitality
to  the  stranger,  and  especially  to  the  brother.  And  the
Golden  Rule  Degree,  carrying  the  sentiment  of  charity
into  the  domain  of  mind,  enforces  Toleration  (not  in-
difference, nor  yet  approval)  of  all  differences  of  opinion,
faith,  and  worship,  for  the  sake  of  unity  in  working  in
the  cause  of  God  and  Humanity.  We  now  reach,  in
this  most  sublime  degree,  the  idea  of  REST  (not  indo-
lence, or  cessation  of  the  powers  of  mind  and  heart,
but)  the  Rest  of  Faith,  that  prelibation  of  the  immortal,
glorious  Reposeof  Immortality  itself.  For  Heaven  is  the
Reality  of  all  that  Regeneration  prefigures — of  Faith,
which  is  "  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence
of  things  not  seen."  That  heavenly,  purely  spiritual
repose,  is  but  a  higher,  greater  freedom  for  the  soul  to
exercise  its  powers  aright,  easily,  willingly,  gladly.

"  Rest  is  not  quitting

The  busy  career ;
Rest  is  the  fitting

Of  self  for  its  sphere.
*  *  *  *  *
'Tis  loving  and  serving,

The  Highest  and  Best!
'Tis  ONWARD!   unswerving  —

And  that  is  true  rest.''

OF  THE  ROYAL  PURPLE  DEGREE.        285

§  2.  Introduction  to  the  R.  P.  Degree.

1.  Let  all  who  are  weary  of  ill-doing,  and  heavy  laden
with  doubt  and  error,  seek  the  unwearying  activity  of
true  righteousness,  and  the  calm  search  after  truth  and
Divine  assurance :    such  will  find  rest  to   their   souls.
And  they  will  find  it  only  by  travelling  the  road  the
Patriarchs  trod  before  them.

2.  There  is  no  true,  real  rest  on  earth.     Once  entered
on  life,  all  is  toil  and  trouble,  from  infancy  to  old  age.
We  are  enticed  and  hurried  onward,  and  still  onward,
without  power  of   halting   to  enjoy  the   beautiful    and
pleasing  of  present  time  on  the  journey.     The  child
enjoys  not  the  sunshine  of  a  mother's  caress,  he  longs
to  be  a  youth.     The  youth  is  beguiled  from  his  glad-
some sports  by  the  wish  to  become  a  man.     The  man  is
impelled  onward,  yet  onward,  through  perils,  struggling
and  striving  ever  after  enjoyments  which  burst  in  his
grasp  and  flee  as  he  approaches.     And  thus  the  restless
spirit  is  impelled  on  life's  swift  current,  till  it  is  merged
in  the  ocean  of  eternity  !

8.  But  you  are  strong  in  body  and  stout  in  heart,
and  the  experience  of  others  is  naught  to  you.  You
hope  for  a  better  fate  than  has  been  won  by  those  who
preceded  you.  The  wreck  of  their  joys  will  save  you
from  their  disasters  ;  the  wild  torrents  that  overwhelmed
them,  you  feel  strong  to  stem.  Be  it  as  you  say.
Onward,  then,  and  God  speed  you  in  your  laudable
endeavors,  and  furnish  you  with  good  guidance  and
sure  protection.

4.  If  true  principle,  combined  with  stern  integrity,
be  your  guide  and  safeguard  in  the  journey,  all  will  be
well.  However  derided  by  the  worldly-wise,  and  abused

286

THE    ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

by  the  imprudent,  it  alone  can  lead  you  through  the  in-
tricacies of  your  path,  and  deliver  you  from  the  tempta-
tions that  would  allure  you  from  your  onward  course.

5.  Onward,  but  be  wary.    Narrow  and  rough  though
the  path  be,  it  is  better  than  the  broad  and  flower-strewn
way  that  leads  to  death.     Press  on,  though  obstacles  in-
crease   and    the   gloom  thickens  and  the  dark   forests
threaten  to  shut  out  the  day.     Seek  not  ease,  0  pilgrim,
for  it  can  be  obtained  only  at  the  risk  of  delay  and  per-
haps destruction.

6.  Be  principle  still  your  guide.     If  Sensuality  calls
in  syren  tones  and  songs  of  mirth,  opening  an  easy  road
beneath  your  feet,  turn  not  in.     Look  down,  and  be-
hold serpents  twined  among  the  roses ;   note  that  the
laughter  is  that  of   giddy    intoxication ;    see   the  iron
bands  concealed  in  the  flower-wreaths,  rusting  into  flesh,
and  mind,  and  heart.     Oh,  there  is  no  canker  equal  to
sensual  lust  I     Tf  Ambition  invites  to  worldly  glory,  be-
hold beneath  her  robes  meek  humanity  bleeding  in  the

OF  THE  ROYAL  PURPLE  DEGREE.        287

dust !  Turn  from  her  chaplet,  crimsoned  with  the  blood
of  brethren  slain  ;  and  her  laurels,  watered  with  the  tears
of  widowed  mothers  and  orphaned  babes.  "He  that
taketh  the  sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword."  The  spi-
rit of  fell  destruction  that  would  lure  thee  on  to  fame,
will  as  readily  pile  thy  corpse  on  a  heap  of  slain,  a  mo-
nument to  another's  honour.  No,  no ;  let  useful  aims
engross  your  energies,  that  the  world  may  feel  you  have
not  lived  in  vain.  And  be  your  journey  long  or  short,
"  the  great  teacher,  Death,"  is  neared  at  last,  before
whose  scrutinizing  eye  all  your  life-deeds  will  gather
darkness  and  rust,  unless  they  were  wrought  in  love  and
goodness.  Be  firm,  then,  in  principle,  and  you  may
hope  for  the  best.  A  rugged  path  is  traversed  at  last,
and  when  the  waning  light  of  old  age  is  reached,  you
will  retrospect  your  journey  and  find  it  short,  for  life  is
brief  at  most.  Passing  the  critical  period  of  life  which
establishes  its  character,  you  turn  the  hill,  and  begin  its
descent.  Rapidly  now  you  approach  the  great  aim—-
rest,  the  only  true  rest.

7.  Yet  deem  not  all  trials  past.     Many,  indeed,  sink
exhausted  before  they  reach  this  stage.     A  few  troubles
are  yet  in  the  distance,  which  if  passed  safely,  will  leave
the  way  to  peace  and  glory  all  open  before  you.

8.  Your    progress    now  will    be  more   equable,   less
exciting.     Experience  has    calmed  the  tumult  of  your
spirits  and  sobered  your  expectations.     The  storm  of
death  may  soon  burst  upon  you,  but  you  will  not  fear
it :  it  will  but  prepare  you  for  a  purer  atmosphere  be-
yond.    Besides,  on  its  retiring  gloom  is  set  the  signet
bow  of  Hope,  placed  there  by  the  hand  of  our  covenant-
keeping  Father.

9.  Your    guide    must    soon    leave    you.      In    other
words,  Faith   must  give  place  to  Knowledge,  Hope  to

288  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Fruition.  However  serviceable  in  this  world  of  sha-
dows and  blindness,  they  imperfectly  represent  the  glo-
rious realities  beyond.  Those  of  defective  judgment
and  wayward  passions  may  lay  their  own  errors  at  the
door  of  their  guide;  but  he  who  has  truly  followed  the
leadings  of  a  divine  Faith  and  Hope  can  better  judge
their  worth  as  teachers  and  comforters  here,  and  guides
to  the  great  realities  on  high.

10.  But  better  even  their  imperfect  teachings  than
the  starless  night  of  their  absence;  better  their  guid-
ance than  wandering   unled,  through  snares  and  pit-
falls, passion-tost  and  impulse-driven,  unto  destruction
without  it.     They  bring  to  cheering  music  and  to  joy-
ous light  the  wandering  soul  at  last.

11.  Happy  they  who,  admitted  to  the  company  of
departed  patriarchs  of  time,  are  permitted  to  sit  down
with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  at  the  feast  of  Hea-
ven's kingdom.     It  may  be  said  of  them,  "Ye  are  come
unto  Mount  Sion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,
the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;    and  to  an  innumerable  com-
pany of  angels  ;  to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of
the  first-born,  which  are  written  in  heaven  ;  and  to  God,
the  Judge  of  all ;  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made
perfect."*

12.  In  imagination  place  yourself  there,  and  review
the  probable  pilgrimage  of  your  life.      Such  reviews
may  be  salutary  to  your  real  future.

The  progress,  so  tedious  at  the  time,  how  rapid  !  The
discipline,  so  sharp,  how  purifying !  All  excellence
gained  has  been  the  result  of  toil ;  all  perfection  ac-
quired, the  fruit  of  suffering.  How  blinded  are  we,  not
only  to  danger,  but  to  good !  What  childish  desires,

*  Hebrews  xii.  22,  23.

OF  THE  ROYAL  PURPLE  DEGREE.         289

restless  and  unsatisfiable,  impel  us  onward  !  What  bub-
bles we  grasp  after ;  what  bubbles  burst  in  our  grasp !
"  What  shadows  we  are,  and  what  shadows  we  pursue  !'?
Thus,  from  our  first  feeble  wail  in  the  cradle  to  the  ladt
groan  on  the  bed  of  death,  "  all  is  vanity  and  vexation
of  spirit."  And  Death  is  at  our  side  through  it  all:
watching  the  first  breath  we  draw,  implanting  disease  in
our  sustenance,  impregnating  the  vital  air  with  his
breath  ;  he  pursues  us  steadily  to  the  close,  and  triumphs
at  last.  How  necessary,  then,  to  realize  these  facts,
that  we  may  sedulously  practice  those  principles  which
alone  can  convert  his  conquest  into  our  triumph,  even
make  us  more  than  conquerors  over  the  last  enemy,  the
conquering  foe  of  our  race  !

13.  Let  us  be  Patriarchs,  then,  in  deed,  and  not  in
name  only.  Let  us  contemplate  with  reverence  all  that
is  good,  and  copy  all  that  is  laudable,  in  the  characters
and  lives  of  those  ancient  worthies.  They  were  faith-
ful, confiding  in  the  veracity  of  Him  who  promised.
They  showed  their  faith  by  works,  not  by  professions
only.  What  a  glorious  galaxy  is  furnished  in  the  Epis-
tle to  the  Hebrews !

14.  SCRIPTURE  LESSON.

By  faith  Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than
Cain,  by  which  he  obtained  witness  that  he  was  righteous,  God  testi-
fying of  his  gifts  ;  and  by  it  he,  being  dead,  yet  speaketh.  By  faith
Enoch  was  translated  that  he  should  not  see  death ;  and  was  not
found,  because  God  had  translated  him:  for  before  his  translation  hp
had  this  testimony,  that  he  pleased  God.

By  faith  Noah,  being  warned  of  God  of  things  not  seen  as  yet,
moved  with  fear,  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his  house ;  by  the
which  he  condemned  the  world,  and  became  heir  of  the  righteous-
ness which  is  by  faith.  By  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was  called  to
go  out  into  a  place  which  he  should  after  receive  for  an  inheritance,
obeyed,  and  he  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he  went.  By  faith  he
25

290  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

sojourned  in  the  land  of  promise,  as  in  a  strange  country,  dwelling
In  tabernacles  with  Isaac  and  Jacob,  the  heirs  with  him  of  the  same
promise  :  for  he  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whos*1
maker  and  builder  is  God.

By  faith  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau  concerning  things  to  come
By  faith  Jacob,  when  he  was  a  dying,  blessed  both  the  sons  of  Jo-
seph, and  worshipped,  leaning  on  the  top  of  his  staff.  By  faith
Joseph,  when  he  died,  made  mention  of  the  departing  of  the  children
of  Israel  ;  and  gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones.  By  faith
iMoses,  when  he  was  born,  was  hid  three  months  of  his  parents,  be-
cause they  saw  he  was  a  proper  child,  and  they  were  not  afraid  of
the  king's  commandment.  By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was  come  to
years,  refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter;  choosing
rather  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the
pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season.  By  faith  the  Israelites  passed
through  the  Red  Sea  as  by  dry  land,  which  the  Egyptians  assaying
to  do  were  drowned.

And  what  shall  I  more  say?  for  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of
Gideon,  and  of  Barak,  and  of  Samson,  and  of  Jephtha,  of  David  also,
and  of  Samuel,  and  of  the  prophets,  who  through  faith  subdued
kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness,  obtained  promises,  stopped  the
mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of
the  sword,  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in
fight,  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens. — HEBREWS  xi.  4,  5
7-10,  20-25,  and  29-:',4.

15.  Such  are  the  men  we  should  imitate  in  their  ad-
herence to  true  worship,  in  their  fidelity  to  duty,  in  their
devotion    to    the    interests    of   posterity,    and  in  their
hopefulness  for  the  future.     Virtues  like  these  are  of
more  worth  than  many  jewels  or  heaps  of  gold — are  the
only  true  riches  and  honors  of  the  soul,  and  will  fur-
nish comfort  and  peace  when  all  else  on  earth  fades
from  the  grasp  and  vanishes  from  the  sight.

16.  In  concluding  our  remarks  upon  this  highest  de-
gree of  the  Subordinates,  we  cannot  but  congratulate
you  on  its  reception.     If  the  teachings  imparted  have
been  duly  impressed  on  your  mind,  your  time  and  labor

O*  THE  ROYAL  PURPLE  DEGREE.         291

will  not  have  been  devoted  in  vain.  And  we  trust  that
as  your  mind,  thus  freighted,  advances  in  moral  investi-
gation, the  light  within  you  may  grow  "brighter  and
brighter  unto  the  perfect  day,"  until  faith  is  truly  swal-
lowed up  in  knowledge,  and  hope  in  fruition,  and  charity
survives — immortal,  blissful,  and  all  in  all. .

Remember,  then,  the  obligations  resting  on  you,  and
may  the  prayers  offered  up  at  your  admission,  advance-
ment, and  elevation,  be  fulfilled  in  and  by  you  of  our
Heavenly  Father.

17.  The  color  of  this  degree  is  the  Imperial  Purple.
The  regalia,  according  to  the  By-law,  as  amended  by
the  G.  L.  U.  S.  at  its  session  in  1868,  is,  for  "  Patriarchs
who  have  attained  the  royal  purple  degree,  purple  collars
only,  trimmed  with  yellow  lace  or  fringe."  Black  gloves
should  be  worn,  if  any.

§  3.  Emblems  of  the  R.  P.  Degree.

[We  reserve  the  emblem  peculiar  to  this  degree,  and
our  remarks  thereon,  for  the  close.]

292  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

II.  HOUR-GLASS  AND  SCYTHE.
Emblem  of  passing  and  ended  Time: — The  world,  at
its  brightest  and  best,  is  of  Time — subject  to  all  Time's
chances  and  changes — and  this  emblem  reminds  us  that
all  the  goodliness  and  fashion  thereof  is  but  as  the  grass
that  withereth  and  the  flower  that  fadeth.  The  Hour-
Glass  "admonishes  us  to  improve  the  moments  as  they
fly,  in  a  manner  that  shall  redound  to  the  glory  of  God,
and  our  own  and  our  neighbor's  good.  It  also  brings
before  us  the  great  contrast  between  Time  and  Eternity."
And  the  Scythe  "  reminds  us  of  the  solemn  truth,  that
as  the  grass  falls  before  the  mower's  scythe,  so  man,
being  as  the  grass  and  flower  of  the  field,  must  wither
before  the  touch  of  Time,  and  fall  before  the  King  of
Terrors."  Both  teach  us,  that  it  is  only  through  Time
that  we  can  reach  Eternity  —  only  through  Mortality
that  we  can  attain  Immortality — only  through  death
to  sin  that  we  can  enter  into  eternal  life.

III.  THE  GLOBE  IN  FULL  LIGHT.
Emblem  of  the  Regenerated    World:  —  It  repr^sente

OF  THE  ROYAL  PURPLE  DEGREE.         2£3

"  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein,"  as  beheld  in
its  Creator's  purpose,  when  "  God  saw  everything  that
He  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good ! " — as
seen  by  the  heavenly  host  in  visioned  future,  when  "  the
morning  stars  sang  together  and  all  the  sons  of  God
shouted  for  joy" — and  as  it  will  be  seen  in  reality,
when  purified  from  selfishness  and  sin,  by  the  Spirit  of
the  Most  High  breathing  over  and  into  it  the  sanctify-
ing influences  of  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth,  and  of
Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity.

By  contrast  with  the  world  in  clouds,  it  reminds  us
of  the  world  as  it  is,  with  the  world  as  it  should  be,
and  of  our  solemn  duty  to  "go  o/t,"  and  still  "  onward,"
under  such  guidance  as  will  bring  us  through  all  dark-
ness, temptation  and  trial,  to  light,  and  virtue,  and
victory,  at  last.  And  it  teaches  the  brother  of  the  R.
P.  to  let  the  full  light  of  our  Order,  now  received  by
him,  so  shine  that  others  may  be  induced  to  make  the
world  within  a  true  representation  of  this  emblem — all
enlightened  and  all  enlightening.

"  To  the  Sun  of  truth  if  thou  turnest  thy  back.
The  shadow  of  Self  will  darken  thy  track.
Is  4  Forward '  the  motto  ?     It  will  end  in  woe,
For  taller  and  darker  that  shadow  will  grow.
0  Brother!  thou  hast  turn'd  thy  face  to  the  Sun,
And  a  good  pilgrimage  with  thee  is  begun.
To  the  spiritual  equator  still  forward  press,
And  every  step  thy  shadow  will  be  less.
Onward,  still  onward  with  cheerfulness  haste,
Past  Syren  bower  and  o'er  Satyr  waste  ;
For  the  shrine  is  with  beauty  and  blessing  crown'd,
And  glory  is  beaming  forever  around.
Thou  shalt  know  thy  pilgrimage  complete,
When  all  of  shadow  is  beneath  thy  feet."*

*  Autobiography  of  Rev.  A.  C.  Thomas,  p.  297.

294

THE   ODD-FELLOW  S   MANUAL

I.  THE  ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT.

Emblem  of  the  Presence  of  the  Most  High  God,  our
Heavenly  Father:  —  This  is  the  special  Emblem  of
this  most  solemn,  sublime  and  exalted  degree — the
last,  highest,  greatest  of  our  Ritual.

The  Ark  of  the  Covenant  was  placed  in  the  Holy
of  Holies;  that  is,  within  the  second  vail  of  the  Taber-
nacle, and  in  the  innermost  part  of  the  Temple.  It
contained  the  golden  pot  of  manna,  Aaron's  rod  that
budded,  and  the  tables  of  the  Law.  On  it  was  the
Mercy-Seat,  overshadowed  by  the  wings  of  the  Cheru-
bim, between  which  the  SHEKINAH,  (Cloud  of  Glory,)
denoting  the  Presence  of  the  Holy  One,  appeared  to
the  High  Priest.  All  these  were  made  after  the  Pattern
which  God  shewed  unto  Moses  in  the  Mount.  (Exodus
xxv.  40.)  That  Ark  with  its  contents,  and  the  Cheru-
bim with  the  SHEKINAH,  links  together  the  remem-

OF  THE  ROYAL  PURPLE  DEGREE.        295

brance  of  all  sacred  things  with  the  Presence  of  God,
and  the  hope  of  heaven.  It  is,  therefore,  a  most  solemn
emblem,  suggestive  of  all  things  most  sacred — of  the
Holy  of  Holies,  that  type  of  Heaven  itself,  and  of  the
very  presence  of  "the  Lord  —  the  Lord  God,  merciful
and  gracious,  long-suffering  and  abundant  in  goodness
and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  and  forgiving
iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin,  and  that  will  by  no
means  clear  the  guilty."

And  it  teaches  us,  that  "  as  the  prosperity  of  ancient
Israel  depended  on  the  respect,  devotion,  and  obedience
paid  by  them  to  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  and  its  sacred
deposits,  so  will  our  purity,  peace,  and  prosperity  "  be
commensurate  with  our  obedience  to,  and  communion
with,  the  Most  High  and  Holy  One,  our  ever-present
Heavenly  Father.

We  conclude  our  remarks  on  the  sublime  degrees
with  following  Ode,  which  appeared  originally  in  the
Golden  Rule,  signed  "  Luof,"  and  dated  at  Canandaigua,
N.  Y

THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  LIFE.

Hail,  Patriarchs  of  high  degree,

The  watch  is  set.  the  password  given!
A  Son  of  Nimrod,  bold  and  free,

Shall  guide  and  guard  the  way  to  heaven.
The  Pilgrim  stranger  travels  on,

O'er  hill  and  stream,  a  weary  way ;
Through  night  and  storm,  yet  cries,  "Go  on!

Till  I  behold  the  perfect  day/'

Life's  rough  and  thorny  way  is  trod,
Death's  narrow  bridge  is  nobly  won,

The  bright  Pavilion  of  our  God
Gleams  in  the  distant  horizon!

296  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Hark!  clashing  arms  assail  our  ears —
The  battle  of  the  last  great  day

Is  o'er ;  let  Pilgrims  dry  their  tears,
March  boldly  on  their  bright'ning  way.

Hark!   Pilgrim,  pause — the  balmy  air

Breathes  music  sweet  as  seraphs  sing !
Now,  distant,  far — and  now,  more  near,

Throughout  the  Camp  loud  anthems  ring!
Hark !  the  full  chorus  pealing  out

From  conq'ring  legions,  pure  and  brave,
Like  many  waters,  thundering,  shout —

"Where  is  thy  victory,  boasting  grave?'*

Bright  Seraphim,  who  guard  the  Tent,

We  kneel  before  the  Holy  Place !
Then  let  the  purple  vail  be  rent.

Behold  your  Chief  with  open  face!
"Rise,  Patriarchs,  rise!   Behold  in  me

The  Centre  of  your  mystic  ring—
Your  Password  through  eternity —

Melchisedek,  your  Priest  and  King!"

CHAPTER  XX.

OF    GRAND    ENCAMPMENTS.

§  1.  How  Commenced  and  Constituted.

UNTIL  a  Grand  Encampment  is  instituted  in  any
State  or  Territory,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United
States  alone  has  power  to  charter  an  Encampment  in
its  bounds ;  and  such  Subordinates  receive  their  laws
and  instructions  from,  and  make  their  returns  and  pay

OF    GRAND   ENCAMPMENTS.  297

percentage  on  their  receipts  to,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
United  States  alone.  But  when  a  Grand  Encampment
is  established  in  any  State  or  Territory,  all  the  Subor-
dinates of  the  same  receive  their  instructions  from,  and
make  returns  and  pay  percentage  to,  their  State  Grand
Encampment  only.  They  are  no  longer  subject  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  directly,  but  only
indirectly  through  their  Grand  Encampment.

When  five  or  more  Subordinate  Encampments  con-
tain seven  or  more  Past  Chief  Patriarchs  in  good  stand-
ing, they  can  call  a  convention  to  petition  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States  for  a  Charter  for  a  Grand
Encampment  within  their  State,  Territory,  or  District.
Each  Encampment  in  the  proposed  jurisdiction  will  ap-
point one  or  more  of  its  Past  C.  Ps.  or  Past  H.  Ps.  to  re-
present it  in  the  proposed  Convention,  which  should  be
duly  notified  to  be  held  at  a  place  and  time  convenient  for
all  parties.  These  Representatives  should  be  furnished
with  certificates  of  appointment,  and  a  statement  of  the
number  of  P.  C.  Patriarchs  in  good  standing  in  their
respective  Encampments,  under  seal.  The  propriety
of  applying  for  a  charter,  and  the  location  of  the  Grand
Encampment,  are  to  be  determined  by  a  majority  of
the  Convention,  comprising  at  least  five  Encampments
in  favor,  the  votes  being  taken  by  Encampments.  After
which,  the  Petition  is  drawn  up  in  due  form,  signed
by  the  Representatives,  and  forwarded  to  the  Grand
Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,
accompanied  by,  1st,  the  Charter  fee  of  thirty  dollars ;
and  2d,  the  certificates  and  certified  statements  given
the  Representatives,  as  above  named.  The  Encamp-
ments petitioning,  must  have  paid  up  their  dues,  or  the
Charter  will  not  be  granted  ;  but  if  not  granted,  the
Charter  fee  will  1  e  returned.  If  granted,  the  Grand

298  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Encampment  will  be  duly  instituted  and  in&tructed  by
the  Grand  Sire,  or  some  qualified  brother  duly  author-
ized. The  expenses  of  such  opening  are  paid  by  the
new  Grand  Encampment.

During  the  interim  between  the  sessions  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States,  the  Grand  Sire,  Deputy
Grand  Sire,  and  Grand  Secretary  are  authorized  to
consider  and  grant  Charters,  subject,  however,  to
the  revision  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,
at  its  next  session.  Such  Charter  continues  in  force  so
long  as  its  requisitions  are  obeyed,  and  while  seven
P.  C.  Patriarchs,  the  representatives  of  three  Encamp-
ments, continue  to  claim  it.  If  forfeited  or  annulled
for  just  cause,  it  must  be  delivered  to  the  Grand
Recording  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United
States,  or  the  G.  P.  of  the  Grand  Encampment,  (as  the
case  may  be,)  with  all  the  documents,  books,  funds,
and  other  property,  to  be  returned  on  the  renewal  of
the  same.

And  this  rule  and  procedure  are  applied  in  all  cases
of  Lodges  and  Encampments,  Grand  and  Subordinate,
by  the  power  having  jurisdiction.  No  Charter  can  be
thrown  up  while  the  requisite  number  claim  it.

Grand  Encampments  are  composed  of  all  Past  Chief
Patriarchs  in  good  standing  in  their  jurisdiction.  In
some  States,  Past  High  Priests  are  also  admitted  as
members.  They  yield  precedence  to  State  Grand
Lodges,  but  have  supreme  jurisdiction  over  their  Subor-
dinate Encampments.  They  are  themselves  subject  to
the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  to  which  they
submit  their  Constitution  and  By-Laws  for  revision,
make  their  returns,  and  pay  seventy-five  dol  larsj^er  ann  u  in
for  each  Representative  which  they  are  entitled  to  send
to  that  Grand  Body ;  that  is  to  say,  until  they  have  one

OF   GRAND   ENCAMPMENTS.  299

thousand  members  of  Subordinates  in  jurisdiction,  one
Grand  Representative,  and  after  that,  two.  They  may
nominate,  by  their  Representation,  a  candidate  for
each  office  of  Grand  Sire  and  Deputy  Grand  Sire,  and
are  entitled  to  copies  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States,  equal  to  double  the  number
of  Subordinates  in  their  jurisdiction.

The  support  of  a  Grand  Encampment  is  derived  from
fees  for  charters  and  dispensations,  and  a  specified  per-
centage levied  on  the  receipts  of  its  Subordinates.  To
this  is  sometimes  added  a  small  profit  on  the  Odes,
cards,  and  books  which  it  furnishes  to  its  Subordinates.

§  2.   The  Grrand  Encampment  Degree.

The  Grand  Encampment  opens,  works,  and  closes  in
the  Grand  Encampment  Degree  only,  which  must  be
conferred  on  its  members  free  of  charge.  The  receiver
of  this  degree  appeals  to  heaven  and  earth  to  witness
the  fidelity  with  which  he  will  represent  the  interests  of
his  Subordinate,  and  at  the  same  time  faithfully  pre-
serve the  secrets,  advance  the  interests,  and  promote
the  welfare  of  his  Grand  Encampment.  May  the  God
of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  aid  him,  and  keep  him
true  and  pure  as  a  fellow-patriarch  with  those  who  have
preceded  him  into  the  true  rest !

§  3.  Members,  Representatives,  and  Committees.

Each  P.  C.  P.  (and  in  some  States,  P.  H.  P.)  in  good
standing  within  jurisdiction,  is  a  member  of  the  Grand

300  THE  ODD- FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Encampment,  and  is  entitled,  as  such,  to  attend  its
sessions,  to  receive  its  degree,  to  hold  office  if  elected
and  qualified,  to  take  precedence  according  to  grade,
and  to  vote  for  Grand  officers  ;  and  of  these  privileges
he  cannot  be  deprived  so  long  as  he  retains  his  good
standing  in  the  Order.  In  nearly  all  the  States,  mem-
bership, and  the  powers  of  legislator  as  the  Representa-
tive of  his  Subordinate,  are  connected.  But  the  P.  C.
Patriarchs  may  (as  in  New  York  and  Ohio)  delegate
the  legislative  power  to  a  select  portion  of  their  number,
to  be  annually  elected  for  that  purpose,  as  may  be  fixed
by  Constitution  and  By-Law.

Each  P.  C.  P.  (and  P.  H.  P.)  on  completing  his  ser-
vice in  the  Chairs  of  the  Subordinate  Encampment,
should  receive  therefrom  a  Certificate  under  seal,  stating
the  fact,  and  recommending  him  as  a  member  of  the
Grand  Encampment.  (And  when  elected  to  serve  as
a  Representative,  where  the  legislative  power  is  confined
to  a  select  number,  a  Certificate  to  that  effect  should
also  be  given.)  On  the  presentation  of  such  Certificate
in  the  Grand  Encampment,  a  proper  officer  is  appointed
to  wait  on  the  candidate,  and,  after  due  examination,
prepare  and  conduct  him  into  the  Grand  Encampment
to  receive  its  degree  and  take  his  seat.

The  business  of  the  Grand  Encampments  is  fre-
quently performed  by  Committees,  provided  in  the
Constitution  and  By-Laws,  or  appointed  specially  as
occasions  demand.  These  vary  in  number,  and  in  duties
and  powers,  in  various  jurisdictions,  but  partake,  gene-
rally, so  nearly  of  the  same  character  with  those  of  the
Subordinates,  that  a  reference  to  Chap.  XL  is  sufficient
Of  Appeal  Committees  we  shall  speak  in  Chap.  XXII.

OF    GRAND    ENCAMPMENTS.

301

§  4.  Appointed  and  Elective  Officers.

The  officers  of  a  Grand  Encampment  are— M.  W,
Grand  Patriarch,  M.  E.  Grand  High  Priest,  R.  W.
Grand  Senior  Warden,  R.  W.  Grand  Junior  Warden,
R.  W.  Grand  Scribe,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer,  and
R.  W.  Grand  Representative,  (or  Representatives,)  who
are  elected  by  the  members  as  provided  by  its  funda-
mental laws;  and  W.  Grand  Inside  and  Outside  Sen-
tinels, who  are  appointed  by  the  Grand  Patriarch  at  his
installation.  R.  W.  District  Grand  Patriarchs  for  each
District  in  jurisdiction  are  usually  appointed  by  the
Grand  Patriarch  also,  but  their  appointment  may  be
otherwise  provided  for  in  the  Constitution  and  By-
Laws.  (See  Chap.  XXII.)  R.  W.  Grand  Representa-
tive we  shall  consider  in  Chap.  XXIII.

1.  W.  GRAND  SENTINELS. — The
Jewel  of  these  Officers  is  Crossed
Swords  in  a  double  Triangle  of
yellow  metal.

The  duty  of  the  Outside  Sentinel
is  to  guard  the  outside  door ;  and
of  the  Inside  Sentinel,  to  guard
the  inside  door  of  the  Grand  En-
campment, and  prevent  the  ad-
mission, or  facilitate  the  ejectment,  of  any  improper
person,  under  the  orders  of  the  Presiding  Officer.  The
same  qualifications  are  required  as  for  similar  officers
in  the  Subordinate.

26

302

THE    ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

2.  THE  R.  W.  GRAND  TREASURER.
— The  Jewel  is  Crossed  Keys  in  a
double  Triangle  of  yellow  metal.

His  duties  are  the  same  as  of
the  same  officer  of  the  Subordinate.
His  bond  is  usually  executed  to
theG.  P.,  G.  H.  P.,  andG.S.W.;
and  in  most  cases,  the  investment
of  the  funds  is  CDnfided  to  his
charge.

3.  THE  R.  W.  GRAND  SCRIBE.—
The  Jewel  is  Crossed  Pens  in  a
double  Triangle  of  yellow  metal .

His  duties  are  to  record  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  Grand  Encamp-
ment, superintend  their  printing,
and  distribute  them  to  the  D.  D.
G.  Patriarchs  and  the  Subordinates ;
to  keep  the  accounts  between  the
Grand  and  Subordinate  Encampments,  and  between  the
former  and  all  other  bodies  and  individuals  having  busi-
ness transactions  therewith  ;  to  receive  all  payments
made  to  the  Grand  Encampment,  and  pay  the  same  to
the  Grand  Treasurer ;  to  send  necessary  notices  to
Subordinates  and  others ;  to  provide  needed  stationery
for  the  Grand  Encampment;  and  perform  such  other
duties  as  pertain  to  the  office  and  as  the  Grand  Encamp-
ment may  order.  He  is  generally  required  to  give  bond
for  the  faithful  execution  of  his  duties  to  the  three
principal  Grand  Officers.  He  receives  pecuniary  com-
pensation (a  fixed  salary)  for  his  services.

OF    GRAND    ENCAMPMENTS*

303

4.  THE   R.  W.  GRAND  JUNIOR
WARDEN. — The  Jeivel  of  this  office
is  a  single  Crook  in  a  double  Tri-
angle of  yellow  metal.

His  duties  are  to  open  and  close
the  Grand  Encampment  as  directed ;
to  introduce  all  new  members  ;  and
to  officiate  in  cases  similar  to  those
confided  to  the  Junior  Warden's
office  in  the  Subordinate.

5.  THE  R.  W.  GRAND   SENIOR
WARDEN. — The  Jewel  of  this  office
is  Crossed  Crooks  within  a  double
Triangle  of  yellow  metal.

His  duties  are  to  assist  in  pre-
serving order  and  enforcing  the
laws  and  rules  of  the  Grand  En-
campment ;  to  preside  in  the  ab-
sence of  the  G.  P.  and  G.  H.  P. ;

and  to  perform  such  other  duties  as  are  analogous  to

those  of  the  S.  W .  of  a  Subordinate.

6.  THE    M.   E.    GRAND    HIGH
PRIEST. — The  Jewel  of  this  office
is  a  Breastplate  within    a    double
Triangle  of  yellow  metal,  worn  on
the  breast.

His  duties  are  those  of  the  second
officer  of  a  Subordinate  :  to  preside
in  the  absence  of  the  G.  P.,  and  to
instruct  members  in  the  work  of

the  Grand  Eneaiipment.     He,  also,  is  the  Chaplain  of

the  Grand  Encampment.

304  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

7.  THE  M.  W.  GRAND  PA-
TRIARCH. — The  Jewel  of  this  office
is  Crossed  Crooks  and  an  Altar,
within  a  double  Triangle  of  yellow
metal.

His  duties  are  to  preside  over
and  preserve  order  in  the  Grand
Encampment ;  to  exercise  super-
visory authority  within  its  juris-
diction; to  decide  constitutional  questions,  and  deter-
mine what  is  law  and  usage  in  the  Patriarchal  branch ;
to  receive  and  dispose  of  complaints,  and  appeals  and
petitions ;  to  give  instructions  in  the  work  of  the  En-
campment ;  to  grant  such  dispensations  as  he  may  deem
for  the  good  of  the  Order,  and  to  perform  such  other
offices  as  usually  pertain  to  a  Chief  presiding  and  exe-
cutive officer.

REGALIA.  —  P.  C.  Patriarchs  "  wear  purple  collars  or
sashes "  "trimmed  with  yellow  lace  or  fringe."

8.  PAST  GRAND  PATRIARCH.  —  The  jeu-el  is  "of
yellow  metal,  two  and  a  half  inches  in  diameter,  rim
three-eighths  inch  wide,  with  double  triangle,  rays  ex-
tending from  rim,  and  the  letters  P.  G.  P.  in  the  centre
of  triangle."  —  Jour.  G.  L.  U.  S.,  p.  4399.

All  Past  Officers  of  Grand  and  Subordinate  Encampments  are
entitled  to  wear  the  regalia  and  jewels  appertaining  to  the  offices
they  have  passed. —  Digest  G.  L.  U  S.

Past  Officers  of  every  description,  and  members  in  possession  of
Encampment  Degrees,  and  all  other  members  of  the  Order,  when
visiting  Grand  or  Subordinate  Lodges,  are  entitled  to  wear  the  regalia
and  jewels  pertaining  to  the  highest  degree  which  they  have  taken.
Art.  24,  By-Laws  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.

PRIVILEGES. —  The  elective  officers  of  all  Grand  Bodies  may  in-
troduce visiting  brethren  (without  examination  by  others)  into  any
Subordinate  within  the  jurisdiction  of  their  Grand  Body,  which
such  visitor?  would  be  entitled  to  visit  by  card.  —  Digest  G.  L.  f  $

OF   STATE   GRAND    LODGES.  305

CHAPTER  XXI.

OF   STATE   GRAND   LODGES.

§  1.  How  Commenced  and  Constituted.

GRAND  Lodges,  under  the  authority  and  supervision
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  have  supreme
legislation  and  control  of  the  affairs  of  the  Order  within
the  State,  Territory,  or  District  comprising  their  juris-
diction. They  cannot  interfere  with  the  jurisdiction
proper  of  the  Grand  Encampments ;  but  take  prece-
dence of  them  on  all  public  occasions.

Until  a  Grand  Lodge  is  established  in  a  State,  Ter-
ritory, or  District,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United
States  has  immediate  and  supreme  jurisdiction  over  all
interests  of  the  Order  within  the  same.  But  ten  or
more  Lodges  having  seven  or  more  Past  Grands  may
unite  and  petition  for  a  Charter  for  a  Grand  Lodge
to  be  established  within  such  State,  District,  or  Terri-
tory, and  when  such  Grand  Lodge  is  opened,  all  Subor-
dinate Lodges  become  immediately  subject  to  it  alone,
as  in  the  case  of  Grand  and  Subordinate  Encampments.
The  preliminary  proceedings  for  establishing  a  Grand
Lodge  are  also  the  same.  (See  Chap.  XX.)  It  con-
tinues to  exist  so  long  as  it  has  five  members  in  good
standing.

Grand  Lodges  are  required  to  render  the  same
obedience,  and  to  pay  the  same  support  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States;  are  entitled  to  representation
in  it  on  the  same  basis  and  terms,  and  receive  from  it

26*

306  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

the  same  privileges,  as  Grand  Encampments.  They
are  supported  by  revenue  derived  from  the  same  sources,
and  collected  from  their  Subordinate  Lodges.  (See
Chap.  XX.)

§  2.    The  Grand  Lodge  Degree.

Grand  Lodges  work  only  in  the  Grand  Lodge  Degree,
which  must  be  conferred  in  the  Grand  Lodge  or  one  of
its  apartments.  This  is  conferred,  as  are  all  past
official  degrees,  on  all  entitled  to  receive  it,  without
pecuniary  charge.

He  who  receives  this  degree  is  eligible  to  legislate
for  the  welfare  of  his  Lodge  and  the  Order,  and  to  sit
in  judgment  in  trials  of  Lodges  and  brethren.  He
should  not  only  see  clearly  the  mote  that  is  in  another's
eye,  but  remove  the  beam  that  may  be  in  his  own  ;  and
the  causes  hidden  from  common  view,  he  should  search
out.  Thus  with  impartiality  and  searching  scrutiny  let
him  faithfully  represent  his  constituents,  and  truly
serve  his  Grand  Lodge  and  the  Order,  as  one  of  its
Past  Grands.

§  3.  Members,  Representatives,  and  Committees.

Similar  to  Grand  Encampments,  "  each  Grand  Lodge
consists  of  all  the  Past  Grands  in  good  standing  within
its  jurisdiction ;  but  by  its  Constitution  it  may  restrict
its  legislative  power  to  such  representative  basis  as  it
may  deem  best  for  the  proper  transaction  of  business ;
but  it  cannot  abridge  the  privileges  of  Past  Grands
pertaining  to  their  rank  in  the  degrees  of  the  Order :
viz.  their  right  to  past  official  degrees,  eligibility  to
office,  precedence  belonging  to  their  grade,  privilege  of

OF   STATE   GRAND   LODGES.  307

attending  the  meetings  of  their  Grand  Lodge,  and  right
to  vote  for  Grand  Officers."— Digest  G.  L.  U.  8.

P.  Grands,  when  first  admitted,  present  the  certificate
of  service  given  them  by  the  Lodge,  (or  a  duplicate,  if
the  first  has  been  forwarded  to  the  G.  Secretary,)  where-
upon the  proper  officer  examines  them  in  the  P.  Grand's
degree,  and  conducts  them  to  receive  the  G.  Lodge
degree.  When  they  change  their  membership  from  one
Lodge  to  another,  the  latter  gives  notice  of  such  change,
which  is  sufficient.  When  the  Grand  Lodge  is  repre-
sentative, P.  Grands  elected  to  represent  their  Subor-
dinates must  present  a  certificate  of  election,  of  which  a
form  will  be  found  in  Appendix  B,  No.  20.

As  in  Grand  Encampments,  so  in  Grand  Lodges,
much  of  the  business  is  elaborated  and  transacted  by
Committees.  The  duties  of  these  are,  generally,  so
similar  to  those  of  Subordinates,  already  treated  of  in
Chap.  XL,  that  special  remarks  are  unnecessary,  espe-
cially as  the  persons  appointed  are  too  experienced  to
need  them.

§  4.  Appointed  and  Elective  Officers.
The  appointed  and  elective  officers  of  a  Grand  Lodge
are — M.  W.  Grand  Master,  E.  W.  Deputy  Grand
Master,  R.  W.  Grand  Warden,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary,
R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer,  who  are  elected  annually ;  and
R.  W.  Grand  Representative,  or  Representatives,  elected
biennially  —  if  two,  one  each  year — and  W.  Grand
Marshal,  W.  Grand  Conductor,  and  W.  Grand  Inside
and  Outside  Guardian,  who  are  appointed  annually  by
the  Grand  Master.  Some  Grand  Lodges  elect  or  ap-
point a  W.  Grand  Chaplain  and  a  W.  Grand  Herald,
(or  Messenger,)  in  addition  to  the  foregoing.  Generally,
R.  W.  District  Deputy  Grand  Masters  are  appointed

308  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

by  the  Grand  Master,  independently,  or  by  consent
and  approval  of  the  Grand  Lodge;  but  in  some  States
they  are  elected  by  the  Past  Grands  of  their  respective
Districts.  In  several  States  the  elections  for  Grand
Officers  are  held  in  the  Subordinate  Lodges,  instead  of
the  body  of  the  Grand  Lodge;  and  in  others  they  are
held  in  the  meetings  of  the  Dist.  G.  Committees;  and
none  but  P.  Grands  vote.  Of  Appeal  Committees  and
D.  D.  G.  Masters  we  will  treat  in  Chap.  XXII.;  and
of  G.  Representatives  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
United  States,  in  Chap.  XXIII.;  the  remainder  of  the
Grand  Officers  we  will  consider  here,  in  reversed  order
of  precedence.

1.  W.  GRAND  HERALD.  —  His  duty  is  to  announce
the  G.  M.  at  ceremonials,  and  to  precede  and  usher  the
Grand  Lodge  (or  its  Officers)  in  its  processions.     He  is
also  the  Messenger  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  as  which  he
receives  a  small  salary.     In  Pennsylvania,  he  acts  as
the  O.  G.  also.

2.  W.  GRAND  CHAPLAIN. — The  Jewel  is  a  Bible  of
white  metal.     His  duty  is  to  open  and  close  the  Grand
Lodge  with  prayer,  and  to  officiate  at  public  ceremonials
and  funerals  of  the  Order  which  are  under  special  charge
of  the  Grand  Lod^r.

3.  W.  GRAND  GUARDIAN. — The  Jewel  of  this  office
is  Crossed  Swords  of  white  metal.

The  duties  are  similar  to  those  of  the  corresponding
office  in  the  Subordinate.

4.  W.  GRAND  CONDUCTOR. — The  Jewel  for  this  office
is  the  Roman  (or  straight,  two-edged)  Sword,  made  of
white  metal.

The  duties  are  to  examine  the  certificates  of  candi-
dates for  admission,  and,  if  correct,  to  introduce  the

OF   STATE   GRAND    LODGES.

309

bearers  to  the  Grand  Lodge;  and  to  aid  the  Grand
Marshal  in  his  duties.

5.  W.  GRAND  MARSHAL.  —  The  Jewel  of  this  office
is  a  Baton  of  white  metal.

His  duties  are  to  assist  the  Deputy  G.  Master  in
supporting  the  Grand  Master,  and  to  superintend  the
arrangements  of  all  processions  ordered  or  permitted  by
the  Grand  Lodge.  He  is  specially  the  Marshal  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  in  person,  in  all  processions.

6.  R.  W.  GRAND  TREASURER. —
The  Jewel  of  this  officer  is  Crossed
Keys  made  of  white  metal.

His  duties  are  similar  to  those  of
Treasurer  of  the  Subordinate.  His
books  must  exhibit  clearly  the  sources
and  amounts  of  receipts,  and  the  pur-
poses and  amounts  of  expenditures,  as
well  as  to  whom  paid.  In  some  Grand
Lodges  he  is  to  make  the  necessary  investments  for  the
Grand  Lodge.  His  Bond  is  usually  executed  to  the  G.
Master,  Deputy  G.  Master,  and  G.  Warden.

7.  R.  W.  GRAND  SECRETARY.
—  The  Jewel  for  this  officer  is
Crossed  Pens  made  of  white  metal.
His  duties  are  analogous  to  those
of  the  same  office  in  the  Subor-
dinate, and  the  same  as  those  of
Grand  Scribe  of  the  G.  Encamp-
ment. They  are,  however,  more
arduous,  and  are  compensated  with
a  larger  salary.  He  also  usually
gives  bond  for  his  fidelity  to  the
three  principal  officers  of  the  Grand

310

THE   ODD-FELLOW  S   MANUAL.

8.  R.  W.  GRAND  WARDEN.—
The  Jewel  is  Crossed  Gavels  made
of  white  metal.

His  duties  are  to  assist  the  Grand
Master  in  maintaining  law  and  order
in  the  G.  Lodge ;  when  direeted  by
the  G.  Master,  to  take  charge  of  the
door,  and  to  preside  over  the  sessions
of  the  G.  L.  in  the  absence  of  the  G.
Master  and  the  Deputy  G.  Master.
He  gives  the  instruction  of  his  Chair
to  candidates  on  their  admission.
9.  R.  W.  DEPUTY  GRAND  MAS-
TER. —  The  Jewel  of  this  office  is  a  Half
Moon,  made  of  white  metal.

The  duties  are  to  support  the  Grand
Master  in  presiding  over  the  G.  Lodge,
to  fill  his  chair  during  his  absence,  and
usually  to  act  as  the  Deputy  of  the
district  in  which  he  resides.  In  the
event  of  the  death,  removal,  or  resigna-
tion of  the  Grand  Master,  he  succeeds
to  the  Chair  for  the  rest  of  the  term,  or  until  a  special
election  supplies  the  vacancy.

10.  M.W.  GRAND  MAS-
TER.—  The  Jewel  for  this
officer  is  the  Sun  with  the
Scales  of  Justice  engraved
or  impressed  thereon,
made  of  white  metal.

By  his  installation  into
office  he  ceases  to  be  con-
sidered an  active  member
of  any  Subordinate  in  par-

OF   STATE   GRAND    LODGES.

311

ticular;  though  he  must  continue  a  contributing  mem-
ber in  his  Lodge.  His  duties  are  to  preside  over  the
G.  Lodge  during  its  sessions,  and  preserve  order  and
enforce  the  laws  of  the  Order  therein ;  to  execute  its
laws  and  mandates  during  the  interim  between  its  ses-
sions; and  to  open  Lodges,  install  officers,  and  deliver
necessary  instructions  on  the  work  of  the  Order  to  new
Lodges  and  members  and  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
either  in  person  or  by  deputy;  to  decide  questions  of
law  and  usage  during  the  recess  of  the  G.  Lodge;  and
to  perform  such  other  duties  as  belong  to  an  executive
and  presiding  officer  of  such  a  body.  He  is  usually
authorized  to  grant  dispensations  for  degrees,  when  he
deems  it  necessary  for  the  good  of  the  Order;  and  to
confer  the  Past  Official  degrees  on  those  entitled  to
them.  He  must  have  received  those  degrees,  and  in
some  G.  Lodges  must  also  be  a  R.  P.  D.  member  in
good  standing  in  an  Encampment.

11.  PAST  GRAND  MAS-
TER.—  The  Jewel  for  a  P.
G.  M.  is  the  Sun  with  Heart
in  hand,  made  of  white
metal.

REGALIA.  —  "  Past
Grands  shall  wear  scarlet
collars  or  sashes  trimmed
with  white"  —  " silver  lace
or  fringe  "  -  "  and  those
having  attained  the  royal
purple  degree  may  have

trimmings  of  yellow  metal."  "  The  Grand  Officers  and
Past  Grand  Officers  shall  wear  the  regalia  of  Past  Grands,
as  above  defined."— Jour.  G.  L.  U.  S.,  1868,  p.  4357.

312  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

The  elective  Grand  officers  may  introduce  visiting
brethren  into  any  Lodge  within  the  jurisdiction  of  their
Grand  Lodge,  without  the  usual  examination  of  the
Lodge  officers. — Digest  G.  L.  U.  S.

The  G.  Lodge  can  confer  power  on  the  G.  Master  to
grant  dispensations  for  opening  Lodges.  —  Digest  G.  L.
U.S.

CHAPTER  XXII.

OF   DISTRICTS,   THEIR   COMMITTEES   AND   OFFICERS.

GRAND  Lodges  and  Grand  Encampments  usually
divide  their  jurisdiction  into  a  number  of  Districts,
which  they  place  under  the  charge  of  proper  officers  and
committees,  and  thus  facilitate  the  performance  of  duties,
hasten  the  redress  of  grievances,  and  lessen  the  work
of  their  sessions.  Though  not  taking  precedence  of  the
Grand  Bodies  themselves,  yet  for  convenience  we  pre-
ferred considering  them  after  their  superior-.

§  1.  District  Grand  Committees.

Some  States  have  restored,  in  improved  forms,  these
ancient  members  of  our  general  organization.  In  such
jurisdictions,  every  P.  G.  [or  P.  C.  P.]  in  good  stand-
ing in  a  Subordinate  of  the  county  or  counties  forming
the  District,  is  a  member  of  the  District  Grand  Com-
mittee. It  meets  monthly  or  quarterly,  as  determined
by  the  State  Grand  Body  or  its  own  By-laws,  and  is
presided  over  by  the  D.  D.  G.  Master  [or  D.  D.  G.
Patriarch]  —  its  other  officers  being  elected  by  itself.
It  recommends  the  granting  of  charters  for  Subordinates

OF    DISTRICTS,    THEIR  COMMITTEES  AND  OFFICERS.     313

in  the  District;  acts  on  all  grievances  and  appeals
arising  in  the  same ;  settles  disputes  and  controversies
between  the  subordinates ;  grants  needed  dispensations
when  authorized,  and  nominates  candidates  for  the
Grand  offices.  Its  business  is  subject  to  the  revision  of
its  State  Grand  Body.  It  keeps  correct  minutes  of  its
proceedings  by  its  Secretary  [or  Scribe],  who  issues  all
notices  ordered  by  it  or  the  District  Deputy.  And  it
may  be  suspended,  after  due  trial  and  by  a  two-third
vote,  by  the  State  Grand  Body;  such  vote  suspending
all  its  members  from  the  Grand  Body,  except  those
specially  excepted.

§  2.  Appeal  Committees.

The  frequent  changes  made  in  regard  to  these,  and
the  various  modes  of  constituting  them  in  different
States,  forbid  minute  details.  We  can  only  give  in-
stances as  specimens,  and  lay  down  the  rules  most  gen-
erally adopted.  The  Digests  of  the  National  and  State
G.  Lodges,  the  Standing  Rules,  Constitution  and  Laws
of  each  jurisdiction,  must  be  consulted  for  fuller  and
more  precise  information.

In  all  appeals,  notice  should  be  given  to  the  opposite
party.  Books,  papers,  and  minutes  of  evidence  taken
at  the  trial,  are  submitted,  and  the  parties  heard  in
person,  (by  counsel,  in  some  States,)  and  the  Lodge,
Encampment,  or  D.  G.  Committee  by  its  sub-committee
or  officers.  Informality  or  irregularity  in  the  mode  of
preferring  the  charges,  in  appointing  the  Committee  to
try  them,  or  in  conducting  the  trial,  is  cause  for  re-
manding back  the  case.  If  the  charges  were  not  proved,
or  did  not  warrant  the  sentence,  or  were  not  within  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Subordinate,  the  proceedings  may  be
27

314  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

reversed ,  and  tl  e  injured  party  be  restored  to  good
standing.  But  i  i  no  case  of  appeal  should  new  evidence
be  produced  except  to  prove  irregularity,  &c.;  nor  can
a  Lodge  or  Encampment  contradict  its  minutes  duly
approved.

Where  there  are  District  Grand  Committees,  appeals
are  usually  decided  by  them  alone,  subject  to  further
appeal  to  and  revision  by  the  Grand  Body.  So  where  a
Standing  Committee  on  Appeals  is  appointed  by  the
Grand  Body,  as  in  Pennsylvania,  where  the  Grand  Mas-
ter appoints  six  Past  Grands  each  year,  to  serve  two
years  —  they  keep  a  journal  of  their  proceedings  and  de-
cisions, which  latter  are  published.  All  appeals  to  the
G.  Master  are  referred  to  this  Committee,  which,  after
hearing,  they  decide,  and  report  in  writing  to  the  G.
Master.  If  he  approve,  the  decision  is  final,  unless  ap-
pealed from  to  the  Grand  Lodge  within  three  months.
If  he  disapprove,  he  refers  it  to  the  Grand  Lodge  for
its  decision.

During  trials  of  appeals,  none  should  be  present  but
the  Appeal  Committee,  the  appellant  (and  his  counsel,
if  any),  and  the  representatives  of  the  Lodge  or  En-
campment. Such  representatives  should  be  accredited
under  seal  of  the  Subordinate.  And  the  Appeal  Com-
mittee should  confine  itself  strictly  to  the  alligations  of
illegality  or  informality  of  the  charges  or  mode  of  trial;
insufficiency  of  the  testimony,  or  of  the  charges  to  war-
rant the  sentence;  unfairness  toward  the  appellant  or
his  witnesses;  or  lack  of  jurisdiction  in  the  Subordinate
—  as  the  case  may  be,

§  3.  District  Deputy  Grand  Patriarch,

In  all  cases  where  the  general  organization  of  the
Grand  Encampmnit  resembles  that  of  the  Grand  Lodge

DISTRICTS,  THHK  COMMITTEES  AND  OFFICEES.       315

of  the  same  State  or  Territory,  his  duties  will  corre-
spond precisely  to  that  of  the  D.  D.  G.  M.,  given  below.
As  the  representative  of  the  Grand  Encampment  and
Grand  Patriarch  in  his  District,  he  should  be  received
with  the  honors  and  courtesies  due  to  those  he  repre-
sents, when  he  visits  Encampments  in  his  official  ca-
pacity.

§  4.  District  Deputy  Grand  Master.

As  the  duties  of  this  important  office  vary  in  the
several  jurisdictions,  his  first  duty  is  to  study  well  the
Constitution  and  Laws  immediately  governing  him.
The  following,  compiled  from  various  sources,  embraces
the  most  general  duties  of  the  office.

He  represents  the  G.  Master,  and  has  all  the  powers  he  would
have,  if  present.  He  is  to  give  such  instruction  in  the  work  of  the
Order  as  will  secure  uniformity  —  to  see  that  no  alterations  or
omissions  are  made  in  the  ceremonies  and  charges  —  to  enforce  on
the  part  of  Subordinates,  through  their  officers,  a  strict  observance  of
the  Constitutions  and  Laws  of  the  State  and  U.  S.  Grand  Lodges,  —
and  to  report  promptly  all  violations  thereof  to  the  Grand  Master.
Where  there  are  District  Grand  Committees,  he  is  to  preside — to
see  in  person  or  by  deputy,  that  the  five  degrees  are  properly  con-
ferred in  Subordinate  and  Degree  Lodges  —  to  confer  P.  0.  degrees
when  authorized  —  to  collect  the  returns  and  dues  of  Subordinates,
and  see  that  they  are  forwarded  in  season  to  the  Grand  Secretary  —
to  see  that  officers  of  the  Subordinates  under  his  charge  are  duly
elected  and  properly  installed  —  and,  in  short,  be  the  representa-
tive of  the  Grand  Master  and  agent  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  his  dis-
trict. To  him,  in  the  first  place,  all  applications  should  be  made
for  dispensations,  explanation  of  laws,  instruction  in  work,  and
advice  in  questions  of  doubt  and  difficulty  pertaining  to  the  Order.
If  not  satisfactory,  an  appeal  can  be  made  to  the  higher  authority.
He  cannot  act  directly  as  an  officer  of  a  Subordinate ;  his  advice  or
command  must  be  given  to  the  officers  of  the  Lodge,  who  then  be-
come responsible  for  its  enforcement  on  the  Lodge.

And  to  do  all  this  weV.  each  D.  D.  G.  M.  should  keep  an  official
record  of  every  case  and  question  submitted  to  him  —  when,  where,

316  THE   ODD-.?ELLOW'S   MANUAL.

what,  and  bj  vhom  —  with  his  decision  and  doings  therein.  And
this  record  he  should  submit  to  the  Grand  Master  for  approval  or
correction  as  frequently  as  may  be  —  at  least  once  in  six  months  —
entering  therein  any  corrections  made.

When  officially  visiting  the  Subordinates  of  his  District,  he  must
be  received  with  the  honors  of  the  Order.

§  5.  Institutions  and  Installations.

The  ceremony  of  opening  new  Lodges  and  Encamp-
ments, is  termed  Institution.

At  the  appointed  time  and  place  of  meeting  the  peti-
tioners for  the  Charter,  the  officer  appointed  will  call
them  to  order,  read  his  commission,  and  exhibit  the
Charter.  After  which,  in  proper  form  and  manner,  he
will  administer  the  obligations,  and  deliver  the  Charter,
with  such  advice  and  directions  as  he  may  deem  both
necessary  and  suitable.  If  the  members  of  the  new
Lodge  or  Encampment  are  not  experienced  in  the
management  and  business  of  the  same,  he  should  enter
freely  into  the  minute  details  of  their  duty,  in  a  well-
arranged  order,  and  be  careful  to  repeat,  or  otherwise
impress  specially,  what  is  most  important  for  them  to
do  or  remember.  So  much  depends  on  a  fair,  intelli-
gent start,  that  the  case  is  always  worth  much  time  and
labor.  And  so  ignorant  are  even  intelligent  (but  inex-
perienced) men,  of  these  matters,  that  he  must  not  sup-
pose them  uninterested  in  what  is  trifling  or  common-
place to  himself.

After  this  instruction  to  the  members  generally,
direct  them  how  tc  organize  properly  by  electing  their
officers.  After  installing  the  officers,  give  them  their
special  instructions,  that  they  may  at  once  enter  on  the
performance  of  their  special  duties.  It  is  better  far  that
they  begin,  while  the  installing  officer  is  present  to  aid,
advise,  and  correct  them,  than  to  wait  until  he  leaves.

DISTRICTS,  THEIR  COMMITTEES  AND  OFFICERS       317

§  6.  Insubordination  and  Disorder.

"  It  must  needs  be  that  offences  will  come,  but  woe
unto  that  man  by  whom  they  come."  So  in  our  smaller
communities  and  with  our  brotherhood.  Men  of  ill-
directed  ambition,  a  factious  spirit,  or  an  unregulated
temper,  are  found  among  us,  and  at  times,  seizing  some
wrong  or  appearance  of  injustice  on  the  part  of  those  in
authority,  they  succeed  in  inflaming  the  passions  of  the
majority,  and  inducing  them  to  refuse  obedience  to  the
laws  or  commands  of  the  G.  Body  or  its  officers.  This
is  always  very  unwise,  and  impolitic  even.  The  wrong
is  scarcely  ever  corrected  by  wrong-doing  in  return.
A  respectful  remonstrance,  protest,  or  appeal  is  seldom
without  success,  if  accompanied  by  manifestations  of  a
love  of  peace  and  order,  and  willing  obedience.  But
when  passion,  angry  words,  and  violent  means  are
resorted  to  on  the  part  of  the  inferior,  the  superior  too
often  feels  that  retraction  and  apology  for  even  a  wrong
mandate  would  encourage  Subordinates  to  rebel  against
lawful  authority  on  slight  pretences,  and  hence  a  con-
test ensues,  in  which  (no  rational  and  moral  forces  being
employed)  mere  numbers  and  power  must  finally
triumph.  True,  after  the  contest  is  ended,  and  much
injury  done  and  ill-feeling  deeply  planted,  the  wrong
may  be  corrected  voluntarily  by  the  superior;  but  years
may  not  efface  the  deforming  scars  that  remain  as  evi-
dences of  the  conflict.

When  a  Lodge  or  Encampment,  therefore,  begins  to
manifest  a  spirit  of  lawless  passion,  be  prompt  in  seek-
ing out  the  cause.  If  the  cause  be  just,  remove  it
instantly,  but  fail  not  sternly  to  rebuke  the  ill-temper
that  was  leading  to  wrong  measures  of  resistance,  and
kindlj  point  out  the  evil  consequences  to  which  it  would
27*

318  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

have  led.  But  if  the  alleged  cause  is  a  rightful  and
proper  law  or  measure,  reason  with  them  feelingly  on
their  obligations  to  obey,  and  the  inevitable  results  of
their  disobedience.  Consider  not  so  much  your  dignity
is  an  officer,  as  your  feelings  and  duties  as  an  Odd-
Fellow.  A  peacemaker  is  of  a  far  higher  grade  than  a
conqueror;  and  he  seldom  fails  to  conquer  also,  but  by
moral  rather  than  by  physical  force.  Yet  do  not  sacri-
fice right,  nor  yield  principle  to  secure  peace.  But
exhaust  every  means  of  kind  persuasion  before  you  re-
sort to  threats  and  arbitrary  commands.  And  when  at
last  you  must  resort  to  the  power  vested  in  you,  do  it
coolly,  calmly,  and  even  pityingly.  Make  no  threat
that  is  either  unreasonable  or  impracticable,  and  that
you  will  not  execute.  Utter  no  command  in  a  passion,
or  that  is  not  clearly  just  and  right,  and  that  you  are
not  determined  and  able  to  enforce.  And  do  not  even
utter  such  threats  and  commands  until  after  you  have
consulted  with  your  superiors,  (if  time  will  permit,)  and
obtained  their  advice  and  direction  in  regard  to  them.
In  short,  see  that  reason  and  right  are  on  your  side  in
all  your  words  and  actions ;  and  cause  the  disorderly  to
feel,  if  possible,  that  they  are  in  the  wrong.  "  Thrice
is  he  armed  that  hath  his  quarrel  just,"  and  faint  and
brief  must  be  the  resistance  where  conscience  and  judg-
ment both  side  against  the  rebellious.

§  7.  Reclaiming  Charters.

When  a  Subordinate  summons  its  passions  to  the
point  of  open  defiance  of  its  superior,  against  all  remon-
strance, argument,  and  warning,  but  one  remedy  is  left,
the  last  resort.  Its  Charter  has  been  forfeited  and  must
be  taken  away.  Its  funds  and  property,  raised  and

DISTRICTS,  THEIR  COMMITTEES  AND  OFFICERS.        319

procured  for  purposes  of  benevolence  and  charity,  are
endangered,  and  must  be  secured  for  the  use  of  the
minority  (if  any)  who  desire  rightly  to  employ  them.
In  such  case,  the  Grand  Master  or  Grand  Patriarch  (or
his  representative)  will  summon  such  aid  as  he  deems
absolutely  necessary,  and,  entering  the  Lodge-room  on
the  stated  evening,  and  at  the  appointed  hour  of  meet-
ing, he  will  take  the  chair,  place  his  aids  in  the  other
chairs,  and  call  the  Subordinate  Body  to  order.  He
will  then  narrate  his  duty,  remind  the  Chief  Officers
of  their  solemn  pledges  to  deliver  up  the  Charter,  books,
&c.,  in  circumstances  like  the  present,  point  out  the
proper  mode  to  obtain  redress  or  be  again  restored ;  and
take  possession  of  the  Charter,  books,  seal,  papers,  and
other  properties  of  the  Subordinate,  in  the  name  and
by  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Body  represented ;  after
which  he  will  declare  the  Subordinate  suspended,  (or
dissolved,  as  the  case  may  be,)  until  the  further  pleasure
of  the  Grand  Body  can  be  made  known.

A  painful  duty  like  this  should  be  performed  in  none
other  than  a  kind,  gentle,  and  sorrowing  spirit.  If  the
resistance  made  demands  force,  it  should  be  employed
with  promptitude  and  decision,  but  not  in  such  a  way
as  to  exhibit  passion  and  a  love  of  power.  Those  mem-
bers who  show  a  disposition  to  support  the  law  should
be  carefully  noted,  as  also  those  who  appear  to  be  most
active  in  contumacy,  and  reported  to  the  Grand  Lodge
accordingly.

320  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

CHAPTER  XXIII.

OF   THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF   THE   UNITED   STATES.

§  1 .  How  Constituted  and  Supp  wted.

THIS  is  the  highest  authority  and  judicatory  of  the
Order.  It  "  possesses  original  and  exclusive  jurisdic-
tion," and  is  "  the  source  of  all  true  and  legitimate
authority  in  Odd-Fellowship  in  the  United  States  of
America."  It  is  the  ultimate  tribunal  to  which  all
matters  of  general  importance  to  the  State,  District,
and  Territorial  Grand  Lodges  and  Encampments  are  to
be  referred,  and  "  its  decisions  thereon  shall  be  final
and  conclusive."  If  an  expelled  Subordinate  have  de-
livered up  all  its  effects  to  the  State  Grand  Body,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States  may  receive  its  ap-
peal without  the  consent  of  the  State  Grand  Body;  and
with  such  consent,  if  the  Subordinate  has  retained  its
effects.  "  To  it  belongs  the  power  to  control  and  regu-
late the  work  of  the  Order,  and  the  several  degrees
belonging  thereto ;  and  to  fix  and  determine  the
customs  and  usages  in  regard  to  all  things  which  per-
tain to  Odd-Fellowship.  It  has  inherent  power  to
establish  Lodges  or  Encampments  in  foreign  countries
where  no  G.  Lodge  or  G.  Encampment  exists."  It
supplies  the  A.  T.  P.  W.  to  all  G.  Bodies  in  its  juris-
diction.

It  is  constituted  of  all  its  officers,  (whether  G.  repre-
sentatives or  not,)  of  R.  W.  G.  Representatives  of  Grand

THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF   THE   UNI1  ED   STATES.         321

Bodies  in  its  jurisdiction,  and  of  its  Past  Grand  Sires;
but  the  Representatives  only  are  entitled  to  vote  in  the
election  of  officers,  which  is  by  ballot.  Its  annual  com-
munication is  held  on  the  third  Monday  in  September,
usually  in  Baltimore,  and  generally  continues  during
the  week.

Its  revenues  are  derived  from  —  1st,  Fees  for  Char-
ters to  Grand  and  Subordinate  Bodies ;  thirty  dollars
each.  2d,  Ten  per  cent,  on  the  receipts  of  Subordinates,
where  there  is  no  State  Grand  Body.  3d,  Seventy-five
dollars  from  each  State  Grand  Body  for  each  G.  Repre-
sentative to  which  it  is  entitled.  4th,  Profits  on  diplo-
mas, cards,  odes,  charge  and  lecture  books,  journals,
digest,  &c.,  of  which  it  has  exclusive  sale.

§  2.  Members,  Representatives,  and  Officers.

Elective  officers  may  debate  and  oner  motions,  but
cannot  vote ;  and  non-elective  officers  may  do  the  same,
if  a  majority  of  Representatives  permit.  All  officers
have  travelling  expenses  allowed  for  attending  the  ses-
sions of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.

The  Representative  of  any  Sovereign  Body  recognized
by  the  G.  L.  U.  S.,  is  admitted  on  the  floor,  and  granted
the  privilege  to  deliberate,  but  not  to  vote.

A  R.  W.  G.  Representative  must  be  of  the  R.  P.  D.,
in  good  standing  in  his  Lodge  and  Encampment,  a
resident  in  the  jurisdiction  he  represents,  and  a  P.  G.
in  the  G.  Lodge  thereof.  He  receives  from  the  G.  L.
U.  S.,  for  his  services,  five  cents  per  mile  travelled,
(nearest  route,)  and  five  dollars  per  day  during  attend-
ance on  the  sessions.  The  Representatives  are  divided
into  two  classes,  one  of  which  goes  out  each  year.

Any  P.  G.  of  the  R.  P.  D.,  in  good  standing  in  Lodge

322  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

and  Encampment,  is  eligible  for  nomination  to  any
office  in  the  G.  L.  U.  S.,  by  the  Representatives  there-
in, except  for  the  offices  of  Grand  Sire  and  Deputy
Grand  Sire  —  the  candidates  for  which  must  be  Past
Grand  Masters  also.

§  3.  Appointed  Officers.

These  are  a  Worthy  Grand  Messenger,  R.  W.  Grand
Chaplain,  R.  W.  Grand  Guardian,  and  R.  W.  Grand
Marshal,  who  are  appointed  with  the  consent  and  ap-
proval of  the  Grand  Lodge,  by  the  Grand  Sire  at  his
installation,  and  hold  office  two  years,  unless  removed
by  him  for  cause.  He  also  appoints  District  Deputy
Grand  Sires  for  each  State,  District,  and  Territory  in
which  there  is  no  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand  Encamp-
ment, subject  to  removal  in  like  manner.

1.  The  W.  GRAND  MESSENGER  prepares  the  room
for  the  meetings  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  attends  its  ses-
sions, provides  the  Representatives  with  needed  docu-
ments, books,  stationery,  &c.,  delivers  messages  for  mem-
bers and  officers,  keeps  in  order  the  office  of  the  R.  W.
Grand  Secretary,  and  executes  his  orders.     For  these
services  the  Grand  Lodge  pays  him  a  suitable  salary.

2.  The  R.  W.  GRAND  CHAPLAIN  opens  and  closes
the  Grand  Lodge  with  prayer  to  the  Supreme  Ruler  of
the  Universe.

3.  The  R.  W.  GRAND  GUARDIAN  guards  the  door
of  the  Grand  Lodge-room,  proves  every  brother  before
admission,  prevents  the  entrance  of  persons  not  duly
qualified,  and  permits  none  to  retire  without  the  P.  W.

4.  The  R.  W.  GRAND  MARSHAL  marshals  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States  in  processions  and  visita-
tions, and   makes  all  necessary  arrangemei  ts  for  the
comfort  and  accommodation  of  visitors  and  members.

THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF   THE   UNI  JED   STATES.         323

5.  R.  W.  DISTRICT  DEPUTY  GRAND  SIRES  act  for
the  Grand  Sire,  and  by  his  direction  execute  the  laws
and  mandates  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States
in  their  respective  Districts.  They  are  agents  of  the
Grand  Lodge  under  the  instructions  of  the  Grand  Sire,
and  are  to  obey  his  instructions  in  all  he  is  commanded
to  perform  for  the  good  of  the  Order.  They  are  agents
also  of  the  Grand  Secretary,  and  are  to  obey  his  special
instructions  in  matters  pertaining  to  his  office.  Each
has  general  supervision  in  his  District  over  all  Subor-
dinates working  under  charters  granted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States.  They  are  not  to  interfere
with  the  State  Grand  Lodges  or  Encampments,  and
must  report  their  acts  and  doings  semi-annually  to  the
Grand  Sire.

A  D.  D.  G.  Sire  must  be  in  good  standing  in  his
Subordinate  Lodge  and  Encampment,  have  attained
the  rank  of  P.  G.  and  the  degree  of  R.  P.,  and,  in  States
where  there  is  a  G.  Lodge  or  a  G.  Encampment,  he  must
also  be  a  member  of  the  same.

§  4.  Elective  Officers.

These  are  "  the  Most  Worthy  Grand  Sire,  Right  W.
Deputy  Grand  Sire,  R.  W.  Grand  Corresponding  and
Recording  Secretary,  and  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer,  who
shall  be  elected  by  ballot  by  a  majority  of  all  the  votes
cast,  biennially,  at  the  stated  communication"  in  Sep-
tember—  usually  on  the  second  day  of  the  session  —
"  and  shall  be  installed "  "  at  the  conclusion  of  said
stated  communication."

1.  The  R.  W.  GRAND  TREASURER  keeps  the  moneys
of  the  Grand  Lodge,  pays  all  orders  drawn  on  him  by
the  Grand  Sire,  attested  by  the  Grand  Secretary  under

324  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

seal  of  the  Grand  Lodge;  and  lays  before  the  Grand
Lodge,  at  its  annual  meeting,  a  full  and  correct  state-
ment of  his  accounts.

2.  The  E.  W.  GRAND   CORRESPONDING  AND  RE-
CORDING SECRETARY  carries  on  the  correspondence  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  under  its  direction  or  that  of  the
Grand  Sire,  and  lays  a  Report  and  abstract  of  the  same
before  the  Grand  Lodge  at  its  annual  session.     He  also
performs  such  other  duties  appertaining  to  his  office  as
may  be  required  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  pays  over  to
the   Grand    Treasurer  all   moneys    paid    him   for   the
Grand  Lodge.

In  addition  to  the  duties  usual  to  the  office  of  Grand
Secretaries  generally,  he  also  reports  to  the  Grand
Lodge,  at  each  annual  communication,  a  tabular  abstract
of  the  returns  received  from  the  several  Bodies  under
jurisdiction,  and  a  statement  of  those  which  have  failed
to  report ;  and  he  distributes,  as  soon  as  possible,  copies
of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  —  to  each  mem-
ber one  copy;  to  each  Subordinate  under  immediate
jurisdiction,  one  copy;  and  to  each  Grand  Body  twice
as  many  copies  as  it  has  Subordinates  in  jurisdiction.
He  is  -authorized  to  print  two  hundred  copies  of  his
annual  report  for  the  use  of  members  at  the  annual
session.

The  G.  Treasurer  and  G.  Secretary  are  salaried
officers,  and  the  former  gives  bond  with  security  for  the
proper  discharge  of  his  trust.

3.  The  R.  W.  DEPUTY  GRAND  SIRE  opens  and  closes
all  meetings  of  the  Grand  Lodge ;  examines  the  Repre-
sentatives as  to  their  qualifications  previous  to  taking
their  seats,  and  reports  to  the  Grand  Sire ;  keeps  the
Secret  Work  for  examination  during  the  sessions ;  sup-

vmivwsrrt

THE   GRAND   LODGE   OF   THE   U

ports  the  Grand  Sire  by  his  advice  and  assistance,  and
presides  in  his  absence;  and  in  case  of  the  death,  dis-
qualification, or  refusal  to  serve  of  that  officer,  he  per-
forms his  duties  for  the  remainder  of  his  term.

4.  The  M.  W.  GRAND  SIRE,  in  addition  to  the  duties
common  to  the  chief  executive  and  presiding  officer  of

a  Grand  Body,  selects
and  forwards  by  the
Grand  Representatives,
or  other  safe  agencies,  the
A.  T.  P.  W.  to  all  parties
entitled  to  it,  so  that  the
same  shall  go  into  opera-
tion on  the  first  day  of
January  in  each  year.  He
has  a  casting  vote  in  a  tie,
except  in  the  election  of
officers ;  and  is  authorized
to  fill  vacancies  in  the
Grand  Offices,  and  to  ex-
ercise a  general  superintendence  over  the  interests  of  the
Order,  during  the  recess  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  He
cannot  hold  any  elective  office  in  any  State  Grand
Body.  He  may  print  two  hundred  copies  of  his
annual  report  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  for  the  use  of  its
members  at  the  stated  session.

5.  The  PAST  GRAND  SIRES  are  not  officers  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  but  are  life  members
without  the  right  to  vote  or  to  have   their  expenses
paid,  unless  they  are  Representatives  also.     They  can
make    motions,    and    debate,   and    are   competent   to
serve  on  committees,  or  to  perform  other  duties  assigned
them.

28

326  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

§  5.  Regalia  and  Jewels.

"REGALIA  for  Grand  Representatives  shall  be  a
collar  of  purple  velvet,  not  more  than  four  inches  in
width,  with  a  roll  of  scarlet  velvet  on  the  upper  edge,
the  trimmings  to  be  of  white  and  yellow  metal,  and  the
collar  to  be  united  in  front  with  three  links,  from  which
may  be  suspended  such  medal  or  medals  as  the  member
may  be  entitled  to  wear.

"  P.  G.  Representatives,  and  the  Officers  and  Past
Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  to
wear  the  regalia  above  described.

"  The  JEWEL  of  the  Grand  Sire,  and  Past  Grand
Sire,  shall  be  a  medal  three  inches  in  diameter,  of
yellow  metal,  on  one  side  of  which  shall  be  the  coat-of-
arms  of  the  United  States,  surrounded  by  an  ornamental
edging  of  silver.

"  Representatives  and  Past  Representatives  shall  be
entitled  to  wear  medals  of  the  size  and  style  above,  with
the  coat-of-arms  of  the  State  represented."  —  Digest;
and  By-Laws  of  G.  L.  U.  8.,  Article  22.

CHAPTER  XXIV.

OF    MISCELLANEOUS   MATTERS.

§  1.  Diplomas  and  Cards.

ALL  certificates  of  membership  designed  to  supersede
or  occupy  the  place  of  the  Diploma  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.,
are  unlawful ;  and  all  officers  of  Lodges  and  Encamp-
ments are  forbidden  to  sign  or  affix  the  official  seal  to
the  same.

OF    MISCELLANEOUS   MATTERS.  327

Diplomas  are  of  two  kinds  :  —  1st,  To  members  of
any  Lodge  or  Encampment,  and  may  be  obtained  of
any  Grand  Secretary  or  Scribe  or  D.  D.  G.  Sire;  and
2d,  To  members  of  the  G.  L.  U.  S.  as  a  testimonial.
Both  are  designed  for  framing.

Cards  are  of  four  kinds.  1st,  Travelling  or  Visiting,
given  to  members  who  wish  to  retain  their  membership
while  travelling  or  residing  abroad.  2d,  Final  or
Withdrawal,  for  members  who  wish  to  cease  member-
ship, either  entirely,  or  to  unite  with  some  other  Subor-
dinate. These  two  are  engraved,  and  issued  by  the  G.
L.  U.  S.,  and  signed  by  its  Grand  Secretary.  Some-
times, for  greater  security,  State  G.  Lodges  and  En-
campments have  ordered  them  to  be  countersigned  by
their  G.  Secretaries  and  G.  Scribes.*  3d,  To  a  Daughter
of  Rebekah  who  desires  to  travel.  4th,  To  the  Wife  or
Widow  of  a  member,  to  secure  her  needed  protection
and  aid.  The  Card  to  a  Wife  is  not  granted  for  more
than  twelve  months  —  and  to  a  Widow  only  during  her
widowhood.  These  two  (3d  and  4th)  are  written,  and
issued  under  seal  of  the  Subordinate,  signed  by  the
proper  officers.

All  cards  must  be  applied  for  in  open  Lodge  or  En-
campment, and  granted  by  a  majority  vote  before  sign-
ing or  sealing  ;  and  be  signed  on  the  margin  by  the
recipient  before  delivery.  If  sent  by  mail,  an  order  for
the  A.  T.  P.  W.  should  be  sent  in  a  separate  letter,  and
then  the  card  must  be  signed  in  the  presence  of  the
officer  who  gives  the  A.  T.  P.  W.  Hig^  No  P.  Word,

*  In  filling  them,  the  bearer's  rank  and  station  should  be  named,
as  P.  G.  or  P.  C.  P.,  &c.  These  two  cards  can  only  be  obtained
under  the  seal  of  the  Subordinate,  from  the  Grand  Secretaries  and
Grand  Scribes.

328  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

or  its  explanation,  should  ever  be  sent  in  writing,  by
mail  or  otherwise.

If  a  Withdrawal  Card  is  refused  to  a  member  "  free
from  all  charges/'  he  can  resign  from  the  Order,  and
that  resignation  should  be  formally  accepted.  (For
forms  of  all  these  cards,  &c.,  see  Appendix  B,  Nos.
11-18.)

§  2.  Pass  Words.

Besides  the  several  Pass  Words  imparted  with  the
Degrees,  there  are  two  other  kinds,  designed  to  preserve
Lodges  and  Encampments  from  imposture:  1st,  a  Term
Word,  which  is  given  or  sent  by  the  G.  Master  or  G.
Patriarch,  through  the  G.  Secretary  or  G.  Scribe,  to  the
installing  officers,  and  is  imparted  in  each  Lodge  and
Encampment,  at  the  commencement  of  each  term  ;  and,
2d,  the  Annual  or  T.  P.  W.,  which  is  given  or  sent  by
the  Grand  Sire  to  the  State  Grand  Bodies,  and  by  them
sent  to  the  installing  officers,  to  be  imparted  only  to
the  two  highest  elective  officers  of  each  Lodge  and  En-
campment, and  by  them  to  members  who  receive  Cards,
and  design  to  travel  beyond  the  State  or  Territory.

§  3.  Examination  of  Visitors.

When  a  brother  holding  a  Visiting  or  Final  Card
desires  to  visit  a  Lodge  or  Encampment  in  another
jurisdiction,  he  will  send  the  Card  to  the  N.  G.  or  C.  P.
by  the  Guardian  or  Sentinel.  The  Presiding  Officer
will  appoint  a  Committee  of  the  proper  rank  and  degree
to  examine  the  applicant,  one  of  which  Committee  must
be  in  possession  of  the  T.  P.  W.  This  Committee  will
then  proceed  to  the  ante-room  with  the  Card,  and  there
examine  the  applicant.  First,  the  Committee-man,  hav-

OF   MISCELLANEOUS   MATTERS.  329

ing  the  T.  P.  W.,  will  examine  him  in  that,  according
to  the  mode  laid  down ;  and  in  a  low  tone  of  voice,  so
as  not  to  be  overheard  by  those  not  entitled  to  the  word.
Second,  the  committee  will  get  his  signature,  and  com-
pare it  with  that  on  the  margin  of  his  card.  Third,  they
will  examine  him  in  the  degrees  as  far  as  that  in  which
the  body  is  then  open.  All  being  satisfactory,  they
will  then  hand  him  the  regalia  of  the  degree  in  which
he  was  examined.  If  he  claim  a  higher  degree,  they
will  examine  accordingly,  and  give  the  proper  regalia.
The  Committee  will  then  announce  itself  and  visitor,
and,  on  admission,  and  after  addressing  the  chairs,  the
Chairman  will  introduce  the  visitor  in  due  form,  who
will  be  welcomed  by  the  Presiding  officer,  and  then
conducted  to  a  seat  in  honorable  position.  His  card,
after  having  his  visit  recorded  thereon  by  the  Secretary
or  Scribe,  will  be  handed  him  before  the  closing  ser-
vices. If  he  has  applied  for  and  received  relief,  the
same  will  also  be  noted  on  the  card,  and  his  Encamp-
ment or  Lodge  immediately  notified  of  the  fact  and  the
amount.

If  doubts  are  excited  by  the  examination,  great
wisdom  and  prudence  will  be  needed  to  resolve  those
doubts.  On  the  one  hand,  great  injury  threatens  the
Order  —  on  the  other  is  an  irreparable  injury  to  the
feelings  of  a  worthy  but  diffident  or  inexperienced
brother.  Counsel  with  the  Presiding  officer,  or  some
of  the  oldest  and  ablest  brethren,  before  acting  decidedly.
But  if  he  prove  an  impostor  beyond  doubt,  not  only
detain  the  card,  but  immediately  warn  neighboring
bodies,  and  inform  the  Subordinate  issuing  the  card  of
the  facts.

The  same  examination  should  be  made  of  a  sick  or
28*

330  THE    ODD-FELLOW'S   MANUAL.

distressed  brother,  by  the  Chief  officer  who  may  be
called  to  visit  him ;  but  with  a  delicacy  suited  to  the
circumstances.  And  all  visiting  cards  should  be  re-
turned to  the  Subordinate  giving  them,  as  soon  as
expired  —  if  by  mail  or  third  parties,  tear  off  the  seal,
or  the  holder's  signature,  to  prevent  any  use  of  them
by  unauthorized  persons.

§  4.  Honors  and  Courtesies.

"  In  honor  preferring  one  another,"  is  a  duty  in  our
fraternity;  as  is  that  other  injunction  — "  Render  to
all  their  dues  ....  honor  to  whom  honor."  Any  dig-
nitary, entering  as  an  officer,  is  to  be  received  as  such;
but  coming  only  as  a  visiting  brother,  or  a  fellow-mem-
ber, official  honors  may  be  omitted;  but  fraternal
courtesies  must  not  be  withheld.  They  are  his  due,  as
they  are  the  due  of  the  humblest  in  rank  and  lowest  in
degree.  "  Be  courteous  "  —  "  honor  all  men."

Grand  Honors  are  to  be  paid  only  to  those  entitled
to  them,  and  only  on  proper  occasions,  or  when  pre-
scribed in  ceremonials.  They  are  part  of  the  secret  work
of  the  Order,  and  are  never  to  be  given  before  the  un-
initiated, in  public  or  in  private.

§  5.   General  Interdicts.

"  The  Emblems  of  the  Order  cannot  be  used  for  busi-
ness purposes  in  connection  with  any  advertisement  or
public  display  not  appertaining  to  the  wants  of  the
Order."  —  (Digest  G.  L.  U.  S.)  Their  use,  as  above
forbidden,  subjects  to  expulsion.  Avoid  the  hotel,
store,  &c.,  where  they  are  thus  employed — the  owner,
IF  an  Odd-Fellow,  should  be  reported  and  dealt  with.

"  Refreshments  in   the  way  of  edibles  or  beverages

OF   MISCELLANEOUS   MATTERS.  331

(except  water],  shall  be  strictly  excluded  from  all  Lodge-
rooms,  or  ante-rooms  or  halls  connected  with  or  adjoining
thereto,  under  the  control  of  any  Subordinate  or  Degree
Lodge  or  Encampment  of  this  Order."  And  "no  Subor-
dinate Lodge  or  Encampment  of  this  Order  shall  hold  any
anniversary  or  other  celebration,  ball,  or  party,  where
the  regalia  of  the  Order  may  be  worn,  or  the  name  of
the  Order  assumed,  without  the  consent  of  the  Grand
Master  or  Grand  Patriarch  of  the  jurisdiction  first
obtained  in  writing  —  such  permission  to  be  predicated
only  upon  the  direct  promise,  (through  the  officers  of
the  Subordinate  seeking  the  permission,)  that  no  in-
toxicating beverages  of  any  kind  shall  be  offered  by
them  to  the  members  or  guests  present  on  the  occasion."
Adopted  unanimously  by  G.  L.  U.  S. — See  Proceedings,
1864,  p.  3709.

"  Gift  Enterprises"  Lotteries,  &c.  —  "No  Lodge  or
Encampment,  or  any  of  the  members  thereof,  shall,  in
the  name  of  the  Order,  resort  to  any  scheme  of  Raffles,
Lotteries,  or  Gift  Enterprises,  or  schemes  of  hazard  or
chance  of  any  kind,  as  a  means  to  raise  funds  for  any
purpose  of  relief  or  assistance  to  such  Subordinates,  or
to  individual  members." — Proceedings  of  G.  L.  U.  S.y
1866,  pp.  3953,  3987,  and  3988.

PART  THIRD.

|)ublir  CjimnumKa  of  th*  ©rdw.

CHAPTER  I.

PUBLIC   PROCESSIONS.

1.  No  Lodge  or  Encampment  can  appear  in  public
with  its  regalia  and  emblems,  at  any  procession,  ball,
&c.,  without  the  consent  of  its  Grand  Lodge  or  Grand
Encampment,  previously  obtained.    (Digest  G.  L.  U.  S.)
Generally,  the  G.  M.  and  G.  P.  are  invested  with  dis-
cretionary power  to  grant  such  permission,  during  the
recess  of  the  bodies  over  which  they  preside.

2.  The  Grand  Marshal  of  the  Grand  Lodge  has  a
supervisory  power  over  all  such  processions  within  the
limits  of  its  jurisdiction.     It  is  his  duty  to  see  that  the
brethren  are  properly  clothed  and  marshalled  in  due
order,  and  also  that  the  banners  and  devices  are  appro-
priate and   adapted  to  public   exhibition.     He  is  the
special  Marshal  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  his  station  is
at  its  head,  when  in  line;  but  the  Chief  Marshal  of  the
procession  is  to  look  to  him  for  counsel  and  direction.

3.  In  all  processions,  the  post  of  honor  is  the  rear.
The  Lodges  therefore  march  in  the  inverse  order  of
their  seniority,  the  youngest  first :  the  Encampments

332

PUBLIC   PROCESSIONS.  333

follow  in  the  same  order:  then  the  Grand  Encampment:
finally  the  Grand  Lodge.

4.  Each  Lodge  will  be  marshalled  in  the  following
order :  —

0.  G.  with  drawn  sword.

MARSHAL.

S.  Supporters,  with  white  rods.
Members  of  the  Initiatory  Degree.

Members  of  the  First,  Second,  Third,  Fourth,  and  Fifth

Degrees  respectively,  in  the  order  of  juniority.

Past  Grands  in  the  order  of  juniority.

Conductor  and  Wardens.

Treasurer  and  Secretaries.

V.  G.  and  Supporters.

N.  G.  and  Supporters.

ASSISTANT  MARSHAL.

1.  G.  with  drawn  sword.

5.  Each  Encampment  will  be  marshalled  in  the  fol-
lowing order:  —

0.  S.  with  drawn  sword.

MARSHAL.
Members  of  Patriarchal,  G.  R.  and  R.  P.  Degrees  respectively,

in  the  order  of  juniority.
Past  Chief  Patriarchs  in  their  due  order.

Treasurer  and  Scribe.

Junior  and  Senior  Warden.

High  Priest,  supported  by  G.  of  T.

Chief  Patriarch,  supported  by  two  P.  C.  Patriarchs.

ASSISTANT  MARSHAL.

1.  S.  with  drawn  sword.

6.  The  members  and  officers  of  Grand  Lodges  and
Encampments  are  arranged  in  procession  on  the  same
principles  as  the  above.

7.  On  reaching  its  place  of  destination,  the  procession
will  halt  and  open  to  the  right  and  left,  so  as  to  allow
the   Grand    Officers   and    Grand    Lodge,  &c.   to   pass
through,  and  thus  enter  in  reversed  order.

334

THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

CHAPTER   II.

LAYING  CORNER-STONES.

CEREMONIAL  I. —  FOR  PUBLIC  STRUCTURES.

The  following  ceremony  can  be  performed  at  the  laying  of  the
Foundation  Stone  of  all  public  structures,  whenever  requested  by
the  proprietors.*

ON  the  day  appointed  the  Lodge  will  be  opened  in
due  form,  and,  formed  in  the  following  order,  will  pro-
ceed to  the  foundation  of  the  building:  —

OUTSIDE  GUARDIAN.

MARSHAL.

Initiate  members.
First  Degree.
Second  Degree.
Third  Degree.
Fourth  Degree.
^  Fifth  Degree.

Past  Vice-Grands.

Past  Grands.
Four  P.  Gs.  bearing  Stone  on  a  hand-barrow.

>  Scene  Supporter

§

I

.       .

Scene  Supporter.  |

*  "Resolved,  That  the  forms  adopted  by  this  Grand  Lodge,  for
public  dedication  of  Halls  and  laying  Corner-Stones,  be  published
.....  and  that  these  forms  be  used  by  the  Order,  AND  NO  OTHER."  —
Journal  G.  L.  U.  S.,  1860,  p.  3278.

We  have  given  "no  other"  in  this  Improved  Manual.

OF    LAYING   CORNER-STONES.  335

Warden.    j     .,n/  f        Conductor.
\  with  Copper  Plate.  J

Supporter    (    VICE-GRAND,    1    Supporter
to  V.  G.     \  with  Holy  Bible.  /     to  V.  G.

Past  Grand.  {  ^ ^  Q  }  Past  Grand.

Supporter.         NOBLE  GRAND.         Supporter.
ASSISTANT  MARSHAL.

INSIDE  GUARDIAN.

On  arriving  at  the  foundation,  the  procession  will
open  to  the  right  and  left,  and  change  the  rear  to
the  front.  The  Noble  Grand,  with  his  Vice-Grand
and  Supporters,  will  take  his  position  on  a  platform,
previously  prepared  for  the  purpose,  near  the  Stone  —
the  Treasurer  and  Secretary  immediately  by  the  Stone.
A  piece  of  music  may  be  performed,  or  any  suitable
Ode  be  sung,  [see  Appendix  A,]  after  which  the  prin-
cipal workman  will  address  the  Noble  Grand  as  fol-
lows :  —

Principal  Workman  —  Most  Noble  Sir,  being  de-
sirous that  the  foundation-stone  of  this  building  should
be  laid  with  appropriate  ceremonies  by  your  honorable
Order,  I  have  solicited  your  attendance  upon  the  pres-
ent occasion,  and  hope  that  it  may  now  be  your  plea-
sure to  proceed  in  the  performance  of  that  service.
The  necessary  preparations  are  all  made,  and  now  await
your  direction.

Noble  Grand — Honored  Sir,  in  compliance  with
your  request,  so  politely  tendered,  I  now  proceed  to
discharge  the  duty  desired,  hoping  that  the  building
which  shall  arise  upon  this  foundation  may  reflect
credit  upon  your  skill,  and  be  completed  with  satisfac-
tion to  the  owners,  and  profit  to  the  workmen.

336  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

The  Treasurer  will  then  present  the  articles  to  be  de-
posited to  the  N.  G.,  who,  naming  aloud  each  article,
will  direct  the  Treasurer  to  deposit  them  in  the  Stone.
The  Secretary  will  then  hand  to  the  N.  G.  the  Copper
Plate  (on  which  is  engraved  the  object  of  the  building,
date  of  laying  the  stone,  by  whom  laid,  under  what
President  of  the  U.  S.  and  Governor  of  the  State,  &c.,)
and  the  N.  G.  will  read  aloud  the  inscription,  and
direct  the  Secretary  to  put  it  in  its  place.  The  stone
is  then  to  be  placed,  the  N.  G.  proclaiming:

Noble  Grand — In  the  name  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  United  States,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State
of ,  I  pronounce  the  first  Stone  of  this  build-
ing, intended  for  [here  state  its  object]  to  be  laid  in
regular  form  and  order.

Brethren.  —  So  be  it.

Music,  or  an  ODE  from  Appendix  A,  ORATION  or
other  ADDRESSES,  &c.

The  procession  will  then  form  again,  as  at  first,  re-
turn to  the  Lodge- room,  again  change  front  as  they
enter,  and  the  Lodge  be  closed  in  due  form.

CEREMONIAL  II.  —  FOR  LAYING  CORNER-STONES  FOR  ODD-FFLLOWS'
HALL*.

This  ceremony  should  be  performed  by  the  Grand
Master,  or  a  Gi*and  Officer  commissioned  by  him  for
that  purpose — in  which  case,  the  officiating  and  other
Grand  Officers,  and  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge
present,  shall  assemble  with  the  brethren  in  the  Lodge
room,  (or  other  appropriate  place  near  the  site  of  the
new  hall,)  and  proceed  in  regalia  to  the  place,  the  whole
preceded  by  the  Grand  Marshal  (with  baton]  —  t

OF    LAYING   CORNER-STONES.  337

the  music — then  the  Lodges  and  Encampments,  as  di-
rected on  page  333, — save  that  the  Chaplain  follows
the  V.  G.  supported  by  the  Warden  and  Conductor,
bearing  their  staves  of  office;  and  the  Guards  of  Tent
bear  their  spears.  The  Banners  with  the  escorts,
precede  the  0.  G.,  and  Sentinel,  respectively.  After
the  subordinates  come  the  Grand  Bodies  in  the  fol-
lowing order:  —

Marshal  of  Grand  Encampment.
Escort — Banner  of  Grand  Encampment — Escort.

Grand  Sentinel,  with  drawn  sword.

Members  of  Grand  Encampment  in  order  of  juniority.

Grand  Senior  and  Junior  Wardens.

Grand  Scribe  and  Grand  Treasurer.

M.  E.  Grand  High  Priest,  supported  by  two  P.  High

Priests,  carrying  crooks,
M.  W.  Grand  Patriarch,  with  gavel.

-~  f  Banner  of  Grand  Lodge,  )    -n

Escort.  <         •  j  u    n       j  XT      ij    f  Escort.
(  carried  by  Grand  Herald.  J

Grand  Guardian,  with  drawn  sword.
Members  of  Grand  Lodge  in  order  of  juniority.

Grand  Secretary,

with  documents,  &c.,  for

deposit  in  box.

Grand  Treasurer,
with  copper  box,  to  be  de-
posited in  corner-stone.

Grand  Chaplain,  with  open  Bible,  (on  which  is  laid  a
wreath  of  flowers,)  supported  on  the  right  by  the
Grand  Warden,  carrying  a  silver  vessel  con-
taining water,  and  on    the   left    by  the
Grand  Conductor,  carrying  a  silver

vessel,  containing  wheat.
Deputy  Grand  Master  and  Orator.

M.  W.  Grand  Master,  with  gavel.
29

338  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

NOTE.  —  If  the  ceremony  is  to  be  performed  by  the  N.  G.,
or  a  P.  G.  appointed  by  Aim,  the  Encampment  mem-
bers follow  immediately  after  the  scarlet  members  —
then  the  P.  Gs. — then  the  Secretary  (bearing  the  docu-
ments) and  the  Treasurer  (bearing  the  box)  —  then  the
V.  G.  and  Supporters — then  the  Chaplain  (bearing
the  JBible,  on  which  is  laid  the  FLOWERS,)  supported
by  the  Warden  on  his  right  (bearing  WATER  in  a  silver
vessel)  and  the  Conductor  on  his  left  (bearing  WHEAT
in  a  silver  vessel— then  the  Orator  attended  by  a  P.  G.
—  then  the  N.  G.  (with  gavel)  and  his  Supporters.

At  a  convenient  distance  from  the  site,  the  procession  will  reverse
front,  as  directed  pp.  333  and  335,  and  pass  three  times  around  the
building  (if  convenient),  while  the  officiating  officers  take  their
places  on  the  platform  near  the  North  East  corner,  where  the  Foun-
dation Stone  is  to  be  laid,

(J/us/c  or  an  Ode.)

Grand  Master.  —  My  brethren,  we  have  assembled  on
this  occasion  to  perform  an  interesting  and  important
ceremony,  and  one  which  we  trust  will  have  its  proper
influence  upon  your  hearts  and  minds.  The  spot  on
which  we  stand  has  been  selected  on  which  to  erect  a
temple,  which  is  to  be  consecrated  to  the  great  principles
of  our  Order,  and  we  are  here  to-day  to  inaugurate  the
enterprise  by  laying  the  first  foundation  or  corner  stone
in  the  structure  with  the  solemn  ceremonies  befitting
such  an  occasion.

The  work  so  auspiciously  begun  can  only  be  consum-
mated by  persevering  effort  and  patient  industry,  and
we  should  enter  upon  it  with  a  determination  to  carry
it  forward  to  completion,  uvtil  its  cap-stone  shall  be

OF   LAYING   CORNER-STONES.  339

brought  with  rejoicings,  and  the  structure  shall  present
beauty,  symmetry,  and  proportion,  every  way  adapted
to  the  use  and  purposes  for  which  it  is  designed.

Before  proceeding  to  the  immediate  duties  of  the
occasion,  it  is  right  and  proper  that  we  should  invoke
the  Divine  Blessing,  without  which  no  good  work  can
succeed.  Our  Grand  Chaplain  will  now  address  the
Throne  of  Grace.

( The  Grand  Master  gives  three  raps  with  the  gavel.)

Grand  Chaplain.  —  O  Thou  who  didst  lay  the  foun-
dations of  the  earth,  and  in  whom  alone  we  live,  and
move,  and  have  our  being,  we  beseech  Thee  of  Thy
great  goodness  to  command  Thy  blessing  to  rest  upon
the  work  which  we  this  day  begin  ;  honor  it  with  Thy
approving  smile,  and  prosper  it  to  its  final  accomplish-
ment and  to  the  glory  of  Thy  great  name.  Amen.

/  esponse.  —  So  may  it  be  !

The  Grand  Secretary  will  then  read  the  record  to  be
deposited  in  the  Stone,  with  a  list  of  the  documents,
coin,  etc.,  and  hand  the  list,  with  the  articles  and  things
to  be  deposited,  to  the  Grand  Treasurer,  who  will  place
the  same  in  the  box.  The  Grand  Master,  accompanied
by  the  Grand  Warden,  Grand  Conductor,  Grand
Chaplain,  and  Grand  Treasurer,  shall  then  descend  to
the  Stone.  The  Grand  Treasurer  will  then  present  the
box  to  the  Grand  Master,  who  will  place  it  in  the  cavity
previously  prepared  for  it,  and  adjust  the  lid.  The
Stone  will  then  be  fitted  accurately  to  its  place.

340  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Grand  Master  —  (receiving  from  the  Grand  Warden
the  vessel  containing  water.)  —  In  the  name  of  Friendship
as  pure  as  this  water  —  (sprinkling  three  times  upon  the
Stone)  —  I  lay  this  corner-stone;  and  as  it  here  forms
the  basis  of  this  edifice,  binding  together  in  harmony
and  consistency  the  component  parts  of  its  superstruc-
ture, so  may  true  Friendship  ever  constitute  the  foun-
dation of  our  social  fabric,  and  unite  the  family  of  man
in  one  fraternal  brotherhood.

Response.  —  So  may  it  be  !

Grand  Master  —  (receiving  from  the  Grand  Chaplain
the  wreath  of  floivers.) —  In  Love,  symbolized  by  these
flowers — (strewing  three  times  over  the  Stone)  —  I  here
lay  this  corner-stone,  and  as  it  underlies  and  supports
this  material  temple,  so  may  Love  ever  be  the  chief
foundation-stone  of  the  moral  temple  of  our  Order,  and
the  divine  sentiment  of  Love  ever  animate  the  hearts
of  all  its  votaries.

Response.  —  So  may  it  be!

Grand  Master — (receiving  from  the  &i*and  Conductor
the  vessel  containing  wheat.}  —  In  Truth,  represented  by
this  wheat  —  (strewing  three  times  over  the  Stone)  —  I
lay  this  corner-stone,  trusting  that  Truth  may  ever
prevail  over  error,  and  that  its  good  seed,  sown  in  our
hearts,  may  bring  forth  its  peaceable  fruits  in  our  lives.
May  the  building  here  to  be  erected  for  the  inculcation
of  Truth,  ever  remain  unshaken  by  the  storms  of  time,
and  our  beloved  Order  ever  rest  secure  on  the  Rock  of
Ages.

OF    LAYING   CORNER-STONES.  341

Response. — So  may  it  be  !

Grand  Master — (giving  three  blows  of  the  gavel  upon
the  Stone.)  —  In  Benevolence  and  Charity,  I  lay  this
corner-stone,  earnestly  praying  that  as  it  is  firmly  fixed
in  this  solid  foundation,  so  may  these  cardinal  virtues
immutably  repose  in  our  organization,  and  never  fail
to  be  the  constant  practice  of  our  Order.

Response. — So  may  it  be !

The  Architect  will  then  deliver  a  trowel,  with  mortar,  to
the  Grand  Master,  who  shall  spread  it  upon  the  Corner-
Stone,  and  fix  thereon  a  corresponding  stone.

Grand  Master.  —  As  this  cement  binds  together  the
stones  of  the  wall,  so  may  the  cement  of  brotherly  af-
fection bind  us  together  during  all  the  days  of  our  lives
below ;  and  so  may  the  cement  of  Divine  Love,  in  our
Father's  own  good  time,  unite  us  as  living  stones  in  the
temple  above,  the  "  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal
in  the  heavens."

Response.  —  So  may  it  be!

The  Grand  Master  and  other  officers  will  then  return
to  the  platform.

Grand  Master. — The  Deputy  Grand  Master  will
now  make  the  proper  proclamation.

Deputy  Grand  Master.  —  By  direction  of  the  Most
Worthy  Grand  Master,  I  decla  'e  this  corner-stone  duly

29*

342  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

laid  according  to  regular  and  ancient  form,  and  the
building  that  is  to  rise  upon  it  devoted  to  the  principles
and  work  of  Odd-Fellowship.

(Music,  or  Ode,  if  deemed  proper?)

Grand  Master. — The  Grand  Chaplain  will  now  ad-
dress the  Throne  of  Grace.

( The  Grand  Master  gives  three  blows  with  the  gavel.}

Grand  Chaplain.  —  Almighty  Architect  of  the  Uni-
verse, who  spake,  and  it  was  done ;  who  commanded,
and  it  stood  fast;  accept,  we  humbly  pray  Thee,  the
work  of  our  hands  this  day  performed,  and  strengthen
us  by  Thy  blessing  to  build  upon  this  corner-stone  a
temple  in  which  may  be  taught  the  great  principles  of
Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth,  and  where  Benevolence
and  Charity  may  ever  exercise  their  kind  offices,  and  be
a  safe  refuge  from  the  deluge  of  men's  passions,  and  the
discordant  elements  of  faction  and  selfishness.

Let  Thy  blessing  abide  with  those  who  have  zeal-
ously undertaken  the  work  of  building  this  edifice,  and
may  they  be  enabled  by  Thy  good  Providence  to  carry
it  forward  to  entire  completion.  And  bless,  we  pray
Thee,  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  construction  of  the
building,  and  preserve  them  by  Thy  mighty  power  from
danger  and  accident  while  they  are  thus  employed.
Surround  them  with  Thy  protecting  care,  and  may  their
health  and  lives  be  precious  in  Thy  sight  and  keeping.

And  we  earnestly  :nvoke  the  continued  smile  of  Thy
approving  countenan  je  upon  our  wide-spread  and  bene-
ficent Order.  Give  to  it,  we  beseech  Thee,  the  guid-

OF    LAYING    CORNER-STONES.  343

ance  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  and  prosper  it  in  the  thing
whereunto  Thou  hast  ordained  it.  Give  it  success  in
all  its  aims  and  efforts  to  benefit  mankind.  May  it
ever  build  upon  the  sure  foundations  of  Truth  and
Righteousness,  and  may  it  ever  exert  a  moral  influence
over  the  minds  and  consciences  of  its  entire  membership,
by  the  constant  practice  of  the  principles  which  have
been  taught  them.

Command  Thy  rich  blessing  upon  the  poor,  the  needy,
the  friendless,  and  the  destitute,  and  open  up  the  way
and  the  means  for  their  relief.  Bless  the  widow  and
the  orphan  in  their  affliction,  and  give  unto  us  sympa-
thizing hearts  and  open  hands  to  aid  them  and  provide
for  their  wants.

And  we  pray  Thee,  thou  God  of  Love,  that  the
period  may  soon  come  when  discord,  and  strife,  and  war
shall  cease  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  the  reign  of
peace  shall  be  universally  established  —  when  the  law
of  love  shall  control  all  hearts,  and  the  nations,  tribes,
and  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  be  united  together  as
a  band  of  brothers,  and  acknowledge  Thee  as  their
Father ;  and  to  Thee  we  will  ascribe  all  majesty,  power,
and  dominion,  now  and  forever.  Amen.

Grand  Master.  —  Brethren  of ,  the  sol-
emn ceremonies  of  the  occasion  are  now  concluded.
The  duty  assigned  us  has  been  performed.  We  have
begun  for  you  a  good  work,  which  it  remains  for  you
to  finish.  Having  entered  upon  so  important  an  enter-
prise, fail  not  in  carrying  it  forward  to  success,  which  I
am  confident  you  will  achieve.  When  next  the  authori-
ties of  the  Order  visit  you,  may  it  be  to  consecrate  a
temple  worthy  of  our  great  cause,  and  which  will  reflect
honor  iiT>on  your  zeal  in  its  behalf.

344  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

This  ceremony  is  concluded  by  a  benediction.

( The  Grand  Master  gives  three  blows  with  the  gavel.)

Grand  Chaplain. — The  Lord  bless  you  and  keep
you ;  the  Lord  make  his  face  to  shine  upon  you  and  be
gracious  unto  you ;  the  Lord  lift  up  his  fatherly  coun-
tenance upon  you,  and  give  you  peace.  Amen.

(Music,  Odes,  Oration,  <fce.)

The  procession  will  then  form  again,  and  return  as
directed  on  page  336.

FORM   OF   DEDICATION.  345

CHAPTER  III.

FORM    OF   DEDICATION   OF   AN   ODD-FELLOWS*    HALL
OK    LODGE-ROOM.*

This  ceremony  may  be  performed  in  presence  of  a  general  audience,  or  in
a  Lodge-room,  with  closed  doors.  If  others  than  members  are  present,
the  honors  will  be  omitted,  and  the  Grand  Officers  will  enter  in  due  pro-
cession, and  take  their  appropriate  seats.  If  admission  is  restricted  to
members  of  the  Order,  a  Lodge  ivill  first  be  opened  in  due  form,  and
Guardians  stationed  at  the  doors  ;  and  the  Grand  Lodge  Officers,  properly
clothed,  will  form  in  another  apartment,  and  approach  the  outer  door,
at  which  the  G.  Herald  will  give  the  usual  alarm.

0.  G.  WHO  comes  there?

G.  H.  The  M.  W.  G.  M.  and  other  Officers  of  the
R.  W.  Grand  Lodge  of ,  who  desire  to  be  ad-
mitted, in  the  name  of  F.,  L.,  and  T.,  for  the  purpose
of  dedicating  this  Hall  to  the  uses  of  the  I.  O.  of  O.  F.,
and  the  diffusion  of  the  principles  of  Benevolence  and
Charity.

0.  G.  Enter,  in  the  name  of  F.,  L.,  and  T.

The  same  dialogue  will  occur  at  the  inner  door,  with  the  I.  G. ,  after  which
the  Grand  Lodge  Officers  will  enter  the  room,  and  take  their  respective
seats,  the  four  brethren  appointed  as  Heralds  having  seats  in  front  of
the  G.  M.,  when  the  grand  honors  will  be  given.  The  G.  Officers  re-
suming their  proper  seats,  the  exercises  proceed  as  follows:

*  With  a  few  omissions  and  a  few  additions  this  is  substantially
the  form  of  Dedication  originally  prepared  by  the  late  Past  Grand
Master,  Dr.  Henry  S.  Patterson,  of  Philadelphia,  dec'd.,  and  pub-
lished in  the  Odd-Fellow's  Manual,  in  1852.  In  my  humble  opinion,
r,he  original  has  not  been  improved  by  the  alterations.  But  the
above  is  now  the  only  authorized  form.

346  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Grand  Chaplain.  —  Direct  us,  O  Lord,  in  all  our
doings,  with  Thy  most  precious  favor,  and  further  us
with  Thy  continual  help,  that,  in  all  our  works  begun,
continued,  and  ended  in  Thee,  we  may  glorify  Thy  holy
name,  and,  finally,  by  Thy  mercy,  obtain  everlasting
life.  Amen.

The  Lodge  being  called  up,  the  brethren  will  sing  the  "  Opening  Ode."

G.  Marshal.  —  Is  it  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the  M.
W.  G.  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  I.  O.  O.  F.
of  the  State  of ,  that  the  ceremony  of  dedicat-
ing this  Hall  to  the  business  and  purposes  of  Odd-
Fellowship  do  now  proceed?

Grand  Master. — Such  is  my  will  and  pleasure.

The  N.  G.,  [or  President  of  the  Hall  Association,  or  Chairman  of  the
Committee,  ]  laying  the  keys  on  the  G.  Master's  pedestal,  icill  then  say :

Noble  Grand. — Most  Worthy  Grand  Master,  we  meet
you  here  to-day  to  announce  that  the  work  in  which  we
have  been  engaged,  is  finished,  and  our  temple  is  at  last
ready  to  shelter  us  within  its  walls.  It  is  not  the  busi-
ness of  the  Committee  to  allude  to  its  own  labors,  nor
the  manner  in  which  those  labors  have  been  performed :
nor  would  good  taste  permit  them  to  descant  on  the
fitness  of  our  edifice  for  the  sacred  purpose  to  which  it
is  designed.  It  is  capable  of  speaking  for  itself  through
its  proportions  and  its  style.  If  these  fail  to  impress
you,  any  words  of  mine  would  prove  worse  than  useless.
I  have  only  to  repeat  that  our  work  is  finished,  and  in

behalf  of  [ Lodge,  No.  — ,]  and  of  the  Order

in  this  place,  I  make  request  that  this  Hall  be  set  apart
and  dedicated  to  the  business  and  purposes  of  Odd-
Fellowship.

Grand  Master.  —  Noble  Grand,  [or,  Mr.  President  of

FORM    OF    DEDICATION.  347

the  Odd-Fellow's  Hall  Association  —  as  the  case  may  be.]
In  the  name  and  in  behalf  of  the  I.  O.  O.  F.  of  the

State  of  ,  I  accept  for   dedication  to  the  uses

of  Odd-Fellowship,  this  Hall,  which  has  been  con-
structed under  your  supervision.  To  you  and  your
associates  the  present  must  be  an  occasion  especially
gratifying.  To-day  you  witness  the  consummation  of
that  for  which  you  have  ardently  toiled  and  hoped  —
to-day  you  hail  the  completion  of  that  for  which  you
have  zealously  and  faithfully  labored  —  and  to-day  you
behold  the  recognition  by  your  brethren  from  the  North,
the  South,  the  East,  and  the  West,  of  this,  the  result  of
your  efforts,  as  a  temple  devoted  to  the  service  of  those
whose  vocation  it  is  to  visit  the  sick,  relieve  the  dis-
tressed, bury  the  dead,  educate  the  orphan  —  duties
which  neither  interfere  with  nor  supersede  the  discharge
of  any  other,  social,  moral,  or  religious.

Brethren,  I  congratulate  you  upon  the  completion  of
this  beautiful  edifice,  which  we  are  about  to  dedicate  to
those  cardinal  virtues  which  should  adorn  and  elevate
humanity,  and  the  names  of  which  we  have  selected  as
the  motto  and  watchword  of  our  beloved  Order.  Be-
neath this  roof,  you  are  to  encourage  one  another  in  the
duties  of  benevolence  and  charity;  before  this  altar  the
good  works  of  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth  are  ever
to  be  presented  as  the  only  acceptable  sacrifice.  From
hence,  as  from  a  perennial  fountain,  are  to  flow  the
gentle  streams  of  true  Friendship,  to  gladden  and  make
green  many  waste  places.  In  this  quiet  retreat  are  to
be  cultivated  those  flowers  that  Love  unfeigned  shall
scatter  on  the  rugged  pathway  of  life,  under  many
bleeding  feet.  Here  is  to  be  sown  the  good  seed  of
Truth  in  many  hearts,  to  spring  up  and  yield  its

348  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

hundred-fold  harvest.  It  is,  therefore,  not  so  much
this  temple  made  with  hands  that  should  occupy  our
attention  at  present,  as  the  great  principles  that  are  here
to  be  disseminated.  I  hope  and  trust,  brethren,  that
our  united  efforts,  with  those  of  our  brethren  through-
out the  globe,  may  lead  to  the  raising  and  adorning  of
a  still  nobler  Temple,  which  shall  be  consecrated  by  the
approval  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Master  of  the  Universe,
without  the  invocation  of  whose  blessing  no  work
should  be  undertaken.

G.  C.  Almighty  God,  the  Maker  of  all  worlds !  whom
we  are  taught  to  approach  and  call  by  the  tender  name,
Father!  we  would  humbly  draw  near  and  beg  Thy
blessing  on  the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged.  What-
ever is  amiss  in  us,  do  Thou  make  right  by  Thy  Divine
power,  and  in  all  things  do  Thou  overrule  our  thoughts
and  deeds  to  Thy  greater  glory  and  the  good  of  our
fellow  men.  Amen.

The  members  of  the  Order  called  up.

PSALM  cxxn.

G.  Master.  I  was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  into
the  house  of  the  Lord !

Response.  Our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  0  Jerusalem!

G.  M.  Jerusalem  is  built  as  a  city  that  is  compact  together  (at
unity  in  itself).

R.  Whither  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of  the  Lord,  unto  the
testimony  of  Israel,  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord.

G.  M.  For  there  are  set  thrones  of  judgment,  the  thrones  of  the
house  of  David.

R.  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem ;  they  shall  prosper  that  love
thee.

G.  M.  Peace  be  within  thy  walls,  and  prosperity  within  thy
palaces.

R.  For  my  brethren  and  companions'  sakes,  I  will  now  say,
Peace  be  within  thee!

G.  M.  Because  of  the  house  of  the  Lord^our  God,  I  will  seek  thy
good.

R.  Bo  be  it.

DEDICATION   OF   AN   ODD-FELLOWS*    HALL.  349

G.  Master.  Hear  —  hear  —  hear,  all  men:  By  au-
thority and  in  the  name  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  In-
dependent Order  of  Odd-Fellows  of  the  State  of  -  ,
I  dedicate  this  Hall  to  the  business  and  purposes  of
Odd-Fellowship,  to  disseminate  Friendship,  Love,  and
Truth,  and  to  diffuse  Benevolence  and  Charity  in  their
fullest  extent,  to  all  its  worthy  members  —  and  by  this
solemn  act  I  hereby  declare  it  duly  dedicated.

The  Grand  Marshal  will  please  cause  this  dedication
to  be  appropriately  proclaimed.

Grand  Marshal.  Brothers,  Grand  Heralds  of  the
North,  of  the  South,  of  the  East,  and  of  the  West  —  by
the  solemn  act  of  the  M.  W.  G.  Master  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  -  ,  this  Hall  is  duly  dedicated  to  the
business  and  purposes  of  Odd-Fellowship  —  to  dis-
seminate Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth,  Faith,  Hope,
and  Charity,  in  their  fullest  extent,  to  all  its  worthy
members.  It  is  his  will  and  pleasure  that  the  same
be  proclaimed,  which  duty  you  will  perform.

Herald  of  the  North.  Hear,  all  men.  By  command
of  the  M.  W.  Grand  Master,  and  in  the  name  of  Friend-
ship, as  pure,  refreshing,  and  life-giving  as  this  water,
[sprinkling  it,]  I  dedicate  this  Hall  to  the  practice  of
that  ennobling  virtue,  which,  uniting  men  as  brethren,
teaches  them  to  sustain  that  relation  at  all  times,  each
in  his  turn  helping  and  helped,  blessing  and  blessed.

Response.  Behold,  how  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is
for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity;  for  these  the
Lord  commanded  the  blessing,  even  life  forevermore.

Herald  of  the  South.     Hear,  all  men.     By  command
of  our  M.  W.  Grand  Master,  I  proclaim  this  Hall  dedi-
cated to  Love,  world-wide  and  ever-enduring,  \lights
30

350  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

the  fire  on  the  altar, ~]  and  may  the  fire  that  is  this  day
kindled  upon  the  altar  of  our  hearts  be  as  perpetual  as
that  which  burned  upon  the  altar  in  the  secret  taber-
nacle of  the  Most  High,  of  which  this  is  but  a  feeble
emblem.

Response.  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men
and  of  angels,  and  have  not  Charity,  I  am  become  as
sounding  brass  or  a  tinkling  cymbal.  Charity  never
faileth.

Herald  of  the  East  Hear,  all  men.  By  command  of
our  M.  W.  Grand  Master,  I  proclaim  this  Hall  dedi-
cated to  the  inculcation  and  cultivation  of  Truth.
[Scattering  WheatJ]  And  may  the  good  seed  here
sown,  of  which  this  is  the  emblem,  like  the  grain  sown
broadcast  on  the  earth,  spring  up  again  an  hundred-
fold for  future  use  and  blessing;  and  may  that  en-
nobling virtue,  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  other
virtues,  and  which  is  devoid  of  guile  and  hypocrisy,
teach  us  sincerity  and  plain-dealing  in  all  our  com-
munications, and  earnestness  in  the  inculcation  of  what-
ever is  good  and  true.

Response.  He  that  walketh  uprightly  and  worketh
righteousness,  and  speaketh  the  Truth  in  his  heart,  O
Lord,  shall  abide  in  Thy  tabernacle,  and  shall  dwell  in
Thy  Holy  Hill.  [£.]

Herald  of  the  West.  Hear,  all  men.  By  command  of
our  M.  W.  Grand  Master,  I  proclaim  this  Hall  dedicated
to  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity.  Those  Graces,  like  these
flowers,  [strewing  flower  s,~\  fill  the  common  air  with
fragrance,  and  beautify  and  adorn  all  on  whom  they
fall.  The  practice  of  these  highest  virtues  is  in  itself
the  fulfilling  of  that  law  which  commands  us  to  visit
the  sick,  relieve  the  distressed,  bury  the  dead,  and
educate  the  orphan.

DEDICATION   OF   AN   ODD-FELLOWS*    HALL.  351

Response.  A  good  man  showeth  favor  and  lendeth ;
he  will  guide  his  affairs  with  discretion ;  he  hath  dis-
persed ;  he  hath  given  to  the  poor ;  his  righteousness
endureth  forever  •  his  horn  shall  be  exalted  with  honor.

[a]

Grand  Marshal.  M.  W.  Grand  Master.  Proclama-
tion has  gone  forth  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe,
that  all  men  may  hear  and  know  that  the  principles  of
Odd-Fellowship  have  here  a  dwelling-place.

Grand  Master.  The  Grand  Chaplain  will  now  ad-
dress the  Throne  of  Grace.

G.  C.  We  humbly  beseech  thee,  O  God,  to  bless  the
work  in  which  we  have  now  been  engaged.  Let  the
lessons  we  have  received  sink  deep  into  our  hearts,  so
that  this  shall  have  been  to  us  no  idle  ceremony,  but  a
means  of  edification  in  righteousness,  and  truth,  and
humanity.  May  we  all  leave  this  place  with  our  good
resolutions  strengthened,  our  charities  enlarged,  and
our  hearts  expanded  in  all-embracing  love  toward  our
brethren  of  every  tongue  and  clime.  Bless,  O  Heavenly
Father,  the  Order  of  which  we  are  members.  Aid  us
in  the  good  work  of  Benevolence  and  Charity,  to  which
we  are  pledged,  and  give  direction  and  success  to  our
efforts.  Bless  this  edifice  in  the  promotion  of  the  good
objects  to  which  it  has  this  day  been  set  apart.  Let
Thy  protecting  care  be  over  the  brethren  who  here  shall
meet  together.  Keep  their  feet  upon  the  right  path,
and  guide  them  by  Thy  power  in  the  way  everlasting.
Make  them  faithful  to  their  duties,  and  zealous  in  every
good  word  and  work,  so  that  when  the  solemn  close  of
life  comes,  the  soul  of  each  may  be  stayed  upon  Thee.
And  unto  thee,  our  God  and  Father,  be  ascribed  glory,
and  dominion,  and  power,  world  without  end.  Amen.

352  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

G.  M.  (First  calling  down  the  Lodge.)  My  brethren,
I  trust  that  the  solemn  ceremonies  of  this  occasion  may
not  be  lost  upon  our  hearts.  In  setting  apart  this  Hall
for  its  noble  purposes,  we  have  renewed  our  vows  to
practice  conscientiously  the  lessons  of  our  beloved  Order.
Let  us  never  forget  the  imperative  command  of  our
laws,  "to  visit  the  sick,  to  relieve  the  distressed,  to
bury  the  dead,  and  to  educate  the  orphan.'7  Let  us
not  forget,  moreover,  that  beside  these  good  works  of
charity,  Odd-Fellowship  has  high  and  important  lessons
to  inculcate :  lessons  that,  if  attentively  listened  to  and
practiced  by  all,  would  elevate  the  character  of  man,
and  hasten  the  coming  of  the  promised  day  of  universal
peace  and  love.

Brethren   of  ,  we   now   again    deliver   into

your  hands  this  beautiful  temple  you  have  elevated  to
our  Order.  Joy  be  within  its  walls,  and  Peace  a  con-
stant guest!  May  these  walls  never  echo  with  the
sound  of  an  angry  or  unkind  word!  May  all  the  in-
fluences that  flow  hence  be  good  and  for  good,  now  and
forever !  Amen.

R.  So  may  it  be.

G.  C.  Now  unto  him  who  is  able  to  keep  you  from
falling,  and  to  present  you  faultless  before  the  presence
of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy,  I  commend  you  and
the  whole  family  of  man.  And  to  Him,  the  only  wise
God,  our  Saviour,  be  glory  and  majesty,  dominion  and
power,  now  and  forever.  Amen.

Here  follow  Odes,  Oration  or  Addresses,  $c.t  as  may  have  been  arranged.

NOTE. — Where  the  brethren  and  "Daughters"  are  so  gifted  and
inclined,  the  Dedication  Ode,  Appendix  A,  adapted  to  the  familiar
air,  "Bruce's  Address,"  can  be  happily  introduced  as  choruses  to
the  Responses  in  the  foregoing.  The  1st  verse  at  [^4.],  after  the
Response  to  the  Herald  of  the  North  — the  3d  verse  at  [J&.J  after
the  Response  to  the  Herald  of  the  East  —  and  the  2d  and  4th  verses
at  [<?.],  after  the  Response  to  the  Herald  of  the  West.

OF   INSTALLATIONS.  353

CHAPTER  IV.

PUBLIC    INSTALLATION     OF     SUBORDINATE     LODGE
OFFICERS.

NOTE. — Public  installations  can  be  held  only  by  permission  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  and  in  manner  prescribed  by  G.  L.  U.  S.  The
representative  of  the  Grand  Master  (if  any)  must  be  addressed  by
his  own  proper  title  — any  other  Grand  officer  pro  tern.,  by  that  of
the  officer  represented.

The  Lodge  properly  arranged,  and  the  inner  door  opened  wide,  the  G.
Marshal,  with  white  baton,  trimmed  with  scarlet,  approaches  the  L  G.
from  without.

G.  Marshal.  Worthy  Guardian,  inform  the  Noble
Grand  that  the  G.  Marshal  of  the  R.  W.  Grand  Lodge
of demands  admission.

I.  Guardian.  Noble  Grand,  the  W.  G.  Marshal  of
the  G.  L.  of is  without,  and  demands  admis-
sion.

JV.  Grand.  You  will  admit  him.

1.  G.  You  have  liberty  to  enter.

G.  Marshal  passes  to  centre  of  room,  and  salutes  N.  G.  with  a  flourish
of  the  baton.

G.  Marshal.  Worthy  N.  G.,  I  am  instructed  by  the

M.  W.  G.  Master  of  the  R.  W.  G.  Lodge  of ,

to  ascertain  whether  the  charter  (or  dispensation)  of  this
Lodge  is  in  the  hall, — whether  the  dues  of  this  Lodge
have  been  paid,  and,  if  not,  to  request  that  they  shall
be  placed  in  my  hands, — to  ask  if  the  officers  have  been
elected  for  the  ensuing  term,  —  if  they  are  free  from
30*

854  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

all  charges,  pecuniary  or  otherwise,  upon  your  Lodge-
books;  and  whether  you  are  now  ready  to  proceed  with
the  ceremony  of  installation?

N.  G.  W.  G.  Marshal,  the  charter  of  this  Lodge  is
in  the  Lodge-room,  and  in  my  keeping.  The  Treasurer
will  pay  over  to  you  the  dues  of  the  Lodge,  or  show
you  the  G.  Secretary's  receipt  for  the  same.  The
officers  for  the  ensuing  term  have  been  elected;  they
each  and  all  stand  free  from  all  charges  upon  our
Lodge-books.  You  will  please  inform  the  M.  W.  G.
Master  that  we  are  prepared  for  installation,  and  await
his  pleasure.

G.  Marshal  receives  dues,  salutes  A".  G.  >r'tl<  /Won,  retires,  and  mar-
shah  the  Grand  officers  to  the  inner  door.

G.  Marshal  The  G.  L.  of  the  I.  O.  O.  F.  of .

I.  G.  Noble  Grand,  the  Grand  Lodge.
N.  G.  In  the  name  of  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth,
admit  it.

G.   L.   enters,  Lodge  rises  as  G.  L.  passes  to  the  centre.      G.  Master

sfepx  in  front.

G.  Master.  Noble  Grand,  by  authority  of  the  R.  W.

G.  Lodge  of ,  we  appear  here,  this  evening,  for

the  purpose  of  installing  into  their  respective  chairs  the
officers  of  this  Lodge.  You  will  please  direct  your
officers  to  surrender  their  respective  chairs  to  the  G.
officers  in  attendance;  and  you  will  now  please  take
your  seat  as  Sitting  Past  Grand  of  this  Lodge  for  the
current  term,

N.  G.  Officers  of Lodge,  you  will  surrender

your  chairs  to  the  officers  of  the  R.  W.  G.  Lodge  of

OF   INSTALLATIONS.  355

The  G.  Master  takes  the  N.  G's  chair  —  the  G.  Warden  the  V.
G.  '.5  —  G.  Sec.  and  G.  Treas.  the  chairs  of  the  Sec.  and  Treas.

G.  Master.  My  brethren,  you  will  please  be  seated.
W.  G.  Marshal,  you  will  retire  with  the  officers  elect
for  examination.  It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  remind
you  that  that  duty  should  be  faithfully  performed.

They  retire  —  and,  after  examination,  return,  and  are  announced.

G.  Guardian.  The  G.  Marshal,  with  the  officers  elect
for  installation.

They  enter  in  procession.  Each  officer  may  be  supported  by  two  Past
officers  of  that  grade.  The  Lodge  remains  seated,  unless  the  Ode  is  sung
during  the  march.  The  procession  forms  on  the  left  of  the  N.  GSs  chair.

INSTALLATION   ODE.

Come,  let  us  swell  the  joyful  note,

And  hail  the  chosen  band,
Who,  in  compliance  with  our  vote,

To-night  before  us  stand.
Our  Noble  and  Vice  Grand  will  now

To  seats  of  honor  move,
And  bear  the  ensign  on  their  brow

Of  Friendship,  Truth,  and  Love.

Hail !  all  our  officers  elect,

Of  high  and  low  degree  ;
Hail !  each,  with  due  and  kind  respect,

Whate'er  his  station  be  :
We  place  reliance  in  their  zeal,

That  they  will  worthy  prove,
And  stamp  their  actions  with  the  seal

Of  Friendship,  Truth,  and  Love.

G.  Marshal.  M.  W.  G.  Master,  I  present  to  you  for
installation,  our  worthy  Brother  [A.  B.],  whom  the
brethren  of  this  Lodge  have  elected  Noble  Grand  for
the  present  term.

356  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

G.  Master.  Brother,  do  you  accept  the  office  to  which
you  have  been  elected?

N.  G.  elect.  I  do.

G.  Master.  Brethren,  are  you  content  with  the  choice
you  have  made  of  Noble  Grand  ?

Lodge.  We  are.  \If  objection  be  made,  the  G.  Mas-
ter will  call  the  officers  to  their  chairs  again,  and  will  re-
tire with  the  Grand  Officers.]

G.  Master.  M.  W.  G.  Marshal,  have  you  examined
the  N.  G.  elect,  to  ascertain  whether  he  is  sufficiently
acquainted  with  the  various  lectures  and  instructions  to
enable  him  to  deliver  them  according  to  his  office?
Have  you  ascertained  whether  he  has  rendered  sufficient
previous  service  in  office,  and  is  free  from  all  charges  on
the  books  of  this  Lodge,  of  whatsoever  kind  ?

G.  Marshal.  I  have,  M.  W.  G.  Master,  and  find  the
brother  competent  and  eligible  to  fill  the  honorable  sta-
tion to  which  he  has  been  elected  by  the  brothers  of
this  Lodge.

G.  Master.  Noble  Grand  elect,  will  you  promise  to
submit  to  your  charges  —  to  be  obedient  to  the  man-
dates of  the  G.  Lodge  of  the of , — to

support  the  regulations  of  our  Order  —  to  act  with
justice  toward  all  brothers,  as  is  the  duty  of  a  Noble
Grand  ?

Noble  Grand  elect.     I  will.

G.  Master.  Your  apparent  willingness  to  conform  to
the  charges  and  regulations  of  our  Order  —  the  pro-
ficiency you  have  made  therein  —  your  moral  stand-
ing—  your  freedom  from  indebtedness  to  the  Lodge,
and  the  voice  of  a  majority  thereof,  entitle  you  to  be
now  installed  into  the  office  of  N.  G.  of  this  Lodge.

OF   INSTALLATIONS.  357

You  will,  therefore,  place  your  right  hand  upon  your
left  breast,  and  repeat  after  me :

NOBLE  GRAND'S  O.  B.  N.

In  the  presence  of  the  members  of  the  Order  here

assembled,  I, ,  do  promise,  declare,  and

say, that  I  will  perform  the  duties  of  Noble  Grand  of
this  Lodge  until  the  end  of  the  present  term ;  and  will .
support,  maintain,  and  abide  by  the  Constitution,  By-
laws, Rules,  and  Regulations  of  the  G.  Lodge  of  the
I.  O.  O.  F.  of  the  -  -  of  -  — ;  as  well  as  the
Constitution  and  By-laws  of  this  Lodge.  I  further-
more promise  that  I  will  not  give  the  means  whereby
to  gain  admission  to  any  person,  except  a  member  of
this  Lodge  in  good  standing.  I  will,  to  the  utmost  of
my  power,  enforce  the  laws,  and  preserve  order  and
decorum  in  the  Lodge.  I  will  judge  of  every  trans-
action that  comes  before  me  without  prejudice  or  par-
tiality —  see  that  the  obligations  to  candidates  for  mem-
bership are  legally  administered  —  and,  should  the  G.
Lodge  direct,  I  will  deliver  the  warrant  or  dispensa-
tion of  this  Lodge  to  the  Grand  Master.  All  this  I
promise  to  fulfil,  unless  prevented  by  sickness,  or  some
other  unavoidable  occurrence.  To  the  performance  of
all  which,  I  pledge  my  most  sacred  honor.

(?.  Master.  W.  G.  Marshal,  you  will  proceed  to  invest
(he  Noble  Grand  in  the  regalia  of  his  office.

G.  Marshal.  By  command  of  the  M.  W.  G.  M.,  I  in-
vest you  with  this  collar  and  jewel,  which  are  emblems
of  your  office.

G.  Master.  Noble  Grand,  you  will  receive  from  us
the  Constitution  and  By-laws  of  your  Lodge.  You  are

358  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

to  take  them  for  your  guide,  and  cause  them  to  be  fre-
quently read  in  your  Lodge.  You  will  please  be  seated
at  our  right  hand.

G.  Marshal.  [Introduces  V.  G. — introduction,  ques-
tions and  answers,  including  ike  ansiver  of  the  Lodge,  the
same  as  in  case  of  the  N.  G.]

G.  Master.  W.  G.  Marshal,  have  you  examined  the
V.  G.  elect,  to  ascertain  whether  he  is  sufficiently  ac-
quainted with  the  various  lectures  and  instructions  to
enable  him  to  assist  in  delivering  them  according  to  his
office?  Have  you  ascertained  whether  he  has  rendered
sufficient  previous  service  in  office,  and  is  free  from  all
charges  on  the  books  of  this  Lodge,  of  whatsoever  kind?

G.  Marshal.  I  have,  M.  W.  G.  Master,  and  find  the
brother  competent  and  eligible  to  fill  the  honorable  sta-
tion to  which  he  has  been  elected  by  the  brothers  of
this  Lodge.

G.  Master.  Vice  Grand  elect,  will  you  promise  to
yield  a  like  obedience  to  your  charges,  and  the  man-
dates of  the  R.  W.  G.  Lodge  as  the  N.  G.  —  to  assist
him  in  the  execution  of  his  office  —  to  use  your  efforts
in  promoting  the  harmony  and  welfare  of  the  Lodge,
and  to  increase  love  among  your  brethren  ?

Vice  Grand  elect.  I  will.

G.  Master.  In  consequence  of  your  avowed  willing-
ness to  enter  upon,  and  perform  the  duties  of  V.  G.  of
this  Lodge,  you  will  now  proceed  with  our  W.  G.  Mar-
shal to  the  chair  of  your  office,  where  you  will  be  in-
stalled. W.  G.  Marshal,  you  will  present  the  V.  G.
elect  to  our  R.  W.  G.  Warden  for  obligation.

G.  Marshal.  R.  W.  G.  Warden,  by  command  of  our

M.  W.  G.  Master,  I  present  you  Bro. ,

the  V.  G.  elect,  for  obligation.

OF    INSTALLATIONS.  359

G.  Warden.  Vice  Grand  elect,  you  will  please  place
your  right  hand  upon  your  left  breast,  and  repeat  after
me :

VICE  GRAND'S  O.  B.  N.

In  the  presence  of  the  members  of  the  Order  now

assembled,  I, ,  do  promise,  declare,  and

say,  that  I  will  perform  the  duties  of  Vice  Grand  of
this  Lodge  until  the  end  of  the  present  term ;  and,  in
the  absence  of  the  N.  G.,  to  the  utmost  of  my  ability,
perform  all  the  duties  he  has  obligated  himself  to  do  —
that  I  will  restrain  every  improper  sentiment,  and
strictly  administer  the  obligations  to  candidates  for
membership,  or  cause  the  same  to  be  done  by  a  P.  G.
or  P.  V.  G.  All  this  I  promise  to  fulfil,  unless  pre-
vented by  sickness,  or  some  unavoidable  occurrence.
To  the  performance  of  all  which,  I  pledge  my  most
sacred  honor.

G.  Master.  W.  G.  Marshal,  you  will  proceed  to  in-
vest the  V.  G.  in  the  regalia  of  his  office.

G.  Marshal.  By  command  of  the  M.  W.  G.  Master,
I  invest  you  with  the  badges  of  your  office.  In  receiv-
ing them,  you  will  not  cease  to  remember  that  the  pre-
ference of  the  Lodge  has  placed  them  upon  you,  in  the
full  confidence  that,  while  you  wear  them,  their  purity
shall  not  be  blemished.

G.  Warden.  Vice  Grand,  I  present' to  you  a  copy  of
the  Constitution  and  By-laws  of  your  Lodge,  which
you  will  make  your  study,  in  order  that  you  may  assist
the  N.  G  in  the  performance  of  his  duties  —  and  this
gavel,  which  indicates  that  you  are  to  assist  him  in  the
exercise  of  his  authority.  You  will  now  take  your  seat
as  V.  G.  of  this  Lodge  for  the  present  term.

360  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

G.  Marshal.  [Introduces  Sec.  — introduction,  questions,
and  answers,  including  the  answer  of  the  Lodge,  the  same
as  in  case  of  the  N.  (?.]

G.  Master.  W.  G.  Marshal,  have  you  examined  the
Sec.  elect,  and  ascertained  whether  he  has  attained  suf-
ficient degrees  to  entitle  him  to  the  office?  Have  you
ascertained  whether  he  is  free  from  all  charges  on  the
books,  of  whatsoever  kind?

G.  Marshal.  I  have,  M.  W.  G.  Master,  and  find  the
brother  fully  qualified  to  fill  the  office  to  which  he  has
been  elected.

G.  Master.  Worthy  Secretary  elect,  will  you  engage
to  perform  the  duties  of  Secretary  of  this  Lodge  faith-
fully and  punctually,  and  to  comply  with  the  requisi-
tions of  the  Grand  Lodge?

Secretary  elect.  I  will.

G.  Master.  Having  expressed  your  willingness  to
enter  upon  and  perform  the  duties  of  Sec.  of  this  Lodge,
our  W.  G.  Marshal  will  conduct  you  to  the  chair  of
your  office,  where  the  obligation  appertaining  to  it  will
be  administered  to  you.  W.  G.  Marshal,  you  will  pre-
sent the  Sec.  elect  to  our  R.  W.  G.  Secretary.

G.  Marshal.  R.  W.  G.  Secretary,  by  command  of  our

M.  W.  G.  Master,  I  present  to  you  Br. ,

the  Sec.  elect,  for  obligation.

G.  Sec.  W.  Secretary  elect,  you  will  place  your  right
hand  upon  your  left  breast,  and  repeat  after  me :

When  all  the  duties  of  Sec.  are  performed  by  one  person,  the  "Secre-
tary's 0.  B.  AY'  will  be  administered — when  by  two  persons,  the  "Re-
cording Secretary's  0.  B.  N."

OF    INSTALLATIONS.  361

SECRETARY'S  O.  B.  N.

In  the  presence  of  the  members  of  the  Order  now

assembled,  I, : ,  do  promise,  declare,  and

say,  that  I  will  keep  accurate  minutes  of  the  transactions
of  this  Lodge — I  will  keep  correctly,  the  accounts  be-
tween this  Lodge  and  its  members  —  I  will  pay  all  moneys
into  the  hands  of  the  Treasurer,  taking  his  receipt  for  the
same  —  and  that  I  will,  as  soon  as  practicable,  forward  to
the  Treasurer  copies  of  all  resolutions  authorizing  drafts
of  moneys  on  him.  I  furthermore  promise,  that  I  will
not  wrong  the  Lodge,  or  a  brother,  to  the  value  of  any-
thing— and  I  will  deliver  all  books  and  papers  belong-
ing to  the  Lodge,  to  my  successor  in  office  ;  and  perform
such  other  duties  as  the  Lodge  may  require.  All  this
I  promise  to  fulfil,  unless  prevented  by  sickness  or  some
unavoidable  circumstance.  To  the  performance  of  all
which,  I  pledge  my  most  sacred  honor.

RECORDING  SECRETARY'S  O.  B.  N.

In  the  presence  of  the  members  of  the  Order  now

assembled,  I, ,  do  promise,  declare,  and

say,  that  I  will  keep  accurate  minutes  of  the  transactions
of  this  Lodge  —  and  that  I  will,  as  soon  as  practicable,
forward  to  the  Treasurer  copies  of  all  resolutions  au-
thorizing drafts  of  moneys  on  him.  I  furthermore
promise  that  I  will  not  wrong  the  Lodge,  or  a  brother,
to  the  value  of  anything — and  that  I  will  not  take
part  or  share,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  any  illegal  dis-
tribution of  the  funds  or  other  property  of  the  Lodge,
but  will,  to  the  best  of  my  ability  and  the  utmost  of  my
31

362  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

power,  endeavor  to  prevent  any  attempt  at  such  perver-
sion of  the  property  of  the  Lodge  —  and  I  will  deliver
all  books  and  papers  belonging  to  the  Lodge,  to  my
successor  in  office,  and  perform  such  other  duties  as  the
Lodge  may  require.  All  this  I  promise  to  fulfil,  unless
prevented  by  sickness  or  some  unavoidable  circumstance.
To  the  performance  of  all  which,  I  pledge  my  most
sacred  honor.

G.  Master.  AV.  (i.  Marshal,  you  will  now  invest  the
Sec.  with  the  regalia  of  his  office.

Gr.  Marshal,  By  command  of  the  M.  W.  G.  Master,
I  invest  you  with  the  badges  of  your  office.  In  wear-
ing this  regalia  of  the  important  office  to  which  you
have  been  elevated,  it  is  our  hope  that  you  will  not  for
a  moment  lose  sight  of  the  responsibilities  resting  upon
you,  so  that  you  may  surrender  it  to  your  successor  with
as  much  honor  to  yourself  as  you  now  receive  it.

G.  Secretary.  W.  Secretary,  I  present  to  you  these
books  and  papers,  the  property  of  your  office;  and  this
seal  of  the  Lodge,  which  is  to  remain  in  your  official
keeping.  You  will  now  take  your  seat  as  Sec.  of  this
Lodge  for  the  present  term.

The  "  Pfrmnui-nt  Secretary"  (if  any]  ?/•///  be  presented  by  ti>l>-.  in
s/f/tif  iiKitnn  r  <nnl  form  as  Sec.  ;  and  will  fake  the

PERMANENT  SECRETARY'S  O.  B.  N.

In  the  presence  of  the  members  of  the  Order  now
assembled,  I,  -  — ,  do  promise,  declare,  and

say,  that  I  will  keep  correctly  the  accounts  between  the
Lodge  and  its  members,  and  will  pay  all  moneys  in  my
hands  to  the  Treasurer,  taking  his  receipt  for  the  same.
I  furthermore  promise,  that  I  will  not  wrong  the

OF    INSTALLATIONS.  363

or  a  brother,  to  the  value  of  anything  —  and  t^at  I  will
not  take  part  or  share,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  any
illegal  distribution  of  the  funds  or  other  property  of
the  Lodge,  but  will,  to  the  best  of  my  ability  and  the
utmost  of  my  power,  endeavor  to  prevent  any  attempt
at  such  perversion  of  the  property  of  the  Lodge  —
and  I  will  deliver  all  books  and  papers,  belonging  to
the  Lodge,  to  my  successor  in  office ;  and  perform  such
other  duties  as  the  Lodge  may  require.  All  this  I
promise  to  fulfil,  unless  prevented  by  sickness  or  some
unavoidable  circumstance.  To  the  performance  of  all
which,  I  pledge  my  most  sacred  honor.

G.  Master.  W.  G.  Marshal,  you  will  now  invest  the
Permanent  Sec.  with  the  regalia  of  his  office.

G.  Marshal.  By  command  of  our  M.  W.  G.  Master,
I  invest  you  with  the  badges  of  your  office.  In  bear-
ing this  distinction  among  your  brethren,  be  assiduous
in  discharging  the  duties  of  your  station.

G.  Secretary.  W.  Per.  Sec.,  I  present  to  you  the  books
and  papers  of  your  office.  You  will  now  take  your

station  as  Per.  Sec.,  for  the  term  of months,  as

provided  by  the  By-laws  of  your  Lodge.

G.  Marshal.  [Introduces  Treasurer,  questions  and
answers,  including  that  by  the  Lodge,  the  same  as  in
case  of  N.  (?.]

G.  Master.  W.  G.  Marshal,  have  you  examined  the
Treas.  elect,  and  ascertained  whether  he  has  attained
sufficient  degrees  to  entitle  him  to  the  office?  Have
you  ascertained  whether  he  is  free  from  all  charges  on
the  books,  of  whatsoever  nature  and  kind  ?  Has  his
bond  of  office  been  duly  and  regularly  executed,  to  the
benefit  and  satisfaction  of  the  Lodge  ?

364  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

G.  Marshal.  I  have,  M.  W.  G.  Master,  examined  the
brother,  and  find  him  duly  qualified  and  free  from
charges.  I  have  also  ascertained  that  his  bond  has
been  regularly  executed,  presented,  and  accepted,  and
is  now  in  possession  of  the  Lodge.

G.  Master.  W.  Treasurer  elect,  will  you  engage  to
perform  the  duties  of  Tr.  faithfully,  as  required  by  the
Constitution  and  By-laws  of  the  Lodge?

Treasurer  elect.  I  will.

G.  Master.  Under  this  assurance  of  your  disposition
to  enter  upon,  and  perform  the  duties  of  Tr.  of  this
Lodge,  our  W.  G.  Marshal  will  conduct  you  to  the  chair
of  your  office,  where  the  necessary  obligation  will  be  ad--
ministered unto  you.  W.  G.  Marshal,  you  will  present
the  Tr.  elect  to  our  R.  W.  G.  Treasurer.

G.  Marshal.  R.  W.  G.  Treasurer,  by  command  of

our  M.  W.  G.  Master,  I  present  to  you  Br.

,  the  Tr.  elect,  for  obligation.

G.  Treasurer.  Worthy  Tr.  elect,  you  will  place  your
right  hand  upon  your  left  breast,  and  repeat  after  me:

TREASURER'S  O.  B.  N.

In  the  presence  of  the  members  of  the  Order  now

assembled,  I, ,  do  promise,  declare,  and

say,  that  I  will  justly  and  truly  perform  the  duties  of
Treasurer  of  this  Lodge  —  I  will  pay  all  orders  drawn
on  me  by  the  N.  G.,  or  committee  duly  authorized  by
the  Lodge,  after  having  received  from  the  Sec.  M  rr.pv
of  the  resolution  authorizing  the  same —  I  will  deliver
all  books  and  papers,  and  pay  all  moneys  in  my  hands
to,  my  successor  in  office;  and  I  will  not  wrong  this
Lodge  to  the  value  of  anything — and  that  I  will  not

OF    INSTALLATIONS.  365

take  part  or  share,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  any  illegal
distribution  of  the  funds  or  other  property  of  the  Lodge,
but  will,  to  the  best  of  my  ability  and  the  utmost  of
my  power,  endeavor  to  prevent  any  attempt  at  such
perversion  of  the  property  of  the  Lodge.  All  this  I
promise  to  fulfil,  unless  prevented  by  sickness  or  some
unavoidable  circumstance.  To  the  performance  of
all  which,  I  pledge  my  most  sacred  honor.

G.  Master.  W.  G.  Marshal,  you  will  now  invest  the
worthy  Tr.  with  the  regalia  of  his  office.

G.  Marshal.  By  command  of  our  M.  W.  G.  Master,
I  invest  you  with  the  badges  of  your  office.  The  im-
portance and  responsibility  of  your  office  will  always
admonish  you  of  the  necessity  of  preserving  free  from
tarnish  the  honor  you  have  pledged.

G.  Treasurer.  Worthy  Tr.,  you  will  receive  from  rne
the  books  and  papers  of  your  office.  You  will  now  take
your  seat  as  Tr.  of  this  Lodge  for  the  present  term.

The  G.  Master  retires  from  the  N.  &s.  chair  by  the  left,  as  he  says:

G.  Master.  Noble  Grand,  I  present  to  you  this  gavel,
the  emblem  of  your  authority,  and  call  upon  your
brethren  to  arise.  [Lodge  rises.]  Receive  your  author-
ity, and  take  your  seat  as  N.  G.  of  this  Lodge.  [Lodge
is  seated.']  Noble  Grand,  you  will  now  appoint  your
subordinate  officers.

Appointments  made  thus:

[N.  G.  or  V.  G.~]  Br.  — ,  I  appoint  you

[my  R.  H.  Sup.,  or  Warden,  &c.,  of  this  Lodge,  (as  the
case  may  be)]  for  the  present  term.  Are  you  willing  to
accept  that  office,  and  enter  upon  the  duties  thereof?

Answer.  I  am,  Noble  Grand.
31*

366  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

N.  G.  Br. ,  you  will  take  your  station.

After  the  appointments  hacii  been  made  —

G.  Master.  Noble  Grand,  previous  to  delivering  into
your  keeping  the  charter  and  books  pertaining  to  your
office,  it  is  necessary  that  you  should  enter  with  us  into
another  obligation.  Place  yourself  in  the  attitude  in
which  you  were  last  obligated,  and  repeat :

NOBLE  GRAND'S  SECOND  O.  B.  N.

j? ^  Noble  Grand,  do,  in  the  presence

of  these  brethren,  most  sincerely  promise  and  declare,
that  I  will  neither  print  nor  write,  nor  cause  to  be  print-
ed or  written,  any  part  or  parts  of  these  charges;  nor
will  I,  in  the  presence  of  any  person,  either  read  or
rehearse,  or  cause  to  be  understood  by  any  means,  any
part  or  parts  of  them,  except  in  the  presence  of  bro-
thers duly  qualified  to  receive  them  in  legal  form.  Nor
will  I,  at  any  time,  permit  them  to  be  taken  from  my
keeping  by  any  person  or  persons,  excepting  those  sub-
ordinate officers  whose  various  charges  shall  have  ob-
ligated them  to  return  to  me  such  printed  or  written
part  or  parts  as  wrere  delivered  to  them,  without  having
made  themselves  or  permitted  any  others  to  make  any
extracts,  or  take  any  copies  therefrom:  and  I  will  use
every  effort  to  effect  the  return  of  those  books,  or  printed
or  written  parts  of  them,  as  soon  as  the  purpose  for  which
they  were  obtained  from  me  has  been  accomplished.
And  I  do  furthermore  promise  and  declare,  that  I  will
deliver  these  books  to  no  person  or  persons,  except-
ing the  M.  W.  G.  Master,  or  his  Deputy,  or  to  a  Com-
mittee from  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  the  N.  G.  who  shall

OF    INSTALLATIONS.  367

have  been  elected  to  succeed  me.  I  furthermore  prom-
ise, that  I  will  not  wrong  this  Lodge,  or  the  Grand
Lodge  of  this  jurisdiction,  to  the  value  of  anything  —
and  that  I  will  not  take  part  or  share,  directly  or  indi-
rectly, in  any  illegal  distribution  of  the  funds  or  other
property  of  the  Lodge,  but  will,  to  the  best  of  my  abil-
ity and  the  utmost  of  my  power,  endeavor  to  prevent
any  attempt  at  such  perversion  of  the  property  of  the
Lodge.  To  the  performance  of  all  which,  I  pledge  my
most  sacred  honor.

G.  Master.  Having  full  confidence  in  your  integrity,
we  here  present  you  with  the  books  pertaining  to  your
office,  the  Constitution,  By-laws,  Rules  and  General

Regulations    of  the  Grand   Lodge  of  the  of

,  and  the  Charter  under  which  this  Lodge  exists.

And  it  is  your  duty  that  these,  severally,  shall  be  pre-
sent in  the  Lodge,  when  open,  and  at  the  installation
of  your  successor.

CHARGES

TO  BE  DELIVERED  BY  THE  INSTALLING  OFFICER.

MOST  NOBLE  GRAND:  You  have  been  elected  and

installed  into  the  office  of  N.  G.  of — Lodge,  No.

,  for  the  present  term,  and  until  the  installation

of  your  successor:  and  as  it  will  be  your  duty  to  pre-
side at  the  meetings  of  the  Lodge,  much  of  the  peace,
harmony,  and  prosperity  thereof  will  depend  upon  you.
It  is  therefore  necessary  that  you  should  deeply  impress
on  your  mind  the  important  duties  of  your  station.
Among  them,  we  would  particularly  bring  to  your  no-
tice the  necessity  of  requiring  the  regular  indications  of
good  standing  of  every  person  who  desires  to  visit  your

368  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Lodge.  Admit  none,  unless  it  be  your  own  members,
without  them.  In  the  performance  of  your  duties,  act
without  fear  or  partiality  —  be  zealous,  yet  temper  your
zeal  with  prudence,  and  maintain  in  yourself  a  tran-
quil temper,  a  generous  disposition,  and  an  unsullied
character,  that  your  decisions  and  instructions  may  be
received  with  respect,  and  attentively  observed.  You
are  bound  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and
to  execute  those  of  the  Lodge  over  which  you  preside:
you  must  therefore  screen  none  who  may  violate  them,
and  enforce  the  transaction  of  Lodge  business  with
punctuality  and  dispatch.

WORTHY  VICE  GRAND  :  You  must  carefully  attend
to  the  support  of  order  in  the  Lodge;  and  at  all  times
when  the  N.  G.  is  otherwise  engaged,  his  duties  will
devolve  upon  you;  and  should  he,  at  any  time,  omit
anything  appertaining  to  his  office,  it  will  be  not  only
your  privilege,  but  your  duty,  to  apprise  him  thereof.

]\'/t<n  tin-re,  is  a  Perm.  Sec.,  omit  the  portion  in  italics.

WORTHY  SECRETARY  :  You  are  charged  with  the
care  of  the  books  of  the  Lodge — you  must  keep  a  rec-
ord of  the  proceedings  of  every  Lodge  meeting — you
must  fill  up  all  summonses,  and  write  all  letters  and
communications  that  may  be  ordered  by  the  N.  G.
You  must  be  punctual,  correct,  and  faithful  in  the  dis-
charge of  your  office :  you  must  keep  your  accounts  reg-
ularly posted,  so  tJiat  no  dispute  arise,  and  be  ready  at  all
times  to  render  to  the  N.  G.,  statements  of  tlie  arrears  of
brethren,  so  that  their  rights  be  not  abused: — and  no  per-
son is  privileged  to  interfere  with  your  books,  except
the  N.  G.,  the  M.  W.  G.  Master,  or  the  R.  W.  Deputy

OF    INSTALLATIONS.  369

G.  Master  of  your  district.  At  the  end  of  your  term
you  will  render  a  faithful  report  of  the  work  of  the
Lodge  for  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  every  assistance  re-
quired by  the  committee  appointed  to  examine  the
books,  &c.

WORTHY  TREASURER:  You  have  in  charge  the  funds
of  this  Lodge;  be  correct,  careful  and  honest,  and  se-
cure the  Lodge  against  any  loss,  or  probability  of  loss,
by  or  through  you.  On  a  proper  management  of  the
fiscal  concerns  of  a  Lodge,  mainly  depends  its  ability  to
render  assistance  where  it  is  needed,  and  at  the  time  it
may  be  required.  It  is  expected  of  you  to  keep  your
accounts  in  such  a  manner  as  to  enable  you  to  inform
the  Lodge  of  its  pecuniary  condition;  and  so  that  you
can,  at  any  moment,  when  called  upon,  surrender  your
trust,  together  with  all  books,  papers,  and  funds  in
your  possession,  belonging  to  the  Lodge.

WORTHY  PERMANENT  SECRETARY  :  You  are
charged  with  the  care  of  the  accounts  between  this
Lodge  and  its  members ;  you  must  be  punctual,  correct,
and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  your  duty  —  keep  your
accounts  regularly  posted,  so  that  no  dispute  arise,  and
be  ready  at  all  times  to  render  to  the  N.  G.  statements
of  the  arrears  of  the  brethren,  so  that  their  rights  be
not  abused.  At  the  end  of  your  term  of  office,  you
will  prepare  for  the  Grand  Lodge  the  annual  report
required  by  the  regulations — and,  at  the  end  of  each
term,  render  such  facilities  to  the  Committee  appointed
to  examine  the  books,  &c.,  as  may  be  required  by  them.
No  person  is  at  liberty  to  interfere  with  your  books,
&c.,  except  the  N.  G.,  the  M.  W.  G.  Master,  or  the
R.  W.  D.  G.  Master  of  your  district.

370  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

The  G.  Marshal  will  present  the  Warden  and  O.  Guardian  thus  :

G.  Marshal.    I  present  to  you  Br.

who  has  been  appointed  [W.  or  O.  G.]  of  this  Lodge,
and  whom,  on  examination,  I  find  to  have  attained  the
proper  degrees  for  the  office.

G.  Master.  WORTHY  WARDEN  :  Your  duty  calls
upon  you  to  do  all  you  can  while  in  the  Lodge  to  make
the  brothers  comfortable.  You  must  examine  every
person  in  the  room  when  the  Lodge  is  about  to  be
opened  —  deliver  your  charge  to  candidates  at  initia-
tion —  take  care  of  the  regalia  of  the  Lodge,  and  con-
vey all  summonses  that  may  be  issued.

WORTHY  OUTSIDE  GUARDIAN  :  You  have  charge
of  the  ante-room — you  will  see  that  no  person  shall
enter  it  who  cannot  prove  himself  according  to  the
regulations  of  the  Order.  You  will  secure  the  outer
door  against  improper  intrusion ;  and  submit  all  cases
of  doubt  to  the  N.  G.  for  decision.

WORTHY  CONDUCTOR:  You  will  receive  candidates
for  initiation  in  the  ante-room — give  the  charge  accord-
ing to  your  office,  and  assist  the  Worthy  Warden  while
in  the  Lodge.

WORTHY  INSIDE  GUARDIAN  :  Prove  every  brother,
before  you  admit  him,  according  to  the  regulations  of
our  Order  —  see  that  he  is  in  proper  regalia — report
his  name  to  the  N.  G.  (or,  when  the  door  is  in  charge
of  the  V.  G.,  to  that  officer) — and  let  no  one  pass  out,
or  return,  without  the  V.  G.'s  pass-word  of  the  night.

WORTHY  R.  H.  SUPPORTER  OF  THE  N.  G. :    It  is

your  duty  to  open  and  close  the  Lodge  in  due  form —

OF    INSTALLATIONS.  371

fco  advise  with  the  N.  G.,  and  to  take  his  seat  during  a
temporary  absence.

WORTHY  L.  H.  SUPPORTER  OF  THE  N.  G. :  It  is
your  duty  to  see  that  every  brother  who  enters  the
room  is  in  proper  regalia,  and  makes  his  address  to  the
chair.

WORTHY  R.  AND  L.  SUPPORTERS  OF  THE  V.  G. :
The  duties  of  your  stations  require  you  to  support  the
L.  Supporter  of  the  N.  G.  in  the  duty  of  his  office.
The  R.  Supporter  will  take  the  seat  of  the  V.  G.  dur-
ing a  temporary  absence.

WORTHY  R.  AND  L.  SC^ENE  SUPPORTERS:  You
will  assist  at  initiations  according  to  your  offices.

After  an  Address  (if  any)  l>y  the  G    Master:

G.  Master.  And  now,  R.  W.  Grand  Marshal,  proclaim
the  installation  completed.

G.  Marshal.  And  now,  by  command  of  the  M.  W.
G.  Master,  and  in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  the
R.  W.  G.  Lodge  of  -  -,  of  the  I.  O.  O.  F.,  I  do

declare  the  officers  of Lodge,  No.  — ,  installed

into  their  respective  offices  for  the  current  term  in
["Ample"  or  "Regular"]  form.*

When  about,  to  retire,  the  installing  officers  will  notify  the  N.  G  ,  the
Lodge  will  rise,  and  the  G.  L.  retire  in  procession,  preceded  by  the  G.
Marshal,  the  G.  Master  bringing  up  the  rear.

*  If  by  a  Grand  Master,  "  Ample  Form  ;  "  —  if  by  a  Deputy  G.  M.
or  D.  D.  G.  Master,  "Regular  Form;  "  —  if  by  a  P.  G.  Officer  or  a
P.  G.,  "Form."

372  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

CHAPTER  V.

FORM    OF    DEDICATION    OF    AN    ODD-FELLOWS'    CEMETERY
OR    BURIAL-LOT.*

The  brethren  having  assembled  in  some  appropriate  place  in  the
vicinity  of  the  Cemetery,  a  procession  will  be  formed  m  due  order,
and  proceed  to  the  place  selected  for  the  ceremony,  passing  around
the  ground  three  times,  if  the  situation  permits.  The  Officers
will  take  their  station  upon  a  raised  platform.

Gr.  M.  IT  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  remind  any
good  and  faithful  Odd-Fellow  that  the  great  primal
command  of  our  Order  is  fourfold,  and  includes  four
principal  heads  of  duty.  Equal  in  prominence  and
binding  force  to  any  of  the  others,  is  the  solemn  injunction
to  "bury  the  dead/'  In  order  to  understand  why  the
founders  of  our  Brotherhood  insisted  so  strongly  upon
this  important  duty,  we  must  recur  to  the  fact  that  it
had  its  origin  among  a  poor  and  oppressed  population,
where  the  hard  struggle  of  a  brave  and  virtuous  life  too
often  ended  in  an  unpitied  death  and  a  pauper's  grave.
Therefore  it  was  that  when  men  first  bound  themselves
together  in  mutual  helpfulness,  under  the  then  singular
name  of  Odd-Fellows,  they  entered  into  a  solemn  cove-
nant to  provide  each  member  and  his  wife,  at  their
death,  with  the  means  of  decent  Christian  sepulture.
To  the  praise  of  our  Order,  this  duty  has  never  been

*  This  form  is  framed  for  the  use  of  a  Grand  Lodge  or  its  Officers.
It  may  be  used,  however,  by  a  D.  D.  G.  M.,  or  by  the  N.  G.  of  a
Lodge,  when  circumstances  prevent  the  attendance  of  the  Grand
Officers.

DEDICATION    OF   AN    ODD-FELLOWS'    CEMETERY.      373

neglected.  Large  sums  are  annually  expended  in  its
due  performance.  Not  only  has  want  been  relieved,
sickness  alleviated,  and  the  eyes  of  the  dying  closed  in
peace  by  friendly  hands,  but  the  care  of  the  brethren
has  followed  on  to  the  place  of  sepulture,  and  a  crowd
of  sympathizing  friends  has  stood  around  the  humble
open  grave.  Not  only  has  the  sufferer,  fallen  faint  by
the  wayside,  been  lifted  up  and  ministered  unto  with
kindliest  offices,  but  men  have  often  been  made  to
wonder  on  seeing  a  band  of  mourning  brethren  follow
to  the  tomb  a  stranger,  unknown  to  any  in  their  neigh-
borhood except  in  the  bonds  of  our  mystic  tie.  This  is
as  it  should  be,  and  as  I  trust  it  ever  will  be.  The
comparative  easiness  of  condition  of  the  brethren  in  our
more  favored  land,  does  not  lighten  one  jot  the  obliga-
tion of  this  duty.  In  the  great  and  just  equality  of  our
Order,  the  same  provision  is  made  for  all,  and  to  all
must  it  be  promptly  and  without  stint  extended.

But  the  closeness  with  which  we  are  drawn  together
in  life  in  the  bonds  of  our  brotherhood,  has  created  also
a  desire  that  there  should  be  provided  for  our  mortal
remains  a  common  resting-place,  where  we  may  lie
down  together  to  await  the  solemn  summons  of  the
Great  Day,  and  where  the  poor  and  needy  as  well  as  the
stranger  may  repose  among  brethren,  and  no  longer  be
thrust  out  as  unclean  things.  Apart  from  the  con-
sideration of  economy  in  obtaining  a  cheap  and  beau-
tiful place  of  burial,  (while  the  great  cost  of  interment,
especially  in  cities  and  large  towns,  renders  it  otherwise
an  onerous  tax  upon  the  survivors,)  there  is  a  justness
arid  propriety  in  this  arrangement,  which  commends  it
to  the  heart  of  every  sincere  brother.  Already,  in
contemplating  our  fraternity,  men  have  been  made  to
say,  as  they  did  of  the  early  Christians,  "  Behold  how
32

374  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

these  love  one  another !"  Let  them  also  be  made  to
8ay  as  David  did  of  Saul  and  Jonathan,  "  In  life  they
were  joined  together,  in  death  they  are  not  divided  !"

And  now,  brethren,  we  are  met  to  dedicate  to  its
sacred  uses  this  city  of  the  dead,  this  "  God's-acre,"
as  our  thoughtful  ancestors  fitly  named  it.  Remember
that  this  dedication  is  no  unmeaning  rite.  It  means
that  this  ground  is  solemnly  set  apart,  in  covenant  with
God  and  man,  to  its  holy  purposes,  never  to  be  diverted
to  any  other  until  the  last  trumpet  shall  sound  and  the
dead  shall  arise  incorruptible.  To  the  attainment  of
which  end  let  us  now  unite  in  supplicating  the  Divine
blessing.

Gr.  0.  Be  with  us,  0  God,  in  the  solemn  services  of
this  day.  Compose  our  thoughts  into  the  solemn  sober-
ness that  befits  the  occasion.  Purify  our  hearts,  elevate
our  desires,  and  make  us  fit  for  Thy  service.  Bless,  we
beseech  Thee,  the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged,  and
give  us  strength  to  keep  in  faithfulness  forever  the
obligations  we  now  assume.  Amen.

Gr.  M.  The  brethren  will  be  attentive  while  our  R.  W.
D.  G.  M.  dedicates  this  ground,  with  solemn  ceremonies,
to  the  uses  of  our  beloved  Order.

D.  Gr.  M.  (Before  whom  there  is  placed  a  shovel  or
other  implement,  filled  with  fresh  earth.)  In  the  name
of  the  R.  W.  Grand  Lodge  of  the  I.  0.  of  0.  F.  of

,  and  by  authority  of  the  M.  W.  G.  M.  of  the

same,  I  hereby  solemnly  dedicate  and  set  apart  this
ground  to  the  burial  of  all  good  Odd-Fellows,  their
families  and  friends,  and  to  no  other  purpose  whatever,
while  the  world  stands  ;  so  that  here  their  remains  may
rest  in  undisturbed  security  until  the  last  great  day,
and  that  here  we  may  come,  amid  the  gentle  stillness  of
nature,  to  mourn  over  the  loved  and  lost  whom  we  have

DEDICATION   OF   AN   ODD-FELLOWS*    CEMETERY.      375

deposited  in  the  silent  tomb,  (strewing  the  earth,)  "earth
to  earth,  ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to  dust !"

Gr.  M.  Yet  not  to  sorrow  as  those  that  are  without
hope !  For  we  know  that  our  Redeemer  liveth,  and
that  though  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  our  flesh
shall  we  see  God.  Let  us  feel,  my  brethren,  that  death
is  but  the  gate  to  a  better  life,  and  that  over  the  resting-
place  of  the  departed  dwells  ever  the  bright  halo  of  the
hope  of  a  glorious  resurrection.  Hence  it  is  that  we
thus  strew  above  the  place  of  tombs  and  in  the  graves
of  our  loved  ones,  these  emblems  of  undying  life,
(strewing  evergreens ;)  for  we  know  that  they  are  but
sleeping  here  urtil  the  voice  of  the  Maker  and  Master
of  all  shall  call  them  to  Himself  in  the  day  that  He
makes  up  His  jewels,  and  proclaims  that  time  and  its
griefs  shall  be  no  more.

The  brethren  will  unite  in  singing  Ode,  page  390.

G.  C.  Be  with  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  0  God,  our  Hea-
venly Father,  in  the  exercises  of  this  solemn  occasion.
Fill  our  hearts  with  that  deep  faith  in  Thy  holy  Word,
which  shall  enable  us  to  see,  beyond  the  night  of  the
grave,  the  portals  of  a  diviner  day.  Strengthen  the
hands  of  those  who  have  prepared  this  place  of  rest  for
the  dead,  and  enable  them  to  keep  it  sacred  to  that
purpose  and  to  Thee.  Let  Thy  Spirit  descend  like  dews
of  consolation  upon  the  hearts  of  all  who  shall  here
resort  as  mourners,  and  make  them  to  feel  that  this  is
indeed  holy  ground.  Comfort  the  afflicted,  bind  up  the
broken  hearts,  lift  up  the  bowed  down,  and  give  to  the
bruised  souls  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  and  the  gar-
ment of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness.  From  this
place  let  the  glad  testimony  rise,  from  many  a  bleeding
heart,  that  Thou  art  truly  the  widow's  God,  and  tho

376  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

Father  of  the  fatherless.  Help  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  to
labor  faithfully  in  the  great  work  of  Benevolence  and
Charity.  Bless  our  beloved  Order  with  an  everlasting
benediction,  and  make  all  its  works  to  praise  Thee.
And  finally  receive  us  to  Thyself  in  glory,  so  that  unto
Thee  we  may  ascribe  glory  and  dominion,  world  without
end.  Amen.

Gr.  M.  The  natural  man  instinctively  shrinks  from  the
contemplation  of  the  silent  tomb.  It  is  to  him  a  sight
of  fear  and  a  source  of  terror.  The  warm  life-blood  at
his  heart  is  chilled  by  the  very  thought  of  its  gloom.  To
such  the  habitation  of  the  dead  must  be  a  repulsive  place,
fit  only  for  sounds  of  wo.  But  to  him  to  whom  death  has
no  longer  a  sting,  and  over  whom  the  grave  can  have  no
victory ;  to  him  whose  fears  are  swallowed  up  and  lost  in
the  glorious  assurance  of  a  blessed  resurrection  and  happy
immortality,  it  presents  a  different  aspect.  No  longer
must  its  precincts  be  doleful  with  the  wailings  of  sorrow,
or  its  soil  be  abandoned  to  the  thistle  and  thorn.  We
plant  flowers  upon  the  graves  of  our  loved  ones  ;  we  cast
over  them  the  cool  shadow  of  pleasant  trees ;  we  place
them  amid  the  gentle  scenes  of  bounteous  nature,  and  from
them  rise  ever  the  voice  of  prayer  and  the  song  of  grate-
ful praise.  We  have  learned  to  look  upon  the  solemn
end  of  all  without  terror,  as  we  see  one  after  another
entering  the  dark  valley,  leaning,  in  unbroken  confidence,
on  the  precious  promises  of  Him  who  cannot  lie.  There-
fore it  is  that  we  rightly  make  our  burial-place  a  beau
tiful  and  attractive  spot.  This  you  have  already  done,
my  brethren,  and  I  commend  you  for  it.  Continue  in
the  good  work,  maintain  in  ever-increasing  beauty  this
consecrated  place,  and  the  hearts  of  generations  yet  un-
born will  bless  you  for  the  kindly  labor.

The  audience  will  be  dismissed  with  benediction  by  G.  O.

FUNERAL   CEREMONY.  377

CHAPTER  VI.

FUNERAL   PROCESSION    AND   SERVICE,

AS    ORDERED    BY    O.    L.    U.    8.    AT    ITS    SESSION    IN    1866.

1.  THE  regalia  directed  to  be  worn  at  funerals  con-
sists of  "a  black  crape  rosette,  having  a  centre  of  the
color  of  the  highest  degree  to  which  the  wearer  may
have  attained,  to  be  worn  on  the  left  breast  ;x  above  it  a
sprig  of  evergreen,  and  below  it  (if  the  wearer  be  an
elective   or  past  officer)  the  jewel  or  jewels  which  as
such  he  may  be  entitled  to  wear."

2.  The  ordinary  mourning-badge  to  be  worn  by  bro-
thers in  memory  of  a  deceased  brother,  is  "  a  strip  of
black  crape  passed  through  one  button-hole  only  of  the
left  lapel  of  the  coat,  and  tied  with  a  narrow  ribbon  of
the  color  of  the  highest  degree  to  which  the  wearer  may
have  attained."    "  The  several  State  Grand  Lodges  and
Grand  Encampments  may,  at  their  discretion,  permit
the  usual  regalia  of  the  Order  to  be  worn  at  funerals,
either  in  connection  with,  or  as  a  substitute  for  the
simple  regalia  above  described."    We  respectfully  hope
that  none  but  the  "simple  regalia"  will  ever  be  used
on  funeral  occasions.

3.  "  If,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  the  deceased  brother
was  a  member  of  an  Encampment,  the  Encampment
may  attend  the  funeral  in  a  body,  in  order  similar  to

32*

378  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

dial  prescribed  for  Lodges,  and  shall  take  the  position
in  line  designated  as  No.  (6);  but  in  all  cases  the  fune-
ral ceremonies  shall  be  conducted  by  the  subordinate
Lodge,  except  that  if  the  brother  was  a  past  or  present
elective  officer  of  a  Grand  Lodge  or  Grand  Encamp-
ment, then  the  ceremonies  may  be  conducted  by  such
Grand  Lodge  or  Grand  Encampment."

4.  "  The  order  of  procedure  at  the  funeral  of  a  de-
ceased brother,  shall  be  as  follows:"  —  (See  Journal  G.
L.  U.  8.  for  1866,  p.  3960.)

"  At  the  appointed  hour,  the  subordinate  Lodge  of
which  such  brother  was  a  member,  shall  meet  at  its
Lodge-room,  and  the  N.  G.,  or  in  his  absence  the  V.  G.,
or  in  the  absence  of  both,  the  senior  P.  G.  present,  shall
appoint  a  Marshal  and  such  number  of  Assistant  Mar-
shals as  may  be  required ;  the  Lodge  shall  then  pass  in
procession  from  the  Lodge-room  to  the  place  from  which
the  funeral  may  have  been  appointed  to  start,  in  the
following  order :

"(1.)  The  Marshal,  wearing  a  black  scarf,  and  bear-
ing a  baton  bound  with  black  crape.

"  (2.)  The  Outside  Guardian,  bearing  a  red  staff,  in
like  mourning.

"  (3.)  The  Scene  Supporters,  bearing  white  wands  in
like  mourning.

"  (4.)  Members  of  the  Initiatory  degree,  in  order  of
juniority,  two  abreast.

"(5.)  Members  of  the  White,  Pink,  Royal  Blue,  and
Scarlet  degrees,  respectively,  in  like  order.

"  (6.)  Members  of  the  Lodge  having  the  Patriarchal,
Golden  Rule,  and  Royal  Purple  degrees,  respectively,
in  like  order.

"(7.)  The  Past  Grands  of  the  Lodge,  in  order  of
juniority.

"  (8.)  The  Inside  Guardian,  bearing  the  regalia  and
insignia  indicative  of  the  rank  in  the  Order  of  the  de-
ceased brother.

FUNERAL   CEKEMONY.  379

"  (9.)  The  Treasurer,  Assistant,  Permanent  or  Finan-
cial Secretary  or  Secretaries,  and  the  Secretary  of  the
Lodge.

"  (10.)  The  Vice  Grand,  supported  by  his  R.  and  L.
Supporters,  each  bearing  his  wand  of  office,  bound  with
a  band  of  black  crape.

"  (11.)  The  Chaplain,  wearing  a  white  scarf,  and  sup-
ported by  the  Warden  and  Conductor,  each  bearing  his
staff  of  office  in  like  mourning.

"  (12.)  The  Noble  Grand,  supported  by  his  R.  and
L.  Supporters,  each  bearing  his  wand  of  office  in  like
mourning.

"  (13.)  Invited  brethren  will  take  places  with  the
members  of  the  Lodge,  according  to  their  rank.  The
Lodges,  when  more  than  one  attend,  shall  be  arranged
in  order  of  juniority,  preceding  the  Lodge  conducting
the  ceremonies."

5.  "  On  arriving  at  the  place  appointed  for  the  start-
ing of  the  funeral,  the  brothers  shall  take  position  in
the  above  order,  immediately  before  the  corpse,  and
shall  precede  it  to  the  place  of  interment."

6.  "  On  arriving  at  the  place  of  interment,  the  brothers
shall  open  to  the  right  and  left,  and  allow  the  corpse,
mourners,  &c.  to  pass  through,  the  brothers  on  either
side  standing  uncovered,  the  hat  held  in  the  left  hand
of  each,  and  joining  hands  with  each  other.     And  after
the  passing  of  the  corpse,  mourners,  &c.  between  the
two  lines,  the  brothers  shall  re-form  in  procession  after
them  in  reversed  order,  and  close  the  procession  into
and  within  the  place  of  interment."

7.  "  After  the  performance  of  such  religious  service  as
the  friends  of  the  deceased  may  cause  to  be  there  per-
formed, and  before  the  final  closing  of  the  grave,  the
brothers  shall  form  silently,  and  as  nearly  as  may  be

380  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

according  to  the  order  above  set  forth,  uncovered,  the
hat  in  the  left  hand  of  each,  and  joining  hands  with
each  other,  in  one  or  more  circles,  as  regular  as  the
nature  of  the  ground  may  admit,  around  the  grave  ;
when  the  Chaplain,  or  in  default  of  a  Chaplain,  the
N.  G.  may  address  the  brothers,  and  offer  up  a  prayer,
or  may  address  the  brothers  without  the  offering  of  a
prayer ;  and  after  such  address  or  prayer,  or  both,  or
if  there  be  no  address  or  prayer,  then  after  a  pause
suited  to  the  solemnity  of  the  occasion,  the  N.  G.  shall
advance  singly  to  the  head  of  the  grave,  and  cast  into
it  with  the  right  hand  the  sprig  of  evergreen  from  his
regalia,  and  shall  return  to  his  place;  whereupon  the
brothers  from  left  to  right  in  regular  succession,  and  in
such  numbers  at  a  time  as  not  to  cause  confusion,  shall
advance  to  the  grave,  shall  cast  into  it  (each  with  the
right  hand)  the  sprig  of  evergreen  from  their  regalia,
and  shall  return  to  their  places.  And  after  att  have
done  this,  and  the  grave  shall  have  been  filled  up  or
closed,  the  brothers  shall  silently  re-form  into  procession
according  to  the  order  observed  in  coming  to  the  place
of  interment,  and  shall  return  in  such  order  to  the
Lodge-room,  where  the  N.  G.  shall  declare  the  funeral
ceremonies  to  be  closed."

8.  The  following  Address  and  Prayer  are  to  be  used,
if  any.  It  is  optional  with  the  Lodge  whether  to  use
them  or  not,  but  no  others  can  lawfully  be  substituted.

ADDRESS.

We  are  assembled,  my  brethren,  to  render  the  last
office  which  the  living  may  minister  to  the  dead.

Man  is  born  to  die.  The  coffin,  the  grave,  the  se-
pulchre, speak  to  us  in  language  that  cannot  be  misun-
derstood, however  unheeded  it  may  be,  of  "  man's  latter

FUNERAL    CEREMONY.  381

end."  Youth  in  its  harmlessness  and  comparative
innoeency,  and  manhood  with  its  wonted  vigor  and  pride
of  strength  are  not  more  exempt  than  decrepit  and
tottering  age  from  the  fixed  law  of  being,  which  dedi-
cates all  that  is  mortal  to  decay  and  death.

This  truth  is  inscribed  in  the  great  volume  of  nature
upon  its  every  page.  The  beautiful  and  the  sublime
which  the  handiwork  of  the  Creator  displays  on  our
every  side,  fearfully  associate  the  unerring  certainty  of
the  end  of  all  things  with  the  vividness  of  the  moral
which  they  are  ever  suggesting  to  the  contemplative  mind.

Day  after  day,  we  are  called  upon  to  follow  our
fellow-creatures  to  that  bourne  whence  no  traveller
returns ;  but  from  the  house  of  mourning  we  go  forth
again  to  mingle  in  the  crowded  world,  heedless  perhaps
of  the  precarious  tenure  of  life  and  the  certainty  of  that
end  to  which  all  flesh  is  rapidly  tending.  He  who  gives
the  vigor  of  body,  without  warning  paralyzes  the  stout
heart,  and  strikes  down  the  athletic  frame :  the  living
of  to-day  become  the  dead  of  the  morrow.

Men  appear  upon  and  disappear  from  the  stage  of
life,  as  wave  meets  wave  and  parts  upon  the  troubled
waters.  "In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death. ""  He
whose  lips  now  echo  these  tones  of  solemn  warning,  in
turn  will  be  stilled  in  the  cold  and  cheerless  house  of
the  dead,  and  in  the  Providence  of  God  none  may
escape.

Let  us  then  so  far  improve  the  lesson  as  to  be  pre-
pared for  that  change  which  leads  to  life  eternal.

PRAYER.

Our  Father  and  our  God,  who  art  the  Resurrection
and  the  Life ;  in  whom  whosoever  believeth  shall  live
though  he  die  ;  and  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in

382  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

thee  shall  not  die — hear,  we  beseech  thee,  the  voice  of
thy  creatures  here  assembled,  and  turn  not  away  from
our  supplication?.

We  humbly  beseech  thee,  so  to  imbue  us  with  a  con-
viction of  our  entire  helplessness  and  dependence  upon
thee,  that  we  may  be  brought  to  meditate  upon  the  un-
certainty of  life  and  the  certainty  of  death.  In  the
dispensation  of  thy  Providence,  thou  hast  summoned
from  among  us  our  brother,  and  we,  the  surviving  monu-
ments of  thy  mercy,  are  gathered  together  to  commit
his  remains  to  the  earth.  Give,  0  God,  we  beseech
thee,  thy  Holy  Spirit  to  us,  whom  thou  hast  spared ;
increase  our  knowledge,  and  confirm  our  faith  in  thee,
forever.

[Bless  and  comfort,  we  pray  thee,  those  whom  it  has
pleased  thee  to  add  to  the  number  of  the  disconsolate ;
buoy  them  up  under  this  heavy  stroke,  sustain  them
against  despondency.  Oh !  wilt  thou  be  their  Father
and  their  God,  and  pour  down  from  on  high  thy  bless-
ings upon  their  heads.]  Bless,  0  Heavenly  Father,
the  brethren  here  assembled  ;  imbue  them  with  the
wisdom  of  thy  laws,  and  draw  them  unto  thee  by  the
cords  of  thy  inestimable  love  ;  impress  them  with  their
duty  to  each  other  as  brethren,  and  their  obligations
in  the  various  relations  of  human  life  ;  and  finally,  bless
our  beloved  Order  throughout  the  globe.  Preserve  its
principles  and  its  purposes  from  innovation ;  sustain  it
from  the  shafts  of  enmity,  protect  it  from  self-immola-
tion, and  shield  it  from  all  evil,  and  unto  thee  we  shall
render  the  praise,  forever."  Amen.

Here,  before  (or  while)  depositing  THE  SPRIG,  the  Choir  may  sing  any
Funeral  Ode  in  Appendix  A.

APPENDIX   A.

anft  (Dfos.

No.  I.— DEDICATION   ODE.

CEPHAS.

BY   A.  B.  QROSH.

1.  "  IN  GOD  WE  TRUST!"  was  sweetly  sung  By  every  "  Morning  Star"  on  high— "In

2.    "  IN  GOD  WE  TRUST!"  the  golden  Sun  And  silver  Moon  yet  seem  to   say;      And

3.    "  In  God  we  trust!"  the  builders  said,  And  deep  in  earth  they  sunk  the  wall ;  In

m=^-^^i

9

'.trunt!"  right  gladly  rung  From  "  So  us  of  God,"  in  loud  reply — When  out  from

million  Stars,  that  round  them  burn.  Repeat  the  anthem  night  and  day,   And  still  our

/Tope  the  corner-stone  was  laid,  And  raised  the  ImMdingover          all.          No  ac-ci-

384

THE   ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

cha  -  os  systems  rolled,  /  nd  earth,  wrapped

From  darkness,  light,  in  rosy  y  outli,  in  her  clouds  of

earth — from  hill  and  vale,  Where  loot  doth  tread,

From  all  that  live,  and  breathe,  and  move,  or  waves  a

dent  has  marred  our  trust —  Complete  our  Hall,

No  loss  of  life  drawn  forth  regret—  it  is  but

S    S  S  N  S  .

gold,     A    -  woke    to  "  FRIENDSHIP,   LOVE,  and  TRUTH."

sail—   Re  -spondswith  "Friendship,  Truth,  and  Love."

just     That      it         to       TBBB    we      ded    -     i     -    cate.

4.  Here  may  we  with  FIDELITY

111    l'('VK\ANT,.I»    I/.VI.    n-iii'Vr,

And  FRIENDSHIP  with  KKMEMURANCE  be,
Till  TufTH  her  sovereign  power  give.

May  HOSPITALITY  here  reign
VVith  TULKKATION'S  kiudly  love,

And  FAITH  enrh  pilirriin  soul  sustain,
Until  we  reach  Thy  TENT,  above.

6.  "  In  Thee  we  trust !"  ami  thus  to  THEE

\V"e  offer  all — for  all  is  thine! —
That  Thy  co-workers  we  may  be

On  earth,  in  word  and  work  divine.
When  brethren  want,  or  death  lays  low —

When  orphans  cry  in  helpless  youth —
When  widows  weep  in  cheerless  wo—

Oh,  grant  us  "FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  and  TRUTH P

APPENDIX  A. SONGS   AND   ODES.

385

No.  II.— CLOSING  ODE   AT   DEDICATION.

BY   A.  B.  GROSH.

MIRIAM'S  SONG.

tr

1.  Sound  the  glad  chorus!  Let  praises  a  -  ria
i  Air — SOLO.     Animate.

In  works  of  our  Or-der,  to

CHORUS.

9-.-

w

God    in    the  skies.       Sound  the  glad  chorus!  Let   praises    a  -  rise,  In

Truth  is     its  sword.       Welcome,  Odd-Fellowship!  Praise  to  the  Lord  !  His

VV

-r

9      I      *

works  of  our   Or-der,  To      God    in    the  skies.  Sing!  for  the  light  of    His

••    f'        F     0

3=FF

love     is  its    buckler,  His    Truth  is      its  sword.         Brethren  raised  up  from  de-

-*— *-

38

^^

T—&-JI-

386

THE   ODD-FELLOW  S    MANUAL.

I     ft    is  N   *   N   h
-J    J^.l     I    J     £

truth    is  ad  -  vancing,  And  darkness   and  suff'ring  are      flee  -  ing     a -way;  His

m    7-7-  m      m   Y~^=:L          V      *      *l       IS    m      -    ?~

f1-^ r  £  £  b'TT"  L     ~^ !i *  f  L  r~M

\J  *     1J         *          ^         *  rj    1J          iJ  r          ]J  LJ

r  wr        r^

spair,  are  its    sto-ry,  And    orphan's  pro  -tect-ed,    its      jew  -  el --ry  bright;  The

^     K     )\T

•rphan'

r^

I 1 L-: L7 L.

*-!-*-^l

^T  0  0±-

-^-j'l  j'j;  f  •.

love,  in   its  warmth,  human  souls  is      en-trancing.  And  Friendship,  on  earth,  is  as-

^

P   b  b

tears  of  the  widow — from  gloom  turned  to  glo-  ry,  Like    the  bow    on    a  cloud — grow

^yrfOT^

7  r  nr

•T-H-f*    r  »

sert    -    ing         its        sway.

,s..und  tlie  glad    ch<>-ru>!  l.«t

^-  r  *  r  *=fo

^=b  i.  ^  =  J

^

«i  ^

bright        in  its        light.

1

Sound    the  glad    cho  -  rus !  Let

F^-'-h^^^^fft^S^g^a

APPENDIX  A.-  -SONGS   AND    ODES.

387

praises    a  -  rise,  In    works  of  our  Or-der,  to       God    in    the  skies.

praises  as  -  cend  To      God,  in  the  work  of  the    heart  and  the  hand.

y  v

CHORUS.

S

V     V

jj  <>  j^mztmjji

Sound  the  glad  chorus !  Let  praises    a  -  rise,  In  works  of  our  Order,    to

JL_U_P    i  r     r  -v-

-£j — H-f-h — M  !  i   ^  Tr —

-V

Sound  the  glad  chorus!  Let    praises    as -cend  To    God,  in  the  work  of  the

r  r

V   V

3=*

God   in     the  skies.  To        God  in     the  skies,     To      God    in    the   skies.

Is.      K      K     K       I h.      K     t.       s   ^  r-

l      p    _p   - .  n  i      p     n     r\     i  •

J    ^[  J    J    J-J — J  [  J    J    j    J      7  ft

heart  and  the  hand.  The    heart  and  the  hand,  The    heart  and  the  hand.

388  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

DEDICATION  ODE.

BY    REV.    A.    C.    THOMAS.

AIR —  "  Bannockburn"

Trickling  far  among  the  hills,
Tinkling  in  the  cheerful  rills,
Flowing  till  the  sea  it  fills  —

Water t  evermore!

FRIENDSHIP  —  void  of  worldly  art,
Baptism  of  the  faithful  heart,  —
To  our  souls  thy  grace  impart  —

Blessed  evermore!

Bursting  in  the  early  Spring,
Beauty  to  the  earth  to  bring
Fragrance  all  abroad  to  fling  —

Flowers  forevermore.
LOVE  —  that  in  the  blossom  glows,
Breathing  in  each    -ind  that  blows,
Ours  be  lily*  and  UK  rose,f

Blessed  evermore!

Buried  'neath  the  wintry  sheen,
Springing,  clothed  in  living  green,
Golden  in  the  harvest-scene,

Wheat  forevermore!
TRUTH  —  of  heaven's  own  glory  born,
'Reft  of  thee,  how  sad,  forlorn !  —
Welcome  waving,  vital  corn,

TRUTH  forevermore!

Thus  in  Water,  Flowers,  and  Wheat,
FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  and  TRUTH  repeat,
All  the  virtues  here  we  greet,

Banded  evermore:
Vet  in  CHARITY  shall  men
Sound  the  noblest  praise  again,
Ana  the  angels  shout  AMEN,

Blessed  evermore.

•  Purity.  f  Affection

APPENDIX  A. —  SONGS   AND   ODES.  389

ODE.— LAYING  A  CORNER-STONE.     7s.  M.

BY    MRS.    FIDELIA    W.    GILLETT.

Gather'd  now,  from  far  and  near,

On  this  sacred  spot  we  stand,
Bound  by  everlasting  Truth,

Heart  to  heart,  and  hand  to  hand,
Lay  we  here  this  Corner-stone

Of  a  Temple  yet  to  be,
In  the  spirit  of  that  Love

That,  our  God,  binds  all  to  Thee.

May  we  build,  as  we  have  laid,

Fair,  and  strong,  and  firm,  and  sure  —
Stone  on  stone,  and  arch  on  arch  —

Wildest  storms  't  will  then  endure ;
Like  the  Temple  Friendship  rears

In  each  faithful  brother's  heart,
Where  the  needy  and  the  poor

Have  a  shelter  and  a  part.

LAYING  A  CORNER-STONE.     C.  M.

BY    REV.    D.    K.    LEE,  D.  D

0  LORD,  we  praise  Thee  for  Thy  grace,

And  thank  Thee  for  Thy  love,
And  pray  the  glory  of  Thy  face

May  shine  down  from  above !

In  FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  and  TRUTH,  we  join

A  band  of  brothers  here,
For  works  we  pray  Thou  'It  make  divine,

And  bless  through  many  a  year.

This  CORNER-STONE  our  weak  hands  lay

A  Temple  here  to  build;
And  may  it  rise  complete,  we  pray,

And  with  Thy  light  be  filled.

[We  pour  libations  on  this  stone,

And  may  Thy  dews  descend !
These  Flowers  are  strewn  our  love  to  own,

This  Wheat  for  Truth  we  lend.]

May  Friendship  bright  our  Temple  grace,

And  Love  its  fountain  be,
And  Truth  spring  up,  and  crown  the  place,

With  honors  all  from  Thee.

£90  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

ODE  AT  LAYING  A  CORNER-STONE.

Deep  in  the  quarries  of  the  stone,

Amid  vast  heaps  of  other  rock;
In  darkness  hid,  to  art  unknown.

We  found  this  rude  and  shapeless  block,
Now  shaped  by  art,  its  roughness  gone,

And  fit  this  noble  work  to  grace,
We  lay  it  here,  a  corner-stone,

Chosen  and  sure,  in  proper  place.

Within  this  stone  there  lies  conceal'd

What  future  ages  may  disclose,
The  sacred  truths  to  us  reveal'd

By  Him  who  fell  by  ruthless  foes.
On  Him,  this  corner-stone  we  build,

To  Him,  this  edifice  erect;
And  still,  until  this  work's  fulfilled,

May  Heaven  the  workman's  ways  direct.

DEDICATION  OF  A  CEMETERY.     L.  M.

BY    A.    B.    GROSH.

Our  Father,  from  on  high  look  down,
And  sanctify  Thine  "Acre"  here;

Bid  guardian  angels  flock  around,
And  spirit-brethren,  too,  draw  near !

Here  may  our  unforgotten  dead

Repose  in  sleep  Thy  love  has  given,*

And  mourning  groups  be  comforted,
Submissive  to  the  will  of  Heaven.

May  nature's  sighs,  at  Thy  command,

Here  spread  the  bloom  of  Hope  and  Love;

And  evergreens,  like  Faith's  own  hand,
Point  fond  affection's  eyes  above  —

Above  the  frequent  darkling  tears
That  dim  our  mortal  eyes  on  earth,

To  where  Thy  promise-bow  appears,
Bright  presage  of  a  higher-birth.

•  "  For  ^o  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep."  — Psalm  cxxrii.  2.

APPENDIX  A. —  SONGS    AND   ODES.  391

FUNERAL  ODE.

BY    REV.     A.    C.    THOMAS.

AlR  —  Zeuner's   "Missionary  Chant."

In  earth's  cold  heart,  unsealed  afresh,
We  lay  our  brother  low  and  lone ;

And  what  he  was,  while  veiled  in  flesh,
Shall  yet  be  told  in  sculptured  stone.

Told  it  has  been,  and  long  shall  be
Within  our  Temple's  mystic  walls;

For  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth  decree
His  Legend  in  our  honored  Halls.

The  hour  shall  pass,  baptized  in  woe.

Which  now  lifts  up  its  mournful  cry.
And  joy  shall  come  with  memory's  glow

Of  one  whose  record  is  on  high.

Then  hail  —  all  hail,  redeemed  from  dust
The  soul  that  now  on  earth  is  dumb,

And  welcome,  while  "in  God  we  trust,"
The  rapture  of  the  life  to  come !

REBEKAH  AT  THE  WELL.

BY    REV.    A.    C.    THOMAS.

AIR —  "  Of  a1  the  airts  the  wind  can  blaw."  *

The  sick  and  lone,  the  sore  distressed,

The  dying,  clad  in  gloom, —
The  weary,  whose  appointed  rest,

Seems  only  in  the  tomb,
Have  heard  a  voice  of  thrilling  tone

With  feelings  none  may  tell,
And  hope  and  help  have  sweetly  shown

Rebekah  at  the  Well.

Not  in  a  cistern,  in  whose  hush

No  type  of  health  we  know,
But  in  a  Fount,  whose  waters  gush

From  living  depths  below,

*  Or  any  other  suitable  air  of  8  and  6s.  Metre.

392  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

She  fills  her  pitcher,  made  of  clay,
Transformed  to  crystal  bowls,

And  brings  refreshing  draughts  away
For  sinking,  fainting  souls.

With  spirit  born  of  Heaven  above

And  open  face  unveiled,
Her  ministry  of  patient  love

Shall  everywhere  be  hailed  ;
And  battle-chiefs  the  knee  shall  bow,

Nor  longer  scoff  nor  frown,
When  viewing  on  her  pitying  brow

The  radiant  Cross  and  Crown.

In  nightly-watch  and  orphan-ward

She  writes  her  blessed  creed ;
The  shroud  and  coffin  oft  record

Her  sympathetic  deed  :  —
And  victor-palm  and  snow-white  robe

Her  triumph  yet  shall  swell,
And  celebrate,  o'er  all  the  globe,

Rebekah  at  the  Well.

DEGREE  OF  REBEKAH.     8  &  Is.  M.

BY    REV.    D.    K.    LEE,   D.  D.

*'Mau  is  the  glory  of  the  Lord,

And  Woman  is  man's  glory"  —
Said  one  who  spoke  the  heavenly  word,

And  told  a  heavenly  story.
The  glory  of  His  glory,  then  —

Most  holy  while  most  human  —
The  crowning  light  of  God  and  men,

The  fairest  life,  is  WOMAN.

Woman  is  Heaven's  warm  heart  below,

This  glory  we  accord  her ;
To  her  with  honors  bright  shall  go

The  welcomes  of  our  Order.
While  Woman  found  a  bolted  door

At  Athens,  Rome,  and  Mecca,
Our  Temple  gates  unbar  before

The  Daughters  of  Rebekah.

APPENDIX  A. —  SONGS   AND   ODES.  '393

Their  smiles  shall  make  our  darkness  bright,

Iheir  virtues  shall  defend  us
When  evils  lie  in  wait  to  smite,

And  sinful  powers  to  rend  us.
Our  Lodge,  around,  their  hearts  shall  hold,

And  ring  their  cheers  and  chidings,
As  Aaron's  robe  with  bells  of  gold

Rang  out  the  heavenly  tidings.

Their  prayers  shall  bring  sweet  blessings  down;

Their  hymns  sound  our  thanksgiving  ;
Their  hands  our  works  of  mercy  crown,

Their  lives  exalt  our  living.
0  God,  bless  woman  with  Thy  love  —

With  fairest  honors  deck  her,
And  clothe  with  beauty  from  above

The  Daughters  of  Rebekah !

SONG.  — THE  RAINBOW.

BY    MRS.    S.    J.    HALE.

0  beautiful  Rainbow,  all  woven  with  light,
There's  not  in  thy  tissue  one  shadow  of  night!

It  seems  as  heaven  open'd  when  thou  dost  appear,
As  if  a  light  vision  of  angels  drew  near,
And  sung — "The  Rainbow!   The  Rainbow!
God's  smile  is  here  !  "

1  think,  as  I'm  gazing  thy  colors  to  mark,
How,  over  the  mountain,  where  rested  the  Ark,
Those  saved  from  the  deluge,  with  wond'ring  eye,
Beheld  the  first  Rainbow  burst  over  the  sky  —

And  sung  —  "The  Rainbow,"  &c.

And  thousands  of  ages  have  flourished  and  fled,
Since  on  the  first  Rainbow  God's  promise  was  read;
Man  dies,  and  earth  changes ;  but  still  doth  endure
7  hat  signet  of  mercy,  fresh,  lovely,  and  pure.
Then  sing— "The  Rainbow,"  &c.

394  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL*

FUNERAL  ODE.

nr    REV.    BB.    J.    G.    FORMAN.

AIR  —  PleyeVs  Hymn.
Brother,  to  thy  grave  we  come,
At  the  beat  of  muffled  drum ;
Hearts  with  silent  grief  opprest,
Bear  thee  to  thy  home  of  rest.

Voices  from  the  sighing  breeze,
From  the  woods  and  leafy  trees,
And  the  faded  Autumn  leaf,
Will  remind  us  of  our  grief.

Though  in  the  Grand  Lodge  above,
We  remember  thee  in  love;
Yet  our  Lodge  has  lost  thee  here  —
'T  is  for  this  we  shed  the  tear.

In  the  earth  we  lay  thee  low,
Yet  upon  thy  grave  shall  grow
Evergreens,  like  these  we  bring,
As  our  last,  sad  offering.

FUNERAL   HYMN.     L.  M.

BY    REV.    D.    K.    LEE,  D.  D.

0,  Brothers,  travelling  hand  in  hand!

On  life's  long  road  again  we  pause,
And  here  in  grief  and  mourning  stand,

As  one  more  from  our  ranks  withdraws.

With  us  he  shared  the  pains  and  joys
That  rise  along  our  pleasant  way  —

The  labor  which  our  strength  employs  —
The  toil  and  guerdon  of  the  day

And  now  he  quits  our  weary  train

And  marches  o'er  the  heavenly  heights;

But  we  shall  walk  with  him  again,
And  share  his  rest  and  his  delights.

God,  comfort  us — our  brothers  bless,

While  this  dear  friend  Thy  love  receives ;

Raise  the  sad  mourner  from  distress,
And  gladden  every  heart  that  grieves.

APPENDIX  A. —  SONGS   AND   ODES.  395

DISMISSION.

For  the  close  of  Social  or  Public  Occasions.
BY    A.    B.    GROSH.

AIR —  "  Good  night  and  joy  be  wi1  ye  a'."

"  Depart  in  peace  !  "  ye  favor'd  few,

For  night  now  calls  us  to  repose:
In  pleasant  dreams  may  you  renew

The  joys  that  have  our  evening  closed.
May  Friendship's  visions  round  you  press,

And  Love's,  more  tender,  warm  each  heart,
To  make  refreshing,  sweet,  your  rest  —

"Depart  in  peace!  "  dear  friends,  depart!

"Depart  in  peace  ?  "  for  knowledge  here

Has  shed  abroad  her  radiant  light,
The  heart  to  warm  —  the  mind  to  cheer,

Through  slumbers  of  the  peaceful  night.
And  when  to-morrow's  sun  shall  rise,

Oh,  be  that  Truth  to  practice  given,
Till  life  shall  end  —  then  hear  the  voice,

"  Depart  in  peace,  from  earth  to  heaven!"

FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  AND  TRUTH.

BY    JAMES    MONTGOMERY.
[N.  B.  —  This  is  the  earliest  Odd-Fellow's  Song  known  as  such.

When  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth  abound,

Among  a  band  of  brothers,
The  cup  of  joy  goes  gayly  round,

Each  shares  the  bliss  of  others :
Sweet  roses  grace  the  thorny  way

Along  this  vale  of  sorrow;
The  flowers  that  shed  their  leaves  to-day

Shall  bloom  again  to-morrow.

How  grand  in  age,  how  fair  in  youth,
Are  holy  Friendship,  Love,  and  Truth!

On  halcyon  wings  our  moments  pass,

Life's  cruel  cares  beguiling;
Old  Time  lays  down  his  scythe  and  glass,

In  gay  good-humor  smiling  ;

396  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

With  ermine  beard  and  forelock  gray,
His  reverend  front  adorning,

He  looks  like  Winter  turned  to  May,
Night  softening  into  Morning.
How  grand  in  age,  &c.

From  these  delightful  fountains  flow

Ambrosial  rills  of  pleasure ;
Can  man  desire,  can  Heaven  bestow

A  more  resplendent  treasure  ?
Adorn'd  with  gems  so  richly  bright,

We  '11  form  a  Constellation,
Where  every  Star  with  modest  light

Shall  gild  his  proper  station.
How  grand  in  age,  &c.

APPENDIX  B.

BUSINESS   FORMS.

No.  1. — Application  for  Initiation  and  Membership  in  a  Subordi
note  Lodge.

[Reading,  May  1st,  1849.]
To  the  Officers  and  Members  of  [Salome]  Lodge,  No.  [1051  I.  0.

0.  F.  of  [Pa.]

Gentlemen : — Having  conceived  a  favorable  opinion  of  Odd-
Fellowship,  and  read  a  copy  of  your  Constitution  and  By-Laws,
I  ask  to  be  initiated  into  the  Order,  and  become  a  member  of
your  Lodge.

My  residence  is  in  [South  Fifth  street,]  my  age  is  [thirty-one]
years,  and  my  occupation  that  of  a  [Carpenter.]  If  admitted,  I
promise  obedience  to  the  usages  and  laws  of  the  Order  and  of  the
Lodge.

The  Proposition  Fee  accompanies  tnis.

Very  respectfully  yours,  [ADAM  SMITH.]

Proposed  and  recommended  by  [THOMAS  JONES.]

The  Proposition  Fee  [$3.00]  received,  and  the  Proposition  re
ferred  to

Brs.  [JOHN  JACOBS,]
fWM.  DARE,]  and
[SAML.  JOHNSON.]
Attest:   [WILLIAM  WAKE,]  Secretary.

No.  2. — Report  on  Application.

To  the  N.G.,  V.  G.,  Officers,  and  Members  of  [Salome]   Lodge

No.  [105,]  I.O.O.F.of  [Pa.]

Your   Committee    to   whom   was   referred  the   application   ot
[Adam  Smith]  for  [state  whether  membership  by  card  or  initiation]
respectfully  report,  that  we  have  performed  the  duty  assigned  us,
34  397

398  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

and  find  the  candidate  [worthy  or  unworthy]  and  recommend  that
he  be  [elected  or  rejected]  accordingly.

[ If  an  applicant  on  Card,  state  the  terms  on  which  Tie  is  to  be  re-
ceived, if  worthy.]

Respectfully  yours,  in  F.,  L.,  and  T.,

[Signed  by  Committee.]
[Date.]

No.  3. — Certificate  for  Degrees.

To  [Berks  County  Degree  Lodge,  No.  8,  I.  0.  0.  F.  of  Pa.,  at
[Reading.]

This  certifies  that  [Adam  Smith]  a  member  in  good  standing
in  [Salome]  Lodge,  No.  [105,]  and  properly  qualified,  having
been  duly  balloted  for,  was,  this  evening,  elected  to  receive  the
[First  and  Second]  Degrees  of  the  Order.  You  are  therefore
nereby  requested  and  authorized  to  confer  the  same  on  him,  he
paying  you  the  fees  for  so  doing.

Witness  the  seal  of  the  Lodge  this  [7th]  day  of  [August,  1849.]

[Salome  Lodge  Seal.]  [WILLIAM  WAKE,]  Secretary.

Fees  received  [50  cents,]  and  Certificate  approved  by  [Degree
Lodge,  No.  8,]  August  10th,  1849.  [JAMES  LONG,]  Scribe.

No.  4. — Certificate  of  Standing  and  Grade  in  a  Subordinate
Lodge.*

To  all  whom  it  may  concern,  this  certifies  that  [Adam  Smith]
is  a  member  of  the  Fifth  Degree,  in  good  standing  in  [Salome]
Lodge,  No.  [105,]  I.  0.  0.  F.  of  [Pa.]

Witness  the  seal  of  our  Lodge  this  [13th]  day  of  [November,
1849.]  [JOHN  BROWN,]  N.G.

[Seal  of  Salome  Lodge.]

Attest:   [WILLIAM  WAKE,]   Secretary.

No.  5. — Application  to  be  admitted  into  an  Encampment.

[Reading,  Nov.  14th,  1849.]

To  the  C.  P.,  H.  P.,  Officers  and  Members  of  [Hebron]  Encamp-
ment, No.  [8,]  I.  0. 0.  F.  of  [Pa.]

Brethren : — Having  read  a  copy  of  your  Constitution  and  By-
Laws,  I  now  solicit  initiation  into  the  Patriarchal  Order,  and
membership  in  your  Encampment.  The  accompanying  Certificate
will  show  my  grade  and  standing  in  [Salome]  Lodge.  My  resi-
dence is  in  [South  Fifth  street,]  my  age  is  [thirty-one]  years,  and
my  occupation  is  that  of  a  [Carpenter.]  If  admitted,  I  promise

*  To  accompiny  No.  5,  or  for  other  purposes  that  are  lawful  and  proper.

APPENDIX   B. —  BUSINESS   FORMS.  399

to  obey  the  laws  of  the  Order  and  of  the  Encampment.     Enclosed

I  send  the  Proposition  Fee.
Very  respectfully,  your  Bro.  in  F.,  L.,  and  T.,

[ADAM  SMITH.]

Proposed  and  recommended  by  [JOHN  FRANKS.]

Proposition  Fee  [$4.00]  received,  and  the  Proposition  referred  to

Patriarchs

JAMES  RICHARDS,]

'JAMES  WILSON,]  and
LEVI  WOOD.]
[Nov.  16th,  1849.]  [JOHN  JAMES,]  Scribe.

No.  6. — Application  for  Benefits  in  Sickness.

[Lancaster,  June  5th,  1850.]
To  the  N.  G.,  V.  G.,  Officers  and  Brethren  of  [Salome]   Lodge,

No.  [105,]  I.  0.  0.  F.  of  [Pa.]

Brethren : — On  the  [10th]  day  of  [May  last,]  (as  formerly  re-
ported to  you,)  I  was  prostrated  by  a  severe  illness,  and  disabled
from  following  my  occupation  until  [Monday]  last.  I  send  the
certificate  of  my  physician,  and  the  statement  of  the  N.  G.  of
Monterey  Lodge  of  this  city.  I  therefore  claim  benefits  for
three  weeks.  If  granted,  please  pay  to  my  wife,  whose  receipt
will  be  as  my  own.

Fraternally  yours,  in  F.,  L.,  andT.,  [ADAM  SMITH.]

Physician's  Certificate.

[Lancaster,  June  4th,  1852.]
(Addressed  as  above.)

This  certifies  that  I  was  called  to  visit  Mr.  [Adam  Smith]  pro-
fessionally, on  the  [10th]  day  of  [May  last,]  and  found  him
prostrated  by  a  [severe]  attack  of  [bilious  diarrhoea.]  I  have
attended  him  from  that  to  the  present  time,  and  know  that  he
was  unable  to  attend  to  his  usual  occupation  before  [yesterday.]

[JOHN  FITCH,]  M.  D.

JV.  Grand's  Statement.

(Dated  and  addressed  as  above.)

Having  visited  Br.  [Adam  Smith]  during  his  illness,  [on  the
18th,  and  again  on  the  25th  of  May  last,]  and  being  personally
acquainted  with  [Dr.  Fitch]  as  a  man  ot  honor  and  veracity,  1
have  no  doubt  the  above  statements  are  correct,  and  that  Br.
[Smith]  is  entitled  to  benefits  for  [three]  weeks,  so  far  as  disa-
bility to  labor  constitutes  such  claim.

Fraternally,  in  F.,  L.,  and  T.,  [JAMES  LOGAN,]  N.  G.

[Seal  of  Monterey  Lodge.]

Attest :   [R.  WEIDMAN,]   Secretary.

N.  B. — Application  for  benefits  to  an  Encampment  is  in  the  same  form,
only  changing  address,  <fec.  Of  course,  if  the  By-Laws  of  the  body  applied
to,  requires  other  or  different  proof  from  that  given  in  form  above,  or  if  the
case  itself  requires  other  certificates,  the  applicant  will  make  the  requisite
changes.

400  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

No.  7. — Application  for  Admission  by  Card.

[Fort  Plain,  Nov.  10th,  1851.]
To  the  N.  G.,  V.  G.,  Officers  and  Brethren  of  [Montgomery]  Lodge,

No.  [164,]  1. 0.  0.  F.  of  [Northern  New  York.]
Brethren : — Herewith  I  present  my  Card  of  Withdrawal  from
[Salome]  Lodge,  No.  [105,]  I.  0.  0.  F.  of  [Pa.,]  and  respectfully
ask  to  be  admitted  a  member  of  your  Lodge  by  deposite  of  the
same.

Fraternally  yours,  in  F.,  L.,  and  T.,  [A.  B.  GROSH.]

Presented  and  recommended  by  [L.  Fox.J

Referred  to  [3  brethren.]
[S.  KELLER,]  Secretary  pro  tern.

N.  B. — The  application  for  admission  by  deposite  of  Card  or  Initiation
into  an  Encampment  is  the  same,  except  the  necessary  change  of  address,
and  name  of  the  body  addressed.

No.  8. — Dispensation  to  confer  Degrees.

I,  Jonas  Wright,  D.  D.  G.  Master  for  the  District  of  Montgomery
in  the  State  of  New  York,  do  hereby  authorize  and  empower
Montgomery  Lodge  No.  164,  of  this  jurisdiction,  to  confer  the
five  degrees  of  the  Order  on  Aaron  Bell,  a  member  of  said  Lodge,
dispensing  with  any  further  time  requisite  to  qualify  him  for  re-
ceiving the  same,  such  being  the  request  of  said  Lodge,  which
has  paid  for  this  dispensation.

In  witness  whereof  I  have  hereunto  set  my  seal  of  office,  this
12th  day  of  July,  1852.

[L.  S.]  JONAS  WRIGHT.

No.  9. — Petition  for  a  Warrant  of  a  Subordinate  Lodge.

To  the  [Grand  Sire,  Officers,  and  Members]  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  [the  United  States.]

The  Petition  of  the  undersigned,  holding  Withdrawal  Cards  from
Lodges  named  opposite  to  our  signatures  respectively,  and  legally
recognized  by  your  R.  W.  Body,  respectfully  represents,  that  it  would
be  consistent  with  the  advantage  of  the  Order,  to  establish  a  Sub-
ordinate Lodge,  to  be  located  at  in  the  State  of

Wherefore  your  Petitioners  pray  that  a  Warrant  may  duly  issue
in  pursuance  of  the  Laws  of  your  R.  W.  Body.
Dated  at  this  day  of     .

No.  10.  — Petition  for  a  Warrant  of  a  Subordinate  Encampment.

To  the  M.  W.  G.  Master  and  Members  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  [New

York.]

The  Petition  of  the  undersigned  Patriarchs,  holding  Withdrawal
Cards,  from  the  legal  Encampments  set  opposite  our  names,  [or  in-

A1PENDIX  B. BUSINESS   FOKMS.  401

structed  in  the  Encampment  Degrees,  under  commission  of  tl  e  Grand
Sire,]  respectfully  represents,  that  it  would  be  consistent  with  the
advantage  of  the  Order,  to  establish  a  Subordinate  Encampment,
to  be  located  at  ,  in  the  State  of

Wherefore,  your  Petitioners  pray  that  a  Warrant  may  duly  issue
in  pursuance  of  the  Laws  of  the  R.  W.  Body.
Dated  at  ,  this          day  of

No.  11.—  Visiting  Card.
FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  AND  TRUTH.
INDEPENDENT  ORDER  OF  ODD-FELLOWS.
To  all  whom  it  may  concern:

This  certifies,  that  ,  whose  name  is  written  on

the  margin  of  this  card,  in  his  own  proper  handwriting,  is  a  mem-
ber in  good  standing  of  No.  held  at
and  working  under  a  Charter  duly  granted  by  authority  of  the
Right  Worthy  Grand                          of  the  State  o'f
That  the  Constitution  and  By-Laws  of  our  allows  for
weekly  benefits  the  sum  of                        dollars  per  week,  and  for
funeral  benefits  the  sum  of                         dollars ;  and  that  Brother
is  entitled  to  the  said  benefits  from  the  date  of
this  card,  and  until  the  expiration  of  the  same.

We  therefore  recommend  him  to  your  Friendship  and  Protection,
and  admission  into  all  regular  of  Odd-Fellows,  for  the

space  of  from  the  date,  and  no  longer.

In  witness  whereof,  we  have  subscribed  our  names  and  affixed
the  Seal  of  our  this  day  of  in

the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and
[SEAL.]

No.  12. —  Withdrawal  Card.

FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  AND  TRUTH.
INDEPENDENT  ORDER  OF  ODD-FELLOWS.

To  all  whom  it  may  concern:

This  certifies,  that  our  well-beloved  Brother  ,

whose  signature,  written  by  himself,  is  properly  situated  on  the

margin  of  this    card,   was   regularly  admitted   a  Member  of   our

by  on  the         day  of  18         and

has  paid  all  demands  against  him  up  to  this  day,  and  is  under

no    charge    whatever.      We    therefore    recommend    him    to    your

Friendship    and    Protection,    and    admission    into    any    regular

of  Odd-Fellows,  to  which  he  may  apply  within  one

year  from  the  date  hereof.

This  card  is  granted  by  No.         which  was  duly

instituted  at  on  the         day  of  18

by  authority  of  the  Right  Worthy  Grand  of  the  State

of

In  witness  whereof,  we  subscribe   hereto  oui  hands,   and  affix
the  Seal  of  our  this         day  of  in  the  year

of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and
[SEAL.]
34*

402  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

No.  1 3.  —  Resignation  of  Membership.

[Marietta,  Pa.,  June  3d,  1867.]

To  the  [N.  G.,  V.  G.,]  Officers  and  [brethren]  of  [Donegal  Lodge]
No.  [129]  I.  0.  0.  F.  of  [Pennsylvania.]

BRETHREN  —  I  feel  constrained  to  sever  my  connection  with  your
[Lodge]  and  the  Order,  and  therefore  tender  this  my  resignation
of  membership  therein.  I  consider  my  pledge  of  honor  as  binding
out  of  the  Order  as  in  it.

Wishing  you  prosperity  in  every  good  word  and  work,  I  remain,
Respectfully  yours,

[HENBY   HOME.]

No.  14.  —  Certificate  of  Resignation.

[Donegal  Lodge],  No.  [129],  I.  0.  0.  F.,
June  9th,  1867.

We  certify  that  Henry  Home,  being  free  from  all  charges  in  our
[Lodge]  and  Order,  has  resigned  his  membership  in  the  same,  and
said  resignation  has  been  duly  accepted.  He  is  therefore  no  longer
a  member  of  our  [Lodge]  and  Order.

In  witness  whereof  we  have  hereunto  set  our  names  and  the
seal  of  the  Lodge  at  the  date  above  written.

[SEAL.]  [HORACE  HONOR,  N.  G.]

Attest:   [ROBERT  RIGHT,  Secretary.]

No.  15. — Form  of  Card  presented  to  Wife  or  Widow  of  an  Odd-Fellow.

FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  AND  TRUTH.
INDEPENDENT  ORDER  OF  ODD-FELLOWS.

To  all  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come,  greeting :

This  certifies,  that  ,  whose  name  is  indorsed  on  the

margin  of  this  Card,  in  her  own  proper  handwriting,  is  the  [wife]
of   our  well   beloved    Brother   who  (is)  a  member  of  Lodge  No.
held  at  and  working  under  authority  of  a  Charter

duly  granted  by  authority  of  the  Right  Worthy  Grand  Lodge  of
the  .  We  therefore  recommend  her  to  your  Friendship

and  Protection  wherever  she  may  be,  throughout  the  world,  for
the  space  of  and  no  longer.

In  witness  whereof,  we  have  subscribed  our  names  and  affixed
the  Seal  of  our  Lodge,  this  day  of  in  the

year

[L.  s.]  ,  N.  G.

,  V.  G.

,  Secretary.

APPENDIX  B. —  BUSINESS   FORMS.  403

No.  16. — Form  of  Card  for  a  Daughter  of  Rebekah.

FRIENDSHIP,  LOVE,  AND  TRUTH.
INDEPENDENT  ORDER  OF  ODD-FELLOWS.
To  all  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come,  greeting :

This  certifies,  that  our  well-beloved  sister,  ,  whose

name  is  indorsed  on  the  margin  of  this  card,  in  her  own  proper
handwriting,  has  been  duly  initiated  in  the  degree  of  Daughter  of
Rebekah,  and  is  the  [w(/e]  of  our  Brother  who

[is]  a  member  of  Lodge,  No.         ,  held  at

and  working  under  authority  of  a  charter  duly  granted  by  authority
of  the  Right  Worthy  Grand  Lodge  of  .  We  therefore

recommend  her  to  your  friendship,  aid  and  protection,  wherever
she  may  be,  throughout  the  world,  for  the  space  of  and

no  longer.

In  witness  whereof,  we  have  subscribed  our  names  and  affixed
the  seal  of  our  Lodge,  this          day  of  in  the  year  of  our

Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and
[SEAL.]

,  N.  G.

,  V.  G.

Attest: ,  Secretary.

No.  17.  —  Order  for  the  Term  P.  W.

[Reading,  Pa.,  January  3,  1868.]

To  the  [N.  G.]  of  [Donegal  Lodge,  No.   [129],  I.  0.  0.  F.  of
[Pennsylvania.]     Please  communicate  to  Brother  [C.  C.,  P.  G.],  a
member  in  good  standing  in  this  [Lodge],  the  P.  W.  and  E.  of  the
current  Term,  he  being  entitled  to  the  same,  and  oblige
Yours,  fraternally,  in  F.,  L.,  and  T.,

[WM.  SMITH,  N.  G.]
[SEAL.]
Attest:   [JACOB  JONES,  Secretary.]

No.  18.  —  Order  for  the  A.  T.  P.   W.  for  a  Member,  or  Daughter  of
Rebekah1  s  A.  P.  W.

[Shenandoah  Lodge,  No.  95,  I.  0.  0.  F.,  of  the  State  of  New  York.
Utica,  July  1st,  1868.]

To  the  [Noble  Grand]  of  any  [Lodge]  of  the  I.  0.  0.  F.
The  bearer  [Brother,  Patriarch,  or  Sister  (as  may  be).  Name  as  in
the  card]  holding  a  legal  card  from  this  [Lodge],  dated  the  [first]
day  of  [July],  eighteen  hundred  and  [sixty-eight],  for  the  period
of  [six]  months,  is  entitled  to  the  [A.  T.  P.  W.,  or  A.  P.  W.  of  the
Deg.  of  R.]  for  the  current  year,  which  please  communicate  to
[him]  after  due  examination — whereupon  you  will  retain  or  de-
stroy this  letter.

[SEAL.]  -— ,  [N.  G.  or  C.  P.]

,  [Sec.  or  Scribe.]

N.  B.  — Have  the  card  signed  in  your  presence.

,  [N.  G.  or  C.  P.]

404  THE  ODD-FELLOW'S  MANUAL.

No.  19.  —  Certificate  for  Past  Official  Degrees.

[Date.]

To  the  D.  D.  G.  Master  of  [Oneida]  District  of  I.  0.  0.  F.  of
[New  York.]

This  is  to  certify  that  Brother  [James  Grant]  has  lawfully  and
faithfully  served  the  required  terms  of  office  [as  Secretary,  as
Vice-Grand,  and  as  Noble  Grand]  in  [Oneida]  Lodge,  No.  [70,]
I.  0.  0.  F.  of  the  State  of  [New  York,]  and  is  therefore  entitled  to
receive  the  Past  Official  Degrees  of  those  several  offices ;  and  you
are  therefore  respectfully  requested  to  confer  the  same  upon  him
in  proper  form.

Fraternally  yours  in  F.,  L.,  and  T.,

[JAMES  BROWN,  N.  G.]
[SEAL.]
Attest:   [SAMUEL  SCRIBE,  Secretary.]

No.  20.  —  Certificate  of  Past  Noble  Grand.

To  the  Right  Worthy  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of  [Pennsylvania],
I.  0.  0.  F.

Lodge,  No.  — .

This  is  to  certify,  that  Bro.  Past  Grand  is  a

member  in  good  standing  in  this  Lodge  —  that  he  has  received  the
First,  Second,  Third,  Fourth,  and  Fifth  Degrees  —  that  he  has  been
duly  elected  to,  and  has  served  in,  the  office  of  Noble  Grand  for
one  Elective  Term  next  ensuing  his  election,  discharging  the  duties  of
his  office  in  a  satisfactory  manner;  and  that  he  is  entitled  to  mem-
bership in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  [Pennsylvania;]  we  therefore  re-
spectfully request  that  he  may  be  acknowledged  accordingly.

Witness  our  hands  and  the  Seal  of  the  Lodge,  at
in  the  State  of  [Pennsylvania],  this         day  of
A.  D.  18      .
[SEAL.]

,  N.  G.

,  Secretary.

No.  21. — Representative's  Certificate  to  Grand  Lodge.

To  the  Right  Worthy  Grand  Lodge  of  [Pennsylvania],  I.  0.  0.  F.
This  is  to  certify,  that  P.  G.  has  been  duly  elected

the  Representative  of  t^iis  Lodge,  in  your  body,  to  serve  until  the
[first]  day  of  [July],  18  .

In  witness  whereof,  we  have  hereunto  set  our  hands,  and  affixed
the  Seal  of  Lodge,  No.  ,  this  day  of  18  .

[SEAL.]

,  N.  G.

,  Secretary.

NOTE. — By  proper  changes  in  the  words  enclosed  in  [brackets],
all  the  foregoing  forms  can  be  adapted  to  any  jurisdiction,  Lodge,
or  Encampment.  But  in  all  cases  where  the  ruling  Grand  Body
has  prescribed  other  fcrms,  those  prescribed  forms  should  be  used,
of  course,  in  preference  to  these.  The  above  are  to  be  used  only
where  better  forms  are  not  furnished.

APPENDIX  B. —  BUSINESS    FOR^IS.

405

RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desk  of  any
University  of  California  Library
or  to  the

NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY
Bldg.  400,  Richmond  Field  Station
University  of  California
Richmond,  CA  94804-4698

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS
2-month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling

(415)642-6753
1-year  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing  books

to  NRLF
Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made  4  days

prior  to  due  date

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW

HAY  2  3  1991

AU6Q2

mo-

•oola  Cruz

YB  06>5I

//S  SQ/