COMPENDIUM
MALEFICARUM


COMPENDIUM
MALEFICARUM
Collected in 3 Books from many Sources by
BROTHER FRANCESCO MARIA GUAZZO


OF THE ORDER OF S. AMBROSE AD NEMUS


SHOWING THE INIQUITOUS AND EXECRABLE OPERATIONS OF
WITCHES AGAINST THE HUMAN RACE, AND THE DIVINE
REMEDIES BY WHICH THEY MAY BE FRUSTRATED


EDITED WITH NOTES BY THE REV. MONTAGUE
SUMMERS ; + + TRANSLATED BY E. A. ASHWIN


“6
2
qt;

3


JOHN RODKER «+ 1929 + LONDON


BF
1559
G3


This edition is of 1275
copies only, this copy
being numbered


oS


es NONE S laet


oe  eeitonae


TO
THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND RIGHT REVEREND


LORD ORAZIO MAFFEI


CARDINAL OF THE HOLY ROMAN CHURCH AND
EVER VIGILANT PROTECTOR OF THE
ORDER OF $. AMBROSE
FRA FRANCESCO MARIA GUAZZO


A HUMBLE BROTHER OF THE
SAME ORDER


GIVETH GREETING


the Court of His Serene Highness the Duke of Cleves and

Filich (who was vexed and bound by many spells of witchcraft),
I put together and composed this book which I have called “Compendium
Maleficarum”’ and I have, moreover, filled it with various and most
ample examples, with the sole purpose that men, considering the cunning
of witches, might study to live piously and devoutly in the Lord. And
although it may provoke the idle jests of the censorious ( for what ts
more difficult than to satisfy every palate ?), yet I conceive that it will be
of some avail to those who would escape the mortal venom of sorcerers.
When I had, then, determined to print it, I began to look for a Patron
under whose auspices it might be more securely brought to the light.
Then, O most illustrious and Most Reverend Protector, whom no one has
excelled in genius, gifts of mind and body and countless graces, did you
stand out in my mind as one who has given public proof that your most
eminent courage is joined to a like degree of learning, a Patron who, far
from despising a humble writer, would rather extend to him your greatest
favour and more than ordinary kindness. Having these considerations in
my mind, therefore, I was assured that you were pre-eminently suited to
act the part of a Maecenas towards such as devoted themselves to the


(): T vigilant Prelate, three years ago when I was attending


v


™ io


vi DEDICATION


Jurtherance of sound doctrine, among whom I count myself the humblest :
and I determined to light this new-born work upon its way with the
torch of your most Famous Name; and although you are worthy of a far
nobler work, I venture to dedicate to you this little book which has not
been compiled without some labour. And if (as is my hope) you will
accept it wholly and generously with that fair candour which is yours, it
may assuredly be expected that those carping critics, who will tolerate
nothing that does not savour of perfect genius and unremitting industry,
will turn a blind eye to its faults. Farewell : and may Guazzo be written
among those who are whole-heartedly attached to you.


Milan, May, 1608.


PREFACE
TO THE READER


MONG the countless blessings which the Divine mercy
ve daily confers upon the whole human race, and es-
pecially upon His faithful, I esteem this to be the

most particular: the power to discover the malice and wicked-
ness of our enemies, both visible and invisible. So that, recog-
nising their cunning, we may counteract their stumbling-blocks
and temptations. And since (Ps. Ixxiii) the pride of them
that hate God is daily increased and ever grows, and the
venomous Enemy of the human race, whose fierceness waxes
ever greater, does not fear to sow in our path the sharpest
thorns of sorrow and tribulation and all sorts of maladies,
although he himself is fearful of being tormented ; therefore he
essays his utmost to increase his own eternal punishment by
leading as many men as he can to hell, and to deride, despise,
and insult the most excellent and divine likeness of God which
has been washed in the Precious Blood of Christ, and to turn
man’s freedom to slavery. Therefore each one of us ought
to search his heart to keep it free from the malice of the
devil; for he goeth about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he
may devour; and even though his heart may be pierced and
torn by his enemy’s weapons, yet the devil leaves nothing
unattempted and dares everything. When he sees men of weak
and timid mind, he takes them by storm: when he finds
them dauntless and firm, he becomes as it were a cunning fox
to deceive them: for he has a thousand means of hurting us,
and he uses countless methods, superstitions and curious arts,
to seduce men’s minds from God and lead them to his own
follies; and all these he wondrously performs by means of
illusions and witchcraft. Therefore it is agreed that this sort of
evils has been disseminated to the destruction of men’s bodies

vu


viii PREFACE


and souls by the devil and his fiends through the agency of
warlocks, witches, sorcerers and diviners; and in proof of this
the present book will give a sure indication of the truth. And
that each man may be able to guard himself, let him seriously
read and carefully digest this book, which I have called
Compendium Maleficarum ; for just as there are shown to be various
means and methods of inflicting injury, so there are various
remedies by which these harms may be met and dispersed when
they are recognised. If therefore, reader, there be anything in
this book which holds your attention and points you the way
to a remedy, I lift up my hands in thanks to God, who to
His own greater glory, and the confusion of devils, has per-
mitted the temptation of our souls that the just may be made
perfect and the wicked cast into hell. Therefore the demons
do but work in accordance with the design and permission of
Almighty God.


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION


HE ancient origins of the local Milanese Order Ambrosian or

Ambrosini, of which Francesco-Maria Guazzo was so eminent

and honoured a member, are buried in obscurity, although the
Brethren themselves, perhaps with more devotion than exactness, were
ever wont to refer their foundation to no less a figure than the great
S. Ambrose himself. It is very possible, and even probable, that some old
traditions had actually been handed down from the illustrious Father who
had taken so deep an interest in monasticism and so closely watched the
beginnings of the cloister throughout his diocese. However that may be,
in the earlier decades of the fourteenth century certain solitaries and
hermit priests dwelling near Milan gradually adopted the cenobitic life,
making it their pious custom to assemble at stated intervals during the
day for solemn office and united prayer. About this very time three young
nobles, Alessandro Crivelli, Alberto Besozzo, and Antonio della Pietra-
Santa, disgusted with the licentiousness of the aristocratic society and
court of Giovanni II, had sought refuge in retreat from the world, and
taking as their anchorhold a wood not many leagues from the city, here
they built a humble chapel which soon became the common oratory of a
regular community, and this forest sanctuary may not untruly be said
to have been the cradle of the Ambrosian Order. In 1375 Pope Gregory
XI, who some twelve months before had approved the Congregation of the
Spanish Hermits of S. Jerome, gave the Milanese frati the Rule of
S. Augustine, adding thereto a number of particular constitutions, and
assigning as their name “Fratres Sancti Ambrosit ad Nemus.” They
were, moreover, empowered to elect their own superiors, subject to the
confirmation of the Archbishop of Milan. A habit was prescribed with
broad scapular, a stuff girdle pendent as is the Augustinian cincture, a
voluminous cowl and capuce, a mighty mantle in which to walk abroad,
in colour all of chestnut brown.* The Ambrosian Liturgy, both for


* It does not seem certain whether the Ambrosians (ad Nemus) were by rule discalced
or shod. Hélyot, “Histoire des Ordres Monastiques,” 1715, vol. IV, p. 52, gives an
engraving, “Religieux de Ordre de S. Ambroise ad Nemus,” who is wearing sandals.
But there appear to have been modifications, and this detail differed from tim: to time.
pt ag no doubt the brethren were discalced, but a mitigation tolerated some form of

oot-gear,


ix


x EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION


Mass and choir, must be followed. The Order henceforth was canonically
established.

Of the history of the Ambrosiani comparatively few details are
known, and it is hardly necessary here to rehearse them at any length. It
will suffice to say that various houses were founded, and that for more
than half a century each monastery remained entirely independent, their
only connexion being the fact that each adopted the same rule. In 1441
Eugenius IV united all the existing foundations in one Congregation
under a Master-general who was to reside at the original convent where
in future a full Chapter met every three years. It was found that the old
discipline had become somewhat relaxed in the time of S. Carlo Borromeo,
but at the request of the brethren this great Saint presided in person over
their Chapter of 1579, and with his encouragement the earlier strictness
was soon restored. Subjects, none the less, were few, and on 15 August
1589 Sixtus V issued a bull joining the Ambrostani with the Apostolini
or Barnabites,* who claimed the Apostle S. Barnabas as their founder,
but whose constitution, as then followed at any rate, had been approved
by Rome early in the fifteenth century. The Congregation thus formed
was now generally known as the Brethren of S. Ambrose ad Nemus and
S. Barnabas, and upon the engraved title-page of the second edition
(1626) of Guazzo’s “Compendium Maleficarum,’” the two Saints are
duly depicted as patrons in full pontificalia.

Outside the archdiocese of Milan the Ambrosiani held for a while
only two houses, both of which were at Rome: San Clemente,\ and
San Pancrazio. In Milan itself their most important monastery was that
attached to the Church of San Primo, a parish which in more recent
Jears was divided among three other churches, S. Bartolomeo, S. Babila,
and San Andrea. The Church of San Primo and the adjoining cloister
stood hard by the Porta Orientale where was the Collegio Elvetico at the
opening of the Strada Marina. The religious also served the church of
S. Ambrogio della Vittoria, which was built (1348) at Parabiago t
in thanksgiving for the famous battle won there by the Milanese in
1339.

* The Brothers of S. Barnabas, not to be confused with the Barnabites, Clerks
Regular, “‘Clerici Regulares Sancti Pauli,” founded by S. Antonio Maria Zaccaria in
I.


530.
+ Now served by the Irish Dominicans. S. Pancrazio fuori le Mura was seriously
damaged in 1849, but has been restored.
i For an account of the connexion of the Ambrosini with this church and the jeal
of the civic authorities who wished to int their own chaplains, see the article
*‘Ambrosiani” by Monsignor Giovanni tali in the “Grande Enci ia Italiana,”


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION xi


However popular at Milan, where they were held in high honour,
even in the day of their greatest prosperity the Ambrosian had never
been more than a purely local Congregation, and when their numbers
sensibly diminished and several of their houses fell vacant it is not
surprising to find that the question of suppressing the Order was more
than once debated. Eventually, on 1 April, 1645, by the bull ““Quoniam,”
Innocent X dissolved the surviving monasteries, including that of Para-
biago, which remained, directing that they should be assigned to secular
priests. The details of these arrangements were entrusted to two Car-
dinals, Odescalchi and Monti, who acted on behalf of the Holy See.
It must not be supposed that the dissolution was in any way intended
as a censure or reflection upon the Ambrosiani. At that time certain
reforms were being essayed in various directions, and of these one was
the diminution of the very many provincial Congregations and obscurer
local Orders, whose continuance involved a vast complexity of business
and affairs, whose members were few and dwindling, whose purpose had
been served, in most cases admirably and devotedly served throughout the
years, but whose day was gone. Even as one of our own poets has
said:

God fulfils Himself in many ways,
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.


The Ambrosiani were not without their holy names. There were Beatt
in the calendar of the Order; Blessed Alberto Besozzo; Blessed Antonio
Gonzaga of Mantua, Blessed Filippo of Fermo, Blessed Gerardo of
Monza, Blessed Guardate, Blessed Giovanni, Blessed Placido, and many
more, a noble roll of sanctity. They boasted too eminent scholars and
writers of renown; the pious and strictly orthodox Paolo Fabulotti whose
authoritative “De potestate Papae super Concilium,” first published at
Venice in 1613, ran into several editions; Ascanio Tasca, who left the
Society of Jesus to follow the more cloistered Ambrosian life, and who
rose to be Master-general; Michele Mulazzani, a Piedmontese, who in
his day had also governed the Order; Zaccaria Visconti; and Francesco-
Maria Guazzo.

Even the recent and particular researches of Monsignor Professore
Giovanni Galbiati, the distinguished Prefect of the Ambrosian Library,
have failed to discover any details of the life of Guazzo. Perhaps thts 1s
because there is really little to know of the contemplative and monastic
life, little to know of Guazzo save what we may gather from his own
printed works, The archives and cartularies of the Ambrosiani whence


|


— _—


xii EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION


we might at least have learned the dates of Guazzo’s birth, of his
profession in the Order, and his death, have been lost for many a century.
There remain then his writings, three in number, the first and most
important being the “Compendium Maleficarum,” which was originally
published at Milan, ‘“‘Apud Haeredes Augustini Tradati,” in 1608.
This golden treatise is dedicated to the Protector of the’ Ambrosiant,
Cardinal Orazio Maffei, and the preface is signed in the month of May.
Guazzo was indeed no mere prodigy of the lecture-room and the schools,
Sor he brought his genius to bear upon the pressing problems of a much-
distracted time, and perhaps there was no business which more
immediately required examination and remedy than the evil of witchcraft.
The north of Italy and the remoter Alpine villages had for some reason
long been infected to an almost unexampled degree. It was at Asti in
Piedmont that well-nigh six hundred years before a society of devil-
worshippers had been almost accidentally discovered, largely owing to
their zeal for proselytism, and in spite of all efforts, both ecclesiastical
and civil, it would seem that these had never wholly been stamped out,
but that the dark tradition lingered and was perpetuated in obscure and
evil ambuscades. It may be that throughout the thirty years’ incumbency
of the Cardinal Archbishop Ippolito d’Este (1520-1550), always absent
from his see, this cult waxed strong in common with many another
dereliction and abuse. Certain it is that during the tenure of S. Carlo
Borromeo, that great prelate was well-nigh overwhelmed by the corruptions
of Milan, and indeed of his whole diocese. On one occasion he received
the submission and confessions of no less than one hundred and thirty
sorcerers. Another time as he was passing through a certain village it
was noticed he refused to give his blessing to any house or to any
individual save the parish priest alone, whom he informed that the folk
were, one and all, secret Satanists.

In Milan itself the votaries of this hidden worship were to be met
on every side. They vended charms and love-brews, poisons and philtres;
almost openly they boasted of their skill in necromantic lore, their traffic
with demons, their sabbats and sorceries, enormously corrupting the whole
city.
It was at the instant request of a prelate of rare learning and
keenest intelligence, Cardinal Federico Borromeo, the cousin and successor
of San Carlo, and Archbishop of Milan from 1595 to 1631 that Fra
Francesco-Maria Guazzo composed his encyclopaedic ““Compendium Male-
ficarum,” ‘in the which is "hily set forth the vile craft and enmity of


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION xiii


witches against the whole race of mankind. Whereunto is further added
a most salutary and potent Exorcism to dissolve and dispel all iniquities
and delusions of the devil.” Guazzo tells us that he has been engaged
upon these chapters for some three years, and in addition to his earnest
desire to satisfy the Cardinal-Archbishop he was yet further induced to
employ his pen on the theme of witchcraft owing to what he had person-
ally witnessed and heard at the court of the Serene Duke John William
of Fiilich-Cleves. Owing to the great reputation Guazzo had acquired
throughout the Milanese Archdiocese as being one of the most learned,
most patient and most acute Fudges and Assessors in the prosecutions for
witchcraft, he was summoned in the year 1605 to Cleves to advise and
direct in the case of the Duke himself, who as it was feared and proved
had been overlooked and ensorcelled by an aged Satanist, a warlock
ninety years old, named John, who dwelt at Lauch, in the archdiocese of
Cologne. This wretch confessed that by his charms and certain evil runes
he had indeed afflicted the Duke with a wasting sickness and a frenzy,
whereupon, being guilty in the highest degree, he was, as the law directed,
condemned to the stake. However, in the madness of desperation, as he
lay in prison on Sunday morning, 25 September, with a sharp knife he
inflicted a fearful wound in his throat, and it was said the very find
stood by him in his death throes.

It is not to be wondered at that the whole cohort of witches aimed
their utmost malice at the Duke, for he was very active in the suppression
of that sect throughout his dominions.* Thus on 24 July, 1581, he sent
to the upper bailiff at Vlotho, Bertram von Landsberg, a woman accused
of sorcery and deeply implicated, bidding the officers examine her straitly
“both by gentle means and under torture,” and adding an express
injunction that “in case of her still refusing to confess, she was to be
subjected to trial by water.” It was to Duke John William, his terri-
torial prince, that in 1596 Franz Agricola, pastor of Sittard, a strong
opponent of Weyer, Hermann Neuwaldt, Wilckin, Anton Praetorius, and
the rationalising school, dedicated his “Von Xauberern, Kauberinnen
und Hexen,” in the preface to which pamphlet he very plainly says: “I
know not whether any Catholic writers have hitherto treated this subject
in German, but at any rate the rulers are not yet sufficiently informed as
to the horror and monstrosity of this sin; .. . . so that most scandalous,
dangerous and abominable sin of sorcery and witchcraft has spread in all


* For the witch cutions in the Lower Rhine district see Kuhl’s “‘Geschichte der
Stadt Fiilich,” 3 Teile, Fiilich, 1891-94.


:
7
i
i
‘


—— eo!


—. a —— £e ——_ o <a


: ;


xiv EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION
directions; no country, town, village, or district, no class of society is free
Srom it.”


Lambert Daneau writing in 1574 tells us that in some districts “the
witches are so defiant and audacious that they say openly, if only they
had an eminent and renowned man for their captain they should become
so strong and numerous that they could march against a powerful king in
open battle and easily vanquish him with the help of their arts.” Well
might James I whilst yet he only held his Scottish throne fear the dark
Earl of Bothwell. In later years too the boast of the witches has been
fearfully fulfilled.

Timely indeed was the writing of the “Compendium Maleficarum,”
and necessary. A second edition “Ex Collegii Ambrosini Typographia,”
appeared in 1626. The text here is very considerably amplified by further
examples and the extended discussion of nice theological points. An
exorcism 1s added together with various Benedictions, especially for the
sick, such as the “Modus Curandi Febricitantes.”’

The second work of Guazzo was a Life of Blessed Alberto Besozzo,
one of the earliest of the Ambrosiani, and especially venerated as the
Propagator of the Order, “Vita del Beato Alberto Besozzo,’ Milan,
Nava, gto, 1625. This notable piece was widely esteemed for the elegance
of its style, and brought Guazzo no small increase of reputation as a
skilled hagiographer. The monograph was reprinted by the Milanese
house of Corrada, gto, 1684. In 1643 was issued at Venice Guazzo’s
last book, “‘Il principe perfetto,”’ 12mo.

It has been conjectured that “Il principe perfetto” may be a
posthumous volume, in which case we should date Guazzo’s death “circa”
1640, and it has further been suggested that the dissolution of the
monasteries of the Ambrosiani—a suppression determined some years before
—was purposely delayed until after the demise of so honoured and
Samous a member of that community.

Francesco Maria-Guazzo comes before us as a writer and scholar of
no mean order, In the course of the “Compendium Maleficarum’’ I have
counted quotations from and references to more than two hundred and fifty
authors, and these illustrations are never those of some mere commonplace
book or random excerpts, but pertinent, illuminative, well chosen and
aptly employed. His reading and erudition were prodigious. Steeped in
the lore of Councils and in the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, the
writings of S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Athanasius, S. John
Chrysostom, S. Cyril, Tertullian, Lactantius, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose,


EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION xv


S. Jerome, S. Bernard, S. Peter Damian, Dionysius the Carthusian,
and many other a mighty name are easily familiar to him. With equal
Sacility will he cite Cedrenus and Pontano; Pliny and the Dominican
Silvester; Lucian and Luitprand; Hippocrates and Francesco Mattioli; the
Catholic champion, Bishop Dubravsky of Olmiutz and the Protestant
Philip Camerarius, the son of Melancthon’s partner in the Augsburg
Confession,

Although the “Compendium Maleficarum” was at once accepted as
supremely authoritative by all contemporaries, and later demonologists
have not been slow to commend, apprize, and make final appeal to this
most salutary and excellent treatise—the learned and judicious Sinistrari
manifestly and formally not merely follows but actually paraphrases
entire more than one chapter when discussing dark problems of witchcraft
—it is surprising indeed that Francesco-Maria Guazzo has never generally
achieved the wide renown and high reputation of a Bodin, a Remy, a
Boguet, or a De Lancre. The reason for this no doubt lies in the fact
that these writers were also men of action, each of whom perforce from
his very office and estate stood largely in the public eye, and wrought
zealously for the public weal. Jean Bodin won fame as a politician, a
deputy of the Third Estate to the States-General of Blois, Attorney-
General at Laon; Nicolas Remy for fifteen years held the helm as Privy-
Councillor and chief Fudge in the Duchy of Lorraine; Boguet was
“Grand Fuge de St. Claude au Comte de Bourgogne”; Pierre De Lancre,
the wealthy magistrate of Bordeaux, served as Commissioner Extraordinary
in the witch trials of Labourd. Francesco-Maria Guazzo remained but a
humble friar, the subject of an obscure and solitary Congregation.

And yet the “‘Compendium Maleficarum”* is a treatise of no less
value and importance than the famous ‘‘Démonomanie des sorciers’’ and
the “Tableau de Vinconstance des mauvais anges et démons.”’ Guazzo
analyses and describes as perhaps no other demonologist has set out with
equal conciseness and clarity the whole practice and profession of
witchcraft. Although never sparing of illustration and detail he does not
indeed draw examples from the trials of those whom he had examined
and judged as do Boguet and De Lancre, a feature which lends their
work an especial and personal value, but the “Compendium Maleficarum”
may be taken to be in some sort a complementary volume, an essential
text-book of the subject, as it were, a tractate which probes and proves
every circumstance of Satanism and sorcery.


* Curiously enough there is no mention of the book either in Graese or Brunet,
b


jin


Xvi EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION


To the historian, to the occult student, Guazzo’s work is of incalculable
worth, and it is not too much to say that he can pretend to little knowledge
of that evil Society and their horrid devices who is not intimately
conversant with these pages. It will be found moreover that not the least
valuable of these chapters are those which treat “De Remediis Diuinis,”
and in particular the sections “De Eucharistia,’ “De S: igno Sanctae
Crucis,” and “Auxilium singulare Beatae Mariae Virginis,” per Quam,
ut ait Bernardus, Deus nos uoluit totum habere.


MONTAGUE SUMMERS.
In Festo B.M.V. Diuini Pastoris Matris, 1929.


b
FOREWORD


LTHOUGH the “Compendium Maleficarum,” both from the
Ae learning of the author and the scientific precision
of his details, must rank as one of the most important of all
Witchcraft Manuals, not only—largely owing to his severe concentration
of thought and expression and the many technicalities—is the original
Latin more than ordinarily difficult, but Guazzo was ill-served both i
1608 and in 1626 by his printers, for these two (which are the only)
editions of the book are marred by a superabundance of most riddling
typographical errors. Indeed before the work could be well rendered into
English I found that it was necessary to prepare something like a
definitive recension of the text, a preliminary which, if mechanical
enough, has cost me no little time and labour.

To write a full excursus upon the “Compendium Maleficarum,”
giving further and later examples of the many ill observances and devices
of witchcraft, the transvection of the sorcerers to their rendezvous, the
abominations of the Sabbat, the worship of the demon, the pledges of
diabolical servitude, the “osculum infame,” the revelry, the dances, the
lewdness of the Incubus and the Succubus, the malice and evil charms of
Satanists, all of which and many more black secrets of goety Guazzo
has so amply and so authoritatively displayed, would be to pen a second
“History of Witchcraft,” another volume as copious and as detailed as
the “Compendium” itself. However interesting and useful it would have
proved to afford modern instances of the continued practices of this horrid
Society I have judged it best to reserve so extensive a relation for a
separate occasion, and therefore I have furnished this work of Guazzo
with a minimum of annotation. Even so I am very well aware that in the
glosses will be found information some may perhaps deem superfluous.
On the other hand I am constantly being requested to illustrate these
manuals of the demonologists by far more extensive commentaries than my
wont, so that in fine it is, I fear, not possible entirely to satisfy every
student and reader. In the present case I frankly acknowledge that on


xvii


dhs


xviii FOREWORD


account of practical limitations of space, if for no other reason, I have
felt obliged entirely to pass over no small number of points concerning
which I was minded to write something fully, as also was it necessary
Sor me to treat with economy other details not unworthy of closer
investigation.

T. the most learned Prefect of the Ambrosian Library, Monsi
Professore Giovanni Galbiati, I am greatly indebted for the trouble and
pains he has so generously bestowed on my behalf in making very particular
researches concerning Francesco-Maria Guazzo and in communicating to
me important bibliographical and historical details of the Ambrosiani.

My best thanks are due to Dr. H. T. Norman, not only for the loan
of many rare pieces on witchcraft from among the treasures of his
library, but also for the very real and inspiring interest he has so
cordially taken in the present series.


MONTAGUE SUMMERS.


TABLE


DEDICATION
PREFACE TO THE READER
EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION
FOREWORD


OF CONTENTS


eR Rey


THE FIRST BOOK


PAGE
Be 1 The Nature and Extent of CH,


1x Whether the Devil can


the Force of Imagination 1 Truly Enrich His Sub-
cu. w Of Artificial Magic 3 sen
cH, wt Whether this Magic can 4 — Saraengge
Ss produce True Effects 7 Living Thing
_— ex. =v That Witches Effect their
Marvels with the Help cH. x1 Whether there Truly are
of the Devil 9 Incubus and Succubus
Devils; and Whether
cH. v The Menof Old Accredi- Children can be Gener-
ted Witches with Mar- ated by Copulation with
vellous Deeds II Them
cat, vi Of the Witches? Pact witty gy en
the Devil 13 Really Transported
cu, vit By their Terrible Deeds Srom Place to Place to
and Imprecations Wit- their Nightly Assem-
ches Produce Rain and blies
Pan he "9 cu. xu Whether Witches can
/ cu. va The Power of Witches over Transmute Bodies from
External Things 22 One Form to Another
xix


a


PAGE


25


28


30


33


50


xx CONTENTS


cu. xiv Whether Witches have \ cut. xvit Whether the Spirits of the“
Power to Make Beasts %- Dead can Appear to
Talk 53 Men 59
‘ cH. Xv Whether the Devil can oe
Make Men Insensible me EVE -CF epee fee:
to Torture 55 sep DB corded 73
cH. xv1 Whetherby Witchcraftand cH. xix That Cacodemons Exercise
Devil’s Work the Sexes their Magic Powers of
can be Interchanged 57 their Own Will 80
THE SECOND BOOK
DEALING WITH THE VARIOUS KINDS OF WITCHCRAFT,
AND CERTAIN OTHER MATTERS WHICH
SHOULD BE KNOWN
e\ee\)’
1 Of Soporific Spells 83 cH. x1 Witches Use something of
Religion in Heali
cH. Witches use Human Corp- Shines aes 123 —
ses for the Murder of
Men 88 cH. xm Threatening or Beating
_. CH. wt Of Witches’ Poisons go cin of = oe
cH. Vv Of Tying the Points gI the Spells cast by Them rp
cH. v Of Incendiary Witchcraft ss » cH. xu After the Many Blasphe-
mies Committed by
cH. vi The Devil Wishes to Per- Witches, the Demon at
petuate the Race of x last Tries to Induce
Witches we them to Kill Themselves
} cH. vit Of the Various Ways by with Their Own Hands 129
which Witches Vent cu. xv Upon Those who have
fieir Spite aan: the once Fallen into his
Human Race 98 Power the Devil keeps a
cH. vit Of the Different Diseases boa ”*, Tir.
Brought by Demons 105 when They s ;
\ tured before Their
cH. 1x Why God Permits the y Judges, or in Holy
Devil so to Busy Him- \\ y Places, or wherever +
self with Witchcraft hw They may Be ,
cH. xX The Laws Observed by cu. xv A Summary in a Few
e Witches in Causing and "Words of All the


in Curing Sickness 121 Crimes of Witches 135


CONTENTS xxi


cH. xvi The Devil Deceives and" cH. xvi Of the Trial by Single
Seduces by means of Combat 149
False Revelations or :
at cH. xix Of Vulgar Purgation b
Apparitions 136 Pb 8 151


cu. xvit Of the Appeal to God 147 GH. (xx) Of Superstitious Folk 160


THE THIRD BOOK


TREATING OF THE DIVINE REMEDIES FOR THOSE WHO
ARE BEWITCHED, AND OF CERTAIN
OTHER MATTERS


cu. 1 Whether it is Lawful to Re- cH. m1 Recent Examples of the
move a Spell in Order to Mercy of God and the
Heal One thatis Bewitched 163 Tyranny of the Devil 171
cH. 1 How to Distinguish De-
moniacs and Those who cu. 1v Of Divine and Supernatural
are Simply Bewitched 167 Remedies 177


EE


COMPENDIUM
MALEFICARUM


BOOK I * CHAPTER I
The Nature and Extent of the Force of Imagination.


ARGUMENT.


ANY authors have written

at length concerning the

force of imagination: for

example Pico della Miran-

dola,* De Imaginationibus; Marsilio
Ficino,t, De Theologia Platonica, Book
135 onso Tostado,t On Genesis,
apter 30; Miguel de Medina,§ De


Miranila 1-144. Thee or mane
in 1463-1 @ are many edi-
tions of his oud orks: Bologna, 1496;
Venice, 7498 Strasburg, 1504; Basle, 1557;
1573; 1601.

% “Marsilio Ficino.” 1493-1499. “‘Theo-
logia Platonica de animarum Immortalitate,”


his most i work, was pub-
lished at Florence 1482.
ye Tostado.” Circa 1400-1455. A


Janet exegele often


Venice, 1728.

§ “Mi; de Medina.” 1489-1578. A
ptor gs ranciscan, esteemed Op nie poy
tos? distiapuiehell theclagions of Ii
‘Annales Ordinis Minorum,” xix, xxi.

B


Recta in Deum Fide, U1, 7; Leonard
Vair,|| De Fascino, II, 3; and count-
less others. are agreed that the
imagination is a most potent force;
and both by argument and by ex-
perience they prove that a man’s
own body may be most extensively
affected by his imagination. For they
argue that as the imagination examines
the i of objects perceived by the
senses, it excites in the appetitive
faculty either fear or shame or anger
or sorrow; and these emotions so
affect a man with heat or cold that
his body either grows pale or reddens,
and he consequently mes joyful
and exultant, or torpid and dejected.
Therefore S. Thomas (Contra Gent.
III, 103) has well said that a man’s
body can be affected by his imagina-
tion in every way which is naturally
correspondent with the imaginative
faculty, such as local motion in those


~ ll ps ae Vair.” a at ro of
panis cent, c. 1540; Bishop of Pozzuolt,
clhere he died ia: see iis
Libri III, Paris, 1583; Venetiis apud Aldum,
1589, is a work of singular erudition.


EE ———————


2 COMPENDIUM


who are asleep: but that his other
bodily dispositions which bear no
natural relation with the imagination
cannot be so affected ; so that imagina-
tion cannot, for example, cause any
man to add one cubit to his stature.
The argument is proved also by the
daily experience of sleep-walkers who
do wonderful things in their sleep:
for it is agreed that such things are
done through the power of imagina-
tion while the senses are asleep. y
such matters are di Martin
Delrio,* Disquisitiones Magicae, Quaest.


> 3


*


Examples.


MARTIN DELRIOf tells of what
happened at a monastery at Liége a
few years ago. There was a certain
lay brother whose duty it was during.
the day to teach the rudiments
the Catechism to a class of boys:
and when he slept his thoughts were
occupied with the same subject, so
that he used ee se a oe eens
encouraging sco as
loudly and fervently as he did when
he was awake; and in this way he
disturbed the won tag those near him.
Another lay brother who slept next
to him often complained to him about
it; and one day he jokingly threatened
that, if he made that noise again, he
ek uP in the night and go to
his and beat him with a rope
whip. And what did Gundislaus, as


* “Martin Delrio.”” This famous Jesuit
scholar was born at Antwerp, 17 May, 1551,
and died at Louvain, 19 October, 1608. His
— aedic “‘Disquisitionum Magicarum

i Sex,” 3 a 1599; was frequently
reprinted. Of these the folio, 1603, Mainz, 1s
among the most highly esteemed. It is some-
times said that the edition of Delrio’s
work was Mainz, 1593, but this folio is a
mere myth.

} **Delrio.”” “‘Disquisitiones Magicae,”
Il, q. 3.


BK. I, CH. I.


his name was, do? In the middle of
the night he arose in his sleep and
went been his bed to his fellow’s
cubicle with a pair of scissors in his
hand which he pointed straight at
the bed of the other who had threat-
ened him, But see the providence of
God! The moon was shining, and the
night was clear and cloudless; so that
the brother, who was awake, saw him
coming and at once threw himself
from the bed on that side where the
partition was farthest removed. The
sh came up to the bed and
stabbed the mattress three or four
times with the scissors, and quickly
went back where he came from. In
the morning he was questioned, and
said that he remembered nothing of
it, adding that he had never had the
least oe of doing such a thing;
but that he had only contemplated
frightening that brother and driving
approached him with a whip.

wo Saga were travelling to-
gether back to their own country and
came one day to a town where one of
them had an acquaintance with whom
he lodged, while the other went to an
inn for the night, intending to resume
their journey the next day. But while
his guest was sleeping the innkeeper,
conceivi a greedy esire to take his
money, him; and having done
so ae to think how he could
smuggle the body out of the town to


t‘‘Two friends.” This history is very
famous in English literature as having begn in-
into the Nonne Phhestes


b
Tale of the Cok and Hen, Chauntecleer and
Pertelote. Guazzo had it from Cicero, “De
Diuinatione,” I, 27. It is also related
Valerius Maximus, I, 7 (‘De Somniis’’),
where Warton wrongly that Chaucer
had found it. But it is plain that Cicero was
the author to whom er refers, since in
peer ag eeg are Lae saga oSen on
poet gives, but in a c
order and notes before the second narrative:


And certes, in the same book I rede,
Right in the nexte chapitre after this . . .


\


BK. I. CH, Il,


bury it. The same night the murdered
man appeared in a dream to his com-
ion who was soning in his friend’s
ouse, and said: ‘‘My friend, my
friend, help me; for the i
means to kill me.” An hour or two
later he appeared again, saying: “Ah,
my friend, you did not help me; and
behold, the cruel innkeeper has de-
stroyed me.” A little later on the
same night he came the third time in
his dream, and said: “My friend, you
did not help me to escape from my
murderer’s hands, and now I am
lying dead. And the murderer is con-
sidering how to di of and bury
my body in the outside the
town walls; and already he has hidden
it in a cart-load of dung. I beg you,
as you love me, not to allow this, but
at least to see to it that I go to my
burial in an honourable and befitting
manner.” In the morning the man
awoke and, terrified by his dream
went to look for his friend. He asked
the innkeeper : ‘‘Where is my friend?”
He answered, in the words of Cain:
“Am I his keeper? He arose and went
away, taking his belongings with him.
I do not know where he went.” The
friend stood for a while in doubt what
he should do: but meanwhile he saw
in the yard a cart laden with dung.
The unhappy man was then stru
with the vision he had seen in his
imagination and, since he could not
find his friend, quietly thought the
matter over with himself. He waited
some time to see whether his friend
would come back; and when he did
not return, he said that perhaps he
had started on his journey, and


added; “‘Good-bye then: if my friend
comes, say that I have gone on, and
tell him to follow me.” He then went


ky to the mayor and told what
had happened to his friend, mention-
ing the load of d and adding


other information. The
mayor sent his ofhcers, who stood at
a di ce and watched what the


innkeeper would do. The murderer,
thinking that all was safe since the


MALEFICARUM 3


dead man’s friend had gone away,
started off with his cart to go out of
the town. Seeing this the officers ran
up and said: ‘‘Where are you off to,
my good fellow, and what is this dung
for? We =~ see ordered to —
possession of it.” overturning the
cart they found the murdered man
lying amidst the dung. The murderer
was taken, and met with the terrible
punishment which his crime deserved.


x


CHAPTER II,
Of Artificial Magic.
Argument

Macc is of two kinds, natural

and artificial. Natural or legiti-
mate magic was, together with all
other knowledge, a gift from God to
Adam, who by peopling the world
handed it down to posterity. This, as
Psellus* (De Daemonibus) and Proclus ¢
(De Magia) have noted, is no more
than a more exact knowledge of the
secrets of Nature, which by observing
the courses and influence of the stars
in the heavens, and the sympathies
and antipathies subsisting between


separate things, compares one we
with another and 6" itech marv


* “Psellus.”” Michael Constantine Psellus,
roz0-1110 (Caillet); or ¢. ror8-c. 1078
(Adrian Fortescue), the celebrated Byzantine
philosopher, attained a vast reputation at Con-
stantinople, and even now Krumbacher, “By-
zantinische Litteraturgesch.”” (2nd ed., Munich,
1897), regards him as “the first man of his
time.”’ At Paris, 1615, was published the
***De Operatione Demonum’ Dialogus Gil-
bertus Gaulminus Molinensis primus Grace
edidit et notis illustrauit.”’

t ‘““Proclus.”’ Born at Constantinople, gro;
died at Athens, 485. ‘The scholastic of Ka
Platonism.” His writings were collected by
Cousin, “‘Procli Opera,” Paris, 1820-25.


4 COMPENDIUM


which to the ignorant seem to be
miracles or illusions. As when Tobias
dispersed his father’s blindness with
the gall bladder of a fish, a virtue
which Galen and many others attri-
bute to the dragonet.* Also the sound
of a drum made from a wolf’s skin
will burst a drum made from the skin
of a lamb. Many other notable
examples are mentioned by S. one
tine :} such as the peacock’s flesh which
cannot decompose; chaff which by
its coldness preserves snow, and by
its heat ripens fruit; a chalk which is
set on fire by water, but will not burn
if oil be poured upon it; the salt of
Girgenti which melts in fire, but
becomes hard and sprees in water;
and many other such things.

The other kind is artificial magic,
which effects marvels by means of
human skill. This again is two-fold,
Mathematic and Prestidigital. Mathe-
matical magic involves the principles of
Geometry, Arithmetic or Astronomy :
and examples of this are the setting
fire to the ships at the siege of Syra-
cuse ¢{ by means of mirrors; the flying
wooden doves of Archytas § of Taren-


oe onet.”” Cf. Pliny, “Historia Natur-
alis,’ XXXII, 7: “‘Calltonymi fel cicatrices
sanat, et carnes oculorum superuacuas consu-
mit.”


*§. Augustine.” “De Ciuitate Dei,”
XXI, 4, 5, and 6. “A chalk which is set on
fire by water,” ““Eam uiuam calcem loquimur,”
t.e. “quicklime.” “The salt of ah 3X Cf.
Pliny, san ial) en ba XXI, 7:
*‘Aorigentinus (sal) ignium patiens ex aqua
ee Tice & robected by*Solinus, “Paly-
historia,’ XI; and S. Isidore “‘Etymologiae,”
XVI, 2, 4.

+ “Siege of Syracuse.” Syracuse was me
tured 2 gronae Mie R in mg i
story 0 urning © ‘oman fleet
reflected rays of the sun, a device said to be
due to the genius of Archimedes, is not found
in Plutarch, Polybius, or Livy. It is first men-
tioned by Galen, “De Temp.” Ill, 2; and
Lucian, “Hipp.” II, 2. In fuller detail it is
recorded by Foannes Tzetzes, ““Chiliades,” II,


103, $qq-
¢Grchytas.” He probably lived about


BK.I. CH, I.


tum; the golden singing birds || of the
Emperor ; and such matters. Yet
we affirm that by this means nothing
can be effected which is op to
the nature of things, but rather that
it necessarily requires the help of
natural causes and the correct appli-
cation of certain movements and
dimensions. The other sort, which


any art is of itself good. But it may
happen to become unlawful: first,
when it is done for an evil purpose ;
second, when it gives rise to scandal,
being thought to be done with the
help of demons; third, when it in-
volves any spiritual or bodily danger
to the conjurer or the spectators. And
it must be noted that, for every ten
tricks of prestidigital illusion, these
men perform one of pure sleight of
hand, so as to foster the belief that
there is no illusion or sorcery in any-


B.c. Our chief authority for the little
cat of his life is Diogenes Laertius, VIII,


|| “Golden singing birds.” “When _ the
Crusaders came their grey castles to Con-
stantinople, they were dazzled by the magnifi-
cence they saw at the Emperor's Court.
told, when they came back, almost fabulous
tales of the wonders they had seen, the costl
toys, golden lions that roared, trees of senate
where seer birds ee al wings and
sang, thrones of ivory and sheets o Kv
Fortescue, Phe Orthodox pohly x44
Part I, chapter 3.

q “Bel.” “Daniel” xiv.


BK. I. CH. I.


thing that they do, but that all is
done eee ill and dexterity.
Ulricus Molitor* states that the devil
is able to make one thing seem as if
it were another; and Nider ¢ tells us
that many other tricks are i
by conjurers. For this prestidigital
art was taught by the giant demons
before the Flood, and from them
Ham ¢ learned it, and from him the
Egyptians, then the Chaldaeans and
ere sre i in me dV) 6 Ss.
ement in hi gnitions says:
Zoroaster was the first of the Chal-
daeans, and he was struck by light-
ning as a fit reward for his deeds.


5


Examples.


A certain virgin of Cologne was
said to have performed in the pres-
ence of the nobles wonders which
seemed to be due to magic art: for
she was said to have torn up a nap-
kin, and suddenly to have pieced it
together again before the eyes of all;
she threw a glass vessel against the


* “Ulricus Molitor.” A learned lawyer of
Constance, who being consulted by Sigismund
of Austria on various problems of witchcraft
published in January, 1489, his famous trea-
tise ““De lanits [sic] et phitonicis mulieribus.””


Molitor died in 1492.
_ t ““Nider.” Jean Nider, O.P., prior of the
important Dominican house at Basle, in-


oo and Rector As the University of Vienna,
fe died in 1438. Hts work is very famous and
there are constant appeals to his rity. The
edition of the ‘‘Formicarius” (or “‘Formicar-
ium”) which I have used is that of Douai,


1602.

¢ “‘Ham.” Cf. “‘Malleus Maleficarum,”
Part I, tion 2: “Vincent of Beauvais in
his ‘Spe historiale,’ quoting many learned
authorities, says that he who first practised the
arts of magic and Zy was Loroaster,
who is said to have been Cham (Ham), the son
of Noe.” This tradition is very frequently


‘ound. See note on above ge in my
translation i the ‘‘Malleus Maleficarum”’ (.
15), John , 1928,


MALEFICARUM 5


wall and broke it, and in a moment
mended it again; and other like
things she did. She escaped from the
hands of the Inquisition with a
sentence of excommunication.

From the same source we hear of a
conjurer in France named Trois

elles,§ who in the sight of all and
in the presence of Charles IX, called
the Praiseworthy King, charmed from
a certain nobleman standing at a
distance from him the rings of his
necklace, so that flew one by
one into his hand, as it seemed; and
yet the necklace was soon found to be
whole and uninjured. This man was
convicted of many actions which
could not have been due to human
art or skill or es natural cause, and
confessed that they were all devil’s
work, although he had obstinately
denied this before.

John Trithemius |! tells that much
earlier, in the year 876 during the
time of the Emperor Louis,{] a certain
Zedechias, a Jew by religion and a
physician by profession, worked won-
ders in the presence of Princes. For
he appeared to devour a cart loaded
with straw, together with the horses
and the driver; he used to cut off
men’s heads and hands and feet, and
exhibit them in a bowl dripping with
blood, and then suddenly he would
restore the men unharmed each to his
own place; and in mid-winter he
dese Be Caesar’s palace a most
beautiful garden, with trees, .
flowers, and the singing of iadeatt
produced birds.


Siete eM teherefs by te see Koa
Geo, of Witchcraft,” by Montague Sum-
orn 4 pp. and 426, Also Bodin,
““Demonomanie”’ (ed. Lyons, 1593), Ill, 5,
bp. 329-30; IV, 4, pp. 421-2; > 5s


_ PFohn Trithemius.”” The famous Bene-
dictine abbot was eh at sce ena I 8
ruary, 1462; and died at Wiirzburg, 13 De-
oe: Lass

“Louis.” Louis le tag 8 third son
of Louis le Debonnaire, born 806; died 876.


6 COMPENDIUM BK. I, CH. Il,


Thomas Fazelli, O.P.,* relates in his
De rebus Siculis, Decade II. v. 2 (also
Dec. I. iii. 1) wonders of a certain
Diodorus, commonly known as Lio-
dorus, who was endowed with ic
art and flourished at Catania by
means of his marvellous skill in illu-
sions. This man, by the force of his
incantations, appeared to change men
into brute beasts, to effect a meta-
morphosis of nearly all things into
new shapes, and instantly to bring
to himself objects very far distant
from him. Moreover by slandering
and insulting and reviling the C
of Catania he bound them with such
vain credulity that he incited them
Hecsed up cs be onioned arch condi
iv up to i wi
by means of his pre-eminent skill in
incantations he had himself i
out of his saree hands through the
air from Catania to Byzantium, to
which Sicily was then subject, and
back again from Byzantium to Catania
in a very short space of time. And
the people so wondered at this magic
that they thought there was some
divine power in him, and in sacri-
legious error began to worship him,
At length Leo, the Bishop of Catani
received a sudden power from
and in the midst of the city caused
him to be cast in the sight of all into


* “Thomas Fazelli, O.P.”’ This famous
historian, one of the glories of the Dominican
Order, was born in 1498 at Sacca, a town of
Sicily, not far from Palermo, where whilst yet
young he joined the famous Priory of San Dome-
nico. “In omni scientiarum genere excelluit.
Orator enim euasit, poeta, philosophus, theolo-
gus Patauii laureatus.”” Thus the old bio-
gr . Amongst the works of Thomas Faz-
elli the most important are: the posthumous
“Thesaurum Antiquitatum et Historiarum
Siciltarium,” Tomt x, 1579, and the history
which is quoted here, ‘‘De rebus Siculis de-
cades duo,” “‘nunc primum in lucem edita,”
Panormi, folio, 1558. This was soon trans-
lated into Italian. Fra Fazelli died at the
Palermo convent, 8 April, 1570. For fuller
details see Quétif-Echard, “‘Scriptores Ordinis
Praedicatorum,” vol. II, pp. 212-13.


a furnace of fire, in which he was
burned. In this way divine justice
prevailed; for he who had escaped
death at the too lenient hands of the
judges, could not escape from the
hands of the Holy Man.

In our own times they say that one
Cesare, a Maltese, was See by
the Parisians, but cunningly escaped
from prison; and this, among other
charges, was brought up against him
in judgement ae the Inquisitor.
But as he was being exhorted to fear
damnation, and the Governor of that
time had required the Ecclesiastical
1 s to preside over the enquiry,

¢ broke away into the midst of the
Court and there began to do many
fresh marvels. He caused another
n to hold magic cards in his
ands, and standing at a distance he
altered their appearance two or three
times: he charmed to himself vessels
says on another part of the table
merely moving a small piece of

glass : at times he divined the thoughts
of others, as when he scattered on the
table a great number of small grains
of sugar, and told each man which
grain he was thinking of; and even if
any one was doubtful of his choice, he
would then come to a decision after a
little hesitation, boasting that he had
long before known which they would
choose: and many other such marvels
he claimed to perform. Wherefore he
was a third time called to trial by the
illustrious Archbishop of Malines, the
learned Hovius,t in the year 1600 ; and
though he undertook to appear, he
escaped to a refuge with a Prince who
was the chief champion of Antichrist.


“‘Hovius.”” Matthias Hovius was con-
secrated Bishop of Malines, 18 February,
1596; died 30 May, 1620. This great pre-
late, “‘qui coaeuos omnes et discendi celerttate


BK. I. CH, It.


This Prince who unlawfully kept the
conjurer from the Judge’s authority
hardly lived two years longer, but
died in the prime of his life ; and after
— un i the defence of _
cause nothing prospered in
Fo paces ° From this it is clear that
never leaves unpunished those
Princes who defend enemies; for
He has expressly commanded : “Thou
shalt not suffer a witch to live”
(Exodus xxii, 18).


*


CHAPTER Ill
Whether this Magic can produce True
Efects


Argument

NY man who maintained that

all the effects of ic were true,

or who believed that they were all
illusions, would be rather a radish
than a man. Most often the devil,
being the father of lies, deceives us
on blinds onF eyes Rs mocks our
other senses with vain illusory es:
and not seldom God taeaiaee ime
from achieving on behalf of witches
what he would and could truly essay ;
and when he sees that this is so he has
recourse to glamours, so that his im-
potence may not be perceived. But
when permits it, and the devil
wishes to produce a true effect, pro-
vided ast - does pa hs his
power, n there is nothing to pre-
vent him from ing a genuine
result; for he then applies active to
passive principles, and natural causes
Fa aor a true effect. Dionysius of
Athens (De Diuinis Nominibus, IV.)
roves this when he affirms that the
Bevil did not, in sinning, lose his
natural gifts, so that he has the eatest
natural strength together with age-
long and unlimited experience to
enable him to produce a true effect
when he desired. But witches’ works are
illusions, not real but apparent. This


MALEFICARUM ‘j


is shown by Sa ha where he speaks


of the Egyptian cians who seemed
to do as did, and says: “They
indeed changed their rods into ser-


pents, but the rod of Moses swallowed
their rods. And they also changed the
water into blood, but once it had been
changed, they could not restore it to
its former state. They brought forth
frogs also, but they were unable to
rotect the houses of the Egyptians
them. They had power to plague
the Egyptians, but they had no power
to ease their afflictions. Rather di
God afflict the magicians with the
same boils and blains as the rest of
the le suffered; that it might be
shown that not only were they unable
to avert the divine punishment, but
they must themselves partake of it.”


*


Examples.


We read that the sorcerer Pasetes
by means of certain enchantments
caused a sumptuous feast to appear,
and again he made all vanish at his
pleasure. He used also to buy thin
and count out the price, and shortly
the money would be found to have
passed back secretly from the seller
to the buyer. In S, Clement of Rome
we also read much concerning Simon

: that he made a new man out
of air, whom he could render invisible
at will; that he could pierce stones as
if they were clay; that he brought
statues to life; that when cast into the
fire he was not burned; that he had
two faces like another Janus; that he
could himself into a ram or a
oie c cate the air; that he
sui uced a great quantity
of gold; Eee could set up kings
and cast them down; that he com-


* “Glycas.” Michael Glycas, Byzantine
historian. His “Annals” commence with the
Creation and conclude with the death of Alexis
I, Commenus, 1118. Editions; Bekker, Bonn,
1836; Migne, Paris, 1866.


8 COMPENDIUM


manded a scythe to go and reap of
itself, and that it went and reaped ten
times as much as the others; and that
when a certain harlot named Selene
was in a tower, and a great crowd had
run to see her and had entirely sur-
rounded that tower, he caused her to
appear simultaneously at all the win-
dows and exhibit herself to all the
people.

Anastasius * of Nicaea says: “Simon
Magus made statues walk, and when
thrown into the fire he did not burn,
and he flew in the air, and made
bread from stones. He him-
self into the form of a t and
other beasts; he had two faces: he
was changed into gold; he would
cause all sorts of spectres to appear at
feasts; he caused many shades to go
before him, which he said were the
souls of the departed; he made the
vessels in a house move as though of
their own accord with apparently
none to = 24 them.”

wrapag es ravsky ¢ of Olmiitz tells
that a Bohemian sorcerer Zytot ex-


* “Anastasius.” A theologian and exegete
of the sixth . The reference is to his
In Sacra scriptura,” q. xxiti.


t+ “Bishop Dubravsky.” P has Dubravsky,
Bishop of Olmiitz, was great Catholi
champion of the sixteenth century, who refuted
Speratus, Hubmaier, Huter, Socinus and other
sectaries. His various writings include five
books on piscatology; the work entitled “Ueber
das heilige Messopfer”; and the thirty-three
volumes of his monumental History of Bo-
hemia, present reference is to Book XXIII
of this work.

t <a the favourite magician of the Em-
peror Wenceslas, and upon the occasion of the
Bavaria, ts said to have far outexcelled in his
art all the warlocks and conjurers of the land.
His feats are recorded in not a few chronicles:
¢.g. Concil. Pragens. anno 1355) c. 61 (Hartz-
heim, IV, goo); Hofler, “Prager Concilien,”
p. 2 (Statuta breuia Arnesti anno 1953) ;
naldus, anno 1400, No. 14. Most of these
tricks—the sprouting of antlers on the heads
of persons looking
of straw sold as pigs


iage of this latter in 1389 with So, hia of


ugh a window; fardels
and sinking in running


BK. I. CH. It.
hibited his skill now in his own appear-
ance and form, and now under that
of another; also that he appeared
before the King in purple and silk
which suddenly changed to sordi

woollen rags ; and that he walked upon
the ground as if he were sailing over
water. Sometimes he would drive in a
four-wheeled coach drawn by cocks.
He used also to make sport in many


ways with the King’s guests; some-
times causing them to be unable to
reach their hands to the dishes, by


changing their hands into the hooves
of oxen or horses; and sometimes he
fixed spreading stag’s antlers to their
foreheads when they looked out at
window at some passing spectacle, so
that they ne as draw owed heads
in again. He made t out
of bundles of straw an drome them
toa certain rich baker named Michael,
saying that he might buy them at his
own price; only he warned the buyer
not to drive his new herd to the river
to water. The baker took no notice of
the ing, and saw his pigs sink
into the water while bundles of straw
floated on the : he then sought
out the seller and at last found him
in a tavern lying stretched out on a
bench; and when he angrily tried to
stir him by ‘rag od one of his legs,
Zyto caused his foot and leg to come
away in the other’s hand. Zyto then
loudly complained and, seizing him
by the throat, had him taken before
the Judge. The baker seemed to have
been caught in a manifest crime, and
suffered punishment in addition to
his loss. For this power of sorcerers to
throw off their limbs, see Pliny, Books
25, 26 and 28, and Aulus Gellius,
Book 10, chapter 12.


water (fatal to sorcery); the leg coming away
pw |; passed ua common folk lore


books, being attributed to con-


Ray- jurer of popular renown. These three illusions


are introduced in Marlowe's ““Dr. Faustus,”
gto, 1604.
*


BK. I. CH. IV. MALEFICARUM 9
CHAPTER IV conjurer ras — a to be

; : r a serpent. But for a better understand-

That Witches Effect their Marvels with ing of this it must be known that the
the Help of the Devil devil deceives our senses in many
Argument different ways. First when he wholly


HE demon can effect the most
rapid local movement of bodies,

so that he can withdraw an object
from sight and substitute another so
quickly that he deludes the under-
sanding oy the eyes of the onlookers
into a belief that the first object has
been changed into the second. We
must believe that the metamorphoses
of the heathen were of this sort; such
as the ecg a as of ped
companions into birds, an phi-
into a hind, as S, Augustine *
observes. These deceptions were cx-
by Astirius also, whose deeds

were saved from oblivion by Eusebius.
We must, then, consider marvels as
of two kinds. The first is when the
effect is not due to any local motion
and is beyond the sphere of applied
natural causes, as, for example, the
raisin i of the dead or the healing of
true blindness; for in such there is
always some glamour or deception.
The other is when a visible object
suddenly vanishes; and this is due to
some prestidigital contrivance. An
example of the first is when a sorcerer
places in a room a bow made of
a certain wood, and an arrow of
another wood, and a string of a cer-
tain material, and shoots the arrow
and causes a river to appear in the
lace as wide as the length of the
w shot: of the second, when a horse
appears to be torn in pieces, and then
is found to be whole. Of the same sort
is that trick mentioned by Nicctas,} to
which we shall refer later, in which a


* “S, Augustine.” “De Ciuitate Dei,”
XVII, 18.

+ “Nicetas.” Acominatus, also called Cho-
niates s (from his birthplace Chonae in Phrygia).


He ranks among the most important Byzantine


tions by Be hd os st wah aa noth edi-
tions jonn, 1835; by Migne, Paris,
1865. “Annales,” IV, 23. :


or in part hides from our eyes an
object which is present. Secondly,
when he so affects the medium of our
vision that an object seen through it
seems different from what it is: as
when salt is mixed with acid and a
linen cloth soaked in it, if that cloth
be lighted at a candle the faces of
those present will assume a ghastly
appearance; or if a candle e from
an ass’s semen and wax be lighted, all
those present appear to have asses’
heads. Thirdly, when the vapours of
the intermediate air are thickened and
so it ap that a cock is drawing
along a when it is really only
a straw. Fourthly, when objects seem
to move through the air, as trees
appear to sailors to move along
together with their ship. Fifthly, when
there is shown to the onlookers an
aerial or a fantastic body similar to that
which they suppose it to be. Sixthly,
by a swift agitation or a sudden con-
cealment of visible objects, and by
various secret arrangements and divis-
ions of them, as conjurers do with
strings and little balls, etc. Seventhly,
if the bodily humours be agitated or
disturbed things appear to be differ-
ent from what they are, as henner to
drunkards and madmen. Finally, I say
that the devil can so compound and
arrange fantasms that even when a
man may be said to be awake he is as
one who sleeps, and thinks he sees
what he does not see, according to
Gaetani,f{ 2. 2, q. 95, artic. 3.


‘“‘Gaetani.”” Tomaso de Vio Gaetani,
Dominican Cardinal, philosopher, theologian,
and exegele, 1409 153: . His Commentaries
on the “Summa” of S. are recognised
as a classic of s ic literature, were
by order of Leo XIII incorporated in the
official Leonine edition of the works of S.

, of which the first volume appeared at
Rome in 1882.


10 COMPENDIUM


Examples.


At Caesarea Philippi, which the
Phoenicians call Paneas, it is said that
at a certain Festival of the Heathen a
woman was solemnly sacrificed and
thrown into the spring which there
arises from the base of Mount Paneus,
from which the Jordan is said to flow:
and this woman, through the potent
might of the demon, vanished in a
wonderful manner from their eyes so
that they thought that a memorable
miracle had been performed. On one
occasion Astirius chanced to be pres-
ent while this was being done and
secing so many pk dumbfounded
with wonder at thi ox he had pity
on their ignorance and, raising his
~ to heaven, prayed God the Ruler

all through the mediation of Christ
to restrain from his deception that
demon who had so blinded the people
with error, and to prevent him from
those illusions with which he used to
mock them. When he had thus prayed
to God, the victim suddenly appeared
floating on the water; and this matter
which had caused so great wonder
came to nothing, so that thereafter
the like was no more practised in that

ace.

Michael Sicidites looked from a high
place in the Palace of Constantinople
and saw a ship laden with pots and
dishes ; and by a magic spell he caused
the captain to rise and start beati
those dishes until they were redu
to i psee Soon, when his blindness
had passed, the wretched man tore
his beard and to utter loud
lamentations : and when he was asked
why he had treated his merchandise in
that manner, he sorrowfully answered
that, while he was intent upon his
oars, he saw a horrible serpent
stretched upon the dishes and glaring
at him as if it were about to devour
him, and that it had not ceased from
its twistings and contortions until all
the dishes were broken.

Hear another example which is so


BK. I. CH. IV.


well told and instructive that I cannot
refrain from relating it.

In the time of Sigismund I,* King
of Poland, Jacob Melstinch, the Mayor
of the town of Brezinium, was induced
by some lightness of the mind to take
upon himself the authority and name

Christ. He chose Peter Zacorski of
Cracow and eleven other robbers like
him, and gave them the names of the
7 te ut himself he called Jesus

ist. They visited the towns doing
miracles after the manner of con-
jurers; they suborned other rogues
and robbers to feign death and raised
them to life; they planted fish in
muddy marshes where they could not
naturally be, and then in the name of
Christ caught them in their hands;
they hid loaves in ovens, and then in
the name of their Christ brought
them out as if they had not been there
before, to the great wonder of the
simple vulgar people. At one time he
came with his disciples to Czensto-
chowa,+ a monastery famous for its
picture of the Blessed Virgin Mary;
and staying there some days incited
one of their number to ave as if
he were of the devil, and
by means of this man they obtained
food: for he went among the guest
rooms, and snatched meat from the
kitchen and threw it to his comrades,
who blessed the meat with the cross
and ate it. And when there was a


t gathering of le before the
Holy Ties: Gens enaues led their
possessed companion to the altar
wearing a two-fold robe within which
he eel secrete what was required.
They put stones within his garment.


As he was being led to the altar, he


* “Sigismund I.” 1506-1548.

t ““Ceenstochowa,” Our Lady of Czensto-
chowa, Krélowa Korony Polskiej. Czensto-
chowa is a small town in the palatinate of
Kalisz, near the Silesian frontier. The most
Holy and Miraculous Picture of Our Lady, the
work of S. Luke, is painted on cypress, and,


says an old author, “‘has a majesty which
passes the conception of art.”


BK. I. CH. V.


broke away from their hands raging,
and rushed upon the altar, which was
covered with alms money which he
seized and thrust between his two-
fold garment. The monk who was at
the altar broke off the divine office
and fled; and the other monks ran
up and undid the man’s belt. The
stones then fell to the ground, but the
moncy remained between the folds of
his garment. The monks thought that
the money had been ed into
stones by the devil, and tried by exor-
cisms to restore it to its proper shape:
but when the stones still remained,
i ily threw down the


angrily
hol : “We ha
eed pach ie dealt Shopart- swith -hien


with the real money into Silesia where
in a certain village they approached
a noble matron who, in the absence
of her husband, would not receive
them. They asked her to give them at
least a napkin or a piece of flax as
alms; and she offered them a bundle
of flax, upon which they said: ““This
we will take and Christ will bless
, that your linen may increase
more abundantly. Show us, if re
have it, another bundle.” And when
they would likewise have taken this,
the woman, fearing her husband, re-
fused: whereupon they secretly put a
piece of lighted tinder in the flax as
they returned it to her. And so by
means of the flax the house was set
on fire and burned. When the husband
returned, the woman said that this
was a just punishment for her bad
behaviour to Christ and His disciples.
But the husband was smitten with
anger and said: ‘There has been no
Christ here, but a very vile rogue.”
So with his neighbours he went in
it and found them in a certain
town. Then the false Christ said to


him he called Peter: “Now my Pas-
sion draws near, Peter, and the cu

which I am to drink.” Peter answ :
“And, Lord, I think it threatens me
also.” He replied: “Peter, I can in no
other wise escape from this than by


MALEFICARUM


the window.” Peter answered: “And
as long as [ live I will not leave you,
but will follow you wherever you go.”
So they escaped through the window,
and eleein oir — by whatever
means : but the peasants
followed them smiting them with
staves and ropes, saying: “Prophesy
unto us, thou Christ cb thy Apostles,
in what forest did these sticks grow.”
So, being chastened with blows, they
thereafter chastened their lives, say-
ing: “It is hard for us to bear the
Passion of Christ and the persecutions
of the Apostles as well.’’ This

is told in the Chronicles of Poland.


*
CHAPTER V.


The Men of Old Accredited Witches
with Marvellous Deeds.


Argument.

J OHN of Salisbury * says that, when

God its, witches can with the
help of demons shake the clements
together and alter the true yf aa
ance of things. They can foretell much
of the future. They confuse the minds
of men with dreams; and merely by
the potas of their charms can cause
death, etc. Saxo Grammaticus + writes
that giants and sorcerers in the
North practised unheard-of wonders
with various illusions, and could so
skilfully deceive men’s eyes that they
hid their own features and those of
others under various fantasms, and
obscured the true shape of things
under seductive forms, and did other
marvels like those which we have
already told of Simon Magus. Pytha-
goras made his thigh appear to
golden, and by his spells tamed an
eagle with which he often conversed.
Baianus ¢ the King of Bulgaria was


* “Fohn of Salisbury.” “‘Polycraticus,” I,
10.
“Saxo Grammaticus.”? “ Hist. Dan.” I.
**Baianus.”? This is Marcantonio
Cocceius Sabellius, IIT, “Ennead.” 2.


seen to change himself whenever he
would into a wolf or any other animal,
and sometimes did so in such a manner
that no one perceived it. Glycas * tells
of Simon Magus, besides what we
have already mentioned, that once
when Caesar would have apprehended
him he was stricken with terror and
escaped by leaving another man in
his own likeness. He says also that he
had a dog chained to the door of his
house, which devoured those who
tried to come in without his permis-
sion: but the dog told S. Peter to
enter, and announced in human
speech that S. Peter was present. You
see how the power of the devil yielded
to the divine virtue in S. Peter; for
that Cerberus fawned upon S. Peter
and was unable to harm him. Numa
Pompilius produced a sumptuous feast
when he had no food in his house.
Ollerus sailed over the open sea on an
enchanted bone as if it were a ship,
as we are told by John Trithemius in
his Chronica Hersaugiensis. Eric, King
of the Goths, could draw a favourable
wind from any quarter by turning his
hat towards it. Apuleius+ himself,
according to many, was skilled in
magic, and he relates a wonderful
story of two women, the first of whom
was a Queen among witches, as
follows.


b


Examples.


This woman, because her lover had
seduced another woman, changed
him with one word into a beaver;
since that animal, when it is in fear of
being caught, escapes its pursuers by
cutting off its stones: and so also it
happened to this man, because he had
loved another woman. She changed
a neighbouring innkeeper into a fro
because he was jealous of her: an
now (says gage Re his old age he
swims about in a large vessel of his


* “Glycas.”” ‘Annales,’ IT and III.
t “Apuleius.” “Metamorphoseon,” I.


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH, V.


own wine, and squatting in the dregs
of it greets his former customers with
hoarse servile croakings. Another man
who spoke against her in public she
changed into a ram. Also when her
lover's wife, who was heavy with
child, loaded her with insults, she
closed up the woman’s womb and
by checking the growth of the foetus
condemned her to a perpetual preg-
nancy; so that it is agreed that the
wretched woman went for eight years
swollen like an elephant t about to
give birth. The same author writes of
one Pamphile who was said to be a
witch of the first order and a mistress
of every necromantic spell. This
woman, by breathing upon pebbles
and twigs and such small articles
could plunge the heavenly light of the
world into hellish and primeval dark-
ness, Again, when she saw any beauti-
ful youth she was at once smitten by
his charms and turned her whole eyes
and soul upon him; but if they would
not comply with her, or ete in any
we defective, she would detest them
and at once change them into rocks
or cattle or some other animal ; while
some she killed outright.

It is certain that all the wonders
we have just instanced were due to
some magic illusion. But the Saints,
as S. Paul§ says (Hebr. xi, 34), per-
formed miracles and wonders in the
name of God and in perfect faith:
“The Saints through faith quenched
the violence of fire,” as did the
Hebrew children, and S. Francis of
Paula, and many others. Hear the
following example of faith and praise-
worthy religious obedience.

Bernardino Scardeone writes as fol-
lows. A certain Dominican Prior of
the Preaching Friars was invited to
dine with the ee the sons of
Blessed John Colombini, and sat down


t “* Elephant.” Pliny, “Historia Naturalis,”
VILL, 10, says of the elephant: Decem annis
gestare in utero uulgus existimat. Cf. Plautus,
“Stichus,”’ I, 3, and Achilles Tatius, Lib. IV.

§ “S. Paul.” “Hebrews” XI, 34.


BK. I. CH. VI,


to the meal. When the food had been
removed and leave was given to
talk, this Prior began to speak of the
Passion of Our Lord and His suffer-
ings in good set phrase indeed, but
somewhat arrogantly, tacitly criticis-
ing his hosts because, although they
were monks they did not, as other
monks did, make i i
profession of the o this
the Jesuate Prior, a simple man, but
prudent and beloved of God, an-
swered: “Since we have fallen into
this talk, Father, do you that
we see whether one of our Brothers,
who has humbly devoted himself to
See es that peor need ours who
pu ay e three vows,
to his ‘Supedor?™ Without thinking,
to uperior?”’ Without thinking,
the other willingly agreed. Then the
esuate turned to our Brother Mark
ere as he ministered to those at the
table, and said: “Brother Mark our
ag are cold: in the name of your
oly obedience bring them quickly
from the kitchen in your bare hands
some burning coals that they may
be warmed at once.” The Brother
promptly and unhesitatingly apered.
not dreaming that anything could be
impossible which he was commanded
to do in the name of his obedience,
and brought straight from the kitchen
to the table as many burning coals as
he could hold in his two hands, with-
out taking the slightest hurt, and
offered them to the two guests to
warm themselves with: and at the
Prior’s command, to the wonder of
all, he then carried them back again
to the place where he had fetched
them from. The Dominican Prior was
beyond measure astonished, and looked
at his companion as if he were about
to command him to do likewise; but
this man, recognising this, thought
there was not a moment to lose and
broke out into the following words:
“I beg you, Father, not to command
me to tempt God. If you wish I will
vine, hg neces, ae
potsherd, but not in my hands.” The


vows.


MALEFICARUM


13
other monks were looking at each
other in silent amazement at this great
miracle; but when they heard him
blurt out those words, they quietly
smiled at each other.


*


CHAPTER VI
Of the Witches’ Pact with the Devil.
Argument.


‘ ! ‘HE pact formed between a witch
and the devil may be either ex-
pressed or tacit. The srt pact
consists of a solemn vow pas} and
homage made, in the presence of wit-
nesses, to the devil visibly present in
some bodily form. The tacit pact in-
volves the offering of a written petition
to the devil, and may be done by
proxy through a witch or some third
person when the contracting party is
afraid to see or have speech with the
devil. Grilland* calls this a tacit pact,
yet although it is made with another
person than the devil, it is expressly
made in the devil’s name, as is clear
from the examples he gives. Perhaps
we should class as an expressed pact
that rather rare instance of a German
woman who, jumping backwards out
of her bath, said: “‘As far as I thus
leap away from Christ, so much
nearer may I come to the devil.” But
there are certain matters common to
all their pacts with the devil, and
these may be arranged under eleven
heads.
First, they deny the Christian Faith
and withdraw their allegiance from
God. They repudiate the protection


* “ Grilland.”” Paul Grilland of Castig-
lione wrote his famous ‘‘Tractatus de hereticis
et sortilegiis, ommifariam coitu eorumque
poenis” about 1525. Grilland was “‘diocesis
Aretinae (Arezzo) criminalium causarum
auditor, Andreae de Iacobatiis, sanctissimi
domini nostri papae almaeque urbis uicarit
generalis.” The reference is Q. 111, N. 1 599.
of the “De hereticis.”


14
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, heaping
the vilest insults upon her and calling


her Harlot, etc. And the devil arro-
gates honour to himself, as S. Augus-
tine notes (contra Faustinum, cap. 22).


Therefore S. Hippolytus * the Martyr
writes that the devil compels them to
say: “I deny the Creator of Heaven
and earth. I deny my Baptism, I
deny the worship I formerly paid to
God. I cleave to thee, and in
thee I believe.” The devil
then places his claw upon
their brow, as a sign that he
rubs off the Holy Chrism and
destroys the mark of their
Baptism.

econd, he bathes them in
a new mock baptism.

Third, they forswear their
old name and are given a
new one; as, for example,
della Rovere of Cuneo was
renamed Barbicapra.

Fourth, he makes them
deny their godfathers and
godmothers, both of bap-
tism and confirmation, and
assigns them fresh ones.

Fifth, they give the devil some piece


*“S. Hippolytus.”” Died c. 296. This
Saint was a prolific author, but many of his
works have not come down to us, and there is
much in his history which is obscure.


COMPENDIUM


BK, I. CH. VIL


of their clothing. For the devil is
eager to make them his own in every
particular: of their spiritual goods he
takes their Faith and Baptism ; of their
bodily goods he claims their blood, as
in the sacrifices to Baal; of
their natural goods he claims
their children, as will be
shown later; and of their
acquired goods he claims a
piece of their clothing.

Sixth, they swear allegiance
to the devil within a circle
traced upon the ground. Per-
haps this is because a circle
is the symbol of divinity, and
the earth is God’s footstool;
and so he wishes to persuade
them that he is the God of
heaven and earth.

Seventh, they pray the
devil to strike them out of
the book of life, and to in-
scribe them in the book of death. So
we can read written in a black book
the names of the witches of Avignon.

Eighth, they promise to sacrifice to
him: and certain fiendish hags, as Bar-


tolomeo Spina f tells, vow to strangle


t “Bartolomeo Spina.” c. 1475-c. 1546. A
Dominican theologian, Master of the Sacred
Palace under Paul III. His “Tractatus de
Strigibus et Lamiis,” Venice; 1523, has been
often reprinted.


BK. I. CH. VI, MALEFICARUM 5


or suffocate for him one child every
— or two weeks (De Strigibus,


Ninth, they must every year make
some gift to the demons their masters


to avoid being beaten by them, or to
purchase exemption from such of their
pledged undertakings as are obnoxi-
ous to them; but, as Nicolas Remy
says, these gifts are only legitimate
when they are SpeRiCtEy

black in colour (Demonol. I,


11).

Fenth, he places his mark
upon some part or other of
their bodies, as fugitive slaves
are branded ; and this brand-
ing is sometimes painless and
sometimes painful, as we
learn from examples of it.
He does not, however, mark
them all, but only those
whom he thinks will prove
inconstant. And the mark is
not always of the same de-
scription; for at times it is
like the footprint of a hare,
sometimes like that of a toad
or a spider or a dog or a dormouse.
Neither does he always mark them
upon the same place: for on men it is
generally found on the eye-lids, or the
arm-pit or lips or shoulder or pos-
terior; whereas on women it is found
on the breasts or private parts, as has


been observed by Lambert Daneau *
and Bodin and Gédelmann.+ And just
as God in the Old Testament marked
His own with the sign of circumcision,
and in the New Testament with the
sign of the Holy Cross which
took the place of circum-
cision, according to S.
' Gregory Nazianzen and S,
4 jerome; so also the devil,
who loves to imitate God,
has from the very infancy of
the Church marked those
heretics who were implicated


* “Tambert Daneau.”’ A Cal-
vinist theologian, born at Beau-
gency. He was minister to Protes-
tant communities at Gion, Orthez
and Castres, in which latter town
he died in 1595. His dialogue “Les
Sorciers’’ (Geneva ?), 1574, was
translated into Latin, English, and
other languages. See Paul de Félice ‘Lambert
Daneau,”’ Paris, 1881, and Paulus “Lambert
Daneau et la Sorcellerte,” in *‘Etudes hist. et
relig. du diocése de Bayonne,” 1895, pp. 573;
594:


fill


ay
Yi


ius


a ie
i
i
:
7


=
3
L
a
-


IN


t “Gédelmann.” John George Gidelmann,
Doctor of Law and Professor at the University
of Rostock. He gave public lectures at Rostock
on the Carolina, and then published a part of
these in Latin, ‘‘ Tractatus de magis, ueneficts
et lamiis.”” The first edition is probably 1590.
They were often reprinted.


16 COMPENDIUM


in witchcraft with a certain sign, as
we learn from Irenaeus, I, 24, and
Tertullian, de praescript. aduers. haeret.,
post medium.

Eleventh, when they have been so


marked they make many vows : as
never to adore the Eucharist; that
they will both in word and deed heap
continual insults and revilings upon
the Blessed Virgin Mary and the
other Saints; that they will
trample upon and defile and
break all the Relics and
images of the Saints; that
they will abstain from
using the sign of the Cross,
Holy Water, blessed salt and
bread and other things con-
secrated by the Church;
that they will never make
full confession of their sins
to a priest; that they will
maintain an obstinate si-
lence concerning their bar-
gain with the devil, and
that on certain stated days
they will, if they can,

to the witches’ Sabbat and
pei | take part in its activities ; and
finally that they will recruit all they
can into the service of the devil. And
the devil in his turn promises that he
will always stand by them, that he will
fulfil their prayers in this world and
bring them to happiness after death.


BK. I. CH, VI,


It must be known too that, as Remy
notes (I, 13), it is an inviolable rule
among witches that, when several of
them are met together for the purpose
of doing ill to some person, and
through the will of God
their plans come to nothing
since, perhaps, he whom
they wish to harm daily
commends himself to God
in his prayers, defendin
himself from their devilis
works with Holy Water and
the Sacrament; then they
have to settle among them-
selves which of their number
shall herself incur the evil,
so that they may observe
their contract, which pro-
vides that, if they try to
send misfortune upon an-
other and fail, it must re-
turn upon themselves, For
the devil will not endure that the
injunctions he has laid upon them
should all come to nothing. And she
to whom the fateful lot falls has to
suffer the evil for them all. The devil


exacted this condition in the case of
Catherine Praevotte in the town of
Freising. This woman had a wish to
poison the only daughter of her
neighbour Michael Cocus, and tried
often to do so, but in vain (for the
mother guarded her every day with


BK. I. CH, VI.


prayers and lustrations against the
evil of witchcraft); and finally the
devil repeatedly accused her of cheat-
ing him of his prey, and in the end the


wretched woman was forced to poison


her own son Odilo, a babe in his
cradle.

But to return to our argument: the
way to the pact between the devil and
witches and the vow of service and
allegiance seem to be’ pre-
pared by some sympathy
in wickedness between the
witches and the devil, which
gives rise to a familiarity
approaching friendship, and
so to a gradual feeling of &
confidence; and this begets
in the weaker party a certain
presumptuousness and bold-
ness in making requests from
the stronger, and in the
stronger some pleasure in

his federate’s re-

uests. And so it comes that
devil, thinking that he.can
t he can

command him, and the devil
retends to wee one pete his power.
This has been well and fully proved
by Abbot Trithemius: emg

III, 5). “Such pacts with the devil
are usually vain and empty; for the
devil never keeps faith, nor thinks
himself bound by any promise, who

c


MALEFICARUM 17


dared to lie to Christ when he said,
‘All these will I give to thee, if thou
wilt fall down and worship me’”
(S. Matthew iv).

He promised the sorcerer rian *
that he should enjoy Justina,
and yet he did not keep his
word: for rr Is THE HEIGHT
OF MADNESS TO EXPECT THE
TRUTH FROM THE FATHER
or Lirs (see Origen, contra
Celsum, Bk. 8). But these
pacts with the devil are not
only vain and useless; they
are also dangerous and im-
measurably pernicious, as I
shall show the two fol-
lowing examples, and by
many others in their proper
places.


we


* “Cyprian.” “Martyrologium Romanum,”
26 September: “At Nicomedia the birthday of
the holy martyrs Cyprian and Justina the Vir-
gin, the latter whereof suffered much for Christ


under the Emperor Diocletian and the governor
Eutholomius, and converted to Christ the said
Cyprian, who was a mage, and who had at-
tempted with his wizard arts to make her mad,
and presently she underwent martyrdom with
him.” The birthday is the heavenly birthday,
that day upon which a Saint passes to bliss.


1S ou toe


18 COMPENDIUM


Examples.


Remy (I, 9) relates that a youth
named Theodore Maillot desired in
marriage a maiden of very wealthy
family, but was quite without hope of

i her since he was poor and of
humble birth, and his family was en-
gaged in commerce, which was then

espised as ignoble ; therefore he could
see no honourable means of declaring
his love. ve when peter a are des-
perate and entirely without "
men readily turn to any pest
remedy and en themselves to fol-
low any plan, whether it be lawful
or not. C uently young Maillot
approached a fellow servant Ger-
many who, as he had heard, had a
demon always at his service, and told
him of his trouble, asking him not to
begrudge him any help that he could
give him, for he would not prove un-
grateful. The German gladly ac-
cepted this chance: for such were the
_ terms of his pact with the demon that
he was are Sere within a few days
either to deliver up another man to
take his own debt upon him, or to have
his neck twisted and be killed by the
demon. He therefore appointed the
following day at dawn for their busi-
ness at a close and secret place; and
they had hardly met there before the
doors suddenly opened and there en-
tered a maiden of the most beautiful
and pleasing aspect (for so the demon
chose to appear at first, lest Maillot
should be revolted by his terrible
appearance), who said that she would
easily bring to pass the marriage which
he so ardently desired, on condition
that he would follow her instructions:
and as he waited in anxious suspense,
she gave him her advice. First she
said that he must abstain from theft,
obscenity, lust, blasphemy and other
vices which soil the soul, and must
practise piety and relieve the poor
according to his ability, and fast twice
a week, and not cease from solemn
prayer every day, and be diligent in
doing all that befits and becomes a


BK. 1. CH. VI.


Christian man; and that if he would
bind himself by an oath to do all this,
he would without difficulty obtain the
marriage he desired. Saying this, and
having appointed a day for his answer,
she went out at the door. Maillot,
seeing that so great a benefit was
offered him on such holy and honour-
able conditions, thought that he need
have no hesitation in gratefully and
willingly accepting them. But on
thinking more and more deeply of the
matter, and being tossed between hope
and fear, there was that in his face
which caused a certain priest of his
house to guess that there was some


in
sink to vg Se t6d communing with
the devil.
of his hope, soon after paid the debt of
his pact; for not many days later he
fell on to his head from his horse on a
tox and open road, and was instantly


Johann Nider (Formicarius, V) relates
that, a little before the present General
Council, there dwelt in Lesser Basle a
man of evil life and strongly suspected
of witchcraft, whose daughter was
married and living in her father’s
house. At length the old father began
to sicken and, showing his daughter
and son-in-law a certain casket, said:
“Do not move this chest, but let it rest
in its place even after my death, or you

ill be sorry for it.” And soon after-
wards he died. After some time had
a neither the daughter nor her

usband paid much attention to her
father’s words: but as they were mov-
ing the rest of their furniture to a new
house, the man ok ang to carry the
chest, which was only a small one, to
their new dwelling. On the way it
began to grow so heavy that it was too
much for his strength, and he called on
his wife to help him. I do not know
whether the woman opened the casket
afterwards in the house, or whether
she rashly interfered with it in some


BK. I, GH. VII.


other way ; but it is certain that when
they entered their new house with the
ild that had been born to them the
woman suddenly became stark lunatic
and rushed upon the cradle to kill the
child. Seeing this, the husband for-
rmx! nm pupae tad ising aa
she was a demon. She
was exorcised, whereupon the demon
threatened that he d not come out
without killing her; and so it ha)
pened, under the very hands of the
exorcist. The next day, as the husband
was walking in public, a stone sud-
denly fell from the top of a conduit
pe the agency of the devil, as it
seemed, struck him in the face and so
deformed him that he no longer looked


human.

See how the demon exacted pay-
ment in accordance with the pact
which he had no doubt formed with
the old father, namely, that he should
kill whoever opened or moved the
casket. Pierre Crespet* has much to say
concerning such imprisoned demons,
namely, that in serving their masters
some are saturnine, some jovial, some
venereal, some mercurial, etc.; that
they must be approached with a cer-
tain ritual, and that at certain times in
the night they arouse their owners and
require to be worshipped by them, if
they do not demand a worse thing.

It remains to quote another instance
of how, when a witch attempts to do
evil and fails, the evil rebounds upon
herself, as I said in my argument. At
Freising on the 4th September, 1589,
Catharine Praevotte, whom I have
mentioned before, told the following
with her own lips. “Several of us
witches met tcwethes to plot how to
bewitch the cattle of a certain shoe-
maker of Freising ; but in some way we
were thwarted so that we could not do
this. Nevertheless our bargain had to
be fulfilled, so that he who was await-


* “Pierre Crespet.”” A monk of the Celes-
tine Order. A mystical and ascetical writer,
author of “Deux livres de la haine de Satan et
des malins esprits contre U homme,” Paris, 1590.


MALEFICARUM


19
ing a sure prize should not be dis-
appointed. So we decided to cast lots


ses see hoes suffer it and -
u es Eyswitz, the vilest an

<aichadlaet of all us women. She did
not hesitate, but with the utmost readi-
drink to her


twenty-year-old son Peter in the
presence of his c ns, which
soon caused his whole body to become


monstrously distorted and deformed.’
This was doubtless done so that he
might suffer pains even worse than
death at the hands of the demon, who
never forgoes one tittle of his bargain.


*
CHAPTER VII


By their Terrible Deeds and Imprecations
” Witches Produce Rain and Hail, etc.


Argument.


} he is most clearly proved by i
ence that witches can control not
only the rain and the hail and the
wind, but even the lightning when
God permits. Therefore Andrea Césal-
pino, in his Daemonum inuestigatio peri

tetica, says that men have been

own who could raise, not only hail
storms, but lightning also; but they
confessed that they could not injure
whomsoever they pleased, but only
those whom God had forsaken, that is
for so I understand it) those who had
allen from God’s grace by mortal sin.
They can a oke dar ; where-
fore we read in Marco Polo that the
Tartars are so potent in devilish illu-
sions that they can cause darkness
when and where they will, and that he
once narrowly escaped from robbers
through the protection of this art.
Bishop Haitof of Basle also tells that
when the Tartar army was being
beaten in battle, the witch Vexillarius


t “Bishop Haito.”’ Born in of a noble
house of Sabie died 17 "Marche Oo in the
Abbey of Reichenau on an island in the Lake
of Constance. Vautrey, ‘Histoire des évéques
de Bale,” I, (Einsiedeln, 1884).


ee ee


a ee


20 COMPENDIUM


fenton assed their enemies with a

| thick dacknues by means of his spells,

/ so that they rallied and won the vic-
“tory *They can moreover cause rivers
to stop flowing, and dry up springs,
and irrigate the land with fresh springs
produced from rocks and stones: th
can make the water of a river turn back
and flow to its source, a thing which
Pliny* says happened in his time (II,
103). Many examples are to be found
in Remy, of which I shall quote a few
here.


In the dis-
trict of Treves
a peasant was

lanting cab-

ages in his
en with
iseight-year-
old Pabatiick:
and hey
the girl highly
for her skill
in the work.
The young fF
maid, whose §!)
sex and age {
combined to \ft
makehertalk- §\0
ative, boasted
that she could do more wonderful
things than that; and when her father
asked what they were, she said: “Go
away a little, and I will quickly
make it rain on whatever part of the
garden you wish.” He was aston-
ished, and said: “Come then, I will
go a little away.” And when he
ad withdrawn the gil dug a trench
and pissed in it, and beat the water
with a stick, muttering I know not
what, and behold there fell from the
clouds a sudden rain upon the said
place. The astounded father asked:


* “Pliny,” “Historia Naturalis,” IT, 103:
‘“‘Amnes retro fluere et nostra uidtt aetas,
Neronis principis annis supremis, sicut in
rebus eius retulimus.””


BK. I. CH, VI.


“Who taught you to do this?” She
answered : “My mother did; and she
is very clever at this and other things
like it.” The peasant nobly faced his
right and plain duty, so a few days
later, on the pretence that he had been
invited to a wedding, he took his wife
and daughter dressed in festal wedding
robes to the neighbouring town, where
he handed them over to the Judge to
be semen for the crime of witch-
craft.


It is recorded in the Malleus Male-


the power
claimed by
witches ofstir-
ring up tem-
pests. They
therefore re-
leased her;
since it is cer-
tain that, as
long as they
remain in
prison, all
magic powers
desert s aeatn:
She then went
to a thickly
wooded place
and there du.
a trench with her hands and fille
it with water, which she continued
to stir with her finger until there
arose from it a vapour which grew
into a dense cloud. This cloud at
once became alive with thunder and
lightning, to the great awe and terror
of the onlookers. But she said: “‘Be of
good heart; I will cause all this cloud
to be removed to whatever place you
wish.” And when they named a
desert place near by, the cloud was at
once borne thither by the force of the
wind and tempest, and let loose its
hail upon the rocks, so confining all its
damage within the prescribed and
indicated limits.

The following example is very like
the first. A Suabian peasant was bit-


BK. I. CH. VI. MALEFICARUM 21


terly complaining of the drought from
which they were suffering, and as he
was doing so his Spit gyn who was
eight or ten years old, came to him
and said that if he wished she would
at once bring a heavy shower upon the
field in which they were together.
When the father said that he very
greatly wished it, she asked him to
give her a little water. So they came
to a neighbouring stream where she
beat the water in the name of that
Master, as she said, to whom her
mother was dedicated ; and thereupon
there fell rain from the skies abun-
dantly enough to water that field,
while it left all the other fields as dry
as they were before.

Remy relates how a witch named
Alexia Granjean told that she was
once being carried through the clouds
and came to a place where, from her
point of vantage, she could see a man
named Johann Vehon pasturing his
horses. Suddenly there appeared to
her a huge black man who, as if
eager to serve her, asked her whether
she had any grudge against that
oe i for he would quickly en

er upon him, She answered that she
hated the man bitterly because he had
once beaten her only son nearly to
death while he was pasturing his
horse. “Very well,” replied he; “I
agree to wttnc i you at once.”’ So say-
ing, he qui ecectn Gendt degli
high that no eye could see him, and
thereupon the lightning, with a
mighty flash and thunder, fell upon
the horses and smote down two of
them, while the peasant looked on in
terror about thirty paces away, accord-
ing to his own evidence.
iovanni Pontano* tells that Fer-
dinand II, King of Naples, laid close
siege to Sessa Aurunca, which is situ-
ated near Monte Massico. Now this
town was for the House of Anjou, and
he hoped to force it to surrender


* “Pontano.” “De Bello Neapolitano,” V.
**Pontani Opera Omnia,” Basileae, 1538, II,
Dp. 574-75:


through lack of water. But a number
of wicked priests dared to summon
rain by means of magic. For some of
the besieged townsmen went out in
the dark of night evading the camp
sentries, and stealthily made their way
to the sea shore dragging with them
over rugged rocks the image of the
Crucifix, which these execrable sin-
ners reviled with foul curses and incan-
tations and then cast into the sea. At
the same time certain priests, the vilest
sinners of all men, being anxious to
assist the soldiers’ profane practices,
performed a wi rite in order to
produce rain of this sort. They stood
an ass before the Church door and
ite Sor gem irge as for a living
soul; then they placed the Divine
Eucharist in its mouth, and continued
their funeral chants about the living
ass, and finally buried it before the
Church doors. Hardly had this rite
been performed before the air grew
dark and the sea began to be lashed
with the wind, and at midday the
darkness of night descended, and now
the heavens were rent with lightning,
and now all was black darkness, and
the heavens and the earth shook with
thunder, and trees were hurled
through the air by the wind, and
rocks were split by lightning and filled
the air with crashing explosions: and
so heavy a downpour of rain fell from
the clouds that the cisterns were not
adequate to collect the water, but the
torrents swept away stones and rocks
which had before been parched and
dried by the sun. The King therefore,
whose whole hope of taking the town
had rested upon the townsmen’s thirst,
was baffled in his intention and re-
turned to his former camp by the river
Savone.

I purposely set down this example,
reader, that jae may be advised of
what abuses have crept into certain
regions ; such as dragging the Crucifix
and the images of the Saints over
the ground. In Germany and Aqui-
taine also they boldly resort to such
evil means for ensuring seasonable


i


| 4


22 COMPENDIUM BK. I. CH. VII.


weather; and Martin de Arles* has,

written against similar foul practices
revailing in Spain in his book on
uperstitions.


tr


CHAPTER VIII


The Power of Witches over External
Things.


Argument.


T is one of the obligations that
witches owe to the devil that, when
ve aes .
at the Sabbat, nti NEAL
they must # sub
show that they ; = Sr
have wrought
some fresh
evil since the
last meeting ;
and if they
cannot do so


r


they do not NZ —— eae
escape with J \@ T f fs ro


impunity.
And that they
may not be


able to plead
ignorance as
an excuse,
their evil Master instructs them in
all those activities which he demands
from them: as in infesting the trees
and fruits with locusts, caterpillars,
slugs, butterflies, canker-worms, and
such pestilent vermin which devour
everything, seeds, leaves and fruit;
or in bewitching cattle; or in casting
a spell on the crops so that they
are destroyed by leeches or wasted
in some other way; or in the use of
poisons, and in working as far as in
them lies for the destruction of the
whole human race. For all this we


* “Martin de Arles.’ Martin de Arles y
Andosilla, author of the rare “ Tractatus insig-
nis de Superstitionibus, contra Maleficia, seu
Sortilegia quae hodie uigent in Orbe terrarum,”
Paris, 1517. Another edition, Rome, 1559.


know from their own confessions; as,
for example, those of Helena of Ar-
mentiéres at Douzy on the goth Sep-
tember, 1586; of Anna Ruffa at the
same place and time; of Jean the
Fisher at Gerbeviller on the 13th
May, 1585; of his wife Colette; and
of several others whom we pass over
for the sake of brevity. For these, see
Remy, Book I, chap. 22, and else-
where.

They can also destroy the flocks and
herds, either by scattering poison or
by sending into their bodies a demon
which throws them down and strangles
them or tears
themin pieces.
They can re-
move a man’s
crops and


(In Apologia),
and by y
Augustine
Ciu. et,


can cause
houses to be
consumed by fire, as was done in a
certain town of Suabia in the year
I 539 by a certain witch, as we shall
tell in the proper place.

They can conjure up feasts: and
these are either sheerly fantastic like
those of Scotot of Parma, from whose


+ “Scoto.” There is an allusion to Scoto of
Parma, a notorious Italian necromancer and
adept in the black art, in the ‘‘Defensative
against Supposed Prophecies” of Henry How-
ard, Earl of Northampton, 1583: “I was pre-
sent my selfe when diuers Gentlemen & noble
men, which vndertooke to descry the finest
sleights, Scotto the Italian was able to
play by Leger du main before the , were
notwithstanding no lesse beguiled the rest:
that presumed lesse vppon theyr owne dexteritie
and skyll in those matters.’ In 7. Harvey's
“‘Discoursive Problem concerning Prophecies,”


BK. I, CH, VIII.
banquets the


ently satisfied, but soon they were tor-
tured by hunger; or else they may be
composed of true food, but bad tasting
and of an evil odour, since God does


not permit them to conjure savoury
food. Generally salt is aeding: and
often bread; perhaps because salt is
used in Baptism, and in the Eucharist
we are fed with the life-giving flesh
of our Lord Christ veiled
under the form or accident
of bread. But with God’s
permission they can also
produce bread and salt and
savoury foods, as the witches
themselves have confessed
to their Judges; but this is
rarely the case. Again when
God wills they can by mere
local motion free captives
from their prisons and fet-
ters: but this does but re-

uire the breaking of some-

ing; and since this can
be A by men, why not
by a devil? Trithemius
narrates a story worth re-
cording, which we shall tell later.


1588, Scoto is named together with the well-
known juggler Feates as a member of the
“*foisting crue.”’ Also in Nash's ‘The Unfor-
tunate Traveller,” 1594,

Cornelius Agrippa, = is said to bear “‘the


MALEFICARUM
ests departed appar- |


mention ts of


23
Examples.


There was put to death at Treves
some years ago a very famous witch
who had inserted a pipe into the wall
of her house, through which
she charmed all the milk of
her neighbours’ cows: that
is to say, the demon milked
the cows and instantly car-
ried the milk to her house.

Remy tells (I, 23) of a
certain peasant named De-
siré Finance, who dwelt
among the Vosges moun-
tains, and who, whenever he
sat down to eat in company,
had a dog lying at his feet
from which he used secretly
to take poison which he then
administered to whomever
he wished: and by him a
considerable number of men
were killed before any suspicion rested
upon him as being the cause of it.

The same author tells that Antoine
Welsch was asked to lend the garden
of his house for the approaching cele-


bration of the witches’ Sabbat. At
first he said that he could not do so


fame to be the greatest coniurer in Christen-
dome, ‘Scoto, that dyd the iugling tricks be-
fore the Queene, neuer came neere him one
quarter in magicke reputation.”


24
because he had to go out that night:
but when they still continued to press
him and insist upon it as their right,
he knew that he was ov uaded ;
yet, as he had said, he himself went
out. When he came home in the morn-
ing and happened to go into his gar-
den, he found it all devoured by cater-
pillars and slugs, and the whole
— filled with such animals: but he

re all in silence, recognising the
usual traces of that ungodly Assembly.

In the year 1323 Frederick Duke of
Austria marched against the Emperor
Louis of Bavaria, and was defeated in
a great battle between Otti and


Moldova, and was captured by Louis,
who placed him under in his
fortified citadel. Meanw ile a witch


promised his brother Leopold in
Austria that he would by his art bring
back Frederick within an hour if he
should have a sufficient reward; and
the Prince made liberal promises. The
demon then flew to Frederick in Ba-
varia, and entered his prison in the
form of a pilgrim, saying: “If you
wish to be freed from captivity, mount
this horse, and I will take you safe into
Austria to your brother Leopold.”
The Duke asked: “Who are you?”
But he answered: “Do not ask who I
am, for that does not concern you ; but
mount this horse which I bring you.”
But when even this most valiant e
was scized with horror and protected
himself with the sign of the cross, the
evil spirit disappeared together with
his black horse, and went back empty
to him who had sent him; in reply to
whose complaints that he had not
bake the captive home, he told all
that had happened.

Among the Swedes Ollerus attained
to such fame in arms by means of his
magic art that, as Saxo Grammaticus
(Hist. Dan. 3) says, he was thought to
be divine. The same author writes as
follows (Book 5) of the Danish pirate
Oddo YF “He has the seas without
any ship, an rails up storms
often wrecked his momen oy fleets. He


was a foe to merchants and a friend to


COMPENDIUM


— eee Se


BK. I. CH. VHI.


barbarians. He embarked upon a war
with the Normans; and by his spells
so deluded his enemies’ eyes that they
thought they could see the flashing of
the Danish swords at a distance, so
that when it came to hand to hand
fighting they were so dazzled that they
could not see to fight, and were thus
defeated by magic.”

Bishop Martin Kromer* writes as
follows of the memorable victory of
the Tartars over the Poles: “In the
year 1240 the Poles joined battle with
the Tartars near Legnitz and pressed
them strongly and were putting them
to rout. In the extreme rear of the
Tartar army there was, among other
banners, a notable one bearing a
picture of the letter X, while at the
top was a hideous bearded black head.
As the standard bearer strongly
waved this banner, it exhaled a dense
and horribly sti cloud of smoke,
which not only hid the barbarians


from the Poles, but even killed the
Poles with its overpowering stench.
The Tartars had done this by their
spells; for they were much addicted


to consultation with soothsayers and
diviners, especially in war but also in
ace, in order to foreknow the future.
en they saw that the Poles were in

a panic, the barbarians roused them-
ves and charged them, and put
them to rout with great slaughter. So
eat a number of Christians was
illed in that battle that nine huge
sacks were filled with the ears that
were cut off, one from each dead man.
The Chinese, according to Juan
Gonzales de Mendoza,t worship the


* “Kyromer.” The famous Polish bishop of
Ermland and historian. Born, 1512; died 1589.
His “De origine et rebus gestis Polonorum,” a
vast work in thirty books treating of the his
of Poland from the earliest times until 10
was published at Basle in 1555. It has
twice translated into Polish, and also into Ger-
man, 1562. Walewski, “Martin Kromer,”
Warsaw, 52 The reference here is to Book
VIII of the “De origine . . . Polonorum.”

+ “Mendoza.” This eminent early geo-
grapher was of the Order of Augustinian


BK. I. CH. IX.


Virgin Noema as sacred; and he says
that she owed her cult to magic art.
= —_ i er sgt yr named

m a order of the King,
Gaon oe fleet to a certain island, he
could by no force weigh anchor to sail
away again; but at last he suddenly
saw Noema sitting in the stern of his


ship. He ap ed reverently and
begged her for help and advice; and
she replied that the Chinese would


never win the victory t under her


charms. For the enem
godine f povar gsticin

ect a to urning and every-
thing Aap lie consumed in the false
flames: but Noema put the flames out
and, by her more powerful art, sent a
similar s upon the enemy who,
finding that all their efforts were un-
availing, surrendered themselves to
Compo as beaten.

The people of Pergamus also once
tried to raise a siege of the town by
means of magic, but without success,
as Paul the Deacon* tells (Rerum
Romanarum, XX).

In the time of Leo Isaurus, Masal-
mas the Saracen chief occupied Per-
gamus with no difficulty, although the
citizens, trusting to a witch, had
offered up a terrible sacrifice to the
devil by cutting open a pr t
woman and taking out the ving
foetus, which they boiled in a pot, an
all the soldiers defiled their right
sleeves with this abominable sacrifice.
Theophanes is our authority for this.

Duke Wratislaw, the founder of
Breslau (says Aeneas Silvius), went to
war wi i dson Gremozislav,
Duke of Bohemia. There was a woman


Hermits. It was he who made the first really
ee _ of China, 1585.

* “Paul Deacon.” c. 720-799. The
Benedictine historian also known as Casinen-
mana,” an
Eutropius, was formerly much esteemed.


MALEFICARUM


25
who foretold that her own son-in-law,
together with Wratislaw and_ the
greater part of the people, would fall
in that war; but that the young man
could escape if he would obey her.
When the youth answered that he
would obey her commands, she told
him to kill the first man he met, then
to make the sign of the cross with his
sword on the ground between his
horse’s forefeet, then to cut off both
the dead man’s ears and put them in a
bag and make haste to flee. The battle
precna incie Sei yr edt rd bore
when Wratislaw had been killed, the
man, having done as the old
woman bade him, returned safe to his
home; but he found his dearly loved
wife killed and with her ears cut off
and her breast pierced, and was
amazed and grieved to find that the
ears he had cut off from his enem
were those of his wife. This was ind
a fit reward for consulting with a
witch: and it may be that the wife
also was a witch and had joined in the
battle after the manner of Bohemian
women; or else the demon set some
deadly image in the battle and trans-
ferred the wounds which it received to
the wretched woman in the house.


tr


CHAPTER IX


Whether the Devil can Truly Enrich His
Subjects.


Argument.


E read that Stuphius paid his

army with magic money. Psellus
writes that the devil cannot veritably
fulfil any of his promises, but only
offers cupty eae to his worshi
pers: but this view, while it ma
true of some of the things that the devil
is said to do, is false if it be made ap-
plicable to everything that he is able
to do. For I say that the devil, if God
permits and he hi wishes, can en-
rich his subjects: and if God com-
manded him to do so, he would be


26


compelled to obey, however unwilling
he were: but only rarely does the
devil wish this, and never does God
command it, and very seldom does
God it it. The devil’s reluctance
in this matter is clear, since we see that
he most often cheats his subjects; and
although he enriches a few with a little
money at times, as he did Doctor
Viaet at Treves, he usually deceives
them with empty hope and vain a
pearances. Remy proves this
many examples taken from cye-wit-
nesses as follows.

At Douzy on the goth September,
1586 it transpired that Seneel of Ar-
mentiéres, having received from the
devil what appeared to be a gift of
money, hurried home rejoicing to
count it; but when she shook out her
ame she found nothing but charred

its of clay and coal. Catherine of
Metz, on the 31st October, 1586, found
nothing but pigs’ excrement. Claude
Morelle, at in December 1586;
caeee Driget, ° Héricourt in Jan-
uary; Dominique Petronine, at Parg-
pare he October 1586; all were proved
to have been similarly deceived.
eanne de Bans, at Chalons-sur-
arne in July 1585, stated that she
found on the road a sum of money
wrapped in paper as the demon had
foretold, and gleefully showed it to her
husband; but to her shame she found
that instead of gold she had a rusty-
looking pebble which crumbled at the
first touch. Others have been given
the leaves of a tree for money. But
Catherine Ruffa, at Val-de-Villé near
the Moselle, in 1587, admitted that
she had once been given three genuine


coins.

I have freely quoted these examples
because they are publicly vouched for
in the Courts of Justice. I could add
many more, but think it unnecessary
since the above are sufficient.

Lorenzo Anania* (de Natura Dae-


* “‘Anania.”* Giovanni Lorenzo Anania,
born at Taverna in Calabria, died c. 1582.
His chief patron was the Archbishop of Naples,


COMPENDIUM


BK. lL CH, Ix.
monum, II) adduces another reason
why the devil is loath to enrich his


votaries. He says that evil spirits are
given to avarice, and that they amass
treasures and money to mect the needs
of Antichrist, the son of perdition, and
that a certain soothsayer was told this
by a demon. And although the
demon is a liar and little faith can be
placed in him, yet this is not far from
the truth. But we are nearer to the
true reason when we say that God
never bids the devil to enrich his
pea ipeal (since He — no part in evil),
and only very rarely permits it: for
indeed ‘hese to whom the ae
promises riches, dignity, honours an
the favour of Princes are the most vile,
abject, needy and despicable: and if
they — ine before, they ssoney
poor: an were ty
never Seccmeree, And aaoe who
vraprarmes at meee
i eir magic and against
human laws, as may be seen from the
first Canon Law de thesauris, the devil
frightens to death or wig? epy nT


André Thevett (Cosmog. I, 1) tells
that he heard from an eye-witness that
a certain Greek named ianus was


looking for treasure in the island of
Paros, and was swallowed up by the
earth. oe gen uotes vin my as
telling the and many others have
such stories, one of which I shall set
down as being a wonder not unworthy
of record.
te


Examples.
About the year 1520 at Basle a cer-
tain simple-minded tailor afflicted
with a stammer somehow or other


Caraffa. In 1581 was published at Venice his
“De Natura deamonum, libri aps A
second edition followed in 1589. The reference
here is to Book II.

+ ““Thevet.” This great French explorer is
best known for his voyage to America when
wag arn apenas epi

fe


the Penobscot.
count of his visit.


has left a very complete ac-


BK. 1. CH, IX.


entered the cave which has its entrance
at Augst and’ going further into it than
any had ever gone before, said that he
saw marvellous sights. He said that,
after burning consecrated corn, he
went into the cave and first went
through an iron gate, and then from
one room to another, and so into a
most beautiful flower garden. In the
midst was a magnificently decorated
hall where he saw a very beautiful
Virgin with a golden diadem upon her
head and her hai ing loose; but
the lower part of her body ended in a
horrible t. This Virgin led him
by the hand to an iron chest which was
— by two black Molossian

ounds, which by their baying pre-
vented any from app: ing : but the
Virgin in some wond manner
calmed them, and taking a bunch of
keys from her neck, opened the chest
and displayed every sort of gold, silver
and copper money. And he said that
the Virgin gave him no small sum of
this money, which he brought back
out of the cave. He added that the
Virgin said that she was a King’s
a who had always led a devout
life, but that she had been changed by
an evil spell into that monstrous shape
and that there was no other hope of her
recovery than for her to be kissed three
times by a youth of unimpaired
chastity; for Ha she would be re-
stored to her former shape, and would
give asdowry to her liberator the whole
treasure hidden in that place. He as-
serted also that he twice kissed the
Virgin, and twice saw upon her face
such a horrible gloating at the thought
of her liberation that he was afraid
that he would not escape from her with
his life. Afterwards he was taken b
some loose boys into a brothel, and
could never thereafter find the ap-
proach to the cave, to say nothing of
entering it again.

Who does not understand the illu-
sion? The young man was not quite in
his right senses: or a devil of the class


of the Lamiae tempted him to kiss her,
so that she might devour him after the


MALEFICARUM


27
third kiss; but God did not permit it.
The two dogs were other demons, or
may have been the true or pretended
guardians of the treasure. The money
was perhaps real, and given with the
permission of God.

Some years later another citizen of
Basle entered that cave gt ad to
relieve his family’s poverty. He found
nothing but the bones of human
ee and seized with a sudden panic


in the cave of Ki
Pozzuoli, and met with a wretched
death, never being seen ei? This
I have from Jacques de Villamont
(Les Voyages, livre I, 23).

Andreas of Ratisbon { writes: “* We
know that many treasures have been
collected by magic art, but it is not
known who obtained possession of
them.”

In our own time certain men began
to dig for treasure at Pisa, but at last
were beaten by the difficulty of the
work and ceased from it.

Finally last year men started to dig
where Nero’s§ palace is said to have


* * Beatus Rhenanus.”* 1485-1547. Human-
ist and classical scholar, the friend of Erasmus
and Gelenius.

+ “Les Voyages.’ “Les Voyages du Seig-
neur Jacques de Villamont.” I have used
Arras edition, 1598, of very lar book.
There were ag aris, 1600; Lyons, 1606
and 1607; Paris, 1609; Rouen, 1618; and
Paris, 1 which to be the Third
Edition. is is, of course, incorrect.

$ “Andreas of Ratisbon.” All that is
known of this historian is Ys from his
works. Ordained priest at Eichstatt in 1405,
he joined the Canons Regular of S. Augustine
at Ratisbon in 1410. His writings have won
him the title of the “Bavarian Livy.”

§ “Nero.” Nero's “Golden House’ ex-
tended from the Palatine across the valley of


28


stood, in a place which is to-day a
cloister for Holy ne re where there
is a huge pine tree: but they were so
tormented by devils that fear com-
pelled them to desist from the work
which they had begun; and mean-
while many of the nuns dwelling in
that place were possessed by devils.
And what wonder, when they per-
mitted this unlawful treasure search in
their own grounds? Therefore God
punished them in this life that He
might pardon them in the future.
Paul Grilland (De sortileg. q. 3, n. 12)
writes more exactly on this subject
than do any others.


tr

CHAPTER X
Whether Witches Can by their Art Create

any Living Thing.

Argument.

[: is the opiadots of S. Augustine (De
Trinitate, III, 7), supported by all
other Theologians, particularly S.


Thomas and S. Bonaventura, that
witches can in a moment produce im-
erfect animals, such as flies, worms,
ogs and such insectsandotheranimals
which are generated by putrefaction;
not by creating them, but by applying
activeto passive principles. Itis usuall
the demon who, in accordance wi
his pact with the witch, produces such
animals by the application of active
to passive forces : for the witches them-
selves for the most part do not know
how they are produced, and are ignor-
ant of the causes: as when the devil
gives a witch a little dust which she
into the air, and there are born
various kinds of locusts and grass-
hoppers and mice and caterpillars
and suchlike animals. The devil could
also, having produced such things,


the Colosseum and far up the Esquiline. It
would be difficult—and it ts perhaps not neces-
sary—to identify the Convent of which Guazzo


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH, IX.


tend them and nourish them and give
them breath in remote places whine
they appear to be generated; as
among rocks, where imperfect animals
are often born, such as flies and mice
and similar things. And I believe that
this is what happened in the case of
those dogs mentioned by William of
Newburgh (Hist. Anglorum, I, 28) as
follows. A huge stone was being split
open in a certain quarry, when there
appeared two dogs equal in size to that


sh ; and one of them, it is
said, query SS eg But the
‘ i to have a ex-

ly voracious, was kept in

L days _by Henry,
Bishop of Winchester. These dogs
could not, I think, have been gener-
ated except from prolific semen; but
the devil was able to take them from
their mother’s womb and hide them in
that place. Demons can also bring
forth stra: monsters, like that in
Brazil which is seventeen palms high,
has a lizard’s skin, very swollen paps,
the forelegs of a lion, deadly eyes and
a flaming tongue: or like those mon-
sters in the forests of Saxony, of half
human appearance, which were cap-
tured in 1240 (Anania, De Natura
Daemonum, IV). Unless perhaps such
were the issue of an abominable coition
of menand beasts, whichisundoubtedly
the cause of most monsters. For in this
way in the Marsic war Alcippe gave
birth to an elephant. And Alexander
ab Alexandro,* II, tells us that in
the year 1278 in Switzerland a woman
ve birth to a lion. So in 1471 at
avia one produced a cat, and another
at Brixen a dog. So in 1531 a woman
of Augsburg brought forth at one


Alessandhi fi a ‘Neapol . Prrvane4
sandri, a famous itan juri:
and archaeologist, born rg61; died c. 1523.
The reference is to his “Genialium Dierum,”’
an encyclopaedic work, often reprinted.


BK. I. CH. X.


— = a cee oa covered in :
caul, then a two-legged serpent, an
thirdly a complete pig. We read of
many such births in more recent
times; but the most astounding of
is that recorded in the Chronicles of
Portugal.

*


Examples.

A woman was d for some
crime to a desert island and there left,
and was at once surrounded by a
chattering crowd of apes, of which
there were many in that place. Then
one larger than the rest, for whom they
all made way, came and took her

tly by the hand and led her into a

ig cave, where he and some other
apes brought her a plentiful variety of
fruit and nuts and roots, and signed
to her to eat. Finally she was forced
into foul sin with the ape, and so con-
tinued for many days until she gave
birth to two children by the animal.
The wretched woman lived in this way
for some years, until God took pity up-
on her and sent a ship there from
Portugal, from which some sailors
came ashore to fetch water from a
spring which was near her cave. It
happened that the ape was not at
hand; so the woman ran up to the
men, whose like she had not seen for
so long, and throwing herself at their
feet implored them to set her free from
her criminal and disastrous servitude.
They consented, having pity on her
misfortune, and she embarked upon
the ship with them. But behold, the
ape then appeared calling with extra-
vagant gestures and groans to his wife,
who was not his wife ; and when he saw
the sails set for departure, he quickly
ran and held out one of her children
to the mother, threatening to drown it
in the sea if she did not come back.
And he was not slow to carry out his
threat. Then he ran back to the cave
and as quickly came again to the shore
with the other child, which he like-
wise threatened and drowned, After


MALEFICARUM


29
this, in his fury, he swam after the
ship until he was overcome by the
waves. This story became the talk of
all Portugal ; and the woman was con-
demned by the King of Lisbon to be
burned : but certain men petitioned for
her, and her sentence was commuted
to imprisonment for life. Does this
surprise you, reader? Hear what Saxo
Grammaticus and two pert Bishops of
Upsala say. They say that the Gothic
Kings sprang from a bear and a nobly
yap aly and Joao de Barros * says
that the Pegusian and Sianite Indians
originated the physical union of a
dog and a woman,
et I am sceptical in this matter, for
man must be generated ox man. And
if there is any truth in what we have
just told, I shall say that an Incubus
devil injected the warm semen of
those animals into the women: and as
for the report engages Fu Gothic
Kings, I think this is to be said; that
the devil in the form of those beasts
tumbled the women. And that he can
do this is shown by the next example,
and the following yn ey
There was a lewd fellow in Belgium
who had to do with a cow, and the
cow soon became pregnant and after
some months gave birth to a male
foetus, which was not a calf but human.
There were many present who saw it
come from its mother’s womb, and
they picked it up from the ground and
gave it to a nurse. The boy grew up
and was baptised and instructed in
the Christian life, and applied himself
seriously to piety and works of pen-
ance for his father; and so came to
manhood. But he felt in himself cer-
tain bovine poogenseess as that of
eating grass and chewing the cud.
What must be thought of this? Was
he not a man? Certainly I believe he


* “Fogo de Barros.” 1496-1570. His
classical work “‘Asia,” giving an account of
explorations and conquest, is highly esteemed as


masterpiece of Portuguese literature. See De


a
Feria, “Vida de Jodo de Barros,” Lisbon,
1778.


30
was; but I deny that his mother was
a cow. What then? The devil was
aware of his father’s sin, and at his
pleasure made the cow appear to be
pregnant: he then secretly brought an
infant from elsewhere, and so placed
it by the labouring cow (which was big
only with wind) that it seemed to be
born from the cow,


*


CHAPTER XI


Whether there Truly are Incubus and
Succubus Devils; andwhether Children can
be Generated by Copulation with them.

Argument.

SS all the Theologians and

learned Philosophers are agreed,
and it has been the experience of all
times and all nations, that witches
practise coition with demons, the
men with Succubus devils and the
the Crates, Philo, Joeeptim, and the

e Cratylus, 0, us, and the
Old Syina gue; S. yprtan, S. Justin
Martyr, Clement of Alexandria, Ter-
tullian, and others have clearly proved
that devils can at will fornicate with
women. But a more substantial Pb vid
is to be found in S. Jerome on Ephes-
ians vi, and S. Augustine (Civ. Dei.
XV, 23), who is followed by the con-
sensus of all Theologians, and especi-
ally by S. Isidore, chapter 8. The
same belief is championed in the Bull
of Pope Innocent VIII * against
witches.

This truth can be proved by argu-
ment. For demons can assume the
bodies of dead men, or make for them-
selves out of air a palpable body like
that of flesh, and to these they can im-
part motion and heat at their will.


* “Innocent VIII.” The Bull “Summis
desiderantes affectibus,” 9 December, 1484, a
translation of which will be found in my
“Geography of Witchcraft,” Pp. » as
also prefixed to the “Malleus arum,”
John Rodker, 1928.


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. X.


They can therefore create the appear-
ance of sex which is not naturally

resent, and show themselves to men
in a feminine form, and to women in a
masculine form, and lie with each
accordingly: and they can also pro-
duce semen which they have brought
from elsewhere, and imitate the
natural ejaculation of it.

I add that a child can be born of
such copulation with an Incubus devil.
To make this clear, it must be known
that the devil can collect semen from
another place, as from a man’s vain
dreams, and by his speed and experi-
ence of physical laws can preserve that
semen in its fertilising warmth, how-
ever subtle and airy and volatile it be,
and inject it into a woman’s womb at
the moment when she is most disposed
to conceive, making it appear to be
done in the natural way, and so
mingling it with the woman’s ova.
Yet it is true that the devils cannot, as
animals do, procreate children by vir-
tue of their own strength and sub-
— ba for a between er

ves have they any propagation
their own kind, nor are they endowed
with any semen which can in the least
degree prove fertile. And how should
they have semen of their own, since
semen is a vital part of the corporeal
substance, and eter to Sym-

ianus in his Problems) a secretion

m well-digested food; whereas
devils are substances without corporeal
bodies? We say, then, that a child can
be born from the copulation of an In-
cubus with a woman, but that the
father of such a child is not the demon
but that man whose semen the demon
has misused. There are countless
examples told by many authors ( Jor-
nandus, de rebus Gothicis, and Luit-
serge that the Huns were descended

m the union of Fauns with Gothic
witches. Chieza (Hist. Peru, Il, 27)
writes that in Spanish America a
demon named Corocoton lies with
women and that there are born child-
ren with two horns. The Japanese
claim that their Shaka is of the same


BK. I, CH. XI.


sort. Nor are there wanting those who
place Luther * in this class. And not
ten years ago a woman was punished
in the chief city of Brabant because
she had been brought to bed by a
demon. It remains for us to reply to
the arguments which are brought for-
br to pamper ne oc rete
e first argument at
as follows. Devils and human beings
are of a different species, and therefore
no issue can come of a copulation be-
tween them. I answer that this argu-


ment bears no weight; for from a horse
and an ass, and other differing


animals, are born mules, wolves, leo-
pards, panthers, etc. Also, the pro-
creation is not ascribed to the demon,
but to the man whose semen is ,
pcs {nscamas says (Quodlib. V1, art. 6


The second argument is that the
devil has no part in life, but is the
source of death? therefore he cannot
be the author and origin of the vital
act. I answer that this vital force is
not in the devil, but in the semen it-
self; just as the warming virtue of wine
is not in the vat or the goblet, but in the
wine itself. See S. Thomas as above,
and the Malleus Maleficarum, I, 4.

The third argument is that witches
confess that the semen injected by the
devil is cold, and that the act brings
them no pleasure but rather horror ;
and therefore no issue can come of
such a union. This is the ment of
Mark of Ephesus, who is followed by
Remy, and it is based on the con-
fessions of witches who say that such
copulations are entirely devoid of
pleasure, and that they rather feel the
most acute pain in them. I answer
that when the devil wishes to disguise
himself in the form of a certain man,
and would not have it known that he


* “Tuther.’ Malvenda, ‘De Antichristo”’
(1604), IT, vi, certainly says of Luther: “Ex
tncubo demonto genitum leuibus futili-
brisque coniecturis deprehensum est ag q
ut Coclaeus refert.”’ Coclaeus is Johann Do.
beneck, 1479-1552.


MALEFICARUM 3t


is a devil, then he must as far as
possible imitate every detail of true
copulation between a man and a
woman: and then, if he wishes any
issue to result (which is very rare; for
he never desires propagation for his
own sake, since nothing of like nature
to himself can be generated : although
sometimes at least he humours the
woman’s ye and seeks -: aon pe
pregnant means of another’s
semen), he must necessarily take care
to provide ing needful for pro-
creation. Therefore he seeks for fer-
tile semen as having found it, con-
serves it and so quickly transports it
that its vital essence is not wasted;
and when need is, he injects it. But
when he does not mean to

issue he injects some substance in the
likeness of semen, which is warm so
that the deception may not be de-
tected. As for the cold semen, that is
only found in the case of witches who
are fully aware that he is a devil.
Moreover, as Sprenger says (Malleus
M. I, 1, c. 4), he usually asks the
woman if she wishes to become preg-
nant; and if she does, he provides
true semen from another source, as I
have described.

The fourth ent was that it is
incredible that should allow such
a thing to be done, or would endow
with a living soul anything born of
such a union, for this would be adding
the final touch to the devil’s work. The
answer to this is that, as far as natural
operation is concerned, the devil is
only the instrument which applies the
principal agent, namely, true human
semen ; and therefore God concurs in
the final disposition of an organic
body born from human semen, al-
though it is abnormal; and the sin
lies entirely at the door of the witch
and the devil’s malice. God, the
author of nature, delights in all thin
natural; but if this argument held
good, since He is not the author or
abettor of sin, no issue could be born
of fornication or adultery or unclean-
ness or incest. It is further objected


32


that the root of all procreation is the
heart, and that when the necessary
cordial heat and virtue are wanting
there can be no procreation. The
answer is that, whether its source is
the heart or the red gy ere fer-
tilising germ is contained in the semen
in the actual ejaculation of that semen
from the human body; and that the
devil can preserve that germ in its
necessary warmth.

We shall set down certain instances
of the activities of Succubus devils, as
well as some more of Incubus devils.


*


Examples.


Fifteen years ago, at Bamberg, a
certain Peter Stumpf was sentenced to
death because he had sinned with a
Succubus devil for more than twenty-
eight bag This devil had given him
a girdle which he had only to put on
and it appeared both to himself an
others that he was changed into a wolf.
He tried to devour two of his
daughters-in-law. He lived with his
own daughter and her godmother as
his wives. This is all vouched for in
the Court records, and is memorised
in pictures carved in brass which are
for sale.

Remy tells an example which he
heard from a trustworthy man named
Melchiore Errico, taken from the most


closely guarded secrets of the Most
Serene e of Lorraine. “‘ There was
at Hemingen,” says this man, “while I


was watching my Lord’s interests in
that place, a certain warlock who,
when he was asked by the Judge how
he had first been led into such wicked-
ness and, especially, by what wiles the
devil had seduced him, freely and
openly declared as follows: ‘I was a
common herdsman, and at dawn of
day was gathering my herds from
their several houses, when of all the
girls who let the cattle out of the
stables one especially fired my soul
with love, and I began to think more


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XI.


and more of her by night and by day.
Pas pent as I ve burning with owe
or her at my so asturage, there
appeared to me sai ed her coyly hid-
ing behind a bush, I ran to my longed-
for prize, wooed her and at last em-
braced her although against her will;
but after some repulses, she consented
to make me free of her on condition
that I acknowledged her as my Mis-
tress and behaved to her as if she were
God Himself. I accepted the con-
dition, and possessed her ; but she also
so possessed me that from that time I
have been unhappily subject to no
will but hers.’ ”
Hector Boece (De rebus Scoticis, liber
8) tells that in the coasts around
oray Firth a highly born girl of
great beauty refused several noblemen
in marriage and fell into an abomin-
able familiarity with an Incubus
devil. When her parents commanded
her to tell whether this were true, and
to discover her paramour, she said
that a marvellously beautiful youth
had frequent intercourse with her by
night, and sometimes by day, but that
she did not know whence he came or
whither he went. Her parents did not
entirely believe the girl, and formed a
plan by which they should learn more
exactly who it was who had stormed
the fortress of their daughter’s hi ‘va
ity; and when, three days later, they
were informed by a serving maid that
the Sparc was present, they bolted
the house doors and, lighting many
torches, went into the bedroom, where
they saw in their daughter’s arms a
horrible monster whose appearance
was terrible beyond human imagina-
tion. Others quickly ran up to see the
foul sight, among them a priest of most
holy life not unlearned in rituals and
exorcism, who, while the rest were run-
ning away in terror or stood rooted to
the ground with horror, began to
recite the Gospel of S. John; and when
he had come to “‘ The Word was made
flesh,’ the evil demon gave a terrible
cry, set fire to all the furniture, and
departed, carrying with him the roof


BK. I, CH, XII.


of the bed chamber. The girl, havin:
escaped from this danger, gave birth
to a monster of utterly loathsome
appearance, such as had never before
been seen, as it was said; and lest it


should be seen and bring dis upon
her family, the midwives lit a huge
fire and quickly burned it.


A little earlier the same author tells
of a Succubus devil as follows. In the
district of Gareotha in a village not
fourteen miles from Aberdeen, a young
man of great beauty openly com-
plained before the Bishop of A een
that for many months he had been
tormented by
a Succubus
devil, as they
say, more
beautiful
than any
woman that
he had ever
seen. He said
thatshe came


into her em-
braces, and
went away
as the dawn
began to break, with scarcely any
sound; and that he could by no
means, though he had tried many, be
delivered from so great and foul a
madness. The excellent Bishop at
once ordered the young man to re-
move himself to another place, and
to apply his mind more than usual
to the Christian Religion, with more
devout fasting and prayer; and so,
following the advice of the venerable
Bishop, the yo man was after a
few days delivered from the Succubus
devil. here I shall describe other
examples.


t%


MALEFICARUM


33
CHAPTER XII


"from Place to Place to’ ter Nighy

‘ace to to their Ni,

Assemblies. i
Argument.


ANY of the followers of Luther
and thon maintained


that witches went to their Sabbats in
imagination only, and that there was
some diabolical illusion in the matter,
es that their bodies had often
been found lying at home in their
beds and had never


moved from
them; and.
they support
their conten-
tion with that
passage in
the Life of
Ss us
concerning
the women
who met to-
gether, as it
seemed, in a
feast, and yet
were all the
time sleeping
at home. It
is certain that
such women
are very often
the victims of illusion, but it is not

roved that this is always so. But as
Michal the wife of David deceived
the soldiers of her father Saul by put-
ting an imagein David’s room, sowe say
that the devil can and does place a
false body in the bed to deceive the
husband while a witch has gone to the
Sabbat; and in order that the husband
may not — she is absent, he
either causes him to fall into a heavy
sleep, or substitutes a likeness of his
wife so that the husband on awaking
may think that it is indeed his wife.
Nicolas Remy proves this from
judicial records, A barber’s wife con-
fessed at Forbach on 1st September,
1587, that she had often done this to
her husband Bertrand, and had put


34 COMPENDIUM


him to so deep a sleep by anointing
him with a certain ointment that she
could tweak him by the ear without
rousing him; and sheused thesameoint-
ment upon herself when she wished to
go to the Sabbat. On the same day at
the same place Eller, the wife of a
beadle of Ottingen, was said to have
substituted for her own body a child’s
cradle, or as some said a bundle of
twigs marked with the name of her
Familiar, and so often duped her
husband. At Homberg on the 5th
June, 1590, Maria, the wife of a tailor
in Metzer Esch, anointed a bundle of
straw — so
create ne,
illusion which WW Fa UE NN
vanished as
soon as she
herself re-
turned to the
house. Cath-
arine Ruffa
declared that
the devil him-
self had at
times taken
her place in
bed andacted
in her stead.
These in-
stances are
taken from
Remy, Demonolatreia, I, 12.

Further I hold it to be very true that
’ sometimes witches are really trans-

ported from place to place by the
devil who, in the shape of a fo or
some other fantastic animal, both
carries them bodily to the Sabbat and
himself is present at its obscenities.
This is the general opinion of the
Theologians and Jurisconsults of Italy,
Spain, and Catholic Germany; while
a great many others are of a like
opinion. Turrecremata  (Torque-
mada) on Grilland, De sortileg. libre 2,
q. 7, num, 8: Remy, Demonolatreia, 1,
ie 24, 29: S. Peter Damian, Epist.
IV, 17: Francesco Silvester,* In uerbo

* “Silvester of Avila.” Francesco Silvester,
¢. 1474-1526. Dominican theologian, and


BK. I, CH. XI.


haeresis, num, 3: Gaietani on S. Mark
iv, quest. 47: Alfonso a Castrot:
Sisto of Sienat: Crespet: Spina,
Contra Ponzinibium§: Anania: and
very many others whom for the sake


of brevity I omit. J


But it must be known that before
they go to the Sabbat they anoint
themselves upon some part of their
bodies with an unguent made from
various foul and filthy ingredients, but
chiefly from murdered children; and
so anointed they are carried away ona
cowl-staff, or a broom, or a reed, a
cleft stick or a distaff, or even a
shovel, which
things they
ride. At times
they are
mounted
upon an ox
or a goat or
a dog, and so
are carried
to their feast.
And yet again


they go on
foot when the
place is not


sometime Mas-
ter-General of
the Order. A
prolific and
esteemed writer.
t “Alfonso a Castro. 1495-1558. A Fran-
ciscan theologian of great eminence. Confessor


to Charles V and Philip II. Among his chief


works are “‘Aduersus omnes haereses,”’ first edt-
tion, Cologne, 1539; and “‘De Iusta Hereti-
corum punitione,’’ Salamanca, 1547.


monograph on seg in which he strove
to regard the Sabbat, the flight of witches and
much beside as a sick i n. He was com-
pletely answered and routed by Bartolomeo
S “ who set no less a seth gy
to these points an properly arrai, on~
zinibio Pe himself pe hitter suspect of heresy
and an advocate of heretics.


BK. I. CH. XII.


far distant. Examples of all these were
to be found in Remy, I, 14.

When these members of the devil
have met together, they generally
light a foul and horrid fire. ‘The devil
is president of the Assembly and sits
on a throne a some pe ees
of a goat or a dog; an ap
him to adore ‘in, but not Sean
in the same manner. For sometimes
ae bend their knees as suppliants,
and sometimes stand with their backs
turned, and sometimes kick their legs
high up so that their heads are bent
back and their chins point to the sky.

Then they -
offer him
pitch black
candles, or
infants’ navel
cords; and
kiss him upon
the buttocks
insignofhom-
age. Having
committed
these and
similar crimes
and execrable
abomina-
tions, they
proceed to
otherinfamies
as we shall tell later: but first let us
discuss the hour of their Sabbat.

Remy says that he learned from the
witches’ own answers at their trials
that the fixed time for the nocturnal
assembly of witches is one or two hours
before midnight, this being most suit-
able and St not only for such
assemblies but also for certain other
devils’ terrors, sports, runnings about
and hubbub which follow, and are not
at such an hour so obnoxious. Witches
do not explain the cause of this,
neither do I inquire into it. But it has
been sworn to by Johannes a Villa and

atina the wife of Francis the tailor.
This one thing will I add: that no
hours of the night are more suspect
nor more favourable to the apparition
of fearful and terrifying shades. In-


MALEFICARUM


35


deed it is known from experience that
such hours are chiefly notorious for
spasers and hideous ghosts, as the
classical authors have testified in their
writings. For example, Aristomenes,*
in Apuleius, Golden Ass, Bk. I; Pliny,t
VII, 6: Pliny the Younger,t Epist. 7:
and among more modern writers
Alexander ab Alexandro (Genial. Die-
rum, V, 24) tells that he heard in the
silence of midnight a terrible noise of
hosts from certain houses in Rome.
d authors of weight say that this
silent time is the dead of night which
comes (according to Censorinus,§ De
Die Natali,
cap.
just before
the stroke of
midnight.
Eusebius of
ca ar-
gues that the
untimely hour
of the night
is just before
cock crow,
and that this
is the most
suited to the
demon’s wick-
ed purposes.
Servius (in


hags gi
iam,”’ and long after their departure “‘nox ibat
in diem.”

t “Pliny, H.N.” VII, 6: Plenilunium,
te tempus editos quoque infantes praecipue
infestat.”’

t ‘Pliny the Younger.’ The allusion is to
the well-known history of the haunted house at
Athens, “‘Epist.” VII, 27. The spectre ap-
peared with a noise of chains “per silentium
noctis,”” and when the philosopher Athenodorus
was watching “Initio, quale ubique, silentium
noctis, deinde concuti ferrum, uincula moueri.””

§ “Censorinus.”’ “Concubium,” cum itum
est cubitum. Exinde “‘intempesta,’ id est,
multa nox, qua nihil agi tempestiuum est: tunc
“‘ad mediam noctem,” dicitur: et sic ‘‘media
nox.”


36


the Fifth Book of the Aeneid) says that
it is the middle of the night: Macro-
bius* that it is just after midnight;
since such time is aptest to the
Prince of Darkness for his dealings


with men, being an uncouth and
vacant time. And, to return to the
subject of the cock crow, Remy in the
same place says that he had it in
judicial examination from a witch
named Latoma that nothing
more baleful and hostile to
them could happen than
that the cock should crow
while they were still about
their business. Johann Pul-
mer and his wife Desideria,
both of them witches, like-
wise deposed in Court that
their ters often used to
cry out, when it was nearly
time to break up the Sab-
bat: “Now go quickly away
all, for the cocks begin to
crow.” And this can only
mean that they are unable
to prolong their business any
further. But I know not the
reason of their fear of the cock crow.
From Pliny and Aelian I know that
the cock crow is feared by lions and


* “ Macrobius.” “Saturnalia,” I, 3: “ma-
gistratus ... post mediam noctem auspican-
tur.”


COMPENDIUM


BK. 1. CH, XII.


pease ee Se Also that it portends
much when they crow out of time
during the night, as Zacchia da Vol-
terra} (Philologiae, libre 25) records
it to have happened on the birth night
of the eldest son of Matteo
Visconti the Great, Lord of
Milan: for on that night the
cocks did not cease from
crowing to the point of
tediousness, and therefore
the child was named Gale-
azzo, and grew up to great
eloquence and_ milit
glory, as Paolo Giovio tells.
Remy (I, 16) tells that
the witches themselves as-
sert that a great number of
both sexes meet at their
nocturnal Sabbats, but that
there are far more women
than men. This was affirmed
by Barbellina Raiel of Blain-
ville-la~Grande on the 13th January,
1587; In 1585 Jeanne de and
icole Ganette from the town of Mainz
in Lorraine said that they were some-
times present among so great a num-


ber of witches that they felt no small
pity for the human race when they
saw it assailed by so many enemies and
betrayers, and that it was indeed


t “Volterra.” A famous professor of the
University of Pisa. PREY:


BK. I. CH. XI.


wonderful that mortals did not suffer
more harm from them. Catharine
Ruffa of Val-de-Villé near the Moselle
said in July 1 387 that she saw no less
than five hundred on that night when
she was first lured into their number.
There are tables placed and drawn
up, and they sit and start to eat of the
food which the demon has provided, or
which they have themselves brought.
But all who have sat down to such
tables confess that the feasts are all
foul either in appearance or in smell,
so that they would easily nauseate the
most ravenously hungry stomach.
The above-
mentioned
Barbellina
and_ Sybil
Morelle said
at Bar-le-
Duc in Sep-
tember 15
that all sorts
of food were
there, but so
vile and
mean and
badly cooked
that they
were scarcely
worth eating.
At Bar-le-
Duc in Feb-
ruary 1587 Nicolas Morelle said that
their taste was so evil and dry and
bitter that he had to spue them out as
soon as he had eaten them; and that
the demon was so angry when he saw
this that he hardly kept his hands
from him. Their wine also is black
like stale blood, and is given to the
feasters in some filthy sort of drinking
horn. They say that there is plenty of
everything except bread and salt. In
1583 at Ribeauville, near the Chateau
de Girsberg, Dominique Isabelleadded
that human flesh was also sct out, and
that this was a frequent practice
among the Scythian witches we learn
from Belleforest (Cosmographiae, I1, 6).
Most of the partakers of such feasts
say that the food and -drink satisfy


MALEFICARUM 37


neither their hunger nor their thirst,
but they are just as hungry and thirsty
afterwards as theywere before. Joanna
Michaelis, of Chateau-Salins, in 1 590
added that the eyes of those who
attend such assemblies are not sure
and clear of sight, but that all is con-
fused and disturbed and appears
vague to them, like those who are
blinded by drunkenness or some sin
or some magic. Thus witches some-
times are actually present at the Sab-
bat; and often again they are fast
asleep at home, and yet think that
they are at the Sabbat; for the devil
meneame acccives their
Be Os senses, and
Yoresiea through his

Wa illusions
many imag-
inings may
enter the
minds of
sleepers, leav-
in 5 them
with a con-
viction of
their reality
when the
awake, as if
it were not a
dream but an
actual ex-
perience and
an undoubted physical action. For so
for the most part does the crafty devil
manage his affairs.

Then follow dances, which are per-
formed in a circle but always round
to the left; and just as our dances are
for pleasure, so their dances and
measures bring them labour and
fatigue and the greatest toil. And they
return home from them so weary,
according to the confession of Barbel-
lina and nearly all witches who have
attended them, that they have often
had to lie abed for a full two days.
And the most sorry and most iniqui-
tous thing about it is that no one is
allowed to excuse herself from the
dance; and if any of them, by reason
of ill health or old age, shirks that


38


labour, she is soon beaten and bruised
by fists and feet, just as salted fish is
beaten with hammers.

When they approach the demons to
venerate them, they turn their backs


J
~
in


iN
Wt :

| oo pees
CY)


hiner


and, going backwards like crabs, put
out their hands behind them to touch
him in supplication. When they speak
they turn their faces to the ground;
and they do all things in a manner
altogether foreign to the use
of other men. Indeed it is
sufficiently clear from our
own experience that the
desire of men for wanton
dancing and treading light
measures nearly always lead
by evil example to more lust
and sin; in his day this was
complained of by Scipio
Aemilianus, in his oration
contra legem iudiciariam Tiberii
Gracchi, and by Macrobius,
Saturnalia, III, 4.
Sometimes they dance be-
fore eating, and sometimes
after the repast. Some three
or four tables are set apart for
the richest and most honoured among
them. Sometimes each sits next to his
own Familiar Spirit; sometimes the
witches on one side, and the demons
opposite them. There is not lacking a
grace said at this table, worthy of such


COMPENDIUM


BK. I, CH, XI


an assembly, composed of blasphe-
mous words in which Beelzebub him-
self is acclaimed the Creator and Giver
and Preserver of all. The same spirit
inspires their actions after the tables
have been removed. For
when the banquet is done
each demon takes by the
hand the disciple under his
guardianship, and all the
rites are ace gee with the
utmost absurdity in a fren-
zied ring with hands joined
and back to back; and so
they dance, throwing their
heads like frantic folk, some-
times holding in their hands
the candles which they have
before used in worshipping
the devil.

They sing in honour of the
devil the most obscene songs
to the sound of a bawdy pipe
and tabor played by one
seated in the fork of a tree; and then
in the foulest manner they copulate
with their demon lovers. They come
to these Sabbats, as we have said, in
the silence of midnight when the


powers of darkness are strong; but
sometimes they even meet at noon-
tide; and this is referred to in the pas-
sage of the Psalms (xci, 6) where it
speaks of the noon-day demon. They
have also’ fixed days which differ in


BK. I. CH, XII,


various localities. In Italy they meet
about midnight on Thursday, accord-
ing to Sébastien Michaelis.* The
witches of Lorraine meet on Wednes-
day night, and on Saturday night
with the Sunday following, acco’

to Remy: and I have read that others
meet on Tuesday night.

From what we have already de-
scribed, therefore, and from the con-
fessions of witches themselves before
their Judges, it is clearer than light,
and will be confirmed. by particular
instances, that witches are carried
bodily through the air to the Sabbat
by demons;
and not only
are they
themselves so
carried, but
with the help
of the devil
theycan carry
others on
their own
shoulders, as
the examples
will show.
Sometimes
indeed, when
the Sabbat
has been sud-
denly dis- —.
pase. tables and silver furnishings

ave been found and recognised by
their owners, which the women have
confessed that they have carried with
them to the Sabbat.

Only I will add this: that they who
assert that all this is not true, but only
a dream or an illusion, certainly sin in


* “Sébastien Michaelis.” A Dominican of


Venerable.


MALEFICARUM


39


lack of true reverence to our Mother
the Church. For the Catholic Church
punishes no crime that is not evident
and manifest, and counts no one a
heretic unless he has been caught in
patent heresy. Now for many years
the Church has counted witches as
heretics and has ordered that they be
pee by the Inquisitors and
anded over to the ar Courts, as
is clear from the works of Sprenger,
Nider, Nicolas Jacquier,t and Mi-
chaelis, as well as from our own
knowledge. Therefore cither the
Church is in error, or they who main-
- tain this be-

lief. But he
who says that
the Church is
in error over
a matter con-
cerning — the
faith is Ana-
thema Mar-
anatha. I con-


clude  there-
fore that
witches are


7 most often ac-
tually trans-

rted by the
Revil, tee
that some-
times they go afoot: and when they
wish to be transported bodily they
anoint themselves, as I have said
already, with an ointment made from
the fat of infants’ bodies; but when
they wish to attend the Sabbat nay
in dream, they lie down on their |
side: but when they prefer to keep
awake, and yet see what is done at
the Sabbat as if they were present at
it, then by some devils’ work they
send a thick vapour from their mouths,
in which they can see all that is done
as if in a mirror.


t “Nicolas Jacquier.”” Dominican and
Inquisitor. Author of “Flagellum Haereti-
corum fascinariorum,” a piece of great value,
which with some other tractates was first printed
at Frankfort by Basse in 158t.


40


It is stated by some authors * as a
fact that there have been women who
have manifestly spent the night in bed
with their husbands, and yet on the
next morning have confidently remem-
bered and spoken about many things
pertaining to the Sabbat, at which
they have maintained that they were
ae on the preceding mee Others

ave been observed by their family
and relations, who have formed some
suspicion of them, to start violently in
their sleep as if they were in great
pain; or even to bestride a chair or
some other object as if it were a horse,
and spur it on with their heels: yet
they have not gone out of the house,
but on awaking have been as tired as
if they had returned from a long jour-
ney, and have told of marvellous
things which they thought they had
done. ees vised y more, ee 3s
angry incensed against those who
do not believe them. This has led
many to believe that this is no more
than a matter of dreams sent by the
devil into the minds of those whom he
has caught in his net.


*


Examples.


In the County of York in and
a wonderful thing happened which is
recorded by Martin Delrio of the
Society of Jesus, who quotes from
William of Newburgh,f to whom it
was known from boyhood (for it was
not far from the birthplace of this his-
torian). There is a village some miles
from the North Sea, near which are
those famous waters which the com-
mon people call ‘‘the Gipsies” t or the


* “Some authors.” e.g. Bodin, “‘Démono-
manie,” IT, 5.

t “William of Newburgh.” ‘Historia An-
ery? I, 28. Gips, a ak

t oe ipsies.”” iy ar .° is rel 4 0
Lambeth MS.; Cotton MS.; and aed
edition of William of Newburgh. MS. Reg.
13 B ix gives “Vipse.” The village of We
Newton, eight miles from Bridlington, has a


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XI.


“Gipsey-race.” A certain peasant
went on a visit from this village to a
pe cay ri village to see a friend
and as he was returning late at night
not very sober, behold from a mound
some two or three furlongs from the
village came the sound of voices sing-
ing and of people feasting. He won-
dered who could be breaking the
silence of the night in that place with
these formal celebrations, and was
curious enough to wish to enquire into
it; and seeing an open door in the
side of the mound he went and looked
in, and saw a wide and well-lit hall
filled with men and women sitting
down to a grand feast. But one of the
servers saw him standing at the door
and brought him a cup,§ which he
took but p refused to drink
from it; for he spilled its contents and
at once went away with the cup. An
outcry arose among the feasters at the
theft of the cup, and the guests went
in pursuit of him; but he escaped
con Ree ale 697 chart meee
came back to the village with his rare
prize. Afterwards this cup, which was
of unknown material and unusual
colour and uncommon shape, was
acai aon. gratia ing of
England, and then to the brother of
the Queen of David, King of Scotland,
and was for many years kept in the
‘tiene of Scotland, as may be read
in the First Book Rerum Anglicarum,


cap. 28.
Sebastien Michaelis tells that among


large mere principally supplied by the “Gi

seys,” streams © pater whch ee
tervals of two or three years and ar after
two or three months. Allen, “History of


County of York,” vol. IT, p. 330.

Ad “eg Hamilton’ is his edition of
William of Newburgh has the following note
on this passage: “This Scandinavian legend
is common, with variations, to the ballad and
romantic literature of most countries of
Europe. It may be ient to direct attention
ok @ version very sar to the above, oie

“Altar-cup in Aegerup,’ a story of t

Trolls, quoted in Keehiley's ‘Fairy Mytho-


logy,’ from Thiele’s ‘Danske Folkesagen.’ ”


BK. I. CH, XI.


the witches of Avignon a boy was
taken who told the Judge that he had


been led by his father to the S gue
(for so they called their fren yes | , and
had there seen many wicked rri-


ble things done; so that in his terror
he had signed himself with the cross
and said yous what is this!” And

isa e had rove Aaah —
rout [pou ving cre
alone; and the next omen
home, which was three miles
distant from the place of the Syna-

e, and t his father before

e Judges. therefore in that
district the boy was given the name
Masquillon, that is, Little Magician:
and this boy was still in captivity at
was when Michaelis wrote this
in 1582.

Bartolomeo de Spina (De Sirig.
Tom. II, p. 11, cap. 17) relates the
following: Master Socino Benci, a
famous physician of Ferrara who was
Public Intendant of the sick in that
city, lately told me as the faithful
truth that when he was in the country
about three years ago to see after his
propertiGhs he fell into conversation
with his bailiff about witches. The
physician said that all the talk about
witches was madness, especially that
they could be bodily transported wher-
ever they wished. But the bailiff (who
is still living, one Tommasino Polas-
tros from ke district of Mirandola,
but now living in the place called
Clavica Malaguzi) nee that there
was another peasant living close by,
who said that he had seen great num-
bers of men and women dancing in
the night and abandoning themselves
to pleasures. The physician was as-
tounded and asked the bailiff to bring
that ant to him; and when he
was brought and asked about those
things, he answered as follows: “One
night I rose about three hours before
dawn and came with my own oxen
and wagon to this bailiff of yours to
help him in Joe of work; and I had
got as far as that plain I am pointing


as soon as


to” (for it was near by) “when I saw


MALEFICARUM 41


afar off a big fire in different places,
like great lights, among which I saw
a great crowd of men and women
wrestling or dancing together. Goin
nearer, | saw more than six thousan
pape Set see ht of the fires,
tables spread, and some of them
eating and drinking; but more were
dancing and playing different sorts of
, while most of them were acting
Seiad tach aeny teddies ciotcight to
speak of. I aero see and fone
them whom I knew, an e
reagen h of them: but after an hour a
i was given and they all seemed
to run away very roncney & indeed, and
they were nowhere to be seen, as if
they had been carried away in a
cloud.”’. On hearing this evidence the
physician changed his opinion, and
not only believed that what he had
formerly thought to be madness was
pee but that it did actually
appen


e following, which is a witch’s
own statement, is taken from Grilland.
After she had paid her homage, the
chief of the devils at once appointed
as her guardian a demon who must
never leave her but serve her in all
that she wished; and whenever their
rendezvous and games were to be held
he was to inform her of it and take her
there fully instructed : and this demon
used her carnally as a husband serves
his wife. She said that witches often
go to these Assemblies, where a great
number of women meet; and that it
is no matter of a mere mental or intel-
lectual or apparent vision, for in their
true and natural shape they go to such
places in the following manner. A day
or two before the Sabbat the witch is
told by her guardian demon to pre-
pare to go to the games on such a
night at such an hour; and if she has
any just cause to hinder her she
adduces it and is heard, provided that
it is a true and legitimate excuse: but
if she invents a false reason to excuse
her attendance, she is not carried
there against her will, but remains in
her house; yet as a punishment for


her lies the demon so mightily tor-
ments her both in mind and body
with continuous torture of the sharpest
degree, and aches and pains both
within and without, that she can have
no rest by ve or by night, but is
always plagued; and everything that
she does comes to nothing and is abor-
tive. So that, to put an end to such
great pain, she must confess her fault
and promise on oath that she will no
more refuse to go to the Sabbat. When
she has so promised, as soon as the
night and the hour have arrived she is
summoned in a sort of human voice
by the demon himself, whom she does
not call demon but Little Master, or
Martinet Master, or Martinellus. And
on this summons she goes out of her
house and always finds her Little
Master waiting the door in the
form of a goat, upon which this
woman said that she rode holding
tightly to its hair, and the goat rose
into the air and in the shortest time
carried her to the wizard walnut tree
of Benevento * and gently put her
down there.

Paul Grilland (De sortileg. HU, , ?)
tells that in 1524 there was brought
to him as Inquisitor a certain Lucretia
who, while she was being carried
home from the Sabbat, came at dawn
within sound of the bells calling the
people to morning prayer, and was
suddenly left by the devil who was
carrying her near a river in a field
covered with thorns. It happened that
a young man well known to her was
walking across it, and the unhappy
woman called to him by his name.
The young man, seeing her quite
naked except for a covering over her


* “Benevento.” The magic walnut tree of
Benevento was reputed to be the general rendez-
vous of all the witches in Italy. Peter of
Piperno has a pamphlet, “De Nuce Maga
Beneuentana,”’ which gives many of the legends
connected with this ill-omened var = one
tague Summers, “‘Geogr. of Witchcraft,”
tp 546-48; and A, de Binks: **Inciarmatori,
laghi, e Streghe di Benevento,”’ Naples, rg00.


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XII.


rivate parts, and with her hair all
oose, was afraid to go near her: but
she coaxed him with flattering words,
and at last he went up to her and
asked her how she came to be there
in that state. At first she invented
many lies, but the young man did not
believe her and said he would not
help her unless she told the truth.
Then, binding him to secrecy, she
told the truth of what had happened
to her, and the reason for it. The
young man took her secretly to her
ome, and she gave him many gifts;
but in the end he forgot his promise
of the matter first to one
and Cost vine = Rei le
grees the story was spr
jo and the woman was ae,
and the young man was com to
give evidence of the truth and he told
all this to Grilland.
A woman in the Diocese of Sabina
ractised this diabolic art, and her
usband becoming suspicious re-
peatedly questioned her, but she
always denied the charge. But the
husband retained his suspicions and
anxiously sought to know the truth,
and contrived so cunningly that one
ight he saw her anointing herself
with some ointment, after which she
flew away as quickly as a bird. He
followed to see where she was going,
but lost sight of her; and going to the
door of the house he found it shut,
which caused him great surprise. On
the following day he again asked his
wife what he so eagerly wished to
know, and she firmly denied all know-
ledge; until, so that she could no
longer plead ignorance, he openly
told her all that he had seen her do
the night before, and then soundly
thrashed her, since it is wisely said
that an obstinate heart is broken by
the rod; and he threatened to beat
her even more severely unless she told
the truth, promising her a full pardon
if she would freely confess. The
woman, seeing that she could no
longer hide it, told the truth and asked
pardon of her husband, which he


BK. I, CH, XII.


granted on condition that she would
take him to the Sabbat. To obtain
<r she readily promised this,
and, with the permission of Satan, ful-
filled her word, The husband was
taken to the place of the Sabbat and
saw the games and dances and every-
thing else, and finally sat down with
the rest at the tables to eat; but find-
ing the food insipid, he asked for salt
and, although there was none on the
table, kept asking again and again for
it, i was not given ed until after
much importunacy an waiting.
Then he said: “Praise Pape God, for
at last the salt has come!”’ As soon as
he had uttered these words the demons
immediately d , and all the rest
vanished, and the lights were put out
and he remained there alone and
naked. In the morning he saw some
shepherds whom he asked in what
country he was; and they answered
that it was Benevento in the Kingdom
of Naples, which was a hundred miles
from the man’s own country. So,
although he was a rich man, he had
to beg his way home; and on his
arrival he at once accused his wife of
the crime of witchcraft, and told the
Judges the whole story and how she
ad departed. And when they had
well and duly examined the matter,
they found all that we have related to
be true, and it was all confirmed by
the woman’s own confession.
Bartolomeo Spina,* Master of the
Sacred Palace, records some equally
certain examples, one of which is as
follows. A girl who lived with her
mother at Bergamo was found one
night at Venice in her brother-in-law’s
bed. In the morning she was found
naked and was recognised as a kins-
woman, and was asked why she had
come there. When they had clothed
her she told with tears the followin:
story: “Last night I was lying in bed
awake and saw my mother, who


* “Spina.” This is from “De Strigibus,”’
c. xvitt. It was told Spina by Andrea Magnani
of Bergamo, who personally of these events.


MALEFICARUM


43


thought I was asleep, rise from her
bed and take off her vest and anoint
her body with an unguent from a pot
which she took from a secret place;
and then she mounted a staff which
was at hand as if it were a horse, and
rose up and was carried through the
window, so that I could no longer see
her. Then I also rose from bed and
anointed my body as my mother had

, and was at once borne through
the window and —— to this place,
where I saw my mother threatening
with horrid gestures the boy lying in
this bed. I was frightened at this,
saw that my mother also was dis-
turbed by my appearance and began
to menace me: so I called upon the
Name of the Lord Jesus and of His
Mother, and then I no longer saw my
mother, and was left here alone and
naked.”’ When they heard these words
of the girl, her brother-in-law wrote
all down and brought it before the
a csr ane eae of Bergamo, who
took the woman into custody. She
was exposed to torture and confirmed
everything in confession, adding that
the demon had carried her more than
fifty times to kill the son of that
brother-in-law, but that she had never
succeeded in doing so because she had
always found him too well protected
by his parents with the sign of the
cross and holy prayers.

Spina also relates that a certain
Antonio Leone, a charcoal burner of
Ferrara, who was then living in the
Valtellina, that very same year, at-
tested that he knew intimately the
man to whom the following oc
in his native district. This man, on
account of many hints which had been
given him, suspected his wife of going
to the witches’ Sabbat while he him-
self was asleep. One night, therefore,
he p gies 7 to be in a deep sleep,
and saw his wife rise from her bed


and anoint herself from a hidden vase,
and immediately vanish. In astonish-
ment not unmixed with curiosity the
man also rose from his bed and did
as his wife had done; and at once, as


44


it seemed to him, he was carried up
the chimney just as his wife appeared
to have been, into the wine ale of a
certain noble Count, where he found
his wife together with many others.
When she saw him, his wife and all
the rest of the company made a cer-
tain occult sign and disappeared, the
husband being left all alone in that
place. There he was found in the
morning by the servants of the house,
who raised an outcry, and seizing him
as a thief haled him before the nt.
When he had been granted leave to
speak, he shamefacedly told what had
prone, and so his wife was accused

ore the Inquisitor, and at last con-
fessed, and suffered the punishment
well merited by her crimes.

Nicolas Remy (I, 14) tells the fol-
pean At Luthz at the foot
of the Vosges Mountains in May 1589
the villagers were celebrating a pagan
festival. ae _— er pin
ing in ev m that
to the next, which is called Wiser=
bach, and had already climbed a good
part of the hill which separates the
two villages, when he was suddenly
caught in a whirlwind and stood look-
ing about him in amazement to see if
he could find any cause for such an
unusual occurrence, for the air was
most calm and still everywhere else.
Then he saw in a sheltered place six
witch women dancing round a table
sumptuously decked with gold and
silver, tossing their heads about like
people afflicted with madness; and
near them was a man like a black bull
watching them as if he were a casual
passer by. He therefore stood still for
a while collecting himself and makin
sure that he saw quite clearly; |
when he had done so, they all sud-
denly vanished from his sight. Re-
covering from his fright he then
started on his road in and
ghonis passed the top of the hill when
behold, those women were following
him from behind, throwing thcir heads
about as before and keeping a deep
silence, while before them went a man


COMPENDIUM


BK. 1, CH, XI.


with a black face and hands curved
like talons, with which he would have
clawed his forehead if he had not
turned and opposed him with his
drawn sword; but then the man
ceased to threaten him and vanished
as if in fear of his life. The women
showed themselves yet again, and
with them the man lke a bull, who,
as I have said, was looking on at their
dances. Cothéze now felt more con-
fident towards this man, and went w
to him, saying : “Are not you my frien
Desirée Gazéte?” (for so he was
named). “I beg you to protect me if
you can; for I promise you that I will
tell no one anything of what I have
seen.” Hardly had he said this when
he was encompassed by a fresh whirl-
wind or cloud, and when he had come
out of it as soon as he could, he went
home. Three days after he had given
evidence as above, he was recalled for
examination by the Judge, and added
the following: that he remembered
that when he had gone near the table
to see what food there was upon it,
the demon had instantly flown at his
face with his talons, and that while he
was defending himself with his sword
he had been lifted up by a violent
wind and carried to the cataracts of
Comber Hill, which was no less than
two hundred paces away. And lest
anyone should think that this was the
imagining of a drunken man fright-
ant by the darkness and solitude, the
story was confirmed at St.-Dié in June
1589 by Barbelline Gazéte, one of the
women in question, who told it in
almost the same words to the Inquisi-
tor, adding that her husband Desirée
Gazéte had given to Cothéze as a gift
three measures of wheat and as many
cow’s cheeses which he kept hidden,
and that she had seen them. All this
was admitted and agreed to, except
that Barbelline said that the demon
had not raised his hands against
Cothéze because he came near the
table, as he had falsely stated in his
evidence, but because he was about
to steal a golden cup from it.


BK. 1, CH, XI.


When Johann of Hembach was
scarcely more than a child, his witch
mother took him to the nocturnal
assembly of demons and, because he
was so clever a crowder, ordered him
to play his kit and to climb up a tree
from which he could be better.
He did so and, having leisure to watch
their lewd reels and rigadoons, found
it very unusual (for ev ing at their
Sabbat was uncouth and ridiculous),


men?” No sooner had he said this
than he fell to the and hurt


his shoulder; and when he called for
pet he found meg alone. He told

is story openly various opinions
prea pret bit ing that
it was only a vision, whilst others con-
tended that it had really happened.
But not long afterwards the oppor-
tunity arose to remove all doubt. For
Catharine Prevotte, one of those who
had taken part in those dances, was
soon afterwards taken on suspicion of
witchcraft, and confessed the whole
matter as we have told it, although
she was unaware of the story told by
Johann and was not pressed by any
questions.

As Nicole Langbernard was return-
ing home from Marainviller to oy
Avricourt in July 1590, and was walk-
ing at full noonday along a wooded
path, she saw in a neighbouring field
a company of men and women danc-
ing in a ring, not in the usual manner
of men but in the opposite direction
and with their backs turned. She
looked more closely and saw further
some who were deformed with hooves
like re or oxen among the dancers ;
and being struck with terror she began
to call upon the Most Holy Name of
Jesus, and earnestly to pray that she

ight come back safe and unharmed
to her own people. Thereupon all the
dancers vanished except one named
Peter, and he quickly rose into the air
and was seen to let fall to the earth a
little brush of the sort used by bakers
to clean their ovens before they bake


MALEFICARUM 45


bread. Meanwhile she was caught in
a violent wind so that she could hardly
draw her breath; and then returned
home, where she lay sick for three
whole days. This thing became known
jcc the talk of herself and her
neighbours, and had soon spread all
over the village. This Peter, lest by
ignoring the story he should seem to
admit and confess to so heavy a charge,
went first to the judge and angrily
laid a complaint before him; but in
the end he was afraid he would lose
his suit and lay himself open to a
greater danger, and so desisted from
it. This brought him into far greater
suspicion of the cri since many
were of opinion that his Le con-
science had caused him to withdraw
the complaint which he had started
so bitterly against her. Accordingly
the Judge made diligent enquiry into
his life and character, and found some
indications that this was no empty
ow are. and arrested him (at Dieuze,
Feb. 1591). And he was with little
trouble induced to confess his guilt,
and finally to name and indicate those
others who had been partners in that
crime, among whom were Barbelia
the wife of Johann Latomer, and
Mayette the wife of Laurentius, the
Chief Magistrate, all of whom told the
same story of their dancing back to
back with the cloven-hoofed creatures,
maintaining that it was all true. Their
confession was yet further substanti-
ated by Johann Michel, a herdsman,
who stated that during those proceed-
ings he had been playing w his
pipes, beating time with his foot and
seater rs aueey over the
pipes. But when Nicole in panic called
upon Jesus, and moreover signed her-
with the Cross, he fell from the
high branch of an oak on which he
was sitting, and was then caught in a
whirlwind and carried to a field called
Veiler in which he had shortly before
left his flock grazing. But the gravest
and weightiest proof was that the
lace where the dance had been per-
ormed had been found, on the day


46
following that mentioned by Nicole,
marked with a ring such as Is seen in
circuses where horses run round in a
circle, and there were recent tracks of
goats or oxen, all of which could be
seenuntil that fieldwas again ploughed
up in the following winter.

In Holland there was in the village
of Oostbruck not far from Maes-
tricht a widow woman whose circum-
stances required her to keep a man-
servant to manage the affairs of the
house. This man was, like most ser-
vants, inquisitive, and often used to
look through a window and see his
mistress go at the dead of every night,
as soon as the servants had gone to
sleep, to a certain fixed spot in the
stables, where she stretched up and
laid fast hold of the nearest rack of
hay. At last, wondering what she
could be about, he made up his mind
to do the same just once, unbeknown
to his mistress, and to try the same
venture. So when his mistress went
as usual to that place and seemed to
be out of sight, he followed and
looked about the place and, as his
mistress had done, grasped the hay,
Then he was at once carried to the
town of Wijk into a secret under-
ground cave, where he found himself
in the midst of a aes of witches
brewing their evil plots. The mistress
was surprised at her servant’s unex-
or appearance, and asked how he

ad managed to come there in a
moment of time. He told her how it
was; and she waxed very angry and
highly incensed, being afraid lest by
this means their nocturnal and clan-
destine meetingsshould become known.
She therefore asked her associates
what they advised in this doubtful
pm and they at length agreed that

e should be received in friendly
fashion and be sworn to keep silence,
and that he would never communicate
or tell to any one those mysteries
which chance had allowed him to wit-
ness, beyond his desert or expectation.
He gave his promise and spoke fairly
to them; and, that they might treat


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XI.
him more leniently, pretended that
his one chief wish was that they should


thereafter admit him into the fellow-
ship and company of witches. Mean-
while the hours passed until it was
time for their return; and then a new
question was d by the mistress,
whether he should be sent back home
to be a danger to the whole assembly,
or whether he should be killed for the
general good. They arrived at the
more merciful decision of binding him
an oath and sending him home.

is duty was undertaken by his mis-
tress, who promised that when he had
iven his oath she would carry him
ome on her shoulders; and to this
business they set themselves, and were
carried by an east wind through the
air. But when they had covered the
greater part of their jo a lake
ov wn with reeds came in sight;
and the old witch, fearing lest the
young man should be led by penitence
to disclose what he had seen at those
frantic orgies, saw her chance of get-
ting rid of him, and to cast him from
her as she flew, hoping, as it is
thought, that he would die either from
the violence of his fall or in the deep
waters of the lake. But God, who is
merciful and desireth not the death of
a sinner but rather that he should turn
from his wickedness and live, frus-
trated the evil design of that witch,
and did not allow the innocent young
man to be drowned, but most justly
ted that he should live to this very

y. As he fell among the reeds he
received no mortal hurt indeed, for
the violence of his fall was a little
broken by the reeds: but the unhappy
man was unable to do anything but
use his tongue, and lay there till day-
light in the most dreadful agony, sigh-
ing and groaning, until some passers
by were surprised to hear this unusual
lamentation, and searched and found
a young man with both his hips dis-
located. They asked how he had fallen
into such misfortune; and when he
had told all they took him in a cart to
Maestricht. There a nobleman, Jehan


BK. I, CH. XII.


leer: the Mayor of the city,
being stru by the strangeness of the
affair, wonderingly enquired into it
all; and having examined the matter
he ordered the youth’s mistress to be
seized and put in chains. As soon as
she fell into the hands of the Mayor,
she denied nothing, but confi to
every particular.
: Bernard er Ribinge in his De
trigiis, 3, t at about sixty years
ago in he Diocese of Como proceed-
ings were being taken against such
witches by an Inquisitor named Mas-
ter Bartolomeo de Homate, with Mas-
ter Lorenzo da Concorezzo the Podesta
and Giovanni da Fossato as Notary.
One day the Podesta, out of curiosity,
wished to prove by 1 ele whether
witches go to the Sabbat really and in
their bodies. Accordingly he agreed
to go one Thursday evening with his
Notary and another companion to a
lace outside the town t which had
aes indicated by the witches. While
they were standing there they saw
many people assembled before one
who was the devil in the form of a
goat enthroned like some great Lord:
and behold, at the command of the
devil all those persons there assembled
fell upon ors magi rhe and his com-
panions and, wi *s permission,
so beat them with sticks that they all
three died from their blows within
fifteen days.
Florimond de Raymond,{ Senator


Haereticae Prauitatis.” My own copy is
Venice, 1596, and this edition also contains the
valuable Commentaries of Francesco Pegna.

+ “Place outside the town.”’ Mendrisio


tix%
Z “Raymond.” Or Raemond; sometimes
Rémond. Born at Agen c. 1540; died at Bor-


MALEFICARUM 47


of the King at the Parlement of Bor-
deaux, a pious catholic and learned
man, in his L’Antéchrist, VII, tells of
some unspeakable and _ sacrilegious
rites in the following words.

At this Court in the year 1594 was


tried a girl of Aquitane, a
wench of intelligent appearance who,
without being » freely con-


fessed that she had been corrupted at
a tender age by a certain Italian, In
the middle of ae before the day
of S. John Baptist the Italian had led
her to a certain field, where he had
traced a circle on the ground with a
beech twig, muttering some words out
of a black book. Suddenly there ap-
peared a large and ectly black
t, well horned, and accompanied

y two women, and soon there came
up a man clothed and vested like a
priest. The goat asked the Italian
what girl that was; and he answered
that she had been brought by him to
be enrolled among the goat’s subjects.
Hearing this, the goat ordered her to
make the sign of the cross with her
left hand, and all who were present to
approach and perform their act of
veneration. ‘Thereupon they all kissed
him with their lips under his tail.
Between the goat’s horns a_ black
candle gave a horrid light, and from
this they all lit the candles they were
holding; and as they worshipped the
poat, ey dropped money in a bowl.
is is what happened the first time.
Afterwards the Italian again took the
girl to the same place; and then the
t asked her for a tress or lock of

er hair, which the Italian cut off and
gave to him. By this sign the goat led
er apart as his bride into a neighbour-
ing wood and, pressing her against the
ground, penetrated her: but the girl
said that she found this operation
quite lacking in any sensation of plea-


deaux, c. 1602. His famous work, ‘‘L’ Anté-
christ,” first appeared at Lyons in 1597, and
was frequently reprinted. ¢ are editions of
riser, 1599 and 1607; Arras, 1613; Cambrai,
1613.


i ee


48


sure, for she rather experienced a very
keen pain and sense of horror of the
at’s semen, which was as cold as ice.
m a Wednesday and a Friday in each
month these rites were performed by
the well of Déme, and she attended
them countless times with more than
sixty others, all of whom brought
candles with them which the goat lit
by blowing upon them from his be-
hind, after which they danced round
with joined hands and their backs
turned. They also performed a trav-
esty of the Mass, celebrated by one
clothed in a black cope with no cross
woven upon it. At the time of the
Holy Sacrifice and the Elevation of
the Host, he lifted up a segment or
round of turnip stained black, upon
which they all with one voice cried
out: “Master, help us!” The Chalice
contained water instead of wine; and
they made their Holy Water as fol-
lows:—The goat pissed into a hole
dug in the ground, and with this un-
diluted water the celebrant sprinkled
them all with a black aspergillum. In
this assembly each witch has his or
her particular duty assigned, and each
gives a report of what he has done. So
writes Raymond ; and he discusses the
question of poisons, spells, charms and
magic remedies, as also the destruc-
tion of the fruits of the earth, and
many such crimes.
oe us mentee ae ee wong
are borne e clouds
demons at other times than that of
the nocturnal assembly. In Belgium a
nobleman of proved faith named Van-
derburch, Dean of the Cathedral
Chapter and an honoured citizen of
in, was walking outside the
town with an arquebus, when sud-
denly he heard the screaming of crows
and crowds of obscene crows and pies
in a tree near his path. He levelled his
arquebus and disc ed it at them,
and thought he had fairly hit one and
brought it down from the tree; but
all he found was an iron key from a
woman’s girdle. He took this home
and told a friend what had happened,


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XII.
asking whether he recognised the key.
His friend said that he knew it for the


key of a neighbouring house. Th
then went to the house, found the aes
locked, opened it with their key and,
shutting the door behind them, went
in, since they were acquainted with
the good man of the house; and there
they found a woman, the owner’s wife,
a in the side with an arquebus
shot.

Martin Delrio (Disgu. Magic. V,
makes the ‘allowing Sohastenaiac 3
was at the Nieulay Bridge at Calais
when it was stormed under the auspi-
cious leadership of the Serene Arch-
duke Albert and held by the soldiers
of His Catholic Majesty. A company
from Valogne was stationed as outpost
to keep a watch upon the men of
Boul who were then on the
enemy’s side ; and towards the eveni
two of these men saw a black pe
floating out of the clear sky, and from
the midst of it there seemed to come a
confused sound of many voices, al-
Soe no one could be seen. At last
the bolder of these two men said:
“What ghey ren we safe? If you
consent, e my arquebus
into that cloud.” Homme agreed,
and after the report of the arquebus
there fell to their fect from the clow
a drunken naked woman, very fat and
of middle age, wounded right through
the thigh. On being seized she pre-
tended to be feeble minded, and
would answer nothing to their ques-
tions but, ‘‘Are you friends or foes?”
Now what do they say to this, who
deny that these witches are trans-
ported? They will say that they do
not believe it. Then let them remain
sceptical ; for they will not believe any
number of eye-witnesses whom I could
produce. y? Because they them-
selves have never seen or heard such
a thing, and they have examined cer-
tain witnesses who have maintained
that they knew nothing of such hap-
penings. So says Delrio.

Now, reader, I will take further
instances from Nicolas Remy, the


BK. I. CH. XII.


truth of which has been sworn on oath
and given in evidence at trials. There
is, he says, at Gironcourt in the Vosges
Province a ropes ea castle which
was struck by lightning so that some
of its roofing was torn away. Not long

ards, namely, in October 1580
one Sebastienne Piccarde was accused
of witchcraft in that village, and con-
fessed to the Judge that this had been
the work of herself and her demon.
For, she said, we together rushed
from a cloud upon the castle meaning
to bring it entirely to ruin; but it was
not in our power to do so, and we
could only inflict a little damage so
that our attempt should not be
altogether abortive.

e following instance is similar.
A man named Cunin, who was a
magistrate in the bailiwick of S.
Clement in Ronchamp, was attending
to his hay with his servants on the 1st
arene. 1586, shag noticed the
s w very stormy. He was get
Yeady to go home, when suddenl Be
saw six oak trees near him crack by
lightning and torn up by the roots,
and a seventh appeared as if it had
been all rent and lacerated with
claws. He then made the more haste
towards home, in his hurry leavin
behind his hat and all his tools, an
again heard the crash of lightning
striking and saw perched in the top
of an oak near him a woman who
seemed to have come from the clouds.
He looked at her more closely and
recognised her as an old neighbour
of his, and at once began to revile
her as follows: “Are not you that vile
hag erite Warens, who, as I
now find, thoroughly deserve the
general suspicion of witchcraft which
every one has long harboured against
you? Whence come you now in that
costume?” To this she answered:
“Spare me, I entreat you, and kee
silent about what you now see. If
you will promise me this, I will
manage so that no harm at all shall
ever come from me to you and yours.”
And lest any should doubt the truth

E


MALEFICARUM 49


of this, let him know that it was proved
not only by the evidence of Cunin,
but by the confession of that very
Warens which was often repeated
even without the stimulus of torture,
and confirmed by her in the hearing
of many at the very last moment of
her life.

To the same effect are instances
arising out of other capital trials,
vouched for as true by those who
conducted them. A great thunder-
storm arose while some shepherds
were watching their flocks in the
Vosges, and since they were exposed
in the open they took shelter in the
neighbouring woods. There all at
once they saw two peasants perched,
or rather entangled, in the tops of the
trees, so terrified that it was to
see that they were not there of their
own will, but quite by accident and
a some unexpected impetus.
But then the filth and muddiness of
their clothing, and the fact that they
were all scratched with brambles,
gave rise to an increasing suspicion
that they had been cast out and
hurled into that place by their Master
after he had dragged them hither and
thither according to his custom. This
suspicion was the more confirmed
because, after they had sat there long
enough for the shepherds’ eyes to
make sure that they saw clearly, in
an instant, without anyone marki
how, they seemed to fall to the .
Finally all doubt was removed when
their own words, and the report of
the shepherds, were fully borne out
by spontaneous confession when they
were questioned in prison.

There is also a village lying to the
left as you go from emont to
Vittel, where the same two peasants
fell headlong from a storm cloud on
to the top of a roof. One of them,
whose name was Rouet, was terribly
troubled as to how they could get
safely to ground from so difficult a

lace. But the other, Amant, had
n led into the devil’s service by
his parents as soon as he reached


.
EEE


50

uberty and very soon adapted him-
rat othe Genito, saying: ‘Cheer
up, you fool; for he in whose power
we are is Master of far more difficult
matters than this, and will very soon
manage this affair for us.’ And no
sooner said than done; for they were
suddenly caught up together in a
whirlwind and set down safe on the
ground, while the house itself shook
so that it seemed to be torn from its
foundations. This was told by each
of them separately in the same words:
moreover their s agreed in every
respect with that of the villagers, as
to the day, the storm, and all the

anic. Finally, they who in life had


en associated together in crime,
perished in one fire by the Judge’s
sentence. So says Remy.


*


CHAPTER XIII


Whether Witches can Transmute Bodies
from One Form to Another.


Argument.


O one can doubt but that all

the arts and metamorphoses by
which witches change men into beasts
are deceptive illusions and opposed to
all nature. I add that any one who
holds the contrary opinion is in
danger of Anathema; and in this I am
supported by the opinion of S. Augus-
tine,* as also by logical reasoning.


~©For a human soul cannot inform the


body of a beast, any more than the
soul of a lion can inhabit the body of
a horse, or the soul of a horse the body
of a man: because every substantial
form, to be true to its own nature,
requires the peculiarly adapted dis-
positions and physical organism which
are natural to its own body, and the
soul regulates the motions of the


* “5. Augustine.” “De Ciuitate Dei,”
XVIII, 18. .


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XIl,


organic body. Therefore, as I have
said, no animal’s soul can inform the
human body, and no human soul
an animal’s body. The belief in such
monstrous seiainieniatiode is nothing
new, but was firmly held by the
Ancients many ages ago. Euanthes,f
an author of great note, says that it is
recorded in the Annals of Arcadia
that there was a certain family of the
tribe of Anthus which used every so
many years to go to a certain post
across which, having taken off their
clothes, they swam, and they were at
once changed from men into beasts:
and after nine years, if they had not
in that time tasted human blood, they
to their former shape. Hero-

dotus in Me , and Solinus in the
Polyhistor, chapter 8, record that the
Neuri, who live by the river Dnieper,
into roberto aerase
every year, and after the
appointed time has elapsed they
return to their true shape. But this
did not happen to them only in
times before the light of Christian
truth shone upon the world; for in
Bulgaria a certain official had in his
“ney the son of that Symeon who
had formerly ruled over the country,
and this boy could when he wished
change himself into a wolf or any
other animal by black magic. And
a certain Russian chieftain, hearing
that there was in his territory a man
who could change himself into what-
ever form he pleased, summoned him
and put him in chains and commanded
him to give instant proof of his power.
The man said he would willingly do
so if he might withdraw into the next
room for a while; and when this
had been granted, he suddenly came
back in the form of a wolf, but still
bound with his chains, to the great
astonishment of all who were present.
But the chieftain had two very fierce
dogs at hand, which fell upon the un-
happy creature and tore him to pieces.


are
days in


t “‘Euanthes.”” A Greek author as quoted
by Pliny, “Historia Naturalis,” VIII, 22.


BK. I, CH, XII.


But, as I have already said, no one
must let himself think that a man
can really be changed into a beast, or
a beast into a real man; for these are
magic portents and illusions, having
the form but not the reality of those
things which they present to our
sight. For the devil, as I have said
elsewhere, deceives our senses in
various ways. Sometimes he substi-
tutes another body, while the witches


themselves are absent or hidden apart
himself


in some secret place, and

assumes the body of a wolf formed
from the air and wrapped about him,
and does
those actions
which men
think are


done by the

wretched ab- y
sent witch

who is asleep. <)
William of } Dy
Paris tells J
how a certain E |
Holy Man A


made _ this
stratagem
clear to all.
Sometimes, in
accordance
with his pact,
he surrounds a witch with an aerial
effigy of a beast, each part of which
fits on to the correspondent part of the
witch’s body, head to head, mouth
to mouth, belly to belly, foot to foot,
and arm to arm; but this only happens
when they use certain ointments and
words, as in the case of the above
example of the man who was torn
in pieces by dogs: and then they
leave the footprints of a wolf upon the
ground. But in this last case it is no
matter for wonder if they are after-
wards found with an actual wound
in those parts of their human body
where they were wounded when in the
appearance of a beast ; for the envelop-
ing air easily yields, and the true
body receives the wound. But when
the witch is not bodily present at all,


ve 7 i
SS
=
NT sg
Sai ty
S
=
= 2
ue
By). =


MALEFICARUM 51


then a = a her in that
part of her absent body correspondi
to the wound which he ainins 7 ame
been received by the beast’s body.
Bartolomeo Spina* tells the following
example of this sort.


*
Examples.


A certain day-labourer named
Philip bore witness in this very city
of Ferrara to this apparent conversion
of witches into cats. For he swore to
me on oath that, three months before,
a certain
witch had
told him not
to drive them
away if he
saw any cats
come coying
playfully up
to his son,
whom she
had strongl
bewitche
and had un-
dertaken to
cure. The
same day,
aboutan hour
after she had

one away, he and his wife saw a
ig cat which they had never seen
before go deliberately up to the boy.
They were frightened and kept driving
it off, and were at last goaded to
exasperation by its insistence, and the
man shut the door and chased it about
for a long time, striking it with a
stick, until finally he made it jump
out of a high window, so that the
cat’s body seemed to be all bruised
and broken. After that, the old
witch kept her bed for many days
with a Tecilena and broken body.
Consequently, where there had already
been a slight suspicion that she was a


* “Spina.” “De Strigibus,” XIX. “Ex-
perientiae apparentis conuersionis strigum in
catos,”


52


witch and had bewitched the boy who
lay very sick under the spell of his
infirmity, this now grew into a strong
and grave suspicion; for the blows
and wounds which were given to the
cat were found upon the corresponding
parts of the witch’s body.

Remy (II, 5) writes that nearly all
those who came into his hands
charged with witchcraft told him
that they chan themselves into
cats whenever they wished to enter
other people’s houses in secret, so
that they could scatter their poison
ee night. Barbelline Rayel, at
Blainville-la~Grande on the 1st Janu-
ary, 1587, confessed that she was
turned into a cat so that in that shape
she might more easily enter the house
of Jean Louis and wander about it
in greater safety; and when she had
done so and found his two-year-old
infant unguarded she dusted it with a
drugged “Siege which she held in
the pad of her paw, and killed it.

¢ Shepherd Petronio, who was
tried at Dalheim in 1581, whenever
he felt moved with hatred or envy
against the shepherds of neighbouring
flocks (as is the way of such men),
used to change himself into a wolf by
the use of certain incantations, and so
for a long time escaped all suspicion
of being the cause of the mutilation
and death of his neighbours’ en

The following example is told by
the famous Count of Salm, chief
Gentleman of the Bedchamber at the
Palace of Lorraine. In Hesse- -
hau, over which town he was Lord,
the inhabitants, in accordance with
the ancient custom, came to pay him
their yearly tribute of labour. As they
came with their cart-loads of timber,
and waited in turn for their reward
of food, the dogs which were with
them began to fight in the castle hall.
One of these dogs hid itself in one
of the bathroom furnaces, and the
rest barked violently at it. One of the
townsmen looked at it and, finding it
uglier than the rest, began to suspect
the truth (for that part is said to be


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH, XIII.


infested with witches); so he thrust
his weapon into its face and grievously
wounded it, whereupon it rushed out
of the door and was no more seen.
Then a rumour crept all over the
town that there was an old woman in
bed with a wound of which no one
knew where she had received it. They
all ony to suspect the truth, namely,
that she was the mad dog who had
been wounded in the castle hall. This
suspicion, on the top of a long stand-
ing rumour that she was a witch, led
to her being seized and imprisoned ;
and at last, after she had been care-
fully questioned, she freely confessed
all that has just been told, together
with very many other sorceries.

Hear also what Remy reports to
have been told him by the Noble
Baroness Lady Diana of Dommart,
ee oes

ar “ uis 0}
Haurech, as follows. Not long since
there was in Thiaucourt, a village of
that country, a woman addicted to
these evil practices and credited with
the power of assuming different sha
with the help of the Devil. This
nes i coeneicen RSet hatred
oe heh, ¢ village shep on account
of his having bested her in some money
transaction, and fell in the form of a
wolf upon his flock as it was feeding.
The shepherd ran up and wounded
her in the thigh with an axe so
grievously that, in her weakness, she
was forced to flee into a neighbourin:
thicket. He followed her there, a
found her trying to stop the freely
flowing blood by binding her wound
with strips torn from her clothes.
With this evidence against her she
was taken into custody and acknow-
ledged all that we have said, and
peeny expiated her crimes at the
s


In Flanders at a town not far
from Dixmude a peasant was drinking
at an ale-house with his son, a lively
youth, and watched the hostess scoring
= the beer which she brought him.

e noticed that she marked up double


BK. I. CH. XIV.


the quantity that he drank, but kept

uict until he had finished drinking.

hen he called the hostess and asked
what he owed; and she demanded
po rege ny nie fe wre
r to pay it ’ many
persons mide threw on to the table
what he knew to be a sufficient sum
of money, and was going out. The
enraged hostess said: “You will not

o home to-day, or my name is not

o-and-so!’’ But he went away despis-
ing the woman’s threats. He came to
a stream where he had left his boat,
but he could not, however much he
tried, even with the help of his son,
who was a lusty lad, move it from
the bank; so that you would have
said that it was nailed to the very
ground. Two or three soldiers hap-
pened to come that way, and he called
to them, sp bon “Good friends, come
and i me launch this boat from
the bank, and I will give you a good
drink.” They came and exerted them-
selves to the utmost for a long time
in vain, till one of them, panting and
sweating, said: “Let us unload the
boat. Perhaps when it is em y we
shall manage better.’? And be old,
when the goods were exposed to view,
a lurid great toad stood in the road
looking at them with gleaming eyes.
One of the soldiers at once spitted
it through the throat with his sword
and threw it into the water, where it
floated belly upwards as if dead. The
rest gave it more wounds as it floated,
and suddenly the boat was launched.
The overjoyed peasant took his helpers
back to the same inn and ordered
beer. This was brought by a serving
maid; and he asked where the hostess
was. He was told that she was very
ill in bed. “What!” said he. “Do
he think I am drunk, you fool? It is

ardly half an hour since I left her
as well as you are. I am going to
see what the matter is.”’” He went


into the bedroom and found that the
woman had died from wounds in the
neck and stomach. “How did she
get these wounds?” he exclaimed.


MALEFICARUM


53


The ing maid said she did not
know and that, to her knowl , she
had not set foot outside the house.


They went to the Magistrate, and the
cuts and stabs were found to be in
the same places as those in which the
soldiers had wounded to death the
toad, which was never found.


*


CHAPTER XIV
Whether Witches have Power to Make
Beasts Talk.


Argument.


A? times it happens that God
grants the power of to
that which naturally has no such
power, as in the case of Balaam’s ass
in Holy Scripture. How this may
be, none knows but He who is the
author of all speech: but I think that
for the most part it is the voice of an
Angel speaking in such inanimate
objects or brutes. As for brute animals
speech is created in their own bodies
and is a physical action of the beast
itself; yet such action is intellectual
only on the part of the Angel. This is
true of such animals as have organs
adapted to speech, as magpies, parrots,
ravens and their like: but when the
animal’s organs are not so adapted, as
in asses, oxen, etc., I think that the
Angel creates a voice from the air
about the animal, The same would
be true in the case of inanimate
objects, such as fire, water, earth, air,
or corpses, which likewise could easily
be made to appear to speak.
Porphyry, considering the question
whether magicians can truly under-
stand the speech of animals, writes
that in his own time it used to be said
of Apollonius of Tyana that, havin
ae a sparrow twittering to a floc
of its fellows, he explained to his
friends who were with him that the
sparrow was telling the others that
an ass laden with corn had fallen by


54


the city gate, and the corn had been

Uled on the ground. In this way

pollonius wished to pretend that he
could understand the chattering of
birds; but such a thing is incredible.
Yet we have daily evidence of the
fact that beasts, at any rate those of
the same kind, understand each other ;
and Porph tried to prove this.
For when a fish has broken from the
net it warns the others of the 4
so that no more fish of that sort will
be caught that day. Petrus Gregorius*
in his De Republica, XV, 5, mentions
this matter, prudently adding that
animals are incapable of true intelli-
gence and conversation.


*


Examples.

Antonius Bonfinius t in his Histories,
III, writes that about three years
after the defeat of the Emperor Sigis-
mund by the Turks at Ternowar, a
number of — went to the battle-
field and heard a voice from
the bones calling upon the Names of

esus Christ the Saviour and the
irgin Mary: and a talking head
among the corpses, seeing that there
were men standing by, said: “Why
do Pa stand so amazed, O men? Iam
a Christian who died in this battle
unconfessed; but Mary our Mother
would not have me condemned to
eternal punishment, and has granted
me to keep my power of speech till
now so that I may confess my sins
and purge my soul with holy absolu-
tion. I beg you, then, to bring me a
priest to hear my confession and give
me absolution.”” When he was
how he had earned so great a benefit
from the Virgin, he answered that
he had been peculiarly devout to

* “Petrus Gregorius.” A famous jurist
who in 1570 was appointed to the Chair of
Civil Law at the University of Cahors.

t “Antonius Bonfinius.” “Rerum Ungari-
carum Decades Quattuor cum Dimidia.”’ Folio,
Basle, 1568,


COMPENDIUM


BK. 1, CH. XIV.


Her during his life, and had with
great reverence observed Her seven
early Feasts, fasting religiously on
read and water. Therefore a ia
was brought from the next village,
who duly heard the confession; and
when the head had obtained remission
and absolution for all its sins, it at
once and for ever fell silent.

The devil, who is the Ape of God, at
times performs many false miracles of
a similar nature, which Noa ens
in His own avenging justice. Phlegon
of Tralles says that Polycritus married
a ian woman and, after havin
slept with her for three nights, di
on the third day, leaving her pregnant.
The woman gave birth to an herma-

hrodite monster, which was brought
ore a council of the people to
decide what it portended what
rag te eae about it: and then

e ghost ycritus appeared in
the midst of the people and foretold
a massacre of the Locrians and
Aetolians ; and with the people power-
less to interfere he took off the head
of his monstrous son and devoured
him and vanished ; and afterwards the
head also spoke of the same massacre.

The same author quotes the follow-
ing from Antisthenes the Peripatetic
Philosopher. When the Consul Acilius
Glabro conquered Antiochus, King of
Asia, the Romans were frightened
by oracles from invading Asia an
further. And the Roman General,
Publius, moved as it is thought with a
divine madness, foretold that he
would be devoured by a wolf, which
would leave his head: and this head
made a oH speech foreshowing
the coming defeat of the Romans.

With the help of a demon a witch
can easily vitiate a man’s organs so
that, while trying to speak, he barks
or howls or clucks or neighs; for we
have known many such cases. We
read that in 1546 Margarita of
Essling had pains in her belly, and
that it swelled to such a size as com-
pletely to hide her face, te more
than ten palms in circumference.


BK, 1. CH. XV.


Those who stood about her bed
heard the crowing of cocks, the
clucking of hens, the braying of asses,
the barking of dogs, the bleating of
sheep, the grunting of pigs, the lowing
of oxen and the deh 9 43 of horses.
Then she voided from her side about


a hundred and pee worms and
serpents. This was believed to be a
miracle; but it was in truth only a
devil’s illusion created by the girl’s
mother for the sake of gain.


*


CHAPTER XV


Whether the Devil can Make Men
Insensible to Torture.*


Argument.


| arse with the question
whether the devil can render
insentient that which is naturally
sensitive, so that, for example, a man


*“Insensible to torture.” It was well
known that witches had charms which enabled
them to bear the severest tortures without
flinching. Damhouder, whilst member of the
council at Bruges, relates a case which came
under his own eyes. A witch during three ex-
aminations not only endured the fiercest en-
gines, but actually laughed at and mocked the
officers. At length a piece of parchment
covered with cabalistic characters was found on
her person, and after its removal she soon con-
Sessed her pact with Satan, (‘‘Rerum Crimin.
Praxis,” Cap. XXXVII, Nos. 21, 22. Cf.
Brunnemann, “Le Inquisit. Process,’ Cap.
VIII, Memb. v, No. 70.) Grilland tells us
that he had met instances of insensibility to
torture only to be lained by magic. “‘De

tione et Tortura,”’ Art. LIT, 12-16. He
gives ever setae which were used
completely to deaden all pain: ‘‘Quemadmo-
dum lac Beatae Gloriosae Mariae Uirginis
Suit dulce et suaue Domino Nostro Iesu
Christo, ita haec tortura sit dulcis et suauis
brachits et membris meis.”” Another ran:
Imparibus meritis tria corpora ramis.
Dismas et Gestas, in medio est Diuina Potestas.
Dismas damnatur, Gestas ad asira leuatur.


MALEFICARUM


55


should feel no pain when put to
torture, Iamblichus (De myster. <sypt.)
writes that many heathen seers have
been thrown into the fire and have
either not been burned or have not
felt their burning or any other tortures ;
and he says that this is due to some
god who drives back the flames, or
nullifies the other tortures. And what
is this of the sorcerer Iamblichus
butthe Eurycles? Whatare
those seers but witches? In our own
day there are impious soldiers who
think that they are invulnerable if
their armour is charmed with a
spell, or if have the hardi-
hood to commit sacrilege of


Cocrasacif (2M meer »12
tells that they wear a shirt inscri

with a terrible and most horrid
character, which they call the Shirt
of Hell; or else they wear trinkets
engraved with various magic signs;
or they make use of prayers, which


At Innsbruck a witch boasted that if she had


but a thread of a prisoner's tunic she could
enable him to endure torture to the death with-


pe Spear with Torture.” When one finds him-
self tied


spill Blood by Herod, the infamous executioner.
Amen.’ Order a mass in the name of all the
Saints”

¢ “‘Codronchi.” This famous Italian physi-


cian was born at Imola c. 1560. The work to
which reference is made is: “‘Batistae Codron-
chit de Morbis Ueneficis ac Ueneficiis, libri
quattuor, in quibus non solum certis rationi
ueneficia claro demonstratur sed eorum species
. . . aperiuntur.” Venice, 1595.


56


the sorcerers blasphemously and
falsely ascribe to S. Leo or Charle-
e, invoking the mighty Names


of . So does the devil delude his
own, as may be seen from the examples.
t*
Examples.


Martin Delrio (D.M. I, 21) tells
that he knew a certain law student
named Quirino, a Bachelor of Law,
who, relying upon such a charm,
boldly mingled in brawls and fights
and, aoe _~— struck, was never
wounded. At last, in 1572 or 1573,
he was killed at a drinking-bout in
Rome through some trifling wound.
The following example is similar.

Nider writes in his Formicarius that
in the district of Berne there was a
notorious witch named Scavius,* who
dared to boast publicly that whenever
he wished he could change himself
into a mouse in the sight of all his
rivals; and so he is said to have often
escaped from the hands of his mortal
enemies. But, when it was the will
of Divine Justice to make an end of
his wickedness, his enemies stole upon
him as he was sitting in a warm bath
by the window suspecting no attack,
and suddenly struck him through the
window with swords and spears, so
that he perished miserably for his
crimes.


* “Scavius.”” This wretch was not only a
warlock of most ancient impiety, but also an
instructor of younger witches. Peter of Berne
judged that he spread sorcery like a plague, and
Nider tells us that this holy Inquisitor when


bewailing the iniqui necromancy prac-
tised in Berne “quorum primus auctor
Suit quidam Scauius dictus . . . Hic tamen suae


Sraudis commenta discipulo, qui Hoppo uoca-
batur, reliquit. Et idem supra dictum Staedelin
in malefictis istrum fecit.”’ Staedelin or
Stadlin dwelt at Boltigen in Simmenthal. He
was brought to trial before Peter of Berne and
confessed many secrets of the horrid craft.
ro * et Maleficarum,” Part II, Qn. 1,


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XV.


It is a common matter for witches
to escape the torture of the rack; for
they overcome all the pain by laughter
or sleep or silence. Loys Charondas
le Caronf¢ in his Antichrist Unmasked, 1,
tells a wonderful story of this sort as
follows. He knew a woman of
who endured boiling fat poured over
her whole body and severe racking
of all her limbs without feeling any-
thing. For she was taken from the
rack free from any sense of pain,
whole and uninjured, except that her

eat toe, which had been torn off

uring her questioning, was not re-
stored, but this did not hinder or
hurt her at all. After she had under-
me ony torture and had obstinately
enied her crimes, she cut her
throat in prison. So the devil, having
accused her of witchcraft through the
Sout of a possessed woman, killed


Near Amiens in 1599 a girl witch
was imprisoned, who felt nothing
when her feet were cruelly burned or
when she was heavily scourged, until
at the suggestion of a priest they
hung about her neck a waxen image
of the Blessed Lamb. Then, by virtue
of the sacred amulet, the wiles and
guile of the devil were defeated, and
she began to feel the force of pain.
Therefore it is clear that this indiffer-
ence to torture, which even Tostado

In»Genesim. XIII) recognises, springs

m no physical cause, but is due
to the devil’s work.

Remy (I, 5) tells the following.
When Isabella Pardea was seized for
witchcraft at Epinal on the 6th May,
1588, and had shown the magistrate
a part of her body branded by the
devil, it occurred to the magistrate
to test the truth of this alleged
insensitiveness to pain. So he ordered
a pin to be thrust and pressed deeply
into her, and this was done in the
presence of sufficient witnesses, and


no blood flowed from the wound,


t “Loys.” “Charondas de Caron.’ Born
at Paris, 1530; died 1617.


BK. I. CH. XVI.
and the witch gave not the least sign


of pain.

ke Brindisi in November 1590,
when Claudia Bogarta was about to
be tortured, she was closely shaved,
as the custom is, and so a scar was
exposed on the -P of her bare brow.
The Inquisitor then suspecting the
truth, namely, that it was a mark made
by the devil’s claw, which had before
been hidden by her hair, ordered a
pin to be thrust deep into it; and
when this was done she neither felt
wey ain, nor did so much as a drop
of blood come from the wound. Yet
she persisted in denying the truth,
saying that her insensitiveness was
caused by an old blow from a stone.
But when she was t to the
torture, she not only acknowledged
that the scar had been given her by
the devil, but confessed to many other
abominable crimes which she had
ves usa es re

n June 1591 at Iesi, a village a
mile Fermce Pom Brindisi, the Judge
ordered a gaoler to search Mugeta,
who was charged with witchcraft.
The gaoler therefore stripped her to
see if he could find any devil’s mark,
and at last found on her left thigh a
mark like a shell. Into this he thrust
his weapon with all his force, but
Mugeta uttered no cry, nor could
he get one drop of blood from the
wound; but when he li a pricked
the place next to the Snaths she roared
aloud in pain, and much blood
flowed from it.


w


CHAPTER XVI


Whether by Witchcraft and Devil’s Work
the Pals can be Interchanged.


Argument.
ORNELIUS GEMMA inquires


into the mutation of the feminine
into the ; e sex, and the
masculine into the feminine, which is


MALEFICARUM


™" 57
admitted by modern physicians to
be natural. We read of many women
who have become men. Hippocrates
writes that at Abdera Phactula, the
wife of Pitheus, had borne him
children; but when her husband was
sent into exile, after a few months her
menstrual courses ceased, and she
was smitten with terrible pains all
over her body, and acquired the
physical features of a man. He says
that the same pe happened to
Anamisia, the wife of Gorgippus, at
Thasos. Livy tells the same ag in
Book 24 (de Spoletana muliere). Pliny
says that it is no fable that women
are changed into men. Martin Delrio
uses the following words (quoting
from Pliny, Historia Naturalis, VII, 4):
“T myself saw in Africa L, Cossicius,
a Tisdritanian citizen, ed into
a man on his weddi ay.” S.
Augustine* mentions heathen records
of women becoming men, and of hens
being changed into the masculine
sex, not, however, by witchcraft but
naturally: for witches cannot actually
do this thing, but only in appearance
to deceive us by casting a glamour
over our senses with the help of the
devil, as we have shown elsewhere.


t


Examples.


Giovanni Pontanof (Hist. Spe vee
tells that at Gaeta a woman change
into a man after having been married
for fourteen years to a fisherman: and
another, named Emilia, after havi
been for twelve years the wife
Antonio Spensa, a citizen of Eboli,
dissolved her marriage, married a
wife and begot children. He speaks
also of another woman who had borne
one son to her husband, and suddenl
assumed virility, left her husband,


* “S§, Augustine.” ““De Ciuitate Dei,” IT,
T.
2 + “Pontano.” “De Bello Neapolitano,” V,
**Pontani Opera Omnia,” Basileae, 1538, II,
bb. 574-75+


ee


58
and married a woman who bore
children to her.

Cocceius Sabellicus* has some simi-
lar stories which I shall omit, and
will set down two instances which
occurred in Spain in our own time,
and were faithfully described by
Antonio de Turrecremataf in his
Jardin de las Flores curiosas.

In the town of Ezgucira in Portugal,
about nine leagues from Coimbra,
there lived a nobleman who had a
daughter named Maria Pacheco. When
this girl was at the age when a woman’s
monthly courses usually begin, in-
stead i. a fluid sey eg mee broke
or otherwise grew from those parts
a virile member; and so, from a
girl, she suddenly became a ic
young man endowed with virility,
and assumed the name of Manoel
Pacheco. He then took ship for India
and endured much hardship and
ph apiemes great deeds as a soldier.

ing to his country he married
a noble wife: yet Amatus the Portu-
guese, writing in his Centuries, makes
no mention of any children, but
says that he remained unbearded and
with a feminine cast of countenance,
these being indications of imperfect


* “Cocceius Sabellicus.”’ Marcus Antonius
Cocceius Sabellicus, a Venetian writer of emin-
ence. He is the author of “‘Epistolarum libri
XII’; “Orationum libri XII’; “De situ
Uenetae libri tres’; and many poems, ow
some are devotional, such as “De ibus
Deiparae Uirginis Eligiae XII.” I have used
the collected edition of his “Opera,” Venice
(23 December), 1502.

t “Antonio de Turrecremata.” In Latin
Torquemada, The first edition of the “Jardin
de las Flores curiosas, en que se tradan algunas
materias . . . etc.”, is Salamanca, 1570.
“Olivante de Laura,” a romance by Turrecre-
mata was discovered in Don Quixote’s library
and condemned to the flames by the curate.
Turrecremata was a very popular author in his
day, and the “* Jardin de las Flores’’ was trans-
lated into French by Gabriel Chappuys as the
“Hexameron” as early as 1579. It was re-
ital Lyons, 1582; Paris, 1583; Rouen,
1610.


————————— ee, _


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XVI.


virility. Finally Torquemada adds
that he heard this from a most trust-
worthy friend of great authority.

Not far from Benaventana in Spain
the wife of a farmer of moderate
fortune was ill-treated by her husband
because she was barren. Weary of
such bad treatment she ran away
one night dressed as a man-servant,
and in this guise went from place
to place earning her living by menial
work. After some time, either because
of the efficacy of her natural heat or
through imagination induced and
strengthened by her continuous mascu-
line clothing and work, she found
that she had actually turned into a
man. Therefore she, who had long
been a wife, determined to act the
husband, and consummated her mar-
riage with a woman. The secret was
kept for a long time, since she did
not dare to tell it to any one, until a
certain man who been very
well known to her noticed that she
was in face very like that farmer’s
wife who had run away. He asked
if he were her brother; whereupon
she told him the whole story as it
sag SP and so it came to light.

aptista Fregosof (Exemplorum, I, 6)
writes as follows. At ram the reign
of Ferdinand I, Ludovico Guarna,
acitizen of Salerno, had five daughters,
the two youngest of whom were named
Francesca and Carola. When these
two girls reached the age of fifteen the
genital parts of both of them sprouted
into masculinity, so that they changed
their clothes and were taken for men,
being called Francesco and Carolo.

At Eboli in the same region, a girl
had been betrothed for four years.
On the first night of her marriage
she went to bed with her husband:
but ecither‘owing to the friction or to
some other unknown cause, when
the hymen which gave her the appear-
ance of a woman was broken, a male
organ stood out. She then went home


¢ “Baptista Fregoso.”’ An Italian writer of
the fifteenth century.


BK. I, CH, XVI.


and sued in the Courts for a return
of her dowry, and was thereafter
reckoned as a man.

Phlegon writes: “A virgin born at
Smyrna named Philotis was, on reach-
ing maturity, given by her parents in
marriage to a man: but a masculine
organ appeared and she changed
into a man. Also in Laodicea in
Syria a woman named Aeteta was

into a man while in the very
act with her husband, Aetetus. This
was when Macrinus was Governor of
Athens, and Lucius Lamia and


Michel de Montaigne says that in
his time there was at pat. Pe girl
named Maria who, as she was dancing
rather vigorously, was suddenly made
a sorta, 2 the sprouting of male
organs, and was given in the Sacra-
ment of Confirmation by the Bishop
of Soissons the name of Germain, ef
which she began to be known.
beard grew upon her chin, and she
lived long, even to a decrepit old
age, but never married a wife.

If this can come about naturally, as
so many authors maintain, I should
think that with God’s permission it is
possible to the devil, relying upon
natural causes.


a


CHAPTER XVII


Whether the Spirits of the Dead can
Appear to Men.


Argument.


LL ro Mevtetint oY a are
ce t, ce) c wer
dent Sete t of God the souls of the
dep can and do at times ce
to the living. For we read that Christ
appeared to S. Peter when the Apostle
was fleeing from persecution, and
said that He was going to Rome to
be crucified again.
Our Holy Father Ambrose bears
witness to the appearance of spirits


MALEFICARUM 59


in his Contra Auxentium de _basilicis
tradendis. Dionysius the Areopagite
writes that Jesus appeared with a

t company of Angels and blamed
Fim for his harshness in seeking to
punish the sins of his brother and
seducer.


8. Justin Martyr testifies that the
souls of the dead - ta times
a , Maintaining that spirit
oF Samuel was actually catied x A
Tertullian sup this view in the
following words: “But if the Divine
Power has recalled the souls of some
to their bodies to witness to His
truth, we must not on that account
give credence to the claims of witches,
to illusive dreams, or to poetic fables.”
ee speaks as follows in refutation
of Celsus: “The wicked spirit, which
is bound to the,earth by horrid
crimes so that it may not aspire to
Heaven, goes wandering about the
earth haunting graveyards; and in
such places shadowy ghosts are most
often seen dwelling upon this carth.
And it is to be thought that of such
sort are the spirits of those in every
age who have been snared and bound
in witchcraft.” And in the time of
Origen, the Blessed Potamiaena ap-
peared to the murderer Basilides and
converted him to the faith, as we are
told by Eusebius, and by Origen
_ i contra ae Bk. 1. -

. Gregory of Nyssa, in his most
authoritative Life of S. Gre the
feet mate ge ee

ir ary . Jo e Evange-
list prokavens to oy See pists S.
Cyprian, De Uistonibus Nocturnis, Epist.
12 and 69, where he argues against
those who despise such visions. S.
Ambrose, in 90, says that
while her family were watching by
the tomb of S. Agnes one night, she
appeared to them and said: “Do not


mourn for me as dead, my kinsmen,”
etc.

In the year of Our Lord 300 Christ
appeared to S. Peter of Alexandria in
the form of a boy asking for his robe
which had been torn by Arius (Surius,


ad a


COMPENDIUM


60
tom, 6, 15th Nov.). See also Pope


re 7: Concil. Nicene 2, act. 2:
. Gregory of Tours, apud Laurentium,
tom. 6, 12th December: S. Gregory of
Neocaesarea, Jn oratione de Nicena
Synodo: Nicephorus, VIII, 23: S. Basil,

uera Uirginitate, paulo post medium,
and S. Gregory of Nazianzus, Jn
oratione in Laudem Caesarii.

In the year 400 the death of S.
Martin was made known to S, Severi-
nus and S. Ambrose when they were
absent from him. This is told also by
S. Gregory of Tours in his Book on the
Miracles of S. Martin, and in his Book
on the Glory of the Confessors. We have
the authority of S. Augustine* that
SS. Gervasius and Protasius a)
to S. Ambrose and told him where
their bodies were lying.
oe the tia 2 ~ Sea

Mary with S. Jo e Baptist
aad S. John the E ist appeared
to Abbot Ciriacus and said that she
would not enter his cell because, un-
known to him, there were in it two
books na th ae eee written
against the Blessed Virgin Mary.

There is the signal authority of S.
Jerome which at one blow silences all
the heretics who say that the spirits
are all held imprisoned until the Day of
Judgement. These are S, Jerome’s own
words: “Thou sayest that the souls of
the Apostles and M s abide in
Abraham’s bosom, or in the outer cold,
or under the Altar of God, and that
they cannot appear at their tombs or
wherever they wish: for they are for-
sooth of senatorial dignity, and are
shut, notin a foul prison together with
murderers, but in free and honourable
keeping in the Islands of the Blessed
and the Elysian Fields. Wilt thou
make laws for God? Wilt thou put
chains upon the Apostles? So that they
should be held in bondage up to the
Day of Judgement, and not be with
their Lord, of whom it is written that


* “§. Augustine.’ “De Ciuitate Dei,”
XXII, 8; and “*Confessiones,” IX, 7.


BK. I. CH. XVII


they follow the Lamb wherever He
weg They therefore who are with
e Lamb must be believed to go
everywhere, if the Lamb goes every-
where: and can the Devil and his
demons wander all over the earth
and with great speed appear in
every place, while the Martyrs, after
their blood has been shed, are shut
down in a box and cannot come out
_ it?” So says S. Jerome (Aduersus
i ;
ut we must understand that such
apparitions are not the ordinary rule,
but occur in accordance with the
special and singular permission of
. S. Augustine (De cura pro mor-

tuis agenda, c. 13), wrote about his
mother in words which our opponents
have scandalously twisted against us,
as follows: “If the souls of the dead
were concerned with the affairs of the
living, I am sure that my mother (to
say nothing of any others) would not
fail to visit me every night.” Else-
where he speaks openly about that


exceptional ission, saying in
Chapter 15 that it is no common or

i thing for the souls of the
dead to appear to the living; but that
the appearance of Samuel and Moses
in the Scriptures proves that they can
do so.

To conclude shortly, there is un-
limited authority on this matter.
Therefore, that I may not be tedious, I
will only quote the authority of cer-
tain Theologians; such as Richard
de Middletont; Peter of Palude,f 4,


+ “Richard de Middleton.” “Doctor soli-
dus et fundatissimus”; the date of his birth is
unknown; most authorities name 1300 as the
year of his death; but some say 1304, and others
1307 or 1308, This great schoolman paid due
attention to the important problems of demonia-
lity, “‘Quaestiones disputatae”’ (1284), q. xxxi;

he also treats of the Incubus and Succubus,
“In wet neroaeee NM d, ben ts is i; 6.
For a st See ar Hocedez, S.7.,
‘Richard de py Ave » Vie, Ses Guvres,
Sa Doctrine,” Louvain, 1985.

t “Peter of Palude.”” A Dominican theolo-
gian of the fourteenth century; died 1342.


7 nell


BK. 1. CH, XVII.
distinct. 45, q. 3; Scotus, = T, art. 45


Denys the > usian, —
Theologicum, 4, distinct. 45, q. 1.5
in his work on the Four ings,


and in his book inscribed to the
Novices of his Order; Dominic Soto*
and Peltanusf in their several treatises,
de Tite ~. 5; S. Peter Canis-


very many others. Let us now turn
to some examples.


og


Examples.

Socrates and Rufinus record that
S. Spiridion had a daughter named
Irene who, having well ministered to
him, died a virgin. After her death
there came a man who said that he had
given her something to keep for him.


* “Dominic Soto.” A renowned Spanish
theologian of the Order of S. Dominic. Born
at Segovia, 1494; died at Salamanca, 1560.
See d-Quétif, “‘Scriptores Ordinis Prae-
dicatorum,” LI, p. 171, sqq.

+ “‘Peltanus.”’ Theodore Peltanus, a Bibli-
cal scholar of note, who translated several
commentaries from Greek into Latin. His own
glosses are very highly esteemed. One of his
ase important pigh is his me 0 inp
“Com on pocalypse,” is)
Andrew of Caesarea (sixth century), which was
published, gto, 1584.

t “S. Peter Canisius, S.7.” 1521-1597.
Doctor of the Church.

§ “Gregory of Valencia, 8.7.” Professor
Hans University of Ingolstadt. Born at Me-

7 Sarre. (some say 1551; others
1540); died at Naples, 23 April, 1603. He
The lcs poen et Ingolsted (575-08)

lectures given at t (1575-92
Cuaeeebres wad alas


mentarti,” Liv. III, col. 2008, 44°) that
where the guilt of witchcraft is legally estab-
lished the must inflict the ty, even
though he hit were personally convinced of
the nullity of the charge.


MALEFICARUM 61


The father knew nothing about it, but
searched the whole house without find-
ing what the man wanted. But he
insisted and said with tears that he
would lose his life unless he recovered
the thing. The old man was touched
by his tears, and went to his daughter’s
tomb and called her by name. Then
she said from the tomb: “What do you
wish, father?” He answered: ‘Where
did you put that thing which this man
gave you to re oe the

lace, saying: “If you dig there, you
Weill find it.” He went home and found
it just as his daughter had said, and
gave the ms eman. Ifshe could
ant could she not also appear?

ertainly she could. Hear also how
the dead subscribed to the Council of
Nicaea.

Gregory of Neocaesarea records the
following marvel, writing of the Coun-
cil of Nicaea. Two Holy Bishops,
Chrisantus and Musonius, happened
by God’s will to die before they had
appended their signatures to the

ouncil’s decisions. So the Holy
Fathers met together at the last rest-
ing-place of the two who had gone
before, and when they were where they
could be heard, they said: “Brethren
and Fathers, you have fought a noble
fight with us, and have run your course
and kept your faith. If therefore, in
the light of your clearer knowledge,
you judge that our decisions are pleas-
ing to God, let there be nothing to
prevent you also from adding your
signatures.” Saying this, and leaving
there the signed decisions of the Holy
Fathers, sea passed all that night in
prayer: and on the next day when
they came there, they found added to
their own signatures those of the two
Holy Fathers in the following words:
‘We, Chrisantus and Musonius, who
sat with all the Fathers in the First
Holy Oecumenical Council, although
we are translated in body, with our
hands we agree to and sign this docu-
ment.” From this it is clear that with
God’s permission the souls of the dead
can return to us.


ve


62


Blessed Paul the Deacon (not S. Paul
of Nola) says in his Life of S. Ambrose:
“On the day of his death a letter was
received from the East by his vener-
able successor Simplicianus, written by
S. Ambrose as if he were still living,
and this letter is still preserved in a
monastery at Milan. He appeared to
certain saintly men, praying with
them and laying his hands upon them;
and we found that the letter bore the
same date as that of his death. And
in Tuscany at Florence, where the

d Zenobius is now Bishop, because

e had promised that he would often
visit them, he was seen praying at the
fad boon bude thes Bp Bley aa.

t there as we
learn from Zenobius imnaclt When
Radagais the Ostrogott was besieging
Florence and citizens were in
despair, he appeared to some one in the
house where Eugenius lay sick, and
promised that they would be relieved
in two days; and at this the citizens
took heart, and on the second day
Count Stilicho came with an army
and defeated the enemy. The follow-
ing we learned from Pansofia, a religi-
ous woman who was mother of the boy
Pansofius. When Mazcezel was in
despair for his own safety and that of
his army which he was leading against
Gildo, S$. Ambrose appeared to him in
a vision at night holding a stick; and
when Mazcezel cast himself at the
Saint’s feet, the old man struck the

und with his stick and said: “Here,
ere, here,’ pointing out the place, and
giving the man who had been deemed
worthy of the visitation to understand
that in the same place where he had
seen the Saint he would in three da
gain the victory. And so he brought
is war to a prosperous conclusion.

‘But we who are dwellers in Milan
know these things on the authority of
Mazcezel hi ; for in this our
vince he related this matter to man
priests, and therefore we have set it
down in our book with the greater
confidence.

“Further, we received at Milan with


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XVII.
the greatest reverence the Relics of
the tyrs Sisinnius and Alexandrin-


us* who in our time, after the death of
S. Ambrose, gained the Martyrs’ crown
in the parts of Anaunia through the

ersecution of the heathen. And we

ow that on that day there came a
blind man who touched the coffin in
which the Relics of the Saints were
being carried, and received his sight.
For in a dream he had seen a ship
coming to the shore with a number of
men clothed in white; and as they
came to the shore he prayed one of
them to tell him who they were, and
was told that they were S. Ambrose
and his companions. Hearing this
name he eae Ye that he might receive
his sight, and was told by the man:
‘Go to Milan to my brethren who will
come there onsuch a day, and you shall
receive sight.’ For the blind man
was, as he said himself, from the coast
of Dalmatia and had never been to the
city before he came straight to the Holy

ics, although he was yet blind;
and when he had touched them, began
to see.”

Constantius Presbytert in his Life
of S. Germain of Auxerre, chapter 17,
writes as follows: The Saint was
fearlessly abiding in a ghost-haunted
house, when suddenly there appeared
before the master of the house a
terrible Shade which slowly raised it-
self before his eyes, and the stone walls
were hidden by acloud. In terror the
man begged for the priest’s protec-
tion; and the Saint ran forward and
saw a fearful apparition. He first in-
voked the Name of Christ, and then
asked who he was and what he did


* “Sisinnius and Alexandrinus.” “Roman
29 May. “In the district of
the holy Martyrs Sisin-
nius, gage Alexandrinus, who in the

S78 Honorius, as Paulinus
is “Life of S. Ambrose,” obtained
the crown of martyrdom, being persecuted by
the heathen in the parts of Anaunia,”*

+ “Constantius Presbyter.”” See Constan-
tius, ‘* Vie de St. Germain d’ Auxerre, tr. frang.
avec une étude,” 1874.


BK. I. CH, XVI,


there. The spectre at once put off its
empty frightfulness and answered
humbly as a suppliant that he and his
companion had been guilty of many
crimes, and lay unburied; and there-
fore they haunted men because they
themselves could not rest quiet : and he
asked him to pray God for them that
they might be granted rest. The Saint
was grieved at this, and asked to be
shown the place where they lay: and
the ghost went before them and by the
light of a wax taper, at dead of night
among ruins most difficult of access,
showed them the place where — had
bees wie eighbe was light -
upon the neighbours urg
them both by word and his own
example; and they threw aside all the
rubbish and searched the place with
rakes, and at last found the bodies
lying quite disordered, with the bones
still bound in chains. He directed a
grave to be dug, freed the bodies from
their chains and clothed them in
shrouds, and buried them decently in
the ground, uttering a prayer of inter-
cession over them; and so the dead
found rest. After that day the house
was happily inhabited without any
sign of haunting.
Every faith may be placed in the
following history of Sinesius, Bishop of
e, and the Philosopher Evagrius,
which is preserved by Sophronius*
from Leontius. Sinesius tried dili-
gently to convert Evagrius to Chris-
tianity; but he objected that he could
only regard as fables the Christian
doctrine of the Resurrection of the
body, and the teaching that alms-
giving would be rewarded a hundred
se after this oo eae omitted,
sparing no effort, the Bishop per-
suaded him to become a Christian and
to be baptised together with his child-
ren. Not long after his baptism he
gave the Bishop three hundred pieces


* “Sophronius.” c. 560-638; Patriarch of
Ferusale and Greek ecclesiastical writer,
much of whose work is preserved in “Symeon
Metaphrastes.”


MALEFICARUM 63


of gold for the use of the poor, saying:
“Take this gold and distribute it to
the poor; and give me a written
und ing that ist will restore it
to me in the next life.”” He took the
gold and at once A te him the under-
ing required. The Philosopher lived
for some years after his -~ seape: and
at last fell sick to death. he was
near his end, he oe to er —
you arrange for my funer:
put that paper in my hand and bury it
with me.”’ When he was eaathey
did as he had asked, and buried the
paper with him. On the third day
after his burial he appeared to the
Bisho ag: pn gr night, and
said: ‘Come to the tomb where I lie,
and take your paper: for I have re-
ceived my debt and am satisfied. And
to convince you of this, I have signed
it with my own hand.” Now the
Bishop did not know that they had
buried that paper. In the morni
he went to the sons and asked: “Di
you place anything in the grave with
your father?”’ They, thinking that he
was asking about money, said: “‘No-
thing, Lord, except the customary
garments.” “What, did you not bury a
certain paper with him?” Then ‘the
sons remembered and said: ‘“Cer-
tainly, Lord; for when he was dying
he gave us a paper and said, ‘When
i bury me, place this paper in my
and’; but we did not know what it
contained.” Then the Bishop told
them his dream which he had seen in
the night; and taking them with the
Clergy and Elders of the city to the
Philosopher’s grave, they opened it
and found the Philosopher lying,
holding in his hand a paper written in
the Bishop’s writing. They took it
from his hand and opened it, and
found newly written in the Philoso-
pher’s handwriting the following
words: “I, Evagrius the Philosopher,
to thee, Sinesius the Most Reverend
Lord Bishop, greeting. I have re-
ceived the debt stated by you in this
letter and am satisfied ; and I have no
legal claim against you for the gold


64
which I gave to you and, through you,
to Christ Our Lord and Saviour.”
Hugh Etherianus relates the same
story.

In his De regressu animarum ab in-
feris, XVI, Hugh Etherianus relates
how the Abbot Menas told that he
heard S. Eulogius* of Alexandria say
as follows: “When I had set out for
Constantinople, I was lodging with
Master Gregory, Archdeacon of Rome
and a famous man, who told me the
following concerning the most Holy
and Blessed Pope Leo. He said that
Pope Leo had written in the Church at
Rome a letter to S. Flavian, Bishop of
Constantinople, against the heretics
Eutyches and Nestorius; and that he

laced the letter upon the tomb of

. Peter, the First of the Apostles,
and devoted himself to prayers and
vigils and fasts, beseeching the mighty
Apostle as follows: ‘If I, being but a
man, have put anything in this letter
ill-advisedly, do , to whom this
Church and See were committed by
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
amend it.’ After four days the Apostle
appeared to him and said: ‘I have
read and amended it.’ Then he took
the Letter from S. Peter’s sepulchre
and, on opening it, found it amended
by the Apostle’s hand.”

Theodore, the Holy Bishop of Dorna
in Lybia, told us as follows: When I
was lodging with the Holy Father
Eulogius I saw in a dream a man in
the habit of amonk and of huge stature,
who said to me: “Announce my
arrival to Eulogius.” I said: “Who
are you who tell me to announce
you?” He answered: “I am Leo, the


* “§. Eulogius.” Patriarch of Alexandria
from 580 to 607. He was a warm friend of S.
Gregory the Great, who bestowed upon him
many signal marks of esteem. S. Eulogius
stoutly refuted the many heresies which were
vexing the Church, but unfortunately with the
exception of one sermon and a few fragments
his writings have perished. Those remain
are in Migne, “‘Patrologia Graeca,” LXXXVI
(2), 2973-64.


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH, XVI.


Pope of Rome.”’ So I went in and told
him, saying: “The Most Holy and
Blessed Pope Leo, Bishop of Rome,
desires you to come to him.” Hear-
ing this, Father Eulogius quickly arose
and ran to him; and they saluted each
other and, having prayed, sat down
together. Then the ted Lord Leo
said to S. Eulogius: “Do you know
why I have come to you?” And when
he said “No,” he told him: “To thank
you for your just and eloquent defence
of my Letter which I wrote to my
Brother Flavian, Patriarch of Constan-
tinople, expounding its sense and
meaning, and closing the mouths of
heretics. For know, my Brother, that
your holy zeal and iabour were not for
me only, but also for S, Peter, the Chief
of the Apostles, and for Him whose
truth we all preach, namely, Christ
Our Lord.” I saw this vision not once
only, but twice and three times; and
so, being assured of its truth, I told it


to S. Eulogius.
About the year 587 a vision of this
sort appeared to Guntram about


Chilperic, that terrible tyrant of the
Franks; and the King related it as
follows to S. Gregory of Tours: “And
I saw another vision which foretold the
death of this man. For he was led
before me in chains by three Bishops,
the first of whom was Tetricus, the
second Agricola, and the third Nicetus
of Lyons. Two of these Bishops were
saying: ‘Loose him, I beg, and scourge
him and let him go.’ But the third
Bishop answered them bitterly: “Not
so; but he shall be burned in the fire
for his crimes!’ While they were dis-
puting together at great | , I saw
at a distance a bronze vessel set on a
fire and glowing fiercely. Then, as I
wept, they seized Chilperic and broke
his limbs and threw him into the pot,
where he was soon dissolved by the
aie so that no trace remained of

im.”

In the year 600 the Most Blessed
nt I, Pope of Rome and Doctor
of the Church, tells (Dialo , IV,
17) the following of S. Musa. One


BK. I, CH. XVII.


night there appeared to her in a vision
the Blessed Mother of God the Virgin
Mary, together with some maidens of
her own age clothed in white. She
wished to le with these, but dared
Blessed Virgin Mary ask i'sine wished
she
to be of their company and live in Her
service. The girl said that she did,
and was at once ordered to behave in
no foolish or girlish manner, and to
abstain from laughter and joking; for
she must know that on the thirtieth
day from then she would enter Her
service with those other virgins. The
girl followed these 2 pes and be-
came changed in all her habits and
with great warty put away all her
girlish levity; an cap peng
rise at the in her,
nt caneahatt what the Blessed Mother
of God had commanded her and on
what day she was going to enter Her
service. On the twenty-fifth day she
was taken with a fever; and on the
thirtieth day, as the hour of her death
drew near, she saw the Blessed Mother
of God come to her with the same
virgins whom she had seen in her
vision, and spoke to Her aloud with
cyes reverently lowered, saying: “Be-
hold, Lady, I come.”” And with these
words she gave up the ghost.

Hugh Etherianus* again writes of
the spirit of the owner of a bath who
for his sins was, after his death, de-
puted to the heat of the hot rooms
where he was compelled to attend
carefully upon the bathers. He had

ormed this duty to a priest of
ivita Vecchia more than once when,
in charity, the priest gave him two


* “Hugh Etherianus.” A Tuscan em-
ployed at the Court of Constantinople under the
Emperor Manuel I (Comnenus 1143-1180).
He was a very learned theologian and on ac-
count of his treatise commonly known as “‘Ad-
uersus Graecos’’ he is esteemed as one of the
most eminent Catholic controversialists against
the Eastern Church. His “De regressu anima-
rum ab inferis” was composed at the request of
the clergy of Pisa. His works are in Migne,
“Patrologia Latina,” CCI.


MALEFICARUM


65


pieces of Blessed Bread. But he, wee
ing and ——’ said: “Why do
you give me this, Father? This bread
1s holy, and I cannot eat it. For I
whom you see was once the Master of
this place; but for my sins I was de-
sanee after my death to serve here. If,
owever, wish to help me, offer
this b for me to Almighty God
and intercede for my sins: and you
will know that you have been heard
when come here and do not find
me.” Saying this, he disa and
so showed that, although he seemed to
sn — he was a spirit. King of
n the year 1139 Alfonso,

» when about to join battle
with five Saracen Kings, was told by
Christ in a dream to be of good heart,
and to use in the battle a Standard on
which the Five Wounds were depicted.
He won a notable victory which was
the foundation of the glory of the
Kingdom of Portugal. Fourteen years
later Alfonso, se of Castille, was
besieging Baeza, when S. Isidore a
peared to him and advised him to
an assault, which resulted in one of
the- most remarkable victories ever
won.

A very wonderful thing is told as
an eye-witness by Bishop Constantine
concerning the translation of the Relics
of S. Euphemiat the Martyr. In order
to put a — to her marvellous
miracles, a IIIf the hese secretly
removed the Martyr’s Relics, putting
dry bones in their place and throwing
into the sea the true Relics in their
coffin. Some sailors chanced upon this
coffin, knowing nothing about it;
and thinking some treasure was hid-
den in it, they took it and opened it.
But by the miraculous scent which
came from it they knew that they were
Holy Relics. While they were still


t “S. Euphemia.” Virgin and Martyr.
She suffered under Diocletian. Feast Day, 16
September. Her Relics were venerated at Chal-


t “Leo III.” The Iconoclast; Emperor of
Byzantium, 717-741.


66


ignorant of whose they were, on the
same night they saw lights and candles
and men wondrously chanting and
praising God. And when they had
reached Levinum and had gone to
sleep, in the quiet of the night they
saw Glycerias the Martyr come to
Euphemia the Virgin and embrace
nat kiss her, congratulating her on her
arrival; and so they knew whose
Relics they were. Three times they
sailed from that place, and three times
the winds drove them back again. At
last S. Euphemia came to them in a
dream and told them what would hap-
pen, saying that she wished to remain
in that place, from which she had been
cast into the sea by the impious Leo.
es In = ne reese ing of
ain, fought fiercel ay with a
fi u Towards


mi one host of Saracens.

night retired to a hill with a small
band hing a followers. As re |
watching and praying to ye.
James appeared ‘him and com-
manded that they should all purge
themselves by confession and take the
Eucharist, and then give battle. In
the morning, when they had all
obeyed the divine warning, they ad-
vanced their standards and slew sixty
thousand of the enemy. In that battle
the Apostle was seen riding on a white
horse bearing a snow-white

with a red transverse cross u it.
This is told by Bishop Roderick in his
Chronicum generale ane Regis,* and
by Mariana,} Bk. VII, 13.


* * Alphonsi Regis.” Alfonso X “‘el Sabio,”
1220-84. It was under his patronage that the
“Crénica de Espana,” more commonly known
as “‘Crénica general,” was compiled from many
historical sources.


+ “Mariana.” Juan Mariana, S,7.,
1536-1623. His most ii t work is the
great history of Spain which during the life-


has Thirty Books.


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XVII.


In the year 1117, among other pro-
ne which were appalling Italy, an
infant was lying in its cradle at Cre-
mona wrapped in clouts and, contrary
to all nature, opened its mouth and
began to speak, calling from her bodily
cares its mother as she was preparing
food for its elder brother who was cry-
ing for something to eat. The babe
said that it had seen Mary the Mother
of God standing before the Judgement
Seat of Christ, interceding with Him
with the most earnest prayers for the
doom which was coming upon the
world because of its sins. After this it
mes v4 eak until the a
orac to begin talking. $ Is
told by Dodechinus in his History.

F (Exemplorum, IX, 12) tells
the following: Since Udo, Bishop of
Magdeburg, would not for any sign
= coe from ioe himself

m impudicity, certain religious men
prayed God nee to correct or to
remove the Bishop. One night, as one
of these, Canon Frederick, was so

raying in the Cathedral of S.
ice, all the lights of the Church
were suddenly put out by a violent
gust of wind, and soon afterwards two
young men came bearing lighted wax
candles, and following them came
Christ with His Mother and _ the
os calling upon the Holy Men
whose bones were resting in the
Church. Among these came S.
Maurice, who spoke gravely and at
length in denunciation of Bishop Udo.
Soon afterwards Christ passed sentence
that Udo should be brought there
naked 2 two of them. The Bishop
$ led and one of those who were
fe him struck him in the belly;
and he vomited into the Chalice upon
the Altar the Host which he had alien
the day before in Communion. Udo
was struck down with an axe, and then
all that vision vanished. Frederick
was greatly frightened and went up
to the Altar, where he saw the Chalice
Lr sag re x it, and —— bod
e Bishop on the ground.
He then soneed the other religious


BK. I, CH. XVII.


men, who took the Bishop’s body
away and buried it in a field,

Two rich merchants of no mean
birth were entering France by the
Mont Cenis Pass, when they met a
man of more than human stature who
ordered them as follows: “Speak to
my brother Lodovico Sforza and gi
him this letter in my name.” As i
stood wondering who he was, he told
them that he was Galeazzo Sforza,
and soon vanished from them. They
at once returned to Milan and thence
to Vigevano where the Moor lived.
They delivered the Duke’s letter,
which was written in these terms:

*“Oh, Oh, Oh, Lodovico, beware!
hes the Venetians and a are

ut to come against you and destroy
your Dukedom, But if you will give
me three thousand pieces of gold I will
help you to conciliate the Spirits and
avert your evil fate; and this I hope
to do if = do not oppose me. Fare-
well!” The signature was: “The
Spirit of your brother Galeazzo.”

And though some may laugh at this
thing, yet it is true that not long after-
wards the Duke was thrust from his
Dukedom by Louis XII,* King of
France, and was led away captive.
Bernard of Arles testifies that he was
an eye-witness of this.

The father of Lodovico Alidosi, the
Lord of Imola, not long after he died
appeared like one on horseback with
a hawk, to a man secretly sent by his
son Lodovico to Ferrara as he went
on his way, and told him to tell his
son to meet him in that place on the
next day, for he had a matter of great
importance to say to him. When
Lodovico heard this, both because he
did not believe it and because he
feared a trap, he sent another in his
place, to whom the same Shade ap-
peared and bitterly grieved that his
son had not come; for he said that he
had been going to tell him much


* “Louis XII.” This king impri.
Sforza br. ihe ganhatnder of ae Tift im the
Caste of Lockes,


MALEFICARUM


67


more, but that now he would only say
that after twenty-two years and one
month, on a specified day, he would
lose the Lordshi of the city that he
then enjoyed. When the time pre-
dicted by the Shade had come, al-


father’s spirit, erate y
of ilip of Milan set on
ders, since moats were en
over, and captured the town and its
Prince. This is Marcantonio


there was a popular rumour that the
spirit of Ferdinand, King of Naples,
appeared on three different nights to
Jacopo, the surgeon of his son Ki
onso; and first with mild an

gentle words, but afterwards with
threats and commands, had ordered
him to acquaint Alfonso that he must
not buoy himself with a vain hope of
withstanding the French power: for it
was written in the Book of Destiny
that the House of Aragon must be sub-
ject to untold misfortunes, and finally
be cast out from the Kingdom.

The Ven. Cesare Baronio relates
that Michele Mercatis the Elder was
bound by a strong friendship to Mar-
siglio Ficino by reason of their com-
mon interest in Platonic philosophy.
They happened one day to be dis-
cussing, as they frequently did, Plato’s
theory of the survival of the human
soul after death; and not without re-
verential awe they decided that his
opinons could not stand without the
support of the Christian faith. (A
record is extant of that a CAC pe ina
learned letter concerning and the
immortality of the soul written by
Marsiglio to Michele Mercatis.) When
they argued this matter for a
long time they concluded it in the
following manner: they joined hands
and agreed that whichever of them


died first should, if he were permitted,
reassure the other concerning the next
life. Having sworn this together, they
parted. Not long afterwards it hap-


68 COMPENDIUM


pened that, as Michele was engaged in
philosophical speculations at high
morning, he suddenly heard the sound
of a horse galloping and stopping in
front of his door, and the voice of
Marsiglio crying: ‘“O Michele,
Michele, it is true, it is true!’’ Marvel-
ling at the spirit’s voice Michele rose
and opened the window, and saw him
whom he had heard riding away upon
a white horse. He cried after him:
“Marsiglio, Marsiglio!”” and watched
him until he disappeared from view.
Wondering at this strange occurrence,
and feeling anxious about Marsiglio,
he went to seck for him at Florence
where he was living when he died,
and found that he had died at the
a hour that he had heard and seen


Not many years ago, when Ales-
sandro Farnese* was conducting his
admirable siege of Antwerp, the Hol-
landers and the English made a fierce
onslaught upon him in order to relieve
the heniegel; who at the same time
made a sally; and having tured
from the Royal Army their offensive
works, they seemed to have won
safety. Then a few of the King’s
soldiers saw standing by the wor.

Pedro de Paz, a Spanish Tribune
famous as a soldier and for his piety,
who had died a few months before.
He was scen fully armed, just as he
used to lead his regiment ; and beckon-


* “Alessandro Farnese.” This renowned
and noble commander was the son of Margaret
of Parma. The history of his campaigns in the

Countries is a tale of heroic genius and
victory. He commenced the siege of Antwerp in
1584, and on 17 August, 1585, the city sur-
rendered. Alessandro Farnese was created
Duke of Parma in February 1586. He very
properly attributed his success to Our Lady,
Patroness of Antwerp. The occasion to which
Guazzo refers was the great attack, 26 May,
1565: when the Antwerpers endeavoured to

a gap in the Kauwenstein dike. One
contingent was headed by Hohenlo and Fustinus
of Nassau; another containing English auxi-
iaries under Colonel Morgan, and Scotch under
Colonel Balfour, was commanded by Marnix.


BK. I. CH. XVI.


ing to his former soldiers, he ordered
them to follow him. The front rank
encouraged the second, and _ the
second the third, and so on; and they
all saw the same thing and marvelled
and, taking courage, followed their
well-known leader. He went in front
and led them straight against the
enemy. A battle was fought; and the
Hollanders were forced to retreat to
their ships, leaving the works to the
Royal Army. In that moment that
impregnable town lost all ~ of
victory or of defending itself. This is
confirmed by the evidence of many
soldiers who were eye-witnesses of
the event.

In the Diocese, and not far from the
city, of Pavia we read that a horrible

i in April of the Load
1601 at a town called Correto. The
funeral rites of a certain notary were
being performed in the Church, when
suddenly the corpse rose 1 Ps its
coffin and, turning to one of his rela-
tives who was attending the funeral,
said: “Go quickly to my house and
take a certain written instrument and
restore it to such a place where it justly
belongs: for because I suppressed this
instrument, when I died I was sen-
tenced by God’s judgement to the fires
of Hell.” Having said this, he laid his
head down as before. This was per-
mitted by God that mortals should
know what heavy punishment awaits
such dishonest lawyers who embezzle
the legacies of the pious.

In the year 1590 occurred the fol-
lowing event, which is most worthy to
be recorded. It is taken from a col-
lection of Peruvian Letters and the
writer is said by some to be Francesco
Bencio, and by others Gaspar Spitilli.
In a certain lady’s house there was
a native maid of about sixteen who
had been ae, pate in war, and had
been baptised in the name of Catha-
rine. As she grew older, she developed
a sad freedom and dissoluteness of
behaviour, and frequently had to be
scolded and aint ed by her mis-
tress. At last she became so wicked


BK. I. CH, XVII,


that she associated secretly with certain
lost souls: yet she did not neglect con-
fession, although she kept silent as to
this sin, lest she should be thought a
harlot lost to all shame. On the first
of August, 1590, she fell ill and sum-
moned a priest, to whom she ed
the sins upon her soul, but not ‘holly:
for dicieal the priest came and went
away from her nine times during that
same sickness, she laughed contemptu-
ously and said to the other servants
that she had committed another thing
which she would not confess among
her sins; and she added such filthy
and obscene words that the others
were offended and went and told all
this to their mistress. The lady
scolded Catharine as she deserved, and
then with gentle looks and kind words
asked her what were those sins which
she would not confess to the Father.
She made no difficulty about answer-
ing and said that, as often as she sum-
moned the Father in her sickness in
order to purge herself with confession,
there stood at her left hand one like an
Ethiopian who told her not to confess,
because they were very little sins of
no importance, and if she confessed
them the Father would only think
her the more dissolute; while on her
right hand appeared S. Mary Mag-
dalene urging her to rid herself of
whatever sin it was. So the Father
was summoned again and the lady
told him how matters were; and he
tried by every means to induce her to
make a full confession, but in vain:
for the more he urged her the more
obstinate she became, so that she
would not even utter the Name of

esus. Another time when they offered

er a Crucifix that she might look
upon it and consider in her soul that


t was crucified for us, she
answered with the greatest indignation
and perturbation of spirit: “I know


that ; but what would you have me
do?” Her mistress said: “That you
should turn to Christ, who will remit
you your sins if you acknowledge
them in confession.” To this Catharine


MALEFICARUM


69


replied: “I beseech you to cease from
troubling me.” And when her mis-
tress had gone away, she to sin
about her loves and her shame, ani
continued to do so for several days,
until one night her mistress and some
of the maid-servants came to her, and
a out into ceroterysind (eal
in the greatest torture ish 0
spirit because of m olated engi
sion.” And from t up to
midnight her whole body became rigid
so that they th t that she was dead
and began to think about her burial.
But she came to herself, and the priest
was called ; but she in no way seen!
her former behaviour with regard to
confession. Three hours later, a little
before she died, the servants urged her
to take in her hand the Cross and a
holy candle and to call upon the Name
of Jesus; but she said: “Who is this
Jesus? Ido not know Him.” And she
sat up on the end of the bed and was
avs talking to someone else who was
invisible. And another servant who
was lying sick in the same room
urgently begged her mistress to move
her to another room because, she said,
she could see certain black demons
which terrified her. On the night that
Catharine died the house was filled
with such a fetid and putrid stench
that the corpse had to be placed in the
open air: the lady’s brother was
dragged out of bed by his arm: a
serving-maid was struck on the
shoulder by a stone, and bore the
mark of the blow for several days: a
most gentle horse went kicking its
heels against the wall and i
madly about all through the night:
d the dogs went running about and
barking. After the body was buried
one of the maids entered the room
where Catharine had lain, and though
no one was there, she felt a vessel,
which stood on the table, hurled at
her. And over the greater part of the
town tiles and slates were seen to be
hurled about with a great uproar to a
distance of two miles (not that there
are many tiles or slates in the suburbs


70
of Callao, as the houses of that city
are nearly all roofed with palm leaves).
Another maid-servant was, in the sight
of many people, dragged for a long
way by her foot, although no one
could be seen dragging her.

On the seventh of October, when a
serving-maid went into the wardrobe
to fetch a certain garment, she saw
Catharine standing stiff upon her feet ;
and as she ran away the apparition
took up a vessel and hurled it against
the wall with such violence that it was
smashed into a thousand pieces. The
next day a Cross was fixed upon the
wardrobe door, but it was torn down
and rent in three pieces before their
eyes. The same day, as the lady was

ing in the garden, a brick was
hurled and overturned the whole
dinner 2) and at ee same time her four-
ear-old son be: to out:
UMteaminal mal Catharine is
suffocating me!” They then hung
Holy Relics about his neck, and so
delivered him from that pain. These
occurrences compelled the lady to
change her house, and she went and
lodged with a kinswoman, leaving her
own house in charge of some servants.
On the tenth of the same month one
of the servants went into the house-
keeper’s office and heard herself called
three times by Catharine, and was so
overcome with fear that the other
servants urged her to call upon Our
Lord for help and to take a lighted holy
candle and go back with two of the
boldest of them. This she did safely,
and the dead woman then told her to
send the others away and throw away
her candle, since it hurt her, and to
remain alone. Catharine sent out
flames from all her joints, with an
incredible stench, and was afire from
head to foot, and was pit with a
blazing girdle eight or ten fingers wide,
the ends of which fell to the ground,
which seemed to be some punishment
for her lust and acknowledged lewd-
ness. Seeing this spectre, the servant
began to tremble and grow pale, and
the wretched corpse said to her:


COMPENDIUM


BK. 1. CH. XVII.


“Come here. How many times have
I called you?” The servant, nearly
dead, replied: “Good Jesus! Who
would not be terrified to see you?”
When she had said this, there came
down to that place a most beautiful
youth in white garments who told the
servant to lay aside her fear and be of
good courage, and to take careful note
of what she heard from Catharine and
spread it among the others, and to
expiate all her sins by confession as
soon as she left that place. Then
Catharine spoke as follows: “Know
that I am sent from Hell, and that I
am subjected to the most terrible
punishment because, when I went to
confess my sins to the priest, I con-
fessed only the least of them, as that I
was warrhton and talkative and prone
to anger, and such things; but was
silent about my lusts and my habitual
meetings with young men. Do you
then learn to confess well and to keep
no sin back. I give you this warning
because I am so co ed and am
compelled to speak of this matter as
an example for others.” Then the bell
was heard ringing for the Angelus, and
the dead woman quickly withdrew
into a corner and vanished. And the
Angel (for such was that beautiful
young man) told the servant to go to

er companions, which she did. We
have set down this well-attested story,
because all the kinds of apparition
are found in it: Angels, S. Mary Mag-
dalene, the devil in the form of an
Ethiopian, and a damned spirit in an
assumed body not, I think, its own,
but one formed of air in the likeness of
its own body.

At Naples about the year 1370 it
happened in a Dominican Friary
(as Brother Antonio of Siena says
in the Chronicon Fratrum Praedicatorum)
that, after he had completed his last
duty of the day the Friar whose task
it was to look after the Refecto


entered it, and found it filled wi

Friars wearing hoods who were sit-
ting down as if it was the hour for
supper and they were expecting a


BK. I, CH, XVII.


meal. He at once ran and told the
Prior of it: but the Prior thought he
was mad or dreaming; yet, as he
insisted, went with him, and saw, and
believed. At this he also was per-
turbed, and at once consulted with
the gravest and most prudent Fathers
of the House. On their advice he put
on sacred vestments and, bearing the
ent Body of Christ, ied with
all the Brethren to the Refectory and,
addressing him who sat in the seat of
honour, adjured him to say who they
were and for what they come,
and urged him to answer in the Name
of that Lord whom he bore in his
hands, When the Prior a) thus
before them with the Holy Sacra-
ment, they all rose and bowed their
heads, but they kept their faces so
hooded that they could not be seen.
Then they sat down and, being com-
manded by the Prior to answer his
questions, nodded in agreement. At
last the chief ace them said:
“We formerly belonged to this same
religious Order, and were for the
most Masters, Priors, Superiors,
Lectors, or holders of other offices.’
And he went on to say that they had
all been judged to damnation because
they had been guilty of ambition,
pride, envy, and many such mortal
crimes; but that by the mercy of
God they had been commanded to
come there to warn them and all of
their Order to be content in their
vocation. For because they had
thought too little of it, they were all
damned and were being Covina’ in
eternal flames. And in sign of the
truth of shi Ie them all Yok, upon

em. Sa ; 0 eir
hoods, Soe cack of seat ad seen to
be surrounded by flames of fire. Then
their leader struck the table as a
signal, and they all vanished: and
the whole Convent was mightily dis-
turbed with fear.

In proof of this I will add another
no less credible authority, In the year
1599 at Naples, Fra Tiberio, a most


holy man who was Superior of the


MALEFICARUM


71
Dominican house, says that the follow-
ing happened to him. One night
when he was going the rounds to see
if the Brethren were in bed as usual,
he went through the Refectory, and
there saw many lights and heard the
voice of a man reading from a lectern,
and saw men serving. Finally he who
sat in the chief place gave a si

upon the table and spoke as follows:
“Ambition and gluttony led us to
Hell.” And even now there is a scar
upon the table as if it had been


ed.

Blessed Peter of Cluny * tells the
following, which he had from a
Spanish noble: “When King Alfonso

Aragonf succeeded to the Kin —
of the L amet King Alfonso of Spain
at his death, it happened that he was
gathering an army inst certain
rebels in Castile, and issued an edict
that each house of his Kingdom
should send so many horse or foot.
Obeying this command, I sent to the
army one of my servants, named
Sancho. Some days passed, and when
all who had been in that expedition
were returned to their homes, he also
came back; but not long afterwards,
as is the way of men, he fell ill and
died. Four months after his death,
while I was lying in bed near the fire
in my winter house near Estella, the


same Sancho suddenly appeared to


cognise him. He was naked except for


a slight covering u
aa: When I sew him, I said: ‘Who


* “Blessed Peter of Cluny.” Blessed Peter
of Montboissier, also known as Peter the Vener-
able, c. 1092-1156. He was ever honoured as
a Saint both by the and his Order, and
thus Pius IX the cult of this great
and glorious monk. His works are in Migne,
nina i gr a

* Alfonso of Aragon.” Alfonso II. Al-
an I, the Fighter (“El Bataleador”), reigned
1104-1134.


72


are you?’ He humbly answered : “I am
your servant Sancho.” ‘What are you
doing here?’ ‘I am going to Castile,
and a great army accompanies me on
the road, that we may do penance for
our sins in the place where we sinned.”
‘And why,’ I asked, ‘have you turned
aside here?’ ‘I have hope,’ he said ‘of
pardon, and if you will have pity on
me you can obtain an earlier rest for
me.’ ‘How?’ ‘When I was lately in
the expedition you know of, I was
seduced by Satan’s wiles to enter a
Church with some companions, and
despoiled it of its contents and stole
away with the priestly vestments ; and
on this account x NEEL I am pun-
ished. And with all my might I pray
you, as my master, to help me; for you
can give me many spiritual benefits
if you will. Further I beg that you
ill ask«my eee your wife not to
delay in paying the eight soldi which
she owed me for my service, and to
devote that money, which she would
have paid me for the needs of the
flesh if I were still alive, to the far
eater needs of my soul by distri-
uuting it amongst the poor.’ Taking
more co’ e after this conversation,
I said: ‘What has happened to our
fellow citizen Peter Deioca who lately
died? Tell me what you know of
rs He ape ’ ae of his
uent works of mercy, and especi-
ally because of his gifts to the Cohe
during the late famine, he has earned
the rest of the blessed and is a sharer
in eternal life.’ When I heard him
answer so promptly and easily, I
added: ‘And do you know anything
of our other fellow citizen Bernecio,
who died a little while since?’ ‘He
is in Hell: for when he was appointed
to determine the boundaries of this
town, he sale many unjust decisions
owing to having received bribes or
favours; and because he did not
shrink from taking from a poor widow
her only pig, which was the sustenance
of her life.’ Then, being incited to
ask greater things, I said: “Can you
know anything of our King Alfonso


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XVII.


who died a few years ago?’ At this,
another voice spoke to me from a
window near my head: ‘Do not ask
him this, for he does not know it; for
he is but recently come among us and
has not yet been permitted to know
this thing. But I have been dead for
five years and know more than he.
What you ask of the King he cannot
know.’ I was astonished to hear this
fresh voice and, wishing to see him,
turned to the window and, by the
light of the moon which then lit up
the whole court very clearly, saw a
man sitting on the sill of the window,
clothed just as the other was. ‘Who
are you?’ I asked. And he said: ‘I
am his friend, and am going to
Castile with him and many others.’
‘And do you know, as you said, any-

ing of King Alfonso?’ ‘I know
where he was, but I do not know
eae he is. a he was for a ons
terri tortured in Purgato » but
was delivered from there a the
Monks of Cluny,* and what has
happened to him since, I do not
know.’ Saying this, he addressed his
friend who was sitting by the fire:
‘Rise, and let us now resume our
journey; for the army of our com-
panions fills all the roads to Castile,
and we must join them.’ At this
Sancho arose and tearfully repeated
his former request, groaning:
*‘Master, I implore you not to forget
me, and eae will persuade my
Lady your wife to restore in mercy
for my soul what she owed to my
body.” When he had said this, they
both at once vanished. But I called
my wife and aroused her as she lay by
me in bed, and before I told her what
I had seen and heard, I asked her
whether she owed anything to Sancho
our servant for his services. She
answered what IT had never heard


* “Monks of Cluny.” The Benedictine
Monks of Cluny inaugurated the Solemn Com-
memoration of All Souls, which was ordered
S. Odilo (died 10g8) to be held annually in
the monasteries of his Congregation.


BK. I. CH. XVIII.


from any except the dead man, that
she ow Sancho eight soldi. I could
no longer doubt the truth, since my
wife aos oo me aor man’s
story. In the morning I took the eight
soldy from my wife and, myself Adee
what I thought suitable, distribu
the money among the poor for the
soul of him who had ap to me,
and had the priests say for him,
and spared no expense to obtain for
him pardon of his sins.”

In this clear, certain and most

ifying vision we are taught that
men’s deeds follow them in death.


*


CHAPTER XVIII


Of Apparitions of Demons, or Spectres.
Argument.

T must be known that there are

many kinds of demons differing
ae Angee yy ey by fixed degrees.
The first kind is the Fiery, for they
dwell in the upper air and will never
sink to the lower regions until the Day
of Fea oun and these have no
dealings on earth with men.

The second is the Aérial, for they
dwell in the air about us. These can
descend to Hell and, by assuming
bodies formed from the denser air,
can at times appear to men. More
often, with the ission of God,
they disturb the air and raise thunders
and tempests; and they all conspire
together for the ruin of the human
race.

The third sort is Terrestrial; and
we may not doubt that these were cast
from ven upon earth for their
sins. Some of these devils dwell in
woods and forests, and lay snares for
hunters; some dwell in the fields and
lead nightfarers astray; others dwell
in hidden places and caverns; while
others delight to live in secret with
men.

A fourth sort is of the Water; for


MALEFICARUM 73


they dwell under water in rivers and
lakes ; and are full of wrath, turbulent,
unquiet and fraudulent. They raise
up storms at sea, sink ships in the
deep, and destroy life in the waters.
When such demons appear, they are
more often women than men; for they
live in humid places and lead a softer
manner of life. But those which live
in drier and harder places usually


and look for treasure in the earth; and
they are ever ready to harm the human
race. They cause earthquakes and
winds and fires, and shake the


foundations of houses.
The sixth sort is called pean
because they chiefly abhor and t


the light, and never appear by day,
nor can they assume a sedi? ata
except at night. This kind of demons
is ether inscrutable and of a
nature beyond human understanding,
being all dark within, and shaken
with icy passions; malicious, restless,
and perturbed; and when they meet
men at night they violently oppress
them and, with the permission o God,
often kill them by some breath or
touch. Of this sort, perhaps, was
that Asmodeus* of whom we read in
the story of Tobias. This kind of
demons no dealings with witches ;
neither can they be kept away by
incantations, for they shun the light
and the voices of men and every sort
of noise.

It is further to be noted that the
demon manifests himself in many
various forms of spectres, such as dogs,
cats, goats, oxen, men, women, or a
horned owl. But, that his deceptions
may be made known to us, Almighty
God will not allow him to appear in


* “Asmodeus.” Possibly this demon corre-
sponds with the demon called Abaddon, the De-
Stroyer, mentioned in the Apocalypse, LX, ti.


74


certain other forms, such as doves,
lambs, or sheep; for the true Lamb is
Christ, the Good Shepherd, and the
Holy Spirit is ~won to make His
appearance in the form of a dove:
«i because these animals are with-
out guile and do no harm, God does
not permit him to appear in their
form. But because the human form
is in all respects the most perfect and
beautiful, therefore he generally
appears in that form to us. For, as
arulli* writes, the human form is
adapted to nearly every purpose.


*
Examples.


A certain wagoner from Nancy was
in a fenny copse on the outskirts of
the town of Nancy, cutting wood,
when a fierce storm suddenly arose,
He made haste towards a cottage to
find shelter, and on the way rested
under a thick wide-spreading tree,
and waited for the storm to abate.
There he was surprised to see standi
near him another woodman; an
when he looked at him more closely
(as we do when we meet a stranger)
he saw that his nose —% shooting
out to the length of a stick and then
quickly contracting to its former shape
and size; that his feet were cloven
hooves; and that his whole body was
of immoderate size. He was struck
nearly dead with sheer terror at this,
and then (as is the Christian custom
in difficulties) made the sign of the
Cross, after which he found himself
alone as before. But he remained so
stupefied by his experience that,
— he was used to say that he
could find his way about Nancy
blindfold, now he could not do so even
with the most diligent attention; but
came to that city with his tongue
sticking and his eyes staring and so
trembling all over that it was easy


* “Marulli.” Cesare Marulli, Archbishop
of Palermo (1578).


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XVII.


to believe what he said had happened.
This belie€ was largely borne out b
the report of what some other wine 6
men had seen at a distance; for they
said that it had appeared to them that
in that place the air had become thick
and wrapped in a dense cloud.
In the same chapter Remy tells of
a similar occurrence in 1588. One
Nicolas Stephen had been com-
missioned by Master Desiderius, the
Mayor’s cellarman, to buy some wine
vessels for him; and, having done so,
he sent his wife Jacobeta (who was a
witch) time and again to ask for the
urchase money to be paid to him,
t in vain. Jacobeta grew tired of
asking and angry at so much waste of
time and trouble, and turned her
whole attention to finding the means
and occasion to punish Desiderius for
his tricks and subterfuges. Meanwhile
it fell aptly pigeon. 2 that Desiderius was
forced by an outbreak of the plague in
his house to take refuge in the open
fields, and lived there away from his
household in a hut. As he was there
with his only son there appeared to
him late at night (through the agency
of Jacobeta) a demon with so terrible
a shrieking and aning that it
seemed as if the whole heaven had
burst from its foundations and was
falling upon his hut. And that this
was no feigned terror maliciously
assumed by Desiderius, as it was
cones rumoured, was afterwards
roved by the fact that he and his son
lates so ill because of it that every-
body who saw them despaired of them.
The following happened within
our own memory at Colombiéres, a
village six miles from Toul. At the
extreme end of the village where the
road goes to Salsure, a peasant lived
in a humble cottage which was, how-
ever, as clean and neat as his means
would allow and had never been
rumoured to be haunted by spectres.
Yet it became occupied by a demon
who was at first content with throw-
ing stones at night at the servants
without hurting them; but as they


BK.1I, CH. XVIII.


grew used to this they ignored it and
treated it as a joke. The demon could
not tolerate this contempt, so one dark
night he set fire to the cottage, which
was quickly burned almost to the
poses Some days later I was travel-

g that way and heard of this from
the inhabitants; so I went myself to
see the ruins of the cottage so that I
could tell the story to others more
clearly and with the greater authority.

The Spanish author Antonio de
Turrecremata (Torquemada) writes
as follows in his native to 7
and this is from his Jardin de las Flores
curiosas. “At Salamanca there was a


the istent report concerning that
Gasdeen true, or whether it was not
rather invented by the servants in
order to cover some naughty pranks
of theirs; for there were among them
two young girls of no mean beauty,
and it was suspected that the whole
of this story had been fabricated in
order to facilitate their meetings with
their lovers. So the Mayor went to
the house at the time when the stonin
was said to be most frequent; an
there went with him no less than
twenty of the townsmen, some of
whom he sent with a light to search
the upper part of the house to see who
it was who threw stones at the ser-
vants. They searched diligently every-
where, and came back and said they
had found nothing at all alarming.
He then decided to examine the
cellars, to which some steps led down
from the dining-room, and to spend
some time in a further search in that
direction. And lo! hardly had they
reached the place before there was a
t noise and stones began to be
urled at them and swept them off
their legs, but without harming them.
So they were sent again to see where
this shower of stones came from; and
altho they found no one in the
place, the shower of stones kept falling.


MALEFICARUM 75


This went far to confirm the opinion
which many had formed, that the
phenomena were all due to devil’s
work and magic; and this belief they
more stoutly maintained as the stones
kept falling about their heads. Some
of them there rushed from the house in
terror; but one of them, feeling bolder
at a safe distance, took up and care-
fully noted the appearance of one
particular stone and threw it into
the house, saying: ‘If this came from
ate O demon, throw the same stone
ack at me.’ And when this was at
once done, there was no more room
for doubt that the house was haunted
by demons as the Matron had said.”

I remember, when the ap was
raging at Toulouse about the year
1563 I was in Auch spending the
night gaming and Playing ina manner
fitting my age and leisure, with my
good friend ter Abel, a member
of the Cathedral Chapter. And to all
of us who were in that house a petu-
lant demon of this sort manifested, as
we were playing, noslight disturbance,
hurling stones roughly here and there,
although they fell to the ground with-
out hurting anyone. The room was
locked from the inside and there was
no furniture, except the gaming table
and the seats, so that there was no
place where any mechanical device
could have been hidden.

In such ways do good and evil
demons approach men, with hatred,
terror, hurt and injury. So says Remy
as above quoted.

Nider in his Formicarius relates that
when the Kingdom of Bohemia was
shaken with tumults and massacres
because of its heresies, near a valley
on the boundary of that country there
were heard shouts at night, and the
clashing together of horsemen, who
were often seen to be clothed in various
colours. There were two bold standard-
bearers in the camp not far from the
valley of spectres, who determined
to learn the whole truth and what
these visions portended ; so they went
one night to the haunted valley and


a a


saw the usual spectres, but before
they dared to come near to it one of
them grew afraid and said to the
other: “It is quite enough that we
have seen these things at a distance;
I shall not go near to them. For it is
an old saying that no one should joke
with such matters.’’ The other called
him a coward and spurred his horse
forward and drew near to the whole
ghostly aimy, whereupon one of them
came and cut off his head and returned
to his companions. When the one
who had loitered behind owing to his
apprehensions saw this he took to
flight and spread the news of this
horror. And the next day they found
the headless body and the head in the
valley where the armies had been seen,
but there was no trace of man or
horse; and only the marks of some
birds were seen in muddy places.
Nider adds another story worthy
of belief, which was told him by the
Bishop of Mayence, He said that he
knew a soldier from the Rhine, whose
son was still living where he heard
this story, who was remarkable for
his intrepidity in warfare; and
because of his boldness and pugnaci
others were often involved in q
on account of which he used fre-
quently to ride by night to suitable
meeting places. One night he was
thus riding with his attendants and
came into a wood near the Rhine;
but before coming out of the wood,
since a wide plain lay beyond it, he
sent one of his attendants, as is the
habit of those who suspect an am-
bush, to discover if there were any
lurking enemies lying in wait for him
in the plain at the end of the wood.
It was a clear moonlight and star-lit
night, and he had no difficulty in see-
ing: so the attendant spied through
the branches of the trees and saw a
wonderful army extending right across
the plain and advancing on horse-
back, and came back and told his
master, who said: “Let us stand still
a little ; for it is likely that a rearguard
will follow this army, and we will ride


COMPENDIUM


BK. I, CH. XVIII.


up to those and inquire whether the
main army are friends or enemies;
nor will we be afraid of a few men.”
After a short pause the soldier and his
attendants came into the plain, and
found no one except one man riding
a horse and leading another by the
bridle. The soldier went up to him
and asked: ‘‘Are you not my cook?”
For so it seemed to him at a distance.
That cook had died a little before this,
and now answered: “I am _ he,
Master.” The soldier then asked:
“What are you doing here? And who
are those who went before?” The
dead man answered: “Master, they
who went before are nobles and
knights”’(and he named many of
them by name), “and they and I must
this night be at Jerusalem, for that is
our = a recvse Fo7
aa t is the meaning i

horse which you lead without a rider?”
“That,” he said, “‘is for your use if you
will come with me to the Holy Land.
Be assured by the Christian Faith
that I shall bring you back alive and
safe if you obey my words.” Then
said the soldier: “In my day I have
done marvels, and I will not shrink
from adventure too.” And though
his attendants tried to dissuade him,
he dismounted from his own horse
and mounted that of the dead man,
and they both vanished from their
sight. On the next day, as his attend-
ants were waiting by the same place,
the soldier and the dead man returned
to the place where they had first met,
and the dead man said: “Lest you
should think that this is nothing but a
false phantasm, I give you two rare
things which you must keep in
memory of me—a small piece of
cloth no fire can burn or scorch, and
a knife in a sheath. The first, when it
is dirty, you must clean in the flames:
the second you must handle with care,
for whoever is wounded by it, is
poisoned.”

Cromerus, a diligent author, tells
the following. Wratislaw I, King of
Poland, was besieging Dramburg, a


BK. I. CH. XVIII.


very strong city of Pomerania. One
moonlight night the sentries saw a
great host of armed enemies riding
over the open fields and attacking the
Polish lines: and when this happened
many times the Poles became angry
because they could never these
enemies in Bsanid-te leo teahtion:
So one night, when this enemy army
was announced to be at hand, they
charged furiously out of the camp,
troop after troop, and pursued
fleeing enemy for a long way i
Hearing this uproar in
camp and seeing their charge from
the camp, the besieged army made a
sudden sortie and set fire to the
military works and soldiers’ quarters,
with burning straw and reeds, and so.
since only a ew had been left to guard
the camp, easily burned all the works
and the greater part of the camp. It
is said that these were shadows of the
night who, with divine permission,
disturbed the Poles in this way
because, in contempt of the us
and institutions of the Catholic
Church, they had dared on a former
ition to desecrate the solemn
Forty Days’ Fast of all Christians
the odly eating of flesh and mi
foods. God sometimes permits such
apparitions because of sin, either as a
trial for the righteous, or to announce


lagues, wars, changes in kingdoms,
aaa such things, as the following
examples show.


On the night before the sedition of
Antioch, a huge woman of formidable
eee was seen, beating a bronze
shield so violently that the sound was
heard all over the city.

Gennadius, Patriarch of Constanti-
nople, went one night to the altar to
pray to God for the public safety,
when there appeared to him a horrible
spectre which, on being conjured
according to the sacred ritual of
exorcism, said that as long as Gennad-
ius lived he was not allowed to inflict
the injuries which were threatening
that Church; but that when he was
dead he would rage terribly against it.


MALEFICARUM


77


Cabades, King of Persia, heard that
on the boundary between Persia and
India, in a strongly fortified place
named, there was a huge treasure of
precious stones and gold and silver

demons, who kept all
mortals from coming near. He there-
fore set out with an army and tried
to take the place by storm, but the
demons fought fiercely and drove him
off. He then tried the arts of the Jews
and Magicians, but these were equally
useless. At last he was persuaded that
he could win his desire by the prayer
of Christians to a asked help
from a Christian Bishop living in
Persia. This Bishop ordered the
Christians to fast, and with pra
performed the Divine mysteries before
the congregation, and going to the
place conjured the demons living there
and drove them out, and with no
trouble gave the fortress to Cabades.
Of this sort was that demon of Basle
which we have already mentioned.

Philinnion,* the daughter of Demo-
stratus and Charito, fell in love with
their guest Machates; but since her
parents refused to countenance this,
she died of grief and was publicly
buried. Six months after her death,
Machates returned to that house, and
Philinnion entered to him and took
mare with him and was entwined
with him more than once that even-
ing; and Machates gave her an iron
ring and a gold cup, while she gave
him a gold ring and a girdle. Now as
her old nurse came to make sure that
the guest lacked nothing, she saw her
ch lying in bed with him, and
joyfully told it to the girl’s parents.

ey ran up in astonishment, and the
next morning found them both, and


* “Philinnion.” This is from Phlegon of
Tralles, “‘Mirabilia,’ No. 30. It may be
read apud “*Fr Historicorum Graeco-
rum.”’ Ed. Carolus Miillerus, Parisiis, Didot,
1849, vol. Ill, fp. 611-13. See “The Vam-
pire in Europe,” by Montague Summers, Chap-
ter I, ““The Vampire in Greece and Rome,”
Pp. 34-37-


78


with cries of joy embraced their
daughter as she lay sleeping with
their guest. But Philinnion looked at
them with stern eyes and said: “O
_ cruel parents to your daughter!

id you then begrudge me three short
days in my father’s house with my
Machates? Whether it be curiosity or
cruelty on your part, it will bring you
great misfortune, for you will renew
me former grief, and once more

our daughter.” When she had
said this, she grew pale and fell down
like the dead corpse which she
actually was; and her parents were
overcome with sorrow. When this
matter became known to the people
and the Magistrate, they ordered the
tomb to be opened, and found it
empty of any corpse; for there were
in it only an iron ring and a gold cup,
the gifts of Machates. But ifeiea e
of Philinnion was found in the bed in
his bedroom, and on the advice of a
certain seer named Hyllus it was cast
out of the city as a prodigy, to be
devoured by the birds and beasts.
As for Machates, when he saw that he
had been mocked by a spectre, he
would not bear the ignominy of it,
and before long he lads violent hands
upon himself.

Such are the many false resurrec-
tions of the heathen: and just as it is

reed that the devil has to do with
witches in an assumed body, either as
Incubus or Succubus, so also in this
kind of spectre a nauseating charnel
smell is perceived.

Among the writings of the Germans
(says Remy, I, 2) there is a popular
story of a certain Aulicus, who received
news of his wife’s death and of the
manner of her burial. He at once
returned home to see to his domestic
concerns; and as he kept thinking of
his wife during the night (as is usual
when anyone has a deep-seated desire
for anything), he saw her undressin
herself as usual ready to come to
with him. He made some effort to
peewee her from doing this, since he

ad been assured that she was dead;


COMPENDIUM


BK. 1. CH, XVIII,


but he was overborne by the sound
of her voice and the sight of her body,
and allowed her to lie down with
him. And so he continued for some
days, until the potent words of an
Exorcist drove away the demon who
had inhabited the corpse in order to
delude and, if he could, destroy the
husband. And certainly this could
not have been done if the body had
been informed with its own proper
soul. But just as the law has power
to eject an usurper, so let no one, who
knows the power of adjurations and
exorcisms, wonder that the demon
can be cast out from his insidious
occupation of a dead body.

Philostratus, in the Life of Apollonius
of Tyana, IV, xxv, records that a
similar thing once ocean arg

, the disciple of Demetrius the
Eynic. He was going from Corinth to
Cenchrew, when he met a eful
and apparently rich foreign girl who
said that she was seized with love for
him, and familiarly invited him to
turn aside into her house. Since he in
his turn was taken with love for her,
he lay with her many times and erent
to think of marrying her ; for she had
a house decked like a king’s palace.
But as soon as Apollonius looked at
the house he cried out that she was a
Lamia who would soon either entirely
devour him, or bring some terrible
injury upon him.

Thomas of Brabant,*in his De bono
uniuersali, II, 57, relates the followi
history. In Genappe, a sober an
noted town of Brabant, a certain
young man loved a girl who was a
virgin, and spoke to her parents with
a view to marrying her; but they
refused. In the middle of the night
the girl fell into an acute fever and


* “Thomas of Brabant.” A Dominican
and suffragan bishop, 1201-70. He is gener-
ally referred to as Cantimpratanus, or
Thomas of Cantimpré. His famous work
““Bonum uniuersale de Apibus’’ was immensely
popular, but now is of the last rarity. I have
used the Douai edition of 1597.


BK. I. CH. XVIII.


grew so ill that they all thought she
was dead; and they mourned and
tolled the bell as if for the dead. The
young man her lover was going that
evening from that town to another,
and as he was going by a thicket he
heard the sound of a woman weeping,
He anxiously ran up and, seeking for
the woman he had heard, found the
girl whom he thought to be dead, and
said to her: “Your ts are mourn-
ing you as dead! ence have you
come here?” “See,” she cried, “the
man going before me, who led me
away.” The young man was aston-
ished at this, since he saw no one
except the girl; and he boldly caught
her up and hid her in a house outside
the town. Returning to the town, he
spoke to his friends, and then went to
e girl’s father as he sat with his
friends at the funeral feast, and asked
him if he would give him his daughter
whom he was mourning as dead. The
father answered in surprise: “Are you
God, to raise up and wed the dead?”
But the young man said: “Only
promise me that I shall have your
daughter as my wife if I bring her
back alive and safe.” To this the
father agreed, and confirmed his
cowerm in presence of them all.
he young man then raised the shroud
which hid the body, and they found
an image so wonderful that it could
have been the work of no man. For
they who have seen such images made
by the devil say that they are like
rotten wood inside, but are covered
outside with a delicate skin. After
this the girl was brought back safe and
sound to her father, and a few days
later married the man, and
lived safely right up to our own times.
An old author tells in the Life of
S. Robert* the Abbot that one night the
Holy man saw a foul demon standin,
at arian of the ite an
repeatedly trying to enter, butin vain.
He had the form of a peasant in a


*“S. Robert.” Abbot of Molesme; c.
1029-1111,


MALEFICARUM


79


rough smock with long bare legs,
carrying a basket on his back and a
piece of wood slung in front of him;
and he kept going about the Choir
with his neck stretched out, looking
attentively at the Brothers to see
whether he could find in any of them
a quality favourable to himself. The
Man of God Dae bo earnestly and
roused the Brothers from their torpor ;
and when the wicked spy had waited
a long time in vain and saw that he
was me. with no success, he
mocked the sleepy Brothers with bitter
laughter and, leaping about with
extraordinary agility, applauded them
whenever their thoughts were turning
to evil. At last he found among them
a young Brother whose thoughts kept
wandering upon forbidden things,
his body only being present in that
place, for he was even meditating a
secret ra; Seeing that this man was
ripe for his purpose, the devil seized
him with his pitch-fork and thrust
him into his basket and quickly ran
away with him. Perceiving this, the
Holy man was in great anxiety for
that Brother’s safety, and diligently
ie for him in the morning. But
he had escaped before the dawn and
had become an outcast, throwing off
the easy yoke of Christ and followin:
the Enemy; for he joined himself wi
the worst criminals and gave himself
ee brigandage, and was not long
rwards captured and miserably


punished with death.
Ranulf Higden,+ the author of the
Polychronicon, writes that Count


Richard went one night alone into
the church to pray, and found there a
coffin with a corpse in it. While the
Count was praying, the corpse burst
from its shroud with a great cry and


t “Ranulf Higden.” Benedictine chroni-
cler; a monk of S. Werburg, Chester; died
1364. The **Polychronicon,” a universal history
to his own times, was translated into English
by John of Trevisa in 1387, and this version
was printed by Caxton in 1482, and by Wynkyn
de Worde in 1495.


80 COMPENDIUM


rushed with arms outstretched as if to
embrace him. The Count made the
sign of the Cross on his brow, and
ana A adjured it in vain to depart,
drew his sword and cut it in two; and
he then ordered that the Office for the
dead with Requiem Masses should be
pangs sung throughout the whole
and.

More wonderful than any is the
following, taken from the description
of Muscovy by Guagninus.* He
writes that certain inhabitants of the
Livonian district of Russia die every
year on the 27th of November on
account of the intense cold, just like
swallows and frogs; and on the 24th
of April in the next spring they come
to life again. He adds that when they
feel their annual death approaching,


.


they put their ons in a certain

place; and their neighbours, the

ere yore — —— we
ese away, leaving equivalent g

in their place. When they come to life


again, they take their goods if they
seem to be just; but if they do not
appear just they demand their own


back. And therefore much strife and
warfare are said to arise between them.
Sigismund, Baron Herbestein,t it


* “Guagninus.”” Alessandro ini (or
Alexander Gwagnin, as he turned his name)
was born at Verona in 1538 and died at
Cracow in 1614. His whole life was in
Poland, and he became a naturalised Pole. For
a full study of this curious and most interesting
man see Carlo Cipolla’s ‘‘Un Italiano nella
Polonia e nella Svezia tra il XVI e il XVH
secolo,”’ Torino, 1887. The work of Guagnini
from which eee mee is the menenrer
“‘Sarmatiae Europeae Descriptio, g-
num Poloniae, mesiaon, Semauiias, Rus-
siam, Masouiam, Prussiam, Pomeraniam,
Liuoniam, et Moschouiae Tartariaeque partem
complectitur, Alexandri Gwagnini Ueronensis,


Equitis Aurati peditumque praefecti, diligentia
conscriptae,” Cracow, i578.

+ “Baron Herbestein.” Sigismund, Baron
Herbestein was born in 1486. He was pro-
moted and became eminent in the Austrian ser-
vice, and acted as Ambassador to Russia and
to Constantinople. He died in 1566. The De-


BK. I. CH. XVII.


is true, relates the same story in his
Rerum Moscouitarum Commentarit, but he
makes it quite clear that he regards
it as a mere fable.


*


CHAPTER XIX


That Cacodemons Exercise their Magic
Powers of their Own Will.


Argument.

Ox this subject Tostado (on Job
xl) argues strongly as follows. It
must not be maintained that men can
i or — a ray - any
ar place except ivine
power, that is, by exorcisms and ad-
jurations : but witches do not claim to
oythe <i of the o seleupasinen,
e er eir s and signs,
or fe very foreign to the Chris-

tian Religion; therefore it is im
sible for the lesser er, which is
man’s, to subject to itself the greater,
which is the demon’s, since there is no
power on earth which can be com-
ed with the er of demons.
herefore there can be no natural or
ritual means by which a man can
compel the demons to appear or to
answer him or to do anything, except,

as I have said, by means of the

cisms of the Church: for then it may
be said that they are put under com-
ulsion either to depart from the
ies of those whom they possess, or
to refrain from injuring them ; and this
was instituted by God to be performed
by the Church, and the power of God
is in such Exorcisms. But God is not
present in the operation of witches by
which they claim to master demons,
for such are contrary to the honour of
God. The demons themselves play


dication to Ferdinand I, King of the Romans,
A m rgereee aie gt agen ie aaa

I is 1 March, 1 7
Malniendes, tober Blace-i Herhestein, Ney-
perg, et Guettenhag.


BK. I. CH, XIX.


false and pretend that they are com-
pelled; for in this lies their chief


er of i But demons
ener =i be mastered by men


they ma
the cords of your sins. Therefore, in
short, they pretend that they are under
compulsion, when they are really
serving of their own will and volun-
ret until such time as seems good to
them.


t


Examples.


Giovanni Francesco Pico della Mi-
randola (the younger) in his De
Praenotione * says that two magicians
met in the hall of the Queen of Eng-
land to give an entertainment, having
mutually agreed to obey each other
implicitly. The first ordered the
second to look out of the window ; and
when he had done so, stag’s horns grew
from his head, and he was for a long
time sed to the ridicule and jokes
of all, So, since he had been powerless
under this outrage and wished to
avenge himself with a worse one, he
drew a human figure with charcoal
on the wall, and ordered the first sor-
cerer to stand under that e and
walk through the wall. The first


* “De Praenotione.”’ Libri Nouem. I have
used the folio edition, Argentoraci [Strasburg],
1506~7.

G


MALEFICARUM


81


ician saw instant death in this,

was afraid and began to beg to
be excused; but when the other re-
minded him of their agreement he was
compelled to obey, and he was seen to
walk the wall. But he was
never found afterwards ; for the demon
with his Eeecemeens had killed him


and hidden his body in some deserted
place or cave.

I will give another example, taken
from a certain German jurisconsult.f


A conjurer, a man of high estate, for
the public amusement and at the
request of his fellow guests, cut off the
head of his host’s servant; but when
he wanted to restore his head to him,
he found that there was another sor-
cerer who was preventing this. He
asked the man not to do so; but when,
after many warnings, he still per-
sisted, the first conjurer caused a lily
to opin upon the table and, no sooner
had he cut off its head and leaves
than that second sorcerer who had
been thwarting him fell headless from
the table, and the conqueror replaced
the head upon the servant with no
ae. aving done this he im-
mediately fled from the house and
city, lest he should be taken by the
Magistrate for murder.

is pretended cutting off the head,
and its restoration, as well as the pro-
duction and cutting off of the lily,
must all be ascribed to magical illu-
sion, There was a contest between the
demons of the two sorcerers, and the
weaker of them was strong enough to
hinder the success of the glamour, but
was poapeiee by the stronger (though
not unwillingly, as I think) to agree to
his client’s death, which was a matter
of fact, and no illusion.

Johan Dubravsky, Bishop of Ol-
miitz, in his Historia rerum Bohemi-
carum, XXIII, tells the following.
Wenceslaus, the Emperor and King
of the Bohemians, formed an alliance
with Prince John of Bavaria by marry-


t “German jurisconsult.”’ John


J George
Gédelmann in Ins “De lamiis.””


COMPENDIUM


82
ing his daughter Sophia. And since
e Prince knew that his son-in-law
took a delight in ludicrous shows and
yor illusions, he took a wagon full
of buffoons and conjurers to Prague.
There the most skilful of the con-
jurers was giving an exhibition of his
power to deceive the eyes, when there
came amongst the spectators Zyto, the
ician of Wenceslaus, with his
mouth stretched open to the ears.
He came nearer and ate up that Ba-
varian conjurer with all his apparatus,
except his shoes, which he spat out be-
cause they were muddy. He then
retired to rid his belly of its unwonted
burden, and voided it into a tub full
of water; and thus he restored the
dripping conjurer to be laughed at on
all sides by the spectators. After this


MALEFICARUM BK. I. CH. XIX,


his companions also stopped their
tricks.

Now that eating of the conjurer was
mere illusion; but the wretched man
was really snatched up and thrown
into the tub of water by a demon, and
was not voided through the other’s
bowels.

Olaus Magnus (III, 20) writes that
a certain magician nam ilbert was
quarrelling with his master Catilla as
to which of them was superior in their
art. The master then threw him a
little stick carved with Gothic or
Ruthenian characters, which he seized
and at once became stiff, and was car-
ried bound to an island in the lake
called Wetter in the country of the
Ostrogoths, and there imprisoned in
an underground cavern,


THE SECOND BOOK, DEAL-
ING WITH THE VARIOUS
KINDS OF WITCHCRAFT,
AND CERTAIN OTHER
MATTERS WHICH SHOULD
BE KNOWN.


*
CHAPTER I
Of Soporific Spells.


Argument.


ORCERERS and witches are in

the habit of putting others to

sleep by means of potions or evil
incantations or some secret rite,

so that they
may then
poison them
or seize their
children, or
kill them, or
rob them, or
pollute them
with filth and
adultery. And
this, as the
examples will
show, can be
effected by
natural so-
rific drugs.
or it is a
very truth
that there are many natural drugs
which, on being applied internally
or externally, induce not only sleep,
but a torpid insensitiveness to the
acutest pain; and this is well known
to surgeons, who make use of them
when they wish to cut a limb from
the human body without any pain.
A laughable and at the same time
pitiable example of this art is told
of a young man of Narbonne who
was led into slavery by a Thracian
pirate. He was put to sleep by a
powerful drug, and his testicles were
so neatly cut out that, when he awoke
thus deprived of his virility, he mar-


velled at himself as at a new man,
Another story is told by Mattioli * of
the asses of Etruria which were so put
to sleep by eating hemlock that they
were carried away for dead ; but when
they had started to skin them, they at
last awoke and stood up on their feet
and rushed miserably back to their
stalls. Many drugs, then, are known
and used by chemists, such as darnel,
nightshade, the rush commonly called
Euripice, mandragora, castor, poppy,
etc,, but if all these have the property
of inducing a compulsory sleep in the
daytime simply Y reason of the
natural powers with which they are
imbued, what, I ask, cannot demons
effect with their arts and contrivances,
since they have perfect knowledge,
eee Dit ‘Only oF
the secret
and hidden
powers of
nature, but
can also, with
the permis-
sion of God,
effect many
things with-
out the help
or presence
of any exter-
nal thing?
And that
witches may
the more
conveniently
pour abroad, spread and disseminate
their poisons, they themselves con-
fess, as can be read in Remy (II, 4),
that after they have worked with
their familiars for some years, they
are given by these demons power to
penetrate into houses, so they can
easily slip through narrow openings by


* “Mattioli.” Pietro Andrea Mattioli, the
famous Italian physician, born at Siena in
1500; died at Trent 1577. He was especially
renowned for his knowledge of herbs and
simples. One of the best editions of his ‘‘Com-
mentarii’’ (secundo aucti) is that of Venice,


1598.


83


84 COMPENDIUM


shrinking themselves into mice or cats
or locusts or some such small animal
as the occasion demands, and once
they are inside they can again, if they
wish, resume their proper shape and
then go deedily about their business.
Now they would first anoint all the
limbs of their victim whose death they
were contriving, so that he should not
awake, and next they would pour
poison down his throat. And the oint-
ment they use is either given them by
the demon or brewed by themselves
with devilish art. Wherefore this
seems particularly worth noting: that
just as Em-
perors reserve
certain re-
wards for
their veteran
soldiers only,
so the demon
grants this
power of


me

S3
S
“
N


changing }
themselves = 83
into different = 84


shapes, as the
witches be-
lieve, only to
those who
have proved
their loyalty
by many
years of faithful service in witchcraft;
and this is as it were a reward for
their long service and loyalty. This
was amply proved by Henry Carmut
in the year 1583 by his own particu-
lar confession, coming after that of
many others of his sort. Witches used
also to make use of strange lights in
order to induce sleep, and | think
Apuleius * called the smoke of them
*a cloud of smoke.”” Sometimes they
set fire to the feet or hands of corpsest


nt


SS MOLSEOTIOVITE


A


* “Apuleius.” The expression used in the
“‘ Metamorphoseon,” Il, 30, of the sleep in-
duced by the witches is “imiecta somni nebula,”
Statius, “‘Siluae,”’ IV, viit, 2, has, I remember,
““Sabaeae nubes” for *‘fume of. | egey oe
+ “Hands of corpses.” A Hand of Glory.


BK. I, CH. I.


which they have first anointed with
an oil given them by the demon: or
else they fix candles to each of a
corpse’s fingers, or light the way
before them with enchanted torches
made from a horrid fat known to
them, or they fix these torches in a
certain place in the house; and the
sleep lasts as long as those corpse lights
burn. Sometimes they hang several
parts of the corpse in various places ;
sometimes they practise other ini-
quities, all equally abominable, which
are efficacious solely because of their
pact with the devil. They also use
magic char-
acters in or-
der to escape
or overcome
the tortures
to which the
Judges sen-
tence them,
as will be
shown in the
examples.

Therefore
Ict those who
go to sleep
protect them-
selves by re-
citing Holy
psalm and
prayer: such
as “Qui habitat in adiutorio Altissimi”’ or
“In te Domine speraui,” or some such
orison. Let them make the sign of the
Cross, reciting the Salue Regina Mater
misericordiae, the Paternoster, and the Aue
Maria, etc., if they would be safe from
such snares. Let them have by them
a waxen Agnus Dei blessed by the
Pope, or some Holy Relics. For such
devotions are the safest protection and
rampart against all the wiles of the
Prince of Darkness.


pat er a nc
“Le Petit Albert’ gives directions how one
“se servir de la main de glorie,” and other
moires (such as “‘Le Dragon noir”) have
full anes, a for the composition of this horrible
charm. It will be re — remembered that in
“The Ingoldsby Legends’’ there is a striking
poem, “The Hand of Glory.”


BK. H. CH. 1.


Examples.

Marguerite Jenin came to hate her
son Jaquelin because she had to keep
bullying him to go and earn money at
the Alsatian markets round about, and
by no arguments or demands could she
prevail upon him to bestir himself.
At last she was taken at dead of night
by a demon, together with her associ-
bingen, and Saldenl asia seer Iams

ingen, and su y approac:
as he slept and soeeed bit Sone his
bed and stood him in front of the fire
intending to roast him alive, if it lay
in them to do so. But they were by
some means prevented from this, and
turned to another method of injuring
him. They made a cut in his side an
inserted a piece of brick which was
lying on the ground; and the wound
ei together again in a moment.

er many months of torture, the
iece of brick broke out from under
is flesh in the sight of many.

The following history is very similar.
At Vorpach in September 1586 Be-
trande, a barber’s wife, confessed that,
with the help of her fellow witches, she
had fixed a bone on to the neck of a
woman named Elisa because she had
refused her a pitcher of milk.

Similarly Seneael of Armentiéres
confessed at Douzy on the gn Sep-
tember, 1586, that he had inserted
part of a sheep’s hip-bone into the top
of the foot of one Philippe, a baker,
having first made an incision with a
fish’s spine; and when the wound
hardened, the baker suffered acute
and continual pain, as he himself
complained.

A man named Benignus was impli-
cated in the murder of a Counsellor of
bee ey sient no eee

esty, the een of Denmark. he
cca easily have escaped the death
penalty, because he was abroad when
the law was set in motion against him:
but he preferred to rely upon a magic
charm which had been given him by
some strolling charlatan, and volun-
tarily offered himself for trial. And he


MALEFICARUM


85


was in no way deceived in his hope;
for he came through all sorts of torture
unhurt and without confessing, and
was acquitted. But just as he was
being released from prison he was
unable to bear any longer the burden
of so great a crime, and openly ac-
knowledged his guilt, and at length
suffered the nt of death.

In the Diocese of Liége, relates
Caesarius of Heisterbach (Miracul.
III, 40), in a town which some call
Hugo and others Dinant, there came
pcrire F to an inn two men who pre-
t that rye vc aor ase a ped
journey; and when sup
they said that they would not go to
bed in another room, but importun--
ately insisted that the Soy ey
should allow them to sleep by the
in the kitchen. But a maid-servant,
who did not like the appearance of
the travellers, secretly spied
the key-hole what they would do. In
the middle of the night she saw them
take from a bag a hand cut from a
dead man and anoint the fingers, and
light them at the fire; and all of them
except one were soon ablaze. The
warlocks were surprised at this unusual
occurrence, and tried many times to
light this finger at the fire, but always
in vain. Then one of them said:
“What does it matter if there is one
person in the house keeping awake?”
And setting the hand by the chimney
with its four fingers ing with a
dim blue flame, they went out of the
house and by a whistle signalled to
their companions to come and join in
the plunder. The maid foll them
and, locking the door, shut them out.
Then she ran to the room where her
master and mistress slept, and found
them so fast asleep that she could not
awaken them al h she ed
them from the bed into the middle
of the room. Meanwhile the thieves
were trying to get into the house
through a window, so she ran and
threw down their ladder. But they
persisted in their attempts to enter
the house. The servant then remem-


86 COMPENDIUM


bered the light and, suspecting it to
be the cause of the deep sleep of those
in the house, extinguished all those
burning fingers, and after that the
sleepers awoke and ran to see what the
matter was, and drove from the house
the thieves who were thus caught in
the act. After some days these villains
were captured and confessed their
crime. What wonder is it, then, if
witches steal by night to the cradles
of infants, and to others whom they
mean to destroy?

Peter Binsfeld * writes as follows:
Anna, the mother of Johann Cuno de
Rouer, and two other witches met
together one night in order to bewitch
a certain zealous witch-hunter. Their
Little Master went before them and
opened the doors; and Johann Cuno
himself was taken as a companion by
his mother and the others, that he
might hold a lighted candle, made not
naturally bat by devilish art. They
came into the room of him whom they
would bewitch, in the town of Tréves ;
but because he had, after the manner
of _— Christians, fortified himself
with the sign of the Cross and other
pious acts before he went to rest, they
could do nothing but had to shut the
doors again an ween back without
arene: any harm. The good man
whom they wished to injure yet lives
by the grace of God, and shall live for
arin as God pleases. Johann Cuno
hi told this; and his mother,
when she was questioned concernin
information laid against her, confes
to the same matter. Necromancers,
who are high in the order of witch-
craft, have no need of this candle
burning before them; but when they
have lit it, they put it in some more
remote place, as will be seen in the
ac ae

What I am about to set down was


* “Binsfeld.” ““Commentarius in Titulum
Codicis Lib. IX. de Maleficis et Mathemati-
cis,” Quaestio VIII, ed. 1605, pp. 566-69.
Peter Binsfeld, suffragan Bishop of Tréves,
was born c. 1540 and died 1603.


BK. Il. CH. I.


taken from grave authors worthy of all
belief, and is mentioned also by Martin
Delrio (Disqu. Magic. III, 1, q. 3) and
should, I think, be especially noted so
that we may see the vengeance of God
against sorcerers and necromancers.
It has seemed to me fitting to conceal
the names of the person and place. In
a certain town in Spain a very famous
man was the intimate friend of a
nobleman who had a most beautiful
but chaste wife. He began to love her,
and not for mies ree this flame
hidden, revealed his thought and tried
to persuade the woman to sin. She,
sure of keeping her chastity, tried her
hardest to recall him from his madness
to a better state of mind; but it was
only throwing oil on the fire. For as
meray MF ae does but burn the
more furiously if you throw water
upon it, so her admonitions did but
the more i e¢ the man, who con-
tinued to press her until she grew
weary and determined to be revenged
upon the wretch. She told the whole
matter to her husband, who was
seized with no less a than that of
the sons of Atreus. At his command
the wife made an assignation, and the
longed-for night came for the wicked
lover. The husband with some of his
servants waited well armed in the next
room to receive his friend in no friendly
manner. And lo, at last arrived the
lover girt with sword and dagger: he
boldly followed where she led and,
when they had sat down, repeated his
old refrain: the woman as
refused and denied him: the adulterer
was emboldened by the darkness of
night, and resorted to force: she force-
fully resisted him until at last she cried
out in fear, giving the agreed signal to
her husband; but she might as well
have called to the deaf, for neither her
husband nor anyone else ran to her
help. What was she to do? Should
she run away? She was held b
stronger arms. Should she consent?
Rather an honourable death than a
shameful sin. So she used her woman’s
weapons, her nails and teeth, and


BK. 0. CH. Ll.


mutilated his face: but in his madness
he hardly felt it. He laid his sword
aside; but weitere her aie the
woman notice r sti out
behind him, sclinkt a dabe it and
stabbed her assailant to death, and his
dead body fell to the ground. Havi
conquered, she regained command
and ran to the room where she
had hidden her husband, and found
him and his servants more like dead
men than living. She called them,


shook them and them about,
and left nothing one to awaken
them; but th i


Suspecting that this was due to wi
t (as in fact it was), and seei
that her whole hope rested in ;
she carried the corpse out of the house
and threw it into the street with the
sword and the bloody d . While
it lay there some of the night watch
came upon it, took it into the guard
house and, washing its face, not
without difficulty recognised the man,
Here the Alcalde exhibited great pru-
dence. He enjoined silence upon
the rest, and next morning went to the
man’s house and saying that he wished
to speak to the master in the presence
of the whole household on a matter of
the greatest importance ordered them
all to assemble together. All the living
were assembled, the dead man only
being absent. The Alcalde remarked
that it seemed to him that someone
was missing, and the master of the
house noted the fact and said: “All
are present except So-and-so, who is
robably now getting ready for some
Busitiess.” “Let him also be sum-
moned,” said the other. To save time
some of them ran to call him, and
finding his bedroom locked they beat
upon the door; but no one answered.
So the Alcalde himself went with the
master and forced the door open;
but there was no one in the room:
and they were all amazed to find
nothing but a torch burning with a
pale flame by the chimney. Then the
Alcalde told the master of the house
how and where he had found the


MALEFICARUM


87


corpse: and while they took it from
the guard house to bury it in uncon-
secrated soil, behold there came that
nobleman and his wife who related
the whole story. On taking note of
the times, they found that they had
awaked when the torch was extin-


guish ed. So the dy of that vile
ypocrite was Aes fin universal


ery lady
nowned and honoured throughout the
whole neighbourhood.

Caesarius of Heisterbach (vi, 10)
tells that a few years ago there died a
simple man named Engilbert, a native
of the Province of Tolbiac. Although
he was born blind, he was known in
many Provinces and esteemed by
many noble persons of either sex on
account of certain gifts with which
the grace of God had illumined his
inner life. In a simple hood and a
woollen tunic and with bare feet he
went both in summer and winter; and
following this mode of conduct himself
from his earliest years, he often visited
distant shrines of the Saints, he never
ate flesh, never slept at night on a bed,
but only on a little hay or straw, and
edified many both by word and ex-
ample. In the time of his youth he
was one night in the house of his aunt,
a rich matron, and had gone to bed
with her servants, when in the early
evening two thieves broke through the
wall and entered the house, where
they stirred up the fire, lit the lamp,
icubs open the boxes and talked to
each other without any fear, As soon
as Engilbert heard them he had no
doubt that they were thieves, but
being unable to rouse the servants
sleeping on each side of him, he cut
himself a club from the wooden seat
with his knife and, since he was blind,
found his way towards the thieves b
his ears, and lay about with his clu
on all sides wherever he could reach,
striking like a madman, and so drove
them from the house. He followed


them to the door where a ladder
barred the exit; and when they were


88


outside the house and saw that there
was no one awake but him only, they
were ashamed at being so driven out.
They took counsel and tried to enter
again; but when he perceived this
from the motion of the rungs, Engilbert
so placed the ladder that the thieves
would fall into a great corn-bin which
was near the hole in the wall; and
when they had done so, he pinned
them down with the actual steps so
that they could move neither forward
nor backward. The thieves, fearing
that they would be captured in the
morning, to be pardoned, and
after they had sworn a terrible oath
never to harm his person or to enter
that house, he let them go away.
When Engilbert reported this in the
morning no one could by any means
rouse the sleepers, and so they searched
for the magic charm which they were
convinced must be the cause of this,
and found hanging from the roof above
the hole in the wall what appeared to
be the backbone of a human corpse;
and when this was taken away, they
all quickly awoke. Many years later
the same thieves, i had. by the fame
and virtues of that Engilbert and, as I
think, urged to it by his prayers,
approached him and confessed their
crimes and afterwards embraced the
religious life.

Remy writes that at her trial at
Gebweiler in January 1589 Marguerite
Luondman confessed the following
among other crimes. One night she
and other wretches entered a house
with the intention of pouring poison
down the throat of the inmate who
was sleeping heavily; and they had
nearly accomplished their purpose,
since everything seemed to favour
them, when they were amazed to sce
their intended victim waken from his
slumber, so that she and her fellow
criminals were compelled to make
their escape with their purpose un-
achieved. The man seized a weapon
and pursued them, but not being able
to catch them hurled terrible threats
at them. To arrive at a more complete


COMPENDIUM


BRK. U, CH.1I.


knowledge of this matter, the man
himself was examined as a witness, and
told everything clearly and fully as
the witch had told it; namely, that
there had been an attempt to poison
him, which had been thwarted only
by his having awaked (for he had not
yet been anointed with their unguent)
and his having protected himself by
the sign of the Cross and the Lord’s
Prayer against so great a danger. He
said that it was quite true that he had
chased them a long way with a hal-
berd without catching them. After
this nearly all those who were charged
with witchcraft in the German
ase of Lorraine agreed in con-


essing that they owed to demons
their power of penetrating into houses,
as I have said above of anointing


all the limbs of their victims so that
they should not awake, and holding
their mouths firmly open so that the
— should not be spilled, and

y pouring the poison down their
throats by the light of a lamp burning
with a sulphurous flame.


*


CHAPTER II


Witches use Human Corpses for the
Murder of Men.


Argument.


ee our days it is the custom of
witches to dig up human corpses
to use them for the murderous slaugh-
ter of men, especially the bodies of
those who have been punished by
death or hanged. For not only from
such horrid material do they renew
their evil spells, but also from the
actual appliances used at executions,
such as » be rope, the chains, the stake,
and the iron tools. Indeed it is the
popular belief that there is some magic
power and virtue inherent in such
objects.

Others cook the whole body to dry


BK. 1. CH. I. MALEFICARUM 89


ashes, and mix it with certain other
matter into a solid lump. Giovanni
Battista Porta mentions that this was
wont to be done in his day, and Pliny
(Historia Naturalis, XXVIII, 7) * also


\ Gitat)’ —=
tn AS


pie: w/e 4 =
(yee: oe & AE


=


speaks of it. In our own time Remy
tells of many who have been tried and
executed for such practices in German
Lorraine.

*


Examples.


At Douzy on the rst Octo-
ber, 1586, Anna Ruffa con-
fessed that she helped a
witch named Lolla to dig
up in this way a corpse
which had recently been
buried, and from its burned
ashes they compounded a
potion that they afterwards
used for killing those whom
pay ere

e evidence of the witch
Briceia at Vorpach in August
1587 is clear concerning the
digging up of an infant's
bear which had been buried


* “Historia Naturalis,’ XXVIII, 7.
““Quae ex mulierum corporibus traduntur, ad
portentorum miracula accedunt, ut sileamus
diuisos membratim in scelera abortiuos, men-
sium piacula, quaeque alia non obstetrices modo


the day before by its father, Wolf the
Smith. It differs from the case we have
just quoted only in the fact that they
did not burn the body to ashes, but
melted it into a solid lump so that
they could more easily make
an unguent fromit. But they
reduced the bones to ashes
with which they sprinkled
the trees of orchards to pre-
vent them from bearing fruit.
At Guermingen in Decem-
ber SS Antony Welch re-
rted what had been told
im by the wives of Nichel
Gross and Beschess, both of
whom were well known to
him through his companion-
ship with them in witch-
craft. They said that not
long before they had dug up
from the cemetery of Guer-
oe two corpses which
had lately been consigned to
the earth by their relatives Bernard
and Antony Lerchen, and that they had
burned them in a fire and used them
for their own vile spells of witchcraft.
But first they cut off the right arm


uerum etiam ipsae meretrices prodidere.. .
Cinere eo quidem, si in testa sint cremati, uel
cum spuma argenti scabritias oculorum ac pruri-
gines emendari: item uerrucas, et infantium
ulcera cum melle.””


go


together with the shoulder and the ribs
rtaining to it, which they required
or the devilish light that we have
mentioned above: for if they wished
to poison anyone by night they set light
to the fingers at the end of the limb,
which burned with a blue sulphurous
flame until they had completed their
work; and when the flame was extin-
guished the fingers remained whole
and unwasted, as if they had never
been burned. And this happened in
the same manner just as often as they
wished.
Johann Miiller of Welferdingen had
a child but
one year old
whom he
ae very
early. a-
tina of Pita
ingen and
Maietta of
Hoheneck
stole this
child from its
cradle and
laced it on a
urning pyre
which they
had prepared
for that pur-
pose on a
steep hill called “‘La Grise,” and care-
fully collected its calcined ashes. These
they mixed with dew, shaken from the
ears of corn and the heads of grasses,
into a mass that could be easily
crumbled, and with this they dusted
the vines and crops and trees, causing
their flowers to fade and preventing
them from bearing fruit.


t%


CHAPTER III
Of Witches’ Poisons.
Argument.


, ' ‘HE poisons used by witches are
compounded and mixed from
many sorts of poisons, such as the


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. IL.


leaves and stalks and roots of plants;
from animals, fishes, venomous rep-
tiles, stones and metals; sometimes
these are reduced to powder and
sometimes to an ointment. It must
also be known that witches admin-
ister such poisons either by causin
them to be swallowed, or by extern
application. In the first instance they
usually mix some poisonous powder
with the food or drink: in the second
they bewitch their victim, whether
man or woman, while he is crags by
anointing him with their lotions,
waters, oils, and unguents which con-
tain many
and various
poisons. They
anoint the
thighs, or
belly, or head,
throat, breast,
ribs, or some
other part of
the body of
the person to
be bewitched,
who being
aslee feels
nothing; but
such is the
potency of
that unguent
that, as it is slowly absorbed by the
heat of the sleeper’s body, it enters
his flesh and penetrates to his vitals,
causing him the reeves bodily pain,
as Spina has said. They have also a
third method of administering poison,
namely, by inhalation: and this is the
worst of all kinds of poison, for by
reason of its tenuity it is readily
drawn in through the mouth and so
quickly reaches the heart.


*


Examples.


Villamont in his Voyages, I, 33, tells
of a witch at Venice who was the
most villainous of all. He used to buy
the souls of those condemned to the
galleys, promising them freedom from


BK. I. CH. Iv.


their earthly punishment of pete
he used to pay ten pieces of gold for
yee souls, w = 9 sold with t
ly engrossed deed written wi

blood, making them over to a demon
and the witch. Soon after this, lest
they should retract, he used to kill
them by suddenly touching them with
some poison, saying that he had been
charged with carrying out the sen-
tence which had passed w
them. Who ever heard tell of such a
thing?

Sprenger relates the history of two
midwives who were burned, one in the
Diocese of Basle and one in that of
Stras . One of them had killed
forty, and the other a countless number
of newly born children, by secretly
thrusting great needles into their


heads

A pean’ to Xiphilinus and Dio
Cassius in the time of Domitian there
were arrested many who used to prick
whom they would with poisoned
needles, so that numbers died without
feeling any pain. This was also prac-
tised in the time of the Emperor
Commodus.

Johann Nider tells that in the terri-
tory of Berne certain witches of both
sexes killed and ate their own chil-
dren; and that others did the same in
the district of Lausanne.

A certain lawyer of Frankfort, says
Gédelmann, de iis, I, 7, narrated
a few years ago that a Count of Higher
Germany gave to the fire eight witches
who had murdered a hundred and
forty infants. In the year 1553 there
were captured at Berlin two women
witches who tried to cause a frost to
destroy the fruit: these women secretly
monn ig the child of a women who
was their neighbour, and cut it up
and cooked it; but by Divine will it
i that the mother, seeking her

d, came upon them and saw the
pot with the limbs of her child thrust
in it. The women were therefore
taken and examined under torture,
and said that if that prea, had gone
forward a great frost would have fol-


MALEFICARUM


gt
lowed, so that all the fruit would have
been lost.

About the year of Our Lord 1536 at
Saluzzo * some forty men, one of
whom was a hangman, and as many
women, swore together that, since the
plague which had been “cae dae
now abating, they would m an
unguent which would cause death
when placed on the cornices of the


and when at the same time they
became aware of an Hermaphrodite
which went creeping into the houses,
and that they whose house it entered
generally died, the plot was at last
d, and all the conspirators were
put to death with the most exquisite
torture. They confessed moreover that
they had planned to anoint the
thresholds during the festival of a
Saint much honoured in that district,
and so caches Nana 33 and for —
urpose they repared more than
eenty vessels of Sntnent, Others
attempted the same thing at Geneva,
and paid the penalty.


t


CHAPTER IV
Of Tying the Points.
Argument.
] FIND that learned men have


given seven immediate causes of
this impotence. The first is when one


* *4t Saluzzo.” This ts from Girolamo
Cardano, 1501-1570, the famous Italian physi-


cian, mathematician, and philosopher. “De
rerum uarietate libri XVII,” lib. XV, c. 80.
T have used the Basle edition, “per. H. Petri,”


1557+


92
of a married couple is made hateful to
the other, or both hateful to each
other, by means of calumny or sus-
picion, or by the affliction of some dis-
ease, as Medea is said to have injected
a poison which made all the women
of Lemnos smell badly in their breath,
and so caused their husbands to neg-
lect them.

The second is some bodily hindrance
to their coming together. By this
means a husband and wife are cither
kept apart in different places; or,
when they try to approach each other,
a phantasm or some such thing is
interposed be-
tween them,
as will be
seen in the
example.

The third is
when the vital

irit is hin-

ered from
flowing to the

enital organ,
aaa 0. the
emission of
semen is pre-
vented. This
has been well
expounded by
John Mayor.

The fourth is when the fertile semen
is dried up and taken away.

The fifth is when the man’s penis
becomes flabby whenever he wishes to
perform the conjugal act.

The sixth is the a plication of cer-
tain natural drugs which in some way
deprive a woman of the power to con-
ceive. These are the more common
causes mentioned by learned Doctors.

The seventh is rarer, namely, the


* “John Mayor.’ Foannes Maior or Had-
dingtonus Scotus, Scotch philosopher and his-
torian, 1496-1550. For an account of his many
literary productions which were all written in
Latin see Mackay’s “Life of John Mayor”
prefixed to Constable's translation of Mayor's
“History of Greater Britain,” Edinburgh,
1892.


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. IV.


closing up or narrowing of the female
genitals; or the retraction, hiding or
actual removal of the male genitals.
Sprenger (HI, q. I, cap. 7) and Remy
ctr, 5) tell various stories of such a
calamity to the male. This kind of
witchcraft is of two sorts, one tem-
porary and the other permanent. It is
called permanent when it lasts up to
death and cannot be removed by any
natural medicine or other lawful
means. It is temporary when it is only
to last for a certain time.


Examples.


Vincent of
Beauvaist
tells the fol-
lowing. At
Rome in the
time of the
Emperor
Henry III
there was a
certain noble
and rich
yo man
he had
lately mar-
ried a wife
and invited
his friends to a sumptuous wedding
feast, and they went out after dinner
into the fields to play at ball. The
bridegroom as leader of the game
asked for the ball, and lest his be-
trothal ring should fall off he put it
on the finger of a bronze statue of
Venus which was close by, and all


t “Vincent of Beauvais.” Even the years of
the birth and death of this celebrated encyclo-
paedist are uncertain, but the dates most fre-

ntly assigned are 1190 and 1264 respectively.

t is thought that he joined the Dominican
Order shortly after 1218, and that he passed
practically his whole life in his monastery at
Beauvais incessantly occupied with his enor-
mous work, of which the general title is “ oon
lum Maius,” containing 80 books divided into
9885 chapters.


BK. Il. CH. IV.


turned to the game, He soon grew
tired and stopped playing, and came
back to the statue to get his ring; but
the statue’s st os was bent back to
the palm of the hand, and however he
tried to recover the ring, he could not
bend the finger nor draw off the ring.
He went back to his friends, but told
them nothing about this. In the dark
of night he came back with a servant
to the statue, and found the finger
stretched out as it had been at first,
but without the ring. He kept quiet
about his loss and went into the house
to his newly married wife; and when
he entered the bridal chamber and
wished to lie with his wife, he felt
himself prevented, and something
cloudy and dense rolled between his
body and his wife’s. He could feel this,
but he could not see it. By this ob-
stacle he was prevented from embrac-
ing his wife ; and he also heard a voice
saying : “Live with me, for to-day you
have wed me. I am Venus, upon
whose finger you placed the ring,
which I shall not return.” The man
—_ S. Antoninus, who takes this story

om Vincent of Beauvais) was terri-
fied by such a prodigy, and neither
did he dare nor was he able to make
any answer, but he spent that night
without sleep in deep thought. So it
continued for a long time, that when-
ever he wished to have intercourse
with his wife he felt and heard the
same thing. In other respects he was
healthy, ruled his house well, and was
diligent in his military service. At last,
driven by his wife’s complaints, he
took the matter to his parents and
they, after due consideration, made it
known to a certain suburban priest
named Palumbus, who was a necro-
mancer and a master of spells. This
man, in return for many fair promises,
wrote a letter and gave it to che young
man, saying: “Go at such an hour of
the night to the cross-road where four
ways meet, and stand there in silent
thought. There will go by you the
figures of men and women of all ages
and conditions, some on horseback


MALEFICARUM 93


and some afoot, some rejoicing and
some mourning; but whatever you
hear, you must not speak. Following
that company will come one of greater
stature and bulk sitting on a car, and
to him you must silently give the letter
to read; and he will at once do what
you desire.” The young man did all
this exactly as he een directed,
and he saw there among the rest a
woman clothed like a harlot riding
upon a mule with her hair flowin
loose over her shoulders and bou d
with a golden fillet in front, i
in her hand a golden rod with whic
she drove the mule, and appearing
almost naked because of the thinness
of her garment, and making lascivious
gestures. Last came the Lord of the
whole rout, bending terrible eyes upon
the young man from a superb chariot
made of emeralds and pearls, and
asked him why he was there. He
answered nothing, but held out the
letter to him. The demon recognised
the seal and, not daring to despise it,
read what was written, and thereupon
raised his arms to heaven and said:
“Almighty God, how long wilt Thou
suffer the iniquities of the priest Pa-
lumbus?” He at once sent his servants
from his side to wrest the ring from
Venus, who after many subterfuges at
last yielded it with reluctance. So the
young man, having obtained what he
pat at last consummated his long-
ished love. But when Palumbus
heard of the demon’s cry to God about
him, he understood that his days were
numbered ; therefore he himself cut off
all his limbs and died in miserable
pain, having confessed to unheard of
crimes in the presence of the Roman


le.
P Gouchsiets Hollen,* the A
tinian Eremite, writes as follows (Prae-


* “Gotschalcus Hollen the Augustinian.” I
have used two editions of the “\Praeceptorium’?
of this Evemite theologian; Preceptoriti nouum,

‘ologne, folio, 1481; and “*Preceptorium gots-
calei ordinis heremitarum sanctt Augustini,”
Cologne, folio, 1489.


o


e=


—=_— —- —_ ~~


ceptorium, fol. 20, litt. A). I know a
woman who wished to cause a divorce
between a man and a woman who
loved each other, and for this she was
to receive payment. She wrote upon
some cards two strange characters,
together with other devout words, and
gave them these cards to wear; yet
they did not quarrel. Then she wrote
the same words on a cheese which she
gave them to eat; and afterwards took
a black chicken which she cut in half,
and offered one half to the devil with
certain sacrificial rites, and gave the
other half to the man and woman to
eat. After this there arose the greatest
hatred between them, so that they
could not bear to look at each other.
And how did this happen, unless it
were a sacrificial offering to the devil?
So writes Hollen.

Giovanni Battista Codronchi (De
morbis maleficiis, XIII, 8) relates that
there was in the town of Sepino, in the
Kingdom of Naples, a man named
Jacopo whose wife so detested him
that, from the very first day of their
marriage, they had been so far from
being able to consummate the wed-
ding that they could not even live
together; and if ever Jacopo tried to
approach his wife, she was filled with
such fury and rage that she would
rather throw herself from the window
than submit to him. This was told to
a certain religious man to whom th
had given hospitality ; and he found it
difficult to believe the story, and there-
fore, in order to prove it, asked that
the woman should be approached
there and then. The husband accord-
ingly hid himself within the house, lest
his wife, knowing him to be present,
should refuse to come in. The woman
came, and being asked the reason for
her hatred of her husband began to
bemoan her evil fate and said that she
could give no reason at all; but she
declared that when her husband was
absent she was consumed with such a
longing and love for him as she could
not express in words; but when she
went near him to speak to him and


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH, IV.


look at him, there at once appeared
in her imagination such deformed,
ugly and horrible monsters in the like-
ness of her husband that she would
rather die than endure him; and that
her whole soul and all her strength
and part of her life seemed to be drawn
into her husband as an evil offering
to her own ruin: but when he was

in absent she again burned with
the same love. The good priest wished
to prove the truth of the woman’s
words and told the women who were
with her to bind her by her arms and
legs with a strong rope to the bed in
the form of a cross; and he told the
husband to put off ail repugnance and
quickly have to do with her. For the
eae suspected that the woman might

pretending to be affected in that
way so that she might conceal some
deformity, The wife, in her desire for
her husband, let herself be bound and
asked that her husband should be ad-
mitted to her: but when he came in,
never was seen such terrible fury, no
wild beast was ever so fierce or so
filled with madness and rage as that
woman ; for she foamed at the mouth
and gnashed her teeth and rolled her
eyes, whilst her whole body seemed to
be shaken and possessed with demons.
The women who were present said
that when they touched her belly
which was twisting under the ropes, it
appeared to be crammed full, and all
her skin was covered with weals as if
she had been beaten. There was no
end to this raging until the husband,
tired out with struggling and moved
with pity for her, went away.

The same author says as follows. In
the town S. Gimignano in Etruria a
young man so desperately fell in love
with a witch that he left his beautiful
and faithful wife as well as his children
and, forgetting them, lived with his
mistress until his wife, persuaded that
his conduct was due to witchcraft,
secretly searched for the charm which
had caused it, and found in a jar under
her bed a toad with its eyes stitched up.
This she at once took away, opened


BK. Il. CH. V.


its eyes, and afterwards burned; and
immediately her husband, as if he were
awaking from sleep, remembered his
family and forthwith came back to his
wife and children.


ve


CHAPTER V
Of Incendiary Witchcraft.
Argument.


rhea that meet os ane
vipers, do not o} eir
devilish ea 4 fa

inflame souls,
but set fire
to; bodies,
houses, and
whole towns;
wherefore
they are mani-
festly fuel for


1 eternal


*
Examples.
Rem


Il,
1g) tells a


at Montlhéry
a certain
witch called Black Jeanne Armacu-
riana quarrelled with one Frangoise
Huyna and, when she could not get
what she wanted, was consumed with
a desire for vengeance. She was then
given by the demon a piece of linen
in which were wrapped some small
objects like cut straws, and was told
to hide it in Huyna’s house and go
away quickly; for the house would
soon afterwards catch fire suddenly
and be burned with all the furniture.
She therefore rolled the piece of
linen into a ball and offered it for
sale as a head ornament to Huyna,
who was then busy in the bakehouse.
But when she said that she did not
need it, as her servants could provide
all that she required, Jeanne never-


MALEFICARUM


95


theless threw it into the bakehouse
saying that if she had no use for it she
could return it to her; and she had
hardly left the house before the bake-
house where that ball was caught on
fire, and then the whole house began
to blaze so fiercely that it was burned
down before any help could be
brought. The truth of this matter was
established beyond doubt by the sepa-
rate accounts of the two women and
by the event itself.

A less subtle, though equally per-
nicious work of incendiarism is testified
to by Conrad Wolffhart,* who writes
as follows in
his Prodigiorum
ac Ostentorum
Chronicon.
There is a
town in Swit-
zerland called
Schiltach
which, on 13
April, 1533;
was suddenly
and com-
pletely burn-

; and, ac-
cording to the
report of the
townsmen to
the Magis-
. : es Sieers at Irei-

urg, the cause of the fire was u-
larly supposed to be as Slows. A
demon whistled a signal from a cer-
tain part of the house, and the master
went up thinking it was a thief, but
found no one. But the signal was
heard again from the upper dining-
room; and the master ran up to find
the thief, but again saw no one, yet
the whistling was heard from the top


* “Conrad Wol; .” This famous Ger-
man scholar was born at Rouffach in Alsace,
1518. He professed Grammar for many years
at the University of Basle where he died 1561.
In his writings he often adopted a Hellenised
name, Lycosthenes, under which he is not infre-
quently known. I have used the Basle edition,
folio, 1557, of the *‘Prodigiorum Chronicon.”


96
of the smoke-chamber. Then it came
into the master’s mind that it was
something devilish; and he bade his
household keep their wits while two
priests were fetched. They began their
exorcism, and he answered that he
was a demon. Asked what he was
doing there, he said that he wished to
ruin the town. When they threatened
to offer Masses, he said that he cared
nothing for their menaces. And soon
afterwards he seized a woman with
whom he had had intercourse for four-
teen years (although she had confessed
every year and had received the
Eucharist),
and bore her
up in the air
and set her
on the top of
the smoke-
chamber, and
gave her a jar
eres he told

er to upset:
and be
she had done
so the whole
town was
burned down:
within an
hour.

A few years
ago some
incendiaries were infesting the region
of the Rhine. They used to place in
other persons’ houses a sword or spear
or knife, or some other object entirely
free from heat or fire; and after afew
hours flames would burst from the
house and consume it as if it had
been made of straw.


tr


CHAPTER VI
The Devil Wishes to Perpetuate the Race
of Witches.
Argument.


HE infection of witchcraft is
often spread through a sort of
contagion to children by their fallen


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. V.


parents when these study to find
avour with their Cacodemons by so
doing. For the greed of Satan was
ever infinite and insatiable: thus, when
once he has gotten a foothold in an

family, he is never known to relinquis

it except with the greatest difficulty.
And it is one among many sure and
certain proofs against those who are
charged and accused of witchcraft, if
it be found that their parents before
them were guilty of this crime. There
are daily examples of this inherited
taint in children, for the devil is always
busy to increase the number of his
own. And
there can be
no more fruit-
ful means of


compelling
those who are
already in his
power to cor-
rupt their
children.


*


Examples.


Nicole Mo-
relle con-
fessed at Barr in January 1587 that her
father had taken her to the demon’s
assemblies at night before she had
reached puberty. There was another
who, although she was not yet of
marriageable age, was taken by her
mother far into a dense wood, being
ene rhea that she would meet a

dsome young man, whom she
might easily take to husband: and
it happened as her mother had said;
but as soon as she was embraced by
him she felt herself deceived, for she
seemed to be embraced by some statue
of marble, he lay so stiff and heavy
upon her.

At Gebweiler, in July 1568, Henry
and Catharine gave their son Hanzel
a Succuba for wife. As far as he could


BK. II. CH, VI.


see at his first approach, her hair and
ts were b and her feet de-
ormed like horse’s hooves; yet he did


not on that account r her, but
immediately lay with in greedy
pleasure, having abjured holy


thoughts: but it was as if he had
entered an icy cavern, and he went
away ashamed and sorrowful without

At Girancourt, in October 1586,
Domenico Petronius said that before
he was twelve years old he had been
pers by his aes Aer abomin-
able meetings that t marry a
wife. For marri are often per-
formed at the Sabbat. Colette the
Fisher’s wife and many others have
confessed this. And de the
Barber’s wife, and Synchen May re-
ported that they had witnessed a wed-
ding of this sort, when they happened
to be present there one night, and that
in place of the customary wedding
gifts the couple were only required to
stoop down and blow upon each
other’s fundaments.

Near Ribeauville Domenique Falvet
was picking rushes with her mother
for binding up the vines, and they lay
on the ground to rest. After they had
talked a little, the mother began to
warn her not to be frightened if by
any chance she saw something strange,
for there would be no danger to her in
it. When she had said this, there sud-
denly appeared something in human
form which looked like a shoe-maker,
for he was girt round the middle with
twine rubbed with pitch. The girl was
made to swear an oath to this man,
and he marked her on the brow with
his nail as a sign of her new allegiance,
and then he =3, tua her in the sight
of her mother. The mother in her turn
offered herself to be defiled by him in
her daughter’s presence. Then they
joined hands and danced round in a
ring for a while; after which he gave
them what seemed to be money (but
afterwards it crumbled to dust), and
disappeared into air and returned to
his own place.

H


MALEFICARUM 97


At Jouy-aux-Arches, in 1581, Fran-

ise Hacquart, in order to free herself

Jal pions wg by a demon, de-
liv up to the demon her daughter
Jeanne, who was not yet seven years
old. This was the chief of her many
confessions at her trial. Now since
there was evidence that the child had
consented to this thing, and this was
largely substantiated by her own clear
statements concerning the witches’
Sabbats at which she had been present,
it yo ee to be commonl t that
she should be held as i i
her mother. But she too young
to be tried as a criminal, and no
rtrd pie
against her; so a o! tp
took her into her own house to try to
wean her from that execrable way of
life with every holy means in her
power. After her mother had been put
to death, therefore, she was kept in the
matron’s house for some time
urged to lead a good life, and they all
thought that she had verily shaken
off the demon’s yoke and won back
her former liberty. But alas! one night
as she was sleeping as usual with the
serving maids, the demon scized her
and lifted her up as if he were about
to carry her away with him: and it is
believed that he would have done so,
if the maids had not prevented him
by calling often upon the Name of
oy Thus cheated of his prey, he
eft her hanging between the boards
of the roofing and went away. And
this was no hysterical vain report of
the servant maids, for it was seen by
all the neighbours who ran there upon
hearing of it. The girl then fell into a
sort of stupor, ss and ing silent
and awake for eight days and nights
together; and that this was not as-
sumed by her through fraud or malice
was sufficiently indicated by the fact
that, according to Pliny, no one can
with safety fast for more than seven
days, and if anyone should continue
to fast up to the eleventh day it must
be confessed to be something preter-
natural.


—_—-—_— — "Te oe


98

Remy says that he has read, in the
accounts of such trials, of those who
have confessed that they had hidden
beneath their nails a poison given
them by their parents, and that by
this means they had often scratched
and killed their companions while
playing.

In the same place he writes of a
child not yet seven years old named
Laurent d’Arsonval, who lived at
Barr in 1591, and who clearly proved
by his own evidence that he had been
taken by his parents to the execrable
assemblies of demons, where he was
set to turn the

it and tend
the flesh that
was to be
tye rime.

e presiding
Little Master,
who had
given him the
name of Verd
Joli, had more
than once
given him
poison with
which he
afterwards
killed the
cattle of those
who did him even the very smallest
injury. This was proved by the actual
event.


5


CHAPTER VII


Of the Various Ways by which Witches
ent their Spite upon the Human Race.


Argument.


T is not to be wondered at that
witches are everywhere to be
eared*: for although they have not


* “Witches . . . to be feared.” King James
in his ‘“‘Demonologie,”’ Book II, v, says that
there are three kinds of folk whom God will


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. VI.


an infinite power of nay to whom-
soever they wish (see the history of
Asmodeus and the seven husbands of
Sara in Tobit), yet our sins, when God
wills, often make us the victims of
their malice. For no one is so upright
of life and free from sin but that he is
pricked and terrified by the conscience
of some misdeed ; no onc is so attentive
and diligent in his religious observ-
ances but that sometimes the stress of
business will cause him to neglect the
customary prayers by which he was
daily wont to commend himself to the
protection and guardianship of God;
no one is so
secure as to
be free from
all tg 2 of ee
jury the
OY Our
daily experi-
ence is proof
enough that
most of us are
exposed to no


light danger
in this direc-
tion. For
witches do not
attack with
their poisons
only those


who are off their guard or asleep at
night; but they spread their snares for
the vigilant in such a way that they
can gag be escaped by human
counsel or foresight. There are many
stories upon this subject in other parts
of our book which should abundantly
satisfy the reader; but as we are ap-
proaching the subject from a fresh
angle, and the stories are not alto-
gether without pleasant profit and


permit to be troubled or tempted by witches:
‘*the wicked for their horrible sinnes, to punish
them in the like measure; The godlie are
sleeping in anie great sinnes or infirmities and
weakenesse in faith, to waken them up the fas-
ter by such an uncouth forme: and even some of
the best, that thetr patience may bee tryed before
the world, as Job was.”


BK. Il. CH. VII.


interest, it may not prove wearisome
if they are here set out at some
length.


t


Examples.

An old man who was porter at the
Chateau de Bassompierre had married
a g wife, but continued to live in

ultery with another woman who had
been his mistress before his signe
His wife grieved that a harlot, who
could not be eoenae with her for
youth or beauty, should be preferred
to her; and, as the custom is, went and
told her trouble to a neighbouring
woman and asked her advice as to
what she should do. Her neighbour,
whose name was Laire, told her to be
of good heart, for she had ready a
remedy for her misfortune; and she
picked a herb from her garden and
gave it to her, saying that if she made
a broth from it and gave it to her
husband he would entirely lose his love
for the other woman. She gave him
the broth the next day at supper; and
he then first experienced a heaviness
in his head and afterwards sank into a
deep sleep. When he awoke from this
on the next day he discovered, not
without shame, that his virility had
been taken from him; yet he told his
wife of his misfortune, since he could
not hope to conceal it from her for
long. His wife, secing that her impru-
dence and folly had etbayea her, and
that through begrudging another
woman a she had herself lost the
whole, told her husband everything
that had been done, and asked for-
giveness for her fault, saying that it
was all due to the great love which
ww had a him. The npgane. easily

orgave her, recognising that the mis-
fortune had been brought about by
his own lasciviousness and lust; and
he told the whole matter to his
patron, the Lord of the place, Frangois
de Bassompierre. This noble man
thought it his duty both to attend to


MALEFICARUM


99


the recovery and health of a member
of his household, and worthily to
punish the witch for so foul a crime;
so he summoned the woman and com-
pelled her by his threats to restore to
the man that which had to all seeming
been lost: and this she did by giving
him another herb to eat. She was
therefore guilty by her own showing,
and was seized and soon afterwards
burned to death, It is very clear from
this that there is no real actuality in
such matters, but that it is a
mockery and a delusion of the eyes.
This is taken from Remy, II, 5.

Again, Barbellina Rayel had con-
ceived a vindictive hatred for Jean
Louis. As he was crossing a river on
his way to a mill house, with the help
of a demon she shook a big sack of
wheat from his wagon, and then threw
over his horses some powder which
had been drugged by her Little Mas-
ter, by which means she killed two of
them at once, and the rest were ill for
many days. Next, changing herself
into a cat, she entered his house by
night in that form, and with the same

wder killed his two-year-old son.
inally she placed a poisoned pear in
his way as he was going to Gerbéviller,
as if it had fallen from a traveller’s
bag; he imprudently took it up and
ate it, and at once became so it that
he could hardly crawl home for pain.
The demon had foretold all these
things just as they happened, and had
even himself advised the placing of the
pear by the roadside.

Lolla Gelea aroused against herself
the hatred and malice of Catharine of
Metz, who kept trying to find a means
of avenging herself but could not see
how to do it without yin <a ea
picion towards herself, for she knew
that the other was on the alert against
her wiles, But a demon showed her a
safe way, and told her to come the
next day and fill a pitcher with burn-
ing cinders from the metal furnaces
(which at Dieuze are the most famous
in all Lorraine), and to to Lolla
and upset the pitcher and breathe in


100


her face: for he said that Lolla would
give birth before her time with the
greatest pain. And it was as he had
said; for no sooner had Catharine
overset the pitcher and breathed un-
cleanly upon her, than Lolla was at
once seized with violent parturient

ins, and could hardly get into her

ouse in time.

At Conz in July 1582 Jeanne Gran-
saint went alone to the window late
one night thinking how she could be
revenged on the comely Barbara, who
had insulted her. At once there ap-
peared a demon in the form of a cat,
who told her to pound a slug’s head
to powder and sprinkle it over Bar-
bara’s clothes. She followed this ad-
vice as closely as she could, and soon
found an occasion to make use of it;
for she found Barbara sleeping in a
mean stable on some straw in the
cattles’ stall. She therefore blew the

over her and the cattle that
were with her, and they all at once


She used the same powder with less
harmful effect against the daughter of
Antoine Lebossa: for though she thor-
oughly sprinkled her limbs with it, she
only suffered a slight sickness and re-
covered her health after a few days.

Here it is to be noted that the drugs
which they use in this way possess no
inherent power either to kill or to heal,
neither can the same substance possess
such contradictory qualities. But all
this is contrived and effected by the
power of the demon, who is satisfied if
the witch does but lend her hand to
the work so that she may be a con-
scious ope aa in the crime.

Alexia Belheure used continuously
to ——_ with her husband, as is
usually the case when there are poverty
and want in the home: and her hatred
of him grew to such an extent that it
was only the difficulty of injuring him,
not the will to do so, that restrained
her. But a demon agreed to do the
work for her, if he should consider her
—— worthy of execution by him;
and when she had extravagantly


COMPENDIUM


BK Il. CH. Vil,


tal ha him to do so, he undertook the
usiness. It chanced that on Christ-
mas Eve the unhappy husband had

me to a neighbo town to buy
ousehold necessities for that Holy
Season, and was returning home late
at night. The demon violently seized
him on his way and beat him and left
him half dead in the cave of Donali-
baria (as it was called), and flying to
his good wife told her what he had
done. On hearing this she hastened
out to all ap ce as if she were
anxious about her husband’s return,
but really that she might see with her
own eyes the miserable condition of
him against whom she had so long
cherished evil thoughts. When she
found him lying and bewailing his
unhappy lot, she said : “Alas! husband,
I was coming to meet you, knowing
that you were i h the
country so
Goes. thie


lying thus on the
ing?” When he told her what she
already knew, she raised him up and,
supporting him as well as she could
with her shoulder, brought him home,
where he died on the same night from
the intolerable pain of his wounds.
The next day she roused the neigh-
bours and showed them the naked
body all black and blue with bruises,
and said that he had fallen into the
hands of brigands the day before and
had crawled home in that condition
ing for breath. And they all easily
Belteved her, for she was not young or
beautiful enough to be suspected of
oie apts adulterers.

Odille Boncceur of Harécourt said
that it was the custom of witches, when
they feared to be caught in the act, to
sprinkle a —- powder in the way
by which they thought those persons
would go t whom they plotted
some calamity. And this agrees with
the confession of Rose Gerardine in
1588, that she infected her partner
Stephane Obert with a mortal disease
by scattering such a powder on his
threshold before the dawn.


BK. Il. CH. VII.


Jacobus Agathius, again, said that
his demon had taught him that this
was by far the easiest way to destroy
the wife of Hilary 4 Banno.

Isabella Pardea and Martha Merge-
latia affirmed that they had never used
this means against anyone without
success, especially if they were bidden
to do it by their demons.

Francesca Perina took, as she was
passing, some which had fallen

a tree belonging to a neighbour
called Riberianus, and was severely
beaten for it. As she was by
this and seeking to be revenged by any
means, it was not long before a demon
showed her a way to obtain her wish,
and gave her some herbs which she
must scatter on the path by which
re sc sen ee = ee

morning. s ; and he,
not suspecting anything, walked over
the herbs and at once became ill, so
that he soon died in great agony.

Barbeline Rayel used similar means
against Frangois le Violon, near whom
she had lately come to live. She
poisoned with a powder the gate
through which his cattle used to go to
water, and on the next day three of
his mares were found in the stable
dead on their backs.

In 1586 Claude Morel spread such
a pomete before the a of ee ng
man by marriage, Wolfgang 0-
wille; and when his daughter hap-
pened to go that way she at once fell
ill and soon afterwards died miserably :
for when she passed by that way she
broke her leg.

Catharina of Metz was angry be-
cause she had been refused by a baker
from whom she wished to obtain bread
on credit, and asked the help of her
demon to pay him out. The demon,
as is their nature, came at once read
and eager for any chance of doing ill,
and gave her some herbs wrapped in
a paper, telling her to scatter them in
the place most often used by the baker
and his family. She at once took them
and spread them in the doorway by
which they had to go to the village:


MALEFICARUM


101


and the baker, and after him his wife
and children, walked over them and
were all afflicted with the same sick-


them. This she secretly hid in
their beds, as she had been told to do,
and they were soon all restored from
sickness to their former health.


he told them to scatter a poison broad-
cast in that place where the village
cattle most often went to pasture, and
that they might i Pixies the
poison by pounding a sufficient quan-
x4 of grubs and worms. This they
did, and within a few days there died
of the cattle of that village a hundred
and according to Driget, and a
hundred and sixty according to Odille.
For they were questioned separately
but agreed in everything except the
number.

Jeanne Foirelle gave a drugged cake
to the whole of a neighbour’s family
to eat, but that one only died whom
she had intended to kill.

Huberte of Bussi¢re had been un-
fairly treated by one of the townsmen,
and it seemed to her that she would
be amply revenged if she killed by
poison the five cows by which he sup-
coke himself ant Hes being '
there was a danger of her caught
in the act if she did the business wath
her own hand by touching each cow
with a poiso Ww as was her
method in her other poisonings. So
her Little Master relieved her of that
fear and told her to sprinkle before
dawn a poison er which he gave
her about the place where the cattle
were usually driven. But she hesitated,
fearing lest the poison should affect
the whole of the cattle, since she
wished to harm none except that of


=.  § ~~. . ..


102


the man against whom she wished to
be revenged. The demon then pro-
mised that all the harm should be
confined to those five cows; and so it
proved in the event. For of all the
cattle, only those five died or even
became sick.

Jeanne Armacuriana had _ stolen
three bundles of faggots from a neigh-
bour’s land, and had hidden them in
the garden of Alexée Cabuse, which
lay most conveniently to conceal her
theft ; but she did not manage secretly
enough to prevent Cabuse, who was
at work in a remote of her garden,
from seeing her. the way of
women, she told her neighbours what
she had seen; and in consequence,
Jeanne was not a ill spoken of, but
was even in some danger: for in Lor-


raine the punishment for the theft of
even a cabbage from another’s garden
is the lash. Her anger and indignation
against Cabuse was beyond descrip-
tion, and she kept looking for any
means of revenging herself satisfac-


torily for so great an injury. While she
was pondering deeply on this subject,
the demon to which she had given
herself came to her and twitted her
with cowardice in that she had allowed
herself to suffer such mental torture
for so long when she had so often
ee that he was ready to procure
er the occasion for v ance; and
he undertook that it would not be long
before the other woman should be
punished for her evil tongue, if she
would allow him to work. Jeanne said
that such was her wish, and the demon
at once flew to Alexée, who was then
tending her cattle in the meadows and
was trying to drive back to the herd
one which had strayed into a neigh-
bour’s corn-field. He caught her up
in a whirlwind and dashed her to the
ound so violently that her leg was
roken, and she was so bewildered by
this happening that she had to be
carried home half dead.
The following example concerns one
Bernard Bloguat. He was driving his
cart to Strasburg where he had some


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. VII.


business, when he was seen by Jeanne
de Bans as she was working in the
fields. She then called to mind certain
injuries he had done her, which had
not been avenged, and by her curses
and execrations brought disaster upon
him. For she had hardly begun to
curse before he fell so violently from
the cart in which he was sitting that
he was instantly killed. Yet his body
was quite uninjured, with no wound
or bruise or discoloration or any swell-
ing or dislocation or hurt of any sort,
so that it is to be believed that his life
and soul were cut off in a moment “d
a demon. And lest any should thi
that such a belief was based solely upon
that witch’s confession, let him know
that it was commonly rted that
an ostler named Johann, who had lent
Bloguat his cart for that journey,
was privy to the whole affair. More-
over, the strange and unheard-of man-
ner of his death is itself an argument
that it was due to some preternatural
power of evil.

At Nancy a certain witch commonly
known as Asinaria used to go from
door to door begging, and her age and
infirmity so aroused the pity of the
rich that she received every day
enough to live in comfort. One day
she was standing as usual begging in
front of the Governor’s door, when his
eldest son, coming out in an unlucky
moment, told her to go away and to
ask him another time, because it was
not convenient just then for his ser-
vants to give her money. She became
indi t at this treatment and, as
witches are always ready to do, cursed
him: and immediately afterwards, as
if he had pierced his foot with a flint
stone, he fell and hurt himself so that
he had to be carried back into the
house at once. There he told his ser-
vants how it had all happened, adding
that it was not the result of any im-
ageer or careless step on his part,

ut that he had been struck from be-
hind by some higher er and that
there was no doubt he would have
broken his leg if God had not helped


-BK. H. CH. VI.


him as he fell; for he said that he had
fortified himself with the sign of the
Cross at his prayers that morning. Yet
after this the witch did not rest: for
when her familiar had indignantly up-
braided her because he had been foiled
in his attempt, she started to beg and
beseech him all the more to proceed
by any means with the destruction of
the young man, a task which would
be easy for him if ever the youth came
out without the protection of his morn-
ing prayers and the sign of the Cross;
for the demon hi admitted that
these were the causes of his previous
failure. Not many days later it hap-
pened rand foncagh acai
out of the window of an upper room
to take some young sparrows from the
nest on the wall, when he was lifted
up from behind and thrown through
the window with such force that he
was thought to be dead. But after a
few hours he regained consciousness
and, looking at his father who was
abandoning himself to tears and
lamentation, said: ‘‘Father, do not
think that this evil has happened to
me through my own fault, for indeed
I am very far from being to blame.
Something came bchind me and
thrust me through the window in spite
of my struggles, and I was over-

owered by some stronger power and
orced out.” And indeed they had
found near him as he lay prone a piece
of wood from a pile which had been
stored for household use in the top
attic. Constantly maintaining the
same story, the youth died after a few
days. Not many days later, Asinaria
was thrown into prison by reason of
the evidence of other witches against
her and because of the daily increasing
suspicion that she was a witch, and as
a result of her careful examination and
the evidence taken by Remy, who tells
this story. And at last she was induced
by persuasion, without any recourse
to torture, to make a full confession
of all her crimes; and among them
was that which had been so often and
confidently affirmed by the boy. For


MALEFICARUM


103


she said that as soon as he had accom-
plished the crime the demon had flown
to her in a neighbouring market-place
and told her everything that had been
done: and she continued to maintain
this until she suffered punishment by
death in the fire.

There were some peasants, one of
whom was lopping off the over luxu-
riant boughs of a tree, another throw-
ing fruit from a loft down to the yard
ready to be pressed, and another load-
ing and arranging straw at the top of
a wagon. None of them were acting
rashly in any way ; but they were taken
and hurled to the ground with such
force that they had to be carried away
half dead. Yet there was no sign of
any person or thing to have caused
their fall.

There was a pear tree in a remote

art of a wood, from which Jean

otier had long planned to gather the
fruit; and he did not think that the
tree, being in such a hidden and out-
of-the-way place, would be noticed by
anyone, and his tit-bit be taken from
his mouth. Yet the tree was discovered
by Desiré Salet, a man of his own
class, who came there first and picked
the rs. He was caught in the act,
and it was not long before Rotier made
him suffer for robbing him of his
booty ; for this class of men bears such
injuries mesh Poe is easily incited to
vengeance. He accordingly cursed
Desiré, as he was in the habit of
cursing others, and he was suddenly
caught in a whirlwind and hurled to
the ground, and so hurt in one leg
that he could not move until some
swincherds ran at his cry and helped
him home. And he was not yet healed
when Rotier made a full confession of
this matter.

The following story of Apra Hose-
lotte is similar. She had a son in the
service of Jean Halecourt, whom his
master had cruelly punished for a
theft of which he, more than the rest
of the servants, was suspected. This

ieved the mother and made her wish
for revenge, the chance for which she


104


ly grasped. When the master was
bringing his horses home from pasture
and was carelessly — upon one of
them, she and her familiar came in-
visibly and so bore upon the horse’s
neck that the rider fell to the ground
and broke his leg: and he was still
lame and crippled by that fall when
he apeares as a witness against that
witch.

Claude Fellet of Maiziéres was al-
ways quarrelling with a neighbouring
woman, as it so often appears that
women of the same class have only to
live near each other to find occasion
to quarrel and dispute; and she had
pondered for a long time how she
could privily bring some harm u
her neighbour. For it had to be done
very secretly, since all the inhabitants
would at once accuse Fellet if any

ve accident befell the other woman.

he consulted a demon about it, and
he told her to go out into the fields
and work as usual, while he would
play his part in the town; for if she
stayed at home she would be sus-
pected. The neighbour’s house was
shut up and the doors were bolted,
when her son, whom the woman had
left alone in the house when she went
out, was heard crying pitifully. All who
heard it ran up and broke open the
door to see what had happened to the
child to make it cry so; and they found
it covered and surrounded with hot
coals, They quickly threw these aside
and took him from his cradle to save
him if possible, but he was already
breathing his last and died in their
arms. A rumour then began to be
spread that Fellet had certainly been
at the bottom of this, for it was bruited
that she had punished others before
in the same way. ee she was
brought to trial on account of this and
other crimes of which she had long


been suspected, and she was at last
induced to confess freely that she had


wrought this mischief, and to tell
everything that the demon had done
at her request, particularly the matter
of the burning coals which he had


COMPENDIUM


BK. II, CH. VI.


taken with a stick from the hearth near
by, and had thrown them over the
poor child’s cradle,

A peasant named Mauletic was
oing early one morning to a castle
y the Moselle to negotiate a profitable

deal in milk, since that was his trade,
when a violent whirlwind took all his
breath away, though ev here else
it was dead calm, so that he lay for a
long time between life and death. This
isfortune came to him through the
contrivance of Francois Fellet with the
help of a demon; for this man had
long nursed a rancorous desire for
vengeance upon Mauletic for certain
pears pacaess oars 42
W! 4 induced by
penitence to s his sin.

Colette the Fisher’s wife, without
coming near her fellow townsman
Claude J: ies pomracre made je blind an
one eye by em a demon to
that work, as ghe herself freely con-
fessed when she was tried for witch-
craft. And the greater faith was given
to her story because the same Jaqui-
mine afterwards said that his eye
been wounded as if pierced by a force-
fully driven branch of a tree, although
there were no trees for a considerable
distance in any direction. Therefore
it was suspected that he had received
that injury through some black art.

“lage ta Weher testified as follows:
“For many reasons I hated a certain
peasant who lodged in the same house
as I; but I could not see how to harm
him without incurring suspicion, for
he kept a keen and careful watch upon
me. But at last I found a way; for
when he was busy over some work in a
thicket, a demon at my request drove
a thorn so deep into his knee that he
was disabled for a whole three months ;
and he was not cured until I took pity
on his prolonged pain and asked the
demon to heal him again. A few days
after this, as he was cutting wood in
the forest, the demon poured a lotion
upon the wound and he was imme-
diately healed.” ms


BK. Ul. CH. VIII.


CHAPTER VIII
Of the Different Diseases Brought by
Demons.


Argument.


VICENNA and Galen and Hi
rates deny that it is possible for
any diseases to be b t upon man
by demons; and their view is followed
by Pietro Pomponazzi* and Levin
Lemne,+ not because they did not be-
lieve that the demons, which they
acknowledged to be evil, wished to
cause disease,
but because
they held that
every disease
is due to natu-
ral causes.
But that is no
good argu-
ment: oh
it not sible
for icone
to sprin
from na
causes, and at
the “ei ons
sible for
tea to be
the _instiga-
tors of such sicknesses? The contrary


* “Pietro Pomponazzi.” 1492-1525. Phil-
osopher and bey! of the Aristotelean-Aver-
roistic School. He taught philosophy at Padua,
Ferrara, and Bologna. Among his chief works
is the “De naturalium effectuum admirandorum
causis, siue de incantationibus (1520) in
which he seeks to prove that in Aristotle's phil-
osophy miracles are not possible. The doctrine
was condemned and Pomponazzi did not escape
in common report the stigma of heresy.

“Levin Lemne.” Or Livin Lemmens,
1505-1568. A Dutch philosopher, born at
Ririckzee in Zeeland, where also he died. He
practised medicine and acquired no small repu-
tation in his day. His “ Miraculis Occultis
Naturae Libri IV” was well esteemed, and
was translated into French both by du Pinet
ore 1566) and by Jacques G (Paris,
1567).


MALEFICARUM


105


opinion is held by Codronchi, Andrea
ino, Jean Fernel,t Franciscus
Valesius the Spaniard, and other most
learned physicians, together with S.
Jerome jae Matt, iii), S. stom
in, 54, on Matt. xvii), S. Thomas
I, 2, 115, art. 5), and other theo-
logians. ‘The jurists also, especially


but I iP. the firmer authority
of the Holy Scriptures. Did not the
devil afflict Job with loathsome sores
==, {rom the soles
of his feet to
the crown
of his head?
Did not the
devil put to
an alien use
the tongue
and ears of
him whom §S.
Matthew calls
the Lunatic?
Did not a
devil afflict
Saul with a
black hum-
our? The ac-
count is quite
a for it says that an evil spirit
icted him, which went away when
David played the harp.
Let us now see by what method the
demon causes sickness, This has been


+ “Jean Fernel.”” Born in 1497; “‘le Galien
moderne,’’ physician and master astrologer to
Henri II and Diane de Poitiers. He published
several works on medicine; “La P. ie”;
“Les VII livres de la physiologie”’ ; and after
his death a “‘Uniuersa Medicina” containing
his various tractates and monographs appeared
at Frankfort in 1592.

§ “Burchard.” The famous Bishop of
Worms; born shortly after the middle of t
tenth ; died 20 August, 1025, His cele-
brated “‘Collectarium canonum”’ or ** Decretum”
is in twenty books, and was long used as a
practical guide for the clergy.


106


clearly set forth by Franciscus Vale-
sius,* who says that the demon is the
external cause of sickness when he
comes from without to inhabit a body
and bring diseases to it; and if the
sickness has some material source he
sets in motion its inner causes. Thus
he induces the melancholy sickness by
first disturbing the black bile in the
body and so dispersing a black humour
throughout the brain and the inner
cells of the body : and this black bile he
increases by superinducing other irri-
tations and by preventing the purging
of the humour. He brings epilepsy,
paralysis and such maladies by a sto
page of the heavier physical fluids, o
structing and blocking the ventricle of
the brain and the nerve-roots. He
causes blindness or deafness, bringing
a noxious secretion in the eyes or ears.
Often again he suggests ideas to the
imagination which induce love or
ae? or other ere
or the purpose of causi ily in-
firmities he distils a ors homes sub-
stance from the blood itself, purifies it
of all base matter, and uses it as the
aptest, most efficacious and swiftest
weapon against human life: I say that
from the most potent poisons he ex-
tracts a quintessence with which he
infects the very spirit of life, and (as
Cesalpino well observes, De Daemonum
Inuestigatione, c. 16) so establishes his
devil-made disease that human skill is
hardly able to find a remedy, since
the devil’s poison is too subtle and
tenuous, too swift and sure in killing,
and reaches to the very marrow of the
bones. But those more common mala-
dies which are caused solely by some
external injury or noxious breath, by
means of certain instruments of witch-
craft, unguents, signs, buried charms
and such things, have no natural
power for evil in themselves, but are


* “Franciscus Valesius.”” A Spanish Doc-
tor of Physic who flourished towards the end of
the sixteenth century. He won a great reputa-
tion for his translations of, and commentaries
upon, the older medical writers.


COMPENDIUM


BK. Ul. CH. VII.


merely symbols in response to which
the demon fulfils his pact with a witch.
This was pointed out by the same
Andrea Cesalpino in Chapter 17 of the
work above quoted.


*


Examples.


A certain honest woman who had
been legally married to one of the
household of the Archduke formally
deposed the following in the presence
of a Notary. In the time of her
maidenhood she had been in the ser-
vice of one of the citizens, whose wife

e afflicted with grievous pains
in the head; and a woman came who
said she could cure her, and so began
certain incantations and rites. And I
carefully watched (said this woman)
what she did, and saw that, against the
nature of water poured into a vase, she
caused water to rise in its vessel, to-

ther with other ceremonies which

ere is no need to mention. And con-
sidering that the pains in my mistress’s
head were not assuaged by these
means, I addressed the witch in some
indignation with these words: “I do
not know what you are doing, but
whatever it is, it is witchcraft, and you
are doing it for your own profit.”
Then the witch at once replied: “You
will know in three days whether I am
a witch or not.”’ And so it proved ; for
on the third day when I sat down and
took up a spindle, I suddenly felt a
terrible pain in my body. First it was
inside me, so that it seemed that there
was no part of my body in which I
did not feel horrible shooting pains;
then it seemed to me just as if burni
coals were being continually heap
upon my head; thirdly, m the
crown of my head to the soles of m
feet there was no place large enoug’
for a pinprick that was not covered
with a rash of white pustules; and so I
remained in these pains, crying out
and wishing only for death, until the
fourth day. At last my mistress’s hus-
band told me to go to a certain tavern;


BK. Il, CH. VIII.


and with great difficulty I went, whilst
he walked before, until we were in
front of the tavern. “See!” he said to
me; “there is a loaf of white bread
over the tavern door.” “I see,” said I.
Ble! hy said ; “Take Pg hte if you
possibly can; for it may do you good.”
And I, holding on to the Shon: with one
hand as much as I could, got hold of
the loaf with the other. “ a
(said my master) ‘‘ and look
at what is inside.” Then, when I had
broken open the loaf, I found many
things inside it, po ew some white
armas e pustules on my

y; and I saw also some seeds and
herbs such as I could not eat or even
look at, with the bones of ts and
other animals. In my astonishment I
asked my master what was to be done ;
and he told me to throw it all into the
fire. I did so; and behold! suddenly,
not in an hour or even a few minutes,
but at the moment when that matter
was thrown into the fire, I regained all
street health.

he same author tells in the same
place the following story. An honest
married woman deposed the followin;
on oath. Behind my house (she said)
have a greenhouse, and my neigh-
bour’s garden borders on it. One day
I noticed that a passage had been
made from my neighbour’s garden to
my greenhouse, not without some
damage being caused; and as I was
standing in the door of my green-
house reckoning to myself and be-
moaning both the passage and the
damage, my 7) pel suddenly came
up and asked if I suspected her. But I
was frightened because of her bad
reputation, and only answered, “The
footprints on the grass are a proof of
the damage.” Then she was indig-
nant because I had not, as she hoped,
accused her with actionable words,
and went away murmuring; and
though I could hear her words, I could
not understand them. After a few days
I became very ill with pains in the
stomach, and the sharpest twinges
shooting from my left side to my right,


MALEFICARUM 107


and conversely, as if two swords or
knives were thrust through my breast ;
whence day and night I disturbed all
the neighbours with my cries. And
when they came from all sides to con-
sole me, it ha ed that a certain
clay-worker, who was engaged in an
adulterous intrigue with that witch,
my neighbour, coming to visit me,
took pity on my illness, and after a few
see of comfort went away. But the
next day he returned in a hurry, and,
after consoling me, added: “I am

ing to test whether your illness is due
to witchcraft, and if I find that it is,
I shall restore your health.” So he
took some molten lead and, while I
was lying in bed, poured it into a bowl
of water which he placed on my body.
And when the lead solidified into a
certain image and various shapes, he
said: “‘See! your illness has been
caused by witchcraft; and one of the
instruments of that witchcraft is hidden
under the threshold of your house
door. Let us £0, then, and remove it,
and you will feel better.” So my hus-
band and he went to remove the
charm; and the clay-worker, taking
up the threshold, told my husband to
put his hand into the hole which then
appeared, and take out whatever he
found; and he did so. And first he
brought out a waxen image about a
palm long, perforated all over, and
pierced through the sides with two
needles, just in the same way that I felt.
the stabbing pains from side to side;
and then little bags containing all sorts
of things, such as grains and seeds and
bones. And when all these things were
burned, I became better, but not en-
tirely well. For although the shootings
and twinges stopped, and I quite re-
gained my appetite for food, yet even
now I am by no means fully restored
to health. And when we asked her why
it was that she had not been complete-
ly restored, she answered: There are
some other instruments of witchcraft
hidden away which I cannot find. And
when I asked the man how he knew
where the first instruments were hid-


108


den, he answered: “I knew this
through the love which prompts a
friend to tell things to a friend.”

A tale surpassing all wonder is
told in his De Naturae diuinis character-
ismis, II, 4 by Cornelius Gemma,*
who relates that a fifteen-year-old girl
of Louvain named Catarina Gualteri
was sometime under his charge in
the year 1571. She was given by a
kinswoman of her own something
to taste, and when she had eaten it
she at once showed extraordinary
symptoms of sickness ; for Gemma him-
self saw her every day void so many
objects of such a size and nature that
he would not have believed if it had
been told him by anyone else. In the
eighth month of her sickness with a
great effort she voided from her back
passage a live eel, perfectly formed, as
thick as a thumb and six feet long
with scales and eyes and tail and
everything belonging to an eel. He
tells that, three days before it came
out, not only the girl herself but also
those near her heard the eel utter a
sharp thin cry in her belly; and when
it was coming out the girl said that
she clearly felt that at the first
attempt it drew back its head, and
then came out with a rush. They
killed and disembowelled the eel, and
hung it high out of the reach of the
animals; but it suddenly vanished.
Meanwhile the girl began to vomit an
immense quantity of fluid not unlike
wine and of an unpleasant taste; and
this continued for more than fourteen
days, each day’s vomiting weighi
twenty-four pounds. Besides this she
made water copiously two or three
times a day. No tumour or external
swelling could be seen in her stomach
or anywhere in her body, and the girl


* “Cornelius Gemma.” Dutch physician
and astrologer, born at Louvain in 1595, the
son of Régnier Gemma (Frisius or Fricn),
Professor at the University of Louvain.
chief work of Cornelius Gemma, “‘De Naturae
diusnis characterismis . . . libri II,” was pub-
lished at Antwerp in 1575.


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. VII.


ate and drank very sparingly, hardly
taking a cup of wine or beer or other
liquor ; but her excretion of water was
such that in two weeks she could easily
fill two water-butts. After this flood
of water she began to vomit a vast
number of hairs of about a finger’s
length, some longer and some shorter,
like those which fall from old dogs;
and the quantity of the hairs grew
each day so that she could easil Ans
filled many full-sized balls. this
she vomited with much retching and
difficulty. After a few days’ interval
there followed other vomitings of great
balls of hair floating in a purulent
sanies, and sometimes of the appear-
ance of the dung of pigeons or geese;
and in this pus were found bits of
wood and tiny pieces of skin, some of
the wood being various-sized pieces of
living trees, as if they had been broken
off from the trunks; these were of the
thickness and breadth of a _ nail,
spongy inside and black with old bark
outside. Shortly afterwards her vomit-
ing became as black as coal, so that
you would have said that it was ink
or the excretion of a cuttle fish, with
minute pieces of coal in it; and each
day she vomited two or three pounds,
nearly always accompanied with more
hairs than could be put into a walnut,
all white and long and stiff. This con-
tinued for three days, and then in one
single vomit she threw up two pounds
of pure blood, as from an opened vein,
unmixed with any other matter. After
this blood, the black vomiting re-
turned, as if the fluid had been dyed
with pounded antimony, and each
day there were five or six pounds of
the fluid; and this prodigy continued
for seven solid hours. The application
of human and divine remedies brought
some relief, during which the hairs
were still ejected, but they were fewer
and gradually became Wacker and
shorter every day, growing from
auburn to dark and so to jet black,
and it seemed that the vomiting broke
them into minute particles, such was
her virulent spitting; though at times


BK. ll, CH. VIII.


it was more like mud. About the
middle of cp ee she vomited
larger pieces of skin which seemed to
be torn from her stomach, and they
had the appearance of a thick fleshy
membrane, h and difficult to tear,
like the choroid envelope of a foetus,
and were marked with a network of
all's pales x engtsTinraba diately ly
a in ;

after these followed others mu

thinner but black right through, but
still bearing the of veins, and
in other respects not unlike the allan-
toid mem . Last came mem-
branes of a third kind, devoid of vasa,


and thinner than of the others,
like the amnion yet differing from it
in appearance and material;


erial; for
though thin, they were remarkably
pitty nag in some marvellous man-
ner larger. The fragments differed in
size, but two especially were more
than two palms wide and were deeply
grooved: these split themselves from
top to bottom and took the form
of cancellated rhombs. I can com-
pare them with nothing better than
the slough of a viper, although I had
never before seen anything compar-
able with them. But this was chiefly
remarkable in them, that along the
length of them there appeared a
deeper groove marked sparsely with
transverse marks, as appears in hoarse-
ness of the lung. They had a hollow
circular cavity within, a little nar-
rower in the fastigium of one mem-
brane, like the mark of a snake’s head
with a mastoid “sty She or a mamil-
lary processus. In the end of the other
there lurked something abdominal
and asymmetrical, not unlike a bifur-
cated vertex. All these joined together
clearly attained to the length and
thickness of an eel, and I think that
it was a papillary tubercle through
which the eel breathed and, perhaps,
drew into itself the needful solid and
liquid nutriment.
After she cast up these membranes,
there followed a vast quantity of
stones, which she brought up always


MALEFICARUM


10g
in the evening and at a fixed hour
with much contortion and nausea.
These stones were of the shape which
is found in the ruins of old houses,
and were solid, angular, and of vari-
ous shapes and sizes, some as big as
walnuts; and she vomited them not
without danger of suffocation. Some-
times also they were coated with chalk
and joined together, so that they could
not be distinguished from stones
pulled from a house wall.

Once in my presence she brought
up an angular stone as big as a
double chestnut, with very great diffi-
culty, so that I manifestly saw her
vomiting it and heard the sound of it


mediately afterwards she br t up,
but with less difficulty, a piece of
wood as long and thick as a thumb.


This was bound right round with a
sort of thread. Meanwhile at intervals
she still vomited hairs, but fewer and
blacker. Then came that which would
surpass all belief, for she brought up
a hard triangular bone, hollow and
spongy inside, such as was clearly a
ent of ox’s leg, and the girl’s
father said he had seen such a one the
day before in his broth. Without delay
on the following day she vomited a
number of bony objects, some sharp
and some round, of various shapes and
sizes, still mingled with hairs and
stones: and last of all, pieces of glass
and bronze. Gemma justly sw
that a demon was, with the permission
of God, the originator of these prodi-
gies, but that he nevertheless employed
natural causes in their due order as
far as he could.
Sprenger (Malleus Maleficarum, II,
4: I, c. 13) tells of a woman of
abern with whom a certain midwife
was very angry because she did not
engage her to minister to her at child-
birth. This midwife came one night
with two other witches where she was
lying in bed and said that, out of
revenge, she was going to put some-


Ito


mon in her intestines, the pain of
which she would feel in six months’
time; and she touched her belly. And
it seemed to her that she took out her
entrails and put in something which
she could not see. After six months
were gone, in the words of Sprenger,
such a terrible pain came into her belly
that she could not help disturbi
everybody with her cries day an
night. And because, as has been said,
she was most devout to the Virgin,
the Queen of Mercy, she fasted with
bread and water every Saturday, so
that she believed that she was de-
livered by Her intercession. For one
day, when she wanted to perform an
action of nature, all those unclean
things fell from her body; and she
called her husband and her son, and
said: “Are those fancies? Did I not
say that after half a year the truth
would be known? Or who ever saw
me eat thorns, bones, and even bits
of wood?” For there were brambles


as long as a palm, as well as a quan-
tity of other things.
ere is a castle* called St.-


Symphorien in the Diocese of Lyons
and a few miles from that city, where
there lived a man full of faith, a con-
scientious entertainer of religious men,
and of sober and learned conversation
and opinions. This man once dragged
an Abbot, almost by force, to his
dwelling to see his daughter who was
troubled with a wretched affliction:
for, instigated by her envious mother-
in-law, an evil witch-woman had
caused her to sink into a hopeless
languor, so that she could not endure
the presence or sight of her husband.
The girl’s mother, led by womanly
affection to believe that Satan would
cast out Satan, sought the help of a
famous warlock, who came and ex-
amined the girl and pronounced that
she was bewitched. He then rubbed


* “There is a castle.” This history ts given
by Laurentius Surius the hagiologist. “De pro-
batis Sanctorum historiis”’ (Cologne, 1570-77),
Tom. III, 8 May, ¢. xxiti.


COMPENDIUM


BK. II, CH, VIII.


the bark of a tree with a potion of
herbs which he gave her to drink,
uttering certain enchantments; and
with his own teeth bit the poor girl’s
arm, a marvellous and strange thi
unheard of before. She then recover
from her languor; but kept feeling as
it were needles coming from her heart,
and was in terrible pain while some
unseen power drew these needles out
through the bite in her arm, upon
which no scar had appeere. A cruel
remedy, but one worthy of its author.
In this way at various times more than
thirty needles were expelled, some
with and some without an eye for the
thread. The Abbot who, as we have
wy a to the house where a
was happening, is a most eminent an
disti : ed monk whose good work
in this and other marvellous cases is
not unknown; but since he is yet
living I have thought fit not to Rivulee
his name. The anxious father showed
him his acne fs daughter and with
tears explained her miserable case,
and as he was speaking hi
proved by the fact: for the girl
aned and said that she felt a
needle coming. The needle reached
the opening, preceded by the usual
flow of blood, and had already begun
to show part of itself, when one of the
lay brothers waiting upon the Abbot
drew it out all bloody, to be kept for
many years as evidence of the fact.
The Abbot touched the wound and
promised that by virtue of faith no
more iron would come out of it. And
so it was; but the material only was
changed, for the malady was not ges
conquered. Instead of the iron needles
there began to come out little bits of
wood, like spits of oak or ash, thicker
and rather longer than thorns, but not
all of the same length or thickness,
any more than the needles had been.
Within a year and a few months six-
teen of these bits of wood came from
the woman. At last came the Rever-
end Bishop Peter who was endowed
with grace to perform this miracle.
He gave orders in the preceding even-


BK. Il. CH. IX.


ing that the woman should be brought
to him as he celebrated Mass; and
during the Mass the seventeenth piece
of wood came from her body. The
Chaplain drew it out in the sight of
all, and the Bishop confe and


was permitted to experience. Her
father’s name was Pierre du Fraxinet,


a man well known and honoured by
his neighbours, as may be verified by
any who may find this story too
strange to be believed.

Cesalpino writes as follows, in the
De Inuestigatione Daemonum, cap. 17:
This year at Pisa I, with many others,
saw the following. A woman possessed
by demons used frequently, sometimes
while she was being exorcised and
sometimes after, to cast from her bod
aris ir = size 7 — cae

reclu e possibility of her havi

seins them; fae as long iron a
bones, stones, balls of wool, coals, and
many other things. And in her bed,
where her breast, and especially her
heart, lay, were found many balls
cunningly formed from palm leaves
in various shapes, but mostly in the
form of a rose with many layers of
delicate petals, some bound round
with thread and others stuck together
with glue. Other objects were found
on her pillow where her head rested.


*


CHAPTER IX


Why God Permits the Devil so to Busy
Himself with Witchcraft.
Argument.

HERE can be no doubt that


there are many reasons for this.
irst, that glory may be increased


MALEFICARUM Ii!


even in us, when the glorious qualities
of God are manifested in us.

Secondly, it is consonant with the
laws of God; for since He created man
to be free, He freely permits him to sin.

Thirdly, we may see in this a proof
of His benevolent government; for He
gave free will even to the devil, and
permits him to make use of it at times.

Fourthly, it proves His mercy to-
ward the human race. For if the devil
were permitted to do all the harm that
he wished and could, no man would
escape, but all would be killed, There-
fore God often denies him the power
to do harm.

Fifthly, it shows God’s wisdom. For
although He allows the devil to use
his natural powers, yet He causes that
Father of Pride to be overcome by
such foolish little creatures as men.

Sixthly, it shows His power. For
although He allows the demon to effect
the greater marvels, such as turni
water into blood, He does not permit
him to accomplish smaller things, such
as the generation of gnats.

Seventhly, it shows His justice: for
in this way God punishes men’s sins
even in this life.


*


Examples.


In 1566, through the mouth of a
demoniac woman at Laon, a demon
in the hearing of all mocked at the
Calvinists, crying out that he had
nothing to fear from them since they
were his friends and allies. This is too
well known throughout Picardy for it
to be denied; and it is recorded
Bishop Willem Damasus van Linda
(De “fegiendis nostri seculi idolis, I, 14).


* “Bishop Willem Damasus van Linda’”
(or van der Lint), 1525-88. Bishop of Rure-
monde and of Ghent. He was a staunch de-
fender of the Faith, and the author of many
theological and controversial treatises, some of
which he Pep in we for the cee =
safeguarding of hi. . See Thus in “De
Rodboticn Lex | a and Utrecht,
1904), 435:


112 COMPENDIUM


It was noted as a fact that when
Martin Luther * died at Eisleben, the
demons flew to his funeral from those
who were possessed, as is recorded by
Bredembach, Bk. VII, ch. 37 and 39.

In an ancient Life of S. Zenobius f
of Florence, the history is told of a
certain heathen woman of that city
who was both noble and wealthy. Her
husband died, leaving her with two
sons whom she reared most carefully ;
weed re Daigo inte es oa
grow ey one day into a rage
and terribly beat their own mother


* “Martin Luther.” Malvenda, “De Anti-
christo” (Romae, 1604), Liber X, p. 501,
writes as quoting Bredembach: ““Narrauit mihi
uenerabilis Dominus N. aetate, doctrina, et uitae
sanctimonia ae atque etiam-
num stes, eo ipso die, quo nouus euange-
lista Staal Lidheris Gefuactin est, uniuersos
Soabontiae ip lihere che ayers

jae spe liberationis, quam

S. Dymnae diuino beneficio vrarin istic iam
inde a multis retro annis consequi solent,
aduecti erant, a teterrimis illis et horrendis
daemonibus hospitibus suis liberatos. Postridie
uero ab iisdem rursus obsessos et discruciatos
Suisse: daemones uero, cum interrogarentur ubi
pridie delituissent, respondisse, principem ipso-
rum et archidaemonem — ut uniuerst
spiritus maligni ad sui prophetae et fidelis co-
operarii D. Martini Lutheri exequias conflue-
rent, congruere enim, ul qui plurimos ad
inferos seduxisset, a quam plurimis ad eosdem
solemniter deduceretur.”

S. Dympna, Virgin and Martyr, whose
Relics are now venerated at Gheel, province of
Antwerp, was the daughter of a Pagan king
in Ireland. In art she is represented with a
sword in her hand and a devil chained at her
feet. From time immemorial the Saint has been
invoked upon behalf of those possessed by
demons and lunatics. Miraculous cures and
deliverances from demons have without number
been wrought at her shrine. The feast of the
Saint is 15 May, when many pilgrims visit the
sanctuary, as also on the Tuesday after Pente-


cost.

+ “Life of S. Zenobius.” Apud Surium;
Tom. 3; 25 May. S. Zenobius (died 337) is
venerated as one of the Patrons of 77
when his Feast is kept, 25 May, with especial
solemnity.


BK. Il, CH, Ix.


with many blows. Unable to endure
this outrage she cursed their bodies
with horrible imprecations, falling on
her knees and beating the ground with
her hands, and calling upon Erinnys
and the hellish furies to bring madness
upon her sons. The demons heard her
from the depths of darkness; and they
attacked the young men, driving them
to a so that they immediately
became like mad dogs and began bit-
ing each other’s limbs. The servants
ran up, there was a great outcry, and
some brought ropes and some chains,
and the young men were bound; but
even so their madness could not be
S ema ine, in The City of God
. Augustine, in ity © ,
XXII, 8, refers to the following story
told by one Paul. While (he said) we
were still living at Caesarea in our
native country of padocia, our
eldest brother to maltreat our
mother in a terrible and insufferable
manner, not hesitating to lay his hands
on her. The rest of us brothers and
sisters bore this patiently without
speaking a word for our mother to our
brother to ask him why he treated her
so: but our mother, goaded by woman-
ish anguish, determined to punish her
cruel son by cursing him, and went
after cock crow to the font of Holy
Baptism where she called down the
wrath of God upon her son. Then
there came to her some demon in the
form, as it is said, of our father, and
asked her what she wished to do; and
she answered: ““To curse my son, for
his intolerable ill-treatment of me.”
Then that enemy, since he can easily
find a place in the heart of an an
woman, persuaded her to curse all her
children; and she, kindled by his
viperish counsel, prostrated herself
and seized the sacred font, and with
her hair all disordered and her breasts
bared begged from God the followi
boon :—that we should be banish
from our country and wander about
foreign lands as a terrible example to
the whole human race, Our mother’s
prayers soon took effect, and her ven-


BK. Ul. CH. IX.


geance at once fell upon our eldest and
guiltiest brother ; for he was seized with
os a shaking of his limbs as your
oliness saw in me three days ago.
Before a year had passed we were all
afflicted with the same punishment in
the order of our age. But when our
mother saw the great effect of her
curses, she could no longer endure the
conscience of her unnatural behaviour
or the general disgust felt against her,
but tied a cord round her t and
thus miserably ended her unha
life. Unable to bear the scandal of
these events, we all left our native land
and were scattered in all directions,


and after long wandering we have
won freedom our ctions.
In the County of Flanders (hear and


tremble!) there is a Monastery (but it
is well not to reveal its situation or the
name of its Order) where there were
three who were monks in name, but
in reality beastly gluttons and whore-
mongers, who had no shame at all in
theircrapulenceor their lechery. Once
when they had sat drinking till late in
the night one of them, not quite so
hardened in sin, said : ““We have given
enough to Bacchus and our stomachs.
Let us at least thank God.” “For my

art,” said another, who was bolder,
‘I thank Cacodemon; and I think it
is he who should be thanked, since it
is he whom we serve.” They then left
the table with laughter and went to
the dormitory, each with his wench.
They had hardly lain down when
there walked in through the bolted
door a demon, in the form of a great
fierce black man dressed like a hunter,
and with him two little cooks. He
looked threateningly at the beds and
in a terrible voice exclaimed : ‘Where
is he who gave thanks to me? I am
here to repay him!” Then he dragged
that man from his bed, quaking and
nearly dead with fright, and giving
him to the cooks ordered them to spit
him and roast him by the blazing fire.
They at onceo , and the wretched
man was roasted and most obvious!
died. The rest were nearly dead wi

I


MALEFICARUM 113


terror, for the room was filled with the
stench of the burned body. At last the
hunter turned to the others who were
cowering half dead under their blan-
kets, and said: ‘You also deserve the
same punishment, and I would will-
ingly inflict it; but I am prevented by
a Righer and leave you against
my will. But I warn you to mend your
ways, lest an even more terrible fate
should overtake -’ The demons
then vanished; but the men did not
recover their seats or even their
speech until b daylight. Then
when they arose they found their com-
rade dead and (to prove that it had
been no et vision) quite blackened
and burned. I doubt whether there
has been so useful an example as this
for hundreds of years.

Geilana, the wife of the Duke of
Franconia, ordered SS. Kilian,* Colo-
man and Totnan to be put to death,
and this crime remained hidden until
God discovered its author in the fol-
lowing manner. One of those who had
struck S. Kilian with his sword was
suddenly possessed by a demon and
began to cry aloud: “O Kilian, you
persecute me cruelly, for I am con-
sumed with fire and cannot hide what
I did. I see threatening me a sword
red with your blood.” He kept shout-
ing like this for a long time, tearing
himself with his own teeth, until he
passed from present to eternal — -
ment. Of such it is written, “Destroy
them, O Lord, with double destruc-
tion ” (Jeremiah, xvii, 18). The other
associate in the killing fell into a mad-
ness and disembowelled himself with
his sword, passing from the torments


* “S. Kilian.” SS. Kilian, Coloman, and
Totnan converted the ingtan Duke Goz-
bert, who after baptism was bound to put
away his brother's widow, Geilana, whom he

wedded, since under the Christian dispen-
sation this pagan marriage was unlawful—
Geilana plo ance and in the absence
of the Duke caused S. Kilian and his two com-
panions to be murdered, 8 July, 689. S. Kilian
is Patron of Wiirzburg.


J


114


of this present time to those of eternity.
And what of Geilana when this was
known to her? The wretched woman
was infuriated to the point of extremest
agony; and not long afterwards this
ogress was seized with tormenting
pains and cried out at the top of her
voice: “I am justly tortured, since I
set the torturers upon the Holy Men;
I am rightly tormented, since I pre-
pared torments for them. O Kilian,
ou come upon me relentlessly; you
ight the fire, O Kilian; and you, O
otnan apply the burning coals. Be
content with your victory, for you
have sufficiently avenged your wrongs.
O Kilian, you are named from a cup;
but the drink you give me is too
bitter.” Saying this she was cruelly
tortured, so that she could hardly be
held by many people; and at last in
excruciating p passed to the tor-
ments prepared for the devil.
Thomas Netter* in his book a
the Wycliffites, De Sacramento Euchar-
istiae, cap. 63, vouches that in 1384 he
was an eyé-witness of the following.
He writes in these words: “I tell the
story of what I saw myself with the
eyes of my flesh in the Cathedral of
S. Paul in London. The venerable
Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas
Arundel of happy memory, whose
father and brother were Earls of
Arundel, sat there in the Episcopal
throne in judgement, with Bishop
Alexander of Norwich and others as
his assessors, and put some questions
soncoraliet the faith in the Eucharist
to one William Taylort from Worcester
* “Thomas Netter.” Born at Saffron Wal-
den, c. 1375; died at Rouen, 2 November, 1430.
Carmelite theologian and controversialist. He
took a prominent part in the prosecution of
Wycliffites and Lollards, confounding their
teachers and refuting their abominable doc-
trines in many admirable treatises. He died in
the odour of sanctity; miracles were wrought at
his tomb; and it is hoped that his cult will
—_ be confirmed by the Congregation of


+ “William Taylor? This horrid heretic
graduated M.A. at Oxford and proceeded to


COMPENDIUM


BK. ll. CH. IX.


who had been charged with heresy.
When this man could by no means be
turned to the true faith, and isted
in calling and believing the most
Sacred Host to be nothing but
‘blessed bread,’ he was finally ordered
to do reverence to the Host. But he
blasphemously replied : “Trulya spider
is more worthy to be revered.’ Im-
mediately there descended from the
top of the roof a huge and hideous
spider, and came straight on its thread
to the blasphemer’s mouth, and per-
sistently tried, while he was yet speak-
ing, to gain an entrance one his
polluted ae Thomas of Woo a
uncle of the King, was present an

witnessed the miracle. The Arch-
bishop immediately arose with the
other bishops, and expounded to the


whole congregation there gathered
whet Eia-etena hand of the Lord
had done to the blasphemer. A demon
in the form of the spider the


blasphemer and so avenged the dis-
honour done to God.”

Sophronius writes as follows of a
vengeance taken by the Blessed Virgin
Mary. In Heliopolis of Syria (Baal-
bek) there was an actor named Gaia-
nus who used to blaspheme against
the Holy Mother of God publicly in
the theatre. The Holy Mother ap-

eared to him and said: “Do not, I

you, do not such hurt to your
soul.” He did but the more blaspheme
against her, and she came a third time


priest's Orders, Under Archbishop Thomas
Arundel he was laid by the heels for his sub-
versive and blas opinions. 12 Feb-
, 1420, he recanted and was absolved,
5 , 1421, he was charged in convocation
the Bishop of Worcester, to which diocese
belonged. Condemned to perpetual poste
ment, he was afterwards Eg osge lowever,
he gave continual trouble by his teaching
against prayer, the veneration of the Cross, the
worship of the Saints, and other holy doctrines.
In the end this pestilent wretch was degraded
from his Orders and burned at Sie rt
March, 1423. See Shirley's “‘Fascicult Size,
niorum,” pp. 412, sqq.; Wilkins, “Concilia,”


BK. ll. CH, Ix.


to him repeating the same words,
When he would not mend his ways,
but even increased his blasphemies,
she appeared to him as he was sleeping
one mid-day, and without saying any-
thing touched his hands and feet with
her er; and when he awoke he
found himself without
lying there


phemy; for “ I
mete out gentle positon.

Nider says: I was studyi
sacred Theology at the University
Cologne, there was a virgin some
fifteen or sixteen years old, well
enough behaved as manners are now
counted, and she was living away from
her parents in the house of a kins-
woman. She happened to break a
common earthenware pot belonging
to this kinswoman, who was sore
angered when she knew of it, and cried
out that it was due to the girl’s care-
lessness. This angered the girl all the
more because it was but a very com-
mon pot; and in her temper she de-
clared at dinner-time that she would
not eat, nor even come to the table.
Her kinswoman said to her: “You
must eat.” But the girl muttered to
herself some such words as: “If I
must eat, be it so in the name of the
devil,” and thus came to the table,
neglected to asked the customary bless-
ing, and with her first mou of
bread (as it is thought) felt a fly in her
mouth. Bei no means able to
eject it, 7 owed fen Da was
immediately teaneene ph yet she always
kept her faculties and reason, although
she was often tormented by the demon.
She was sorrowfully taken back to her
parents’ house, and for a long time
no one was found who could deliver
her. But at last a certain Dominican
had pity on the girl and her parents,
and undertook to exorcise her on con-
dition that, if she were delivered, no
earthly reward should be given to the
exorcist, but that the girl should serve


MALEFICARUM


115
God for the rest of her life, if she freely
consented to do so, in her present vir-
gin state, and not be given to any in
ee ccs oa eg ge offered
the ut Sacrifice, and the possessed
girl ¢ the usual offering and was
present throughout the whole Mass
without appearing to suffer any tor-
ments. But after long exorcism the
demon came out of her, leaving every
limb of her virgin body bruised ;
€


or tells the following
dge of


one day he returned to the Castle of
mesrysnersoe » where a kinsman of his
had su ed him in his office, and
there intended to do some business
with certain of his acquaintances.
Then a witch, together with four m
who were her associates in this crime,
being busy late one night with the
mysteries of their art, searched their
brains for a means of "raghbont harm-
ing or killing Peter by witchcraft in
some secret manner without being
suspected, der aiery Fd when night
came Peter crossed himself and went
to his bedroom, but with the intention
of keeping awake all night in order to
write some necessary letters so that he
might be able to leave the place in the
morning. As he was thus awake, in
the middle of the night it suddenly
seemed to him that the day had come,
for he was deceived by a fictitious
light. Being then with hi
because he thought he wasted the
night, he put on his clothes without
blessing himself as he should, and went
downstairs to the place where he kept
his writing materials, and found it
locked. He then became more angry
and began climbing upstairs again to
his bedroom, allowing himself, in his
irritation, one brief word of cursing,
mentioning the name of the devil. At


* “Peter.” “Formicarius,” Lib. V, c. 3,
4) 7+


116 COMPENDIUM


once he was hurled downstairs in
dense darkness so violently that his -
servant, who was sleeping near at
hand by the stairs, was awakened and,
coming out to see what was the matter,
and lighting a light, saw his master
Peter lying senseless on the ground
with all his limbs broken and profusely
bleeding. Some time later it was dis-
covered through the confession of a
prisoner that those four men and that
witch had thus hurled Peter down the
stairs. Note, reader, what harm came


to Peter through neglecting to make
the sign of the Cron oe
Remy relates the following mar-


vellous story. Jeanne Blaise of Baden

a son-in-law named Rayner with
whom she lived in the same house.
A fellow coun of this Rayner,
one Claude Gerard, had sr ago
lent him a pair of breeches, t so
far had been unable by any impor-
tunity to get him to give them back to
him. Weary of so long a delay he at
last came to Rayner to ask when he
was going to be done with his subter-
fuges, but found that he was away from
home and that only his mother-in-law
Blaise was sitting by the fire with their
aeryF repre asked ae to re-
turn him his garment, sa at, as
often as her fine slit kaechineh madea
fool of him, he would find that he was
well able to pay him back in his own
coin. This enraged the woman; but
she decided to refrain from words so
that she might be fully av in
deed upon the man, and asked him to
wait a few days more, and he should
have what he wanted without any
further delay. In the meantime she
asked him if he would not sit down
with her by the fire for a little in
friendly wise and partake of some ap-
ples which she had just baked. Gerard
declined more than once, saying that
he had no leisure to tarry there any
longer and that he had no wish for the
food which she offered him ; but one of
the applesstuck to the palmof his hand,
and was so hot that he was forced to
try to knock it off with the other hand,


BK. I. CH. IX.


Then both his hands were stuck, as if
they had grown together, while the
apple between them kept waxing
hotter until he was driven nearly out
of his mind. He therefore cried out on
some who were — to have pity on
him, and each brought what remedy
he could, some bringing water to
uench the heat, and others tools for
orcing his hands apart; but none of
these were of any avail. It then be-
came clear that it was a matter of some
evil art, and one of his more under-
standing neighbours advised that he
should be taken to the place where the
evil had first come upon him: and
when this was done old gammer
Blaise to make fun of what had
en to him; yet she gently rub-
his arm from the shoulder to the
hand, and thereupon the apple fell
from him and the pain was assuaged,
a Pata sesame


Jurisconsult


history. Elizabeth the daughter of
aw King of Denmark, Sweden and
orway, was married to Joachim the
Elector of Brandenburg; and he left
her at his death Queen of the town of
dau, at the confluence of the
rivers Havel and Spree. While she
was yet living in this town, a certain
soldier came travelling through the
Province and was taken ill and had to
go to bed; and he gave his hostess a
urse of money to keep for him,
eae days later, when he had re-
covered, he asked for his purse. But
the avaricious woman was loath to
part with so much money and deliber-
ated with her husband whether she
must give it back, and they decided
that she should deny having received
it. copay 24 when the soldier again
asked for it she brazenly said that she
had never had it and that she won-
dered at his impudence in daring to
ask for something which he had never
given her to keep. Moved to indigna-
tion, the soldier in his turn acc the


OO


BK. ll. CH. IX.


hostess of perfidy ; and her husband, as
if in defence of his wife, thrust the
soldier out of the house. Enraged by
the hostess’s theft, he stood before the
door and drew his sword as if to attack
the host, and beat upon the door. The
bors complatatng ait his bau a
, complaini at his house was
bei attacker shin} iecialicenteateaD
and took the soldier off to prison for
causing a public disturbance. After
a few days the Mayor of the town sent
a report of the case to another place,
and asked that a sentence should be
passed; upon which it was decided
that the house had been publicly at-
tacked and that therefore the soldier
must be sentenced to death. When
the day of his execution was at hand,
the devil came to him in his prison and
told him what sentence the Judges
would upon him, promising that
he d free him from that danger on
condition that he gave himself to the
devil. The soldier firmly answered
that he would rather die, although he
was innocent. The devil with great
eloquence exaggerated his danger;
but when he could not influence the
soldier’s determination he finally pro-
mised him his freedom without any
condition; saying: “When you come
into the Court, say that you are un-
skilled in pleading and ask for an
advocate ; and I shall be there wearing
ré <— et arma ce sir —
en t 1 ma permitted to
plead for you.” Thinking that he
might do this without sinning, the
soldier said that he would follow this
advice. Next day he was led into the
Court, where he saw a lawyer wearin
a dark hat. The prosecutor demand
that the soldier should be put to death
for causing a public disturbance;
whereupon the soldier said that he was
unfamiliar with legal procedure and
asked that his advocate might speak
for him. The Judges consented: and
then the devil discoursed learnedly on
the law, saying that he ought not to
be sentenced to death who was neither
the origin nor real cause of the quarrel


MALEFICARUM


117


and disturbance; that the soldier had
been turned out and robbed the
host ; and he said that they would find
the purse if they looked in a certain
place. The host violently denied this
with terrible cursing. Then the devil
added: “Swear then that, if you did
rob this man, the devil may seize you
and carry you away.” And when he
had repeatedly sworn this oe
the devil, that advocate left his learne
pleading, suddenly went up to the

ost , seizing him, took him away
with a great noise through the window
and over the market square to the
terror of all; and the host’s body was
never afterwards found.

Three men* were drinking be o er
in a tavern and, being heated with
wine, began di ing the immortal-
ity of the soul and the pains of hell.
One, rasher than the rest, said that it
was all nonsense and the invention of
priests; and the others laughingly ap-
plauded him. Thereupon there came
In a man of great stature but rp
built, who sat down and said: “‘What
may you be discussing, and why are
you all laughing?” The same bold
fellow told him, and added that he
would sell his soul cheap to any bidder,
so that it were for money. “For how
much,” said the newcomer, “‘will you
sell it to me?” They soon agreed
upon a price, and the man’s soul was
bought and sold. They drank hard
with the purchase money; and at last
when it was st the buyer said: “It
is time for each man to return to his
own place. But do you tell me rightly:
ifa man buys a horse which is tied up
with a halter, has he not the right to
take away both horse and halter?”
Saying this, he seized the trembling
vendor i his own Hg eawkierd

es, and raising him up in the air
cual him off to hell to ae that which
he had refused to believe. For that was
a dealer in souls, like the King of


* “Three men.” This is from Thomas
Cantimpratanus, ““Bonum uniuersale,”” IT, 55,
Par. 3.


118


Sodom who said: “Give me the souls,
and you may have the rest.”

Again, Gédelmann says: A noble-
man in Silesia had invited some guests,
and the time of the feast had come and
everything was ready, when he was
disappointed by all his guests excusing
themselves. Angry at their failure to
appear, he broke out into these words:
**Then let all the devils come, if no
man can eat with me.” So saying, he
went out and entered the church,
where the priest was ad ing his
congregation, and listened to him for
a while with the intention of calming
his anger. But while he was in the
church there came into the courtyard
of his house some tall black horsemen
who told his servant to call his master
and tell him that his tshad arrived.
The servant went in terror to the
church and told this to his master who,
not knowing what to do, asked the
Fees advice. The priest broke off

is sermon and advised that all the
household should leave the house.
This was done, the servants, men and
women, all hurrying out; but it hap-
oka that they forgot the baby and
eft it lying asleep in its cradle. The
demons began to eat and shout and
look through the windows in the form
of bears, wolves, cats and men, holding
up cups full of wine, and roast meats
and fishes. When the neighbours and
the priests and others saw this, the un-
happy father cried : ‘Ah, where is my
child?” When he had said this, one
of the demons carried the child in his
arms to the window as if to show it to
its parents. The nobleman was then in
the utmost anxiety for the child’s
safety, and asked a faithful servant of
his: “What, I entreat you, am I to
do?” The servant said: “Master, I
will commend and commit my life to
e Lord


“God be with you and help you and
reserve your soul,” After being
lessed by the priest and the others,


COMPENDIUM


BE. Il. CH. Ix,


the servant went in and fell on his
knees before the door of the chamber
where the demons were assembled,
and commended himself to God, and
in that mind opened the door. There
he saw demons of horrible appearance
sitting, standing, walking and creep-
ing about, who all ran together to-
wards him shouting : ‘““Huh, huh! what
are you doing here?” Sweating, but


still trusting in God, he said to the
demon who was carrying the child:
“Give me that child.””’ He answered:


“By no means, for this child is now
mine. Tell your master to come and
take it.” The servant replied : “I domy
duty in that state of life in which God
has placed me, and I know that what-
ever I do in duty is pleasing to God;
therefore as in du und, and with
the help of and in the name and might
of Jesus Christ, I take the child from
— and restore it to its ts”? And
e took the child in his arms. The
demons made no answer but: “Huh,
rascal! Huh, rascal! Leave the child,
leave it; or else we will tear you to
an hundred pieces.” But he took no
notice of their devilish threats, and
went out unharmed, and gave the
child back safe to its noble father.
After some days had passed the demons
vanished, and the nobleman was able
to enter his house again with all his
household.*
ain he writes ds Saxony a rich
virgin had promised marriage to a
handsome but r young man. The
man, fearing what would appen, told
the girl that she was vas wealthy and,
like all her sex, changeable, and would
hardly keep her promise, but the girl
answered with the most solemn oaths:
“If I marry any but you, then may the
devil take me in that marriage!” And
what Se pean After some time
she changed her mind and married an-
other man, spurning her former be-
trothed, although he again and again


. The Tmeldsby Le will be ——e that
in “ I gends” this history is
turned as “The Lay of S. Cuthbert.”


BK. Il. CH. IX.


reminded her of her promise and her
terrible oath: but she put all that be-
hind her and, leaving him, celebrated
her marriage with another. On the
day of the wedding, when all her re-
lations and friends and guests were
gathered together, her conscience
pricked her sorely and made her very
sad. Then came two devils to the mar-
i house in the likeness of horsemen,
and were welcomed and led to the
table. Afterwards the tables were re-
moved and they fell to dancing, and
the bride danced with one of the horse-
men to do honour to a stranger. He
gave two leaps with her, and then in
the sight of her parents and with her
friends groaning and lamenting bore
her up on ec adhere 9 the door. On
the next da wretched parents and
friends looked for the bride to bury
her, if they could find where she had
fallen; but the same horseman came
back with her clothes and jewels, say-
ing: “Not over these things, but over
the bride was power given to us by
God.” So she gave herself body and
soul to the devil, because she had
broken her promise, and had more-
over despised the oath which she had
sworn.


Pietro Bizzari* tells the following:


* “Pietro Bizzari.” A humanist of the
sixteenth century who won great repute for his
elegant verses as also for his erudite but some-

diffuse histories and chronicles. He was
born at Sassoferrato. Much of his work is
conveniently collected in the Antwerp folio of
1580, “Senatus Populique Genuensts Rerum

mi Forisque Gestarum Historiae atque An-
nales,” “‘cum luculenta uariarum rerum cogni-
tione dignissimarum, quae diuersis temporibus,
et potissimum hac nostra tempestate continge-
runt, enarratione.” I have used this editwon.
Certain of Bizzari’s shorter will be
heri’s ** Delitiae Italorum Poetarum”

; and in the “Carmina
alive aghonept

» Pp. 250-255. Notable among these are
odes to Catherine dé” Medici, and to Girolamo
Priuli, who was Doge of Venice, 1559-1567.
of particular interest also are the addresses to
the Earl of Leicester, Sir Thomas Randolph,


MALEFICARUM


119


In Suabia, which lies by Bavaria and
Franconia, there was a very rich and


wealthy nobleman named Richberger,
whose yearly returns exceeded
thousand gold gulden. Yet, because of


his manner of acting, he was not
popular with the people ; for he was of
an bly miserly nature. His
one aim was, by fair means or foul, to
increase his wealth every day; and he
tried to get Sk agp ey his own
hands. RODE. when he foresaw
the famine, which followed in the next
year, he filled his barns with wheat
and fruit and began to sell them at a
great profit, so that the poor were
seuepaliod by his boundless avarice to
buy their food from him; and th
must either die of hunger or, if they
wished to get food and nourishment,
they were reduced to the utmost want
and poverty, so dearly did he sell them
corn and other necessaries. Among
many others there came to him a cer-
tain poor man burdened with children,
who offered him six thalers, begging
him to take the money and let him
have a certain measure of wheat, and
he would pay him the rest that he
owed for it in a short time. But he
looked proudly and angrily at him and
told him to be gone at once and fetch
the rest of the money if he wanted any
corn; and so the poor wretch went
away, bitterly cursing him. After a few
days he sent one of his servants to in-
spect his granaries as usual, and was
told by him that there were three
black oxen eating his corn: and the
servant who reported this took to his
bed the next day and soon after died.
The same thing happened to a gentle-
man whom the master had sent to see
whether it was as he had been told:
for he saw both oxen and horses. When
he was told of this, the master deter-
mined to go himself to the place and,
ing to the door of the granary, he


co.
saw ugh the chinks the whole


and the brief “In mortem Eduardi Curtnaei.”
Edward Courtenay, Earl of Devon, died in
exile at Padua, September 1556.


120 COMPENDIUM


place full of countless cattle of all
sorts, which were eating all the corn.
He was so terrified by this sight that
he at once became stark mad and
rushed away in a frenzy committing
many violent acts until he was caught
and put in chains. This horrible event
aroused great wonder in that province
and especially in Aalen, where he had
always been known as a most sober
and prudent man.

A priest named Epachius* was over-
taken by the ju t of God be-
cause he presumed to do that which
he was not worthy to do. For when
he should have been in the church
keeping the Vigil of the Nativity of
Christ, he kept leaving the church and
going into his house where he drank


ewdly of foaming cups of wine, so
that asa ng. 2 had tng

inking that night till after cock-
crow. But since he was of noble rank
and there was not his superior in
secular so ad in that town of Riom,
he was to celebrate the solemn-
ities of the Mass; and the wretch did
not hesitate, although sodden with
wine, to undertake that which no man,
even after fasting, can approach with-
out fear and searching of hisconscience.
But when he had pronounced the
sacred words and had broken the
sacrament of the Lord’s Body, and had
himself taken It and distributed It to
others to eat, he uttered a neigh like a
horse and fell to the ground and
vomited out the Sacred Mystery,
which he had not been able to chew
with his teeth, and was carried from
the church by his servants. And he
never recovered from that epilepsy;
but with the waxing and waning of
each moon, so his malady increased
and abated; for the Banapey, man
could by no means keep from drinking
too much wine.

Not long ago, after the people of
Dorpatt had embraced the Lutheran


* “Epachius.”” This is from S. Gregory 0,
Tours, “De gloria M f :? I, 87. f
t “Dorpat.” This is from Tilmannus


BK. I. CH. IX.


teaching, on the Saturday before
Easter Sunday the Lutherans had
concluded their meeting and the
people were returning from the holy
church of the Blessed Virgin Mother,
when one of them met another who
was his friend and asked him to come
home and dine with him, for he had a
fine fat Westphalian ham all ready.
The other, not at all shocked, an-
swered that he had a pause boiled
chicken which he would bring as his
contribution to the feast. They sat
down to table; and one of them, eat-
ing a chicken bone rashly, nearly
swallowed it, so that it could neither
be extracted nor gulped down, and he
was suffocated the same day. The
other was seized by an evil spirit on
the day after Easter, and soon after-
wards, shaken by madness and fury,
oe out both his life and the


emon.

Peter of gs (Liber Miraculorum,
II, 1) tells the fo
to heretics. A certain t of Macon
was meting in his palace on the town’s
patronal festival with a large company
of soldiers and others around him,
when suddenly a stranger on horse-
back entered the palace gate and, as
they all looked on in wonder, rode
right up to the Count. When he had
come near him he said that he wished
to speak to him, and not so much
asked as commanded him to arise and
follow him. Compelled by some un-
seen power and unable to resist, the
Count arose and went to the palace
door where he found a horse ready for
him. He was bidden to mount, and
did so; whereupon the man seized the
reins and in the sight of all began to


Bredenbachius. His work, which was first
printed at Douai, has a Dedication, signed at
Cologne, 1563, to Julius Plugh, Bishop of
Nuremberg. The “Historia belli Liuonici
quod gestis magnus Muscouitarum Dux,”
‘auctore Tilmanno Bredenbachio,” occupies
pp. 217-299, of the folio “Rerum Muscoui-
tarum Auctores Uarii Unum in Corpus nunc
primum Congesti,” Frankfort, 1600.


——— ——


BK. I. CH, X.


carry him swiftly up through the air.
The whole town ran up at his loud

ing and wretched lamenting to see
this strange spectacle, and watched
him flying th the air for as long
as their eyes could follow him. They
heard him for a long time crying out:
“Help, citizens, help!” But could
not help him, and he was taken from
the sight of men and became, as he
deserved, an eternal associate of the
demons. So did this man expiate in
this life and the next his iling of
churches and his sacrileges.

In a very old life of S. Calais* we
read of a woman named Gunda who
was enticed by the subtle Deceiver to
mock the Holy Spirit. For she put on
man’s cenye and tried to enter the
monastery of the Saint, to test the
truth of his hecy that no woman
would ever be able to enter there.
But, by the just judgement of God,
before she even came in sight of the
closed approach to the cloisters, she
was seized by the devil and driven
back; and was so shamefully tormented
by him that I blush to speak of it. For
he thrust her head between her thighs,
so that she who had tried to imprint a
false kiss upon the holy threshold was
forced to kiss the filthy parts of her own
body; and she had to exhibit openly
to all who wished to see it that sex
which she had tried to conceal be-
neath a man’s clothing. The result
of this was that no woman thereafter
dared to approach the monastery.


* “S. Calais” or S. Carileff (c. 540) was
a monk of Menat on the Sioule, in Auvergne.
For the sake of greater solitariness this holy
recluse withdrew and fled away to the desert
near Le Mans when he made his hermitage at
the place since called Aninsole. His reputation
Sor sanctity became so great that before long a
monastery grew up there of which he was forced
to assume the government. A life of S. Calais
was written by S. Siviard, Abbot of Aninsole,
died 687, The feast of S. Calais is observed on
1 July.

*


MALEFICARUM


CHAPTER X
The Laws Observed by Witches in Causing
and in Curing Sickness.
Argument.

| Fede as witches always see their

way clearly to any evil, so they
find many di ties and obstacles
when they would do good or heal. For
what time witches would bring disease
or death, ing is ready, every-
thing at hand for Se cian’
poison, curses, spells, enchant-
ments. With all these the devil is
prompt, and with the witches’ consent
always undertakes the work of doing
harm. This he does to earn their grati-
tude by gaining them the vengeance
they have so ardently desired, and he
is able to provide means which, it
seems, no human art or skill can com-
bat. At the same time it is in his power
to keep the witch clear of all suspicion,
when he acts in their absence without
their stirring even a finger to help him.
But when it is a question of restoring
health or saving life, then there are
never wanting opposing forces to com-
bat such an intention.


*


Examples.


Rosa Girardin gave it as the truth
that a sickness could not be removed
except by the person who had caused
it; for no one might thrust his sickle in
another’s harvest, according to the law
which provides that he who binds must
also unbind., And therefore we must
fear injury and look for help from the
same hand.

Dominique Eurea said that no one
who had been bewitched could be re-
stored to health unless his sickness were
even more grievously transferred to
another; and that the sickness always
Brew in these exchanged. Also the

caling power received from thedemon
always vanished when a priest or a
eer laid his hands on the sick to
eal him.


122


Alexée Drigée said that such restora-
tions to health were never absolute and
complete, but that there always re-
mained some trace of the sickness.

Catharine Balandre used to say that
it was useless to look for any alleviation
or cure of a sickness from those who
had been brought to trial for witch-
craft; for all such power had then
passed into the hands of the devil, who
is able to perform all such things.

Nicolas Morell with this
statement. For when he was asked, in
prison, to heal the son of Jean Chemat,
whom he admitted that he had be-
witched with the sickness from which
he was suffering, he answered that he
had no more power in such matters
since, by confessing his crimes, he had
driven the devil away from him, and
the sanctity of his place of imprison-
ment also prevented him from such
work. And not even to expiate his
crimes could he EO s which
were necessary to e boy.

When Cattina Gilotte was pide why
it was that she had not healed Canasse
Godefreda of the disease which she had
brought upon her by witchcraft, al-
though she had more than once given
her to eat apples and plums and other
such fruit by means of which she was
in the habit of curing others, she an-
swered that it was because that Gode-
freda had not prayed to be healed.

Balial Basol and Colette the fisher’s
wife mentioned another kind of ob-
stacle. For they said that when they
were trying to effect a cure, and some
other person, without informing or
consulting them, meddledin the matter
by making and fulfilling a vow to one

the Saints, then they were prevented
by this contempt of their art from do-
ing anything more to heal the sick
man. And no doubt they essayed a
cure, because such wretches desire
above all things the alms and thanks
of sick folk, since they are beggars
and live entirely on such charity.

When the father of Nicole Morell
was charged with witchcraft and was
pleading in his own defence, he said


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. X.


that which involved his daughter in
suspicion of the same crime; and so the
apparitor who was then present per-
suaded the judge to order her arrest.
While Nicole Morell was yet at liberty
“grees warned remy —_ and
er to be revenge ringing some
harm upon the Socacior, and that he
would gladly undertake such work if
she bade him. She quickly assented,
and he flew to the apparitor’s house
where he found his wife sitting by the
fire giving the breast to her baby. He
passed by and blew upon her breasts so
isonous a powder that they at once
ame dried up and empty of milk.
The apparitor soon cted the cause
this, and went to Nicole Morell, who
was now in prison, and offering her a
cake to appease her d her not to
begrudge himany help which she could
give in the matter; and in his turn he
would take care that she had every-
thing to make her life easier while she
was in prison. He then left her, won-
dering what she would do in the mat-
ter. The demon at once ap to
her and scolded her for s ing with
the apparitor ; but at last allowed him-
self to be persuaded to fill the breasts
of the man’s wife again with milk,
even to superfluity if she wished. And
soon after he accomplished this by
applying a white powder to her.
atharine Ocrea had formerly been
discharged on her own recognizances,
but was a brought to trial by
reason of fresh suspicion against her
and because of the eloquent mandate
of His Most Serene Highness the Prince
of Lorraine, who had been advised of
the whole matter. Before she was re-
imprisoned she had smitten with her
evil art the arm of one of the witnesses
against her so that it became withered:
and now she seized this man’s arm
roughly as if she was angry, and to the
astonishment of all who were present
it was at once restored to health; so
that whereas it had been for many
months useless and without strength,
it at once became vigorous and fit and
able to perform all its former work.


BK. Il. CH. XI. MALEFICARUM 123
fore be placated with gifts at his shrine;

CHAPTER XI and that, i they ba ¢ her, she would

Witches Use something of Religion in Heal- gladly undertake the matter. She was
ing Sickness induced by payment to attempt this

ing S work. Fine aia taabadied ae sick

Argument. ee te aed ye m aes linen

z en e cloth so many

OSs sonnioaty does eer ag times and it in her bosom as
perversity, mask though to cherish it. Then for the


magic under the appearance of re-

ligion: and this he , both that he

may the more easily lead into super-

stitious error those who are naturally

disposed to thats eae ents ee
w


8 orking ous cures, he may
avert icion from his followers, so
that it shall not be ht that he who


has removed the sickness was the
original cause of it. This we
later make clear, For witches observe
various silences, measurings, vigils,
mutterings, and fires, as if
they were some Bepenery religious
rite; and worse still, they transfer
the sickness to certain pious men,
alleging that it is a punishment for
having dishonoured their deity. Most
intolerable of all, they often mingle
with their prayers all sorts of filth and
dung and excrement, than which no-
thing can be imagined more foreign to
the purity which is proper to Divine
worship and ceremonies. The follow-
ing are examples of this sort.


*


Examples.

Within the last fifteen years there
was at Nancy a woman named The-
notte who was a witch. Once when she
was asked to heal a sick neighbour (for
she was supposed to have such power),
she said that the sickness had been
caused by S. Fiacre,* who must there-


+ * “9, Dan ea in pocenee died 18
. He It in a hermitage on
ha fi Pret ed
in a era), Ki . S.
Fiacre mi, bet pra and built an Seales
illum (Breuil), where his shrine is yet


a place of i . During his life he
healed all manners of diseases and numberless


whole of the following night she la
outside the doors of the house in whi
the sick woman was, and at dawn went
her way in utter silence. When she
came to the shrine of S. Fiacre she went
in and lit the linen cloth, and with the
burning drops of wax traced a cross on
the steps of the High Altar; and then
went out and walked three times round
the chapel, with the cloth still splutter-
ing blue flames. When she had done
this she went back to the city.

A peasant of the Vos named
Desiré Finance had cherished a long
grudge against a fellow townsman
named Valentine Valére and longed
to be thoroughly revenged upon him,
but had not found any safe or favour-
able chance of doing so. But this
chance came when Valentine was
travelling alone in a solitary place, and
a figure like a shadow seized him and
hurled him from his horse with such
violence that he was lamed in one leg.
But some time later he had pity on the
man, since he had suffered his mis-
fortune for so long, and went to him as
if upon some other business. Then he
asked him how he came by that acci-
dent, and was told at great length the
cause, which he himself knew much
better ; and finally he promised a sure
and immediate cure, if he would do as
he told him, and that he would take no
payment for it. The other anxiously
waited to hear what he must do; and
Desiré told him to go and beg the
horse-dung from nine different stables,


cures are At at his tomb. His shrine was
removed in 1568 to the Cathedral at Meaux for
safety from the violence and destruction of the
Calvinists, and precious Relics have been dis-
tributed to other sanctuaries. Feast, 30 August.


ele t—‘—OSCSC SF


124


enough to fill a sack, and to limp with
it and take it as a gift to S. Benedict, to
whom there was a famous shrine in the
German town of Berguel ; for thus, he
said, he would by some secret virtue
and power be freed from his affliction
and grow strong again. See how it is
the custom of witches to cover their
cures thus with the cloak of religion;
when they have nothing to do with
religion, but rather despise and mock
at it.


*


CHAPTER XII


Threatening or Beating Witches is the Best
Method of Removing the Spells cast by


Argument.


EARLY all witches who have

been questioned on the matter
have confessed that the greater their
fear the \ pcos their boldness in doi
evil; and that threats and the fear o
prison very often cause them to remove
their spells, In this connexion there
are many points worthy of note.

First, however holy or sacred the
reason may be, it does not deprive
witches of either the will or the power
to do mischief; unless God in His great
goodness forbids and turns aside such
evil. This is Los by the case of a
man who used the aspergillum during
the Divine Office tosprinkle and fatally
injure a woman whom he could find no
other way to harm: and we often find
lying about the shrines of the Saints
broken fragments of thunderbolts
which are believed to have been
wielded and hurled by some demon.
For in no place are the demons more
fain to work their abominations than
where they can disguise them under
the aspect of some omen of blessing.
Aulus Gellius * (IX, 4) and Pliny t


* “Aulus Gellius.”” “Id etiam in iisdem


tea quoque
Nord Historiae


libris scrij offendimus,
in libro hints Secundi


COMPENDIUM


BK. II, CH. XI,


(Vil, 2) say that it is no rare thing to
d those who, by blessing and ex-
travagantly pianos ing them, have be-
witched and destroyed trees, crops
and even men.

Secondly, the benefit (ifit may right-
ly be called so) conferred by demons is
never lasting, full or complete; but he
who has received it must soon suffer
a like, or even a heavier injury and
incapacity. For hardly ever do they
drive a sickness from one man without
transferring it to some other man, so
that often they give a man health at
the expense of another’s death. S.

ry of Tours in his Historia Fran-
corum t (VI, 35) writes that this was
done some witches of Paris who,
after they had by their black art
stricken the prefect Mummol with a
mortal sickness, could not restore him


ic, a child scarcely two
years old, witien his father was rear-


pulchras arbores, segetes laetiores, infantes
amoeniores, egregios equos, pecudes Dy atque
cultu i pe emoriantur repente haec omnia,
nulli aliae causae obnoxia,”’

t “Pliny.” “Historia Naturalis,” VII, 2:
“In eadem Africa familias quasdam effasci-
nantium, Isigonus et Nymphodorus: quorum
laudatione intereant probata, arescant arbores,


Sour books yer with the years 5


instantly accused Pas general Mummol, whom


young prince b
of Witch-
craft,” by Montague Summers, pp. 354-55.


BK. Il. CH. XII.


ing to succeed to the kingdom. The
annals of that time are filled with ac-
counts of such inequitable bargains
cunningly driven by men of old time
who were infected with the sin of
demons. For when a huge chasm a
peared through the subsidence of the
earth in the middle of the Roman
Forum,* it was said that it would never
again be filled unless some youth of the
test promise cast himself into it.
Pra ares ee Sh ae
difference between the fatherly kind-
ness of God and the tyrannical cruel
and savagery of the devil : for God cal
man h adversity to Heaven,
whereas the Fos d turns me draws man
to eternal through prosperity
(iE euch aanaittbnay be said ever to

ros .

PeThi y, with the utmost mock
and derision witches, when they heal,
imitate and copy the method used by
Elisha and S. Paul and Elijah, and
9 6 Holy Fathers, when oop brought
the dead to life ; stretching themselves
limb for limb upon the bodies of the
dead.

Fourthly, there is no curative virtue
in any of the external remedies used by
witches for the sicknesses they have
caused, such as herbs, unguents, baths
and such things; but these are merely
a cover for their witchcraft which,
pk oy of the severity of the law,
ree? not show openly.

ifthly, so tenacious is the demon’s
hold that he does not easily let go when
once he has gripped. Therefore when,
at the prayer of his follower, he has
sent a sickness, it is on the understand-


* “Roman Forum.” When a chasm ap-
peared in the forum at Rome in 362 B.c. the
soothsayers announced that it could only be
filled oy throwing into it the city’s greatest
treasure, whereupon a allant youth, Mettus
or Mettius Curttus, in full armour mounted his
steed and leaped into the abyss which inconti-
nently closed over him. Varro tells us that the
spot was blasted by lightning in 445 B.c. and
was enclosed by Curtius, one of the consuls for
that year, whence the legend had its origin.


MALEFICARUM


125


ing either that - sickness shall rand

or any prayers be cured or assuaged,

or that it shall be commuted for a

ver sickness in another man. Thus

¢ demon provides that in any event
he is always the gainer.


*


Examples.

Claude Morell said that the greatest

compulsion he felt to remove the evil

which he had cast was due to
his fear of prison, the lash, or any
violence.

On this point Remy (III, 3) writes
as follows. I was ae ing of this mat-
ter with one of Ministers of His
Most Serene ye nena the Duke of
Lorraine, who told me in good faith
that at one time he had been informed
that his infant son had suddenly fallen
ill, and that it was thought that he had
been bewitched by a certain old wo-
man. He first made enquiries from the
nurse who had been holding the child
when he was taken ill, and then formed
an accurate estimate of the nature of
the sickness, whether or not it was of
the sort which naturally overtakes
children of that age. He decided that
without doubt it could only be due to
magic and witchcraft; and after pon-
dering over this conviction, could not
come to any other conclusion save that
his son had been bewitched by that old
beldame. Accordingly he ordered her
to be summoned, and when she was
alone with him in the house he at first
appealed to her kindly, if she knew of
anycure for the sickness, that she would
freely use it, and he would not be un-
grateful. But when he saw her begin
to be very voluble in averting any sus-
picion of witchcraft from h and
obstinately refusing to listen to his en-
treaties that she would find a cure, he
took a rope which he had ready for the
purpose and so beat her on the shoul-
ders and flanks that she said she was
ready to do what he asked: only she


126


required a little time to prepare what
was necessary for the work. This was
granted her and she was given all the
opportunity she desired for ministering
to the sick child, and soon afterwards
she restored him to health by the ap-
plication of certain matters which were
not themselves of any medicinal value,
Le ai used as a cloak for her witch-


Remy in the same place tells the
following, which is similar: My friend
Antoine Blyestem, the public treasurer
of Dammartin and that district, once
told me that the same thing had hap-
pened to a son of his. For he said tha
as children will, the boy had wander
from his mother to play while they
were in church, and an old woman
came and stroked his head as if to pet
him, and after blessing him went out
as if she were hastening off somewhere.
The boy then hung down his head and,
hardly able to stand up, clearly showed
by his pitiable crying that he was sick.
So he was carried home and, when the
sickness grew worse every hour, all
who heard what had passed were con-
vinced that it had been caused by that
old woman, who was already strongly
suspected of being a witch. She was
therefore scized by some neighbours
and brought to remove the spell; and
as soon as she was in the c walk a
ence she began to suffer the same kind
of affliction as the little lad was suffer-
ing; for her face grew livid and she
foamed at the mouth, causing great
nal pes eer San her and

t that she ecome raging
mad. When the night came, she spent
it in the same bed as the child, at
times lying upon him with arms out-
stretched, and her mouth upon his
mouth as if she were trying to restore
his failing life with her warmth and her
breath. From the talk of the women
who were watching it was learned that
a buzzing, such as is made by the gad-
fly in summer, was heard at times
about the boy; and that they ceased to
see the fragment of the Gospel which
was stitched to his pillow as a godly


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. XII.


charm, shoals they could not tell
whether it had been taken away by the
witch or her demon. But the truth
was that the boy who, the day before,
was thought to be sick to death was
found at the dawn to be well and
strong. Yet this was no advantage to
my friend: for it was not long before
he had to repay it with interest when
he lost through witchcraft the greatest
part of his cattle which was stabled
there.

At Dammartin, December 1587,
Nicole Stephanie of Saint-Pol was in-
duced by a reward to A yene the castle
from the plague which was afflicti
it, since she had a reputation for ski
in such matters. She performed this
task with great care: but after a
sufficient period to prevent any fear of
further contagion, and when she had
bess paid one reward and was es
to depart, she was angry at being di
caoectl estes than she eb and
at the thought of losing the good rich
living she had been enjoying, and
eg eye she tres bot -
excuse for delaying her departure
casting some s of sickness on the
Chatelain’s wife, who had been very
prompt and eager to dismiss her. So
without any hesitation she decided to
afflict that lady with a disease, so that
she might again be asked for her ser-
vices in removing it. Accordingly she
at once went and stood at her bedroom
door and said ; ‘‘ My Lady, the folds of
your stomacher are dis ed: let
me put them a little in order.” And
when she was admitted to do this ser-
vice, she cunningly contrived to shake
down the lady’s back some grains of a
poisoned powder which she had con-
cealed in her hand: and at once the
lady was attacked with a trembling in
all do limbs, such as is suffered at the
height of a sharp fever. Before long she
began to feel such pain in her feet that
they were horribly curled up so that
the toes were twisted round to the
heels. All this was seen and noted by
the servants; and the woman was
seized and kept under observation, and


BK. Il. CH. XII.


finally put in fear of the lash, and
threatened that they would not let her
go until she removed the spell from
their mistress and restored her to her
former health. For their suspicion of
witchcraft had been increased by the
fact that she had been heard to say that
any skill she hadin preteseiry -kicleeie
ing the plague was derived a cer-
tain Matthieu Amant, who not lo

since had been condemned to dea’

for witchcraft, and that to pay for her
initiation she had let him swive her
ons had been made pregnant by


At first she cried aloud that they
were wronging her in repaying
her thus vilely for her services to them,
and threw out threats of hanging her-
self. But when they none the less
seemed to ist in their opinion, and
she saw she could do no good in that
way, she changed her tactics and be-
gan to ask, if she must needs find some
cure for the lady, that they would wait
while she tried to call to mind whether
she had ever heard tell of a remedy for
such a sickness.

Soon afterwards she came back and
said that she had found a remedy in
which they could put their hope and
faith, for wha knew a herb which when
rubbed into the bath would infallibly
cure thatsickness: and she begged them
not to take it ill if the cure were not
instantaneous, since it was not so easy
a sickness to cure.

Meanwhile when her son, who was
with her, saw his mother thus seized,
he feared the same fate for himself
since he knew that he was implicated
with her. So at dead of night he let
himself down by a rope from the battle-
ments. But he was caught the next day
and brought back bound, and bidden
to confess why he had escaped so
secretly: whereupon he explained
ev ing as we have told it; adding
that he was entirely nsible for
causing his mother to look for an ex-


cuse to tpone her departure, and
that all om fomentations which she


was so meticulously applying to the


MALEFICARUM


127


sick lady had no remedial value, being
no more than a pretext to give the im-
pression that the cure was wrought by
the appropriate natural remedies. For,
he said, she had already begun a secret
antidote as soon as they first threatened
to beat her; but there could be no
shortening of the time which was set at
the beginning for the duration of the
sickness. Let them, then,wait until the
day of the week and the hour had twice
recurred ; for that was the time set for
the spell, and after that their mistress
would surely recover her health, bei

at least freed from all pain altho
her limbs would still remain weak. In
pagent eee thus gave he was in no re-
spect found to be : for at the
very moment of the day he had fore-
told the sickness was assuaged.

But on the following night it re-
turned in an acuter form. For, as was
discovered afterwards, the witch had
repented of undertaking the cure, on
the ground that she had been induced
to do so in order to provide convinci
and indubitable evidence of witchoraft

ainst herself. For, as I have shown
above, it is one of their laws that a
spell can hardly be removed or as-
suaged except by that witch who has
cast it. This was the reason then why
the spell was renewed and re-inflicted
by the woman.

The next day when complaint was
made to the son of the failure of his
| ainerciss he cursed much under his


sight of many with a whitish powder.
So she was at last allowed to go, as she
had been promised, and fell into the
hands of the officers of justice waiting


at the castle gate. For the Judge, hav-
ing inquired carefully into her life and
manners, had ordered them to seize
her and put her in chains; and forth-
with she confessed everything as it had
Sappened, and was finally burned to-
gether with her son.

Stephane Noach of the district of
Chatenois was for three years con-
tinually sick and in such pain that he
was little short of madness; and de-
spairing of all the usual remedies
tried by the physicians, he finally
turned to sorcery for his cure. There
was at that time at Crainvillers a man
pre-eminently famous for witchcraft,
and to him he went and told all his
story, and was informed that his sick-
ness had been brought upon him by
that woman whom on his return home
he would find talking with his wife.
The warlock made a chain from some
pliant twigs, and told him to throw it

her neck as soon as he came to
her, and to threaten her fiercely that
he would quickly kill her unless she at
once restored his failing health. He
went home and saw sitting with his wife
by the hearth an old woman named
Parisette of Neuvillers, and as he had
been advised he frightened her as much
as he could both by word and deed.
She at once fell and embraced his knees
and asked forgiveness, and promised
that he should be healed of all his
sickness if he would do as she told him.
First, he must not hesitate to eat a
pear which she would give him; for
though at first it would appear as hard
as astone, it was not really so, for when
he rubbed it it would become as soft as
if it had been well cooked. Then, he
must at once lie down in bed; for his
sickness would then grow worse, even
to the point of death. On that account
he must summon two chosen women
from the neighbourhood to keep watch
over him that night. By the presence
of these women this vilest of witches
cunningly prepared a defence for her-
self if it should ever be objected that
black art had been employed, since
such a long and severe illness had been


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XI.


cured so easily and quickly: for she
would not expose any of her methods
to open view. Noach said he would
agree to any condition so long as he
was freed from his great pain. But
when he took the , he at first said
that it was impossible to bite it, since
it was plainly made ofiron: but while
he was saying this, and squeezing it a
little, he was ee to feel it become
as soft as wool. en he had eaten it
and it was most unpleasant in taste)
e at once felt such burning pains in
his stomach that live coals could hardly
have been hotter. He went to bed at
once, and was like a man at the point
of death. His trembling wife watched
over him that night together with the
two other women. She was indeed by
her own affection for her husband in-
duced to sit up with them, and her
countenance was already full of grief
and woe, so that he might see his wife’s
ag tears ag pr ery pce ones
of strangers. They t careful
watch up to midnight, when the witch
secretly sprinkled them with her
Lethean powder, like another Mercury,
and put them to a deep sleep. She
then took the sick man on her shoulders
and carried him into the next court-
yard, where she placed him upon an
immense bear, which carried him
backwards and forwards many times,
groaning all the time as if the weight
were too much for it. But this was the
voice of the demon grieving that,
inst his will, he was compelled to
give her help in curing the man. The
witch cried out more and more against
the demon’s tardiness, and kept urging
him to proceed with his work, saying:
“Come, then, you vile and odious
beast, now we are getting your de-
serts, you who first drove me against
my will to afflict this man!” The
terrified rider of the beast afterwards
testified on oath that he had heard
these words. Meanwhile the women
who were watching by the bed awoke
and, finding it empty, made a hasty
search throughout the house for the
man in their care: and when at last


BK. I, CH. XII.
they found him alone with the witch


in the co , they asked him why
he had gone from them without their
patient e, thus naked and unat-
tended. The witch made it her busi-


ness to answer them first, saying: “* Do
you not see that I brought him here
that he might go to stool?” But they
did not wait to bandy words with her,
turning their whole attention to lifting
the man and carrying him as quickly
as possible back to bed : but while they
all with the greatest effort could
scarcely accomplish this, the witch
easily did it by herself. In fulfilment
of the witch’s
promise No-
ach, after
what we have
just describ-
ed, was cased
of his sickness,
but still there
remained no
small degree
of pain: and
the reason for
this was that
the inoppor-
tune arrival
of the other
women had
revented her
rom a suc-
cessful conclusion of the work she
had begun well. She said, however,
that there must then be a delay of
eight days, after which he would re-
his health without any hindrance:
and so it happened. Being manifestly
guilty of this and other crimes, she
was at len; ut in prison; but she
broke her in the very Court of
Justice, and escaped.


MALEFICARUM 129


CHAPTER XIII


After the Many Blasphemies Committed

Witches, the Demon at last Tries to

nduce them to Kill themselves with
their Own Hands.*


Argument.
At who have given themselves
to the devil and have been in
bon to his power confess that he
keeps them in such a harsh and unjust
slavery that he often puts it into their
minds to take their own life, by stab-


may shake o
Sy” the desire
taf cruel = yoke.
a 24 And when
FH} they make
such attempts
they are fol-
lowed by such
“4 sudden and
¥ instantaneous
death that no
help, however
promptl
brought, can be of any avail. It is
certain that the devil so insistently
urges and goads them to this desper-
ate course, so that, after having spent
nearly their whole lives in bia de oe
and crime, witches may with their
own hands cut off what little remains
to them, and finally end their abomin-
able lives in an eternal death. Thus
the devil contrives that they whose
lives were one continual crime shall


* Induce them to Kill themselves.” See
Boguet, “‘An Examen of Witches” (John
Rodker, 1929), ¢. xlv: “Satan often Kills
Witches when they are in Prison, or else he In-
spires them to Kill Themselves. Sometimes he
Reveals what will Happen to them at their
Deaths” (pp. 130-32).


130 COMPENDIUM


in death suffer eternal punishment.
For death, which men commonly
term the end of life and all its mis-
ea ear eae poor j Scare

ut a of misery. But the
Divine Shepherd in His unspeakable
mercy and lovingkindness again and
again recalls to the fold His sheep
that have been carried away by the
wolf, and again He feeds them in the
celestial pastures ; and so when witches
have been cast into prison and have
confessed their sins, not grudgingly
and My “A ag of eres but
willingly and wi ten JOY;
it may well be said that they obtain the
opportunity to avert so great and
eternal a calamity from themselves
at the small expense of their most
wretched lives. For the bow does not
always strike where it aims, neither is
it always in Satan’s er to drive
men where he will by his violence. He
is permitted to tempt men, but not to
coerce them. For this reason it is that
he does not himself cast despairing
souls against their wills into the waters,
or hang them by a rope from a beam,
or stab them with knives; but he only
lures them to commit such madness.
But all his wiles are often thwarted by
God, who Chena the folly of men and
in His wisdom protects them, now in
this way and now in that, as will be
seen from the examples.


tr


Examples.


Remy says (III, 6) that he saw the
body of a malefactor named Sedenarius
hanging by the neck from a nail in-
securely fixed in the wall, by means of a
flimsy and rotten strip of undercloth-
ing, with his knees drawn up just clear
of the floor. And in this way he had
killed himself just as easily as if he had
been hanged from a high beam with a
short rope, and a skilful executioner
had performed the operation. And
nearly all such who kill themselves die
just as quickly and easily.


BK. Il. CH. XII,


I was at Hambach in Lower Ger-
many in the boundaries of Flanders
Pacing t9 reign of the Serene Duke
John William, of the Duchies of Cleves
and Jiilich, being there for the pur-
pose of curing that same Duke, who
was bewitched. A _ ninety-year-old
sorcerer priest was summoned, named
John, who had a cure of souls at a town
named Lauch in the Archdiocese of
Cologne; for, according to his own
confession, he had by witchcraft made
the Duke mad, fearful and panic-
stricken. Three days before he was
summoned by the Duke there appeared
to him in his house at Lauch a demon,
who told him that the Duke would
shortly send to him, but warned him
on no account to go, since he saw
danger in it. To him the sorcerer
answered: “What is that to you? I
shall go where I wish.” Hearing this,
the demon said no more but, as the
witch himself told, pulled down his
breeches (for he had taken the form of
a nenneer So va gayi’
and, turning his bum to him, let
a fart of such an intolerable stink
that the sorcerer could not be rid of
that stench for three days, although he
fumigated the house with incense and
other rare perfumes. This ninety-year-
old sorcerer came to the Duke and,
being eee confessed that he had
bewitched him, and that at that time
he had invoked Lucifer, the Prince of
the Devils, to inscribe those characters
which comprised the spell. After-
wards, as he was sleeping in a tower
in a state of despair he was
to be burned for the crime which he
had confessed, a demon appeared to
him and tempted him so that on Sun-
day morning, the 25th September of
the year 1605 now passed, he cut his
own throat with his knife; and al-
though the wound was not serious
enough to cause instant death, yet
the demon, in that very act of despera-
tion, seized violently on to his ontaad
carried it to hell, to the great astonish-
ment of all. I saw the man dead, and
still warm, lying on the straw: and as


rr


BK. ll. CH, XIll.


he had led the life of a beast, so he
lay upon the provender of beasts.
For so did Divine Justice dispose,
which rewards every man se arcing. ha
his works; and God willed that he,
who had for ninety years lived a fol-
lower of Satan, should also end his
life at the hands of Satan.

Jeannette Gallee gave a very com-
lete econ of one of my contentions.
or she and entreated the
magistrate who examined her not to
delay her well-merited punishment
any further, for she was well content
to undergo it in order that she might
the sooner expiate the terrible crimes
which she confessed she had com-
mitted against God.

From the moment when she con-
fessed her crimes to the Judge Nicole
Morell did not cease to proclaim her
happiness in thus being able first to

her peace with God and free
herself from all her bondage to the
devil. For she said that such had ever
been her wish for three years, but she
had been unable to accomplish it, or
even to attempt it, because that
enemy was so tenacious of his prey.

Catharine Latomia of Marques did
not deny that for her horrible sins she
deserved the extreme penalty and the
utmost severity of her Judge; but she
asked that, if there was left her any
room for mercy, she might be granted
one est, namely, that her death
should be no longer deferred, so that
she might stand as soon as possible
before the tribunal of that Judge in
Whom all her hope was placed, since
her soul was very heavily laden.

Idatia of Miremont implored her
Judge to sentence her to death as soon
as possible; for she said that even if
she were loosed from her bonds she
would never be free to mend her ways
and — forth better fruit, because
she had pledged her faith to the devil,
as to an inexorable creditor, and could
not ae her obligations to him as
long as she lived.

Apollonie of Freising said that
nothing could be more welcome to her


MALEFICARUM


131
than death, by which she could at last
t an end to her most wicked life:
or as long as she lived she would be
unable to abstain from sin and witch-
craft, since her demon was so assidu-
ous a persuader, and she could only
by death free herself from his domina-
tion. On the next day therefore she
poten avec abr a Aree
piness, to open y
bare Tae life to her Heavenly Father,
Antonia Mercatrix said that she
nig ete so ee to die
on as quickly as
sible, since she knew that she had rom
justly deserved such a fate.

Because of his patricide and many
foulest mischiefs wrought by witch-
craft, the two Supreme Justiciars of
Nancy passed a very heavy sentence
upon iré Finance of the neigh-
bourhood of Chatenois, namely, that
he should be punished by being torn
with red-hot pincers and then be cast
alive on to the fire. Whether he was
informed of this by his demon (as it
has been and will be shown that it has
happened to many), or whether his
own consciousness of his horrible guilt
foretold it, he determined to die at
once by his own hand and so escape
that punishment. So he took a knife
which his gaoler had carelessly left in
the bin with the bread, and thrust it
as far as he could into his throat, and
so died. In the same year there were in
Lorraine more than fifteen who thus
killed themselves to escape public
execution. But, lest my * minds
be filled with horror, there is enough
of this: let us turn to matters which
had a more fortunate outcome.

Jeanne de Ban by her free confes-
sion gave evidence that her demon

never ed her so impor-
tunately to anything as he had that
she should throw herself into a well
or drown herselfin a river, or hang her-
self with a rope, or destroy herself in
some mae or other, and that it was
impossible to say how insistent he had
been when he knew that she was about
to be made a prisoner, just as if he


132 COMPENDIUM


saw a morsel being snatched from
his jaws: and even after her imprison-
ment he had not relaxed his efforts,
but had rather redoubled them and the
more insistently tried to bring his
wishes to accomplishment. And when
she excused herself by saying that
there was no means of killing herself
in prison, he showed her in an obscure
corner of the prison a neglected chain
which she could, if she wished, put
round her neck, and so strangle her-
self. In the end she had consented;
but she was pees from achieving
her purpose by the fact that there was
nothing from which to hang the chain.

In the same way he tried to persuade
Anna Drigée. For he represented to
her the horrible torture of th
Sr being ade & palite eeseuser
rs) ea ic example,
the infamy she would incur in the eyes
of all; and so easil ed her to
ee ee illing herself. But

desire (natural to all of us) to
escape present misfortune was com-
bated by the thought that she would
certainly lose her soul’s safety; and
that is a cathy: tan by even the most
abandoned. Therefore her mind was
drawn to a contrary decision, and she
firmly rejected the demon’s advice that
she should throw herself out of the
prison window, which gave on to a
precipice.

When he could by no argument
bring Desiré Guerardu to commit this
crime, the demon added as a further
inducement that, if he killed himself,
he would come to be a demon like

i , who would have power to
fulfil all his wishes. But not even this
rap vs could make him budge from

is determination. For he had so often
before been deceived by the wiles of
the familiar that he suspected all such
advice, holding it certain that the
demon would keep no better faith with
him in the future. For it belongs to the
devil only to persuade, not to compel ;
as it is said in S. Matthew iv: “If thou
art the Son of God, cast thyself down.”


*


BK. II. CH. XII.


CHAPTER XIV


Upon Those who have once Fallen into
his Power the Devil keeps a Tenacious
Grip, even when They stand Tortured
before Their Judges, or in Holy
Places, or wherever They may Be.


Argument.


oy the devil has acquired
power over a man he obstin-
ately guards and retains it, so that he
does not lose his hold of, or deny his
help to, his bondslave even when such
a one stands bound before the Judge;
just as a strenuous pugilist does not
slacken or relax his efforts so long as
his strength endures and he is able to
fight. And the demon never leaves
those who have once followed him
until they are snatched from him as a
lamb from a wolf. And when he fore-
sees such an event, he often drives
them by base counsel to take their own
lives hanging themselves, or else he
ac eo em by twisting their
necks, beating them, or (unless God
prevents him) persuades them some
other way to death, as we have else-
where shown in our examples. Or if
even this is forbidden him he con-
trives, if he can, to do some horrible
thing so that he shall not away
without leaving mischief and misfor-
tune. And although this is so evident
as to be apparent to any who have
leisure to consider the matter, it will
not be tedious to describe certain hap-
mes sion may help us to under-
stand better the wiles of our enemy.
There is, moreover, no —_ so sacred
or religious but that bold and intrepid
old Enemy will try to violate and break
into it when he is pursuing his prey.
He roams about churches, shrines, the
cells of anchorites, and frequently and
assiduously haunts them; and this
should not seem wonderful to anyone,
when it is remembered that formerly
he dared to be present when the Sons
of God gathered before God, as we
learn from Job i. And wherever he


BK. Il. CH. XIV.


may be, he shows himself visible to
those whom he wishes, while the rest
are able to discern nothing; as will be
seen from the examples.


*


Examples.

As soon as Quirina Xallea was cast
in prison a demon came and told her
that she would not come out from
there except after having endured the
most excruciating torture; but if she
would only bear in silence a short

iod of pain, she would certainly be
Free afterwards; and meanwhile he
would not fail her at her need. And,
as he had foretold, so it happened be-
fore long. For while she was being
tortured and was in supreme anguish,
he hid himself in her hair-net and did
not cease to encourage her and to
romise that the torture was just com-
ing to an end. And if it so happened
that the examiner signed to them to
relax the torture a little, he would
foresee this and tell the wretched
woman that it was going to happen,
just as if he was the cause of it. But
when there was no end to her pain and
it became more than could be borne
by the most hardened, she broke into
these words: ““Take me away ; for that
deceiver of mine has given me enough
of his words. See, I am ready to con-
fess the truth.” And so when she was
free from the devil, whom she was
bidden to abjure in a solemn declara-
tion, she told the whole in order from
that day when she had given herself
to the devil.

In the same year and at the same
place Anna Xallea told a similar story
in nearly the same words. But she
said that her devil had hidden himself,
not in her hair, but at the back of her
throat while she was being tortured,
doubtless that he might more easily
prevent her from s ing if by chance
she felt impelled, through inability
to bear the pain, to confess the truth.
And in the opinion of those who were


MALEFICARUM


133


present this was no deception ; for they
saw her throat swell to a great size
until it became level with her chin and
so livid and discoloured that they could
easily believe there was some large
object strangling her.

many other women con-
demned to the fire for witchcraft,
whose names I do not now remember,
when Claude Simonette and her son
were led into prison it was observed
that a demon in the form of a fly*
buzzed round their temples and re-
et them not to lay their
crimes by confession even under
stress of the direst torture: for if they
confessed, it was most certain that they
would be condemned to the most
terrible death; whereas if they held
their tongues they would shortly
escape safe and unharmed.

Francoise Fellet said that a demon
had impressed a her a similar
need of keeping silent; and moreover
that her cars were so deaf to the Judge's
words when he first questioned her
that she heard no more than if he had
not spoken at all: but that when this
spell was at length overcome and the
truth had been wrung from her by
torture, the demon had not ceased
from that time to threaten her with
death, And for that reason she begged
that they would not leave her alone,


* “Form of a fly.” Beelzebub was the Lord
of Flies, it was considered that a familiar
might often assume the
the description given by


The sus-


uneasy posture upon a stool or table in the
middle


¢ without meat or s or twenty-four
pd “A little hole is Monitee made yy
door for the Impe to come in at; and lest it
might come in some less discernible shape, they
that watch ave taught to be ever and anon
ing the room, and if they see any spiders

or foes to Kill thom. And if they cannot kill
them then they may be sure they are her Impes.”


134


especially at night, when she had the
greatest fear of being attacked by him.

At the same place, in the year 1587

Francois Fellet, who had twice esca’
a capital sentence by concealing the
truth and resisting the torture, was
a third time accused, and was con-
victed and, after a full confession, paid
a belated but heavy penalty for his
crimes. There have not been lacking
others who have endured the stress of
their questioning without confessing,
and when they were on the Vogt of
being discharged have at last dis-
covered the crimes about which they
had so long kept silence.

This is exemplified by the case of
Marguerite Valtrin, who endured the
executioner’s fiercest tortures for a
whole hour without admitting any-
thing ne herself; but when at
length she was to be discharged she
asked that the Judge should be sum-
moned, and first having asked pardon
of him for her obstinacy which was
due to the lying promises of the demon,
she then unburdened herself by a
confession of every sort of wickedness.

Not unworthy of being recorded is
what happened in the same year to
Alexia Belhore, to the utter amaze-
ment of all who were present, when
she wished to behave in the same way.
For when she had in like fashion pre-

ared herself for a free confession, and

in the manner of Christians pre-
faced with the Lord’s Prayer, she
rushed backwards against the wall
behind her with such violence that
many were of opinion that she should
be carried away as a dead woman.
But after a little she came to herself
and, being asked what had caused her
mishap, said: “Do you not see the
executioner lying under the bed, who
just now seized me by the throat and
nearly strangled me? See how he
threatens me and does all he can to
revent me from saying a word about
im. That is not the first time he has
tried to keep me from telling the truth:
for while I was being tortured he stood
by my left ear as big as a thumb, and


COMPENDIUM


BK. tl. CH. XIV.


busily warned me to hold re eh
and not allow myself to over-
powered by a short period of not too
violent pain.

Remy writes as follows of a case
which he witnessed with his own eyes:
There was a witch commonly called
Asinaria, from her husband the ass-
driver, whom I was confounding with
the evidence that had been given
against her, so that she had no room
left for evasion. Accordingly she was

reparing herself to make a full con-
ession, when she suddenly changed
colour and fixed her eyes in horror
upon a corner at the back of the
prison, and began to lose all power of
speech or thought. I asked her what it
was that so suddenly ailed her; and
she answered that she saw at the top
of that corner her Little Master
threatening her with hands forked and
jagged like a crab’s claws, and that
e seemed about to fly at her. I
looked there, and she continued to
point her finger in that direction, but I
could see nothing. I then told her to
be of good , and with every
confidence spoke a great deal in con-
tempt of that Little Master: and at
last she recovered from her fear and
was startin ng to tell her story. But be-
fore she had begun she saw him y me
in a monstrous guise starting out from
another corner. He had completely
changed his appearance, just as if he
had been a play actor on the stage, for
huge horns were peg from his
head, and he seemed on the very point
of rushing violently upon her. But


* “Tittle Master.” Bodin, “‘Démono-
manic,” IT, iv, quoting the examination of
three witches at the Castello San Paolo, Spoleto,
by Grilland, says that the youngest of these
made an ample confession concerning her at-
tendance at the Sabbat. “Et quad il falloit
partir pour i aller, elle oyoit la voix d’vn
homme, qu’elles appelloyent leur petit maistre,
& quelquesfois matstre Martinet.”* ‘‘Euocaba-
tur,” says Debris (II, xvi), “‘uoce quadam,
uelut humana ab ipso daemone, quem non
uocant daemonem, sed Magisterulum, aliae
magistrum Martinettum, siue Martinellum.”


BK. II. CH, XV.


when he was sete reviled and loaded
with derision he departed, and was
pei to seen by her, as she frankly
decl; when she was on her way to
the stake,

Elsewhere there have been told, and
will be told, examples of how the de-
mons enter sacred buildings and
cloisters.


*


CHAPTER XV


A Summary in a Few Words of All the
Crimes of Witches.


EBASTIEN MICHAELIS in his

gie* gives an example of a

sentence passed at Avignon in 1582, as

comprising in a little space the most

execrable and abominable of the

crimes of Witches and Sorcerers. The
extract is as follows :—

We N. N. having considered the
charge wherewith you stand charged
and accused before us, and having
examined both the statements of your-
selves and your associates, and your
own confessions made to us according
to lawful requirements and often re-
peated upon oath, as well as the depo-
sitions and charges of the witnesses
and the other legitimate proofs, bas-
ing our judgement on that which has
been said and done during this pro-
cess, we are fully and lawfully
that you and your associates have
denied God the Creator of us all and
the Most Holy Trinity our Maker, and
that you have Bvpenaned the devil,
that ancient and implacable Enemy
of the human race. You have vowed
yourselves to him for ever, and have
renounced your most Holy Baptism


and your sponsors therein, together


* “Pneumalogie.” ‘““Discours des Esprits


en tant qu'il est de besoin pour entendre et
résoudre la maniére difficile des sorciers. Fait
et composé par le R. P. Sebastien Michailis,


Docteur en théologie de l’ordre des Fréres Pre-
scheurs, et Prieur au couvent Royal de S. Maxi-
min en Provence.” Paris, 8v0, 1587.


MALEFICARUM


135
with your part in Paradise and the
eternal heritage which our Lord Jesus
Christ bought for you and the whole
race of men by His death. All these
you did deny before the said cacode-
mon in the form of a man, and that
blatant devil did baptise anew
ctivicrd Veg bed eepice aoe
names given to at the Holy Font,
and so took sad fvetved another false
name in the guise of baptism. And as


a pledge of your fealty sworn to the
ici ave to him 2 fragment and
article clothing ; and that the


ather of Lies should have a care to
delete and obliterate you from the
book of life you did at his direction
and command with your own hands
write your names in the black book
there prepared, the roll of the wicked
condemned to eternal death ; and that
he might bind you with stouter bonds
to so great a perfidy and impiety, he
branded each of you with his mark as
belonging to him, and you did swear
homage and obedience to his behests
upon a circle (the symbol of Di Pai 2
traced upon the earth (which is *s
footstool) ; and each of you bound her-
self to tread under foot the Image of
the Lord and the Cross; and in obedi-
ence to Satan, with the help of a staff
smeared with some abominable un-
guent given to by the devil him-
self and placed between your legs you
were enabled to fly through the air at
dead of night to the place ordained,
at an hour fit for vilest criminals, and
on stated days you were so carried and
transported by the Tempter himself;
and there in the common synagogue
of witches, sorcerers, heretics, con-
jurers and devil-worshippers, you did

indle a foul fire and many re-
joicings, dancings, eating and drink-
es in honour of your

resident ebub the Prince of
Devils in the shape and appearance of
a deformed and hideous black goat,
you did worship him in deed and word
as very God and did approach him
on bended knees as oe and
offered him lighted candles of pitch;


ing, and lewd


136


and (fie, for very shame!) with the
greatest reverence ie did kiss with
sacrilegious mouth his most foul and
beastly posterior; and did call upon
him under the name of the true

and invoke his help; and did beg him


to avenge you upon all who had ©


offended you or denied your requests ;
and, taught by him, you did wreak
peer spite in s and charms against
th men and beasts, and did murder
she help of that eh socpenstGasea yor
e of that t Satan
did afilict mankind with curses, loss
of milk, the wasting sickness, and other
most grave diseases, And your own
children, many of them with your own
knowledge and consent, you did with
those magic spells suffocate, pierce,
and kill, and finally you dug them up
secretly by night from the cemetery
where they were buried, and so carried
them to the aforesaid e and
college of witches: there Fa ‘id offer
them to the Prince of Devils sittin
upon his throne, and did draw o
eir fat to be kept for your use, and
cut off their heads, hands, and feet,
and did cook and stew their trunks,
and sometimes roast them, and at the
bidding of your aforesaid evil Father
did eat and damnably devour them.
Then, adding sin to sin, you the men
did copulate with Succubi, and you
the women did fornicate with Incubi:
moreover, in most bitter and icy con-
nexion and foul coitus with demons
you did commit the unspeakable
crime of buggery. And, most hateful
of all, at the bidding of the aforesaid
Serpent thrust from Paradise, you did
keep in your mouths the most Holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist received
by you in the sacred Church of God,
and did execrably spit It out upon the
ground that you might with the great-
est of all contumely, contempt and
blasphemy dishonour God, our true
_ me Hope, ae Le the
ory, honour, triumph and kingdom
of the devil himself, and worship
honour and glorify him with all
honour, praise, majesty, authority and


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il, CH. XV.


adoration. All which most grave, ab-
horred and unspeakable crimes are
directly contumacious and contemptu-
ous of Almighty God the Creator of
all. Wherefore We, Brother Florus,
etc.


*


CHAPTER XVI.


The Devil Deceives and Seduces by means
of False Revelations or Apparitions.


Argument.


OUCHING revelations or visions
and as to the character of the
person who sees them, much must be
taken into consideration if the true
are to be distinguished from the false.
In the first place it must be discovered
whether such a is of the true
Catholic faith; for no credence can
be placed in the visions of devil-wor-
shippers or heretics. In the town of
Gretz, in the year 1601, there were a
man and his wife who persistently de-
clared that it was ogee them alone
that the Church had endured. There-
fore the father baptised their children,
with the mother acting as sponsor.
They foretold that the world would
come to an end in that year; but th
were hanged, and by their own dea
anticipated that of the world.
Secondly, it must be considered
fanatic, for no belief may be placed in
the revelations or prophecies of such.


Firmilian* sent to S. rian many
who had been deluded a woman
of this sort (Epistola ate:


y, it must be examined
whether the person’s honesty and
virtues point to the sincerity of his
faith, or whether his vices and notable
imperfections constitute a contrary
indication. For we must not believe
the proud and ambitious, the im-
patient, the carnally minded, drunk-
ards, those who cherish anger or stir


* “Firmilian.” Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, died c. 269.


BK, ll, CH. XVI.


up hatred and spread dissent, or those
who defame others; nor hypocrites
who display and parade some excep-
tional proof of devotion and penitence,
against the mposoen of their superiors
in the Church.


throug
sleep; if he is injured in the brain,
or is excessively timid and subject to a


seen or heard or tasted; for the devil
easily deludes them, since they eagerly
accept and believe the images of false
scpmereas:

poe the consideration of their
age sex must not be neglected.

or in their declining years persons are
often delirious ; and if they are children
there is the risk of a light and morbid
imagination, since the brains of children
are more humid than the normal, and
are full of vapours and are influenced
by a little thing. Therefore in times
past the demons used to love to utter
their oracles through children’s
mouths, as being more adapted to
their work. And as for the female sex,
it is agreed that this must be regarded
with the greater suspicion, as is noted
by Johann Nider* in the ogg 9
torum, I, 11, in the Question De


D 5

Sixthly, it should be considered
whether the pea is an old practi-
tioner of such spiritual exercises, or
whether she is ©: ty a novice; whether
the devil has in other ways attempted,
with or without success, to deceive her;
and whether her former prophecies
were truc, and, if not, which of them


* “‘Nider.” I have used the Douai edition,
1612, of the “Praeceptorum diuinae legis.”
There were seventeen editions of this book be-

Sore 1500


MALEFICARUM


137


were false. Ifshe is a novice there must
be suspicion of fraud. For, according to
Gerson, the fervour of a novice is soon
misled if she has none to control her.
ially in the case of the young and
of women, whose fervour is too ‘
captious and unbridled, and therefore
suspect. By this indication Giovanni
Francesco Pico della Mirandola (De
rerum praenotione, 1X. 3) discovered the
falsity of a certain revelation or vision,
after other indications had tended to


prove its truth ; for the devil, to give his


vanities an ap ce of verity, had
begun to s in the likeness of our
Lord Christ.


I said above that the sex is to be
taken into consideration; for, other
ings being equal, greater faith is to
be placed in the revelations of men,
The feminine sex is more foolish, and
more apt to mistake natural or de-
moniacal suggestions for ones of
Divine origin. Women, too, are of a
more humid and viscous nature, more
easily influenced to perceive various
phantoms, and slower and more loath
to resist such impulses. Therefore
women are quicker to imagine, but
men are less obstinate in holding to
their imaginings; and since women
have less power of reasoning and less
wisdom, it is easier for the devil to
delude them with false and deceptive
apparitions.
urther, since women are lascivious,
luxurious and avaricious in their
manner of life (as Apollonius has re-
marked), it must be noted whether
such prophetesses are particularly gar-
rulous, of a roaming disposition, evil-
doers, greedy of praise, passionate, and
whether in their teaching or in their
attitude towards the Sacraments of the
Church bt | show themselves in any
way opposed to the Apostolic doctrine.
For women of this sort not only deceive
themselves, but drag even learned
men to destruction when these place
too much credence in them, as will be
shown in the examples,


*


138


Examples.


Father José de Acosta,* in the De
ibus nouissimis, Bk. II, ch. ii.,

relates the following :—

In the Kingdom of Peru there was
a man who was at that time held to be
of great ability, a learned professor of
Theology, a pious Catholic of long
standing, and almost esteemed the
marvel of his age. This man became
familiar with a woman who declared
that she had been taught certain m
teries by an Angel was not i
quently thrown into a trance “Sd
rather she pretended to be rapt)
another Priscillat or a Maximilla


phe he Rta ncr cal yerst f geass
rence ales Acosta, His
learning and losophic spirit pervading


his many works Sonatas widest attention.


novice at thirteen, and in April 1569
sent to Lima, the Jesuits having been established
in Peru during the preceding year. In Peru,
through which country he travelled extensively,
he oi ee ee See Return-
ing to Europe he filled the chair of theology at
the Roman College in 1594, and at the time of
his death he was rector of the College of Sala-
manca. A good biography and a short biblio-
graphy of José de Acosta will be found in

mri orres Saldanando’s “Los antiguos
Jesuitas del Peri,” Lima, 1882.

t “Priscilla.” Or Prisca (also called by
Epiphanius Quintilla), and Maximilla, two
prophetesses, together with the prophet Mon-
tanus founded the sect called Montamists, schism-
atics of the second century. The oe
of these enthusiasts were in the village of

epuza, and the ecstatics did not so much speak
as messengers of God but vaunted that
were possessed by God and uttered oracles in
His Person. It appears that the extravagances
of the sect increased after the deaths of the
ounders (Maximilla must have died about the
end of 179, Montanus and Priscilla yet earlier) ;
but Tertullian, the most famous of the Mon-
tanists who definitely broke away from the
Church in 207, merely emphasised those parti-
culars of the Montanist teaching that appealed
to him and almost ignored the remainder which


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il, CH. XVI


among the Montanists: and he was so
enslaved by her that he often con-
sulted her upon the deepest points-ef
Theology and in all things treated her
as an oracle, proclaiming that she was
filled with mighty revelations and was
very dear to God. Yet in other
ei ee she was mundane enough and
had very little intelligence except for
constructing lies. But whether she was
possessed by the devil (as is the easier
to believe) when she went into this
sort of ecstasy, or whether she cleverly
simulated it (as many prudent men
have thought), the result was that the
Theologian, hearing from the woman
many wonders concerning himself and
wishing greatly to enhance his future
importance, freely avowed himself a
disciple of him whom the woman called
her spiritual father. What followed?
The man was so far led astray that he
tried to perform miracles, and was per-
suaded that he did perform them,
although there was never even the
slightest indication of a miracle. For
this reason, and because he had taken
from that prophetess certain doctrines
foreign to the teaching of the Catholic
Church, he was, to the amazement of
the whole Kingdom, seized by the
Judges of the most Holy Inquisition

and was for five years patien heard
and examined, until finally he was
clearly proved to be the proudest and
maddest of all men. For although he
most obstinately maintained that he
had been divinely gifted with an Angel
from whom he learned all that he
wished, and that he was on terms of the
most familiar conversation with God
Himself, yet he proclaimed the wildest
absurdities which no one could believe
it possible for any man to give utter-
ance to unless he were quite out of
his mind. None the less, as to his intel-
lect, it seemed to all that no one could
be saner. He soberly affirmed that he
would be King and Pope, when the
Apostolic See had been transferred to


was presently to degenerate into Gnostic theo-
sophy and other fantastical heresies.


BK. Il. CH. XVI.


that Kingdom; that he had been en-
dowed with a sanctity above all Angels
and Celestial Choirs and Apostles, and
that God had even offered him a
hypostatic union with Himself, but that
he had declined this: that he had been
sent to yet redeemer of the es
in point of efficacy, whereas Christ (as
he said) had been so only in point of
sufficiency. All the laws of the Church
were to be abrogated, and he would
make new laws which would be easy
and clear: the celibacy of the clergy
should be abolished, and plurality of
wives allowed, and holy confession
should no longer be obligatory. These
and other arguments he maintained so
strongly that all were astonished that a
a pri. ini : should not a
mad, after a long exposure o

his frantic Sehivichar iad lesa he had
been found guilty of more than a
hundred and ten doctrines which were
heretical or foreign to the true teach-
ing of the Church, skilled theolo-
gians were bidden, after the manner of
that holy Tribunal, to reason with the
man and try to bring him back to his
senses and his faith. Accordingly the
Judges and the Bishop of Quito* and
three other doctors met together, and
the man was brought into their
presence, where he defended his most
pernicious cause with such fluency and
eloquence that to this very day, says
the writer, I am astounded that the
pride of the human mind could pro-
ceed to such lengths. He professed
that he could not prove his doctrine
except by the Holy Scriptures and by
miracles, which were above all human
reasoning; yea, that he had indeed
proved his arguments by the authority
of the Scriptures far more clearly and
effectively than S. Paul proved that


Jesus was the true Messiah:

* dye .” The Diocese of Quito was
created by Paul III on yp re 1545, at the
request of Charles V, and made suffragan of
Lima. the Bull “Nos semper Romanis


Pontificibus,” 13 r ius LX made
Quito a Metrofalitan See. -


MALEFICARUM


139
that he had performed so many and
such sienty miracles that the resur-
rection of Christ was no ter. For
he said that he had actually died and
risen again, and that he had most
clearly manifested this. He quoted
from memory (for he had no book,

i iary had been taken


im)
the Prophets, the Apocalypse, the
Books, that it was


weep. Finally he said that, if we
wished res i prove his case by


r
fellow proceeded to speak in a mace
that suggested either that he thought
we were mad, or that he was mad him-
self. For he said that it had been re-
vealed to him that the Archduke John
of Austria had been defeated at sea
by the Turks, and that the Kingdom of
Spain had been nearly lost by the in-
vincible Philip, and that a Council had
been held at Rome to consider the
deposition of Pope Gregory} and the
election of another. that he told
us that we might know just as surely
as if we had received certain news of
them, saying that he could only
ee some divine quality have had
knowledge of them, And although all
this was so false that nothing d be
falser, yet he maintained it all as very
truth. Finally when after two days’
reasoning we could do no good, and
he had been taken as the Spanish
law directs, to be shown to the public
with the other criminals, he kept look-
ing up to Heaven waiting for the fire
to descend upon the Inquisitor and
everyone else as the devil had prom-
ised him it should. No fire from above
seized upon us, however; but the fire
from below seized upon that King,
that Pope, Redeemer, and Legislator,


+ “Pope Gregory.” Gregory XIII, who
reigned 1572-1585.


140
and burned him to ashes. So says
Father José.

We read in Surius (1 June) that S.
Simeon * the Monk of Tréves was sent
by divine command to live at the top
of Mount Sinai. One night a demon
appeared to him in the form of an
angel and bade him celebrate Mass.
Between sleeping and waking, he ob-
jected that no one who was not in
Priest’s Orders must undertake that
office; but the Enemy urged that he
was a messenger from God, and that it
was Christ’s will, for it was not right
that the holy place should any lo
be without such a celebration. While
he Rt argued and resisted, the demon,
with the help of another demon,
dragged him from his bed and set him.
now awake, before the altar, and
put an alb upon him; but there was a
dispute about the stole. For the Enemy
would have him wear it after the
manner of a priest, but Simeon said he
should wear it as a deacon. At len:
the servant of God came to hi
virtue of prayer, and drove off the
Enemy by the sign of the Cross, and
eenganed that he had been deceived.

That Deceiving Spirit, seeing
amongst the  Premonstratensian
Canonsf certain ignorant triflers whom
he had long recognised as his ownvessels
since they devoted themselves to idle-
ness and pleasure, so filled them with
his false illusion of wisdom that they,
who had before been scarcely able to
read from a book, now Yer grave
matters from books and prophesied
even greater and more astounding
things for the future. One of them
maintained that he understood the
prophecy of Daniel and, under a lying
inspiration, made certain pronounce-


* “S. Simeon.” In the ““Roman Martyro-
logy” under 1 Fune is inscribed: “At Tréves, of
S. Simeon, a monk who was numbered among
the Saints by Pope Benedict 1X.”

t “‘Premonstratensian Canons.” This his-
tory is from Surius under 6 June, the Feast of
S. Norbert, the Founder of the Order of Pré-
montré.


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XVI.


ments with regard to the passage where
the prophet writes of the four and the
seven and the ten horns and the ki
and Antichrist; and so he gained the
ears of the more simple, and if it had
been possible would have led into error
even the man of God the Venerable
Abbot Simon of S. Nicolas. For his
arrogance went so far that, when they
were sitting in the presence of the
Superior, he dared to preach a sermon
upon that Chapter. One who heard
and saw it bears witness to the truth of
this, and as a proof has given us the be-
ginning of that sermon, as follows :—
‘Be ye valiant in war, and fight against
that old t.”” These words did
that lying spirit utter through this
man’s mouth; but he was in no wa
able to proceed to the truth which
follows, namely: ‘‘ And ye shall re-
ceive the eternal Kingdom.” When
the Deceiving Spirit saw that he could
not wholly delude his hearers, bei
w y full of guile he turned wi
the greater skill to other methods of
deceit; so that if he could not openl
subvert those who were on their A
he might at least disturb them in their
meditations. Accordingly that same
cleric who was his minister in this work
was seized with a sudden and very
grave sickness; and whereas he had
confined his pronouncements to visible
matters, he now turned his face to
Heaven and did not fear to s of
matters invisible and ineffable. The
Brothers, as is the custom, ran up to
give him Unction, and’ to hear his
words ; for he said much of himself, but
more of many of those who stood round
him. Of himself he said that on that
same evening he would either be with
the Angels in Heaven, or he would be
standing restored to health with the
Brothers in the choir, Of the others,
he considered the character of each
and said as if pears and prog-
nosticating: “This man, when I was
lately borne up to Heaven in the


church, I saw called to eternity ” ; and
posi foretold various things of the
others.


BK. Il, CH. XVI.


Here note, reader, the degree of the
devil’s pride when he chooses the
ignorant and makes them appear
learned. Then he causes them to in-
He! sine the Scriptures and to preach
before their superiors in places where
they should be silent.

Ribadeneira * in his Life of S.


Ignatius Loyola (V. 10) writes that a fe


years ago in in one of the cities
of Hainault there was a nun who was
thought to be d, and she was


led to the Superior of her Order to be
exorcised. But when the ceremony had
already been proceeding a long time,
she began to speak successively with
different voices, in a gentler voice
claiming that she was Christ Our
Lord God, while her other voice was
harsher and more like a demon: and
(with this) she openly blurted out
many impieties, and much that was
parently devout; and so some who
should have known better came to be-
lieve that now Jesus and now the devil
spoke through her. This matter so full
of danger and deception was carried
to such an extent that the woman, as if
Christ were speaking through her,
dared with solemn intention to utter
the canonical words and consecrate
the Bloodless Sacrifice ; and (ah, woe!)
certain pious but ignorant or rash per-
sons bowed in adoration before the un-
leavened bread consecrated (or rather,
let it be said, execrated) by this priestess
ut not after the order of Melchise-
ech) and as if it were the live Body
of the Lord brought and placed candles
upon the altar and venerated it. Yet
there were two indications that it was
animposture: first the fact that she was
a possessed woman, and secondly that
she dared to usurp the priestly office


* “Ribadeneira.”” Pedro de Ribadeneira,
SF; 1526-1611, wrote his “Life of S. Igna-
tius”’ as an eye-witness of many of the events. It
er aa Gada cn ae ote
1572. ‘st Spanish edition was 1583.

the shies
1594. This book was soon translated into al-
most all European languages.


MALEFICARUM 141


which belongs to men, not women. But
God deliver us from the like!

In two of the above examples we
have shown what fruit may come of
intercourse with women of fictitious

iness. I will here in a very few
words add a third instance, and Ter-
tullian ¢ won a is indeed a
signal example. For most pro-
found scholar of his time, trusting in
the visions of women as concerning
emeey and colour of the soul, forgot

that he had most learnedly and
truthfully written against such women
and fell into grossand ridiculous errors.

Francesco Benci f¢ adds the following
example, During the year 1 590 ina
certain outlying district near the town
of Arona, some thirty women were
tormented by the devil. Most of them
were girls of the humblest station, and
those especially were afflicted who
were bound by a vow of virginity; for
it was wonderful with what wiles he
surrounded them and with what arts
he attacked them, assuming various
forms to tempt them to sin or to deter
them from honesty. Now he would
take the appearance and piety of a
monk, or even (a thing which the ears
shudder to hear) that of Christ Himself
upon the Cross 2 ey vag them to
impious deeds. Now he would appear
as a bear or a lion or a serpent + seo
to rush with gaping mouth upon the
virgins and devour them in one gulp.
At other times he appeared as a soldier
with his dishonourable weapon thrust
out, threatening them with fire and
thunder if he could not achieve his


Quid Tertulliano eruditius, quid acutius?
Apologeticus eius et contra Gentes ibe cunc-
tam saeculi continent disciplinam.” “‘Epistola
LXX.”

t “Francesco Benci.” A Milanese writer
of local gazettes and intelligences.


er aes


142.
aim. But their virgin simplicity, with
the help of God, overcame all his
subtleties. Great indeed was their
faith, and with that shield
a the fiery darts of the Evil
ne. Let us relate two of the man
stories which are told of these virgins.
One of them, who was born of noble
parents and had been gently reared,
was much disturbed one night by the
devil’s temptings; and ore,
though it was mid-winter and bitterly
cold, she left her bed and slept naked
on the bare floor. But when the flame
of her desire in no way decreased (for a
mighty fire does but burn the more
when water is thrown upon it), she stole
from her bedroom into the garden and
there, in emulation of the great S.
Francis who she had heard had done
the same, threw her body into a bank
of snow; and, although the demon
(who was visible to her) raved and
gnashed his teeth, she rolled in the
snow so long that she wholly quenched
her in fire with the external cold,
To another of these virgins the demon
likewise appeared at night in the form
of S. — bearing Pes ant of the
Cross with a company of many
and spoke to Ger as follows: “ God
sees and loves your zeal in keeping
your chastity. But because it is some-
what difficult for you in your father’s
house, with so much bustle of people
coming and going, and so many
dangers to be encountered, to avoid
contaminating your mind in some
art, He has sent us to take you toa
nvent of Holy Virgins who have put
aside all other cares to serve His will
with all their str -” The virgin,
with the breath of God u a ke
feared some ambush of the devil and
drew her right hand from her brow to
her breast, and then from left to right
in the form of the Cross, and protested
that she was most unworthy of such
a vision and so great an honour. And
she added: “Neither have I very
arey faith in you, for I fear some
idden guile in your specious counsel.
But if you are the messengers of God,


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. XVI.


then humbly adore these Relics of the
Saints.” (For she was wearing these
about her neck.) Strange to say, the
devils knelt in worship before them,
and urged her all the more to hasten
her departure with them. But she said:
“I may not come to any grave de-
cision without the advice of my
spiritual father, and it is not seemly for
me to go to him at this hour of the
night. you, therefore, approach
him and make known the commands
of God ; and when it is day I will come
and abide by his advice.”’ At this an-
swer the demons threw off all disgui
and hid themselves in their own dark-
ness, raging at, and attacking with
their tongues only, and pouring insults
and vituperations upon the maiden,
who at them and humbly gave
thanks to God. What greater om
St ee
But indeed true wisdom became
who bound herself with the girdle of


og Hab

I will add an example of a remark-
able precaution, by which we are
taught that nothing is safer for a man
than to mistrust his own judgement,
and to preserve his obedience to his
superior even in the face of a vision
which com his_belief. S. Gene-
bald,* Bishop of Laon, formed a
friendship, which arose from the best
of motives, with a woman; but such is
human frailty that at last he had carnal
intercourse with her. Afterwards he
came to his senses and confessed to S.
Remigius of Reims. He was shut in a
narrow cell like a tomb, and there did
bitter ce for seven years. In the
seventh year at the vigil of the Lord’s
Supper, while S. Genebald was spend-
ing the night in prayer and lamenta-
tion, about the middle of the night an
Angel of the Lord came to him in a
great light in the cell where he lay,
and said to him: “‘ Genebald, the


* “S. Genebald.” As the nephew of S. Re-
migius, S. Genebald, first Bishop of ¢ Me who
was inted to that see in 497, is much ven-
erated in the Diocese of Reims.


BK. Il. CH. XVI.


rayers of your father Remigius for
you have been heard, and the Lord
as accepted your penitence and your
sin is absolved. Arise and hence,
and perform your Episcopal duties and
reconcile penitent sinners with the
Lord.” But S. Genebald was too terri-
fied to answer anything. Then the
el of the Lord comforted him and
told him not to fear, but to rejoice in
the mercy of God shown to him. Thus
encouraged, he said to the Angel:
“I cannot go from here; for my Lord
and father Remigius carries with him
the key of this door, and he has sealed
it with his seal.” And the Angel said to
him: “ Do not doubt: I am sent from
the Lord. Even as Heaven is open to
you, so also will this door open.” And
at once the door was opened, the wax
of the seal being yet unbroken. Here,
then, are the signs of a true vision: for
first he was id, and then he was
comforted ; and the unbroken seal and
wax was a true and patent miracle.

Ah, how different was that virgin of
Ghent in our own times!

This miserable woman spent much
time in prayer and frequently assisted
at Mass, but either she did not go often
enough to a confessor or, if she did, she
did not unfeignedly open to him the
secrets of her heart, or else she did not
follow his good advice. In any case,
by degrees and in various visions the
devil filled her with spiritual pride,
and at last persuaded her that in all
other merits she was the equal of the
Virgin Mary, but that the one thin
lacking to her was fertility joined wi
spotless virginity ; and that, if she per-
severed, she would achieve that also.
Oh madness, worthy of the folly of
women! After that she no longer de-

ised confession but used it regularly

or some years, at the same time par-
ing of the Holy Communion. What
followed? Once when she was in
church awaiting her Communion, and
was Prveniay praying for that one re-
maining benefit, she heard a voice say :
+ of good heart, beloved ; for know
that your prayer is heard and you are


MALEFICARUM 143


permitted to become pregnant with all
the p tives of cheatin: Have faith
that you have conceived from heaven.”
(For she had lain Svs the pevesrs iw
was pretending to be an -) She
went home, and felt her womb swel-
ling ; and after the due period of gesta-
tion she went to a pious and discreet
citizen who was known, and told
him all, and asked that she might give
birth in the interior of his house,
begging him to keep it secret. The
man did not believe her story about
her visions, yet he would not thrust
the woman from his house; for the
Sectarians were just then gaining
ground, and he feared that if this
matter were made public it would give
rise to blasphemous and injurious
utterances by the heretics. Therefore
he took her in and, havin a
trustworthy midwife, awaited her de-
liverance. The unhappy woman was
afflicted with violent pains, and at
length, instead of a human child, shed
from her womb a great quantity of
horrible, ugly and vile worms, so
terrible to see that all were appalled,
and of so foul a stench that it nearly
killed all who were present. So at last
the wretched woman understood that
she had been deluded, and that she
had reaped the merited fruit of her
pride from the Prince of Pride. In this
way was the woman deceived.

S. Friard* and his companion, the
Deacon Secondel, remained perfectly
stable in their anchoretic vocation
upon an island, each having his own
cell at a long distance from the other’s.
As they were labouring in strenuous
prayer, the Tempter appeared at night
to the Deacon Seconde! in the likeness
of the Lord, saying: “I am Christ to
whom you continually pray. And
now you are a Saint, and I have


*“§. Friard.” The two holy hermits S.
Friard and §. Secondel of Besnd (sixth century)


are particularly honoured in the diocese of
Nantes. Guetee hat his kistery from 8. Gre-
gory of Tours, “De uita Patrum,” X, and one
may also consult Surius under 1 August.


144
written your name in the Book of Life
with the rest of my Saints. Depart
now from this island, and go among
the people healing the sick.” De-
ceived by this illusion he departed
from the island without telling his
companion; and when he placed his
hands upon the sick in the name of
Christ they were moreover healed.
After a long time he returned to the
island and came with great glory to


his companion, saying: “I went from
the island and ve done man
mighty works among the people.”


The other was appalled, and asked
what he meant; and he told him
simply all that he had done. But the
old man was amazed, and said with
sighs and tears; “Woe to us! How
terribly do I hear that you have been
deceived by the Tempter! Come now
and do penance, lest his wiles prevail
over you.” Secondel, ee
his error, fell weeping at his feet an
him to intercede for him with
ert cae
. et us ray the Almighty
for the safety of wor eau : for He is not
a hard God to those who trust in His
mercy, as He said by the Prophet.*
I desire not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should turn and live.”
While they were apian, Pe Tempter
came again in the same likeness to the
Deacon Secondel, saying: “Did I not
tell you, because my sheep were sick
and without a shepherd, to go out and
visit them and heal their sickness?”
But he answered: “I know now of a
truth that you are a seducer, and I do
not believe Psa you are —— —
i u assume. But if you
Kine | show a your Cross which
‘ou have left behind, and I will be-
ieve you.” And when he could not
show it, and the Deacon had made the
sign of the Cross upon his face, he
vanished in confusion.
Albert Leander? tells us that when


* “Prophet.” Ezechiel, xxxiii, rr.
t “Albert Leander.”? A Dominican writer
and hagiographir of the sixteenth century. The


COMPENDIUM


BK. II, CH, XVI.


Blessed Jordant of Saxony, the
Master General of the Order of
Preaching Friars, was suffering from
an acute fever, there chanced to be
with the venerable Father the Supe-
rior, or Prior, of a certain friary of
the same Order, a discreet man, skil-
ful, provident, learned and of sober
behaviour, who brought him some
medical assistance. But he could read
the mind of Father Jordan and knew
that in his very sickness he bore him-
self very stiffly towards him. There-
fore he said : “Father, a sick man must
in all things be subject to his physician
if he wishes to recover his former
health. Wherefore, although you are
the chief and head of our religious
Order, now that you are sick you must
lay aside your headship and subject
yourself to me and obey me. And, if
you do this, I have no fear but that in
a short time will go away from
here cured.” Venerable Father
agreed, and at the order of the prudent
Prior lay upon a bed of feathers, con-
trary to the custom of the Order. In
the night the devil came in the form of
an el and said to him, as if in
astonishment: “Is this the famous
Swen so renowned among all men?

s this the Master and Father of the
esteemed Order of Preachers? I should
doubt it if I had not known you before.
Oh how vile and imprudent you have
become, that you lie upon a bed of
feathers and silken stuffs like one of
the Lords of the earth. Unhappy man,
what an example you give to the
Brethren of your Order! Yet God
has not forgotten you, for He has sent
me to “oops ou. Rise ee from
your and cast yourself in prayer
upon the ground.” And at once, when
the devil had vanished, Jordan threw


history is from his “Uita B. Iordanis,”” xxi and

xxit.
¢ “Blessed Jordan.” The Second Master

General of the Dominicans, which Order he

ruled from 1222-1237. His cult was

by Leo XII and his feast is kept on r5 Febru-

ary.


BK. Il. CH. XVI.


himself in terror to the ground, and
after the dawn he was found so lyi
by the Prior and the Brethren.
Prior seized him roughly and com-
pelled him, on his obedience, to lie
upon the bed prepared for him. On
the following night the devil came
again in the same likeness, and chid
him more than before for his disobed-
ience, and ordered him to jump down
on to the When the Prior
again saw him in the morning lying on
the ground he was at first , Say-
ing: “I wonder at your simplicity, not
to say ignorance, that you have pre-
co the danger Raklaaiparpoor baer
to the not y
but of your soul. For I call God, the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, to witness
that, for my part, I would not for the
whole world sin so gravely against God
and the Order.” And so saying he
burst into a flood of tears. Seeing this,
the Venerable Father himself wept and
fell at his feet, and told him of his
visions, or rather illusions, and how, as
he guessed, it had been the devil,
transfigured into the form of an Angel
of Light. The Prior was then seized
with astonishment and became soft-
ened to him through pity, and told
him to climb into bed: for these ha
penings had brought him such a weak-
ness of the limbs and such an indura-
tion of his humours that he hardly
had breath left for sleep. On the third
night the devil came as before, but as
soon as he saw him the Holy Man said:
“O shameless dog! O most wicked
foe to the human race! O filthy
beast! How have you dared to delude
my simplicity under a cloak of zeal for
our Order? Had it not been per-
mitted by the dispensation of Al-
mighty God, I should have been more
 ocengt in noting that obedience is far
tter than the sacrifices of fools.”” And
spitting in his face, he put him to flight.
Not long after his death S. Meinolf*


* “S. Meinolf.” S. Meinolf was a canon
of the Cathedr ee ne fe
st half of the ninth century, and the founder


L


MALEFICARUM


145


the canon of Paderborn and Confessor
appeared in a vision to one of his
sacristans, ing him quickly to
renounce the world and its pomps, and
to fight under the banner of the
Eternal King. But the man took the
to be an illusion, and made no
ees eae

on ty again
ened hi as before: a when even
so no thought for correcting
his life, he the third time
and said: “You know not, unhappy
wretch, you know not how the 9m
Thief is claiming your soul for hi ‘
for he it is who has persuaded you to
disobey the message of God and of me
who am sent by When you were
plainly going astray in evil living and
would not of your own will desist from
sinning, a Divine revelation warned
you so that you might thus betake
yourself to better fruits. But, fool that
you are, you allowed yourself to be
miserably and perniciously deluded,
taking a true revelation to be a fan-
tastic illusion. For none of the faithful
can be in doubt that there is no illusion
about that revelation which invites a
man to Christian piety and religion.
But if such a vision were to come to
you while you were awake, you ought
in no wise to despise it: and since
words will not serve to correct you, we
must proceed to deeds. Therefore, that
I may make it plain that the vision
which you affect to misunderstand was
a very true one, you shall be left in no
doubt at all.” en the Saint had
said this, the man arose and found
that his entire beard had been torn
from his chin, and all sleep fled far
from his eyes.

Cardinal Jacques de Vitry,* in his
of the Béddeken monastery. His feast is kept
pees capes rs life Pade Gobeliges
(“ita Meinulphi’ will be found in the
** Acta Sanctorum” of the Bollandists, October,
vol. II, 216, a4.

* ““Facques Vitry.” ores the
Crusades, cardinal, Bishop of Acre, and later
of Tusculum, was born c. 1160 and died at


146


Book de Mulieribus Leodiensibus, I, 9,
tells that a friend of Blessed Marie
d’Oignies was notably infested by an
evil spirit which walked in darkness at
noon-tide and was sometimes violently
and sometimes cunningly dangerous.
For the subtle Enemy transfigured
himself into an Angel of light and ap-
to him familiarly in dreams

under the cloak of piety, sometimes
reproving him for certain faults,
sometimes fraudulently urging him to
good works; so giving him as it were
a false seeming antidote that anon he
might the more secretly instil his
ison, and c him with a
honored tongue that he might after-
wards sink his teeth in and bind him
securely to his tail. For when the man
had put a complete trust in him, then
that Betrayer, like a sophist or im-
postor, so covered his falsehoods with
a shadow of truth that at length by his
machinations he led that Brother to
what would have been a disastrous
conclusion of his life, had not the
handmaiden of Christ learned through
the revelation of the Y Spirit the
deceits of that cunning Enemy. For
she told the man that those revelations
of his were not from God but were
illusions of a wicked demon: but he on
the other part objected, guided by his
own spirit instead of the Holy Spirit,
saying: “That spirit has brought me


Rome 1240. After attending the University of
Paris he visited Marie d’ Oignies, a mystic of
the Diocese of Liége, who had won a great re-
putation for sanctity. Acting upon her advice
he became a Canon Regular and from 1210 to
1213 he was one of the most eminent preachers
of the crusade against the Albigenses. His
“Tiber de Mulieribus Leodiensibus”’ is rad
famous. The most celebrated of these ho
women was Marie d’ Oignies, whose visions
relates; see “Acta Sanctorum,” June, vol. IV,
696, 666.

S. Marie d’Oignies was born at Nivelles
about 1177 and died at the béguinage of Oignies


in 1213. Her feast is kept in the dioceses of


Namur and Liége on
were enshrined by or
1609


une. Her holy Relics
of Pope Paul V in


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. XVI.


so many benefits, and has truthfull
foretold so much of the future, that
am sure he does not wish to impose
upon me.” The woman then had re-
course to her customary weapon of
prayer (see, what a sure remedy and
shield it is!), and watered with her
tears the feet of the Crucifix, assailing
Heaven with her prayers; nor did she
cease until that wicked Impostor with
much groaning and shame came to her
as she prayed in her cell at night.
Seeing him thus clothed in false
splendour, she said: “Who are you,
and what are _ called?” He looki
proudly and balefully at her said: “
am he whom you with your cursed
prayers have compelled to come to
you; and you are trying to take from
me my friend by force. I am called
tdseaetot Ladibe we aay, cppeciliy
to many, y
to Religious, and they obey me and by
my consolations are driven from their
senses and consider themselves worthy
to converse with Gods and oo
And I was just about to lead
en that friend of mine who
is lost to me oe your will.” And
so it proved in the event. But the
adder’s eggs were broken, and the evil
counsels of the Wicked One were


brought to light.
In his De plas Anglicano Nicholas


Sander* relates how the heretics
formed an unheard of Plott to rouse a


* “Nicholas Sander.” 1590-1581. Edu-
cated at Winchester and New College, Oxford,
he graduated in 1551. Under Elizabeth he had
to fly the country and was ordained at Rome.
His writings are very valuable and he did much
to hel; oppressed Catholics during the
Elizabethan persecutions. The most widely


)
first at Cologne in 1585 and in the following
‘year with many additions by Father Parsons at
Rome. sin af been seeerese et various lan-
guages and frequently reprinted.

t “Plot.” ‘De Rin Anglicano.”’
Rome, 1586, “Liber Secundus, Maria” (op.
342-2), where Sander gives details of this silly
and profane plot. Elizabeth Croft or Crofts, an


BK. Il, CH. XVII.
turbulent mob to disturb the people of


London and urge them to sedition and
heresy. They persuaded a girl eight-
een years of age, corrupted both by


heresy and bribes, to act the fi
abominable lie. She wcherchrertie
self to be shut up for a time between
two walls in an obscure corner of a
certain house, and through a suitable
pein pt eke ary HS
gested to her by the plotters. The girl’s
name was Croft, the
— rete the nai of the plot ine
rake. Accordingly, having been thus
instructed and posted in the place con-
venient for the deception, the oe
making wonderful utterances her
hiding place, so loudly that all the
neigh could hear her. ran
up from all directions to see what it
was, and in their wonder declared that
it was not a mortal voice, but the voice
of an Angel. That spirit threatened
the city and the country with misery,
suffering and every misfortune if they
permitted the Spanish marriage, or
communion with the Pope of Rome.
The voice also uttered much in the
manner of an oracle against the Holy


Dotted ei Mecnat Dieerephee™ Bests
“Dictionary of National Bio, .” Ear
in 1554 she seems to have comealed herself in
the thick wall of a house in Aldersgate Street,
and through a whistle or trumpet her voice ut-
tering denunciations of the Catholic Faith,
King se and the Queen herself sounded so
hollow loud that large crowds collected,
amongst which confederates spread the rumour
that the locutions were divinely inspired. Be-
Sore Fuly 1, 155s the mysterious voice, “‘the
Spirit in the wall,” was traced, and Elizabeth
sent to yee Drake, Sir Antony Knyvett’s
servant, supplied the whistle and a rabble
of low rascals were numbered ae, his ac-
complices. On Sunday, Hy July, Elizabeth
Crofts was set on a scaffold by S. Paul’s Cross,
there she read her public page and on
her knees asked forgiveness of Taner She
returned to prison itent, owing to
the clemency 9, pF sm soon released. See
Stowe’s “Annals,” 1554, and the authorities


cited in “The Dictionary of National Bio-
graphy.”


MALEFICARUM


147


Sacrifice and the rest of the Catholic
Faith. Some of the conspirators took
care to mingle with the crowd and
interpret the prophetic and darker
sayings of this spirit as admonitions for
the subversion of religion and the
stirring up of sedition. The Lord
Mayor, to a the multitude and
difficulty i exposing the frand: ‘but
e fraud: but
at lext he decided to pull down the
wall and those next to it, whence the
voice seemed to come. The wretched
girl was then discovered and was
questioned as to who had induced and
ed her to act in that way; and
she at once confessed that she had been
led to that horrible wickedness by
certain seditious sectaries, and
ially by the villain who was ed
Drake.


*


CHAPTER XVII
Of the Appeal to God.


Argument.


| ee is dangerous for men not of

poorer: righteousness to provoke
such an appeal. Indeed they commit
mortal sin who knowingly and un-
justly call others to judgement, for so
= cause grievous harm and injustice
and the Judges are brought into dis-
repute as the oppressors of the inno-
cent. But if such action is taken with-
out hatred, desire for vengeance, im-
patience, anger, despair, vanity or any
other vicious motive ; or if anyone op-
pressed by injustice acts in good faith
to make his innocence appear, so that
his family should not become infam-
ous, or that the world should be rid of
such a tyrant, or that he should be
turned and through fear become peni-
tent and cease from his oppression and
down-treading of the unfortunate;
then such a citation is lawful, neither


148 COMPENDIUM


did Frangois Feuardent * dare to con-
demn it, since when the end is good I
suppose the means if indifferent are to
be commended. There are many ex-
amples in Holy Writ. Sarah said:
“The Lord ju between me and
thee.” (Genesis xvi, 5): David said to
Saul: “ The Lord je


ge between me
thee.” (I. Samuel xxiv, 12). So said
Zechariah the son of Jehoiada: ‘* The
Lord look upon it and require it.”” (II.
Chronicles xxiv, 22).


*


Examples.

Thomas of Brabant in his De Apibus,
VII, records a most memorable event
in the following words: The Monas-
tery of S, James at Liége is well known
to all, as is the truth of the following
ae A young man who was cousin to
the Bishop entered that monastery for
the sake of devotion and religion. But
when the Bishop heard this he was en-
raged and collected a strong band of
his servants and, forcing his way into
the monastery, seized the young man
and ee im of his religious habit
and clothed him in secular clothing.
The Abbot of the monastery therefore
collected the chief men of the city and
complained to the Bishop, and ap-
pealed to all the clergy concerning this
outrage. But the Bishop in his rage


* “Frangois Feuardent,” 1539-1610. A fa-
mous Franciscan theologian oaeaeh a je
minent part in the religious and political
troubles which so disturbed France during his
day. He was one of the most zealous preachers
in the cause of the Catholic League, and a-
chieved no mean reputation as an eloquent and
ardent defender of the Faith. In his old age he
retired to the convent of Bayeux which he re-
stored and furnished with a large library. For
his own works, both theological and contro-
verstal, one may conveniently consult Wadding-
Sbaralea, “‘Scriptores Ordinis Minorum,” ed.
Nardecchia, I, 80, 49.3 Rome, 1906. The
present reference is to his ““Entremangeries et
guerres ministrales”’ (Caen, 1601).


BK. ll, CH. XVII.


would scarcely listen to him, but rather
spoke harshly to the Abbot; where-
upon the Abbot knelt down and said
with great moderation: “* O Bishop, I
can have no Judge against you upon
earth; and therefore | appeal to
the Supreme Judge against you, that
within forty days both of us may ap-
pear before him to receive pecgemnent
according to our deserts.”’ The Bishop
laughed at this, and with his followers
mocked at the good man and despised
him and drove him away in disgrace.
What happened? On the fortieth day
about Nones that Abbot died; and as
they were solemnly tolling for him the
Bishop, sitting in his bath, asked the
tanders what it was. Soon one came
in and said that the Abbot of S. James
had just died, and that the solemn tol-
ling was for him. The Bishop then re-
membered that it was the fortieth day
since the time he had been summoned
by the Abbot, and in terror of soul said
to his followers: “Quick! See what I
must do. I = — 5 et I must
appear in the sight e Supreme
udge.” Shortly after these mone as
e was hastening out of the bath, he
died with a terrible groan in the arms
of his attendants, without doubt being
compelled to answer for himself there
where no causes are cried and the
pendings of advocates are silent, where
ecdom cannot be won by prayers or
by bribery.
Fregoso, I, 6, writes that Frangois I,t


+ “‘Frangois I.”’ Born at Vannes, 11 May,
1414; the eldest son of John VI of Brittany.
When Sir Francis Surienne invaded Brit
on the pretext of redressing the wrongs done
the Duke to he joingir tool, illes, Fran-
gois appealed for protection to Charles VII of
France. The king after remonstrating in vain
with the Duke of Somerset on the conduct of
Surienne instituted pe the English a cam-
paign which led to their expulsion from Lower
Normandy. The cruel treatment of his brother
by Frangois has left an ineffaceable blot on his
memory. But it had terrible results. A month
po the death of Gilles in 1450, Frangois, con-

onted in his sleep by his brother's confessor,


was solemnly cited to appear in forty days be-


BK. Il. CH. XVIII.


Duke of Brittany, with infamous and
cruel treachery put to death his
brother who was returning from Eng-
land. But within a ¢ Duke in
his turn perished miserably, for his
brother had cited him to the tribunal
of God, and thus he most wretchedly
lost both his Dukedom and his life.


*


CHAPTER XVIII
Of the Trial by Single Combat.
Argument.


Ik former times, when an accusa-
tion was doubtful and could not be
proved, no sort of trial was more com-
mon than this. For then either the
accuser challenged the defendant, or
else the defendant offered himself or
someone else in his place to fight. It is
agreed that this is a most ancient
stig and that it was used in the
ands of Palestine ; for Alciati * points
out in his De singulari certamine, Il, that
Davidt challenged and overcame Goli-
ath. After the invasion of Italy by the
Barbarians it was chiefly practised by
the Lombards, the Germans, Franks,


Sore the tribunal of God, there to answer for his


misdeeds, Terror gave full effect to the ghostly
citation, which the wretched man perforce


obeyed, 4 ing on 19 July, 1450.
Aleiath.” ea ‘Acati, 1492-1550,
the famous Italian jurist.

“David.” This Scriptural example was
of old quoted by several writers in support of
phony §, Vive eta twig But as early
as 1240 S. de Peitafort (““Summa,”’ I,
tit. 2) definitely laid down that all who engage
in such combats are guilty of mortal sin. Car-
dinal Henry of Susa is no whit less uncompro-
mising (“‘Aureae Summae, V, tit. “De Clu.
ate Alexander of Hales (“Summae,
IH; Q, xlvi, ae regarded the precedent
of David and Goliath as altogether an excep-
tion which no argument must be deduced.
It was to him only permissible to refer to it in
an allegorical manner as prefiguring the tri-
umph of Christ over the devil.


MALEFICARUM


149
and even Spaniards. But this sort of
combat provides no proof; for it is
against all law according to the unan-
imous opinion of the Doctors. Sufius
(ei iniustitia duelli) and Pedro Mexiat
Silva de varia leccion, IV, 9) prove
that it is contrary to natural law.
All the Doctors agree in igrorins: that
it is against the civil law, although that
law is not very clear in detail ; yet there
is no Roman law by which such com-
bats can be justified. That duels are
forbidden by the law of God is proved
by ev ment which forbids us to
tempt , and by the Command-
ment that we shall do no murder. This
is more clearly proved by the Ecclesi-
astic, or positive Divine Law, as ex-
ressed by the Council of Trent as
ollows: The detestable practice of
duelling, introduced by the wiles of
the devil that he might win the death
of souls together with the bloody death
of the body, should be entirely exter-
minated from the Christian world, etc.
Sess. XXV; De Reform, cap. XIX).
d a little later the same holy Coun-
cil added the following: They who
engage in duels, and they who act as
seconds thereto, let them be punished
with excommunication and the con-
fiscation of all their goods and per-
es disgrace, and may they for ever
¢ deprived of ecclesiastical burial like
murderers, etc. There exists that most
admirable Bull of Pope Gregory XIIT
of blessed memory, issued in the a
1582 in the month of December, which
begins with these words: Crescente
hominum malitia,§ facinorosi non desunt.


t “Pedro Mexia.” This wae Spanish
author was born c. 1496 and died in 1552. His
‘Silva de varia leccion,’”’ published at Seville
in 1543, has been to the ‘‘Noctes At-
ticae’”’ of Aulus Gellius. Mexia was a great
favourite with Charles V and collected material
‘for a history of that monarch. This, unfor-
tunately, was never written.

§ “Crescente hominum malitia.” Reference
may also be made to the glosses of Pedro Mattei
roo the Bull ““Mox laudandam” of ts

III. Benedict XIV decreed that duellists,
even if they had not perished on the duelling-


150
Examples.


In the year 1326, when William III
was Count of Hainault, a certain Jew
pretended to be baptised in all sin-
cerity into the Holy Christian Faith,
and the Count gave him the name of
William at the font and appointed him
as a servitor in the palace at Mons.
Not long afterwards this wicked fellow
entered the church at the monastery of
Cambrai and in a fit of fury hurled a
number of blasphemies against the
image of the Mother of God, and (oh,
horror!) wounded it with his spear in
five several places from which streams
of blood at once flowed. This was seen
by a carpenter and by a lay Brother
named Matthaeus Lobbie: The car-
peeve was about to cleave the Jew’s

ead with his axe, but he was pre-
vented by the Brother. They la
the matter to the Abbot, John of Mons,
and he to the Count. The Jew stub-
withstood all torture and was
therefore released, but four years later
an Angel appeared to an old man
named Jean Flander D’Esteney who
had been bed-ridden with paralysis for
seven years, and ordered him to accuse
the Jew and challenge him to a duel.
After he had been thus warned twice,
the old man still, at the bidding of the
parish priest, delayed, but the third
time the Virgin Herself came and
showed him her five bleeding wounds,
and commanded him to fight the duel.
Full of hope and faith the old man
went to Cambrai, and having seen the
wounds upon the image obtained an
audience of the Count and thereupon


ground but had lingered and later received ab-
solution, should without exception be denied
Christian burial; Pius IX in the “Constitutio
Apostolicae Sedis,” 12 October, 1869, excom-
municates all who are in any way accessory to
a duel, who are present at a duel, or who permit
and do not prevent a duel, even though they be
kings or emperors; Leo XIII in his letter
“*Pastoralis officti,” 12 September, 1891, em-
phasises the oxigen peste fy ae
against the Divine Law proclaimed both by the
inspired Holy Scriptures and natural reason.


COMPENDIUM


BK. I. CH. XVII.


accused the Jew of his crime. A day
was appointed for the combat ; and the
weapons, rough clubs* and wooden
shields, exist even to this day. The Jew,
who although he seemed but a puny
fellow was in fact muscular and
vigorous, had sewn a number of little
tinkling bells to his galligaskins and
gambadoes in bitter mockery of the
poor old man: but God helped His
champion who had undertaken so un-
equal a fight, for the sick man beat the
healthy man, the weak the strong, and
the old the . And as he was con-
victed terribly blaspheming and im-
itent, the Count ordered him to be
und by the hair of his head to a
horse’s tail and so ed to the gib-
bet, and after he had been hanged by
the neck with two fierce Molossian
hounds rending his flanks, he was cast
into the fire. This story is fully told by
Robertus Hauport, who wrote a poem
in two books on the subject.
Radislaus,+ a Prince of Kreis Kau-
rim (Kolin) and son of Mistibogius,
wrongfully invaded Bohemia, so that
at last King Wenceslaus was per-
suaded to raise an army against him.
As they were on the point of joining


* “Rough clubs.’ When champions were
fa on both sides, and such would be actu-
ally the case here since the old man was fighting
in honour of Our Lady, the law of battle re-
stricted the combatants to the club and buckler.
See Patetta, “Le Ordalie”’ ( Torino, 1890), for
full details. Philip Augustus in 1215 directed
that the club should not exceed three feet in
length, but in England this baton was often
rendered a formidable enough weapon through
being furnished with a sharp beak or pick o
iron. The wooden shield was generally
covered with leather. It may be remarked that
the difference of age between the old man and
the Few was altogether exceptional as the punc-
tilio of combat required an equality.

+ “Radislaus.”’ Guazzo’s sources for this
history are: Widukind of Corvey, O.S.B.,
“Res gestae saxonicae siue annalium libri tres,”
IT, which see in the “‘Scriptores rerum ger-
manicarum,”* Hanover, 1882; Vincent of Beau-
vais, ‘‘S) hs xxiv, 70, and Dubravsky,


“Historia Bohemorum,”’ v.


BK, Il. CH. XIX.


battle, Wenceslaus said: ‘“‘ If the mat-
ter cannot be settled except by fight-
ing, why should we two not decide it in
single combat without shedding inno-
cent blood?” And without delay he
put on a cuirass over his hair shirt and
girt himself with a small sword and
came out into the battle field. But
Radislaus armed himself to the teeth


g

made he ge aeeeeers
and suddenly saw Angels who spoke in
human voice, saying : * Do not strike.”
And suddenly lay upon the
ground and asked pardon for his bold-
ness and yielded himself into the hands
of his victor. Wenceslaus raised him up,
forgave him and restored him to his
dignities, bidding him to turn his con-
tumacy to fitting humility, lest he
should thereafter suffer op es
ment from the angry Godhead. Here
God declared the justice of the cause
by a miracle.

When God does not wish a miracle
to take place, it generally happens that
the matter remains in doubt, or that
he who is in the right submits to the
judgement of God. The first was the
case in a duel between two noble
Spaniards in the time of King Alfonso

I,* the father of King Pedro of Cas-
tile. Their names were Ruy Paez de
Biedma and Pay Rodriguez de Ambia.
The former accused the latter of
treason, and the latter retaliated with
an accusation of an even more serious
crime. They met and fought for three
days from sunrise to sunset, and both
were sorely wounded ; yet the affair re-
mained in doubt and neither could
claim the victory. Therefore the Kin
declared them both innocent an
equally virtuous, and bade them be
friends. This is fully related by Pedro
Mexia in his Silva de varia leccion, I1, x.


* “Alfonso XI.” This combat took place in
1942. See the “Crénica de Alfonso el Onceno,”
cap. CCLXI.


*


MALEFICARUM 151


CHAPTER XIX
Of Vulgar Purgation by Fire.


iron:

proved if he escaped unhurt from the

Seal, he ode fre ht in
e Japanese, as we learn

from letters written in the year 1595

by Father Luis Frées, a Jesuit, w

were afterwards printed at Mainz in

ear


times it was only legal in secular causes,
as we learn from the Epistles of Ivo.f
I find that this hot iron was called a
“judgement,” and that this name was
Speen to all the instruments of these
vulgar


gar proofs, as is noted by Pierre
Le Loyer in his De Spectris, II, 7. It
is referred to in various laws of the
Northern peoples introduced by the
Gauls into Italy after the Barbarian
invasions. Radevicust in his De Frid-
erici Imperatoris Gestis, 1, 26, mentions a
military law by which a slave who has
not been caught stealing, but is ac-
cused of it, was commanded to prove
his innocence either by an oath before
God or by the ordeal of red hot iron.
The laws of the Franks and Lombards
provided that a man accused of mur-
der must purge himself by walking
over nine red hot ploughshares.


“Ivo.” S. Ivo of Chartres denied the lia-
bility of ecclesiastics to the Ordeal, but allowed
that it could be properly used on laymen, and
copers t there is no appeal from the
result. “Iuon. Carnot. Epist.”” cexxxit, ccxlix,
cclii.

“*Radevicus.” A Canon of Freisingen.
His “Libri duo... de . . . Friderici Impera-
toris gestis” were published, folio, 1515. An-
other edition is the text given tn Tissier’s ““Bib-
liotheca Patrum Cisterciensium,” vol. VIII,
folio, 1660. The work is also included in
Wursisten’s “‘Germaniae Historicorum illus-
trium Collectio,” folio, 1670.


i Mellin —_—


152 COMPENDIUM


We learn from the Council of Tri-
bur* that in Germany this purgation
was not employed for nobles lor whom
it was enough that twelve of their peers
should swear their innocence), but for
the base-born. Yet history proves that
even nobles often underwent it, using
either red hot blades or red hot gaunt-
lets or some other such thing. In the

ear 1215 or thereabouts Conrad of
intunet the Apostolic Inquisitor,
ordered those who had denied a charge
of heresy to undergo the ordeal by red
hot iron; and if they were burned he
at once committed them to the stake.
If this is true, he acted against the
Canon Law: for Pope Stephen V had
already forbidden that practice.


t
Examples.


A certain Christiant was living in
the land of Omura with the heathen,
and was accused of theft. Now thisisa
crime most severely punished in
Japan, so that if a man be convicted
on the very slightest evidence he is con-
demned to death without hope of
pardon. But they could not truly
convict this Christian ; so the heathen,
baffled in all other attempts, insisted
upon his being forced to swear an oath

r their custom in the following


* “Tribur.” The First Council of Tribur
(now Trebur) was held in May 895, and pre-
sided over by Archbishop Hatto of Mainz. For
the ordinances of this politico-ecclesiastical as-
sembly see Concil. Triburens. ann. 895 apud
Harduin, “‘Concil.” VI. i. 446.

t “Conrad of Marburg.”” The confessor of
S. Elizabeth of Thuringia, and inguist-
tor. He was assassinated 30 July, 1233. Pope
Stephen V reigned 816-17. As recently as 1210
Innocent III prohibited the employment of any
ordeal by the ecclesiastical courts (‘*Regest.”
xiv, 198). Guazzo has taken this instance
rent Trithemius (‘“Chron. Hirsaug.’ ann.
1215).

t “‘A certain Christian.” This is from the
Japanese letters of Fr. Luis Fries, SF., which
were collected and printed at Mainz, 1598.


BK. I. CH. XIx.


yes Tp he must es an needful
oath upon a paper and, with the paper
in his vand, must grip hold of a red
hot iron, calling upon his head the
vengeance and wrath of Kami if he
were guilty; and if his hand were
burned they would say that it was a
pense he was guilty, and if his

d and the paper were unharmed
it would prove him innocent. Being
placed in this dilemma (for either he
must take this oath, or else by refusing
to do so prove himself guilty and en-
danger his life), the istian relied
upon his innocence, but said that it
was not lawful for him as a Christian
to swear by the false Kami, but only
by the true God. The heathen agreed
that he should swear by his own God.
compe haa oe Par a Pear

e paper and, being forced to take
the red hot iron in his ety
it with the greatest confidence.
by a notable miracle neither his hand
nor the paper was burned. He was
therefore freed not only from the
punishment with which the heathen
threatened him, but also from the
accusation which they had falsely
brought against him.

The Emperor Otto III§ had a wife
named Maria, of slippery faith and no
conscience. Like another Phaedra this
woman tried to entice Amula, Count
of Modena, into her embraces, and
when she was repulsed conceived a
furious hatred against the man whose
love she had failed to win; and put
her own crime upon him. The Count
was aware of her treachery, but was
torn between his love for the Emperor
and his own honour. His honour gave


§ “Otto III.” The date assigned to these
incidents is 996. The history is given by several
chroniclers: Gotfridi Uiterbiensis Pars xvii,
“De Tertio Othone Imperatore” ; Siffridi Epit.
Lib. I. ann. 998; Ricobaldi Hist. Impp. sub
Ottone III. Muratori originally (‘‘Antiqui-
tates italicae medii aeui” ; dissert. xxxviii) ac-
cepted the old account, but later (‘Annali
d'Italia” ; anno 996) he argues that it is im-
probable,


BK. Il. CH. XIX.


way to his love, for he preferred the
honour of Caesar to his own life. But
to his wife, a most prudent and (which
is rare) brave woman, he told all about
the attempt of the Empress, his own
answer, her calumnies and his own
danger; and said that he had deter-
mined to die a thousand bitter deaths
rather than bring to light so great a
disgrace to the Emperor arising from
the incontinence and dy of the
Empress. And he begged her, if he
had deserved her love, to witness that
he would undergo the sentence of
death which threatened him in all
constancy as a faithful husband to
her : and when he was dead, he begged
her to vindicate the name and honour
of her husband and free him from
ae Not long afterwards the
unt was sentenced to death by a too
credulous judge. Afterwards a Court
was held at Roncevaux, and on the
day set for the hearing of widows’
causes, the Count’s wife came forward
and in legal form before the Court
brought a claim of talion against the
Emperor, because he had put her
eater to death unjustly. Otto in
astonishment said: “But how will you
prove that your husband was, as you
say, innocent?” “By a red hot iron,”
she answered. At the Emperor’s com-
mand a well heated iron was brought,
and the widow in the sight of all took
it and held it in her hand without
being hurt at all. This miracle so
astounded the Emperor that he avowed
that he was worthy to be punished,
but he pleaded for delay ore he
underwent punishment. “I demand a
threefold bail from three sureties,” she
answered, “But I only ask the punish-
ment of the Queen, whose wicked
calumnies robbed me of my husband,
you of a loyal soldier, and the State of
a useful citizen.” All thought her de-
mands were just, and the Emperor
raised her and offered the security of
our sureties in his camp in Etruria.
But as for the Empress, who had so
evilly burned with the fire of lust, he
ordered her to be thrown by the execu-


MALEFICARUM


153


tioner on to the pyre, there to be con-
sumed in the flames she justly deserved.
In the town of Wittenberg* in
Saxony, a man was accused of public
incendiarism; but he proved hi
on his oath and by ordeal. For he
carried a red hot iron for a long way
in his hand and put it down on the
; but the iron sud-
y vanished from re Exactly a
year later the man who was reall
guilty of the incendiarism was at wor
in the town paving the roads with
stones, and turned up that iron where
it lay hidden, and badly burned his
hand, All were astonished, and recog-
before. the Julge, On behog quae
‘ore the ¥ ues-
tioned he confessed the truth, and his
legs were broken and he was bound
to the wheel as guilty. See Kranz,
Historia Uandalorum, VIII, 30.
Caesarius of Heister (X, 35)
describes another equally marvellous
instance as follows: Abbot Bernard of
a used to say that he knew a fisher
in the;Diocese of Utrecht who had for a
long time fornicated with a woman;
and because his sin was too widely
known and he was afraid of being
accused at a synod which was about to
be held, he went straight to a priest
and confessed his sin rather, as it
appeared later, through fear of punish-
ment than for love of justice; and he
received the following advice. “If,”
said the priest, “‘you are firmly re-
solved never to sin again with her, you
will be able to carry the red hot iron
safely and resist that sin; and I hope
that through the virtue of a con-
fession you will be free.” And this was
done, to the astonishment of all to
whom he had told the matter. He
was not hurt by the fire; but when he
fell back into a wish to repeat his
crime, and boasted that he had no
more been burned by the iron than by
the water of the river which he was
then crossing in a boat, and took up


* “Wittenberg.” This is from the “‘Chroni-
con’’ (Book iv) of Godfrey of Wittenberg.


154


some of the water in his hands, the
cold water acted as if it were red hot
oe burned all theskin off his


In the same chapter he tells of an
abominable hypocrite who hid his
crimes under the cloak of a Paper
This man, being bribed by another
rascal, burned down the house of his
host by whom he had been well enter-
tained: and after he had twice been
received into the house, twice showed
his gratitude by again setting fire to it.

€ master in a panic accused ee
whom he suspected, but they
proved their innocence safely
undergoing the ordeal by red hot iron.
The house was built again for the third
time, and the iron was put in a corner
of it, After some time the false travel-
ler came and was for the third time
hospitably received and, seeing the
iron, asked what it was for. His host
told him, and he replied: “Well, I
should put it to some other use, and
not let it lie there idle.” At the same
time he took it in his hand: but it
immediately grew hot and _badl
burned his hand. He dropped it wi
a yell; and the host in astonishment
formed a just suspicion that this man
was guilty of having twice burned his
house. Therefore he had him seized
and taken before the Judee, who
ordered him to be tortured on the rack.
He then confessed all and was bound
to the wheel. So wonderful are the
judgements of God.

I will add another instance taken
from the abundant store of Caesarius.
Rollo the Norman Duke, who was
afterwards called Robert, knew that
his subjects were given to pourerrs
theft and rapine. Therefore he made
stri t laws against these crimes
which he thought would be a sufficient
deterrent, and told the peasants that
they might confidently leave their
aves implements in the fields.

ne of the farmers, on his return home,
was immediately asked by his wife
why he had not brought his tools with
him, and he exc himself on the


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il, CH. XIX,


ground of the Duke’s advice. But she
secretly stole the tools from the field
and hid them, to teach her husband a
lesson in caution. The man went back
to the field and, not finding what he
had left there, reported it to the magis-
trate of the place, who in his turn
reported it to the Duke. The Duke
summoned the peasant to him and
gave him the price of what he had lost,
and ordered the Prefect to find the
thief by means of the ordeal by fire.
The first attempt failed to indicate the
thief, although all the peasants sub-
mitted to the test. Then the Duke
turned to the Bishop and said: “If the
God of the Christians knows all secrets,
why does He not expose the thief?”
Since he was not yet well confirmed in
the Faith, the Bishop did not reprove
him, but said that it was because the
fire had not yet touched the thief. So
the Prefect was bidden to search more
diligently even among the neighbour-
ing villages; but no one was found.
The Duke then summoned the peasant
and asked him if he had told anyone
that he had left the tools in the field;
and he answered that he had told no
one except his wife. The wife was

uestioned and confessed the theft.

hen the Duke called the ant and
privately asked him: “Did you know
that your wife was the thief, or not?”
He said: “I knew that she was.”
Then said the Duke: “ Why then did

ou not either punish her or ex
her?” Therefore he ordered them both
to be hanged, and by this severity
established the law.

There comes to my mind the action
of a Spanish Catholic who in the time
of Leovigild* challenged an Arian
Goth to the ordeal by fire. For when
he could make no impression upon him
by logic or argument, he said: “I have
on my finger a gold ring which I will
throw into the fire. Do you take it out


* “Leovigild.” The Arian King of the
Visigoths, . He was the father of S.


Hermengild. This incident is from S. Gregory
of Tours, “De Gloria Confessorum,” xiv.


BK. Il. CH. XIX.


red hot.” He then threw the ring
among the coals and let it become as
hot as fire, and turning to the heretic
said: “If your contention is true, take
it ge Am But pene re-
fused, he said: “O Almig rinity,
if I hold any unworth belief, rang
a wears - pity faith is right, let

erce fire have no strength against
me.” And he took the ring from the
fire and kept it for a long time in his
OTK was pap i hy his was no
judici uiry, but a cogent -
ment as to ry Dancin aaa ip

We read in Polydore Vergil’s* His-
tory of England (Bk. 8) that et
Archbishop of Canterbury, persuad
King Edward the Confessor to compel
his mother Emmaf to ream the
ordeal of walking over red hot plough-
shares becauseshe was suspected of hav-
ing committed fornication with Alwyn,
Bishop of Winchester. She was un-
harmed the fire, but fled at once
from England in terror, and shortly
died with a broken heart.

In the Life of S. Johnt the Alms-
giver in the month of June, we read
that when S. Leontius was sick and felt
his death to be at hand, he ordered a
thurible full of burning coals to be
brought, and in the presence of many


* “Polydore Vergil.”” Born at Urbino, c.
1470; died wane pags in 1555. In 1501
peerage yee sent him to Dadeseb

of Peter's pence. He here, and


ty for this story.


tS. John.” S. iy q
Patriarch of Ale. ia (606-16), was born
¢. 550 at Amathus in Cyprus, where he died in


¥ Malmesbury, anno 1043) that Richard of


pany ch dma tp eA eh Th He
was the original Patron Saint of the Hospital-
lers, and was commemorated by the Greeks on
12 November. In the “Roman Martyrology”
his name is given under 23 January.


MALEFICARUM 155


took those coals and poured them upon
his bosom and said in the hearing of
all: “Blessed be God who of old saved
the Bush from burning! Let Him be
re faithful segs am Pada as the

power as not
ached my garments, so have I never
in all my life touched a woman.”

In France St. Brice,§ who succeeded
S. Martin in the See of Tours, invoked
a similar jud, t. For the people
accused him of fornication with a nun,
who used to wash the cert fh linen,
and had given birth to a child by some
rascal. S. Brice ordered the child,
which was not yet a month old, to be
brought among them, and asked it in
the presence of the people whether he
were its father. The child answered
that he was not, but another whom he
did not name. This was the work of
God, but the people ascribed it to the
devil. Then S. Brice filled his biretta
with burning coals and wore it all over
the city without being hurt; and so he
declared himself innocent of the crime
of carnal lust, for not even his clothes
were touched by the fire.

Peter,|| a priest of Marseilles, during


§ “‘S. Brice.” Bishop of Tours from 397 to
444- Among the principal feasts of his diocese,

served with a vigil, Perpetuus, Bishop o
Tours (461-491), sets down: Natalis
Bricii, 13 No


seiged in that city and sorely pressed by famine,
p> oi and : it ws re to this
humble priest by Our Lord and S. Andrew in a
vision the Lance out ee ae
Christ upon the Cross lay hidden in the Ch
ys. Peter. The next day with much toil the
‘acred Relic was exhumed, and cheered by this
Si manifestation of divine favour the
Christians rallied shortly to defeat the Infidels
with great slaughter. Yet such was the un-
happy rivalry of the leaders of the Crusade that
certain of the Frankish princes, jealous of the
possession of the treasure by Count Ra


ofthe Ral blasphemous) declaring that te


156


the First Crusade, at the time of the
= of Antioch (1098), was suspected
of heresy. On Good Friday, therefore,
he went with the Holy Lance of the


Lance was unworthy of veneration. Peter in
order completely to sati essed
as to his veracity
and the identity


Sor the result, Peter clad only in a tunic and
bearing in his hands


passed through the a He emerged
in ect safety, but kily the frenzied
pik ch ie round him to touch if it


: “ A Agiles,
RE He “anih ef Tooleean: He was
ly present at the
Lance and throwing himself into the pit which
had been excavated he kissed the point as soon
as it was seen in the earth. It was he who
officiated at the Ordeal and so delivered the
solemn adjuration as Peter entered the pyre.
Foulcher de Chartres, chaplain to Baldwin I o,
Jerusalem, who also has some account of
Jinding of the Holy Lance, does not write as
aaron as he should, and seems a little jealous
that the treasure was not granted to his patron.
Raoul de Caen who wrote in 1107 and was
primed by the party inimical to Count Raymond
must not be believed.

The Holy Lance ss fell into the

é can be no doubt,


sent in 1492 by Sultan Bajazet to Innocent VIII
iwiteucilisie:the-Pooes foovar eons the
Sultan’s brother, Djem, who was then a pri-
soner in the Vatican.

The Holy Lance, preserved at S. Peter's, is
ee Three Great Relics of the Passion
which are shown after Matins on Wednesday
in Holy Week; several times in the course of
Maundy Thursday and Good Friday; and
again afler Mass on Easter Day. They are ex-
saa: Srom the balcony over the statue of S.

eronica.


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. XIX,


Lord Christ in his hand naked through
a pile of burning wood, and escaped
unhurt from the fire.

Poppo,* a Danish priest, acted as
follows in proof of the Christian faith.
He ponked all his clothes in wax and,
putting them on, entered a fire in the
presence of all the people, and (as he
solemnly declared) stood there with-
out feeling any pain while the whole
of the clothes upon his body were
burned to ashes without the fire having
touched his skin. Moved by this
miracle, the Danes abolished the or-
deal by combat and substituted the
ordeal by fire.
following sory. in the ti me PMare

. in the time o -
cian} two Bishops, one Catholic and
the other Arian, began a dispute about
the controversies and owe of the
faith; and at last the Catholic Bishop
pro as a condition of their dis-
pute that they should lay aside all
vain arguments and go together into
the fire and so sonic ty the evidence
of God which of them had the true
faith. The Arian hesitated, but the
Catholic went straight into the fire


* “Poppo.” This is related by Widukind
of Corvey, III, 6: Sigebert. Gemblac. Anno
966: Dithmari Chron. IT, viii: Saxo Gramma-
ticus Hist. Danic. X. The history is said to be
that Seg Poppo of Slesvick, the date 962,
and the King of the Danes Harold Blaatand.
But the chroniclers of Tréves claim the merit o
this conversion for S. Poppo, who was Are
bishop of Tréves from ro16 to 107. “Gest.
Treuin. A oy > * xvt (Marténe, “Ampliss.
Collect.”” iv. oot Guazzo has taken as his
authority the “Historia Francorum’’ (iv) of
Paulus Emilius.

t “Theodorus.” A Lector attached to the


. He


istoria Se wie ich is
mainly an epitome of the historians Socrates,
Sozomen, and Theodoret. Fragments of the
“Historia” were published by Valesius, who
used the book in his editions of the origi:
historians. These fragments also be found
in Migne, “‘Patres Graeci,”’ LXXXVI.


7,
+


¢ “Marcian.” Marcian was Emperor 450-
457. Anastasius I was crowned in 491.


BK. Il, CH. XIX.


Florence, was accused of simony b
ce, tea


his


masses of flame which rose on high,
treadin B upon the burning coals on
the path between the blazing heaps of
wood: and when he was about to re-
turn by the same way, and there was
no sign of burning upon his body: or
his clothes, he was restrained by the
people and went away unharmed.
And. so the people learned the truth of
the matter. See how wonderful is God
in his saints.


* “Pietro di Pavia.” This account is
slightly confused. Pietro di Pavia, Bishop of
Florence, was mere J simony and heresy.
breroge, rAhet san py by the Council of Rome in
1063, his enemies still continued to denounce
him, and when he rejected the ordeal of fire, the
monks of Vallombrosa (whose house of San
Salvio he had destroyed, butchering many of the
religious) determined to decide the question of the
bishop's guilt by a public trial, and with the
sanction of his abbot S. Giovanni Gualberto, a
holy Pietro Aldobrandini offered to make
the trial. The blazing pyre was lit and before
a vast concourse of many thousands he
slowly through the flames, unscathed, un-
touched by the fierceness of the fire. It is said
that the Bishop now confessed his simony.
Pietro Aldobrandini has canonized, and
his feast is kept by the Vallombrosians as S.
Peter Igneus, a Double of the Second Class, on
8 February.


MALEFICARUM 157


Caesarius+ of Heisterbach tells the
following :—In the Cathedral City of
Cambrai less than five years ago
[about 12 5] several heretics were
taken, all of whom for fear of death
denied their perfidy. The Bishop sent
a Cleric to examine them with the
ordeal of the red hot iron, and if they
were burned they were to be sentenced
as heretics. They were all examined
and aves a As they eae
being to their punishment, €
Cleric kept alive one who was of noble
blood in the hope that he might by
some means bring him to penitence,
and said to him: “You are of noble
birth, and I pity you and feel com-
passion for your soul. I beg and im-
plore you to think better even now of
such great perfidy and return from
your error to the truth, lest through
temporal death you come to death
eternal.” To this he answered: “I
have proved by experience that I was
in error. If a belated repentance may
avail me at all, I shall not refuse to
confess.” And he said to him that true

itence was never too late; there-
ore a priest was called and the man
confessed his error with all his heart,
promising satisfaction to God if his life
were spared. Now as the holy man
taught him the power of confession,
the man soon began to confess his sins
as a penitent; and at the same time
the burn upon his hand began gradu-
ally and visibly to disappear in pro-
rtion as his confession ed,
en the confession was half made,
half the burn was healed; and when
he had completed his confession his
hand was entirely restored to its former
health, all pain and discoloration hav-
ing vanished. The Judge summoned
the man to the fire, but the Cleric
asked: ‘‘Why do you call this man?”
“That he may burn,” said the Judge,
“since he was burned at the examina-
tion.”” Then the Cleric showed them
his hand perfectly whole and freed


*‘Caesarius.”’ “*Dialogus Miraculorum,”
III, xvi and xvii.


158


him from punishment; but the rest
were consumed in the fire.

Master Conrad Abati tells the fol-
lowing example, which is said to have
happened a few years ago at Stras-
burg. Ten heretics were apprehended
in that city, and when they denied the
charge they were convicted by the
red hot iron and were sentenced to be
burned. As they were being taken to
the fire on the ire ay one of
their escort said to one of them:
“Unhappy man, you are damned!
But come, and confess your sins now
with true penitence, so that after the
death of your body, which lasts but a
moment, the fire of Gehenna may not
eternally burn your soul.” He an-
swered him: “I , indeed, that I
have erred ; but I fear that God would
not accept a repentance conceived
under such stress.’ The other said to
him: “Only confess from your heart.
God is merciful and will accept your
repentance.” And lo, a wonder! For
as soon as the man had confessed his
perfidy his hand was fully healed. He
was jingering over his confession, and
the Judge summoned him to come to
his punishment; but his confessor an-
swered the Judge: “‘It is not just that
an innocent man should be unjustly
condemned.” And when no trace of a
burn was found on his hand, he was
discharged. This man had a wife not
far from the city, who had heard
nothing of what we have just told.
When he came to her rejoicing, and

side. “Blessed be God, who has to-
day delivered me from the death of
my body and my soul!” and told her
how it had been, she answered : “What
have you done, most unhappy one,
what have you done? Have you re-
canted your true and holy faith be-
cause of a moment’s pain? It would
have been better for you if your body
could have been burned a hundred
times, than that you should once draw
back from the true faith.” Alas! who
is not Mager by 47 voice of -
serpent? Forgetting the great good-
ness of God to him, forgetting that


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. XIX,


undoubted miracle, he listened to his
wife’s advice and again embraced his
former heresy. But God did not forget
to avenge Himself for so great in-
gratitude, and wounded the hand of
each of them. The burn re-appeared
upon the heretic’s hand, and since his
wife was the cause of his returning to
his error she was made a partaker in
the backslider’s pain. The burn was
so severe that it penetrated to the
bones of their hands : and because they
dared not in the town give vent to the
cries which the pain wrung from the
they fled to a ee wi
where they howled like wolves. What
need I say more? They were taken
and led back to the city and together
cast upon the fire which was not yet


quite extinguished, and were burned
to ashes. t, I ask, is the truth of
the matter? Does the flame follow


h even as a shadow follows the
body?”


In another altogether marvellous
happening God manifested the truth,
using a demoniac as the executioner
of a heretic. Two writers have wit-
nessed to the truth of it: Bernard* of
Luxemburg, O.P., in his Catalogus
haereticorum omnium, under the letter
E; and that more ancient authority,
Thomas of Brabant, whose words in
the Bonum Uniuersale, Bk. II, I shall
here quote: Near Cambrai there was
a very astute heretic who, fearing lest
he should be questioned and burned
by the Friars Preachers, who at that
time were burning many in that city,
pretended that he was possessed by a
demon; and therefore his friends
bound him and took him to Dour
to the shrine of S. Aichard who had
power to cast out devils, since they
thought that his affliction was mad-
ness, and not heresy. When a certain
cleric, who was possessed by a devil
and was bound, heard that Eloi Bou-


* “Bernard.” Dominican theologian and
Inquisitor of the Archdioceses of Cologne,
Mainz and Tréves. He died at Cologne, 5
October, 1535.


BK. Il, CH. XIX.


gris (for that was the man’s name)
was in the place, he was by God’s will
freed from his bonds on the followi:
night, and went and heaped rus
mats, straw, and benches from the
church upon the bound heretic. Eloi
pretended to treat this as a mad joke,
Haren! ceinnde heme Puberty
lamp and began to burn the heretic;
but upon this he cried out and aroused
the gaolers, who ran up and tried to
put the fire out. But the cleric seized
a sword which he happened to find 4
the bed, and fiercely drove them
off, and so burned the heretic in the
fire. Immediately afterwards, rye |
executed the just judgement of God,
the cleric was delivered from his
demon and was entirely healed.

S. Gregory of Tours (De Gloria Mar-
tyrum I, 81) tells how a Catholic
deacon disputed with an Arian priest
and invited him to prove by his deeds
which was the true faith, in the fol-
lowing manner. A fire was lit under a
cauldron and each of them was to
throw his ring into the boiling water ;
and he who should take his ring out
of the boiling water should be held to
have proved his argument. The here-
tic accepted these conditions; but
meanwhile the deacon began to lose
confidence, and smeared some un-

ent upon his hand and arm. The

eretic also began to shrink from the
danger; but when he saw the Catho-
lic’s arm anointed with an unguent,
he protested that his adversary was
relying upon magic arts and protec-
tions, not one his faith ; and a dispute
arose. As they were thus quarrelling,
there came another deacon from the
town of Ravenna named Tacintus,
who, when he knew the cause of their
quarrel, at once put forth his arm from
his robe and page it into the boilin
cauldron. Now the ring which h
been thrown in was very light and
small, and was tossed about by the
ae a martke Baad orcing

ut he t searc an
for it, sad within an hour’s Som fond
it. Meanwhile the fire under the caul-


MALEFICARUM


159


dron was burning fiercely and became
so hot that it was not easy for his hand
to take hold of the ring when he had
found it: but at last the deacon drew
it out, feeling no pain in his flesh but
rather protesting that the cauldron
was cold at the bottom and only
moderately hot at the top. Seeing this
the heretic was quite confounded and
rashly thrust his hand into the caul-
dron saying: “Let this be the proof
of my faith.” And at once all his flesh
was melted and came away from his
hand, right down to the joints of his
— us ise me ispute ended.

. Gengulphus* the tested
the violated honour of his Rao
wife in the following manner : He and
his wife came to a certain spring, and
he addressed her in these words: “O
wife, on all sides I hear shameful
things of you, unworthy of your birth,
but hitherto I am not certain whether
they are true or false.”’ She then un-
blushingly swore that the rumours
about her were false, and that she had
never defiled herself in another’s bed;
but S. Gengulphus said: “Divine pro-
vidence, from which nothing escapes,
will clearly show how the matter
stands. See, here is a spring, neither
very cold nor immoderately hot, Put
your hand in, then, and pick up a
stone from the bottom ; and if you are
free from guilt you will suffer no harm,
but if you are corrupt God will not
allow your crime to be hidden.” She
ascribed these words of the Saint, as
she did all his utterances, to madness
and rg plunged her hand
into the spring. But as soon as she
tried to take hold of the stone, she
became stiff in nearly all her limbs,
and wherever the water touched her
fingers and arm the skin was stripped


* “8. Gengulphus.’’ Originally a warrior
and a favourite of King Pepin. He retired from
the world and led a life of strictest piety. He is
especially venerated in the diocese of Langres.
See Pet. Cantor. Uerb. Abbreu. Not. in cap.
= (Migne, “Patres Latini,” CCV, p.
471).


160 COMPENDIUM


off leaving the bare flesh exposed, and
the wretched woman expected nothi

but instant death. He put his wife
away from him when she was thus
convicted of adultery; and not long
afterwards, at the instance of his wife,
he was murdered by her adulterer.


t


CHAPTER XX
Of Superstitious Folk.*
Argument.


BE it known to them who lightly
use and practise superstitious rites,
that the inventor of all superstitious
and vain observances is the devil, who
at the beginning of the world led
nearly the whole human race astray
into idolatry. They, therefore, who
study and follow superstitious observ-
ances show themselves to be disciples
not of Christ but of the devil, and they
manifest themselves to be lovers of his
service and learned in his wiles, and
they are alienated from the teaching
of the Catholic Church. But it is a
marvel that, anyone should put faith
in such illusions, if he knows of the
wretched death of all icians and
conjurers. Zoroaster, the inventor of


magic, was at last burned to ashes by |


the very demon to which he addressed
his too importunate ca gery oe as
S. Clement has testified. The fate of
Simon Magus is notorious, how he
was carried up in the air by demons,
and fell and broke his legs, and died
in ish and ignominy. When
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippat was at


aaron ps “song ate The present
‘ope, Pius now happily reigning re-
onus (sa ae sonar: Romano,” 11

‘anuary, I 7 io condemn super-
J saions, particalants the prejudice against the
number thirteen and the idea that Friday is an
unlucky day.

+ “Agrippa.” But see Weyer, ‘De Praes-
tigits Daemonum,” II, c. v, 11 and 12. Weyer
lived for some years in daily attendance upon


BK. Il. CH. XIX,


the point of death he drove from him
his dog, a familiar, saying: “Depar
evil beast! You have destroyed me.’
The citizens knew how Joannes Por-
tantius met his death in prison at
Antwerp. William,t Archbishop of
Tyre, in his Historia Hierosolymitana
(VIII, 15) tells how two sorcerers
tried to bewitch the war machines of
the Christians, and were themselves
the first to be killed by them.

That conjurer of high estate Zyto
lived a consort and companion of
devils to the end, when he was taken
body and soul from the midst of men.
Johann Faust, the famous German sor-
cerer of our time, was at last dragged
from his bed by the cacodemon at
night, and was strangled with his face
twisted round to his back, and the
whole house was shaken and nearly
fell, as we are told by Camerarius and
others. Francesco Pico tells how he
heard from his friends who were
actually present that a certain sor-
cerer had been carried away alive by
a demon and was never to be found
anywhere again. And Scoto of Parma
in our own day had his neck twisted
in an ale-house by a demon in Ger-
many, and perished miserably.


*


Examples.
Johann Pistorius§ the younger in
his Artis cabbalisticae tomus unus writes


Agrippa, and the black dog; ““Monsieur,” re-
specting which such strange stories were
ap mare ee innocent animal which
had himself often led about on its leash.
Agrippa was much attached to his dog, which
to eat off the table with him and of nights

lie in his bed.

t “William.” Born in Palestine of a Euro-
pean family about 1127-30; died in 1190 or a
little later. Baldwin IV, who became ing of
Jerusalem in m4 eee. William
cellor and then Archbishop of Tyre. His chief
work is the “‘Historia Hier i


osolymitana” in 23


§ “Johann Pistorius.” 1546-1608. The
son of a well-known Protestant minister, he was


BK. ll. CH. XX,


that there was a swineherd who had
in his pastoral staff a writing inscribed
with the name of S. Blaise; and he
thought that the virtue of this staff
kept his swine safe from attack by
wolves, and placed such confidence in
it that he would leave his swine to
feed alone in the fields. At last it
chanced that, while the swineherd was
absent, someone passed that way and
saw a demon keeping the herd, and
asked what he, the sworn tor
= human nl A i

e answered: “I am
swine.” The other asked" At Shows
bidding?” And the demon said: “‘Be-
cause of the foolish confidence of the
swineherd, For he has put in his staff
a writing to which he imputes divine
virtue because it has upon it the name
of S. Blaise; and the fool fast bound
in false superstition believes that it
supernaturally guards his swine from
wolves. And when I had called and
called him again, and he did not come,
I undertook to keep the swine instead
of S. Blaise; for I am always ready to
take the place of God and His Saints.
And so I most gladly ig 2 his swine
for him in the place of S. Blaise, that
I may encourage and strengthen the
silly man in his vain confidence, and
lead him to think more of that writing
than of God.”

Lucian, in the Philopseudes, relates
that when a certain Eucrates saw an
Egyptian magician named Pancrates
do many marvels, he ually in-
sinuated himself into his friendship
until he learned nearly all his secrets.
At last the magician persuaded him
to leave all his servants in Memphis
and accompany him alone, for they
would have no lack of servants; and
from that time (he said) thus we lived.


converted in 1588. He filled many offices of high
responsibility both before and after his ordina-
tion in 1591. He wrote several controversial
treatises of great value, such as the “* Anatomia
Lutheri,” Cologne, 1595-8. His “Artis caba-
listicae tomus unus” was published at Basle in
1587.


MALEFICARUM


161


“When we came into an Inn, he
taking the bolt of the door, or a broom
or bar, and clothing it, spoke a charm
to it, and to enable it to go, and in all

ings to resemble a man, The thing
going forth, would draw water, pro-
vide, and dress our supper, and dili-
Bently wait and attend upon us. After

is business was done, he pronounced

another charm, and turned the broom
into a broom again, and the pestle
into a pestle. This was an art which,
though I laboured much, I could not
learn of him. For this was a m
which he denied me, though in
things else he were open. One day,
oe myself in a dark corner, I over-
h his charm, which was but three
syllables. He having appointed the
bolt its business, went into the market.
The next day, he ipo Bate other
employment in the market, I taking
the pestle and apparelling it, in like
manner pronounced the syllable, and
bid it fetch me some water. When it
had brought me a basin full, ‘It is
enough,’ I said, ‘fetch no more, but
be a pestle again.’ But it was so far
from obeying me, that it ceased not
to fetch water till it had overflown the
room. I, much troubled at the acci-
dent, and fearing lest if Pancrates
should return (as * did) he would be
much displeased, took an axe and cut
the pestle in two. Then both parts
taking several buckets fetched water.
And instead of one, I had two servants.
In the meantime Pancrates came in,
and perceiving what had happened,
transformed them into wood again, as
they were before I uttered the spell.
Shortly after he secretly left me, and
vanishing went I know not whither.”
Here it may be seen how his curiosity
was nearly the cause of his being
drowned. (From Sir T. More’s trans-
lation.)

Hear another example of how some
men were in instant danger of cutting
off their own noses, Philippus Came-
rarius writes as follows: Johann Faust
was once with some noted persons who
had heard much concerning his magic,


162 COMPENDIUM


and they asked him to show them a
specimen of his art. For a long time
he refused, but at last yielded to the
not too sober company and promised
that he would show them whatever
they wished. With one accord they
desired him to show them a vine laden
with ripe grapes: for they thought
that, on account of the unseasonable
time of year (for it was winter), this
would be impossible for him to do.
Faust agreed, and said that what they
had asked for would presently be seen
upon the table: but he made this con-


dition, that they should all

ty ile le sae bg Ad ta
to e grapes; for

othehiiee they ala be in instant
danger of their lives. When they had


MALEFICARUM BK. ll, CH, XX,


given this promise, he soon so deceived
the eyes of that drunken company and
obscured their senses that they thought
they saw upon a fair vine as many
large and juicy grapes as there were
persons present. Greedy for such a
novelty, and thirsty after their drink-
ing, they took their knives and awaited
his bidding to cut the grapes. At last,
after he had kept the fools for some
time in suspense in their vain error,
the vine and its gra suddenly
vanished in smoke; and each one of
them was seen holding, instead of a
grape, his own nose with his knife
ised over it. So if any of them had
tten the condition and tried to
cut his grapes, he would have sliced
off his own nose.


7
‘


THE THIRD BOOK, TREAT-
ING OF THE DIVINE REME-
DIES FOR THOSE WHO ARE
BEWITCHED; AND OF CER-
TAIN OTHER MATTERS.


*


CHAPTER I


Whether it is ee to Remove a Spell in
Order to Heal One that is Bewi
Argument.
ITCHCRAFT is a form
of magic whereby with
the help of a demon one
man does an injury to
Now the instruments of
witchcraft are 1 age bands, bars,
feathers, little balls, and such things,
which the witch uses in order to be-
witch a person: and the witch is
wk promised that, so long as
those bands are knotted in that man-
ner, or so long as a certain matter is
buried under threshold, or certain
bolts are barred, for so long will the
on affected remain bewitched; or
it may cause death to whomsoever is
in that place, or enters or leaves it;
and so on. Therefore it is asked
whether it is lawful, by unbarring the
bolt, by burning the ball of hairs, by
untying the knotted band, or by dig-
ging up the pot and burning or de-
stroying its contents, to break the
pak eS) deliver the person who is
bewitched. To answer this question
in a few words, I will quote the words
of Henry of Ghent.* He says: “It is a


* “Henry of Ghent.” Doctor Solemnis;
died at Paris or Tournai, 1293. He lived in
the golden age of Scholasticism, and as philoso-
pher and theologian ranks only just below his
great contemporaries S. Thomas, S. Bonaven-
tura, and the Venerable Fohn Duns Scotus. It
has been well said that the writings of Henry


Catholic duty to destroy the super-
stitious work of the devil and thereby
to thwart him.” (Quodlibeta. E.q. 33).
And therefore I say that it is clearly
lawful to break a spell of witchcraft,
just as it is lawful to throw down an
idol into the gutter. Duns Scotus* also
— ise. Sent. d. 34): “If the power
the demon be hindered by the
ee ipneee y ania, Si lainbaa but if
does not hear their prayers, but
the charm is discovered and destroyed
so that the demon troubles him no
more, since by his pact he can only
work for as long as the charm endures,
then it is not only lawful to remove
the spell, but it is even meritorious
to destroy the works of the devil.
Neither does this savour of infidelity ;
for he who destroys such evil wo
does not signify his belief in them, but
by destroying them puts an end to the
affliction.”
*


Examples.


In the year 1589 a devout young
man of Genoa cast wanton eyes upon
a woman and conceived such a burn-
ing love for her that he forgot his love
for God. These two, then, exchanged
furtive messages and gifts for the space
of three months, after which he was
perforce obliged to take to his bed by
a grave malady; and it was marvel-
lous what variety of filthy objects he
vomited before the eyes of the spec-
tators: women’s hairs, sheep’s wool,
linen, silk, hair-pins, needles, nail-


with great applause by modern inquirers con-
i ic melon en Coney
ice and medi


speculation. Of the By sap jones Quodlibet~
ales” or ““Quodlibeta,”’ the work to which re-
Serence is here made, there are editions Paris,
1518; Venice, 1608 and 1613.
* “Duns Scotus.” The reference is to D. 34
of the so-called “Opus Oxoniense,” the vast
‘ommentary of Scotus on the “‘Sentences” of
Peter Lombard, which was composed at Ox-


ed ford.


163


164


parings, fragments of bone, and no
small quantity of iron nails, together
with blood. A friend admonished him
not to let himself be bound any longer
by his lect ge love, and asked
whether he had any letters or gifts
from the woman. He said that he had
received letters, but had torn them
up. The other did not believe him and
told his servants to search his chest
and remove any love tokens that they
might find. When the sick man had
been made aware of this by some
secret voice, he cried out horribly and
demanded the key of his chest; and
when he had it, at the instigation of
the same voice, he threw it into his
mouth and would have swallowed it if
he had not been prevented. Then he
hid it beneath his pillow, and anon
lost the sight of his eyes. His mother
urged him to restore the key; but
when he looked for it he could not
find it and thought that it had been
stolen. He then cried the louder, yet
it could not be found though the whole
bed was carefully shaken. At last the
chest was forced open and two love
letters were found and burned; after
which his sight was restored to him
and, to his great surprise, the key lay
exposed to his eyes. Meanwhile he
began to grow better in body and soul,
and soon after was entirely healed.
Here it was evident to all that the
letters were the spell of witchcraft and
that the demon had tried to prevent
them from being removed; and that
when they were taken away and
burned the demon had ceased to
afflict him.

A certain high-born Count in the
ward of Westerich,* in the diocese of
Strasburg, married a noble girl of
equal birth; but after he had cele-
brated the wedding, he was for three
years unable to know her carnally, on
account, as the event proved, of a


* “Westerich.”’ This is from the “‘Malleus
Maleficarum,” Part II, Qu. 1, ch. 1. See the
“*Malleus Maleficarum’” translated by Mon-


tague Summers (John Rodker, 1928), p. 98.


COMPENDIUM


BK, Il. CH. I.


certain charm which prevented him.
In great anxiety, and not knowing
what to do, he called loudly on the
Saints of God, It happened that he
went to the State of Metz to negotiate
some business ; and while he was walk-
ing about the streets and squares of
the city, attended by his servants and
domestics, he met a certain woman
who had formerly been his mistress.
Seeing her, and not at all thinking of
the spell that was on him, he spon-
taneously addressed her kindly for the
sake of their old friendship, aukin g her
how she did, and whether she was
well. And she, seeing the Count’s
gentleness, in her turn asked very par-
ticularly after his health and affairs;
ae A ne answered that he nes

t i Ae rospere
with him, she was astoni aan was
silent for a time. The Count, secing
her thus astonished, again spoke kindl
to her, inviting her to converse wi
him. So she inquired after his wife,
and received a similar reply, that she
was in all respects well. Then she
asked if he had any children; and the
Count said he had three sons, one born
in each year. At that she was more
astonished, and was again silent for a
while. And the Count asked her,
Why, my dear, do you make such
careful inquiries? I am sure that you
congratulate me on my roe, pre
Then she answered, Certainly I con-
gratulate you; but curse that old
woman who said she would bewitch
your body so that you could not have
connexion with your wife! And in
proof of this, there is a pot in the well
in the middle of your yard containi:
certain objects evilly bewitched, an
this was placed there in order that, as
long as its contents were preserved
intact, for so long you would be unable
to cohabit. But see! it is all in vain,
and I am truly glad. On his return
home the Count did not delay to have
the well drained ; and, finding the pot,
burned its contents and all, where-
upon he immediately recovered the
virility which he had lost.


BK. II, CH. I.


Martin Delrio* of the Society of
Jesus relates the following, taken from
the public lectures which have now
for many years been delivered at
Louvain by Father Robert Bellarmine
in refutation of the teaching of Jean
Hessels: I remember as a boy seeing
at Montepulciano during Lent a cer-
tain preacher try to ad his con-
gregation : but he was unable to speak,
and this eo, a second and a
third time. Understanding that it was
not natural that he should lose his


have healed the preacher when he
called upon Him, nor have revealed
the charms to him.

The same author tells of a certain
priest who was most evilly bewitched
and kept his bed for many months,
for none of all the remedies which the
geen gave did him any good.

ut one month several witches’ charms
were found in the bed and were
burned: after another month, yet
more of different sorts were found and
likewise burned. After this with the
help of God and of the Church’s
remedies he ined his former
health. This happened only a few
years ago.

Codronchi (De morbis uenefic. I, 8)
tells the following of his own daugh-
ter: When my daughter Francesca
was ten months old and still at nurse,
she became very greatly emaciated,
and kept heaving great sighs; and she
always cried when she was undressed
and hated to be undressed, contrary
to the nature of children, who how-
ever ill Mews may be or in pain always
are soothed when they are rid of their


* “Delrio.” “Disquisitiones Magicae,”
Lib. vi, cap. 2, sec. 1, quaest. 3.


MALEFICARUM


165


clothes, and then begin to Pa When
no preternatural cause of this could
be found, her nurse was changed. But
she grew worse, and her mother began
to suspect that, because she was a very
beautiful child, some old witch had
been envious and had bewitched her.
So she searched the cradle and found
not a few witches’ charms, such as
chic , coriander seeds, bits of coal
and bone, wh —_ asa a
strange matter w is compoun
by evil women from horrid i red nts
mingled with menstrual blood. A
learned exorcist was called. There
were also discovered some feathers
such as are usually sewn on to a hat.
All these were burned in a blessed fire,
and the exorcisms were conducted for
three days, other holy remedies =
also employed; after which the chil
began to be better and to take food,
so that we thought she was healed,
But some days later, since she was very
peevish and cried much, the cradle
was again searched and other charms
were found; and when these were
burned she appeared to be restored to
health. But at full moon, after she had
been awake crying all through the
night, she was found in the mornin
to be the colour of ashes and so altere
in appearance from what she had been
on the evening before, that it was a
matter for tears rather than wonder.
The cradle was again searched and
there were found two pieces of dry nut
and white bone, nine or ten fish-bones
formed into a hair comb, and cer-
tain little wreaths wonderfully and
variously fashioned. All these were
burned, we changed our house, and
applied, through the learned exorcist,
several other more potent remedies;
and by the mercy of God the child
recovered without any natural remedy.
A certain Nobleman was riding his
horse in the outskirts of a city and,
passing an ale-house, saw there some
of his debtors. He determined to
remind them of their debt, and
threatened to prosecute them if they
did not pay. Some of them found


166 COMPENDIUM BK. I, CH. I.


excuses for their delay; others, who
thought he was of a generous disposi-
tion, asked to be allowed time to find
the money. Among all these there
stood out an old woman with a baleful
look, who bent her eyes upon the
d as if in admiration of his paw-
ing steed, and asked him whither he
was going, at the same time warning
him not to trust too much to his horse.
He smiled, and said: “What! Do you
think I do not know the strength of
this brave horse which it seems im-
ossible to tire, seeing that I have
ee used to ride him for ten miles
and more without tiring him?” Yet
she answered that she was afraid it
would not carry him. The man looked
upon this as an old woman’s tale, and
dug his spurs into his horse; but for
the first time in its life it moved very
sluggishly, tottering and staggering
upon its legs. Wondering at his horse’s
sudden weakness, he went home lead-
ing the horse by hand step by step,
and at once summoned a veterinarian
who, seeing the horse reeking with
sweat, asked whether it had been over-
worked, or had been suddenly made
to gallop after a day’s rest, or had
drunk too soon after galloping; and
made other enquiries about such
things as are often the cause of illness
in horses. But when he could find no
obvious cause of that sort of sickness
he asked that the horse be left in his
care, and promised that he would not
fail in his duty and would leave no
stone unturned to discover the reason
of the sickness and find a cure for it.
The horse was entrusted to the veteri-
narian, who led him into the stable,
where the horse began to suffer acute
ain and, after scraping with its
ooves, fell flat to the ground pantin
violently. The veterinarian puzzle
his brain to think of the various causes
of sickness in horses, and it came into
his mind that there was always great
danger in such illnesses when there
was any inflammation of the bowels
or when the animal could not pass
water as often as it should. Therefore


he determined to examine whether
there were any obstructions in its
bowels or bladder, and he thrust his
hand into its anus to see whether any-
thing was there to cause such an ill-
ness. For when horses are badly con-
stipated it causes them to roll about
in agony and to be bathed in sweat.
But when he could find no such mat-
ter, he began to draw out its genital
member with his hand, and found it
to be tightly and intricately knotted.
First he tried to undo the knots with
his finger-nails; but he could not, be-
cause the ends of those knots were
hidden in the confusion of their coils,
and they could only be prised loose
with an iron tool. For, as all think,
this knot was woven by witchcraft
from the roots of hemp, and was thus
more formidable than the Gordian
knot which was made of reeds which
were pliable in every direction,
whereas this was made from the root
itself and was inflexible. But when the
knot was untied, the horse at once
jumped up, made water together with
a deal of coagulated blood, and did
indeed recover; but it was never re-
stored to its full former vigour.
Grilland (De sortil. q. 8, num. 16}
relates that a lawyer in the diocese of
Sabina married a wife but was made
impotent by witchcraft, and could not
be helped at all by the physician’s
skill. So he consulted a witch who told
him to sleep with his wife that night,
but to take a certain potion before he
went to bed ; only he was to take great
care that neither he nor his wife made
the sign of the Cross that night, and
they were not to be afraid if they heard
or saw anything strange. The lawyer
obeyed and observed all his instruc-
tions to the letter: and about the fifth
hour of the night, behold there was a
eat rain and tempest, with a mighty
thunder and lightning, followed by
such a quaking of the earth that the
house was shaken from top to bottom
like a tree which is almost uprooted
by the wind. After this there came
much shouting and yelling of men;


BK. III. CH. Il.


and when the husband turned his eyes
in that direction it seemed to him that
he saw in the room more than a
thousand combatants struggling and
fighting fiercely with their nails and
fists and feet, tearing each other's faces
and clothes; and ceerae. heey he saw
a woman from a neighbouring town
who was said to be a witch: and the
husband had formed a strong sus-
picion that he had been bewitched by
this very woman. This woman was
howling and shrieking louder than all
the rest, tearing her hair and her face
with her nails; so that the ensorcelled
lawyer said that at first he was afraid
that it boded some harm to himself.
But then ett ae rates the percents ¢
warni co again,
the cian keepi his wife under the
blankets so that she should see nothing.
After they had struggled for an hour
or more, the sorcerer came into the
room at about midnight and at his
entrance all those fighting folk, to-
gether with the woman, disappeared
and vanished at once. But the sor-
cerer came up to the lawyer and
touched his shoulders and rubbed
them a little with his hand, telling
him to doubt no longer, for he was
now cured. After his departure, the
husband was healed and able to beget
children. In this case the sorcerer
compelled the woman who had cast
the spell to remove it, by sending
demons in the guise of rioters to tor-
ment her. But it is not lawful to re-
move a spell by this means, because
of the mortal sin which is committed ;
and beside the sin, there is great dan-
ger when demons are invoked, as will

seen from the following example.

A certain man ord a witch to
summon demons to bring his mistress
to him in an underground cavern. A
demon came in the likeness of his
beautiful mistress and, standing in his
sight, strangled the lover by pressing
him strongly against the side of the
cave, and then threw his body so
violently at the witch that he nearly
killed him.


MALEFICARUM 167


CHAPTER II


How to Distinguish Demoniacs,* and
Those who are Simply Bewitched.


, { ‘HE peculiar toms of posses-
sion by pet ninongh witch-
craft are difficult to recognise when the
demon which has been sent into a
person by witchcraft mingles himself
with some unclean substance intro-
duced into the body from another
source, or arising from the humours of
the sick person hi . For as long
as such rset psa Reece in
an ¢ body, it o
sae eave are no signs of its banat
beyond some interference with the
natural functions of that particular
art. rear such 3ons vn
ave de imaginations, i
in their sleep, and so betray the pres-
ence of a demon: but this indication
by itself is not enough, since it is com-
mon also tosufferers from melancholia.
But when the evil spirit moves from
one place to another in the body, the
matter becomes easier to recognise ; as
follows :

1. If something moves about the
body like a live thing, so that the
possessed feel as it were ants crawling
under their skin.

2. If the part of the body for which
the demon is making is stirred by a sort
of palpitation.

3. Ifthe patient is tortured with cer-
tain prickings.

4. Ifit is as though wind descended
from his head to hisfeet, and then again
went from his feet to his head.

5. If blisters are raised upon the
tongue and immediately disappear ; or
if they are like many ot it is
a sign that he is inhabited by many
demons.

6. If the demon rises as far as the
throat and causes it to swell, and brings
on a dry cough.


* “Demoniacs.” The rubrics of the “De
Exorcizandis Obsessis a Daemonio” in the
“Rituale Romanum’ should be consulted.


eS


.
.
[la a i


168


7. If the demon takes hold of his
erg. and twists it and makes it swell;
or if he causes it to give utterance not
to the man’s thoughts but to those of
the demon; or if the mouth is stretched
wide open and the tongue thrust


out.
8. If he feels as if cold water were
eeeny being poured down his
c


g. An even more certain sign is
when the sick man speaks in foreign
tongues unknown to him, or under-
stands othersspeaking in those tongues;
or when, being but ignorant, yer ar
ents argue about high and difficult
quemtionss or when they discover hid-

en and long-forgotten matters, or
future events, or the secrets of the inner
jc a mains sack as the sins — ie
aginings ers; or cy
provoke them to quarrel without cause
or become so furious that they cannot
be bound or restrained by many strong
men, :

10. Some say that they hear a voice

ing inside them, but that they
know nothing of the meaning of the
words.

11. Others, when they are asked
what they have done or said, confess
that they remember nothing after-
wards.

12. Some think that it is an in-
fallible and inseparable sign when
those who are possessed are unable to
attend Divine worship, so that th
can by no means be sprinkled with
Holy Water, nor hear nor utter sacred
words; but if they are compelled by
force to observe the ceremonies of the
Church or the Divine Offices, and
chiefly if they are forced to be present
at the most Holy Sacrifice of the
Altar, then they are tormented far
more violently. And in support of this
opinion is the fact that they themselves
testify that they wish to assist and be
present at all these Masses and Offices,
and to have the help of holy things,
but that there is something within
them which strongly prevents them.

13. Some demoniacs have terrible


COMPENDIUM


BK. Ill. CH. Il,


eyes; and the demons miserably de-
stroy their limbs and kill their bodies
unless help is quickly brought to them.

14. Some pretend to be stupid, and
always grow even more so; but they
can be detected if they refuse to recite
the Psalm Miserere mei Deus, or Qui
gioning of the Gospel of &. John, i

ng of the of S. John, Jn
inci; eared Uerbum, or similar passages
of Scripture.

15. It is a sign of obsession if a man
speak in a tongue foreign to his own
country, provided that he is not living
out of his own country.

_ 16. It is a ayenated sign when =
ignorant man terary an
a arte prabe.: or if sora

Ww. (7 ¢ art he sings musically
or says something of which he could
never have had any knowledge.

17. Abstinence from food and drink
for seven or more days is a powerful
sign.
18. When some inner power seems
| thei the pc to hurl res 3

m a precipice, or hang or s ¢
emeelt ot the like.

19. Sometimes they become as if
they were stupid, blind, lame, deaf,
dumb, lunatic, and almost incapable
of movement, whereas before they were
active, could speak, hear and see, and
in other respects acted sensibly.

20. It is also a sign when they are
subject to sudden frights, which are as
suddenly allayed.

21. A man may very surely be
known for a demoniac if he is dis-
turbed when the exorcisms are read.

22. When the priest’s hand is placed
upon his head, it feels very heavy and
ponderous.

23. When the patient feels under the
priest’s hand something as cold as ice.

24. When a very cold wind descends
through his shoulders and reins.

25. When his head swells to an enor-
mous size.

26. When his brain feels as if it were
tightly bound, or pierced and stricken
as if by a sword.

27. When the head and face, and


BK. Il. CH. Il.


sometimes the whole body, swells as if
it were filled with hot vapour.

28. Some are afflicted with violent
fever and headache, and their whole
body is weakened and in pain; but all


these symptoms last a very little while,
since a conjuration takes away the
power of the demon.


29. In some the throat is so con-
stricted that they seem as if they are
being strangled.

go. From the abdominal orifice of
some there issue certain matters like
balls, as ih Seg essere ee


gs.

gt. Some have a great vamiti

from their stomachs, ” <4
32. Many feel acute pain in their
ts.


guts.

33. The stomach of some becomes
pry eee

34. Some feel a contraction of the
heart, as if it had been unmercifully
beaten.

35. Sometimes the demon shows

i in some part of the body palpi-
tating like a fish, or like moving ants.

36. Sometimes the bewitched per-
son has a face the colour of cedar wood.

37. Some have very narrow eyes,
and appear bound in all their limbs,
and their shoulder blades grate dryly.

38. Two very sure signs are the con-
traction of the heart and of the arms,
and when it seems to them that they
have a lump upon their stomach.

39. Some have their hearts punc-
tured as if by needles.

o. Some feel as if their heart was
being eaten away.

41. Some have great pain in their
heart and kidneys, and it seems as if
those organs were being torn by dogs.

2. Some feel a lump rising and
falling in their throat.

43. In some the genital vein is ob-
structed.

Some are so indisposed in their
stomachs that they vomit whatever
ss and drink; but this is a very
slight signunless accompanied by other
symptoms.

45. Some have a very cold wind, or


MALEFICARUM


169


one as hot as fire running through their
ee gh SE Da
. In some the sign is indigestion
of their food ; aalite when they are
given drugs without being relieved.
47. Some have a continuous pulsa-
tion about their necks, which seems to
inspire them with terror.


*
The Signs which Show a Man to be Simpl:
ai Bewitched. -


All the above have been far more
exactly classified and proved by Cod-


ronchi (De morbis is, III, 13) who
states that some those si are
common to all cases of bewitc t,


and others peculiar to particular cases.
He says that the signs common to all
cases are to be fi cither in the cause
of the malady or in its concomitant
circumstances. Such signs may
recognised in the cause, when the sick-
ness originates from some inordinate
and irrational love or some insensate
hatred for another, or from the curses
or threats of some witch, or if magic
charms are found such as we have often
spoken of and are mentioned by
Andrea Cesalpini (De inuestigat. dae-
monum. c. 22). Among the signs which
accompany the sickness are paroxysms,
and the efficacy or harmfulness of
medicines. The commonest signs are
the tay

1. In the first place, when the pati-
ent’s sickness is very difficult to diag-
nose, so that the physicians hesitate and
are in doubt and keep changing their
minds, and are afraid to make any
definite pronouncement about it.

2. If, although remedies have been
applied from the very first, the sickness
does not abate but rather increases and
grows worse.

3. If it does not, like natural sick-
nesses, come on by degrees; but the
sick man oftensuffers theseverest symp-
toms and pains from the very begin-
ning, although there is no apparent
pathological cause for it.

4. That the sickness is very erratic:


—


170 COMPENDIUM


and although it may be periodic, it
does not keep its regular periods; and
although it may resemble a natural
sickness, yet it differs in many respects.

5. Although the sick man is often in
the greatest pain, he cannot say in
which part he feels the pain.

6. At times the sick give the most
mournful sighs without any manifest
cause.

7- Some lose their appetite, and
some vomit up their food and are so
sick in the stomach that often they are
doubled up with pain, and a sort of
lump may be seen rising and falling
from the stomach to the at; and if
they try to eject this when it is risen all
their efforts are in vain, although it
may very soon shoot out of its own
accord.

8. They feel painful pricks in the
region of the heart, so that often they
say that it is being torn in two.
ae es the pulse may Ae seen

ting and, as it were, trembling in
their necks. 43
to, Others have excruciating pains
in their neck or kidneys or the bottom
of their bellies, and often an ice-cold
wind goes about their stomach and
quickly comes again, or they feel a
vapour like a hot flame of fire torment-
ing them in the same manner.

11, Some become sexually impo-
tent.

12. Some fall into a light sweat
especially at night, although the
weather and the season are very cold.

13. Others seem to have certain
parts of their bodies twisted as it were
in a knot.

14. The sicknesses with which those
who are bewitched suffer are enerally
: Anite temaer raate of the Merwe

y and a loss of strength, together
with a deep | or, dullness of mind,
various melancholy ravings, different
kinds of fever, all of which keep the
aes very busy; certain con-

sive movements of an epileptic
appearance; a sort of rigidity of the
limbs giving the appearance of a fit:
sometimes the head swells in all direc-
tions, or such a weakness pervades the


——— ae


BK. Ill. CH. It,


whole body that oe can hardly move
on any account at all.

15. Sometimes the whole skin, but
generally only the face, becomes
yellow or ashen coloured.

16. Some have their eyelids so tight
shut that they can scarcely open them,
and there are certain tests by which
such may be re ised.

17. Those who are bewitched can
hardly bear to look at the face of a

riest, at least not directly; for they
eep shifting the whites of the eyes in
ifferent ways.

18. When the charms are burned,
the sick are wont to change for the
worse, or to take some greater or less
harm according as their bewitchment
was slight or severe; so that not in-

uently they are to utter
terrible cries and roars. But if no
change or fresh lesion can be found,
there will be great hope that the sick
man will with a little attention be pre-
sently restored to good health.

19. If by chance the witch should
come to see the sick man, the patient
is at once affected with great uneasi-
ness and seized with terror and tremb-
ling. If it is a child, it cries. The eyes


become grey in colour, and other re-
markable are to be noted in
the sick man.


20. Finally when the priest, to heal
the sickness, applies certain holy lini-
ments to the eyes, ears, brow, and
other parts, if a sweat or some other
change is seen in those parts it is a sign
that he is bewitched.

The following is the usual practice
to determine whether the sick man is
possessed by a demon. They secretl
apply to the sick man a writing wi
the sacred words of God, or Relics of
the Saints, or a blessed Agnus Dei, or
some other holy thing. The priest

laces his hand and his stole upon the
fread of the sed and pronounces
sacred words. Thereupon the sick
man begins to shake and tremble, and
in his pain makes many uncouth move-
ments, and says and does many str
things. If the demon is in his head, he
feels the keenest pains in his head, or


BK, ll. CH. Itt,


else his head and all his face are suf-
fused with a hot red glow like fire. If
he is in his eyes, he twists them about.
If in the back, he bruises his limbs be-
fore and behind, and sometimes makes
the whole body so rigid and inflexible
that no exertion of force can bend it.

Sometimes they fall down as if dead,
as though they were suffering from
tertiary epilepsy, and a sort of vapour
rushes up into their heads: but at the
priest’s bidding they arise, and the
vapour returns whence it came. If the
demon is in their throats, they are so
throttled as to be nearly strangled. If
he is in the nobler parts of the body,
as about the heart or lungs, he causes
panting, palpitation and syncope. Ifhe
is more towards the stomach, he pro-
vokes hiccoughs and vomiting so that
sometimes they cannot take food, or if
they do they cannot retain it. And he
causes them to void a sort of ball by
the back passage, with roarings and
other harsh cries; and afflicts them
with the wind and pain about the mid-
riff. They are known also sometimes
by certain fumes of sulphur or some
other strong smelling matter.


*


CHAPTER III
of the Mercy of God and
ryranny of the Deal.


Paid wet a Like
Sd Wool anes


me Rao


MALEFICARUM


171
both related on paper and told by word
of mouth by the man to whom these
things happened, and that he himself
had that account to his hand as he
wrote. On the 22nd of March in the
ek 1600, being the Wednesday in

oly Week, a young nobleman aged
twenty-two, of the name of Nicolas
Prutenns, entered the College of the
Jesuits, and was seen and heard by one
of the Brothers walking about and
making peg, ee in the lower
ico of the College, shaking his

ead and rashly uttering desperate
blasphemies against God. He was told
again and — to moderate his be-
haviour and bridle his tongue, but in
vain; for he became even worse, and
showed every sign of a troubled and
disturbed mind. Therefore one of the
Brethren went up to him and asked
him kindly what was the matter and
what was so troubling him, and why he
kept breaking out into such irreverent
use of the Name of God. He answered:
“Alas, I am lost! I am bound by the
shackles of the devil. And yet he has
not given me the pleasures I desire,
which he promised me.” Hearing this
the good Jesuit feared there was some-
thing gravely amiss and led him by the
hand into the College, where he gently
asked him not to hesitate to tell him
what was the matter. Then Nicolas
Prutenns with tears and at first wholly
incoherent, but more calmly on the
next day, began to tell him as follows.
That he was of noble birth and had
been brought up richly, elegantly and
delicately; but for certain reasons
ee need not mention) he had
orfeited his parents’ love and had been
driven from this father’s house. He had
pow of money when he set out, but

ad spent it and fallen into extreme
want: but at last a demon came to him
with a mighty gust of wind one night
as he was lying under a tree, and
promised him help and assistance for
the ills he had just suffered and those
which he would suffer, and also that
he would restore him to his former
favour with his parents, if only he
would put his signature to certain


172


small obligations. That time he did
not obey the s tion, which he
knew to be full of danger, and the
demon departed with the same wind
and disturbance as he had come, pre-
dicting that he would some day be
sorry for not having accepted his con-
ditions. This a8 Levis near a village
not far from Breslau ; therefore he went
to that _ and lived there for a short
space in meeps Koes evening he
went out reproaching himself for not
having put faith in the demon, and
weeping because there was no help or
hope left to him since he had been
offered his chance and had rejected it.
It was the dead of night, and a demon


of gigantic size a to him and
oe eres


fi help? te T
or m t
should re to beet _ as bei


un-


ears of favour with your parents as
ore, of pleasures and happiness;
but when they are done, I shall have
full power over your body and soul,
You for your part must freely agree to
the stipulations which I exact. First,
then, abjure God and His Mother, all
the Saints, and the Faith taught you of
old. Swear also that you will reveal
this pact to no mortal, that you will
not read any book of prayers, that you
ill persecute with implacable hatred
all men, especially those who would
incite and urge you to piety, and that
you will not marry a wife but use con-
cubines hired for money.’’? When the
youth had agreed to this vile compact,
and it only remained for him to sign
the agreement with his own blood,
the demon squeezed his left hand as he
a it out, with such force that he
ed his hand with blood pressed
from the ends of three fingers, and
gave him a document to sign, I know
not of what material, but it was softer
than parchment and harder than
paper; and the pen wrote as it were


COMPENDIUM


BK. lll. CH. Il.


of its own will the terms of the agree-
ment as they affected both parties.
After he had signed and delivered the
document, he said that he heard a
wonderful music of all instruments and
was weet rts res, by the sound ;
and the next day he at last awoke late
in the morning without having been
disturbed by the noise of any passers
by on the public road. Then he re-
pented of the crime he had com-
mitted, and went from Breslau to
Olmiitz and from there to Vienna,
From Vienna he went to Graz where
he visited the learned Weninger, and
was directed and recommended by
him to Master aae cap, Na Lastly
he came to Marburg to the learned
Homelius, and there, weary of his
exile, he again lamented that he had
not ig Tae with the demon.
Again as he lay in bed at night the
demon came to him and offered to
renew the pact; and he signed a new
eement with the demon in his own
blood, and placed it by night in a
ruined temple near Marburg. After a
few days he again nted of his
crime, and in his despair would have
killed himself; but someone persuaded
him to seek a remedy at Graz. But the
day before he left bashes the demon
came to him at night and described to
him a certain cottage at Graz near
Karlau, telling him to be there on the
oth of March, and then he would
his vow and restore him to his
former fortune: but meanwhile he
must very particularly beware against
approaching any Jesuits, for if he did
he would be most severely punished.
All this the young man told to our
Brother on the day that the demon
had appointed to meet him at the cot-
tage; and although our Brother
frightened him from going there on
that day, yet on the next day (which
was Good Friday) after noon, the un-
ren man went to the place assigned
by the demon, without consulting any-
one. The demon appeared and rated
him for his want of faith, in that he
had disobeyed him by approaching


BK. Il, CH, IIt.


the scoundrelly Jesuits, and asked
him to renew his pact for the third
time, and to offer his. middle finger
as a pledge: then he recounted all
his sins from the time of his youth,
_ him that he must despair of
his *s salvation, and quoted the
Scriptures to prove that he ought to
live his days in luxury, and at the same
time offered him a containing
the names of all the demons, and show-
ing how to summon whichever one
he needed. But the young man would
have none of it.

On Holy Saturday, when it was
known what had happened, they
began to ene pees care of the young
man, never — to be alone,
and from that time he was instructed
in the Catholic Faith by a Father to
whose peculiar care he was entrusted.
About the end of April he was ripe for
confession, and on the day when he
was to make his confession he was
bidden to renounce the devil in the
presence of some of the Fathers, and
righteously to violate his unholy pact.
During the recital of the Litanies, at
the words Pater de Coelis Deus, he fell
down nearly dead. We raised the
man, trembling in all his limbs; but
he would have fallen again at the
glorious Name of the Mother of God,
if we had not held him up on each
side. When he had at last with diffi-
culty made his renunciation and
abjuration of the devil, and had been
refreshed with food (for all his strength
had gone), he was taken in the after-
noon to the church to make his con-
fession. But when he had recited the
Litanies of the Name of Jesus and of
the Angels, and had begun to tell his
sins, the demon whispered in his ear:
“Do not trust this rogue of a confessor,
unless you wish to be foully cheated
by him.” During the whole of May
there was not a day but the Father
assigned to him wrestled with him to
strengthen him in the faith and that he
might by frequent confession purge
every corner of his conscience; and
there appeared to be some hope of his


MALEFICARUM


173


salvation. Yet he suffered various in-
juries at the hands of the demon.

hree times one night he was thrown
from his bed to a distance of three
paces, but without receiving any hurt.
At other times the demon appeared to
him and, pretending great kindness to

i ed him to return to Mar-
burg; for why did he afflict himself in
that place? “I wonder,” he said, “that
when know that you are damned,
you no ter care to make your
present life happy, and that do
not return to your former fortunes
from ee you ae uae beie wih of
you and pity t, being mine,
you lead such chad life in this place.”
And as at that very time a most pious
and religious man had died in the


honeeet house (in which the th
imself was), and certain the
Brethren were praying to God for him


all night in the hospital, he added that
he neither could nor would remain an
longer while those living hell-ho
were barking in the hospital about the
dead dog; and therefore he begged
him again and again to come even
once more to the cottage, where he
would hear such new things as had
never been heard before.

On Trinity Sunday, the 28th of
May, when our Brethren had carefully
commended the work to God and had
to this end offered to God many other
pious exercises and mortifications, he
was brought to a public assembly
of the Faithful, where first, before
many of our good Brethren and the
a Reese. ac rr in the church of
S. Catharine, he abjured the devil in
measured words read from a paper,
and protested that he repudiated the
_ which he had so wickedly made.

ut he did this with incredible diffi-
culty, for the demon so hindered his
faculties that he could not read, and
could only repeat the words after
another, s — and with difficulty.
Then he made a profession of the
Catholic Faith according to the form
laid down in the Bull of Pius the
Fourth where it is expressed in these


174


words: “The traditions, observations
and constitutions of the Church I do
most firmly believe and embrace: and
that there are seven true and proper
Sacraments of the new law: and that
in the most Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist there is truly, really and
substantially the Body and Blood, etc.
And all heresies condemned by the
Church, I do also condemn.” All his
str had gone from him, and he
was deprived of the use of his eyes,
ears and tongue; so that, when he
regained a little str , he said that
he feared he would die in that place.
While va was in god state, and we
were vainly urgin to express in
words what he believed in hi heart,
namely that he believed in the presence
of Christ in the Eucharist, he

to be moved nearer to the Adorable
Sacrament. And at Its presence he
was so restored that he awoke as it
were from a deep slumber and said
that he believed and most fully felt the
power of Christ’s presence. Yet the
matter ended otherwise: for when the
Eucharist was yet on the Altar, he
could both speak and hear; but when
the priest approached to offer the
Sacrament to the youth, he lost all his
senses and his teeth were clenched so
tightly that it seemed that no power
could unlock them; and when the
priest withdrew again with the Euchar-
ist, he could again see and speak and
hear. And he said that he knew no-
thing of all that we had cried in his
ears, but had only known that his
mouth seemed to be shut as ifin a vice.
That nothing might be left unat-
tempted, the same priest left the
Eucharist upon the Altar and placed
his consecrated finger upon the
youth’s mouth; then when he brought
the Host to his lips and offered It to
him to eat, the Enemy openly attacked
him be: began to raise ary = in the
air, ough many struggled against
him. When the demon was adjured to
leave him in peace and to restore his
signed compact, this was seen (but only
by the young man) hanging by a great


COMPENDIUM


BK. Ill. CH. II,


rope from the roof of the church; for
no one else saw any such thing.
mney. f else was done that day,
rest, at raed hs ers were offered
to for his safety, and the young
man was left with great hope of recover-
ing the pact which he had signed.

On the third of June the young man
entered the church, when the Enemy
smote him unexpectedly in the face as
if with his cloak, and at the same time
tore his left hand so grievously that
the blood flowed freely ; yet there was
no one visible who did this. He also
felt his neck twisted by some one; but
suffered no inconvenience except that
for some days the scars remained on
his hand, Hate with less pain than
when the hand had been torn. That
day our Brethren redoubled their

ious efforts that the matter might
ave a happy end to the greater glory
of God. And that night a terrible
wind arose without any rain, and the
voice of the young man was heard as
it were in the wind, woefully lament-


ing.
“On the fourth of June, on the Sun-
day within the Octave of Corpus
Christi, after the offertory and Litanies
to each Person of the Most Holy
Trinity, he was bidden to read a re-
pudiation of his sins and a profession
of faith, and to protest before God,
pia ord and men that he was a Catholic,
and that he would never mistrust the
mercy of God towards him. This he
did for some time without help from
any ; and when his sight failed, another
read for him and he repeated the
words slowly, with difficulty and hesi-
tation, since the demon obstructed his
ea When he came to the words,
“Wherefore, O Blessed Jesu,” etc., he
could neither read them nor suffer
another to suggest them. The demon
was adjured by the virtue of God not
to hinder the youth in this; and then
the young man was violently shaken
as if he were possessed, and in a single
moment learned the German tongue
which, by the help of the demon, he
spoke elegantly enough but with his


BK. lI. CH, Ill.


own native idiom. When they saw
this all believed yet more firmly in the
powet of grace, and recited the Te

eum , and bade him pro-
ceed. But he could not say “I confess
to Almighty God, "etc. and “Lord,
I am not worthy,” etc. And it was
in vain that the priest approached him
with the Sacrament, commanded
the demon by the power of God to
leave the man alone: for the youth was
taken up into the air so violently that
ten or twelve men with difficulty held
him back,

At the ye om pronouncement of
the Name of Jesus and the invocation
of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary the
demon was broken and departed from
him; and the young man exclaimed in
his own tongue: “He
me.” Thereupon he at once bent his
knees and proceeded in a clear and
loud voice to recite: “Wherefore, O
good Jesus,” etc., and at the end of the
prayer added these words: “Praise be
to , lam now another man.” And
he prepared himself for Communion
and confessed, saying the ““Confiteor.”
The demon was adjured not only to
leave the young man alone thereafter,
but also to restore the written com-

act; and he confessed again. At
ength he was so weak that he could
not even sit; yet, being now free from
the attacks of the demon, he none the
less knelt and recited the Confiteor and
Domine, non sum dignus, etc., and pro-
tested aloud that he believed with all
the strength of his soul that Christ was

resent in the Eucharist and that he

oped that He would be merciful to
him. He took the Eucharist kneeling
with the greatest devoutness of spirit,
and continued for some time to return
thanks and sofar recovered his strength
that he left the church without appear-
ing to suffer from any weakness.
“Now at last,”’ he said, ‘I do not fear
the demon, but scorn him from my
heart; but of myself I could never
have won this freedom. I am ready
now to shed my blood a hundred times
for the Catholic Faith.’ And much


MALEFICARUM


175
more he said in praise of the charity
of our Brethren, who had been so
careful for the salvation of a man
whom they had never seen before;
saying that the like was not to be
found among the Lutherans, and much
more which modesty forbids me to


t.
oe the 1oth of June, the vigil of
S. Barnabas the Apostle, our Brethren
again armed themselves in the monas-


tery against the Enemy by those
methods known to the Societ 3 and
€ man wore a hair shirt all


th young
day lest he should fail himself, and in
the evening scourged himself soundly
of his own accord. That evening, and
during a rot part of the night, a
eat wind blew upon the cone
ore the eleventh hour of the night
the Enemy came, together with some
man or woman, and walked into the
dormitory where the young man was
sleeping with three others, and the
demon said to the woman with him
(who is thought to have been a certain
witch): “Do you see this vile fellow
lying here? Oh, if I had managed my
business differently it would not have
ended like this: they would hardly
have driven me off before its fulfil-
ment! Meanwhile I commend the
fellow to you. Torment him as much
as you can.” Then he turned to the
young man and said in a terrible
voice: “O faithless varlet, O you most
light and inconstant wretch who never
kept your promise to me, O base and
degenerate heart! Your forefathers
would have lost body and soul a
hundred times rather than break their
word once it had been given. Have
then, what you gave me; but I will
keep what is mine.” He said this
two or three times, and the young man
heard him making a sound like the
erasure of writing from a paper. Then
he said to the woman: “I go to the
place appointed for me. Do you mean-
a ce pg of this fellow.” Por
en again to the young man: “
did you think, you worthless rogue,
that you would escape from my


176 COMPENDIUM


hands? I am compelled now to re-
store to you that which is yours: but
meanwhile do you and the vile Jesuits
leave me untroubled by the foolish
mummery of your ceremonies; for I
have nothing of yours. Yet hereafter I
shall take much more from you; for
the faith which you have embraced is
unsound and an invention of these
Fathers, whom you revere as holy
men, but I drag them to hell as they
deserve.” Saying this he placed an
ice-cold hand upon the man’s
neck without at all wounding him, and
vanished. To all this the young man
made no answer except for telling him
at once to depart, for God was upon
his side. Then he tried to arouse the
others who were sleeping soundly in
the dormitory, calling out their names ;
and one of who was sick, heard
him and sprang to his feet and, goi
to the bed of another who was in
health, awakened him. This man
struck fire from a flint and kindled
tinder; but before he could light a
candle it was violently put out by
someone. This happened a second and
third time, and when at last he had
just got the candle alight, both it and
the tinder were again extinguished.
At last it came into his mind to light a
blessed candle ; and, when he had done
this, it could no longer be put out.
On the appearance of a light the
Enemy vanished; and although he
had again and again said that he was
restoring to the young man that which
was his, yet the youth had had nothing
from him, They then addressed them-
selves to prayer, and he who had lit
the light recited Litanies before an
Image of the Blessed Virgin :
After about half-an-hour he arose and
saw lying upon the floor a bloody
paper, which he took up and offered
to him whose handwriting it was.
He, recognising the writing, began to
show great joy, ome it and pressing
it to his bosom ; and then they all gave
thanks to God, the four of them to-
gether reciting the Te Deum laudamus,
etc. And lest by chance the demon


BK. Ill, CH, Il,


should recover the paper, they pro-
tected it with the sign of the Cross, and
sprinkled it with Holy Water, and
bound it round with the halo of the
Blessed Virgin Mary.

On Sunday morning they called the
Father to whose care the young man
had been committed, and showed him
the recovered ere which he had
written at Marburg, with the blood
erased which recorded the demon’s
part of the pact. But lest there should
re remain some evil guile and per-

ps there had not been a complete sur-
render of everything which the young
man had written, our Brethren went

ain as is their custom to the church

S. Catharine and poured out prayers
to God, recited Litanies, brought the
Sacrament to the young man, and
adjured and required the demon, if
there was anything further belonging
to the young man, by the virtue
Almighty God to restore it. But since
the youth said that he was sure that
everything had been restored, and he
was perfectly at ease in his heart, they
decided to proceed no further. There-
fore they gave hearty thanks to the
Divine goodness for so great a mercy.
saying a Te Deum laudamus, etc., and
we all returned rejoicing. His Most
Serene Highness the Archduke Ferdi-
nand, and the Right Reverend Bishop
of Seckau determined to make the
whole of this matter known to the
people. Accordingly this was done at
midday on the eighteenth me and
the very paper written with lood was
by the order of the Bishop burned in
our church by the parish priest of Graz
before a great concourse of men. This
is a most true story of what really hap-
pened: and you may see from it,
reader, the efficacy of each and every
of the Catholic ceremonies, of which we
could add countless other examples.


*


—


BK. Ill. CH. Iv,


CHAPTER IV
Of Divine and Supernatural Remedies.
Argument.

, i ‘HERE are many remedies of this
sort which men ought always to
use ; for they always help the and
never harm the body, and often they
cure or prevent the sicknesses and other
apparel by sor Wow Premcinn eae

approv ¢ wiser clans
Cothotiqaaseded men, pare as Jean
Fernel (Uniuersa Medicina I1), Cornelio
Gemma rb eaapiy made Cadron-
chi (de Morbis ueneficis), Andrea Cesal-
pini (Disquisit. de nat. -), and others.
The first of these is a true
and lively faith, fortified with the love
of God and His Son. S. Paul bids us
to take this as a shield (Zph. vi and I.
Thess. v). S. Antony the Great also
commends this to his disciples, say-
ing: “O my dearly beloved, a sincere
gk and a pure faith oh : pny
mi. weapons against the _
Cornelius Circti fiesta (De origine et
Situ Frisiae, III, 31) affirms the same
in the following words: “About the
time of the Emperor Lothair there were
throughout Friesland,” etc. And
the same author proceeds to say how
S. Cyprian (Ad Fortunatum, de exhortat.
Martyrit) and Lactantius {Il, 16) and
Ambrosius Ansbertus* (Jn Apoc. V,
11) teach that the observance of God’s
Commandments and innocence of life
are the most effective remedies pos-
sible. And Nider (Jn Epitom. Formic.
cap. 4), quoting a certain Peter,
praises the following five most efficaci-
ous remedies: To have an entire faith,


* “Ambrosius Ansbertus.”” Ambrose Aut-
pert, an early mediaeval writer and Benedictine
Abbot; born in France early in the eighth cen-
tury, and died after ruling little more than a
year at his monastery of S. Vincent on the Vol-
turno, near Benevento, 778 or 779. ““Ambrosti
Ansberti Galli i...%n sancti Ioan-
nis.” “Apostolt et elistae Apocalypsim
libri decem... nunc primum typis excusi”
(Cura Eucharii Ceruicorni). Coloniae, per E.
Ceruicornium, folio, 1596.
N


MALEFICARUM


177
and keep the commandments of God;
to protect oneself with the sign of the
Cross and with prayer; to honour the
rites and ceremonies of the Church;
to execute public justice truly; to
contemplate aloud or in secret Christ’s
passion,

The second is a lawful use of the
Sacraments of the Catholic Church;
as, for example, Baptism in the case of
those not yet initiated into the Faith.
For it is proved by experience that

who are known not to have been
baptised are freed from magic spells
by means of unconditionally adminis-
tered baptism: while for such as may
with probability be assumed not to
have baptised, the same benefit is
obtained from a conditional baptism.
When I speak of a probable assump-
tion, I mean that an unsubstantiated
conjecture is insufficient to warrant
even a conditional baptism.

The third remedy is to have recourse


‘to holy men and to seek help from


them who are known to possess the
gift of working miracles (a gift which
may be found, though rarely, even in
those whose life is not upright, so long
as they have the true faith; as may be
seen from the Gospels (Matth. vii,
Mark ix, Luke x)). Although there
are hardly any now (at Erwin at’
who have this gift, it was formerly m
used as a remedy: for all sacred his-
tories are full of examples of men who
have profitably had recourse to holy
men. And it is agreed that not all they
who cast out demons were ordained by
the Church into the order of Exor-
cists. Of old, certainly, holy men put
to flight and conquered demons simply
by their presence, as we read of S.
acarius of Al ia in Palladius,
chapters 19 and 20; of Aegyptius in
Sozomen, Bk. VI, chap. 20; of S.
Cuthbert in chapter 15 of his Life
written by Bede; of S. Rusticus in


John Cassian, Collat. 14, chap. 7;


and of many others everywhere in the
artes -
¢e fourth remedy is Ritual Exor-
abe


cism., Touching this it is tobe noted


178


that this order of Exorcists has existed
in the Church for 1300 years, as is
clear from the Epistle of S. Ignatius to
Antioch; and the Epistle of Pope
Cornelius* to Fabius preserved by
Eusebius; (Hist. Eccl. VI, xliii.) and
from the Letters of Firmilianus to S.

rian, and from other Fathers.-

e fifth way is to seek a remedy by
tone igen IneYs EY fasting,

ms-giving, and prayer. Alms-

is commended by the authority Of the
Canon, chapter si sortiarias. With
regard to fasting, I find that S. Auxen-
tiust the Abbot prescribed it to a
certain countess, as Metaphrastes re-
cords in his Life, February 14th. And
S. Procopius the Monk very often won
the victory against the demon by
means of fasting.[ We have, more-
over, Christ to witness in Matth.
xvii and Mark xxix. As for prayer,
there survives a verse of an anonymous
old versifier :


Against the Fiend’s might
Prayer is a weapon right.


* “Pope Cornelius.”? 251-252. This Pon-
tiff in his letter to Fabius mentions that there
were then in the Roman Church forty-two
acolytes and Sify fo exorcists, readers and
door-keepers, the formal institution of these
orders together with the organisation of their
functions was probably the work of Pope
Fabian, 236-251. The practice of exorcism,
not confined to any one particular order, pre-
a *f seed ee the xo fendi

power of exorcism being given to t
by Our Lord Himself.

} “S. Auxentius.” The ““Roman Martyr-
ology” under 14 February has: “‘In Bithynia,
of S. Auxentius, Abbot.’ See the Bollandists
or this day.

“Fasting.” The Homily of S. Basil the
Great, “‘Homilia I de ietunio,” rises to supreme
heights of sacred eloquence. Passages are read
in the Roman Breviary in the Second Nocturn
of Matins on the Fourth Sunday of Lent.
“*Teiunium legislatores sapientes facit: animae
optima custodia, corporis socius securus, forti-
us uiris mumimentum et arma, athletis et
certantibus exercitatio. Hoc propterea tenta-
tionem propulsat, ad pietatem armat, cum
sobrietate habitat, temperantiae opifex est.”


COMPENDIUM


w= = —_


BK. ll, CH. IV.


The sixth is a devout invocation of
the Name of the Saviour Jesus Christ,
or of the Blessed Virgi ary, or a
prayer for help to the Guardian Angel.
All the most ancient ecclesiastical
writers assert so firmly and fre-
neg Po the power of the Name of

e Saviour that it would be super-
fluous to collect their words. There are
many examples of the invocation of the
Blessed Virgin, pees that famous
one of Theophilus § about which,


among (others, Honorius|| of Autun
treats in the Seal of Mary. The help
from the Guardian Angel is testified


“* Theophilus.”’ This history is well known.

lus had made so formal compact with

Satan that he actually signed away his soul
with a written deed. Even in his darkest mo-


, that which goes under the name of Botho
(or Potho), an Abbot of Priefling near Ratisbon
in the eleventh o . It is quoted by S, Peter
Damian, S. Bernard, 8. Bonaventura, S. Anto-


“<The Glories of Mary” S. Al
gives it as the “ * in
of his on “Ad Te suspiramus.”” It
is also related on the Twenty-fourth Day o
“The Love of Mary,” a golden treatise
Dom Roberto, a Camaldolese Hermit of Monte
Corona. S. Peter Damian cries: ““O Mary,
Who couldst snatch Theophilus from the very
jaws of perdition, what is there that Thou
canst not do?”

|| “‘Honorius.”” A ag 2s a philosopher,
and encyclopaedist who lived in the first half of
the twelfth century. Although many works from
his pen have won considerable reputation, of his
life practically nothing is known, and it has
even been discussed whether “‘of August” (near
Basle) or “‘of Augsburg’’ (in Suabia) ought
not to be read instead of “of Autun” in Ber-
gundy. The “‘Sigillum Beatae Mariae” is an
exposition upon the “‘Canticle of Canticles.”

works of Honorius will be found in Migne,

“*Patres Latini,”” CLXXI.


BK. Ill. CH. IV.


by Origen contra Celsum, Bk. VI, and
S. Golanduch, who is mentioned b
his contemporary Evagrius,* Bk. VI.


ar 19.
e seventh is the sign of the Holy
+ in commendation of which a
whole book could be compiled from
padigiees. pacientes Ge arneinse
m actual examples, .
Serm. de Passione Christ ; Origen w
Job, Bk. III; Lactantius, De Uera
Sapientia IV, 26; S. Antony as quoted
S. Athanasius; S. Athanasius him-
, De Incarnatione Uerbi XLVIII; 8S.
Gregory of Naziansus, ion. 1. in
ianum, and ad Nemesium; S. John
tom, the 8th homily on the
Fee phe p es at et Bp oth

G) u . Matthew; S.
Catheceis 4, de Ascensione; Di
Niceno the Basilian in the Life of
Thaumaturges; S. Jerome in the Life
of S. Hilarion; S. Augustine, de Symbol.
ad Cathecumen, Bk. II, and Serm. 81,
de ¢; Theodoret in the Life of
Macedonius, and Hist. 111, 3 and V, 21;
S. Gregory, Dialogues II, 10, and many
others.

The eighth safeguard is the Relics}
of the Saints, of which we read: “ ia
friends, O God, are greatly honoured,
and their pak ag is very secure.”
But care must be taken not to mingle
certain superstitious rites with thi
most sacred worship, as Silvester§


wae ius.” Scholasticus, born in 596 at
Epiphania in Cale-Syria; died after 594, the
exact date being unknown. Of all his works
one alone survives, the important “Ecclesiastical


+ “Hol unica!
See also Baltus, “Histoire des Oracles,” I, p.


ele.

“Relics.” The virtue of Holy Relics is
i inestimable. I have OO ths oe and
experienced many instances of this. Upon one
occasion a Relic of S. Antony of Padua, ven-


erated in the private Oratory of Our Lady of
Loreto, healed and restored permanent health to
a sick man. Mirabilis Deus in sanctis suis.

§ “Silvester.” Francis Silvester (Ferrarj
sis), Dominican, 1474-1526. It is dy
see how any superstition could be connected


t to
with


MALEFICARUM


179
warns us, s ing of the word Relics.
For to the Saints superstition is odious,
religion is pleasing. This was attested
by 8. Glyceria the , from whose
personal garments there was distilled
a most sweet and healing ae for
all diseases ; but one day the Bi of
Heraclea peg tried to collect
chang br or pncloge peeravon
been purposes sorcery,
and the ointment at once axe
to be distilled. wine rp ayaa
uired diligently into the matter
ved ter eaueckabae vessel ming oo
‘or ees ere-
fore he removed it put another in
its place, whereupon the ointment
flowed again as . This is told by
S. Nicephorus,|} XVIII, 32.


The ninth remedy is of most ancient
standi a thee: Chacon ean
wond efficacy, namely Holy


Water blessed by the solemn rite
ordained for its benediction. One
sort, which is called Baptismal, is con-
secrated on the Eves of Easter and
Pentecost. The other, called Lustral,
is consecrated at Prime on every
Sunday, and it is avowedly for repel-
ling the attacks of the devil, and for
averting other dangers. Its use was
known before the time of Pope S.
Alexander I,§ and has always been


efer.

| “S. Nicephorus.” Born about 758; died
2 , 829; Patriarch of Constantinople 806-
815. This holy and x champion of the
veneration of Images was sorely persecuted by
the abominable iconoclasts, and his dogmatic
treatises upon the controversy have the greatest
weight. His feast is celebrated both in West

East on 13 March, which day he was in-
7 in the Church of the Holy Apostles at


tanti .

“| “Pope S. Alexander I.” S. Irenaeus tells
us that he was the fifth Pope in succession from
S. Peter. Duchesne dates his pontificate 106-
115; Lightfoot, 109-116. “‘Constituit aquam
pare cum sale benedici in habitaculis

um?


180 COMPENDIUM


retained by all Catholics to their great
advantage. It is worshipfully men-
tioned in the Life of S. Gregory the
Great by John the Deacon, a Monk of
Monte Cassino, who says that those
possessed by devils are delivered when
sprinkled with it; and that this miracle
is often renewed to-day among the
a thly, th ther things
enthly, there are other
which the Catholic rite is wont to bless
for a remedy, as waxen discs which
we call Agnus Deis because of the print
of a lamb on one side. Of their efficacy
there is a book by Vincenzo Bonar-
do,* and Pietro Mattei speaks much
of them in 7 Decretal.t When the
Pope blesses them, he asks God to
grant all kinds of favours to those who
wear them devoutly. Of the same sort
are Blessed Grain, Blessed Candles,
Blessed Salt, and Blessed Bread.
Eleventh are pious writings or
sacred amulets hung around the neck,
such as the Apostles’ Creed; the be-
inning of the el of S. John, “Jn
incipo erat Uerbum’’; or verses of some
Psalm. These were much used of old;
and Manuel de Costat writes that in
our own time a devil was driven out of
a demoniac at Hormuz by this means.
But for this remedy to be lawful S.
Thomas says that there must be two
conditions: first that nothing super-
stitious is mingled with the sacred
words, as that one should put faith in
the shape or colour of the letters, or


* “Vincenzo Bonardo.”’ The work here al-
luded to is this author's ongre ** Discorso


V

1317, under the title of “Liber septimus Decre-
talium,”” but better
Clementis V” or ‘‘Clementinae.”? This is the
last official collection of decretals, and the
glosses o the canonist Mattei were long highly
es


teemed.

+ ‘Manuel de Costa.’’ A famous canonist
of Salamanca, who when University of
Coimbra was at the height of its reputation
accepted a chair in the faculty of law at the
particular invitation of John Til (1521-57).


BK. Il. CH, Iv.


the manner of writing, or the material
of the paper or the ink; and second
that the wearer’s intention must be
righteous, and he must piously ob-
serve the sense of the words and put
his true hope in God.

Twelfth is the ringing of Bells§ in
the Catholic Church (for heretics take
more delight in the losion of
grenades). This we know from daily
experience to be so hostile and inimical
to demons that they are prevented by
it from raising up violent storms, and
even if they have been already raised
it lulls them or turns them aside else-
where, as has been sucpel Remep 2 by
the Council of Cologne, chapter 24.

Let us now come to some examples
of all these remedies of which we
have spoken.


Bb


Examples.
1. Of Faith.


|S apa Nider in his Formicarius
(IV) tells the following: A certain
witch said: “When a man once asked
me to kill an enemy of his, or else to
injure him grievously by a stroke of
lightning or in some other way, I
invoked my Little Master, or demon,
who answered that he could do
neither: for he said that the man had
a pure faith and protected himself
diligently with the sign of the Cross;
therefore he could not injure him in
his body but, if I would, he could
destroy an eleventh part of his crops
in his field.”

The Empress Justina sent against
our Father S. Ambrose a witch named
Innocentius, who afterwards openly


**Bells.” Boguet,““An Examen of Witches”
ohn Rodker, 1929), tells us: “Satan holds
ls in extreme detestation; for by their ringing
the people are warned to prepare to observe their
duty and pray to God. Also they drive away
storms and tempests.”


BK. Ill. CH. Iv.


confessed that he had delegated some
demons to kill S. Ambrose, but they
had been unable to approach even
the door of the house in which the
Bishop was; for the house was pro-
tected all round by an unquenchable
fire which burned there even at a
distance; and so their wiles were
thwarted, and baffled was the mis-
chief by which he thought to have
oes ear to the Priest and Bishop
0


John Cassian relates that two philo-
sophers tried to trouble S. Antony by
means of magical illusions and the
deceits of demons. But when with all
their labour they could effect nothing,
and that was all the result of the plots
they had sought out with such deep
magic, it very evident to them
that there was great virtue in the
professions of the Christians; for the
same sa’ Powers of Darkness
which could, as they thought, at will
obscure the sun and moon, were not
only unable to injure S. Antony, but
could not even cause him the slightest
disturbance in his monastery. ‘There-
fore S. Epiphanius denounces the
heretical opinion of the Ebionites*
that there is no virtue in an invocation
which uses the name of Christ and
the sign of the Cross.

About the time of the Emperor
Lothair Friesland was infested with a

t number of Spectres of Hellish
Soopensdieate who lived in an under-
und cave in a little overhangi

row of a high hill, which they
built by ee without human help.
Here lived those whom the ancients
called White Nymphs, who used to
seize upon night-farers, and such as
kept watch over their flocks and herds
in the open, and yet more frequently
they snared women with the children
they had just borne; and the spectres
used to take them secretly to their


* “Ebionites.”’ Early Christian sects in-
Sected with Fudaistic and (later) with Gnostic
errors. In the time AES 9 pene ashing
obscure communities existed among scat-
tered hamlets of Syria.


MALEFICARUM


181


hidden und nd caves, from which
eo could then oo ee ond ee
murmuring under the ground, an
the wailing of children and the loud
weeping and moans of men; and
sometimes singing and other uncer-
tain sounds were heard. For this
reason a careful watch was set upon
regnant women and little children,
est they should be seized unawares
by those hellish Nymphs. But all these
devilish illusions vanished and came
to nought after they received the true
of God; for erstwhile the
Frisians were deluded by the errors
of Sabellius and Arius.


Sep Spee Barcel hopes 2 all) ed ae ee eae


We read in Ecclesiastical History
that Tiridates, King of Armenia,
afflicted the Christians in the time of
Diocletian with various massacres and

ersecutions, and that he placed S.
Eeeul to die of hunger in a deep


t “S. Gregory.”’ Surnamed the Illuminator,
the apostle of Armenia. He was born c. 957 and
en at


died c. 337. S. Gregory after hong
Jirst yo se by Khe Trdat (Tiridates)
eventually converted that monarch, and with his
aid spread Christianity throughout the country.
This happened whilst Diocletian was emperor
(284-305). There is a famous life of S. Gre-
gory iy Anahangels which was composed
shortly after the year. 496 in Armenian, whence
it was turned into Greek, used by Symeon Meta-
phrastes, and translated into Latin early in the
tenth century.


182 COMPENDIUM


and muddy pit. Moreover, because
she would not comply with his de-
sires, he ordered to a most cruel death
the virgin Khipsime, together with
many of her pious companions. But
he soon felt the vengeance of God.
For he was afflicted with madness so
that he raged like one possessed, and
his body was changed into that of a
pig, and in his madness he tore his
meat with his teeth. And others who
had approved his deeds, the soldiers,
istrates, and officers, were also
driven og ee showed net same
symptoms ; for they too were changed
into swine (as Nicephorus will have
it), or suffered from a delusion to that
ect (as Metaphrastes thinks). But
at last they were washed in the font
of Baptism and recovered the shape
of their bodies and the health of their
minds and souls, being baptised and


urged to tance by S. Gregory
the Martyr himself ;—not the Thau-
maturge, as is thought by Nicephorus
and some scholiasts, but the other
one [S. Gregory the Illuminator], as
Metaphrastes teaches. And this evil
was not brought upon them by any
magic art, as one learned man thinks,
but by the vengeance of God working
through the evil Angels.

Kazan* the King of the Tartars,
otherwise known as the Great Cham,
speed Spade Syria and the surroundin
lands with two hundred thousan
horsemen ; and having thus made him-
self an object of fear to all, he de-
manded in marriage the daughter of
the King of Armenia, whom he had
heard to be very beautiful. The
Christian King, fearing the might of
this great King, . After some
time she bore a son to her husband
Kazan, so hideous that the King her
husband would by no means acknow-
ledge it as his, since it appeared to
be a monster, He summoned his chief
men to a council, and on their advice
sentenced to death his wife as an


* “Kazan.” This history is from Gio-
vanni Villani, “Croniche,” Venice, 1537, Book
VIII, chapter 35.


BK. Ill. CH. IV.


adulteress, and her son as having been
conceived in adultery. The innocent
woman bewailed her misfortune and
took refuge in prayer, and while still
unaware of the sentence which had
been passed upon her, asked permis-
sion to baptise her son. This was
granted on condition that there were
present some men of known reliability,
as well as the King, to see that there
was no fraudulent practice. By a
miracle, when the boy was baptised
he at once became so exceeding comely
and beautiful that the King and
many others were moved wholly to
turn to God, and the Christian cause
was very greatly advanced in the
land. S. Antoninus tells this story at
greater length in his Historiarum Opus,
tit. 20, c. 8. Let us turn to more recent
and equally proved examples. Pedro
Cieza de Leon describes a miraculous
victory over spectres prntes by God
by means of this holy

Baptism. I will quote faithfully from
his Cronica del Peru,

Near Anzerma, in a place called
Pirsa, reigned an Inca who had
a you brother named Tamara-
cunga. This young man_ thirsted
eagerly for baptism and _ therefore
tried to seek the vongicre: 6 of Chris-
tians; but he was frightened by
demons which atone to him in
strange forms, for they were visible to
him alone, in the shape of huge birds,
the condor of the Andes. Seeing the


demons thus , the young man
ordered a poor Christian of the neigh-


bourhood to be summoned; and he
came without delay and, hearing the
will of the Inca, made the sign of the
Cross upon his brow. This did but
the more enrage those enemies, whom
only the Indian saw threatening him
even more furiously ; for the Christian
saw nothing but falling stones, and
heard the whistling of demons. By
good fortune there then came to that
place a Spaniard named Pacheco
who offered to help the other Chris-
tian in his difficulty. While these two
were striving, Tamaracunga trembled
more violently and grew pale with


BK. Ill. CH. IV.
fear, and was snatched up into the


air. This was seen by all, and they
heard his prayers and groans, and the
howling and whistling of the demons.
Once, when the Indian was holding a
cup of wine, behold, the cup was lifted
up in the air and returned empty of
wine, and soon the wine was i
ured into it from on high; and the
ndia, full of fear, tried to hide his
face with his ent so that he
might not see the horrible spectres:
yet, without removing the garments
with which his face was covered, they
took possession of his mouth and
nearly throttled him in his throat. At
len - Christians, who rk mah
while been praying contin to
God, decided ‘to take him to the town
of Anzerma and there sprinkle him
from the saving font. More than three
hundred Indians offered to accom-
pany them, but they were so terrified
that they dared not come near the
chief who was to be baptised. They
came all together to a place where
they were hindered by a broken road,
rex there some human enemies tried
to pick up the chieftain and cast him
over a precipice: but he cried aloud
to the Christians to help him, and
while the Indians retreated in terror,
they placed him in their midst, bind-
ing him with ropes to their girdles,
and so guarding him they went on
together, bearing three crosses in their
hands and not ceasing to pray for the
deliverance and salvation of the un-
happy man. Not even so did they pro-
ceed free from all molestation : for the
Enemy often threw him to the ground,
and as they ascended a hill on their
way they had the greatest difficulty in
saving him from some birds that tried
to snatch him up and kill him. When
they came to Anzerma, the Christians
in the town met at the house of
Pacheco, where they all saw a violent
hail-storm, and heard the demons
shouting and whistling, together with
that terrible war of the Indians—


Hu, Hu, Hu! The demons threatened
him with death unless he abandoned
his wish for baptism; they execrated


MALEFICARUM 183


the God of the Christians who would
not permit them to seize the rae
soul from the Indian’s body. Wi
the hail still falling they went to the
church where, because it was a
thatched building, the Sacrament was
eS reserved. free say that before
entered it they heard something
king. When the church was open
and the rest had gone in with the
Moe the Indian wr sar aged of
frightful a: ance but wi eir
heads ey Wow towards their feet.
pag sabe 4 Juan of the eee of
e Blessed Virgin Mary of Mercy
made ready io backer him, the
demons, unseen by any of the Chris-
tians, visibly snatched the Indian into
the air and stood him up on high with
his head down in the same posture as
themselves. The Christians then, rely-


ing on their faith, cried aloud: “‘Jesus


Christ, help us!” and dragged
the Indian, and holding him put a
sacred stole about his neck and
sprinkled him with Holy Water; yet
whistlings and were still heard
in the hasch. amaracunga saw the
demons, and received many blows
from them; for they brandished darts
before his eyes, and spat their fetid
saliva in his face. These things hap-
pened at night. In the morning a
monk put on his sacred vestments
to offer the bloodless Sacrifice; and
he had hardly begun the Mass when
the whistling, Upp , howling and
clanking ceased, and the Indian was
no more molested. As soon as the
Sacrifice was done, Tamaracunga
together with his wife and children
ed to be baptised: and when he
had been baptised he became stronger
and bolder in the Faith, and asserted
that he was now a Christian and would
like to see what the Enemy could do
if they would let him brave them
alone. But they did not dare to attack
him, alone as he was. Unable to con-
tain his joy he marched up and down
the church three or four times shout-
ing: “I am a Christian, I am a Chris-
tian!” And when he found himself
safe and victorious, he went home and


184


was no more molested: so great was
the might of Baptism,

At aie in the year 1596 there
was a heathen woman possessed by a
demon, and she was told that she
could not be delivered unless she
became a Christian. She consented
and was already pespering for baptism
when, on the following night, the
demon dissuaded her from becoming
a Christian, saying: “Have you been
associated with me in such intimate
familiarity for so long, and will you
desert me now? You shall not do so
with impunity.” And as she slept and
felt nothing, he cut off her hair leaving
but one tress upon her head. When
in the morning she saw that her hair
roots of the eee Pek acto
re © opposite e it
as as ur to be baptieed the sooner.
This she did and, having received that
Sacrament, she was immune from all
the torments of the demon, This is
told by Luis Frées in his Japanese
Letters of that year; and he adds the
following :

In the island of Chusan there kept
appearing to a young heathen, eigh-
teen years of age, a horrible great red
dog which spoke with him and led
him through the mountains to most
remote places, keeping him there for
two or three days, and compelling
him to lift up his hands and worshi
him, and to do other unmentionable

ings. The unhappy youth, wee
that he was so molested by the mort
foe of the human race, at last fled to
the church, heard and learned the

istian doctrine, and was bound
to Christ by the Sacrament of Baptism ;
after which he was no more molested
by that hell-hound.

At Bungo about the year 1549 a
certain man had a serving maid who
was familiar with a demon. For the
demon used to come to her every
night in the likeness of a fox and lead
her from the house: but when she
embraced the faith through Baptism,
she was delivered from this spectre.

In 1583 at Munich in Bavaria a


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH, Iv.


oung Jew twenty-three years old was,
0 the tification of all, baptised in
the College of the Jesuits. A demon
laid many wonderful snares for him;
and the more the youth sought for
Baptism, the more violently did the
demon assail him. He threw him
nearly naked out of the house; some-
times he nearly throttled him; often
he frightened him with visions and
spectres so as to drive him out of his
mind. The face of the demon was so
foully hideous that the youth said that
there was no torture to be compared
with the sight of him. On the day
before he was to be baptised, it was
then or never for the demon to gain
the victory; and the bitter Enemy so
violently took hold upon the youth
that he could hardly be held in one
place by many men. But when he was
made a member of Christ through
Baptism, the demon was at once
broken and deprived of his strength.


me
ies


iN tae “4
( ‘|
fi


J


SRST ALAA TZ,


Anno 1591, in a certain Cisalpine
Valley in the Diocese of Novara, there
was a girl who was

senses, and seemed to


uite out of her
€ amazed and


stupefied by the spectres and shades
which she seemed to see. In the
farthest part of this valley of which
we speak there was a wise woman, or
witch, who claimed to cure with her
charms diseases which could not other-
wise be cured; and a great many men


BK. Ill. CH. IV.


went to her for help and advice.
Although the priests warned them
that it was a sin, when they had
departed, the girl’s mother, moved
by a mother’s care, took the ah
ask the witch’s help about the es.
Then the witch said: “Take the girl
to the priests and ask help from
them.” The father and mother took
the girl a journey of eight miles, and
told the priests what the witch had
said: after they had confessed
their sins, they were bidden to fortify
themselves with the Holy Body of
Christ. And when they had done so
— i depen better. eee
ut year 1591, at Pont-a-
Mousson in Lorraine, hose was a boy
of noble birth but poor fortune who
was, at his parents’ bidding, taken
from school and assigned a position at
the Court. But his active spirit rebelled
at this and, longing for his former
life, he preferred to go and live with
the servants in the military camps.
As he was on his way, he met a black
man in silken garments who asked
him why he was sad, and promised to
find a remedy. “But,” said he, “if I
help you, what reward will you give
me?” But the boy said: “If you turn
me up and shake me, you won't find a
farthing.” But the other answered:
“Only give yourself to me, and no
wish of yours be in vain.” The
boy thought he was being asked for as
a slave, and demanded time to con-
sider; and the other loaded him with
great promises, so that even the boy
wondered at such vain words and
began to suspect the hidden presence
of a cacodemon in the form of the
man. He then silently observed the
whole of his body, and saw that his
left foot was deformed with a cloven
hoof; and at once in horror he mur-
mured the name of Jesus and made
the sign of the Cross on his brow; and
at the same time the terrible spectre
vanished. On the third day as he was
returning to his own peeps, the same
demon ae and was again be-
trayed by his foot, and asked whether


MALEFICARUM


185


he had made up his mind. The boy
answered that he did not i


require a
master ; and, cis bebe asked whet
ing, named the town. Then the


was go’
demon at his feet a jinglin

purse containing thirty or forty gul-
den of bronze (as was later by
fire). Then he gave him a poisonous
pe in linen, telling him
ow to afflict whom he would with


Soon afterwards he came back to his
mother and his school; and having
obtained forgiveness of his sins by a
good confession, rejoiced to find him-
self freed both from the snare of the
hunter and from his fear, through the
help of God.

ear some more ancient examples.
“Certane marchandis* wer passand
betwix Forth and Flanderis (quhen
haistelie came sic ane Thud of wynd)
that sail mast and taikillis were blawin
in the brym seis, throw quhilk the
schip belevit nocht bot si derth,
The patroun thairof astonist with sa
huge and uncouth tempestis againis
the season of the yeir because it wes


about Sanct Barnabyis day (quhen
the seis apperis more calise than
rageande) fraistit the samyn war cumin


be illusioun of the devil the ennyme
of man, than be violence of weddir.
In the mene tyme the voce wes hard
of ane woman in the bow of the schip
wariand hir self. For the instant hour
scho wes conversit with ane devil in


* “Certane marchandis.” Hector Boece,
“‘Scotorum Historiae,”’ viii. Bellenden’s
translation (1536).


186


e of ane man. And schew how
evill had usit hir in that maner
mony yeris afore. And thairfore be-
socht the pepill to cast hir in the seis,
that be hir deith the remenant pepill
in the schip mycht be savit. Than be
command of the patroun ane preist
went to hir in the hevy cheir. Com-
mandying hir to mak confessioun of
hir abhominable lyfe. And to have
confidence in God, be quhais mercy
all synnis ar purgit, quhen the synnar
hes repentance and teris. Quhen this
woman wes makand hir confessioun
with gret repentance to the preist in
sycht of all Fre ane uglie cloud
with ane crak of fyre and reik flew out
of the schip and fell down with ane
vennomus stink in the seis. Incon-
tinent this tempest ceissit.”
Bellenden’s translation, published 1536.)

Peter the Venerable, Abbot of
Cluny, describing the terrible tor-
menting of a certain Monk, agonies
which could not be relieved either by
prayer or by the use of Holy Water,
in all sober truth adds the followin
words: “But lest any should marv
that the demon was not put to flight
by ee Water, let him know that
when the plague is seated internally
no outward application of salves can
avail. And by the plague I mean
mortal sin which, as long as it lurks
within a man, cannot be removed by

artaking of an external sacrament.”

ut the Abbot ed the Monk to
make confession of his sins; and after
he had confessed he at once ceased to
be tormented.

Caesarius tells that at Bonn a priest
who had led an abominable life made
an end of himself by hanging. When
he was dead his concubine entered a
Convent, wishing to repent; but by
the permission of God she was con-
tinually solicited by an Incubus Devil
to sin with him. She drove him awa
with the sign of the Cross and wi
Holy Water; and when he again
returned she devoutly recited the


—— Salutation, upon which he
fled further than a Gelnahot: but the


ym
this


COMPENDIUM


BK. Ill, CH. IV,


importunate fornicator never returned
after she had purged herself clean of
all the stains of her life by a general
confession.

It is recorded that a man at Liége
was similarly vexed by a most pestilent
Succubus Devil. But let us relate a
more recent example. In Austria in
the year 1591 a nobleman was en-
slaved by a great love, near to mad-
ness; and no worldly advice or divine
admonition could persuade him to
cease from it, so entirely was his heart
filled with the fire of this poison. But
he was cured of his frenzy in the
following manner, being stricken with
the fear of God. He had contracted a
slight fever and was lying in his bed
at night, when he saw before him a

chariot drawn by a horse blazing
with fire, and the i in
ravage than the Evil Spint himself
savage than the Evil Spirit
rv whom there is nothing more fear-
ful to mortals. “Why do you delay,”
he said, “to mount into a chariot
which is worthy of your deserts?”
The unhappy man was paralysed with
fear, but at last recovered his cou
and seized a sword which was by the
bed and brandished it, crying aloud
the while for his servants to come to
his help. The attendants ran up in
terror, and the whole household was
aroused from sleep; even the neigh-
bours were awakened, some of them
asking the reason for the tumult and
then covering their ears and eyes with
their blankets to hide themselves from
the terror. But when the tumult con-
tinued and their fear was not appeased,
but rather spread to the breasts of
others, despite the hour of the night
the priests were sent for, bei c-
ligious of the Society of Jesus. These
came and, by the use of Holy Water,


the sign of the Cross, and blessed wax
imprinted with the Lamb, calmed the
terror a little while the sick man
asserted that the demon had departed
for the present with a threatening
countenance full of savage ,
Then, when he had confessed his sins,


BK. Ul. CH. IV.


he was delivered from his shameful love
and from the sad terror in his soul.

At the same time in Bavaria a poor
woman was induced, either by the
lightness of her nature or by poverty,
to give herself to a demon in return
for his help; and though she did not
at the time perceive his presence, she
felt that she was in his et After
she had recovered from her poverty,
she paid the penalty for her rash
words; for she was not only haunted
by sore alarm, but was even beaten
with blows and prevented from ap-
proaching a church: yet she alone
could see the rods that menaced her.
She told the matter to a certain
matron who led her to a priest, by
whom she was purged in confession,
and so was delivered from all moles-
tation, having hung about her neck a
waxen image of the Celestial Lamb.

The same remedy was used for
another who suffered under the same
affliction. At the instigation of her
kindred a woman broke her vows of
chastity and outraged the monastic
life by contracting an incestuous mar-
riage. But she was not unpunished ;
for she had wedded an evil man, and
she was in perpetual ish of con-
science, and so lived wretchedly.
Weighed down by these cares, and in
need of solace, she went one day out
of the house and soon, to her utter
horror, saw a demon. She drove him
away with the sign of the Cross; but
immediately she became as one mad,
and meditated sp abominable crime
in her heart. Yet there shone a ray of
light in this darkness when she took
refuge in prayer; and, like a cloud at
the rising of the sun, her fear departed
and she suddenly thought of confes-
sion and remembered the vow she had
broken. But when this hot-bed of vice
came to the church, the more she
tried to come to the priest the more
she was withheld from confession as if
by a hand that restrained her: yet at
last, with the help and example of
others, she conquered both herself and
the evil spirit.


MALEFICARUM


187
4. Of Confirmation.


Thomas of Brabant, De Bono Uniuer-
sali, c. lvii, writes as follows: The
Venerable Boniface, one time Bishop
of Lausanne, related in my hearing a
story to the following effect. There
was in a certain town a blind man
we used to watch the Be a the
whole town at pasture, keeping them
off the tilled land and feat them
to the richest pastures. What was even
more wonderful, he could tell the
colour and erin of each separ-
ate cow; so that if you asked him for
such a cow of such a colour, he would
take that cow by the horns and ae
it to you without any difficulty.
bishop came to the ro and, having
h and proved this marvel of the
blind man, asked him if he had re-
ceived the Sacrament of Confirmation
from a bishop; and he said that he
had not. The bishop at once confirmed
him; and thereupon he lost that power
of discrimination between the different
cows. For he had done this through
the operation and ministry of demons.


5. Of the Eucharist.


ES D29E Bk ES 6 DENI *
5 LLNS PS COLLEY OP


Saint Prosper* writes: In our own
times a girl of Arab race, who wore
ctrl at Stl cs mn


* “Saint Prosper.” The dates of his birth
and death are uncertain. He is first mentioned
in 428 or 429, when he writes to S. a
and he appears to have been living later
than 455. It does not seem that he was Bishop
of Reggio, as was once believed.


188 COMPENDIUM


the habit of a handmaiden of God,
was once washing herself in a bath
when she cast immodest eyes upon a
statue of Venus, comparing herself
with it, and so offered herself as a
dwelling place for the devil. For he
who goes about as a roaring lion at
once found what he sought and
entered into her throat. For nearly
seventy days and nights no food or
drink passed down her throat, and
the devil proved his mastery and pos-
session of her by this fast. The girl’s
parents, hoping to be able to put an
end to this prodigy after so many
days, and unable to endure the evil
yoke any longer, went with their
mee to a priest and faithfully
told him what happened. The
girl only confessed that a bird had
appeared to her in the middle of the
night and had poured something into
the gat showiag to signs of her lang
girl s no signs er lon

fast, being neither pale nor waited
nor weakened, but on the con

organically sound and robust of limb.
And when the story seemed incredible,
they held a council in a nunnery
where were certain Relics of S. Stephen,
and the priest and the Prior com-
mended the girl to God. On the first
day there she asserted that the bird
had appeared to her and rated her
because neither hunger nor thirst had
driven her to seek that place to which
it was not lawful for her to go; and
she remained in the convent for two
weeks without taking food or drink.
But at the dawn of the fifteenth day
which was a Sunday, the priest went
up with us to offer the customary
morning Sacrifice, and the Prior led
the girl to the Altar, she adopting the
gait and habit of women overcome
with shame after feasting and drink-
ing. Then, prostrating herself at the
Altar, by the noise of her weeping she
moved all those present to groans and
tears, with which all the people
prayed God to take away so great a
misery: for there was an increasing
murmuring among the people. After


BK. Il. CH. Iv.


the Sacrifice had been performed, she,
with the other women, received a
small particle of the Body of the Lord
from the priest; but after chewing It
for half an hour she could not swallow
It. For he had not yet been put to
flight of whom the Apostle says ‘What
concord hath Christ with Belial?”
(II. Cor. vi, 15). And again, “Ye
cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and
the cup of devils” (I. Cor. x, 21).
While, therefore, the priest supported
her face with his hand so that she
should not eject the Holy Element, a
certain deacon ested that the
priest should hold the Cup of Salva-
tion to her lips: and no sooner was
this done than, at the Saviour’s com-
mand, the devil left that place which
he was possessing, and the girl cried
out, praising the Redeemer, that she
had swallowed the Sacrament which
she had aoe mouth. At pe os
was joy and voices lifted to ory
of God, that after cighty-two od
the devil had been cast out and the
gil delivered from the power of the
nemy.

In Milan at the church of S.
Ambrogio, there was brought to S.
Bernard a woman who had been pos-
sessed for many years, and was so
deformed that she seemed rather a
monster than a woman. The Saint
turned to the congregation and ordered
them to fe fervently to God, then
commanding the Clerics to hold the
woman near the Altar, he proceeded
to offer the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
Every time he made the sign of the
Cross over the Sacred Host, this
valiant champion turned also to the
woman and fought the Evil Spirit
with the same sign of the Cross. At
the end of the Lord’s Prayer he
attacked the Enemy more strongly,
placing the Holy Body of the Lord
upon the paten and holding It over
the woman’s head, with these words:
“Here is He Who, when about to
suffer for our salvation, said: ‘Now
shall the Prince of this world be cast
out.’ This is that Body which was


BK, Il. CH. Iv.


formed in the Virgin’s womb, and
was stretched upon the Cross, and
lay in the tomb, and rose from the
dead, and ascended into Heaven in
the sight of His disciples. By the
terrible power of this Majesty I com-
mand you, O evil spirit, to depart
from body of this woman, and
never to be so hardy as to molest her
again!” The demon, being forced to
leave her and unable to remain
longer, passant ag “nse
ing the ter rage in that
he had but little time to exercise them.
The Holy Father returned to the Altar
and completed the Breaking of the
Host of Salvation and gave the Pax
to the deacon that he might com-
municate it to the people: and at
once the woman regained both peace
and health. So much says the Abbot
William* in his Life of Blessed Bernard,
Book II, c. 4. .

Jehan Molinett (C. ues,’an 1491)
describes a most pestilent vexation
lasting for many years with which
God, on account of the sin of one of
them who had long fornicated with a
demon, ate: Hever 2° rene a
convent of holy virgins of le Quesnoy.
The Dean of Camieat, a learned and
righteous man, came with other Exor-
cists, and having celebrated the Mass
carried the life-giving Host to the
possessed community. But the demons
could not endure this, and cried out
together: “Ah, are you well armed?
Have you bread there?” “What are
you calling bread?” said the dean.
‘If this is mary § but bread, remain
in possession of this body: but if, as
we believe, It is the true Body of our
Saviour Jesus Christ, I command you
to depart at once from this body and


* “Abbot William.” William of S. Thierry

author of the “Uita Prima’ of the Saint. ~°

“Fehan Molinet.”’ “Les Chroniques de

Molinet”’ cover the period from 1474 to

1504. Molinet died in 1507. @ were cur-

rent many MSS. of the “*Chroniques”’ but actu-

ally they were not published until they appeared
in five volumes, 1


MALEFICARUM 189


never more to trouble it.” When he
had said this (oh, wonderful!) the
essed woman seemed as if she
were freed from a great burden, and
at once beget to breathe freely and
to cry aloud on the name of Jesus ; and
all the others did likewise, bei
when the demons were driven away.
That the like of this happened in
our own times at Laon in Belgium is


well known to many thousands of


Calvinists who witnessed it to their
terror and confusion.

S. Auxentius the Abbot had a
rote named Basil who was so
terribly afflicted by demons that, with
his whole body wounded and broken,
he was taken for dead in a cart to S,
Auxentius. The holy Abbot ordered
him to arise and to take the venerable
Body and the life-giving Blood of Our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to return at
once to his home. Upon this he went
away, and the tempter assailed him
no more. Ae peak

A history, surpassi wonder, is
related by Bernard of Luxemburg con-
cerning one Guido de Lachia (Cata-
logus haereticorum, sub littera G). This
man obtained such a false reputation
for sanctity in the Diocese of Brixen
that the people took him to be a second
S. John Baptist, and therefore gave
him a most honourable burial. After
his death the Inquisitors were led by
certain sure indications to pronounce
that he was a heretic; and therefore,
following the advice of the Bishop and
other wise men who were his assessors,
they passed a sentence that his body
should be exhumed and burned. This
was done in the presence of the people,
and his bones were thrown upon the
fire: but behold, certain demons,
which were seen by not a few, lifted
them from the pyre and held them
spon in the air. This aroused the
indignation of the People, who cried
out: “Death to the Bishop and these
Monks who, out of jealousy, have
tried to burn the bones of a Saint!
Why do we hold our hands? God is
manifesting unto us His sore dis-


—_—


190 COMPENDIUM


pleasure!” The Bishop was afraid, but
the Inquisitors encou him to
commence Holy Mass, saying that
God would perform a miracle rather
than permit the cause of the Faith to
be imperilled. He then said the Mass
of Our Lady; and when it came to the
Elevation of the Lord’s Body the
demons b to shout in the air: “O
Guido de hia, we have defended
you to the best of our power but can
do so no longer, for a ter than we
is here.” At once the bones fell back
upon the pyre and were burned to
ashes in the flame.
Peter Martyr d’Ang


hierra, who
pp sone the histo
of


of the voyage


umbus to that Western Land of Mas:


the Indians, testifies that the follow-


ing miracle commonl : if
the Sacrament of ae adteie we
reserved anywhere by the Christians
the demons at once were silenced in
that place.

Nearly four hundred years ago lived
Caesarius of Heisterbach, who in his
Dialogue ¥ Miracles, IX, 12, wrote as
follows: At the time when the heresy
of the Albigenses began to manifest
itself some malignants, supported by
the power of the devil, showed certain
signs and portents by which they both
strengthened that heresy and subverted
the faith of many Catholics: for they
used to walk upon the waters without
sinking. A certain priest of the Catholic
faith and of religious life saw this and,
ae that no true signs could
proceed from a false doctrine, carried
the Lord’s Body in a Pyx to the river
where these men were to show the
ene their powers, and said in the

earing of all: “I adjure thee, thou
devil, Him whom I bear in my
hands, that thou work not such phan-
tasies upon this river by means of
these men to the subversion of the
people.” Saying this, and while the
men were walking as before upon the
waters of the river, the priest in
righteous wrath apace inspiration
threw the Lord’s into the river.
Marvellous is the might of Christ: for


BK. ll. CH. IV.


° soon as = Sacred Host aes
e water phantasy gave place to
truth, and A ee false aclats Loe like
lead to the bottom and were drowned.
But the Pyx with the Sacrament was
immediately borne away by Angels.
Seeing all this the priest rejoiced, in-
deed, in the miracle, but grieved at
ing thrown away the Sacrament.
spending the whole night in tears and
ing. But in the morning, he
found e Pyx with the Sacrament
upon the Altar,

In the same century, in the year
1231, lived Thomas of Brabant, com-
monly called Cantimpratanus, who
tells the following: At the time that

ter Conrad was preaching in
Thuringia against the heretics and
died a martyr at their hands, a certain
heretic, thereto by demons,
invited one of the Preaching Friars to
embrace his heresy, and when he saw
that he very firmly resisted him, said :
“You hold very fast to faith, and
yet you have no pi of it save cer-
tain oe But if you would believe
my words, I would show you, as ocular
roof, Christ and His Mother and the
aints.” The Friar soon suspected
some illusion of demons, but wishi
to see what it would be, said: “You
would verily deserve to be believed, if
ou fulfilled your promises,” The
eretic joyfully appointed a vig ene the


Friar; but the Friar secretly brought
with him under his hood a Pyx with the
Sacrament of the Body of Christ. The


heretic led the Friar to a cave in a
mountain, as wide as a palace and
marvellously lit; and as soon as they
reached the inner end of it they saw
thrones, seemingly of the purest gold,
on which sat a surrounded with
a dazzling brightness, and next to
him a most beautiful Queen, serene of
countenance; and on each side were
seats upon which sat the older Patri-
archs car by wae A cathe ts a
great multitude of Angels stan :
and all shone with a heavenly eke:
so that they could be thought to be
nothing less than demons. As soon as


BK. lll, CH. Iv.


the heretic saw them he fell upon his
face and worshipped; but the Friar
stood motionless, yet mightily amazed
at this spectacle, Soon the heretic
turned to him and said: “Why do you
not worship when ane upon the
Son of ? Fall and worship
him whom you see, and will learn
the secrets of our faith his lips.”
Then the Friar came near and

out the Pyx and, offering It to the
ae sitting upon the , said;
“If thou art the the Mother of
Christ, behold there thy Son. If thou
receive Him, I shall acknowledge thee
to be the Mother of God.” At these


so thick
could hardly find their way back out
on to the mountain. The heretic was
then converted and returned to the
Faith, and trembled with terror at the
wonderful cunning of the devil.
Here is another story, told by Pico
della Mirandola in his De Strigibus.
Fifteen years since, there dwelt in the
Rhaetian Alps a certain good priest,
and he had need to take the Eucharist
to a man sick unto death, who lived a
long distance away. Thinking that if
he went on foot he would not reach
him as qui Bee he ought he mounted
his horse, with the most Holy Body of
Christ in a Pyx reverently fastened
about his neck, and so rode as fast as
he could. When he had gone some dis-
tance he met a wayfarer who asked
him to dismount and go with him to
see a most wonderful sight. Rashly,
from a desire to sce this marvel, the
priest Sheets and wane & had he dis-
mounted his horse before he felt
himself carried through the air with
his companion, and in a short time set
down upon the top of a very high
mountain, where there was a fair plain
full of lofty trees and surrounded by
forbidding rocks. In the midst was a
great company and es of all sorts,
and tables loaded with various luxur-
ies of food and drink; and a sound of


MALEFICARUM


191
sweetest singing was heard; and there
came women such as can enslave a
man’s soul with their beauty and
soften his very marrow with the sweet-
ness ey: exe: The simple good
priest wholly astounded at this un-
event was speechless for very
wonder, not daring to open his mouth ;
yea, he was quite beyond himself and
struck still with astonishment. Then
his companion who had led him there
asked him if he wished to worship as a
suppliant before the ae who was
perc prem eran er her any gift.
On a high throne sat a Queen of most
beautiful appearance, adorned in royal
splendour and marv rich j :
and all who were there went up to her
and prostrated themselvestothe ground
in two or four ranks in the fairest
manner, and worshipped her and
offered her various gifts. Hearing the
word Queen, and —< her so resplen-
dent and surrounded by so many
ministers, the priest thought that she
was the Mother of Christ, Queen of
Heaven and Earth; for he did not
suspect any prestige or devilish
| eager or otherwise he would not
ve gone near to her. ro
with himself, then, what gift he shoul
offer to her, he thought that none
could be more grateful or acceptable
than the Body of Her Son; and he
went up and, kneeling as a suppliant at
her feet, took the Pyx containing the
Most August Sacrament from his neck
and placed it upon the woman’s lap.
Everything then at once vanished in a
miraculous manner. Astounded at this
strange experience the simple man saw
that he had been ensnared by an illu-
sion, and tremblingly began to beseech
the help of God to bring him safe from
such a wandering from the right way.
For a long time he strayed through
trackless places and vast forests until at
last he found a shepherd who put him
upon his road and informed him that
he was a hundred miles from the place
towhich he wished to carry the Euchar-
ist. At last he reached home again,
and told the whole matter to the


192


Magistrates. This happened during
the reign of Maximilian.

S. Augustine (City of God, XXII, 8)
tells us that a man na’ Hesperius,
who had formerly been a tribune,
possessed a farm called Zubedi in the
district of Fussala; and on account of
the sickness afflicting his animals and
his servants he found that his house
was suffering from the visitation of
malignant spirits. Therefore, in my
absence, he asked our priests to send
one of their number; and they granted
his re eat eee went, and offered
these the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ,
and prayed with all his might that that
vexation should cease. And God at
once had mercy, and it ceased.


S. Augustine ier in the Ninth


Book and also in chapter of his
Collation that witches confess that they
are freed from all vexation by the devil
while they are hearing Mass; there-
fore they remain as vcr can at
about mid in Catholic churches
where many are said.


6. It is not Meet to Joke with Demons.


Nider in his Formicarius says that he
saw a Brother in a monastery at
Cologne who was rather ribald of
speech, but famous for his power of
casting out demons. This man was
casting a demon from the body of a
possessed person in the precincts of the
monastery at Cologne, and the demon
asked him to give him a place to go to;
whereupon the Brother jokingly said:
“Go to my privy.” The demon went
out; and in the night, when the
Brother wished to purge his belly, the
demon attacked him so fiercely in the
privy that he escaped with difficulty
with his life.

Therefore the casting out of demons
is a sacred matter, and should be
undertaken most reverently.


7. Of Prayer.


In er 1549 a man confessed to
a Jesuit Father that while he was per-


COMPENDIUM


BK. lll, CH. IV.


forming in the middle of the night the


penance set him by his confessor, h


and ow it seemed
if the house would down,


his th in

Se eh meaake possessed
now was

a demon so that he did not know


for fifteen days. At the
time one of the Jesuit Fa
him and bade him call
Michael ; but when he named theS
he was struck with a violent trembliny
and threw his limbs about in such
way as to frighten those who were b
But when the priest invoked God tl
Father, and the Son, and the Ho
Ghost, he was incontinently deliver
from the demon. A few days later |


.


BK. Ill. CH. Iv. MALEFICARUM 193


ister was besct by the demon’s moles-
tations ; and in the midst of her agony
he cried out in the hearing of the
Jesuits that she wished to become a
Christian. When she was brought to
sacred font and tried to protect
herself with the holy sign of the Cross,
she began to shake and tremble vio-
ently. The priest poured forth fervid
prayers; and she herself strove to
utter the Sacred Name of Jesus and
that of S. Michael, but the demon only
her the more, forcibly sealing
her mouth fast. At last, however, she
burst out into a kind of refrain and


no one could understand. One day,
when many Christians were present,
the priest celebrated Mass, and the
ed woman also was there. When
had finished he asked her how she
was, and she answered: “‘Very well.”
But when she was told to pronounce
‘the name of S. Michael, she began to
shake and gnash her teeth, and the
demon said that he would come out
but, because he had for so many years
used that family as his lodging, it was
against his will to depart. The priest
in bade her utter the name of S.
chael, and she answered that it was
peor to her, and shed tears
complainingly said: ‘Whither
shall I go?” Then all the Christians
joined in prayer; and when they had
yed enough the demon departed
her whom he had till then pos-
sessed. The woman at once asked for a
drink to be given her; and when she
was bidden to invoke the Names of
Jesus and Mary, she pronounced them
with such sweetness that it seemed like
the voice of an Angel.

In the year 1588 there was in a
hospital at Brinn in Moravia a
woman who was so pees Dae ens
by the devil that sometimes she tried
to drown herself, and sometimes tried
to do away with herself with a knife
°


which she deliberately seized in order
to injure herself; but she was pre-
vented by all the others in the
hospital. she had been thus
afflicted for three years, she was
stricken with apoplexy; and her
tongue was tied up so that she could
not speak, A request was sent to the
priests to ask for the prayers of the
eople: and God heard their prayers,
or first the knot of her tongue was
unloosed and then that of her soul,
as was proved after she had made a
good Confession, and received Sacra-
mental absolution.

In the Letters of Luis Frées (anno
1596) there is the following history:

certain Nobleman formerly of

great honour and authority who lived
near Funai had a daughter who was
married to a heathen, her mother
and all her family being heathens also,
and none being a Christian except
the said Nobleman, who was a good
and religious man. It happened that
his daughter fell suddenly ill and in
six days was near to death; and it was
said that she was possessed by a
demon, because her gestures were so
frantic and strange that she could
hardly be held by two or three men.
Her husband and father-in-law im-
plored the Bonzes for help; but they
could help her no whit with their vain
rites and superstitious trifling. When
the woman seemed to be at death’s
door they told her father, who dwelt
eighteen miles away. He hurried to
her as quickly as he could and found
his daughter alive indeed, but so
delirious that she did not recognise
her father. He then ordered the
Bonzes and the other heathens about
the bed to be removed; and taki
his Rosary recited the Lord’s Prayer
three times and was commencing the
Angelic Salutation. Meanwhile the
woman became no better, but rather
was convulsed with more terrible
spasms than before, so that now many
men could hardly hold her down. Her
father again had recourse to the
Rosary, and beat her back with it


oOo OC


194
saying: ‘““You seem to me to be some
demon. Depart from this body.”” And
the demon answered: “I shall not
depart.” The father, being a man of
eminent virtue, threw the Rosary
about her neck, sa ing: “‘Whether you
will or no, you shal depart.” Then
the demon said: “Take away the
Rosary, for it tears my neck; and then
I will depart.” The father answered :
“T shall not take it away.” Then he
took some ropes and threatened that
he would whip him; and so the demon
departed and left the woman free.


MLL LLL


one 7 es etl Srp Se lCTsy = ae \ tse


Ferdinand of Castile,* the Historian
of the Order of S. Dominic, relates
the following: At Vouzella, a town
in the district of Coimbra, was born
one Egidius (or Giles) of noble parents.
Whilst he was still but a youth, owing
to his own natural talents and family
influence he obtained no less than
three rich benefices and also a Priory.
But now he abandoned himself to


* “Ferdinand of Castile.” ““Historia gener-
alis Ordinis Praedicatorum,’’ Pars prima;
liber secundus; cap. Ixxii. The history of
Blessed Gil of Santarem, O.P., who was born
c. 1185 and died at Santarem, 14 May, 1265,
is related by all Dominican hagiographers and
chroniclers. The cult of Blessed Gil was ratified
by Benedict XIV on
is kept throughout
semi-duplex.


March, 1748. His feast
Order on 14 May as a


COMPENDIUM


BK, Ill. CH, IV.


every vice. He was well versed in the
humane sciences, and determined to
4 aeee a complete knowledge of
Philosophy and Medicine, a
that this would provide him wi
greater opportunity to practise his
iquities. Accordingly he set out for
Paris with that object in view. On
his way he fell in with a demon in
human shape; and his evil travellin
companion (who knew him well,
though — did not know what he
was) by degrees began to ask ques-
tions ; and when he heard the purpose
of his journey, he said: “Why do you
not rather listen to me? I will give
you knowledge which is both easy to
acquire and is chiefly of use for
obtaining those honours and pleasures
which you have in mind, being the
very perfection of all medicine. It
is Necromancy I mean.” With these
words he persuaded Egidius, and led
him away to a vast cavern near the
City of Toledo, where he was joyfully
met and received by men and demons
in human form; and they entered the
cavern. Not only was an oath of
secrecy exacted from him, but he was
made to swear perpetual allegiance
and homage; yet he did this full
willingly, confirming his promise with
a paper signed with his own blood,
For seven years after this he deeply
studied the Black Arts and Magic,
and then proceeded to Paris where in
a short time he made marvellous pro-
gress among the followers of Hippo-
crates and obtained the degree of
Doctor. He began to give way to
viler and viler enormities and sins,
and rushed headlong from crime to
crime, so that it was doubtful which
waxed the greater, the fame of his
learning or the infamy of his wicked-
ness. But oh! the goodness of God!
For since He could not lead him by
aoe He would have him by
bear eX meg there spon pvr se
ran a a spear, and, looking at
the miserable man with an angry
countenance, cried to him threaten-
ingly: ‘Leave this life and these evil


BK. Ill. CH. IV.


ways, and turn again to the practice
of .” Egidius was seized with a
pesca gp onder evan iheen
e was un to
eee of life and returned to wallow
in his filth, Three days later the same
pestle pad i Moe ing even more
terrible not only the same
threatening words, telling him to
change his manner of life, but pierced
his breast with his spear, wounding it
slightly. This broke his a and he
said: “I yield myself: I shall do what
Lord.” You would


ou co
ave said that ‘om was rier! a
rostrate u ground, He y
determined to give himself entirely to
(which, oT ink, was inspired by his
Ww. as was s
reais Angel who had ap to
him), resolved to join some Religious
Order, In this mind he started back


for Paris, and while he was passing
through Palencia, where the Domini-
can Brothers were then building a
monastery, he felt a sudden wish to
observe the work. He saw men of
evident sanctity and learning, some
of them aged and enfeebled, who had
formerly been delicately nurtured,
ixing mortar, cutting wood, shaping
stone, and bearing loads upon their
shoulders with the test cheerful-
ness and alacrity. He wished to join
them, and at once asked to be
admitted and was granted his request.
He fulfilled his novitiate under the
spur of a great hope of future sanctity,
and after some years was sent to
Santarem in Portugal where he
increased in prayer and in his victo
over himself The one regret whic
tortured him was that that obscene
and execrable paper was still in the
ion of the demon. Therefore
e commended himself the more fer-
vently to the Queen of Heaven, pray-
ing not without tears and frequent
sighing for some remedy for this evil.
t can the Mother of Mercy deny
to one who prays in such a manner?
One day as he was praying with great
fervour in a chapel of the church,


MALEFICARUM


195


monasticism and
compels me to restore to you this
paper; for will never cease to
regret it.” He then threw the paper
down at the feet of Egidius and
vanished, Egidius took up the paper
and tore it to bits. But the demon’s
threat was not vain: for he tormented
him for more than seven years after in
a marvellous manner. Withoutreckon-
ing his other vexations, he assumed
the likeness of a certain friar who
dwelt in the same monastery, and so
plagued Egidius with every domestic
discomfort that can possibly be
imagined. After suffering this, Egidius
at last, in grief that the evil should
lurk hidden and that the Brother (as
he thought him) should so continually
offend against God, took the matter to
the Prior and asked to be sent else-
where, telling him the reason. Upon
this the matter was brought to light;
and the calumniator, being exposed
and nowfor the first timeovercome not,
as before, by Egidius but by them all,
ceased to torment his victor. Egidius
lived on, and was famous not only for
his many virtues, but for various
miracles.

In the year 1265 he left this world
to be born —_ in Heaven, and was
buried at Santarem where he is
worshipped as a Saint. See what a
mighty protection against demons
there is in the Virgin Mother of God,
and what inducement to a good life
in a man’s Guardian el,

ohn of Salisbury He lycraticus, II,
28) writes as follows: In my boyhood
I was sent to learn the Psalms from a
priest who unfortunately was given
to crystal gazing. One day he made
me sit at his feet with one of my com-
panions who was rather older than


196
I, after having uttered certain spells,
in order to use us in those profane
mysteries so that we might be able to
tell him what he asked. He rubbed our
finger nails with some oil or holy
ointment, and we gazed at them
as also into a highly polished and
shining bowl. After the priest had
pronounced some strange names
which seemed to me merely by reason
of the horror I felt at them to be the
names of demons, and had muttered
some adjurations, which cannot have
been in the name of God, my com-
panion told him that he had seen
certain ghostly and cloudlike figures ;
whereas thing b so panay eho pt a
saw nothi ut my -nails an
the bowl and such things as had before
been visible to me. From that time I
was considered to be of no use for
these divinations ; and I was forbidden
to come near them, as being a
hindrance to their sacrilege: and
every time they determined to prac-
tise these mysteries, I was kept away
from them as an impediment. Thus
did God (as I think, through my
Guardian Angel) show favour to me
in my childhood; and from that day
the horror which I conceived for this
crime increased as I grew older, and
was but the more deeply printed
he my soul by the miserable end to
which I saw many such Diviners come.
For I have never known one who did
not die before his time, or through
some extraordinary mischance, or
by the hands of his enemies; not to
speak of others whom I have seen
with my own eyes stricken to the
ground a the vengeance of Heaven,
and destroyed. Yet I must mention
two, of whom one was this priest I
y of, and the other a certain
eacon, who fled in terror from the
horrors of the magic crystal, one to a
Chapter of Canons and the other to a
cell at Cluny, where they assumed the
religious habit. And from that time I
have felt great compassion for those
two poor men, who have suffered even
more than the rest of their companions.


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il, CH. IV.


g. The Singular Help of the Blessed
Virgin


ary.


Besides other examples which I have
already quoted, I will add another
most certain story to show the present
help of the Virgin Mother of God,
Orazio Torsellino,* the writer of the
History of Our Blessed Lady of Loreto,
relates a happening which was as
beautiful as it was true:

“Moreover the patronage of the
B. Virgin of Loreto saved another

oung man, whom raging lust drew
eadlong to utter perdition. For bein
of desperate affection, desire an
audacity, he gave himself wholly to
forbidden pleasures; and overcoming
many motions with his dishonesty, he
burned with the excessive love of a
certain woman, whom seeing he could


*“Ovazio Torsellino.’ The historical
works of Orazio Torsellino, S.F., are still
held in high estimation. Sommervogel’s “Bib-
liothéque des écrivains de la Compagnie de
Jésus” (10 vols., Brussels, 890-1910) may be
consulted. For this passage the translation of
Thomas Price (1608) has been used. The refer-
ence ts III, 33.


BK. Ill. CH. Iv.


gain neither by entreaty nor moncy,
nor force, alts Poi h he etermtined
to experience the most desperate
course of all. Making means therefore
to the devil by Art magic, he
requested to be made partaker of his
desire, shewing himself ready to con-
descend to all, to enjoy that which he
so earnestly ie pon by
commandment of the devil, he for-
sook Christ, and gave and delivered
himself wholly to him, and what is
more, did also swear unto him b
proscript words, and bound himself
unto it by hand-writing: so far doth
the love of pleasure bind impure
— But Aye cp aibaiece “her
esire, satiety (as it
loathsomeness, and ty the ess
and grace of God he weighed the
greatness of his offence with mature
consideration. And being truly peni-
tent for his wicked sin, and conceiving
some hope of pardon, he began to
seek for caavecty help, and to call on
Almighty God and His B. Mother,
Meantime the B. Virgin of Loreto,
and the priests of the sacred House
(endowed with most ample faculty to
release sins) coming to his mind, with-
out delay made him go to Loreto,
Almighty God being the author and
ecige of his journey; not doubting
ut there to find remedy against so
many evils. His hope deceived him
not. For as soon as he came thither,
making means to confer with a dis-
creet priest, he declared unto him his
mournful state, and asked him,
whether he might have any hope to
be saved. At first the priest remained
somewhat amazed at the grievousness
of the offence, but then declaring
unto him the greatness thereof; he
put him in hope of salvation, if by
prayer, ae and voluntary punish-
ment of his body, he would wholl
og himself to pacify Almighty God.
en he refused no punishment at
all, the priest promised him, if he did
what was commanded, he would
bryos at hear him, and by the grace
of God would also take away so great


MALEFICARUM


197
an offence. At parting he exhorted
him to punish his body, with fasting,
with hair-cloth and stripes, for the
space of three days, to implore the
help of the B. Virgin, and Hog to
ask humble pardon of Almighty God
for his grievous sin; and he also
promised to say Mass for his salvation
all that time, whereby there was good
pity cia on either re nes e

ys so spent, ore he gave
him stachation the priest thought
good to wrest his hand-writing from
the devil, that he might have no right
nor interest at all in him. Therefore
he exhorted the Penitent to retire
himself into the most Majestical
Chapel, and earnestly to importune
the Mother of God with prayer and
tears, until he got his hand-writin
out of the devil’s hands. He obeyed,
sr desirous of salvation and security,
with undoubted hope to obtain it by
the intercession of the B. Virgin
Mother of God. Whereupon prostrat-
ing his body before the B. Virgin, with
flowing tears he earnestly besought
her, that she would vouchsafe to get
him his wicked hand-writing, and to
work his salvation and health. By a
great miracle he had his desire. For
as he repeated these verses with all
devotion :


A Mother show thyself,

He take our plaints by thee,
That being for us born,
Vouchsafed thy Son to be.


he saw the hand-writing fall suddenly
into his hands, and scarce mene |
himself for the unexpected joy thereof,
with new tears he gave manifold
thanks to the B. Virgin. Whereupon
departing presently out of the sacred
Chapel, he went joyfully unto the
priest, and showed him his hand-
writing gotten again by the benefit of
the Mother of God, which was stuffed
with so many horrible execrations and
curses against Christ, and himself that
wrote it, that it may easily ap to
be dictated by the everlasting Enemy


of mankind. Notwithstanding the


198


power of God, more potent than all
diabolical deceit, loosed so great a
band, whereby that sinful soul given
by vow to hell itself, by favour of the

other of God was set in the liberty
of the children of God, that no wicked
nor desperate man should despair of
salvation (if he himself will not perish)
nor doubt of the clemency of God
who hath freely given his B. Mother
a Patroness to offenders for their
salvation.”


10. Of the Sign of the Holy Cross.


Of the many further examples
which I could adduce, be content with
this one which is both rare and
marvellous. A certain priest dwelling
at Arona in the year 1591 had made a
vow to God that he would enter the
Society of Jesus, and made his inten-
tion known to one of the Fathers. But
the devil took this ill and turned to his
wonted weapons; for he so plagued
the man with impure thoughts that he
prevented him from sleeping. The
soldier of Christ arose from his bed
and passed sleepless nights reading the
lives of the Saints; but the Adversary
would not endure even this, for he
threw down the lamp which was
hanging upon the wall so that the oil


COMPENDIUM


BK. Ill. CH. IV.


was spilled and dirtied the whole
book. Not satisfied with this, he burst
into the midst of supper like a foul
wind, so that the priest at once went
from the table to his cubicle and fell
prostrate upon the ground in prayer
to God, giving his body stripes instead
of food. And when even so he yet felt
the fire of blind desire plucking at
him, he stood barefoot upon the
ground for two or three hours while
that importunate heat should be
cooled, and then threw himself wearily
upon his bed. Lying in the same bed
he seemed to see a woman, and to put
out his hand and touch her hair;
therefore he quickly leaped out in
amazement and, turning his eyes to
the bed, saw nothing: and this hap-
pened two or three times. He feared
that he was suffering a delusion of the
eyes, and affirmed that the same thing
happened on many nights; until at
last it reached such a pass that, when
the unhappy man went to bed, he used
to tie down his arms and hands with
bands for fear lest his hands should
wander for some vain te er in his
dreams: but it was unavailing, for no
sooner had sleep bound up his senses
than, in a short time, it unbound his
arms. But how wonderful is the mercy
of God, who does not allow the devil
to tempt us beyond our strength! The
priest, obstinately fi roy * for his
chastity, put the devil to flight; but
though beaten he returned to the
combat with marvellous cunning.
One day the priest went out to escape
from the heat of the town and was
walking by a lake saying the Hours of
Our Lady. He had hardly gone two
hundred paces when he was over-
taken by a man with a long reddish
beard, in very costly raiment, and
sitting upon a very beautiful black
horse like no other in those parts, and
accompanied by two foot-servants.
Approaching the priest he greeted
him with great politeness and asked:
**Have you come to the Jubilate yet?”
Now it happened that the priest was
just then reciting that Psalm; but


BK. It, CH. IV.


the wonder was that he was doing it
80 i cy he could hardly hear
himself. Then the horseman and the
ing began to converse as follows.
irst the horseman asked enquiringly :
“What is it that is worrying you so
deeply?” But the priest tried to put
him off, and said: “I am quite well
and ws Your question is wide of
the mark.” But the other answered:
“My friend, it is hard to bandy words
with me; for I have long had from
God the gift of reading the inmost
thoughts of men.” The priest stood
rooted to the spot with wonder and
amazement, staring at the speaker’s
clothing and his whole person; but at
last he took heart and said: “If
have that bows, tell me what it is
that is troubling me, if you know more
about my affairs than I do myself.”
The other answered him: “It is your
vow to the Society of Jesus which is
icking you and will not leave you
in peace. But you must order your
life in a different manner, for there is


no door open to you in that direction.” |


The priest, ee that the other
had somehow heard that the Jesuits
were undecided whether or not to
accept his vow, replied: “If the
Fathers will not have me, I shall not
be disheartened nor torture myself;
for there is not only one way of serving
God pious! and devoutly.” “That is
right,” said the horseman; “‘put that
trouble from your heart. Your mind
and body are of such a nature that,
even in your present manner of life,
you are able to preserve your inno-
cence. But if you will listen to me, you
shall see another country where you
shall live for God and yourself.
Leave Arona and follow me. You
shall not have cause to regret it, for
you will be excellently placed with me.
And here is proof that my promises
are not idle.” Saying this, he shook a
purse full of money in his hand. The
priest thanked him, saying: “I do not
at present need your generosity, for I
must keep faith with the Church at
Arona,” The horseman at once inter-


MALEFICARUM 199


rupted him, saying : “What obligation
have you? It has not been publicly
witnessed, or put in writing. Can they
claim you in return for fifty-three
pounds of bronze? For that is all you
receive, and you will never get more.”
The priest, not without wonder,
admitted the truth of this; but was


going? Where do you live?” “In
allanza,”” he answered; ‘“‘and the
boat which is approaching us is mine
and at the service of my friends.”
This boat was propelled by an oars-
man on each side, and the priest
bi -watghi eee he had not seen it
ore. “Now i accept my con-
dition, you shall sie all you desire
in Pallanza with me. If you are
determined to embrace the religious
life, I shall see to it that you are
admitted into a famous and most holy
House.” “I thank your i
civility towards a stranger, but I have
my reasons for declining.’ When,
after this exchange of conversation,
the priest was constrained to wait a
little, he said: “Go forward, Master :
I shall follow a little behind” ; and he
did as he said. Then he made the sign
of the Cross upon his brow and over
his heart, and taking in his hands the
rosary with which he had been count-
ing his prayers, followed the other.
But at the sign of the Cross, the horse-
man, the servants, the boat and the
rowers all vanished. See how the
tortuous wiles of the Serpent were all
were ated like a cloud by one sign of
e Cross,


11. Of Holy, or Lustral Water.


At Wurzburg in the year 1583 a
priest’s house not far from the city
was haunted either by an evil spirit or
by some illusion. The priest himself
and his confidential servants used to


t everything in the house was


say tha
hurled violently to the floor ; moreover


|
.


200


lighted torches, even when placed in
great numbers in a room free from


Uy!)


AIL It.


all Oe we, oe were blown out at one
pee : were forcibly dragged away
m them when they went to lie on
them; and many of the servants had
such an obstruction in the throat that
they were nearly suffocated. Finally
many horrible things were seen and
heard in the house. The wretched
priest, at his wits’ end, went to other
riests and told them how he was
eing plagued, and asked the rector
to depute some priest to be his pro-
tection. One was entrusted with this
duty, and towards evening went fast-
ing to the place; but hardly had he
crossed the threshold before he him-
self saw what he had been told of. For
in the actual sight both of him and his
companion a salver was hurled against
the wall with such force and violence
that it frightened those present nearly
to death. This priest bade them all be
of good heart and urged the parish
priest to peoere to approach the
tribunal of Penance ; and then putting
on a surplice and stole he went up to
the upper part of the house where the
demon was chiefly wont to rage. He
employed the usual rites of the Church
for putting demons to flight ; and when
there was no answer and no presence
was evoked by the priest’s voice, he
turned to exhorting the servants,
especially to throw aside heresy and
to expiate their sins by a good con-


COMPENDIUM


BK, Il. CH. Iv.


fession. Then, having duly purified
the place, he returned to his house
with a great harvest of souls. For it
is agreed that many were reclaimed
from heresy to the Church; and that
the house was freed from all its former
molestation, as the parish priest after-
wards testified.
We read in Epiphanus (II) of a
certain Josephus who, while he was
et a Jew, restored a sick man to
ealth by making the sign of the Cross
upon him in water. Palladius* testi-
fies the same of a woman whom
through magic glamour seemed to
be c ed into a mare: for when
S. Macarius blessed water and having
rayed sprinkled it upon her head, it
boctine clear to all that the woman
stood there in her own proper shape.
Theodoret (lib. 5, hist., cap. 21)
records that, when Bishop Marcellus
was destroying the Temple of Jupiter
at Apamea, he saw a black demon
restraining the force of the flames so
that they should not consume the
wooden material. He fortified and
blessed water with the sign of the
Cross and ordered it to be thrown
upon the flames; and the evil spirit
could not endure this conduct and
fled. But the flames were aroused by
the water as if it had been oil, and
consumed the Temple in a moment.
S. Theodore the Archimandrite
used to drive away all harms with
Holy Water, even sickness caused by
demons, as he did from that Phentinus
near Tantendia who met a demon in
the form of a dog which, by merely
gaping at him, struck him with a most
grievous malady; and as he did from
the house of one Theodore, a Tribune,
where both men and all the animals
were tormented by demons; so that
when they would dine, stones were
hurled upon the table to the great


* “Palladius.” Born in Galatia, 368; died
probably before 431. Author of the “Historia
Lausiaca,” an account of the monks of Egypt
and Palestine. The first edition was a Latin
version by Gentianus Hervetus, Paris, 1555.


BK. Ill, CH. Iv.


terror of all, and the women’s beds
were broken, and the house was
infested by so many snakes and mice
that everybody was afraid to enter it.
So rng st of i went a and
spent the whole night wors i
and Praying to God; and ice
ling the whole house with Holy Water,
delivered it from the unclean spirits.
This we learn from Gregory the
Priest, whom we have often quoted.

He recalls also the following illus-
trious miracle: The inhabitants of a
Misa p in the district of Como had
killed an ox in order to feed u
ten roeried deste eueobaceeaen t
all who ate of it became ill and lay as
if one were dead, and whatever meat
they had left went black and stinking.
Those, therefore, who had not tasted
of the meat told what had happened
to a holy man; who answered that the
misfortune must have come from a
company of demons in the cooking
pots, and since he could not at that
time go with them he blessed water
and sent it by one of the Brethren to

rinkle it over those who were in

er and to offer it to them to
ink. When this was done they all
arose as if from sleep, except one who
was dead. For this man’s brother,
John the Bailiff, would not wait for
the blessing of the servant of God but
ran for help to a witch; and while he
was applying her charm to his brother,
he lost his life.

Great armies of devils invaded the
dwelling of S. Hubert the Bishop of
Liége, a veritable sc of demons.
Seeing this, the man of said to his

e: “Go, and let there be brought
ere water which a priest has con-
secrated by mingling salt therewith,
and which has been impregnated by
the power of prayer for putting to
ight the Enemy’s malice; and oil
(that is, the ism) blessed by
apostolic authority; for by the asper-
sion and unction of these the pestilent
phantasms of the Enemy will soon be
so routed, that he will not dare to
renew his machinations.” So says


MALEFICARUM 201


the anon author, that disciple
of S. Hubert who wrote a life of the
ae 58 Ri

e year 1 at ‘a one
Ruthenus was oft stmbctne to
return to the bosom of the Roman
Church, but he always refused to
listen and went away impenitent.


But from that time various ns RN
were seen by his servants in his house:
the tables were removed from them
when they sat down, yet there was no
one to be seen; the doors,
although secured not only with bolts
but with bars across them, were torn
ight off their hinges; from the top

the house were hurled huge stones
covered with pitch, which a Jesuit
Father writes that he hi has
handled, And a certain Pole, whom
that priest asserts that he saw, was so
grievously wounded wu the head
that he lay half dead for some days.
There was also much straw in that
house, and this was all cut up into the
most minute pieces. In short these
and other such terrible manifestations
led the man to have no doubt that
Satan had taken possession of that
house as his by right. The priest whom
I have mentioned went into the house
with one companion and purified it
with Holy Water and incense, and by
this exorcism all the disturbance of
the demons was allayed, wherefore
they returned great thanks in the
House of God.

About 1587 the Jesuits established
a colony at Patzcuaro in Mexico.
Here there was an Indian woman with
a child, and every night when she
slept it seemed as if the child were
snatched from her side and then
replaced, but she did not know where
he was taken to. Meanwhile the boy
himself lost strength every day and
was slowly wasting to his death. He
was brought into the church and was
saved by the application of Holy
Water, with prayer.

In 1588, the following year, a
peasant woman of Tréves offered a
man some eggs. The man’s lackey


202


took the eggs in his hat and, after
removing them, replaced his hat upon
his the and was at once stricken
with such pain that he nearly went
mad. Not knowing what he was
doing, he rushed into a church and
pees his burning head into the
oly Water stoup which stood there,
and was cured. The witch, on being
a examined, me ote
een sO polsone at they
ea kill whoever ate them, and
would cause those who touched them
to swell.
aoe Pont-a-Mousson in na oa: ss
e year 1593 a virgin of advan
age was su ject to such fits that she
was held to be possessed: another
woman was bewitched, and another
tormented by an evil spirit. After a


‘ Gomara, in his
Historia Mexicana, testifies that amon


the Indians there are three chief


remedies against the illusions and
apparitions of demons. The worship-
ful Presence of the most potent Sacra-
ment of the Eucharist; the Crucifix,
and Holy Water. And he says that
the cacodemons themselves have con-
fessed as much to the Indians more
than once.


12. Of the Virtue of Salt, Bread, Wax,
and the Blessed Agnus Dei


At Trapani in the year 1585 there
was a householder in whose house it
was reported that certain voices had
been heard for some months; and this
was a familiar demon who in various
ways tried to delude men. He would
hurl great stones, but without wound-
ing anyone’s head, and would cast
down the household vessels from on
high without breaking them. And
when a boy of the house was wont to


COMPENDIUM


BK. Ill. CH. IV.


sing hymns, the demon trolled out
lascivious songs in the hearing of all


to the accompaniment of a harp, and
openly boasted that he was a demon.
en the master of the house and his
wife were starting on their business to
a certain town, the demon attached
himself to their company; and when
the gure hey Gocay. re fap rain and
was coming e spirit went
before shouting on his way, aa began
to warn the servants to Duild nye
for the master was at the door soaked
through with rain. But so soon as the
master of the house understood how
he was being deluded, he threatened
the demon that he would fetch a priest
to drive him from his house: and the
demon began to exclaim that he must
not do this, and threatened him with
his enmity and hatred, saying that he
would keep himself hidden for as long
as the priest should be in the house.
Nevertheless the master went to a
priest and told him all that had ha
pened, and even changed his house in
order to free himself from that haunt-
ing. But the priest, fearing to arouse
the curiosity of the ignorant multi-
tude who would flock thither to see
what would happen, decided not to
go with him; only he advised him and
all his household to cleanse their souls
by a general confession and strengthen
themselves with the Heavenly Bread,
and to take care that none of the
servants or anyone else should fall


BK. Ill, CH, IV.


into conversation with the Enemy, nor
seck to know from him what was
hidden, as they had done; but rather
or were to laugh at Se
said, and despise it as coming from
the Father of Lies. They all promised
to do so, and the priest gave them an
image of the Celestial Lamb in blessed
paper Paper sp Gaon sap genes Se
necks of those who were chiefly
troubled by the demon. The demon
was in terror of that wax and threat-
ened that, if they did not throw it
away, he would twist their necks and
kill them. But they followed the sage
counsel and advice of the priest and
gave him no answer, but fortified
themselves against the Enemy with
the weapons of the Sacraments and
were casily saved from his guile and
molestation.

The country of Tréves is even now
infested with witches, one of whom
with her spells and charms enticed a
boy, about eight years of age, to that
place where, under the cover of dark-
ness and night, they orm their
execrable games. The boy was given
his part to play; for while the rest
joined hands and danced, he beat the
measure upon a tabor. Neither was he
a looker-on at their dances and games
only, but often witnessed the magic
with which they do hurt to human
bodies and the fruits of the earth.
The Archbishop ordered the boy to
be kept in custody in his Palace and
to be taught the catechism, of which
he was quite ignorant. He had an
Agnus Dei hung round his neck, and
a demon came to him at night and
scolded him bitterly for having let
himself be deceived so easily, and
ordered him to throw away that
waxen image if he did not wish to be
beaten. The boy, in terror, obeyed;
and at once the demon, since the
object of his fear had been removed,
carried him to the town walls and
placed him upon a black goat and
took him in a moment to the most
obscene spots haunted and infested
by witches. After he had remained


MALEFICARUM 203


some time with the witches he was
again restored to the Palace, with the
cord apes steer os the me
image ung. At the request o
the Archbishop and the whole city,
the boy was sent to a house of the
Jesuits, and kept till he should learn
what was necessary to the Christian
discipline, so that he might after-
w return to the Palace piously
fortified by the Sacraments and free
from the snares of demons. And so,
finally, this came to pass; although it
is said that after some years he re-


lapsed and paid the penalty of his
crime.


In 1586 in the same district there
was a young t, less than fifteen
ears old, of very keen intelligence.
¢ had been more than once to the
hellish place where men mingled with
women, and young with old, with the
demon presiding, in feasting at night
with all sense of shame forgotten. But
he had not yet renounced God and
the Mother of God, nor had pro-
nounced after the demon the exe-
crable prayers: only he had eaten the
brain of a cat in his food when the
moon was waning, and felt that his
own brain had become smaller. He
entered the city of Tréves which he
had never seen before, doubtless being
lured to his punishment by the same
hand that had led him to the sin of
witchcraft; and was taken as posses-
sed into the Prince’s Palace to be
ange apart, that the demon might
e driven from him, But the demon
os him no rest at night, beating
im and tearing the Agnus Dei from
his neck. The Archbishop then deter-
mined to send him to the College of
the Jesuits; but even there the r
had no peace until his cubicle

was solemnly exorcised. It will be
worth while to record some of his
statements; for he told the Bishop as
follows: “While we were holding our
Sabbat there was one of your retainers
who boasted that on such and such a
night he had poured a poisoned drink
into you as you slept, having found


204
the way open to you because you had
imprudently left your Agnus Dei on
the table when you went to bed; and
if the cup had been a little larger, you
would not have escaped death.” And
indeed the Bishop said that he had
been so ill after that particular night
that he had been forced to keep his
bed for some days. When this state-
ment did not convince the great com-

any of nobles who were present, the

oy said to the Burgomaster of the
city: “And our witches have attacked
you twice; but they were repulsed by
that little locket which you always
wear, containing two images and
some consecrate ote cag (He meant
the Agnus Dei.) The Burgomaster
admitted that he always wore these


holy things.

Another man by a demon
appeared more like a mizing, bark-
ing dog than a ing and speaking
man. He was brought from ta cml
to us and with great difficulty forced


into the church; and he did not cease
to act like a dog until an Agnus Dei
was put about his neck. Then at last
he grew quict and behaved like a man
again, and purged his soul with the
healing grace of confession. The same
amulet similarly benefited another
who laboured under the same afflic-
tion.

In the Province of Innspruck an
apt medicine for the gravest maladies
is much in use, and the terrors of the
devil are counteracted in many places
by the use of sacred amulets. y
incidents are told in proof of this.
One man asserted that he was destined
to hell because of his crimes, and in
his convulsions invoked the devil,
making it clear by his behaviour to
the panic-stricken bystanders that the
Fiend had appeared to him. But the
man was cured: for a priest soothed
him at first with gentle words, and so


led him to make his confession, having
given him an Agnus Dei to place
devoutly in his bosom. Another man
had in time past ecard his soul and

e Snatcher of souls ;


body to the terrib


COMPENDIUM


BK. Il. CH. Iv,


and as his time was at hand the un-
happy wretch went to a priest and
sought his advice with trembling li
and uneasy eyes. In a sudden panic
he cried out: “Help! Father, make
haste to help a poor wretch with some
holy thing.” The priest asked what
was the matter, and he answered
“The Enemy is standing at the door
waiting for me to come out, and
looking threateningly at me because
of my broken vow.” This man also
was by the same remedy. The
following story also is not unknown.
A certain peasant heard that there
were in Innspruck men who had a
sure medicine to drive away witch-
craft and delusions: so he came to
them for the medicine against the
devil; for so he called it. en asked
what he meant by a medicine, he
answered: “I do not know. I only
know what I have heard: but what-
ever it is, it is something that drives
the devil away.” So he was given a
_— of blessed wax, and soon after
ound great benefit from it: so that
now, whenever a Jesuit Father goes
through that town, he needs more
than seventy pieces of blessed wax to
satisfy their clamorous requirements.

About the same time at Avignon a
woman was tormented by an evil
spirit; and a friend advised her to go
to a priest, and meanwhile he gave
her parents an Agnus Dei which they
sewed in her garment unbeknown to
her. She cither forgot this advice, or
put off going; and she was seized
through the window by four seemin
cats and carried up on to the roof
the house; then she heard a human
voice threatening to hurl her down
unless she threw away the waxen
image which she had in her clothes.
She understood what that must be,
and recognised that they were evil
counsellors : therefore with great cour-
age she refused to do so, and at once
turned to her prayers, and was left
oe ee upon the roof. For there her
usband, roused by her cries, found
her,


BK. II. CH. Iv.


At pie bck the year 1590 a + young
man received a t wrong involving
much loss at ar eth of those from
whom he should least have expected
it; and he resented this more than


twilight he met a demon who, seeing
his chance, was not slow to take it.
He was in the form of a noble man,
very dark, and at first caused the
young man some terror; but he
greeted him and so removed his fear,
and asked him the cause of his sorrow.
The young man explained what was
the matter; and the demon told him
that by himself he had no hope of
recovering his money, since it had
fallen into the hands of very powerful
pean but if he would follow him,
e would very easily recover every-
thing. The young man answered him:
“J have been imposed upon by men
whom I know, and by my friends:
shall I, then, put my trust in a
stranger, whom I now see for the
first time? Good God——” At these
last words the man-monster vanished
into the air like lightning. On the
next day at the same time, as the
young man was pondering the same
thoughts, there appeared to him a
woman of noble mien who begged him
to retire with her for a short time.
But the young man refused, and kept
resisting her importunate persuasions,
until she advised him to draw his
sword from the bedside and pierce
the wall with it. He refused at first;
but at last, not knowing what he did
(for he was nearly mad with worry},
he obeyed; and as he struck the w
he cried: “God turn it to good!”
This again drove off the second
demon sora eeg But the demon
came a third time (for his moody
anxiety was deeply implanted in the
man’s mind, and the tempter would
not leave him alone), and took the
form of a woman in the flower of life
and of great beauty, who, both by
word and gesture, lasciviously invited


MALEFICARUM 205


him to sin. She did not stop short at
words, but forcibly tried to drag him
to her. The young man cried aloud
for help, and when the servants ran
quickly to him that wicked apparition
vanished, and the man was found
utterly spent and nearly ion When
he was asked the reason of his fear and
his screams, he could not even open
his mouth, but lay with glazing eyes
like a dead man, having lost his voice
ea Trarbalaehcs Seat and
upon a tended, an
caaconme ite courage as soon as he
was sprinkled with Holy Water; and
the next day he told the whole story,
and at the advice of a priest fortified
himself with waxen images conse-
crated by the sacred mysteries, and
other weapons feared by the devil,
and in this way so frightened his
Enemy that he ceased to appear to
him. But sometimes it happens, with
God’s permission, that this remedy is
of no avail, especially when God has
willed to gain a more glorious victory
by some other means, as for example
by the bare name of Jesus or of Mary.
This was proved by what hap-
pened at Augsburg in the year 1591,
where the wearing of consecrated wax
weuwped with the image of the Lamb
was for many a present remedy against
the horrid monsters of the devil and
his nightly terrors. But to one man
the demon appeared openly, as if in
contempt, and bribed him with much
money to commit a crime, having
broken the cord by which the disc
hung, and thrown away the Agnus Dei.
Yet the man was saved when he called
upon the names of Jesus and Mary.
In the year 1589 there was a woman
who had written a Deed with her own
blood and vowed herself to the devil.
After she had repented of this, the
demon often showed her the Deed;
but she trusted in the protection of
the Divine Lamb with whose image
she had fortified her breast, and
ordered him to return to her her
hand-writing. At last she saw it fall
at her feet, to glowing ashes.


206


13. Of the Sound of Bells


We have elsewhere given proof of
the efficacy of the sound of bells
against demons. And this is main-
tained also by the Council of Cologne,
cap. 24; and confirmed by an ares
quoted by Peter the Venerable, Abbot
of Cluny, who writes as follows

De miraculis, I, 13): A certain Italian

rother named Giovanni became
weary of the severity of the unvarying
ren ig em and even thought of escap-
ing from the monastery. The devil
himself wi Seeger to him in the form
of an abbot accompanied by two
demons in the guise of monks, while
this Brother was sitting alone in a
remote part of the monastery in deep
thought; and thinking the moment
ripe for deceiving him, he sr rea
to him and said: “Brother, I have
lately come here to lodge. But, hap-
pening to see you, I recognised that
you are in some aes —— le and are
a over many thoughts in your
mind. Now I have in ehed: and in
art know the cause of your trouble;
but if you would tell it to me openly,
perhaps I shall be able to give you
some advice. Therefore tell me, as a
friend, who you are and why you are
so sad and sorry.” And when that
brother hesitated to open the secrets
of his heart to one whom he supposed
a str , and only answered that he
was of Italian nationality; one of the
demons in the form of a monk added:
And I am an abbot in that very
district, and can be of good help to
you in all things: for I know, although
you keep silent, that the abbot of this
monastery, and the others, treat you
badly, not respecting you as you de-
serve, and moreover putting you to
much indignity. Therefore I advise
you to consult your own interest and
eave this pica pernicious place and
come away with me; for I am ready
to take you from these evils to my
abbey, which is called Grotta Ferrata


COMPENDIUM MALEFICARUM


BK. Ill. CH. Iv.


where will receive every honour.”
To this the Brother a : “I can
no means leave here; for the gates

of the monastery are shut, and as
surrounded with a crowd of monks.”
Then the devil said: “‘As long as you
remain here, I can give you no help.
But find some way to break out of the
monastery, and I shall at once be by
eee side and take you to my place as
said.” But shenell ul God, who does
not allow us to be tempted beyond our
strength, did not permit the Enemy to
roceed any further. But as it is written
P b xx, 24), “He shall flee from

e iron weapon.” For as they were
thus disputing, the company of monks
were sitting down to supper in the
refectory at their accustomed hour,
and when they had finished the Prior,
as was his custom, struck one blow
upon the bell. Hearing this sound, the
demon who was pretending to be an
abbot, was by the act of God snatched
away from the Brother, who was
speakicds to him, and driven with
great speed and violence to the privies
which were close by, and in the sight
of the said Brother plunged right into
them,

It is commonly confessed by witches
that if, when they are being carried
by a demon to the Sabbat, or back
home from it, the sound of bells is
heard, the demons carrying them at
once set down their foul burdens and
escape in terror. This I have already
explained in the proper place.


FInis.
sg


Grant, we beseech Thee, O Lord,
That Thy people may escape the con-
tamination of the Devil, and may with
a pure mind follow Thee, the only
God, ate Jesus Christ, Thy Son,
Our Lord, &c.
