The Traditions of Islam: An Introduction to the Study of the Hadith Literature (Alfred Guillaume, 1924)
========================================================================================================
The first English introduction to hadith literature, with translated examples — the pioneering Western study of the Sunna. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1924 Oxford edition.

THE 
Traditions of 

ISLAM 

THE 

Mraditions Of 

ISLAM 

An Introduction to the study of 
the 

HADITH LITERATURE 

By Avrrep GuiLLauME, M.A. 

Professor of Hebrew and Oriental Languages in the 
University of Durham. 

Sometime Hody Exhibitioner of Wadham College, Oxford. 

Cy Xan) 
AT .THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1924 

926T OFV 

Ag30 1926 

Oxford University Press 
London _— Edinburgh Glasgow Copenhagen 
New York Toronto Melbourne Cape Town 
Bombay Calcutta Madras Shanghai 
Humphrey Milford Publisher to the University 

Printed in England 

PREFACE 

Ir is a curious fact that an empire containing more 
than a hundred million Muslims has not produced 
a book in the English language dealing with and 
explaining a great branch of Muhammadan literature 
which stands beside the Quran as a source of Muslim 
belief and practice. The lack of such a book on the 
traditions of Islam is difficult to explain, because the 
everyday life of Muslims throughout the world is 
governed and directed by these traditions. But, at 
any rate, it absolves the author from the necessity for 
an apology for venturing to treat of so vast a subject. 

I need not point out my indebtedness to the work of 
older scholars, particularly the late Ignaz Goldziher, 
whose Muhammedanische Studien must form the basis 
of any work on the /adith literature. Scholars will 
recognize that I have drawn freely from his writings, 
and this acknowledgement of my indebtedness must 
suffice. I have not, however, shirked the obvious 
duty of studying the literature at first hand, especially 
in the Kanzu-l'Ummal, compiled by ‘Ala-al-Din b. 
Muttaqi of Burhanpur, who died in 975 4.u., and in 
the Mishkatu-l-Masabih, ‘The Niche of the Lamps,’ 
an anthology of tradition selected by Waliu-l-Din Abu 
‘Abd Allah (fl. 737), and based on the Masadbthu-l- 
Sunna of Muhammad Abt Muhammad Al Baghawi 
(d. 516). It would be difficult to over-estimate the 

2851 

OT a UT I Se OR er 

6 PREFACE 

value of the MWishkat as a synopsis of the hadith 
literature. The author has (a) omitted the zsvad or 
chain of narrators of each tradition, (4) arranged his 
material according to the subject-matter with sub- 
divisions of ‘genuine’, ‘good’, and ‘weak’ authority, 
(c) ranged almost the whole field of the literature, and 
(2) given a representative selection of the traditions 
free from the constant repetitions occurring in almost 
all the original collections. I have not always been 
careful to cite the individual author from whom the 
anthologist has culled his hadith, because a most 
laborious search would be necessary to determine 
whether a parallel hadith was preserved by other 
writers, and the point is often of no importance. 
Moreover, when the great concordance to hadith, 
which is now being prepared by Professor Wensinck, 
of Leyden, with the assistance of many British and 
Continental Arabists, has been published the curious 
will be able at a glance to determine such questions 
for themselves. Nor do I propose to notice the pro- 
lific growth of compendia and commentaries to hadith 
which form excrescences on the original literature. 

The Shia collections of traditions deserve a separate 
treatise, and are not dealt with in these pages. 

I cannot hope in a work of this size to have given 
more than an outline of a vast territory which has not 
yet been opened up to the Western student. 

Experience as a political officer in the Arab Bureau 
during the war convinced me of the importance of 
hadith. I have, for instance, seen it invoked by doctors 
to settle the question as to whether the faithful might 
eat horseflesh, and by Bolshevists to persuade Muham- 
madans that republics are of divine appointment. 

PREFACE 7 

My thanks are due to my friend Sir Thomas Arnold, 
who first suggested this undertaking to me, and who 
has constantly assisted me with helpful criticism; and 
to Professor Margoliouth, without whose advice no old 
pupil of his would venture to write on matters Arabian. 
Finally, 1 desire to express my deep gratitude to the 
Librarians and sub-Librarians of the India Office and 
the Indian Institute, Oxford, who lent me for long 
periods books which were otherwise inaccessible. 

CO: NSE EAN 

I. The Evolution of Hadith 
II. The Umayyad Period 
III. The Abbasid Period 
IV. Criticism of Hadith by Muslims 
V. Selections from Hadith 

VI. Borrowing from Christian Documents 
and a cinon 

VII. Some Aspects of the Prophet Muhammad 
in Tradition : 

Appendix A. The Caliphate in Tradition 

Appendix B. A Translation of the A7ztadu-l- 
Qadar from the Sahzh of Al-Bukhari 

Bibliography of Works cited 

A Glossary of the more Common Technical 
Terms used in the Hadith Literature 

Addenda . 

Index 

I 

fe EVOLUTION.OF HADITH 

Meaning and use of the word hadith and tts relation 
to sunna.—A re any hadith genuene?— Their genesis and 
historical value. — When were hadith first written 
down ?— Authorities contradict one another.—Maltk's 
Muwatta.x—Musnad of Ahmad.—The six canonical 
collections, Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Déid, Al Tirmidhi, 
lon Maja, and Al Nasat.—Other collections. 

InQuIRY into the content, scope, and character of the 
traditions of Islam must necessarily begin after the 
death of Muhammad; for the vazson @étre of this vast 
literature is to provide an authoritative standard of 
belief and conduct based upon the word and deed of 
Muhammad which shall be binding upon the whole 
of the Muhammadan world. It is notorious that 
though the Quran contains a certain number of laws, 
e.g. rules in regard to marriage, inheritances, and the 
care of orphans, it cannot be successfully invoked to 
settle questions arising in such diverse categories as 
systematic and moral theology, ritual, and civil and 
military law. The Jews found the Mosaic law with 
its wealth of detail insufficient by itself without the 
assistance of case law and tradition, and the Talmud 
arose to supply thisneed. Similarly, the Muhammadan 
community found itself at the death of Muhammad 
with a holy book and the living memory of a prophet ; 
from these two sources the ecclesiastical and temporal 

polity of the Islamic world was for all time built up. 
2851 B 

io LHe Evolution OF Ha&pite 

The word adith is a noun formed from the verb 
hadatha ‘to be new’ (cf.the Hebrew Zadash with the same 
meaning and the noun odesh ‘new moon’). Properly 
hadith means ‘news’ and then a tale or verbal com- 
munication of any kind. It may with propriety be used 
of an account of a tribal raid, of old sagas, of incidents 
in the life of the prophet, and even of the Quran itself. 
The great impetus given to religious thought and 
speculation by Muhammad and the Quran could not 
fail to influence the language of Muhammadan writers, 
and thus the word has acquired its narrowed technical 
connotation of an oral tradition which can be traced 
back to a Companion or to the prophet Muhammad. 
Arabic preserves clearly the consciousness of the special 
connotation given to the word Zadz/h, for Bukhari records 
a saying of ‘Abd Allah b. Mas‘tid that ‘the best hadith 
is the book of God’,! and of the prophet in reply to 
Abi Huraira’s question, ‘Who will be the happiest on 
the day of resurrection thanks to your intercession ?’ 
‘I thought you would be the first to inquire of me 
about this hadith because I have noticed your eager- 
ness in regard to the hadith.’ ? 

Hadith enshrines the suzza or ‘beaten track ’—the 
custom and practice of the old Muhammadan com- 
munity. Inasmuch as hadith were often invoked to 
prove that a certain act was performed by the prophet, 
and was therefore to be imitated by all pious believers, 
it follows that hadith and sunna are sometimes names 
for one and the same thing. But there is no necessary 
connexion between them, and we often find that 
tradition is in conflict with custom. The great merit 

1 Bab I'tisam, ed. Krehl, iy, p. 420. 
* Bab Rigaq 51, Krehl, iv, p. 245. 

Tuer EvoLtutTion oF HapiITH II 

of Malik b. Anas in the eyes of his contemporaries was 
that he was an authority both on custom law and on 
oral tradition. Perhaps the best example of the 
distinction is in the title of a book cited by the Fihrist, 
‘the book of the sunnas with confirmatory hadith’. 
The conservatism of the East has long been pro- 
verbial, and the Arab may fairly claim a share in the 
building up of this reputation. The acceptance of 
monotheism, it is true, marked a break with the past; 
but the prophet was careful to depart as little as 
possible from the path of his forefathers. Indeed, it 
may be said that in the Medina suvas he appears as 
the restorer of the ancient faith of Arabia—the religion 
of Ibrahim Abt Ismail.?- The word suzna up to’the 
time of Muhammad meant the practice of antiquity : 
after his time it acquired in orthodox circles a different 
significance, and came to denote the practice of the 
prophet and his immediate successors. The same 
hatred of innovation finds expression in the utterances 
of the savants of Medina as in those of their heathen 
forefathers. Medina naturally became the ‘home of 
the sunna’, because there lived the men who had first 
to adapt their lives to the teaching of the prophet ; 
thus, so far as corporate life was concerned, Medina 
was the authority on questions of orthodox custom. 
The reverence in which the prophet was held by his 
contemporaries, and more especially by those who had 

1 p. 230, 3. The word hadith throughout this book will be used 
both as a singular and a collective noun. //adzths is scarcely possible 
in English, and the constant employment of the Arabic broken plural 
ahadith is hardly to be desired. 

2 See the illuminating observations of Pere H. Lammens in Une 
adaptation arabe du monothéisme biblique. 

12 Tuer EvoLuTion oF HaDITH 

never seen him in the flesh, naturally led them to 
preserve and repeat his sayings on all subjects. The 
feverish desire to know what he had said and done, 
which is well marked in the second generation, in- 
creased in intensity until it reached its height in the 
absurdities of the exercise known as 7alabu-l-Ilm.} 
The foundation of the enormous mass of traditions 
which afterwards accumulated was laid by the Com- 
panions who were scattered throughout the Muham- 
madan world; but it would be rash to dogmatize as to 
how much of existing material can be safely ascribed 
to them. Our estimate of traditions circulated in their 
name cannot but be adversely affected by the frequent 
accusations of forgery levelled against many of the 
professional traditionists, by the many anachronisms 
they contain, and by the political and sectarian bias they 
display.2 When all these factors are allowed for, and 
account is taken of the inevitable mistakes that must 
occur when traditions are handed down through a long 
line of speakers, it is difficult to regard the hadith 
literature as a whole as an accurate and trustworthy 
record of the sayings and doings of Muhammad. But 
however sceptical we are with regardto the ultimate 
historical value of the traditions, it is hard to overrate 
their importance in the formation of the life of the 
Islamic races throughout the centuries. If we cannot 
accept them at their face value, they are of inestimable 
value as a mirror of the events which preceded the 

* Infra, p. 36. 

? «The number of motives leading to the fabrication of traditions 
was so great that the historian is in constant danger of employing 
as veracious records what were deliberate fictions.’—Margoliouth, 
Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, London, 1905, p. vi. 

THE EvortvuTion oF HapitH 13 

consolidation of Islam into a system. Many of the 
political, dynastic, religious, and social differences which 
agitated Islam in the days of its imperial might are 
illustrated in traditions promulgated by the conflicting 
parties in the interest of their pretensions. In them 
we see how the rival forces of militarism and pacificism, 
asceticism and materialism, mysticism and _literalism, 
free will and determinism, strove fiercely for the 
mastery. 

While the prophet was alive he was the sole guide 
in all matters whether spiritual or secular. Hadith, or 
tradition in the technical sense, may be said to have 
begun at his death, for the extraordinary influence of 
his personality on his companions and associates 
created from the beginning a demand that believers 
should be informed what the prophet had done and 
taught in various circumstances in order that the life 
of the community and the individual might be modelled 
on that of the revered leader. But of the resultant 
mass of tradition few can be confidently regarded as 
emanating from the authorities whose names they 
bear. The veneration of a later generation for the 
prophet is well illustrated in a hadith quoted by Muir: 
‘Is it possible, father of ‘Abd Allah, that thou hast 
been with Muhammad?’ was the question addressed 
by a pious Muslim to Hudhaifa, in the mosque of 
Al Kifa ; ‘ Didst thou really see the prophet, and wert 
thou on terms of familiar intercourse with him ?’ 
‘Son of my uncle! it is indeed as thou sayest.’ ‘And 
how wert thou wont to behave towards the prophet ?’ 
‘Verily we used to labour hard to please him.’ ‘ Well, 
by the Lord!’ exclaimed the ardent listener, ‘if I had 
been but alive in his time, I would not have allowed 

14 THen EVOLUTION Peele ore 

him to put his blessed foot upon the earth, but would 
have borne him on my shoulders wheresoever he 
histed.? 

During the reign of the first four caliphs the energies 
of the Arabs were mainly directed to the expansion of 
their empire. The amazing rapidity of their conquests 
left little time, even if the inclination were present, to 
preach and teach the faith. A people which within 
a century had made itself master of the races and 
lands lying between the Atlantic and the Oxus could 
not be extensively preoccupied in religious matters. 
Nor must it be supposed that there was a fixed and 
established cultus and theory of an ordered religious 
life even in the prophet’s own town. Possibly in 
Medina, where, under the personal influence of 
Muhammad, men devoted themselves to the things of 
religion, an ecclesiastical usage may have developed 
quite early in the first century; in the provinces where 
Arabs represented but a mere fraction of proselytized 
nations no such usage existed. With the army went 
Companions and Followers, who must have carried with 
them some traditional religious customs; but in the 
earliest days Medina itself had no fixed system of 
jurisprudence, indeed it was then hardly developing. 
The natural result was a wide divergence in practice 
between many of the provinces of the empire, which 
has continued down to the present day in the Muslim 
world. Echoes of this state of affairs can sometimes 
be heard in the hadith literature: Abu Daid constantly 
calls attention to the purely local character of some 
hadith (22farada ahl of such and such a place). 

* Life of Muhammad, revised by T. H. Weir, Edinburgh, rgr2, 
p- xxx. (In this edition the references to the original sources are 
omitted.) 

Tue Evotution oF HapiTH 15 

The hadith literature as we now have it provides us 
with apostolic precept and example covering the whole 
duty of man: it is the basis of that developed system 
of law, theology, and custom which is Islam. Now 
inasmuch as the bulk of this literature is demonstrably 
the work of the two hundred and fifty years after the 
prophet’s death, it is necessary, in endeavouring to 
determine the age and early authority of hadith, to 
examine the very considerable amount of evidence for 
the existence of hadith written down during the life of 
the prophet. This evidence has been collected by 
Sprenger’, who also quotes what claims to be early 
evidence to the contrary. Of the series “authorizing 
the writing of hadith we may cite one on the authority 
of that prolific father of tradition Abi Huraira, who 
says that one of the Helpers (Ansar) used to sit and 
listen with admiration to the utterances of the prophet 
of God, and, being unable to remember what he heard, 
lamented his weakness to the prophet. The latter 
replied, ‘Call your right hand to your aid,’ i.e. write 
them down. This hadith exists in many different 
forms associated with the names of Abu Salih and 
Anas b. Malik. Again, “Abd Allah b. ‘Umar says: 
‘We said, “O prophet of God, we hear from you 
hadith which we cannot remember. May we not write 
them down?” “By all means write them down,” said 
he. This hadith exists in no less than thirty versions, 
which present small differences. Again, Aba Huraira 
asserts—not without reason !—that none of the Com- 
panions preserved more hadith than he, except “Abd 

* 1 On the origin and progress of writing down historical facts among 
the Musulmans. (Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1856, 

Pp: 303-29.) 

16 PoE EVOLUTION OVID rte: 

Allah b. ‘Umar. ‘But he wrote them down, and I did 
not write them.’ This ‘Abd Allah (d. 65) says, ‘The 
book I wrote from the prophet of God is Al Sadiqa,’ 
and Mujahid asserts that he saw this book in the 
possession of its compiler. Anas b. Malik states that 
Abi Bakr wrote down for him the laws regarding alms. 
Abundant proof could be adduced that books were 
read and written by the early Arabs; it will suffice to 
quote a saying attributed ‘to Dhul Rumma (d. 117), 
in which he expresses his dislike of those who rely 
on their memories instead of writing down poetry: 
‘Write down my poetry, for the written word is more 
pleasing to me than memory... . A book does not 
forget, nor does it substitute one word for another.’ 
Probably the hadith literature presents us with more 
contradictory statements on the question as to whether 
it was permissible to write down traditions of the 
prophet in the early days of Islam than on any other 
question. Many express prohibitions can be quoted. 
Abi Sa‘id al Khudri asserts that he asked the prophet’s 
permission to write down hadith, and it was refused. 
Abt Huraira is reported to have said: ‘ The prophet 
of God came out to us while we were writing hadith, 
and said, ‘‘ What is this that you are writing?” We 
said, “ Hadith which we hear from thee.’ Said he, 
“A book other than the book of God! Do you not 
know that nothing but the writing of books beside the 
book of God led astray the peoples that were before 
you?” We said, “Are we to relate hadith of you, 
O prophet of God?” He replied, “ Relate hadith of 
me: there is no objection. But he who intentionally 
speaks falsely on my authority will find a place in 
hell.”’ In one version Aba Huraira adds that the 

THe EvouvutTion oF HapitTH 17 

writings were heaped together and burned. Further 
Abi Nadhra relates : ‘We said to Abi Sa‘id: “ Would 
that you would write down hadith for us, for we cannot 
remember them.” He answered: “ We will not write 
them, nor will we collect them in books. The prophet 
of God related them to us orally and we remembered 
them, so you must do the same.”’ The comment of 
_Ibn ‘Aun (d. 151) on the situation is not without 
interest. He says: ‘The men of the first century who 
disapproved of writing held that principle in order that 
the Muslims might not be kept by other books from 
the study of the Quran. The ancient scriptures have 
been forbidden because it is impossible to distinguish 
what is true in them from what is false and the 
- genuine from the spurious: moreover the Quran 
renders them superfluous.’ 

As a matter of fact, the controversy as to whether it 
was lawful or not to write down traditions really 
belongs to the age when the critical collections of 
traditions were made. The hadith last quoted do not 
invalidate the statements that traditions were written 
down from the mouth of the prophet; the extra- 
ordinary importance attached to every utterance of his 
would naturally lead his followers who were able to 
write to record his words in order to repeat them to 
those who clamoured to know what he had said; and 
there is nothing at all in any demonstrably early 
writing to suggest that such a practice would be dis- 
tasteful to Muhammad. But it cannot be proved that 
any single tradition or group of traditions now extant 
were copied from the memoranda of the Companions. 
The most that can be said is that the canonical 
collections may preserve some such traditions. 

2851 Cc 

1i8 THe Evolution OF HADITH 

Written hadith were, no doubt, objectionable to old- 
fashioned and orthodox traditionists, who preserved in 
their memories an enormous number of traditions 
and enjoyed no small reputation on that account. 
Objections, too, were raised by those who saw that in 
many points hadith were contradictory to the Quran. 
Those also who repeated traditions which were genea- 
logically unsound and accounted unworthy of a place 
in the written, and soon to become, canonical collections 
could not but view the corpus of Bukhari and his 
imitators with acute displeasure. 

The basis of hadith is essentially religious, and 
during the Umayyad period theologians were under 
a cloud; so that it was not until the second century 
was well advanced that hadith of a religious character 
won their way into literature. Of course, a consider- 
able number of traditions which were subsequently 
incorporated in the canonical collections of hadith were 
not committed to writing for the first time by the 
collectors. A goodly number of works on_ juris- 
prudence were already in existence besides the well- 
known works of Abii Hanifa, Shaibani, Shafi'i, and 
Abi Yisuf. 

The earliest date which Muhammadans give for the 
collection of hadith is contained in the following 
tradition, said to rest on the authority of Malik b. 
Anas (94-179). ‘Umar b. ‘Abdu-l-‘Aziz wrote to Aba 
Bakr. b. Muhammad b. ‘Amr with the order: ‘See 
what hadith of the prophet of God are extant or 
ancient customs (swzna madiya) or hadith known to 
‘Amra, and write them down; for I stand in dread of 
the disappearance of knowledge and of the death 
of them that possess it. This Aba Bakr. b. Muhammad 

Tue Evorvution oF HapitH 19 

was one of the Ansar whom ‘Umar II appointed judge 
at Medina, and‘Amra was his aunt. Of the statement 
Sir William Muir writes?: ‘About a hundred years 
after Muhammad, the Caliph ‘Umar II issued circular 
orders for the formal collection of all extant tradition. 
The task thus begun continued to be vigorously 
prosecuted ; but we possess no authentic remains of 
any compilation of an earlier date than the middle or 
end of the second century of the Hijra.’ It would 
seem that this writer accepts the statement at its face 
value; but the fact that no authentic remains of this 
alleged first-century compilation are extant, and that 
the indefatigable students and compilers of tradition in 
the third century make no mention of an effort to 
trace such early documents, suggest very strongly that 
the tradition is not based on fact. It is difficult, if not 
impossible, to suggest a cogent reason why such an 
early collection, if it existed, should never have been 
mentioned by later scholars whose life-work it was to 
recover the genuine hadith of the apostolic period. 
For this reason the hadith must be regarded as an 
invention designed to connect the pious caliph, whose 
zeal for the sunna was gratefully recognized by theo- 
logians, with the tradition literature of Islam. This 
seems the more likely, as another tradition connects 
Ibn Shihab Al Zuhri with ‘Umar II in this work. 
Moreover, Malik’s statement is only to be found in 
Al Shaibani’s recension of the Muwatta. It is absent 
from the other versions. 

Two other second-century writers have been cited 
as authors of compilations of hadith, namely, ‘Abd al 
Malik b. Juraij and Sa‘id b. Abi ‘Ariba. Their works 

1 Op. cit, pp. 33 f 

20 Tuer EvoLtuTtTion oF HADITH 

are not extant; but from the description of them given 
by later writers there is little doubt but that they were 
books of jurisprudence (72g), drawn up with a view to 
stabilizing the sunna. Therefore they only incidentally 
contained traditions; their primary purpose was to 
serve as handbooks for lawyers. The need for such 
works increased when the free development of the 
public religious life of the community was no longer 
hindered by the worldly régime of the Umayyads. 

Of a similar nature, though of far greater importance, 
is the MWuwatta of Malik b. Anas. This work, which 
has always been highly prized by Muhammadans, is 
not a collection of traditions. The author’s interest 
was in jurisprudence, and his aim to establish a system 
of law based on the sunna of Medina. Thus he appeals 
to legal precedents as often as to hadith, which it was 
only incidentally his purpose to record for the sake of 
their legal significance. His object was not, like that 
of the later collectors, to ascertain what traditions of 
the prophet were current throughout the Muhammadan 
world and to test their authenticity by a series of 
artificial canons; but he had the severely practical and 
limited aim of establishing a system of law according 
to the agreement or consent (z7ma') of the people of 
Medina. Thus he appeals, in matters in which his 
paragraphs coincide roughly with the hadith literature, 
not to hadith carried back by a chain of guarantors to 
the prophet, but to the sunna, which, with the legal 
decisions of recognized authorities and the consensus 
of opinion of the Medinotes, in his view constituted 
a system of law binding on the whole community, 
His method was to collect under distinct heads the 
sunna of Medina in regard to legal and religious 

THE EvoLtuTion or HapITH 2I 

matters: where tradition failed he appealed to zjma. 
Thus he had none of the theoretical interest in hadith 
which characterizes the traditionists of the next 
century. When necessary he did not hesitate to 
express his own opinion (vay) on difficult points where 
the evidence seemed to be at all dubious or self- 
contradictory. The following extract from the 
Mudawwanat will best illustrate Malik’s method: 
‘Malik was asked concerning certain persons who went 
raiding and disembarked in Cyprus, where they pro- 
- ceeded to buy sheep, honey, and butter, and paid for 
these articles with dinars and dirhems; Malik dis- 
approved. He further said to us of his own initiative : 
‘I strongly object to coins which contain the mention 
of God and His book being taken and given to one 
that is unclean. I disapprove most strongly of such 
a practice.” I asked him whether we might make 
purchases with dirhems and dinars of traders who 
disembarked on our coast, or of members of the 
tolerated cults. He replied that he disapproved. 
He was asked whether money might be changed by 
changers in Muslim markets who belonged to these 
cults. He replied that he disapproved.’ ? 

That Malik was no collector of traditions in the 
later sense is clear from his independent handling of 
his material. He does not always take care to trace 
back his zsv@d* or chain of guarantors to the prophet, 
nor are all the links in the chain set out. Thus, 
although his Muwatta saw the light a century before 
the canonical collections, it contains many hadith 
which have no place in the later works, because they 
me x, p. 102, as quoted by Margoliouth, Larly Development of 
Muhammadanism, p. 119. ' 2 Infra, p. 23. 

22 THRE EVOLUTION OFM ADITE 

are not supported by a list of names reaching in 
uninterrupted succession from Muhammad to Malik. 

It is unfortunate for the study of Muhammadan 
origins that the extant versions of the text of the 
Muwatta differ so radically one from another. The 
explanation of these different versions is probably to 
be sought in the practice of Ijaza and Munawala,' to 
which Malik frequently resorted when pressed by 
a number of pupils.2 The s¢extus receptus of Malik 
is the version of his Spanish pupil Yahya b. Yahya al 
Masmidi; and it is this version which is commonly 
quoted as the Muwatta. But there are no less than 
fifteen other versions all differing from the Muwatta 
Yahya and from each other. Of these by far the most 
important is the work of Muhammad b. Al Hasan Al 
Shaibani, who was the pupil of Malik and of Abi 
Hanifa. This is generally cited as the Muwatta 
Muhammad. It contains certain matter which is not 
to be found in the received text and has been worked 
over by Al Shaibani and brought into accord with the 
tenets of his master Abi’ Hanifa. In such cases he 
prefixes his own views and comments with the words 
‘Muhammad says ’.® 

The growing importance of tradition as an authori- 
tative force in the establishment of the legal and ritual 
life of the community created a demand for hadith on 
every conceivable subject, a demand which, as will be 
seen in the following chapters, produced an unfailing 

1 See Additional Note to Chap. I. 

? Cf. Sprenger in ZDMG, x, pp. 9 ff. 

* A translation of a short section of the Muwatta illustrating the 
differences between the recensions of Yahya and Shaibani will be 
found in MMS, ii, pp. 224-6. 

THe EvorutTion oF HapiTH 23 

supply; and naturally the vast accessions to current 
tradition thus generated necessitated some sort of 
systematic arrangement of material. The earliest 
collections are at one with the later in this, that atten- 
tion was focused not on the watz or subject-matter of 
the tradition but on the zszdd or chain of guarantors 
going back to a Companion of the prophet. The 
characteristic of the JZusnad, the earliest type of 
collection, was that hadith, quite irrespective of their 
contents and subject-matter, were arranged under the 
name of the Companion on whose authority they were 
supported (mausuad). The person who could repeat 
a respectable number of such mzusnad traditions re- 
ceived the honorific M/usuid, or Musnida in the case 
of a woman. The zszad must always be in direct 
speech, thus: ‘A told me, saying that B said C had 
informed him, saying ID mentioned that he heard E 
relate, “I heard F ask the Apostle of God so and so.”’ 
The name mzsnad, which properly belonged to the 
individual tradition, passed over to the whole collec- 
tion. A large number of such collections was current 
in the third century, though comparatively little of the 
literature survives to-day. The most important would 
seem to have been the W/usnad of Ahmad b. Hanbal. 
On account of its great bulk? this work was seldom to 
be found in its entirety even in antiquity. It contains 
about thirty thousand hadith grouped under the names 
of some seven hundred Companions. Though the 
author follows a plan of his own, dividing his work 
into books of traditions emanating from Muhammad’s 
family, the Helpers, Women, and so on, he makes no 

1 The Cairene edition (1890) is in six volumes 4'°, containing in all 
2,885 pages. 

24 LHe BR yoLUuTION- OF? 4 Dita 

attempt to group his gigantic store of tradition with 
any regard to the encyclopaedic range of the several 
subjects dealt with. 

Ahmad was an indefatigable Talibu-l-Ilm, and to 
his journeys we owe the J/usnadu-l-Shamiyyin and 
other geographical groups of traditions. His vast 
collection was edited and published by his son ‘Abd 
Allah Abt ‘Abdu-l-Rahman (d. 290). The Musnad 
preserves a great many traditions which are not to be 
found elsewhere. Like all other collectors, Ahmad 
practically always confined his criticism to the zsxad; 
especially was he strict in his scrutiny of traditions 
from any one suspected of Qadarite leanings. Post 
eventum prophecies are to be found in the canonical 
collections ; but not in the profusion and with the detail 

and exactitude of Ahmad’s collection. Hadith dealing 
- with conquests, the geographical advantages of certain 
cities, and royal personages are the clearest examples 
of this development. 

The Musnad is marked by a fearless indifference to 
the susceptibilities of the ‘Abbasids. Whereas the two 
great works of Bukhari and Muslim may be searched 
in vain for any generous recognition of the merits of 
the Umayyads, Ahmad, who forsooth had little to 
thank their successors for, preserves many of the 
numerous traditions extolling the glories of the Bani 
Umayya which must at one time have been current in 
Syria. A similar liberal attitude is adopted towards 
hadith which support the claims of the Shi‘as. The 
great importance of this gigantic collection of tradition 
lies in its wealth of detail. Its value as a witness to 
events in the prophet’s life, real and fictitious, is best 
illustrated in Margoliouth’s Muhammad. 

THE Evo.uutTion or HapitTH 25 

Later writers in the opposing schools often edited 
the collections of their leaders, arranging the authorities 
in alphabetical order, so that we read of the Musnadu- 
L-Shajfi't or the Musnadu-Malik. The reference is to 
the works mentioned on page 20 arranged as musnads. 
The word musnad is often misapplied by Muhammadan 
scholars, who speak of tradition works in general as 
musnads, e.g. of the Musnadu-l-Bukhari, where $ami‘ 
would be correct. 

By the middle of the third century hadith had 
attained such importance as a means of determining 
the practice and beliefs of the community that a more 
practical collection and arrangement than the musnads 
became imperative. It was felt generally that hadith 
must be (@) brought, into closer relation with juris- 
prudence, and (4) put on an unassailable footing. The 
controversy among the doctors of Islam which deter- 
mined whether the community might develop its 
customs and re-interpret them according to the needs 
of each age, or whether it must rigidly conform to the 
practices and precedents of the apostolic generation, 
was probably responsible for the great impetus given 
to the collection and codifying of hadith. At this 
time traditions were written down with the definite 
aim of establishing an unerring authority for law and 
custom ; thus, though the collectors devoted scrupulous 
attention to the zsvad, so far as the arrangement of 
traditions was concerned the zsza@d was subordinate to 
the matn. Traditions were recorded according to their 
subject and the subject-matter was arranged under 
the headings of law books. Such collections were 
Musannafat. The object of the musannaf was ‘to 
provide the lawyer with a handbook of tradition. in 

2851 D 

6 THe EBVOoLuUDON OF A DTtTa 

which he could readily look up the aszssema verba 
of the prophet and thus silence an objector. The 
musnads were obviously unsuited to such a purpose: 
unless one knew the name of the original guarantor of 
a particular hadith one might have to read through 
the whole corpus of tradition to find it. While no 
ordered arrangement of oral and written tradition 
existed it was impossible to ask that young men who 
were being trained for the office of judge in the various 
provinces should be made to study hadith. 

The task of the compilers was to demonstrate the 
practical value of hadith for the practical lawyer. The 
first and most important of the WZusannafs is the Sahih, 
‘the Genuine’, of Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma‘ll 
Al Bukhari (194-256). This is a corpus of tradition 
pure and simple, compiled with the object of providing 
an orthodox criterion in all matters of jurisprudence.? 
The author applied himself to the task by adopting as 
the framework of his book headings which covered the 
whole range of gh. His work is divided into ninety- 
seven books, which again are divided into 3,450 dads 
or chapters. The traditions themselves are preceded 
by a ¢arvjama or rubric designed to lead the reader to 
a decision where authorities in the various Wadhahzb 
or schools differ. As Al Qastallani has said, ‘ Bukhari’s 
jigh is contained in the headings of his chapters.’ The 
tarjama consists of a text from the Quran, or quite 
as often of a fragmentary hadith for which no zsv@d is 

* As Chapter V will show, jurisprudence is by no means the only 
interest of hadith. Inasmuch as the Sahih is a Jami‘ it contains z/er 
alta historical, biographical, and eschatological matter. It is precisely 
its many-sided character which lends charm to the study of the 
hadith literature. 

THe Evotution or HapitH 2 

forthcoming. It is generally supposed that the author 
regarded these last as genuine, but was unable to find 
a genuine chain of transmittors. There is great 
acumen behind the selection of these texts and frag- 
mentary traditions with which most chapters are fur- 
nished, for they suggest a connexion in thought and a 
consequent interpretation of a hadith which is otherwise 
neutral or susceptible of a contrary meaning. More- 
over, in cases where the Quran was invoked the author 
appeared to have the support of an unimpeachable 
authority. An interesting feature of these paragraphs 
is that they sometimes occur without any hadith fol- 
lowing. It has been inferred from this that although 
Bukhari planned to cover the whole field of fg he 
sometimes failed to find confirmatory hadith and left 
the heading in the air, as it were, in the hope that the 
hiatus would some day be filled. This theory of the 
gaps is in keeping with the general purpose of this 
and other musannafat, and accords with the scrupu- 
lous honesty and exactitude of the author himself. 
M. Houdas, however, makes the interesting suggestion ! 
that they are in reality a polemic against the Murjiites : 
‘El-Bokhari . . . usa d’un moyen détourné pour at- 
teindre plus sirement I’hérésie qui menagait l’existence 
méme de Iislamisme; et, tandis que ses confréres se 
bornaient a classer et étiqueter leurs hadits, il songea 
a en faire une arme offensive contre les Mordjiites et 
contre tous ceux qui attentaient a la pureté primitive 
de la religion musulmane.’ Thus he sees a peculiar 
significance and purpose in the first hadith recorded by 
Bukhari, ‘Works are only to be judged by their inten- 

1 Kl Bokhart, Les Traditions tslamiques traduites ... par O. Houdas 
el W. Marcais, ii, Paris, 1906, pp x 

28 Tur EvoLtvuTion oF Hapite 

tion,’ and in the chapter on Faith. In his view, the 
explanation given above does not suffice. It is to be 
regretted that M. Houdas has not worked out his 
interesting theory in detail. It is not difficult to find 
examples to which his explanation could hardly apply. 
It might be held, for instance, that the first hadith, 
which continues, ‘As for him who migrates to obtain 
worldly possessions or to marry, his migration will be 
rewarded according to its object, is rather a protest 
against the usurpation of the term Muhajir than an 
attack on the Murjiites. Nevertheless, as M. Houdas 
well says: ‘Quoi qu'il en soit de cette question bien 
secondaire en somme, El Bokhari a, d’une part, rendu 
un signalé service 4 l’islamisme en conjurant le péril 
Mordjiite, et, d’autre part, il a, pour ainsi dire, fixe 
d'une maniére définitive la constitution pratique de la 
religion du Prophéte.’ 

Tradition reports that this remarkable man took 
cognizance of 600,000 hadith,! and himself memorized 
more than 200,000. Of these he has preserved to us 
7,397, or, according to other authorities, 7,295. If one 
adds to these the fragmentary traditions embodied in 
the ¢avjama the total is 9,082. On the other hand, 
the same tradition is often repeated more than once 
under different chapters (4 éw4é), so that if repetitions 
are disregarded the number of distinct hadith is reduced 
to 2,762, which are to be found in the 3,450 adwad 
into which his book is divided.2 When one reflects 

* Ibn Khallikan, Wa/fayatu-l-A‘yan, ed. Wiistenfeld, p. 580. These 
figures must be taken with a grain of salt. It is hardly likely that 
a man of Bukhari’s ability would commit to memory 200,000 hadith 
in order to utilize less than a twentieth of them. 

> T have taken these figures from Houdas, op. c7/. 

Tue Evotrution or HapitTH 29 

from these figures furnished by a Muslim historian that 
hardly more than one per cent. of the hadith said to be 
openly circulating with the authority of the prophet 
behind them were accounted genuine by the pious 
Bukhari, one’s confidence in the authenticity of the 
residue is sorely tried. Where such an enormous 
preponderance of material is judged false, nothing but 
the successful application of modern canons of evidence 
can restore faith in the credibility of the remainder. 
This is not, of course, to assert that the hadith litera- 
ture is destitute of any historical foundation: such 
a conclusion would be unwarranted. But the un- 
doubted historical facts do demand that each indivi- 
dual hadith should be judged on its merits. 

So far as one is able to judge, Bukhari published the 
result of his researches into the content of what he 
believed to be genuine tradition with all the pains- 
taking accuracy of a modern editor. Thus he records 
even trifling variants in the hadith, and wherever he 
feels that an explanatory gloss is necessary either in 
tsnad or matn it is clearly marked as his own. When 
a variant has been given he sometimes adds his 
comment at the end, Qala Aba‘Abd Allah ... ashbah, 
in my opinion the words so and so are more probably 
correct. In the Appendix will be found a translation 
of the Kitabu-I-Qadar from this most important of all 
hadith collections.+ 

Though the text of the Saih toes not present the 
unusual divergences in type to be found in the Wuwatta 
it has survived in several recensions. It is only to be 
expected that a collection which, according to Ibn 

1 Reproduced, without critical and historical notes, from my article 
in JRAS, January 1924, by permission of the Society. 

30 LH ev EVOLUTION OH 214 Dip 

Khallikan,! was read before ninety thousand hearers, 
should now be extant in several different forms. Of 
these the best known is that founded on a critical 
edition made by Muhammad Al Yunini (d. 658). 
This was printed at Buladq in 1314, is carefully 
vocalized, and contains marginal notes of variant 
readings. The commentary of Ahmad b. Ahmad Al 
Qastallani (d. 923), /rshddu-l-Sarz,? is of such value 
as to be wellnigh indispensable. The version of Abi 
Dharr, represented by Krehl’s text, is also of consider- 
able value : it is frequently at variance with the received 
text. 

Nothing is more eloquent of the exalted position of 
hadith in the Islamic community from the third century 
onwards, and of the prominent position of Al Bukhari 
among the Ashdbu-l-hadith, than the extravagant 
homage which was paid to him and his work. A 
man who laboured sixteen years on the compilation of 
his corpus, who sought the aid of prayer before com- 
mitting a tradition to writing,’ and who interrogated 
over one thousand shaikhs living in places so distant 
as Balkh, Merv, Nisapur; the principal towns of Meso- 
potamia, the Hijaz, Egypt, and Syria, deserved well of 
his co-religionists. If Muslims since his death have 

) Loc. ctt. 

® Bulag, 1305, ten vols. For the literature see Brockelmann, 
Geschichte d. arabischen Litteratur, i, pp. 158 ff. 

* Bukhar?’s work from first to last was an act of consummate piety. 
He was inspired to undertake the task, he says, by a dream in which 
he seemed to be driving away flies from the prophet’s person. An 
interpreter of dreams told him that the flies were lies which had 
gathered round apostolic tradition. He never afterwards inserted 
a hadith in his collection until he had made an ablution and offered 
up a prayer of two rak‘as. 

THE Evo.uutTion oF HapviITH 31 

canonized him, made pilgrimages to his tomb, and 
invoked his saintly aid in the difficulties of this life, 
they have but shown their devotion to the man who 
holds the position next their prophet. The latter, 
indeed, is reported to have been seen in a dream 
awaiting the arrival of Bukhari at the gates of 
Paradise.? 

Another 4/usannaf on which Islam has also conferred 
the title 4/ Sahih is that of a younger contemporary of 
Bukhari, Muslim b. Al Hajjaj (d. 261). Its contents 
are practically identical with Bukhari’s collection except 
in the zszads, and the difference in treatment is really 
not very great. The principal difference is the absence 
of the paragraph headings characteristic of Bukhari. 
Muslim’s work is arranged according to /7gh, but he 
does not follow his plan so scrupulously: thus, while 
Bukhari often arranges the same tradition with a 
different zsv@d under different paragraphs when it is 
suitable to support more than one point of law and 
custom, Muslim places the parallel versions together. 
He does not plunge straightway into his task, but 
prefaces his book with a statement of the conditions 
a tradition must fulfil before it can be regarded as 
genuine and authentic.2 Every hadith which could 
serve as a support for fg must itself rest upon the 
authority of men whose trustworthiness was above 
suspicion (¢hzgat). Further, the authorities must stand 
in unbroken succession (z¢ézsa/); it must be demon- 
strable that they were contemporaries, and were 
actually in personal intercourse. Such a hadith must 
contain the words haddathani, sami‘tu, or some other 

1 Houdas, II, xxiii. 

2 Some extracts from his introduction will be found in Chap. IV. 

32 Tue EvoL_uTion oF HADITH 

word implying personal intercourse. Another category 
of hadith which was not so highly esteemed was called 
muanian; in these in place of a verb of hearing or 
telling it is only asserted that A narrates from (‘az) B. 
Muslim was willing to accept such hadith if it could be 
established that A and B were contemporaries, but 
Bukhari demanded a further proof, that they should 
have been in personal contact: it was not sufficient 
that A should report—though in good faith—that B 
had related a certain hadith unless it could be proved 
that he himself had met him and therefore could be 
presumed to have heard it from his mouth, not through 
a third person. Muslim, however, excluded many 
traditions, not because he questioned their genuineness, 
but because they were not supported by z7ma@. His 
assertion of this prepared the way for a more thorough 
Famt 

The man Bukhari has always been immeasurably 
greater in the popular estimation than Muslim, and 
the tendency has been for the work of the former to 
take precedence of the latter. The one is prized for its 
range over the whole field of #g/ and the strictness of 
the shurut or rules for determining the trustworthiness 
of rawizs, while the other is preferred for its more concise 
treatment of the material. Together they form an 
almost unassailable authority, subject indeed to criti- 
cism in details, yet deriving an indestructible influence 
from the zjma‘ or general consent of the community 
in custom and belief, which it is their function to 
authenticate. 

* It has not been considered necessary to give a translation of any 
section of Muslim’s Sahih, because the great majority of the hadith 
given in Ch. V are muttafag, i.e, to be found in the Safihan. 

THe EvoLtutTion or HapitH 33 

Besides these ‘ Two Genuine Books’ there are four 
others which Islam has elevated to canonical rank, the 
whole being known as ‘ The Six Books’ (A-kutubu-/- 
sitta), These are the 

Sunan of Abii Daid (d. 275). 

Fami of Abii ‘Isi Muhammad al Tirmidhi (d. 279). 

Sunan of Aba ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Maja 

(d. 283). 

Sunan of Abu “Abd Al-Rahman al Nasa’ (d. 303).! 

The same motive which inspired Bukhari moved the 
authors of the Swan to their labours. Their aim was 
a narrower one, the compilation of a collection which 
would provide hadith dealing with all that was permis- 
sible and unpermissible to a Muslim. If so much 
genuine material had existed it is a@ przord inconceiv- 
able that it would have been passed over by Bukhari 
and Muslim; consequently much greater latitude had 
to be given to all who narrated hadith that were 
desiderated. Apostolic authority was obtained for all 
the enactments in jurisprudence, but at the cost of 
a principle. Hadith which were only fairly sound 
hasan were included. As the author of Masabihu-l- 
Sunna tells us, ‘support for most of the azkam comes 
from fair hadith’. 

Abi Daid, a contemporary of Bukhari, was a pupil 
of Ahmad b. Hanbal, and the master of Al Nasal. 
These two reversed the principle of the Sahihan that 
only hadith which rested on the authority of men 
universally esteemed trustworthy could be accepted, 
and they rejected only those which were universally 

1 These are loosely called ‘the four sunnas’, but inasmuch as 
Tirmidhi does not confine himself to matters of jurisprudence but 
deals with the whole field of hadith, his collection is properly a Jami’. 

2861 E 

34. Toe Evovution or TlApran 

deemed unworthy of credence. They noted that 
some theologians were stricter than others in their 
scrutiny of the guarantors (vza@/), and where a favour- 
able verdict had been accorded by a lenient scholar 
they accepted the hadith despite the weight of adverse 
criticism. At the same time they did not attempt to 
exalt the mass of additional matter to the same degree 
of respect as that accorded to a hadith admittedly 
sahih. They expressed their opinion of the guarantors 
in no unmeasured terms. Abia Daiid says that he 
wrote down half a million hadith, from which he 
selected 4,800; he calls these authentic, those which 
seem to be authentic, and those which are nearly so.? 

The Suzan naturally fill up the gaps left by Bukhari 
in his scheme of fg, and supply hadith in support of 
the most pettifogging details in the ritual and legal 
life of the community, a pedantry which threatened to 
bring the whole system of hadith into ridicule. Al 
Nasa’i in his Swan? takes notice of this ridicule. 

Al Tirmidhi studied under Bukhari, Ahmad b. 
Hanbal, and Abi Daiid. He was the first to classify 
the various hadith under the three headings sahzh, 
hasan, and hasan sahih. 

The great value of these suzan is in their witness 
to the extent to which the rival schools of Islam had 
established their ritualistic and legal systems in the 
third century. Al Tirmidhi in particular, with his 
wealth of inconsistent hadith, shows clearly how the 

1 Muir, of. czz., xiii. 

? Al Nasa‘, Shahdra 1282, i, p. 6, g@la-l-mushrikiina inna nara 
sahibakum yu'allimukum-l-khar@ata. In truth, what was really being 
said by men who objected to all the insignificant activities and even 

decencies of life being governed by apostolic tradition is here put into 
the mouth of the idolatrous contemporaries of Muhammad. 

PME VvOLUTION oF, HapitTH 35 

divergences in the orthodox schools of to-day were as 
clearly marked in his time. 

Besides the ‘six books’ there were several other 
collections in circulation which failed to establish 
themselves in catholic consent. Of these the most 
important is that of Aba Muhammad ‘Abd Allah al 
Darimi (d. 255). The chief characteristic of his work 
is its eclectic and subjective method. He often records 
his own opinion as to whether a hadith is binding on 
the community or not; and he does not hesitate to 
give decisions contradicting earlier authorities. It is 
a little difficult to say whether his book is with pro- 
priety to be called Suzan or Famz". It is in the main 
a manual of hadith necessary in jurisprudence, but it 
does not confine itself to purely legal matters. The 
author is indifferent to the minute questions of law 
and ritual so fully dealt with in the W/adhhadé collec- 
tions of Abu Daiid and Al Nasai, so that even with 
the inclusion of matter of a general character his work 
is barely a third of the size of the other suman. 
The tendency was for the pressure of the School 
(MWadhhab) to increase, and a collection which failed to 
apply that pressure everywhere could not compete 
with suzan of a comprehensive character: thus Al 
Darimi’s work never won its way to canonical rank. 

It would unduly prolong this work to enumerate 
and discuss other collections which enjoyed a certain 
amount of popularity, e.g. Baqi b. Makhlad Al-Qurtubi 
(d. 276), Al ‘Assal (d. 349), which are sometimes 
quoted by writers with the encyclopaedic knowledge of 
Al Suyiiti and Ibn Khaldin. An account of them will 
be found in Brockelmann’s Geschichte, and their hadith 
in some of the later compendia. 

36 “Dan LvouuTrON Ore A iam 

ADDITIONAL NOTE TO CHAPTER I. 
Tjaza and Munawala. 

It will have been seen that the Sahih of Bukhari owed its existence 
to the arduous journeys undertaken by its author in search of hadith 
in circulation throughout the Muslim world. So great was the prestige 
of one who could narrate, as the last link in a chain, a tradition from 
the mouth of the prophet that those who were prevented by the 
responsibilities of life from undertaking these journeys in quest of ‘c/w 
had to find some other means to secure their admission to this 
apostolic succession. The means lay ready to hand. Malik b. Anas 
had been known to give his pupils a written text with his authority 
to repeat its contents with the formula Zaddathana, as though the 
conveyance had been by word of mouth. This process was called 
Munawala, ‘ personal transmission’ or ‘handing over’. Jaga, ‘ per- 
mission’, was more lax. A teacher or r@wz was asked to allow 
a person to promulgate a collection of hadith in his name. Malik 
is said to have allowed a pupil to do this without examining his text. 
The extraordinary differences between extant texts of the Muwatta 
are probably the sequel. 

Bukhari evidently felt some hesitation about traditions by way of 
munawala; but in the following centuries, when the zeal of the 
‘Searchers after Knowledge’ was at its height, zj@za could be given 
by letter or by proxy by an authority living in one end of the 
Muhammadan world to an applicant in the other. It would seem 
that when the content of tradition had been committed to writing, 
and partially established by zjma’, the continued pursuit of ‘knowledge ’ 
merely represented the activities of the credulous, who believed that 
there was still a residue of genuine apostolic tradition to be recovered, 
and who hoped to add their finds to the collections which had been 
accepted or were then winning their way to recognition in the second 
rank, — 

HH 
ore MAY VAD PERTOD 

Faint influence of the great Umayyad line on tradt- 
tion.— Character and policy of their régime—No fixed 
religious use—Hostile attitude of doctors towards 
Umayyads refiected in hadith coined to influence the 
pious.—Official counter-invention of hadith.—Syrian 
hadith—Hadith frankly recognized as inventions. 

An account of the rise and character of the Umayyad 
dynasty would be naturally sought in a general history 
of the Caliphate rather than in a description of the 
traditions of Islam. But some explanation is certainly 
needed to show why Islam in its canonical literature 
has remained unmindful of the inestimable service 
rendered to its empire, and ungrateful for the enduring 
prestige bequeathed it by the Umayyads. The reason 
is that in authoritative tradition the voice of the schools 
of the Iraq and the Hijaz is to be heard sounding the 
praises of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Ali, and sometimes 
of ‘Uthman ; but the Syrian tradition for the most part 
perished with its great dynasty.’ 

The compilation of the canonical collections dates 
from the time when the ‘Abbasids were firmly in the 
saddle, and by this time systematic efforts had long 
been made to extirpate the memory of the predecessors 
of the reigning house. We know that the names of 
the Umayyads were even removed from public 
monuments. 

1 The Musnad Ahmad, as we have seen, is an exception. 

38 THe Umayyapb PERIOD 

Earlier writers? have with good reason emphasized 
the godless régime of the Umayyads, yet it would be 
a mistake to regard it as entirely worldly. Lam- 
mens? has pointed out that after the time of “Umar 
the public treasury, the army, booty of war, and the 
administration were called mal Allah, jund Allah, fat 
Allah, and sultan Allah respectively.2 The Belgian 
savant gives good reason for his assertion that the 
religion of Yazid, in the eyes of the orthodox the arch 
offender, was no better and no worse than that of his 
contemporaries. It has been recorded as a heinous 
offence that the Caliph Mu‘awiya sat down to 
pronounce the Auta (solemn oration); yet this 
posture while giving public direction was common in 
the pre-Muhammadan era (jahz/zyya), and Muhammad 
is said in the canonical traditions to have sat down in 
the pulpit (#cxdar) while addressing the faithful. It 
is undoubtedly due to later writers’ ignorance of the 
practice of antiquity that they explain the references 
to ‘Uthman sitting in the mzxéar during the £hutba to 
betrothals (£utbatu-l-nikah).t Curiously enough in 
this matter, in which they have been held up to 
reproach as godless innovators, the Umayyads were 
adhering to the sunna of the prophet, and preserved 
the early significance of the mzndar as the seat of 
judgement on which the ruler sat. Only in the days 

1 E.g. Von Kremer and Dozy. 

2 Etudes sur le regne du Calife Omatyade Mo'awia Ter. Mélanges 
de la Faculté orientale, Beyrout, 1906, p. 9. 

* «Expressions sonores, formules archaiques, demeurées pratiquement 
vides de sens,’ of. czt., vol. ii, p. 88. 

‘ Jahiz Bayan, i. 50, and cf. MS, p. 53. ‘ 

* There may have been a simpler explanation: Mu‘awiya in middle 

Tut Umayyab Perriop 39 

of the next dynasty did the mnéar degenerate into 
a pulpit from which the weekly sermon was delivered. 
Indeed, the role played by the mosque itself in the 
early days of the Islamic empire was radically different 
from that of later times. At first it served the purpose 
of a town hall or council chamber. The Umayyads 
took counsel with their advisers and transacted their 
public business in the mosque, not in their palaces. 
While still to a certain extent followers of the old 
democratic principle of tribal government, they were 
not slow to see the importance of the weekly harangue 
from the pulpit. 

In some respects the Umayyad Paiste aon was 
far in advance of its time. It was marked by a genial 
tolerance of Christianity and other religions. One of 
Mu‘awiya’s contemporaries protested that the Caliph 
would have employed negroes in public offices had it 
suited his purposes of state.1 This reproach would 
not unnaturally follow Mu‘awiya’s treachery in em- 
ploying a Christian physician to rid him of the 
powerful Abdu-l-Rahman, the son of the great general 
Khalid, ‘the sword of Allah’, whom he feared as the 
rival of his son Yazid. He even allowed the said 
Christian to collect religious imposts from the people 
of Homs. Tolerance of Christians was not confined to 
Syria. The governor of Medina actually employed 
Christians from Aila (Aqaba) to police the holy city. 
In the Iraq, too, they held offices of importance. 

A variety of reasons led to this toleration of 

age was gluttonous and corpulent. A/ Fakhrz, ed. Cairo, 1317, 
pp: 98 ff. ? Al Fakhri, 7d. 

2 Despite their provocative function there is no record of any 
protest having been made against their presence. 

4O THE Umayyvap PERIOD 

Christians : first, there were the aristocratic connexions 
of the Christians among the Arabs of the peninsula ; 
the kingdom of Ghassan, and the names of Bakr, 
Taghlib, and the Bani Hanifa, all co-religionists, stood 
high in the estimation of Arabians. Secondly, Islam 
had not hardened into a systematized religion; and 
owing to the poll-tax on dhzmmis, or members of 
tolerated religions, an increase of converts meant 
a decrease in revenue. And thirdly—perhaps the 
most potent reason—the Syrians, who formed such 
a powerful and important part of the Umayyad armies, 
were Christianized Arabs who cared little for Islam. 
Ibnu-l-Fagih! calls them muslimina ft akhlagt-l- 
Nasarda, Muslims with the characteristics of Christians. 
It was not uncommon at this time for a soldier in the 
Caliph’s army to ring the bell of a neighbouring church, 
or perform other minor duties of a religious nature 
among the Christian community.” 

. These examples of the relations between Muslims 
and dhimmes in the Umayyad period will illustrate how 
utterly different in outlook were the caliphs and the 
theologians.* It could hardly be said that an enormous 
number of soz-dzsant Muslims flouted the sunna: they 
were simply ignorant of its existence. 

In the wars that seem inevitably to follow the rise 
of a new religion it is often difficult to separate their 
political from their religious significance. And it is 

' 315, 9 (Brb2. Geog., ed. M. de Goeje). ; 

? «Devenus musulmans, moitié par ambition, moitié par lassitude, 
ils constataient sans regret l’attachement de leurs parents et de leurs 
femmes 4 l’ancienne religion,’ of. cét., p. 54. 

* Malik’s attitude towards the tolerated cults as illustrated on p. 21 
above is an instructive contrast. 

Tue Umayyapb PERIop 4l 

highly probable that much of the odium that has 
‘gathered round the Umayyad name in the sphere of 
religion is really due to their determination to hold the 
pre-eminence in temporal affairs. Their natural enemies, 
as later events so clearly proved, were in the Hijaz 
and the Iraq; and consequently the traditionists in 
these territories who claimed to interfere in the public 
and private lives of the subjects of the Syrian monarchs 
were repressed with scant ceremony. 

It can hardly be denied that the policy of the 
Umayyads—always with the exception of the piously 
brought up ‘Umar b. ‘Abdu-l-‘Aziz—was dictated by 
considerations of a worldly rather than a religious 
nature. They had practically no interest in religious 
law, and no great veneration for the teaching of the 
prophet. The Book of Songs is an eloquent witness 
to the unbridled licence of thought and life at that 
time. Al Walid II, when threatened with the divine 
wrath pronounced in the Quran against the enemy of 
religion, actually threatened to use the sacred volume 
as a target for his arrows. 

However, it must always be borne in mind that the 
sources from which our knowledge of this period is 
gained are for the most part marked by a fierce hatred 
of the Umayyads and all their works; so that those 
who denounce them as the enemies of the faith shut 
their eyes to the wise and firm administration of the 
early rulers of that house, their conquests, military 
organization, navy, and public works. All these 
benefits were as nothing in the sight of their phari- 
saical subjects in Medina. Like the Hasidim of old, 
who held fast to Law and Tradition, standing aloof 
from the national party and its materialistic aims, the 

2861 F 

A2 THE UmMayyvaD PERIOD 

doctors of Medina refused to deal with the caliphs of 
Damascus. They laboured to establish the sunna of 
the community as it was, or as it was thought to have 
been, under the prophet’s rule, and so they found their 
bitterest enemies in the ruling house. As sincere 
Muslims they risked their lives by refusing to do 
homage to the Umayyads ; and it required the ferocity 
of the notorious Al Hajjaj to compel them to yield 
even lip service to his masters so deeply were their 
religious sentiments outraged. The consequences of 
the attitude of the government were twofold. In the 
first place, abysmal ignorance of even the rudiments 
of Islam prevailed over the Muslim world; and in 
the second place, a theoretical turn was given to the 
subterranean labours of scholars who were endea- 
vouring to elaborate a rule of life and thought for 
the community. Debarred by the policy of the 
Umayyads from any share in the administration— 
good orthodox Muslims who accepted office under the 
worldly régime were scathingly rebuked by the godly 
irreconcilables—their work suffered under the disad- 
vantage inseparable from all legislation which is not 
founded on, and tested by, experience. They were as 
it were legislating for posterity, and much that was 
idealistic and out of relation to everyday life was 
incorporated in their work to serve as a basis for the 
normal practice of the future. 

How far the surprising ignorance of the ordinary 
duties and beliefs of a Muslim which reigned through- 
out a large part of the Muslim world towards the end 
of the first century is due to the policy of the 
Umayyads, and how far a fanatical desire to prosely- 
tize has wrongly been attributed to the earlier Muham- 

THe Umayyap PErRIop 43 

madans, are points for the historian to pronounce upon. 
But certain it is that at this time the people of Basra 
did not know the rules of ritual prayer. Al Bukhari 
tells us? how Malik b. Al Huwairith instructed 
the people there in the postures proper to prayer. 
The ¢avjama is interesting in that it contemplates the 
giving of formal instruction in ritual. Further, the 
existence in Syria of a salutation Al-salam ‘ala ‘Ilah 
shows that the chapter devoted by traditionists to the 
correct forms of greetings and salutations was by no 
means uncalled for. 

The contrast between the theoretical and the prac- 
tical at the end of the first century is startling. For 
in theological circles, if Al Darimi is to be believed, 
the sunna was declared to be the judge of the Quran, 
not vice versa. This view was shared by Al Shaibani 
and Al Shafi, and theologians did not shrink from 
proclaiming as a dogma the corollary that the sunna 
was of divine origin. 

Amid general ignorance and indifference pious 
doctors painfully gathered material for a reconstruction 
of the conditions of Muhammad's time. They ques- 
tioned all living Companions and Followers on points 
of law and custom. Driven by a deep sense of reli- 
gious obligation to gather the precious material at any 
cost to themselves, these men did not shrink from 
travelling thousands of miles in search of Companions 
who could give them first-hand information of the 
prophet’s actions. Thus armed with the authority of 
the prophet, the traditionists hoped, by giving the 

1 Adhan, no. 45; Krehl, i, p. 175. 

2 I hesitate to put an obelus to a tradition which Goldziher (JZS, ii, 
p. 21) accepts, 

AA Tuer UMAYYADIVERIOD 

widest possible circulation to hadith, to rouse the public 
to a sense of their religious duties, and to undermine 
the world power ‘of the government. The temptation 
to use so potent a weapon to further their political 
aims was more than flesh and blood could resist. We 
may detect covert attacks on the Umayyad dynasty in 
the numerous hadith which extol the merits of the 
prophet’s family, whose representatives were, of course, 
the house of Ali. 

The hadith literature faithfully reflects the passions 
roused by the government. The burning question 
was how the believer was to conduct himself under 
a godless tyranny. Was it a duty to take up arms 
against the tyrant, or must his rule be accepted as 
ordained by God? There was a party which refused 
to have anything to do with the Umayyads, who 
declined to take office under them, who reviled them 
and their vice-gerents, their generals, and their ignoble 
instruments the forgers of prophetic traditions, and 
who promised the martyr’s crown to him who died in 
resisting the oppressor. Traces of this attitude still 
survive in the canonical collections in hadith like the 
following: ‘A Muslim must hearken and obey whether 
he approves or dislikes an order so long as he is not 
commanded to disobey God. In that case obedience 
is not incumbent on him. Again, ‘No obedience is 
due where disobedience to God is involved. Obedience 
is only due to lawful demands.’ 

The Murjiites, on the other hand, refused to see in 
the suppression of religious law any cause for refusing 
homage to the Umayyads; it sufficed for them that 
their rulers were nominally Muslims : they did not care 
to inquire too closely into their actions. A good 

THe Umayyapb PERIopD AS 

example, directly contradictory in import to the last 
two, is: ‘Whoso obeys me obeys God. Likewise 
whoso disobeys me disobeys God. Whoso obeys an 
Amir obeys me, and whoso disobeys an Amir disobeys 
me. Verily an Imam is a shield behind which one 
fights and is protected. If he gives orders in the fear 
of God and with justice he will have his reward; if 
contrary thereto he will suffer for it.’ All three 
hadith are muttafag.2. These were the men who by 
lending themselves to the government as instruments 
in the promulgation of hadith favourable to the powers 
that be did so much to keep down the rising tide of 
disaffection. 

But it was the intermediate party which left 
the deepest mark on the hadith literature and on 
the thought of Islam. They did not go so far as the 
Murjiites, who boggled not at supporting even the 
massacre of the pious, but they taught that though 
a ruler was the most unworthy of men, it was wrong to 
take up arms against him to the detriment of the state 
and the unity of Islam. ‘ Hearken and obey though 
an Abyssinian slave be made your governor with 
a head like a dried grape!’ They preached the duty 
of submission to the will of God, and of patience and 
endurance under oppression. ‘Let him who dislikes 
the conduct of his Amir be patient ; for he who divides 
the Muslim community a hand’s breadth shall die the 
death of a pagan.’ At all costs the unity of Islam 
must be preserved. Muslim gives the following on 

1 The text of the Mishkat varies between minhu and munnata. The 
commentators prefer the former, and explain ‘alach’ minhu: ‘alathi 
wieran thagilan min sani‘thi. 

2 See Glossary of Technical Terms, 

A6 THe Umayyapb PERIOD 

the authority of ‘Arfaja: ‘Evil times will come 
repeatedly. But he who seeks to separate this people 
which is a united community slay him with the sword 
be he who he may.’ Hadith of a similar import are 
extremely numerous. The attitude of acquiescence 
was supported by the doctrine of ijma‘, an example 
from the first century of that respect which Islam has 
always paid to the fazt accomplt. Invariably in times 
of stress the theologian and would-be reformer appealed 
to it to deliver him from an impossible position, and 
never in vain. 

Most probably the prolific output of pseudo-prophetic 
hadith had their origin in the days of the Umayyad 
oppression. The pious, in the name of Muhammad, 
who by projecting himself into an unhappy future 
becomes a laudator temports actt, pronounce condemna- 
tion on the degeneracy of the times. ‘The best age 
for my community was the time when I was sent, then 
the time following, then will arise a people whose word 
none can trust.’ This hadith exists in very many 
different forms and collections. The following from 
Ibn Hanbal is of interest as showing the interpretation 
given to it in the time of the next dynasty: ‘ Prophecy 
will be with you as long as God wills; then he will 
take it away; then will come a caliphate on the pattern 
of prophecy ; then will come a tyrannical! kingdom... 
then will come a kingdom in arrogance: then will come 
a caliphate on the pattern of prophecy. Then the 
prophet was silent. Habib said: When ‘Umar b. 
‘Abdu-l“Aziz came to the throne I wrote to him 

‘ “addan explained by the commentator ya‘addu ba‘du ahl:hi ba‘dan 

ka‘addi-l-kilab, ‘its subjects will bite one another after the manner 
of dogs’. 

Tuer Umayyapb PERIop 47 

informing him of this hadith, and said: “I hope that 
you are to be the Amiru-l-Miminin after the tyrannical 
and arrogant reigns,” whereat he was much pleased.’ 
This hadith is reported by Hudhaifa, who is credited 
elsewhere with being the prophet’s confidant on escha- 
tological matters.!. His information from this source 
is asserted to extend to the yaumu-lgtyama, so that, 
for the orthodox, there is an adequate explanation of 
the prophecies on such matters as the rise of the Turks 
and the principal battles fought against the Byzantines. 

The reigning house could not afford to leave their 
opponents with the sole right of collecting and promul- 
gating hadith: in fact, Tabari? states that Mu‘awiya I 
ordered that all hadith favourable to the house of ‘Ali 
should be suppressed, and the glories of the family of 
‘Uthman be extolled in hadith. The Umayyad hand 
is perhaps most clearly seen in the traditions which 
were forged to emphasize the sanctity of Jerusalem 
vis-a-vis Mecca and Medina. While his rival ‘Abd 
Allah b. Zubair was in possession of the holy places, 
and could bring pressure to bear upon the pilgrims who 
resorted thither, and seduce them from their allegiance 
to the northern house, the problem which confronted 
‘Abdu-l-Malik in Syria was not unlike that of Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat in those regions ; nor was his counter- 
move dissimilar. Whereas Jeroboam provided within 
his own territory sanctuaries for the veneration of his 
subjects, ‘Abdu-l-Malik hit upon the expedient of 
enjoining a pilgrimage to the mosque he built in 
Jerusalem instead of the orthodox journey to Mecca 
and Medina. All that was necessary was to declare 

1 See Bab Fitan and the Jocus classicus in Qadar, p. 173. 
A er 

48 Tue UmMayvyabD PERIOD 

that a circumambulation of the holy place at Jerusalem 
possessed the same validity as that enjoined at Mecca, 
and to procure for his assertion a confirmatory hadith 
with an zsz@d going back to the prophet himself.? 
‘Journey only to three mosques, Al Masjidu-l-Haram, 
the mosque of the prophet, and the mosque of Jeru- 
salem, is the form this tendentious hadith takes in 
Al Bukhari.2. The inventor is Al Zuhri, who fathers 
iton Abt Huraira. This was countered from Medina 
by the following hadith, which comes next in Bukhari's 
bab: ‘A prayer in this my mosque is better than 
a thousand prayers in others, except the Masjidu-l- 
Haram. The interesting feature of these two hadith 
as Bukhari records them lies in the tavjama, which 
reads: ‘Of the superiority of prayer in the mosques of 
Mecca and Medina’ Bukhari was too scrupulous to 
omit from his collection a hadith which was supported 
by witnesses whose bona fides he did not suspect ; but 
by the simple expedient of ignoring the references to 
the Masjidu-l-Aqsa he asserted the paramount sanctity 
of the holy places of the Hijaz. Ibn Maja gives the 
Syrian version of the latter half of the second hadith— 
undoubtedly the original, since Muhammad in the 
Quran had established the sanctity of the Hijaz 
temples—to the effect that prayer at Jerusalem is a 
thousand times more effective than at other places.* 

Many hadith which exalt the honour and sanctity 
of Syria over the rest of the Muslim world still find 
a place in some of the collections. Thus in Ahmad’s 
Musnad and the Jami‘ of Al Tirmidhi* we read that 

1 Journal Astatique, 1887, p. 482. 

2 Bab Fadi-l-Salat, Krehl, p. 299. 

* Sunan, Delhi, p. 102. * Mishkatu-l-Masabih, p. 574. 

THe Umayyap PErRIop 49 

the prophet said: ‘Blessed be Syria! “Why?” we 
asked. “Because”, said he, “the angels of the Com- 
passionate spread their wings over it.”’ Aba Daud 
from ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr: ‘There will be migration 
after migration and the best of men (will flee) to 
Abraham’s place of refuge. Again, Ibn Hawala: 
‘It will come to pass that armies will be assembled in 
Syria, the Yaman and Iraq.’ Said he: ‘Choose for 
me my course, O Apostle of God, if I live till that 
epoch.’ He replied: ‘Get you to Syria, for that land 
is chosen by God from his (whole) earth, and thither 
will he gather the chosen of his creatures. If you 
refuse (to go there) then get you to Yaman and water 
your flocks from its pools. Verily God hath guaranteed 
to me the safety of Syria and its people”! Other 
hadith tell us that the prophet especially recommended 
Damascus as a place of residence, and appointed a 
suburb, Al Ghita, a military rendezvous. 

Another form of the Umayyads’ official propaganda 
was the publication of hadith glorifying the name of 
the murdered ‘Uthman. He is said to have been 
marked out for the caliphate by the prophet, to have 
been a martyr, and destined to be the companion of 
Muhammad in paradise. The long and involved 
explanations of ‘Uthman’s cowardice at Uhud and 
Badr,? which earned him the title Al Farrar, The 
Fugitive, are undoubtedly an attempt to defend the 

1 Most of the hadith that follow are quoted from the M/ishkaé, and 
can easily be found under the appropriate chapter headings. A more 
precise reference will not be given, for the reasons explained in the 
preface. 

2 Managib ‘Uthman in the various collections, and Houdas, ii, 600 f. 

2861 G 

50 THE UmayyvaApD PERIOD 

memory of one from whom the Umayyads claimed 
their right to the throne. 

If any external proof were needed of the forgery of 
tradition in the Umayyad period, it may be found in 
the express statement of Al Zuhri: ‘ These princes 
have compelled us to write hadith.’1 Undoubtedly 
the hadith exalting the merit of the pilgrimage to the 
qubbatu-l-Sakhra at Jerusalem is a survival of the 
traditions Al Zuhri composed. Ibn ‘Aun, who died in 
the middle of the second century, refuses to credit 
traditions resting on the authority of Shahr b. Hau- 
shab because he had held office under the government.” 
It is difficult to imagine a more telling accusation. 
Al Bukhari a century later feels no compunction in 
including traditions in Shahr’s name in the category of 
‘genuine’, presumably because he knew little or nothing 
about the circumstances of the time in which Shahr 
lived, nor the pressure that was brought to bear upon 
him. And it is to be remembered that Shahr is by no 
means the only Muhaddith whose name appears both 
in the canonical collections of tradition and in the roll 
of Umayyad state officials.* 

It need cause no surprise that comparatively few 
traditions ‘inspired’ by the Umayyad house survive. 
We have seen that a great many were in circulation 
while the dynasty flourished, and we hardly need the 
express assurance that the Abbasids sternly repressed 
them. The house of Abbas had ruled for more than 
a century when the great written collections were made, 
and during this time the theologians and muhaddithiin 

Sprenger, oc. cz, and Muir, LIZ, p. xxxiii. 

* Al Tirmidhi (Bulag, 1292, ii, p. 117), who constantly quotes 

hadith guaranteed by Shahr. The Musnad of Al Tayalisi, Ibn “Aun's 
pupil, contains but three such. & MS, pp. 40 ff. 

THe Umayyap PErRiop 51 

had been able to develop their doctrines and practices 
without the hindrance, and often with the help, of the 
government. In these circumstances it would be 
astonishing if more than a faint trace of traditions 
favourable to the irreligious race of the Umayyads 
was allowed to appear. As a matter of fact, we find 
that those preserved by Al Bukhari suggest to the 
faithful that Mu‘awiya was careless, or at all events 
eccentric, in his religious exercises. The following 
example must suffice: ‘Mu‘awiya made an odd number 
of rak‘as after the evening prayer while a freed man 
belonging to Ibnu-l“Abbas was present. “Whereupon 
the freed man came and told his former master, who 
said : “ Let him alone, for he has been in the society of 
the prophet of God.”’?! 

There is a pathetic ring about the tradition ascribed 
by Ahmad b. Hanbal to Shuraih b.‘Ubaid. He says: 
‘The Ahlu-l-Sham were mentioned in Ali’s presence 
with the remark “Curse them, O commander of the 
Believers.” ‘‘No,” said he, ‘‘for I heard the apostle 
of God say: The Abdal are in Syria. Now they are 
forty men; when one dies God puts another in his 
place. By them rain is obtained,? victory gained over 

1 Bab Dhikr Mu'awiya, no. 28; Krehl, p. 446. 

2 Cf. Aghani, x (quoted JZS, ii, p. 381 note) of Abdu-l-Malik: 
Khalifati-llahi_yustasga bihi-l-mataru. The Abdal were an order of 
wonder-working saints who mingled unrecognized and often unper- 
ceived among their fellow-creatures. They formed the third of five 
orders of a mysterious hierarchy, at whose head stood the Qutbu-l- 
Ghauth. See Aradzan Sociely in the Middle Ages, Lane, London, 
1883, pp. 47-9. On rain-making among the heathen Arabs, see 
Wellhausen, Res/e arabischen Heideniums, p. 157. I suspect the 
activities alluded to here are similar to those of Rabbi Honi in 
the Talmud, Za‘anith, fol. 19 a. 

52 THe UmMayvap PERIOD 

our enemies, and punishment turned aside from the 
people of Syria.”’ This hadith is to be connected 
with the ritual cursing of the Umayyads. Al Ma’min 
had to send round a street-crier to threaten all those 
who spoke well of Mu‘awiya, and a collection of hadith 
assailing the honour and prestige of the Umayyads 
was circulated by Al Mu‘tadid with the order that the 
cursing of the first of that dynasty should form part of 
the ritual. The presence of traditions of this kind in 
the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal strongly suggests that it 
was not only his theology but also his political fear- 
lessness which made him an object of Al Ma’mun’s 
hatred. 

An account of the criticism which Muhammadans 
have from time to time passed on the hadith literature 
has been reserved for a later chapter; but it may not 
be out of place to examine the defence implicit in 
many of the hadith themselves. During a long period 
of suppression the pious had to endeavour to form the 
religious life of the community. They had no official 
position under the government—with few exceptions— 
and the prophet’s position as the seal of the prophets 
and the revealer of the will of God for all time effec- 
tually shut the door to any fresh revelation. Thus 
those who desired to secure universal recognition of 
their dogmas must perforce cast them into a form 
which would be regarded as authoritative by the com- 
munity. There was only one way of doing this, 
namely, to throw the teaching it was desired to incul- 
cate into the form of a hadith with an ¢suad reaching 
back to the prophet. Second-century writers make no 
secret of this method. They recognize that it is only 
the form adopted to secure the respectful attention of 

THE UmMayyapb PErRiop 53 

their audience; they recognize, too, that it is a form 
adopted by all who wish to gain a respectful hearing — 
from the piously disposed. Thus a hadith which 
obviously has no greater authority than those it seeks 
to undermine says: ‘ After my death sayings attributed 
to me will multiply just as a large number of sayings 
are attributed to the prophets who were before me. 
What is told you as a saying of mine you must compare 
with the Quran. What is in agreement therewith is 
from me whether I have actually said it or not.’ This 
is but another way of saying that provided an invented 
hadith is edifying or unobjectionable to the orthodox, 
none need trouble to inquire whether it actually pro- 
ceeded from the mouth of the prophet or not. What- 
ever the effect this frank admission may have on our 
estimate of the genuineness of the Muhammadan tradi- 
tions as a whole, there is no necessity to impute the 
worst motives to these men who adopted the only 
course open to them to persuade their co-religionists. 
It is instructive to observe that the defence of the 
legitimacy of those who, according to Old Testament 
critics, promulgated a code of laws in the name of 
Moses some five hundred years after his death is in 
substance the same as that in the hadith last quoted.? 

1 *To this conclusion, that Deuteronomy was written in the age 
of either Manasseh or Josiah, it is objected that the book plainly 
produced its effect on account of the authority which it was believed 
to possess, in other words, on account of its claiming, and being 
supposed, to be the work of Moses: if Josiah had not believed the 
ancient law-book of Israel to have been discovered, would he have 
attached any weight to its words?... Its force must have been due 
principally to the name of Moses, which it bore; and if the prophets 
were aware that it did not really possess his authority, then not only 
are they guilty of an act questionable morally, but the course taken 

54 THE UmMayyaD PERIOD 

Less than half this space of time lay between the 
Muhammadan traditionists and their apostle. More- 
over, the principle is canonized in Judaism, for we read 
in the Talmud a statement of startling similarity to 
that quoted above: ‘Anything that a disciple of the 
wise may say in the future was revealed to Moses on 
Sinai. The use here of the word haddesh = haddatha 
is extremely interesting and suggestive: the intimate 
relationship between the Talmud and some sections of 
the hadith literature is a subject to which I shall recur 
in another place. 

In spite of these warning notes which still sound in 

by them is a confession of moral impotence and failure: they resort 
to an external name to accomplish what centuries of their own 
teaching had failed to effect. 

‘In estimating these objections, it must be remembered firstly, 
that what is essentially new in Deuteronomy is not the maéter, but the 
form. . . . Such laws as are really new in Deuteronomy are but 
the logical and consistent development of Mosaic principles.... All 
Hebrew legislation, both civil and ceremonial, however, was (as a fact) 
derived ultimately from Moses, though a comparison of the different 
Codes in the Pentateuch shows that the laws cannot all in their 
present form be Mosaic: the Mosaic nucleus was expanded and 
developed in various directions, as national life became more complex, 
and religious ideas matured. Nevertheless, all Hebrew laws are 
formulated under Moses’ name,—a fact which shows that there was 
a continuous Mosatc tradition embracing a moral, a ceremonial, and 
a civil element: the new laws, or extensions of old laws, which as 
time went on were seen to be desirable, were accommodated to this 
tradition, and incorporated into it, being afterwards enforced by the 
priestly or civil authority as the case might be. ... It is no fraudulent 
invocation of the legislator’s name: it is simply another application 
of an established custom.’—S. R. Driver, A Critical and Exegetical 
Commentary on Deuteronomy, Edinburgh, 1902, pp. lv—Ivii. All this 
is equally true of Muhammadan legislation and the ethical and moral 
truths inculcated in the hadith literature. 

THe UmMayyap PErRIopD 55 

the hadith literature, there does not appear to have 
been any attempt to investigate the claims of any 
tradition to represent the actual words of Muhammad. 
Even Bukhari was content to confine himself to a 
criticism of the genealogy of the isnad rather than the 
subject-matter of the tradition and the circumstances 
in which the guarantors lived, so that any tradition 
which could clothe itself in a canonical dress became 
tpso facto respectable. 

IT] 
THE ABBAS (Dero. 

Character and policy of their régime —Dynastic 
hadith, Aid Umayyad and Abbasid —Shia Colle- 
tions.—Establishment of the sunna.— Talabu-l-Ilm and 
its object—Enormous growth of tradition—Contradtc- 
tions, critics and harmonizers——Doctrine of [gma 
applied to hadtth. 

A CONTEMPORARY would probably have noticed no 
difference between the lives of the Caliphs of Baghdad 
in their harems and banqueting-halls and the similar 
institutions of their deposed rivals in Damascus. 
Wen, Web und Gesang might have been written over 
all alike. The great difference, which has profoundly 
influenced the subsequent course of Islam, was in their 
official attitude towards religious institutions. The 
‘Abbasid could drink the forbidden wine as long and 
deeply as the Umayyad. But whereas the latter 
tolerated wine booths in the mosques, the former took 
pains to enforce his subjects’ obedience to the Prophet’s 
prohibition of wine with all the power of an oriental 
despot. Within their palaces the early monarchs of 
this line lived the lives which in the pages of the 
Arabian Nights still fire the imagination and form 
the stock-in-trade of the modern vdawi, and the 
legendary records of their carousals are probably better 
known in the Occident than any other Arabic work. 
But the ‘Abbasids understood their subjects well 
enough to perceive that if they made the revival of the 

Tue ABBASID PERIOD 57 

sunna an integral part of their policy, and in their 
official capacity as Imams conformed to the national 
religion, no serious interference with their personal 
tastes would ensue. Theoretical discussions of reli- 
gious questions were popular amongst the most worldly 
princes in the halcyon days of the ‘Abbasid caliphate. 
Their bid for the support of the orthodox party was 
successful because of their avowed zeal for the sunna 
of the prophet. They wore his mantle (6urda) on 
solemn state occasions to strengthen the idea that 
there was something sacrosanct in their authority ; and 
honorifics which suggested that they were the true 
successors of the prophet and even his representatives 
were eagerly accepted by them, especially by the later 
caliphs.1 Indeed, it may be said in general that as 
their political power declined, so their preoccupation in 
purely religious matters and their claim to religious 
authority increased. 

During the Umayyad régime foreign converts had 
claimed in vain the equality which the prophet assigned 
to all Muslims. The Umayyad and the nobles of 
Syria openly treated all foreigners as subordinate to 
free-born Arabs. One of the consequences of this 
racial pride was that the more ambitious and unscrupu- 
lous foreigners pretended that they were of pure Arab 
descent, discarded their foreign names, and produced 
forged pedigrees tracing their descent to men famous 
in the sagas of Arabia. Especially among the more 
intellectual Persians, with their age-long traditions of 
culture and civilization, was there fierce resentment 
of the Arab domination, a fact which explains their 

1 Such titles as Aminu-llah and Khairu-l-Quraish were given to 
their predecessors. 

2861 H 

58 Tuer ABBASID PERIOD 

enthusiastic adoption of the Abbasid cause. With the 
accession of the new dynasty their chance had come. 
The tables were turned, and henceforth it was the 
comparatively ignorant Arab who was to be an object 
of ridicule to those he had formerly despised. Practi- 
cally all the Abbasid viziers were Persians, or, at any 
rate, non-Arabs; and the caliphs, for the most part, 
made no secret of their preference for Persians. The 
results of this more liberal policy towards foreigners 
were manifold. It was responsible for the great 
impetus given to the study of philosophy and science 
through the medium of translations into Arabic of 
classical and Syrian writers, and for the increased 
knowledge of the Old and New Testaments, especially 
in regard to their eschatological and historical matter. 
Though, as we have seen, there was a systematic 
attempt during the Abbasid caliphate, when the canoni- 
cal collections of traditions were compiled, to root out 
all hadith favourable to the Umayyads, the voice of the 
Arab has not been altogether stilled. We seem to 
hear the despairing cry of the orthodox Arab of 
Medina in the tradition which Bukhari records as 
spoken by the dying ‘Umar to ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas, 
the ancestor of the dynasty of that name, ‘ Praise be to 
God, who has not let me die by the hand of a Muslim. 
You and your father would gladly have seen Medina 
full of barbarians.’ - Now Al ‘Abbas had more foreign 
slaves than any one else in the city.! This tradition 
is the more pointed in its application in that the 
assassin of ‘Umar was a Persian. There is, too, a 
story of how Al ‘Abbas excited the prophet’s contempt 

’ Fadailu-l-A shab. 

THe ABBASID PERIOD 59 

by his cupidity and avarice, faults with which the true 
Arab had no sympathy. Its presence in Bukhiri’s 
collection is a tribute to the fearless spirit of the 
collector.? 

The Abbasids were keenly alive to the importance 
of the principle of the divine right of kings, the more 
so as their claim to the caliphate by right of inheritance 
was a principle foreign to the tribal customs of Arabia 
and one which Islam had never admitted. The court 
poet who could write some telling verses on the claim 
of the prophet’s uncle as against that of his cousin, or 
attack the principle condemned in the Salic Law, could 
thereafter enjoy a life of ease. In hadith inspired by 
the Abbasids the Hashimite line was represented as 
sharing, by virtue of the revelation in Sura 8. 42, in 
the distribution of booty to the next-of-kin.2 In Abi 
Daiid’s version of the story the significance of the 
hadith is underlined, for it is expressly stated that the 
Umayyads received nothing. 

Muslim doctors never recognized the principle of 
a hereditary caliphate. Bukhari’s chapter on inheri- 
tances with the /avjama, ‘We leave no inheritance. 
What we leave is alms, * asserts the principle that the 
prophet had no heir in no less than five entirely diffe- 
rent hadith. The principle which gave his power to 
the caliph was the 2jma‘u-l-umma, the consent of the 

1 Kitabu-l-Jizya, no. 4; Krehl, ii, p. 294; and cf. 7., i, p. 116, 
Kitabu-l-Salat, no. 42, for a variant of the same tradition. 

? Bukhari, Managqib, no. 3. 

8 For the extremely clever alteration in the Shi'a interest of the 
words 14 nirith ma tarakna sadaka into 14 yiirath ma tarakna sadaqatan 
(What we leave as alms is not to be inherited) by the change of one 
letter and the cognizance taken of this in later versions of the text see 
MS, ii, pp. 103-4. 

60 Turn ABBAS To PERI eD 

community. Asa matter of fact, logic demanded the 
denial of a hereditary overlordship; for that would 
involve the assumption that the three first caliphs— 
the £hulafau-l-rashidain—were usurpers, and the admis- 
sion either that right lay with the Alides or that the 
community had erred in accepting the Umayyads. 
A claim to the caliphate on the score of prophetic 
descent was a double-edged weapon, and one which 
the Alides were obviously more comfortable in 
handling! The latter never ceased to maintain their 
right. Anenormous number of traditions were forged 
to further Abbasid interests, some of which are pseudo- 
prophetic, as for instance that quoted by Al Suyiti,? 
‘The prophet said to ‘Abbas: “In you shall rest 
prophecy and sovereignty.”’ There was an immense 
volume of this kind of tradition which need not be 
quoted. The author of the Hzstory of the Caliphs 
evidently did not prize such hadith highly, for he tells 
us that one to the effect that the prophet clothed 
‘Abbas and his son in his mantle, praying for a special 
blessing on them, together with the one just quoted 
is the best of those alleged to foretell the exaltation 
of the family of ‘Abbas. 

‘Every corner of Irak and Hijaz was ransacked for 
traditions in support of the right of the house of Abbas. 
The doctors of law were required to formulate the 
principles of orthodoxy in explicit terms: and gradually 
the grand superstructure of the Sunni church was 
raised on the narrow foundations of Abasside self- 

’ Professor Margoliouth remarks that in the earliest appointments 
of Caliphs relationship to the Prophet seems to have been a determining 
factor. Mu‘awiya was a brother-in-law. 

* Tarikhu-l-Khulafa, tr. Jarrett, p. 13. 

THE ABBASID PERIOD 61 

interest, says the Sayyid Amir ‘Ali? Al Suyiati 
mentions a hadith in which the names of no less than 
six caliphs appear as guarantors of its contents. 
However, despite the efforts of the Abbasids, the 
Muhammadan doctors never gave way on the general 
question. The caliphate was not an heirloom. They 
affirmed again and again that the dignity of the prophet 
was exclusively confined to Muhammad, and no one 
could possibly inherit it. But their peculiar considera- 
tion for the unique prophetic character of Muhammad 
did not result, as one might have expected, in the 
suppression of hadith favourable to the claims of the 
‘Alids. This was due partly to veneration for ‘Ali 
and his family as martyrs, and partly to the fact that 
in the first centuries the Shi‘as were not schismatics, 
nor a body of people held together by doctrine or 
political aims. At most they desired to see the triumph 
of the house of ‘Ali, and gave their support to any 
movement which would tend to further this project. 
Thus it is that the canonical collections abound in 
stories extolling the memory of ‘Ali. Yet there is no 
yielding when the prophetic office is involved. ‘Were 
there a prophet after me it would be ‘Umar b. Al 
Khattab.’2 Many of them were collected and sum- 
marized by Al Suyiati, of which the following are 
examples*: ‘O God, befriend the friend of “Ali and 
oppose his enemy. ‘Ali is part of me and I of ‘Ali. 

1 The Spirit of Islam, Calcutta, 1902, p. 287. 

2 lau kana ba‘di nabiyyun lakana ‘Umara b. Al Khattab. The com- 
piler of the Mishkat adds rawahu Al-Tirmidhi waqala hadha hadithun 
gharib. ‘This from the collection of T., who says this is a tradition 
resting on the authority of one Companion alone.’ 

3 Op. cit., pp. 172 ff. 

62 LHE ABBASIDY £ ERTOD 

This last is quoted by Tirmidhi, Nasai, and Ibn Maja: 
‘Thou art my brother in this world and in the next’ 

One of the clearest examples of hadith promulgated 
in the Alid interest is the following, taken from Ibn 
Maja: ‘ While we were with the prophet of God some 
young men of the Banu Hashim approached. When 
the prophet saw them he shed tears and his countenance 
changed. I (‘Abd Allah) said: ‘““We see from your 
face that something troubles you,” and he replied: 
“God has chosen for us, the ahlu-l-bait, the world to 
come rather than this world. After my time the 
people of my family will suffer misfortune: they will 
be dispersed and pursued until a people shall come 
from the East with black banners. They will ask for 
prosperity and will not obtain it. They will fight and 
will conquer and obtain what they asked. They will 
only receive it to render it to a man of my household. 
And he will fill the earth with justice just as they filled 
it with injustice. A more obvious invention it would 
be difficult to discover. This hadith is one of the 
versions of the tradition known to Muhammadan 
savants as the ‘hadith of the banners’. Of its author 
Ibn Hanbal remarks: ‘ His hadith are not hadith!’ 
The first section, which apparently refers to the 
attempt made by Al Ma’min to secure the caliphate 
for the Alid, ‘Ali b. Misa Al Rida,! has been added to 
the more widely received Mahdi tradition. In the 
Fadailu-l-Ashab it is recorded that the prophet gave 
the standard by which God was to give victory to his 
people into the hand of ‘Ali, after curing him of a form 
of ophthalmia. 

Al Fakhri, ed. Cairo, 1317, p. 198. 

THe ABBASID PERIOD 63 

It would seem that the theologians either would not 
or could not suppress traditions which had established 
themselves in the minds of the community and were 
generally recognized. They found it more convenient 
to promulgate other traditions which could not but 
tend to invalidate the claims the Shi‘as rested on 
hadith admittedly in favour of ‘Ali, as, for example, 
saying that Muhammad's infant son would have sur- 
vived if it had been God’s intention to send another 
prophet after him.t Again, the assertion of the Shi‘as 
that the prophet had made a testamentary disposition 
in ‘Ali's favour repeatedly finds mention in the canoni- 
cal collections. Characteristically the ashabu-l-hadith 
leave those traditions obviously inspired by the ‘Alids 
unaltered, and insert hadith which give them the lie 
direct. For example, ‘Aisha is made to describe the 
last moments of her dying husband and exclaim: 
‘How could he have made any such disposition in 
these circumstances ?’ . 

Later, when the feeling between Shi'a and Sunni 
became exacerbated, the former repudiated all traditions 
but their own, which they rested on the authority of 
‘Ali and his friends. This was naturally the only 
course open to them: they could not appeal to Ijma’, 
since they had never represented more than a fraction 
of the community, and the Sunni traditions as a whole 
were useless for their purpose. The first written Alid 
collection was known as A/ Ka/fz, and was composed 
by Muhammad b. Ya‘qib Al Kulini, who died in 328. 
A great difference between the two great divisions of 
the Muhammadan world is in their Quranic exegesis. 

1 Bukhari, Krehl, ii, p. 434. 

64 THE ABBASID PERIOD 

The Alids accused Abi Bakr and ‘Uthman of having 
altered and suppressed words and verses in the Quran 
which exalted ‘Ali, and the Shi‘a collections of traditions 
explain what those words and verses are.’ They 
abound in fanciful interpretations of obscure expres- 
sions, especially when ‘Ali can be introduced in 
some eschatological role. The difference in Quranic 
exegesis was probably a fairly early stage in the 
controversy. 

Unfortunately, in religious matters the Abbasids did 
not observe the broad-mindedness and tolerance their 
attitude to foreigners, including those who were 
obviously only nominal Muslims, would lead one to 
expect. With the admission of foreigners to the full 
privileges and brotherhood of Islam there came a 
greater insistence on uniformity within Islam. If, so 
far as concerns the Arab, racial consciousness was 
weakened, so far as concerned the Muhammadan 
religious consciousness was enormously strengthened. 
The proud and independent Arab, while his authority 
was undisputed, could afford to ignore for the most 
part the dk¢mmzs who adhered to their religion ; but 
the Abbasid, who had thrown open the highes places 
in his kingdom to the foreigner, could not, or at any 
rate did not, accord the same toleration that Muhammad 
and his countrymen had displayed to the protected 
cults. With the Abbasid rule, the latent fanaticism of 
Islam burst forth, humiliating and subduing Jews and 
Christians to the position they occupy in purely 
Muhammadan countries to-day. 

* See Geschichte des Qorans, Nédldeke-Schwally, Leipzig, 19109, 
pp: 93 ff. 

THE ABBASID PERIOD 65 

It is not germane to our subject to inquire how far 
the caliphs themselves or their governors and generals 
obeyed in their private lives the injunctions of the 
prophet. The fact remains that the Abbasids officially 
supported the efforts of the doctors to restore the 
sunna of Muhammad throughout their vast dominions. 
Most of the Abbasids had a theological education from 
their tutors ; and some one learned in religious matters 
was attached officially to the court. The religion of 
Islam became ‘established’. Provincial governors 
were ordered to measure their actions by the standard 
of the Quran, and to uphold the authority of religious 
law. Now the pious could emerge from their obscurity 
and take their place in regulating the life of the indivi- 
dual and the community according to the laws which 
had been evolved and deduced during the century and 
more since the prophet’s death. With the definitely 
religious bent of the administration their importance in 
the community was enormously enhanced. Now that 
the swnna was to be the norm of life it was discovered 
that the Muhammadan world did not know what the 
sunna was. It may easily be conjectured what was 
the depth of the ignorance in the distant provinces 
from Bukhari’s account of the conduct of public prayer 
in the mosque of Basra.’ Before the task of ‘ reviving 
the swnna’ could be begun it had first to be deter- 
mined what was the practice of the prophet. Malik in 
the middle of the second century could produce only 
six hundred sayings of the prophet of a legal character. 
Thus it is clear that the vast mass of material in the 
sunna was unknown to him. 

MD; SegiPt 43. 

2861 I 

66 THe ABBASID PERTIOGD 

The demand having arisen for a clear unequivocal’ 
ecclesiastical tradition, efforts were made by the reli- 
gious and by the professional doctors to supply it. 
First there were those who applied the words of 
Muhammad, ‘Seek knowledge even unto China,’* to 
the problem, believing that if they traversed the whole 
Muhammadan world and interrogated all who had 
been in converse with the Companions and Followers 
of the prophet, ‘knowledge’, the resultant body of 
traditional matter, would suffice to guide all Muslims 
in the right path. 

Secondly there were those who frankly recognized 
that there was not a sufficient amount of tradition 
extant, nor in the nature of things could there ever 
have been, to provide guidance for the whole com- 
munity in every department of private and public life 
in the changed circumstances of the time. These 
people claimed the right to frame laws by the exercise 
of reason and induction. Their school was known as 
the Ashabu-l-Rai. 

Thirdly there was the ignoble party, who shared 
neither the simple faith of the first nor the intellectual 
- honesty of the second school. They claimed to be 
traditionists pure and simple and to base their findings 
on the traditions and customs of the prophet; but 
inasmuch as tradition was sometimes self-contradictory 
and sometimes non-existent they had to resort to a 
forced exegesis: the inductive method of the oppo- 
nents they affected to despise; or to sheer invention. 

The ‘searchers after knowledge’ (Taleban al-L/m) 
displayed a marvellous activity, some unquestioningly 

1 Kanzu-l--Ummail, v, p. 202. 

THE ABBASID PERIOD 67 

undertaking the long and hazardous journey from the 
Guadalquiver to the Oxus in order to hear a hadith 
from the lips of one who claimed to have it in succes- 
sion from Muhammad. In the second century a certain 
punctiliousness had to be observed. It was necessary 
to take over the hadith in its entirety, adding one’s 
own name as the last link in the chain. It would 
be difficult to over-estimate the importance of this 
movement within Islam. Without the journeys and 
researches of these men the canonical collections 
would have been impossible. They kept alive in the 
memories of men scattered throughout the Muham- 
madan world a record of what the prophet was re- 
ported to have said and done. Nor was this all. 
They secured the general application of hadith which 
possessed only a local or provincial authority. In the 
nature of things, before the swxua was adopted by the 
government as an authoritative principle in the life of 
the state, no practice or doctrine—even if it were 
a genuine tradition of a Companion—could be gua- 
ranteed a hearing outside the circle of its original 
audience. But now that scholars travelled everywhere 
to supplement the traditions current in their own 
provinces and returned with their store to instruct an 
eager circle of pupils, the whole of the Muhammadan 
world had to listen to what was reported in its several 
districts. The summary report of Bukhari’s handling 
of the vast number of traditions current in his day (see 
p. 28 f.) is an indication of the general character of 
hadith in the third century. Some were deemed 
worthy of inclusion in the canonical corpus; the great 
majority had been coined to support doctrines current 
in particular areas. 

68 Tue ABBASID (PERIOD 

Journeys in quest of knowledge were elevated into 
acts of consummate piety, so that, for example, he who 
died from perils by the way, or succumbed to privation, 
was likened to him who lost his life in fighting for the 
faith. The following, recorded by Al Tirmidhi, Ibn 
Maja, Ibn Hanbal, and Al Darimi, illustrates the 
activity of the 7albu-/-“J/m, and the esteem in which 
‘knowledge’ was held by the pious Muslim: ‘ Kathir 
b. Qais said: “I was sitting with Abi Darda in the 
mosque of Damascus when a man came to him and 
said, ‘I have come to you from Medina for a tradition 
which I have heard that you narrate from (‘az) the 
apostle of God: for no other purpose have I come.’” 
‘Abu Darda said: “I heard the apostle of God say, 
‘Whoso travels a road in search of knowledge will God 
lead in a road to Paradise. Verily the angels joyfully 
spread their wings over the 7a/zbu-l-Iim. All crea- 
tures in heaven and earth and even the fishes in the 
depth of the waters pray for the learned man (a/‘ahm). 
His superiority over the ordinary man is as that of the 
full moon over all the stars.”’ It would be difficult to 
find more fulsome praise of any human activity. 

Both the strong religious motive and also the desire 
to pose before their countrymen as men who possessed 
traditions of prophetic origin which were not contained 
in written collections accounted for the longevity of the 
‘Quest for knowledge’.!| Centuries after the canonical 
collections had become recognized as authoritative and 
binding on the conscience of the pious, Muslims still 

* Al Suyiti (sub Must‘asim) records that a number of traditionists 
granted this caliph a licence to repeat traditions in their name. This 
evidence from the seventh century of the Hijra is a striking example 
of the longevity of oral tradition. 

THe ABpBasip PERIOD | 69 

undertook these journeys. The demand created the 
supply. There were not wanting charlatans who were 
willing to narrate any number of hadith for a sum of 
money. And as the /a/zdzim of later times were gene- 
rally the most credulous of men, the wild stories which 
they brought back from their travels and related as 
sober traditions emanating from the founder of their 
religion ultimately brought the whole practice into 
contempt. 

The very name of the second party—those who 
desired to frame the jurisprudence of the Islamic 
community by the aid of the vast amount of knowledge 
which had been acquired by its more enlightened 
members—is probably a reflection on their non-Arabian 
tenets. They were called the Ashabu-l-Rai. The 
early fig literature contains many axioms which are 
taken straight from Roman law-books. The foreign 
character of much of the gh was apparent to early 
Arabian writers, who do not hesitate to display their 
scorn for the methods of those who relied on members 
of a conquered race for the principles of their juris- 
prudential system rather than on the customs of the 
Arabs. 

The third party to take a share in the work of 
providing the community with foundations for a rule 
of life and conduct were the Ashabu-l-hadith. They 
were not, as we have seen, the first party in the field: 
probably they did not feel called upon to bestir them- 
selves until they had amassed more traditional matter 
than was at their disposal when the Ashabu-l-Ray first 
took the field. But the painstaking researches of the 

? rai = opinio. 

70 THE ABBASID PERIOD 

Taliban-al-ilm produced an ever-growing mass of 
hadith which could be drawn upon to support almost 
any doctrine or practice, so that they were able by 
supplementing this source from their own inventions 
to deny the necessity for the exercise of opznzo, and to 
demand that the laws and customs of the community 
should be based on the swzma as it was embodied in 
the traditions of the prophet. It was this controversial 
necessity for the production of hadith which helped to 
swell the vast number of traditions ascribed to the 
prophet. But since custom and law had by this time 
become established in some respects both practically 
and theoretically, the controversy, like so many of the 
disputations of the Rabbis in the Talmud, was to a 
large extent robbed of practical value. It was a con- 
troversy to determine not so much what the law of the 
community should be, but rather on what principle it 
should rest—free and independent drawing from the 
legal systems of the civilized world, or the sznxua of 
the prophet as reported by tradition. 

Despite the invention of hadith to support a principle 
required at the time, the existence of contradictory 
hadith, and the lack of any critical examination of the 
statements of the traditionists, the controversy ended 
in the complete victory of the traditional party, so that 
their doctrines have become an integral part of the 
faith of a Muhammadan. 

* The comparison drawn between the corruption in law and custom 
introduced into Islam by the Shu‘tbiyya and the error into which 
Israel fell through the contamination of muwallidiin (J/S, ii. 76, 
foot-note) is undoubtedly suggested by Jewish Haggada.  Israel’s 
apostasy and idolatry are constantly attributed to the presence of the 
‘mixed multitude’ of Exodus xii. 38. 

THe ApsBasip PERIOD 71 

It must not be supposed that the representatives of 
these two opposing schools of thought were always 
divided into two sharply-divided camps.!_ Distinct as 
their methods were in principle, there were many of 
the most influential men in the world of Muslim juris- 
prudence who sought to confirm the findings of vaz by 
the traditions of the orthodox, as did Al-Shaibani. 
Moreover, on the other hand, A/+Muwatta, the law- 
book emanating from the ‘home of the swzua’, where 
hadith fails, appeals to raz. 

The attacks of the 4 sha@éu-/-Rai on the traditionists 
hada salutary effect; they were compelled to endeavour 
to put their house in order, and the beginnings of some 
sort of criticism of authorities may be traced. The 
flat contradiction existing between many of the hadith 
was obviously the favourite object of attack; and 
where such an accusation can be sustained there are 
only two replies. It must either be maintained that 
the contradiction is apparent rather than real,* or the 
inconvenient hadith must be thrown overboard. 

1 A protest against speculation and the enmity subsisting between 
the schools is preserved by Bukhari (Krehl, p. 282, Babu Ta’‘limi-l- 
Faraid: ‘Beware of conjecture (zgavm), for conjecture is the most lying 
hadith. Do not scrutinize everything exhaustively nor dwell in hatred 
and mutual dislike, but be servants of God as brethren,’ These, says 
Abii Huraira, were the prophet’s words. 

2 See, further, D. B. Macdonald, Mushm Theology, London, 1903, 
pp. 100 ff. 

8 Any collection of hadith which is provided with a commentary 
will show the straits to which harmonists are reduced. Cf.e.g. MZishkai, 
Pp. 351, sub zzfagasa, note 5. Almost every page is occupied with 
a discussion of this kind. ‘There are few chapters of Muhammadan 
jurisprudence in which the underlying traditions are free from con- 
tradictions’: Goldziher. 

72 Tue ABBASID PERIOD 

Already Al-Shaffi (d. 204) lays down principles by 
which contradictory hadith can be made to explain 
and complement each other, while Ibn Qutaiba displays 
great ingenuity in this field, as the following examples 
from the Mukhtalifu-l-hadith will show : 

‘The ahlu-l-kalam assert that the two following 
hadith are contradictory and mutually exclusive, 
namely : 

(a) There will be no prophet after me, and no 
religion after my religion. The lawful and the 
unlawful will be what God has permitted and for- 
bidden according to my words until the last day. 

(5) The Messiah will descend and slay swine, 
break the cross, and add to the lawful. And from 
‘Aisha: Say of the Apostle of God, “ The seal of the 
prophets”: do not say, “ There will be no prophet 
after him.”’ 

Now we maintain that there is no contradiction 
whatever in these statements; for the Messiah was an 
earlier prophet whom God took up (to Himself) and 
will send him down again at the end of the age as 
a sign (‘a/aman) of the Hour. As God has said: 
‘Verily he shall be a sign (‘c4un) of the hour. Doubt 
not then of it’;? and some Readers read ‘as a sign’ 
(‘alamun). And when the Messiah descends he will 
not abrogate anything that Muhammad the apostle 
of God commanded, nor will the Imam from his reli- 
gion® be first, but he will set him (Muhammad) first 
and pray behind him. As to the words ‘and add to 
the lawful’, a man said to Abii Huraira, ‘ He will only 
add women to the lawful, to which he answered with 

? Cairo, 1326 a.H., pp. 235-6. 
? Sur. 43, v. 61, lit. ‘He is for knowledge of the Hour’. 
* Or, ‘people’. 

THE ABBASID PERIOD 73 

a laugh, ‘Precisely. The words ‘and add to the 
lawful’ do not mean that he will allow men to marry 
five or six wives: they merely mean that whereas 
when the Messiah was first on earth he did not marry, 
when God sends him down again he will marry a 
woman and will add to what God has made lawful to 
him, i.e. the addition is from God. Then will there be 
no Christians but will know that he is the servant of 
God and be certain that he is mortal. 

As to ‘Aisha’s words, they refer to the descent of 
Jesus and consequently do not contradict the prophet’s 
saying: ‘There will be no prophet aftér me. He 
meant there will be no prophet after me to abrogate 
my commands as is customarily the prophet’s mission. 
Her meaning was, ‘ Do not say that the Messiah will 
not come down after him.’ 

The contradictory import of traditions authorizing 
or prohibiting the writing of traditions has been referred 
to above (p. 16). Our author?! deals with them thus: 

(z) Do not write anything from me except the 
Quran. Whoso writes anything from me, destroy him. 

(6) From ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr. I said to the apostle 
of God shall I record knowledge (‘z/m). Yes, said he. 
From Shu‘aib: May I write down all that I hear from 
thee of the things that please (God) or displease Him ? 
Yes, said the apostle, for I speak nothing but the 
truth. 

Here, say the philosophers, is a blatant inconsis- 
tency. Now we say that there are two meanings to 
these hadith. One, that a sumna is abrogated by a 
sunna, for he at first forbade that his words should be 
written down; then afterwards when he knew that 
sunnas would be multiplied and escape the memory he 

* Pp. 365. 

23851 K 

74 Tue ABBASID PERIOD 

agreed to their being recorded in writing. Two, the 
permission was peculiar to ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr because 
he read the books of the earlier monotheists and used 
to write in Syriac and Arabic, while the rest of the 
Companions were illiterate (#mzyin), only one or two 
of them being able to write, and they not correctly. 
Therefore, because the prophet feared that they would 
write inaccurately he forbade them to write anything, 
and because he could trust ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr’s ability 
he allowed him to record his saying (pp. 365-6). 

Again the question, May a Muslim drink standing ? 

(2) Anas says the prophet forbade it. 

(6) Ibn ‘Umar says the prophet used to drink 
standing. 

There is no contradiction, says Ibn Qutaiba, because 
the prophet forbade drinking while one is walking. 
He wanted people to eat and drink in comfort, and 
not to drink while hurrying on a journey or business. 
Neglect of this precaution causes choking and indiges- 
tion; moreover, the word gum implies walking, not 
mere standing. (Here follows a quotation from Al 
“Asha where yagiimu ‘ala means ‘ proceed against’.) In 
the second hadith ‘drinking while standing’, gazmun, 
not walking nor active is meant. There is nothing 
objectionable in that because he was at his ease, which 
is after all as though he were seated (4¢-manztlatt-l- 
ga id). 

To a modern reader these explanations will seem 
more ingenious than convincing.? 

Despite the power which a well-disposed government 

* An interesting discussion of the contradictory traditions as to the 
age of the prophet at his death will be found in Al Mas‘idi, Les 
Prairies d@Or, Paris, 1914, Tome iv, pp. 148 ff. 

THE ABBASID PERIOD 75 

gave to the traditionists they could not dominate the 
everyday life of the Muhammadan entirely by their 
theories. And often custom and practice were not in 
agreement with the swzza and hadith. When these 
differences were merely local something could perhaps 
be done by an ecclesiastically-minded governor who 
was not unwilling to apply the civil power to bring 
about conformity. But when the differences were in 
customs which had become almost universal the tradi- 
tionist had to yield. Two lines of retreat were open 
to him. Either he must declare that the hadith was 
invalid and had been abrogated by another (a device 
familiar to the Quran exegetes),! or he must admit that 
universal practice was invested with a higher power 
than hadith. This would seem to be a jeopardous 
step, but the traditionists were fully equal to the 
occasion. They elevated the agreed practice of the 
community to the position of an authoritative prin- 
ciple—a/ /jma'—and asserted that when zjmd@ was in 
contradiction with the szsa it was a clear indication 
that an abrogating hadith had been lost! Ibn Qutaiba, 
however, does not feel himself called upon to go to 
such lengths to justify the hadith. He asserts roundly 
that zjma@ is a more trustworthy guide than hadith ; 
for the latter is subject to change through the careless- 
ness of the narrators, to obscurity, abrogation, and 
forgery, while gma‘ is not liable to such mishaps: 
hence the cause of the conflict between tradition and 
practice. 

But the doctrine which satisfactorily set aside all 
disquieting reflections on the possibility of untrust- 

1 Ibn ‘Umar in Al Daraqutni (J/rshkat, p. 24), explicitly: cana 
ahadithana yunsakhu ba'duha ba‘dan kanaskhi-l-qurant. 

76 Tue ABBASID PERIOD 

worthy traditions was enshrined in the words, ‘My 
people will never agree upon an error. This tradition 
is not to be found in the Sa/zhan, though it is recorded 
by Aba Daitd and Al-Tirmidhi as Zasan. The pro- 
mulgation of this doctrine was truly masterly. We 
cannot but admire the resource and ingenuity of those 
who, threatened with the destruction—or at all events 
the discrediting—of their elaborate structure of tradi- 
tion, incorporated the destructive force in their system 
and invested it with the authority of the prophet 
himself. 

1 It is obvious that this doctrine of the infallibility of the community 
as a whole provides an open road for the free development of the 
Muhammadan peoples. Any intelligent student of contemporary 
literature can see that the leaders of Muhammadan thought, when 
popular feeling is behind them, have no difficulty in obtaining the 
support of a large section of the Islamic world in favour of men and 
causes that would be condemned by orthodox tradition—the caliphate 
question is an interesting example. The words of a great scholar and 
man of affairs, written forty years ago (Aznals of the Early Cali- 
phate, by Sir W. Muir, London, 1883, p. 456, as quoted by Cheragh 
Ali), are hardly trae of the Muhammadan world to-day: ‘Islam is 
stationary; swathed in the rigid bands of the Coran; it is powerless, 
like the Christian dispensation, to adapt itself to the varying circum- 
stances of time and place, and to keep pace with, if not to lead and 
direct, the progress of society and the elevation of the race. In the 
body politic the spiritual and the secular are hopelessly confounded, 
and we fail of perceiving any approach to free institutions or any 
germ whatever of popular government. The Muhammadanism 
of the present day differs from the letter of its ancient documents 
in many important particulars, and given the impetus from within 
there is great scope for reform and development. 

IV 

Piet eros Ar TAD TT Hr BY 
MUSLIMS 

Minatory hadith against lars in tradition; the 
‘ gussas’ —Hladith as a study— Method of Muslim crite- 
cosm.— The categories of hadith—Ilbn Khaldun's verdict 
on tradition — Modern criticism by Mushms. 

We have examined some of the influences which 
were at work during the formative period of Islam, 
and seen how they have all left their mark on tradition. 
It now remains to review briefly the criticism of hadith 
by Muhammadans themselves. It is quite impossible 
here to attempt to give a résumé of the opinions formed 
by the principal Arabic writers. In general, perhaps, | 
it may be said that, like most Oriental authors, without 
feeling themselves in any way bound to take into 
account the trustworthiness of their sources, they used 
the hadith literature as a quarry from which to extract 
whatever they considered relevant to their purpose. 
Some writers who were not afraid to subject the 
canonical literature to some sort of criticism will be 
noticed. 

The two judgements which Muhammadans_ them- 
selves have passed on hadith have been admirably 
summarized by Dr. Nicholson :' ‘While every impar- 
tial student will admit the justice of Ibn Qutayba's 
claim that no religion has such historical attestations 
as Islam—/aysa i-ummatin mina ’l-umamt asnadun ka- 
asnaaihim—he must at the same time cordially assent 
to the observation made by another Muhammadan : 

1 A Literary History of the Arabs, London, 1907, p. 145. 

78 CRITICISM OF HADITH 

“In nothing do we see pious men more given to false- 
hood than in Tradition” (lam nara ’l-salihina fi shayin 
akdhaba minhum fi 'l-hadith).’ The latter statement 
was made by ‘Asim al-nabil (d. 212): almost the same 
words are reported to have been said by Yahya b. 
Sa‘id (d. 192); both of them were active nearly a cen- 
tury before the compilation of the first corpus of 
canonical tradition. Al-Zuhri is reported to have said 
that the reason he wrote down hadith was because of 
the prevalence of traditions emanating from the East 
whose authenticity he denied.! 

A most significant recognition within hadith itself 
of the untrustworthiness of guarantors is to be found in 
Bukhari.? [bn ‘Umar reports that Muhammad ordered 
all dogs to be killed save sheep-dogs and hounds. 
Abia Huraira added the word au zar‘in; where- 
upon Ibn ‘Umar makes the remark, ‘Abu Huraira 
owned cultivated land!’? A better illustration of the 
underlying motive of some hadith can hardly be found. 

Weighty pronouncements against what was becoming 
a universal evil produced a reaction. Men came to 
see that the union of truth and falsehood might result 
in the complete overthrow of apostolic tradition. A 
most remarkable feature of the reaction was that the 
theologians borrowed the weapons of the liars. In 
order to combat false traditions they invented others 
equally destitute of prophetic authority. An extra- 
ordinary number of Companions are cited as witnesses 

1 JASB, 1856, p. 322. * Kitabu-l-Said, Bab. 6. 

* Cf. Tirmidhi, i, p. 281, and JZS, ii, p. 49 and the notes there (to 
which add Ibn Maja, Bab Qatli-l-kilabi, illa kalb saidin au zar‘in), 
I do not find Ibn ‘Umar’s damaging observation on Abi Huraira in 
Krehl or Houdas 2% doc. 

BY MUSLIMS, 79 

that the prophet said, ‘Whoever shall repeat of me 
that which I have not said, his resting-place shall be in 
hell’? A study of the theological systems of the 
world would hardly reveal a more naive attempt to 
tread the szvatu-l-mustagim! Other pseudo-prophetic 
hadith portray Muhammad warning his people against 
liars who will seek to mislead the community while 
_ claiming his authority for so doing. 

However, the threat of eternal damnation was not 
thought to be sufficient in itself to secure the com- 
munity against the forgeries of the unscrupulous. The 
matter soon, moreover, became one of political urgency. 
Such chapters as we now find in the canonical tradi- 
tions dealing with the merits of the heroes of the 
different factions of Islam had a profound influence on 
the popular mind. Obviously much might be done 
by promulgating the Fadail ‘Ali,’ or, on the other 
hand, the Fadazl ‘Uthman, in a province which had 
heard of neither. In fact, according to the express 
statement of Muslim, criticism of hadith owed its rise 
to the great dynastic struggles of the second century, 
when the empire was split into hostile camps, each of 
them supporting their pretensions by a claim to 
apostolic authority. Criticism of hadith was keenest 
in those regions where political and religious differences 
were most felt, notably in the Iraq. As we have seen, 
it centred not on the subject-matter but on the chain 
of guarantors, though perhaps, since Orientals are the 
best judges of Oriental mentality, the result was very 

1 Cf. Muir, ZZ, 1912, p. xxxvi. The saying is to be found in all 

collections. 
2 The hadith extolling his merits and establishing his claim to the 

highest place in the prophet’s estimation. 

80 CRITIcismM OF HADITH 

much the same. Hadith was not criticized from the 
point of view of what was inherently reasonable and 
to be regarded as worthy of credence,! but from a 
consideration of the reputation which the guarantors of 
the tradition bore. However, the doctrine of Ijma 
may have had a restraining influence on purely subjec- 
tive criticism, for quite early it had been extended to 
cover the sphere of hadith, and what the community 
agreed upon was above serious questioning. 

However, there was still a large circle outside the 
orthodox thinkers who rejected the whole system of 
hadith. They were not concerned to adopt those 
which happened to fit in with the views and doctrines 
of the doctors, or even with those which might fairly 
be held to support their own view of life. So far from 
being impressed by the earnestness of the traditionists 
who scrupulously examined the zszdd, or by the halo 
of sanctity which had gathered round the early guaran- 
tors of tradition, the independent thinkers of the 
second and third centuries openly mocked and derided 
the system as a whole and the persons and matters 
named therein. Some of the most flagrant examples 
of these lampoons will be found in the Book of Songs, 
where indecent stories are cast into the form in which 
tradition was customarily handed down to posterity. 

Nor were these careless free-lances alone in attacking 
the elaborate system which was being built up on the 
foundation of the supposed utterances of the prophet. 
Popular as such literature was among savanés and 

* T except, of course, the great philosophical historian Ibn Khaldiin, 
who expressly says, ‘ the rule for distinguishing what is true from what 
is false in history is based on its possibility or impossibility,’ quoted 
by Nicholson, ZA, p. 438. 

BY Mus LImMs, 81 

vulgar alike, a more serious enemy to the orthodox 
entered the field. The many mutually contradictory 
traditions coined to establish dogmatic and legal points 
were intolerable to contemporary philosophers, who 
eagerly seized upon hadith which had been discredited 
by the conscience of Islam. The presence of folk-lore 
and fable whose heathen origin was well known to the 
learned could not but excite contempt, and the hadith 
which were borrowed direct from Jewish Haggada and 
Christian legend were especially vulnerable to attack. 
Their presence is deprecated by speeches attributed to 
the prophet in other hadith, and Ibn Qutaiba boldly 
throws them overboard. As Ibn Khaldin says, the 
Arabs were an ignorant race, with no literary nor 
scientific knowledge, and when they wished to probe 
the mysteries of creation and the universe they turned 
for information to the Jews who had accepted Islam. 
These, says this learned author, were no less ignorant 
than the surrounding Arabs; but they brought over 
into Islam a mass of their own traditions, especially 
those dealing with the origin of the creation and with 
the future of the human race. Commentaries were 
soon filled with their stories. So great was their 
reputation with the Muslims that their fables and 
pseudo-prophetic hadith were accepted despite the fact 
that all proof of the speakers’ veracity or the intrinsic 
probability of the stories were lacking. These Jews 
included natives of the Yaman such as Ka‘bu-] Ahbar 
(d. 32) and Wahb b. Munabbih (d. 114) and ‘Abd Allah 
b. Salam (d. 43). 

The popularity of these moralizing stories, whatever 
their source, among the Ascetics and Moralists, and 
also among the general public, has ensured them 

2851 L 

R85 THe Criticism OFaLLADITH 

a permanent place in Muslim tradition. Despite their 
vulnerable zszads, the later collectors accepted them 
for the sake of their valuable influence in the sphere 
of morals and ethics. Nemesis followed hard on this 
weakness, for, as we have seen, the fables were on the 
one hand a cause of embarrassment in dealing with 
the attacks of the learned; and the public on the other 
hand showed a marked preference for the lying and 
impudent inventions of the street story-tellers, the 
gussas, who clothed their nonsense in the garb of a 
canonical sazad.1 Unless the ears of the simple 
believer had been tickled and his curiosity stimulated 
by these haggadic stories the guzssa@s could never have 
entered into competition with the m«haddithin. So: 
great was the effrontery of these street orators and 
fablemongers that the saintly Ibn Hanbal had to flee 
before them. 

1 The following two illustrations of the methods of these plausible 
rascals deserve mention, as they are not without humour, and show 
how incredibly credulous the ordinary ignorant Muslim was: 

(2) ‘The poet Kulthtm b. ‘Amr al ‘Attabi, who lived in the time of 
Hartin and Al-Ma’min, collected a crowd round him in a mosque of 
the capital, and gave out the following hadith in the correct form : 
‘*He who can touch the end of his nose with the tip of his tongue can 
be certain that he will never feel the flames of hell.” As though a 
signal had been given the whole company put out their tongues to 
see whether they had the visible mark of those destined for Paradise.’ 
MS, ii, p. 164. 

(2) ‘ They collect a great crowd of people round them: one Qass 
stations himself at one end of the street and narrates traditions about 
the merits of ‘Ali, while his fellow stands at the other end of the street 
exalting the virtues of Abi Bakr. Thus they secure the pence of the 
Nasibi as well as the Shi‘i, and divide their gains equally afterwards,’ 
Lb., pp. 165 f. 

BY Mus.uimMs, 83 

But in matters of jurisprudence the traditionists 
refused to yield. On the contrary, one result of the 
attack on tradition was to enhance its authority, as the 
following hadith, which are now canonical, will demon- 
strate: ‘Verily I have brought the Quran and along 
with it that which is similar thereto, yet the rich man 
on his throne would say, “ Hold fast the Quran and 
its injunctions to enjoy and to refrain.” But verily 
what the apostle of .God has declared unlawful God 
has made unlawful. ...’ Again: ‘Does any one of 
you suppose that God has not forbidden anything but 
what is contained in this Quran? Verily by God that 
which I have commanded, admonished, and forbidden 
is like unto the Quran and more than it. And God 
does not permit you to enter the houses of the People 
of the Book without their permission, nor to beat their 
wives and eat their fruit, provided they have paid their 
taxes. Nothing could be more explicit than this 
assertion of the authority of the oral law enshrined in 
tradition. 

But this position involved the giving of some sort 
of guarantee that traditions were authentic, and so, 
when in the third century the compilation of the 
canonical collections was begun, a systematic selection 
of trustworthy traditions—trustworthy, that is, in the 
uncritical estimation of the collectors—became an 
integral part of the science of tradition. Inquiries 
were made as to the character of the guarantors, 
whether they were morally and religiously satisfactory, 
whether they were tainted with heretical doctrines, 
whether they had a reputation for truthfulness, and 
had the ability to transmit what they had themselves 
heard. Finally, it was necessary that they should be 

84° THE CRITICISMO MT apie 

competent witnesses whose testimony would be accepted 
in a court of civil law. 

In Muslim’s day the great importance of hadith, as 
a study in itself, was clearly recognized, for we find in 
his collection? the saying: ‘Verily this science® is 
a religion: take care on whose authority you receive 
your religion.” There are also the solemn words: 
‘The zsuad is a matter of religion; and were it not for 
the zsvad any one could say what he pleased’ (/aw/a-/- 
isnadu lagala man sh@’a ma sh@a): in other words, the 
isnad was regarded as a protection against forgery and 
invention, as it well may have been with the religiously- 
minded Muslims. Muslim himself evidently does not 
feel comfortable about the selection he has made from 
the content of Muhammadan tradition. He tells us on 
the authority of Ibn Sirin that ‘people used not to ask 
questions about the zszad, but when dissension (/:/ua) * 
broke out they said, “Tell us the names of your autho- 
rities.” So the ah/u-l-sunna were scrutinized and their 
hadith received, and the ah/u-/-bida‘ were scrutinized 

1 JASB, 1856, p. 53. ® Bab Al Isnad min al Din. 

° The ‘Science of Tradition’ determines what is to be understood 
by a saying or action of the prophet which forms the subject of 
tradition. It is defined in the Déctionary of Technical Terms..., 
ed. A. Sprenger, Calcutta, 1862, p. 27, thus: ‘ The science of tradition 
is that science by which the sayings and doings of the prophet of God 
are known. As to his sayings, they are in the Arabic tongue, and 
consequently he who is unacquainted with Arabic is unable to acquire 
this science. It may be something said by itself or in a context, 
metaphorical or literal, general or particular, absolute or qualified, 
explicit or implicit, and so on, according to the rules of Arabic... . 
As to his doings, they are the things which he did of himself, whether 
he commanded us to follow him therein or not, as for example, actions 
which he did naturally or out of some individual characteristic.’ 

* On the double meaning of this word see Bukhari, K7tabu-l-Saum. 

By Mus Lims 85 

and their hadith were not received.’ In the same 
chapter he mentions that traditions—which the context 
suggests were in some way suspicious—were received 
as genuine because the people who reported them were 
notoriously pious Muslims. 

He adds the exceedingly important note that in his 
day the traditionists (a@4/u/ ‘/m) frequently suspected 
reporters of tradition, but that they did not feel it 
incumbent upon them to expose their faults and to give 
a decision against them, except where serious interests 
were involved. He strongly deprecates this careless- 
ness on the ground that false hadith constitute a 
standing menace to Islam. He urges that the utmost 
pains should be taken to brand such traditions false 
and unworthy of credence, and he has only contempt 
for those who, knowing that traditions are weak, wil- 
fully repeat them in order to be accounted learned and 
pious. ‘He that thus treads the path of knowledge 
has no part in it, and ought to be called ignorant rather 
than learned, says Muslim. 

The three categories into which all traditions were 
divided were sound (sa/7zh), fair (Lasan), and weak 
(daif). One of the great differences between the 
collections of Bukhari and Muslim! was that the former 
refused to regard hadith mu‘an‘an as standing in the 
same category as those which contained words like 
‘T heard’ or ‘I saw’ the Prophet of God, or ‘ So-and-so 
informed me’. Unless some word implying personal 
contact between two guarantors was used in a tradition 
Bukhari maintained that Islam could not apply it to 
establish any law. To him and to rigorists in tradition 

1 Supra, p. 32. 

86 THE CRITICISM OF HDADITE 

all other traditions were at the best a sort of apocrypha. 
It rather looks as if Muslim, when he attacks an 
anonymous contemporary (da ‘du ’l-muntahale ’l-hadith 
min ahli ‘asrina) and asserts that the expression ‘ax 
implies personal contact unless there is direct evidence 
to the contrary, has Bukhari in mind. He accuses his 
opponent of inconsistency on the ground that there 
are several hadith w‘an‘an which are accepted as 
genuine, e.g. Hisham ‘az adihz. In this and similar 
cases, he argues, it would be ridiculous to suppose that 
there was no personal contact between the two men, 
and to refuse to regard the tradition as genuine. 

The classification of traditions is a highly technical 
pursuit, and a new terminology had to be evolved to 
indicate the numerous kinds of tradition current in the 
Muhammadan world. 

The Muslim doctors’ view of tradition, as given by 
Al Jurjani (d. 816), is both detailed and clear, and is 
substantially the same as that which has always pre- 
vailed among his co-religionists. He says with good 
reason that the text of a tradition is rarely taken into 
account, and that criticism is confined to the zsxzé@d. 
He accepts the three categories given above, and 
defines and subdivides them at length thus: 

1. Sahih or sound tradition. 

musnad, A tradition which is supported by authori- 
ties resting on the prophet. 

muttasal, \Nith a continuous uninterrupted zszad. If 
it does not go back to the prophet it is said to be 
mauguf stopped. 

marfa', Carried back and attributed to the prophet; 
le. it may be muttasal or maugif. 

muanan, Linked by the word ‘from’ instead of a 
word implying personal contact. 

BY Mus Lims 87 

muallag. Suspended with the name of a guarantor or 
more missing. If the name is missing from the 
middle it is mungata‘; if from the end it is 
mursal (v.2.). 

fard. Unique; peculiar to one district. Sometimes 
it means peculiar to one reporter, in which case it 
may be weak. 

mudrag. One which has been glossed or interpolated 
by one of the first reporters. 

mashhir. ‘Nell known, and from many reporters. 

ghartb. Resting on the authority of only one person. 

‘aziz. Resting on the authority of two or three 
persons. - 

musahhaf. Badly written either in respect to the 
name of a guarantor or with a variant reading in 
the matn. 

musalsal, \Nith a chain going back to the prophet 
containing the formula ‘I heard’ and so on. 

2. Datf or weak. 

maugif. Stopped short of the prophet, and therefore 
no legal proof. 

magth. Cut off. Emanating from the ‘Followers’ 
as to their sayings and doings. Not a legal proof. 

mursal, A saying of the Followers that the prophet 
did or said so-and-so. 

mungata, Severed, i.e. a link is missing. 

mudal. One or more names missing, e.g. a statement 
of Malik that Muhammad said. 

shadh, At variance with another well-tested tradition. 

munkar. A weak tradition at variance with another 
weak one. 

muallal, With a hidden fault or inconsistency. 

mudallas. With a hidden fault: either personal inter- 
course is falsely claimed between guarantors, or 
the name of one has been intentionally disguised 
by means of an appellative. 

mudtarab, Deranged by verbal inconsistencies with 
another tradition. 

98. THE CRITICISM OF (HM ADIT 

maglib. One known to have come from a person 
other than the one named. 

maudi. Supposititious; hearsay which may be truth 
or mere invention. 

3. Hasan or fair tradition is that which stands 
midway between genuine and weak. It may be either 
genuine or false. It is fair because nothing is known 
against the character of its reporter, and because it 
can sometimes be supported by other evidence. 

The reader will probably agree with Al Jurjani’s 
saying that ‘further examination into the distinction of 
names, titles, epithets, and degrees appertaining to the 
science would be a lengthy matter’, and be content 
with a perusal of these and the other technical terms 
given in the appendix. As an example of the appli- 
cation of this systematic criticism the following extracts 
from Abt Daiid may be of interest :? 

‘ Dies ist ein verwerfliches (#unkar) Hadith, niemand 
anders hat es iiberliefert als Yazid al Dalani von 
Qatada .. . Abu Dawid sagt: Ich habe das Hadith 
des Yazid al Dalani dem Ahmad b. Hanbal vorge- 
legt, er hat mich aber hart zuriickgewiesen, weil er es 
als krasse Falschung betrachtete, er sagte : Was hat 
Jazid . . . unter den Genossen des Qatada zu suchen, 
hat er sich ja nicht um Hadith gekiimmert! .. . 

‘Dieses Hadith ist nicht stark (gawt), Muslim b. 
Khalid ist schwach (da‘tf). . . Ein schwacher Gewahrs- 

* Much information is to be found in the Dictionary of Technical 
Terms used in the Sciences of the Musalmans, ed. A. Sprenger, Calcutta, 
sub The Science of Tradition, and in his article in ZDMG, x, 1856, 
pp. 1-15, Uber das Traditionswesen bet den Arabern. See also 
Edward E. Salisbury, Contributions from Original Sources to our 
Knowledge of the Science of Muslim Tradition, in JAOS, vii, 1862, 
pp. 60-142, to whom I owe the foregoing. 

” Abii Daiid, Cairo, 1280, i, p. 20, quoted in JS, ii, p. 251. 

BY Mus.tims 89 

mann, beide Hadithe sind falsch (wahm) ... nach 
einem Isnad: Al Hajjaj ‘an Al Zuhri. Dies ist ein 
schwaches Hadith, Al Hajjaj hat den Zuhri nie gesehen 
und nie von ihm gehdért, auch Ja‘far b. Rabi‘a hat den 
Zuhri nie gesehen, dieser hat nur schriftlich mit jenem 
verkehrt.’ (p. 197.) 

The importance and value of the examination of the 
tsnad is obvious. By impugning the bona fides of a 
guarantor—the process was called zar# or ¢a‘an, i.e. 
wounding the reputation—thousands of untrustworthy 
traditions were eliminated from the canonical collec- 
tions. On the other hand, if the subject-matter (#atn) 
contained an obvious absurdity or an anachronism 
there was no ground for rejecting the hadith if the 
zsnad was sound. This is the reason why there are so 
many hadith of a contradictory import in one and the 
same 6a6, Historical difficulties within the ma/z could 
not arise when once the prophetic power of Muhammad 
was established as an article of faith. The exist- 
ence to this day of such hadith as those quoted in 
Chapters V and VI can only be accounted for when the 
amazing credulity of the Muhammadan community is 
realized. 

It is refreshing, after perusing these, to read the 
sane remarks of Ibn Khaldun! on a subject which 
more than once within living memory has profoundly 
stirred a Muhammadan country. 

‘The whole body of Muslims throughout the cen- 
turies have held that at the end of the age a man of 
the family of the prophet must appear who will 
strengthen religion and make justice manifest. The 

Muslims will follow him, and he will gain possession 
of the Muslim kingdoms, and be called Al Madhi. 

1 Al Mugaddima, Beyrut, ch, 52, p. 271. 

2861 M 

90 THE Criticism oF HapbDITH 

Al-Dajjal (the Antichrist) will come and afterwards 
the signs of the (last) hour indicated in the Sahih. 
Then Jesus will descend from heaven and kill Al- 
Dajjal; or, as some say, will descend with him (Al 
Mahdi) and help him to kill Al-Dajjal, and will have 
the Mahdi as Imam in prayer. On this subject hadith 
are cited as proof which the Imams have published, 
though there are not wanting those who deny their 
authenticity, often comparing them with other reports. . 
.. . We will now quote the hadith that bear on this 
matter ; the objections which have been made to them ; 
and the ground on which the objections rest... . 
We say, then, that many of the Imams have published 
hadith about the Mahdi, namely, Al Tirmidhi, Abi 
Daid, Al Bazzar, Ibn Maja, Al Hakim, Tabarani, and 
Abu Ya'la al-Mausili. They carry back the traditions 
to many of the companions like ‘Ali, Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn 
Umar, Talha, Ibn Mas‘id, Abu Huraira, Anas, Abi 
Said al-Khudri, Um Habiba, Thauban, Qurra ibn 
Aias, ‘Ali al Hilali, and ‘Abd Allah b. al Harith b. Juzi. 
The genuineness of the isnads has often been denied, 
as we shall explain; but, as the doctors of hadith 
know, impugning (ark) precedes justification (¢a‘d7/). 
If we find any of the guarantors of tradition convicted 
(ta‘an) of carelessness, defective memory, weakness, or 
lack of judgement, the soundness of the hadith is 
thereby adversely affected and its value decreased. 
If it be argued that on these grounds guarantors 
accepted by the authors of the Sahihan are affected 
(we may reply) that Ijma° has agreed to accept the 
works of these two writers, and public conduct (‘aml) is 
based on their contents. Ijma‘ is the greatest protec- 
tion and the best defence. No other work can be put 
in the same sure category (as the Sahihan). Never- 
theless we find ground for discussion as to their isnads 
in what has been handed down by doctors of hadith.’ 

Our author then proceeds to quote a long extract 
from the work of Al-Suhaili (d. 581) on the authority 

BY Mus.Lims gI 

of Abi Bakr b. Abt Khaithama (d. 279), of which we 
give a summary. ‘He (apparently Abu Bakr)! says: 
the following hadith rests on the authority of only one 
companion and comes from al Iskaf: 

1. The prophet of God said: “ He who disbelieves 
in the Mahdi is an infidel, and he who disbelieves in Al 
Dajjal is an infidel.”’ Now he says the same thing of 
the sun rising in the west—sufficient indication of exag- 
geration! Moreover, God knows whether he is right in 
carrying back the tradition to Malik. At any rate, 
Al Iskaf with the doctors is suspect and an inventor. 

2. (2) Tirmidhi and Abi Daid publish a tradition 
resting on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas® by way of 
‘Asim (d. 127), one of the seven readers, Zirr b. 
Hubaish and ‘Abd Allah b. Mas‘tid from the prophet. 
‘Though the world had but a day to exist God would 
prolong that day until he sent a man of mine or of my 
family whose name is my name and whose father’s 
name is as my father’s name.’ So Abi Daid without 
comment. Now he says in his celebrated epistle that 
what is cited in his book without comment is true. 

(2) Tirmidhi’s version is: ‘ The world shall not pass 
away until a man of my family and of my name shall 
reign over the Arabs. And elsewhere with the 
variant ‘until a man of my family shall be in power’ 
(wala). Both of them are fasaw sahth. Moreover, 

1 One cannot always determine the author of certain passages. 
None of the writers systematically documents his sources, and there- 
fore the comments may emanate from our author or his primary or 
secondary authority. 

? Either this is a mistake for Ibn Mas‘id, as I suspect (Ibn Abbas 
and Ibn Mas‘tid were both named ‘Abd ‘Allah) ; or, since they were 
contemporaries, the tradition was attributed to them both. 

92 THe Criticism oF HADITH 

he relates them maugif on the authority of Abt 

Huraira. Al Hakim says that Al Thauri (d. 161), 

Shu‘ba (d. 160), Zaida, and other Imams of the 

Muslims relate the same from ‘Asim. 

The following summary of the judgements passed 
on the said ‘Asim as a traditionist is most instructive : 
Al Hakim. Sahih. ‘Asim was a Muslim Imam. 
Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241). An honest, trustworthy 

man; but Al-A‘amash (d. 148) had a_ better 
memory ; and Shu‘ba, too, preferred him to ‘Asim. 
Al“Ajli (d. 261) did not accept his authorities 
(Zirr and Abu Wail) (d. 79), and regarded tradi- 
tions from these men as weak. 

Muhammad b. Sa‘d (d. 230). Truthful, though he 
made many mistakes in hadith. 

Ya‘qib b. Sufyan (d. 288). Confused (#udtarad). 

‘Abd al Rahman b. Abi Hatim (d. 327). ‘I said to 
my father “Abu Zara‘ says that “Asim is trust- 
worthy.” He replied he is not.’ _ 

Ibn ‘Ulayya (d. 193). All the ‘Asims have bad 
memories. 

Aba Hatim (d. 275). Trustworthy and honest in 
hadith, but he has not a retentive memory. Al 
Nasai’s judgement on him is not consistent. 

Ibn Hirash (? Khirash d. 322). Disapproves of his 
hadith. 

Abi Jafar al ‘Aqali (d. 322). He had nothing but a 
bad memory. 

Al Daraqutni (d. 385). Has somewhat to say about 
his memory. 

Yahya b. Al Qattan (d. 198). Every ‘Asim I have 
ever met had a bad memory. I heard Shu‘ba say 
‘Asim b. Abi Nujid told me traditions, but I 
kept my own opinion about them, ! 

Al Dhahabi. As a Quran reader he was trustworthy, 

" Read fz nafsi for fil-nasi. 

By Mus.iims 93 

but not as a traditionist, though by nature truth- 
ful. His traditions are Aasan. 

Ibn Khaldiin remarks that if it be objected that the 
two shaikhs have published traditions from ‘Asim, it 
may be replied that they have only done so when his 
reports have been confirmed by others; not solely on 
his authority. But God knows best. 

The reader would only be wearied by further 
examples of Ibn Khaldiin’s exhaustive investigation of 
the authority for the belief in the coming of the Mahdi. 
But it is interesting to notice that he makes the point 
that there is no mention whatever of the Mahdi in 
Muslim’s Sahih; and that of the relevant traditions 
elsewhere only a few are free from taint. Moreover, 
a tradition which can claim some measure of support 
credits the Prophet with the utterance, ‘There is no 
Mahdi except Jesus the son of Mary.’ ? 

The extraordinary reverence in which the Sahih of 
Bukhari was held naturally deterred Muslim scholars 
from criticizing its contents. Within a century of its 
appearance it was hailed by a writer as the prophet’s 
own book, and the prestige of the work grew with the 
advancing years. Bukhari was regarded as a saint, 
and pilgrimages were made to his tomb: the possession 
even of a copy of his book was held to be a sure 
protection against disaster. 

Although such an exalted position was not attained 

1 The Isnad given is: Muhammad b. Khalid Al Jundi from Abban 
b. Salih b. Abi ‘Ayyash from Al Hasan al Basri from Anas b. Malik. 
The judgements on these are as follows: Yahya b. Ma‘in says Muh, 
ibn Khalid is trustworthy. Al Baihaqi, it is unique. Al Hakim says 
the isnad occurs in different forms, mursal. Abu ‘Ayyash is branded 
as matrik by Baihaqi; it is munga/a‘; in short, the tradition is da‘tf 
and mudtarab. 

94 Tuer Criticism oF HADITH 

by Muslim and his work, yet it has always been 
bracketed with the Sahih of Bukhari, and they are 
cited as The Two Sahihs (Sahihan). But inasmuch as 
the ground of the authority of the Sahihan was their 
acceptance by the general consent of the Islamic com- 
munity, and they had not been subjected to any 
systematic critical examination, some dissentient voices 
have been raised against them from the earliest times 
down to the present day. Like the customs they 
sought to authorize by appeal to apostolic custom and 
precept, they owe their position to ma‘, not to their 
inherent virtue and faultlessness. Al Daraqutni 
(d. 385) devotes a book (al /stedrakat wal Tatabbu) to 
the demonstration of the weakness of many of the 
canonical traditions, while Abii Daid and his disciples 
claim for his work a higher position than that of any 
collection of hadith. Again, Ibn ‘Abd al Barr (d. 463) 
and Al Nawawi (d. 676) do not hesitate to assail tradi- 
tions which seem to them to be contrary to reason or 
derogatory to the dignity of the prophet. However, 
though theologians down to the ninth century in- 
veighed against particular hadith in the canonical col- 
lections, the authority of the Sahihan as the content of 
genuine apostolic tradition as a whole was not called 
in question. 

Modern Criteccsm of Tradition by Muslims. 

The study of hadith and hadith-criticism in Muslim 
academies still continues on the lines laid down a 
thousand years ago; and it is interesting to see how 
the modern educated Muslim regards this activity. 

BY Musuims 95 

The extracts that follow are taken from ‘A critical 
exposition of the popular “Jihad” ... by Moulavi 
Cheragh Ali.’! 

‘The biographers of Mohammad and the narrators 
of his campaigns are too lax in enumerating the expe- 
ditions led by Mohammad. They have noted down 
the names and accounts of various expeditions without 
having due regard to a rational criticism, or without 
being bound by the stringent laws of the technical 
requirements of traditionary evidence. Consequently 
they give us romances of the expeditions without 
specifying which of them are true and which fictitious. 
There are many expeditions enumerated by the bio- 
graphers which have, in fact, no trustworthy evidence 
for their support; some are altogether without founda- 
tion, and some of them are wrongly termed as expedi- 
tions for warring purposes.’ The writer in a foot-note 
adds: ‘The biographers have only compiled or 
arranged the mass of popular romances and favourite 
tales of campaigns, which had become stereotyped in 
their time, but were for the most part the inventions 
of a playful fantasy.’ Further, he observes (p. xxii) of 
Bukhari’s account of Muhammad’s wars in the Kitabu- 
l-Maghazi: ‘Even the latter minimized numbers are 
not deserving of confidence.’ 

p. cii. ‘It is only the Mohammadan Common Law, 
with all its traditions or oral sayings of the Prophet— 
very few of which are genuine reports*—and the sup- 
posed chimerical concurrence of the learned Moslem 
Doctors, and mostly their analogical reasonings (called 
Hadees, Ijma, and Kzas), passed under the name of 
Figah or Shariat, that has blended together the 
spiritual and the secular, and has become a barrier in 
some respects regarding certain social and political 
innovations for the higher civilization and progress of 
the nation.’ 

1 Calcutta, 1885, pp. xx ff. 2 The italics are mine.—A. G. 

96 THE CRITICISM oF HADITH 

It is not our purpose to examine how the learned 
Indian author repudiates traditions and traditionists 
which do not support his own enlightened views, nor 
to criticize his attitude towards hadith from the same 
authorities when they tend to glorify the founder of 
his religion. But it is interesting to see how the hadith 
literature, and the vast structure built upon it, are 
viewed by the modern Muhammadan.' 

‘It is only a theory of our Common Law, in its 
military and political chapters, which allow[s] waging 
unprovoked war with non-Moslems, exacting tribute 
from “the people of the Book”, and other idolaters, 
except those of Arabia, for which the Hanafi Code of 
the Common Law has nothing short of conversion to 
Islam or destruction by the sword. - As a rule, our 
canonical legists support their theories by quotations 
from the Mohammadan Revealed Law, i.e. the Koran, 
as well as from the Sonnah, or the traditions from the 
Prophet, however absurd and untenable may be their 
process of reasoning and argumentative deductions.... 
The Mohammadan Common Law is by no means 
divine or superhuman. It mostly consists of uncertain 
traditions, Arabian usages and customs, some frivolous 
and fortuitous analogical deductions from the Koran, 
and a multitudinous array of casuistical sophistry of 
the canonical legists. It has not been held sacred or 
unchangeable by enlightened Mohammadans of any 
Moslem country and in any age since its compilation 
in the fourth century of the Hejira. All the Mujta- 
hids, ‘Ahl Hadis, and other non-Mokallids had had 
no regard for the four schools of Mohammadan reli- 
gious jurisprudence, or the Common Law.’ 

The same writer is even more explicit elsewhere : ? 

OD NCI DOAG SM. 

® The proposed political ... reforms in the Ottoman Empire and other 
Mohammadan States (Bombay, 1883), pp. xix and 147, quoted by 
Goldziher, JZS, p. 132. 

BY Mus.iims 97 

‘The vast flood of traditions soon formed a chaotic 
sea. Truth and error, fact and fable mingled together 
in an undistinguishable confusion. Every religious, 
social, and political system was defended, when neces- 
sary, to please a Khalif or an Ameer to serve his 
purpose, by an appeal to some oral traditions. The 
name of Mohammad was abused to support all manner 
of lies and absurdities, or to satisfy the passion, caprice, 
or arbitrary will of the despots, leaving out of con- 
sideration the creation of any standards of test... . 
I am seldom inclined to quote traditions having little 
or no belief in their genuineness, as generally they are 
unauthentic, unsupported, and one-sided.’ 

It will have become clear how the acute reasoning 
of this cultured and enlightened Indian gentleman 
has anticipated many of the conclusions of European 
Orientalists. His writings are by no means alone in 
protesting against the authority of tradition, They 
are symptomatic of a force in liberal Muhammadanism 
which awaits the opportunity for expression in that 
Reformation and Renaissance many of the best minds 
in Islam confidently anticipate. 

2851 N 

Vv 
SELECTIONS FROM ADT 

Ethics and morals—Trade and commercial mora- 
lity — Divorce —Courtesy and kindness.—Slavery.— 
Treatment of animals.—Retaliation.—F thad.—Oaths 
and vows.—Folklore and animism.— Women and mar- 
riage.—Manners and customs. 

To give an exhaustive account of the whole contents 
of the hadith literature is as impossible as it is to 
perform a similar office for the Talmud. The most 
that can be done in the following pages is to gather 
under headings some of the salient and some of the 
more interesting traditions... If the reader finds the 
constant quotation tedious it must be urged that there 
are already a large number of books about Islam which 
give the opinions of their writers; and only by giving 
the zpszsstma verba of the traditions can the charge of 
unfairness and partiality be rebutted. 

The moral grandeur and beauty of many of the 
sayings attributed to Muhammad in the hadith is not 
the least of the causes of the veneration and affection 
in which he is held throughout the Muhammadan 

+ J have found the Kanzu-l-‘Ummal impossible to use except as 
a book of reference. Its vast bulk and peculiar method of arrange- 
ment render it unsuitable except as a corpus traditionum. Almost 
all the citations in this chapter are from the Mrshkatu-l-Masabih, 
Bombay, 1880. The translation of this by Captain A. N. Matthews 
(Calcutta, 1809), in two volumes, is a remarkable work for its time. 
A tradition can be readily found by its means, but the work is not 
complete, or, at any rate, follows a somewhat shorter text, and should 
be used with caution. 

SELECTIONS FROM HapbiITH 99 

world. And any estimate of his living influence must 
necessarily be one-sided unless it allows not only for 
the all-pervading authority and example of the prophet 
applied as it is to every single detail of human life, 
but also for the constant expression of a loving and 
affectionate consideration for mankind. It is this 
aspect of Islam and of its founder which has not 
obtained in the West the generous recognition it has 
earned. 

Ethics and Morals. The prophet is said to have 
declared that ‘A Muslim is he from whose tongue and 
hands Muslims are safe’! and that ‘it is required of 
the best of men that they should love God and his 
apostle above all others and their fellowmen ? for God’s 
sake’. The prophetic view of honesty as a principle 
of life is well expressed in the hadith, ‘A servant of 
God shall not acquire property unlawfully and give 
alms thereof which shall be accepted. Nor shall he 
spend thereof and be blessed. And he shall not leave 
it behind him as it will bring him to hell. God does 
not blot out evil by evil, but God blots out evil by 
good.’ 

A chapter bearing the title ‘Gentleness in social 
relations’ contains the prayer that God may deal 
kindly with the man who sells and buys and claims 

1 An interesting play on the word Muslim: A/ mushmu man 
salima-l-muslimina ... 

2 ‘abd, ‘There is a striking similarity in the phraseology of some 
of these sayings and the maxims of the great Jewish fathers. The 
constant enumeration of categories (already found in the book of 
Proverbs), e.g. Three things are an abomination unto the Lord, 
is strongly reminiscent of Pirqge Aboth, ed. Taylor, Cambridge, 
pp. 11-12, &c., as is the use of ‘add here. Cf. al tihyu ka-abadim 
ha-meshammeshim eth ha-Rab, &c. 

100 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

his debts in a kindly spirit. ‘The place of the faithful 
merchant who speaks the truth is with the prophets, 
the veracious, and the martyrs. The prophet ex- 
pressly forbade buying from a person in distress; the 
purchase of any thing to which a risk or hazard 
attaches ;! and of fruit before it has ripened. ‘He 
who sells a thing without notifying the buyer of 
a defect in it will abide in the hate of God, and the 
angels will curse him unceasingly!’ Muhammad is » 
said to have related the following story (which in a 
shorter and somewhat different form is related of 
Rabbi Shin‘on in Haggada): A man of the people 
who were before you? bought a plot of land, and found 
in it a jar containing gold. Whereupon he said to the 
seller, ‘Take your gold for I only bought your plot.’ 
The latter replied, ‘But I sold you the ground and 
whatever it contained.’ So they went to an arbitrator, 
who instructed them to marry the one’s son to the 
other's daughter and endow them with the proceeds, 
giving something in alms. 

The golden rule is implicitly taught in the following : 
‘Let no one milk a man’s cattle without his permission. 
Would any one of you like'to have his upper chamber 
broken into, his treasury ransacked, and his food taken 
away? Now the udders of their cattle are the treasury 
of their food.’ Again: ‘There was a man who used 
to lend money and to say to his servant, “If you come 
to a man who is unable to pay, pass him over; per- 

? bat‘u-l-gharari. Commentators differ as to the meaning of this 
phrase. 

* This reference to the Jews would seem to indicate that the speaker 
is conscious that he is borrowing from an alien source. 

SELECTIONS FROM HaDITH IOI 

adventure God will pass over our shortcomings.” And 
when he stood before God He did so pass him over.’ 

This principle is carried even further in the chapter 
which deals with the laws of retaliation. The higher 
law of forgiveness is clearly propounded. Abia Darda 
says: ‘I heard the prophet say, “There is no man 
who receives a bodily injury and forgives! the offender 
but God will exalt his rank and diminish his sin.”’ 

Trade and Commercial Morality. The following 
are some of the wholesome restrictions ideally govern- 
ing the commercial life of the Muhammiadan world : 
Abi Mas‘iid Al Ansari said,‘ Verily the apostle of God 
declared unlawful the price of a dog, the wages of 
immorality, and the fee? of a diviner”. Aba Huraira: 
‘ The apostle declared unlawful the price of a dog and 
the earnings of a singing girl.’ 

The thoroughness of the prophetic condemnation 
of usury leaves no room for any part, however indirect, 
in the transaction. ‘The apostle of God cursed the 
receiver * of interest, the payer, the clerk who writes 
the bond, and the two witnesses thereof, and said, 
“They are equally culpable.”’ Another tradition 
records that Muhammad forbade the barter of a heap 
of dates of an unknown weight for a specified quantity. 
Similarly, Muslims are forbidden to sell the fruit upon 
their trees before it is ripe, even when the two parties 
are willing to take the risk inseparable from the 
transaction.* 

1 fatasaddaga bihi, The commentator explains that this means 
he pardons the offender sabran ‘ala gadrt-llah, leaving requital to Him. 

? Lit. douceur. 

8 Lit. ‘eater’. Cf. Hebrew xdshak, of biting and of paying interest. 

* The wisdom of prohibiting speculation in the food supply of 
a community notorious for its poverty is obvious. 

102 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

It would seem that the early Muhammadan trades- 
man was quite modern in his methods. He knew how 
to ‘corner’ the food of a town, how to ‘doctor’ an 
animal when coping, how to use the arts of misrepre- 
sentation in order to squeeze the largest possible sum 
from his customers. All these immoral methods are 
sternly condemned in hadith attributed to Muhammad. 
‘Do not go out to meet the caravans to bargain. .. . 
Do not buy one against another and outbid one 
another, and let not the townsman bargain with a 
Beduin (so as to keep the price up for the consumer). 
Do not keep back in the teats the milk of a camel or 
goat.2_ He who buys such a one has the choice, after 
milking it, of retaining or returning it with a sa‘a of 
dates. ‘He who monopolizes a commodity is a 
sinner. ‘An importer is blessed, but a monopolist is 
accursed.’ ‘ He who monopolizes food against Muslims 
may God smite with elephantiasis and grinding poverty.’ 
Another hadith says: ‘Though he give the profit in 
alms it is no atonement.’ The charming anthology of 
prophetic sayings collected by Al Mas‘adi contains the 
following, which has as good a claim to be regarded 
aS genuine as those just quoted: ‘When he is ruined 
a merchant speaks the truth!’ 3 

Divorce. The Islamic ordinance which makes it 
impossible for the husband who has divorced his wife 
by the threefold repetition to remarry her until she has 
lived with another man is supported by a ruling of the 
prophet.* On the other hand, there are not wanting 

* T.e. let them come into the markets. 

* To give the impression that the animal is still yielding milk. 

* OD cit. 1¥, p. 172. 

* The Zesala of Al Kindi, London, 1880, p. 10g, contains some 

SELECTIONS FROM HaDITH_ 103 

several hadith which make a vigorous protest against 
such an immoral injunction. Thus, ‘Abd Allah b. 
Mas‘tid reports that the apostle /a‘ana-l-muhallila wa- 
l-muhallala lahw ‘cursed the second husband who 
makes her again lawful for the first and cursed the 
first husband for whom she was thus made lawful.’ 
Other ‘hadith which remind one of Christ's interpreta- 
tion of the Mosaic law are: ‘Of the things which are 
lawful the most hateful to God is divorce. And: 
‘O Mu‘adh, God has created nothing on the face of 
the earth dearer to him than the emancipation of 
slaves, nor anything more hateful to him than divorce.’ 
The following hadith claims to give Muhammad’s view 
on the question of the custody of the child: ‘A 
woman came to the apostle and said, “ With my body 
I carried, nourished, and cradled this son of mine, and 
now his father has divorced me and wants to snatch 
him from me.” The apostle answered, ‘‘ You are the 
most worthy of him so long as you remain unmarried.”’ 
On the other hand, two traditions ascribed to Abi 
Huraira allow the boy to choose which of his parents 
he will adhere to. 

Courtesy and Kindness. The Muslim practice of 
returning a salutation with an additional compliment or 
blessing ? is as old as creation, for at his creation Adam 

trenchant observations on this practice from a cultured Christian Arab. 
The practice was constantly attacked by Christians. Cf. the MJZuja- 
dala of Abi Qurra, MS. Arabe 70, in the Bibliothéque Nationale, 
fol. 199 b. 
_ 1 For the interpretation of these aqwal in Muhammadan law see 
the commentators 27 doc. 

2 For many interesting details see Lane, Modern L-gyptians, ch. 8. 
The necessity of replying at length to ‘salutations in the market-place’ 
is sometimes objected to by the modern Muslim. An amusing protest 

104 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

was ordered to go and salute a number of angels and 
listen to their response, which would be the pattern 
for posterity. Thereupon he went and said A/ Salam 
‘alatkum, and received the response AZ Salam ‘alatka 
wa-rahmatu-llahe. 

A long section of the hadith literature is full of 
sayings inculcating the necessity of kindliness and 
love, of which the following may serve as examples: 
‘God will not have compassion on him who hath not 
compassion on mankind.’ ‘The Compassionate has 
compassion on those who show compassion. Show 
compassion to those on earth, and He who is in 
Heaven will have compassion on you.’ ‘For every 
young man who honours an old man on account of his 
age will God ordain one who will honour him in his 
old age.’ ‘The best house amid the Muslim com- 
munity is that which contains an orphan who is well 
treated; and the worst is that wherein an orphan is 
wronged.’. ‘He who is destitute of gentleness is 
destitute of goodness.’ 

Hospitality, for which the Arabs have ever been 
justly praised, is in hadith a mark of the true believer. 
Thus, Abi Huraira tells us that the prophet said: 
‘Whoever believes in God and the last day, let him 
honour his guest, let him not injure his neighbour, and 
if he has nothing good to say let him remain silent.’ 
A more precise definition of the hospitality incumbent 
on a Muslim: ‘Whosoever believes in God and the 
last day let him entertain his guest bountifully for a day 
and a night. Hospitality (should be given) for three 

against this genial practice appeared in one of the Cairene newspapers 
in 1918 under the heading of ‘Izzé ek’. 

SELECTIONS FROM HaDITH_ 105 

days. What is done over and above that is in the 
nature of almsgiving. It is not right for a guest to 
stay in a man’s house so long as to embarrass him.’ 

Again, Abu-l-Ahwas asks the prophet whether he is 
to entertain a man who in the past had refused him 
hospitality. Muhammad replies, ‘Certainly, entertain 
him,’ 

Slavery. The status of the slave in the Muham- 
madan world does not differ materially from that 
described in the New Testament. As a co-religionist 
of his master he is a member of the household, and 
shares in the fortune good or bad of his owner.1. The 
following sayings will illustrate the traditional policy 
and attitude of Muslims towards their slaves: ‘The 
slave must be given food and clothing. He must not 
be given a task which he is unable to perform.’ ‘It is 
your brethren that God has put beneath your hands. 
He who has one thus subjected to him by God must 
feed him from what he eats himself, and clothe him in 

1 A good deal of misapprehension still exists in this country as to 
the lot of slaves in Islam. It may be doubted whether it is so 
unenviable as that of many people in our great cities. Cf. Burton, 
Pilgrimage, i, London, 1915, p. 61, and Doughty, Arabia Deserta, i, 
pp. 554-5. ‘In those Africans there is no resentment that they 
have been made slaves... even though cruel men-stealers rent them 
from their parentage. The patrons who paid their price have adopted 
them into their households, the males are circumcised, and—that 
which enfranchises their souls, even in the long passion of home- 
sickness—God has visited them in their mishap; they can say, ‘It 
was his grace’, since they be thereby entered into the saving religion. 
This, therefore, they think is the better country, where they are the 
Lord’s free men, a land of more civil life, the soil of the two 
Sanctuaries, the land of Muhammad: for such they do give God 
thanks that their bodies were sometime sold into slavery !’ 

2851 0 

106 SELECTIONS FROM HaDITH 

his own clothes. He must not give him a task beyond 
his strength. If he does, then he must help him 
himself.” Again, ‘He who beats a slave for a fault he 
has not committed or slaps his face must make atone- 
ment by setting him free.’ ‘Whoso separates a woman 
from her child (the commentator explains, by selling, 
giving, &c.) God will separate him from his loved ones 
on the resurrection day.’ It is related that the apostle 
of God gave Ali a slave, saying: ‘Do not beat him, 
for I have ordered that those who pray shall not be 
beaten, and I have seen this slave at prayer.’ The 
chapter on Qisds contains the words of the prophet, 
‘We will slay him who slays his slave, and we will 
maim him who maims him.’ (Another version reads: 
‘We will castrate him who castrates his slave.’ ) 
Treatment of Animals. The claims of the brute 
creation on the compassion of good Muslims is clearly 
set forth. The prophet once passed by a camel whose 
belly clave to its back. ‘Fear God’, said he, ‘in these 
dumb animals, and ride them when they are fit to be 
ridden, and let them go free when it is meet they 
should rest. The following of kindness to birds: 
We were on a journey with the apostle of God, who 
left us for a short space. We saw a hummara with its 
two young, and took the young birds. The hummara 
hovered with fluttering wings, and the prophet returned, 

? The hatred of the right-minded Muslim for the practice of making 
eunuchs is expressed by Al Jahiz, who, while unfairly blaming 
Christians for originating this horrible custom, rightly asks how they 
dare claim a monopoly of kindness and tenderness and yet habitually 
commit this crime. Muslim historians often note with disapproval 

that the Umayyads were the first to introduce this barbarity into 
Islam. 

SELECTIONS FROM HaDITH 107 

saying, ‘Who has injured this bird by taking its young ? 
Return them to her. Again: Do not clip the fore- 
locks of your horses, nor their manes, nor their tails ; 
for the tail is their fly-whisk; the mane is their 
covering; and the forelock has good fortune bound 
within it.? 

Animals are not to be ridden unnecessarily. By 
precept and example the prophet showed consideration 
for beasts of burden. Thus Abia Huraira reports that 
he said: ‘Do not use the backs of your beasts as 
pulpits, for God has only made them subject to you in 
order that they may bring you to a town you could 
only otherwise reach by fatigue of body.’?... While 
Anas writing of his custom says: ‘When we stopped 
at a halt we did not say our prayers until we had 
unburdened the camels.’ Nevertheless a donkey may 
be made to carry two men, for we read that Buraida 
said: ‘While the apostle of God was walking a man 
with a donkey came up, and said as he moved back on 
the donkey’s rump: “ Ride, O apostle of God.” He 
replied: “No, for you are more worthy of riding in 
front on your own beast, unless you give me the place.” 
He said: “I do give you the place;” so he rode in 

front.’ 
The Law of Retaliation, The Quran has established 

1 This is one of the sayings of the heathen Arabs which was in- 
corporated in the hadith literature. Cf. Imru-l-Qats, 8, 1. Muhammad 
himself did not scruple to incorporate sayings and proverbs of the 
Jahiliyya in the Quran, so that his followers had a precedent for 
drawing on this source. 

2 The commentator says, ‘The meaning is: Do not sit on their 
backs, and make them stand while you transact your business; but 
dismount, accomplish your object, and then ride them again,’ 

108 SELECTIONS FROM HaDITH 

in the Islamic community the principle of ‘an eye for 
an eye and a tooth for a tooth’, and, like its prede- 
cessor in this legislation, the Torah of Moses, it claims 
divine authority for itslaw. Nevertheless, the Muslim, 
like the Jew, knows how to interpret this law with 
justice and some degree of mildness. The hadith 
illustrate the application of the principle, and an 
attempt to carry it through in opposition to the deeply- 
rooted custom of paying and receiving pecuniary com- 
pensation for bodily injuries. Thus Anas: A Jew 
broke the head of a slave girl between two stones. 
She was asked the name of the culprit, and when the 
Jew’s name was mentioned she made a sign with the 
head in assent. So the Jew was brought, and acknow- 
ledged the act; whereupon the apostle ordered that 
his head should be broken with a stone. 

The same authority reports that Rubai’, the aunt of 
Anas b. Malik, broke the teeth of a slave girl of the 
Ansar. They came to the prophet, and he ordered 
the law of qisds to be applied toher. Anas b. Al Nadr 
said, ‘No, by God, her teeth shall not be broken, 
O apostle of God.’ He said, ‘ But, Anas, retaliation 
is in the Book of God!’ Then the people agreed to 
accept the price of an injury, and the prophet said: 
‘There are some servants of God who, if they take an 
oath by God, God holds them free from guilt.’ ! 

Again: He who kills a man intentionally must be 
given up to the relatives of the slain: if they wish they 
can kill him, and if they will they can accept blood- 
money. There are only three crimes for which a man 

1 The commentator writes, The meaning is: ‘God makes him 

truthful in his oath, not a perjurer’, i.e. God performs, or allows him 
to perform, his oath. 

SELECTIONS FROM HaDITH 109 

can be condemned to death according to the hadith, 
namely, wilful murder, adultery, and apostasy from 
Islam. The murder of Muslims is, of course, in 
question, as the chapter on Jihad clearly shows, 
though harsh treatment of adherents of other faiths 
is deprecated. The interesting point is raised: At 
what point can a man rightly be regarded as a Muslim ? 
The prophet was asked: ‘If I meet an unbeliever and 
we fight, and he smites off my hand with his sword, 
and then takes refuge behind a tree, and says, “I am 
a Muslim to God” (another version is: And when I am 
about to kill him he says, “ There is no God but the 
God”), am I to kill him after that?’ He replied, ‘Do 
not kill him.’ ‘But, O prophet of God,’ said the man, 
‘he has cut off one of my hands.’ The apostle 
answered : ‘Do not kill him, for if you kill him, before 
you can kill him he is in your state, and you are in the 
state} he was before he made his utterance.’ 

It will be obvious that the example given is one 
evolved from the inventive minds of the Muhammadan 
legists. It is closely akin to the discussions of the 
Jewish halaka, and owes it origin to the desire to frame 
traditions which will give the weight of sacred authority 
to every possible contingency of life* As though it 
were realized that it would be neither safe nor practic- 
able to allow an enemy to escape death in action by 
the mere repetition of the formula /a zlaha wla-llah, 
the foregoing tradition is weakened somewhat in its 
effect by the tradition attributed to Usama b. Zaid. 

1 You cannot kill him because he has become a Muslim, and to kill 
a Muslim is to commit murder and forfeit your own life. If you do 
kill, you have come under God’s wrath like an infidel. 

2 Cf. Margoliouth, Larly Development, p. 96. 

10 SELECTIONS FROM HaADITa 

‘The apostle of God sent us against some of the 
Juhaina, and I was about to spear one of them when 
he cried, “ There is no God but the God.” I transfixed 
and slew him, and when I came to the prophet and 
told him what I had done he said: “ Did you kill him 
when he had borne witness in these words?” I replied, 
“But, apostle of God, he only did that to save himself 
from death!” Muhammad said: “Can it be that you 
did not test his sincerity?”’ (Another version is: 
‘What will you do with those words: “ There is no 
God but the God” at the day of judgement?’ The 
prophet repeated these words several times.) 

The following hadith expresses the opinion of the 
religious on the murder of an unoffending non-Muslim. 
‘Whoso slays a Wu‘ahid shall not smell the scent of 
Paradise ; and verily its perfume is perceptible a forty 
years journey distant. Abi Darda expresses the 
higher truth when he says: ‘There is no man who 
receives a bodily injury and forgives the offender, but 
God will exalt his rank and lessen his sin.’ 

Theft. Theft, according to ancient tradition, is to 
be punished by the amputation of the hand. According 
to ‘Aisha the prophet said that this punishment was 
not to be inflicted unless the theft amounted to the 
fourth of adinar. Abt Huraira, however, says: ‘God 
curses a thief who steals an egg or a rope, and his 
hand must be cut off.’ 1 

Fthad. So many Christian writers have discussed 

' Various attempts have been made by the commentators to mitigate 
the harshness of this doctrine. Thus, it is said, dazda means an iron 
helmet, and /ad/ a ship’s cable! Others think it refers to primitive 
practice. The Qzd/a, the organ of the Sharif of Mecca, August, 1918, 
contains an account of the application of the Sharia‘ to a local thief. 

SELECTIONS FROM HapiITH III 

at length the prominence assigned to Jihad, the holy 
war against infidels incumbent upon all Muslims, that 
it does not seem necessary to quote here more than 
a few of the exceedingly large number of traditions on 
this subject. From these it will be seen that fighting 
in the way of God (/% sadti-'W/ah) is a religious exercise 
of supreme merit, dearer in the sight of God than any 
other form of piety: the meanest participator—the 
non-combatant—who loses his life or substance in the 
holy war is thereby assured of eternal life. 

The most extravagant praise of ¥zhdd is the saying 
vouched by Sahal b. Sa‘d, and recorded by Bukhari: 
‘Frontier duty for one day in the way of God is better 
than the world and all that therein is.’ This tradition 
in almost the same words is independently ascribed to 
Anas. A man asked if his sins would be forgiven if 
he fell fighting in the way of God. Muhammad 
answered, ‘ Yes, if you display enduring patience, faith 
in a future reward, ever advance and never retreat. 
This does not apply to the sin of debt. Gabriel in- 
formed me of this.’ ‘One of the Companions travelled 
by a mountain path in which was a pool of sweet 
water ; and liking it exceedingly he exclaimed, “ Would 
that I might withdraw from men and dwell in this 
spot!” The apostle of God was told of this, and said: 
“Do not so, for to remain in the way of God is better 
than praying in one’s house for seventy years. Do 
you not desire that God should pardon you and bring 
you into. Paradise? Make raids in the way of God! 
He that contends in the way of God but the time 
between two milkings of a camel, paradise is his 

999 

due. 
Al Tirmidhi and Ibn Maja report the following: 

II2 SELECTIONS FROM HapDITH 

the martyr has six privileges with God: his sins are 
pardoned when the first drop of blood falls; he is 
shown his seat in paradise; he is safe from the punish- 
ment of the grave and secure from the great terror 
(i.e. hell); a crown of dignity is placed on his head 
one jewel of which is worth more than the world and 
all that is therein; and he is married to seventy dark- 
eyed virgins ; and he makes successful intercession for 
seventy of his relatives. ‘He who equips a warrior 
in the way of God has fought himself; and he who is 
left behind to take care of a warrior’s family has fought 
himself.’ 

The last quoted hadith probably marks an early 
stage in the reaction against the extravagant claims of 
martyrs on the admiration of men and the notice 
of God. Taken by themselves the hadith we have 
selected clearly imply that the martyr’s merit exceeds 
that of all others. But inasmuch as all men could not 
be combatants, even in the early days of the Arabian 
Caliphate, rival traditions soon began to circulate, 
asserting that the warrior had no better chance of 
eternal life than the pious non-combatant. Of these 
perhaps the most significant is fathered on the long- 
suffering Abii Huraira: ‘He who believes in God and 
his apostle and performs prayer and keeps the fast of 
Ramadan has a claim on God to be brought into 
Paradise, whether he fights in the way of God or sits 
in his plot on which he was born. They said: ‘Then 
are we to tell men of this?’ Muhammad answered: 
‘There are in paradise a hundred steps which God 
has prepared for his warriors: the space between two 
steps is as the space between heaven and earth. 
When you pray ask for Fzvdaus, for that is in the 

SELECTIONS FROM HapitTH 113 

middle of paradise (4/7 ¥anna) and its highest point: 
above it is the throne of the Merciful. From it gush 
forth the rivers of paradise. This tradition would 
seem to recognize a protest registered against the 
prevailing exaltation of martyrdom, and at the same 
time reinforces the claim of the warrior by giving him 
a position in paradise above that of the faithful. 
There is a sturdy independence about the first half of 
the tradition which creates a strong suspicion that the 
second half has been added by those who feared the 
logical application of its teaching. The next stage is 
clear. It is asserted that he who asks God with all 
sincerity to grant him martyrdom will have the reward 
of the martyr though he die upon his bed. The 
object of this hadith is apparently to safeguard, as it 
were, the interests of the man who has fought in the 
Fihad unscathed, or has been prevented by some 
unavoidable circumstance from taking any part in it. 
Abi Huraira is the spokesman in the last stage of the 
controversy between the soldier and the civilian for 
priority in paradise: were it not for the terrible serious- 
ness of the ¥zhdd itself the conclusion would be 
laughable. ‘The apostle of God said: “Whom do 
you regard as a martyr?” The companions replied: 
“He who is killed in the way of God.” He replied: 
“Of a truth in that case the martyrs of my people 
would be few. . . . He who dies in the way of God 
(without being slain) is a martyr, as also he who dies 
of the plague and of a disease of the belly.” ’ 

Oaths and vows. It can hardly be said that an oath 
or a vow among Muslims has the binding force even 
on the pious that it assumes in the West. The hadith, 

as will appear from the few extracts given below, 

2851 P 

114 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

practically make the performance of a vow dependent 
on the convenience of the speaker. This does not 
mean that a vow has no power to bind; but rather 
that there is an instinctive dislike to a vow of any 
kind. When made it need not be regarded as irrevoc- 
able! Vow not at all is the sum of the traditions 
recorded in the Badu-l-Nudhir of the Mzshkatu-l- 
Masabih; and the chapter heading in the Sunan of 
Ibn Maja Al Nahyu ‘ani-l-nadhr® speaks for itself. It 
is related that during the Autba the prophet saw 
a man standing, and asked the reason. He was told 
that the man had vowed never to sit, nor seek shade, 
nor speak, and to fast. Thereupon the prophet gave 
orders that he was to abandon his intention. A similar 
incident is narrated of an old man whom Muhammad 
saw tottering along between his two sons, and was told 
that he had vowed a vow to walk to the Ka‘ba. Said 
he: ‘Verily God the exalted does not need that this 
man should punish himself!’ and he ordered him to 
ride. Ka'b said to the apostle, ‘It is a part of my 
penitence that I should strip myself of my wealth in 
alms to God and his apostle.’ The apostle answered, 
‘Keep back some of your money, for it will be better 
for you.’ I said, ‘I will retain my lot in the ground 
in Khaibar.’ Again: ‘When you take an oath to do 
a thing, and you see a better alternative, then do what 
is best and make atonement for your oath.’ ‘Aisha 
said: This verse was revealed: ‘God will not punish 
you for rashness in your oaths,* as for example when 
a man says, “No, by God!” and “ Yea, by God!”’ 

? Al Fakhri (ed. Derenbourg, pp. 267 f.) will illustrate the care that 
is necessary to devise an oath that will bind a Muslim when anything 

of great importance is at stake. 
2 Prohibition of Vows. $ Sur. ii. 226. 

SELECTIONS FROM HapDITH 115 

The Babu-l-Aman of the Mishkat contains some 
interesting hadith on the subject of fidelity to private 
and national agreements made between belligerents ; 
they display a high standard of honour. ‘An agree- 
ment lay between Mu‘awiya and Rim, and he used to 
march to the frontier so that, when the agreement 
expired, he might raid them. There came a man on 
horseback, crying, Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar! 
Fidelity, not Treachery! When they looked they 
saw it was ‘Amr b. ‘Abasata. On being asked what 
he meant, he said: “I heard the apostle-of God say: 
‘Whoso has an agreement with people must not break 
it until the allotted time has passed or give notice 
dissolving the agreement on equal terms.’ So Mu‘a- 
wiya withdrew with his men.’’ This tradition, as the 
mention of Mu‘awiya’s pious obedience would suggest, 
is not to be found in the Sahihan, though both Tirmidhi 
and Abi Daid report it. Again, ‘The apostle said 
to two men who came to him from Musailama,! “ By 
God, were it not that messengers (i.e. heralds) must 
not be killed I would behead you.”’ 

Folk-lore and Animism. The hadith literature 
contains a very large number of allusions to pre- 
Islamic practices. Besides the well-known heathen 
rites of the pilgrimage to the holy places,? we find 
the beliefs of the pagan predecessors of Muhammad 
often confirmed by him, and their customs and preju- 
dices repeated. Along with these primitive folk- 

1 The false prophet. Muir, Zzfe of Muhammad, p. 478. 

2 Burton, Pilgrimage, pp. 279-93- 

$ A most interesting account of the extent of animistic beliefs and 
customs in Islam to-day will be found in Zwemer’s Zhe Influence of 
Animism on Islam, London, 1920. 

116 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

lore is perpetuated. Examples are: ‘The cry of a 
child at birth is caused by the evil touch of Satan.’! 
‘The apostle said to his Companions, “When your 
brethren were slain in the day of Uhud God put their 
spirits into the crops of green birds which come down 
to the rivers of paradise and eat of its fruit and shelter 
in golden chandeliers suspended in the shadow of God's 
throne. And when they perceive the excellence of 
their food, their drink, and their resting-place they 
exclaim: ‘Who will inform our brethren of our state 
in paradise, so that they may not despise it and 
refrain from war?’ God said, ‘I will inform them of 
you, and He revealed: ‘Reckon not those slain in 
the way of God as dead. Verily they live’, &c.”’ 
(Sur. iii. 1.70)2 

Snakes. ‘Kill snakes; kill the one with two black 
lines on its back and the adzar,’ for these two blind the 
sight and cause miscarriage.’ “Abd Allah said: ‘While 
I was driving out a snake to kill it Abu Lababa called 
out to me, “ Do not kill it.” I said, “But the apostle 
ordered snakes to be killed.” He replied, “ Yes, but 
afterwards he forbade the killing of those who live in 
houses, seeing they are inhabitants.”’ The commen- 
tator here explains that the passage means that the 
snakes are jinn. Zwemer remarks,‘ ‘ The superstitious 
idea that every house has a serpent guardian is pretty 
general throughout the country [Egypt], and many 
families still provide a bowl of milk for their serpent 

1 This superstition is nearly as old as man. 

* The student will find a somewhat similar belief, cited as a belief 
of the heathen Arabs, in Shahrastani, A7/abu-/-Milal wa-l-Nihal, 
ed. Cureton, p. 433. 

* i.e. short-tailed. * Op. cit., p. 224. 

SELECTIONS FROM HapiITH 117 

protector, believing that calamity would come upon 
them if the serpent were neglected. This is un- 
doubtedly a survival of the ancient belief that the 
serpent was the child of the earth—the oldest inhabitant 
of the land and guardian of the ground.’ 

Perhaps a clearer example of the power ascribed to 
the snake is: ‘ These houses have domestic snakes ; if 
you see one of them urge it to go three times. If it 
goes, well; if not, then kill it, for it is an infidel. 
Again: ‘Ifa serpent appears in a dwelling say to it: 
“We ask you by the agreement with -Noah! and 
Solomon b. David not to stay and annoy us.” If it 
returns then kill it.’ It is not surprising that those 
who did not share the animistic beliefs of the com- 
posers of the hadith just quoted display no tenderness 
towards the snake in traditions coined to express 
a more enlightened view. Ibn ‘Abbas says: ‘ The 
prophet ordered snakes to be killed, and said, Whoso 
lets one alone fearing the vengeance of his mate is not 
of us. Similarly, Aba Huraira is made to voice the 
common sense view: ‘Never have we made peace 
with them since war between man and snake began, 
and whoso lets one of them alone out of fear is not 
of us.’ 

Finn and Devils. ‘Verily Satan is present in all 
the activities of life, even at meals, so when one of 
you drops a mouthful he must remove any dirt from 
it, and then eat it, not leaving it to Satan. And when 
he has finished, he must lick his fingers, for he does 
not know in what part of his food blessing resides.’ 

1 The naive suggestion of the commentator as to the date of this 
agreement is that perhaps it was made when Noah took the snakes 
into the ark! 

118. SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

The jinn are of three kinds: one has wings and 
flies, serpents and dogs are another, and the third stops 
at a place and travels about.) ‘At the beginning of 
nightfall keep your little ones in, for Satan (commen- 
tator, i.e. the 7zzz) roams abroad at that time. When 
an hour of the night has passed let them free. And 
bolt your doors and make mention of the name of 
God. Satan cannot open a door which has been bolted. 
Tie the necks of your water skins, and mention the 
name of God, and put a veil over your waterpots, 
mentioning His name (though you but lay something 
across them), and extinguish your lamps.’ 

‘When you hear the barking of dogs or the braying 
of asses at night then seek refuge in God from Satan 
the stoned, for animals see what is invisible to you, 
and forbear to go out often when the feet are at rest 
(i.e. at night). For God in the night spreads abroad 
whom he will of his creatures. (The conclusion of 
this hadith follows fairly closely the text of the pre- 
ceding.) Again, of the noise of bells we read: ‘A 
slave girl took Ibn Zubair’s daughter to‘Umar. She 
had little bells on her leg, and ‘Umar cut them off, 
with the words: “I heard the apostle of God say there 
is a devil with every bell.”’ When any one sees 
a vision (or dreams a dream) which he dislikes let him 

* The same extreme vagueness about the jz in the mind of the 
modern Beduin is noticed by Doughty, Arabia Deserta. I have no 
doubt that the Jewish view of Shédim has influenced the Arab writer 
(unless we seek a common origin in Persia). Zulm. Chagiga, 16a: 
‘Six things are said of the demons: in three they resemble the 
ministering angels, and in three they resemble the sons of men. As 
angels they have wings, and fly from one end of the world to the 
other, and they know what the future holds in store.... As men, 
they eat and drink, they reproduce their species, and they die,’ 

SELECTIONS FROM HapitTH 119 

spit to the left three times, and take refuge with God 
from Satan three times, and let him turn from the side 
on which he lay when he dreamed. 

Spells and the evil eye. There is no attempt in the 
hadith to disguise the source of popular beliefs which 
are still held by the ignorant and superstitious to-day. 
Thus ‘Auf b. Malik Al Ashjai says: ‘We were in the 
habit of using spells in the time of ignorance, and we 
said: “O apostle of God what is your opinion of 
them?” He replied: “Show me your spells. There 
is no harm ina spell in which there is_no taint of 
polytheism (shzrk).”’ 

Anas reports that the prophet permitted the use of 
spells against the evil eye, snake-bite, and pustules. 
On one occasion he saw a slave-girl suffering from 
a stroke of Satan (i.e. jaundice), and said: ‘ Use spells 
for her, for the evil eye has looked upon her.’! Jabir 
relates that Muhammad had forbidden spells, and the 
family of ‘Amr b. Hazm came and said: ‘We have 
a spell for use on those bitten by scorpions, and you 
have forbidden spells’; and they showed him it. He 
answered: ‘I see no harm in it. If any of you can 
help his brother by it, let him.’ The theistic view of 
such charms is expressed in hadith, of which these 
must serve as examples: Isa b. Hamza said: ‘I 
went to visit ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Ukaim, who suffered 
from a rash, and said: “ Why do you not tie on a 
charm?” “God forbid,” said he, “for the prophet of 
God said, ‘He who depends on a thing will be left 
trusting to it.” “It will suffice you to say what the 
apostle of God used to say: ‘ Take away misfortune, 

1 The Nibaya explains the words dch@ mazratun thus: biha ‘ainun 
asabatha min nazari-]-jinni. 

1200 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

O Lord of men, and heal. Thou art the Healer: 
there is no healing but Thy healing.’”’ 

Omens. ‘The prophet used to take good Bee 
not bad ones, and he was fond of a happy name.’ 
‘Taking a bad omen is polytheism. These words 
Muhammad said thrice. There is not one of us but 
will have evil presentiments removed by God if he 
trust in Him.’ 

Divination. The following hadith make it evident 
that traditionists have no doubt that sorcerers and 
diviners are able to foretell the future! The general 
conclusion is that they obtain their information from 
the evil one and his messengers. The first of those 
quoted is interesting, as the somewhat cryptic reference 
to the prophet who used to write suggests a reference 
to John viii. 6.? 

Mu‘awiya b. Al Hakam said: ‘I said to the apostle 
of God, “In the time of ignorance we used to resort 
to diviners.” He said: “Do not consult them.” 
“Also we drew bad omens.” He replied: “If you 
are troubled in your mind because of it do not 
let it deter you from your purpose.” “We used to 
draw lines.”* He said: “One of the prophets used 
to draw lines. And he whose writing agrees with his 
is good.”’ 

From ‘Aisha. When the prophet was asked about 
diviners, he said, ‘They are nothing. ‘But’, they 
objected, ‘it sometimes happens that they relate what 

LAS 

* For a description of the writing of incantations, &c., see Lane, 
op. cit., pp. 27.4 ff. 

* Probably on the ground (though the word used is khatt, not 
nakata). 

SELECTIONS FROM HapITH WI 

is true. He said: ‘That word of truth the jinn 
seizes and repeats in the ear of his devotee!... and 
they mix more than a hundred lies with it.’ Again: 
‘The angels descend in rainclouds and mention what 
has ‘been decreed in heaven. Then the devils listen 
stealthily and reveal what has been said to diviners, 
and they add a hundred lies to it out of their own 
minds. Hafsa reports that Muhammad said: ‘He 
who goes to a sorcerer (‘arraf) to ask about a matter, 
his prayer will not be accepted for forty days.’ ‘He 
who learns knowledge from the stars learns a branch 
of sorcery (sz4v) the more of one the more of the 
other.’ 

The following is the explanation of the shooting 
stars. ‘While some of the Companions were sitting 
with the prophet one night a star shot and gleamed 
bright. “What used you to say in the time of ignor- 
ance,” said he, “when a star shot like that?” They 
replied: ‘‘God and his apostle know best. We used 
to say: ‘A great man is born to-night and a great man 
has died.’” He said: “It did not shoot for the death 
or the birth of any one, but when your Lord decrees 
a thing the bearers of the Throne praise God; then 
the inhabitants of heaven near thereto, until the 

1 The reading and meaning of the two words omitted are doubtful— 
qarra-l-dajajati_qarra, according to the Véhaya, means to repeat or 
pour words into a person’s ear until he understands them. The 
commentator mentions that qarra is the verb used when a hen brings 
her cackling to anend. He records a variant zujaja, and infers ‘the 
jinn pours it into his ear as one pours liquid into a glass bottle!’ 
Ibn Al Salah says the former reading is correct, and the latter corrupt. 
I suspect an ancient corruption. ‘As a hen repeats’ is hardly a 
satisfactory sense. Houdas, of. cét., iv, p. 84, completely ignores 
the words in text and notes. 

2851 Q 

122 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

Tasbih reaches the inhabitants of this lowest heaven. 
Those near ask the bearers of the throne what their 
Lord has said. They are informed, and the inhabitants 
of heaven inquire one of another until the information 
reaches this lowest heaven, and the jzmwz steal the 
tidings and carry (throw) it to their devotees and (the 
stars) are thrown at them.”’? 

Again: ‘God created these stars for three reasons : 
to be an ornament of the sky, to be used as stones 
against the devils, and as signs to guide people. Whoso 
interprets them otherwise is in error, loses his good 
fortune, and pretends to know what he is ignorant of.’ 

‘There is no contagious disease, nor ornithomancy, 
nor #dma, nor significance in the serpent Safar.? 
Nevertheless, flee from one with elephantiasis as you 
would from a lion.” An Arab of the desert said: 
‘O Apostle of God, what of the camels in the 
desert? they are as it were gazelles in condition, 

1 Cf. Suras, 15.17; 18.48; 37.7; and 26.212. This explanation 
of the phenomenon caused considerable embarrassment when Greek 
astronomy and philosophy gained a strong position among Arabian 
savants. Cf. Al Jahiz, 2” loc., and Margoliouth, Larly Development, 
pp. 226 ff. 

> Text: 1a ‘adwa wala tirata wa la hamata wala safara. This hadith 
is cited by the author of the M@ustatraf and by Shahrastani, op. cit, 
p- 433. In the latter quotation the author might possibly have taken 
‘adwa to refer to metempsychosis. The passages quoted will explain 
the Adama or bird which issued from a dead man’s skull. Safar means 
either the month of that name, or a kind of serpent. The commen- 
tator of the Afishkat (p. 383) says: kant yatasha ’amiina bi-dukhilt 
Safar. They used to regard the entry of a Safar as an evil omen. 
Houdas, of. czz., iv, p. 83, writes: ‘Suivant les uns, il s’agirait d’un 
animal, sorte de serpent ou de ver, logé dans le corps de l’homme- 
il mordrait les entrailles de l-homme chaque fois que celles-ci seraient 
vides et qu'il aurait faim.’ See A/rshkat, margin. 

SELECTIONS FROM HapiITH 123 

yet mix them with mangy camels, and they become - 
mangy too.’ The apostle answered: ‘ But who infected 
the first with a contagious disease?’ The shrewd 
criticism levelled at this doctrine by the Beduin is met 
by a reply which evades the point either by referring 
the disaster to an act of God decreed and unavoidable, 
or by attributing the disease to the cause responsible 
for the first outbreak, and therefore not dependent on 
the infected camels. In either case this is yet another 
example of the inability of the Oriental to distinguish 
between a primary and a secondary cause.! 

The comparative paucity of personal names in 
Muhammadan countries is due to the influence of 
traditions which express God’s approval of certain 
’ names, or the prophet’s taste in such matters. Thus 
Anas tells us that when Muhammad was in the market 
a man called out, ‘Ho Abu-l-Qasim!’ and the prophet 
turned towards him. ‘I merely called this fellow,’ said 
the man, whereupon the prophet said: ‘Call your 
children by my name, but do not use my unya.’ 
‘God likes best the names ‘Abd Allah and ‘Abdu-l- 
Rahman. ‘The vilest of names before God at the 
day of resurrection will be maliku-l-amlak (king of 
kings).’ 

1 On this Al Suyiti, quoted by Lane, Aradzan Sociely, says: ‘A 
Halimi says, “Communicable or contagious diseases are six: small-pox, 
measles, itch or scab, foul breath or putridity, melancholy(!) and 
pestilential maladies ; and diseases engendered are also six: leprosy, 
hectic, epilepsy, gout, elephantiasis, and phthisis.” But this does not 
contradict the saying of the prophet, “There is no transition of 
diseases by contagion or infection. . .”, for the transition here meant 
is one occasioned by the disease itself; whereas the effect is of God, 
who causes pestilence to spread when there is intercourse with the 
diseased.’ Thus is responsibility moved to the predestination of God. 

124 SELECTIONS FROM HaDITH 

An unsuccessful attempt on the part of Muhammad 
to change a name he did not like is recorded by 
Bukhari. Sa‘id b. Al Musayyib related that his grand- 
father Hazn went to the prophet, who asked his name. 
‘Hazn,’ he was told. ‘No, you are Sahl, said he. My 
grandfather said: ‘I am not going to change a name 
my father gave me.’ Sa‘id added: ‘From that time 
hardness in temperament has continued in my family.’ 

Women and Marriage. Much has been written on 
the status of women in Islam, and the theologian must 
decide how far responsibility for the present state of 
affairs rests, on the one hand, with Islam as a system, 
and with sinful human nature on the other. The 
hadith in this, as in so many other matters, reflect the 
thoughts of the best and the worst minds. For ~ 
instance, Muhammad, as reported by ‘Abd Allah b. 
‘Umar, tells us: ‘ The world, all of it is property,! and 
the best property in the world is a virtuous woman.’ 
And again, as reported by Abii Huraira: ‘A woman 
may be married for four things: her money, her birth, 
her beauty, and her religion. Get thou a religious 
woman (otherwise) may thy hands be rubbed in dirt!’ 

On the other hand, Usama b. Zaid would have us 
know that the apostle said: ‘I have not left behind 
me a source of discord? more injurious to men than 
women. And Ibn ‘Umar: ‘A woman, a house, and 
a horse are bad omens.’ 

* The meaning of this word ma/a‘ is a little doubtful. It might 
mean ‘enjoyable’ or ‘valuable’. Professor Margoliouth, who reminds 
me of the reference to Sur. ili, 12, inclines to agree with my rendering 
above. 

* fina. The Wihaya explains faltin: mudillu-l-nasa ‘an il-haqq, 
‘a fattan is one who causes men to err from the truth’. 

SELECTIONS FROM HapiITH 125 

As to the subordination of the wife to the husband: 
“A Muslim must not hate his wife. If he dislikes her 
for one trait let him find pleasure in another. ‘Ifa 
man summon his wife to his bed and she refuse to 
come, so that he spends the night in anger, the angels 
curse her till morning.’ (Another version of this says: 
‘He who is in heaven is enraged against her till her 
husband is pleased with her.’) 

Lastly, a tradition—which must either be officially 
repudiated or for ever condemn the system which 
enshrines it—resting on the authority of Mu'‘adh: 
‘Whenever a woman vexes her husband in this world, 
his wife among the Zurzs of Paradise says: “Do not 
vex him (May God slay thee!) for he is only a guest 
with thee. He will soon leave thee and come to us.”’! 

Political power may sometimes be held by women, 
but the prophetic verdict on women in high places is 
recorded by Bukhari thus: ‘When the apostle of God 
was informed that the Persians had made Kisra’s 
daughter their sovereign, he exclaimed: ‘A people 
that entrusts its affairs to a woman will never prosper.” ’ 

The subordinate position of women in the religious 
life is likewise fixed by the Prophet's utterance. ‘He 
went out on the day of the victims and Bairam to the 
place of prayer, and passing some women he said: “O 
company of women give alms, for I have seen that 

1 It is only fair to say that this tradition, which is recorded by 
Ibn Maja and Al Tirmidhi, is marked gharib by the latter. At the 
same time, it is a logical inference from the Quran itself that if 
Muslims in paradise are to be gratified by the possession of huras 
there will be no place for their wives of this world. A great point 
is made of this by the Christian disputant at the court of Ma’min, see 
Paris MS. Arabe, no. 70, fol. 7. 

1206 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

many of you will be inhabitants of hell.” “ Why?” 
said they. Replied he: “ Because you curse much 
and deny the kindness of husbands. I have not 
seen—despite your deficiency in intelligence and reli- 
gion—any sharper than you in captivating the mind 
of the resolute.” They said: “What is the defect in 
our religion and intelligence?” He answered: “Is 
not the witness of a woman equal to half the witness 
ofa man? This is the defect in her intelligence. And 
when she is ceremonially impure she neither prays nor 
fasts. This is the defect in her religion.” ’} 

Manners and Customs. No more than a mere 
selection of the vast number of traditions enshrining 
the customs of the Arabs in the time of Muhammad 
and some of those which have grown up in the 
Muhammadan world in the centuries following the 
prophet’s death can be given here. Some of those 
selected will serve to show what a tremendous conser- 
vative force hadith has been through the centuries, 
preserving among the various nations of Islam the 
habits of primitive Muslims. It will be seen that the 
action of the modern Muhammadan in adopting Euro- 
pean dress marks not a mere change from an Oriental 
to an Occidental tailor, but a break with an apostolic 
past, similar in gravity to that made by Hellenistic 
Jews in the Seleucid era, and often entailing similar 
consequences.” Others will show how customs un- 
known to early Muhammadans were borrowed from 
the superior culture of the Greeks and Persians, the 
memory of the old conservative Arab recording their 

' Cf. Talmud, sub Niddah. 
? E. Bevan, Jerusalem under the High Priests, pp. 35 ft. 

SELECTIONS FROM HapITH_ 127 

alien origin. The inclusion of a few here can only be 
justified by their strangeness, curious character, or 
dogmatic foundation. 

Muslims are enjoined to eat without a knife, following 
the example of their prophet. ‘Meat was brought to 
the apostle of God and the shoulder was put before 
him, he being fond of the shoulder, and he ate of it 
with his teeth. More explicitly as a command from 
him: ‘ Do not cut meat with a knife as foreigners do, 
but bite it with the teeth. It tastes better, and is more 
wholesome thus.’ 

The habit of drinking water while standing is evi- 
dently disliked and to be avoided,’ though the hadith 
do not speak with one voice: thus Anas says, ‘ The 
apostle forbade a man to drink while standing’; and 
Abt Huraira underlines the prohibition, ‘Let none of 
you drink water while standing, and if any one forgets, 
he must vomit it forth. On the contrary, Ibn ‘Abbas 
says: ‘I brought to the prophet a bucket of zamzam 
water, and he drank of it while standing’; and Ibn 
‘Umar: ‘In the time of the apostle of God we used to 
eat while walking and drink while standing.’ And 
yet another tradition relates that the prophet was seen 
to drink standing and sitting. 

A good example of the way in which custom was 
perpetuated is to be found in the following narrative: 
‘Ibn ‘Umar passed by the apostle of God, and his 
drawers were slack. The latter said, ‘‘ Raise them,” 
and again, “ Further.” ‘ Afterwards,” said Ibn ‘Umar, 
“TI strove to keep them thus.” Some people asked, 
“How far up?” He said, “To the middle of my 

1 Burton, Pilgrimage, p. 6, and v. s. 
2 Tirmidhi marks this hadith as Zasan, sahif, gharib. 

128 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

7 

shanks. More extravagantly Abi Huraira: ‘The 
portion of the drawers below the ankles is hell fire!’ ? 
False hair is not to be worn, for Muhammad said: 
‘God curse the woman who wears false hair and the 
woman who ties it on. Gold rings are not to be worn, 
though silver ones are permissible. They should be 
carried on the little finger according to some authorities. 
The following two hadith are of interest, in that popular 
custom proved too strong for them, and they are 
therefore abrogated (mansikh). Asma bint Yazid: 
‘The woman who wears a golden necklace will have 
one of hell fire fastened to her neck on the day of 
resurrection.’ A similar threat is directed against gold 
ear-rings. Hudhaifa’s sister: ‘O women, can you not 
be adorned with silver? Every one of you that is 
bedecked with gold and shows it shall be punished.’ 
The march of civilization bringing customs unknown 
in the simplicity of patriarchal Arabian society is 
admitted and accepted in the following: Anas said, 
‘I do not know that the prophet ever saw fine bread 
to the day of his death; nor did he see a goat baked 
(in its skin, adds the commentator). Sahal b. Sa‘d 
said: ‘ The apostle of God never saw sifted flour from 
the time God sent him forth on his mission until He 
took him to Himself; nor did he ever see a sieve.’ 
One of the edicts of the prophets which has had an 
incalculable effect on the culture, art, and architecture 
of the Muhammadan East is his ban on pictures. 
‘Angels will not enter a house containing a dog or 
pictures. ‘Aisha relates that she bought a cushion 
on which were pictures, and when the apostle of God 

1 According to the commentator it means the wearer will go to hell. 
See Lane, AZ£, p. 30. 

SELECTIONS FROM HapbiITH_ 129 

saw them he stood at the door and would not enter. 
Seeing signs of displeasure in his face she said: ‘O 
apostle of God, I repent unto God and his apostle. 
What have I done amiss?’ He asked, ‘What is the 
meaning of this cushion?’ ‘I bought it for you to 
sit and recline on,’ said she. ‘Verily, he answered, 
‘the makers of these pictures will be severely punished 
on the day of resurrection, and it will be said to them, 
“ Bring to life the pictures you have made.”’! Again, 
‘Every painter will be in hell.’ 

It is said that a man came to Ibn ‘Abbas and 
lamented that he had lost his livelihood, for he lived 
by his painting. What was he todo? ‘Woe to you,’ 
says he, ‘if you must needs paint, then paint trees and 
objects that have not a spirit in them.’ 

There is little reason to doubt that this prohibition 
has been faithfully observed by Muhammadans. There 
are, so far as I know, but few paintings of the prophet 
in existence which can boast a moderate antiquity, and 
if Christian art provides an analogy it would have been 
the prophet himself that would have formed the subject 
of every devout painter. Love of colour and design 
has found an outlet in the direction indicated in the 
last tradition quoted. 

It is believed by Muslims that God has created 
a remedy for every disease. Probably a primitive 
view of the healing art is that which limits the patient 
to three prescriptions—cupping, purging, and caute- 
rizing. Ibn ‘Abbas puts it thus: ‘Cures are wrought 

1 One is irresistibly reminded in this hadith of the constant allusion 
in the Talmud to the difference between the earthly artist and the 
heavenly designer. -Cf. Berakoth 10a and Megilla 14a, where 
the word is the same (sar). 

2861 R 

130 SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 

by three things: letting blood, drinking honey, and 
cautery; the latter I forbid my people.’ On the other 
hand, two hadith mention the occasions on which the 
prophet cauterized the wounds of his followers. 

Bukhari’s ‘ztabu-l-7766: contains two interesting 
hadith : 

(2) ‘Aisha is the speaker: ‘The prophet used to say 
to the sick, “ Bismillahi!? The soil of our land with 
the spittle of some of us will cure our sick.”’ 

(4) ‘The apostle of God used to sayin a magical 
formula (/---rugyatc)?: “ Bismillahi! the soil of our 
land with the spittle of some of us will cure our sick 
by the permission of our Lord.”’ 

Significant. and interesting is the hadith which 
registers the protest of those who feel that the ‘tradi- 
tion of the fathers’ is becoming a burden and is without 
the authority it claims. ‘Abd Allah b. Mas‘iid said: 
‘God has cursed women who tattoo and those who 
seek to be tattooed, those who pluck out hair,* and 
those who make openings in their front teeth by way 
of coquetry, who alter what God has created.” A 
woman came to him and said: ‘I have been told that 
you have cursed such and such women.’ He replied: 
‘What can I do but curse those whom the apostle of 
God has cursed and those who are cursed in God’s 

\ Krehl; iv, p63: 

2 I think that Houdas (iv, p. 79) has missed the point that the 
Bismillah in both these traditions is the rugya. See Lane, ME, 
p. 258, and Zwemer (of. czd., p. 166). 

S7Ci the. lines: 

wa)-(rai'atin lamma allamat bi)-(matriqi 
talaqqaituha khauta-l-fadihati bil-qatti 
(ta)-qalat ‘ala du‘fi qawita wa-innani 
tali‘atu jaishin saufa ya’tika min khalfi. 

SELECTIONS FROM HADITH 131 

book ?’ She said: ‘But I have read what lies between 
the two tablets, and have not found a trace of what 
you adduce.’ He answered: ‘If you had read it you 
would have found it. Have you not read, “ What the 
prophet has brought you receive; and what he has 
forbidden you avoid ?”’ (Sur. lix. 7.) -‘ Yes, certainly,’ 
said she. ‘Then verily he has forbidden this, was 
Ibn Mas‘id’s rejoinder. 

It will be seen that the significance of this tradition 
lies in the underlying argument. The test ‘What the 
prophet has brought you’ does not only refer to the 
Quranic injunction and revelation: it applies also to 
what the prophet said or was reported to have said on 
some occasion when he was admittedly not repeating 
the message of his heavenly visitant. 

VI 

BORROWING FROM CHRIS 1 tas 
DOCUMENTS AND TRADITION 

Muslims accuse one another of slavishly imitating 
Christians—Imitation of miracles of Christ; of 
sayings ; of parables.—Ascetics and Monks.——Logia of 
F esus, 

WitTHIn a few years of the prophet’s death the 
Muslims were masters of Syria, Mesopotamia and 
Egypt, lands inhabited by nations which from a remote 
antiquity possessed traditions of civilization and cul- 
ture. As we have seen, Islam at this time was un- 
developed both as regards theory and practice, and 
we should a priorz expect to see in the traditional 
literature some traces of that borrowing from Judaism 
and Christianity with which Muhammad in the pages 
of the Quran has long familiarized us. Nor is this 
expectation unrealized; for we find that many of the 
same speculations agitated the minds of Muhammadan 
theologians and thinkers before a rigid orthodoxy was 
enforced by the power of the sword as find expression 
in the writings of Christian theologians of that time. 

The broad tolerance of the early Umayyads pro- 
moted the freest intercourse between their followers 
and the Christians of their capital. We find Akhtal, 
a Christian, the official court poet, and John of Damas- 
cus and his father high in the councils of the caliph. 
So genial were the relations between Muslims and 
Christians that we find the latter moving unhindered 

DocUMENTS AND TRADITION 133 

with the cross openly displayed on their breasts within 
the mosques of their Muslim friends. In such an 
atmosphere of freedom and tolerance theological dis- 
cussions must have abounded. To this unhindered 
intercourse of Muslim and Christian theologians is due 
the similarity between many of the dogmas of Islam 
and Christianity. This, of course, was not the only 
channel through which Christian thought percolated 
to the Islamic mind; but it was one of the earliest, 
and one which has left a permanent mark on the 
thought and literature of Islam.! 

Down to Abbasid times there was Sccy oppor- 
tunity for the exchange of ideas, as the Azsa/a of Al 
Kindi, written in the reign of Al Ma’min, proves. The 
hadith literature preserves a very large number of 
examples of this borrowing, ranging from the earliest 
and best-known doctrines of Islam, which were taken 
over from Jews and Christians, and are already incor- 
porated in the Quran, to those sayings attributed to 
the prophet which betray a knowledge of Christian 
writings. Muslim theologians were not content to 
borrow the sayings of their predecessors in the counsels 
of God: they borrowed also events from the life of 
Jesus, attributing them to their own prophet. Muham- 
mad himself constantly insisted that he was not sent 
to work miracles. His miracle for all time was the 

1 The great tolerance displayed towards Jews and Christians during 
the first centuries is well illustrated in the saying reported by Abi 
Huraira (Bukhari): The People of the Book used to read the Tora 
in Hebrew and expound it in Arabic to the people of Islam. The 
apostle of God said: ‘Do not believe the people of the book and do 
not disbelieve them, but say, “ We believe in God and what he has 

79 

revealed to us. 

134 BORROWING FROM CHRISTIAN 

Quran. This is the opinion held by the authors of the 
oldest hadith: the chapter Fadailu-l-sayytdt-l-mursalin 
does not contain a single miracle of Muhammad's: on 
the contrary, there is the express statement of Abt 
Huraira that whereas the former prophets were given 
signs to induce the people to believe, Muhammad was 
given only the Quran, which nevertheless might secure 
him more followers than all that were before him. 
Naturally people who were familiar with many of the 
noblest writings of all time denied the claim of Muslims 
to possess a book of surpassing literary merit; and the 
polemical literature of the time abounds in taunts that 
Muhammad could not have been a prophet because, 
unlike the Messiah and the earlier prophets of Israel, 
he worked no miracles. 

It is interesting to notice that apparently the only 
miracles said to have been performed by Muhammad 
and known to Al Kindi are: the wolf and ox that 
spoke; the tree that moved towards the prophet; the 
shoulder of goat's flesh, poisoned by Zainab bint 
Harith the Jewess, which called out that it was 
poisoned; and the miraculous production of water. 
Some, this writer says, the Ashabu-l-Akhbar reject 
altogether, while others are from reporters branded 
datf.' Al Kindi’s testimony to enlightened opinion 
on these miracles is worthy of note, because he wrote 
some years before Al Bukhari’s collection was made, 
and he expressly refers (p. 60) to the traditions in terms 
which imply that they were not written. 

Muhammadan apologists could not afford to allow 
their apostle to labour under the disadvantage appa- 

* He calls them Akhbdrun baridatun wa-kharéfatu ‘ajaiz, ‘witless 
fables and old wives’ tales’. 

DocUMENTS AND TRADITION 135 

rent when his everyday mundane life was compared 
with the mighty works of Christ, which seem to have 
been believed without question. And thus the curious 
and interesting fact is that the later picture of Muham- 
mad approximates in tradition ever more closely to 
that of the Jesus of the gospels. No biographer, 
either ancient or modern, has succeeded in giving his 
readers an entirely satisfactory appreciation of the 
baffling personality of the great prophet of Arabia. 
His loyalty and treachery, abstinence and debauchery, 
wisdom and ignorance, mediocrity and inspiration, 
demand the pen of a Boswell. 

The most prejudiced among his followers or his 
enemies could hardly trace in the authentic record of 
Muhammad’s life the lineaments of the Prince of Peace. 
Yet this is what a certain group of traditionists and 
theologians have constructed. Weary of hearing of 
the acts of love and mercy, of supernatural power and 
forgiveness of ‘Isa b. Maryam, they have made a 
Muhammad after his likeness. Not content with the 
picture of a courteous, kindly, and able man, famed as 
the possessor of all human virtues, the idol of his race, 
if he was to compete with the Messiah they must 
represent him as a worker of miracles. There is an 
unmistakable reference to the slavish imitation of 
Christians in the plaint put into the prophet’s mouth, 
‘Verily you would follow the paths (swuan) of those 
who were before you foot by foot and inch by inch so 
that if they went down a lizard’s hole you would 
follow them!’ ‘Do you mean the Jews and Chris- 
tians ?’ said they. ‘And who else ?’ he answered. 

The most obvious imitation of the New Testament 
miracles is that based on the ‘feeding of the five 

136 BoRROWING FROM CHRISTIAN 

thousand’ (John ii. 1-11). A large number of variants 
are extant. The version cited below is perhaps the 
most interesting: Anas said: ‘Abi Talha said to Umm 
Sulaim, “ The voice of the apostle of God sounded to 
me weak: I know he is hungry. Have you anything 
to eat?” ‘ Yes,” said she, and bringing out some 
barley loaves she wrapped them in her veil. Then 
she put them in my hand, and wound the rest of the 
veil round my head, and sent me to the apostle of God. 
I brought them to him in the mosque where he was 
with the people. I saluted them, and the apostle of 
God said to me, ‘Did Abia Talha send you with food ?” 
“Yes,” said I. The apostle said to those who were 
with him, “ Arise.” And he went off to Abu Talha’s 
house, while I led the way and told Abi Talha, who 
cried, “O Umm Sulaim, the apostle of God has come 
with a company and we have nothing to give them to 
eat!” She answered: “God and his apostle know best!” 
So Abi Talha went forth to meet the apostle, and they 
came together. He said: “ Produce what you have, 
Umm Sulaim,” and she brought that bread, and the 
apostle ordered it to be broken, and Umm Sulaim 
squeezed a butter skin to season it. Then the apostle 
said grace. “Call ten men,” said he; and they called 
them, and they ate and were well filled and went out. 
Then he said the same words again, and all the people 
ate and were well filled, and they were in number 
seventy or eighty men. ? 

Sometimes this miracle takes the form of miracu- 
lously supplying water in the desert for a large number 
of men; and the detail is added that water ran from 
the prophet’s fingers in order to enable the people to 

* Mishkat, p. 529. 

DocUMENTS AND TRADITION 137 

perform wadu. Most of these miracles will be found 
in the chapter Mu{jizat of the M7shhdt. 

Again, it is interesting to compare the acts of healing 
performed by the prophet with those recorded in the 
New Testament. Yazid b. Abu ‘Ubaid says: ‘I saw 
the mark of a wound on Salma’s leg, and I said, ‘‘O 
Abti Muslim, what is this wound?” He answered, 
““Tt is a wound I received on the day of Khaibar, when 
it was said Salma is smitten to death. And I came to 
the prophet, who blew on the wound three times, and 
I have not felt it from that day to this’ Cf. Mark 
Vil. 33. 

There is a close parallel to the man possessed with 
an unclean spirit in the story of the woman with the 
demoniac son (dchz zinnatun). The prophet takes 
hold of him by the nostril, crying, ‘Come forth, for 
I am Muhammad the apostle of God.’ ! 

The Companions of the prophet, like the apostles of 
the New Testament, enjoy some of the special privi- 
leges of their master: thus two of them were lighted 
on their homeward way at nightfall by a staff;? another 
foretells his death; and Abit Bakr’s food is miracu- 
lously increased. The very clothes of Muhammad 
and his shorn hair have virtue to heal the sick and to 

1 Op. cit, p. 532. The story, fathered on Ibn ‘Abbas, of the boy 
possessed by unclean spirits who vomited, at the apostle’s touch, a 
thing like a black puppy, is reminiscent of the Syriac Acta Marlyrum 
rather than the Gospels. 

2 This recalls somewhat similar stories of the greater Rabbis. It is 
hardly possible, without a systematic investigation of the hadith 
literature and the Talmud, to determine whether the borrowing has 
been from Judaism or Christianity. This is a subject to which I shall 
recur elsewhere. 

5 Op. cit., pp. 536 f. 

2851 Ss 

138- BORROWING FROM CHRISTIAN 

cure those under the power of the evil eye. Cf. Acts 
RIKa1 2. 

Controversy with Christians on the rival merits of 
Jesus and Muhammad may fairly be regarded as the 
origin of the pretended miracles, flatly contradicting 
the plain statement of the great Arabian and those of 
many of his immediate followers that he was not sent 
with power to work miracles. Whether the object of 
the inventors was to elevate their prophet to a position 
equal to that held by Jesus in the estimation of His 
servants, or whether it was to furnish themselves and 
their pupils with a messenger of God who satisfied 
a natural craving of the human heart for a visible 
manifestation of divine power, it is not our purpose to 
determine. There are good reasons for believing that 
deliberate imitation was resorted to for the reasons 
already given, and because the ashabu-l-hadith did not 
stop at ascribing the works of Christ to their prophet. 
His words and those of his apostles are freely drawn 
on and put into the mouth of Muhammad.? 

It is unnecessary to do more than set out some of 
the sayings of Jesus which have been attributed to 
Muhammad, and leave them to speak for themselves. 

1. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar. A man came to the 
prophet and said: ‘O apostle of God, how often are 
we to forgive a servant?’ He remained silent. Then 

? Muhammadan critics quite frankly draw a clear line between 
hadith of a legal and an edifying nature. They confess that where 
a pious motive underlies a tradition there is not the same necessity 
for scrutinizing the isnad. Thus Al Nawawi says of a hadith of this 
kind, ‘it is weak, but one is delighted by it’; and Ahmad says that 
he deals gently with the genealogy of traditions concerning virtuous 
behaviour. 

- 

DocuMENTS AND TRADITION 139 

the man repeated the question three times, and finally 
he answered, ‘Forgive him seventy times every day.’ 
Cf. Matt. xviii. 21. 

2. Numan b. Bashir. The apostle of God said: 
‘Believers in their mutual compassion, love, and kind- 
ness are like the body. When it aileth in a member it 
summons all the body to it in sleeplessness and fever 
(muttafag ‘alaihi). Another version from the same 
guarantor is: Believers are as one man. If a man’s 
eye pains him his whole body suffers, and if his head 
pains him he suffers everywhere (Muslim), Cf. 1 Cor. 
xii. 13-26 and Eph. iv. 16. 

3. Abu Masa. The relation of believer to believer 
is as a building. One part strengthens another. Then 
(by way of illustration) he interlaced his fingers. Cf. 
Eph. ii. 21. 

4. Ibn Mas‘id. None will enter hell who has in 
his heart faith of the weight of a grain of mustard 
seed ; nor shall any one enter heaven who has in his 
heart pride of the weight of a grain of mustard seed. 
Cf. Matt. xvii. 20. 

5. Anas: God does not deprive a believer of his 
reward in the world to come for a good deed, though 
he has been recompensed on earth; but an unbeliever 
is nourished in this world for the good deeds he has 
done for God, so that when he passes to the next 
world he has no good deed for which he can be 
rewarded. Cf. Matt. vi. 1-2. 

6. Abi Huraira: There will go forth in the end of 
time men who will deceive the world in religion, they 
will appear to men clad in sheep skins for softness, 
their tongues will be sweeter than sugar, and their 
hearts are the hearts of wolves. God will say: ‘Is it 

140 BoRROWING FROM CHRISTIAN 

with me ye are careless, or against me ye are bold? 
I swear by myself I will send against those men 
a punishment which will leave the wise man with 
understanding of the enigma.’ 

7. Abi Huraira: Blessed is he who hath seen me, 
and sevenfold blessed is he who hath not seen me and 
yet hath believed in me. Cf. John xx. 29. 

Doubtless a search through the Six Books would 
reveal a large addition to the instances I have cited. 
To them may be added the examples quoted by 
Goldziher,! which I have refrained from reproducing. 
The New Testament references are: Matt. v. 33; vii. 
sand 6; 1x; 2-73 >x=465 xviei24; and xxi or 

The chapter on the Excellence of the Poor? contains 
a selection of sayings which amply illustrate the extent 
to which the ‘ other-worldliness’ of the New Testament 
influenced some of the thinkers of Islam. Riches are 
in themselves evil: they are the portion in this life of 
those who will perish in the next: the poor will enter 
paradise five hundred years before the rich: the world 
is a prison to the believer: all of which suggest an 
affinity in attitude and aspiration to the teaching of 
sections of the New Testament. 

Of the parables of Jesus which have been transferred 
to Muhammad we may cite the following : 

1. The Labourers in the Vineyard. Matt. xx. 1-16, 
Ibn ‘Umar. Your age compared with the age of the 
peoples who were before you is as the time between 
afternoon prayer and sunset. You, the Jews, and the 
Christians, may be compared unto a man who employed 
labourers, saying, ‘Who will work for me till noon for 
a qirat?’ The Jews worked till noon for a qirat. 

1 Op. cit, pp. 384 ff. ® Mishkat, pp. 438 ff. 

, oe hry ~ * ; 
Pak Ee se se” 3 ee, ‘ 

DocuUMENTS AND TRADITION I4I 

Then he said: ‘Who will work for me from noon till 
afternoon prayer for a qirat?’ The Christians did so. 
Then he said: ‘Who will work for me from afternoon 
prayer to sunset for two qirat ?’ Ye are the latter. 
Have ye not a double reward? And the Jews and 
Christians were angry, and said: ‘We have worked 
more and received less.’ God said: ‘ Have I wronged 
you of your due?’ They said,‘No.’ He said: ‘It 
is my grace. I give to whom I will.’ (Bukhari’s 
versions, see Ijara and Tauhid, differ considerably.) 

2. The Wedding Guests. Matt. xxii. 1-10. Jabir. 
Angels visited the prophet while he was asleep, and 
said to one another: ‘ There is a parable of this friend 
of yours, so propound a parable to him.’ But some 
said, ‘He sleeps’; others, ‘His eye sleeps but his heart 
is awake.’ So they said: ‘He is like unto a man who 
built a house and made therein a feast, and sent forth 
one to bid men come. And those who accepted the 
invitation of the summoner entered the house and ate 
of the feast, and those who refused neither entered nor 
ate. They said: ‘Explain it to him so that he may 
understand. Some said, ‘ He sleeps’; others, ‘His eye 
sleeps but his heart is awake.’ So they explained: the 
house is paradise, the summoner Muhammad; for he 
who obeys Muhammad obeys God, and whosoever 
disobeys Muhammad disobeys God, Muhammad being 
the dividing difference (favg) between men’ (Bukhari). 

3. The Sower. Matt. xiii. 3-12. Abi Musa. ‘The 
guidance and knowledge wherewith God has sent me 
is like unto abundant rain that falleth on earth, of 
which the good part receives the water and brings 
forth grass and herbage manifold. And part is high 
ground that retains the water wherewith God profits 

142 BoRROWING FROM CHRISTIAN 

men in that they drink, water their beasts, and sow 
their seed. And some of the rain falls on another part 
which is flat ground, neither retaining the water nor 
bringing forth grass. The two first are like unto 
a man who understands God’s religion and the message 
God entrusted to me profits him, and he understands 
and teaches it. And the last is like unto the man 
who does not honour nor receive God’s guidance with 
which I was sent.’ © 

Many of the traditions quoted above found their 
way into the canonical collections through the same 
channel as the moral and didactic sayings current 
among the Arabs themselves, or among the Jews and 
other nations whose culture was so freely drawn on in 
the formative period of the history of Islam. These 
traditions circulated first as a hadith maugifa’ (i.e. 
traceable only to a Companion or Follower). To gain 
a respectful hearing they required the stamp of the 
prophet himself. A missing name or two was all that 
was needed to make the chain complete, and this was 
supplied by the pious fraud who bore a special desig- 
nation Fafa, because he made the hadith marfu‘! 
carried back to the prophet himself. 

Nothing could be further removed from the point of 
view of the ordinary Arab of the Jahiliyya or of Islam 
than asceticism, as the formidable array of hadith con- 
demning it in all its forms clearly testify. Of these 
one example must suffice. 

Anas: ‘Three men came to the prophet’s wives 
questioning them about his devotion (‘7éada). When 
they were told they were for despising slightly his 

* See Glossary. 

DocuMENTS AND TRADITION 143 

devotion, saying, “Where do we come short of the 
prophet? And God has pardoned his sins past and 
future.” One of them said: “As for me I will ever 
pray by night.” The second said: “I will ever fast 
by day and not break by fast.” The third: “I will 
turn aside from women and never marry.” Then the 
prophet came to them, and said: “Are ye they who 
speak thus? Verily I am the most God-fearing and 
pious among you, yet I fast and break my fast. I pray 
and sleep; I marry women. And he who turns away 
from my swzna is none of mine.”’ 

A certain tendency to asceticism was Rave latent 
in Islam from the days when Muhammad first pro- 
claimed the judgement of God one day to be pro- 
nounced against sinners, and the punishments of hell 
for those who lived without God in the world. Indeed 
reflections and meditations on the transitoriness of 
human life and a Day of Reckoning to come are not 
unknown in the poetry of the pre-Islamic period. But 
they are not of native origin: they are to be ascribed 
to the influence of Christian monks and communities, 
and also to Jewish monotheists scattered over Arabia. 

The amazing successes of the Caliphs’ armies, 
bringing in their train an influx of wealth which, even 
at the present day would be thought stupendous, could 
not but turn men’s thoughts and ambitions towards 
worldly things. This tendency to covetousness and 
worldliness was apparent to, and condemned by, the 
prophet, ‘ You desire the passing wealth of this world,’ ' 
he exclaims, ‘ but God desires the next world’ (Sur. viii. 
68). Ibn Sa‘d furnishes us with details of the colossal 
fortunes bequeathed to their heirs by those reputed 
the holiest among the prophet’s associates : thus Talha 

144 BoRROWING FROM CHRISTIAN 

b. ‘Ubaid Allah is said to have died leaving a hundred 
leather sacks each containing three qintars of ingots.’ 
The early hadith are full of stories of the grinding 
poverty and want of the early Muhammadans. Talha’s 
father relates that when he and his friends complained 
to the prophet of their hunger they each took a stone 
from their bellies, and the prophet took two from his.? 
It is not surprising if a people which in a generation 
had passed from the extreme of indigence to the height 
of wealth and luxury should show active dislike of 
those who taught the vanity of riches. Yet even so 
among a minority the ideal of We/tverneinung lived on. 

There was always a strife between those who fought 
for the gain of this world and those who strove ‘a/a-d- 
akhera. Abu Sa‘iid Al Khudri is the mouthpiece of 
those who took the middle view that wealth in itself 
is harmless if it does not lead to avarice and extrava- 
gant display. This was the view of the ordinary 
Muslim, who stood midway between the Ascetic and 
the Plutocrat. 

Probably the reason why asceticism provoked so 
much opposition and gave rise to so many hadith in 
its condemnation was that, like the doctrine of man’s 
free will, it was recognized that its immediate origin 
was Christian. Many of the hadith directed against 
asceticism, like ‘There is no monasticism in Islam— 

* Eine schwere Ladung fiir das Paradies! Goldziher, Vorlesungen, 
p. 141. 

* There are frequent references in hadith to the custom of tying 
stones on the belly to still the craving for food, and to enable men 
to walk upright. Mshkat, p. 440. Hunger was the driving force 
behind the Arab migration. See Caetani, Aznar, ii, passim, 

* Mishkat, p. 431. 

DocuUMENTS AND TRADITION 145 

the monasticism (vahéaniyya) of my community is the 
Jihad’, bear the obvious stamp of anti-Christian 
polemic.1. The Christian monks had long been settled 
in Arabia. Muhammad in the Quran (9. 113 and 66. 5) 
speaks of them not unfavourably. And when the 
conquest and occupation of Syria, Egypt, and Mesopo- 
tamia brought Muhammadans into daily intercourse 
with monks and nuns, those to whom a life of prayer 
and meditation and poverty appealed were not slow to 
copy closely the practices of their Christian neighbours. 
These early Sifis drew from the New Testament the 
parables and sayings of Jesus which seemed to sanction 
and commend the ascetic life; and very early in their _ 
history a work full of thinly-disguised extracts from 
the Christians’ bible was circulated. Margoliouth 
writes of Aba ‘Abd Allah al Harith b. Asad al Muha- 
sibi (d. 243 A.H.): 

‘It is to be noticed that these sermons show evident 
traces of the use of the Gospel, as indeed the work on 
the “ Observation of God’s Claims” commences with 
a repetition of the Parable of the Sower without dis- 
tinct mention of its source. The Keupriilii treatise, 
which is against hypocrisy, might be said to be an 
expansion of the doctrines of the Sermon on the 
Mount: and to the phraseology of the Gospels there 
seem to be some clear allusions: these may be due to 
infiltration or to actual study of the Gospels on the 
author’s part. ? 

An extremely interesting collection of Logza et 

' «In the early part of the third century it appears that the Muslim 
ascetic was not easily distinguished from the Christian; and, indeed, 
they had much in common.’—Margoliouth, Early Development, p. 141. 

2 Transactions of the Third International Congress for the History 
of Religions, i, p. 292, Oxford, 1908. 

2851 T 

146 BoRROWING FROM CHRISTIAN 

Agrapha attributed to Christ by Muhammadan 
writers was made by Professor Asin,! who explains 
their origin thus: 

‘Slowly and by degrees monasticism, an institution 
execrated by Muhammad,? was evolved in the suc- 
ceeding centuries, and was developed to such a point 
that it lacked none of the essentials of Christian monas- 
ticism. . . . Now from what seed could this mystical 
tree of monastic perfection grow in the arid soil of 
Muhammadanism? No other source can be imagined 
than Christian monasticism, which was well known to 
the Muslims, and not unknown to the pre-Islamic 
Arabs. . . . Therefore it is not to be wondered at if, 
after the Christian institution of monasticism began to 
put forth roots among the Muslims, the example of 
Christian monks was imitated by the Muslims them- 
selves, and they at once endeavoured as far as possible 
to destroy the anti-monastic lineaments, so to speak, 
of Muhammad, both by forging traditions in which the 
words and deeds of Jesus are attributed to Muhammad, 
and by publishing the precepts and precedents, authen- 
tic or apocryphal, of Jesus, so that His authority might 
lend strength to their ascetic innovations. ... Without 

' Logia et Agrapha Domini Jesu apud Moslemicos scriptores, asceticos 
praesertim, usitata ... Michael Asin et Palacios (Patrologia Orientalts, 
Tome xiii, Fasc. 3, Paris (n. d.), p. 338). 

* It may be doubted whether this statement is altogether justifiable. 
‘Know ye that this world’s life is only a sport and pastime and show 
and a cause of vainglory among you’ (Sur. 57, 19), would suggest 
the advisability of withdrawing}from the affairs of this world. Ver. 27, 
‘We put into the hearts of those who followed him (Jesus) kindness 
and compassion: but as to the monastic life (rahdanzyya) they invented 
it themselves’ (cf. Rodwell, 9. 31), fis hardly an execration. But 
possibly Dr. Asin is referring to some of the hadith quoted above. 

DocuMENTS AND TRADITION 147 

doubt the Zogza ascribed to Jesus by Muslim writers 
are connected with a settled (cev¢a) Christian tradition 
among the Oriental churches, orthodox or heterodox, 
before the seventh century a.p. Now I do not say 
that this tradition is entirely free from error: indeed it 
has been corrupted by their traditionists ; yet not inten- 
tionally, but rather from the accidents inseparable from 
all oral tradition. The simple choice of words, the 
ingenuous character of the narrative, full as it is of 
anachronisms, both as to time and place, point to the 
vehicle of transmission being not written but oral tra- 
dition handed on in the first place by the common 
people before it was recorded by theologians.’ 

The examples given below, quoted from more than 
a hundred collected by Asin, are all taken from 
Al Ghazalis great work the Lhyau ‘Ulimi-l-Din. 
Ghazali lived in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, 
though the traditions, for the most part, are demon- 
strably centuries older. 

1. Jesus said, ‘Do not hang pearls on the necks of 
swine. Verily wisdom is better than pearls, and he 
who despises it is worse than swine. Cf. Matt. vil. 6. 
Al Ghazali, Zz. I. 43. 4. 

2. It is related that God revealed to Jesus: ‘If you 
worship me with the worship of the dwellers in heaven 
and earth and have not love in God? and hatred in 
God, that will not profit thee aught.’ //. II. 110. 15. 
The same in a somewhat different form is ascribed in 
110. 6 to ‘Abd Allah b. Umar. ‘By God, though 
I fast all day without sustenance and rise spending the 
night in prayer and spend my wealth purse by purse 

1 For the Christian genesis of the expression ji-//ah and dzllah in 
tradition, see AZS, ii, p. 392. 

148 BoRROWING FROM CHRISTIAN 

in the way of God, and when I die there is no love in 
my heart towards the people who obey God, nor hatred 
to those who disobey Him that will not profit me 
aught.) > Cir Cor. xii./4—3. A 

3. It is related that the devil appeared to ‘Isa b. 
Maryam, and said: ‘Say, “ There is no God but the 
God.”’ He replied, ‘The saying is true, but I will 
not say it with your voice because it has ambiguity 
beneath the good.’ A cryptic synopsis of Matt. iv. 
3-107 Lhe 23) 49, 

4. Jesus said: ‘Blessed is he who leaves present 
desire for a promise not present which he does not 
see. Jh. III. 48. 8: cf. John xii. 25. 

5. The Messiah passed by a company of Jews, who 
cursed Him, but He blessed them. It was said to 
Him: ‘ They speak Thee evil and Thou speakest them 
well!’ He answered : ‘ Every one spends of that which 
he-hath“i/2) Tike123>197-cf. Matt. x34) geen 
Luke vi. 8 and 45. 

6. It was said to Jesus: ‘Teach us one precept 
(ilm) for keeping which God will love us. He 
answered : ‘ Hate the world and God will love you.’ 
fh. U1. 141. 10: cf. John xii. 25; xv. 18,19. Practically 
the same hadith is put in the mouth of the prophet by 
Tirmidhi and Ibn Maja on the authority of Sahal b. 
Sa‘d. It reads thus: A man came and said: ‘O 
Apostle of God, teach me a work the which if I accom- 
plish God and mankind will love me. He replied: 
‘Renounce the world and God will love you. Renounce 
what mankind possess and mankind will love you.’ ! 

* Since I wrote this paragraph, I see that Goldziher ( Vorlesungen, 
p. 188) quotes this hadith as one of the ‘ Forty Traditions’ of Nawawi. 
Apparently he is incorrect in saying ‘Der Spruch findet sich nicht in 

DocuMENTS AND TRADITION 149 

7. Jesus said: ‘The world is a bridge. Therefore 
cross it; do not dwell on it’? Zf. III. 149. 11. 

8. ‘When death was mentioned in the presence of 
Jesus his skin used to distil blood.’ 7%. IV. 325. 12. 
This remarkable tradition is evidently based on the 
agony in the garden described in Luke xxii. 44. 

g. ‘It is related that when Jesus the Son of Mary 
was born the devils came to Satan and said: “ To-day 
the idols are overthrown and their heads broken.” 
He said: “A new thing has happened. Keep in your 
places.” So he flew unto the ends of the earth and 
found nothing. Then he found that Jesus had been 
born, and lo angels were encompassing him. And he 
returned unto the devils and said: “Verily a prophet 
was born yesterday. Never has a woman conceived 
or brought forth but I was present with her, except 
this. Therefore the idols despair of being worshipped 
after to-night. Nevertheless tempt the sons of men 
(to act) with haste and levity.”’ III.26.4. This is 
in keeping with the canonical tradition recorded by 
Bukhari that the only child untouched at birth by 
Satan was Jesus. 

den strengern Sammlungen und blosz aus dem Traditionswerk des 
Ibn Madscha nachgewiesen’, if the compiler of the Mzshkat is to be 
believed. The latter writes, ‘rawahu Al Tirmidhi wabnu Maja’. 

1 «This appears to me to be an agraphum,’ Asin. The words 
occur in an inscription on the great gateway of the mosque of 
Fathpir-Sikri erected by Akbar in 1601. 

VII 

SOME ASPECTS OF (THE, PROEHZ® 
MUHAMMAD IN TRADITION 

Our purpose is not to attempt to give a coherent 
biography of the Arabian prophet, or even to mention 
the principal incidents in his life. Material for this 
must be sought elsewhere. But simply because no 
survey of the hadith literature, however superficial, 
would be complete without some account of the 
impression it gives of the enigmatic personality of its 
great hero, a few hadith are translated to supplement 
what has gone before, and to show particularly how, 
with the passing of years, the fallible, human figure of 
Muhammad has faded into oblivion. The gulf between 
the prophet who is believed to have worked the 
miracles mentioned on page 136 and him who spoilt 
the date crop of Medina by his untimely interference 
with established custom could not have been bridged 
in one or two generations. 

Many of the hadith already cited will have shown 
the good sense, amiability, and liberality of the 
prophet; and the following further examples of the 
qualities which have ever endeared him to his fol- 
lowers must suffice. 

Rafi b. ‘Amr al Ghaffari: ‘When I was a boy I threw 
stones at the Ansar’s date-palms, and so they brought 
me before the prophet of God. “Boy,” said he, “why 

* See especially the works of Caetani, Muir, Margoliouth, Sprenger, 
and others; also Ibn Sa‘d and Ibn Hisham. 

MuHAMMAD IN TRADITION I51 

did you throw stones at the date-palms?” “So that 
I might eat dates,” I said. “Don’t throw stones,” said 
he, “ but eat the fallings.” Then he touched his head 
and prayed: “O God, satisfy him with food.’ ‘Aisha: 
‘A man asked permission to see the prophet of God, 
who said: “Let him come in though he is of an evil 
tribe.” When the man sat with him the prophet 
showed him a bright countenance and conversed 
agreeably with him. After he had gone ‘Aisha asked: 
“ How is it that you treated him so kindly when you 
had thus spoken of him?” He replied: ‘When have 
you known me immoderate in speech? The worst 
men in God’s sight on the day of resurrection will be 
those whom men forsake through dread of their 
wickedness’ (variant: harsh speech)! The Badu-l- 
Muzah contains a pleasing notice of the prophet’s 
kindness to children and his fondness of jokes and 
raillery, which may be further illustrated from the 
story of his relation to his child-wife. ‘Aisha said: 
‘The apostle of God returned from the raid of Tabik 
(variant: or Hunain). Now her booth was protected 
by a curtain, and when the wind blew aside the edge 
of the curtain ‘Aisha’s dolls were seen. ‘“ What are 
these ?” asked Muhammad. “ My dolls,” she answered. 
Then he noticed among them a horse with two wings 
of patchwork, and was told what the object was. “A 
horse with two wings!” he exclaimed. “ Have you not 
heard”, she replied, “that Solomon possessed winged 
horses?” ‘Aisha, in relating the hadith, adds: “ Then 
he laughed so that I could see his molars.” ’ 

1 Commentators differ as to the meaning of this last sentence. It 

reads rather like a protest against the autocratic bearing of the caliphs 
than a recommendation of courtesy towards the wicked. 

152 THE PropHeEtT MUHAMMAD 

But their relations were not always so easy. There 
are frequent references to the domestic troubles of the 
prophet which sometimes scandalized his followers. 
We read of the anger of Aba Bakr when his daughter 
dared to scold the prophet in a voice that could be 
heard without. Exclaiming, ‘I will not hear thee lift 
thy voice against the apostle of God,’ he seized hold of 
her to slap her face. But the prophet restrained him 
so that he went out in anger. When he had gone the 
prophet said, ‘ You see how I have delivered you from 
the man.’? Abi Bakr remained unreconciled for some 
days. Then he called and found the pair at peace, 
and said, ‘Include me in your peace as you included 
me in your quarrel!’ The prophet answered, ‘We do! 
we do!’ Another occasion of strife is connected with 
the dispute between Muhammad and his wives which 
has found its way into the Quran (Sur. 33. 51). Its 
guarantor is Jabir: Abi Bakr came asking to see the 
apostle of God, and found people who had been refused 
admittance sitting at his door. Aba Bakr was allowed 
to enter, and was followed subsequently by ‘Umar. 
They found the prophet sitting, surrounded by his 
wives, gloomy and silent. ‘Umar said: ‘I must say 
something to make the prophet laugh’; so he began: 
*O apostle of God, if I see Bint Kharija asking me for 
money then I get up and throttle her!’ The apostle 
of God said: ‘These women about me, as you see, are 
asking for money.’ So Abi Bakr got up and throttled 
‘Aisha, and ‘Umar treated Hafsa similarly, saying: 
‘Will you ask the apostle of God for what he does not 
possess?’ They said: ‘By God, we never ask him 
for anything he does not possess!’ Then he sepa- 

* The commentators suppose the remark to be a jest. 

IN TRADITION 153 

rated himself from them for a month (variant; or 
twenty-nine days), when this revelation descended: 
‘O prophet, say to thy wives, if ye desire this present 
life and its braveries, come then I will provide for you 
and dismiss you with an honourable dismissal. But if 
ye desire God and his apostle and a home in the next 
life, then truly hath God prepared for those of you 
who are virtuous a great reward.’1_ He told ‘Aisha of 
this first, saying: ‘I wish to lay a matter before you 
in the which I desire that you do not decide until you 
shall have consulted your parents.’ When she inquired 
what it was he recited the revelation to her. She 
responded: ‘Is it about you that I am to consult my 
parents? Nay, but I choose God and his apostle and 
the home in the next life. I ask you, however, not to 
inform any of your other wives of what I have said.’ 
His answer was, ‘If any of them ask me I shall tell 
them, for God has not sent me tc cause chagrin and 
sin, but to teach and to make (righteousness) easy.’ 
Probably nothing is more illustrative of the prophet’s 
greatness both among his contemporaries and with 
posterity than the fact that his reputation could sur- 
vive the publication of the following story by his wife 
‘Aisha: ‘I was jealous of the women who gave them- 
selves to the apostle of God, and said, “ Does a woman 
give herself?” Then when God revealed: “Thou 
mayest decline for the present whom thou wilt of 
them, and thou mayest take to thy bed her whom thou 
wilt, and whomsoever thou shalt long for of those thou 
shalt have before neglected; and this shall not be 

1 Sur. 33. 28-9. The translation is Rodwell’s. The text has only 
the opening and the final words of the verses. Cf. Muir, p. 304, where 
the passage is connected with the scandal that gathered round ‘Aisha. 

2851 U 

154 Tue PropHet MUHAMMAD 

a crime in thee.”1 I said, “I see your Lord does 
nothing but hasten to fulfil your desire!”’? In this 
context we may include the significant tradition of 
Anas recorded by Al Nasa‘, ‘After women nothing 
was dearer to the apostle of God than horses.’ * 

In a hadith of Umm Salma the prophet freely admits 
his fallibility: ‘I am only mortal, and when you come 
disputing before me perhaps some of you are more 
eloquent in argument than others, and I give judge- 
ment according to what I hear. But whoso receives 
judgement in this way to the detriment of his brother's 
rights let him not take it, for if he does I have 
reserved a place in hell for him, 

But the clearest possible recognition of Muhammad’s 
ignorance of everyday matters is to be found in the 
story of his interference with the process of fertilizing 
date-palms. Rafi b. Khadij: ‘The prophet of God 
came to Medina when they were fecundating the date- 

Vv. Bis 

* It must be counted unto the traditionists for righteousness that 
this and the many other hadith so damaging to the prophet’s reputa- 
tion were not expunged from the canonical collections. It would 
seem that the prophet’s character among the faithful was above 
criticism ; otherwise it is difficult to see how such traditions could 
have been tolerated in a community which claimed to have received 
a revelation from God. 

’ The contradictory nature of some of the hadith is well illustrated 
by the following sayings which claim to reflect the prophet’s preference 
in the matter of horses: 

(2) Abt Qutada. The best horses are black with white foreheads 
and white upper lip. Then a black horse with a white forehead and 
three white legs; then a bay with these markings. 

(2) Abi Wahab. A bay with a white forehead and white legs 
is the best. 

(c) Ibn ‘Abbas. Prosperity goes with the sorrel. 

IN TRADITION 155 

palms,! and asked what was being done. It was replied 
that this was custom. “Perhaps it would be better if 
you did not do it,” said he. So they left the trees as 
they were and the crop was deficient. When the 
people told him of this, he said: “Iam only mortal. 
If I give you an order in the domain of your religion 
then receive it; but if I give you an order from my 
own opinion (vaz) then am I but mortal.”’ 

There is also preserved the story of Muhammad’s 
unsuccessful negotiations with a Jew. The story 
comes from ‘Aisha: ‘The prophet wore two thick 
Qutrt*® garments, so that when he sat down perspiring 
he found them oppressive. Now clothes had come 
from Syria to a certain Jew, so I said: “If you were 
to send to him and buy (sc. on credit) two garments 
you would be more at ease.” So he sent, and the 
fellow said: “I know what you want: you only want 
to go off with my money!” The apostle of God said: 
“He lies: for he knows that I am the most God-fearing 
and punctilious in money matters of all men.” In 
another hadith she repeats: ‘‘ If you wish to cleave to 
me then be satisfied with the portion of a horseman in 
this world, and beware of sitting with the rich, nor 
think a garment shabby until it has been patched.”’ ® 
Though the last is probably not a genuine hadith it 

1 See Margoliouth and Muir zz loc.; and Burton, Pilgrimage, p. 403, 
for a description of the process. 

2 The commentator explains this as ‘a kind of Yaman garment’. 
The Wihaya says it is a garment dyed red with rough coarse fringes, 
and offers another explanation to the effect that it comes from Bahrain, 

8 This tradition bears the warning: Al Tirmidhi relates it, and 
says, ‘This is a gharid hadith. We only know it from the hadith 
of Salih b, Hassan. Muhammad b. Ismail (i.e. Al Bukhari) says the 
latter is munkiru-l-hadith. See Glossary. 

156 THe PropHetT MuHAMMAD 

points rightly to the poverty and privation in which 
the prophet and his friends lived, to which allusion has 
already been made on p. 144. The same authority 
(in Bukhari) tells us that the prophet’s family did not 
eat barley bread for two consecutive days during the 
whole of his life, a statement which is strengthened by 
Anas, who says that he went to the prophet with some 
barley bread and rancid dripping, and found that he 
had pawned his coat-of-mail to a Jew in Medina in 
exchange for barley for his family. ‘Never did there 
remain overnight in the family of Muhammad a 
measure of corn or grain though he had nine wives.’ 

The various currents in Christian tradition, with 
which theologians are all familiar, represented by 
the Synoptic, the Apocryphal, and the Apocalyptic 
school, all have their counterpart in traditions which 
gather round the person of the founder of Islam. 

Some examples of the first have already been given, 
while to the second belong the stories of Muhammad’s 
miracles: the sun standing still, the splitting of the 
moon, and others which have already been mentioned. 
In the Apocalyptic hadith Muhammad stands out as 
the prophet of the end and consummation of all things, 
and as the powerful intercessor for his people with 
God. The following long hadith vouched for by Abia 
Huraira contains many of the prevailing ideas on these 
subjects: ‘The Hour will not come till there is a fierce 
battle between two great forces both professing Islam ; 
and until nearly thirty lying Dajjals (antichrists) have 
been sent, each pretending that he is the apostle of 
God; until knowledge has been taken away and there 
are numerous earthquakes, till rebellions occur and 
commotions are frequent; till wealth be multiplied and 

IN TRADITION 157 

abundant, and the wealthy will trouble him who receives 
alms and beg him to accept it, and it will be declined, 
for none need it; till men display arrogance in building, 
and one will pass by a man’s grave and say “ Would 
that I were in his place!” till the sun rises in the west, 
and all men seeing it will believe. Then will none 
profit by faith who has not believed aforetime and 
acquired virtue by faith. And the Hour will come 
_ when men have spread out their garment between 
them and have not agreed on a price nor folded it up; 
when a man shall have taken away the milk of his 
camel and not have drunk it; when a man shall be 
plaistering his cistern and have put no water in it; 
while a man is lifting food to his mouth and before he 
can eat it.’ A characteristic difference between these 
Apocalyptic hadith and the literature as a whole is 
their great length. The tradition which records men’s 
need of an intercessor on the day of resurrection and 
the refusal of the office successively by Adam, Noah, 
Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, and the triumphant inter- 
cession of Muhammad for all Muslims, contains up- 
wards of three hundred words exclusive of the isnad. 
The average length of hadith on all the topics dealt 
with in the literature I should estimate at fifty words 
only. 

The eschatology of the traditions of Islam—the 
slaying of the antichrist, the descent of Jesus son of 
Mary from heaven to usher in a reign of peace, 
prosperity, and goodness—need not be discussed here. 
A tradition, hardly in accord with the general content 
of eschatological speculation, which seems to be deeply 
rooted in the Muslim mind is that of ‘Abd Allah b. 
‘Umar, which the compiler of the M/tshkat says is 

158 THe PropHet MUHAMMAD 

recorded by Ibn Al Jauzi in the Kztadu-l-Wifa: ‘ Jesus 
son of Mary will descend to the earth, marry, and beget 
children. He will stay on the earth forty-five years, 
and then die and be buried in my grave. He and 
I shall arise in one grave between Abi Bakr and 
‘Umar. } 

One of the most interesting subjects in Muhammadan 
apocalyptic is the Mi'raj, or nocturnal journey of 
Muhammad to the heavenly mansions. On this inci- 
dent, which is referred to in an obscure passage of 
the Quran (Sur. 17. 1), the reader may consult the 
interesting study of the learned Spanish Arabist 
‘Asin.2 No more striking example of growth and 
development within the field of hadith has yet been 
adduced. From the story of the prophet’s nocturnal 
journey in which he saw as in a vision the punish- 
ments of the wicked, the joys of Muslims and the 
felicity of martyrs, and finally Abraham, Moses, and 
Jesus awaiting him beneath the throne of God, there 
has grown up a large and extensive literature with 
which, in its latest form, the Occident has long been 
familiar in the pages of Dante Alighieri.* 

? Burton, Pilgrimage, pp. 325 ff. ‘It is popularly asserted that in 
the Huwjra there is now spare place for only a single grave, reserved 
for ‘Isa bin Maryam after his second coming.’ 

* La Escatologia Musulmana en la Divina Comedia, Madrid, 1919, 
and see my review in Theology, i, pp. 315-16. 

° Kangu-l-‘Ummal, Cairo, 1312, vii. 248, no. 2835, and 280, no. 3089. 

APPENDIX A 
he CALIPHATE IN TRADITION 

IN the following pages I have given some of the opinions 
of Muslim doctors on the subject of the caliphate. The subject 
is of greater importance in the political work of the immediate 
future than almost any other question in view of the fact that 
within the last two generations several millions of our fellow- 
subjects in India have prayed for the Sultan of Turkey in the 
Khutba; and it is becoming increasingly important that the 
place and office of the caliphate should be clearly understood 
in the West. 

The extracts which I have made from Muslim writers will 
serve to show how foolish and mistaken it is for European 
writers to compare the caliphate with the papacy. In the 
sense that the learned and charming writer the Right 
Honourable Ameer Ali writes! it is of course true, but the 
very clear distinction between political and religious allegiance 
so familiar in Western states is flatly contradicted by the 
Muslim theory of the caliphate. 

The clearest and most scholarly exposition of the caliphate 
is to be found in the W/ugaddima of Ibn Khaldin, of which 
following is a free translation. 

The Caliph is the representative of the giver of the 
religious law (Sahibu-l-shari‘ati) in maintaining religion and 
governing the world. The office may be termed the Khilafate 
or the Imamate indifferently. When the Caliph is called 
Imam he is, as it were, compared with the leader, whose 
movements in prayer must be imitated by the whole assembly, 
The great Imamate is a term often used of the Caliph’s office. 
He is called Caliph because he caliphs (i.e. succeeds or repre- 
sents) the prophet ; or ‘the Caliph of God’, or more fully, 

1 Infra, p. 169. I have refrained from comment. 

160 THE CAtTEa Are 

‘ Caliph of the apostle of God’. Many doctors took exception 
to the title khalifatu-Wah, and refused to admit its propriety. 

The appointment of an Imam is a matter of necessity from 
the point of view of law founded on the Ijma‘ of the Com- 
panions and Followers. Immediately on the death of the 
Prophet they took the oath of fealty to Abu Bakr and 
surrendered to him the conduct of their affairs. Succeeding 
centuries have followed this precedent, and such universal 
agreement indicates the necessity, and sanctions the setting 
up, of an Imam. (According to the Mu'tazilites the sole 
raison a’étre of the Imam is to carry out the law: so that if 
the people were only righteous in their dealings there would 
be no need for an Imam. These views are to be attributed 
to their hatred of the abuse of power and position inseparable 
from human potentates.) 

Four qualifications necessarily pertain to this office: Know- 
ledge, Justice, Capacity (or competence), and the power to 
exercise the senses and limbs which reflect the activities of 
mind and body. A fifth condition, namely, that its holder 
should be a member of the tribe of the Quraish has been the 
subject of dispute.’ 

The first two qualities are essential because the imamate is 
a religious office (mansab dini). The third, Capacity, implies 
courage both in internal administration and in war, statesman- 
ship, and leadership, and a knowledge of the political situation 
at home and abroad. Thus there is required of him the 
active exercise of mind and body so that he may defend 
religion and fight the enemy, and thereby fulfil the commands 
of the law and the claims of the public weal. 

The fourth condition contains an important implication. 
It includes the power of unrestrained action. If the Imam 
loses his independence through captivity or similar restraint 
it is as though he had lost the use of his limbs and faculties. 
He cannot be Imam. On the other hand, if it is only a 

? Our author’s ruler approaches the ideal, yet it is interesting to see 
how temporal power is, in theory at all events, indissolubly linked 
with the caliphate, or, as he expresses it here, the imamate. 

IN TRADITION 101 

question of the loss of some of his powers through the action 
of subjects who have not overtly revolted against his authority, 
and it is found that he acts according to the requirements of 
law and justice, his imamate is to be allowed. But if not, 
Muslims may invoke the help of one to depose him and fulfil 
the duties of a Caliph. 

With regard to descent from the Quraish it must be 
admitted that the principle was accepted by the Companions 
on the day of Al Saqifa. The Companions met the claim of 
the Medinotes to the right to elect Sa‘d ibn ‘Abada by the 
words of the prophet, ‘The Imams are from the Quraish’ (Al 
Aimatu min Quraishin), whereupon the Medinotes receded 
from their position. Moreover, there is in the Sahih the 
authentic tradition: ‘This authority shall not cease in this 
tribe of Quraish,’ and there are many other hadith to the 
same effect. History relates how the Quraish at home dissi- 
pated their strength in luxury and idleness, while their armies 
fought battles in all parts of the world, so that failure to 
consolidate and conserve their resources made the burden of 
the caliphate a task beyond their strength, and foreigners 
came to be invested with supreme power. 

Now many doctors go so far as to deny the necessity of 
Quraishite birth as a qualification for an Imam, relying on the 
literal sense of the words of the prophet, ‘ Hearken and obey 
even if a slavering negro be set over you. And again, 
‘Umar said, ‘If Salim the client of Hudhaifa were alive, 
I would have made him ruler.’ The first proves nothing, for 
it is only a supposition; and the second rests on the opinion 
of only one of the Companions, and is therefore not authorita- 
tive. The great majority of Muslim doctors regard Quraish- 
ite birth as essential, and that one of that tribe must be 
Imam, though he be impotent to direct the affairs of the 
Believers. But we may refute this by pointing out that the 
condition of capacity cannot be fulfilled in such a case. What 
then was the reason for the doctrine that the Imam must be 
of the Quraish? Every law has a definite object, and the 
object of this law was not only to honour the prophet as is 

2851 x 

162 TH BY OS BaP ae 

generally believed. It was also to ensure the safety and 
well-being of the Muslim people. The Quraish were formerly 
the noblest and bravest of the Arabs and best fitted to link 
together the warring factions of the Arabian peninsula. No 
other tribe would have been able to put an end to dissension 
and lead Muslims to victory. The legislator, then, declared 
' that an Imam must be of the tribe of the Quraish because 
they were obviously best equipped in every respect to maintain 
law and order. The Quraishite domination was more or less 
justified under the Umayyads and Abbasids. But if we 
recognize the principle that the legislator is not making laws 
for one time and one people, we shall see that the condition of 
‘capacity’ at once applies. Applying, then, the motive 
underlying the dogma that the Imam must be of the tribe of 
the Quraish, we say that he who guides the destinies of the 
Muslim peoples, like the Quraish of old, must be renowned 
for patriotism, influence and power: dominating his genera- 
tion he must be able to command the obedience of others, 
and unite them in the defence of the commonwealth. When 
God appointed the Caliph his representative (aiban ‘anhu) 
He ordered him to seek his people’s welfare and to protect 
them from disaster. And it is certain that He would not 
entrust this task to those who were impotent to fulfil it. 

At this point we may note that the Shi‘as’ conception of 
the Imamate is quite different. With them the Imamate is 
the foundation of Islam. It cannot even be supposed that 
the prophet suffered the Imamate to be dependent on popular 
sanction. He, say they, appointed ‘Ali; and though this 
assertion involves the branding of ‘Umar and ‘Uthman as 
usurpers they do not stop short of this folly. To support 
their claim they advance certain traditions which are unknown 
to men learned in the swzza and the law. Most of them are 
inventions (saudi‘) or come from tainted sources (matin ft 
tarigtht) ; or, if genuine, are not susceptible of their corrupt 
interpretations. These proofs are from ‘clear’ and ‘ hidden’ 
sources (jali wa khafi). Of the first ‘Who owns me as 
master has ‘Ali as his master’ is an example; of the second, 

IN TRADITION 163 

we may mention their interpretation of the events at Mecca 
when the prophet sent Abii Bakr to inform the people of the 
revelation of the si#ratu-l-barati and afterwards sent ‘Ali to 
read it. This shows, they argue, that ‘Ali took precedence of 
Abi Bakr. Such are the arguments on which they rely. 

The caliphate was converted into an imperial throne by the 
natural pressure of circumstances. In The Sahih we read, 
‘God only sends a prophet when his people can defend him.’ 
The exponent of sacred law does not care for this spirit. He 
prefers to lay stress on the Quranic injunctions to avoid pride 
and worldly display: his eyes are on the next world. Though 
he disapproves of imperial might he does not condemn it in 
its several activities, e.g. compelling respect for religion and 
securing the public weal. The first four Caliphs displayed 
a dislike towards luxury and ostentatious display of state and 
pomp. But this was because they had one and all been 
inured to the privations of a desert life. They lived on the 
meanest food and amid miserable conditions. The conditions 
prevailing in the Umayyad times made it necessary for men 
to rally to the reigning prince to save the country from the 
horrors of civil war. The later princes of this line, it must be 
confessed, gave themselves up to gross and sensual pleasures 
till the people gave the kingdom to the Abbasids. Through 
the impiety of some of this race the kingdom was taken from 
the Arabs altogether. 

Yet though the caliphate became a monarchy it retained its 
essential characteristics for a long time. The ordinances of 
religion were enforced and men kept to the right paths. It 
was in the compelling force underlying authority that the 
change was made. Whereas in the past it was religion, it 
came to be the power of party passion (‘asabiyya) and the 
sword. In the generation that followed the reign of Al Rashid 
nothing remained of the caliphate but its name, and that only 
while the racial pride (‘asabiyya) of the Arabs supported it, 
With the subjugation of the Arabs the caliphate died, and all 
authority was invested in the monarchy. Foreign monarchs 
in the East, it is true, treated the Caliphs with respect from 

164 Tue CALIPHATE 

a motive of piety, but they, claimed for themselves the titles 
and honorifics of the monarch. 

A necessary preliminary to the installation of the Caliph is 
the dac‘a or oath of allegiance tendered in the name of the 
Muslim people. He who makes the Jdaz‘a recognizes the 
rights of the Caliph over the Muslims, and undertakes to obey 
all his orders whether they are agreeable to his own interests 
or not. He places his hand in the hand of the Caliph when 
pledging his faith to confirm the undertaking, just as do 
buyers and sellers. In fact, the word daz‘a is derived from 
ba‘a, to buy or sell; hence daz‘a meant a mutual handtaking:? 
this is its meaning in ordinary and legal language, and, indeed, 
what is meant in the hadith by the daz‘atu-l-nabiyyi on the 
night of ‘Aqaba and near the tree. So of the daz‘a of the 
Caliphs and of the oath of the daz‘a. The Caliphs used to 
require an oath embodying a formal declaration of assent 
to the compact. The daz‘a now consists of a salutation 
modelled on the court of Kosroes: one must kiss the ground, 
the hand, foot, or hem of the monarch’s garment. Saz‘a has 
thus lost its earlier meaning, though it still contains the idea 
of promising obedience by a compact: the essential idea of 
joining hands has been lost, the humble posture of the subject 
being a necessary concession to court etiquette and the dignity 
of the sovereign. So general has this form of dai‘a become 
that it must be regarded as valid. 

As has been explained, the Caliph is the representative of 
the lawgiver, and acts for him in protecting religion and 
governing the world. The lawgiver’s religious function is to 
compel men to observe their religious obligations, and it is 
his duty to secure the temporal prosperity of his subjects in 
his character of temporal ruler. The religious power of 
the Caliph is exercised through peculiarly Muslim offices 
which are subordinate to him. These are connected with 
public prayer, religious decisions, civil justice, the Jihad, or 

‘ Cf. the similar act when giving a pledge in Job xvii. 3, mi hi — 
leyadhi yittaqéa‘, and Prov. xvii. 18, xxii. 26. 

a nw 

IN TRADITION 165 

war against unbelievers,) and the police—all of which are 
subordinate to the great imamate, which is the caliphate. 
The most exalted office of all is the Imamate in prayer. It is 
higher than the mk or sovereign power in its essential 
nature, for the prophet’s appointment of Abi Bakr to repre- 
sent him in prayer was taken by the Companions to carry 
with it the appointment to temporal supremacy over the 
Muslim people. Unless the latter were dependent on the 
former such an assumption would have been groundless. 

The government of the great mosques pertains to the 
Caliph, though he may refer it to the sultan, vizier, or qadi; 
so also the right of presiding at the five daily prayers, the 
Friday prayer, and those of the two great feasts and on 
eclipses and prayers for rain. The first four Caliphs and the 
Umayyads jealously guarded their privileges of presiding at 
public prayer, but when the caliphate became absorbed in 
sovereignty, and the rulers would not recognize other men as 
their equals in matters religious or temporal, they allowed 
others to replace them in presiding over public prayers. 

The Caliph should appoint to the office of mufti the most 
worthy scholar and legist, and himself exercise a proper 
control over unworthy aspirants to that office. The Qadi’s 
appointment is likewise subject to the caliphate. His office 
is to apply the decisions and principles of the sacred book 
and the suuna to the settlement of all disputes and actions 
between litigants. Originally this office was filled by the 
Caliph himself. ‘Umar first delegated it to another. The 
functions of the qadi have been enlarged so as to include the 
administration of the affairs of the insane, orphans, bankrupts, 

1 «The Mohammadan Common Law makes the fighting only 
a positive injunction where there is a general summons (that is, where 
the infidels invade a Mussulman territory, and the Zmam for the time 
being issues a general proclamation, requiring all persons to stand 
forth to fight), for in this case war becomes a positive injunction with 
respect to the whole of the inhabitants.’— Zhe Hedaya or Guide ; or, 
A Commentary on the Mussulman Laws, translated by Charles Hamilton, 
London, 1791, vol. ii, Book IX, p. 141. 

166 THk CAVIPEATE 

the testamentary dispositions of Muslims, pious benefactions, 
and soon. Formerly the qadi was charged with the righting 
of wrongs—a function which requires the strong hand of the 
magistrate to enforce its decrees. Up to Al Muhtadi the 
Caliphs exercised this function themselves, though sometimes 
they delegated it to their qadis. Sometimes too the qadis 
were made leaders of bands to carry the jihad into enemy 
territory. 

The office of chief of police is a religious function based on 
the religious law.1 His powers were more extensive than 
those of the qadi, for he had power to act to prevent crime 
and oppression. Later on the functions of these two offices 
were absorbed by the sultan whether they were confided to 
him by the Caliph or not. The duties of the police are of 
two kinds: first, to establish the guilt of suspected criminals, 
and to apply the legal penalties—mutilation or the lex talionis 
(sometimes the holder of this office is called wadz), and 
secondly those duties which pertain to the qadi in relation to 
the punishment of evil-doers, 

The office of Zzsba or local police carries with it a far- 
ranging commission. He may act in the public interest in 
putting down public abuses and offences against public safety 
or morals. 2 

The office of inspector of coinage (szkka) is also religious, 
and is dependent on the caliphate. Certain offices have 
been suppressed or have fallen into desuetude, or have been 
absorbed into the temporal administration (s@rat sultanty- 
yatan). Ofthe latter we may mention the government of the 
provinces, the vizirate, the supreme command of the army, 
and the collection and administration of the public revenues. 
Jihad has practically ceased except in a few countries; where 

* This passage from one of the great classic writers of Islim shows 
how meaningless such phrases as ‘the spiritual prerogatives’, or ‘ the 
purely religious attributes’, sound in Muslim ears. If the Chief 
Commissioner of Police is a religious (dini) office, what are ‘purely 
religious functions’, and by what word do politicians propose to 
translate ‘ spiritual’ in connexion with the Caliph’s jurisdiction ? 

IN TRADITION 167 

it survives it is for the most part dependent on the sultanate. 
Another office which has disappeared is the registry of sharifs, 
set up to establish the veracity or otherwise of those who 
claim to be descended from the prophet. 

The title Commander of the Faithful (amir ul mu’minin) 
pertains to the caliphate. It dates from the time of the first 
Caliphs. When Abi Bakr was proclaimed Caliph the Com- 
panions and the rest of the Muslims hailed him as Caliph of 
the messenger of God. ‘Umar in his turn was called ‘the 
Caliph of the Caliph of the messenger of God’. Obviously 
there was no end to such a title if it was to be indefinitely 
extended thus to each succeeding Caliph, and so it was decided 
to replace it by another title. The title amir ul mw minin was 
adapted from one used of the army leaders. In the Jahiliyya 
the prophet was called Amir of Mecca and Amir of the 
Hijaz, so that when one of the Companions hailed ‘Umar 
as amir ul miuminin the title was generally approved and 
adopted. Since then the title has been inherited by succeed- 
ing Caliphs. It is not without significance that leaders of 
rebellion against existing authority such as the Shi‘as and - 
Abbasids at first adopted the title Imam, and after they 
were secure in the government claimed the title ‘Commander 
of the Faithful’. 

The title properly was a sign that its possessors reigned 
over the Hijaz, Syria, and ‘Iraq, the native land of the Arabs; 
and though each Abbasid Caliph had a distinct name they all 
bore the title amir ul mu’minin. So also did the Fatimids of 
Africa and Egypt. The Umayyads of Spain followed their 
ancestors in not adopting titles like the Abbasids. They 
did not assume the title Commander of the Faithful because 
they could not hope to obtain possession of the caliphate, and 
because they did not hold the Hijaz, the cradle of Islam. 
But in the beginning of the fourth century when ‘Abdu-]- 
Rahman came to the throne he took the title Al Nasir li Din 
Allah with the honorific amir ul mu’ minin, being moved to do 
this by reports of the humiliations to which the Caliphs of the 
East were subjected. Cut off from all communication with 

168 Tae CATrIPH ATE 

the outside world, they were insulted and even blinded and 
murdered. His example was followed by his successors until 
ruin overtook the Arab caliphate. The Caliphs in Cairo and 
Morocco and the petty kings of Spain all suffered dishonour 
and contempt from their subjects, and with the degradation of 
the caliphate went the essential unity of Islam. 

Our next extract is from the ‘ History of the Caliphs’, 
written by Jalalu-l-Din Al Suyiti (849-911).!_ It is interesting 
to observe that he refuses even to mention the descendants of 
‘Ubaid Allah al Mahdi, who assumed the title of Caliph in 
296, on the ground that the assumption of the title was illegal 
for many reasons, of which he thinks it sufficient to mention 
that he was not of the tribe of the Quraish. Moreover, Al 
Suyiiti devotes some pages to discussing the question as to 
whether the caliphate as an office ever existed in the mind 
of the prophet at all. 

The two shaikhs, he says, have recorded eeeardine ‘Umar 
that he said when he was stabbed, ‘ Were I to name a successor 
then verily he named a successor who was greater than I (i.e. 
Abi Bakr). And were I to leave you without one, then 
verily he also hath left you so who was greater than I.’ 

The authority of Hudhail ibn Shurahbil is quoted to refute 
the claim of the Alids that Muhammad bequeathed the 
caliphate to “Ali. But the objection is raised, ‘ Why then was 
not ‘Ali the immediate successor of Muhammad rather than 
Abi Bakr?’ 

Writing of the fall of the caliphate he says: ‘Things came 
to such a pass that nothing remained of the caliphate in the 
provinces but the name, after it had been that in the time of 
the children of ‘Abdu-l-Malik b. Marwan the Khutba was 
read in the name of the Caliphs in all the regions of the 
earth, the east and the west, the right hand and the left, 
wherever the true believer had been victorious, and none in 
any one of the provinces was appointed to hold a single office 

* Tr. by. Major H. S. Jarrett, Calcutta, 1881, pp. 2 ff. (Bibliotheca 
Indica, xii, Series III). 

IN TRADITION 169 

except by order of the Caliph. Regarding the immoderate 
lengths to which things went, verily in the fifth century in 
Spain alone there were six persons who assumed the title 
Caliph.’ 

Al Suyiti’s account! of the temporary restitution of the 
caliphate in Cairo after the death of Musta‘sim at the hands 
of Hulagi illustrates the threefold qualification required of an 
aspirant to the caliphate, namely, descent from the Quraish, 
public election and homage, and temporal power. ‘He rode 
through Cairo, and subsequently certified his family descent 
through the chief Kadi Taju-l-Din b. Bint Al ‘Azz, and he 
was then acknowledged Caliph. The first who swore alle- 
giance to him was the sultan, next the chief Kadi Taju-l-Din 
. . - and lastly the nobles according to their degree. This 
occurred on the 13th Rajab (12 May, 1261). His name was 
impressed on the coinage and read in the Khutba, and he 
received the surname of his brother, and the people rejoiced. 
He rode in procession on the Friday, bearing the black mantle, 
to the mosque in the citadel. He then mounted the pulpit 
and preached a discourse in which he extolled the nobility of 
the house of ‘Abbas, blessed the Caliph and the Muslims, and 
prayed before the people. Next he proceeded to the cere- 
mony of the bestowal on the sultan of the robe of honour 
usually granted by the Caliph and the diploma of investiture. 
A pavilion was erected without the walls of Cairo, and the 
Caliph and the sultan rode to the pavilion on Monday 4th 
Sha‘ban, and there were present the nobles, kadis, and prime 
minister. The Caliph with his own hand invested the sultan 
with the dress of honour. . . .’ 

Lastly, we may cite the views of a learned and distinguished 
Indian writer of to-day on this question: * ‘ Until the rise of 
the house of ‘Abbas there was little or no difference between 
the assertors of the right of the Ahlu-l-Bait to the pontificate 
and the upholders of the right of the people to elect their own 

LOOP. ttt., po 563; 
2 The Spirit of Islam, by Ameer Ali, Syed, Calcutta, 1902, pp. 288 ff. 

2851 ¥ 

170 THE CALIPHATE 

spiritual and temporal chiefs... . The Church and State 
were linked together: the Caliph was the Imam—temporal 
chief as well as spiritual head. .The doctors of law and reli- 
gion were his servants. He presided at the convocations, and 
guided their decisions. Hence the solidarity of the Sunni 
church. . . . The question of the Imamate, or the spiritual 
headship of the Mussalman commonwealth, is henceforth the 
chief battle-ground of the two sects. The Shi‘as hold that 
the spiritual heritage bequeathed by Muhammad devolved on 
‘Ali and his descendants. They naturally repudiate the 
authority of the ¥amaat (the people) to elect a spiritual head 
who should supersede the rightful claims of the Prophet’s 
familys. 3 

According to the Sunnis the Imamate is not restricted to 
the family of Muhammad. But no one can be elected to the 
office unless he is a Quraishite.’ 

In a note the author writes: ‘There is a great difference 
of opinion, however, on this point. Ibn Khaldin, being a 
Yemenite himself, maintained that it was not necessary for 
the Imam to be a Quraishite; and many Sunni doctors have 
held the same view. The Sultans of Turkey have since the 
time of Salim I, the father of Sulaiman the Magnificent, 
assumed the title of Caliph. They base their title upon 
a renunciation of the Caliphate and Imamate in favour of 
Salim by the last Abbasid Caliph of Egypt.’ 

They also hold that the Imamate is indivisible, and that it 
is not lawful to have two Imams at one and the same time. 
As Christianity could yield obedience to but one Pope, so 
the Muslim world could yield obedience to but one lawful 
Caliph. . . . As formerly, the Ummayads, the Abbasids, and 
the Fatimids reigned contemporaneously at Grenada, Bagdad, 
and Cairo; so at the present day the sovereigns of the 
house of Kajar and Osman possess the dignity of Caliph at 
Teheran and Constantinople, and the rulers of Morocco in 
West Africa. It must be said, however, that the Sultan of 
Turkey, the custodian of the two holy cities! and the holder 

* The Sultan is no longer the de facto Guardian of the Holy Places 

a 
IN TRADITION 171 

of the insignia of the Caliphate—the banner, the sword, 
and the mantle of the Prophet—has the best claim to the 
dignity.’ 

APPENDIX B 

A TRANSLATION OF THE KITABU-L-QADAR 
FROM THE SAHIH OF AL-BUKHARI 

THE following translation of the K7ita@bu-l-Qadar will show 
the general character of the hadith literature, and illustrate 
the various matters already discussed in this volume. By the 
kind permission of the Royal Asiatic Society it is reproduced 
(with the omission of the critical and historical notes that 
accompanied it) from my article ‘Free Will and Predestination 
in Islam’ in the Fournal of the Royal Asiatic Society for 

January, 1924, pp. 42-63. 
THE BOOK OF PREDESTINATION ! 

1. Bab concerning Predestination. 

(2) Abul Walid Hisham ibn ‘Abd il Malik informed us 
(saying): Shu‘ba informed us (saying): Sulaiman al A‘mash 
told me as follows: I heard Zaid ibn Wahb on the authority 
of ‘Abd Ullah? say: The Apostle of God (may God bless and 

for H.M. King Husain, the Amir of Mecca, recovered this office when 
the Turks were driven from the Haramain. He is a Sharif of the 
Hashimite line. 

1 Kitabu’l Qadar 82. Le recueil des Traditions Mahométanes, par 
Abou Abdallah Mohammed ibn Ismail el Bokhari, publié par 
M. Ludolf Krehl, continué par Th. W. Juynboll, Leyden, 1908, 
vol. iv, p. 251. 

2 i.e. Ibn Mas‘tid. The zsxad will be omitted in future, only the 
name of the original guarantor being given. 

172 A TRANSLATION OF 

preserve him, for he is the Veracious and the Verified) told 
me as follows: Verily (each) one of you is assembled in his 
mother’s womb forty days; then he becomes a clot for a 
similar period, and then a lump of flesh for the same period. 
An angel is sent to him and given four commands with 
reference to his sustenance, the duration of his life, and he is 
to be wretched or happy. By Allah! each one? of you may 
do the works of the people of hell so that between him and it 
there lieth but a fathom or a cubit, and that which has been 
written shall overcome him, and he will do the works of the 
people of paradise and shall enter therein. And verily a man 
may do the works of the people of paradise so that between 
him and it there lieth but a fathom or a cubit, and that which 
has been written shall overcome him, and he will do the works 
of the people of hell and shall enter therein. (Variant: Adam 
[i.e. Ibn Abi Iyyads] said : ‘except a cubit.’) 

(6) Anas ibn Malik. The prophet said: God commands 
an angel concerning the womb. The angel says: Lo, Lord, a 
drop! a clot! an embryo! And when God wills to decree 
its creation the angel says: Is it to be male or female, wretched 
or happy, and what is to be its sustenance and duration of 
life, O Lord? In the mother’s womb the answer is written. 

2. Bab. The pen is dry (that wrote) according to the (fore)- 
knowledge of God, and the saying ‘According to (fore)- 
knowledge God leads him astray’ (Sur. xlv, v. 22). And 
Abi Huraira said: ‘The Prophet said to me, “ The pen is 
dry (that wrote) of what will befall thee.”’ Ibn ‘Abbas said: 
With regard to the words laka sabiguna (Sur. xxiii, v. 63) 
the meaning is that those who hasten after good deeds 
happiness has hastened unto them. 

(2) ‘Imran ibn Husain. A man said: ‘O Apostle of God, 
are those (destined) to paradise known from those (destined) 
to hell?’ ‘Yes, replied he. The man answered: ‘ Then of 
what use are deeds of any kind?’ He answered: ‘ Every one 

* The customary blessing on Muhammad will be omitted throughout 
the book. 
? Textual variant, or ‘a man’ of you. 

THE KITABU-L-QADAR 173 

does that for which he was created or that which has been 
made easy for him.’ 

3. Bab. ‘God knoweth better what they would have done.’ 

(z) Ibn ‘Abbas said: The Prophet was asked about the 
children of idolators (mushrikin). He replied: ‘God knoweth 
better what they would have done.’ 

(6) Abi Huraira: The Apostle of God was asked about the 
offspring of idolators. He replied: ‘God knoweth better 
what they would have done.’ 

(c) Abi Huraira. The Apostle of God said: ‘None is 
born but in the religion of Islam. It is his parents who make 
him a Jew or a Christian just as you breed cattle. You do 
not find maimed cattle unless you yourselves first maim them.’ 
They said: ‘O Apostle of God, have you considered the case 
of’ him who dies as a little child?’ He answered: ‘God 
knows better what they would have done.’ 

4. Bab. ‘The command of God is destiny predestined’ 
(Sur. xxxili, v. 38). 

(z) Abi Huraira. The Apostle of God said: ‘A woman 
shall not ask that her sister be divorced so that she may 
enjoy her share of conjugal rights. Let her marry, for verily 
she shall have what has been decreed for her,’ 

(6) Uséma. I was in the company of the prophet when the 
messenger of one of his daughters came—Sa‘d and Ubay ibn 
Ka‘b and Mu‘adh were with him at the time—to report that 
her son was at the point of death. He sent word to her: 
‘To God belongeth what He taketh and to God belongeth 
what He giveth. Every one (departeth) at the appointed time. 
Let her therefore be patient under bereavement and earn the 
reward of patience.’ 

(c) Sa‘idu-] Khudri. The Prophet said: Every living soul 
whose coming forth into the world has been written by God 
must come into being. 

(dz) Hudhaifa. The prophet preached us a sermon in which 
he spoke of everything that will happen until the hour of the 
resurrection. He that knoweth it knoweth it; and he that is 
ignorant of it is ignorant thereof. If I see a thing which I have 

174 A TRANSLATION OF 

forgotten I shall recognize it just as a man knows the face of 
an absent acquaintance and recognizes him when he sees him. 

(e) ‘Ali, We were sitting with the prophet who had a stick 
with which he was writing on the ground. He said: ‘There 
is not one of you whose resting place in hell or paradise has 
not been written. Whereupon one of the people said: 
‘Then may we not (abandoning effort) trust in (our destiny), 
O Apostle of God?’ He replied: ‘No! Do (good) works 
for everything has been made easy.’? Then he read (Sur. xcii, 
v. 5): ‘He that giveth to the needy and feareth,’ &c. 

5. Bab. ‘ Works (are to be judged) by their results.’ 

(2) Abi Huraira said: We were present with the Apostle 
of God at Khaibar when he said of one of those who were with 
him and professed Islam: ‘This fellow is one of the people 
of hell.’ When battle was joined the man fought with the 
utmost bravery, insomuch that he was covered with wounds 
and disabled. One of the Companions of the prophet came 
up and said: ‘ O Apostle of God, do you see that the man you 
said was one of the people of hell has fought with the utmost 
bravery in the way of God and is covered with wounds.’ 
The Prophet replied: ‘Nevertheless, he is one of the people 
of hell.’ And while some of the Muslims were on the point of 
doubting, lo the man, in anguish from his wounds, put forth 
his hand to his quiver, plucked out an arrow, and pierced his 
throat therewith. Some of the Muslims then ran to the 
Apostle of God and said: ‘O Apostle of God, God has con- 
firmed thy saying. So-and-so has pierced his throat and 
killed himself’ The Apostle of God said: ‘O Bilal, rise and 
proclaim: Only believers shall enter paradise. Verily God 
strengtheneth this religion with an impious man.’ 

(6) Sahl. The prophet looked at a man who did most 
service to the Muslims on a raid he made in company with 
the prophet, and said: ‘ He who would see one of the people 
of hell let him look at this fellow.’ So one of the people 
followed him—now he was the most violent of men in con- 
tending with the idolators—until he was wounded, when he 

1 Or prepared. See Al-NMthaya in loc. 

THE KITABU-L-OQADAR 175 

proceeded to hasten his death by putting his sword point to 
his breast so that it came out between his shoulders. The 
man quickly went to the prophet and said: ‘I bear witness 
that thou art the Apostle of God!’ He said: ‘But why?’ 
The man replied: ‘Thou saidst of So-and-so, ‘‘ He who would 
see one of the people of hell let him look at this fellow.” 
Now he was one who did the Muslims most service, and thou 
knewest that he would not die thus. And when he was 
wounded he hastened his death by suicide.’ Thereupon the 
prophet said: ‘Verily the slave may do the works of the 
people of hell when he is really one of the people of paradise. 
And he may do the works of the people of paradise when he 
is really one of the people of hell. Actions are to be judged 
by their results.’ 

6. Bab. A vow delivers a slave to fate. 

(2) Ibn ‘Umar. The prophet forbade vows, saying: ‘ Verily 
they cannot frustrate anything though something is extracted 
from the avaricious thereby.’ 

(4) Abt Huraira. A vow brings nothing to a son of man 
that has not been decreed for him. Nevertheless, a vow does 
precipitate a man towards (his) destiny, and it has been 
decreed that something shall be extracted from the avaricious 
thereby. 

+, Bab. There is no power and no might save in God. 

(2) Abi Misa. We were raiding with the Apostle of God, 
and whenever we climbed or ascended a height or went down 
into a valley we lifted up our voices and shouted, ‘ Allah 
Akbar!’ The Apostle of God approached us and said: 
‘Restrain yourselves, O men. For ye do not call to one who 
is deaf or absent, but ye call to one who hears and sees.’ 
Then he said: ‘O ‘Abd Allah ibn Qais, I will teach thee 
a saying which is one of the treasures of paradise, ‘“‘ There is 
no power and no might save in God.”’ 

8. Bab. The Protected is he whom God protects (‘asama) 
(in Sur. xi, v. 45, the word ‘asima is the equivalent of mani‘a). 
Mujahid said: saddan (in Sur. xxxvi, v. 8, ‘we have placed 
before and behind them an obstacle’ means) a barrier against 

176 A TRANSLATION OF 

the truth. They repeatedly fall into error. The word dassaha 
(Sur. xci, v. 10, in ‘Miserable is he who has corrupted it’ 
[i.e. the soul] means) aghwaha misled. 

(a) Sa‘idu-1 Khudri. Every one who is appointed Caliph 
has two kinds of intimates: one advises him to do good and 
incites him thereto; the other suggests and incites to evil. 
The protected is he whom God protects. 

g. Bab. It is a necessary lot of (the people) of a city which 
we have destroyed that they shall not return (Sur. xxi, v. 95). 
None of thy people will believe save those who have already 
believed (Sur. xi, v. 38). ‘And they will beget only impious 
unbelievers’ (Sur. 1xxi, v. 28). 

(2) Ibn ‘Abbas. The word hirm in Abyssinian means 
wajaba. 

(6) Ibn ‘Abbas, Nothing seems to me more insane than 
Abi Huraira’s report that the Prophet said: ‘God has 
written every man’s portion in adultery. It must certainly 
befall. Now it is adultery of the eye to gaze; it is adultery 
of the tongue to utter (the thought thus engendered); the 
appetite longs and desires and the body consents or denies.’ 
(Here follows the isnadic authority for the hadith of Abi 
Huraira to which Ibn ‘Abbas takes exception.) 

10, Bab. We have made the vision that we showed thee 
a cause of dissension for men (Sur. xvii, v. 62). 

(2) Ibn ‘Abbas. This is the vision of the eye which the 
Apostle of God was shown when he was conducted on the 
night journey to the temple of Jerusalem. He said: ‘The 
tree which is cursed in the Quran’ is the tree of Al Zaqqiim. 

11. Bab. Adam and Moses argued before God (to Him 
belong might and majesty). 

(2) Abi Huraira. The Prophet said: ‘Adam and Moses 
were arguing, and Moses said : “O Adam, thou art our father, 
Thou hast brought loss upon us and caused us to be excluded 
from paradise.” He replied: “O Moses, God chose thee by 
His word and wrote for thee with His hand. Do you blame 
me for a matter which God decreed concerning me forty 
years before He created me?” And Adam confuted Moses 

THE KITABU-L-QADAR 177 

three times.’ (The same tradition is reported with a change 
of two names in the intermediaries between Abi Huraira and 
the compiler.) 

12. Bab. None can withhold what God giveth. 

(2) Warrad, the client of Al Mughira ibn Shu‘ba. Mu‘awiya 
wrote to Al Mughira as follows: ‘Write for me an account of 
what you heard the prophet say at the end of the prescribed 
prayer. Al Mughira then dictated to me: ‘I heard the 
prophet say at the end of the prescribed prayer, “ There is no 
God save God alone; he is without associate. O God, there 
is none that withholdest what Thou givest and none that 
giveth what Thou withhoildest, and good fortune will not profit 
the fortunate in place of Thee.”’ Ibn Juraij said ‘Abda told 
him that Warrad told him of this. ‘Then’, said he, ‘I after- 
wards went on a mission to Mu‘awiya and heard him laying 
commands on men in accordance with these words.’ 

13. Bab. He that taketh refuge in God from the misery 
that overtaketh him and from the evil of fate. And God’s 
Word: ‘Say: I take refuge in the Lord of the Dawn from 
the evil He hath created’ (Sur. 113). 

(a) Abi Huraira. The prophet said: ‘Take refuge in God 
from grievous adversity, from misery that overtaketh, from 
evil fate, and from the reviling of enemies.’ 

14. Bab. (God) intervenes between a man and his heart 
(Sur. viii, v. 24). 

(a) ‘Abd Ullah. The prophet used often to take an oath 
‘No, by the Reverser of hearts!’ 

(4) Ibn ‘Umar. The prophet said to Ibn Sayyad: ‘I have 
a riddle to ask of thee.’ He replied: ‘Smoke.’ The prophet 
said: ‘Go away, for thou shalt not exceed thy measure 
(gadr)” ‘Umar said: ‘Give me permission to strike off his 
head!’ The prophet replied: ‘Let him alone. If it is he 
(the Dajjal) you cannot do it, and if it is not he then you will 
gain nothing by killing him.’ 

15. Bab. Say ‘Nought will befall us save what God has 
written for us’ (‘written’ here means) ‘decreed’ (Sur. ix, 
v. 51). Mujahid said: (In Sur. xxxvii, v. 162, the word) 

2851 Z 

178 THe KITABU-L-QADAR 

bifatinin means bimudillin (ye are not able to) seduce means 
‘lead astray’, save those of whom God has written that they 
shall burn in Gehenna. ‘He decreeth and guideth’ (Sur. 
Ixxxvii, v. 3) means ‘He decreeth misery and happiness and 
He guideth the sheep to their pastures’. 

(z) ‘Aisha said that she asked the Apostle of God about the 
plague. He replied: ‘It is a punishment which God sends 
against whom He wills. And God makes it a mercy to 
believers. There is not a servant in a plague-stricken country 
who remains therein without removing thence in patient belief, 
knowing that nought will befall him save what God has written 
for him, but receives the reward of a martyr.’ 

16. Bab. We should not be guided aright were it not that 
God guideth us (Sur. vii, v. 41). Had God guided me, verily 
I had been of the godly (Sur. xxxix, v. 58). 

(2) Al Bara ibn ‘Azib. I saw the prophet on the ‘day of 
the Trench’ helping us to remove the earth, saying the while : 

‘If God were not our Guide, then we should stray 

From His straight paths and should not fast nor pray. 
Then keep us strong and calm in danger’s hour; 
Stablish our feet by Thy almighty power. 

The idolators have wrong’d us, we sought peace, 

But they, rebelling, fight and will not cease.’ 

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WORKS CITED 

Ameer Ali. Zhe Spirit of Islam, Calcutta, 1902. 

Arnold, Sir T.W. Zhe Preaching of Islam, London, 1913. 

Asin et Palacios, Michael. Zogia e¢ Agrapha domini Jesu apud Mos- 
lemicos scriptores, asceticos praesertim, usttata . . . Patrologia 
Orientalis, Tome xiii, Fasc. 3, Paris (n. d.). 

—— La Escatologia Musulmana en la Divina Comedia, Madrid, 
191g. 

Abt Daiid. Suman, Cairo, 1280. 

Ibnu-l-Athir. Véhaya, Cairo, 1311. 2 vols. 

‘Ala-al-Din Al Muttaqi. Aangu-/-Ummal, Haidarabad, 1894. 

Al Bukhari. Le Recuerl des traditions mahométanes, ed. L. Krehl and 
T. Juynboll, Leyden, 1908. ° 

Burton, Sir R. F. Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah 
and Meccah. 2 vols., London, 1915-19. 

Bevan, E. Jerusalem under the High Priests, Cambridge, 1910. 

Caetani, Prince L. Avnalz dell’ Islam, Milan, 1905. 

Cheragh Ali. A Critical Exposttion of the Popular Jihad, Calcutta, 

1888. 

The Proposed Political... Reforms in the Ottoman Empire and 
other Muhammadan States. 

Doughty, G. Arabia Deserta, Cambridge, 1923. 

Driver, S. R. A Critical... Commentary on Deuteronomy, Edinburgh, 
1902. 

Goldziher, I. Muhammadanische Studien, Halle, 1889. 

—— Vorlesungen iiber den Islam, Heidelberg, 1910. 

Guillaume, A. Predestination and Free Will in Islam, /RAS, Jan., 
1924. 

Hamilton, Charles. Zhe Hedaya, or A Commentary on the Mussulman 
Laws, London, 1791. 

Houdas, O. et Marcais, W. Les Traditions islamiques traduites par... 
4 vols. Paris, 1903-14. 

Ibn Hanbal. JZusnad, Cairo, 1890. 

Jarrett, H.S. History of the Caliphs (Bibliotheca Indica, xii, Series III), 
Calcutta, 1881. 

180 BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WORKS CITED 

JASB. Journal of the Asiatic Soctety of Bengal. 

JAOS. Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

JA. Journal Asiatique. 

JRAS. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

Ibn Khaldun. M@ugaddima, Beyrout. 

Al Kindi. 7sa/a, London, 1880. 

Lane, E.W. Zhe Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians, 
London, 1917. 

—— Arabian Society in the Middle Ages, London, 1883. 

Lammens, H. Evudes sur le regne du calife Omayade Moawia I”, 
Beyrout, 1906. 

Al Mas‘idi. Les Pradries d’Or, texte et traduction, par S. Barbier de 
Meynard. g vols. Paris, 1861-77. 

Macdonald, D. B. Development of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence, 
and Conshttutional Theory, London, 1903. 

Ibn Maja. Sunan, Delhi, 1282. 

Margoliouth,D.S. The arly Development of Muhammadanism, 
London, 1914. 

—— Muhammad and the Rise of Islam, London, 1905. 

Muir, Sir W. Life of Muhammad, revised by T. H. Weir, Edinburgh, 
Igt2. ’ 

—— Annals of the Early Caliphaie, London, 1883. 

Nicholson, R. A. A Lzverary History of the Arabs, London, 1904. 

Noldeke, T.-Schwally. Geschichte des Qorans, Leipzig, 1919. 

Ibn Qutaiba. Mukhtalifu-l-hadtth, Cairo, 1317. 

Al Qastallani. Jrshadu-l-Sari, Bulag, 1305. 10 vols. 

Abu Qurra. Mujadala, MS. arabe, No. 70, Bibliothéque Nationale. 

Rodwell, M. Zhe Quran, London, 1861. 

Al Suyiti. Za’ rikhu-i-Khulafa, Cairo, 1305. 

Sprenger, A. Das Leben und die Lehre des Mohammad. 3 vols. 
Berlin, 1861-5. 

—— Dictionary of Technical Terms, Calcutta, 1862. 

Ibn Tabataba. Ad Fakhri, Cairo, 1280. 

Taylor, C.W. Sayings of the Jewish Fathers, Cambridge, 1897. 

Taimud Babli. Vilna. 

Wiistenfeld. Wafayatu-l-A‘yan of Ibn Khallikan. 

Waliu-l-Din Abt ‘Abd Allah. Mishkatu-l-Masabif,, Bombay, 1880. 

Zwemer, S.M. Lhe Influence of Animism on Islam, London, 1920. 

ZDMG. Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlindischen Gesellschaft. 

A GLOSSARY OF THE MORE COMMON 
PECHINICAL -TERMS*+USED: INTHE 
HADITH LITERATURE 

‘aziz. Precious. An authentic tradition coming from two Companions, 

daif. Not fulfilling the required conditions. 

Sard. See gharid. 

gharib, Authentic, but resting on the authority of only one 
Companion. 

hasan, Of fair authority; with a slight fault. 

ymalz. Referring to many things. 

mahfiz. One of two suspicious traditions which has-a slight advantage 
over its rival. 

mangil, Handed down by tradition. 

mansiukh. Abrogated. 

magbil. Recetved generally; fulfilling all conditions. 

maqilib. Known to have come from a person other than the soz-dzsant 
reporter. 

magtii. An tsnad which is interrupted or cud off. 

mardud. A tradition from a doubtful source which contradicts a 
tradition of good standing. 

marfi. Record of a word or deed of the prophet reported by the 
Companion who heard or saw it. 

marif. Weak, yet known because it is confirmed by another. 

mashhir. A tradition vouched for by more than two Companions. 

maudi. False. 

mauguf, An isnad going back to the Companions, but s/opping short 
of the prophet. 

mu‘allal. An isnad or text with a hidden fault. 

mu‘allag. Suspended, i.e. without the name of the Companion. 

mubham. Coming from one of whom one knows nothing but the 
name. 

mu‘dal. An isnad from which a name has disappeared. 

mudallas. A tradition falsely ascribed to an early authority. 

mudraj. A gloss or observation inserted by one of the first reporters 
of the tradition. 

mudtarab, A tradition in which a word has become mzsplaced, added, 
or suppressed, or suffered any kind of derangement. 

mukhtalif, Two traditions which are in apparent contradiction, but 
which can be reconciled. 

munkar. A tradition of weak authority contradicted by a weaker one. 

182 GLOSSARY 

mungata. An zsnad from which a name has disappeared. 

mursal. A text without zsmdd, or one with an incomplete zswdd, or 
without the name of the Follower. 

musahhaf. An isndd in which a name is badly written; or, a text in 
which a word is badly written. 

musalsal. With a chazn of authorities reaching back to the prophet. 

mushkal. Of doubtful authority. 

musnad, A tradition whose zsvd@d goes back to the prophet. A col- 
lection of such supported traditions. 

mustafid. See mashhiur. 

mutabe’. A tradition similar in import to another one going back 
to the same authority. 

mutawatir. Reported by numerous authorities. 

mutgin. Accurate reporter, 

muttafag ‘alatht. Received by Bukhari and Muslim. 

muttasal. A tradition with an uninterrupted zsxad. 

nasikh, Abrogating. 

raw. One who reports a tradition. 

sahih. Genuine; fulfilling all conditions. 

shadhdh. Exceptional. A tradition of good authority yet in conflict 
with another similarly attested. 

shihid. A tradition from a Companion Jdearing witness to or con- 
firming one from another Companion. 

tarig. The rou/e, or reporters, by which the tradition has come. 

thiga. ‘Trustworthy reporter. 

ADDENDA 

p. 23. The earliest extant musuad is that of Abi: Daiid Sulaiman al- 
TayAlisi (133-203). His authorities were Al-Thauri, Shu‘ba, Hisham 
and others. It is recorded by one of his contemporaries, Muhammad b. 
Minhal al-Darir, that he proved him guilty of falsely propagating tradi- 
tions in the name of Ibn ‘Aun. Al-Tayédlisi’s most celebrated pupil was 
Ahmad b. Hanbal. This note is based on al-Sam‘ani, Kztabu-l-Ansad, 
(Gibb facsimile) 1913, p. 374 w/¢., and I owe the reference to Dr. Nicholson. 

p. 68, 1. 17. ‘spread their wings over’ éada‘u ajnihataha li-talibi-l-‘ilm, 
see Vzhaya, vol. I, p. 182, under jamah. I prefer this, the last of many 
explanations offered by the commentators. An abridged form of this 
hadith will be found on p. 4 of Derenbourg’s edition of A/-Fakhri. 
M. Amar (Histocre des dynasties musulmanes, Paris, 1910, p. 3) renders : 
‘the angels lower their wings to carry the seeker after knowledge’; this, 
I suppose, is implied by Ibnu-l-Athir when he explains: ‘wita’an lahu 
idha masha.’ 

INDEX 

‘Abdu-l-Malik, 47. 

Abdu-l-Malik b. Juraij, 19. 

Abi Bakr, 18, 37, 40, 64. 

Aba Daud, 14, 33, 34, 35, 49, 88, 

gl. 

Abt Dharr, 30. 

Abii Hanifa, 18, 22. 

Abi Huraira, 10, 15, 16. 

Abt Yusuf, 18. 

Ahmad b. Hanbal, 23, 33-4, 51-2, 
62, 82. 

‘Alau-l-Din b. Muttaqj, 5. 

‘All, 64, 79. 

Ameer Ali, Rt. Hon., 61, 159, 169 f. 

Antichrist, 90. 

Arnold, Sir T. W., 7. 

Asin, Prof., 146, 158. 

Ibn ‘Aun, 17, 50. 

al-Baghawi, Muhammad, 5. 

al-Bazzar, go. 

al-Baihaqi, 93 2. 

Bevan, E., 126 2. 

Brockelmann, C., 30, 35. 

al-Bukhari, 10, 18, 24, 26-33, 43, 
50, 55, 171. 

burda, 57. 

Burton, Sir R., 115 7., 127 2. 

Caliphate, 159 f. 
Cheragh Ali, 76 ., 95. 
Christian influence, 132 f. 

Dajjal, go f. 
al-Daraqutni, 75 ., 93. 
al-Darimi, 35, 43 2. 
Dhu-l-Rumma, 16. 
Doughty, C., 118 . 
Driver, S. R., 53 7. 

Eschatology, 157 f. 
al-Fakhri, 62 7., 114 7. 
al-Ghazali, 147. 

Goeje, M. de, 40 2. 

Goldziher, I., 5, 43, 59 #, 71 %%, 
82 7., 96, 140, 147 %. 

Hadith, derivation of, I0 ; 
writing of, 15 f.; on ethics, 99; 
on trade, lol ; on divorce, 102; 
on courtesy, 103; on slavery, 
105 ; on animals, 106; on reta- 
liation, 107; on theft, 110; on 
jihad, 110; ‘on oaths and vows, 
113; on folklore and animism, 
115; on snakes, 116; on jinn, 
1173 on spells, 119; on divina- 
tion, 120; on women, 124; on 
customs, 126; on aspects of 
Muhammad, 150. 

haggada, 70 #., 81, 100. 

al-Hajjaj, 42. 

al-Hakim, 92. 

Hamilton, C., 165 7. 

hasan traditions, 88. 

Houdas, M., 27, 31 2., 78 #., 121 
M., 122 H. 

Ijaza, 22, 36. 
ijma’, 75, 80, 93. 

Jarrett, H. S., 1638. 

Jesus Christ, 72 f., 90, 135 2. 
Jewish influence, 81, 118, 137. 
al-Jurjani, 86. 

Juynboll, T. W., 171 2. 

Kanzu-l-‘Ummal, 5, 98, 158. 

Ibn Khaldin, 81, 89, 93, 159. 

Ibn Khallikan, 28 z., 29. 

al-Kindi, 133. 

Krell W.5530, 43) 70m 591 7209070) they 
I7I. 

Lammens, H., 11 2., 38. 
Lane, E. W., 51 #., 123 #., 128 #. 

Macdonald, D. B., 71 2. 

al-Mahdi, 89 f. 

Ibn Maja, 33 f., 48, 114. 

Malik b. Anas, 11, 18-22, 4o. 

al-Ma’min, 52, 62. 

Margoliouth, D. S., 7, 122., 21 #., 
ZA OOH, V217., 122'72., 124\72., 

145. 

184 

INDEX 

al-Mas‘idi, 74 7. 

Matthews, A. N., 98 7. 

Miracles, 135 f. 

Mishkatu-l-Masabih, 45 7., 71 7%, 
75 2%.) 99- 

Muawiya I, 38, 39, 47, 51, 115. 

Mudawwanat, 21. 

Muhammad b. Ya‘qib al Kulini, 
63. 

Muir, Sir W., 13, 19, 34, 50 7., 76%., 
79 2. 115 #. 

Munawala, 22, 36. 

Murjiites, 27, 28, 44, 45. 

Musannafat, 25-7, 31. 

Muslim b. al-Hajjaj, 31, 84, 93. 

musnad, 23, 25-6. 

Muwatta, 19, 20, 22, 29, 71. 

al-Nasai, 33-5. 

al-Nawawi, 94. 

Nicholson, R. A., 77, 80. 
Nihdya, 119 7., 121 #., 124 7. 
Noldeke, T., 64 2. 

Parables, 140 f. 
Pirke Aboth, 99 2. 

Qadar, 171 f. 
al-Qastallani, 26, 30. 
Qussas, 82. 

Ibn Qutaiba, 72 f., 77. 

Rai, 66, 69. 
ibn Sa‘d, 143. 

Sahih (of Bukhari), 26-9, 93. 
Sahih (of Muslim), 31. 

Sa‘id b. Abi ‘Ariba, 19. 
Salisbury, E. E., 88 z. 
al-Shafil, 18, 43, 72. 

Shahr b. Haushab, 50. 
al-Shahrastani, 116 2., 122 7. 
al-Shaibani, 18, 19, 22, 43, 71. 
Shi‘as, 24, 63- 

Ibn Shihab al Zuhri, 19. 
Shu‘tbiyya, 70. 

Sprenger, A., 15, 22 7., 50 #., 84 7. 
al-Suhaili, go. 

al-Suyuti, 60-1, 68, 123 7., 168. 
Syrian hadith, 48. 

al-Tabari, 47. 

Talabu-l-‘Ilm, 12, 24, 66, 68. 

Talmid, 51 ., 54, 70, 118 7., 129 7. 

Tarjama, 26 f., 59. 

al-Tayalisi, 50 7. 

al-Tirmidhi, 33 f., 48, 50 7., 61 7., 
QI, 127 7. 

“Uthman, 48, 64, 79 
“Umar b. “Abd-al-Aziz, 18, 19,41, 46. 
Umayyads, 18, 20, 24, 37, 40, 49. 

Waliu-l-Din, 5. 
Weir, T. H., 14. 
Wellhausen, J., 51 7. 
Wensinck, A. J., 6. 

Yahya b. Yahya al~-Masmiudi, 22. 
al-Yunini, Muhammad, 30. 

al-Zuhri, 48, 50, 78, 89. 
Zwemer, S. M., 115 7. 

Printed in England at the Oxford University Press