The History of Civilization in Europe (Francois Guizot (William Hazlitt, trans.), 1846)
==========================================================
The classic liberal history of European civilization; the Sorbonne lectures that made Guizot famous. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (generalhistoryof03guiz).

Da ae He cetera para et nae Hehe
in ae tea Hil tat yeas sina
ear ea: a Woes ai a sab ian way i may ‘aie rs i Sita my beater
vet che RS ae ME 4 ‘isnt Aye Mie a) i fi a epaie nabeaa bane

7 sie fiat

Syria at!


iH i rs ioe of “aie
(af iii
my Hane uh


ua ia
i ata Nai
bebe bi
ny ed s a i
ti i, A We
sdb Ht

igs tk o Hi Hi rH
ibis tf hits
ste mite WA Wey dea da


Hans
Ot rH at tie ae
it civ i i te
i aif i
ee hy Die
i
be ails
te


Ay


dh

rath i

ai cy tree
enti


i ‘it
i is


Pe


hy Ae


es


Sapa ee!


i
tipedowudhe
as ei iin
| it vt )


oi.

fr

eee ahasiy
rai Cee bray


aH
saath He


=
wet


ittne ae ae ana vt
pi i Maya pte


=e


See


—t=


f2ehr : rots ——
sasssserse= = ates


reas


tie
4) aide j
Pat ‘|


file
iH rdell al
ji io


tae i ‘ ie fa ed
ie jhe Melba th
al eal ue Unt ae


er i 4 ¢ thie iene iy
abet aa a ay eat ied bait en iti
im jabs teats etal Faas t Ley rus Helahige
Satellite hehe, Ae tas fbr eed
g (heey es Mt Pit ries aaeial
ra fa baa We
Spies
anes


at yy iit
rie Deena ht ris ia
{she '

Aa i

4


Mi) LEE aH


athe}


Grom fhe Zibrarp of
(professor Wiffiam BHenrp Green


Bequeathed Bp Bim fo
tBe Library of


(Princeton Theofogicaf Seminary
CB 1 saad (Le eo pve
Guizot, 1787-1874.
General history of
Civilization in Europe


ws


RY OF CIVILIZATION,
— > a
as FROM THE be


, "fo
) *


PRENCH REVOLUTION. |


Ne A
-


TRANSLATED BY WILLIAM HAZLITT.


oS


2 , VOLUME TIL = "


“3 * oad
NEW YORK: Fd
& CO., 200 BROADWAY.
| PHILADELPHIA: °\. ee
GEO, S. APPLETON, 148 CHESNUT STREET.
M DCCE XLVE.


~.
vx ;
DAP PLE T


¥


a ne e
‘id +S h ; » 4 at
7 ~ ‘i:

* — |


https://archive.org/details/generalhistoryof 3guiz.


Ld &


CONTENTS.


TWENTY-FIRST LECTURE.


Object of the lecture—Of capitularies in general—Review of the capitula-
ries of the Carlovingian Frank kings—Of the two forms under which
the capitularies have descended to us—Scattered capitularies—Collection
of Angesise and of the deacon Benedict—Of the edition of the capitula-
ries by Baluze—Erroneous idea generally entertained as to capitularies
—They are not invariably laws—Great variety in these acts—Attempt
at classification—T able of contents of the capitularies of Charlemagne:
1. Moral legislation—2. Political legislation—3. Penal legislation—4.
Civil legislation—5. Religious legislation—6. Canonical legislation—7.
Domestic legislation—8. Incidental legislation—True character of the
CI Fe on kn eee Sa ma ee ea Be


TWENTY-SECOND LECTURE.


Of intellectual decay in Frankish Gaul, from the fifth to the eighth cen-
tury—Of its causes—It ceases under the reign of Charlemagne—Diffi-
culty of describing the state of the human mind at this epoch—Alcuin
is its most complete and faithful representative—Life of Alcuin—His la-
bors for the restoration of manuscripts-—For the restoration of schools—
His teaching in the school of the palace—His relations with Charle-
magne—His conduct as abbot of Saint Martin of 'Tours—His works:
1. Theological; 2. Philosophical and literary ; 3. Historical; 4. Poeti-
cal—His general character . i bthet SMR ah p- 18


”
TWENTY-THIRD LECTURE.


Classification of celebrated men of the age of Charlemagne: 1. Leidrade,
archbishop of Lyons—His letter to Charlemagne upon what he has done
in his diocese—2. Theodulph, archbishop of Orleans—His measures for
the instruction of the people—His poem entitled Exhortation to Judges
—3. Smaragde, abbot of Saint Michael—His treatise of morality for
kings, entitled Via Regia—4. Eginhard—His alleged marriage with a


(oD)


CONTENTS.


daughter of Charlemagne—Their relations—Of what happened after
the death of this prince—His letters—His Life of Charlemagne—Re-
capitulation Rise rhe: RRMA ce See SOBRE r Uy p- 55


va
TWENTY-FOURTH LECTURE.


S


The progress and causes of the dismemberment of the empire of Charle-
magne—l. State of this empire in 843, after the treaty of Verdun—
Inferior state of the kingdom of France at this epoch—2. In 888, after
the death of Charles le Gros—Seven kingdoms—Definitive establish-
ment of the inheritance of fiefs in France—Twenty-nine small states,
or important fiefs, founded at the end of the ninth century—3. In 987,
at the fall of the Carlovingians—Four kingdoms—In France, fifty-five
important fiefs— Explanation of this dismemberment—Their insufficiency
—One only, the diversity of races, developed by M. Thierry, is proba-
ble, but incomplete—The true cause is the impossibility of a great state
at that epoch, and the progressive rise of the local societies which form-
ed the feudal confederation . . . . . . . Me A sy


TWENTY-FIFTH LECTURE.


History of legislation from the death of Charlemagne to the accession of
Hugh Capet—Necessity of precisely determining the general character-
istics of the legislation at the two terms of this epoch, in order to under-
stand properly its progress during its course—l. State of the legislation
under Charlemagne—It is personal, and varies according to races—The
church and the imperial power give it some unity—2. State of the legis-
lation after Hugh Capet—It is territorial; local customs have replaced
national laws—All central legislative power has disappeared—3. History
of legislation in Frankish Gaul between these two terms—Analytical
tables of the capitularies of Louis le Débonnaire, Charles le Chauve,
Louis le Begue, Carloman, Eudes, and Charles le Simple—Comparison
of these tables according to the figures only—-Comparison of the provi-
sions of the capitularies—General results of this inquiry . . . p.93


Bou


TWENTY-SIXTH LECTURE.


Object of the lecture—Internal history of the Gallo-Frankish church, from
the middle of the 8th century to the end of the 10th—Anarchy which
pervaded it in the first half of the 8th century—Twofold principle of
reform—The reformation is actually undertaken by the first Carlovin-
gians: 1. By the civil power; 2. By the ecclesiastical power—Special
reforms—Order of Canons—Its origin and progress—Reformation of the
monastic orders by Saint Benedict d’Aniane—They change character—
Preponderance of the temporal power in the Gallo-Frankish church at
this epoch—Proofs—Still the church progresses towards its future pre-
ponderance—But it is not to the profit of its own government, of the
bishops of France, that this progress istotun . . . . . . p.109


CONTENTS. 9


TWENTY-SEVENTH LECTURE.


History of papacy—Peculiar situation of the city of Rome—Relations of
the popes about the middle of the eighth century, with the Italian, Span-
ish, Anglo-Saxon, Gallo-F rankish, and Germanic churches—Their al-
liance with the early Carlovingians—Advantages which they drew
from it—Donation of Pepin and of Charlemagne—Sovereignty of the
Carlovingian emperors over the popes—Uncertainty of the ideas, and
incoherency of the facts concerning the rights of papacy—It increas-
es more and more in minds—It apparently acquires a legal title—False
decretals--Nicholas I—His character—Aflair of the marriage of ‘Lo-
thaire and of Teutberge—Affair of Rhotarde, bishop of Soissons—Tri-
umph of papacy: 1. Over temporal sovereigns ; 2. Over national churches
—JIts decided preponderance in the.west . - + + + + + + PB 127


TWENTY-EIGHTH LECTURE.


Of the intellectual condition of Frankish Gaul, from the death of Charle-
magne to the accession of Hugh Capet—Sketch of the celebrated men
of this period—The theological mind—The philosophical mind—Hinc-
mar and John Erigena are respectively their representatives—Life of
Hincmar—His activity and influence as archbishop of Rheims—1. Con-
cerning his relations with kings and_popes—2. Concerning his admin-
istration in the interior of the Gallo-Frankish church and of his diocese
—-3. Concerning his disputes and theological works—Origin of the the-
ology of the middle ages—Quarrel between Hincmar and the monk
Gottschalk upon predestination—Numerous writings upon this subject
—Councils of Kiersy, Valence, and Langres—Recapitulation . p.144


TWENTY-NINTH LECTURE.


Object of the lecture—Of the philosophical spirit in the 9th century—
Scotus or Erigena—His country—Date of his birth—Tradition respect-
ing his travels in Greece—He settles in France at the court of Charles
le Chauve—Of the School of the Palace under Charles—Ancient philo-
sophy studied there--Encouragement of Scotus Erigena—His learn-
ing—Relations of Christianity with the Neoplatonism of Alexandria—
Their struggle—Attempt at Amalgamation—History and pretended
works of Dionysius the Areopagite-—-Fundamental differences of the two
doctrines: 1, in the point of departure and the method ; 2, in the bases
of the questions—These differences occur between Scotus Erigena and
the Christian theologians of the 9th century—Examination of his works:
1, De Predestinatione: 2, De Divisione Nature—His celebrity and his
Meat —Recapiitlation cote e oe a eee ee ay, Pe LOB


-  . THIRTIETH LECTURE.


General summary of the course—Extent and variety of subjects—The his-
tory of civilization, its price—It is the result of all partial histories—Uni-
*


10 CONTENTS.


ty and variety of the existence of a people—Three essential elements
in French civilization, Greco-Roman antiquity, Christianity, Germany
—1l. Of the Roman element, from the 5th to the 10th century—Under
a social point of view—Under an intellectual point of view—2. Of the
Christian element, from the 5th to the 10th century—Under a social
point of view—Under an intellectual point of view—3. Of the German-
ic element, from the 5th to the 10th century——Under a social point of
view— Under an intellectual point of view—Two principal facts charac-
terize this epoch: 1. The prolongation, more or less apparent, but every-
where real, of Roman society and its influence—2. The disorderly and
indeterminate fermentation of the different elements of modern civili-
marion=—-Conclusion if 4.) Aiea Ys. oo ted Re


ILLUSTRATIONS AND HISTORICAL TABLES


I. Table of the organization of the court, and of the central govern-
ment of the Roman empire at the commencement of the fifth


century . + 2, paws
II. Table of the hierarchy ‘of ranks and titles i in Roman society at
the same epoch . . - 209


III. Narrative of the embassy sent in 449 by Theodosius the Younger,
emperor of the east, to Attila, established on the banks of the


Danube . . . 211
IV. Chronological table of the principal events of the political history

of Gaul, from the fifth to the tenth century . . . 230
V. Chronological table of the principal events in the ecclesiastical

history of Gaul, from the fifth to the tenth century . . . 233
VI. Chronological table of the principal events of the literary history

of Gaul, from the fifth to the tenth century . . . 237


VII. Table of the councils and canonical legislation of Gaul, from
foe tith to tie tenth century ..'2.) ese.» cs ius oe cha ue st «. 240


SECOND COURSE,


LECTURE THE FIRST.


Object of the course—Elements of national unity—They exist and begin
to be developed in France towards the end of the 10th century—Thence
dates French civilization—The feudal period will be the subject of this
course—It includes the 11th, 12th, and 13th centuries, from Hugh Ca-
pet to Philippe de Valois—Proof that these are the limits of the feudal
period—Plan of the course: History ; 1st, of society ; 2d, of the human
mind, during the feudal period—The history of society resolves itself
into, Ist, history of civil society ; 2d, history of religious society—The
history of the human mind resolves itself into, Ist, history of learned
literature ; 2d, history of national literature in the vulgar tongue—Im-
portance of the middle ages in the history of French civilization—The
present state of opinions concerning the middle ages—Is it true that
there is danger in historical impartiality and poetical sympathy for this
period ?—Utility of thisstudy . . 2. .. 2. - «© « « es p34


SECOND LECTURE.


Necessity for studying the progressive formation of the feudal system—lIt
is often forgotten that social facts form themselves but slowly, and in
forming themselves, undergo many vicissitudes—Analysis of the feudal
system in its essential elements. ‘They are three in number: 1. The
nature of territorial property ; 2. Amalgamation of sovereignty and pro-
perty ; 3. Hierarchical organization of the feudal association—State of
territorial property from the 5th to the 10th century—Origin and mean-
ing of the word feodum—It is synonymous with beneficium—History of
benefices, from the 8th to the 10th century—Examination of the system
of Montesquieu concerning the legal gradation of the duration of bene-
fices—Causes of the increase of the number of benefices—Almost all
landed property becamé feudal . . . . 2. . 2. « +» « - pe ddd


THIRD LECTURE.


Of the amalgamation of sovereignty and property, the second characteris-
tic of the feudal system—True meaning of this fact—Its origin—It


12 CONTENTS.


comes neither from the Roman society nor from the German band—Is
it the result of conquest only ?—Of the system of feudal publicists on
this subject—T wo forms of society in Germany, the tribe and the band
—Social organization of the tribe—Domestic sovereignty is there dis-
tinct from political sovereignty—Twofold origin of domestic sovereignty
among the ancient Germans—lIt arose from family and from conquest—
What became of the organization of the German tribe, and especially
of domestic sovereignty after the establishment of the Germans in Gaul
—What it retained of the family spirit gradually diminished; what it
retained of conquest became dominant—Recapitulation and true char-
acter of feudal sovereignty’. 2.09. 6 (eNO  e oD


FOURTH LECTURE.


General association of the possessors.of fiefs among themselves; third char-
acteristic of the feudal system—From the very nature of its elements
this association must have been weak and irregular—It, in fact, always
was so—Fallacy of the view which the apologists of this system trace
of the feudal hierarchy—Its incoherency and weakness were especially
great at the close of the 10th century—The formation of this hierarchy
from the 5th to the 10th century—Three systems of institution are seen
together after the German invasion: free institutions, monarchical insti-
tutions, aristocratical institutions—Comparative history of these three sys-
tems—Decline of the two first—Triumph of the third, which yet remains
ipeomplete and disordered: “2. “Ss. es te Peo


FIFTH LECTURE.


Method to be followed in the study of the feudal period—The simple fief
is the fundamental element, the integrant molecule of feudalism—The
simple fief contains: 1, the castle and its proprietors; 2, the village and
its inhabitants—Origin of feudal castles—Their multiplication in the 9th
and 10th centuries—Causes of this—Efforts of the kings and powerful
suzerains to oppose it—F utility of these efforts—Character of the castles
of the 11th century—lInterior life of the proprietors of fiefs—'Their iso-
lation—Their idleness—Their incessant wars, expeditions, and adven-
tures—Influence of the material circumstances of feudal habitations
upon the course of civilization—Development of domestic life, condition


of women, and of the spirit of family in the interior of castles . p. 395


ee


———


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. . 13


TWENTY-FIRST LECTURE.


Object of the lecture—Of capitularies in general—Review of the capi-
tularies of the Carlovingian Frank kings—Of the two forms under
which the capitularies have descended to us—Scattered capitularies
—Collection of Angesise and of the deacon Benedict—Of the edition
of the capitularies by Baluze—Erroneous idea generally entertained
as to capitularies—They are not invariably laws—Great variety in
these acts—Attempt at classification—Table of contents of the capi-
tularies of Charlemagne: 1. Moral legislation—2. Political legisla-
tion—3. Penal legislation—4. Civil legislation—5. Religious legisla-
tion—6. Canonical legislation—7. Domestic legislation—8s. Inci-
dental legislation—True character of the capitularies.


{ ANNOUNCED to you my intention of laying before you a
summary of the reign of Charlemagne, and its results, review-
ing his government and his influence upon intellectual deve-
lopment. In the first of these respects, the picture I have
placed before you appears to me sufliciently complete ; it pre-
sents, I think, a clear and precise idea of the part filled by the
wars of Charlemagne in the history of civilization in the west 5
and, moreover, I could not enter more fully into the subject,
without going through an absolute and continuous narration
of events. As to the government of Charlemagne and its
action upon mind, what I have said in the last lecture is alto-
gether mee and I may, without losing myself in details,
enter more closely into this part of the subject. I will proceed
todoso. The legislation of Charlemagne will now occupy
our attention: that which he did in protecting intellectual
development, with an account of the distinguished men who
lived and labored under his influence, will be the subject of
following lectures. |

It is commonly supposed that the term capitularies applies
only to the laws of Charlemagne; this is.a mistake. The
word capitula, “little chapters,”’ equally applies to all the laws
of the Frank kings. I have no remark to make at present
respecting the capitularies, in themselves of very slight im-
portance,! of the first race ; of those of the second race, there
have come down to us 152, namely:


| The table in the twentieth lecture mentions only sixty ; but there
were besides five private acts, which, upon reflection, I think ought to
be inserted among the capitularies.


14 HISTORY OF


5 capitularies of Pepin le Bref, commencing with the year
752, the period of his elevation to the title of king of the
Franks.

65 of Charlemagne.

20 of Louis le Debonnaire.

52 of Charles le Chauve.

3 of Louis le Begue.

3 of Carloman.

1 of Eudes.

3 of Charles le Simple.

I reckon here only the acts of such Carlovingians as reigned
in France; several descendants of Charlemagne, established
in Germany and Italy, also left capitularies, but with these we
have nothing to do.

The capitularies enumerated have come down to us in two
different forms. We have them, first, in the shape of as many
separate acts, scattered through various manuscripts, some-
times with, sometimes without date ; and there exists, secondly,
a collection of them made in the course of the ninth century,
and divided into seven books. The first four of these were
compiled by Angesise, abbot of Fontenelle, one of the council-
lors of Charlemagne, who died in 833. He collected and
classified the capitula of that prince, and a portion of those of
Louis le Debonnaire. The first book contains 162 capitula
of Charlemagne, relative to ecclesiastical affairs.

The second, forty-eight capitula of Louis le Debonnaire, in
the same class of subjects. )

The third, ninety-one capituda of Charlemagne, on temporal
affairs.

The fourth, seventy-seven capitula of Louis le Debonnaire,
on temporal affairs.

To these four books, which, immediately upon their publi-
cation, acquired such credit that Charles le Chauye, in his
own capitularies, cites them as an official code, a deacon of
Mayence, named Benedict, at the request of his archbishop,
Otger, added, about the year 842, three new books, constitut-
ing the fifth, sixth, and seventh books of the collection, and
which contain :

The fifth, 405 capitula ; the sixth, 436 capitula ; the seventh,

478 capitula. In all, 1697.

But, besides the capitularies which Angesise had omitted,
and those which had been declared since the compilation of
his collection, the three books of the deacon Benedict contain


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 15


a number of acts with which the Carlovingian kings had no-
thing to do; for instance, fragments of the Roman law, ex-
tracted from the Theodosian code, from Breviarium of the
Visigoths, from Justinian, Julien, &c. We even find there
considerable fragments of the famous collection known by the
name of The false Decretals, pretended canons, and other acts
_ of the first popes—a collection at this time scarcely known,
and which Benedict himself was one of the first to bring into
vogue ; so that many learned persons have assigned their fa-
brication to him.

Four supplements, added by anonymous compilers at later
periods to the seven books already mentioned, extend the num-
ber of articles in this collection to 2100.

The capitularies have been published several times under
both these forms. The best edition is unquestionably that of
Baluze, in two vols. folio, Paris, 1677. It is not only the best
as a matter of comparison, but it is excellent in itself. “Of
all the sources of the law of the middle ages,”’ says Savigny,'
‘¢] have found none more fully presented to us than the capi-
tularies in Baluze’s excellent edition.’”’ And, in fact, it is far
more complete, and better edited than those of Lindenbrog,
Pithon, Herold, Du Tillot, &c. Baluze had collected a great
number of manuscripts, and he published fragments and
whole capitularies previously inedited. His work may fairly
be described as a vast and good collection of texts; but there,
in truth, its merit ends. The texts themselves have been sub-
jected to no examination, to no critical revision. Baluze has
given them to us exactly as he found them, without troubling
himself to inquire whether or no the copyists had confused
them, or filled them with blunders. It would doubtless have
been an entire misconception to have sought to introduce into.
the capitularies an order foreign to the ideas of the primitive
legislator, to have classified them systematically, to have cur-
tailed repetitions emanating from the legislator himself, and
which are characteristic of his work. But there are, in the
various manuscripts, a confusion and a want of accuracy
which are manifestly attributable to the copyists alone; a
multitude of words are changed, a multitude of articles wrong-
ly placed; various readings of the same manuscript are set
down as different capitula. [donot by any means propose to


ar Gea)


16 HISTORY OF


go through a list of the blunders of this description, or to dis-
cuss the question of their rectification. All I desire to point
out to you is the general fact that they exist in abundance,
and that Baluze’s work, consequently, valuable in many re-
spects, is still only to be regarded as the materials for a really
correct and satisfactory edition of the capitularies—an edition,
however, which it would require long and arduous and scien-
tific labor to produce. _

Let us first consider the capitularies themselves.

At the first glance, it is impossible not to be struck with
the confusion which pervades this word: it is indiscriminately
applied to all the acts inserted in Baluze’s collection ; and yet,
in point of fact, the greater portion of those acts differ essentially
from capitularies, properly so called. What would be the ef.-
fect, if some centuries hence, a compiler were to take all the
acts of a government of our times, of the French administra-
tion for instance, in the last reign, and, throwing them pro-
miscuously together in one heap, under one undistinguishing
title, were to give the collection forth as the legislation, the
code of the period? The result would manifestly be an
utterly absurd and fallacious chaos ; laws, ordinances, de-
crees, briefs of the crown, personal judgments, departmental
circulars, would be mixed up together, hap-hazard, in utter
confusion. ‘This has been exactly the case with the capitu-
laries. I will proceed to analyse the collection of Baluze,
classifying according to their nature and objects the acts of
all kinds which we meet with there. You will at once see
how great is their diversity.

We find there under the general title of capitularies:

1. Ancient national laws revised; the Salic law, for ex-
ample.’

2. Extracts from the ancient laws, Salic, Lombard, Bava-
rian, &c.; extracts evidently made for a particular purpose,
a particular place, a particular moment of time, for a special
necessity, the nature of which there is no longer anything to
indicate to us.*

3. Additions to the ancient laws, to the Salic law, for in-


1 See Baluze, i., col. 281, sub anno 798.
2 Extract from the law of the Lombards, cap. a., 801; Baluze, i., col.
349; from the law of the Ripuarians, cap. a., 803: 7d., col. 395.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 17


stance,' to the law of the Lombards,’ to that of the Bavarians,$
&c. These additions seem to have been made in a peculiar
form, and with peculiar solemnities; that to the Salic law is
preceded, in an ancient manuscript, by these words:

«‘ These are articles which the lord Charles the Great, em-
peror, caused to be written in his councils, and ordered to be
inserted among the other laws.”’

The legislature, indeed, appears to have required the adhe-
sion of the people to these additions more expressly than to the
other parts of the law; thus, in 808, the year in which the
additions to the Salic law were made, we find Charlemagne
issuing the following direction to his misst :

“Let the people be interrogated touching the articles which
have recently been added to the law ; and after they have all
consented to them, let them affix to the said articles their sig-
nature in confirmation.’’ ne

4. Extracts from the acts of the councils, and from the
entire body of canonical legislation; the great capitulary
enacted at Aix-la-Chapelle, in 789,*° and a host of articles in
the other capitularies, are nothing more than such extracts.

5. New laws, of which some were passed by the general
assemblies of the people, with the concurrence of the great
laymen and great ecclesiastics together, or of the ecclesiastics
alone, or of the laymen alone; while the rest appear to have
been the work of the emperor himself, or to have been what
we now call ordinances. The distinctions between these two
classes of laws are not, on a close examination, very precisely
marked, but they are perceptible.

6. Instructions given by Charlemagne to his miss?, on their
departure for the provinces, and designed sometimes to regu-
late the personal conduct of the missi, sometimes to guide
them in their inquiries, very often as simple communications
to the people in particular districts, which the missi were to
convey. Acts of this description, very foreign, in part, at all
events, to our notions of legislation, are of frequent occurrence
in the capitularies ;° articles of a totally different nature are
sometimes mixed up with them.


1Cap. a., 803 ; td.,1., 387. 2 Cap. a., 801; éd., 1., 345.
Cap. 1:, 7885 id., 1., 207. 4 Cap. a., 803, § 19;1., 394.
© 7d Acs 209.


® Cap. a., 789; Baluze, i., 243; a., 802, i., 351; a., 802, iy 31s Bs
803, 1., 391; a., 806, i., 449.
»*


a
18 HISTORY OF


7. Answers given by Charlemagne to questions addressed
to him by the counts or bishops, or mzssi dominici, on the occa-
sion of difficulties occurring to them in the course of their ad-
ministration,’ and wherein he solves these difficulties, which
have reference sometimes to matters which we should call
legislative, sometimes to points in executive administration,
sometimes to private interests.

8. Questions which Charlemagne proposed to put to the
bishops or counts at the next general assembly, and which he
had noted down on paper that they might not, meantime, pass
out of his recollection. ‘These questions, which are among
the most curious documents in the whole collection, bear in
general a character of censure and reprimand of those to
whom they are to be addressed. I will read a few of them
to give you a practical idea of the liberality and poodaense
which characterized the mind of Charlemagne. My transla-
tion is literal :

“‘ How does it happen that, both on the frontiers and with
the army, wherever there is any great measure to be taken
for the defence of the country, one man will not give aid to
another 2?” aid

‘What is the meaning of these continual suits by which
every one appears seeking to wrest from his neighbor that
which he possesses ?7’8

“To ascertain on what occasions and in what places the
ecclesiastics and the laity seek, in the manner stated, to
impede each other in the exercise of their respective func-
tions. To inquire and discuss up to what point a bishop or
an abbot is justified in interfering in secular affairs, and a
count or other layman with ecclesiastical affairs. To inter-
rogate them closely on the meaning of those words of the
Apostle: ‘No man that warreth for the law, entangleth him.
self with the affairs of this life.’ Inquire to whom these words
apply.’”

Desire the bishops and abbots to tell us truly what is the
meaning of the phrase always in their mouths: ‘ Renounce
the world ;’ and by what signs we may distinguish those who
have renounced the world, from those who still adhere to the
world: is it merely that the former do not bear arms, or marry
publicly ?°

16° Cap. &, 803: éd., i., 401.

71 Cap. a., 811, § 1. . Baluze,i., 477. 2 10:5 8.2.

"Cap. FL, @.,.0) 059-4, ° Ib,


©


*


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 19


“'To ask them further, whether he is to be considered as
having renounced the world, whom we see laboring, day by
day, by all sorts of means, to augment his possessions ; now
making use, for this purpose, of menaces of eternal flames,
now of promises of eternal beatitude ; in the name of God or
of some saint despoiling simple-minded men of their property,
to the infinite prejudice of the lawful heirs, who are, in very
many cases, from the misery in which they are thus involved,
driven by their necessities to robbing and to all sorts of dis.
orders and crimes.’”!

Clearly such questions as these do not at all resemble arti-
cles of law.

9. Some of the capitula are not even questions, but mere
notes, memoranda of particular things which Charlemagne,
from time to time, conceived the idea of doing, and which he
had put down on paper, lest he should forget them. We read,
for instance, at the end of the capitula, or instructions to the
misst dominict, in 803, these two articles :—
<@ ire to order that they who send us horses as pre-


sents, ins their names on each horse. And so with dresses
that may be sent us from abbeys.

_ ©Recollect to order that whenever vicarious persons are
found doing evil, or suffering it to be done, they be expelled
from their post, and replaced by others of a better charac-
ter?

I could cite many capitula of this description.

10. Other articles contain judgments and briefs of the
crown and the courts, collected evidently for the purpose of
jurisprudence ; thus we read in a capitulary of the year
803 :

«A man had suborned a slave, induced him to kill his two
young masters, the one aged nine, the other eleven, and then
killed the slave himself, and threw him into a ditch. Ad-
judged, that the said man pay a wehrgeld for the boy of nine
years old, a double wehrgeld for the boy of eleven, and a
treble wehrgeld for the slave; and undergo, moreover, our
ban.’’8


This is obviously a judicial decree in a particular case, in-


~eap. t.,a, Sid, 9 5, 2 Baluze, i., 395.
3 Cap:, a., "803, § 12; Baluze, i., 398,


20 HISTORY OF


serted among the capitularies as a precedent in future cases
of a similar description.

11. We meet, in like manner, with acts of pure domestic
financial administration, relative to the administration of
Charlemagne’s own domains, and which enter into the most
minute details on this subject. The famous capitulary De
Villis is an example of this, and there are several other articles
of the same character scattered through the collection.’

12. Besides the so various acts I have enumerated, the
capitularies contain purely political acts, occasional docu-
ments, nominations, recommendations, decisions upon personal
and passing differences. I look, for instance, at the capitulary
rendered in 794 by the assembly of Frankfort,? and among
the 54 articles of which it is composed, I find:

(Art. 1.) Letters of pardon granted to Tassilon, duke of the
Bavarians, who had revolted against Charlemagne.

(Art. 6.) Arrangements for the settlement of a dispute be-
tween the bishop of Vienne, and the archbishop of Arles and
others, respecting the limits of the sees of the Tarentaise, Em-
brun, and Aix. It sets forth that letters from the pope on
these matters were read, and that it was determined to consult
anew with his holiness.

(Art. 7.) As to the justification offered, and the pardon re-
ceived, by bishop Pierre.

(Art. 8.) As to the deposition of the pretended bishop
Gerbod.

(Art. 53.) Charlemagne procures the assent of the assem-
bly of bishops to the pope’s license, authorizing him to retain
about his person bishop Hildebold as his minister of ecclesias-
tical affairs.

(Art. 54.) He recommends Alcuin to the good wishes and
prayers of the assembly.

There is obviously nothing legislative here.

Thus, at first glance, on the most simple examination of the
nature of these various acts, and without entering into any close
inspection of their contents, you see how wholly erroneous is
the general, the common idea entertained of these capitularies ;
they constitute anything but a code; they comprise anything
but laws. Let us now take a closer view, let us penetrate


! Baluze, 1., 331. 2 Td., tb., 26.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 21


into the interior of the collection, and examine the articles of
which each capitulary is composed; we shall here find the
same diversity, the same confusion; we shall here, in like
manner, find how inadequate has been the attention hitherto
paid to thi#study, and how fallacious are most of the results
which have been deduced from it.

I have analyzed the sixty-five capitularies of Charlemagne,
classifying under eight heads, according to the nature of the
provisions, the articles which they comprise. These eight
heads are :

1. Moral legislation.

2. Political legislation.

3. Penal legislation.

4. Civil legislation.

5. Religious legislation.

6. Canonical legislation.

7. Domestic legislation.

. Occasional legislation.

I will first lay this classification before you, and then make

some observations upon each head.


ed)


Analytical Table of the Capitularies of Churlemagne.


slas|_8| 8|28| a8 | 28 Be
¢ |SE|SE|SeB | Se / 25 | ez | BS ES
. ma lee | at | eer) ee) We) oie) big ares
= S| Sb | 280 | a | Ob | | s | © bp © bo
Bilis fat Not g lk (etsy |) Tok aa eel ee
769 | 18 1 3 3 11
119) 23 9 5 2 2 5
183 1 1
lid 1 1
Id. 8 4 3 1
789 |. 80- | 16 3 11 45
Id. 16 2 14
Td 23 6 2 2 1 5
| Id.| 34 3 BP) -18 3 3 5
793 17 1 6 7| A
7194 | 54 6 4 6 27 8
797 | 10 5 5
799 9) 9)
800 1 1
Id. 70 70
Id. 3) 5
g01| 8 5 3


I) HISTORY OF


Analytical Table of the Capitularies of Charlemagne—continued.


7


|


£\s2|_2|2| 22/38 (28 2s

§ |ge | 22 | Gs | EE | 3S | es MSE los
al Org jm O'R RQ | a B o'n Sim | clu

ee (AP ey | e| Pl sel ae arise

eh. a) as | pee RO RS rere

Id. 1 it

Id. 22 2 20

802 Al 9 10 5) 1 16

Id. 23 2 13 3 9)

803 7 7

Id. 1 i

Id. if ; ef

Id. da 2 4 3)

Id. 34 20 2 8 2 2

Id. 12 3 3 6

Id. 14 1 6 2 3 1 a

Id. 8 4 4

Id. 13 1 9) 1 3 il 2

Id. 3 ih 2

804 | 20 2 3 15

Id. 1 2.

805 16 4 12

Id. 25 4 13 3 4. 1

Id. 24

Id. 16

Id. 1

806 20 1

Id. 8 4 3 1

Id. 6 3 i 2

Id. 8 4 i 2

Id. 19 1 2

806 23 vi 16

807 7 7 2

808 ; 30 11 10 6 1

809 ov 3 15 at eee 1

Id. 16

810 18 6 8 4

Id. 16 5) 4 3 2 2

Id. 5 5

Sii-| 42 4 8

Id. 13 ) 9 A

id. 9

812 9 9

oR oe a 1 9 1

law 43 10 3

813 | 28 3 2 3 20

Id. | 20 6 z: 7 2 3

Id. 46 39 7


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 23


Analytical Table of the Capitularies of Charlemagne—continued.


elas/_8| 2/38/28 | 28 [8
[Se | sei eS ink | oS iss | ee les
| mM 8 acs a8 4S as Ces Ia 2
| 3s | 84 | 88 | o@ | Ria | a | ga | Bra laa
2 ‘S| So | o'bo | Arb | Ob | Bho | Sb | Sh |Q "ap
~ a o A, o rob) rob) fee ae o eye
ox 4 4 | | an el eS 4
Q <
year
uncer-
tain. | 959 9) 13 3 9 29
ra | Le 14
Id. 13 9
Id. 13 2 8 2 1
Id 9 9 9


rs | as | | "| |


Let us now examine a little more closely the contents of
this table; the examination will be a very rapid one, but
sufficient, I hope, to give you an idea of the true character of
the government of Charlemagne, and of the monuments which
exist of it in this collection.

I. Moral Legislation.—I have classed under this title
those articles which are neither commanding nor prohibitory ;
which, in truth, are not laws at all, but mere advice, sug-
gestions, or moral precepts. For instance :

‘«* Avarice consists in desiring the possessions of others, and
in not giving to others a share of that which we ourselves
possess ; according to the apostle, it is the root of all evil, and
it should, therefore, be carefully avoided.!

‘“‘' Those who apply themselves to amass property by all
sorts of ways make dishonorable gains.?

«¢ All men should practise hospitality.°

“Keep clear of theft, of unlawful marriages, of bearing
false witness, as we have often exhorted you, and as is ex-
horted by the Word of God.’”4

The legislator goes even further than this; he seems to
think himself responsible for the conduct of each individual,
and apologises for not being able to fulfil this responsibility to
the extent he desires :


1Cap. a., 806, § 15; Baluze,i., 454 2 Jb.,§ 16.
= Cap: a., 794, § 335, 16,, 268. 4 Tb., 189,.§ 56; 1b., 236,


- a
4


a
24 HISTORY. OF


“It is necessary,” he says, “that every man should seek, to
the best of his strength and ability, to serve God and walk in
the way of his precepts; for the lord emperor cannot watch
over each person individually, with the necessary care, or
keep each man in proper discipline.’

Is not this pure morality? Such provisions are foreign to
the laws of rising societies and to those of perfected societies :
pea Salic law and our codes, you will find nothing of
the kind there ; they in no way address themselves to human
liberty in order to give it counsel; they contain merely for-
mally prohibitive or imperative texts. But in the passage
from primitive barbarism to civilization, legislation takes
another character ; morality is introduced into it, and be-
comes, for a certain period, matter of law.  Skilful legis-
lators, founders or reformers of societies, comprehend the
empire which the idea of duty exercised over men; the in-
stinct of genius warns them, that without its support, with-
out the free concurrence of the human will, society can
neither be maintained nor developed in peace; and they
apply themselves to introduce this idea into the souls of men
in every kind of way, and they make legislation a kind of
preaching, a medium of instruction. Consult the history of
every nation, the Hebrews, the Greeks, &c., you will every-
where recognize this fact; you will everywhere find between
the epoch of the primitive laws, which are purely penal, pro-
hibitive, destined to repress the abuses of force; and the
epoch of scientific laws, which have confidence in morality, in
the reason of individuals, and leave all which is purely moral
in the domain of liberty ; between these two epochs, I say,
you will always find one in which morality is the object of
legislation, in which legislation formally writes and teaches
it. Gaulo-Frankish society was at this point when Charle-
magne governed it; and this was one of the causes of his
close alliance with the church, the only power then capable
of teaching and preaching morality.

I accordingly comprehend, under the name of moral legis-
lation, all relating to the intellectual development of men;
for example, all the provisions of Charlemagne concerning
schools, what books to distribute, the reformation of ecclesias-


tical offices, &c.


1 Cap. a., 802, § 3; 1b., 364.


- . mY


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. D5


Il. Political Legislutionn—This is one of the most consi-
derable portions of the capitularies; it comprehends ‘two
hundred and ninety-three articles. Under this head I place—

1. The laws and measures of Charlemagne of all kinds, to
‘ensure the execution of his orders throughout the- extent of
his states; for example, all provisions relative to the nomina-
tion or conduct of his various agents, counts, dukes, vicars,
centeniers, ézc.; they are numerous, and are constantly 2
peated. iad

2. The articles whose object is the administration of jus-
tice, the sitting of local courts, the forms to be followed there,
the military service, &c.

3. The police legislations, which are very various, and
sometimes go into the most minute details; the provinces,
the army, the church, merchants, beggars, public places,
the interior of the imperial palace, alternately form the ob-
ject of them. We there meet, for example, with an attempt
to fix the price of goods, a veritable attempt at a maximum
price.

“The most pious lord our king has decreed, with the con-
sent of the holy synod, that no man, ecclesiastic or layman,
shall, whether in times of plenty or in times of scarcity, sell
provisions dearer than at the price recently fixed by the bushel,
namely: a bushel of oats, one denier ; of barley, two deniers ;
of rye, three deniers; of wheat, four deniers. If he desires
to sell it in loaves, he shall give twelve loaves of wheat, each
of two pounds, for one denier, fifteen loaves of rye, twenty of
barley, or twenty-five of oats, of the same weight, also for one
denier, &c.’”

The suppression of mendicity and a poor rate, likewise ap-
pear there.

“With regard to vagrant mendicants, we order, that each
of our subjects support his own poor, whether on his fees or
within his house, and not allow them to go elsewhere to beg.
If such beggars are found, and they do no work with their
hands, let no one think of giving them anything.’”

The provisions relative to the internal regulation of the
palace give a singular idea of the disorders and violences


which were committed there :

NR TR Ve 8 eal re Se aE oe eT ae eh
1 Cap. a., 794, § 2; vol.i., col. 263.
2 Cap. a., 806, § 10; vol, i., col. 454.


«


a


4


26


HISTORY OF

a: will and order that none of those who serve in our
palace, take upon himself to receive any man who seeks a re-
fuge there, and comes there to conceal himself, on account of
robbery, homicide, adultery, or any other crime; that if any
free man violate our prohibition, and conceal a malefactor in
our palace, he shall be forced to carry him on his shoulders
to the public place, and there he shall be attached to the same
post as the malefactor. . . . . Whoever shall find men fighting
in our palace, and cannot or will not put an end to the con-
flict, he shall pay a share of the damage which they have
caused, &c.’”!

The capitularies contain numberless analogous provisions ;
internal police was evidently of great importance in the gov-
ernment of Charlemagne.

4. I class, also, under the head of political legislation all
which concerns the distinction between the lay and the
ecclesiastical powers and their relations. Charlemagne made
great use of the ecclesiastics—they were, in truth, his. prin-
cipal means of government; but he wished to make use of
them, and not for them to make use of him: the capitularies
attest his vigilance in governing the clergy himself, and
keeping it under his power. You have seen, by some of the
questions which he proposed addressing to the bishops in the
general assemblies, to what a'degree he was impressed with
this idea. :

5. It seems to me necessary, lastly, to refer to political
legislation, the provisions relative to the administration of the
sees conceded. by Charlemagne, and his relations with the
beneficiaries. ‘This was certainly one of the leading features
of his government, and one of those to which he most assidu-
ously called the attention of the missz.

I need not point out to you that the general character of all
this. political, legislation, in its various parts, is a continual,
indefatigable effort. towards order and unity.

Ill. Penal legislation. This in general is scarcely more
than the renewal, to a certain extent, of the ancient Salic,
Ripuarian, Lombard, barbarian, &c., laws. Punishment,
repression of crimes, of abuse of force, is, as you have seen,
almost the only object, the essential character of those laws.
There was, therefore, less to do in this respect than in any


Cap. .a., 800, § 3 and 4; vol. 1., col. 343.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. PAT


other. The new provisions which Charlemagne here and
there added, were in general for the object of mitigating the
ancient legislation, especially the rigor of the punishments
inflicted upon slaves. In some cases, however, he aggra-
vated the punishment, instead of mitigating it—when, for
example, punishments were a political instrument in his
hands. Thus the punishment of death, so rare in the bar-
baric laws, recurs in almost every article of a capital of
the year 789, intended to restrain and convert the Saxons ;

almost every violation of order, every relapse into idolatrous
practices, is punished with death.’ With these exceptions,
the penal sega haw of Charlemagne has but little originality
or interest.

VI. The civil legislation offers but little more. Here,
also, the ancient laws, the ancient customs, remained in
vigor; Charlemagne had very little to alter inthem. He,
however, carefully occupied himself, doubtless at the instiga-
tion of the ecclesiastics, with the condition of persons,
especially with the relations between men and women. It is
evident that at this epoch these relations were prodigiously
irregular—that a man took and quitted a woman without
scruple, and almost without formality. The result was a
great disorder in individual morality, and in the state of
families. The civil law was thence strongly interested in
the reformation of manners, and Charlemagne understood
this. Hence the great number of provisions inserted in his
capitularies concerning the conditions of marriages, the
degrees of parentage, the duties of husbands towards wives,
the duties of widows, &c. The greater portion of these
provisions are borrowed from canonical legislation ; but it
must not be supposed that their motive and origin was purely
religious—the interest of civil life, the necessity of fixing
-and of regulating the family, had evidently a Pee share
therein.

V. Religious legislation. By religious legislation, | mean
provisions relative, not to the clergy, to ecclesiastics alone, but
to the faithful, to the Christian people, and to its relations with
the priests. It is thus distinguished from canonical legisla-
tion, which concerns only the ecclesiastical society, the


1 Bal., vol. i., col. 251.


28 HISTORY OF


relations of the clergy among themselves, The following are
some provisions of religious legislation :

“Let care be taken not to venerate the names of false
martyrs, nor the memory of doubtful saints.’”!

“¢ Let no one suppose that God is only to be prayed to in
three languages,” for God is adored in all languages, and man
is heard if he ask just things.’”

“Let preaching always be performed in such a manner
that the common people may be able to understand it tho-
roughly.’

These provisions have generally a character of good sense,
even of liberty of mind, which one would scarcely expect to
find in them.

VI. The canonical legislation is that which occupies the
greatest place in the capitularies, and naturally so; the
bishops (as I have already observed) were the principal coun-
sellors of Charlemagne ; they sat in the greatest numbers
in the general assemblies ; their affairs were always attended
to first. Accordingly, these assemblies were generally looked
upon as councils, and their laws were transmitted to the col-
lection of canons. They are almost all drawn up in the
interest of the power of the bishops. You will remember
that at the accession of the Carlovingian race, the episcopal
aristocracy, strong as it had been, was in complete disso-
lution. Charlemagne reconstituted it ; under his hand, it
regained the recularity, the entirety it 10st and became, for
many centuries, the dominant ruler of ihe church: *Ata
later period, I shall speak of this more minutely.

VII. The domestic legislation contains only what relates to
the administration of the private property, the farms of
Charlemagne; an entire capitulary, entitled de Villis, is a
collection of various instructions, addressed at different periods
of his reign to the persons employed on his domains, and
which have been erroneously asembled under the form.of a
single capitulary. M. Anton has given, in his History of
German Agriculture in the Middle Ages,‘ a very curious com-


tyCap..a., 789, 9 413 a., 794, 8 40; vol. i., col. 228, 269.
x Probably i in Latin, Greek, and the German language.

® Cap, ia., 794, 9 50; vol..1., col. 270.

is Cap. a., 813, § 14; vol i., col. 505,

* In Geran, vol. i, p. 177—243.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 29


mentary upon this capitulary, and upon all the domestic
details which we find there.

VIII. The occasional legislation is inconsiderable in
amount ; only twelve articles belong to this head, and I have
just cited some of them. ce:

Here closes my examination, far too brief in itself doubt-
less, but still more detailed, more definite, I think, than any
previously made of the legislation of Charlemagne and its
object. I say degislation, because I wish to avail myself of
words in common use; otherwise, it is quite clear that in all
we have gone through there is nothing of what we understand
by a code, and that Charlemagne, in his capitularies, did any-
thing but legislate. Capitularies are, properly speaking, the
whole acts of his government, public acts of all kinds by
which he manifested his authority. It is evident that the
collection which has come down to us is far from containing.
all those acts, and that a large number of them are wanting.
There are whole years for which we have no capitularies ; in
those which we do possess we find. provisions which relate to
acts which are missing. The collection of Baluze is a mere,
collection of fragments; they are mutilated wrecks, not of
the legislation only, but of the whole government of Charle-
magne. This is the point of view under, which any one
wishing to make an accurate study of the capitularies should
view them in order to comprehend and explain them.

In our next lecture, we shall begin to occupy ourselves.
with the state of mind at the same epoch, and with the influ-
ence of Charlemagne over intellectual development.


3*


30 HISTORY OF


TWENTY-SECOND LECTURE.


Of intellectual decay in Frankish Gaul, from the fifth to the eighth
century—Of its causes—It ceases under the reign of Charlemagne—
Difficulty of describing the state of the human mind at this epoch—=
Alcuin is its most complete and faithful representative—Life of
Alcuin—-His labors for the restoration of manuscripts—For the res-
toration of schools—His teaching in the school of the palace—His re-
lations with Charlemagne—His conduct as abbot of Saint Martin of
Tours—His works; 1. Theological; 2. Philosophical and literary ;
3. Historical; 4. Poetical—His general character.


I wAvE said, and I consider it established, that, from the
fifth to the eighth century, decay in Frankish Gaul was con-
stant and general ; that it was the essential character of the
time, and only stopped under the reign of Charlemagne.

If this character was anywhere more visible, more signal
than elsewhere, it was in the intellectual order, in the history
of the human mind at this epoch. Recal to mind through
what vicissitudes we have seen it pass. At the end of the
fourth century, two literatures, two philosophies, marched, as
it were, side by side, profane literature and sacred literature,
pagan philosophy and Christian theology. It is true, profane
literature and pagan philosophy were dying; but they still
breathed. We saw them soon disappear; sacred literature
and Christian theology alone remained. We have continued
on our way; Christian theology and sacred literature them-
selves have disappeared; we no longer meet with anything
but sermons, legends, monuments of an entirely practical ac-
tivity, devoted to the wants of actual life, foreign to the
research and contemplation of the true and beautiful. This
is the state into which the human mind had fallen in the
seventh, and during the first half of the eighth century.

This decay has been generally attributed to the tyranny of
the church, to the triumph of the principle of authority and
faith over the principle of liberty and reason. Quite modern
writers, men of impartiality and learning—Tennemann, for
example, in his History of Philosophy'—have adopted this ex-


el


| ren aan ea)


1In German, vol. vili., p 1—8.,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 31


planation. The absolute authority of the church, and the
doctrine of pure and simple faith, opposed to that of rational
inquiry, have, doubtless, powerfully contributed to weaken
the human mind ; but it was at a later period that their influ-
ence was exercised. At the epoch which occupies us, this
cause, I think, had as yet acted but feebly. Recal to mind the
picture I place before you of the state of the Christian church
at the fifth century ;' liberty then was great. Now, from the
fifth to the eighth century, the church was not constituted with
sufficient regularity or strength to exercise tyranny ; none of
the means of government by which, at a later period, she
dominated over mind were then within her hands ; the rising
papacy as yet possessed only a power of influence and coun-
sel; episcopacy, although it was the dominant system of the
ecclesiastical society, was weak and disordered ; councils be-
came rare ; no authority was firm and general ; if there had
been any true energy of mind, doubtless it would easily have
forced itself into light. At a later period, from the 11th to
the 14th century, the church was strong ; her power was re-
gularly organized ; the principle of implicit submission to her
decision reigned in the minds of men; and yet intellectual
activity was far greater. There was then a real danger in
struggling against the church, and yet men struggled: they
resisted her pretensions, they even assailed her title. The
seventh century made no attempt at attack or resistance ; the
ecclesiastical power and freedom of thought had not even oc-
casion to commence a struggle.

Is it not, then, to this cause that the intellectual apathy and
sterility of this epoch are to be attributed? The fall of the
empire, its disorders and miseries, the dissolution of social
relations and ties, the occupation and sufferings of personal
interests, the impossibility of permanent labor, of tranquil lei-
sure, such were the true causes of the moral, as well as of
the political decay, and of the darkness which enveloped the
human mind.

Whatever may be the cause of it, the fact is undeniable.
If we considered in its entirety the history of the human mind
in modern Europe, from the fifth century up to our own days,
we should find, | think, that the seventh century is the lowest
point to which it has descended, the nadir of its course, so to


OO


1 See vol. i., the third and fourth lectures


32 HISTORY OF
speak. With the end of the eighth century began its move-
ment of progress. :
It is rather difficult to characterize this movement with ex-
actness, and to sum up in a few characteristic words the intel-
lectual state of Frankish-Gaul under Charlemagne. No one
simple idea dominates in it. ‘The works which then occupied
mind formed no whole, attached themselves to no principle.
They are partial, isolated works; the activity is sufficiently
great, but manifests itself by no great results; all attempt to
systematize this time under a moral point of view—to reduce
it to any general and striking fact, would infallibly misre-
present it.
_ Another method appears to me more suited to make it
known and understood. We find in this period a man with
mind doubtless more active and extensive than any around
him, except that of Charlemagne ; superior in instruction and
intellectual activity to any of his contemporaries, without
elevating himself much above them by the originality of his
knowledge of ideas; in a word, a faithful representative of
the intellectual progress of his epoch, which he outstripped in
all things, but without ever separating himself from it. ‘This
man is Alcuin. It is necessary, as a general rule, to give
way only with extreme reserve to the temptation to take a
particular man as the image, the representative of an epoch.
Such comparisons are more ingenious than solid. On the
one hand, a society, however declining and sterile it may be,
is almost always, intellectually speaking, greater and richer.
than an individual... It comprehends a body of ideas, of
knowledge of facts, and of moral wants, which are not repro-
duced within the narrow space of an individual existence.
On the other hand, a distinguished man, even when originality,
is not his pre-eminent characteristic, always differs greatly
from the mass of his contemporaries: he is himself, and not a
nation ; so that, under a twofold relation, the representation is
incorrect, and the image fallacious. Care should be taken,
in this particular case which occupies us, not to. depend too
much upon it, though it is, perhaps, here more faithful than
in any other instance. Alcuin is, perhaps, one of the men
who best represent their epoch; still we must make many
reservations. And, at the same time that I place him before
you as the expression of the state of the human mind at the
end of the eighth century, I should wish to be sure that you
will reduce this comparison to its true value.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 33°

Alcuin was not a Frenchman. It will be sufficient to cast

a glance at the last table in the previous lecture, to see that
Charlemagne took great care to attract distinguished foreigners
into his states, and that among those who helped to second in-
tellectual development in Frankish Gaul, many came from
abroad. Charlemagne even did more. We see, at the seven-
teenth century, that Louis XIV., not content with protecting
letters in his kingdom, extended his encouragement and favor
to them throughout Europe. Colbert wrote to learned Ger-
mans, Dutch, Alsatians, to announce to them, on the part of
the king, presents and pensions, which went sometimes as
high as three thousand livres. Analogous facts are met
with under Charlemagne; he not only strove to attract dis-
tinguished men into his states, but he protected and encou-
raged them wherever he discovered them. More than one
Anglo-Saxon abbey shared his liberality ; and learned men
who, after following him into Gaul, wished to return to their
country, in no way became strangers to him. Peter of Pisa
and Paul Warnefried, who remained but a short time in Gaul,
experienced this. Alcuin fixed himself there permanently.
He was born in England, at York, about 735. ‘The intellec-
tual state of Ireland and England was then superior to that
of the continent; letters and schools prospered there more
than anywhere else. It is rather difficult to assign any pre-
cise causes for this fact ; the principal of them, I think, is the
following :—Christianity was carried into [reland by Greek
missionaries, and into England by Latin missionaries. In
Ireland, during the first ages which followed its introduction,
no invasion of barbarians came to stop its progress, to dis-
perse the monasteries and schools, to stifle the intellectual
movement which it had set on foot. In England, when the
missionaries of Gregory the Great arrived, the barbaric inva-
sion was consummated, the Saxons well established ; there
also, therefore, Christianity had not to undergo, at least not at
this epoch, or until the great incursion of the Danes, any
social disorder; its studies and its various works were not
violently interrupted. I placed before you, in the beginning
of this course,’ the view of the intellectual state of Gaul in the
fourth, and at the commencement of the fifth century ; neither
schools nor literary men were wanting to it; and if the Visi-


1Vol. i., lectures third and fourth.


34 HISTORY OF


goths, the Burgundians, the Franks, had not brought chaos
and ruin into it, the human mind, although weakened, had
not fallen into the state in which we find it at the seventh
century. This is the advantage which England possessed at
that epoch; society here had not been ravaged or broken up
by recent, continual invasions. The establishments for study
and science which Christianity had formed there, were still
erect, and quietly pursued their labors.

Whether this cause is or is not sufficient to explain it, the
fact is incontestable. ‘The schools of England, and particu-
larly that of York, were superior to those of the continent.
That of York possessed a rich library, where many of the
works of pagan antiquity were found ; among others, those of
Aristotle, which it is a mistake to say were first introduced to
the knowledge of modern Europe by the Arabians, and the
Arabians only ; for from the fifth to the tenth century, there
is no epoch in which we do not find them mentioned in some
library, in which they were not known and studied by some
men of letters. Alcuin himself informs us of the instruction
which they gave in the school of the monastery of York. We
read in his poem, entitled, Pontiffs and Saints of the Church
of York:

“The learned Adlbert gave drink to thirsty minds at the
sources of various studies and sciences. ‘To some he was
eager to communicate the art and rules of grammar ; for
others he made flow the waves of rhetoric. He exercised
these in the combats of jurisprudence, and those in the songs
of Adonia. Some learned from him to sound the pipes of
Castalia, and to strike with a lyric foot the summits of Par-
nassus. ‘To others he taught the harmony of heaven, the
‘works of the sun and the moon, the five zones of the pole, the
seven wandering stars, the laws of the course of the stars,
their appearance and decline, the motions of the sea, the trem-
blings of the earth, the nature of men, of beasts, and birds,
and the inhabitants of woods ; he unveiled the various quali-
ties and the combinations of numbers ; he taught how to cal-
culate with certainty the solemn return of Easter; and
above all, he explained the mysteries of the holy scriptures.’”!

Reduce this pompous description to simple terms: grammar,


1 Pontiffs and Saints of the Church of York, vy. 1431—1447; Alcuini
Opera, Vol. ii., y. 256; ed. Frohben, 1777.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 35


rhetoric, jurisprudence, poetry, astronomy, natural history,
mathematics, chronology, and the explanation of the holy
scriptures, these surely form an extensive course of instruc-
tion, more extensive than was found at this epoch in any school
in Gaul or Spain. He who taught these, this A®lbert whom
Alcuin celebrates, became archbishop of York, and Alcuin
succeeded him in his functions.

About this time, before 766, he had already made one, or
even two journeys to the continent. The occasion and date
of the journeys are very difficult to determine. I will not
eccupy you with these details of minute and complicated
criticism. Some learned men have thought that at that time
—at Pavia, perhaps—Alcuin saw Charlemagne. If the fact
be true, it is to no purpose, for we know absolutely nothing
of their first connexion. But, in 780, on the death of arch-
bishop Aélbert, and the accession of his successor, Eanbald,
Alcuin received from him the mission to proceed to Rome for
the purpose of obtaining from the pope and bringing to him
the paliium. in returning from Rome, he came to Parma,
where he found Charlemagne. It is not known whether
this was the first time of their seeing each other ; but, at all
events, the emperor at once pressed him to take up his abode
in Franee. After some hesitation, Alcuin accepted the invi-
tation, subject to the permission of his bishop, and of his own
sovereign. ‘The permission was obtained, and in 782 we find
him established in the court of Charlemagne, who at once
gave him three abbeys, those of Ferrieres in Gatanois, of
St. Loup at Troyes, and of St. Josse in the county of Pon-
thieu.

From this time forth, Alcuin was the confidant, the coun-
cillor, the intellectual prime minister, so to speak, of Charle-
magne. Let us endeavor to form somewhat of a clear and
complete idea of his labors.

In doing so, we must observe a distinction between his
practical activity and his scientific activity, between the im-
mediate results of his personal influence, and those of his
writings.

In the practical point of view, as intellectual prime minis-
ter of Charlemagne, Alcuin did, more especially, three things
—1. He corrected and restored the manuscripts of ancient
literature ; 2. He revived public schools and public studies ;
3. He himself taught.

1. The historians mention only in passing, and without


36 HISTORY OF


attaching any importance to it, a fact which really played an
important part in the revival of intellectual activity at this
period; I mean the revision and correction of ancient manu-
scripts, both sacred and profane. From the sixth to the
eighth century, these had gone through the hands of copyists
so ignorant that the texts had become altogether unrecogniza-
ble ; infinite passages had been mutilated and misplaced ; the
leaves were in the utmost disorder; all orthographical and
grammatical correctness had disappeared ; to read and under-
stand the works thus injured, required absolute science, and
of science there was less and less every day. ‘To remedy
this evil, to restore ancient manuscripts to their proper read-
ing and order, to correct their orthography and their grammar,
was one of the first tasks to which Alcuin applied himself; a
task which continued to occupy him throughout the remainder
of his life, which he constantly recommended to his pupils,
and in the fulfilment of which he was supported by Charle-
magne’s authority. We find among the capitularies an ordi-
nance in these terms :—

“Charles, by the aid of God, king of the Francs and Lom-
bards, and prince of the Romans, to the high ministers of re-
ligion throughout our dominions: Having it near at heart that
the state of the churches should more and more advance to-
wards perfection, and being desirous of restoring by assiduous
care the cultivation of letters, which have almost entirely dis-
appeared from amongst us, in consequence of the neglect and
indifference of our ancestors, we would excite by our own
example all well-disposed persons to the study of the liberal.
arts. ‘To this purpose, we have already, by God’s constant
help, accurately corrected the books of the Old and New Tes-
taments, corrupted by the ignorance of the copyists. We
could not endure that in the divine services, amidst the sacred
lessons, there should occur discordant solecisms, and we,
therefore, conceived the design of reforming these lessons.
We entrusted this work to our proved servant, the deacon
Paul. We enjoined him diligently to go through the writings
of the catholic fathers; to cull amidst those fertile meads the
finest and most useful flowers, and to form of these one sweet
and beneficial garland. Eager to obey our highness, he re-
perused the treatises and discoveries of the various catholic
fathers, and selecting the best of these, has presented to us, in
two volumes, a series of divine readings, freed from inaccu-
racies, adapted to each sacred day throughout the year. We


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. aa


have examined the texts of these volumes with our sagacity,
and having found them worthy of our sanction and authority,
we transmit them to you to be read in the churches of Christ
under your care.'

Whilst he was thus, by the agency of others, collecting and
correcting the texts destined for divine services, Alcuin him-
self labored at a complete revisal of the sacred writings. He
concluded it about the year 801, in the abbey of St. Martin de
‘Tours, and sent it to Charlemagne. ‘JT long meditated,”’ he
says, ‘“‘ what present I could offer you, not merely not unwor-
thy of the glory of your imperial power, but which might
form some addition to your wealth; for I could not consent
that while others were laying at your feet rich gifts of every
kind, my humble talents should remain so idle as not to pre-
pare some offering to your beatitude. At length, by an in-
spiration of the Holy Ghost, I thought of a present at once
suitable in me to offer, and calculated to be agreeable to your
wisdom. What, indeed, could be more worthy of you than
the divine books, which I herewith send to your Most Illus-
trious Authority, collected into one body, and carefully freed
from all errors, to the utmost of our ability and pains? If the
devotion of my heart could have devised anything better, I
would have offered it to you with equal zeal for the increase
of your glorious fortune.’”

This present, it would seem, excited the emulation of
Charlemagne himself, for we read in Thegau, a contemporary
chronicler, that, ‘in the year which preceded Charlemagne’s
death, he carefully corrected, by the assistance of certain
learned Greeks and Syrians, the four gospels of Jesus
Christ.’”8

Such examples, and such orders, could not fail of effect,
and the ardor for the reproduction of ancient manuscripts
became general ; as soon as an exact revision of any work had
been completed by Alcuin or one of his disciples, copies of it
were transmitted to the principal churches and abbeys, where
fresh copies were made for diffusion amongst the lesser churches
and abbeys. ‘The art of copying became a source of fortune,


1 Constitution of Charlemagne, addressed to the bishops, in 788;
Baluze, i., 203.
2 Letters of Alcuin, 1., 153, letter 103.
3 De la Vie e des Actes de Louis le Debonnaire, in my Collection
des Mémoires relatifs a lH’istoire de France, 111, 281.
4


38 HISTORY OF


of glory even; the monasteries in which the most correct and
beautiful copies were executed, attained celebrity on this sole
account ; and, in each monastery, the monks who most excelled
in the art were, in like manner, honored among their brethren.
The abbey of Fontenelle, and two of its members, Ovon and
Hardouin, were especially renowned in this respect. The
fraternities at Reims and at Corbie sought to vie with the
famed monks of Fontenelle ; instead of the corrupt characters
which had been in use for the past two centuries, the small
Roman characters were resumed. ‘The monastic libraries
soon became very considerable in their extent ; a great number
of existing manuscripts date from this period ; and though its
zeal was more peculiarly directed to sacred literature, profane
literature was not altogether neglected. Alcuin himself, it is
stated, on more than one authority, revised and copied the plays
of Terence.

Il. At the same time that he was restoring manuscripts,
and thus supplying study with sound materials, he labored
with ardor at the re-establishment of schools, which had then
fallen everywhere into decay: here again an ordinance by
Charlemagne shows us the measures, doubtless suggested by
Alcuin himself, which were taken on this subject:

“Charles, by the aid of God, &c., to Baugulf, abbot, and
his brotherhood, health :

“We beg to inform your Devotion to God that, in concert
with our councillors, we have deemed it beneficial that in the
bishoprics and monasteries confided by the favor of Christ
to our government, care should be taken, not only to live
orderly and according to our holy religion, but moreover to
instruct in the knowledge of letters, and according to the
capacity of individuals, all such as are willing and able to
learn, by God’s help. For though of the two it is better to
be good than to be learned, yet to have knowledge leads to
the being good. In the various letters addressed to us from
monasteries, announcing that the brethren continued to pray
for us in their holy ceremonies, and in their private orisons,
we have remarked that for the most part, while the senti-
ments were excellent, the language in which they were con-
veyed was generally rude and illiterate ; that the fine thoughts
and feelings which a pious devotion dictated within, an un-
skilful and an uneducated tongue mutilated in the delivery.
This inspired us with an apprehension that the same want of
ability which prevented men from writing properly, must


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 39


also operate in keeping them from a due understanding of
the holy scriptures. It is certain, at all events, that the
allegories, emblems, and imagery of the holy writings, will
be more readily comprehended in their true spiritual mean-
ings, by those who are versed in general learning. We,
therefore, would have you select from among your brethren
such as may be deemed best fitted, for first acquiring them-
selves, and then communicating to others, a knowledge of
letters ; and let such proceed to their task with the least possible
delay. As you value our favor, fail not to communicate
copies of this communication to all the suffragan bishops, and
all the monasteries around you.’”

Many contemporary monuments give evidence that this 7m-
perial circular, as we should now call it, did not remain with-
out effect ; that it resulted in the re-establishment of system-
atic studies in the episcopal cities and in the great monasteries.
From this epoch date the majority of the schools, which soon
afterwards acquired such celebrity, and from which proceeded
the most distinguished men of the following century ; for
example, of Ferrieres in Gatinois, of Fulda in the diocese
of Mayence, of Richenau in that of Constance, of Ainane in
Languedoc, of Fontenelle or St. Vandrille, in Normandy ;
while most of the men who did honor to these establishments
at the period in question, had been disciples of Alcuin himself,
who, amid all his avocations, was a public preacher and a
public teacher of great distinction.

III. 11 was not, however, in a monastery, nor in any pub-
lic institution, that he taught in the first instance: from 782
to 796, the period of his residence in the court of Charle-
magne, Alcuin presided over a private school, called The
School of the Palace, which accompanied Charlemagne
wherever he went, and at which were regularly present all
those who were with the emperor. Here, besides many others,
Alcuin had for auditors :


1. Charles, son of Charlemagne.

2. Pepin do.

3. Louis do,

4. Adalhard.

5. Angilbert. , ;

6. plas Dameetas. aie umeh ote pf
7. Eginhard. i ee


1 Baluze, i., 201.


40 HISTORY OF


8. kiculf, archbishop of Mayence.
9. Rigbod, archbishop of Tréves.

10. Gisla, sister of Charlemagne.

1]. Gisla, daughter of Charlemagne.

12. Richtrude, a nun of Chelles.

13. Gundrade, sister of Adalhard; and Charlemagne
himself, who took the most lively interest in the lessons given.

It is difficult to say what could have been the course of
instruction pursued in this school; I am disposed to believe
that to such auditors Alcuin addressed himself generally upon
all sorts of topics as they occurred; that in the Ecole du
Palais, in fact, it was conversation rather than teaching, es-
pecially so called, that went on; that movement given to mind,
curiosity constantly excited and satisfied, was its chief merit.
At such periods, in the days of its new birth, amid the joy
of its first progress, the mind is neither regular nor fastidious ;
it troubles itself very slightly as to the beauty and real utility
of its labors ; that which it takes most especial delight in is the
play of thought, it may be said to disport with itself rather
than to study ; it is more intent upon its own immediate ac-
tivity than upon results; so that it is occupied with some-
thing which interests it, that is all it asks; let it but discover
or produce something new, unexpected, and it is all delight.
There has come down to us a singular specimen of the in-
struction given at this Ecole du Palais : it is a conversation
entitled Disputatio, between Alcuin and Pepin, second son of
Charlemagne, at that period a youth of fifteen or sixteen: |
will lay before you a literal translation of the greater portion
of this; you will judge for yourselves as to its claims to a
learned character, and whether it is what we now understand
by lessons.

Interlocutors: PEpin, ALCUIN.

“Pepin. What is writing ?

Aucuin. The keeping of history.
What is speaking ?
The interpreter of the soul.
What is it gives birth to speaking ?
. The tongue.
What is the tongue ?
. The whip of the air.
What is the air ?
. The preserver of life.
What is life ?


Ub Ub pO po


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 4]


A. Happiness for the happy, misery for the miserable ;) the
expectation of death.

P. What is death ?

A. An inevitable event, a doubtful journey, a subject of
tears for the living, the confirmation of wills, the robber of
men.

P. What is man ?

A. The slave of death, a passing traveller, a guest in his
own abode. let
How is man placed ?

. Asa traveller exposed to the world.
Where is he placed ?
. Between six walls.
What are they ?
. That above, that below, that on the right, that on the
left, that in front, that behind.
What is sleep ?
. The image of death.
. What is the liberty of man ?
. Innocence.
. What is the head ? 5
. The pinnacle of the body. !
- What is the body ?
. The abode of the soul.

(Next follow twenty-six questions relative to the various
parts of the human: body, which I suppress as wholly desti-
tute of interest. Then Pepin goes on :)

P.. What is heaven ?

. A moving sphere, an immense vault.

What is light ?

. The torch of all things.

What is the day ?

. A call to labor.

What is the sun ?

. The splendor of the universe, the beauty of the firma-
ment, the grace of nature, the glory of the day, the distributor
of the hours.

(I here again suppress five questions on the stars and
elements. )

P. What is the earth ?

A. The mother of all that grows, the nurse of all that
exists, the granary of life, the gulf which swallows up all
things.


> b> PO be Me


> > Ob > ty


b> OO b> MD be MO b>


4*


42


P.


HISTORY OF


What is the sea 2


A. The highway of the daring, the limits of the earth, the
hostelry of rivers, the source of rain.

(Now follow six wholly uninteresting questions as to mate-
rial objects in nature. ‘Then Pepin goes on:)


a a ee


. What is winter ?
. The exile of spring.


What is spring ?


. The painter of the earth.
. What is summer ?
. The power which clothes the earth, and ripens fruits.


What is autumn 2


. The granary of the year.


What is the year ?


. The chariot of the world.


(I here omit five astronomical questions. )


Pr
A.
P.
A
P.


Master, I am afraid to go upon the sea.

What leads you to the sea ?

Curiosity.

If you are afraid, I will accompany you.

If | knew what a ship was, J would prepare one where-


in thou mightest accompany me.


A.


A ship is a wandering house, an inn ready in all places,


a traveller who leaves no trace behind him.


. Hope.


PUP tb UP Ub Ub Ub Ub Ups


. What is grass ?
. The robe of the earth.


What are vegetables ?


. The friends of the physician, the glory of the cooks.


What is it renders bitter things sweet ?


. Hunger.


What is that of which men never get weary ?


. Gain.


What is the dream of the waking ?


What is hope ?


. The refreshment of labor, a doubtful event.


What is friendship ?


. The similarity of souls.


What is faith ?


. The assurance of unknown and marvellous things.
. What is marvellous 2
. I saw the other day a man standing, a dead man walk-


ing, a man walking who had never breathed.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 43


P. How may that have been? Explain yourself.

A. It was an image reflected in the water.

P. How could I have failed to understand you; I who
have so often seen the same thing ?

A. As you are a youth of good disposition, and endowed
with natural capacity, I will put to you several other unusual
questions: endeavor to solve them.

P. I will do my best; if I make mistakes, you must cor-
rect them.

A. Doubtless. Some one, who is unknown to me, has
conversed with me, having no tongue and no voice; he was
not before, he will not be hereafter, and I neither heard nor
knew him. What means this ?

P. Perhaps you mean a dream, master ?

A. Exactly so, my son. Listen, once more: I have seen
the dead engender the living, and the dead consumed by the
breath of the living.

P. Fire was produced by rubbing together dead branches,
and it then consumed the branches.

A. You are quite accurate.

(Then come fourteen more enigmas of the same character,
and the conversation terminates as follows) :

A. What is that which at one and the same time is and
is not ?

. NorHine.

. How can it be and not be ?
It exists in name, but not in fact.

. What is a mute messenger ?
That which I hold in my hand.

. What do you hold in your hand ?
My letter.

. Read it, my son.’

Clearly, as a means of education, these conversations are
altogether and strangely puerile: as a symptom and com-
mencement of intellectual movement, they merit all our
attention: they evidence that eager curiosity with which
mind, in its crude infancy, directs its view upon all things ;
that so vivid pleasure which it takes in every unexpected
combination, in every at all ingenious idea; a tendency which
is manifested alike in the life of individuals and in that of


b> Ob Ob Ob


1 Alcuini Opera, 1i., 352—354.


44 HISTORY OF


nations, and which gives birth to the most fantastic dreams,
the vainest subtleties. It was, beyond doubt, dominant in
the palace of Charlemagne, and, doubtless, led to the forma-
tion of that sort of academy there, whose members all assumed
surnames derived from sacred or profane literature—Charle-
magne—David, Alcuin—Flaccus, Angilbert—Homer, Fried-
gies—Nathaniel, Amalaire—Symphosius, Gisla—Lucia, Gun-
drade,—Eulalia, and so on; and the singular conversation of
which I have just laid extracts before you is, in all probability,
only a fair specimen of that which habitually took place, and
to their no small delight, among these beaux-esprits, half bar-
barian, half cultivated.

If the influence of Alcuin had been confined within the
walls of this academy, it would have effected but little worthy
of our notice ; but the great business of his life was in con-
nexion with Charlemagne, and the intellectual authority of
this extraordinary man was more grave and more productive
of results.

To give you an idea of the relations existing between
these two men, and of the prodigious movement of mind
which Alcuin was entrusted with the direction of, I cannot
do better than lay before you the most authentic monument
of them which exists—their correspondence. ‘There remain.
to us, in the whole, two hundred and thirty-two of Alcuin’s
letters ; of those, thirty are addressed to Charlemagne; | will
pass these in review before you, sometimes translating
passages as I proceed, sometimes merely indicating the
nature of their contents.


Review of the Letters of Alcuin to Charlemagne.


No. of
the | Date. Purport.
Letter.


14— | 793 On the Transfiguration of Jesus Christ.
20° 1 °796 He congratulates him on his victories over the
Huns (Avares), and gives him advice as to the manner
in which he should proceed for their conversion: 1.
By sending among them gentle-mannered missiona-
ries ; 2. By not requiring tithe from them.

«Tt is better to lose the tithe than to prejudice the
faith ; we ourselves, born, bred, and educated in the
Catholic religion, scarce consent to surrender a tithe
of our goods ; how much less readily will such consent
be given by the newly-born faith, the doubtful heart
and greedy spirit of these tribes ?”


No. of
the
Letter.


32
38


61


64
65


67


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 45 -


Review of the Letters of Alcuin to Charlemagne.


Date.


796
796


Purport.


3 By observing a certain method of religious in-
struction :

<«* This method, I think, should be that which the
blessed Augustin has laid down in his book On the
Instruction of the Simple-minded. The pupil should
first be taught the general facts of the immortality of
the soul, of a future life, and the eternity of our des-
tiny. Then he should be told for what crimes and
sins eternal punishment with the devil and his angels
will be inflicted on him, and for what good actions he
will be rewarded, in the presence of Christ, with
eternal glory. Finally, he should have carefully in-
culcated upon him faith in the Holy Trinity, and have
explained to him the coming of Jesus Christ into this
world, for the salvation of mankind.”

He recommends him to be lenient towards his Hun
prisoners, and towards his enemies generally.

He gives him an account of what he is doing for the
prosperity of the school at the Abbey of Tours :

««T, your Flaccus, in obedience to your exhortation
and wise desire, apply myself in serving out to some
of my pupils in this house of Saint Martin, the honey
of the holy writings; I essay to intoxicate others with
the old wine of antique studies; one class I nourish
with the fruits of grammatical science; in the eyes of
another, I display the order of the stars. But I am
constantly in want of most of those excellent books of
scholastic erudition, which I had collected around me
in my own country, both by the devoted zeal of my
master, and by my own labor. I therefore entreat
your majesty to permit me to send some of my people
into Britain that they may bring these flowers thence
into France....In the morning of my life I sowed the
seeds of learning in Britain; now, in its eventide,
though my blood is less warm within me, I do not
cease sowing these seeds in France, and I hope that by
the grace of God they will prosper in both countries.”

He gives him a detailed explanation of the lunar
eycle,

He recommends several persons to his favor.

He explains to him the origin of the names of
Septuagesima and Sexagesima. (The sixty-sixth let-


ter is a reply from Charlemagne, who puts forward
several objections to his views.)

He recurs to the subject, and defends himself from
the imputation of obstinacy.


a


46


68
69


70
71
80
81


84
85


90


91
93


HISTORY OF


Review of the Letters of Alcuin to Charlemagne.


| 197


798
798
798
799
799


S00
800


800


800
800


801


801
801


801


Purport.


«* As to what you say in the conclusion of your let-
ter, in a most friendly spirit, and solely for my good,
that, if there be anything to correct in my opinions on
the matter, I should correct them promptly and
humbly, I would reply that, thanks to God, I have
never been obstinately pertinacious in error, nor over
confident in my own opinion ; I yield without a strug-
gle to superior judgment, attentive to the maxim that
it is better to make use of the ears than of the tongue.
I entreat your wisdom, then, to believe that I address
myself to you, not as to a disciple but as to a judge,
and that I offer you my humble ideas, not as to one
ignorant of the matter, but as to one fully competent
to correct the views of others.”

On the course of the sun and the phases of the year ;
and on the heresy of Felix, bishop of Urgel.

On astronomy and chronology: he replies to several
questions which had been addressed to him by a woman,
probably Gisla, Charlemagne’s sister.

On astronomy; he replies to several questions of
Charlemagne on the course of the sun, the constella-
tions, &c,

On the same subject.

On the state of public affairs; he urges him to be
lenient towards the Saxons.

He excuses himself from accompanying Charlemagne
to Rome, on the ground of ill health.

A complimentary letter, with some astronomical
calculations.

He thanks him for having heard read the pamphlet
he (Alcuin) had written against bishop Felix, and
sends him some observations on orthography and arith-
metic.

He condoles with him on the death of his wife Lint-
garde, and forwards an epitaph,

On the same subject.

He congratulates him on his victories; exhorts him
to clemency; speaks to him about the health of pope
Leo; excuses himself for not having written, and re-
fuses to go to Rome.

He felicitates himself upon the return of Charle-
magne from Italy.

Forwarding his corrected copy of the holy scriptures.

He excuses himself from going to court, on the
ground of his advanced age.

He expresses his sorrow for the death of Manfred,
solicits materials for the building of a church, and en-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 47


Review of the Letters from Alcuin to Charlemagne.


~ the | Date. Purport.


treats Charlemagne to be careful in avoiding the dan-

gers of the expedition to Benevento :

“Though my affection may appear insensate, at
least it cannot be charged with want of consistency ;
and the confidence I have in your proved humility,
emboldens me to say to you whatI do. Perhaps some
one may object: why does he concern himself with
that which is not his business? But I humbly interest
myself in all that concerns your prosperity, which, I
declare to you, is more dear to me than my own life.
You are the blessing of the kingdom, the safety of the
people, the honor of the church, the protector of all
the faithful in Christ; it is under the shadow of your
power, the shelter of your pious care, that, by Divine
grace, we are enabled to pursue a religious life, and to
serve God in tranquillity: it is, therefore, just and ne-
cessary, that, with an attentive spirit and a devoted
heart, we occupy ourselves with your fortune and your
health, and pray God to preserve to us in health and
prosperity our most excellent and most honor-worthy
king David.”

106 | 801 He thanks him for his favors, and entreats him, on
account of his infirmities, to allow him to remain at
St. Martin’s,

115 | 802 He excuses himself and the fraternity of St. Martin

or for having given an asylum to a priest of the church of

803 |Orleans, which affair had been the occasion of a great
tumult in the church of St. Martin, and of great anger
to Charlemagne and Theodulf.

123 | Year| He replies to questions forwarded by Charlemagne,
uncer-|as to the difference between the terms eternal and
tain. |sempiternal, perpetual and immortal, age and time.

124 Id. He replies to questions from Charlemagne, on cer-
tain passages of Scripture.

125 Id. He replies to a question by Charlemagne, why we
find in none of the gospels the hymns sung by Je-
sus Christ after the Last Supper.

126 Id. He replies to Charlemagne, who has asked him, on
the part of a learned Greek, to whom the price of
man’s redemption was remitted.

127 Id. He gives advice to Charles on the subjects of capi-

tularies, wills, successions, &c.


It was no easy task for Alcuin to fulfil such varied rela-
tions, to satisfy all the intellectual requirements of that
indefatigable master, who thought of everything and busied


48 HISTORY OF


himself with everything—history, morals, theology, astrono-
my, chronology, grammar—and doubtless regarded it as a
matter of course, that in these things, as in all others, his
will should in every case, and immediately, be carried into
effect.

There is doubtless a powerful charm in the society of a
great man; but when the great man is a sovereign, it soon
becomes a heavy burden to have to please him at every mo-
ment and in everything. No formal text shows it us; but
Charlemagne, in his relations with Alcuin, no doubt exhibited
that pitiless egoism of a superior and despotic genius, which
only considers men, even those whom it best loves, and to
whom it attaches the greatest importance, as tools, and pro-
gresses towards its end without troubling itself as to how dear
it costs those whom it employs in the attainment. A pro-
found weariness seized upon Alcuin—he earnestly solicited
permission to retire from the court, and to live in retirement.
In 796, he wrote to an archbishop, whose name is unknown:

“Your paternity must know that I your son ardently desire
to lay aside the weight of worldly affairs, and to serve God
alone. Every man needs with vigilance to prepare to meet
God, and how especially so old men, borne down with years
and infirmities !’7!

And to his friend Angilbert :

‘On thy departure, I attempted many times to take refuge
in the haven of repose ; but the King of all things, the Mas-
ter of souls, has not yet accorded to me what he has so long
made me wish.’”

Charlemagne at length allowed him to depart, and about
796, it seems, he gave him for a retreat the abbey of Saint
Martin of Tours, one of the most wealthy in the kingdom.

Alcuin hastened to take possession of it. The retreat was
magnificent ; there were more than twenty thousand laborers
or serfs on the domains of the abbeys which he possessed,
and the correspondence which he continued to keep up with
Charlemagne animated without burdening his life. He did
not remain idle in his new situation; he re-established rule
and order in the monastery, enriched the library with manu-
scripts copied at York by young priests whom he sent for
this purpose, and by his own teaching he gave the school a


1 Lett. of Alcuin, 168th, vol. i., p. 228. ? Ibid., 21st, vol. 1., p. 31.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 49


brilliancy which it had never before known. It was at this
epoch that many of the most distinguished men of the follow-
ing century—among others, Raban Maur, who became arch-
bishop of Mayence, and Amalaire, a learned priest of Metz—
were formed by his lessons.

Charlemagne attempted several times to recal Alcuin to
his side ; he wished him, among others, to accompany him to
Rome, when he went there, in 800, to assume the empire of
the west. “It is a reproach,” he writes to him, ‘ to prefer
the smoked roofs of the people of Tours to the gilded palaces
of the Romans.’”!

But Alcuin remained firm.

“I do not think,”’ answers he, “that my weak body, broken
by daily pains, can support this journey. I should have
much desired it if it were practicable. How can I constrain
myself to new combats, and to toil under the weight of arms
—I, who am left by my infirmities scarcely in a state to raise
them from the earth 23... 1 implore you to leave me to
finish my career at Saint Martin; all the energy, all the dig-
nity of my body has flown; I admit it; less and less is daily
left me, and I shall never again recover it in this world. I
had of late desired and hoped once more to see the face of
your beatitude, but the deplorable increase of my infirmities
has proved to me that I must renounce that hope. I conjure,
then, your inexhaustible goodness that the so holy spirit, that
the so benevolent will, which are in you, be not irritated
against my weakness ; grant, with a pious compassion, that
a wearied man may repose himself, that he may pray for
you in his orisons, and that he may prepare, by confession
and tears, to appear before the eternal judge.’”

Charlemagne, it seems, insisted no longer; and Alcuin,
perhaps in order to protect himself from new solicitations,
resolved entirely to renounce all activity, even that to which
he had given himself up in his retreat. In 801, he resigned
his abbeys. and obtained that they should be divided among
his principal disciples ; and, free from all business, he, till
the day of his death (19th May, 804), occupied himself only
with his health and his salvation.

I have given somewhat of expansion to this account of his


* Lett. of Alcuin, 93d, vol. i., p. 188. ? Ibid., 81st letter, p. 120.
3 Ibid., 104th letter, p. 154. 4 Tbid., 106th, p. 157.


¢.


50 HISTORY OF


relations with Charlemagne, and the various situations of his
life; it is there, more especially, that is reflected the image
of this time, and that the social movement amidst which he
lived is shown. Iwill now say something to you of his
works; a few words and a few extracts will, | hope, suffice
to give you at least an idea of them.

They may be divided into four classes: 1, theological
works; 2, philosophical and literary works; 3, historical
works; 4, poetical works.

1. The theological works are of three kinds: 1. Commen-
taries on various parts of the holy scriptures; commentaries
whose especial object is to discover the allegorical meaning,
and to determine the moral sense of the sacred writings.
2. Dogmatical treatises, the greater part directed against the
heresies of the Adoptians respecting the nature of Jesus
Christ ; a heresy which played a rather important part at this
time, which was condemned by two councils held by the or-
der of Charlemagne, and of which Alcuin was the principal
adversary. 3. Liturgical works on the celebration of eccle-
siastical offices.

2. The philosophical and literary works are six in number:
1, a kind of treatise of practical morality, entitled De Virtu-
tibus et Vitiis, and addressed to count Wido or Guy in a dedi-
catory epistle, and a peroration in the following terms:

“T recollect thy request and my promise; thou didst
urgently pray me to write thee some exhortations in a concise
style, in order that, amidst the occupations given thee by mili-
tary affairs, thou mightest constantly have before thine eyes
a manual of maxims and paternal counsels, where thou might-
est examine thyself, and excite thyself to seek eternal beati-
tude. I very willingly comply with so worthy a request ;
and be assured that, although these counsels may appear to
thee written without eloquence, they are dictated by holy
charity. I have divided this discourse into separate chapters,
so that my advice may be more easily fixed on the memory
of thy piety ; for ] know thou art much occupied with worldly
affairs. Let the holy desire to thy salvation, I beseech thee,
make thee often have recourse to this reading, as to a useful
refreshment: so that thy soul, fatigued with external cares,
may enter into itself, there find enjoyment, and understand
properly to what it ought especially to apply itself.

«« And do not allow thyself to be deterred by the lay habit
which thou wearest, or by the secular life which thou leadest,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 51


as though in that habit thou couldst not pass through the
gates of celestial life. For as the beatitude of the kingdom
of God is preached to all without distinction, so the entry to
that kingdom is open equally, with only a distinction as to
merits, to each sex, to all ages, to all ranks; there no heed is
taken as to whether a man on earth has been layman or priest,
rich or poor, young or old, master or slave, but eternal glory
crowns each according to his works.’”!

Thirty-five chapters then follow upon the various virtues
and vices, wisdom, faith, charity, indulgence, envy, pride,
&c. We find nothing here particularly original or profound ;
but practical utility is aimed at with much good sense, and
human nature is sometimes observed and described with a
highly intellectual delicacy. The following two chapters
prove it.


“* Of Sorrow.


“There are two kinds of sorrow, the one beneficial, the
other pernicious. Sorrow is beneficial when the soul of the
sinner is afflicted with his sins, and is so afflicted with them
that it aspires to confession and penitence, and desires to be
converted to God. Very different is worldly sorrow, which
works the death of the soul, become incapable of accomplish-
ing any good; this latter troubles man, and often depresses
him to that point that he loses the hope of eternal good. Of
this sorrow are born malice, rancor, cowardice, bitterness,
and despair, often even disgust at this life. It is conquered
by spiritual joy, hope of future blessings, the consolation
given by the scriptures, and by fraternal conversation, ani-
mated with spiritual enjoyment.’”


“Of Vain Glory.


‘“‘'That pest, vain glory, is a passion with a thousand forms,
which glides on all sides into the heart of the man who is
occupied in striving against vices, and even of the man who
has conquered them. In the deportment and the beauty of
the body, in step, word, action, fasts, prayer, solitude, read-
ing, science, silence, obedience, humility, long-suffering, pa-
tience, it seeks a means of overcoming the soldier of Christ ;


2 Alcuin Oper., vol. ii., pp. 129, 145. 2? Chap. 38, vol. ii., p. 152.


52 HISTORY OF


it resembles a dangerous rock concealed under swollen bil-
lows, and which prepares a terrible storm for those who sail
the most successfully, and when they are all unsuspecting.
This man, who does not take pride in fine and _ splendid
clothing, the demon of false glory endeavors to inspire with a
pride in the foulness and coarseness of common clothing ;
another has resisted the temptations of ambition, he will be
lost by those of humility ; a third has not allowed himself
to be puffed up by the advantages of science and eloquence,
he will be subdued by the gravity of silence. One publicly
fasts, and vain glory possesses him; to escape it he fasts in
secret; it insinuates its poison into the swelling heart of the
internal man; for fear of succumbing he avoids long prayer
before his brothers, but what he does in secret does not protect
him from the excitements of vanity ; it puffs one, because he
is very patient in his works and labors; another because he
is very prompt to obey; this man because he surpasses all
others in humility ; that, because of his zeal in science; a
third, by reason of his application to reading ; a fourth, be-
cause of the length of his watches. A terrible evil, which
strives to sully man, not only in works of the world, but
even in his virtues.’”*

There is here a rather skilful observation of human nature,
and a tolerable art in expressing the results.

The title of the second work of this class is De Ratione
Anime (of the nature of the soul), and it is addressed to Gun-
drade, sister of Adalhard, and surnamed Eulalia, one of the
women who were present at the lectures of Alcuin in the
school of the palace. It is a more purely philosophical at-
tempt than the preceding, and in which, under all its forms,
the idea of the unity of the soul is expressed with subtlety
and energy.

“ The soul,” says he, “ bears divers names according to the
nature of its operations : inasmuch as it lives and makes live,
it is the soul (anima); inasmuch as it contemplates, it is the
spirit (spiritus) ; inasmuch as it feels, it is sentiment (sensus) ;
since it reflects, it is thought (animus); as it comprehends,
intelligence (mens) ; inasmuch as it discerns, reason (ratio) ;
as it consents, will (volwntas); as it recollects, memory


1 Chap. 34, vol. ii., p. 144.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 53


(memoria). But these things are not divided in substance as
in name, for all this is the soul, and one soul only.’’

‘And elsewhere :

‘‘ The soul, in its very nature, has an image, as it were,
of the Holy Trinity, for it has intellect, will, and memory.
The soul, which is also called the mind, the life, the sub-
stance which includes these three faculties within itself, is
one ; these three faculties do not constitute three lives, but
one life; not three minds, but one mind; not three sub-
stances, but one substance. When we give to the soul the
names of mind, life, or substance, we regard it in itself; but
when we call it the memory, the intellect, or the will, we
consider it in its relation tosomething. These three faculties
make but one, inasmuch as the life, the mind, the substance,
formone. They make three, inasmuch as they are considered
in their external relations ; for the memory is the recollec-
tion of something ; the intellect is the understanding of some-
thing ; the will is the will of something, and in this they are
distinguished. And still there is in these three faculties a
certain unity. I think that I think, that I will, and that I
remember; I will to think, and to recollect, and to will;
I remember that I have thought and willed, and that I have
remembered, and thus these three faculties are combined in
one.’”*

In other respects, there are in this treatise nothing but
scattered ideas, and no systematic character.

After these two moral essays, come four treatises; 1. On
grammar; 2. Onorthography ; 3. On rhetoric ; 4. On logic,
which I shall only mention ; for to make known the contents
and merits of them would render it necessary to enter too far
into detail. The last two are in the form of a dialogue be-
tween Alcuin and Charlemagne, the object of which is
evidently to instruct Charlemagne in the methods of the
ancient sophists and rhetoricians, especially in what concerns
logic and judicial eloquence.

3. The historical works of Alcuin are of little importance ;
they are confined to four lives of the saints, Saint Waast,
Saint Martin, Saint Riquier, and Saint Willibrod. The latter,
however, contains some rather curious details for a history of
manners. It is said-that Alcuin wrote a history of Charle-


1 Vol. ii., p. 149. > Vole i; pe 147,
Be


D4 HISTORY OF


magne, in particular of his wars with the Saxons, but this, if
it ever existed, is now lost.

4. His poetical works, although numerous, are also but of
little value ; there are two hundred and eighty pieces of verse,
upon all kinds of subjects, most of them upon the incidents
of the day. The principal is a poem upon the bishops and
saints of the church of York ; it is worth reading, as an indi-
cation of the intellectual state of the age.

I regret that I am unable to enter more fully into these
monuments of a mind so active and distinguished. Some
will, perhaps, think I have dwelt too long upon them as it is :
for myself, I fear that I have scarcely thrown a glance at them ;
and if we were to make a profound study of them, we should
unquestionably find both profit and pleasure in it: but we
must restrict ourselves. ‘To sum up, the following seems to
me to be the general character, the intellectual physiognomy
of Alcuin and of his works. He is a theologian by profession,
the atmosphere in which he lived, in which the public te
whom he addresses himself lived, is essentially theological ;
and yet the theological spirit does not reign alone in him, his
works and his thoughts also tend towards philosophy and an-
cient literature ; it is that which he also delights in studying,
teaching, and which he wished to revive. Saint Jerome and
Saint Augustin are very familiar to him; but Pythagoras,
Aristotle, Aristippus, Diogenes, Plato, Homer, Virgil, Seneca,
Pliny, also occur to his memory. The greater part of his
writings are theological ; but mathematics, astronomy, logic,
rhetoric, habitually occupy him. He is a monk, a deacon,
the light of the contemporaneous church ; but he is at the
same time a scholar, a classical man of letters. In him, at
length, commenced the alliance of these two elements of
which the modern mind had so long borne the incoherent im-
press, antiquity and the church—the admiration, the taste, the
regret, shall I call it, for pagan literature, and the sincerity
of Christian faith, the zeal to sound its mysteries, and to defend
its power. —


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 55


TWENTY-THIRD LECTURE.


Classification of celebrated men of the age of Charlemagne: 1. Lei-
drade, archbishop of Lyons—His letter to Charlemagne upon what
he has done to his diocese—2. Theodulph, archbishop of Orleans—
His measures for the instruction of the people—His poem entitled
Exhortation to Judges—3, Smaragde, abbot of Saint Michael—His
treatise of morality for kings, entitled Vie Regia—4. Eginhard—
His alleged marriage with a daughter of Charlemagne—Their rela-
tions—Of what happened after the death of this prince—His letters
—His Life of Charlemagne—Recapituiation.


WueEn I placed before you the view of the celebrated men
of the age of Charlemagne, | comprehended therein those
who died and those who were born in his reign, his contempo-
raries, properly so called, and those who long survived him ;
the former discovered, as it were, and employed by him, the
second, formed under his influence : an important distinction,
if we would justly estimate an epoch and the influence of a
man. A sovereign arrives at power in the midst of cireum-
stances, and under the influence of causes, anterior to, and
independent of his own will ; and which have planted around
distinguished men; he gathers them, but he has not made
them: his merit consists in knowing how to recognize them,
to accept them, to make use of them; but they are not the
result of his action; we must not judge of this by them. We
have in modern times a striking example of this distinction.
Most of the men who constituted the glory of the reign of
Louis XIV. were formed entirely independently of him,
while the religious struggles still resounded in France,
amidst the troubles of the Fronde, and in a liberty which
soon vanished. The true fruit of the influence of Louis
XIV. belongs to the last period of his reign ; it is the man-
ners and the men of that time which are necessary to be
considered in order to judge properly of the effects of his
government, and the direction which it impressed upon mind.
The distinction is great, and should be well observed.

We shall find no such difference among the men whom
Charlemagne found, and those who were formed under him.
The latter were in no way inferior to their predecessors, but


56 HISTORY OF


they were different, and the truth of the distinction which I
have pointed out is equally evident.

I spoke in our last lecture of the chief, and, without
contradiction, the most distinguished cotemporary of Charle-
magne. ‘The men of whom I am about to speak, at least
almost all of them, belong to the same. epoch, to the same
class; like Alcuin, they were not formed by Charlemagne ;
he discovered and made use of them. ‘Two among them,
Leidrade and Theodulph, were, like Alcuin, foreigners; and
without Charlemagne, would probably never have appeared
in Frankish Gaul.

I. Leidrade was born in the province which the Romans
called Norica, situated on the confines of Italy and Germany.
He was first attached to Arnon, bishop of Salzburg, and made
himself distinguished at an early age by his mind and know-
ledge. Charlemagne first engaged him as a librarian, and
employed him in various missions. ‘The missi dominic, the
principal instruments, as you have seen, of his government,
were almost all men of this kind, whom he had attracted
from all parts, and whom he habitually retained near him,
in order to send them, according to need, to inspect some
portion of his states, until, sooner or later, he separated from
them, conferring upon them some great ecclesiastical or civil
charge. It thus happened to Leidrade. After numerous
missions, the last of which, in Southern Gaul, prevented him
for some time from being consecrated, he was nominated, in
798, archbishop of Lyons. The church of Lyons had always
been one of the most considerable of the south of Gaul, and,
at the same time, one of those in which disorder had been the
greatest, and calculated to give the greatest trouble to repair.
It was on this ground, and to satisfy this want, that Charle-
magne confided it to Leidrade. A curious monument has
come down to us of what the new archbishop did in his
diocese. This is a letter in which he himself gives a detailed
account to Charlemagne of his labors and their results. [
will read it entire, despite its emphatic prolixities. It is
necessary to bear with them in order to form a true idea of
the turn of mind of the age, and the relations of an archbishop
with the sovereign. The date of this letter is not exactly
known, but it probably belongs to the early years of the ninth
century.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 57
“ To Charles the Great, Emperor.


“'To the powerful Charles, emperor, Leidrade, bishop of
Lyons, health. Our lord, perpetual and sacred emperor, I
supplicate the clemency of your highness, to hear read this
short epistle with a favorable countenance, so that your pious
prudence may know what it contains, and that your noble
clemency may know the purport of my request. You deigned
awhile ago to entrust the government of the church of Lyons to
me, the most infirm of your servants, incapable and unworthy
of that charge. But since you treat men far less according to
their merit, than according to your accustomed bounty, you
have acted with me as it has pleased your ineffable piety ; and
without any title thereto on my part, you have been pleased
to charge me with the care of this church, and to act in such
a manner that the abuses which have been committed in it
may be for the future reformed and avoided. Many things
were wanting to this church, both externally and internally,
as much in what concerns the holy offices, as for the edifices
and other ecclesiastical wants. Listen, therefore, to what I,
your very humble servant, have effected in it, since my
arrival, with God’s aid and yours. ‘The all powerful Lord,
who sees into consciences, is my witness, that I do not expose
these things in order to draw profit therefrom, and that I have
in no way arranged, and communicate this to you in order to
procure any advantage to myself, but because I expect
each day to leave this life, that because of my infirmities
I think myself very near death. J tell you these things to the
end that, having attained your benign ear, and being weighed
with indulgence, if you think that they have been effected
suitably, and according to your will, they may not, after my
death, be allowed to languish and perish.

‘When, according to your order, I had taken possession of
this church, I acted with all my power, with all the strength of
my weakness, to bring the ecclesiastical offices to the point at
which, with the grace of God, they have nearly arrived. It
pleased your piety to grant at my request the restitution of the
revenues which formerly belonged to the church of Lyons; by
means of which, with God’s grace and yours, there has been
established in the said church, a psalmody, where is followed,
as far as we are able, the ceremonies of the sacred palace, in
all that the divine office requires. I have schools of singers,
many of whom are already sufficiently instructed to be able to


58 HISTORY OF


teach others. Moreover, I have schools of readers, who not
only acquit themselves of their functions in the church, but
who, by meditation on the holy scriptures, assure themselves
the fruits of understanding of spiritual things. Some can
explain the spiritual sense of the Evangelists; others have
understanding of the prophecies ; others, of the books of Solo-
mon, the Psalms, and even Job. I have also done in this
church what lay in my power, as to copying books. I have
likewise procured clothing for the priests, and what was ne-
cessary for the offices. I have omitted nothing which lay in
my power for the restoration of the churches, so that I have
roofed the great church of this town, dedicated to Saint John
the Baptist, and I have reconstructed a portion of the walls ;
[ have also repaired the roof of the church of Saint Etienne ;
I have rebuilt the church of Saint Nizier, and that of Saint
Mary, without counting the monasteries and_ episcopal
houses, of which one in particular was almost destroyed, and
which I have repaired and re-roofed. [ have also constructed
another with a high platform. This I have prepared for you,
in order that if you come into these parts you may be
received there. For the priests, I have constructed a cloister
in which they now live all united in one edifice. I have also
repaired other churches in this diocese, one of them dedicated
to Saint Eulalia, where there is a nunnery dedicated to Saint
George; I have had it re-roofed, and part of the walls built
up from the foundations; another house in honor of Saint
Paul has also been re-roofed. I have entirely repaired the
church and house of a nunnery dedicated to Saint Peter, where
rests the body of Saint Annemond, martyr, and which was
founded by that holy bishop himself. ‘Thirty-two virgins of
the Lord now live there under the monastic rule. I have also
repaired, by renewing the roof and part of the walls, the royal
monastery of l’Isle Barbe; ninety monks now live there under
a regular monastic rule. We have given to its abbot the
power to bind and unbind; the same as his predecessors had
—Ambrose, Maximian, Licinius, illustrious men who have
governed this place, and which Euchere, Loup, Genest, and
the other bishops of Lyons, when they were absent and could
not fulfil in person, delegated, in order to take care that the
catholic faith was believed with sincerity, and that heretical
feuds did not abound.

“These abbots were even charged, if the church of Lyons
was without its chief, to serve it in all things as guides and


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 59


counsellors, until, with the grace of God, it was provided with
a worthy pastor. We have likewise given this power to their
successors. Above all things, we have ordered that the de-
crees of the ancient kings of France should be executed, to
the end that, as it was by them ordained in their statutes re-
specting sales and augmentations, these monks may for ever
possess without dispute, that which they have at present, that
which by the grace of God they may one day acquire.’”

I shall spare all commentary: the letter is sufficiently de-
tailed to show what an archbishop did at that time, who wished
to re-establish religion, society, and learning, in his diocese.
Leidrade passed his life in works of this kind; we find him
quitting his church but twice to go into Spain, by the order
of Charlemagne, to discuss and preach against the heresy of
the Adoptians. His eloquence, it is said, gained for him
there brilliant triumphs, and thousands of heretics were con-
verted by him. | However this may have been, in 814,
almost immediately after the death of Charlemagne, whether
from sorrow or prudence, he resigned his bishopric, and shut
himself up in the monastery of Saint Medard at Soissons.
He was taken thence for awhile, by Louis le Debonnaire,
who charged him with re-establishing order in the church of
Macon. Nochronicler pronounces his name after this epoch,
and with the exception of the letter which I have just read,
there only remain of his writings two or three short and very
insignificant theological pieces.

Il. We are better acquainted with a friend of Leidrade, his
companion in the great mission entrusted to him by Charle-
magne, in Narbonnese Gaul; J mean Theodulph, bishop of
Orleans. Like Alcuin and Leidrade, he was a foreigner, a
Goth by nation, and an Italian by birth. Charlemagne sent
for him, it is unknown at what epoch ; we find him established
in Gaul in 781, and between 786 and 796, he was bishop of
Orleans. He took especial care to re-establish schools in his
diocese. We have by him, concerning the duties of priests,
a capitulary in forty-one articles, which displays rather
elevated views of order and morality, and contains, among
others, the two following articles :

“If any priest wishes to send his nephew or any other of


' Sanct. Agobardi Opera, vol. 11., pp. 125—129, ed. of Baluze, Paris,
1


e


60 HISTORY OF


his relations to school, we allow him to be sent to the chareh,
of St. Croix, or to the monastery of Saint Aignan, or of Saint
Benedict, or of Saint Lifard, or to any other monastery con-
fided to our government.

“‘Let the priests hold schools in villages and districts, and
if any of the faithful wish to confide their young children to
them, in order to have them study letters, let them not refuse
to receive and to instruct them; but, on the contrary, teach
them in perfect charity, remembering that it is written:
‘And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the
stars for ever and ever.” And while instructing children,
let them exact no price therefor, and receive nothing, except
when the parent shall offer it them, willingly, and out of
affection.’’?

This last article is almost the only monument of this epoch
which positively institutes a teaching destined for others than
priests. All the measures, whether of Alcuin or Charle-
magne, which I have hitherto spoken of, have the literary
education of priests for their object; here are included the
faithful in general, the people; and not only the people of
towns, but of the country districts, which were far more
neglected as regards instruction. There is nothing to show
us the rests of the recommendations of Theodulf in his dio-
cese, and they were probably almost null; but the attempt
deserves remark.

About the year 798, Theodulph was sent by Chariemagne,
with Leidrade, into the two Narbonnese, to observe and re-
form the administration of those provinces. On his return
he composed a poem of 956 verses, entitled, Paranesis ad
Judices (Exhortation to Judges), and destined to instruct
magistrates in their duties in such missions. The course of
the work is simple. After a religious preamble, which ter-
minates with an eulogy on Charlemagne, Theodulph describes
the route followed by Leidrade and himself, and the principal
towns through which they passed, Vienne, Orange, Avignon,
Nimes, Agde, Beziers, Narbonne, ‘Carcassonne, Arles, Mar-
seilles, and Aix. ‘To this enumeration succeeds a view of
the dangers which assail the probity of magistrates, and of
all the attempts which were made to corrupt Leidrade and


1 Daniel, xii., 3. ? Theod., cap. § 19, 20.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 61


himself. ‘Then come his exhortations to the judges, exhorta-
tions over which he takes pleasure in dwelling at length, asa
man who has seen the evil, and as a bishop accustomed to
give everything the form of a sermon. The poem abruptly
finishes with this general exhortation to the great men of the
world :

‘“¢ Mortal, always be prepared to treat mortals with mild-
ness; the law of nature is the same for them and for thee.
However different may be thy course here below, thou and
they start from the same point; it is to the same point that
you tend. One sacred spring runs for them as for thee, and
throws upon them, as upon thee, the same paternal blot. . . .
The Author of life died for them as well as for thee, and he
will extend his gifts to each according to his merits. Let us
here fold the sails of my book, and let the anchor retain my
ship on this shore.’”!

There is, in all this, you see, very little invention or art:
but, as an historical and moral monument, the poem is devoid
neither of merit nor interest. ‘The most curious passage, in
my opinion, is that where Theodulph describes all the attempts
at corruption which he had to resist :

“‘ A large crowd,” says he,” “ pressed around us, of both
sexes and of every age: the child, the old man, the young
man, the young woman, the girl, the boy, he who hed attained
his majority, he who had reached puberty, the old woman,
the full grown man, the married woman, she who was still a
minor. But why did I stay? The entire nation earnestly
promise us gifts, and think that at that price whatever they
desire is as good as done. ‘This is the machine by which all
endeavor to throw down the wall of the soul, the battering-
ram with which they wish to strike in order to seize it. Here
one offered me crystals and precious stones of the east, if I
would make him master of the domains of another ; a second
brings me a quantity of gold money, impressed with the
tongue and character of the Arabians, or upon whose bril-
liantly white silver surtace a Latin style has engraved words,
with which he wished to acquire lands, fields, and houses ;
another secretly called one of our servants, and said to him


| Parenesis ad Judices, v. 947—956, in the Opera Varia of P. Ger-
mand, vol. i1., p. 1046.
? Ibid., v. 163—290 ; vol. ii., p. 1032—1034.
6


62 HISTORY OF


with a low voice the following words, which were to be re-
peated to me: ‘I possess a vase remarkable for its chasing
and its antiquity ; it is of a pure metal and of considerable
weight ; on it is engraved the history of the crimes of Cacus,
the faces of the shepherds bruised by the blows from clubs of
iron, and soiled with blood, the signs of his numerous rob-
beries, a field inundated with the blood of men and herds;
we see Hercules who in fury breaks the bones of the son of
Vulcan, and the latter with his ferocious mouth vomiting the
terrible fires of his father ; but Alcides presses his knee upon
the stomach of Cacus, his sides with his feet, and with his
club shatters his face and throat, whence issue torrents of
smoke. You next see Alcides bringing out of the cavern the
stolen oxen, which seem to fear being dragged a second time
backward. All this is on the hollow part of the vase, with a
circle around it; the other side, covered with smaller designs,
shows the child of Tyrinthus strangling the two serpents, and
his ten famous labors are there placed in their order. But
frequent use has so polished the exterior, that, effaced by
time, the figures which represent Hercules, the river Chaly-
don, and Nessus fighting for thy beauty, Dejanira, have
almost completely disappeared. We see also the fatal man-
tle, poisoned with the blood of Nessus, and the horrible fate
of the unhappy Lychas, and Antzeus, who could not be con-
quered or fought upon earth, like other mortals, strangled in
the formidable arms of Hercules. This, then, will I offer to
the lord (for he even called me lord), if he will favor my
wishes. ‘There is a great number of men, women, young
people, children of both sexes, to whom my father and mother
have granted the honor of liberty, and this numerous group
find themselves enfranchised ; but, by altering their charters,
we shall enjoy, thy master the possession of this antique vase ;
I, of all this people ; and thou, of my gifts.’

“* Another says: ‘I have mantles dyed in various colors,
which came, as | believe, from the ferocious Arabians. We
see there the calf following its mother, and the heifer the bull,
the color of the calf and that of the heifer exact to nature, as
are those of the bull and the cow. See how brilliant they
are, how pure are the colors, and with what art the larger
parts are joined to the smaller. I have a quarrel with some
one about some beautiful herds, and I offer on this occasion a
fitting present, since I offer bull for bull, cow for cow, ox for
ox.’


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 63


‘“* Here one promises me beautiful cups, if by that means
he can obtain what I ought not to give him ; the inside of one
of them gilt, the outside black, the color of the silver having
the dye of sulphur. Another. says: ‘I have cloths fit to
cover splendid beds and beautiful vases ; I will give them if
my desires are granted.’ ‘A well watered estate, ornament-
ed with vines, olives, meadows, and gardens, was left by my
father,’ says one ; ‘ my brothers and sisters claim from me a
share, but I wish to possess it without partition ; I shall obtain
the accomplishment of this wish, if it find favor before thee ;
and if thou acceptest what | give thee, I shall reckon upon
thy giving me that which I request.’ One wishes to seize
the house of his parent, another his estates ; of these two, one
had already taken, the other wished to take what did not be-
long to him; both burned with the desire, that to keep, this
to acquire: one offered me a sword and casque, the other
bucklers; one brother is in possession of the inheritance of
his father, his brother likewise lays claim to it ; one offers me
mules, the other horses.

“Thus do the rich act; the poor are not less pressing, and
the will to give is not more wanting. With various means,
the conduct is alike: as the great offer great presents, the
lower offer small. Here behold some who display prepared
skins which take their name from thee, Cordova ; one brings
white, the other, red ; this offers fine linen, that woollen stuffs,
to cover my head, my feet, or my hands. Such a one offers
as a gift one of those cloths which are used to wash, with a
little water, our face and hands; others bring boxes. ‘There
was even one, who, with an air of triumph, presented round
wax candles. How can we enumerate all these things? all
were confident in their gifts, and no one supposed that he
could obtain anything without presents. Oh wicked pest
spread over all places! oh, crime, oh, fury ! oh, vice, worthy
of horror, which may boast of its having subdued the uni-
verse ! nowhere is there wanting people who give and people
who receive wrongfully. They hastened to gain me; and
they would not have thought to find me susceptible of corrup-
tion, if they had not found my predecessors susceptible. No
one seeks wild boars in the water, fish in the forest, a wood
house in the sea, water in fire. . . . They expect to
find each thing where they have been accustomed to find it,
and mortals think that what has happened will always hap-
pen. When they see that the darts of their words are broken,


64 HISTORY OF


and that the arms of their promises in no degree avail them,
when they see that [ remain firm as a fortress after an inef-
fectual siege, and that I do not allow myself to be deceived
by any of their artifices, every one forthwith occupies himself
only with his own business ; every one receives what he is
entitled to, and no more; thus, a man who sees closed up a
passage, through which he has been accustomed to go for the
purposes of robbery, turns aside, and proceeds hopelessly else-
where. But, in order not to show myself deficient in mode-
ration and discreet judgment, to manifest that I acted openly
and frankly, to guard against my conduct exciting too much
astonishment by. its entire novelty, and that the so recent evil
might not bring good into hatred, [ did not refuse that which
was offered to me by real benevolence, by that noble feeling
which, joining souls together, causes them readily to take
and receive from each other. I| accepted with thanks the
little presents made me, not by the hand of anger, but by that
of friendship—fruit, vegetables, eggs, wine, bread, hay. I
took the young fowls, and birds, smaller in size than they,
but good to eat. Happy the virtue which is tempered,
adorned, and maintained by discretion, the nurse of all vir-
tues.”’

The invasions and their disasters, so often renewed, had not
destroyed, as you see, in the cities of southern Gaul, all the
wealth, and there still remained abundance wherewith to tempt
the avidity of magistrates.

Independently of these details concerning the state of so-
ciety, the poem of Theodulph is remarkable for the gentle-
ness of the sentiments which pervade it ; one is astonished to
find, amidst barbarous disorders and tyrannies, that delicate
goodness which seems to belong only to times of great civili-
zation and peace. He exhorts the judges to treat considerate-
ly all who present themselves before them :

‘“‘ If one,” says he, “ has lost his father, another his mother,
another her husband, take particular care with their cause ;
be their protector, their advocate ; be to the one her husband,
the other his mother. If any ever come to thee weak, infirm,
or ill, infantine, or aged, bear towards him a charitable help ;
cause him who cannot stand erect, to sit; take by the hand
him who cannot raise himself; sustain and encourage him
whose heart, voice, hand, or legs, are about to fail him; with
thy words raise him who is cast down; appease him who is


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 65


irritated ; give strength to him who trembles, recal to order
him who is excited.’’!

I will cite the original text of this passage; the style,
although very faulty, is of a remarkable conciseness and
energy :


‘Qui patre senue matre orbatur, vel si qua marito
Istorum causas sit tua cura sequi
Horum causiloquus, horum tutela maneto,
Pars hec te matrem noverit, illa virum,
Debilis, invalidus, puer, aeger, anusve, senexve,
Si veniant, fer opem his miserando piam ;
Fac sedeat qui stare nequit, qui surgere prende ;
Cui cor, voxque tremit, pesque, manusque juva;
Dejectum verbis releva, sedato minacem ;
Qui timet, huic vires, qui furit, adde metum.”


Independently of this poem, there are seventy-one various
pieces of Theodulph remaining, divided into five books, but
they are of little value. ‘Two small theological treatises, and
some fragments of sermons by him, have also been collected.

After the death of Charlemagne, Louis le Debonnaire still
employed Theodulph in various missions; but in 817, com-
promised in the conspiracy of Bernard, king of Italy, against
the emperor his uncle, he was exiled from his diocese, and
banished to the town of Angers, where he died in 821.

Ill. Smaragde, abbot of Saint Mihiel, in the diocese of
Verdun, was a man of the same character and the same posi-
tion as the two bishops of whom I have just spoken. It is
neither known in what country he was born, nor at what epoch
Charlemagne took him into his service ; but we find him abbot
of Saint Mihiel before 805, and employed, in 809, in various
negotiations, with Rome. In the diocese of Verdun he took
particular care of schools, and in the schools with the teaching
of grammar. ‘To expound and discuss the precepts of Donatus,
a grammarian of the fourteenth century, who was preceptor
of | Saint Jerome, Smaragde wrote a large Latin grammar,
which was celebrated in his time, and of which many manu-
scripts still exist. It has never been printed. We have two
other works by him: the first, entitled Via Regia, is a treatise
of morality for the use of princes, divided into thirty-two


1 Verse 621.
6*


65 HISTORY OF


chapters, and addressed either to Charlemagne, or to Louis le
Debonnaire ; it is not exactly known which. The ideas are
wise and benevolent, but common ; one fact alone merits re-
mark: this is, the far more moral than religious character of
the work. ‘The church occupies but little place therein, and,
with the exception of some general recommendations, the au-
thor only speaks of it in a cursory manner, and to exhort the
prince to watch over it. If the book was addressed to Louis
le Debonnaire, the emperor was far more of a monk than the
abbot of Saint Mihiel.

The second work of Smaragde, entitled the Diadem of the
Monks, is purely religious, and has no other object but that of
giving to the monks advice on the means of sustaining or re-
animating their fervor. The abbot of Saint Mihiel took an
active part, among others, in the council of Aix-la-Chapelle
in 817, in all measures for the reform of monastic orders. He
died, it would appear, shortly after 819.

These were the most remarkable men among priests whom
Charlemagne employed. ‘Their origin is clear; their know-
ledge made their fortune ; it was in their character of literary
men that Charlemagne distinguished them, and called them
near him. By the side of these, we meet men of another na-
ture, of another origin ; politicians, military men, who acquired
a taste for learning, and ended by devoting themselves to it,
after having been engaged at first in an entirely different ca-
reer. Charlemagne employed literary men in affairs of state,
and inspired statesmen with an esteem for letters. Among
these last, three especially merit our attention, all three un.
connected in the early part of their life, both with the church
and with learning, soldiers or counsellors of Charlemagne,
occupied in the business of civil government, taking part in
warlike expeditions, and who, however, all three ended by
study and by a religious life, and have left us monuments of
their intellectual activity. These are Angilbert, Saint Bene-
dict d’Aniane, and Eginhard.

I shall merely mention the names of the first two: they
wrote but very little ; of Angilbert we have only some poems,
and some documents concerning the abbey of Saint Riquier,
to which he retired; and when we shall especially occupy
ourselves with the history of the church at this epoch, we
shall again find Saint Benedict d’Aniane, who, after having
led a life of war in his youth, became the second reformer of
monastic orders. Eginhard alone fills an important place in


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 67


the literature of this time, and we shall at present occupy
ourselves with him.

He was of the Frankish race, born, perhaps, beyond the
Rhine, and calls himself ‘‘a barbarian, but little versed in the
language of the Romans.” Charlemagne took him into his
service while very young ; caused him to be brought up with
his children in that school of the palace of which Alcuin was
the head; and when Eginhard arrived at the age of man-
hood, he not only made him superintendent of all those works
which we in the present day call public works, roads, canals,
buildings of all kinds, but his councillor and private secretary.

Traditions go farther ; they attribute to Eginhard the honor
of having married Emma, the daughter of Charlemagne ; and
the adventure which they say led to this marriage is one of
the most popular traditions of our old history. Here it is as
we have it in the chronicle of the monastery of Lauresheim,?
the only ancient monument which makes any mention of it:

“ Heinhard, arch-chaplain and secretary of the emperor,
Charles, acquitted himself very honorably of his office in the
court of the king, was welcomed by all, and especially loved
with very lively ardor by the daughter of the emperor, her-
self named Emma, and who was promised to the king of the
Greeks ; each day love increased betweén them; fear re-
strained them, and, out of apprehension of the royal displea-
sure, they dared not incur the grave danger of seeing each
other. But love, ever on the alert, conquered everything: at
last this excellent young man, burning with irremediable fire,
and not daring to address himself through a messenger to the
ear of the princess, suddenly took confidence in himself, and
secretly, in the middle of the night, repaired to where she
lodged. Having knocked softly, and as if to speak with the
young girl by order of the king, he obtained permission to
enter, and then alone with her they yielded to the tender im-
pulses of love. But when at the approach of the light of
day, he wished to return through the last shadows of night,
to the place whence he came, he perceived that a great deal
of snow had suddenly fallen, and dared not go out, for fear


1 Preface to his Life of Charlemagne, in my Collection, vol. iii.,
po di.

* Lauresheim, or Lorch, in the diocese of Worms, and four leagues
from Heidelberg. This chronicle extends from the year 763 or 764,
the period of the foundation of the monastery, to the year 1179.


68 HISTORY OF


that the traces of a man’s feet should betray his secret.
They were both full of anguish at what they had done, and
seized with fear, remained within; at length, as in that
trouble, they deliberated upon what to do, the charming young
girl, whom love rendered daring, gave her advice, and said
that, stooping, she would take him on her shoulders, that she
would cairy him before day close to his dwelling, and that
having deposited him there, she would return, carefully fol-
lowing the same steps.

“« Now, the emperor, by the Divine will, as it is believed,
had passed the night without sleep, and rising before day, was
looking from the tower of his palace. He saw his daughter
walking slowly, and with steps tottering under the weight
which she bore, and when she had deposited it in a conve-
nient place, quickly retracing her steps. After having long
looked at them, the emperor, seized at once with admiration
and grief, but thinking that it could not have happened thus
without a providential interposition, restrained himself, and
preserved silence upon what he had seen.

“In the meantime, Eginhard, tormented with what he had
done, and quite sure, in some way or other, the thing could
not long remain unknown to the king, his lord, at last resolved
in his anguish to seek the emperor, and on his knees demand
a mission of him, saying that his services, already great and
numerous, had received no suitable recompense. At these
words, the king discovering nothing of what he knew, held
silence for some time, and then assuring Eginhard that he
would shortly give him an answer, he named a day for doing
so. He immediately convoked his councillors, the chief of
the kingdom, and his other familiar adherents, ordering them
to repair to him. This magnificent assembly of various lords
thus met, he commenced, saying that the Imperial majesty
had been insolently outraged by the guilty love of his daugh-
ter for his secretary, and that he was greatly troubled at it.
Those present remaining struck with stupor, and some of
them still appearing to doubt, the thing was so unheard of and
daring, the king satisfied them by evidence, recounting mat-
ters exactly as he had seen them with his own eyes, and
asked them their advice upon the subject. ‘They pronounced
various sentences against the presumptuous author of the
deed: some wished him to be punished with chastisement
hitherto without example, others that he should be exiled,
others again that he should be subjected to such or such a


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 69


penalty, each speaking according to the sentiment which ani-
mated him. Some, however, as much more benevolent as
they were more wise, after having deliberatéd among them.
selves, earnestly implored the king to examine this affair him-
self, and to decide according to the wisdom which he had
received from God. When the king had well observed the af-
fection which each bore him, and amongst the various opinions
offered had selected that which he had determined to follow,
he spoke thus to them: ‘ You know that men are subject to
various accidents, and that it often happens that things which
commence with a misfortune have a more favorable issue ;
we must not grieve for this affair, which, by its novelty and
gravity, has surpassed our foresight, but rather piously seek
for and respect the intentions of Providence, who is never de-
ceived, and who knows how to turn evil to good. I shall not
therefore subject my secretary, for this deplorable affair, to a
chastisement which will increase instead of effacing the dis-
honor of my daughter. I think that it is more wise, and that
it better becomes the dignity of our empire, to pardon their
youth, and unite them in legitimate marriage, and thus give
to their disgraceful fault a color of honor.’ Having listened
to this advice of the king, all loudly rejoiced, and loaded with
praises the grandeur and benevolence of his soul. Eginhard
was ordered to enter; the king saluting him as had been re-
solved, said to him with a tranquil countenance: ‘ You have
laid before us your complaints that our royal munificence has
not worthily rewarded your services. ‘To speak truly it is
your own negligence which should be accused, for despite so
many and so great affairs of which I alone have borne the
burden, if I had known anything of your desire, I would
have accorded to your services the honors which are due to
them. Not to detain you with a long discourse, | shall, how-
ever, put an end to your complaints by a magnificent gift: as
I wish always to see you faithful to me as heretofore, and
attached to my person, I will give you my daughter in mar-
riage, your bearer, she who, girding up her robe, has shown
herself so docile in carrying you.’ Immediately, according
to the orders of the king, and amidst a numerous suite, his
daughter entered, her face covered with a charming blush,
and the father put her hands within the hands of Eginhard,
with a rich dowry, many domains, much gold and silver, and
other valuable property. After the death of his father, the
most pious emperor Louis likewise gave Eginhard the domain


70 HISTORY OF


of Michlenstadt and that of Miihlenheim, which is now called
Seligestadt.’7!

This is the graceful narrative upon which all the tales, all
the poems, all the dramas of which this adventure has been
the subject, are founded. The chronicler wrote at an epoch
near to the event in an abbey which Eginhard endowed, and
the monks of which might have been well acquainted with the
incidents of his life. Still this is the only monument of the
time in which the event is stated. Moreover, it seems denied
by the silence of Eginhard himself, and by some passages in
his life of Charlemagne. Among the children of this prince,
whose name he enumerates, we do not find Emma or Imma:
he names seven boys and eight girls, whom Charlemagne had
by his wives or his mistresses ; none of his daughters is called
Imma ;” and in none of the other lists which have come down
to us of the history of Charlemagne do we meet with this
name. Moreover, we read in the Life of Charlemagne :

‘“‘His daughters were very beautiful, and he passionately
loved them. Accordingly, to the astonishment of all, he
would never consent to any of them ever marrying either to
his own people or to a foreigner ; he kept them all about him,
and with him, until his death, saying that he could not de-
prive himself of their society. Although happy in all else,
he experienced the malignity of fortune with regard to his
daughters ; but he concealed his vexation, and conducted
himself as if they had never given rise to injurious suspicions,
as if no reports went about concerning them.’

If the adventure which I have just read were true, how
could such a passage be found in the work of Eginhard 2
How would he himself have spoken of the report which went


* Recueil des Historiens des Gaules et de la France, vol. v., p. 383.
2 According to Eginhard, Charlemagne had :—

1. By Hildegarde, three sons, Charles, Pepin, Louis ; three daugh-
. ters, Rotrude, Bertha, Gisla.

2. By Fastrade, two daughters, Thebrade, Hildrade.

3. By a concubine (Himiltrude), one daughter, Rothaide.

4, By Mathalgarde (a concubine), one daughter, Rothilde.

5 By Gersuinthe, (id.) one daughter, Adelrude.

6. By Regina, (id ) two sons, Drogon, Hugo.

7. By Adalinde, (id.) one son, Theodoric,

8. By a concubine, one son, Pepin.—In all, seven sons and eight

daughters.—Life of Charlemagne, pp. 142—145.
8 Life of Charlemagne, p. 145.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 71


abroad concerning the conduct of the daughters of Charle-
magne, when his own wife would have been the principal
object of them? It is impossible to resolve this little histori-
cal problem ; but if I must give an opinion, I should strongly
doubt the recital of the chronicle of Lauresheim.

However this may be, the affection of Charlemagne for his
secretary was great, and they lived together in close intimacy.
It was especially out of gratitude that Eginhard wrote the
life of the emperor.

‘“ Another motive,” says he, ‘ which seems to me not un-
reasonable, would moreover suffice in deciding me to com-
pose this work ; brought up by this monarch, from the time
when I began to be admitted to his court, [ lived with him
and his children in constant friendship, which imposed upon
me after his death, as during his life, all the ties of gratitude
towards him. People would therefore be justly authorized
to believe and declare me to be an ingrate if I retained no
recollection of the benefits heaped upon me, and should say
not a word of the high and magnificent actions of a prince
who has acquired so many titles to my gratitude, and if | were
to consent that his life should remain the same as if he had
never existed, without a written memorial, and without the
tribute of eulogy which is his due.’”!

Charlemagne never separated himself from his secretary ;
he did not employ him in any extraordinary missions: once
only, in 806, he sent him to Rome to get his will confirmed
by the pope ; with this exception, he constantly kept him near
him.

After the death of Charlemagne, Eginhard enjoyed the
same favor with Louis le Debonnaire ; but he soon became
full of a distaste for that prince, and only desired to retire
from the court. Among the sixty-three of his letters which
have come down to us, many are curious monuments of the
situation and despondency of the companions of Charlemagne,
when they found themselves separated from that prince, and
forced to live under the deplorable government of his son.

‘“‘T do not ask thee,” writes Eginhard to one of his friends,
“to write me anything concerning the affairs of the palace,
for nothing done there can please me to know: I only desire


2


1 Preface to the Life of Charlemagne, by Eginhard, vol. iii., p. 120,
in my Collection.


72 HISTORY OF


to learn where my friends are, and what they do, if there
remain there any of them but thou.’”!

Elsewhere he conjures one of the officers of the palace to
excuse him to the emperor for not coming to court :

“The queen, in quitting Aix, ordered me to rejoin her at
Compiégne, for I could not set out with her. To obey her
orders, I proceeded with great difficulty, and in ten days, to
Valenciennes. Thence, not in a state to mount my horse, |
came by water to Saint Bavon. But [I am alternately attacked
with pains in the kidneys, and with relaxed bowels, in such
a manner that since my departure from Aix I have not passed
a single day without suffering from one or other of these evils.
I am likewise struck with that which cast me down last year,
with a continual numbness in the right thigh, and an almost
intolerable pain in the liver. Amidst these sufferings, I had
avery sad life, and almost devoid of every enjoyment; but
what most afflicts me is, that I fear I shall not die where I
wish, and that I shall have to occupy myself with something
other than the service of the holy martyrs of Christ.’”

Domestic troubles were soon combined with political annoy-
ances. Whether or not she was a daughter of Charlemagne,
Keginhard had married an Imma, of whom he speaks several
times in his letters, and whom he tenderly loved. In their old
age, as it very often happened at this epoch, she separated
from him to devote herself to a religious life. She died in
836, in the nunnery, whither she had retired ; and Eginhard
wrote to his friend Loup, abbot of Ferrieres :

‘“¢ All my labors, all my cares for the affairs of my friends
or for my own, are nothing to me; all is effaced, all sinks
before the cruel sorrow with which the death of her who was
formerly my faithful wife has struck me, who was also my
sister and my cherished companion. It is a misery which
cannot end, for her merits are so deeply engraven in my
memory, that nothing can tear them thence. What redoubles
my grief, and each day aggravates my wound, is, to thus see
that all my wishes have been without effect, and that the
hopes which I have placed in the intervention of the holy
martyrs are deceived. Accordingly, the words of those who
attempt to console me, and which have often succeeded with


1 Letter 47, in the Recueil des Historiens de France, vol. ii., p. 382.
2 Letter 41, Ibid., vol. vi., p. 380.


CIVILIZATION IN. FRANCE. 73


other men, do nothing but re-open and cruelly envenom the
wound of my heart; for they call upon me to support with
courage sorrows which they do not feel, and ask me to con-
gratulate myself upon a trial wherein they are incapable of
pointing-out to me the slightest subject for contentment.’

The language of sorrow, infected, in most of the monu-
ments of this age, with a cold and dry religious jargon, which
reduces it to monotonous common-place, is here frank and
simple, and proves that Eginhard had not imprisoned his soul
as well as his life in the monastic habit.

He did not long survive his wife: he died in 839, in the
monastery of Sligestadt, which he founded.

Independently of these letters, we have remaining of his:
—1, the Life of Charlemagne ; 2. Annuls of his times. Of
these two works, the first is, without comparison, the most
distinguished piece of history from the sixth to the eighth cen-
tury—indeed, the only one which can be called a history, for
it is the only one in which we recognize any traces of compo-
sition, any political and literary pretension. I have as yet
only had occasion, for the most part, to speak to you of miser-
able chroniclers. The Life of Charlemagne is not a chroni-
cle: it is a genuine political biography, written by a man who
was present at the events he narrates, and who understood
them. Eginhard commences by describing the state of
Frankish Gaul under the last Merovingians. We see that
their dethronement by Pepin was still a subject of discussion
with a certain number of men, and caused some disquietude
to the race of Charlemagne. LEginhard took care to explain
~ how it could not be otherwise ; he minutely describes the hu-
miliation and powerlessness into which the Merovingians had
fallen; proceeds from this exposition to recount the natural
accessions of the Carlovingians; says a few words upon the
reign of Pepin, upon the beginning of that of Charlemagne,
and his relations with his brother Carloman ; and enters at last
into the account of the reign of Charlemagne alone. The first
part of the account is devoted to the wars of that prince, and
especially his wars against the Saxons. From wars and con-
quests, the author passes to the internal government, to the


1 Letter from Eginhard to Loup, abbot of Ferrieres, Recweil des His-


toriens de France, vol, vi., p. 402.
~


é


74 HISTORY OF


administration of Charlemagne ; lastly, he comes to his do-
mestic life, his personal character.

It is evident that this is not written at hazard, without plan
or aim; we here recognize intention, a systematic composi-
tion—there is art, in a word; and since the great productions
of Latin literature, no historical work had borne such charac-
teristics. The work of Gregory of Tours itself, without com-
parison the most curious which we have encountered on our
road, is a chronicle, like the others. The Life of Charle-
magne is, on the contrary, a true literary composition, con-
ceived and executed by a reflecting and cultivated mind.

With regard to the Annals of Eginhard, they have no value
beyond that of a chronicle. His title to them has been dis-
puted, and they have been attributed to other writers, but
everything leads us to believe that they are by him.

It is said that he composed a detailed history of the wars
against the Saxons. Nothing of it has come down to us.

Alcuin and Eginhard are, without doubt, the two most dis-
tinguished men of the reign of Charlemagne. Alcuin, a man
of letters, employed in government affairs ; E:ginhard, a states-
man, who became a man of letters. We are about to see this
momentary splendor of the reign of Charlemagne disappear ;
we are about to be present at the dismemberment of his em-
pire. ‘The intellectual movement, of which we have observed
the first steps, will not perish ; we shall see it perpetuated as
it began; on the one hand, in men who direct the affairs of
the world ; and, on the other, in those who devote themselves
to solitary study and learning. Society will often change its
state and forms; intellect, reanimated, will now, without
stopping, traverse all its revolution.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 75


a”
TWENTY-FOURTH LECTURE.


The progress and causes of the dismemberment of the empire of Charle-
magne—1. State of this empire in 843, after the treaty of Verdun—
Inferior state of the kingdom of France at this epoch—2. In 888, after
the death of Charles le Gros—Seven kingdoms—Definitive esta-
blishment of the inheritance of fiefs in France—Twenty-nine small
states, or important fiefs, founded at the end of the ninth century—
3. In 987, at the fall of the Carlovingians—Four kingdoms—In
France, fifty-five important fiefs—Explanation of this dismember-
ment—Their insuflficiency—One only, the diversity of races, deve-
loped by M. Thierry, is probable, but incomplete—The true cause is
the impossibility of a great state at that epoch, and the progressive
rise of the local societies which formed the feudal confederation.


WE read ina chronicle of the century in which Charle-
magne died :

“Charles, who was always travelling, arrived by chance
unexpectedly at a certain maritime town of Narbonnese Gaul.
Whilst he was dining, and was as yet unknown by any one,
Norman corsairs came to execute their piracies even in the
port. When the people saw the vessels, they supposed that
they were merchants; according to these, Jews; according
to those, Africans ; according to others, Britons; but the able
monarch, perceiving by the construction and speed of the
vessels that they carried not merchants, but enemies, said to
his people: ‘ These vessels are not filled with merchandize,
but with cruel enemies.’ At these words, all his Franks, in
emulation of one another, ran to their vessels, but in vain.
The Normans, learning that he whom they used to call
Charles le Marteau, was there, feared lest their whole fleet -
should be taken in his port, or perish by wreck; and they
avoided, by an inconceivably rapid flight, not only the sword,
but even the eyes of those who followed them. Still the reli-
gious Charles, seized with a just awe, rising from the table,
went to the window which looked towards the east, and long
remained, with a countenance covered with tears. No one
daring to interrogate him, this valiant prince, explaining to
the great men who surrounded him the cause of his action
and his tears, said to them: ‘ Know you, my friends, why I
weep so bitterly? Truly, I fear not that these men should


76 HISTORY OF


succeed in harming me by their miserable piracies ; but J am
deeply affected that, I living, they have dared to touch this
shore ; and I am troubled with a violent sorrow when I fore-
see with what evils they will overwhelm my successors and
their people.’ ””

By a singular chance, we know the precise date of this
anecdote: it was written about the month of June, 884—that
is to say, seventy years after the death of Charlemagne, from
the account of a man who had taken part in many of his ex-
peditions against the Saxons, the Slaves, the Avares, &c.
Omitting the emphasis and tears, which the chronicler doubt-
less added, we see therein that at.the end of his life Charle-
magne was occupied with the perils which menaced his king-
dom on all sides. Many other texts, less precise, indicate the
same uneasiness in him. He was still, surely, very far from
foreseeing how brief a space this empire would survive him,
and to what a degree the dissolution would be earried.

I do not propose recounting to you the events of this disso-
lution, but I wish to place before you the principal crises, and
to point out their causes.

It took place between the death of Charlemagne, in 814,
and the accession of Hugh Capet, in 987. All this epoch
was employed in the accomplishment of this great work. It
was by the fall of the race of the Carlovingians, and the
accession of the Capetians, that it was definitively consum-
mated.

At the death of Charlemagne, his empire extended from the
north-east to the south-west, from the Elbe, in Germany, to the
Ebro, in Spain; from north to south, it extended from the
North Sea to Calabria, almost at the extremity of Italy. His
power was, doubtless, exercised very unequally in this vast
territory ; upon many points he was not obeyed,—people did
‘ not even hear him spoken of, and he cared not for this: that

was still his empire. |

At the end of twenty-nine years, in 848, after the treaty of
Verdun, by which the sons of Louis le Debonnaire, Lothaire,
Charles le Chauve, and Louis le Germanique, shared this em-


1 Faits et Gestes de Charles le Grand, by a monk of Saint Loup,
in my Collection des Mémoires relatifs a Histoire de France, vol. iil.,
p. 251.


CIVILIZATION


IN FRANCE.


7


pire, this was its arrangement: it formed three kingdoms, di-


vided according


to this table :—


Table of the Dismemberment of the Empire of Charlemagae, in 843.


1b
Kingdom of
France.
Charles le Chauve.
840—-877.


It comprehend-
ed the countries
situated between
the Scheldt, the
Meuse, the Saone,
the Rhone, the
Mediterranean,

the Ebro, and the


Bes
Kingdom of Ger-
many.
Louis le
Germanique,
840—876.

It comprehend-
ed the countries
situated between
the Rhine, the
north sea, the
Elbe, and _ the

Alps.


3.
Kingdom of Italy.


Lothaire I., emperor, 840—855.


It comprehended, 1. Italy,
with the exception of Calabria;
2. The countries situated be-
tween the Rhone, the Saone, and
the Meuse, to the West, the
Rhine, and the Alps to the East,
that is, Provence, Dauphine,
Savoy, Switzerland, la Franche-


Comté, a part of Burgundy, Lor-
raine, Alsace, and a part of the
Netherlands.


Ocean.


Let it not be supposed that each of these kingdoms was
compact unity ; in that of France, the only one concerning
which we have especially to occupy ourselves, two princes,
Pepin II., in Aquitaine (from the year 835), and Nomenoé,
in Brittany (from the year 840), likewise assumed the title of
king, and took from Charles le Chauve the sovereignty of a
considerable portion of his territory.

The dismemberment followed its course: forty-five years
after this epoch, in 888, on the death of Charles le Gros, the
last of the Carlovingians, who seemed to unite for a moment
all the states of Charlemagne, this was the point to which it
had come. Instead of three kingdoms, we find seven:

rh


78 HISTORY OF


Table of the Dismemberment of lhe Empire of Charlemagne, about
the end of the Ninth Century.


Kingdoms. | Reigning | Accession Extent.
kings. |and death.
1, Kingdom of| Charles le] 893—929 The countries included be-
France. Simple. tween the Scheldt, the Meuse,
the Saone, the Rhone, the Py-
renees, and the Ocean, and a
portion of the north of Spain
beyond the Pyrenees, formerly
the county of Barcelona.

. Kingdom of| Fortun le} S80—905 Almost all the north of Spain,

Navarre. Moine. between the Pyrenees and the
Ebro.

. Kingdom of} Louis ?A-| 890—928 The countries included be-
Provence, veugle. tween the Saone, the Rhone, the
or cis-Juran Alps, the Jura, and the Medi-
Burgundy. terranean.

. Kingdom of| Raoul I. | 888 912 | The countries between the
trans-Juran Jura, the Pennine Alps, and the
Burgundy. Reuss, that is, Switzerland, Va-

lais, the country of Geneva,
Chablais, and Bugey.

. Kingdom of| Zwente- |895—900 | The countries between the

Lorraine. bold. Rhine, the Meuse,
Scheldt.

. Kingdom of| Arnoul. 888—899 | The countries between the
Germany. Rhine, the North Sea, the Elbe,

the Oder, and the Alps.

. Kingdom of |Bérenger I.| 888—924 | All Italy to the frontier of the
Italy. kingdom of Naples, then the

principality of Bénévento, and
Calabria.


I return to the internal state of the kingdom of France. In
843, two princes only, a king of Aquitaine, and a duke of
Brittany, shared his territories with Charles le Chauve. In
888, the dismemberment was carried still farther, and by a
cause which was not destined to stop. Every one knows that
the possessors of domains and royal offices, that is to say, the
beneficiaries and the dukes, counts, viscounts, centeniers, and
other governors of provinces or districts, were constantly bent
upon rendering themselves independent and hereditary, and
assuring themselves the perpetual possession of their lands and
governments. In 877, we find a capitulary .of Charles le
Chauve conceived in the following terms:


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 719


“Tf, after our death, any of our faithful subjects, seized
with the love of God and our person, desire to renounce the
world, and if he have a son or any other relation capable of
serving the public, let him be at liberty to transmit his fees
and honors as he pleases.’”

And, in another article:

*‘ Tf a count of this kingdom be about to die, and if his son
be near us, we desire that our son, with those of our subjects
who are most nearly related to the defunct count, as well as
the other officers of the said county, and the bishop of the dio-
cese in which it shall be situated, shall provide for his admi-
nistration, until the death of the said count be announced to
us, and we have been able to confer upon his son, present at
our court, the honors with which he was invested. If the son
of the defunct count be a child, let the same son, the bishop,
and the other officers of the place, in like manner see to the
administration of the county, until, informed of the death of
the father, we have accorded the same honors to the son.’”

Here we find the inheritance of benefices and of royal offi-
ces legally consecrated: and it is written in the manners, as
in the laws ; for numerous monuments attest that at this epoch,
when, on the death of the governor of a province, the king
attempted to give his county to any other than to his descend-
ants, not only was he resisted therein by personal interest, but
that such a measure was considered as a violation of right, a
veritable injustice. Wilhelm and Engelschalk occupied two
countships on the confines of Bavaria, under Louis le Begue:
on their death, their offices were given to count Arbo, to the
exclusion of their sons: “ Their children and their relations,
looking upon this as a great injustice, said that things should
be otherwise, and that they would die by the sword, or that
Arbo should quit the county of their family.’”

This principle bore its fruits: About the end of the ninth
century, twenty-nine provinces, or fragments of provinces,
were already erected into small states, the ancient governors
of which, under the names of duke, count, viscount, had be-
come their true sovereigns. ‘Twenty-nine fiefs, in fact, which
have played an eminent part in our history, are traceable to
this period.

1 Cap. Car. Calv., a., 877, tit. 53, § 10; Bal., vol. ii., p. 264.

2Id..§ 9 and 3; Bal., vol. i1., p. 263—269.


3 Aune, Fuld, a., 887, Recueil des Historiens de France, vol. Viit.,
p. 48.


80 HISTORY OF


Table of the Feudal Dismemberment of the Kingdom of Irance, aboué
the end of the Ninth Century.


Date of

: Date of be-| Name of the possessor|his acces-
S Title of the fief. coming he-|at the end of the ninth/sion and
A reditary. | century. of his


death.
1!Duchy of Gascony. 872 Sanche Mittara II.
2)Viscounty of Bearn. 819 A zyson of Centulf
3|County of Toulouse. 850 Eudes, 875—918
4\Marquisate of Septima-; 878  |Williamle Pieux. |886—918
nie.
5|County of Barcelona. 864 Wifred le Velu. 864—906
6\County of Carcas-}| 819 Acfred I. 904
sonne.
7|\Viscounty of Nar- ie Mayeul, 911
bonne.
8|County of Roussillon. wh Raoul. Abt. 905
9\County of Urgel. 884 Suinifred. 884—950
10\County of Poictiers. 880 Eble le Batard, 892—932
11)County of Auvergne. 864 William le Pieux. |S86—918
12|/Duchy of Aquitaine. id, The same. id.
13/County of Angouléme.| 866 Alduin I. 886—916 |
14/County of Perigord. id. William. S86—920
15|Viscounty of Limoges.| 887 Adelbert.c ». 5 914
16\Lordship of Bourbon. Se Adhemar. Abt. 921
17\County of the Lyon-| 890 William IT. 890—920
nese.
18/Lordship of Beaujolais. id Berauld I.
19|Duchy of Burgundy. 887 Richard le  Justi-
cier.
20|County of Chalons. 886 Manasses de Vergy.
21|Duchy of France. 830 Robert II.
22)County of Vexin. 878 Aledran.
23|/County of Verman. Abt. 830 | Herbert I.
24\County of Valois. id. Pepin.
25/County of Ponthieu. 859 Helgaud IT.
26/County of Boulogne. | Abt. 860 | Regniel.
27|\County of Anjou. 870 Foulque le Roux.
28!County of Maine. 853 Gottfried.


29|County of Britany. Alain III, 877—907


The importance of these states is not equal, nor their inde-
pendence absolutely alike ; some still keep up frequent rela-
tions with the king of France ; others are under the protection
of a powerful neighbor ; certain ties unite them, and hence
certain reciprocal obligations result which will become the
constitution of the feudal’ society. But ‘the dominant feature
is not any the less isolation, independence ; they are evidently


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 81


as many small states, born of the dismemberment of a great
territory—local governments, formed at the expense of the
central power.

From the end of the ninth century I pass at once to the end
of the tenth, to the termination of the epoch which occupies
us, to the complete fall of the Carlovingians, who give place to
the Capetiens.

Instead of seven kingdoms, the ancient kingdom of Charle-
magne then could number only four.

1. ‘The kingdoms of Provence and Transjuran Burgundy
were united, in 933, by Raoul Il., king of Transjuran Bur-
gundy, and formed the kingdom of Arles, governed, from 937
to 993, by Conrad le Pacifique.

2. The kingdom of Lorraine, from which many great fiefs
were detached, was nothing more than a duchy, possessed,
from 984 to 1026, by Thierry I.

3. Otho the Great, in 964, united the kingdom of Italy to
the empire of Germany.

In the interior of the kingdom of France, the dismember-
ment was continued: instead of 29 small states or fiefs which
we encountered at the end of the ninth century, we find
therein, at the end of the tenth, fifty-five fully established.


Table of the Feudal Dismemberment of the Kingdom of France, about
the end of the Tenth Century.


Date of
; Date of the his
$| Title of the Fief. | hereditary |Name of the possessorjaccession
A foundation, in 987. and of his
death.
1)/Duchy of Gascony. 872 Bernard William 984-1010
 2/Viscounty of Bearn. 819 Centuf Gaston II. 984-1004
3)Viscounty of Bigorre. |End of 9th/Garcia Arnould I.
century.
4\County of Fezenzac. 920 Aimery I. 983-1032
5\County of Armagnac. 960 Gerard Trancalion
6|County of Lectoure and|End of 10th|Raymond Arnaud.
Lomagne. century.
7|\County of Astarac. About 930 |Arnaud II.
8iCounty of Toulouse. 850 William Taillefer. |950-1037
9)County of Barcelona. 864 Borrel,count of Urgel.|967-— 993
10|\County of Rouergue. 820 Raymond III. 961-1010
11\County of Carcassonne] 819 Roger I. 957-1012
12)/Viscounty of Narbonne|End of 9th|Raymond I. 966-1023


century,


82 HISTORY OF


Table of the Feudal Dismemberment of the Kingdom of
France, &c.—~continued.


Date of
i Date of the his
o| Title of the Fief. {hereditary |Name of the possessor|jaccession
z foundation. in 987. and of his
death.
13/County of Melgueil. |Commence-\Bernard II.
ment of
10th cent.
14/Lordship of Montpe-} 975 William I. 975-1019
her.
15|County of Rousillon. {Middle of |Gauffred I.
9th cent.
16|County of Urgel. 884 Borrel. 950- 993
17|County of Poictiers. 880 William Fier-a-Bras. |963- 997
18|Duchy of Aquitaine. 864 The same.
19\County of Auvergne. Id. Gui I. 979- 989
20\County of Angouléme.| 866 Arnaud le Batard. _|975-1001
21\County of Perigordand} Id. Adalbert I. 968— 995
of La Haute-Marche. .
22/County of La Basse Id. Bosson II. 968-1032
Marche.
23|/Viscounty of Limoges. 887 Gerard. 963-1000


24|Viscounty of Turenne.'Middle of |Archambaud Jambe-
9th cent.} Pourri.


25|Viscounty of Bourges. 927 Geoffrey II. . 1021
26|Lordship of Bourbon, |End of 9th|Archambaud II.
century.
27|\County of Macon. 920 Alberic II. 979-995
28|Duchy of Burgundy. 877 Henry le Grand. 965-1002
29\County of Chalons, 886 Hugues I. 987-1039
30|Lordship of Salius, 920 Humbert IT.
31\County of Nevers. 987 Othon William. 987-1027
32|\County of Tonnere. /End of 10th/Gui. 987— 992
century.
33\County of Sens. 941 Renaud le Vieux. 951- 996
34;/County of Champagne.|End of 9th/Herbert II. 968— 993
century.
35|County of Blois. 834 Eudes I. 978- 995
36|County of Rethel. Middle of |Manasses I.
10th cent.
37\County of Corbeil. Id. Bouchard I. 1012
38/Barony of Montmo- Id. Bouchard II. 1020
rency.
39|County of Vexin, 878 Gauthier I.
AO0|County of Meulent. 959 Robert I.
41|\County of Vermandois.| 880 Herbert III. lbs7-1000
42\County of Valois. Id. Gauthier I.
43|County of Soissons. {End of 10th/Gui, Count of Vexin.


| century.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 83


Table of the Feudal Dismemberment of the Kingdom of
France, &c.—continued.


Date of
; Date of the his
&| Title of the Fief. | hereditary |Name of the possessorjaccession
Z foundation. in 987. and of his
death.
44|County of Reucy andj; 940 Gilbert. 7139
Rheims.
45|County of Ponthieu. 859 Hugues.
46|County of Boulogne. 860 Guy Barbe Blanche.
47|County of Guines. 965 Adolphe. 966
48/County of Vendome. /|End of 10th|Bouchard I. 1007
century.
49|Duchy of Normandy. 912 |Richard-sans-Peur, |943- 996
50|County of Anjou. 870 Foulques Nerra. 98'7-1040
51\County of Maine. 853 Hugues I. 955-1015
52|Lordship of Belléme. 940 Ives I. 997
53/County of Brittany. ws Conan [. 987-— 992
54|Barony of Fougeres, {End of 10th|Meen I. 1020


century.
862


55!County of Flanders. jArnauld II. (younger)|965- 989


And these were net, as was the case under the Merovin-
gians, accidental momentary dismemberments, the fruit of the
general uncertainty of property and power; they were perma-
nent, consummated results. These fifty-five duchies, coun-
ties, viscounties, lordships, had a long political existence ;
sovereigns hereditarily succeeded sovereigns ; laws, customs,
were regularly established therein. Men might write, indeed
have written, their separate histories; for a long period they
formed the history of France.

Such is the actual picture of the progressive dismember-
ment of the empire of Charlemagne, which commenced before
the middle of the ninth century, and was accomplished at the
end of the tenth. This dissolution was a subject of great
sorrow and fear to some contemporaries, as in the fall of the
Roman empire, elevated minds thought they saw in it a new
invasion of barbarism and of chaos. A talented man, Florus,
deacon of the church of Lyons, under the reign of Louis le
Debonnaire and of Charles le Chauve, has deplored it in a
kind of lament, of which the following is the literal transla-
tion :—

‘‘A beautiful empire flourished under a brilliant diadem ;
there was but one prince and one people; every town had


84 HISTORY OF


judges and laws. The zeal of the priests was sustained by
frequent councils; young people repeatedly read the holy
scriptures, and the minds of children were formed to the study
of letters. Love, on the one hand, on the other fear, every-
where kept up good order. Thus the Frankish nation shone
in the eyes of the whole world. Foreign kingdoms, the
Greeks, the barbarians, and the senate of Latium, sent em-
bassies to it. The race of Romulus, Rome herself, the mother
of kingdoms, was subject to this nation ; it was there that its
chief, sustained by the help of Christ, received the diadem by
apostolic gift. Happy if it had known its good fortune, the
empire which had Rome as a citadel, and the door-keeper of
heaven as a founder! Now fallen, this great power has lost
at once its splendor and the name of empire; the kingdom
lately so well united is divided into three parts; there is
no one who can be looked upon as emperor ; instead of a king,
we see a kinglet; instead of a kingdom, a piece of a kingdom.
The general good is annulled ; each occupies himself with his
own interests ; they think of nothing else; God is forgotten.
The pastors of the Lord, accustomed to meet, can no longer
hold their synods amidst such division. There is no longer
any assembly of the people, no longer any laws ; an embassy
arrives in vain there where there is no court. What will the
neighboring nations of the Danube, the Rhine, the Rhone, the
Loire, and the Po, become? Anciently united by the ties of
concord, now that the alliance is broken, they will be troubled
by unhappy dissensions. To what end will the wrath of God
bring all these evils? Scarcely is there one who thinks
thereon with fear. Who meditates on what.is passing and is
afflicted ? men rather rejoice at the breaking up of the empire,
and they call an order of things peace, which offers none of
the benefits of peace.’’!

Two facts clearly appear in this poem: on the one hand,
the sorrow which the dismemberment of the empire caused
to enlightened men; on the other, the popular satisfaction ;
the people felt as if restored to themselves, and disencumbered
of a burden The dissolution was evidently brought about
by general, necessary causes. The bonds which the will and
conquests of Charlemagne had established between so many


1 Recueil des Historiens des Gaules et de la France, vol. vii., p. 302,
and following pages.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 85


different nations, so many distant and separate territories,
the unity of country and power, were factitious, and could
not subsist.

What, upon regarding more nearly, were the causes of the
phenomenon, whose principal crises we have just followed ?
How was the dismemberment effected ? What internal trans-
formation did society in the end then undergo ?

A crowd of solutions, all equally unsatisfactory, have been
given of this problem. Some people have assigned the decay
of the empire of Charlemagne to the incapacity of his suc-
cessors; of Louis le Debonnaire, of Charles le Chauve,
Charles le Gros, and Charles the Simple ; ; if they had had the
genius and the character of the founder of the empire, the
empire, say they, would gloriously have subsisted. Others
have imputed its fall to the avidity of the dukes, counts,
viscounts, beneficiaries, and other royal officers of all kinds;
they sought to render themselves independent ; they usurped
the power, dismembered the state. According to others, it is
the Normans who should answer for its ruin; the continuity
of their invasions, and the misery into which the people had
fallen, brought about all the evil. The explanations are evi-
dently narrow and puerile. One only has more value, and
merits a serious inquiry: this is that which M. Augustin
Thierry has recently developed, in his Lettres sur U’ Histoire
de France, and especially in the second edition.’ I do not
entirely agree with it; I do not think that it is sufficient to
account for the facts; but it is ingenious, lofty, and, without
doubt, contains much truth.

According to M. Thierry, the dismemberment of the empire
of Charlemagne was brought about by the diversity of races.
On the death of Charles, when the terrible hand which forci-
bly held together so many different nations had lost its hold,
they first separated, and then grouped themselves according
to their true nature, that is to say, according to origin, lan.
guage, manners; and under this influence was accomplished
the formation of the new states. Such is the general phy-
siognomy and explanation which M. Thierry assigns to this
great event. Let us see how he applies the particular facts,
and in what successive crises he supposes he can recognize
the development of this cause. I shall perhaps give a more


1 Letters xi. and xii., pp. 191—247.
8


86 HISTORY OF


precise, more systematic form to his ideas, than they have in
the letters themselves ; but, at bottom, I shall neither add nor
retrench anything.

Between the death of Charlemagne, and the accession of
Hugues Capet, M. Thierry distinguishes two great epochs.
The first extends from the death of Charlemagne to that of
Charles le Gros, after which seven kingdoms (M. Thierry
reckons nine) shared the territory of the empire. The second
extends from the end of the ninth century to the end of the
tenth, to the accession of Hugues Capet. To these two
epochs correspond two phases of the dismemberment, two
revolutions different in object and character, although arising
from the same causes, and tending to the same end.

To the first epoch belongs the national struggle of races,
by which the great events which fill it are naturally ex-
plained. The two principal are incontestably the quarrel
between Louis le Debonnaire and his sons, and that of the
sons of Louis le Debonnaire among themselves. What is
the true meaning of these two crises? Let us hear M.
Thierry himself:

“From the commencement of the civil wars between the
emperor Louis |. and his children. . . . a great divergency of
political opinion became visible between the Franks living in
the midst of the Gaulish population, and those who remained
upon the ancient German territory. The first, connected,
despite their descent, with the interest of the people con-
quered by their ancestors, in general took part against the
emperor, that is, against the empire, which, for the Gaulish
aborigines, was a government of conquest. The others united
in the contrary party, with all the Teutonic colonies, the an-
cient enemies of the Franks. Thus all the Teutonic nations,
leagued apparently for the rights of a single man, defended
their national cause by maintaining against the Gallo-Franks
and the Welskes, a power which was the result of the Ger-
man victories. . . . According to the testimony of a cotempo-
rary, the emperor Lodewig mistrusted the Gallo-Franks, and
put confidence only in the Germans. When, in 830, the
partisans of a reconciliation between father and son proposed,
as a means of attaining it, a general assembly, the evil-dis-
posed labored to procure that this assembly might be held in
a town in Roman France. “But the emperor,” says the
same historian, “‘ was not of this opinion, and he obtained, ac-
cording to his desires, that the people should be convoked at


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 87


Nimeguen: ali Germany repaired thither in great numbers,
in order to aid him.””!

“‘ Shortly afterwards, Germany herself, hitherto so faithful
to the empire, separated her national cause from that of the
new Cesars. When Lodewig I. at his death, left the Frank-
ish dominion shared between his three sons, Lother, Lodewig,
and Karle; although the first had the title of emperor, the
Teutonic nations attached themselves to the second, who was
only king. ‘The question of the pre-eminence of the empire
over the kingdoms was soon discussed between the brothers
at the point of the sword; and from the commencement of
the war, the eastern Franks, the Almanni, the Saxons, and
the Thuringians took part against the heisar (emperor).

“ Reduced to the government of Italy, Helvetia, Provence,
and a small portion of Belgian Gaul, the emperor Lother also
had as few partisans on the borders of the Rhine and the
Elbe, as upon those of the Seine and the Loire: “ Know,”’ he
wrote to his brothers, who prayed him to leave them in peace
each in his kingdom, “ know, that the title of emperor was
given to me by superior authority, and consider what extent
of power and what magnificence should accompany such a
title.’ This haughty answer was, properly speaking, a
manifesto against the national independence of which the people
felt the want; they answered to it, in a terrible manner, by
that famous battle of Fontanet, near Auxerre, where the sons
of the Welkses and the Teéutskes fought under the same ban-
ner for the overthrow of the political system founded by
Charles the Great.’”

Despite the diversity of combination, both quarrels have,
then, the same character: and, in this continued effort against
unity and empire, it was always according to races that the
dismemberment tended to operate.

In all the events comprehended between 814 and 888, as
in these two, M. Thierry thinks the action of the same cause
may be recognized, and he comes thus to the formation of
the nine kingdoms that it raised upon the ruins of the empire.
He reckons nine, for he looks upon Aquitaine and Brittany as
kingdoms, although at the end of the ninth century the count


1 Recueil des Historiens des Gaules et de la France, vol. Vi., p. 3.
3 Letter xi., pp. 195—199.


88 HISTORY OF


of Brittany and the dukes of Aquitaine did not bear the title
of king. Then commenced the second epoch, and the second
revolution.

In this epoch it is no longer the breaking up of states ac-
cording to the difference of race that is in question ; this
work was already consummated. But Frankish Gaul remains
under the empire of foreign sovereigns : the population which
inhabits it is mixed ; even Gauls dominate in it; and the
descendants of Charlemagne are pure Germans. To expel
them, to put in their. place princes of a more national origin,
such, according to M. ‘Thierry, was the constant effort of
France, properly so called, from 888 to 987 ; such is the secret
of all the vicissitudes, of all the struggles of the 10th century,
and especially, Ist, of the struggle of the elective king Eudes
against the legitimate king, Charles le Simple ; 2, of that of
Hugues the Great, duke of France, against Louis d’Outre
Mer ; 3, of the definitive fall of Louis V. and of the succes-
sion of Hugues Capet.

“The race of Charles the Great,” says M. Thierry, “en-
tirely German, and attaching themselves by the ties of tradi-
tion and the affections of parentage, to the countries of the
Teutonic language, could only be looked upon by the Franks
as an obstacle to that separation upon which their independ-
ent existence had just been founded. The idiom of the con.
quest, fallen into disuse in the castles of the lords, was pre-
served in the royal house. The descendants of the Frank
emperors deemed it an honor to understand this language of
their ancestors, and collected pieces of verse composed by the
poets beyond the Rhine. . . . Doubtless, in the events which
followed 987, the premature death of Lodewig, the son of
Lother, we must attribute a large share to the ambition and
character of the founder of the third dynasty. . . . Neverthe-
less it may be affirmed that this ambition, hereditary in the
family of Robert le Fort, for a whole century was maintained
and aided by the movement of national opinion. Even the
expressions of the Chronicles, dry as they are at this epoch
of our history, lead us to Suppose that the question of the
change of dynasty was not then looked upon as a personal
affair. According to them, the matter in hand was an in-
veterate hostility, an enterprise undertaken long since with
the view of rooting up the posterity of the Frank kings from
the kingdom of France. . . . The accession of the third race


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 89


was the accomplishment of this enterprise ; it was, properly
speaking, the end of the kingdom of the Franks, and the
substitution of a national royalty instead of the government
founded by the conquest.’”!

From Charlemagne to Hugh Capet, the history of France
reduces itself into two great facts: 1, the separation of
nations according to the diversity of races; 2, the expulsion
of the sovereigns of a purely German race, in order to give
place to sovereigns of Gallo-Frankish, that is to say, national
origin.

Such is the system of M. Thierry; a rare knowledge of
events, a lively feeling of the situation and of manners are
displayed therein, at each step. But a few observations will
suffice, if I do not deceive myself, to show that it is incom-
plete, and too exclusive.

1. In the various alliances and combinations which took
place under Louis le Debonnaire, and his children, the nations
were far from being always connected or separated according
to races; many other causes determined their movements, and
the consideration of race often appears very subordinate
therein. I desire for proof only, the facts of which M. Thierry
himself has spoken. In the wars of Louis against his children,
the nations of purely German race seem to defend the empe-
ror and the empire; in the wars of the sons of Louis, it is they
who combat him ; and among those who defend it in the train
of Lothaire, there are Romans, Gauls, Goths, Burgundians,
Franks; nor are all the kingdoms ranged against the imperial
pretensions of Lothaire, for the king of Aquitaine, Pepin II.
allied himself with him against Louis le Germanique and
Charles le Chauve. The geographical position, personal in-
terests, numerous changing and special causes evidently, exer-
cised an influence over their alliance which was often more
decisive than the origin and relationship of nations.

5. This relationship is not more decisive as to the forma-
tion of kingdoms: those of Cis-Juran and Trans-Juran Bur-
gundy clearly show this; all the races are there mixed,
and there the demarcation is determined by entirely other
motives.

3. The consideration of race is still more foreign to the


1 Letter xii., pp. 228, 235, 287,
R*


90 HISTORY OF


formation of three small states, duchies, counties, lordships,
&c., into which each kingdom was subdivided. There was
here no struggle of origin or nationality, and yet there was
Separation, dismemberment, the same as among the great
masses of populations of which kingdoms are formed.

Other causes than the diversity of races presided, then,
at the dissolution of the empire of Charlemagne, and at the
formation of the new states. That, doubtless, contributed to
it: but it should not be looked upon as a general, dominant
cause: for the same facts are brought about when it did not
act, as when it did act. Now it is the general and dominant
cause which we seek. Since the diversity of races does
not furnish us with it, let us endeavor to find it elsewhere.

You will recollect that, in exhibiting the state of Roman
Gaul and its inhabitants, ancient and modern, after the great
invasion,' I established that the two primitive associations
of the German nations—the tribes, administered according to
the principles of liberty; and the warrior-band, in which
military and aristocratic patronage prevailed—were equally
broken up in passing to the Roman soil, for their institutions
no longer suited the new situation of the conquerors, at once
proprietors, and dispersed over a vast territory.

You have also seen the Roman society, its general organi-
zation, at least, as to the force which presided over it, the
imperial administration, dissolve after the invasion: so that
at the commencement of the eighth century, Roman society
and German society had alike perished in Frankish Gaul,
now abandoned to the most heterogeneous anarchy.

The attempt of Charlemagne was to entirely resuscitate it ;
to restore the empire and its unity, by re-establishing on the
one hand the Roman administration, on the other, national
German assemblies, and military patronage. He in some
sort renewed all the modes of association, all the means of
government which the empire and Germany had known, and
which lay disorganized and powerless, in order to replace
them in vigor for his own good. He was at once chief of
the warriors, president of the national assemblies, and emperor.
He succeeded for a moment, and on his own account. But
this was, as it were, a galvanic resurrection; applied to a


1 Lecture viii., vol. i,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 9]


great society, the principles of the imperial administration,
those of the wandering band, and those of the free tribes of
Germany, were equally impracticable. No great society could
be maintained. It is necessary to find its elements, on one
hand in the minds of men, on the other in social relations.
Now the moral and the social state of the people at this epoch
equally resisted all association, all government of a single
and extended character. Mankind had few ideas, and did
not look far around. Social relations were rare and restricted.
The horizon of thought and of life was exceedingly limited.
Under such conditions, a great society is impossible. What
are the natural and necessary bonds of political union ? on the
one hand, the number and extent of the social relations; on
the other, of the ideas whereby men communicate, and are
held together. Where neither of these are numerous or
extensive, the bonds of a great society or state are non-
existent. Such was the case in the times of which we now
speak. Small societies, local governments, cut, as it were, to
the measure of existing ideas and relations, were alone pos-
sible ; and these alone succeeded in establishing themselves.

The elements of these petty societies, and petty local
governments, were ready at hand. The possessors of benefices
by grant from the king, or of domains occupied by con-
quest, the counts, dukes, governors of provinces, were dis-
seminated throughout the country. These became the natural
centres of corresponding associations. Round them was
agglomerated, voluntarily, or by force, the neighboring
population, whether free or in bondage. Thus were formed
the petty states called fiefs; and this was the real cause of
the dissolution of the empire of Charlemagne. Power
and the nation were dismembered, because unity of power
and of the nation was impossible; all became local, because
all generality was banished from interests, existences, and
minds. Laws, judgments, the regulations for order, wars,
tyrannies, liberties, all were compressed in small territories,
because nothing could be regulated or maintained in a larger
circle. When this great fermentation of the various social
conditions, and of the various powers which covered France
was accomplished, when the small societies which had arisen
from it had invested with a more or less regular and deter-
minate form, the hierarchical relations which united them,
that result of the conquest and of the reviving civilization


92. HISTORY OF


took the name of the feudal system. It is at about the end
of the tenth century, and when the Carlovingian race disap.
peared, that this revolution may be looked upon as consum-
mated. We have just followed it in the historical monu-
ments; in the next lecture we shall study the legislative
monuments of the same epoch, and if I do not deceive myself,
we shall equally recognize it there.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 93


TWENTY-FIFTH LECTURE.


History of legislation from the death of Charlemagne to the accession
of Hugh Capet—Necessity of precisely determining the general cha-
racteristics of the legislation at the two terms of this “epoch, in order
to understand properly its progress during its course—i. State of’
the legislation under Charlemagne—It is personal, and varies ac-:
cording to races—The church and the imperial power give it some
unity—2. State of the legislation.after Hugh Capet—lIt is territorial >
local customs have replaced national laws—All central legislative
power has disappeared—3 History of legislation in Frankish Gaul
between these two terms—Analytical tables of the capitularies of
Louis le Debonnaire, Charles le Chauve, Louis le Begue, Carloman,
Eudes, and Charles le Simple—Compari ison of these tables accord-
ing to the figures only—Comparison of the provisions of the capitu-
laries—General results of this i inquiry.


| wave sought the progress and the causes of the dismem-
berment of the empire of Charlemagne, in events, in history,’
properly so called. I have endeavored to distinguish what
transformation Gallo-Frankish society underwent, and why.
I have shown that, of the various explanations which people
have attempted to give of it, none is satisfactory ; that that
even which contains the most truth, the diversity of races, is ex-
clusive, incomplete, does not account for all the facts. It
seemed to me that the impossibility of a sole and extensive
society, in the state in which social relations and minds then
were, alone fully explains this great and so rapid metamor-
phosis ; that the formation of a multitude of small societies,
that is to say, the establishment of the feudal system, was the
necessary consequence, the natural course of. events ;: that
since their meeting, Roman and German society had tended
towards this end, and that they had, in fact, attained it at the
end of the tenth century, when the dismemberment of the
empire of Charlemagne was definitively accomplished.

If this explanation is established, if such was the progress
of facts from Charlemagne to Hugh Capet, we ought to
find it in the history of laws as in the history of events.
Between the development of legislation and that of society,
there is an intimate correspondence ; the same revolutions
are accomplished therein, and in an analogous order. Let
us now study the history of the laws during the same epoch,


94 HISTORY OF


and let us see if they will lead us to the same result, if we
shall see the same explanation arise from it.

The history of laws is more difficult to understand tho-
roughly than that of events, properly so called. Laws, from
their very nature, are monuments more incomplete, less ex-
plicit, and consequently more obscure. Besides, nothing is
more difficult, and yet more indispensable, than to take fast
hold of and never lose the chronological thread. When we
give an account of external facts, wars, negotiations, inva-
sions, &c., their chronological concatenation is simple, palpa-
ble ; each event bears, as it were, its date written on its face.
The actual date of laws is often correctly known ; it is often
known at what epoch they were decreed ; but the facts which
they were designed to regulate, the causes which made them
to be written in one year rather than another, the necessities
and social revolutions to which the legislation corresponds,
this is what is almost always unknown, at least, not understood,
and which it is still necessary to follow step by step. It is from
this study having been neglected, from the not having rigo-
rously observed the chronological progress of laws in their
relation with that of society, that confusion and falsehood have
so often been thrown into their history. For example, you
constantly hear speak of the feudal laws as already in vigor
at the sixth century, immediately after the conquest, and of
barbarous laws as being still in vigor at the eleventh cen-
tury, under the feudal system. The resemblance of certain
facts, of certain words, which are equally met with in the
two epochs, causes this mistake : a little more attention to the
chronological development of laws and of the social state,
would have prevented it. Numerous errors in this matter,
some of them the result of mere ignorance, many systematic
and learned, have no other origin.

In order to prevent falling into it in the study with which
we have now to occupy ourselves, one means only seems to
me efficacious, that is, to determine precisely the two terms
between which this study is comprised, that is, the general
state of Gallo-Frankish society, first at the death of Charle-
magne, and then at the accession of Hugh Capet. When
we correctly know these two facts, when we know what the
legislation was throughout its progress, we shall not be so
liable to deceive ourselves concerning the route which it had
followed in the interval ; and if the study which we make of
its history, between the two terms, gives a clear account of


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 95


its transition from one to the other, we shall be justified in
confiding in it.

It will be understood that I only intend here to point out
the general characteristics of legislation under Charlemagne
and under Hugh Capet; but that will suffice for our pur-

ose.

5 At the first epoch, at the commencement of the ninth cen-
tury, the essential characteristic feature of the legislation is
that it is personal and not territorial ; that is to say, that
each people; each race, has its law, and that wherever men,
of such or such a race, live, they follow its law, and not that
of the territory which they inhabit. The Romans are
governed by the Roman law ; the Franks by the Salic or the
Ripuarian law; the Burgundians by the Burgundian law ;
the Lombards by the Lombard law ; the Saxons by the Saxon
law, &c. Nationality is inherent in the legislation ; in the
diversity of races, and not in that of places, resides the prin-
ciple of the variety of laws.

Above this variety hover certain principles of unity. And
first, the canonical legislation is one, the same for all people,
whatever their origin or name. ‘The religious society is
essentially one ; unity is the standard of the church ; hence
the unity of the ecclesiastical legislation, in the midst of the
most various national laws.

Civil legislation itself, taking this word in its most exten-
sive sense, and as opposed to religious legislation, is not
devoid of all unity. The king, the emperor, with or without
the concurrence of the national assemblies, decrees certain
laws applicable to all the inhabitants of his empire, Romans,
Franks, Lombards, Burgundians, &c. There is evidently
universality in many of the capitularies of Charlemagne ; they
are addressed to the whole territory, and are obligatory upon
all.

To speak in a general way, and leaving aside exceptions,
it is more especially in respect to civil. and penal law that
diversity according to races pervades the legislation of this
period. Unity is complete in the religious legislation, and
tends to prevail in the political legislation, which comes under
the influence of the central power.

Such are the general characteristics of legislation at the
commencement of the ninth century. I pass at once to the
commencement of the eleventh, the term at which the epoch
which we are studying stops, and when the feudal system


56 HISTORY OF


had taken her definitive consistency in France, and truly
possessed society. What metamorphosis is brought about in
the laws ! aoe

Their diversity, according to races, has disappeared,
There still remains some traces of it ; we still find the Saxon,
Salic, Lombard law spoken of; but "these are only rare in,
stances, the faint echo of an order of things becoming extinct.
The laws vary, not according to races, but, on the one hand,
according to conditions ; on the other, according to places,
The social legislation, from being personal, has become terri,
torial. There are different laws for different kinds. of. pro,
perty, different degrees of liberty. Accordingly,.in each
small state formed by the feudal subdivisions of. the territory,
arise peculiar laws. The diversity of races has. been. re-.
placed by that of classes and of places. To the national
laws have succeeded privileges and customs. This is the
first characteristic, the essential feature of the new physiog-
nomy that legislation has taken.

Another great change also took place. You have just seen

that in the beginning of the ninth century, the unity of the
imperial power was, notwithstanding the variety of the na-
tional laws, a principle of unity in the laws. In the com-
mencement of the eleventh century, nothing of the kind exist-
ed; there was no longer any central, seneral legislative
power ; the variety of laws established ‘according to places,
to vircumstances—that is to say, the variety of privileges and
customs was no longer combated or modified by any princi-
ple of unity derived from a higher sphere. ‘There was no
unity existing but in the legislation of the church, which
alone remained superior to all diversities.
- The great revolutions, then, which occurred in the legisla-
tion from the ninth to the tenth century, may be thus stated :
1. Legislation, according to races, had given way to legisla-
tion according to social conditions, to local circumstances.
2. Central legislative power, and the unity thence resulting
to certain branches of legislation, more especially in political
legislation, had disappeared.

This is the transformation which the history of legislation
from the ninth to the eleventh century has to describe. Let
us exhibit its course.

I have already spoken to you of the legislative monuments
which remain of this period, the capitularies of the Carlovin-
gian kings. You remember the analysis to which I subjected


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 97


those of Charlemagne, and the results I derived from that ana-
lysis. I classed them, as you recollect, under eight principal
heads: 1. Moral legislation; 2. Political legislation; 3. Penal
legislation; 4. Civil legislation ; 5. Religious legislation :
6. Canonical legislation ; 7. Domestic legislation ; 8. Occa-
sional legislation. JI have applied the same method to the
capitularies of Charlemagne’s successors, with these results:


Analytical Table of the Capitularies of Louis le Debonnaire.


Legislation,
Political
Legislation.
Legislation.
Legislation.
Religious
Legislation.
Canonical
Legislation.
Domestic
Legislation.

Occasional
“| Legislation.


Articles.


iw)


3
1
4
9
6
4.
3
4)
6


ae
Aker KR OOrADWAAQUN


HISTORY OF


98


“UOI]L[SISa']


_ | Teuorses99
© a
S “UOT}LISIZI'T . mes ne ,
& Sei et Mee ey oe SR, 5 el ee cs eee we cane a ee ose Bees ee Sects co fegeameee
a orjsomod | e e e e e e .
o ee ee Ln 54 Sp a ee ees = ee
oe |x 3
ie uoTye{IST aT 10 e©Odo © e Oo rte ° e e ey eo oe HH 010 oo ¢ e@ “OO
8 jeoruoueg seer 5 : Anne -
&
3
OS | ‘Uoryepsise] : ary Or eran sa AMM Cegeetee ieee eter cee Ae a Seton ~
snolst1a e e OF.) 405 6) 0 8 Shae 16 ° e e e e i A in foe ey ay ae vy en ee A ee

> Lol]oy
S
spe “WOT}EISISIT ° e ° ee x * ¢ : : Seis peas See ° eo 8 ° = oe «© © © © @ *
& THATO r
a LLL
sm
‘S| ‘uonestse
= Herstoo'] ig ae eee aah ee ee een de cement SS £5800 FE eget eee a
© jeued |
= EC A Oe ees ae ee ee
S | -uoneyst8a
oe (ye[st Al OHO -OHOD -OMODMDO “NO HO © © OH e1DOH © -MOH © *NRWDM eM 2 © © eH +B
S [eorjIpog : a5 Sea C eee, ie “4 seme ian) ord eo eo .
x
eS
rs "UOTILISIZA'T @ ° e e e e e Oo OS 5 100) Os One ret rt Oe GO TO) LO: sO i Ol Oh Os CS: 9. 6., £O. O:3 > 8) G5 Biot ° . °

e10 i a ee Me ET bi ee ee Te ee ee ee oe ee oe on eo Se | e 2. 8) ak 2 Ore). Bre Ge 8 OF ©. e Cr ee ee ee en ee a 2
we [eto
3 i athe Re EE ee ae ee ee eee
=
= : OAONDWDOMANDWDOMNONM I~ >
> sePOQIy a aaa et wa cee ee ee Oe Cy el ed. ate ala Ce ds ae eee
38
§
= . e ° . ° ° oe e $i ° e ° :I . 70a . es) 7H ON s Hid © bir) ey SN O HO

a dodpauod od
ayeq SB Be BBS BSS SSeS bbb


99


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE.


Analytical Table of the Capitularies of Charles le Chauve—contin


*d:


“UOT}VISISO'T
[eUOIsed0Q


‘uolyetsisoyT |.
orsaM0g Tae Gk


“‘UOTJISISAT
Teoruoueg


“UOTYRISTSA'T
SnNoIsIoy


“UOTILISISO'T
an


“WOTye[STSa"T
jeued


“UoTyeISISa'T
[eed


“UOT}RISISA'T
[elo


‘sapyay


‘ayeq


Analytical Table of the Capitularies of Louis le Begue—877-9.


“uorRysisery


Teuorsedd0Q


“UOTILISISA'T


otsoul0g


“UOT}eISIZAT


[eoruoues)


“UOT]LISIZO'T


SNOIST{OY


UOT} LSISO'T


H4I9


“UOT}eISTSA’T


jeueg


“‘UOT]eISISO'T


Teont]od


“uoTIeISISA'T


[elo


ies)


| .


©


“sapoTIy


‘ayeq


4 0O


r~ @
r= {=
@ 0


jor)


son of Louis le


>


e Capitularies of Carloman


Begue—(879-884).


Analytical Table of th


“UOT}eISISA'T


[eUOISsed09


“UOT}LISTSI]


o1Jsowlod,


"uOTIeISISa'T


yeoruoue sy)


‘uoT]eISISa'T


SNOTSITOY


“UOT]LISIZIT


Taro


“UOTILISISA'T


[eueg


“UOT}RISISO'T
Heceasda ies |


"UOT}e[SISA'T


[e410]


‘SOPOT


‘ayeq


HISTORY OF


100


Capitulary Table of Eudes, King of France (887—898)


“"UOT}R]SIS0'T
Jeuorses00


“UOT}eISIBO'T
d1}soU0g


‘UOT]e[SIZa'T
yeoruourg


"UOT}LISTSAT
SNOISI[OY


"UOT}LISIZO'T
TAT)


“UOT]LISIZA'T
[eusg


“UOT}LISISO'T


Pentld


“UOT}eISISO'T
[eto]


"sap


‘o]eq


“‘UoT]eISISA'T
[euoIsed0G9


"UOTLSIBO'T
dT}soW9(]


‘UOT}L[SIZA'T
[eoruours


“UOT}LISIZO'T
SNOISI[OY


“‘UOTILISIBI'T
a
jeueg


“UOT}LISIZA'T
Od


“UOT]LISISO'T
[elo]


ee
ee
ee


"sopPOTLW


Analytical Table of the Capitularies of Charles le Simple
(893—929)


‘ayeq


|
|
|
vem tee f
|
|
|
|


101


IN FRANCE.


CIVILIZATION


"66—€68) ‘eTduiIg eT soyreyO


(‘S68—L88) ‘sepngy

(PSS—6L8) “WeUIOTIED
(6LS—LL8) “onseg eT sot
CLLS—OFS) ‘“aAneYyd 2] saprey
(‘OFS—PT8)


‘aeuuogeq ef stnovy


(‘FI8—S89L) ‘ouSeumopreyg


UOT}e[SISa'T
[euoIseo09


UOT}e[SIso'T
d1ysauL0g


UOT} [SISO]
Teoruouesd
UOTye[SIsa'T
UOT}LISISO'T
UOT}LISISa'T

Teontod


"UOT]LSIBaT
SNOLSI[AyY


‘ajdung 97 sajapyg pun ‘sapny ‘unwoping ‘ansag a7 sinoT ‘aannyg


a] SILDYD ‘asmUuUogag a] simoT ‘ausnwmapinyg fo snsojnpidog ayz fo ajqn,z, yoauhjouy aayninduog


UOT]LISISA'T


‘sapnIVy


102 HISTORY OF


Before we enter into an examination of the provisions
themselves, thus classified under these different heads, let us
consider their numerical aspect: the mere comparison of
figures will develope important facts. |

Between the reign of Charlemagne and that of Louis le
Debonnaire, if we merely look to the number of articles in
moral, political, penal, religious, &c., legislations, we shall
notice very little difference ; the various classes of capitula-
ries are, as to mere figures, in very nearly the same respec-
tive proportions. The occasional legislation is somewhat
fuller in the latter reign, but not sufficiently so to arrest our
attention. We must penetrate quite into the interior of the
legislation to discover that it has become changed in its cha-
racter, that it is no longer the work of the same government
in the latter as in the former case.

We perceive a further distinction under Charles le Chauve ;
here the numerical proportion of the various classes of legis-
lation is changed. Under the heads of moral, penal, civil,
religious, canonical, and domestic legislation, we find very few
articles, while, on the other hand, the list of political and
occasional measures is much fuller ; a certain indication of a
great change in the state of society and of power. ‘To what
interests does moral, penal, civil, religious legislation address
itself? To interests which affect society far more nearly than
they do power; important, doubtless, for power itself, but of
an importance which has nothing direct or selfish about it,
which has relation to the public functions of government, and
not to distinct and personal existence. Political and occa-
sional legislation, on the contrary, affects power in its per-
sonality ; it is power which such measures serve or impede ;
it is power, more especially, and often power alone which
they contemplate in their effects. Accordingly, whenever, in
whatever epoch, or under whatever form, you see political
and occasional laws multiply, be assured that the government
is in danger, that it has enemies against whom it is defending
itself, that it is not simply and solely occupied in fulfilling its
public character, that it is not principally intent upon social
interests, but that it is its personal interests which guide and
rule its action. In the course of the Revolution of England,
and of our own, in all similar crises, what classes of legisla-
tion fill the statute books? Political and occasional laws.
The name and character of law is given formally to all the
measures of government; but, in point of fact, they are


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 103


merely acts of government, acts framed in the view above
all to the interest of power, and for its service, rather than
for the public service. This fact manifests itself clearly in a
simple numerical comparison of the different classes of
capitularies under Charlemagne and under Charles le Chauve.
Under Charlemagne, occasional legislation is very limited ; it
is evidently a tranquil government, having full confidence in
itself, occupied solely with the idea of accomplishing its task
and conducting the affairs of the society, Under Charles le
Chauve, it is to political and occasional measures that legisla-
tion applies itself; this, assuredly, is a tottering government,
desperately endeavoring to regain the force and order which
are abandoning it. Weakness and disorganization in the
central power are manifested in the very fact.

How stands the matter under the successors of Charles le
Chauve? What do the figures tell us here ?

Political and occasional legislation still predominate in the
capitularies, but even that is more and more limited; even
the legislative measures in which power is personally inter-
ested, become fewer and fewer. It is clear that, not only as
under Charles le Chauve, the central government is in peril,
but that it is disappearing altogether; before, it defended
itself ; now, it makes no attempt to do so; it abandons itself,
it takes no heed to itself; it has, indeed, no self to take heed
to, for it is non-existent.

Thus, without any examination of the contents of the
capitularies, by a simple comparison of the figures which in-
dicate the various classes of laws, we identify the same pro-
gress, we are present at the same spectacle that has been
exhibited to us by the history of events. Legislation is
stamped with the impress of the revolutions which the country
underwent. The government of Charlemagne, like his Em.
pire, is dismembered and dissolved.

Let us examine the interior of this legislation, the contents
of the capitularies: we shall arrive at precisely the same
results.

This examination is susceptible of great extension, and
might be made the topic of a vast number of curious obser-
vations; but I am compelled to limit myself to general facts.
Of these, the most important are as follow :

1. In describing to you the capitularies of Charlemagne,
I pointed out their extreme diversity ; they are not, as you
will remember, merely laws, but comprise acts of every. kind ;


104 HISTORY OF


ancient laws re-enacted, fragments of ancient laws, applied
specially to particular portions of the empire ; additions to the
ancient laws; new laws of the emperor, decreed sometimes
with the concurrence of the laity and ecclesiastics together ;
sometimes with that of the ecclesiastics alone, sometimes,
again, of the emperor in person, independently of any assem-
bly at all; instructions given to the misst dominici ; questions
addressed to the missi; answers by the emperor to questions
from the missi ; notes made by the emperor for his own use ;
memoranda of questions that he proposed to put, in the next
general asembly, to such and such persons, bishops, counts,
&c. Ina word, the prodigious variety of the acts compre-
hended under the general title of capitularies was one of the
facts upon which | particularly dwelt.

But, however great their variety, it was always from
Charlemagne himself that these acts emanated; he was on
all occasions the author and centre of the legislation. Whether
old or new laws were in question, whether instructions or pri-
vate memoranda, whether questions or answers, his presence
and his power were everywhere felt; he was everywhere
active and sovereign.

Under Charles le Chauve, the case was altogether different.
The diversity of the acts comprised under the title of capitu-
laries still subsisted, but a far different diversity had intro-
duced itself: that of legislators. It is no longer the emperor
alone who speaks and ordains ; it is no longer from him alone
that all things emanate. Among the capitularies which go
under the name of Charles le Chauve, there are several acts
with which he had nothing to do.’ 1. Petitions from certain
bishops to the king, requiring him, and that sometimes in a
very imperious tone, to establish order, and to protect the
church. 2. Counsels addressed by bishops to the king respect-
ing the government of his states, and even as to that of the
interior of his palace.? 3. Acts of bishops regulating the
administration of their affairs in the different kingdoms among
themselves, entirely without any reference to the king him-
self.2 4. Acts of the pope, with respect to the affairs of the
king and of the kingdom.* Finally, treaties, conventions


1 Cap. Car. Calv., a. 845, 856 ; Baluze, ii., 7, 14.
2Tb., a. 8085 ii, 101. 3 Cap. Car. Carlo., a. 859; ii., 121.
4Ib., a. 8773 ii., 251.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 105


entered into between the king and his brothers, or his nephews,
or his fideles. So that the sources of the acts constituting
this collection are as various as the nature of the acts them.
selves. A most significant fact, which a glance at the title
and first two or three lines of each capitulary fully enables
us to recognize.

2. There is another no less deserving of attention. Not
only does political legislation, under Charles le Chauve, oc-
cupy a larger space than under Charlemagne ;. it is wholly
different in itself, has no longer the same object in view. The
political laws of Charlemagne have almost always reference
to truly public interests, to the business of general govern-
ment, sometimes relating to the conduct of the imperial dele-
gates, the dukes, counts, centeniers, missi dominici, scabini,
&c.; sometimes to the holding of the assemblies, local or
general, in which justice was administered. The rela-
tions of Charlemagne with his beneficiaries and with the
church, make their appearances indeed, but more occasionally
and more briefly. Under Charles le Chauve the case is re-
versed: provisions bearing upon administration, properly so
called, upon the conduct of the royal officers, on the holding
of assemblies, on really public business, are rare; the pre-
dominant feature, that, in fact, which constitutes the political
legislation of this reign, is provisions having for their object
the arrangements of the king with his beneficiaries, and with
the church, that is to say, with the portion of the government,
further removed from the public, nearer to the king himself,
whether the other parties in these cases are ecclesiastics or
laymen, it is always class or personal interests that we find in
question ; it is always some personal or class grievance for
which redress is sought at the hands of the king, or some ex-
tension of privileges solicited. The representations made are
more or less powerful, more or less legitimate, but it is no
longer the body of the people that is in question, nor the
government of the people ; political legislation is no longer a
public legislation ; it has changed its character ; its object is
wholly private interests.

I. It has, at the same time, changed its tone. The legisla-
tion of Charlemagne is, in general, concise and imperious; it
commands or prohibits summarily, without taking up the time
in roundabout phrases and dissertations, and such is the pro-
per method. Laws are not theses of philosophy nor specimens
of eloquence; it is not their business to maintain doctrines


106 HISTORY OF


nor to move the passions; to command, to forbid, is their
purpose, and they always suffer when they deviate in any way
from it. The legislation of Charlemague, for the most part,
went straightforward to this object. Such was by no means
the case with the legislation of Charles le Chauve. However
closely we examine that legislation, you can scarce detect
either command or prohibition, amid the heaps of ratiocina-
tion, exhortation, advice, entreaty. The capitularies of
Charles le Chauve are not regular laws, but either sermons
addressed to minds sought to be brought over to particular
views, or negotiations with men whose obedience was only to
be hoped for by a certain degree of obedience in return.

This leads us to the greatest legislative change which is
seen between these two epochs, to the really new character
of the legislation of Charles le Chauve, and of his successors,
the character in which the approach of the feudal system is
clearly shown.

I have just said that in the capitularies of the last Carlo.
vingians, we find many acts which do not emanate from the
king only, from the central legislative power, and especially
many treaties ; between Charles le Chauve, for example, and
his brothers, his nephews, or other princes, in possession of
some portion of the territory of the empire of Charlemagne.
Out of the fifty-one capitularies of Charles le Chauve, there
are nine treaties of this kind. But this is not all ; almost the
entire legislation at this epoch is a series of negotiations
between separate and independent powers. Under Charle-
magne, however various they may have been, whether they
were addressed to the agents of power or to its subjects, all the
acts bore the character of a superior who commands inferiors.
Social and political unity was strongly marked on it. Under
Charles le Chauve, the unity disappeared ; it is evidently no
longer a general power which commands ; it is a special power
which treats with other powers, a government which defends
its territory and rights against other governments. Out of
the 529 articles which the capitularies of Charles le Chauve
contain, more than a hundred have this appearance ; legisla-
tion has become diplomacy. Now what is the dominant
characteristic of the feudal society 2? Precisely the facts which
we here observe ; petty states, petty governments, consider-
ing themselves each independent in its territory, or nearly
so, quarrel, dispute, reciprocally send ambassadors, hold con-
ferences, form conventions. During a long period the rela-


CIVILIZATION IN’ FRANCE. 107


tions of royalty with the feudal lords dispersed throughout the
French territory are nothing else ; its laws, its charters, are
treaties ; its progress is concession or acquisition. This is
what distinguishes, what characterizes :feudal society when
considered in its whole. Now, under the last Carlovingians,
this characteristic already appears in the laws: there is no
longer any legislation, properly so called : there is diplomacy
between independent states. |

You see the history of legislation leads us to ‘the same
results to which history, properly so called, conducted us.
We have just put to laws the corresponding question to that
which we have addressed to events; the answer is the same:
we have discovered not only the same tendency, but the same
progression in the development of facts so different. This, if
I do not deceive myself, is the best confirmation of our view
of the dismemberment of the empire of the Carlovingians.
We have had reason to lay aside as incomplete that which is
drawn from the diversity of races, fer you see it is contra-
dictory to the history of legislation; from the ninth to the
eleventh century, the diversity of races, instead of exercising
any more empire over laws, ceased to be a dominant prin-
ciple, and the source of variety: the laws vary not according
to races, but according to classes and to places.

The diversity of races, then, will never explain the history
of the legislation at this epoch, whilst the progressive develop-
ment of the feudal society, the necessary formation of a
multitude of petty states and petty powers,—one sole state
and one sole power having become impossible—alike ac.
counts for the vicissitudes of legislation and the vicissitudes of
society.

I will go no further into the history of the laws under the
Carlovingians. I should find there the texts for many cu-
rious observations ; but they would require too much detail,
and would carry us further than we have time to go. In our
next lecture we will examine the history of the church, of
religious society at the same epoch; and then see if it will
give us results analogous to those which have been furnished
us by the history of civil society. Before, however, I close
this lecture, I will place before you a particular fact which
did not come naturally within the scope of the considerations
i have been suggesting to you, but which yet it is desirable
that you should be acquainted with. This is the distribution
of the missi dominic, sent throughout the kingdom by Charles


108 HISTORY OF


le Chauve in 8538, the only year in reference to which the
details of this distribution have come down to us. France
was then divided into eighty-six districts or territorial circum-
scriptions. The coincidence of this number with that of our
present department, though very singular, is pure matter of
chance ; some of these eighty-six districts are described as
comprehending several counties. They were divided among
twelve companies of missi, whose total number was forty-
three. We have their names and their quality. Of the forty-
three, thirteen were bishops, five abbots, and twenty-five lay-
men, without any particular title ; at the head of each mission
was a bishop; at least a bishop occurs first in each list.

The consequences to be deduced from this table are unim-
portant, but the document is a curious one in itself.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. ; 109


TWENTY-SIXTH LECTURE.


Object of the lecture—Internal history of the Gallo-Frankish church,
from the middle of the 8th century to the end of the 10th—Anarchy
which pervaded it in the first half of the 8th century—Twofold prin-
ciple of reform—The reformation is actually undertaken by the first
Carlovingians: 1, By the civil power; 2. By the ecclesiastical pow-
er—Special reforms—Order of canons—Its origin and progress—
Reformation of the monastic orders by Saint Benedict d’Aniahe—
They change character—Preponderance of the temporal power in
the Gallo-Frankish church at this epoch—Proofs—Still the church
progresses towards its future preponderance—But it is not to the
profit of its own government, of the bishops of France, that this
progress is to turn.


I wave already given the history of the Gallo-Frankish
church up to the accession of the Carlovingians, towards the
middle of the eighth century. I then considered it under the
two points of view to which all questions which may arise
with regard to a religious society attach themselves; on the
one hand, without, in its relations with the civil society, with
the state ; on the other, within, in its organization and in-
ternal government. And not only the church in general, but
those two distinct elements, the priests and the monks, the
secular clergy and the regular clergy, have been the subject
of a twofold inquiry.!

It conducted us, you will remember, to this result—that at
the commencement of the eighth century, the Gallo-Frankish
church was a prey to an ever-increasing anarchy. Ex-
ternally, far from simplifying and fixing itself, its relations
with the state became more and more confused, disordered,
uncertain ; the spiritual power and the temporal power “lived
from day to day without principles, without fixed conditions ;
they encountered everywhere, running against each other,
confounding, disputing the means of action, struggling and
meeting in darkness and at chance.’” Internally, in its own
government, the situation of the church was no better—


1 See the 19th Lecture. 2 See the 12th Lecture,
10


110 HISTCRY OF


episcopacy had entirely usurped it; the inferior clergy in
vain struggled to maintain some rights, to assure themselves
some guarantees. And, after having usurped everything,
the episcopal aristocracy itself fell into a powerless anarchy :
scarcely were there any more councils, scarcely any more
metropolitan power; egotism penetrated there as in civil
society ; each bishop governed his diocese at his will—despo-
tic towards his inferiors, independent of his superiors and his
equals. The monasteries presented almost the same pheno-
mena. So that, taking all things together, a little before the
middle of the eighth century, that which dominated in the
heart of the church, as in the state, in Frankish-Gaul, was
disorganization.

Still, at the same time that we recognized this fact, we
caught a glimpse on the two banks of the Rhine, both for
church and for state, of the first glimmering of another
destiny. There were growing up together, on the one hand,
that race of the Pepins which was to give Frankish-Gaul new
masters ; on the other, that Germanic church which, regularly
and strongly organized under the influence of papacy, might
serve for the reform of the other churches in the west, as a
fulerum and model.

It so, in fact, happened. You have seen, under the first
Carlovingians, order and life re-enter into civil government:
we are about to be present at the same fact in the church, at
the same epoch, and from the same causes.

There is no need of demonstration; it breaks forth on all
sides. From Pepin le Bref to Louis le Debonnaire, it is im-
possible not to be struck with the movement of reform which
speaks out and propagates itself in the Gallo-Frankish church.
Activity and rule appear in it at the same time. The temporal
government labors with all its strength to introduce them.
Pepin and Charlemagne commenced by drawing the episcopacy
out of the anarchy and indolence into which it had fallen; they
restored the power of the metropolitans, frequently assembled
the bishops, occupied themselves with giving back to ecclesias-
tical government its entirety and regularity. Towards 747, at
the request of Pepin, pope Zachary sends a collection of canons
tohim. In 774, Adrian I. sends a second, much more complete,
to Charlemagne: and Charlemagne does not confine himself to
circulating these codes of ecclesiastical discipline ; he carefully
watches over their observation ; he causes new canons to be
decreed; religious administration is evidently one of the


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. lll


principal affairs of his government. He succeeded in re-
awaking in the church that general, regular activity which so
long since had almost died away. ‘I'wenty councils only
were held in the seventh century, and only seven in the first
half of the eighth. Dating from Pepin, they once more
became frequent. The following is a table of those which
met under the Carlovingian race :


Date of acces- [Number of


Kings. sion and death.| Councils.
Pepin le Bref, 752—768 14 in 16 years.
Charlemagne, 768—814 33 in 46 years.
Louis le Debonnaire, 814—840 29 in 26 years.
Charles le Chauve, 840—877 69 in 37 years.


From the death of )


Charles le Chauye, |
to the accession of 877—987 56 in 110 years.
Hugh Capet.

201 in 235 years.


This fact alone attests the return of activity and life into
ecclesiastical society ; and this activity did not content itself
with holding councils, with regulating the immediate and
special affairs of the clergy ; it extended itself to the wants of
religious society in general ; of all the Christian people, in the
future as in the present. This was the time of the definitive
improvement of the liturgy ; writings upon the ecclesiastical
offices, their celebration, their history, abound; and rules
establish themselves in the train of these treatises. It is also
the time when the greater part of the penitentials, or codes of
ecclesiastical punishment, were drawn up, which regulated
the relation between sins and penances; they often vary
from diocese to diocese, and appear in great number before
any had acquired the least extended authority. Then, also,
homiliaries or collections of sermons for the use of priests and
the faithful, were multiplied. In a word, everything at this
epoch gives testimony of a great ardor for labor and reform,
a reform which, whether pursued by the civil power, which
concurred very actively in the government of the church, or by


112 HISTORY OF


the church itself, was applied to re-establish rule and progress
in its own bosom.

Two special reformations, undertaken and accomplished by
isolated individuals, the formation of the order of canons, and
the re-establishment of rule among the monks, attest the same
movement, and powerfully contributed to accelerate it.

About the year 760, Chrodegand, bishop of Metz, struck
with the disorder which pervaded the secular clergy, and
with the difficulty of governing the scattered priests, living
isolately and each in his own fashion, undertook to subject
those living in his episcopal diocese to an uniform rule, to
make them live in common—in fact, to constitute of them a
society analogous to that of monasteries. ‘Thus arose the
constitution of canons; the institutions of the times were its
occasion, the monastic order its model. Chrodegand applied
himself to render the assimilation as complete as he could.
The rule, in thirty-four articles, which he gave to the first
canons is almost literally borrowed from the rule of Saint
Benedict. Labors, relaxations, duties, the whole employ-
ment of the time of the canons, are regulated in it; meals
are to be taken in common, clothing to be uniform. It is
true, a fundamental difference exists between the two orders ;
the canons may possess private property, while, with the
monks, the monastery alone is possessed. But in the details
of life the resemblance is minute, and it has evidently been
sought.

The institution must have answered to the wants of the
age, for it was rapidly propagated. Many bishops imitated
Chrodegand ; the organization of the clergy of episcopal
churches into chapters became general ; in 785, 789, 802, 813,
we find the civil and ecclesiastical power eagerly sanctioning
it. At length, in 826, Louis le Debonnaire, in a council held
at Aix-la-Chapelle, had a rule of canons drawn up in 145
articles, which reproduced and extended that of Chrodegand,
and he sent it to all the metropolitans of his kingdom, in
order that it should everywhere be applied, and become the
uniform discipline of churches.

It seems that this discipline encountered much resistance in
the secular clergy ; it deprived them of the disorderly liberty
which they had so long enjoyed; it imposed an uniform and
rather rough yoke upon them. But a circumstance to which
most historians have paid but too little attention, almost every-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 113


where removed these obstacles, and powerfully favored the
extension of the new order.

I have already observed,' that the possessions of the church
in each diocese were at the disposition of the bishop, who
administered and distributed her revenues almost alone and
arbitrarily ; so that the simple priests, and not only the priests
dispersed through the country districts, but those of the epis-
copal city, of the cathedral church itself, depended entirely
on the bishop for their support, for the first and most impe-
rious wants of life. And as a great number of bishops gave
themselves up to infinite disorders, and spent on their own
account the revenues of the church, the existence of the priests
was very miserable and precarious ; poverty, even distress,
was often their condition.

The evil was so real, that when many bishops wished to
imitate what had been done by the bishop of Metz, to unite
the priests of their cathedral in the same edifice, and make
them live in common, the temporal and spiritual powers
thought it their duty to interfere, in order to prevent this being
done, unless there were means of subsistence, a secured liveli-
hood for the new establishment. The council of Mayence
ordered, in 813, that the reform should be carried out, “ where
there were the means ;”’ and that of Aix-la-Chapelle, in 816,
enjoined bishops in the admission of canons to regulate
themselves according to the revenues of the church.

But this difficulty did not last long. When the people
saw priests thus confined, disciplined, and leading a life as
regular and severe*as the monks, it felt a redoubled respect
and fervor for them. Gifts flowed to chapters as well as to
monasteries. Never, perhaps, had so many and so well-
endowed churches been founded ; most of the cathedrals were
rapidly enriched, and many donations were especially ad-
dressed to the canons, now become an object of edification and
admiration. Simple priests thus escaped, in many places,
from the state of distress and dependence into which they had
been cast; the secular clergy became favorable to the new
order, although it bore its yoke; and the order of canons soon
played a very important part in the movement of reformation
of the church at this epoch.

At the same time, a new reformation of monks was accom-


113th Lecture.
10*


114 HISTORY OF


plished, by the influence of a man who took the name of their
first reformer in the west, Saint Benedict d’Aniane.

Benedict was not his original name; it is not known what
that was; he was a Goth by race, and was born in 751, in
the diocese of Maguelonne, in Septimania, of which his father
was count. Sent in his childhood to the court of Pepin-le-Bref,
he was page, cup-bearer, warrior, and took part in many ex-
peditions of Charlemagne. In 774, without any details re-
maining to us concerning the adventures of his lay life, we
find he has renounced it, become a monk in the abbey of
Saint Seine, the foundation of which I have already recount-
ed.'' There he soon became the most respected of the monks ;
so much was he respected, that the abbot being dead, they
wished to confer the title upon him: a singular resemblance,
you perceive, between his destiny and that of the great re-
former, whom he had adopted as a model. As Saint Benedict
of Nursia at first opposed the wishes of the monks of Vicovaro,
Benedict d’Aniane repelled those of the monks of Saint Seine :
they were not, he said, capable of supporting the severe rule
which he wished to establish ; they would not be long before
they rose up against him. ‘The monks insisted; but Benedict,
more obstinate than his patron, resolved to quit the abbey.
About the year 780 he returned into southern Gaul, and,
still faithful to the example of Saint Benedict, he became a
hermit on the borders of a small stream, the Aniane, in the
diocese of Maguelonne. His celebrity accompanied him, in-
creased even, in his hermitage; a crowd of companions, already
monks, or eager to became. 5c; assembled around him, and he
soon found himself obliged to build a large monastery, where
he put in force the reformation which he proposed, in all its
rigor.

This reformation was, at bottom, but a return to the primi-
tive rule of Saint Benedict, concerning which I spoke to you
in detail,*? and which the relaxation of discipline, in most
monasteries, had caused to be abandoned. Benedict d’Aniane
published it anew, at the same time collecting the various
rules given to monasteries, from that up to his own day ;
he formed of them the codex regularum, a regular body of
law for the monastic society, and circulated it in Frankish
Gaul. Not content with thus placing the law before the eyes


117th Lecture. 214th Lecture.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 115


of those who were to obey it, he undertook the practical
reform of monasteries; and, either in his own person, or by
disciples of his choice, in point of fact, accomplished it in
those of Gellon in Languedoc, of |’Isle Barbe, near Lyons, of
Saint Savin in Poitou, of Cormery in Touraine, of Massay in
Berry, of Saint Mesmin near Orleans, of Marmunster in
Alsace, and many others.

So great a work soon attracted the consideration of the
people and of Charlemagne to its author. In 794, we see
Benedict seated at the council of Francfort, and there taking
part in the condemnation of the heresy of the Adoptians, in
the person of Felix, bishop of Urgel. In 799, by order of
Charlemagne, he repaired to Urgel, with archbishop Leidrade,
to preach to the heretics. Lastly, in 816, Louis le Debonnaire
called him near his person, made him abbot of a large monas-
tery, which he had just founded at Inde, in the vicinity of
Aix-la-Chapelle, and in 817, Benedict presided at the special
assembly, held at Aix-la-chapelle, for the reformation of
monastic orders, an assembly entirely composed of monks and
abbots, and the convocation of which he probably brought
about.

From this assembly there went forth a great capitulary,
destined to accomplish, in a general manner, and by the in-
strumentality of the public power, that reformation which
Benedict followed in detail so long ago; it contains eighty
articles, and should be looked upon as the completion and
commentary of the rule of Saint Benedict. But the commen-
tary differs greatly from the text, and here is shown, in the
monastic mind, a revolution which it is necessary for us to
characterize.

It will be recollected how, in analyzing the rule of Saint
Benedict, we found it, despite the severe enthusiasm of which
it is the fruit, to be feeling, even liberal—that is to say, foreign
to all minute details, to all narrow views; humane and mode-
rate with regard to practical life, in the heart of a very rigid
general thought. Utterly different is the character of the
additional rule which the capitulary of 817 contains. It seems,
at first, to have no other object than that of again putting
the primitive rule in vigor. The first three articles impose
upon every abbot the obligation of re-perusing it upon re-
entering his monastery, and of penetrating thoroughly into
its purpose ; upon every monk, that of learning it by heart.
But to this succeeds a legislation most foreign to the text and


116 HISTORY OF


spirit of the ancient law; a legislation overcharged with pue-
rile details, with minute forms and vain observances ; the
following are some examples:

‘“¢ Let the monks not shave during Lent, unless it be Holy
Saturday. During the rest of the year, let them shave once
a fortnight, and at the octave of Haster.’”

“Let the bath be used according to the directions of the
prior.’”

“Let them not eat poultry either within or without the
monastery, except by reason of sickness ; let no bishops order
monks to eat poultry. At Christmas and at Easter let them
eat poultry for four days, if there be any; if not, they shall
not demand it as their due.’

‘“‘ Let them eat no fruit nor salad, except with their other
food.’’+

“Let the length of the hood be two cubits.”

‘¢ Let his portion of meat and drink be given eee: to
each brother, and let no one give any of his own share to
another.’”°

‘‘ Let no fixed time be observed for bleeding, but let every
one be bled according as he needs it; and at such times have
some especial indulgence as to eating and drinking.’’7

And so on of eighty-one articles, twenty-one are of a kind
entirely foreign to all religious sentiment, to all moral tendency;
and contain nothing but miserable prescriptions of this kind.
Assuredly nothing less resembled that enthusiasm, that
gravity, with which the primitive rule is marked ; nothing
more clearly attests the decay of the monastic mind, and its
rapid tendency towards a miserable superstition. Benedict
d’ Aniane, like Benedict of Nursia, wished to reform the monas-
teries ; but the reformation of the sixth century was at once
extensive and sublime; it addressed itself to what was strong
in human nature: that of the ninth century was puerile, in-
ferior, and addressed itself to what was weak and servile in
man. Such, in point of fact, is the general character of the
monastic order from this epoch, despite numerous attempts to
lead it back towards its source; it lost its grandeur, its first
ardor, and remained laden with those puerilities, those ridicu-
lous details, which humiliate men, even when they submit to
them with a good intention.


38,9, 78. 4 Art 0:


1 Art. 6. Wh
66, T Axe, 11.


5 Art, 21. 6 Art.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 117


Puerile or grave, monastic or secular, all this reformation
of the Gallo-Frankish church was accomplished under the
inspection and with the concurrence of the temporal power.
In truth, from Pepin le Bref to Louis le Debonnaire, it is the
temporal power, king or emperor, which governs the church,
and effects all that I have just placed before you. ‘The proofs
of this are evident.

1. All-the canons, all the measures relative to the church
at this epoch, are published under the name of the temporal
power; it is that which speaks, which orders, which acts.
To be convinced of this, one need only open the acts of the
councils.

2. These acts, and many other monuments, even formally
proclaim that it is to the civil power that the ordering of such
things belongs, and that the church lives and acts under its
authority. The canons of the council of Arles, held under
Charlemagne, in 813, terminate as follows :—

“We have briefly enumerated the things which seem to us
to require reformation, and we have decided that we shall
present them to the lord emperor, invoking his clemency, to
the end that if anything be wanting to his work, his prudence
may supply it; that if there be anything contrary to reason,
his judgment may correct it; that if anything be wisely or-
dered, his support, with the aid of the Divine goodness, may
cause it to be carried into effect.’

_ We likewise read in the preface of the acts of the council
_ of Mayence, also held in 813:

' & Above all things, we have need of your aid, and of your
holy doctrine, to warn us, and instruct us with benevolence ;
and if what we have drawn up below in some articles, appear
worthy to you, let your authority confirm them ; if anything
appear to you to require correction, let your imperial grandeur
order its correction.’”

What texts can be clearer ?

3. The capitularies of Charlemagne likewise prove at every
step, that the government of the church was one of his prin-
cipal affairs ; a few articles, taken promiscuously, will show
with what attention he occupied himself with it.

“Our missi are to inquire whether there be any cause of


1 Con. Labbe, vol. vii., eol. 1238. 2 Tbid., 1241.


118 - HISTORY OF


complaint against a bishop, an abbot, an abbess, a count, or
any other magistrate whatsoever, and inform us thereof.’

‘Let them examine if the bishops and the other priests
live according to the canonical institution, and whether they
know and properly observe the canons; whether the abbots
live according to rule and canonically, and whether they
thoroughly know the canons; if in monasteries the monks
live according to rule ; if in nunneries they live according to
rule, and what is the extent of the establishment.”

“‘ Let them examine the monasteries and nunneries in each
city ; let them see how the churches are kept up or repaired,
both as regards the edifices themselves and their ornaments ;
let them carefully inform themselves of the manners of each,
and of what has been done with regard to what is ordered
concerning readings, the chanting, and all which concerns
the ecclesiastical discipline.’”®

“If any of the abbots, priests, deacons, &c., do not obey
his bishop, let them go before the metropolitan, and let him
decide the business with his suffragans ; and if there is any-
thing which the metropolitan bishop cannot reform or settle,
let the accusers and the accused come to us with the letters
of the metropolitan, that we may know the truth of the
thing.’”*

‘“‘ Let the bishops, abbots, counts, and all the powerful men,
if they have between them any dispute and cannot reconcile
themselves, come into our presence.’’

This is assuredly a very direct and active intervention.
Charlemagne did not govern civil affairs more immediately.

4. He exercised, besides, a very efficacious influence, al-
though indirect ; he nominated bishops. We read, indeed, in
his capitularies, the re-establishment of the election of bishops
by the clergy and the people, according to the primitive cus-
tom and the legal right of the church :

“ Not being ignorant of the sacred canons,”’ says he, “ and
to the end that in the name of God the holy church may
freely enjoy her privileges, we have given our assent that the
bishops be elected, according to the canonical statutes, by the


a


1 3d Cap. a., 789, § 11; Bal., vol. 1., col. 244.
2 2d Cap. a., 802, § 2—5; vol. 1., col. 475.

3 Sth Cap. a., 806, § 4, vol. i., col. 453.

4 Cap. a., 794, § 4, vol. 1., col. 264.

5 3d Cap. a., 812, § 2.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 119


choice of the clergy and the people, in the diocese itself, with.
out any regard to persons or presents, by the merit only of
their life and wisdom ; and to the end that they may be com.
pletely able to direct those who are subject to them.’?!

But the fact continued to be but little in accordance with
this right; both after and before this capitulary, Charlemagne
almost always nominated the bishops; and even after his
death, under his feeblest successors, the intervention of
royalty in such matters was allowed by the most jealous of
its rivals. In 853, pope Leo IV. wrote to the emperor
Lothaire :

‘“‘ We supplicate your mansuetude to give the government
of this church to Colonna, an humble deacon, to the end, that
having received your permission, we may, with the aid of
God, consecrate him bishop. If it do not seem well to you that
he be bishop of this church, let your serenity confer upon him
that of Tusculum, which is now without a shepherd.’”

In 879, pope John VIII. made a similar request to Carlo-
man, in reference to the church of Verceil.? .

The chronicles of the time are,: besides, full of particular
facts which can leave no doubt upon the subject, and prove
that the choice of bishops was the occasion, on the part of
the candidates, of a multitude of intrigues; on the part of the
prince himself, of partiality, or a singular indifference. Two
anecdotes, derived from the chronicle of the monk of Saint

_ Gall (a monument more important and more instructive than
ts pedantry of scholars is willing to believe), are remarkable
examples of it: I shall give them literally.

“It is known that Charlemagne brought up, in the school
of the palace, many young men whose learning and talent he
afterwards employed.

‘ He made one of these pupils, who was poor, the chief and
writer of his chapel... .. One day, when they announced
the death of a certain bishop to the most prudent Charles, he
asked if this prelate had sent before him into the other world
any of his property and of the fruits of his labors.

*¢ ¢ Not more than two pounds of silver, sire,’ answered the
messenger. ‘The young man in question, unable to contain


Cn eee Se eee ee ee ee ee eee Se eee


1 ist Cap. a, 803, § 2, vol i., col. 379.
2 Gratian, Deeret., p. ii., dist. 63, c. 16.
3 Gieseler, Manual of Eccles. Hist., vol. ii., p. 44, note 9.


120 HISTORY OF


within his breast the vivacity of his spirit, cried, in spite of
himself, in the presence of the king: ‘ What a light viaticum
for a journey so great, and of so long duration.’

“ After deliberating some minutes within himself, Charles,
the most prudent of men, said to the young priest: ‘ What
sayest thou ? were I to give thee this bishopric, wouldst thou
be careful to make more considerable provision for this long
journey ?’ The other hastening to devour these wise words,
as grapes ripe before their time falling into his half-open
mouth, threw himself at the feet of his master, and answered:
‘Lord, it is for the will of God and your power to decide.’

“‘ «Conceal thyself,’ said the king, ‘ behind the curtain, and
thou shalt learn what rivals thou hast for this honorable
post.’ When the death of the bishop was known, the officers
of the palace, always ready to watch the misfortune, or, at
all events, the death of another, impatient of all delay, and
each with the other, set to work the favorites of the em-
peror in order to obtain the bishopric. But he, firm in his
design, refused: them all, saying that he would not break his
word to the young man. At last queen Hildegarde sent first
the great men of the kingdom, and then came herself, to
solicit the bishopric for her own chaplain. The king received
her request with the most gracious air, assured her he could
not, and wished not to refuse her anything, but added, that
he could not pardon himself, if he were to deceive his
young priest. In the manner of all women, when they think
to make their desires and ideas predominant over the will i?
their husbands, the queen, dissimulating her rage, softened
her naturally strong voice, and endeavoring to mollify, by ca-
ressing manners, the immovable soul of Charles, said to him:
‘ Dear prince, sire, why throw away this bishopric by giving
it tosuch a child? I conjure you, my amiable master—you,
my glory and my support, grant it to my chaplain, your de-
voted servant.’ At these words the young man, whom Charles
had enjoined to place himself behind the curtain, near which
he himself was seated, and to hear the prayers which each
made, cried in a lamentable tone, but without quitting the
curtain which surrounded him: ‘ Lord king, hold firm ; suffer
no one to tear from thy hands the power given thee by God.’
Then this prince, the courageous lover and friend of truth,
ordered his priest to show himself, and said to him: ‘ Receive
this bishopric, but take the utmost care to send before me,
and before thyself, into the other world, great alms, and a


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 12}


good viaticum, for the long journey, from which no one
returns.”’

This is the second :

“‘ Another prelate was dead. Charles gave the succession
to a certain young man. He, all content, prepared to set out.
His servants brought him, as suited the episcopal gravity, a
horse of a very quiet sort, and placed a stool for him to get
into his saddle. Indignant that they should treat him as he
were infirm, he sprang from the ground on to the horse so
energetically, that it was with difficulty he could keep his
seat, and not fall over the other side. The king, who saw
what passed from the balustrade of the palace, had this man
called to him and said: “My brave man, thou art lively,
agile, quick, and thou hast a strong foot. The tranquillity of
our empire is, as thou knowest, incessantly troubled by a mul-
titude of wars; we have need of such a priest as thou in our
Suite: remain, then, to be the companion of our fatigues,
since thou canst mount thy horse so freely.’”!

I might cite many facts of this kind. This was assuredly
treating the episcopacy and the church without ceremony.

5. Not only did the Carlovingians thus dispose of the
bishoprics, but they often appropriated a portion of their
domains to themselves. Every one knows what Charles
Martel did in this way. But it is less generally known that
this fact was repeated many times under the princes of his

race, even the most devoted and submissive to the church. In
743, Carloman, brother of Pepin le Bref, decreed the follow-
ing capitulary :

“We have resolved, with the counsel of the servants of
God and the Christian people, because of the wars and the
‘invasions of other neighboring nations which menace us, to
take for a while, and by way of usufruct, some portion of the
ecclesiastical domains, and to keep them, with the permission
of God, for the maintenance of our army, on the condition
that every year there shall be paid to the proprietary chureh
or monastery, a sol—that is to say, twelve deniers, for each
farm ; and that if he to whom the capital belongs dies, the
church is to retake possession of it; and if necessity re-


1 Deeds and Exploits of Charlemagne the Great, by a Monk of
Saint Gall; vol. ii., p. 181, of my Collection.
1]


122 HISTORY OF


quires, or the prince orders it, this possession shall be
renewed.’’}

We read also in a capitulary of Louis le Debonnaire, in
828 :

“ We order the abbots and /aymen to have observed in the
monasteries which they hold from our gift, and according to
the counsels of the bishops, all which relates to the religious
life of monks, canons, &c.’’2

There were, then, laymen who received from the emperor
certain monasteries in the way of benefices. Abbots of this
kind were still more numerous under Charles le Chauve ;
they had the name of Abbacomites.

Doubtless the church was constantly protesting ; and, upon
the whole this fact passed, and properly passed, for an attack
on her rights, a violent usurpation. Yet it was so frequent,
so open, that an idea of some kind of royal right was almost
attached to it; and the church more than once seemed to
acknowledge, that in extreme need, a portion of her property
might be thus temporarily applied to the service of the state.

6. It was not only with ecclesiastical administration and
discipline that the temporal power occupied itself at this
period. It interfered even in matters of dogma, and they were
governed in itsname. Three questions of this kind were raised
in the reign of Charlemagne. I shall merely point them out.
1. The question of the worship of images, raised in the west
by a canon of the second council of Nice, in 787. The Gallo-
Frankish church rejected this worship, and all that seemed to
tend to it. A special work, drawn up by order of Charle-
magne, probably by Alcuin, entitled, Libri Carolini, was
published against it. The favor given by the popes to this
doctrine did not operate upon the Frankish bishops nor their
master, and, in 794, the council of Frankfort formally con-
demned it. 2. The heresy of the Adoptians concerning the
nature of Jesus Christ, of which I have already spoken, and
which Charlemagne also formally condemned in three succes-
sive councils, at Ratisbon, in 792, at Frankfort in 794, and at
Aix-la-Chapelle, in 799. 3. The question of an addition to
the symbol as to the procession of the host. These, assuredly,
are matters entirely foreign to the external government of the


12 Cap. Carlom., a., 743; Bal. vol. i., col. 149,
* Cap. Lud., p. a, 823, § 8; vol. i., col. 635.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 123


church—they are purely dogmatical. They were not the
less regulated, if not by the civil power itself, at least under
its authority, and with its intervention.

It may, therefore, be affirmed, without discussing the
question of right, without examining whether it be good or
ill that it should be thus, that at this epoch, directly or
indirectly, the temporal power governed the church. The
situation of Charlemagne in this respect was almost exactly
the same as that of the king of England in the English
church. In England, also, the civil assembly, or parliament,
and the ecclesiastical assembly, or convocation, were long
distinct ; and neither one nor the other decided upon, or could
do anything without the sanction of royalty. Whether the
matter in hand was a council or a champ de mat, a dogma or
a proclamation of war, Charlemagne equally presided at it :
in neither case did they think of dispensing with him.

But at the same time that they governed the church, and
for the very reason that they did not in any way fear her
independence, the first Carlovingians conferred immense
advantages on her, and provided the most solid foundations
for her future power.

1. It was by their support that the tithe was definitively
and generally established. You have seen that the church,
relying upon the Hebrew customs, had at various different
times, but without any great success, attempted to appro-
priate this rich revenue to herself. Charlemagne gave to
the tithe the aid not only of his laws but of his indefatigable

will. It was under his reign that it truly took root in the
legislation and practice of the west.

2. He also extended the jurisdiction of the clergy. We
read in one of his capitulations :—

« We will that neither abbots, priests, deacons, nor under-
deacons, nor any priests, be cited or taken before public or
regular judges, for deeds concerning their person : let them
be judged by their bishop, and so let justice be done
them. If any complaint be carried against them before the
_ judge concerning the domains of the church or their own
property, let the judge send the complaint with one of his
own messengers to the bishop, in order that he may do
justice by the intervention of his advocate ; and if there arise
between them any dispute which they cannot or will not
settle themselves, let the cause be carried before the court or
the judge by the advocate whom the law gives the bishop, and


we
124 HISTORY OF


let it there be decided according to the law, respect being
always paid to what has just been said with reference to the
person of the priest.’”?

Whenever he had any purpose in interfering in the disputes
of the bishops, whether among themselves or between them
and the laymen, he made no hesitation in doing so. But in
general, as the ecclesiastical jurisdiction was more enlightened
and regular, he was. more inclined to extend than to restrict
it ; and despite the submission of the bishops during his reign,
they drew from it at a later period many useful precedents in
favor of their independence.

3. In the civil order also, especially in reference to mar-
riages and wills, the power of the clergy greatly increased at
this period. I have already pointed out the cause from which
it drew this important attribute. I have shown how, among
the barbarians, the family was unfixed, unstable, and how it
was the interest of a regular government to introduce more
order and fixedness into it. It was more especially for this
reason that all questions of parentage, marriage, or wills,
came under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction ; and the church,
by penetrating into the interior of families, acquired an
enormous power.

4. Lastly, Charlemagne gave up to each church, under
the name of mansus ecclesiasticus, a farm free from all kinds
of charges and taxes; an important concession at an epoch
when rural property furnished almost all the public expen- a
diture. |

Despite her momentary servitude, the church assuredly had
here numerous fertile principles of independence and power.
These were not long in developing themselves. During the
early years of the reign of Louis le Debonnaire, the order of
things established by Charlemagne continues, or nearly so: it
is still the emperor who governs, who, at least, appears to
govern the church. But everything soon changes, and the
church in her turn governs the emperor. I shall not enter
with any detail into this subject. Every one knows that the
usurpation of power by the clergy is the dominant charac-
teristic of the reigns of Louis le Debonnaire and Charles le
Chauve, up to the time when all general society, all central
government, disappeared to give place to the feudal system.


* Cap. Car., M. A. 801, § 39, vol. i., cap. 255,


*


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 125


The facts are present to all minds. I shall quote but one
text, possibly more clear than all the facts put together.
This is Art. 2 of the accusation brought the 14th of June,
859, before the council of Touil, by Charles le Chauve,
against Wenilon, archbishop of Sens, who had _ separated
from him to ally himself with his enemies. This denuncia-
tion of a bishop by a king seems an act of the resistance and
independence of royalty ; it is expressed in the following
terms :

“ By his election, and that of the other bishops, and with
the will, consent, and acclamations of all the faithful of our
kingdom, Wenilon, in his own diocese, in the city of Orleans,
in the cathedral of Saint Croix, in presence of the other arch-
bishops and bishops, consecrated me king, according to the
ecclesiastical custom ; and in calling me to reign, he anointed
me with the holy oil, gave me the royal diadem and sceptre,
and led me to the throne. After this consecration, I could
not be cast from the throne, nor supplanted by any one—at
least, not without having been heard and judged by the
bishops, by whose ministry I was consecrated king, and who
have been named the throne of God. God rests upon them,
and it is through them that he decrees his judgments. I[
have always been, and am at present ready to submit my-
self to their paternal corrections, and to their castigatory
judgments.’”!

__ Truly the revolution which, in Frankish Gaul, had raised
the priesthood above the empire, cannot be proved by a less
suspicious and more formal testimony.

It was to the profit of the Gallo-Frankish episcopacy that
this revolution seemed to be brought about; it was by the
bishops that the temporal power was thus acquired and thus
treated. But this sovereignty of the national church was not
to subsist long, and it was not to the profit of the bishops that
the church had overcome the state. It will be recollected
that in seeking amidst the dissolution which invaded Gaul
under the last Merovingians, what principles of civil and


_ ecclesiastical regeneration became visible—that it was beyond


the Alps, at Rome, that the principle of ecclesiastical regene-
ration appeared to us.” There, in fact, was developed the
power called upon to rule the church in general, and the


1 Bal., vol. ii., col. 133 2? 19th Lecture.
1) oa


126 HISTORY OF


Gallo-Frankish church in particular. It was in the hands of
the papacy, not of the episcopacy, that the empire definitively
fell. In the next lecture I shall place before you the history
of the relations between the Gallo-Frankish church and pa-
pacy during this epoch, and you will see that it was papacy
that took possession of the sovereignty on the decay of the
Carlovingians. ,


CIVILIZATION *N FRANCE, 127


TWENTY-SEVENTH LECTURE.


History of papacy—Peculiar situation of the city of Rome—Relations
of the popes about the middle of the eighth century, with the
Italian, Spanish, Anglo-Saxon, Gallo-Frankish, and Germanic
churches—Their alliance with the early Carlovingians—Advantages
which they drew from it—Donation of Pepin and of Charlemagne—
Sovereignty of the Carlovingian emperors over the popes—Uncer-
tainty of the ideas, and incoherency of the facts concerning the
rights of papacy—It increases more and more in minds—It appa-
rently acquires a legal title—False decretals— Nicholas I.—His cha-
racter—A ffair of the marriage of Lothaire and of Teutberge—A ffair
of Rhotarde, bishop of Soissons—Triumph of papacy: 1. Over
temporal sovereigns ; 2. Over national churches—Its decided pre-
ponderance in the west.


I wave shown that the Gailo-Frankish church was raised
by the first Carlovingians, from the state of impotence and
anarchy into which it had fallen. We have seen it re-enter
into order and activity ; we have seen this revolution brought
about by the concurrence and under the authority of the
temporal power. Pepin, Charlemagne, and even Louis le
Debonnaire, on his accession, actually governed the Gallo-
Frankish church. This state of things was of short duration.
I have pointed out with what rapidity the spiritual power
passed from docility to independence, from independence to
sovereignty ; I have shown its pretensions already acknow-
ledged by the temporal power itself, particularly by Charles
le Chauve. It was to the profit of the Gallo-Frankish epis-
copacy that this change was brought about. I announced
that it would not long enjoy it, that a third power, the papacy,
would soon take their scarcely acquired supremacy from the
national bishops. It is with this fact—that is to say, with the
history of papacy, from the eighth to the tenth century, espe-
cially in its relations with the Gallo-Frankish church, that we
have to occupy ourselves at present.

There is a primitive fact with regard to the development
of papacy in Europe, which, I think, has never been taken
sufficiently into account. Not only was Rome always the
most important city in the west; not only did the recollec-
tions of its ancient grandeur tend to the good of the bishop,


128 HISTORY OF


who, without as yet reigning, was already the chief of its
people ; but Rome also had a particular advantage in the
west, that of never remaining in the hands of the Barbarians,
Heruli, Goths, Vandals, or others: they had many times
taken and pillaged it—they never long retained possession of
it. Alone, among all the great western cities, and whether
as united to the empire of the west, or as independent, it
never passed under the German yoke : alone it remained
Roman, after the ruin of the Roman empire.

It happened, without premeditation, without labor, by the
sole nature of its situation, that Rome found herself, morally
at least, at the head of the ancient population disseminated
throughout the new Western States. In this struggle, at
first public, afterwards secret, but for a long period so active —
this struggle of the conquered against the conquerors—the
attention of the Gallo-Romans, of the Hispano-Romans, of all
the cities desolated by their barbarous conquerors, naturally
turned towards Rome, so long their sovereign, and now the
only living wreck of the ancient society, alone exempt from
new masters, alone capable of still preserving the respected
traditions of the people that they still governed. For this
reason, Rome was a name dear to the whole mass of the
population in the west, the centre of recollections and ideas,
the image of all which remained of the Roman world. It
was under the influence of this fact that papacy took rise; it
was, so to speak, its cradle ; it placed it in its very origin at
the head of mations; it rendered it a kind of national power
for the race of the conquered.

Let us now see what was its situation with regard to the
principal churches of the west, at the middle of the eighth
century.

At this epoch, there were in the west five great national
churches: the Italian church, or rather the Lombard—for I
only speak of the north of Italy, then in the power of the
Lombards—the Spanish church ; the Anglo-Saxon church ;
the Gallo-Frankish church, and the rising Germanic church.

1. It was in Italy, in the Lombard church, that papacy
was the least powerful. The bishop of Rome had never been,
either as metropolitan or by any other title, the superior of
the bishops of the north of Italy: the Lombard kings, who
had long been Arians, and incessantly applied themselves to
drive their conquests into the territory which they adminis-
tered, were its natural enemies. “The perfidy of the Lom-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 129


bards,” wrote pope Pelagius I., in 584, “has caused us,
despite their own oaths, so many tribulations and evils, that
no one can recount them.” ‘The correspondence between the
Lombard bishops and the popes, became, therefore, difficult
and rare ; and that church which reached almost to the gates
of Rome, was stranger to them than any other.

2. For a long time, on the contrary, their influence over
the Spanish church was great and progressive. Under the
domination of the Arian Visigoths, the catholic and_perse-
cuted clergy of Spain maintained frequent and intimate rela.
tions with the bishop of Rome, who, in the name of the
catholic church, supported it in its resistance. It happened,
moreover, that in the course of the fifth and sixth centuries,
two illustrious Spanish bishops, Torribius, bishop of Astorga,
and Leandro, bishop of Seville, were the secretaries and
friends—the one of Leo the Great (440-461), the other of
Gregory the Great (590-604), and established habitual rela-
tions between their church and that of Rome. Accordingly,
it is on the subject of the Spanish church that the pretensions
of papacy are the most openly manifested at this epoch. In
538, pope Vigilius writes to Profuturus, bishop of Braga:

‘‘As the holy Roman church possesses the primacy over
all churches, it is to her, as the chief of the church, that all
important affairs are to be sent, the judgments and complaints
of bishops, as well as great questions of ecclesiastical matters.
For that church, which is the first, in confiding her functions
to the other churches, called upon them to share in her labors,
not in her plenitude of power.’

There was, at that time, no other church in the west to
which the bishop of Rome addressed language like this.
Accordingly some doubts have been raised as to the authen-
ticity of this letter ; still it seems tome probable. The power
of the papacy in Spain was so real, that in 603 two Spanish
bishops, Januario of Malaga, and Stephen, having been irre-
gularly deposed, Gregory the Great sent an envoy, named
John, with orders to inquire into the affair : and without con-
voking any council, without seeking the adhesion of the
Spanish clergy, John declared that the deposition was illegal,
annulled it, and reinstated the two bishops, thus exercising
the rights of the most extended ecclesiastical supremacy.


1 Baluze, WVov. Coll. Conce., vol. i., coll. 1468,


<a .


130 HISTORY OF


It was not, however, so well established as one would sup-
pose. The Visigoth kings, dating from Ricared (586-601),
had become Catholics. At first, the papacy profited by it;
the fact which I have related proves it. But the struggle be-
tween the national clergy and the temporal government having
ceased, the clergy grew more closely connected with the gov-
ernment, and less so with the foreign bishop, whom they had
taken for a chief. Accordingly, we see the power of papacy
a little weakened in Spain during the course of the seventh
century, and the national church acting with more indepen-
dence. At the commencement of the eighth century king
Witiza quarrelled with the pope, interdicted all recourse to
Rome, rejected the Roman discipline, and, it is said, even
authorized the marriage of priests. Some years afterwards,
the invasion of the Arabs took place, and the greater part of
Spain was lost both for papacy as well as for Christianity. In
the middle of the eighth century, it preserved power only
among the Christian refugees in the north of the Peninsula, or
at the foot of the Pyrenees; and there even the disorder was
such, and society so agitated or weak, that there was scarcely
anything for a distant and systematic influence to do.

3. With regard tothe Anglo-Saxon church, you know, that,
founded by the popes themselves, it was placed, from its very
origin, under their most direct influence ; it was still in the
middle of the eighth century in the same situation.!

4. The situation of the Gallo-Frankish church was different.
You have seen that during the course of the seventh century
her relations with Rome had become very rare.? It was in
the middle of the eighth century, precisely at the opening of
the epoch with which we are about to occupy ourselves, that
they again became more frequent and efficacious. I will re-
sume this history presently.

5. The Germanic church, as you know, owed its success
to the labors of the Anglo-Saxon missionaries, of Saint Boni-
face, more especially ; and her founders, in creating her, as it
were, to the papacy.®

Such was the situation of the popes with regard to the great
national churches in the West, when, about the middle of the
eighth century, the first Carlovingians closely allied them-
selves with them. It is easy to recognize the happy effects
upon the papacy of this alliance.


119th Lecture. 2 Ibid. ° Ibid.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 13]


And, first, it acquired an ascendency in the Italian church
which it had never before possessed. After the defeat of the
Lombards by the Franks, the bishop of Rome did not become
the metropolitan of the Lombard bishops; he did not receive
the title of patriarch; but he was invested with a superiority
without example, indefinite, and so much the greater.

The Lombard clergy saw him respected by the Frank-
conquerers, who in general looked upon him as their repre-
sentative and minister beyond the Alps, and it was through him
accordingly that the clergy treated with the conquerors. No
one in the Lombard church could think of equalling it; and
the church itself rapidly fell under his authority.

He also acquired fresh authority in the Gallo-Frankish
church. It was with his aid, and by supporting themselves
with his name and opinions, that the first Carlovingians labored
to reform her. Even before their elevation, Saint Boniface
wrote to pope Zachary, that Carloman, brother of Pepin le
Bref, asked him to repair to Gaul : “ Protesting that he wished
to amend and reform the state of religion and the church,
which, for at least seventy or eighty years, had been aban-
doned to disorder, and crushed under foot.’

It was under the presidence®and influence of Saint Boniface,
in his character of legate of the pope, that councils were held,
formerly so rare, but now again become frequent. ‘T'he acts
of the council of 742, called Germanicum, commence in the
following terms:

“‘T, Carloman, duke and prince of the Franks, with the
counsel of the servants of God and our great men, have con-
voked the bishops of my kingdom, and Boniface, who is sent
from Saint Peter, that they may give me counsel,” &c.

The same fact reappears in the council held the following
year at Lestines or Leptines, in the diocese of Cambray, and
at the assembly of Soissons (752), where Pepin was conse-
crated king. Not content with thus serving as mediator be-
tween the temporal sovereigns and the popes, Saint Boniface
undertook to unite closely to the see of Rome the metropolitans,
er archbishops, whose power he was establishing ; he induced.
those of Rouen, of Sens, and of Reims, at the time of their
nomination, to demand the paliium—the sign of their new dig-
nity—from the pope, and thus to claim of him a sort of inves-


1S. Bon., ep. 51, p. 107.


132 HISTORY OF


titure. Only one among them followed his counsel, and the
pope testified to Boniface his disappointment that the other
two had not done the same. Lastly, it was not the sovereigns
or the clergy only who were reconciled to papacy, and con-
tracted a more intimate alliance with it. ‘The same move-
ment was manifested among the faithful, the people: the
number of pilgrims who repaired to Rome with pious inten-
tions rapidly increased. We read in a capitulary of Pepin le
Bref:

‘“¢ As regards pilgrims who make a pilgrimage in the service
of God, let no one demand toll of them.’”!

And it is evidently to the pilgrimage of Rome that this pro-
vision relates.

Though we had no other proof of the ascendant movement
of papacy in the Gallo-Frankish church, but the tone in which
it is there spoken of, this were sufficient ; not only the language
of the clergy, but of writers in general, the temporal sovereigns
themselves, becomes. extremely pompous—magnificent and
respectful epithets increase. The pope was no longer simply
the bishop of Rome, the brother of other bishops ; titles were
given to him, and expressions employed towards him which
were not employed towards or Siven to any other. Certain
phrases of Alcuin, who in his capacity of favorite to Charle-
magne, cannot be suspected of wishing to sacrifice the power
of his master to a foreign power, will say more concerning
those titles and expressions than any generalities. In 796, he
addressed pope Leo III. (695-816) in these words:

** Most holy father, elected pontiff of God, vicar of the apos-
tles, heir of the fathers, prince of the church, guardian of the
only dove without stain.’”

And in another place, in 794, to Adrian I. (761-795) :

“ Very excellent father, even as I recognize thee for the
vicar of the blessed Peter, the prince of the apostles, so do I
regard thee as the heir of his miraculous power.’”3

Again, in writing to Charlemagne, in 799:

“ Hitherto there have been in the world three persons of
supreme rank: the sublimity of the apostolical vicar who
occupies the seat of the blessed Peter, the prince of the apos-
tles ; the dignity of the emperor who exercises the secular


TCap. Pipp., a. 755, p. 22; Bal., vol. i., col. 1°75.
? Letter 20, vol. i., p. 30. 3 Letter 15, vol. i., p. 25.


CIVILIZATION IN. FRANCE. 133


power in the second Rome; the third is. the royal dignity
with which the will of our Lord Jesus Christ has invested you,
that you may govern the Christian people.’”!

It is true that it would be improper to accept these expres-
sions literally ; we must not believe that the pope possessed,
in its whole extent, the power which they attribute to him ;
but they show what moral and religious supremacy he already
possessed in the mind of the people. His intellectual domi-
nion, the source of all other species of his dominion, really
dates from this period. .

His temporal power received at the same time a notable
accretion. When Pepin had conquered the Lombards, he
compelled them to restore to the bishop of Rome the lands
which they had taken from him, and he, moreover, added a
part of those which he had himself conquered, especially in
the exarchy of Ravenna. After the complete ruin of the
Lombard kings, Charlemagne, in appropriating these states,
made new and considerable donations of the same kind to
Adrian the First. The authenticity of these two gifts has
been called into question, and it is true that the original act
is, in neither case, extant. Nevertheless, they are, directly
or indirectly, mentioned by contemporary writers; and nu-
merous chronicles and monuments of various kinds attest, or
suppose their existence. ‘The extent of the lands thus con-
ceded may be disputed: in the succeeding centuries the pope
greatly exaggerated it, no doubt; but.I conceive that it is im-
possible reasonably to question the reality of these donations.
They present nothing which is not perfectly natural, and in
harmony with the entire history of the eighth century. We
ought rather to have been surprised had they not occurred.

It is more difficult to determine the true meaning and poli-
tical bearing of such concessions. Two hypotheses have been
maintained upon this point. According to some, Pepin and
Charlemagne gave to the pope no more than the civil pro-
prietorship, the dominiwm utile, the revenue of the lands, and
of the slaves and laborers who inhabited them—not the sove-
reignty, the government of the territory. According to others,
political sovereignty was attached to the concession ; the popes
exercised all the rights of political sovereignty, as had been
done before them by the exarch of Ravenna, and the other


o


1 Letter 80, vol. i., p. 117.
12


134 HISTORY OF


delegates of the emperor of the East, who, even after the do-
nations had been made, preserved, for a while, some shadow
of supremacy over these lands, but soon completely lost it,
leaving the pope as their only successor.

In my opinion, neither one nor the other of these hypotheses
can be maintained ; each of them depends upon an oblivion
of the condition of minds in the time which it relates to. In
those days, people did not acquire such clear and precise ideas
of sovereignty, power, and rights, as are formed of them by
us, in the present day. They did not distinguish with such
strictness between the dominium utile and political govern-
ment, between property and sovereignty. All this science
of modern civilians was foreign to men’s minds and to facts,
in the middle of the eighth century. The proprietor, as pro-
prietor, exercised in his domains a portion of those rights
which are at present ascribed to the sovereign alone. He
maintained order, did justice or caused it to be done, led or
sent to war the men upon his lands, not in virtue of a special
power, called political, but in virtue of his proprietorship
itself, in the idea of which the most various powers were con-
founded. Thus, on the one hand, when, in the ninth century,
we see the popes exercising the greater part of those rights
which we name political, in the domains which they had re-
ceived from Pepin and Charlemagne, we must not therefore
conclude that real, complete, and independent sovereignty had
been conferred upon them ; and, on the other hand, neither
must we any more believe that Charlemagne, in retaining a
certain sovereignty over the territory which he had given to
the popes, thought that he ought to, and, in fact, did, reserve
to himself all the rights which, in the present day, appear to
us to be attached to the word. At the same time that the
pope, in the name of proprietor, had ministers, judges, and
even military chiefs, chosen by and dependent upon himself,
on his domains, Charlemagne received taxes from them, and
sent them, as to the rest of his states, missi dominici, charged
with the inspection of all matters, the suppression of abuses, é&c.
In a word, complete sovereignty was attributed neither to the
pope nor to the emperor ; it fluctuated between the two, ina
divided and uncertain state ; and from this fact arise all the
difficulties of a question which does not exist in the eyes of
any one who is acquainted with and understands the period
of which we are speaking.

Whether or no he possessed such sovereignty, there can


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 135


be no doubt but that the acquisition of such vast domains,
and of all the rights of proprietorship, was a great increase
of temporal power for the bishop of Rome. He found him-
self, from that time, beyond any comparison, the richest bishop
in Christendom, and without a peer materially as well as
morally.

Thus, the early Carlovingians, and especially Charlemagne,
were the most useful allies to the papacy: Ist, in ensuring to
the pope a power over the Italian church, which they had not
hitherto possessed ; 2dly, in giving them a very active in-
fluence in the affairs of the Gallo-Frankish church; 3dly, in
recognizing in these, by language and all demonstrations which
strike the imagination of nations, a majesty and supremacy
which had not yet been admitted by princes ; 4thly, and finally,
in increasing, whether by wealth, or by its indirect conse-
quences, their temporal power.

Nevertheless, you must not believe that, in their relations
with the papacy, they had abdicated their empire. As you
have seen that Charlemagne favored the influence of the
clergy within the Gallo-Frankish church, and yet subjected
them to his own power, so he ruled the popes even while he
prepared for them the means of ruling his successors. In the
first place, their election was not complete until it had received
the approbation of the emperor. Facts and texts abound in
proof of this. In 796, Charlemagne wrote to pope Leo ILI.
who had just been elected :

“ After having read your excellency’s letter, and noticed
the decree, we were greatly rejoiced both with the unanimity
of the election and with the humility of your obedience, and
with the promise of fidelity which you have made to us.’”

In 816, the election of Stephen IV. took place in the pre-
sence of the commissaries of Louis le Debonnaire, to whom
the decree was sent in order that it should receive his confirm-
ation. In 817, Pascal I. excuses himself for the precipitation
of his ordination. In 825, at the time of the election of Eu-
genius II., Louis le Debonnaire sent his son Lothaire to Rome,
and it was determined that commissaries of the emperor should
always be present at the ordination of the pope.

This consent of the emperor has sometimes been represented
as a nomination ; it has been pretended that he named the


! Cap., vol. i., col 271.


136 HISTORY OF


pope like the other bishops. Nothing is less founded than this
assertion. The pope was elected at Rome by the clergy, and
sometimes, too, with the concurrence of the people of Rome ;
but in order to his consecration, the approbation of the emperor
was necessary. ‘The concurrence of the temporal power went
no further than this.

The language of many popes at this period expressly wit-
nesses their dependence, and the positive superiority of the
imperial power. Leo III. wrote to the emperor :

‘“‘If we have done anything incompetently, and if, in the
affairs which have been submitted to us, we have not rightly
followed the path of the true law, we are ready to reform what
we have done, according to your judgment and that of your
commissaries.’”!

Leo IV. wrote to Lothaire the First :

** We promise that we will always do all that shall be in our
power to keep and observe inviolably the statutes and decrees
as well of yourself, as of your predecessors.’”

Moreover, in France, within the Gallo-Frankish church,
the emperors governed alone, without, in any respect, sharing
the power with the papacy. ‘That influence upon the Gallo-
Frankish church which I have just exhibited to you as being
in the hands of the popes, was only indirect. They did not
convoke the councils; the emperor alone called them. The
decision of these assemblies did not require their approbation.
All ecclesiastical supervision or administration belonged
either to the national bishops or to the delegates of the em-
peror, and the pope only interfered indirectly, by way of
advice.

There existed, moreover, with the public, both laity and
clergy, a certain idea of an ancient and general legislation of
the church, to which the popes were bound to submit, as well
as the other bishops. People made no precise estimate of its
source and its authority ; they were not fully aware from what
power it ought always to emanate ; the question was not, as
it afterwards was, very clearly laid down between the coun-
cils and the popes ; but it was the firm impression of the public
that, above the popes, were the canons, discipline, and general
law of the church, and that of themselves they had no right
to change them.


i Gratian. Decret., p. 11, caus. 2, quot. 7, col. 41.
Gratian. Decret:, Distinct. 10, c. 9


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. ' kee


Such was the situation of the papacy, more especially in
its relations with the Gallo-Frankish church, at the com-
mencement of the ninth century, and at the end of the reign
of Charlemagne. You see that much incoherence and con-
fusion reigned in it. We thus meet with a multitude of con-
tradictory facts; some bear witness to the independence of
the national churches ; others exhibit the papal power above
the national churches. Here appears the superiority of the
temporal power; there, that of the spiritual power enthroned
at Rome. In 833, Gregory IV. interfered to reconcile Louis
le Debonnaire and his sons, reproaching the bishops of
Frankish Gaul with their conduct: they protested against his
interference, and contested with him the rights which he as-
sumed, declaring that “they would by no means submit to
his will, and that if he came to excommunicate, he should
depart excommunicated; for the authority of the ancient
canons permitted nothing of this kind.’’? Nevertheless, in his
answer, Gregory reproaches them with having employed, in
writing to him, the titles frater and pater, by turns, “ whereas
it would have been much more becoming to have exhibited
towards him nothing but a filial respect ;”” and, upon this, not
only did they not expostulate again, but the word frater
gradually disappeared from their language. In 844, the .
bishops of Frankish Gaul refused to acknowledge Drogon,
archbishop of Metz, the natural son of Charlemagne, a vicar
of pope Sergius II., who had given him his diploma; and, in
849, they menaced Nomenoe, king of Brittany, with excom-
munication, because he received with disdain a letter of pope
Leo IV., ‘to whom God had given the primacy of the entire
world.” I might multiply examples ; I might exhibit tempo-
ral sovereigns, popes, and national churches, turn by turn,
conquerors or conquered, arrogant or humble. Neverthe-
less, through all these contradictions, we plainly perceive
that the papacy was making progress; it reigned, if not in
fact, at least in the minds of men. The conviction that the
pope was the interpreter of the faith, the chief of the uni-
versal church, that he was above all other bishops, above
national councils, and above temporal governments, in matters
of religion, and even in temporal affairs, when they related
to religion; this conviction, I say, became more and more
established in the minds of men. In the middle of the ninth
century, we may regard it as definitively formed ; the conquest

12*


*
138 HISTORY OF


of the intellectual order was then completed for the profit of
the papacy.

_It had also to make the conquest of the legal order; the
mind of nations attributed it to the sovereignty of law, but
there were wanting titles in which its laws should be written,
and in the name of which it might assert their historical
antiquity, as well as their national legitimacy. ‘These it soon
found.

Collections had been making, for a long time, of the canons
of the church. The first collection of this kind, in the west,
had been compiled in the sixth century, by a Roman monk,
named Denis le Petit. It soon became a kind of eccle-
siastical code, and the object of general emulation. Many
similar collections were written in the different states of the
west. Spain, in particular, had one of them, to which the
name of Isidore was given, although St. Isidore, bishop of
Seville, had evidently no hand in it. It was more extensive
than that of Denis le Petit, and contained a greater num-
ber of letters of the popes, as well as of canons of councils,
and particularly of the Spanish councils. It spread itself be-
yond Spain, and very soon obtained great credit, particularly
in Gaul.

In the first half of the ninth century, between the years
820 and 849, there suddenly appeared, still under the name
of St. Isidore, a new collection of canons, much more import-
ant than that which I have already mentioned. It is in the
north and east of Frankish Gaul, in the dioceses of Mayence,
Tréves, Metz, Reims, &c. &c., that we first meet with it;
there it had no obstacle opposed to its circulation ; very few
were the doubts which arose here and there concerning its
authenticity, and in a short time it acquired a sovereign
authority. This is the collection which is called The False
Decretals. It has received this name, because it contains
numerous pieces which are manifestly false, and because it
bears all the characters of a lying fabrication. It begins with
sixty letters of the most ancient bishops of Rome, from Saint
Clement (91—100) to Melchiades (311—214) ; letters of which
no monument had yet made mention, and of which the false-
hood appears at the first glance. The popes of the three first
centuries are therein continually made to employ St. Jerome’s
translation of the bible, which was not produced until the end
of the fourth century ; they also allude to facts and to works
of the sixth and seventh centuries. In short, the fabrication


¥
CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 139


cannot in the present day be called into question by a man of
any sense or information.

The author of this fabrication is not known. Since we
meet with it first of all in the dioceses of Tréves and May-
ence, and on account of other minor indications with which I
will not occupy your time, it has been attributed to Benedict,
deacon of Mayence, whom | have already named to you, and
who made the second collection of the statutes of Charlemagne.
Whoever he may have been, his work spread rapidly : many
took it for the ancient collection already known by the name
of Saint Isidore: others, believing it to be new, neglected
even to examine its contents. It had for patrons, not alone
the popes and their partisans, but also nearly all the bishops ;
for, in fact, it was not written exclusively in the interest of
the papacy. It even seems, all things considered, in its
primitive intention to have been more especially destined to
serve the bishops against the metropolitans and the temporal
sovereigns. The greater portion of the fabricated pieces,
even whilst displaying with pomp the power of the popes,
have for their principal object the establishing of the inde-
pendence of the bishops, and it is above all against the metro-
politans and the temporal princes that the power of the pope
is invoked.

The false decretals had, therefore, from the first, the sup-

port of the bishops; and, far from calling them into question,
they eagerly adopted them, pre-occupied, as has so often hap-
pened, with the interest of the moment, and not troubling
themselves to perceive that one day the fraud would turn to
the profit of the pretensions of the papacy, rather than to their
own advantage.
- About the middle of the ninth century the pope had thus
triumphed both in the intellectual and in the legal orders ;
they were in possession of a rational right and a written title ;
this sovereignty reposed not only upon public belief, but also
upon traditions.

Thus founded, and invested with such forces, their power
was naturally not slow to display itself practically. About the
same period, in fact, all the consequences of the principles set
down, either in the general opinions of the time, or in the
false decretals, made their appearance in certain particular
events.

In 856 a nephew of Charles le Chauve, and great-grandson
of Charlemagne, Lothaire, king of Lorraine, had married


140 : HISTORY OF


Teutberge, daughter of Boson, a Burgundian count. In 857
she displeased him, and he put her away ; he accused her of
all kinds of crimes, among others, of incest with Hubert,
her brother. He lived openly with another woman, Wal-
drade, sister of Gunther, archbishop of Cologne, and niece
to Teutgaud, archbishop of Tréves, whom he had loved, it is
said, for a long time, and to whom he had even promised mar-
riage.

In 858, Teutberge, with the assistance of a champion,
justified herself by the proof of boiling water, and Lothaire
found himself forced to take her back again, but he never
ceased in his efforts to get rid of her. Whether truly, or
through fear, she permitted herself to avow the crime of which
she was accused ; and between 860 and 862, three councils
held at Aix-la-Chapelle solemnly condemned her, annulled
the marriage, and allowed Lothaire to wed Waldrade.

But, pretty nearly about the same time, in 858, the holy
see was assumed by a monk of severe manners, ardent cha-
racter, and inflexible spirit, who had not,.without great diffi-
culty, determined upon leaving his cloister to become pope,
and who, once pope, desired to reign over Christianity indeed.
Hear how a contemporary chronicler speaks of Nicholas the
First :

‘‘ Since the blessed Gregory, no bishop exalted, in the city
of Rome, to the pontifical see, may be compared with him ;
he reigned over kings and tyrants, and subjected them to his
authority, as 1f he had been the master of the world. He
showed himself humble, benign, pious, and benevolent towards
religious bishops and priests, and those who observed the pre-
cepts of the Lord—terrible and extremely severe towards the
impious, and those who wandered from the right way ; so
that he might be taken for another Elias, resuscitated in our
days by the voice of God, if not in body, at least in spirit
and in virtue.’’!

In the year 859, it appears that Teutberge addressed her-
self to Nicholas I., and claimed his interference. He made
her wait for some time. It was not till 862, and after the
holding of the three councils of Aix-la-Chapalle, that he sent
two legates to Lorraine, with orders to investigate the matter
anew. For this purpose a council was convoked at Metz,


1 Chron. de Reginon, ad a, 868.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 141


in 868. Whether the facts with which Teutberge was
charged appeared sufficiently proved, or whether Lothaire
(which seems the most probable) succeeded in winning over
the two legates, the councils at which they assisted sanc-
tioned the conclusions of former councils, and the matter ap-
peared to be terminated, with the accord of all judges and all
powers, ‘

But when the news of this decision came to Rome, whether
with or without reason (and, for my part, I believe that it was
with reason), Nicholas perceived in it nothing more than the
effect of obsequiousness, or, to speak plainly, of servility and
corruption, whether upon the part of the bishops of Lorraine,
or upon that of his own legates. The general voice accused
them ; the two archbishops who had directed the council were
relations of Waldrade. Nicholas resolved to take no half mea-
sures ; and, without convoking any council at Rome, he, with
his single authority, not only annulled the acts of the council
of Metz, but deposed the archbishops of Tréves and Cologne,
and commanded Lothaire to receive his wife again. He had,
to excuse him in adopting this bold and despotic conduct,
upon one hand, public opinion, which was strongly pronounc-
ed against Lothaire and Waldrade ; on the other hand, as far
as we can judge at this distance of time, truth and justice:
against him were the rights of the bishops and councils, and
all the ancient discipline of the church ; but the text of the
false decretals furnished him with a point of support against
these last objections. Strong in the austerity of his conscience
and the approbation of the people, he persisted in his resolution,
and not content with avenging morality, called also to his aid
the spirit of liberty. In 863, he wrote to Adventius, bishop
of Metz:

_“ Examine well whether these kings and princes, to whom
you profess yourselves subjected, are really kings and princes.
Examine whether they govern well, first, themselves—next,
their people: for he who is worth nothing for himself, how
can he be good for another? Examine whether they: reign
according to justice ; for, otherwise, they should be regarded
as tyrants rather than as kings; and, in such case, we ought
to resist and oppose, instead of submitting to them. Were we
to submit to them, were we not to rise up against them, we
should be obliged to encourage their vices.””!


ees eee ee


1 Mansi.


ae
ps


142 HISTORY OF


Against such arms the temporal princes, aided even by their
own clergy, as Lothaire was upon this occasion, were too
weak. Nicholas]. triumphed at the same time over Lothaire
and over the clergy of Lorraine ; both one and the other sub-
mitted to, whilst they expostulated against, his decision.

Nearly at the same moment, a second matter presented it-
self, which furnished him with the occasion of a second vic-
tory. Hinemar, archbishop of Reims, with whom I shall
occupy you more in detail by and bye, desired to reign almost
as despotically in the Gallo-Frankish church, as Nicholas
reigned in the church universal. One of his suffragans, Ro-
thade, bishop of Soissons, had deprived a priest of his diocese
of his rank, on account of misconduct ; three years after this
condemnation, under the pretext that it was unjust, and rather,
as it appears, from ill-humor against Rothade, than from any
other motive, Hincmar re-established the priest in his parish,
against the will of his bishop, and excommunicated the latter
for his disobedience. A dispute was thus established between
the bishop of Soissons and the archbishop of Reims. The
bishop deposed in 862, by the council of Soissons, appealed
from it to the pope; Hincemar, by means of stratagems and
violence, eluded, for some time, the effects of their appeal,
and even prevented its arrival at Rome; but Nicholas I. re-
ceived it at last, and in 865, having called a council upon this
subject, he said, in his opening discourse :

“The bishops of Gaul, having convoked a general council
(which it is permitted to none to do), without the order of the
apostolic see, have there cited Rothade . . . . Even though the
council had not been called, he ought not to have been deposed
without our knowledge, for the sacred statutes and the canon-
ical decrees have remitted to our decision the trials of bishops,
together with all other important matters.”

This was to misunderstand and to brave all canonical rules,
all the examples of the past, all the customs of the church.
But upon this particular occasion, as upon the former, Nicho-
las had right and the public voice on his side; and he upheld
justice and the popular opinion. He triumphed again; Ro-
thade was re-established, and the national churches were con-
quered in the person of Hinemar, as the temporal sovereigns
had been in the person of Lothaire. ;


1 Marsi, t. xv., p. 686.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 143


This double victory was not undisputed: more than once,
in the course of the tenth century, resistance reappeared ; and
the successors of Nicholas I., among others Adrian II., were
not all of them so skilful or so fortunate in their enterprises
as he had been. Nevertheless, on the whole, their power
and the maxims which supported it, were making progress in
external things, as well as in the minds of men ; and it is from
the reign of Nicholas I. that the sovereignty of the papacy
really dates.

I approach my limits. I have occupied you with the inter-
nal history of the Gallo-Frankish church from the eighth to
the tenth century, as regards its relation with the temporal
sovereign. I have placed before you its external history, its
relations with its foreign sovereign. And to this I confine
my picture of the Carlovingian ecclesiastical society. It re-
mains for us to study intellectual development in the same
. period. You have already seen what this was under Charle.
magne, and up to the time of Louis le Debonnaire. The
study of it, from the reign of Louis le Debonnaire to the ac-
cession of Hugh Capet, will be the object of our next meetings.


144 HISTORY OF


TWENTY-EIGHTH LECTURE.


Of the intellectual condition of Frankish Gaul, from the death of
Charlemagne to the accession of Hugh Capet—Sketch of the cele-
brated men of this period—The theological mind—The philosophi-
cal mind—Hincmar and John Erigena are respectively their repre-
sentatives—Life of Hincmar—His activity and influence as archbishop
of Reims—1. Concerning his relations with kings and popes—2.
Concerning his administration in the interior of the Gallo-Frankish
church and of his diocese—3. Concerning his disputes and theolo-
gical works—Origin of the theology of the middle ages—Quarrel
between Hincmar and the monk Gottschalk upon predestination—
Numerous writings upon this subject—Councils of Kiersy, Valence,
and Langres——Recapitulation.


In exhibiting the intellectual revival of Frankish Gaul
under Charlemagne,' I affirmed that the movement which was
then given to mind, did not cease under his successors. It is
to the progress of this movement, in the ninth and tenth cen-
turies, that I purpose to direct your attention to-day.

When I arranged the table of the celebrated men of the
times of Charlemagne,’ I included in it, you remember, those
alike, whom he found, and those whom he formed, his con-
temporaries, properly so called, and their immediate disciples.
I have treated in detail only of the first, confining myself, as
regards the last, to the indications of their names and their
works. The majority of these—for instance, the historians
Thegan, Nithard the astronomer, the theologians Raban, Flo-
rus, Walfrid Strabo, Paschase Radbirt, Ratramne, and many
other erudite and literary men, and poets, who were comprised
in the last part of the table which I have placed before you,
belong to the epoch whereupon we are now to be engaged ;
and in adding to this table that of the celebrated men who ap-
peared towards the end of the ninth, and in the course of the
tenth century, I complete a summary of the intellectual acti-
vity of Frankish Gaul under the Carlovingian line. Here is
this supplement :


1 Lecture 23d. 2 Lecture 20th. e


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE, 145


es eee


Name. |Country.| Born. Died. | Condition. Works,
1, St. Remi.|Gaul. Beginning} 878 |Archbish’p|Theological writ-
of the ninth of Lyons. | ings ; amongst


century. others, writings
upon predestina-
tion and  free-
will,
2. St. Ado. |Diocese 800 875 |Archbish’p/1. Theological

of Sens. of Vienna. | writings; 2. An
universal chroni-
cle.
3. Hincmar|Gaul. 806 882 jArchbish’pj1. Theological

jof Rheims.) writings; among

others, writings on
predestination ; 2.
Political writings
and decrees; 3.
Letters.
4,Remi. |Bungun-| About the |About |Monk of St.|1, Commentaries


dy. middle of | 908 | Germain | upon the scrip-
the ninth d’Auxerre.| tures; 2. Theolo-
century. gical writings ; 3.

Commentaries
upon the ancient
grammarians and

rhetoricians.

5. Abbo. Gaul. Idem. {About [Monk of St.}1. A _poem upon


des Prés.


script sermons.
6. Hucbald./Flanders| About 840} 930 {Monk of St./1. Poems ; 2. Lives
Amand. | of the Saints.
7. St. Odo. |Maine. 879 942 | Abbot of |1. Theological
Cluny. | writings; 2. Lives
of the Saints; par-
ticularly Gregory
of Tours; 3. Ser-
mons.
8. Frodoard|Epernay. 894. 966 Canon of |1. Poems ; 2. His-
Reims. | tory of the church
of Reims; 3. A
chronicle, from


919 to 966.
9. Gerbert. |Auriilac.| In the first} 1003 | Pope. |1. Works on ma-
(Silv. IT.) half of the thematics; 2. On
tenth cen- philosophy; 3. On
tury. theology; 4. Po-


ems; 5. Letters.


13


146 CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE.


Now, in endeavoring to go further than this series of
names, dates, and titles, of works, I experience the same em-
barrassment which I experienced when I desired to depict
the intellectual condition of France under Charlemagne. The
works of all those men whom I have just named form no unit-
ed whole, do not connect themselves with any great idea, or
with any general and fruitful system, around which we may
group them, or which may be employed as a thread of con-
nection in this study. Their works are detached, partial,
little varied, and more remarkable for the activity they mani-
fest than for the results they have produced. In the absence
of a systematic summary, shall I take these men one by one,
relating the life, and describing the writings of each? Such
biographies would be uninteresting and uninstructive unless
they were very minute ; but we have little time to devote to
them. I will solve the question as I solved it in the case of
the reign of Charlemagne. I referred the intellectual picture
of his epoch to the life of one man, of a man who seemed to
me its most faithful representative: I traced in the destiny
and works of Alcuin, the delineation of the condition and
general movement of mind. I shall adopt the same method
for the following epoch: I shall seek for some man who is
the image of it, in whom the intellectual life of his contempo-
raries is reflected: and I shall endeavor to make him tho-
roughly understood, well assured that, considering the short-
ness of the time to which I am limited, this will be the best
way of making you acquainted with the entire period. Two
men will enable us to arrive at this result.

In studying the life and writings of Alcuin, we were led
to recognize therein a double tendency, a double character :
* Alcuin,” I said, “was a theologian by profession; the
atmosphere in which he lived was essentially theological ;
but nevertheless the theological spirit did not reign in him
alone ; his labors and his thoughts also tended towards phi-
losophy and ancient literature. He was familiar with St.
Jerome and St. Augustine ; but Pythagoras, Aristotle, Aris-
tippus, Diogenes, Plato, Homer, Virgil, Seneca, and Pliny,
lived also in his memory. He was a monk, a deacon, the
light of the contemporary church, but he was also a man of
learning and classical literature. In him, in fact, commences
the alliance of the two elements of which the modern mind
has so long carried the discordant impress: antiquity and the
church ; admiration, love—shall I say regret ?—for pagan


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 147


literature ; with sincerity of Christian faith, and eagerness to
fathom its mysteries and defend its power.’”

The same fact is the predominant character of the epoch
with which we now occupy ourselves ; but it is no longer in
any one man that we find its image; the Christian and the
Roman mind, the new theology and the ancient philosophy
manifest themselves equally, but in a separate and even hos-
tile state. We meet with two men who may be considered as
the distinct representations of these two elements. One,
Hinemar, archbishop of Reims, is the centre of the theological
movement ; the other, Scotus or Erigena, is the philosopher
of the time. With the life of Hincmar the events and labors
of contemporaneous theology connect themselves ; in that of
Erigena, the modes of ancient philosophy are revealed. In
the history of these two men appear the two forces of which
the struggle for a long time constituted all the intellectual
history of modern Europe; I mean the doctrinal church, and
free thought. I shall endeavor to make you acquainted both
with one and with the other. It is with Hincmar that I shall
begin.

He was born about the year 806, in Frankish-Gaul, pro-
perly so called, that is to say, in the north-east of present
France. His family was one of the most considerable of the
time: the famous Bernard II., count of Toulouse, and another
Bernard, count of Vermandois, were his relations. He was
brought up from his childhood in the monastery of St. Denis,
under the abbot Hilduin. Louis le Debonnaire, when he
ascended the throne, whether it was that he already knew
Hincmar, or whether he took an interest in his family, caused
him to come to his court, and retained him near him. You
know the efforts that were made by this prince, from 816 to
830, to reform the church, and particularly the monasteries.
The monastery of St. Denis, like many others, greatly re-
quired reform; discipline and knowledge were there equally
declining. Hincmar, young as he was, labored and power-
fully assisted, in 829, to enforce their regeneration. He did
more: he himself entered the monastery, and led the most
rigid life there ; but he was not permitted to remain in peace
long ; the abbot Hilduin took part, about 830, in the quarrels
of Louis le Debonnaire with his sons; he declared himself


1 Lecture 22.


148 HISTORY OF


against the emperor; and when Louis recovered power, Hil-
duin was dispossessed of his monastery and banished to Sax-
ony. Whether from affection to his abbot, or from other
considerations with which we cannot now become acquainted,
Hincemar followed him there, and nevertheless retained suf-
ficient credit, not only to allow of his son returning to the
court himself, but to enable him to cause Hilduin to be re-
called and reinstated.

To begin from this epoch, we see him sometimes with the
emperor, sometimes in his monastery, leading, by turns, the
life of a favorite priest, and that of an austere monk. It is
difficult, at this distance of time, to decide upon what were
the parts taken in his actions by worldly ambition and by
religious fervor. What appears certain is, that neither one
nor the other was ever wholly absent from him, and that, in
the entire course of his life, as at this epoch, he was almost
equally taken up with his fortune and his salvation.

At the death of Louis le Debonnaire, in 840, Charles le
Chauve took Hincmar into the same favor. From 840 to 844,
he lived at the court of this prince as his most intimate con-
fidant, and his principal agent in all ecclesiastical affairs.
Charles gave him many abbeys. In 844, he assisted at the
council of Verneuil. The archbishopric of Reims had been
vacant for nine years, in consequence of the deposition of the
archbishop Ebbo—a complicated and obscure business, into
the details of which I will not enter. The clergy demanded,
at last, that this important see should be filled, and the fol-
lowing year, in 845, at the council at Beauvais, Hincmar,
then thirty-nine years old, was elected archbishop of Reims.

His activity and influence in the Gallo-Frankish church
dated from this epoch. He was archbishop of Reims for
thirty-nine years, from the year 845 to the 23d of December,
882. In this long space of time we find his signature below
the acts of thirty-nine councils, not to speak of many minor
ecclesiastical assemblies, of which there remain no records.
In the greater part of these councils he presided and directed
affairs.’


1 Hincmar assisted,
In $44, at the council of Verneuil. {In 847, at the council of Paris.
845, of Beauvais. 849, of Kiersy.
id. of Meaux. id. of Paris,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 149


The historian of the church of Reims, Frodoard, who had

the archives of the church at his disposal, especially mentions
four hundred and twenty-three of his letters, and, at almost
every page, indicates the existence of a great many others.
These letters are directed to kings, queens, popes, archbishops,
bishops, abbots, priests, dukes, counts, &c. He was evidently
in habitual and familiar correspondence with all the consider-
able men of the time. Finally, there remain to-us sixty-six
of his works, great or small, religious or political, collected by
father Sirmond, in two folio volumes, to which another Jesuit,
father Cellot, afterwards added a third volume ; and we know
with certainty that there are many other writings of Hinemar
which have not reached us.
_ Assuredly we have here an active and powerful life. In
order to appreciate it well, and to draw from it much light
concerning the general history of the time, we must classify,
to some degree, the facts which filled it, considering Hincmar
under three principal points of view :

I. Without the Gallo-Frankish church and his own diocese,
in his relations whether with the national civil power, the
Kings of France, or with the foreign ecclesiastical power, the
pope. Il. Within the Gallo-Frankish church and his own
diocese, in his ecclesiastical influence and his episcopal ad-
ministration. III. In his scientific and literary activity as
theologian and writer. All the important and instructive
facts of Hincmar’s life come under one or other of these three
aspects.


. In 850, at the council of Moret. In 863 at the council of Senlis,


851, of Soissons. id. of Verberie.
853, ad. 866, of Soissons
id. of Kiersy. 867, of Troyes.
ad, of Verberie. 869, of Verberie.

857, of Kiersy. td. of Metz.
858, id. td. of Pistes.
859, of Metz. 870, of Attigy.
td. of Toul. 871, of Douzy.
860, Place uncrt’n.| 873, of Senlis.
id. of Toul. 874, of Douzy.
861, of Soissons. 875, of Chalons.
862, of Sens. 876, of Pontion.
id, of Sablonniere. 878, of Neustria.
zd, of Pistes. ad. of Troyes.
862, of Soissons, 881, of Fismes,
id. of Pistes.


(transferred to Soissons.)
%


‘150 HISTORY OF


J. Considered in his relations with the national civil power,
Hinemar appeared, throughout his entire life, as the bishop of
the court of France, the director of two kings. It is advisedly
that I say the bishop of the court of France. We find him,
indeed, at the head of all the events of the court, of all official
ceremonies. Four coronations, four consecrations of kings and
queens took place in this epoch, and Hincmar presided at them
all. In 856, at Verberie, he crowned Judith, daughter of
Charles le Chauve, who married Ethelwolf, king of the Anglo-
Saxons. In 866, at the council of Soissons, he crowned Her-
mentrude, wife of Charles le Chauve. In 869, at the council
of Metz, he crowned Charles le Chauve himself king of Lor-
raine. In 877, he crowned Louis le Begue, king of France.
In a word, it was always Hinemar who, upon all great occa-
sions, within or without his diocese, in ecclesiastical or civil
assemblies, represented the church amidst the court, and pre-
sided at the alliance of religion with royalty.

In matters of a graver nature than ceremonies, in politics
properly so called, the remarkable characteristic of the life of
Hincmar was his constant fidelity to the direct line—to the
legitimate descendants of Charlemagne ; a difficult task in his
time, amidst all the vicissitudes of the throne, and the dissen-
sions of the reigning family. Whether by attachment, prin-
ciple, foresight, or skill, the faith of Hincmar never lost itself
in this labyrinth ; he always kept himself at a distance from
the party which history has qualified as the rebellious; and
those princes who are recognized as having formed the series
of true kings of France ever counted him among their de-
fenders. We find him, nevertheless, keeping himself, at the
same time, on good terms with their enemies and rivals. It
would be unjust to say that, in history, Hincmar bears the
appearance of an intriguer ; there is nothing to indicate that
he sought out intrigue, that he pursued, at all cost, opportu-
nities of acting, influencing, and prevailing ; but everything
shows that, when need was, he knew how to employ intrigue
with activity and dexterity, and that he excelled in acquiring
or preserving influence wherever the interest of his position,
in the state or in the church, made it necessary to him. He,
in consequence, possessed great credit with all kings and con-
temporary powers during the long period of his life. We see
his intervention not only in the relations of princes with the
church, but in civil government itself; he was employed upon
difficult missions, consulted in delicate questions. And not


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 151


only does this political activity appear in his history, but there
are written monuments remaining of it. We have five works
by him, either upon government in general, or upon the events
and affairs wherein he took part, which abound in valuable
information upon the ideas and political condition of France at
that epoch. These works are:

I. A treatise, in thirty-three chapters, addressed to Charles
le Chauve, and entitled: De regis persona et de regio minis-
terio ;' a work upon morality rather than upon politics, judg-
ing according to our present ideas, but which, in the ninth
century, was truly political, for it was in the name of morality,
and in developing its precepts, that the ecclesiastics influenced
governments. In the treatise of Hincmar, morality is more-
over mingled with a great number of maxims of prudence and
practical wisdom, very like those which, in the fifteenth cen-
tury, constituted all political science, and of which the book
of the Prince is the type.

II. A letter addressed to Louis le Begue, after his corona-
tion, at the end of the year 877, containing advice upon the
government of his states, and terminating with this remarka-
bly sensible paragraph :

«‘T address to your majesty, by letter, what I would say in
words if | were near you. As to the affairs properly so called
of the church and of the kingdom, I ought not to give counsel
upon this subject without the general concurrence and advice
of the great, and I cannot, and dare not, decide concerning it
of myself. If, in the interim, there should befal any cause of
trouble (from which may God preserve us), and if it should
please your majesty to inform me of it, I will endeavor to
assist you with my advice and services, according to my
knowledge and my power.’”

III. A letter to the emperor Charles le Gros, engaging him
to superintend the education of the two young kings of France,
Louis II]. and Carloman, and to provide them with good
councillors.

IV. A long letter, addressed to the grandees of western
France, who had consulted Hincmar concerning the govern-
ment of king Carloman, in which he transmits to them long
extracts from, perhaps an entire copy of, the work of Adal-


ce ere ee ETS


1 Hine. Op., vol. ii., p. 184. 2 Ibid.


152 HISTORY OF


hard, de ordine palatii, in which is exhibited Charlemagne’s
method of government, and of which I have already treated.2

V. Finally, advice upon the government of Carloman, ad-
dressed to the bishops of his kingdom in 882, the year of
Hinemar’s death, and written at Epernay, where he had just
fled from his episcopal town, besieged by the Normans; so
much did the affairs of the states, in the government of which
he had assisted, continue to engage him.

We must not believe that this desire of political importance,
this court popularity which Hincmar constantly enjoyed, cost
nothing to the independence, say, rather, to the pride of the
bishop. He was not, as you have seen, of the number of those
insolent and shuffling prelates, who, under Louis le Debon-
naire and Charles le Chauve, delighted in humiliating royalty
before them ; but he professed, as a general position, the prin-
ciples upon which their pretensions were founded, and, more
than once, he opposed to the desires of the temporal power,
language very similar to theirs. We read, in his treatise upon
the divorce of Lothaire and Teutberge, a quarrel of which I
have already spoken :

“Some wise men say that their prince, being king, is not
subject to the laws or to the judgments of any one, unless it
be God himself... .. who made him king . . . . and that, as
he must not, whatever he may have done, be excommunicated
by his bishops, so he cannot be judged by other bishops ; for
God alone has a right to command him... . . Such is not the
language of a Catholic Christian; it is full of blasphemy and
of the spirit of evil. ... The authority of the apostles says
that kings ought to be subject to those whom: it establishes in
the name of the Lord, and who watch over their souls, in order
that this task may not be a source of trouble to them. The
blessed pope Gelasius wrote to the emperor Anastasius:
‘There are two principal powers by which this world is
governed : the pontifical authority and the royal dignity ; and
the authority of pontiffs is so much the greater, inasmuch as
they must account to the Lord for the souls of kings them-
selves.’ . . . When it is said that the king is not subject to the
laws or judgments of any one, save God alone, no more than
the truth is said, if he be indeed king as his name indicates
him to be. He is called king because he rules and governs ;


1 Lecture 20.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 153


if he governs himself according to the will of God, if he
directs the good in the right way, and corrects the wicked, in
order to lead them from the bad way into the good, then he is
king, and is subject to no judgment save that of God alone...
for vba are made, not for the just, but for the unjust. . . but
if he be an adulterer, a murderer, partial, or avaricious, then
ought he to be judged, in secret or in public, by the bishops,
who are the throne of God.’”!

Assuredly, the maxims of ecclesiastical sovereignty were
never more formally set forth.

In fact, the life of Hincmar was full of acts of resistance
to the very sovereigns whom he served with most zeal, and
his language towards them was that of the most inflexible
haughtiness. I will cite but one example:

In 881, under the reign of Louis III., a dispute had occur-
red between this prince and the council of Fismes, touching
the election of a bishop of Beauvais ; the king had protected
and obstinately supported a clergyman, named Odacre, whom
the council thought unworthy. Hincmar wrote to Louis:

‘“‘ As regards what you have written to us, saying that you
will do nothing other than what you have already done, know
that, if you do it not, God will himself do that which is pleas-
ing tohim. The emperor Louis (le Debonnaire) did not live
so many years as his father Charles. King Charles (le
Chauve), your grandfather, did not live so many years as his
father; your own father (Louis le Begue) did not live so
many years as his father ; and, even while living amidst that
pomp in which your father and grandfather lived at Com-
piegne, cast your eyes where your father rests; and, if you
do not know, ask where your grandfather died and reposes ;
and do not let your heart swell before the face of Him who
died for you and for us all, and who afterwards rose from the
dead, to die no more. And be sure that you must die: you
know not at what day, nor at what hour; and you have
therefore need, as we all have, of being ever ready for the
call of the Lord. . . . You will pass away soon; but the holy
church, with its heads, under Christ, its sovereign head, ac-
cording to his promise, shall never pass away.’”

I might multiply these quotations: the writings, like the
entire life of Hinemar, prove that, without carrying them as


1 Hinem. Op., de Divort. Loth. et Teuth., vol, i., pp. 693-695.
2 Hinem. Op., vol. ii., p. 199.


154 HISTORY OF


far as rebellion and usurpation of the civil power, be professed,
concerning the relations of the two powers, all the maxims
which, since the death of Charlemagne, had developed them-
selves in the Gallo-Frankish church, and that he knew, when
need was, to take advantage of them as means of resistance.

As regards his relations with another power, with the
foreign sovereign of the church, the pope, they are more dif-
ficult to determine, as also are the ideas which he entertained
upon this subject ; there is much contradiction and uncer-
tainty touching this matter. Hincmar appears often to have
been in high favor at Rome: Leo IV., upon sending him the
pallium, gave him the right, which (said he) had scarcely
ever been given to other archbishops, of wearing it every day.
Adrian II., John VIIL., shaped their conduct by his advice,
and accorded to him all that he asked of them. In the great
struggle of Nicholas I. against king Lothaire, concerning
Waldrade and Teutberge, Hincmar took the part of the court
of Rome, supported its cause, and received from it many
marks of esteem and good will. Upon other occasions, on
the contrary, we find him not only opposing but combating
the court of Rome, by which, on such occasions, he is very
ill-treated. I have already spoken to you of the check he
met with in the affair of Rothade, bishop of Soissons.!  [ will
instance another matter in which Nicholas the First was not
more favorable to him. Ebbo, the predecessor of Hincmar
in the see of Reims, had appointed a certain number of priests
or deacons, among others, one called Wulfad: it was main-
tained that this appointment was not canonical; that Ebbo,
not having been legitimate archbishop of Reims, had not pos-
sessed the right of conferring orders, and that they ought to
be withdrawn from these pretended clergymen. In 853, the
question was carried before the council of Soissons, and after
a long and curious process, whether it was by the influence of
Hinemar, or by the real opinion of the council, the priests
and deacons ordained by Ebbo were dismissed. They ap-
pealed to Rome; and, in 866, Nicholas the First commanded
the revision of the matter: a new council took place at Sois-
sons ; and the pope addressed to the assembled bishops a long
letter, in which the conduct of Hinemar, in that of 853, was
harshly censured :


1 Lecture 27,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 155


« There,”’ said he, “‘ we saw the archbishop sometimes lay-
ing aside, sometimes reassuming his rights ; sometimes sub-
mitting himself to the council, sometimes presiding over it ;
by turns, the accused, accuser, and judge ; ruling all things
after his own fancy, changing his part unceasingly, and thus
taking the semblance of a certain animal, which is not always
of one and the same color.’”

Opposed by such reproaches and by the influence of Charles
le Chauve himself, who, this time, showed favor to his ad-
versaries, the predominance of Hincmar in the Gallo-Frankish
church failed; the dismissed clergymen were re-established
in their canonical rank ; and, notwithstanding the discretion
which the pope recommended them to observe towards
Hincmar in their conquest, the defeat was a marked one for
him.

The same struggle with the same result was renewed upon
other occasions, with the detail of which I will not occupy
your time. Upon such occasions, we find Nicholas the First
sometimes keeping fair with, sometimes severely reprimanding
Hincmar ; and the latter, upon his part, in his correspondence
with the pope, appears singularly embarrassed and fluctuating
in his maxims and language. Sometimes he himself recog-
nizes, and, in magnificent terms, proclaims the sovereignty
of the pope ; sometimes he defends the rights of archbishops
and of bishops, and seems even to lay the foundations of a
national independent church ; and then he presently abandons
all that he has said upon the subject, as if he feared to be ac-
cused of maxims and intentions, which, nevertheless, he could
not suppress, which, haply, he wished to become apparent.
His letters to the pope, inserted by Frodoard is his Histoire de
V Eglise de Reims, betray, at every word, this uncertainty of
ideas and desires.

All things considered, and remembering the vast difference
of mind and times, there was, in the situation and conduct of
Hinemar, whether towards the civil power or the papacy,
some analogy with the situation and conduct of Bossuet, in
nearly similar questions, in the seventeenth century. Not
that these two great bishops bear the least resemblance to one
another as writers: a talent for writing, a genius for expres-
sion, brilliancy of imagination and style were wholly want-


1 Labbe, Concil., vol. 8, col. 834.


156 HISTORY OF


ing to Hinemar; and, looking merely to his works, the idea
would never arise of tracing any relation between him and
Bossuet. But when we look deeper, the analogy becomes
substantial, and the two men are explained and elucidated one
by the other. Through all the fluctuations, all the changes
of his language, we recognize in Hincmar a firm and bold
mind, a powerful logician, who, when he had once conceived
a principle or a system, unfolded its consequences skilfully,
and, in the freedom of his thought, followed them without
hesitation to their last results. But he was, at the same time,
a man of strong common sense, and of great practical under-
standing, who saw what obstacles were opposed to his ideas by
external circumstances, and did not allow himself to be de-
ceived by the seduction of logic, concerning the possibility or
expediency of their application. In writing, he laid down or
deduced maxims with that loftiness of thought which seems to
delight in its own bold and free development. In acting, no
fact, no detail of the true situation escaped him ; he compre-
hended all that ought to influence the conduct of the matter,
all that was required in order to succeed ; he wisely measured
the possible, and attempted that and no more. Hence the
embarrassment which sometimes appears in his ideas and
words ; sometimes it is the logician, sometimes the man of
business that predominates; he fluctuates, so to speak, un-
ceasingly between the strict steadfastness of his thought and
the practical impartiality of his reason.

Thus it was with Bossuet, placed in very different society
and circumstances. That lofty genius, that simple and irre-
sistible reasoner, who arrived, by a glance, at the last conse-
quences of a principle, and grasped. them, like a club, to let
them fall at a single blow, upon the head of his adversaries,
more than once exhibited himself, in practice, uncertain, dila-
tory, anything but logically strict, inclined to cautious and to
middle courses. Was this mere weakness of soul, compliance,
and a tendency to yield? Sometimes perhaps, but assuredly,
not always. Another cause led to this contrast. When the
mind of Bossuet was free and in the presence only of its ideas,
whatever might be the system upon which he was engaged,
whether it concerned the pontifical power or a national church,
authority or free inquiry, and whether he wished to attack or
to defend it, he boldly embarked, as M. Turgot expresses him-
self, upon the faith of an idea, and voyaged at full sail as far
as it would carry him ; but when it became necessary to act,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 157


when he was called upon actually to regulate the relations of
different powers, of different rights, then all the considera.
tions, all the difficulties of action presented themselves to him :
he saw what was required by his times, by the state of society
and of mind ; the clear perception and impartiality of his good
sense suppressed the boldness of his thought; and a prudence
and caution, which seemed like servile compliance, took the
place of that intractable dialectic and of that haughty elo-
quenee which lately characterized him. It is a difficult pro-
blem to ally the height and rational consequence of philosophy
with the flexibility of mind and the common sense of the prac-
tical man. Hinemar and Bossuet did not solve it; but they
knew how to place themselves, by turns, under the two dif.
ferent points of view ; they deemed themselves capable, if not
of reconciling, at least of playing the two parts, and it is pre-
cisely this superiority that casts their deficiencies into relief,

You will pardon me for having paused awhile upon this
analogy, which seems like a digression ; but to be just towards
great men, we must understand them well; and in order to
understand them, we must turn for a long time around them,
for they have a thousand different faces to show us.

II. Within his diocese, in ecclesiastical administration pro-
perly so called, Hincmar had no such difficulties to surmount i
he was alone, and master; he could, at least almost always,
regulate facts according to his ideas; he governed despoti-
cally, sometimes even tyrannically, but generally with wisdom,
and to the true interest of the clergy, and of the faithful who
were under him. We have written monuments of his goyern-
ment ; that is to say, capitularies, addressed to his priests, as
those of kings are addressed to their courts, missi dominici,
or other agents. The capitularies of Hincmar which remain
to us, are of four different epochs. The first, addressed in
352, to the clergy of his diocese, after an assembly of the same
clergy, held at Reims, under his presidency, contain forty-
three articles, of which seventeen are in the form of precepts
upon the conduct of priests, and twenty-six in that of inter-
rogations and inquiries upon the same subject. The second,
in three articles, are of the year 857; the third, in five arti-
cles, of 874; the fourth, in thirteen articles, of 877.1 These
capitularies are generally very judicious ; their object is either


a ES
?Hinem, Op., vol. i., pp. '710—741.
14


158 HISTORY OF


to recommend to the clergy regularity of behavior, know-
ledge, and a gentle and legal administration, or to prevent the
vexations of the archdeacons, who were placed between the
simple priest and the bishop, and who often oppressed those
who were under them, or, finally, to protect the diocese
against the invasions of the civil magistrate, the disorders and
the depredations of the laity, &c. They bear witness to an
active, provident, and skilful government, one that was taken
up with the advancement of the moral and material welfare of
its objects.

III. Hitherto, | have endeavored to show you in Hincmar,
the spiritual or temporal governor, the bishop or councillor of
kings. It remains for us to consider him in his intellectual
activity as theologian; and this is the point of view which in
the present day, at least, and in the questions upon which we
are now occupied, is the most important to us.

Christian theology suffered, at this epoch, that is to say, in
the course of the ninth century, a revolution which has not
generally been recognized. From the sixth to the eighth
century it had been dormant, as, indeed, had been every de-
partment of human thought. We do not find that any great
religious questions were discussed in this period: there were
bishops, priests, and monks, but no theologians. It was under
Charlemagne that theological discussion recommenced ; you
remember that we then met with discussions upon the wor-
ship of images, the nature of Jesus Christ, the procession of
the Holy Ghost ; and intellectual activity, once set in motion
in this direction, ceased not to advance in it. But it soon
changed its character. Created in the first five centuries by
the Greek and Roman fathers, Christian theology, even in
combating, received the impress of that ancient civilization,
in the bosom of which it had been born. The system of dog-
mas, put forth and arranged by St. Basil, St. Athanasius, St.
Jerome, St. Hilary, St. Augustin, &c., differed essentially
from all the systems of the stoics, platonists, peripatetics, neo-
platonists, &c., and yet it connected itself with them ; it was
a philosophy, a doctrine, of which the decisions of the church
were not the only source, nor its authority the only support.
When, after a sleep of a hundred and fifty years, the theolo-
gical movement recommenced in the west, the fathers of the
first centuries, especially St. Augustin, were regarded as irre-
fragable authorities, as masters of the faith. They were to
the theologians 'who then began to arise, what the apostles


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 159


and the holy books had been to themselves. But the condi-
tion of society, both civil and religious, was completely
changed ; and the new theologians, in adopting the fathers as
masters, found it impossible to reproduce or even to imitate
them. There was an abyss between the theology of the first
five centuries, which was born in the bosom of Roman society,
and the theology of the middle ages, which was born in the
bosom of the Christian church, and truly commenced in the
ninth century. I cannot pretend to treat in this place of the
new and important question of their difference and its causes ;
I can do no more than indicate its existence, by the way, and
in one particular subject.

Two kinds of religious questions re-appeared at this period ;
Ist, questions purely Christian, that is to say, which belonged
especially to Christianity, and which do not necessarily arise
in all religious philosophies, because they are not connected,
or are, at least, very remotely connected, with the general
nature of man ; such, for instance, are the questions relating
to the nature of Jesus Christ, the Trinity, transubstantiation,
&c. 2d, general questions which are met with in all reli-
gions and in all philosophies, because they arise from the
very essence of human nature, as for instance, the question of
the origin of good and evil, that of atonement, that of free-will
and predestination, &c.

I have nothing to say to the first; they belong to pure
Christian theology ; the second come within the general do-
main of thought. I will select from the latter the questions
of free-will and predestination, to which I have already called
your attention, that arose in the ninth century, and upon
which Hincmar and all the great minds of that epoch were
long and intensely occupied.

I pray you call to mind, as accurately as you can, the state
in which we left this question at the beginning of the ninth
century, after the struggle of St. Augustin and his disciples
against Pelagius and his successors. Two great heresies
present themselves to our view: Ist, that of the Pelagians
and of the anti-Pelagians, who attributed to the free choice
and free-will of man the principal part in his moral life, and
greatly abridged the action of God upon the human soul, over
which they yet endeavored to preserve it; 2d, that of the
predestinarians, who well nigh annul human freedom, and
attribute the moral life and destiny of man to the direct action
of the Divinity. We have seen the predestinarians pretending


160 HISTORY OF


to be alone the faithful disciples of St. Augustin, and deducing
their principles from his works. We have seen St. Augustin
disowning them, refusing to abolish human freedom; and we
have seen the church, after his example, placing herself, with
more good sense than philosophical consequence, between the
two parties, condemning, on the one hand, the predestinarians,
on the other, the Pelagians or semi-Pelagians, and at once
maintaining, without reconciling, the freedom of man and the
all-powerful action of divine grace upon his soul. It was at
this point we left the discussion.'

When it was recommenced in the ninth century, minds
were much changed ; the fathers of the first centuries, St.
Augustin among others, had regarded all questions, and
especially this, under a triple aspect: Ist, as philosophers
examining things in themselves; 2d, as heads of the church
charged with governing it; 3d, as teachers of the faith, and
called upon to maintain orthodoxy—that is to say, to harmo-
nize the solution of all questions with the essential principles
of Christianity. I have endeavored to show how the com-
bination of these various characters was calculated to exert,
and, in fact, did exert, the greatest influence upon the quarrel
originated by Pelagius. In the ninth century, nothing of the
kind existed ; minds had no longer so much freedom and great-
ness ; no one was any longer like St. Augustin, at once a
philosopher, head of the church, and teacher of the faith; the
theologians, above all, had become total strangers to the philo-
sophical point of view. Their doctrine reposed exclusively
upon the texts of the fathers who had preceded them, and
applied itself only to the deduction of consequences from rules
of belief already laid down. From the epoch at which we
are now, the essential character of the theological spirit is,
never to examine things in themselves, but to judge of all
ideas by their relations to certain determined principles. The
theologians in this respect have played the same part in
modern Europe as was played by the jurisconsults in the
Roman world. The Roman jurisconsults did not examine
what we call the general principles of law, or natural law;
they had for their point of departure, certain axioms, certain
legal precedents ; and their skill consisted in subtilly unravel-
ling the consequences, in order to apply them to particular


{ Lecture 5.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 161


cases, as they presented themselves. Thus the Roman juris-
consults were logicians of admirable ingenuity and accuracy,
but they were never philosophers. The theologians of the
middle ages were similarly constituted; they applied them-
selves to the same kind of work, and attained the same excel-
lences—namely, accuracy and logical subtlety—and fell into
the same faults—namely, want of attention to facts them-
selves, and of any feeling for reality.

Now, in the question of free-will and grace, in particular,
St. Augustin had laid down all the principles. His doctrines
were made the obligatory point of departure, from which no
one dared to confess that he deviated. Whatever opinion a
man desired to maintain, whether human freedom or predes-
tination, it was only by reasoning upon texts of St. Augustin,
and taking them for his rule, that he was allowed to defend
his system. The discussion, in short, became a matter of
logic ; it was no longer a question of philosophy. It was
under this banner and these conditions that the dispute re-
comnfenced. I will tell you how, and upon what occasion.

A monk, Saxon by birth, named Gottschalk, lived in the
abbey of Fulda, under the discipline of the abbot Raban, whom
I have already mentioned, and who was afterwards archbishop
of Mayence, and one of the most celebrated theologians of
the time. Gottschalk, we know not for what reasons, did not
wish any longer to remain as monk in this abbey, and he
succeeded in annulling his monastic engagement. Raban
conceived a strong antipathy to him on this account. Gotts-
chalk quitted the abbey of Fulda, and retired into that of
Orbais, situated in the diocese of Soissons, and, consequently,
under the jurisdiction of Hincmar, as archbishop. About
the year 847, Gottschalk (it is not known upon what occasion)
went upon a pilgrimage to Rome. In returning, he stopped
in a valley of Piedmont, at the house of a count of the place,
named Eberhard. There he had, either with count Eber-
hard, or with Noting, bishop of Verona, who was also staying
there, long theological conversations, and he maintained that
the good and the bad, the elect and the reprobate, were
equally and from all time predestinated by the divine omnipo-
tence and omniscience to their present and future fate. The
bishop of Verona, shocked at this opinion, whether because it
was new to him, or because it had long been repugnant to
him, denounced it to Raban, now become archbishop of May-
ence, and prevailed upon him to combat it. Raban, already

14*


162 HISTORY OF


prepossessed against Gottschalk, wrote to count Eberhard, in-
forming him that he harbored a heretic in his house. Gotts-
chalk, accused, departed immediately, in order to defend
himself. We find him at Mayence, in 848, addressing to
Raban a justification of his conduct. But it was condemned
by the council which assembled the same year at Mayence ;
and, by order of the council, Raban wrote to Hinemar :

“Know, your Dilection, that a certain wandering monk,
named Gottschalk, who affirms that he was ordained priest in
your diocese, is come from Italy to Mayence, disseminating
new superstitions, and a pernicious opinion concerning the
predestination of God, seducing people into error ; for he says
that there is a predestination of God, as regards the good as
well as the wicked, and that, in this world, there are certain
men whom the predestination of God forces to pursue the
path of death, not being able to correct their error and their
sin, as if God in the beginning had created them incorrigible.
.... Having lately heard this opinion from his own mouth,
at a council held at Mayence, and having found him incorri-
gible, by the consent and order of our very pious king Louis,
we have decided, after having condemned him, as well as his
pernicious doctrine, to send him to you, in order that you may
retain him in your diocese, from whence he irregularly went
forth, and that you may not permit him any longer to teach
error, and seduce the Christian people. According to report,
he has already seduced many persons, and has rendered them
less devoted to the work of their salvation ; for they say:
‘To what purpose shall I labor in the service of God? If I
am predestinated to death, I shall never escape from it; and
if I am predestinated to life, even though I do wickedly, I
shall, no doubt, arrive at eternal rest.’ ”’

Hincmar was at bottom little of a theologian ; the spirit of
government and practical dexterity predominated in him, and
he had not made avery attentive study of the fathers. When
the letter of Raban reached him, he judged of Gottschalk
and his opinions according to the instinct of common sense,
rather than according to any profound and extensive acquaint-
ance with theology. He was, moreover, haughty and despotic.
Gottschalk agitated the faithful, and resisted his superiors.
Hincmar forthwith (in 849) condemned him by a council held
at Kiersy-sur-Oise, and, thinking to subdue him by force,
ordered him to be publicly scourged, and summoned to retract
his opinions and to cast his writings into the fire. But the


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 163


arrogance of despotism can never force the obstinacy of con-
science. Gottschalk resisted all, and was shut up in the
prison of the monastery of Hautvilliers, where he was treated
with extreme severity.

The matter soon became noised about. Hincmar was not
well acquainted with the spirit of his contemporary theologi-
ans, nor with the power which an argument, drawn from St.
Augustin, could exercise over them. Whether from pity for
Gottschalk, who had been so barbarously treated, or rather
through the prevalence of the theological spirit, a loud clamor
was raised against the conduct of the archbishop of Reims.
Some very influential men in the Gallo-Frankish church,
Prudence, bishop of Troyes, Loup, abbot of Ferrieres,
Ratramne, monk of Corbie, and many others, attacked him,
nearly all at the same time. They did not positively take the
part of Gottschalk, but they declared against the treatment
which he had suffered, protested against the meaning that
was attributed to his words, and maintained the doctrine of
predestination, rejecting only so much of it as seemed contrary
to divine justice.

Hinemar was not prepared for such a storm. He wrote to
Raban, who had drawn it upon him, to persuade him to
defend what they had thought and done in common; Raban,
intimidated, did not write, and left Hincmar exposed to the
danger alone. Seeking upon all sides for champions, the
archbishop of Reims addressed himself first of all to a priest
of Metz, named Amalaise, who, at his request, wrote a work
against Gottschalk, which is now lost. A man of much talent
and learning, Scotus Erigena, concerning whom I shall soon
speak more in detail, was at that time in great favor at the
court of Charlesle Chauve. Hincmar persuaded him to write
against predestination, and he readily consented ; but Erigena
was a philosopher and a free thinker; he made the fact of
human liberty much greater than any other had represented
it, mingled in his defence a number of opinions repugnant to
the theological world, and compromised Hincmar instead of
serving him. The explosion was far more violent against
him than it had been against the archbishop of Reims ; con-
troversial writings became multiplied ; triumphant theologians
discovered a thousand heresies in the work of Scotus Erigena.
The church of Lyons, in particular, under its archbishop
Remi, took a very active part in this war. An ill-suppressed
struggle had always existed between the south and north of


164 HISTORY OF


Gaul. The south of Gaul had preserved more considerable
remains of Roman civilization ; the character of the north was
much more German. The archbishop of Lyons was the most
important prelate of southern Gaul, as the archbishop of
Reims was the most important of northern Gaul. The
rivalry of sees became coupled with the opposition of doc-
trines. Compromised by his writers, Hincmar, in order to
defend himself, had recourse to the arms of authority. <A
council, held at Kiersy, in 853, laid down, in four articles,
the opinions which it pronounced orthodox upon this matter,
and Gottschalk found himself condemned thereby for the
second time. But the archbishop of Lyons was also able to
invoke councils and to cause articles to be written; and he
summoned one at Valence, in 855, and the articles of Kiersy
were condemned by it in their turn. Hincmar again invoked
the aid of learning and argument; but this time he deter-
mined to entrust the work to no one, and he himself, in 857
and 859, wrote two works upon predestination, of which one
is lost; the other, which remains to us, is addressed to Charles
le Chauve, and is divided into forty-four chapters, including
six chapters of epilogue. The whole course of the contro-
versy is herein reproduced, with a great display of theological
erudition ; but, in reality, the theological spirit is wanting ;
there is more of good sense exhibited in the general ideas
than of subtlety in the argumentation; and, as theologians,
properly so called, the adversaries of Hincemar had the ad-
vantage over him.

His works failed, therefore, in putting a stop to the quarrel ;
and the matter ended by its being carried to Rome, like all
other great questions of the time. It is difficult to affirm that
Nicholas the First took any positive part, or that he declared
either one or other of the opinions to have been the doctrine
of the church. Nevertheless, we see plainly that he inclined
to the ideas of Gottschalk, and to the canons of the councils
of Valence, confirmed in 889 by the council of Langres.
His correspondence and his conduct in this matter are unfavora-
ble to Hincmar.

The dispute was thus prolonged, becoming, however, cooler,
until the death of Gottschalk, which happened suddenly on the
30th of October, 868 or 869. A little while before, when they
saw him very ill, the monks of Hautvilliers, where he was in
prison, consulted Hinemar as to what they were to do in his
case: the inflexible bishop replied that it was absolutely


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 165


necessary that he should retract his opinions, and that other.
wise they must refuse him confession and the sacrament. Not
less inflexible than his persecutor, Gottschalk again refused
to retract, and died beneath the severities which he was suf.
fering. Hincmar survived him only three years. He died,
in his turn, on the 21st of December, 882, driven from his
episcopal city by an incursion of the Normans, and still
engaged in writing, at Epernay, where he had taken refuge.

It is time for me to pause; one remark will conclude my
account of this great controversy. You may see three elements
appearing in it; the three spirits, so to speak, of which the
coexistence and the struggle for a long while constituted the
intellectual history of modern Europe: 1. the logical spirit
which predominated among theologians by profession, engaged
exclusively in arguing, in deducing consequences from prin-
ciples, which were never called into question; 2. the political
spirit, peculiar, in general, to the heads of the church, who
were, above all, charged with the duties of government, and
were much more engaged with the practical than the logical
point of view, with business than discussion ; 3. finally, the
philosophical spirit, existing in certain free-thinkers, who
yet endeavor to regard things in themselves, and to seek for
truth, independently both of practical aim and predetermined
principle. The theological spirit, the political spirit, and the
philosophical spirit, were all openly at work in this affair ;
Hincmar represented the politicians, Gottschalk the theo.
logians, Scotus Erigena the philosophers. The last I have
scarcely more than named to you; I shall treat of him at full
in my next lecture.


166 HISTORY OF


TWENTY-NINTH LECTURE.


Object of the lecture—Of the philosophical spirit in the 9th century—
Scotus or Erigena—His country—Date of his birth—Tradition res-
pecting his travels in Greece—He settles in France, at the court of
Charles le Chauve—Of the School of the Palace under Charles—
Ancient philosophy studied there—Encouragement of Scotus
Erigena—His learning—Relations of Christianity with the Neopla-
tonism of Alexandria—Their struggle—Attempt at amalgamation—
History and pretended works of Dionysius the Areopagite—Funda-
mental differences of the two doctrines: 1, in the point of departure
and the method; 2, in the bases of the questions—These differences
occur between Scotus Erigena and the Christian theologians of the
9th century—Examination of his works: 1, De Predestinatione ; 2,
De Divisione Nature—His celebrity and his death—Recapitulation.


I REMINDED you, in the last lecture, of the two fundamental
elements to which we may ascribe the intellectual develop-
ment of modern Europe: Christianity, on the one part, and
ancient literature on the other; Christian theology and pagan
philosophy, religious polemics and classical learning ; already,
at the end of the eighth century, at the moment of the intel-
lectual revival of Frankish Gaul, under Charlemagne, we have
recognized the presence of these two elements in Alcuin,
whom we considered as the most faithful image of the state
of the mind at this epoch. In proportion as this influence
developed itself, they became distinct and separate: about the
middle of the ninth century, two men appeared to us as the
representatives, one of the theological, the other of the philo-
sophical element. I named to you Hinemar and John Erigena;
I led you to a consideration, in the history of Hincmar, of the
theological life of his time : let us now try to ascertain if any
philosophical life corresponded to it; it is from the history of
John Erigena that we shall learn it.

There exists amongst scholars much uncertainty respecting
the date of his birth and his country. The uncertainty re-
specting his country appears to me not well founded: his
double name indicates it clearly. John Hrigena, or John
Scotus, means John of Ireland. Ireland was anciently called
Erin, and its people were of the same race as the population
of the highlands of Scotland, the Scots. The name Erigena


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 167


points out therefore his country, that of Scotus his race and
nation. All the little difficulties, all the elaborate conjectures
of the learned, fall to the ground before this simple fact.

With respect to the date of the birth of John, it is more
dificult to determine anything, and I will not enter upon a
minute and purposeless discussion of this subject. All that
can be affirmed is, that he was born in the early part of the
ninth century, from the year 800 to 815. We do not know
where he passed his childhood, or where he followed his first
studies. The peculiarities of his knowledge, however, agree-
ing with natural probabilities, give rise to the belief that it
was in Ireland. Of all the western countries, Ireland was,
as you know, that wherein letters maintained themselves and
prospered, amidst the general confusion of Europe.

A tradition which we find prevailing at an early period,
attributes to John Scotus travels in the east, in Greece par-
ticularly ; we read, in a manuscript deposited in the library
of Oxford, a passage of his which seems to point at them:

“J quitted,” said he, “no place or temple where the
philosophers were accustomed to compose or deposit their
secret works, without inspecting it; and there was not one
amongst such scholars, as might be supposed to possess any
knowledge of philosophical writings, whom I did not question.’”?

He does not indicate, you see, any place or period ; yet his
words seem to relate to a country where the ancient philoso-
phers lived and labored. No other document sheds further
light upon these travels; and the knowledge possessed by
John Erigena of Greek literature does not appear to me a
conclusive proof. However the case may have been, about
the middle of the ninth century, we find him settled for life at
the court of Charles le Chauve. There has also been much
dispute about the date of his arrival ; it has been placed as
far forward as the year 870; but the error of this appears
evident to me. Many documents indicate that John was con-
nected with Saint Prudence before the latter became bishop
of Troyes in 847, It was probably, therefore, between the
years 840 and 847 that John Erigena went into France,
perhaps attracted thither by a formal invitation from Charles
le Chauve.


Se SE Se me a a ER Ee SH Bi a eee eee


* Wood’s Hist. and Antiquit. Univers, Oxon., in fol. 1674, vol. i.,
p 15.


168 HISTORY OF


History gives a very false idea of this prince and his court
—not certainly under the political point of view; all that it
says of the weakness of the government and the falling con-
dition of France is well founded ; but under the intellectual
point of view there was much more activity and liberty of
spirit, much more taste for letters than is commonly supposed.
The school of the Palace, so flourishing under Charlemagne,
and under the teaching of Alcuin, had greatly fallen away
under Louis le Debonnaire. Louis had been engaged much
more with the church than with science, and much more with
the religious reform of the monasteries than with the progress
of study. The School of the Palace was thus a subject little
considered, a sure proof of its decay ; for the social state was
not then such that it could subsist by itself, and without pow-
erful protection. Charles le Chauve revived it; he sum-
moned thither foreign scholars, especially Irish and Anglo-
Saxons; he treated them with marked favor ; he appreciated
their works and their conversation, and lived on familiar
terms with them. The School of the Palace resumed such
a splendor that contemporaries were struck with it as with a
novelty. To judge by the words of Herric, a monk of Saint
Germain l’Auxerrois, and of Wandalbert, a monk of Prum,
in the diocese of Tréves, the prosperity of the studies at those
places became such that Greece might have envied the for-
tune of France, amd that France had nothing for which to
envy antiquity. There is, no doubt, great monastic emphasis
in the phrase ; but, at all events, the public at the time were
so struck with the revival of letters in the court of Charles le
Chauve, that instead of saying the School of the Palace
(Schola Palatii) they said, the Palace of the School (Palatium
Schole). What, then, was the direction of mind in this
flourishing school ? what studies were preferred? We may,
I think, affirm that ancient philosophy and literature held a
high place there. Of this we have abundant and apparently
undeniable proofs.

The first are deducible from the works of John Erigena
himself, chief of the School of the Palace, and teacher there.
Of these works, ancient philosophy, as you will presently see,
is generally the object. Not only did the original works
which he has left emanate from this source ; not only did he
translate many treatises of the Neoplatonic school of Alex-
andria; but it appears certain that there exist in manu-
script in many libraries, especially in that of Oxford, com-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 169


mentaries by him on several works of Aristotle; and in
the twelfth century, at the very moment when the peripatetic
philosophy resumed in the west a despotic empire, Roger
Bacon lauded Scotus Erigena as a very faithful and clear-
sighted interpreter of Aristotle, and awarded him the merit
of having preserved, pure and authentical, certain of his
writings.

It is said, also, that Scotus Erigena applied himself to the
study of the works of Plato; and in some sentences of his on
these two masters of antiquity, he has passed so strong and
precise a judgment upon them, as to negative the supposition
that he knew them merely from the writings of certain of
their disciples, or from vague traditions. He calls Plato
“the greatest philosopher in the world,’ and Aristotle “ the
most subtle investigator, among the Greeks, of the differences
of natural things.’”!

It is not to be doubted that he understood Greek well, since
he translated the treatises attributed to Dionysius the Areopa-
gite, and gave a Greek title to his principal work. There is
also reason to think that he understood Hebrew, by far the
most unusual accomplishment of his time ; for, in citing a
verse of Genesis, he corrects the Vulgate; and instead of
saying as St. Jerome, “ Terra autem erat invisibilis et incompo-
sita,’”’ he says, ‘“‘ Terra erat inanis et vacua ;’’ a translation
far more exact, and nearer the original.?

Lastly, a celebrated scholar of his time, named Mannon,
succeeded Scotus Erigena as director of the School of the
Palace, and held that office, until the death of Louis le Begue,
and Mannon, like Erigena, made ancient philosophy his prin-
cipal study. Many contemporaries praised the learned lec-
tures which he gave on this subject; there exist, we are
assured, in some libraries of Holland, commentaries by him
on Plato’s discourses on Laws, and on the Republic, and also
on Aristotle’s Ethies.

Were ail these indications wanting, or were they to prove
unworthy of credit—were we to possess no direct and positive
assertion concerning the study which Scotus Erigena made
of the Greek philosophers, the language of his contemporaries
would reveal clearly the tendency and character of his works.


1Scot. Erig., De Divisione Nature, vol. i., c. 33, c. 16.
2 Tbid., vol. ii., chap 20.
15


170 HISTORY OF


I have told you what an uproar was created amongst theolo-
gians by his treatise on predestination, written at the request
of Hincmar, against Gottschalk. The following are the terms
in which Florus, a priest of the church of Lyons, immediately
attacked him :

‘In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,’? commences the
book of Florus, ‘‘ against the follies and errors of a certain
presumptuous man named John, on predestination and divine
prescience, and.the true liberty of human thought.

‘“‘ There have reached us, that is, the church of Lyons, the
writings of a certain vain and ostentatious man, who, disput-
ing upon divine prescience and predestination by means of
arguments of a purely human, and, as he himself boasts,
philosophical kind, has dared, without assigning any reason,
and without alleging any authority from the scriptures and
holy fathers, to affirm certain things, as though they ought to
be received and adopted on his sole and presumptuous asser-
tion. By the assistance of God, readers, who are faithful and
well exercised in the sacred doctrine, easily judge and reject
these writings, which are so full of vanity, falsehood, and
error, and which offend the faith and divine truth, and are to
them an object of contempt and derision. Nevertheless, from
what we have heard say, this same man is much admired by
many persons, for being learned and versed in the knowledge
of the schools: whether by speaking or writing, he casts some
in doubt, and others he draws away with him in his error, as
though he uttered something remarkable ; and, by the vain
and pernicious flow of his words, he so takes possession of
his hearers and admirers, that they no longer yield themselves
to the divine scriptures, nor the authority of the fathers, but
prefer following his fantastic reveries. We have, therefore,
judged it necessary, through charitable zeal, and for the sake
of our city and our order, to reply to his insolence,”’ &c.’

You observe that the character of the writings and ideas
of Scotus Erigena is clearly portrayed in the accusation here
put forth against him ; he is denounced for purely human, and,
according to his own words, philosophical arguments, and as
being learned and versed in the knowledge of the schools. It


1 Veterum Auctorum qui ix. seculo de Predestinatione et Gratia
scripserunt Opera et Fragmenta, published by the president Mau-
guin ; 2 vols. in 4to., v.1., p. 585. Paris, 1650. —


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 171


was, in short, as a philosopher that he was condemned. In
855, the council of Valence decreed as follows :

‘We banish absolutely from the pious ears of the faithful,
as useless, nay, even as hurtful and contrary to the truth,
the four articles (capitula) adopted with so little foresight by
the council of our brethren,’ and the nineteen other capitula,
very foolishly set down in syllogisms, wherein no ability,?
though they are lauded in this respect, shines in the secular
point of view, and wherein we find an invention of the devil,
rather than any argument for the faith. By the authority of
the Holy Spirit, we interdict them everywhere, and we think
that those who introduce novelties ought to be punished, in
order to prevent the necessity of having afterwards to strike
harder.’’

Some years after, in 859, the council of Langres renewed
the same sentence of condemnation against Scotus Erigena.
Both accusers and judges, the simple clergy and the assem-
blies of the church, were then unanimous in their judgment
of Scotus Erigena, and the character of his works. Let us
see what he says himselt’; he describes and paints himself
as his enemies have painted him.

His treatise on predestination begins thus :—

‘Since, in earnestly investigating and attempting to dis-
cover surely the reasons of all things, every means of attain.
ing toa pious and perfect doctrine, lies in that science and
discipline which the Greeks call philosophy, we think it
necessary to speak in a few words of its divisions and classi-
fications. ‘It is believed and taught,’ says St. Augustine,
‘that philosophy, that is, the love of wisdom, is no other than
religion ; and what proves it is, that we do not receive the
sacraments in common with those whereof we do not approve
the doctrine.’ What, then, is the object of philosophy but
to set forth the rules of true religion, whereby we rationally
seek and humbly adore God, the first cause and sovereion
of all things? From thence it follows that true philosophy
is true religion, and conversely, that true religion is true phi-
losophy.’”*


1 The council of Kiersy.

2 The nineteen chapters of Scotus Erigena’s treatise on Predestina-
tion.

§ Council of Valence in 855, can. 4,

* Divina. Predest., c. i., col. of Maug., v. i., p. 221.


172 HISTORY OF


Is not this evidently the language of a man who is much
more a philosopher than a theologian, and who takes his point
of departure in philosophy, attempting to mix, or at least to
reconcile it with religion, either because he considers them as
one and the same science, or because he has need of the shield
of religion to protect himself against the attacks of which he
is the object ?

Again, in his work On the Division of Nature :—

“We must follow in all things the authority of the holy
scriptures, for the truth is there enclosed as in a secret
sanctuary ; but we must not think that, in order to endow us
with the divine nature, the holy scripture always employs
precise and literal words and signs ; it makes use of simili-
tudes, strained and figurative expressions, adapts itself to our
weakness, and raises, by a simple mode of teaching, our dull
and immature spirits.’”!

Who does not recognize here an effort, very often made,
to avoid the strict interpretation of texts or dogmas, and to
introduce into the study of religion some liberty of thought,
under the veil of explanation and allegory ?

We cannot doubt it: even before examining deeply into
the ideas of Scotus Erigena, and judging only by the tradi-
tions which remain to us respecting his works, by the lan.
guage of the church and of his enemies, and by his own, the
philosophical character appears vividly in the life and spirit
of this man ; he differs from theologians essentially ; it is to
antiquity that he belongs, it is of ancient knowledge that he
discourses to his contemporaries.

His character was by no means a cause of disfavor with
Charles le Chauve. It is well attested, on the contrary, that
Charles often attended his lectures, took a lively interest in
them, and consulted him upon all the affairs, upon all the in-
tellectual difficulties, so to speak, which arose in his kingdom.
An anecdote in a manuscript of William of Malmesbury, a
chronicler of the thirteenth century, will show you to what
an extent the familiarity of the king with the philosopher was
carried :

“ John,” says he, “ was seated at table in front of the king,
who sat at the other side of the table ; when the viands had
disappeared, and jokes began to circulate, in a light humor


a sg


1 De Nat, Divis., v. i., c. 66,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 173


and after some other pleasantries, seeing John do something
which shocked the Gallic politeness, the king rebuked him mild-
ly, saying, ‘ Quid distat inter sottum et Scotum ?’ (what separates
a sot from a Scot ?) ‘Nothing but the table,’ replied John,
returning the quip to its author.’”!

Are not these the liberties of a licensed bel-esprit, who be-
lieves all things are permitted to him because he amuses and
pleases ?

It was, 1 am much disposed to think, this encouragement
of Scotus Erigena by Charles le Chauve, that suggested to
Hinemar the idea of gaining his interference in his quarrel
with Gottschalk, by engaging him to write on his behalf,
Hincmar (as I have already remarked) was more of a poli-
tician than theologian, more filled with the idea of governing
than reasoning, and rather aiming at success than truth. He
found himself in a difficult position ; most of the theologians
of Frankish Gaul were rising against him; the celebrated
Raban, after having compromised him, refused to support him.
He applied to Scotus Erigena, wishing, doubtless, to profit at
once by his interest and by his knowledge, and hoping to find
in him an able and influential defender.

But Hincmar knew not what an ally he was calling to his
assistance, and in what a strife he was again about to engage.
In order to make clearly understood the turn which the question
then took, and the part which Scotus Erigena played in it, I
am obliged to ascend a step higher.

Christianity, in order to establish itself, had had to vanquish
all sorts of enemies, governments, nations, priests, and pagans,
civil as well as religious power, and laws as well as customs.
But in the intellectual order, the Alexandrine neoplatonism
had been its sole adversary.

Properly speaking, it was between the Neoplatonists of
Alexandria, and the Christians, that the question lay. From
the second century, some attempts had been made by the
rival schools at conciliating, or rather at amalgamating the
two doctrines. St. Clement of Alexandria, who died in 220,
and Origen, from 185 to 254, were disciples of the Alexan-
drine philosophy, Neoplatonists become Christians, and who
endeavored to accommodate their philosophical doctrines to


Ca Se a ee ee eee


* William of Malmesbury, in his unpublished work, De Pontifi-
cibus.
15*


174 HISTORY OF


the Christian creeds which were developing themselves and
taking the form of asystem. In the course of the third or fourth
centuries, these attempts were once more renewed : but it was
in the middle of the sixth, that they became most vigorous.
The victory was then completely on the side of Christianity ;
the Alexandrian Neoplatonism, abandoned by princes, and
decried, and persecuted, had no alternative but to lose itself
in the bosom of its enemy, preserving of itself only so much
as Christianity would consent to receive. We see, indeed, at
that time most of the philosophers of this school, become or
near becoming Christians, blending their old opinions with
their new faith, by endeavoring to make them agree. To
this epoch belongs, for example, the dialogue of Auneas of
Gaza, a disciple of Hierocles, entitled, ‘« Theophrastus ; or on
the immortality of the soul and the resurrection of the body,”
and that of Zacharius the Scholastic, entitled, “ Ammonius ;
or on the construction of the world, against the philosophers ;
writings, the design of which was evidently to introduce into
the theology of St. Athanasius, St. Jerome, and St. Augustin,
such ideas and forms of the expiring philosophy as would
accommodate themselves with it. There were then, assured-
ly, many more works of this kind than are now remaining to
us; the proof of which is, that they were composed with a
view to being ascribed to the ancient philosophers, in the hope
of thereby enforcing upon them more authority. In the
middle of this fifth century there appeared, under the name of
Dionysius the Areopagite, several treatises bearing the cha-
racter which I have just described. Dionysius the Areopagite
was one of the most illustrious names in Christian traditions,
one of the most glorious conquests of nascent Christianity. .
He is mentioned for the first time in the 17th chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles. This chapter is so remarkable, and
carries in itself, independently of all external evidence, such
indications of authenticity, that | beg your permission to read
the text of the principal passages. Nowhere is the preaching
of Christianity in the midst of ancient society painted with so
much truth and clearness: the sacred chronicler relates the
sojourn of St. Paul at Athens:

‘‘ Now when Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was
stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.
Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and
with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them
that met with him. Then certain philosophers of the epi-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 175


cureans and of the stoics, encountered him. And some said,
‘What will this babbler say ?’ other some, ‘ He seemeth to be
a setter forth of strange gods:’ because he preached unto them
Jesus, and the resurrection.

“ And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus,
saying, ‘ May we know what this new doctrine whereof thou
speakest is? For thou bringest certain strange things to our
ears : we would know, therefore, what these things mean.’ ”’
(For all the Athenians and strangers which were there, spent
their time in nothing else, but either to tell or hear some new
thing.

ages Paul stood in the midst of Mars’ Hill, and said,—‘ Ye
men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too super-
stitious. For as I passed by and beheld your devotions, I
found an altar with this inscription—To the unknown God.
Whom, therefore, ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto
you. God that made the world and all things therein, see-
ing that he is the Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in
temples made with hands ; neither is worshipped with men’s
hands, as though he needed anything, seeing he giveth to all
life, and breath, and all things. That they should seek the
Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though
he be not far from every one of us: for in him we live, and
move, and have our being ; as certain also of your own poets
have said, For we are also his offspring. Forasmuch, then,
as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the
godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art
and man’s device. And the times of this ignorance God wink-
ed at; but now commandeth all men everywhere to repent ;
because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge
the world in righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordain-
ed; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he
hath raised him from the dead.’

** And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead,
some mocked: and others said—‘ We will hear thee again of
this matter.’ So Paul departed from among them.

“¢ Howbeit, certain men clave unto him, and believed: among
the which was Dionysius the Areopagite.’”!

Such a convert would naturally have been cherished by the
new society: accordingly, since that epoch, the name of


! Acts of the Apostles, chap. 17, ver. 16-34.


176 HISTORY OF


Dionysius the Areopagite frequently occurs in Christian
narrations. In the second century, particularly, Saint Justin,
one of the earliest and most able defenders of Christianity,
mentions him on several occasions with honor. ‘Tradition
relates that, towards the end of the first century, in 95,
Dionysius being burnt alive at Athens, obtained the honors of
martyrdom. ‘The fact is possible, but does not rest on any
sure proofs. ti

Whatever may have been the truth of the case, towards
the end of the fifth century, there appeared under the name
of Dionysius the Areopagite, several works designed to effect
the amalgamation of the Alexandrian Neoplatonism with
Christian theology; they are entitled: 1. On the Celestial
Hierarchy ; 2. On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy ; 3. On Divine
Names ; 4. Mystical Theology ; lastly, to the dogmatic writ-
ings are subjoined ten letters. ‘The forgery is evident: the
books and letters could not have been written before the mid-
dle of the fifth century: facts and customs which did not be-
long to the Christian church before that epoch, are therein
mentioned ; and at every step we meet with ideas and forms
of style, of which Dionysius the Areopagite could not have
had the least notion. Accordingly, in the first half of the sixth
century, about the year 532, at Constantinople itself, Hypatius,
a rhetorician, attacked the authenticity of these pretended
works of the Athenian senator. But they agreed very well
with the nature of an attempt, at that time very actively
prosecuted, and very important in the then state of society ;
their object was to effect that reconciliation, that amalgama-
tion of Christian dogmas with Neoplatonic ideas which formed
the intellectual problem of the age. Public credulity was
great, true criticism almost dormant; the writings of which
I speak, easily passed into circulation. Several scholars,
amongst others Maximus the Confessor (in 622), added com-
mentaries to them; and they continued to bear the name of
the illustrious Christian to whom they had been attributed.

At the commencement of the ninth century, a particular
circumstance gave them immense popularity in the west, and
especially in Frankish Gaul. A Saint Denis passed for hav-
ing been, about the middle of the third century, the apostle
of the Gauls and the first bishop of Paris. It entered the
heads of some monks to maintain that this Denis and Diony-
sius the Areopagite were one and the sameman. The Chris-
tianity of the Gauls was thus referred to an antiquity far


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 177


more remote, and might thus boast of a far more illustrious
founder. In 814, Hilduinus, abbot of Saint Denis, the same
by whom Hincmar was educated, wrote a book, entitled Areo-
pagetica, to uphold the opinion in point. It rapidly gained
credit, and became in Gaul a sort of national creed. The
works of Dionysius the Areopagite were from that time for-
ward the object of eager curiosity, and in 824, Michael the
Stammerer sent a copy of one of them to Louis le Debonnaire.
The precious MS. was deposited and preserved in the abbey
of Saint Denis; but it was in Greek, and few persons could
understand it. Charles le Chauve engaged Scotus Erigena to
translate it. He undertook this translation, which was pro-
bably the work that, of all others, most extended the fame of
his learning in Gaul.

Historically, then, the character of the works of Scotus
Erigena is incontestable. He was in the ninth century the
representative and interpreter of that attempt, commenced in
the second century, and so active in the fifth, at an amalga-
mation of the Alexandrine Neoplatonism and Christian
theology. It is under this aspect that he presents himself in
the succession of facts and proper names. He was the last
link of that chain whose first link a pious delusion had
attempted to trace to Athens herself, to the bosom of the
schools of ancient philosophy.

Let us now quit history, and let us penetrate into the ideas
themselves: let us judge from the works of Scotus Erigena,
by comparing them, on the one hand, with those of the Neo-
platonists of Alexandria—on the other, with those of the
Christian theologians of his time, whether they indeed connect
themselves with Neoplatonian doctrines, and vainly attempt
to reproduce them and infuse them into Christianity.

I cannot, as you may easily understand, think of here
offering any very extensive or strict comparison between
Alexandrine Neoplatonism and Christianity. I am forced to
limit myself to a few broad features, to the most general
characteristics of the two doctrines ; they will suffice, I hope,
to distinguish them, and to show clearly to which Scotus
Erigena properly belonged.

At first sight, and neglecting minor questions, two essential
differences are remarkable between the Alexandrine Neopla-
tonism and Christianity. 1st. Neoplatonism is a philosophy,
Christianity a religion. The first has human reason for its
point of departure ; it is to her that it addresses itself, her


178. HISTORY OF


that it interrogates, in her that it confides. The point of
departure of the second is, on the contrary, a fact exterior to
human reason; it dictates to, instead of interrogating her.
From thence it follows, that free inquiry predominates in
Neoplatonism ; it is its fundamental method and habitual
practice ; whereas Christianity proclaims authority for its
principle, and proceeds by means of authority. From
thence it again follows that, although the Alexandrine Neo.
platonism, to judge of it by the language and character of its
Writings, presents itself under a profoundly mystical aspect,
its principle at the bottom is rational ; whilst primitive Chris.
tianity, the.character of which is in no degree mystical, which
is, on the contrary, very positive and simple, has, never-
theless, a supernatural principle. There is, then, in the start-
ing points of these two doctrines, a radical difference.

2d. If we pass over this question of the point of departure,
and of the preliminary method of every philosophy, and
examine ideas to the very bottom, a second essential difference
will strike us. The main doctrine of Alexandrine N eoplatonism
is pantheism, the identity of substance and being, individuality
reduced to the condition of a simple phenomenon, of a tran-
sitory fact. Individuality, on the contrary, is the funda-
mental belief of Christian theology. The God of the Chris.
tians is a distinct being, who communicates and treats with
other beings, to whom the latter address themselves, who re-
plies to them, whose existence is sovereign, but not sole.
Among many other indications, the diversity of the two doc-
trines reveals itself clearly in the idea which they respectively
involve concerning man’s future state beyond his present one
of actual existence. How does Neoplatonism view the con-
dition of human beings at the moment of their death? As
being absorbed in the bosom of the great all; all individuality
having been abolished. How, on the other hand, does Chris-
tianity view them? It regards individuality as perpetuated
even to infinity ; and an eternity of punishments and rewards
is substituted for the absorption of individual beings; so that,
casting but a rapid glance at the two doctrines, we notice a
radical difference both in the foundation and in the point
of departure of the ideas—a difference which especially ap-
pears in the two essential features to which I have now drawn
your attention.

Is it not true, then, that if we find these very same differ-
ences between the philosophy of John Scotus Erigena, and


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 179


the Christian theology of his time; the filiation of his ideas
and their affinity with Alexandrine Neoplatonism will be as
certain by the very essence of the ideas, as it has appeared
to us by historical traditions ?

Independently of his translation of the pretended works of
Dionysius the Areopagite, and of some treatises now lost, or
still in manuscript,’ there remain to us two great works of
Scotus Erigena: Ist, his treatise, De Predestinatione, of
which I have already spoken to you; 2d, a treatise entitled
Ilept Bicews Mepicpox, Concerning the Division of Nature, which
contains the systematic exposition of his ideas on man and
the universe.

From these two works alone! shall select the quotations
to be presently offered to your view. The first is found in
the collection of writings relative to the quarrel between
Hinemar and Gottschalk, published by the president Mau-
guin. But, by an ill fortune, which I have attempted in vain
to remedy, | shall be unable to present you with an analysis,
whose accuracy I could guarantee, of the second, which is of
most importance, for I could discover it in none of the libra-
ries of Paris. It was published in Oxford in 1681, by
Thomas Gale, in one volume, folio. Great kindness has been
shown towards me, at the different public libraries, in the
efforts that have been made to find it; but, unfortunately,
none of them contain it. I have also made inquiries for it
in England, but have not yet obtained it. I have therefore
been obliged to content myself with the extracts and nume-
rous quotations which I have found in several histories of
philosophy, and particularly in two German dissertations,
whereof Scotus Erigena is the special object.?__ I should say,
also, by the way, that it has been demonstrated to me, by the
attentive examination which [ have made of them, that many
foreign writers who have spoken of this work have not had
it before them, any more than myself, in its entire state. Of
this they ought to have made their readers aware.


1 Among others, a treatise on the Vision of God, of which Mabil-
lon had seen the MS. in the library of Clairmarest near St. Omer, and
which commenced with these words: Ommnes sensus corporet nascun-
tur ex conjunctione anime et corporis.

2 One is entitled, John Scotus Erigena; or, On the Origin of a
Christian Philosophy and its Holy Mission, by P. Hioart, Copen-
hagen, 1823; the other, The Mysticism of the Middle Ages in their
Infancy, by H. Schmid, Jena, 1824.


186 HISTORY OF


I begin with the first question, the preliminary question of
every doctrine, that of the point of departure and the method.
I have just shown you what, with respect to this, was the
radical difference between Alexandrine Neoplatonism and
Christian theology, and how one had reason for its principle,
—the other, authority. The following are some of the pas-
sages wherein Scotus Erigena expresses his thoughts on this
subject :

ai


“Nature ”’ (by nature he means the universe, all created
things) “and time were created together, but authority does
not date from the origin of time and nature. Reason is born
at the commencement of things, with time and nature.
Reason itself demonstrates it. Authority is derived from
reason, and not reason from authority. An authority which
is not acknowledged by reason seems valueless. Reason, on
the contrary, invincibly resting on its own strength, has no
need of the confirmation of any authority. Legitimate
authority appears to me to be but truth unfolded by the force
of reason, and transmitted by the holy eo for the use of
future generations.’”

Il.


‘We should not allege the opinions of the holy fathers,
especially if they are known to most people, unless it be neces-
sary thereby to strengthen arguments in the eyes of men,
who, unskilful in reasoning, yield rather to authority than to
reason.’’2 |

Il.


“ The salvation of faithful souls consists in believing what
we have reason to affirm concerning the sole principle of all
things, and in comprehending what we have reason to be-
lieve.’

Iv.


‘Faith is nothing more, in my opinion, than a certain
principle from which the knowledge of the Creator takes its
derivation in a reasonable nature.’’+


1 De Divisione Nature, v.1., p. 39. 3 Tbid., v. iv., p. 81.
3 De Divisione Nature, y. i., p. 81. 4 Ibid., v. i, p. 41.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 18]


Vv.


“The soul in itself is unknown ; but it begins to manifest
itself to itself and to others in its form, which is reason.’”!


VI.


“Tam not so fearful of authority, and I do not so dread the
rage of minds of small intelligence, as to hesitate to proclaim
aloud the things which reason clearly unfolds and with cer-
tainty demonstrates ; there are, moreover, subjects of which
we need only discourse with the learned, for whom nothing is
more sweet to hear than the truth, and nothing more delight-
ful to investigate, or more beautiful to contemplate, when
found.’”

Assuredly, no philosopher has ever more clearly expressed
the rational character of his point of departure, which is that
of all philosophy. The last passage also clearly indicates
that the contest was then being waged between this principle
and that of authority, and that Scotus Erigena hesitated not
to engage in it. Devotion to truth and liberty is thus in a
few words indicated with striking power :—

He goes further, and points out here and there in the
course of his work some of the principles of philosophical
method, with a precision so much the more remarkable that
he often violates it himself, and like the rest of the N eopla-
tonic sohool, does often the very reverse of proceeding from
the known to the unknown, and by the path of observation.
The following are a few of these passages :—


VII.


“The true course of reasoning may be from the natural
study of things sensible, to the pure contemplation of things
spiritual.’

VIII.


“Tf we do not desire to study and to know ourselves, it is
because we do not desire to raise ourselves up to what is
above us, that is to our cause; for there is no other way of
attaining to the most pure contemplation of the sovereign
model than to well regard his image, which is nigh unto us,””4


* De Divisione Nature, v. ii., pil; 3 Ibid., Veagits 39:
3 De Divisione Nature, v. v., pa22k. * Ibid., p. 268.
6


182 HISTORY OF


Ix.


“Far from being of little importance, the xnowledge of
things sensible is greatly useful to the understanding of things
intellectual. For, in the same manner as, by the senses, we
arrive at intelligence, so, by the creature, we return to
Ged:’?’ ;

Are not the scientific spirit, and the method of observation
and induction, clearly opposed, in these places, to the theolo-
gical spirit, to the method of authority and deduction ?

Let us pass the vestibule of the philosophy ; let us go into
the interior of the temple. There, the affinity of Scotus
Erigena with the Alexandrine Neoplatonism will not be less
apparent. He is likewise essentially a pantheist, and he hesi-
tates not to say so, with all that confusion, it is true, which is
inherent in this doctrine, and dooms it to incoherency and ab-
surdity in the very terms by which it attempts to declare
itself, yet he does so as openly and as consequently (if the
word consequence may be here used) as his more illustrious
predecessors.

Xs


“The cause of all things, which is God, is at the same time
simple and multiple. The divine goodness (essence) spreads
itself, that is, multiplies itself in all things which exist....
and lastly, by the same paths, disengaging itself from the
infinite variety of things which exist, again returns and
concentrates itself in the simple unity which comprehends all
things, which is in God and is God. Thus, all is God and
God is all.”

ote


“In the same manner that, originally, the river flows
entire from its source ; and as the water which first gushes
out from the spring, spreads itself constantly and without
ceasing in the bed of the river, whatever be the length of its
course, in the same manner the goodness, essence, wisdom,
divine life, and all which is in the source of all things, spreads
itself first in the first causes, and makes them to subsist ;
then passes from the first causes into their effects, according
to an ineffable mode, and thus circulates by uninterrupted


1 De Divisione Nature, v. iii., p. 149. 2 Ibid., v. iii., c. 4


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 183


degrees from things superior to things inferior, and finally
returns to its source by the most subtle and secret ways of
nature.””!

XII.


‘God, who alone truly exists, is the essence of” all things,
as Dionysius the Areopagite says: ‘The existence of all things
is what remains in them of divinity.’ ’”


XIII.


‘God is the beginning, the middle, and the end: the be-
ginning, because all things come from him and participate in
his essence ; the middle, because all things subsist in him and
by him; the end, because all things move towards him in
order to attain repose, the limit of their motion, and the stability
of his perfection,’’3

XIV.


“ All things which are said to be, are images of God (Theo-
phanie) .... all that we perceive and comprehend is but an
apparition of what we see not, a manifestation of what is
hidden . . . . opened a way towards the apprehension of that
which we have no comprehension of, a name of that which is
ineffable, a step towards that which we cannot attain....a
form of that which does not possess form, &c.’’4


XV.


“‘ We can conceive nothing in the creature which is not the
Creator, who alone truly is. Nothing out of himself can be
called really essential ; for all things, coming from him, are
nothing more, inasmuch as they exist, than a certain par-
ticipation in the existence of him who alone comes from no
other and subsists of himself.’’


XVI.


“ We ought not to conceive the Lord and the creature as
two beings distinct one from the other, but as one and the
same being. For the creature subsists in God, and God, in a


1 De Divis. Nat., v. i., c. 3. ST bid, Cal. * Thid,. you Jeu:
* Dedic. ad S. Maximi Schol.in Gregorium Nazianz.
® De Divis. Nat., v. ii., ¢..2.


184 HISTORY OF


marvellous and ineffable manner, creates himself, so to say, in
the creature in whom he manifests himself, and thus renders the
invisible visible, and the incomprehensible comprehensible.’”}


XVII.


“‘ All that the human soul, by its intelligence and its rea-
son, knows of God and the principles of things, under the form
of unity, it perceives under the multiple form, and by the
senses, in the effects of causes.’”

Although I have not the complete work before me, it would
be an easy matter for me to continue these quotations ; but I
have given enough, doubtless, to establish the Pantheism of
Scotus Erigena, and to show that he was really, with respect
to the ground of his ideas, as also indeed of his method, the
representative, in the ninth century, of that Alexandrian
philosophy, which was for a long time the intellectual adver-
sary of Christianity, and which from the second century had
sought, if not to reconcile itself, at least to amalgamate itself
with the nascent theology.

Since the attempt had not succeeded from the second to the
fifth century, when Alexandrine Neoplatonism was still popu-
lar and powerful, far more reason was there for its failing in
the ninth, when it had only for its organ and defender a wan-
dering philosopher, favored by a king without power. [| will
not return to what I told you in the last lecture, about the
clamor which was raised against Scotus Erigena; it was as
general as it was violent, and greatly injured the cause of
Hinemar, who had chosen him for his defender. Scotus
Erigena had foreseen this, and was obliged to protect himself
by all the precautions in his power. We read at the head of
his treatise on predestination, dedicated to Hincmar :—

“Of this opuscule, then, which we have written at your
command, and in proof of your orthodox faith, adopt and
assign so much to the catholic church as you shall judge true
—reject what appears to you false; and, simply human as
we are, pardon us for it. As regards what seems doubtful,
believe it, until authority teaches you that it must be rejected,
or taken for truth, and believed always.’’’ |

But the precaution was in vain: we cannot deceive or


1 De Divis. Nat., v. ii., p. 74. 2 Tbid.
8 De Div. Pred. Pref., Col. of Maug., v. i., p. 110.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 185


lull to sleep intellectual adversaries. Not only did a crowd
of theologians write against the philosopher—not only was he
condemned by councils, but the rumors of his opinions soon
arrived at Rome, and pope Nicholas I. addressed to Charles
_le Chauve—probably between 865 and 867—a letter conceived
in these terms :

‘It has been reported to our apostleship that a certain
John, of Scotch origin, has lately translated into Latin the
work which the blessed Dionysius wrote in the Greek
language, on divine names and celestial orders. This book
ought to have been sent us, according to custom, and ap-
proved by our judgment ; the more so, that this John, though
he is cried up as possessed of great knowledge, has not
always, it is everywhere said, been sound in his views
upon certain subjects. We recommend, therefore, very
strongly, that you cause the said John to appear before
our apostleship, or at least that you do not permit him any
longer to reside at Paris, in the school of which he is stated
for a long time to have been the chief, in order that he may
no longer mingle his tares with the wheat of the holy word,
giving poison to those who seek for bread.”

There is much difference of opinion amongst scholars as
to the consequences which this formidable attack produced
with regard to Scotus Erigena. According to some, Charles
le Chauve, after having for a long time supported him, was at
last obliged to abandon him; and EHrigena fled to England,
where king Alfred then reigned, who gave him a favorable
reception, and placed him at the head of the university of
Oxford. This opinion is founded on a passage of Matthew of
Westminster, an English chronicler of the thirteenth century.
We there read, under the date 883—

“This year came to England, Master John, of Scottish
origin, a man of a very penetrating mind, and of singular
eloquence. A long while before, having quitted his native
country, he went to Gaul, to the court of Charles le Chauve,
and, being received by him with great honor, became his boon
companion and bedfellow. . . At the request of this same king,
he translated from the Greek into Latin, the Hierarchy of
Dionysius the Areopagite, and gave to the world another book,


? Collection of P, Mauguin, v.i., p. 105; Boulaz., Univ. Hist., Paris,
v.i, p. 184.


16*


186 HISTORY OF


which he entitled epi gvocws Mepiopos, that is, Concerning the
Division of Nature,—‘ very useful,’ says he, ‘for resolving
divers questions scarcely soluble ;? we must excuse him on
certain occasions, whereupon he has strayed from the path
pursued by the Latins, for he had his eyes especially directed
towards the Greeks. He has accordingly by some been judged
heretical. A certain Florus has written against him: we are
ignorant who this man was, who condemned the writings of
John by perverting them. There are indeed many things in
this book which, if we do not examine them with care, ap-
pear contrary to the catholic faith. (He then speaks of
the letter of Pope Nicholas I.) . . . In consequence of this
reproach, this same John quitted France and came into
England, where, some years after, he was stabbed to death by
his own pupils with their styles, and died in great agony. For
some time he had only an humble grave in the church of St.
Laurence: but a ray of celestial light having fallen upon that
place, the monks, encouraged by such signs, transported him
to the cathedral, and honorably deposited him on the left of
the altar.’”*

A mass of objections are raised against this narrative of a
chronicler who lived more than three centuries after the oc-
currence of the facts which he relates. He appears to have
confounded Scotus Erigena with another of the same name,
whom king Alfred in effect summoned from the continent
about the year 884, with the view of entrusting to him the
direction of the university of Oxford. Such is the account of
Asser, a biographer contemporary with Alfred, who adds, that
in 895, John the Saxon, having become abbot of Ethelingay,
was slain by strokes of the style in a commotion of monks,
and that, being a very strong man, he defended himself a
long while. But, in 895, Scotus Erigena must have been
eighty years old; he could not, therefore, have been very
strong, nor have defended himself a long while against his
assassins. ‘Thus the details given by his contemporaries are
absolutely inapplicable to him, and the whole story of his re-
turn to England becomes very doubtful. Most French scholars
contend that he remained in France, and even that he died
there before Charles le Chauve, that is, before 877; and, inde-
pendently of the circumstances which I have just noticed,


? Collection of Mauguin, v. i., p. 106.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 187


their opinion seems confirmed by a letter of Anastasius,
librarian of Rome, to king Charles, written about 876, wherein
he speaks to him of Scotus Erigena, as of a man deceased.
Contemporary testimony has, in my opinion, more authority
than that of Matthew of Westminster, and I am disposed to
side with this latter opinion.

However that was, the philosophical movement which
Hrigena had prolonged or re-animated declined with him.
His history is nearly the last glimmer which marks the
presence and activity of the Alexandrian Neoplatonism in
the bosom of Christianity. With him ended all the attempts
whether at warfare or at amalgamation between these two
great intellectual adversaries. Dating from this epoch,
Christian theology became more and more a stranger to
ancient philosophy, and the tenth century witnessed the birth
of the theology of the middle age, the true ecclesiastical
theology, that which was to bring forth the creeds and the
Christian church, alone and free in their development.

Scotus Erigena, however, preserved to himself a great
reputation, and I meet with a fact, in the thirteenth century,
which loudly attests it. It appears that at this epoch, when
the great heresy of the Albigenses burst forth, his works,
particularly his treatise De Divisione Natura, and his trans.
lation of Dionysius the Areopagite, were known and much
esteemed in southern France ; to such an extent was this the
case that Pope Honorius III. ordered that a search should be
made for the manuscripts of them in all libraries, and that
they should be sent to Rome to be there burnt. No docu-
ment, no narration attaches this fact to the history of Scotus
Erigena himself, and I am not in a condition to follow, from
the ninth to the thirteenth century, the traces of his writings
and of their influence ; but the fact, though isolated, is the no
less certain and curious.

I have detained you a long time upon the life and writings
of a man much forgotten in the present day. But, in the first
place, it was but justice to restore to his proper rank this
strong and great intellect, which appeared as a phenomenon
in the middle of his age ; on the other, I desired to show you
that this phenomenon had in it nothing strange, and that, in
the case of philosophy as of legislation, ancient society, the
Greco-Roman society, had not so completely or so hastily
perished as we have been accustomed to think. I will here
conclude my description of Frankish Gaul from the eighth to


188 HISTORY OF


the tenth century ; and in our next lecture, which will be the
last—l shall endeavor to sum up all the facts which I have
placed before your notice, and to trace rapidly that course of
French civilization, under the two first races, which we have
now been considering.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 189


THIRTIETH LECTURE.


General summary of the course—Extent and variety of subjects—The
history of civilization, its price——It is the result of all partial histo-
ries——Unity and variety of the existence of a people—Three essen-
tial elements in French civilization, Greco-Roman antiquity, Chris-
tianity, Germany—-1. Of the Roman element, from the 5th to the
10th century—-Under a social point of view—-Under an intellectual
point of view—-2. Of the Christian element, from the 5th to the 10th
century— Under a social point of view--Under an intellectual point
of view--3. Of the Germanic element, from the 5th to the 10th cen-
tury--Under a social point of view-—-Under an intellectual point of
view--Two principal facts characterize this epoch: 1. The pro-
longation, more or less apparent, but everywhere real, of Roman
society and its influence—2. The disorderly and indeterminate
fermentation of the different elements of modern civilization—
Conclusion.


WE are come to the termination of this course. I would
now take a review of the whole, noticing the chief and pre-
dominant facts, which appear to me to result from it, and
which characterize, during that long period, the history of
our civilization.

I gave at the commencement a description of Gaul prior
to the German invasion, at the end of the fourth and the
beginning of the 5th century, under the Roman administra-
tion. We considered its social and intellectual state in civil
and in religious society.’

After I had thus made you acquainted with Roman-Gaul,
_ [took you across the Rhine. I directed your view towards
Germany, prior to the invasion also, and in the infancy of
its institutions and manners.”

The Germans having invaded Gaul, we examined what
were the consequences, whether immediate or probable, of
this first contact of Roman with barbarous society. I drew
your attention to their abrupt and violent collision.®

From the sixth century to the middle of the eighth, we
followed the progressive amalgamation of the two societies.


1 Lect. 2—6. saaekeek,: ‘7; * Lect. 8.


190 HISTORY OF


In the civil order, we saw barbarous laws arise, and the
Roman law perpetuated. I labored to explain the character,
generally misunderstood, in my opinion, of these first rudi-
ments of modern legislation.| We passed from thence to
religious society ; and considering it in its double element,
priests and monks, the’secular and regular clergy, we gave an
account both of its relations with civil society, and of its
own internal organization.? .

Such has been our progress, from the sixth to the eighth
century, in the history of the social state ; but we had also to
consider the intellectual state of Frankish-Gaul at the same
period ; we searched both in sacred and profane literature,
and we endeavored to ascertain their distinctive character
and reciprocal influence.?

We thus arrived at the great crisis which signalized the
middle of the eighth century, the fall of the Merovingian
kings and the accession of the Carlovingians; | attempted to
characterize this revolution, and to assign its real causes.4

The Carlovingian revolution being comprehended, the
reign of Charlemagne specially occupied us ; I considered it
in its events, properly so called, in its laws, in its action on
mind. I desired particularly to distinguish that which he
attempted, and that which he effectually accomplished,
that which perished with him, and that which survived
him.®

After the death of Charlemagne, the rapid dissolution of
his vast empire struck our attention; we endeavored to take
an account of it, and to make known to ourselves the progress
as well as the causes of that phenomenon ; we pursued it, on
the one hand, in its events, on the other, in its laws ; we inquired
into the political and the legislative revolution, which, from
the death of Charlemagne to the accession of Hugh Capet,
led to the feudal system.®

To this history of civil society, from the middle of the
eighth to the end of the tenth century, succeeded the history
of religious society at the same period, that is to say, the
history of the Gallo-Frankish church, considered firstly in
itself, that is, in its national existence ; secondly, externally,
in its relations with the government of the universal church,
that is, the popedom.


1 Lect. 9—11. 2 Lect. 12--15. 3 Lect. 16, 18.
4 Lect. 19. 5 Lect. 20~-23. 8 Lect, 24—-25,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 191


Lastly, always remaining true to the essential idea of civi-
lization, and always mindful to consider it under its double
aspect, with respect to society and the human soul, the intel-
lectual state of Frankish-Gaul, from the eighth to the tenth
century, was our concluding study. We saw ancient philoso-
phy expire, and ecclesiastical theology arise: and we deter-
mined with some precision the profane and the sacred elements
which have contributed to the modern development of the
human mind.?

Such is the vast career, the steps of which we have fol-
lowed ; such is the immense variety of objects which have
passed under your view. Certainly, I have not arbitrarily or
from mere fancy led you into this vast expanse, causing you
continually to be changing the point of view of subject.
The very nature of our study rigidly exacted it: the history
of civilization can only be given at this expense.

This history is a new work, scarcely more than sketched.
The idea of it has been first conceived in the eighteenth cen-
tury, and it is in our own times, under our own eyes, that
we see its true fulfilment begin. It is not, however, only in
the present day that history is made a study of; not only
facts, but their connection and their causes, have been studied 5
philosophers and scholars have equally labored in this field.
But up to the present times, we may say, the study of his.
tory, both philosophical and scholastic, has been partial and
limited ; political, legislative, religious, and literary histories
have been written ; learned researches have been made, bril-
liant reflections have been presented on the destination and
development of laws, manners, sciences, letters, arts, of all
the works of human activity; but they have never been
regarded together, at one view, in their intimate and fertile
union. And wherever there has been an attempt to grasp at
general results, or a desire to form a complete idea of the
development of human nature, it is altogether on a partial
foundation that the edifice has been raised. The Discours
sur U Histoire Universelle, and the Esprit des Lois, are glorious
essays on the history of civilization ; but who cannot see that
Bossuet has almost exclusively confined his search to religious
creeds, and Montesquieu to political institutions 2. These two
geniuses have thus narrowed the horizon of their view. What


? Lect. 28, 29


192 HISTORY OF


are we to say concerning minds of an inferior order? It is
evident that, scholastic or philosophical, history up to the pre-
sent day has never really been general ; it has never at one time
followed man in all the careers wherein his activity exhibits
itself. And yet the history of civilization is possible only under
this condition ; it is a summary of all histories ; it requires them
all for materials, for the fact which it relates is the summary
ofall other facts. An immense variety, without doubt ; yetdo
not think that unity is destroyed thereby. There is unity in
the life of a people, in the life of the human race, just as
there is in that of an individual; but, as in fact all the cir.
cumstances of destiny and activity in an individual contribute
to form his character, which is one and the same, so the unity
and history of a people must have for its basis all the variety
of its entire existence.

It is, then, wholly of necessity, and driven by the very
nature of our subject, that we have gone over the political,
ecclesiastical, legislative, philosophical, and literary history
of Frankish Gaul, from the fifth to the tenth century: if we
have arrived at any precise and positive results, we owe them
to this method. You may have observed, especially, how
much we have been enlightened by placing civil and religious
society continually in juxta-position, both of which are incom-
prehensible if we leave them separate. Let us now endeavor
to understand clearly these results, which we have obtained, I
think, with some certainty ; let us endeavor to determine
the point of departure of Gaulish civilization in the fifth
century, and the point at which it had arrived at the end of
the tenth.

You are aware that the essential, fundamental elements of
modern civilization in general, and of French civilization in
particular, reduce themselves to three: the Roman world,
the Christian world, and the Germanic world 3 antiquity,
Christianity, and barbarism. Let us see what transformation
these three elements underwent between the fifth and tenth
centuries, what they became in this last period, and what
remained of them in the civilization of that period.

I. I commence with the Roman element. I wish to cast a
slight glance at what the Roman world has furnished to
France, under a social and an intellectual point of view ; and
we must discover what remained of it in the tenth century,
In society and in mind.

Under the first point of view—that is to say, the influence


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 193


of Roman on Gallo-Frankish society, from the fifth to the
tenth century, the result of our inquiries is, that the Roman
world, when it broke up, bequeathed to the future the wrecks
of three great facts—Ist, central sole power, empire, and
absolute royalty ; 2d, imperial administration, government
of provinces by the delegates of the central power; 3d, the
municipal system, the primitive mode of existence of Rome
and most of the countries which had successively formed the
Roman empire.

What are the changes which these three facts underwent
between the fifth and tenth centuries ?

1. With respect to the central power, sole and sovereign, it
perished, as you know, in the invasion; in vain some of the
first barbarous kings tried to restore it, and to exercise it to
their advantage ; they were baffled in the attempt ; imperial
despotism was too complex an instrument for their rude hands.
At the fall of the Merovingians, Charlemagne attempted to
revive it, and to use it; the attempt had a momentary
success ; central power re-appeared : but, after Charlemagne,
as after the first invasion, it broke asunder, and was lost in
the chaos. Nothing, surely, less resembled imperial power
than the royalty of Hugh Capet. Some remembrance of it,
nevertheless, lay in the minds of men: Empire had left behind
it profound traces. The names of emperor, imperial authority,
sovereign majesty, had still a certain virtue, and recalled a
certain type of government; these were now only words, yet
words still powerful, and sufficient to produce deeds if the
occasion offered. Such was the state in which, at about the
end of the tenth century, this first legacy of the Roman world
manifested itself.

2. The imperial administration underwent very nearly the
same vicissitudes ; the barbarous chiefs tried to use it, but
with no better success. This mode of governing the several
parts of a state was too complicated, too exact ; it required
the concurrence of too many agents, and intelligence of too
developed a kind; the administrative machine of the empire
was speedily deranged, if I may so speak, in the hands of its
new masters. Charlemagne attempted to give it regularity
and motion ; it was a necessary consequence of the restoration
of central power ; and, by an analogous consequence, together
with the central power of Charlemagne, perished also the
provincial administration, which he had, as well as he could,
reconstructed. After the complete dissolution of the new

17


194 HISTORY OF


empire, however, when the feudal system had prevailed,
and when the holders of fiefs had succeeded the ancient
delegates of the sovereign, there remained, in the thoughts
of the people and of the possessors of fiefs themselves, some
recollection of their origin. That origin, | have been care-
ful to point out to you, was of a double kind; the fiefs
originated on the one hand in benefices, or lands conceded,
whether by the sovereign or by other chiefs; on the other
hand, in offices or appointments of dukes, counts, viscounts,
centeniers, &c., that is, of officers, invested by the sovereign
with local administration. This second origin was not,
therefore, absolutely effaced from memory: it was vaguely
remembered that these lords—now sovereigns, or nearly
so—had formerly been delegates of a greater sovereign:
that they had been the representatives of a general and
superior power ; and that instead of being then proprietors of
the sovereignty on their own account, they were only magis.
trates or administrators in the name of another, and that the
portion of that sovereignty which they possessed might have
been usurped from this sole and remote monarch, who was
now lost sight of. This idea, which pervades the course of our
history, and which has been the favorite theory of juriscon-
sults, and other writers upon public laws, is clearly a wreck
of the ancient Roman administration—an echo which had
survived the ruin of that vast and learned hierarchy. Such
is all that we discern of it towards the end of the tenth cen-
tury ; but a potent germ of life lay buried under this remem-
brance.

3. The third fact bequeathed by the Roman to the modern
world is the municipal system. You know what the state of
towns was, at the end of the tenth century, into what depopu-
lation, decay, and distress they had fallen. Nevertheless, so
much as still remained of internal administration, especially
in southern Gaul, was Roman in its origin; here was still
some shadow of the curia, of consuls, duumvirs, and other
ancient municipal magistrates. The Roman law presided
over the acts of civil life, donations, contracts, &c. Municipal
magistrates, deprived of their political importance, were
become in a manner simple notaries who registered civil acts,
and preserved records of them. A new municipal system,
of a different principle and character, the system of the
commons of the middle age, was about to raise itself upon the
ruins of the Roman municipality ; but as yet it had scarcely


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 195


begun to dawn; and, in general, all that we can discern as
existing in the tenth century, of distinct administration in
towns, is Roman. Let us now see what remained of Greco-
Roman antiquity under an intellectual point of view, what
the mind of the tenth century still retained of it. I cannot
here enter into detail ; I do not mean to search, in the theolo-
gical tenets and popular opinions of that time, for those which
were allied to Roman philosophy and opinions; | merely
wish to characterize, in its most general features, the intel-
lectual heritage which ancient society has bequeathed to us,
and the condition of it at the end of ‘the tenth century. An
important fact, and far too little noticed, in my opinion, first
strikes me ; it is that the principle of liberty of thought, the
principle of all philosophy, reason being its own point of
departure and guide, is an idea essentially the daughter of
antiquity, an idea which modern society holds from Greece
and Rome. We have received it evidently neither from
Christianity nor from Germany ; for it was included in neither
of those elements of our civilization. It strongly prevailed
on the contrary in Greco-Roman civilization: there is its
true origin; there the most valuable legacy which antiquity
has left to the modern world: the legacy which has never
been absolutely set aside and without value ; for you have
seen the idea which is the mother of philosophy, namely, the
right of reason to act from itself, animating the works and life
of Scotus Erigena, and the principle of liberty of thought still
prevailing in the ninth century, in face of the principle of
authority. A second intellectual legacy of Roman civiliza-
tion to ours, is the body of beautiful works of antiquity. In
spite of the general ignorance, in spite of the corruption of
language, ancient literature has always been presented to the
mind as a worthy object of study, of imitation, and of admira-
tion, and as the type of the beautiful. The influence of this
idea was very great, you are aware, from the fourteenth to
the sixteenth century ; it has never been lost completely, and
in the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries, we have encountered
it at every step.

The pnilosophical and the classical spirit, the principle of
liberty of thought and the model of the beautiful, are the gifts
which the Roman has transmitted to the modern world, and
Which still survived to it in the intellectual order at the end
of the tenth century.

II. I pass to the Christian element; I desire to ascertain


196 HISTORY OF


what was its condition at this epoch, and what effects it had
produced.

You have followed the changes of Christian society from
the fifth to the tenth century ; in its birth you have seen the
origin and model of all the modes of organization, of all the
systems which subsequently appeared; therein you have
recognized the democratical, aristocratical, and monarchical
principles ; you have seen the lay community one while
associated with the ecclesiastical community, and at another,
excluded from all participation in power: all the combinations,
in short, of religious social organization offered themselves to
your view. During the period which we have considered, the
aristocratic system prevailed; episcopacy became soon the
ruling and almost the sole power. At the end of the tenth
century, the popedom raised itself above episcopacy, the
monarchical overcame the aristocratic principle. Under a
social point of view, therefore, the state of the church at that
time reduced itself to two facts :—the preponderance of the
church in the state, and the preponderance of papacy in the
church. Such are the results which at this epoch we may
regard as established.

Under an intellectual point of view, it is more difficult,
and still more important, to render to ourselves an account
of what the Christian element had at that time furnished to
modern civilization. Let me here ascend a step higher, and
compare for a moment what has passed in antiquity with that
which passed in Christian society.

Spiritual and temporal order, human thought and human
society, developed themselves amongst the ancients parallel
rather than together, not without an intimate correspondence,
but without exercising a prompt and direct influence one
upon the other. I will explain myself: without speaking of
the earlier times of philosophy, but taking it at the epoch of
its highest glory, Plato, Aristotle, and most of the philosophers,
whether of Grecian, or more latterly of Greco-Roman anti-
quity, had full liberty of thought, or nearly so. The State,
public policy interfered but little with their labors to cramp
them and give them a particular tendency. ‘They, on their
part, concerned themselves little about politics, nor cared
much to influence immediately and decisively the society in
which they lived: undoubtedly they exerted that indirect and
remote influence which belongs to all great human thought
cast into the midst of mankind; but the ancient philosophers


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 197


made few pretensions to the action or direct influence of
thought over exterior facts, of pure knowledge over society ;
they were not essentially reformers ; they aspired to govern
neither the private conduct of individuals, nor society in
general. The ruling character, in one word, of intellectual
development in antiquity, is liberty of thought and its prac-
tical disinterestedness ; it is a development essentially rational
and scientific. Upon the triumph of Christianity in the Roman
world, the character of intellectual development changed :
that which was philosophy became religion ; philosophy was
enfeebled more and more ; religion usurped the understand-
ing ; the form of thought was essentially religious. It aspired
from that time to much more power over human affairs ; the
end of thought, in religion, is essentially practical ; it aspires
to govern individuals, frequently even society. The spiritual
order, it is true, continued to be separate from the temporal
order ; the government of nations was not directly and com-
pletely committed to the clergy ; its lay society and ecclesiastic
society developed themselves independently. Nevertheless,
the spiritual penetrated much further into the temporal order
than it had done in ancient times ; and whereas liberty of
thought, and its purely scientific activity, had been, in Greece
and Rome, the ruling character of the intellectual development ;
its practical activity and pretension to power, was the dis.
tinguishing trait of intellectual development amongst Christian
nations.

From this there resulted another change, which was not of
less importance. In proportion as human thought, under the
religious form, aspired to more power over the conduct of
mankind, and the fate of states, it lost its liberty. Instead of
remaining open and free to competition, as amongst the
ancients, intellectual society was organized and governed ;
instead of philosophical schools, there was a church. It was
at the cost of its independence that thought purchased empire ;
it no longer developed itself in all directions, and according to
its simple impulse ; but it acted forcibly and immediately on
mankind and on societies.

This fact is important ; it has exercised a decisive influence
on the history of modern Europe, so decisive, as still to subsist
and to manifest itself around us in our own days. The re.
ligious form has ceased to hold exclusive dominion in human
thought; scientific and rational development has recommenced;
and yet what is come to pass? Have philosophers thought,

17*


198 HISTORY OF


have they wished to treat pure knowledge in the same manner
as those of antiquity have done? No: human reason aspires
in the present day to govern and reform societies after its own
conceptions, to rule the exterior world according to general
principles; that is to say, the thought, again become philo-
sophical, has preserved the pretensions it held under the re-
ligous form; with this immense difference, it is true, that it
would unite the liberty of thought with its power, and that
even whilst it tries to take possession of societies, to govern
them, and place the power in the hands of intelligence, it
does not wish intelligence to be organized nor subjected to
forms and a legal yoke. It is in the alliance of intellectual
liberty, as it shone in antiquity, with the intellectual power,
as it showed itself in Christian societies, that we find the great
and original character of modern civilization ; and it is, without
doubt, in the bosom of the revolution effected by Christianity
in the relations of the spiritual and temporal orders of thought
and of the exterior world, that this new revolution has taken
its origin and its first point of support. °

At the epoch to which we are now come, at the end of the
tenth century, the double fact which characterizes the first
revolution, I mean the abdication of the liberty of the human
intellect, and the increase of its social power, was already
consummated. From the tenth century, you observe spiritual
society pretending to the government of temporal society, that
is, announcing that thought has a right to govern the world ;
and, at the same time, you observe thought subjected to the
rules, the yoke of the church, and organized according to cer-
tain laws. These are the two most considerable results of the
vicissitudes which intellectual order has suffered from the fifth
to the tenth century, the two principal facts which the Chris-
tian element has thrown into modern civilization.

III. We come to the third primitive element of this civiliza-
tion, the Germanic world or barbarism. Let us see what
modern society has already received from it in the tenth
century.

When we considered the condition of the Germans prior to
the invasion, two facts especially, two forms of social organiza-
tion, struck us:

1. The tribe formed of all the proprietary chiefs of family,
governing itself by an assembly, where justice was rendered,
and where public business was transacted—in one word, by
the common deliberation of free men; a system very incom-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 199


plete and precarious, without doubt, in such a state of social
relations and manners, but of which, however, glimpses may
be caught of the principal rudiments.

_ 2. Side by side with the tribe, we have met with the war-
like band, a society where the individual lived in so free a
manner, that he could adopt it or reject it, according to his
taste, and where the social principle was not equality of
free men, and common deliberation, but the patronage of a
chief towards his companions, who served him, and lived at
his expense, that is to say, aristocratic and military subordi-
nation ; words which ill answer to the idea which must be
formed of a band of barbarians, but which describe the system
of social organization which was about to issue from it.

Such are the two principles, or rather the two germs of
principles, which Germany has furnished in the earliest times,
to modern society in its nascent state. The principle of com-
mon deliberation of free men no more existed in the Roman
world, unless in the bosoms of the municipal system; it was
the Germans who restored it to the political order. The
principle of aristocratic patronage, combined with a large
portion of liberty, was become equally foreign to Roman
society. Both the one and the other of these elements of our
social organization are of German origin.

From the fifth to the tenth century they underwent great
changes. At the end of this period, the assemblies, or govern-
ment, by the voice of common deliberation, had disappeared ;
in fact there remained scarcely any trace of the ancient mdls,
fields of Mars and May, or Germanic courts. The remem-
brance, however, of national assemblies, the right of free men
to join together, to deliberate and transact their business
together, resided in the minds of men as a primitive tradition
and a thing which might again come about. It was with the
ancient German assemblies as with imperial sovereignty :
neither the one nor the other any longer existed ; government
by the voice of free deliberation and absolute power had equally
fallen, yet without absolutely perishing. They were germs
buried under immense heaps of ruins, but which yet might
one day reappear and be fruitful. Such was, in fact, what
really happened.

With respect to the patronage of the chief towards his
companions, the acquisition of large domains and the territo-
rial life had much changed this relation of the ancient Ger-

We can no more find, in any degree worth mentioning,


200 HISTORY OF


the same liberty which used to reign in the wandering band.
Some had received benefices, and were settled in them ;
others had continued to live around their chief in his house
and at his table. The chief was become eminently powerful ;
there was introduced into this little society much more in-
equality and fixedness. Nevertheless, although the aristo-
cratic principle and the inequality which accompanies it, and
which constitutes even it, had assumed a great development,
they had not destroyed all the ancient relation between the
chief and his companions. The inequality did not draw
servility after it; and the society which resulted therefrom,
and with which we will occupy ourselves more in detail here-
after, the feudal society reposed, for those at least who com-
posed part of it, that is, the proprietors of fiefs, upon the
principles of right and liberty.

In the tenth century, and under the social point of view, the
Germanic element then had furnished to modern civilization
in its nascent state, on the one hand, the remembrance of
national assemblies, and of the right of free men to govern
themselves in common; on the other hand, certain ideas, cer-
tain sentiments of right and liberty implanted in the bosom
of an entirely aristocratic organization.

Under the moral point of view, although eminent writers
have strongly insisted upon what modern Europe holds from
the Germans, their assertions seem to me vague and too gene-
ral; they make no distinction of epoch or country; and I
think that, in western Europe, especially in France, the ener-
getic sentiment of individual independence is the most im-
portant, I would willingly say the only great moral legacy
which ancient Germany has transmitted to us.

There was, in the tenth century, a national German
literature, consisting of songs and popular traditions, which
hold a high place in the literary history of Germany, and
which have exerted a great influence on its manners. But the
part played by these traditions, and by all primitive German
literature, in the intellectual development of France, has been
very limited and fugitive; this is the reason why | have not
entered upon it with you, though this literature is positively
full of originality and interest.

Such was the state of the three great elements of modern
civilization in the tenth century ; such are the changes, social
and moral, which Roman antiquity, Christianity, and bar-
barism have experienced on our soil.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 201


From thence flow, if I mistake not, two general facts, two
great results, which it is necessary to exhibit.

The work of M. de Savigny on the History of Roman Law,
after the fall of the Empire, has changed the face of the
science ; he has proved that the Roman law had not perished ;
that, notwithstanding great modification, without doubt, it
was transmitted from the fifth to the fifteenth century, and
had always continued to form a considerable part of the legis-
lation of the west.

If I am not mistaken, the facts which I have laid before
your view, in this course, have generalized this result. It
follows, I think, evidently, that not only in municipal institu-
tions and civil laws, as M. de Savigny has proved, but in
political order and philosophy, in literature and all depart-
ments, in a word, of social and intellectual life, Roman
civilization was transmitted far beyond the date of the Empire ;
that we may everywhere discern a trace of it; that no abyss
separates the Roman from the modern world ; that the thread
is nowhere broken; that we may recognize everywhere the
transition of Roman society into our own; in a word, that the
part played by the ancients in modern civilization is greater and
more continuous than is commonly thought. A second result
equally arises out of our labors, and characterizes the period
which is the object of them. During all this period, from the
fifth to the tenth century, we have nowhere been able to
pause ; we have been unable to find, either in social or intel-
lectual order, any system, any fact, which became fixed, which
took a firm, general, and regular hold on society or mind.
The general fact with which we have been struck is a con-
tinual and universal fluctuation, a constant state of uncer-
tainty and of transformation. It was, then, from the fifth to
the tenth century, that the work of fermentation and amalga-
mation of the three elements of modern civilization, namely,
the Roman element, the Christian element, and the German
element, was in operation ; and it was only at the end of the
tenth century that the ferment ceased, and the amalgamation
being nearly accomplished, the development of the new order
and truly modern society commenced.

The history which we have just concluded, then, is the his-
tory of its very conception and creation. All things rise out
of the chaos, modern society among the rest. That which we
have studied now is the chaos, the cradle of France: what
we shall have to study hereafter is France herself. Dating


202 HISTORY OF


only from the end of the tenth century, the social being which
bears that name, if I may thus speak, has been formed and
exists ; we might attend it in its proper and exterior develop-
ment. This development will merit, for the first time, the
name of French civilization. Until now, we have spoken of
Gaulish-Roman, Frankish, Gallo-Roman, and Gallo-Frankish
civilization ; we have been obliged to combine foreign names
in order to characterize, with any justice, a society without
unity and certainty. When we again enter upon our labors,
it will be to speak of French civilization; we shall date
therefrom; the question will no longer be concerning Gauls,
Franks, and Romans, but of Frenchmen, of ourselves.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 203


ILLUSTRATIONS AND HISTORICAL TABLES.


On authorizing the publication of these lectures, I promised to add
to them a number of tables and documents intended to prove or to ex-
plain the ideas which I might have occasion to express. I have insert-
ed some of these tables in the lectures themselves. There are some
others for which I could not find a place there, and which seem to
me no less necessary. I give them here. It would have been both
easy and useful to multiply illustrations of this kind; but I have been
obliged to limit myself. The object of those which I have selected
is both to show in their developments facts which I have been merely
able to point out, and to place before the reader those events, the
knowledge of which I took for granted. They are seven in number :—


I, Table of the organization of the court, and of the central gov-
ernment of the Roman empire at the commencement of the
fifth century—that is to say, at the epoch which I took as the
starting point of the course.

II. Table of the hierarchy of ranks and titles in Roman society at
the same epoch.

III. Narrative of the embassy sent in 449 by Theodosius the Young-
er, emperor of the west, to Attila, established on the banks
of the Danube.

IV. Chronological table of the principal events of the political his-
tory of Gaul, from the fifth to the tenth century.

V. Chronological table of the principal events of the ecclesiasti-
cal history of Gaul, from the fifth to the tenth century.

VI. Chronological table of the principal events of the literary his-
tory of Gaul, from the fifth to the tenth century.

_ VII. Table of the councils and canonical legislation of Gaul, from
the fifth to the tenth century.


Unless Iam much deceived, there is no occasion for me to insist
upon the utility of these documents—it will speak for itself; and for
persons who weigh and study them attentively, the history of our
civilization, so obscure and so vague in its cradle, will appear, I think,
under more clear and precise forms. This is my aim and hope in
publishing them.

I.


Table of the Organization of the Court and of the Central Govern-
ment of the Roman Empire, at the commencement of the Fifth
Century.


It was under the reigns of Diocletian and of Constantine that the
court and the central government of the Roman emperors gained that


204 HISTORY OF


systematic and definitive organization, whose image the nofitia wnpe-
rit Romani has preserved tous. It was the same both in the empire
of the east and in that of the west, with the exception of some
unimportant differences occasioned by that of localities. For the basis
of this table I have adopted the empire of the east, the most com-
plete and the pest known of the two, taking care to point out here and
there facts which distinguish the empire of the west.


IMPERIAL COURT.
I.—Prepositus sacri cubiculi (grand chamberlain).


He had under his orders a large number of officers, divided into six
classes, schole, and all named palatini ; their duty in the palace was
called in palatio militare. The principal were :—

1.—Primicerius sacri cubiculi (first chamberlain).—He was at the
head of all those who served the emperor in his apartments, and ac-
companied him everywhere for this purpose; they were named cubi-
cularii (chamberlains or valets de chambre) ; they were divided into
parties of ten men, at the head of each of which was a decanus.

2.—Comes castrensis (count of the palace).—The chief of those
who served the emperor at table, and took care of the interior of the

alace ; this was a kind of steward or maitre-d’hotel. He had under
is orders :—

(1.) Primicerius mensorum, the chief of those who, when the
emperor travelled, went before to get everything prepared upon
his road, and in the places where he was to stop.

(2.) Primicerius cellariorum, chief of all those employed in
the kitchens and offices,

(3.) Primicerius pedagogiorum, the chief of the young pages,
brought up for service in the interior of the palace.

(4.) Primicerius lampadariorum, the chief of those who over-
looked the lighting of the palace. There was inthis class a num-
ber of sub-divisions and subaltern officers.

3.—Comes sacre vestis (count of the sacred wardrobe).—He was
charged with the imperial wardrobe, and commanded many officers.

4.—Chartularti cubiculi (secretaries of the chamber).—They were
generally three in number, and were the private secretaries of the
emperor ; and although occupied with public affairs, they were under
the direction of the prepositus sacri cubiculi, because their service
was personal.

5.—Decurionus III, silentiariorum.—The silentiarti were charged
with preventing all noise in the palace : the thirty principal were sub-
divided into three parties of ten, each commanded by a decurion.

6.—Comes domorum per Cappadociam.—This was the steward of
the property which the emperor of the east possessed in Cappadocia;
these patrimonial estates were very considerable ; the comes domorum
directed their administration and collected the revenues: he held
office as a magistrate.


II.—Comites domesticorum equitum peditumque (counts of
the cavalry and infantry of the palace).
These were the two commanders of the select bands of cavalry and
infantry who guarded the person of the emperor. These bands, who


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 205


were called protectores domestici, were drawn from the seven schools
of Armenian soldiers, called palatini, and destined for the military
service of the palace. The seven schools formed a body of 3500 men,
from among whom were taken the protectores domestici, who enjoyed
great privileges. The counts of the domestic infantry and cavalry also
had under their orders deputati, charged with executing their com-
mands in the provinces.

The empress also had her court, organized in nearly the same man-
ner as that of the emperor.


CENTRAL GOVERNMENT.


I.—Magister officiorum (master of the offices).


This was a sort of universal minister, whose functions were very
extensive; he administered justice to almost all the officers of the
palace ( palatini), received the appeals of private citizens, presented
senators to the princes, &c. His jurisdiction also extended over the
officers belonging to other departments, such as the mensores, the
lampadarti, and those who were in the department of the prepositus
sacri cubiculi. He had under his jurisdiction :—

1.—The seven schools of the milites palatini. (1.) Schola scutari-
orum prima; (2.) Schola scutariorum secunda ; (3.) Gentilium senio-
rum; (4.) Scutariorum sagittariorum; (5.) Armaturarum juniorum ;
(7.) Gentilium juniorum.

2.—The school of the agentes in rebus : these were the messengers
and spies of the princes in the provinces: before Constantine they
were called frumentarii.

3. The mensores and the lampadarii, of whom we have already
spoken; also, the admissionales, or the gentlemen ushers of the
palace, and the invitatores, who were charged with transmitting invi-
tations.

4.—Four scrinia or officers, where the affairs of the prince with his
subjects were immediately managed.

(1.) Serunium memoria, Here were kept registers of employ-
ments and grades; hence, for the most part, issued the nomina-
tions.

(2.) Scrinium epistolarum: here were received the deputations
and requests from cities, and hence were dispatched the answers
of the prince.

(3.) Scrinium libellorum ; hither were addressed the requests
and appeals of subjects.

(4.) Scrinium dispositionum: the functions of this last office
resembled those of the two preceding ones; it is omitted in the
notitia, but the laws make mention of it.

Each of these offices had its own chief, magister scrinii me-
morie, epistolarum, &c.; the last was called comes dispositio-
num ; there were numerous officers in it.

5.—The armorers of the empire. The master of the offices of the
east had fifteen under his direction: Damascus, Antioch, 2; Edessa,
Irenopolis, Cesarea in Cappadocia, Nicodemia, 2; Sardis, Adriano-
ple, 2; Thessalonica, Naissus, Ratiaria, Margus. The master of the
offices of the west had nineteen : Sirmium, Acincum, Cornutum, Lau-
riacum, Salona, Concordia, Verona, Mantua, Cremona, Pavia, Lucca,
Strasburg, Macon, Autun, Besancon, Reims, Tréves, 2; Amiens.


206 HISTORY OF


Il.— Questor (the questor).


He judged in concert with the pretorian prefect, and sometimes
alone, affairs referred to the prince: he composed the laws and edicts
which the prince was to publish ; he signed the rescripts; he had the
superintendence of the register (laterculum minus), in which were
enumerated the tribunes and the prefects of the camps and frontiers.
He was a kind of high chancellor. He sent his edicts to the scrinium
dispositionum, where they were kept, and copies distributed through-
out the empire. He had no offices attached to his post, but he had
twelve secretaries in the scrinium memoria, seven in the scrinium
epistolarum, and seven in the scrinium libellorum,


III.— Comes sacrarum largitionum (count of the sacred largesses).


This was the high treasurer of the empire ; he collected and admin-
istered all the public revenues; all the payments issued from his
office ;, Constantine put him in the place of the questors, the prafecti
@rari, &c.

His administration was divided into two offices, scrinia, at the head
of which was a primicerius, or magister scrinii (chief of the office).

1. Scrinium canonum.—This, it seems, was the office in which
was prepared the account of what each province, each town, &c., was
to send to the public chest, arce largitionum.

Se ie febulartorium These two offices kept an account

S|! Seetabian ids Ls et eek of the moneys received and expend-

; > (ed by the treasury.

4. Scrinium auree masse.—This office was occupied in keeping
account of the bullion which was sent to the treasury, and of the use
made of it in coining money, in the decoration of public monuments,
in crown jewels, &c.

5. Scrinium auri ad responsum.—They here regulated and fur-
nished the sums of money, whether intended to supply the expenses
of the officers whom the prince sent into the provinces, of the armies,
&c., or whether to be sent into the different parts of the empire, or
for tribute paid to allies, barbarians, &c.

6. Scrinium ab argento.—This was the office where were deposited
silver in ingots, the imperial plate, vases, &c.

7. Scrinium vestiarit sacri.—This was the office from whence issued
the funds for the clothing of troops, the monarch, the imperial family,
the people of his court, to whom he furnished clothing. ;

8. Serinium annularense vel miliarense.—According to the first
reading, this office would be intended to preserve the rings and jewels
of the emperor ; according to the second, which seems to me the most
probable, its intention was to strike and distribute the small silver
money, called miliarensium, of which the value was the tenth part
of an aureus.

9. Scrinium a& pecuniis.—Pancirollus thinks that it was this office
which directed the coining of money throughout the empire.

10. Scrinium exceptorum.—The clerks of this office wrote out the
account of the cases which had been judged by the count of the sacred
largesses.

The attributes of these various offices were very uncertain; their
names are obscure, and we can only conjecture their object. It seems


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 207


that they afterwards added an eleventh office, called scrinium mitten-
dariorum, and composed of officers who were sent into the provinces
to get the payment of taxes hastened and completed.

Besides these offices attached to his service, the count of the lar-
gesses had a great number of subordinates in the provinces, charged
with directing the affairs of his department. The principal were :—

1. Six comites largitionum, in the east, in Egypt, in Asia Minor, in
Pontus, in Thrace, and Illyria; there were five of these in the west.
They were charged with paying the salaries of the generals, soldiers,
and other officers, and to overlook the collection of taxes.

2. Four comites commerciorum, charged with buying the stuffs and
jewels necessary for the imperial household, with overlooking the
operations of the merchants, and watching that the duties levied upon
the commodities should be correctly paid. There was but one in the
west.

3. Prefecti thesaurorum ; they received and kept, in each province,
the money proceeding from taxes, until it was sent to the count of the
sacred largesses.

4. Comes metallorum, charged with deducting, from the produce of
the mines of gold, silver, or other metals, the portion which went to
the prince.

5. Comes vel rationalis Egypti, charged with collecting the pro-
perty which fell to the prince in that province, whether by escheat,
or any other cause; he also superintended the great commerce in In-
dian merchandise, which passed through Egypt; there were eleven
rationales of this kind in the west.

6. Magistri linee vel tintee vestis ; they directed all the laborers
who worked in flax for the wardrobe or furniture of the emperor.
Their office was filled in the west by a comes vestiarii.

7. Private magistri ; they directed the workmen in silk, linen,
&c , for the royal household.

8. Procuratores gyneciorum ; charged with the superintending of
spun and wove fabrics.

9. Procuratores baphiorum ; inspectors of the dying of stuffs in
purple, &c. There were nine in the west.

10. Procuratores monetarum ; mint inspectors. There were six of
them in the west.

11. Prepositi bastagarum, charged with the superintending the
transport of goods intended for the public service, or that of the em-
peror, corn, commodities, merchandise, silver, &c.

12. Procuratores linificiorum, charged with procuring the flax ne-
Cessary for the imperial fabrics. There were two in the west, at
Vienna and at Ravenna.


IV. Comes rerum privatarum (the crown treasurer).


The public treasury was called @rarium ; the private treasure of
the emperor was called fiscus Although he equally disposed of both
one and the other, yet there was a distinction, and they were admin-
istered separately. '

The comes sacrarum largitionum had the administration of the
@rarium ; and the comes rerum privatarum had that of the fiscus,
whose revenues were the property which devolved upon the emperor


208 HISTORY OF


in any manner whatsoever, the produce of certain taxes, &c. He had
under his orders :

1, A department directed by the primicerius officii, and divided into
four offices.

(1.) Serinium beneficiorum.—Here were managed all affairs
relative to gifts of property, real or personal, to the concession of
privileges, &c., which the emperor made to such or such of his
subjects.

(2.) Serinium canonum.—This office received the rents of the
farms on the imperial property, and kept the accounts of them.
The rent was paid in money or in kind.

(3.) Scrinium securitatum.—In this office were depesited the
receipts of those who had received the money of the fisc ; and the
duplicates of those which had been given to people who had paid
anything to the fisc.

(4.) Scrinium largitionum privatarum.—Here.were kept the
accounts of money given by the emperor to individuals, and the
salaries which he paid to the people attached to his personal ser-
vice.

2. Rationales vel procuratores rerum privatarum.—-These were offi-
cers charged with collecting the revenues of the fisc, in the provinces.
They were often judges in cases where the fisc was concerned.

3. Prepositi bastagarum rei private, inspectors of transports made
for the service of the prince. There were two of these in the west,

4. Prepositi stabulorum, gregum et armentorum, inspectors of the
studs and herds of the emperor throughout the empire. There was
also a comes stabuli, answering to our master of the horse.

5. Procuratores saltuum, inspector of the woods and pasturages
where the herds of the emperor were taken to graze.

There were, doubtless, many other petty officers, mention of whom
has not come down to us.


V. Primicerius notariorum (first secretary of state).


This was a magistrate charged with keeping the register in which
were inscribed all the public functionaries, their duties, salaries, war-
rants of nomination, &c. This register was called laterculum majus.
The people nominated to the places, paid certain fees to this primice-
rius notariorum, who thus kept the list of all the dignities which we
have just enumerated. There were three classes of notarit.

In each province there was a provincial chest, in all one hundred
and eighteen chests. The receiver of taxes transmitted the money to
these chests, under the superintendence of the prefecti thesaurorum.
These latter gave to the comites largitionum the sums necessary for the
expenses of the province, the salary of the officers, &c. They trans-
mitted the balance to the governor of the province, who sent it to the
chest of the sacred bounty. The carriages intended to transport it,
were furnished by men kept on purpose, and formed part of the public

ost (cursus publicus), which the government alone, or those whom
it authorized, had to make use of.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 209


If.


Table of the Hierarchy of Ranks and Titles in the Roman Empire at
the commencement of the Fifth Century.


Rank and titles multiplied in the Roman empire, at the same epoch
in which the court and central government received their definitive
form, as given in the preceding table. These ranks and titles con-
ferred important privileges upon the possessors, with reference to the
other citizens, but in no degree rendered them independent of power.
They were mere personal distinctions attached to certain offices, and
which even the holders of these offices did not enjoy, until they had
been authorized to assume them by letters patent from the prince.
There were six principal ranks or titles, the rights of precedence
among which were minutely regulated.


I. Wobilissimi.


This was the highest of the titles; it came close to the throne, and
conferred, to a certain extent, the dignity of Cesar. It was bestowed
upon the members and allies of the imperial family.


Il. Ilustres.


The persons decorated with this title were twenty-seven in number
—viz.,

1, The pretorian prefect of the East.

2. The pretorian prefect of Illyria.

3. The pretorian prefect of Italy.

4, The pretorian prefect of Gaul.

5. The prefect of Constantinople.

6. The prefect of Rome.

7—11. The five generals, commanders of the army in the East.

12. The general of the horse in the West.

13. The general of the infantry in the West.

14, 15. The two grand chamberlains of the East and West.

16, 17. The two masters of the offices in the East and West.

18, 19. The two questors of the palace in the East and West.

20, 21. The two counts of the sacred largesses in the East and West.

22, 23. The two counts of the privy purse in the East and West.

24, 25. The two counts commanding the body-guard, cavalry, in the
East and West.

26, 27. The two counts commanding the body-guard, infantry, in
the East and West.

The consuls were also id/ustres. The date of the introduction of
this title is not known. Augustus used to select every month, at first
fifteen, and afterwards twenty, members of the senate, to form his
privy council; their decisions were held as having emanated from the
entire body of the senate; they were called patricii, while the other
senators were only entitled clarissimi. They, in concurrence with
the sovereign, discussed and directed public affairs. Constantine
formed of them his consistorium principes (council of state), and en-
titled the members comites consistoriani. ‘They were, with the con-
suls, the first honored with the title of iJ/ustres, which was afterwards


18*


210 - HISTORY OF


extended, probably also under Constantine, to the magistrates above
mentioned. The dlustres were addressed thus,—vestra tua, or tua,
magnificentia, celsitudo, sublimitas, magnitudo, eminentia, excellen-
tia, &c. Those who neglected to observe the etiquette in this re-
spect, had to pay a fine of three pounds in gold.

The illustres could only be tried for any offence by the prince in
person, or his immediate delegates; they were entitled to have their
sentences read by the registrar ; they were prohibited from making a
traffic of their power and influence, and from marrying women of an
inferior rank ; this latter prohibition, however, was recalled at a later
period; neither they nor their families could be put to the torture, nor
be subjected to any of the capital punishments inflicted on plebeians ;
they were exempted from being summoned to any court as witnesses,
&c.

Il. Spectabiles.


Of these there were sixty-two.

1, 2. The first two chamberlains in the East and West. (Primicerii
sacri cubiculi.)

3, 4. The two counts of the palace, in the East and West. (Comites
castrenses.)

5, 6, The two chief secretaries of the emperor, in the East and West.
(Primicerii notariorum.)

7—13. The seven heads of the principal departments of the central
government in the East and West. (Magistri scriniorum.)

14—16. The three proconsuls (governors of dioceses or provinces)
of Asia, Achaia, and Africa.

17. The count of the East.

18. The prefect of Egypt. (Prefectus Augustalis.)

19—29, Eleven vicars, or governors of dioceses; five in the empire
of the East, and six in the empire of the West.

30—37. Eight counts, or generals of armies; two in the East, and
six in the West.

38—62. Twenty-five dukes, or generals of armies; thirteen in the
East, and twelve in the West.

The title of spectabiles was also given to the senators, probably un-
der Constantine. It seems to have had no other origin than the mania
for the classification of ranks. It was very uncertain in its application ;
we find it given to men who are called elsewhere clarissimi, or per-
fectissimi, or even egregii ; thus the duces, the silentiarii (ushers in
law courts), the notarit (secretaries), are designated sometimes by the
one, sometimes by the other of these appellations.


IV. Clarissimi.


We find this title already, under Tiberius, in possession of the sena-
tors and senatorial families. After a certain number of senators had
become illustres, the rest continued to assume the title of clarissim#,
and by degrees it became extended to all the inferior officers employed
in the provinces, At the commencement of the fifth century there
were, it would appear, 115 persons addressed by this title—viz ,

Thirty-seven consular personages, governors of provinces; fifteen
in the East, and twenty-two in the West.

Five correctores, governors of provinces ; two in the East, and three
in the West.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 211


Seventy-three presides, governors of provinces; forty-two in the
East, and three in the West.


V. Perfectissimi.


This title was invented by Constantine; we find it, indeed, made
use of in the law of Diocletian, but it was Constantine who introduced
it into his classification of ranks, and divided the perfectissimi into
three grades. The title was given,

To the presides, or governors, of Arabia, Isauria, and Dalmatia.

To the rationales, collectors of the public revenues in the provinces.

To the magistri scriniorum, heads of the offices of the court of the
sacred largesses. __

To the counts of the sacred largesses, or imperial collectors and pay-
masters in the provinces.

And to many other persons in the public service.


VI. Egregit.


This last title was very common; it appertained to all the imperial
secretaries, to all the persons employed in the offices of the various
governors of the provinces, to priests, to the crown lawyers, and to a
whole host of other persons.


III.


Narrative of the Embassy sent in 449 to Attila, by Theodosius the
Younger, Emperor of the East.


INTRODUCTION.


There is scarcely any feature of the history of this period which it
were more interesting to be thoroughly acquainted with, than the re-
lations of the Roman emperors with the barbarians, the Germans,
Huns, Slavonians, &c., who pressed upon their frontiers. A know-
ledge of this can alone enable us to form anything like a precise and
accurate idea of the comparative state of Roman and of barbarian civi-
lization. Unfortunately, the materials of this knowledge are very
deficient; we have upon the subject little more than mere sentences,
paragraphs, scattered throughout the Latin chroniclers, the confused
traditions of the German tribes, or some old poems which, in their
present form, are evidently greatly posterior to the fourth and fifth
century. The narrative of the embassy sent in 449 by Theodosius the
Younger to Attila, at that time master of the whole of Germany, and
himself established on the Danube, is, unquestionably, the fullest and
most instructive of the monuments remaining to us of this branch of
history; the only one, in fact, which shows us the interior of the
states, and the life of a barbarian chief, and enables us to examine
closely, and, as it were, in person, his relations with the Romans: the
narrative itself is of the highest authenticity ; it formed part of the
history of the war against Attila, in seven books, written by the sophist
Priscus, of Panium in Thrace, a member of the embassy ; it has come
down to us among the Excerpta legationum, inserted in the first vo-


212 HISTORY OF


lume of the Collection of Byzantine historians, and which formed the
53d book of a great historical collection made by one Theodosius, by
order of Constantine VI. Porphyrogenitus (911-959). I here pre-
sent you with a literal translation of this interesting production. The
narrative, it is true, relates to the empire of the east, not to that of
the west, and to Hun barbarians, not to German barbarians: but the
relative situation of the two empires and of the two classes of barba-
rians at this period was very nearly the same; the social state and
manners of the Huns, notwithstanding the diversity of origin and of
language, very closely resembled, in general outline, at all events,
those of the Germans. We may, therefore, in the absence of docu-
ments specially relating to the Germans or to the west, regard the
narrative before us, as a tolerably faithful image of the relations of the
expiring empire with its future conquerors.


448—449,


Embassy of Attila to Theodosius. Plot of Chrysaphus the Eunuch to
take away the life of Attila by means of Edeco and Vigilius.
Embassy of Theodosius to Attila. Details as to the manners of
the Huns; their mode of life, &c.


* The Scythian Edeco, who had performed great military exploits,
again came with Orestes, in quality of envoy; the latter, a Roman by
birth, lived in Pxonia, a country situate on the Savus, and which, in
virtue of the treaty with tius, general of the western Romans, was
now subject to the barbarian.

This Edeco, on being admitted into the palace, presented to the em-
peror letters from Attila, in which the barbarian complained that the
deserters from his camp had not been brought back to him, and threat-
ened to resume hostilities unless they were forthwith restored ; and,
moreover, unless the Romans at once abstained from cultivating for
themselves the territory which the fortune of war had added to his
dominions, Now this territory extended along the Danube from Pzxo-
nia to Thrace; its breadth was fifteen days’ march. Moreover, the
barbarian required that the great market should no longer be held, as
heretofore, on the banks of the Danube, but at Naissus, which town,
taken and sacked by him, and distant from the Danube five days’ rapid
march, was situate, he said, at the limit of the Scythian and Roman
states. Finally, he ordered that ambassadors should be sent to him,
men not of common birth and dignity, but consular personages, to re-
ceive whom, he added, he would come as far as Sardica.

These letters having been read, Edeco quitted the presence in com-
pany with Vigilius, who had acted as interpreter of the words of
Attila; and after having visited the other apartments, repaired to that
of Chrysaphus, servant of the emperor, and in great favor and authority
with him.

The barbarian had greatly admired the magnificence of the imperial
abode. Vigilius, who still accompanied him as interpreter, repeated
to Chrysaphus his expressions of praise of the imperial palace, and his
feeling that the Romans must be very happy by reason of their vast
wealth. Chrysaphus hereupon told Edeco that he might himself have
a similar abode, splendidly decorated, with gilded ceilings, and be
placed in possession of every other advantage he might desire, if he


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 213


would quit Scythia to reside at Rome. Edeco replied that it was not
permissible to the servant of a foreign prince to take this step without
his master’s sanction. The eunuch asked him whether had easy ac-
cess to Attila, and what power he was invested with in his own coun-
try. Edeco replied, that he and Attila were upon terms of familiar
intercourse, and that he was one of the guards who took it in turn to
keep watch over that prince in his abode. The eunuch then said, that
if Edeco would do a certain service for him, he would confer upon him
very important advantages ; but that, as the affair required delibera-
tion, he would communicate it to him after he had taken supper, if he
would then return to his apartment without Orestes and his other fel-
low ambassadors. The barbarian promised to do so; and, accordingly,
after he had supped, again presented himself to Chrysaphus.

After they had, by means of the interpreter Vigilius, exchanged
mutual oaths, the eunuch, not to propose anything to the detriment of
Edeco, but solely what should be to his great advantage, the latter not
to reveal what should be proposed to him, even though he should not
execute it, the eunuch told Edeco that if on his return to Scythia he
would kill Attila, he should pass the rest of his life in affluence and
luxury Edeco consented to the proposition, and said that he should
want some money to effect the business, about fifty pounds in gold, to
divide among the soldiers under his orders, and in other ways to facili-
tate his proceedings. The eunuch offered to give him the amount he
named at once; but the barbarian said that, in the first place, it would
be advisable to send him back, accompanied by Vigilius, to give Attila
the answer that should be determined upon respecting the deserters ;
that then he and Vigilius would consult further upon the best mode
of executing the design, and that this being settled, Vigilius should
come for the money; this, he said, would be better than for him to
take the gold with him, seeing that, immediately upon his return, in
the first instance, Attila would assuredly interrogate him and his fel-
lows as to whether they had received any presents, and as to how much
money the Romans had given them, and that in such case, were he to
take the miney at once, it would be impossible for him to keep the
fact a secret, by reason of his companions. The eunuch admitted the
soundness of the barbarian’s view of the matter, and acted upon it.

After that Edeco had taken his leave, Chrysaphus repaired to the
emperor’s privy council, who immediately sent for Martial, the minis-
ter of the offices, and communicated to him the agreement entered
into with the barbarian; for it was the very nature of his post that he
should be made acquainted with the matter, he being on all occasions
a confidential adviser of the emperor, and having under his orders all
the couriers and interpreters, and all the troops entrusted with the
guard of the palace. ‘The emperor and Martial having considered the
whole affair, it was determined to send to Attila not only Vigilius, but
Maximin also, as ambassador. Vigilius, whose ostensible office was
that of interpreter, was to fulfil the directions of Edeco ; while Maxi-
min, who knew nothing of the real affair in hand, was to deliver the
emperor’s letter to Attila.

The emperor’s letter was to the effect, that he had sent Vigilius as
interpreter, and had selected Maximin as his ambassador, who was
superior to Vigilius in rank, being of illustrious birth, and employed
about his own person in many affairs; that it was not fitting that
Attila, violating treaties, should invade the Roman territory 5 that he


214 HISTORY OF


had already sent back to him a great many deserters, and now forwarded
— more, being all that remained of those who had come over
to him.

Besides these things which were set forth in the letter, Maximin
was ordered to ask Attila, by word of mouth, not to request men of
higher rank to be sent to him as ambassadors ; adding, that the prede-
cessors of the emperor had been accustomed to send to those who
heretofore ruled in Scythia, merely one of their soldiers who had be-
come a prisoner of Rome, or any other private messenger who was
capable of repeating that which he was told to say. That with refer-
ence to the other matters which still kept up dissension between them,
he would suggest that Attila should send him Onegeses as an envoy ;
that it was impossible Attila could properly receive a consular person-
age in a devastated place like Sardica.

Maximin having, at the earnest request of the emperor, undertaken
the proposed embassy, asked me to accompany him, and we departed
with the barbarians, and proceeded to Sardica, which is thirteen days’
rapid march from Constantinople. On our arrival, we invited Edeco
and some other principal barbarians to dine with us. Several oxen
and sheep furnished by the inhabitants of the place were slaughtered
and prepared in various ways, and everything being ready, we sat
down to our repast. During the banquet the barbarians exalted Attila
to the skies, and we the emperor. Vigilius imprudently went the
length of saying that it was not fitting to compare a man with a god ;
that the emperor was a god, and Attila only a man. The Huns took
this in very ill part, and by degrees became inflamed with the fiercest
anger. We endeavored to turn the conversation, and to appease them
by soft words, which we at length succeeded in doing.

On rising from table, Maximin, desirous of conciliating by presents
Edeco and Orestes, gave them silk garments and precious stones of.
India. Orestes, Edeco having withdrawn, said to Maximin that he
was the wise and prudent man who took care not to do as so many
others did, and who avoided anything that might be offensive to kings.
We found out afterwards that some of our people, neglecting Orestes,
had invited Edeco to supper, and loaded him with presents. At the
time, ignorant of this circumstance, and not understanding what
Orestes meant, we asked him how and in what he had been treated
displeasingly ; but he gave us no answer, and quitted us.

Next day, on continuing our journey, we related to Vigilius what
Orestes had said. He observed that the latter had no right to complain
of not obtaining the same honors with Edeco; that he was but a ser-
vant, a common secretary of Attila, whilst Edeco, a Hun by birth, and
famous for his military exploits, far surpassed him in dignity. He
then addressed Edeco in the native language of the latter, and after-
wards told us, whether it was true or false [ know not, that he had
repeated to Edeco what we had mentioned. Edeco became so angry
that we had great difficulty in tranquillizing him.

On arriving at the town of Naissus, which had been taken and de-
stroyed by the enemy, we found no inhabitants there except a few
invalids, who had taken refuge in the ruins of the temples. Proceed-
ing thence into the desert plains at some distance from the river, the
banks of which were covered with the bones of those who had been
killed during the war, we arrived at the abode of Agintheus, chief of
the soldiers of Illyria, who dwelt not far from Naissus. We had with


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 215


us orders from the emperor for him to deliver up to us five deserters,
who were to complete the number of seventeen, mentioned in the
letter to Attila. We went to Agintheus and applied for them; and
after he had addressed some words of consolation to them, he made
them depart with us.

It was scarcely yet day when we crossed the mountains of Naissus
towards the Danube. We arrived, after many turnings and windings,
in a certain town which was still dark. We thought that our road
should turn towards the west ; but as soon as it was day, the rising sun
presented itself before our eyes. Ignorant of the position of this place,
we exclaimed, as if the sun, which we saw in front of us, was follow-
ing another than its accustomed course, and thus indicated commotion
in the regular course of things; but it was because of the inequalities
of places that this part of the route turned towards the east.

From this place, by a steep and difficult road, we descended into the
swampy plains. There the barbarian boatmen received us in canoes,
made of a single piece, which they construct from the trunks of trees
cut and scooped out, and they passed us over the river.' It was not
for our passage that these canoes had been prepared, but for that of a
multitude of barbarians whom we met upon the road, for Attila seemed
marching to the invasion of the frontiers of the empire as to a hunting
party. Such were the preparations for war against the Romans, and
the deserters not yet being given up, merely served as a pretext for
commencing it.

After having passed the Danube, and having proceeded with the
barbarians the distance of fifteen stadia, they made us stop in a plain,
to wait while Edeco went to announce our arrival to Attila.27 The
barbarians who were to be our guides still remained with us. Towards
night, while we were at supper, we heard the sound of approaching
horses: two Scythian warriors soon appeared, who ordered us to repair
to Attila. We invited them first to partake of our supper; they de-
scended from their horses, supped with us, and the next day marched
before us to show us the road. About the eighth hour of the day we
arrived at the tent of Attila. There was also a large number of others.
As we wished to plant ours on a certain hill, the barbarians hastened
to prevent us, because those of Attila were placed in a valley on the
side. We left them to decide at their will where our tents were to be
pitched.

There soon arrived Edeco, Scotta, Orestes, and some other principal


1 They probably passed the Danube near the small town of Aqua,
whose environs, situated between a chain of mountains and the river,
must have been marshy; perhaps it was at the confluence of the Mar-
cus with the Danube.

2 This plain must be in the Bannet of Temeswar ; the tents of
Attila were, therefore, probably pitched between the Themes and the
Danube.

8 Reckoning an hour’s march at a league, their tents would be about
nine leagues from the Danube. The great number of boats already
prepared upon the Danube for the passage of troops, and the multitude
of barbarians whom the ambassadors had met, induce me to believe
that they were not, in fact, more distant from it.


216 HISTORY OF


Scythians, who demanded with what object we had undertaken this
embassy. We mutually looked at each other, astonished at so ridicu-
lous a question. They still insisted, and assembled in a crowd and
tumult to force an answer from us. We answered that the emperor
had commanded us to show our commission to Attila alone, and to none
others. Scotta, offended at these words, said that for what he did he
had received the order of his chief. “ Greeks,” cried he, ‘‘ we well
know your craft and your perfidy in affairs.” We protested that the
obligation had never been imposed upon ambassadors to display the
object of their mission before being admitted into the presence of
those to whom they were sent.

We added, that the Scythians must needs know it, since they had
often sent deputies to the emperor, and that we ought in all respects
to enjoy the same rights; that, otherwise, the privileges of ambassa-
dors would be violated. They immediately went to seek Attila, and,
returning soon after, but without Edeco, they openly told us all that
our orders contained, and enjoined us to depart immediately, if we had
nothing further to treat of with them.

These words threw us into great anxiety ; we could not conceive
how the projects of the emperor, which the gods themselves could not
penetrate, had been discovered and revealed; but we thought it best
not to show any of our orders until they had allowed us to see Attila.
We answered ; “‘ whatever may be the aim of our mission, whether
we may have come to treat of what you have just said, or of any other
matter, it concerns only your chief, and we are resolved to speak with
none but him.” They then renewed their order for us to depart
immediately.

As we were making our preparations for departure, Vigilius re-
proached us for the answer which we had just made to the Scythians:
“¢ Tt would have been much better to have lied,” said he, ‘* than to
return without having done anything. If I had spoken with Attila, I
could easily have deterred him from making war against the Romans ;
I have formerly rendered him many services, and I was very useful
to him at the time of the embassy of Anatolius. Edeco is of the same
opinion as myself.” Whether he spoke true or false, his only object
was to profit by the embassy, to find an occasion to make Attila fall
into the snare prepared for him, and to carry back the gold which
Edeco had said he required to divide among certain warriors. But
Vigilius was ignorant that he was betrayed: “Edeco, in fact, whether
he feared that Orestes would report to Attila what had been said at
the supper at Sardica, or accuse him of having secret interviews with
the emperor and Chrysaphus, had revealed to Attila the conspiracy
against his life, and informed him of the quantity of gold which was
to be provided for this design, as well as of all the subjects concerning
which we were to treat in our embassy.

Forced, therefore, to return, despite the approach of night, we were
getting ready our horses, when the barbarians came to tell me that
Attila ordered we should remain, by reason of the night, which op-
posed our departure. Men immediately came leading an ox to us, and
brought us fish of the Danube,! which Attila sent us. After having


? The carp of the Danube were celebrated at this epoch, and formed


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 217


supped, we went to sleep. When day appeared, we hoped that Attila
would be softened, and would make us some favorable answer; but
the same barbarians came on his part to repeat the order for us to go,
if we had no other business to speak of except that with which he was
already acquainted. We answered that we had not, and we prepared
to retreat, although Vigilius did all he could to get us to say that we
had to speak with Attila of things which would much interest him.

As I saw that Maximin was afflicted, I took with me Rusticus, who
understood the language of the barbarians: he had accompanied us
into Scythia, not because of the embassy, but for some private business
which he had with Constantius, an Italian by origin, whom Aetius, the
general of the western Romans, had sent to Attila as a secretary. I
sought Scotta (Onegeses being absent), and told him, through the
medium of Rusticus, that he should receive rich presents from Maxi-
min, if he would procure a safe interview with Attila. I added that
the ambassador had to speak of things very advantageous, not only to
the Romans, but to the Huns; that this embassy would be very profit-
able to Onegeses himself, for the emperor requested Attila to send him
to his court, to terminate the differences of the two nations, and that
he would return loaded with the most magnificent presents. I ob-
served to him, that since Onegeses was absent, he could not do less
than his brother would have done in so important an affair. “TI
know,” said I, “ that Attila also places great confidence in you ; but
we cannot reasonably believe all one has heard on this point, and it is
for you to prove to us that Attila really bestows such favor upon you.”
«<Rest content,” said the barbarian immediately, “‘ whether in speak-
ing or acting, I have as much credit with Attila as my brother,” and,
mounting his horse, he departed for the camp of Attila.

I returned to Maximin, whom I found with Vigilius, very much
troubled and uncertain as to the course he ought to take ; I recounted
to him the conversation I had just had with Scotta, and what answer
he had given me; I then got him to prepare presents to make to this
Hun, and to think what he should say to Attila. They immediately
arose (for I had found them lying on the turf), thanked me for the
trouble I had taken, and recalled those of their people who had already
commenced their journey; they then discussed between them what
Maximin should say to Attila, and how they should give him the pre-
sents which he brought for him on the part of the emperor.

While we were occupied with these things, Attila sent for us by
Scotta; we therefore set forward toward his tent, which we found sur-
rounded by a multitude of barbarians, who formed a guard all round it.

When we were allowed to enter, and had been introduced, we saw
Attila seated on a wooden chair: we remained at some distance from
the throne ; Maximin advanced, saluted the barbarian, and giving the
letter of the emperor, said that the emperor wished him and all his
people health and prosperity. ‘‘ May that happen to the Romans
which they desire for me!” answered the barbarian ; and immediately


part of the luxury of the tables of the barbarians. Cassiodorus says:
Privati est habere quod locus continet ; in principali convivio hoc
decet exquiri quod visum debeat admirari. Destinet carpam Danu-
bius, a Rheno veniat ancorago. (Vari., 1. xil., ep. 4.)


218 HISTORY OF


turning towards Vigilius, he called him an impudent animal, asked
him how he dared to present himself before him, when he must know
what had been settled with reference to peace at the time when he
accompanied the embassy of Anatolius, and added, that no other am-
bassader ought to have approached him until all the deserters had been
sent back. Vigilius attempted to reply that they had all been given
up, and that there no longer remained one among the Romans; but
Attila, becoming more and more heated, loaded him with reproaches
and abuse, and raising his voice in fury, told him, that but for his re-
spect for the character of ambassador which restrained his rage, he
would have crucified him, and abandoned him to the vultures, to
punish him for his audacity and the insolence of his language. He
added, there were still many deserters among the Romans; and having
a list brought on which their names were written, he ordered his
secretaries to read it aloud.

After this reading had made known all who were still wanting,
Attila required that Vigilius should immediately set out with Esla to
carry an order to the Romans to send him all the Scythian deserters
who were still in their power, and who had gone over to them since
the time when Carpilion, son of Aetius, general of the western Ro-
mans, had remained as hostage in his court. ‘I will not allow my
slaves to bear arms against me,” said he ; “they shall not be any help
to those who pretend to entrust to them the guard of lands which I
have conquered. Where, throughout the whole Roman empire, is the
city or fortress which can remain whole and erect, when I have
decided that it shall be destroyed? After I have proclaimed my will
concerning the deserters, let the envoys immediately return to me to
announce whether their masters choose to return them, or whether
they prefer war.”

He had begun by ordering Maximin to await the answer which he
should make to the letter of the emperor, but he demanded the pre-
sents forthwith. After having given them to him, we retired into our
tent, where we conversed in our native tongue upon all that had just
been said. As Vigilius was astonished at the abuse with which Attila
had loaded him, he who had experienced so much benevolence and
kindness from him in his first embassy, I told him I was very
much afraid that some of the barbarians who had supped with us at
Sardica had irritated Attila by telling him that Vigilius had called the
emperor a god and Attila a man. This also appeared probable to
Maximin, who was ignorant of the conspiracy formed against the
king of the Huns: but Vigilius was in very great anxiety, and could
not divine the cause of the abuse and rage of Attila; it was impossi-
ble to believe, as he afterwards said to us, that the conversation at the
supper at Sardica had been reported to him, or that the conspiracy had
been discovered. The fear which had overcome all hearts was such,
that, with the exception of Edeco, none who surrounded Attila dare
address a word to him; and Vigilius thought that Edeco would only
be the more careful to keep everything a profound secret, both on
account of the oath which he had taken, and by reason of the gravity
of the affair. He would fear, in fact, that the crime of having been
prcseat at clandestine councils directed against Attila, would cause

im to be treated as guilty, and very severely punished. :

While we were a prey to this uneasiness, Edeco came in; he took

Vigilius aside (he indeed feigned a wish to execute seriously and sin-


}
|
|


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 219


cerely the project which they had formed) ; he told him to bring the
gold which he was to distribute among those whom he made use of in
striking the blow, and then he left us. Curiosity caused us to ask
Vigilius what Edeco had just said to him; but, deceived himself, he
persisted in deceiving us, and concealing the true subject of their con-
versation, he pretended that Edeco had reported to ‘him that it was
because of the deserters that Attila was so enraged against him; the
king of the Huns required, he added, either that they should be given
up to him, or that they should send him ambassadors, drawn from
among the richest and most powerful men of the empire.

Our conversation was interrupted by people who came, on the part
of Attila, to forbid both us and Vigilius to buy any Roman captive, or
barbarian slave, or anything whatever, except the necessaries of life,
until the differences between the Huns and the Romans were termi-
nated. This prohibition was not without intention : he wished to detect
Vigilius in the fact, by leaving him no pretext upon which he could
excuse himself for having brought a considerable number of money. He
also ordered us to wait for Onegeses, to receive from him the answer
to our embassy, and that we ourselves should give him the presents
sent by the emperor, and what we wished to have. Onegeses had, in
fact, been sent to the Acatzires, with Attila’s eldest son. After this
order had been given to us, he made Vigilius and Esla set out for
Constantinople, under the pretext of again demanding the deserters,
but, in fact, with the intention that Vigilius should bring the gold pro-
mised to Edeco. ;

After the departure of Vigilius, we did not remain more than one
day in this place; we departed with Attila for more distant places,
towards the north. We had proceeded but a very short distance with
the barbarians, when we changed the direction, according to the order
of the Scythians, our guides! Attila, however, stopped at a certain
village, where he took for wife his daughter Esca, although he
had already several wives; the laws of the Scythians allow this.?


1 Priscus does not say what their new direction was: everything
leads to the supposition that it was towards the west, and that in gene-
ral their route lay almost constantly towards the north-west.

2 This passage has been the subject of great discussion: the follow-
ing is the phrase of Priscus: ’Ev jj yapew Ovyarepa Eoxap sGBovdsro.
The sense which naturally presents itself is: ‘‘ where he willed to
espouse his daughter Esca.” Still the Aés is wanting, and it would
seem as though Priscus ought to have put cavrov. Some learned men
have inferred from this, that it was not his daughter whom Attila
married, but that it was the daughter of Esca, and that it must be read,
@vyarepa tov Ecxan; they have remarked, and with reason, that the
Greeks almost always made the proper names of barbarians, with
which they were imperfectly acquainted, indeclinable ; that if Attila
had married his own daughter, Priscus would not have failed to insist
upon the irregularity of such a marriage; and the desire to clear
Attila from the crime of incest has made them regard this conjecture
ascertain. It is possibly well-founded ; still they cannot dispute that
the following phrase of Priscus, ‘‘ The laws of the Scythians allow
this,” relates to Attila having married his daughter, as well as to the


220 HISTORY OF


Thence we proceeded across a great plain, over a level and easy
road, and we met with many navigable rivers; the largest, after the
Danube, are called the Dracon, the Tigas, and the Tiphisas. We
crossed the most considerable upon boats of a single piece, which
those who inhabit the banks of the river make use of; the others we
crossed in canoes which the barbarians always have with them ; for
they carry them on chariots, to make use of upon ponds and inundated
places. They brought us provisions from the villages, millet instead
of wheat; mead instead of wine; it is thus that the inhabitants call
them. Those who accompanied us to serve us, brought méllet, and
gave us a kind of drink made from barley, which the barbarians call
cam.

At the approach of night, after a rather long journey, we set up our
tents upon the borders of a morass, whence the inhabitants of the
neighboring villages drew their water, which was very good to drink:
but a violent hurricane, mixed with lightning, thunder, and rain, sud-
denly arising, our tent was overthrown, and our utensils thrown into
the morass. Alarmed with this fall and with the storm, we aban-
doned the place ; we dispersed ourselves, and each at hazard took the
road which seemed best to him, amidst darkness and rain. Arrived
at last, from different directions, at the huts of the village, we assem-
bled and demanded with loud cries what we wanted. On this noise,
the Scythians came out: they lighted the reeds which serve them for
torches, and asked what we wanted, and why we raised such cries?
the barbarians who accompanied us, answered that we had been dis-
persed and had lost our way in the tempest: they then granted us a
generous hospitality, and made us a fire with dry reeds,

The mistress of the village, one of the wives of Bleda, sent us
nourishment and beautiful women. This, among the Scythians, is
looked upon as an honor. We thanked the women for the provisions
which they had brought us, and we slept in our huts, without availing
ourselves of the latter present of their queen. When it was day, we
set about seeking for the moveables and travelling utensils which we
had lost ; we found part of them in the place where we had stopped
in the evening, and a part on the borders of the morass or in the
morass itself: the storm had ceased, the sun had risen brilliantly, and
we passed the whole day in the village, drying our things. After
having taken care of our horses and other beasts of burden, we went to
salute the queen, and, not wishing to be inferior in generosity to the
barbarians who had received us so well, we gave her silver cups, red
woollen garments, Indian pepper, dates and other dry fruit: after
wishing all kind of prosperity to the inhabitants of the village, in
return for the hospitality which had been accorded us, we proceeded
on our way.


—


plurality of his wives; and moreover, historical testimony does not
allow us to doubt but that, among a large number of barbarous nations,
it was allowable for a man to marry his daughter; that of Saint
Jerome is positive: Perse, Medi, Indi, et J/Ethiopes, regna non mo-
dica, et Romano regno paria, cum matribus et aviis, cum filiabus et
nepotibus copulantur. (Lib. ii., Adv. Jovinianum.) Why should not


the Huns have done the same ?


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 221


After a march of six days, the Scythians, our guides, ordered us to
stop at a certain village, in order that we might continue our route in
the train of Attila, who was going to pass that way ; we here met the
ambassadors whom the western Romans had sent to him; the principal
were: Romulus, invested with the title of count, Primutus, prefect of
Norica, and Romanus, chief of a body ot troops. With them were
Constantius, whom Atius had sent to Attila for a secretary, and Ta-
tullus, father of Orestes, the colleague of Edeco; the latter had accom-
panied them not because of the embassy, but out of friendship, and
by reason of their own affairs. Constantius had become united with
them during his sojourn in Italy, and family reasons had determined
Tatullus ; his son, Orestes, had taken for wife the daughter of Romulus
of Petovio, a city of Norica.

These ambassadors had been endeavoring to soften Attila, who had
demanded that they should give him up Sylvanus, prefect of the impe-
rial plate of Rome, because he had received some gold cups which
had been sent to him by a certain Constantius. This Constantius, a
native of western Gaul, had been given to Attila and to Bleda for a
secretary, in the same way as, at a later period, another Constantius
was. This man then, at the time when the town of Sirmium, in
Pannonia, was besieged by the Scythians, had received some gold
vases from the bishop of the city; the bishop wished, that if he sur-
vived the taking of the town, the value of these vases should be em-
ployed for his ransom, and that if he died, this money should serve
to deliver the captive citizens; but Constantius, after the ruin of the
town, without troubling himself as to the results of the siege, repaired
to Italy on business, gave the vases to Sylvanus, received the price of
them, and it was arranged between them that if Constantius repaid
the capital and interest of this money within a fixed time, the vases
should be returned to him; that, in the contrary case, Sylvanus should
keep and use them as his own. Attila and Bleda, suspecting this
Constantius of treason, had him crucified; and Attila, informed of
the affair of the cups of gold, demanded that they should give up
Sylvanus to him, as having stolen property belonging to him. Aetius
and the emperor of the western Romans sent deputies to him, to tell
him that Sylvanus had not stolen these vases, that he was the creditor
of Constantius, that he had received them in pledge for the sum lent,
and had sold them to the first priest who wished to buy them, see-
ing that it was not permitted to laymen to make use of cups conse-
crated to God. They were to add, in case such good reasons and
respect for God did not prevent Attila from persisting in again de-
manding the cups, that Sylvanus would send him the price of them,
but they could not give up a man who had done no wrong.

Such was the object of the mission of these deputies, who were
following the barbarian in order to obtain an answer and then return.

As we were to march by the same route as Attila, we waited for
him to go before us, and we followed him ata short distance with the
rest of the barbarians. After having crossed some rivers, we arrived
at a large town; here was the house of Attila, much higher and more
beautiful than any of the other houses of his empire; it was made of
highly polished planks, and surrounded with a palisade of wood, not
by way of fortification, but as an ornament.

The house nearest to the king’s was that of Onegeses, also sur-
rounded with a palisade of wood, but it was neither so high nor


197


Qe HISTORY OF


furnished with towers like that of Attila. At some distance from the
enclosure of the house was situated the bath which Onegeses, the
richest and most powerful of the Scythians next to Attila, had had
constructed with stones brought from Pannonia ; there was, indeed, in
this part of Scythia, neither stones nor large trees, and it was neces-
sary to get materials elsewhere. The architect who had constructed
this bath, made prisoner at Sirmium, had hoped that liberty would be
the reward of his labor, but this sweet hope was utterly deceived ; he
was cast, on the contrary, into a far still harder servitude; Onegeses
made him his bather, and he waited on him and all his family when
they went to the bath.

When Attila arrived at this village, young girls came to meet him;
they walked in a file, under pieces of fine white linen, held up on
either side by many ranks of women, and so well held out, that, under
each piece, walked six virgins, or even more: they sang barbarous
songs.

We were already close to the house of Onegeses, past which the
road leading to that of the king went, when his wife came out, fol-
lowed by a multitude of women slaves, who brought meats and wine,
which is regarded among the Scythians as the greatest honor. She
saluted Attila, and prayed him to taste her meats, which she presented
to him with the most lively protestations of her devotion, The king,
to give a mark of his good-will towards the wife of his confidant, eat
upon his horse. The barbarians who escorted him held the table,
which was of silver, up to him. After having dipped his lips into the
cup which they offered him, he entered his palace, which was much
more conspicuous than any of the other houses, and stood upon an
eminence,

As for us, we remained in the house of Onegeses; according to the
orders of the latter, who had returned with the son of Attila; we
were received by his wife and by the other illustrious chiefs of his
family, and we supped there. Onegeses could not remain with us and
enjoy himself at table, because he had to give an account to Attila of
what he had done in his mission, and of the accident which had hap-
pened to his son, who had dislocated his right wrist; this was the
first time he had presented himself before the king of the Huns since
his return.

After supper, we quitted the house of Onegeses, and pitched our
tents nearer to the palace of Attila, in order that Maximin, who was
to have an interview with that prince, and to converse with those who
acted as his council, might thus be as little distant as possible. There
we passed the night.

When day appeared, Maximin sent me to Onegeses to carry him the
presents which he himself offered and those which the emperor sent
him, and to ask him when and where he could have a conversation.
I therefore repaired to Onegeses, with the slaves who carried the pre-
sents; the doors were closed, and I was obliged to wait till they
were opened, and until some came out who could inform him of my
arrival.

While I passed the time in walking round the enclosure of the
house of Onegeses, some one advanced whom I at first took for a bar-
barian of the Scythian army, and who saluted me in Greek, saying to
me, Xaipe. I was surprised that a Scythian should speak Greek, for
the barbarians, shut up in their own manners, cultivate and speak


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 223


noue but barbarous languages, that of the Huns or that of the Goths ;
those who have much commercial intercourse with the Romans also
speak Latin; none of them speak Greek, with the exception of the
captive refugees in Thrace or in maritime Illyria; but when we meet
with these latter, they are easily recognized by their wretched cloth-
ing and pale faces, signs of the ill fortune into which they have fallen.
This man, on the contrary, had the air of a happy and rich Scythian ;
he was elegantly clothed, and had his head shaved round: saluting
him in return, I asked him who he was, from whence he came into
the country of the barbarians, and why he had adopted the customs
of the Scythians? < You are, then, anxious to know ?” saidhe. ‘“ My
reason for asking,” I answered, “is, that you spoke Greek.” He then
told me, smiling, that he was a Greek by birth, that he had established
himself with a view to commerce, at Viminacium, a town of Mesia
on the Danube, that he had long remained there, and had there mar-
ried a rich wife; but that, at the taking of the town, all his fortune
yanished, and that in the subdivision of booty his goods and himself
had fallen to Onegeses. It is, indeed, the custom among the Scythians,
for the principal chiefs, after Attila, to put aside the richest captives
and share them afterwards. My Greek had afterwards courageously
fought against the Romans; he had assisted in subjecting the nation
of the Acatzires to his barbarous master, and, according to the Scy-
thian laws, he obtained liberty as a reward, with the possession of all
which he had acquired in war; he had married a barbarian wife, by
whom he had children ; he was the companion of Onegeses, and his
new mode of life appeared to him far preferable to the old. In fact,
those who remain among the Scythians, after having supported the
fatigues of war, pass their life without any trouble ; each enjoys the
property that fate has granted him, and no one interferes with or
troubles him in any way whatever.

While we thus conversed, one of the domestics of Onegeses opened
the gates. I hastened towards him, and asked for Onegeses ; I added,
that I had to speak with him on the part of Maximin, the ambassador
from the Romans: he answered, that if I waited a little, I might soon
see him, for he was going out; shortly afterwards, indeed, 1 saw
Onegeses advancing; I went towards him, saying, “ The ambassador
from the Romans salutes you, and I bring you presents on his part, as
well as the gold sent you by the emperor.” As I tried to ask him
when and where he would converse with us, he ordered his people to
take the gold and presents, and told me to inform Maximin that he
would repair to him soon.

I therefore returned to tell Maximin that Onegeses was about to visit
him ; almost immediately afterwards he arrived at our tent, and, ad-
dressing himself to the ambassador, thanked him for the gifts of the
emperor and his own, asking him what he wished, since he had
required him to come. Maximin answered him, that the time ap-
proached when he might acquire great glory, by repairing to the em-
peror, terminating the contentions of the Huns and the Romans, and
by his wisdom establishing a solid peace between the two nations; a
peace which would not only be very advantageous to them, but which
would be of so much value to him and to all his people, as his family
would then experience an eternal gratitude from the emperor and all
the imperial race. Onegeses then asked how he could render himself
agreeable to the emperor and terminate these contests : Maximin an-


224 CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE.


swered him that he had but to take part in the present affairs, go to
thank the emperor, carefully study the causes of discord, and interpose
his credit to arrange the differences, according to the conditions of
treaties. <‘‘ But,” said Onegeses, ‘* I long since informed the emperor
and his councillors of the will of Attila concerning this affair: do the
Romans think that their entreaties will induce me to betray my master,
and to hold no reckoning of the advantages which I have found among
the Scythians for my wives and children? Is it not better to serve
with Attila, than to enjoy the greatest riches with the Romans? As
to the rest, I shall be much more useful to them in remaining at home,
in calming and softening the rage of my master, if he is forming any
violent project against the empire, than by repairing to Constantinople,
and exposing myself to suspicions, if I were to do anything which
appears contrary to the interests of Attila.” At these words, thinking
that I should be charged to converse with him, upon what we desired
to learn (such an interview little suiting the dignity with which
Maximin was invested), he withdrew.

The next day, I went into the interior enclosure of the house of
Attila, to carry presents to his wife, who was called Creca; he had
three children by her; the eldest already reigned over the Acatzires,
and the other nations which inhabited Scythia, around the Pontus
Euxinus. Within this enclosure there were many edifices, partly
constructed of carved planks, elegantly arranged: partly of uncarved
beams, well formed with the adze, and polished, with round pieces
of wood mixed with them; the circles which united them, rising
from the ground, were elevated and distributed, according to cer-
tain proportions. Here lived the wife of Attila. The barbarians who
guarded the gates allowed me to enter, and I found her lying on a
soft couch; the floor was ornamented with carpet, upon which we
walked: numerous slaves surrounded her in a circle ; and opposite to
her, maid servants, seated on the ground, were making piece work,
composed of linen of various colors, which the barbarians wear over
their dress as ornaments.

After having saluted Creca, and offered her the presents, I with-
drew ; and, while waiting for Onegeses to return from the palace,
whither he had already repaired, I went through the other buildings of
the enclosure where Attila dwelt. While I was there, with many
other persons (as I was known to the guards of Attila and the barba-
rians of his train, they allowed me to go everywhere), I saw a nume-
rous crowd advancing in tumult, and with a great noise. Attila came
out with a grave air; all eyes were directed towards him; Onegeses
accompanied him, and he seated himself before his house. Many
people who had causes approached him, and he delivered judgments
upon them. He then re-entered his palace, where he received de-
puties from barbarian nations, who had come to seek him.

While I waited for Onegeses, Romulus, Promutus, and Romanus,
the deputies who came from Italy about the affair of the gold vases,
Rusticus, who was in the train of Constantius, and Constantiolus, a na-
tive of Pannonia, then under Attila, spoke to me, and asked me if
we had received our dismissal. ‘It is to know this of Onegeses,”
said I, ‘* that I wait in this enclosure.” I asked, in my turn, whether
they had obtained any favorable answer concerning the object of
their mission. ‘‘ Not at all,” answered they; ‘it is impossible to
change Attila’s determination; he threatens war, unless they give
him up Sylvanus.”


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 225


As we were expressing our mutual astonishment at the intractable
pride of the barbarian, Romulus, a man of great experience, and who
had been charged with many very honorable missions, said to us:
‘‘ This pride arises from his happy fortune, which has placed. him in
a rank so elevated; his fortune gives him great power, and he is so
inflated with it, that reason has no access to him, and he only thinks
that just which he has once taken into his head; none of those who
have reigned, whether in Scythia or elsewhere, have done such great
things in so short a time; he has subdued all Scythia, he has extended
his dominion to the islands of the ocean, he has made the Romans his
tributaries ; not content with this, he meditates still greater enterprises ;
he still wishes to drive back the frontiers of his empire, and he is
preparing to attack the Persians.”

One of us asked what road led from Scythia to Persia; Romulus an-
swered that the country of the Medes was situated not very far from
that of the Scythians, and that the Huns knew the road well, having
often gone it. During the ravages made in their country by-a famine,
and the tranquillity in which the Romans, occupied elsewhere, left
them, Basich and Currich, warriors of the royal family of the Scythi-
ans, and chiefs of numerous troops, had penetrated into the country
of the Medes ; these chiefs lately come to Rome to treat for an alliance,
related that they had journeyed across a desert country, that they had
traversed a morass, which Romulus believed to be the Palus-Meotis,
and that after fifteen days, after having ascended certain mountains,
they descended into Medea; that there, while they were pillaging
and making incursions in the country, there suddenly came a Persian
army, which darkened the air with its arrows; that at the sight
of such danger, they had retired, repassed the mountains, and brought
but asmall part of their booty, because the Medes had regained the
greater portion ; that to avoid the shock of the enemy, they had taken
another route, had crossed places strewn with marine stones which
burnt,! and at last arrived at their native country after a journey, the
duration of which Romulus could not recollect: it was easy to see from
this that Scythia was not very far from the country of the Medes.

Romulus added, that if, in consequence, the idea of attacking the
Medes seized upon Attila, the invasion would cost him neither much
care nor fatigue, end that he would not have a long road to take in
order to fall upon the Medes, the Parthians, and the Persians,
and oblige them to pay him tribute. He had such an immense
number of troops, that no nation could resist him. We then set
about forming the wish that Attila might attack the Persians, and
thus turn the weight of the war fromus. “It is to be feared,” said
Constantiolus, ‘‘ that the Persians once conquered, he will treat the
Romans not as a friend but as a master. Now we send him gold, be-
cause of the dignity with which we ourselves have invested him; but
if he subjugates the Medes, the Parthians, and the Persians, he will
no longer spare the the Romans, who form, on this side, the bounda-
ries of his empire; he will regard them as his slaves, and will force
them to obey his terrible and insupportable will.”


1 These stones were the bitumen which abounds upon the borders
of the sea of Azof and the Black Sea.


226 HISTORY OF


The dignity of which Constantiolus spoke, was that of the general
of the Roman armies, an honor which Attila had received from the
emperor, receiving at the same time the salary attached to this title.
Constantiolus thought that Attila would without scruple violate the
duties of this dignity, or of any other with which it might please the
Romans to invest him, and that he would force them to give him the
name of king instead of that of general. Already, when he was out
of humor, he said that the generals of his armies were his slaves, and
that his generals, in his eyes, were the equals of the Roman emperors.

The discovery of the sword of Mars had greatly added to his power.
This sword, formerly worshipped by the kings of the Scythians, as
being sacred to the god of war, had disappeared for many centuries,
and had just been again found on the occasion of the wounding an ox.
While we discussed the matter rather eagerly, Onegeses came out;
we approached and asked him concerning the affairs with which we
were charged. After conversing with some barbarians he told me to
ask Maximin what consular personage the Romans proposed to send to
Attila. I returned to our tent, and related to Maximin what Onegeses
had just said to me; we deliberated upon what answer to make to the
barbarians. I then returned to Onegeses and told that the Romans
eagerly desired that he should repair to Rome, and that he should be
charged with arranging their differences with Attila; but that if
they were deceived in this hope, the emperor would send whatever
ambassador he pleased. He ordered me immediately to fetch Maxi-
min; and directly he came he conducted him to Attila. Maximin re-
turning soon after, told us that the barbarian declared that he positively
willed the emperor to send him as an ambassador, Nomius or Anato-
lius, and that he would receive no other. Maximin observed to him
that it was not proper to make the deputies who should be sent to him
suspected of the emperor, by designating them, but Attila answered
that if the Romans refused him he would terminate the quarrel by
taking arms.

We had scarcely entered our tent when the father of Orestes came
to say: ‘* Attila invites you both to a banquet which is to take place
about the ninth hour of the day.” At the hour mentioned, we re-
paired to the invitation, and in company with the ambassadors of the
western Romans we presented ourselves before the entry of the hall
in front of Attila; there, the cup-bearers, according to the usage of
the country, presented us acup, in order that, before sitting down,
we should offer libations; after having performed this, and having
tasted of the cup, we occupied the seats upon which we were to sup.

Seats were prepared on each side the hall, along the walls; in the
midst was Attila, upon a couch, opposite to which was another couch,
and behind that the steps of a staircase which led to where this prince
slept. This couch was ornamented with cloths of various colors, and
resembled those which the Romans and the Greeks prepare for mar-
ried people. It was then arranged that the first rank of guests should.
seat themselves on the right of Attila, and the second rank on the
left; we were placed in the second rank with Berich, a very conside-
rable warrior among the Scythians, but Berich was above us. One-
geses occupied the first seat on the right of the king, and opposite him
were two of the sons of Attila; the eldest lay upon the same couch
as his father, not by his side but below him, and he alwaps kept his
eyes cast down out of respect for his father.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 227


Every one being seated, Attila’s cup-bearer presented him a
cup of wine; on receiving it, Attila saluted him who occupied the
first place. At this honor the latter immediately rose: he was not
allowed to re-seat himself until Attila, tasting the cup, or emptying
the contents, had returned it to the cup-bearer. Attila, on the con-
trary, remained seated, while the guests, each receiving a cup in his
turn, gave him homage, by saluting him and tasting the wine. Each
guest had a cup-bearer, who took his place after Attila’s had gone. All
the guests were honored in the same manner; Attila, when it came
to our turn, saluted us in the manner of the Thracians. After these
ceremonies of politeness, the cup-bearers retired.

By the side of Attila’s table were prepared four other tables, made
to receive three or four, or even more guests, each of whom, without
disarranging the order of seats, could take upon plates with his knife
whatever he pleased. In the middle, first the servant of Attila came
forward, carrying a dish full of meat, then those who were to serve
the other guests covered the tables with bread and meats. There had
been prepared for the barbarians, and for us, meats and ragouts of all
kinds, and they served them to us upon plates of silver, but Attila had
only a wooden plate, and eat nothing but plain meat.

In all things he showed the same simplicity ; the guests drank from
cups of gold and silver; Attila had only a wooden cup; his clothes
were very simple, and were only distinguished from the other barba-
rians because they were of one color, and were without ornaments ;
his sword, the cords of his shoes, the reins of his horse, were not,
like those of the other Scythians, decorated with plates of gold or
precious stones.

When the meats served in the first plates were eaten, we arose, and
no one again sat down until he had drank a full cup of wine to the
health and prosperity of Attila, according to the forms which I have
just described. After rendering him this homage, we re-seated our-
selves. They then brought to every table fresh plates with other
meats ; and when each was satisfied, we arose, again drank as at first
and again sat down.

On the approach of night the meats were taken away; two Scythi-
ans advanced, and recited before Attila verses of their own composi-
tion, in which they sang of his victories and warlike virtues. The
attention of ail the guests was fixed upon them; some were charmed
by the verses, others were excited by the description of battles ; tears
flowed down the cheeks of those whose strength had been worn away
by age, and who could therefore no longer satisfy their thirst for war
and glory. After these barbarian songs were ended, a buffoon came
and went through all sorts of extravagances and ridiculous gesticula-
tions and sayings, which made those present laugh heartily.

The last person who came in was the Moor, Zercho: Edeco had
told him to come to Attila, and promised to employ all his influence
to have his wife brought to him; the Moor had married but some years
before in Scythia, where he enjoyed great favor with Bleda, but on
quitting that country had left her behind him. When Attila sent the
woman as a gift to Aetius, Zercho at first hoped to see her again; but
this hope had been frustrated by reason that Attila had been angry at
his returning into his own country. Availing himself of the occasion
of this festival, the Moor again sought permission to have his wife
brought to him, and his face, his demeanor, his pronunciation, and his


228 HISTORY OF


strange mixture of Hunnish, Latin, and Gothic words, excited such
mirth and transports of joyousness, that the shouts of laughter on all
sides appeared undistinguishable.*

Attila alone preserved an unaltered visage ; he was grave and mo-
tionless; he neither said nor did anything indicating the slightest dis-
position to participate in the merriment around him ; the only change
that we observed in him was, that when his youngest son, named Ir-
nach, was .brought in, he looked at him with eyes of affection and
pleasure, and patted him on the cheek. I was wondering why Attila
paid so little attention to his other children, and seemed only to care
for this one, when a barbarian, who sat next to me, and who spoke
Latin, after having made me promise that I would not repeat what
he was about to say to me, told me that the diviners had predicted
to Attila that all his race would perish except this boy, who would
once more restore it.

As the banquet seemed likely to be extended to a late hour of the
re and as we did not wish to remain drinking any longer, we with-

rew.

Next day we went to Onegeses, to tell him that we desired to be
dismissed, not wishing to lose any more time; he replied, that such
also was the intention of Attila, who had determined upon our depart-
ure. He then held acouncil of the principal chiefs upon the subject
of the resolution which had been formed by Attila, and drew up the
letter which we were to carry to the emperor. He had with him his
corresponding secretaries, and among them Rusticus, a native of Upper
Mesia, who, having been made prisoner by the barbarians, had been
raised to this post in consequence of his talent for composition.

After the council, we entreated Onegeses to restore to liberty the
wife and children of Sylla, who had been reduced to slavery at the
taking of Ratiaria ; he was not indisposed to grant our request on our
paying a considerable ransom. We earnestly supplicated him to be
merciful, in consideration of their former condition, and of their pre-
sent misery. At length, as he was taking his leave, Onegeses granted
us the liberty of the woman for 500 aurti, and made the emperor a
present of that of his sons.

Meantime Recca, the wife of Attila, who superintended his domes-
tic affairs, had sent to invite us to supper.2. We accordingly proceed-
ed to her apartments, and found her surrounded by a great number of
Scythian chiefs ; she overwhelmed us with kindness, and gave us a
magnificent banquet. Each of the guests rose, presented to us a
cupful of wine, and kissed us on the forehead in taking it back, which
among the Scythians isa mark of great good will. After supper we
retired to our tents for the night.

Next day Attila invited us to another banquet: the same ceremo-
1Ts it not singular to find a harlequin at the court of Attila? yet
such is the origin of these buffoons. The color of the black slaves,
the strangeness of their face and manners, caused them to be sought
after by the barbarians as excellent ministers of mirth; to complete
the singularity, Zercho asks his wife at the hands of Attila, closely
paralleling harlequin demanding columbine.

4The learned have warmly discussed the question whether this
Recca was the same with that wife of Attila of whom Priscus has al-
ready spoken, and whom he then named Creca.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 229


nies were observed as on the first occasion, and we diverted ourselves
very much; this day it was not the eldest son of Attila who was
seated on the same couch with the chief, but his uncle Oebar, whom
Attila regarded in the f a father.

Throughout the ba ttila conversed with us in the kindest
manner; he ordered Maximin to induce the emperor to give to his
secretary Constantius the wife he had promised him. This Constan-
tius had gone to Constantinople with the deputies of Attila, and had
offered his services in maintaining peace between the Romans and
the Huns, in consideration of a rich wife being given him; the em-
peror had consented to this, and had promised him the daughter of
Saturnillus, a man of noble family and large fortune ; but Athenais,
or Eudoxia (the empress went by both these names), put Saturnillus
to death, and Zen, a consular personage, prevented the emperor from
fulfilling his promise. This Zen, at the head of a numerous body
of Isaurians, was at that time guarding the city of Constantinople,
menaced by war, and had, besides, the general command of the armies
of the east; he withdrew the young girl from the prison in which she
had been placed, and gave her to one Rufus, a relative of his. Thus dis-
appointed in his marriage, Constantius had earnestly entreated Attila
not to suffer the affront which had been put upon him, to pass, but to
insist upon a wife being given him; either the one just snatched
from him, or some other woman with a rich dowry: accordingly,
during supper, the barbarian desired Maximin to tell the emperor that
Constantius was not to be disappointed of his hopes, and that it was
contrary to the dignity of an emperor to be a liar; Attila took this
interest in the matter because Constantius had promised him a large
sum of money in the event of his obtaining by the barbarian’s influ-
ence a rich Roman wife.

On the approach of night we withdrew from the banquet.

Three days afterwards we were dismissed, after having received a
present each of us. Attila sent with us, as his ambassador, Berich,
one of the leading Scythian chiefs, lord of many villages in that coun-
try, and who, at the banquet, had been placed on the same side of the
table with us, and, indeed, above us. Berich had before this been re-
ceived as ambassador at Constantinople.

On our way, as we were entering a certain village, the barbarians
who accompanied us part of the road, took prisoner a Scythian who
was acting as spy for the Romans. Attila ordered him to be cruci-
fied. Next day, again, as we were passing through another village,
there were brought to us, their hands tied behind their backs, two
slaves, who had killed those whom the fortune of war had rendered
masters of their life and death; their heads were fastened between
_ two pieces of wood, and they were then crucified.

Berich, so long as we journeyed in Scythia, travelled with us, and
treated us with kindness; but no sooner had we passed the Danube,
than he became an enemy, upon some miserable pretexts furnished
by our servants. He began by taking from Maximin the horse he had
given him; Attila had r all the Scythian chiefs who accompa-
nied him to make presen aximin, and they had all offered him
horses, Berich among the t: but Maximin, wishing to show his
moderation, had refused most of these offers, accepting only two or
three horses. Berich now took the one he had given him, and more-
over, would no longer converse with us, nor even follow the same


230 HISTORY OF


route. Thus, this pledge of a hospitality contracted in the country
of the barbarians themselves, was withdrawn. We proceeded to
Adrianopolis through Philippolis, and stop or awhile to repose our-
selves; while there, we addressed Beric had also reached the
city, and asked why he so pertinaciously o d silence towards men
who had given him no offence. He was pacified by our words, ac-
cepted an invitation to supper, and we departed the next day from
Adrianopolis in company together.

On our way, we met Vigilius, who was returning to Scythia, and
after informing him of the manner in which Attila had received
us, continued our journey. On arriving at Constantinople, we thought
that Berich had altogether forgotten his anger, but our kindness and
courtesy had not overcome his naturally fierce and vindictive disposi-
tion; he accused Maximin of having said that the generals Areobin-
dus and Aspar enjoyed no credit with the emperor, and that since he
had become acquainted with the frivolous and_ unstable character of
the barbarians, he had no faith whatever in their alleged exploits.


IV.


Chronological Table of the Principal Events of the Political Eistory
of Gaul, from the Fifth to the Tenth Century.


A.D.

406—412 General invasion of the Germans into the empire of the
west, and especially into Gaul.

411—413 Establishment of the Burgundians in eastern Gaul.

412—419 Establishment of the Visigoths in southern Gaul.

418—430 Establishment of the Franks in Belgium and northern
Gaul.

451 Invasion of Attila into Gaul. His defeat in the plains
of Chalons in Champagne. .
476 Definitive fall of the empire of the west.

481—511 Reign of Clovis. Establishment of the kingdom of the
Franks. Their conquests in eastern, western and
southern Gaul.

27 Nov., 511 Death of Clovis. Division of his domains and states be-
tween his four sons,

523—534 Wars between the Franks and the Burgundians. Fall
of the kingdom of the latter.

558—561 Clotaire I., fourth son of Clovis, sole king of the Franks.

587 Treaty of Andélot, between Gontran, king of Burgundy,
and Childebert II,, king of, Metz.

613—628 Clotaire II., son of Chilperic I., and of Fredegonde, sole
king of the Franks.

628—714 Progressive elevation of the,family of the Pepins among
the Austrasian Franks.

656—687 Struggle between the Fra Neustria and the Franks
of. Austrasia.

687 Battle of Testry. Triumph of the Austrasian Franks.

9415—741 Government of the Franks by Charles Martel.

7414—1732 Invasion and progress of the Arabs in southern and west-
ern Gaul.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 231


A.D 5
Oct., 732 They are defeated near Tours, by Charles Martel.
ist Oct., 741 Death of Charles Martel. Division of Gaul between
his sons, Pepin and Carloman.
747 Carloman enters a monastery. Pepin sole chief of the
Franks.
752 Childeric III., last of the Merovingian kings, is deposed.
Pepin, surnamed Le Bref, is declared king of the
Franks, and crowned at Soissons by Winfried (Saint
Boniface) archbishop of Mayence.
154 Pope Stephen II., who visits France, again crowns Pe-
pin and his family.
754, 755 Pepin makes war in Italy against the Lombards, His
alliance with the popes.
750—759 The wars of Pepin in southern Gaul against the Sara-
cens. He makes himself master of Septimania.
745—768 The wars of Pepin in the south-west of Gaul against the
Aquitani. He seizes upon Aquitaine.
Sept., 768 Death of Pepin. Division of his states between his two
sons, Charles and Carloman.
eure Death of Carloman. Charlemagne sole king of the


Franks.
7169 Expedition of Charlemagne against the Aquitani.
ee
774—776
778—780
1 denial | Expeditions of Charlemagne against the Saxons.
797—798
802
804


773—714 Expeditions of Charlemagne against the Lombards.
776 He defeats their kings, and possesses himself of their


states.
787 EO eas of Charlemagne against the Lombards of
801 Benevento.
778
796—797


801 Expeditions of Charlemagne against the Arabs of Spain,
806, 807 Italy, Sardinia, &c,


809, 810
812 J

788, 789)
a Expeditions of Charlemagne against the Slaves and the
805 Avares in eastern Europe.


Relations of Charlemagne with the emperors of the east.
24 Oct., 800 Charlemagne enters Rome.
25 Dec., 800 He is proclaimed emperor of the west.
801 Embassy of Haroun-al-Raschid to Charlemagne.
806 Charlemagne divides his states between his three sons,
Charles, Pepin, and Louis.
808—814 The Normans begin to ravage the coasts of Frankish-
Gaul.
21 Jan., 814 Death of Charlemagne.


232 HISTORY OF


A.D.

816 Coronation of Louis le Debonnaire, at Reims, by Pope
Stephen IV.

817 Louis associates with himself his son Lothaire, and gives


to his two youngest sons, Pepin and Louis, the king-
doms of Aquitaine and Bavaria.
828—833 Intrigues and revolts of the sons of Louis le Debonnaire
against their father.
1 Oct., 833 The assembly of Compiegne meet to degrade Louis.
2 Nov., 833 Public penance and degradation of Louis at Soissons.

835 The assembly of Thionville annuls the acts of that of
Compiegne.

838 The assembly of Kiersy-sur-Ouise, when Louis deprives
his eldest sons, Lothaire and Louis, in favor of the
youngest, Charles le Chauve.

30 May, 839 Louis le Debonnaire is reconciled with his son Lothaire.
New division of the empire between Lothaire and
Charles le Chauve.
20 June, 840 Death of Louis le Debonnaire,
840—843 War between the sons of Louis le Debonnaire.
29 June, 841 Battle of Fontenay.
843 Treaty of Verdun. Definitive division of the empire.
862—877 Charles le Chauve reunites successfully a great part of
the states of Charlemagne.
25 Dec., 875 He is crowned emperor at Rome.

877 He acknowledges in the assembly of Kiersy-sur Oise, the
right to the hereditary possession of fees and royal
offices.

6 Oct., 877 Death of Charles le Chauve.
836—S77 Continued and augmenting visions of the Saracens, and
of the Normans, in Frankish Gaul.
877—879 Reign of Louis le Begue, son of Charles le Chauve.
10 April,879 Reign of Louis le Begue.
879—882 Reigns of Louis III. and Carloman, sons of Louis le
Begue.
5 Aug., 882 Death of Louis III.
S$2—884 Reign of Carloman.
6 Dec., 884 Death of Carloman.
884—888 Reign of Charles le Gros.
885—886 The Normans besiege Paris during one year.
12 Jan., 888 Death of Charles le Gros.
887— 898 Reign of Eudes, count of Paris, son of Robert le Fort,
elected king during the life of Charles.
877—888 Formation of a number of independent lordships.
28 Jan., 893 Coronation of Charles le Simple, son of Louis le Begue.
1 Jan., 898 Death of king Eudes.
893—929 Reign of Charles le Simple.

911 By the treaty of Clair-sur-Esste, he gives to Rollo, a Nor-
man chief, that part of Neustria which has since taken
the name of Normandy.

922 Robert, duke of France, brother to king Eudes, is elect-
ed king.

15 June, 923 He is killed near Soissons in a battle with Charles le
Simple. :

923 ‘Raoul, or Rodolph, duke of Burgundy, is elected king of

France,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. "233


A.D.
923—929 Captivity of Charles le Simple in the hands of Herhert,
count of Vermandois. He is set at liberty for a time,
but soon imprisoned again.
7 Oct., 929 Death of Charles le Simple.
15 Jan., 936 Death of king Raoul. ,,
936—954 Reign of Louis IV., surnamed d’Outre-Mer, son of
Charles le Simple. He is sometimes friendly, some-
times hostile; on one hand with the emperor Otho I.,
master of eastern France, on the other with the inde-
pendent lords of central and western France.
10 Sept., 954 Death of Louis d’Outre Mer,
954—986 Reign of Lothaire, son of Louis. His wars with Otho II.
2 Mar., 986 Death of Lothaire.
986, 987 Reign of Louis V., son of Lothaire.
21 May, 987 Death of Louis V.
3 July, 987 Hugh Capet, count of Paris, is crowned king of France,
at Reims.


Ve


Chronological Table of the Principal Events of the Religious His-
tory of Gaul from the Fifth to the Tenth Century.


A.D.
11 Nov., 400 Death of St. Martin, archbishop of Tours.
400—407 Writings of Vigilantius, priest, against the relics of the
martyrs, and some other practices of the church.
Answered by St. Jerome.
400—420 Foundation of monasteries in southern Gaul; amongst
others, those of St. Victor, at Marseilles, and of Le-


rens.
418 St. Germain, bishop of Auxerre.
420 The Burgundians embrace arianism.


423 Birth of semi-Pelagianism in southern Gaul. St. Augus-
tin combats it.

428 St. Loup, bishop of Troyes.

429 A numerous-council. Place uncertain.?

— St. Hilary, bishop of Arles.

441 Council of Orange.

450» Contest between the bishops of Arles and Vienna, upon
the extent of their metropolitan jurisdiction.

452 Council of Arles.

455 Council of Arles.

462 Faust, bishop of Riez; his discussion with Claudienus
Mamertius, upon the nature of the soul; he is accused
of semi-Pelagianism ; he writes against the predestina
rians.


1 I only indicate in this table the principal councils, without men-
tioning their object. The seventh table is especially devoted to the
history of the councils and canonical legislation of Gaul at this period.


20*


234 °


576


578

585

590
590—600


600—650
615


HISTORY OF


Institution of the Rogations by St. Mamertius, bishop of
Vienne.

St. Sidonius Apollimaris, bishop of Clermont.

Council of Arles.

St. Avitus, bishop of Vienne.

Clovis embraces Christianity.

Conference held at Lyons, in the presence of Gonde-
baud, king of Burgundy, between the Catholic and
Arian bishops.

St. Cesaire, bishop of Arles.

Council of Agde.

Sigismond, a Burgundian prince, abandons Arianism.

Council of Orleans.

Council of Epaone, in the diocess of Vienne.

Council of Orange.

Council of Vaison.

Council of Orleans,

Council of Orleans.

Council of Orleans.

Introduction of the rule of St. Benedict into Gaul. Re-
form and progress of monasteries. Monastic life re-
ceives the name of religio.

Council of Orleans.

Council of Arles.

St. Germain, bishop of Paris.

Council of Paris.

St. Gregory, bishop of Tours.

St. Senoch, and several other hermits, render themselves
celebrated by their austerities.

Childebert II., king of Austrasia, obliges the Jews to re-
ceive baptism.

Council of Auxerre.

Council of Macon.

Arrival of St. Colomban in Gaul.

He founds the monastery of Luxeuil.

Disorder in the monasteries. Impostors overrun Gaul,
and give themselves out to be Christ.

Progressive incorporation of the monks into the clergy.

Council of Paris.

Clotaire II. allows to the people and clergy the right of
electing bishops, reserving to himself the confirmation
of their choice. °

Council of Reims.

St. Amand, a missionary bishop, labors at the conversion
of the infidels in Belgium.

Dagobert I obliges the Jews to receive baptism.

Foundation of the abbey of St. Denis.

Council of Paris.

St. Eloy, bishop of Noyon.

St. Ouen, bishop of Rouen,

Foundation of numerous monasteries,

Council of Chalons.

Saint Leger, bishop of Autun.

Progress of the temporal power of the bivhons:


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 235


A.D.

670—700 Preaching of Anglo-Saxon and other monks, sustained
by the mayors of the palace of Austrasia, amongst the
people beyond the Rhine, such as the Saxons, the Fri-
sons, the Danes, &c.

— Tyranny of the bishops over the monasteries—Charters
obtained by the monasteries—Protection afforded them
by the kings and popes.

715—755 Preaching and institutions of Saint Boniface in Germa-

. ny—Foundation of the bishoprics of Salzburg, Frey-
singen, Ratisbon, Wurtzburg, Passau, Eichstedt, &c.

720—741 Charles Martel seizes a part of the domains of the clergy.

739—752 Relations of the popes with Charles Martel and Pepin le
Bref.

743 Council of Leptines.

751—800 Progress of the papacy by means of its alliance with
Pepin and Charlemagne.

752 Council of Wermerie.

755 Council of Verneuil.

— Pepin le Bref gives to the church of Rome the domi-
nions taken from the Lombards.

761 Recommencement of the dispute upon dogmatical ques-
tions—reform of the church by the civil power.

761—763 Establishment and rule of the canons by Chrodegaud,
bishop of Metz.

767 Council of Gentilly.

769 Charlemagne interdicts the abuse of the right of asylum
in the churches.


772 Pope Adrian I. gives a collection of canons to Charle-
magne. '

774 Charlemagne extends Pepin’s donation to the church of
Rome. i

780 Benedict d’Aniane undertakes the reform of monastic
life.

785 Theodulf, bishop of Orleans.

786 Especial bishops established in certain monasteries.


790—794 Condemnation of the worshipping of images by the
Gallo-Frankish church—Caroline works composed on
this subject by Alcuin, and sent to the pope by the
order of Charlemagne.

790—799 Heresy of the adoptians—Opposed by Alcuin, and con-
demned by the Gallo-Frankish church.

798  Leidrade, archbishop of Lyons.

809 The Gallo-Frankish church adopts the doctrine, that the

Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son.

813 Five councils held the same year labor at the reform of
ecclesiastical discipline.

816 Rules of canons and canonesses adopted at the council
of Aix-la-Chapelle—Louis le Debonnaire gives the
force of law to the treatise of ecclesiastical offices by
Amalaire, priest of Metz.

817 Reform of the monasteries ordered by a council of abbots
and monks held at Aix-la-Chapelle.

820—877 Progress of the independence and temporal power of
the bishops—Decline of royalty.


236
A.D.
823—824
826
About 830.


831—865


833

835

836
840—877


About 843


847—S61
849—869


852—875
853
853—S66


856—869
858


862—866

869—878
876
887
909
910
912


926—942


HISTORY OF


Proofs of the right of the emperor of the west to inter-
fere in the election of the popes.

Harold and his wife, Danish princes, with their suite,
are baptized in the palace of Louis le Debonnaire.

Ideas and attempts of Agobard, archbishop of Lyons,
after the example of Claude, bishop of Turin, to re-
form the abuses of the church, particularly the wor-
ship of relics and the adoration of images.

The writings of Paschase-Radbert give rise to a contro-
versy upon transubstantiation and the immaculate con-
ception.

Council of Compiegne.

Council of Thionville.

Council of Aix-la-Chapelle.

Progress of the papal power at the expense, Ist, of the
power of temporal sovereigns; 2d, of the power of
the bishops and the national churches—Relations of
Nicholas [. with the government of the Gallo-Frank-
ish church.

Appearance of the False Decretals.

Council of Thionville.

Hincmar, archbishop of Reims.

Saint Prudentius, archbishop of Reims.

Controversy upon predestination and grace—Contest be-
tween Gottschalk and Hincmar.

Saint Remy, archbishop of Lyons:

Council of Soissons.

Affair of Wulfad and the other priest ordained by Ebbo,
archbishop of Troyes.

Affair of the divorce of Lothair and Teutberge.

Letters of counsel and reproach from the bishop of Gaul
to Louis le Germanique.

Affair of Rhotade, bishop of Soissons.

Affair of Hincmar, bishop of Laon. .

Ansegise, archbishop of Sens, is instituted primate of
Gaul and Germany by pope John VIII.

Council of Pontion.

Council of Mayence.

Council of Trosley.

Foundation of the abbey of Cluny by William the Pious,
duke of Aquitaine.

Rollo and a great number of Normans embrace Chris-
tianity.

Saint Odo, bishop of Cluny, reforms his monastery and
several others, which being authorized by the pope,
unite in one congregation—First example of common
government in a monastic order.

Struggle between the Christian Normans and the Nor-
mans that remained pagans.

Gerbert, archbishop of Reims, pope in 999.

Canonization of Ulrich, bishop of Augsburg, by Pope
John XV.—First example of papal canonization—The
bishops continue to declare saints in their diocese.


%


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 237


A.D.
Towards the Odillo, abbot of Cluny, institutes the feast of All Souls.
end of the Institution of the office of the Virgin.
century. Progress of simony, disorder in the manners of the cler-
gy, and superstitions of all kinds amongst the people—
Infinite humber of saints and relics—Extension of pe-
nances and absolutions.

The popes declare themselves more and more the adver-
saries of the disorder in the church, and attempt to
put a stop to it.

Private individuals rise against abuses and superstitions,
amongst others, Leutard, in the environs of Chalons-
sur-Saone.

The monasteries labor to escape from the jurisdiction of
the bishops.


VI;


Chronological Table of the principal Events of the Literary His-
tory of Gaul, from the Fifth to the Tenth Century.


Fifth Century.


Condition in


Name. Date. Life. Works.

Rutilius Numa-| Died after 418. |Civil magistrate|A poem, entitled Iti-

tianus, of nerarium ; or, De
Toulouse, or Reditu, from Rome
Poictiers. to Gaul,

Sulpicius Seve-|Died after 420.| Ecclesiastic. |1. The Life of Saint
rus, of Aqui- Martin of Tours;
taine. 2. A Sacred His-

tory, from the Cre-


ation to 400; 3.
Dialogues on the


° Monks of the East,
and a Life of St.
Martin.
Evagrius. Beginning of Idem. 1. Controversy be-
the 5th century. tween Theophi-


lus, a Christian,
and Simon, aJew;
2. Dialogue be-
tween Zacheus, a


Christian, and Ap-
ollonius, a philos-
opher.
Saint Paulin, of} 354—431 [Bishop of Nola.|1. Letters; 2. Short
Bordeaux. poems ; 3. a sermon


upon charity ; >; 4.
| Several lost works,


238 HISTORY OF


Condition in


Name. Date. Life.
’ Cassienus 350—433
(John) of
Provence.


Palladius, of |Beginning ofthe} Jurisconsult.


Poictiers. 5th century.
Saint Prosper, | Died towards | Ecclesiastic.
of Aquitaine. 463.
Mamertius’ {Died about 474. Idem,
Claudienus, of
Vienne,
Salvienus, of [Died about the} Ecclesiastic.


end of the
oth century,


the north of
Gaul.


Sidonius Apol-| 430—488


linaris, born at mont,
Lyons.

Faust of Breton) Died towards Idem.
origin, the end of the
5th century.

Gennade, of |Died at the end Idem.

Provence. of the

5th century.

Pomerius, of | End of the Idem.


Bishop of Nola.j/1. A treatise on mo-)


A poem upon agri-


Bishop of Cler-


Works.


nastic institutions;
2. Conferences on
monastic life; 3.
Several works on}
theology.


culture.


1. A poem upon the


question of pre-
destination and
grace, entitled, |
Of Ingrates ; 2.
A chronicle from
the creation of the
world until 455;
3. Several theolo-
gical writings and
letters.


1, A treatise upon


the nature of the
soul; 2. Hymn
upon the passion,
pange lingua ; 3.
Letters.


1,°A_ treatise ie |


avarice; 2. A trea-
tise on the govern-
ment of God, or
Providence; 3. Let-
ters; 4. Lost writ-
ings.

1. Nine books of let-
ters; 2. Poetry ; 3)).
Lost writings.

1. A treatise upon
grace; 2. Letters,
wherein he treats
of several philoso-
phical and theolo-
gical questions; 3.
Sermons.

1. A treatise, or cat-
alogue of illustrious
men, or ecclesiasti-
cal authors; 2. A
treatise on ecclesi-
astical doctrines,

1. A treatise on con-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 239


Condition in |
| Name. Date. Life. Works,


African origin,| 5the : templative life; 2.

resided at Arles. A treatise on the
nature of the soul ;
lost.


Sixth | Centurp.


Saint Ernodius,} 4'73—521,. Bishop of Paris.|1. Panegyric of The-
of Arles. odoric, king of the
Ostrogoths; 2. Life

of St. Epiphanius,

bishop of Paris; 3.

Letters ; 4. Poems;

5. Theological wri-


tings.
Saint Avitus | Died in 525. Bishop of 1. Ter religious po-
(Alcimus Ecdi- Vienne. ems ; 2. Letters; 3.
cius) of Au- Lost Sermons; 4.
vergne, Lost Poems.
St. Cesaire, of} 470—542. Bishop of |1. Sermons;.2. A
Chalons-sur- Arles, treatise upon grace
Saone. and free will ; lost.
Saint Cyprien,|Died about 546. Bishop of [Life of St. Cesaire.
of Arles. Toulon.
Saint Gregory,| 544—595. Bishop of {1. An ecclesiastical
of Auvergne. Tours, history of the
, Franks; 2. On the
glory of martyrs; 3.
On the glory of con-
fessors; 4, Lives of
the fathers ; 5. The
miracles of Saint
Martin ; 6. Several
theological writ-
ings ; lost.
Marius, of 532—596. Bishop of |A chronicle extend-
Autun. Avenche. ing from 455 to the
year 581.
Joseph of Towards the A Jew. A history of the
Touraine. end of the 5th Jews, in Hebrew.
century.


Seventh | Centurp. |
Saint Fortuna-|530, Beginning] Bishop of |1. Sacred and pro-


tus, of Ceneda, of the 7th Poictiers. fane poems; 2.
in Italy. century. Lives of the saints,

St. Colomban, | Died in 1615. Abbot of  {1. Poems; 2. Homi-

of Irish origin. Luxeuil. lies ; 3. Letters; 4.


Short theological
writings.


Date.


Towards the
middle of the
7th century.


Frédégaire, of | Towards the


Burgundy. middle of the
7th century.
Jonas, of Italian Idem.
origin.
Saint Ouen, of| 609—683.


Sanci, near °
Soissons.


Eighth


An anonymous| Beginning of
historian. [the 8th century.


Saint Boniface} 6S0—755.
(Winfried),
Anglo-Saxon.
Ambroise Aut-
bert, probably


of Aquitaine,


Died in 778.


An anonymous| Towards the


historian, end of the
8th century.
Turpin. Died in 800.


Ninth


Alcuin in Eng-| 735—804.
land, Yorkshire.
Anonymous. | Beginning of
a, 9th century.
Angilbertsin | Died in 814.
Neustria.


HISTORY OF


Condition in


Life. Works.

A m Collection of formu-
le, or models of
public and private
acts.

A monk, A chronicle from the
creation until the
year 641.

Abbot of Saint |The life of St. Co-

Amand, lomban.

Archbishop of |The life of Saint
Rouen. Eloy.
Centurp.
Les Gestes des
Francs, a chronicle
extending to the
year 584,
Archbishop of |1. Letters; 2. Ser-
Mayence. mons; 3. Theolo-


gical writings; lost.
Abbot of Saint |1. A Commentary
Vincent near | upon the Apoca-
Benevento. } lypse; 2. Sermons;
3. A treatise on

combating vice.
The Life of Dago-

bert_I.


Archbishop of |It is to him that has
Reims. been attributed the
fabulous chronicle
entitled, Histoire} —
de la Vie de Char-
lemagne et de Ro-

land,


Centurp.


Abbot of Saint |1. Commentaries up-
Martin of | on the Scriptures ;

Tours. 2. Philosophical
and literary writ-
ings ; 3. Poems; 4.

Letters.

Annales de JlHis-

toire des Francs.
Counsellor of |1. Poems; 2. A re-
Charlemagne, | lation of what he


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 241


Condition in


Name. Date. ie Life, Works.
abbot of St. | had done for his

Regnier, monastery, —
Leidrade, origi-| Died towards | Archbishop of |1. Letters ; 2. Theo-


nally from No- 816. Lyons. logical writings,


rica.


Smaragde. |Died about 820. 1. Moral treatise ; 2.
Abbot of St. | Commentaries on
Mihiel. the New Testa-


ment; 3. A Gram-

mar.

751—821. [Abbot of Ani-|1. The Code of Mo-

ane and Inde, | nastic Rules; 2.

The Concordance

of the rules; 3,

Writings on The-

ology.

Died in 821. | Bishop of Or- |1. Instruction

leans. schools ; 2. Theolo-

gical writings; 3.

Poems.

753—826. Counsellor to |1. Statutes for the

Charlemagne, | abbey of Corbie; 2.

abbot of Corbie.| Letters; 3. A trea-

tise De Ordine Pa-

lati, reproduced
by Hinemar.

Dungal, of Irish/Died about 834.|A hermit, nearj1. A letter to Char-

origin. St. Denis. lemagne on the
pretended eclipses
of the sun in the

Year [SLO 82 AN

treatise in favor of

the worship of im-

ages; 3. Poems.

1. A penitential ; 2.

A treatise on the

lives and duties of

priests.

Died in 833. |Counsellor to/The first collection
Charlemagne, | of the capitularies
abbot of Fon-| of Charlemagne and
tenelle. Louis. Le Debon-

Soot naire, in four books,

Died in 834, |Abbot of Saint}1. A philosophical

Martin of treatise on Chaos
Tours. and Darkness; 2.

Poems.

A poem on the life

and actions of Louis

le Debonnaire,


{Saint Benedict,
of Aniane, in
Septimania.


Theodulf, an
Italian Goth.


Adalhard, born
in Austrasia.


Died in 831. |Bishop of Cam-


Halitgaire.
bray.


Ansegise of
Burgundy.


Friedgies, an


rl


Died towards Abbot of
the middle of Aniane.
the 9th century.
P|


Ermold le Noir,
from Septima-
nia.


242 HISTORY OF


Condition in
Name. Date. Life. Works.


Amalaire, in | Died in 837. A priest at {1. The rule of the
Austrasia. Metz. Canonesses; 2. A
| treatise on the ec-

clesiastical offices ;


3. Letters.
Eginhard in | Died in 839. |Counsellor to/l. Th * life of Char-
Austrasia. Charlemagne,| lema; 1e; 2. An-
abbot of Seli-| nals; 2. Letters.


genstadt,
Agobard, origi-| 779—840. | Archbishop of |1. Theological writ-
nally of Spain. Lyons. ings; 2. Letters ; 3.
Poems.


Hilduin. |Died about 840./Abbot of Saint/The Areopagites,
Denis. destined to prove
that Denys the Are-


opagite is the same
as St. Denis, first,
bishop of Paris.


Dodane. Died in the [Duchess ofep-|A manual contain-
middle of the timania. ing counsels to he
9th century. sons.

Jonas in Aqui-| Died in 842. |Bishop of Or-|1. A treatise on the
taine. leans. institution of lay-


men ; 2. On the in-
stitution of the
king; 3. On Im-


ages.
Saint Ardon, | Died in 843. A monk at /The life of St. Bene-
Smaragde, in Aniane. dict d’Aniane.
Septimania.
Benedict in | Towards the Deacon at {A collection of the
Belgium. middle of the Mayence. capitularies of the
9th century. kings of the Francs,
in three books, add-
ed to the four books
collected by Ange-
sise.
Thegan,in Aus-| Died in 846. | Chorepiscopus |The life of Louis le
trasia. of .Tréves, | Debonnaire.
An anonymousiIn the first half} .. .. |The life of Louis le
writer calledjof the 9th cen- Debonnaire.
the Astronomer. tury.
Walfried Stra-| 807—849. Abbot of |1. Acommentary on
bo, in Germany. Reichenau the whole of the


Bible ; 2. The life

of Saint Gall; 3.
| Theological writ-
ings; 4. Poems;

amongst others a


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 243


ae


Condition in


Name. Date. Life. Works,
descriptive poem,
entitled Hortulus.

Frecult. Died in 850. Bishop of —|An universal history

Liseux. from the creation
of the world until
the end of the sixth
century.

Angelome in |Died about 855.| A monk at |Commentaries upon
Burgundy. Luxeuil. et parts of the
ible.


Raban-Maur, in} 776—856. [Archbishop of |Fifty-one works on


Austrasia, Mayence, theology, philoso-
phy, philology,
chronology; Let-

ters, &c.
Nithard in Aus-| Died in 859. |Duke of Mari-/The history of the
trasia. time France,| dissensions of the
monk at Saint} sons of Louis le
Riquier. Debonnaire.
Florus, in Bur-/Died about 860.| A priest at |1. Theological writ-
gundy. Lyons. Ings, amongst oth-


ers, a refutation of
the treatise on pre-
destination, byJohn
Scotus; 2. Poems;
amongst others, a
complaint on the
division of the em-
pire after Louis le
Debonnaire.
Died about 861.| Bishop of |Theological  writ-
Troyes. ings; amongst oth-
ers, on predestina-
tion, and against
John Scotus,

Died about 862.;Abbot of Fer-|1. Theological writ-
rieres in Gati-| Ings ; amongst oth-
nais. ers, on predestina-

tion; 2. Letters;
3. A history of the
emperors ; lost.
Died in 865. |Abbot of Corbie.|1. Theological writ-
ings; amongst oth-
ers, a treatise on


Saint Pruden-
tius, in Spain.


Loup (Servat),
in Burgundy.


Radbert (Pas-
chase), in the


diocese of Sois- ;
sons the Eucharist; 2.
The life of Wala,

abbot of Corbie.
; Ratramne. Died in 868. |Monk at Corbie./Theological __ writ-


ings ; amongst oth-
ers, on transubstan-


|


244 HISTORY OF


Condition in


Name. Date. Life. Works.
tiation and predes-
tination.
Gottschalk, of} Died in 869. |Monk at Orbais./Writings on predes-

Saxon origin. tination.
Otfried. Died about 870.|Monk at Weis-|A paraphrased trans-
semburg. lation of the Gos-


pel, in German
rhymed verse.
Milon. Died in 872. |Monk at Saint/Poems; amongst
Amand. others, a poem on
sobriety, dedicated
to Charles le
Chauve ; and a pas-
toral entitled, the
Combat of Winter


and Spring.

Jean, called the} Died between Layman. Several. philosophi-
Scot, or Eri-| 872 and 877. cal works: 1. On
gena, in Ire- divine predestina-
land. tion; 2. On the di-


vision of nature;
3. The translation
of the pretended
writings of Diony-
sius the Areopa-
gite.

Usnard. |About the mid-| Monk at Saint |A great martyrology.

dle of the ninth] Germain des


century. ° Pres.
Saint Remy. | Died in 875. |Archbishop of Theological works ;
Lyons. amongst others, on
predestination and
free will.

Saint Adon, inj 800—875. [Archbishop of|i. Theological wri-
the diocese of Vienne. tings; 2. A univer-
Sens. sal chronicle.

Isaac. Died in 880. Bishop of | |An extensive collec-
Langres. tion of canons.
Henrie,atHery,| 834—881. |MonkatSt.Ger-)The life of St. Ger-
near Auxerre, maind’Auxerre.) main d’Auxerre, in
verse, in six books.
Hincmar. Died in 882 | Archbishop of |1. Theological writ-
Reims. ings; amongst oth-
ers, on predestina-
tion; 2. Political
writings and coun-
sels; 3. Letters.


Anonymous. a *e os .. |The annals of St.
Bertin, by severall
writers, in part by


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 245


Condition in
Name. Date, Life. Works.


op of Troyes, and
perhaps by Hinc-


mar.
A monk of Saint/The end of the] .. .. |Des faits et gestes de
Gaul, Anony-| ninth century. Charlemagne.


mous,


Genth Century.


Remy in Bur-|Died about 908.|Monk at St.Ger-|1. Commentaries on
gundy. maind’Auxerre.| the Bible; 2. Theo-
logical works; 3.
Commentaries on
the ancient gram-
marians and rheto-
ricians,
Reginon. Died in 915. |Abbot of Priim./1..A chronology from
the birth of Jesus}
Christ until the
year 906 ; 2. A col-
lection of canonical}
rules.
Abbon. Died about 924.|Monk at Saint|A poem on the siege}
Germain des | of Paris by the Nor-}


Pres, mans in 885.
Hucbald, in 840—930. | Monk at Saint |1. Poems; ‘among
Flanders. Amand. others, a poem in


honor of the Bald,}
dedicated to Chas.|
le Chauve,inwhich
all the words begin
with c; 2. Lives of
the saints.
Saint Odon, in} 879—942. |{AbbotofCluny.| 1. Theological
le Maine. writings ; 2. The
lives of the saints,
especially that of
Saint Gregory of
Tours; 3. Poems.
John, of Italian|About the mid- Monk. The life of St. Odon,


origin. dle of the 10th abbot of Cluny.
century.
Frodoard, at 894—966. |Canon at Reims,|1. Poems; 2. The
Epernay. history of _ the}


919 to 966.
Helperic. | About the end |Schoolmaster of|A treatise on compu-
| of the Grand Fel. | tation or supputa-
10th century. tion of time as re-


a1*


246


Name.


John.


Adson, in
Transjuran
Burgundy.


Arnoult,


Gerbert, at
Aurillac.


HISTORY OF


Date.


Condition in


Life.


Works.


gards the ecclesias-
tical calendar.


About the end | Abbot of Saint |Several lives of the


of the
10th century.


Died in 992.


End of the
10th century.


Died in 1003.


Arnould at
Metz.


saints; amongst
others that of John
de Verdiere, abbot
of Gorze, and the
relation of his em-
bassy in Spain to
Abderrahman, ca-
liph of Cordova.


Abbot of Mon-]1. A treatise on the


tier en Der.


Bishop of
Orleans.


Antichrist, cele-
brated in the mid-
dle ages; 2. The
lives of the saints.
Letters entitled de
Cartilagine — (on
the Cartilage), re-
markable as an es-
say at anatomical
studies. They are
inedited.


Pope, under the}1. Works on mathe-
name of Sil-| matics ; 2. On phi-


vester II.


VII.


losophy ; 3. On the-
ology ; 4. Poems; 5.
Letters.


Chronological Table of the Councils and Canonical Legislation of
Gaul, from the Fourth to the Tenth Century.’


Date.


314


Place.
Arles.


Present.


33 bishops,

14 priests,

25 deacons,
8 clerks,


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


This council was convoked by
Constantine, to pronounce on the
subject of the Donatists; and of


Cecilian, bishop of Carthage.
Rules.—That each priest reside
in the place in which he was or-


dained.


1 It will be at once seen that in this abstract I have only inserted
the most important of the canons.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 247


Se Na a a aa SSE a a TS
Date. Place. Present. [Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


That the faithful who become

‘|governors of provinces receive let-
ters of communion, in order that
the bishop of the place they in-
habit may be able to watch, and
excommunicate them, if they act
contrary to the discipline.

That the priests and deacons
who quit the places assigned to
them, shall be deposed.

The council orders that Easter
should be celebrated everywhere

the same day; excommunicates
those who carry arms in time of
peace, usurious clerks, and calum-
niators; forbids deacons to cele-
brate the office; orders that abso-
lution shall be received in the
same place where excommunica-
tion was pronounced; __ forbids
bishops to encroach reciprocally
on their rights, and interdicts to
the deacons of towns the power
of doing anything without the
consent of the priests.


Euphratus, bishop of Cologne,
having denied the divinity of Jesus
Christ, the faithful and clergy of
Cologne denounce him as a here-
tic, and he is condemned and de-
posed.


346 | Cologne. | 14 bishops,
10 envoys
from bishops


This council, at which the em-|
peror Constantius assisted, and the
Arians prevailed, deposed Paul,
bishop of Tréves, who would not
sign the condemnation of Saint
Athanasius.


353 Arles.


This council, convoked by Sa-
\turnin, bishop of Arles, and which
decided nothing, banished Saint
Hilary, bishop of Poictiers, to
Phrygia.


356 Beziers. Ae ap


| This council condemned the
Arian formula adopted at Sir-
mium.


359 In Gaul. ma Se


360 Paris. oe ee This council condemned the!


248 HISTORY OF


Place. Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.|


Arian formula of Rimini; com-
municated this resolution to the
bishops of the east, and excom-
municated Saturnin, bishop of}
Arles,

Rules.—It is forbidden to con-
fess a crime, whether true or false,
in order to escape from holy or-|
ders. The council forbids the
ordaining those who have been|
twice married, or who have mar-|
ried a widow. It excommuni-]
cates virgins consecrated to God
if they marry, and those who,
after their baptism, sacrifice to
demons, or make use of pagan


374 | Valence 21 bishops.


383 Nimes purifications.
Date
uncer-
tain,
| 385 | Bordeaux. oe ve This council was held at the
request of Ithace against the Pris-
cillianists. Instantius was de-
prived of his bishopric; Priscil-
han appealed to the emperor, who}
put him to death.
386 | Tréves.! Fa ar This council declared Ithace}
absolved from the death of the}
Priscillianists, Saint Martin there
communicated with him, for
which he never forgave himself.
395 Turin. - “s This council treated only of af-


fairs of discipline, and the preten-
sions to primacy of the bishops
of Marseilles, as well as the ri-


Rules.—That no bishop shall
receive a clerk of another bishop
and ordain him for himself. That
no one who has been rejected


1 We have, as usual, preferred the date of Sirmond to that of Labbe,
because the events of these two councils clearly prove, that that of
Bordeaux must have taken place before that of Tréves. I can only
conclude that Sulpicius Severus deceived himself, when he said that
after the year 384 St. Martin was present at no council: or, which i
very possible, it is an error of the copyist.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 249


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.
shall be admitted to the commu-
nion.

That those who have had chil-
dren after their ordination, shall
be excluded from the major or-
ders.


Sifth | Century.


429 In Gaul. ie ae This numerous council assem-
Place uncer- bled in compliance with the
tain. wishes of the Bretons, who de-


manded from the bishops of Gaul
succor against the heresy of Pe-
lagius; the council sent them
Saint Germain and St. Loup.


439 Riez. 13 bishops, This council was held on the
1 bishop’s [subject of the bishop of Embrun,
envoy. who had been consecrated by two

bishops only. Several canons of
discipline were made at it.

Rules.—That if two bishops
only shall ordain a bishop, they
shall, for the future, be excluded
from all ordinations and councils.

That when a bishop dies, the
nearest bishop shall take charge
of his diocese.

That no person shall interfere
with the consecration of a bishop
without having been invited to do
so by the metropolitan.

That it be permitted to country
priests to give the blessing, to
consecrate virgins, to confirm neo-
phytes, and that they conduct
themselves as superiors to the
priests, and inferiors to the bish-
ops.!

That a council be held twice a
year.


441 Orange. {16 bishops, This council was engaged only
1 priest for jon affairs of discipline.
a bishop. Rules.—That no one shall re-


1 This passage proves that chorepiscopi, or rural bishops, are meant;
a class superior to priests, but inferior to the bishops. :


250 HISTORY OF


Date. Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


a


Place. Present.


duce to servitude those who bes
long to the church.
That one council shall not be


That the functions of an infirm
bishop shall be fulfilled by an-
other bishop, and not by priests.

The council forbids repeating
confirmation, delivering up those
who take refuge in a church; for-
bids a bishop to communicate with
him who has excommunicated an-
other bishop, or to ordain dea-
conesses ; orders that some of the
graces of the church be granted
to idiots, and that catechumens|
shall be present at the reading of
the Gospel.


442 Vaison. od This council was occupied with
affairs of discipline.
Rules.—That those who retain
the offerings of the dead shall be
excommunicated. If a bishop
does not acquiesce in his sentence,
he can appeal to a synod.!
444 Vienne. ie ut This council was presided over’
by Saint Hilary. Chelidonius,
bishop of Besangon, was deposed
for having married a widow.
Rules.—That the priests shall} _
receive the holy Chrism every
year at Easter, from the nearest!
bishop, and not at their own mere
discretion.


About| Arles.2  |44 bishops.
452


This council was held against
the Novatians, the Photinians, or
Paulinists, the Bonosians, the
Arians, the Eutychians. Several
canons of discipline were made at


1 The judgments of the metropolitan are doubtless here referred to.

2 We find among the canons of the council of Arles, twenty which
belong, as it would appear, to that of Orange; they are distinguished
by the titles C. d’O.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 251


Date. Place.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


it. The council also was engaged
with the Japsi, that is to say, those
who had given way during the
persecution.

Rules,—That no one shall be
consecrated a bishop without a
letter from the metropolitan, or
from three provincial bishops.

That in a contested election the
metropolitan must vote with the
majority.

The ordination of a clerk out
of his diocese, and without the
approbation of his bishop, is null.

A bishop who does not come to
the council, or who quits it before
the end, is excommunicated.

A bishop is guilty of sacrilege
who neglects to extirpate the cus-
tom of adoring fountains, trees,
and stones.

When there are priests present,
ideacons must not administer the
body of Jesus Christ.

Actors shall be excommuni-
cated.

That penance shall not be given
to married people without their
mutual consent.

C. a@O. The causes of clerks
must, under pain of excommuni-
cation, be brought before the
bishop.

C. @O. If a bishop builds a
church in the diocese of another

ishop, which cannot be prevented
without a crime, he must not think
he has therefore the right of dedi-
cating it; that is reserved for the
bishop in whose diocese it stands ;
but he will have the privilege of
placing what clerks he pleases
therein.

To avoid simony in the elec-
tion of bishops, the bishops shall
name three persons, among whom
the clergy and the people shall
choose.

The council forbids the clerks
to practise usury, to charge them-
selves with the conduct of other


252


‘Date.


About
453


455


A61


Place.


Angers.


Arles.


Tours.


HISTORY OF


Present.


8 bishops.


13 bishops.


8 bishops,
1 bishop’s
envoy.


i


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


people’s affairs, to have in their
house, after they have passed the
deaconship, other women than
their grandmother, their mother,
their daughter, their niece, or
their wife, converted like them-
selves.

The canons of the council of
Orange give to priests the power
of confirming a dying heretic,
grant penance to the clerks, per-


mit them to absolve dying persons


without penance, on condition of
their performing penance if they
recover.

They grant baptism to demoni-
acs, and those who have suddenly
lost the use of speech, and ex-
communicate any person who,
having lost his serfs, owing to
their having taken refuge in a
church, shall possess himself of
the serfs of that church.


This council was held on the
occasion of the consecration of
Talasius, bishop of Angers.

Rules.—That those who re-
nounce the priesthood for the
army shall be excommunicated.

That monks who wander about
without letters of leave shall be}
excommunicated.

That a bishop shall not advance
the clerk of another bishop.


This council assembled to ter-
minate the quarrel existing be-
tween several bishops and Faust,
abbot of Lerens.


This council was composed of
bishops assembled for the feast of
St. Martin. Several canons of
discipline were made.

Rule.—That a clerk shall not
travel without letters from his
bishop.

That a clerk who has permis-
sion to marry, shall not marry a
widow.


CIVILIZATION


IN FRANCE. 253


cnn ei Sari nnEE nnn nr USSD SESE


Place. Present.


Vannes. 6 bishops.


Arles. 30 bishops.


Lyons. . oe


Agde. 25 bishops,


8 priests,


bishops.


22


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


If a clerk is guilty of drunken-
ness, he must be punished accord-
ing to his order.


This council was composed of
bishops assembled for the purpose
of the consecration of the bishop
of Vannes. It discussed points
of discipline. '

Rules.—That without the per-
mission of his abbot, a monk shall
not ask for a private cell.

That each abbot shall have but
one monastery.

That, under pain of excommu-
nication, no clerk shall practise
divination by Saints’ names, or
the Holy Scriptures.

The council forbids clerks to
be present at Jewish wedding-
feasts or entertainments ; orders
all who are in town to attend at
matins ; and prescribes for all the
province (Brittany) one order of
ceremonies and chant.


This council was also held
against the predestinarians.


a


This council was held against
the predestinarians. We are ig-
norant of what passed.


Sixth | Century.


This council was not occupied
with dogma. All its canons, of


2 deacons, |which 24 out of 70 belong to the
representa- |council of Epaone, are upon dis-
tives of their|cipline.


The twenty-four rules
of the council of Epaone will be
found in their place. Saint Ce-
saire presided at this council.
Gratian adds canons taken from
various authors; one against sor-
cerers, another against usurers ;
the first of all forbids to bishops
and priests the effusion of blood;
there is another against quarrel-
some persons, scandal-mongers,
and calumniators, At the end of


254 HISTORY OF


Date. Place. Present. [Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


this council is a letter from Theo-
doric to the Roman senate, which
appears to be the result of it, and
in which priests are forbidden to
sell the goods of the church.

Rules.—If a bishop has pro-
nounced an unjust, or too severe
excommunication, and warned by
the neighboring bishops, he does
not withdraw it, they must not
refuse the communion to those
who have been deprived of it.
All that is given to a bishop be-
comes the property of the church.

The council prescribes the ton-
sure of clerks, the fast of Lent,
and the communion at the three
great feasts.

Freedmen are protected by the
church.

Every person must be present
at mass every Sunday, and not to
leave until the conclusion, under
the penalty of being publicly re-
primanded by the bishop. The
bishop can dispose of the minor
goods of the church, and of his
vagrant serfs.

The clerk who shall suppress
or deliver up the titles of posses-
sion belonging to the church,
shall be excommunicated, and
condemned to pay out of his own
property the damage which shall
accrue thence to the church.

Priests, deacons, and sub-dea-
cons, are forbidden to be present
at wedding feasts.

A clerk guilty of drunkenness,
shall, according to his order, be
deprived of the communion during
thirty days, or submitted to a cor-
poral punishment, corporali sup-
plicio.

The council deprives of his
priesthood the clerk who robs
the church ; orders that a young
clerk shall not be preferred to an
elder one; if, however, the latter
cannot fulfil the duties of an arch-
deaconate, he shall have the title,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 255


Date.


d11


Place.


Orleans.


Present.


32 bishops,


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


and the bishop must choose some
one to exercise the functions,
This council fixes, at the age
of forty years, the time when vir-
gins take the veil, at twenty-five
that of the deaconship, at thirty
that of priesthood and episcopacy.
It forbids conferring the mo-
nastic order upon married men
without the consent of their
Wives ; it renews a canon of the
council of Vaison, upon the care
to be taken of exposed children.
It forbids the celebration of great
feasts out of the parish; to sell
or to give the goods of the church ;
to build new monasteries without
the permission of the bishop ; to
build monasteries for men near
those of the women, and to ordain
penitents. It commands the
church to defend freedmen, and to
distribute the salaries of priests
according to their merits. It also
regulates several rules of worship.


This council was convoked by
Clovis, on the advice of Saint Re-
my, whose signature, however, is
not to be found. Many bishops
were there from the kingdom of
the Visigoths, which had just
been conquered by Clovis.

Rules.—This council made se-
veral canons upon the right of
asylum, and prescribed that the
criminal and serf who had taken
refuge in the church, should not
be delivered up until they had
stipulated for their safety.

That no secular person shall be
ordained without an order from
the king or the judge, and that
the children and the grandchil-
dren of clerks shall be under the
authority of the bishop, instead
of that of their parents.

That no one shall be excom-
municated for having, without
proof, claimed anything belonging
to the church; that the ab-'


256°


HISTORY OF


Place.


Date. Present.


515 | St. Maurice.| 4 bishops,


8 counts.


| 516 Lyons. “s oe
517 Epaone, | 25 bishops.
in the


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


bots shall be subject to the
bishops, and the monks to the
abbots.

That no person shall celebrate
Easter in the country.

That the bishop, if not ill, must
on Sunday attend the nearest
church.

That if, through humanity, the
bishop has lent land to be culti-
vated, the length of time must not
occasion any prescription.

That no monk, instigated by
ambition or vanity, shall, without
the permission of his abbot, aban-
don his brethren to build a sepa-
rate cell ; that any professed monk
who marries shall be expelled the
ecclesiastical order.

The council also orders, that if
a bishop has ordained a serf with-
out the permission of his master,
he must indemnify the latter for
his loss, but the clerk will remain
ordained; it forbids any one to
marry the widow of a priest or
deacon ; places under the power
of the bishops the real property
given to the church, and secures
to them a third part of the offer-
ings; enjoins them to provide the
poor and sick with clothes and
nourishment, and regulates seve-
ral articles of worship.


This council was convoked by
king Sigismond, converted to the
Catholic faith, upon the subject of
the foundation or restoration of
the monastery of Saint Maurice,
and the rules to be established
therein.


It is known by a letter from
Avitus, that this council was held,
and that he assisted at it. No-
thing else has come down to us
concerning it.


There exist two circular letters
by which Avitus and Viventiolus


Date. Place.


Vienese,
now Jena,
in Savoy.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 257


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


convoke to this council the bish-
ops of their provinces: Avitus in-
sists upon the importance of
making a good choice of priests
charged in times of sickness with
signing for their bishop. Viven-
tiolus declares that clerks are
obliged to come to the council,
while it is only permitted to the
laity, that the people may know
that which is regulated by the
bishops.

Rules.—That priests, bishops,
and deacons, shall not possess
sporting dogs or falcons.

That an abbot shall not, with-
out the authorization of the bish-
op, sell the goods of the abbey,
neither shall he enfranchise its
serfs, for it seems unjust that
while the monks are obliged to
work every day upon the land,
their serfs should enjoy repose and
liberty. That no bishop shall sell
the goods of the church without
the approbation of his metropoli-
tan; he may only conclude useful
exchanges.

Ifan abbot, convicted of fault,
is refractory, and will not receive
a successor from his bishop, the
affair must be taken before the
metropolitan.

If any one has killed a serf,
without the consent of the judge,
he must expiate this effusion of
blood by a penance of two years.
The council imposes the same
penance on those Catholics who
have fallen into heresy.

That if a serf, guilty of atro-
cious crimes, seeks refuge in a
church, he shall only be exempted
from corporal punishment.

The council declares null the
donations or legacies made by
priests and bishops of the goods
of the church; it forbids priests
to serve a church in another dio-
cese, without the consent of their
bishop; to be present at the feasts


258


Date.


517


Place.


Lyons.


HISTORY OF


Present.


11 bishops.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


given by heretics; it permits the
laity to accuse clerks; it forbids
placing the relics of the saints in
country oratories, unless there are
priests in the neighborhood to
serve them; it forbids bishops and
clerks to receive women after the
vesper hour; orders all the pro-
vincial bishops to conform them-
selves to the order of offices esta-
blished by the metropolitan. It
forbids the young monks and
clerks to enter the monasteries for
women, unless they go to see a
mother ora sister. It orders all
the noble citizens to come at
Easter and Christmas, to receive
the bishop’s blessing. We must
add to the canons of the council
of Epaone, several rules which
belong to it, and which have been
placed in the council of Agde of
506 ; these are their principal pro-
visions :

Bishops are allowed to dispose
of their own goods, but not of
those of the church; the council
condemns to restitution out of
their own property, those priests
and deacons who have disposed of
the property of the church, and
declares null the enfranchisements
that they have made. It forbids
clerks to practise magic; it will
not allow the ordination of fac-
tious, usurious, and vindictive
clerks; it forbids the clerks that
are not consecrated to enter the
sacristy, and to touch the sacred
utensils ; and to the deacons to sit
down in the presence of the
priests.


This council was held on the
occasion of a certain Stephen,
who had married his sister-in-
law. There are no canons that
call for remark; they are a repe-
tition of some already cited. Fra-
ternal union among the bishops is
recommended.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 259


ne TUE E EIT UEInII EIEN SSUES SISSIES


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


524 Arles. {14 bishops, This council was held and pre-
4 priests forjsided over by Saint Cesarius on
their bish-|the occasion of the dedication of
ops. the cathedral of Saint Mary.

Rules.—Although we ought to
observe the ordinances of the
ancient fathers as to the longer
duration of the conversion of the
laity, before their ordination, yet
as the number of churches aug-
ments, and the want of clerks is
greater, it is ordered, without pre-
judice to the ancient rules, that
no metropolitan bishop shall make
a bishop from the laity; that the
bishops shall not make a laic
priest, or deacon, until a year of
noviciate.

That the bishop who has or-
dained a penitent or a bigamist,
shall remain a year without say-
ing mass.


527 | Carpentras. | 16 bishops. This council was presided over
by St. Cesarius; it has but one
article. The fathers arranged to
meet at Vaison the next year.
Rules.—That what belongs toa
church, shall be distributed to the
clerks who serve it, and employed
in reparations. That if a bishop
has more expenses than money,
and there are in his diocese pa-
rishes in the contrary situation,
he can apply their surplus to his
expenses, leaving them the sum
necessary to the wants of their
churches and clerks.


529 Orange. 14 bishops, | This council was assembled for

8 viri illus-|the dedication of the cathedral of

tres. Orange, built by the prefect Li-
ber; but the true cause of its con-
vocation by St. Cesarius, was a
writing by Faust, bishop of Riez,
«De gratia Dei qua salvamur,”
which was suspected of semi-Pe-
lagianism. The council fixed, in
25 canons, the doctrine of St.
Augustin, but did not make it into
discipline.


260


_HISTORY OF


1s


Date.


529


533


529 Valence.


Place.


Vaison.


Orleans.


Present.


12 bishops.


26 bishops,
8 priests.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.}


This council was convoked by
St. Cesarius (who could not pre-
side) against the semi-Pelagians.


This council was presided over
by St. Cesarius.

Rules.—That, as is the salutary
custom in Italy, the priests, when
they have no wives, shall receive
in their houses young lecturers,
whom they shall instruct, and
thus prepare for themselves
worthy successors; and when
these are of age, if by the fragility
of the flesh, they wish for a wife,
they are not to be prevented from
marrying.

That, the same as in Italy and
the Eastern provinces, the Kyrie
eleison and the Sanctus, Sanctus,
shall be said every day at the
mass.

That the pope’s name shall be
recited in our churches.

As, not only in the apostolic
seat, but also in the East, Africa,
and Italy, the malice of the here-
tics causes them to deny that the
Son of God has always been equal
with the Father, after Gloria,
&c., Sicut erat in principio, has
been added; and we order that
the same shall be observed in all
the churches.

The council permits all the
priests to preach, not only in the
towns, but in all the provinces,
and prescribes that when they
cannot do it, a deacon shall read
the homilies of the holy fathers.


Rules.—That no bishop having
received notice from his metro-
politan, fail to come to the coun-
cil or to the consecration of a co-
bishop.

That the metropolitans convoke
each year the bishops to the pro-
vincial councils.

That the bishops shall receive
nothing for the ordinations. |


vi
*


“<2


CIVILIZATION


IN FRANCE. 261


a Date.


534


Place.


Clermont.


Present.


Bishops.


Object of the Council, Rules, &e. |


gras

That no bishop shall refuse to!
attend the funeral of another bish-
op, and that he shall demand no-
thing for his trouble and ex-
penses.

That a bishop attending the
funeral of a bishop, shall assemble
the priests and entrust the goods
of the church to persons worthy
of confidence.

That no person ina church shall
sing, drink, or do anything unbe-
coming.

That no one who is unlettered
or ignorant of the form of baptism
shall be ordained deacon or priest.

On account of their frailty, wo-
men are excluded from the dea-
conship.

Catholics who return to the
worship of idols and eat flesh of-
fered to idols, or animals killed by
the bite of a beast, or suffocated,
shall be excommunicated.

That no priest shall lve with
secular persons without the per-
mission of the bishops.

The council condemns to de-
gradation the deacon who shall
marry in captivity, and the clerks
who disdain to acquit themselves
of their functions, It excommu-
nicates abbots who resist bishops.
It renews the ancient form for the
consecration of the metropolitan,
and orders that after being chosen
by the provincial bishops, the
clerks, and the people, he shall}
be consecrated by the provincial
bishops. It forbids marriages be-
tween Christians and Jews.


The council was held the
11th year of his reign, by Theo-
debert, king of Austrasia, who was
more favorable to the clergy than


his father had been.
Rules.—That no bishop shall
dare to propose any affair to the
council before those which re-
gard the amendment of manners,


262


Date.


Place.


HISTORY OF


Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


the severity of the rule, and the
saving of souls.

That bishoprics shall be given
according to merit, and not to
those who merely ask for them.

That the clerks shall not rise
against the bishops by the help of
the power of the laity.

That those who demand from
kings the property of the church,
and by a horrible cupidity seize
the goods of the poor, shall be ex-
cluded from the communion, and
the donation shall be null.

That Jews shall not be consti-
tuted judges over Christian peo-|—

le.

That if a bishop will not by ca-
nonical rigor prevent the priests
and deacons from having com-
merce of any kind with women,
he shall himself be excommuni-
cated.

The council forbids priests pri-
vate oratories to celebrate the
great feasts away from the cathe-
dral church.

Canons derived from different
authors.—That the priests shall
inform the people where the inns
are situated. The innkeepers
must not refuse to lodge any tra-
veller, and must not make him
pay for anything more than the
market price, or the affair must
be taken before the priest, who
will oblige them to sell with hu-
manity.

There shall be no action against
a bishop who has without inter-
ference possessed the diocese of
another bishop during _ thirty
years. (Some words are wanting
here, but it is evident that the
council recommends that in this
case the limits of the dioceses
shall not be confounded.)

As regards priests who are ac-
cused of fornication, or any capital
crime, and who have no colleagues
to swear with them, as to their


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 263


Date. Place. ‘Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


innocence, they must be judged
by the canons.

A bishop may, with the con-
currence of the clerks, help his
family with the church treasures,


538 Orleans. | 19 bishops, , Rules.—If clerks placed under
7 priests, [the patronage of any of the laity,
shall make it a pretence to disobey
their bishop, and refuse to fulfil
their functions, they must be sep-
arated from other clerks and shall
receive nothing from the church.

It shall be in the power of the
bishop to decide whether or not
the clerks attached to a monastery
or a church shall or shall not re-
tain what they possessed before
their ordination.

If any clerks, as by the inspira-
tion of the devil happened lately
in several places, rebel against
authority, unite in conspiracy,
and take mutual oaths, or mutually
subscribe an agreement to that
purpose, nothing shall excuse
such presumption, but the affair
shall be taken before the synod.

That no serf or laborer shall be
admitted to ecclesiastical honors.

That no one shall be present at
divine service with warlike arms,

If a judge, knowing that a here-
tic has re-baptized a catholic,
does not seize the heretic and send
the affair before the king, for we
have catholic kings, he shall be
excommunicated during the space
of a year.

This council repeats the rules
of the preceding, concerning the
separation of priests from women ;
sub-deacons are included. We
must repeat, says the council,
what we know is not observed.

It orders, also, as regards the
newly converted Christians, on
account of the novelty of their faith

| and conversion, that the forbidden
| marriages they have contracted!
previous shall not be broken.


264 HISTORY OF


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c. |


It renews, also, the anathemas
against those who obtain or alien-
ate the goods of the church, it ex-
communicates, for six months, the
bishops who shall make an ordi-
nation contrary to the canons; for
one year, him who in such acase
has deceived the bishop, clerk or
witness. It expels from his order

' |the clerk guilty of any capital
crime. .

It directs them not to restore
but to buy at a just price the
Christian serfs who have sought
in the church an asylum against
their Jewish masters, who would
impose on them anything contrary
to their religion, or shall not have
fulfilled the promises made when
they were restored upon a former
occasion.

It refers clerks, who complain
of the bishops, to the synodal
judgment.

It complains, that the people
have been told that one may not
travel, or cook, or clean houses or
one’s person on a Sunday; it de-
clares these, observances more
Jewish than Christian, and holds
permitted all that was allowed be-
fore; it excludes the cultivation
of land, which would prevent the
attending church. It forbids peo-
ple to leave church before the end
of mass. It interdicts, also, ‘* for
by the grace of God, we have ca-
tholic kings,” from Holy Saturday
until Easter Monday, the Jews
from mixing with the Christians
in any place or on any occasion.


541 Orleans. | 38 bishops, | The council was occupied with
11 priests, jdiscipline.
1 abbot each} -Rules.—The council orders the
for 1 bishop.|celebration of Easter according to
the usage of Rome, and decides
that each time there is a doubt
upon the epoch of a solemnity, the
apostolical usage ought to be ob-
served,


| Date.


Place.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 265


Present.


28


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


That the parish priests receive
the decrees of the canons, so that
they or their people cannot excuse
themselves on the plea of igno-
rance of what is necessary for their
salvation.

If a bishop, who has left none
of his own property, has disposed
of that of the church, it must re-
turn to the church; but if from
the serfs of the church he has
made a number of freedmen, they
remain free, but they must not


\fall away from their allegiance to


the church.
If bishops quarrel among them-


jselves for lands or other posses-
\sions, on being warned by the let-


ters of their brothers, they must
arrange between themselves or
submit to arbitrators.

Bishops, priests, and deacons,
are exempt from the wardship of
the administration, because it is
just to retain for Christians what
the law of the world did for the
pagan priests.

That the slaves of the priests
and of the church must neither
pillage nor make prisoners, for it.
is iniquitous that ecclesiastical
discipline should be stained by the
crimes of the servants of those
who frequent the sacrament of re-
demption. Serfs who have fled to
the church under pretext of mar-
riage, and believing that thus they
can marry, must be returned to]
their masters or parents; and the
clerks must not protect such
unions.

If parishes are placed in the
hands of powerful men, and the
clerks, warned by the archdeacon
of the city, neglect to acquit them-
selves of their duty towards the
house of the Lord, they must be
corrected according to ecclesiasti-
cal discipline.

If Christians, slaves of the
Jews, have fled from their masters


266


HISTORY OF


Date.


549


Place.


Orleans


Present.


50 bishops,
21 priests,
archdeacons

or abbots,
each repre-
senting a
bishop.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


and demand their liberty, we or-
der that, as in the ancient laws,
having given a just price they be
set at liberty.

If any one desires to have a
chapel on his own premises, he
must assign sufficient land for it
and furnish it in with clerks, who
will celebrate the offices in a pro-
per manner.

The council orders also that the
consecration of a bishop shall take
place in the town which he is to
govern ; it forbids proprietors of
chapels to receive strange clerks
without the consent of the bishop
of the place. It forbids heirs to
take what has been left to the
church ; it also forbids any one to
marry a girl without the consent
of her parents.

It excommunicates those pro-
prietors of chapels who would
hinder the clerks who serve them
from acquitting themselves of
what they owe to the divine ser-
vice.

It excludes from ordination
those who descend from uneman-
cipated serfs, and assures to the
churches the return of all of which
the bishops have given out the
usufruct.


This council condemned the
errors of the Eutychians, the Nes-
torians, and according to Baluze,
of the Arians, whose heresy was
reaching Orleans.

Rules.—A serf shall not be or-
dained, even though he be free,
against the will of his master. If
it has been done, the serf must
be returned to his master ; but if
he exacts from him services in-
compatible with the honor of the
ecclesiastical order, then the
bishop shall give two serfs to the
master, and take the one who has
been ordained.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 267


Date. - Place. Present. Object of the Council, Rules, &c.
549 or| Clermont. {10 bishops. This council assembled a short
550 time after that of Orleans.


Rules.—As we have discovered
that several people reduce again
to servitude those, who, according
to the custom of the country, have
been set at liberty in the churches,
we order that every one shall keep
possession of the liberty he has
received; and if this liberty is at-
tacked, justice must be defended
by the church.

The prisoners must be visited
every Sunday by the archdeacon,
or some one proposed by the
church, that all their wants may
be attended to.

The veil may not be given to
virgins when the will of their pa-
rents, or their own, leads to the
monastery, until three years’ trial.

A bishop knowing that there are
leperous persons on his territory,
or in the town, must furnish them
with all that is necessary.

A master who has not kept the
word he gave to his serf to in-
duce him to leave the church,
shall be excommunicated. If the
serf refuse to leave the church
upon the word of his master, he
can employ force, that the church
may not suffer from calumny, as
if she withheld serfs.

If a master is a pagan or a here-
tic, he must present Christians
worthy of confidence to swear for
him.

No one may be permitted to
obtain a bishopric with the help
of presents, but, with the consent
of the king, the pontiff elected by
the clergy and the people must,
as prescribed in the ancient rules,
be consecrated by the metropoli-
tan, or some one commissioned in
his place, and the provincial bish-
ops.

PNo one shall be made bishop
over those who refuse to have
him, and (it would be a crime)


268


Date.


550


554


Place.


Metz.


Arles.


HISTORY OF


Present.


11 bishops,
8 priests, dea-
cons, and
archdeacons.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


the consent of the clergy and citi-
zens must not be constrained by
the oppression of persons in pow-
er; if it beso, the bishop who
has been elected more by violence
than by a legitimate election, shall
be for ever deprived of the usurped
pontifical honor.

Excommunication may not be
lightly pronounced.

Priests may not at an unfitting
time see even their near relations.

Bishops may not ordain in a
diocese vacant by the death of its|
bishop. No bishop must be,
placed above another, unless the’
latter has been guilty of some!
crime. |


This council was convoked by
Theodebald, king of Austrasia.
Nicet, bishop of Tréves, had ex-
communicated several Franks for
incestuous marriages. This irri-
tating them, they insulted the
bishop. The issue of this coun-
cil is not known; its epoch is not
precise.


Saint Gall, bishop of Clermont,
being dead, the bishops present at
his funeral wished to consecrate
as his successor Cato, who was
elected by a great part of the peo-
ple; but the archdeacon Cautin,
coming to king Theodebald, ac-
quainted him with the death of
the archbishop, but concealed the
rest. The king gave him the
bishopric; and the bishops, then
at Metz, consecrated him, and he
was bishop in spite of his flock,
by the violence that the king em-
ployed towards the deputies of
Clermont.


Rules.—No priest shall depose
a deacon or subdeacon without the
consent of his bishop.

The clerk shall not waste the
property which has been given


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 269


Date. Plage: Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


him for his use by the bishop. If
a young clerk does so, he must
be corrected by the discipline of
the church; if he is old, he must
be looked upon as an assassin of
the poor.

The council also made several
rules for keeping under the spir-
itual and temporal power of the
bishop, the monasteries of men
and women. It forbids abbots to
itravel without the permission of|”


the bishop.
555 |In Armorica, This council excommunicated
place uncer- Maclou, bishop of Vannes, who,
tain. after the death of his brother,


Chann, count of Brittany, quitted
his bishop for the countship and
a wife.


556 Paris. 27 bishops. | This council, convoked by Chil-
debert, king of Paris, and presided
over by Sapandus, bishop of Arles,

{deposed and shut up in a monas-
tery Saffaracus, bishop of Paris:
Eusebius his successor.


557 Paris. 16 bishops. | This council was assembled to
prevent by laws the dispersion of
the goods of the churches, that
the Frank kings gave to the first-
comers,

Rules.—Several laws against
the detainers of church property,
those who receive it from the
kings, those who attack the per-
sonal property of the bishops, be-
cause the goods of the bishops are
the property of the church. It
forbids bishops to try to get pos-
session of another’s goods, and or-
ders, without prejudice to royal
liberality, the restitution thereof
to the legitimate proprietor. It
forbids any one to carry off or to
marry, under favor of the king, a
girl or a widow without the con-
sent of her parents. It annuls

| the ordination of a bishop named
by the king against the will of


270


Date. Place.


567 Lyons.


HISTORY OF


present.


8 bishops,


5 priests,
1 deacon.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


the metropolitan and the provin-
cial bishops, and the citizens;
and as in several things ancient
customs are neglected, the coun-
cil renews and recommends the
observance of the ancient laws.
The council also orders the church
and the priests to observe the will
of the defunct as regards serfs left
by will to keep the tombs.


This council elected Heraclius
in the place of Emerius whom
Clotaire had made bishop of Sain-
tes, Clotaire being dead in the
interval, but Charibert made them
receive Emerius, and imposed
fiaes on the bishops, amongst
others, on Leontius, the metropo-
litan of Bordeaux, who had con-
voked and presided at the coun-
cil.


This council was convoked by
king Gontran, to judge Salone,
bishop of Embrun, and Sagittaire,
bishop of Gap, who were thorough
brigands. They were deposed
by the council ; but they appealed
to Pope John, and were by his
order reinstated in their sees.

Rules.—As to the ruin of their
souls many have made captives by
violence and treason, if they neg-
lect to restore those they have
taken captive, as the king orders,
to the place where they have long
lived in repose, they must be de-
prived of communion with the
church.

The council orders that discus-
sions between bishops must be
decided by the metropolitan, and
that no bishop shall give commu-
nion to him who has excommuni-
cated another bishop. That wills
by which clerks, or other persons,
have left anything to the church,
shall always be valid, whatever
fault may be in the form thereof.
It forbids bishops to reclaim the
liberalities of their predecessors.


| | =


CIVILIZATION


IN FRANCE. 271


Fn Ett UtttdttdEtIEEIIISS


Date.


567


573


Place.


Paris.


Tours.


Present.


a


7 bishops.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


This council was assembled
during the wars of the sons of
Clotaire, and when the kings
made use of the goods of the
church to meet the expenses they
incurred. Saint Redegonde wrote
to the council to demand the con-
firmation of her rule. Her de-
mand was granted.

Rules.—-This council, like many
others, strongly recommends con-


lcord amongst the bishops. It or-


21 bishops, |


ders that citizens and country
priests shall nourish their poor,
that they may not be obliged to go
to other cities; it reiterates all
prohibitions about women, and
orders several precautions that
suspicion may not fall upon the
clerks. It forbids priests and
monks to sleep together; it ex-
communicates the judge who shall
refuse to separate a monk from
the wife he has taken since his
profession ; it regulates the monks’
fasts; it ferbids several pa
gan superstitions; it renews all
the menaces against those who,
whilst our lords make .war upon
each other, invade or reclaim the
goods of the church ; and declares
those judges and lords excommu-
nicated who oppress the poor in
spite of being warned by the
bishop.

The council orders that bishops
only shall give letters of recom-
mendation; that before sending
away an abbot or an archpriest,
they take counsel of all their
priests and abbots, under penalty
of being themselves excommuni-
cated. It excommunicates priests
who do not keep the rules of
celibacy; prescribes that they,
shall help each other when one}
of them is insulted by indocile
clerks. It forbids women to en-
ter monasteries of men.


This council was assembled to


272


HISTORY OF


Date. Place.
575 Lyons.
577 Paris.
578 Auxerre.
i
E


Present.


1 priest.


The bishop
of Auxerre,
7 abbots,
34 priests, 3
deacons, all
from the dio-
cese of Aux-
erre.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


decide the affair of Promotus, who
had been consecrated bishop of
Chateaudun, against all canonical
rule, The council declared him
deposed, according to the demand
made by Pappolus, bishop of
Chartres, administrator of the
church of Chateaudun during the
vacancy.


This council judged the affair
of Pretextat.


This synod was held by Anna-
chaire, bishop of Auxerre; no-
thing was discussed but questions
of discipline and ceremonies.

Rules.—This synod forbids ma-
ny pagan superstitions; it orders
all priests to attend the synod in
May, and the abbots to come to
the council in November.

It forbids repasts in churches,
and allowing young girls and se-
cular persons to sing there.

No clerk shall summon any one,
but he shall authorize his brother,
or some other layman, to do it.

Every layman, who has despised
the warnings of his archpriest,
shall be excluded from the church
so long as his disobedience shall


The synod forbids two masses to
be said the same day on the same
altar; to put a corpse upon a
corpse; to receive the offering of
those who have committed sui-
cide; it also forbids clerks to hear
or celebrate mass unless they be
fasting ; priests or deacons to assist
at executions, or at sentences of
death. No clerk shall summon
another before the secular judge ;
priests may not sing or dance at
feasts ; abbots and monks may not
be godfathers. It regulates the
penance of an abbot who has not


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 273


Date. Place, Present. [Object of the Council, Rules, &c,


enforced the observance of the
laws upon celibacy; his penance
ought to take place in another
monastery than that of which he
is the head.


579 Chalons. ose ae This council was convoked by
Gontran to judge anew Sagittaire
and Salone. They were con-
demned as guilty of high treason
and being traitors to their country,
the bishops having found that
their other crimes could be ex-
piated by canonical penance. The
council consecrated a bishop for
Maurienne, and subjected it to the
bishop of Vienne.


579 Saintes. .. oy The council recommended to
the mercy of Heraclius the count
Nantinius, whom he had excom-
municated, and who demanded
absolution. The bishop granted
it.


580 Braines. ee O This council judged the affair
of Gregory of Tours, accused by
one Leudaste. The cause was
gained by Leudaste.


581 Lyon. og £: This council reprimanded seve-
ral bishops for negligence,


581 Macon. 21 bishops. This council was convoked by
Gontran.

Rules.—No clerk shall wear
silk or other secular vestments
that do not become his profession.

A judge who has without suf-
ficient cause—that is to say, with-
out a charge of manslaughter,
theft, or craft, arrested a priest,
shall be excommunicated.

No Jew shall be made judge
over Christians, nor shall they be
permitted to receive taxes. The
council forbids Christians to serve
Jews, and gives to Christians,
serfs of Jews, the power of re-
deeming their liberty.

The council made a law upon


Q74 HISTORY OF


Date. Place. Present.


SS |


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.
the letters from bishops to other
bishops concerning the redemp-
tion of captives, recommending
that their authenticity be exam-
ined,

It orders bishops to take care of
the lepers found in the territory
of their city, that they may not go
to other cities.


583 Lyon. 8 bishops, 12
bishops’ le-
gates.


584 Valence. | 17 bishops. | The council confirmed the do-
nations that Gontran, his wife and


daughter, had made to churches,


585 Macon. 43 bishops, | The council convoked by Gon-
15 envoys, 16/tran, was composed of all the


bishops with-|bishops under him, amongst whom
out sees,


ecute the decrees of the council.
It was in this council that took
place the celebrated discussion, of
which it has so often been said,
the question was whether woman
had a soul. The fact is, that a
bishop insisted that woman ought
not to be called homo; but he
submitted to these two reasons,
that the Scripture says that God
created man, male and female;
and that Jesus Christ, son of a
woman, is called the Son of Man.
Rules.—The council orders that
Sunday shall be more exactly ob-
served ; that every Christian shall
present offerings; that the tithes
shall be paid regularly, and that
no baptisms shall be celebrated
except in the time prescribed,
unless it is a matter of necessity.
One of the canons commences
thus :—It behoves us to bring to
their first state all those things of
the holy church that we know are
egenerated by the lapse of time.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 275


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


That no priest being intoxicat-
ed, or having broken his fast,
are to celebrate the sacrifice.
The council made a law for
protecting freedmen before the
church, and charged their bishops
to plead their cause. It also reg-
ulates, thatif any powerful person
has a quarrel with a bishop, the
affair must be carried before the
metropolitan, and no_ violence
employed against the bishop ; it
orders the same to be observed as
to priests and deacons.
It forbids the judges to decide
Jabout widows and orphans, with-
out having informed the bishop,
their natural protector, or, in his
absence, one of his priests, and
to decide all in deliberating with


ought to respond.

The council forbids clerks to
assist at the trial of criminals.

It orders that all the demands
be judged according to the laws
and canons, “for treading under
foot the laws and rules, those who
are near the king, and are inflated
by the power of the world, usurp
the goods of others, and without
judicial action or proof, not only
deprive the poor of their fields,
but eject them from their dwell-
ings.”


This assemblage of bishops and
nobles counselled and confirmed
the peace between Gontran and
Childebert.


587 Andelot. <e oe


276


pe ne ne Te a ee ee ee
Date.


588


588


589


589


589


589
590


Place.


Clermont.


Place uncer-
tain.


Sourcey.


Poitiers.


Chalons.


Norbonne.


HISTORY OF


Present.


The bishops
who were
with Gontran.


7 bishops


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


This council was held by Sulpice,
bishop of Bourges, with his suffra-
gans, about certain parishes, which
the bishops of Cahors and Rhodez
were disputing ; the latter gained
the cause.


This*council was occupied with
several crimes, amongst others,
with the murder of Pretextat,
archbishop of Rouen.


This council ordered that the
entry of the town be granted to
Drontegisile, bishop of Soissons.


This assembly excommunicated
Chrodielde and the nuns of the
monastery of St. Radegonde.


This assembly confirmed the
excommunication pronounced by
the council of Poitiers.


This council was convoked by
Recared, king of the Visigoths,

Rules.—The council forbids
clerks to wear purple vestments ;
to stop upon public places ; to mix
in the conversations which are
held there ; and to meet in coun-
cils or plots, under the patronage
of the laity, which had been al-
ready forbidden by the council of
Nicea (of Chalcedonia, according
to Labbe). It orders abbots not
lto inflict upon the guilty impris-
oned in the monasteries any other
penance than that imposed by the
bishops.

The council forbids certain pa-
gan superstitions, and condemns
the guilty, if they are freemen, to
penance; if they are slaves, to
the rod.

It orders clerks to be subordinate
to their superiors ; forbids those
who are at the altar to quit it
during the celebration of mass; it
forbids, under penalty of a fine,
the Jews interring their dead
with chants. :


Date. Place.


590 {On the con-
fines of Au-
vergne, of
Gerardin and
Rouergue.


590 Poitiers.


590 Metz.


591 Nanterre.


594 Chalons.


Chalons.


615 Paris.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 277


a ee a ee ae nee ee ee 7 |
Present. (Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


6 bishops,


Seventh | Century.


24.


This council judged the affair
of Tetradia, divorced from Didier,
and first wife of Euladius, who
claimed the property she had tak-
en in flying to rejoin Didier.


This council judged the quarrel
between Chrodielde and the ab-
bess of the monastery of Poitiers.


Gilles, bishop of Reims, was
deposed in this council for the
crime of high treason. Chrodi-
elde and Basine were received in-
to grace.


The little king, Clotaire IL.,
was baptized in this assembly.


This council regulated the man-
ner in which the offices should be
said in the monastery of Saint
Marcel.


a


Queen Brunehault, in this coun-
cil, deposed Saint Didier, bishop
of Vienne.


This council was convoked by
Clotaire II.

Rules.—No bishop shall choose
a coadjutor for himself.

No judge shall arrest a clerk
without the knowledge of a bish-
op


$$$ S$


The council forbids any one to
touch the goods of a deceased ec-
clesiastic until his will is made
known.

It forbids bishops and all who
have power, whether clergy or
secular, to seize the goods or
rights of a bishop.

It forbids bishops and archdea-
cons to take possession of what
has been left by a priest or an ab-
bot, and to despoil the church un-].
der pretext of the good of the
church.


—S——


278


Date. Place.


SS


A lit-|Place uncer-


tle af- tain,
ter the
prece-
ding.
625 Reims.


HISTORY OF


Present.


41 bishops.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


It forbids Jews to demand from
princes any authority over Chris-
tians, and orders that he who has
obtained it shall be baptized with
all his family.

Rules.—The council forbids
making a layman archpriest, un-
less it be because the merit of his
person has made the bishops judge
it necessary for the consolation of
the church, and the defence of the
parishioners.

If freedmen have sold them-
selves, when they are able to give
the sum for which they sold them-
selves, they ought to receive their
liberty; if amongst such persons,
the husband has a free wife, or
the wife a free husband, their
children shall be free.

The council forbids celebrating
in the monasteries, unless by the
permission of the bishops, bap-
tisms and masses for the dead, or
interring the laity there.

It forbids depriving without
reason, archpriests and the arch-
deacons. .


There are after this council sy-
nodal statutes of the church of
Reims, but they are thought to
be of much later date; they con-
tain nothing of importance.


Rules.—The council renews the
laws against the conspiracy of
priests, and the snares they hold
out for their bishops. It orders
bishops to seek out and convert
the heretics that may be found in
Gaul. It orders that those whose
lives shall be saved by their seek-
ing refuge in the churches shall
promise before being set at liberty
to accomplish the canonical pe-
nance. Ifa Christian is forced to
sell his slaves, he may not sell
them to any but Christians, under
pain of excommunication. If
Jews wish to make their Christian
slaves adopt their persuasion, or


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 279


a ee ee eee ae ee ee ee
Date. Place. Present. [Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


make them suffer cruel torments,
they shall return into the power
of the fisc. The council forbids
receiving the accusation of per-
sons who are not free, and reduc-
ing freedmen to servitude ; it for-
bids, as did almost all the preced-
ing councils, to regard as a bishop
him who is not a native of the
place, and who has not been cho-
sen by the will of all the people,
with the consent of the provincial
bishops ; it forbids bishops to
break the sacred vases unless it is
for the redemption of captives.


627 Macon a we Agrestius, monk of Luxeuil,
rigorously attacked the rule of St.
Columban; the abbot Eustache
defended it ; and the council sanc-
tioned it.


628 Clichy. [Bishops and} The council of Clichy was oc-
nobles con-|cupied with public peace and ec-
voked by |clesiastical discipline.
Clotaire.
633 Clichy. 16 bishops, | This council treated of fugi-
king Dago- |tives and the asylum of the church
bert and |of Saint Denis.
some noble
laymen.
638 Paris. 9 bishops, This council confirmed the pri-
king Dago- |vileges of the church of Saint
bert, 3 noble|Denis.


laymen.

645 Orleans. in a This council was assembled by
Saint Eloy against a Greek who
preached the heresy of the Mo-
nothelites. He was opposed by
bishop Sauve, and driven from
Gaul.

648 Bourges. Provincial

synod.


650 n 38 bishops, | The council of Ch&lons de-
: lek 5 abbots, 1 |pose Agapius, and Bobon, bishops
archdeacon. jof Digne.

Rules.—The council forbids
consecrating at the same time two
bishops for one town ; confiding
'the property of parishes and the


280


Date.


About
658


664


669


670


Place.


Nantes.


Paris.


Clichy.


Autun.


HISTORY OF


Present.


25 bishops.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


parishes themselves to laymen;
selling slaves beyond the dominion
of the king (Clovis II.). It forbids
judges to visit parisires and mo-
nasteries, which are under the
jurisdiction of bishops, and to send
before them clerks and abbots, to
make them prepare lodgings. It
forbids electing two abbots for one
monastery, or one abbot to choose
his successor, or abbots and monks
to seek the protection of the no-
bles, and to go to the prince with-
out the permission of the bishop;
it complains that those nobles who
have chapels shake the allegiance
of their clerks to the jurisdiction
of the ordinary. It forbids carry-
ing arms in church, or attacking
any one there to kill or wound
him ; it also forbids that women
should sing indecent songs there


Nivard, bishop of Reims, con-
sented in this assembly to the re-
novation of the monastery of
Hautvilliers, near Marne.


These bishops confirmed the
privileges granted to the church
of Saint Denis by Landry, bishop
of Paris. Labbe mentions this
assembly but does not reckon it.


Bishops and] King Clovis in this assembly


nobles.


had the privileges of the church
of Saint Denis committed to writ-
ing.

This council, held by Saint Le-
ger, was only occupied with mo-
nastic discipline, and prescribed
nothing new on this subject.

Rules.—Let the priest, or dea-
con, who does not know perfectly
by heart the symbol of Saint
Athanasius, be condemned by his
bishop. No layman shall be looked
upon as catholic who-does not go
to communicate at Christmas, at
Easter, and at Whitsuntide. No
woman shall mount to the altar.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 281


Date. Place. Present. [Object of the Council, Rules, &c.

About Sens. 34 bishops. | This council confirmed the pri-

670 vileges of the monastery of Saint
Pierre-le-Vif.

679 |Place uncer-| .. 28 This council condemned the

tain. Monothelites, and sent three le-


gates to the pope, two bishops,
and one deacon.


685 or| In a royal a ots Ebroin deposed in this council
684. palace. Saint Leger, and Lambert, bishop
of Maestricht.


688 Id. oe Oe Saint Leger and Ebroin being
dead, three bishops disputed for
the body of Saint Leger; the
council adjudged it to Ansoald,
bishop of Poitiers.


692 Rouen. 16 bishops, | This council granted several
4 abbots, 1 |privileges to the monastery of
legate and |fontanelles, upon condition that

many of thejit should not swerve from therule
clergy. of Saint Benedict.


Eighth | Century.


Saint Willibrod and St. Swith-
bert presided at this synod, which
sent Saint Boniface and several
other missionaries to preach the
gospel to the Germans.


719 | Maestricht. He


142 Germany. Carloman, Carloman convoked this coun-
7 bishops |cil which was held at Augsburg
named, seve-jOr at Ratisbon ; he had just ar-
ral others, |rived from Italy, and had received
and their [from pope Zachary the order to
priests, noble hold this council. Itis Carloman
laymen. who speaks in these canons.

Rules.—By the counsel of holy
priests and my nobles, we insti-
tute bishops for the cities; we
place Boniface at their head, and
we order that synods shall be held
every year.

Priests are forbidden to carry
arms, except those who are ne-
cessary in the armies to say mass,
and to hear the confessions of sin-
ners,


24*


282


Date. Place.


Present.


—_—.


743 | Leptines.


nn


HISTORY OF


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


Parish priests must submit to
their bishops, and render them an
account of their conduct every
year.

One must be cautious with
strange and unknown bishops.

Unknown priests and bishops
may not be admitted to the holy
mystery.

The bishops, with the aid of the
count (Gravio), must watch that
the people do not fall into any pa-
gan superstition. .

(Several dispositions follow re-
garding the conduct of the atang

This council was held by Pepin ,
it confirmed the decrees of the
council of Germany. Pepin
placed at the head of the bishops
whom he had chosen, Abel, arch-
bishop of Reims, and Adorbert,
archbishop of Sens. Saint Boni-
face presided at this council; the
object of it was to reform the
clergy; the bishops, priests, and
all the clerks promised to change
their habits, and to conduct them-
selves according to the ancient
canons; the monks received the
rule of Saint Benedict; chastise-
ments were denounced agains
those, male or female, who should
be guilty of adultery. Itis Pepin
who speaks.

At the end of this council are
found several pieces which appear
to belong to it: the renunciation
by the Saxons of the worship of
Odin, in the German language; a
list of the pagan superstitions of
the Germans; an allocution on
illicit marriages, one on morals,
and one against the Jewish ob-


iservance of the sabbath; also the


canons given by Boniface; they
contain nothing new.

Rules.—We order that he who
is in possession of a house, shall
give a sol to the church or monas-
tery.


CIVILIZATION


IN FRANCE. 283


emperor tibrevenrts: Hole re a


Date.


744


745


Place.


Soissons.


Germany.


Present.


23 bishops,
several
clerks and
laymen.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


We order, as my father ordered
before, that he who has practised
any pagan superstition, be con-
demned to a fine of fifteen sous.

Canons and statutes decreed by
the synod held by Boniface, ac-
cording to the order of the Roman
pontiff and the prayer of the prin-
cipal Franks and Gauls.

These canons commence and
finish by a profession of obedience
to the pope, whom they engage to
consult and obey in all things;
they promise also to ask from him
the Pallium. The metropolitan
must hold a council every year;
every bishop on his return from
council must assemble his priests
and his abbots and exhort them to
observe its decrees ; every bishop
must visit his diocese every year ;
every priest must at Lent render
a complete account of his conduct
to his bishop. The metropolitans
must watch the bishops and in-
quire about their zeal. If a bishop
cannot correct his priests, he
must carry the affair to the arch-
bishops, as the Roman church has
insisted upon my making a vow to
indicate to her those priests whom
I could never correct.


This council, with the consent
of the princes and the people,
condemned the heresy of Adal-
bert; it made several canons of
no interest; it is signed by Pepin
and Radbod.


This council deposed on the
demand of Saint Boniface, the
bishop of Mayence, who had
killed some one in war. Carlo-
man, who had convoked this coun-
cil by the advice of Boniface, and
his brother Pepin, gave to Boni-
face the bishopric of Mayence,
which was made metropolitan of
Germany.


284


Date.


748


752


Place.


—._— —_——_._ —_—.


Duren.


Vermerie.


HISTORY OF


Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


This council was convoked by
Pepin to occupy itself with the
repair of churches and the affairs
of the poor, widows and orphans,
to whom it was urgent that jus-
tice should be rendered.


This council was held in the
presence of Pepin.

Rules.—The council forbids
giving a woman the veil against
her will, and in this case declares
her at liberty ; ; the priest who has
done it is disgraced.

A freeman who has married a
wife, believing her to be free, can
marry again upon learning that
she is not; and so for a woman,
unless her husband has sold him-
self through poverty, and she has
consented to it, and the price of
the sale has kept her.

He who knows that the woman


he marries is aserf must keep her.

A serf who has a concubine
who is a serf, can quit her and
receive another from the hands
of his master; but he would do
better to keep her.

If a man is obliged to fly, and
his wife refuse to accompany him,
he can marry again after he has
done penance.

If a freed serf has commerce
with a woman who is a serf, he
must marry her if the master give
his consent; if not, so long as she
lives he may not have another
wife.

He who permits his wife to take
the veil cannot marry again.


This council was held under
king Pepin; all its dispositions
bear the mark of civil authority.

Rules.—The count must force
the priests to attend the synod.

No one shail, under any pre-
text, stop the pilgrims who are
travelling to Rome.

A livre may not contain more


CIVILIZATION


IN FRANCE. 285


Oe ee


Date.


755


Place. Present.


Verne.  |Nearly all the


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


than 22 sous, of which one must
be for the coiner. Franchises
must be preserved.

This council confiscates the
goods of those who make for-
bidden marriages, and condemns
to pecuniary and corporal pun-
ishment those who aid or tolerate
them.


The council was held by the


bishops of jorder and in the presence of king


Gaul.


Pepin.

Rules.—There must be bishops
in every town.

All must obey the bishops whom
we have constituted metropoli-
tans, from this time until we can
do it more canonically.

There shall be every year two
synods, one in the calends of
March, in the presence of the
king, and in whatsoever place he
please; the other in October, and
in the place that the bishops shall
have chosen in March.

All the ecclesiastics that have
been so directed by the metropoli-
tan shall come to the second sy-
nod.

The bishop shall have the pow-
er of correcting his clergy and
the monks.

Those men who say they have
been tonsured for the love of God,
and who live on their property,
and according to their fancy, shall
be shut up in a monastery, or shall
lead a canonical life under the
direction of the bishop.

If a monastery has fallen into
the hands of laymen, so that the
bishop cannot amend it, and the
monks wish for the salvation of
their souls to leave it, and to enter
another, they must be permitted
to do so.

Bishops who have no diocese
must not exercise any function in
the diocese of other bishops.

As the people have been per-


756


757


HISTORY OF


Place. Present.


Leptines,


Compiegne. | 20 bishops,
14 ecclesias-
tics.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


suaded that they may not on Sun-
day goon horseback, on oxen, or
in carriages, or travel or prepare
their nourishment, or cleanse
themselves, or their houses (and
as this is more Jewish than Chris-
tian), we have decided that Sun-
day may be kept as it has been
hitherto. We think that we ought
to abstain from cultivating the
land, that we may have more fa-
cility to come to church ; if any
one does work that is interdicted,
his chastisement does not belong
to the laity, but to the priests.

All laymen, whether noble or
not, must be married publicly.

No church may remain more
than three months without a bish-
op.
Royal monasteries must render
account of their income to the
king ; those of the episcopacy, to
the bishop.


This council was held by king
Pepin, who endeavored to procure
the restitution of church property :
not being able to succeed, they
imposed a rent of twelve deniers
on the farms on this property, and
they ordered a levy of ninths and
tenths with the same view.


This council was held by king
Pepin in the general assembly of
the people.

Rules.—All the canons of this
council regard marriage; they
permit the wife of a leper to mar-
ry another man, if she has the
consent of her husband; and the
man who has married in a fief to
which he has followed his lord,
after the death of this lord,
if he is despoiled of the fief which
he received, and has left the wife
he received at the same time, and
married again in his own country,
is permitted to regard this second
wife as legitimate.


2


Date.


758


759


761


763


764
765


766
767


767
768
770
771
772
773


773
775
776


Place.


Complegne.


Germany.


Wolwich.


Nevers.


Worms.


Attigny.


Orleans.


Gentilly.


Bourges.
Saint Denis.
Worms.
Valenciennes
Worms.

In Bavaria.


Geneva.
Duren.
Worms,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 287


Present.


27 bishops,
17 abbots,


5 bishops,


13 abbots.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


This assembly, which perhaps
ought not to be counted here, was
that in which Tassilon, duke of
Bavaria, swore fidelity to Pepin.


Guarin and Ruithard, employed
by the fisc, condemned to prison
for disorderly conduct, Othmar,
abbot of Saint Gall, whose only
crime appears to be that he had
complained and still complained
of their exactions.


Pepin held this assembly in
Auvergne ; they disputed against
heresies on the Trinity. Pepin
made many donations to the neigh-
boring churches,


‘Pepin held this assembly; it
has left nothing regarding the
church,


Nothing remains of this assem-
bly except the methods taken by
its members to assure themselves
a great number of masses and
prayers after their death.


In this assembly, held, like the
preceding, py Pepin, there was a
discussion between the Greeks
and the Romans touching the
Trinity and the procession of the
Holy Ghost and images.


Many Saxons were baptized in
this assembly,


288


Date.


777
779


780


782


785
786


786
787
788


788


790
792


Place.


Paderborn.


Duren.


Near Lippe.


Near Lippe,


or at
Cologne.


Paderborn.


Paderborn


Worms.
Worms.


Ingelheim.


Narbonne.


Worms.
Ratisbon.


HISTORY OF


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


Present.


& $y In this one also.


These rules bear the title of
capitularies, but they are never-
theless canons of the ecclesiastical
assemblies held by Charlemagne.

Rules.—Bishops who are not
ordained must be so without de-|
lay. Churches cannot give asy-
lum to men condemned to death.

There are many other disposi-
tions, but they relate more to pub-
lic police, than to ecclesiastical
discipline.


This council was occupied with
the erection of episcopal sees in
Saxony, and the construction of
several churches.


Witikind was baptized.


They occupied themselves with
the affairs of the church of Saxo-


ny.


29 bishops, | This council treated of the
Didier, the |heresy of Felix, bishop of Urgel,
pope’s legate ;jand the limits of the diocese of
3 envoys from Narbonne. Under the date of
bishops, and |789, there isa collection of capitu-
one chan-_ |laries, given by Charlemagne upon
cellor. ecclesiastical discipline; the
council of Soissons calls them
synodals; they are in a great part
taken from Eastern canons and
the decrees of the popes. Charle-
magne held that year an assembly

at Aix la Chapelle.


This council condemned Felix,
bishop of Urgel, who said Jesus
Christ was the adopted son of God.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 289


Pe
Date. Place. Present. jObject of the Council, Rules, &c.


This council condemned for the
third time, Felix and Elpaud,
archbishop of Toledo, who held
the same opinion as Felix. The
council rejected with anathema
the doctrine of the council of
Constantinople upon the worship
of images, regarding it as idola-
trous.

Rules.—The council ordered a
maximum price for the sale of
goods, and ordered the new money
to be received, It forbids ava-
ricious cellarers to be chosen in
monasteries. Abbots may not
blind or mutilate their monks;
ecclesiastics and monks may not
drink in an ale-house ; clerks of
the. king’s chapel may not com-
municate with clerks who are re-
bellious to their bishop. Bishops
may not absent themselves from
their diocese more than three
weeks. Bishops may not be ig-
norant of the canons and the rules;
they may not invoke new saints;
the sacred woods must be de-
stroyed.


794 | Francfort. | The bishops
of Gaul,
Germany,
and Italy,
2 legates
from the


pope.


This council was occupied with
the subject of the construction of
the monastery of St. Paul at Rome.


797 Aix-la- ae ve
Chapelle,


This council received the abju-|


799 Aix-la- es a : ;
ration of Felix.


Chapelle.


The date of this council is un-
certain, amongst other things it
treats of the chor-bishops or
country-bishops. Traces of it are
only to be found in the capitula-
ries of Charlemagne. ;


799 Ratisbon. ots “s


%


800 Tours. Shi
Place uncer-| .. Wy Nothing is left of these councils

tain. and their date; it is only known

Worms. that they occupied themselves as


to the manner in which the priest
could purge themselves from the
crimes of which they were ac-
cused.


25


290


HISTORY OF


Ninth Century.


Date.


802


809


813


Place.


Chapelle.


Aix-la-
Chapelle.


Arles.


Aix-la-


Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


This council was occupied with
the reform of monastic and eccle-


This council treated of the
question of the procession of the
Holy Ghost which had been raised
by John, a Jerusalem monk; he
sent a legation to the pope to have
his decision.

The council was also occupied
with discipline, but nothing was
decided.


These five councils of 813 were
held by order of Charlemagne, for
the reform of ecclesiastical dis-
cipline; much is repetition; the
general intention was to oppose
the ignorance, grossness, and vio-
lence that pervaded the clergy;
all recommend to the priests and
bishops retirement from the affairs
of the world, goodness and study,
and interdict them avarice, &c.

These dispositions so often re-
peated in several councils, an-
nounce the progress that the secu-
lar spirit was making every day
in the clergy. There are also
several questions upon tithes, the
observation of the Sabbath, mo-
nastic discipline, and the stability
of ecclesiastics.

These councils recommended a
great preparation for communion,
and seem to desire that the laity
should not communicate so often.

Rules.—The council orders that
the bishops shall carefully instruct
the priests and the people regard-
ing baptism and the mysteries of
the faith.

They must preach not only in
the towns, but also in the parishes.

Bishops must protect the poor
against oppression, and address


Date.


813


813


813


813


Place.


Mayence,


Reims.


Tours.


Chalons.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 291


Present.


30 bishops,
25 abbots.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


themselves to the king to procure
the cessation of it.

It forbids the laity to receive
money from the priests to recom-
mend them to benefices.


Rules.—The council orders that
powerful persons, counts, bishops,
&c., may only buy the goods
of the poor in public under pain
of nullity.

It prescribes rules for the ca-
nonical life of the clerks.

-It forbids holding assemblies
for temporal affairs in the church.

It recommends the priests teach-
ing the people the Creed and the
Lord’s Prayer, at least, in the vul-
gar tongue, if they cannot learn
them otherwise, and declares free
the clerks and the monks tonsured
against their will.


Rules.—The council forbids a
priest to pass from an inferior title
to a superior one; monks may not
attend secular pleadings ; a town
or monastery may not have more
servants of God in it than it can
well contain.


Rules.—The council recom-
mends bishops to read, and, if
possible, to retain by heart the
gospel and the epistles of Saint
Paul; not to give way to excesses
at table ; not to amuse themselves
with games of actors, and to ex-
hort priests to fly them, and also
the chase. It forbids priests to
give the communion, indiscrimi-
nately, to all those who attend
mass. It recommends all the
faithful, rich or poor, to submit to
the bishops.


This council was occupied with
the administration of penance,
and it pronounces anathemas
against those penitential works
whose errors are certain, and the


292


Date.


814


814


816


Place.


Lyons.


Noyon.


Tréves.


Aix-la-


HISTORY OF


Present.


11 bishops,
8 abbots,
4 counts,
several of
the clergy.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


authors uncertain. Their appre-
ciation of sins was very unequal.
The council counts eight sins,
from which it is difficult to keep ;
these are the deadly sins; and ha-
tred is comprised therein. It is,
without doubt, this which makes
the eighth.

Rules.—The council forbids
bishops to require a private oath
from the priests they ordain. It
forbids separating the serfs united
in marriage ; it condemns to peni-
tence, but does not separate from
their husbands those women who
to gain this end have their chil-
dren confirmed.

Some think that we ought to
confess our sins to God alone,
others that we ought to confess
them to the priests; both one and
the other are useful in the church)
of God.

The confession which is made
to God purges from sin; that made
to the priest teaches us how to
purge ourselves of them, for God
is the author, and the distributor
of health and salvation, and he
accords much by the invisibie ef-
fect of his power, and much by
the action of the doctors.

The council declares that con-
fession ought to be entire.


This council named Agobard
archbishop of Lyons, in the place
of Leidrade, who had retired in a
monastery at Soissons.


This council, which was held
by Wulfaire, archbishop of Reims,
and his suffragans, terminated a
dispute about boundaries between
the bishops of Soissons and No-
yon.


The date of this council, held
by Hetton, archbishop of Tréves,
is uncertain.
| Rules.—This council, accord-}


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 293


Date. Place. Present. (Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


ing to the order of Louis le De-
bonnaire, made two regulations,
one for the canons in 145 articles;
the other for the nuns in 28.
Louis sent copies of it to each me-
tropolitan, with the order to see
them observed in their provinces.
These two rules are extracted
from the fathers and the councils,
and contain nothing of any impor-
tance except the growing tenden-
cy to impose monastic life upon
the clergy. This rule of the can-
ons differs very slightly from that
of a monastery.

Rules.—This rule given to the
nuns, as well as a multitude of
canons at this epoch, shows the
difficulty the bishops had to re-
duce them to the obedience they
wished to impose on them: the
following dispositions recur con-
tinually :

Abbesses must submit to the
bishops ; abbesses may not go out
without the permission of the
bishop ; abbesses may not give the
veil, nor take upon themselves
any sacerdotal functions. We see,
too, that they had a great difficulty
in making them keep the cloister ;
for the councils frequently forbid
their receiving men, monks, or
priests, at forbidden hours, and
without necessity.


Chapelle.


Aix-la- he rs This council was composed of

Chapelle. ; abbots and monks alone; they
only treated of monastic disci-
pline.


817


Aix-la- es .. |. This council condemned several

Chapelle. bishops who had taken the part
of his nephew Bernard against
Louis le Debonnaire,


818


Vannes.
Aix-la-
Chapelle.
Thionville. aie sits This council was held by the
archbishops of Mayence, Cologne,
25*


818
819


820


(294


Date.


822


$23


Place.


Attigny,


Compiegne.


HISTORY OF


Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.
Tréves, Reims, their suffragans,
and the deputies of the other pro-
vinces of Gaul, pronounced ec-
clesiastical punishment and fines
against those who should be found
guilty towards clerks.


It was in this council that Louis
le Debonnaire submitted to do pe-
nance.


This council was occupied with
ecclesiastical goods usurped by
the laity. The legates of pope
Paschal were there.


This council was occupied about
the worship of idols. The au-
thors of the collection regard as
forged the acts which bear its
name, but have no knowledge of
the real acts. The council was
held on the occasion of two le-
gates being sent on the same ques-
tion to the pope by the emperor
of theeast. The council also sent
its acts by two legates to the pope.
Rules.—The canons of this
council are contained in three
books. In the first, in thirty-four
articles, the council established
the distinction of the two powers,
and placed that of the priests
much above that of the kings. It
announces to the clergy the ne-
cessity of correcting themselves ;
it insists upon the right adminis-
tration of baptism, and the neces-
sity of well explaining the mean-
ing of it to the people; it declares
against simony, against the avarice
of the bishops, which it endeavors
to check, by renewing the ancient
dispositions as to the goods of the
church; it also makes several
rules which apply to manners. It
demands that two councils be held
every year in each province, and
that the priests, deacons, and all
those who are aggrieved attend
them.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 295


Date. Place.


Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.

The council assimilate the
chor-bishops to the seventy disci-
ples of Jesus Christ, and complain
that they wish to assume the func-
tions of a bishop.

The council orders bishops to
watch the schools with care, and
to summon the scholars to the
provincial council. It interdicts
commerce, and the occupations of
a farmer to the priests and monks,
and enjoins exact residence to the
bishops and priests. It forbids
bishops who are not in want to
take the fourth part of the offer-
ings ; it forbids priests to give the
veil, and women to take it them-
selves; it complains bitterly that
women serve at the altar, and even
give to the people the body and
blood of Jesus Christ. It forbids,
unless in a case of absolute ne-
cessity, to say mass in houses and
gardens; it forbids forcing the
priests to do so—at any rate, it
cannot be done without an altar
consecrated by the bishop. It al-
so forbids celebrating mass with-
out having any one to respond.

The second book of the council
treats of the duties of kings. It
is there declared that, ‘“‘ No king
ought to think he holds his
kingdom from his ancestors, but
from God.” The rest of the book
treats of submission to the king,
the duties of Christians, and the
respect to be shown in churches,
in thirteen articles.

The third book is a letter from
the bishops to the king, in which
they give him an account of all
that has passed in the council, and
indicate to him the rules they
wish particularly to be observed.
Besides those we have mentioned,
they added others.

They demand that schools
should be founded in three places
in the empire, that the efforts of
his father and his own should not]


296


Date.


826


829


829
829
829
829


830


831


833


Place.


Ingelheim.


Paris.


Mayence:
Lyon.
Toulouse,
Worms.


Lyon.


Nimeguen.


Worms.


HISTORY OF


Present.


ee ee


7 bishops,
2 chor-
bishops,
13 abbots,
priests, or
deacons,
14 proxies.


r


26 bishops,
5 abbots.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


perish by negligence. They de-
mand that he send from the pal-
ace a crowd of priests and monks,
who reside there in spite of their
bishops. They complain against
the custom of celebrating Service
on holy days in the chapels of the
palace. In short, they give the
king several counsels, in which
the tone is very different to the
habits of respect the bishops had
contracted with Charlemagne.


This council was occupied with
the affairs of the church. Louis
le Debonnaire received there the
envoys from the pope, and from
the Holy Land.


Louis le Debonnaire convoked
these councils of Paris, Mayence,
Lyons, and Toulouse, which were
held in the same year, 829. He
indicated the bishops who should
compose it, the questions to be
treated, and the capitularies they
should adopt. Of these councils
we have only that of Paris. It is
probable that they much resem-
bled each other.


This council confirmed the re-
solutions of the four preceding
ones.


The synod confirmed the dona-
tion that had been made to the
monastery of Saint Pierre de Be-
zon by Alberic, bishop of Langres.


This assembly deposed Jesse,
bishop of Amiens, who had taken
part against Louis le Debonnaire.


Alderic, archbishop of Sens,
permitted in this council, that the


—


Date.


833


834


834


835


835


836


Place.


ee


Compiegne.


Saint Denis.


Attigny.


Metz.


Thionville. | 43 bishops.


Aix-la-
Chapelle.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 297


e


Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


abbey of Saint Remy should be
removed.


This assembly deprived Louis
le Debonnaire of the crown.


This assembly again admitted
Louis to the communion and the
empire.


This assembly was occupied
with the bad state of the church.
The bishops referred to lay judges
the decision of a question of mar-
riage, reserving for themselves the
power of applying a penance, if it
must take place. ~


Louis complained in this coun-
cil of Ebbon, archbishop of Reims,
who had excommunicated him.
Ebbon chose judges from amongst
the bishops according to the Afri-
can canons,


Louis again received absolution
in this council. Ebbon was con-
demned, and abdicated.


This council was assembled by
the order of Louis le Debonnaire,
to deliberate upon three objects
which form the matter of its three
books: ist, the lives of the bish-
ops, twelve articles; 2d, the doc-
trine of the bishops, twelve arti-
cles, and the doctrine and lives
of the inferior orders of the cler-
gy, sixteen articles; lastly, 3d,
the person of the king, his chil-
dren, and his servants, twenty-five
articles. The last articles of this
book have, however, no direct
connection with its title, and are
generally dispositions. The coun-
cil also addressed to Pepin, king
of Aquitaine, a treatise, in three
books, in which it confirmed, by
the authority of the Seriptures,


|the things it had ordered. The


first book has thirty-eight articles;


298


HISTORY OF


Date.


836 |Cremieu, in


the q iy. Ph


839


Place.


Chalons.


Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


the second, thirty-one; the third,
twenty-seven. They are all cita-
tions, narrations, and reflections,
and contain no positive disposi-
tion. As to the canons, they are
only the repetition of the pre-
ceding councils. The third book,
that part which relates to the king,
and to several other points, is the
copy, sometimes abridged, of the
third book of the sixth council of
Paris.

Rules.—The council recom-
mends to the priests to watch that
the faithful who are confided to
them be baptized and confirmed,
know the Creed and the Lord’s
prayer, and how they ought to
conduct themselves; and that they
be corrected of their faults as they
ought, and do not die without con-
fession, sacerdotal prayers, and
extreme unction.

It recommends that there should
not be in the monasteries for wo-
men dark places and _ corners,
where they can offend God with-
out being seen.

It recommends that, where it is
possible, every church have its
priest, who will govern it himself,
or under the conduct of a priest of
superior grade.

It forbids fasting, marrying, and
pleading on Sunday.

It recommends communion
every Sunday.


Agobard, archbishop of Lyons,
and Bernard, bishop of Vienne,
had been deposed by the council
of Thionville for having deposed
Louis le Debonnaire. ‘This coun-
cil was assembled to judge them,
but nothing could be decided, on
account of their absence. They
were at last restored to grace.


This assembly regulated the
affairs of the church and the state.
In 841, an assembly was held


es


i


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 299


Date. Place. Present.


841 Auxerre. | 20 bishops,
4 abbots.


842 Bourges. a =


843 | Toulouse.


843 Coulaine. eo ee


844 Loire, in cf ir
Anjou.


844 | Thionville. es ng


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


at Ingelheim, at which twenty
bishops assisted, and several of the
clergy ; by the order of Lothaire,
then emperor, it returned to Eb-|-
bon the see of Reims, from which
he had been deposed.


This assembly ordered a fast of
three days on the occasion of the
battle which had just taken place
at Fontenay.


This council, held by the par-
tisans of Charles le Chauve, ap-
proved the deposition of Ebbon.


Nothing remains of this assem-
ly but the capitularies of Charles
le Chauve. We can easily per-
ceive that they were given at the
solicitations of simple priests;
they are only given while await-
ing a general council.

Rules.—The bishops must not
take it ill if the priests lay claims
before the king; they must not in-
sist upon a too strong protestation
from the priests, they must not
demand it when they are not
making the visit of their diocese,
and they must only demand it
once when they visit it twice;
they must not divide the parishes
to receive double ; they must not
constrain the priests to attend more
than twice a-year at the councils.


This assembly was held by
Charles le Chauve; the capitula-
ries which remain recommend the
observance of the duties towards
God and the royal power; they
offer nothing curious.


The canons of this council are
to the same effect as the prece-
ding; it appears that they relate
to the rebellion of Count Lam-
bert.


This assembly was presided


300


HISTORY OF


i


Date. |


Place.


Present.


Jdained for the vacant sees, and
those who have lost theirs mus


llaity must be given in charge t


‘ifaithful, that the military service


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


over by Droyon, bishop of Metz;
it was held in the place called the
Judgment Seat.

The three sons of Louis le De-
bonnaire here made peace, and
passed several capitularies, which
had for their object to order the
affairs of the church.

Rules.—Bishops must be or-


take them again.
The monasteries confided to the


religious persons, male or female.
Ecclesiastical property must no
be invaded.


This council had nearly the
same aim as the preceding one;
it was presided over by Ebroin,
bishop of Poitiers.

Rules.—Send persons to chas-
tise those who contemn the di-
vine and human laws; let reli-
gious men visit the monasteries,
to inquire into the relaxation of
discipline.

Clerks and monks who have de-
serted must be returned to their
churches and convents. Ecclesi-
astical goods must be returned ;
the churches must be provided
with pastors.

Those bishops who do not go to
war, whether it be on account of
the feebleness of their body, or by
the indulgence of the king, must
confide their men to one of the


may not suffer by it.
Kings and bishops may not
reside long with the bishops; and
they must not oppose themselves
to the holding of the provincial
councils.
No novelty must be adopted in
the explanation of the Scriptures.
Bishops must have some one to
instruct the country priests.
Laymen must.not employ the


IN FRANCE. 301


CIVILIZATION
Date. Place. Present.
845 Beauvais. | ate he
845 Meaux. 3% s%6
846 Vannes, ae
846 or Paris. 20 bishops,
rather 5 abbots.
847
847 Mayence. | 13 bishops,
4 many of
the clergy.


26


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


priests of the church in the care
of their farms.

The king may not take canons
into his service without the con-
sent of the bishops.

Do not demand from the priests
illicit tributes upon the tithes and
the goods of the church.


This council was held by
Charles le Chauve and his bish-
ops ; it is for the same end as the
two others.


This council repeated and con-
firmed the canons of the preced-
ing councils; it made a great
many new ones, of which several
repeated ancient dispositions ; all
are in the same spirit as the three
preceding ones: ecclesiastical re-
form and the restitution of goods
and immunities.


Nomenoe, prince of Brittany,
after having expelled several bish-
ops, named others, augmented the


Jnumber of sees, assembled the


‘bishops on his side, and had him-
self crowned king.


This council forbade Ebbon the
diocese of Reims, until he sub-
mitted to his judgment about


}which the pope was occupied.


They terminated what they could
not finish at the council of Meaux.
Rules.—The prince must give
to the bishops, powers signed with
is seal, that when they need
civil authority, they can so accom-
lish their divine ministry.
Royal chapels must not be con-
fided to laymen, but to ecclesias-
tics.


Raban, archbishop of Mayence,
eld this council with his suffra-
gans and their clergy; the coun-
cil was occupied with discipline,
and reclaimed the rights and im-;


302


Date.


848


848


848


849


849


849


Place.


Mayence.


Lyon.


Limoges.


Chartres.


Kiersy.


HISTORY OF


Present.


ee ee


16 bishops,
3 abbots,
several of
the clergy.


Paris, accord-| 22 bishops.


ing to some,
Tours.


lin this council.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


munities of the church. It con-
demned a prophetess, named Thi-
ota, who announced the end of
the world, and denounced the ec-
clesiastical orders,

Rules.—No penance shall be
imposed on the dying, but they
must be contented with their con-
fession, and the alms and prayers
of their friends, and they must
give them the viatic, and pray for
them ; if they get well, they must
submit to the penance.

The council grants Christian
interment and the prayers of the
church to criminals executing,
after they have confessed.


This council condemned the
monk Gottschalk, who maintained
the doctrine of predestination ;
Raban presided at the council;
Gottschalk was sent to Hincmar,
archbishop of Reims.


This council was occupied with
the affair of a priest, named Gol-
degaire ; it offers nothing inter-
esting.


This council grants the demand
of the canons of the church of St.
Martin, who desired to be made
monks. The bishop of Limoges
consented with reluctance.


Charles, brother of Pepin, de-
manded and received the tonsure


This council condemned Gotts-
chalk again, had him beaten with
rods, and put in prison.


This council was held at the
invitation of Lantraun, archbishop
of Tours, on the subject of Nome-
noe, and addressed him a letter
of reproach, in which it menaced
him with excommunication.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 303


Date. Place. Present. lObject of the Council, Rules, &c.

850 Moret.

851 Soissons, ve a Pepin, king of Aquitaine, was
in this council deposed and ton-
sured.


852 Mayence.
852 | Sens, date | 13 bishops, | This council confirmed the pri-


uncertain. 2 abbots. |vileges of the monastery of Saint
Remy.
853 Sens. +s ay This council refused to conse-


crate bishop of Chartres, Burch-
ard, recommended by Charles le
Chauve, but who was unworthy
OF it.


853 Soissons. | 27 bishops, | This council admitted Burchard
6 abbots, |to the episcopacy; it was occu-
several of {pied in supplying the wants of
the clergy. |jseveral churches; on points of

general discipline, and ordinations

made by Ebbon, predecessor of

Hincmar, at Reims; they were

annulled. Charles le Chauve con-

sulted the council upon the in-
structions that he should give to
his envoys; they were approved.

Rules.—Instructions of Charles
le Chauve.

Our envoys must take care, how
the lords take it ill, when the
bishops or their servants strike
their serfs with their rods, to cor-
rect them; they must know that
then they will be submitted to
our ban and to arigorous chastise-
ment,

Our faithful must know that
we have declared to the synod,
that what we should grant of the
goods of the church to an unrea-
sonable demand, were it to a bish-
op or to an abbot, will not avail ;
they must then take care not to
make such demands.


853 Kiersy. ve ce This council made four canons
against Gottschalk, and excom-
municated again .a nobleman,
named Fulcre, who had left his
wife to espouse another.


304


Date.


853


855


857


857


858


858


859


Place.


Vermerie. | 22 bishops.


Valence,


Kiersy.


Mayence.


Kiersy.


Soissons.


Metz.


HISTORY OF


Present.


18 bishops,


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


This council looked to the af-
fairs of many churches,


This council made many canons


and many of |about predestination, and about


the clergy.


The arch-
bishop of
Rouen and
his suffra-
gans, the
suffragans
of Reims.


6 bishops,


particular interests and objects of
discipline. It was favorable to
Gottschalk.

Rules.—That the bishops take
care not to ordain persons unwor-
thy of the ministry.

The council blamed the cus-
tom of taking the oath, in judicial
proceedings, because it necessa-
rily led to perjury. It blamed
also the judgment by battle, and
refused to those who were slain
Christian burial. It recommend-
ed the erection of schools of sci-
ence, divine, humane, and for
church singing, seeing that the
long interruption of study, igno-
rance of the faith, and the neglect
of all sciences, had invaded many
of the churches of God.

That there is nothing repre-
hensible in the priests’ service
towards the bishops.


This council was held for ec-
clesiastical reform, and convoked
by Charles le Chauve.


This council discussed ques-
tions concerning ecclesiastical
law.


This council addressed to Louis
le Germanique, who was invading
the states of Charles le Chauve, a
letter of advice and reproach.


This council was held by order
of Louis le Germanique, who‘had
entered Gaul, sword in hand.


This council occupied itself with


3 archbish- ithe quarrels of Louis and Charles.


CIVILIZATION


IN FRANCE. 305


Date.


859


859
859


860


860


861


862


862


862


Place.


a a ee |


Langres.


Langres.


Toul.


Aix-la-
Chapelle.


Aix-la-


Chapelle.
Coblentz.


Toul ou Sa-
voniers.


Toul ou Tu-
sey.


Soissons,


Sens.


Aix-la-


Chapelle.


Sabloniéres,


Present.


ops.
2 archbish-
ops, many
bishops.


8 bishops.
The bishops


of twelve
provinces,


7 bishops.


2 abbots,
10 bishops,


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


Rules.—This council made 16
canons, which were confirmed at
the council of Toul or Savonieres,
and which are only found there.

The six first confirmed the ca-
nons of the council of Valence in
favor of Gottschalk. The twelfth
canon recommended that each
congregation have a superior of
its order.


This council occupied itself
with the peace between Louis
and Charles; with the complaints
of Charles against many bishops ;
with the Breton bishops, and
points of discipline.


These two councils were held
for the divorce of Lothaire and
Teutberge, at a month apart; they
pronounced the divorce


This council occupied itself
with the peace between the kings ;


and many of |they here made a treaty.


the laity.

40 bishops,
from 14

provinces,


26*


This council made some canons
about discipline.


This council occupied itself
about the affair of Ingeltrude,
wife of count Boson, who had
quitted her.


Hincmar excommunicated in
this provincial synod, Rothade,
bishop of Soissons.


It is not known precisely where
this council was held, which de-
posed Heriman, bishop of Nevers.


This council permitted Lothaire
the Second to espouse another wife
than Teutberge


This council. occupied itself
with the accusation brought}.


306 HISTORY OF


cE


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


against Lothaire II., protecting
Ingeltrude and Judith, the daugh-
ter of Charles le Chauve, who,
without his consent, had espoused
the count Baudouin.


This council confirmed the pri-
vileges of many monasteries, and
took many measures to re-esta-
blish the order in the state and
church.


862 Pitres. 37 bishops,
11 abbots,
many eccle-

siastics.


This council occupied itself
about the affair of Judith.


862 Soissons. se as


This council occupied itself
about the affair of Kothade, who,
in the council of Pitres, had ap-
pealed to the pope; he was de-


862 Soissons. ae Se


863 Senlis. Ae ate According to Pagi, this council


is the same as the preceding.


This council, composed of bish-
ops of the kingdom of Lothaire,
approved his divorce; the pope
annulled the judgment, and ex-
communicated the bishops.


863 Metz. Se OF


This council excommunicated
Etienne, count of Auvergne; it
was held by order of pope‘Nicho-
las, who had some legates here.


863 |Place uncer-| .. rs
tain in
Aquitaine.


This council occupied itself
about the abbey of Saint Calais,
which the bishop of Mans claimed
as under his jurisdiction; it pro-
nounced in favor of the abbey.


863 | Vermerie. a7, ons


866 Soissons. | 35 bishops. | This council was held by order
of Pope Nicholas, who, after hay-
ing ordained that it should restore
to Rothade his bishopric, wished
to do the same for Wulfade and
the clerks ordained by Ebbon,
since his deposition by Hincmar :
it did as he desired.


866 Troyes. | 20 bishops, | Hincmar was attacked in this


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 307


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


of 6 pro- |council by some bishops who
vinces. |wished to please the king; how-
ever, he finished by prevailing,
and made it give an account to the
pope of all that had passed, as he
had ordered. Pope Adrian wrote
to this council that it should con-
secrate no other bishops than such
as should be named by the empe-
ror ; the bishops refused,


868 | Place uncer-| Bishops of | This council was occupied about
tain. Gaul and discipline.
Bourgoyne.

868 Worms.

869 | Vermerie. | 29 bishops. Hinemar, bishop of Laon, and
nephew of Hincmar, archbishop
of Reims, accused before this
council, by Charles le Chauve,
and by his uncle, of having made
some unjust excommunications,
failed in his oaths to the king,
and unjustly deprived some clerks
of their benefices ; he appealed to

* |the pope.


869 Metz. & es This council gave to Charles le
Chauve the kingdom of his ne-
phew Lothaire, who had died in
Italy.

869 Pitres. 12 bishops.


870 Attigny. [Bishops of 10} Hincmar, bishop of Laon, again
provinces, jaccused, again appealed to the


pope.
870 | Cologne. This council treated of disci-
pline.
871 | Douzy-les- | 22 bishops, | This council deposed the bish-
Prés. 8 envoys of jop of Laon.
bishops, 8
ecclesiastics.


873 | Chalons. | 5 bishops, This council was occupied with
1 rural bish-|a discussion between two church-
op, many of |es of Chalons.
the clergy. ;

873 Cologne. | 11 bishops, | This council confirmed the pri-

5 priests, |vileges accorded to the preben-
1 deacon. (daries of the cathedral of Cologne.


308


Date.


873


874


876


Place.


Senlis,


Douzy-les-
Prés.


Chalons.


Pontion.


HISTORY OF


Present. {Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


Bishops of 2} This council, convoked by


provinces. |Charles le Chauve, degraded from
the order of deacon, his son, Car-
loman.


This council was occupied with
forbidden marriages, and the inva-
sion of church property.


This council confirmed the pri-
vileges of the monastery of Tour-
nus,


46 bishops,


2 legates, This council was held a little
5 bishops, |after the coronation of Charles le
3 abbots. |Chauve, as emperor, it confirmed


the acts of the council which he
had held at Pavia, just before.

Capitularies of the council of
Pontion.—That the holy Roman
church be honored and revered by
all, as the mother of all churches,
and that no one dare to act un-
justly against her right and pow-
erg and that she have power. and
fitting strength to show towards
the universal church a pastoral
solicitude, and to invoke for all,
by her holy prayers, the Author
of all things.

And that respect be paid by all
towards the lord John, our spirit-
ual father, sovereign pontiff, and
universal pope; that all receive,
with great veneration, the things
that, according to his sacred min-
istry, he has decided in his apos-
tolic authority, and that we render
to him, in all things, the obedi-
ence which is his due,

That the imperial dignity be re-
spected by all, and that no one
disobey with impunity that which
the emperor shall ordain, by let-
ters or by messages.

The Capitularies enact: That
the bishops lead, with their clerks,
a canonical life; that they treat
the counts and vassals of the king
as sons, and that these shall ho-
nor them as fathers; that the


a


CIVILIZATION


IN FRANCE. 309


Date.


Place. Present.


878 | In Neustria. ce


878


Troyes. Pope John
and 29
bishops.


879 | Mantaille in| 29 bishops.


881


883


the Vien-
noise.


Fimes. ie oe


Toulouse. | The bishops


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


bishops shall have the authority
of the missi dominici; that the
bishops and the counts, in their
circuits, shall not lodge at the
houses of the poor unless invited.


This council, presided over by
Hincmar, received the complaints
of the emperor Louis III. against
the devastation that had been
committed in his states by Hu-
gues, the son of Lothaire II., and
Waldrade; the council menaced
Hugues with excommunication.


This council excommunicated,
by command of pope John, Lam-
bert, duke of Spoleto, Adalbert,
Formoso, bishop of Porto, and
their partisans. It heard the
complaint of Hincmar, bishop of
Laon; confirmed many privileges
and made many canons. It ex-
communicated also those who in-
vaded the property of the church-
es.
The pope here crowned Louis
le Begue.


This council, composed of bish-
ops and grandees of the kingdom
of Arles, gave to Boson the title
of king.


This council was held in the
church of St. Macre, in a place
now named Fimes, and which is
between the diocese of Reims and
Soissons ; the council occupied it-
self with discipline and ecclesias-
tical reforms.


The account of this council is


of Septimania|found in the life of St. Theodard,


and Aqui-
taine.


archbishop of Narbonne; being
curious as a picture of manners,
we give an extract, while agree-
ing with father Labbe, that its
authenticity is doubtful :

“The Jews of Toulouse com-
plained to king Carloman of the


310


HISTORY OF


Date.


Place.


Present.


!
Object of the Council, Rules, &c.
injuries that they suffered from
the bishop and people of this
town, who, three times a year,
beat and maltreated one of them ;
the affair was referred to a council
of bishops of Septimania and
Aquitaine; the discussion was
opened there; the Jews complain-
ing of the injustice of the treat-
ment they suffered, the Christians
calling it a just chastisement.

“Then Theodard, who was
very young, with the permission
of the bishop of Toulouse, spoke,
and produced two acts, one of
Charlemagne, the other of Louis
le Debonnaire, which established
that the Jews of Toulouse, having
called Abderrahman to France,
Charles had only allowed them
their lives, upon the condition
that, on Christmas day, Good Fri-
day, and Ascension-day, one of
them should receive before the
door of the church a beating from
the hand of a notable, and make
an offering of three pounds of wax.

‘“*The bishops having heard
these things, and being consulted
by the duke, cried out, ‘ far be it
from us to oppose anything to this|
just and equitable decision of the
king.’

*¢ The discussion between The-
odard and the Jews continued and
warmed. The Jews pronounced
against Jesus Christ such blasphe-
mies, that the duke, furious, me-
naced them with the last extre-
mities; then they threw them-
selves at the feet of the bishop,
entreating him to obtain their
pardon from the duke, in such a
manner, that, remaining subject
to the torture the emperor had
decreed for them, they might live
in peace and safety.

“The duke consented, after
some resistance, but adding the
following condition, suggested by
Theodard; that the Jew who was


Date.


886


886


886.


Place.


Chalons.


Near Port
Nimes.


Cologne.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 31]


Present.


9 bishops
and a
chancellor.


19 bishops.


5 bishops,
4 abbots,


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


to be scourged, before being
struck, should declare, in a loud
voice, before all the assembly ; < It
is just that the heads of the Jews
should be submitted to the blows
of the Christians; because they
would not submit to Jesus of
Nazareth, Lord of lords, and King
of kings.” If the Jew refused
this, then he should be struck
seven times, that it might be ac-
complished which was written in
their law: Iwill punish you seven-
fold, lifting up myself against

ou.

‘** The bishops approved of this,
the duke added it, and the king
confirmed it.”


This council confirmed the pri-
vileges of many churches,


Theodard, archbishop of Nar-
bonne, held this council against
Selva, a Spanish clerk, who had
ordained himself archbishop of }
Tarragona contrary to the canons,
and had ordained, in spite of The-
odard, Eumiza to be bishop of
Gerona; they were both deposed,
and their episcopal vestments
torn off them; they had the rings
taken from their fingers, and their
pastoral staffs broken over their
heads.


This council made many canons
against those who took possession


some clerks,jof church property, those who
and some of [oppressed the poor, and those who


the laity.


contracted forbidden marriages.


888 | St. Maurice. |Bishops and} This council elected for king


888


Mayence.


grandees.


The archbish-


of Transjuran Burgundy, and
crowned Rodolph, the son of Con-
rad the Second.


This council was held the first


op of May-lyear of the reign of Arnold, with
ence, of Co-ithe object of reforming the disci-


312


HISTORY OF


Date. Place. Present.


logne, of
Tréves, and
their suffra-
gans.


4 bishops
of Belgium,
1 abbot,
clerks, laity.


888 Metz.


4 bishops,
abbots,
6 counts.


Saint
Jangoul.


889


Bishops and

grandees of

the kingdom
of Arles.


890 Valence.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


pline, and repairing the disorders
occasioned by the invasions of the
Normans.

Ruics.—The council forbids that
for the future the priests should
have any women in their house,
even their own sister, on account
of the disorders resulting there-
from.

It forbids that a clerk of an in-
ferior order should accuse a clerk
of an order superior to his own;
it regulates how many witnesses
should be required for judgment;
for a bishop, 72: a priest-cardinal,
40; a deacon-cardinal, of Rome,
26 ; a sub-deacon, an acolyte, 7.|
That the witnesses should be men
of good repute, having wife and
children. This canon is taken
from the council of Rome.

That the witnesses should be at
least fourteen years of age.


This council ordered a fast of
three days and solemn prayers, to
obtain peace and the retreat of
the Normans.

Rules.—That no lord shall re-
ceive anything of the tithes of his
church, and that the priest who
serves the church shall take them
wholly for the divine office.

That a priest shall have only
one church; unless his own have
been joined from all antiquity to a
chapel which may not be separat-
ed from it.


This assembly ( placitum) was
occupied by the order of the queen
Ermengarde, widow of Boson,
with a complaint of the monks of
Guiny against a certain Bernard,
who had seized some of their pro-


perty.


This council made Louis, son
of Boson, king.


Date.


890


894


895


Place.


.
Worms.


Mehun-sur-


Loire.


Vienne,


Chalons.


Tribur,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 313


Present.


——


The archbish-
op of Reims,


Object of the Council, Rules, &c,


—__


This council occupied itself
with the quarrel of the archbish-
his suffra- jops of Cologne and Hamburg, who
gans, the j|were disputing for the church of
archbishops |Bremen. It was held by order of
of Cologne |the pope Formosus.
and Ham-
burg, many
neighboring
bishops.


This council decided that no
one should be elected abbot of St.
Pierre de Sens but by the bre-
thren.


16 bishops. ’


The bishops | Rules.—Let laymen who have
of the king- |killed, mutilated, maimed, dis-
dom of Arles,|honored a priest, do penance, and

2 legates. |seek to amend themselves.

That no one possess himself
fraudulently of the alms of a dy-
ing or sick bishop or priest.

That laymen neither give nor
dispose of churches without the
consent of the bishops on which
they are dependent, and that they
exact no tribute, under form of
gift, of priests, at their entry upon
churches: that they extort from
them nothing by violence.


‘ie ida Foulques, archbishop of Reims,
crowned in this council Charles
le Simple, competitor of Eudes.


4 bishops. This council admits to the proof
of the communion a priest ac-
cased of having poisoned the bish-
op of Autun.


22 bishops. | This council, composed almost
entirely of German bishops, occu-
pied itself with ecclesiastical re-
form, by order of king Arnould.

Rules.—That the Webhrgeld,
given for the death of a priest, be
divided into three parts—one for
the church, the other for his
bishop, the third for his parents.

It is a sacrilege, calling for pe-


27


314


HISTORY OF


Date.


Place.


Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


nance, to enter a church with a
sword unsheathed.

If a bishop in his progress has
fixed for the canonical assembly
the same day that the count, wit-
tingly, or unwittingly, has fixed
upon for holding his court, let
all, including the count him-
self, leave the court to attend the
bishop’s assembly; but if the
bishop in his own town and the
count have named the same day
for their respective assembly, let
him who first named the day have
the preference, always saving the
dignity and power of the bishop.
Any priest who, even under com-
pulsion, has committed homicide,
shall be deposed.

When necessity requires it, per-
sons may be buried out of the par-
ish appertaining to the cathedral
church; in such cases, let the
parish be selected in which the
person has paid tithe. It is a
frightful thing, and hereby inter-
dicted, to claim any money for the
ground in which a person is bu-
ried.

That none of the laity be buried
in the churches. That in a quar-
rel between a layman and a priest,
the layman be _ interrogated by
oath, the priest by the commu-
nion, because the priest ought
not to swear.

In memory of the blessed Peter
the Apostle, we honor the holy
apostolical seat of Rome, in such
manner that this church, mother
of the sacerdotal dignity, is for us


a


_|the mistress of ecclesiastical right.


If, then, which may God pre-
vent, some priest working against
our ministry, being accused to us
of having brought a forged letter
from the apostolic seat, or any-
thing that could not thence, that
it may be in the power of the
bishop to keep him in prison un-
til, by letters or message, he has


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 315


Date. Place. Present. | Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


called upon his apostolic sublimity
to explain, by a worthy legate,
the rules of the Roman law, and
that which we ought to do to con-
: form to it.

If a church is the property of
many coheritors, let them agree
among themselves, that the ser-
vice of God shall not suffer ; but
if, in place of this, they do not
agree in the choice of a priest,
and that quarrels happen between
themselves, or between the priests,
let the bishop take the relic from
the church, shut and seal the door
with his seal, in order that they
may not celebrate any office until
they shall have provided them-
selves witha priest worthy to take
care of the holy place, and procure
the salvation of the people of God.

The count is not allowed to
force any penitent to plead.

That whoever has committed
adultery with a woman cannot
marry her.

If a husband, dishonored by his
|; Wife, wishes to kill her, and she
flies to the bishop, he should en-
deavor to dissuade the husband
from his project, and if he does
not succeed, he ought not to de-
liver her up to be killed, but to
put her carefully in a place chosen
by herself, where she can live
safely.

If persons who live in adultery
make to themselves mutual dona-
tions, let it serve for their child,
but they shall have nothing in
common when they separate.

The council makes many other
canons regarding illegal mar-
riages, and penitential canons.


Uncer-| Nantes. hs ets This council occupied itself
tain with discipline. We are ignorant
date. of its date; its third and tenth


canons are transcribed from the
seventh book of the capitularies
collected by Benedict Diacre Sir-


316 HISTORY OF


Date. Place. Present.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


mond does not think it impossible
that the canons belong to the
grand council held at Nantes in
658, which Frodoard mentions.
We have left them in the place
that Labbe assigned to them.
Rules,—That the priests before
celebrating mass, Sundays and
féte days, interrogate the people
if there is any one from another
parish, in spite of his own priest ;
send him from the mass, and


oblige him to go to his own par-
ish: if he finds persons engaged
in rancorous quarrels, let him re-
concile them.

The council exempts from the
obligation of attending mass in
their parish those who are travel-
ling or pleading. That the priests
be aware that the tithes and offer-
ings are the revenue of the poor
and strangers, and that they are
not given to them, but only con-
fided to them, and for them to ren-
der an account thereof to God.

The council orders that before
making an ordination, the bishop
assemble the priests and prudent
men, versed in the law of God,
and question them on the life,
the birth, the country, the age,
and education of those who are to
be ordained, the place where they
have been instructed, if they are
learned, if they know the law of
the Lord, above all, if they are of
the catholic faith. The council
occupies itself afterwards with
confraternities, confines them to
objects which relate to salvation,
to offerings, to keeping in repair
the church lights, and the month-
ly prayers, the alms, the funerals,
and other pious objects. It re-
commends, when meetings are
necessary, and that a repast fol-
lows, it should be modest and
frugal, and that all should be or-
derly. Priests and the laity met
in these confraternities. The


CIVILIZATION


Date. Place. Present.
897 | Port,in the | 4 bishops,
Nimois. 8 ecclesi-

astics.
Centh
900 Reims, 12 bishops.
906 | Barcelona. 8 bishops.


907 |Saint Tiberi,} 10 bishops.
in the diocese


of Agde.
909 | Jonquieres, | 11 bishops.
diocese of
Maguelonne.
909 | Troli, in the| 12 bishops,


Soissonnais,


27*


317


IN FRANCE.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c,


council complain of women speak-
ing of public affairs, at public as-
semblies, unless with the permis-
sion of their bishop, and for their
affairs, or commanded by him.
The council recommend to the
bishops and priests, to strive to
abolish the pagan superstitions.


This council ordered the bishop
of Maguelonne to restore to the
church of St. John the Baptist the
domains that he had awarded to
the church of St. Andrew.


Century.


This council excommunicated
the murderers of the archbishop
Foulques.


Although this council took
place in Spain, we give it here be-
cause it was composed of suffra-
gans from Narbonne; discussed
the rights of this metropolis, and
that the following one, upon the
same affair, was held in France,
and that, at this epoch, the count
Vico of Barcelona was a fief of
France.

This council agitated the ques-
tion whether the church of Ogona,
at present, belonged to Narbonne.


This council freed the church
of Osona from all dependence and
service towards the church’ of
Narbonne; Aurnste, archbishop
of Narbonne, agreed to it.


This council gave absolution
and benediction to count Suniaire
and all his family.


This council occupied itself with
ecclesiastical reform ; it cited fre-
quently the capitularies and de-
crees of the popes; it finished its
session by a profession of its faith,
upon advices from Rome that the


318 HISTORY OF


Tica Tes WS Te aassamenepeceeeer se eo a Se ee


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


Greek heresy, regarding the pro-
cession of the Holy Spirit, was
still alive in the East.

Rules.—This council complain-
ed of the state of the monastic or-
ders; a great number of monaste-
ries have been destroyed by the
pagans ; in the monasteries of men
or women dwell lay abbots, with
their wives, their children, their
soldiers, and their dogs; and if
one presents the rules to them
they reply, as Isaiah, “I know
not how to read.”

The council extends to all pro-
ducts the obligation to pay tithe.

Some, perhaps, may say, I am
not a laborer, I have neither land
nor flocks for which I can give
tithe ; let every one know, be he
a military man, a merchant, or
artisan, that the source from
whence he draws his living comes
from God, and to him he ought to
give tithe.

The council attributes to the
non-payment of tithes, the devas-
tation of pagans and bad seasons.

The council prohibits, accord-
ing to the capitularies, secret mar-
riages, from which result many
disorders, which give birth to the
blind, the lame, the deformed,
&c. ; it is necessary that the priest
who performs the marriage inter-
rogate the parties, to ascertain if
the woman is a relation of her fu-
ture husband, or spouse of another,
or adulteress.

The council requires the oath
of seven witnesses to convict a
priest of having lived with a wo-
man ; if these fail, he can justify
himself by his sole oath.

The council renews a canon of
the council of Valencia, in Spain,
which forbids the parents of a
bishop dying without a will to
take possession of his property
before the ordination of his suc-
cessor, or the consent of the me-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 319


Date. Place. | Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


tropolitan, for fear that they pos-
sess themselves at the same time
of things belonging to the church.


911 | Fontaine ar a This council occupied itself

Couverte, with a quarrel between the bish-

near ops of Urgel and of Pallarie, on a
Narbonne. question of boundary.

912 Tours. The arch- | This council decided that the


bishop of festival of the translation of the
Tours and |remains of St. Martin should be
his suffragans.|celebrated.

One finds at this epoch, the
» canons of Gautier, archbishop of
Sens: Constitutiones ex concilio
Galteri, archiepiscopi Senonens! ;
this appears to indicate that he
held a council, but we have no
other indications ; these canons of

discipline are not important.


915 Chalons. 7 bishops. | This council occupied itself
with discipline, and received re-
stitution of the goods of the
church, which had been usurped
by Rodolph, Count of Macon,
alarmed with a menace of excom-
munication.


921 Troli. an rly This council gave absolution to
Count Erlebald, who had died ex-
communicated.


922 Coblentz. 8 bishops, | This council, at which Charles
many clergy. |le Simple and Henry L’Oiseleur
were present, made many canons

of discipline.

Rules.—If the laity have cha-
pels, itis against law and reason
that they receive tithes and nourish
with it their dogs and their mis-
tresses ; it is better that the priests
should receive it. It is asked,
what ought to be done with one
who has seduced and sold a Chris-
tian; we are of opinion he is
guilty of homicide.

Let a layman who wishes to

ive away his property know that
he cannot give away the tithes of


320


‘Date.


923


924


926


vet


927


932


933


935


941


eee oe:


Place not
known, in the
Remois.


Charlieu.


Troli.


Duisberg.


Erfurt.


Chateau-
Thierry.


Fismes,


Soissons.


HISTORY OF


Present.


The arch-
bishop of
Reims and
his suffra-
gans.
Bishops ;
many counts.


3 bishops.


6 bishops.


13 bishops,
many clergy.


7 bishops.


The suffra-

gans of the

diocese of
Reims.


Object of the Council, Rules, &c,


the church where it is situated;

if he does so, the act will be null,

and he will be himself under the
censure of the church.


This council imposed a penance
on those who were at the battle
of Soissons, between Charles le
Simple and king Robert.


Etienne, bishop of Cambray,
received at this council satisfac-
tion from Count Isaac; he gave
him absolution.


This synod restored to the mo-
nastery of Charlieu, ten churches
which had been taken from it.


This council, convoked by or-
der of Count Heribert, whose son }.
aged five years had been elected
arcl.bishop of Reims, was held in
despite of king Raoul, and admit-
ted to penance count Herlnin,
who had remarried during the
life of his wife.


This council excommunicated |.
those who had blinded Bruno,
bishop of Metz.


This council prohibits calling a
Law Court seven days before
Christmas, fifteen before Easter,
seven before Saint John, in order
that all have the facility of going
to church to pray. It prohibits
imposing extraordinary fasts.


This council consecrated the |
bishop of Beauvais.


This council anathematized }
those who usurped the goods of
the church.


This council decided in favor
of Hugues, son of Heribert, against
Hartaud, who pretended also to
the archbishopric of Reims; the


Date.


942 or


943


943


944


947


947


948


948


948


948


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 321


Place.


Bonn.


Binden in
Germany.


Trenorch,
or
Tourneux,


At Fontaine,
diocese of
Elne, in
Roussillon.


Verdun.


Ingelheim.


Laon.


Tréves.


Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


bishops went to Reims and con-
secrated him there.


22 bishops. | We are ignorant of the positive
date of this council, or if two were
held consecutively ; there is no-
thing remaining of them.


we 56 There is no account of this
council.


7 bishops ;} Convoked by order of Duke
many clergy. |Gilbert ; this council decided, that
the relics which had been trans-
ported from the monastery of Tre-
norch to that of St. Porcien in

Auvergne, should be returned.


This council, deposed, by order
of pope Agapetus, and restored
immediately the bishops of Gero-
na and Urgel; it granted to the
bishop of Elne the highest rank,
after the archbishop of Narbonne.
(The see of Elne has since been
transferred to Perpignan.)


8 bishops; | This council adjudged to Ar-
many abbots, jtaud the see of Reims.


Mouson, This council adjudged anew
archbishop of |the see of Reims to Artaud, and

Tréves, and |ifiterdicted the communion to Hu-

his suffra- |gues, until the general council

gans; some |convoked for the month of August.
bishops of the
diocese of
Reims.

31 bishops. This council confirmed that
which the preceding had done,
and excommunicated the Count
Hugues, for having driven from
his see the bishop of Laon. It
also made many canons of disci-
pline.


7 ots This council cited, by letters
of Marin, the pope’s legate, the
Count Hugues to repentance,


5 bishops, | This council excommunicated


322 HISTORY OF


pee Tt 1 ep meee nena


a legate, excommunicated Thi-
baud, bishop of Amiens, ordained
formerly by Hugues, archbishop
of Reims, and already excommu-
nicated for another reason.


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, wd
1 legate. |the Count Hugues, and some bish-
ops ordained by bishop Hugues,

and many other persons.

952 | Augsburg. | 25 bishops. | This council, composed of bish-
ops of Germany, Italy, and East-
ern Gaul, made canons of disci-
pline, which have nothing new in
them.

953 | St. Thierry,| 3 bishops. | This council was held against

in the the Count Hainold, whose ex-
Remois. communication was deferred at
the demand of the king.

955 |Theplaceun-| .. : This council excommunicated

certain, upon the Count Iodard, who retained
the confines the domains of the church of St.
of Burgundy. Symphorian,

962 | Uponthe | 13 bishops. | This council was convoked on

Marne, near the occasion of the death of Ar-
Meaux. taud. Many bishops wished the
see of Reims to be given to Hugu-
es; others refused. The council
then consulted the pope, and, by
his advice, elected and consecrat-

ed Odalric.

972 | Mount Saint! The arch- This council confirmed the de-

Mary,inthe| bishop of |cree of Adalberon, archbishop of
Tardenois. | Reims and /Reims, who put in the hermitage
hissuffragans,|}of Mouson monks instead of can-
ten in all; 5 jons. The pope, being consulted,
abbés, 8 arch-|appointed and confirmed it.
deacons.

972 | Ingelheim. | .. os This council refused to Odal-
ric, bishop of Augsburg, permis-
sion to quit his bishopric for a
monastic life, because of the dis-
order which would ensue in the
election of his successor.

975 Reims. ais os This council, presided over by


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 323


Date. Place. Present. |Object of the Council, Rules, &c.


980 Sens. 6 bishops, | Sevin, archbishop of Sens, re-
4 church- |stored at this council much pro-
men. perty to the monastery of Saint


Pierre le Vif.


SECOND COURSE


LECTURE THE FIRST.


Object of the course—Elements of national unity—They exist and begin
to be developed in France towards the end of the 10th century—Thence
dates French civilization—The feudal period will be the subject of this
course—It includes the 11th, 12th, and 13th centuries, from Hugh Ca-
pet to Philippe de Valois—Proof that these are the limits of the feudal
period—Plan of the course: History ; Ist, of society ; 2d, of the human
mind, during the feudal period—The history of society resolves itself
into, Ist, history of civil society ; 2d, history of religious society—The
history of the human mind resolves itself into, Ist, history of learned
literature ; 2d, history of national literature in the vulgar tongue—Im-
portance of the middle ages in the history of French civilization—The
present state of opinions concerning the middle ages—Is it true that
there is danger in historical impartiality and poetical sympathy for this
period ?—Utility of this study.


In commencing the last course, I was obliged to determine
its subject, and to explain the motives of my choice. At
present I have not any thing of the kind to do. The sub-
ject of our study is known; the route is traced. I endeay-
ored to place you in the presence of the origins of French
civilization under the first two races; I propose to follow it
through all its vicissitudes, in its long and glorious develop-
ment up to the eve of our own times. I now, therefore,
again take up the subject where we left it, that is to say, at
the end of the tenth century, at the accession of the Ca-
petians.

As I told you in concluding the past course, it is there
that French civilization commences. Hitherto, you will rec-
ollect, we have spoken of Gaulish, Roman, Gallo-Roman,
Frankish, Gallo-Frankish, civilization; we were obliged to
make use of foreign names which did not belong to us, in
order to express with any fulness, a society without unity,
without fixedness, without entirety. Dating from the end
of the tenth century, there is no longer any thing of this


HISTORY OF CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 325


kind ; it is now with the French, with French civilization,
that we have to occupy ourselves.

And yet it was at this very epoch that all national and po-
litical unity was disappearing from our land. All books say
this, and all facts show it. It was the epoch when the feu-
dal system, that is to say, the dismemberment of the people
and of power, entirely prevailed. At the eleventh century,
the soil which we call France was covered with petty na-
tions and petty sovereigns, almost strangers one to the other,
almost independent of each other. Even the very shadow
of a central government, of a general nation, seemed to have
disappeared.

How comes it that really French civilization and history
commence exactly at the moment when it was almost im-
possible to discover a France ?

It is because, in the life of nations, the external visible
unity, the unity of name and government, although important,
is not the first, the most real, not that which truly constitutes
a nation. ‘There is a more profound, more powerful unity :
that which results, not from the identity of government and
destiny, but from the similarity of social elements, from the
similarity of institutions, manners, ideas, sentiments, lan-
guages; the unity which resides in the men themselves
whom the society unites together, and not in the forms of
their junction ; moral unity, in point of fact, far superior to
political unity, and which alone can give it a solid foundation.

Well, it is at the end of the tenth century that the cradle
of this at once unique and complex being, which has be-
come the French nation, is placed. She required many
centuries and long efforts to extricate herself, and to produce
herself in her simplicity and grandeur. Still, at this epoch,
her elements existed, and we begin to catch glimpses of the
work of their development. In the times which we studied
in the last course, from the fifth to the tenth century, under
Charlemagne, for example, external political unity was often
greater and stronger than at the epoch with which we are
about to occupy ourselves. But if you go thoroughly into
the matter, into the moral state of the men themselves, you
find there is an utter absence of unity. ‘The races are pro-
foundly different, and even hostile; the laws, traditions,
manners, languages, likewise differ and struggle ; situations,
social relations have neither generality nor fixedness. At
the end of the tenth and at the commencement of the elev-

28


326 HISTORY OF


enth century, there was no kind of political unity like that
of Charlemagne, but races began to amalgamate ; diversity
of laws according to origin is no longer the principle of all
legislation. Social situations have acquired some fixedness ;
institutions not the same, but throughout analogous, the feu-
dal institutions prevailed, or nearly so, over all the land. In
place of the radical, imperishable diversity of the Latin lan-
guage and the Germanic languages, two languages began to
be formed, the Roman language of the south, and the Roman
language of the north, doubtless different, but still of the
same origin, of the same character, and destined one day to
become amalgamated. Diversity also began to be effaced
from the soul of men, from their moral existence. ‘The
German is less addicted to his Germanic traditions and hab-
its; he gradually detaches himself from the past to belong
to his present situation. Itis the same with the Roman ;
he thinks less of the ancient empire, of its fall, and of the
sentiments which it gave rise to in him. Over conquerors
and conquered, the new, actual facts, which are common to
them, daily exercise more influence. In a word, political
unity is almost null, real diversity still very great, and yet at
bottom there is more of true unity than there has been for
five centuries. We begin to catch glimpses of the elements
of a nation; and the proof is, that from this epoch the ten-
dency of all these social elements to conjoin, to assimilate
and form themselves into great masses, that is to say, the
tendency towards national unity, and thence towards politi-
cal unity, becomes the dominant characteristic, the great fact
of the history of French civilization, the general and con-
stant fact around which all our study will turn.

The development of this fact, the triumph of this tendency,
has made the fortune of France. It is by this especially
that she has outstripped the other nations of the continent
in the career of civilization. Look at Spain, Italy, even
Germany: what is it that they want! They have pro-
gressed far more slowly than France towards moral unity,
towards the formation into a single people. Even there
where moral unity has been formed, or nearly so, as in Italy
and Germany, its transformation into political unity, the
birth of a general government, has been slackened or almost
entirely stopped. France, more happy, arrived more rapidly
and more completely at that double unity, not the only prin-
ciple, but the only pledge of the strength and grandeur


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. Sor


nations. It was at the end of the tenth century that it, so
to speak, commenced its progress towards this important
result. It is, therefore, from this epoch that French civiliza-
tion really dates ; it is there that we may begin to study it
under its true name.

The feudal period, that is, the period when the feudal
system was the dominant fact of our country, will be the sub-
ject of the present course.

It is comprehended between Hugh Capet and Philippe de
Valois, that is, it embraces the eleventh, twelfth, and thir-
teenth centuries.

That these are the true limits, the career of the feudal
system, it is easy I think to establish.

The peculiar general character of feudalism, as I have just
tepeated, and as every one knows, is the dismemberment of
the people and of power into a multitude of petty nations
and petty sovereigns ; the absence of any universal nation,
of any central government. Let us see the limits in which
this fact is contained. These limits will necessarily be those
of the feudal period.

We may, if I do not deceive myself, recognise them espe-
cially by three symptoms.

1. To what enemies did feudalism succumb? Who op-
posed it in France? Two powers; royalty on the one
hand, on the other, the commons. By royalty a central:
government was formed in France; by the commons was
formed a universal nation, which grouped itself around the
central government.

At the end of the tenth century, royalty and the commons
were not visible, or at all events scarcely visible. At the
commencement of the fourteenth century, royalty was the
head of the state, the commons were the body of the nation.
The two forces to which the feudal system was to succumb
had then attained, not, indeed, their entire development, but
a decided preponderance. By this symptom we may then
say that there the feudal period, properly so called, stops,
since the absence of any universal nation, and of all central
power, is its essential characteristic.

Here is a second symptom which assigns the same limits
to the feudal period.

From the tenth to the fourteenth century, wars, which
were then the principal event of history, have, at least the
greater part of them, the same characteristic. ‘They are in-


328 HISTORY OF


ternal, civil wars, as it were in the bosom of feudalism itself.
It is a suzerain who endeavors to acquire the territory of
his vassals ; vassals who dispute among themselves certain
portions of the territory. Such appear to us, with the ex
ception of the crusades, almost all the wars of Louis le Gros
of Philip August, Saint Louis, and Philippe le Bel. It 1s
from the very nature of the feudal society that their causes
and effects arise.

With the fourteenth century the character of war changed.
Then began the foreign wars; no longer a vassal against
suzerain, or vassal against vassal, but nation against nation,
government against government. On'the accession of Philippe
de Valois, the great wars between the French and the Eng-
lish broke out—the claims of the kings of England, not upon
any particular fief, but upon the whole land, and upon the
throne of France—and they continued up to Louis XI.
They were no longer feudal, but national wars; a certain
proof that the feudal period stopped at this limit, that another
society had already commenced.

Lastly, if we address ourselves to a third kind of in-
dication, if we interrogate the great events which we are
accustomed, and with reason, to look upon -as the result, ‘as
the expression of feudal society, we shall find that they are
all included within the epoch of which we speak. ‘The
crusades, that great adventure of feudalism, and its popular
glory, finished, or nearly finished, with Saint Louis and the
thirteenth century ; we hear afterwards but a futile echo of
them. Chivalry, that poetical daughter, that ideal, so to
speak, of the feudal system, is equally enclosed in the
same limits. In the fourteenth century it was on the de-
cline, and a knight-errant already appears a ridiculous per-
sonage. Romantic and chivalrous literature, the trouba-
dours, the trouveres, in a word, all the institutions, all the
facts which may be looked upon as the results, the com-
panions of feudalism, alike belong to the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth centuries. That, therefore, is evidently the feudal
period ; and when I confine it to these limits, I do not adopt
an arbitrary, purely conventional classification ; it is the fact.

Now, how shall we study this epoch? What method will
best make it known to us ?

It will, I hope, be borne in mind, that I have regarded
civilization as the result of two great facts; the develop-
ment, on the one hand, of society, on the other, of individual


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 329


man. I have therefore always been careful to retrace ex-
ternal and internal civilization, the history of society and the
history of man, of human relations and of human ideas, po-
litical history and intellectual history.

We shall follow the same method here ; we shall examine
the feudal period from this twofold point of view.

From the political point of view, in confining ourselves to
the history of society, we shall find from the tenth to the
fourteenth century, as from the fifth to the tenth, two societies
closely bordering on each other, dovetailed, as it were, into
one another, yet essentially distinct: the civil society and
the religious society, the church and the state; we shall
study them separately, as we have hitherto done.

Civil society is to be considered, first, in the facts which
constitute it, and which show us what it has been; secondly,
in the legislative and political movements which emanate
from it, and upon which its character is imprinted.

The three great facts of the feudal period, the three facts
whose nature and relations comprehend the history of civili-
zation during these three centuries, are—l, the possessors
of fiefs, the feudal association itself; 2, above and by the
side of the feudal associations; in intimate relation with it,
and yet reposing upon other principles, and applying itself to
create a distinct existence, royalty ; 3, below and by the
side of the feudal association, also in intimate relation with
it, and yet also reposing upon other principles, and laboring
to separate itself, the commons. ‘The history of these three
facts, and of their reciprocal action is, at this epoch, the his-
tory of civil society.

With regard to the written monuments that remain to us,
there are four principal ones: two collections of laws which
modern learning, wrongly I think, would call codes; and two
works of jurisconsults. The legislative monuments are—
1. The collection of the ordinances of the kings of France,
and especially the établissements of Saint Louis. 2. His
assises of the Frank kingdom of Jerusalem, drawn up by
order of Godefry de Bouillon, which reproduce the image of
the feudal society more completely and more faithfully than
any other document.

The two works of jurisconsults are—1. The Coutume de
Beauvaisis, by Beaumanoir. 2. The Traité de Vancienne
Jurisprudence des Francais ; ou Conseils & un Ami, by Pierre
de Fontaines.

28*


330 HISTORY OF


I shall study with you these monuments of the feudal le-
gislation as I have studied the barbarian laws and capitula-
ries, by carefully analyzing them, and attempting to thoroughly
comprehend their contents, and to exactly understand their
nature.

From civil society we shall pass to religious society ; we
shall consider it, as we have already done, 1. In itself, in its
peculiar and internal organization. 2. In its relations with
civil society, with the state. 3. Finally, in its relations with
the external government of the universal church—that is,
with papacy.

The history of society, if I do not deceive myself, will
thus be completed ; we shall then enter into the history of
the human mind. At this epoch it resides in two great facts,
two distinct literatures: 1. A learned literature, written in
Latin, addressed solely to the learned classes, lay or eccle-
siastical, and which contains the theology and philosophy of
the time. 2. A national, popular literature, entirely in the
vulgar tongue, addressed to the whole community, particu-
larly to idlers and to the lower classes. Whosvever neg-
lects either of these two facts, whoever does not thoroughly
understand these two literatures, who does not see them
marching abreast, rarely close to each other, rarely acting
upon one another, but both powerful and holding an impor-
tant place, who does not see all this, will have but an incom-
plete and false idea of the intellectual history of this epoch,
of the state and progress of mind.

Such, in its whole, is the plan of the present course.

Here, most assuredly, is a vast field opened to our study.
There is here enough long to excite and nourish learned
curiosity. But is so great an epoch of our history—is France
in the rudest crisis of her development—in a word, the mid-
dle ages, are they with us a mere matter of learning, a mere
object of curiosity? Have we not the most universal and
pressing interest in thoroughly understanding it? Has the
past no other value attached to it than for erudition? has it
become totally foreign to the present, to our life ?

Two facts, if I mistake not, two contemporary visible facts,
prove that such is not the case.

The imagination at the present day is evidently gratified
in carrying itself back towards this epoch. Its traditions, its
manners, its adventures, its monuments, have an attraction
for the public which cannot be mistaken. We may, upon


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. ook


this subject, interrogate letters and the arts; we may open
the histories, romance, poems of our time ; we may enter the
furniture and curiosity shops ; everywhere we shall see the
middle ages cultivated, reproduced, occupying the thought,
amusing the taste of that portion of the public which has
time to spare for its intellectual wants and pleasures.

At the same time there is manifested, on the part of some
enlightened and honorable men, sincere friends to the learn-
ing and progress of humanity, an increasing aversion towards
this epoch and all which recalls it. In their eyes, those who
there seek inspirations, or merely poetical pleasure, carry
literature back towards barbarism ; in their eyes, those who,
from a political point of view, and amidst an enormous mass
of error and of evil, seek to find in it any thing of good,
those, whether they wish it or not, favor the system of des-
potism and privilege. These unrelenting enemies of the
middle ages deplore the blindness of the public who can take
any pleasure in going back, merely in imagination, amidst
those barbarous ages, and seem to predict, if this despotism
continues, the return of all the absurdities, of all the evils,
which then weighed upon nations.

This clearly proves that the middle ages are quite other
than a matter of learning to us; that they correspond to in-
terests more real, more direct than those of historical erudi-
tion and criticism, to sentiments more general, more full of
life than that of mere curiosity.

How can we be surprised at this? ‘The twofold fact
which I spoke of is exactly the result, and as it were a new
form of the two essential characteristics of the middle ages,
the two facts by which that epoch has held so great a place
in the history of our civilization, and influenced posterior
ages so powerfully.

On the one hand, it is impossible to overlook the fact
that there is the cradle of modern societies and manners.
Thence date—1. Modern languages, and especially our own.
2. Modern literatures, precisely in all that there is in them
/ of the national, the original, of the foreign to all mere learn-
ing, to all imitation of other times, of other countries. 3.
The greater portion of modern monuments, monuments in
which, for many centuries, the people have assembled, and
still continue to assemble, churches, palaces, town-halls,
works of art and public utility of every kind. 4. Almost all
historical families, families who have played a part and


aa2 HISTORY OF


placed their name in the various phases of our destiny. 5.
A large number of national events, important in themselves,
and for a long time popular, the crusades, chivalry; in a
word, almost every thing which for centuries has filled and
agitated the imagination of the French people.

This is evidently the heroic age of modern nations, among
others, of France. What more natural than its poetical af-
fluence and attraction ?

By the side of this fact, however, we encounter another
no less incontestable: the social state of the middle ages
was constantly insupportable and odious, and especially so in
France. Never did the cradle of a nation inspire it with
such antipathy ; the feudal system, its institutions and prin-
ciples, never obtained that unhesitating adhesion, the result
of habit, which nations have often given to the very worst
systems of social organization. France constantly struggled
to escape from them, to abolish them. Whosoever dealt
them a blow, kings, jurisconsults, the church, was sanctioned
and became popular; despotism itself, when it seemed a
means of deliverance from them, was accepted as a benefit.

The eighteenth century and the French revolution have
been for us the last phase, the definite expression of this
fact of our history. When they broke forth, the social state
of the middle ages had long been changed, enervated, dis-
solved. Yet it was against its consequences and recollec-
tions that, in the popular mind and intention, this great shock
was more especially accomplished. The society which
then perished, was the society which the Germanic invasion
had created in the west, and of which feudalism was the first
and essential form. It was, in truth, no longer in existence :
yet it was against it that the revolution was directed.

But precisely because of this fact, precisely because the
eighteenth century and the revolution were the definitive ex-
plosion of the national antipathy to the social state of the
middle ages, two things were inevitably destined to happen,
and in fact did happen: 1. In their violent efforts against
the memory and remains of this epoch, the eighteenth cen-
tury and the revolution would necessarily fail in impartiality
towards it, and would not recognise the good which might
be met with in it; and it would in like manner overlook its
poetical character, its merit, and its attractions as the cradle
of certain elements of the national life. The epochs in which
the critical spirit dominates, that is to say, those which


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 333


occupy themselves more especially with examining and de-
molishing, generally understand but little of the poetical
times, those times when man complacently gives himself to
the impulsion of his manners and the facts which surround
him. They understand more especially little of what there is
of the true and poetical in the times against which they make
war. Open the writings of the cme century, those at
least which really have the character of the epoch, and con-
tributed to the great revolution then accomplished ; you will
see that the human mind there shows itself very little sensi-
ble of the poetical merit of any social state much differing
from the type which they then conceived and followed, es-
pecially of the poetical merit of the rude and unrefined times,
and, among those times, of the middle ages. The Essai sur
les meurs et Pesprit des nations is in this way the most faith-
ful image of the general disposition of the age: look there
for the history of the middle ages: you will see that Vol-
taire incessantly applied himself to the task of extracting all
that is gross, absurd, odious, calamitous, in this epoch. He
was right, thoroughly right in the definitive judgment which
he gave of it, and in his efforts to abolish its remains. But
that is all that he sees of it; he thinks only of judging and
abolishing, in his historical writings, that is to say, in his
works of polemical criticism ; for Voltaire has done other
things than criticism. Voltaire was also a poet, and when
he gave himself up to his imagination, to his poetical in-
stincts, he found impressions greatly differing from his judg-
ment. He has spoken of the middle ages elsewhere than
in the Essai sur les meurs et Vesprit des nations, and how
has he spoken of it?


‘Oh! Vheureux temps que celui de ces fables,
Des bons démons, des esprits familiers,
Des farfadets, aux mortels secourables !
On écoutait tous ces faits admirables
Dans son chateau, prés d’un large foyer.
Le pére et l’oncle, et la mére et la fille,
Et les voisins, et toute la famille,
Ouvraient V’oreille & monsieur l’aumodnier,
Qui leur faisait des contes de sorcier.

On a banni les démons et les fées ;
Sous la raison les graces €touffées
Livrent nos cceurs & linsipidité ;

Le raisonner tristement s’accrédite ;
On court, hélas! aprés la vérité :

Ah! croyez-moi, lerreur a son mérite.”


334 HISTORY OF


Voltaire is wrong to call the poetical side of these old
times erreur ; Poetry there doubtless associated herself with
many errors; but in herself she was true, although of a
truth very different from philosophical truth, and she an-
swered to very legitimate wants of human nature. This in-
cidental observation, however, is of but little importance ;
what is necessary to be remarked, is the singular contrast
between Voltaire the poet, and Voltaire the critic. The
poet acutely feels for the middle ages impressions to which
the critic shows himself an entire stranger; the one deplores
the loss of those impressions which the other applies him-
self to destroy: nothing, surely, better manifests that want
of political impartiality and poetical sympathy in the eigh-
teenth century, of which I just now spoke.

We are now in the reaction against the tendency of the
age which preceded us. This fact is evidenced in the di-
rection now taken, at least for the most part, by historical
studies, by works of general literature following the public
taste, and also in the indignation of the exclusive partisans
of the eighteenth century. Is this indignation legitimate ?
Is the danger denounced from this reaction so great? is
there any danger at all ?

In a literary point of view I shall not absolutely deny it.
I would not say that there is not some exaggeration, some-
thing of mania in this return of the imagination towards the
middle ages, and that good sense and good taste have not a
little suffered from it. The reaction, followed with much
talent, appears to me, upon the whole, a groping rather than
a regeneration. In my opinion, it proceeds from very dis-
tinguished men, sometimes sincerely inspired, but who often
deviate in seeking a good vein, rather than from people who
have found one, and are working it with confidence. But in
truth, in the actual state of society and mind, the evil cannot
become very grave. Are not publicity and criticism always
at hand in the literary world as well as in the political world,
and always ready to render everywhere the same services,
to warn, restrain, to combat, in fine, to prevent us from falling
under the exclusive domination of a coterie or system ?
They do not spare the new school; and the public, the
genuine and general public, while receiving it with gentle-
ness, does not seem disposed to become subjected by it. It
judges it, and sometimes even rebukes it rather roughly.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 385


Nothing, therefore, seems to me to indicate that barbarism
is about to resume sway over the national taste.

Besides, we must take life where life manifests itself; the
wind, from whatever quarter it blows ; talent, wherever it
has pleased Heaven to bestow it. For we need above all
things in the literary world talent and life. ‘The worst that
can happen to us here is immobility and sterility.

Is danger to political impartiality the character of the re-
action which they deplore? This must be absolutely denied.
Impartiality will never be a popular tendency, the error of
the masses ; they are governed by simple, exclusive ideas
and passions ; there is no fear of their ever judging too fa-
vorably of the middle ages and their social state. Present
interests, national traditions in this respect preserve, if not
all their potency, at least sufficient influence to prevent all
excess. ‘The impartiality which is spoken of will scarcely
penetrate below the regions of science and of philosophical
discussion.

And what is it in these regions themselves, and among the
very men who most pique themselves on it? Does it impel
them in any way towards the doctrines of the middle ages 2
to any approbation of their institutions—of their social state ?
Not in the least degree. The principles upon which modern
societies rest, the progress and the requirements of reason
and of human liberty, have certainly not firmer, mere zealous
defenders, than the partisans of historical impartiality ; they
are first in the breach, and more exposed than any others
to the blows of their enemies. They have no esteem for
the old forms, the fanatic and tyrannical classification of feu-
dal France, the work of force, which ages and enormous la-
bors have had such difficulty in reforming. What they claim
is a full and free judgment of this past of the country. ‘They
do not believe that it was absolutely destitute of virtue, lib-
erty, or reason, nor that we are entitled to contemn it for its
errors and fallings off in a career in which, even in the
present day, after such progress, so many victories, we are
ourselves advancing so laboriously.

There is evidently therein no danger either for the liberty
of the human mind, or for the good organization of society.

Might there not be, on the other hand, great advantages in
this historical impartiality, this poetical sympathy for ancient
France ?

And first, is it nothing to have a source of emotions and


336 HISTORY OF


pleasures opened to the imagination? All this long epoch,
all this old history, in which one hitherto saw nothing but
absurdity and barbarism, becomes for us rich in great mem-
ories, in noble adventures, in events and sentiments in which
we feel a vivid interest. Itis a domain restored to that need
of emotion, of sympathy, which, thanks to God, nothing can
stifle in our nature. ‘The imagination plays an immense
part in the life of men and of nations. In order to occupy
it, to satisfy it, an actual energetic passion is necessary, like
that which animated the eighteenth century and the revolu-
tion, a rich and varied spectacle. ‘The present alone, the
present without passion, the calm and regular present, does
not suffice for the human soul; it feels narrow and poor in
it; 1t desires more extension, more variety. Hence the im-
portance and the charm of the past, of national traditions, of
all that portion of the life of nations in which imagination
wanders and freely enjoys itself, amidst a space far more
vast than actual life. Nations may one moment, under the
influence of a violent crisis, deny their past—even curse it ;
they cannot forget it, nor long or absolutely detach them-
selves from it. Ona certain occasion, in one of the ephem-
eral parliaments held in England under Cromwell, in that
which took the name of one of its members, a ridiculous
personage, in the Barebone parliament, a fanatic arose, and
demanded that in all the offices, in all public establishments,
they should destroy the archives, the records, all the written
monuments of old England. This was an excess of that
fever which sometimes seizes nations, amidst the most use-
ful, the most glorious regenerations ; Cromwell, more sensi-
ble, had the proposition rejected. Is it to be supposed that
it would long have had the assent of England, that it would
truly have attained its end ?

In my opinion, the school of the eighteenth century has
more than once committed this mistake of not comprehending
the whole of the part which imagination plays in the life of
man and of society. It has attacked, cried down, on the
one hand, every thing ancient, on the other, all which as-
sumed to be eternal, history and religion: that is, it has
seemed to dispute, to wish to take from men the past and the
future, in order to concentrate them in the present. The
mistake explains itself, even excuses itself by the ardor of
the struggle then on foot, and by the empire of the passion
of the moment, which satisfied those requirements of emotion


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 387


and of imagination, imperishable in human nature. But it
is no less serious, and of serious consequence. It were
easy to show the proof and effects of this in a thousand de-
tails of our contemporaneous history.

It has, moreover, been made matter of complaint, and with
reason, that our history was not national, that we were in
want of associations, of popular traditions. To this fact
some of the faults of our literature, and even of our charac-
ter, have been imputed. Should it then be extended beyond
these natural limits? Is it to be regretted that the past
should again become something for us, that we should again
take some interest in it ?

In a political point of view, and in an entirely positive
aim, this were a valuable advantage. The power of associa-
tions in fixing and fertilizing institutions, is very great. Our
institutions are beneficial and powerful; they rest upon truly
national interests, upon ideas which have penetrated deeply
into minds. Still they are young; they do not claim the
authority of a long experience, at all events not of a long
national experience. It was in the name of reason, of
philosophy, that they first appeared: they took birth in doc-
trines : a noble origin, but for some time subject to the uncer-
tainties, the vicissitudes of the human mind. What more
useful than to make them thus strike root in the past; to
unite the principles and guarantees of our social order to
principles half seen, to guarantees sought in the same path
through ages? Facts are at present popular; facts have fa-
vor and credit. Well, let the institutions, the ideas which
are dear to us, be strongly established in the bosom of facts,
of the facts of all time ; let the trace of them be everywhere
found ; let them everywhere reappear in our history. They
will thence derive force, and we ourselves dignity ; for a na-
tion has higher esteem for itself, and has greater pride in it-
self, when it can thus, in a long series of ages, prolong its
destiny and its sentiments.

Lastly, another advantage, an advantage of an entirely dif-
ferent nature, but no less considerable, must result to us from
impartiality towards the middle ages, and from an attentive
and familiar contemplation of that epoch.

That the social reform which is brought about in our times,
under our eyes, is immense, no man of sense can deny.
Never were human relations regulated with more justice,
never has the result been a more general well-being. |

29


338 HISTORY OF


Not only is social reform great, but I am convinced that a
correspondent moral reform has also been accomplished ;
that, perhaps, at no epoch has there been, upon the whole, so
much propriety in human life, so many men living regularly,
that never has less public force been necessary to repress in-
dividual wills. Practical morality, | am convinced, has made
almost as much progress as the well-being and the prosperity
of the country.

But under another point of view we have, I think, much
to gain, and we are justly reproachable. We have lived for
fifty years under the influence of general ideas, more and
more accredited and powerful, under the weight of formi-
dable, almost indescribable events. Thence has resulted a
certain weakness, a certain effeminacy in minds and in cha-
racters. Individual wills and convictions want energy and
confidence in themselves. They think with a common
opinion, they obey a general impulse, they give way to an
external necessity. Whether to resist or to act, each has
but little idea of his own strength, little confidence in his
own thoughts. The individuality, in a word, the inward and
personal energy of man, is weak and timid. Amidst the pro-
gress of general liberty, men seem to have lost the proud
sentiment of their own liberty.

Such were not the middle ages; the social condition of
those ages was deplorable ; human morality very inferior,
according to what is told us, to that of our times. But in
men, individuality was strong—will, energetic.

There were then few general ideas which governed all
minds, few events which, in all parts of the territory, in all
situations, weighed upon characters. The individual dis-
played himself upon his own account, according to his own
inclination, irregularly, and with confidence ; the moral na-
ture of man appeared here and there with all its ambition, all
its energy. A spectacle not only dramatic and attractive,
but instructive and useful ; which offers us nothing to regret,
nothing to imitate, but much to learn from, were it only by
constantly recalling our attention to that wherein we are de-
ficient, by showing us what a man may do when he knows
how to believe and to will.

Such merits certainly will justify the care which we shall
take in our study ; and it will, I hope, be seen, that in being
just, fully just towards this great epoch, there is for us no
danger and some benefit. |


2 CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 339


SECOND LECTURE.


Necessity for studying the progressive formation of the feudal system—It
is often forgotten that social facts form themselves but slowly, and in
forming themselves, undergo many vicissitudes—Analysis of the feudal
system in its essential elements. They are three in number: 1. The
nature of territorial property ; 2. Amalgamation of sovereignty and pro-
perty ; 3. Hierarchical organization of the feudal association—State of
territorial property from the 5th to the 10th century—Origin and mean-
ing of the word feodum—It is synonymous with beneficium—History of
benefices, from the 8th to the 10th century—Examination of the system
of Montesquieu concerning the legal gradation of the duration of bene-
fices—Causes of the increase of the number of benefices—Almost all
landed property became feudal. ;


Ir has been shown that the feudal period embraces the
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries. Before entering
upon it, before studying it in itself and according to the plan
which I have drawn out, it is necessary that we should have
some distinct idea of the origins of feudalism ; it is necessary
to follow it, and to present it to our minds in all the various
phases of its progressive formation, from the fifth to the tenth
century. .

[ intentionally say, its progressive formation. No great
fact, no social state, makes its appearance complete and at
once ; it is formed slowly, successively ; it is the result of a
multitude of different facts, of different dates and origins,
which modify and combine themselves in a thousand ways
before constituting a whole, presenting itself in a clear and
systematic form, receiving a special name and _ standing
through a long life.

This is so simple, so evident a truth, that, at first sight, it
seems useless to call it to mind; it is, however, necessary to
do so, for it has been and is constantly forgotten. An his-
torical epoch is generally studied when it has ceased, a so-
cial condition when it has disappeared. It is, then, in their
entirety, under their complete and definitive form that that
epoch and that condition are presented to the mind of the
observer or the historian. He is easily led to suppose that
it has always been thus; he easily forgets that those facts,
which he contemplates in all their development, commenced,


340 HISTORY OF


increased, and while increasing underwent numerous meta-
morphoses ; and he proposes to see, and everywhere seeks
them, such as he knew and conceived them at the time of
their full maturity.

Numerous and various errors arise from this inclination, in
the history even of beings whose unity and whose perma-
nence is the greatest and most visible in the history of men.
Why are there so many contradictions and uncertainties con-
cerning the character and moral destinies of Mahomet, of
Cromwell, or of Napoleon? Why those problems concern-
ing their sincerity or hypocrisy, their egoism or patriotism ?
Because people want to see them, as it were, simultaneous-
ly, and as having co-existent in them dispositions and ideas
which were successively developed; because they forget
that, without losing their essential identity, they greatly and
constantly changed; that the vicissitudes of their external
destiny corresponded to internal revolutions, often unseen by
their contemporaries, but real and powerful. If they followed
them step by step, from their first appearance in the world
until their death, if they were present at that secret work of
their moral nature amidst the mobility and activity of their
life, they would perceive many of those incoherences, those
absurdities which surprise them, disappear, or at least be-
come attenuated; and then only would they truly know and
understand them.

If it be thus in the history of individual beings, the most
simple of all, and whose duration is so short, with how much
more reason is it in the history of societies, of those general
facts, so vast, so complex, and which extend through so many
centuries! It is here especially that there is danger of over-
looking the variety of origins, the complication and slowness
of formation. We have a striking example of this in the
matter which occupies us. Few historical problems have
been more differently and eagerly debated than that as to
when and how the feudal system commenced. ‘To speak
only of French scholars and publicists, Chantereau-Lefevre,
Salvaing, Brussel, de Boulainvilliers, Dubos, Mably, Mon-
tesquieu, and many others: each forms a different idea of it.
Whence arises this diversity? It is that they have almost
all proposed to find the feudal system entire even in its very
cradle, to find it such as they see it is at the epoch of its full
development. Feudalism has, as it were, entered at once
into their mind; and it is in this condition, at this stage of.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 341


its history, that they have everywhere sought it. And as,
notwithstanding, each of them has applied himself more par-
ticularly to such and such a characteristic of the feudal sys-
tem, and has made it to consist in one particular element
rather than another, they have been led into immensely dif-
ferent ideas of the epoch and mode of its formation; ideas
which may be easily rectified and reconciled as soon as
people will consent not to forget that feudalism took five
centuries in forming, and that its numerous elements, during
this long epoch, belong to very different elements and origins.

It is according to this idea, and never losing sight of it,
that I shall endeavor to trace the history of its progressive
formation, rapidly and as a preparation to the study of feudal-
ism itself.

To succeed in this, it is necessary—first, to determine the
principal facts, the essential elements of this social condition ;
{ mean the facts which properly constitute it, and distinguish
it from all others. Secondly, to follow these facts through
their successive transformations, each isolately and in itself,
and in the junctions and combinations which at the end of
’ five centuries resulted in feudalism.

The essential facts, the constituent elements of the feudal
system may, | think, be reduced to three.

1. The particular nature of territorial property, real, full,
hereditary, and yet derived from a superior, imposing certain
personal obligations on its possessor, under pain of forfeiture,
in a word, wanting in that complete independence which is
now its characteristic.

2. The amalgamation of sovereignty with property, I
mean the attribution to the proprietor of the soil over all the
inhabitants of that soil, of the whole or nearly the whole of
those rights which constitute what we now call sovereignty,
and which are now possessed only by the government, the
public power.

3. The hierarchical system of legislative, judicial, military
institutions, which united the possessors of fiefs among them-
selves, and formed them into a general society.

These, if | am not mistaken, are the truly essential and
constitutive facts of feudalism. It would be easy to resolve
it into a larger number of elements, to assign to it a greater
number of characteristics ; but these, I think, are the prin-
cipal, and contain all the others. I shall therefore confine
myself to them, and sum them up by saying, that properly to

oS ng


342 HISTORY OF


comprehend the progressive development of feudalism, we
have to study: first, the history of territorial property, that
is, the state of lands ; secondly, the history of sovereignty
and of the social state, that is, the state of persons ; thirdly,
the history of the political system, that is, the state of insti-
tutions.

I enter at once into the matter; the history of territorial
property will now occupy us.

At the end of the tenth century, when feudalism was de-
finitively constituted, its territorial element, as you know,
bore the name of fief, (feodum, feudum.) A writer replete
with sense and learning, Brussel, in his Examen de usage
général des Fiefs aux 11, 12, 13, et 14 siécles, says, that the
word fief ( feodum) did not originally mean the land itself,
the body of the domain, but only what in feudal language is
called the tenure of the land, that is, its relation of dependence
towards such or such a suzerain :

“Thus,” says he, “when king Louis le Jeune notifies by
a charter of the year 1167, that count Henry of Champagne
has granted the fief of Savegny to Bartholomew, bishop of
Beauvais, it is only to be understood from this, that count
Henry had granted the dependence of Savegny to the bishop
of Beauvais; so that this land which had hitherto been held
immediately from the count of Champagne was thenceforward
only to hold of him as a sub-fief.”

I think that Brussel is mistaken. It is very improbable
that the name of feudal property meant at first only the
quality, the attribute of that property, and not the thing itself.
When the first lands which became fiefs were given, it was
not suzerainty alone which was conferred; the donors
evidently gave the land itself. Ata later period, when the
feudal system and its ideas had gained some firmness and
development, then they might have distinguished the tenure
of the domain, have given one apart from the other, and de-
signated it by a particular word. It may be that at this
epoch the word fief was often used for the tenure, inde-
pendently of the body of the land. But such could not have
been the primitive meaning of feodum; the domain and the
tenure were surely originally confounded in language as in
fact.

However this may be, the word is only found at a late
period in the documents of our history. It appears for the
first time in a charter of Charles le Gros, in 884. Itis there


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 343


repeated three times, and almost at the same epoch it is also
met with elsewhere. Its etymology is uncertain; many have
been assigned to it. I shall point out but two of them, as
those alone which I consider probable. According to some,
(and this is the opinion of most of the French jurisconsults,
of Cujas among others,) the word feodum is of Latin origin ;
it comes from the word fides, and means the land in con-
sideration of which people were bound to fidelity towards a
suzerain. According to others, and especially according to
German writers, feodum is of German origin, and comes from
two ancient words, of which one has disappeared from the
German languages, while the other still exists in many, par-
ticularly in the English, from the word fe, fee, reward, re-
compense, and from the radical od, property, goods, posses-
sion ; so that feodum means a property given in recompense,
by way of pay or reward.

The Germanic origin seems to me far more probable than
the Latin origin: first, because of the very construction of
the word, and next, because that, at the time when it was
introduced into our territory, it was from Germany that
it came; lastly, because, in our ancient Latin documents,
this kind of property bears a different name—that of bene-

cium. The word beneficium very frequently occurs in
our historical documents from the fifth to the tenth century,
and these evidently indicate the same condition of territorial
property which, at the end of the eleventh century, took the
name of feodum. For a long time after this epoch, the two
words are synonymous ; so that in the very charter referred
to, of Charles le Gros, down to a charter of the emperor
Frederic I., of 1162, feodum and beneficium are used indif-
ferently.

In order, therefore, to the study of the history of the
feoda from the fifth to the tenth century, it is necessary to
iook at that of the beneficia. What we say of benefices will
apply to fiefs, because the two words, at different dates, are
the expression of the same fact.

From the earliest times of our history, immediately after
the invasion and establishment of the Germans upon Gallic
soil, we find benefices appear. This kind of territorial
property is contradistinguished from another, which bears
the name of alodiwm. The word alod, alodium, means an
estate which the possessor holds of no one, which imposed
no obligation upon him towards any one.


344 HISTORY OF


There is reason to suppose that the first freeholds were
lands which, under various forms, and without general or
systematic division, were appropriated among themselves
by the conquering Germans, Franks, Burgundians, or Visi-
goths, at the time of their establishment. These were en-
tirely independent ; they were gained by conquest, by lot,
not from a superior. ‘They were called alod, that is to say,
according to some, lot, chance ; according to others, full, in-
dependent property, (Al-od.)

The word beneficium, on the contrary, meant from its origin
(it is on the very face of it) an estate received from a superior
by way of recompense, of favor, and which required certain
duties and services towards him. You know that the German
chiefs, to attract or attach their companions to them, made
them presents of arms, of horses, supported them and main-
tained them in their train. The gifts of estates, the bene-
fices, succeeded, or at least were added to presents of move-
ables. But thence there was to result, and in fact soon did
result, a considerable change in the relations between the
chief and his companions. The presents of arms, horses,
banquets, retained the companions around the chief, and
made them lead a life in common. ‘The gifts of estates, on
the contrary, were an infallible cause of separation. Among
the men to whom their chiefs gave benefices, many soon
wished to establish themselves upon those benefices, to live
also upon their own estates, there to become in their turn
the centre of a small society. Thus, by their very nature,
the new gifts of the chief to his companions dispersed the
band, and changed the principles as well as the forms of the
society.

There was a second difference, fertile in results: the quan- .
tity of arms, horses, in a word, of personal presents, which a
chief might make to his men was unlimited. It was a matter

of pillage ; a new expedition always procured the means of
giving. It could not be so with presents of estates. ‘There
was doubtless much to share in the Roman empire, but still
the mine was not inexhaustible; and when a chief had
given away the lands of a country where he was fixed, he
had nothing more to give, in order to gain other companions,
unless by constantly recommencing the wandering life, by
constantly changing residence and country, a habit which
gradually disappeared. Thence a twofold fact is every-
where visible, from the fifth to the ninth century. On the


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 345


one hand, the constant efforts of the givers of benefices to
resume them when it suited them, and to make them a
means of acquiring other companions; on the other, the
equally constant effort of the beneficiaries to ensure them-
selves the full and unalterable possession of the estates,
and to free themselves from their obligations towards
the chief from whom they held them, but with whom
they no longer lived, and whose whole fate they no longer
shared.

From this twofold effort there resulted a continual insta-
bility in properties of this kind. Some resumed them,
others retained them by force, and all accused each other of
usurpation.

This was the fact; but what was the right? what was the
legal condition of benefices, and of the tie formed between
the givers and the receivers? Let us see the system of
most political historians, especially of Montesquieu, Robert-
son, and Mably.

They think the benefices were: 1, entirely revocable; the
giver could take them back when he pleased; 2, temporary,
conceded for a fixed time, a year, five years, ten Years -3y
for life, granted during the life of the beneficiary ; 4, lastly,
hereditary. Arbitrary revocability, temporary concession,
life possession, and hereditary property, such, in their opin-
lons, are the four conditions through which beneficiary prop-
erty passed from the fifth to the tenth century; such was
the progression of facts from the conquest to the complete
establishment of feudalism.

I think this system is alike controverted by historical tes-
timonies and by moral probabilities. And first, how can we
conceive to ourselves the absolute, arbitrary revocability of
benefices ? In the expression alone, there is something re-
pugnant to the very nature of human relations. Unless those
relations be the work of force, as is the case between master
and slave, the prisoner of war and the conqueror, it is not
probable, it is not possible, that all the advantage, all the
right should belong to only one of the interested parties.
How could a free man, a warrior, who voluntarily united him-
self to a chief, have subjected himself to this condition, that
the chief might do as he pleased with regard to him, and, for
example, take from him to-morrow, without motive, of his
mere whim, the domain which he has given him to-day? In
the voluntary relations of free creatures, whatever the in-


346 HISTORY OF


equality may be, there is always a certain reciprocity, certain
mutual conditions ; @ priori, entire and arbitrary revocability,
cannot have been, at any epoch, the legal and recognised
state of benefices.

Historical testimonies agree with moral probabilities. Let
us see in what terms Montesquieu describes the system, and
upon what text he founds it:

‘Jt cannot be doubted but that at first fiefs were re-
vocable. We see in Gregory of Tours that there was taken
from Sunegisile and Galloman, all which they held from
the fisc, and that they had only left to them what they held
in property.' Gontran, raising his nephew Childebert to
the throne, had a secret conference with him, and pointed
out to him those to whom he should give fiefs and those from
whom he should take them away.’ In a formula of Marculf,
the king gives in exchange, not only benefices which his
son held, but also those which another had held.2 The law
of the Lombards contradistinguishes benefices from property.‘
Historians, formule, the codes of different barbarous nations,
all the monuments which remain to us, are unanimous.
Lastly, those who wrote the Book of Fiefs,° inform us that
at first the lords could withdraw them at will, then they
were assured for a year, and afterwards they were given for
life.”

With the exception of the last authority, that of the Book
of Fiefs, of which I shall immediately speak, it is evident
that all these texts prove a fact, and not a law; the actual,
not the legal condition of benefices. Doubtless the king,
or any giver of benefices who found himself more powerful
than the receiver, took back his gifts when he felt the desire
or need.

The instability, the violent struggle was incessant; but
that it was the legal state of this kind of property, that the
possessors of fiefs acknowledged the right of the givers to
take them back when they pleased, there is no evidence to
show. On the contrary, we find the beneficiaries everywhere
exclaiming against the iniquity of such spoliation, and main-
taining that the benefices should only be taken from them
when they, on their side, were wanting in the promised


2°Ii. ixs C38: 247. Vib, C33. * Lyi, £30.
4°T;. Wis tis O, Oas an he ee
® Esprit des Lois, |. xxx., c. 16.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 347


faith—when they had been unfaithful towards the patron of
whom they held them. On condition of the fidelity of the
beneficiary, the possession of the benefice should be stable
and peaceable : that is the law, the moral rule established in
minds. I will select a few texts out of a hundred:

‘¢ Let all which has been given to a church, to the priests,
or to any other person, by the munificence of the said princes
of glorious memory, rest fixedly with them.”!

“If any land be taken from any one, without fault on his
part, let it be returned to him.” :

“‘ Charles the Great suffered no lord, from any impulse of
anger, to withdraw his benefices from his vassal. without
reason.”

“ We will that our faithful hold as settled that no person
henceforward, of whatever rank or condition he be, shall
be robbed or despoiled of his benefices by our arbitrary will,
or by the artifice or unjust avidity of any other person with-
out a just judgment dictated by equity and reason.’

With regard to the Book of Fiefs, drawn up at a far pos-
terior epoch, from the twelfth to the thirteenth century, and
by the jurisconsults of the time, it most probably committed
the same error as Montesquieu : it converted the fact into a
law.

The very first step, then, of that systematic progression
which it is said the beneficiary property observed in its de-
velopment, bears no inquiry. I pass to the second. Did it
for some time assume the legal form of a concession with a
fixed term, a kind of bailment or farming ?

Unless I am mistaken, there is something in the very
nature of such a concession which is repugnant to a social
state so irregular and violent as that of the times of which
we speak. Contracts for a fixed term, for precise conditions,
and of short duration, are delicate combinations, difficult to
get observed, which can only be put in practice in advanced
and well-regulated societies, and where there exists a power
capable of enforcing their execution. If we look closely
into the civil life of barbaric nations, or nations bordering
upon barbarism, if we run our eye over the Formule of Mar-


1 Baluze, Recueil des Capitulaires, vol. i. col. 8. Ordonnance of
Clotaire, Ist or 2d.

* Bal., vol. i., col. 14; Treaty of Andelot, in 587.

* Vie de Charlemagne, by Eginhard.

* Capit. de Charles le Chauve, in 844 ; Bal., vol. ii, col. 5.


348 . HISTORY OF


culf, almost all the agreements which we find there are either
of a prompt, immediate execution, or concluded for perpe-
tuity, or at least for life. We find very few agreements for a
limited time: such agreements are more complicated, and
they would be deficient in guarantees. Guarantees also
would have been wanting to temporary benefices ; and, the
term of concession arrived, the giver would have had great
difficulty in regaining possession of his domain. :

We however find, from the sixth to the ninth century,
benefices which appear temporary. Their origin, I think,
was this:

In the Roman legislation, the gratuitous concession of the
usufruct of a property for a limited, and generally a short
time, was called precarium. , After the fall of the empire,
the churches often leased out their properties for a fixed
rent, by a contract also called precarium, the term of which
was commonly one year. In some instances, doubtless to
ensure the protection or divert the hostility of a neighboring
power, a church gratuitously conceded to him this temporary
enjoyment of some domain. In some instances, also, the
concessionary, availing himself of his power, did not pay the
agreed rent, and yet retained the concession. Undoubtedly
the use or abuse of these precaria, or temporary benefices of
church property, were frequent enough; for, in the course
of the seventh century, we find the kings and mayors of the
palace employing their credit, or rather their authority, with
the churches, to obtain usufructs of this kind for their clients :
‘At the recommendation of the illustrious Ebroin, mayor of
the palace, the said John obtained from the monastery of
St. Denis the domain called Taberniacum, by precarious
tenure.”! When Charles Martel seized a portion of the
domains of the church to distribute them among his warri-
ors, the church exclaimed against the sacrilege, the spolia-
tion ; and she had good right so to do. Pepin, become chief
of the Franks, needed to reconcile himself with the church ;
she demanded her domains. But how to return them to her?
It would be necessary to dispossess men of whom Pepin had
even more need than he had of the church, and who would
more efficaciously defend themselves. ‘To extricate himself
from this embarrassment, Pepin and his brother Carloman
decreed the following capitulary :


1 Recueil des Historiens de France, vol. v., p. 701.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 349


“With the consent of the servants of God and of the
Christian people, and because of the wars which threaten
us, and the attacks of nations which surround us, we have
decided that, for the maintenance of our warriors, and with
the help of the indulgence of God, we shall retain for some
time, as precaria, and subject to the payment of a rent, a por-
tion of the properties of the churches ; on this condition, that
each year there shall be paid to the proprietary church or
monastery one solidus, that is to say, twelve deniers for each
farm; and that if he who enjoys the said property die, the
church shall re-enter into possession. If we are constrained
to it by necessity and so order it, the precarium shall be re-
newed, and a second shall be drawn up. But let them heed
that the churches or monasteries whose properties shall be
thus lent im precario do not suffer want: if that happens, let
the church and the house of God be again put in full posses-
sion of their property.”!

Here you perceive between the church and the new pos-
sessors of her domains there is a kind of transference placed
under the guarantee of the king. Pepin indeed, and his
first successors, took much trouble to make it observed ; their
capitularies incessantly order men to pay the rent due to the
churches, or to give up the domains, or to renew the preca-
ria. Most of these domains, as you may suppose, were
never given up, and the rent was very irregularly paid.
Thence, however, arose temporary benefices, lands held for
a fixed time, generally for five years. But this fact cannot
be considered as a legal state of beneficiary property in ge-
neral, as one of the degrees through which it passed. It is
rather an accident, a special form of certain benefices; and
a very unimportant form, for the conditions which it imposed
were scarcely ever respected.

From being temporary, it is said, benefices became of life
duration: this is their third degree. It is far more than a
degree in their history—it is their veritable, primitive, habit-
ual state, the common character of this kind of concession.
It was thus willed by the very nature of the relations which
benefices were destived to perpetuate. Before the invasion,
when the Germans wandered upon the Roman frontiers, the
relation between the chief and the companions was purely
personal. ‘The companion assuredly engaged neither his


1 Capit. du Roi Carloman, in 743; Bal., vol. i., col. 149.
30


350 HISTORY OF


family nor his race; he engaged only himself. After the
establishment, and when the Germans had passed from the
wandering life to the state of proprietors, it still continued
the same; the tie between the giver and the beneficiary was
still considered personal and for life; the benefice must have
been so too. Most of the documents of the epoch, in fact,
expressly say as much, or take it for granted. I shall cite
but a few texts of various dates, from the sixth to the ninth
century ; they will place the matter beyond doubt.

In 585, “ Wandelin, who had brought up the young king,
Childebert, died; all the property which he had received
from the fisc returned to the fisc.”!

In 660, under Theodoric, king of Austrasia, “after the
death of Warratum, who had enjoyed it, the domain called
Latiniacum returns to our fisc.””

In 694, under Childebert IT., ‘the domain called Napsini-
acum, which had been ceded to the illustrious Pannichius,
returned to our fisc after his death.”

“Let those who hold a benefice from us be careful to im-
prove it.”

‘‘ Whoever holds a benefice from us must take care, as
much as may be done with the aid of God, that none of the
slaves which form part of it die from hunger, and must not
sell the products of the soil on his own account, until he has
provided for their subsistence.”

“In 889, king Eudes conferred a domain upon Ricabod,
his vassal, in benefice and usufruct, with this clause, that if
Ricabod had a son, the benefice should pass to that son, but
only for his life.”®

Neither, then, is this a crisis of the development of bene-
ficiary property, a degree through which it passed; it was
its general and primitive condition.

At all epochs, however, amidst life benefices we find
hereditary benefices. ‘There is no reason to be surprised at
this; and the so prompt tendency to hereditary possession
which manifests itself in the history of benefices is not to be
solely attributed to the avidity of the possessors: it arose
from the very nature of territorial possession. Succession


1 Grégoire de Tours, |. viii., c. 22.

? Mabillon, de Re Diplomatica, |. vi., p. 471. 8 Mabillon, p. 476.
* Capit. de Charlemagne, in 813; Bal., t. i., col. 507.

® Ibid., a. 794; Bal., t. i, col. 264. ® Mabillon, wt sup., p. 556.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 7484


was its normal, almost necessary state, the end towards
which it tended, even from its birth. Out of many reasons,
I shall mention but two. From the time that a man pos-
sesses and improves an estate, whatever the manner of his
possession or of his improvement, he employs upon it means
which he does not draw from the soil, but from himself; by
the labors which he spends upon it, by the buildings with
which he covers it, he adds a certain value to the estate, and,
to speak in the present language of political economy, he
invests therein a certain capital, which, if he at any time
leaves, he cannot entirely nor conveniently carry away—a
capital which becomes more or less incorporated with the
soil, and which cannot be entirely separated from it. Thence
arises, and by the instincts of reason and justice, a certain
natural tendency of all territorial property to become heredi-
tary ; a tendency especially powerful when society, still rude,
knows not how to estimate the value which the possessor
who is leaving it has added to the soil, and to indemnify him
' by other means.

Another cause concurred to the same effect. Except in
extraordinary states of society, man cannot be constantly
moving about and leading a wandering life in the country
which he calls his native land; it is a need, a moral inclina-
tion with him to fix himself somewhere, to plant himself in a
certain place: in the bosom of the political country a domes-
tic country is necessary to him, to which he may attach him-
self, where he may establish his family. It is therefore the
constant effort of the cultivator, of the possessor, to become
perpetual proprietor.

Accordingly, by its very nature, and independently of all
external circumstance, beneficiary property tended to become
hereditary. ‘This tendency, in fact, manifests itself even at
the very origin of benefices, and at all epochs, it sometimes
attained its end. ‘The treaty of Andelot, concluded in 587,
between Gontran and Childebert II., in speaking of the bene-
ficiaries of queen Clotilde, sets forth:

“‘ Let the lands which it pleases the queen to confer upon
any one belong to him in perpetuity, and at no time be taken
from him.”

The Formule of Marculf contain the following, which


1 Bal., vol. i., col. 13.


352 HISTORY OF


proves that hereditary concession, as early as the end of the
seventh century, was a common practice.

‘“We have conceded to.the illustrious the domain
called We order, by the present decree, which is
always to endure, that he shall keep the said domain in per-
petuity, shall possess it as proprietor, and shall leave posses-
sion of it to his descendants, or to whom he will.’”!

Dating from Louis le Débonnaire, concussions of this kind
became frequent; examples abound in the diplomas of this
prince and of Charles le Chauve. At length the latter, in
877, formally recognises the hereditability of benefices, and,
at the end of the ninth century, this was their common and
prevalent condition; as in the sixth and seventh centuries
the occupation for life had been the general fact.

Still, even at the ninth century, and although hereditary
right prevailed, it was not yet an evident law, nor was it re-
garded as indubitable. The following is a fact which will
clearly show what the state of mind was in this respect:

In 795, Charlemagne had given to a man named John,
who had conquered the Saracens in the country of Barcelona,
a domain called Fontes, situated near Narbonne, “in order
that the said John and his descendants may enjoy it without
trouble or rent, as long as they remain faithful to us and to
our sons.” In 814, Charlemagne died; in 815, the same
John presented himself to Louis le Débonnaire with the
hereditary donation which he held from Charlemagne, and
solicited its confirmation. Louis confirmed it, and added
other land, “to the end that the said John, his sons, and their
posterity, may enjoy it in virtue of our gift.” In 844, the
emperor Louis and the beneficiary John, are dead; Teut-
fried, son of John, presents himself to Charles le Chauve,
with the two anterior gifts, asks him to confirm them anew,
and Charles does so, “to the end that thou and thy posterity
possess their property without any rent.”

Thus, despite the hereditary right of the title, whenever
the beneficiary or the giver died, the possessor of the bene-
fice thought it necessary that he should be confirmed in his
possession ; so strongly was the primitive idea of the per-
sonality of this relation and the right which resulted from it,
engraved upon minds.’


a bea. ® Essai sur ? Histoire de France, p. 145.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 393


At the end of the tenth century, when we enter truly into
the feudal period, we no longer find any thing of the kind;
the right of fiefs, inheritance, is no longer called into doubt
by any one, it has no longer any need of confirmation.

As I said, historical testimonies agree with moral proba-
bilities. Beneficiary property, from the fifth to the tenth
century, did not pass through four successive and regular
states—arbitrary revocability, temporary concession, life-
long, and hereditary concession. ‘These four states are met
with at all epochs. The primitive predominance of life con-
cession, and the constant tendency to inheritance, which in
the end triumphed, these only are the general conclusions
which may be deduced from monuments, the true characters
of the transition from benefices to fiefs.

At the same time that this transition was brought about,
and beneficiary property became hereditary and stable, it
also became general—that is, territorial property almost
everywhere took this form. At first, you will recollect, there
was a large number of freeholds, that is to say, properties
entirely independent, which were not held from any one, and
which owed nothing to any one. From the fifth to the tenth
century, freehold property, without entirely disappearing, be-
came gradually less extensive, and the beneficiary condition
became the common condition of territorial property. The
following are the principal causes of this :—

It must not be supposed that when the barbarians seized
upon the Roman world, they divided the territory into lots
more or less considerable, and that each, taking one for him-
self, established himself upon it. Nothing of the kind hap-
pened. ‘The chiefs, the men of importance, appropriated a
large extent of land to themselves, and most of their com-
panions, their men, continued to live with them in their
houses, always attached to their person. freemen, Franks,
Burgundians, &c., living upon the estates of others, is a fact
which is met with at every step in the monuments of the
sixth, seventh, and eighth centuries.

But the inclination and desire for territorial property were
not long in spreading. In proportion as the habits of the
wandering life left them, a greater number of men wished to
become proprietors. Besides, money was rare; land, so to
speak, was the most common, the most disposable coin; it
was employed to repay all sorts of services. The possessors
of large domains distributed them among their companions by

30*


354 HISTORY OF


way of payment. We read in the capitularies of Charle-
magne,

“Let any steward (villicus) of one of our domains, who
possesses a benefice, send a substitute into our domain to
overlook in his stead the works and all the care of our
land.”!

‘* Let those of the keepers of our horses (poledrarii) who
are free men, and possess benefices in the locality of their
employment, live upon the product of their benefices.””

And every great proprietor, ecclesiastic or layman, Egin-
hard or Charlemagne, paid in this way most of the free men
whom he employed. Thence arose the rapid division of
landed property, and the multitude of petty benefices.

A second cause, usurpation, also greatly increased their
number. Powerful chiefs, who had taken possession of a
vast territory, had little means of actually occupying and pre-
serving it from invasion. It was easy for neighbors, for the
first comer, to establish himself upon it, and to appropriate
to himself such and such part of it. It so happened in many
places. In the anonymous life of Louis le Débonnaire, we
read :

“In 715, Charlemagne, sending back his son Louis into
Aquitaine, asked him how it happened that, being a king, he
was SO parsimonious as to offer nothing to any one, not even
his blessing, unless it was asked of him. Louis informed
his father that the great men of the kingdom occupying
themselves only with their own interests, and neglecting the
public interests, the royal domains were everywhere con-
verted into private properties ; hence it happened that he
himself was king only in name, and in want almost of every-
thing. Charlemagne wishing to remedy this evil, but fear-
ing that his son would lose somewhat of the affection of the
great men, if he were to take again through wisdom what he
had allowed them to usurp through improvidence, sent his
own messengers into Aquitaine, Willbert, afterwards arch-
bishop of Rouen, and count Richard, inspectors of the royal
domains, and ordered them to procure the restoration to the
king of the domains which had formerly belonged to him,
which was done.”* .

And when, in 846, the bishops gave advice to Charles le


1 Capit. of Charlemagne, de Villis ; Bal., vol. i. col. 333.
? Thid., c. 338. ® Historiens de France, t. iv., p. 90.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. S5D


Chauve, as to the best means of elevating his dignity and
power:

‘Many public domains,” say they to him, ‘“ have been taken
from you, some by force, and some by fraud; and because
men have made false reports, and unjust demands of you,
they have retained them by way either of benefices, or free-
holds. It appears to us useful and necessary that you should
send into the countries of your kingdom, firm and faithful
messengers, taken from each order; they shall carefully
draw up a list of the estates which, in the time of your
father and grandfather, belonged to the royal domain, and of
those which formed the benefices of vassals ; they shall ex-
amine what each now withholds of them, and shall render a
true account thereof to you. When you find that there is
reason, utility, justice, or sincerity, whether in the donation
or in the taking possession, things shall remain in their
present state. But when you see that there is unreasonable-
ness, or rather fraud, then, with the counsel of your faithful,
reform this evil in such a manner that reason, prudence, or
justice be not overlooked, and that at the same time your
dignity be not debased, nor reduced by necessity to that
which is unbecoming it. Your house cannot be filled with
servants to do their duties, if you have not the means of re-
compensing their merits, or of alleviating their poverty.”

The greater part of the lands thus usurped certainly did
not re-enter into the domain of the first possessor, king or
subject. It was too difficult to dispossess the usurpers ; but
they undertook to hold them as benefices, and to observe the
obligations attending them. A new, and I| think very in-
fluential cause, of the extension of beneficiary property.

There were also many deserted, uncultivated lands ; men
driven from their dwellings, or still leading a wandering life,
or monks, established themselves upon them and cultivated
them. When they had become valuable, some powerful
neighbor often demanded them, in order afterwards to con-
cede them, by way of benefices, to those who occupied them.

Lastly, a fourth cause powerfully contributed to make the
beneficiary condition the common condition of territorial
property ; by a practice known under the name of recom-
mendation, numerous freeholds were converted into benefices.
The proprietor of a freehold presented himself before some


2 Bal., vol. ii., col. 31.


356 HISTORY OF


neighbor, some powerful man, whom he wished to select as
a patron, and holding in his hand either a clod of turf, or a
branch of a tree, he ceded to him his freehold, which he im-
mediately resumed by way of benefice, to enjoy according to
the rules and duties, but also with the privileges of this new
condition.

This practice was allied with the ancient German man-
ners, with the primitive relation of chief and companions.
Then also free men recommended themselves to another
man, that is, they selected a chief for themselves. But this
was an entirely personal and perfectly free relation. When
it pleased him, the companion quitted his chief and took an-
other; the engagement entered into between them was pure-
ly moral, and rested on their will alone. Immediately after
the territorial establishment, the same liberty continued to
exist; they could recommend themselves, that is to say,
they could select for a patron whom they wished, and might
change him at their will. Still, in proportion as society be-
came a little strengthened, attempts were made to introduce
some regularity into these proceedings and relations. The
law of the Visigoths declares :

“Tf any one has given arms, or aught else, to a man
whom he receives into his patronage, let those gifts remain
to him who received them. If the latter choose another
patron, let him be free to recommend himself to whom he
wills; this cannot be interdicted to a free man, for he be-
longs to himself; but let him return to the patron from whom
he separates all which he has received from him.”!

And we read ina capitulary of Pepin, son of Charlemagne,
and king of Italy :

“If any one, occupying the portion of land which has
fallen to him, choose another lord, whether the count or any
other man, let him have full liberty to leave him; but let him
not retain or carry away any of the things which he pos-
sesses, and let all revert to the domain of his first lord.’”

Matters soon proceeded still farther. Men were in the
transition from the wandering life to the sedentary life. It
was above all things necessary to put an end to the fluctua-
tion, the disorder of situations; in this direction tended the
effort of superior men who aimed at the progression of so-


1 Laws of the Visigoths, 1. v., tit. 3, ¢. 1.
2 Capit. de Charlemagne, in 813 ; Bal., vol. i., col. 510,


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 357


ciety. Charlemagne undertook to determine, on the one
hand, under what circumstance the client might quit his pa-
tron; and on the other, to impose upon all free men the ne-
cessity of recommending themselves to a patron, that is to
say, of placing themselves under the authority and respon-
sibility of a superior. We read in his capitularies :

“Let no man who has received the value of a solidus
from his lord quit him, unless his lord has sought to kill him,
or to strike him with a stick, or to dishonor his wife or
daughter, or to despoil him of his heritage.”!

“Tf any free man quit his lord against the will of the latter,
and go into the kingdom of another, let not the king receive
him into his patronage, and not allow his men to receive
him.”

‘¢ Let no one buy a horse, a beast of burden, an ox, or any
thing else, without knowing him who sells it, or of what
country he is, where he lives, and who is his lord.”

In 858, the bishops wrote to Louis le Germanique: “We
bishops, sacred to the Lord, we are not, like the laity, obli-
ged to recommend ourselves to any patron.”

Charlemagne did not obtain all he wished; for a long
time still an extreme fluctuation pervaded this class of rela-
tions. Yet his genius was not mistaken as to the true need
of the time, his labors had ever in view the natural course
of things. ‘The necessity and fixedness of the recommenda-
tion of persons and lands prevailed more and more. Many
freehold proprietors were weak, not in a state to defend
themselves; they had need of a protector; others became
weary of their isolation: free and masters, it is true, in their
domain, they had no tie, no influence beyond it; they held
no place in that hierarchy of beneficiaries which was become
the general society. They wished to enter into it, and to
participate in the movement of the period. Thus was
brought about the metamorphosis of the greater part of the
freeholds into benefices ; a metamorphosis less complete in
the South of France, where the feudal system did not per-
vade all things, and where many freeholds continued to ex-
ist, but which was not the less general, and which made the


Capit. de Pepin, king of Italy, in 795; Bal., vol. i., col. 597.
Capit. de Charlemagne, in 806; Bal., t. i., col. 443.

Capit. of the year 806, vol. i., col. 450.

Ibid., vol. i., col. 118.


> o dS


358 HISTORY OF


beneficiary condition the common condition of territorial
property.

Such was the state in which it found itself at the close of
the tenth century, after going through the vicissitudes which
I have attempted to trace ; and not only did most lands be-.
come fiefs at this epoch, but the feudal character gradually
penetrated into all kinds of properties. At that time almost
every thing was given in fief: the gruerie or forest jurisdic-
tion; the right of hunting therein; a share in the péage
(toll-money) or in the rouage (wine-toll) of a place; the
convoy or escort of merchants going to fairs; the office of
judge in the palace of the prince or high lord; the mint-
offices in those of his towns where money was coined; the
letting of the places in which fairs were held; the houses
where the public stoves were; the common ovens of towns ;
lastly, down to the swarms of bees which might be found in
forests.’ The whole civil order, in a word, became feudal.
We shall see the same revolution in the political order.


? Usage Général des Fiefs, by Brussel, t. i., p. 42.


f


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 359


THIRD. LECTURE.


Of the amalgamation of sovereignty and property, the second characteris-
tic of the feudal system—True meaning of this fact—Its origin—It
comes neither from the Roman society nor from the German band—Is
it the result of conquest only ?—Of the system of feudal publicists on
this subject—Two forms of society in Germany, the tribe and the band
—Social organization of the tribe—Domestic sovereignty is there dis-
tinct from political sovereignty—T wofold origin of domestic sovereignty
among the ancient Germans—It arose from family and from conquest—
What became of the organization of the German tribe, and especially
of domestic sovereignty after the establishment of the Germans in Gaul
—What it retained of the family spirit gradually diminished ; what it
retained of conquest became dominant—Recapitulation and true char
acter of feudal sovereignty.


We have studied the first of the great facts which consti-
tute and characterize the feudal system; I mean the special
nature of landed property, in its progressive development
from the fifth to the tenth century. I now approach the
second of these facts, the amalgamation of sovereignty and
property. ,

It is first of all necessary to come to an understanding as
to the meaning of these words, and as to the limits of the
fact itself. Our business here is solely with the sovereignty
of the possessor of the fief in his domains, and over their in-
habitants. Beyond the fief, and in his relations with other
possessors of fiefs, superior or inferior, and whatever the in-
equality between them, the lord was not a sovereign. No
one in this association possessed the sovereignty. There
other principles and other forms prevailed, which we shall
study in treating of the third characteristic of the feudal sys-
tem, that is to say, the hierarchical organization of the gen-
eral society which the possessors of fiefs formed among
themselves.

When I speak of the amalgamation of sovereignty and of
property, I repeat that I speak solely of the sovereignty of
the possessor of the fief within his own domains, and over
their inhabitants not themselves possessors of fiefs.

The fact thus limited, its certainty is incontestable. At
the eleventh century, feudalism once well established, the


360 HISTORY OF


possessor of the fief, great or small, possessed all the rights
of sovereignty in his domains. No external or distant power
gave laws there, established taxes, or administered justice ;
the proprietor alone possessed all this power.

Such, at least in principle and in the common thought,
was feudal right. This right was often overlooked, then
disputed, and lastly usurped by the superior and powerful
lords, among others by the kings. It did not the less exist,
nor was it the less claimed as primitive and fundamental.
When the publicist friends of feudalism complain that the
sovereignty of the simple lords was usurped by great barons,
and that of the great barons by kings, they are quite accu-
rate ; such was the case. Originally, in the right, in the
spirit of the system, each lord exercised the legislative, ju-
dicial, and military powers in his domains; he made war,
coined money, &c.; in a word, he was a sovereign.

Nothing of the kind existed before the full development of
the feudal system immediately after the invasion, in the sixth
and seventh centuries. We then see the germ, the first
rudiments of feudal sovereignty ; but by its side, and even
above it, there still exist imperial royalty, military royalty,
the Roman administration, the assemblies and jurisdiction of
free men. Various powers and systems coexisted and
struggled with each other. The sovereignty was not con-
centred within each fief, and in the hands of its possessor.

How was the fact brought about from the fifth to the tenth
century ? How were all other sovereignties abolished, or
at least effaced, in order to leave only that of the lord within
his domain and over its inhabitants ?

Assuredly it was not from Roman society that this fact
could have taken its origin, for that contained nothing re-
sembling it. So far from sovereignty there being inherent
in property, and disseminated, as here, over the face of the
country, it was not even politically divided; it resided
wholly and completely in the centre of the empire, and in
the hands of the emperor. ‘The emperor alone made laws,
imposed taxes, possessed the jurisdiction, regulated war and
peace, in fact governed, either of himself or by his delegates.
‘The remains of the municipal system still visible in cities,
consisted of some administrative privileges, and in a certain
degree of independence, which did not extend to the limits
of sovereignty. A master, agents, and subjects—such was
the entire social organization of the Roman empire, always


&


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 361


excepting slaves, who remained under the domestic juris-
diction.

It is evidently not from the bosom of Roman society that
feudal sovereignty could have taken birth.

Nor could it have arisen from the German bands which
invaded the Roman empire. There nothing resembling the
amalgamation of sovereignty and power can be met with ;
for property (I mean landed property) is incompatible with
the wandering life, and with regard to persons, the chief of
such a band possessed no sovereignty over his companions ;
he had no right to give them laws, to tax them, or of himself
to administer justice to them. There reigned common deli-
beration, personal independence, and a great equality of
rights, although the principle of an aristocratical society ger-
minated there, and at a later period was to develop itself.

Did the amalgamation of sovereignty and property take
rise from conquest alone? and did the conquerors divide the
territory and its inhabitants between them, to reign as sov-
ereign each in his portion, in the sole right of the strongest?

This is what many publicists have believed and maintain-
ed. Correctly speaking, in truth, this is the idea which con-
stitutes the basis of the system of all the defenders of the
feudal régime, of M. de Boulainvilliers, for example. They
do not formally express it; they do not say openly that force
alone founded the sovereignty of the possessors of fiefs ; but
this is their principle, the only possible principle of their
theory. The soil had been conquered, and with the soil,
the inhabitants ; thence the amalgamation of sovereignty and
property. Both of them passed, and legitimately passed, to
the bravest. Unless M. de Boulainvilliers takes this fact for
granted, the whole of his system falls to the ground.

In fact as in right, M. de Boulainvilliers and the publi-
cists of this school are mistaken. The amalgamation of
sovereignty and property, that great characteristic of the
feudal system, was not so simple, so purely material, so
brutal, thus to speak, a fact so foreign both to the organiza-
tion of the two societies which the invasion brought into con-
tact, the Roman society and the German society, or to the
general principles of social organization.

Let us seek its true origin ; you will see, I think, that it
is more complex, more remote, than the simple right of con-
quest.

When I spoke, in the last course, of ancient Germany, I

31


362 HISTORY OF


distinguished the two societies, or rather the two modes of
social organization, differing in their principles and their re-
sults, which were visible there ; on the one hand, the tribe
or horde, and on the other, the band.

The tribe was a sedentary society, formed of neighboring
proprietors, living on the produce of their lands and their
herds.

The band was a wandering society, composed of warriors
united around a chief, either for some special expedition, or
to seck fortune at a distance, and living by pillage.

That these two societies coexisted among the Germans,
and were essentially distinct, Cesar, Tacitus, Ammianus
Marcellinus, all the monuments, all the traditions of ancient
Germany prove to us. Most of the nations mentioned by
Tacitus, whose names fill his treatise Upon the Manners of
the Germans, are tribes or confederations of tribes. The
greater part of the invasions which ended in the destruction
of the Roman empire, especially the first, were effected by
wandering bands, who had quitted the German tribes to seek
booty and adventures.

The ascendency of the chief over his companions formed
the band, and pressed it around him. This was its origin. It
was governed by common deliberation ; personal indepen-
dence and warlike equality played a great part in it.

The organization of the tribe was less irregular and less
simple.

Its primitive element, its political unity, to speak in the
language of publicists, was not the individual, the walrilor,
but the family, the chief of the family. The tribe, or the
portion of the tribe which inhabited the same territory, was
composed of families, of the proprietary heads of families
established near each other. The proprietary heads of fami-
lies were its true citizens, the cives optimo jure of the Ro-
mans.

The dwellings of the families of the German tribe were
not contiguous, and at a distance from the lands to be culti-
vated, as they are in our towns and villages; each chief of
a family was established amidst his own lands; his family,
and all who cultivated them with him, whether free or not,
relations, laborers, or slaves, were established on them like
himself, dispersed here and there, like their dwellings, over
the face of the domains. The domains of the different chiefs
of the family were adjacent, but not their dwellings.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE, 363


It is in this way that the villages of the Indian tribes are
still constructed in North America; in Europe, most of the
villages of Corsica, and still nearer to us, at our very door, a
large number of the villages of Normandy. ‘There also the
dwellings are not contiguous ; each farmer, each small pro-
prietor, lives in the midst of his fields, in an enclosure, called
masure, mansura, dwelling, the mansus of our ancient docu-
ments.

I dwell upon these circumstances, because they arise from
the social organization of the tribe, and assist its proper com-
prehension. ‘The general assembly of the tribe was formed
of all the proprietary heads of families. ‘They met, under
the direction of the most aged, (grau, grav, the’ count, be-
come at a later period, the lord,) to discuss together of com-
mon affairs, to administer justice upon important occasions,
to occupy themselves with religious ceremonies in which
the whole tribe was interested, &c. The political sove-
reignty belonged to this assembly.

By political sovereignty, 1 mean the government.of the
general affairs of the tribe. ‘To that, in fact, the jurisdiction
of the assembly was confined; it did not penetrate into the
domains of the chief of the family; with him no authority
had a right to interfere. By title of proprietor and chief of
the family, he alone was sovereign there.

In the domains of the proprietary head of a family, and
under his authority, lived: 1, his family, properly so called,
his children and their families, grouped around him; 2, the
laborers who cultivated his lands, some free, others enjoying
only a half-freedom. These Colont held certain portions of
his domains from the chief of the family, and cultivated them
on their own account, subject to a certain ground-rent.
They did not by this acquire any right of property over these
lands ; yet they and their children established themselves
there; they possessed and cultivated them hereditarily.
Between them and the proprietary head of the family there
were formed those ties which rest upon no title, confer no
legal right, and nevertheless are true ties, a moral element
of society ; 3, after the bond-laborers came the slaves, pro-
perly so called, employed either in the house or to culti-
vate, for the chiefs of the family, those lands which he had
not ceded to any one, and which generally lay immediately
around his habitation.

Such was the extent of the family, and, so to speak, the


364 HISTORY OF


contents of the domain. All this internal population, of very
different conditions, was placed under the jurisdiction of the
proprietary head of the family ; no public power interfered ;
every man was master in his own house ; such was already the
maxim of the ancient German society. Proprietor and
magistrate, the chief of the family was even priest, 1t appears,
for that portion of domestic worship which could subsist at
that epoch.

What was the origin of this organization of the tribes in
Germany? Should we see in it a first step, and, in some
measure, an anticipated repetition of what happened at the
sixth century, after the establishment of the Germans upon
the Roman territory—that is to say, the result of a conquest ?
These proprietary chiefs of families, are they conquerors come
from afar, and who have seized the soil and its inhabitants ?
Those laborers who cultivate the soil on payment of a rent,
and under the authority of the proprietor, are they the con-
quered, dispossessed entirely or in part, and reduced to an
inferior condition ?

Or is this an example of the social organization which has
been called the patriarchal system, which arose among pas-
toral and agricultural nations, from the progressive extension
of the natural family and from the agricultural life, of which
the annals of the East, especially those of the Arabs and the
Hebrews, offer the model: which at every step remind us of
the narratives of the Bible, and which also appeared, at least
under its most essential features, in the bosom of the Roman
republic, in the situation of the pater familias, at once pro-
prietor, magistrate, and priest, in the midst of his domain, of
his children, and of his slaves ? i

This last explanation is that which most of the German
writers have adopted and maintain. Passionate admirers of
the ancient institutions, of the ancient manners of their
country, they find in this organization of the tribes, not a
complete and regular model, but all the good principles of the
social system. In the family, the domestic magistracy ; be-
yond the family, political liberty; the chiefs of the family
governing the inferior classes by the ascendency of property
and position, and then regulating im common the affairs of
the tribe; is not this, say they, the best union of power and
liberty 2 What system better respects the natural elements,
the necessary conditions of the social order? Can we see
there the work of conquest and of force? Must we not, on the


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 365


contrary, there recognise the simple and spontaneous de-
velopment of human relations 2

I, for many reasons, cannot entirely adopt this system.

And, first, the Germans appear to me to carry into their re-
searches and ideas upon this subject a disposition of mind
which I must characterize with some precision, for, unless I
am mistaken, it exercises a great influence over them.

When, under some broad point of view, or under some
essential relation, a social state appears to them good and
beautiful, they conceive for it an exclusive admiration and
Sympathy. They are generally inclined to admire, and to be
overcome with passion ; the imperfections, the interruptions,
the bad side of things, strike them but little. Singular con-
trast! In the purely intellectual sphere, in the research for
and combination of ideas, no nation has more extension of
mind, more philosophical impartiality. When the question
is of facts which address themselves to the imagination, which
arouse moral emotions, they easily fall into prejudices and
narrow views; their imagination then wants fidelity, truth;
they are without poetical impartiality—in fact, they do not
see things from all points of view, and such as they really are.

This disposition has often governed them in the study of
ancient Germany, of its origins, its national manners. What
they found there great, moral, truly liberal, has struck them,
has filled them with enthusiasm; and here their inguiry has
stopped; to this has their imagination been limited. It is
with these elements only that they have reconstructed their
primitive society.

There is a second cause of error. Most of the national
documents which the Germans make use of in order to study
the ancient Germanic institutions, are of an epoch far pos-
terior to that which occupies them, far posterior to the
second, third, fourth, and fifth centuries. Before the con-
version of Germany to Christianity—that is to say, before
the eighth century—there existed no really national monu-
ments, for then the German languages were not written.
Of these times there only remain vague, incomplete tradi-
tions, preserved by writers of a period far less remote. Till
then, we know the Germans only through Latin writers, or
through the western chroniclers ; there are consequently many
anachronisms in the picture which the Germans trace of the
ancient social state of their country. They refer to the third
and fourth centuries facts derived from monuments of the

>


366 HISTORY OF


ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries. I do not say that there
is not in these monuments some revelation, some echo of the
ancient Germanic society; but these inferences from premises
antecedent to them three, four, five, and six centuries, are
extremely delicate and difficult. We run great risk of de-
ceiving ourselves in such inductions, and when we undertake
this work with an exclusive and passionate turn of imagina-
tion, the chance of error becomes infinitely greater.

Lastly, numerous positive texts, Cesar, ‘Tacitus, Ammianus
Marcellinus, attest that before the great invasion, between the
Rhine, the Elbe, and the Danube, nations of the same race
and of different race often expelled, enslaved, exterminated
one another, and that the organization of the ancient German
tribe, especially the situation of the agricultural laborers,
was more than once the result of conquest. I have already
had occasion, in our last course, to point out some of these
texts ;' I shall here repeat the most explicit of them:

“The slaves in general,” says Tacitus, “ are not arranged
in their several employments in household affairs, as is the
practice at Rome; each has his separate habitation or home.
The master considers him as an agrarian dependent, who is
obliged to furnish, by way of rent, a certain quantity of grain,
of cattle, or of wearing apparel. ‘The slave does this, and.
there his servitude ends. All domestic matters are managed
by the master’s own wife and children. ‘lo punish a slave
with stripes, to load him with chains, or condemn him to
hard labor, is unusual; they kill their slaves sometimes,
not out of ordinary severity or discipline, but from violence
or sudden impulse, as they would kill an enemy.”

‘In the neighborhood of the Teucteres were formerly the
Bructeres ; it is said, however, that now the Chamaves and
the Angrivarians possess the district, having, in concert with
the adjoining tribes, expelled and entirely extirpated the
ancient inhabitants.”

“The Marcomanians are the most eminent for their
strength and military glory ; the very territory they occupy
is the reward of their valor, they having dispossessed its
former owners, the Boians.””

Go through the treatise On the Manners of the Germans—
at every step you will find phrases and words which indicate
the same fact.


1 Lecture VII. vol. ii. * De Morib. Germ., c. 25, 33, 42.


OIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 367


In the social state of ancient Germany, and especially in
that of the sedentary and agricultural tribe, I therefore believe
the share of conquest, of force, much greater than the German
historians generally suppose it to be. I believe the domestic
sovereignty of the chief of the proprietary family wis much
more tyrannical, the conditions of the laborers much worse
than they imagine. This, in my opinion, is indicated not
only by moral probabilities, not only by the Latin writers
whom I have just spoken of, but down to the national docu-
ments which the Germans call to the support of their ideas ;
among others, by all the wrecks of the ancient Germanic
poetry. I regret that 1 have not time to dwell upon this.
It would, I think, be easy to prove how far their pictures of
their ancient condition is from the truth.

Still, having brought all these restrictions to bear upon
the favorite system of the Germans in this matter, I think
with them, that the organization of the German tribe, and
the relations of the various classes of the inhabitants, is not
wholly attributable to conquest, to force. The sovereignty
of the proprietary chief of the family, in his domains, was not
exclusively that of the conqueror over the conquered, of the
master over the slaves or demi-slaves; there was, in fact,
something of the patriarchal system; the family, its relations,
its habits, its sentiments, were, in part at least, the source
of this state of society.

And first, the mere fact that this is a general opinion in
Germany, a public belief, prevalent in all classes, is at once
a strong presumption that it was so. A nation dogs not de-
ceive itself to such a degree as to its origins, and the feeling
with which they inspire it. That antipathy which we else-
where encounter towards the ancient social state of the
country, does not exist in Germany. ‘The first relations be-
tween the superior and inferior classes, between proprietors
and cultivators, have not left those mournful traditions, those
unhappy recollections, with which our history is filled.
The German population has not constantly struggled to es-
cape from its origins, to abolish its old institutions. ‘There
is, then, evidently something besides conquest and tyranny.

The common opinion is right, it is conformable with facts.
The general invasion of the country by foreigners, the strug-
gle of races, the struggle of languages, the profound hostility
of social situations, nothing, or scarcely any thing of all this
was found in Germany, at least in a great part of Germany.


368 HISTORY OF


The feudal system was established there, played an impor-
tant part there, and still weighs heavily upon the people,
. although less so than elsewhere. There were at all times
many free and proprietary peasants, many independent
properties, not in the least fettered with the bonds of feu-
dalism.

We therefore cannot refuse to recognise in the organiza-
tion of the ancient German tribe, and chiefly in the domestic
sovereignty of the proprietary chief of the family, another
origin than conquest, another character, a character more
moral, more free than that of force. This origin is the pa-
triarchal system, of a system analogous to it; this character
is that of the life of the family. Very probably, the German
tribe was originally the development, the extension of one
and the same family ; very probably a large portion of the
inhabitants of the domain, many of these hereditary labor-
ers, subject to a rent, were relations of the proprietary chief
of the family. There was herein, very probably, somewhat
of that social organization which has long subsisted in the
clans of the Scotch Highlands, and the septs of Ireland; an
organization which the novels of Sir Walter Scott have ren-
dered familiar to all minds; which, at the first glance, and
judging from external appearances, resembles the feudal sys-
tem, but is still radically different, for it evidently arose from
the family; it perpetuates its ties through centuries, and
maintains affectionate sentiments in spite of the profound
inequality of social conditions ; it has rights recognised and
respected, where political guarantees are entirely wanting ;
in fe, morality and liberty in a system where, without this
origin and its influence, there would have been only oppres-
sion and degradation.

Such, also, was doubtless the influence which, in the Ger-
manic tribe, had introduced something of the relations and
manners of the clan.

From these details there result, if | mistake not, two great
facts :

1. In the German tribe, the sovereignty, as to all the gen-
eral affairs of the tribe, belonged to the assembly of the pro-
prietary chiefs of the families ; as to all which passed in the
interior of such domain, to the chief of the family himself;
that is to say, that there was a political, collective sover-
eignty, and a sovereignty domestic, individual, and inherent
to property.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 369°


2. The domestic sovereignty of proprietors had a twofold
origin, a twofold character. On the one hand, the ties and
habits of the family ; the proprietary chief was a chief of the
clan, surrounded by his relations, whatever might be the dis-
tance of relationship and the diversity of condition ; on the
other hand, conquest and force: there also had been portions
of territory occupied at the sword’s point, conquered, dispos-
sessed, and reduced to servitude or nearly so.

Thus in this organization of the ancient Germanic tribe,
there are seen the three great social systems, the three great
origins of sovereignty : first, the association among equal and
free men, where political sovereignty is developed; second-
ly, the primitive natural association, that of the family, where
the sole and patriarchal sovereignty prevails; thirdly, the
compulsory association, the result of conquest, and subject
to despotic sovereignty.

Upon the narrow and obscure theatre of the tribe of the
Cherusci or of the Hermundures, or other such, there existed
then, as early as the third century, all the essential principles,
all the great forms of human society.

Let us now transport ourselves to the sixth century, after
the invasion, between the Rhine, the ocean, the Pyrenees,
and the Alps, and let us see what necessarily happened then.

And first, it was not the German tribes, but the band
which went into the Gallo-Roman territory, seized upon it,
and established itself there. Of the two original societies
of Germany, that which was not resident, but wandering,
whose basis was the individual, not the family, and which
was devoted, not to an agricultural life, but to warfare ; this
became one of the primitive elements of our civilization.

In Germany, it was the agricultural tribe, among us it was
the warlike band, which is seen at the cradle of society.

Once established, it is true, once impelled to quit the wan-
dering for the sedentary life, and pillage for property, the
Germanic band must have wished to reproduce the institu-
tions, the habits of its native country ; the organization of the
tribe must have been the source, the model of the system
which it attempted to adopt.

This, in fact, was what happened. We see the German
band, in proportion as it fixes itself upon our territory, at-
tempting to transplant thither the social condition which I
have just described, more especially that twofold sovereign-
ty: political, in general affairs, belonging to the assembly of


370 HISTORY OF


the chiefs of the family; domestic, in the interior of the do-
mains of each proprietary chief of a family, and exercised by
him alone.

But what changes must the change of situation and of ex-
ternal circumstances have introduced into the new society !

Let us first see what political sovereignty became.

In Germany, the tribe was generally established upon a
contracted territory. ‘The tribes reciprocally confined and
narrowed themselves, surrounding themselves, as Cesar says,
with vast deserts, for better security. The chiefs of families
lived near to one another, and could easily meet to treat of-
their common affairs. The sovereignty of the general as-
sembly was natural and possible. '

After the invasion into the empire an immense territory
was thrown open to the expeditions and eager avidity of the
conquerors. They dispersed themselves throughout it in
every direction. The chief of them occupied vast domains.
They were too far from each other to meet often, and delibe-
rate in common. ‘The political sovereignty of the general
assembly became impracticable, was doomed to perish, and,
in fact, did perish, giving place to another system, to that
hierarchical organization of proprietors, of which I shall
speak, in discussing the feudal association and its institutions.

The domestic sovereignty, that of the proprietary chief of
the family over the inhabitants of his domains, had equal
alterations to undergo.

It was not with his relations, with his clan alone, that the
German chief had effected his conquests, and found himself
established in his new domains. ‘The band which had fol-
lowed him was composed of warriors of various families of
the tribe, often men of different tribes. ‘Tacitus expressly
says as much: “If the tribe in which they were born be-
comes torpid in the laziness of a long peace, the principal
among the young men go to seek nations who are engaged
in war; for repose is unknown to this people; the warriors
acquire celebrity only in the midst of danger, and it is only
by war, by enterprises, that they can preserve a sufficient
troop of companions.”

The ties between the chief and his companions were thus
often the ties of war, not of family. Hence arose a great
change in the character of their relations in the new estab-


1 De Mor. Germ., c. 14.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. STL


lishment. ‘There was no longer that community of habits,
traditions, sentiments, which might exist in Germany among
the proprietary chiefs and the laborers of their domains ; in
its place was the comradeship of Warriors, a principle of as-
sociation which was far less Strong, far less powerful, far
less moral.

The proprietary chief, moreover, found himself, in Gaul,
surrounded by a foreign, hostile population, of different race,
language, manners, and from whom he had incessantly to
guard himself. The Roman Gauls were still the inhabitants,
the cultivators of his domains ; while in Germany the greater
part were Germans like himself. A new and powerful cause
of weakness in that patriarchal character, which domestic
sovereignty had in Germany.

In his new settlement he was not long surrounded even by
those of his countrymen who had formed part, if not of his
family, at least of his band. Yet, as I have already had oc-
casion to say several times, this band broke not up imme-
diately into individuals, eager to separate, and to go and in-
habit each his own domain. The principal chiefs occupied
vast territories, and many of their companions continued to
live with them in their homes. Accordingly we find in the
documents of the sixth, seventh, and eighth centuries, and
even later, a great number of free men, of German origin,
and designated under the names of armmannt, erimanni, heri-
mannt, hermannt, among the Lombards,! and of rachimburgi,
rathimburgi, regimburgi,? among the Franks. Many German


* The arimanni incessantly recur in the Lombard laws, and in the
italian monuments, from the 7th to the 12th century. Their name is
written erimanni, eremanni, harimanni, haremanni, héerimanni, herman-
ni, variations more especially arising from the difficulty of writing the
Teutonic sounds; and all leads us to suppose that the Germani, named in
many acts, of which many refer to the 9th century, are no others than
the arimanni or hermanni; so that the national name of the Germans
would have no other origin than that of herimanni, free men. People
differ as to the etymology of this latter word: according to some, it comes
from heer, (army, war,) and the heermanni are watriors.; according to
others, it comes from ehre, (honor,) and means free men par excellence,
citizens invested with all the rights of political liberty, the cives optima
jure of the Roman law. This latter explanation is adopted by Mier
(Osnabriickische Geschichte, in the preface et passim) and by M. de
Savigny.—History of the Roman Law, &c., vol. i. p. 160, 175.

' ? The rachimburgi, often mentioned in the Salic law, are so also in
many formule of the time, and even in acts of the 10th century: the
variations of orthography are still more numerous than for the arimannt ;


372 HISTORY OF


writers, M. de Savigny among others, have thought to recog-
nise, under these names, a condition, a particular class, the
ancient free men and independent proprietors, the true citi-
zens of the German tribe before the invasion; and they
have thence inferred the prolonged continuation of the an-
cient social organization of the Germans in their new coun-
try. I think they are mistaken. I have carefully examined
this question in my Essais sur [Histoire de France. 1 shall
here quote my words ; I have no reason to change them:

“The names of arimanni and of rachimburgi are evidently
applied to free men; they mean even (as every thing leads
us to suppose) the free men in general, the acting citizens.
The Lombard arimanni sit in courts or public assemblies in
quality of judges, march to war under the orders of the count,
appear as witnesses in civil actions; the Frank rachimburgt
exercise the same right.

“It is equally certain that these words do not mean magis-
trates, men invested with special functions, judicial or other-
wise, and distinct, by this title, from the rest of the citizens.
In numerous documents, the arimanni are mentioned as
witnesses, or simple warriors; the same name is given to
the free citizens of town. The Frank rachimburgi also ap-
pear when there is no public function to fill; the word
rachimburgi is often translated by that of boni homines. Ev-
ery thing shows that these names are applied to free men, to
citizens in general, and not to any special magistrate, to any
public power.

‘But these free men, these ahrimans, these rachimburgs,
were they distinct from the leuds or beneficiaries, as from
slaves? Did they form a class of independent citizens,
united only among themselves and to the state,—whose social
condition, in a word, was other than that of the men who,
under the name of recommended, leudes, faithful, antrustians,
or vassals, had entered into a particular association, and


we find rachimburgi, rathimburgi, racimburgi, racineburgi, recynebur gi,
racimburdi, regimburgi, raimburgi. Most of the learned derive this
word from racha, (cause, process,) or from recht, (right, justice,) which
would exclusively represent the rachimburgi under the character of
judges. M. de Savigny thinks, with the celebrated historian Muller, that
it comes from the ancient Teutonic word rek, (great powerful,) which
forms the termination of so many German proper names, and occurs
again in reich, (rich ;) so that the rachimburgi, called also bont homines,
would be merely powerful, notable men, the ricos hombres of the Span-
iards.—History of the Roman Law, &c., vol. i. p. 184.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 373


lived in the dependence and under the protection of a supe-
rior ?

“The monuments and facts alleged even by the defenders
of this opinion, prove that it is ill founded, and that the
leudes, the vassals of a lord, were called ahrimans or rachim-
burgs, as much as if veritable citizens alone were spoken of,
men who were strangers to all individual independence.

‘A man comes to place himself under the faith of the king,
declares himself his faithful, his vassal; he comes, says the
formula, cum arimannia sua—that is to say, followed by his
warriors. Here, then, are ahrimans who are already leudes,
the vassals of a man, and about to become the arriere-vassals
of the king. They do not the less remain ahrimans—that is
to say, free men, for that is all that this word means ; it indi-
cates liberty in general, and not a social condition distinct
from that of the leudes, of the vassals.

“In a diploma of the tenth century, the emperor, Otho I.,
gives a fortress to a convent, ‘ with all the freemen, common-
ly called ahrimans.’ In the eleventh century, the emperor
Henry IV. made a similar donation to a monastery, and the
ahrimans who inhabit the domain are here also included.
Concessions of this kind were long common; many docu-
ments prove it, and a council of the tenth century forbade
counts ‘to give the ahrimans of their counties in benefice to
their men.’ In fact, the counts, originally at least, had no
right by that title only to dispose of the lands of their county,
nor of the free men who inhabited it. It was for the latter
themselves to choose the superior to whom they wished to
be attached.

‘The quality of ahriman, therefore did not exclude that
of leude, of vassal; ahrimans were the leudes of the man
upon whose lands they lived, and when these lands were
given in benefice they became the leudes of the new bene-
ficiary.

“I do not find any texts with regard to the rachimburgs,
where it is evident that this denomination was applied to
leudes as well as to men absolutely free. Often employed
in the Salic law, it is more rare than that of ahriman in the
monuments of posterior ages ; but all things authorize us to
form the same judgment as to the meaning of this term that
we see formed upon analogous terms. Both the one and the
other mean men free and in possession of the rights attendant
upon liberty, but not a particular class of citizens placed in a

32


374 HISTORY OF


condition distinct on the one hand from that of slaves, and on
the other from that of the leudes, or vassals.”!

Not only did the ahrimans, the rachimburgs, not form a
class distinct on the one hand from that of the bond-laborers,
or slaves, on the other from that of the leudes, or vassals, but
they could not fail soon to range themselves under one or
other of these two conditions. How, in the house with, and
by the side of, a chief who had become a great proprietor,
and who was in possession of a thousand means of influence,
and whose superiority increased daily, how, I say, could they
long preserve that equality, that independence, which the
companions of the same band formerly enjoyed? It is evi-
dent that it could not be. Those freemen who after the in-
vasion still lived for some time with their chief, before long
were divided into two classes ; some received benefices, and,
become proprietors in their turn, entered into the feudal
association, with which we shall occupy ourselves at a later
stage of our progress; the others, always fixed within the
interior of the domains of their ancient chief, fell either into
an entirely servile condition, or else into that of laborers cul-
tivating a part of the land, liable to certain payments or rents.

You see what must result from this sovereignty of the
ancient Germanic tribe which I have just described. In the
new territorial establishment, it experienced a profound alter-
ation ; it lost its character of the family; it could not con-
tinue to attach itself to the common sentiments, to those tra-
ditions, those ties of parentage which, in ancient Germany,
united the proprietary head of the family with most of the
inhabitants of his domains. This element of the organization
of the Germanic tribe disappeared, or nearly so, when it was
transplanted into Gaul. ‘The element which became domi-
nant was that of conquest, of force; and its predominance
was the necessary result of the situation in which the pro-
prietary heads of families found themselves in Gaul, a situa-
tion radically different from that in which they were placed
in Germany.

- Thus, this fusion of sovereignty aud power, which we have
remarked as one of the great characteristics of the feudal
system, was not, properly speaking, new: it was not the
result of conquest only; an analogous fact existed in Ger-
many, in the heart of the German tribe: there also the pro-


1 Essais sur Histoire de France, pp. 237-241.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 375


prietary head of the family was sovereign within his do
mains ; there also took place the fusion of sovereignty and
property. But in Germany this fusion was accomplished
under the influence of two principles; on the one hand, un-
der the influence of the spirit of family, of the organization
of clan; on the other, under the influence of conquest, of
force. These two principles had, in the domestic sovereign-
ty of the proprietary chief of the family in Germany, parts
altogether unequal, and which it would be difficult to estimate.
In Gaul, the share of the patriarchal system, of the organiza-
tion of the clan, became greatly impaired ; that of conquest,
of force, on the contrary, took a great development, and be-
came, if not the only, at least the dominant principle of that
fusion of sovereignty and property which is, [ repeat, one of
the great characteristics of the feudal system.

There is therefore nothing, or at least nothing important
to conclude from this fact in Germany, with regard to this
fact in our country. I do not say that there is nothing re-
maining among us of the ancient German habits ; I do not
say that the spirit of the family, the idea that all the inhabi-
tants of one domain, of one territory, are connected in some
moral relations, and in a kind of parentage, had no influence
in the French feudal system. I only say that this influence
was very confined, very inferior to that of conquest.

Such, if I mistake not, was the transformation of this fact
from the fourth to the tenth century. ‘I'hus, on its removal
from Germany did it become wholly different in our country.
In our next lecture we shall occupy ourselves with the third
characteristic of the feudal system, that is to say, the rela-
tions of the possessors of fiefs among themselves, and the
hierarchical organization of their society in itself.


376 HISTORY OF


FOURTH LECTURE.


General association of the possessors of fiefs among themselves ; third char-
acteristic of the feudal system—From the very nature of its elements
this association must have been weak and irregular—It, in fact, always
was so—Fallacy of the view which the apologists of this system trace
of the feudal hierarchy—Its incoherency and weakness were especially
great at the close of the 10th century—The formation of this hierarchy
from the 5th to the 10th century—Taree systems of institution are seen
together after the German invasion: free institutions, monarchical insti-
tutions, aristocratical institutions—Comparative history of these three sys-
tems—Decline of the two first—Triumph of the third, which yet remains
incomplete and disordered.


Tue two first characteristics of the feudal system, the
special nature of landed property, and the fusion of sove-
reignty and property in each fief, we are well acquainted
with. We know how they were formed; we have seen
them take birth and grow, from the fifth to the tenth century.
Let us now leave the interior of the fief, let us examine the
relations of the possessors of fiefs among themselves, the
progressive development of the organization which united
them, or rather which was reputed to unite them in one and
the same society. This, as you know, is the third of the
great facts which constitute the feudal system.

I said the organization which was reputed to unite them:
the union, in fact, of the possessors of fiefs among them-
selves, their organization into a general society, was far more
a principle than a fact, far more nominal than real. The
very nature of the elements of such an association lead us to
presume this. What is the tie, the cement of a great society ?
It is the need which one of the partial, local associations
which compose it has of the others; the necessity in which
they are placed of having recourse to one another, in order
to exercise their rights, for the accomplishment of the various
public functions, for legislation, for the administration of jus-
tice, of finances, of war, &c. If each family, each town,
each territorial circumscription finds within itself, in its own
bosom, every thing of which it has any need in a political
point of view; if it forms a complete petty state, which has
nothing to receive from elsewhere, nothing to give elsewhere


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 377


it will not adhere to other families, to other towns, to other
local circumscriptions ; there would be no society between
them. ‘The dispersion of sovereignty and government into
the various parts, among the different members of the state,
that it is which constitutes a state; that is, the external tie
of general society, which brings and retains together its ele-
ments. .

Now, the fusion of sovereignty and property, and its con-
centration within the domain, in the hands of its possessor,
had exactly the effect of isolating the proprietor of the fief
from other similar proprietors ; each fief formed, as it were,
a small, complete state, whose inhabitants had nothing, or
almost nothing, to seek beyond it, which sufficed to itself, in
matters of legislation, administration, of justice, taxes, war,
&c. Ina society formed of such elements, it was an inevi-
table consequence that the general tie should be weak, rarely
felt, easily broken. The possessors of fiefs had, it is true,
common affairs, reciprocal rights and duties. There was,
moreover, the inclination natural to man, of continually ex-
tending. his relations, of aggrandizing, of animating his
social existence more and more, of constantly seeking, as it
were, new citizens, and new ties with them. In fine, at
the epoch with which we occupy ourselves, the Christian
church, a society always one, and strongly constituted, in-
cessantly labored to introduce something of its unity, its
entirety, into the civil society ; and this work was not fruit-
less. But it is not the less evident that, from the nature of
its elements, and especially from the fusion of sovereignty
and property, from the almost entire localization of power, if
such a term be allowed, the general association of the pos-
sessors of fiefs must have had very little compactness, very
little activity ; that but very little entirety or unity could have
prevailed in it.

Amd such, in fact, was the case; history fully confirms
the inductions drawn from the very nature of this social
state. Its apologists have applied themselves to the bring-
ing prominently forward the reciprocal rights and duties of
the possessors of fiefs ; they have vaunted the skilful grada-
tion of the tles which united them among themselves, from
the weakest to the most powerful, in such a way that none
were isolated, and yet that each remained free and master of
himself. According to them, the independence of individuals
was never more happily reconciled with the harmony of the

32*


378 HISTORY OF


whole. A chimerical idea, a purely logical hypothesis!
Doubtless, in principle, the possessors of fiefs were united
to each other, and their hierarchical association appears
skilfully organized. But in fact, this organization was never
real and efficacious ; feudalism could never draw from its
bosom a principle of order and unity sufficient to form a
general, and, however little, regulated society. Its ele-
ments, that is to say, the possessors of fiefs, were always in
a state of disunion and war among themselves, continually
obliged to have recourse to force, because no supreme, truly
public, power was present to maintain between them justice
and peace, that is, society ; and to create such a power, to
fuse all its scattered and even hostile elements into a single
and true society, it was necessary to have recourse to other
principles, to other institutions, to institutions and principles
foreign and even hostile to the feudal system. As you
already know, it was by royalty on the one hand, and on
the other by the idea of the nation in general, and of its
rights, that political unity has prevailed among us, that the
State has been constituted ; and it was always at the expense
of the possessors of fiefs by the weakening and progressive
abolition of the feudal system, that we have approached
this end.

It, therefore, must not be expected that we shall find that
systematical and general organization of the possessors of
fiefs among themselves, which | have pointed out as the
third great characteristic of the feudal system, clearly and
entirely realized in facts. The character belongs to it, and
distinguishes it from every other social state ; but it has
never had its full development, its efficacious and regular
application; the feudal hierarchy has never been really
constituted, has not lived according to the rules and forms
which the publicists assign to it. The special nature of
landed property, the fusion of sovereignty and propertyy are
simple, evident facts, which are shown in history, just as
they are conceived in theory. But the feudal society in its
entirety is an imaginary edifice, constructed after the event
in the minds of learned men, and the materials only of
which have existed in our territory, always unconnected and
imperfect.

If such was its state during the course of the feudal
period, how much more must it have been so at the com-
mencement of this period, towards the end of the tenth


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 379


century. Feudalism had then scarcely arisen out of the
chaos of barbarism ; it was arising from it as a kind of pis-
aller, as the system nearest allied to that which was coming
to a close, as the sole form which the growing society could
take. The incoherence, the want of entirety, would neces-
sarily be much greater than at a later period. The feudal
association would be still farther removed from that state of
unity, of regularity, which it never attained. The close of
the tenth and the commencement of the eleventh century,
are, in fact, in the feudal epoch, the period when feudalism
appeared most disordered, the most destitute of general
organization. We there see the possessors of fiefs form-
ing themselves into an infinity of small groups, of which
some count, duke, or mere seigneur, became the chief, ac-
cording to the chances of place or events, remaining almost
Strangers to each other. Sometimes these local associations
seemed to preserve relations among themselves, to adhere
to a common centre ; but we soon find that this appearance
is fallacious. We see, for example, the name of the king
of France still inscribed by such or such a lord of Aqui-
taine at the head of his acts, but it is the name of a king
already dead ; they render homage to royalty, but are igno-
rant as to who is its actual depositary. At no epoch was the
parcelling out of territory among the possessors of fiefs so
great, and their independence so complete ; at no epoch had
the hierarchical tie which should have united them so little
reality.

In studying, therefore, from the fifth to the tenth century,
the progressive formation of this third characteristic of the
feudal system, we shall not arrive at results so prompt, so
positive, as in the study of the two first. We shall not see
the feudal organization appear, and clearly develop itself be-
fore our eyes, as was the case with regard to the special na-
ture of landed property, and the amalgamation of sovereignty
and property ; we shall see but the germs, we shall witness
only the first efforts at formation of that system which was
never thoroughly perfected ; we shall encounter here and
there upon our own soil, the materials of that edifice which
was never regularly constructed, or, more correctly speaking,
we shall see every other social edifice fall, every other sys-
tem vanish. F'rom the fifth to the tenth century, no principle
of social and political unity was able to preserve or acquire
the empire ; all those which formerly prevailed were con-


380 HISTORY OF


quered, abolished ; and it was above their ruins that the rude
and incomplete attempts at feudal organization appeared. It
is, therefore, less the progressive formation of the general
association, of the possessors of fiefs, than the progressive
destruction of every other great social system, which I shall
endeavor to retrace.

Immediately after the invasion and establishment of the
Germans in Gaul, three principles of social organization,
three systems of institutions co-exist and are present to-
gether: 1, the system of free institutions ; 2, the system
of aristocratical institutions ; 3, the system of monarchical
institutions.

The system of free institutions has its origin: 1st, in Ger-
many, in the general assembly of the proprietary chiefs of
family of the tribe, and in the common deliberation and per-
sonal independence of the warriors who formed the band:
2d, in Gaul, in the remains of the municipal system, in the
heart of cities.

The system of aristocratical institutions has its origin:
Ist, in Germany, in the domestic sovereignty of the pro-
prietary chiefs of family, and in the patronage of the chief
of the band over his companions: 2d, in Gaul, in the very
unequal subdivision of landed property, concentrated in
the hands of a small number of great proprietors, and in
their domination of the mass of the population, laborers
or slaves, who cultivate their domains, or serve them in
their houses.

The system of monarchical institutions has its origin : 1st,
in Germany, in military royalty, that is to say, the command
of the chief of the band, and in the religious character in-
herent to certain families: 2d, in Gaul, in the traditions of
the Roman empire, and in the doctrines of the Christian
church.

These are the three great systems of institutions, the three
principles essentially different, which the fall of the empire
and the German invasion brought into the presence of each
other, and which were to concur in the formation of the new
society.

What were, from the fifth to the tenth century, the desti-
nies of these three systems each in itself, and in their amal-
gamation?

Let us first speak of the system of free institutions.

It perpetuates and manifests itself from the fifth to the


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 381


tenth century : Ist, in the local assemblies, where the con-
querors established in various parts of the territory assem-
bled, and together discussed their affairs ; 2d, in the general
assemblies of the nation ; 3d, in the remains of the municipal
system, in the heart of cities :

That the local assemblies of the ancient Germans called
mils’ in their language, and placita in Latin, continued after
the invasion, cannot be doubted ; the text of their laws gives
evidence of it at every step. The following are some in-
Stances :

‘If any one convened to the mdl does not repair thither,
let him be condemned to pay fifteen solidi, unless he has
been kept back by some lawful impediment.”

‘If any one has need of witnesses in order that they may
give testimony at the mal, he who has need of them must
convene them.’?

“Let the assembly (conventus) be according to ancient
custom in each hundred, before the count or his envoy, and
before the hundred-man.’

“Let the court (placitum) take place every Saturday, or
such day as shall please the count, or the hundred-man, in
every week, when there is but little tranquillity in the pro-
vince: when there is greater tranquillity, let the assembly
take place every fortnight in each hundred, as it is ordered
here above.’”®

“‘ Let the court be held every calend, or every fortnight if
necessary, to inquire into causes, in order that peace may
reign in the provinces.”

‘These assemblies were composed of all the free men set-
tled in the territorial circumscription; all had not only the
right, but were obliged to repair thither.

“If any free man neglect to come to the court, and do not
present himself to the count, or to his delegate, or to the
hundred-man, let him be condemned to pay fifteen solidi.
Let no person, whether vassal of the duke or of the count,
or otherwise, neglect to come to the court, to the end that


? From the ancient German word, mahl, which signifies meeting, as-
sembly, and is still found in many words, as mahlzet, repast, time of meet-
ing; mahlstatt, place where the tribunal meets, &c.

* Salic Law, t. 1, ¢. 1, b. 16.

* Law of the Rip., t. 1, ¢. 1, t. Ixvi., c i, &e.

* Law of the Allem., t. xxxvi., c. 1. ® Ibidem, c. Q.

° Law of the Boiares, t. xv., c. 1.


382 HISTORY OF


the poor may not be prevented from prosecuting their cau-
ses.”

“Let all free men meet on the days fixed, where the
judge shall direct, and let no person dare omit coming to the
court. Let all who live in the county, whether vassal of the
king or duke, or any other, come to the court, and let him
who shall neglect to come be condemned to pay fifteen
solidi.”

It is not easy to enumerate the attributes, the occupations
of these assemblies, for they discussed every thing in them,
all the common interests of the men who were assembled
at them; but their principal business was to administer
justice : all causes, all disputes were carried thither, to be
submitted to the decision of free and notable men, of the
rachimburgs, whose duty it was to declare, to show what was
the law. |

“Tf any rachimburgs sitting in any mal have not declared
the law, when a cause shall have been debated between two
persons, he who prosecutes the cause must say to them three
times, ‘ Tell us the Salic law;’ if they will not say it, he
who prosecutes the cause must say to them again, ‘1 require
you to declare the law between my adversary and me.’ ‘The
day being named for this purpose, seven of these rachim-
burgs shall each pay nine sols. If they do not then choose
to declare the law ... . nor give assurance of payment,
then let a second day be appointed them, and then let each
of them be condemned to pay fifteen sols.”*

“If any one is prosecuting his cause, and the rachimburgs
have not chosen to declare the Ripuarian law between the
parties, then let him against whom they have pronounced an
adverse sentence, say, ‘I summon you to tell me the law.’
Let those who have not chosen to declare it, and have after-
wards been convicted of it, each of them pay fifteen sols fine.”*

‘If any one gain his cause in the mil and by law... the
rachimburgs must explain to him the law by which the cause
has been decided. ‘The plaintiff must act according to law,
invite the officer to go to the house of the other, im order to
take of his goods what he legally owes in respect of the
cause.”


Be Oe ne Oe ee a


1 Law of the Allem., t. xxxvi., c. 4.
2 Law of the Boiares, t. xv., c. l. 3 Salic Law, t. Ix.
+ Law of the Rip., t. lv. 5 Salic Law, tit. lix.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 383


Not only did they administer justice in the mdls, not only
did they deliberate there upon common affairs, but most civil
affairs, most contracts were there completed, and thence only
acquired the publicity, the authenticity which 1t is the duty
of the notaries and public officers to give them in the present
day :

“If any one sell any thing to another, and if the buyer
wish to have an act of sale, he rust demand it in full mil,
immediately put down the price, receiving the articles, and
then let the act be written. If the article be of little value,
let the act be attested by seven witnesses ; if of much value,
by twelve.”

Such was the state of local assemblies in the first ages
following the invasion ; they were not long so real and genu-
ine as the texts seem to indicate. You may observe that,
according to these very texts, it was more especially among
the Germans still established upon the frontiers, or even in
the interior of Germany, that the national mdls appear active —
and frequent. The laws of the Germans, of the Boiares, of
the Ripuarian Franks, speak of them more frequently and in
a more authoritative tone than those of the Salian Franks,
further advanced into the interior of Gaul, and amidst the
Roman population. There, indeed, the local mdéls soon fell
into disuse, into such disuse, that at the end of the Carlo-
vingian race, the local chiefs, counts, viscounts, or others,
convoked them in order to have the right of fining the free
men who did not attend them. A capitulary of Louis le
Débonnaire is entitled:

“ Of vicars and hundred-men who, more out of cupidity
than to administer justice, frequently hold courts and thus
trouble the people too much.”

And Charlemagne, in order to remedy this abuse, had al-
ready reduced to three a year, the number of those local
courts which the first barbarous laws convoked every month,
every fortnight, or even every week.

‘With regard to the local courts which free men are to
attend, the decrees of our father must be observed ; namely,
that only three general courts are to be held in the year, and
that no person shall be forced to attend them, except the
accused or the accuser, or him who is called to give evi-
dence. With regard to other courts held by hundred-men,


ee ee


1 Law of the Rip., t. lix., ¢. 1. 2 Bal., i., coll. 617.


384 HISTORY OF


let none be convoked to them, except him who pleads, him
who judges, and him who gives evidence.”

Who were these judges who were bound to attend local
assemblies, when most free men were exempt from them ?
The scabini, or sheriffs, the real magistrates, charged by the
prince with administering justice, instead of the citizens, who
refused the burden. ‘That is the true meaning of the word
scabini, (in German schéffen, judges,) which many writers
have confounded with the rachimburgi of the Salic law ; and
this innovation of Charlemagne suffices to prove into what
decay the ancient local mdals, that is to say, the system of free
institutions applied to civil life, had fallen at this period :

‘‘ Let no person be convoked to the court, but the plaintiff
and the defendant in each cause, except seven scabini, who
must be present at all hearings.”

With much stronger reason, the same decay would strike
this system in the political sphere, in the general assemblies
of the nation. Among men living at a distance from one
another, and who had no longer the same interests, and the
same destiny, these great meetings became difficult and arti-
ficial. Accordingly, the Champs-de-Mars, the placita gene-
ralia, became more and more rare and futile under the Mero-
vingians. In the earliest ages we still frequently meet with
them, because the warriors often made new expeditions in
common; the band still met to attempt new adventures.
Gradually, as the sedentary life prevailed, the general assem-
blies disappeared, and those which bear the name are of an
entirely different nature ; they have no longer either one or
the other of these two characteristics. Sometimes they are
solemn meetings, where people came, in virtue of an ancient
custom, to bring to the chief or king presents which form a
part of his wealth ; sometimes the kings, after having strug-
gled against their leudes, their beneficiaries, the one to re-
sume, the other to retain their fees, entered into a negotiation
with them, which led to meetings of which the name calls to
mind the ancient national assemblies, but which, in fact, are
only conferences, congresses, where great proprietors, petty
sovereigns, discuss their interests and arrange their disputes.
Such were, in 587, the assembly which concluded the treaty
of Andelot; in 615, under Clotaire II. that of Paris, whence


1 Capit. of Louis le Débon., in 819; Bal., t. i., col. 616.
2 Capit. of Charlemagne, in 803 ; Bal., t. i., col. 394-465.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 385


issued the ordinance which bears its name, and many other
meetings in no way national, in no way resembling the as-
sembly of the tribe, or the German band, but which were yet
called placita generalia.

With the first Carlovingians, the general assemblies re-
newed their primitive character, the military character. The
establishment of the second race was, as you know, up to a
certain point, a second invasion of Western Gaul by the Ger-
man bands. We accordingly see these bands meet periodi-
cally to prosecute their expeditions further, and to secure
their conquests by new ones. This was the predominant
feature of the Champs-de-Mars, become the Champs-de-Mai of
Pepin le Bref. We meet under his reign with more than
ten great meetings of this kind. Under Charlemagne they
are still more frequent, and their character assumes higher
dignity. They are no longer mere military meetings, great
national reviews. Charlemagne made them a means of
government. Most of you, I think, remember what I said in
the last course upon this subject, and the fragments which I
quoted from the small treatise of Hincmar, De Ordine Palatii,
where he gives a detailed account of these assemblies, of
their composition, and of their labors. Charlemagne con-
voked almost all his agents, and, to speak the language of
our times, the functionaries of his empire, dukes, counts,
viscounts, vicars, hundred-men, scabini, &c. His object
was to learn through them what was passing around, to com-
municate his wishes to them, to discipline them to his will,
and thus to introduce some entirety, some order, into that
immense and incessantly agitated body, of which he claimed
to be the soul. These, assuredly, are not the ancient
assemblies of the German warriors, those assemblies where
personal independence prevailed, and where Clovis was con-
strained to allow each to take his share of the booty.

Under Louis le Débonnaire, the placita generalia are still
frequent, but disorder and war penetrate them, and make in-
struments of them. Under Charles le Chauve, they resume
the characteristic of which I have just spoken ; they are no
longer any thing but conferences, congresses, where the king
struggles with greater or less success against vassals who
isolate themselves more and more, and whom he can neither
retain nor repress. After Charles le Chauve, and towards
the close of the Carlovingian race, even these congresses
ceased. Sovereignty decidedly became local; royalty had

33


386 HISTORY OF


no longer even the simple claim to figure as the centre of the
state. To the ancient national assemblies the feudal courts
were about to succeed, the assembly of the vassals around
the sovereign.

With regard to the wrecks of the Roman municipal sys-
tem, the third element of the free institutions of this epoch,
I shall not repeat what I have already said in our last
course ; nor shall I anticipate what I shall have to say when
we are occupied with the regeneration of the commons. I
confine myself to calling to mind, that the cwria, its rights
and institutions, have never disappeared from our territory,
especially in the south of Gaul, and that we may equally at-
test their decay and their perpetuity from the fifth to the
tenth century.

Such was the fate of the system of free institutions in
this long interval. You see that all its principles grew
more and more enervated, that all its means of action
were broken. Had the monarchical institutions any better
fortune ? :

I have said that among the Germans royalty had a two-
fold origin; that it was military and religious.

As being military, royalty was elective; a famous chief
proclaimed an expedition to draw around him companions ;
he had no right, no coercive means ; whoever chose came ;
warriors rallied around a chief of their choice ; he was their
king while it pleased them to follow him: this was election,
if not according to political forms, at least in its principle
and its liberty.

Inasmuch as it was religious, royalty was hereditary ; for
the religious character was the property, so to speak, of cer-
tain families descended from heroes, from national demi-gods,
from Odin, Tuisco, &c.; and this character could be neither
lost nor transferred. ‘There is scarcely any Germanic nation
in which we do not meet with these royal families; the
Gothic and Anglo-Saxon princes descend from Odin ; among
the Franks, the Merovingians, in virtue of an analogous
origin, alone wear long hair. 7

In passing over the Roman soil, Germanic royalty there
found other principles, other elements which were profound-
ly to modify its character; there imperial royalty dominated,
an institution specially symbolical, and a symbol purely
political. The emperor had succeeded to the Roman peo-
ple; as the representative of the Roman people, he ap-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 3887


propriated its rights, its majesty; by this title he called him-
self sovereign. Imperial royalty was the personification
of the republic; and as Louis XIV. said, L’ Etat ¢ est mot,
the successor of Augustus might say, The Roman people,
itis,

Beside imperial royalty arose Christian royalty, also a sym-
bolical institution, but a symbol of a different nature, a sym-
bol purely religious. The king, according to Christian ideas,
was the delegate and representative of the Divinity. I just
now spoke of the religious origin of barbarous royalty : it
had, however, nothing symbolical about it ; the families which
passed for the descendants of the national demi-gods were
thus invested with a positive and personal character. In
Christian royalty, on the contrary, there is nothing personal
or positive ; it is a type, an image of the invisible and only
sovereign Being.

Thus, under a twofold point of view, Roman royalty es-
sentially differed from barbarous royalty; political or re-
ligious, this was a personal prerogative ; political or religious,
that was a pure symbol, a social fiction.

Such, so to speak, are the four origins of modern royalty,
the four principles which, after the invasion, sought to com-
bine in its production. We see then labor commence under
the Merovingians. ‘The Frank kings are, and wish to re-
main, chiefs of warriors—at the same time they take ad-
vantage of their barbaric religious descent; they adopt the
Roman maxims, and endeavor to stand forth as the represen-
tatives of the state ; in fine, they call themselves, and make
the clergy call them, the images and representatives of God
upon earth.

For minds so rude and simple as those of the barbarians of
the sixth century, these notions and combinations were too
complicated. ‘They were, accordingly, not successful; and
Merovingian royalty—precisely, if I mistake not, by reason
of the uncertainty of its character and of its basis-—soon fell
into complete decay. When it began to reappear with
vigor in the person of the Carlovingians, it had undergone
a great metamorphosis. ‘The first Carlovingians were pure
military chiefs. In the eyes of their German countrymen,
they had none of that religious character with which the
family of the long-haired kings was invested. Neither Pepin
de Herstall nor Charles Martel in any way gave themselves
out as the descendants of Odin, or other Germanic demi-gods;


388 HISTORY OF


they were simply great proprietors and chiefs of warriors.
Germanic royalty, then, reappeared at this time with the
military character only. Every one knows how eagerly
Pepin sought to add to it the Christian religious character.
A stranger to all the traditions, to all the religious creeds of
ancient Germany, he desired to support himself by new re-
ligious creeds, already far more powerful. Charlemagne
went still further; he undertook again to give the character
of imperial royalty to Frankish royalty, to again make it a
political symbol, himself to resume the rank of representative
of the state which the Roman emperors occupied. And he
labored at this by the most efficacious means; not by
the sole pomp of ceremonies and language, but by really
resuscitating the imperial power, the Roman administration,
and that omnipresence, as it were, of royalty, at all parts
of the earth, which, amidst the universal decline, had con-
stituted the whole strenath of that great despotism.

This is the true characteristic of the government of
Charlemagne. I shall not repeat here what | said concern-
ing it in the last course; but some extracts from his capitu-
laries will show how carefully he was occupied with all
things, desired to know every thing, to be everywhere, either
in person or by his delegates—in fine, to present himself to
the minds of the people as the universal mover and source
of the entire government.

‘* Let the counts and their vicars be well acquainted with
the law, to the end that no judge may decide unjustly in their
presence, nor unduly alter the law.”

“We will and order that our counts do not remit the
sitting of their courts, nor abridge them unduly, in order to
give themselves to the chase or to other plaasures.””

‘“¢ Let no count hold his courts unless he be fasting, and of
composed mind.”

‘“‘Let each bishop, each abbot, each count, have a good
registrar, and let not the scribes write in an illegible man-
ner. 994

“ We will, that with regard to the jurisdiction and affairs
which have hitherto belon ged to the counts, our envoys shall
acquit themselves of their mission four times in the year: in


* Capit. of Charlemagne, in 803 ; Bal., tom. 1, col. 396.
a Race 807; Bal., tom. i., col. 459. : Year 803 ; ibid., col. 393.
4 Year 805 ibid., col. 421.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 389


winter, in the month of January ; in spring, in the month of
April ; in summer, in the month of July ; and in autumn, in
the month of October. Each time, they shall hold courts
where the counts of the neighboring counties shall meet.”

‘“ Hach time that one of our envoys shall observe in his
legation that any thing happens otherwise than as we have
ordered it, not only shall he take care to reform it, but he
shall give us a detailed account of the abuses which he may
discover.””

‘Let our envoys select, in each place, scabini, advocates
and notaries, and on their return let them bring us their
names in writing.”

“Whenever they find bad vicars, advocates, or hundred-
men, let them be removed, and others selected who know
how and are willing to judge affairs according to equity. If
they find a corrupt count, let them inform us of the same.”

“We will that each of our envoys carefully watch that
each of the men whom we have charged with the govern-
ment of our people, acquit himself justly of his office, in a
manner agreeable to God, honorable to us, and useful to our
subjects. Let the said envoys, therefore, make a point of
knowing if the orders contained in the capitularies which
we transmitted to them last year, are executed according to
the will of God and our own. We will that in the middle of
the month of May, our envoys, each in his legation, convoke
in one place all the bishops, abbots, our vassals, our advo-
cates, vicars, abbesses, as well as the representatives of all
the lords whom any imperious necessity prevents repairing
thither themselves ; and if it be more convenient, especially
with a view to the poor people, that this meeting be held in
two or three different places instead of one, let it be so.
Let each count bring thither his vicars, his hundred-men,
and also three or four of his most notable sheriffs. In this
assembly, let them first occupy themselves with the state of
the Christian religion, and the condition of the ecclesiastical
order. Then let our envoys inform themselves, from all
present, of the manner in which each acquits himself of the
employment which we have confided to him; let them lear
if concord reigns among our officers, and whether they mu-
tually give each other help in their functions. Let them


* Year 812; Bal., col. 493. 2 Thid. * Year 803 ; ibid., col. 393.
* Bal., t.i., c. 396, year 805; ibid., c. 426.
rad


390 HISTORY OF


make this inquiry with the most careful diligence, and in
such a way that we may from them know the truth of all
things ; and if they learn that in any place there is an affair,
the decision of which requires their presence, let them repair
thither, and regulate it in virtue of our authority.”

Surely, nothing less resembles barbaric royalty than such
a mode of government; nothing more forcibly calls to mind
the spirit and administration of the empire; of that power
which represented the state, and acted almost alone in the
state. ‘That is the system which, without being thoroughly
aware of it, without having reconstructed its theory, Charle-
magne labored to restore ; and he knew very well what was
the principal obstacle to this enterprise; he knew very well
that the rising feudal system, the independence and the rights
of proprietary beneficiaries in their domains, the fusion of
sovereignty and property, were the most dangerous enemies
of that sovereignty and administrative royalty to which he
aspired. Accordingly, he struggled incessantly against these
enemies, and endeavored to restrain and to divide the power
of the proprietors as much as in him lay.

“ He never,” says the monk of Saint Gall, “ confided the
administration of more than one county to his counts, except
it were those which were situated on the frontiers, or in the
neighborhood of barbarians. He never, unless impelled by
really powerful motives, conceded to a bishop, in benefice, an
abbey or church of the royal domain; and when his coun-
sellors or favorites asked him why he acted thus, he answered
them: ‘ With this property or that farm, with this little ab-
bey or that church, I acquire the faith of a vassal as good,
even better than this bishop or that count.’ ””

He did more ; he attempted to pierce through, if I may so
express myself, all private properties, in order to enter into
direct relations with all the inhabitants of his empire. I will
explain myself. He only communicated with the mass of
the population through the intermediation of the possessors
of freeholds or fees, each sovereign in his domains, and
chief of the free men, or coloni, or serfs who inhabited them.
Charlemagne desired that an oath of fidelity, directed and
personal, should be given him by all freemen, as to the real


? Capit. of Louis le Débon., in 823. He but repeats what Charlemagne
prescribed. Bal., t. 1, col. 649.
? Recueil des Historiens de France, t.v., p. 3.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 391


and true sovereign of the state. We find in the formule of
Marculf, the following letter from him:

“To the count ———. With the consent of the high men
of our realm, we have ordered that our glorious son
shall reign in the kingdom of ———. Consequently, we
order that in all cities, villages, and castles, you convoke and
cause to meet in convenient places all your inhabitants,
whether Franks, Romans, or any other nation; to the end,
that in the presence of the illustrious —, our envoy,
whom we send to you for this purpose, they all swear fidelity
and loyal attachment to our son and to us, whether by the
holy places, or by such other holy pledge as we transmit to
you for that purpose.”!

When he had been crowned emperor,

“ He ordered that every man in his kingdom, layman or
ecclesiastic, who had already sworn fidelity to him under the
name of king, should renew the same promise to him as Ce-
sar; and that all those who had not yet taken the said oath
should take it, down to the age of twelve.”

Lastly, we read in a capitulary of the year 805 :

“Let none swear fidelity to any other than to us and to his
lord for our utility and that of his lord.”

‘Such a system evidently tended to free royalty from all
feudal relations ; to found its empire beyond the hierarchy
of persons and lands ; in fine, to render it everywhere pres-
ent, everywhere powerful, in virtue of the public power and
by its own right. The attempt succeeded while Charlemagne
presided over it. His successors undertook to continue it,
that is to say, they ordered what he had done. The demand
of the universal oath reappeared in their acts, and even sur-
vived their impotence ; but it was no longer any more thana
futile form. The relations between free men and the king,
and his personal power over them, became daily weakened.
The obligation of fidelity was no longer real, except between
the vassal and his lord. It was to the lords that Charles le
Chauve addressed himself, in order to repress the disorders
committed on their lands; it was through their authority that
he brought his own to bear. He had no direct influence ;
and although he menaced the lords with making them re-
sponsible for the crimes of their men, if they did not prevent
or punish them, it is clear that the feudal hierarchy had re-


? Marculf, |. i., £. 40. 2 Bal., t. 1, col. 363. 3 Thid., col. 425.


392 HISTORY OF


gained independence with the empire, and that the attempt
of Charlemagne to free royalty from it had failed by the ef-
fect of the general course of things and the incapacity of his
successors.”! ©

At the close of the tenth century, then, the system of mo-
narchical institutions had succeeded no better than the sys-
tem of free institutions in taking possession of society, and
introducing unity and rule into it. All its laws were shaken,
all its means of action enervated or inapplicable. The reli-
gious character of ancient German royalty had disappeared ;
the heroic origin of such or such a family was forgotten, as
well as many of the traditions of the barbaric life. It had
equally lost its primitive military character; the band no
longer existed ; the wandering and common life had ceased ;
most of the warriors were established in their own domains.
The political character of imperial royalty was incompatible
with the new society; there was no longer sovereignty, no
longer national majesty, no longer any state in general; how
could there be a symbol, a representative of that which no
longer existed? The religious Christian character of royal-
ty alone preserved any reality, any influence, and that was
but weak and rare ; lay proprietors scarcely heeded it; the
tumult of their life and the needs of personal independence
alone occupied their minds ; the bishops and great abbots
themselves cared but little about it; they also had become
proprietors of fiefs, had assumed the interests and habits of
such, and had but little affection towards ideas which in no
way accorded with their temporal position. All the bases, I
repeat, of the system of monarchical institutions, as well as
of the system of free institutions, were shaken, all its vital
principles had lost their energy.

It was entirely different with the system of aristocratical
institutions. Instead of declining, they were progressing.
‘To be convinced of this, it is only necessary to observe what
the elements, whether German or Roman, which constituted
it had become. They were all strengthened and developed.

And first, as you have already seen, the domestic sove-
reignty of the German proprietary chief of the family was
transplanted into Gaul; it even became there more complete
and more absolute, because the spirit of family which had
formerly been associated with it there had disappeared, and


1 Essais sur ? Histoire de France, p. 155-160.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 393


the fact of conquest, of force, had become almost its only
base. Accordingly, this first aristocratical element of ancient
German society became strengthened instead of weakened,
in the new social state.

The second, that is to say, the patronage of the chief of the
band over his companions, had experienced the same fate ;
it had changed its form; to the ascendency of the warrior
had succeeded the rights of the suzerain over his vassals.
But this metamorphosis of relations had given far more ener-
gy and solidity to the aristocratical principle that it previously
contained. On the one hand, inequality was developed ;
the possessors of fiefs were far more unequal among them-
selves than the warriors; on the other, in the ancient band,
the companions living together, supported one another, and in
common controlled the power of the chief. When they had
entered into the condition of proprietors, each found himself
isolated, and the superior, the suzerain, had far greater facili-
ties for subduing them. A new progress of the aristocratical
system.

With regard to the subdivision of landed property, I think
it underwent considerable and rather aristocratical change ;
it divided itself. Without doubt, the feudal system had this
effect at first. At the close of the tenth century, at the com-
mencement of the feudal period, there were many more land-
ed proprietors in Gaul than at the fall of the empire. The
territory was divided into smaller lots, more especially into
more varied lots; the fiefs were much more different, more
unequal, than the domains of the great Gallo-Roman proprie-
tors had been; in this respect, therefore, the aristocratical
principle was a little weakened ; but assuredly the distribu-
tion of landed property was still sufficiently unequal, the land
concentrated into a sufficiently limited number of hands, to
found a very aristocratic system.

You see, therefore, that while the system of free institu-
tions and that of monarchical institutions were declining, the
system of aristocratical institutions, on the contrary, saw its
bases strengthen, its principles gain vigor. It had not ac-
quired, it had not given to society in general, a regular form,
unity, or entirety ; it never will attain that. But, it evidently
prevailed ; it alone was likely to live, if I may use the ex-
pression, alone capable of subduing men, and of giving to
other social principles time to regain breath, to reappear one
day with better success.


394 HISTORY OF


Thus was feudal society prepared, thus was it progressive-
ly formed, from the fifth to the tenth century. We have
attempted to discover its origins, to follow it in its earliest
developments. It now subsists, it covers our land. We
shall henceforward study it in itself, and in its maturity.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 395


FIFTH LECTURE.


Method to be followed in the study of the feudal period—The simple fief
is the fundamental element, the integrant molecule of feudalism—The
simple fief contains: 1, the castle and its proprietors ; 2, the village and
its inhabitants—Origin of feudal castles—Their multiplication in the 9th
and 10th centuries—Causes of this—Efforts of the kings and powerful
suzerains to oppose it—Futility of these efforts—Character of the castles
of the 11th century—tInterior life of the proprietors of fiefs—Their iso-
lation—Their idleness—Their incessant wars, expeditions, and adven- *
tures—Influence of the material circumstances of feudal habitations
upon the course of civilization—Development of domestic life, condition
of women, and of the spirit of family in the interior of castles.


WE now approach the special object of this course. We
are about to study feudal society in itself, during the period
which especially belongs to it, from the time when it may be
regarded as truly formed, down to the time when France es-
caped from it, and passed under the empire of other prin-
ciples, of other institutions; that is, during the eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth centuries.

I desire to follow in their entirety the destinies of feu-
dalism during these three centuries. I would wish not to
parcel it out, but to keep it constantly entire under your eyes,
and make you thus see its successive transformations at a
single glance. ‘This would be its true history, the only
faithful image of the reality. Unfortunately, this cannot be.
In order to study, the human mind is forced to divide, to
analyze ; it learns nothing unless it be successively and in
parts. It is then the work of the imagination and of the
reason to reconstruct the demolished edifice, to resuscitate
the being destroyed by the scientific scalpel. But it is abso-
lutely necessary to pass through this dissection and its pro-
gress ; the weakness of the human mind so orders it.

I have already pointed out the classification of our re-
searches upon feudal society. I have said that on the one
hand we shall study the social state, and on the other, the
intellectual state: in the social state, the civil and the re-
ligious society; in the intellectual state, the learned litera-
ture, and the popular literature. It is, therefore, with the


396 HISTORY OF


history of civil society in the feudal period, that we must
commence.

Here also we have need to divide, to classify, to study sepa-
rately ; the matter is too vast and too complicated, to allow
of it being comprehended all complete and at a single grasp.

Let us at least endeavor to discover and to follow out the
least artificial method, that which will the least mutilate
facts, which will best respect their integrity and concatena-
tion; the most living method, as it were, the one most neigh-
boring on reality.

If I mistake not, it is the following:

At the end of the tenth century, feudal society was defini-
tively formed ; it had attained the plenitude of its existence ;
it covered and possessed our territory. What was its funda-
mental element, its political unity? What, so to speak, (I
have already made use of this expression,) what was the
primitive feudal molecule, that which could not be broken
without the feudal character being abolished ?

It is evidently the simple fief, the domain possessed by way
of fief, by a lord who exercises over the inhabitants that
sovereignty inherent, as you know, to property.

It is therefore with the simple fief, considered in itself, that
we shall commence our study. We shall first apply our-
selves to the proper understanding of this fundamental ele-
ment of feudalism.

What does the mere, simple fief contain, reduced to its last
expression? What is there to study in its enclosure ?

First, the possessor himself of the fief, his situation and his
life, that is to say, the castle ; then the inhabitant of the fief,
not possessors, mere cultivators of the domain, and subject to
the proprietor, that is to say, the village.

These are evidently the two objects to which our attention
is called in the study of the simple fief. It is necessary that
we should thoroughly know what was the condition and des-
tiny, from the eleventh to the fourteenth century—l1, of the
feudal castle and its proprietors ; 2, of the feudal village and
its inhabitants. When we shall have actually lived in the in-
terior of the fief, when we shall really have been present at
what passed there, at the revolutions which were accom-
plished in it, we shall leave it in order to seek the ties which
united together the fiefs disseminated throughout the territo-
ry; to be present at the relations, whether between suze-
rains and vassals, or between vassals among themselves.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 397


We shall then study the general association of the possessors
of fiefs under the various relations which constitute the politi-
cal order, that is, in its legislative, military, judicial, and other
institutions. We shall endeavor thoroughly to discern: 1,
what principles, what ideas presided at these institutions,
what were the rational foundations, the political doctrines of
feudalism; 2, what the feudal institutions really were, no
longer in principle, and conceived systematically, but actu-
ally and in application; 3, finally, what results must have
been produced, and in facet were produced, whether by the
political doctrines, or by the practical institutions of feudal-
ism, for the development of civilization in general.

There feudal society seems to stop. Do we not now
know all its elements? is not all its organization unveiled to
us? It essentially consists in the hierarchical association
of the possessors of fiefs, and in their sovereignty over the
inhabitants of their domains. This known, is not all known ?
have we not arrived at the term of the career which we had
to go over?

Certainly not: feudal society, properly so called, even in
its triumph, was not, at this epoch, the entire civil society.
As I have already had occasion to observe, other elements
are there encountered, of another origin and of another char-
acter ; elements which took place in feudalism, but which
were never completely incorporated with it, which have al-
ways secretly combated it, and ended by triumphing over it:
these are, royalty and the towns. Royalty was both within
and without feudalism: feudal in certain points of its situa-
tion, in some of its rights, it borrowed from others, other
principles, other social facts, not only foreign but hostile to
feudalism. It was so also with towns; they reconstituted
themselves within the bosom of feudal society, to a certain
degree assimilating themselves to it; but they were also
attached to other principles, to other facts; and, upon the
whole, the difference was greater than the assimilation, as
the event has proved.

When, then, we shall have studied feudalism in itself, it
will still remain for us to study two other elements of civil
society at the same epoch, royalty and the towns. We shall
study, on the one hand, what, in their feudal character, they
had in common with feudalism; on the other, how they were
separated from it, in their peculiar and distinct character.

All these elements of civil society thus properly known,

34


398 HISTORY OF


we shall endeavor to bring them face to face, to unravel the
play of their relations ; to fix the true physiognomy, and the
principal revolutions of the whole which they formed.

Such will be our progress in the study of civil society
in France, during the feudal period. Let us immediately
approach it, let us enter, and confine ourselves to the simple
fief.

Let us first occupy ourselves with its possessor; let us
study the situation and the life of the sovereign of this little
state, the interior of the castle which contained him, and his
people.

The single word castle awakes the idea of feudal society ;
it seems to rise up before us. Nothing can be more natural.
These castles which covered our soil, and the ruins of which
are still scattered about, it is feudalism which constructed
them ; their elevation was, so to speak, the declaration of its
triumph. Nothing of the kind existed on the Gallo-Roman
soil. Before the German invasion, the great proprietors
lived either in cities, or in beautiful houses, agreeably situated
near cities, or in rich plains upon the banks of rivers. In
the country districts, properly so called, were dispersed the
ville, a species of farms, great buildings serving for the im-
provement of estates, and for the dwelling of the laborers or
serfs who cultivated them.

Such was the distribution and habitation of the, various
classes, which the Germanic nations found in Gaul at the
time of the invasion.

It must not be supposed that they disliked and were eager
to change it; that they immediately sought the mountains,
steep and savage places, in order to construct new and en-
tirely different dwellings. They first established themselves
in the habitations of the Gallo-Romans, whether in the cities,
or in the ville, amidst the country districts and the agricul-
tural population, and rather in the latter dwellings, whose
situation was more conformable to their national habits.
Accordingly the ville, of which constant mention is made
under the first race, were the same, or almost the same, as
they had been before the invasion ; that is to say, they were
the centre of improvement and habitation of great domains,
buildings scattered throughout the country districts, where
barbarians and Romans, conquerors and conquered, masters,
free men, laborers, slaves, lived together.

Still a change soon became visible. The invasion con-


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 399


tinued ; disorder and pillage were incessantly renewed ; the
inhabitants of the country districts, of ancient or new origin,
had need to guard themselves, and incessantly keep on the
defensive. We find the ville gradually becoming surrounded
by moats, ramparts of earth, with some appearances of forti-
fications. Hence arises a pretended etymology of the word
villa, which we read in the Glossary of Du Cange, thus:

Villa dicttur a vallis, quasi vallata, eo quod vallata sit solum
vallatione vallorum, et non munitione murorum. Inde villanus.

The etymology is incorrect; the word villa is far anterior
to the epoch when the inhabitants of this kind of dwellings
had need to surround them with moats or ramparts; the
word is commonly derived from vehilla, vehere, which proba-
bly means the place where the agricultural carts were made.
But whatever may be its merit, the mere etymology of the
word is not the less a remarkable fact; it proves that the
ville were not long before they were in a measure fortified.

There is another circumstance which prevents all doubt
of this: in certain parts of France, in Normandy, Picardy,
&c., the names of many castles terminate with ville, Fronde-
ville, Aboville, Méréville, &c.; and many of these castles
are not situated, as most feudal castles properly so called
were, in steep, isolated places, but amidst rich plains, in
valleys upon the site which the ville doubtless formerly oc-
cupied: a sure sign that more than one Anglo-Roman villa
in fortifying itself, and after many vicissitudes, ended by be-
ing metamorphosed into a castle.

As for the rest, even before the invasion was consumma-
ted, and in order to resist its disorders, to escape its dangers,
the population of the country districts had begun, in many
places, to seek refuge in the heights, in places difficult of
access, and to surround them with fortifications. We read
in the life of St. Nicet, bishop of Tréves, written by Fortu-
nat, bishop of Poictiers :

“In going through these districts, Nicet, that apostolic
man, that good pastor, constructed there for his flock a pro-
tecting fold: he surrounded the hill with thirty towers, which
enclosed it on all sides, and thus raised an edifice where for-
merly was a forest.”!

I might quote many analogous examples. Is not this evi-
dently a first attempt of that choice of places, and of that
pA Mia Sp ede ks “hE NES ION


? Fortun. Carma. |. iii, c. 12.


400 HISTORY OF


kind of constructions, which were adopted at a later period
for feudal castles?

In the dreadful anarchy of the following centuries, the
causes which had impelled the population to seek such places
of refuge, and to surround them with fortifications, became
more and more pressing ; it was necessary for it to fly from
places easy of access ; to fortify its dwelling. And not only
did men thus seek security, they also found in it a means of
abandoning themselves without fear to depredation, and to
secure to themselves its fruits. Among the conquerors,
many still led a life of hunting and pillage ; they were forced
to have a receptacle where they might shut themselves up
after an expedition, repel the vengeance of their adversaries,
resist the magistrates who attempted to maintain any order
in the country. Such was the aim which originally caused
the construction of many of the feudal castles. It was more
especially after the death of Charlemagne, under the reigns
of Louis le Débonnaire and Charles le Chauve, that we find
the country covered with these haunts; they even became
so numerous and so formidable, that Charles le Chauve, de-
spite his weakness, and for the sake of the public order, as
well as of his own authority, thought it his duty to attempt
to destroy them. We read in the capitularies drawn up at
Pistes in 864:

“We will and expressly order that, whosoever in these
times shall, without our consent, have constructed castles,
fortifications, and embankments, (Aazas,) shall entirely destroy
them between this and the latter end of August, seeing that
the neighbors and inhabitants have suffered much uneasiness
and many depredations from them; and if any one refuse to
demolish these works, let the counts, in whose counties they
have been constructed, themselves cause them to be demol-
ished ; and if any one resist them, let them immediately in-
form us. And if the counts neglect to obey us in this, let
them know that, according to what is written in these capit-
ularies, and in those of our predecessors, we shall order
them to our presence, and we shall ourselves establish in
their counties men who can and will cause our orders to be
executed.”

The tone and precision of the injunctions addressed to all
the royal officers, prove the importance which was attached


1 Cap. of Charles le Chauve, at Pistes, in 864 ; Bal., vol. ii., col. 195.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 401


to the matter ; but Charles le Chauve was evidently not in a
condition to accomplish such a work. We do not find that
this capitulary had any effect, and his successors do not even
claim its execution. Accordingly, the number of castles
went on increasing under the last Carlovingians with extra-
ordinary rapidity. Still the struggle did not cease between
those whose interest it was to prevent, and those who felt
the need of raising buildings of this kind: we find it pro-
tracted to the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries.
And it was not merely between the king and the possessors
of fiefs that it subsisted, it also broke out among the posses-
sors of fiefs themselves. It was not a mere question, in fact;
of the maintenance of public order in the whole territory, nor
of a duty or interest of royalty. Every suzerain saw with
displeasure his vassal constructing a castle on his fief, for the
vassal thus ensured himself a powerful means of independ-
ence and resistance. Local wars then became longer and
more fierce, the castle served for aggression as well as for
defence, and the powerful, who desired alone to have them,
like the weak who had none at all, greatly feared to see them
constructed around them. There was here, accordingly, a
subject for continual complaints and protest. About the year
1020, and on a similar occasion, Fulbert, bishop of Chartres,
wrote to king Robert a letter which I shall quote entire, be-
cause it gives a clear and lively idea of the importance which
such a dispute must have had:


“To his lord Robert, his most gracious king, whom Ful-
bert, humble bishop of Chartres, prays may remain
in the grace of the King of kings.


‘“We return thanks to your goodness for that you have
lately sent us a messenger charged with rejoicing us by bring-
ing news of your good health, and to instruct your majesty of
the condition of our affairs, after having demanded from us
an account thereof. We then wrote to you concerning the
evils done to our church by viscount Geoffrey, of Chateau-
dun, who shows sufficiently, and even more than enough, that
he has no respect for God or your excellency, for he rebuilt
the castle of Galardon, formerly destroyed by you; and upon
this occasion we may say, See! the evil comes from the east
upon our church: and lo! again he dares to undertake the
building of another castle at Illiers, in the midst of the domains
of Saint Mary, concerning which we may well say, and also

34*


402 HISTORY OF


in good truth, See! the evil comes from the west. Now, there-
fore, forced to write to you by reason of these evils, we
bring complaint to your mercy, and, ask help and counsel of
it; for in this calamity we have received neither aid nor
consolation from your son Hugh. Accordingly, penetrated
to the depths of our heart with a lively grief, we have already
manifested it to such a degree, that, according to our order,
our bells, accustomed to announce our joy and gladness, have
ceased to sound, as the more to show our sadness; and
divine service, which, up to the present time, and by the grace
of God, we have been accustomed to celebrate with great
rejoicing of heart and mouth, is no longer celebrated, except
in a lamentable manner, with a low voice, and almost in
silence.

“Thus, therefore, on our knees we implore your pity, with
tears of heart and mind, save the holy church of the Mother
of God, of which you have willed that we your faithful
should be the chief, however unworthy we be thereof ;
succor those who from you alone, after God, expect their
consolation and comfort in the evils with which they are so
heavily laden. Consider of the means of delivering us from
these sufferings, and of converting our sadness into joy;
summon the count Eudes,' and enjoin him sharply, in the
name of your royal authority, that he should, in all sincerity,
give the necessary orders to have destroyed, or that he him-
self destroy these constructions of diabolical inspiration, for
the love of God, and by fidelity towards you, in honor of the
holy Mary, and by affection for us, who are always her faith-
ful. If neither you nor he put an end to this evil, which
keeps every thing in our country in confusion, what will re-
main for us to do, but to formally interdict the celebration of
all divine service throughout our bishopric ? and for ourselves,
alas! although greatly against our will, and constrained only
by the severest necessity, to exile ourselves to some place,
being unable any longer to see with our eyes, or to suffer the
oppression of the holy church of God. ‘To the end that we
may not be forced to come to this extremity, we again im-
plore your pity with lamentable voice ; for God keep us from
seeing ourselves constrained to banish ourselves far from you,
to have to confess to a foreign king or emperor that you


1 Geoffrey was vassal of Eudes II., count of Chartres, and the latter
was the vassal of the king.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 403


would not or could not defend the bride of Christ, the holy
church confided to our care !”

Assuredly, the construction of the castles of Galardon and
Illiers must have appeared a grave fact, for it to cause a
bishop, in the mere hope of making its gravity felt, to silence
the bells of his church, and have divine service almost sus-
pended. The successors of Fulbert, in the bishopric of
Chartres, took a different course ; they fortified the episcopal
house, and were in their turn obliged to demolish their forti-
fications. We read, in a charter granted to Yves, bishop of
Chartres, by Stephen, count of Chartres and of Blois, who
died in 1101, the following clause :

“If any future bishop cause to be constructed, in the said
episcopal house, a tower or ramparts, let that tower and those
ramparts alone be demolished, and let the house itself remain
standing, with its dependencies.”!

Doubtless, between Fulbert and Yves, some bishop of
Chartres had added such works to his house, and count
Stephen wished to prevent their being renewed.

The lords who each held fiefs, often had quarrels among
them, arising from the construction of castles, whether within
the fief, or on the frontiers of neighboring fiefs.

“In 1228, Guy, count of Forest and Nevers, and Thibaut,
count of Champagne, were at war with one another, because
of fortresses which they had respectively caused to be con-
structed upon the borders of their counties of Champagne and
Nevers. This war having lasted for a long period, the two
counts put it to the arbitration of the cardinal legate, who
then gave his judgment as umpire, by which it was said that
so long as Guy, count of Forest, should hold the county of
Nevers, the fortresses which were on the confines of the
county of Champagne, and on those of the county of Nevers,
should subsist, and that they might even be fenced around
with new works, provided, however, that it was only to the
distance of the shot of a cross-bow ; but that the counts could
not make new fortresses on the same borders, nor suffer others
to make them.’” é

And in 1160, under the reign of Louis le Jeune, a charter
of his brother Robert, count of Dreux, is expressed in the
following terms :


1 Martenne, Amplis. Collect., t. i., p. 621.
* Brussel, Usage des Fiefs, t. i, p. 383.


404 HISTORY OF


“IT, Robert, count, brother of the king of France, make
known to all present and to come, that there was a certain
contest between Henry, count of Champagne and Brie, and
myself, concerning a certain house which is called Savegny,
and a part of which I fortified by a moat of two outlets.
The affair has been arranged as follows, namely : that what
is already fortified by a moat of two outlets, shall so remain,
but that the remainder shall be fortified with a moat of one
outlet only, and a fence without battlements.

“If I make war against the said count, or against any
other, I shall immediately give him up the said house. I
have guarantied it to him on my faith and by hostages, and
he has promised me that he will keep the said house, with
the ponds and mills, in good faith and without ill design ; and
that he will immediately return it to me, the war being fin-
ished.”! |

It would be easy to multiply this example of the resistance,
or, more correctly speaking, various resistances, which, down
to the middle of the thirteenth century, the construction of
castles had to surmount.

It did surmount them, as it happens with every thing which
is the work of necessity. At this epoch, there was war
everywhere ; everywhere would necessarily be also the mon-
uments of war, the means of making it and repelling it. Not
only were strong castles constructed, but all things were
made into fortifications, haunts, or defensive habitations.
‘Towards the end of the eleventh century, we find, at Nimes,
an association called Les Chevaliers des Arénes. When the
meaning of this is sought, we find that they were knights
who had taken up their abode in the Roman amphitheatre,
the Arénes still remaining in the present day. It was easy
to fortify them: they were strong in themselves. These
knights established themselves in them, and intrenched them-
selves therein when necessary, and this is not an isolated
fact; most of the ancient circuses, the arena of Arles, as
well as that of Nimes, have been put to the same use, and
occupied for some time as a castle. It was not necessary to
be a knight, or even a layman, in order to act thus, and to
live amidst fortifications. Monasteries, churches, also forti-
fied themselves ; they were surrounded by towers, ramparts,
and moats ; they were assiduously guarded, and long sieges


1 Brussel, Usage des Fiefs, t. i., p. 382, note b.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 405


were sustained by them. The burghers did like the nobles ;
towns were fortified. War so constantly menaced them, that,
in many of them, a child was kept, at a fixed post and by
way of sentinel, in the bell tower of the church, to observe
what passed at a distance, and to announce the approach of
an enemy. Moreover, the enemy was within the walls, in
the neighboring street, in the intermediate house ; war might
break out, in fact did break out, between one quarter and
another, from door to door, and fortifications, like war, pene-
trated everywhere. Each street had its barriers, each house
its tower, its loop-hole, its platform, in the fourteenth cen-
tury.

‘‘Rhodez was divided into two parts, surrounded with ram-
parts and towers. One was called the city, the other the
borough ; the inhabitants of the city and those of the borough
made war with each other from time to time ; and even when
they were at peace, they shut the gates of their enclosure
every night, and were more particular in setting the watch
upon the walls which separated them, than upon those which
protected the town on the side towards the country.”

And many other towns, among others Limoges, Auch,
Perigueux, Angouléme, Meaux, were the same, or almost the
same, as Rhodez.

Would you have a somewhat exact idea of what a castle
was, not exactly at the epoch which occupies us, but at a
rather posterior epoch? [ shall borrow its description from
a very recent work, and which as yet is not even finished; a
work which, in my opinion, is often deficient in a due senti-
ment of the ancient times, and in moral truth, but which,
concerning the actual state of society in the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries, concerning the employment of time, man-
ners, and domestic, industrial, agricultural life, é&c., contains
very complete information, collected with a great deal of
learning, and well arranged. I speak of the Histoire des
Francais des divers Etats, pendant les cing derniers Sieécles,
by M. A. Monteil, the first four volumes of which are pub-
lished. The author describes, in the following terms, the
castle of Montbazon, near Tours, in the fourteenth century.

“First, imagine to yourself a superb position, a steep
mountain, bristling with rocks, furrowed with ravines and
precipices; upon the declivity is the castle. The small


? Histoire des Francais de divers états, by M. A. Monteil, v. ii., p. 196.


406 HISTORY OF


houses which surround it set off its grandeur; the Indre
seems to turn aside with respect; it forms a large semicircle
at its feet. ;

“This castle must be seen when, at sunrise, the outward
galleries glimmer with the armor of the sentinels, and the
towers are shown all brilliant with their large, new gratings.
Those high buildings must be seen, which fill those who de-
fend them with courage, and with fear those who should be
tempted to attack them.

‘The door presents itself all covered with heads of boars
or wolves, flanked with turrets, and crowned with a high
guard-house. Enter, there are three enclosures, three moats,
three drawbridges to pass. You find yourself in a large,
square court, where are cisterns, and on the right and left
the stables, hen-houses, pigeon-houses, coach-houses ; the
cellars, vaults, and prisons are below; above are the dwell-
ing apartments; above these are the magazine, lardevs, or
salting-rooms and arsenals. All the roofs are bordered with
machicolations, parapets, guard-walks, and sentry-boxes. In
the middle of the court is the donjon, which contains the
archives and the treasure. It is deeply moated all round,
and can only be entered by a bridge, almost always raised.
Although the walls, like those of the castle, are six feet thick,
it is surrounded up to half its height with a chemise, or sec-
ond wall, of large cut stones. |

“This castle has just been rebuilt. There is something
light, fresh, laughing, about it, not possessed by the heavy,
massive castles of the last century.”

This last phrase will cause some astonishment ; one would
scarcely expect to hear such a castle qualified with the names
of light, fresh, laughing ; and yet the author is right; and,
compared with those of the eleventh and twelfth centuries,
the castle of Montbazon really merited these titles. The
former were entirely the reverse—heavy, massive, and gloomy ;
there were not so many courts in them, not so much interior
space, nor so judicious a distribution of it. All idea of art
or convenience was foreign to their construction; they had
no monumental character, no idea of the agreeable; defence,
safety, was the only thought manifested in them. Men se-
lected the steepest and most savage places; and there, ac-
cording to the accidents of the ground, the edifice was raised,


1 Histoire des Francais des divers états, by M. A. Monteil, tip: IGE


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. ° 407


destined solely to repel attacks effectually, and to shut up the
inhabitants. But buildings thus conceived every one raised,
burghers as well as lords, ecclesiastics as well as laymen ;
the territory was covered with them, and they all had the
same character, that of haunts, or asylums.

Now that we know what was the actual state of feudal
habitations at their origin, what passed within? What life
was led there by the possessor? What influence must have
been exercised over him and his people by such a dwelling,
and the material circumstances which arose from it? How
and in what direction developed itself the petty society con-
tained by the castle, and what was the constitutive element
of feudal society 2

The first feature of its situation was isolation. At no
epoch, perhaps, in the history of any society, do we meet
with isolation so complete. “Take the patriarchal system,
the nations which were formed in the plains of western Asia ;
take the nomadic nations, the tribes of shepherds‘; take those
German tribes I described in one of the last lectures; be
present at the birth of the Greek or Roman society ; transport
yourself to the midst of those villages which afterwards be-
came Athens; to the seven hills whose population formed
Rome: everywhere you will find men in infinitely closer
connection, far more disposed to act upon one another, that
is to say, to become civilized, for civilization is the result of
the reciprocal and continual action of individuals. The
primitive social molecule was never elsewhere so isolated,
So separated from other like molecules; the distance was
never so great between the essential and simple elements of
society.

With this first feature, with the isolation of the castle and
its inhabitants, was combined a singular indolence. The
possessor of the castle had nothing to do; no duties, no regu-
lar occupation. Among other nations, at their origin, even
in the superior classes, men were occupied, sometimes with
public affairs, sometimes with frequent and various kinds of
relations with neighboring families. We never find them at
a loss how to fill up their time, to satisfy their activity: here
they cultivated and improved large estates ; there they man-
aged great flocks; elsewhere they hunted for a livelihood ;
in a word, they had a compulsory activity. Within the
castle, the proprietor had nothing to do; it was not he who
improved his fields ; he did not hunt for his support; he had


408 HISTORY OF . »


no political activ y, no industrial activity of any kind; never
has there been seen such leisure in such isolation.

Men cannot remain in a situation of this kind; they would
die of impatience and ennui. The proprietor of the castle
thought only of getting out of it. Shut up there when it was
absolutely necessary to his safety and independence, he left
it as often as he was able, to seek abroad what he was in
want of, society, activity. The life of the possessors of fiefs
was passed upon the high roads, in adventures. ‘That long
series of incursions, pillages, wars, which characterizes the
middle ages, was, in a great measure, the effect of the nature
of the feudal habitation, and of the material situation amidst
which its masters were placed. They everywhere sought
the social movement which they could not find within their
own castles.

Horrible pictures of the life which the possessors of fiefs
led at this epoch, have been seen in many works. ‘These
pictures have often been traced with a hostile hand, in a par-
tial design. Upon the whole, however, I do not think them
exaggerated. Historicalevents on the one hand, and con-
temporaneous monuments on the other, prove that such was
in fact, for a very long period, the feudal life, the life of the
seigneurs.

Among the contemporaneous monuments, I shall refer you
to three only, in my opinion the most striking, and which
give the most exact idea of the state of society at this epoch :
first, the Histoire de Louis le Gros, by Suger ; secondly, the
Vie de Guibert de Nogent, by himself, a book less known, but
curious, and to which I shall immediately return ; thirdly,
? Histoire Ecclésiastique et civile de Normandie, by Orderic
Vital. You will there see to what an extent the life of pos-
sessors of fiefs was passed away from home, entirely em-
ployed in depredations, incursions, disorders of every descrip-
tion.

Consult events instead of monuments. ‘That which has
astonished all historians, the crusades, first presents itself to
the mind. Can it be supposed that the crusades would be
possible among a people who had not been accustomed,
brought up from childhood to this wandering, adventurous
life? In the twelfth century, the crusades were not nearly
so singular as they appear to be to us. The life of the pos-
sessors of fiefs, with the exception of the pious motive, was
an incursion, a continual crusade in their own country: they


o-


. CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 409


here went farther, and from other causes ; that is the great
difference. For the rest, they did not leave their habits—
they did not essentially change their mode of life. Could
©1e conceive in the present day a nation of proprietors,
vho should suddenly displace itself, abandon their estates or
tieir families, to go, without any absolute necessity, and seek

Isewhere such adventures ? Nothing of the kind would
uave been possible, if the daily life of the possessors of fiefs
had not been, so to speak, a foretaste of the crusades,—if
they had not found themselves all prepared for such expe-
ditions.

Thus, whether you consult monuments or events, it will
be seen that the need to seek activity and amusement abroad,
prevailed in the feudal society at this epoch, and that it had
a large share, among other causes, in the material circum.
stances amidst which the possessors of fiefs lived.

T'wo characteristic traits manifest themselves in feudalism.
The one is the savage and fantastical energy of the develop-
ment of individual characters: not only are they brutal, fero-
cious, cruel, but they are so in a singular, strange fashion,
such as we might look for in an individual who lives alone,
abandoned to himself, to the originality of his nature, and to
the caprices of his imagination. The second trait, equally
striking, in feudal society, is the stubbornness of manners,—
their long opposition to change, to progress. Into no other
society have new ideas, or manners, had so much trouble to
penetrate. Civilization was more slow and difficult in mod-
ern Kurope than anywhere else ; it was not till after the tenth
century that it actually conquered and settled in the territory.
Nowhere was, during so long a period, so little progress with
so much movement.

How can we but recognise, in these two facts, the influ-
ence of the material circumstances under the empire of which
the constitutive element of feudal society lived and was de-
veloped? Who does not see therein the effect of the situa-
tion of the possessor of the fief, isolated within his castle,
surrounded by an inferior and a despised population, obliged
to seek afar off, and by violent means, the society and activi-
ty which he had not about him? The ramparts and moats
of the castles formed obstacles to ideas as to enemies, and
civilization had as much trouble as war to penetrate and in-
vade them.

But at the same time that the castles opposed so strong a

35


410 HISTORY OF


barrier to civilization, ‘at the same time that it had such diffi-
culty in penetrating therein, they were in some respects a
principle of civilization; they protected the development of
sentiments 'and manners which have played a powerful and
beneficial part in modern society. ‘There is no one but
knows that the domestic life, the spirit of family, and particu-
larly the condition of women, were developed in modern
Europe much more completely, more happily, than _else-
where. Among the causes which contributed to this devel-
opment, must be reckoned as one of the principal, the life of
the castle, the situation of the possessor of the fief in his
domains. Never, in any other form of society, has the family
reduced to its most simple expression,—the husband, the
wife, and the children,—been found so bound, so pressed to-
gether, separated from all other powerful and rival relation.
In the various states of society which I have just enumerated,
the chief of the family, without quitting home, had numerous
occupations, diversions, which drew him from the interior of
his dwelling, which at least prevented that from being the
centre of his life. ‘The contrary was the case in feudal so-
ciety. So long as he remained in his castle, the possessor
of the fief lived there with his wife and children, almost his
only equals, his only intimate and permanent company.
Doubtless, he often left it, and abroad led the brutal and ad-
venturous life which I have just described; but he was
obliged to return to it. It was there that he shut himself up
in times of danger. Now whenever a man is placed in any
particular position, the part of his moral nature which cor-
responds to that position is forcibly developed in him. If he
be obliged to live habitually in the bosom of his family, with
his wife and children, the ideas, the sentiments in harmony
with this fact cannot fail to have great influence. Thus it
happened in feudalism.

Moreover, when the possessor of the fief left his castle to
seek war and adventures, his wife remained in it, and in a
situation wholly different from that in which women had
hitherto almost always been placed. She remained mistress,
chatelaine, representing her husband, charged in his absence
with the defence and honor of the fief. ‘This elevated and
almost sovereign position, in the very bosom of domestic life,
often gave to the women of the feudal period a dignity, a
courage, virtues, a distinction, which they have displayed
nowhere else, and it has doubtless powerfully contributed to


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 411


their moral development and to the general improvement. of
their condition. Ry

This is not all. The importance of children, of the eldest
son more especially, was much. greater in the feudal man-
sion than anywhere else. There broke forth not only natu-
ral affection, and the desire to transmit his property to his
children, but also the desire to transmit to them that power,
that superior position, that sovereignty, inherent in the do-
main. The eldest son of the lord was, in the eyes of his
father and all his people, a prince, an heir presumptive, the
depositary of the glory of a dynasty. So that the weaknesses
as well as the good feelings of human nature, domestic pride
as well as affection, combined to give the spirit of family
more energy and power.

Add to this the influence of Christian ideas, which I here
merely point out in passing, and you will comprehend how
this life of the castle,—this solitary, gloomy, hard situation,
was favorable to the development of domestic life, and to that
elevation of the condition of women which holds so great a
place in the history of our civilization.

This great and beneficial revolution was accomplished. be-
tween the ninth and twelfth centuries. We cannot follow
the trace of it step by step; we can but very imperfectly
mark the particular facts which have served it as steps ; for
we are deficient in documents. But that at the eleventh
century it was almost consummated,—that the position. of
women was changed,—that the spirit of family, the domestic
life, the ideas and. sentiments connected with it, acquired. a
development, an empire, till then unknown, is a, general. fact
which it is impossible to overlook: Many of you will, still
have before you the spirit of the monuments of the eleventh
century, which I placed before you in the last course ; com-
pare them with the three pages I shall here quote from
the Vie de Guibert de Nogent, of which I just now spoke.
They have no historical importance, and no other merit than
that of showing to what dignity, to what refined and delicate
sentiments, women and domestic manners were elevated
from the ninth to the eleventh century ; but, under this point
of view, they appear to me conclusive, and of a genuine in-
terest.

Guibert de Nogent gives an account in this work, both of
the public events at which he was present, and of the per-
sonal events which passed within his own family. He was


412 HISTORY OF


born in 1053, in a castle of Beauvaisis. Let us see how he
speaks of his mother, and of his relations with her. Call to
mind the narrative, or rather the language, (for narrative is
entirely wanting,) of writers contemporaneous with Charle-
magne, Louis le Débonnaire, and Charles le Chauve, on a
similar matter, and say if this is the same condition of rela-
tions and of souls.

““T have said, God of mercy and holiness, that I would
return thanks to thee for thy goodness. First, I especially
return thanks to thee for having given me a chaste and
modest mother, and one filled with fear of thee. With re-
gard to her beauty, I should praise it in a worldly and ex-
travagant manner, did I place it anywhere but in a face armed
with a severe chastity... . The virtuous expression of my
mother, her rare speech, her always tranquil countenance,
were not made to encourage the levity of those who beheld
her ....and what is very rarely, or scarcely ever seen in
women of a high rank, she was as jealous of preserving pure
the gifts of God, as she was reserved in blaming women who
abused them ; and when it happened that a woman, whether
within or without her house, became the object of a censure
of this kind, she abstained from taking part in it; she was
afflicted at hearing it, just as if the censure had fallen on
herself.’.. ..It was far less from experience than from a
kind of awe with which she was inspired from above, that
she was accustomed to detest sin; and, as she often said to
me, she had so penetrated her soul with the fear of sudden
death, that, arrived at a more advanced age, she bitterly re-
gretted no longer experiencing in her aged heart those same
stings of pious terror which she had felt in her age of sim-
plicity and ignorance.”

“The eighth month of my birth had scarcely elapsed,
when my father in the flesh died; .. . . although my mother
was still fair and of fresh age, she resolved to remain a
widow, and how great was the firmness which she used to
accomplish this vow! How great were the examples of mo-
desty which she gave! .,.. Living in great fear of the Lord,
and with an equal love for her neighbors, especially those
who were poor, she managed us prudently, us and our pro-


1 Vie de Guibert de Nogent, 1. i., c. 2, inmy Collection des Mémoires
relatifs 4 Histoire de France, t. ix., p. 346-349.
2 Tbid., c. 12, p. 385.


CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE. 413


perty.... Her mouth was so accustomed to continually re-
peat the name of her dead husband, that it seemed as if her
soul had never any other thought; for, whether in praying
or distributing alms, even in the most ordinary acts of tife,
she continually pronounced the name of that man, which
showed that her mind was always preoccupied with him. In
fact, when the heart is absorbed in a feeling of love, the
tongue forms itself in a manner to speak, as it were uncon-
sciously, of him who is its object.!

‘‘My mother brought me up with the most tender care. . .
Scarcely had I learned the first elements of letters, when,
eager to have me instructed, she confided me to a master of
grammar. ... ‘here was shortly before this epoch, and even
at this time, so great a scarcity of masters of grammar, that,
so to speak, scarce one was to be seen in the country, and
hardly could they be found in the great towns.... He to
whom my mother resolved to confide me had learned gram-
mar in a rather advanced age, and was so much the less
familiar with this science, as he had devoted himself to it at
a later period; but what he wanted in knowledge, he made
up for in virtue.... From the time that I was placed under
his care, he formed in me such a purity, he so thoroughly
eradicated from me all the vices which generally accompany
youth, that he preserved me from the most frequent dangers.
He allowed me to go nowhere except in his company, to
sleep nowhere but in my mother’s house, to receive a pre-
sent from no one without her permission. He required me
to do every thing with moderation, precision, attention, and
exertion.... While most children of my age ran here and
there, according to their pleasure, and were allowed from
time to time the enjoyment of the liberty which belongs to
them, I, held in continual restraint, muffled up lke a clerk,
looked upon the bands of players as if I had been a being
above them.

“Every one, seeing how my master excited me to work,
hoped at first that such great application would sharpen my
wits; but this hope soon diminished, for my master, alto-
gether unskilful at reciting verses, or composing them accord-
ing to rule, almost every day loaded me with a shower of
cuffs and blows, to force me to know what he himself was
unable to teach me.... Still he showed me so much friend-


Vie de Guibert de Nogent, c. 4, 12, 13, p. 355, 385, 396, 397.
35*


414 HISTORY OF CIVILIZATION IN FRANCE.


ship; he occupied himself concerning me with so much so-
licitude, he watched so assiduously over my safety, that, far
from experiencing the fear generally felt at that age, I forgot
all his severity, and obeyed with an inexpressible feeling of
love.... One day, when I had been struck, having neglected
my work for some hours in the evening, I went and sat my-
self at my mother’s knee, severely bruised, and certainly
more so than I had deserved. My mother having, according
to her custom, asked if I had been beaten that day, I, in or-
der to avoid accusing my master, assured her that I had not.
But she pulling aside, whether I would or no, the garment
they call a shirt, saw my little arms all black, and the skin
of my shoulders all raised up and swollen by the blow of the
rod which I had received. At this sight, complaining that
they treated me with too much cruelty at so tender an age,
all troubled and beside herself, her eyes full of tears, she
cried: ‘I will no longer have thee become a priest, nor in
order to learn letters, that thou thus endure such treatment.’
But I, at these words, regarding her with all the rage of
which I was capable, said to her: ‘I would rather die than
cease learning letters, and wishing to be a priest.’

Who can read this account without being struck with the
prodigious development which, in two centuries, has been
taken by the domestic sentiments, the importance attached
to children, to their education, to all the ties of family? You
might search through all the writers of the preceding cen-
turies, and never find any thing resembling it. We cannot, I
repeat, give-an exact account of the manner in which this
revolution was accomplished; we do not follow it in its de-
grees, but it is incontestable. .

I must close this lecture. I have given you a glimpse of
the influence which the internal life of the feudal castles ex-
ercised over the domestic manners, and to the advantage of
the sentiments which arose from it. You will immediately
see this life take a great extension; new elements will be-
come joined to it, and will contribute to the progress of civil-
ization. It was in the castles that chivalry took birth and
grew. We shall occupy ourselves with it in our next lecture.


1 Vie de Guibert de Nogent, |. i., c. 2, in my Collection des Mémoires
relatifs 4 Histoire de France, c. 4, 5, 6, p. 356, 358, 363, 364.


END OF VOL. III.


mu
4
4 Baty
7a

(ay


any


RP Waa,
id ante oY Ni


DATE DUE


| (Reena 6


ca title Mee en NE
yh eden! uA f Maree uid
aie


Mat
aha #
ee ;
Aad t oi i,


i NK . a) bast q et Ae
" fi a i i ny cis sent ei eat ey ry i i Hs uf whe sie PBA Si tH Ava iti
We S ee febetir eet ie ate cist a te i ay ate te f dy a4 Pea iy haces ket
i Cia ue a GALE or RG an CK LORRI ca ty
‘ oe ih ue pvt ty re) ARiedeb sae ere AA RE BD Hi


ithe jl
i AH He Wa iene hh
sth 2 be uti 2 We Ld Pat 4 it at f
ieacueee veikoeer leh Whey aA esha theo 4s
M Hoi fe FD ate Mtl i tie Heat iee
jas bh teeny et ;
aad


it)


Ha
_ ti ay weal
nee a

ee peed a iinet
ith Cat aia


Si Mieueen ay Hen E regnned r(eueh atthe UR Whee te tabul
eenntahs ihe ie Pa iH fe at Taare Week A at eerie i
i ae eh: ‘ f beady ah CCE DANG ATH ie i i i at
i ie aly et teat
Ay ie eee ve vied iy i! shat i f «
ae i) i. ret i) sate Wc Fleer
; ith ioe Hal va ce ¥
(My ‘


>=.
==


ee manaeesn ire
Abdi! i ‘x 4 i He t
iy u A uh " 4 i RRCLLRE at tet Hie qi HA


oe 1
hOGA HM
Aen)

an LAE


aS


£


ee


=


Sst
SSeS
is
Se


a aS
; t


ee nih Bite ii
+h tie rt


na ve
a sit We
;


of


=
—


idee Mie Pat ie iN Seian aceon:
cots Seaih Sanit 4 aii a a At fevrint
et


=
ne:


=


Se srs


=


tid


ine ha


oh
in HS siigdtt
aiialas FAS
ie a i alte
i Ab (8 ie foal
me fee tH
as
ve \*
Won
Then


s ti
Hae RE ‘ut ie
4 annals +{t


or


Ai}
ie Hy Hy
nes
ha} PBs Mi

hs


ee,


aie


Hits Pay tet vette vite ate
aepee ueanheaete kta meanbstt eth a a


0G 2 RES EP


