The History of Humayun (Humayun-Nama) (Gulbadan Begum (Anette Beveridge, trans.), 1587)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of Anette Beveridge's 1902 translation (https://archive.org/details/historyofhumayun00gulbrich). The only surviving Mughal-era history written by a woman — Princess Gulbadan Begum's intimate account of her brother Humayun's reign, court and household.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Tia 


GIFT OF 


eg 
= 
Ee 
a 
GJ 
A. | 
2 | 
VU 
fj | 


HORAC 








Raid 


ey 





THE HISTORY OF HUMAYUN 
(HUMAYUN-NAMA). 











Sere 


Saye! scoala te ae sh 
| Leg Lp UtEDidag Sieep ll 
| Ms svire Hg Kiss ie Uplate ie 
sine 
Gow Es) SHtrpeslsa er 
Loves of 14 G73" ly Lf ves 
BOy—ws Sill 
| 4 “AS: e l per bin ineMo oats i 
95 slays St ya bpoi9ie) a3 
ints hound | 
Ly YY Af , pir —_ pLife Uys e. | 
bat thihee [ate 
cE tp P hi HKG ord 
=a) FL ey Cnt: 12, “1H a 2 fo 
NON 24) ae iF), wi Ze a 














PORTO TE SS ESS Sa Si a Ses saa 


PAGE 28) OF GUL-BADAN BEGAM’S MS. 


| Frontispiece. 


ORIENTAL TRANSLATION FUND. 


NEW SERIES. 
I. 





THE 


HISTORY OF HUMAYUN 


(HUMAYUN-NAMA). 


BY 


GUL-BADAN BEGAM\(PRINCESS KOSE-BODY). 


Translated, with IBnfroductionw, BWofes, Bllusfrafions and 
Biographical Appendix; and reproduced in fhe Wersian 
from fhe only known WS. of the BWrifish Wuseum 


BY 


ANNETTE 8. BEVERIDGE, M.R.A.S. 


PRINTED AND PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF THE 
ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, 


AND SOLD AT 


22, ALBEMARLE STREET, LONDON. 
‘1902 





Cos 
MY HUSBAND, 


WHO SET MY FEET UPON THE PERSIAN WAY, 
AND HAS STREWED IT 


' WITH OPEN-HEARTED LARGESSE OF HELP AND COUNSEL. 


A. 8. B. 


November, 1901. 





PREFACE. 


Ir was in October, 1900, that the late Mr. F. F. Arbuthnot 
made arrangements with me for the publication of this 
volume. It has now to put forth bereft of his guidance. 
I can but trust that he would have given to the finished 
work the welcome with which he greeted the small portion 
I was able to show him in print. It is natural to feel 
towards him what he has expressed in his dedication of 
the Assemblies of Al Harirt to Chenery, and to hope he 
may be glad of the fulfilment of this piece of his work, 

The little history which is reproduced in this volume has 
few, if any, compeers, inasmuch as it is the work of a 
Musalmani, and lights up her woman’s world. She writes 
colloquially and without pose, and is unaffected and spon- 
taneous. Tor these reasons I have tried to make an accu- 
rate copy of her text, and to preserve her characteristics of 
orthography and diction; and this the more that the 
British Museum MS. may be her very own, unique, and 
autographic. With a few chosen exceptions, I have repro- 
duced all her deflections from common rule without com- 
ment; my additions to the MS. are limited to a few izdfats 
and other signs of which example is given at some place in 
the MS.. 

Princess Rose-body has rendered one essential service to 
history, by giving precise details of relationship in her own 
and some contemporary families. Up till now, however, 
no use has been made of her information, and her book 
has remained, both in India and Europe, a literary parda- 
nishin. 


Vill 


The Biographical Appendix, which I have modelled in 
admiration of Professor Blochmann’s in his 4in-i-akbar7, 
will, I hope, be of use to future writers. It is the outcome 
of the notes of several years, but it is incomplete and over 
brief. Nevertheless, it discloses the elements of many a 
romantic story. Cs 

One of an author’s most agreeable final touches is the 
expression of thanks to those who have helped his book on 
its way. My obligation to my husband is too great to be 
told. Iam much indebted to Mr. A. G. Ellis for his un- 
failing kindness during the long and pleasant time of my - 
work in the British Museum, and to my friends Mr. E. H. 
Whinfield and Mr. W. Irvine for the expression of their 
opinions on several perplexing points. As I have said in 
writing of the plates, I owe all my illustrations but one to 
Mr. Bourdillon, B.C.S.. 

The printing of a book so full as is this one of unfamiliar 
names and of diacritically-marked letters entails a heavy 
tax upon proof-readers and compositors. I wish to express 
my sense of this, and to thank Messrs. Billing, their proof- 
readers and their compositors for what they have done to 
accomplish a difficult and tiresome task. My thanks are 
indeed due and are offered to Messrs. Drugelin for the 
patience and skill with which they have dealt with Persian 
copy from my untrained hand. 

I now venture to express, in Mr. E. Granville Browne's 
words, the thought which haunts all who make a book, and 
to beg my critics to listen to their plea : 


‘ Now, seeing that to fail and fall is the fate of all, and 
to claim exemption from the lot of humanity a proof of 
pride and vanity, and somewhat of mercy our common 
need; therefore let suchas read, and errors detect, either 
ignore or neglect, or correct and conceal them, rather than 
revile and reveal them.’ | 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


PREFACE - - = ‘ - : - - 


List OF ILLUSTRATIONS, AND NOTE ON THEM - - vi, 


INTRODUCTION : 


Part I: BroGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF GUL-BADAN BEGAM 
AND HER FAMILY - - ! : s 7 


Part IL: GuL-BaDAN BeGam’s Book, THE ‘HUMAYUN- 
NAMA’ . ; : ‘ ‘ : = 


NOTE ON THE PERSIAN TITLES 2 : _ - 
TRANSLATION OF THE ‘ HUMAYUN-NAMA’ OF GUL-BADAN 
BEGAM - i ad - - ; 3 - : 
APPENDIX A, BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES OF THE WOMEN MEN- 
TIONED BY BABAR, GUL-BADAN, AND HAIDAR . : 


APPENDIX B. Manpi KuwaAja - - - : . 


INDEX OTHER THAN OF PLACES - : : ‘ : 


INDEX OF PLACES- © ‘ ‘ : : : 


PAGE 
vii 


Liii. 


77 
82 


~ 83 


203 
298 


303 
325 


PERSIAN TEXT - , - - At the end of the Volume. 








LIST OF PLATES. 


PAGE 
I. PHOTOGRAPHIC REPRODUCTION OF PAGE 28) 
OF GUL-BADAN BrEGAm’s M§, - - - Frontispiece 


11. PHOTOGRAPHIC REPRODUCTION OF AN AUTO- 
GRAPH NOTE oF THE EMPEROR SHAH-JAHAN Facing xiii 


111, AMIR TIMUR . - . - - a 84 
Iv. BABAR DEVOTING HIMSELF FOR HIS SON - e 105 
v. THE EMPEROR HUMAYUN - : : ca 112 
vi. Suir SHAH ArGHANn - ~ . . ee 133 
vil, INCIDENTS CONNECTED WITH THE BIRTH OF 
AKBAR - . - - - . cs 158 
vill, NAUTCH IN CELEBRATION OF AKBAR'S BIRTH - te 160 
1X, HYMN OF PRAISE FOR AKBAR’s BIRTH - - 162 


x. THE EMPEROR AKBAR_ - : . Vion 164 











-JAHAN 


AUTOGRAPH NOTE OF SHAH 


ce p. xiii. 


[To fa 


NOTE ON THE ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Tue page of the MS. selected for reproduction in Plate I. 
contains several words which I have found difficult, and 
concerning which explanation will be welcomed. It and 
Plate No. II. make silent protest against printing, and 
plead that the sun best shows the grace and beauty of 
manuscript. 

With the exception of the first illustration, all the plates 
are photographic reproductions from a splendidly illustrated 
Persian MS., entitled the Tarikh-i-khanddan-i-timiriya, 
which is the choicest volume in the library with which 
Maulvi Khiida-baksh Khan Bahadur has enriched the city 
of Patna.* 

The Emperor Shah-jahan appears to have paid R.8,000 
for the illustrations in the volume. The MS. itself is of 
older date, and Mr. Beveridge has found in it some portions, 
at least, of the T'arikh-i-alfi. The title-page is wanting. 

The volume has a further distinction, inasmuch as it 
bears on an opening page an autograph note of Shah-jahan. 
This is reproduced (as Plate No. II.) on the opposite page, 
and by its charm and grace is worthy of that royal fount 
of creative beauty. 

The pictures of Babar’s devotion of himself and the triad 
connected with the birth of Akbar are admirable; they 
repay close attention and enlargement under a glass. 





1 A copy of the Maulvi’s catalogue (published while he was Chief 
Justice in Hydarabad) is in the British Museum, and may be con- 
sulted for some details of the book. (p. 110) Mr. Beveridge also gives 
some particulars about it in the R.A.S. Journal, January, 1901, p. 81. 


XIV 
I am indebted for these pictures, first to Mr. Beveridge 
who, when he examined this Tarikh in 1899, thought of 
my book, and, secondly, to Mr. Bourdillon, the then Com- 


missioner of Patna, who most kindly photographed them 
for us. 





TRANSLATION OF SHAH-JAHAN’S NOTE. 
Ix tHE Name or Gop, THE MERcIFUL, THE CoMPASSIONATE. 


This history, which contains an abridgment of the 
affairs of his Majesty, Sahib-qiran Gitt-sitani (Timir), and 
of his glorious descendants, and of the events of the days 
of “Arsh-dshyant (Akbar)—May God make clear his proof !— 
down to the twenty-second year of his reign, was written 
in the time of Shah Baba (Akbar). 

Signed: Shah-jahan Padshah, son of Jahangir Padshah, 
son of Akbar Padshah. 





INTRODUCTION. 





PART L 


BIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF THE PRINCESS AND HER 
FAMILY.* 


Section I1.—Unper BAsBar. 


GuuL-BaDAN Becam (Princess Rose-body) was a daughter of 
Zahru-d-din Muhammad Babar, in whom were united the 
lines of highest Central Asian aristocracy—namely, that 
of Timur the Tiark, through his son Miran-shah ; and that 
of Chingiz the Mughal, through his son Chaghatai. He was 
born on February 14th, 1483, and succeeded to his father’s 
principality of Farghana when under twelve. He spent 
ten years of early youth in trying to save his small domain 
from the clutch of kinsmen, but, bemg forced to abandon 
the task, went southwards in 1504 to Afghanistan, where 
he captured Kabul from its Arghun usurpers. 

Princess Gul-badan was born somewhere about 1523 and 
when her father had been lord in Kabul for nineteen years ; 
he was master also in Kunduz and Badakhshan; had 
held Bajaur and Swat since 1519, and Qandahar for a year. 
During ten of those nineteen years he had been styled 
padshah, in token of headship of the house of Timur and of 





1 In selecting from the mass of material which, without discursive- 
ness, might have been included under the above heading, only that has 
been used which concerns the begam or is in touch with her interests 
and sympathies. 

This Introduction corrects sevéral errors which occur in an article 
on the life and writings of the begam, and which was published by me 
in the Calcutta Review, April, 1898. 


1 


“= 


. < ‘his: indepencent sovereignty. To translate padshah, how- 


ever, as is often done, by the word emperor would give a 
wrong impression of Babar’s status amongst rulers at this 
height of his rising fortunes. Nevertheless, Gul-badan was 
born the child of a strong and stable chief, and of one who 
was better followed in war than his nominal domains would 
allow, because his army was drawn for the most part from 
tribes not under his government, and was not territorial 
and of Kabul but personal and inherited. 

Babar says that he cherished the desire to conquer 
beyond the Indus for nineteen years. At the date of 
Gul-badan’s birth he was engaged in the attempt, and 
succeeded when she was about two and a half years old. 
He then became the first Tirki sovereign in Hindustan, and 
the founder of its miscalled Mughal dynasty. 

If the princess had first seen light in London instead of 
in Kabul, she would have had Henry VIII for king, and 
the slumbers of her birth-year might have been troubled 
as men marched forth at Wolsey’s will to fight and lose in 
France. Her personal vicissitudes were the greater that 
she was a Timurid and Turk. She spent her childhood 
under her father’s rule in Kabul and Hindustan; her 
girlhood and young wifehood shared the fall and exile of 
Humayun ; and her maturity and failing years slipped past 
under the protection of Akbar. 

Her mother was Dil-dar Begam—the Heart-holding 
_ Princess—of whose descent, it is noticeable to observe, 
neither her husband nor her daughter gives any informa- 
tion. This peculiarity of omission she shares with Maham, 
the wife of Babar’s affection and the mother of his heir; 
and with Gul-rukh, the mother of Kamran and ‘Askari. 
All three ladies are spoken of by our begam with the style 
befitting the wives of a king; all were mothers of children, 
and for this reason, if for no other, it seems natural that 
something should be said of their birth. Babar frequently 
mentions Maham, and calls her by this name towt court. 
Dil-dar’s name occurs in the Turki version of the Memoirs, 
but not in the Persian, and she is there styled aghacha— 


3 


i.¢., & lady, but not a begam, by birth. Gul-rukh is, I 
believe, never named by Babar. This silence does not 
necessarily imply low birth. It may be an omission of the 
contemporarily obvious ; and also it may indicate that no 
one of the three women was of royal birth, although all 
seem to have been of good family. 

Three Timtrids had been Babar’s wives in childhood and 
youth. These were: ‘Ayisha, who left him before 1504 
and who was betrothed to him when he was five; Zainab, 
who died in 1506 or 1507; and Ma stma, whom he married 
in 1507 and who died at the birth of her first child. 
Maham was married in Khurasan, and therefore in 1506 ; 
Dil-dar and Gul-rukh probably considerably later, and after 
the three royal ladies had passed away from the household. 
The next recorded marriage of Babar is one of 1519, when 
a Yusufzai chief brought him his daughter, Bibi Mubarika, 
as the seal of submission. She had no children, and was 
an altogether charming person in the eyes of those who 
have written of her. 

To return now to Dil-dar. She bore five children, three 
girls and two boys. The eldest was born in an absence of 
Babar from Kabul and in Khost. This fixes her birth as 
occurring somewhere between 1511 and 1515. She was 
Gul-rang (Rose-hued), named like her sisters from the rose ; 
then came Gul-chihra (Rose-cheeked); and then Abi’n- 
nasir Muhammad, the Hindal of history, who was born in 
1519; next was Gul-badan (Rose-body); and last a boy, 
whom his sister calls Alwar, a word which looks like a 
sobriquet drawn from the Indian town. He died after the 
migration of the household to Agra, and in 1529. 

Princess Gul-badan was born some two years before 
Babar set out on his last expedition across the Indus, so 
her baby eyes may have seen his troops leave Kabul in 
November, 1525, for the rallying-place at Jacob’s Village 
(Dth-i-ya qub). It is not mere word-painting to picture 
her as looking down from-the citadel at what went on 
below, for she tells of later watching from this view-point 
which would give the farewell glimpse of the departing 

1—2 


4 
army, and, as weeks and years rolled on, the first sight of 
many a speck on the eastern road which took form as 
loin-girt runner or mounted courier. 

We who live upon the wire, need a kindled imagination 
to realize what it was to those left behind, to have their 
men-folk go to India. With us, fancy is checked by maps 
and books, and has not often to dwell on the unknown and 
inconceivable. Tothem, what was not a blank was probably 
a fear. Distance could have no terrors for them, because 
they were mostly, by tribe and breeding, ingrain nomads ; 
many of them had come from the far north and thought 
the great mountains or the desert sands the desirable 
setting for life. Such experience, however, would not help 
to understand the place of the Hindis, with its heats, its 
rains, strange beasts, and hated and dreaded pagans. 

It is not easy to say wherein lies the pleasure of animating 
the silhouettes which are all that names, without detail of 
character, bring down from the past. Perhaps its roots 
run too deep and close to what is dear and hidden in the 
heart, for them to make way readily to the surface in speech. 
But it is an undoubted pleasure, and it is what makes it 
agreeable to linger with these women in Kabul in those 
hours when our common human nature allows their 
thoughts and feelings to be clear to us. Sometimes their 
surroundings are too unfamiliar for us to understand what 
sentiments they would awaken, but this is not so when there 
is news of marches, fighting, defeat, or victory. Then the 
silhouettes round, and breathe, and weep or smile. 

Babar left few fighting men in Kabul, but there remained 
a great company of women and children, all under the 
nominal command and charge of Prince Kamran, who was 
himself a child. His exact age I am not able to set 
down, for Babar does not chronicle his birth, an omission 
which appears due to its falling in one of the gaps of the 
Memoirs. Babar left the city on November 17th, and was 
joined on December 3rd by Humayin at the Garden of 
Fidelity (Bagh-i-wafa). He had to wait for the boy, and 
was much displeased, and reprimanded him severely. 


5 
Humayin was then seventeen years old, and since 1520 had 
been governor of Badakhshan. He had now brought over 


his army to reinforce his father, and it may well be that 
Maham had something to do with his delayed march from 


Kabul. She could have seen him only at long intervals’ — 


since she had accompanied Babar, in 1520, to console and 
settle her child of twelve in his distant and undesired post 
of authority. 

Shortly after the army had gone eastwards, disquieting 
news must have reached Kabul, for three times before the 
middle of December, 1525, Babar was alarmingly ill. What 
he records of drinking and drug-eating may explain this; 
he thought his illness a chastisement, and set himself to 
repent of sins which were bred of good-fellowship and by 
forgetfulness in gay company; but his conflict with them 
was without victory. He referred his punishment to 
another cause than these grosser acts, and came to regard 
the composition of satirical verses as a grave fault. His 
reflections on the point place him near higher moralists, 
for he says it was sad a tongue which could repeat 
sublime words, should occupy itself with meaner and 
despicable fancies. ‘Oh, my Creator! I have tyrannized 
over my soul, and if Thou art not bountiful to me, of 
a truth I shall be numbered amongst the accursed.’ These 
- are some of the thoughts of Babar which lift our eyes 
above what is antipathetic in him, and explain why he 
wins the respect and affection of all who take trouble to 
know him. | 

Not long after January 8th, 1526, a messenger would 
reach Kabul who took more than news, for Babar had 
found manuscripts in the captured fort of Milwat, and now 
sent some for Kamran, while he gave others to Humayun. 
They were valuable, but not so much so as he had hoped, 
and many were theological. This and other records about 
books remind one that they were few and precious in those 
days. How many that we now rank amongst the best of 
the sixteenth century had not yet been written! There was 


6 


no Tartkh-i-rashidi, and the very stuff of the T’azuk was 
in the living and making. 

On February 26th Humiayin created news which would 
be as welcome to Maham as it was to Babar, for he was 
successful in his first expedition on active service. This 
occurred at Hisar-firoza, and the town and district were 
given to him with a sum of money. News of the victory 
was despatched to Kabul from Shahabad ; and immediately 
after Babar’s record of this in the Memoirs, there occurs a 
passage of varied interest, although it seems to Kuropean 
ears a somewhat strange commemoration of a detail of 
toilette : ‘At this same station and this same day the razor 
or scissors were first applied to Humayun’s beard.’ Babar 
made an entry in June, 1504, of the same act accomplished 
for himself. It was one which Turks celebrated by 
festivity. The entry quoted above is made as though by 
Babar, but it is followed by an explanation that it is 
inserted by Humayun in pious imitation of his father’s 
own. Humayun did this in 1553-4, shortly before he set 
out to recover his father’s lost domains in Hindustan. 
The date is fixed by his statement that he made the inter- 
polation when he was forty-six.! 

Humaytn’s little victory would be dwarfed by the next 
news of the royal army, for April 12th, 1526, brought the 
battle of Panipat and the overthrow of Ibrahim Lodi Afghan, 
the Emperor of Hindustan. The swiftest of runners would 
carry these tidings to Kabul in something under a month. 
On May 11th Babar distributed the treasures of five kings, 
and left himself.so little that he was jestingly dubbed 
beggar (qalandar). He forgot no one, but sent gifts far 
and wide to kinsmen and friends, and to shrines both in 





1 There is a point of great interest about this note of Humayin and 
Mr. Erskine’s translation of it. I venture to refer readers who take 
interest in the Memoirs, as a book, to my article on the Turki text of 
the Memoirs (Royal Asiatic Society’s Jowrnal, July, 1899), which 
contains information gathered from some sources which were not at 
Mr. Erskine’s disposition, and which suggest that another reading is 
allowable to the concluding words (not mentioned in this text) of 
Humayiin’s interpolation. 


7 


Arabia and ‘Iraq. Kabul was specially remembered and a 
small coin sent for every soul within it. Gul-badan tells 
what was given to the ladies, beginning with the great 
begams, the aunts of frequent mention. It was certainly a 
wonderful day when the curiosities and splendid things of — 
Hind were unpacked for their inspection, and very welcome, 
too, would be the amir who escorted the precious caravan. 
He was Babar’s friend, Khwaja Kilan, who had extorted a 
most unwilling leave from India on the ground that his 
constitution was not suited to the climate of that country, a 
delicate assumption of blame to his own defects which it is 
to be hoped he conveyed to the ladies as a reassurance. 
After the gay social fashion of the time, no doubt he 
helped the ladies to run day into night in the tale-telling 
they loved. It appears probable that there was no such 
complete seclusion of Turki women from the outside world 
as came to be the rule in Hindustan. The ladies may 
have veiled themselves, but I think they received visitors 
more freely, and more in accordance with the active life 
of much-travelling peoples, than is the case in Hindu or 
Moslim houses in India at the present day. | 
The little Gul-badan will have had her present with the 
rest, and probably, like some others, it was chosen by her 
father specially for her. He sent a list with the gifts so ° 
that each person might receive what he had settled upon. 
This he is said to have done both in allotting the jewels and 
the dancing-girls, the latter of whom are mentioned as sent 
to the great begams. Their novel style of dancing ranks 
them amongst the ‘curiosities of Hind,’ but nothing is 
said about their views of presentation to foreign ladies in 
Kabul. Certainly Gul-badan will have seen them dance, 
and she will also have enjoyed the joke played off by Babar 
from Agra on an old dependent called ‘Asas (night-guard). 





1 I remember a Muhammadan gentleman astonishing me by a story 
of a Musalmani child who died of the shock to her propriety when she 
was taken out from the haram. He was an ‘ English-educated’ man, 
and the child was his sister. 


8 


This and all the begam’s stories are left for her to tell, as 
she does later in this volume. 

There came with the gifts an injunction which calls out 
the remark, that at all crises Babar gave expression to 
religious feeling and performed due devotional ceremonies. 
He had desired Khwaja Kilan to arrange for the ladies to 
go out of the city to the Garden of the Audience-hall, so 
that they might there make the prostration of thanks for 
the success of his arms. They were to go in state, and to 
remain some days. He must have sighed as he planned an 
excursion so much to his liking and in which he could not 
share. The act of thanksgiving would be done under a 
summer heaven, in an enchanting June garden, of which 
the snowy hills were the distant girdle. Our princess will 
have gone out with the rest, and with theirs her small 
figure, bravely attired, will have bowed forehead to the 
earth in thanks to the Giver of Victory. Tender thoughts 
will have travelled to the absent, and especially to him who 
loved his Kabul as Babar did. 

It is remarkable in him that, longing to return home as 
he did, he should have had endurance to remain and fight 
on in Hindustan. His constitution was assuredly not 
suited to its climate. His men hated it; his closest friend 
had left it; Humaytn and other intimates were soon to 
follow the khwaja on leave; but he resisted all influences, 
even when he had become so homesick that he wept at 
sight of fruit from Kabul. Only love of action, desire to be 
great, and capacity for greatness, could have held and 
upheld him at his self-chosen post. It cannot be called a 
small matter on which the history of hundreds of years 
turns, and yet it was but the innate quality of one man, and 
that man very human. Babar stood fast, and India had 
Akbar and his splendid followers and all the galaxy of 
their creations in sandstone and marble. 

When Gul-badan was about two years old, and therefore 
shortly before her father left Kabul, she was adopted by 
Maham Begam to rear and educate. Maham was the chief 
lady of the royal household and mother of Babar’s eldest 


9 


son; she was supreme, and had well-defined rights over 
other inmates. Perhaps this position justified her in taking 
from Dil-dar two of her children, Hindal and Gul-badan, as 
she did in 1519 and 1525. Before 1519 Maham had lost 


four children younger than Humayin; they were three 


girls and a boy, and all died in infancy. So it may have 
been heart-hunger that led to the adoptions she made, or 
they might be the outcome of affection for Babar (it is 
said she was to him what ‘Ayisha was to Muhammad), 
which determined her, if she could not rear her children 
- for him, at least to give him his children with the stamp of 
her love upon them. In some cases which are mentioned 
by Babar, adoptions were made by a childless wife of 
high degree from a slave or servant, but no such reason 
seems behind those from Dil-dar. She is spoken of in 
terms which preclude the supposition that (as Haidar puts 
it in another place,) she was outside the circle of dis- 
tinction. 

The story of Hindal’s adoption is briefly this: In 1519 
Babar was away from Kabul on the expedition which gave 
him Bajaur and Swat, and which brought into the royal 
household Bibi Mubarika Yusufzai. On January 25th he 
received a letter from Maham, who was in Kabul, about 
a topic which had been discussed earlier between them— 
namely, the adoption by her of a child of which Dil-dar 
expected the birth. Now she repeated her wishes and, 
moreover, asked Babar to take the fates and declare whether 
it would be a boy or girl. Whether he performed the 
divination rite himself, or had it done by some of the 
women who were in camp with the army, (he speaks of it 
as believed in by women,) it was done, and the result was 
announced to Maham as promising a boy. The rite is 
simple: Two pieces of paper are inscribed, one with a boy’s 
name and one with a girl’s, and are enwrapped in clay and 
set in water. The name first disclosed, as the clay opens 
out in the moisture, reveals the secret. On the 26th Babar 
wrote, giving over the child to Maham and communicating 
the prophecy. On March 4th a boy was born, to whom 


10 


was given the name of Abiw’n-nasir with the sobriquet of 
Hindal by which he is known in history and which is 
perhaps to be read as meaning ‘of the dynasty of Hind.’ 
Three days after birth he was taken, whether she would or 
no, from Dil-dar to be made over to Maham. 

It is clear that Dil-dar objected; and although the ~ 
separation could not have been so complete where the real 
and adoptive mothers are part of one household as it is 
under monogamous custom, it was certainly hard to lose 
her firstborn son in this way. She had still her two elder 
girls. Gul-badan was born four years later and removed ~ 
from her care at the age of two, by which date, it may be, 
she had her son Alwar. In after-years Dil-dar, as a widow, 
lived with Hindal, and she had back Gul-badan while the 
latter was still a young and unmarried girl. 

Babar was separated from his family for over three 
years after he left Kabul in 1525. The tedium of waiting 
for news or for his return was broken for the ladies by 
several interesting home events, and by several items of 
Indian news which must have stirred the whole community 
in Kabul. On August 2nd, 1526, Maham gave birth to a 
son who was named Faruq, but he too died in babyhood 
and his father never saw him. In December, 1526, there 
occurred to Babar what must have roused anger and dread 
in all Kabul, for he was poisoned by the mother of Ibrahim 





1 The account of the adoption of Hindal is given in much abbreviated 
form both by the Persian and English versions of the Memoirs. The 
latter has, indeed, an error which is not borne out by the Persian; 7.e., 
it states that several children had been born in 1519. The correct 
statement is that several had been borne by Maham younger than 
Humaytn. The Tarki text of Kehr and Iiminsky has a longer account, 
with curious details which may have been omitted on revision of the 
Memoirs by Babar himself in later copies, or may have been omitted 
by the Persian translator. The former is the more probable sugges- 
tion, because if the full passage had occurred in the Elphinstone Turki 
text used by Leyden and Erskine, it could not have escaped both these 
careful workers. (This MS. is unfortunately not forthcoming for con- 
sultation.) ‘The point is of interest as bearing on the history of the 
Turki texts. It makes for the opinion that Kehr’s source was one of 
the early copies of the Memoirs, since the passage is one which from 
its domestic nature would be less likely to be added to, than omitted 
from a revised version. 


aE 


Lodi Afghan. How Babar conveyed the news of this to his 
people at home can be seen, because he has inserted the 
letter he wrote to allay anxiety, as soon as recovered strength 


permitted. Gul-badan has given the main points of the. 
crime. She observes that Babar had called the ‘ ill-fated 


demon,’ mother, and had shown her kindness, a sectional 
view which leaves out the Afghan mourner, Buw’a Begam, 
whose son had been defeated and killed, his dynasty over- 
thrown, and herself pitied by the man on whom she tried 
to avenge herself. Her fate is worth commemorating. 
She was first put under contribution—i.e., made over for 
the exploitation of her fortune to two of Babar’s officers— 
and then placed in the custody of a trusty man for convey- 
ance to Kabul. Perhaps she dreaded her reception there, 
for she contrived to elude her guards in crossing the Indus, 
threw herself into the water, and was drowned. 

The letter above-mentioned is full of what one likes in 
Babar. He quotes, ‘ Whoever comes to the gates of death 
knows the value of life,’ and says, with thanks to Heaven, 
that he did not know before how sweet a thing life is. 
Here, too, he shows that he felt the tie which bound him 
- to the Power in whose hands are the issues of life and 
death. He, his daughter, and his cousin and literary 
compeer, Haidar Mirza Dughlat, frequently express religious 
sentiment ; and here Babar exhibits the human graces of 
kind thought and solicitude to lessen the anxieties of his 
distant household and people. He forced himself to live 
again, in words, the horrible experiences of which he wrote 
while still in retirement, and four days! only after their 
occurrence. 





1 This letter bears date December 26th, 1526, and thus provides a 
detail which is of use when considering the probable time of composi- 
tion of the Memoirs. Was a copy of the letter kept? Did the 
original return from Kabul? The impression given by points of 
evidence is that the book was written down in present form later than 
the date of this letter. There are in the beginning of it statements 
which refer its composition or revised version to 1528. The same 
point is raised by letters of 1529 to Humayiin and Khwaja Kilian, the 
date of which may indicate progress in the composition. 

All the letters share another ground of interest, which is that, having 


12 


Three months later Kabul had news of an uplifting 
victory, inasmuch as it had been won from men of alien 
faith, whose overthrow was a plenary religious duty to the 
Moslim. It was fought on March 18th, 1527, against 
Hindt Rajputs under Rana Sanga, and at Khanwa, on the 
skirts of the yet uncrowned hill of Sikri. It was preluded 
by dread amongst the Musalmans, and by solemn acts 
which should make them more worthy to be the tools 
of Heaven and to enforce the stern belief that in battle 
with the pagan there was vengeance of the cause of God. 
Men declared repentance for sin and took oaths of 
abstinence ; gold and silver drinking-vessels, probably of 
Persian handicraft and artistic beauty, were broken up and 
given to the poor; wine was poured out upon the ground, 
and some was salted into vinegar. Where the libation of 
penitence was offered, the earth was dedicated to the uses 
of an almshouse with chambered well. So strengthened, 
the Musalmans went into the fight and made great slaughter 
of valiant foes. 

The victory was followed by change in the personnel 
of Babar’s army, which had: long been wearying for home 
and murmuring against Hindistan. This was especially 
so amongst Humaytin’s Badakhshis, who were accustomed 
to short service of one or two months, and it was now 
almost sixteen since they had left even Kabul. Only 
promise of immediate leave to follow had induced some 
men to stay for this one fight, and they had been told that 
when it was over, all who desired it should have freedom to 
go. Many amirs had given ‘ stupid and unformed opinions’ 
against remaining in Hindistan at all, and down to the 
humblest followers these views had found acceptance. As 
has been said, nothing would persuade Babar’s closest 
friend to stay with him, although before his final decision 





been composed in Turki, they have been preserved in Tirki in the 
Persian translation. This may be an act of pious deference. The 
Memoirs were certainly altogether in Turki, but they were not 
addressed to individuals as were the letters. It is a fact of interest, 
and open to pleasant interpretation. 


1 


was acted on, his master had called a council, and had 
expressed himself with directness and vigour. 
‘I told them that empire and conquest could not exist 


without the material and means of war; that royalty and _ 


nobility could not exist without subjects and dependent 
provinces ; that by the labour of many years, after under- 
going great hardships, measuring many a toilsome journey, 
and raising various armies—after exposing myself and my 
troops to circumstances of great danger, to battle and 
bloodshed, by the Divine favour I had routed my formid- 
able enemy (Ibrahim), and achieved the conquest of 
numerous provinces and kingdoms which we at present 
held. And now, what force compels, what hardship obliges 
us, without visible cause, after having worn out our life in 
accomplishing the desired achievement, to abandon and fly 
from our conquests, and to retreat to Kabul with every 
symptom of disappointment and discomfiture? Let anyone 
who calls himself my friend never henceforward make 
such a proposal; but if there is any among you who 
cannot bring himself to stay, or to give up his purpose 
of return, let him depart. Having made this fair and 
reasonable proposal, the discontented were of necessity 
compelled, however unwillingly, to renounce their seditious 
purpose.’ 

After the Rajput defeat the time came for the promised 
leave, but there is no mention in the Memoirs of a general 
exodus. Humayin went with his Badakhshis, and also, as 
he seemed ‘uncomfortable,’ Mahdi' Khwaja, Khanzada’s 
husband. He, but not only he, had been through one hot 
season in the plains and another was approaching,—a 
discomposing fact, and one to wing the fancy and the feet 
to Kabul. He, however, left his son Jafar in his govern- 
ment of Etawa, and returned to India himself in 1528. 

Humaytn said farewell on April 16th, 1527, and betook 
himself to Dihli, where he broke open the treasury and 





1 There are difficulties in tracing the descent of this man, which are 
discussed in the Appendix. Cf. Index, s.n. Muhammad Mahdi. 


14 


stole its contents. If he had needed money to pay his 
men, his act might have taken different colour and have 
been leniently described ; but he had had lavish gifts in 
money and kind from Babar, and had been allowed to keep 
the great diamond which the Rani of Gualiar had given 
him as the price of family honour and which, there is good 
ground to believe, is the Koh-i-nuir. Treated as he had 
been, his act was a crime, and base and mean. Perhaps it 
may be set to the credit of the older Humayitn that the 
record of his theft has survived 1558-4 and his then perusal 
and annotation of his father’s Memoirs. By that time he 
had suffered many painful consequences of his own acts, 
and may have concurred with his father’s judgment on his 
younger self. Babar was extremely hurt by his unexpected 
conduct and reproached him severely. There was enough 
now known of Humayitin’s character to awaken doubt of his 
fitness to rule, and to need all his father’s great affection to 
veil and forgive. From Dihli he returned to Badakshan, 
and is next heard of in the autumn of 1528, when he 
announced the birth of his first-born son, Al-aman. 
Al-aman was the child of that Bega (Hajt) Begam of whom 
the histories all speak, when in 1539 she is captured by 
Shir Shah at Chausa. 

Together with the news of Al-aman’s birth came that of 
a marriage of Kamran with a daughter of Sultan ‘Ali 
Begchik. Babar sent congratulatory gifts to both sons in 
response; and he has included his covering letter to 
Humayun in his text. It is frank, fault-finding, and 
affectionate. It objects to the name given to the child; 
if urges action: ‘The world is his who exerts himself’; it 
objects to Humayin’s complaints of the remoteness of 
Badakhshan, and tells him that no bondage is like the 
bondage of kings, and that it ill becomes him to complain. 
It attacks Humayin’s spelling and composition, and ends 
this topic with words good to quote: ‘ You certainly do not 
excel in letter-writing; and you fail chiefly because you 
have too great a desire to show off your acquirements. 
For the future, write unaffectedly, clearly, and in plain 


15 


words, which will give less trouble to writer and reader.’ 
Some remarks about Kamran have a coming interest; 
Babar faintly praises him as a worthy and correct young 


man, and enjoins favour for him, without a hint of suspicion _ 


that it could ever be in Kamran’s power to show favour to 
Humayun. Humayin is also desired to make friends with 
Khwaja Kilan and with Sultan Wais of Kilab. He failed 
with the khwaja, who on Babar’s death joined the worthy 
and correct Kamran. Humayiin kept on better terms with 
Sultén Wais (Qibchaqg Mughal), and at a later date owed 
much to his daughter, the inimitable Haram (Khurram), 
who stands up in history bold, capable, pee and 
altogether strongly outlined. 

Something must now be set down about Babar’s third 
adult son, who was a younger full-brother of Kamran and 
is known in history by his sobriquet of ‘Askari, which 
indicates a camp as his birthplace. Neither his birth nor 
Kamran’s is mentioned in the Memoirs, as we now have 
them,—an omission which other sources allow to be 
explained by their falling in one of the gaps of the book. 
“Askari was born in 1516 (922H.), and during a period of 
storm and of camp life. His name first occurs in the 
Memoirs as having presents sent to him after the battle of 
Panipat, when he is classed with Hindal, as suited their 
ages of nine and seven, and they received various gifts, and 
not, like their two seniors, sums of money. In 1528 he 
was in Multan, but there is no entry of an appointment, 
perhaps because it would fall in the gap which extends 
from April 2nd to September 18th. On the latter day he 
was received, in home fashion, by his father in his 
private apartments at Agra, and then, having spent till 
December 2nd with him, he was furnished with munitions 
of war for a campaign in the eastern districts. Special 
injunctions were given to the officers to consult with him 
as to the conduct of affairs. The interest of these details is 
their relation to the boy of twelve. Few years were needed 
in those days to support military command. Humayin 
had gone to Badakhshan at eleven; Babar had been a 


16 


fighting king at twelve. Boy chiefs were common when 
fathers were so apt to die by violent means; so were baby 
figure-heads of armies such as that few-monthed Persian 
baby who (like an angel’s semblance on an ancient battle- 
ship) led his father’s army for Humayin’s help in 1544. 

On December 12th other signs of dignity were bestowed 
on the boy ‘Askari: not only a jewelled dagger, a belt, and 
royal dress of honour, but the insignia of high command, 
_ the standard, horse-tail, and kettle-drums; excellent horses, 
ten elephants, mules and camels, the equipage of a royal 
camp, and leave to hold a princely court and sit at the 
head of a hall of state. The small boy’s mind is clear 
to us about the horses, for where is the child of twelve 
whom they would not delight? But what was in it about 
the elephants? and how did he look when he inspected 
their bulky line ? 

He bade farewell to his father on the 21st,—the Emperor 
being in his bath, a statement which exhales the Hast,—and 
after this, though there are many details of his cam- 
paigning, nothing of living interest is set down in the 
Memoirs about him. In the future he was Kamran’s 
shadow, and displayed a loyalty to mother-blood which was 
natural under the difficulty of being loyal to Humayun, 
but which made him a Timirid foe to his house, who 
initiated nothing and walked always in the bad path 
marked out for him by the ‘ worthy and correct’ Kamran. 

Coming back from this excursion into the future, to the 
simple topic of Babar’s presents to his children, there can 
be mentioned a set which is quite delightful in its careful 
choice and appropriateness. It was sent to Kabul in 1528 
for Hindal, and consisted of a jewelled inkstand, a stool 
inlaid with mother-of-pearl, a short robe of Babar’s own, 
and an alphabet. What could be better for the royal 
schoolboy of ten ? 

In 1528 an order was issued which brought about an 
event of extreme importance to the ladies in Kabul,— 
namely, that they should migrate to Hindustan. There 
was delay in the execution of the royal command; and 


17 


having regard to the number of ladies, the difference of 
opinion as to the advisability of going at all, discussion as 
to the details of the journey, and also remembering that 
(as the facts about the migration come out in the Memoirs,) _ 
there would be many who thought their family interest 
might be better served by remaining in Kabul, it is not 
remarkable that there was delay in starting the cavalcade. 

The migration: was amply dictated to many of the party 
by Babar’s wish to see his own people again; but it is 
clear that the enforced levée en masse of the ladies was a 
result of considerations of policy and peace. The city was 
full of women who, by birth or marriage, were attached to 
various branches of the Timiurids, and there was conflict of 
aims and palpable friction. It may well be that Kamran’s 
government provoked unrest, because he was the son of a 
mother of less birth than were very many of the resident 
begams of Kabul. 

The Emperor was put in full possession of the state of 
affairs by a letter from Khwaja Kilan which reached him 
in camp on February 6th, 1528, and which was brought by 
a servant who, in addition to the written words, gave him 
all the news of Kabul by word of mouth. Babar replied to 
the khwaja on February 11th by that letter which those 
who know the time and writer rank amongst the truly 
interesting epistles of the world. The tenor of the khwaja’s 
own is clear from it, and in part reply the Emperor 
writes : | 

‘You take notice of the unsettled state of Kabul. I 
have considered the matter very attentively and with the 
best of my judgment, and have made up my mind that in 
a country where there are seven or eight chiefs, nothing 
regular or settled is to be looked for. I have therefore 
sent for my sisters and the ladies of my family into 
Hindustan, and, having resolved on making Kabul and all 
the neighbouring countries and districts part of the imperial 
domain, I have written fully on the subject to Humayun 
and Kamran. ... Immediately on receiving this letter 
you will, without loss of time, attend my sisters and the 

2 


18 


ladies of my family as far as the Nil-ab (Indus) ; so that, 
whatever impediments there may be to their leaving Kabul, 
they must, at all events, start out within a week after this 
arrives; for as a detachment has left Hindtstan and is 
waiting for them, any delay will expose it to difficulty, and 
the country, too, will suffer.’ 

Who were these seven or eight chiefs in Kabul? Not 
men! ‘The fighting chiefs were almost all in India; even 
Mahdi had rejoined the army before the date of this letter. 
Babar’s word ‘ sisters’ is a guiding light, and it does not 
altogether exclude the influence of the men who, though in 
Hindustan, were in touch with Kabul and its friction and 
intrigues. First of sisters was Khanzada, who had certainly 
a holding for her support ; and who had influence of birth 
and personal, as having sacrificed herself in her earlier 
marriage to secure Babar’s safety. She was now the wife — 
of a man, Mahdi Khwaja, who, if the story told of him 
by the author of the Tabaqdat is true even in gist, was 
such as to suggest him as a possible successor of Babar 
to the powerful and sensible Khalifa. There was, since 
her husband was with Babar and all great ladies had been 
left in Kabul, Shahr-banu, Khanzada’s half-sister, wife of 
Khalifa’s brother, Junaid Barlds, and mother of a son. 
There was also, it is probable, another of ‘Umar Shaikh’s 
daughters, Yadgar.! 

Besides: Babar’s sisters de facto, there were others of 
courtesy. Such was Sulaiman’s mother, whose anxieties 
for his future were, however, about to find happy end by 
his reinstatement in 15380 in his hereditary government of 
Badakhshan. ‘There were the families of three men of 
Timurid birth, grandsons of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra, 





1 Of the two others who are the complement in girls of his family, 
it is safe to say that they were absent. Mihr-banii was the apparently 
contented wife of an Uzbeg Sultan, and Ruqaiya, who, like Mihr-bani, 
had been spoil of battle and an Uzbeg wife, was recently dead. Babar 
says she died just when he was making the entries about her parentage 
at the beginning of the Memoirs. This can hardly have been before 


1528, because an appointment mentioned on the same page is recorded 
on its occurrence as made in 1528, 


19 


all of whom were in India, and all of whom were men of 
high pretension. They were,—Muhammad Sultan Mirza, 
the arch-rebel of the future; Qasim Husain Sultan Mirza, 
son of an Uzbeg father; and Muhammad-zaman Mirza, 
son of Husain’s son, Badi‘u-z-ziman. There werein Kabul 
the people of Yadgar-nasir also, Babar’s half-nephew. 
These instances will suffice to show the reality of the 
elements of unrest which conflicting family interests and 
jealousies might and did foment in Kabul; they do not 
include the many others furnished by Babar’s personal 
circle, and by his numerous and influential aunts. 

Two Timurid ladies, Fakhr-jahan and Khadija, both 
paternal aunts of the Emperor, had gone to Hindustan so 
early as November, 1527. With whom they went or why 
they went is not recorded. The first was the wife of a 
Tirmizi sayyid, member of a religious family with which 
royal alliance was frequent, and she would find relations of 
her husband in the army. The second, Khadija, has no 
man mentioned as her husband, an omission by Babar and 
Gul-badan which surprises, and which the chance word of 
another writer may easily fill up. Perhaps these aunts 
joined their nephew in response to his invitation of April, 
1526, that kinsfolk and friends would come and see pros- 
perity with him. They brought their children, and were 
met outside the city by Babar on November 28rd, and by 
him conducted in a lucky hour to their assigned palace! in 
Agra. ; 

Fakhr-jahan and Khadija stayed eleven months, and 
were bidden good-bye before their return journey to Kabul 
on September 20th, 1528. After all, Khadija did not go, 
having affairs of her own to detain her, and this delay 
allowed the Emperor to pay her another of the Friday 
calls which he habitually made, during the time of his 





1 Readers who are interested in the Ttrki and Persian texts of the 
Memoirs, will like to have attention drawn to the fact of there being a 
record of this episode in one of the fragments attached to Kehr’s. MS., 
and that this varies in detail from his text and from the Persian source 
of the Memoirs. 


2—2 


20 


occupation of Hindustan, on his elder kinswomen. On the 
17th three sisters of Fakhr-jahan and Khadija arrived in 
the suburbs and were welcomed. From all these Babar 
could hear the news and gossip of Kabul, and thus add to 
the impressions which led to his order for the begams to 
join him in India. 

Apropos of the aunts of frequent mention, it may be said 
that both Babar and Haidar convey the opinion that defer- 
ence to elder women was a permanent trait of their age and 
set. Comings and goings of aunts are set down; houses 
and incomes provided; advice is sought; troubles are 
carried to them for sympathy; they are ambassadors of 
peace; their nephews vie with one another as to who shall 
entertain them; in short, both the Tuzuk and the Tarikh 
indicate distinct deference to women of an elder generation. 

A good deal about the exodus of the ladies can be 
- gleaned from Babar and from our princess, who now comes 
on the scene in her small person of five or six. The order 
for it was given at latest in 1528; this is clear from the 
royal letter to the khwaja and from the fact that Maham 
started in January, 1529. Babar heard on March 22nd that 
all had really left Kabul, which news, taken with the arrival 
of the main cavalcade three months after her, suggests 
that Maham started first and travelled quickly, as being 
of a small company, and that the rest set off in detach-. 
ments, as they and their transport were ready. The whole 
party would get off between January 21st and the end of 
February; this can be surmised, because the letter of 
March 22nd would be about a month in reaching Babar. 
Most of the journey would be made by horse-litter, and 
some perhaps by palki with bearers. Men frequently 
dropped down the Kabul River on rafts, being thus able to 
do in twelve hours what ten marches covered; but one 
cannot suppose the ladies would make this adventurous 
journey, which was attended by risk even when people did 
not fall off the raft after potations, as some of Babar’s com- 
panions had done. Probably the road taken was that by 
But-khak (Dust of Idols) and Jagdalik, and by Jalalabad 


21 


and the Khaibar ; but there is no certainty, because there 
is no information. 

Gul-badan travelled with Maham in advance of her 
sisters, and thus had experiences all her own and a re- 
ception by her father unalloyed by numbers. Her liveli- 
ness would while away the tedium of the five months’ 
travel, and help to distract Maham’s sad thoughts from the 
loss of Fartq, her youngest born. Unfortunately, she sets 
down nothing about the journey until near its end. Letters 
between the Emperor and the travellers were frequent. 
One of the couriers, named Shirak (Little Lion), who was 
despatched by him on March 5th, carried not only letters 
to Maham, but was entrusted with a copy of the Memoirs 
which had been made to send to Samarqand.' 

On April 1st, and at Ghaziptr, Babar heard that the 

ladies had been met at the Indus on February 19th by 
their military escort under his master-of-horse, and by this 
amir convoyed to the Chanab. This might fitly be told of 
Maham’s party, for there are other records of covering the 
distance to the Indus in about a month. 
_ On the 22nd a servant of Maham brought letters to 
Arrah from her whom he had left at the Garden of Purity 
(Bagh-i-safa), near Pind-dadan Khan, and this is the last 
such entry. Maham reached Agra on June 27th, and Babar 
met her outside the city at midnight. 

Gul-badan gives amusing particulars of her own arrival, 
all of which she shall be left to tell. She followed Maham 
into Agra on the 28th, not having been allowed to travel 
with her through the previous night. Then she saw her 
father. Of him she can have kept only a dim memory, 
and it is likely enough she would stand in some awe of him 
and his deeds, but no word he has written suggests that a 





1 This is the earliest recorded copying of the Turki text. This 
Samarqand MS. and its descendants (if any) may have been written 
up subsequently; but the points of this early transmission to Central 
Asia of a copy and the variations of the Russian texts from those 
found in India, are worth consideration. There is an unexplored MS. 
in Bukhara of high reputation. 


22 


child needed to fear him, and she soon experienced ‘ happi- 
ness such that greater could not be imagined.’ Happy 
child! and happy father, too! who recovered such a clever 
and attractive little daughter. It is not only her book that 
lets us know she had a lively mind, but the fact of its .com- 
position at an age when wits are apt to be rusted by domestic 
peace. Only a light that was strong in childhood would 
have burned so long to guide her unaccustomed pen after 
half a century of life, and only a youth of happy thoughts 
and quick perceptions have buoyed her, still gay and 
vivacious, across the worries and troubles of Humayin’s 
time. 

There were pleasant days after the coming to Agra, 
when Babar took Maham, and the child also, to see his 
works at Dholpur and Sikri. He had always been a 
builder and a lover of a view, a maker of gardens and 
planter of trees. Much of the scenery of his new location 
displeased him; he thought the neighbourhood of Agra 
‘ugly and detestable’ and ‘repulsive and disgusting,’ 
words which do not now link well with that Agra which 
he and his line have made the goal of the pilgrim of beauty. 
It is difficult to go back in fancy to the city without a Taj, 
with no Sikundra near and with Sikri uncrowned. 

Dholpur and Sikri had much to show of work done by 
the orders of the Emperor,—‘ my royal father,’ as Gul- 
badan generally calls him, using the home word baba in- 
variably. At Sikri, amongst other buildings, was that in 
which she says he used to sit and write his book, 7.e., the 
Tuzuk. There, too, the great battle which had been 
fought in 1527 will not have been ignored to ears so sym- 
pathetic as Maham’s. Perhaps here the little girl first 
learnt dimly what it was to be a Ghazi, and to fight on the 
side of Heaven. She says that when these excursions had — 
been made, and three months after her own arrival had 
sped by, the begams, with Khanzada as their chief, came 
within meeting distance of the capital, and that the 
Emperor went out to welcome them. There is nothing 
of this in the Memoirs, which are silent after the arrival 


23 


of Maham as to the doings of the royal ladies. The reunion 
was soon to be clouded by anxieties and loss. 

A brief return in the story of Humaytn must be made 
here. In the summer of 1529 he heard in Badakhshan 
of his father’s failing health, and, without asking leave, 
set off for India. He passed through Kabul, and there, 
to Kamran’s surprise, met him, who had just come up 
from Ghazni. The two conferred, and persuaded the 
ten-years-old Hindal, who was under orders for Agra, 
to take up the government of Badakhshan. Humayun 
then continued his march, and arrived in Agra without 
announcement to his father. 

He came to the presence just when, by a coincidence 
which Maham may have helped to bring about, his parents 
were talking of him. It would be natural for the mother, 
who cannot have been ignorant of her son’s coming, to 
stir gentle thoughts of him and to warm his father’s heart 
towards him before they met, and by this‘to break the 
shock of the unpermitted absence from duty. 

Babar was greatly angered by the desertion, which in 
truth placed Badakhshan in difficulty by withdrawing both 
troops and control. Its consequences were important, and 
caused him profound regret. To stand fast across the 
mountains and to push out the royal holdings beyond the 
Oxus from the vantage-ground of Badakhshan was a 
cherished dream, and one which he had taken steps through 
both Humayun and Kamran to realize. He wished Huma- 
yun to return to his post, but the latter, while saying he 
must go if ordered, was not willing to leave his people 
again. Babar then asked Khalifa to go, but this request 
was evaded, and there is much to arouse surmise that 
Khalifa saw in it the act of someone who wished him 
absent from the scene of crisis now foreseen as near. In 
his objection to leave Agra, affection for his old master 
would be a natural factor; another was his own supreme 
influence, the sequel of his character and of Babar’s recent 
failure in health; and springing from his power was, 
perhaps the dominant factor of his objection to leave,—a 


24 


disposition to supplant Humayun in the succession by a 
ruler of less doubtful character. 

The fate of Badakhshan was decided by its bestowal on 
its hereditary chief, Sulaiman Mirza, Mirdn-shahi, now a 
boy of sixteen, while Humayin’s youthful locwm tenens was 
ordered to come to India. Humayun betook himself to the 
idle enjoyments of his jagir of Sambhal, and was there, in 
a few months, attacked by illness which threatened life and 
which led to the remarkable episode of Babavr’s self-sacrifice 
to save him. The narrative of this stands in all the 
histories and need not be repeated, but for the sake of 
making our princess’ details clear, it is as well to state 
what was the rite performed by Babar. 

There was and is in the East belief that if offering be 
made of the thing most precious to the suppliant, and if 
the offering be accepted, Heaven will give the life of a sick 
man in exchange. The rite observed is simple: first prayer 
of intercession is made; then the suppliant walks three 
times round the sick man’s bed. Of Babar’s sincerity 
there is no doubt; in mind and heart he gave himself; he 
felt conviction that, after the circuits, he had borne away 
the illness. Humayun was restored and Babar died,—a 
return from the gate of death and an entry there which 
might have occurred without Babar’s rite, but none the 
less was the self-sacrifice complete because he believed in 
its efficacy and was willing to die. 

His health worsened rapidly after this and he made 
ready to go. Marriages were arranged for Gul-rang and 
Gul-chihra; the amirs were addressed; Humayun was 
counselled and named to the succession. Babar died on 
December 26th, 1530. ‘Black fell the day,’ says his 
daughter; ‘we passed that ill-fated day each in a hidden 
corner.’ 

The question of Khalifa’s wish to supersede Humayun is 
of great interest. It is written of by Nizamu-d-din Ahmad, 
in the J'abaqat, who had the story he retails from his 
father, Muqim, an old retainer of the Court. Abw’l-fazl 
repeats the main statement, which is that Khalifa had had 


25 


thoughts of superseding Humayun by Muhammad Mahdi 
Khwaja, the husband of Khanzada Begam.! 

A few of the many points involved in Nizamu-d-din’s 
story find fitting entry here. Babar must have been long 
conscious of the fact that he was not so strong as before he 
faced the Indian climate; he did not send for Humayun ; 
he wished him to leave when he came unasked; he had 
‘Askari in the full dignity of a commander near him; as 
he lay dying, he was fretfully anxious for Hindal’s coming ; 
he and Khalifa were friends of many years’ testing; both 
knew the faults of Humayun; if Khalifa had planned to 
set the latter aside, it is likely that the thought was not 
altogether absent from the mind of Babar ; it is not credible 
that Khalifa should have regarded a supersession as 
practicable, if he had no acquaintance with the Emperor’s 
doubts as to Humayun, and without knowing that these 
were shared by others than his master and himself, for 
the nomination would be made by Babar and to his 
chiefs. 

Muhammad Mahdi Khwaja is one of those men about 
whose birth and descent particulars are looked for with the 
sure hope of success in the search. Yet nothing is said 
on the topic by Babar or by Gul-badan. When he first 
appears on the scene (in the Persian version, and presumably 
also in the Elphinstone text), he is not introduced, as it is 
customary for Babar to introduce, with some few words 
indicating family. This omission may be a result of 
forgetfulness bred of familiarity, or it may be, and most 
probably is, that he himself first met Muhammad Mahdi at 
a date which falls in one of the gaps of his book.’ 

Nizamu-d-din’s statements must have some corn of truth, 
and they imply that by birth, as well as by marriage and 





1 Neither of the sources thus describes Mahdi, but a somewhat full 
consideration of the several Mahdis of the time allows no other than 
the husband of Khanzada to be understood by the name Mahdi 
Khwaja of the two sources. Cf. Appendix, s.n. Muhammad Mahdi. 

* This omission, and perhaps some others, are straws pointing to the 
existence, at some time, of material which would fill the gaps. 


26 


wilitary rank, Mahdi was a man who, without outrage, 
might be raised still higher.. There are hints which make 
it seem probable that he was a Tirmizi sayyid and the son 
of a Timurid mother. The suggestion of Tirmizi parentage 
is supported by the burial of Abu’l-ma ali T7%rmizt in the 
place of interment of Mahdi and Khanzada. 

It has suggested itself to me as possible that Khalifa’s 
plan of superseding Humayun was meant to apply only to 
Hindustan, or at least to a part of Babar’s dominions. 
Abu-said had partitioned his lands amongst his sons; 
provinces so varied as Babar’s seem to demand division 
even more than his grandfather’s had done. We look back 
to Babar across Akbar’s Indian Empire, and may not give 
sufficient weight to the fact that Dibli and Agra were not 
the centre or the desired heart of Babar’s. He wanted 
Farghana and Samarqand and much more beyond the 
Oxus, and he had taken decisive steps towards securing 
his object through both his elder sons, and had given them 
charge and work of extension in those countries. Kabul 
was the true centre of his desired empire, and to force 
the Uzbegs back in widening circle was his persistent 
wish. 

If Mahdi or any other competent man had ruled in 
Dihli, by whatever tenure, this would not necessarily have 





1 It is singular that both Khalifa and Mahdi disappear from 
prominent place with the death of Babar. From Gul-badan it is 
known that the latter was living at the time of Hindal’s marriage 
with his sister Sultanam in 1537, because she names his gifts to the 
bridegroom. A good deal of search has failed to disclose other 
particulars of action or death of either man after Humayiin’s acces- 
sion. Khalifa’s brother, Junaid (like Mahdi, a brother-in-law of 
Babar), fought faithfully for Humayin till his recorded death. 
Khalifa was older than Junaid, and the impression given by the early 
part of the Memoirs is that he was older than Babar. ‘The difficulty 
of the obvious interpretation of the silence about Khalifa’s later life 
is, that he withdrew support from Mahdi’s promotion, and it is dis- 
tinctly said of Humayiin by Badayuni that he was made emperor by 
the concurrence of Khalifa. So there would be no ground for a con- 
spiracy of courtly silence about him. He was probably dead before 
the exile of the Timirids from India in 1540, because his wife Sultanam 
was with the royal household, and made her pilgrimage shortly after 
the exodus to Sind. 


27 


ruined Humayun, or have taken from him the lands most 
coveted by Babar. All Babar’s plans and orders were such 
as to keep Humayun beyond the Hindu-kush, and to take 
him across the Oxus. The dislike of the royal army to 
Hindustan was a large factor in the question of centralizing 
government there, and so too would be the temptations to 
indolence afforded by its climate and customs, to which it 
was easy to foresee from Humayun’s life in Sambhal that 
he would readily succumb. 

Kabul was made an imperial domain by Babar’s written 
command to both elder sons, and his own words leave one 
in doubt as to his further intentions about it. To whom 
Hindustan would have been given if Humayun had obeyed 
orders and had held fast in Badakhshan, there is nothing 
to show, but weight is due to the gist of the story of the 
supersession. Kamran declared that Kabul was given to 
his mother Gul-rukh, and Humayin gave it in fief to 
Kamran at his accession. There is mist over the scene 
from which only the accomplished facts emerge. Humaytin 
came to India; he was Maham’s son; she was there; 
Khalifa let Mahdi fall; Humayin’s personal charm reas- 
serted itself over Babar’s anger, and he became Emperor 
of Hindustan and all the imperial domains. 

Child though Gul-badan was at her father’s death, she 
must have been impressed by the events that preceded it: 
Alwar’s death; her own accident at Sikri; her father’s 
premonitions and dervish-moods; Humayin’s sudden 
arrival and the anger it caused; his illness and the dread 
for his life; her father’s awe-inspiring rite and its bewilder- 
ing success; her sisters’ marriages, which could not be 
joyful; the haunting suspicion of poison; the end and the 
blank,—all too much for so short a time in strange scenes 
and in a disabling climate. 

Following the death came the forty days of mourning, 
and of good works and gifts at the tomb in the Garden of 
Rest at Agra. Sikri furnished a part of the endowment 
for its readers and reciters, and Maham sent them food 
twice daily from her own estate. The tomb was put under 


28 


the guardianship of a man whom our begam calls Khwaja 
Muhammad ‘Ali ‘asas (night-guard), and who may be he 
that ‘never killed a sparrow,’ and may be Maham’s brother. 
If so, he will be heard of again under other and widely 
different circumstances in 1547. As is well known, Babar’s 
body was conveyed to Kabul, and there laid to rest in the 
spot chosen by himself. 


Section I].—Unpser HumAvytn. 


In Babar’s history the man holds the interest and lifts 
the eyes over his shortcomings to his excellence. No. 
character demanding admiration attracts interest to 
Humayun, but yet his story is one which it needs a master- 
hand to unfold. A Tolstoi could depict his faults and 
merits ; his qualities and defects rolled a tide of retribution 
over him and those bound to him as surely and visibly as 
it does over Anna Karénine and her associates. From the 
historic standpoint, Mr. Erskine has told the tale in a way 
to hold his readers, and it befits this humble introduction 
to build up only such framework as will support details, 
some of which concern the ladies of the time, and others 
of which may interest readers who are not Orientalists. 

In order to realize how fully the fate of the ladies was 
involved in that of the Emperor, it must be remembered 
that his occupation of Hindtstan was unrooted, military 
and the sport of war. When we in Britain have to lament 
a reverse of arms, we do it in safe homes and we brace 
ourselves to what will come next, in the familiar surround- 
ings of the daily tradesman, the usual postman, and the 
trivial comforts of the hearth. Even Colonials had a 
refuge under the flag at measurable distance from their 
outraged homes in 1899-1900. But when the Timurids 
were defeated in 1539-40, and driven from Agra and Dihli 
and Lahor, there was no refuge open to all. Their 
head, Humayin, had none; a brother took his last. 
Like the Israelites, he and his followers then wandered in 
deserts and hungered and thirsted; dwelt in strange lands, 


29 


pursued and attacked, exiled and humiliated. The course 
of events was less historic than biographical, was individual 
and not national. There were no nations behind Babar 
and Humayun; there were only ruling families who came 
and went as they could or could not get the upper hand of 
other houses; and there was the dumb mass whom the 
earth nourished, and labour of whom fed, in luxury of life 
and strength of alien arms, whatever dynasty had just 
struck hardest. 

An enumeration of the chief events of the downfall of 
Humayun and of his years of exile will give our required 
framework. He became Emperor in December, 1530. In 
the next year Kamran took possession of Lahodr and the 
Panjab, in addition to his grant of Kabul, and he was 
allowed to remain in possession of these wide and potential 
lands. In 1533 there were rebellions of the ‘ mirzas.’ By 
1535 Gujrat had been overrun, and in 1537 was lost. 
Years of indifference fostered the growth of Shir Shah 
Afghdn’s power, and there were campaigns against him in 
Bengal, which began well and ended ill. There was growing 
indignation against Humaytn’s character and private life, 
and this culminated in the attempt to set him aside for 
Hindal in 1589. Through months of indolence and folly, 
he dropped oil on his own descending wheels, and prac- 
tically abdicated the throne; finally, there were the 
crushing reverses of Chausa on June 27th, 1539, and of 
Kanauj on May 17th, 1540. Then came the flight of the 
Timurids to Lahor, and their exodus from the lands that 
had been theirs east of the Indus. 

Maham was spared the worst of these misfortunes ; she 
died before Hindal’s marriage, which Jauhar places in 
1537. Her son had certainly addicted himself to drugs 
before her death, but his worst lapses into sloth followed it, 
and it was after 1537 that the pace of his descent became 
rapid. Much can be learned from our princess of the 
reaction of outside events-on the inner circle, and she 
gives details which could only be gathered in that circle. 
This is particularly so as to Hindal’s rebellion and the 


30 


home conference about it, and about the murder in his 
name, but not by his act, of Humayutn’s favourite, Shaikh 
Bahlul. Gul-badan, like the good sister she was, makes 
excuses for her brother, and those who have not her bias of 
affection, can add others and stronger. Hindal was nineteen, 
a good and successful young general ; he was supported by 
men of rank and age, some of whom had come from Gaur, 
and had seen Humayun’s army perishing in that sink of 
fever and corruption, and Humayun buried within its walls. 
There was no ruler in Hindustan; Shir Shah was between 
Humayun and the capital. The ‘mirzas’ were lifting up 
their heads again, and a chief was needed. Hindal was 
perhaps always the best of Babar’s sons in character, and 
certainly so when Humayun had become the changeling of 
opium. He had the Friday prayer (khutba) read in his 
own name; and on his behalf, Nuru-d-din Muhammad, a 
son-in-law of Babar and grandson of Sultan Husain Baygqra, 
murdered Shaikh Bahlul. The motive of the crime appears 
to have been desire to place the death as an impassable 
barrier between the royal brothers. 

The news of Hindal’s rebellion stirred Humayun to move 
from Gaur. His march to Agra was broken off tragically 
by the rout at Chausa, where he lost 8,000 of his best 
Turki troops by sword or river. Here Mastma was 
widowed, and here a terrible blank was made in the royal 
household by the loss of several women. Bega’s (Haji 
Begam) capture is known to all the histories, and so, too, 
is her return to Humayun. Shir Shah promised safety to 
all women found in the camp, and there is no reason to 
doubt that he did his best for them. But there had 
been fighting round their tents before his guards arrived, 
and some of Humayun’s amirs had perished in trying 
to defend them. It came about that there were losses of 
women and of children as to whose fate no word was ever 
heard again. Amongst them was‘ Ayisha Baygra, the wife 
of Qasim Husain Sultan Mirza. The next name in our 
begam’s list. takes us far back. It is that of Bachaka, 
a head-woman-servant (khalifa), and one such and so 


31 


named had escaped from Samarqand with Babar’s mother 
in 1501. The one lost at Chausa had been a servant in 
Babar’s household, and may have been she of the memor- 


able siege. Next are named two children, a foster-child and_ 


Bega’s ‘Aqiga of six years old. Two of Humayun’s wives 
of low degree also disappeared. 

When Humayun had been rescued from the river by a 
lowly water-carrier, he made way to Agra, and there had 
a conversation with Gul-badan about the loss of “Aqiqa. 
The princess was then seventeen years old, and a comment 
of his, which she sets down, lets it be known that she is 
now a married woman. Humayun told her he did not 
recognise her at first, because when he went away with the 
army (1587) she wore the tdq, and now wears the lachak. 
The tdq is a cap, and the lachak,—a wife’s coiffure—is 
a kerchief folded crossways, tied under the chin by two 
corners, and capable of much more elaboration and orna- 
ment than this simple description would lead one to 
suppose. This is Gul-badan’s nearest approach to in- 
forming her readers of her marriage, and she never 
mentions her husband as such. He was her second 
cousin, Khizr Khwaja Khan, Chaghatai Mughal, and of the 
line of the Great Khans. His father was Aiman Khwaja, 
and his mother a cousin of Haidar Mirza Dughlat. One 
ancestor was that Yunas whose fate as a chief of nomads 
was in such entertaining contrast to his taste as a lover 
of cities and books. Khizr had many other noteworthy 
kinsfolk, but to tell of them would lead too far afield. It is 
useful, however, to say that Gul-rang and Gul-chihra had 
married two of his uncles, and that his brother Yasin 
(Hasan or Ais)-daulat, the Fair Sultan, became the hus- 
band of Kamran’s Habiba. He had two other brothers 
in India, namely, Mahdi and Mastd. Their father and 
one at least of them came from Kashghar to Agra just 
after the death of Babar. 

Shortly after this interview Humayun took the field 
against Shir Shah, and Kamran, deserting his post, left 
Agra and led off his 12,000 troopers towards Lahor. Under 


32 


his escort went an immense convoy of women and helpless 
people, and he wished to take Gul-badan also. She was 
extremely unwilling to go and only partially resigned her- 
self when she saw that it was Humaytn’s will. She 
bewailed herself as parting from those with whom she had 
grown up, and no uninitiated reader could guess that she 
was going with her father’s son. She was a clever and 
attractive girl whose society was welcome to all her 
brothers, but in Kamran’s wish to take her now there is 
something more. It is possible that he who liked her, 
thought of her safety; it is probable that, as he had 
attached two of her husband’s brothers, Yasin-daulat and 
Mahdi, and perhaps the third, Masud, he desired to have 
Khizr too. Gul-badan’s departure from the home circle 
was perhaps her first adventure into the foreign world as 
a married woman. By going when she did and under the 
escort of Kamran’s strong force, she was spared a terrible 
journey which her mother and the rest of the royal party 
made under care of Hindal, with foes in front and behind, 
and at great peril. 

There now followed that amazing battle at Kanauj, in 
which 40,000 men in armour fled, without a gun fired, before 
10,000. Here again, as at Chausa, the deaths in the river 
were appalling, and here again the Emperor was saved by 
a lowly man, Again the remnant made its way to Agra; 
but, says Haidar, ‘we made no tarry; broken and dispirited, 
in a state heart-rending to tell, we went on to Lahor.’ 
Their road took them to Sikri, of which the memories and 
witness to Babar’s genius for living must have rubbed salt 
into the wounds of their spirit. Many ladies had remained 
in Agra, and Humaytn spoke to Hindal of the difficulty of 
getting them safe to Lahor, and confessed that he had often 
regretted not killing ‘Aqiqa with his own hand. - Hindal 
combated the suggestion, born of defeat, that a mother and 
sisters should be killed, and himself fought his way through 
country folk and Afghans, and convoyed them safe to 
Lahor. 

Here was a mighty gathering of Timtrids and their 


33 


following, and five months slipped by in uncertain counsels 
and fruitless talk. The four brothers met often to discuss 
plans, and it.seems that the emptiness of this in practical 
result lay in what was in the mind of Kamran and made 
him object to every course proposed. He wished to make 
terms for himself with the daily approaching victor, and 
to keep Lahor and the Panjab; but if this could not be, 
he meant to hold fast to Kabul and keep Humayun out 
of it. The fief of Kabul had been granted to him by 
Humayun; Humayun therefore could resume it. That he 
would now do so was Kamran’s expectation; so, when 
Humayun proposed to go to Badakhshan, Kamran would 
not hear of it, because the road thither lay through Kabul, 
and once in that beloved city, it was highly improbable 
that Humayun would move further. 

On October 30th, 1540, something decisive had to be 
done, for Shir Shah had crossed the Biah and might 
appear at any hour. ‘It was like the Day of Resurrection,’ 
says our princess; the confusion was extreme, and, like 
the simile, impossible for us to realize. It has been said 
that 200,000 souls left Lahor in flight on that day; an 
overtax of all resources of transport. 

Happily for the fugitives, the Ravi was fordable, but the 
Chanab required boats and the Jehlam was in flood. Many 
episodes unfolded themselves in the duab of the Ravi and 
Chanab. Haidar Mirza took his departure for Kashmir, 
hoping to secure in it a royal retreat; Hindal and Yadgar- 
nasir deserted and went south for Multan; Humayun was 
urged to put further mischief out of Kamran’s power by ~ 
his death; he refused,—a refusal which would be upheld 
in the haram, ever faithful to the injunctions of Babar, 
and knowing these better than the real risks caused by 
Kamran’s disloyalty. Penetrating everything was the 
irritation aroused by Kamran’s opposition to the royal 
- march for Kabul,—irritation which diffused itself and barely 
missed a sequel of bloodshed. 

The depression and gloom of the men who were the 
responsible leaders of the fugitive mob must have been 

3 


34 


deep and painful; but what was in the minds of their 
dependents,—the ordinary troopers, the helpless women, 
the comfortless children, and the camp-followers ? 

There were many striking scenes in the lives of Babar 
and Humayun, but none more dramatic than that in which 
the latter’s flight through the Panjab ended. A little 
west of the Jhelam, at Khushab, the road runs through 
a ravine of an outlying spur of the Salt Range. Beyond 
this it forks, north-west for Kabul and south-west for Sind. 
Kamran asserted his intention to enter the defile first, 
perhaps with the object of closing the Kabul road. Hu- 
mayun insisted on his right to take precedence, and 
blows threatened between their followers. Mediation was 
made by Abu’l-baqa, the man who had led Babar to offer 
himself for his son in 1530. He directed Humayun’s 
attention to the superior force of Kamran, and he told 
Kamran that it was the right of Humayun to take prece- 
dence. In the end Humayun marched first and took 
the southern road. At the fork of the ways each com- 
mander and many a man must have made or confirmed 
his choice between the brothers. And so the mighty 
caravan split itself, and followed Kamran and ‘Askari or 
Humayun. 

With the Kabul section many women went to the safer 
asylum. They had no choice to make where the roads 
parted, but those of them who saw their litters turn south- 
wards and themselves carried by a strange road, of which 
they knew that it took them from the old home in Kabul, 
must have had some bitter feelings about their destiny. I 
believe Gul-badan went with Kamran. She does not say 
so, but it comes out with tolerable clearness incidentally. 
Her mother, Dil-dar, had gone with Hindal to Multan, and 
with her was Hamida-banu, Akbar’s mother to be. Khan- 
zada seems to have gone with Humayun, for her niece 
mentions her later as an ambassador from him in Sind to 
Qandahar. No other writer speaks of this embassy, I 
think; but most tell of her other, made later from Kabul 
to Qandahar in the service of peace between Kamran and 


35 


Humayun, after the latter had returned from his Persian 
exile (1545). 

Khizr is not mentioned as with Humayun in the desert 
wanderings, but he was in Qandahar with ‘Askari in 1545. 
On the occasion of her reunion with Humayun in Kabul, 
in 1545, Gul-badan says that there had been a ‘toil and 
moil of separation ’ lasting five years. The lustrum points 
to a farewell said at the Jhelam. One thing makes for her 
having gone with the royal party, and this is her lively 
account of what befell it; but she is equally lively about 
Persia; where she certainly did not go. She had excellent 
opportunity of hearing what went on in Sind because she 
met her mother again in 1548, after she had come to Kabul 
from Qandahar. She also met Hamida in 1545, and could 
hear from her not only about her wedding, concerning 
which she has such an excellent passage, but also about her 
visit to Persia. There was ample and easy opportunity for 
the two old companions to talk over the past and to refresh 
their memories when the book was being written in and 
after 1587 and when they were comfortably installed as the 
beloved and respected ‘Beneficent Ladies’ of Akbar. More- 
over, Gul-badan has a note of acknowledgment to Khwaja 
Kisik for help derived from his writings, as to the early part 
of the royal wanderings. There is therefore nothing to 
contradict the probability that she continued under Kamran’s 
protection from 1540, the date of her unwilling departure 
from Agra, till 1545, when Humayun took Kabul. 

During the lustrum in which she did not see Humayun, 
his adventures were too many and too remarkable for 
abbreviation in these pages. Mr. Erskine has told them 
with evident enjoyment, and Gul-badan supplements his 
narrative with some material he did not use; it may be 
interjected here that he had no knowledge of her book. For 
most of the period of the exile in Sind and Persia, Hamida 
was a good authority, and more than once Gul-badan has 
prefaced a statement with ‘Hamida-banu Begam says.’ 
She was one in the cruel desert march to Umarkot; it 
will have been from her that the princess heard that 

3—2 


36 


Akbar’s birthplace was a beautiful spot where food was 
very cheap; she was one of the little band which fled from 
Quetta; she shared the qualified hospitality of the Persian 
king, and, it should be said, reproduced only a sense of 
good treatment by him; and she came back to Qandahar 
with his auxiliary army. 

In Kabul Gul-badan did not want for old friends and 
kinswomen. She had her own home occupations and her 
children to look after; of these, though she names one 
only, Sa‘adat-yar, she may have had several; but there is 
no definite statement as to which of Khizr’s children were 
also hers. She was not unkindly treated by Kamran, as were 
the other royal ladies whom he turned out of their usual 
homes and exploited in purse. Indeed, he wished to regard 
her as one of his own family and to distinguish between 
her and her mother; but of this she would not hear. 

In 1548 she had again the society of Hindal who, after 
losing Qandahar to Kamran, came as a prisoner upon parole 
to Kabul and his mother’s house. The movements of 
Humayun were made known from Sind to Kabul with 
speed and completeness, and the news was acted on to 
Humayun’s great detriment. There were domestic reasons 
why Shah Husain Arghtin should not be well disposed to 
Humayun, besides the substantial one of the latter’s entry 
and long occupation of his country. Of the more intimate 
causes of ill-will one was inherited ; Babar had dispossessed 
the Arghuns from both Kabul and Qandahar, and not only 
so, but had given in marriage to his foster-brother Qasim 
an Arghun girl, Mah-chuchak, daughter of Muqim Mirza. 
This was a great offence, because it was a misalliance in 
Arghun eyes and because it was enforced and the bride was 
spoil of battle. The story of her anger and of her rebellion 
at her fate is delightfully told by Mr. Erskine, and to his. 
pages readers may be safely referred for the sequel of my 
brief allusion to it. 

When Qasim kika died, Mah-chichak married her cousin, 
Shah Husain, and she was with him ere. Humayun’s 
miserable stay in Sind. 


37 


Another cause of friction lay in the presence of a former 
wife of Husain with Humiaytn’s household. In 1524 
Flusain had allied himself with Khalifa’s family by marry- 
ing his daughter Gul-barg. As the fact adds to the— — 
domestic complication, it may be mentioned that at the 
same time [usain’s stepdaughter, Nahid, the child of 
Qasim and Mah-chuchak, married Khalifa’s son, Muhibb- 
‘ali. Husain and Gul-barg (Rose-leaf) did not get on well, 
and she left him after what Mir Ma‘sum calls two years of 
wedded life. She then, says the same author, went to India 
with Jannat-dshyant (Humayun) ‘previous to the /itrat.’ 
This last word is frequently used of the rout at Chausa in 
1539, but the next nearest catastrophe to which it would 
apply after 1524 is the death of Babar, because Gul-barg is 
named by Gul-badan in Humayun’s household shortly after 
his accession. She was with him in Sind in 1541 onwards, 
and so, too, was Sultanam,' who was perhaps her mother, 
and both were unlikely to make the best of Shah Husain to 
Humayun. 

In 1545 Kabul heard that Humayun was on his way back 
from Persia with the Shah’s army behind him. A first 
result of this was to bring the little Akbar within reach of 
Khanzada and to her charge. All the histories tell of his 
wintry journey from Qandahar taken with Bakhshi-bant, 
the one being under three and the other about four. Their 
coming adds a touch of tenderness to the historic Khanzada, 
who paces through the histories sad and wise and trusted. 
She kissed the baby feet and hands of Akbar, and declared 
they were the very hands and feet of Babar, and that he 
was like him altogether. Her first marriage with Shaibani , 
had been made to save Babar from captivity or death. She 
was divorced because suspected of leaning to his side when 
his interests conflicted with her husband’s, and she had 
been restored to him (1511) when she was about thirty- 





1 The presence of Sultanam here, and a royal permission allowed to 
her to go to Makka and take her daughter also, gives the impression 
that Khalifa is dead. 


38 


three years old.' To the reader’s fancy she wears a 
mourning garb; she is mentioned with deference, and is a 
dignified figure in the turmoil of her day. Her third 
marriage,—she was doubly widowed at Merv,—takes an 
impersonal colour, as an alliance which her age, story and 
loss of her only son make seem rather one contracted to 
confer honour and afford her a safe home, than on any 
ground of personal affection. She bore Mahdi no child; 
she adopted his sister Sultanam at the age of two, and 
reared her to become the wife of Hindal. 

By March 21st Humayun was besieging Qandahar, and 
he then sent an envoy to Kabul, who would be a welcome 
guest as teller of the events since Humayun had left Quetta 
in 1548. This was Bairam Khan Bahdrli, and with him 
went Bayazid biydt. Bairam saw Akbar, and could take 
back to Hamida news of his welfare; and also a number 
of princes who were kept in Kabul under Kamran’s eye. 
These were Hindal, Yadgar-nasir, some of the ‘ mirzas,’ 
Sulaiman, Haram and Ibrahim. 

Bairam spent six weeks waiting till Kamran should 
choose his course now that he knew his brother was the 
stronger; and when he left the city, he was accompanied by 
Khanzada, charged to mollify Humayun and smooth the 
way for “Askari when the latter should submit. She went 
into Qandahar, but her presence did not bring about the 
immediate surrender, and the weary siege carried on its 
burden of suffering. Many of the amirs of the defence 
began to slip away; the two Khizrs, Hazara and Cha- 
ghatai, dropped themselves over the wall. The first got 
away to the mountains with adventures which fit a High- 
land setting; the second sought Humayin and obtained 
forgiveness. 

@andahar was surrendered on September 3rd, and ‘Askari 
and his amirs came out with swords hung round their 





_ 1 The date of her return by Shah Isma‘il to Babar in 1511 falls 
in one of the long gaps (eleven years) of the Memoirs. This covers — 
also, it is probable, Babar’s first association with Mahdi and the 
latter’s marriage with Khanzada. 


39 


necks, and some having winding-sheets in their hands. 
He was forgiven, and a feast with wine and talk and music 
sped the night away. While ‘Askari was gay with the rest, 
someone laid before him his own letters to the Biluchi_ 
chiefs of whom Gul-badan tells, urging them to capture 
Humayun when he was in flight from Quetta. This was 
Humayun’s revenge. 

Meantime Kamran was in singular isolation in Kabul. 
He heard of the fall of Qandahar, of the move of the royal 
army for Kabul, of the death of the travel-worn Khanzada, 
and of the escape of some of his princely détenus. He 
was depressed and irritable. He sent troops out to meet 
Humayun, but there was no fighting, and he fled by way 
of Ghazni to Sind. Then came the end of the ‘ toil and 
moil’ of separation, and Gul-badan met her brother again 
after five years, on November 15th, 1545. For awhile 
there was peace and festivity in Kabul. Hamida followed 
the army in the spring; she had now a second child, a 
girl, born in Persia, and she took possession once more of 
her first-born. ‘Humayun wished to see if Akbar, whom 
his mother had had to desert at Quetta when he was 
fourteen months old, would remember her now. He had 
him taken into a room in which a number of ladies had 
assembled and seated him on the masnad. The child 
recognized [Hamida, and made his way to her arms. 
Abuw’l-fazl, who tells the story, gives all the credit of the 
recognition to the boy; but to those not dazzled by the 
light in which Akbar lived for his historian, it seems 
extremely probable that the child had some help from the 
smile which he had known as one of the first happy things 
of life. 

In the spring, too, Humayun set out on a campaign in 
Badakhshan. He sent word back to the governor of Kabul, 
Uncle Muhammad ‘Ali, that he was to strangle Yadgar- 
nasir, who had been tried and condemned to death for 
treachery. The khwaja declined the office. ‘How should 
I kill the mirza, I who have never killed a sparrow?’ This 
uncle (fayhaz) seems a mild man for his post. Another 


40 


executioner was found, and the mirza ‘ was relieved of the 
pains of existence.’ 

Humayun took ‘Askari with him as a precautionary 
measure. Of the ladies, Mah-chuchak went, and in atten- 
dance, Bibi Fatima, the chief armed woman of his haram 
and mother of Zuhra, whom Hamida’s brother was to 
marry and murder. Near Khishm Humayun fell alarm- 
ingly ill and lay unconscious for four days. He had nurses 
at hand whose excellence is attested by the annals, and it 
adds life to the scene to know that the long watch over the 
unconscious man was broken by his opening his eyes just 
when Mah-chuchak was dropping pomegranate-juice into 
his mouth. He recovered, but it was a perilous time for 
him and his supremacy, and had a bad sequel. — 

News of the illness went to Sind, and Kamran, reinforced 
by his father-in-law, Husain, hurried up and seized Kabul. 
Winter was at its depth on the passes, and the amirs with 
the royal force were anxious to get back to protect their 
families. They had premonitions that he would take the 
city again, and many slipped away in small parties and 
went to Kabul, where they found all their anticipations and 
dread justified. It does not seem right to stigmatize their 
leaving Humayun as traitorous; they had their own people 
to save, and this might be done by slight show of submis- 
sion to Kamran. No one can consider Humayun a man who 
had claim to fidelity when the lives and honour of wives and 
children were in the balance. Indeed, to have left Kabul 
under the charge of Muhammad ‘Ali was to court disaster, 
and to make reasonable a good deal of independence of 
action in those whose unarmed people he could not protect. 

Every fear of the amirs was justified. On his northward 
march Kamran passed through Ghazni, where Zahid Beg 
was governor. He it was who when offered a Bengal 
appointment in 1538, had asked Humayun if he could not 
find another place to kill him in. He had not waited for 
a reply, but had left Bengal, and helped Hindal to rebel 
in Agra. Kamran now answered his question in Ghazni, 
and after this murder hurried off towards Kabul. ‘It was 


41 


morning, and the Kabulis were off their guard, and grass- 
cutters and water-carriers were going in and out as usual. 
Mirza Kamran went in with all these common people.’ 
So speaks the princess. The gentle-hearted governor was—_— 
at the hamadm, and was brought before Kamran, without 
time given to dress, and there and then sabred. The list 
of other cruelties and murders is too terrible reading for 
these pages, and the ensuing siege was full of barbarous 
acts. Humayun crossed the passes as soon as it was 
practicable, and sat down to take the city. When Kamran 
saw at length that he could not hold it, he escaped through 
a hole fashioned in the wall, got through the trenches and 
away to the mountains. Some say Hindal let him pass 
the royal lines; others that Haji Muhammad Khan kitka 
overtook him later (so destitute that he was being carried 
by a man), and that Kamran appealed to their milk- 
brotherhood and was allowed to go free. He then joined 
his hereditary foes, the Uzbegs. 

In 1548 Humayun entered upon a campaign in Badakh- 
shan which yielded interesting personal matters, such as 
this rivulet of the great stream of affairs can convey. He 
left Kabul on June 12th, and Hamida bore him company 
with Akbar as far as Gul-bihar. As governor this time a 
soldier, and a man enraged against Kamran, was left in 
charge of Kabul. The campaign culminated in the capture 
of Taliqan, which was made over on August 17th by 
Kamran, who was allowed to go to the refuge of all 
whose presence was undesired at home, Makka. Piety 
had no part in Kamran’s intention to betake himself to the 
holy city, and when he had heard, with incredulous ears, 
that Humayun was meting out mercy without justice to the 
revolted amirs he had captured, he took heart and himself 
asked forgiveness. It is almost incredible, and would be 
quite so if one did not know Humayun, that he was 
received with kettle-drums, trumpets, tears and pardon. 
Certainly Humayun never deprived himself of the luxury 
of tears and the loose rein on his feelings. So wonderful 
was the following scene that Mr. Erskine’s words shall tell 


42, 


it: ‘When Kamran approached the Emperor, who was 
sitting in state in the pavilion of public audience, he took 
a whip from the girdle of Munim Khan, who stood by, and 
passing it round his neck, presented himself as a criminal. 
‘* Alas, alas !’’ exclaimed the Emperor, “ there is no need 
of this; throw it away.’”’ The mirza made three obeisances, 
according to the usual etiquette of the Court, after which 
the Emperor gave him the formal embrace and commanded 
him to be seated. Kamran began to make excuses for his 
past conduct and to express his regret. ‘‘ What is past is 
past,’ said the Emperor. ‘‘ Thus far we have conformed 
to ceremony; let us now meet as brothers.” They then 
rose and clasped each other to their breasts in the most 
affectionate manner, and both burst into tears, sobbing 
aloud, so as to affect all present. Humayun, on resuming 
his seat, desired his brother to sit next to him on the left, ' 
the place of honour, adding kindly in Turki, the language 
of the family, ‘‘ Sit close to me.” A cup of sherbet was 
brought, of which the Emperor, having drunk one half, 
handed it to his brother, who drank the other. A grand 
entertainment followed, at which the four brothers (also 
Sulaiman), who now met for the first time after a long 
separation, sat on the same carpet and dined, or, to use 
the words of the historian, ate salt together. The festival 
was prolonged for two days in the midst of universal 
rejoicing. As Kamran, from the rapidity and hurried 
nature of his return, had left his tents behind him on 
the road, the Emperor ordered a set to be pitched close 
to his own, and, at his desire, consented to ‘Askari’s going 
to stay with him.’ 

For this historic feast Gul-badan has provided a hors 
@euvre in shape of a story of improper conduct in 
Sulaiman which, if it expressed derision, as her vague 
wording does not forbid to be read, was fully justified by 
both what had been and what was to come. It is a very 
funny little tale, and readers are commended to it. 

To tears and professions were added lands and freedom. 
Kamran received Kulab, where Haram Begam’s father had 


43. 


once ruled for Babar and Humayun. He was now dead, 
and his son, Chakr “Ali, was left with Kamran there. The 
mirza was not pleased with his fief. ‘What!’ he exclaimed 
to the bearer of the deed of grant, ‘have I not been king _ 
of Kabul and Badakhshan? Kulab is a mere district of 
Badakhshan. How can I serve in it?’ The bearer 
observed that he had heard Kamran was wise, and begged 
permission to remind him that the wonder was he had 
received anything at all. ‘Askari, too, was given a fief, 
and then, leaving them neighbours and at large, Humayun 
went back to Kabul in October, 1548. 

A campaign was planned for 1549 against the Uzbegs 
and Balkh. This was done despite marked instability in 
the royal following. Instability or, in a plainer word, 
desertion, was an accident to which Humayun was pecu- 
liarly liable. One cause of it is more interesting than the 
common one of personal gain, because it is rooted in 
theological bias. Humaytn’s coquetry with Shiism in 
Persia is one of the most entertaining of the episodes of 
his sojourn there, and it had consequences in arousing 
distrust of him, which cropped up from time to time. 
Babar himself had lost ground because of his tolerance to 
variety of faith. But to this, both in the father and still 
more in the son, were added, as causes of desertion, the flux 
and reflux of weak government which forbid men to know 
who will keep the upper hand and have power to oppress. 

To return to the Balkh campaign: spring was waited 
for and there was delay for men. Spring came, and the 
minds’of the ladies turned to thoughts of excursions out of 
town. They remarked more than once to Humayun that 
the riwaj would be coming up in the hills. This is a 
plant of subacid flavour which some say is like sorrel and 
some like rhubarb. It was, at least, a plant that people 
made excursions to eat, much as others go blackberrying. 
To these hints for change, the royal reply was that the 
army was going out; that it would pass by the Koh-i- 
daman (which is renowned for its riwaj); and that the 
ladies should go too. Gul-badan must not be deprived of 


44 


her story of the picnic, which illuminates the domestic 
ways of the court. The ladies went so far as to see the 
waterfall at Farza, and perhaps even to Istalif, twenty 
miles north of Kabul, and then returned. 

There had been bad omens for the start and there 
followed plenty of bad news from the front to fix attention 
on them. Kamran broke his promise to come to Humayun’s 
help. Gul-chihra’s second husband, an Uzbeg prince, ran 
away when he came to know that the army was directed 
against his people. There was an extraordinary retreat 
without an enemy, and of which the cause seems to have 
been fear that, as Kamran was not there, he was oppressing 
Kabul. Humayun was left almost alone, and the Uzbegs 
attacked and killed many fugitives. His horse was 
wounded and the whole affair was a fiasco. After all, too, 
when Kabul was reached, there had been no sign of 
Kamran. 

It was the expected that Kamran should not keep his 
word, but perhaps the unexpected was behind his conduct 
on the occasion of the Balkh campaign. Sulaiman and 
Ibrahim were with Humayun, and their presence might 
well have kept him away, for Gul-badan tells of an in- 
cident in which the three men had part and which did 
not make them good company for one another. It is a 
bit of scandal to which Haram adds salt and vitality. It 
is repeated here because some little points do not quite 
stand clear in the begam’s wording. While Kamran was 
in Kulab—.e., his last holding,—someone, who from her 
name of Tarkhan Begam must have been a woman of 
good birth, advised him to make love to Haram Begam. 
Good, she said, would come of it. So Kamran sent a 
go-between with a letter and a kerchief to Haram, who, 
furiously angry, at once summoned husband and son 
from wherever they were away from home, and told them 
of the advances made to her. She railed at Sulaiman, 
saying that it was clear he was thought a coward, and 
further observed that Kamran feared neither her nor 
her son. Much was packed in the pronoun here; there 


45 


was ground to fear the energetic and resolute woman who 
had the army of Badakhshan at her disposal. She was 
a forceful person and had the go-between torn to pieces. 


Kamran was audacious, and his advances look the moreso. _ 


that Haram’s sister was his wife; but they may have been 
made rather to the charms of her army than to those of its 
commandante. 

The events of 1550 sum up in Jauhar’s words: ‘ Mirza 
Kamran wandered about the country with bad intentions.’ 
In his course he surprised Humayun in the Qibchaq defile, 
and an engagement took place which was attended by great 
loss of life. It was witnessed by Kamran’s wives and 
daughters from a commanding height. Bayazid mentions 
that the ladies wore turbans (dastdr-bastt), a detail which 
may have been suggested by the great heat of the weather. 
Why the women were on the scene is perhaps explained 
by a similar record in the Memoirs which concerns a wife 
of Sultan Husain Bdayqrd. Shahr-banu, a daughter of 
Sultan Abu-said Mirza, was, with Husain’s other wives, 
present at a battle between her husband and her brother, 
Mahmud Mirza. She did not, as the other ladies did, leave 
her litter and mount a horse, so as to be ready for flight if 
necessary, but trusting to her brother, in the case of her 
husband’s defeat, remained comfortably in her litter while 
the fight went on. ‘This dispassionate composure so much 
offended Husain that he divorced her. Perhaps Kamran’s 
family, too, had prepared for whatever was to be their fate 
by protecting themselves against the sun and by being 
ready to mount. 

In this encounter Humayun was badly wounded. Gul- 
badan was able to hear the details of the misadventure, 
because Khizr Khwaja was with her brother and, it may 
be said, fighting against his own, Yasin-daulat. Khizr 
and Mir Sayyid Birka T’trmizi helped to hold the wounded 
man up on an ambling pony when he could not sit his 
horse, and so they led him out of the fray, sustaining his 
courage as they went by tales of other princes who had 
come through plights as bad. ‘The wound was on the head, 


46 


and was like one of Babar’s in that it was given through 
a covering turban and this was uninjured. The pain was 
great and caused faintness. Humayian took off his quilted 
coat and gave it to a servant. The man finding its weight 
an encumbrance, left it lying; it was taken to Kamran, 
who posted off with it to Kabul, showed it as evidence of 
death, and once more took possession of the unfortunate 
city. 

Jauhar has quaint stories of the destitution in which 
Humaytin now was, with his camp equipage lost and 
deprived of all necessaries. He was helped along through 
the night, cold and weakened, and in the morning was 
placed in safety by the arrival of a body of reliable troopers 
under Haji Muhammad kika. He warmed himself in the 
sun, washed his wound, said his prayer kneeling on a 
scarlet stool, and borrowed a coat from a servant to replace 
his own, which was blood-stained. Then came an old 
woman of the place and offered him a pair of silk trousers, 
that he might discard his blood-stained ones. He accepted, 
while saying they were not fit for a man’s wear, and 
remitted her taxes for life. This was drawing well in 
anticipation of the time when his account in those regions 
would stand to his credit. 

It is said that while he sat with his face still to the gibla 
one of his followers, Sultan Muhammad qardwal, performed 
again for him the rite his father had observed, and expressed 
his willingness to die for him. Humayun spoke reassuring 
words and comforted his faithful sacrifice. 

For nearly three months Kabul believed Humayin dead. 
These words cover much feeling, sad and joyful; but there 
is no one to tell the truth and say whether it was thought 
by some to offer better hope of peace that Humayun should 
be dead. There was always a large following of powerful 
officers ready to join Kamran, and one cannot suppose their 
changes in allegiance mere folly and fickleness. But no 
courtly author has told Kamran’s side of the whole matter, 
nor his view of his own position. 

With Kabul Akbar came again into his uncle's hands. 


47 


He was kept safe through all the vicissitudes of his father’s 
career, and was well cared for both by Kamran and by 
“Askari. It has been said that on one occasion Kamran 
exposed him on the battlements of Kabul to his father’s _ 
cuns, and this charge finds support from our princess. She 
however, it may be observed, makes no mention of the act 
attributed by some writers to Maham anaga, of interposing 
her own body to shield the child; indeed, she never once 
mentions this latterly influential woman. But this incident 
notwithstanding, it must be admitted that the boy was well 
treated. ‘Askari’s wife, who took charge of him after his 
capture at Quetta, is said to have been most kind to him. 
He was entrusted by Kamran to Khanzada, itself an act of 
surety and kindness. Again and again he fell into his 
uncle’s hands when Kamran was exasperated by foiled 
attempts to keep Kabul, and yet he survived. Kamran 
had a son; it would have surprised no one to learn that, 
as complement to his effort to oust Humayun from his 
higher place, he had killed Akbar to give his own son 
more chance. In this there is what fixes attention in the 
same way that it is fixed by Gul-badan’s record of Kamran’s 
anxiety to obtain from the elder ladies of his house 
sanction to have the khufba read in his name. It was 
in his power to have himself proclaimed ruler in Kabul, 
but he discussed his wish to be so proclaimed with the 
other members of the royal family before he did it, and 
the discussion was prolonged, and referred from Dil-dar to 
the greatest of the ladies, Khanzada. In both these points 

there is something which, if better known, might mitigate 
the sweeping judgment usually passed upon Kamran as 
altogether wrong in all his doings. 

Humayun spent some time in Ander-ab while his wound 
was healing and his army gathering, and here Haram 
comes again upon the scene. Where Sulaiman and Ibrahim 
were, is not quite clear, but it was to Haram a message went 
asking her for the army of Badakhshan. It was to come 
as quickly as possible, and fully equipped. It took the 
energetic woman only a few days to put some thousands of 


48 


men in the field. It was she, says our princess, who did it 
all, took thought, and overlooked everything. Then she 
led the men to ‘the pass, —amongst so many possible, one 
cannot fix on which,—and having done her work, went 
home. It seems probable that Sulaiman and Ibrahim were 
already with Humayun, and that Haram despatched a 
supplementary force. The battle in which it was to engage 
was that important fight at Ushtur-gram which Humayun 
tried hard to prevent by previous mediation, and which 
was forced on by Kamran’s chief officer, Qaracha Khan. 

There was much previous discussion as to terms of peace, 
but Kamran and Qaracha would have nothing less than 
Kabul. A second embassy offered alliance of the ‘ unique 
pearl of the khildfat,’ Akbar, with the mirza’s ‘dear 
daughter’ (who may be ‘Ayisha), and that Kabul should 
be theirs ; and suggested that Humayun and Kamran should 
join forces and again attack Hindustan. All came to 
nothing, because Qaracha cried, and enforced his cry, ‘ Our 
heads or Kabul.’ The battle that followed was a complete 
success for the royal arms, and to add to its good results, 
Akbar, of whose safety there had been doubt, was brought 
to Humayun’s camp. His father vowed charitable gifts 
for his restoration, and also that he would never part from 
him again. 

A pleasant chance befell Humayun on the stricken field, 
for when he had claimed, as his share of booty, two 
driverless camels, he found in their loads his own books 
which he had lost at the Qibchaq defile. Many would be 
MSS. of the Persian poets; Babar knew these well and 
often quotes the Gulistan; and Humayun was too much of 
a dilettante and verse-lover not to have made himself 
familiar with their round. 

Happily the tale of the doings of Kamran is drawing to 
a close. He made a night attack, by which Hindal lost his 
life, on the royal forces on November 20th, 1551; sued 
for help in vain from Salim Shah, the Emperor of 
Hindustan; from Adam Ghakkar, and was surrendered by 
him to Humayun; was blinded by the insistence of the 


49 


amirs on August 17, 1553, and allowed to go to Makka. 
He was accompanied, as all the writers tell, by his Arghun 
wife Mah-chuchak, and by her equal in compassion, a 


servant of Humayun, Chilma Beg. He made the haj four _ 


times and he died on October 5th, 1557. Mah-chtchak sur- 
vived him seven months. She only of his wives is com- 
memorated as accompanying him to Makka, but I see no 
reason why others may not also be accepted as equally 
faithful. Her father opposed her going, and she roundly 
upheld her view of her duty and has been taken into the 
texture of history, but her co-wives may have gone un- 
opposed and unpraised. How interesting Kamran might 
have made a book of Memoirs in which he set down his 
life from his own point of view, his motives, ambitions, 
opinions of right and wrong, and above all, if he had spoken 
his inner mind about the religious duties he was enabled 
to perform before death, through his defeat and mutilation ! 
We do not know all the truth about him ; certain crimes, of 
murder and of treachery after promise given, could never be 
palliated, but in the matter of possession of Kabul there 
may be much brought forward which would place him 
rather in the position of the defender of rights than their 
assailant. He had no courtly chronicler, and has borne 
the blame of much that could plausibly be traced back to 
Humaytn’s own defects and their outcome of opportunity. — 

To end the story of the faithful brothers ;— Askari too 
received leave to go to Makka from Badakshan in 1551; he 
died between that city and Damascus in 1558. Both he and 
Kamran thus lived long enough to see their house triumph 
again in India and their weary thwartings of its elder 
branch set at naught by the firmer hands of Akbar’s chiefs. 
Of “Askari one clear characteristic only comes out: he was 
true to the blood-tie with his mother’s son and own senior, 
Kamran. 

A little return must now be made, in order to bring up 
the tale of home events to the date of those military. In 
1551 the first marriage of the younger generation was 
arranged by the betrothal of Bakhshi-banut to Ibrahim, son 

4 


50 


of Haram. The Badakhshi trio had certainly deserved 
well of Humaytn and, while doing the best they could to 
strengthen their own position, had given him efficient 
help. It is good to tell all that is known of Haram. She 
seems to have had several daughters who played a part in 
public events as seals of alliance. When Humayun had 
passed a short time of repose in Kabul after his victory of 
Ushtur-gram, he sent to Haram to ask Shahzada Khanam, 
one of these girls, in marriage for himself. His envoys 
were two persons whom Haram did not consider worthy of 
their office. They were members of the royal household, 
and trusted members too, for one was Khwaja Jalalu-d-din 
Mahmud, mir samdan,t who, on Akbar’s accession, was 
made commander of 2,500; and the other was Bibi Fatima, 
whom we know as having helped to nurse Humayun in his 
illness of 1546. 

Haram, the dominant partner in the command of 
Badakhshan, mother of a girl in whose veins was. reputed 
to flow the blood of Alexander and of Timur, daughter of a 
tribal chief, and conscious of intrinsic claim to deference, 
inquired of the two lowly messengers why no begam or lady 
(aghacha) had come to prefer the royal request. She must 
have known that Humayun could not mean to affront 
her ; he had just given his daughter to her son and had 
testified gratitude for help in substantial ways to Sulaiman 
at the same time. She allowed herself to be mollified on 
condition that he himself should come to fetch his bride. 
The wedding does not seem to have taken place and the 
alliance was handed on to the next generation, in which, 
besides Ibrahim’s, there was a betrothal of Muhammad 
Hakim to a daughter of Haram. 

While speaking of Haram and the alliances of her 
family with the royal house, there may be named a high- 
handed act about another quasi-royal marriage. One of 





1 This title is sometimes rendered ‘butler,’ but this is misleading, 
and a word not linked in English with intoxicants would be better. 
Jalalu-d-din it was who led Humayiin to give up the use of drugs,. 
unfortunately late in life, by a gentle and forcible reproach. 


51 


Kamran’s wives was Muhtarima Khanam Chaghatdi, and 
on his death Sulaiman wished to marry her. Of her as 
co-wife, Haram would not hear, and contrived to make her 
a daughter-in-law by marrying her to Ibrahim. —~ 

The death of Hindal in the night attack of Kamran, on 
November 20th, 1551, was a heavy blow to Gul-badan. 
She writes of it with feeling, and casts light on the question 
of rank in the affections of a Musalman wife. She asks 
why her son or her husband was not killed rather than her 
brother. Perhaps she spoke out of feeling born of the fact 
that no dead father’s son can be replaced, and from the 
deeps of family affection. Dutiful and admirable as were 
many of the wives of this time, the tie between the husband 
and a wife can never be so close as it is where the husband’s 
affection is never a divisible factor in the household. Gul- 
badan shows that Musalmani affection centred on those of 
the same blood. 

The royal ladies must have felt it hard when, after 
having mourned Humayun through Kamran for nearly 
three months, Hindal was killed. This happened near 
Khizr Khwaja’s fief of Jui-shahi, which explains why the 
body was sent there for burial and entrusted to the khwaja. 
It was removed later to Kabul and laid at Babar’s feet. 
Hindal was thirty-two years old, and left one daughter, 
Ruqaiya, who became the first wife of Akbar and survived 
him, a childless woman, to the age of eighty-four. 

Unfortunately for her readers, our begam’s book ends 
abruptly (just after she has mentioned the blinding of 
Kamran,) in the only MS. of which we have knowledge, i.e., 
that belonging to the British Museum. The missing pages 
are a real loss. The narrative breaks off some three years 
before Akbar’s accession, and for the future the best 
authority on our topics is silent. There is no occurrence of 
her own name in the histories until she goes to India in 
the first year of Akbar. Much of supreme importance 
happened to the royal family in the interval, and this 
makes regret the keener for the defective MS. 

Set free from the burden of his brothers, Humayun 

41—2 


52 


determined, in 1554, to try his fortune again in Hindustan. 
He left Kabul on November 15th,—a date so near that 
of Babar’s start in 1525 that it looks as if both obeyed 
the same omen of the heavens,—and with Akbar dropped 
comfortably down the river from Jalalabad to Peshawar. 
The course of his advance beyond the Indus can be followed 
in Mr. Erskine’s pages, and need not be repeated here. 
He was proclaimed Emperor in Dihli on July 23rd, 1555. 
A little-known episode of the time is the visit to India and 
the court of Sidi‘ Ali Reis, a Turkish admiral of Sulaiman 
the Great, who by the exigencies of war and weather 
found himself obliged to travel with a few officers and fifty 
sailors from Surat to Lahor and thence across all the wide 
intervening lands to Turkey. He was welcomed by 
Musalmans for his master’s sake, and he was offered 
appointments in India, all of which he refused. He was 
received with great honour by Shah Husain Arghin, of 
whom he says that he had then reigned forty years, and 
had become so invalided during the last five that he could 
not sit his horse and used only boats for travel. Else- 
where it is said of Shah Husain that he was subject to 
fever of such kind that he could live only on the river, and 
that he used to spend his time in going up and down from 
one extremity to the other of his territory in search of 
ease and health. Probably this is a detail of the admiral’s 
remark. He heard of Mah-chuchak (wife of Husain), 
whom he calls Haji Begam, as prisoner of ‘Isa Tarkhan, 
and of her return to Husain. He heard, too, something 
which is not supported by other writers, namely, that she 
poisoned Husain, and that he died in consequence ten days 
after she rejoined him. The improbability of this story is 
shown by the fact that later on she conveyed Husain’s 
body to Makka for interment, an act which would be 
incredible if the accusation of murder were true. Much 
that is interesting is told of the journey to the first place 








1 «Travels and Adventures of Sidi ‘Ali Reis’; Vambéry; Luzac 
and Co., 1899. 


58 


where Sidi ‘Ali’s route brought him into contact with Hu- 
mayun’s people, z.e., Lahor. He arrived early in August, 
shortly after the Restoration (July 93rd), and there awaited 
royal orders, because the governor would not let him go on— 
until the Emperor had seen him. When one tries to 
picture one’s self without telegrams or newspapers, one 
judges that a kindly-disposed amir would endeavour to 
forward everyone who could tell a tale for the entertain- 
ment of the court. Humayun sent for the admiral, and 
had him received, in the first half of October,! outside Dihli 
by Bairam Khdn-i-khandn, other great amirs, 1,000 men, 
and 400 elephants. He dined with the Khdn-i-khandn, and 
was then introduced to the presence. - 

As was natural, the Emperor wished to keep his guest at 
court permanently, if possible, and if not this, then long 
enough to ‘calculate solar and lunar eclipses, their degree 
of latitude and exact date, and to help the court astrologers 
to study the sun’s course and the points of the equator.’ 
What fastened interest on the Ottoman was that he learned 
to write verses in Chaghatai Turki so well that Humayun 
called him a second ‘Ali Shir Nawat. He had a turn for 
chronograms, too, and at his first audience presented one 
of the taking of Dihli, and made others subsequently which 
were admired. He was a clever man, and his literary 
aptitudes suited his royal host and the tone of the entourage. 
But he had other acquirements than those which ring well . 
the change of words and obtained him his sobriquet of 
‘book-man,’ and these others he used to bring about an 
agreement between the Emperor and his own former host, 





1 M. Vambéry makes the Emperor urge, as a reason for keeping the 
admiral, that they were ‘now close upon’ the rains. But it was 
October, and, moreover, Humayiin pointed out that the rivers were in 
flood and roads impassable. Perhaps this is a mistake of the admiral’s, 
but still he saw the rivers, to his cost, in going to Dihli. Those who 
may read the interesting little book, for which thanks are due to 
M. Vambéry, need to accept it in other places also with some caution— 
é.g., p. 38, Sultan Mahmid Bhakkar‘i is called Husain Arghiin’s adopted 
brother, and, p. 40, his father. He was a kika. Some of the mistakes 
may well be due to the difficulty of getting hold of a fact, and this 
especially on a journey. But cf. p. 48 n. 


54 


Sultan Mahmud Bhakkari. An official paper was drawn up, 
to which Humayun, literally, set his fist, for he dipped his 
clenched hand in saffron and laid it on the deed. Mahmud 
was much pleased, and both he and his vizier wrote their 
thanks to the mediator. This incident, and others too, 
gave occasion for other Turki ghazels and higher praise. 
Sidi “Ali was constantly in the royal circle, and there were 
contests in verse-making and dilettante amusements which 
reveal the true and newly-risen Huma once more at ease — 
in untranquillized India. The traveller had not much to 
coax court favour with in the way of gifts, and this plumed 
his poetic flights; when he was wearied by his detention, 
he carried two ghazels to the royal seal-bearer and let 
them plead for his departure. They were heard, and he 
got ‘leave to go,’ with gifts and passport. 

His affairs were all in order for his start when there 
happened the fatal accident which ended Humayun’s life. 
That Humayun should die violently was in keeping with the 
- violent changes of his career; and that he met his death in 
a building of Shir Shah was a singular chance. His last 
hours of activity were filled by pleasant occupations; old 
friends had been seen who had just come back from Makka 
and would bring him news of both pilgrim brothers; letters 
had been read from home in Kabul; he had gone up to the 
roof of the Shir Mandal, which he used as his library, and 
had shown himself to the crowd assembled below; then he 
had interested himself in the rising of Venus, with the 
object of fixing a propitious hour for a reception,—perhaps 
to include the farewell of the Turkish guest. 

The Shir Mandal is a two-storied building with flat roof 
in the middle of which rises a small cupola which looks like 
a shade from the sun. The roof is reached by two discon- 
tinuous, steep, and narrow flights of high and shallow granite 
steps, which are enclosed in walls and the upper one of which 
emerges through the roof. The Emperor on that Friday 
evening of January 24th, 1556, had started down the upper 
flight and was on its second step, when the mw’azzin raised 
the cry for prayer from the neighbouring mosque. Sidi 


5D 


‘Ali says, as though it were some individual habit of 
Humayun, that the latter had the custom of kneeling 
whenever he heard the cry; other writers say that he 
tried to seat himself. His foot became entangled, some—— 
say in his mantle (postin), his staff slid along the smooth 
step, and he fell to the bottom of the flight with severe 
injuries to head and arm. It is professed that a letter 
went after the fall from him to Akbar, but this may be a 
part of the well-meaning deception in which the dangerous 
nature of the injuries was shrouded; it would seem 
more probable from the admiral’s account of the episode, 
which is silent as to any recovery of consciousness, that 
the injuries to the head were too severe to allow of 
restoration to sense. ‘Three days later Humayun died, on 
January 27th, and in the forty-eighth year of his age. 

‘We come from God, and to Him we return,’ and 
‘There is no guard against fate,’ are the quoted comments 
of the Turkish admiral. He counselled that the death 
should be concealed until Akbar’s return to Dihli, and 
brought forward experience drawn from his own country’s 
similar circumstances. This was done and various fictions 
were composed. A man personated the dead Emperor in 
public audience, and there were rejoicings over his recovery 
from the fall. Sidi “Ali took leave of the grandees, and 
conveyed the false news of Humayin’s restoration to 
health in a friendly way along his route. By the time he 
reached Lahor he found that Akbar had been proclaimed, 
and his name read in the Friday prayers. Here, as 
before, the traveller had to wait for royal orders, because 
the governor had, or invented, useful orders for the crisis, 
that no one should pass to Kabul. Then he was sent to 
the presence in Kilantr, where Akbar honoured his father’s 
passport and let the harassed and home-sick man con- 
tinue his journey, with money for expenses and a strong 
escort to Kabul. 

Before bidding him good-bye on his still lengthy journey, 
it may be said that he and his four escorting begs and his 
sailors marched to Peshawar through the night to escape that 


56 


Adam Ghakkar who had made over Kamran to Humayun ; 
that they saw two rhinoceroses, an event which makes one 
wonder whether there still remained a part of the ancient 
lake of the plain of Peshawar to serve as habitat for the 
huge and now vanished beasts; and that they crossed the 
many-memoried Khaibar. 

In Kabul the admiral saw Humayun’s two sons, 
Muhammad Hakim and Farrukh-fal, who were born in 
the same month of 1553, one being the child of Mah- 
chuchak and the other of Khanish dghaé Khwarizmt. This 
statement is a surprise, because Bayazid says that Farrukh 
died within a few days of birth. The admiral’s information 
suggests an error in Bayazid’s MS. 

Sidi “Ali found Kabul beautiful and speaks of its snowy 
girdle, its gardens and its running water. He traced pleasure 
and merriment and feasting everywhere, and even instituted 
comparison between it and Paradise to the disadvantage of 
the latter. But he had no time for ‘ frivolities,’ and thought 
only of hurrying home. He saw Munim Khan in the city, 
and being told by him that he could not cross the passes, 
observed that men had overcome mountains, and under the 
care of a local guide whose home was on the road, accom- 
plished the feat with labour and safely. He took the road 
to Taliqan and there saw our well-known friends, Sulaiman 
and Ibrahim, but he is silent as to Haram. Here, too, he 
wrote and offered his ghazel, and was both welcomed and 
speeded. In Taliqan we must leave him who has been a 
welcome new figure amongst familiar actors. 


Section II]].—Unper Axpar. 


Protected by the capable men who upheld Akbar, the 
royal ladies had not again to flee before foes or to suffer 
violent change of fortune. Humaytn had planed their 
journey from Kabul to India. Akbar more than once in 
his first year of rule had to cancel the orders he had given 
to effect it. Three military affairs disturbed the plan,—the 
suppression of the revolt of Abua’l-ma‘ali, the operations 


57 


against Sikandar Afghan, and the encounter with Himut at 
Panipat. At length amirs were named to escort the ladies 
from Kabul. ‘The officers set out, but on their march 
received orders to act first against Sulaiman Mirza, who,— — 
on hearing of Humaytn’s death, had come over from 
Badakhshan to besiege Kabul. This was the first of a 
series of his attempts on the city, to which he laid fanciful 
claim as head of the house of Timtr after Humayin. The 
approach of the imperial troops broke up his siege, and his 
claim having been accommodated by reading his name 
once in the khutba at Kabul, he went home and left the 
ladies free to start. 

They made their journey in time to arrive during the 
first quarter of 1557 near where lay the royal camp, at 
Mankot, in the western Sewaliks. The Emperor came a 
stage from it to meet them, and was ‘much comforted by 
the reunion.’ With Hamida-banu Begam, to whom, as 
Kmpress-mother, the chief place must be assigned, were 
Gul-badan, Gul-chihra, Haji, and Salima Begams. There 
was also a large company of officers’ wives. 

Perhaps the ladies remained near the camp until it broke 
up and went to Lahor. It left that city on its. march for 
Dihli on December 7th, 1557; at Jalindhar it halted, and 
here, with pomp and amidst general interest, Bairam 
Khan-i-khandn married Salima Sultan Begam, a grand- 
daughter of Babar. She was a half-niece of Humayun, 
and she had with Akbar cousinship of the ‘four-anna’ 
degree. Babar was their common ancestor, and their 
differing grandmothers diluted the cousinly relation. 

This alliance had been arranged by Humayun, and the 
use of sipurdan by Abu’l-fazl when writing of it, shows 
that what was now celebrated was a marriage, and not a 
betrothal. This point is mentioned here because some 
writers fix Salima’s age at this time as five, an estimate 
which is not supported by known facts of her life. The bride 
was probably a reward for the surpassing services done by 
Bairam for Humayun, the newest being those of the Resto- 
ration. Bairam was aman to whom seems due the largesse 


58 

of the hand of a king’s daughter; he out-topped his con- 
temporaries by his full stature in capacity, culture, faithful- 
ness, and character. Salima,'though much his junior, was 
in other respects a fit wife for him. She was an educated 
woman; ranks amongst verse-makers so completely as to 
have a pen-name (takhallas), and stands out gently, by 
birth, character, and attainments. 

Khizr Khwaja Khan had gone to Hindustan with 
Humayutn in 1554, and early in 1556 had been appointed 
by Akbar to the government of Lahor. He was left to 
carry on operations against Sikandar Afghan when Akbar 
was called away by Himi’s movements, and he was defeated. 
The few words said about him give the impression that 
he was uot a good soldier, and he is never again named 
in responsible command. The slight things recorded of 
him point to subsequent comfortable existence at court as 
the ‘husband of the Emperor’s aunt, Gul-badan Begam.’ 
Once he made a gift of horses to Akbar; in 1563 he helped 
to nurse Akbar when the latter was wounded in Dihli; and 
there is no record of his death. He was raised to high 
military rank, and at some time was amiru-l-wmara, but 
the Ain-i-akbart does not place him in its list of mansabdars. 
He stands twelfth in the general list of the J’abaqat, and 
amongst the chiefs of 5,000. 

From her coming to India in 1557 to the time of her 
pilgrimage in 1574, our princess is not mentioned by the 
historians. The interval held much of deep interest to her 
and to others of her generation whose lives were slipping 
away under the safeguarding of Akbar. Some survivors of 
an older day, witnesses of Bairam’s fidelity to Humayun, 
must have felt his downfall keenly. Hamida can hardly 
have been ignorant of the intrigue which brought this 
about, because she was related to the chief actors in it,-— 
Maham anaga, Adham Khan, and Shihabu-d-din Ahmad 





1 The histories have a definite statement about her descent which 
yet presents difficulties when looked into. Its points are considered in 
the Appendix, s.n. Salima. 


59 


Nishapirt. The last was governor of Dihli, where she 
lived, and part of the scheme to separate Akbar from 
Bairam took him to Dihli to see her, and thus under the 
eye of Shihab. Hamida must have had clear in memory — 
the truly valid services done for her husband by Bairam 
during the Persian exile. The plot had its nucleus in a 
sayyid circle and in families religious by inheritance, and it 
was carried out at the point of the tongue. Muhammad 
Baqi Khan kika, the anaga’s elder son, does not appear as 
taking part in it. He served the Emperor till 1584, rose 
to be a chief of 3,000, and of his character nothing is 
known. His younger brother, Adham, although put to 
death in 1562, had become chief of 5,000. All that is said 
of him is bad, and he, like his mother, was fluent in detrac- 
tion and did all in his power to poison the mind of Akbar 
against the worthiest of his amirs. 

Many comments have been made upon Maham anaga, 
both by the Persian writers and by their European com- 
mentators. Abi’l-fazl calls her a cupola of chastity, and 
it is now possible to wipe from her reputation the stain — 
suggested by Professor Blochmann when writing of the 
parentage of Adham. She was wife of Nadim Khan kika, 
a faithful servant of Humayin. This fragment of useful 
information was brought to light by Mr. Beveridge, who 
found it in a MS. of Colonel Hanna, which may yield other 
valuable matter on quasi-domestic points. Maham anaga 
may be granted the praise she deserves as a nurse who 
earned the affection of Akbar to the end of her life; she is 
entitled to such praise as belongs to a mother who screens 
a son’s every fault and pushes his fortunes with all her 
influence. She must take the dispraise of not pushing her 
elder son’s as she did Adham’s. Bayazid biydt speaks of | 
her as kind to him, and tells little stories which show her 
the centre of small affairs. Ihave not discerned in her any 
sign of talent. Whatever influence Akbar’s affection gave 
her would be strengthened by her connection with his 
mother, and perhaps, too, with other women who were de- 
scended from Ahmad Jami. Amongst these was Haji 


60 


Begam, Humayiin’s widow and a person much regarded 
by the Emperor. 

In the year following Bairam’s death, Adham Khan, 
who, says the TJ'abaqat, held a place higher than the other 
courtiers because he was his mother’s son, was on duty in 
Malwa against Baz Bahadur Sur. Incidents resulted 
which emphasize regret that for such as the actors in them 
Bairam had had to make way. Maham anaga was de facto 
prime minister; Munim Khan had been made Khdn-i- 
khandn, and it was looked for by his friend the anaga that he 
should become prime minister de jure. Baz Bahadur was 
defeated and fled from Sarangpir. Aping the Hindis, he 
had ordered his servants to kill the women of his household 
in the event of his defeat. Several had been so killed, 
many had been wounded, when the sacrifice was inter- 
rupted by the imperialists under Adham. Badayuni says 
that there followed slaughter by Adham and his colleague, 
Pir Muhammad Khan, of terrible extent, and his own eyes 
saw that these two regarded God’s creation in mankind as 
leeks, cucumbers, and radishes,—a quaint turn of words 
which covers awful butchery. When remonstrated with 
in the name of the law, the murderers asked what was to 
be done with so many prisoners. 

If the order for the death of the women of Baz Banadur’s 
household had issued from a Rajptt heart, there would 
have been no need for executioners while he was in flight. 
The victims were, however, not Rajputnis, and they suffered 
only to gratify the vanity of a Moslim. Amongst those 
wounded was Rip-mati, a dancing-girl renowned through- 
out Hindustan for beauty, singing, and poetic gifts. Her 
name seems that of a Hindi. Her wounds, inflicted by 
Baz Bahadur’s order, were severe and she wished to die. 
Adham let her know that, if she would care for herself, he 
would send her to her master when she could travel. She 
took his promise as true, had her wounds dressed and re- 
covered. When she claimed fulfilment of Adham’s word, 
she was told to consider herself as his slave. He entered 
her room, raised her veil, and saw her dead by her own act. 


61 


Perhaps the point of deepest social degradation in this 
story is that Rup-mati was, by men’s decree, born to sin 
without blame, and yet she died because she loved one 
man. Her heart was single, and yet she was only the—— 
most charming, clever and beautiful of a crowd of dancing- 
girls, purchased slaves, to whom no man’s loyalty and no 
mercy were thought due. 

Adham Khan took much booty from Baz Bahadur, and 
he disregarded the rule which required the choicest part 
to be sent to the Emperor; he also comported himself more 
like an independent ruler than a king’s lieutenant. This 
angered Akbar, and he hurried off to Sarangpur, out- 
distanced a messenger of Maham anaga whom she had sent 
with warnings, and took Adham by surprise. She herself 
came in next day and counselled surrender of the spoil. 
This and other matters having been adjusted, the Emperor 
started for his capital. No sooner was he gone than Adham, 
with his mother’s connivance, regained possession of two of 
the most coveted of the captive women. News of this went 
after Akbar, who ordered them to be returned to the royal 
camp. When they came again within her power, the 
anaga had them murdered, so that they might not tell 
the tale of their abduction. 

Having spent so many years under the influence of 
Maham anaga, it is to the credit of Akbar’s humanity and 
mental force that there are not more than the recorded 
blots on his scutcheon ; at nineteen he rebelled against his 
nurse, when she had set his feet on the primrose path to 
ruin of person and empire. He did not punish the murder 
of the captive girls, but he soon manifested his intention to 
depose his nurse and her son from power. Instead of 
appointing their friend Munim prime minister, he sum- 
moned his foster-father, Shamsu-d-din Ahmad Ghaznavi 
and gave him the post. Shamsu-d-din was an unlettered 
man, but he was staunch and had sons who were true to 
Ji-Ji anaga’s nursling. 

The next episode in which Maham anaga and her son 
appear, was one to shake the home fabric to its foundations, 


62 


for Adham murdered Shamsu-d-din, bursting in upon him 
as he sat in business audience and unsuspicious. It was 
done on the night of May 16th, 1562. The incident is well 
known, how the murderer rushed to the haram door and 
on the appearance of Akbar began to palliate his crime, 
but was struck down by a blow of the royal fist and then 
killed by royal order.* 

It was the Emperor who told Maham anaga of her son’s 
death: ‘Mama! we have killed Adham,’ are the words put 
into his mouth by Bayazid. She fell ill from anger and 
srief; this blow shattered her heart’s idol and her ambi- 
tion for him and herself. Badayuni says that she died 
after having presented the food of the fortieth day of 
mourning, and this points to her belief that the souls of 
the dead take final departure from earth on that day and 
after partaking of the food of their choice which the care 
of relations sets for them. Mother and son were buried 
in one spot, and Akbar placed his shoulder under his 
nurse’s bier in sign of his sentiment to her. 

Quite stirring news for discussion through some years, 
amongst the elder ladies of the royal family, would be the. 
conduct of Mah-chuchak Begam in Kabul. She was the 
last recorded wife of Humayiin,.and was married in 1546, 
after the coming of Hamida from Qandahar to Kabul. She 
was not a woman of birth,—one gathers a general impres- 
sion that few royal wives married late in life were so,—and 
her title of begam was probably owed to her having borne a 
son, Muhammad Hakim. In 1554 Humayun had left her 
three-years-old boy as nominal governor of Kabul under 
charge of Mu'nim Khan, and in 1556 Akbar had confirmed 
the appointment. When Munim went to court in 1561, 





1 Some writers put into Akbar’s mouth, when he addressed Adham, 
an epithet which would imply baseness in his birth and opprobrium of 
his mother; but I am advised that from various considerations weight 
need not be given to the inference of the word, which, moreover, is not 
used by all the sources. The point is mentioned here because of the 
contradiction involved in the epithet with the statement of marriage 
with Nadim kika, and with the terms of respect employed towards 
the anaga by the Persian writer who uses the degrading epithet. 


63 


his son Ghani became his locum tenens, but Ghani had 
neither ‘suavity nor sense,’ and the begam shut him 
out of Kabul, one morning when he had gone to walk 
in the melon gardens. He went to India, and she took — 
up the guidance of her boy’s affairs. She chose three men 
to help her; two soon came by their deaths at her dicta- 
tion, and the third became supreme. Akbar, and no doubt 
the ladies also, heard of these doings, and despatched 
Mu‘nim Khan with men to put things straight. Mah- 
chuchak met Munim at Jalalabad, utterly defeated him, 
and he fled to court. She then killed the last adviser 
of her trio and took another, whom she may have married, 
named Haidar Qasim Kohbur. These proceedings surprise 
one in Mah-chuchak, and bring her story down to the 
first half of 1564, when Abu’l-ma ali appears upon her 
stage. 

We cannot enter here into the previous history of Abuw’l- 
ma ali—his rebellions, murders, imprisonment, pilgrimage, 
and reinvigorated return to wickedness. He now came 
to Kabul fresh from two assassinations in Hindustan, a 
fugitive, and indited a letter to the ruling begam, with 
profession of affection and devotion to the memory of 
Humayun. She welcomed him, gave him her little 
daughter Fakhru-n-nisé in marriage, and let him take 
the lead. Before long he stabbed Mah-chuchak with his 
own hand, murdered Haidar Qasim, and stirred revolt 
against himself which led to woeful slaughter within the 
walls of Kabul. Word of all this went from Muhammad 
Hakim to Sulaiman and Haram, with a prayer for help. 
Haram approving and accompanying, the army of Badakh- 
shan marched over the passes, met Abu’l-ma ali in the 
Ghurband valley, captured him, and sent him bound to 
the prince, who had him strangled. Both he and Adham 
Khan had justified Bairam’s distrust, which had prompted 
him to wish their death early in Akbar’s reign. 

A little story of Haram maybe inserted here, somewhat 
after date. She had not been always on perfect terms 
with Sulaiman. Not only, a little earlier, had there been 


64 


the discussion between them of his wish to take Muhtarima 
to wife, which Haram had frustrated by marrying the 
khanam to Sulaiman’s son instead of to himself, but she 
had been angered extremely by the murder of one of her 
brothers by her husband and her son. She took the reso- 
lution of deserting Sulaiman and went over to Kabul, where 
then Mu‘nim Khan was governor, and she had meant to 
carry on her complaints to Akbar. Mu'‘nim, however, who 
had been begged to mediate by Sulaiman, gave her good 
advice and pacified her, so that at last she consented to 
return to Badakhshan. He rode out to bid her farewell ; 
she bade her camel kneel and dismounted; he got off his 
horse, and there was exchange of friendly greeting. She 
told him she regarded him as a brother and that for his 
sake she would never bring the army of Badakhshan against 
Kabul. It came several times later and with her approval, 
but Haram could swear and break even ‘awful oaths.’ 
Bayazid biyat accompanied her to the Ghurband and was 
charmed by her suavity and agreeableness. 

On the death of Abt'l-ma‘ali, Sulaiman sent home for a 
daughter and married her to Muhammad Hakim, parti- 
tioned out some of the lands of Kabul to his own people, 
and went home to Qila-i-zafar. Irritation against the 
interlopers led to their expulsion by the Kabulis, and 
this brought the Badakhshi forces again to Kabul, in 1564. 
Muhammad Hakim hurried to the Indus and complained 
to his big brother and Sulaiman was made to retreat. 

In 1566 he and Haram and their girls were again 
before the coveted Kabul, and on this occasion Haram 
tried to supplement their failing military action by . 
treachery. She got Sulaiman to lay an ambush for Mu- 
hammad Hakim, whom, with ‘awful oaths’ of amity, she 
had persuaded to have a meeting with her under profession 
of desire to adopt him now that her son Ibrahim was dead. 
The end of this affair was, in net result to the Badakh- 
shis, nothing; Haram went home and Sulaiman followed. 
With them went the unfailing daughters, of whom Haram 
seems to have had many, or who were betrothed and not 


65 


‘entrusted,’ so many recorded times. They had been near 
capture by the Kabulis in the Four-walled Garden, but the 
commandant of the city recalled his men and let the girls 
go free, because he did not think it seemly to capture 
women. 

This is not the place to follow Sulaiman’s interesting 
fortunes to their close, under Akbar’s protection, by death 
in Lahor in 1589. For our purpose, it is enough to say 
that he held Badakhshan so long as Haram’s watchful eye 
was on him, and lost it at her death. It was Muhtarima’s 
son, Shah-rukh, his own grandson, who turned him out of 
his beloved Badakhshan, and in this, too, there may be 
Haram’s hand. Muhtarima would not be likely to teach 
her boy dutiful conduct to Haram or to Haram’s husband, 
for the two women were foes, and Haram had tried to 
separate Muhtarima from her son, and to expel her from 
Badakhshan to her parental home in Kashghar. If Haram 
had lived, her pride would have found content in two 
alliances of her grandson with daughters of the royal blood, 
—one a child of Muhammad Hakim, and the other of 
Akbar himself. 

The ill-behaviour of Hamida-banu’s brother, Khwaja 
Muazzam, must have been a frequent annoyance to the 
inner circle of the elder ladies at court. From boyhood 
he had been fantastic and mischievous, and perhaps carried 
always the germ of the madness which overtook his last 
years. Bairam, the sensible, had exiled him, then had 
given him some countenance; on Bairam’s fall he had 
received a fief, and, so far, had been favoured. But Akbar 
did not like him, and the murders he had committed were 
sufficient to warrant dislike. He was a true parvenu, 
assertive and relying on his sister to excuse his faults. 
Hamida had been conscious before her marriage that her 
lowly birth was a point against her wedding with Humayun. 
The disparity in her case, as in other misalliances of 
the time, had raised unworthy people to power. Now, 
in 1564, Bibi Fatima lamented to Akbar that Khwaja 
Mu azzam had threatened to kill his wife Zuhra, who was 

5 


66 


her daughter. The Emperor consequently sent the khwaja 
word that he was coming to his house, and followed the 
message closely. As he entered, the khwaja stabbed 
Zuhra and then flung his knife, like a challenge, amongst 
the royal followers. Abu’l-fazl says that for punishment 
the murderer was flung into the river, but ‘would not 
drown.’ The more sensible Nizamu-d-din Ahmad says he 
was beaten and then soused in the river. He died insane, 
in prison, at Gualiar. All the shortcomings and crimes of 
the man notwithstanding, Hamida must have cherished 
some warmth of feeling for the tricksy boy who had lifted 
suspicion from her in the matter of the stolen rubies of the 
Persian episode. 

In 1571 another old acquaintance comes to the front in 
the person of Nahid Begam, in whom our princess must 
have maintained interest for the sake of her father Qasim, 
Babar’s foster-brother. Nahid, as has been said earlier, was 
the daughter of Qasim and of Mah-chuchak Arghtin, who 
must not be confounded with Kamran’s wife of the same 
name, one common amongst the Arghun women of the 
time. She had married Muhibb-ali, son of Nizamu-d-din 
‘Ali Khalifa Barlas, and who had risen to high military 
rank but now lived remote from soldiering and in reposeful 
retirement. Nahid’s mother was now in her (third) widow- 
hood for ‘Isai Tarkhan Arghin, and she was not well 
regarded by her last husband’s son, Muhammad Baqi 
Tarkhan Arghin, the ruler of Tatta. Nahid, in 1571, went 
to see her mother, and perhaps conveyed to Baqi the 
impression that her visit was something more than filial. 
He put Mah-chuchak in prison, and so behaved to Nahid 
that she hurried off to court and made bitter complaint of 
her own wrongs and of the rudeness shown to the royal 
attendants who had been with her in Sind. She told Akbar, 
too, that she had talked with Sultan Mahmud Bhakkavi, 
that old retainer of Shah Husain who had kept the island- 
fort against Humayun in the forties, and for whom Sidi 
‘Ali Reis had negotiated terms in 1555. Mahmud had 
suggested an attack on Tatta, and, supported by him, 


67 


Nahid pleaded for help from Akbar to act against Baqi. 
She was very keen about her plan and persuaded the 
Emperor to give men and money. 

Muhibb- ali was disturbed from his repose, and put at 
the head of the force. With him went Nahid and also a 
wife named Samia and her son, Mujahid. For Nahid’s 
ends the long war that followed was infructuous. An 
amusing episode of it was that Samia, when things did not 
go as she wished, went into rebellion against Akbar, and 
actually held an entrenchment against the royal amirs a 
day and a night. In the end, Muhibb-ali obtained a 
comfortable town appointment and nothing more is heard 
of the ladies. Probably they too accommodated them- 
selves to the tolerant and forgiving atmosphere of Akbar’s 
court. 

Nizamu-d-din Ahmad is somewhat more sober of diction 
than his fellow-penmen and so, when he says that the 
Gujrat campaign of 1572 caused the royal ladies joy 
enough to last their lives, whole-hearted delight is pictured. 
This was the campaign which made beautiful Sikri the City 
of Victory (Fath-pir). Round one incident of the war 
womanly interest,—and surely compassion also,—will have 
centred. ‘The veil of historic silence lifts for a brief moment, 
and shows Gul-rukh, Kamran’s daughter, in flight with 
her son. | 

Gul-badan’s long span of unchronicled life was probably 
spent in the peaceful occupation of a wife and mother, with 
variety from books, verse-making, festivities, and outside 
news. She must have found much to exercise her lively 
mind in Hindustan. That she went about with the royal 
camp is shown by the record of the place assigned to her 
tent in the encampments. It was pitched next to Hamida’s, 
well within the great enclosure, and not far from the 
Eimperor’s own. Since she was a woman, she must have 
found food for observation in the doings and position of her 
sex under the conditions of their life in Hindustan. How 
did satt look to her? What did she think of the juhar ? 
Both these Hindu customs were far different from those of 

5—2 


68 


her traditions in similar crises. She came ofa tribe which 
boasts of the fidelity of its wives to the marriage tie. All 
the women of her house must have heard of the defiant act 
of Ais-daulat, Babar’s grandmother, who had ordered her 
maids to stab a man to whom her captor had given her, and 
who then, for sole excuse, had observed that she was the 
wife of Yanas Khan. Gul-badan had also in her own family 
history plenty of examples of the fate of captured girls, for 
many of her kinswomen had married foes of their tribe ; 
and many too had become contented wives, well treated, 
and remaining in their foreign homes apparently without 
constraint." 

What Timurid women saw amongst the Hindis reveals 
another type of virtue and another standard of wedded life. 
Our princess must have heard something on the topic 
through her father’s experience when she was a child. 
Wifehood and motherhood now gave her better insight into 
the problems which underlie social relations. She would 
hear that Rajputnis died joyfully rather than be captured ; 
that outmatched Rajputs killed wives and children and 
went to certain death themselves,—a holocaust to honour. 
The early years of Akbar furnished plenty of such records. 

How, one would like to know, did the Musalmani regard 
the willing death by fire of the Hindu widow, in that exalta- 
tion which lifts thought above pain and terror and is 
admirable, whether in the martyr for faith or for wifely 
duty? Unfortunately, the barriers of language and habit 
must have kept Akbar’s Rajput wives from charming the 
Musalmani ladies by recital of the legends of their race. 
These Hindus can never have been welcome inmates of the 





1 I think, and the impression is gathered from the Memoirs, that 
although women and children were often murdered by victorious 
soldiers, wives were often returned to their husbands or families, and 
that enforced marriage was usually with the defeated leader’s 
daughters. Perhaps the Muhammadan law of divorce helped the 
wives. Injustice might easily be done under the rough-and-ready 
expectation that family ties would be set at naught by conquerors 
who were Muhammadans. There was certainly diversity of action 
and of degree of mercy and chivalry. 


69 


palace to any of the Moslims; but, pagan as they were 
thought, their conduct as wives must have insinuated the 
thin edge of conviction that to no one form of faith is 
committed the nurture of the sense of duty. 

One common thought Gul-badan and the rest could have 
shared with the Hindwt ladies,—that of the duty of pilgrim- 
age and of respect for holy places. When next history 
concerns itself with our begam, it is to tell of her setting 
out, in 1575, for Makka. The Emperor had been unwilling 
to part with her, and it may be, even, had delayed with 
the thought of accompanying her. His heart was now 
much set upon making the haj, but he did no more than 
walk a short distance with a caravan from Agra, dressed in 
the seamless wrapper of the Arabian ceremonies. Though 
debarred from leaving Hindustan himself, he helped many 
others to fulfil this primary duty of their faith, and opened 
wide his purse for their expenses. Hach year he named a 
leader of the caravan, and provided him with gifts and 
-ample funds. Sultan Khwaja, Gul-badan’s cicerone, took, 
amongst other presents, 12,000 dresses of honour. He did 
not bring her home again; this duty fell to Khwaja Yahya 
(John). What circumstance extorted royal consent to Gul- 
badan’s absence is not recorded; her advancing age,—she 
was past fifty,—and her dislike of the laxity in opinion and 
practice in matters of the Faith would add warmth to her 
request for leave to go. 

Abi’ 1-fazl has preserved the names of the chief ladies of 
the pilgrim party, but many others went with Gul-badan 
Begam, and for all the royal purse bore the cost. She 
was the lady of highest birth, and was probably a widow; 
next came Salima Sultan Begam, widow of Bairam and 
wife of Akbar. It was not usual for a wife to make the 
pilgrimage, but Muhammadan law stipulates that per- 
mission shall be granted to such wives as strongly desire 
to do so, and Salima’s seems a case in point. Next comes 
a woman whose presence reveals pleasant things. She was 
Sultanam, widow of Akbar’s uncle, ‘Askari, and of her it is 
recorded in Akbar’s babyhood that she cared for him when 


70 


captured, with tender affection. It is probable that she 
had spent many years under the care and at the cost of 
the Emperor. Then come two step-nieces of Gul-badan, 
daughters of Kamran,—Haji and Gul-izar Begams. I do 
not know which child of his is veiled under the title of 
Haji. She seems to be making her second haj, and may 
well have gone on her first when her father was in Arabia. 
To these two the pilgrimage would have humanly pious 
significance, as a visitation to their father’s tomb and to 
that of Mah-chtichak Arghiin, whom all his children must 
have held in reverence. Next comes a grand-daughter of 
Gul-badan herself, named Um-ktlsum (Mother of Plump- 
ness), presumably after the daughter of her Prophet. 
Whether she was the child of Sa adat-yar is not said, nor 
whether the last name on the list, Salima Khanam, is that 
of a child of Gul-badan, as well as of Khizr Khwaja Khan. 
Here some of the inconveniences of polygamy show them- 
selves to the seeker after family facts. 

An old associate of our princess accompanied her in the 
person of Gul-nar dghdcha, who had been of Babar’s house- 
hold and was, I think, one of the two Circassians sent as a 
present to him by Shah Tahmasp in 1526. She was now 
well on her way through life and considerably older than 
Gul-badan Begam. Another of the party had also been of 
Babar’s household, Bibi Sart-qad, or Saru-i-sahi (Straight 
Cypress). She had been, too, in Humayiin’s service and 
later had married, with full nisbat, Mu'nim Khdn-i-khandn. 
She was a widow, had been a singer and reciter, and was 
a ‘reliable woman.’ Like her in accomplishments were Bibi 
Safiya and Shaham dghd, both formerly of Humayun’s 
household. Of the first and of Bibi Saru-qad we have the 
happy little record that they sang in the moonlight on the 
road to Laghman in 1549. 

Fathpur-sikri seems to have been the rallying-point of 
the caravan and October 15th, 1575, the day of departure 
from it. It started earlier than was usual, perhaps because 
the ladies could not travel fast. Caravans generally left 
Agra in the tenth month—this left in the seventh—of the 


\ 


7 


Muhammadan year. Akbar’s second boy, Murad, was told 

off to escort the ladies to the coast. Salim met them one 
stage out to give last greetings. At Gul-badan’s request, 
Murad was excused from his long task of escort to Surat,—— 
and he went back to Agra. One smiles to find that the 
princes were five and four years old. The real charge of 
the caravan was with several amirs, one being Muhammad 
Baqi Khan kika, and another Rami Khan of Aleppo, who 
may have been Babar’s artillery officer. 

It is a real loss that there is no record of the journey 
from our begam’s pen. It was to be adventurous; even 
perilous; and it was of great interest whether as sight- 
seeing travel or pious duty. Strat was the port of embarka- 
tion, but there are no details of the road taken to reach it. 
Father Rudolf Acquaviva passed between the same two 
terminal points in 1580, but the military movements of the 
interval may well have allowed him to travel where the 
ladies could not go. When they were first in Surat, it had 
been a royal possession for two years only, and even when 
the Father took the fairly direct route from it to Fathpur- 
sikri, the Rajput peasantry was in arms against their new 
lord. The ladies were probably handed on from one 
garrisoned place to another as the immediate circumstances 
of conquest dictated. The main body of their haj joined 
them by a tedious and weary route, first escorted through 
Goganda by the army which was on active service, and 
then passing on to Ahmadabad, and, perhaps by water, to 
Surat. 

The governor of the port, who was to have a good deal 
of trouble with this caravan, was Qulij Khan Andyani, a 
sobriquet of pleasant sound in our begam’s ears. He had 
inherited Timurid service from many generations, and his 
father had been a grandee of Sultan Husain Baygqra. 

‘There was peace with the isles of the Franks,’ but it 
took the ladies a year to get to sea. The Akbar-ndma 
attributes some part of the delay to a foolish panic about 
the Firingis which, after the ladies had embarked in their 
hired Turkish transport, the Salimi, seized the other 


72 


pilgrims who were to sail in the royal ship, the Ilahi. 
The real ground appears to have been want of a pass. 
The Portuguese were then masters of the Indian waters, 
and no ship might dare to put to sea without toll paid and © 
pass obtained. Alarm about the Portuguese was natural, 
for there were stories that the very pass was sometimes a 
letter of Bellerophon enjoining capture and death. Abuw’l- 
fazl says that, although the ladies embarked, they were 
unwilling to put out and desert their fellow-pilgrims. 
This may be mere broidery, or the one ship may have had 
a pass and the other not. Perhaps, too, as theirs was a 
hired transport, it was also one privileged to sail free. 
However this may be, Badayuni makes the difficulty clear 
by saying that Khwaja Sultan’s ships lay idle from want 
of the pass. He also, it may be added, quotes a legal 
opinion that at this time it was not lawful to make the 
haj from India because, of the two practicable routes, one 
lay through the Shiah country of ‘Iraq, and the other 
obliged a pass which bore the idolatrous stamp of the 
heads of the Virgin Mary and of Jesus Christ (‘on whom 
be peace ’). 

The mtr haj sent word to the Emperor of his plight, who 
at once despatched orders to Qulij Khan, in Idar, to go to 
Surat and arrange the difficulty. Qulij took with him a 
Cambayan, who was presumably a man versed in seafaring 
business,—hurried to Surat and overcame the difficulty. 

It took the ladies a year to get to sea; they sailed on 
October 17th, 1576. Their port of debarkation is not men- 
tioned; some pilgrims sailed by the Arabian, some by the 
Persian Gulf. They spent three and a half years in Arabia, 
and were able to make the /aj four times. 

Some day perhaps a pious and enlightened Musalman 
will set down the inner meaning he attaches to the rites of 
the pilgrimage. How interesting it would have been if our 
princess had told us what it was in her heart that carried 
her through the laborious duties of piety she accomplished 
during her long stay in her holy land! She might have 
given us an essential principle by which to interpret the 


73 


religious meaning which devout women attach to the rites 
commanded on the pilgrimage. 
The visitation duties are set down in Hughes’ ‘ Dic- 


tionary of Islam,’ where even their brief recital is attractive _ 


and adds to the wish of gauging the sentiment of believers 
in their efficacy. The acts prescribed are exhausting, not 
only to the body but also,.one thinks, to the mind, because 
the very conception of the pilgrimage as a Divine ordinance 
keeps brain and heart tense, as all obedience does which sets 
the human will parallel to the Divine. 

The mere recapitulation of the prescribed ceremonies is 
impressive: The halt six miles from the city to put on the 
seamless wrapper (ihram); the chanting of the pilgrim 
song; the prayer of intention and of supplication for grace 
to make the visitation duly ; the contemplation, touch, and 
salutation of the mystic black stone; the sevenfold en- 
compassment of the kaba, towards which from distant 
homes has been directed the prayer of the bygone years; 
the ascent of the Mount of Purity (Safa), and prayer 
and confession of faith upon it; the race seven times 
repeated from its summit to that of the Mount of Marwa; 
the common worship in the Great Mosque, and the sermon 
preached to the assemblage of common believers; the 
various pilgrimages and prayers of the eighth and ninth _ 
days; and on the tenth the extraordinary pelting of devils, 
which is symbolized by the patriarchal rite of the stoning 
of the pillars of Mina. Later in the same day occurs the 
final act of the haj, an animal sacrifice. Whether the 
ladies could pay a substitute to perform this is not said. 

During these ten busy days the seamless wrapper is 
worn ; after the sacrifice itis laid aside, and attention may 
be paid to the neglected toilette. The pilgrim stays three 
days longer in Makka—days of the ‘ drying of the blood of 
sacrifice,’ ‘three well-earned days of rest after the peri- 
patetic performance of the last four.’ Still, all is not 
finished; there should be more circuits of the kaba, 
another stoning at Mina, and a draught drunk from the 
sacred well. Our princess would certainly do everything 


74 


which was due, and probably would go to Medina, and 
she would also make visitation to the tombs of many pious 
persons buried in the desirable soil of Arabia. 

In 1579 Khwaja Yahya was mir haj, a friend of Badayuni, 
and the charitable man to whom Husain the Patcher 
(tukriya) was indebted for decent burial. He was com- 
missioned to escort the ladies home, and also to bring back 
curiosities and Arab servants,’ who may perhaps have been 
wanted for the Arab sarat, established near the mausoleum 
of Humayun, outside Dihli 

The return journey was both adventurous and perilous. 
They were shipwrecked off Aden, and had to stay, some 
say seven, others twelve, months in that desolate spot, far 
less habitable then than now, with condensed water, a 
tide from the Suez Canal, occasional rain, and the British 
raj. The governor did not behave well, and quitted the 
path of good manners, misconduct for which he was 
punished by his master, Sultan Murad of Turkey. One 
pleasant incident broke the gloom of the long delay. Ona 
day of April, 1580, the rock-bound travellers saw a ship 
coming up from the south with the wind, and, wishing to 
know whose it was, senta boat out to make inquiry. By a 
pleasant chance Bayazid’ biydt with his wife and children 
were on board, and he shortened sail, though the wind was 
favourable, and gave and took news. Bayazid says that 
the persons who sent out the boat to him were Gul-badan 
Begam, Gul-izar Begam, and Khwaja Yahya. Perhaps 





1 The passage in the Akbar-ndma about these servants is in its 
author’s later and difficult style. ‘This led to mistake in my article of 
the Calcutta Review, April, 1898. I referred a difficulty the khwaja 
experienced to the ladies, whereas it was the servants who were 
unwilling to leave their Arabian domicile. Several other errors of that 
article are corrected in this book. 

2 His wife and a child died in Arabia; he wished to end his days on 
the sacred soil, and so sent home his other children. His wish also 
was to be laid beside his wife, and he tried her grave for several hours 
to see that it was neither too narrow nor too short. Happily for his 
readers, he did not stay in Arabia. His children were captured by the 
Portuguese, and he had to go back to their rescue. He sailed in 1582, 
but had long to wait in Mocha harbour for a wind, and this, with other 
delays, kept him eight months on board. 


aD 


he was instrumental in getting them ships for return to 
India. 

I do not know when the ladies succeeded in leaving 

Aden, nor when they landed in Surat. Here they again 
waited long, and this delay is attributed partly to the rains 
and partly to the royal absence in Kabul. It was March, 
1582, when they reached Fathpur-sikri. 
_ On the northward journey they visited the shrines of the 
Chishti saints in Ajmir, and there met Prince Salim. Day 
after day there came an amir with greetings from the 
Emperor, until he met the caravan at Khanwa. The night 
of reunion was kept awake by ‘questions and entrancing 
stories; gifts were shown, and happiness brimmed over.’ 
One item of home news would cloud the meeting: Bega 
Begam had died just too soon to welcome her old friends. 

Arrived in Fathptr-sikri, Gul-badan Begam would find 
much to ruffle her orthodoxy ; for Father Rodolf Acquaviva 
was installed there and was giving Prince Murad lessons in 
the Christian faith. She would hear of the reverence shown 
by her nephew for the sacred things of an alien faith, and 
of his liking for the society of the pious and learned guest. 
Hamida-bant is named by the Father as protesting, with 
other ladies of the haram, against the royal countenance of 
Christianity, and assuredly Gul-badan would swell the 
chorus of complaint, in which, too, Hindt wives would join 
the Moslim lamentation.! When the Father was leaving 
Fathpur-sikri, he accepted only so much money as would 
pay his expenses back to Goa, but he asked a favour from 
Hamida-bant Begam. She had amongst her household 
slaves a Russian of Moscow and his Polish wife, with their 
two children. These four the Father begged to take with 
him to Goa. ‘The begam, who was no friend to the 
Firingis, was most unwilling to give up the slaves; but 





1 The whole account of Father Acquaviva’s stay at the court is 
extremely interesting, and much of it may be read in Father Goldie’s 
‘ First Christian Mission to the Great Mughal’ (Dublin: Gill and Co., 
1897). 


76 


the Emperor would refuse nothing to the Father,’ and the 
family was carried off to freedom. 

The next thing known of our princess is that she wrote her 
Humdaytin-nama. The book is its sole witness, for no one 
speaks of it. It is not literature, but a simple setting down 
of what she knew or had heard, for the help of the Akbar- 
nama. This was not her only composition, for she followed 
the fashion of her day and wrote verses. Mir Mahdi Shirazi 
has preserved in his Tazkiratu-l-khwdatin two lines of hers, 
in which her thought seems to be, ‘No love, no fruit of 
life.’ 


** Har pari ki au ba ‘ashag khud yar nist, 
Tu yaqin midan ki hech az ‘umr bar-khur-dar nist.” 


Nine copies were made of Bayazid’s Humdyun-nama, 
which was written in obedience to the royal command 
obeyed by Gul-badan Begam and also by Jauhar the Ewer- 
bearer. Of these two went to the Emperor’s library; three 
to the princes Salim, Murad, and Danyal; one to our begam ; 
two to Abu’l-fazl; and one perhaps was kept by the author. 
This allotment brings out the little point that Gul-badan 
collected books. Badayuni has a curious passage about 
himself which also discloses something ‘bookish’ of 
Salima: ‘On account of the book Khirad-afza, which had 
disappeared from the library, and concerning Salima 
Sultan Begam’s study of which the Emperor reminded 
me, an order was issued that my allowance should be 
stopped, and that they should demand the book of me.’ 
He adds that Abu’l-fazl did not lay his refutation before 
the Emperor, and he does not clear up the awkward doubt 
as to what he had done with Salima’s desired book. 

The remaining records of Gul-badan Begam’s life are few 
and scanty. When she was seventy, her name is mentioned 
with that of Muhammad-yar, a son of her daughter, who 
left the court in disgrace; again, she and Salima join in in- 
tercession to Akbar for Prince Salim; again, with Hamida, 
she receives royal gifts of money and jewels. Her charities 
were large, and it is said of her that she added day unto day 


77 


in the endeavour to please God, and this by succouring the 
poor and needy. When she was eighty years old, and in 
February, 1603, her departure was heralded by a few days 
of fever. [lamida was with her to the end, and it may be 
that Ruqaiya, Hindal’s daughter, would also watch her last 
hours. As she lay with closed eyes, Hamida-banu spoke to 
her by the long-used name of affection, ‘ Jiw/’ (elder sister). 
There was no response. Then, ‘Gul-badan!’ The dying 
woman unclosed her eyes, quoted the verse, ‘I die,—may 
you live!’ and passed away. 

Akbar helped to carry her bier some distance, and for 
her soul’s repose made lavish gifts and did good works. 
He will have joined in the silent prayer for her soul before 
committal of her body to the earth, and if no son were 
there, he, as a near kinsman, may have answered the 
Imam’s injunction to resignation: ‘It is the will of God.’ 

So ends the long life of a good and clever woman, affec- 
tionate and dutiful in her home life; and brought so near 
us by her sincerity of speech and by her truth of feeling 
that she becomes a friend even across the bars of time and 
creed and death. 





PAST Tl. 
GUL-BADAN BEGAMS BOOK, THE ‘HUMAYUN-NAMA.’ 


Ir is not generally known to English students of the 
(so-called) Mughal period of Indian history that Gul-badan 
Begam wrote a book. It was not known to Mr. Erskine, 
or he would have given fuller and more accurate accounts 
of the families of Babar and Humayitn. It escaped even 
Professor Blochmann’s wider opportunities of acquaintance 
with Persian MSS. Until the begam’s Humdayiin-nama was 
catalogued by Dr. Rieu, it was a literary parda-nishin, and 
since that time has been little better. Abwt-l-fazl, for 


78 


whose information it was written, does not mention it, but 
the Akbar-nama is not without indication of its use.* 

Bayazid’s Tartkh-i-humayin was reproduced several 
times on its completion. Gul-badan Begam’s Humdyin- 
nama was written under the same royal order and for the 
same end. It would have been natural to reproduce it also, 
but no second example of it can be discovered by us in any 
of the accessible book-catalogues of Europe or India, and 
prolonged search, made by advertisement, private inquiry, 
and in person by my husband in India, has failed to dis- 
close knowledge of its existence which may not con- 
jecturally be traced to my own work upon it. Once hope 
arose that a second MS. was to reward the search, because 
a correspondent intimated that he possessed for sale a 
MS. which was inscribed as being the begam’s. On 
examination this was found to be so, but the MS. was a 
copy of the Kdnin-t-humdayin of Khwand-amir. It is now 
in the British Museum. 

Hope was again aroused by a mention of Gul-badan’s book 
in a recent work, the Darbdar-i-akbart of Shamsu-l-ulama 
‘Muhammad Husain dzdd. Mr. Beveridge paid two visits to 
the author in Bombay, but could learn nothing from him. 
He appeared mentally alienated, denied all knowledge of 
the work, and that he had ever written of it. His reference 
may conjecturally be traced to my article in the Calcutta 
Review upon Gul-badan Begam’s writings, and does not, 
unfortunately, appear to indicate access to a second MS. 

The MS. from which I have translated belongs to the 
Hamilton Collection in the British Museum, and was 
bought in 1868 from the widow of Colonel George William 
Hamilton. It is classed by Dr. Rieu amongst the most 
remarkable of the 352 MSS. which were selected for 
purchase out of the 1,000 gathered in by Colonel Hamilton 
from Lucknow and Dihli. It does not bear the vermilion 


1A passage about Babar (Bib. Ind., edit. I. 87) closely resembles 
the begam’s on the same topic; and a divergence, noted by Mr. Erskine 
(Mems., 218 n.) as made from Babar’s narrative by Abi‘l-fazl, is made 
also by the begam. 


79 


stamp of the King of Oude, so the surmise is allowed that 
it came from Dihh. It has been rebound (not recently, I 
believe), plainly, in red leather; and it is unadorned by 
frontispiece, margin, or rubric. Whether there has ever 
been a colophon cannot be said; the latter pages of the 
work are lost. The folio which now stands last is out of 
place, an error apparently made in the rebinding. Catch- 
words are frequently absent, and there are none on the last 
folio. There are blank fly-leaves, prefixed and suftixed, of 
paper unlike that of the MS.. 

The absence of a second MS., and, still more, the 
absence of mention of the work, seem to indicate that 
few copies ever existed. 

Dr. Rieu’s tentative estimate of the date of the British 
Museum MS. (seventeenth century) does not, I am coun- 
selled, preclude the possibility of transcription so late in the 
sixteenth century as 1587 (995 H.) onwards. It may be the 
first and even sole example. 

Gul-badan Begam, as is natural, uses many Turki words, 
and at least one Turki phrase. Her scribe (who may be 
herself) does not always write these with accuracy; some 
run naturally from the pen as well-known words do; some 
are laboured in the writing, as though care had to be taken 
in the copying or original orthography. 

Turki was Gul-badan’s native language; it was also her 
husband’s; it would be the home speech of her married 
life. Persian was.an accomplishment. These considera- 
tions awaken speculation: Did she compose in Persian ? 
or in Turki? That she read Turki is clear from her 
upbringing and her references to her father’s book. She 
has one almost verbal reproduction of a passage from it 
retained in Turki. 

The disadvantage of working from a single MS. is felt at 
every point, and nowhere more than when the MS. itself 
is under consideration. 








OF GUL-BADAN BEGAM. 

















: 5 
, ae _ 
=| ; 
x ry i e : 7 ; 
» a ‘ 
; 





NOTE ON THE PERSIAN TITLES. 


Of these there are two: 

1. ‘Humdayitin-nama. Written by Gul-badan Begam, 
daughter of Babar Padshah.’ This is on the first fly-leaf, 
which is of paper differing in colour and texture from that 
of the body of the MS., and identical with that of four 
blank sheets which are bound up at the end of the MS, 
perhaps to allow of writing in the missing portion of the 
work. 

2. ‘Accounts of Humayun Padshah. Put together by 
Gul-badan Begam, a daughter of Babar Padshah and a 
paternal aunt of Akbar Padshah.’ This stands on the first 
folio of the MS., which by the original paging is folio 10, 
and by the British Museum marking folio 2 (a). 


(2b of the Persian text.) 


In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compas- 
sionate ! : 


There had been an order?! issued, ‘ Write down whatever 
you know of the doings of Firdaus-makani and Jannat- 
ashyani.’? 

At the time when his Majesty Firdaus-makdni passed 
from this perishable world to the everlasting home, I, this 
lowly one, was eight® years old, so it may well be that I 
do not remember much. However, in obedience to the 
royal command, I set down whatever there is that I have 
heard and remember. 

First of all, by way of invoking a blessing (on my work), 
and in pious commemoration, a chapter (juzw) is written 
about my royal father’s deeds, although these are told in 
his memoirs.’ 





1 Probably that mentioned by Abii’l-fazl, as issued for the gathering- 
in of material for the Akbar-nadma. (H. Beveridge, I. 29.) If so, the 
begam’s book dates from about 1587 (995H.). There are indications 
of its use by Abi’]-fazl. 

2 Babar’s and Humayiin’s posthumous names, ‘ Dwelling’ and ‘ Nest- 
ing in Paradise.’ Several women, and notably Akbar’s mother, have 
been named after death Maryam-makdni, ‘Dwelling with Mary.’ 
Babar’s half-sister, Shahr-banit, is styled by A.F. Bilgis-makdni,— 
Bilqis being the Queen of Sheba. Many other examples might be 
quoted of the custom which, amongst some savage tribes, takes the 
extreme form of total suppression at death of the name borne in life, 
and towards which affection and reverence incline the most civilized 
‘peoples. 
 %Tunar years. Babar died December 26th, 1530. The begam’s 
dates and numerical statements must always be taken lightly. 

4 From this treasury Gul-badan’s meagre historical sketch can be 


6—2 


84 


From his Majesty Sahib-qirdnt' down to my royal father 
there was not one of the bygone princes who laboured as 
he did. He became king in his twelfth? year, and the 
khutba® was read in his name on June 10th, 1494,* in 
Andijan, the capital of Farghana. (3a) 

For eleven full years his wars and struggles against the 
Chaghatai and Timurid and Uzbeg princes® in Mawara’u- 
n-nahr (Transoxiana) were such that the tongue of the pen 
is too feeble and weak to recount them. 

The toils and perils which in the ruling of kingdoms 
befell our prince, have been measured out to few, and of 
few have been recorded the manliness, courage and en- 
durance which he showed in battle-fields and dangers. 
Twice he took Samargand by force of the sword. The 
first time my royal father was twelve years old, the second ~ 
nineteen, the third time he was nearly twenty-two.® For 
six months he was besieged’ (in Samarqand), and neither 
Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqrad, his paternal uncle,* who 





filled in. The Tuzi#k-1-babarz (Leyden and Erskine: Longman, Rees, 
etc., 1826.) will be referred to in these notes as the ‘Memoirs’ or 
‘Mems.’. Mr. W. Erskine’s ‘History of India under Babar and 
Humiayin’ will be indicated by ‘ B. & H.’. 

1 Lord of the fortunate conjunction, t.e., of Jupiter and Venus, a 
posthumous title of Timtir (1336-1405), from whom Babar was fifth in 
descent. 

2 Babar was born February 14th, 1483 (Muharram 6th, 888H.). He 
therefore became king of Farghina (Khokand) when 114 years old. 

3'The prayer and oration in which it is ordained that the name of 
the reigning sovereign should be recited. Cf. Dict. of Islam, Hughes, 
s.v.. The histories show that it was formerly so recited in India. The 
term ‘ Ruler of the Age’ filled Victoria’s place. 

* Ramzan 5th, 899H. | Text, 909H.]. 

6 The first and second of this triad of foes were near and elder - 
kinsmen ; the third was the Shaibani of the histories. 

6 Babar occupied Samargand three times. Twice he captured it, 
and the third time entered without a blow struck and amidst a popular 
welcome. The dates are respectively 1497, 1500, and 1511, and his 
age fifteen, seventeen, and twenty-nine. 

’ By Shaibani, after the second occupation. 

5 ‘amma. Husain was of the fourth, and Babar of the fifth degree 
of descent from their common ancestor, Timiir. Babar’s father was. 
(anglice) Husain’s fourth cousin. As Husain was of an elder genera- 
tion, Babar calls him ‘uncle.’ If ‘ammz# were ever used to denote 
an uncle by marriage, it would have triple application here, since. 
Husain married in succession three paternal aunts of Babar—Shahr- 


gm 

my 
hy: 

= 

Y 

~< 


. 


AMIR TIMUR 


MMR 
= 


mie 
See 


scene eer tmensiittiee 





eee Si 











85 


(ruled) in Khurasan, nor Sultan Mahmud Khan, his 
maternal uncle, who ruled in Kashghar, sent him help. 
When none came from any quarter, he grew desperate.” 

At this difficult time, Shahi Beg Khan? sent to say: ‘If 
you would marry your sister Khanzada Begam* to me, (3b) 
there might be peace and a lasting alliance between us.’ 
At length it had to be done; he gave the begam to the 
khan, and came out himself (from Samarqand).> With 200 
followers on foot, wearing long frocks on their shoulders 
and peasants’ brogues on their feet, and carrying clubs in 
their hands,—in this plight, unarmed, and relying on God, 
he went towards the lands of Badakhshan eee ane 
and Kabul.® 

Khusrau Shah’s’ people and army were in Comins and 
the Badakhshanat. He came and paid his respects to his 
Majesty,® my father, who, being’ as he was manly and 
kind and generous, did not in any way touch the question 
of retaliation, although Khusrau Shah had committed such 
crimes as the martyrdom of Bayasanghar Mirza and the 
blinding of Sultan Masud Mirza, both of whom were sons 
of my royal father’s paternal uncle. In addition to this, 
when in the early days of the forays,® his Majesty chanced 





bant, Latif and Payanda. Husain is the well-known Mecenas of 
Herat (1438-1506). 
ltagha. Sultan Mahmid Khan was full-brother of Qutluq-nigar, 
Babar’ s mother, so that here taghdai is exactly equivalent to our 
‘maternal uncle.’ Mahmid is ‘ the Khan’ and the ‘ elder Khan’ of the 
Memoirs, and also Janaki or Khanaki and Jangz. He was murdered 
by Shaibani in 1508. 

2 He was eighteen. 

3 Abi’l-fath Muhammad Shahbakht Khan Uzbeg (Shahi Beg Khan 
and Shaibani). 

*For details of her life and that of all other women named in this 
book and some other contemporary works, see Appendix. 

> Karly in 907H. (July, 1501). 

® Muharram, 910H. (June, 1504). 

7 A Qipchaq Tirk, chief beg of Sultan Mahmiid Mirza, the father of 
Bayasanghar and Mas‘id. He was put to death by Shaibani’s Uzbegs 
in 910H. (1505). 

’ Brevet rank. Babar was an exile from his own kingdom of 
Farghina, and not yet master of Kabul. 

® Turki, gazzdaqi, from gqazzdq (Cossack), the name of the nomads 
whom the Russians term Kirghiz. I think Gul-badan uses it to de- 


86 


to cross his country, he was watched and rudely driven 
out. Now he was pleased to command that Khusrau Shah 
should take whatever his heart desired of his (own) jewels 
and golden vessels, and so he got leave to go to Khurasan 
in kindness and safety, and took with him five or six 
strings of camels and five or six of baggage mules.' (4a) 

His Majesty now set out for Kabul, which was occupied 
by Muhammad Mugim, a son of Zi’l-niin Arghin, and 
grandfather of Nahid Begam.? He had captured it after 
Ulugh Beg Mirza’s® death from Mirza ‘Abdu-r-razzaq, son 
of his Majesty’s paternal uncle (Ulugh Beg). 

His Majesty reached Kabul in safety. Muhammad 
Muqim kept command for a few days, and then by pact 
and agreement made over charge to the royal servants, and 
went off with goods and chattels to his father in Qandahar. 
This was in the last ten days of Rabi II., 910H.* Being 
now master of Kabul, his Majesty went to Bangash, took it 
at a blow, and returned to Kabul. 

Her Highness, the khanam,® his Majesty’s mother, had 
fever for six days, and then departed from this fleeting 
world to the eternal home. They laid her in the New Year’s 
Garden. His Majesty paid 1,000 coined misqal to his 
kinsmen, the owners of the garden, and laid her there. 

At this time urgent letters arrived from Sultan Husain 
Mirza, saying: (4b) ‘I am planning a war against the Uzbegs. 
It would be excellent if you came too.’ My royal father 





scribe the time of her father’s military incursions, made when he was 
trying to carve out a ruler’s seat. 

1The begam’s brevity makes Babar’s capacity and forbearance 
seem alike remarkable. He had gathered a force, and safety was the 
- condition of Khusrau’s surrender (1504). Mr. Erskine writes (B. & 
H., I. 208.) : ‘ Babar, whose abhorrence of Khusrau was as deep as it 
was just, ordered his treasurer to send back the treasure, horses, and 
whatever had been presented to him, just as they were; although, 
says our author (Mirza Haidar), the King had only one horse suitable 
for a person of his rank, and that was used by his mother.’ 

2 Through his daughter Mah Chiichak. 

3 A son of Abii-sa‘id, known as Ka@bulz. He died 1502. 

4 October, 1504. Babar was now twenty-three, and had acquired 
more territory than his lost Farghana. 

® Qutluq-nigir. She died June, 1505. 


87 


sought counsel of God. At length he set out to join the 
mirza. On the way news came that the mirza was dead. 
His Majesty’s amirs represented that, this being so, it was 
advisable to return to Kabul, but he replied: ‘As we have _ 
come so far, we will carry our condolences to the princes.’ 

In the end he went on towards Khurasan.! 

When the princes? heard of the royal visit, they one and 
all set out to give him honourable meeting, except Badi‘u- 
z-zaman Mirza, who did not go because Baranduq Beg 
and Zii’l-ntin Beg—amirs of Sultan Husain Mirza—said, in 
effect, that as his Majesty was fifteen years younger than 
Badiu-z-zaman Mirza, it was right that he should be the 
first to bow, and that they should then embrace one 
another. Qasim Beg® rejoined: ‘ Younger he is by years, 
but by the tiéira,* he has precedence because he has more 
than once taken Samarqand by force of the sword.’ (5a) 
At length they agreed that his Majesty should bow on 
coming in, and that Badi‘u-z-zaman should then advance 
to show him honour, and they should embrace. The 
mirza was not attending when his Majesty came in at the 
door; Qasim Beg clutched my royal father’s girdle and 
pulled it, and said to Barandtiq Beg and Zi’l-nin Beg: 
‘The agreement was that the mirza should come forward 
and that then they should embrace one another.’ The 
prince then advanced in great agitation and they embraced. 

As long as his Majesty was in Khurasan, each one of 
the princes showed him hospitality, and feasts were 
arranged, and excursions to all the gardens and places of 





1 Babar set out in June, 1506 (Muharram, 912H.). Husain had died 
in May (Zi’l-hijja, 911H.), on his way northwards from Herat, and at 
Baba Mahi. Word reached Babar when he had already made a great 
journey and had crossed the Saighan and Dandan-shikan passes to 
Kahmard. After receiving the news he marched some 800 miles to the 
mirzas’ camp on the Murgh-ab. 

2 Badi‘u-z-zaman and Muhammad Muzaffar Husain, sons of Sultan 
Husain Mirza. The meeting was on November 6th, 1506 (Jumada IT. 
8th, 912H.). 

3 Babar’s Prime Minister and (I believe) relation. He was of the 
Qiichin tribe to which Babar’s grandmother, Ais-daulat, belonged. 

* The Rules of Chingiz Khan. These are referred to again on points 
of etiquette. 


88 


interest. They set forth to him the inconvenience of 
winter, and said: ‘ Wait till it is over, and we will fight 
the Uzbegs.’ But they could not in any way settle about 
the war. LEHighty years' long had Sultan Husain Mirza 
kept Khurasan safe and sound, but the mirzas could not 
fill their father’s place for six months. When his Majesty 
saw that they were careless? about his expenses and revenue, 
he went to Kabul on the pretext of seeing the places he had 
assigned to himself. (5b) Much snow had fallen that year. 
They took the wrong road. His Majesty and Qasim Beg 
chose one® because of its shortness, but the amirs had 
given other advice, and when this was not taken, they all 
left him without a thought for him. He and (Qasim 
Beg and his sons made a road in two or three days by 
removing the snow, and the people of the army followed. 
So they reached Ghirband. Some Hazara rebels having 
met his Majesty here, there was fighting; and cattle and 
sheep and goods without number belonging to the Hazara 
fell into the hands of his people. Then they started for 
Kabul with their enormous booty. 

At the skirts of Minar Hill they heard that Mirza Khan* 
and Mirza Muhammad Husain Girkan® had rebelled and 





1A well-rounded number. Sultan Husain was born 842H. (1488), 
and died 911H. (1506). Babar calls the joint-kingship of his sons a 
strange arrangement and one never heard of, and quotes Sa‘di’s well- 
known couplet as applicable—‘ Ten darvishes can sleep on one rug, but 
one climate cannot hold two kings.’ 

2 While on the Murgh-ab, Babar agreed to winter in Khurasan, and he 
went with the joint-kings to Herat in order to see the ‘ sights’ of that 
renowned city. He certainly worked hard, for he names some fifty- 
two which he saw in twenty days. The invitation to winter was 
repeated, but neither quarters nor suitable conveniences (? revenues) 
were allotted. Babar delicately says he could not explain his real 
motive for not remaining, and left under pressure of necessity on 
December 24th, 1506, after snow had fallen along a route which was a. 
month’s ordinary journey. 

It was during this absence from Kabul that he married Maham, 
Humaytin’s mother. 

i Through the Aimaq and Hazara country, and south of his route to ' 
erat. 

* Sultan Wais, a son of Babar’s paternal uncle, Mahmid, and his 
maternal aunt (7.e., his mother’s half-sister), Sultan Nigar Khanam. 

° Father of Haidar Mirza Dughlat, author of the Tartkh-i-rashidi. 
He married Khib-nigar, full-sister of Babar’s mother. 


89 


were holding Kabul. His Majesty sent a comforting and 
cheering letter (to his friends in the fort), and said: ‘ Be of 
good heart! I too am here. (6a) I will light a fire on the 
Hill of the Moon-faced Lady; do you light one on the 
Treasury, so that I may be sure you know of our coming.— — 
In the morning we will fall on the enemy, you from that 
side and we from this.’ But he had fought and won before 

the people of the fort came out. 

Mirza Khan hid himself in his mother’s house; she was 
his Majesty’s maternal aunt. Mirza Muhammad Husain 
was in his wife’s house. She was his Majesty’s younger 
maternal aunt. He flung himself down on a carpet, and 
in fear of his life cried to a servant, ‘Fasten it up!’ His 
Majesty’s people heard of this. They took him out of the 
carpet and brought him to the presence. In the end, his 
Majesty forgave the mirzas their offences, for the sake of 
his aunts. He used to go, in his old fashion, in and out 
of his aunts’ houses,! and showed them more and more 
affection, so that no mist of trouble might dim their hearts. 
He assigned them places and holdings in the plain- 
country. (6b) 

God the most High; having freed Kabul from the power 
of Mirza Khan, committed it to my royal father’s care. He 
was then twenty-three years old? and had no child and greatly 
desired one. In his seventeenth year a girl? had been born 
to him by ‘Ayisha Sultan Begam, a daughter of Sultan 
Ahmad Mirza, but she had died in a month. The most 
high God blessed the taking of Kabul, for after it eighteen 
children were born. (1.) Of my Lady (Akadm*) who was 
Maham Begam there were born his Majesty the Emperor 





1 Text, khana khali khalah@z. This I do not understand, as there 
were certainly no mothers’ brothers present in Kabul now. 

* He was twenty-three when he took Kabul from Muhammad Muqim 
Arghin in 1504. Mirza Khan’s rebellion took place two years later. 

$ Fakhru-n-nisa', the Glory of Women. ‘She was my first child, 
and I was just nineteen. In a month, or forty days, she went to the 
mercy of God.’ (Mems. 90.) 

4 Written sometimes Akam, and sometimes Akam. The Tiirki Aka 
is used as a title of respect from a junior to a senior. It has also the 
sense ‘ elder brother,’ which makes application to a woman doubtful. 


90 


Humayiin, and Barbil Mirza, and Mihr-jan (jahan) Begam, 
and Ishan-daulat Begam, and Fariiq Mirza.! 

(2.) Ma‘stma Sultan Begam, daughter of Sultan Ahmad 
Mirza, died in childbed. The mother’s name they gave to 
the daughter. 

(3.) Of Gul-rukh Begam were born Kamran Mirza, and 
‘Askari Mirza, and Shah-rukh Mirza, and Sultan Ahmad 
Mirza, and Gul-izar Begam. 

(4.) Of Dil-dar Begam were born Gul-rang Begam, and 
Gul-chihra Begam, and Hindal Mirza, and Gul-badan 
Begam, and Alwar Mirza.? 

. In short, in taking Kabul he got a good omen. All his 
children were born there except two begams who were born 
in Khost, viz., Mihr-jan Begam, a daughter of Maham 
Begam, and Gul-rang, a daughter of Dil-dar Begam. (7a) 

The blessed birth of the Emperor Humayin, the first-born 
son of his Majesty Firdaus-makdni, occurred in the night 
of Tuesday, Zi’l-qa da 4th, 918H. (March 6th, 1508), in the 
citadel of Kabul, and when the sun was in the sign Pisces. 

That same year his Majesty was pleased to order the 
amirs and the rest of the world to style him emperor 
(badshah). For before the birth of the Emperor Humayiin 
he had been named and styled Mirza Babar. All kings’ 
sons were called mirzas. In the year of his Majesty 
Humayin’s birth he styled himself badshah. 

They found’ the date of the birth in Sultan Humdytin 
Khan, and also in Shah-(i)-ftroz-qadr.* 

After children had been born to him, news came that 
Shah Isma‘il had killed Shahi Beg Khan.° 





(Cf. Vambéry’s ‘ Cagataische Sprach-studien.’) Babar uses the word 
(Mems. 208.), and Mr. Erskine suggests to read ‘ My Lady.’ 

1 Born 1525; died 1527. His father never saw him. 

* Gul-badan or her copyist does not balance accounts. She says 
eighteen, and names sixteen children. This may be a clerical error 
only. 

32.e., by abjad. Cf. Steingass’ Persian Dictionary, s.v. abjad. 

4 ‘The king, victorious in might.’ 

5 At Merv, December 2nd, 1510. Cf. B. & H., I. 802. On the 
removal of this formidable foe, Babar again tried to regain his ancestral 
lands, but was still outmatched by the Uzbegs. Defeat by them led 
him to take a road of less resistance through Bajaur to Hindiistan. 


91 


His Majesty at this time entrusted Kabul to Nasir! Mirza, 
and set out? for Samarqand, taking with him his people and 
wives and children, who were Humaytn Mirza, and Mihr- 


jahan Begam, and Barbul Mirza, and Masuma Begam, and 


Kamran Mirza. (7b) 

With help from Shah Ismail, he took Samarqand 
(October, 1511), and for eight (lunar) months the whole of 
Mawara’u-n-nahr (Transoxiana) was in his power. Owing 
to want of co-operation in his brothers and to the oppo- 
sition of the Mughals,’ he was defeated at Kul Malik by 
‘Ubaidu-l-lah Khan. As he could not remain in those 
parts, he set out for Badakhshan and Kabul, and put out 
of his head further thought of Mawara’u-n-nahr. 

He had become master of Kabul in 910H. (1504). He 
had always desired to go into Hindustan, and had not 
carried out his wish because of the feeble counsels of his 
amirs and the non-agreement of his brothers. When at 
length these were gone,* and there remained no amir such 
as could argue against it, he accomplished his desire. 

Bajaur’ he took in two or three hours and ordered a 
general massacre. 

On the same day the father of Afghani dghacha,® Malik 
Manstr Yusufzai, came in and paid his respects. (8a) His 
Majesty took his daughter in marriage and then gave him 
leave to depart. He bestowed on him a horse and a suit 
of honour befitting a ruler, and said to him: ‘Go and 





1 Babar’s half-brother, son of Umid, an Andijani. 

* January, 1511 (Shawwal, 916H.). 

3 For a more interesting cause of defeat, cf. B. & H., I. 321, et seq. 
‘Ubaidu-l-lab was Shaibani’s nephew. Kil (Lake) Malik is in Bokhara. 
Babar was again defeated by the Uzbegs in this same year (1511). 

47.e., dead. Jahangir died in 1507 and Nasir in 1515, both from 
drinking. This passage resembles Babar’s own words. (Mems. 309.) 

° Gul-badan is confusingly brief. Bajaur was attacked 925H. (1519) 
on the way to India, and its people put to the sword because they were 
‘rebels to followers of Islam’ and addicted to infidel customs. 
(Mems. 246 et seq...) 

6 The Afghan Lady. It is thus that Gul-badan always speaks of Bibi 
(Lady) Mubarika, the Ytisufzai wife of Babar. Pavet de Courteille 
defines adghacha thus: ‘Se dit des femmes par opposition 4 begam et 
khanam; dame.’ I do not in Gul-badan’s work trace any disrespect 
attaching to ‘aghdcha,’ such as is indicated by ‘ concubine,’ as which 
it is sometimes translated. 


92 


bring men and labourers, etc., to your native land and 
cultivate it.’ 

Qasim Beg,! who was in Kabul, sent a letter saying: 
‘Another prince has been born. I have ventured to write 
as an omen of the conquest of Hind and of taking its 
throne. As for the rest, the Emperor is master, whatever 
is his pleasure” (let it be done). In an auspicious hour 
his Majesty named him Mirza Hindal. 

Having subdued Bajaur, his Majesty went towards the 
Bhira country, and on his arrival made peace without 
plundering. He took four laks of shahrukhis? and gave to 
his army, dividing them according to the number of his 
followers. He then set out for Kabul.* 

Just now came a letter from Badakhshan saying: ‘ Mirza 
Khan is dead ;> Mirza Sulaiman is young; the Uzbegs are 
near ; take thought for this kingdom lest (which God forbid) 
Badakhshan should be lost.’ (8b) Until there should be 
thought taken, Mirza Sulaiman’s mother® had brought him 
(to the Emperor). Agreeably to this petition and their 
wish, the Emperor assigned to Mirza Sulaiman the lands 
and inheritance which had been his father’s, and he gave 
Badakhshan to Mirza Humayin. 

The mirza set out for his province. His Majesty and 
my Lady (Akadm) followed and also went to Badakhshan, 
and there spent several days together. The mirza remained 





1 Qasim Beg Qaichin, an ancient Beg of Andijan, and one of Babar’s 
best followers. 

2 Qy., as to the child’s name. His true name was Muh. Nasir, but he 
is only known as Hindal. He was Gul-badan’s full brother, and was 
given, before birth, to Maham Begam, who had lost all her children 
younger than Humayiin. Cf. 24a n. 

3 Estimated by Mr. Erskine at about £20,000 sterling. 

4 End of February, 1519. In his winning fashion Babar relates that 
he forbade the news of his return to be taken to Kabul, and that there 
was therefore no time to put his boys, Humayiin and Kamran, on 
horseback, and that they were carried out in the arms of the nearest 
servants to offer their duty on his return, to a place between the fort 
gates and the citadel. 

5 Cor. 926H. (1520). Cf. Mems. 286 n., and Tar. Rash., Ney Elias 
and Ross, 373 n.. 

6 Sultan Nigar Khanam. 


93 


and my royal father and my Lady came back to Kabul’ 
(926H.—1520). 

After a time his Majesty set out for Qilat and Qandahar.’ 
He was victorious at once in Qilat, and went on to Qanda-— — 
har and kept its garrison shut up for a year and a half. 
Then, by the Divine favour and after great fighting and 
skirmishing, he captured it. Much gold fell into his 
hands, and he gave moneys and camels to his soldiers and 
the people of the army. Qandahar he bestowed on Mirza 
Kamran, and himself set off for Kabul. 

His advance camp having been set up,*® he crossed the 
hill of Yak Langa, and gloriously alighted in the valley of 
Dih-i-ya'qub on Friday, Safar 1st, 932H. (November 17th, 
1525), when the sun was in Sagittarius. (9a) He spent the 
following day there, and on the next set forth, march by 
march, for Hindistan. In the seven or eight years since 
925H. (1519)* the royal army had several times renewed the 
attempt on Hindustan. Each time it used to conquer lands 
and districts, such as Bhira, Bajaur, Sialkit, Dipalpir, 
Lahér, etc., up to the fifth time, when on Safar 1st, 932H., 
his Majesty went, march by march, from his glorious en- 
camping in Dih-i-yaqub towards Hindustan. He conquered 
Lahor and Sirhind, and every country that lay on his 
path. : 

On Friday, Rajab 8th, 932H. (April 20th, 1526), he 





1 Humiayiin was now thirteen years old. He was young to be sent 
so far as Badakhshan. That his parents went with him is one of Gul- 
badan’s life-giving touches. Akam may now well have shown her 
boy to her father and her kinsfolk in Khost. (Memoirs of Bayazid, 
1.0. MS., 26a.) 

* Held now by Shah Beg Arghian, father of Shah Husain, Humayiin’s 
later enemy in Sind. Firishta gives three years as the duration of the 
siege, Khafi Khan four years, and Mirza Haidar five years. The 
occurrence unfortunately coincides with one of the gaps in the Memoirs, 
This was Babar’s culminating attempt on Qandahar; his first being 
in 1505,—this one seems to have ended in 1522 (928H.). 

3 Gul-badan, by a sudden transition, passes over some three years, 
and, as it seems, using her father’s Memoirs, enters on the account 
of his last and successful expedition to Hindiistan. Yak Langa isa hill 
between Kabul and Butkhak, and on the road to Jalalabad. 

* Text, 935H. ; clearly a slip. 


94 


arrayed battle at Panipat’ against Sultan Ibrahim, son of 
Sultan Sikandar, son of Bahlil Lodi. By God’s grace he 
was victorious, and Sultan Ibrahim was killed in the fight. 

His victory was won purely by the Divine grace, for 
Sultan Ibrahim had a lak and 80,000 horse, and as many 
as 1,500 head of fierce elephants; (9b) while his Majesty’s 
army with the traders and good and all (badr (?) bad, bad) 
was 12,000 persons and he had, at the outside, 6,000 or 
7,000 serviceable men. | 

The treasures of five kings fell into his hands. He gave 
everything away. The amirs of Hind represented that in 
Hindistan it was thought disgraceful to expend the treasure 
of bygone kings, and that people rather added and added to 
it, while his Majesty, on the contrary, had given all away.’ 

Khwaja’? Kilan* Beg asked leave several times to go to 
Kabul. He said: ‘My constitution is not fitted for the 
climate of Hindustan. If leave were given, I should tarry 
awhile in Kabul.’ His Majesty was not at all, at all 
willing for him to go, but at last gave permission because 
he saw him so very urgent. He said: ‘When you go, I 
shall send some of the valuable presents and curiosities of 
Hind which fell into our hands through the victory over 





1¢ A far-reaching, almost illimitable level tract, broken only by insig- © 
nificant undulations. Here and there, where the shallow soil is 
moistened from some niggardly watercourse, grow sparse grasses and 
stunted thorn-bushes. But, for the most part, the eye falls only on 
the uniform yellowish-gray waste of sterile earth. Everywhere empty 
silence reigns, and it would almost seem as if this desert had been 
designed for the battlefield of nations.’ (Emperor Akbar, F. v. Noer., 
trs. A.S.B. I. 74.) 

Thrice in modern times a decisive battle has been fought out here: 
(1) by Babar against Ibrahim and the Lodis, 1526; (2) by Akbar 
against the Indian Afghans in 1556; and (3) by Ahmad Shah Durrani 
against the Marathas in 1761. 

2 Babar distributed the treasure on the 11th or 12th of May, 1526, _ 
and left himself so little that he was dubbed galandar. 

3M. Garcin de Tassy says, in his ‘ Mémoire sur la Religion Musal- 
mane’ (46 n.) that khwaja, like sayyid, is a title for a descendant of 
Muhammad. Shaw’s Ttrki Dictionary states that khwaja is applied 
to the offspring of a sayyid by a woman of another family, also to 
their descendants. I find many instances where both titles are applied 
to the same man. 

4 One of Babar’s most admirable followers and friends, and perhaps 
arelation. He was one of seven brothers, sons of Maulana Muhammad 
Sadru-d-din, who spent their lives in Babar’s service. 


95 


Sultan Ibrahim, to my elder relations’ and sisters and each 
person of the haram. You take them. I shall write a list, 
and you will distribute them according to it. (10a) You 
will order a tent with a screen to be set up in the Garden 
of the Audience Hall for each begam,” and when a pleasant 
meeting-place has been arranged, the begams are to make 
the prostration of thanks for the complete victory which 
has been brought about. 

‘To each begam is to be delivered as follows: one special 
dancing-girl of the dancing-girls of Sultan Ibrahim, with 
one gold plate full of jewels—ruby and pearl, cornelian and 
diamond, emerald and turquoise, topaz and cat's-eye—and 
two small mother-o-pearl trays full of ashraftis, and on 
two other trays shahrukhis,* and all sorts of stuffs by nines— 
that is, four trays and one plate. Take a dancing-girl and 
another plate of jewels, and one each of ashrafts and 
shahrukhts, and present, in accordance with my directions, 
to my elder relations the very plate of jewels and the self- 
same dancing-girl which I have given for them. I have 
made other gifts ;* convey these afterwards. (10b) Let 
them divide and present jewels and ashrafis and shah- 
rukhis and stuffs to my sisters and children and the 
harams® and kinsmen, and to the begams and aghas® and 





1 waliyu-n-ni'matdn, lords of beneficence. Gul-badan’s application 
of it is to ‘ benevolent ladies,’ 2.e., the numerous aunts. It is a title of 
respect for seniors. 

2 T think each begam was to encamp with her own establishment and 
within her own enclosure (sardparda), and not in hasty camp-fashion 
of community of quarters. This would exalt the assembly. 

The saraparda or enclosing canvas wall, run at optional distance 
round tents, was, it is stated in the Ma’asirw-r-rahimz, invented by 
Bairam Khdn-i-khdndn, and if this is true, it must at this date have 
been a quite modern convenience. 

* It is waste of time to try to estimate the amount of these money 
gifts, made as they were in coins of uncertain value and recorded, 
probably on hearsay, more than fifty years after bestowal. Mr. Erskine 
puts the sha@hrukhz at from 10d. to 1s., Steingass, s.v.ashrafi, gives 
for its value about 16 rwpis, presumably of undegenerated rank. 

£ Qy., for the elder relations. 

: Presumably of his kinsmen and of officers whose families were with 
Babar’s own in Kabul. 

6 This word seems to describe women who were heads of household 
departments and not merely the guardians of harams. 


96 


nurses and foster-brethren and ladies, and to all who 
pray for me.’ The gifts were made according to the 
list. 

Three happy days they remained together in the Audience 
Hall Garden. They were uplifted by pride, and recited 
the fatiha' for the benediction and prosperity of his 
Majesty, and joyfully made the prostration of thanks.? 

The Emperor sent by Khwaja Kilan a large ashraf7,? 
which weighed three imperial s?, that is, fifteen st of 
Hind, for . . . ‘Asas.* He said to the Khwaja: ‘If ‘Asas 
asks you, ‘‘What has the Emperor sent for me?’’ say, 
‘One ashrafi,’’’ as there really was only one. ‘Asas was 
amazed, and fretted about it for three days. His Majesty 
had ordered that a hole should be bored in the ashrafi, and 
that “Asas should be blindfolded and the ashraf? hung 
round his neck, and that then he was to be sent into the 
haram. The hole was bored and the ashraft hung round 
his neck. He was quite helpless with surprise at its 
weight, and delighted and-very, very happy. He took it 
in both hands, and wondered over it and said, ‘No one 
shall get my ashraf?.’ Hach begam, too, gave (? him) ten or 
twelve ashrafz, so he had seventy or eighty. (11a) 

After Khwaja Kilan Beg had started for Kabul, the 
Emperor made gifts in Agra to his Majesty Humayun and 





1 The first chapter of the Quran. 

2 In this prostration the forehead touches the ground. 

3 Perhaps from the Lodi treasury. (Cf. J.A.S.B. Proceedings, 1888 ; 
~ Thomas, 423; Richardson’s Ar. & Per. Dict., s.v. sikka ; Memoirs of 
the Mughal Empire, Jonathan Scott, 3 and 3 n.) 

4 Lit. a night-guard. The words preceding ‘Asas offer much diffi- 
culty. They may be read ba ‘ammiu,—to the paternal uncle of ‘Asas. 
But the story is of ‘Asas, the night-guard and not of his uncle. Perhaps 
‘ammiu is a clerical error for ‘amah, bewilderment, misleading, and 
this would suit the story well. Mr. Beveridge has suggested to me to 
read ‘Umari, %.e., an old servant of ‘Umar Shaikh. This, too, 
would be appropriate, for the victim of the hoax is clearly an old 
man. 

The title ‘Asas is applied several times by Babar. One ‘Asas was a 
boon companion and partook of Babar’s vow before the battle of 
Khanwa. (Mems. 283 and 354; Firishta, Pers. Text, Briggs I. 449.) 
Gul-badan names one (20b) as entrusted with the care of Babar’s 
tomb,—Muh. ‘Ali ‘Asas. I think he was brother to Maham Begam, 
and the governor of Kabul whom Kamran murdered in 1547. 


97 


to all the mirzas and sultans and amirs. He sent letters 
in all directions, urgently saying, ‘We shall take into 
full favour all who enter our service, and especially such 
as served our father and grandfather and ancestors. If 
such will come to us, they will receive fitting benefits. 
Whoever there may be of the families of Sahib-qiran~and 
Chingiz Khan, let them turn towards our court. The most 
High has given us sovereignty in Hindustan; let them 
come that we may see prosperity together.’ 

Seven! daughters of Sultan Abi-said came (to Hindi- 
stan): Guhar-shad Begam, and Fakhr-jahan Begam, and 
Khadija Sultan Begam, and Badiu-l-jamal. Begam, and 
Aq Begam, and Sultén Bakht Begam. 

(Also) Zainab Sultan Khanam, daughter of his Majesty’s 
maternal uncle, Sultan Mahmud Khan, and Muhibb Sultan 
Khanam,? daughter of I/a@cha Khan (Ahmad), his Majesty’s 
younger maternal uncle. 

In short, all the begams and khanams went, ninety-six 
persons in all, and all received houses and lands and gifts 
to their heart’s desire. (11b) 

_All through the four years that (my father) was in Agra 
he used to go on Fridays to see his paternal aunts. One 
day it was extremely hot, and her Highness my lady 
(Akam) said, ‘The wind is very hot, indeed; how would 
it be if you did not go this one Friday? The begams 
would not be vexed.’ His Majesty said, ‘Maham! it is 
astonishing that you should say such things! The 
daughters of Abu-said Sultan Mirza, who have been 
deprived of father and brothers! If I do not cheer them, 
how will it be done ?” 

To the architect, Khwaja Qasim, his Majesty gave the 
following order: ‘We command a piece of good service 
from you. It is this: whatever work, even if it be on a 
great scale, our paternal aunts may order done in their 





1 Six only named. 
2 Wife of Mirza Haidar Dughldt, the historian. 


7 


98 


palace, give it precedence, and carry it out with might and 
main.’ 

He commanded buildings to be put up in Agra on the 
other side of the river,! and a stone palace to be built for 
himself between the haram and the garden. He also had 
one built in the audience court, with a reservoir in the 
middle and four chambers in the four towers. On the 
river’s bank he had a chaukandi? built. (12a) 

He ordered a tank made in Dholpur, ten by ten,’ out of 
a single mass of rock, and used to say, ‘When it is 
finished, I will fill it with wine.’ But as he had given up 
wine before the fight with Rana Sanga, he filled it with 
lemonade. 

A year after Sultan Ibrahim’s death, the rana* appeared 
from the Mandut (or Hindu) side with a countless host. 
Amirs and rajas and ranas, every one of those who had 
come earlier and paid duty to his Majesty, now became an 
enemy and went and joined the rana, until Kul-jalali and 
Sambhal and Rapri—every pargana,—and rais and rajas 
and Afghans became hostile. Nearly two laks of cavalry 
assembled. . 

At this time, Muhammad Sharif, the astrologer, said to 
the royal soldiers, ‘It would be best for the Emperor not to 
fight, for the constellation Sakkiz Yildoz (Hight Stars) is 
opposite.’ Amazing perturbation fell upon the royal army. 
They became exceedingly anxious and troubled,° and showed 
signs of cowardice. (120) When his Majesty saw his army 





1 7.e,, opposite the fort. 

2 ¢ A building on the roof which has a door on each of the four sides.” 
Vullers, 602. Badaoni uses ghurfa, upper room, as an equivalent. 
Cf. Elliot’s History of India, V. 347 and 503. 

3 About 20 feet by 20 feet. (Mems. 398 n..) 

4 This decisive battle was fought on March 16th, 1527, on the skirts. 
of the hill of Sikri, at Khanwa. Akbar’s prenomen of Fathipur—. 
the City of Victory—was given to Sikri in 1573 to commemorate the 
Gujrat campaign. 

5 When the fight had been won, Babar soundly rated Muhammad. 
Sharif, gave him money, and dismissed him to the place from which 
he had emerged, apparently only to cause trouble. He had come to 
India with a royal kinsman from Kabul, and to Kabul in 1519 from 
Khost (Maham’s home). 


99 


in this state, he thought over the whole position. As the 
enemy was close at hand, this device occurred to his 
blessed mind; he ordered the remnant of what remained 
over and above deserters and enemies, to gather together. 
One and all came—amirs and khans and sultans; plebeian 
and noble, low and high. Then he addressed them, and 
said: ‘Do you not know that there lies a journey of some 
months between us and the land of our birth and our 
familiar city? If our side is defeated, (God preserve us 
from that day! God forbid it!) where are we? where 
is our birthplace? where our city? We have to do with 
strangers and foreigners. It is in every way best for 
each man to set resolutely before himself the two alterna- 
tives: if we win, we are avengers of the cause of God; if 
we lose, we die martyrs. In either fate is our salvation ; 
each is a step and upward stage in greatness.’ 

To this they all agreed. They swore by the divorce of 
their wives and on the Holy Book; they recited the /atiha, 
and said, ‘O King! God willing, we will not spare our- 
selves in sacrifice and devotion, so long as there are breath 
and life in our bodies.”! (13a) 

Two days before the battle his Majesty renounced wine, 
and, indeed, he forswore all forbidden things. Following 
his example, 400 young men of name, who had given proof 
of manliness and one-mindedness and friendship, also 
renounced these things when he did. His Majesty broke 
up all forbidden utensils,—vessels of gold and of silver, 
goblets and flasks, etc.; and he gave them to the poor and 
needy. 

He also sent abroad firmdns with the announcement: 
‘We exempt (you) from all dues and octroi and tithe on 
corn, and from all illegal imposts, so that no one, trader or 





1 Mr. Erskine thus gives Babar’s words: ‘Every man dies. God 
only survives unchangeable. He who comes to life’s feast must 
drink the parting cup of death. How much better to die with honour 
than to live with infamy ’ 

Perhaps, as Gul-badan says, Babar touched also the thought of home, 
and this would be recorded by the woman. 


7—2 


100 


other, may be hampered in his comings and goings, but all 
may move unmolested and free from interference.’ 

In the night! before the battle word was brought that 
Qasim Husain Sultan,—a grandson of Sultan Husain Mirza 
through a daughter, ‘Ayisha Sultan Begam,—had come 
to within ten kos (of the royal camp) on his way from 
Khurasan. (13)) 

This news delighted his Majesty greatly. He asked, 
“How many men are with him?’ When he heard ‘thirty 
or forty,’ he at once sent off 1,000 troopers, all armed and 
equipped, at midnight, so that they might march in again 
with Qasim Husain Sultan, and in this way the enemy and 
outsiders be let know that reinforcements had come in good 
time. Everyone who heard the plan thought it a good one. 

Next morning, which was March 16th, 1527 (Jumada II. 
[18th], 983H.), his Majesty arrayed battle against Rana 
Sanga on the skirts of the hill of Sikri, where now Fathpur 
has been built? and peopled. By the Divine grace he was 
victorious and became an avenger of the cause of God.° 

A year later my lady (akém), who was Maham Begam, 
came from Kabul to Hinditstan. I, this insignificant one, 
came with her in advance of my sisters, and paid my duty to 
my royal father. When my lady reached Kul(-jalali—z.e., 
‘Alighar), his Majesty had sent two litters with three 
horsemen. (14a) She went on post-haste from Kil to Agra. 
His Majesty had intended to go as far as Kil-jalali to meet 
her. At evening-prayer time some one came and said to 
him: ‘I have just passed her Highness on the road, four 
miles out.’ My royal father did not wait for a horse to be 





1 Babar says that Qasim had come earlier and with 500 men. Muh. 
Sharif, the ‘rascally fellow’ and ‘ evil-minded wretch,’ was with him. 
(Mems., 352.) 

2 How beautifully built may, in small part, be seen by visiting the 
Oriental section of the South Kensington Museum and there examining 
the architectural reproductions, the drawings of Mr. W. B. Carpenter, 
the photographs, ete. The South Kensington Museum and the British 
Museum furnish numerous illustrations for Gul-badan Begam’s M6&., 
and add to it the charm of life and reality. 

3 Ghazi. Babar now assumed this title, because he had vanquished 
non-Muhammadans. 


bd Hc a Bd 


101 


saddled but set out on foot. He met her near the house of 
Maham’s nanacha.!| She wished to alight, but he would 
not wait, and fell into her train and walked to his own 
house.’ ee 

At the time of her meeting his Majesty, she desired me 
to come on by daylight and pay my respects to him. 

. . . ‘nine troopers, with two sets of nine horses and 
the two extra litters which the Emperor had sent, and one 
litter which had been brought from Kabul, and about a 
hundred of my lady’s Mughal servants, mounted on fine 
_ (tiptichaq) horses,‘ all elegance and beauty.° 

My royal father’s Khalifa® with his wife Sultanam’ came 
as far as Naugram®’ to meet (us). My mdmds® had made 
me alight at the Little Garden, and having spread a small 
carpet, seated me on it. They instructed me to rise when 
Khalifa came in, and to embrace him. When he came, I 
rose and embraced him. Then his wife Sultanam came in 





1 dar pesh khana nanacha Maham. This might read ‘in the advance 
camp.’ Maham’s nanacha appears thrice in the MS.: here and at 180 
and 26a. She is clearly of the innermost circle. The word may be 
rendered ‘ dear little mother,’ and is one of close affection. 

2 Cf. Mems., 423. 

8 tuqiz. The Tiirks made kings’ gifts by nines and attached 
superstitious reverence to the number. 

+ A tipachaq horse, according to Shaw, is long-necked like a Tarkman 
horse, and it seems. ‘also to be one with speed, beauty, and specially- 
trained paces. Vambéry says,‘ ein fettes, gutes Pferd.’ 

® The above passage is inserted without break in the text and sug- 
gests transcription from an imperfect MS. It may be an enumeration 
of the items of the cortége which followed Maham with Gul-badan. 

6 Sayyid or Khwaja Nizamu-d-din ‘Ali Barlds and Babar's vazir. 
Hod brother, Junaid Barlds, married Shahr-bani, a half-sister of 
Babar. 

’ Clearly an intimate. There were close relations, as has been said, 
between this Barlds family and Babar. Cf. Biographical Appendix, 
s.n. Sultanam. : :, 

8 Some four miles from Agra and on the east of the Jamna. The 
royal palace was not yet built on the western bank. Cf. Rajpiitana 
Gazetteer, III. 274. 

9 Steingass translates ‘ mother,’ ‘matron,’ and ‘old women.’ One 
mama is named later, ‘ Fakhru-n-nisa‘, my mama.’ (26a) She was the 
mother of Nadim Khwaja kijka. She is several times mentioned, and 
it appears from a MS. belonging to Colonel Hanna which Mr. 
Beveridge has examined, that she was mother-in-law of the celebrated 
Maham anaga who was Nadim’s wife. 


102 


too. (14b) I, not knowing, wished to get up, but Khalifa 
raised objections, and said: ‘She is your old serving- 
woman. ‘There is no need to rise for her. Your father has 
exalted this old servant (? himself) by giving such an order! 
about him. So be it! what power have slaves ?’ 

From Khalifa I accepted 6,000 shahrukhis and five horses, 
and Sultanam gave me 8,000 and three horses. Then she 
said: ‘A hasty meal (md hazart) is ready. If you will eat 
you will honour your servants.’ I consented. There was 
a raised platform in a pleasant spot, and a pavilion of red 
cloth with lining of Gujrati brocade, and six canopies of 
cloth and brocade, each of a (differing) colour, and a square 
enclosure? of cloth with painted poles. 

I sat in Khalifa’s quarters. The meal drew out to almost 
_ fifty roast sheep,? and bread and sherbet and much fruit. 
Having at length eaten my breakfast, I got into my litter 
and went and paid my duty to my royal father. (15a) 

I fell at his feet; he asked me many questions, and took 
me for a time in his arms, and then this insignificant 
person felt such happiness that greater could not be 
imagined. 

When we had been in Agra three months, the Emperor 
went to Dholptr. Her Highness Maham Begam and this 
lowly person also went. A tank had been made there, ten 
(gaz) by ten, out of one piece (of rock). From Dholpir his 
Majesty went on to Sikri. He ordered a great platform 
made in the middle of the tank, and when it was ready, he 
used to go and sit on it, or to rowabout. This platform 
still exists. 

They also made a chaukandi in the Sikri garden, and my 





1(?) as that she should rise to greet him. 

2 Text, chahar chiqa-i-saraparda. Cf. Notices et Extraits, Quatre- 
mére, XIV. 498. 

3 The ‘ fifty’ sheep will not reduce by any reading I can suggest. 
Cf. anglice ‘heaps of, ‘hundreds of,’ etc. Perhaps the flock is a 
product of childish weariness recalled half a century later. Possibly 
one should read panj ahar, five foods, 7.e., courses, dishes. Gul-badan is 
now between five and six. Her doubt as to the reception due to Sul- 
tanam rings true, and Khalifa’s words suggest a little play-acting to 
please the small traveller; he treated her like a grown-up, and she 
tried to act one. 


103 


royal father put up in it a tér-khana,! where he used to sit 
and write his book.? 

I and Afghani dghdcha were sitting in the front of the 
- lower storey when my lady went to prayers. I said to 
Afghani dghacha: ‘Pull my hand.’ She pulled, and my— 
hand came out. My strength went and I cried. (15b) Then 
they brought the bone-setter and when he had bound up 
my hand, the Emperor went to Agra. 

After his arrival, word was brought that the begams were 
on the way from Kabul. My royal father went as far as 
Naugram to give honourable reception to my dearest 
lady (aka-janam),? who was my oldest paternal aunt and 
my royal father’s eldest sister. All the begams who had 
come with her, paid their duty to the Emperor in her 
quarters. They were very happy and made the prostration 
of thanks, and then set off for Agra. The Emperor gave 
houses to all the begams. 

A few days later he made an excursion to the Gold- 
scattering Garden (Bagh-i-zar-afshan). There was a place 
in it for ablution before prayers. When he saw it, he said: 
‘ My heart is bowed down by rtling and reigning; I will 
retire to this garden. As for attendance, Tahir the ewer- 
bearer will amply suffice. I will make over the kingdom 
to Humayiin.’ On this my lady (akam) and all his 
children broke down, and said with tears: ‘God keep you 
in His own peace upon the throne many, many years, 
and may all your children after you reach a good old 
age !’ (16a) 

A few days later Alwar Mirza fell ill. His illness led to 
an affection of the bowels, which grew worse and worse in 
spite of all that the doctors could do, and at last he passed 
from this transitory world to the eternal home. His 
Majesty was very sad and sorry, and Alwar’s mother, 
Dil-dar Begam, was wild with grief for the child, who was a 





1 “ Perhaps a space enclosed by a low railing.” (Mems., 202 n..) 
Possibly and suitably, a mosquito-room (fawr, net). Cf. Khwand- 
amir, B.M. Or. 1,762, and Add. 30,774, ff. 25-114. 

2 The Tiztk-i-babari. 3 Khanzada Begam. 


104 


rarity of the world and unique of the age. . As her lamenta- 
tion passed due bounds, his Majesty said to my lady and 
the begams: ‘ Come, let us make an excursion to Dholpur.’ 
He himself went comfortably and pleasantly by water, and 
the begams also begged to go by boat. 

Just then there came a letter from Maulana Muhammad 
Farghari (Parghali) in Dihli, saying: ‘Humayin Mirza is 
ill and in an extraordinary state. Her Highness the begam 
should come at once to Dihli, for the mirza is much 
prostrated.”! (16)) 

My lady was very much upset on hearing this news, 
and started for Dihli, like one athirst who is far from the 
waters. They met in Mathura. To her experienced eye 
he seemed ten times weaker and more alarmingly ill than 
she had heard he was. From Mathura the two, mother 
and son, like Jesus and Mary, set out for Agra. When 
they arrived, this insignificant one went with her own 
sisters to visit that royal angel of goodness. 

He was then growing weaker and weaker. Every time 
he came to his senses, his pearl-dropping tongue asked for 
us, and said: ‘Sisters, yOu are welcome! Come, and let 
us embrace one another. I have not embraced you.’ It 
might be three times that he raised his head and that his 
jewel-dropping tongue let fall these uplifting words. 

When his Majesty came and saw how it was, his light-— 
revealing countenance at once became sad and pitiful, and 
he began more and more to show signs of dread. (17a) On 
this my lady said: ‘Do not be troubled about my son. 
You are a king; what griefs have you? You have other 
sons. I sorrow because I have only this one.” His 
Majesty rejoined: ‘Maham! although I have other sons, 
I love none as I love your Humayin. I crave that this 





1 Cf. Babar-nama, Ilminsky, 502 et seqg., and P. de Courteille, II. 
457 et seq., where is one of the supplementary fragments included in 
Kehr’s Babar-nama (Tizik) and possibly taken from the Bukhara MS. 
(Cf. Notes on the Turki texts of the Bdbar-ndma, A. 8. Beveridge. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, July, 1900.) 

* All Maham’s other children died in childhood. 








oe 


a 


a 
es 
a 

¥ 
bs 


 ® 


Pe a ae 
Re re tee 


( 
bs 
4 
cf 
OG 


a e 


RE 


Pe 
ees ee ee ee 





Saari tinst ti, cticesiang cecitn, ceencanet 
p Poa 
% 
ee ek Se alii 
z ie * 
Pins al alae _ ‘ « 
% ae. aes . ey owes Nee he ; 
Eee Fe oem 
ld cid tl f ee ets er 
or Sy re Rod 2 * et Pia a # 
in OP *e Fy . rad 4 3" : vy 3 
7 ™ 7 ri ‘ ; 
s vs Pm 
Da lt he tae. a , 
ale 
ft 


a & 
* F 
me) ee 
bee 
betes Paes n® , 3 


Peed 
Died 
ea ee 


3 





re egwrt Pies ¢ e6 








BABAR 1N PRAYER, DEVOTING HIMSELF FOR HIS SO 


[To face p. 105, 


























105 


cherished child may have his heart’s desire and live long, 
and I desire the kingdom for him and not for the others, 
because he has not his equal in distinction.’ 

During Humayutn’s illness' his Majesty walked round _ 
him and turned his face (in intercession) to his Reverence, 
Murtaza “Ali Karimu-l-lah. He kept up that going-round 
from the Wednesday and made intercession from the 
Tuesday, in anxiety and deep dejection. The weather 
was extremely hot and his heart and liver burned. While 
going round he prayed, saying in effect: ‘O God! if a life 
may be exchanged for a life, 1 who am Babar, I give my 
life and my being for Humayun.” 

That very day he fell ill, and Humayun poured water on 
his head, and came out and gave audience. (17) Because 
of his illness, they carried my royal father within, and he 
kept his bed for two or three months. 

As he grew worse, a messenger was sent to summon his 
Majesty Humayun, who had gone towards Kalinjar. He 
came post-haste, and on paying his duty to the Emperor, 
noticed that he was very feeble. Filled with compassion, 
he began to break down, and kept saying to the attendants: 
‘How has he come to such a lamentable pass all at once ?’ 
He sent for the doctors, and said to them: ‘I left him well. 
What has happened all at once?’ They said this and that 
in reply. 





1 The account of Babar’s self-surrender which follows is somewhat 
puzzling to translate, but the sense is clear and the important state- 
ments are in accordance with other sources. 

2 One of Kehr’s (Ilminsky’s) ‘ fragments ’ (which, if it be not Babar’s 
own, it is not improbable was added to the T#zik by Jahangir) tells 
this story in Babar’s person. After rejection of the suggestion to 
sacrifice for Humayiin’s life the great diamond (? the Koh-i-nzir), the 
narrative continues (P. de C., IJ. 460.): ‘J’entrai dans la chambre ou il 
se tenait, et je tournai trois fois autour de lui, en commencant par la 
téte et en disant, ‘‘J’assume sur moi tout ce que tu souffres.””’ En 
méme instant je me sentis tout alourdi, tandis que lui se trouvait 
léger et dispos. Il se leva en pleine santé, et moi je m’affaissai, accablé 
de malaise.’ 

Faith in the rite of circumambulation still prevails in Persia. Babar, 
it is clear, believed his devotion to have borne fruit. (Cf. Hughes, 
Dict. of Islam, s.v. Intercession. For Karimu-l-lah, see Badayuni, Bz. 
Ind. Text, II. 191.). 


106 


The whole time my royal father kept repeating: ‘ Where 
is Hindal? What is he doing?’ Just at this time 
some-one came in and said: ‘ Mir Bardi Beg, the son 
of Mir Khurd Beg,! conveys his obeisance.’ My royal 
father, full of agitation, sent for him at once and asked: 
‘Where is Hindal? When will he come? What trouble 
waiting gives!’ (18a) Mir Bardi said: ‘ The fortunate prince 
has reached Dihli; he will wait on you to-day or to-morrow.’ 
On this my royal father said to Mir Bardi Beg: ‘IIl- 
fated little fellow! I have heard that they married your 
sister in Kabul, and you in Lahor.? It is because of the 
wedding festivities that you have (not)® sooner brought my 
son, and so my weary waiting has been very long.’ He 
asked: ‘ How tall has Hindal Mirza grown?’ and ‘ What is 
he like?’ As Mir Bardi was wearing one of the mirza’s 
dresses, he showed it. and said: ‘This is a robe of the 
prince which he bestowed on his servant.’ His Majesty 
called him nearer and said: ‘ Let me see how tall and how 
big Hindal has grown.* He kept repeating, ‘Alas! a 
thousand times alas! that I do not see Hindal,’ and asking 
everyone who came in: ‘ When will Hindal come ?’ 

During his illness, he laid a command on my lady, and 
said: ‘ Marriages ought to be arranged for Gul-rang Begam 
and Gul-chihra Begam. (18b) When the royal aunt, my elder 
sister,> honours me with a visit, tell her that I say it has 
occurred to me to give Gul-rang to Isan-timtr Sultan and 
Gul-chihra to Tukhta-bagha Sultan.” 





1 Hindal’s guardian from birth (1519-1530). He had previously 
been Babar’s bakdwal (house-steward). One of his sons, Khwaja ‘Tahir 
Muhammad, served under Humayiin and Akbar, and was mir faraghat 
(master of comfort). He may be the Mir Bardi (qy. a child’s sobriquet, 
Master Full-of-fun) of this episode. ‘Tahir’s son, Baqi, was a sewer, 
2.€., table-decker (sufra-chi). 

2 Hindal, with whom doubtless Mir Bardi and his father were 
travelling, was on his way from Badakhshan to the court. 

3 The text has no negative. 

4 Hindal was now about eleven years old, so Mir Bardi must also 
have been a boy. 

5 Khanzada Begam—aka-janam—dearest lady. 

6 Tsan (Ishan, or Yussun) was the ninth, and Tikhta-bagha the 
tenth, son of Ahmad Khan, Babar’s maternal uncle. They were uncles 
of Gul-badan’s own husband, Khizr Khwaja. 


107 


Dearest lady, the smiling one,' came, and they said to 
her: ‘The Emperor spoke in this manner, and it has 
occurred to him in such a way. It now remains to know 
your pleasure. Let it be as you wish.’ She said the same 
and, ‘God grant blessing and peace! His idea is very 
good.’ My chicha? herself and Badiu-l-jamal Begam and 
Aq Begam, both of whom were paternal aunts of his Majesty, 
were conducted into the hall. Having raised an estrade?® 
and spread carpets and chosen a propitious hour, Maham’s 
nanacha made both sultans bow the knee* in order to exalt 
them to the rank of sons-in-law. 

Meantime his Majesty’s disorder of the bowels increased. 
The Emperor Humayun broke down again when he saw 
his father’s condition worsen, and called the doctors, and 
said to them: ‘ Think it well over and find some remedy.’ 
(19a) Having consulted together, they said: ‘Small is our 





1 tabassum kundn. 

2 This Tarki word presents great difficulty. 

Vambéry has jicha, Kirghiz, mother, and chicha, aunt (inferentially 
maternal); Shaw, chichd, Qazzaq, mother. P. de Courteille, Dict., 
chicha, an elder sister. The word has in Samarqand the meaning 
‘maternal aunt.’ 

li occurs again in the text (23a), and is used for Gul-badan’s sisters, 
the brides of this page (19a); so that it may be right (spite of the 
singular number) to read ‘my elder sisters themselves ’—.e., the 
brides. But it might be ‘my mother.’ 

The word occurs at least once in the Memoirs. (Ilm., 446; Ers., 387.) 
It is preceded by one which Ilminsky writes yanka, and Erskine Bikeh 
(Bega). The letters of both words might be identical and the points 
only decisive. Shaw says yanga is an elder brother’s wife; Vambéry, 
belle-seeur, Schwagerin ; and Erskine (208 n..), bridesmaid, by which, 
I believe, is meant one who leads the bride to the bridegroom—an 
exactly appropriate use here, since Habiba yanga brings her daughter 
Ma‘sima to marry Babar. (N.B.—Shaw writes yanga and chicha, 
where Vambéry and others have a final ‘round hd.’) 

But if the chicha of Mems., 387, is to be read ‘elder sister,’ Babar 
can apply it only to Khanzada Begam (elsewhere called by him au lugh 
igachi (Ilm., 116.); and this would, I believe, make the reading of 
Bikeh (Bega) difficult, since Khanzada could not be called anything less 
than Khanam. The same objection would apply to the reading of chicha 
as mother or as maternal aunt. This inclines one to read yanka, and not 
bikeh, at Mems., 887; and the Zainab of the sentence may be grand- 
_ daughter (nabira), through the female line, of the belle-sewr, or brides- 
maid, of Khanzada Begam. But nothing is clear as to the relationship. 

3 Text, sufa dada. Perhaps, content was given to all, but suffa, 
estrade, fits better with the following basat. 

4 Lani zand ’tnda, literally, ‘ striking the knee.’ Mems., 204 n.. 


108 


luck, for our remedies are of no avail. We hope that God, the 
most Holy, will soon give one from His invisible treasures.’ 

When they felt his Majesty’s pulse, they came to the 
opinion that there were symptoms of the same poison as 
that given him by Sultan Ibrahim’s mother. It was in 
this way: that ill-fated demon (the mother) gave a tola of 
poison to one of her maids, and said: ‘ Take this and give 
it to Ahmad the taster and tell him to put it in some way 
or other into the special dishes prepared for the Emperor.’ 
And she promised him large rewards. The ill-fated demon 
did this although his Majesty used to call her ‘‘ mother,” 
and had assigned her place and lands with every favour, 
and had been kindly pleased to say: ‘ Consider me as in 
the place of Sultan Ibrahim.” But as ignorance prevails 
amongst those people, she did not regard his kindnesses. 
The (fitting) hemistich is well known : 


‘ Everything reverts to its original type, 
(Whether pure gold, or silver, or tin).”” 


To cut short the story: the cook (Heaven having made 
him blind and deaf,) spread the poison which had been 
brought and given to him, on the Emperor’s bread only, 
and so little was eaten. But the symptoms of this illness 
were like that one’s, seeing that day by day he lost 
strength and became more and more emaciated. (19b) Hvery 
day the disorder increased and his blessed countenance 
changed. 

Next day® he called his chiefs together and spoke after 
this wise: ‘For years it has been in my heart to make over 
my throne to Humayun Mirza and to retire to the Gold- 
scattering Garden. By the Divine grace I have obtained 
all things but the fulfilment of this wish in health of body. 
Now, when illness has laid me low, I charge you all to 
acknowledge Humayun in my stead. Fail not in loyalty 





1 Her son, who died fighting Babar at Panipat. 

2 Pers. and Hind. Proverbs, T. Roebuck, Calcutta, 1824, p. 124, and 
Mems., 13. 

3 (2?) after Humayin’s arrival. 


109 


to him. Be of one heart and one mind with him. I hope 
to God that Humayun also will bear himself well towards 
men. 

‘Moreover, Humayun, I commit to God’s keeping you 
and your brothers and all my kinsfolk and your people and 
my people; and all of these I confide to you.’ 

At these words hearers and onlookers wept and lamented. 
His own blessed eyes also filled with tears. | 

When his family and the people within the haram heard 
of these occurrences, they were stupefied and overwhelmed, 
and cried and lamented. 

Three days later he passed from this transitory world to 
the eternal home. The death took place on Monday, 
December 26th, 1530 (Jumada I. 5th, 9387H.). (20a) 

They brought out our paternal aunt’ and our mothers? 
on the pretence that the doctors were coming to look. All 
rose. They took all the begams and my mothers to the 
~ Great House.® | 

Black fell the day for children and kinsfolk and all. 
They bewailed and lamented; voices were uplifted in 
weeping; there was utter dejection. Hach passed that ill- 
fated day in a hidden corner. 

The death was kept concealed. After a time Araish 
Khan,—he was an amir of Hind,—said: ‘It is not well 
to keep the death secret, because when such misfortunes 
befall kings in Hindustan, it is the custom of the bazar 
people to rob and: steal; God forbid that the Mughals 
not knowing, they should come and loot the houses and 
dwelling-places. It would be best to dress someone in red, 
and to set him on an elephant, and to let him proclaim that 
the Emperor Babar has become a dervish and has given 
his throne to the Emperor Humaytn. This his Majesty 
Humayun ordered to be done. People were at once re- 
assured by the proclamation, and all offered prayers for 





1 Khanzada Begam, 

2 Babar’s wives. 

3 Perhaps ‘ palace,’ and the sense may be that they did not go to 
their separate residences but remained nearer to the dead. 


110 


his welfare. On Friday, December 29th, 1530 (Jumada I. 
9th, 987H.), the Emperor Humaytin mounted the throne, 
and everyone said: ‘May all the world be blessed under 
his rule.’ (20b) 

After that he came to visit his mothers and sisters and 
his own people, and he made inquiry after their health 
and offered sympathy, and spoke with kindness and com- 
miseration. He was pleased to order: ‘ Let each keep the 
office, and service, and lands, and residence which he -has 
had, and let him serve in the old way.’ 

On the same day Hindal Mirza, having come from Kabul, 
paid his homage to the Emperor, who received him with . 
kindness, and was very happy, and bestowed on him many- 
things from the treasures left by their father. 

After my royal father’s death, there were the good works 
and consecrated days of the first assembly! at his tomb.? 
His Majesty named Muhammad ‘Ali ‘asas* its guardian, 
and ordered the appointment of sixty good reciters of the 
whole Quran and readers with good voices, so that the 
congregational prayers might be said five times daily and 
the whole Quran recited, and prayer offered for the soul of 
the royal dweller in Paradise (Firdaus-makanz). (21a) The 
whole of Sikri—now known as Fathpur—together with five 
laks charged on Bayana, was given as an endowment to the 





1 ma‘rka. Raverty (Afghan Dict..) gives as the first meaning of 
this word ‘a party of ambassadors, or persons sent to make peace 
between two tribes’; and, secondly, as ‘the business of making peace, 
or an arrangement between two tribes.’ Lane and other writers 
render it ‘battle-field’ and ‘battle,’ etc. Steingass adds ‘hubbub, 
turmoil’ (modern colloquial). Gul-badan uses it for the common 
social assemblies she names, and here for the gathering of relations 
at a tomb. 

2 Babar’s body was laid first in the Ram or Aram Bagh (Garden 
of Rest), on the opposite side of the river from the present Ta@j-mahaill. 
Later it was taken to Kabul.’ Mr. Erskine (B. & M., I. 517 et seq..) 
quotes a charming passage from Burns’ ‘ Travels in Bokhara’ (IT. 121 
et seq.), which describes Babar’s self-chosen resting-place. He follows 
this by an eloquent estimate of Babar’s character which makes clear 
his regret in bidding farewell to the great and vivid personality he 
has so admirably set before his readers. 

3 7.e., of the night-guard. I believe he was the brother of Maham 
Begam. 


111 


tomb, for the support of the men of learning (‘ulamd) and 
the reciters who were attached to it. 

My lady made an allowance of food twice daily: in the 
morning an ox and two sheep and five goats, and at after-—— 
noon prayer-time five goats. She gave this from her own 
estate during the two and a half years that she remained in 
the prison of this world. 

During my lady’s life I used to see his Majesty in her 
residence. When she fell into bad health, she said to me: 
‘It will be very hard that when I am gone, the Emperor 
Babar’s daughters should see their brother in Bibi Gul- 
barg’st house. Just as though her words were in the 
royal heart and mind, his Majesty used always, so long as 
he was in Hindistan, to come to our house. He used to 
visit us and showed us kindness and affection and favour 
without stint. He used to come to the house of this 
insignificant one, and there would come Masuma Sultan 
Begam, and Gul-rang Begam, and Gul-chihra Began? etc. 
—all the married ladies—and pay their duty to him. (210) 

In short, after the death of my royal father and my 
lady, his Majesty, in the fulness of his affection, showed 
this broken one such favour, and spoke with such boundless 
compassion to this helpless one, that she did not know she 
was orphaned and headless.’ 

During the ten* years after the death of his Majesty 
Firdaus-makanz that his Majesty Jannat-dshydni was in 
Hind, the people dwelt in repose and safety, and obedience 
and loyalty.° 

Six months after the death of his Majesty Firdaus- 





1 Cf. post. 296, and ‘ Biographical Appendix,’ s.n.. 

2 These three were her half and full sisters respectively. 

3 Gul-badan was about eight at her father’s death. At three she had 
been adopted by Maham Begam. 

4 Really about nine. 

5 This rose-coloured picture accords neither with the facts nor with 
the narrative of Gul-badan. It may be that some limiting word has 
slipped out ; e.g., ‘in Agra,’ or ‘the people of the country,’ in opposi- 
tion to the dispossessed Afghans, conquerors of earlier date, or Babar’s 
people, z.e., household. 


112 


makanz, Biban* and Bayazid advanced from the direction of 
Gaur. On the news of this, his Majesty at once left Agra 
and moved to meet them. He defeated them, and then 
went to Chanada (Chunar), took it, and thence returned to 
ine 

My lady, who was Maham Begam, had a great longing 
and desire to see a son of Humayiin. Wherever there was 
a good-looking and nice girl, she used to bring her 
into his service. Maywa-jin, a daughter of Khadang 
(? Khazang), the chamberlain (yasdwal),? was in my employ. 
One day (after) the death of his Majesty Firdaus-makani,! 
my lady said: ‘ Humayin, Maywa-jan is not bad. Why 
do you not take her into your service?’ So, at her word, 
Humayiin married and took her that very night. (22a) 

Three days later Bega Begam® came from Kabul. She 
became in the family way. In due time® she had a 
daughter, whom they named ‘Agiqa. Maywa-jan said to 
Lady (Aka) Maham Begam, ‘I am in the family way, too.’ 
Then my lady got ready two sets of weapons, and said: 
‘Whichever of you bears a son, I will give him good 
arms.’ ‘Then she packed up the arms, and got ready 
gold and silver walnuts. She procured also the (special) 
arms of a Mughal commander, and was very happy, and 





1 Text, Bibban. Biban and Bayazid were two distinguished Afghan 
chiefs and supporters of the fallen Lodi dynasty. The defeat named 
here occurred at Daura, on the Gumti, 1531 (937H.). 

All who love the story of an adventurous life, chequered through 
character of individuals in a marked degree, should fill out Gul-badan’s 
brief narrative from Mr. Erskine’s life of Humayiin. 

2 1532 (938H.). Taken from Shir Shah late in 1532 (939H.). 

3 An attendant on a man of rank, who carries a gold or silver staff 
(Johnson, Pers. Dict., s.v..) ; chamberlain in the service of Khans of 
Tarkistaén (Zenker, s.v..) Gul-badan’s use of the word (810) would 
allow a more extended sense. 

4 Text has also dar hayat khud. This is not the only instance of 
a similar redundant expression. 

5 Bega had had one son, Al-aman. She is known in the later 
histories as Haji Begam, but she made her pilgrimage in 972H.. She 
was captured at Chausa in 1539 (946H.) by Shir Shah; and most 
writers give her at this date the brevet titie of Haji. It is probable 
that Bega was not her personal name. It is the title of a lady of rank, 
and answers to beg. 

6 Text, b‘ad az yak sal, which, read literally, spoils the story. 


113 


kept saying: ‘ Perhaps one of them will have a son.’ She 
kept watch till Bega Begam’s“Aqiqa was born. Then she 
kept an eye on Maywa-jan. Ten months went by. The 
eleventh also passed. Maywa-jan said: ‘My maternal aunt—— 
was in Mirza Ulugh Beg’s' haram. She had a son in the 
twelfth month; perhaps I am like her.’ So they sewed 
tents and filled pillows.? But in the end everyone knew 
she was a fraud. 

His Majesty who had gone towards Chanada (Chunar), 
returned safe and sound. 

My lady who was Maham Begam, gave a great feast. 
(22b) They lit up the bazars.* Before that time people used 
to illuminate the bazars (only). Then she gave orders to 
the better class and to the soldiers also to decorate their 
places and make their quarters beautiful, and after this 
illumination became general in India. 

. .. a jewelled throne,* ascended by four steps, and above 

it gold-embroidered hangings, and laid on it a cushion and 
_ pillows embroidered in gold. 

The covering of the pavilions and of the large audience 
tent was, inside, European brocade, and outside, Portu- 
guese cloth. The tent-poles were gilded; that was very 
ornamental. 7 

(My lady) had prepared a tent-lining and a kannat® 
and sar-i-kannat of Gujrati cloth-of-gold, and a ewer for 
rose-water, and candlesticks, and drinking-vessels, and rose- 
water sprinklers,—all of jewelled gold. 

With all her stores of plenishing, she made an excellent 
and splendid feast. 





1 This will be Babar’s paternal uncle, known as Kabul. 

*~¢., made all preparations. Perhaps khirgaha dokhta is not 
* sewed tents,’ but ‘ pitched tents.’ Cf. zamin-doz. 

3 I am very doubtful as to the meaning of the following paragraph. 
It can hardly be true that India waited for Maham to instruct it in the 
art of illumination or decoration. I have conjecturally read that, 
whereas formerly only ba@zdrs were made to look festive, she had other 
houses adorned. 

* Here follows a list of arrangements, plenishing and gifts for the 
feast. There are here and at p. 123 /f. many difficult words in it. 

® Ar., a pent over a doorway, a veil, an umbrella. Perhaps qandt, 
& screen, an enclosure for tents, the tent walls. 

8 


114 


. . . twelve strings of camels, and twelve of mules, and 
seventy tipiichdq horses, and one hundred baggage horses. 
She gave special robes of honour to 7,000 persons. The 
festivities lasted several days.! 

At this time came news that Muhammad-zaman Mirza? 
had killed the father of Haji Muhammad Khan kwki,’ 
and was meditating rebellion. (23a) His Majesty sent to 
summon them‘ to the presence, and having laid hands 
on them, imprisoned them in Bayana, in charge of 
Uncle Yadgar. Uncle Yadgar’s men sided with Muhammad- 
zaman Mirza, and let him escape (1533—940H.). At this 
time it was ordered that Sultan Muhammad Mirza®> and 
Nai® (Wali) Khub Sultan Mirza should both be blinded. 
Nai Khub Sultan lost his sight, but the man who had the 
blinding of Muhammad Sultan did not injure his eyes.’ 
Muhammad-zaman Mirza and Muhammad Sultan Mirza, 





1 The feast here credited to Maham Begam may be that of the first 
anniversary of Humayiin’s accession. Of this Gul-badan gives an 
account, minus such details as are set down here, at 24a et seq.. 

At the ‘ accession feast,’ held December 19th, 1531, and thus not quite 
a year after the accession, it is said by Nizamu-d-din Ahmad that 
12,000 robes were bestowed, 2,000 of these being ‘ special.’ For details 
as to khil‘at, cf. Memoirs, 274 n.. 

Lists are dull reading, unless each item calls up an image. It is 
easy to add splendour and beauty to Gul-badan’s few poor words by 
looking at actual things of the kinds she names, as may be done in the 
Oriental Section of the South Kensington Museum. The links between 
Persia and India in her day and earlier and later were many and close. 
Many Persians born and bred in Persia or by descent formed part of the 
Mughal court. Persian art and manufacture were at their highest 
development, experts say, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. 
The uncritical eye doubts if the products of those centuries, as exhibited. 
in the examples England possesses, can be excelled for splendour and 
satisfying charm. With such things the personages of our begam’s 
book surrounded themselves. 

2 Son of Badi‘u-z-zaman Mirza, and grandson of Sultan Husain 
Mirza Baygrad, and husband of Ma'‘stiima, a daughter of Babar. He: 
was drowned in the Ganges at the rout of Chausa. 

3 Cf. B. & H., IT., 8... 

4 Sic ; apparently the names of his fellow-rebels are omitted. They 
occur below. 

* Grandson, through a daughter, of Sultan Husain Mirza Biyqra,. 
and thus, a cousin of Muhammad-zaman. 

6 Called both Nai and Wali in the histories. 

” See Mr. Erskine’s interesting note on blinding. (B. & H., IJ. 14 n.).. 


115 


with his sons, Ulugh Mirz& and Shah Mirza, made their 
escape a few days later. 

There was perpetual disturbance from these people 
during the years we were in Hind. i 

When his Majesty returned from the campaign against 
Biban and Bayazid, he was in Agra! for about a year. 
He said to my lady: ‘I am sad at heart in these days. 
If you approved, I would go with you to Gualiar.”” Her 
Highness my lady, and my mother (d@am),? and my sisters 
Masuma‘ Sultan Begam, whom we used to call Elder 
sister® Moon, and Gul-rang Begam, whom we used to call 
Hilder sister Rose,—we all were in Gualiar in attendance on 
the beneficent ladies.° 

As Gul-chihra Begam was in Oude, and her husband, 
Tukhta-bigha Sultan, went to the mercy of God, her 
attendants wrote to his Majesty from Oude and said: 
‘Tukhta-bigha Sultan is dead. (23b) What is the order 
about the begam?’ His Majesty said to Mir Zaycha:’ ‘Go 
and bring the begam to Agra. We also are going there.’ 

At this time her Highness my lady said: ‘If you 
approve, I will send for Bega Begam and ‘Aqiqa, so that 
they also may see Gualiar.’ She despatched Naukar® and 
Khwaja Kabir, who brought them from Agra. 





* * Occupied in dreamy speculations of false sciences ’—7.¢., astrology. 
(B. & H., IT. 14.) The date is 1584 (941H.). 

* The histories tell us that the Gualiar expedition was a military 
demonstration against Bahadur Shah of Gujrat. Khwand-amir fixes 
its date as Sha’ban 939H. (February, 15383). 

3 Taken as it is written, this name might be charmingly translated 
as ‘ Ma desirée,’ but considered with other words in this text after which 
the enclitic am (my) is incorrectly written, it seems that prosaic ‘ my 
mother,’ Tiirki, acham, is safer. In favour, however, of reading dam, 
desire, is the wording on 250 (No. 48 of the guest-list), djam walida- 
a-ma, our mother. Ajam occurs also at 29d. 

* Her husband, Muhammad-zaman, is the rebel of this name just 
spoken of. 

5 Chicha; which I have rendered ‘elder sister’ to suit the actual 
relationship between Gul-badan and her two sisters. Cf. 18) n.. 

6 The aunts, presumably. 

’ The Chief Astrologer. 

’ Babar names this man as being sent from India in charge of gifts 
to Kabul (Mems., 337.), and Gul-badan names him again (670) as 
guardian of the begams’ doorway in the citadel of Kabul. 


8—2 


116 


They let two months slip by in one another’s company 
in Gualiar, and then set out for Agra, which they reached 
in February, 1584 (Sha ban, 940 H.).? 

In April (Shawwal) my lady was attacked by a disorder 
of the bowels. On the 27th of the same month (13th 
Shawwal) she passed from this transitory life to the 
eternal home. 

The stamp of orphanhood was set anew on my royal 
father’s children, and especially on me, for whom she 
herself had cared. I felt lonely and helpless and in great 
affliction. Day and night I wept and mourned and grieved. 
His Majesty came several times to comfort me, and 
showed me sympathy and kindness. I was two years old 
when her Highness my lady took me into her own house 
and cared for me, and I was ten when she departed from 
this life. (24a) I remained one year more in her house.” 
When I was eleven, and his Majesty went to Dholpur, | 





1 This date cannot be right. The following are approximately correct 
for this time: Visit to Gualiar undertaken, Sha‘ban, 939H. (February, 
1588). Return to Agra and Maham’s illness, Shawwal (April). Death 
of Maham, 13th Shawwal (May 8, 1533). Forty days of mourning 
carries on the time to late in Zi’l-qa‘da (June). Start for Dihli, begin- 
ning of Zi’l-hijja,—after June24. The building of Dinpana was begun 
Muharram, 940H. (July, 1538). 

2 Maham had also adopted Hindal. Babar details the circum- 
stances, but the abbreviation, as it seems, of the Persian text, has led 
to an error. (Mems., 250.) Those children of Babar who died young, 
were not born in ‘this year’ (925H.), as will be seen in the fuller 
rendering of Ilminsky, 281, and of P. de C., II. 44: ‘ Aprés Humayin 
(b. 913H.) j’eus encore plusieurs enfants, nés de la méme mére que 
lui, mais qui ne vécurent pas.’ 

We know from Gul-badan that these were Barbil, Mihr-jahan, and 
Ishan-daulat. 

‘Hindal n’était pas encore venu dans le monde. Comme j’étais 
dans ces parages [Kehraj, in Mandesh, and on his way to India], il 
m/’arriva une lettre de Maham, dans laquelle elle me disait, ‘‘ Sera-ce 
un fils ou une fille? Prononcez vous-méme sur la part que me réserve 
la fortune ; 4 moi de mettre l’enfant dans le monde [Erskine, ‘I will 
regard the child as mine’] et de Vélever.’’ Le vendredi, 26 du mois, 
toujours 4 ce méme ecampement, j’adjugeai Hindal 4 Maham [before 
birth], et je lui écrivis 4 ce sujet une lettre qui lui fut portée 4 Kabul 
par Yusuf ‘Ali rikab-dar [courier] quoique Hindal ne fit pas encore né.’ 

A passage now follows which, as is noted by P. de C., is neither in 
the Persian version of the Memoirs nor in the English translation : 

‘Pour bien comprendre tout ce qui 4 été dit plus haut, il faut savoir 
que jusqu’a cette époque, de tout les enfants nés de la méme mére 


117 


accompanied my mother.! This will have been before he 
went to Gualiar and began to build.” 
At the end of the mourning for my lady, his Majesty 


went to Dihli*® and began to build the fort of Din-pana.t_ _ 


He then returned to Agra. 
Dearest lady® (Khanzada Begam) said to his Majesty : 
‘When will you make Mirza Hindal’s marriage feast ?’ His 





que Humayiin, soit un fils [7.e., Barbil], cadet par rapport 4 lui, l’ainé 
par rapport 4 mes autres enfants et trois filles, dont l’une etait Mihr- 
jan, il n’y en avait pas un qui ne fit mort en bas’age. Je souhaitais 
vivement de lui voir naitre un frére ou une sceur. [%.e., a child of 
Maham. There were other children of other wives. | 

‘Précisément & cette époque Dil-dar dghdcha se trouvait enceinte. 
Je ne cessais de répéter, ‘* Plit 4 Dieu que l’enfant qui va naitre, sortit 
du méme sein que Humayin!” A quoi ma mére [sic. Turki text, 
Iminsky, 271, hazgrat walida] me répondait, “ Si Dil-dar dghacha 
met au monde un fils, ne pourrais-je pas le prendre et m’en charger ?” 
** Rien de mieux,” faisais-je 4 mon tour. 

‘D’ordinaire les femmes ont la maniére suivante de consulter le 
sort, quand elles veulent savoir si elles auront un fils ou une fille. 
Elles prennent deux morceaux de papier; sur l’un elles écrivent, ‘Ali 
ou Hasan, sur l’autre Fatima; puis elles les placent dans deux boules 
de limon qu’elles mettent dans une coupe d’eau. Celles des deux qui 
s’ouvre la premiére, leur sert A prognostiquer Vavenir ; si elle ren- 
ferme le nom d’un garcon, il y aura un garcon; si c’est celui d’une 
fille, il y aura une fille, disent-elles. On employa cette méthode; ce 
fut un enfant male qui en sortit. En recevant cette bonne nouvelle, 
j’écrivis aussitét pour en faire part 4 ma mére [sic]. Quelques jours 
plus tard, effectivement Dieu me donna un garcon. Trois jours aprés 
sa naissance et avant de l’annoncer, on enleva l’enfant, bon gré, mal 
gré, 4 sa mére et on l’apporta chez moi ot on le garda. Lorsque j’en 
donnai avis 4 ma mére [sic], celle-ci apprenant qu’elle avait obtenu 
Vobjet de ses vceux, donna au jeune prince le nom de Hindal, qui était 
pour nous de bon augure. Par cet.arrangement cet enfant fit pour 
moi [? nous] a la fois un frére cadet (for Humaytin) et un fils (for 
Maham and himself). 

The words hazrat wdlida cannot mean the mother of Babar She 
had been dead some fourteen years. They may be equivalent to 
Sultdn-walida—i.e., the mother of the heir-apparent. Certainly it 
was Maham who adopted Hindal. ‘This initial misconception as to 
the identity of Hazrat walida runs through the whole translation of 
this most interesting passage. According to Gul-badan, Fariiq (born 
in 932H.) was Maham’s son. Babar names the birth. (Mems., 343.) 

1 7.e., returned to her own mother’s charge 7.e., Dil-dar’s. 

2 An obscure passage. Humayiin was building about this time. 
(Elliot, V. 126.) 

3 Beginning of Zi’l-hijja, 939H. (June—July, 1533). 

4 Humdayiin-ndma, Khwand-amir. (Elliot, V. 125.) 

5 Cf. 156 n., 


118 


Majesty replied: ‘ B’ismu-l-lah.’ When Mirza Hindal was 
married, my lady (Maham) was living, but there was delay 
in arranging the feast. (Khanzada Begam) said: ‘ The 
things for the Mystic Feast are also ready. Let us first 
celebrate this, and afterwards Mirza Hindal’s.’ His Majesty 
said: ‘ Let whatever my royal aunt wishes be done.’ She 
replied: ‘May God bless it and make it good.’ 


DESCRIPTION OF THE HovusE OF FEASTING WHICH WAS SET 
UP ON THE Rtiver’s BANK, AND WHICH WAS CALLED THE 
Mystic! House: 


First there was a large octagonal room with an octa-— 
gonal tank in the centre, and again, in the middle of the 
reservoir, an octagonal platform on which were spread 
Persian (wildyatt) carpets. (24b) Young men and pretty 
girls and elegant women and musicians and sweet-voiced 
reciters were ordered to sit in the tank.” 

The jewelled throne which my lady had given for the 
feast was placed in the fore-court of the house, and a gold- 
embroidered divan® was laid in front of it, (on which) his 
Majesty and dearest lady sat together. 

On her right sat her paternal aunts, the daughters of 
Sultan Abi-said Mirza : 

1.4 Fakhr-jahan Begam. 
2. Badi‘u-l-jamal Begam. 
8. Aq’ Begam. 

4, Sultan Bakht Begam. 


1 Tilism; Greek, réd\eowa, talisman. Perhaps an epithet drifted 
from astrological phraseology. This feast commemorated the acces- 
sion of Humayitn. Cf. Humdyiin-nama, trs. Sada-sikh La’l (B.M. 
Add. 80,774, p. 76.): ‘talismanic palace,’ which may be the building 
named by Gul-badan. Cf. ‘ samite, mystic,’ of Tennyson. Khwand- 
amir speaks at length of this feast in his Hwmdyun-ndama, and calls 
the building in which it was held ‘wndrat-i-filism. 

2 The sequel to this order follows later. 

3 tushak, (?) anglice, squab. 

4 Translator’s numbering. For details as to each woman cf. Ap- 
pendix s.n.. 

5 This epithet,—the Fair,—is given to several persons, not all women; 
and in some instances the true name is also known—e.g., Yasin-daulat 
ee? Kamran’s son-in-law, and Saliqa, daughter of Sultan Ahmad 

irza. 





119 


5. Gihar-shad Begam. 
6. Khadija Sultan Begam. 

Upon another cushion sat our paternal aunts, the sisters 
of his Majesty, Firdaus-makani : 

7. Shahr-bant Begam. 
8. Yadgar Sultan Begam. 

(N.B.— Other guests of the right follow). 

9. ‘Ayisha Sultan Begam, daughter of Sultan Husain 
Mirza. 

10. Ulugh Begam, daughter of Zainab Sultan Begam, a 
paternal aunt of his Majesty. 

11. ‘Ayisha Sultan Begam. 

12. Sultani Begam, daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza, 
paternal (great-) uncle of his Majesty! and mother of Kilan 
Khan Begam. (25a) 

13. Bega Sultan Begam, daughter of Sultan Khalil Mirza, 
paternal (grand-)uncle of his Majesty. 

14. Maham Begam.? 

15. Begi Begam, daughter of Ulugh Beg Mirza Kabuli, 
paternal (grand-)uncle of his Majesty. 

16. Khanzada Begam, daughter of Sultan Mas‘ud Mirza; 
on her mother’s side, grand-daughter of Payanda Muham- 
mad Sultan Begam, paternal (grand-)aunt of his Majesty. 

17. Shah Khanam, daughter of Badi’u-l-jamal Begam 

(No. 2.). 

18. Khanam .. daughter of Aq Begam (No. 3.). 

19. Zainab Sultan Khanam, daughter of Sultan Mahmid 
Khan, eldest maternal (grand-)uncle of his Majesty. 

20. Muhibb Sultan Khanam, daughter of Sultan Ahmad 
Khan,— known as Ilacha Khan, the younger maternal uncle 
of the elder? Emperor (Babar). 





1 The words used of Sultani do not grammatically apply to ‘Ayisha, 
but I believe she is also a daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza and is 
Babav’s first wife, who left him under the influence of an elder sister, 
perhaps Saliga Sultan (Aq Begam). Saliqa married a son of Sultan 
Mahmiid Mirza, and may have acted under the evil impulses of the 
family quarrels ‘which did so much to embitter, if also to stimulate, 
Babar’s early ambitions. 

2 This is not ‘ my lady,’ whose death has been already recorded. 

3 kilan ; perhaps, great. 


120 


21. Khanish, sister of Mirza Haidar and daughter of (a) 
maternal (great-)aunt of his Majesty. 

22. Bega Kilan Begam.1 

23. Kichak Begam. 

24. Shah Begam, mother of Dil-shad Begam, and 
- daughter of Fakhr-jahan Begam (No. 1.), paternal (great-) 
aunt of his Majesty. 

25. Kichakna Begam. 

26. Apaq (Afaq) Begam, daughter of Sultan Bakht 
Begam (No. 4.). 

27. Mihr-liq (? Mihr-banu) Begam, paternal aunt of his 
Majesty. 

28. Shad Begam, grand-daughter of Sultan Husain 
Mirza, and daughter of a paternal aunt of his Majesty 
(? No. 22.). 

29. Mihr-angez Begam, daughter of Muzaffar (Husain) 
Mirza, and grandchild of Sultan Husain Mirza. (25b) They 
had great friendship for one another (? Shad and Mihr- 
angez), and they used to wear men’s clothes and were 
adorned by varied accomplishments, such as the making 
of thumb-rings” and arrows, playing polo, and shooting 





1 Probably the daughter of Sultan Mahmiid Mirza and mother of 
Shad Begam (No. 28.) by a son, Haidar, of Sultan Husain Mirza. 

2 Text zth-giri tardshi, which might be experimentally rendered 
carving thumb-rings, a gentle art of the day. But if wa be inserted, 
each word would represent a separate accomplishment of the well-bred 
in knightly arts. These would be congenial to a lady who played polo 
(chaugdn). Cf. Babar’s account of Haidar’s accomplishments (Ilmin- 
sky, 14, Mems., 13, P. de C., 22.), and Haidar’s own recital in his 
prologue to the Tartkh- i-rashidi. 

I suggest to take td@rashi (a word not used by Babar or Haidar) as 
equivalent to the fletchery (awq), or the ‘ making arrow-heads’ (paikan), 
of Babar. 

Another possible reading has been suggested to me by Mr. Beveridge 
—(a)z hikirt tarashi, ‘by cutting arrows.’ Hikri is a Hindi name for 
cultivated reeds grown on low marshy grounds. (Wilson’s Glossary, 
s.v., and Platt’s Hindustani Dict..) There is nothing improbable in 
Gul-badan’s use of a Hindi word. Arrows were fashioned from these 
reeds and men-at-arms practised the art. Gujrat reeds were exported 
for arrows to Persia. The omission of the alf of az is not infrequent 
in the MS.. 

A few words on the zth-gir find fit insertion here. It is a thumb- 
ring worn on the right hand as a protection against the fret of the 
bow-string both in drawing and release. Persians, like the Japanese and 
Mongols and Chinese, drew with the thumb. The zth-gir is of eccentric 


121 


with the bow and arrow. They also played many musical 
instruments. 

30. Gul Begam. 

31. Fauq Begam. 

32. Khan (? Jan) Begam. 

83. Afroz-banii Begam. 

84. Agha Begam. 

35. Firoza Begam. 

36. Barlas Begam. 

There were other begams, very many, adding up 
altogether to ninety-six stipendiaries. There were also 
some others. 

After the Mystic Feast (988 H.) came Mirza Hindal’s 
wedding-feast (Jauhar, 944 H.). Some of the begams 
already named went away,' and (of those) some had sat at 
the right hand in that assembly (7.e., the Mystic Feast).? 

Of our begams : 

37. Agha (Agha,—passim, dgha), Sultan aghacha, mother 
of Yadgar Sultan Begam. 

88. Atin mama. 

39. Salima. 

40. Sakina. 

41. Bibi Habiba. 


thickness and unequal width, elongating on one side into a tongue. 
This elongation lies along the inner side of the thumb, and points 
towards the thumb-tip. In drawing, the thumb crooks round the 
string which pulls against the zih-gir. The arrow is released by 
straightening the thumb, and the string then flies over the hard surface 
of the ring. The zth-gir is of jade, crystal, ivory, brass, gold, etc.. Some 
are chased and carved, and some are jewelled. In December, 1898, a 
remarkable one was offered for sale at an auction in Edinburgh of 
Lord Dalhousie’s collections and the jewels of his daughter, Lady 
8S. G. Brown (Connemara). It is cut from a single emerald, and 
inscribed: ‘ Jihat zthgir shah-i-shaihan Nadir sihib-qiran bar taskhir- 
t-hind az jawéhar-khana intikhab shud’ (‘ Selected for a thumb-ring 
for the king of kings and lord of happy conjunction Nadir, from the 
jewel-room on the conquest of Hind’). 

An interesting account of Persian archery is included in the ‘ Book 
of Archery,’ G. Agar Hansard (Lond., 1840.). It, however, calls the 
ath-gir, safn. Safn is the rough skin of a fish or lizard which is 
used to smooth the arrow-shafts. (Cf. Lane’s Ar. Dict..) 

1 Ba wildyatt. (2?) to Kabul and other outside places. 

2 Perhaps this is an explanation of the paucity of right-hand wedding- 
guests. 





122 


42. Hanifa Bega. 

And the others who had sat! at the Emperor’s left on 
embroidered divans. 

43. Ma‘stima Sultan Begam. 

44, Gul-rang Begam. 

45. Gul-chihra Begam. 

46. This insignificant one, the broken Gul-badan. 

47. ‘Aqiqa Sultan Begam. 

48. Ajam, our mother, who was Dil-dar Begam.? 

49. Gul-barg Begam. 

50. Bega Begam. (26a) 

51. Maham’s nanacha. 

52. Sultanam, the wife of Amir (Nizamu-d-din) Khalifa. 

53. Alish Begam. 

54. Nahid Begam. 

55. Khurshid kika, and the children of my _ royal 
father’s foster-brothers. 

56. Afghani dghdcha. 

57.° Gul-nar dghdcha. 

58. Naz-gul dghdcha. 

59. Makhduma dgha, the wife of Hindi Beg. 

60. Fatima Sultan anaga, the mother of Raushan kitka. 

61. Fakhru-n-nisa° anaga, the mother of Nadim kika. 

62. The wife of Muhammadi kitka. 

63. The wife of Mu’yid Beg. | 

64. The kikas of his Majesty: Khurshid kaka. 

65. Sharifu-n-nisa kitka. 

66. Fath kika. 

67. Rabia Sultan kika. 





1 (?) At the Mystic Feast. Its left-hand guests have not been specified. 
There are no repetitions of names, although the list seems to give the 
guests at both feasts. Perhaps down to and including No. 36 the 
names are of begams who were at the first feast, and then went away. 
Then come ‘our begams’ of the right, whose home was near Humayun, 
and who were at both feasts. 

2 Cf. 230 n.. 

3 Nos. 57 and 58 are, perhaps, the two Circassians whom Shah 
Tahmasp sent as a gift to Babar (Mems., 347.). Gul-nar is named in 
Abii ’1-fazl’s list of pilgrims who went with Gul-badan to Makka in 
983H., and as being of Babar’s household. They (Nos. 57 and 58) are 
named also by Firishta. 


1238 


68. Mah-liqa kitka. 

69. Our nurses (anaga). 

70. Our kikas. 

71. The begams’ people and the wives of the amirs. 


Those who were on the right. 

73. Salima Bega. 

74. Bibi Neka. 7 

75. Khanam dgha, daughter of Khwaja ‘“Abdu-l-lah 
Marwarid.. 

76. Nigar dgha, mother of Mughal Beg. 

77. Nar Sultan dgha. 

78. Agha kiika, wife of Mu‘nim Khan. 

79. Daughter of Mir Shah Husain, (illegible) Bega. 

80. Kisak Maham. 

81. Kabuli Maham. 

82. Begi agha. 

83. Khanam dgha. 

84. Sa‘adat Sultan dgha. 

85. Bibi Daulat-bakht. 

86. Nasib dgha. 

87. (Illegible) Kabuli. 

Other begas and aghas, the wives of the amirs, sat on this 
hand, and all were present at the marriage feast. (26)) 

This was the fashion of the Mystic House: (there was) 
a large octagonal room in which they gave the feast, over 
against this a small room, also octagonal. In both every 
sort of profusion and splendour appeared. In the large 


octagonal hall was set the jewelled throne, and above and \’ 


below it were spread out hangings (adsaqahdt) embroidered 
with gold, and wonderful strings of pearls (shadhthda) hung, 
each 14 yards (gaz) in length. At the end of each string 
(larv) were two glass globes. There had been made and 
hung some thirty or forty strings. 

In the small room, in an alcove, were set a gilded bed- 
stead and pdn-dishes,! and water-vessels and jewelled 
drinking-vessels, and utensils of pure gold and silver. 





1 This word excites curiosity as to the time when Gul-badan’s people 
learned to eat pan. 


124 


Facing west (was) the audience hall; facing east, the 
garden; on the third side and facing south, the large 
octagon ; and on the side facing north, the small one. In 
these three houses were three upper rooms. One they 
named the House of Dominion,' and in it were nine military 
appurtenances, such as a jewelled scimitar and gilded 
armour, a broad dagger and a curved dagger, and a quiver, 
all gilt, and a gold-embroidered overmantle.? (27a) 

In the second room, called the House of Good Fortune, 
an oratory had been arranged, and books placed, and 
gilded pen-cases,® and splendid portfolios,‘ and entertaining 
picture-books written in beautiful character.° 

In the third room, which they called the House of 
Pleasure, were set out a gilded bedstead and a coffer of 
sandal-wood, and all imaginable pillows. Then in front 
were spread specially choice coverlets,® and before these 
table-cloths, all of gold brocade. Various fruits and 
beverages had been got ready, and everything for merri- 
ment and comfort and pleasure. 

On the feast-day of the Mystic House, his Majesty 
ordered all the mirzis and begams to bring gifts,’ and 
everyone did so. He said: ‘ Divide the gifts into three 
heaps.’ They made three trays of ashrafts and six of 
shahrukhis. One of ashrafis and two of shahrukhis he 





1 As to this threefold classification, Elliot and Dowson, V., 119, may 
be consulted. 

2 Six articles only are separately named, but the qr (translated 
armour) may be taken in the sense given to it in the Ain (Bloch- 
mann, 109.), and include four weapons, which makes the total the mystic 
nine, Cf. Ain, l.c., and plates. (N.B.—The numbering of the weapons 
[Z.c. p. 110.] does not agree with that of the plates. Plate X. should be 
consulted.) 

3 galam-dan. Several such are to be seen at the 8. K. M. They 
are boxes damascened or painted with pictures, about 10 inches by 
3 inches, and contain writing implements. ‘Gilded’ does not seem an 
appropriate epithet. Perhaps the dictionaries define imperfectly. 

4 juz-dan. Perhaps the beautiful book-covers of the day. Those 
having flaps might be called portfolios. 

> muraqqa'. 

6 nthalcha, Placed, I presume, over carpets. 

7 sichaq. This word appears to have a special meaning of wedding- 
gifts, but Gul-badan uses it elsewhere more widely. 


125 


gave to Hindu Beg and said: ‘This is the share of 
Dominion ; give it to the mirzas and chiefs and vazirs and 
soldiers.’ (27)) | 

He gave in the same way to Mulla Muhammad Farghari 
(Parghali) and said: ‘ This is the share of Good Fortune. 
Give it to those who are eminent and respectable, and to 
theologians and religious men, to ascetics and graybeards, 
and dervishes and devotees, and the poor and the needy.’ 

Concerning one tray of ashrafis and two of shahrukhis he 
said : ‘ This is the portion of Pleasure. Thisismine. Bring 
it forward.’ They did so. He said: ‘ What need is there 
to count?’ First he himself vouchsafed his blessed hand 
and said: ‘ Let them take to the begams on one small tray 
ashrafis and on another shadhrukhis. Let each person take 
her hands full.’ What was left, that is two trays of shah- 
rukhts,—which may have been 10,000,—and all the ashrafis, 
—about 2,000—he gave in largesse, and scattered! first be- 
fore the walt ’u-n-ni matan (beneficent seniors), and then to 
those present at the entertainment. No one received less 
than 100 or 150, and those in the tank especially received 
very much. (28a) His Majesty was pleased to say: ‘ Dearest 
lady ! if you approved, they might put water in the tank.’ 
She replied: ‘ Very good,’ and went herself and sat at the 
top of the steps. People were taking no notice, when all 
at once (?) the tap was turned and water came. (28a) The 
young people got very much excited. His Majesty said : 
‘There is no harm ; each of you will eat a pellet of anise? 
and a bit of comfit® and come out of there.’ Upon this, 
everyone who would eat the comfit came out quickly. The 
water was as high as their ankles. To end the story, 
everyone ate the comfit and all came out. 

Then the viands of the feast were set forth, and robes of 





1 misér. Again a word which, like séchaq, would seem to fit the 
marriage feast better than the accession. 

2 shit. The text has no points and would yield seb, apple; but 
anise is the better remedy against cold. 

> ma‘jun, any medical confection, but commonly an intoxicant. 
Here it may be some preventive of chill. 


126 


honour were put on,' and gifts bestowed, and head-to-foot 
dresses given to the comfit-eaters and others. 

On the margin of the tank was a room (talar)* fitted 
with tale windows, and young people sat in the room and 
players made music. Also a woman’s bazar® had been 
arranged, and boats had been decorated. In one boat was 
made (?) the semblance of six people (kast) and six alcoves 
(kanj); in (another) an upper room, and below it a garden ~ 
with amaranthus and cockscombs and larkspurs* and 
tulips. In one place there were eight boats, so that 
there were eight pieces.° 

In short, everyone was astonished and amazed who 
beheld what gift of contrivance the great God had bestowe 
on the blessed mind of his Majesty. (28)) 


Tur Description oF MirzA HinpAu’s (Marriage) FEAst Is 
AS FOLLOWS :° 

Sultanam Begam (i.e., the bride) was a sister of Mahdi 

Khwaja.’ My father’s brother-in law (yazna) had no child 

except Jafar Khwaja, and there was no child (?) of Khan- 

zada Begam).® Dearest lady had taken care of Sultanam 





1 Tt was now that 12,000 khil‘ats are said to have been distributed. 
In this passage Gul-badan twice uses the expression sar-w-pdv. Per- 
haps one might say that the ‘ young people’ were given new clothes 
from head to foot, and so shake off the fetters of the rigid khe‘lat, sar- 
u-pat, and ‘honorary dresses.’ 

2 The dictionaries I have seen, explain ¢dldr as a saloon built of wood 
and supported on four columns, and this is appropriate here. Le 
Strange and Haggard (Vazir of Lonkuriin) say, ‘ Aleove or chamber in 
which a ruler sits to give public audience and hear suitors.’ It is raised 
above the level of the (e.g.) courtyard, so that petitioners are below the 
hakim. Approaching this meaning is the ‘ throne’ of the dictionaries. 

3 Of. Ain, Blochmann, 276; Khushroz, or Day of Fancy Bazars. 

4 na-firman, stubborn, (?) because they will break and not bend. 
Balfour (Cyclopedia) and Forbes (Hind. Dict.) give larkspur; Fallon, 
poppy. An account of the boats, etc., may be read in B.M. MS. 
Add. 80,774, where is a translation by Sir H. Elliott’s mwnshi from 
Khwand-amir. 

5 narcha. Perhaps flower-gardens; perhaps Fr. piéce. Cf. Un 
appartement de deux, trois pieces. 

6 Jauhar’s date for this is 944H. (1537). 

7 Many difficulties gather round thisname. Cf. Appendix s.n. Mahdi 
Khwaja. 

8 The copyist has perhaps omitted one dka-jandm. 


127 


as though she were her child. Sultanmam was two years 
old when Khanzada Begam took charge of her. She 
(Khanzada) loved her very much, and thought of her as a 
brother’s child of her own. She made a most entertaining 
and splendid feast. 

A kishka' and hangings (adsaqa)? and five divans and 
five pillows for the head (ytsti%q), and one large pillow and 
two round ones (galila); and girdles (qishqa) and veils 
(nagab), together with a tent? .... with three gold- 
embroidered cushions and head-to-foot dresses for a prince, 
with collar and bordering of gold embroidery, and bath- 
wrappers (fauta) and napkins (ru%pdk) and embroidered 
towels (rimal) and an embroidered mantle (qarposh) to be 
worn over the armour. 

For Sultanam Begam: nine jackets (nim-tana)* with 
garniture of jewelled balls,° one of ruby, one of cornelian, 





1M. Quatremére uses this word twice with perhaps two meanings. 
(Notices et Extraits, XIV. 324, 325 and 406-8.) At p. 408 he translates 
it kiosques, and it seems to be a building. At pp. 324 and 406 he 
leaves it untranslated. (Here it may have the sense given by 
Gul-badan.) It is named amongst items prepared for ambassadors at 
a post-house. These are: ‘ kat, trone ; bastar, estrade;... kushka; 
jinltk ; sandali, siége,’ etc. Gul-badan might intend to name a canopy 
or screen for a sleeping-place in a large room or a movable kiosk with 
sleeping comforts. 

2 Cf. 22b. 

3 A word follows tent which I cannot make out. It resembles 
j-(h,ch)-l-gh (no vowels). 

4 nim-tana, t.e., demi-corps. Like many of Gul-badan’s words, this 
is marked by Steingass as ‘modern colloquial.’ Apropos of this, 
Dr. Fritz Rosen says in the preface of his Modern Persian Colloquial 
Grammar, that the Persian of Iran differs ‘in every respect’ from the 
Persian of India. The Persian of Gul-badan allows one to feel at home 
with the vazir of Lonkuran, and with Dr. Rosen’s own book. Per- 
haps the difference he indicates is between the literary and colloquial. 
Gul-badan’s Persian, however, is presumably that of contemporary 
Iran, and her teachers were probably Persian born. Dr. Rosen’s 
remark appears to require some restriction. 

5 tukma (dar), usually translated buttons ; but the button is so asso- 
ciated with the button-hole as to suggest a fastening. A dressmaker 
might say ‘ball-trimming.’ Globular buttons were and are placed 
round the neck and hem of a boddice. The vazir of Lonkurin 
ordered a jacket with garniture of twenty-four gold buttons, smaller 
than a hen’s and larger than a pigeon’s. Vests trimmed with ‘ buttons’ 
(Mems.) are repeatedly named by Babar as gifts. 


128 


one of emerald, one of turquoise, one of topaz, and one of 
cat’s-eye. 

Again: of necklaces, nine; and one embroidered collar 
and bordering, and four short jackets! with ball-trimming 
(tukma-dar), and one pair of ruby earrings and another of 
pearls, three fans,” and one royal umbrella. 

One dirakht®? and two khutb? and other furniture and 
effects, and household goods and chattels and workshops‘ of 
all sorts. (29a) Khanzada Begam gave everything she had 
collected, and she arranged a feast such as had not been 
made for any other child of my royal father. She planned 
it all and carried it all out. 

. nine tipiichdq horses, with jewelled and gold-em- 
broidered saddles and bridles; and gold and silver vessels 
and slaves,° Turki and Circassian and Arus (? Rus) and 
Abyssinian,—of each (race) a royal gift of nine. 

What my royal father’s brother-in-law’ (Mahdi Khwaja) 
gave to the mirza was a set of nine tipichaqg horses, with 
jewelled and gold-embroidered saddles and bridles; and 





1 char qartyi; a suggested rendering only. Johnson gives karti 
(garti) as a short boddice reaching to the hips, and the gar recurs in 
other words, having the sense of a body garment; e.g., gartaq, a 
short-sleeved jacket ; qgarza, a woman’s vest. 

2 pankha. 

3 I find no help as to these words in the dictionaries. My only 
suggestion as to their possible meaning is too slightly based to be of 
value. It is this: In the South Kensington Museum, Oriental Section, 
I have seen tall lamp-stands so shaped that they recall the Qutb pillar 
outside Dihli. That such stands would be a part of good household 
furnishing the South Kensington Museum allows us to suppose. We 
have our ‘tall lamps,’ our ‘ pillar lamps,’ and also our ‘branched candle- 
sticks,’ which may be a term parallel to dirakht, a tree. 

4 kar-khanaha. These may be the kitchen and its plenishing; the 
goldsmith’s, with his tools, furnaces, and appliances; the perfumer’s, 
etc.. Cf. Ain, Blochmann, and Tar. Rash., E. & R., 470. 

> ghulaman, which I have rendered slaves, because they were a gift. 
But I know no warrant for such servitude as is thus implied. 

6 yazna, which is explained by Vambéry and Steingass as ‘ husband 
of the king’s sister.’ Nizamu-d-din Ahmad styles Mahdi Khwaja 
damad, which Meninsky and Steingass explain as ‘husband of the 
king’s sister’ and ‘son-in-law.’ I do not find yazna rendered son-in- 
law by any of the dictionaries. To read yazna ‘ brother-in-law of the 
king’ agrees with the detailed statement of Mahdi’s relation to Babar 
made by Bayazid biyat. Cf. Appendix, s.n. Khanzada. 


129 


gold and silver vessels, and two other sets of nine horses, 
baggage animals, with velvet saddles and bridles; and 
brocade and Portuguese cloth, and Turki and Habshi and 
Hindi slaves,—in all, three sets of nine; and three head of __ 
elephants. 

In his Majesty’s leisure after the feast came news that 
the vazir of Sultan Bahadur, Khurasan Khan by name, 
had attacked Bayaina. His Majesty despatched Mirza 
‘Askari, with several amirs, Mir Faqr-ali Beg and Mir 
Tardi Beg, etc.. These went to Bayana and fought and 
defeated Khurasan Khan.' (29)) The Emperor set out 
for Gujrat shortly afterwards, in prosperity and safety. It 
was on the 15th of the revered Rajab 941H.? that he quite 
decided to go himself to Gujrat. He set up his advance 
camp in the Gold-scattering Garden, and there spent a 
month while the forces were gathering in. 

On court days, which were Sundays and Tuesdays, he 
used to go to the other side of the river. During his stay 
in the garden, djam (Dil-dar Begam) and my sisters and the 
ladies (haraman) were often in his company. Of all the 
tents, Ma suma Sultan Begam’s was at the top of the row. 
Next came Gul-rang Begam’s, and djam’s was in the same 
place. Then the tent of my mother,’ Gul-barg Begam and 
of Bega Begam* and the others. 

They set up the offices (kar-khadnaha) and got them into 





1 Mirza Muqim, Khurasin Khan. 

2 January 29th, 1535. Abi’l-fazl gives Jumada I., 941H. (Novem- 
ber, 1534) as the time for collecting the troops. Perhaps the begam’s 
date is that of departure, a day liable to postponement when Humayiin 
was in pleasant quarters. 

3 It may be that the copyist has transferred the words ‘ my mother’ 
from a quite usual place,—preceding or following the djam of the 
previous sentence. ‘They are inappropriate to Gul-barg Begam; at 
least, I have never seen them used to describe a brother’s wife, and such 
I believe this Gul-barg to be. We know ofa ‘ Bibi Gul-barg,’ mentioned 
somewhat condescendingly (21a) by Maham Begam ; I incline to take 
Gul-barg there and here as Khalifa’s daughter, and the former wife of 

Mir Shah Husain Arghiin. Cf. Appendix, s.n. Gul-barg. 

4 This is, I think, Humayiin’s wife and the mother of ‘Aqiqa. The 
object of Gul-badan’s enumeration of the tents seems to be desire to 
show that Babar’s daughters and widow had places of honour higher 
than Humayiin’s family. 

9 


130 


order. When they had put up the pavilions (khaima) and 
tents (khar-gah) and the audience tent (bar-gah), the Emperor 
came to see the camp and the splendid set-out, and visited 
the begams and his sisters. As he had dismounted some- 
what near Mastma Sultan Begam’s (tent), he honoured 
her with a visit. All of us, the begams and my sisters, 
were in his society. (30a) When he went to any begam’s or 
sister’s quarters, all the begams and all his sisters used to 
go with him. Next day he came to the tent’ of this lowly 
person, and the entertainment lasted till the third watch’? 
of the night. Many begams were there, and his sisters, 
and ladies of rank (begaha) and of position (dghahda), and 
other ladies (dghdchaha), and musicians and reciters. 
After the third watch his Majesty was pleased to command 
repose. His sisters and the begams made resting-places 
(takia) in his presence.* 

Bega Begam woke (us) up, and said: ‘It is time for 
prayers.”* His Majesty ordered water for ablution? made 
ready where he was, and so the begam knew that he was 
awake. She began a complaint, and said to him: ‘ For 
several days now you have been paying visits in this 
garden, and on no one day have you been to our® house. 
Thorns have not been planted in the way to it. We hope 
you will deign to visit our quarters also, and to have a 
party and a sociable gathering there, too. How long will 
you think it right to show all these disfavours to us help- 
less ones? We too have hearts. Three times you have 
honoured other places by visits, and you have run day and 
night into one in amusement and conversation.’ (300) 

When she had finished, his Majesty said nothing, and 





1 khana, lit., house. 

2 pahr. Gul-badan names the Hindistani division of time into 
watches on which her father had commented as being a novelty to 
himself. (Mems., 331.) 

3 It seems, as again later on, that they fell asleep where they were 
seated, on mattresses and provided with pillows. 

4 The early morning prayers, about which the opinion is expresree 
that prayer is better than sleep. 

5 wazu’, ablution before prayers. Cf. Hughes, Dict. of Islam. 

6 From what follows, Gul-barg would seem to be the fellow-sufferer. 


131 


went to prayers. At the first watch of the day he came 
out and sent for his sisters and the begams, and for Dil-dar 
Begam, and Afghani dghdcha, and Gul-nar dghacha, and 
Meywa-jan and Agha-jan, and the nurses (anagaha). We 
all went, and he said not a word, so everyone knew he was 
angry. Then after a little he began: ‘Bibi, what ill- 
treatment at my hands did you complain of this morning ?’ 
and: ‘ That was not the place to makea complaint. You all 
(shwma) know that I have been to the quarters of the elder 
relations (walt’u-n-ni’matdn) of you all (shwmdydn). It isa 
necessity laid on me to make them happy. Nevertheless, 
I am ashamed before them because I see them so rarely. 
Tt has long been in my mind to ask from you all a signed 
declaration (silz), and it is as well that you have brought 
me to the speaking-point. Iam an opium-eater. If there 
should be delay in my comings and goings, do not be angry 
with me. Rather, write me a letter, and say: ‘‘ Whether 
it please you to come or whether it please you not to come, 
we are content and are thankful to you.”’’ 

Gul-barg Begam wrote to this effect at once, and he 
settled it with her. Bega Begam insisted a little, saying: 
‘The excuse looked worse than the fault.” (314) We com- 
plained in order that your Majesty might lift up our heads 
by your favour. Your Majesty has carried the matter to 
this point! What remedy have we? You are Emperor.’ 
She wrote a letter and gave it to him, and he made it up? 
with her also. 

On February 18th, 1534 (Shaban 14th, 941 H.), he 
set out from the Gold-scattering Garden and marched for 
Gujrat, to fall upon Sultan Bahadur. They confronted one 
another at Manhasur (Mandsur) ; a battle was fought, and 
Sultan Bahadur, on his defeat, fled to Champanir. Then 


1 ba Gul-barg Begam daryiftand. 

2 A familiar proverb. Cf. Steingass, 840, s.v. ‘azr. 

> daryaftand. Gul-badan frequently uses this word as meaning to 
embrace and to greet, a sense not mentioned by Johnson or Steingass. 
The ba of the earlier instance (note 1.) induced me to give it the notion 
of coming to an understanding. Cf. 16d. 


oe 


182 


his Majesty resolved to pursue him. Sultan Bahadur left 
Champanir and went towards Ahmadabad. His Majesty 
took the country of Ahmadabad also, and portioned out the 
whole of Gujrat to his men. Ahmadabad he bestowed on 
Mirza ‘Askari,?2 Bahraich on Qasim Husain Sultan,® and 
Patan on Yadgar-nasir Mirza.* 

He himself, with a small following, went from Champanir 
to visit Kanbayat® (Cambay). A few days later there came a 
woman with news, and said: ‘ Why are you sitting here? 
The men of Kanbayat have gathered, and will fall upon 
you unless your Majesty rides off.’ The royal amirs 
attacked the rabble,° and got them into their hands and 
cut them in pieces. (310) 

His Majesty then went to Baroda, and from there 
towards Champanir.’ We had settled down, when there 





1 Taking his treasure with him, Sultan Bahadur fied before 
Humayiin to Champanir, Ahmadabad, Cambay and Diu. 

2 Humayin’s half-brother. 

3 Grandson, through a daughter, of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayer : 
on his father’s side an Uzbeg. 

-4 Humayiin’s first cousin, the son of Babar’s half-brother Nasir. 
He was a posthumous child. Mr. Beveridge has drawn my attention 
to the fact,—of which there are other examples,—that he is called 
Yadgar, a souvenir, of Nasir, his father. 

5 This excursion preceded the allotment of fiefs. Gul-badan’s way 
of putting the pursuit of Bahadur is borne out by some other writers. 
This was Humayiin’s first sight of the sea, and the spectacle seems to 
have been more in her mind than was Bahadur. Akbar’s first sight of 
the sea is also commemorated in the histories. 

6 Abi’l-fazl calls them Bhils and Gawars. (H.B: 1.309.) They were 
rude tribesmen acting in Bahadur’s interests. Maternal affection saved 
the small royal camp. The ‘woman’ had a son a slave in it, and she 
purchased his freedom by revealing the designs of her fellow-tribes- 
men. Although Cambay had not furnished the assailants, it paid in 
fire and pillage for the attack. It lay near, was an enemy’s town, and 
such an incident as the onslaught of the Bhils would not allow of fine 
distinction of race and person. 

7 Behind this dull statement is a stirring episode. Humayiin took 
Champanir after a four months’ blockade, by night escalade of a rock 
so nearly perpendicular that seventy or eighty iron spikes had to be 
driven in to allow ascent. Thirty-nine men climbed up. Bairam 
Khan was the fortieth, Humayin the forty-first of the three hundred 
who mounted. Such a Babar-like episode makes regret the keener 
that Humayiin’s life was ruined and stained by his slavery to a drug. 
The loot of Champanir was enormous; it had been regarded as im- 
pregnable, and was full of treasure. It was taken in 1536 (943 H.). 





ecer 


7: : 
2 ft S — as 
See ee ee ee cence 








é ; 
pasar tseeer eet 5 1c) 


aed 
Bs 


a Se 


a ele ladcte seatet a 
: rata a 
She. 














SHIR SHAH AFGHAN. 
[Zo face p, 133. 


133 


was a tumult, and Mirza ‘Askari’s people left Ahmadabad 
and came to the Emperor. They represented to him that 
Mirza ‘Askari! and Yadgar-nasir Mirza had conspired, and 
wished to go to Agra. On hearing this, he himself was 
forced to go; he left the important affairs of Gujrat [(?) its 
pacification], and turned away and went to Agra. Here he 
spent as much as a year.’ 

He then went to Chanada (Chunar), and took it,® and 
also Benares. Shir Khan was in Charkanda,‘* and made 
an offer of service, saying: ‘I am your old servant. Give 
me a place with a fixed boundary in which I may establish 
myself.’ : 

His Majesty was considering this, when the king of 
Gaur Bangala® came wounded and a fugitive. For this 
reason he gave no attention (to Shir Khan), but marched 
towards Gaur Bangala. Shir Khan knew that his Majesty 
had gone there, and went himself also with a large 
detachment of horse, and joined his son (Jilal Khan), who 
was in Gaur with his servant Khawas Khan. Shir 
Khan sent them out, and said: ‘Go and fortify Garhi.” (32a) 

Both came and occupied Garhi. His Majesty had 
written to Jahangir Beg: ‘Advance a stage, and go up 





Humayun now relapsed into an evil mood of feasting and indolence. 
He remained near Champanir, and affairs entered on a recurrent phase. 
There was complete relaxation of discipline. 

Gul-badan’s ‘we had settled down’ (nishista budim) allows the 
inference that she and other ladies had joined the camp. A later 
instance will be found of the inopportune presence of women and 
children with the army. But it inay mean merely ‘we were com- 
fortably awaiting events’ in Agra. 

_ + He was thinking of having the khutba read in his own name in 
Agra. Such an aspiration in Humayiin’s brothers was encouraged by 
his own abdications of sovereignty. 

* A fatal year which allowed Shir Khan to gather force. Gul-badan’s 
recital of the historical events of this time has no value. 

3 Shir Khan. 

4 Jharkand. 

5 Sayyid Mahmid Shah. He had been defeated by Shir Khan. 
(Cf. Erskine’s notes on Stewart’s Jauhar, B. M. Add. 26,608, p. 12.) 

6 «The gate of Bengal,’ a pass between it and Bihar, and which 
has a hill on one hand and the Ganges on the other. It is the Teria 
garhi or Tilia gulley of our maps. 


134 


to Garhi.’ There was fighting, and Jahangir Beg was 
wounded and many men were slain. 

When the Emperor had spent three or four days in 
Kohlgani (Colgong), it became advisable for him to march 
on and halt near Garhi. He marched forward, and when 
he came near Garhi, Shir Khan and Khawas Khan fled by 
night, and he entered Garhi next day. Thence he went to 
Gaur Bangala, and took it. 

He was nine months in the far-away country of Gaur, 
and named it Jannatabad.* 

He was comfortably and safely in Gaur, when news came 
that some of the amirs had deserted and joined Mirza 
Hindal.? 

Khusrau Beg® (kiikaltash) and Zahid Beg* and Sayyid 
Amir’ paid their respects to the mirza, and said: ‘The 
Emperor has gone comfortably far away, and the mirzas, 
Muhammad Sultan Mirza and his sons, Ulugh Mirza and 
Shah Mirza, have again raised their heads,° and continually 
keep showing themselves in company.’ (32b) 

Just at this time the asylum of shaikhs, the servitor 
(bandagt) Shaikh Bahlul, hid’ armour and horse-accoutre- 





1 City of Paradise. The demoralizing effects of life in Gaur were 
felt under Akbar. Humayin, with his empire crumbling around him, 
was now (as Jauhar testifies) ‘so much devoted to pleasure and sensual 
enjoyment that, after the first month, he was never seen, as he was 
always shut up in a private apartment of the palace.’ Naturally, Gul- 
badan’s next item of narrative is of rebellion,—this time by her own 
brother, Hindal. 

2 He was only nineteen, and the crown may well have seemed at 
anyone’s service. The date is 15388 (945H.). Humayiin in Gaur was 
cut off from his capital by Shir Khan. 

3 Babar first names him in 1507-8 as coming from Harat. There 
are two men named Khusrau kiikaltdsh by Babar, but they were not 
contemporaries. One died in 1502-3, before the other came upon the 
scene. 

4 Husband of the sister of Bega Begam, Humayiin’s wife. He was 
put to death by Mirzi Kamran at Ghazni in 1547. 

5 Sayyid Niru-d-din Mirza, the father of Salima Sultan Begam, and 
the husband of a daughter of Babar. Cf. App. s.n. Gul-rang. 

6 Hindal had recently defeated them. (Erskine, II. 89 et seg..) For 
causes of Hindal’s rebellion, and for Bega Begam’s part in it, see 
Erskine’s Jauhar, l.c., p. 13. 

7 Some words seem to be omitted, e.g., ‘ was accused of.’ Gul-badan 


135 


ments and military stores in an underground place, and 
would have loaded them on carts and sent them to Shir 
Khan and the mirzas.t Mirza Hindal would not believe it, 
so Mirza Nuru-d-din Muhammad was sent to inquire into 
the matter. He found the armour and accoutrements, and 
had Bandagi Shaikh Bahlal killed.2 The Emperor, on 
hearing news of it, set out for Agra. 

He was coming by that side of the Ganges (1.e., the left 
bank) opposite Mungir, when his amirs represented: ‘You 
are a great king! Return by the way you came, lest Shir 
Khan should say: ‘‘Forsaking his road of advance, he took 
another of retreat.”’’? The Emperor returned to Mungir, 
and brought many of his people and his family by boat up 
the river as far as Hajipur-Patna. 

When he went (to Bengal) he had left Qasim (Husain 
Sultan Uzbeg) there. Now came news of Shir Khan's 
approach. Whenever there was fighting, the royal troops 
won. 

Just now Baba Beg (Jalaiv) came from Jaunpur and 
Mirak Beg from Chanada (Chunar), and Mughal Beg from 
Oude. (33a) As these three amirs joined the Emperor, 
corn became dear. 

Then,—such was God’s will,—they had halted without 
precaution, when Shir Khan came and fell upon them. 
The army was defeated, and many kinsmen and followers 
remained in captivity. His Majesty’s own blessed hand 
was wounded. Three days he remained in Chunar, and 
then came to Arail.* 





cannot have believed the accusation. Perhaps, however, her long 
friendship with Niru-d-din’s daughter Salima would make her pen 
discreet in blaming his murder of the shaikh. 

1 The rebels mentioned on p. 230. 

2 For the probable facts, cf. B. & H., II. 162 et seq.. 

3 It was Mu’yid Beg Duladai Barlds who urged this foolish point 
of honour, and who thus led to the disaster at Chausa. He was a 
eruel man as well as one ignorant in military matters. He was a 
a of Humayiin, but the Emperor’s followers rejoiced when 

e died. 

4 Gul-badan’s brevity (natural enough even if she were more historic 
‘in method) is somewhat misleading. Mr. Erskine allows one to follow 


136 


When his Majesty reached the river’s bank, he stopped, 
bewildered as to the crossing, and said: ‘How to cross 
without boats!’ Then came the raja (Birbahan) with five 
or six horsemen and led him through a ford. For four or 
five days his people were without food or drink. At last 
the raja started a bazar, so that the people of the army 
lived some days in comfort and repose. The horses also 
were rested. Many men who were on foot bought fresh 
mounts. In short, the raja rendered fitting and dutiful 
services. Later on his Majesty gave him leave to go, and 
at the hour of mid-day prayer came himself, safely and 
comfortably, to the bank of the Jamna. The army 
crossed ata ford they had found. A few days later they 
came to Karra, where corn and grass were plentiful, 
because it was his Majesty’s own country. (33b) 

When his people were rested, he went on to Kalpi, and 
then marched on to Agra. 

Before his arrival in Agra, he heard news that Shir 
Khan was coming (from) the direction of Chausa. Great 
anxiety fell upon his people. 

Of many who were in that rout (at Chausa) there was 
never heard, in any way soever, news or sign. Amongst 
them were ‘Ayisha Sultan Begam, daughter of Sultan 
Husain Mirza! (Bayqra); and Bachaka, who was a khalifa 
of my royal father;? and Bega-jan kiika; and ‘Aqiqa 
Begam ;? and Chand Bibi, who was seven months with 





the misadventures which culminated in the defeat. 'This—the rout at 
Chausa—occurred near to where the Son falls into the Ganges and at 
Chtipat Ghat, on June 27th, 1539 (Safar 9th, 946H.). The statement 
of Humayiin’s visit to Chunar, I do not find elsewhere. Chunar was 
then held by royalists. The Arail named is presumably that near 
Allahabad. 

1 Wife of Qasim Husain Sultan Uzbeg, whose timely arrival gave 
Babar so much satisfaction. (18a) Qasim had been Governor of Patna 
(82), but, from the circumstance of his wife’s being at Chausa, would 
seem to have left it with Humayin. 

2 A Bachaka, who was a khalifa of Babar’s household, escaped with 
him from Samarqand in 1501 (907H.), some thirty-eight years before 
the Chausa episode. Khalifa, as applied to a woman, denotes a servant 
or slave who exercises surveillance over other women-servants, and has 
charge of rooms,—an upper maid-servant. 

3 Bega Begam’s daughter, who will have been about eight years old. 


137 


child, and Shad Bibi, all three! (sic) of whom were of his 
Majesty’s haram. Of these several people, he never heard 
even a word, as to whether they were drowned or what 
became of them. In spite of all possible inquiry and 
search, what had become of them was never found out. 

His own illness? dragged on for forty days, and he then 
crew better. 

At this time, when Khusrau Beg (kiikultash), and 
Diwana Beg, and Zahid Beg, and Sayyid Amir, had come 
on in advance of his Majesty, news again arrived that the 
mirzas, Muhammad Sultan Mirza and his sons, had come 
to Kanauj. (34a) 

After Shaikh Bahlil’s murder, Mirza Hindal went to 
Dibli. He took with him Mir Fagr-‘ali and other well- 
wishers to frustrate and disperse the mirzis. The mirzas 
fied, and came into the Kanauj quarter. Mir Faqr- ali 
brought Mirza Yadgar-nasir to Dihli. As there was 
neither friendliness nor confidence between Mirza Hindal 
and Mirza Yadgar-nasir, Mirza Hindal, when Mir Faqr- ali 
made this mistake, sat down out of sheer annoyance and 
besieged Dihli.* 

When Mirza Kamran heard these things, there arose 
in him also a desire of sovereignty. With 12,000 fully 
equipped horsemen he went to Dihli. Mir Faqr-‘ali and 
Mirza Yadgar-nasir closed the city gates on his approach. 
Two or three days later, Mir Faqr-‘ali, having made an 
agreement, went and saw Mizra Kamran. He represented : 
‘The news heard of his Majesty and Shir Khan may be 
so and so.* Mirza Yadgar-nasir, from thought of his own 
interest, does not wait on you. The advisable course at 
this crisis is, that you should lay hands on Mirza Hindal, 





1 Perhaps the copyist has omitted a name; perhaps, as a child of 
Humayin, ‘Aqgiga is ‘ of the haram.’ 

* From his wound or from distress of mind. The ‘forty days’ 
suggest the ceremonial term of mourning. 

* The whole of the above paragraph it would be safest to hide with 
Hindal under his sister’s charitable cloak. For a historical account. 
of the time, see B. & H., II., Book IV., Cap. IV. 

* Clearly the ill news of the rout at Chausa. 


138 


go to Agra, and not think of establishing yourself in 
Dihli.’ (340) 

Mirza Kamran gave heed to Mir Fagr- ali’s words, and 
bestowed on him a head-to-foot dress. He then seized 
Mirza Hindal and came to Agra. He visited the tomb of 
Firdaus-makani,' saw his mother and sisters, and halted in 
the Rose-scattering? Garden. 

At this time Nur Beg brought word of his Majesty’s 
coming.? As Mirza Hindal was excluded from the presence 
because of the murder of Shaikh Bahlil, he went to 
Alwar.* 

A few days after his Majesty’s arrival, Mirza Kamran 
came from the Rose-scattering Garden and paid his respects 
to him. We paid our respects on the evening of the day 
he came. He took notice of this insignificant one, and was 
kindly pleased to say: ‘I did not know you at first, because 
when I led the army (whose footprints are victorious’) to 
Gaur Bangala, you wore the high cap (fa@7), and now when 
I saw the muslin coif® I did not recognise you. And oh, 
my Gul-badan, I used very often to think of you, and was 
sometimes sorry, and said: ‘‘ I do wish I had brought her !” 
But at the time of the disaster (jifrat) I was thankful I 
had not, andI said: (35a) ‘‘ Thank God I did not bring Gul- 
badan!’ For although “Aqiqa’ was young, I have been 





1 Babar’s remains then had not been conveyed to Kabul in 15389. 

2 (?) Gold-scattering. Mr. Erskine calls it so, and it is likely to be 
that already mentioned by Gul-badan more than once. 

3 Retreating from Chausa. 

4 His own jagir. 

5 zafr-agar. This, after Chausa, can only be a precative of Gul- 
badan’s. 

6 This change appears to indicate that Gul-badan, who is about 
eighteen or nineteen years old, has been married. The Persian has 
lachagq qasaéba, without conjunction. Steingass and Johnson describe 
the lachaq as a square mantle worn by women, doubled into a 
triangle, but here the description given in the Burhdn-i-qatv' is more 
apropos, %.e., a square of stuff folded cornerwise and put upon the 
head so that the corners tie under the chin. It is often (/.c.) elaborately 
embroidered in gold. Qasdba appears to have the same meaning as 
lachaq. 

’ Cf. p. 880. 


139 


consumed by a hundred thousand regrets and cares, and 
have said: ‘‘ Why did I take her with the army ?”’’ 
A few days later he came to see my mother. He had 


with him the Holy Book. He commanded the attendants — 


to retire’ for awhile, and they rose and there was privacy. 
Then he said to dam (Dil-dar Begam) and this insignificant 
one, and to Afghani dghdcha, and Gul-nar dghdcha, and 
Nar-gul dghdcha, and my nurse (anaga): ‘ Hindal is my 
strength? and my spear; the desirable light of my eyes, 
the might of my arm, the desired, the beloved. . May what 
I do be right! What shall I say to Mirza Muhammad 
Hindal about the affair of my* Shaikh Bahlul? What was 
to be has been! Now there is no anger in my heart 
against Hindal. If you do not believe it’... He had 
lifted up the Holy Book when her Highness my mother, 
Dil-dar Begam, and this poor thing snatched it from his 
hand. All cried, ‘May what you do be right! Why do 
you say such things?’ — 

Then again he spoke: ‘How would it be, Gul-badan, if 
you went yourself and fetched your brother, Muhammad 
Hindal Mirza?’ (35b) Her Highness, my mother, said: ‘ This 
girlie (dukhtarak) is young. She has never made a journey 
(alone). If you approved, I would go.’ His Majesty said: 
‘If I give you this trouble, itis because it is clearly 
incumbent on fathers and mothers to feel for their chil- 
dren. If you would honour him with a visit, it would be a 
healing-balm applied for us all.’ 

Then he sent Mir Abi’l-baqa’ with her Highness my 
mother, to fetch Mirza Hindal. At once on hearing this 





' kinara kardand. This metaphor recalls the arrangement of 
carpets in Persian rooms, with the carpet proper in the centre, an 
upper end (sar-anddz) and borders (kindra). ‘Go aside’ might be a 
good rendering. 

* qul, Mongolian,—main body of an army. 3 Ar. gandt. 

* Here and in the apostrophe to Gul-badan I have allowed the man 
to indicate the affection Humayiin -had for his half-sister and for the 
revered shaikh. It might be, however (as at ‘ Now there is no anger,’ 
cf. text), the simple first person. 

BE, & Ta. Ey 6s 


140 


news: ‘She has come to see me!’ Muhammad Hindal 
Mirza made his mother happy by giving her honourable 
meeting. He came with her from Alwar, and paid his 
duty to his Majesty. About Shaikh Bahlil he said: ‘He 
used to send arms and military appurtenances to Shir 
Khan. When this was ascertained, I killed the shaikh on 
account of it.’ 

To put it briefly: in a short time came news that Shir 
Khan had come near Lakhnau. 

In those days his Majesty had a certain servant, a 
water-carrier. (36a) As he had been parted from his horse 
in the river at Chausa and this servant betook himself to 
his help and got him safe and sound out of the current, 
his Majesty now seated him on the throne. The name of 
that menial person we did not hear, some said Nizam, 
some said Sambal. But to cut the story short, his Majesty 
made the water-carrier servant sit on the throne, and 
ordered all the amirs to make obeisance to him. The 
servant gave everyone what he wished, and made appoint- 
ments. For as much as two days the Emperor gave royal 
power to that menial. Mirza Hindal was not present at 
his court;? he had taken leave, and had again gone to 
Alwar with the intention of getting arms ready. Neither 
did Mirza Kamran appear. He was ill, and sent to say to 
his Majesty: ‘Gifts and favours of some other kind ought 
to be the servant’s reward. What propriety is there in - 
setting him on the throne? Ata time when Shir Khan is 
near, what kind of affair is this to engage your Majesty? 

In those days Mirza Kamran’s illness increased amaz- 
ingly. He became weak and so thin that his face was not 
in the least his own, and there was no hope of his life. (86d) 





1 Hindal was received in the presence of Kamran and other kinsmen. 
Humayun said to Kamran: ‘ You know who is to blame! Why did 
Hindal rebel?’ Kamran passed on the question to Hindal himself, 
who, with profound shame, pleaded that being young he had listened 
to bad advice, and begged forgiveness. (Erskine’s notes on Stewart’s - 
Jauhar, B. M. Add. 26,608.) 

2 Lit., in that assembly. 


141 


By the Divine mercy he grew better. He suspected that 
the Emperor’s mothers,' by his Majesty’s advice, had given 
him poison. His Majesty came to hear of this, and 
instantly went to see the mirza and swore that he had 
never had such a thought, nor given such an order to any 
one. Nevertheless, Mirza Kamran’s heart was not purged. 
Afterwards he got worse, day after day, and he lost power 
of speech. 

When news came that Shir Khan had left Lakhnau, the 
Emperor marched towards Kanauj, and left Mirzi Kamran 
in Agra to act for him. In a few days the mirza heard 
that he had made a bridge of boats and crossed the Ganges. 
On this, he himself marched out of Agra towards Lahor.? 

We had settled down* when he sent* a farman like a 
king’s, and said: ‘ You® are commanded to go with me to 
Lahor.’ He must have said® to his Majesty about me 
something of this sort: ‘I am very ill and very miserable 
and lonely, and I have no one’ to sympathize with me. (37a) 
If you will order Gul-badan Begam to go with me to Lahor, 
it will be a real favour and kindness.’ For his sake his 
Majesty will have said: ‘She shall go.’ Two or three 
days after the Emperor had gone towards Lakhnau, the 
mirza sent a farmdn,® in royal style, to the effect: ‘ Most 
assuredly you will come with me.’ Then my mother must 
have said: ‘ She has never travelled apart from us.’ He 
replied :° ‘If she has not travelled alone, do you also go 
with her.’ He sent as many as 500 troopers and trusty 
erooms, and both his foster-father and his foster-brother, 
and said (to my mother): ‘If she may not go with me (to 





1 4,.e., Babar’s widows. 2 A treacherous defection. 

3 The royal family, after the Emperor’s and the mirza’s departure. 

* Perhaps from his first halting-place outside the city. : 

5 Clearly Gul-badan. 6 Before either brother left Agra. 

7 4.e., of his kinsfolk, and especially of his women kinsfolk. 

8 This, I think, is the one already named. 

®° ashan farmudand. This seems to mean Humayin, and to refer 
the following speech back to the earliest discussion of the project of 
Gul-badan’s journey at the time Humayin was still in Agra. The 
whole episode is confused in narrative. 


142 


Lahor), come all of you one stage.’ When one stage was 
reached, he began to declare, on his oath: ‘I will not let 
you go.’ Then he took me by main force, with a hundred 
weepings and complaints and laments, away from my 
mothers, and my own mother and my sisters, and my 
father’s people, and my brothers, and parted us who had 
all grown up together from infancy.* 

I saw that the Emperor’s command also was in the 
affair. I was helpless. (37b) I wrote a suppliant letter, 
saying: ‘I never expected your Majesty to cut off this in- 
significant one from your service, and to give her to Mirza 
Kamran.’ To this humble note he sent a compassionate 
answer (salam-ndma), to this effect: ‘I had no heart to part 
with you, but the mirza persisted, and was miserable, and 
begged very hard, and I was obliged to trust you to him. 
For just now there is important work? on hand. God 
willing, I will send for you when it is settled.’ 

When the mirza was starting, many people, amirs and 
traders and so on, made preparation with the intention of 
letting their wives and families march under his escort to 
Lahor. When we reached (the city) news came of a battle 
on the Ganges, and that defeat had befallen the royal 
army.® 

At least there was this limit to misfortune,—his Majesty 
and his brothers came safely through the peril.* Our other 
relations’ came from Agra by way of Alwar to Lahor. (38a) 





1 Tt must be remembered that Gul-badan’s husband, Khizr Khwaja, 
was a brother of Aq Sultan (Yasin-daulat), Kamran’s son-in-law, and 
Kamran may have had other motives than affection for desiring her 
presence, ¢.g., the attraction of her husband’s contingent. 

2 The opposition of Shir Khan, soon to be closed at Kanauj. Gul- 
badan’s enforced departure with Kamran saved her a painful and 
hazardous flight. 

3 May 17th, 1540 (Muharram 10th, 947H.). Mirza Haidar gives an 
admirable account of it as ‘the battle of the Ganges.’ Gul-badan’s full 
brother, Hindal, led the van at Kanauj, and defeated Shir Khin’s son, 
Jalal. Hindal was a successful general. ‘Askari, Kamran’s full brother, 
was defeated by Khawas Khan. 

4 As at Chausa, so at Kanauj, Humayiin was nearly drowned. Here 
he was saved by Shamsu-d-din Muhammad of Ghazni, whose wife, 
under the sobriquet of Ji-ji anaga, became a nurse of Akbar. 

5 They were convoyed by Hindal. See mfra. 


143 


Just now the Emperor said to Mirza Hindal: ‘*Aqiqa 
Begam disappeared in that first interregnum (/itrat'), and 
I repented extremely, and said: ‘‘ Why did I not kill her in 
my own presence?’ Now, again, it is difficult to convey 
~ women with us.’ Mirza Hindal answered: ‘ What it would — 
be to your Majesty to kill a mother and a sister, speaks for 
itself! So long as there is life in me, I will fight in their 
service. I have hope in the most high God, that,—poor 
fellow as I am,—I may pour out my life’s blood for my ~ 
mother and my sisters.’ 7 

Then the Emperor set out for Fathipar (Sikri) with 
Mirza ‘Askari and Yadgar-nasir Mirza and the amirs who 
had come safely off the battlefield.? 

Mirza Hindal sent on before him? her Highness his 
mother, who was Dil-dar Begam, and his own sister, Gul- 
chihra Begam, and Afghani dghdcha, and Gul-nar dghdcha, 
and Nar-gul dghdcha, and the amirs’ wives and families, etc. . 
He was marching along when the Gawars pursued him 
in great numbers. (38)) Some of his troopers charged 
and defeated them. An arrow struck his horse. There 
was much fighting and confusion. Having saved. the 
helpless women from the bond of the Gawars, he sent 
on (to Lahor) his mother and sister, and many of the 
amirs’ people, etc., and went to Alwar. Here he got 
together tents and pavilions and numerous requisites, 
and then started for Lahor. He arrived in a few days, 





1 7.¢., battle of Chausa. Fitna would read more easily here. 
Perhaps behind jfitrat is the notion of relaxation in effort, or of an 
interval between two periods of good fortune. 

* Amongst them was Haidar Mirza, who describes the fugitives as 
‘broken and dispirited, and in a state heartrending to tell.’ Sikri must 
have rubbed salt into their wounds, since it recalls Babar’s triumph. 
Their halting-place there was his garden, a token of his genius for 
living. 

3 The known enemy, Shir Khan, was in the rear. With Hindal’s 
marriage-feast fresh in mind, one may give a thought to Sultanam. 
She was probably of this party, since her husband’s contingent was 
with Humayin, and he was not on his jagir of Alwar. 

* Asp-i-mubartk, (?) the horse which had the happiness to bear him. 
Perhaps asp is a mistake for some word to which ‘blessed’ would be a 
more fit adjective. 


144 


and brought what was wanted for the princes and the 
amirs. 

His Majesty alighted in Khwaja Ghazi’s garden near 
Bibi Haj-taj.1. Every day there was news of Shir Khan; 
and during the three months that the Emperor was in 
Lahor word was brought day after day: ‘Shir Khan has 
advanced four miles,’ ‘ six miles,’ till he was near Sirhind. 

One of the amirs was named Muzaffar Beg. He was a 
Tiurkman. The Emperor sent him with Qazi “Abdu-l-lah 
to Shir Khan to say: ‘ What justice is there in this? I 
have left you the whole of Hindistan. Leave Lahor alone, 
and let Sirhind, where you are, be a boundary between you 
and me.”’ (39a) But that unjust man, fearless of God, did 
not consent, and answered: ‘I have left you Kabul. You 
should go there.’ 

Muzaffar Beg marched at once, and sent on an express to 
say: ‘A move must be made.’ As soon as this message 
came, his Majesty set off. It was like the Day of Resurrec- 
tion. People left their decorated places and furniture just 
as they were, but took with them whatever money they 
had. There was thankfulness to God, because mercifully a 
ford was found across the Lahdr water (Ravi) where every- 
one crossed. His Majesty halted a few days on the river’s 
bank. Then an ambassador came from Shir Khan. The 
Emperor had decided to see him next morning, when 
Mirza Kamran made a petition, saying: ‘ To-morrow there 





1 Abi'‘l-fazl says that Hindal’s quarters were in Khwaja Ghazi's 
garden, and Humayiin’s in Khwaja Dost munshi's. 

Bibi Haj, Bibi Taj, Bibi Nar, Bibi Har, Bibi Gihar, and Bibi 
Shabaz are said to have been daughters of ‘Aqil, brother of ‘Ali 
(Muhammad's son-in law). They were famous for piety and asceticism. 
After the murder of Imaém Husain at Kerbela, these ladies left Syria 
for India in obedience to a secret intimation. They alighted outside 
Lahodr at the place named by Gul-badan and where their shrine now 
is. They converted many of the townspeople to their faith, and thus 
angered the, presumably Hindi, governor. He sent his son to 
command their departure, but the son fell under their influence, and 
remained near them. This still more angered his father, who went out 
against them and their followers with an armed force. The ladies 
prayed that their honour might be preserved, and they not be seen 
by strange men. Immediately the earth opened and swallowed them. 
(Khazina’u-l-as fiyd, U1. 407.) 


145 


will be an entertainment, and Shir Khan’s envoy will be 
present. If I may sit on a corner of your Majesty’s carpet, 
so that there may be distinction between me and my brothers, 
it will be a cause of my exaltation.”! 

Hamida-bant Begam says it was his Majesty who wrote 
and sent the following verse to the mirza.” I had heard 
that he sent it to Shir Khan by the envoy. This is the 


verse : 


* Although one’s image be shown in the mirror, 
It remains always apart from one’s self.’ (39)) 

‘It is wonderful to see one’s self in another form : 
This marvel will be the work of God.’ 


When Shir Khan’s ambassador arrived he paid his 
respects. | 

The Emperor’s blessed heart was cast down. He fell 
asleep in a sad mood, and saw in a dream a venerable man, 
dressed in green from head to foot and carrying a staff, 
who said: ‘ Be of good cheer; do not grieve ;’ and gave his 
staff into the royal hand. ‘The most high God will give 
you a son who shall be named Jalalu-d-din Muhammad 
Akbar.’ The Emperor asked: ‘What is your honourable 
name?’ He answered: ‘The Terrible Elephant,? Ahmad 
of Jam ;’ and added: ‘ Your son will be of my lineage.’ 





* For an account of Kamran’s odious and fruitless treachery see 
B. & H., II. 200 et seg... The meaning of his message to Humiayin is 
not clear to me. Perhaps he wished to show the envoy that he was 
not on the level of Hindal and ‘Askari, but able to claim recognition as 
a ruler and as Humayiin’s equal. Perhaps it was a hint to Humayin 
that he must recognise Kamran’s equality in the lands in which 
the latter had been supreme while he himself ruled in Dihli. 

At this time Humayiin was strongly advised to put Kamran to 
death. He refused, but later on and after a dreary waste of good nature, 
his filial piety had to yield to the common-sense of his victimized 
followers and allow the blinding. 

* At the time when the verse was written Hamida was not married. 
The discussion in 1587 (circa) of a ‘point’ between the ladies is a 
living touch to the old MS.. Which was likely tobe right,—Hamida 
who might later have heard the story from her husband, or Gul-badan 
who was in Lahdr? Gul-badan puts the difference of opinion gently 
but does not surrender, and leaves her readers to draw their own 
inferences. 

3 Zinda-fil. 

* Humayin was of the lineage of Ahmad of Jam through his mother 
Maham. (A.N., Bib. Ind., ed. I. 121.) To give force to the prophecy, 

10 


146 


In those days Bibi Gunwar'! was with child. Everyone 
said: ‘A son will be born.’ In that same garden of Dost 
munsht and in the month of Jumada’u-l-awwal, a daughter 
was born whom they named Bakhshi-banu. 

At this time his Majesty appointed Mirza Haidar to take 
Kashmir. Meantime, news was brought that Shir Khan 
was there. A wonderful confusion followed, and the 
Emperor decided to march off next morning. (40a) 

While the brothers were in Lahor, they conferred and 
took counsel and asked advice, but they did not settle on 
any single thing. At last the news was: ‘Shir Khan is 
here.’ Then, as there was no help for it, they marched off 
at the first watch of the day (9 a.m.). 

The Emperor’s wish was to go to Kashmir, where he had | 
sent Mirzé Haidar Kdshghart ; but news of the mirza’s 
success had not yet come, and people counselled: ‘If your 
Majesty were to go to Kashmir, and the country was not 
conquered at once, it would—with Shir Khan in Lahor—be 
a very difficult time.’ 

Khwaja Kilan Beg? was in Sialkot, and disposed to serve 
his Majesty. With him was Mu’yid Beg, who wrote: 
‘The khwaja greatly wishes to serve you and would come, 
but he has Mirza Kamran to consider. If your Majesty 
would come quickly, his help would be made easy in an 
excellent way.’ The Emperor at once took arms and 
equipment, and set out to go to the khwaja, and joined 
company with him and brought him along.? 





however, the coming child’s mother had to be of the same descent, since 
Humayin’s claim to rank as of the saint’s lineage required no prophetic 
announcement. Indeed this story seems to cast doubt on that claim. 
Akbar’s mother, Hamida, was of the line of Ahmad of Jam. So, too, 
was Bega (Haji) Begam. Another of the same family was Babi or 
Bani dgha, wife of Shihabu-d-din Ahmad of Nishapir. 

1 To give value to Ahmad’s prophecy, Bibi Ginwar ought also to 
have traced back to him. She does not seem to have been a woman 
of rank. The girl now born was at least the third child of Humayin, 
there having been Al-aman and ‘Agigqa, children of Bega Begam and 
now both dead. 

2 The well-known old servant of Babar and now one of Kamran’s 
chief amirs. 

3 The begam’s story here does not agree with that of Mr. Erskine’s 
authorities. Miu’yid Beg is the ill-adviser of the march from Bengal 
to Chausa. 


147 


The Emperor was pleased to say: ‘ With my brothers’ 
concurrence, I shall go to Badakhshan. (40b) Let Kabul 
remain the fief of Mirza Kamran.’ But Mirza Kamran 
would not consent to (his Majesty’s) going to Kabul,' and 
said: ‘In his lifetime the Emperor Firdaus-makant gave — 
Kabul to my mother (Gulrukh Begam). It is not right 
(for you) to go to Kabul.’ 

Then said his Majesty: ‘As for Kabul, his Majesty 
Firdaus-makani often used to say, ‘‘ My Kabul I will give 
to no one; far from it! Let none of my sons covet it. 
There God gave me all my children, and many victories 
followed its capture.’ Moreover, this expression of opinion 
is recorded many times in his Waqi'a-nadma. What was 
the good of my showing kindness to the mirza from 
civility and brotherliness, if he now keep on talking in 
this way !’ 

Let his Majesty talk as he would, pacifying and con- 
ciliating, the mirza resisted more and more. When he saw 
that there was a large following with Mirza Kamran, and 
that the mirza was in no way willing for him to go to 
Kabul, he had no resource but to move towards Bhakkar 
and Multan. Having arrived in Multan, he halted one 
day. (41a) A small quantity of corn was obtained in the 
fort and having divided that little amongst his men, he 
marched on till he came to the bank of a river which was 
seven rivers in one.” He stood distracted. There were 
no boats, and he had a large camp with him. Then there 
came word that Khawas Khan,’ with several amirs, was 
coming up behind. 

There was a Baluchi named Bakhsht (sic) who had forts 





1 Kamran may well have feared that Humayiin would get no further 
than Kabul on his way to Badakhshan. 

? 7.e., the Indus. The begam’s ‘seven’ is interesting. Cf. ‘Sketch 
of the Hindistani Language,’ C. J. Lyall, p.ln.. ‘ Hindo represents 
an earlier Hindaw, being the modern Persian for the ancient Hendava, 
v.e., a dweller in the country of the sapta hindi (Sk. sapta sindhu), or 
‘seven rivers,” now called, with the omission of two (probably the 
Saraswati and Drishadwati or Ghaggar) the Panj-ab.’ ? 

3 A follower of Shir Khan. 


‘10—2 


148 


and many men. His Majesty sent him a banner and 
kettledrums, and a horse, and a head-to-foot suit, and asked 
for boats and alsofor corn. After atime Bakhsht Baliicht 
got together and sent about a hundred boats, full of corn 
too, for the royal service,—a proper attention which pleased 
the Emperor very much. He divided the corn amongst his 
people, and crossed‘ the water! safe and sound. May mercy 
be shown to Bakhshi for his dutiful service ! 

‘After a weary journey, they reached Bhakkar at last. 
The fort is in the middle of the river and very strong. 
The governor, Sultan Mahmud (Bhakkari),* had fortified 
himself in it. (41b) The Emperor alighted safe and well 
over against the fort, near which was a garden® made by 
Mirza Shah Husain Samandar.* 

At length his Majesty sent Mir Samandar to Shah 
Husain Mirza with this message: ‘ We have come into © 
your territory under compulsion. May your country be 
blessed to you! We shall not take possession of it. Would 
to Heaven you would yourself come and pay us your 
respects, and do us the service which is our due! We 
intend to go to Gujrat, and should leave you your own 
country.’ By tricks and wiles, Shah Husain kept his 
Majesty as much as five months in Samandar; then he 
sent a person to wait on him, and to say: ‘I am arranging 
my daughter’s wedding-feast, and I send (someone) to wait 
on you. I shall come (later). His Majesty believed him, 
and waited still three months. Sometimes there was corn 
to be had, sometimes not. The soldiers killed and ate 
their horses and camels. Then his Majesty sent again, by 





1 The Gara, near Uch. 

2 Foster-brother of Shah Husain Arghiin, and the man for whom 
Sidi ‘Ali Rets negotiated terms with Humayiin in 1555, 

3 A delightful garden, the Char-bagh of Ruhri (Lihri), on the left 
bank of the Indus. Shah Husain felt no anxiety as to military opera- 
tions after hearing that Humayitin had camped here. Chdr-bagh seems 
to denote a royal and private garden. 

4 ¢ A place in Hindustan from which aloes are brought.’ (Steingass, 
s.v..) Cf.. Samandiri, aloe-wood, of the Ain. (Blochmann 80.) 
Samandar seems an equivalent for Sind. 


149 


Shaikh ‘Abdu-l-ghafir,' to ask: ‘How much longer will 
you be? What prevents you from coming? (42a) Things 
have come to such a pass that there is inconvenience, and 
many of my men are deserting.’ The reply was: ‘My _ 
daughter? is promised to Mirza Kamran, and a meeting 
with me is impossible. I could not wait on you.’ 

As at this time Mirza Muhammad Hindal crossed the 
river, some said he might be going to Qandahar.* On 
hearing this his Majesty sent several people after him to 
make inquiry and to say: ‘It is reported that you plan 
going to Qandahar.’ When questioned, the mirza said: 
‘People have given a wrong impression.’ On this the 
Emperor came‘ to see her Highness my mother. 

The mirza’s haram and all his people paid their respects 
to his Majesty at this meeting. Concerning Hamida-banu 
Begam, his Majesty asked: ‘Who is this?’ They said: 
‘The daughter of Mir Baba Dost.’ Khwaja Mu azzam’° was 
standing opposite his Majesty, who said: ‘This boy will 
be one of my kinsmen (too ?)."° Of Hamida-banu he said: 
‘She, too, is related to me.’ (42b) 

In those days Hamida-bani Begam was often in the 
mirza’s residence (mahall). Another day when his Majesty 
came to see her Highness my mother, he remarked: ‘ Mir 





1 Humayiin’s treasurer (mir-i-mdl) whose official functions must 
now have been of the least pressing. 

* The admirable Mah-chtichak who insisted upon accompanying the 
blinded Kamran to Makka. As her peer in compassion may be com- 
memorated Chilma Beg kika. (B. & HL, II., 418.) 

° He encamped at Pat (text, Patr), about twenty miles west of the 
Indus and about forty miles north of Sehwain. Pat isin the sarkdr 
of Siwistan, a little to the east of the highroad to Hyderabad, and not 
far north of Meani, the scene of Napier’s victory of 1843. I am in- 
debted to Major-General Malcolm R. Haig for the information that 
Pat is ‘now a ruin, having been destroyed in the latter part of the 
eighteenth century when two Kalhora chiefs of Sind called in the 
Afghans to quell domestic troubles.’ 

* Leaving his troops to prosecute the siege of Bhakkar, and passing 
through Darbila where was his cousin, Yadgir-nasir. From the 
wording it might be supposed that Gul-badan was with her mother in 
Pat, but I believe she was in Kabul at this time. 

> Cf. Appendix, s.n. Hamida-bani. 

® (2?) interrogative, but the preceding verb is guftand, and not pursi- 
dand. 


150 


Baba Dost is related to us. It is fitting that you should 
give me his daughter in marriage.’ Mirza Hindal kept on 
making objections, and said: ‘I look on this girl as a sister 
and child of my own. Your Majesty is a king. Heaven 
forbid there should not be a proper alimony, and that so a 
cause of annoyance should arise.” 

His Majesty got angry, and rose and went away. Then 
my mother wrote and sent a letter, saying: ‘The girl’s 
mother has even before this been using persuasion.” It is 
astonishing that you should go away in anger over a few 
words.’ He wrote in reply: ‘Your story is very welcome 
to me. Whatever persuasion you may use, by my head 
and eyes, I will agree to it. As for what they have written 
about alimony, please Heaven, what they ask will be done. 
My waiting eye is on the road.” My mother fetched his 
Majesty, and on that day she gave a party. When it was 
over, he went to his own quarters. (43a) On another day 
he came to my mother, and said: ‘Send someone to call 
Hamida-banti Begam here.’ ~ When she sent, the begam 
did not come, but said: ‘If it is to pay my respects, I was 
exalted by paying my respects the other day. Why should 
I come again?’ Another time his Majesty sent Subhan 
Quli, and said: ‘Go to Mirza Hindal, and tell him to send 
the begam.’ The mirza said: ‘Whatever I may say, she 





1 This looks like a side-glance at the wasted fortunes of royalty. 
No kingdom! No revenues! Whence then the dowry? It is clear 
from the sequel that the important point was being pressed. 

Jauhar says that Hamida had been already asked in marriage, but 
not betrothed or perhaps promised. Her objections to marry Humayan 
seem personal, and may indicate preference for another and dislike for 
him. She is said to have been fourteen years old and Humayiin was 
thirty-three, an opium-eater, and much married already. Her objec- 
tions, whatever their true basis, must have been strong or they could 
hardly have survived, for Gul-badan to record, through the many years 
of prosperity and proud motherhood which her husband’s renewed 
sovereignty in India and her son’s distinction secured to her. 

Behind Gul-badan’s story of the wooing of Hamida there were 
doubtless many talks over ‘old times’ when the royal authoress was 
freshening her memory for her literary task, begun (it seems probable) 
when she was about sixty-five and Hamida some few years younger. 

2 Madar-i-dukhtar az in ham peshtar ndz mikanad. Perhaps, 
‘ caressed the idea.’ 


151 


will not go. Go yourself and tell her.’ When Subhan 
Quli went and spoke, the begam replied: ‘To see kings 
once is lawful; a second time it is forbidden. I shall 
not come.’ On this Subhan Quli went and represented _ 
what she had said. His Majesty remarked: ‘If she is 
not a consort (nd mahram), we will make her a consort 
(mahram).’ 

To cut the story short: For forty days the begam 
resisted and discussed and disagreed. At last her highness 
my mother, Dil-dar Begam, advised her, saying: ‘ After 
all you will marry someone. Better than a king, who is 
there?’ The begam said: ‘Oh yes, I shall marry some- 
one; but he shall be a man whose collar my hand can 
touch, and not one whose skirt it does not reach.’ Then 
my mother again gave her much advice. (43)) 

At last, after forty days (discussion), at mid-day on 
Monday (fault) Jumidu-l-awwal (sic) 948H. (September, 
1541), and in Patr (sic), his Majesty took the astrolabe into 
his own blessed hand and, having chosen a propitious hour, 
summoned Mir Abi‘l-baqa and ordered him to make fast 
the marriage bond. He gave the mir two laks of ready 
money for the dower! (nikahana), and having stayed three 
days after the wedding in Patr, he set out and went by 
boat to Bhakkar. | 

He spent a month at Bhakkar and he sent Mir Abiw'l-baqa 
to Sultan Bhakkari. The mir fell ill while away, and went 
to the mercy of God.? 

His Majesty then gave Mirza Hindal leave to go to 
@Qandahar, and he dismissed Mirza Yadgar-nasir to his own 
place, Lar. He himself went towards Seawan*® (Sehwan), 





1 Perhaps the ladies romance a little here. Humayiin was certainly 
at a loss for money now and later. 

2 This is not a historic account of the death. He was sent to 
Yadgar-nasir and was shot while crossing the river on his return to 
Rihri by adherents of Shah Husain. His death caused great grief to 
Humayin. (B. & H., II., 222.) 

3 At the end of September, 1541. Hindal’s leave is a sisterly gloss 
on his acceptance of an invitation to Qandahar given by its governor, 
Qaracha Khan. 


152 


which is six or seven days’ journey from Tatta.1 Sehwan 
has a, strong fort, in which was Mir ‘Alika, a servant of his 
Majesty the Emperor.” There were several cannon, so no 
one could possibly go near. Some of the royal soldiers 
made trenches, and got near and gave him (‘Alika) advice, 
and said: (44a) ‘ Disloyalty is not well at such a time,’ but 
- Mir ‘Alika did not agree with them. Then they made a 
mine and cast down a tower, but they could not take the 
fort. Corn became dear and many men deserted. The 
Emperor spent six or seven months there. 

Mirza Shah Husain treacherously laid hands on the 
royal soldiers in all directions, and made them over to his 
people, and said: ‘ Take them and throw them into the salt 
sea.’ Three*® or four hundred would be gathered into one 
place and flung into boats and thrown into the sea, till as 
many as 10,000 were cast forth. 

*As after this there were few men even with the Emperor, 
(? Shah Husain) filled several boats with cannon and 
muskets, and came from Tatta against him. Sehwan is 
near the river. (? Mir ‘Alika) hindered the coming of the 
royal boats and provisions, and sent to say: ‘(?) I am 
maintaining my loyalty. March off quickly.’ Having no 
remedy, the Emperor turned to Bhakkar. 

When he came near and before he could reach it, Mir 
(Shah) Husain Samandar had sent word to Mirza Yadgar- 
nasir: (44b) ‘If the Emperor, when he is retreating, should 





1 Semblance of relevance can be given to this statement only by 
reference to other writers. Hum~ayiin had intended to go to Tatta at 
this time, and was diverted from the journey by a slight success of 
arms. He then besieged Sehwan. 

2 Certainly not so, for ‘Alika was an Arghiin and follower of Shah 
Husain. Perhaps Gul-badan wrote or intended to convey that ‘Alika 
had served Babar as once all the Arghiins had done. Perhaps she 
has confused the import of the story that Mir ‘Alika when sent by 
Shih Husain to take command of Sehwan, actually passed through 
Humayiin’s lines and the bazar without recognition as an enemy. 

3 Text, thirty—sisad. No wonder Humayin’s force vanished! He 
is said to have left Hindistan, z.e., Lahor, with a following of 200,000. 
This presumably included Kamran’s party, and was made up of 
soldiers and women, children, traders, servants, etc.. At this time 
Humayin had lost both Hindal’s and Yadgiar-nasir’s troops. 

+ The narrative becomes much confused here. 


153 


come near Bhakkar,' do not let him in. Bhakkar may 
remain your holding. I am with you; I will give you my 
own daughter.’ The mirza believed him and did not allow 
the Emperor to enter the fort, but wished to make him go 
on, either by force or fraud. 

His Majesty sent a messenger to say: ‘ Baba,” you are as 
a son to me. I left you in my stead, so that you might 
help me in case of need. What you are doing is done by 
the evil counsel of your servants. Those faithless servants 
will be faithless to you also.’ Whatever his Majesty urged 
had no effect.* Then he said: ‘ Very well! I shall go to 
Raja Maldeo.* I have bestowed this country on you, but 
Shah Husain will not let you keep.it. You will remember 
my words.’ Having said this to the mirza, the Emperor 
marched away by way of Jisalmir, towards Maldeo. He 
reached Fort Dilawar (Dirawal), on the raja’s frontier, a 
few days later. (45a) He stayed there two days. Neither 
corn nor grass was to be had. He then went to Jisalmir, 
and on his approach the raja sent out troops to occupy the 
road, and there was fighting. The Emperor and some 
others went aside off the road. Several men were wounded: 
Alush® Beg, brother of Shaham Jaldir and Pir Muhammad 
the equerry, and Raushang the wardrobe-keeper, and some 
others. At length the royal troops won and the infidels 
fled into the fort. That day the Emperor travelled 60 kos 
(cir. 120 miles), and then halted on the bank of a reservoir. 

Next he came into Sitalmir, where he was harassed all 
day till he reached Pahlidi, a pargana of Maldeo. The 





1 The mirza was at Rihri and had not possession of the fort. Cf. 
B. & H., II., 226, for a good account of his treachery and credulity. 

2 (?) ‘My dear boy ’—the Persian word of endearment. The relative 
position and ages of Humayiin and Yadgiar-nasir make ‘father’ in- 
appropriate. 

3 In this extremity Humiayiin turned his thoughts towards Makka. 

4 Raja of Jidpur (Marwar), who had proffered help. 

®> Var., Liish and Tarsh,—all three names of such disagreeable 
import as to suggest that they are either nicknames or were bestowed 
to ward off evil influences. Perhaps wis should be read. Cf. App. s.n.. 

6 Muqim Hardwi, father of Nizamu-d-din Ahmad, took part in this 
engagement. 


154 


raja was in Jodhpur, and sent armour and a camel’s-load 
of ashrafis, and greatly comforted his Majesty by saying: 
‘You are welcome! I give you Bikanir.’ The Emperor 
halted with an easy mind, and despatched Atka Khan 
(Shamsu-d-din Ghaznav7) to Maldeo, and sald: ‘What will 
his answer be ?’! 

In the downfall and desolation in Hind, Mulla Surkh, 
the librarian, had gone to Maldeo, and had entered his 
service. (45) He now wrote: ‘ Beware, a thousand times 
beware of advancing. March at once from wherever 
you are, for Maldeo intends to make you prisoner. Put no 
trust in his words. There came here an envoy from Shir 
Khan who brought a letter to say: ‘‘ By whatever means 
you know and can use, capture that king. If you will do 
this, I will give you Nagor and Alwar and whatever place 
you ask for.””’ Atka Khan also said when he came: ‘ This 
is no time for standing.’ So at afternoon prayer-time the 
Emperor marched off. When he was mounting, they 
captured two spies and brought them bound before him. 
He was questioning them when suddenly they got their 
hands free, and one snatched a sword from the belt of 
Muhammad Gird-baz" and struck him with it, and then 
wounded Baqi Gudliadrt. The other at once unsheathed® 
a dagger and faced the bystanders, wounded several and 
killed the Emperor’s riding-horse. They did much mischief 
before they were killed. (46a) Just then there was a cry, | 
‘Maldeo is here!’ The Emperor had no horse fit for 
Hamida-bant Begam. He may have asked for one for 
her from Tardi Beg,* who apparently did not give it. He 
then said: ‘ Let the camel of Jauhar, the ewer-bearer, be 
got ready for me. I will ride it, and the begam may have 





1 » Presumably to Atka Khan’s message from Humiayin. 
2 (2) gird-bazu, strong-limbed. 

3 Doubtful translation; az maydn yak kashida. 

4 This excellent officer is frequently a scapegoat. Our begam, how- 
ever, imputes her blame tentatively. For estimate of his character see 
B. & H., I. and II., s.n..  Jauhar brings Raushan Beg into a similar 
story of this terrible journey. 


155 


my horse.’ It would seem that Nadim! Beg heard that his 
Majesty was giving his horse to the begam and thinking 
of riding a camel, for he mounted his own mother on a 
camel and gave her horse to the Emperor. 

His Majesty took a guide from this place, and mounted 
and rode for “‘Umrkot. It was extremely hot; horses and 
(other) quadrupeds? kept sinking to the knees in the sand, 
and Maldeo was behind. On they went, thirsty and hungry. 
Many, women and men, were on foot. (46)) 

On the approach of Maldeo’s troops, the Emperor said 
to Ishin(Isan)-timur Sultan and to Mu‘nim Khan’ and a 
number of others: ‘You all come slowly, and watch the 
enemy till we have gone on a few miles.’ They waited; it 
grew night, and they missed their way. 

All through that night the Emperor went on, and at 
dawn a watering-place was found. For three days the 
horses had not drunk. He had dismounted when a man 
ran in, shouting: ‘The Hindits are coming up in numbers, 
mounted on horses and camels.’ Then the Emperor dis- 
missed Shaikh ‘Ali Beg (Jaldir), and Raushan kika and 
Nadim kika, and Mir Payanda Muhammad, brother of 
Muhammad Wali, and many others. 

They recited the fatiha, and his Majesty said: ‘Go, fight 
the infidels!’ He thought: ‘Ishan-timir Sultan, and 
Mu nim Khan,‘ and Mirza Yadgar,® and the rest whom we 
left behind, have been killed or captured by these people 
who have now come to attack us.’ He mounted and left 
the camp with a few followers. 

Of the band which his Majesty had sent out to fight 
after reciting the fatiha, Shaikh ‘Ali Beg struck the Rajput 
captain with an arrow, and cast him from his horse. (47a) 





1 The husband of Maham anaga, Akbar’s celebrated nurse. (R.A.S.J., 
January, 1899, art. Maham anaga, H. Beveridge.) His mother was 
Fakhru-n-nisa‘. Cf. Gul-badan, 26a and 71a. 

2 Perhaps ponies only. Text, chairwi. 

3 Gul-chihra’s husband. 

4 The well-known Khdn-i-khandn of Akbar’s reign. 

° Perhaps ‘Uncle Yadgar’ (faghdi), the father of Bega Begam. 
Yadgar-nasir was not here, but still in Sind. 


156 


Several more (of the royal troop) hit others with arrows ; 
the infidels turned to flee, and the fight was won. They 
brought in several prisoners alive. Then the camp went 
slowly, slowly on; but his Majesty was far ahead. Those 
who had recited the fatiha came up with the camp. 

There was a mace-bearer named Bihbid. They sent him 
galloping after the Emperor, to say: ‘ Let your Majesty go 
slowly. By Heaven’s grace, a victory has been vouchsafed, 
and the infidels have fled.’ Bihbad himself was taken to 
the presence, and conveyed the good news.! 

His Majesty dismounted, and a little water even (ham)? 
was found, but he was anxious about the amirs, and said: 
‘What has happened to them?’ Then horsemen appeared 
in the distance, and again there was a cry: ‘God forbid! 
Maldeo!’? His Majesty sent a man for information, who 
came running back and said: ‘Ishan-timtr Sultan, and 
Mirza Yadgar, and Munim Khan are all coming, safe 
and sound.’ They had missed their way. Their return 
rejoiced the Emperor, who rendered thanks to God. 

Next morning they marched on. For three days they 
found no water. (47b) On the fourth, they came to some 
very deep wells, the water of which was extraordinarily 
red. The Emperor halted and alighted near one of the 
wells; Tardi Beg Khan was at another; ata third, Mirza 
Yadgar, and Munim Khan, and Nadim kaka; and at the 
fourth, Ishan-timtir Sultan, and Khwaja Ghazi, and 
Raushan kiika. 

As each bucket came out of the wells into reach, people 
flung themselves on it; the ropes broke, and five or six 
persons fell into the wells with the buckets. Many perished 
from thirst. When the Emperor saw men flinging them- 
selves into the wells from thirst, he let anyone drink from 





1 And also, tied to his girths, two heads of foes which he flung at 
Humiayiin’s feet. 

2 to brim of the cup of joy. 

3 These cries remind one that even now Humayiin must have had 
with him a huge contingent of helpless beings, women and children 
and non-combatants. 


157 


his own water-bottle. When everyone had drunk his fill, 
they marched on again at afternoon prayer-time. 

After a day and a night they reached a large tank. The 
horses and camels went into the water and drank so much 
that many died. There had not been many horses, but 
there were mules and camels. (48a) Beyond this place 
water was found at every stage on the way to ‘Umrkot,} 
which is a beautiful place with many tanks. 

The rana? gave the Emperor an honourable reception, 
and took him into the fort, and assigned him excellent 
quarters. He gave places outside to the amirs’ people. 
Many things were very cheap indeed ; four goats could be 
had for one rupi. The rana made many gifts of kids and 
so on, and paid such fitting service that what tongue could 
set it forth ? 

Several days were spent in peace and comfort. 

The treasury was empty. ‘Tardi Beg Khan had a great 
deal of money, and the Emperor having asked him for a 
considerable loan, he lent 80,000 ashrafis at the rate of two 
in ten.2 His Majesty portioned out this money to the 
army. He bestowed sword-belts and cap-d-pie dresses on 
the rana and his sons. Many people bought fresh horses 
here. 

Mir Shah Husain had killed the rana’s father. For this, 
amongst other reasons, the rana collected 2,000 or 3,000 
good soldiers and set out with the Emperor for Bhakkar.* 
(480) | 

In ‘Umrkot he left many people, and his family and 
relations, and also Khwaja Mu‘azzam to have charge of the 
haram. Hamida-banti Begam was with child. Three days 
after his Majesty’s departure, and in the early morning of 
Sunday, the fourth day of the revered Rajab, 949H.,° 





1 The little desert town must indeed have seemed a haven after the 
terrible journey, and not least so to the young wife who some two 
-months later became the mother of Akbar. Huméayiin reached ‘Umrkot 
on August 22nd, 1542 (Jumada I. 10th, 949H.). 

2 Text, passim, ra‘nd. The ‘Umrkot rina’s name was Parsad. 

3 (?) 20 per cent. Cf. Mems., 138. 

4 After a stay of seven weeks in ‘Umrkot. 5 October 15th, 1542. 


158 


there was born his imperial Majesty, the world’s refuge 
and conqueror, Jalalu-d-din Muhammad Akbar Ghazi. The 
moon was in Leo. It was of very good omen that the birth 
was in a fixed Sign, and the astrologers said a child so born 
would be fortunate and long-lived. The Emperor was some 
thirty miles away when Tardi Muhammad Khan took the 
news to him. He was highly delighted, and by way of 
reward and largesse (nisdr) for the tidings he forgave all 
soever of Tardi Muhammad Khan’s past offences. He 
gave the child the name he had heard in his dream at 
Lahor, the Emperor Jalalu-d-din Muhammad Akbar. 

On leaving this place, the Emperor went towards Bhakkar 
with as many as 10,000 men who had gathered round him, 
people of the rana and of the outlying tribes and Stdmas 
(Sodhas) and Samichas. (49a) They reached the district of 
Jiin, where there was one of Shah Husain’s servants with 
some troopers. He fled.t. Here there was the Mirror 
Garden, a very pleasant and enjoyable place where the 
Emperor alighted. He assigned its villages (? of Jin) in 
jagir to his followers. 

It is a six days’ journey from Jun to Tatta. The Emperor 
was as much as six” months in Jun, and brought his family 
and people and the whole ‘Umrkot party there.* The 
Emperor Jalalu-d-din Muhammad Akbar was six months 
old when they took him to Jin. The party which had 
come from various places with the royal family and the 
haram now broke up. As for the rana, he marched off at 
midnight for his own country, on account of a coolness* 
caused by some talk between him and Tardi Muhammad 
Khan. All the Sudmas and Samichas went off by agree- 





1 Cf. B. & H., II., 256, for stories of the taking of Jin. 

2 Other writers say nine. . 

* Hamida and her baby were good travellers. They left ‘Umrkot 
when the child was under five weeks old (November 20th), and joined 
Humayin early in December (1542). 

* shukr-rangi. I do not find this word in dictionaries, and translate 
tentatively on the analogy of shwkr-db, a tiff. 

5 Other writers give Khwaja Ghazi as the second in the quarrel. 


INCIDENTS FOLLOWING THE BIRTH OF AKBAR. 


At the top, on the right, are Hamida-banii and the child ; on the left, the 


news is announced with sound of castanets and tambourines. : 
In the middle, the hour of birth is being communicated to the astro soc : 
At the foot, the news is being given to Humayiin by Tardi Beg, and is welcome 
by music and dancing. [To face p. 158. 





torn 


he 
- 





159 


ment with him, and the Emperor was left alone, as before, 
with his own people. 

He sent brave Shaikh ‘Ali Beg (Jaldi’) and Muzaffar Beg 
Turkman towards the large district of Jajka (Haj-kan). (49b) 
Mirza Shah Husain sent a force to attack him, and there 
was a famous fight. At last Muzaffar Beg was routed and 
fled, and Shaikh ‘Ali Beg (Jaldir) was killed and perished 
with all his men.' 

A squabble arose between Khalid Beg” and Tarsh Beg, a 
brother of Shiham Khan Jaldir and his Majesty turned 
all his favour to Tarsh Beg. So Khalid Beg deserted and 
went with all his men to Mir Shah Husain. Then the 
Emperor ordered Khalid Beg’s mother, Sultanam, to prison 
and this made Gul-barg® Begam angry. Then he forgave 
Sultanam and gave her leave to go to the blessed Makka 
with Gul-barg Begam. Soon after this Tarsh Beg also 
deserted. The Emperor cursed him, and said: ‘For his 
sake, I dealt harshly with Khalid Beg, who on this 
account left the circle of the faithful for the circle of the 
disloyal. Tarsh Beg will die young.’ Soit was! Fifteen 
days later, a servant killed him with a knife as he lay 
sleeping in a boat. When the Emperor heard of it he 
srew sad and thoughtful. (50a) Shah Husain Mirza 
brought boats up the river to near Jin, and his men and 
the Emperor’s often fought on board, and many were killed 
on both sides. Day by day there were desertions to Shah 
Husain. In one of these fights was killed Mulla Taju-d-din 
whom his Majesty held in the greatest favour as a pearl of 
knowledge. 

There was a squabble between Tardi Muhammad Khan 
and Mu‘nim Khan. Mu‘nim Khan consequently deserted. 





1 A stubborn fight, and fateful for Humayin. It occurred in 
November, 1548. 

2 Son of Nizamu-d-din ‘Ali Khalifa Barlds and of Sultaénam who 
appears to be Gul-badan’s former hostess (14a). 

3 Daughter of Khalifa, and as such sister or half-sister of Khalid, 
and daughter or stepdaughter of Sultamam. She is, I believe, the 
Gul-barg of earlier episodes and a wife of Humayun. 


160 


Very few amirs remained; amongst them were Tardi 
Muhammad Khan and Mirza Yadgar and Mirza Payanda 
Muhammad and Muhammad Wali and Nadim kuka and 
Raushan kiika and Khadang! the chamberlain. Then 
there was word brought: ‘ Bairam Khan has reached 
Jajka (Haj-kan) on his way from Gujrat.’ The Emperor 
was delighted, and-ordered Khadang and others to give 
him honourable meeting. 

Meantime Shah Husain Mirza had heard of Bairam 
Khan’s coming and sent to capture him. Bairam Khan 
rashly went into a hollow, and there they fell upon him. (50d) 
Khadang the chamberlain was killed. Bairam Khan and 
the rest escaped, and the khan came and paid his respects 
to the Emperor. 

At this time letters arrived (addressed to) Mirza Hindal 
for his Majesty from Qaracha Khan, saying: ‘You have 
been long near Bhakkar, and during the whole time Shah 
Husain Mirza has given no sign of good-will but the 
reverse. By Heaven’s grace, an easy way is open, and it is 
best for the Emperor to come here (to Qandahar). This is 
really advisable. If he will not come, come you yourself 
without fail.” As his Majesty’s coming was delayed, 
Qaracha Khan went out and met Mirza Hindal, and made 
over the town to him (in the autumn of 1541). 

Mirza ‘Askari was in Ghaznin, and to him Mirza 
Kamran wrote: ‘ Qaracha Khan has given over Qandahar 
to Mirza Hindal. Qandahar must be considered.’ His 
idea was to take it from Mirza Hindal. 

On hearing of these things, his Majesty came to his aunt 
Khanzada Begam,” and said with great urgency: ‘ Pray do 





1 Probably the father of Maywa-jan. Bairam arrived April 12th, 
1543 (Muharram 7th, 950H.). 

2 From this it would seem that Khanzada was in Sind with 
Humiayitn. No other writer, I believe, mentions this or the embassy 
on which she is now sent. The Uzbegs and Turkmians do not appear 
apropos here. If, as Gul-badan says,—and her authority is good,— 
Khanzada now went to Qandahar, she will have gone on to Kabul, 
possibly with Hindal after he surrendered the town to Kamran. Of 
Mahdi Khwaja, Khanzada’s husband, I find no mention made by any 





S BIRTH. 


3 


ION OF AKBAR 


OH IN CELEBRAT 


7 


LUT 


Nz 


To page p. 160. 


L 


Ry ees 


oe (ue 
Sy Bee 


nd 
sh 





161 


me the honour of going to Qandahar and advising Mirza 
Hindal and Mirza Kamran. (51a) Tell them that the Uzbegs 
and the Turkmians are near them, and that the best plan is 
to be friends amongst themselves. If Mirza Kamran will 
agree to carry out what I have written: to him, I will do 
what his heart desires.’ ; 

Mirza Kamran came to Qandahar four days after the 
begam’sarrival.! Day after day he urged: ‘ Read the khugtba 
in my name’; and again and again Mirza Hindal said: ‘ In 
his life-time his Majesty Firdaus-makani gave his throne 
to the Emperor Humayitin and named him his successor. 
We all agreed to this, and up till now have read the khufba 
in his name. There is no way of changing the khutba.” 
Mirza Kamran wrote to her Highness, Dil-dar Begam:? ‘I 
have come from Kabul with you in mind. It is strange 
that you should not once have come to see me. (51b) Bea 
mother to me as you are to Mirza Hindal.’ At last 
Dil-dar Begam went to see him, and he said: ‘ Now I shall 
not let you go till you send for Mirza Hindal.’ Dil-dar 
Begam said: ‘ Khanzada Begam is your elder kinswoman, 
and oldest and highest of you all. Ask her the truth 
about the khufba.’ So then he spoke to Aka. Her High- 
ness Khanzada Begam answered: ‘If you ask me! well! 
as his Majesty Firdaus-makani decided it and gave his 
throne to the Emperor Humayun, and as you, all of you, 
have read the khutba in his name till now, so now regard 
him as your superior and remain in obedience to him.’ 

To cut the matter short, Mirza Kamran _ besieged 
Qandahar and kept on insisting about the khufba for four 





historian after Babar's death,—a singular fact and matched by the 
similar disappearance of the great Khalifa. Abi’l-fazl names his 
tomb. Cf. App. s.n. Khanzada. 

1 She had a weary journey from Jiin to Qandahar, and Kamran had 
another, but less toilsome, from Kabul. Kamran kept Hindal besieged, 
but there seems to have been a good deal of communication between 
_besiegers gt talenpiered. 

2 Our memory is better than the. begam’s, and we remember that 
. found no difficulty in changing the khwtbu to his own name in 

ihli. 

3 She would be probably with her son Hindal in the fort. 

11 


162 


months. At last he settled it in this way: ‘ Very well! 
the Emperor is now far away. Read the khufba in my 
name and when he comes back, read it in his.’ As the 
siege had drawn out to great length, and people had 
gradually come to cruel straits, there was no help for it; 
the khutba was read. (52a) He gave Qandahar to Mirza 
‘Askari and promised Ghaznin to Mirza Hindal. When 
they reached Ghaznin, he assigned the Lamghanat and the 
mountain passes (Tangayha)' to the mirza, and all those 
promises were false.” 

Mirza Hindal went off to Badakhshan, and settled down 
in Khost and Andar-ab. Mirza Kamran said to Dil-dar 
Begam: ‘Go and fetch him.’ When she arrived, the 
mirza said: ‘I have withdrawn myself from the turmoil 
of soldiering, and even® Khost is a hermitage. I have 
quite settled down.’ The begam answered: ‘If you intend 
to lead the darvish-life, even* Kabul is a hermitage. Live 
where your family and kinsfolk are. That is the better 
plan.’ Then she made him come, and for awhile he lived 
as a darvish in Kabul. 

About this time, Mir Shah Husain sent to the Emperor 
to say: ‘The course favouring fortune is for you to march 
for Qandahar. That is the better plan.’ His Majesty 
was willing, and replied: ‘ Horses and camels are scarce in 
my camp; give me some to travel with to Qandahar.’ (620) 
Shah Husain Mirza agreed, and said: ‘ There area thousand 
camels on the other side of the river, which I will send to 
you as soon as you have crossed.’ 

[If words by Khwaja Kasak (? Kisik), kinsman of Khwaja 
Ghazi, are recorded about the journey from Bhakkar and 
Sind, they are copied from the writings of the said Khwaja 
Kasak.*] 

1 (?) The T’angi of Rudyard Kipling. 

2 The Tartkh-i-badayuni states that Ghaznin was given to Hindal 
and then taken away, and Mr. Erskine comments on this as probably 
untrue. (B. & H., Il. 265 n..) Gul-badan here supports ‘Abdu-l-qadir. 

> ‘as good as any other place’ is perhaps the import of the ham. 

4 We surmise that this is a gloss of Gul-badan, who has copied from 


a diary or writings of Khwaja Kasak. This name may be the Turki 
kistk, a guard, a sentinel. No Persian word seems appropriate. 








HYMN OF PRAISE FOR AKBAR’S BIRTH. 


Of especial interest are the faces of the open-mouthed 
singers. Hamida-bani is probably the featureless 
person on the estrade. 

[To face p. 162. 





163 


At length the Emperor went on board boats, with kins- 
folk and family, army and the rest, and travelled for three 
days on the great river. At the frontier of Shah Husain 
Mirza’s territory is a village called Nuasi.'. Here they 
halted, and his Majesty sent Sultan Quli, the head-camel- 
driver, to fetch the camels. Sultan Quli brought a thousand, 
all of which his Majesty gave to his amirs, and soldiers, 
and others, ordering them to be apportioned. 

The camels were such that one might say they had not 
known city, or load, or man for seven, or rather seventy, 
generations. As horses were few, many people took camels 
to ride on, and what were left were assigned for the 
baggage. Livery camel which was mounted, at once flung 
its rider to the ground, and took its way to the jungle. (53a) 
Every pack-camel, when it heard the sound of horses’ feet, 
jumped and bounded and tossed off its load, and went off 
and away to the jungle. If a load was fixed so fast that, 
jump as it would, it could not get it off, it carried it 
away and ran with it into the jungle. This was the way 
the Emperor started for Qandahar. Some 200 camels must 
have gone off like this. 

Shah Husain Mirza’s head-camel-driver Mahmtd was 
in Siwi (Sibi), and when the Emperor came near, he 
strengthened the citadel and retired into it. His Majesty 
came prosperously to within twelve miles’ distance. Then 
word was brought that Mir Allah-dost and Baba Jajik? 
had arrived in Siwi from Kabul two days earlier, and were 
going on to (visit) Shah Husain Mirza. By them Mirza 
Kamran had sent a dress of honour, and tipiichdq horses, 
and much fruit, and they were to ask for Mirza Shah 
Husain’s daughter.* 

The Emperor said to Khwaja Ghazi: ‘As there is the 





1 Runai, B. & H., II. 262. The text is clear. 

* Both these names may be sobriquets. Abu’l-fazl names Shaikh 
‘Abdu-l-wahab as Allah-dost’s companion. (A.N., Bib. Ind. ed. I. 189 
et seq..) 

Jijtik is perhaps the Tirki ‘sweet-savoured,’ and an epithet of 
‘Abdu-l-wahab, a lawyer with persuasive tongue. 

3 The daughter has already been named as promised. 


11—2 


164 


tie of father and son! between you and Allah-dost, write and 
ask him in what way Mirza Kamran stands towards me, 
and what he will do if I go into his neighbourhood.’ (53d) 
He also gave this order to Khwaja Kasak: ‘Go to Siwi, 
and ask Mir Allah-dost whether he thinks it advisable for 
me to come to Kabul.’ The khwaja set out, and the 
Emperor said: ‘ We will not march till you have returned.’ 

When the khwaja came near Siwi, Mahmud, the head- 
camel-driver, caught him, and asked: ‘ Why are you here ?’ 
‘To buy horses and camels,’ he answered. Mahmud 
ordered : ‘ Feel under his arm and search his cap. Heaven 
forbid that he should have brought a letter to win over 
Allah-dost and Baba Jujuk.’ They searched, and brought 
out the letter from under his arm. He had no chance to 
twist it into a fold.2) Mahmud took it and read it, and, 
not letting the khwaja go, forthwith conveyed Allah-dost 
and Baba Jajak into the fort, and with various rough- 
nesses made them swear: ‘We had no knowledge of his 
coming here.’ (54a) (?) He has taken the initiative ;* and 
‘Khwaja Ghazi is related to us and he was with Mirza 
Kamran,* and this is why he has written.’ Mahmud 
decided to send all three to Shah Husain, and Mir Allah- 
dost and Baba Jujuk spent the whole night smoothing 
him down and entreating him, and in the end they were 
set free. 

Mir Allah-dost sent 3,000° pomegranates and 100 quinces. 
for his Majesty’s use, and wrote no letter, because he was 
afraid it might fall into the wrong hands. By word of 
mouth he sent to say: ‘Ifa letter should come from Mirza 
Askari or the amirs, it would not be bad to go to Kabul; 





1 Probably a spiritual relationship; that of religious teacher and 
disciple. 

2 (2) to toss it secretly into a corner. 

3 sabq khwindaast. Perhaps Kasak as a pupil ‘ has said his lessons. 
to us,’ 2.e., to Allah-dost. 

* He had been Kamran’s diwdn up to the time when the royal family 
left Lahor, and he joined Humayiin when the brothers parted for Sind. 
and for Kabul. 

° Text, stsad, but perhaps only 300 should be read. 


165 


but if not, it will be clear to your Majesty that nothing is 
to be gained by going. You have few followers. What, 
then, will happen ?’ 

Kasak came and reported this. The Emperor was 
stupefied and bewildered, and said: ‘ What is to be done? 
Where am I to go?’ They all consulted together. (54)) 
Tardi Muhammad Khan and Bairam Khan gave it as their 
opinion that it was impossible to decide to go anywhere but 
to the north and Shal-mastain,! the frontier of Qandahar. 
‘There are many Afghans in those parts,’ they said, ‘ whom 
we shall draw over to our side. Mirza ‘Askari’s people, too, 
will join us.’ | 

Having settled it in this way, they recited the fatiha 
and went, march by march, for Qandahar. Near Shal- 
mastan they halted in a village named Rani (? Rali), but 
as it had snowed and rained, and was extremely cold, they 
determined to go on to Shal-mastan. At afternoon prayer- 
time an Uzbeg youth, mounted on a sorry and tired-out 
pony, came in, and cried out: ‘Mount, your Majesty! I 
will explain on the way; time presses.. There is no time 
to talk.’ The Emperor mounted the very hour the alarm 
was given, and went off. 

He went two arrows’ flight, and then sent Khwaja 
~Mu‘azzam and Bairam Khan to fetch Hamida-bani Begam. 
(55a) They went and mounted her, but there was not a 
chink of time in which to take the Emperor Jalalu-d-din 
Muhammad Akbar. Just when the begam left the camp 
to join his Majesty, Mirza ‘Askari came up with 2,000 
troopers. There was an outcry, and when he heard it, he 
entered the camp? and asked: ‘ Where is the Emperor ?’ 
People said: ‘He went hunting long ago.’ So the mirza 
knew that his Majesty had gone away just as he himself 


1 Approximately Quetta. The route seems to have been over the 
Bolan. 

2 The youth was Chupi Bahadir, a former servant of Humayun. 

Gul-badan’s story differs in some details from that told by other 
writers. 

3 Late in 950H. (1543). The little Akbar reached Qandahar on 
December 15th, 1548. 





166 


came in. Then he took possession of the Emperor Jalalu- 
d-din Muhammad Akbar, and gave him in charge to his 
wife Sultanam,! who showed him much kindness and 
affection. He made all the royal followers march, saying: 
‘Go to Qandahar.’ 

His Majesty, when he left, took the road to the mountains. 
He went eight miles, and then travelled as fast as possible.” 
(55)) He had with him Bairam Khan, Khwaja Mu‘azzam, 
Khwaja Niazi, Nadim kika* and Raushan kiika, and Haji 
Muhammad Khan, and Baba-dost the paymaster, and Mirza 
Quli Beg chuli,* and Haidar Muhammad the master of the 
horse, and Shaikh Yusuf chaz, and Ibrahim the chamber- 
lain, and Hasan ‘Ali, the chamberlain, and Ya‘ qub the 
keeper of the armoury, and ‘Ambar the superintendent and 
the royal agent (mulk-mukhtar), and Sambal captain of a 
thousand, and Khwaja Kasak.° 

Khwaja Ghazi says:° ‘I also was in attendance.’ This 
company went with the Emperor, and Hamida-banti Begam 
says,° ‘There were as many as thirty people,’ and that of 
women there was, besides herself, the wife of Hasan ‘Ali, 
the chamberlain. | 

The prayer before sleep had passed before they reached 
the foot of the mountains. The snow lay deep, so there 
was no road to go up by. Their minds were full of anxiety 
lest that unjust creature, Mirza “Askari, should follow 
them. At last they found a way up, and climbed it in 
some sort of fashion. They were all night in the snow, 
and (at first) there was neither wood for fire nor food to eat. 





1 I believe she was in Qandahar, and that she received the child on 
his arrival there. 

2 Perhaps he rode four kos, and then, having waited for Hamida, 
hurried on. 

3’ His wife, Maham anaga, remained behind with Akbar. With 
Akbar was also Atka Khan (Shamsu-d-din Muhammad) and his wife, 
Ji-ji anaga. 

4 Humiayun's sobriquet for those who went to Persia with him; 
from chil, a desert. Others in this list might claim it. 

® Nizamu-d-din Ahmad puts the number of the party at twenty-two. 

6 The tense used suggests conference and talking over. Jauhar says 
that Khwaja Ghazi joined Humayin in Persia from Makka. This 
looks like a contradiction of Jauhar. 


167 


They grew very hungry and feeble. (56a) The Emperor 
gave orders to kill a horse. There was no cooking-pot, so 
they boiled some of the flesh in a helmet, and some they 
roasted. They made fires on all four sides, and with his 
own blessed hand the Emperor roasted some meat which 
he ate. He used to say: ‘My very head was frozen by the 
intense cold.’ 

Morning came at last, and he pointed to another mountain, 
and said: ‘There are people on that; there will be many 
Biluchis there; and there we must go.’ On they went, and 
reached the place in two days. They saw a few houses 
near them, and a few savage Biluchis whose speech is the 
tongue of the ghouls of the waste. | 

The Emperor halted on the skirt of the mountain. There 
were about thirty people with him. The Biluchis saw him, 
and collected and came near. He had settled comfortably 
in his tent, so they knew from far off that he was halting. 
They said to one another: ‘If we seize these people and 
take them to Mirza ‘Askari, he will certainly give us their 
arms, and many gifts besides.’ (56d) 

Hasan ‘Ali, the chamberlain, had a Biltichi wife who 
understood what the ghouls of the waste were saying, and 
who made it known that they meant mischief. Early in 
the morning the Emperor thought of marching on, but 
they said: ‘Our chief is not here. When he comes, you 
shall go.’ Besides this, the time had become unsuitable, 
and so the whole night was spent there in strict watch- 
fulness. 

Part of the night had gone when the chief arrived. He 
waited on the Emperor, and said: ‘A farmdn has come 
from Mirza Kamran and Mirza ‘Askari, in which it is 
written: ‘‘It is reported that the Emperor may visit your 
dwellings. If he does, beware !—a thousand times beware!— 
of letting him go. Seize him and bring him tous. You 
can keep his goods and horses. Take him to Qandahar.” 
As I had not seen your Majesty, I at first had this evil 
thought, but now I will sacrifice my life and the lives of 
my family, I have five or six sons, for your Majesty’s head, 


168 


or rather for one hair of it. (57a) Go where you wish. God 
protect you! Mirza ‘Askari may do what he likes.’ The 
Emperor gave him a ruby and a pearl and some other 
things. 

At dawn he marched to honour Fort Baba Haji' by a 
visit.. He reached it in two days. It belongs to the Garm- 
sir,? and lies on the river (Halmand). There are many 
sayyids there, and they waited on the Emperor and showed 
him hospitality. : 

Next morning Khwaja ‘Alawalu-d-din (Jalalu-d-din) 
Mahmud,’ having left Mirza ‘Askari, came with an offering 
of a string of mules, and one of horses and tents, etce., 
whatever he had. Once more the royal heart was at ease. 
Haji Muhammad Khan kaki* brought thirty or forty 
troopers and offered a string of mules. 

Being helpless because of the disunion of his brothers® 
and the desertion of his amirs, it now seemed best to the 
Emperor,—with reliance on the Causer of causes,—to decide 
upon going to Khurasan.° (57b) 

After many stages and a journey of many days, he came 

to parts adjacent to Khurasin. When Shah Tahmas (sic) 
heard that he had reached the Halmand, he remained sunk 
in wonder and thought, and said: ‘ The Emperor Humayun 
has come to our frontier by the perfidious revolution of the 
firmament,—the firmament unpropitious and crooked of 
gait! The Lord, whose existence is necessary, has led him 
here !’ : 

He sent all sorts of people to give honourable reception, 





1 Fort of the Pilgrim Father. 

2 4.e., a warm climate, a winter habitation in low ground, and 
cultivated fields. 

3 He was a revenue-collector of the mirza. 

* Son of Baba Qishka, an intimate of Babar. 

5 Kamran was master of Kabul and Ghazni, Qandahar, Khutlan and 
Badakhshan. ‘Askari was attached to his full-brother’s fortunes, and 
Hindal was a prisoner in Kabul. Shir Shah ruled Babar’s Indian 
Empire, and Shah Husain was in Sind. Certainly there seemed no 
‘crack’ to hold Humiayiin. The date is December, 1543. 

6 z.e., on his way to Persia proper. Humiayiin’s messenger to the 
Shah was Chupi Bahadur. (55a and n..) 


169 


nobles and grandees, low and high, great and small. All 
came to the Halmand to meet the Emperor.' 

The Shah sent all his brothers to meet his Majesty,— 
Bahram Mirza, and Algqas Mirza, and Sam Mirza. All 
came and embraced him, and escorted him with full honour 
and respect. As they drew near (the Shah) his brothers 
sent him word, and he also came riding to meet the 
Emperor. They embraced. (58a) The friendship and 
concord of those two high-placed paishas was as close as 
two nut-kernels in one shell.?, Great unanimity and good 
feeling ensued, so that during his Majesty’s stay in that 
country, the Shah often went to his quarters, and on days 
when he did not, the Emperor went to his. | 

In Khurasan* his Majesty visited all the gardens and the 
flower-gardens, and the splendid buildings put up by 
Sultan Husain Mirza, and the grand structures of olden 
days. 

There was hunting eight times while he was in ‘Iraq, 
and each time trouble was taken for him also. Hamida- 
banu Begam used to enjoy the sight from a distance in 
either a camel or a horse litter. Shahzada Sultanam,* the 
Shah’s sister, used to ride on horseback, and take her stand 





1 He had crossed the river without receiving invitation or permis- 
sion, because of Kamran’s threatened approach. The incidents of 
Humayin’s visit to Persia are very entertaining. (B. & H., II. 275 
et seq..) 

2 A figure of speech too compact to leave room for the facts. The 
intercourse of the pashas was dramatic with human passion and foible. 
Much of the story would be distasteful to Gul-badan’s family pride and 
vexatious to her orthodoxy. 

3 Not only in Khurasin but on and off the route to Tahmiasp’s 
summer quarters where the pashas met, did Humayiin visit note- 
worthy places. He saw Harat as his father had done, and later his 
devious journey took him to Jam, where he saw the shrine of his own 
and of Hamida’s ancestor, the Terrible Elephant, Ahmad. He visited 
the tomb of the Founder of the Safi dynasty at Ardabil, and the date 
of his visit (1544) makes it probable that he trod that ‘ Holy Carpet’ 
of Ardabil which had been woven in 1540 for the shrine and which 
now attracts our respectful admiration in the Oriental Section of the 
Victoria and Albert Museum (S. K. M.). 

* This lady afforded Humayiin vital assistance in Persia, and even 
pleaded for his life when it was in the balance. She was highly 
esteemed by Tahmasp, and had influence in state affairs. 


170 


behind her brother. His Majesty said (to Hamida-banu) : 
‘There was a woman riding behind the Shah at the hunt. 
She stood with her reins held by a white-bearded man. 
People told me it was Shahzada Sultanam, the Shah’s 
sister.’ (58b) In short, the Shah showed the Emperor much 
hospitality and courtesy, and laid a charge (on his sister) 
to show motherly and sisterly hospitality and sympathy 
(to Hamida-banu Begam).* 

One day, when Shahzada Sultanam had entertained the 
begam, the Shah said to her: ‘When (next) you offer 
hospitality, let it be arranged outside the city.’ It was on 
a beautiful plain, rather more than four miles out, that 
they pitched tents (khaima) and folding-tents (khirga) and 
an audience-tent (barga), and also set up chatr? and taq.* 

In Khurasan and those parts they use enclosing screens 
(sardparda), but they do not put them at the back. The 
Emperor set up an all-round screen after the Hindu fashion 
(hinduidna). Having pitched the tents, the Shah’s people 
put coloured chicks (cheghha) all round. His kinswomen 
and his paternal aunt were there, and his sisters and the 
ladies of his haram, and.the wives of the khans and sultans 
and amirs, about 1,000 women in all splendour and 
adornment. 

That day Shahzada Sultanam asked Hamida-banu 
Begam: (59a) ‘Are such chatr and faq met with in Hindu- 
stan?’ The begam answered: ‘They say two ddng* with 
respect to Khurasan, and four dang with respect to Hin- 





1 An obscure passage in the text, and conjectural only in translation. 
The Persian words I have rendered ‘motherly and sisterly’ are 
midarina wa khwihardna. On this same page occurs hindidna ; at 
43b, nikahdana, and at 62a, pidshahdna. 

2 (?) umbrella-shaped tents. 

3 round-topped tents or balconies, or arched erections. 

4 or dinak. Hazarding a guess, the meaning ‘quarter of the world’ 
seems fittest to select from the several of déing or dinak. Others con- 
ceivably applicable are ‘a small grain’ (anglice, peppercorn in this 
connection), and the sixth of anything (anglice, the colloquial ‘ frac- 
tion’). Doubtless my difficulty is none to those experienced in colloquial 
Persian. 

Hamida’s ready use of a colloquial phrase to express that the 
reputedly greater contains the less is neat and diplomatic. 


171 


dustan. When a thing is found in two dang, it is clear 
it will be found better in four.’ 

Shah Sultanam said also, in reply to her own paternal 
aunt, and in confirmation of the begam’s words: ‘ Aunt,—— 
it is strange that you ask, ‘“‘ Where are two dang ? where 
are four dang?’ It is clear anything would be found better 
and more wonderful (in four than in two).’ 

They passed the whole day very well in sociable 
festivity. At the time of eating, all the amirs’ wives stood 
and served, and the Shah’s ladies placed’ food before 
Shahzada Sultanam. 

Moreover, they were hospitable? with all sorts of stuffs, 
embroidered and others, to Hamida-bani Begam, as was 
incumbent and fitting. The Shah went on in advance? 
and was in his Majesty’s quarters till the prayer before 
sleep. (590) When he heard that Hamida-banu Begam 
had arrived, he rose from the presence and went home. 
To such a height of pleasantness and kindness was he 
amiable ! 

Raushan kika, spite of his former fidelity and services, 
was now faithless, in that foreign and perilous country, 
about some valuable rubies. These used to be kept in the 
Emperor’s amulet-case (fwmdr*), and of this he and the 
begam knew and no one else. If he went away anywhere, 
he used to give the amulet-case into her charge. One day 
she was going to wash her head, so she bundled the case 
up in a handkerchief, and put it on the Emperor’s bed. 
Raushan kiika thought this a good chance to steal five 
rubies. Then he agreed with Khwaja Ghazi, and trusted 
them to him, meaning by-and-by to barter them away. 

When the begam came back from washing her head, the 
Emperor gave her the amulet-case, and she at once knew 





1 mandand, used transitively ; also at 4a. 

2 mihmani kardand. (?) In the way of gifts, or perhaps by lavish 
decoration. 

3 ¢,.e., from the place of entertainment to the town. 

oS tumar, an amulet-case of gold or silver suspended on the 
neck. 


172 


from its lightness in her hand that it had lost weight, and 
said so. (60a) The Emperor asked: ‘ How is this? Except 
you and me, no one knows about them. What can have 
happened? Who has taken them?’ He was astonished. 

The begam said to her brother, Khwaja Mu‘azzam: ‘So 
and so has happened. If at this pinch you will act the 
brother to me and will make inquiry in some way quietly, 
you will save me from what one may call disgrace. Other- 
wise, as long as I live, I shall be ashamed in the royal 
presence.’ 

Khwaja Mu'azzam said: ‘One thing occurs to me! J, 
who am so closely connected with his Majesty, have not the 
means to buy even a poor pony,’ but Khwaja Ghazi and 
Raushan kika? have each bought themselves a tipiichag 
horse. They have not paid the money for them yet. This 
purchase is not without a ray of hope.’ 

The begam answered: ‘O brother! now is the time 
for brotherliness! That transaction must certainly be 
looked into.’ Khwaja Muazzam answered: ‘O elder 
moon-sister !* tell no one about it. Heaven willing, I have 
hope that the right will be righted.’ (60b) 

He went out, and inquired at the house of the horse- 
dealers: ‘For what price did you sell those horses? When 
is the money promised? What security has been given 
for the payment?’ The dealers answered: ‘ Both men 
promised us rubies, and took the horses.’ 

From them he went to the khwaja’s servant, and said: 
‘Where is the khwaja’s wallet, with his honorary dress 
and his clothes? Where does he keep it?’ The servant 
answered: ‘My khwaja has no wallet and no clothes. 
He has one high cap which, when he goes to sleep, he 





1 Text, tatu. : 

2 Jauhar states that amongst other disaffected persons these two 
men, and a third, Sultin Muhammad, the spearman (nazabdz), had 
just returned from Makka, and were of Kamran’s party. . Gul-badan 
makes it seem probable that Jauhar’s statements apply only to Sultan 
Muhammad. (Cf. list of companions of Humayin on his journey, 550.) 

3 mah chicham. Cf. 18b n.. 

4 nirt wa parr. 


1738 


puts under his head or his arm.’ Khwaja Mu‘azzam saw 
the meaning of this, and made up his mind for certain 
that the rubies were with Khwaja Ghazi, and were kept in 

his high cap. He came and represented to his Majesty: __ 
‘T have found trace of those rubies in Khwaja Ghazi’s high 
cap. In some way I will steal them from him. (61a) If he 
should come to your Majesty and seek redress against 
me, let your Majesty say nothing to me.’ The Emperor 
listened, and smiled. 

Khwaja Mu azzam then repeatedly played off tricks and 
little jokes and pleasantries on Khwaja Ghazi, who came 
and set it forth to the Emperor. ‘I am a lowly man,’ 
said he, ‘(? but) I have a name and a position. What 
does the boy Khwaja Mu'azzam mean by playing off these 
tricks and jokes, and making fun of me in this foreign 
land, and insulting me?’ His Majesty said: ‘On whom 
does he not? He is young. It often comes into his head 
to do terrifying and ill-bred things. Do not take it to 
heart. He is only a boy.’ 

Another day, when Khwaja Ghazi was seated in the 
reception-room, Khwaja Mu‘azzam, pretending an accident, 
filched his cap from his head. Then he took out the 
matchless rubies, and laid them before his Majesty and 
Hamida-bant Begam. His Majesty smiled, and the begam 
was delighted, and said, ‘Bravo!’ and ‘Mercy be upon 
you.’ (61D) 

Khwaja Ghazi and Raushan kika, in shame at their 
deed, made secret communications to the Shah, and carried 
their talk so far that his heart was troubled. His Majesty 
saw that the Shah’s intimacy and confidence were not what 
they had been, and at once sent some of whatever rubies 
and other jewels! he possessed as a gift to him, who then 
said: ‘ Khwaja Ghazi and Raushan kaka are in fault; they 
turned my heart from you, and truly I used to regard you 





1 It was now that Humayiin gave to the Shah the ‘ diamond which 
had been obtained from Sultan Ibrahim’s treasury,’ 7.e., the Koh-i-nar. 
(Asiatic Quarterly Review, April, 1899, art. ‘Babar’s Diamond,’ H. 
Beveridge.) 


174 


as a brother.’ Then the two sovereigns again became of 
one mind, and made clean heart to one another. 

The two wrong-doers were excluded from the presence, 
and were made over to the Shah, who, when opportunity 
occurred, got possession of those rubies,! and, as to the 
men, ordered: ‘ Let them be kept in custody.” 

His Majesty’s time in ‘Iraq was (now) spent happily. 
In various ways the Shah showed good feeling, and every 
day sent presents of rare and strange things. (62a) 

At length the Shah despatched his own son and khans 
and sultans and amirs with his Majesty to help him, to- 
gether with good arms and tents, folding and audience 
tents ; and chatr and faq and shamiana, excellently wrought, 
and all sorts of the things necessary and fit for a king, 
from the mattress-warehouse and the treasury and the 
workshops and kitchen and buttery. In a propitious hour 
those two mighty sovereigns bade one another farewell, and 
his Majesty left that country for Qandahar.® 

At the time of his departure, he asked pardon from the 
Shah for the offence of those two faithless ones (Khwaja 
Ghazi and Raushan kaka), and, having himself forgiven 
them, took them with him to Qandahar. 

When Mirza ‘Askari heard (1545) that he was on his 
way from Khurasan and approaching Qandahar, he sent 
the Emperor Jalalu-d-din Muhammad Akbar to Mirza 
Kamran in Kabul, who gave him into the care of Dearest 
Lady, Khanzada Begam, and our paternal aunt. (62b) He 
was two and a half years old when she received him into 
her charge. She was very fond of him, and used to kiss 
his hands and feet, and say : ‘ They are the very hands and 
feet of my brother the Emperor Babar, and he is like him 
altogether.”* 





1 (2) those already bartered away. 

2 They were, it would seem, let down by tent-ropes into the celebrated 
underground prison of Sulaiman’s Diwiéin. (Jauhar, Stewart, 72.) 

* Humayin again indulged his love of travel and sights, and delayed 
so long in Persian territory that the Shah, coming unexpectedly upon 
him, angrily turned him off without ceremony. 

4 The child was just over three. It was now that he and Bakhshi- 
bani travelled together to Kabul in the snow. 


175 


When Mirza Kamran was sure that the Emperor was 
approaching Qandahar, he went to Dearest Lady and cried, 
and was very humble, and said with countless pains :* ‘ Go 

you (May your journey be safe!) - Qandahar to the — 
fer and make peace between us.’ 

When she left (Kabul) she made over the Emperor 
_Akbar to Mirza Kamran, who gave him into the care of 
(Muhtarima) Khanam. Then she travelled as fast as 
possible to Qandahar. The Emperor besieged Mirza 
Kamran? and Mirza ‘Askari for forty days in the city, and 
he sent Bairam Khan on an embassy to Mirza Kamran.? 
(63a) Mirza ‘Askari grew dejected and humble, admitted 
his offences, and came out and paid his duty to the Emperor, 
who then took possession of Qandahar (September 4th, 
1545). He bestowed it upon the son of the Shah, who in 
a few days fell ill and died. When Bairam Khan’ arrived, 
it was given into his charge. 

The Emperor left Hamida-banu Begam in Qandahar and 
set out after Mirza Kamran. Dearest Lady, Khanzada 
_ Begam, went with him, and at Qabal-chak® she had three 
days of fever. The doctors’ remedies were of no avail, and 
on the fourth day of her illness she passed to the mercy of 
God. At first she was buried at Qabal-chak, but three 
months later her body was brought to Kabul and laid in 
the burial-place of my royal father.’ 

During several years that Mirza Kamran was in Kabul, 





1 of persuasion. 

2 The context shows that this is wrong, and so do the histories. 

3 Bairam saw Akbar in Kabul, and also Hindal, Sulaiman, Haram, 
Ibrahim and Yadgar-nasir, all under surveillance. The embassy 
reached Kabul before Khanzada left, and she travelled with Bairam on 
his return to Humayin. 

* He was an infant. 

° The begam’s chronology is faulty here. Bairam had returned 
before the capitulation. 

® For location of this place cf. Akbarniéma H. B., I. 477 n.. It 
seems to have been in the mountain district of Tiri, between the basins 
of the Halmand and the Arghand-ab. 

” Khanzada, Mahdi (her Mahan) and Abi’l-ma‘ali are buried in 
the same spot. 


176 


he had never made a hostile raid,! and now, all at once, 
when he heard of his Majesty’s approach, desire to break 
forth (? hunt) seized him, and he went into the Hazara 
country.” (63)) 

Mirza Hindal, who had chosen the darvish’s corner (in 
Kabul), now heard of the Emperor’s return from ‘Iraq and 
Khurasan, and of his success in Qandahar. He saw his 
chance, and sent for Mirza Yadgir-nasir, and said: ‘ The 
Kimperor has come to Qandahar, and has been victorious. 
Mirza Kamran sent Khanzada Begam to sue for peace, but 
the Emperor did not agree to his sort of peace. The 
Emperor sent Bairam Khan as his envoy, and Mirza 
Kamran did not agree to what he proposed. Now the 
Emperor has given Qandahar to Bairam Khan and has set 
out for Kabul. Come now, let us, you and J, plan and 
agree together, and scheme how to betake ourselves to his 
Majesty.’ Mirza Yadgar-nasir agreed, and the two made 
their plan and compact. Mirza Hindal said: ‘ You make 
up your mind to run away and when Mirza Kamran hears 
of it, he will certainly say to me: ‘‘ Mirza Yadgar-nasir has 
gone off; go and persuade him to come back with you.” 
(64a) You go slowly, slowly on till I come. Then we will 
go as quickly as we can and pay our respects to the — 
Emperor.’ 

Having so settled it, Mirza Yadgar-nasir ran away. The 
news went to Mirza Kamran, who came back at once to 
Kabul and sent for Mirza Hindal and said: ‘Go and 
persuade Mirza Yadgar-nasir to come back.’ Mirza Hindal 
mounted at once, and joined Mirza Yadgar-nasir with all 
speed. Then they travelled post-haste for five or six 
days, when they were honoured by paying their duty to 
the Emperor. 





1 tikht raftan. I do not know what the begam wishes to say. 
Kamran had made hostile raids to Badakhshan and against the 
Hazaras. One might read ‘ hunting expedition.’ 

2 He had a Hazira wife. Perhaps the passage about Kamran’s 
hostile raid or hunting is merely an introduction to Hindal’s plan of 
scape. (Cf. B. & H., II. 314, 315, for this story.) 


177 


They advised the Khimar! Pass as the best route. On 
Ramzan 9th, 951H. (the third week of October, 1545), his 
Majesty ordered a halt in that pass. News of this went to 
Mirza Kamran on the same day and disturbed him ereatly.— _ 
He had his tents taken out very quickly and encamped in 
front of the Guzar-gah.” (64d) 

On the 11th of the same month, the Emperor ordered a 
halt in the valley of (?) Tipa, and Mirza Kamran? also came 
and drew up opposite to fight. Then all his amirs deserted 
and were exalted by kissing the royal feet. Even Bapus* 
who was one of his well-known officers, deserted him with 
all his following and was exalted by kissing the royal feet. 
The mirza was left solitary and alone. ‘No one remains 
near me,’ he thought, so he threw down and destroyed the 
door and the wall of the house of Bapus® which was near, 
and went softly, softly past the New Year’s Garden and the 
tomb of Gul-rukh Begam,® dismissed his 12,000 troopers, 
and went off. 

When it was dark, he went on in the same direction to 
Baba Dashti,’ and halted near a piece of water, and sent 
back Dosti kika and Jaki kika to fetch his eldest daughter 
Habiba, and his son Ibrahim Sultan Mirza, and Hazara 
Begam® who was the brother’s child of Khizr Khan 
(Hazara), and Mah Begam® who was sister of Haram 
(Khurram) Begam, and Mah-afroz, mother of Haji Begam,” 
and Baqi kika." (65a) This party went with the mirza, 





1 (?) himdar, the Ass’s Pass. 

2 (?) The Ferry Garden, or perhaps Babar’s burial-place. 

3 Not in person, I believe. His troops were under Qasim Barlas. 

4 Governor (dtaltiq) of Yasin-daulat (Aq Sultan), the betrothed 
husband of Habiba. 

5 Mr. Erskine says that Kamran escaped by a breach opened in a 
wall. He went by way of Bini-hisar to Ghazni, where ‘Askari still 
was. 

6 (?) His mother. 

7 The Desert Father; perhaps a shrine in a lonely spot. (Cf. 
Khwaja Khizr, infra, 700.) 

8 A wife. ® Probably a wife. 

10 Brevet rank at this time. She made one pilgrimage in 983H. 
(1576). She may, however, have gone earlier with her blinded father, 
but not so early as 1545. 

11 (?) The elder brother of Adham and son of Maham anaga. Maham 
anaga would be in Kabul now, 

| 12 


178 


who planned to go to Tatta and Bhakkar. In Khizr Khan 
Hazara’s country, which lies on the way to Bhakkar, he 
married Habiba Begam to Aq Sultan and entrusted her to 
him, while he himself went on. 

The victorious Emperor dismounted in triumph in the 
Bala-i-hisar when five hours of the night of Ramzan 12th 
had passed,—prosperously and with safety and good luck. 
All those followers of Mirza Kamran who had been promoted 
to the royal service, entered Kabul with drums beating 
(November, 1545). 

On the 12th of the same month, her Highness my mother, | 
Dil-dar Begam, and Gul-chihra Begam, and this lowly 
person paid our duty to the Emperor. For five years we 
had been shut out and cut off from this pleasure, so now 
when we were freed from the moil and pain of separation, 
we were lifted up by our happiness in meeting this Lord 
of beneficence again. Merely to look at him eased the 
sorrow-stricken heart and purged the blear-eyed vision. (655) 
Again and again we joyfully made the prostration of thanks. 
There were many festive gatherings, and people sat from 
evening to dawn, and players and singers made continuous 
music. Many amusing games, full of fun, were played. 
Amongst them was this: Twelve players had each twenty 
cards and twenty shahrukhis. Whoever lost; lost those 
twenty shahrukhis, which would make five misgals.2 Each 
player gave the winner his twenty shahrukhis to add to 
his own.* 

To widows and orphans, and kinsfolk of men who had 





1 The hour was probably fixed by astrological counsel. Abii’l-fazl, 
who may follow the begam’s statement, says that the entry took place 
on the 12th; other writers name the 10th. The only reason for dwelling 
on the point is the agreement of Abi’l-fazl and Gul-badan. 

2 ng shahrukhi was about ten pence. Four shahrukhis made one 
misga 

7 Mr. Erskine says that the earliest mention of cards as made known 
to him by an Oriental writer is when Babar sends some to Shah Husain 
Arghin who was ‘ very fond’ of them, by Mir ‘Ali, the armour-bearer, 
in 933H. (1526-27). No doubt such an easy means of speeding the 
hours was known to the ladies of Babar’s family as early as to anyone 
else, and Gul-badan is perhaps merely describing a new game. ~ 


SN ine ae te A ree een th 


179 


been wounded and killed at Chausa and Kanauj, or Bhakkar, 
or who were in the royal service during those intermissions,' 
he gave pension, and rations, and water, and land, and 


servants. In the days of his Majesty’s good fortune, great—_ 


tranquillity and happiness befell soldiers and peasants. 
They lived without care, and put up many an ardent prayer 
for his long life. (66a) 

A few days later he sent persons to bring Hamida-bani 
Begam from Qandahar. When she arrived, they celebrated 
the feast of the circumcision of the Emperor Jalalu-d-din 
Muhammad Akbar. Preparations were made, and after 
the New Year? they kept splendid festivity for seventeen 
days. People dressed in green,* and thirty or forty girls 
were ordered to wear green and come out to the hills. On 
the first day of the New Year they went out to the Hill of 
the Seven Brothers and there passed many days in ease 
and enjoyment and happiness. The Emperor Muhammad 
Akbar was five years old when they made the circumcision 
feast in Kabul. They gave it in that same large Audience 
Hall Garden.t They decorated all the bazars. Mirza 
Hindal and Mirza Yadgar-nasir, and the sultans and amirs, 
decorated their quarters beautifully, and in Bega Begam’s 
garden the begams and ladies made theirs quite wonderful 
in a new fashion. 

All the sultans and amirs brought gifts to the Audience 
Hall Garden. (66b) There were many elegant festivities 
and grand entertainments, and costly khi‘lats and head-to- 





1 Text, fatratha. The begam writes this word sometimes with a ta 
and sometimes with a fo’e. 

2 ¢.e., Persian era. Nizamu-d-din Ahmad places the date of entry 
into Kabul by Humayiin on Ramzan 10th, 953H., and says Akbar was 
then four years, two months and five days old. ‘Some place the event 
in the year 952H., but God knows the truth.’ It is strange that 
there should be doubt about a historical event occurring not more than 
fifty years before this resigned statement was made. Abii’l-fazl gives 
Ramzan 12th, 952H. (November 17th, 1545), as the date of entry, which 
would fix the feast for March, 1546, when Akbar was three years 
and five months old. (Born October 15th, 1542.) 

3 Probably in honour of the spring season. 

+ This is the garden where the ladies rejoiced after the victory at 
Panipat. (10d) Hence, perhaps, the use of the word ‘same.’ 


12-2 


180 


foot! dresses were bestowed. Peasants and preachers, the 
pious, the poor and the needy, noble and plebeian, low and 
high,—everybody lived in peace and comfort, passing the 
days in amusement and the nights in talk. 

Then the Emperor went to Fort Victory (Qila -i-zafar).” 
In it was Mirza Sulaiman, who came out to fight but could 
not stand face to face with his Majesty and so decided to run 
away. The Emperor then entered the fort safe and sound. 
Then he went to Kishm, where, after a little while, an 
illness attacked his blessed frame and he slept day and 
night.2 When he came to his senses, he sent Munim 
Khan’s brother, Faza’il Beg, to Kabul, and said: ‘Go! 
comfort and reassure the people of Kabul. Set them at 
ease in various ways.* Let them not quarrel. Say: “It 
began ill, but has ended well.’’’ (67a) 

When Faza’il Beg had gone, he (Humayun) went one day 
nearer Kabul.® 

False news having been sent to Mirza Kamran in 
Bhakkar, he set out post-haste for Kabul. In Ghazni he 
killed Zahid Beg® and then came on. It was morning; the 
Kabulis were off their guard; the gates had been opened in 
the old way, and water-carriers and grass-cuts were going 
in and out, and the mirza passed into the fort with all 





1 Perhaps there is expressed here a difference of degree of honour in 
the khi'lat and sar-u-pair. f 

2 Sulaiman had not made submission to Humiayiin,—hence this 
expedition to Badakhshan. 

3 He is said to have been insensible for four days. He was nursed 
by Mah-chtichak and Bibi Fatima, an armed woman (ordi-begi) of 
the haram. She was, it would seem, mother of Zuhra dghd, the 
wife of Khwaja Mu'‘azzam, and to save whose life Akbar nearly lost his 
own. (Elliot, V. 292; B. & H., II. 880 et seq..) 

4 (?) As to his health, and their own safety from Kamran’s return, 
and the continuance of the situation as he had left it. The illness 
and convalescence lasted at least two months. He fell ill in Shahdan, 
between Khishm and Qila‘-i-zafar, and Qaracha Khan, his vazir, 
behaved with decision and good sense, so that Humayiin’s authority 
was upheld. 

5 Doubtful translation. Humiayiin is elsewhere said to have gone 
to Qila‘-i-zafar to recruit, and Faza’il to have arrived in Kabul a few 
hours after the first news there of the illness. Perhaps one of these 
occurrences is behind this obscure statement. 

6 Husband of Bega Begam’s sister. 


181 


these common people. Heat once killed Uncle Muhammad 
Ali' who was in the hot bath. He alighted at the college 
of Mulla ‘Abdu-l-khaliq. 

When the Emperor was starting for Qila -i-zafar, ~he—— 
placed Naukar? at the door of the haram. Mirza Kamran 
must have asked: ‘ Who is in the Bala-i-hisar ?’ and some- 
one must have said: ‘It is Naukar.’ Naukar heard of 
this and at once put on a woman’s dress and went out. 
The mirza’s people laid hands on the doorkeeper of the 
fort, and took him to Mirza Kamran, who ordered him to 
be imprisoned. (67)) The mirza’s people went into the 
Bala-i-hisar, and plundered and destroyed innumerable 
things belonging to the haram, and they made settlement? 
for them in Mirza Kamran’s court (sarkar). He put the 
great begams into Mirza ‘Askari’s house and there he shut 
up a room with bricks and plaster and (?) dung-cakes, and 
they used to give the ladies water and food from over the 
four walls.* 

In what was once Mirza Yadgar-nasir’s house he put 
Khwaja Muazzam’ and ordered his own wives and family 
to stay in the palace where the royal haram and the begams 
once lived. He behaved very ill indeed to the wives and 
families of the officers who had left him for the Emperor, 
ransacking and plundering all their houses and putting 
each family into somebody’s custody.® 

When the Emperor heard that Mirza Kamran had come 
from Bhakkar and was acting in this way, he returned 
from Qila'-i-zafar and Andar-ab safe and sound to Kabul. 
Qjila‘-i-zafar he gave to Mirza Sulaiman. (68a) 





1 Brother of Maham Begam. : 

2 Probably the servant sent with gifts by Babar from Agra to 
Kabul. The name looks like that of an Abyssinian. Is it ‘new in 
work,’ and a sobriquet given in youth and retained ? 

3 zabt wa rabt. Is this an indication of Gul-badan’s opinion that 
Kamran profited by the robbery of his relations? His cruelties at 
this time make theft look innocent, (B. & H., II. 336 et seq..) 

4 The translation of this passage is doubtful. 

5 An undue honour, perhaps prompted by the khwaAja’s disgrace with 
Humayin. 

6 Probably for the exploitation so often named in the histories. 


182 


When he came near to Kabul, Mirza Kamran sent for 
her Highness my mother and for me from the house,’ 
and gave my mother orders to reside in the armourer’s 
house. To me he said: ‘This is your house as well as 
mine. You stay here.’ ‘ Why,’ I asked, ‘should I stay 
here? I will stay with my mother.’ He then went on: 
‘Moreover, write to Khizr Khwaja Khan and tell him to 
come and join me and to keep an easy mind, for just 
as Mirza ‘Askari and Mirza Hindal are my brothers, so 
is he. Now is the time to help.’ I answered: ‘ Khizr 
Khwaja Khan has no way of recognising a letter? from me. 
I have never written to him myself. He writes to me when 
he is away, by the tongue of his sons. Write yourself what 
is in your mind.’ At last he sent Mahdi Sultan® and Shir 
‘Ali to fetch the khin. From the first I had said to the 
khan: ‘Your brothers may be with Mirza Kamran, (but) 
God forbid that you should have the thought of going to 
him and joining them. (68b) Beware, a thousand times 
beware of thinking of separating yourself from the 
Emperor.’ Praise be to God! the khan kept to what 
I said. 

When the Emperor heard that Mirzi Kamran had sent 
Mahdi Sultan? and Shir ‘Ali to fetch Khizr Khwaja Khan, 
he himself despatched Qambar Beg, the son of Mirza Haji, 
to the khan, who was then in his own jdgir, and said: 
‘Beware, a thousand times beware! Let there be no 
joining Mirza Kamran. Come and wait on me.’ The 
result of this auspicious message was that the khan set 
out at once for court, and came to the ‘Uqabain (Hill of 
the two eagles) and paid his respects. 

When the Emperor passed Minar Hill, Mirza Kamran 
sent forward all his well-ordered soldiers under Shir — 





1 Presumably the brick and mud quarters of the ladies. 

2 Suad na dirad ki khat-i-mara shinasad. I understand that he 
had not seen her handwriting, and would not know whether a letter 
purporting to be hers was a forgery. Gul-badan names one son only, 
Sa‘adat-yar, as being her own. She is now about twenty-five 

§ Brother of Khizr and of Yasin-daulat (Aq Sultan). 


183 


Afkan,' the father of Shiroya, so that they might go out 
and fight. We saw from above? how he went out with his 
drums beating, out beyond Baba Dashti, and we said, 
‘God forbid you should fight,’ and we wept. (69a) When 


he reached the Afghans’ village (Dih-i-Afghandn), the two 


vanguards came face to face. The royal advance-guard at 
once drove off the mirza’s* and, having taken many 
prisoners, brought them to the Emperor. He ordered the 
Mughals to be cut to pieces. Many of the mirza’s men 
who had gone out to fight were captured and some of 
them were killed and some were kept prisoners. Amongst 
them was Juki Khan, one of Mirza Kamran’s amirs. 

In triumph and glory and to the sound of music, the 
Emperor entered the “Uqabain, with Mirza Hindal in attend- 
ance and a splendid cavalcade. He set up for himself 
tents and pavilions and an audience hall.° He gave Mirza 
Hindal charge of the Mastan bridge,® and stationed the 
amirs one after another. For seven months he kept up 
the blockade.’ (695) 

It happened one day that Mirza Kamran went from his 
own quarters to the roof (? of the citadel), and that some- 
one fired a gun from the ‘Uqabain. He ran and took him- 
self off. Then he gave this order about the Emperor 
Akbar: ‘ Bring him and put him in front.’ Someone let 
his august Majesty (Humayun) know that Mirza Muham- 
mad Akbar was being kept on the front, so he forbade the 
guns to be fired and after that none were aimed at the 





1 Son of Quch Beg, an amir who lost his life in trying to protect 
Bega Begam at Chausa. 

2 From the citadel where the ladies were. 

3 The begam underrates Humayun’s victory. The struggle was 
fierce, renewed and stubborn. 

4 Doubtful translation. 

6 I think she merely wishes to say that Humayiin camped out on 
the ‘Uqabain, and did not take up quarters under a roof. 

6 Under it flows the stream which issues from the defile of Dih- 
i-ya‘qub. Cf. Ain, Jarrett, I. 404. 

7 Of the Bala-i-hisar, the actual citadel. 

8 Gul-badan’s narrative does not support the story that Maham 
anaga exposed herself to save Akbar. This person,—who later on 
became so important,—is nowhere named by the begam as in charge 
of Akbar. Her husband, Nadim kiika, is so named, 


184 


Bala-i-hisar. Mirza Kamran’s men used to fire from the 
town upon the Emperor on the ‘Uqabain. The royal 
soldiers put Mirza ‘Askari to stand right in front and 
made fun of him. 

Mirza Kamran’s men also used to make sallies from the 
fort, and on both sides many were killed. The royal troops 
were often the victors and then the others had not courage 
to come out. For the sake of his wives and children and 
the begams and the household, ete., the Emperor did not 
have the cannon fired nor did he place the large houses in 
difficulty. (70a) 

When the long siege was ended, they (t.e., the ladies) 
sent Khwaja Dost Khawand madarchi' to his Majesty to 
say: ‘For God’s sake, do whatever Mirza Kamran asks, 
and save the servants of God from molestation.” 

The Emperor sent for their use from outside nine sheep, 
seven flasks of rose-water, one of lemonade, and seven sets 
of nine dress-lengths? and some made-up jackets.? He 
wrote :* ‘For their sakes, I could not use force against the 
citadel, lest I should give an advantage to their enemies.° 

During the siege Jahan Sultan Begam who was two years 
old, died. His Majesty wrote: ‘ Some time or other, if we 
had used force against the citadel, Mirza Muhammad Akbar 
would have disappeared.’ 

To finish the story: There were always people in the 
Bala-i-hisar from evening prayer till dawn, and there was 
a continuous uproar. The night Mirza Kamran went away,° 
prayer-time passed and indeed bedtime came, and there 
was no noise at all. (70d) 

There was a steep stair by which people came up from 





1 Follower of the Musalman saint Madar. 

* This message seems one from the imprisoned ladies. The khwaja 
to whom it was entrusted may now, as in the earlier siege of Kabul, 
have been Kamran’s envoy to Humayun. 

3 parcha and nimcha dokhta. There seems between these words an 
apposition which I render by the Englishwoman’s colloquial terms. 

* Presumably to some kinsman or official to whom the gifts were 
consigned. 

> 2.€., by injuring the royal household. 

8 April 27th, 1547 (Rabi' I. 7th, 954H.). 


185 


below. When all the city was asleep, there suddenly 
sounded (on the stair) a clashing and clinking of armour, 
so that we said to one another: ‘What a noise!’ Perhaps 
a thousand people were standing in front (of the fort). We 
were afraid, but all at once, without warning, off they went. 
Qaracha Khan’s son Bahadur brought us word that the mirza 
had fled. 

Having thrown a rope, they (or he) brought up Khwaja 
Muazzam by way of the wall.” 

Our people and the begam’s people and the rest who 
were outside, took away the door which had kept us 
fastened in. Bega Begam urged: ‘ Let us go to our own 
houses.’ I said: ‘Have a little patience. We should 
have to go by the lane and perhaps too someone will 
come from the Emperor.’ At that moment ‘Ambar Nazir 
came and said: ‘ This is the royal order: ‘‘ They are not to 
leave that place till Icome.”’’ Ina little while the Emperor 
came and embraced Dil-dar Begam and me, and then Bega 
Begam and Hamida-bantu Begam, and said: ‘ Come quickly 
out of this place. (7ia) God preserve His friends from such a 
house, and let such be the portion of His foes.’ He said to 
Nazir: ‘Guard one side,’ and to Tardi Beg Khan: ‘Guard 
the other, and let the begams pass out.’ All came out, 
and we spent the evening of that day with the Emperor in 
perfect content till night became morning. We embraced 
Mah-chiichak Begam and Khanish dgha and those of the 
haram who had been with the Emperor on the campaign. 

In Badakhshan Mah-chuchak had a daughter born. On 
the same night the Emperor had this dream: ‘ Fakhru-n- 
nisa, my mamd,® and Daulat-bakht came in by the door, 





1 Nizgamu-d-din Ahmad says that Kamran escaped by a hole fashioned 
for the purpose in the wall ‘on Khizr Khwaja’s’ side. This suggests 
that Gul-badan’s husband connived at the evasion, unless one re- 
members that Khizr Khwaja is a place outside Kabul. 

2 I do not understand this sentence. Either the followers of 
Kamran drew the khwaja up into the fort-precincts to take him with 
them, he having displeased Humiayiin and being nearly connected 
with him, or the ladies had him drawn up. He was, it seems, not a ~ 
prisoner. (67)) 

8 Fakhru-n-nisa‘, the mother of Nadim kaka, would seem from this 
to have been Humiayiin’s own attendant in childhood. 


186 


and brought something or other, and then left me alone.’ 
Consider it as he might, he could only ask: ‘What does 
this dream mean?’ Then it occurred to him that, as a 
daughter had just been born, he would call her after the 
two, and taking nisa@ from one, and bakht from the other, 
would run them together into Bakht-nisa‘. 

Mah-chuchak had four daughters’ and two sons,—Bakht- 
nisi’ Begam, and Sakina-banu Begam, and Amina-banu 
Begam, and Muhammad Hakim Mirza, and Farrukh-fal 
Mirza. (71)) She was with child when the Emperor went 
to Hindistan (1554), and bore a son, in Kabul, whom they 
named Farrukh-fal Mirza. A little later Khanish agha had 
a son whom they named Ibrahim Sultan Mirza. 

The Emperor spent a full year and a half in Kabul, 
prosperously and happily, and in comfort and sociability.” 

After taking flight from Kabul, Mirza Kamran went to 
Badakhshan, and there stayed in Taliqan. One day the © 
Emperor was in the Inner Garden,’ and when he rose at 
dawn for prayers, news came that many of the amirs who 
formerly were with the mirza, had gone to him again. 
Amongst them were Qaracha Khan and Musahib Khan, 
and Mubariz Khan and Bapis.t Many wretches fled by 
night and went to join the mirza in Badakhshan. 

In a propitious hour the Emperor also started for 
Badakhshan. He besieged the mirza in Taliqan, and after 
a time made him agree to submit and become obedient (72a) 
when he waited on the Emperor, who bestowed Kulab on him, 
and gave Qila-i-zafar to Mirza Sulaiman, Qandahar (sic ; 
(?) Kunduz) to Mirza Hindal, and Taliqan to Mirza “Askari. 





1 Gul-badan does not name Fakhru-n-nisai' who became the wife of 
Shah ‘Abi’l-ma‘ali and of Khwaja Hasan Nagshbandi. Perhaps she 
is Bakht-nisa‘. 

2 From 1547; but a term of one and a half years does not quite fit 
the facts. Humiayiin started for the north on June 12th, 1548. 
(B & H,, II. 352.) 

3 Orta-bagh. 

4 Perhaps it may be taken as an indication of the degradation of 
‘home life’ that Qaracha and Bapis again joined Kamran, although 
the latter had exposed Qaracha’s son and a wife of Bapiis on the battle- 
ments, with the utmost dishonour, and had killed three of the latter's 
children and flung their bodies from the ramparts. 


187 


One day at Kishm! they had set up” the tents and there 
was an assembly of the brothers, his Majesty the Emperor 
Humayitn, and Mirza Kamran, and Mirza ‘Askari, and 
Mirza Hindal, and Mirza Sulaiman.’ > 

His Majesty enjoined certain regulations* which are fixed 
for interviews with kings, and said: ‘ Bring ewer and basin 
so that we may wash our hands and eat together.’ He 
‘washed his hands and Mirzi Kamran washed his. By 
years Mirza Sulaiman (b. 920H.) had precedence of Mirza 
‘Askari (b. 922H.) and Mirza Hindal (b. 925H.j. So, to 
show him respect, the two brothers set the ewer and basin 
first before him. 

After washing his hands Mirza Sulaiman did something 
improper with his nose. Mirza ‘Askari and Mirza Hindal 
were much put out, and said: ‘ What rusticity is this ? (72d) _ 
First of all, what right have we to wash our hands in his 
Majesty’s presence? but when he bestows the favour and 
gives the order, we cannot change it. What sense is 
there in these nose-wagging performances?’ Then the two 
mirzas went and washed their hands outside and came 
back and sat down. Mirza Sulaiman was very much 
ashamed. ‘They all ate at one tablecloth. 

At this gathering his Majesty graciously remembered this 
lowly person, and said to his brothers: ‘ Gul-badan Begam 
used to say in Lahor: ‘‘I wish I could see all my brothers 
together!” As we have been seated together since early 
morning, her words have occurred to my mind. If it be 
the will of the most high God, may our assembly be kept 
in His own place! He knows without shadow that it lies 
not in my heart’s depths to seek any Musalman’s ill; 





1 Abt’l-fazl says the meeting was at Ishkdmish, and this seems to 
agree with the movements of Humayin better than Kishm. 

2 khirga dokhta budand. Certain tents are termed dokhta, sewed. 
They seem to have been large, and were laced together, whence, 
_ perhaps, dokhta. 

For an interesting account of this historic family gathering see 
B. & H., II. 358 et seq.. 

3 * Brother’ by courtesy and custom; anglice, ‘ cousin.’ 

4 Turd, the Institutes of Chingiz Khan of which the begam makes 
other mention. 


188 


how then, should I seek the hurt of my brothers? May 
God grant to you all the same divine and _ beneficent 
guidance, so that our agreement and concord may endure!’ 
(73a) 

There was wonderful cheerfulness and happiness because 
many officers and their followers met their relations again, 
for they too had been sundered because of their masters’ 
quarrels. Nay! one might rather say they had thirsted 
for one another’s blood. Now they passed their time in 
complete happiness. 

On his return from Badakhshan the Emperor spent a 
year and a half in Kabul and then resolved to go to Balkh. 
He took up his quarters in the Heart-expanding Garden,} 
and his own residence was over against the lower part of 
the garden, and the begams were in Quli Beg’s house 
because it was close by. 

The begams said to the Emperor over and over again: 
‘Oh, how the riwaj? will be coming up!’ He replied: 





1 2.e., moved out of the city as a preliminary to marching. 

2 The following account of this plant is taken from Conolly’s 
Travels, I., 213 n.. It is translated by him from the Makhdazinu-l- 
adwiya (Treasury of Medicines). ‘ Ribds, rivis, riwdj or jigart (so 
named from a person of Nishapiir who first discovered it) is a shrub 
two or three feet high, in appearance like beet (salq). In the middle 
are one or two short stems of little thickness; the leaves, which 
separate lengthwise like those of a lettuce, are downy and green, but 
towards the root, of a violet or whitish colour. The heart is white, 
delicate, juicy, acidulous and slightly astringent. Altogether the stalk 
is the size of a man’s arm and when the plant is large every leaf 
has the size of a man’s hand. Ard-shir was named Rawand-dast 
(rhubarb-hand) from the length of his hands. The root is called 
rawand (rhubarb). The top is like the claw of a fowl. The flower is 
red, and the taste is subacid with a little sweetness. The seed is 
formed at the top of a long slender stalk which springs up annually 
in the centre of the plant. It grows where snow lies and in mountainous 
countries. The best grows in Persia. It is medicinally attenuating 
and astringent, gives tone to the stomach, and improves the appetite. 
A collyrium of the juice strengthens the eye and prevents opacity, and 
a poultice of it with barley-meal is a useful application to sores and 
boils. The juice of the rivds is harsher than that of unripe grapes.’ 
For mention of the name riwd see Tabaqat-t-akbari, Lucknow lith. 
ed., 215; Tuzuk-t-jahangirt, 47. Vullers, s.v., ete.. Mr. Erskine 
writes (Mems., 138 n..): ‘It is described as somewhat like beetroot, 
but much larger, red and white in colour, with large leaves that rise 
little from the ground. It is a pleasant mixture of sweet and acid. 
It may be the rhubarb, rdwand.’ 


189 


‘When I join the army, I shall travel by the Koh-daman, 
so that you may come out and see the riwa growing.’ It 
was at afternoon prayer-time that he rode out' (of Kabul) 
to the garden. Quli Beg’s house where the begams were, 
was close by and overlooked it, and his Majesty pulled up 
as he passed, and all the begams saw him, and rose and 
made the kdrnish. (73b) Directly they had made this 
salutation, he beckoned with his own blessed hand, to 
say: ‘Come.” 

Fakhru-n-nisa mama and Afghani dghdcha went on a 
little ahead. There was a stream in the lower part of the 
garden which Afghani aghacha could not cross, and she fell 
off her horse. For this reason there was an hour’s delay.® 
At last we set out with his Majesty. Mah-chuchak Begam 
not knowing, her horse went up a little.* His Majesty was 
very much annoyed about this. The garden was on a 
height and the walls were not yet made. Some vexation 
now showed itself in his blessed countenance and he was 
pleased to say: ‘ All of you go on, and I will follow when I 
have taken some opium and got over my annoyance.’ He 
joined us when we had, as he ordered, gone on a little. 
The look of vexation was entirely laid aside and he came 
with a happy and beautiful look in his face. 

It was a moonlight night.(83a) We talked and told stories,° 
and Mir (fault) and Khanish dghdcha and Zarif the reciter 
and Saru-sahi and Shaham dghd sang softly, softly. 

Up to the time of our reaching Laghman, neither the 





1 Presumably from Kabul, and on the day of starting for Balkh vid 
the Koh-diman. ; 3 

* The ladies seem to have been waiting for this signal to start. 

3 Probably to allow for the coming of a less unpropitious hour. 
This expedition to Balkh ended in a way calculated to attract notice to 
ill-omens such as the begam’s misadventures would seem. 

* andak buland raft. Perhaps the horse reared, the begam not 
knowing how to manage it; but the later and otherwise irrelevant 
sentence about the unfinished wall suggests that the begam went too 
high up the hill. The party is now on its way to see the riwdj growing, 
and Humiaytin’s temper is tried by the various contretemps of the ladies’ 
cavalcade. 

® A folio of the MS. is, I believe, misplaced, and folio 83 should 
come in here. In the MS. volume this is the last folio. 


190 


royal tents nor the pavilions of the begams had arrived, 
but the mihr-amez' tent had come. We all, his Majesty and 
all of us, and Hamida-banti Begam sat in that tent till 
three hours past midnight and then we went to sleep where 
we were, in company with that altar of truth (Humayin). 
Early next morning he wished to go and see the riwd on 
the Koh. The begams’ horses were in the village, so the 
starting-time passed before they came up. The Emperor 
ordered that the horses of everyone who was outside 
should be brought. When they came he gave the order : 
‘Mount.’ . . 
Bega Begam and Mah-chtichak Begam were still putting 
on their head-to-foot dresses, and I said to the Emperor : 
‘If you think well, I will go and fetch them.’ ‘Go,’ he 
answered, ‘and bring them quickly.’ I said to the begams 
and to Mah-chiichak Begam and the rest of the ladies: ‘I 
have become the slave of his Majesty’s wishes. What 
trouble waiting gives!’ I was gathering them all together 
and bringing them when he came to meet me and said: 
‘Gul-badan ! the proper hour for starting has gone by. (83b) 
It would be hot the whole way. God willing, we will go after 
offering the afternoon prayer.’ He seated himself in a tent 
with Hamida-bani Begam.? After afternoon prayers, 
there was the interval between two prayers before the 
horses arrived. In this interval he went away.’ 
Everywhere in the Daman-i-koh the rtwda had put up its 
leaves. We went to the skirts of the hills and when it was 
evening, we walked about. Tents and pavilions were 
pitched on the spot and there his Majesty came and stayed. 
Here too we passed the nights together in sociable talk, and 
were all in company of that altar of truth. 
In the morning at prayer-time, he went away to a 





1 Perhaps a tent of Humayiin’s invention, in the name of which mthr 
means sun. Cf. ‘another of his (Humiaytin’s) inventions was a tent 
which had twelve divisions, corresponding to the signs of the Zodiac. 
Every sign had a lattice through which the lights of the stars of 
dominion shone.” (Akbar-nama, H. Beveridge I. 361.) 

2 Perhaps, a tent of Hamida having come, he seated himself in it. 

3 (?) the start was made to see the riwdj. 


191 


distance (birin), and from there wrote separate letters to 
Bega Begam and to Hamida-banti Begam and to Mah- 
chichak Begam and to me and to all the begams,! saying: 
‘Becoming spokeswoman of your own fault, write apolo- 
gizing for the trouble you have given. God willing, I shall 
say farewell and go to join the army either at Farza or 
Istalif, and if not we shall travel apart.’ (74a) 

Then everyone wrote to apologize for having given 
trouble, and sent the letter for his holy and elevating 
service. 

In the end his Majesty and all the begams mounted and 
rode by Lamghan to Bihzadi. At night each one went to 
her own quarters, and in the morning they ate (? alone), 
and at mid-day prayer-time rode to Farza. 

Hamida-bant Begam sent nine sheep to the quarters of 
each one of us. Bibi Daulat-bakht had come one day 
earlier to Farza and had got ready plenty of provisions and 
milk and curds and syrup and sherbet and so on. We 
spent that evening in amusement. In the early morning 
(we went) above I’arza to where there is a beautiful water- 
fall. Then his Majesty went to Istalif and passed three 
days, and then in 958H.? marched towards Balkh. 

When he crossed the pass, he sent farmdns to summon 
Mirza Kamran and Mirza Sulaiman and Mirza ‘Askari, and 
said: ‘We are on the march to fight the Uzbegs; now is 
the time for union and brotherliness. You ought to come 
as quickly as possible.’ Mirza Sulaiman and Mirza ‘Askari 
came and joined him. (74b) Then march by march they 
came to Balkh. 

In Balkh was Pir Muhammad Khan,? and on the first 





1 Humiiyiin’s comprehensive displeasure looks like a fit of temper 
directed against every and any one. It is possible, however, that a 
page which might describe other untoward matters besides unpunctu- 
ality, has been altogether lost. The sentence which now continues 
the story, places all the ladies, deprived of their evening of talk and 
amusement, in chastened solitude. 

2 B. & H., I. 368, has 956H. (1549), and other differences of detail. 

> Son of Jani Beg, and uncle of the famous ‘Abdu-l-lah Khan 
Uzbeg. He ruled till 974H. (1566-67). 


192 


day his men sallied out and drew up in battle array. The 
royal army carried off the victory, and Pir Muhammad’s 
men tasted defeat and returned to the city. By the next 
morning the khan had come to think : ‘ The Chaghatai are 
strong; I cannot fight them. It would be better to get out 
and away.’ Just then the royal officers joined in repre- 
senting that the camp had become filthy, and that it would 
be well to move to a desert place (dasht). His Majesty 
ordered them to do so. 

No sooner were hands laid on the baggage and pack- 
saddles, than others raised a clamour and some cried out: 
‘We are not strong enough.’ Since such was the Divine 
will, the royal army took the road without cause from a 
foe, without reason or motive. The news of their march 
reached the Uzbegs and amazed them. Try as the royal 
officers would, they produced not a scrap of effect. It 
could not be hindered: the royal army ran away. (75a) 

The Emperor waited a little, and when he saw that no 
one was left, he too had to go. Mirza ‘Askari and Mirza 
Hindal, not having heard of the confusion, rode up to the 
camp. ‘They found no one and saw that the Uzbegs had 
gone in pursuit, so they too took the road and made for. 
Kunduz. After riding a little way, his Majesty stopped 
and said: ‘My brothers are not here yet: how can I go 
on?’ He asked the officers and attendants whether anyone 
would bring him news of the princes. No one answered or 
went. Later on word came from the Mirza’s people in 
Kunduz that they had heard of the disaster and did not 
know where the princes had gone. This letter upset the 
Emperor very much. Khizr Khwaja Khan said: ‘If you 
approve, I will bring news.’ ‘God’s mercy on you!’ re- 
joined his Majesty. ‘ May they have gone to Kunduz !’ (75b) 

Two days afterwards the khwaja, to the Emperor’s great 





1 From other sources we learn that the royalists were anxious on 
two grounds; (1) as to the threatened arrival of an overwhelming 
Uzbeg force from Bukhara, and (2) lest Kamran should again take 
Kabul and have their families at his mercy. The last was perhaps the 
dominant motive for the flight without a pursuer. 


198 


delight, brought word that Mirza Hindal had arrived at 
Kunduz safeand sound. His Majesty gave Mirza Sulaiman 
leave to go to his own place, Qila -i-zafar, and came himself 
to Kabul (1550, 957H.). 

While Mirzi Kamran was in Kulab, a woman named 
Tarkhan' Bega, who was a thorough cheat, showed him 
the way by saying: ‘ Make a declaration of love to Haram 
Begam.? Good will come of it.’ Acting on these words of 
an ill-judging adviser, he actually sent a letter and a 
kerchief*? to Haram Begam by the hand of Begi dghd. 
This woman laid the letter and the kerchief before the 
begam and then set forth the mirza’s devotion and passion. 
Haram Begam said: ‘Keep that letter and that kerchief 
now and bring them again when the mirzés come home.’ 
Begi dghd then wept, and moaned, and coaxed, and said: 
‘Mirza Kamran has sent you this letter and this kerchief; 
he has loved you a long time, and you have no pity for 
him.’ (76a) Haram Begam began to show her disgust 
and violent anger, and at once sent off for her husband, 
Mirza Sulaiman, and her son, Mirza Ibrahim. She said 
to them: ‘Mirza Kamran must have come to think you 
are cowards, since he sends me a letter like this. Have: 
I deserved to be written to in this way? He is as your 
elder brother, and I am to him as a younger brother’s 
wife.* Send off a letter for me about it and rebuke 
him. As for this wretch of a woman, tear her piece by 
piece. Let her be a warning to others that no man may 
cast the evil eye of sinful thought upon another man’s 
womanfolk. What does such a man deserve who, the son 
of a mother, yet does such monstrous things, and who 
fears neither me® nor my son ?’ 





1 This title indicates rank. A ‘Tarkhan Begam’ was wife of Sultan 
Ahmad Mirza. (Mems., 22. .) 

“ or Khurram. One of her sisters was a wife of Kamran. 

3 What fascination may lurk in an embroidered kerchief can be 


guessed by inspecting the dainty examples in the South Kensington 


Oriental Section. 

+ kilin. Both here and at 77) this word seems to have wider 
meaning than is given by the Turki and Persian dictionaries. 

5 The begam’s martial character spices this story, since her husband 


13 


194 


Instantly hands were laid on Begi agha Bibi, condemned 
of fate to die, and she was torn in pieces. In consequence 
of this affair, Mirza Sulaiman and Mirza Ibrahim were 
displeased with Mirza Kamran, or rather they became his 
enemies. (76b) They wrote to the Emperor that Mirza 
Kamran wished to thwart him and that this could not be — 
better seen than in his failure to go to Balkh with him. 

After this the mirza, in Kulab,' could not find, in his 
terror-stricken thoughts, any better remedy than to become 
a darvish. He sent his son, Abu’l-qasim (Ibrahim) to 
Mirza ‘Askari, and betook himself to Taliqan with his 
daughter ‘Ayisha (Sultan Begam), and said to his wife 
(Muhtarima Khanam): ‘Do you and your daughter follow 
me later. I will send for you to whatever place I settle on: 
Till then go and stay in Khost and Andar-ab.’ The khanam 
was related to the Uzbeg khans, and some of her kinsfolk 
let the Uzbegs? know: ‘If you want booty, there are goods 
and men and women servants; take these, and let the lady 
go free, for if ‘Ayisha Sultan Khanam’s? nephew hears 
to-morrow (that she has been hurt), he will certainly be 
very angry with you.’ By a hundred plans and wiles, and 
with a hundred anxieties, and without her goods, she got 
free from the Uzbeg bondage, and reached Khost and 
Andar-ab. Here she stayed. 

When Mirza Kamran heard of the royal disaster in 
Balkh, he said: ‘The Emperor is not so friendly to me as 
he was.’ (77a) So he left Kulab, and went hither and thither. 

At this time (1550) his Majesty came out from Kabul. 
When he reached the Qibchagq defile, he incautiously halted in 
a low-lying place, and Mirza Kamran, coming from higher 
ground, armed and equipped, poured down foes upon him. 





did not dare even to make war without her consent. Perhaps 
Kamrian’s devotion extended to the armed force she disposed of. It 
was clearly in Tarkhan Bega’s eye. 

1 In Kulab were the kinsfolk of his wife, Mah Begam, sister of 
Haram Begam, daughter of Sultan Wais Qibchaq, and sister of Chakr 
‘Ali Khan. 

2 ¢.e., across whose country she had to travel. 

3 (?) Mughal Khanam. 


195 


Since such was the Divine will, a barbarian,—inwardly 
blind, an ill-fated oppressor and ill-omened tyrant,—inflicted 
a wound on the Emperor. The blow reached his blessed 
head, and all his forehead and his dear eyes were stained 
with blood. 3 

It was just like it was in the Mughal war when the blessed 
head of his Majesty Firdaus-makdni, the Emperor Babar, 
was wounded by a Mughal, and his high cap and the 
turban wrapped round it were not cut, but his blessed head 
was badly hurt. His Majesty Humayun used to say with 
surprise: ‘I wondered at it, for cap and cloth were whole, 
and yet the head was cut.’ The very same thing happened 
now to his own head. — . 

After the rout in the Qibchaq defile, his Majesty went to 
Badakhshan, and Mirza Hindal, and Mirza Sulaiman, and 
Mirza Ibrahim came and waited on him. (77) He went? 
to Kabul and the mirzas were in attendance, friendly 
and united and at peace together, when Mirza Kamran 
approached. His Majesty sent a message to Haram Begam: 
‘Ask my kilin® to send me the army of Badakhshan as 
quickly as possible and ready for service.’ In a few days, 
—a very short time,—the begam had given horses and arms 
to some thousands of men. She herself superintended and 
took thought and she came with the troops as far as the 
pass. From here she sent them forward, and while she 
went back they went on and joined the Emperor. 





! ¢Tambol let fall a heavy sword-blow on my head. It is a singular 
fact that, though not a thread of my cap of mail was injured, yet my 
head was severely wounded.’ (Mems., 266. Also 111.) 

2 Nizamu-d-din Ahmad, ‘after forty days.’ 

3 Cf. 77a u.. This story bears out Haram’s military reputation. 
Kamran’s power of attraction and Humiayiin’s present risk can be 
gauged by the fact that even after the defeat at Charikarain some 1,500 
horse were with the former, and many amirs again went over to him. 

It was now that the remarkable compact which effected Kamran’s 
downfall was made between Humiayiin and his amirs. (B. & H., II. 
838.) These swore fidelity by whatever oath would bind them and 
then, at the instance of Haji Muhammad Khan kijka, Humayiin bound 
himself to,—do as he was told. The compact was effective. The amirs 
were the long-suffering victims of Humayiin’s folly and their present 
turning was, he admitted, justifiable. 

18—2 


196 


Hither at Charikaran or Qara-bagh there was fighting with 
Mirza Kamran and his Majesty’s army was successful. 
The mirza fled to the mountain passes (tangayhd) and 
Lamghanat.* 

Aq Sultan (Yasin-daulat) who was the mirza’s son-in- 
law, said in effect to him (gufta bdshad): ‘You are con- 
tinually thwarting the Emperor. What is the meaning of 
it? It is not what should be. (78a) Hither make your 
submission and obeisance to the Emperor or give me leave 
to go, so that men may distinguish between us.’ Mirza 
Kamran said fiercely: ‘Have my affairs come to such a 
pass that you offer me advice?’ Aq Sultan also spoke 
angrily, ‘If I stay with you, my position will be unlawful,’ 
and left him at once, and went with his wife (Habiba) to 
Bhakkar. The mirza wrote to Mirzi Shah Husain, and 
said: ‘Aq Sultan has displeased me and has gone away. 
If he comes to Bhakkar, do not let his wife be with him. 
Part them and tell him to go where he likes.’ Shah 
Husain Mirza at once, on receiving the letter, deprived 
Habiba Sultan Begam of the company of Aq Sultan and 
let him depart for the blessed Makka.? 

In the fight at Charikaran, Qaracha Khan® and many of 
Mirza Kamran’s well-known officers were killed. 7 

‘Ayisha Sultan Begam‘ and Daulat-bakht dghacha were 
in flight for Qandahar, and were captured at the Khimar 
Pass, and brought in by the Emperor’s people. Mirza 
Kamran went to the Afghans,° and stayed amongst them. 
(78b) | 

From time to time his Majesty used to visit the orange- 
gardens. That year also, according to his old habit, he 
went to the mountain passes (tangayha) to see the oranges. 
Mirza Hindal was in attendance, and of the ladies (haraman), 





1 Nizamu-d-din Ahmad, ‘mountains of Mandrid.’ B. &H., II. 393,. 
‘by the Pass of Badpaj towards the Afghan country.’ 

2 Kamran was the son-in-law of Mir Shah Husain Arghin, and was 
therefore able to secure this interference with Aq Sultin’s domestic 
affairs. : 


3 Cf. Elliot, V. 233. 4 Kamran’s daughter. 
5 7.e., Lamghan. 


197 


there went Bega Begam, Hamida-banu Begam, Mah-chichak 
Begam and many others. I could not go because my son, 
Sa‘adat-yar, was ill at the time. One day his Majesty, 
attended by Mirza Hindal, was hunting near the mountain 
passes. They had very good sport. The Emperor went 
towards where the mirza was hunting and had made a 
very good bag. Following the rules of Chingiz Khan, 
the mirza proffered his game to the Emperor, for it is a 
rule of Chingiz Khan that inferiors should so act towards 
their superiors. In short, he gave the Emperor all his 
game. Then it occurred to him: ‘ There is still my sisters’ 
portion. (79a) They shall not complain again. I will hunt 
once more and get them a share.’ Again he busied himself 
in hunting, and had taken one head of game, and was 
returning, when someone sent by Mirza Kamran blocked 
the road, and shot an arrow at the unwitting mirza which 
struck his blessed shoulder. Acting on the thought ‘God 
forbid my sisters and womenfolk should be upset by news 
of this,’ he wrote off at once to say: ‘Ill begun has ended 
well!* Do not be anxious, for I am getting better.’ To 
finish the story: as it was hot, his Majesty went back to 
Kabul, and in the course of a year the arrow-wound got 
better. | 

A year later word was brought that Mirza Kamran had 
collected troops and was preparing for war. His Majesty 
also, taking military appurtenances, set out for the mountain 
passes (tangayhd) with Mirza Hindal. He went safe and 
well, and made his honouring halt in the passes. Hour 
by hour, and all the time, spies kept bringing news: ‘ Mirza 
Kamran has decided that an attack must be made to-night.’ 
(79b) Mirza Hindal went to the Emperor and submitted his 
advice: ‘ Let your Majesty stay on this high ground, and 
let my brother (nephew) Jalalu-d-din Muhammad Akbar 
pdadshah stay with you, so that careful watch may be kept 
on this height.’ Then he called up his own men, and 
encouraged and cheered them one by one, and said: ‘ Put 








1 Repetition of a proverb already quoted. 


198 


earlier services in one scale and the service of this night 
in the other. God willing! whatever claim you can make, 
you shall be exalted to its degree." One by one he allotted 
their posts, and then called for his own cuirass and surtout, 
and high cap and helmet. 

His wardrobe-keeper had lifted up the wallet when 
someone sneezed,” and he set it down for a while. Because 
of this delay, the mirza sent to hurry him. Then the 
things were brought quickly, and he asked: ‘Why were 
you so long? The man replied: ‘I had lifted the wallet 
when someone sneezed, and I therefore put it down. So 
there was a delay.’ (80a) | 

The mirza replied: ‘You were wrong. (You should 
have) said rather: ‘‘ May there be a blessed martyrdom.” ’ 
Then he went on: ‘Friends all! be my witness that I 
abjure all forbidden things and all indecorous acts.’ 
Those present recited the fathiha and prayed: ‘ May there 
be benediction.’ He said: ‘ Bring my vest and cuirass and 
surtout.’ He put them on and went out to the trenches to 
encourage and solace his men. Just then his fabagqchi,’ 
hearing his voice, cried: ‘They are attacking me.’ The 
mirza, hearing this, dismounted and said: ‘ Friends, it is 
far from brave to give no help when my servant is at the 
point of the sword.’ He himself went down into the 
trench but not one of his followers dismounted. Twice 
he sallied from the trenches, and in this endeavour became 
a martyr. 

I do not know what pitiless oppressor slew that harmless 
youth* with his tyrant sword! Would to Heaven that 





1 Perhaps the notion of this sentence is, ‘To-night’s service will 
equal or outweigh previous services, and the lower to-night’s scale is 
forced, the greater will be my largesse.’ 

2 It is hardly necessary to say that sneezing is by many nations 
regarded as an omen of other things than catarrh. 

3 Clerk of the scullery who has charge of plates and dishes, utensils 
which are often of value by material and by workmanship. 

4 Hindal was killed on Zi’l-qa‘da 21st, 958H. (November 20th, 1551). 
He was born before March 4th, 1519 (Mems., 258.), and was therefore 
in his thirty-third year. 

Gul-badan always speaks of her brother with affection, and her story 


199 


merciless sword had touched my heart and eyes, or Sa adat- 
yar, my son’s, or Khizr Khwaja Khan’s! Alas! a hundred 
regrets! Alas! a thousand times alas! (sob) 


HEmIsTICcCH. 
O well-a-day! O well-a-day! O well-a-day! 
My sun is sunk behind a cloud. 

All may be said in a word: Mirza Hindal gave his life 
freely for his sovereign. 

Mir Baba Dost lifted him up and carried him to his 
quarters. He told no one, and fetched servants and placed 
them at the entrance and gave orders: ‘ Tell everyone who 
asks, that the mirza is badly wounded and that the 
Emperor forbids anyone to enter.’ 

Then he went and said to his Majesty: ‘ Mirza Hindal is 
wounded.’ The Emperor called for a horse; ‘I will go 
and see him.’ Mir ‘Abdu-l-hai said: ‘He is badly hurt. 
Tt is not desirable that you should go.’ He understood, 
and however much he tried,! he could not help it, he 
broke down. 

Jii-shahi? was Khizr Khwaja Khan’s jagir. The 
Emperor sent for him and said: ‘Take Mirza Hindal to 
Jui-shahi and care for his burial.’ The khan took the 
camel’s bridle,* and when he was going away with weeping 
and lament and voice uplifted in grief, (sia) his Majesty 
heard of the mourning and sent him word: ‘We must 
have patience! This sorrow touches my heart more closely 
than yours, but I do not give way because I think of our 
bloodthirsty, tyrannical foe. With him at hand, there is 
no help but patience.’ Then the khan with a hundred 
regrets, miserable and stricken, conveyed the body to Jui- 
shahi, and there laid and left: it. 

It that slayer of a brother, that stranger’s friend, the 





shows that she mourned his loss many years. Her book lets us see a 
group of living and feeling men and women. 

1 hafz kardand. Perhaps as a matter of etiquette which demands 
composure in public. 

2 Text, Jisahi, the modern Jalalabad, on the road to Kabul. 

3 7,e., that of the camel which bore the corpse. 


200 


monster, Mirza Kamran had not come that night, this 
calamity would not have descended from the heavens. : 

His Majesty sent letters to his sisters in Kabul, and the 
city at once became like one house of mourning. Doors 
and walls wept and bewailed the death of the happy, 
martyred mirza. 

Gul-chihra Begam had gone to Qara Khan’s tibia: 
When she came back, it was like the day of resurrection.* 
Through weeping and sorrow she fell quite ill and went out 
of her mind. 

It was by Mirza Kamran’s evil fate that Mirza Hindal 
became a martyr. From that time forth we never heard 
that his affairs prospered. On the contrary, they waned 
day by day and came to naught and perished. (sib) He 
set his face to evil in such fashion that fortune never 
befriended him again nor gave him happiness. It was as 
though Mirza Hindal had been the life, or rather the light- 
giving eye of Mirza Kamran, for after that same defeat he 
fled straight away to Salim Shah, the son of Shir Khan. 
Salim Shah gave him a thousand rupis.?, Then the mirza 
told in what position he was, and asked help. Salim Shah 
said nothing openly in reply, but in private he remarked: 
‘How can a man be helped who killed his own brother, 
Mirza Hindal? It is best to destroy him and bring him to 
naught.’ Mirza Kamran heard of this opinion and one 
night, without even consulting his people, he resolved on 
flight and got away, and his own men had not even a word 
of it. They stayed behind and when news of the flight 
reached Salim Shah, he imprisoned many of them. 

Mirza Kamran had gone as far as Bhira and Khush-ab 
when Adam Ghakkar, by plot and stratagems, captured 
him and brought him to the Emperor. (82a) 

To be brief, all the assembled khans and sultans, and 
high and low, and plebeian and noble, and soldiers and the 





1 Khwand-amir compares a hustle of people to the day of resurrec- 
tion. 


2 A scornful measure of Kamran’s fall. The date is the end both of 
1552 and of 959H.. 


201 


rest who all bore the mark of Mirza Kamran’s hand, with 
one voice represented to his Majesty: ‘ Brotherly custom 
has nothing to do with ruling and reigning. If you wish 
to act as a brother, abandon the throne. If you wish to be 
king, put aside brotherly sentiment. What kind of wound 
was it that befell your blessed head in the Qibchaq defile 
through this same Mirzi Kamran? He it was whose © 
traitorous and crafty conspiracy with the Afghans killed 
Mirza Hindal. Many a Chaghatai has perished through 
him ; women and children have been made captive and 
lost honour. It is impossible that our wives and children 
should suffer in the future the thrall and torture of 
captivity. (82b) With the fear of hell before our eyes' (we 
say that) our lives, our goods, our wives, our children are 
all a sacrifice for a single hair of your Majesty’s head. 
This is no brother! This is your Majesty’s foe !’ 

To make an end of words, one and all urgently set forth : 
‘Tt is well to lower the head of the breacher of a kingdom.’ 

His Majesty answered: ‘Though my head inclines to 
your words, my heart does not.’ All cried out: ‘ What has 
been set before your Majesty is the really advisable course.’ 
At last the Emperor said: ‘If you all counsel this and 
agree to it, gather together and attest it in writing.’ All 
the amirs both of the right and left assembled. They 
wrote down and gave in that same line (misra) : ‘ It is well 
to lower the head of the breacher of the kingdom.’ Even 
his Majesty was compelled to agree. 

When he drew near to Rohtas, the Emperor gave an 
order to Sayyid Muhammad: ‘ Blind Mirza Kamran in 
both eyes.’ The sayyid went at once and did so. 

After the blinding, his Majesty the Emperor”... . 


END OF THE MS. 





1 bar jahannum, which I take as an oath. Cf. bar hag. 
2 Here in the MS. volume follows folio 83, which I have conjectured 
should follow folio 730, and have placed there. 





APPENDIX A. 


BrocraruicaL Notices oF THE WoMEN MENTIONED BY 
Basar, GuL-BADAN, AND Harpar.! 


I. Afaq (Apiq) Begam. 


Princess of the Universe ; Ar. dfaq, four quarters, 
universe, etc.. 


She is mentioned, without clue to her parentage, 
by Babar, as a wife of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra. 
He mentions her again, with others of the mirza’s 
widows, as seen in Harat in 912H. (1506-7), and here 
his wording, both in the Turki and the Persian texts, 
allows the inference that she is a daughter of Sultan 
Abu-said Mirdn-shaht. Mr. Erskine translates the 
‘passage thus: ‘Payanda Sultan Begam, my father’s 
sister, Khadija Begam and-the other (Turki, yena; 
Pers., digar) daughters of Sultan Abu-sa id Mirza.’ 

When greeting the ladies, Babar gave Afaq prece- 
dence over Khadija, and notes the fact. Khadija was 
not a woman of birth. 

Husain Bayqrad married three daughters of Abu- 
said, Shahr-bani, Payanda, and Afigq. The last bore 
him no child, but she reared and educated nine chil- 
dren of his by her own foster-sister, Baba dghdcha. 

Early in 932H. (1525) she went from Harat to 
Kabul and was received by Babar (before his depar- 
ture for India in November, 1525) with all possible 
respect and kindness. He gives the impression that 








1 This Appendix makes no pretence at completeness. It contains 
the gatherings in of work on Gul-badan Begam’s Humdyiin-nama. 


204 


she was an affectionate and devoted woman, and says 
that her tender care of her husband in illness sur- 
passed that of all the other ladies of the haram. 
News of her death reached Babar when he was 
besieging Chandiri in 934H. (January, 1528). 
Mems., 182, 183, 204. 


it, Afaq Begam. (No. 26.)! 


She was a daughter of Sultan-bakht Begam; her 
father’s name has not yet come to my knowledge; she 
was a grand-daughter of Sultan Abu-said Mirza. 

Babar mentions the arrival of a daughter of Sultan- 
bakht Begam in Agra in 9385H. (October, 1528), and 
Gul-badan supplies the name Afaq by naming an 
Afaq of this parentage as at the Mystic Feast in 
938H. (1581). 


Gul-badan. Persian text, 250. 
Mems., 387. 





(Afghani aghacha, the Afghan lady. See Mubarika Bibi.) 


Ill. Afroz-banti Begam. (No. 383.) 
Pers. afroz, dazzling, illuminating, and bani, (?) a 
form of ban (van), which in composition means 
holding, possessing. Also a prince or chief. 
Nothing is said to identify her. She was at the 
Mystic Feast (1531). 


Gul-badan, 250. 


IV. Agha Begam. (No. 34.) 


Turki, dghd, a title of honour, and Ar. sultan, sway, 
pre-eminence. Steingass classes the word dghd@ as 
Persian. It may be dka, lady. The dictionaries do 
not apply it to women. 


Mentioned as at the Mystic Feast in 1531. She 
may be Baygqra (infra). 
Gul-badan, 25d. 








1 Numbers so entered are those of Gul-badan’s guest-list, 240 
et seq.. 


205 


V. Agha Begam Bayqra. 
She was a daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra 
and of Payanda Sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi. Her 
descent being so high through both parents, her name 
Agha rises above its frequent application to wives of 
less degree. Here it may have the meaning of chief or 
great. She married her cousin Murad who was a son 
of Rabia-sultan Begam (Bedka): The Habibu-s-siyar, 
327 et seq. (lith. ed.), states that she died before she 
reached maturity, but this does not agree with Babar’s 
statements. The Habib places her death earlier than 
912H. (1506). 


Mems., 181. 
Habibu-s-siyar, lith. ed., 827 et seq.. 


VI. Agha kika. (No. 78.) | 
Wife of Mun‘im Khan ; at Hindal’s Feast (1537). 
Gul-badan, 26a. 


VII. Agha-sultan dghacha. (No. 87.) 

(?) The lady of chief honour. 

She was a wife of ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza (died 1494), 
and mother of Yadgar Sultan Begam (Babar’s half- 
sister). She was present at Hindal’s marriage feast 
(1587), and probably at the Mystic Feast, in 15381. 
She is classed amongst ‘ our begams.’ 


Gul-badan, 250. 
Mems., 10, 14. 


VIII. Agha-sultan Sultanam Dughlat. 


She was a daughter of Muhammad Haidar Mirza 
Dughlat, and therefore aunt of the author of the 
Tartkh-i-rashtdit.. She married ‘Abdu-l-qadus Beg 
Dughlat in Kashghar, after 877H. (1472-73). Her 
husband was alive in 900H. (1494-95), and was gover- 
nor of Khost for Sultan Mahmud Mirza Mirdn-shahi. 


Mems., 27. 
Tar. Rash., E. and R., 95, 1038. 


206 


IX. Ai Begam Miran-shahi. 
Turki, @, moon. Her name is not mentioned in 
the Memoirs, but is so by Ilminsky (Mems., 30; 
Ilminsky, 34, line 7 from foot). 
She was the fourth daughter of Sultan Mahmud 
Mirza Mirdnshahi and Khanzada Termizi I].; and wife 
of Jahangir Mirza, half-brother of Babar. She was 
betrothed in 901H. (1495-96), married in 910H. 
(1504-5), bore one daughter, and was widowed not 
later than 914H. (1508-9). 


Mems., 30, 128. 
Pavet de Courteille, I. 57, 262. 


X. Aka Begam Baygqra. 


Aka is clearly a title; her personal name I have 
not found. Her sister who is styled Bedka, appons 
to be named Rabi‘a-sultan. 


Daughter of Mansur Mirza Bayqrd and Firoza Begam 
Mirdn-shahi, full and elder sister of Sultan Husain 
Mirza. Babar states (Mems., 176, 177) that she 
married (his uncle) Sultan Ahmad Mirza, and had a 
son, Kichak Mirza (the young or small prince). But 
he does not mention her, either as Aka or otherwise, 
amongst Ahmad’s wives (Mems., 22), and he says that 
Ahmad had two sons who died young. Kichak, how- 
ever, lived to change his military occupations for 
literature. 

It is singular that a marriage of the oldest Miran- 
shaht of his generation with the oldest Bayqra girl 
should not have been entered in Ahmad’s biographical 
notice. 

Mems., 22, 23, 176, 177. 





(Alish—Antish—Begam, ‘Ulis, q.v..) 


XI. Amina Begam Mirdn-shahi. 
Ara., amin, faithful. 
Daughter of Humaytin and Mah-chuchak. 
Gul-badan, 71a. 


207 


XII. Aq Begam Bayqra. 


Turki, dq, fair. The word is frequently a sobri- 
quet and the bearer’s personal name is occasionally 
known; ¢.g., Yasin-daulat, Aq Sultan ; Saliqa Begam, 
Aq Begam. But frequently the personal name is not 
traceable. 


Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bdyqra and 
Payanda Sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi; first cousin of 
Babar; wife of Muhammad Qasim Ariat. She had 
one daughter, known as the Black-eyed (qard-guz) 
Begam. 

Mems., 181. 





XIII. Aq Begam Mirdn-shahi. (No. 8.) 

Aq Begam was a daughter of Abti-sa‘id Mirdan-shahi 
and Khadija. She was one of the several paternal 
aunts of Babar who went to India at his invitation. 
She reached Agra in October, 1528 (Safar, 935H.), 
and was met by her nephew. She was present at the 
double wedding of Gul-rang and Gul-chihra in 1530 
(937H.), and was probably at Babar’s death-bed. She 
was at the Mystic Feast on December 19th, 1531 
(Jumada I. 9th, 9388H.). 


Gul-badan, lla, 180, 20a, 240. 
Mems., 179, 182, 387. 





XIV. Aq Begam Mirdn-shahi. 

Third daughter of Sultan Mahmud Mirza Miran- 
shaht and Khanzada Begam Termizt; and first cousin 
of Babar. The Memoirs do not mention her marriage 
or (as usual alternative) early death. She was full 
sister of a wife of Babar, Zainab. 

Mems., 30. 





(Aq Begam, Saliqa, q.v..) 





1 Muhammad Qasim was a Timirid through his grandmother, 
Bega Begam, the sister of ‘Abdu-l-qisim Babar galandar, King of 
Khurasan (died 1457). 


208 


XV. ‘Agiqa (Afifa) Begam Mirdn-shaht. (No. 47.) 


Her name may be ‘Agiqa, a cornelian, ete., or 
‘Afifa, a chaste, modest woman. Our begam’s MS. 
allows both readings. I have used the first but the 
second seems the more appropriate in sense. 


She was a daughter of Humayun and Bega and 
second child of both parents. She was born in Agra 
in 1531. It is only from her aunt Gul-badan that 

-anything is known of her. She went to Gualiar with 
her mother in (?) 1584; she was at Hindal’s feast in 
1587, and she was lost at Chausa on June 27th, 15389. 

Gul-badan, 22a, 23b, 25, 33b, 34d. tag 





XVI. Atiin mama. (No. 88.) 


An dtin is a teacher of reading, writing, and em- 
broidery, etc. Mdamd seems to be the title of old 
women-servants. 


Babar mentions an atin in 1501. He met her at 
Pashaghar whither she had come on foot from Samar- 
gand and where she again joined her old mistress, 
Babar’s mother, Qutluq-nigar Khanam. She had been 
left behind in the city after Shaibani’s capture of it 
because there was no horse for her to ride. 

Gul-badan mentions an dtimn mama as at Hindal’s 
wedding feast, and as mama seems to be used for old 
servants, it is possible that she is the woman men- 
tioned by Babar. 


Gul-badan, 26a. 
Mems., 99. 





XVII. ‘Ayisha-sultan Begam Baygqra. (No. 9.) 





Ar. ‘aish, joy, and sultan, sway, pre-eminence. Cf, 
App. s.n. Daulat. 

Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra and 
Yobaida dghacha of the Shaiban sultans. ‘Ayisha 
married, (1) Qasim Sultan Uzbeg, a Shaiban sultan, 
and by him became the mother of Qasim Husain 
Sultan Uzbeg, an amir of Babar and Humayun ; 
(2) by yanga-lik (cf. App. s.n. Jamal), Buran Sultan, 


209 


a kinsman of Qasim Sultan, and by whom she had 
“Abdu-l-lah Sultan Uzbeg who entered Babar’s service. 

‘Ayisha was at the Mystic Feast in 1581, and she 
was lost at Chausa in 1539 (946H.). 

Khwand-amir gives 929H. (1522-23) as a date at 
which ‘Ayisha was in Qasim Sultan’s haram, but this 
does not agree with Babar’s narrative. His entry that 
‘Abdu-l-lah was in his service and although young, 
acquitting himself respectably, cannot at latest have 
been made after 1530. From 1522 to 1530 is all too 
short for widowhood, remarriage, birth of ‘Abdu-l-lah, 
and his growth to respectable military service. 

Gul-badan, 246, 330. 


Mems., 182. 
Habibu-s-siyar, lith. ed., 327 et seq.. 


XVIII. ‘Ayisha-sultén Begam Miran-shaht. (? No. 11.) 

Third daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza Mirdn- 
shaht and Quttq (Katak) Begam. She was a first 
cousin of Babar, and his first wife. They were 
betrothed in Samarqand when he was five years old, 
894H.(1488-89), and married in Shaban, 905H. 
(March, 1500), at Khojand during the ‘troubles’ 
2.€., conflict with Khusrau Shah and Ahmad Tambol. 
Babar says that at first he had no small affection for 
‘Ayisha and that it declined. She was the mother of 
his first child, Fakhru-n-nisa’ (born 907H., 1501). 
She left Babar before the overthrow (wirdnt) of Tash- 
kand by Shaibani in 909H. (1503), being influenced 
by the ‘machinations’ of her elder sister, probably 
Saliqa, who was married to one of those many kins- 
men who tried to overthrow the boy-king of Farghana. 

Gul-badan mentions an ‘Ayisha Sultan Begam 
(No. 11) as being at the Mystic Feast, without de- 
scribing her. The following entry (No. 12) is that of 
Sultani, a daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza, and 
described as being such. It seems likely that Gul- 

14 


210 


badan meant this note as to parentage to apply to both 
begams (Nos. 11 and 12). (Cf. App. s.n. Sultanan.) 


Gul-badan, 66, 240. 
Mems., 22, 78, 90. 


XIX. Ayisha-sultin Begam Miran-shahi. 

Daughter of Kamran Mirza. 

Firishta (lith. ed., 241) and Khafi Khan (I. 122) say 
that Kamran left one son and three daughters. 

The son is called Ibrahim by Gul-badan, and in the 
early part of the Akbar-nama. (Bib. Ind., ed., I. 226.) 
Later the A. N. and other sources call him Abu’l-qasim, 
which may be a hyonymic (kunyat). 

As to the three girls, Firishta, without naming them, 
gives the information that: 

No. 1 married (a) Ibrahim Husain Mirza (Bayqra). 

No. 2 is (b) Mirza ‘Abdu-r-rahman Mughal. 

No. 8 ‘i (c) Fakhru-d-din Mashhadi who died 
in 986H. or 987H. (No. 88 of Blochmann’s list. Atn-i- 
akbart, p. 406). 

Khafi Khan’s information coincides with Firishta’s 
verbally as to No. 8, and actually as to No. 1 and 
No. 2. For Ibrahim can be described as a son of a 
‘paternal uncle,’ if these words are used in the wide 
sense given to them by contemporary writers. So, too, 
can ‘Abdu-r-rahman, if he be No. 183 of Blochmann’s 
list—a Dughlat Mughal and cousin of Mirza Haidar. 

If we take the girls’ names from other sources we 
can (conjecturally in part) fill up the table. 

1. Gul-rukh is known in history as the wife of 
Ibrahim Husain Mirza Bayqra. 

2. Kamran’s eldest daughter, Habiba, was forcibly 
parted from her husband, Aq Sultan, in about 1551-52, 
and this would allow re-marriage to (b) or (e). Aq 
Sultan went to Makka from Sind 1551-52 (cir.), and 
his name disappears thenceforth. 

3. ‘Ayisha may also have married (bd) or (c). 

In the list of the pilgrims of 983H. (A. N. Bib. Ind. 


211 


ed., III. 145) are included ‘ Hajiand Gul-‘izar, farzand- 
dn of Mirza Kamran.’ We have already the three 
names required by Firishta and Khafi Khan, ie., 
Gul-rukh, Habiba and ‘Ayisha. Gul-‘izar is ‘ super- 


fluous.’ Perhaps farzandan may be read ‘ offspring,” 


and she may be a granddaughter. Or Habiba or 
‘Ayisha may have predeceased Kamran, and for this 
reason three girls only be specified by historians who 
wrote of the time of his death. 

Which one of the daughters was the Haji Begam of 
983H. is not clear. It would seem that this was her 
second pilgrimage, since she is enrolled as Haji before 
starting. Kamran’s daughters may have gone—one 
or all—to Makka after his blinding and during the 
four years of his life there. Of the three, Gul-rukh is 
the only one of whom it is on record that she was 
widowed in 983H., and therefore quite free to make 
the Haj. Ibrahim Husain died in 981H. (1578). 

Haji Begam was visited by Akbar and she died in 
991H. (1583). 


Gul-badan, 77a, 78a. 
Akbar-nama, III. 145, 378, 375. 


XX. ‘Ayisha-sultdn Khanam and Khatim, Mughal Khanam, 
Chaghatai Mughal. 

Daughter. of Sultan Mahmid Khan. In 909H. 
(1508) she, together with other ladies of her father’s 
household, was captured by Shaibani and was married 
by him. She bore him a son, Muhammad-rahim 
Sultan. She wrote Turki verses, and her name 











1 Mr. Beveridge tells me that a MS. Akbar-nama belonging to the 
R.A.S. has wa (and) before farzandan, but it does not seem practicable 
to read this. “ 

2 Professor Blochmann (Ain, p. 465, No. 187) has (by a slip of 
reference numbering) confused Haji Begam, daughter of Kamran, with 
Haji Begam, Bega Begam, widow of Humiayiin. The latter died in 
989H. before Gul-badan’s party returned. Bega Begam went to- 
Makka in 972H.. ~ 


14—2 


212 


appears in the biography of poetesses by Fakhri amirv. 
Mirza Haidar says that some of her children and 
of two other Mughal khanams (Daulat and Qut-liq) 
who were forcibly married at the same time, were 
living and reigning in Transoxiana at the time of his 
writing the Tarikh-i-rashidt. She is, I think, the 
‘Ayisha named by Gul-badan on 76D. 


Tar. Rash., 160, 192, 198. 
Gul-badan, 760. 
Jawahiru-l-‘ajaib. Fakhri amir? (Bodleian MS.). 


XXI. Babi dgha (Mama agha). 
Professor Blochmann writes the name Babi; but 


Baba, darling, or Bani, lady, would seem more 
appropriate for a Persian woman. 


She was the wife of Shihabu-d-din Ahmad Khan 
Nishapirt, and was related to Hamida-banu Begam 
Jami, Akbar’s mother. Abi’l-fazl calls her Mama 
adgha. He says that she was a good woman, and that 
on her death Akbar went to her house and offered 
condolence because of her relationship to his mother. 

Shihabu-d-din was damdd of Maham anaga, and as 
damad is presumably used here in its more common 
sense of ‘son-in-law,’ Babu dghad would seem to be a 
daughter of Maham anaga. 


Akbar-nama, Bib. Ind, ed., III. 716. 
Ain-i-akbari, Blochmann, 333. 





XXII. Bachaka Khalifa. 


Gul-badan, Bachaka; Mems., Bachaka; Ilminsky, 
Bichka. Vambéry (Chaghataische Sprachstudien) 
has an appropriate word, bechek, Chok. (? Kokand), . 
zerrath ; ornament. The name is presumably 
Chaghatai Turki, as the bearer of it was an old 
family servant of a Farghana household. 


Bachaka was a head woman-servant (khalifa) of 
Babar’s household, and was one of two women who 
escaped with his mother and him from Samarqand 
in 1501. There was a Bachaka whom Gul-badan 
calls a ‘khalifa of my royal father,’ lost at Chausa 


213 


in 1539, and the two references may well be to the 
same woman. 


Mems., 98. 
Gul-badan, 330. 
Ilminsky, 116. 


XXIII. Badi‘u-l-jamal Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 


The khanam of rare beauty; Ar. badv‘, astonishing, 
rare; jamal, beauty. 


Daughter of Said Khan Chaghatat Mughal, ruler of 
Kashghar ; and first cousin, once removed, of Babar. 
She married Baush Sultan of the Uzbeg Kazaks. On 
her father’s death, her brother Rashid insisted upon 
her divorce, and then gave her in marriage to Muham- 
madi Barlds whom Haidar Mirza styles ‘a peasant.’ 


Tar. Rash., E. & R., 453. 





XXIV. Badi‘u-l-jamal Begam M7rdn-shahi. (No. 2.) 

She was a daughter of Sultan Abi-said Mirza 
Mirdan-shahz. She went to India during Babar’s life ; 
was at the double wedding of his daughters, and at 
the Mystic Feast in 1531. 


Mems., 387. 
Gul-badan, lla, 18), 240. 


XXY. Bairam (Maryam) Sultan, 


Ilminsky calls her Bairam; Khwand-amir, Maryam. 
The Mems. give her no name. 


She was the elder daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza 
Bayqra and Mingli-bi dghacha Uzbeg. She married 
Sayyid “Abdu-l-lah Mirza of Andikhtd (a Timiurid 
through his mother). She bore a son, Sayyid Birka, 
who served Babar. 





Ilminsky, 209. 
Mems., 181. 
Habibu-s-stydr, 327 et seq.. 


214 


XXVI. Bakhshi-bant Begam. 


Princess Good-fortune. Pers. bakhsh, fortune, and 
bani (van), possessing. 


She was a daughter of Humayun and of Gunwar 
Bibi, and was born in Jumada I., 947H. (September, 
1540), the year of the Timurid exodus from India. She 
fell into the hands of her uncle ‘Askari with her father’s 
camp and the baby Akbar in 1543. In 1545 she was 
sent with Akbar in the depth of winter from Qandahar 
to Kabul. In 957H. (1550), and when ten years old, 
she was betrothed by her father to Ibrahim, son of 
Sulaiman and Haram. Ibrahim (b. 1534) was six years 
older than Bakhshi-banu, and he was killed in 1560, 
leaving her a widow of twenty. In the same year 
she was given in marriage by Akbar to Mirza Sharafu- 
d-din Husain Ahrari. 


Gul-badan, 390. 
Akbar-nama, s.n.. 





XXVII. Bakhtu-n-nisa’ Begam. 


Felicity of womanhood ; Pers. bakht, felicity, for- 
tune, and nisi‘, woman. 


She was a daughter of Humaytn and Mah-chuchak, 
and was born in 957H. (1550). Gul-badan says that 
she received her name in accordance with Humayun’s 
interpretation of adream. There is, however, ground 
for thinking that she and Fakhru-n-nisa, both men- 
tioned in the histories as daughters of Mah-chuchak, 
are one and the same person. Gul-badan enumerates 
three daughters of Mah-chuchak, and says that there 
were four. It is her habit to state, in such matters, 
one more than she names. She mentions Bakht, but 
not Fakhr. — 

Of Bakhtu-n-nisaé it is recorded in the histories 
that she came from Kabul to India with her son 
Diwali, after the death of Mirza Muhammad Hakim, 
her brother (993H.—1584-85), and that she was con- 
cerned in a reconciliation effected by Salima-sultan 
Begam between Akbar and Salim. 





215 


Of Fakhru-n-nisa it is recorded that she married 
Shah Abu’l-ma ali T'ermizt and Khwaja Hasan Nagsh- 
bandi. 

Gul-badan, 71a. 

Khafi Khan (Bib. Ind. ed.), I. 226. 

Baddyuni, Lowe, 72. 


Akbar-ndama, s.n.. 
Ain-i-akbari, Blochmann, 322. 


XXVIII. Bakht-sultan Begam Mirdn-shaht. (No. 4.) 
Daughter of Sultan Abt-said Mirza M7ran-shahi 
and mother of Afiaq (No. 26). She went to India 
shortly after its conquest by Babar, and was at the 
Mystic Feast. 


Mems., 387. 
Gul-badan, lla, 24b, 250. 





XXIX. Barlas Begam. (No. 36.) 
There is no clue given by which to identify this 
lady. Others who were, like herself, at the Mystic 
Feast might, by tribal descent, be styled Barlas. 


Gul-badan, 250. 





(Bedka, Rabi'a, ¢:v..) 


XXX. Bega aghd. - 


Bega is perhaps not a personal name, It appears 
to be a feminine of beg, but its application is not 
always to the daughters of begs, as may be seen by 
the instances here given. For a confusion of bega 
and yanga cf. App. s.n. Zainab, 


A messenger of Mirzi Kamran to Haram Begam. 
Gul-badan, 75d. 





XXXI. Bega Begam Baygqra. 

Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Baygqra and 
Payanda-sultan Begam Mirdn-shahz ; full sister of 
Haidar Bayqra; first cousin of Babar; wife of Babar 


216 


Mirza of Haji Tarkhan who was her first cousin and 
the son of Rabi‘a-sultan (Bedka) Bayqra. 

Khwand-amir says that she married ‘ Khwaja Mau- 
lana.’ This may be a second marriage or a confusion 
with Kichak, her sister. 


Mems., 177, 181. 
Habibu-s-siydr, 827 et seq.. 


XXXIT. Bega Begam and Bibi. 

The Emperor Jahangir, when in his Memoirs 
enumerating the gardens of Kabul, mentions one 
which belonged to Bega Begam, a widow of his father’s 
grandfather, 7.c., Babar. Which of Babar’s wives is 
indicated by this title cannot be said with certainty. 

Jauhar has a story of Kamran’s want of considera- 
tion for ‘Bega Begam,’ in which the points useful 
here are that on the day in 1545 when Humaytn 
took Kabul from Kamran, he asked for food from 
Bega Begam, and he said of her that she was the 
very person who had brought Babar’s bones and laid 
them in Kabul. 

These two references of Jahangir and Jauhar are 
probably to the same lady. Of Babar’s wives, Bibi 
Mubarika (Afghani aghacha) appears to me the most 
suitable to the time and task. 

Babar’s body was still in its Agra tomb in 1539. 
(Gul-badan, 34b.) Maham was then dead; Dil-dar’s 
movements exclude her from consideration ; Gul-rukh, 
if living, will have left Agra with her son Kamran 

~ before the Timtrid exodus was enforced by defeat at 
Kanauj; Bibi Mubarika remains, the probable and 
appropriate agent for fulfilling Babar’s wish as to the 
final disposition of his body. She lived into Akbar’s 
reign, and her character and respected position in the 
household add. to the sum of probability that she 
would discharge this duty. 

Babar’s body was not removed till after the ffrat, 
v.e., the Timurid downfall and exodus. Bega Begam, 


217 


or, as we may call her with Jauhar for the sake of 
clearness, the Bibi, must therefore have remained 
behind the rest of the royal family. This may have 
occurred in one of two natural ways. She might have 
stayed in Agra under the protection of one of the 
religious families and safeguarded by pious duty to 
Babar’s tomb, until Shir Khan gave permission to 
remove the body and a safe escort for her journey to 
his frontier ; or she may even have been in Bengal 
and at Chausa with Humayun, and, like Bega (Hajz) 
Begam, have been made captive. It would harmonize 
with Shir Khan’s known actions if he had allowed 
Babar’s widow to remove his bones, and if he had 
aided her pious task. 


Tuzik-t-jahangiri, lith. ed., 51. 

Humayiin-nama, Jauhar, Pers. text, s.a. 951H. (November, 
1545). 

B. & H., IT. 325 n.. 


XXXIII. Bega Begam Mirdn-shahi. (No. 15.) 

This Bega was a daughter of Mirza Ulugh Beg 
Miran-shahit who was king of Kabul and known as 
Kabulz. She was Babar’s first cousin, and may be 
that daughter of her father who married Muhammad 
Masum Mirza Bayqrad. Gul-badan styles her ‘ama, 
paternal aunt, of Humayin ; anglice, she and he were 
first cousins, once removed. She was at the Mystic 
Feast in December, 1531. 


Gul-badan, 240. 
Mems., 180. 


XXXIV. Bega Begam M7rdn-shahi. (? No. 22. Bega Kilan 
Begam.) 

Daughter of Sultan Mahmud Mirza and .Khan- 
zada Il. Termizi; wife of-Haidar Mirza Bayqrad and 
mother of Shad Begam (No. 28). 

In 901H. (1496) Sultan Husain Bayqra was besieg- 
ing Hisar which was held for Bega’s brother Masud, 


218 


and in which she was. Husain became apprehensive 
about the spring rains and patched up a peace, the 
seal of which was Bega’s marriage with his son 
Haidar, her first cousin through his mother, Payanda- 
sultan. The betrothal took place outside the fort, with 
assistance of such music as could be procured, and later 
when the bride was taken to Harat, the marriage was 
celebrated with the splendour loved by Husain and 
befitting a Timurid alliance. Haidar was a full 
Timtrid; Bega was one on her father’s side, and 
probably as a Termizi sayyida’s daughter, drew through 
her also a strain of the same blood. 

Haidar died before his father; i.e., before 912H. 
(April, 1506). 


Mems., 30, 38, 180. 
Gul-badan, (?) 246, No. 22. 


XXXV. Bega (Haj7) Begam (?) Begchik Mughal. (? No. 50.) 
She was a daughter of Uncle (faghai) Yadgar Beg 
who was, I think, a brother of Sultan ‘Ali Mirza, 
father of Kamran’s wife, Gul-rukh. Abi‘l-fazl calls 
Bega Begam dukhtar-i-taghat-i-walida-i-Jannat-ashyant. 
Yadgar and ‘Ali Begchik are both styled Mirza, but 
this elevation is due, it seems, to their alliances with 

the royal house. Haidar calls their brothers mrs. 

Bega married Humayin, her first cousin, and she 
was the wife of his youth. It is out of harmony with 
the custom of his house that his chief wife should be 
of less than royal descent. So far as I have been able 
to trace the matter, he never made an equal marriage. 
Gul-barg Barlas, ‘ Khalifa’s’ daughter, whose second 
husband he was, had best claim to high birth. 

The first son, perhaps first child, of Bega and 
Humayin was Al-aman, born 934H. or 935H. (1528) 
when his father was about twenty-one and was in 
Badakhshan. Babar has commemorated his birth 
both by mentioning it and by preserving his own 


219 


congratulatory letter to the young father. Al-aman 
died in infancy. 

Bega came to India after Babar’s death (December, 
1580), and her second and last-mentioned child, ‘Afifa 
(‘Aqiqa) was born in 1581. 

In 15384 (circa) Gul-badan’s story (29), 30b) shows 
Bega as resenting neglect by Humayitn who accepts 
invitations to his sisters’ quarters in camp in prefer- 
ence to hers and Gul-barg’s. Some impressions of 
this story make one question whether the Bega it tells 
of is Humayun’s wife or another. But the circum- 
stances that she is associated with a wife, Gul-barg ; 
that Gul-badan does not speak of her as being 
other than the ‘Bega Begam’ of the home circle; 
Humayun’s allusions to the elder kinswomen; and 
the absence of the deference customary to an elder 
woman, seem sufficient justification for identifying the 
complaining Bega with the wife. (Gul-badan, it may 
be observed, mentions one other Bega Begam—i.e., 
Mirdn-shahi, daughter of Ulugh Beg Kabuili.) 

Bega was with Humayun during the idleness of his 
decadence in Bengal, and with her was her sister, the 
wife of Zahid Beg. Zahid offended Humayun, and 
Bega tried in vain to obtain his forgiveness. 

She was captured at Chausa by Shir Khan, and 
here she lost her little girl, “‘Agiqa. The historians 
all call her Hajz Begam in recording her capture ; it 
is only Gul-badan who calls her Bega Begam. She 
was returned in safety to Humayin under the escort of 
Shir Khan’s best general, Khawas Khan. How soon 
she was returned I am not able to say. Support 
is to be found for the view that she was sent to 
Agra directly after Humiayiin’s arrival there, and also 
for the view that she was not returned to him until 
after a considerable time had elapsed. I do not know 
whether she went to Sind with the exiles or was sent 
later direct to Kabul. She was in Kabul with the 
royal family after 1545. She remained there with the 


220 


other ladies when Humayun made his expedition to 
recover Hindustan, and she came with Hamida, Gul- 
badan, and the rest to join Akbar in 964H. (1557). 
After this she built her husband’s tomb near Dihli, 
and became its faithful attendant. 

Akbar is said to have been much attached to her, 
and she was to him like a second mother. She went 
to Makka in 972H. (1564-65), and returned three years 
later. One thing raises the question whether this 
was her first pilgrimage, viz., the fact that all the 
sources, except Gul-badan’s, call her Hajz Begam. 
Why is she singled out to bear this title? It had 
been earned by many royal ladies before any one of 
the trio of great writers under Akbar had put pen to 
paper. The same unexplained distinction is conferred 
by the histories on a daughter of Kamran. In both 
these cases a renewed pilgrimage might serve as the 
explanation of the distinction. 

Bega Begam died in 989H. (1581), shortly before 
Gul-badan’s return from Makka. She had almost 
certainly passed her seventieth year, and was perhaps 
still older. Abu’l-fazl says that her affairs were 
settled by one Qasim “Ali Khan. He also records a 
visit of Akbar to her in her last illness, as well as an 
earlier visit of hers to him made from Dihli in 981H.. 


Gul-badan, 22a, 23b, 29b, 306, 78, 83a. 

Mems., 388, 390. 

Akbar-nama, Bib. Ind. ed., index, s.n.. 

Ain-i-akbari, Blochmann, 465. (Confusion has been made 
here with Kamran’s daughter.) 

Badayuni, Lowe, 308 n.. 

History of the Afghans, Dorn, I. 103. 


XXXVI. Bega Kilan Begam. (No. 22.) 
She was at the Mystic Feast. No clue is given to 
her identification. The ‘kilan’ of her title indicates 
a pre-eminence which would suit Bega Mirdn-shahi, 
daughter of Sultan Mahmiid Mirza. (Cf. supra.) 
Gul-badan, 24d. 





221 


XXXVITI. Bega Sultan Begam Marvt. 


Daughter of Sanjar Mirza of Marv; first wife of 
Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra; mother of Badi‘u-z- 
zaman Mirza. ‘She was extremely cross-tempered, 
and fretted the mirza beyond endurance, till, driven 
to extremities by her insufferable humour, he divorced 
her. What could he do? He was in the right: 


A bad wife in a good man’s house, 
Even in this world, makes a hell on earth. 





May the Almighty remove such a visitation from 
every good Moslim; and God grant that such a thing 
as.an ill-tempered, cross-grained wife be not left in 
the world.’ 

There is no later record of her. 


Mems., 181, 182. 


XXXVIII. Bega Sultan Begam Mirdn-shahz, (No. 18.) 
Daughter of Sultan Khalil Mirza Mirdn-shahi; 
grand-daughter of Sultan Abt-said; first cousin of 
Babar. 


Gul-badan, 24d. 


XXXIX. Begam Sultan. 
Daughter of Shaikh Kamal. Died 945H, (1588), 
Beale’s ‘ Oriental Biography,’ s.n,. | 





(Begam Sultan, Sa adat-bakht, q.v..) 


XL. Begi Sultan aghacha. 
Inferior wife (chadhar-shambihi) of Sultan Husain 
Mirza Bayqra. 
Mems., 183, 


XLI. Buwa Begam. 


Mother of Sultan Ibrahim Lodi Afghan. She at- 
tempted to poison Babar in December, 1526 (933H.) in 
the manner which is told in most of the histories. The 





222 


Iqbal-nama adds the interesting detail that she was de- 
ported from India, and that on her enforced journey 
to Kabul she drowned herself in the Indus. 


Mems., 347. 
Gul-badan, 19a, 


XLII. Chali Begam Azak. 


The Desert Princess; Pers. chil, desert. The 
Memoirs have Juli, but the meaning of chal 
(which looks like a sobriquet) suits the descent of 
the begam better than anything which can be 
extracted from jal. Ilminsky writes Juli, but for 
this the Mems. are his possible warrant. B.M. Pers. 
Or. 16,623, f. 123, 1. 7., has a clearly-pointed chili ; 
also on f, 1246. 


Chili (Juli) Begam was a daughter of a beg of the 
Azaks, and married Sultan Husain Bayqra before he 
conquered Khurasan in 878H. (1473). She was the 
mother of Sultanam, his eldest girl and her only 
child, and she died before 912H. (1506). 


Mems., 181, 182. 
Habibu-s-siydr, 827 et seq.. 





XLUI. Daulat-bakht dghdcha. 
(2) The lady of happy horoscope (bakht). 
She may be the mother of Kamran’s daughter 
‘Ayisha, with whom she was in flight for Qandahar. 
(Cf. ‘ Ayisha.) 


Gul-badan, 78d. 





XLIV. Daulat-bakht Bibi. (No. 85.) 

She was clearly an active and working member of 
Humayitn’s household. She appeared to him in a 
dream (71a), and her name formed a part.of Bakhtu- 
n-nisa’s. She went on before the main body of 
begams when they visited the waterfall at Farza, and 
saw to the commissariat. She is named as being at 
Hindal’s marriage feast. 





993 


She may be the Daulat-bakht dghdcha of the pre- 
ceding notice. 
Gul-badan, 260, 71a, 74a. 


XLY. Daulat-kitta (?) Arghin. 


Kitta I find only as a Turki word, meaning noble, 
powerful. With it the name would be a mongrel 
of Arabic and Turki. Perhaps Daulat-giti might 
be read. 


She was a servant in Mirza Muhammad Muqim 
Arghiin’s house, and was an intermediary in effect- 
ing the elopement of her master’s daughter, Mah- 
chichak Arghin, from Kabul. Mr. Erskine tells the 
story admirably. 


B. & H., I. 348 e¢ seq., and the sources there referred to. 


XLVI. Daulat-nigar Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 


Good-fortune itself; the very image of felicity. 
Ar. daulat, and Pers. nigar, effigy, image. 


Daughter of Isain-bigha Khan Chaghatai; wife of 
Muhammad Haidar Mirza Dughlat. 


Tar. Rash., E. & B., 88. 


XLVII. Daulat-sultan Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 


Ar. daulat, fortune, and sultan, sway. In many 
proper names, sultan does not appear to be a title, 
but rather to indicate the sway or dominance of the 
quality imputed by the first word of the name; 
¢.g., Latif-sultan, Daulat-sultan. In giving these 
names, one might suppose the prophetic notion to be 
that the first child should be a regnant delight and 
the second a prevailing felicity. 


Youngest child of Yunas Khan Chaghatai and Shah 
Begam Badakhshi ; half-sister of Babar’s mother ; wife 
by chance of battle, of Timur Sultan Uzbeg; mother 
by him of a daughter. 

In 907H. (1501-2) she was in Tashkand, and Qut-liq- 
nigar Khanam went to visit her after thirteen or four- 
teen years of separation. Babar, dejected and an exile, 
joined the family party in the next year. In 909H. 
(1503) Shaibani sacked Tashkand and forcibly married 


224 


Daulat-sultan to his son Timtr. ~She bore him a 
daughter, and she remained in his haram until Babar 
took possession of Samargand in 917H. (1511), and 
she joined him. She went south with him in 1513, 
and remained several years in Badakhshan with 
another nephew, Mirza (Wais) Khan who behaved to 
her like a son. 

Another nephew, Said, her own brother Ahmad’s 
son, then invited her, with costly gifts, to visit him in 
Kashghar. She made the long and difficult journey; 
joined him in Yarkand; and with him she spent the 
rest of her life. 

Babar mentions that her foster-brother brought him 
news and letters from her in 925H. (September 8th, 
1519). In the same year Mansur, Sa‘id’s eldest brother, 
went to Kashghar to visit her, his ‘ beloved aunt.’ 

The Persian text of the T’drikh-i-rashidi says that 
Mansir went so that by looking at her kind face his 
grief for the loss of his father might be mitigated. The 
Bible Society’s Turki version reads: ‘ Being prompted 

_ thereto by the extreme warmth of his affection for her.’ 
Both statements illumine her character. The second 
seems the more appropriate, since the death of Sultan 
Ahmad Khan took place in 909H. (1503) and Mansur’s 
visit in 926H. (1520). 

There is no mention of her remarriage, and her 
story is that of an affectionate and leisured aunt. 


Mems., 14, 99, 105, 274. 
Tar. Rash., E. & R., 108, 117, 156, 160, 851, 352, 356. 


XLVIII. Daulat-sultan (?) Sakanj Begam. 


Sakanj I cannot explain. B. M. Add. 24,090 (440) 
has no points, and the word may be 8-k-n-gh. B.M., 
Or. 187 (48a) has k-m-n-j or b-k-n-j. The Turki 
(Bible Society’s MS. translations) has Daulat. 


Daughter of Amir Shaikh Nuru-d-din Qibchaq 
Mughal, governor of Turkistan; wife of Wais Khan 
Chaghatai Mughal. 

Tar. Rash., BK. & R., 64 and 64 n.. 


225 


XLIX. Dil-dar Begam. (No. 48.) 


The Heart-holding Princess; Pers. dl, heart, and 
dar, holding. —— oe 


Neither her husband, Babar nor her daughter, Gul- 
badan gives any clue to her parentage. Her marriage 
is not spoken of in the Memoirs; it, as well as Gul- 
rukh’s, probably occurred in the missing decade of 
1509-19. If Babar held the view that four wives were 
a lawful number, Dil-dar, of whatever parentage, may 
be counted amongst them, since in 1509 Maham only 
remained of his earlier wives, ‘Ayisha, Zainab, and 
Masuma having disappeared from the household by 
death or divorce. 

Dil-dar is mentioned once in the Turki text of Kehr 
and Ilminsky, and then as dghdacha. I am too ignorant 
of the import of this word in the domestic circle to 
venture to draw from its use an inference as to social 
status. It, however, as used by Babar and by Gul- 
badan, supports Pavet de Courteille’s definition of a 
‘lady ’ in contradistinction to a ‘begam,’ and does not 
convey reproach to the woman as its occasional English 
rendering (concubine) does. 

The Akbar-nadma (Bib. Ind. ed., Il. 62) makes use of 
the words ‘ Dil-dar dghacha Begam,’ and adds dghd as a 
variant (cf. App., s.n. dghd). .Gul-badan always styles 
her mother begam, and sometimes hazrat. In enumer- 
ating her father’s children and their mothers, she 
does not mention the parentage of any wife besides 
Ma'stima Mirdn-shahi, a Timutrid, but no deduction as 
to the lower birth of the others can be drawn safely 
from this, and there is some ground for supposing that 
Dil-dar was of Mirdn-shahi birth. (Cf. infra, p. 277.) 

Perhaps some indication of non-royal birth is given 
by Maham’s forcible adoption of Dil-dar’s son in 1519, 
but I am too ignorant of the nuances of Muhammadan 
etiquette to venture on assertion or even on opinion 
in such a matter. That Maham did not take Gul- 

15 


226 


rukh’s! son tells nothing, since the chief factors in the 
adoption, i.e., Maham’s loss of her own children and 
wish to adopt, may have become operative only when 
they were put into practice in 1519. 

Five children of Dil-dar are mentioned by Gul- 
badan: Gul-rang, born between 1511 and 1515; Gul- 
chihra; Abt-n-nasir Muhammad (Hindal), born 1519; 
Gul-badan, born 1523; and Alwar, who died in India 
in 1529. 

She is very frequently written of by her daughter ; 
some other authors give of her a clear and pleasant 
impression ; and she is always spoken of with respect 
and as a good and sensible woman. 


Gul-badan, 6b, 16a, 23a, 25b, 296, 80a, 35a, 350, 38a, 42a, 
506, 51b, 65a, 70b. 

Jauhar, Stewart, 30, 31. 

Ilminsky, 281. 

Akbar-nama, Bib. Ind. ed., 8.n.. 

B. & H., IT. 164, 220, 302. 


L. Dil-shad Begam. 


The Heart-rejoicing Princess; Pers. dil, heart, and 
shad, rejoicing. 


Daughter of Shah Begam and grand-daughter of 
Fakhr-jahan Begam Mirdn-shahi. Of her paternal 
descent nothing is recorded. 

Gul-badan, 240. 





LI. Dada Bibi. 
Wife of Sultan Muhammad Shah Lohdni, Afghan 
King of Bihar; mother of Sultan Jalalu-d-din ; regent 
for her son in his minority from 1529. 
B. & H., 3... 


LU. Fakhr-jahan Begam Mirdn-shahi. (No. 1.) 


The world’s ornament. Ar. fakhr, ornament, and 
Pers. jahan, world. 


She was a daughter of Sultan Abu-said Mirza; a 
paternal aunt of Babar; the wife of Mir ‘Ala’u-l-mulk 
Termizi ; and mother of Shah and Kichak Begams. 





1 For erratum in my Introduction as to Gul-rukh, cf. App. s.n.. 


22:7 


She went to India in 1526, the first year of Babar’s 
occupation, with her sister Khadija, and stayed there 
nearly two years. She took leave of Babar before 
starting on her return journey to Kabul on Septem-—— 
ber 20th, 1528 (Muharram 5th, 9385H.). She was 
again in Agra and at the Mystic Feast in 1581. 


Gul-badan, lla, 240, 

Mems., 374, 382. 

P. de Courteille, II. 458. (This is a fragment, supplied by 
Kehr and Ilminsky, which has the appearance of memo- 
randa and which concerns a period already and variously 
written of in the Bdbar-ndma of Kehr and contained in 
the Memoirs of Mr. Erskine.) 

Ajn-i-akbari, Blochmann, 322. 


LI. Fakhru-n-nisa‘. 


The ornament of womanhood; Ar. fakhr, orna-. 
ment, and nisa‘, woman. 


She was a daughter of Babar and ‘Ayisha-sultan, 
and his first child, born when he was nineteen. She 
died when about a month old. 


Mems., 90. 
Gul-badan, 60, 





LIV. Fakhru-n-nisa anaga and mama. 


Mother of Nadim kuika; mother-in-law of his wife, 
Maham anaga. 

She and Nadim are several times mentioned by Gul- 
badan. 


Gul-badan, 26a, 46a, 71la, 730. 
-Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, January, 1899, art. 
Maham anaga, H. Beveridge. 
Akbar-nama, Bib. Ind. ed., s.n. Nadim. 





LY. Fakhru-n-nisa‘ Begam Mirdn-shaht. (No. 61.) 
Daughter of Humayin and Mah-chichak ; sister of 
Muhammad Hakim; wife (1) of Shah Abi’l-ma ali 
and (2) of Khwaja Hasan Nagshbandi. (Cf. Bakhtu- 
n-nisa’.) 


Akbar-naima, Bib. Ind. ed., s.n.. 
Ain-i-akbari, Blochmann, s.n.. 
Badayuni, Lowe, 72. 





15—2 


228 


LVI. -Fatima Sultan daghd. 


Ar. Fatima, a name given presumably in honour of 
the Prophet’s daughter. The meaning of sultan 
here is not apparent. It does not seem as, e.g., in 
Daulat-sultan, safe to consider it as a part of a com- 
pound word, and to read Fatima-sultan. Nor from 
the bearer’s parentage does it suit to take it as a 
‘title, implying that she is of the sultans of her tribe. 

There are points in the use of the word sultan which 
require fuller discussion than is practicable here. 
One Fatima Sultan and her sister Bairam (Maryam) 
were the children of Husain Baygra by an Uzbeg 
servant of one of his royal wives. They are not 
given any further title, but their brothers are mirzds. 


Daughter of the chief of a Mughal tuwmdn (10,000 
men); first wife of ‘Umar Shaikh Mtrdn-shahi; 
mother of his second son, Jahangir who was two 
years the junior of Babar. 3 


Mems., 10, 14. 





LVII. Fatima Sultan anaga and Bibi. (No. 60.) 


Mother of Raushan kika and of Zuhra, wife of 
Khwaja Mu'azzam. Bayazid biydt speaks of her as 
the drdu-begi of Humayun’s haram, a title which 
Blochmann translates ‘armed woman.’ 

She was at Hindal’s marriage feast; she helped to 
‘nurse Humayun in 1546; and was an envoy to Haram 
Begam for marriage negotiations; and she appears 
in Akbar’s reign when her daughter is murdered. 





Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, October, 1898, art. 
Memoirs of Bayazid biyat, H. Beveridge. 

. Tabaqat-i-akbari, Elliot, V. 291. 

Akbar-nama, Brb. Ind. ed., 8.N.. 

Gul-badan, 26a. 


LVIII. Fatima Sultan Bayqra. 

Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bdyqra and of 
Mingli-bi dghdcha Uzbeg ; wife of Yadgar Muhammad 
Mirza Shah-rukhi (died 875—1470- Uy. She was dead 
before 912H. (May, 1506). 


Mems., 182. 
Habibu-s-siyar, 327 et seq.. 


229 


Lik. Fatima Sultan Begam. 


A wife of Shah Husain Beg Arghtn, and mentioned 
in the Tartkh-i-sind. 





LX. Fauq Begam. (No. 381.) 
Ar. fauq, superiority, excellence. 
Gul-badan, 25b. 





LXI. Firoza Begam. (No. 35.) 


The princess of victory; Pers, ftroz, victorious, 
prosperous. 


Gul-badan, 25b. 


LXII. Firoza Begam Miran-shahi. 


She was a grand-daughter of Timur, and married 
Mansur Mirza Bayqrd. Their son Husain was there- 
fore a double Timirid, fourth in descent through 
Mansur and third through Firoza. 


Mems., 176. 


LXIII. Gauhar-shad Begam and dghd, Turkoman. 


The jewel of joy; Pers. gawhar, jewel, and shdd, 
joy, delight. 


Wife of Shah-rukh, son of Timur; sister of Qara 
Yusuf Turkomdn; founder of the Masjid which bears 
her name in Mashhad, and, with her husband, of the 
Bagh-i-zaghan (Ravens’ Garden) at Harat. Babar saw 
her tomb (dated 861H., 1457) and her mosque in 1506. 


Mems., 207. 
Northern Afghanistan, C. E. Yate, s.n. 
Tar. Rash., E. & R., 83 n.. 


LXIV. Gauhar-shad Begam Dughlat. 
Daughter of Muhammad Dughlat Hisari; wife of 
Amir Yar (sic); son of Amir Jan-wafa, who was 
darogha of Samargand under Shaibani in 906H. 
(1500) when Babar took the city, and who was an 


230 


intimate of Muhammad Hisar?, and saved his life by 
a warning word, as a reward for which Gauhar-shad 
was given in marriage to his son. 


Mems., 86, 88, 239. 
Tar. Rash., E. & R., 1938. 


LXV. Gauhar-shad Begam Mirdn-shahi. (No. 5.) 


Daughter of Sultan Abu-said Mirza and paternal 
aunt of Babar. She was at the Mystic Feast. 


Mems., 387. 
Gul-badan, lla, 240. 


LXVI. Gul-badan Begam Miran-shahi. (No. 46.) 


Cf. Biographical Introduction and her own Humda- 
yun-nama. 


LXVII. Gul-barg Begam Barlds. (No. 49.) 
The rose-leaf princess; Pers. barg, leaf. 

Daughter of Nizimu-d-din ‘Ali Barlds, Babar’s 
Khalifa; niece, therefore, of Sultan Junaid Barlds, a 
brother-in-law of Babar. (Cf. Shahr-banu.) She may 
be the child of that Sultanam who received Gul-badan 
at Kul-jalali. (14a) She married, first, Mir Shah 
Husain Arghin, in 980H. (1524). The alliance was 
not happy and a separation took place. She appears 
to have remarried Humayun at some time before the 
defeat at Chausa (1539). She was with him subse- 
quently in Sind, and from there went with Sultanam 
to Makka previous to 1543. 

She was buried in Dihli. Mir Masim writes of 
her death: ‘She entrusted her soul to the guardians 
of the hour of death, and the leaves (gul-barg) of the 
rose-bush of her life were dispersed by the boisterous 
wind of mortality.’ 3 


Gul-badan, 21a, 256, 29b, 300, 49d. 
Tarikh-t-sind, Mir Ma‘sim, 
B. & H., I. 885. 


231 


LXVIIT. Gul-barg, or-- izar, or -rang, or -rukh Mirdn-shaht. 

By these various names is mentioned the mother 

of Salima-sultan Begam. There are difficult points 

as to her descent which are discussed s.n. Salima- 
sultan. 


LXIX. Gul Begam. (No. 380.) 
The rose princess. 
She was at the Mystic Feast, and may be one of 


the various ladies of the rose who are entered infra. 
Gul-badan, 25d. 





LXX. Gul-chihra Begam Mirdn-shahi. (No. 45.) 
The rosy-cheeked princess ; Pers. chthra, face. — 

Daughter of Babar and Dil-dar ; their second child, 
and born between 1515 and 1517.. She was full-sister 
of Gul-rang, Hindal, and Gul-badan. 

She married Babar’s first cousin (a son of his 
mother’s brother Ahmad), Sultan Tukhta-bugha Khan 
Chaghatat Mughal. The marriage was arranged by 
Babar, and took place in 937H. (end of 1530). She 
would then be about fourteen years old. 

She was widowed cir. 940H. (1533), and nothing 
as to her remarriage is recorded until 956H. (1549), 
when she was over thirty years old. It is improbable 
that she remained a widow so many years. (Cf. App. 
s.n. Salima-sultan.) In 956H. she entered upon what 
looks like a mariage de raison with “Abbas Sultan 
Uzbeg, just before Humayin set out on his expedition 
for Balkh. The bridegroom came to suspect that the 
Timurid army was about to act against his own people 
and ran away. Probably he did not take Gul-chihra 
with him. Her name next appears in the histories 
when she accompanies Gul-badan and Hamida to 
India in 964H. (1557). 


Gul-badan, 6b, 160, 180, 23b, 25b, 29b, 38a, 65a. 
Akbar-nama, Bib, Ind. ed., s.n. 


232 


LXXI. Gul-iziar Begam Mirdn-shahi. 


The rosy-cheeked princess; Pers, gul, rose, and 
‘vzar, cheek, face. 


Daughter of Babar and Gul-rukh; full-sister of - 
Kamran and ‘Askari. 

Gul-badan names no marriage for her, but she 
may have been the wife of Yadgar-nasir. 


Gul-badan, 6d. 
Mems., 10. 


LXXII. Gul-‘izar Begam Mirdn-shahi. 

Daughter of Kamran Mirza; she accompanied Gul- 
badan Begam to Makka (983H., October, 1575). (Cf. 
App. s.n. ‘Ayisha Mirdn-shahi.) 

Akbar-nima, Bib. Ind. ed., ITI. 145. 


LXXIII. Gul-nar aghacha. (No. 57.) 


The red, red rose; Pers. gul, rose, and nar (andr), 
pomegranate, carnation red. 


She was of Babar’s haram, and may have been one 
of the two Circassian (Cherkis) slaves (the other being 
Nar-gul) who were presented to the Emperor by Shah 
Tahmasp in 988H. (1526). 

She was at Hindal’s wedding-feast, and shared in 
the conferences of Humayun and his family; and she 
was one of Gul-badan Begam’s pilgrim band (983H., 
1575). 


Gul-badan, 256, 30a,.35a, 88a. 
Mems., 347. 
Akbar-nama, Bib, Ind, ed., III. 145, 


LXXIV. Gul-rang Begam Miran-shahi. (No. 44.) 
The rose-hued princess. 

Daughter of Babar and Dil-dar and her mother’s 
first child. She was born in Khost, probably between 
- 1511 and 1515, during Babar’s exile from Kabul after 
the Mughal rebellion. She was given in marriage to 
Isan-timur Chaghatat Mughal, her father’s first cousin, 

during the last days of her father’s life and in 1530. 


233 


Isin-timtr is last mentioned in 1548, and of Gul- 
rang there is no certain record after cir. 1534, when 
she was at Gualiar. (28a) (Cf. App. s.n. Salima.) 

Gul-badan, 6b, 16b, 18b, 23a, 250, 290. 


LXXY. Gul-rukh Begam (?) Begchik Mughal. 
The rose-cheeked princess, 

_ Wife of Babar; mother of Kamran, ‘Askari, Shah- 
rukh, Ahmad, and Gul-izar. Outside Kabul there 
was in 1545 the tomb of Gul-rukh Begam. (64)) 
This may well have been hers. 

She is perhaps a Begchik. This may be judged 
from the following notes : a 

(1) Kamran married a daughter of Sultan ‘Ali 
Mirza faghadi.t (Mems., 388.) 

(2) Humayun married a daughter of Yadgar faghat. 
(Mems., 388.) 

Amongst contemporary Begchik amirs are Sultan 
Ali Mirza and Yadgar Mirza. 

If one follows the recorded incidents of Sultan ‘Ali’s 
life, one sees that Gul-rukh may be his sister. 

(a) In 914H. (1508-9) he was ordered to drown 
Khalil Khan. (Tar. Rash., 183.) Having done so, 
he took refuge with Babar in Samarqand. (l.c., 265.) 

(b) In 917H. (1511) he was with Sayyid Muhammad 
Dughiat in Andijan, apparently at Babar’s instance. 
(J.c., 248.) In the same year he was sent by Said 





1 This is a difficult word to deal with. It has a wider use than its 
usual translation ‘mother’s brother.’ It is used for the uncle, great- 
uncle, etc., in ascending line. In other words, the mother’s brother, 
in at any rate distinguished families, of one generation remains the 
mother’s brother, faghdi, in the next and the next. Once a faghdi, 
always a faghdi. The numerous uncles on the mother’s side who 
appear in the Memoirs and the Tarikh-i-rashidi as so-and-so faghi@, 
might be described as brothers of the mothers of a king’s or chief’s 
children. 

To found opinion of relationship on the unsupported use of the word 
is to court disaster. Great wariness is needed. A quite perplexing 
taghai is the Machiavelli of Mirza» Haidar’s life, ‘Ali Mirza taghi 
(Dughlait). He is constantly on the scene, and the one fact not men- 
tioned which it is desirable to know is, whose brother was he? Only 
with much trouble can a surmise as to his parentage be hazarded. 


234 


Khan who had reinforced Andijan’.under Babar’s 
orders, to Kazan. 

(c) In 920H. (1514) he accompanied Said in his 
conquest of Kashghar, and at this date is named 
amongst the Begchik amirs of the Kashghar army. 
(l.c., 308, 326.) | 

(d) In 925H. (1519) he waited on Babar, and is 
styled taghai of Kamran. (Mems., 274.) Babar says 
here: ‘Sultan ‘Ali Mirza, the maternal uncle of 
Kamran (Ilminsky, 311, Kamrdn-ninak taghat), who 
in the year in which I passed over from Khost to 
Kabul had proceeded to Kashghar, as has been men- 
tioned, waited on me here.’ 

Babar must several times have passed from Khost 
(Andar-ab) to Kabul. The T'arikh-i-rashidi fixes the 
occasion here alluded to as in 920H. (1514). This 
was Babar’s latest and last crossing of the northern 
passes to Kabul. 

By thus bringing the statements of the Memoirs 
and the T'arikh-i-rashidi together, Sultan ‘Ali Mirza 
Begchik is fairly-well identified with Sultan ‘Ali Mirza, 
taghat of Kamran.’ 

(e) In 985H. (1528) Kamran married his daughter. 
(Mems., 388.) 


Mems., 274, 388. 
Tar. Rash., 183, 248, 264, 265, 280, 308, 326. 


LXXVI. Gul-rukh Begam Mirdn-shahi. 

Daughter of Kamran Mirza; wife of Ibrahim 
Husain Mirza Baygra; mother of Muzaffar Husain 
who married Sultan Khanam, Akbar’s eldest daughter, 
and of Nitru-n-nisa who became a wife of Salim 
(the Emperor Jahangir). 








1 Something interesting as to the Tazik-t-babari (Turki text of the 
Memoirs) may lie here. The period of Sa‘id’s Kashghar conquest 
falls in a gap of the Taziak. Babar referred to an incident of that 
time as having been already mentioned. This suggests, as a cause of 
the gap, lost leaves, and not an omission of record. (Cf. Tar. Rash., 
247 n..) 


235 


The story of her husband’s rebellious pursuit and 
death (981H., 1573), and of her flight to the Dakhin 
with her son, is found at length in the histories. 

She was living and visited by Jahangir in 1023H. 
(1614). (Cf. XIX. ‘Ayisha-sultan.) 


LXXVII. Gun-war Bibi. 
Wife of Humaytin and mother of Bakhshi-bant 


Begam. 
Gul-badan, 39d. 


LXXVIII. Habiba Begam Mirdn-shahi. 
The beloved or desired princess. 

Eldest daughter of Kamran Mirza and_ probably 
of the daughter of Uncle (faghai) Sultan “Ali Mirza 
Begchik whom Kamran married in 9385H. (1528). 
She married Yasin-daulat (the Fair Sultan) Chaghatat 
Mughal, a brother of Gul-badan’s husband, Khizr, and 
her own second cousin. It may be that she married a 
second time after she was forcibly parted from Yasin- 
daulat in 1551-52. (Cf. App. s.n. Hajt Miran-shahi.) 

Gul-badan, 640, 65a, 78a. 


LXXIX. Habiba-sultan Begam Arghiin. 


The desired of the desired; Ar. habiba, beloved, 
desired, and sultan, pre-eminence, sway. 


‘Brother’s daughter of Sultan Arghin’ (? Muqim, 
Shah Shuja‘a, or a brother of Zi’l-nin); wife of 
Sultan Ahmad Mirza Mirdn-shaht; and mother of 
Babar’s wife, Ma'stma. Babar gave her a name of 
affection, yanga. (Cf. Index, s.v..) 

Mems., 22, 23, 208, 288. 


LXXX. Habiba-sultan Khanish Dughlat. (No. 21.) 
Daughter of Muhammad Husain Dughlat and Khib- 
nigar Chaghatat; full-sister of Mirza Haidar; first 
cousin (maternal) of Babar; wife (1) of ‘Ubaidu-l-lah 
Uzbeg, and (2) of her cousin, Said Khan Chaghatai. 


236 


She was taken captive as a child by Shaibani— 
Uzbeg, and she lived in his household until he gave 
her in marriage to his nephew, ‘Ubaidu-l-lah. Shortly 
before Shaibani murdered her father (914H., 1508-9), 
‘Ubaidu-l-lah asked for Haidar (etat. 11) to come to 
him and Habiba in Bukhara, and thus saved him from 
a, general massacre of Mughal sultans. 

When‘ Ubaidu-l-lah retreated to Turkistan (civ. 1511), 
Habiba remained in Bukhara. She then joined her 
uncle Sayyid Muhammad Dughlat, in Samargand, 
and with him went to Andijan where he married her 
to her cousin Said. She reared one of Said’s chil- 
dren, Rashid whose mother was a ‘ tribeswoman,’ 
Makhdum Qdluchi, but he certainly did her training 
no credit. She was widowed in 939H. (July 9th, 
1588), so that Gul-badan may be wrong in saying that 
she was at the Mystic Feast in 1531. She may have 
been a wedding guest in 1587. 


Tar. Rash., EK. & R., 140, 192, 193, 206, 268, 451, 453. 
Gul-badan, 240. 


LXXXI. Haji Begam Mirdn-shahi. 





She was a daughter of Kamran, and accompanied 
Gul-badan Begam to Makka in 983H., but it is to be 
inferred that this was not the pilgrimage which gave 
her her title of Haji, since she is so entered before the 
haj of 988H. (Cf. XIX., ‘Ayisha-sultan.) 


(Hajt Begam, Bega, q.v.) 


(Hajt Begam, Mah-chuchak Arghin, q.v.) 


LXXXII. Hamida-bani. 





Ar. hamida, praised, laudable, and Pers. bani. 
Daughter of Sayyid Muhammad Qasim. She died 
984H. (1576-77), and was buried at Andakhui. 
The above information is given by Captain Yate, 


237 


and as Hamida-bani may be the daughter of one of 
Humayun’s followers, I have inserted her name. 
Northern Afghanistan, Yate, p. 349. 


LXXXIII. Hamida-bana Begam Maryam-makani. 


Posthumous style, Maryam-makdni, dwelling with 
Mary. 


She was the mother of Akbar. There is difficulty 
in making precise statement as to her family rela- 
tions. She was of the lineage of Ahmad Jami 
Zinda-fil. 

(a). Gul-badan, whose long intimacy with Hamida 
invests her statement with authority, states that Mir 
Baba Dost was Hamida’s father, and that Khwaja 
Muazzam was her barddar, t.e., brother undefined. 

(b). The Tarikh-i-sind states that her father was 
Shaikh ‘Ali-akbar Jamz who was one of the pillars 
of Mirza Hindal. Nizamu-d-din Ahmad says that 
‘Ali-akbar was father of Mu'azzam. 

If the statements of paragraphs (a) and (b) stood 
alone, ‘Baba Dost’ and ‘‘Ali-akbar’ might be iden- 
tified as the petit-nom and the name of one man. 

There is a good deal to support this view, and there 
is something against it. 

In favour of the identification of Baba Dost with 
‘Ali-akbar are the following points : 

(1). ‘Baba Dost’ seems to be not a personal name, 
but a sobriquet of affection and domestic intimacy. 

(2). Jauhar calls- Hamida the daughter of Hindal’s 
akhund, and Mr. Erskine (perhaps, however, infer- 
entially) calls “Ali-akbar Hindal’s preceptor. 

(8). Mir Baba Dost was alive in 947H. (1540-41), 
the year preceding Hamida’s marriage, and was then 
with Hindal. (Akbar-ndma, H. Beveridge, I. 360.) 

(4). Nizamu-d-din Ahmad and Baddyuni contribute 
negative support to the identification by using the 


238 


indefinite khal, maternal uncle, to describe the relation 
of Akbar and Mu‘azzam. 

(5). The Ma dsiru-l-umara’ confirms the identifica- 
tion by use of the words barddar-i-a yani, full-brother. 
Its authority may not be of the best, but the choice 
of these words has some weight. 

(6). “Ali-akbar was of the lineage of Ahmad Jami. 
Humayun had a dream which allowed him to know 
that the son prophesied in it by Ahmad would be of 
the latter’s lineage. There is, I think, nothing said 
on this point of Mir Baba Dost, but saintly descent 
was claimed for Hamida’s father. 

(7). Gul-badan gives one the impression (it is little 
more) that Mu'azzam was younger than Hamida. 
He calls his sister Mah-chichém, which may be read 
as ‘Moon of my mother,’ but also as ‘Hilder Moon- 
sister.’ (Cf. 18) n.) If he were Hamida’s junior, 
and as Mir Baba Dost was alive in 1540-41, he could 
not have been an independent agent in 1548-44. 


In opposition to the identification, there are two 
considerations : 

(i.) A minor matter; two names are given by the 
sources: Mir Baba Dost and ‘Ali-akbar. 

(ii.) The important fact that Abw’l-fazl calls 
Mu‘azzam Hamida’s ukhuwwwat-i-akhyafi,| which, ac- 
cording to Lane, must be rendered ‘ uterine brother.’ 


Was, then, the name Baba Dost a sobriquet of 
Shaikh ‘Ali-akbar ? 

Were Hamida and Mu‘azzam full brother and sister ? 
Were they the children of one father and two mothers, 
or were they uterine brother and sister ? 


Shaikh ‘Ali-akbar’s name I have not found in any 





1 Steingass does not recognise the force of ‘uterine,’ since he 
renders baraddar-i-a‘yani by ‘ uterine brother.’ 


239 


passage except the one dealing with Hamida’s parent- 
age. Mir Baba Dost may be the man so named by 
Babar (Mems., 262), and who was then with Humayun 
in the year of the birth of Hindal (1519).- He may 
also have gone with Humayun, Hamida (? his own 
daughter) and Mu‘azzam (? his son) to Persia, the 
bakhsht in the little party of exiles. He is mentioned 
by Abu’l-fazl not only where already noted, but, we 
believe, also amongst Hindal’s servants who were 
transferred to Akbar in 1551 (958H.). 

Two men with the name ‘Ali-akbar are mentioned 
under Akbar, but neither appears to be a Jami, or to 
warrant identification with Hamida’s reputed father. 
(Cf. Ain-i-akbari, Blochmann, s.n. ‘Ali-akbar.) 


Whether there was any relationship more close than 
that derived from common descent from Ahmad Jami 
between Maham Begam and Hamida I am not able 
to say. 

Hamida was related to Banu (Babu) dghd who was 
the wife of Shihabu-d-din Ahmad Nishdpi7t and a 
relation of Maham anaga. Bega (Haji) Begam also 
had claim to descent from Ahmad Jami, so that the 
saint’s posterity was numerous in Akbar’s court, and 
included the Emperor himself. 

To Gul-badan’s account of the discussion which 
preceded Hamida’s marriage, there may be added the 
following passage from the Tazkiratu-l-waqiat of 
Jauhar. (1.0. MS. No. 221 and BM. MS. Add. 
No. 16,711, f. 82.) After Humayun has asked whose 
daughter Hamida is, he is told, perhaps by Dil-dar, 
that she is of the line of his Reverence the Terrible 
Elephant, Ahmad Jami, and that her father, by way 
of blessing and benediction, has taught Mirza Hindal, 
and that for this reason Hamida is with the mirza’s 
household. 

The Persian (taken from the I.0. MS.) is as 
follows: Pidar-t-ishan do sth kalma ba jihat-i-tabarruk 


240 


wa tayammun ba Mirza Hindal sabq farmudand. Az 
dn jihat ba ma hamré and. 

Erskine (II. 220) and Stewart (Jauhar, 31 n.) both 
say that Hamida was married at fourteen years of 
age. The incidents of her wedded life are set down 
in Gul-badan Begam’s book and in the Akbar-ndma 
and other sources; but having regard to her interest- 
ing personality, they may be enumerated here also. 

She was married at Pat early in 948H. (summer, 
1541), and remained in Sind until she made with 
Humayun the terrible desert journey to “Umrkut 
where Akbar was born (October 15th, 1542). About 
the beginning of the following December she and 
her baby went into camp at Jun, after travelling for 
ten or twelve days. In 15438 she made the perilous 
journey from Sind which had Qandahar for its goal, 
but in course of which Humayin had to take hasty 
flight from Shal-mastan, ‘ through a desert and water- 
less waste.’ She went with him, leaving her little 
son behind. She accompanied her husband to Persia, 
and it is recorded that on the way and at Sistan, its 
governor brought his mother and his wives to enter- 
tain her. With Humayun she made, amongst other 
pious visitations, one to Jam where was their ancestor 
Ahmad’s shrine. She was kindly treated by Shah 
Tahmasp and by his sister, and Gul-badan’s details 
of the Persian episode can hardly have been learned 
from anyone but Hamida. In 1544, in camp at 
Sabz-awar, a daughter was born. She returned from 
Persia with the army given to Humayun by Tahmasp, 
and at Qandahar would meet Dil-dar and Hindal, her 
former protectors. 

It was not until November 15th, 1545 (Ramzan 10th, 
952H.) that she again saw her son, who recognised 
her. She had shortly after this to accept Mah-chtchak 
as a co-wife. In June, 1548, she and Akbar accom- 
panied Humayin on his way to Taliqan as far as 
Gul-bihar, and thence returned to Kabul. This may 


241 


be the expedition made by the ladies and chronicled 
by Gul-badan, to see the riwaj. When Humayin, in 
November, 1554, set out for Hindustan, she remained 
in Kabul. 

Bayazid biyat mentions that at this time he fell 
under her displeasure, and was reproved because he 
had not cleared out a house for one of her servants. 
He pleaded the commands of Munim Khan, and was 
forgiven. LHarly in the reign of Akbar, Khwaja Mirak, 
Nizamu-d-din’s grandfather and who was her diwan, 
was hanged by Munim Khan because he had sided 
with Mirza Sulaiman. 

She rejoined her son in the second year of his reign 
(964H., 1557), together with Gul-badan and other 
royal ladies. She is mentioned as in Dihli in the 
fifth year, and she had a part in the plot for deposing 
Bairam Khan. She was closely associated with Gul- 
badan in Akbar’s court and affection; together they 
interceded for Salim with his father; together they 
received gifts from the Emperor; and their tents were 
side by side in his encampments. Hamida was with 
Gul-badan in the latter’s last hours. 

Abw’l-fazl says that when long fasts came to an 
end, the first dishes of dressed meat used to go to 
Akbar from his mother’s house. 

Hamida died in the autumn of 1604 (19th Shah- 
riyar 1013H.), sixty-three years after her wedding, 
and after almost fifty years of widowhood, passed as 
the proud mother of a great son. If she was fourteen 
in 1541, she must have been born in 1527 (circa), the 
year of Babar’s victory at Khanwa, and have been 
some seventy-seven years old at the time of death. 

Gul-badan, 39a, 42a, 43b, 48a, 55a, 55b, 58a, 596, 626, 66a, 

74a, 78b, 83a. 

Akbar-nama, Bib. Ind. ed., 8.n.. 

Ain-t-akbart. Ain, 26, Suftiydna, Blochmann, 61, 62. 

Jauhar, l.c., Nigamu-d-din Ahmad, etc. 

Ma‘asvru-l-umara@ Bib. Ind. ed., I. 618. 


Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, October, 1898, art,. 
Bayazid biyat, H. Beveridge, 16. 


16 


249, 


LXXXIV. Haram Begam Qibchaq Mughal. 


Princess of the Haram. Her name has been trans- 
literated by some European workers as Khurram, 
‘blossoming, cheerful,’ and this seems the more. prob- 
able name to bestow on a child. But some of the 
Persian texts support Haram, and the editors of the 
Bib. Ind. Akbar-ndma have adopted it. Gul-badan 
has Haram. 

Haram Begam may be a sobriquet bestowed after 
the revelation of the facts of the bearer’s character 
and dominance. 


Daughter of Sultan Wais Kulabt Qibchaq Mughal; 
and sister of Chakr ‘Ali and Haidar Begs and of Mah 
Begam, a wife of Kamran. She married Sulai- 
man Mirza Mirdn-shahi, son of Khan Mirza (Wais). 
She had one son, Ibrahim (Abi’l-qasim), and several 
daughters. Her children, through Shah Begam 
Badakhshi, their paternal ancestress, claimed descent 
from Alexander the Great. 

Most of the incidents of her career are given in the 
Introduction to this book, and her remarkable char- 
acter is exhibited there. Baddyuni calls her Wali- 
nt amat, and says she was known by this name. This 
may be a tribute to her pre-eminence in character 
and action and also to the fact of her belonging to an 
older generation than Akbar’s, under whom he wrote. 
The elder men of royal birth were Lords and the elder 
women Ladies of Beneficence in those days. 





Gul-badan, 65a, 756. 

Akbar-nama, Bib. Ind. ed., s.n.. 

Badayuwni, Lowe, 61, 89, 90, 217. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, October, 1898, art. 
ae biyat, H. Beveridge, 12, 16. 

B. & H., s.n. 
Ain-i- akbar, Blochmann, s.n.. 
Introduction, swpra. 


LXXXY. Hazara Begam. 


Princess of the tribe of the Hazara. This is a title, 
and not a personal name. 


She was the daughter of a brother of Khizr Khan 
Hazadra who was the chief of his tribe during the 





243 


struggles for supremacy of Humayin and Kamran. 
She married Kamran. 


Gul-badan, 64). 


LXXXVI. Husn-nigar Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 


The image of beauty; Ar. husn, beauty, and Pers. 
nigar, image. 


Daughter of Isan-bugha Chaghatat and niece of 
Yunas Khan; sister of Dost-muhammad and wife of 
Aba-bakr Dughlat Mughal. 


Tar. Rash., EK. & R., 89, 99. 


LXXXVII. Isan-daulat Khanam and Begam Qiichin Mughal. 


Her name takes several forms. The Babar-ndma, 
Turki text (B.M. Or. Add. 26,324), has a clearly 
pointed Ishdn; Ilminsky has Isdin passim. An 
early Persian MS. (B.M. Or. 3,714) has Isdn and 
Isan. 

The Memoirs have Jsan in all but two instances 
(p. 12), where Azs is used. But Mr. Erskine’s 
Persian text (B.M. Add. 26,200), which is presum- 
ably his authority, can (I venture to think, after 
comparing the words he renders Azs with those he 
renders Jsan) yield Isam in all places. Where he 
reads Ais (pp. 10 and 141) the nin is not dotted; 
the letters closely correspond with those where it is 
dotted, and where he reads Isan. 

The Tartkh-i-rashidi (B.M. Or. 157) writes Isdn. 

The weight of authority is in favour of Isdn. 





Isan-daulat was Babar’s maternal grandmother and 
a daughter of Mir Shir-‘ali Beg Qaichin (Kunjt), chief 
of the Sagharichi twmdn (10,000) of the Quchin 
Mughals. 

She married Yunas Khan Chaghatdt Mughal when 
he was forty-one years old. He was born in 818H. 
(1415-16), so that the date of her marriage is, approxi- 
mately, 1456. At this time Yunas was made Great 
Khan of the Mughals. 

Tsan-daulat bore three daughters, who were named 
Mihr-nigar, Qiut-liq-nigar, and Khtb-nigar. She had 
many brothers, of whom ec Shiram, Mazid, and 

16—2 


244 


“Ali-dost, took leading parts in Babar’s affairs. Her 
chief co-wife was Shah Begam Badakhshi. 

She shared the vicissitudes of her remarkable 
husband’s remarkable career for some thirty years; 
nursed him through two years of paralytic helpless- 
ness till his death in 892H. (1487) at the age of 
seventy-four, and survived him about eighteen years. 

Four times at least she fell into the hands of an 
enemy : 

(1) In Kashghar, cir. 860H. (1455-56), when Mihr- 
nigar was an infant at the breast and when she was 
returned in safety to her husband. 

(2) In Tashkand in 877H. (1472-73), when Yunas 
had gone to buy barley at a time of dearth in Mughal- 
istan. It was then that there occurred the well-known 
episode which shows Isan-daulat’s high spirit and 
decision of character and which is briefly narrated in 
the Introduction (p. 68). She was returned with 
honour to her husband. 

(3) In Andijan in 903H. (1497-98), when the town 
was taken from her grandson Babar by his kinsfolk. 
She was sent after him in safety to Khojand, and from 
there went on to the protection of her third daughter’s 
home in Kashghar. : 

(4) At Samargand in 906H. (1500-1), when the 
town was taken by Shaibani. She remained behind 
when Babar left the place, and rejoined him in a few 
months with his ‘family, heavy baggage, and a few 
lean and hungry followers.’ 

In the eighth year of her widowhood (900H.) she 
was guiding Babar’s affairs with decision and sense in 
Andijan. He says that few women equalled her for 
sagacity, far-sight and good judgment, and that many 
important affairs were carried out by her counsel. 

News of her death reached Babar in Kabul early in 
911H. (June, 1505), during the forty days’ mourning 
for his mother. 

Two slight records of her remain for mention. 


245 


Desert-born and of a tribe which clamoured against 
settled life, she yet had a garden-house at Andijan. 
She reared a half-sister of Babar, Yadgar, daughter of 


Agha dghdacha. = 


Mems., 10, 12, 16, 27, 58, 59, 100, 111, 169. 
Tar. Rash., E. & R., 86, 94, 175, 197, 308. 
B. & H., 3.n.. 


LXXXVIII. Jahan-sultan Begam. 


The world-ruling princess; Pers. yahdn, world, and 
Ar. sultan, sway. 


Probably a child of Humayin. She died in Kabul, 
aged two, in 954H. (1547). 3 


Gul-badan, 70a. 





LXXXIX. Jamal dghda. 
Grace; Ar. jamdl, grace, beauty. 

Wife (1) of Saniz Mirza Dughlat, and by him mother 
of ‘Umar and Aba-bakr and Jan (or 
Khan)-sultan Khanam. 

(2) of Dost-muhammad Chaghatai in 869 H. 
(3) of Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, and by 
him mother of Muhammad Husain 
Mirza Hisavt (Haidar’s father) and 
Sayyid Muhammad Mirza. 

Her third marriage was made by the Mughal 
custom of yanga-lik, t.e., marriage by a younger 
brother of an elder brother’s widow. (Cf. Khan-zada 
Mirdn-shahi.) 

Tar. Rash., E. & R., 88, 89, 99, 102, 104. 





XC. Jan-sultan Begam. (No. 382.) 


The soul-ruling princess; Pers. jan, life, soul, and 
Ar, sultdn, sway. 


She was at the Mystic Feast in 15381. 
Gul-badan, 250. 





(Juli Begam, Chili, q.v.) 


246 
XCI. Khadija Begam. 


Presumably she was named after Muhammad's first 
wife. | 


She was first a slave! of Sultan Abu-said Mirza, 
and upon his death in 873H. (1469) she betook her- 
self to Harat and there became the wife of Sultan 
Husain Bayqra. : 

She had a daughter, known as Aq Begam, by Aba- 
said, and two sons, Shah Gharib and Muzafiar 
Husain, by her marriage with Husain. | 

Hers is an instance where the conferring of a 
title is mentioned. Babar says that Husain was 
passionately fond of her and that he raised her to the 
rank of begam; also that she managed him entirely. 
To her are attributed the intrigues and rebellion 
which ruined Husain’s family. She acquired more 
influence than any other of his wives, and it was 
consequently round her surviving son Muzaffar 
Husain, that adherents gathered after his father’s 
death. She forced on the joint-kingship which ex- 
cited Babar’s ridicule. Mirza Haidar when speaking 
of the death of Jahangir Mirdn-shahi, said that he- 
was generally reported to have been poisoned in his 
wine by Khadija Begam after her old fashion. 

In 912H. (1506-7) Babar saw her in Harat, and he 
was there unlawfully entertained by her at a wine- 
party. When Shaibani conquered the city in 913H. 

_she was cast down from her high estate and given up 
to be plundered, and was treated as one of Shaibani’s 
meanest slaves. 





Mems., 179, 182, 188, 198, 204, 223, 
Tar. Rash. E. & R., 196, 199. 





1 Turki text (Ilminsky), ghwncha-chi, which Redhouse translates a 
seller of rosebuds and a young and good-looking female slave. The 
Persian text has the same word ghwncha-chi. The interest of these 
details is the light they may cast on the use of such words as dgha and 
aghacha. 


247 


XCII. Khadija-sultan Begam Chaghatai Mughal. 


Fourth daughter of Sultan Ahmad Khan Chaghata. 
After her father’s death in 909H. (1508-4), Mirza 
Aba-bakr Dughlat took possession of his capital, Aksu, _ 
in Farghana, and with it of Khadija-sultan, then «a 
child. He however, says Mirza Haidar, treated her 
kindly and when she was: of age, he gave her in 
marriage to his son Jahangir who was ‘her second 
cousin. She accompanied her husband to her full- 

brother Said’s court, shortly after 920H. (1514), and 
while in Kashghar, Jahangir was murdered by an 
unknown hand, in Yangi-hisar.. She then remained, 
respected and honoured, in her brother Sa‘id’s family 
circle. In 923H. (1517) she was married to Shah 
Muhammad Sultan Chaghatdai, a grandson of Sultan 
Mahmud Khan, through Muhammad, the only son of 
Mahmud who survived the massacre of sultans by 
Shaibani. The marriage of one of Khadija’s brothers, 
Aiman, was celebrated at the same time. 

When Rashid succeeded his father Sa‘id, in Kash- 
ghar (939H.—July, 1533) Khadija was badly treated 
by him. She was then ill and confined to bed, but 
Rashid banished her and her children and made her 
start on the weary journey for Badakhshan. She died 
on the road after much hardship of travel. She left 
four children, Ismail, Ishaq, Ya'qab, and Muhtarima. 
They went on to Kabul, and were there received with 
fatherly kindness. by their uncle, Isan-timur. 


Tar. Rash., B. & R., 161, 829, 352, 382, 451. 


XCII. Khadija-sultan Begam Miran-shaht. (No. 6.) 
Daughter of Sultan Abt-said Mirza Mirdn-shahi 
and paternal aunt of Babar. I have not: ascer- 
- ‘tained the name of her husband. She went to India 
_ In 9384H. (1527), arriving in November, with Fakhr- 
jahan and their children. She planned to return with 
her sister and Babar took leave of them both on 


248 


Muharram 5th, 985H. (September 20th, 1528), but 
various business detained her and Babar paid her 
another of his dutiful visits on October 9th. When 
or if she returned to Kabul is not said, but she was at 
the Mystic Feast in Agra in 1531. 


Gul-badan, lla, 246. 
Mems., 374, 382, 387. 


XCIY. Khal-dar anaga. 


The nurse with a mole; khdl-dar, mole-marked. 


Mother of Sa adat-yar kaka. 
Akbar-ndma, Bvb. Ind. ed., I. 44. 





XCV. Khanam Begam. (No. 18.) 


Daughter of Aq Begam; grand-daughter of Abi- 
said Mirdn-shahit. The ‘ Khanam’ may indicate that 
she is a Chaghatai chief’s child. 

Gul-badan, 24d. 





(Khanam, Muhtarima, q.v.) 


XCVI. Khanish dgha Khwarizmi. 

Daughter of Jujuq Mirza Khwdrizmt; wife of 
Humayun; mother of Ibrahim who died as an infant. 
Bayazid calls her child Muhammad Farrikh-fal, but 
Gul-badan and Abu’l-fazl are against him. Farrukh- 
fal was the child of Mah-chichak. Ibrahim was 
born on the same day as Muhammad Hakim, 2.e., 
Jumada I. 15th, 960H. (April 19th, 1558). 


Gul-badan, 7la, 710, (?) 730. 

Bayazid (I. O. MS. 72a), Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, October, 1898, art. Bayazid biyat, H. Beveridge, p. 14. 

Akbar-nama, Bib, Ind. ed., I. 331. 


XCVII. Khan Sultan Khanam and Sultanam Dughlat. 


Both these names appear to be titles, and not 
personal, 


Daughter of Saniz Mirza Dughlat and Jamal dgha; 
full-sister of Aba-bakr. 


249 


She was a woman of life-long piety and devotion 
to good works. Perhaps for this reason her brother 
who seems to have been an incarnation of unjust 
cruelty, treated her with studied barbarity, as a con- 
sequence of which she died in torture and suffering. 


Tar. Rash., E. & B., 88, 258: 


XCVIII. Khan-zida Begam Bdayqrd. (No. 16.) 


The khan-born princess; Turki khdn, and Pers. 
zada, born. 


Gul-badan says she is a daughter of Sultan Mas ud 
Mirza Mirdn-shahi, and through a daughter grandchild 
of Payanda Muhammad (sic) Sultan Begam, paternal 
great-aunt of Humayun. Babar names no such mar- 
riage of a daughter of Payanda. ‘The second of the 
daughters [of Payanda] was Kichak Begam [whose 
name is probably a sobriquet]. Sultan Masud Mirza 
was extremely attached to her, but whatever efforts he 
made, Payanda-sultan Begam, having an aversion to 
him, would not consent to the match. She was after- 
wards’ (Turki stingra, P. de C. dans la suite) ‘ married 
to Mulla Khwaja.’ 

A daughter of Husain Baygra and of Baba adghacha, 
whose name was Saadat-bakht and title Begam 
Sultan, was married to Masud after his blinding. 
Her daughter. might be fitly described as of inferior 
rank to the great begams. Such a description is given 
by Babar of ‘ Khan-zada, daughter of Sultan Masud 
Mirza.’ Husain and Payanda’s daughter would 
certainly rank as equal in birth to the daughters of 
Abii-said, since she was a full Timurid. 

The ‘extreme attachment’ of Mas id to Kichak fits 
Musalman marriage better than Musalman courtship. 
It may be that, spite of Payanda’s opposition, Mas ud 
married Kichak. The ‘afterwards’ of the Memoirs 
(supra) and the de la suite of Pavet de Courteille 
seem to demand some more definite antecedent than 


250 


Masiid’s attachment. Moreover, this presumably 
persisted with his wish to marry Kichak. 

Did he marry Kichak, and was she divorced after 
his blinding or at some other time, and then was 
Sa adat-bakht given to him ? 


Mems., 181, 182, 387. 
Gul-badan, 240. 


XCIX. Khan-zada Begam Miran-shaht. 


Daughter of ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza Miran-shahit and 
of Qut-liq-nigar Khanam ; full-sister of Babar and 
five years his senior. Eldest of her father’s daughters. 
She is recorded as thrice married: first, to Shaibani 
in 1501 (907H.) ; secondly, to a man of inferior rank, 
Sayyid Hada; and, thirdly, to Mahdi Muhammad 
Khwaja,’ son of Musa Khwaja. One child of hers is 
recorded, Shaibani’s son, Khurram-shah Sultan. 

She was born circa 1478 (8838H.). This is known 
from the statement of her brother that she was five 
years his senior. In 1501 (907H.) she was married 
by Shaibani when he captured Samargqand from 
Babar. Gul-badan makes the marriage a condition 
of Shaibani’s peace with Babar; Haidar says she 
was given in exchange for Babar’s life, and Khafi 
Khan, as a ransom (ba tariq-i-faida). She was in 
Shaibani’s power and could have been married with- 
out consent of Babar. As in 1501 she was twenty- 
three years old, she had almost certainly been 
married before, possibly to Mahdi.. Her marriage 
arrangements with Shaibani might include the divorce 

which the Musalman law requires. Babar does not 
go into details as to the marriage; he says she fell 
into Shaibani’s hands. Presumably as himself of 
Timutrid birth, Shaibani would treat a Timtrid woman 
with respectful forms even when she was spoil of 
battle. To marry Khan-zada, he divorced her 
maternal aunt, Mihr-nigar Chaghatdi. 





1 Cf. Appendix B., Mahdi Khwaja. 


251 


Khan-zada’s son by Shaibani, Khurram-shah, died 
a young man. Shaibani divorced her because she 
leaned to her brother’s side in disputed matters. He 
then gave her in marriage to a certain Sayyid Hada, 
who fell in the battle of Merv with Shaibani himself 
(1510). 

In 1511 and at ee age of thirty-three, she was 
returned to Babar by Shah Ismail. At what date she 
married Mahdi Muhammad Khwaja I am not able to 
say. It is probable that the marriage would take 
place within no long time after her return. As Mahdi 
is never described by Babar in any way (as is his 
custom when a new actor comes upon the scene of 
his Memoirs), it is probable that. Mahdi’s joining 
Babar and his marriage with Khan-zada took place in 
the decade 1509-19, of which no record is known to 
survive.: Mahdi was with Babar in 1519 (925H.), 
and is frequently mentioned subsequently. 

There are many references. to Khan-zada by Gul- 
badan who frequently calls her Dearest Lady (dka- 
janam). She died at Qabal-chak in 1545 (952H.), aged 
about sixty-seven years, and after a life full of sorrows 
and chagrins. i ; 

Gul-badan, 3b, 15d, 18b, 230, 240, 27, 28), 508, 626, 68a. 

Mems., 10, 98, 241 (Supplement). 

Tar. Rash., E. & R., 117, 155, 175, 196, 289, 400. 


Habibu-s-siyar, under date 923H. 
Khafi Khan, I. 83 (here Khana- zada). 


C. Khan-zada Begam Mirdn-shaht. 

Daughter of Sultan Mahmid Miran-shahi and 
Khan-zada Termizi II.; wife (1) of Aba-bakr Dughlat, 
and mother by him of (?) Jahangir, Turangir, and Bus- 
tangir; (2) of Sayyid Muhammad Dughlat who married 








1 There are some indications that a record this decade once 
existed. 


252 
her in conformity with the custom of yanga-lik. 
(Cf. Jamal aghd.) 


Mems., 30. 
Tar. Rash., BE. & R., 330. 


CI. Khan-zada Begam Termizi. 





CII. 


Of the family of the Khans of Termiz; wife of 
Sultan Ahmad Mirza Mirdn-shaht. She was a bride 
when Babar was five, 2.e., in 898H. (1488) but, 
according to Turki custom, was still veiled. Sultan 
Ahmad desired Babar to pluck off the veil and run 
away, a little ceremony which it was supposed would 
bring him good luck when his time for marriage 
should come. 


Mems., 23. 


Khan-zada Begam T'ermizi (a.). 





Daughter of the chief (mir-i-buzwg) of Termiz; 
wife of Sultan Mahmud Mirza Mirdn-shahi ; mother 
of Sultan Masud Mirza. She died apparently early 
in her married life. The mirza was greatly afflicted 
at her death. 


Mems., 29, 30. 


CII. Khan-zada Begam Termizi (b.). 





Daughter of a brother of Khanzada Termizi (a.) ; 
grand-daughter of the chief of Termiz; wife of Sultan 
Mahmud Mirza Mirdn-shahi; mother of Husain (who 
died, aged thirteen, before his father) and of five girls, 
Khanzada, Bega, Aq, Ai, and Zainab. 

Mems., 29, 80, 38, 128. 


CIV. Khan-zada Khanam. 





‘Epouse légitime’ of Muzaffar Mirza Baygra, and 
illegally taken by Shaibani. 


Mems., 224. 
Pavet de Courteille, II., 10. 


253 


CV. Khib-nigar Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 


The image of beauty. Here khanam has its full 
value, since Khiib-nigar was daughter of the Khagdan, 
the Khan emphatically. 


Third daughter of Yanas Khan Chaghatai and Isan- 
daulat Quchin ; wife of Muhammad Husain Dughlat’ 
fMisdrt ; mother of Haidar and Habiba.! She was a 
year older than her husband, and was married in 
899H. (1493-94). Babar, writing in 907H. (1501-2) 
mentions the reception of news of her death. Her 
husband was murdered in 914H.. 


Mems., 12, 99, 218. 
Tar, Rash., BH. & R., 117, 118, 158, 156, 197, 





CVI. Khurshed kikz?. (Nos. 55 and 64.) 


Pers., the sun, sunshine, 


Gul-badan, 26a, 


CVII. Kichak Begam Bayqra. 


The small princess; Turki, kichak, small. The 
name is probably a sobriquet. 


Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqrad and 
Payanda-sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi; wife of Maulana 
Khwaja who was of the family of Sayyid Ata one of 
her father’s best vazirs. 

Khwand-amir reverses her marriage with that of 
her sister Bega, and makes her marry Babar, son of 
Rabi‘a. 


Mems., 181. 
Habibu-s-siyar, 327 et seq.. 





CVIII. Kichak Begam Termizi. (No. 23.) 
Daughter of Mir ‘Ala’u-l-mulk T'ermizt and Fakhr- 
jahan Mirdan-shaht; wife of Khwaja Mu‘in Afra; 
mother of Mirza Sharafu-d-din Husain. 





1 The translation of the Tdarikh-i-rashidi (E. & R., 159) has the 
statement that Khtb-nigar bore six sons (farzanddn), and that two 
died at the breast and four survived. I believe it should read ‘six 
children, of whom four died at the breast, and two survived her.’ 


254 


She went to Hindustan with her mother, and was 
at Hindal’s wedding feast. 


Mems., without names. (Cf, Fakhr-jahin and Shah Begam.) 
Gul- badan. 25a. 

Akbar-nama (lith. ed.), s.n.. 

Ain-t-akbart, Blochmann, 322. 


CIX. Kichak maham. (No. 80.) 


Cf. s.n. Maiham for meaning of the word. 
She is named as at Hindal’s wedding. 


Gul-badan, 260. 


CX. Kilan Khan Begam. 


This is clearly not a personal name. Pers. kilan, 
elder, great, and Turki khan, a title. 


Daughter of Sultanam Begam Mirdn-shahi and 
grand-daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza. Which of 
Sultanam’s three husbands was Kilan Khan Begam’s 
father is not said; from her daughter’s title, Timir 
Sultan Uzbeg seems most probable. 


Mems. » 22. 
Gul-badan, 240. 


CXI. Lad-malik T'wrkomdn. 
(?) Mistress of the Fort; Pers. lad, fortress, and 
Ar, malik, possessor, ruler. 


Wife of (1) Taj Khan Sarangkhdani and (2) of Shir 
Khan Sir (985H., 1528-29). 


B. & H., II. 181, 182, and authorities there cited by Mr. 
Erskine. 


CXII. Lal-shad Khanam Chaghatét Mughal. 


Perhaps, with a lip like the gleam of a ruby; Pers. 
lal, ruby, and shad, gleam, happy. 


Eldest daughter of Sultan Ahmad Khan Chaghatat 
and of a ‘ slave’ (amm-i-wald). 

‘ Although she was outside the circle of distinction, 
she was finally married to Muhammad Amir Mirza 
Dughlat.’ 

Tar. Rash., B. & R., 161. 


255 


CXIII. Latifa-sultan dghdcha. 


Of pre-eminent delicacy or gentleness; Ar. latifa, 
delicate, and a jest, and Ar. sultan, sway. 


Char-shambihi, a Wednesday wife, of Sultan Husain 
Mirza Bayqra; mother of Abia’l-hasan and of Muham- 
mad Muhsin (kepek, round-shouldered). 

The Habibu-s-siyar says she was a relation of 
Jahan-shah (? T'wrkoman or Barlds). She was dead 
before 912H. (1506). 


Mems., 179, 1838. 





CXIV. Latif Begam Duladat Barlas. 

Grand-daughter of Ahmad Haji Beg; wife (1) of 
Sultan Ahmad Mirza Mirdn-shahi; (2) of Hamza 
Sultan Uzbeg, and by him mother of three sons who 
fell into Babar’s hands at Hisar, and were released 
by him. — 

Both her grandfather Ahmad and his paternal 
uncle, Jani Beg Duladdt, were amirs of her first 
husband. 


Mems., 23. 


CXY. Mah-afroz Begam. 


The princess who outshines the moon; Pers. mah, 
moon, and afroz, dazzling, illuminating. 


She was a wife of Kamran and mother of Haji 
Begam. ‘T'wo of Kamran’s wives are not known by 
their personal names, Hazara Begam and the daughter 
of Uncle “Ali Mirza Begchik. Mah-afroz may be one 
of these. 


Gul-badan, 640. 





CXVI. Maham anaga. 


Nurse of Akbar; wife of Nadim kika; mother of 
Baqi and Adham kiikas. Cf. Babi dghad. Much of 
her story is given in the Introduction to this volume. 





256 


CXVII. Maham Begam: aka and akam (lady and my lady). 


The word Maham is explained by Mr. Erskine (who 
did not know Gul-badan’s book) as Babar’s name of 
endearment for his favourite wife, and as meaning 
‘my moon.’ Mr. Schuyler also translates it by the 
same words. He says that a woman who was shot 
for political offences in Bukhara was known as ‘ My 
moon (Maham) of Keninghez.’ 

But many Mahams are chronicled, and not only 
Babar gives the name to Humayiin’s mother; Gul- 
badan speaks frequently of ‘my lady who was Maham 
Begam,’ and Maham seems to be her personal name. 
It is used at least once as a man’s. (Akbar-ndma, I. 
820, Maham ‘Ali Quli Khan.) 

Whether maham is to be classed with sultanam, 
khinam, begam, shaiham, I am unable to say. 

Sir Douglas Forsyth (Mission to Yarkand, 84) 
translates khinam and begam by my lord and my 
ehief. But neither is a domestic word; both are in 
common use in the sources to designate, for general 
readers, the wives or daughters of khins and begs, 
or princes. Sultanam also is a common title, and 
from Gul-badan’s use of it does not appear to be a 
personal name, but to answer to sultan as khanam 
to khan, etc.. 

Against reading khanam as my lady, with a sense 
of possession or admission of superiority (as is done 
by Sir Douglas Forsyth), there are the Turki words 
formed from it, viz., khanam-ali, honeysuckle, and 
khanam-bijaki, ladybird. Shaham, which has the 
appearance of being formed from shah like the others 
by the suffix am or wm, is used both for man and 
woman. Shiram occurs as a man’s name. 





Maham was a wife of whom it was said that she was 
to Babar what ‘Ayisha was to Muhammad, and she 
was Humayun’s mother. Gul-badan mentions her 
often, yet no one of the numerous sources I have 
consulted, sets down her family or the name of her 
father. 

At one time it appeared to me probable that she was 
a Begchik Mughal, because Babar calls Yadgar Begchik, 
taghat when speaking of him in connection with 
Humayun. Further consideration led to the abandon- 
ment of the theory. 

Uncle Yadgar, Uncle ‘Ali, and Uncle Ibrahim (Cha- 
puk, slashed-face) are named as being three of the 
eight brothers or half-brothers of Gul-rukh, the mother 


* 


257 


of Kamran; and Bega (Haji) Begam is the daughter 
of Uncle Yadgar. 

Amongst these eight Begchiks I do not find one 
named Uncle Muhammad ‘Ali, and there is a good 
- deal to lead one to regard a certain Khwaja Muham- 
mad ‘Ali faghat as being Maham’s brother. 

He was associated with Khost, and it is on record 
that Humayin visited his maternal grandparents 
(nanaha) in Khost. The Begchiks do not seem to 
have been connected with Khost. Babar speaks 
frequently of Khwaja Muhammad ‘Ali as being em- 
ployed in the government of Khost (925H.); as coming 
from Khost for orders, etc., and the mzr-zddas of Khost 
also are recorded as visiting the court. One of Maham’s 
children was born in Khost. 

Babar frequently mentions an ‘Abdu-l-malik Khostz, 
and he may be a connection of Maham. He, however, 
appears as Khosti, Khwasti, Qasti, qirchi, Qirchin, 
and without a more complete good Turki text no 
Opinion can be formed as to his identity. 

Gul-badan says that Aka (Maham) was related to the 
owners of the New Year’s Garden in Kabul, and this 
was made by Ulugh Beg Kabult Mirdn-shahi. 

Abuw‘l-fazl says Maham was of a noble Khurasan 
family, related to Sultan Husain Mirza (Bayqra), and, 
like Hamida-banu Begam, was of the line of Shaikh 
Ahmad Jami (az diidman-i-a‘yan wa ashraf-i-Khwrasan 
and, wa ba Sultan Husain Mirza nisbat-i-khwesh darand. 
Perhaps nisbat-i-khwesh implies blood-relationship on 
the father’s side. 

Gul-badan speaks of Maham’s Mughal servants, but 
a Chaghatai, a Begchik, a Qichin is also a Mughal, 
and Babar often sinks the divisional tribe-name in the 
general one, Mughal (e¢.g., Mems. 9 and 21). 

Some considerations suggest that Maham was a 
Dughlat Mughal, and of the family of ‘Abdu-l-qadiis, 
but no valid opinion can be formed until a text as 
good as the Elphinstone is available for guidance. 

17 


258 


Babar married Maham in Harat. when he visited 
that city after Sultan Husain Mirza’s death, and in 
912H. (1506). Humayiin was born on March 6, 1508 
(Zu’l-qa‘da 4th, 918H.). Four other children were born 
to her, and all died in infancy. They were Bar-bul, 
Mihr-jahan, Isan-daulat and Fartq. 

The events of her career are detailed in the Introdue- 


tion to this volume and in Gul-badan Begam’s book. 
Mems., 250, 405, 412, 423, 428 n.. 
Gul-badan, 4a, 6d, 7a, 8b, 11b, 130, 14d, 16a, 16b, 17a, 18, 
21a and b. 22a and b, Ba and b, Ob, 
Akbar-nima, Bib. Ind. ed., and H. Beveridge, s.n. Maham 
and Maham ‘Ali Quli Khan. 
Turkistan, Schuyler, 95 ff.. 


CXVIII. Maham Kabuli. (No. 81.) 
At Hindal’s marriage feast. 
Gul-badan, 26a. 





CXIX. Maham Khanam Chaghatait Mughal. 

Second daughter of Sultan Ahmad Khan Chaghatat 
and full-sister of Mansir Khan. Their mother was 
Sahib-daulat Dughlat, sister of Mir Jabar Bardi 
Dughlat. Maham married Builash Khan Uzbeg — 
Kazak, son of Awigq. 

Haidar Mirza names her as a hostage given, with 
her mother, by her brother Mansir to his half-brother 
Sa‘id at a time of their meeting in 1516. She had 
two other full-brothers, Babajak and Shah Shaikh 
Muhammad. 


Tar. Rash., N. E. & R., 160, 344, 





CXX. Mah Begam Qibchdq Mughal. 
The moon princess ; Pers. ma&h, moon. 
Daughter of Sultan Wais Qibchdq Mughal and sister 
of Haram Begam ; wife of Kamran Mirza. 
Gul badan, 640. 





Ft NR Re ae ee Te rae ee ee 


Pe 


259 


CXXI. Mah-chachaq Khalifa. 
She is mentioned by Bayazid as interceding for him 
with Hamida-bant. She may be a servant (khalija). 


J. R. A. S., October, 1898, art. Bayazid biydt, H. Beveridge 
p. 16. 


CXXII. Mah-chuchak Begam Arghin, Haji Begam. 

The word chichak presents difficulties. Iminsky 
writes chichiiq; Bayazid, chachaqg; Gul-badan, 
chichak and jujak ; the Memoirs, chuchak. Mr. 
Blochmann and Mr. Lowe transliterate, jijak. 
There is a Turki word jiujiq, but its meaning of 
sweet-savoured is less appropriate for a woman’ys 
name than a word which, spite of vowel variation 
it seems safer to take from the Persian; viz. 
chachak, a rose, and chachak, chuchuk, a lovely 
cheek, a mole. 


Daughter of Mirza Muhammad Mugqim Arghtn and 
of Bibi Zarif Khdatin; wife (1) of Babar’s kiikaltash 
Qasim; (2) of Shah Hasan Arghtn of Sind (died 
963H.); (3) of ‘Isa Tarkhan Arghin of Tatta and 
Sind. 

By Qasim, she was mother of Nahid Begam and by 
Shah Hasan of his only child, Chuchak or Mah- 
chuchak, Kamran’s wife. 

She had an interesting story which Mr. Erskine 
tells at length. (B. & H., I. 348 et seq..) 

On the death of ‘Isa (975H.) his son and successo. , 
Muhammad Baqi Tarkhan, who was a madman, ill- 
treated Mah-chiichak and Nahid who was then visit. 
ing her. This led to a plot against him, but in the 
end Mah-chuchak was imprisoned by him and starved 
to death. (Cf. s.n. Nahid.) 

Mems., 233. 

B. & H., I. 848 et seq.. 

Tarvikh-t-sind, Mir Ma‘siim, in the account of Shah Hasan’s 

family. 

Ain-t-akbari, Blochmann, 420. 

Ilminsky, 273. 

17—2 


260 


XXIII. Mah-chuchak Begam Arghin. 

Daughter of Shah Hasan and Mah-chuchak Arghiin 
and her father’s only child ; wife of Kamran; married 
953H. (1546). Her wifely fidelity is commemorated 
by the historians. She went with Kamran to Makka 
after his blinding, and attended him until his 
death, October 5th, 1557. She survived him seven 
months. 


Tarikh-i-sind, Mir Ma‘stim, in the account of Shah Hasan’s 
family. 


CXXIV. Mah-chuchak Begam. 





Sister of Bairam Oghlaén and of Faridun Khan 
Kabul. 

She married Humayun in 1546. She had two sons, 
Muhammad Hakim (born 960H.—1558) and Farrikh- 
fal. Gul-badan says she had four daughters and then, 
with discrepancy frequently found in her writings, 
names three: Bakht-nisa, Sakina-banu, and Amina- 
banu. The name of the best-known of her girls, 
Fakhru-n-nisa‘, is omitted. 

Mah-chuchak’s story is told by her sister-in-law, 
in the Introduction of this volume, by Mr. Bloch- 
mann and by several Persian writers. 

She was murdered by Shah Abu’l-masali in Kabul 
in 1564. 

Gul-badan, 7la, 71b, 73b, 78b, 88a. 

Jauhar, Mr. William Irvine’s MS., Part il. ; Chapter IT... 

Bayazid, 1.0. MS., 72a. 

Nizaému-d-din Ahmad, 27th year of Akbar. 


Baddyuni, Lowe, 54 et seq.. 
Ain-t-akbari, Blochmann, s.n.. 


CXXV. Makhduma dghad. (No. 59.) 


The Lady dghai; Av. makhdama, lady, mistress, 
Wife of Hindi Beg. 


Gul-badan, 26a. 


261 


CXXVI. Makhdima Begam (Qard-giiz). 


Wife of ‘Umar Shaikh Miran-shaht; mother of 
Ruqaiya, a posthumous child; she was married at 


the end of ‘Umar’s days; she was tenderly beloved, — — 


and to flatter him her descent was derived from his 
uncle, Manichahr Mirdn-shaht. 


Mems., 10, 14. 


CXXVII. Makhdima-jahan. 


The mistress of the world; Ar. makhdima, mis- 
tress, and Pers. jahdn, world. 


Mother of Sultan Bahadir Gujratt. 
B. & H., IT. 96. 


CXXVIII. Makhduma Qdluchi. 


A wife of Said Khan Chaghatai; a ‘ tribes-woman’ ; 
mother of Rashid ; sister of Suqar Bahadur Qadluchi. 


Tar. Rash., BE. & R., 140, 187, 309. 


CXXIX. Makhdtima Khanam. 
The Lady Khinam; Ar. makhdima, lady, mistress. 

Daughter of Shir ‘Ali Khan Chaghatait Mughal ; 
sister of Wais Khan; wife of Amasanji Taishi Qalmdq ; 
mother of Qadir, Ibrahim, and Ilyas. 

Her marriage was a ransom for her brother Wais 
of whom it was commonly reported that he was routcd 
sixty times by the Qalmaqs. On her marriage, Wais 
made Amasanji become a Musalman, and Makhduma 
continued the work of her husband’s conversion and 
that of his tribe. ; 

She named one of her daughters Karim Bardi 
in affection and respect for the Dughlat amir of this 
name. 


Mems., 409. 
Tar. Rash., E. & R., 67, 91. 


262 


CXXX. Makhdtma-sultan Begam. 

Daughter of Sultan Mahmid Mirza Mirdn-shahi 
and Zuhra Begi dgha Uzbeg; elder sister of Sultan 
“Ali Mirza. ‘She is now in Badakhshan.’ (Mems., 30.) 
The ‘now’ may be in the late twenties of 1500, and 
she may have been with Mirza Khan (Wais Miran- 
shahi). 

Mems,, 30. 








a Makhfi. 
Hid, concealed. 
This is the poetical name (takhallus) of Salima- 
sultan Begam Chaqdniani, Nir-jahan Begam, and 
Zibu-n-nisa, a daughter of Aurang-zib. 





CXXXITI. Malika-jahan. - 


The world’s queen; Ar. malika, queen, and Pers. 
jahan, world. 


Elliot and Dawson, V. 81, 87, 88. 





JCXXXIII. Ma‘siima-sultin Begam Mirdn-shahi. 


The very chaste princess; Ar. ma‘siim, chaste, 
innocent, and sulfin, sway, pre-eminence. 


Fifth and youngest daughter of Sultan Ahmad 
Mirza Mirdn-shaht. Her mother was Habiba-sultan 
Begam Arghtin. She married Babar (her first cousin) 
in 918H. (1507), and from his account of the affair it 
was a love-match on both sides. She was half-sister 
of ‘Ayisha, Babar’s first wife. She died in child-bed, 
and her infant received her name. 


Gul-badan, 60. 
Mems., 22, 208, 225, 231, 429 Supplement. 


CXXXIV. Ma'siima-sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi. (No. 438.) 


Daughter of Babar and Mastma; wife of Muham- 
mad-zaman Mirza Baygqra. 


Gul-badan, 6b, 23a, 25b, 290. 
Akbar-nama, s.n.. 
Mems., 22, 395, 429 Supplement. 


263 


CXXXV. Maywa-jan. 
Fruit of life; Pers. maywa, fruit, and jin, life. 
Daughter of Khazang yasdwal and a servant of 
Gul-badan Begam; an inferior wife of Humayun. 





Gul-badan, 21b, 22a, 30a. 


CXXXVI. Mihr-angez Begam. (No. 29.) 


The princess who commands affection; Pers. mzhr, 
affection, and angez, commanding, raising. 


Daughter of Muzaffar Husain Mirza Bayqra ; grand- 
daughter of Sultan Husain Bayqra and Khadija. 

She was accomplished after the fashion of gentle- 
men-at-arms and she played polo. 

She was married by ‘Ubaidu-l-lah Uzbeg when 
Harat was taken by Shaibani (913H.., June, 1507). 

She was at the Mystic Feast in 15381. 


Gul-badan, 24d. : 
Habibu-s-siyair, 397 et seq.. 


CXXXVII. Mihr-banu Begam Miran-shahi. (? No. 27.) 


The beloved; Pers. mihr, affection, and bédni, 
possessing. 


Daughter of “Umar Shaikh Mzran-shaht and of Umid 
Andijani; full-sister of Nasir and Shahr-banut ; born 
cir. 886H. (1481-82). 

Gul-badan mentions a Mihr-liq Begam (No. 27.) who 
was a paternal aunt of Humayian, as being at the Mystic 
Feast. This may be Mihr-banu. No aunt named 
Mihr-liq is mentioned elsewhere, and lig and bdni 
have the same sense. 


Gul-badan, 25a. 
Mems., 10. 


CXXXVIII. Mihr-banai Khanam. 


I think she is a relative of Babar, and she may be the 
daughter of ‘Umar Shaikh and Umid, and thus Babar’s 
half-sister. (See infra.) From her title of Khanam, 





264 


she is very possibly a Chaghatai on her mother’s side 
(Umid was an Andijani), or the style is due to her 
martiage with a khan. She appears to have married 
a man of high rank; perhaps Kichum (Qdach-kunji) 
Khan who was Khagqan of his tribe from 1510 to 1530, 
or his son and successor (ruled from 1580 to 153838): 
She had a son Pulad whom Babar mentions as fighting 
with ‘ Qich-kunji’ and his son Abt-said Uzbeg at Jam 
(1528). 

The Qich-kunji was the tribe of Isan-daulat. 

Kichim, Abi-said, Mihr-bani, and Pulad sent 
ambassadors and messengers to Babar in the same 
year, and Babar mentions his return gifts with quaint 
particularity. The envoys were entertained at a feast 
by him on December 12th, 1528 (935H.). 

Mems., 10, 890, 395, 397, 899. 


Tar. Rash., BK. & R., s.n. Kuchum and Sultan and 206 n.. 
Muhammadan Dynasties, Stanley Lane-Poole, 273. 


CXXXIX. Mihr-jahan or -jan Begam Mirdn-shahi. 


Sun of the world or of life; Pers. mihr, sun, and 
jahin, world, or jan, life, soul. 


Daughter of Babar and Maham; born at Khost; 
died an infant. 


Gul-badan, 6b. 


CXL. Mihr-nigér Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 
The image of affection, or a very sun. 

Eldest daughter of Yinas Khan Chaghatai and 
Isan-daulat (Qichin, Kunjt); born cir. 860H. (1455-56) ; 
wife of Sultan Ahmad Mirza Mirdn-shahi; first cousin 
of Babar. 

In 905H. (early in July, 1500) she was captured by 
Shaibani and married by him. In 906H. (1500-1) 
she was divorced when he wished to marry Khan-zada, 
her niece. She then stayed awhile in Samarqand. 
In 907H. (1501-2) she went to Tashkand and joined 


265 


the large family party which assembled there. (Mems. 
99.) In 911H. (middle of 1505) she came to Kabul 
with other kinsfolk, soon after the death of her grand- 
mother (Isan) and of her father, and during the cere-___ 
monial mourning of Babar for his mother. ‘Our 
grief broke out afresh,’ he writes. 

Mirza Haidar gives a pleasant account of the welcome 

she accorded her generous and kindly nephew Babar 
in 912H. (1506-7), when he put down Khan Mirza’s 
(Wais) rebellion in Kabul: ‘The Emperor leapt up 
and embraced his beloved aunt with every manifesta- 
tion of affection. The khanam said to him: ‘‘ Your 
children, wives, and household are longing to see you. 
I give thanks that I have been permitted to see you 
again. Rise up and go to your family in the castle. 
I too am going thither.” ’ 
- In 913H. (1507), when Khan Mirza set out for 
Badakhshan with his mother, Shah Begam, to try his 
fortunes in her father’s ancient lands, Mihr-nigar also 
‘took a fancy to go. It would have been better and 
more becoming,’ writes Babar, ‘for her to remain 
with me. Iwas her nearest relation. But however 
much I dissuaded her, she continued obstinate and 
also set out for Badakhshan. 

Mihr-nigar rued her self-will. She and Shah Begam 
were captured on their way to Qila'-zafar by one of 
Abt-bakr Dughldat’s ‘marauding bands,’ and ‘in the 
prisons of that wretched miscreant they departed from 
this perishable world.’ 


Mems., 12, 22, 99, 169, 232. 
Tar. Rash., 86, 94, 117, 155, 196, 197, 200, 258. 


@XLI. Mingli-bi dghacha Uzbeg. 
A low-born wife (ghiincha-chi) of Sultan Husain 
Mirza Bayqrad. The Habibu-s-siydr calls her a Turk 
and a purchased slave (mamliqa) of Shahr-banu Begam 





266 
Miran-shahi who brought her when she herself married 
Sultan Husain, and presented her to him. . 
She was mother of three sons: Abu-turab, Muham- 


mad Husain, and Faridin Husain; and of two 
daughters: Bairam (or Maryam) and Fatima. 


Mems., 181, 182, 183. 
Habibu-s-siyar (lith. ed.), 327 et seq.. 
CXLITI. Ming-liq kikaltash. 


She escaped from Samargand with Babar’s mother 
on its capture by Shaibani in 907H. (1501). 


Mems., 98. 





CXLITI. Mubarika Bibi; Afghani aghacha. (No. 56.) 
Ar. mubdrtka, blessed, fortunate. 

She was a daughter of Shah Manstr Yusufzai, and 
was married by Babar at Kehraj on January 380th, 
1519 (Muharram 28th, 925H.). The alliance was the 
sign and seal of amity between him and her tribe. 
A charming account of her and her marriage is given 
in the T'arikh-i-hafiz-t-rahmat-khani, and Mr. Beveridge 
has translated it in full under the title ‘An Afghan 
Legend,’ so that it need not be reproduced here. 

Gul-badan never gives the name Mubarika (Blessed 
Damozel) as that of the Afghan lady (Afghani dghdcha) 
whom she so frequently and pleasantly mentions. 
Hafiz Muhammad (l.c.) says that Mubarika was much 
beloved by Babar, and this is borne out by the fact 
that she was one of the small and select party of 
ladies who were the first to join him in India. She 
went there, it is safe to infer, with Maham and Gul- 
badan in 1529. 

She bore no child, and this misfortune Hafiz 
Muhammad attributes to the envy of other wives who 
administered drugs to deprive her of motherhood and 
weaken her husband’s affection. 

She died early in Akbayr’s reign. 





267 


A brother of Mubarika, named Mir Jamal, accom- 
panied Babar to Hindustan in 1525, and rose to high 
office under Humayun and Akbar. Hindal had a 
favourite follower of this name who passed, on his 
death, into Akbar’s service. He may well be the 
Yusufzai. 

Gul-badan, 8a, 25b, 30a, 35a, 38a, 73b. 

Mems., 250, 250 n., 251. 

Akbar-nama, Bib. Ind. ed., I. 315. 


Asiatic Quarterly Review, April, 1901, art. An Afghan . 
' Legend, H. Beveridge. 


(Mughal Khanam, ‘Ayisha, q.v.) 


CXLIV. Muhibb-sultan. 


The very loving khinam; Ar. muwhibb, a lover, one 
who loves, and swltdn, pre-eminence. 


Daughter of Sultén Husain Mirza Bayqra and a 
‘handmaid’ (ghiincha-chi). 
Mems., 30. 


CXLY. Muhibb-sultan Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. (No. 20.) 
- Third daughter of Sultan Ahmad Khan Chaghatdi; 
wife of Mirza Haidar Dughlat. 


Gul-badan, lla, 240. 
Tar. Rash., K. & R., 161, 280,! 341. 


CXLVI. Muhtarima Khanam Chaghatait Mughal. 


The honoured khanam; Ar. muhtarim, respected, 
honoured. 


Daughter of Shah Muhammad Sultan Kadshgharz 
Chaghatat, and Khadija Sultan Chaghatat; wife (1) 
of Kamran, (2) of Ibrahim Mirdn-shahi, the son of 
Sulaiman and Haram. 





1 There is some error here in the translation, as its statements do 
not agree with known facts. 


268 


She is occasionally spoken of simply as ‘ Khanam.’ 


Gul-badan, 620. 

Akbar-nama, 8.n.. 
Ain-t-akbari, Blochmann, s.n.. 
Tar. Rash., E. & R., 451. 

Cf. Introduction. 


CXLVII. Munauwar Sultan Begam Bayqra. 


The illuminated princess; Ar. munawwar, bright 
illuminated. 


Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra and Baba 
dghacha; wife of Sayyid Mirza of Andekhud who 
appears also to have married her niece. She was 
famed for her beauty. The Memoirs and Iiminsky’s 
text do not give her name, and I have found it in the 
Habibu-s-siyar. From this same work is derived the 
information that Sayyid Mirza is a name given to a 
son of Ulugh Beg Mirza Mirdn-shaht. 


Mems., 182. 
Habibu-s-styar, 827 et seq. 


CXLVIII. Nahid Begam. (No. 54.) 


Pers. Nahid, the name of the mother of Alexander ; 
a name for the planet Venus, etc.. 


Daughter of Mah-chuchak Arghin by her marriage 
as a captive of Babar, with his foster-brother Qasim ; 
wife of Muhibb- ali Barlas. 

When her mother, resenting her position in a mis- 
alliance, ran away, Nahid, then eighteen months old, 
remained in Kabul. 

When her mother was imprisoned in Sind by 
Muhammad Baqi Tarkhan, Nahid escaped to Bhakkar, 
and was protected, till her return to Akbar’s court, 
by Sultan Mahmud Bhakkari (975H.). 

She was at Hindal’s wedding feast. Much of her 
story is contained in the Jntroduction of this volume. 


Gul-badan, 4a, 26a. 

Tarikh-i-sind, Mir Ma‘stim. 

Bddshah-nama s.n. (fully used by Blochmann). 
Ain-i-akbari, Blochmann, s.n.. 

B. & H., L 848, 851, 352, 885. 


269 
CXLIX. Nar-gul adghdacha. (No. 58.) 


(?) Red asa rose, pomegranate-red. For nar sce 
unfra. Pers. gul, a rose. 


She was perhaps one of two Circassian slaves, of 
whom Gul-nar may be the other and who were sent to — 
Babar by Tahmasp in 1526. 


Mems., 347. 
Gul-badan, 256, 35a, 38a. 


CL. Nar-sultan dgha. (No. 77.) 


Presumably Pers. nar, a pomegranate ; but it might 
be Ar. nar, advice, counsel, or even fire, and sultan, 
pre-eminence, a high degree of what is expressed by 
the first word of the compound name. 


Gul-badan, 26a. 


CLI. Nigar dgha. (No. 76.) 
Pers. nigidr, a mistress, a sweetheart. 


Mother of Mughal Beg. 
Gul-badan, 26a. 


CLIT. Nizhad-sultan Begam Bayqrda. 


The princess of highly distinguished race; Pers. 
nizhad, family, high-born; Ar. sultidn, pre-eminence. 


Eldest daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra 
and Baba dghdcha; wife of Sikandar Mirza, son of 
Bayqra Mirza who was her father’s elder brother. 


Mems., 182. 
Habibu-s-siydr, 887 et seq. 


CLUI. Papa (? Baba) aghacha. 


Mr. Erskine writes Papa, and Ilminsky, perhaps 
following him, Paépad. Baba—i.e., darling—would 
seem a more fitting name for one who is said to 
have been much beloved. 


She was a low-born wife of Sultan Husain Mirza 
Bayqra and foster-sister of Afaq Begam. The mirza 
‘saw her and liked her,’ and she became mother of 
seven of his children, 7.c., four sons, Muhammad 


270 


Ma'stm, Farrukh Husain, Ibn Husain, Ibrahim 
Husain; of three daughters, Nizhad-sultan, Sa‘ adat- 
bakht, and a third whose name Babar does not give. 


Mems., 181, 182, 188. 


CLIV. Pasha Begam Bahdrlii Turkomdn of the Black 


Sheep. 


(?) Turki Pdshd, a lord, or Pers. pecha, chief, before. 
The Ma‘astr-i-rahimi writes pasha. 


Daughter of ‘Ali-shakr Beg Bahdarlii ; wife (1) of 
Muhammadi Mirza of the Black Sheep ; (2) in 873H. 
(1468-69) of Sultan Mahmud Mirza Mirdn-shahi; 
mother by Mahmud of three daughters and one son, 
Bayasanghar (born 882H.). 

Babar does not give the name of any one of the three 
girls, nor does he mention that one of them was a 
wife of his own. One married Malik Muhammad 
Mirza Mirdn-shaht. The Madsir-i-rahimi supplies 
the information that another was Salha-sultan Begam 
and that she had a daughter by Babar whose name 
was Gul-rukh; that Gul-rukh married Nuru-d-din 
Muhammad Chaqdnidni, and had by him Salima- 
sultan Begam. Abu’l-fazl says that a daughter of 
Pasha by Sultan Mahmud Mirza was’ married to 
Khwaja Hasan Khwdja-zdda, and that on account of 
this connection Firdaus-makdni (Babar) married Mirza 
Nuru-d-din to his own daughter, Gul-barg Begam, and 
that Salima-sultan Begam was the issue of this 
marriage. ; 

(There are difficulties connected with the account 
here given of Salha which are set forth under the 
name of her daughter, Salima-sultan.) 

Pasha Begam was of the same family as Bairam 
Khan. (Cf. genealogical table s.n. Salima-sultan.) 

Mems., 29, 80, 31, 72. 

Tar. Rash., E. & R., 938 n.. 


Ma‘asir-i-rahimi, Asiatic Society of Bengal MS. in year 
1024H.. 


271 


CLY. Payanda-sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi. 


(?) Of fixed pre-eminence; Pers. pdyanda, firm, 
stable, and Ar. sultan, pre-eminence. 


Daughter of Abu-said Sultan Mirza Miran-shahi ; 
paternal aunt of Babar; wife of Sultan Husain Mirza — 
Bayqra; sister of Shahr-banu whom Sultan Husain 
Mirza divorced; mother of Haidar Mirza Bayqra; of 
Aq, Kichak, Bega, and Agha Begams. 

When the Uzbegs took Khurasan, 913H. (1507-8), 
she went to ‘Iraq, where ‘ she died in distress.’ 

Mems., 30, 180, 181, 182, 204, 208 and n., 223. 


Gul-badan, 25a (here a Muhammad is inserted after Payanda 
in the name). 





CLVI. Qadir Khanam Qdlmdq. 
Daughter of Amasanji Taishi Qalmaq and Makh- 
duma Khanam Chaghatdi. 
Tar. Rash., BK. & R., 91. 


CLVII. Qard-giz Begam Bayqra. 
The black-eyed princess. Qard-giz is a sobriquet, 
and I have not found her personal name. 
Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra and 
Payanda-sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi; wife of Nasir 
Mirza, Babar’s half-brother. 


Mems., 181. 
(Qard-guiz Begam, Rabi‘a, q.v.) 


(Qard-giiz Begam, Makhduma, q.v.) 


CLVIII. Quttq dghdcha and Begam. 
Ilminsky writes Qituq ; Mems., Katak. 
Foster-sister of T'erkhan Begam; wife of Sultan 
Ahmad Mirza Miran-shahi; mother of four daughters: - 
(1) Rabi‘a (Qara-giiz), (2) Saliqa (Aq), ‘Ayisha (wife 
of Babar, (4) Sultanam. 
She was married ‘for love,’ and Ahmad was ‘ pro- 





272 


digiously attached’ to her. She drank wine; her co- 
wives were neglected from fear of her. At length her 
husband put her to death, and ‘ delivered himself from 
his reproach.’ 


Mems., 22. 


CLIX. Qut-liq (Qutluq) Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 


(?) The image of happiness; from Turki gitlu, 
happy, and /7q, endowed with. 


Daughter of Sultan Mahmud Khan Chaghatat; wife 
of Jani Beg Khan Uzbeg. 

Her marriage was a sequel of victory by Shaibani — 
over her father. Cf. ‘Ayisha (her sister). 

Tar. Rash., B. & R., 160, 251. 


CLX. Qut-liq-nigar Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 

Second daughter of Yinas Khan Chaghatai and 
Isan-daulat Qiichin ; chief wife of ‘Umar-shaikh Miran- 
shahi; half-sister of Mahmtd and Ahmad Khans; 
mother of Khan-zada and Babar. 

She accompanied her son in most of his wars and 
expeditions, and lived to see him master of Kabul. 
She died in Muharram, 911H. (June, 1505). 

Mems., 10, 11, 12, 30, 90, 94, 98, 99, 104, 105, 184, 169. 

Gul-badan, 4a. 


Tar. Rash., 8.n. 
Akbar-nama, $.N. « 


CLXI. Rabia-sultan Begam Bayqra and Bedka Begam 
Bayqra. 

These two names may indicate the same person. 

The Memoirs (176 and 177) say that Sultan Husain 
Mirza Bayqra had two full-sisters, Aka and Bedka, 
and that Bedka married Ahmad Haji T'arkhan, and 
had two sons who served Sultan Husain. 

These statements are contained also in the Turki 
texts (B.M. Add. 26,324, and Ilminsky), and also in 
a considerable number of good Persian texts in the 
British Museum and. Bodleian. 


273 


There is, however, this difference of statement. 
The Turki texts write: Bedka Begam ham mirza ninak 
aikd-chi st aidi. P. de C. translates: était aussi 
Vainée du mirzd. The Persian texts have: Bedka 
Begam ki khwahar-i-khurd mirza bid; and from this 
Mr. Erskine translates: . . . the mirzd’s younger sister. 

The Turki, it should be observed, uses of Aka 
precisely the same word as of Bedka, aikd-chi si. 

It may be right to regard Bedka as the younger of 
the two sisters of the mirza, and not as the sister 
younger than the mirza. 

To pass now to what has led me to make a tenta- 
tive identification of Bedka with Rabi‘a-sultan. 

The Memoirs (181) mention Rabi‘a-sultan as the 
younger sister of the mirza (Husain) and as having 
two sons, Babar and Murad who were given in 
marriage to two daughters of Husain. 

The Turki texts do not describe Rabi‘a-sultan in 
any way, or say that she was Husain’s sister. They 
simply mention the marriages. 

The Persian texts say of Husain’s two daughters 
(Bega and Agha): ba pisardn-i-khwahar-i-khurd-i- 
khudra Rabit'a-sultan Begam, Babar Mirza wa Sultan 
Murdd Mirza, dada bidand. 

The Persian texts which state that Rabia-sultan 
was Husain’s own sister, have greater authority than 
most translations can claim for such additional in- 
formation as is here given, because the Persian trans- 
lation of the Tizik-i-babart was made in a court circle 
and at a date when such additional statements were 
likely to be known to many living persons. 

Husain may have had a younger and half-sister, 
but the words in the Persian texts which are used of 
Rabi‘a-sultan are those used of Bedka, and they are 
more applicable to a full than a half sister. 

The Aka of the passage in which Bedka is men- 
tioned has no personal name recorded. Bedka may 
be a word of the same class as dka, i.e., a title or 


18 


274 


sobriquet, and Rabia-sultan may be the personal name 
of Bedka. Perhaps the word Bedka is Bega. 

The facts of Bedka’s descent are as follows: she 
was a daughter of Mansur Mirza Bdayqrd and of Firoza 
Begam Mirdn-shahi, and thus doubly a Timtrid. She 
was full-sister of Bayqra and Husain Mirzas and of ~ 
Aka Begam. She married Ahmad Khan Haji Varkhan, 
and had two sons whose names (if Bedka be Rabi'‘a- 
sultan) were Babar and Murad and who married two of 
her nieces, Bega and Agha. 


Mems., 176, 177, 181. 

Ilmnninsky, 208, 204, 208. 

B.M. Turki Add. 26,2384, f. 48a and b; 53. 
Other texts under 911H.. 


CLXII. Rabi‘a-sultan Begam (Qard-giz) Miran-shaht. 
Daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza Mirdn-shahi and 
Qutugq (Katak) dghdcha (Begam) ; wife (1) of Sultan 
Mahmud Khan Chaghatai and mother of Baba Sultan, 
and (2) of Jani Beg Uzbeg who married her after 
the murder of her father and her son by his cousin 
Shaibani in 914H. (1508). 


Mems., 22. 
Tar. Rash., E. & R., 114, 116. 


CLXIIT. Rajab-sultan Mirdn-shaht. 


Ar. rajab, fearing, worshipping. Swltan may here 
be a title. 
Daughter of Sultan Mahmid Mirza and a concu- 


bine (ghiincha-ch?). 
Mems., 30. 


CLXIV. Ruqaiya Begam Mirdn-shahi. 


Ruqaiya was the name of a daughter of Muhammad, 
and conveys the notion of bewitching or of being 
armed against spells. 


Daughter of Hindal; first wife of Akbar; she died 
Jumada I. 7th, 1085H. (January 19th, 1626), at the 
age of eighty-four. She had no children of her own, 
and she brought up Shah-jahan. Mihru-n-nisa (Nur- 


275 


jahan) lived ‘unnoticed and rejected’ with her after 
the death of Shir-afkan. 


Ain-i-akbart, Blochmann, 309, 509. 


CLXY. Ruqaiya-sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi. 

Daughter of ‘Umar Shaikh Mtradn-shahi and Makh- 
duma-sultan Begam (Qard-giiz). She was a posthumous 
child. She fell into the hands of Jani Beg Uzbeg, cir. 
908-9H. (1502-4), and bore him ‘two or three’ sons who 
died young. ‘I have just received information that 
she has gone to the mercy of God.’ The date of this 
entry in the Memoirs is about 985H. (1528-9). 


Mems, 10. 


CLXVI. Sa adat-bakht (Begam Sultan) Bayqra. 


Of happy fortune; Ar. sa‘ddat, happy, and Pers. 
bakht, fortune. 


Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra and Papa 
(Baba) dghacha. She was married to Sultan Ma‘sid 
after the loss of his eyesight. 


Mems:, 182. 
Habibu-s-siydr, 827 et seq. 


CLXVII. Sahib-daulat Begam Dughlat. 


The princess of good fortune; Ar. séhib, enjoying, 
and daulat, fortune. 


Sister of Mir Jabar Bardi Dughlat; wife of Sultan 
Ahmad Khan Chaghatat ; mother of Mansur, Babajak, 
Shah Shaikh Muhammad and Maham. 

Tar. Rash., B. & R., 125, 344. 


CLXVIII. Sakina-bant Begam Miran-shahi. 
The princess guardian of tranquillity; Ar. sakina, 
tranquillity of mind, and Pers. band, keeper. 
Daughter of Humayun and Mah-chuchak; wife of 
Shah Ghazi Khan, son of Naqgib Khan Qazwini, a 
personal friend of Akbar. 


Gul-badan, 71a. 
Blochmann, 435, 449. 


18—2 


276 


CLXIX. Salha-sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi. 
Cf. Salima-sultan Chaqaniant. 


CLXX. Salima-sultan Begam Chaqdaniant. 


Daughter of Mirza Niru-d-din Muhammad Chaqa- 
niant and of a daughter of Babar, as to whose name 
the sources ring changes upon the rose. She appears 
as Gul-rang (B. and H. s.n.), Gul-barg, Gul-rukh. As 
her mother was a full Turkoman or Turk by descent, 
it has occurred to me that she may have borne a 
Turki name, and that the various forms it assumes in 
the Persian may have their origin in this. 

As to her maternal parentage there are difficulties. 
From the Ma‘dsir-i-rahimi, under 1024H., the follow- 
ing information is obtained. Pasha Begam Bahdrli 
Turkomdn married (873H., 1469) as her second husband, 
Sultan Mahmud Mirza Miran-shahi. By him she had 
three daughters and one son: Bayasanghar (b. 882H.., 
1477). One daughter whose name was Salha-sultan 
Begam, married Babar and bore him a daughter, 
Gul-rukh (sic). Gul-rukh married Nuru-d-din Muham- 
mad Chaqdniani, and their daughter was Salima- 
sultan Begam who married first, Bairam Khdan-i-khanan, 
and secondly, the Emperor Akbar. 

Abu‘l-fazl (Bib. Ind. ed., I. 65) adds the particular 
that Firdaus makdni gave his daughter Gul-barg (sic), 
to Nuru-d-din because a daughter of Mahmid and 
Pasha had been given to Nuru-d-din’s grandfather 
Khwaja Hasan, known as Khwaja-zada Chagdniani. 
He also states that Salima-sultan Begam was the issue 
of Gul-barg’s marriage. 

In the Memoirs, as we have them, there is no 
mention of Salha-sultan nor of Nuru-d-din’s marriage 
with a daughter of Babar. Yet Abu‘l-fazl states that 
Firdaus-makdni arranged Gul-barg’s marriaze. The 
first omission is the more remarkable because Babar 
(Mems., 30) states that Pasha had three daughters. 
He does not give their names, and specifies the 


277 


marriage of the eldest only. On the same page he 
tells of his marriage with Salha’s half-sister Zainab 
and of her‘death. The omission is remarkable and 
appears to have no good ground, since he chronicles 
his other Timurid marriages. Of Pasha’s daughters 
it may be noted here that one married Malik Muham- 
mad Mirdn-shahi, another Khwaja Hasan Chaqdaniani, 
and the third, Babar. 

It appears to me tolerably clear that Babar’s marriage 
with Salha-sultan took place at a date which falls in a 
gap of the Memoirs, i.e., from 1511 to 1519. This is 
the period which contains the exile from Kabul after 
the Mughal rebellion. 

Not only does Babar omit Salha-sultan’s name and 
his marriage with her (Mems., 30), but Gul-badan is 
also silent as to name, marriage and child of Salha- 
sultan. This silence is in every way remarkable. She 
enumerates her father’s children and gives their 
mothers’ names, and she enumerates some of his 
wives in more places than one. From her lists a 
Timutrid wife cannot have escaped, and especially 
one whose child became the mother of Gul-badan’s 
associate Salima-sultan. 

An explanation of Gul-badan’s silence and also of a 
part of Babar’s has suggested itself to me; it is con- 
jectural merely and hypothetical. The absence of 
mention of Salha-sultan and of her child suggests that 
she appears under another name in Gul-badan’s list 
of her father’s children and their mothers. She may 
be Gul-badan’s own mother, Dil-dar Begam without 
undue wresting of known circumstantial witness. 

The principal difficulty in the way of this identifi- 
cation is Abu’l-fazl’s statement that Nuru-d-din’s 
marriage was made by Firdaus-makanit, whereas Gul- 
badan states that her father arranged two Chaghatat 
marriages for her sisters. 

If we might read Jannat-dshyant (Humayun) for 
Firdaus-makant much would fall into place; the 


278 


marriage with Nuru-d-din could be a re-marriage of 
Gul-chihra who was widowed in 15838, and of whose 
remarriage nothing is recorded until her brief political 
alliance with ‘Abbas Uzbeg in 1549. It is probable 

that she remarried in the interval. | 


To pass on to recorded incidents of Salima-sultan’s 
life : 

There is an entry in Hindal’s guest-list which may 
indicate her presence. 

She accompanied Hamida-bant and Gul-badan to 
Hindustan in 964H. (1557), and she was married at 
Jalindhar shortly after Safar 15th, 965H. (middle of 
December, 1557) to Bairam Khdn-i-khanan. It is said 
that the marriage excited great interest at Court. It 
united two streams of descent from ‘Ali-shukr Beg 
Baharli Turkoman.  Salima-sultan was a Timurid 
through Babar, one of her grandfathers, and through 
Mahmud, one of her great-grandfathers. 

A few words must be said about her age at the time 
of her marriage, because the question has been raised 
through Jahangir’s statement that she died at~-the 
age of sixty in 1021H., and commented upon by the 
Darbar-i-akbait. If Jahangir gives her age correctly 
she must have been born in 961H., and this would 
make her a child of five when she married Bairam, 
and needs her betrothal by her father to Bairam to 
date from babyhood. 

The Darbdar-i-akbat says that it is clear from 
Jahangir’s statement of her age at death that she was 
married to Bairam etat. 5, and that her memory is 
thus cleared from the reproach of two marriages ! 

Whatever is concealed in Jahangir’s ‘ sixty,’ nothing 
is said to indicate that he desired to biting Salima- 
sultan into the circle of Hindu propriety. He may 
have had the wish; he was a Hindu mother’s son. 
The comment of the modern author of the Darbdr-t- 


279 


akbarvi witnesses to the Hindiizing action to which 
Moslim custom and thought have submitted. Adult 
_ remarriage was no reproach to Islam in Salima’s day. 

It does. not, however, seem correct to accept Jahangir’s 
statement that Salima-sultan was sixty only atdeath 
To have betrothed her as a baby and to have married 
her to a man of, at least, middle-age at five, is not in 
harmony with the Muhammad custom of Humayun’s 
day. Moreover, Jahangir himself speaks of her as 
married (kad-khuda) to Bairam. She is said by Abu’l- 
fazl to have been betrothed (ndmzad) by Humayun, 
and married (sipurdan) by Akbar to Bairam Khan. 

Baddyun?’s words indicate adult and not child 
marriage; sabiqa dar habdla-i-Bairam Khan Khan-i- 
khandan bid, b‘ad azan dakhl-i-haram-t-pddshahi shiid. 

After the murder of Bairam in 968H. Salima-sultan 
was married by Akbar. She was probably a few years 
his senior. 

In 983H. she made her pilgrimage with Gul-badan. 
Particulars of the expedition are given in the Intro- 

duction to this volume. 

Her name appears in the histories as a reader, a 
poet who wrote under the pseudonym of makhfi, and 
as pleading with Akbar for Salim’s forgiveness. 

Her death is chronicled by Jahangir who heard of it 
on Zu’l-qa‘da 2nd, 1021H. (December 15th, 1612). He 
gives particulars of her birth and descent, and of her 
mairiages; and he states that she was sixty at the 
time of her death. By his orders her body was laid in 
a garden which she herself had made. 

Jahangir praises her both for her natural qualities 
and her acquirements. She creates an impression of 
herself as a charming and cultivated woman. 


Gul-badan, (?)26a. 

Akbar-nima s.n.. 

Badayuni, Lowe, 138, 216, 389. 
Tuzink-i-jahaingirt, Sayyid Ahmad, Aligarh, 113. 
Khafi Khan, Bib. Ind. ed., I. 276. 

Ain-i-akbari, Blochmann, s.n.. 

Darbéar-i-akbari, 736. 


280 


The genealogical table on the next page illustrates 
Salima-sultan’s descent, and the following dates bear 
also upon the topic: 


Pasha married Mahmiid ... ca ... 873H.—1469. 
Bayasanghar born site sis ... 882H.—1477. 
Mahmid died es 900H.—Jan. 1495 
Babar married Zainab, a of Mahmiad .. 910H.—1504. 

Zainab died . 3 913H.-914H.—1507-8. 


Salha’s child, ‘the wife of Naru- d- din, was 
not born in 911H. —1511, because she 
is not in the list of children who left 
Kabul with Babar in that year. (Gul- 
badan, 7a.) 


CLXXI. Salima Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 


Daughter of Khizr Khwaja, but whether also of 
Gul-badan is not recorded. 
She went with Gul-badan to Makka in 983H. (1575). 


Ain-t-akbari, Blochmann, 441. 


CLXXII. Saliqa-sultan Begam (Aq Begam) Mirdn-shahi. 


(Ilminsky, 25, reads Salha.) The princess of excel- 
lent disposition; Ar. saliqga, of good disposition, 
and sultan, pre-eminence. 


Daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza Mirdn-shaht and 
Qutigq (Katak) Begam; wife of her cousin Masud. 
The marriage was announced to Babar in 900H. 
(1494) with gifts of gold and silver, almonds, and 
pistachios. She was captured by Abu-bakr Dughlat 
with Shah Begam and Mihr-nigar Khanam. 


Mems., 22, 27. 


CLXXIII. Samiha Begam Barlas. 
The gentle princess; Ar. sa@mth, gentle. 

Daughter of Muhibb ‘Ali Barlds (son of Nizamu-d- 
din ‘Ali Khalifa), and presumably of Nahid. Begam ; 
mother of Mujahid Khan. 

Mujahid (who is named in the Tabaqat-i-akbari as 
commander of 1,000, but is not in the Aim) was a son 


281 


‘UDUDYY 








“1-UDY YY WARLLB ‘mused Uvj[Ns-BUITBG 





“940, ‘Haeq- 20. “ylang 


“peur 


“T[B,-FTBQ ‘equ = weseg — -mBinyy 


UBI[NS-VYTVG FP = “p 


== "pBUIULULBYN UIp-p-NANN Vz 


| 
‘pewUUVYyN] UIp-p-0.V[Y, Bz 
| 
‘upwupboy,) npoz-vipnyy 
*p-————‘ueseyzy vlemyy 
| 








‘peg [Bq-1g "URdOT VYSVgG = 2YVYYs-UPLY VZITIA 





*UDUWOYLN J, “UDUWOYMNT, NPMBYDY 
npVyVg Te,-Ig seg 1ynys-I[y, 
| | 


| 
“supmoyiny, deeyg yolq 





puuryeyy urj[ng 


‘poursu JON 
| 
“njjp, weseyy vleaay 
| 
“apunqysbv 
elvMyy JO 1Osseoons say 
‘UIp-p-nLTy, Beary 


‘uprupboy,) 


‘INVINVOVHO NVLTOS-VNITVS JO HIAVL TVOIDOTVANAD 


282 


of Musahib Khan, son of Khwaja Kilan (Babar’s 
friend). 
Ajyn-i-akbart, Blochmann, 421, 533. 


CLXXIV. Sarv-qad and Sarv-i-sahi. 


Straight as a cypress; Pers. sarv, a cypress, and 
gad, form, or sahi, erect. 


‘Sarv-i-sahi, to use Gul-badan’s word, was a singer 
and reciter. She belonged to the households both of 
Babar and Humayin, and was subsequently married, 
with full nisbat, to Munim Ahdn-i-khandan. 

She acted as go-between of Munim and Khan-i- 
zaman (‘Ali Quli Uzbeg-i-shaibdnt) during the rebellion 
of the latter—probably in the tenth year of Akbar, 
and Bayazid calls her a reliable woman and the 
haram of the Khdn-i-khandn. She sang on the way to 
Lamghan by moonlight in 958H. (1551); she was with 
Mu'nim at the time of his death in Gaur (Safar, 
983H., 1575), and in Rajab of the same year accom- 
panied Gul-badan to Makka. 


Gul-badan, 82a (inserted in the translation after 730). 
Bayazid, 1.0. MS., 122b, 1470. 
Akbar-nama, Brb. Ind. ed., III. 145. 





CLXXV. Shad Begam Bayqra. (No. 28.) 
Daughter of Haidar Bdayqra and Bega Miran- 
shahit ; wife of ‘Adil Sultan. 


Gul-badan, 25a. 
Mems., 180. 





CLXXYV (a). Shad Bibi. 
Wife of Humayun ; lost at Chausa. 
Gul-badan, 330, 





CLXXVI. Shaham dghda. 
(2?) My queen; from Pers. shah, king, ruler. 
Of the haram of Humaytin. She went with Gul- 
badan Begam to Makka in 983H.. 


Ain-t-akbari, Blochmann, 441. 





283 


CLXXVII. Shah Begam Badakhsht. 
The princess of royal blood. 

She was one of six daughters of Shah Sultan 
Muhammad, King of Badakhshan, the last of a long” 
line of hereditary rulers of his country who claimed 
descent from Alexander of Macedon. Her mother was 
a sister of Sultan Sanjar Barlds. 

She was given in marriage to Yunas Khan Cha- 
ghatat and was the mother of Mahmud and Ahmad 
Khans and of Sultan-nigar and Daulat Khanams. 
She was widowed in 892H. (1487), and survived Yunas 
more than twenty years. 

She dwelt in Mughalistan with her elder son, 
Mahmud, the then Khaqan of the Mughals, from the 

- time of Yinas’ death until about 911H. (1505-6). 

Then ‘base advisers provoked a quarrel between the 
mother and son—a son so obedient that he had never 
even mounted for a ride without her permission. 
They [the base advisers] decided to send Shah Bocats 
to Shahi Beg Khan to solicit a country for herself, 
because she found living in Mughalistan distasteful... . 
Now, as the Begam was a very sensible woman, she 
went under this pretext, and thus left her son before 
those base advisers could bring about an open rupture, 
which would have caused endless scandal and reproach 
to herself. The rumour was that she had gone to 
entreat Shahi Beg Khan while she was really enjoying 
in Samargqand the company of her children.’ (Tar. 
Rash, E. & R., 180.) 

Shahi Beg did not permit her to remain in Samar- 
qand but banished her to Khurasan. From Khurasan 
she went with other connections and relations to 
Babar in Kabul. They arrived early in 911H. (June, 
1505), during the ceremonial mourning for Babar’s 
mother, Shah Begam’s. stepdaughter. With Shah 
Begam was Haidar Mirza’s father and also Babar's 
aunt, Mihr-nigar. Haidar says that Babar gave the 
party a warm welcome and showed them all possible 


284 


honour; and that they spent some time in Kabul in 
the greatest ease and comfort. 

Babar’s kindness fell on ungrateful ground, since 
in the following year, 912H. (1506-7), Shah Begam 
fomented a rebellion against him in favour of her 
grandson, Mirza Khan. Haidar says that during 
Babar’s absence in Harat her motherly love (it was 
grandmotherly) began to burn in her heart, and per- 
suaded her that Babar was dead, and that room was 
thus made for Mirzi Khan. The story of Babar’s 
magnanimity to her when he had put down the rising 
she had stirred, is well known and is detailed in the 
histories. , 

In 913H. (1507-8) she laid claim to Badakhshan, 
saying that it had been her family’s hereditary king- 
dom for 3,000 years; that though she, a woman, 
could not attain to sovereignty, her grandson would 
not be rejected. Babar assented to her scheme, and 
she set off for Badakhshan, together with Mihr-nigar 
Khanam and Mirza Khan. 

The latter went on in advance to Qila-zafar. The 
.ladies and their escort were at once attacked and 
plundered by robber bands in the employ of the ruler 
of Kashghar, Aba-bakr Dughldt, and were by them 
conveyed to him in Kashghar. They were placed in 
confinement, and ‘in the prison of that wicked mis- 
creant they departed from this perishable world’ (cir. 
913H.). 

Mems., 12, 18, 22, 32, 60, 74, 99, 104, 105, 106, 169, 216, 


217, 231. 
Tar. Rash., BK. & R., s.n.. 


CLXXVIII. Shah Begam Termizi. (No. 24.) 

Daughter of Fakhr-jahan Begam and of Mir Ala’u-l- 
mulk T’ermzi. She may be ‘ Kichak’ Begam, and if 
not, is her sister. 

She was the mother of Dil-shad Begam. If she be 





285 


Kichak, she was the wife of Sharafu-d-din Husain. 
(Cf. Kichak.) 
She was at the Mystic Feast. 


Gul-badan, 240. 


CLXXIX. Shah Khanam. (No. 17.) 
Daughter of Badi‘u-l-jamal Begam. 
Gul-badan, 240. 





CLXXX. Shahr-bant Begam Miran-shahi. | 
(?) Ar. shahr, the moon, the new moon. 

Daughter of Sultan Abu-said Mirza Mirdn-shahi ; 
wife of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqrd, and married to 
him before his accession in 873H. (March, 1469). 

Babar gives an entertaining detail about her married 
life. Once at Chekman her husband was engaged in 
a battle with her brother Mahmud. All his ladies 
except herself alighted from their litters and mounted 
on horseback, presumably for rapid flight if the day 
went against Husain. Shahr-banu, however, ‘ relying 
on her brother,’ remained in her litter. This being 
reported to her husband, he divorced her and married 
her younger sister, Payanda-sultan. 

Of her subsequent history nothing seems recorded. 
(Cf. Mingli-bi aghacha.) 

Mems., 182. 





CLXXXI. Shahr-banu Begam Mirdn-shahi. (No. 7.) 
Third daughter of Umar Shaikh Mirza Mtran-shahi 
and Umid Andidnt; half-sister of Babar and eight 
years his junior; born cir. 1491; full-sister of Nasir 
and Mihr-banu; wife of Junaid Barlds (brother of 
Nizamu-d-din ‘Ali Khalifa); mother by him of Sanjar 
Mirza; widowed cir. 944H. (1537-88). 
She seems to have gone to Sind with her nephew, 


286 


Yadgar-nasir Mirza, in 1540 and after the débacle in 
Hindustan, for when Yadgar-nasir had fled from Sind 
to Kamran in Qandahar (a traitor cast aside by his 
employer, Shah Husain Arghiin), Kamran sent am- 
bassadors to Shah Husain to request that the begam 
and her son might be returned to his charge. [Shahr- 
bant was Kamran’s paternal (half)-aunt and full-aunt 
of Yadgar-nasir. | | 

She was at once started on her journey, but was 
insufficiently provided with necessaries for traversing 
the difficult desert tract which stretches towards the 
western mountain barrier of Sind. Numbers of her 
party perished before reaching Shal (Quetta); and 
many died in that town from ‘malignant fever.’ 
Amongst its victims was Shahr-banu, at the age of 
about fifty-one years. 

Gul-badan, 240. 

Mems, 10. 

Akbar-nama, 8.n.. 

B. & H., I. 526 and IT. 253. (Here occur errors of statement, 


2.¢e., that Shahr-bantii was Yadgir-nasir’s wife and Kam- 
ran’s sister.) 


CLXXXII. Shah Sultan Begam. 
(?) Wife of Abu-sa‘id Mirza Miran-shahi; mother of 
‘Umar Shaikh Mirza. 
The news of her death in Andijan reached Babar in 
907H. (1501). 
Mems., 20, 99. 


CLXXXIII. Shah-zada Begam and Sultanam Khanam 
Safawi. 
The daughter of kings. 
Sister of Shah Tahmasp of Persia. Her protection 
of the Emperor Humayin during his sojourn in Persia 
is named by many of the historians. 


Gul-badan, 58a, 580. 


287 


CLXXXIV. Shah-zada Khanam Miran-shaht. 
Daughter of Sulaiman Mirza Mirdn-shahi and 
Haram Begam. She was betrothed to Humayiin in_ 
958H. (1551), but the affair went no further. 


_ Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1898, art. Bayazid 
biyat, H. Beveridge. 
B. & H., IT. 397. 
Cf. appendix s.n. Haram and Fatima. 





CLXXXY. Sultanam Begam Baygqra. 
‘For meaning of Sultanam, cf. app. s.n. Maham. 

Daughter of Sultan Husain Mirza Bayqra and Chuli 
Begam Azdk; her father’s eldest girl and her mother’s 
only child. She married, first, her cousin Wais, son 
of her father’s elder brother Bayqra, and, secondly, 
‘Abdu-l-baqi. Mirza Mirdn-shahi. By her first marriage 
she had a son, Muhammad Sultan Mirza, and a 
daughter who married Isan-quli Shatbaéni, younger 
brother of Yili-bars Sultan. Through her son 
Muhammad she was ancestress of those numerous 
rebel Bayqras whom history knows as ‘ the mirzas.’ 

When the Uzbegs took Harat in 1507 (913H.) she 
went to Khwarizm, and there her daughter was 
married. On April 12th, 1519 (Rabi’ II. 12th, 925H.), 
Babar records her arrival with her daughter in Kabul. 
He gave her the Garden of Retirement (Bagh-i-khilwat) 
for her residence, and waited upon her with the cere- 
mony due to an elder sister. He bowed and she 
bowed; he advanced, they embraced; and having 
established this form of greeting, they kept to it. 

Sultanam started from Kabul for India in 1527 
with a grandson (her sons had six sons), but she died 
at the Indus and her body was taken back to Kabul 
for burial. 

There are curious discrepancies of the texts in the 
passage about Sultanam which occurs at Mems., 181. 

The first point to note is contained in the words: 
‘Her elder brother gave her in marriage to Sultan 


288 


Wais Mirza, the son of Miangi Bayqra Mirza.’ 
(Mems., 181.) 

Barddar kildnash ba pisar midngi Bayqra Mirza 
Sultan Wais Mirza dada bid. (Waqi at-i-babart, Persian 
text, B.M. Or. 16,623, 12380.) 

Agha st Bayqra Mirza ninak ortanchi oghali Sultan 
Wats Mirzagha chiqarib adi. (Tizik-t-babari or Babar- 
nama, Turki text, B.M. Add. 26,824, f. 52b, and 
Ilminsky, 209.) 

‘Son frére ainé l’avait donnée en mariage a Sultan 
Wais Mirza, fils cadet de Bayqra Mirza.’ (Pavet de 
Courteille, I. 875.) 

Both the English and French versions make the 
elder brother of Sultanam give her in marriage. But 
she was an only child, and her father was living to act 
for her. The French version, here as in so many other 
places, appears to have relied upon Mr. Erskine. 
The Turki text appears to yield something more 
probable, z.e., ‘His elder brother, Bayqra Mirza’s 
middle son, Sultan Wais Mirza... .’ 

Mr. Erskine has read midngi as part of Bayqra’s 
name. Comparison with the Turki makes appear as 
the more probable reading: ‘the middle son —_— 
miangt. 

M. Pavet de Courteille’s fils cadet lets slip the notion 
of miydn. Redhouse gives for the ortdncht oghal of 
the Turki text, ‘the middle son out of an odd number’ 
—e.g., the third out of five, the second of three, ete.. 

In the same passage the Memoirs have: ‘ Sultanam 
Begam set out along with her grandson. ...’ Here 
the Persian words ba hamin tarikh (Turki, wshbi tartkh) 
are omitted, with loss of precision, for they fix the date 
of her journey by conveying the information that it 
occurred at the time of her son’s appointment to the 
government of Kanauj, z.e., April, 1527. 

Mems., 181, 190, 266. 


Habibu-s- -siyar, 327 et seq.. 
Also the places mentioned in the notice above. 


289 


CLXXXVI. Sultanam Begam Mirdn-shahi. (No. 12.) 


Daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza. 

A Sultanam of this parentage is mentioned by Babar _ 
(Mems., 22), by Haidar (HK. & R., s.n.), and by Gul-— — 
badan (24b). These appear to be at least two, and 
perhaps are three women. Their record is as follows: 

(1). Sultanam, fourth daughter of Sultan Ahmad 
Mirza. (Mems., 22.) She was the child of Qutuq 
(Katak) Begam. She married her cousin Ali, son of 
Mahmud Mirza. ‘Ali was murdered by Shaibani 
(cf. s.n. Zuhra) in 906H. (July, 1500), and his widow 
was taken to wife by Shaibani’s son, Muhammad 
Timur. <A third marriage is mentioned by Babar, 
viz., to Mahdi Sultan. By this style the histories 
mention the Uzbeg chief who was associated with 
Hamza (Khamza) Sultan. But this Mahdi was put to 
death by Babar in 1511, and Timur was living in 1512 
(918H.). Hither Sultanam was divorced, perhaps to 
make marriage with some other kinswoman and later 
captive legal; or Mahdi Sultan may be the father 
of Adil Sultan; or he may be Mahdi Muhammad 
Khwaja. | 

(2). Sultanam, daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza, 
married Muhammad Husain Dughlat in the autumn 
of 1503. She was given to her husband by Khusrau 
Shah who describes her as daughter of Sultan Ahmad 
Mirza wa pddshah-zada-i-man, by which Mr. Ross has 
understood that she was of Khusrau’s ‘family.’ 
There was a son, issue of this marriage and named 
‘Abdu-l-lah. 

Itis difficult to regard No. 1 and No. 2 as one woman, 
both because of their marriage dates and of the cireum- 
stance that No. 1 was an Uzbeg captive and No. 2 
in Badakhshan. Babar mentions no marriage of a 
Sultanam with Muhammad Husain Dughlat. <A sur- 
mise—it is nothing more—has occurred to me, 
namely: No. 2 was married to the Dughlat mirza 
shortly after the destruction of Tashkend; Babar’s 

19 





290 


wife ‘Ayisha, third daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mziran- 
shahi, had left Babar shortly before that disaster. 
She might be Sultanam No. 2. 

(3). Sultanam, or Sultani, daughter of Sultan Ahmad 
Mirza, was at the Mystic Feast in 1531. She is said 
to be the mother of Kilan Khan Begam. This title is 
not appropriate for the child of any of the marriages 
mentioned for No. 1 or No. 2. It is quite appropriate 
for the child of the marriage of Sultan Ahmad and 
Quttq’s firstborn daughter, Rabi‘a-sultan, because 

~Rabi‘a married Sultan Mahmid Khan who was the 
Klder Khan (kildn) and also the Great Khan (Khaqan) 
of the Mughals. Shaibani murdered five of Mahmud’s © 
six sons, but probably his girls escaped because of their 
value as wives. 

The above notes make for the opinion that Sul- 
tanam is a title, and not a name. Cf. app. sn. 
Maham. 


Mems., 22. 
Gul-badan, 240. 
Tar. Rash., KH. & R., 164, 170, 198. 


CLXXXVII. Sultanam. (No. 52.) 
Wife of Nizamu-d-din ‘Ali Khalifa. 
Gul-badan, 14a, 14b, 26a, 50a. 


CLXXXVIII. Sultan-nigér Khanam Chaghatai Mughal. 


Daughter of Yunas Khan Chaghatat and Shah 
Begam Badakhshi; wife of Sultan Mahmud Mirza 
Miran-shahi; mother of Sultan Wais (Khan Mirza) ; 
widowed in 900H. (January, 1495). 

On Mahmud’s death in Samarqand she joined her 
brothers in Tashkand, going off ‘ without giving any 
notice of her intentions,’ says Babar. Later on she 
married Awiq (Adik) Sultan Jiji, the chief of the 
Uzbeg Qazadqs. Her story is somewhat confused in 
the Memoirs (13 and 14) by a double mention of her 


291 


marriage to Awiq. Haidar Mirza throws some light, 
and it seems that when Shaibani had murdered her 
brother, Mahmud Khan, Awiq left him and joined 


the Uzbeg Qazaqs, his own people, and Sultan-nigar  — 


followed him into Mughalistan. 

She had two daughters by Awig, one of whom 
married ‘Abdu-l-lah Qdchin and died a young wife, 
and the other married Rashid Sultan Chaghatai. 

On Awiq’s death, Sultan-nigaér was married to his 
brother Qasim, presumably in consonance with the 
Turki custom of yang-lik. 

With Qasim’s death, the khanship of the Qazdqs 
devolved on Sultan-nigar’s stepson (i.e., Awiq’s by a 
co-wife) named Tahir. ‘ He was,’ says Haidar, ‘ very 
much attached to her, and even preferred her to the 
mother who had given him birth.’ 

What follows is full of colour and feeling. Nigar- 
sultan showed her appreciation of Tahir’s affection, but 
petitioned him, saying: ‘ Although you are (as) my 
child, and I neither think of nor desire any son but 
you, yet I wish you to take me to my nephew, Sultan 
Said Khan. For I am grown old, and I have no 
longer the strength to bear this wandering life in the 
deserts of Uzbegistan. ‘Take me where I may enjoy 
some quiet and repose.’ She then offered to mediate 
for him and to obtain the support for him of the 
Mughal Khagans against his foes. Tahir accordingly 
escorted her to the Mughalistan borders, and with her 
waited. upon Said. ‘The latter, from love of his 
aunt, rose, saying that although his rising to receive 
Tahir was contrary to the rules of Chingiz (their 
common ancestor), yet that he did it out of gratitude 
because Tahir had brought his aunt.’ 

Sultan-nigar died of a hemorrhage in the summer 
of 934H. (1528). 


Mems., 13, 14, 30, 31, 99, 105. 
Tar. Rash., BK. & R., s.n. 


19—2 


292 


CLXXXIX. Tarkhan Begam. 
This is a title, and not a personal name. 

In Babar’s time, according to Mr. Erskine (Mems., 
24 n.), the ancient title of Tarkhin had come to 
belong to a particular family or clan. This may be well 
seen by consulting Professor Blochmann’s Ain-i-akbart, 
361, where the genealogical table of the Arghuns of 
Tatta shows the title to have become hereditary in 
their branch of the Arghuns.! 

The Tarkhan Begam whose name stands above this 
notice was linked with these Tarkhan Arghuns in the 
way shown below. She married her first cousin, 
Ahmad Mirdn-shahi, and Quttiq Begam was her foster- 
sister. 





Urda-bigha Tarkhdin Arghin. 





| | | | 
Daughter—Abii-said Darvish Daughter—‘Abdu-l-‘ali Muhammad 








Mirdn- Muham- Tarkhan Mazid 
shahi. mad Arghin, Tarkhan. 
Tarkhin, d. car. 
1490. 
| | | | 
Mahmid, Ahmad,—Tarkhan Begam. Baqi Tarkhdan. 
b. 1453. b. 1451; 
d. 1490. 
Mems, 22, 24. 


Ain-i-akbari, Blochmann, 361. 
B. & H., I. and II. s.n. Sind, Arghiin, etc.. 


CXC. Tarkhdn Begam and Bega. 
Gul-badan, 75d. 





(Tarsun-sultan, Yun, q.v.) 





1 Professor Blochmann (l.c.) states that ‘Abdu-l-‘ali and five sons 
were murdered by Shaibani, but Babar and the Sind historians give 
no support to the story. It looks as though by some clerical error the 
account of the murder of Sultan Mahmiid Khan and his sons had crept 
ie eee Shaibani drove Baqi out of his late father’s government of 

ukhara, 


2938 


CXCI. Ulugh Begam. (No. 10.) 


Daughter of Zainab Sultan Begam ; grand-daughter 
of Sultan Abu-sa id; first cousin of Babar. 


Gul-badan, 245. 


CXCII. Ults (Anish and Alush) dgha Turkoman. (? No.'53 ) 
Turki, wus, tribe. Clearly a title. 

Daughter of Khwaja Husain Beg Turkomdn of the 
White Sheep, an amir of ‘Umar Shaikh Miran-shahi ; 
wife of ‘Umar Shaikh; mother of a girl who died in 
infancy. She was removed from the haram a year 
or eighteen months after her marriage. Gul-badan 
mentions a begam of this name as at Hindal’s 
wedding-feast; whether she is Ulis dgha promoted, I 
have no means of knowing. 


Mems., 14. 
Gul-badan, 26a. 


CXCIII. Umid aghacha Andijani. 
Pers. uimid, hope. 

An inferior wife of ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza Mirdn- 
shaht whom she predeceased. She was the mother 
of Mihr-banu who was two years older than Babar 
and will have been born therefore in 1481; of Nasir 
who was born in 1487; and of Shahr-banu who was 
born in 1491. 


Mems., 10, 14. 


CXCIV. Umm-kulsim Begam M7irdn-shahi. 


A surname of Fatima, daughter of Muhammad ; 
Ar. umm, mother, and kulsiim, plumpness. 


Grand-daughter of Gul-badan Begam and a member 
of the Haj of 983H.. 


Akbar-nama, III. 145. 


294 


CXCV. Uziin-sultan Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 
(?) Pers. awzin, or uizin, ample, increase. 

Daughter of Shir ‘Ali Khan Oghlan Chaghatat ; 
sister of Wais Khan and Makhduma Khanam; paternal 
aunt of Yunas Khan; wife of Amir Sayyid ‘Ali Dugh- 
lat; mother of Muhammad Haidar Dughlat and great- 
erandmother of Haidar Mirza, the historian. 

She was widowed in 862H. (1457-58), and then, in 
conjunction with her son, received Kashghar and 
Yangi-hisar from her stepson, Saniz. 

Tar. Rash., EK. & R., 64, 87, 88. 





CXCVI. Yadgar-sultan Begam Mirdn-shaht. (No. 8.) 
Pers. yadgar, remembrance, 

Daughter of ‘Umar Shaikh Mirdn-shaht and Agha 
Sultan dghacha; half-sister of Babar, and brought up 
by his grandmother, Isan-daulat. She was a_post- 
humous child, and, if one may draw an inference 
from her example and others similar, is for this 
reason called Yadgar (Souvenir). Her father died 
Ramzan 4th, 899H. (June 9th, 1494). When a child of 
not more than ten, and in 908H. (1503), she fell into 
the hands of ‘Abdu-l-latif Uzbeg, after the conquest of 
Andijan and Akhsi by Shaibani, and in 916H. (1511) 
Babar’s successes at Khutlan and Hisar enabled her 
to return to him and her own people. 

I do not find any marriage mentioned for her by 
her name. 

She is in the list of the guests at the Mystic Feast, 
and her mother is named (as such) as present at 
Hindal’s wedding festivities. 


Mems., 10. 
Gul-badan, 24), 26d. 





CXCVII. Yun (Tarstn)-sultan Mughal. 
Ilminsky, 15, writes Tarsiin. 
Inferior wife of Umar Shaikh, and married at the 
end of his life. 
Mems., 14. 





295 


CXCVIII. Zainab-sultan Begam Mirdn-shahi. 
(?) From Ar. zain, adorning. 


Fifth daughter of Sultan Mahmud Mirza and Khan- 





zada Begam (b.) Termizi; first cousin and wife-of— _ 


Babar. 

She was married at the instance of Qut-liq-nigar, in 
the year of the capture of Kabul, z.e., 910H. (1504-5), 
perhaps at the time that Jahangir Mirza, Babar’s half- 
brother, married her half-sister, Aq Begam. The 
marriage was not happy. ‘Two or three years later 
Zainab died of small-pox. 


Mems., 30. 


CXCIX. JZainab-sultan Khanam Chaghatat Mughal. 
(No. 19.) 

Daughter of Sultan Mahmud Khan Chaghatai 
Mughal; favourite wife of Sultan Said Khan Kashghai, 
her first cousin; aunt of Shah Muhammad Sultan 
whom Muhammadi Barlds put to death; mother of 
Ibrahim who was born 9380H. (1524), Sa‘id’s third son 
and favourite child, of Muhsin, and of Mahmid Yusuf. 

On her husband’s death in 939H. (July, 1533), she 
was banished by her stepson Rashid, and went with 
her children to. Kabul where she met Haidar Mirza 
and where she was under the protection of Kamran. 

Gul-badan mentions her in the guest-list, and places 
her name as present at the Mystic Feast (1581), but 
this can hardly be right. She could easily have been 
at the marriage festivities in 1537. 


Tar. Rash., BE. & R., 146, 875, 383, 467. 
Gul-badan, lla, 240. 


CC. Zainab-sultan Begam Miran-shahi. 





Gul-badan describes her as the paternal aunt or 
great-aunt (‘ama) of Humayun. Babar had no such 
sister, and no Zainab is mentioned by Gul-badan as a 
daughter of his grandfather Abu-sa‘id. An Aq Begam, 


296 


however, is spoken of by her, and Zainab may be her 
personal name. Zainab had a daughter Ulugh Begam. 
Gul-badan, 240. 


CCI. Zainab-sultan Begam. 





There is a difficulty in identifying the begam of this 
name, whom Babar mentions (Mems., 387) as coming 
to India. It will be seen by comparing the sources 
and their French and English interpretations : 


Mems., 387. ‘another, by name Zainab-sultan Begam, the 

granddaughter of Bikeh Chicham.’ 

P. de C., IT. 355. ‘et la petite-fille de Yenga-Tchetcham, 

autrement dite Zeineb-sultan Begam.’ 

B. M. Or., 3714, Pers., p. 482. digar nabira yanga chicham 

ki Zainab-sultan Begam bishad. 

Bodleian, Elliot, 19, f. 180a. digar nabira bega chichim kt 

Zainab-sultin Begam. 
Ilminsky, Turki text, 447. yana, yanga chichim ki Zainab- 
sultin Begam bilagha’t nabira si kilrb. i 

It seems safer to take Zainab as the name of Babar’s 
relation (i.e., the yanga of his chicha) than as that of 
the granddaughter (nabira). 

It may be observed here that the best authorities 
quoted above, z.e., Ilminsky, behind whom is Kehr, 
and Or., 3714, have yanga where Mr. Erskine and 
Elliot, 19, have bega. This exchange may occur in 
the case of other begas of this appendix. Until a good 
Turki text more complete than that in the B. M. is 
found, this must be left an open question. 

If Zainab be taken as the name of the yanga, she 
may be identifiable with one of the other women already 
entered in the appendix, but for deciding this point 
more examples are necessary of Babar’s application of 
the word yanga. 

Mems., 387. 


CCII. Zobaida dghacha Jalair. 
The marigold; Ar. zwbhaida. 
Grand-daughter of Husain Shaikh Timir of the 
Shaiban Sultans. According to the Habibu-s-siydr, 
she was a Jalair. 





297 


She was an inferior wife of Sultan Husain Mirza 
and the mother of ‘Ayisha Begam. She predeceased 
her husband who died April, 1506. 


CCIII. Zuhra Begi and Agha Uzbeg. 
Ar. zulvra, beauty, a yellow flower, the star Venus. 

An inferior wife of Sultan Mahmud Mirza; mother 
of Makhdima-sultan Begam and of Sultan ‘Ali Mirza. 

She was married during the lifetime of Mahmud’s 
father, and therefore before Rajab 873H. (January, 
1469), and was widowed Rabi II., 900H. (January, 
1495). In 905H. (1499-1500) she entered into an 
intrigue with Shaibani, a fellow-tribesman, of which 
the ultimate aim was dominance in Samarqand for 
her son ‘Ali. A part of her scheme and offer was her 
own remarriage with Shaibani. Babar stigmatizes 
her action as ‘stupidity and folly,’ and says, further, 
‘the wretched and weak woman, for the sake of getting 
herself a husband, gave the family and honour of her 
son to the winds. Nor did Shaibani Khan mind her 
a bit, or value her even so much as his other hand- 
maids, concubines, or women. Sultan ‘Ali Mirza was 
confounded at the condition in which he now found 
himself, and deeply regretted the step he had taken. 
Several young cavaliers formed a plan for escaping 
with him, but he would not consent. As the hour of 
fate was at hand, he could not shun it. They put 
him to death in the meadow of Kulba. From his 
overanxiety to preserve this mortal and transitory 
life, he left a name of infamy behind him; and, from 
following the suggestions of a woman, struck himself 
out of the list of those who have earned for themselves 
a glorious name. It is impossible to write any more 
of the transactions of such a personage (? Zuhra), and 
impossible to listen any further to the recital of such 
base and dastardly proceedings.’ 


Moems., 29, 30, 31, 83, 84. 


APPENDIX B. 


Mahdi Khwaja. 

Nizamu-d-din Ahmad has included in his J'abaqdt-i- 
akbart a story which he heard from his father Muham- 
mad Muqim Hardwi, and of which the purport is that 
Babar’s Khalifa (Nizimu-d-din ‘Ali Barlds) had at one 
time thought of placing a certain Mahdi Khwaja on 
the throne in succession to Babar. 

Two circumstances cast doubt on the story: (1) It 
was customary in Babar’s family for a son to succeed 
his father; (2) Babar left four sons, the youngest of 
whom, Hindal, was eleven years old. 

Moreover, there were Timurids both of the Bayqra 
and Miran-shahi branches in India with Babar whose 
claims to a Timurid throne would be strongly enforced. 

But Nizamu-d-din Ahmad has left us the story in 
circumstantial detail and it cannot be passed over 
unnoticed, and this the less because Gul-badan Begam 
throws some light on the identity of the Mahdi con- 
cerned, and also because in an important particular, 
v.e., the relation of Mahdi.to Babar, I am able, through 
Mr. Beveridge’s study of the Habibu-s-siyar, to give 
more accurate information than was at Mr. Erskine’s 
disposal. 

The story was old when Nizimu-d-din set it down 
and it is not necessary to accept all its details as exact. 
It is sufficient to consider its minimum contents which 
are, that in the royal household there had been a 
rumour of a plan of supersession of Babar’s sons by 
Mahdi Khwaja at the instance of Khalifa. : 

The question naturally arises, who was the man 


299 


concerning whom such intention could be attributed 
to the wise and experienced Khalifa ? 

Nizamu-d-din calls Mahdi Babar’s damdd, and Mr. 
Erskine, amongst other translators, has rendered this — — 
by son-in-law. It is unnecessary to consider why any 
Mahdi Khwaja known in history should have been 
preferred to those sons-in-law who were of Babar’s 
own blood, because Gul-badan calls Mahdi Babar’s 
yazna. For this word the dictionaries yield only the 
meaning of ‘brother-in-law’ and ‘husband of the 
king’s sister.’ Both these meanings are also attributed 
to damdd. But the Habib settles the verbal question 
by a statement that Mahdi Khwaja was the husband 
of Khan-zada Begam, Babar’s full sister. 

It is not improbable that he had another close link 
with the Emperor, namely that of relationship to Maham 
Begam, but I am not yet able to assert this definitely. 

Babar never mentions Mahdi Khwaja’s parentage. 
This is learned from Khwand-amir who states that he 
was the son of Musa Khwaja and grandson of Murtaza 
Khwaja. He wasasayyid; and from the circumstance 
that his burial-place was chosen as that of Sayyid 
Abw’l-ma‘ali Termizi, it may be inferred that he 
belonged to the religious house of Termiz. If so, he 
had probably Timurid blood in his veins, since inter- 
marriage between the families was frequent. 

Babar mentions a Khwaja Musa who is perhaps 
Mahdi’s father, in 914H., 1508. He immediately 
afterwards names Khwaja Muhammad ‘Ali, Maham 
Begam’s brother, in suggestive sequence. 


Babar’s first surviving record of Mahdi is made in 
925H. (February, 1519) when ‘ Mir Muhammad Mahdi 
Khwaja’ brings in a prisoner. It is in cir. 923H. 
(1517) that Khwand-amir speaks of the marriage of 
Mahdi and Khan-zada, but this is probably a good 
deal after the fact, because Khan-zada was returned 
to Babar in 917H. (1511). 


300 


Mahdi Khwaja, as Babar invariably calls him after 
his first appearance, went to Hindustan with Babar and 
is frequently mentioned. It is significant of his high 
position and presumably not only by marriage but by 
birth, that on military duty he is always associated 
with men of royal blood, either Timurid or Chaghatai. 
He is sometimes given precedence of them, and is 
never named last in a list of officers. Chin-timur 
Chaghatai, Muhammad Sultan Mirza Bayqra, Sultan 
Mirza Miran-shahi, and ‘Adil Sultan are constantly 
associated with him. It seems clear that he was a 
great noble and ranked amongst the highest. Khafi 
Khan calls him Sayyid Khwaja, and so does Khwand- 
amir. Whether the ‘Khwaja’ indicates anything as 
to his mother’s marriage I am not able to say. 


Khafi Khan (I. 42) has a passage which may relate 
to him: Sultan Mirza wa Mahdi Sultan bini a‘mamra 
(of Babar) ki astr-i-an juma‘ bidand khalds sakht. The 
date of the occurrence is cir. 1511, the year in which 
another Mahdi, 2.e., Uzbeg, was killed by Babar. Mr. 
Erskine appears to think that the two men, named 
here as released, were Hamza and Mahdi Sultans 
Uzbeg, but the sources do not give the style of Mirza 
to either of these chiefs. They appear to have had 
marriage connections with Babar in an earlier genera- 
tion, and a son of Mahdi seems to have been ‘Adil 
Sultan (Mems., 863) who was father of ‘Aqil Sultan 
Uzbeg (Akbar-nama, I. 221). 

A Mahdi Khwaja who was undoubtedly of Babar’s 
family, appears both in the Tdarikh-i-rashidi and in 
Gul-badan Begam’s Humdytin-ndma. He is the son 
of Aiman, and grandson of Sultan Ahmad Khan 
Chaghatai, Babar’s mother’s brother. But his age 
places him out of the question; he was about ten in 
1530, and the hero of Nizamu-d-din’s story stroked 
his beard, and was either a damdd or a yazna. Mahdi 


ee a ee 


301 


Chaghatai, moreover, reached India after Babar’s 
death.} 

The Tabaqat states that Mahdi Khwaja had long 
been connected with Khalifa; the latter was himselfa 
sayyid. 

Nizamu-d-din calls Mahdi a jiiwan and Mr. Erskine 
has accentuated all the faults and characteristics of 
youth in his version of the story. But Gul-badan 
ealls Hindal an uninjurious youth at thirty-three, and 
there seems good ground to read often in juwan the 
notion of vigour and strength rather than exclusively 
of fewness of years. In 1530 Mahdi had served Babar 
eleven known years. | 


Like many other such small problems, that of the 
family connections of Mahdi Khwaja and the other 
men of his name may be solved by some chance 
passage in a less known author, or by a closer con- 
sideration of the personages of the Memoirs. 

Mems., 255, 308, 805-807, 388, 340-842, 344, 845, 849, 352, 

863, 870, 371, 401, 426.? 
Akbar-nima, s.n., ‘Aqil Sultan and Mahdi. 
Khafi Khan, Bib. Ind. ed., s.n.. 


Habibu-s-siyair, Khwand-amir, under date cir, 923H.. 
Cf. Index to this volume, s.x. Mahdi. 





1 The rough estimate of Mahdi Chaghativ’s age is made as follows: 
Aiman was married to Haidar Mirza’s cousin in 923H. (1517). (Tar. 
Rash., HE. and R., 144, 352.) He had five sons by this wife. (1. ¢. 144 
and 401). Of these Ma'‘sid is named as the eldest. The rest are 
Khizr (Gul-badan’s husband) Mahdi, Isan-daulat (Habiba’s husband), 
and another. Khizr is inferentially the second son, but if Mahdi were 
the second, he could hardly have been born before 926H. (1520). This 
would make him about ten in 1530, but he may have been younger 
and the third son, as is indicated by the enumeration of Haidar Mirza. 

* At p. 424 Mr. Erskine has an entry of a Sayyid Mahdi who arrives 
from Gualiar in July, 1529. That this is a mis-reading for Mashhadi 
is shown by collation with other texts than his own. 





INDEX (OTHER THAN OF PLACHS). 


Norr.—This index is full for the pages down to 201. It gives the 
Roman-numbered names only of Appendix A. 

Reference to the Persian imprint is by folio numbering. This is 
reproduced accurately from the MS., in the Persian imprint, and as 
closely as the sentences permit in the translation. 

Words in ‘din, ghain, etc., are classed with their nearest equivalents. 


Abdu-l-chafir, Shaikh, 149 and n.. 

Abdu-L-hai, Mir, 199. 

‘Abdu-l-khaliq, Mulla, 181. 

‘Abdu-l-lah Khan Uz zbeg 191n.. 

Abdu-l-lah, Qazi, 144. 

“Abdu-l- qadir Baddyunit 60, 62, 72, 74, 76, 162n.. 
‘Abdu-r-razzaq, Mirza, 86. 

‘Abdu-l-wahab, see Jujuk. 


Abuw’l-baqa, Mir, 34, 139, 151 and n.. 

Abu’l-fazl 24, 39, 57, 59, 66, 69, 71, 74n., 76, 77, 78 and n., 
83, 129n., 163n., 175n., 178n., 187n.. 

Abu’l-ma ali Termizi 26, 56, 68, 64, 175n., 186n.. 

Abw’n-nasir Muh., see Hindal. 

Abu’l-qasim, see [brahim Mirdn-shahi. 

Abu-sa‘id Mirdn-shahi 26, 45, 97, 118. 


Accession Feast (Humayun’s) 114n., 118 and n.. 


Adam Ghakkar 48, 56, 200. 
Adham Khan kiika 58-68, 177n.. 
Adoption of Hindal 116 and n., 117 and n.. 


Afaq (Apaq), wife of Husain Bayqra, 120, 203. 

Afaq (No. 26.), d. of Sultan Bakht, 204. 

Afghani aghdcha (No. 56.) (Bibi Mubarika) 3, 9, 91 and n., 
103, 122, 181, 189, 143, 189, 204; ? 216 (Bega); 266. 


304 


Afroz-banu (No. 38.) 121, 204. 

dghd, meaning of, 95n., 204. 

Agha Begam (No. 34.) 121, 204. 

Agha Begam Bayqra 205. 

dghdcha, meaning of, 2, 3, 91n.. 
Agha-jan 181. 

Agha kiika (No. 78.) 123, 205. 
Agha-sultan dghdcha (No. 87.) 121, 205. 
Agha-sultan Dughlat 205. 


Ahmad (lldcha Khan) Chaghatai 119. 

Ahmad Durrant 94 n.. 

Ahmad Jami (Zhinda-fil) 59, 145 and n., 169n.. 
Ahmad Mirdn-shahi 89, 90, 118n., 119, 198n.. 
Ahmad, son of Babar, 90. 

Ahmad, the Taster, 108. 


Ai Begam, d. of Mahmad Miran-shahi, 206. 
Aiman Khwaja Chaghatai 31. 

Ais-daulat, see Isan-daulat. 

ajdm, a title, its meaning, 115n.; see Dil-dar. 


Aka Begam, d. of Manstr Bayqra, 206. 

aka and aka-jdnam, titles, see Khan-zada. 

akam, a title, see Maham. 

Akbar (Jalalu-d-din Muhammad) Emperor 2, 26; 37-9; 41; 
46-8; 52, 54; 55-7; 184n., 145, 158, 165 and n.; 166, 
174 and n.; 175 and n.; 179, 180n., 183 and n.; 184, 
190n., 197. 

“‘ Akbar Kaisar,” F. von Noer, trs. A. 8. Beveridge, 94n.. 

Akbar-ndma, see Abi’]-fazl. 


Al-aman, son of Humayun, 14, 112n., 146n.. 
“Alawulu-d-din, see Jalal. - 

Alexander of Macedon 50. 

“Ali Begchik taghat 14. 

“Ali Jaldir 155, 159. 

“Ali Murtaza 105. 

“Ali-shir Nawdi 58. 

“Ali qar-begt 178n.. 

Alika, Mir, 152 and n.. 


305 


Allah-dost, Mir, 168-4. 

Alas Safawi 169. 

Alush (Lish, Tarsh) Beg 153 and n., 159. 
Alush Begam, see Ulus. 

Alwar, son of Babar, 3, 10, 27, 90 and n.; 108. 


‘Ambar ndzir 166, 185. 
Amina-banu, d. of Humayun, 186, 206. 
‘ammu 84n.. 


- Apagq, see Afaq. 


aq (fair), a sobriquet, 118n., 207. 

Aq Begam (No. 38.), d. of Abia- said Mirdn-shahi, 97, 107, 
109, 118, 119, 207. 

Aq Begam, d. of Husain Bayqra, 207. 

Aq Begam, d. of Mahmud Mirdn-shahi, 207. 

Aq Begam, see Saliqa. 

Aq Sultan, see Yasin-daulat. 

“Aqiga (No. 47.), d. of Humayun, 31, 32, 118, 115, 122, 136, 
137n., 138, 143, 146n.. 


Araish Khan 109. 
archery, Persian, 121n.. 


‘asas, night-guard, 7,96andn.. See, too, Muhammad ‘asas 
taghdai. 

Asiatic Quarterly Review, art. Babar’s Diamond; H. Beve- 
ridge, 1738n.. 

“Askari, son of Babar, 2, 15, 16, 25, 34, 85, 88, 39, 40, 42, 
43, 47, 49, 69, 90, 129, 182, 183 and n.; 142n., 143, 
145n., 160, 162; 164-8; 174, 175, 181, 182, 184, 187, 
191, 192, 194. 


Atka Khan, see Shamsu-d-din Ghaznavi. 
atin mama (No. 88.) 121, 208. 


‘Ayisha (No. 9.), d. of Husain Bayqra, 30, 100, 119, 186 
_ -a@nd-n., 208 
‘Ayisha, d. of Kamran 48, 194, 196 and n.; 210 
a (2? No. 11.) Mirdn-shahi, w. of Babar, 8, 89, 119 and 
209. 
‘Ay isha (Mughal) Khanam 194 and n.; 211. 
‘Ayisha, wife of the Prophet Muhammad, o 


20 


306 


Baba dghacha, see Papa. 

Baba Beg Jaldir 135. 

Baba Dost, Mir, 149, 150, 166 (bakhshi) 199. 

Babar Emperor, Firdaus-makdani, 1-28; 57, 83-110; 111, 
119, 127n., 184n.; 186n., 188 and n.; 148n., 147, 
152n., 161, 168n., 174, 178n., 195 and n.; 208. 

Babar-nadma, see Memoirs. 

Babu dgha 212. 


Bachaka khaltfa 30, 186 and n.; 212. 


Badayuni, see ‘Abdu-|-qadir. 

Badi‘u-l-jamal (No. 2.), d. of Abu-said Miran-shahi, 97, 
107, 118, 119. 

Badi‘u-l-jamal, d. of Sa‘id Khan Chaghatdt, 213. 

Badi‘u-z-zaman Bayqra 87, 114n.. 


Bahadur, son of Qaracha 185. 
Bahadur Gujrdati 129, 131, 1382. 
Bahlul Lodi 94. 

Bahlul, Shaikh, 30, 184, 187-40. 
Bahram Safawi 169. 


Bairam (Maryam), d. of Husain Bayqrd, 218, 262. 

Bairam Bahdrlii Khan-i-khdndn 88, 58, 57-60; 68, 65, 69, 
95n., 160, 165, 166, 175, 176. 

Bakhshi-banu, d. of Humayun, 37, 49, 146, 174n., 214. 

Bakhshu (Bakhshur- langa) 147-8. 

Bakht-nisa’, d. of Humayun, 186, 214. 

Bakht- sultan (No. 4.), d. of Abi-sa‘ id Miran-shaht, 97, 118, 
120, 215. 


Bapus 177 and n.; 186 and n.. 


Baqi kiika, see Muhammad. 
Baqi Gudlidri 154. 


Baranduq Beg 87. 
Barbul, s. of Babar, 90-1. 
Barlas Begam (No. 86.) 121.. 


Bayasanghar Chaghatai 85. 
Bayazid Afghani 112, 115. 
Bayazid biydt 38, 45, 56, 59, 62, 64, 74 and n.; 76, 78, 98n.. 


307 


Baz Bahadur Si 60-1. 
Bedka, see Rabi‘a-sultan. 


Bega (first name illegible), d. of Husain Bayqra (No. 79.), — 
123. 

Bega dghd, Bibi, Begi (No. 82.), 123, 193-4; 215. 

Bega Begum, d. of Husain Bayqra, 215. 

Bega Begam and Bibi (? Mubarika) 216. 

Bega Begam and Begi (No. 15.), d. of Ulugh Beg Miran- 
shahi, 119, 217. 

Bega Begam, d. of Mahmud Miran-shahi (No. 22.), 120, 217. 

Bega Begam, Ha i Begam, d. of Yadgar faghdi, wife of 
Humayun (? No. 50.), 14, 30, 57, 59, 75, 112 and n. 
118, 115, 129 and n.; 130, 131, 134n., 136n., 1460. 
179, 185, 190, 191, 197, 221. 

Bega-jan kiika 136. 

Bega Kilan Begam (No. 22.) 119 and n., 220. 

Bega Sultan Begam, d. of Sanjar Marvi, 221. 

Bega Sultan Begam (No. 18.), d. of Khalil Miran-shahi, 119 . 

Begam Sultan 221 | 

Begam Sultan, see Sa‘adat-bakht. 

Begi Sultan aghdcha, w. of Husain Baygqra, 221. 


Beveridge, Henry Mr., 59, 78, 83n., 101n., 120n., 182n., 
155n., 178n., 211n.. 
Bhils 132n.. 


Biban Afghani 112 and n.,; 115. 
Bihbud, a mace-bearer, 156. 
Bilqis, Queen of Sheba, 838n.. 
Bilgis-makdani 88n.. 

Birbahan Raja 136.. 

Birka Termizt 45. 


Blochmann, Professor, 59, 77, 124n., 126n., 128n., 148n., 
Q11n., 212, 292n.. 


Burhdn-i-qatv' 138n.. 
Burns’ ‘ Travels in Bukhara’ 110n.. 
Buw’a Begam, m. of Ibrahim Lodz?, 10, 11, 108, 221. 


Card games 178 and n.. 
Calcutta Review, art. Gul-badan Begam; A.S8.B. 1In., 74n., 78. 


20—2, 


308° 


Chaghatai Khan 1. 

Chakr- ali Kulabi 48, 194n.. 

Chand Bibi, w. of Humayun, 31, 136. 
chaukandi 98 and n.. 


chicha, and meaning of, 107 and n.; 115 and n.; 172n. 
Chilma Beg kiika 49, 149n.. 

Chingiz Khan 1, 97, 87n., 197. 

Chishti shrines 75. 


chili, a sobriquet, 166 and n.. 
Chuli (Juli) Begam, w. of Husain Bayqrda, 222. 
Chipi Bahadur 165n., 168n.. 


Conolly’s Travels 188n.. 
Connemara, Lady 8. G., 121n.. 


Dalhousie, Lord, 121n.. 

Danyal, s. of Akbar, 76. 

Darbar-i-akbavt of Shamsu-l-ulama, Muhammad Husain 
azad 78. 

Daulat-bakht dghdcha 196. 

Daulat-bakht Bibi (No. 85.) 128, 185, 191, 196, 222. 

Daulat-kitta 223. 

Daulat-nigar Chaghatai 228. 


Dil-dar Begam, djam (No. 48.), 2, 8; 9, 10, 34, 47, 90, 103, 
115, 117 and n.;. 122, 129, 181, 189, 140, 148, 150-1; 
161 and n.; 162, 178, 182, 185, 225. 

Dil-shad Begam, 120, 223. 

Diwana Beg 137. 


Dost Khawand madarcht 184 and n.. 
Dosti kika 177. 
Dost munsht 146. 


Dudu Bibi 226. 


Erskine, William, Mr., 6 and n.; 10n., 28, 35, 36, 41, 52, 
77, 78n., 84n., 86n., 95n., 98n., 107n., 110n., 112n., 
114n., 183n., 184n., 1385n., 188n., 140n., 146n., 162n.,. 
178n., 188n., 208, 301n.. 


309 


Fakhr-jahan (No. 1), d. of Abu-said Mirdn-shahi, 19, 97, 
118, 120, 186n., 226. 

Fakhru-n-nisa , anaga and mamd, 101n., 122, 155n., 185 

~ and n. ; 189, 927. aS 

Fakhru-n- nisa‘, d. of Babar, 89 and n.; 227. 

Fakhru-n-nisa (No. 61.), d. of Humayun, 63, 227. 

Faqr- ali Beg 129, 137-8. 

Farrukh-fal, s. of Humayun, 56, 186. 

Faruq., s. of Babar, 10, 21, 90 and n.. 

Fath kika (No. 66.) 122. 

Fatima dghd 228. 

Fatima Bayqra 228. 

Fatima Bibi and anaga 40, 50, 65, 122, 180n., 228. 

Fatima, w. of Husain Arghan, 229, 

Fauq Begam (No. 31.) 121, 229. 

Faza il Beg 180. 


Firdaus-makdni, see Babar. 
Firishta, historian, 98n.. 

Firoza Begam (No. 35.) 121. 
Firoza, w. of Mansur Bayqra, 229. 


Garcin de Tassy 94n.. 


Gauhar-shad Dughlat 229. 

Gauhar-shad (No. 5.) Mirdn-shahi 97, 119, 230. 
Gauhar-shad Turkomdn 229. 

Gawars 182n., 148. 


Ghani, s. of Munim Khan, 63. 


Goldie Father’s ‘First Christian Mission to the Great 
Mughal,’ 75n.. 


Guest-lists of feasts 118 et seq.. 
Guhar, see Gauhar. 


Gul Begam (No. 80.) 121, 231. 

Gul-badan, d. of Babar, passim. 

Gul-barg Barlds (No. 49.) 37, 111 and n.; 122,129 and n. ; 
130n., 181, 159 and n.; 2380. 

Gul-barg, ete., m. of Salima Chaquantant, 231. 


310 


Gul-chihra, d. of Babar (No. 45.), 8, 24, 31, 44, 57, 90, 106, 
111, 115, 122, 148, 178, 200, 2381. 

Gul-i-stan, Sa di, 48. 

Gul-izar, d. of Babar, 90, 290. 

Gul-izar, d. of Kamran, 70, 74, 280. 

Gul-nar dghdcha (No. 57.) 70, 122 and n.; 131, 139, 148, 232. 

Gul-rang (No. 44.), d. of Babar, 3, 24, 31, 90, 106, 111, 115, 
122, 129, 232. 

Gul-rukh, wife of Babar, 2, 3, 27, 90, 147, 177 and n.; 288. 

Gul-rukh, d. of Kamran, 67, 234. 


Gunwar, wife of Humayun, 145 and n ; 235. 


Habiba, d. of Kamran, 31, 177 and n.; 178, 196, 235. 
Habiba Bibi (No. 41.) 121. 

\fabiba-sultan Arghiin (yanga) 107n., 235. 
Habiba-sultan Dughlat 120 (Khanish); 235. 


Haidar Dughlat, historian, 9, 11, 20, 31-3; 88n., 98n., 97n., 
120 and n.; 142n., 148n., 146. 

Haidar Muhammad atka-begi 166. 

Haidar Qasim Kohbur 638. 


Haig, General Malcolm R., 149n. 


Haji Begam, d. of Kamran, 70, 177 and n.; 286. See 
‘Ayisha. 

Hai Begam 236. See Bega Begam. 

Hai Begam 236. See Mah-chichak Arghin. 


Hamida-bantu, Maryam-makdni, m. of Akbar, 84-5; 39, 41, 
57-9; 62, 65, 67, 75-7; 85n., 145 and n.; 149-151; 
154, 157, 158n., 165-6; 169-178; 175, 179, 185, 190, 
191, 197, 287 et seq.. 

Hamida-bant 236. 

Hamilton, G. W., collection B.M. MSS., 78. 


Hanifa Bega (No. 42.) 122. 
Hanna, Colonel (MS.), 59, 101n.. 
Hansard, G. Agar, ‘ Book of Archery,’ 121n.. 


311 


Haram (Khurram) Begam Qibchdy 15, 88, 42, 44-5; 47-8; 
50-1; 56, 63-5; 175n., 177, 198 and n.; 194n., 195 
and n.; 242. 

Hasan- ali tshdq-dgha 166-7. 

Hasan Naqshbandi 186n.. 

Hazara Begam, wife of Kamran, 177 and n.; 242. 


Himu 57, 58. 


Hindal (Abw’n-nasir Muhammad), s. of Babar, 3, 9, 15-6; 
23, 25, 26n., 29, 30, 32-4; 36, 38, 40-1; 48, 51, 77, 90, 
92 and n.; 106 and n.; 110, 116 and n.; 117-8; 121, 
126, 184 and n.; 135, 187, 188 and n.; 139, 140 and n.; 
143, 149, 150, 151 and n.; 152n., 160, 161 and n.; 162, 
168n., 175n., 176, 179, 182-8; 186-7; 192-8; 195, 
196 et seq. and n.. | 

Hindu Beg 122. 


Hughes’ ‘ Dictionary of Islam,’ 72, 105n.. 


Humayun, Emperor, Jannat-dshydni 2, 4-6; 8, 11n., 12-4; 
16-7; 23-5; 28-57; 62, 66, 74, 88, 90-2; 96, 103-201 
passim. 

Humayin-nadma, Bayazid biydt, q.v. 

Humayitn-nama, Gul-badan Begam, 51, 76, 79, 82 (Persian 
titles). 

Humédyiin-ndma, Jauhar, q.v.. 

Huméayin-nadma, Khwand-amir, 117n., 118n.. 


Husain Arghiin, see Shah. 

Husain Bayqra 80, 45, 71, 84 and n.; 86-7; 88 and n.; 
100, 114n., 119, 120 and n.; 1386, 160, 169. 

Husain tukriya 74. 

Husn-nigar Khanam 243. 


Ibrahim Mirdan-shahi, s. of Haram Begam, 38, 44, 47-51; 
56, 64, 175n., 1938-5. 

Ibrahim, s. of Humayun, 186. 

Ibrahim (Abu’l-qasim), s. of Kamran, 177, 194. 

Ibrahim, ishdq-daghda, 165. 

Ibrahim Lodi 6, 10, 94-5; 98, 108 and n.. 


312 


Tlaht, name of a ship, 72. 
Ilminsky’s imprint of Babar’s Memoirs 10, 104n., 105n., 
116n., 120n.. 


‘fsa (Jesus) 104. 

‘Isa Tarkhan Arghin 52, 66. 

Isan-daulat (Ais), g.m. of Babar, 68, 87n., 248 et seq.. 
Isan-daulat, d. of Babar, 90. 

Isan (Ishan)-timur Chaghatai 106 and n.; 155 and n.; 156. 


Isma‘il Shah 90-1. 


Jafar, s. of Muhammad Mahdi, 18, 126. 


Jahan (Jan or Khan)-sultan, ? d. of Humayun 121, 184, 245, 
Jahangir, half-brother of Babar, 9in.. 

Jahangir, Emperor (Salim, q.v.). 

Jahangir Beg Qiachin 133-4. 


Jalal, s. of Shir Khan, 188, 142n.. 
Jalalu-d-din (‘Alawulu-d-din) Mahmud mir sdémdn 50, 168 


and n.. 
Jalalu-d-din Muhammad Akbar, see Akbar. 


Jamal dghd 245. 

Jan-sultan (No. 32.), see Jahan. 

Janaki, Khanaki and Jangi, sobriquets, 85n.. 
Jani Beg Uzbeg 191n.. 

Jannat-dshyadni, see Humayun. 


Jarrett, Col. H. 8.; Atn-i-akbart 188n.. 


Jauhar aftabchi and his Humdyiin-ndma 29, 45-6; 76, 126n., 
138n., 184n., 150n., 154 and n.. 


Jesus, see ‘Isa. 
Ji-ji anaga 61, 142n., 166n.. 


Jujuk Baba (? “Abdu-l-wahab) 168 and n.; 164 
Juki Khan 188. 


313 


Juki kika 177. 
Juli, see Chuli. 
Junaid Barlds 18, 26n., 101n.. 


Kabir Khwaja 115. 
Kabuli Maham (No. 81.) 128. 
Kabult (No. 87.) 123. 


Kamran, s. of Babar, 2, 4-5; 14, 16-7; 28, 27, 29, 81-6; 
38-49; 51, 54, 70, 90-1; 938, 118n., 187-8; 140-2; 
145 and n.; 146-7; 149, 152n., 160-4; 167, 168n., 
172n., 174-8, 180-4; 186-7; 191, 1938-7; 200-1. 


Kanin-i-humayiin, Khwand-amir, 78. 
Karimu-l-lah 105 and n.. 

Kasak, see Kisik. 

Katak, see Qutuq. 

Kawaras, see Gawars. 


Kehr’s MS. of Babar’s Memoirs 10, 19, 104n., 105n.. 


Khadang (Khazang) yaséwal 112, 160 and n.. 

Khadija Begam, w. of Husain Bayqra 246. 

Khadija-sultan, d. of Ahmad Chaghatai, 247. 

Khadija-sultan (No. 6.),d. of Abu-sa‘id Mirdn-shahi 19, 97, 
110, 247, 


Khafi Khan, historian, 93n.. 
Khal-dar anaga 248. 

Khalid Barlas 159 and n.. 
khalifa, a woman-servant, 136n.. 
Khalifa, seé Nizamu-d-din Barlas. 
Khalil Miraén-shahi 119. 


Khan (Jan, Jahan) (No. 82.) 121, 245. 

Khanam, see Muhtarima. 

Khanam dgha Marwarid (No. 75.) 128. 

Khanam dghd (No. 83.) 123. 

Khanam (No. 18.), d. of Aq Begam, 119, 248. 

Khanish dgha Khwarizmi, wife of Humayun, 56, 185-6; 189, 
248. 

Khanish, see Habiba Dughlat. 


314 


Khan Sultan Dughlat 248. 

Khan-zada (No. 16.). d. of Mas‘tid Bayqra 119, 249. 

Khan-zada (@kd-janam), d. of ‘Umar Shaikh, 13, 18, 22, 34, 
37, 38 and n.; 39, 47, 85, 108, 106 and n.; 107 n., 
109 and n.; 117-8; 125-8; 160 and n.; 161, 174, 175 
and n.; 176, 250-1. 

Khan-zada, d. of Mahmud Mirdn-shahi, 251. 

Khan-zada Termizt, wife of Ahmad Mirdn-shahi, 252. 

Khan-zada T'ermizi (a), wife of Mahmud Mirdn-shahi, 252. 

Khan-zada Termizt (b), wife of Mahmud Mirdn-shahi, 252. 

Khan-zada Khanam, wife of Muzaffar Bayqra, 252. 


Khawas Khan 188, 134, 142n., 147 and n.. 
Khazina’u-l-asfiyad 144n.. 


Khirad-afza, a book, 76. 


Khizr Khwaja Chaghatat, husband of Gul-badan, 31-2; 35-6; 
38, 45, 51, 58, 70, 106n., 142n., 182, 185n., 192, 199. 
Khizr Khan Hazara 88, 177-8. 


Khub-nigar, d. of Yunas Chaghatai, 88n., 89, 253. 
Khurasan Khan (Muqim) 129 and n.. 

Khurram, see Haram. 

Khurshid kiikas (No. 55. and 64.) 122, 258. 
Khusrau Shah 85 and n.; 86 and n.. 

Khusrau kiikaltésh 184 and n.; 187. 

khutba 84n.. 


khwdaja, meaning of, 94n.. 
Khwaja Ghazi 144, 156, 158n., 162-3; 164 and n.; 166 


and n.; 171-4. 

Khwaja Kilan, Babar’s friend, 7, 8, 11n., 15, 17, 94, 96, 
146 and n.. 

Khwand-amir, historian, 78, 103n., 117n., 118n., 126n., 
200n.. 


Kichak (Kisak), d. of Husain Bayqrd, 253. 

Kichak (No. 28.), d. of Ala’u-l-mulk J'ermizt, 120, 2538. 
Kichak maham (No. 80.) 123, 254. 

Kichakna Begam (No. 25.) 120. 


Kilan Khan Begam 119, 254. 
Kisik (Kasak) Khwaja 35, 162 and n.; 164, 166. 


Koh-i-niir diamond 14, 105n., 173n.. 


315 


Lad-malik T'urkomdn 254. 
Lal-shad, d. of Ahmad Chaghatdi, 254. 
Lar 151. 


Latif, wife of Ahmad Mirdn-shahi, 255. 
Latif, d. of Abi-said Mirdn-shahi, 85n.. 
Latifa-sultan dghdcha, wife of Husain Bayqrd, 255. 


Le Strange and Haggard, Messrs., 126n.. 
Lyall, C. J., Sir, 147n.. . 


Ma asir-i-rahimi 95n.. 
Madar, a saint, 184 and n.. 


Mah Begam, pbchia, wife of Kamran 177 and n.; 194n., 
258. 


Maham anaga 47, 58-61; 62 and n.; 101n., 155n., 166n., 
177n., 188n.. 

Maham Begam (dkam), wife of Babar, 2-6; 8-10; 20-1; 23, 
27-9; 88n., 89, 90, 92n., 98 and n.; 97, 100-4; 111-5; 
116 and n.; 117-8; 145n., 255. 

Maham Begam (No. 14.) 119 and n.. 

Maham Kabulz 123. 

Maham, d. of Ahmad Chaghatat, 258. 

Maham’s nanacha 101 and n.; 107, 122. 


Mah-chachag khalifa 258. 

Mah-chichak Arghiin, wife of Qasim kikaltash, 36-7; 52, 
66, 86n., 259. 

Mah-chichak Arghiin, wife of Kamran, 49, 66, 70, 149 
and n., 259. 

Mah- chiichak, wife of Humayun, 40, 56, 62, 63, 180n., 
185-6 ; 189, 190-1; 197, 290. 


Mahdi Chaghatat 31-2; 182 and n.. 

Mahdi, husband of Khdn-zada Begam, see Muhammad. 
Mahdi, father of ‘Adil Sultan Uzbeg, 300. 

Mahdi Mir Shirazz, author of the Tazkiratu-l-khwatin, 76. 


Mah-liga kiika (No. 68.) 128. 


Mahmud, King of Bengal, 133 and n.. 
Mahmud Bhakkart 58n., 54, 66, 148 and n.; 151. 


316 


Mahmud Chaghatat 85 and n.; 97, 119. 
Mahmud Mirdn-shahi 45, 88n., 120n.. 
Mahmud sarbdn-bashi 168, 164. 


Makhdazinu-l-adwiya 188n.. 


Makhduma.-dghdé 122, 260. 

Makhduma Begam, wife of ‘Umar Shaikh, 260. 
Makhduma-jahan 261. 

Makhdtma, wife of Sa‘id Khan Chaghatai, 261. 
Makhduma, d. of Shir ‘Ali Chaghatat, 261. 
Makhduma-sultan, d. of Mahmud Mirdn-shahi, 261. 


makhjfi, nom de plume, 262. 


Mal-deo Raja 153 and n.; 154-6. 
Malika-jahan 262. 


mamé 101 and n.. 
Mansur Yisufzai 91. 
Marriage feast of Hindal 117-8; 121-3, 126 et seq.. 


Mary, the Virgin, 104. 
Maryam, see Bairam. 
Maryam-makani, see Hamida-banu. 


Mas ud, s. of Aiman Chaghatat, 31-2. 

Mas‘ud Mirdn-shahi 85, 119. | 

Ma‘sum Mir, historian, 37. 

Ma‘suma-sultan, d. of Ahmad Mirdn-shahi, 8, 90, 107, 262. 

Ma‘suma-sultan (No. 48.), d. of Babar, 80, 90-1; 111, 114n., 
115 and n.; 122, 129, 130, 262. 


Maywa-jan, wife of Humayun, 112-3; 181. 

Memoirs of Babar (all texts) 2, 4, 6 and n.; 10n., iin., 13; 
14, 17, 18n.,.19n., 20, 21 and n.; 22, 25 and n.; 45, 
68n., 88 and n., 84n., 85n., 938n., 103 and n., 104n., 
107n., 116n., 117n., 147n,-234n., 251. 

Mihr-angez (No. 29.), d. of Muzaffar Husain Bayqra, 120, 
263 


Mihr-bana Rhanam 968: 


317 


Mihr-banu (or liq), d. of “Umar Shaikh, 18n., 120. 
Mibr-jahan or jan, d. of Babar, 90, 91, 264. 
Mihr-liq, see Mihr-banu. 

Mihr-nigar, d. of Yunas Chaghatdai, 264. 


Mingli-bi aghdcha, wife of Husain Bayqra, 265. 
Ming-lik kiikaltash 266. 


Mirak Beg 135. 

Mirdan-shah, s. of Timur, 1. 

Mir Bardi 106. 

Mir Khurd 106 and n.. 

mir saman, a title, 50n.. 

Mirza Haji 182. 

Mirza Khan, see Wais. 

Mir Zaycha (astrologer) 115 and n.. 


Muazzam Khwaja 65, 66, 149 and n.; 157, 165-6; 172-8; 
180n., 181 and n.; 185 and n.. 

Mubarika, see Afghani aghdacha. 

Mubariz Khan 186. 

Mughal Beg 135. 

Mughal Khanam, see ‘Ayisha. 


Muhammad, the Prophet, 9. 

Muhammad ‘Ali ‘asas faghdi 28, 39, 40, 96n., 110 and n., 
181 and n.. 

Muhammad akhta-begi 153. 

Muhammad Baqi kiika 59, 71, 177 and n.. 

Muhammad Baqi T'arkhdn 66-7. 

Muhammad Bayqré 19, 114 and n.; 134 and n., 187. 

Muhammad Farghdart (Parghali) 104, 125. 

Muhammad gird-baz 154 and n.. 

Muhammad Hakim, s. of Humayun, 50, 56, 62-5; 186. 

Muhammad Husain Dughlat 88 and n., 89. 

Muhammad kika, Haji, 41, 44, 46,114 andn.; 122 (Muham-. 
madi); i166, 168 and n.; 195n.. 

Muhammad Mahdi, husband of Khan-zada Begam, 13, 18, 
25 and n.; 26 and n.; 126 and n.; 128 and n.; 160n., 
175n., Appendix B. 298 et seq.. 

Muhammad qaradwal 46. 

Muhammad Muqim Arghiin 36, .86. 

Muhammad Muqim Hardwi 24, 158n., ae8. 

Muhammad naza-baz 172 n.. 

Muhammad Sayyid 201. 


318 


Muhammad Shaibdni, see Shahi. 

Muhammad Sharif (astrologer) 98 and n.; 100n.. 
Muhammad Uzbeg 60, 191 and n., 192. 
Muhammad Wali 155, 160. 

Muhammad-yar, grandson of Gul-badan 76. 
Muhammad-zaman Bayqrd 19, 114 and n.; 115n.. 


Muhibb- ali Barlds 37, 66, 67. 
Muhibb-sultan, d. of Husain Bdayqrd, 267. 
Muhibb-sultan (No. 20.), d. of Ahmad Chaghatat 97, 119, 267. 


Muhtarima (or Muhtarima) Khanam Chaghatdi 51, 64-5; 
175, 194, 267. 
Mujahid Barlas 67. 


Munauwar-sultan, d. of Husain, Bayqrd, 268. 
Munim Khan 42, 56, 60-4, 70, 155 and n.; 156, 159, 180. 


Murad, s. of Akbar, 71, 75-6. 
Murad, Sultan of Rum, 74. 


Musahib Khan 186. 
Mu’yid Beg Barlds 122, 135n., 146 and n.. 
Muzaffar T’urkomdn 144, 159. 


Mystic Feast (tz ¢ilism) 114n., 118 and n.; 119-121. 


Nadim kika, husband of Maham anaga, 59, 60n., 101n., 122, 
155 and n.; 156, 160, 166, 1838n., 185n.. 

Nadir Shah’s thumb-ring 121n.. 

Nahid Begam (No. 54.) 37, 66-7; 86, 122, 268. 

Nai (Wali)-khtb Bayqré 114 and n.. 

nanacha of Maham 101 and n.; 107, 122. 

Nar-gul dghdcha (No. 58.) 122, 139, 148, 269. 

Nar-sultan dgha (No. 77.) 128, 269. 

Nasib dgha (No. 86.) 128. 

Nasir, half-brother of Babar, 91 and n.. 

Naukar 115 and n.; 181 and n.. 


Neka Bibi (No. 74.) 123. 


Niazi Khwaja 166. 
Nigar dgha (No. 76.) 128, 269. 





319 


Nizam, water-carrier, 140. 
Nizamu-d-din Ahmad, historian, 24-5; 66-7; 153n., 166n., 
179n., 185n., 195n., 196n.. 
Nizamu-d- din-ali Bar las Khalifa 18, 28 et seq.; 26n., 2, 
37, 66, 101 and n.; 102. —~ 
Nizhad- sultan, d. of Husain Bayqra, 269. 


Noer, Friedrich von., Kaisar Akbar, 94n.. 


Nur Beg 138. 
Nuru-d-din Muhammad Chaqdnidni 30, 184 and n. (Sayyid 
Amir); 185 and n.; 187. 


Papa (Baba) dghdcha 269. 

Parsad Rana 157 and n., 158. 

Pasha Begam Biharli 270. 

Pavet de Courteille’s trs. of Babar’s Memoirs 104n., 105n., 
107n., 116n., 120n.. 

Payanda-muhammad Mir 155, 160. 

Payanda-sultan, d. of Abi-said Mirdn-shahi, 84n., 119 (here 
called Muhammad also). 


Pilgrimage rites 72 et seq.. 


Qadir Qalmaq 271. 
Qambar Beg 182. 


Qarda-giz, d. of Husain Bayqra, 271. 

QWard-giiz, see Makhduma, w. of ‘Umar Shaikh. 

QWard-qiz, see Rabi‘a, d. of Ahmad Miran-shahi. 

Qaracha Khan 48, 151n., 160, 180n., 185, 186n., 196 and n.. 


Qasim, architect, 97. 

Qasim, kikaltdsh, 36-7, 66. 

Qasim Quchin 87 and n., 88, 92 and n.. 

Qasim Husain Uzbeg 19, 80, 100 and n.; 182 and n.; 135. 


Quatremére’s Notices et Hxtraits 102, 127n.. 
Quch Beg 183n.. 


320 


Quli Beg chili 166, 188, 189. 

Quli Sultan sarban-bashi 168. 

Qulij Khan Andydanit 71-2. 

Qushka Baba 168n.. 

Qittiq (Katak) dghdcha 271. 

Qut-liq (Qutlug), d. of Mahmud Chaghatat 272. 
Qut-liq-nigar, mother of Babar, 31, 85n., 86 and n.; 272. 


Rabi‘a-sultan (Bedka), sister of Husain Bayqrd, 215, 272. 
Rabi‘a-sultan (Qard-giz), d. of Ahmad Mirdn-shahi, 274. 
Rabi‘a-sultan (No. 67.) kika of Humayun 122. 


Rajab-sultan, d. of Mahmud Mirdn-shahi, 274. 
Rana, see Maldeo, Parsad and Sanga. 
Rani of Gualiar 14. 


Raushan kaka 122, 154n., 155-6; 160, 166, 172-3. 
Raushang tishakchi 158. 
Raverty’s ‘Afghan Dictionary’ 110n.. 


Rieu, Dr., 77-9. 
riwaj, a plant, 48, 188 and n., 189, 190. 


Roebuck’s Persian Proverbs 108n.. 

Rosen, Dr. Fritz, 127n.. 

Royal Asiatic Society’s Journal, art. Notes on Turki texts of 
the Babar-nama, 6, 104n.. 


Rudolf Acquaviva, Father, 71, 75. 
Ruhri (Lihri) 148n., 151n., 1538n.. 
Kumi Khan of Aleppo 71. 
Rup-mati 60-1. 


Rugaiya, d. of Hindal, 51, 76, 274. 
Ruqaiya-sultan, d. of ‘Umar Shaikh, 18n., 275. 


Sa‘idat-bakht, d. of Husain Bayqra, 275. 
Sa‘ ddat-sultan dghd (No. 84.) 123. 
Sa‘adat-yar, s. of Gul-badan, 36, 70, 197, 199. 


Safiya Bibi 70. 


321 


Sahib-daulat Dughlat 275. 

Sdahib-qirdn, see Timur. 

Sakina (No. 40.) 121. 

Sakina-banu, d. of Humayun, 186, 275. 


Salha-sultan, see Salima Chaganiant. 

Salim, s. of Akbar, 71, 75-6; 105n.. 

Salim Shah, s. of Shir Khan, 48, 200. 

Salima, d. of Khizr Chaghataz, 70, 280. 

Salima Bega (No. 738.) 128. 

Salima-sultan Chaqdnidni (? No. 39.) 57,58 and n.; 69, 76, 
121, 185n., 276-9 ; 281. 

Salimi, name of a ship, 71. 

Saliqa-sultan (Aq Begam), d. of Ahmad Mur wran-shaht, 118n., 
280. 

Sam Mirza Safawi 169. 

Samandar Mir 148. 

Sambal, water-carrier, 140. 

Sambal 166. 

Samicha, a tribe, 158. 

Samiha Barlds 67, 280. 

Sanga Rana of Udaipur 12, 98 and n.; 100. 

sara-pdarda, invention of, 95n., 170. 

Sarv-qad (Sarvi-sahi) 70, 189, 282. 


Shad (No. 28.), d. of Haidar Baygrad, 120 and n.; 282. 
Shad Bibi, wife of Humayun, 137. 
Shaham aigha 70, 189, 282. 
Shaham Jaldair 158, 159. 
Shah Beg Arghin 98n.. 
Shah Begam Badakhshi 288-4. 
Shah Begam T'ermizt (No. 24.) 120, 284. 
Shah Khanam (No. 17.) 119, 285. 
Shah Husain Arghiin and Samandar 36-7; 40, 52, 66, 93n., 
? 123, 151n., 148 and n.; 152-3; 157-60; 162-4; 168n., 
196 and n.. 
Shahi Beg Khan (Muhammad Shaibdni) 87, 84 and n.; 85 
and n.; 90 and n.. 
Shah Mirza Bayqrad 115, 134 and n.. 
Shahr-banu, d. of Abu-sa id Mirdn-shahi, 45, 84n., 285. 
‘Shahr-banu (No. 7.), d. of ‘Umar Shaikh Mir an- -shahi, 18, 
88n., 101n., 119, 285. 
‘Shah- rukh, s. of Babar, 90. 
Shah-rukh, s. of Ibrahim Mirdn-shahi, 65. 
21 


322 


Shah-sultan, m. of ‘Umar Shaikh, 286. 

Shah-zada Safawi 169 and n.; 170-1; 286. 

Shah-zada, d. of Sulaiman and Haram, 50, 287. 
Shaibani, see Shahi Beg. 

Shamsu-d-din Muhammad atka 61-2; 142., 154, 166n.. 
Shamsu-l-ulama Muhammad Husain d@zdd, author, 78. 
Sharifu-n-nisa kika (No. 65.) 122. 

Shaw, Robert, 94n., 101n., 107n.. 


Sheba, Queen of (Bilqis) 88n.. 


Shihabu-d-din Ahmad Nishapii7 58. 

Shir-afkan 162 and n.. 

Shirak, a courier, 21. 

Shir-ali 182. 

Shiroya 183. 

Shir Shah (Khan) 14, 29, 80-1; 838, 54, 188-7; 140-1; 
144-6; 154, 168n., 200. 


Sidi-‘ali Reis 52-3 ; 56, 66, 148n.. 
Sikandar Lodi 57-8; 94. 


Slaves 75, 128 and n., 129. 


South Kensington Museum 100n., 114n., 124n., 128n., 
169n., 1938n.. 


Stewart’s trs. of Jauhar’s Humdyiin-ndma 188n., 140n., 174. 
Steingass’ Persian Dictionary 95n., 101n., 127n., 128n., 
238n.. 


Subhan Quli 150-1. 

Sudma (Sodha), a tribe, 158. 

Sulaiman Sultan of Rum 52. 

Sulaiman Mirdn-shahi 18, 24, 88, 42, 44, 47-8; 51, 56-7; 
68-5; 92, 175n., 180 and n.; 181, 186-7; 191, 1938-5. 

Sultan Khwaja, mir haj, 69, 72. 

Sultan-nigar, d. of Yunas Chaghatdi, 88n., 92n., 290. 

Sultanam, wife of “Askari, 47, 69, 166. 

Sultanam, wife of Hindal, 26n., 38, 126, 148n.. 

Sultanam (No. 52.), wife of Khalifa, 87 and n.; 101 and n.; 
102, 122, 159 and n.; 290. 

Sultanam, d. of Husain Baygqrda, 287-8. 

Sultani and Sultanam (No. 12.), d. of Ahmad Miran-shahi, 
119 and n.; 289. 

Surkh Mulla 154. 


323 


Tabaqat-i-akbari 24, 58, 60, 188n.. 
taghdi 85n., 2338n.. 

Tahir aftabchi 108. 

Tahmasp Shah 37, 70, 168-71; 173-4. 


Taju-d-din Mulla 159. 

Tambol (Ahmad) 195n.. 

Tardi Muhammad Mir 129, 154 and n.; 156-60; 165, 185. 
Tartkh-i-Humdyiin, see Bayazid biydt. 

Tartkh-i-rashidi, text and trs. KE. & R., 6, 20, 128n.. 
Tarkhan Begam 292. 

Tarkhan Begam and Begi 44, 193 and n.; 292. 

Tarsh, see Alush. 

Tarsun-sultan, see Yun. 


Tazkiratu-l-khwatin 76. 


thumb-ring (zih-gi) 120 and n.; 121n.. 

Timur (Sahib-qirdni) 1, 57, 84 and n.; 97. 
tipiichadg (horse) 101 and n.. 

titles (Persian) of Gul-badan’s Humdyiin-nadma 82. 


Tukhta-bugha Chaghatai 106 and n., 115. 

tiigiz, a king’s gift, 101n.. 

tira, Rules of Chingiz Khan, 87 and n.; 187 and n.; 197. 
tii-khdna, meaning of, 103 and n.. 

Turki dynasty of India 2. 

Turki texts of Babar’s Memoirs 6n., 104n.. 
Tizuk-i-babart, see Memoirs. 

Tizik-i-jahdngit 188n.. 


‘Ubaidu-l-lah Uzbeg 91 and n.. 

Ulugh Beg Kabuli 86 and n.; 118 and n.; 119. 
Ulugh Begam (No. 10.) 119, 293. 

Ulugh Mirza Bayqra 115, 134 and n.. 

Ulus (Autsh, Alush) igha (2? No. 58.) 122, 206, 293. 
‘Umar Shaikh Mziran-shaht 18 and ne 

Umid Andijani, w. of ‘Umar Shaikh, 298. 
Umm-kulsum, g.d. of Gul-badan, 70, 298. 
Uzitin-sultan Chaghatat 294. 


21—2 


824 


Vambéry’s Sidi- ali Reis, ete., 52n., 58n., 101n., 107n., 128n.. 
Vazir of Lonkuradn; Le Strange and Haggard 126n.. 


Wais Sultan, Mirza Khan, 88 and n.; 89, 92 and n.. 
Wais Qibchag Kulabi 15, 194n.. 
waliyu-n-ni matan 35, 95 and n.; 115 and n.; 125, 181. 


Yadgar (No. 8.), d. of ‘Umar Shaikh, 18, 119, 121, 294. 

Yadgar faghat 114, 155 and n.; 156, 160. 

Yadgar-nasir Mirdn-shahi 19, 38, 38-9; 182 and n.; 183 
and n.; 187, 148, 149n., 151 and n.; 152 and n.; 158 
and n.; 175n., 176, 179, 181. : 

Yahya Khwaja, mir haj, 69, 74. 

yangd, meaning of, 107n.. 

Ya qub gir-begi 166, — 

yasdwal, meaning of, 112n.. 

Yasin-daulat (Aq Sultan) Chaghatat 31, 45, 118n., 142n., 
177n., 178, 196. 

yaena, meaning of, 126, 128n.. 


Yun (Tarsun)-sultan, wife of ‘Umar Shaikh, 294. 
Yunas Khan Chaghatai 31, 68. 
Yusuf Shaikh chili 166. 


Zahid Beg 40, 134n., 187, 180 and n.. 

Zahru-d-din Muhammad, see Babar. 

Zainab-sultan, d. of Mahmud Mirdn-shahi, 8, 295. 

Zainab-sultan (No. 19), d. of Mahmud Chaghatai, 97, 119, 
295. 

Zainab-sultan, mother of Ulugh Begam, 119, 295. 

Zainab-sultan Begam 107n., 296. 

Zarif, a reciter, 189. 

zhinda -fil. see Ahmad Jami. 

zth-gir (thumb-ring) 120 and n.; 121n.. 


Zobaida aghacha, wife of Husain Bayqra, 296. 
Zuhra, wife of Khwaja Mu azzam, 40, 65, 66, 180n.. 


Zuhra Begi Uzbeg, wife of Mahmud Mirdan-shahi, 297. 
Zu’l-nun Arghin 86-7. 


INDEX OF PLACES. 


Aden 74, 75. 

Afghanistan I. 

Agra 3, 15, 19; 21-3; 26-8; 30-2; 35, 40 ; 69-71; 74; 
96-8 ; 100, 102, 103, 112: 115-7 ; 138 ; 135-6; 138, 
141-2. 

Ahmadabad 71, 132, 133. 

Ajmir 75. 

Alwar 38, 188, 140, 142, 148n., 154. 

Andar-ab 47, 162, 181, 194. 

Andijan 84. 

Arabia 7, 72, 74. 

Arail 135 and n.. 

Ardabil 169n. ; its Holy Carpet 169n.. 

Argand-ab 175n.. 

Arrah 21. 


Baba Dashti 177 and n.; 188. 

Baba Haji 168 and n.. 

Badakhshan 1, 5,14-5; 28-4; 27, 33, 39, 41, 48, 45, 47, 49, 
50, 57, 63-5; 85, 91-2; 93n., 147, 162, 168n., 176n., 
180n., 185, 186, 188, 195. 

Badpaj 196n.. 


Bagh-i-ayima 158. 

Bagh-i-ardm 27, 110n.. 

Baghcha 101. 

Bagh-i-chahar-diwar 65. 
Bagh-i-dil-kusha 188. 
Bagh-i-diwan-khana, 8, 95, 96, 179. 
Bagh-t-Dost-munshi 146. 
Bagh-i-gul-afshan 188 and n.. 
Bagh-i-guzar-gah 177 and n.. 


326 


Bagh-i-khilwat 287. 

Bagh-i-Khwaja Ghazi 144. 
Bagh-i-nau-rozt 86, 177. 
Bagh-i-orta 186 and n.. 
Bagh-i-qara (Qara-Bagh) 196. 
Bagh-i-safa 21. 

Bagh-i-wafa 4. 

Bagh-i-zar-afshan 108, 108, 129, 181. 
Bagh (Char) of Ruhri 148n. 
Bahruch 132. 

Bajaur 1, 9, 90n:, 91 and n.; 92-3. 
Bala-i-hisar 178, 180, 184. 

Balkh 48, 44, 188, 191, 194. 
Bangash 86. 

Baroda 182. 

Bayana 110, 114, 129. 

Benares 133. 

Bengal 29, 40. 

Bhakkar 147-8; 151-3; 157-8; 160, 162, 178-81; 196. 
Bhira 90-8; 200. 

Biah River 338. 

Bibi Mah-rui 89. 

Bibi Haj-taj 144 and n.. 

Bihzadi 191. 

Bikanir 154. 

Bolan Pass 165n.. 

Bukhara 21n., 110n., 192n.. 
But-khak 20. 


Champanir 181, 182 and n.. 

Chanab 21, 338. 

Chanada (Chunar) 112 and n.; 118, 182, 135. 

Charikaran 195n., 196. 

Chausa 14, 29, 80-2; 87, 114n., 185n., 186, 140, 142n., 179, 
188n.. 

Colgong (Kohlganu) 134. 


Damascus 49. 

Daman-i-koh, see Koh-daman. 
Darbila 149n.. 

Dholpur 22, 98, 102, 104, 116. 
Dih-i-afghanan 183. 
Dih-i-ya‘qub 8, 98, 188n.. 


327 


Dihli 13, 26, 28, 58-5; 57-9; 74, 78-9; 104, 106, 117, 
137-8 ; 145n.. 
Dilawar (Dirawal) 158. 


Dinpana 117 and n.. ———_—— 


Dipalpur 93. 
Etawa 18. 


Farghana 1, 26, 84, 86n.. 
Farza 44, 191. 
Fathpur-sikri 12, 22, 27, 32, 67, 70, 71, 75, 98n., 100 and n.. 


Ganges 135, 141-2. 

Gardens, see Bagh. 

Garhi 183, 134. 

Garm-sir 168 and n.. 

Gaur-bangala 30, 112, 133, 184, 138. 
Ghazipur 21. 

Ghazni and Ghaznin 23, 39, 40, 160, 162, cous 180. 
Ghirband 63-4; 88. 

Goa, 75. 

Goganda 71. 

Gualiar 66, 115-7. 

Gujrat 29, 67, 129, 181, 182, 148, 160. 
Gul-bihar 41. 

Guzar-gah 177 and n.. 


Haj-kan 159, 160. 

Hajiptr-Patna 135. 

Haj-taj Bibi 144 and n.. 

Halmand 165, 169, 175n.. 

Harat 88n., 134n., 169n.. 

Hill of the Seven Brothers 179. 

Himar (Khimar) Pass 177 and n.; 196. 

Hind, see Hindustan. 

Hindi-kush 27. 

Hindustan (Hind and India) 2, 4, 6-8; 10, 12, 16-7; 19, 
20, 28-4; 26-8; 31, 49; 51-4; 56, 58, 68, 67-9; 75, 
90n., 91-5; 97, 100, 109, 111, 115, 144, 170. 

Hisar-firoza 6. 

Hyderabad 149n.. 





328 


Idar 72. 

India, see Hindustan. 

Indus (Nil-ab) 8, 18, 21, 64, 147n., 149n.. 

“Iraq (Persia) 7, 35, 39. 48, 57, 72, 169, 174, 176. 
Ishkamish 187 n.. 

Istalif 44, 191. 


Jagdalik 20. 

Jaj-kan, see Haj-kan. 
Jalalabad 20, 51-2; 68, 191, 199 and n.. 
Jalindhar 57. 

Jam 169n.. 

Jamna 136. 

Jannatabad 134 and n.. 
Jaunpur 135. 

Jehlam 338-5. 

Jharkand (Parkanda) 133. 
Jisalmir 1538. 

Jodhpur 153n., 154. 

Jin 158-9. 


Kabul, passim. 

Kalinjar 105. 

Kalpi 136. 

Kanauj 29, 32, 137, 141, 142n., 179. 
Kanmbayat (Cambay) 1382. 

Karra 136. 

_ Kashghar 81, 65, 85. 

Kashmir 38, 146. 

Khaibar Pass 21, 56. 

Khanwa 12, 75, 98n.. 

Khimar, see Himar. 

Khishm 40, 180 and n.; 187 and n.. 
Khizr Khwaja 185n.. 

Khost 3, 90, 98n., 98n., 162, 194. 
Khurasan 8, 85-8; 100, 168 and n.; 169, 170, 174, 176. 
Khush-ab 34, 200. 
Khutlan 168n.. 

Kilanur 55. 

Koh-daman 48, 189, 190. 
Kohl-ganu, see Colgong. 
Kul-jalali 98, 100. 
Kul-malik 91 and n.. 


329 


Kulab 42-4; 186, 198, 194 and n.. 
Kunduz 1, 85, 186, 192. 


Laghman and Lamghanat 70, 162, 189, 191, 196. 

Lahor 28-9; 31-3; 52-5; 57-8; 65, 93, 106, 141-2 ;. 144, — 
146, 158, 187. 

Lakhnau (Lucknow) 78, 140-1. 

Lar 151. 


Makka 387n., 41, 49, 52, 69, 78, 149n., 159, 172n., 196. 
Malwa 60. 

Mandrud 196n.. 

Mandsur 181. 

Mandu 98. 

Mankot 57. 

Marwar 158n.. 

Mastan Bridge 183. 

Mathura (Muttra) 104. 
Mawara’u-n-nahr (Transoxiana), 84, 91. 
Meani 149n.. 

Merv 88, 90n.. 

Milwat 5. | 

Minar Hill 88, 182. 

Multan 15, 34, 147. 

Mungir 135. 

Murgh-ab 88n.. 


Nagor 154. 

Naugram 101 and n.; 108. 
Nil-ab, see Indus. - 

Nuasi 1638 and n.. 


Oude 79, 115, 185. 
Oxus 23, 26, 27. 


Pahlidi 158. 

Panipat 6, 15, 57, 94 and n.; 179n.. 
Panj-ab 29, 33, 34. 

Pat (Patr) 149n., 151. 

Patan 1382. 

Patna 135. 


330 


Persia, see ‘Iraq. 
Peshawar 52, 55-6. 
Pind-dadan Khan 21. 


Qabal-hak 175 and n.. 

Qandahar 1, 3, 4, 35-9 ; 62, 86, 98, 149, 151 and n.; 160-3, 
165, 167, 168n., 174-6, 179, 186, 196. 

Qara-bagh 196. 

Qibchaq Defile 45, 48, 194-5; 201. 

(Jila‘-i-zafar (Fort Victory) 64, 180 and n.; 181, 186, 193. 

Qilat 93. 

Quetta, see Shal. 


Rali 165. 
Rapri 98. 
Ravi 88, 144. 
Rohtas 201. 


Samandar (Sind) 148 and n.. 
Samargand 21, 26, 31, 84 and n.; 87, 91, 136n.. 
Sambhal 24, 98. 

Sarangpur 60-1. 

Sehwan 149n., 151-2. 
Sewaliks 57. 

Shahabad 6. 

Shahdan 180n.. 

Shal-mastan (Quetta) 36, 88-9; 47, 165 and n.. 
Shir-mandel 54. 

Sialkut 98, 146. 

Sikundra 22. 

Sikri, see Fathpur. 

Sind 26n., 34-7; 39, 40, 162. 
Sirhind 98, 144. 

Sitalmir 153. 

Siwi (Sibi) 1638-4. 

Siwistan 149n.. 

Suez Canal 74. 

Surat 52, 71-2; 74. 

Swat 1, 9. 


Taj-mahall 22, 110n.. 


351 


_ Taliqan 41, 56, 186, 194. 
Tangayha (Mountain Passes) 162 and n.; 196. 
Tatta 66, 152 and n., 158, 178. 
Teria-garhi (Tilia Gulley) 138n.. 
? Tipa 177. 
Tiri 175n.. 


“Umarkot 35, 155, 157-8. 
‘Uqabain (Hill of the Two Eagles) 182-4. 
Ushtur-gram 48, 50. 


Yak Langa 93 and n.. 





\, Jlse Vpn OF Gey OF GH ole ee dy _G obll 45 oy 
as 4 dye Sle 5 Jel, Ob doi Vi poe cm 5 slice 1, 23S 
star exe p24 Slub She Sorlé Sle No 14 oye 5 25) 
tls Skea ole owe \nSoog Sls (82d) lie, 4 ob 
od ph — eee aby ool Kyte yp LK rat oP Mu Sle 
Loe OF de Glial 4 ob azar S pat yet ken) Spam 
lye 2 dish o,2>.5 * OSs jo Eb. Ses, SHs34, 
hor en ciel shat op) aS § soy 
emi tgs, d— ia\ § 105, 35 pb AP D595 pk 
gp eke Ts ways ide oN ak K cael A ys 
Heh Sp Akg sagt a ble 2 Un el ony? able P Gtals, 
Be alte Nos Ont ar oll Val shes 5 ung jl ae 
eeaage pot Do dat sk 4 O55) ya she Ses, 

peiae 92 8 SSS at te ttn, Sy, lim, eles yo 
eS wy dy esl > xT Ju bole Sipe 

“ose Se jl te oliol os pa> 


END OF THE MS. 





* This line is quoted by Daulat Shah. Cf. Mr. E.G. Browne’s ed. 

p. 537. 
** The folio which follows in the MS. (83a and 83b) has been con- 
jecturally placed after 73b. 


ot Se ond» # ADS Es led» BS dad dew Sli Sol, 
Sh AS eli US aes su chiel £3, K tidy 3, oe 13 
AAS Sesto n Sle hel dew £9 0S 

a j\ eas tet Slee yw ays db ol Va \5 we (Sr hee 3h 
Ah ssh ob Gas, yl, V5 ahs JS 52 & ¢32i Lo 3S 


s a (s1b) oN. DERI ns aly 2S JR jan 5p 
Ra Sper ole by $5 2S iS, aot LMS yng oto * 


FS la dh ae She ater Skt, lb 
4299 GY gh ROLE DE jw old Ale Ua dy ol ae 
fiw Jed eS 09% ue 2 MS oe UM? Ur? 9 ole 
‘Sib aiS 24 50 \\ pits pee oe Vow lye yo lt . 
Sly xb Ny ppe AS Gl 4 US Jae lw og sole 
oh eT ue keel we OL p> 2S 29 bi ge 
Lae ty 2% ISS p opty tet ole al HES, 
x SLs lal % dtsli eos Yi he oe) <2 F sols \3 Sp 
\ies oS fo slon Wir pr Se & LS alee 
ry ee cle (82a) 50 Soy a3, ia ope Ay SG cyl pe er 
xD) 9\ 5) alto Spd ht 2243) 33 > Say des sa iS 
wo sie 9 9 PP 92 olla y ble a Yl cls 
ghyosutls els Qh jx cao j) Sed 25 Bley 
SS; altol jo S Sisk, oltsk wypa> A Oe 5s ule 
glo A; sal ge pol, be S\ x 32h te wl, ev 
MOV ole ols AS wel, J salt sls S1, 48 
Oy PEs chee) She jw She? et 59 hw jl S| 


eaten qo Wien co eyes 
id ws ake, a 

— fe 25 2 vig 44 cle % g° I leo cl le > Ul or 

Show gle caption Giydo y euts yo Sta ye S Use 
ges ayal \5 ye BIeeS,> yo artlo, | Liye ee? Xe jes xoS 
Jag Ps, J3\as o3\9 92 > war cig lus alge halt: Cad: 
see § ceed pam Ss nl STV po 5 £35 £5. sw 9 
* dal jo 4 

ode is) J\aea Vy Sssb, wah oli, pam UA 
FAS po € eee Wye § sitet oul disk ae x ail 
pe TK Sends aaa Val Ss pa> Fh 9 comes IS cy htsl a5 S aS 
* Aid 96 ales , Jiiw\ 9 32S lie \>,5 S oe ry Js\ Onogd 

Vole ole pad cepdm oy Se eels 2d Sle wloe 
seth lS ill cry slige jo Ly Slum lj S sioged Orde 
(sla) cdyy of eR. Core oad y ol yi 3S Le de oe 
6S iolss 3 wT arle ax widget Me as wae Vj Gh. 
Mee 6s Sl “a>. ul are PF) Noe Jo 28 srk ne 
WK Seed De pe) 5S Koz a SN J\>.s £u lex } VE 
eeeslaS Ll plug 50 ia 2) 5 Soles Seppe 

a si IK Pt J8n SK Sb ey »\ 8 Vee 
ys ee We ee am KAS E J5b ae ANA. cpl 
729 09.9 4 ke Lo Fle SELES oLalye lee os! grey 


mee RE 


9 edyd WSe a Sg8y sidty ode eaydh 5> Jl 
esl e ky ie glee y (79) singed Sel S53 eH sole 
ey hy BY tl eel ola 3 LS ree S singles 
ase ols ISS, 4s, wae cs eh Sane Tye 
atch SV oe cyall Ske poles ath wah ono eee 
Jac, Sipe bli ee GAL, nye W dath ol 2 aj 45 
ay ny. is orslé VS a Oral \ 05> ies s+ 5 
idl aVAB\ GaSe Ghd coud pia Gace eae ae 
At Saale SLi ty ogee: colle clea) Coe 
#titelb ahs y Gls ole ae oe Gly s tli lel Le 
yok \yad SH 5 xo; ube ae So, atl, ad Sy 
351s Os x Solu 3s SG s\» \ ig Ab Sen Sees oye * dls AS 
oS Use #3 $52f Slane Yop Se iden, 296 333)5\ Li 
3 pe ved ky — 95 dukes ae S p> artis» \ pad 2 
: Se bof be S Magis HIS lows aw (808) ep jhy pul 
i Ssh AS oP ohh — sas sh y— ash ble oolgs ail lel 
ad\s oa Ars demas or 3 ~_— 
eu op tliat Chae hay g: sy geleeie 
seh eagiediye CaFiech p08 Ym Juels 
= \eiafeN ey eae gh youl Sher? Agee 
seSaliphs 235 sts 52 Ved Sen \ 55> oils 
alg oe ‘\ Neo tla p tate, § 59 5 


HAE Syd O55 ola jo 95 \naley sly 52> 3\ 4b 99 ue 


les ale ot F axl Zl ws ly>5 5 c oie daushiS 9 
ol ela emia let sod, 31038 ae 
K 0D » 1g cb el shee 52 Od o\ 2 oes ag—— 

es Ea Ke N23 poe é -\ Seto eS, bak par 4 
jh Se Aa Vanes $3, h$s e c. sPrciae 
27 he <e Oo shea \ jake Cr e'D bec le yy oe 
JS 50 Ad; pam US 235° S33) tacky calles ox Sle 
Sd) xy wg SE om Hg Suse 59 Sle ljypny id, 
Shree S25 pee KDA Db G| Pode Soy St lye 
ate San pas 0,5 1S 42 5 le See yy Vie OS 
USA D5 & Mise t gle Se al ose ey DE Se og » 
dn KOS cpm Si, \ 29> sia, Ks ap Us els te 
alse 3h (798) tle a ¢ ol ale tar Som, Ve EE 4 ON 5 ;\ 
dk Nie Hp sam obaly hy SS iS Ms ah, sds als 
chy \5 00 Ssi\,4 » a ee Nf x SOS Iie ee 
Jls ro ae Se 53 = ote 
ssleo5 sash Na “ais ys CRE alg 
Voge labls oble ket hS ido GIL a5 Om) 7 — iS 
pam Ne ee are Cnet 
d\Sazw\ et on bale Mia ae i. ee 
Vp pee g SiS WaSes doe pte cai’ Site ylang pact x ol EScm 


Sapam 5 SoS eas de lorpam onl Lil jae (77d) 5 wed 
eae 2 Ot BE, JS lz » byes 5) IS 
soe ‘i oltol — K Dit 4m gie ent a <a | 
—e LA shi dee 30,3 da, ee . Jud 0d yf 
\, Sas \\ 3 Sans \ jot doe ol ates tae Solo 
oltol os at wl yaa Sal ting cael» age dio eae ee 
spam Sl) 32 Soe hal; pc AVL ylGle > x48 o¥ 
alge \yyis ie deale cnet yl eee ag S28 Ps oul Sle 
pas gl \2 § a\ aiS >5 NS \5 jae shal & hl. 3, 
Vikas lashed Go,\o aiid GEN in ole aldol, ole 
aS dp cus, (78a) | | shy sca pichon as ybip ced 9 eelbl 
SiS wo S shia olan aha slab Acie eddy lee my 
sy? 6a) Jp lake N+ Sears ox 5 Som, vie o 8 
ole gl. Hl, xk pL ot Je Able te 2 oe SV ea 
VS gs Soy O4 oP o55 Koch 5208 \ie oly 
Sie cul ad, gle Ve lao 5) Sey Vy rome dhe \ 
93) \ya\ css Doi 2 D5 3 4 5 aN lbs Wah eal AI,» 
ols yao DH kan al eles S335 \yoly taj lie 
\ cyl SLi Vie oa. 313 pat I \ Se Vee Comm ol 

oS nad; delane 4% 
MV Cal pre BN LE als ole Se ylay 

*x NAS ansS 


tay Mit we 
Bate Nj eal, \ x SiS, iS \oye Sadly (76) op j\_se 
\,o> > S Mabatatsle:, tol) Sus \j ie pty 105 
oly Osi i gs fs 3 pe oulb ale a \,2 oye C5 a— 
; - le eR \ fi 
Made Me she? a Ad. io eens sk Sapa 
af;\ ae S | Salers 2f cee ISis) 4 05 3 ag 5) 
aisle o\; ,>\» Sa \sS- lute. Se ps ei es a\> 5 Je cul 
oe 6d ua, oe ve azsh S:5| ree ee “lal. 
cd Wat gen Ory y 

set lion - cyt ays oer Cal Se SL 
K SG) oly (779) IS jl Jirwng A324) ole 

Jide, Sle? eto Gb, ol), J: j\ cram el onl 59 
JS Ick, She 5\ o\olS V5 0 § soy iW Ng cats lCalen 0 Jjile 
pat ena ode cetera ey 
igs Pe. 4 oe Ky Od ait 1 # glial 4 Ss; L 
des 9; o3 dyes Ltr nh NS G28 Gam She 
disk ogle par 08 ryt lil dhe Ul ation eos 
Spar xt5 yb ola é cdtal See par GSE Sey Praga 
\j yee 9 Sue Vjeeyg Hod, glist a Gle? at> Ss 3\ de, 


j92sd jo een g ee Saat \, aun MS yee oh 
KMS Mes ley tins oan SN) Se yh K Bee, 
doh 5 HS evad, 1th jb ob Sos cle ole lyn s 
abe ek Sy. glipaiey IS Sel wal SIS 
etks Jel Pe pe 42 45 ods hy lel \j nt Oy ne Le 
Lads $k, 2 ACN we emlade yy 2 So SSK 
ye on) etl) Su ei Ss cots Shays dee Sell 
glels MSN roe aie ole Su p> Ry Le vitesse 
NE Wall 7 cy det ghee ie pom OS Neel oa 
Sooo da fas Vyallag ig dade ik dellasyg ey gh yh ee sl 
Soy 5g be yl eS Ne Seok s why “dS , ws > a 
dor th ol lbs a) Gtle lb, Sowlgar, oles be 
Vyre SEN 3 ony rlé tds sl sl oly (762) Se om KIS og 
Slasre bb Val Vpn > AT Ode arly) es ole 
ae onl a oy S al; Arig ee ge 0 S anAasls Ly oglohees 
oS ole 9 8h gy oly el pee ee gi Oe Le & 
ayo ERs cul om Ke btw ede oh 5) Me # th, lel 
me oS Sle Jel» Ses yt ays NRO & ysl 
ab ee les dap ors gol oy3 jh 3S sul SMe 
reds? ne ~\I & 2 SI by kee ts ot Sly he 
Ne V5 ns ee ons ee Ves dled Vig HOS anh anh 1a 
Ghat ng Spm cudF 9 Jt ycto SI, iad 4 
LP ej de 50 eo ing ur» Sash SIGS. oleile, 
Eris ge one P33) HIS eT ie 5 j) Aa, #48 5 


Qh at oe bois Ji) 59 vle 99 >» t re gE at 

| eat ps ae a — ssl, Sal x Sis F Lio Km wl » 
Ape oA od cle sds at Dy gh eed oN 
S- 35 x (5 bl a lie Soy oslo 
Of We yy Sith ae SB gkol oll Spy) oly, 
Re he Nd Jpn nsto aaule » lpm cyjh Sel 
diolg lesb 5h 4 uo £ a5 IS our toy Se pam 
a he Ls wo is p24 oS sole GS tm 5 was AF px Se 
pt dandy ns vis SS der ost On OFF ele cel oa 
hj 9) x25 SF slo Sl Sey pF hj 9) 4 #4 gh) 
45 cols op) & JS aw Stee aliok Vole, 14 4 0 
Sok. phe Sapam Sid Lal) p dye J) ot es (75a) ren) 
Veg SIS oly P epdm 14 92 sili SF so 5) 
HK caael 025 9 By wltsl, Sa) S53 5 \y Sle liens BSue 
hy s\5 wk 4S 59 § sa9— atl ot 2 Ayo Agel 
Nai) co ypam KE aly 554d Ge iu lel de scl pl i> 
oy fe Stal 4s Sle b oll, SaaS, solu £ sio5, vl al, 
$id ge 3 try ease 52 Sed y pl pote 4 Key en ogee 
edi 5 alt lye Se? ole LS ublje 5) Ash LS 
E ah oS ctl poe — ANS Vw 92 jh 5945 5) ONgh oe 
cl Ad, Gb 4S Splat Ply Ss Tas ont 
oF do\ se 25 so Bib shu o\s\ So pare wy § ls 
lash ol, em, — singed old, aK phe DF oe dy So $1 ais 
dolye pat 35) 99 (75d) jlie KIEL 4d, jytth lw F sh, ail 


Se coc 
id pas 23, a cr ae ood Veep AS sys 
oT a> o Aus >» oul oles ate l= a 08 gysld y9 AS» 
eal oS kp lS 5 jake le lage oat ele 6 se 
a>. obbs esl Seinen eae mK Ata) 
soon Cased ving hae gle ky die AS stedpibae 
noone penne oats aa 
Xs as XS Am gis WS ake ae igdek ep 42 aul sl 
dt ae ae a Kee a a lax <a S\s 
iomaduiin et < ee us 

BY hes 5.05 at dng de nF Hs hh BES 5 SL Ou 
Dl rm 5 pty ply“ dy D9 wl 35s eae 
*2C* Lue eds\ As hd pen Tew 028 Shh ext y carts ont 
jay Mwy ad, cadlu\ (fault) VA Kees oF Ay ao, Sil, 
ole 5 Jag! Ssaeaeegs 0S coo a j\ dey 35.5 94 coda) lel le 
HSE Pt do ge cen 

Kut Viney ede Very LAS png SIT SSN, 
GE 235 At hj) Se oe b SHoks Ob ules 
Vows Clade Ve tee cle oe Sty emplys 
4 Ot dag GS a GS esas GE Ose (74h) Ol ESS 


Sdn A 


cass Si ALS. 83a) eS MS, > Ky whee 
* aig GE cna cena (Eh eles agg FAB, malt 

OSs clarke, GUA IDL, Tey as site, ola St 
AP 9 pam Dy Ol jal es p> 234\ 9 Hy, Ol; 5 
eee) > oe 2 52 5s Se sh Oe, oul 
als ae Papen Hedge stall coat BS aes 

xan & Lely JF» #, Salzer clo 5 — eS ole > 

esi 235 cheba b Sid4, 42 52 ofey \.\ CF 
535) SViolel xhy ach S Sips Neeetiel ty pe 95 s Siok 
# age yu Hinge 3 

See ot #92 oo 558 Se: chee oles ¢ Sa Se 
Re? # ple le 43) op 294 oe Coe ae 
— a > Sle one 9 Sa ler ge oles Su 4 oe Kole ot 
rt eats \ lex Ade Mas\ YA sue pdm pe eke 

2 fa) ie Le Soyg) 5) pam S (M.S. 830) daiches 
Vy cyte) ig, ka. tN hs 55 og Ve GAS — 405.5 
od, alee 025 lal ents 5k Jls a) Lush als 





* (8>,S) It seems to me that in binding the M.S. in India; fol. 83 
has been misplaced and that it should follow at this point where its 
contents are d@ propos. The catchwords are wanting on it and on 74a. 

This emendation has been made only since the preparation of my 
article on Gulbadan Begam (Calcutta Review, April 1898) and con- 
tradicts and modifies some statements of that article. 

The account of the journey to Laghman (fol. 83) is appropriate 
here and is out-of-place in the story of Kamran’s blinding and of Hu- 
mayin’s subsequent movements. 

It is possible that another page also is missing and that the quiet 
singing was not on the road. 

* (_,453) Ar. nags, an air with its variations. (Pavet de Courteille.) 


— Ao _— 


gy lelye \_3S\ S\ Va — oy lo Ss) dle ase ee 
25> ylole S\se- je 3) dead orien es CT Po Se 
Soe MI xiang SoS oye ets ah lub SG 3 ale 
atseds\,3Soe elt dee 
oF ol 3 j\ de xk tio: SS ist jlo 
Vy pam Gb els. 5 Hioge,5 i) gas ts Usls gh 525 Sidgt 2B poe 
ee a oe» ae 2219 an Be My 52 
le Cae 5 Sos — Soya « nm # Ath ole, S IFF 
aS 35) cS >i k4ey bee ae ole As €o) ple oS 
ato FE x IS dase y 4a So gb 59 0% j\ye —— 
Oy tg £195 oy ON 
US, (73d) Seley 4 Lo oP oy xokl wal pam 
es >a oa rey aye: = olf ve GUS YS —— av. 
Dee gt Fagen \ az 
po sly 3) tee ae Su Shon oe ah 
02S \py\yo le, Shile 52 pahihe gl— 40S slsl, ssi 
§ sidye3 al, J: Jy BUS aypd> dle see 50 kl cr? XK AD» 
4 ales clo os Led a, ya Cae) oy gy ole 
oul hats Ds a> Su 423 oath s\4;\ pam mau cele 


\ynt bolls Jl \y xs “yjlass y disks glee Iya | ab OS 
Nd 3 cule 5 Sut 

yar — At oly glurls Bidy ayo ITS 2 52 Si 
Voy Se Virey CSE Vers ole peg Look, ole 
* led 

ask F305. 3\ azmdi oltrl pdm ease > Soy 95 tte 
olds, 5 nam * C94 ell \& AP Atend awd Sk, sale 
SESE Nj pe cated Sloe a teint ed Ell; por g Sete eed 
PP S45 all Aas Ly! & sing OW lee Viper Sle Ve 
ede Vie git ewe 5) deny * OLY lee oe Gis bol 
ety hens San \j par y BEE Nee HOTT > Wot Ge 
MT Ge 5 hs, yy) © eS (rad) eal 
ahs oye Nels ess aad lbs pam y 9m 59 S glo ao 
ae dhe ES Salal on — 28 So pai Autlys sirgé & Bry 
bel eis 3 ol O92 Jie ne tesa Ss oN KOS gee 
peta > 48 5 — OS Or 5d hese cles Vj pce g = Hatin wal 
ols mo oe Oe \ yy ol Uelt gyo Syntm 5 SIO pile 
& > a3) op) Soy WSF Sy AT pl > F4\ aT os 
ou of ole «| Anais 4 rhe Ms én * \& ool, 
KOI 34> Ql jo dhs ale go lbs cue She ail las) 1 
She ty aller HM “sh Feet eyh eye pd 92 S eel ha 
Sas hls ee dls dV sl Ah ondk y Lolsle gh Sl 
tly 25 (732) Ath aS he FS ANS 5355 ov dls 


* (\) ler+3) So too Jauhar. Kunduz appears right. 





go he 
3 Blak So chege ol it gre He ot fe Ses 
seal Bisa Wiss oe le Sal jo Sole 

o& BAS); 0 Sor Charge de td, ghia, dy Lm Sisk 
ot soy (Ub LE Sisas lps ert ot A 
Jee ye MLNS oye es X95) Se9 3:\ wal > 59 jo 
ek, Aa oh x Sl, ae Le § ton) a oe 
Nl pe ee SAG Li Sse pb je eel OE BD Cy gee 
xstoly tb G Lice 

Kaftan $225 rn 29989 Jer foe cle de 
—\jye J 658 9 ive So ty Se (71b) Z aly Se 5 il 
KAD» dll> Sy bey ple Has Cry Sea A> gis yar § 355 
3\ \ AS ae Nees x tole ob ln Sb os ae 


yt 9 Coe ae ae ae ica es 
* Sash IT 


WL 525 ded, glis a, Gilet 4io,i 13 JS 3) Slo \es 
sldy je che eAdges FL Syl jo Spey — Jon os 
at S toy optm ajo SLO Vj 0 cll WV S35 S 
ISN 5 eps DE ile y JE olan SE op 3 de j\— 433, 
edt GE LO Vyy td, ylisn 4 eT ot ybl. b 
HD 59 Veh S Vj yer g Bid Gt dom gee ES eich 3 Capt 
x SIS ewle 
Oly 02S Sod Slancheds eSlbl hey lS see j) te 


J3io\> hy O\5 2s 2 pa Vel oD S ee (72a) \ pa 
6* 


9 Bolus a359 des Hag ae AF Sey Yd S| sta 
clel gle lol. 5 Sak asa Ass of cltsl dem I Sik 
#il te So eH 
5p Ass LS ola 4 SL 59 oo eee dhe li hes 

£25 dale ole | yas ae | ii eo) 993 le SV Sst seg 

ees lol | pls S 5M jl poe har SILL? No oF 
Ab ys SL, 2155", \ jis VASV5 poe Sgt ete 
Whe abl pa. \a\ ia, FF 5—Asi ple cles @* (700) £ 
Weak os, ail, Sus 5 ee pee wl ns 
als £25 eS archers Son, 039 cars tor Sly 3) 
62 29 2? Po Ula x dath ool OS lye cu 8 wile gle Uses 59 
MSS Bl, ls ole, Je AS py HHL LF WIS 
2 N35) gly seo hy 3 \ dane sale 5 96 13 \je S 
Sid 9) 

Me $5595 Hy 92 > Sos9 KS ble pay 

> olyls eo S428 dle & ea x BS \, 3295 Ce: 
BE isschkin S35 3- 3S ne Sly E AT oy 
cade Bad all ss ot oy SN BS p epee 
Soy wisS jh; Kialy a lle S 24. 3) ely os G45 teh edinn ss 
onsts Se Ss dl j\ ae LY> Ot ¢ S Salsas ool Cae 
\ yjhtuegd Ss, als (71a) epj\o95 al A33\, 59 Sik 
§ sions bl, Kyo wets oe) >,\o AS ale) \as 
Voloes th ok Sa es abehoo, vhs Gbel 
Sa— 6 pm rae 9 Gt ae reneres) x asl, 35 


\ (52m See st 39 3d jal asl ee Say 
V5 pee cyl \\S, dt Soe oe A Nee 
ONL ey 39 9) 39: Lod 

Sjo39 & Speen 2> Jie yng lio, a a> 
25> Gy j\5— tl > uplis jo a0, aS sssly alole 
chine Sa Serge Sle ey HF bn IGE, MGS 5 ns 
# SOS oy Mery ge eye lee blak s ogé ons 

(y e(o0) sig) chek sh a aels pele he caren 
esl 6 Ss cmlis 3\ ax & Sati ys owls jo be J ol 
9739) PS aS \sltal, SV 235 o,b5 > Log 0292 yltel s 
Ses M5 pee £ wl.., 3a) wd) OS ye dye Sl 9 AS op | 
x Si jlail « sSce Eta) Spam x Jil atls o\SS 5 jes a 
wee j\y tuelily Sai rae VL jo wlool put uns) de 
— sasltls Scr a> $2) 49 colin, ol VS Vy pan Sle 
oll 22% olen 999) a 3? YESue Vj pe glel rus 
Sem wl, dald 5\ \e ae Ubinie prs Sirgen S52 albal 
ALS haypae po S1 x SiS 4 re nile 5 \ 9 ia Se 
We Shae he j\ acs pode 5 — wNshal: yp plang), Sea ee 
Ss Sco Po 9 S» ley gms pins Cer Jub, 
«305g ES (70a) VON (?) Igile g — ssl 

p> \jdgt hte Big cargd dolar tiulel jlo y yt opolt 54> 
Sig ASM soe SAT ja We sly 3 S dialed pce Uh 
sn aes Vlas 4 “— ds 


6 


ae EA Ce eS 





FINO a Ee ee 


eee ss 


O\ gus ole dnl aoe ase SAS i) \> 50 ur HK oaaol Dube 235 
by 3) 032 2° Keel aaty 6 oo Se ony tukt l. Ls $9,\5 
. He my gi Swe |b DLE top ym — dine og GH; J 
(est aS \i\g\ jo peg Sole Oe tle Ve ty Vu tlel. 
o 3\ She pg lle tthe MSV en # olals S 
AN jes — 64 3 2 y\jrlp 4: 5 S94 (68) on Uno 
E syd of) St oh «SG Sle \sle wae 5) Sy; 
LSAQe S yous Relate t pie Habs je SE pry, aS” 
Sapam odlind le tale pad 5255 NAV} yee de ets wlll 
Hol’ ole ele 2+ ole, \, > Vox os Se 538 

a ae aS Oop ae Lees “ls wider 
pam J # Ashe be saajdhe 599g GY oS Ni She5 
hls SS p> deg lA? cline 9 oF ol oH oe Che dale 
2S aja il vwlio ss ess Si 

— ol 8 S\N op jo tT Ske | Ne ay ak 
Lin oF ele os Sah pli oS ois cols 55 Le 
5).03} ot \ S$ god Yi s oh <3 ce 43 § solu 3 
ee Reese SaaS: elie! peat gus Wb au 
* C2 prs So a5 S Se se 

Ht S595) DS s Amy ST yblesl ao Ly 59 om sl 
9 222 bG\jyx osh3 diol or 3 or sr) oe 
lant 32S Se a> eis 4 pdm ues 0S Sx > SI 


Ao» ab, Se So \ 0 \5 0 px SI, ASS ok ok \ a & 


— Yt — 


Ge ham SVL» Fsteny Glee Ksidg, HIT > 
eshe ola Odt IS LS oly—eol Gj Sh oS 
Ly la> obly> MS V5 x0 pose Sd» Only Orin sky yl 
(67b) 3S ty > S sidge 8 ltl tidy Ypres 9 ST 
des oluly ltl, 23, ler GIL yl ee ee enjl de 
Bidgi bays bed NWO pee Sm 52 OS cb SHE p> Jal 
cts s\\ak Shy. sk Salts Ss; pn aS LIK 
ps sls 6y\go er sv\ BY eae oe re > gus pis : 
32508 pats Tal 5 ae S als 505 * Sol>,2 rab, a A oe 
sion So IK 5 yar oly By jas ucaal \ ane oh 
Shale Jil 5 Jes Jepson) Loe Shey Jal aes 
aE oh ce shew (gil 4 ayy ax ee ie een eS § 
\yplaSa Sle Jap — aie Sok y ck Lyla loSe ke, 
LK mel oi. -: ia Sasha oe + 302 jg aie 
JE de gte rte ley edyy Gl uil, ib ald 5) jl ae Hos 
# Sid ga 3 SLE Slede Vj ag jb Ald 5 4H 
Lolly cape elf (688) Vj pu Sidany SS Celys cypntm ge 
Say BE p> F49F Voll, spams adb lb jl es 
eel Le one — could ule p cy SxS \ps ee 
VAN 53 cys 9; daly eye ol, Fiske jo— th le! oe Sly SS 
SE ele p48 1b oe THT Cle ye oliel ey ale 
Vow © eye — ails ae bls g sigs gh ky onl ase tees et 
* (pl) $ ale Armenian, cakes of dung. The word is current in 


Turki. The translation should read “He closed the door of that 
house” ce. . 





I ee, Ee eat oe 


aie ol ke 
Pel. 


a eS ee! 





cee 


yk. 
Slay y FF cloals gloss tu IT oe Say 3 
Highs Bs UP, ee, peg KA? cols Jl, 
cape ety he jay By 9 eal 9 AS ees e259 
i Sigh Se 

lela \ijer Pte Ub jo Ast ab Uli amy V3 ant 
eg acts et Ven yy Ka» Se ly Koy 

72 eadelus dor oltol wpam, xsiol | 3 aa V8 

K Mis\> Wi. p35 5 elds, ES o> edi jo ab 4al3 

Nhe, Beale ote dle ayy > mes al 36 dl 
Loe 4 ws 1>\) \y eS las acl AS 2 Hott 9 — 23 Si 59) 
Fr * S\i> 5b LIS pons 9x SHrlus SIS 
ZF 5 BV dy dpe OY — So 9 Jt ay SSH lis Exo 
a 2b 

ab, WIS Antes 1S SK (672) =, Js oy 3) se 
> MEN jy Oxy ole Vet 0 3? fF SGN, soy 
el, sal; 5.3, oa dyin Sarge 028 lI jl esl. 
| *x HAS HS so 520 ois ol 

Ge 2F 9 \haj Ss Jon BE JS po» £ 23 CF 9 
Sai yes, BAG 3p one 9 Sis, Sh oe soli 
plea > S\ isle Ne eg ial > ald 49 (le ee ose le 
AN 553 GW as We Leyte 9.5 seed IAN 2 ary 

22 385) aye Gye Wb OB le apar SS; 





* ()>) I propose to read here — | S.3 s\ 5 Brel AS oP >> 
MAGS which agrees with other sources. 


Lasigley eetis cle b lets on lt Ge obs! S\; 
\— 52S Gh bla LLy 21, xsoy Lijly oo clo bu Sy 
Sate 9 Gy Sone Gog ont WS ye: dy: UT ea5lgo — der 3 
Sk alt omy oe lan Gh £5, sols salt ony 
ods 5 55 55 Si SF sum p a» Soy Js\ slits a 
Re 
255 > ve 3 29 9 cos ~~ Se 50 S p23 
esle Shes els less» age Boy, oSasy aiS a> 
2 ale preg toe? os cbs Led 5 OH 5 iy asl) 5 dibs 
#3 By Spam oly lipo ctlos 3 > oo) hee ed 9 8) 
cad Ble SV) arte Blo ley AN IS etl ated 
* Ad 46 2 (66a) elasl, els 
sa #3 LTS yh On lb ly jesci, 55) Jey jl te, 
aS 554 ass \olés\, Si Lue spall De & Pa Oe (yA j s\ 
Syile 599 02 Sim 59955 jl dary KK Sb \ oti Sy wel, 
— Vat Ser ae Sdeigneg jo Clewll y 43K 
Sx 599 ch 39a oS 2g Aehny oe Slee Says 
aagl GSiy eat \ 55 (tues spite go | He SAN 5p olels eae | 
jy Ma WS jet 50 Aide dl & oliol, Pine: aS (345 5 
\, s\yh eli, — solo \, a So oe Beoyle> yl 525 tsp 
get WN alg cfillale y wok ISS Vy ag Jlsm V5 peg ite oA 
Se Sy a 3°39 Hy 028 cal at 9 I lala was oh 
2 \ Galey — toy 028 onl) rss HE Elle leds 
(5s Jie #249,5) cleylyo ¢b gle (660) 59 oMLely bye 


0 eee ee eye eee a en ee eS _ ey ry - 


ey 
ae ye oltol Spam ug ls ol 2 Fol 
wre Bi, ot Foy Sole js 5929 LAS No Usb oll \& 
ors Sb less S Oe ke al capa 
aN igh Sli S ngh Je — aki Lae iis9 oF 59 § 449 
scan PISS oles ell \ aS hw Ngo 5 jo — oy Shag + 
Dyn UP 9519 cx) OF Se aS SES, Buy el tn J) tal 
an Go bh 4 ol phe J4 EL] yy #4, ols Gb os 
Se tae Staking We Soy SF gey>y sokenl ool JS 
Se ohses cle Vine ot Vow oll dabaly Vie IS se 
“i28\ es > > p\ge (65a) Se ole s Ce eat 23\} My 
whe ols) «abe \ dle, Mera ice Lure pl & 
KSI Sy ei Age yar y SSL? Le Vie 

33, 5 \A\ 40 ently WS Ay pe > S Ye pad aay 5 
HBAS He 5 Se og 9 Bigg tomy IS SNL LVS ee 

dy HIS 6 SH prjl2 cb 52 00S B cltol, cpa> 
3293 N53 St8ly olen 5 154 Jel Jo 5 Jha Sh 
p> Aaslgi oli AP Nog OS 3 pds ee Bah al \5 we oe 
Sapam $e ol. a>)! b> 509 xa) 59 — Sar cee 

OFF FE 2S ease eam i> only Ss or 2 ¢ BB I> ol, 

ct 5j\, Pte sete s 45> 51 < Me = oer 
ape oily 5\ Jes slg OF LOIS 6) cde y Gy9> 
ay Vers Ten (65D) Syytm \yoo5F Jo oko Deis (4 
Kode lef St lier oly» Ses jy oF Jel ash 


* (59 781,45) Erroneously read as 39 )$| slo in translating. 





ee ee 


Ve Yoe poe dital, capcom 5 33S Jo Le? wd 5 4, oliol, 
9 SS Syd VE poe FH ol€ Ve Hog, colin d SS ee 
Le ale il Os IT segs 02 pe gE pre & Wy jboss oliol, JIA 
«ly, cliol, a pat lo dst 00S” SS | as, Lele, 
ype KHDS Jeeg Lyd 522 ul x28 J,5 wk MS2\, \jy 
6S Mul we kta 18 2 » WL le Sta lon 
LNs aa, |e at 5 ol Wok & (64a) aS als \jo aed) ood 
ae Sh 5\ se x Jes» deat aa 8 cys gyal b x dy he oo 
arly lish spam cuz de | laos ele SH yay OSE oA,P prow 
oh lS \5 p26 xt Lee Tal \ V5 yee ND 13 Lene eagle, 
Vy J\42 Vijeeg saul AV JS iS NAV 2 Oe xed, 
KM ke oS Ls ly wok TL My jeg toe Lb Std db 
ek \g\ No «sas cle ON le eS OS Now MLV 2 ciliel 
UAE SypAh 9 DAE Gps So ptam ua We ol 3 59) i FF 9 028 
AE dm ge LL "le 255 2, Oa 
en 485 59 ALM gles, set ae Sh, ole, dag sate 
yobs soe kaa 2 MSN ot 599 ole 42905 Se! NaF 
of aS tas 72 Dy aly pole ele 9 ND eed po el eel 
p olay at posh se col; (01) eae, ail 5 a3 
a> ol els TV mes dyed Jel Jad, ee Si. 
is Hees oMy\ @ lal yd Se! cues Ob 


* (le) § gle. 

#F (An«3) Perhaps the Tibah of Babar (Mems: L. & E. 139 & 136n.) 
which Mr. Erskine says is 8m.s. of Ak-serai and to the left of the 
road from that place to Kabul. Abi’l-fazl (A. N. I. 243) gives Julga- 
i-dtirI as the meeting place. 





ee ee ee nee eee eee See ee nn eee 


ayptim tel hte 9 KASH We clog dey y Meth Lesh Ab 


g& ov -;\ VolS lapels SD yw ee T\5 pac \suiol ST Se a 0d\ sls 
IN bodes cE Sw 5 mi ek 


Vso 9 ol»S \s ow JI er 33a) Nock Ss olsol, pam 5 


Ve i, BSF 4 WE pny seth J3 os > GSXs 
oe AT OF on5 5 a“ eae Jo \ (632) vee ou s 
599 Sep 5) due x siols ob jue 4.5 Hidyi 2 435 \, losd oliol 
oe ce onl 5) da, \) hod oliol, Do pam rye O+ jlew oN Sy 
: FS jou QE ets: 
Nal pe Slate tl5T Lad 505 VyeSie gly oes 
oe § s\d3 < opeccregacinl alata wpe Sy 


901 


J wey) eet fies Sh ae, dag) Hw 52 plex 
el lb, 5 pam Spe 0 et. ole dav 5) dey KOS o> sde5 
* dri \> olSs 

bi esl Sa toy MK SJL a Me ol yas 
\ ,cjbte| (63) 25, NG Onis oldch wu pa> gt AS * MDs, 
# Ady, 48) oly ola wile at aot Lop 

3G», 0S hes \y ayo 5 S je me Li ee 
\ 20,3 Ost lets H 5g; “sla Vm 9 als 3 \ oldsl, pam carly | 
\, lead isk £ 1S ob \, ol Sol, \y ye actle coent 
KD odlin 5 # sly Pe NAZIS hus; pes i2f # ol 


x SoS tle |, bls SG |, sss Jo dssh so 0 jl x jul 
Woo Le oly KAS loch, (fault) 9 2525 y9> > PP NS 
3K DD paw ole 4% oliol 

\ he ols EN weilet g ews | A eo Ue \,\e J oy) 
Aide se 52 & oléol par 9 diylo Se a 45> doe 8 
de 5 AF 55) Py didrgere Gerble ely ls, singh 3 lets 
oo pil sl xtolujae oltsl uae (622) 485 oF 
02S oliol 24 a> ol, LS lial, cpl, ouls \, \ 255 
NWS, Glues Ges vary AGL Sey ALE (5?) ule | 
dghe lel Gh ye 3) 559 oS chet s tol seas, 
ler bs GES» jl, cbas, sly jl, ale, ob 
plaatle slik, 49 Gl cls cele 2S Ub Lolalool, sles, 
KNAS ped dm gre olds a> lel jl, sas cas) Some 3) 

Oa dt 3\ Vly ex 92 8 OI TS, SN yo clic crams 
AAS Nas den gis AS ol P Oeil 

0D of am | ys cl & 51 oli, So pam § sus £ sSus ee 
Vive utes HE Veltok ST Se yall Je aa og jess ole 
if SK oolsle (oad) Sfle SV 4 MS Vio Hales ef 
@ 2° oltok Ash LF opal Se 255 Oo N39 — ye ;\ L. 

Dandies 9? 0 hoi > sie AS res S\ a sl, 

*>,\> a cals s tae Mee ur aa 

pas’ eh Vis hess atol, a> Bik yo Gas 3) da 
Nyy lb S955 les Bley bee 55 GIy Se abst 


29 2} Sle 23, Solo sb eho ls 5, 5h 5 
poe > 229 ted Bee ole *>\4e AS see » aS; 
BY ole 29 we UE tole i 3° Nadal 3) S25 wri 5 
olticee 42> oS 55, Ses ae Al eal ails AS 
ar 3) 1 aly S90 She xl adh CLE aol db jo Less 
AS Sleza\ oye 3) onl syam te GE sale (61a) $1 x cL 
J) fame al ys HMDA B pad Onl Capon FS Sper of yam 
SHE dN 42S (A) Shey ollery Je ct ole 5h 3 
pre wus e\ 5 Fie oe Shy clio a a> am val 
ce Salo uae dr ep Sle ge ghee cole IQ ody 05 
olda\, a> x aL, 23 lal uts 3K (3?) lye g du\los 4 Je 
aS, Oy bls Sy as by Ves Sie Se Sh E sry. 
yt NS ly LE Gre le x th oS il: b> dy 
Hcl he 
ae don Say, ASamid ale\o so oA, sje to aay 
22931) db 3 J+ se Js °2 im Ny glb jk shy as. Joe 
BOS pas pam xl» 25) 1 Sa gh One 5 clisl a a> Lin, 
(61b) eur y Lille foe arly, srt Jes Sa gl aes 
One shune yd o4> sla, Jail 5\ BS. ss Crear dS ob 
las jor SAS | Sidhe di om GF ylity 43, lb Ltn, 598 
yore S425 pu oltoh pam KLE jhe ols be S425 
sor 8 alee 5 Je) 5\ SIFY 3 eed Ge yymo 4 olt ols, 
9 GK ale OLS. 45 dS lial, okt KAidkws eli, tntl> 
aS Vile le Vy sioy, oF lS \é 5 VAL Se on Oe cas 


Ot Yk SE sale, nose \, Js a> een etary) ee 
# Joli 3 wo Serul ge? be \\ Jo ye S36 aom\ 3g 

icigdide aveltal sake ealaeen Loge ue S Se ih Oe 
cS Wa mb ¢ j\ ee ash jo ME sca s\ye 5) - a * Sols Se 
Bee Me oil dog Spar xT lil, 4 t dpi salle 
xIth a5 5 sth ote ols eel due, Ls (60a) a> 
aly sel SaaS | fine col d9e 52\ Ss KIS lo 
ty the ol patty a ethos is 35 ob yp Si ott 
5s) 3 (| 033 b Vi, el) eo llé 3 \ LSS dy yy S 
Oy: ele JF tol 

doy y Yo AS dey os ye le or — LS lp 
Ske 35 élg Sy ssh Selghs OLE, 2s paca wis 
Shes hel wos Gly lel \sS_a SSS ohn 5 GE ole 
Noted Sh 003 lye oF pl sil obs Lobel 3 jets 3) OS 
on pat all el 6s dy-dhi s\_aaS & 2K Saat 
ae Sl tet rola cS Name sols 9 Sa alles 
58 ele onl» AN; ce sie (60b) G> Se \ytul Sls ail 
as lel Gla 59 Lazty 3 Le Lolel ol Som: olFly 
oS yl XMS Go, +2 Ly a) cbl, ail oS OSs S95 
Jl oa Mgbd tis (ae 52 9 ol le Sa Io, Fash 
iS W538 ely io in AN pau ale xtileds lel s 
7g Ld ys E> GE lS Eas G's Shy ES 
ade |, tals S§s\s lye Bile onl ee Kd lye AS \— 





* (eS) Cf. 18b. 


ee a 


a ae 


Mel, tle. , otis coe old slop my olt olale s oli AF 
aK du Nes anes AP ing ol 03 Narn s 

aco Su gh ote (592) j\ tye, flab. orljols 55, 3 
Cas Sp x Kaye Sieg ae ling tte 50 

» SS a Ss Near \yejleg tr WSs Sls 92 yal > 
# des wal 5 ds) Ge Sige SSN3 Nee’ 0 Say oe Sis > 
gh One oF US ze dm Ae Glee 2 6 El cls jal § gl. As 
Sis a BS \, el & cad CE NE \ at SiS (Se 
HAL cee gy sighs te Send lb LE Silo jlee 9 f 
Wy 4b pee 23, 52 2 si4y\ 3S a9 Wyle 5 Sas 59, res 
A él. od\jolh (dv old - vlurs Si Kee ead 6d \taul Ves 

aes - cyldise oS 9 53.92) 5 slak ur 35 Qo * Kb 
me 3 jb 43 ts 25> ols * 0D »p S alee 4 e gh Or 4 tes 
Praeger als Ss gh ond & 368 5) 3 ce Kody oldo|, als > 
uly Se owl t Kd, oF Sle ls, (59d) olisl sn, 5) 
Se we ERLE 5 

aL ol 2° thle She 5 ENB, o9n5 by STK ety, il j\> 
Slab so S ged Jal oh, te Sos, w ble, , al& 
Sates Su gh One | 4 a> aS dai a oltch pam 
\, seg a Be isle olisl, § ¥\ #95 EME) Se edt 


2 lke 3\ HAD y pteett_p Se By Kes Se 5 \, Oe 4 


\ owe ' SS by) x iolg tt Sy Sy» Oust My, a 





* (Xi3ly) The translation of Sultanam’s speech is doubtful. 


\oepam ole \ sl, 5j\jsl 4 5 sdk. ,o onl ab Las sens Jie 
5a old te sake 3 pe oli ole: gbals Sidon, L955 ges 33,5) 
(582) huh, aSl 0 5 C51, ask pam J ial, Ot Se 2 
e lol, emg, Eh 49 jae 99 stile 6 lin Sle cliok yo ¢ | pe 
Spar Ssi— MW Soy Om Se Lodel, oll, 5k 1s 
S.Sin i asl es ape (| je yd AS olds) 251 athe We, 25 \A\ 
: had joo > pear a ols 

ole SMe Vie oy Sylar s Za sing, Tbs 50 
oe Vat ody Ge dle ables toy 2S ke Ve one 
S slSay tidy, by [Se oye ete Adz GUE 3° Uy dyi9 
ly he 5 edu HESS an \ espa AS ys ym Ath ye 
> élldl.. oStjeltiy -1.2bb Sip ool 5 ga j\ ale jo | olf 59 4 a 
AS tidy iS pam xoluel es old cade Od slow cunl < 
Jas cyult oye tsb — oy 5) Peis dined old vis 83 59 
hein él. 03\ jos S iS OS pe Ky! 0d \eaus | a3 S 
GE Hart Shee glee Spat ob part dad een le _als 
xx us tlaleys slol oles dhe of GIS, slg 

As toy dg dle AILS gh one ple lal ay 
ile Sar et 378 5° 383 Skee og SoS oe ple 
wont » ‘Sh Mss at Aste > oS 2 e553 

oe S| 22 OLE 32 *425 bn 53 Ges wy KAO SL 
29% dylye lick pars ABT g is 595 43S. o2-l- 
Shy Shs ve lH, Ms ole eo clyde Je 3S, 
ls Miglin & slig toy 03 Fy ye SS ASS, slap S15 50 


Bes oleh y Ql sases Le tee 435 a hi ely Sly 
pt Ost onde on S J5\ xsl, asd Voliol , alo ee 
XG Bro HN a pam. Bro > N33 it & eee 
en \ss. ols Ju5 Ry pies J: 3 &\S 3 pam K Lapdom (5 ge 
Blairs tyloxs Je obs oes IS, sal ys a le G Sue 
als VA eB ile 2S eS cles age 8 eubs oho) 45 oS 
HMO 8 i AS 
a Dh. a ae Jaki us 

cpl Jade aml 4\ 3 rhe #89,3) \s ahjn's Bo eae 
M550, ies A) at § SS ue \j pew dy8 
*K BAS aeJSo pam £28 capir SS og) ils 

fe 3 5 ck New er ts vs SE che tae ee aa Le 
os Dey |} lob als olol aly b5\ gl wood Se 
- oe abe Sb pak Sy § 40 che (57) das 
ede Colye Jobe chy ibe Qed sl deg Sb Obs pe 
3 oe col gland Sl olgh clé sian, So sede Gl ett, 
3) é \se his yes | lish ele £ ok beter Wt 
MOE dae) els Siar 4 Ain, oye onl 6 Lk 
x dle, 

wees WS, ae C759 S\5 Sb\s dys Shel ee 

; ck j\ytus sede 6 lag cpl 2 Eek 

\ a2 atl, Le olob. Vn Spee ploy Vue lilly Mire plers 


a lol. § r:t\o » GIES cpl 5 +9) SM 83,3 Ay Soy 
oS svi, U9) oe aza\, \ els K ew, is ;\ hail o 6 Sus 
S35 fe P pat 8s Ua? KOR Gy yl > 4 lis ae 
oS SS only SAF 255 Bix Pose Elis 3S ual 
Ve x 3S Gu eh Sion 8 Spar (568) sida g sllow po 

AS, ony x dase AS ss Ss 
Om > pw PAY ce ee dy Lie : re «328 
dls\\ Sak yp S solo ols \ Ss SE? om oh x25 
aly Hed tes LN 59 dl, <a ely Cher: asl 5 cen 
gil 51 50 K MS Ghee GIS ok Gow, ly 55) 92 59 tie 
oS on’ » 4 ut ol ule Jo* 5\ Sauls § go, ae we 
P Y9 S oleh ksbog WS 8 cpt LP King cept 
23> 3 4S Did» Armd 24) gy See 55 Spam eal odes er 
Voce 571 ace aS. SoG | sl acmti ae Sash,» 
SA, sao2 SED) Mies \ gle NN ere CSS V5 ee Ge at 
* ils rok Ys -A5\ hash de oo * o\> “alse lye llai| 
JF sly Sle el SF pales 5) Kemlds (aroh se 9) 
ane S id = xx Susl Fc oe als 
ahs A nes tf Lk 5 Spot 
sou Caiay Ts yc ae iy 
Ne hey nth, ll 0 Si_ als win tt LS islgle jo lick & 


5 * 


clay oltol, lal lé.¢ aS AE Now ele gla yo De ypdm 
dole Atak cipae Sidy, 03, ol, (658) by pb go ok UAS 
\ Se ol lal tale \ Se gh or Sols oe pes dam 

LP a Voltsl 51 4 Lyall Jake a8 di 3 NSS sew 
Cee ox. ols, ol,2 Ssiry ON » 595) 5\ Se Sov MB ps 
ot Oey UA AS yoy Sey lye ob whe be \s\ 
a3, Ke, Su |e Ba pr ANE oleh, Sow, vee 
\jeltol, sh Sat cpl sie bl x sil 4, oul» SF cwils y ail 
SV dats (2701) 9p Jes pp LES |, sltol ear 4? 3S 
1S Seal ee cS & el. KD pw Dye cS oo él. \ sol, 
Se is \y* 5 Shag shee € Oy 

Jas 9 83, 09,5 New b woly Sole gy Hat |p Solssk,, 
eae 0 ole oyl 23, eh ok KIDS oly, pl Smt N3 ;\ 
SS 6X (35) wl ael\ ey gau sales oF} pp — sing 
Sor Bios Ge ewe ly ob Le as S$ wt. 
5 MSN lel lily dor en Bo SK ws ne pte, va 
Jew st Shh y bb pass way d oye 5 iE sls.) uF a“ 
0} ey? Per TAS Ge ash pn ES ele Nite 
on ph Or 5 — BLE oly, pre le csle .yI Keds: 
Wala Jp one gS tas hy ok Vee 
Kody B 
3S Gp pail \y099 5 Hide 0 Ssh 9S oy atiS ys 5\i 





* ()\j®) Text, wa mir hazdar ; clearly a clerical error. 


alo 


VA, 3 rw g> as\ cobs 59 0D pra) \,5\5 a\ > aS xb» ZS 
Boye AS \yal 2S 39 eles 22 2B Ok Laer 
9 cel ON Some ore te (548) ep y emt 5 Ue od ILLS 
NS ce oh — 99 Vive LS Gt g etl ky eee GE ole 
Crum old us, Af az \\ chs £ ols V3 SH aK ae ay 
9 Hy, yt Lt et cli dee Ub, aye dll» ets 
xl Daw 9 42S Yede an 3 0D 96 cel ge 50 \,5\ 09S ete 
ekg SBS jl Mais 5 old pam sly camry all jor te des 
sails aoe 5\ § sk:.3 aiS ih; E\_ sl Sci our: 
goede s Fg cand ey Wd, teh ONY See bye 
S Spams 42 tale \pltol aa> Seng JS 
a Atley (dye Onl ELAS ok tas 55, ar b_S\ silo 

DSS 25, th Ey Sah a Sst Sieg ee odo 
3\ pS aS (54b) siols AMS. OF eyes Je at wos tof 
suerte Sn - ae 
a cdpal ae art 5 jc \ iets ee 

dage o oHs Sule al slo Sa \ Scam 
eb dy eer 22a Fite cle JE Log Use = poss 
Shs cule, yey on Ok obks Gr ors J+1 533 Gey 
S35 4) a> Kenn Sin J oxj) Soy vee slyly o» 
apni y Any (TALS yay B sgh 2 hj) Ghe Soy as ji 
Ss 5, fo ale UBS B& oly 50 Sissi Nes par § 9; 


5 


Spy € 293 Os Wh Gly oy Oe GL ws ‘A, 39 3\y~ 
SSce Ay 5 (588) oj wren Vly O84 lye et JE yg Oly 

: eh ote ie 2S J La she) - olatjls 23S 
ee onl )» Jew 55> a:s-\;\ Os} Lp Vk Aram Aram owl 
SNBN 95 Sh eae eg Sip ye BE ig tie Se Lye Ss (Sas 
BS) og O35 ile & 5 Ont KB Sn BF te Je Al, Ub Qs 
ay Bi Shoes phim orm saat ae 
see oF Kal 55 5 Spee 9S Utd? Updos 
oak Caw Se int 59 09 MS 3) hig Midas gs Ait\ yaa So 
Drom O99 Sez} olely Lam ¥ tae Ve Umm old Gin tl 
> Takis » OF § 45.3 SH a> \ se So cam > * 5\ 0D of 
S eam 3 Acs a) Bs ol (53) USAi53 5 ya Sa cw 9 ai\ 
Ne yr fo) WY SN 5 al es ie ke ub & OL 
aby Sar ale ae Apes oe pam 4 hehe 
fi Eipd ns x AS Jan ye fea 
~_ ue age aS) a ‘Sis ea we fk, 
ail 4 oly Sah, \,5\ gE ala & » — i 





* (Xn4)) Misread in translating as XW), 


\5 ng SOS OSs Vous» silo (52a) ES; wt \p 25 5 
ge solo Sloe \j ne VileSsy oblal Al oy ae S Ve x oe 
9 Smeg 52 4B) GES Sle lj pe & F559 GAS yb ol 
key le ady lo Sit ala, Gio Agoe Jn 
E359 j\ \ one eye Cas le \y pe dd, oS Nal apnar 
ait Sy He) dts releS pears - a 55 Tse 
juss hae sl eS SS a 22h got 255 da Bet | 
jai NG Vin Seal aa 32h 2 lai 3 5 
Pais Sage eS lmcite JS 

ae Sok. Op oltsh ypae che rer cbt |j LA 0 
nl ee hae jess ile 10g fi Wf 
“pas el L. eh » aso Soli lems B35 2\, opa> 
arnt ign Sa AS OP ae eo ole § 
ahs as Aa Vt le wr ead, 2S (6) Jad 
wakes alse Ute ggh cen ool app 

Pr eS erlys 3) sem y we 'ly yo Syke (51?) SN 
pi 2k eal ope AAS als azigs 5) JB 9 95 Sais SE aml 
ae b x sias |b bg, oF 9 Sal Shes Jal o opa> 
VAN sgh pogo ol gly 22S gc y Joye 5 +S er 
XOte ole b tokes Voth oll eb 8 olkle , aa 55,3 
oll! « Volt ab oat as a3) pote B yl 

ee OU 3 KAD 90 cond sols Sel cl ot 9 oles 
p>) 58 5 de chat Shenty olan aah oy ein LIS sig, 


ry ASN 39 Guill 22 Sa) 52 Use * Soy Ort Lbs 


NL held gL jg OS ed, pole oy — eel GUIS Shop 
8 yes ov SihS col ae th Gel Leos gle 3° 
ole e\. tale 5) bs az 2 >) Jeary AS Spd 51 phat 
«Ses eg 

AMS Ve 590 Nee 3) Je lots So pio cet joe 
Vie ASN oe ple abe s aS, is lea ja) ay Sey 
Lape yar Tojlo yar de ake yrlo_.o £15. Jl 
See 55 ti ools oliok gyla Ly alot 2 sl >> NS 
Soe gl gli) ple cht 5 02S Syd a? ll, 4) ob Soe 
Sapte MEN 2) iyge Alas oho ee sails 
ccintsl) oak coal Sok Mile IOs). Sosy de & so 
3,\ Ja V3 se ON, act lie (51b) — 4 VL wal A a & 
e Ka) gta) gs: 4 <. glo AN st x Me oll, sh cygee 
fll 1 jhace et NF ge SLY i GL je 
: vik etic es & 2 oz ls Fi SB jlo 
eee es al a el Pideoy sitol 3i\, Eee oble 
Lig? Sapam £ be gk ee Jio\o lye Se cols ils. 
cule 5 til eats clio eple 4 log albol , 4) ols \5 ak 
eailo og IT p SLI atl ole glad pbs Jie babe os 
J Be yo le ler i (Se ISL Glal lay ghee 
JAN ae ab \5 bak 6 ciaagd gilda pias, 
ply July oltrk » Fo ae ply Vokes — 4) 450 oltol, 
Ss Paty OS 325 094 JS oe eLNS a ae ole 
& His Vales AS 92 thoy onl ol 


oa ee 
Exe» SF otas S$ ey do Ay Sut 0 \ee ISL 
fans S 05) pam cuss 52 Stouts axel ae 
isp Hcl Raw dls Se poe geld ole 3D oF ps 
Jil, £128 S> sae! | paella Lag is See 
K Big) ye en 

soli? |, So Kai Se ie $25 nor old WV 
ol S>5. onl (50d) 559 Sle 52 Je es SS eee 
Os ONF Gare bye pes 4 aS \\ cha) Ss x Sti, 
ead aed pam sj We yo 

Wom (p?) lish spa As ania ie aie lil oe 
sh aoe oP * J,\ uit: Sa els 52 SS, inns he aS lane 
oe eda (Sarde aS 333 ol a\F o> \ re Cie ols 
dealyy crrlan ig ly obo il ous sale hl iF Jia 
OF xsl, all |e sols par F\., ani) adel oe 
Vass Cal» Jhdcl «(9) Joust 'y dy 09 cade ae 
#99 02S Sle |) os She 

€ 49 als ads oh \ ost KBD gy ONE 52 6 Ks hae 
ye KS tb | loss $5 — slo Sle hy pe bess Ge als 
4,5 Soon \jee 4 nce Ss NS a 

ole og 2E Cty ott Vlas ol par cee op yd 
idak, oS Salo. hye aS socgt Cle) ies ate a 
IG 5 hj) SoS ee ole y Slee Ves oy 





* (el) Cf. Turki 2shtk aghdsi, usher. 


ik Rs 


ok. AP \y) Gpar oy aloe 35 § Sa: \s de ers 
cree bE; ne KO 0d lid 292 red, Kk wile clip 
IS plas 5 EScm Si) 49 38 gle >> (49b) olen oh» 2 ioe 
ait gue SS, Je oy oe St pee SX, 4k. Nt 
x NS Pld Ls 

iF de lt pl ply cS GS le Jes 
ee, 3\ xdoS & Sale Pie ae Sin ache 
Lshealls olds ote ccd, er lt ly wo Ghee 2S ae | 
os ae cnj) Bogs ale ore itis eb allel. «5 
K 2a, % — io ot Kk NDdy Ot) 
iy es ot td AS see 5\ ey G38 alee 
«eS GLP ae ih Va : oe s\, i. S12F ol, 4 les 
rel yes Pil > Ss ele axle: oy SE De opld 5\¢ S\ oes h 
BS > jay 25h, or oy? A\ eit sale 5) 
et 3\ Je, par 9 — etd 0259 » ede To, 028 lye 
ee ee Na gS Cue ot (08) Oks Siew ps lee 
ol pt Sram ody 5) 1 ‘ Ses = 03) 9) yo 
pr ly iS, ahs My = Soe ome 
Se aber a Bp cre hi pe ane 5 joy > atol, 
ae | oh 52 sutls IS ere Shans le acs +yJ\ cs 
x DE aS 

NS a xd 65 aT Oe ie le Lt w2; ole 25 
Veg OW ee sas dle 3) estate Boyde Ula) HET 








* (_X5.) Misread in translating as (,%uS, 


sae GREP ni 


anh ey — dtl oS yo (48d) \, Des Ses es 48K 
Koy de Sy SL Oye & 13\ D> er J Souls 53 \ ype 
eos a hin Be Sp eS so ele it ete ae 
a8 | 
Ai Soy oS 5) Seri 9 485 Jers 29 &—~ call 
* Se dish 51 sie cpl Se iF ple ok, d\s ALE, cam 
NE 5 ent cule, OF Gall ey 50 IS Hoy AN er 52 
Kee, y¢ F 5\,55 J a deh cole rpyd S S535 2 aS 

KAS, pyle Sat! (69 5 § sides 98 cop4 > pee 
aS eh Syhtes y 0050 Sly — At Slee lee shee Spam 
2S sles of us S23 paul. | paeeth 

SV St egal SD pb yg? tog 209 Sls ae 
em sho cuss 4m gs 2S eS lA sl x Sia; eb oldsl 

1S, 99 — KAS ae oS 5\ja od \i ad dod gu 9 abl, ks 
OFF P 2 Mw ee Nh tee gS a (492) Margy cys 
eh ol >> ly lee oe hen “gh Al 50 *e) ots ine 
: yh coe on pe se oy cledlye 5 td 55,3 Ss pam 
a ee £4 kay ol, Se 
tal OFS a \ ue in cp lll “a 355 
Fonda jt, eee ate ae 
ZA ZA 

alt 2S CS S dy om « #2 9 Se S25 he > Ss 
HB, 02S ciBlye gh 53 sy Wye Ulery od, 9 te) 


wer Oh 


oe pe tees thos oe Hl es oa de | Soo 2 5 
A SH Bs a3 eg tails thon, 5 33-\3\, 4 p> ole 5° 
x AAA Sle, Aid y0 So 3 Sins a x Soll. ole )? > 
ia SN—aglalyy dle 52 laogs Ss 5 po» Sto pao 
028 lye Vp Als Ly es donee >> als 
sl ee HK N23) ol, 59) astath Bs ehuack, orien, 5M 
te pee § wins a” 292 a he) 
dibeih; a BS Aakey isl 5.95y 6 (488) Ho osh\) tecticag 
Opa Ny hess * O15 alee SIL, ee is\> ,S> 
“5 son Ln pry le ee J 3 2p 4 O95 ai 
x > le 


i bee rae has al; PN nae a 
haba a, g* Oh30 “rs sh dpis oe hase s 
% Ssh, a. 

ead ghey 55 Se S593 Ab ple on Ss iahtlacs 
2\je alike 59 02 vs | * tub she 53) 025 Gee, pam 
: x KOS 3s Sal pli duy dam BT updo x ole 38 ai 

ms metas | liz 3 5 bey 4 lah sas LAS, 
ero sel oO 


=< ad 0 OLB capam ok a babe ts Sede 





* (Lisy) Text, passim, spells thus. 


ene a me 


433 § so\,5 asils , BaD celiteins So 2s 9 Assn pip 
an Sores 0s Se 
x K A33 , oes, elit eked ae ol? > od ee 5 BS 
Sa de go sing ols Se ale 2b aye S easle 

Soo pS aie y es lath aN 3) 055 & Lobigerl, ol (478) sa 
koe x NS é2 she 5 9 A 35 “ Ss ee 
23> asol, pam tA K 23 pe ook scutes Koj he Os 5 
KNidgas ol a4 oF ee onl KAS y 423 , 

§ solid Og\yo a> is 5\ Lo! Kg Sse ge ki Rye 
apt HAT IE 28 B yl eke, Soy, al capt 
Aa\ solo, 5 pam ky Ut Onley ryyrast | > 55 
S545 Bly ae Vl Soy el Gol xe oa pol 
oS euth pilllol. Sb does hats Apc ype 
jk \5 eg Ce gad glial § o.\ O52 — 3 ke § sioluu3 
Nae HAdy ASF al, ely edkey oe af ule was 
sk Sid, 9h bee Ss De Sle So pam al Oey 

J \ de (47b) ssils SD uy ae LS ES cles 

ial @ dps KN Fae she ar cle, oe 
ihe iain 26 Late chs a 25/3 
apd Ole cle Sh 29 — SS pry OE pars Jak Vie 
# SS ogy 5 GE ole ule 


ag ks 

US she # 0S pd wile 4) oS & cle 3 EF EX Shy 
| 2S lowe EE LSE HT ptm Byer Geely OS BY 
* One y pall S38 WSF cyan? Cp yy (462) aS \, 55 0 S\ SN 
Ses gh ke )\yu a Fras -155\y0 Gal oltsly ena 
Ne xath ob 1 SS wo J So (S)\gu Shy LEI, 
yt oe G\p »— Loge s a> * oD\I3 Cul So 835 
la Se 3 ele heir 4% Ml etsl ale 
leh aie Se \ Ouis Sa gs Volk HA gd \y 
si € 5, Jie dy 9 KN 0DS uns Sai (5 )\gum \yo 9 Sy\ gu 
PRs hg hod S New cd» \jog5-tull, gh araiys ly 
0S Ste iol wa dase 

SBS pay Sle j\ wAdE SGP eye OS y\ye opm 

oy Bu 50 35 8 Vy le 5 ls Oy 2S cals \yp KIS. Lol, 
> 328 oF 5h Amy Eh 5 pl $2) tS 52 9 Sere 
(sob) Sa) a Hog oles 09 05 VSN KsisE ly OS; 
Ets ol e's lee 55 ole —— Suy Shoe gttl 
og ty be br } \s AS Vass sk bata ult S Noyes \y 5 SO 
gaits phe Sapte IS F oly — A eat g hailey seal ke» Ns 

Sle S sds, ee: <sshapel S55; de AE EF Cg 2K AD, Ay 
hee yg Sh Os 92 OS 6 wal 35) Spee sual, A 
‘ siden lye A 5 lye 


Jat On xy SS E%5 SS bss Ss ds - pam 





* (;lg>) The M.S. writes the name of this jewel of chroniclers 
in the plural. 


aly to Bein) ys ial 59) 5 \ Jas oh be 
2S Nyy oS lo tay MBN 5p -9Qasa) ooh ile ee 
Bel, Bide, pede EL95 yg KE Gly dene ile NA 
J Bae spam y— 32 Sey 3, pg heey \ ge ple 
cS “ee iS tie Som yy dedye ofS A, 
oi So tes 3 Sty rere oe al 
<A, Bae ae aaliy at Fie xno os) SIS 
oh 5) Ae, cake J» ig hs 98 el, p95 enat U js, 
eb S252 42 S314 wals ss joy aa evil Adiga) jens 
— 39 p92 25> 9? gdh el, etn, ctl pall « shi Bak 
Dae Silas tole pam code 3,5 a\ hee Soh y de Sh 
ez Jo | pam «pw de | gigs sc rae Urge 4S di 
ade lye ae S Holes pull ier yale Sil widye memes 
gle 22, (45b) ile 40 Eley s aK Sys ihS pe Me 
pam le5 lie le f sk 42: © 5) Ky odd pps 433 
Pa pS chy tule Sp Sle eyes daly ote 
jah cake oe 3 JH o\sl\ , oN iE pF ote yo 

fo 5 slo ss sy p Solis ass — er 
§ Sle a», s Mego b cop Me EVES sc \ ya pam 
Heed yolul 23, 6 2S wl » ole &\, + ie é sal 
3? Spam Sy\y~ ie 9 22S co see Soo.) SL kK 
Sider OF 0359) Shop aint ys 8 — aah Vege 
SoS opt oS 3) jet ae + 08S elle SFV 3 Woe Glacwes 
—9$ #5 Wok WS ah J 5) Am — 095 Voges J5) tb 


ae Be a 


a 8 a ae £5 T ye F2,. PS\5 cul dy ead ab, 
» 5\ Sa) oe oS Ss a mr lt lj yey tidy Al 5» ole 
Nal yd Gh> 59 dp 4S dy yg o> es aS Gb 
oe Gk & asl eS > oS IL Oe eee ler Seictiive 

xe Sls\ 53 sh,o 52 |, x hj oo b J3-\5\) 4 

Som pS ke ail £ Sp ree tn S 5; i) Ae 

Me yte SSS ol go lee ie och pm pe 52 acai 5) sy 03 § ES 

De alec! ol, \joltal a> eas Kew! OLS << 
ged apa ASG ae 293 ete AS Si ge S ok’ ioe 
KISS AS aye AS, Sh dE 

ie be sate onan \5. yt Soadd pe Shed 3 chee 
5\ se slens poli Sk Vw Ute US dey ata 
Le als oe 5 4S sad dias a hos wale act Sw obi 
oF ol 5 \Ta 1S iss # pty lee \ 2S? 5 el \e 5\ Ue *a,I 
ee SS lS, 50 Volek stacgtine eb «5 ols s\'sy\ 
at cies Ks \, alse S 

a ule, +! L 3 5 le \t \b Solus YS 22> 
eh gc tl, Le AS 1 ut Gls \_k SVS 5, ols \ lb 
lee De p> M5 ob #35 es de ose | le ASS (S\ 4: 51 
edad Jol. 5 0S eer pam dep KS salt bb, o 
cls fore oe Jk ol Sle bog S54 capcom 3 «2 
oF eT sale MB Nt one EO agols le Lee, 
OS Jal ys sk \L 

tig Bd yd Sle dry 035; ge e8 \yoe ol ob 53k | 8 


BOE ailies 
Sepam KILL) US ym til ehatad we cl So SB le xa 
Kees pet sil le b Sie 

fs oy dle WLS shar Ye jis Jeb S38 
lS 30S cea Ss sito plell, 52> sol x sdlncges 
£1 S25 Jal > S dss 3\ x Dewy alse ee 
Gh See ge come 4S Sw ale oS oh 

el oll, (43b) 5h a Hs g) yehty Alas ye oud Sex 

90 5 aa 

gay oe SGM ue ok bo 55) Jer sl oe Ce 
5par Ny aul Soy 59) A 4592 59) Jk pli p> cing Jer 
pe OS Sl \tav Seley al aS oe he easy oltol 

lS al 52 ple ate Si Sarg (8 > balls Vis» 
g\j\ aa) Ze io WV Sis gay ae tie GV, nls Ma a 
soetas a sm gia g Hints GAS 49 OSes 

cio e cha. Ute 5 Vel ol 5. #2y LK > Weis 
Ate ge Go Py OF Gh od AN xsl, 

1 wok ISS) \y je RSS Lads ceed, 1, Sidon 5 oe 
S sai. Cl gclwe dom gta Dy nek sthiF 5) 7) > ols 
Leyva aal5 yy\gel sdocens ejay ie Cit agi E ylocl jl 
Sime SIG 9 Oy 40d Cy Jhiso obtalpasee: ej Se gag >,\> 
2 5) US tae yd gy ob Sho J\# Los @& Sd 
Bof eer |, 4), sa, choy ie tad Sans ge olbsh, c4,.a> 
x2 Js3 Ss oe Ket ge S35 og on? S Ll s 
23 F oul, als El eAsll Val oy th, 26S a Sl 


oF BEE eck 


a oe Sera gh or x48 
e onl a. gh ae KD gays oe . a Ast 
mane og 
co. 3d 50,3 ok é., Mealy ae pkg 
4 ISe cane ly Wy) ne ee 4 — ceed be Hi ghdn > ceegd 
See ele Nee cp Ved ppl Shad 5 lade Slee Ajpee 
asl ls oi Jh3 $2 aa VSL. rs\ oLtol, ypa>— fly 2 
db, aul dy 00S ht 2s oldol, cs pam Hoyt eas 

cal pe gol § solu.) Ars 9) ie esl, par vy < 3\ dey 
sam Kd) Os, ot Al 4 aco ew 1S sk sen e 
ok ue) a \g LS oho cpl tes Aaa 9} “— > ols 
* seal i, bs Vast \ gia sal ees a\ \as\ os\ 
* ols daut 345 “ brash \ lds, 4 2> 423 esl, a> 
loll, ur ae Fass, KD» hs 85 og ) 3 Olé 5 \ es 
3 he Ordb | ie gh Oe Jen3 (40) OS oS Sy xy 
Wa 24a « ‘pal OW on Sapam 
oe bec, eee yam — 4s po hs 


ois pes 2S ey isp ye — iS \5 5 # Save ye Se Su 


gro Sails oye So —eiFiad, FB 5 “le Maia 


i ys emt Ro tip po cel ple gay ch glalol 


as gh 


So pei eis 
ae aes ca Sapna 
edt am yo ne Jou noe 8 pm ca dt 
ek. lye ease 5s 25 fortes a> 

ds x 425 lbs\ § 4 Os as: ES ia \y5\ OF Spam 
Vo Let 5 abel ole 02 pe eZ lan aS, dyin ig a 
§ b— solu gs | yl as e pam jh «sin, ee ai 
ae Ph le pte lez) 
Ast 2 Assent ol Sow aon fs 

B21 dye pam, S2t3S ON sh Vj pu Sloen Se lel py 
\5 pee ee iV BAS aS cltal, rpm kK Ugtee leds aeges S 
sat Ss ont S (sn, 2) a3 at, S tok 5 ee 
UP Lis aco aS \5 Aid » Visee OF xls, lms 
all, nam yy Onies o> cpl \ oltol So pam x 5 \ os, 
a sedek 


may e Cult Eye Yoltol a> \j x er AP 5 he Cle 





clearly the scribe’s error. Mir Seatindes was a considera! servant 
of Humayin and is named in the histories as the envoy. Cf. note 
to translation. 

4* 


—— Oo — 


of dle GUS, shay 3 te SV = — 1% hi ak ol 3 SL 
Urgne ab andl y 0 &, od WE suds 3 he S15 od\o JSS 2 
S99 HN ye SE tee ed SI he gee gpl Sete e ii 
Beh, Va al N mnie dle 

Fie 3 tt Ne sein HE Lb ae tp 
cel theme age V5 ype OP S WS am yee kK Ngee lle 
Bley 35 492 08 CMe V ems ly Noe SS oe) ey gee 
(419) Jy0 jay th tm, Fylhe 52 xsd eye lh, 
es dy Ot lay ald no S dé Asal, ss lay AT Ve «si, 
e\ol8 Loew Solo ~ 25 BIS CS 02S eens 
pe xe eae 592)\5 unl ee BT xh ole xsd, 
vp pb yt xl pie j\ A Sine Lhe cothage Stal ela 
5 pdm etl a le ( gS?) od5 catls Sam S\al- So» 
tb, tikes 53 bes ely Mis des bee} 3) ten iS 
ys Bb ze 5 pil gie lel # Hidgé lb a ale aes 
ails eaedd oy jl ak Bidken d pam eas Ade yao oS 
cand Sal 924 1) Sa als a; - BioS Sete lee caper 
& 55 Fae ie she, eI ON Ds oa oS 
999) We dels eet 

hee p05 ta, tte, Se tle cb hae MSI, 
LL &, $4. a tlh —ob bya aby ot ly 0 
33 leans dala Shee 4 a pam 5 Oy OS ppas Ach (41b) SF 
crn ol \5 poe Soy Ek aad SLo5 4 —sioy, alas J eae 


sas TA ote 

Jal 55 M5 yn a diSe 42 XD») Ache spits fl ee 
ye JM Bat de 52 95 sed 3) gos emg? e ole 59 nee 
£42 gb Se oh oe a 5 

oy? * Ai) odyé os eS, aS ote Wor in o 5 "2 
Silo \5 xol> ewe sel CE Dewey iS pad ia 
(402) 4! 2S cle & 

5 ype g EAM 9) ya dy yA 52 ¢ Olle Sade ye 
Sh a eities xdiols V3 je ch, Sel 3K SSS 
3 328 oF Soy 4 ae One gos op Sea ed le S 
* Ady, od lis yao Gee \ jpeg tae et ass am 
lias <o| 4S> o\> aes. 25) Cha ls eS 2S 58 Ll 
PL? ME ats 298 ae SMI 8 SG yt tS tog 
Sign JS eee ol 

He AS 25 pdm aj Me dom gto Dy) OS Sey ee OW aah s 
Sle as Sesethe ADS pat oy sold ole SS a'y 
S\ cals fle Aig ole ul ais d)\> exe 4 £385 
pow Ay ner ptt dole ei We Ake eS pm Spam 
J& 5 Gi Ont ny bea Jies 3 o> oh pts hope kak s 
HD gh ABT oA P\ soley KAS aol yd do gee OF 

(40b) N85 gay GUE a ool, Gul Sion 3 apa 
485 el, WW ode ole 8 lye Ul ath ath oh Vy ne shes 
Nd vy oy 255 whe 53 NS gob a pte \, IOS aS 
Si JT 1 ip S sirye3 pam ket oY JF 3, — a3! 
— abo ANA S gt oe VC Stioguin IS 4593 yee 

4 


F 2iSy 09 J 43 o3 i se (398) Ghail oh xauk SB pu 
xed ah lel jo — ale UST 
Jl, is ge Sous SO phate 28 oF esle 5 anes e 
ly cul 3 ; ED) LS wre S 2 pam Dy y ee xoS 
- a3) = mae ola oll a2 “| ut ule £ 
Seb ae a Migs asa ee ae 
_ y Sin Se a, — ae «al eek 
ot Sale sel seh a or ok dsb ae ae “t5 
% AS Jol, 

ory Halen s aty click Lek) ol lye te Se Ss ge OP 
shy xtoles ety el eed ge yt Sle 39 Spay ont 
sn Kee Coa 
(s0b) ash lie gta yd Sayer — 2 . a9 t «2\ 5 

Pps 8 le 52 ot Slo * SS si cpltel Sane 
IR UAS 5 Oude jam Ld be Gm 3) wal spe Sa\ wo ole 
De ews Loe class 1 # we 9 Gh slay oT ken 
Gib slo wale 64533 2 de css a) aS, oi) cols apa 
Et el S ty pao edhe 1 ee pill Je 

PPO. SN Sgukg—p le ded 3 045 Sal coud Gomee 

AE Salys oy fe 


Me9 ek FS J5 & oF se le oe ela 
ote! Se 33; Gli e> che bo eel eptigy capt 
Oe de wl ophP oll, par pb po Taller Gs — 
re J J\8\) 
Sshy\ 5 yw 52k 5 Sok, Bs Iban \ olssl, ae 
KAS yg P ogee 3idy wl > hs a 
Sophy rI\, Se jlo 51,055 cally 3 3 ao, en je 
als “a eK, eat ces oc el lail a3h Sc es 
ilsl sews a5 \S'& tap pasdal) p58), a \ Stes 
(a8b) Veh NS yl as lh Co Sie ches) chal gh ak esl 
‘Aders Kem wey otal SL. — 4, 73 SL, 4 — ois nae 
9 OS, rpm oF ede NNT Spel jh Vjlind tio Mn 
a & asl) soo 50 \ po oy 9 \ yl camr_9 dg ope 
He idee, 
DP) 4m gts a3 5 oy, 8 Sak ism ods dad 5 ole 
jay Asi 42 BFP 24 IS 2 ) Volbel s ollye & 445 
K Sikes y Ph onl 
ttl og 8 cl ce pa thos BE aele Fl 59 oyte 
jy 9 Ae yd 5° Ne esis Re hye pe ole pt 5 Sy 
o> Ss) bal as 095 dw 098 99 Se nt Sah og 5 ioe 
Spey th po Sgt Oe 
AP \y5) xo» IG x Azsls (sic) \,\ eb 5. ee bpm 9 
Ji. eli — slalom oS sole. a ia itl Ss oe 
one as se oh jg éh # has’ 52 \ haw g tea 


Sei 
se o\ woth Se jp ELS 35 5 AP 51S sol. 5 er 
e\# 5 Hw Ti2F yop 15 ale Ko ol & J 3\ 
+. aS —— 
Va pe® j\g age obly jy nally 5) oiled, els. eh de at 
+ Nx Ot OWS rsh 5% 3) S ghrbis co Ns 
Soh ees £ - ches $ 0 * Bp 9} 9 > ol 
ae VS diy (87d) athe 42S 3,a% 4 ene oe IK endo 
dy: 9 di jhe e 35 aL Si of S stl y Netls ae 
aces pam pim Ld, 5 Big ek ee dy cy ye Sin 
o> 5j\\3 S33 Nai Soe S gente pl 4 tink. batty ab el. 
th iad 2'5f ase 2S hehe Ve og Wl sh 
Shs alesh— 6 ae pen ae SEV SV pre oe & 
stb ale 5 J5\ a2 52 6p wl &\S a 
obs MS oy 9 Val 5\ pre 5) 58 soe) oats ie Or 
\5 se ol, \ bao ge J\$5 al, 08 ans D9) d\az\ poe 
KO) dL Ole S oly iC 
x Som cc. he ae ah 5h ae 
pam Sa aoe ‘\ ssh x oks\ cyte Sa) aa 
xual, che y et § 29 Bh \ ke 5 ol>le 
KALE sel amy OF yall oly Soy ie Bye § 1 
M5) 28 Sly> Ssioged (380) Sloe ly ng erte el Sle 
25> gt Ve S ptt ole laa al ciate in Abs 


Se wsly cle Le eds yb on, Lobe é Jil * 2S 


* * (a3) |S) Misread as (sl 3s in the translation. 





sak EG wee 


capam See Ke op) tee hos bt Teds owe 
a Sa 

ind ole 25555 EF Ghee Le je base, j\59 
fly es Sah ep rerslal oy ot A Sue at gv, 
fs SoS bol BAN sie eS ae el (36b) cule & 593 
cpl lds aypae * Bolsa; gliel « lel, lish 2 ao et 
Boye LS, 5 BAN Le gt Se estat oe 
25, dong kx 6) edged US, : ati Le Sls » Sa £ 
35 54 39 599 b\w Ble s 38 le gli m be 
eS LOS ye gs ele 

B28 GS apem etd gS 3) he jet 6 dak, ee oe 
ease aS lye dg gle! Yale lye eee co sey 
ON j\ ates by oltal eyeae © aidad cle 5 5c 55) aoe ae 


«42S SN \ ic Se ee Ae fe dt IS SST 
soles \yalask shed ole SMe S625 Atauts y ght Syl 
Vow on Ree 3\ eg oY ce LP 5 .\ Sm Wyle & 
5 seal oe Nast sa eles § wth iF oliol pat Bas 
oe & \VS ere Se oil $1 (870) pale it 9 Se 9 at sent 
San Spam Koy Sale eS. Ske OF on Ph LP Of S 
pS tle rola y edge oltoh cy ge x55» 5 sath aS vyltl 

aN § yas \ae, 43>, \) 2 aliok | che o \5 po EB) ee eee 
ls ;\_ So Sth, aS \\ exp? py ody KAS: py ole lt 
pe AG Leal 00.50 hui gs 5 stnga bose steel ar ee 
SS, Sl yo» 5 rt oles Gly jl te Zl kan Le 


at 25> >\y & (35) o45 sy OS SF tio. jks iS 
Ghee VON 5 eam Tle ad) 3 Ulie Jl 
ae = S\ fel 09S jne Sa — eel JL se A> 
2 us| O° OIF slats ol ee or Stioye3 cspadl yas 
8s $1 kel dios phx oy oer Se 
ASG ble): oe es 
od aia el oll, pam alee Vil 1 x are 
33,5) ee oe oe Orit 256 \jye Jee Les, — sinks 
ee ed 5 Gl \te sof ladles ol, prey 
423 aoe diol, Sey oak) 3) Mae hoe oll, 
Cy ate Ns Silt cian 9 Fa te THAT Sie Soy 
3 «eS SND ‘| yy Sse sey GRE Gy oe okie 
cle) 3 05 Je jet Stee FS 59) bop 3) Ju 3 F 
alto SV Ago 53\ x t2il> ce le Sh, lta a> lil ow? 
dsloy \o> . les (008) i>», Oe Kise il j\ kere Zs 
s\n yr, sa td lees gale Sh \ Ae 4 9 
ells am eat LA OE y J by—suls oF, \ Ss 
sh. YE Wspp jaa Sada 
Se pre et Nine ¢ Me BOS bbl & S soy 3 Ss 
siiol, Ns ay 41 39) ‘ Sa, arose Ais Salo aoe 
dus Grnary x Jid», 4 ole ult yl as Jee Vy ye Hols 
ol 2 58 MANS Vey — wd Bl: Gly jl toy, 4) Sh 3h 
Ves ace sols aS oat, tutl wl ctu le 
KJ) oH y Sd5, ead tes Vial Se Shasley 9 Lreds 


a $e 


JS el 42 O21» \yla te, all, 2S ob; Pies Sisal 
LOS J) pe lth 

pun oldo\ 0 pam aN a dak as cry 
wile Voge Sag ax Sloe yo Soler pat HS Se 5 oe 
x 1,25 I 

3\ jg) Hee gh de HOS ud Ileal spt oly C\iee 
S35, ole x 33> Se cL \ olzs\, So pa>- ke os) Sl SS gh 
A> \ on Ke ea 43) A> Dd» mews sac pam 
Sede SS 3, Vot,3) sla li J5\ 5 sions 
> eee eid Be S29 he — ous IS 
we @ ee as ag ea) oo “ Sse 
5) 2) 39> 42.26 ro Ly lS & ail xf \ Bes 
* p23) Sth Ve & ruse urls é Sle te 

SN x Sdy: wal OM cyte Erk anam j9) ter jl dary 
K Ai gt oS pry ask a ee % ScA\' ol baste \Son 
Glail 5 a> cpl s onl & as oe x NS ls eel ae 
Jj Jlse § 185 oy "SN, ee dl SSL 5 ‘cad MS, aqsiadt 

& 2k wb caylee er (shits, \\. S ifs i, uy ols, 
we Je e ara5 dye ith \y) tno hes 
eit od gs Gets Al 2iF ple ae (lie Lt | pe 
— AS 554 S\,— pli Jlae oe gb Ne a » JIA 
p> ops oi alo 5 OSI, epam 4S toy atl, lie 


: 
ose Vp atl |p — eS aey gS F ylisd ewe jl pte 





Lisl a 5 Se , wr re af de 
Se dable cite Sse tes & aids 9 SS ole cis, 39 

Se cD x Sid» oliol, he nek, al 
Lad die p Bait cs, A> § a pot bis, SA 
Add de F A8s egies el 389 $255 5 

wh ce? 6) 5) te AT 59, Jor b sled hig 

Neh tony Se sols, So slyo, So ge oe yp? 
ee ee My oe I eS Mesh sae 
4es\ eal 95 § sey th Spey 

Je 8 oe ies det: Joke: EJS (B42) 5) se Sloe Ves 

Vague gl. Sat e029 ee e ara T ole Sus vlalye)s> 5 
fed) cS ale 2 Fal 5 SV ly pes ei cathe 
Mee whe J? OIF 2,3) Sg da 59 1 2b |Sok \j Js Ae 
os\ S Je Bye — 295 Lode, 218! pol Sak jn 9 Jiao 
fe tants 028 J3 \) Jeo je5 5\ Slee ye 2S > yy 

lan, plik dels @ olel pot Mase Gul S Nae ye 
Biden SF fos, * 445 \, Jao am yee e pet Noi (jj od5 go: KS 
gag 3° j) Jug — sew Jeo 5) art Sal | Ve 9 de 8 
S25 pgs Vole Ns se eal BS N35 S93 de Be 
Vtg — yee Odd Go 9y ox Woe aot y clio o> cles 
ced dy kee — SF ee Vb 955 eee sh ch ISL, 
Sy yt oF) dagen ST, Slee Me bods hue £ 
“atin de 5B oe OF Le 8 Vue 2k tne deo (340) Rats 
08 \ 4 35 \, View |; ee Sp BSS ot dw dy ols leg nw 5 


M45, Ve pS Loe Shes Sal px Sl, sit So 
# ey ay yy ple b idS 2 

Bae aloo eal es: el. pS ts eee 

FHA og NE pte pay 2S S Ko § te “piel 
Des a odler 5) Sort Aye 9 al IRF SD 1S WA MeN ony 
Ss cad dE asl e SVl au ol wal 03,\ (33a) j\é oF 

onl ole pt S tiog, cuts Sle—oy ome IS g gee 
SESS jqet 53 U5 Jel 1, cal uh Sel KF, 
AA ae aatay ae eae 2 i tree he eee 
B sale shin tle goal Lo 2 OF xl jy) 4 
wh she Get gtk wel, Mel 23° oko pier oS 
“ues (ee wapar at coke 0,55 oh 
Liew Jay er Sa) puss 1 a8 ben jk el JA eadle toy, 
sul oy: eee Gr ee adal jg chet s aids cae 
j92 saaegt We imal, 5 dinelt ohas sal, AE xs oj 
br ort, Jee cisle 395 9 Hage erat erly Ko 
eo eed NSA poy ath ‘Se oh etal ee Sl 
(Bab) oy aly o\S, slo Al > xaaeul ps0 So ins oy ;\ 
| — Srys y at Oss el S33 Se karte: Sil shy 5\ 
Sete jie oS) gals whds J age SS ll 3 
KIND wd peal a,b 1, pe Hale tee Bb hie pate ie 

a 3) kes al, lis |; (bas g Mel el bi | Nj geen 





. (8,5) Text % SA. Clearly an error. Humayitin was marching up 
the Diab from the junction of the Jamna and Ganges, towards Agra. 


Se BS oa 

sku J PF pt es}. OF Gols * Jd» aa a de ye 
Beat ets acl Mas 4S bem |, 9 Sy a SS 
pet as Bh S og ety Ae \ Su Sle adi 
see 34 5 Se Se fe Soe K Aw) an 7X9) 
LS at hes 

aS AS okee dea ge aes fay Mees g'S AS ae 
Fn OS ce OFF eon) 237 BF choy, Aap ost 2S; Ee 
oT lb Gols ot ot acl 253 BF thos 3, 
wud, MSs, 5 4, tid 253), wl > 2S 4 ead lop 
£135 \) 55 

cdg, je aoS ye 55 Os kaa eee Ny jo de a | 
eADE GH JSloe Vine # FV) sy pS Srioy 12 

Boe 2S ajo Vj ye gal Jory ES aly y ES 5-8 
oie. com" BS Wy poe 9 — BN 43, 550 dg oltol, Sa, 
oy 25 — 4 0349) om Shire dey ie asl les ox 
oe Jie @ Se al oe, (s20) tres gle LE 5» 
ehh 52 5 28 glee a2 » 5 Saal lel, ak 9 “er Sy 
* HOTS ogh Nae Vow elewie oblie s De 2S Ub 
Vay coe He saling Vie opal 5g Mj el ool Cad eet Sl 
oliol, «. Ss . x BILL, |e Loe este Ts * Sara, 
hadi ak S eS A 555 oh. eid oS | dom gia Dy 

Os slook \é a: eas Gol idea AS 
RG Pe lage oy O'S ply lay acd 
Am ois sap xia, So aly OL Loge si C4 


Af tay. oS ce oksl) 5 e 3 ole Dee ble y 
098 Sam y dt lbs pyutt 4915 Ju, poly ole. 25 tse 
pam Pl eed, vile le ot SF 5) Ses | pole oll. 
od, lard Gla ctliF\, cle Jo Cale of Joh og 

se WAS oli papers dS pa Lobliel 2M setae 
elt gates — Hoye ede ESE Mit loblarl, wf 
3 pam 5 — tolo 1s oan pee ok 4 \yoe 9 — Bale ollele Cum 
Mae jh i a, che a eed gta dal edut alee jl 95 
OS ar coleS ¢, 5e ahaa Siege J32 
pm sslel ys V xta5s lou oe pam |, ease wale ee 
5 os le uaa 42S (a1) gl, aus esldl ny 
dd) yd lee Stay ET 5) el on 4 Shh dey 

dsl Voblaal ESus Wye preg dE ols 5 fy Sat 
pew iS o\ 5) bie ae S sidghy pamrg— an ish Ute 
2978 Sidgd Sapte ogre K Sig» tual 51 ty Hl od Gi Vie 
Gala ssslo,i LS ale, aia — 34 Bi dogie SUE 
K Aid, Si 5 AS, G se Sia) Sy ile 2S oF ashy 

shit ph ee AAs \ edhee 4 ed, dhe o wile Gl jl ae 
ee in Ow S of atls aos 2 im aes dy ocd gs 
x th cats LEI > Jor, tiny Soe GI po WEE eel 

capt (nt, SAS OS FH; MNS ab etal, £ soy 3 y2 
alSel 5 meng 2S eS — Sid Uh Gam ght ay 
Oye Pat KD, MS lis S eps x SAS 


LA\es 5) pe Kt \&: dy Pg H3) a Se oS al - 


sh iN 0245) Gi8s Bh gy.po Seal iy; din 5 58 a6 ole 
SpNyte\— ah atl& Mee Wale ys al ak ties, 
oe wel Sb eal le, Gary ake Gs js als 52 
»— er Lae Le x cathe awl sly, olet onl UL po llidl 
ee S55, 5 ts op pas So clue 
Say es; j\z » ahs er dal (s0b) 51 x 4.23\, WS eyis.» 
MS, ee8\ Sel S alos Sus lett Soy ots jay ste 
fe iW id) Va Say ole Elin cle ogee g epee 
a jae x4) 23 0 Atsh S szssls ap, 3S ge? Leck 43, 
ee es op NU ew oe Sih; Ve ed 
ee AN Seth ede 
od pblal be bls V a5) 942 oy Kel 0g ble » pee 
pele 39 alo 9— is is 22 Sp O82 bts 694 5) ¢ a. oh, 
as. ioe OS eee de “ohlé 3) S55 
— 83 ox 5) Bly Be or 4 9 he ysl 
Ply be Sass ols ashy ole oN § sp, aig bs aS; 
Jisls at, ond one: JE & SF «le Se, 
pas S 12S le oh ¢ < a ae pe tS a 
VL & 24, Hat \yb\ re 3,5 (s1a) aolS 3\ 5, 
egy el EA lel ak Lal oe lal 5 
peli ope wale aty Js atl dish — plo ole oe 


* asd, > 





* (Lb) Read as ba wujid-i-an. 
** (=v) Read in translating for _.\=; an attested writing. 


dogn 25 oltoh cpar olS tee 3) tery xls (29b) 2S 
cen em) Gd p25 # jhe AE dey olen aie 
3 Ulery — Asa ols oe ese Shy Sex 5 2233 we 
leSal Gat az b Sde gh 52 8 ,— 42S ly kesh; gl 
x LD— oS 
ly yaetb yp cl use fh ah qt’ aa Shao ela 
Sandor enti 53 chem» lah? or ln) 381 Aid 9, el, 4° 
Peo NY de eo +, \lal... a AP 5\5 Km Us 
SS" oS jar oh) j\ da oy = A otles's Se ES IF 
rubs 
9 We AS J5\ Bp etry Lb, 3oF lS, 
aA 52? Big My 2 OF? BF ay La et a ASL 5 WSs 
S23 & Oleh. depos OF *42)5) wis anh lS 
\aprin® 5 "WS ad eae wes Gl le so, ol ee 
i ti S (308) opbP y son als K £292 pam oj J 
cpl GIS > Bla Bg — Sede oP lat? 485 OR oP tore 
Lays lee 51, 2 Ot te, eb kins Gk 
Tyee ts 3 ay oe gay lols Sy Wet el, leld\., b&, 
pam ej ds jo 40 a Ate a hb Hk Sid ge 3 alse 
; * 498 SG 
sh S Sidy0 3 cst el SK 3, S495 joes | os 
KMS la, isk S szls ne % Azle Lb ee 





* (@y>e) Cf. n. to trs. 
** (5959) 39 y> occurs elsewhere where 9; might be looked for. 


ae ON. 
42 Sb 4ow e Gas jes ae wii s digs 5 ALT 4 
Shays by 5 Si92y3 ci 59 igh Vw Slay m9 B95 


*S}92y) Legg? 9 5S) 9255 Jhesy 5 


ak 3) So Js sl Sale sho tay 6 Se fll, 

xi Ql o¢ 3\ Bs ten5 5! a3 3979 5 i 5 MSs 
— 2 dle s dle chs — (4) sass 3(\) oe 
lane dh je uw Jo dboe ol, blab oe ch, 
lI at) 5 oa Chas Ss oleh accu te 
La S555, oS ar XS, re olils aN oS cm (298) ae 5;\ 
ae \, ell oles, o\i53 Gb A Me SRS gh (£549 diols 


Pd 


so ew dle \ 48 5 — id an Moka AB Athi Sons 
ies 4 Lit» ol, oh» ol Wh 5 5592455 SS gaye 
® pint 59 5a (Se I Po Gees uz) 

Ble 9 oe j# Bis Sy ee N56 i 43 je AN , 
es iy oy Nl Wes Sis355 eo ¢ 25 cA) 
a dS, AL, oi; 5 J? 45 we ke os “\ Se 
#3 85 dug 5g Me ae ro 45 hie 

ole 255 45 Sak 4 $15 Sb 5\ seal jay 

ASSL, rpm Kewl Ody, Vicwt acl. 4 — pls KE Yel > — yale, 

as. bk cn Cue def & Kol. V lla My is See Ae 
Vl Gbal > fst Se acy tly: 52 \gul x tioku 3 \ oe 5 





* ? of neck ( ;=)— jewels nine. Nahr is the part of the neck on 
which the necklace rests. ,=%} might also be read as zingir but I 
have found no help to this reading in dictionaries. 


UF 5> > 255 fe 5 él> SK £ sioga3 altol, cs ode 
Mets 4s} pw yp Ol oe Kos Nee HF cle ST 4 Jes Me ay 


isnel pS Me ay 035. pres Se & lle ‘ee 
cule aS a— >,\si so sioge olds, 32> (282) vols o> 
49 5 Saree 2 uF oF Sh Shy out IIT sh S 
K Se Onwy Ss b GO, Ap 293 tO Sw che yy it 
Aas 55 sts yb A - rd 2» Boye Ly ogre Salt 
» * Sols one 5 02>) o> os es lols, 9 \nplail s Jsol eos 
oki Stes a 5 4 2)\ ln de? so SWE 25 oy wb re oe 
- 0S je ails Mb xo S 2 2 Sjk lS hs dinate oe me 
- Es oS Ht Je BS oh 50 5 edgy amy ol La stds 
Ue aL Fo bb oe asd ls a a2 oo dow 
Je ee K Soate eee? a 
i Bib dy 038 les wish the Joo lel st - cx 
+h ae 

Ses al ye S fl.” "SV Slaw \y jw Sg (280) ie 13 

§ \ Kd £ A585 actly So 45) dm \ > jaar pS ell 4 5s 
Se oD\ sls Soy Mu 53.5 Aids, azi\> ASS (S335 ye \ elle. Ale 
9g ls oF orls oly a5 trtlo ps corgd GE, Jide, 3 Sas 
KIS ees dl SK 2 sb 


* (44%) This word has only the ya points and might yield also 
sib, apple. Anise seems the safer remedy against chill. 
+ (A531) Translated as an ast ki. 
3% 





ie bax & esr wie , K VS» ole ws sls, S\ » ga 
aslo) joo \ 3% 5 ere he ae, d\ 2 
yo «sluil aoe sll: zo okk jo» asta Sls s\fas ie 
9 29 JES Sis; 5) ae oslal clgleno Lethe Gin 
Lae os ws ts oll Py — SUS Clases ols) Glage 
9» kor is cgi ata Sm ~ eb we 6b S555) 5 
$>— ea, | AD cylinl srgeje kN jle Gels oP oll ul Nas 
Jb 43 0) ols cass. o> » de 5 Soli a SiSgs J 
wo \palt ole o25 dH) IM — salt ole Gs 5 
Oe, ope \ clo 3 ,\ 6 tol 2S, te 
oles 9 9 ay hfs ome Gs Lule» biss 
<a cl & Sols Ss? ao Yye 0 Me (27b) \, els 
4 oly; deg GLI, oll 2 Vl — eel ool. 
NF, — 3% Gt Sn, Wes Les Uys eli. 
Wee a ke || Soy 3 | Leds gle x5 241 
ole de dpe olan 43,5) hoa een 
2? J3) SF toys 5 Adshey Abe emo od S5) oul 
ae * Ay aoa: ie . 1 on 
42 j\ Ul? ee (> od oe Jy Lin J5) 2S by 
Us 5° aS isle Utrae — dy axa one 5 ole 10 5 
x Jil, dew — Sidgs 


an ee 
a SEW, SF gh. wl, SL PSS lu Gt, SF 
eSaiad5d Sp 9 onl c Soom rong bb SSS, be Atel 
als ee: a3\ ces S a. dank — N29, unl, 
oS, rk chal ob, 5 Jie yoke eh iS, Js )\5 40 
aS Al dLaS', i ue () re Nip has oie 
weri'g oF Ely> ows ae cal olen dels, a; Seo 
Gb opts oh ul oS Wal s leSus S23 dic Units azl 
Kid g: pole ie ldo > 485 (26b) Suti 
pb le Ny9 F peg wl — Sesto pe tee 
gigi cyte 99 ph 50g Dy oe ee Se ye He irks 
EW ase Ss s: OMS Gs jae Gia od culls aS 
azdli\ (5595)3 Gleinol a obhs WV 5 oly ters oF 
sal eins iS) > — Se F ok psig #5} A, No 70 SAE 
oF te oe a Hee 45) 5 asl. las) Jar ee 8 obk 22 
I Wh 5 bye & phe g _ Olt 5 orles aepe (sic) Sree 
5 tag) 1S Gltlys Cle, ole laslh jo ol Nl of 2 
32) Ie oy piles rss a le ES - 
ale CS sw p> — 49) Sb 9% yet le eller Jno 
we tho j- cde Oey cea. ale a goes 
cer FS eer P29 er 2 grnct Sa — 39g Sol = 
539295 (278) a 3s gos 4b JGis ee 259 PAE 5 
3k ole al ae 32tiSe cosa an AE 3 Se ale 9 — ad\s\ 
ee dl SH te Glelae 5 gor Salads yl, 


* (+45 5444>) Several Hindustani words occur in the M.S.. 
3 “ 





be ee os 
oliol, a a cee 2 > Se slals phe sy Sas hes 
altok ie ees Si cit Sa. eo all, Feb 
a te Bol ale 5) ioe ore oll. Uy Solty 
Gage Pei one oll aly 93 Vi pe pias 0 6 x Ses 
fr cai walj\ \ le ye a hg Hse 2 alo, uly (25b) sard\iy 
— ely oy lay ads SN 3 Hk ¢ Ins sly 3 Say 
3 Se Sy Se P\irA\o 6 x Mele oles Se 5s» So JS 
«Se Als Sc Sa? 
oad ale 42 — So Ut 29 Jai Sing dew Seoul&s 

KAD PS Cb te 

gan She IR 3) le ive Bob lb EB 5 j) Se 
el ceed 39951 sic ele uit oN » § pany 2d, od, 
oll. ak pow scnl5N , cle rca n oe 5 :\ #59 dedi 
a 5 3 is SHA avs = Se 

— 5399); Sig» Ndg, thea’ oleh, re ets 
OHS 2S pir ony wb Ka +8 eo. Ole. aapaee 
am SS, — 42\ | S ls6 col, hae 2 old, aac 
as 2s ee | cS filles als di (268) | 5 Bet 
WS, ay one oltok islesl; SS, Soap & 


ee 
chen abl, al da gt tS gaa 5 da dl IS 5 ish 


B \ye oF SS eH pl. S\ Lag — SSyt,, pl Sl 
dete — dik DISS, Son ay ae SS slat co SS 





* (CS aha 3) LT read wa before tarashi. 


wb Pek Sino, py bS > Salscy ce 
*K iD» ole; 

pee Cl weer ae 2> >» cee gS els Jol 
2D aslsl 3, ee ol “ yan ABD oan a 
oo 3 eo 5 CaS EAT nam * ve 
S18 % ool; Ad» oS cule Se 32.f ‘ay S poy cos ais 
x Hidg, 51s) UA 59 659295 

wtcats SLs Sh > ee Gin 52 gle S15 click ptm 
\jyee yew gl yllale Leo ¢ oll ole él> S\e. tee 
pas # glk. & Nhe fs ae ek fe de 3 = 

TS a2) cam chal Oe ee Se 
75> Se wilde sites Se glee Ibs Se gles ssh 
cepae sf Sy glee a5 53 Se eds Vow Cne oll 
S52 \joe del gla 39 § Se dlaL, Ky gle. mle, oltol, 
cy Ne ae Mel Ww Se ois ls (25a) oltol, 
o\5 yas S al => 5 c 2. So ple, oliol, Soe \5 yee je 
ih lo ah Vege , hs. Beers Soe LIE 
As ols 5 oltol, as Se © UL (sic) Dad ol wl} 5 yde 
fe dle 54 Se clise Se fy—S Sled) aay ee 
>> a cel. ast gltsl oS lab oF DoF cel see 
slik, 25> (slab De 9h ole aon y\ 45 § Ji>\ cy el. 
Ss ot S 5 lol de fre oe Ve alge Gules QS 


pel oe ae 


aS tala’ \,.,5- sles M5 Kew 45 \, ssl iS less\ S ab 
L Ws, sh 99328349) 05) 5 Wi oll ais , fe Sy 
ee a Sh kok j\ de #BAVIT pe 5 3S 
fetleS\ 53 
aye 

4. Pde et prj 5 At St ryt Sle Sotelo, 
5 pam cli; b 9 — Syl s Slaske dle w ils dls 5 \ ler 5 Snag! 
poate o> cjlaus| © ys aga AS 0; (ee elo Vell bsal 
od\> awd Gar curbide 9 giles 's ale a3 jb \ 0 HK AD o> 9499 
diye deo oltol, pam Se S\5 9 ob 4S jay 9 et ee 
aS ey ks. » x LS lo i ee y nis )\ ay ea ak 

Wages gia S (5,5 9:5 8d» 95% (240) pecans BY spin : 
Js o> @ Se Je ch «soi ob, d\e ee glee) S ws 

at zie axl (a ee ee ery i Bs 

Se aie. 35) IS Sl aii ees 

oly pd ald isle y $2 3s Jat oltsl, 6T aly (FN 3) tees 
\5 yee U5 53 § 1.25 list wae fle §\ 4 usul 05 | 4 5 Sole: 
Shin a LAN SV jog — al pup SiS ete 4S ig F Sle 
fle S\ & oltol pam eas Jie ee Ss AG Vises “ps 
Og Shee. ei VEN: Valin Ug OF be WS 


x sls 





* (eile) Of. 15b n. . 


Lecls 55) tary tight, Gals cals US ile cin, 
: soe 

SF oe Se pele yh Viye by Le Sass lel yo y 
sl lb S\y oltsh spar kolo gdt gh jis, (232) af 
ia ow is lae Waly oS dui ely 59 95 Ls aks oe 
WN ony? x sal S Met cohej Aut of S& cle JS rr 
Ja 99 2 et fs So Myre olla yy Ve Jat olla. 
Jo FS Viper labs hates 4 SH YAW Jue > x suf 
Ny 50 eter: NV de kag Cal all be oa 
9 HSS Vj jee obt.y \5 ye Es les Lox oll. Aes 
* D5 Wl slege ane £25: ee 59 § Ma tee oy 

ps VS Vas ial) Sih y els \ Soltal wpaes 
< S\ iar lejay ee? S35 oe -\S1 4k Dy, za 
apa 5 a a V5 — ee * fn yk MNS om |e aaj 42 954 
set ISVS Ss WS, aS sero SS cle. de gcane 
ad WS > oke d, ae iS 

lake ley, 255 oll jay Sle idg, 095) 59 Ses wad 

09) jl— Aids, fs aj dhe 59 S p20 y (28b) Senge Go cams 
Sa sins os glLle, asy Saf cls aes oat 
\ US asd § 50,3 So \yeerl; 7 pate I Spt fo b> 
* tls B1,958 Lois OSA 4a 

ais, SS oot So S$ S20 61 capios WH op a 





* (MX zp 75) The rebellious Mirzas were of the house of Baygra 
with which Maham Begam had relationship. 


Salt olen y ely tidy, 43, od\ice weal 4S olds 
cal (220) \,le\jh.y sols eg — ath Sen al Ss, rs 
be aka sl Kan y\5h ee Cae pee Cge rae C= 
aul ee UWE, OF Gluk b oS fe Pp Lisdles wl 
Sd iy dik ibagie hee oh 5 :\ x IS 
F595 “Linsl 2 sth ra 23 +3 ee 8 2 Can ces 
oar) Mk s WITS tty» eslal 52,5 GS, hey, 
We, As As Clery «dS, oe j\ os yes Ss a>) 
JS3 3 \ 1s Fon Dg one pet dent 3 RA os 28 pul 
IS; eres le lo es Ss lil, Sey S, ag 
ips shel ab 3\4— ids oaS ial aD yoy Wb 5\ all 
ints p> ei odjloo.9 KID rode yg tye Gp atl. 
Ik es} pl) dey lags wl Ll, okin, F bhi 





* (A840!) This word occurs thrice in the M.S. i.e., at 22b (here), 
at 26 b—in the plural—, and at 28b. It is written clearly and confidently. 
Nothing like it has been yielded to our search by the Dictionaries. 
Mr. Beveridge suggests (1) that it may be a corrupt and domestic form 
of an Arabic word ‘alagaha’ which he finds as what may be termed 
a corresponding word, in a description of the Peacock Throne and 
from this we assume the “hangings” of the translation. Or (2) it 
may be a corruption of the Turki asqz “tout qui est suspendu pour 
ornement”. Zenker 58b. 

** ( oJ 25) % SqJy9%55 There are no points. Mr. A.G. Ellis has kindly 
helped me with the suggestion I have accepted. The meaning of 
Say9%5) is “ feutre qui recouvre la tente”. (P. de C. Turki Dict. 237.) 
As the lining of the festal tents is described in the preceding para- 
graph, I have placed the second among the gifts. Vambéry trans- 
lates the word: die obere Filzdecke des Zeltes. : 

#* (oye Me) I suggest ¢ysMS on the analogy of co MS. One 
looks for bason after ewer but the word following doles} cannot 
be read as chilumcht or any other equivalent for bason which I can 
find. Chilumchi, i. e. chilancht occur at 72a and does not resemble 
the doubtful word here rendered julabjan. 


OS Se 


Pi jee ae el sel set ay 
Risley 2 sl aol) ales cSt \,Irphy yey Oe gil aon gee 
Stal oS \ 4 a3 53 
Vople 253 Sig sphy cb yo lew teh S al 51, 
Sed 9 — os Shes yee ole 5 ished — és 4 
dy, Joly ES3S 39 Sole oye y id) 9\ ig hoe 
Ble 59 Bigy DS 4993 coptem Ld 5) (Ae) oy cy Sane Se 
Gog 0d 50 a eed A abe og — pile — Jide 29> 
oye Hin 3S at le ak, (228) ope Le "iS o\ 4 ‘ 
KE alle paul JE Se Se jay + jp 2S Vole 
e Ki, watslei Re eek stag eo Jl eh 3 NN es 
ale “Gb >» SST | ides j3-iye S ellSee l ae HS 
he \ytls ale oly gs cle | SPS — aS de 
— Hoy 028 curly of y Wh jl jae ley ae Aims 5 9 — Pee 
NM RAE Savoy Sess soy 2Fenl) 33 cil "ahee 
Se dias Sn Se S stl Mass ety» — 2h; a be gl 
jaek Poke Bb de or S rstls ole dase oly er M2) x 3135) 
p> K didy Se Al al yen pm on ME Seay > ogee + 
Wits x Ab oF Jib Old Sale @ os KAAS; jy ols 035149 
0D » ae S A3 ples sad DS 2 le S155 5 A> 9 


* (> yp) The text has no points to the ya of my reading. If 
the prop were absent the word could be read ,5 yb taraq, ply, fold 
i.e. sets. The sense of the two passages is, 1 think, that Maham 
got together two sets of arms of which one included of those a 
Mughal Commander. 

** (3\9) Text yaraq-yalgan for yaragq-i-ilkhan. 

+t (Cig) ~ an ambitious little person or a little mad-woman. 





ee 
Sairy LE Qlis 5 yl Li c0t,— 19 
yam cll Hb, 2S ols os wie esle ji ad, & 
D9. é (21a) JUV S 5Smy each ole dle. 25 
yam ole dy ale 3) ot e BLs Ey Songs? Sel pgs 
aor J\> \je Gls Sod, ble, Ms oF Gh § x0 5 
Asio's>.5 WS hk, ethe— i> 403 ons (VB s\ by 99 KS 
idy die 43> (Sl SSL gol o a oe 
KS EE Nie my lied JO~ mien 9 eb 
\yoltsh a> (SV Zoo jo Koy ole °S\ Sie. bs 
ie ele ne § wat yp 43d Se adi AS gs aK ply ds 
(po geis-3:\3-. 53 Voge oly oleal olseo cyt 98 3) Se: S 
oLisl, cae ale aS > ASV pio oe SUS xan 4 
Bade Yolk od lb ale jo glo — troy gluta p> boy 
Se: chale 4s EES Goan eee ae oe heey 
tiie tt oS SS, Pods hs wt, § 6 SS, 
ee et 9 tN a tle 3 ae ae 
a> £2 (21b) ir lth pao a Le mol ae 
ose + S15 ll ladle, Vase Ss lise ble oltal, 
ee S sioyin olet ol Ob 5> 1= satis 5 32 Soe cubs 
# Gail Vo Som os 
iets AS pak Gedo eddy \ oe sa adds 
US )\dy3 sles als ats 2? py AB Jidg, Le >> pee 


Us 3) te Ais oe ry dK Lip Madly 3) te, tidy: Delis 





* (o>43) Text has tashdid. 


ak, OR 


aby Welle jay pre ots obese o olds KD, os 
. s fF fm « . . 
Shey WS USa 9 — 38F y2f Bless Ne 5 Lo, wl) 
Seb ole ALLAN AT xe ole boll aly, 
cont el ol 2ST oles Seth ase 5) oy 2 uly 
ad ger Sal, \ lolol NS en Mes Ctarg de 52 &\ s\» 3\ 
oll ,o aires ion WS cul oi pds — Jaks 
fale gSithys ©: Coie be x AS A eee —— 
* Jsols faa <a ya od “a de u~3> ic ok 
op S wale ae ia tee fe ola ole pam 4 
Bixee ~ ae isles ee ge — As J i . 
en si, L i\c 4p vole pe 
pete 5 er 9 ales olyol ek yy z 3 da 
PPA toy? So 5 — io lel &> Gg ole Gils, 
Sa a5 Slt — sls Pee ones ae nee 
ej dhe Voltol a pam onl TI; i] ‘a - iS aa 399 ss 
Sols 5) esos Jes News oS e dhe on 42 
# Sioged cubs Sie Vc lee jor 29: Ole jy 


ptm 5\ ye (doe Suet ile a2 5 Ao og ell olsol pam sh} 


eth als Sip 2So see ek, OS atle de} cd 
Ow ol sda pdm SA S55 * D9) 8 Sho OSs hs >;\3\ 
0292 AS cu\c, Bah cae ph cy be iS 2 sok \ ets 
si K ely 24> ell lal. cle \. § sigs 0929 9 — id», 
dpe KEAN 5 ger \yleale) cael NE 05 ol > Jer £14) 
L Sa; ah ae 423 x je AP 24> Jol 205 jb or — enh 
Soy solu $55 Sle ail \yuarsh oy cole 035) aol 3 
Mle JV x soy 2S Jabs oy nth Gb VL Va; 
(19) Hay jay 29 Jide its Gnd joy 59) Soy oe 
Reale AP fla 3 Spe jo cll Alu ders on Sls ciel 
| ae bey aol S ot Slo Jo 5° So» ci. § sidy03 Ob 
je? sl 3h * est padi ol eA Eis we es ba 
SW «So Vl ol 29 Guts p Tas ww Ul eS 
silo oe Sle ygle clisl ae &; Ser ney 2S O93 Ve hy 
NL RE Bly Jl, hie. ae elaes. 
ee eo ale te ps Pogle Splytel she 
ade 2 HV sg lore pes lhe #5 : oles Li 
S\5 3 oS Lost, olele MF ol i * phe FL ox 
SoS y Me lee P22 DNS awd 

len 5 de Gb 4525 9959 prey > Sel Lally onl 
Glo 5\> dle als dls 5 S\ 39) Aw j\ dem KIND wd SN 9 & iS 
hag! 4. 4+ '53\ 555 J3Y sae ole Ake x Voy S 
BAS Net Soy edes ge 


Se 4 Meno © tia, s\n Sl & (808) le al olay be 


ee 
\ Sa wey Se KITS oS he om 995 
Gly) ats “ye 4& wypae F Sm, (18h) of wh os f 
VSS S aye ep Le Fe ltl SAL y Li pales tubes 
fle Ol x S cas glk by sa hiab. Jeb apt onl 4 ) 
skies aploltal: Qaraae Goeals @ slid ahaa. NS ons 
oe ple— eh oll ol, 2) gh—Om) \. Se 
8 6, Ss Sh. sa Saad 55 fle £\ pam LG 
dls Ss JA aris 29% es Om, hil bE > shes 
arslis\ yblys cols Tle Se tor» Olle, & 52 2 Se 
Gorbls a odshssly Lobllel. 522 a\- as 038 aaah ec 
SoS ee 
ltl ople Spam x Ad hes oy \ i yt ome ee 
Aine LN x wai walk, a SNe) 4 
EN x ask apa Uh gts cs oS abo. chs IS odpdle 
i Su, S- eet a oe Se, 
Jele cls os als 5) Salem Ge ope; Ve slytel koy8 
Ady lejcpye Vid Sida: cadet lad cytes cne on a a 
999 02> gal glbe ‘ally «22 cul as gle edhe £ 
0 S Sy odd 5 ap EY Sense ceed ei 4 Oy Sewikdl 





* (94>) By this term of endearment Hamida-bant, Akbar’s mother 
addressed the dying Gul-badan. 

** (o>) I believe this should be e=us. A similar omission 
of the alif is not infrequent in the M.S. Of, Lele for Labelle (14b.). 
So also of the points of the yd and the che. 

*#« (S40) As in this M.S. alif is several times written for ha’ 
hauwaz, I translate AXo, estrade, raised seat and not Wo, 


a6 le sale \ Wg Body UAL pole ols am 59 Gu 3 
Do a> Boer Ot! gis sles a> Uy OFF K Ay 433 
Vaptm og ede, ebb lel x sols OS disk ople 
elSch ole Spam KAS Lied le Voll 2S aL 
SNS, S428 og NSr# , 48 Ty 28 Blew — 295i (ied, 
on S28 sisal \WS, LV, — 41) a) \5,)5 ed cn3) 
Me Ge tos ae 51% — py By et5T uss \oltl 
3S oy la pee 

. Bee ee rs dr hits af 
Me (0) ee par MSFN 3 Se ee S2p yx 
ar hi Seal IS Mew Ss oa ee lasl, 
cee Ow y dea: JE oll SiS $5 ps ss \asl M 
we Nf LA, olds ca pam \u\ . Crp K eww y J\ 5 cds \353 55 \ 
a, sale S\ ont — Ht, dope S3aFS 5, S>» 
ean bash vy| 5\ (adie 8, se , 0 LBS — 
eae reas \ axl §— (52) 9\ $F F3) 
cals Ow 4 Sus — dale cpl § 5, oe On 9 MS xe a ee 
plies ay Slee ld ae he * § siJjb ni. pa> x | 0D 92,3 
V Jlee Sp,2 je Fay ech 2 oly »,— esl v8 
THN elas 5. iS ies yp ilo SS, ym K pest 





* (934%) This is probably a clerical error for Hindal. 
** (( 50) The text has no negative but it is required by the context. 


fro cre hb — py 5 pol — 59 LAV) 52s Gage 
KUNE oS) do yie 

SA cus la hd Dol P pie cpl — siden, 50 oS Sc 
se SN tet Otel hand Oe — 928 48) Shad “yp cyto 
sh a5) v9 cheat aes Waiheke wank cx) 92 29 
Hil tg ale Saag ys er vax dl oly 
AS ye tee ee 9 OK «| Ash Ay\ Sb Sah ye \ 538s rare 

* tidy Sule mike ork oF Kelas y hs jaf sil 
oleal ss yee s cy oo — ddl, sda) pA Yor 9 
xT oS Lon Nel ater jl ates olidly tbed, 5 eilS > 

able oy 5,3 5 \e S iF SV (178) ipa Lis 

Sk o\- ds \> 53 § SD iht5 3 5s # a +\ oltol, 
S cyhti5 99 aay 5 | els § wolo =r a> *ey\2 al& 433 
SA Sin I—pl> dee 3 onlerls 653 aS W_el> 
obs? webs ole w\S Bly 5) ota Geo 5 sols cekl. 
cle ly 6— ale ogle slo 435,5 lo p IOL 

ail we Je peti Spar Vigy Spam sidy gle oll Sy 
* Aloe ASS aut Mr 33) 3) Oa, ghg— satis AS Aes 
coulis \yo a eatls olSG ant an joy jh glen 5 GLb 5 ale 
§ 21,5 le ak ig) 29 — A fish Se Jp *og ES. 
oles of — lok & ep oot joe hole ope ee 
sls uw? oe 5x2 Vl® > 9 — pH omer Loe 
oul - SEE cae, = 23> yn tok oles (170) 34 Gays 
KM» 97> Ube ee 5) 1, ll click or pamy ols ob 


ee Tlic 


Mie Se hy 33 dm gieg 0)5\ eS wlio 
#2, Sil) j Ch oe 33) Ye j\ Aug Hoy cabs 
jee Jo— singe 3 tito <i) Koy dleyo, sa el 3 

Up 5\ 5 — go tS ees; sl, > 2 glol, coll. 
=e og? \y albok — cul le of Ueil_alb 5 Seats 
§ 1s 0S len oS ala; 3 aD 5 “ST pam lil eyo 
cal 52 jleen SIG 3g law sible wltsh tne 2 Vd Sle cls 
¥ Seen By, SIS NE 6 33,3 (16a) ; Gi RAk oslo lS os 

32S Se Bp cltel GS slaty: BA lee eee es 
Ge Bylen— 328 ee \b\, le Se sty pw & 
pam xk Syl S Slyke tle GB dle jhgkey le ay AS 
— sth alo S3\\j nol \, # aye By ab, Nied ohh 
sae “lS oler pol Sue Sh ies é 3 
Ss. Ase olds, pam BASS chine 5 6 Xo OFF x 4S 
lan dent 33S 49 O95 9 — ay ay g®? pe — Sly — ST 
del ge 53 Ry ed) S4. lp. Skis iN ce 

K 3 AS, S53 SN ated BS £ 

Aid g} Bt ates ARG ps 
er ol gdsts Ola. ge des oi lade Ogle Soy: 
Bilan: jy (16D) V5 poe Sy Suh pg clas mse 255 5255 S 
sls «oF gill. 8 Spee pd el yded Sheet WO 
Sidwey 0G 2 KAAS domes doo ile — lh, Sh § uss 
oe She det Set Gd ter 09 Gl jl Boy, ost ede 





* (_J,*,) Sic. Parghali is the usual form. 


aye pe Sd: je Sd5f Sy) ‘gas, pel Lal ¢ ee \ pb 
BLS 
rr dom gia Atsh a> ee ast aS » Aas Slee den 
DP >? er sop oe 4 oy Re pl. > 
#3) 6 Som Al j\ key Sh aay Sw \, 0d yd 0d (yoga 
a Ss Le59 IS use} oe eS —_ 
aes bhsuX bse fh Ay Ja 

Lp ale) 55” eS ne VL oltoh os a> % AD» 2S eeu, 
KAA pis eats J) ) ssh 

Sle ¢ ST he Acai ee Per cll baa os 
x SAS A at Cams cc on \,3 en 

LNG JS) Ri 6835 \ ¥ atsy Crys y iS\ise 
OMS ale 5 ue ous as Sele aS \ slots oul ltl 2 pam 
Sasa 55 AS sane 33, j\pin ASG / soy, ¢ hy ae . 
5 toy Wiles x OS ede oll Vidar 38 él> SV 





* (d3l& 599) Erskine (202n.) says “perhaps a space enclosed by a 
low railing.” Chardin (Voyage en Perse) has a picture of a grandee 
seated within an enclosure (at sides and back) which as he sits, ap- 
pears to reach his shoulders. Perhaps this is a tur-khana. Zenker 
describes it as a seat of honour of the nature of a throne. It would 
supply a necessity of Indian life, if one might read tawr, net, and 
allow the royal author a mosquito-room. 

Q* 


— \A meee 


aS S405 S Ne AN g pul cliol Us Sl § 335 
te AS cane |p pam el On 

od\iu,3 oul olisl, & NS le Sis ewl (i ag CS a" 
ol eats Bae Jo 4 3 — diog, ek MS 3\ Saale ch, Fass 
KES 9 13 le bead obey Si 

le > ge g del Sedies ae \5 oe oF fla. bi Uy as, 
as-\i\ (sic) ad} 9 Oy leak 25 9 Ys sf \, > cp leek K pp 
sdleul |e July oll ae (3, S455) ots Sls 1. a; GL 
eS ce? bas od \zu\ oe ee ell GS Og x dl jo oki, 
S icy § : ele deal (sys sake cjbia\ a> J (14b) AL 
cele fe uu cy § sole; cis al. she ¢ UL ands 
wh 5° f.1\ 28 j\ ile oe pe ot OE yy Kee ole 
Geel Set ae Vlas Sth ly x sil orga, — ose 4\ 

ae él. , ay soul Sty uals lia & ell Ge Sin, 

eh iS 5S Saas lo. silt le ee lal 
Vee Hoy Sale late hil eS oe ag SV cl Ob 
aa ie poles Su cul) gS iS me “le 5 Sh 
=e hoSa ey gi. allt (tt, eee 5 Opt 
* 9 s AP 02 \ ym Slaige ys DL ie dnlm Gor ers eS, 
sin (0) Mot cap AS eydle LL pats Ul He Jpn 
lA > 0d) 5 pb Sees heme ope 9 Ses by Ob 
pS (150) case ol (Ub oliol a pam ease 9 oul 0 





* (45) What follows appears to be an incomplete and perhaps mis- 
placed description of Aka&m’s cortége. 


ae iS ks Sie 55 3) Jet uel je 
Ku; 3, 5 aa) J Eby SA 

Or poll shot o db dale See 1S, be, 6 ee 
Sto Mabe Atle ja, ST N5 pee ue olde Gado Moly ole. 
fel oe 3\. \5 ae em < buch a 2 oe 
AAI oh glenl 3) o> (13d) kA, B95 > ol 
OFF Toyo Le S Nak oe S toys x24i Ss) § de 
€ JS a oly oye NAN 3 on lye Sem we toot GH 
Sa 5 @s poy b— sal os ole Pot gla S stokes os 
Aod \; wildly Sly Eyl & Kol edy 5 Ow) OL ELS Sasls 
ak Sy Jag Shee 

cpl> 59 Sy dey ogy sags oo J5 sue lS) ches 
Saw bs, 4—O4 oobi ae SL oe SMI Cake on 
FAL SIE HSB Mere Ot Lio 1Se 

JS s\ ssh Ke ple ST Sle oh, te Saw ks, 23) 4m 
phat) He Delos ee dm exis re pg epatry 
a5 Shae, AS os “Ss pS ejb. Vekl lish aypa> 
AMA 6 Sh JS 3\ x solos OS, au Sale go lick wae 
jy DUES b ase sath Jls cliol opae, 13, 20S 
BS > > sete S 2iT ol & sli trap (14a) 
339 $6 Jt gh ual 6 ebl olds yam x rah tli ST 
Jel ge 1 Aye > at Ad Glatt 35 GAS los otters 
oe sis | Si Se 59 do 9 HELL Leck, ¥ 4,4 ool, & 
4: le dle 


os eine, Sat pre (12d) 5 Boye do ys ebl, 144 
6 6h dns Shas at Os Koei IT deed. Se etl 
a obi. 5 oles Vel ee Soy ex) Seep ee ve 
\ybb tog ok gl Pusch 0h N S555 ees chs 
go 8 sions wales ax chs K Ji 5S ees So 
wl SN at, b,c. Sala, 
hit Syai — 35) > Ss py 51 £ 9 \4& ae a 
Fe Je Us *25l gy IS Ll pus NS SNE eats obs» 
s SE — AS cs Yet Bi Solo rhs G 59 ok los £ 
snl le ayer 2s 59 ee Got Ls tet — 694 Us aS $1, é~ 
culls 4505 lee tayo s 

9 dy Sy He 5 Sb yp # 42S 95 O48 Jo ch a 
ot 525 Ole o> py & hs atl Lal Aso — aS, dil aZls 
# E Wai (18.2) Shes oe SNS oles She ole > — 9» ale 

ls j\ deol ptm sin jy) 99 4S be) Se sh S35 
5 eal, dost y oS ars ples ot 3\ enc Ad» 02S 43 
BS GS ps Sigh Sip te Jew ane 
ars HoSag se lel lick ace Jae le gl jo— sings 
Pedy ales dhs Mol oe, cM Ue, alecnll 
KASS UH OSL y Lit 

155 5 lads ch 5h S soles ole Se Gila y GLEE les, 
S235 Sio\ eS 69S le \,ae Payne bs WS 5 why 





* (Amle) Cf. 8a. 


oie ice 


ux WS a StS eg 5 Slog nF PP 888 ee: Sou oy 
Sa bey Se 3 JS oye 42 ele Beles 4 She US > 
KLIS 2 Ug) Sere Hoy OF ag Lt 5 £ 

Nyt Bb Mas, JUG hae gala gl 2 5) ae, 
KA> yo Stl, 43 ls, (22 or) 

0d § eae \olioh ae onl 51S Ky 5 leet) 5 Val 5h 
Jee y dus SSE tegen od) be, oF EL aee—stiry 
JM 59 cad xt Sh tll, kel, LET, & EAl > 
KOS az lye 

esak Ss 5 cocalee & aS Sa poe ae ds pe ue, cep 
Shacjo doth KE ole 6 aS See deol 
elles etre gh as slo cud dle C# \, pltol, Ss a wl 





* (Lis y) Perhaps a sarcasm is intended by changing the title rand 
into the epithet rd‘na—a foolish admirer of himself. Sanga is always 
so stigmatized, but so too are other and friendly Ranas. Cf. 48b. 

** (gio) Text uncertain. The enemy came from the side which 
from a military stand-point, was emphatically Hindt and also may 
be said colloquially to have come from the direction of Mandi. 

#** (S43) I am indebted to Mr. Beveridge for the interesting in- 
formation in the following note. The pe (Venus) of the text is, he 


believes, a mistake for pe, Sakkiz, eight, the Eight Stars being 
regarded as unpropitious by Persians. Gul-badan has perhaps con- 
fused the portents of a defeat by Shaibani at Khwaja Kardzin in 
1501 and the battle of Khanwa in 1527. Babar’s statement about 
Khanwa is that Sharif gave warning that Mars was in the west and 
that whoever should come from the east, would be defeated. 

Babar has a characteristic story of his having precipitated the fight 
at Kardzin (1501) because the Hight Stars were exactly between the 
opposing armies and if he had delayed, they would have favoured 


Shaibani for 13 or 14 days. “These observances were all nonsense 


and my precipitation was without the least solid excuse.” He lost 
the battle. Cf. Steingass Pers. Dict. 689; Vullers II. 310a; Mems. 
92, 353, 368. 


aie Ms 
Vyedso b sul 03 Ses Wg Va ledytan Sly ale Go xo F ke 
| Lee 
kt as— id: ol fa ei Ui Jiaw o\ cles 250 5), 
ily Ss Dt\ ers Ss olan aA 5 Ss ole As < 
Spot olla atch (sla at Pe olale a5 5 -—a¥ lhl, Sa 
Abd, par dye Gls Ce ae Vl so gle lal. ety > 
K Aid» OS (11b) Udt, 25 Ge, Ge 2 pat 423 x Aids, 
KAT ns ole ble ollel, Sei S\> lal dats 
D9 SUE Yok A 55) 8 Dy S12 & SL er os 
cole yp s aS S\npamy 9 JS cathe Wye jg) Sh ee teh pe 


Bale oH pj) Se Gagt ay Ags we EL SI cl < 
he cy has cowl CE Ss I el.— ak SUA, dao, DF 
rl yg ys WSs cM yaw ysl re * gS 
ore “Las a Petes te 25> 
re o i vee D> (see Ls Ga \ ae 
x dla, esis Vole ds a\: es ae 
ales 4S Some ole tioga> yy ls a 55) SViiaa 
np el, he als é aa ps eh es as tea cyltel 
3959 — se <H er > oe eam a \s ols y29— Aly 
2 5) Bast s?> poig——tiog oa Sica cg AS aoe (12a) Lo \S 


* (1) Up to this point this alternative name of Maham has been 





written ee \.. Now (as elsewhere in some other words) the orthography 


of the writer improves and the correct spelling is given el 45\= eb! 
=my Lady. 


VolS cleo any lnredl, ISG IS, beadl, hE, 


(S55 5\ bas, aise Vise tres Salts (10d) 2,4) 5 a 
pee alles s a Say 4 mesh tS ep: ate 
B13 pam lye sles iS; sl. xtetl Gary jes 
canal a slaw of Slee ,— os\ 45 
OIF oF 331 a ‘ose Coen: S Seely e a 
PN iay aS aol, tl te jo eoph aS lech ae 
alee — cel odhind dap ogg oltol a pam Stuy lo 5) pt 
wn bo S oF ody Se dat) 8 oe y—G Ah Si 
29 ty haters 008 tur bel S >» So «el 55) 
32 25 ¢\ Ce Bl S oie eins or es adlal Gio T° 
Sw jes, Glbsl, sil, ab NTs) aslal jo 
a3 Se Ys Sal S'S Sh Sab ad T 1, all eu 92 49 
(ita) , olin 2.5 b sols (32) oajlyo 02 \3Sha e oo 5 ski 
P KS Sa oni 
aP 5 lich ole S\ SAS he os don\ 55 weal j\ tars 
ailyey BULL, — so Sse Wels sl Lely able, ollie 
dle le aaj M 0 FS Se Sails 1S clubs ed, . 
sloels Wy 5 Sel Copal Je 2S gale Siskel, 
sale bleh jets jo ols S$) oul oS ect ee 
aS wrap V\ tar Seger} One, eects 3\ 





* (\ y=) Sic; but presumably ,lo>. 
pias (ome?) For remarks on this passage cf, note to translation. 


eo Fy trate le bg cable law lye ole, St ah gl, P 
odjlo> ye 9 AAS 5 S\>5m a 5 Ado, pam os (9b) ie 
Oy OS sje cde Ui a ss IS shes 29 SG 

cay USS (ie Vee, asl ol) ow, oltol @ s\s5 
fo tel He jews aS oF (35 gla cll Lil 
| 3S gar odgi odgi als) \,an js Il, eS ee ele galisl 
x25 3x \, laauys si S ia 5) ey edie 

oe al S situ | 6 vas, 43 ya soe es ot dom\e 4 
— eke iy 12 So dytenat 51 2k come) 3\g0 ka Sloe 
eel * Hides Al, lak , Stel Sl do | gs slit pam 4 
oe S Bidy 35 tiols cues, Jylo alle ly ole § 4.5 
eee Jo orld) 2.4, arb Male # 5) 5 \ 4 “ym 4 ditt hg yas 
dats Jaie y 2 LP — (ic) red ale > Jaly wails (cic 
wlélyo EP SASS 5 ASME pods (100) Jade sy, 3) x pate 
Soe 5, yee gg — yp Oodis lnjol , lro,\,.. he lS a 
rs So yee 9 0294 Ba, SA Sa eg cles a a 
We oS ch be galyl olele ola jh ale sh oh sly, Joa 
S959 303 9 3 a lls Sebks Aly Dds leer 
Se Ne 9? 95 BA Gre Alp 29 — all oF 5 
i chs ols Nee S535 535 clerk wr as Galt 
BoA Gee 5) ole Shes le 6S hs sh chs 
kes Js 4 S\ sh oles > 38) 9 2x oS So Sk, 
x \ lal ¢l 00S Sin, Mess Se 1S Sy. °| IS Sais a 


olds s ghey, obijsy olals,— LIT ol ric 


sioiall Am gis Ato, Ogle» — diols diol, ope \ ebay 
e JeckS 
ws oe \a\ pith an So pam x 3:\, <. ee 
se sida) WS ‘i, rl 

ole Sesh. yo5 AS jess os do gre lS due Jas 
a he iS G jaded poy 9 — itd lad 4 gin oS F Adve; 
\ colkay\ Mads Oka lary See Jl pS se x sing Sse 
leat slay; Sa pea Blas lel eet hee 55 4 Bosh é 
SIS sage opt 5 — Ainle GLAS I Less, — tio ae 
*x KS 

arr 

uF Tr? wll 2°35) Ae say ADH ab sam 59) 
4,5 Sle > (9a) aids &) eh, ante j ie ale Ae 
ce. Ke 59 9 22S pis 45) Se # A>dge,) Sel S555 aie 
* Ae ceed Am gis om 
sor fs, ae Cag tee cle! 
Silt oF 9 25 sotlirs oA, 9% 9 ont: Je — 4) 09598 


igi 42 3) 59.9 ry ag 2 io of sam 39) 9F Ady 
Pg Peg Py HSS glen dog cm ce el So3 
Anz 59) ey ol Ze Ek: — 325 # oy \y we Sods 
Sim 52) Sphr on Sec Se es aly) jiacagh 
Kee Sl (ll es ale “a 


— | setiats 


ti ce ie ee ay fats 52 S254 pan cay els 
oat Fe eg es oS oles Bek, UA 
ESS sly oll apa GIS Sali Te glial 5) 355)— 

Z ” aro 

oe oe 2 Se |) fo my 9 eg Mee 
OS le J5 live png — BT 

th, aelél Gel 55, Sis jing pyaie he S36 55) 95 
dlail dgso click a pam xo 8 (82) aus We lace oul 
— solo dat, \) pau Sh, aoe F doe sis > asi F \ ace lé\ 
5 \isy, ee 4:3 aS Sdga cols “alaltsl Shama | Leaiol 9 
KIjbw loll Re lacy: aSink Vase 

Jey od\; old Sok atl 4255 o» NE js SS ols 5 
Jalsa: x pl ads 8 FS ghic#, sa By Se x LS 
el Sse poe cols jo oltok x lal wls, «2 4) Cole 
x So \gi 

2258 Qs Jel one: 525 BI Uys one le yy @ d=» 
oS puis _Sy dds, SSA es 3S pals SM lee od\> oe 
x MAS JS a ge 

gd yh \5 pa Rai ats 4d S vis, ee J! LV eyo 
32K ay el ae choy Saish Dh ay 5 crleder xe — 4 
eum lta pam 25) nial a \, Sd (Sb) c5\5 poe cylee 
S258 Os yp Slog eed Gle Gli) We bls, eal 





* (d5lel4.b) The M.S. writes indifferently sob and sliorlk, 
With equal caprice it inserts gamma, hamza, under-dotted sin, &e.. 


— t{ — 


Se orl, Vow J: 5 So oed5 , Su SiS S. yo Be 
*\i re Ny 
JS > ¢ clsig 3d ae § sioy a3 5 St 1 WS 35 See 
3) Ss (7a) (sic) esl yae J:\ Oe wag 50 gra Js\ es 
«Ke shale 5) bu CPE A el 
oa a Ul Fe pam on F oliol, cole ae 


ay oe odd 5d pe ot oe to lal SL wal 


Ng — oy > TA AS § 23, ) HE AN jou eSgeee 
Ss pdom Des \ NS SV Vy pS oles A le SA ae 
\yslealjolisl ae Ih airy, ps ee ole 
# bs xk dah S oltol, sk \op olay JL voy 238 ize 
jopd dt Sop Alas NE ciple olla dal eae copa 


x Js\ asl, 5 
bellied Vole Se a fx) 3 chs 5 98 Jy ji day 
x o 3S 


N53 5 Shes Jal oe ole Vue pele SiS cltol 2 pam 
Neale degane y Vie Sorshes (70) Se erarg ok gle & 
Sink, gid Sper dogs BF oh, P— seth ole Uy ney So 
et 9 sel) gle alt ob) cite bg sia F 45, @ Sslel “ 
JFa° Ja» Jal ns bel: Byb sly— oy ole! Sys 
pp RO hy Gig? Selye 5 edhe Se le al oe 
oy Sel yo Slt Bios — Hike dm gre JS; uy ile 
K O_O soa WO Oh ep oes dos 3 nee 


— A, — 


sk 53 é ley sli pe oo 5g.) de cores 0 (68) SU 50 
oy *x Jo | be loys ol; :\ Sho b aja sl « ailsa\ 5s 
cya tA AS als as allie be oilepyl Ny le cldl Se 
Ady, ry oS le etn Aas ee 
KHAE ley — tiag, Lisl dle es “eM 5 GIS > he \5 pe 


| ) sees Jat Vijay Se lS any sh \ > g5 pany él+ _+\ 


jis yo 95> Che fs j\— 5» olds, +) > Sle 95 ce 43\s. 
ltl pry pS) ele x ey aS 248 \y 15 See ap lnl 


nt s 


Sat Vj pee AT 9,5 slle ble wa pY\ cule ed 5) 


PP =4) 9 BN She ge ae GWE Je ole, — sate one 
Pelt ed Lie Le i sir Se ater jl ats EE cele, 5 055, 
KK 56 CS Dies le cols jo Sorts oles 

lel Jls clas asl. ods ¢ ee Os 5 \ (6b) \, |S, 
533 E> Jioy: Ai ng Seeuity ean ee ass 
aus \ SSL. osc Pa—A2y Netty 2 ids xg. nate 
Sake ja 52.9 29 OF iy Sp+>—\j yw Aol olla. > Se old. 
KAS tS ote ToT Ale je cls |W 35, 35 a3 

V5 ee Jat 9 Mok ole pam — s3h Ss als A3 \5\ J5! 
*\jre Gas Ss to hel s Ss oles 

sl) oe ete j>\ - gla. 439 Se ¢ hele adaes Se 
Bile ssoy |) sole ol 4b ys 

lees \ye es ea Ley ire CSS 9 Noe ole oe 2S 3\, i 

«Ks (NalSy \5 oe tml 


— Yr 


yo kau 3 at Pepeos Aas igo ;\ ye cles en Sy kd 
aba OS Pe § s>4, jE \5 20 A439 3) aldol, Lal spl 
cee. oll 535 ae Sep b oS a 5 \, OLED |, 2 pcan 
V5 yee MSV oy 5d 2k Sad 3 pil gs \5 ne S Boy dl ovr 13 & 
KA > \elisl os am wal ys spas eli a) bol, 

Sloe HS plaSLa oblje toy hls 2 Sui, tes 
KAS sere pw ode 4 lel vli, dia ie pend 5 Jiogé ps 
Bosh chews hte S elictan 6 doy alee oe hemes LESS Chl} jae 
sols \3 # See seach: Gs. Wel Ol x «Se Sis 

ble 5 guniig gla Vee mee Hale lle Solan 
Silo ASA, pty whe Saat ys old . 1s A pe CoV 

(5b) wlalobls , cu tex me bin Vygltel dish cay 
KNAS oly, JE ale label cys i. ids, a cows lol> 

guia & dS Le lal, eae ee ied ee 
BLAM 5 ays odet Al Moly cel ol, Soa sels gee -s 
hye lad 339 lal al Gh & 4 Cg KAD, ols SS Ss 
dex dG a9> olyns @s nthe as Sapam dbp — 00S Sales 
x ts, cis 53\_Sel (rs 380 Se Jhb Vy 02S 552 Sx Say 
29 ptt Sh sles 5] Al 495 Jide, Says b aay ork 
ee 5 VS \etess 1S eal 4 ahains lap > 3S 3) aK bioS <2 Stee 0D) 9 
fist JT er ge tet dy, olsl wltsh 2 cam laylje 

one Ft Vy gb Wyo F tists, Ske GL» 
oltol pam Jo xd Jo 3 IS, 3\ od sh Sas 
pl a L—srth slo S rks ay slo, slats clils 


en 


Nt SE Suey poe SF whole « sak Wee 
x dathaS orls lise & 

A oS Ny ae cee ll. SIs LN 
cyte eee Jn tthe ple Sago Ki Se Se 
Ag tt Sgn | aes * ttle. Los AA ge 
se Soke V5 joo Ce Cy i SaNie b> BOW oem 
Neel oe Ne oye © tH en a ae as \ 
§ Siog3 wpar x28, Ub JIG aid, Recs ss 
ya Cubed ec KEL: 98 urls \j ns ¢! onl ol) sldtar\ 25 om 
sidst Mj me Soltol 99,5) G8 jl age KAAE LLS oy 
Sages SV hd ae tt oly JL-l op 
Be ee og Mi ee HL A SS oll ak 
Slime eek ASL. cagh ta) t Voe cll at jh oltok og 
yee Ss aS 5S, 3 \\ oO KUL > djl; oltol § oul 


— oa tk Sy aay 
03553\) ato hae & (5a) oI AN ean a x s\ 0S Sb po 


* (MuSlc) Used transitively. So too at 59a &e.. 


** (jumog) Text arg. 


#** (45%0|) This word may’ be atka or anaga and is to be explained 
by the known ownership of the garden which was made by Babar’s 
paternal uncle, Ulugh Beg. But for the undotted “prop”, it might 
have been read as AS\ and as referring to Khan-zada Begam or Maham, 
Babar’s wife, both of whom, as will be noticed, are styled aka 
(jandm) and aka respectively. Cf. a use of A0)\ p. 28b. 

T (& 394) Vambéry’s derivation of this multiform word, “Ozbeg, 
his own master, independent” (History of Bokhara, 245) is at least 
ben trovato and in congruity with the acts of the tribe. But several 
careful writers, Blochmann amongst them, have chosen the form 
Uzbak. 


tt (S92) Text, sic for Sayre p. 





— oO — 


oS slam jo cape SSH Sle ie SNe 1% ok— Gly oy 
#04 SIS, bliss, amy 

lak, ee JF apna Ae Soa Wb liol 
52> oly 9 22 02S So NS pe > seins oleh Sas 
pdm vy hie S3\ 3 N\A gull 0D» ell oltol, OD\5 oF \5 yee 

AgMadt — siog 43, 279 p? jl — oy od\:3\ \ aly \sl§s AL 

Ls plo y es sah oe ely 5) lop asl elezdys 5 
‘wghae Mla slesebr ag eo a 
om Ae) re (4a) set, ills LHF »— >)» sal 
A 9 olS5\, pam 5 429 cya asl, nae y a wy 
ke SOLE SNS 

ot Soe) ol 95 ee ves JS SS =35 oll 
i se al lt) 34 ql an \ Ld eae Se Jp; ows 
2915 oF 9a SM 3s iw (gl?) ) 5S oe SM 45 5] 
XK 0D » ato 
ey hnel Jel coe oltol, So pm o\S ou 4. yaar See 
a8) OF jy un Jey 29> 

oe jh be 0D » 9 A.2¢; a dBlest A \> IS, 
ead WE oo SUL alS 0 yi 9 33, Se a WS gat 

— 55) Up eo ae oltol, ae & je pam 4 
Sytem S399 GL 25 KAD g ole, LEN jl, GE dle 3\_ of 


— %~ — 


JF sol 6 Hadgi 55) Nery Ale opatl £ SeZ, 
aay a> ys) 45 yo 02S MSyer BP petact eps ergs 9 cl 

ee 4549 s\ o>» dl, oDj% «23> Ao po 9 NN aches AL 093\92 elle 
Sides Ee ell od9 cyl > po biel 64 pak \j 
oo eid ut\, oe (s\ab § oy eo 59 ol 548 cal 
HAE _w gle — Ons \ gn 25 glass Se Cy 9 Si dliw 33 ALS 
Ss pple (3b) SVS awd aad ols Sy alt a3, 5b cao 

aha alo\,y dt 2? le sky ike BS cls ves 
pd 296 2S Seti Se gy \x \, Ses 0015 Wyle abs opal 


KK 


3. \+ lito Ge. kes ip cerna 





* (Jylee) Comparing this passage with A. F.’s parallel passage 
(Bib. Ind. I. 67), we find a curious resemblance, e. g. Cte 8 ele 


—diols aa 9) nae” eS taal ts oyasul ih one ig 

** Pavet de Courteille and Steingass render chapan i eee and 
,tattered garments”, Erskine (127 and n.) by “long frocks”. Vambéry 
gives no chapan but chapan, which he translates Oberrock and par- 
dessus. Steingass has no chapdn. 

mo (S9 »\=) The words of the next phrase present difficulty. The 
sense is “with clubs in their hands”, and that this is so, is shewn by the 
waa passages from the Turki and Persian texts of Babar’s Memoirs. 


in 3 a ls ) (B. 7 Add. 26, 324 p. ‘. Thninakt has iuebas variants). 


29 Gale plas! lol 929 Large wbdal slate 52 (Persian) 
oble plas! sles. The difficult words may be a Turki inter- 


polation in Gul-badan’s text. The word which follows 39 be may 
be read Clink! leathern, but (39 a> includes the notion of leathern 
and neither the Turki nor the Persian text uses any such qualifying 
word. I propose to read the words as a Turki phrase —lv» y do| 

bb 25>. It may be that when Gul-badan was writing she had ‘her 
Father" s book before her. Her close reproduction of his words points 
to this or to intimate recollection of his words. 


(2b) 


oN oral 


o 


> pars a\S uP ‘4a5\y 5 Fey S oy, Be So 
je NES 292 ci ye 8 By & dpeige Sob cco 
ale oly ‘ahlaey Oy: Steeda ode cpl Ska ea 
tig dy Ue, ot al pltol S be xoy os ble 4 
K Doge 
— 2 prays 4A gi ell psa a> 405\4 a oe cyl Js > 
yee S4e Gh op! cll clisk a> Ub adil, jo on $1 
x Sates he (S55 alae 
3 BS e928 Sypam oly & ELS Cole apam oly 5 
SG 0D} a » oe ae ey Aye nies dd le Bees 
tee Ades saul ches eye S090 i ‘Le 
oe A ce 5) By a Fs od5i woo 55 We oa 
pit 6 Ser oh yp Sle y ee jail, OK cS gs By 
Slony Ed 938 Qs Ith 58 55 OS 6 46 595 be 


* (syl.s) Misread in translating as ¢»! a, 
** (Abs) oe (Bib. Ind. 87) has .sLacd> abs. 





olook Cyglh Nel | 
ees luck lh = S dS 02S par 


Copied from the British Museum Persian M.S. (Or. 166), 
by Annette 8. Beveridge. 


c (sles ols) This title stands on the first page of the M.S. and on 
paper like that of the M.S.. The page is numbered 15 in the Arabic 
and 2 in the B.M. marking. The M.S. is numbered by folios, and 
both with Arabic figures—inscribed in India—and with Roman, added 
by the B.M.. This reproduction and the translation of the M.S. are 
numbered in agreement with the Roman figures. A subdivision of 
folios into pages (1a, 1b &c.) allows easier reference. One index serves 
for both parts (Persian text and translation). 


Boi ae ee 


* 


* (Note to sisol) This title is inscribed on the first Sly-leaf of the 
volume containing the M.S. It is upon paper of colour and kind 
differing from that of the M.S. and identical with four blank pages 
bound up at the end of the volume, possibly with the intention of 
writing up the missing terminal portion of the work. 





RETURN. TO. the circulation desk of any 
University of California Library 


or to the 


NORTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 
Bldg. 400, Richmond Field Station 

University of California 

Richmond, CA 94804-4698 





ALL BOOKS MAY BE RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS 

2-month loans may be renewed by calling 
(510) 642-6753 

1-year loans may be recharged by bringing books 
to NRLF 

Renewals and recharges may be made 4 days 
prior to due date 





DUE AS STAMPED BELOW 





SEP 1 9 1994 





Nou - 2! ay 
as Fale b gt 


: 
AVA 
ei? ie 
‘5 2 ws Ww 





JUL 23 2005 

















20,000 (4/94) 





circulation Depa 
rersity of Californi 


sD) 20A 2M 2'77 


AR QOEM o 
t+ Li es Auuy eD ei 


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 








Vai Mee Rp ee 





em a sanse a sande ae Se en p : : 7 r 





et eo 


te 


‘e 





ee ee os 


pay Pe a Se a hee 
7 


< 


ee ae ae ee OD Fe a eS 
- rT 


, 
oy de Ae ee a 


mt 





nee mpee 


Sekt eet 
re i a 


oe 
es? A 


tate 


RE 
ae ee 


roe 
ne ee eee 


ee 


Ce eee 


eee ee a ee ee ee 





Remar a oy 


ao <a ry oo soa 1 Seem 


eae ts aN Ces aba 3